nvestigation that eventually cleared him, Zaborovskii was indicted for destroying evidence that he may have persuaded Konovalov to change his story, for having his brother bring presents to the police investigator, and for coaching his serf and his fellow prisoners to testify in his favor. Although in the end Zaborovskii was only sentenced to a church penance, this case shows in detail the methods available to an average Muscovite from the “middling” classes who did not have any special leverage to influence the police and court officials.68 In another case, a townswoman, Ekaterina Bulasheva, seeking revenge against a pawnbroker, collegiate registrar’s wife Elizaveta Pereshivkina, apparently bribed several individuals with criminal records to falsely testify on her behalf. Bulasheva’s stratagem was discovered, and she came close to serving time in the Moscow Workhouse.69 Failure to follow the informal rules of bribery could lead to unpleasant consequences. Several years after Zaborovskii’s case, the Aulic Court judged Collegiate Councilor Lebedev, who seemed to be completely inexperienced in that art.70 Lebedev was an elderly professional “mechanic,” from the family of a junior officer. Lebedev’s rank corresponded to that of an army colonel but, unlike its military equivalent, only conferred “personal” noble status as opposed to hereditary nobility; however, he married a noblewoman who owned 48 serfs. Despite his poor health and lack of children, Lebedev had a good position at the Moscow Palace Office and a good pension of 571.84 rubles. In his old age, Lebedev decided to become a serfowner himself by Debtors and Bureaucrats 219 purchasing the estate of Titular Councilor Kologrivov at an auction that was to be held on September 25, 1862. However, Lebedev was intimidated by the bureaucratic procedures involved and in particular was intelligent enough to fear that the officials would contrive to sell the estate without its accumulated stocks of rye, hay, and straw, which constituted much of its liquid value. Lebedev wrote a letter to the secretary responsible for the auction, named Mikhail Tsvetkov, asking him for assistance with the sale and promising twenty-five rubles for his labors. Either this letter was read by the wrong person or the amount was too small, but this proved to be Tsvetkov’s chance to show his probity by reporting Lebedev. During the auction itself, in the presence of all the officials and potential buyers, Moscow’s civil governor asked Lebedev whether it was he who had written the letter. Lebedev admitted he had and his case was sent to the Moscow Aulic Court. During his interrogation, Lebedev testified that there were many legal problems with the estate he was trying to buy and that it was only natural for him to offer Tsvetkov a compensation for his labors, which he was not otherwise obligated to perform for Lebedev, and complained that Tsvetkov’s denunciation (donos) was a grave moral insult to him and his family, considering that he had spent thirty years in government service. At the same time, Lebedev did not hesitate to write a letter asking for help from his old acquaintance and neighbor, whose name, unfortunately, was not mentioned, in “providing protection against the hostile actions of Mr. Tsvetkov, which inflicted great sorrow on me and my family, about which I am induced to ask you more in order to sooth my family.” Lebedev maintained that he wrote the letter to Tsvetkov “without thinking” and “offered gratitude out of kindness of my soul and not doubting the Christian kindness of Mr. Tsvetkov’s soul, as well as because of my inexperience in such matters,” which he could not acquire by working in a technical field. Lebedev also claimed that he did not offer the bribe forcefully or persistently, but only “in the event this would be allowed, and not with the intention of gaining anything for my profit.” Whether it was the intervention of the old friend, or the Aulic Court’s good judgment, the court gave Lebedev a warning for “merely asking for permission to offer a gratuity to a public official, even if for his official labors [as opposed to in exchange for doing something illegal].”71 Compared to the sporadic interventions of highly ranked bureaucrats, personal informal connections and influence that ranged in character from outright bribery to the exercise of political patronage were clearly more widely 220 Debt and the Law used in debt-related legal proceedings. However, I found that these attempts were neither universally available nor invariably effective, especially once a case was transferred from the lower-level courts, with their links with local society, to more professional intermediate-level provincial chambers and the Senate. When the opposing sides were relatively evenly matched, they did not hesitate to challenge each other on the grounds of having some special unfair advantage, such as a relationship or acquaintance with one of the judges. It is precisely such evenly matched disputes of prosperous property owners that remained beneath the notice of the critics of pre-reform courts who mostly wrote at the end of the nineteenth century. Notwithstanding contemporary critics’ rhetorical abuse, corruption and the influence of patronage and political connections complemented formal legal rules and procedures but do not seem to have fundamentally undermined or compromised them. Moreover, if corruption were all-powerful and determined the outcome of every case, as some extreme critics of Russian law would have it, such a level of corruption would have made legal rules and institutions meaningless, thus making it pointless for individuals to try to subvert them. Bargaining in the Shadow of the Tsar The practice of civil law before and during the Great Reforms involved intense interpersonal communication and negotiation, both within and outside the court system. High-stakes litigation was time-consuming, unpredictable, and expensive, and so it is not surprising that the legal process involved informal negotiation and that cases could be resolved without ever reaching judgment. Out-of-court settlements were by no means always fair, but they were an additional mechanism for asserting individual interests and resolving disputes when a formal trial was not desirable. In the United States today, even non-lawyers are aware that an overwhelming majority of cases are settled out of court. This is, of course, far from a recent phenomenon, as one article on a seventeenth-century local court in England has shown.72 Robert Mnookin and Lewis Kornhauser, in their landmark paper focusing on U.S. divorce law, emphasized the continuity between formal legal ­adjudication and the social processes of negotiation, viewing law “not as imposing order from above, but rather as providing a framework . . . [to] determine . . . rights and responsibilities.” The court’s function in some cases examined by Mnookin and Kornhauser could legitimately be limited to merely approving—even rubber-stamping—private negotiations.73 Debtors and Bureaucrats 221 Despite the advantage of reducing costs by settling out of court, some cases are still litigated for a variety of reasons, such as the desire to punish the other party rather than increase one’s net worth, a distaste for negotiation or distrust of the opponent, calling the bluff on a party that makes excessive threats, overestimating one’s chances of winning, or the impossibility of dividing up the object of dispute. Other modern-day legal scholars have also noted that legal considerations, in turn, affect private negotiations; for example, Herbert Jacob has argued that the practical effect of a legal rule depends on the way a claim is framed— that is, whether people initially articulate their problems in legal terms, the involvement of lawyers or other intermediaries, and the use of informational networks, that is, whether one’s friends and relatives encourage legalistic thinking. For example, Jacob found that debtors in the United States who knew other individuals who had gone through bankruptcy were more likely to avail themselves of that procedure.74 Imperial Russian law explicitly promoted informal dispute settlement both before and after the 1864 reform. Pre-reform civil procedure included detailed provisions for out-of-court settlements (mirovaia sdelka), arbitration (treteiskii sud), and arbitration commissions that could be established for indebted gentry landowners (posrednicheskaia komissia).75 The pre-­ reform legal system, in other words, was structured similarly to the system described by Mnookin and Kornhauser—as a framework for individuals to resolve disputes that could not be solved through negotiation and ­arbitration.76 Anecdotal evidence suggests that bargaining typically began long before the commencement of legal proceedings. Alexander Miliukov narrated the story of a bankrupt merchant in Moscow who held a dinner party for all of his creditors, during which he kneeled in front of them and offered to settle his debts for 25 percent. The cleverness of this strategy was that all the creditors had to make their decision in each other’s presence and risk ruining their reputations—and, consequently, credit—if their behavior was not approved by their peers.77 More commonly, it was the creditor who commenced the bargaining by visiting the debtor and demanding payment. Nikolai Makarov recalled that in 1860 he was trying to collect a debt from one “Excellency” (presumably a high-ranking civil or military official) who was refusing to repay his debt of 1,400 rubles. Makarov wrote with satisfaction and even glee that he “stormed” the debtor’s dwelling, created “fright” in his office, and recovered the debt, “which, without my speed and energy, 222 Debt and the Law would have only smiled at me and remained forever in the bottomless pocket of the Excellency.”78 It was also routine to settle debts after beginning litigation. One very typical example is the debt case against Collegiate Registrar Nikolai Dolbinin that was begun in 1856 by the Moscow townsman Lev Spiridonov, who wanted to collect 4,950 rubles in bills of exchange issued by the Vladimir townsman Kornil Medvedkin, who claimed that he had never issued them.79 The rather confusing investigation of who owed what to whom continued for almost ten years, until in 1864 Spiridonov petitioned the court that he wanted to discontinue the claim because he had had a “reckoning” with Dolbinin. The Criminal Chamber closed the case in 1867 because of the mutual reconciliation. Another similar case began in January 1859, when a Moscow merchant (in her own right), Irina Vorobiova, submitted a debt claim for 1,112 rubles against another Moscow merchant, Ivan Isaev.80 A literate 48-year-old who “knew the laws of the Russian state,” Isaev claimed that he did not know or have any dealings with Vorobiova but did borrow 400 rubles from her sons. Then, on March 30, Vorobiova and Isaev submitted a joint petition to close the case because, upon a mutual accounting, this debt ended up being “void.” The chamber was happy to oblige, although it took until 1867 to issue the final ruling, as it was obviously not high on the court’s priority list. In these and other similar cases in which a debtor denied signing the bill of exchange, the courts did have the option of continuing proceedings despite the parties’ reconciliation—thereby earning extra income from fees and bribes—but they chose not to exercise it.81 However, there were cases when a settlement could be reversed, as in the case of Sumgalter discussed above, in which the creditor was offered a partial payment by the debtor’s fatherin-law but apparently was unwilling to forgive the remainder of the debt, for which reason the payment was revoked and the litigation continued.82 It is clear that court action could be only incidental to the process of mutual negotiation and accounting among the parties to a dispute. Settlements c