that helped him but rather his knowledge of bureaucratic practices, along with the acknowledgment by high-ranking state officials that protecting his honor—closely related to his business reputation—was a valid and important concern. A similar concern for protecting personal honor and financial interests is found in Rozetti’s case; although his obvious culpability resulted in his acquiring a criminal record, there was no real punishment. Finally, Semenov was an uneducated bankrupt who nonetheless had a rudimentary sense of legal procedures and perhaps was even aware that the more open political climate of the mid-1860s made it acceptable for individuals to assert themselves against police actions. Of course, neither Rozetti nor Semenov had Butikov’s money, which allowed him to purchase the services of a top lawyer, who, in turn, helped Butikov to access the policemen’s superiors using their own “enlightened” language. In sum, the assertiveness of Moscow’s urban and commercial groups in the mid-nineteenth century was based on a combination of factors: knowledge and manipulation of bureaucratic jargon and practices, the power of money that brought control of legal expertise, and links of patronage and acquaintance. Individuals’ concerns for property interests were closely linked with concerns about honor and kinship, all of which were also shared by government officials of all ranks. 206 Debt and the Law Governors and Gendarmes as Arbiters One of the most common criticisms of the attempt to develop the rule of law and a rational bureaucracy in nineteenth-century Russia focuses on the prerogatives of provincial officials and especially provincial governors, who were given extensive powers by Catherine II’s 1775 statute establishing a uniform system of local government.27 Of all administrative officials, the provincial governors exercised the most direct daily influence upon the courts’ operations, both formally and through their informal personal influence. Their powers steadily grew during the first half of the nineteenth century. The law of 1837 referred to governors as the “master of the province” and greatly increased their authority, especially by subordinating the provincial administrative board (gubernskoe pravlenie) that was originally established as a collective organ but then became little more than the governor’s secretariat.28 Governors controlled the police, and the police collected debts, imprisoned debtors, assessed and seized debtors’ property, and could even remove undesirable individuals from the city. At the same time, the police could not directly cancel a debt; even if a lender was expelled from the city, the debt itself could still be sold or transferred to another person. This fact no doubt induced most borrowers to negotiate rather than go to the authorities. In addition to their police powers, governors had extensive judicial functions, especially before the 1864 reform. The most important judicial role of the governors was to review and approve criminal sentences that involved the loss of estate-specific legal rights and penal exile. Criminal issues routinely came up in debt disputes, as in the cases of fraudulent bankruptcy or when a debtor alleged that the signature on the debt document had been forged. If a governor disagreed with the court’s ruling, he could not change the sentence but only forward the case for further review by the Senate. Late imperial jurists and historians regarded this authority as exemplifying pre-reform courts’ lack of independence from administrative officials, but post-Soviet scholars have shown that the extent of the governors’ interference with criminal justice in practice was “insignificant.”29 Aside from these provisions, the law of 1825 explicitly prohibited governors from stopping the implementation of a court decision, much less vacating it or “allowing a digression from its precise meaning.”30 Governors did however control pre-trial procedures and could, for example, order their aides to investigate a particularly important or complicated criminal case. Also influential was the governors’ personal informal Debtors and Bureaucrats 207 network of influence, which usually helped with their appointment in the first place and which often included a direct personal link with the tsar, as well as peers from prior military or civil service positions, friends from their home region, and relatives who were numerous indeed for most of Russia’s old noble families. On some particularly notorious occasions, these networks of influence allowed corrupt governors to remain in their positions for decades. For example, Alexander Panchulidzev, who served as the governor of Penza from 1831 to 1859, was associated with organized criminal groups, took bribes, and embezzled with impunity, thanks to his connections both among local elites and back in Petersburg.31 The governor’s authority was particularly noticeable in Moscow because of its geographical distance from the imperial court and the highest bureaucracy. Whereas in the eighteenth century governors had changed every few years, in the nineteenth they often ruled for extremely long terms, essentially as mini-tsars; for example, Prince Dmitrii Vladimirovich Golitsyn served from 1820 to 1843, Prince Vladimir Andreevich Dolgorukov from 1865 to 1891, and Grand Duke Sergei Aleksandrovich from 1891 to 1905. The most con­ troversial long-term “master” of Moscow was Count Arsenii Andreevich Zakrevskii (1848–1859), a hero of the war of 1812, whom Muscovites referred to simply as “the Count” and remembered for his suspicion of any free thinking, for his arbitrariness, and for his dislike of merchants and moneylenders that eventually led to his downfall.32 In short, after his dismissal he became a symbol of arbitrary and despotic rule associated with the Nicholaevan epoch. To many observers, Zakrevskii’s personal authority appeared to be above the law. The lawyer Nikolai Davydov recalled that he was the “true master of the capital” and that “the entire population submissively and quietly obeyed the decrees, customs, and commands that were not always justified by their contents, but to violate which seemed to be almost a mortal sin, and in any case an act of extraordinary bravery.”33 Ilya Selivanov, who headed the Moscow Chamber of Criminal Justice from 1855 to 1862, recalled that Zakrevskii believed that “the law was not written for him and that he was permitted anything” and that throughout his term of office, Zakrevskii “through various very transparent hints let everyone believe that he had carte blanche and that he could do anything he considered to be appropriate. Only after his removal from Moscow did it turn out that he did not have carte blanche and that he did not have any more power than any other governor general.” As a result, Zakrevskii “created such fear in Muscovites that they 208 Debt and the Law did not dare to say a word even when he became involved in such circumstances of their family lives that were not any concern of his, and over which he did not have any legal authority.”34 In his memoirs, Selivanov hints at his own association with Herzen and other political exiles, and so his depiction of Muscovite submissiveness is clearly polemical, but the general sense of Zakrevskii’s powerful personality and personal involvement in the city’s daily life is unmistakable. At the same time, it is clear that this general dislike of Zakrevskii stemmed not simply from his mandate from the tsar to maintain order in Moscow in the wake of the European revolutions of 1848; another important reason was that he was an outsider in Russia’s networks of power and owed everything directly to the tsar. The real Zakrevskii was anything but a gruff simpleton, since in 1812 he had headed Russia’s military intelligence service. However, he was poorly educated and came from a noble family that was neither wealthy nor well connected. His wife, Countess Agrafena Tolstaia, was a wealthy heiress and a famous beauty, but she was nonetheless shunned by Moscow’s aristocratic circles. Boris Chicherin recalled that even at the height of Zakrevskii’s power, Muscovites liked to attend his grand balls but avoided getting socially close to his family.35 This lack of social standing limited Zakrevskii’s patronage network compared to that of the more aristocratic governors, and so his apologists were far fewer than his enemies. Memoirist Dmitrii Nikiforov was one of the few acquaintances who continued to visit Zakrevskii after his eventual disgrace and thought that he was fundamentally a “truthful” man who in extreme circumstances bent legal rules to achieve justice. Nikiforov thought it a positive thing that Zakrevskii “could not stand usurers.” On one occasion, he personally tore up the bills of exchange issued by a profligate young merchant to an adventuress who had seduced him, and in another case he kept a moneylender waiting in his office, unable to intervene, while a noblewoman who asked for his help was busy executing and registering a sales agreement that was going to place her property out of that lender’s reach. These stories appear to be perfect examples of Zakrevskii’s arbitrariness and contempt for the law, unless one realizes that in the former episode, the “adventuress” was given the opportunity to present her case in front of Zakrevskii himself and that in the second case Zakrevskii had to use a rather risky subterfuge rather than exercise his power in a more direct way.36 Even in his dealings with lesser-ranking provincial officials, Zakrevskii preferred political maneuvering to open confrontations. For example, Zakrevskii’s Debtors and Bureaucrats 209 i­ll-wisher, Selivanov, the chief criminal judge in Moscow, noted that while the count ordered him placed under police surveillance, he did not have the authority or the power to simply get him removed and eventually had to use another official as a go-between to repair their relations.37 Restrictions on governors’ powers included a senior Corps of Gendarmes officer posted in each province, whose task was unofficial oversight over the governors. The elected provincial marshals of the nobility came from distinguished and wealthy backgrounds at least as influential as those of the governors themselves. It was an unwritten custom for the governors and the marshals to be at loggerheads with each other. It appears to have been quite easy for a powerful marshal to use his Petersburg connections to induce the Senate to appoint an inspection that could recommend the governor’s dismissal, which is what happened, for example, to the Kursk governor Andrian Ustimovich in 1850.38 The key legal officials did not depend on the governor for their careers. This applies, most importantly, to the chairmen, assistant chairmen, assessors, and even secretaries of the provincial Chambers of Civil and Criminal Justice, all of whom were either appointed from Petersburg or elected by the local nobles or merchants. Even some of the most important police officials, at least in major cities, were appointed by the tsar personally. Finally, a governor was supposed to remain an outsider in his province, in which he was not supposed to own any landed estates. Thus in debt disputes governors served as arbiters rather than as overwhelming authority figures and were themselves subjected to many checks and limitations, even when their mandate was unusually extensive. Although governors could and often did intervene in property disputes, they could not do so indiscriminately. I have not located any evidence of personal and direct intervention by Zakrevskii or by one of his immediate successors in debt disputes that had already entered the court system. The count could order a creditor to drop his claim on pain of administrative reprisals, but he could not directly order the judges of the Criminal or Civil Chamber to rule against this creditor. Needless to say, the governor could att