empt to influence the proceedings secretly and informally, and Zakrevskii, for example, had a reputation for bribery.39 However, even in criminal cases his authority could not be taken for granted: judges in Moscow courts had no qualms about disagreeing with his views on specific criminal law issues. As a general rule, even in pre-reform Russia, administrative officials appear to have respected the integrity of the legal process and intervened directly only in a specific set of circumstances, such as a potentially criminal issue 210 Debt and the Law emerging from a disputed debt, especially one that affected a sufficiently large number of persons to threaten public order, or when pre-reform evidence laws did not permit any redress of a wrong that was abundantly and clearly established by circumstantial evidence. Moreover, officials intervened not by contacting courts directly but rather operated outside the judicial process by exerting their personal influence, as well as by using their considerable police powers. It is remarkable, though, that in many cases one or more sides to a dispute openly resisted a governor’s or the gendarmes’ persuasions and insisted on continuing their lawsuits and even imprisoning their debtors while themselves being threatened with financial ruin. One example from 1857 illustrates the nature and the extent of a governor’s personal direct intervention to sanction an individual who could not be disciplined through legal channels. A Class 12 official, Aleksandr DeMazer, was subjected to a criminal trial for embezzling from a wealthy female serf owned by Count Sheremetev, who wanted to purchase a house in DeMazer’s name.40 There were several witnesses to confirm the transaction, but only one agreed to testify under oath, and under Russia’s system of formal proofs, this evidence was not sufficient to convict DeMazer. The judges of the Criminal Chamber left him under the “strongest suspicion” and recommended that the governor order his expulsion from the city. Shortly after this ruling, Count Zakrevskii ordered DeMazer to be removed from Moscow as “unreliable” and “harmful to the capital city.” However, DeMazer remained the legal owner of the property he embezzled. This case thus shows both the governor’s power and its limitations: while neither he nor the judges were able to help DeMazer’s victim, they allowed the legal proceeding to run its course and then acted to the extent of their authority to prevent DeMazer from continuing his dishonest practices, as long as his property rights were not openly violated.41 Ironically, the case also shows that courts were not too averse to leaning upon the governor to achieve their goals, as opposed to the opposite situation that is usually assumed. Another example of such cooperation was recalled by Selivanov, who talked Zakrevskii’s more liberal and law-abiding successor, Pavel Tuchkov, into approving an obviously incorrect criminal sentence to avoid the mandatory review by the Senate in order to save two Old Believer youths from being sent to Siberia for blasphemy.42 In cases when no criminal proceedings were initiated, the governor’s ability to influence the outcomes was even more limited. Consider the previously mentioned case of Ivan Butikov, who complained of misconduct by police officers when they broke into his house in an attempt to arrest his son Debtors and Bureaucrats 211 for debt.43 Simultaneously with the governor’s investigation of the police’s actions, his office was also investigating the usurious activities of the junior Butikov’s lenders. Governor Tuchkov chose to intervene as directly as he ever did by summoning Butikov’s creditors to his office and “urging” them to settle their claims against Butikov out of court. Two of the creditors, merchant Sabanin and a civil servant Ivanov, made a “good-faith settlement” with Butikov, but the third creditor, Gubernial Secretary Logotini, despite all the “urgings,” refused the settlement and petitioned to proceed through “legal channels.” Then in June 1860 Tuchkov and the chief of gendarmes, Prince Dolgorukov, agreed that because it was not “possible to compel Lagatini [sic] with administrative measures to end the case,” it was necessary to continue the legal proceedings but on the condition that Logotini, as a “reprehensible usurer,” be expelled from Moscow.44 If it were true that Russia’s administrative officials disdained the law and legal procedures, how can we explain the fact that Tuchkov and Dolgorukov could not simply prevail upon the police or the courts to stop the proceedings against Butikov, which contined in the prescribed fashion? Even more remarkable is Logotini’s steadfast refusal to accommodate the officials; perhaps it can be explained by his hopes of greater liberalization in the early 1860s, but in any case it suggests that his property was more important to him than official favor. On some occasions the governor’s interference could have even less effect. In a case similar to the previous two, moneylender Semen Briukhatov was put on criminal trial for defrauding the nobleman Abramov, whose loan was secured by a landed estate with serfs.45 This was only part of an extensive investigation by the governor’s office of Briukhatov’s predatory lending practices with respect to approximately ten other young men of property. The special commission established by the governor’s decree on March 16, 1865, included Colonel Sochinskii (from the procurator’s office), a procuracy official, Pavlovskii, Colonel Voeikov from the Corps of Gendarmes, and Mr. Saveliev, the special aide to the governor general. Despite all this pressure against him, Briukhatov continued to keep Abramov imprisoned for his debt and even induced him to come to a settlement, which Abramov later managed to rescind. A similar situation beset the insolvent Count Dmitrii Tolstoy, whose father notified the Gendarmes that one of the creditors, a “baptized Jew” named Gorodetskii, took advantage of Tolstoy’s youth and took debt notes for twice the amount actually borrowed. In response, gendarme Colonel 212 Debt and the Law Voeikov wrote that Gorodetskii had on “many occasions” evoked “critical comments” for engaging in illegal usury and that he had gone as far as to take the young count’s personal clothing. While the anti-usury sentiment of the Moscow upper classes and of the authorities is not surprising, it is remarkable that the collection and insolvency proceedings against Tolstoi continued despite the involvement of the gendarmes and only stopped when the father reached a settlement with his son’s creditors.46 While in most of these examples the governor’s intervention was directed against an alleged predatory lender, authorities were by no means always ­pro-debtor. In fact, the Moscow governor’s archive—although ravaged by Soviet-era “systematizations” and “expert evaluations”—contains numerous petitions by individuals complaining that their debtors were maliciously evading payment and asking for his special intervention.47 What could the governor do for such persons? Consider the case of retired private LeibaSrulevich Sumgalter, who had served in the Moscow police force for ­twenty-eight years and retired to Zhitomir province.48 In December 1859 he traveled back to Moscow to collect a 118.50-ruble debt from townsman Krasil’nikov and spent several months trying to negotiate with Krasil’nikov and then going through police collection and the courts. Eventually Sumgalter petitioned governor Tuchkov to summon Krasil’nikov to his office and induce him to pay Sumgalter’s traveling expenses. Interestingly, this is exactly what Tuchkov did on January 19, 1861; even more interestingly, Tuchkov’s personal interview with Krasil’nikov seems to have had very little effect upon Sumgalter’s ability to collect because Krasil’nikov proceeded to hide his property with relatives and then was declared insolvent. And of course, the governor’s most potent power of expelling the debtor from the city in this situation would not have been very helpful. Sumgalter was only able to collect a portion of the amount owed to him several years later by placing Krasil’nikov in debtors’ prison, from which he was ransomed by the Imperial Prison Committee. In addition to pleading with the governor and his subordinates, individuals could turn to other officials of comparable rank, such as the minister of justice and the minister of the interior, and to the Third Section, whose officers were frequently called to intervene in debt disputes. As noted earlier, the Third Section functioned as an alternative system of last-resort justice by investigating particularly important criminal cases, as well as civil-law disputes when one of the sides petitioned for its intervention. Its directors could be approached by individuals in difficult legal circumstances, both by wealthy Debtors and Bureaucrats 213 and sophisticated ones, and those clearly from middling ranks. However, the gendarmes’ involvement in debt cases could not be taken for granted even in high-profile cases, and achieved mixed success. For example, in the 1845 case of Lieutenant Rakhmanov in Petersburg, the creditors agreed to cut their claim by 85 percent after the gendarmes’ invervention.49 In 1859, Lieutenant General Sergei Sergeyevich Golitsyn, a highly decorated war hero imprisoned for debt in Petersburg, petitioned the Third Section to be released in order to earn money and repay his debt. Initially his five creditors would have none of it, but the gendarme Colonel Rakeev started an investigation into their lending practices, which quickly persuaded them to change their minds and to assert that they had never had any idea of inflicting inconvenience on the good general.50 In the fraud case of Princess Ekaterina Cherkasskaia, a Commercial Bank official named Zaborovskii—who supplemented his income by lending money—was convicted wrongfully and swiftly, most likely because of the intervention of a gendarme, a Colonel Tolstoy. Eventually Cherkasskaia’s embezzling estate manager Konovalov repented and sent written confessions both to the Moscow governor and to the minister of justice, Count Panin. Perhaps because of these high personages’ special attention, Zaborovskii’s initial conviction was quickly invalidated.51 However, in the course of the previously discussed 1859 investigation of alleged usurers by the Third Section, the gendarmes made no effort to broker a settlement between General Buturlin and Vasily Chestnokov. The Third Section could also limit its involvement to notifying the local authorities that the case enjoyed its special attention. For example, merchant Butikov in the course of his vendetta against the Moscow police petitioned the chief of gendarmes, Count Shuvalov, who wrote to Governor Tuchkov asking him to give his protection to Butikov if his allegations proved to be true. No separate investigation was initiated, however. Earlier in the nineteenth century, before the Third Section was established, such complaints were addressed directly to the tsar, such as in the 1805 case of a wealthy Moscow merchant, Goriunov.52 Although Goriunov’s retail buildings next to the Kremlin wall were sufficient to cover his debt, he was declared a “bankrupt” under the 1800 Bankruptcy Code. He was kept imprisoned for long periods of time, made several deals with his creditors, was allowed to continue to manage his property, but was then imprisoned again. Much as in the Butikov case sixty years later, Goriunov’s complaint was forwarded to the Moscow authorities without any specific and direct command or instructions that could predictably affect the outcome. It seems that the 214 Debt and the Law value of these petitions was not in producing a specific governmental action but rather in showing local officials that their actions were being monitored by their superiors. The grandees of Nicholas I’s reign, such as Count Zakrevskii and Count Benckendorf (t