he husband obligated himself to tear up the debt and was witnessed by Gubernial Secretary Timchenkov, the merchant’s son Basarev, and State Councilor Kovalevskii. Merchant Novikov, hired to 188 The Culture of Debt collect on behalf of Bronnikov, argued that the receipt did not indicate whether it referred to that same loan letter or some different one and did not contain the signature of the municipal loan broker (makler) or of Martynovskaia’s sisters, who had signed the original letter as sureties. Eventually, Martynovskii was subjected to a criminal trial for forgery and “left under strong suspicion,” which was the pre-reform equivalent of a suspended sentence. The trial did not determine whether Avdotia was responsible for the debt, and the creditors had to start their suit over again in a civil court.77 In addition to using debt notes in marriage, men used these notes to provide for women with whom they had illicit relationships. For example, Lidia Dmitrievna Telesheva, after a falling out with her husband, decided to buy a house in the name of her boyfriend, Prince Mikhail Mikhailovich Golitsyn, and in 1858 had him sign a loan letter for 120,000 rubles. They broke up shortly thereafter, but Telesheva never returned the debt document and instead sold it to a merchant who promptly sued Golitsyn.78 A similar story happened in the 1850s to Ensign Mikhail Ilyin, who had relations with a titular councilor’s wife, Mrs. Rebi, who made him sign loan letters for 9,000 rubles. As Rebi transferred her affections to Mr. Schube, a riding-master at the imperial court, Ilyin’s desperate wife petitioned the Third Section in 1857 to get the letters invalidated.79 Memoirist Dmitry Nikiforov, who was close to Count Asenii Zakrevskii, the notorious governor of Moscow under Nicholas I, recalled a scene when the governor was approached by a young merchant who inherited a fortune from his father and engaged in a life of carousing and drinking, which involved an infatuation with an “adventuress.” In just a few days, the woman ended up holding debt notes for the merchant’s entire fortune, and there was nothing to be done through legal channels to dispute the collection. Although the count was widely believed to despise Moscow’s merchant class, he held a face-to-face meeting between the young man and his mistress, and having caught the latter in a lie, tore up the debt obligations.80 For our purposes, it is important to note that the cultural attitudes at that time connected debt, especially moneyless debt, with sexual adventures. This chapter contains the first systematic attempt to examine the links between credit relations and family and kinship structures in imperial Russia. While family members relied on each other to help cope with the burden of debt, they also used debt relations to assert their financial and other interests Kinship and Family 189 vis-à-vis each other. This applied to parents and children—who were required to bring their disputes to the special Equity Court—and also applied to spouses, who in Russia possessed separate legal personalities and readily took advantage of this legal regime. The legal rules deployed in such family conflicts and family strategies were likewise applied in a variety of ways. Most notably, the regime of separate marital property was used to fight off creditors’ attempts to seize their debtors’ property. But the law could also be deployed in strategies that were likely unintended by the legislator—for instance, by wives defending their interests or by husbands attempting to control their wives’ separate property. In sum, the legal rules affecting debt and family structures appear primarily as instruments used to defend and promote property interests that were not necessarily the same ones that these rules were originally designed to protect. Part II Deb t a n d t h e L aw Figure 6.1a & Figure 6.1b. I. Alekseev, A Group of Civil Servants (1851) Source: Kaluga State Regional Museum. chapt e r 6 Debtors and Bureaucrats A lth o ugh th e cultur e of credit in Russia relied on the discretion and initiative of private persons, it was equally dependent on the machinery of the tsarist government. Unless a loan was completely undocumented and either repaid or forgiven without dispute, state institutions affected the transaction from the day it was registered and notarized to the day it was either repaid or resulted in a final judgment by a court of law. The preceding chapters of this book have explained how imperial laws regulating the culture of credit were applied in practice, from the prescribed forms for debt transactions to rules concerning individuals who could or could not participate in the credit network. This chapter, by contrast, focuses not on the legal rules themselves, but on the daily engagement of private debtors and creditors with government officials at all levels and on the interactions that took place after the procedure of incurring the debt but before the courts or bankruptcy boards became involved. This includes formal debt collection procedures carried out by regular police; semi-formal interactions in which higher officials such as provincial governors and gendarme officers used their police power to intervene in debt ­disputes; and examples of informal interactions including bribery and corruption, as well as out-of-court negotiations and settlements that were often carried out without any direct participation by officials but were motivated and guided by legal rules and the possibility of litigation or official sanctions. Although Alexander Gerschenkron famously argued that the tsarist state generally exercised a positive influence on Russia’s economic development in the nineteenth century, the more commonly accepted narrative is that of 193 194 Debt and the Law failure—that there was something fundamentally wrongheaded about the way Russia was governed. Many economic and institutional historians have argued that the Russian bureaucracy failed in its task to modernize imperial governance and introduce the rule of law.1 One reason given for this failure is that the eighteenth-century police state, with its extensive administrative regulation of all aspects of life and an insufficient system of checks and balances, persisted into the nineteenth century when other major European nations began to rely increasingly on formally independent courts, public participation in politics, and civil society.2 Another line of reasoning emphasizes the persistence of the tsar’s personal power, exercised at the expense of a bureaucratic apparatus that lacked a coherent structure and sufficient trained personnel.3 Such talented statesmen as Mikhail Speranskii and the “enlightened bureaucrats” of the 1860s are seen as splendid but ephemeral and almost tragic figures who could not change the overall pattern.4 However, another line of inquiry takes advantage of the newly opened archives to focus on actual daily interactions between bureaucrats and ordinary individuals and considers such interactions on their own terms—that is, apart from Max Weber’s model of formal rationality or Marx’s model of the bourgeois state replacing a “feudal” one. For instance, Susanne Schattenberg and Richard Robbins show Russian provincial bureaucrats not as the traditional tyrants but as politicians and consensus builders who governed through personal influence and negotiating skills. While historians debate whether the Russian state was primarily an instrument protecting the nobility’s interest, it is clear that the bureaucracy shared power with elites through various formal and informal channels, including elected offices, social interactions, and philanthropy, as Aleksandr Kupriianov shows in his study of pre-reform urban governance. Even ordinary townspeople and peasants were able to pursue their strategies and interests in their engagement with tsarist officials both individually and as members of their local communities, as Alison Smith has pointed out.5 In a similar vein, my contention is that the role of administrative and police officials in the daily running of the system of private credit was complex and brittle: it was neither a brutish imposition nor anarchy any more than it was an example of Weber’s formal rationality. It is of course impossible to conceive of the tsarist administration as a neutral mechanism, but it is equally impossible to define it as unequivocally pro-debtor or pro-creditor. Whereas bureaucratic machinery operated in routine debt-related matters Debtors and Bureaucrats 195 with reasonable efficiency, personal discretion and personal authority were an important counterbalance, whether in enforcing or resisting debt collections or negotiating private settlements. It is not in itself striking to discover that the police and the bureaucracy were challenged by ordinary persons because this was routinely done even by members of the lowest orders of the Russian Empire.6 However, the confidence, and even élan, with which supposedly downtrodden individuals picked fights suggests that the urban classes were prepared, culturally and mentally, to take an active role in political and social life. Contrary to the conventional wisdom that a politically conscious “middle class” was “missing” in Russia, urban Russians were able to deploy their wealth, their social status, and their knowledge of legal and other bureaucratic procedures to protect their property and to engage in a complex relationship with administrative authorities.7 Formal Channels: Debt Collection and the Police Collecting debts was only one of the numerous tasks of the police in pre-­ reform Russia. In the mid-nineteenth century, Catherinian-era codes that set out provincial and municipal administration were still in force.8 It is commonly pointed out that police officials in imperial Russia enjoyed exceptionally broad powers, especially compared with those of the pre-reform judiciary. At the same time, Russia was paradoxically underpoliced, even after the reorganization in the 1850s and 1860s. This was largely due to a very extensive list of responsibilities for policemen, combined with insufficient personnel, lack of training, and a low budget that encouraged corruption.9 The Petersburg and Moscow police were better trained than those in the rest of the country but were still spread thinly, largely reactive, and, I argue, completely dependent on the cooperation of other officials, on elected self-government, and on private individuals. Moscow, for example, was divided into seventeen precincts, headed by bailiffs and assisted by quarter overseers and quarter lieutenants. These officers were assisted by rank-andfile policemen who were conscripted soldiers without any special training in police work. Beneath them were the so-called “booth-men” (budochniki), the beat cops who inhabited tiny huts spread throughout all the major streets and squares and were armed with medieval-looking halberds. In pre-reform Moscow, there were only four special “investigating bailiffs” who handled the more complex criminal investigations. Occasionally the governor general 196 Debt and the Law Figure 6.2. The old court building on Resurrection Square, Moscow, 1870s Source: N.A. Naidenov. Vydy nekotorykh gorodskikh mestnostei, ­khramov, primechatel’nykh zdanii i drugikh sooruzhenii. Prilozhenie vtoroe ­(Moscow, 1891). delegated one of his “special aides” to help with the most important cases. Policemen were commonly retired military officers who obtained their positions through personal connections or as sinecures for distinguished service or bravery in battle; they had to learn their trade on the job. They tended to bring with them a military culture that during the reign of Nicholas I (1825– 1855) emphasized drill and blind obedience to superiors. Police debt collection involved three possible outcomes if the debtor refused or was unable to pay. The basic procedure was for the police to come to the debtor’s