he first chief of gendarmes), were obviously unable and unwilling to help every person who petitioned them. In a case involving a less prominent petitioner with no significant properties or any possible threats to public order, a high official could simply forward the case to one of his subordinates, who might not choose to expend his efforts. This is what happened in another fraud case involving a civil servant, Dmitriev, who had served as an agent for the wealthy Glebov brothers and continued to borrow in their name long after being dismissed from their service.53 In that case, one of the victims, no novice in the world of Moscow officialdom, complained to Count Benckendorf, who transferred the matter to his subordinate, Major General Perfiliev, who did not seem particularly sympathetic to her case: his questions to the woman suggest that he was somehow more suspicious of her than of the perpetrator of the crime. From this and other similar cases it is clear that the tsar’s governors and ministers did not seem to think that they had to personally affect the outcome of every case in which their assistance was summoned. Much like the governors’ interventions, those of the gendarmes could fail. State Councilor Alexander Varentsov, married to the daughter of Collegiate Assessor Prince Fedor Andreevich Golitsyn, had a debt dispute with his father-in-law in 1863. The gendarmes in the town of Tver, where Golitsyn resided, staged what they called “mediation proceedings” and urged Golitsyn and his attorney to settle the dispute amicably. However, the old prince positively refused to budge, stating to the gendarmes that he could not drop the case as a matter of principle. Moreover, his response to the letter from the Third Section was rather cheeky: “I cannot fail to inquire, why an exception was made for my son-in-law from the general Law under which all of us Russians live and which requires that every dispute and every suit must be initiated in a Judiciary institution, before which I stand as a direct and obedient respondent.” In their internal correspondence, the gendarmes referred to Golitsyn’s “unscrupulous stubbornness” and noticed “a shade of irony” in his communications with the Petersburg military governor, General Prince Suvorov, suggesting that the gendarmes were getting involved in a matter that was of little concern to them. Although Prince Golitsyn was obviously a usurer, perhaps because of his family name there was not even a hint of Debtors and Bureaucrats 215 exiling or otherwise harassing him in the manner in which less well-­ connected lenders were sometimes treated by the Third Section.54 Even individuals who lacked a prestigious surname and lived in far less favorable financial circumstances could reject the gendarmes’ mediation. For example, a former guard officer, Viacheslav Bolobonov, a spendthrift without any wealth or particularly helpful connections, flat-out refused the attempt by a gendarme officer, Colonel Koptev, to get him to provide for his estranged wife.55 It thus appears that government officials, most importantly provincial governors and officers of the Third Section, had at their disposal significant means to influence court proceedings, both through their legally mandated authority and through their personal informal influence and prestige. However, a set of practical considerations limited excessive exercise of this authority. They tended to intervene in debt-related cases only under a predictable and defined set of circumstances—for example, when public order was at stake or when unusual criminal proceedings were involved. Officials were clearly unable and unwilling to personally intervene in every case in which a litigant requested their patronage. In cases in which bureaucrats did intervene, their influence affected the proceedings but did not necessarily determine the outcome, mostly because they were unable or unwilling to directly subvert court proceedings but rather chose, or felt compelled, to respect established legal procedures and especially the legally established property rights of the litigants, even those who engaged in behavior that was condemned by society, such as predatory lending. In other words, officials could harass lenders or borrowers, but they could not simply void the debt or seize the debtor’s property without following the required procedures. A danger of denunciation and bureaucratic rivalries, as well as the practical inability to intervene in all important cases, limited even informal influence to a very circumscribed set of facts. Neither Count Zakrevskii nor Leontii Dubelt nor Prince Vasilii Dolgorukov appear to have had any special kind of respect for the courts of law. Rather, a routine bureaucratic demarcation of power was most likely the chief motive for their relative moderation. Nonetheless, the effect of this demarcation was to provide pre-­ reform courts with considerable space in which to exercise their function.56 Corruption and Bribery From what has been discussed so far, it is clear that the criticism of Russia’s pre-reform legal system as being informal in the Weberian sense—that is, 216 Debt and the Law basing its decisions upon some outside non-legal criteria such as the political will of the sovereign or the interests of a particular legal estate or population group—should not be exaggerated. Such influences were significant but not automatic or necessarily determinative of the outcome. Obvious follow-up questions concern the effects of bribery and other forms of corruption, as well as the influence of kinship and personal friendships, which, as we already know, were central to the operations of Russia’s network of private debt. Of course, direct evidence of corruption is always difficult to identify and evaluate. However, researchers are aided by the fact that Russian pre-reform legal procedure was almost entirely written, courtroom rhetoric was nonexistent, court petitions were frequently prepared by individuals without formal legal training, and the petitions tended to focus on technical legal argumentation, making the subtext easier to identify than is often the case with post1864 court proceedings. Recent studies on the practices of reciprocity in Russia that are based on archival evidence persuasively argue that bribery must not be regarded as inherent in Russian mentalities or culture, that it could serve an important social objective of leveling power relations between government officials and private individuals, and that official corruption was greatly reduced by the turn of the twentieth century.57 As part of Russia’s culture of credit, extra-legal intervention appears not as a dichotomy between corruption and honesty but rather as a continuum, one end of which was akin to lobbying and the other end consisting of outright bribery. For example, calling upon a powerful relative in a difficult situation was an obvious strategy. When the elderly Princess Ekaterina Cherkasskaia became a victim of fraud, her first action was to “invite the assistance” of her nephew Colonel Begichev and of the gendarme Colonel Tolstoy. These two officers helped her to contact the police and presumably kept an eye on the investigation. Wealthy Muscovites strove to make friends with police officers, inviting them to their houses for meals and giving them gifts. In the Butikov case, the wealthy Old Believer merchant cultivated a good relationship with local policemen and even “patronized” them (pokrovitel’stroval—a striking word to apply to one’s relationship with police), thus making his abuse at the hands of a local police officer particularly outrageous in his eyes.58 Court cases routinely contain allegations of one of the sides being friendly with a judge, reflecting the fact that judges from first-tier courts were elected from the same social milieu as the litigants, as well as the common recognition that personal connections could affect outcomes. For example, in the Debtors and Bureaucrats 217 debt collection case of Colonel Nikitin in the early 1850s—distinguished only by the wealth and sophisticated knowledge of the law of both ­litigants—the defendant, Actual State Councilor Surovshchikov (equivalent to a major general in the army), claimed that his creditor had “acquaintance and friendship” with one of the judges on the County Court, Vinogradov, and had him replaced by a judge delegated from the Aulic Court.59 More than ten years later, at the beginning of the reform period, Collegiate Secretary Vasilii Gruzdev complained that the Moscow Aulic Court ordered a criminal investigation against him solely out of its collusion with his debtor. Gruzdev complained to the Criminal Chamber that the lower-level Aulic Court appeared to consider itself entitled to do “everything on its whim” and that it was concerned more with expanding, rather than reducing, its caseload. As a busy civil servant, he was irritated at losing time and energy by being implicated in a completely baseless criminal investigation. The Criminal Chamber agreed and immediately closed the case.60 Outright bribery was also rampant, and even the highest officials, such as the Petersburg governor Peter Pahlen or Minister of Justice Viktor Panin, famously had to bribe lowly court clerks.61 However, many such bribes, while illegal, in effect functioned as fees for the clerks’ services, compensating for their extremely low official salaries. For example, Pahlen had to pay only 100 rubles as a bribe to speed up the sale of his house, not an exorbitant amount, considering that the sale had to be completed in three days, the time period given him by the tsar to wind up his affairs and leave St. Petersburg.62 Many memoirists made this distinction explicitly: Feliks Luchinskii, serving as a petty police official in the 1850s and 1860s, recalled that the important distinction was not how large the bribe was but where it came from. Thus, in Kiev and its environs, bribes essentially served to supplement a policeman’s meager salary and were sometimes levied by local property owners to prevent the more predatory type of bribe taking. By contrast, in nearby Kherson province, bribery was far more widespread because police officials were under much weaker control by the local governor.63 Bribery was similarly institutionalized in Riazan province in the early 1860s, according to Peter Kostyliov, who served as the court investigator in the small town of Rannenburg.64 Even in the Senate, Russia’s highest appeals court, the over-secretaries tasked with reporting cases sometimes owned nice brick houses, and, according to Ivan Bocharov, charged a contingency fee for reporting a case in a favorable way, promising to refund the money if the senators failed to heed their persuasions.65 218 Debt and the Law Selivanov’s account of criminal justice in Moscow in the late 1850s suggests that bribery was strictly regulated within each department or institution: for instance, secretaries to the aides to the Moscow governor not only did not “dare” to take bribes but “simply could not . . . take one step” without their bosses’ permission.66 Surprisingly, Nikolai Kolmakov, a reform-minded jurist and memoirist, argued that the bad reputation of the old courts for bribery was based on the fact that the Civil Chambers included a records office that was overworked and required relatively small payments to speed the process of registering sales, loans, wills, and other contracts. Post-reform notaries charged that fee openly, whereas in pre-reform courts, an “immature” public opinion considered these to be bribes and impugned all court personnel.67 Individuals who could not rely on powerful friends and relatives had more limited options. For instance, the former Commercial Bank employee Aleksei Zaborovskii was wrongfully convicted of defrauding old Princess Cherkasskaia but was eventually cleared after the true criminal, Konovalov, repented and confessed. However, during the i