 home and to inventory and seize his or her property to pay the debt. Police officers were motivated to take this task seriously, because they could themselves be held liable for the amount of the debt if they allowed a debtor to escape.10 A play by Ostrovskii, Mad Money (1869), depicts this process as routine, with a foppish character trying to raise the spirits of a profligate Debtors and Bureaucrats 197 young noblewoman on the verge of insolvency: “What are you afraid of ? Cheer up! Yesterday two of my friends got their furniture inventoried, today it’s you, tomorrow it’s me, and then your [friend] Kuchumov. This is the plague these days.”11 Nikolai Nekrasov, in a little-known 1840 semi-autobiographical prose piece, vividly described the matter-of-fact character of a routine debt collection in Petersburg: the landlord, the laundress, and the local shopkeeper came to the apartment of a penniless aspiring author with a policemen, seized all of his movable possessions, and threw him out without ceremony. They did show some regard for his potentially higher status by allowing him to change his clothes, and they did not see any advantage in placing him in debtors’ prison, but there is nothing pro-debtor in that episode.12 The second option in the event that the debtor had no property or did not reveal its location was to arrest him or her, as long as the creditor paid the required prisoner maintenance fee. The third possible outcome was to transfer the case to the appropriate court if the debtor presented one of the enumerated defenses—for example, if the debt had already been repaid or the signature on the debt document had been forged. In such an event, the debtor still had to “secure” the case—that is, to post money or property in the amount under dispute, or, alternatively, present another property owner as a surety— or be arrested. The process was much more complex if the debtor was a wealthy person or if the property to be seized was a serf-populated village. Sometimes it was possible for the debtor to claim that he owned property higher in value than the amount of the debt and thus avoid imprisonment, but this was a tenuous argument, especially for individuals indebted to many lenders. There were relatively few foolproof techniques for resisting lenders’ demands. Unlike in the Anglo-American legal tradition, barricading oneself in one’s house was not an option in Russia.13 It was, however, possible to change one’s residence without informing the creditors, albeit at the risk of being accused of fraudulent bankruptcy. Other strategies included getting help from family members or remaining in state service, because government officials were immune to personal arrest for debt as long as a portion of their wages went to satisfy their creditors.14 Sometimes individuals served in a poorly paid or even preposterous capacity in order to evade their creditors. For example, the young spendthrift Count Dmitrii Tolstoy was serving at the Moscow Noble Assembly in the early 1860s solely for that purpose.15 It was a fairly common sentiment on the eve of the court reform of 1864 that the Russian justice system was in effect “geared to protect the debtor” by 198 Debt and the Law making debt collection overly difficult, so that some provincial nobles clamored for the reform in the hopes of making credit cheaper.16 In practice, however, the efficiency of collection depended entirely on the parties’ relative wealth, social standing, and connections, much as it did in any other legal system. After all, British aristocrats were widely criticized for being shielded from debt collection by their status, wealth, and privilege every bit as much as the Golitsyns, Naryshkins, and Yusupovs.17 Geographic proximity seems to have been a much more tangible factor than any arguable slant in the procedural rules: debtors with the means to do so could evade their creditors by moving to a different town. Memoirist, historian, and entrepreneur Dmitrii Nikiforov recalled how in the 1860s he was trying to collect a debt from Valerian Aleksandrovich Voeikov, who was something of a financial dealer despite his love of gambling, and who quickly moved from Petersburg to Moscow and back to evade the police.18 Russia’s physical distances made debt collection difficult even for the most influential creditors. In 1847, long before the Great Reforms, a group of leading Petersburg merchants that included the banker to the imperial court, Baron Alexander von Stieglitz, obtained the tsar’s personal permission to engage a Corps of Gendarmes officer, Staff Captain Kolomyitsev, to collect their debts in Moscow, Vladimir, Smolensk, Kaluga, and Nizhnii Novgorod provinces, arguing that they had trouble obtaining satisfaction from the local courts and police because of their debtors’ relationships with police and legal officials. Kolomyitsev successfully bullied many of the debtors into paying or surrendering their concealed assets, and this appears to have been his special area of interest, but such a method of debt collection could obviously be used only by the best-connected creditors.19 The present study features numerous debtors, usually wealthy or at least propertied people, who lost their estates, shops, and factories, were declared insolvent, or were sometimes imprisoned despite their rank and reputation. Any pro-debtor slant is difficult to discern in Russia’s actual legal practice apart from the fact that wealthy individuals indeed possessed more means to resist collection; yet, they were never collection-proof. Even in the eighteenth century, debt collection in Russia, while lenient toward aristocrats, was very harsh toward ordinary persons.20 Routine as it might seem at first glance, a police visit to a debtor’s house or apartment, sometimes accompanied by the creditors, was inherently an exercise of power, involving searching, inventorying, and sometimes seizing such items as horses, carriages, merchandise, clothing, furniture, icons, silverware, Debtors and Bureaucrats 199 books, and jewelry. In an age that discovered and placed great stock in the notion of privacy, the experience of having a despised moneylender rummage through one’s bedroom and moneybox was humiliating indeed.21 Debt collection could therefore easily lead to bitter personal and legal disputes. These were more complex and prolonged when debtors were either wealthy or influential, but altercations with police were not limited to the upper classes: even debtors from modest commercial and urban backgrounds were able and willing to resist collections through a combination of direct disobedience and official action. Suing a policeman directly was not permitted; any complaints went to the offending officer’s superiors, who might not be inclined to pursue the matter. Nonetheless, at least some administrative complaints were effective, especially beginning in the 1860s, at the high point of Alexander II’s liberal reforms. One such case began as a matter of routine debt collection but quickly turned into a conflict between a wealthy but otherwise ordinary Old Believer merchant and two noble-born police officers.22 On the evening of December 1, 1859, the recently appointed chief of the Prechistenka police precinct in central Moscow—a decorated veteran of the 1831 campaign in Lithuania with the unimposing surname Puzanov (“Potbelly”)—received an order from the city’s central police office to collect a debt from the younger son of a wealthy Old Believer merchant named Ivan Butikov. In addition to owning a large textile factory, Butikov served as an elected judge on the Moscow Magistrate Court and was well acquainted with Moscow’s bureaucratic world. Nonetheless, he chose not to enroll in the city’s most prestigious first merchant guild and thus seems to have intentionally kept a lower profile than his wealth warranted. Moreover, at that particular historical period, in the late 1850s, Moscow’s Old Believers were subjected to a particularly intense prosecution after the altars at their religious center at the Rogozhskoe Cemetery were sealed by the authorities in 1856. The collection order against Butikov had to be executed by nine o’clock the next morning, and the chief handed the task over to a younger officer, a veteran of the 1849 Hungarian campaign named Shkinskii who had only recently been appointed to the force on the recommendation of the tsar’s personal physician. Both policemen already knew Butikov well, only two weeks before having partaken of his hospitality at his wife’s nameday ­celebration. Shkinskii vigorously proceeded with his assignment. He assembled four policemen, a scribe, and two “good-faith witnesses,” ordinary citizens 200 Debt and the Law delegated for the purpose, and marched to Butikov’s house. In an operation that resembled a modern-day commando raid, Shkinskii posted policemen around the building and forced his way into the side entrance by waking up the doorman and “dragging him around by his arm” until he opened up the building to the police. In the kitchen, Shkinskii found a cook and slapped him until he agreed to show the way upstairs with a candle. The entire company thundered up, meeting a chambermaid at the top of the narrow stairs. The “good-faith witnesses” just behind Shkinskii heard the chambermaid exclaim, “Why are you hitting me?” but did not actually see him do it. Butikov’s eldest son, also named Ivan, appeared immediately on the landing and remarked that “this is a merchant’s house and he [Shkinskii] was not allowed to rough-house here,” upon which the policeman, according to his own testimony, pulled Ivan by his coat, and, according to Butikov’s complaint, beat him up. At this point, the senior Butikov woke up and came out of his room. With him Shkinskii adopted a different tone, claiming that he was merely delivering some important papers. To this Butikov—being no stranger to bureaucratic routines—replied that Shkinskii was free to come by whenever it was necessary but that “it is not proper to be noisy.” Shkinskii then dispensed with the niceties and demanded point-blank either the money or his son, which Butikov promptly refused, further insulting the policeman by saying, “I will not give the money to you” and promising to resolve the issue later in the day at the police station. The policeman took offense that Butikov used the familiar ty to address him, but Butikov responded that ty was “God’s word,” and even the Savior was addressed this way. According to Shkinskii’s report, Butikov then gave a little speech to the “good faith witnesses” that, if true, revealed a familiarity with the political trends of the Great Reforms: “You demean yourselves [before the police], because in reality you are the superiors of the Quarter Overseer [Shkinskii], and not the other way around; the Sovereign does not trust the police, but instead trusts You, and therefore you should not listen to him (pointing at Shkinskii).” Butikov then said to the officer himself, “Don’t you ever dare to visit either my factory or my house, otherwise I am going to see you off in a different way.” This, no doubt, indicated that Shkinskii was no longer to partake of Butikov’s customary hospitality to important local officials, which amounted to a form of bribery and patronage peddling. This would have been bad news for Shkinskii, whose financial well-being undoubtedly rested upon this kind of informal patronage. Debtors and Bureaucrats 201 While Shkinskii and the senior Butikov argued, the sought-after younger Butikov (Stepan), who was at first also present on the landing, quietly left the building, easily getting past the policemen stationed outside. Since Shkinskii’s objective had clearly failed with Stepan’s disappearance, the elder Butikov retired to his room, whereupon the policeman further humiliated himself by continuing to knock on Butikov’s bedroom door, asking for Stepan and threatening to conduct a search and to write up a police r