lly if they were in a debtors’ prison and could not easily advocate for themselves. For example, in 1844, Moscow townsman Ivan Monakhov became insolvent because of his cartwrighting business—mostly, it seemed, due to dishonesty by the merchant Dmitrii Evdokimov, who was refusing to pay his debt to Monakhov of over 10,000 rubles, while presenting his own claim for half that amount. As part of the prolonged case that stretched into the 1850s, Monakhov’s illiterate wife Anna, with the help of townswoman Elizaveta Filipova (who signed her petitions for her), successfully complained to the governor as part of Monakhov’s appeal process and offered to stand surety for her husband.54 Yet another related strategy was for wives to contrive to be included among their husbands’ creditors. For example, in the Krotkov insolvency case that has already been discussed, his creditors included his wife Varvara, with a claim of over 47,000 rubles, twice as much as the next largest claim. Adding this to the large claims by several other relatives, it is not surprising that the creditors eventually voted to grant him full bankruptcy discharge.55 Another wealthy debtor, Privy Councilor Prince Vasilii Khovanskii, who died in 1850, likewise had his wife listed among the creditors, with the hefty claim of 13,148 rubles.56 Needless to say, despite the legal restrictions on debt and other transactions between spouses, couples continued to purchase property in each other’s name. For example, gentleman capitalist Pavel Yablochkov was cheated by numerous relatives whom he had appointed as his agents while in the liquor tax farming business: they had managed to transfer all of their extensive properties to their wives and thereby made themselves ­collection-proof.57 While all these strategies utilized the fact that the wives of insolvent husbands remained off-limits to creditors and could actually count themselves among them, the law of separate marital property was also useful in another common type of situation: when creditors attempted to seize property that belonged to the debtor’s spouse. For example, in the Moscow Equity Court case of merchant Savinov discussed in the preceding section, in which he sued his daughter on the basis of a mortgage note for the estate that he purchased for her as dowry, the father attempted to argue that he actually took 180 The Culture of Debt this mortgage note in exchange for 200,000 rubles that he gave to his daughter’s husband. He backed up this argument with some letters written by his son-in-law. However, the daughter reasonably maintained that she had no idea whether her husband and her father had any debt relations, but “according to existing laws” she was not to be held accountable for them because the letters did not mention her in any way, and her husband was not mentioned in the mortgage note.58 The issue of separate marital property came up even more often when creditors simply appeared at a debtor’s house and attempted to inventory or take away movables. For example, in the case of Moscow brewer and merchant Marshchev, who was imprisoned for government debt in 1825, the police searched his apartment but were forced to conclude that all the property there belonged to his wife. Thus, even the government, while usually very jealous of its financial interests, had enough respect for the law to interpret it to favor the wife.59 In another case, Lieutenant Nikolai Tolstoy managed to mix up his property with that of his wife Natalia so thoroughly that the police could not untangle the question of ownership and in 1851 sent the case to Moscow County Court “as is.” The court not surprisingly objected that it was unclear what property, if any, belonged to Tolstoy’s wife and found that some of the claims were actually against the wife alone and that “it is even more impermissible to mix up the collections against him with those against his wife simply because this court is only examining the case of Mr. Tolstoy.” The court then sent the case back for additional investigation. When the police came to his house to inventory his movable property, Tolstoy claimed that everything in the house belonged to his wife, who submitted the proper “explanation” and refused to let the police into the house.60 Similarly, in another case, the collegiate assessor’s wife Maria Serebriakova refused four times to let the police inventory property—furniture, horses, and carriages—that she claimed was hers. The court eventually held that half of that property was still subject to seizure, but Serebriakova was referring to a 1842 dowry contract that showed all of this property as hers.61 Even in situations when wives were unable to protect their property, the rule of separate property permitted them to contest the police and creditors. In the 1841 case of a modest and not very well educated Moscow merchant Ivan Ignatiev, who was accused of forging a bill of exchange and imprisoned at a police precinct, the authorities inventoried and sealed the merchandise in the shop of his wife Avdotia and obstinately resisted petitions to reverse Kinship and Family 181 their decision. According to Ignatiev’s complaint to the governor, a corrupt and malevolent police clerk falsely wrote in the interrogation transcript that the shop belonged to him. In fact, Ignatiev only “managed and oversaw” the establishment, which his wife legally owned, financed with her own capital, and provided with merchandise of her own manufacture. We do not know whether Advotia eventually managed to get her property back, but it is clear, first, that both she and her husband were fully aware of the law of separate marital property despite their modest social status, and in fact probably set up their joint business with this rule in mind, and second, that the policemen’s obstinacy may have resulted from the fact that it was Ignatiev who managed the business and contracted debt and thus appeared to be the owner. Because townspeople, unlike merchants and peasants, did not need to enroll in guilds or obtain trading licenses, it would have been very difficult for the court to ascertain who actually owned the business. While this confusion of course harmed the Ignatievs’ finances while their business was shut down, the case shows that even in a situation involving serious police misconduct, the law of separate property prevented the Ignatievs from losing their shop outright.62 In situations when the property clearly belonged to the husband, the creditors and the courts seem to have followed the requirement of granting the wife’s half of the husband’s movable property. For example, in the case of merchant Artemii Riazanov, half of his property was given to his wife Matrena Anisimova Riazanova, and the other half was sold at an auction, except for the family’s icons, which were also given to the wife.63 The rule about separate marital property also applied when it was the wife who had become insolvent. For example, the collegiate councilor’s wife Liubov’ Pevnitskaia did not allow the police to take property from her house, claiming that all of it had belonged to her husband before their wedding, although it turned out that two years earlier she had acknowledged this ­property—including furniture, three horses, horse harness, and an icon—as hers. Thus, the Moscow County Court ordered in 1852 that Pevnitskaia’s movables be taken away “without accepting any more refusals from her.” But three months later, her husband was still not allowing the police to take the valuables to an auction, claiming that all the property was his, that his wife’s debts could be paid out of the income from her rural estate, and that in any event he had the right to consider half of these possessions as his “untouchable property,” thus applying to himself the law of 1846 that on its face was designed to protect wives and was specifically couched in feminine language.64 182 The Culture of Debt While it is clear that debtors were attempting to use the law of separate marital property to advance their interests vis-à-vis their creditors, the extent to which the latter were actually taken advantage of is not clear in some cases. For instance, Prince Vladimir Golitsyn was sued and declared insolvent because all the debts of the textile factory that he was running were in his name, although his wife and her two partners were the actual owners. Intriguingly, Golitsyn mentioned in his testimony that although the losses from the fire in the factory constituted his wife’s share, they “fell” on him, perhaps because he was responsible for the accident. It is also possible that Golitsyn contracted to run the factory at his own expense.65 It does, however, appear that the creditors were not able to positively establish who owned the factory and that this confusion was possibly created on purpose to make debt collection more difficult and to shelter the property of the three female investors. While it was obviously difficult to catch someone of Prince Golitsyn’s status in any obvious wrongdoing, the law was indeed strict toward another common abuse of the separate property rule, which consisted of one spouse issuing debt documents in the name of the other, without the appropriate power of attorney. As Margot Finn has shown for Victorian England, wives’ ability to pledge their husbands’ credit resulted in a great deal of litigation and legal uncertainty.66 In Russia, this situation could result in a criminal proceeding, as beset the humble Moscow townsman Mikhail Loskutkov, who was placed on trial for issuing bills of exchange in his wife’s name in 1853; he signed the documents because of his wife’s illiteracy, which created an additional problem when she claimed that she never borrowed any money and never gave that authority to her husband. Loskutkov himself admitted during the interrogation that his wife knew nothing about these debts, although a creditor’s servant testified that when he was sent to ask the Loskutkovs for repayment, it was the wife who requested a postponement. The wife, however, claimed that she was merely asking for a postponement until her husband returned home and was able to respond himself. The Chamber of Criminal Justice held Loskutkova’s denial to be invalid, but she appealed to the Senate in 1863, arguing that she had not engaged in trade at all. The Senate ruled that Loskutkova was not to be held responsible because her husband admitted that she knew nothing about the loans, because she herself did not admit to anything, and because the bills of exchange were not properly registered with the municipal loan broker.67 This case reveals the tension between formal law, which treated bills of exchange almost like cash, Kinship and Family 183 and regular civil law, which was more willing to accept outside evidence— and, surprisingly, the latter won. The legal regime of separate marital property may have been instituted to protect noble families and especially noblewomen, but in the mid-nineteenth century, it served as yet another complex legal and business strategy deployed by property owners, one that was intimately connected with the culture and practice of debt. Court cases show that separating the spouses’ property was rarely easy, even after the law of 1846 limited the kinds of property the spouse could legally hold to be his or her own. At the same time, the rule of separate property eliminated many other possible disputes, such as those that occurred in England because of the application of the law of necessaries. In addition to using the regime of separate marital property to resist outside creditors, husbands and wives utilized the law to borrow from each other and to secure their interests at the other’s expense. Such debt arrangements often provide insight into larger property disputes and the spouses’ respective property-related strategies. One strategy was to contractually re-create the so-called dotal system, whereby the husband acquired t