that, most likely to save money, it was moved to the quarters of the Rozhdestvenskaia police precinct on the opposite side of the city, not far from Znamenskaia Square.54 Both locations were relatively close to the city center but not in any sense prestigious. Interestingly, the prison in Petersburg was only closed in 1889, ten years after personal arrest was abolished for defendants in civil-law disputes and for In the Pit with Debtors 243 non-­commercial debtors. Bankrupt merchants and several other categories of debtors continued to be subject to imprisonment until the end of the tsarist period. Moscow’s Debtors’ Pit was closed in 1882, and debtors were kept in a jailhouse located in the former textile factory compound of the Titov family. According to Giliarovsky, from there the debtors’ prison moved to the building of the Prechistenskaia police precinct.55 The Moscow Debtors’ Pit was originally officially structured to reflect the empire’s system of legal estates. An early description of the prison listed six rooms: for noble debtors, for merchants and townspeople, for criminal defendants, for women, for sick persons (with six beds), and for persons temporarily arrested for petty crime.56 However, by the mid-nineteenth century, the estate-based system was no longer operational in the prison. Ostrovsky observed this when a character from his 1870 play, Mad Money, a vain and profligate young noblewoman, exclaimed: “I can suffer cruelly. I am allaround in debt, they will throw me into the Moscow Pit together with townswomen.”57 One of the reasons for this leveling quality of the Pit was probably that all debtors, even peasants and townspeople, were entitled to the higher daily maintenance amount that among ordinary prisoners was allotted only to nobles and civil servants.58 In 1841, Petersburg police specifically noted that imprisoned debtors were provisioned “without any division into estates.”59 In Moscow, the issue came up during the great renovation project of the court building and the Provisional Prison in the early 1860s. Governor Tuchkov sent his aide, Count Konovnitsyn, to determine how the expanded space should be apportioned among the various categories of debtors. Konovnitsyn was reacting to complaints from the humbler type of debtors, who had been housed in inferior rooms, while the better chambers went to those “who asked most persistently,” without there being any definite rule. Thus, he wanted “to destroy the lack of certainty, the existing arbitrariness in accommodating debtors, which, like any arbitrariness, can bring harm.” Konovnitsyn’s proposed solution was to house debtors based on the amount of their debt, rather than based on their legal estate. He reasoned that debtors who owed larger amounts had to be confined longer and thus deserved better space, but also that larger debtors must have had “larger business, had more money, and therefore were used to a better life.” Thus, two rooms were to be reserved for debtors owing up to 150 rubles, two rooms for those owing up to 300 rubles, and two rooms for those owing over 300 rubles. Four more rooms were given to the wealthy bankrupts, who could be confined for up to five years. Finally, there were to be ten single rooms for 244 Debt and the Law f­oreigners, nobles, and elderly persons of all estates, as well as a special chamber for “unruly persons rejected by the [debtors’] community.” Thus debtors could house themselves according to their “personalities” (kharaktery), although the dining room was common to all.60 Yet another proposal was to adopt the rule used in Petersburg and house debtors “according to their position in society.”61 It appears that this proposal was never officially introduced. But it is clear that in practice there was no clear segregation by social estate. For example, as of June 15, 1865, the Noble Section of the Debtor’s Pit held 14 prisoners, of whom 9 were nobles and 5 were merchants. The First Merchants’ Section held 13 merchants, 2 civil servants, and 3 others. The Second Merchants’ Section held 15 merchants, 15 townspeople, 4 officers and civil servants, and 6 others. Other sections, while mostly occupied by merchants and townspeople, also included a few nobles and civil servants; interestingly, the First Townspeople Section did house mostly townspeople and was clearly intended for the poorer type of debtors, whereas the Second Townspeople Section housed 8 merchants, one civil servant, 2 peasants, and only 4 townsmen.62 Thus, the real distribution of debtors was clearly based on either their wealth or the amount of their debt, but definitely not on the prisoners’ official legal rank. Although the Pit held a scattering of nobles and an occasional truly wealthy merchant, the bulk of its inmates consisted of reasonably well-to-do merchants and townspeople who were still far removed from the rich bankrupts who could owe hundreds of thousands of rubles, but at the same time were far above poor debtors who were imprisoned in the Moscow Workhouse for small tax arrears. For example, the average debt on the list of 66 debtors prepared by the governor’s officials in 1826 was 2,060 rubles, with a median of 1,250.63 Since even 200 rubles—the smallest debt on the list—was a sizable sum amounting to a petty clerk’s or a skilled workman’s annual wages, there were no truly poor persons on the list, nor were there any truly large debts except for one person. The internal rules governing everyday life in the Debtor’s Pit had nothing of the easygoing chaos of unreformed English debtors’ gaols, where prisoners could often leave the premises during the day, have family members live with them, and enjoy outside food, drinks, and smokes.64 However, there was also none of the harshness of regular Russian prisons, where inmates often had their heads shaved, were placed in irons and subjected to arbitrary ­corporal punishment, and had to dress in disfiguring and uncomfortable prison clothes. In the Pit with Debtors 245 Although the law required special rules for debtors’ prisons to be issued by the Ministry of the Interior, the authorities found out in the early 1860s that no such instruction existed even for Petersburg, where debtors were kept based on a set of rules that had “solidified over time” but apparently were not issued by any higher authorities.65 In Moscow, the instructions to the watch officer at the Pit were identical to those for Butyrka Prison, among other things prohibiting debtors from having ink, quills, and paper. The instructions also prohibited prisoners from begging for alms, possessing knives and other weapons, playing cards, having alcohol, singing songs, or making music. In 1860 the military authorities also instructed the watch officer to prevent alcohol from being brought into the prison unless accompanied by a note from the caretaker; another order prohibited the soldiers from searching female visitors “indecently and impudently.”66 The duties of the military guard were limited to preventing debtors from physically escaping the building, conducting a daily roll-call, and stopping any disturbances among the prisoners, but only at the caretaker’s request.67 Entering prisoners were to be examined by a doctor and were deprived of sharp weapons, large amounts of money, and any alcoholic beverages. Debtors could keep their own clothes and underwear, but if they had no bedding or linen of their own, they were to be issued a bed with a mattress, a sheet, a blanket, and a cover; a small cupboard; and a stool. Debtors in Moscow were not obligated to perform any labor other than keeping their rooms clean and tidy. With respect to dining, the rules in Moscow and Petersburg differed ­considerably. In Petersburg food was prepared for everyone at once and consumed in the dining hall during set hours. In Moscow, individual debtors received their own maintenance money to use as they saw fit, usually by forming an eating group with several other prisoners or buying food from the outside. Debtors were allowed not only food from outside but also small sums of money to buy tea, sugar, and other necessary supplies. The menu in Petersburg consisted of beef soup (shchi, a cabbage base, or borshch, with beets added), millet or buckwheat kasha with butter, and on holidays roast beef with sauce and potatoes or cucumbers. During fast days, soup was made with sturgeon or snetki (small dried salted fish), white mushrooms, and peas, and served with kasha prepared with sunflower oil or replaced by potato kisel’ (a savory pudding-like suspension), supplemented on Sundays by fried fish. During high holidays prisoners were to receive pirogi (savory filled pastries); on the last three days before Easter, they ate pancakes; and on Easter itself, 246 Debt and the Law they received eggs, kulichi, and paskha (Easter cakes), and then, for dinner, roasted veal and ham. In addition, prisoners were to receive bread and salt at all times without limit. While simple, this fare corresponded to what could be had in a simple eatery in the city for a very small sum; it also seems to be better and cheaper than what was offered in unreformed English debtors’ gaols.68 Petersburg rules that were almost certainly not followed in Moscow also required that prisoners be quiet during dinner and not be allowed to cook by themselves. Debtors were to be housed in such a way as to fit each other’s personalities and in the event of a quarrel were to be moved to different rooms to ensure “quiet, peace, and concord.” They were to have complete freedom inside the prison, their rooms were not locked, and there were no guards inside the prison. The outside gate was to be unlocked during the day, with a doorman posted at the entrance. Prisoners could engage in crafts and read books and journals in their rooms. Debtors could write letters and petitions concerning their cases, although official court submissions had to go through the caretaker. Whereas in Petersburg visitors were only allowed in the special visitors’ room, in Moscow visiting was allowed from eight in the morning to four in the afternoon in the debtors’ rooms. Neither drinking nor gambling was permitted. No quarreling, swearing, songs, or excessive noise were to be tolerated, and offenders could be placed in the “jail room” for one hour to three days. Otherwise, the prison staff was to treat inmates “as politely and meekly as possible, through which they would be persuaded to be polite and respectful to each other.”69 Female debtors were also imprisoned but in smaller numbers than men. The Workhouse (a separate building) held up to 100 women imprisoned for tax arrears. The Provisional Prison also included a separate women’s section. The number of female debtors imprisoned throughout the year seems to have been between 20 and 40, though the women’s section only had 22 beds. According to an 1853 report, female debtors were housed separately from non-debtors in a “rather comfortable and large room, supplied with the necessary furniture, beds, bed supplies, and linen.” Non-debtor female prisoners, by contrast, slept on bunk beds on felt mattresses and pillows stuffed with hay, and were subjected to constant supervision by a female overseer who treated them to “spiritual books.” Nonetheless, female debtors were subjected to far greater scrutiny than were male debtors, since the Ladies’ Committee of the Prison Society appointed one of its members to gather “the most precise information about In the Pit with Debtors 247 social position [sostoianie], conduct, way of life, and the morality of female prisoners, and about the reasons for which they fell into insolvency, at the same time inquiring into the social position of the creditors themselves and into the nature of their debt.”70 The inspector of the women’s section in the late 1840s was Anna Pichugina, the wife of a fourteenth-class civil servant. She was hired in 1844 and paid 85.7 rubles directly by the committee, as well a