’ monthly “maintenance fees,” which were set to one and a half times the amount provided by the state to imprisoned criminals; debtors whose creditors failed to pay within one week were then freed and could not be rearrested for the same debt.17 This rule followed the French practice and was very much unlike the English practice of requiring imprisoned debtors to pay their own way.18 In the 1840s and 1850s, this law prompted debate within the bureaucracy as to whether charging prisoner upkeep to creditors was the best policy choice. In 1841 Count Benckendorff, the director of the Third Section, who as president of the Imperial Prison Society oversaw prisoners’ living conditions, argued that increasing the maintenance fee would not only make imprisonment less onerous for individuals who had not been convicted or even suspected of any crime, but also to some extent prevent collusion between creditors and debtors who were known to imprison each other solely in order to benefit from charitable donations. Higher charges would at the same time discourage “avaricious speculators” who bought up debt documents for a tiny fraction of their cost and then imprisoned debtors to extort the entire amount. The response by Minister of Justice Viktor Panin belies the view that the Russian legal and administrative system at the time was geared toward protecting debtors and instead reveals an attempt to reach some kind of balance. Panin wrote that neither the Senate nor he himself wanted to increase the amount charged to creditors because he found that “any concession to a debtor already in a way violates the rights of the creditor, who, failing to recover his property, has the right to expect from the Government, not In the Pit with Debtors 233 c­ oncessions to [the debtor], but rather aid through all legal measures and a just recovery of his loss.” Displaying a curious mixture of reliance upon private initiative and paternalistic regulation that was so characteristic of Nicholas I’s regime, Panin concluded that he wished to avoid any measure that would look like a concession to debtors and that “imprisoning debtors constitutes a measure of preserving private credit in the State[, w]hich must be brought under the protection and care of the Government, and therefore there are insufficient grounds to free it completely from all expenses that may occur in this regard and to demand that all expenses be carried by private persons.” Panin and the Senate thought that although collusions and fraud would decrease if the maintenance fee were raised, the measure would damage or even ruin the less wealthy creditors who could not afford the higher charge.19 Debt Imprisonment in Practice In practice, the decision to imprison one’s debtor was merely one of several strategic negotiation choices available to creditors. The maintenance fee was obviously an important factor, since creditors were reluctant to pay yet more money after already losing their investment, although this consideration could be outweighed by the desire for retribution. However, several creditors could split the fee among themselves and make imprisonment much more affordable. But on the whole it appears that only a minority of creditors who had the option to have their debtor imprisoned were actually willing to pay their fees. In a typical case, a bankrupt Moscow merchant Vasilii Prokhorov remained free in 1859 because none of his creditors was willing to pay for his upkeep.20 It seems that when creditors did pay the maintenance fee, they first of all wanted to demonstrate their resoluteness and thereby induce their debtors to pay. Resoluteness was demonstrated because creditors had to pay the nonrefundable maintenance fee for the entire month even if the debtor paid up and was freed within a few days. Initial court petitions to collect debt were often submitted together with the prison maintenance fee to minimize delay and no doubt also as an additional threat. Even when the threat was actually carried out, approximately half of all prisoners were freed within one month for one reason or another.21 In addition to the expense of the fee, creditors could be disinclined to imprison debtors for a number of other reasons. Between 1864 and 1879 imprisonment wiped away a debtor’s liability, and creditors were motivated 234 Debt and the Law not to imprison debtors whenever there was any chance for future repayment. Creditors could also choose to allow debtors to retain their freedom or free them after a brief confinement so that they could continue their employment or trade and earn the money for repayment. For example, in the case of the bankrupt engineer and entrepreneur Colonel Nikolia, his creditors left him free “to give him opportunities to engage in activities suitable to his profession.”22 In 1858, the creditors of Collegiate Assessor Semen Yesaulov wanted to free him to earn some money for repayment, but the Moscow Aulic Court denied the request because Yesaulov was accused of fraudulent bankruptcy and had to remain in prison at the state’s expense if the maintenance money was not paid.23 In 1859, Lieutenant General Sergei Golitsyn, a highly decorated war veteran imprisoned for debt in Petersburg, successfully petitioned the Third Section to help him persuade his creditors to accept a negotiated settlement that would allow him to be free and able to find the money for repayment. Golitsyn argued that even the Commercial Bank—not particularly known for charity—made these kinds of deals with its debtors.24 Incidentally, this case also shows that in Petersburg, with its large population of civil servants and military officers, Golitsyn’s high rank did not prevent him from being imprisoned. This study found no evidence of anyone similarly highly ranked being imprisoned in Moscow, although wealthy merchants did occasionally end up in the Pit. Creditors could also choose not to imprison their debtors because of their pitiable condition, such as illness or responsibility for a large family, or they could otherwise be prevented from exercising their discretion by the authorities. For example, Anna Bestozheva, the fifty-five-year-old insolvent widow of a guard captain, was in bed when the police came to arrest her and she refused to come along because of her illness. She was then examined by a police doctor on February 7, 1868, and found to have an inborn heart defect and a developing paralysis. One of the creditors demanded that she be placed in the prison hospital, but the doctor determined that she could be neither sent to the hospital nor brought to the police station.25 Thus, there were numerous reasons not to imprison one’s debtors; however, sometimes it was the only practicable way to obtain repayment, whether because the creditor knew of some hidden property or because of the high probability of a redemption by charitable persons or the Moscow Prison Committee. For example, the ex-policeman Leiba-Srulevich Sumgalter traveled to Moscow to collect his 118.50-ruble debt from townsman Krasil’nikov and won every court proceeding but was still unable to get his money because In the Pit with Debtors 235 the debtor managed to hide his property with relatives. Finally, Sumgalter had Krasil’nikov imprisoned despite the small amount of his debt, and in March 1863, he was redeemed by the Prison Committee.26 Other creditors were apparently not so desperate but merely wished to take advantage of popular— as well as official—charitable sentiment: one official report in 1856 mirrored Minister Panin’s earlier observation and suggested that “at least half ” of the unusually large prison population on the eve of Alexander II’s coronation that year were confined for fake debts just to take advantage of the charity, as apparently had happened frequently in the past.27 Another police report to the governor included the following anonymous denunciation: Having learned that Your Excellency will be redeeming debtors from the Provisional Prison before Easter, I resolved to notify You that the debtors being redeemed only imprison themselves for the purpose of being ransomed; in particular I must point out townswomen Kalinina and Uskova, who each year before each holiday imprison more than ten people, who they claim owe them large amounts of money, for the purpose of collecting the ransom. I take the liberty to bring this to your attention.28 Even genuine creditors apparently waited to imprison their debtors until just before Easter and Christmas, in the hopes of a charitable redemption.29 The effectiveness of using debt imprisonment as a way to obtain repayment can be judged by the various reasons imprisoned debtors were released in Petersburg and in Moscow in 1862, summarized in Table 7.1. While the number of debt prisoners listed for Moscow was somewhat low for the 1860s, it is notable that every one of Moscow’s prisoners was freed through the charity administered by the Imperial Prison Society. In Petersburg, almost 50 percent of all creditors initially chose to imprison their debtors but gave up before receiving any repayment. However, almost 29 percent were rewarded for their perseverance and were repaid either by debtors or by charitable donations. Even this number is rather high and suggests that debt imprisonment was an effective strategy both in Moscow and in Petersburg. The number of imprisoned debtors in Moscow, as shown in the statistics of the Imperial Prison Society, was much smaller than in Petersburg and was only a tiny fraction of the huge English debtor inmate population, but it was roughly comparable to the number in France, where the debtors’ prison in Paris held 125 prisoners in 1851.30 Several statistical snapshots of the Moscow Debtor’s Pit show that the numbers of prisoners gradually increased from the early nineteenth century. In 1808, there were 60 debtors, including 96 Moscow 307 / 98 385 / 101 n / ac 61 n / a 215 / 78 No. of Debtors Amt. 0 31 0 166 / 134 No. of Debtors Amt. Debtor or Relatives Paid the Debt 0 280 0 837 No. of Debtors Amt. Creditors Dropped Claims or Failed to Pay Prison Fees a. The numerator represents the average debt, and the denominator represents the average sum paid to secure the release. b. The numerator represents the number of debtors released, and the denominator represents the number of debtors imprisoned during the year. c. In Moscow, private donations were administered through the Prison Committee. Data source: GARF 123.1.322. 70 a No. of Debtors Amt. St. Petersburg Prison Committee Private Donations Table 7.1 Released Debtors in St. Petersburg and Moscow, 1862 96 / 96 442 / 564b Total No. of Debtors Released In the Pit with Debtors 237 11 nobles and 49 merchants,31 whereas in 1817 there were already 125, including 10 nobles.32 During the second half of the century this number varied from 100 to 150 and began to include more poor debtors; at one period in 1865, for example, the Pit held 143 persons, including 19 nobles, 54 merchants, 53 townspeople, 7 peasants, and 10 others.33 During major state celebrations that included mass redemption operations, the numbers of prisoners could skyrocket. For example, in 1856, on the eve of Alexander II’s coronation, the Pit held 400 debtors, suggesting that there was some truth in reports that many Muscovites were imprisoned with the express expectation of charitable redemption.34 None of these numbers included debtors who were detained for tax arrears at the Moscow Workhouse or who were briefly detained at police precincts for either private debts or tax arrears. Earlier, in 1841, a Senate report cited a much smaller number of imprisoned debtors: only 12 persons in Petersburg at the end of 1841, between 20 and 35 at any one time in Moscow, and no more than 58 in Odessa during the entire year.35 Given that the Senate was justifying its refusal to increase debtors’ maintenance fees, these numbers are obviously too low: most debtors were redeemed or otherwise set free b