 partnership, apparently unusually for Russia, where solo practice was the norm.21 The two of them were accused of various types of chicanery and conflicts of interest, but even the Third Section’s senior officers noted that the original file had not indicated how these alleged abuses might be uncovered, had not mentioned a single specific court case in which they represented both sides at the same time, and had not named a single legal official who assisted them.22 It is also important to keep in mind the comparative dimension: while an organized bar is a venerable institution in Western law, effective legal advice and legal representation available at trials as a rule rather than as an exception applying only to the wealthy is a relatively recent innovation that even in England only took firm roots in the mid-nineteenth century. In the United States, the Sixth Amendment was only applied to the states in fits and starts after 1932. The fact that most American or Western European litigants and defendants could not expect to have access to effective legal advice until well into the twentieth century makes Russia’s lack of an organized bar not quite as glaring a failure as it might appear from the reformers’ perspective.23 It is true that criminal defendants in Russia were not permitted to hire attorneys during the preliminary investigation—both before and after the 1864 266 Debt and the Law reform. Before the reform, the task of protecting their interests was officially vested, first of all, in the local procuracy official, and second, in special deputies assigned to defendants who belonged to the clergy, to the military, merchants, townspeople, state peasants, retired soldiers, or those from any other particular “department” (vedomstvo). Serfs could be represented by their masters.24 However, on closer examination, it turns out that defendants could hire their own attorneys for the most important stage of the pre-reform criminal trial—namely, reading, commenting on, and signing the case extract on the basis of which the judges rendered their decision. A leading late imperial jurist who wrote an important reform-minded study of the Russian bar, Evgenii Vas’kovskii, misrepresented the facts rather crudely by claiming that attorneys were allowed to review the case extract only during the unimportant lower-tier criminal proceedings that were not going to move to the next tier, concluding that criminal defendants were in effect denied legal representation.25 Had he looked through several more pages of the Digest of the Laws, he would have noticed that representatives were explicitly permitted to review criminal case extracts both in the second-tier Chamber of Criminal Justice and in the Senate after 1828.26 The term “representative” (poverennyi) often referred to individuals who provided legal advice or facilitated access to the court system. However, it was much broader than that, technically including anyone with a power of attorney (veriushchee pis’mo) from another person. Table 8.1 and Appendixes D.1 and D.2 summarize the information for powers of attorney registered at the Moscow Civil Chamber in 1852, 1857, 1861, and 1867, noting the range of activities that involved the services of a poverennyi. Table 8.1 L egal Practice by Type of Matter (Based on Registered Powers of Attorney) Type Real estate 1852 1857 1861 1867 136 101 Commercial 44 44 110 54 33 21 Litigation 54 47 84 80 Other a 8 5 4 2 Total 241b 197 252 136 a. Mainly receipt of money and mail; b. Some powers of attorney had multiple purposes. Data sources: See Appendix D.1. Intermediaries, Lawyers, and Scriveners 267 Powers of attorney show that despite the lack of a formal legal profession, litigation-related matters were in practice distinguished from other tasks, such as property management and routine one-time visits to government offices to sign or obtain documents. Court registers show that debt collection represented between 10 and 27 percent of all matters for which representatives were hired. Moreover, registration books show that many more individuals were already being hired as court representatives from the late 1850s onward—that is, long before the new courts were in the works. It is also noteworthy that women were actively involved in court representation before the reform of 1864, but not more so than the principals’ close relatives, such as parents, children, siblings, and spouses. Other evidence suggests that even those poverennye who did specialize in providing legal services could supplement their income with other types of assignments. Katherine Pickering Antonova’s study of a middling gentry family from Vladimir province, northeast of Moscow, identified correspondence between the noble landowner, Andrei Chikhachev, and his Moscow attorney, Ivan Gruzinov, who was mainly employed to deal with Chikhachev’s loans to the Board of Trustees in the 1830s and 1840s. However, he also volunteered to help him purchase tea, coffee, and sugar, undertaking to get a better price as a bulk buyer.27 In his 1859 investigation of St. Petersburg “usurers,” the Corps of Gendarmes officer Fedor Rakeev noted that many of them doubled up as legal representatives, accepting debt documents in lieu of legal fees.28 Whereas the boundary between legal and non-legal work was obviously porous, it is important to remember that it continued to be so long after the reform, and Russian lawyers continued to be engaged in various less glamorous activities, such as collecting debt, even after the most successful of them became barristers after 1866.29 We have already met one prominent Moscow barrister, Aleksandr Saltykov, who for decades embezzled his clients’ money and eventually, in 1891, fled the city and staged his own suicide. Aside from his successful legal practice, he assisted his highly placed clients by investing their money in loans and mortgages, taking advantage of the prestige granted to the legal profession in post-reform Russia.30 He found out that it was much easier to “invest” in fraudulent mortgages than in real ones, although it took his clients many years to become suspicious because he paid them off with the proceeds of his new “investments.” The connection between legal representation and commercial and financial activity was not unique to Russia: in the Anglo-American legal world, attorneys managed property, collected debt, and performed other paid functions.31 268 Debt and the Law Those pre-reform poverennye who focused on actual legal work usually had some background or connection with government service. It could be someone with a very low official status. For example, a wealthy and legally knowledgeable owner of one of the largest public baths in Moscow, when sued by an equally wealthy Colonel Nikitin for a debt of 110,000 rubles, hired a police copyist, Nikolai Semenov, to prepare his court petitions.32 Many more debt litigants were represented by a poverennyi who held a junior commissioned rank either in the military or in the civil service. For example, merchant Marshchev was imprisoned for his debt to the treasury related to a liquor concession, and his illiterate wife petitioned for his release with her as a surety with the help of the Second Lieutenant Mogilevich.33 In the forgery case of Moscow merchant Stepan Tikhomirov, the alleged fraud victim, another merchant named Iakov Chistiakov, was represented by Gubernial Secretary Konstantin Lozhkin, who in March 1867 requested the Chamber to be allowed to review the case and “give explanations” to the court; he was told that the case had been already reported to the court but that he could still give his comments (poiasneniia).34 Incidentally, this case shows how a criminal defendant in pre-reform courts could be served by an attorney in the absence of a public jury trial. In yet another debt case, collegiate councilor’s wife Strekalova hired Collegiate Assessor Mikhail Rakhmaninov to defend her against a lawsuit by her creditor, nobleman Faleev.35 Lozhkin and Rakhmaninov seem to have been mid-range lawyers, equally removed from the ranks of the lowly scriveners and from the highly successful poverennye with university degrees. The latter group were employed by the wealthiest and most influential clients, such as the wealthy Old Believer merchant and textile factory owner Ivan Butikov, who in the early 1860s waged a bitter feud with Moscow police over a debt collection against his son. Because of his wealth, Butikov could afford the services of Titular Councilor Mikhail Aristov, who was referred to in a police document as the “well-known Moscow advokat.”36 Aristov seems to have specialized in representing wealthy merchants in complex commercial and bankruptcy matters, including appeals to the Senate.37 In 1866 he became one of Moscow’s first sworn barristers.38 In the case of the young spendthrift Count Dmitrii Tolstoy, his father’s representative Shimanovskii negotiated with creditors and ended up buying up the majority of the son’s debt, so that the father controlled the disposition of the bankruptcy proceedings.39 In defending her debt case in the early 1850s, the noblewoman Anna Faleeva mentioned in her petitions to the court Intermediaries, Lawyers, and Scriveners 269 that she spent a large sum of money on hiring poverennye to pursue appellate litigation in St. Petersburg.40 At the same time, some lawyers had a reputation for cheating their clients and attracted the attention of the Third Section, whose reports do, however, indicate that these lawyers’ chicaneries were exceptional and violated all accepted standards of conduct, even in Russia’s largely unregulated pre-­ ­ reform legal profession. For example, Titular Councilor Aleksandr Alekseevich Bilbasov practiced in Petersburg from the 1850s to the 1870s. In 1858 he assisted noblewoman Lidia Telesheva, who defrauded her lover, Prince Mikhail Mikhailovich Golitsyn. In 1866, he was accused of forging a receipt for the money owed to his client, Praskovia Zasetskaia, the widow of a colonel. Finally, in the early 1870s, he became tangentially involved in the massive fraud case known as the Jacks of Hearts Club, allegedly assuring some lenders that a penniless noble, Dmitriev-Mamonov, was about to get a large sum of money by winning a legal case against two other aristocratic families. The Corps of Gendarmes was well aware of Bilbasov’s reputation and filed away the matters in which he took part. Interestingly, the wellknown critic of the old courts, Kolmakov, listed Bilbasov as one of Petersburg’s openly established (glasnye) “advocates,” representing them as victims of the Third Section.41 Another similarly negative figure was Collegiate Assessor Ivan Davydenko, who was described in a secret police memo as obstinate in character, stubborn, and insolent; a pettifogger (kliauznik); a false denouncer; and always extremely mendacious with his clients.42 Before engaging in private practice in the 1830s he had served at the Spiritual Consistory and at the Petersburg provincial administrative office, at the police in the Ukrainian town of Nikopol, at the Fifth Department of the Senate, and then as the chief of police in the Russian town of Kashin. He had been placed on trial and fired for making false denunciations, fraud, and rudeness toward the investigating officials. To be completely fair, none of these accusations sound particularly horrible: ungrounded denunciations were—and are—pretty common in all parts of the world, regardless of the tradition of the rule of law; forged receipts in the petty cash register were no doubt routine practice, and drunken threats against the same man he had earlier falsely denounced suggest a personal conflict rather than some fundamental flaw of character. Eventually he was able to secure a position at the central police office in Petersburg. The Third Section accumulated an impressive list of cases in which Davydenko allegedly cheated his clients. For example, in 