s provided with a two-room apartment, three Dutch ovens, and firewood for them.71 Although Prison Committee officials were frequently concerned about maintaining the morality of female prisoners throughout Russia, only in 1861 were women’s quarters required to be entirely separated from the rest of the prison and the door to be locked at all times. Thus, female debtors’ freedom was significantly restricted compared to that of their male counterparts. This was in line with the French practice, reported in 1851 by a Russian visitor, to allow male debtors to receive their wives and children in their rooms during visiting hours or take walks together in the prison’s flower garden but not allowing the same privilege to imprisoned married women, who were only allowed to see their husbands in the common visitors’ room, for the avowed purpose of preventing pregnancies.72 But in Moscow, keeping male and female debtors in the same building was still deemed to be inappropriate, and a female member of the Prison Committee, Novikova, donated 1,500 rubles in 1862 to establish a separate women’s debtors’ prison at the Prechistenka police station, where, the committee boasted, the women’s section became “most comfortable” and could “stand among the best establishments of this kind.”73 The report suggests that the new facility separated women by their rank, which was not done in the Provisional Prison. Prison Conflicts Despite their relatively relaxed living conditions, imprisoned debtors frequently challenged the authorities and attempted to circumvent the rules. For example, in 1856 the numbers of prisoners increased approximately ­four-fold because creditors were expecting massive charitable redemption on the occasion of the upcoming coronation of Alexander II. State Councilor Gastev reported to the city’s governor general that ever since the debtors’ bathing facilities were converted to living space to house their swelling numbers and visits to outside baths had been allowed, debtors used these visits mainly as a chance to walk through the city and obtain drink, which was not 248 Debt and the Law permitted in the prison.74 Debtors also skillfully explored the lack of coordination between different bureaucratic structures; for example, they would first petition the city police chief to be allowed to leave prison for various private reasons and, if refused, they would petition the provincial procurator, who was more generous.75 Furthermore, they managed to evade the restrictions against drinking by consuming vodka not only when visiting their relatives or the baths but even on visits to the police offices or the courts that were all located in the same building as the prison. Debtors also managed to smuggle alcohol into the prison, in violation of the rules; for example, in 1847, the city police chief inspected the Pit and noticed the smell of vodka in one of the rooms. Investigation revealed that the drink had been brought in by retired sergeant Boitsov, who had been hired by the Prison Committee as a servant and was immediately fired after the incident.76 Quarreling and disorders of various sorts also seem to have been common in the Pit. For example, in 1830 Collegiate Secretary Aleksei Komarov, who was not a debtor but was placed in the Provisional Prison during a criminal investigation, inflicted knife wounds on another civil servant, Botashev, apparently because Komarov asked Botashev to bring him vodka, but he brought a carafe of water as a joke and then took a small whip that was for some reason found in their room and started jokingly hitting Komarov, who eventually lost his patience. Botashev, however, claimed that Komarov was hitting him with his pipe and that he was using the whip in self-defense. Komarov was at first sentenced to be conscripted to the army, but the Senate overruled this and sentenced him to one month’s arrest instead.77 A much more disruptive episode occurred in June 1865, when a sixty-fouryear-old moneylender, the merchant Andrei Lukin, visited one of his imprisoned debtors and was beaten by a group of inmates in the presence of a police officer who was for some reason unable or unwilling to intervene.78 The pretext for the beating was that Lukin had “unjustly” imprisoned the Armenian nobleman and wine merchant Serebriakov. Lukin complained to the police, and after a preliminary investigation, the governor assigned the case to a special high-ranking aide, Prince Chagataev, a colonel. Given the subversive character of the incident, the colonel was zealous in his efforts. However, the prisoners refused to implicate any of their number, and none of the young male merchants and townsmen accused by Lukin confessed, whereas Serebriakov, who allegedly was the cause of the incident, soon paid his debt, was freed, and immediately took a train to Nizhnii Novgorod before Chagataev had a chance to question him. The police officer, who was eventually dismissed from In the Pit with Debtors 249 his position, was likewise either unable or unwilling to recognize any of the culprits. Lukin himself changed his story and became lost in details, and apparently was greatly disliked by the police. Strikingly, the investigation made progress only when the elderman of the room where Lukin was beaten, a Jewish merchant from Berdichev named Natanzon, agreed to testify and identify three men who were the most active perpetrators of the beating. Chagataev had managed to locate the one prisoner who was most likely to cooperate, since he was harassed by prisoners and by the authorities alike and was probably all too happy to be rid of his tormentors. But one witness was not enough for conviction under the Russian law of evidence, and Lukin assisted the investigation by getting another imprisoned Jewish debtor, Matvei Shmuller, to testify as well. Subsequently three non-Jewish debtors also agreed to testify and confirmed Natanzon’s and Schmuller’s account of the incident. Although the case file is not complete, we can be certain that with so many witnesses, Chagataev was going to get the convictions he sought.79 An indirect confirmation of this is presented by a different incident that occurred a couple months into the investigation, around eleven o’clock in the evening on August 11, 1865, when eight imprisoned debtors pummeled Natanzon and three other debtors, threw out Natanzon’s furniture and belongings from his room, and insulted the caretaker and the police officer on duty. Apparently the cause of the riot was that several debtors had decided that a police officer, Voznesenskii, wanted to free Jewish debtors. However, every eyewitness to the incident gave a different version of the story, and the newly established post-reform District Court closed the case.80 Lukin’s story suggests that Moscow’s authorities were deeply conflicted about their approach to the trade of moneylending and to the practice of debt imprisonment. To begin with, the police guards warned Lukin not to go inside by himself but were unwilling or unable to prevent or to stop the beating and unwilling to cooperate with the investigation. This might indicate either a personal dislike of Lukin or a more systemic distaste for pro­ fessional predatory moneylending. But once the investigation had been launched, Prince Chagataev located the culprits quickly and efficiently after finding a way to break through the prisoners’ code of silence. His efficiency was prompted, no doubt, by the governor’s motivation to suppress and punish any prison riot in such a central location as the city’s court building. However, the wealthy and literate Lukin himself does not appear in this story as a downtrodden type of moneylender who—if the stereotype about 250 Debt and the Law the universal hatred of moneylenders were true—should have been afraid to remind the authorities about his very existence. Instead, he took an active part in the investigation, meeting with witnesses and constantly petitioning Chagataev, the police, and the governor. The case, in fact, closely resembles that of the elderly Old Believer merchant Butikov, who complained against police misbehavior in 1859 and eventually saw the offending officer dismissed; both cases suggest that higher-level city authorities were reluctant to antagonize Moscow’s influential and wealthy commercial strata, whatever they may have thought about the morality of usury.81 Lukin’s case also shows that the times had changed: Alexander II’s liberal reforms were in full swing, and thus there is no indication of any police abuse toward the accused individuals, who fifteen or twenty years earlier would probably have been placed in solitary confinement and pressured to confess. In sum, although the Provisional Prison was located in the city’s bureaucratic hub, and although it was unmistakably a prison locked up for the night under military guard, its everyday conditions were comparatively relaxed and permissive, in some aspects—such as in the general level of supervision and surveillance—surprisingly more so than in the semi-privatized debtors’ prison in Petersburg. Even more important, the prisoners were not segregated according to the empire’s system of legal estates but rather housed according to their wealth and social status; while most of them were townsmen, they mingled freely with merchants, civil servants, military officers, and even wealthier peasants. Interestingly, none of the imprisoned debtors were destitute, nor were any but a few exceptional cases truly rich, with most prisoners owing only a few hundred rubles. While inmates regularly challenged the authorities in various ways, this misbehavior was not harshly punished, and even serious violations like the beating of Lukin were investigated energetically but carefully. The Debtor’s Pit’s operations thus question, or at least complicate, the meaning of authority and punishment in microcosm just as these concepts were being reworked within the larger cultural context by the Great Reforms. Although the stereotypical view of Nicholas I’s reign emphasizes its paternalism and authoritarianism, the Debtor’s Pit, as well as many other elements of the pre-reform legal and administrative system, relied upon private action and discretion. As long as the prison was filled up on behalf of private individuals with debtors who were not considered real prisoners, the Pit could not be fully subjected to bureaucratic control. While the partial abolition of debt imprisonment in 1879 appears to have mostly followed the trend In the Pit with Debtors 251 in all major legal systems, it should perhaps be also understood as delineating more sharply between the government and the public and asserting the former’s power to control the penal system. Redemption Rituals and Official Nationality The Debtor’s Pit, in addition to being a place of conflict and cooperation among creditors, debtors, and government officials, also attracted the charitable sentiment both of ordinary Muscovites and of some of the most influential persons in the empire. Twice a year, on Easter and Christmas, most ­imprisoned debtors were redeemed with money from private donations. On other occasions throughout the year, tied to the memory of important dynastic events and to religious holidays, smaller numbers were set free as well. These ceremonies were supervised by important government officials, ostensibly in their private capacity as members of the philanthropic Moscow Prison Committee. Often involving complex negotiations with creditors, as well as assessments of the debtors’ moral character and behavior, redemption procedures demonstrate the curious way in which public and private elements intertwined in Russian life before and during the Great Reforms of the 1860s.82 Official tutelage encouraged private charitable sentiment, while directing it along desired lines. In the late eighteenth century, charity and debtor redemption contributed to the imperial social project that attemp