l, and so were daily bribery and influence peddling. However, both statutory law and governmental practice maintained the courts’ relative autonomy from other officials, even though provincial authorities did exercise certain limited judicial functions. Even the highest-ranking officials who had the power to circumvent the law could not expect to openly violate it without jeopardizing their careers. The written character of court procedure and the relative accessibility of appeals ensured that bribery and corruption could not by themselves determine litigation success. At the same time, the power of such emperors as Nicholas I or Alexander II was inconceivable apart from a robust regime of private property protected by a bureaucratic and legal system but also dependent upon individual discretion and initiative. Daily corruption in the context of this system therefore appears as just another stratagem in debt disputes and not a factor that would have made the law unworkable or unpredictable. chapt e r 7 In the Pit with Debtors T h e d e bt o rs ’ s e cti o n of the Moscow Provisional Prison, known colloquially as the “Debtor’s Pit” (Dolgovaia Yama), was a major part of the city’s culture of debt, despite its complete neglect in historiography.1 Although the number of its inmates was small compared to its English counterparts or even to Petersburg’s debtors’ prison, the Debtor’s Pit and its legends left their mark on the city’s cultural memory, figuring prominently in popular guidebooks and des­ criptions of the city, as well as in the famous sketches of Moscow life by Vladimir Giliarovsky.2 More importantly, debt imprisonment illustrates several key aspects of the daily interactions between private individuals and the tsarist state. First, the process of debt imprisonment illustrates that imperial Russia’s authoritarian political regime, especially before the reforms of the 1860s, relied on private discretion and initiative for many of its everyday functions. Debtors were arrested at the request of individual creditors and imprisoned at their expense, a surprising concession of what we today view as a major prerogative of the centralized modern state. At the same time, private discretion was limited in scope because the government refused to privatize prison operations. Moreover, the fact that creditors had to pay for prisoner upkeep limited their discretion to cases when imprisonment was either economically profitable or at least emotionally satisfying. Second, what we know about the conditions of the imprisoned debtors shows that they occupied a peculiar position between free persons and the mass of Russia’s prison population, thus bringing into question the extent of 228 In the Pit with Debtors 229 the rights granted to the tsar’s subjects, and especially the meaning of individual freedom and of its deprivation. Third, imprisoned debtors were regularly set free when their debts were paid by anonymous private donations, including those from members of the imperial family, usually on important religious and dynastic occasions. These rituals of redemption thus forged emotional and symbolic connections within propertied groups, as well as links with the imperial family and with their Orthodox faith. History and the Law of Debt Imprisonment As was the case with all other legal rules related to property ownership and control, the ability to imprison one’s debtors was used by individuals as a strategic and negotiating tool, with much of the bargaining power favoring creditors. Debt imprisonment raised complex legal issues concerning the legal remedies that should be available to private persons, the nature of punishment, and the distinction between civil and criminal law. Lawyers and statesmen queried whether private law remedies could properly include effectively holding one’s debtors hostage for ransom or, conversely, punishing them with prison for not being able to repay, or whether there was a way to view imprisonment as somehow nonpunitive. The logical implications of such inquiries, as well as the evolving understanding of debt from a moral to an economic failure, led most Western legal systems, including Russia’s, to reform and gradually abolish debt imprisonment in the second half of the nineteenth century. In England, as Margot Finn has shown, debtors’ prisons, despite their often-abusive practices, could serve as shelters for their inmates, protecting them from their creditors’ arbitrary authority. Inmates themselves exercised considerable autonomy in their affairs. In the course of the mid-Victorian reforms, wealthier debtors were gradually freed from the menace of the debtors’ prisons, whereas the poorer ones began to be subjected to an increasingly punitive regime that assumed and enforced their moral defectiveness.3 Debt imprisonment in Russia was significantly influenced by the English model in the early nineteenth century and developed along a similar ­trajectory—but with some rather telling deviations. In early modern Russia, debt collection had typically involved measures against a debtor’s person, especially when the debt was commercial in nature and the debtor did not possess any property that could be easily sold. The procedure known as 230 Debt and the Law praviozh (also used to collect tax arrears) at least theoretically involved daily beatings of the debtor until he paid up or the mandated time period had lapsed, in which case the collection was then directed against the debtor’s property.4 Considering that commercial debts typically required cosigners, failure to pay would expose the debtor’s partners or friends to beatings as well. Indentured service for debt was also available: under the Law Code of 1649, creditors could claim the debtor’s labor at the rate of 5 rubles per year, a considerable sum; lesser amounts were counted for women’s and children’s labor.5 In 1700 Peter the Great reaffirmed the praviozh system and required that if it failed to produce results, the debtor was to be beaten with a knout and sent to penal labor in the southern fortress of Azov for three years, where, in the unlikely event of survival, he was to be subsequently resettled. If there were several creditors, one of them could pay off the debt and acquire the debtor as his permanent indentured laborer. The decree also suggested that the way this harsh law was evaded in practice was by use of a front man in whose name the debt obligation was issued and who would be the person beaten and exiled in the event of nonpayment. Consequently, it is not surprising that in 1718 another decree abolished praviozh and instead granted delinquent debtors a six-month grace period, as long as they could provide a guarantor; if no payment was made, both the debtor and the guarantor—and if the debtor had died, then his wife and children—were required to be employed on the galley fleet as rowers or, if unfit, then on other state projects or—for women—in the Petersburg Spinning House for life or until they worked off the debt. Creditors were paid one ruble per month for each person, but debtors’ wives were apparently not counted.6 Yet debt collection during the early eighteenth century often continued to be a violent procedure, and the violence could go either way; for example, in 1714, one creditor arriving with witnesses and a police bailiff was beaten by the debtor and his friends with clubs and a rifle butt.7 A more durable alternative to pure debt slavery was to bind debtors not to their creditors but to third parties. In the eighteenth century, indentured service for debt became common and was known as partikuliar. This term, officially decreed in 1736, referred to the remedy’s “private” character. The rate according to the 1736 decree was at least 24 rubles per year.8 Although this system would have been reasonably efficient for smaller debts, the legally mandated fees could not possibly repay larger loans. A 1795 memorandum from the Moscow city police chief to the city governor argued that the arrangement whereby someone with multi-thousand-ruble debts went to In the Pit with Debtors 231 work for 24 rubles per year in effect allowed spendthrifts and “bankrupts” to escape their obligations, considering that even an unskilled laborer at that time received at least 60 rubles per year. The proposed correction in the police memorandum was to indenture those debtors who became insolvent through no fault of their own to the highest bidder and to sentence the more blameworthy bankrupts to penal exile.9 Apparently the city authorities followed this recommendation at least in part because a later page from the same document contains a list of debtors indentured to work for as much as 100 rubles a year, although most were still fetching between 24 and 30 rubles. At the same time, the Moscow magistrate compiled a list of fifty-one debtors who wished to enter indentured service, including four women.10 The fact that the debtors’ wages were not officially adjusted suggests that partikuliar was not in practice used to effect repayment or to punish debtors but rather served as a form of bankruptcy discharge, if the debt was large, and as a settlement between debtors and creditors, if the debt was moderate. Indentured labor seems to have fallen out of use by the first half of the nineteenth century and was abolished in 1834.11 Debt imprisonment per se was also commonly used by the end of the eighteenth century, especially after Russia began to acquire an organized prison system under Catherine II. A 1793 list of imprisoned debtors from Moscow province included very small numbers of individuals who agreed to serve as indentured laborers. For example, in Kolomna there were only two such individuals out of eighty prisoners in the town jail. It is unclear, however, how many of these eighty were debtors and how many were ordinary prisoners.12 In Moscow itself, imprisoned debtors were numerous enough by the beginning of Paul’s reign to participate in an elaborate redemption ritual in 1797.13 Although provinces without large cities did not have specialized debtors’ prisons, debtors could still be arrested. For example, memoirist Feliks Luchinskii (Luczynski) recalled that in the Ukrainian town of Cherkasy in the 1840s, “if a debtor did not pay . . . he would be locked up [by the police] in a cold room and kept there until he paid up.”14 Like many other Russian laws relating to debt, debt imprisonment was for the first time regularized by Tsar Paul’s Bankruptcy Statute of 1800. One key innovation was that individuals could no longer be arrested for debt if they had sufficient property to cover what was owed.15 Debtors who were unable to repay and had no property could be subjected to arrest. Officially insolvent debtors who were subject to bankruptcy proceedings could also be arrested at their creditors’ discretion while their case was being processed, and they 232 Debt and the Law could be held for up to five years if they were found to be “reckless” bankrupts. Finally, individuals could be imprisoned in lieu of “securing” civil lawsuits against them if they could not post property sufficient to cover the amount of the suit or find a friend or a relative who had enough property to guarantee the suit. In the English and American systems in the eighteenth and early nineteenth centuries, in some notorious cases, debtors grew old in prison. In contrast, in the French and Russian systems officials were not eager to increase their prison population; in Russia the length of imprisonment for any one claim was limited to five years. However, until the reform of 1864, a debtor who had served this time continued to be liable for the debt if he or she later managed to acquire any property. Moreover, there were several categories of persons who could not be arrested, including government officials and individuals holding elected office.16 Another important reform, introduced in 1828, required creditors to provide debtors