1863, he promised 270 Debt and the Law one of them to take her case on a contingency basis but in the written agreement he was to be paid 5,000 rubles unless the case was lost because of his negligence or mistake. This particular dispute was taken to the Gendarmes, but Davydenko managed to deceive them by signing a settlement agreement but still submitting his claim to the police for collection. In several other cases, he was accused of taking his clients’ fees but doing nothing to work on their cases; he was also accused of the defloration of a young girl in 1856 and of falsely denouncing his own estranged wife, accusing her of becoming pregnant with someone else’s child. Finally, he was known to take money from criminal defendants whose cases were hopeless, as in the prosecution of a serfowner Svirskaia, accused of torturing and murdering her serfs and most certainly about to be exiled to Siberia. Davydenko promised her that he would get her sentence reduced or overturned on appeal, in which case she would pay him between 300 and 600 rubles, and if he did not, he would give her 3,000 rubles, on the premise that Svirskaia would be unable to enforce this agreement while performing hard labor in Siberia. The Gendarmes noted that no conscientious attorney could undertake such a reckless obligation, suggesting that Davydenko’s conduct, while outrageous by any standards, was regarded by the Third Section—which was not known to harbor any special affection for private legal practitioners—as standing apart from the generally accepted standards of conduct. When confronted by the Gendarmes Davydenko told them that he was not afraid of them, or of their superiors at the Third Section, or the Petersburg governor, and that none of them could “prohibit him from conducting cases the way he wants to do it.” This interview took place in October 1864: the landmark court reform was to be enacted in only a month, and Davydenko no doubt felt emboldened by the spirit of reforms.43 The Gendarmes had clearly assumed that lawyers valued their good reputation; in the 1863 debt-related dispute between the old Prince Fedor Andreevich Golitsyn and his sonin-law, the Gendarmes urged Golitsyn’s attorney, Yefremovskii, to help reach an amicable settlement, arguing that if the case proceeded to court and he lost, he would “incite an unfavorable opinion of himself as a lawyer among the public.”44 On the lowest end of the scale were the Russian counterparts of British pettifoggers who for a small fee prepared court petitions and were commonly criticized for engaging in legal—or illegal—trickery.45 Merchant and ­memoirist Ivan Slonov remembered: Intermediaries, Lawyers, and Scriveners 271 Near the Resurrection Gate, next to the building of the provincial administration, from time immemorial there was a litigious exchange of scriveners, chancery clerks, and fired former civil servants, who engaged in the writing of all kinds of denunciations, complaints, and petitions for illiterate, ignorant folk. Among the common folk such persons are known as the “Iberian Lawyers” [referring to the nearby Chapel of the Iberian Mother of God]. All of them to a man are alcoholics, with puffy faces and red-purplish noses. Such a “lawyer,” having found his client on the street, invited [that client] to follow him to a tavern[, where], in exchange for a glass of vodka, he would wrote him such an elaborate petition that not only an unrelated person, but often even the author himself could not understand it.46 Slonov made it clear that only poor and ignorant clients hired such attorneys. In one of Ostrovsky’s plays, a pettifogger (abvokat) named Petrovich, who supplemented his income by forging passports, provided his teenage neighbor advice about possible trouble with the police after he kissed a merchant’s daughter; the important legal point was that he had not climbed the fence into the merchant’s garden because his feet were still located on the street, and only his lips were technically in the garden.47 As legal historian William Pomeranz has shown, such bottom-level legal practitioners continued to be important long after the reform of 1864 and evoked concern from authorities and officially recognized attorneys.48 Sometimes these “underground” (podpol’nye) lawyers were former chancellery clerks, but on occasion they had no clearly discernible prior connection to the official world. Lower-end legal representatives could find employment even with wealthy gentry, such as titular councilor’s wife Aleksandra Vasilievna Kupriianova, who in the late 1840s was fighting her late cousin’s creditors for his inheritance and delaying accepting the property to avoid it being sold for debt.49 Kupriianova engaged an illiterate Moscow townswoman Stepanida Matveeva and later another Moscow townswoman, Elizaveta Diushkova, to help her with the busy work at the courts. While it is unclear whether Kupriianova prepared her petitions herself or hired someone else, her case was masterfully defended, so either the townswomen were efficient or their apparent vulnerability was part of Kupriianova’s litigation strategy. A particularly memorable “lawyer” with no observable qualifications for his occupation was the twenty-nine-year-old former peasant Boris Korotkov, 272 Debt and the Law who was arrested in 1865 for pawning fake gold watches.50 Because the police seized and inventoried his belongings, we now have a unique insight into the world of an “underground lawyer” on the threshold of two epochs in Russia’s legal and social development. While Korotkov had no background in the law and made his living as a low-level intermediary in credit and employment matters, the police also found among his possessions a written agreement to open a law office in partnership with a man who was most likely the actual source of the fake watches. This fascinating and unique document is fully reproduced in Appendix E, preserving as much of the original as possible in translation. Despite its clumsy style, the agreement is surprisingly well crafted. It required each partner to provide 400 rubles for start-up expenses, stated that Korotkov would hire a clerk to deal with paperwork and accounting, and provided for a 50-ruble penalty in the event of an early termination, as well as arbitration for any disputes that might arise. Korotkov’s law business either failed or did not get a chance to take off before Korotkov’s arrest because his papers contained only several commissions to provide domestic servants and governesses. At the same time, he had some advantages: although he was semi-literate at best, this was still a period when the overwhelming majority of Russian peasants and many townspeople were not literate at all. Moreover, Korotkov’s handwriting was quite good, which was an extremely useful skill, although he made many spelling and punctuation errors. Despite his low status and young age, the agreement mentions significant amounts of cash (400 rubles was the annual salary of a midlevel civil servant) that the partners either possessed or expected to possess. The agreement itself, despite its awkward style, is sophisticated and even contains an arbitration clause. Even Korotkov’s intellectual outlook was not as limited as we may presume; included in his papers was the following poem: Mr. Bribes! You have Mastered the Learning . . . tell us Why We are given hands—is it Truly So that we can take bribes and smack people on the head.51 The poem suggests that Korotkov was even somewhat familiar with the then-fashionable rhetoric of legal reform. But above all, what is most Intermediaries, Lawyers, and Scriveners 273 f­ascinating about Korotkov is the very fact that this young semi-literate peasant was hoping to make a living as a “lawyer” in Moscow, no doubt perceiving the demand for legal services and aware of the profession’s desirability, profitability, and perhaps even prestige. In other words, it was a ­desirable thing for Korotkov to open specifically an advokatnaia office rather than simply be a busy go-between like many other enterprising peasants. More commonly, lower-status individuals employed as poverennye were not “underground” lawyers like Korotkov but rather privileged household servants, either serfs or freedmen, who sometimes handled complicated cases with large amounts of money at stake. For example, Natalia Naryshkina, the daughter of a privy councilor, engaged her freedman Petrov in her litigation with her wastrel brother for her mother’s inheritance.52 Although Natalia seems to have eventually lost, Petrov’s petitions were literate and clearly written, albeit without great legal subtlety or energy. Legal representation by one’s serf could also be both competent and energetic, as in the debt case of Lieutenant Nikolai Tolstoy.53 Tolstoy mortgaged his landed estate populated by nineteen serfs to Lieutenant Beklemishev for 9,000 rubles. Beklemishev acted through his serf, who prepared and filed complaints when Tolstoy avoided payment by constantly moving his residence and continued to get into still more debt. Beklemishev’s serf also represented another creditor, named Goffard, and showed considerable energy in pursuing Tolstoy and locating his other estate in Orel province, which Tolstoy was trying to hide from his creditors. A serf could even engage in what appeared to be a fully-fledged paralegal-­ style practice, as did Count Zakrevskii’s serf Matvei Toropov. He was commissioned by a merchant named Vorontsov from Vyborg to collect debts pursuant to a large number of debt documents, which Vorontsov transferred to Toropov in exchange for an advance payment, often of thousands of rubles.54 While it is clear that even persons of moderate means could access some kind of legal representation and that wealthy individuals could access the services of higher-end lawyers who functioned similarly to post-reform barristers and who in some cases did join the bar after 1866, the related question of how easily information about the law was accessed is less clear. This question is important because, as contemporary research shows, the individual’s ability to conceive his or her circumstances in legal—as opposed to moral, cultural, social, religious, or other—terms is one of the key factors determining the decision to litigate.55 Evidence on how well informed Russians 274 Debt and the Law were about the law before the reform is conflicting. For example, Michelle Lamarche Marrese, in her study of female property ownership and control in Russia, tends to be pessimistic, emphasizing the difficulties.56 Some of my research is in the same vein. Individuals of considerable means and social standing made mistakes in negotiation and litigation and either used bad legal advice or none at all. For example, an exceedingly wealthy noblewoman, Anna Shevich, whose debt suit against her husband was closely related to her divorce proceedings, lost because she admitted in writing that no money exchanged hands when the debt note was signed.57 We have already encountered the case of an elderly civil servant and aspiring landowner, Lebedev, who was naïve enough to write a letter offering a bribe to a court official.58 Moneylender and civil servant Aleksandr Zaborovskii, whose case is discussed throughout this book, was employed by the Commercial Bank, but he was unable to devise a legal strategy to fight off allegations of fraud by his borrower’s attorney, a much lower-status, uneducated townsman, Konovalov. Thus, even comparatively sophisticated and educated individuals could be so helpless in the world of courts and gov­ ernment offices as to fail to obtain basic legal information or legal advice of any quality. At the same time, in other cases, individual Russians displayed a remarkable command of legal issues related to their proceedings. Particularly interesting are situations when individuals initially made mistakes but later ­managed to obtain helpful advice, whether from 