ted to create a Western-style urban bourgeois culture, as argued by Alexander Martin.83 In the first half of the nineteenth century, redemption rituals transcended this original meaning to forge a symbolic link between Moscow’s propertied populace, who provided most of the money; the imperial family, whose members donated their influence, some of the funds, and the use of the bureaucracy to administer the charity; and the Orthodox faith. During the reign of Nicholas I (1825–1855), these three elements coincided with the government-designed doctrine of “Official Nationality,” first formulated in 1832 by Count Sergei Uvarov and other conservative intellectuals inspired by German Romantic philosophy. The doctrine centered on the triad of “Orthodoxy, Autocracy, and Nationality.” It represented the tsar’s response to the growing challenge of nationalism and liberalism and was designed to fuse Russian national sentiment with the monarchy’s fundamentally Western European character. Earlier historians have tended to dismiss the extent to which the doctrine was successful in taking root in Russia’s society and culture, although 252 Debt and the Law Nicholas Riasanovsky argued that the doctrine was directly influential at least as far as the daily operations of the higher bureaucracy were concerned. He concluded that this influence was ultimately harmful, alienating Russia’s educated society from the government.84 However, John Randolph, in his microhistory of the aristocratic and intellectual Bakunin family, argued that its members were not quite as alienated from the government as had been previously assumed. As to the middling provincial nobility, Katherine Pickering Antonova has shown that the conservative themes encapsulated in the triad were interpreted, shared, and put into practice in a world far removed from the capitals and their aristocratic salons. Finally, Alexander Martin has argued that patriotic literary and journalistic discourse under Nicholas I turned Moscow into a key symbolic element of Official Nationality, thanks to the way it “admirably combined Russian tradition and enlightened modernity”: “had Moscow not existed, the spokesmen of Official Nationality would have had to invent it.” 85 Debtor redemption rituals were an integral part of Official Nationality as it was practiced in Nicholaevan Moscow. Originating from a different philanthropic discourse, redemption predated the triad by over thirty years and quickly became integrated both into public patriotic discourse and into the wider system of charitable practices and institutions. Yet there was a special intensity in the way debt redemption reflected, captured, and expressed the same popular sentiment that was coopted by Uvarov and other tsarist ideologues and propagandists. A citizen could doubt whether Moscow was actually as modern or as prosperous as they represented it to be, but there was very little doubt that real debtors were really set free from a real prison, aside from the fact that Muscovites sometimes imprisoned their debtors or even their friends for the sole purpose of benefiting from charitable donations. During most of the nineteenth century, redemption operations were administered by the local committees of the Imperial Prison Society, which was established by the English philanthropist John Venning, who came to Russia in 1817 to propagate the ideas of the Bible society and the English Prison Society.86 Alexander I took the project under his patronage, and its operations were launched in 1819, with branches eventually opening in all sizable cities and towns. It is also possible that earlier redemption rituals involved Empress Maria Fedorovna, well known for her charitable work. She was commemorated by the Prison Society along with Catherine II and Alexander I, but I have not found any evidence of her involvement in any redemption rituals.87 In the Pit with Debtors 253 Society operations had from the start a semi-official character: while technically a private charitable society, the Imperial Prison Society was headed by the minister of the interior and staffed by bishops, governors, and other local dignitaries. Not surprisingly, by 1879 the Society lost most of its philanthropic character and morphed into the Chief Directorate of Prisons within the Ministry of the Interior.88 The second important aspect of the Prison Society was the way it combined practical efforts to improve the prisoners’ physical condition with a concern for their spiritual well-being, as well as with the introduction of “prison discipline,” such as strict visitation hours, a com­ bination of work and rest periods, and in general various restrictions and regimentation.89 The rules of the Petersburg debtors’ prison required clerks processing new prisoners to find out as much information as possible about the circumstances that caused these people to default on their debts, which was to be verified at each debtor’s home address by interviewing his (or her) acquaintances and combining it with “detailed information about his way of life.” In Moscow this duty was delegated to the Prison Committee, whose members made regular visits and investigated any inmates who were particularly worthy of compassion, although they seem to have been prying only with female debtors. Another member was appointed as an intermediary (khodatai) on behalf of debtors who were detained at police precincts throughout the city. Yet another interesting impact of Prison Society ideas was that both in Moscow and in Petersburg, the prison’s caretaker was charged with negotiating with creditors to persuade them to free debtors from arrest altogether or to forgive part of their debt. Even more importantly, the Committee set aside some of its funds, in addition to private donations, to redeem prisoners. In addition, Dr. Fedor Gaaz (Friedrich-Joseph Haass), the famous nineteenth-­century philanthropist, received 100 rubles once a month to help the families of poor imprisoned debtors, and each December he received another 200 rubles to redeem Workhouse inmates detained for city tax arrears. When redeeming the Workhouse inmates, Dr. Gaaz also distributed religious literature that he had purchased with his own money, as well as Russian and Church Slavonic grammars.90 Large-scale redemptions were already taking place during the reign of Catherine II, but this study did not reveal evidence of any accompanying rituals or celebrations. For example, Catherine ordered a redemption in 1765, and the merchants of Moscow redeemed 150 poor and middling debtors in 254 Debt and the Law 1796 on the occasion of Grand Duke Konstantin Pavlovich’s wedding.91 The earliest redemption ritual whose detailed description I was able to locate took place in 1797, on the occasion of Emperor Paul’s birthday, long before the Prison Society was founded, but it established the scenario: the philanthropic subjects of the tsar donated money, and then the city’s top officials arrived at the prison and rescued grateful debtors. As the city’s governor general reported to the tsar: “For the Most happy day of your Imperial Majesty’s Supreme birth, the inhabitants of this capital as a sign of their feelings toward Your Majesty’s most Supreme favors toward them, donated a sum of money . . . in order to redeem individuals imprisoned pursuant to veksels and other collections, with which on that day 51 persons were redeemed and freed. The joy of those receiving their freedom was so touching that many creditors . . . conceded 50 to 60 percent of their claims.”92 The newspaper account of this event noted an ethnic Greek merchant, Konstantin Bakcheev, who contributed over 5,000 rubles and described the collective visit to the prison by the military and civil governors, the ober-­ procurator of the Senate, the vice governor, the Moscow provincial procurator, and other officials, who administered the redemption and inspired such joy among the prisoners that many creditors were then induced to forgive additional sums. One just-released debtor hurried to find his own debtor, who was still imprisoned, and set him free. This description suggests that the ceremony—although not strictly a public one like a coronation—took place in the confined but crowded and emotionally charged environment of the Provisional Prison, with its church, its courtyard, its broad corridors and staircases, and its numerous chambers. Inmates, creditors, and government officials appear to have been able to directly observe each other’s bargaining and its results, much in contravention of the usual practice. After the ransoming was completed, all the debtors and the officials also went to the prison church together and prayed for the tsar’s health.93 A similar ceremony took place on the occasion of Nicholas I’s coronation in 1826, when the dowager Empress Maria Fedorovna donated 5,000 silver rubles for redeeming those debtors who were “worthy of compassion.”94 On Coronation Day (August 22), 17 persons were redeemed for the amount of 2,880 rubles, exactly 25 percent of their original debt. Creditors had to issue signed receipts agreeing to discontinue their claims. The anniversary of Alexander I’s death, on November 19, was also a popular occasion for charitable works, given that he was the august founder of the Prison Society.95 After Nicholas I died in 1855, four Moscow merchants donated 10,000 silver In the Pit with Debtors 255 rubles to redeem debtors in memory of the anniversary of his death.96 This was enough to redeem 15 persons from the Provisional Prison and 92 persons who were kept in the Workhouse for tax arrears. The imperial family also redeemed debtors during regular holidays. As noted above, Catherine II seems to have set the example in 1765 by redeeming 93 debtors for the amount of 3,796 rubles (apparently emptying the prison because there was money left over). This tradition continued into the nineteenth century. For example, before Easter in 1847, the Prison Committee received 572 rubles for redeeming “debtors who are more worthy than others of compassion and aid” from “two Persons who wished to remain anonymous” but used the Hofmarshal of the heir to the throne to transfer the money.97 In 1850, Nicholas I donated 10,000 rubles to redeem debtors owing no more than 100 rubles.98 In 1855 he donated 6,329.03 rubles.99 Private citizens also actively contributed to the redemption rituals. For this they certainly had the means, given that Petersburg and especially Moscow had a powerful and prosperous merchantry. In fact, unless a given year happened to include a major dynastic event, most donations to redeem debtors came from private persons; for example, in 1850 the imperial family gave 572 rubles to redeem debtors in Moscow, and various private donors gave 6,598 rubles.100 Some specific collective donations were quite large for their time. At the wedding of the Grand Duke Konstantin Pavlovich in 1796, the merchants of Moscow redeemed 150 people with debts of up to 300 rubles.101 The sum of the donation is not given, but the potential commitment was 45,000 rubles, vastly exceeding the usual amounts of a few thousand rubles. For example, in 1807, on the occasion of the peace treaty with France, a group of Moscow’s liquor tax farmers donated 5,000 rubles to redeem debtors who owed between 100 and 500 rubles, which curiously excluded the poorest and the richest debtors alike and benefited Moscow’s middling groups.102 In 1817, debtors at the Pit received private donations for 2,500 rubles and large quantities of bread, fish, eggs, salt, and other supplies.103 In 1847, to mark the 700th anniversary of Moscow’s foundation, the elders of its Old Believer communities and a group of tax farmers sent 1,000 silver rubles to the city governor to redeem debtors “who deserve it.” The governor forwarded the money to the Committee and directed its particular attention to the unfortunate condition of lieutenant’s wife Princess Kastrova, who