 was at the time hospitalized but was to be imprisoned upon discharge for her debt of 750 paper rubles to the wife of a Class 14 civil servant, Rombakh. 256 Debt and the Law During the second half of that year, charitable donations for redeeming debtors amounted to 1,149.82 rubles.104 In 1856, Count Zakrevskii personally donated 825 rubles; twelve other people, —including merchants, civil servants, and a priest—donated between 2.5 and 145 rubles; and “various unknown donors” gave 3,420.36 rubles.105 It seems that Muscovites were far more charitable than Petersburgers. For example, in 1862, new private donations in St. Petersburg amounted to only 755.40 rubles. In Moscow, private donations were over ten times that amount: 7,848 rubles.106 In addition to giving money directly, private donors set aside certain sums in their wills to be deposited at a bank to be used for redeeming debtors, usually on a holiday like Good Friday. For example, in 1810, the famous Princess Ekaterina Dashkova willed 500 rubles, enough to redeem eight persons. In 1811 there was a set of bequests including state councilor’s wife Alfimova (600 silver rubles), hegoumenos (abbot) Simonovskii (5,000 paper rubles), an unmarried noblewoman Bileva (400 paper rubles), cavalry Lieutenant Tarelkin (200 paper rubles), and state councilor’s wife Baskakova (100 rubles). The income from this amount (310 rubles) was sufficient to redeem six Moscow townspeople during Easter.107 Their creditors—who had to make a considerable concession of the original total debt of 1,155 rubles— included an army non-commissioned officer, a craftsman, a merchant, a soldier’s wife, and a servant. Grigorii Potemkin’s favorite niece, Aleksandra Branicka (née Engelgardt), before her death in 1838 bequeathed 200,000 rubles for redeeming imprisoned debtors.108 Other donations were not self-advertising and not timed for some festive occasion. For example, in 1823 townsman Ivan Kholshchovnikov was freed when “an unknown philanthropic person” paid his debt of 184.50 rubles.109 Thus the redemption ritual symbolically connected the donors with the middling stratum of Moscow’s propertied classes that made up the overwhelming majority of the imprisoned debtors. Creditors who received redemption money could only hope to recover a fraction of the original debt. As of 1826, the number could be as little as twenty percent, which was of course better than not receiving any payment at all.110 However, complex negotiations often took place. It seems as though creditors who sensed that a particular debtor attracted the authorities’ ­sympathy were more likely to hold out. In 1859, the creditors who imprisoned Lieutenant-General Sergei Golitsyn, imprisoned in Petersburg, initially refused to negotiate, apparently because they knew that the old general attracted the tsar’s personal attention and sympathy. Instead, the creditors In the Pit with Debtors 257 attracted the attentions of the Third Section, which regarded these lenders as suspected harmful usurers and threatened to shut down their operations. Although Russian tsars were jealous of their autocratic prerogatives and Alexander II did have sympathy for the old warrior, as it turned out this did not prevent him from explicitly refusing to circumvent or undermine the legal procedures.111 Earlier, in 1826, Moscow officials were unable to persuade sergeant’s wife Ezhevskaia to accept anything but the full amount owed to her by collegiate registrar’s wife Maria Aleeva, who incurred her debt because of a complicated lawsuit. Despite the high amount of her debt, officials were sympathetic to her situation because she had been nursemaid to Prince Paul of Württemberg, father-in-law of the tsar’s brother Grand Duke Mikhail Pavlovich. Only several months later did her creditor agree to take 1,300 rubles in cash and to take over Aleeva’s own lawsuit against townsman Dolgov for 25,000 rubles. Whereas a connection to the imperial family automatically entitled Aleeva to special consideration, redemption procedures typically involved assessments of debtors’ behavior and moral qualities. One 1826 redemption created the most detailed record of such a procedure that I was able to locate. One of the governor’s special aides, Aulic Councilor Nechaev, drew up a list of all prisoners and selected those who deserved preference in light of the length of their confinement, the large size of their families, and the small size of their debt, which “condemn them to a useless lack of activity and distract them from their families and their ordinary commercial or craft activities.” Even then, the amount of their debt was four times what was available as ransom, and Nechaev had to hope for concessions from the creditors.112 Nechaev’s short list included 29 persons, of whom three were women. This is a rather small number, considering that Russian women frequently engaged in commerce and typically there were at least a dozen imprisoned female debtors at any one time. Altogether, there were 20 townspeople, 1 civil servant, 3 foreigners, and 5 craftsmen. The first on the list was townswoman Katerina Prakhova, who was also the subject of a separate memo, detailing that she had absorbed her late husband’s debt of 2,800 rubles, originally ­borrowed from a county treasurer in connection with his liquor tax farming operation in the town of Makariev. It turned out that the treasurer had stolen the money in the first place, and so the Prakhovs were left responsible for the debt to the Treasury. Next to each name Nechaev made notes about each 258 Debt and the Law debtor’s character and reasons for indebtedness. When the debtor’s references were good, the notation was simply “outstanding,” “good,” or “decent.” Sober behavior was definitely a plus, as was having a spouse and children, although drunkenness was not automatically a minus. It is noteworthy that the debtors’ acquaintances’ vouching for them made further elaboration into a debtor’s qualities unnecessary, as far as Nechaev was concerned. Bad or ambivalent references were more varied: for example, Collegiate Registrar Tselevich was “unsober,” and his wife had a small amount of property; the “way of behavior” of Gubernial Secretary Naryshkin was “wellknown,” soldier’s wife Fomina was “an idle woman of mediocre behavior,” and craftsman Rodionov was “not completely sober, but otherwise ha[d] good qualities”; townsman Gavrilov was “not always temperate but deserves compassion because of her poverty and a large family.” Other sample notations were “owns a house”; “decent man but poor; son keeps a drinking establishment”; and “went into debt because of illness.” To summarize, people with a weakness for drink were not automatically out of luck, while keepers of drinking establishments definitely were, even when their debt was not large; also out of luck were merchants with relatively large debts. The reasons for indebtedness varied but seemed to have little bearing on whether someone made it onto the short list, unless it was one of only a few accidental insolvencies caused by fire, flood, or illness.113 Although the 1826 list was unusually detailed, the practice of bureaucratically evaluating debtors’ characters persisted into the 1850s. For example, when in 1855 four Moscow merchants donated 10,000 silver rubles to redeem debtors in memory of Nicholas I’s death, authorities redeemed 15 debtors from the Pit and emptied out the Workhouse of its 92 inmates. Officials assessed the debtors’ moral qualities and even compiled a list of 22 persons who were not to be redeemed under any circumstances. This included a handful of “thieves and frauds,” one debtor who had already been redeemed in the past, and several men who were involved in the business of furnishing substitute recruits to clients who wished to avoid military conscription.114 No inquiries were ever made about Workhouse inmates kept for tax arrears and routinely redeemed en masse without any extra ceremony: Muscovites seemed to show a rather more unconditional charity toward the poorest debtors, as compared to the contemporary English trend of treating poor debtors as blameworthy delinquents. Indeed, the assumption seems to have been just the opposite: many donations were explicitly limited to the poorer debtors who owed very small amounts. This was the case not only In the Pit with Debtors 259 in the nineteenth-century cases but also earlier, under Catherine II. In 1765, she redeemed 25 Muscovites for tax arrears averaging 43.6 rubles and 68 private debtors averaging 39.8 rubles—that is, members of the lower middle class. The redemption in 1796 was limited to Muscovites owing under 300 rubles.115 Redemption rituals curiously mingled official and private behavior and symbolically linked the people of Moscow, who were both the donors and the recipients of charity, with the Orthodox faith, given that redemption was often carried out during a holiday and tapped into popular religious sentiment; with the imperial family through the donations of its members and the tying of many ceremonies to important dynastic events; and with the bureaucracy, which actually presided over the rituals. Redemption rituals thus began to apply the underlying sentiments of Official Nationality in practice even before the doctrine itself was officially enunciated. Finally, the procedure of evaluating debtors’ characters and behavior reflected—and perhaps even helped partly to form—the identity of Moscow’s middling classes. Categories of wealth, commercial success, and official rank were secondary compared to the debtor’s reputation with his or her acquaintances, the size of the debtor’s family, and any personal connections with the imperial family. Redemption rituals thus show an interesting example of how existing popular charitable sentiment was blended with—and clearly triumphed over—foreign-derived ideas of Protestant prison reform and moral discipline. There were only a few places in imperial Russia where imprisoned debtors were kept in large numbers, but the inmate population, while small compared to its English counterparts or to the vast mass of Russia’s vagrants and petty thieves, was significant compared to the small numbers of persons arrested or convicted for serious crimes. Moreover, the rituals and practices of debt imprisonment challenged and renegotiated some of the key understandings of the tsarist political system relating to punishment, authority, and personal autonomy. Debt imprisonment relied upon the cooperation, and even initiative, of private persons, as did police collection procedures and bankruptcy and civil-law proceedings. Similarly to other mid-century institutions, the debtors’ prison had its peculiar dynamic of cooperation and confrontation between individuals and authorities, showing that the relationship between the overt political and police power of the government and the more subdued “exercise of gentle 260 Debt and the Law violence” (to use Bourdieu’s words) represented by creditors when they forgave their debtors was less of a dichotomy and more of a symbiosis.116 The Debtor’s Pit existed because private persons were imprisoned at the discretion of other private persons and were treated differently from Russia’s ­generally miserable regular prison population. The corollary was that the authorities could not control the Pit any more efficiently than they could bankruptcy boards or the regular courts, with their often drawn-out proceedings. Finally, the history of debt imprisonment, as part of Russia’s culture of debt, reveals the formation of a single “middling” class that was supplanting Russia’s official legal hierarchy of estates. Materially, this process is revealed in the make-up of the imprisoned debtor population, which excluded truly rich and truly poor persons, and in the prison rules and regulations that had little regard for their legal estate as opposed to their wealth. Symbolically and mentally, this process is 