ses on its docket in a given year, split roughly equally between first- and second-tier courts and between civil and criminal matters; after the reform, the courts became even busier.1 But one of the most persistent beliefs about Russian law is that—in any historical period—it has lacked a legal tradition comparable to those of Western and Central Europe and especially that the law has lacked a firm foundation in either political or popular culture. This general argument is made particularly forcefully about pre-1864 law. In addition to the lack of institutional autonomy or a regulated legal profession—which I have already argued to be greatly exaggerated—other specific criticisms focus on court structure and procedures, alleging that the courts were fragmented according to the estate system, that they deployed inferior “inquisitorial” rules of procedure, as well as a system of evidence based on “formal proofs,” which deprived individual litigants and judges alike of flexibility and discretion. This chapter explores whether and in what ways these features of pre-­ reform justice affected actual cases involving property and debt, and e­ specially 284 Creditors and Debtors in Pre-Reform Courts 285 the interests and strategies of property owners who used the courts. First recall that in any legal system, even a very elaborate set of procedural rules cannot foresee all possible facts and circumstances and so is inevitably modified in practice. In actual cases litigated in pre-reform courts, practical considerations undermined the principle of estate-based justice as soon as it was established; inquisitorial procedure surprisingly left civil law proceedings to private individuals’ discretion; and the requirements of expert evaluation of debt documents undermined the system of formal proofs. None of this is to deny that pre-reform procedures did not conform to the model featuring public trials, juries, and elite barristers that was becoming predominant elsewhere in Europe. But my research contradicts the myth that pre-reform law was dysfunctional to the point of not deserving to be called law at all and that Russians possessed no culture of using the courts in a rational and efficient way to promote and protect their property interests. To the contrary, the pre-reform legal system was reasonably efficient in protecting the system of private credit and of private property more generally. It therefore should be seen as a logical precursor of late imperial law rather than a dead branch on the tree of Russian legal development. Interpretations of Pre-Reform Courts There is little doubt that the reform of 1864, with all its limitations and disappointments, was a momentous achievement, and the 1860s are rightly seen as a watershed in Russia’s legal development. Numerous accounts by memoirists and legal scholars contrasted the new courts with the legal reign of darkness that allegedly preceded it. This consensus owes much to fiction and memoirs by Gogol, Ostrovskii, Sukhovo-Kobylin, Saltykov-Shchedrin, Herzen, and Aksakov. Their arguments were then marshaled by late imperial jurists to defend the reformed justice system against conservative attacks. Jurists Anatolii Koni, Iosif Gessen, Ivan Blinov, or Grigorii Dzhanshiev used the old court system as a rhetorical backdrop to better highlight the reform’s achievements.2 But while this literature’s polemical framework is very clear, its specific claims are neither as accurate nor as unambiguously critical as they first appear. To give just a few typical examples, Gessen supported his claim of pre-­ reform corruption and inefficiency by discussing a single low-profile, out-of-court commercial arbitration case while revealing nothing about actual court procedures.3 His stories about officials falsifying legal documents 286 Debt and the Law refer to the police rather than the courts, and his claim that pre-reform judges did not write their decisions themselves but employed clerks and secretaries does not sound very shocking.4 Gessen also quoted the well-known post-reform barrister Vladimir Spasovich as claiming that judges in the old courts were “only concerned with conducting the case mechanically according to the law, rather than according to their conscience.”5 Even if we do for a moment agree that judging a case according to the law is actually a shortcoming, Gessen later in his book noted that this criticism could be directed at the new courts as well.6 Blinov thought that judicial corruption in Russia could be studied on the basis of literary works, press articles, and Herzen’s émigré publications, with “original cases” (podlinnye dela) only useful for providing additional examples, which he deemed to be unnecessary.7 By contrast, my study maintains that the evidence of “original cases” is essential for studying any country’s legal practice and legal culture. Even those accounts that are grounded in personal experience are still polemical; an example is one of the best-known memoirs about pre-reform law by Nikolai Kolmakov, who had extensive experience with pre-reform justice and was personally involved in drafting the reform legislation. At the same time, he never served on an actual trial court; as a Ministry of Justice official, he formed his opinions by working in Petersburg, conducting appellate procedures or the inspections of provincial courts and administration that were specifically tasked with rooting out local corruption.8 Kolmakov’s condemnation of pre-reform courts was indeed scathing: “old courts . . . in their composition and circumstances, and in their procedural forms . . . and above all in their dependence on the provincial authority and other ­officials . . . were pathetic institutions, which did not at all fulfill the great responsibility of the state—that of administering justice!”9 However, Kolmakov’s criticisms can be reduced to only a few specific issues. One was that the provincial nobility did not take seriously their responsibility to participate in the administration of justice, most importantly by electing chairmen of provincial Judicial Chambers. But Kolmakov’s evidence showed exactly the opposite: that the nobles were capable of acting in concert to vote down candidates who were approved by the authorities but were thought to be detrimental to the nobles’ interests, although competent professionally. Second, Kolmakov argued that the Ministry of Justice and the judiciary as a whole were not sufficiently powerful as compared to the Ministry of the Interior and the police, which admittedly had a very extensive range of Creditors and Debtors in Pre-Reform Courts 287 responsibilities. But, once again, Kolmakov’s horror stories all concerned police misconduct and did not reveal anything about the courts. Other ­representative critical accounts include those by Ivan Bocharov, who had extensive—and highly negative—experience as a court secretary at the ­ Senate in Petersburg, which, as he himself acknowledged, occurred before the codification of 1832 had transformed Russia’s legal landscape. Another account is provided by Piotr Kostylev, who began his career as a court investigator in the early 1860s and had some experience with pre-reform justice but did not provide any detailed examples aside from general incantations about “the sinister labyrinth of . . . written procedure.”10 Although imperial-era lawyers and memoirists clearly did not set out to objectively analyze pre-reform justice, even taken at face value their accounts show that the condemnation was not unequivocal, and they also provided considerable evidence of fairness and professionalism. For example, Aksakov, in his frequently quoted tirade from 1884 about his younger years spent as a court clerk, admitted that second-tier all-estate courts were staffed by individuals trained in law “who could not be fooled by a zapiska [a case summary prepared by court secretaries who could theoretically falsify the facts].”11 Vasilii Gettun, whose memoirs contain rich information on patronage, bribery, and all types of official malfeasance in the early nineteenth century, first made his career in Petersburg as an unpaid judiciary volunteer, by taking the initiative to investigate the case of a minor civil servant in the far-away Urals who was wrongly convicted and sentenced to hard labor. When much later the Grand Duchess Ekaterina Pavlovna asked him in a social setting how a judge should rule in a civil law case that could be resolved in favor of either side, he said that the rule of thumb was to rule in favor of the poorer side. Even taking into account Gettun’s hypocrisy, it is important to note the general sentiment he was trying to exploit.12 At the end of his sharp analysis of the courts’ shortcomings even Kolmakov asked himself, “Were these and other similar phenomena general and ubiquitous? I would say no. There were also such Chambers [province-level courts], especially those where chairmen were appointed by the government[and] assisted by useful deputies, [that] conducted cases expeditiously and decided them correctly. But these were the exceptions.” Kolmakov thought that the main issue reducing the Chambers’ effectiveness was their Records Office, which performed non-judicial, notarial functions and crowded out actual court proceedings, imparting to the courts a reputation 288 Debt and the Law for bribery. Kolmakov clearly implied that the Records Office’s reputation for regularized petty bribery was not shared by the regular court personnel.13 Ilya Selivanov, in his bitterly humorous account of the elderly judges of the Senate’s Moscow departments, at the same time added that some of the senators did not share their colleagues’ senility and incompetence. Once again, he was referring to the period before 1832.14 In his work on the history of the Russian bar, Gessen admitted that some pre-reform lawyers were good; his claim that some were bad does not seem all that surprising or shocking, or for that matter necessarily rectifiable by the creation of an organized bar.15 Blinov, after mentioning the horrors of pre-reform criminal procedure, noted that they did not apply to “privileged” offenders.16 Journalist Yekaterina Kozlinina wrote an uncommonly subtle account of pre-reform justice, once again mainly describing police procedures and not the courts themselves. While condemning their moral and intellectual underpinnings, she argued that actual institutions and proceedings had positive aspects; for example, criminal trials included the possibility of a suspended sentence— known as being “left under suspicion”—that was absent in post-reform criminal procedure. Even the infamously rough police investigations that relied on beatings and freely doled out corporal punishment were speedy and— Kozlinina implied—fundamentally reliable. Despite her reform-minded rhetoric, Kozlinina’s account creates the impression of a faulty but vibrant and viable legal and administrative apparatus.17 The reform-centered rhetoric of imperial-era writers also migrated into more recent scholarship, most notably through the groundbreaking book of the U.S.-trained historian Samuel Kucherov, who originally studied law in imperial Russia.18 The most detailed modern analysis of the early imperial court system, by John LeDonne, stops at 1825 but has clear implications for Nicholas I’s reign, which did not introduce any significant procedural innovations. LeDonne convincingly emphasizes the influence of patronage and social networks upon the legal process, as well as the court system’s responsiveness to political pressure—none of which were (or are), however, unique to Russia. The English ideal of the rule of law that is taken as a given in LeDonne’s analysis not only never existed in actual practice, but was itself still in the initial stages of being formulated during the time period covered by his study.19 For example, how can one—partially accurately—criticize Russia’s legislative