ely chose not to pursue the inconvenient, embarrassing, and no doubt ultimately futile investigation of the Glebovs’ possible culpability. The police and the courts may also have considered their willingness to repay some of the creditors, for whom this was the only chance to recoup at least a portion of their losses. Even individuals much less wealthy than the Glebovs employed property managers who could be tasked with finding loans. For example, Princess Ekaterina Cherkasskaia, who came from a prominent family but owned only seventy-two serfs in Iaroslavl’ province in addition to a house in Moscow, employed a young Moscow townsman and former merchant Sergei Kono­ valov as her estate manager and agent (poverennyi i upravliaiushchii), as he styled himself. Apparently not aware of his less than stellar past—he was expelled from his home by his own parents for dissolute behavior— Cherkasskaia asked him in 1842 to find a loan of 10,000 rubles. The lender that Konovalov found, the previously mentioned Zaborovskii, was none too naïve himself, insisting on getting a receipt signed by Cherkasskaia, whom he never met in person, even though the loan letter was executed at the Second Department of the Moscow Chamber and so, legally speaking, Cherkasskaia would not be permitted to claim that she never received the money.69 Konovalov received the money, embezzled it, and then complained to the princess that Zaborovskii never paid him. Cherkasskaia complained to the gendarmes, and Zaborovskii was summoned to Police Chief Lev Tsynskii, famous for his heavy-handed investigation methods; according to the authorities, Zaborovskii confessed during the interrogation, after which he was convicted of fraud in court. However, in 1845, Konovalov repented and confessed everything, in part because he interpreted his unspecified but serious venereal disease as a punishment from above. While in prison, Konovalov bragged to another inmate, a “tramp” and army deserter Diakov, that he used the money to rent a sizable apartment in Moscow and stage “evenings in Paradise, where dancers of both sexes represented the first humans before the Fall” for as much as 1,000 rubles per night. The type of agent represented by Dmitriev or Konovalov must have been a familiar presence in all types of credit or sale transactions. Their networks of acquaintance were firmly rooted in Moscow’s middling classes, consisting of civil servants and nobles of modest means as well as merchants and entrepreneurs. Their ambition could lead them to violate their principals’ trust, but typical lenders seem to have thought that the agent’s reputation and social 280 Debt and the Law connections would prevent fraud. For example, in the case of the Senate Registrar Petr Veselkin, which involved a complex mortgage fraud conspiracy, only one of his many victims became suspicious at all, and even then he waited several weeks after handing over his money to a “representative” of a nonexistent Prince Kropotkin from Vladimir province.70 It was also possible for a less highly ranked principal to hire a more highly ranked agent. For example, the victim of the Class 12 civil servant Aleksandr Demazer was a wealthy female serf of Count Sheremetev, Akulina Mikhailovna Mashkina, with whom he was “acquainted.”71 Demazer suggested to Mashkina that she could live more comfortably in her own house and proposed to buy one for her in his own name because as a serf, she could not effect the purchase in her own name or in her landlord’s (this last claim was false), but in practice the house would belong to her. She agreed and gave Demazer 6,573 silver rubles, which he used to buy a house that he promptly began to claim as his. While in her court papers Mashkina claimed that she was illiterate and inexperienced, this case is not so simple: Mashkina was certainly sophisticated enough because she kept her money deposited in a bank, and once she became suspicious of Demazer, she quickly obtained advice on how to proceed and went on to complain to the police. In addition to claiming “inexperience,” it is also possible that Mashkina simply did not want to buy a house through her landlord, thinking Demazer to be more reliable. In addition to using a poverennyi to find loans or serve as a legal front man, it was common for individuals of all levels of wealth to hire an intermediary to assist them in dealing with the Board of Trustees. We have already mentioned Ivan Gruzinov, hired by a middling landowner from another province. Whereas there are no indications that Gruzinov himself was in any way dishonest, it is also clear that the Board’s operations created many opportunities for fraud and embezzlement. For example, in 1861, a peasant from Novgorod province, Konon Osipov, needed to deposit 354 rubles with the Board. He hired a townsman from the town of Valdai, Ivan Stoliarov, to help him with the task. Stoliarov deposited the money, took the receipt, and promptly appropriated it as his own. There was nothing Osipov could do to prove his ownership of the money.72 A more circumspect investor than Stoliarov would have preferred to hire an actual Board employee, but this was not a foolproof strategy either, judging from the case of one such employee, twenty-four-year old Collegiate Registrar (the lowest fourteenth class) Aleksandr Shtibing (Stibing).73 His Intermediaries, Lawyers, and Scriveners 281 victims, the Board’s borrowers, must have thought it a smart precautionary measure to engage him when receiving or depositing money to help them with the paperwork. Most of these victims were serving or retired junior officers and civil servants, their wives, mothers, and sisters, a “noble-born maiden,” a townsman, and a wealthy serf, but also Actual State Councilor (equivalent to major general) Petr Divov and actual state councilor’s wife Princess Elizaveta Dolgorukova. In other words, all ranks and estates of Russian society, from serf to aristocrat, were represented. Incidentally, many of them admitted that they knew they were not legally allowed to pay a Board employee to help them. Shtibing took his clients’ money and issued them bogus receipts with forged signatures of senior Board officials. For years nobody noticed anything, until in 1854 one out-of-town merchant asked for verification of two such receipts that came to him from one of Shtibing’s victims, a physician’s wife, Ekaterina Bove. The clerks checked the Board’s journal and found that no payment was recorded under the ­numbers of those receipts. When questioned about the receipts, Shtibing confessed to embezzling Bove’s money, and when his apartment was searched, the Board officials found evidence of about a dozen other similar episodes. It seemed that he made no effort to conceal his activities and had no explanation prepared in case he was discovered. It is also notable that the Board did not have any procedure in place to catch this kind of embezzlement. Although Shtibing’s victims appear rather foolish, considering how easy it was to catch Shtibing once he came under suspicion, it would have been reasonable to expect the Board to have some kind of audit mechanism to detect this kind of embezzlement, and it actually may have been more reasonable to engage him rather than hire someone completely unrelated. Shtibing’s superiors were understandably reluctant to get the police involved immediately because any official investigation could damage the Board’s reputation and thus its otherwise highly profitable operations. In Russia, as well as in Victorian England, employers often preferred to deal with embezzlers in private.74 However, Board officials also failed to detain Shtibing or otherwise prevent his flight. He slipped away as soon as his questioners left, and so we cannot find out much more about his motivations. He left behind a letter, which claimed that he was about to drown himself in the Moscow River and that he alone was to blame for his crimes. Two weeks later, a dead body was found floating in the river; it was sufficiently decomposed that the police could not determine the precise cause of death, but 282 Debt and the Law there were no obvious signs of beatings or injuries. Shtibing’s relatives recognized the clothes found on the corpse as belonging to him. However, they were never shown the body itself, and so we can only guess whether he did actually kill himself or managed to stage his suicide. Interestingly, the clothes on the corpse did belong to Shtibing but did not fit the description of what he wore when he was last seen; furthermore, the police report gave the corpse’s age as approximately forty-five, whereas Shtibing was only twenty-four. In any event, the Criminal Chamber was not convinced and ruled “not to enter a judgment” about the dead body or about Shtibing until he was found. Whoever that corpse really was, once Shtibing was revealed to have abused the trust inherent in his position in Russia’s credit system, his only escape, in his mind at least, was either his own literal death or a metaphorical death in which he had to commit further frauds and begin his career completely new with a fresh identity—as if his old identity, having lost its respectability, had lost all its value. Although traditional credit ties between acquaintances and relatives remained strong in imperial Russia until the end, the use of intermediaries who might or might not be acquainted with both participants to the transaction was a routine practice in Moscow long before the Great Reforms, considering that even such individuals as Korotkov managed or at least attempted to make a living from this activity. No less common was the use of an agent who would substitute for one of the parties. Activities of credit brokers blended into those of legal practitioners. While imperial-era writers such as Gessen emphasized the striking novelty of the emergent organized bar in terms of personnel, the first twenty-seven barristers sworn in during 1866 included individuals who had been practicing law for some time, such as Nikolai Aristov and Adam Fal’kovskii, as well as some lawyers who had been practicing before the Moscow Commercial Court.75 Stories of actual pre-reform legal practitioners suggest that, although they could have benefitted from greater social status and professional self-­ regulation, they were not the dysfunctional and pathetic group depicted by late-imperial-era publicists committed to preserving the achievements of the Great Reforms. Rather, pre-reform lawyers as a group performed real services for their clients and for the legal system. While educated advokaty were available for complicated cases, such as appellate proceedings in the Senate or to serve wealthy and prominent clients such as the merchant Butikov, middling-level lawyers were available and adequate for the variety of matters Intermediaries, Lawyers, and Scriveners 283 that required practical acumen and experience but not necessarily a university education or a persuasive pen. This business must have been profitable enough to leave room for such lower-level “lawyers” as Korotkov. It is, moreover, important to note that the gradation in the quality and character of legal services in Russia before the reform of 1864 also persisted after the reform, according to William Pomeranz. In sum, the real shortcomings of pre-reform legal practitioners should not be exaggerated or taken to support the case for Russian legal exceptionalism. chapt e r 9 Creditors and Debtors in Pre-Reform Courts D isput e s ab o ut d e bt were the bread and butter of any Western legal system. In pre-reform Russia, most provincial Chambers of Civil Justice had two departments— one for disputes about landed estates and especially inheritance, and the other for lawsuits about contracts and especially debt—in addition to the Records Office, which registered sales, loans, and other private agreements. This court system was widely used, with approximately half a million ca