a legal representative or from well-informed friends or acquaintances. For example, in the fraud case of the twelfth-class official Aleksandr DeMazer, a wealthy serf woman named Mashkina gave money to DeMazer so that he could purchase a house in her name in order to avoid getting her master’s permission. However, she then suspected that DeMazer was swindling her, “consulted with other people,” and asked DeMazer for an accounting and the original purchase agreement for the house; she eventually complained to the police.59 Similarly, an illiterate Moscow merchant woman, Daria Kartasheva, initially admitted a debt to the police, but two weeks later changed her mind and contested the collection, claiming that her son issued the debt note in excess of the amount allotted on his power of attorney.60 Kartasheva’s petition to the Commercial Court stated the reasons the debt was not valid in a clear and professional way that sounds very much like a document that could be written today, suggesting that Kartasheva was able to secure the services of a competent lawyer. Intermediaries, Lawyers, and Scriveners 275 In another fraud case, discussed below in greater detail, the defendant Dmitriev allegedly used a forged blank sheet of paper with his former employers’ signatures to borrow money in their names. After accumulating significant debt, Dmitriev surrendered this sheet to one of his creditors, who, in turn, was advised by his poverennyi that the sheet was most likely fraudulent because Dmitriev’s employers would have used a standard power of attorney if they had really authorized him to borrow money. Finally, a remarkable example of a sudden and dramatic change in an individual’s legal circumstances is found, again, in the Zaborovskii case. The defendant originally confessed to a fraud he never committed, but at the end of the proceeding he obtained accurate information about the laws governing confessions and persuaded the court to dismiss his initial confession as wrongfully obtained.61 Individual cases thus suggest a more nuanced view of the availability of legal information: while wealthy and sophisticated litigants could make egregious mistakes, many members of Moscow’s middling administrative and commercial classes had access to legal advice and information that made a considerable difference in the outcome of their cases, even after initial mistakes. In short, access to legal knowledge was not a given, but it was by no means rare, and, most importantly, it was not limited to persons of wealth and privilege. Most likely, it depended—much as it does today in Russia or in the United States—on the quality of one’s social and kinship network and whether it included individuals with legal experience or helpful connections. Credit Intermediaries The variety of activities of the poverennye corresponded to their widely different social ranks and relations with their employers. The poverennye whose powers of attorney were registered in Moscow can be divided into three groups. The largest one consisted of individuals who held either a civil or military officer’s rank included in the Table of Ranks (either active or retired). The second group consisted of merchants and townspeople, which is not surprising given Moscow’s commercial significance. Finally, another group included serfs, peasants, and domestic servants, who were typically engaged to manage an estate or to furnish a conscript to the military authorities and also frequently employed to pursue debt-related matters, most notably obtaining a certificate required to remortgage an estate, or even for court appearances, especially for the rather mechanical procedure of hearing the 276 Debt and the Law lower-court decision and signing the intention to appeal. It is also notable that the practice of engaging women, servants, or close relatives—very common in the 1850s—deteriorated rapidly in the 1860s, as summarized in Table 8.1 and Appendixes D.1 and D.2. A freelancing loan broker (svodchik) was a familiar figure in Moscow. A svodchik was typically hired by the borrower and accompanied him or her both during the preliminary negotiations of the terms of the loan and during the final signing. A flamboyant example of this kind of broker was Boris Korotkov, who, as already mentioned, attempted to become a legal representative and was eventually arrested for pawning fake gold watches. His other occupations were to work as a clerk for a merchant Sudakov, as well as a pawnbroker in a loose partnership network with other individuals, including his victim, Emma Flik, whom he assisted with finding clients. When Korotkov was arrested, the police prepared a detailed inventory of all papers and objects seized from him, which, in addition to a remarkable agreement to provide legal services, included three passports that apparently had been pawned by Korotkov’s clients, two bronze watches, a silver watch case, a leather wallet, a leather-bound notebook, and thirteen notes (zapiski) of unspecified character. Korotkov also acted as a domestic servant-finding broker, as evidenced by a reference letter from one aspiring servant and by several sheets of paper containing information about individuals available as servants or needing servants. Finally, Korotkov possessed several cheat-sheets for his loan ­brokering business. One of them listed the colors of different banknote denominations. The other sheet was titled “At what amount to receive collateral for a 100-ruble nominal price,” and it specified, for example, that Finnish public debt went for 70 percent of its nominal value, and 1 pound sterling went for 6.3 rubles, while one share of the Riga–Dünaburg Railroad sold for 100 rubles. Altogether the list included nineteen various types of cur­ rencies and commercial paper that were commonly circulating in Moscow in the 1860s.62 Engaging a broker of Korotkov’s variety was of course risky: not only could these brokers be dishonest, but they could turn out to be incompetent. For instance, the serf girl Praskovia Gavrilova was arrested for fraud when she attempted to sell to a merchant’s brother, Lintsov, a loan letter that belonged to her brother-in-law, using the go-between services of chancery clerk Nikolai Pokhorskii, who himself somehow managed to avoid a closer look by the police.63 Intermediaries, Lawyers, and Scriveners 277 Similarly, the retired chancery clerk Dmitrii Zaitsev, who was engaged to find money for aulic councilor’s wife Maria Skrebkova, may or may not have known that she was attempting to cheat the lender, Staff Captain Georgii Balakan, but he was arrested and put on trial together with Skrebkova; he claimed in his defense that he was tricked by her as to who exactly was supposed to act as the borrower, and he successfully asserted that during the key moment when Skrebkova and her accomplice signed a fraudulent loan letter, he was standing in a different room and so did not know what was happening.64 Another svodchik, Tikhon Nikolaev, helped Collegiate Registrar Shere­ metievskii in 1855 to borrow 100 rubles from meshchanin Ivanov, but could not prevent a misunderstanding when the debt document was actually written out for 200 rubles; Sheremetievskii initiated a criminal investigation for fraud and usury. Ivanov saw Nikolaev at the court building and loudly blamed Nikolaev for finding him a client who refused to understand the rules of the game and for testifying against him. Nikolaev called him a “usurer” (rostovshchik), and Ivanov replied with “idiot” (durak). This is the only indication in the sources that this kind of svodchik may have had any implied responsibility for vetting potential parties to a transaction as opposed to simply introducing them to each other.65 Wealthier borrowers who could afford a hired property manager (upravliaiushchii) could entrust him with finding loans, either in specified amounts or to borrow whenever it was possible or expedient to carry out their responsibilities. Only rarely were their powers of attorney issued to collect or to borrow from a specific person on a specific occasion; typically, the principal issued a blanket permission to borrow on his or her behalf.66 The common practice was for the principal to note the credit limit he or she was granting to the agent on the power of attorney, where all the debts incurred on the principal’s behalf had to be recorded as well.67 Those nobles who did not have a hired property manager, or did not sufficiently trust him, employed a relative, a trusted serf, or a freedman who continued to associate with his former masters. For example, the brothers Aleksandr and Dmitrii Glebov, from a line of important tsarist bureaucrats and both holding the rank of state councilor, employed Titular Councilor (equivalent to army captain) Nikolai Dmitriev, the son of their emancipated former serf who had himself reached the civil service rank of collegiate assessor (Class 8 on the Table of Ranks) and thus acquired hereditary noble status.68 Nikolai’s rank was the more junior 278 Debt and the Law Class 9, although his official job was at Moscow’s Board of Trustees. Dmitriev’s duties included obtaining loans from various private persons, none of whom had the Glebovs’ social standing. Dmitriev had decades-long relationships with some of these lenders. When meeting potential creditors, Dmitriev would show them a blank sheet of paper with the Glebovs’ signatures and claim that if his patrons refused to honor the debt incurred by Dmitriev on their behalf, he would convert this sheet into a promissory note and collect from them in court. Seeing such apparent trust from the Glebovs, creditors quickly came up with the money, without ever asking themselves why the brothers did not simply give Dmitriev a regular power of attorney. Although Dmitriev’s family had served the Glebovs for decades, in 1835 they allegedly had a falling out, and Dmitriev was fired. However, he continued to borrow money in the Glebovs’ name until 1839, when the brothers finally thought to announce Dmitriev’s dismissal in newspapers, and several creditors complained to the police and the gendarmes. However, the best they could do at that point was to try to collect from the penniless Dmitriev. We can only speculate whether it was Dmitriev’s ambition or—if the Glebovs were involved in the scheme—loyalty to his patrons that caused him to embezzle, but all of his creditors, one of whom had known him and his father for decades, noted that he had always made timely payments and thus earned their trust. What is most interesting about this case is the extent of the Glebovs’ involvement after the case came to court, and the authorities’ hesitation to pry into their affairs. The police made no attempt to ascertain whether the Glebovs actually received any of the money borrowed by Dmitriev in their name or why they failed to notify creditors about his dismissal in a timely fashion. The brothers, in turn, claimed that their signatures on the blank sheet were forged but made this claim impossible to verify by buying the sheet for 10,000 rubles and destroying it. For the destruction of a key piece of evidence in a large-scale criminal fraud case, they were indicted but received only a mild reprimand that was cleared under the tsar’s 1841 amnesty. The brothers also indirectly admitted their responsibility by offering and in some cases reaching settlements with Dmitriev’s creditors for a fraction of the original amounts. Of course, bribery and personal connections must have played some role here, and the case record also mentions the Glebovs’ ­financial complications, suggesting that their ability to pay must have been limited. In any case, the convenience of placing all the blame on Dmitriev— who died before his case went on trial in 1846—must have been as obvious to Intermediaries, Lawyers, and Scriveners 279 the court as it was to the Glebovs. It appears that the authorities may have considered the risks and ultimat