 procedure for being haphazard and casuistic and—­ inaccurately—for not containing clear procedural rules, when the very idea of codification was under sharp attack throughout Europe in the first quarter Creditors and Debtors in Pre-Reform Courts 289 of the nineteenth century because of its association with Napoleon’s ­dominance? Although no comprehensive, archival-based study of Russia’s pre-1864 courts has existed until now, some historians have departed from the reformdriven narrative to illuminate various aspects of Russian legal culture before the 1850s.20 The most ambitious of them is Boris Mironov’s sweeping social history of imperial Russia, which argues rather sanguinely that pre-reform courts already manifested a progression of legality and individual rights, and even employed some adversarial procedures. A much more convincing and empirically grounded depiction of the pre-1864 legal universe is found in Michelle Lamarche Marrese’s study of female property ownership and control, which has implications far beyond her stated topic, showing that pre-­ reform Russia had a vigorous culture of private property, intimately linked to imperial legislation and to a legal practice that served to protect property interests in court. Marrese’s approach is close to studies of pre-Petrine courts by Nancy Shields Kollmann and George Weickhardt, who establish the ­existence of a vibrant, sophisticated, and widely used legal structure with well-­ developed procedural rules. Without attempting to whitewash the problems, all these works question the divergence of Russia’s legal universe from the Western “norm.”21 My study similarly focuses on the stories of individual litigants and interprets any legal system as a venue where multiple interests and influences intersect and where political ideas often determine the outcome.22 Estate-Based Court Structure As has been mentioned above, the degree to which Russia was divided into a strict system of predominantly closed legal estates has been questioned by recent scholarship showing estate boundaries to be porous and contested. However, other scholars argue for the continued relevance and importance of estate-based social identities until the end of the imperial period.23 One factor that has been seen to unequivocally support the estate structure was the pre-reform legal system, which is commonly labeled as estate-based in its entirety. It is true that Catherine’s 1775 Provincial Statute established a system of first-tier trial courts that was based on her notion of peer-administered justice and therefore divided into County Courts for nobles and, later, free peasants; Magistrate Courts for merchants and townspeople; and Aulic Courts in Moscow and Petersburg primarily for government officials. 290 Debt and the Law Scholars of Russian law for the past 150 years have interpreted this structure as evidence of the fractured and unreliable character of the Russian legal system. One historian, for example, has argued that the courts were “disjointed and separated” and that “there was no unified system of national courts to apply a common law.”24 Any lawyer would object that all legal systems are fragmented in some way, but historians of imperial Russia have extrapolated the first-tier court structure onto the legal system in general, ignoring the elements of the court system that were common to all estates. Most importantly, province-level courts included noble and urban assessors, who were explicitly required to take part in deciding all cases, “regardless of the estate of the litigants.”25 Estate-based first-tier courts were closely supervised and reviewed by the Chambers. In reality Russia’s pre-reform legal system was unified to a remarkable degree even compared to the late imperial period, when the new courts were established only gradually outside the core Russian provinces. Moreover, no previous scholar has attempted to find out how estate-based pre-reform courts actually functioned in practice. It turns out that the estate principle built into the 1775 system had to be eroded in practice, most importantly because the system inevitably raised the issue of jurisdiction in cases involving members of different estates. The basic principle of Russian law that the suit was to be brought to the court that had jurisdiction over the defendant obviously gave advantage to the latter. In the United States today, such cases are transferred from state to federal courts. In imperial Russia, all-estate provincial courts (Civil and Criminal Chambers) were overburdened by having to review virtually all serious first-tier decisions. The problem became even more complicated for cases involving multiple defendants from different legal estates. Theoretically, such cases could be split into separate proceedings. However, such splitting would violate the principle of “procedural indivisibility,” also known in Western European law, which prohibited the break-up of large cases with multiple defendants.26 The solution adopted by the 1775 Provincial Statute mandated joint trials in cases when more than one court was “involved” in a case.27 Even in the early years, the government viewed local court judges as interchangeable despite their estate affiliation; for example, when one of the two elected County Court assessors was not available, he was to be replaced by a member from the lower court for peasants.28 Subsequent legislation and court reorganization only furthered the erosion of the estate principle. Catherine’s successor, Paul I (1796–1801), abolished the original second tier of the court system, which was also estate-based.29 This Creditors and Debtors in Pre-Reform Courts 291 change undermined the estate principle severely because from then on, only the lowest and least important county- or city-level courts were estate-based. Alexander I ascended the throne in 1801 but did not reverse Paul’s reform. Rather, he continued to erode the estate principle by eliminating special courts for peasants and placing state peasants under the jurisdiction of County Courts, thus eliminating these courts’ all-noble character.30 State peasants, relatively few in number in the eighteenth century, multiplied enormously in the first half of the nineteenth until they made up almost twothirds of the empire’s peasantry on the eve of the emancipation of 1861. The court structure was therefore adapted to account for the participation of peasant representatives in County Courts by strengthening the nobles’ role and by prohibiting the peasants from judging cases that involved only nobles.31 This legislative activity reflects the government’s desire to strengthen the nobility’s tutelage over other estates, but it also undermined the original compartmentalization of the courts and the principle of peer justice. The fact that lawsuits frequently involved members of different estates caused pre-reform courts to function in practice as one single unit, as one little-known imperial-era jurist noted.32 Joint sessions of estate-based courts prescribed in the Provincial Statute were actively practiced in the nineteenth century. An 1848 law elaborated the rules on the joint sessions of County Courts and Magistrate Courts. These sessions were to be chaired by the crown-­appointed County Court judge and consist of three or five members of each court, depending on whether peasant members were involved.33 In Moscow, the practice of joint sessions became common at least by midcentury, in criminal as well as civil cases. Virtually every significant case discussed in this study involved a joint court session. Exact statistics would take years to compile from thousand-page annual “journals” of each court, but notes from 1860 of occasions when the Moscow magistrate invited County Court members to a joint hearing of various civil cases do provide some indication (see Table 9.1).34 The fact that this list is not hugely long should be explained by the fact that the Magistrate did not process “commercial” cases in which merchants were likely to be involved; they were litigated at the Commercial Court.35 Nor does this list include criminal cases or instances of other courts inviting each other’s or the Magistrate’s members to their joint sessions. What is important is the fact that this list was compiled at all, which provides additional confirmation that at least in the minds of court officials, joint sessions were a regular practice, and ­lower-level courts in Moscow tended to operate as a single unit. 292 Debt and the Law Table 9.1 J oint Hearings at the Moscow Magistrate Court with Members of the Moscow County Court, 1860 Date Litigants Type of Case Apr. 26 Coachmen (iamshchiki) N. Sharov and S. Bezport(ill). v. townswoman M. Shchukina Unlawful building by Shchukina on plaintiff ’s children’s land. May 10 Guard Colonel V. B. and Staff Captain D. D. Kazakovs v. late merchant N. N. Kraiushkin Collection of a debt (38,000 and 9,000 rubles) incurred by Kraiushkin’s father. Townsman A. Dmitriev Exercise of the redemption right May 8 & 24 to Dmitriev’s patrimonial house, on sale by a nephew. June 15 Kraiushkin (see above) Kraiushkin’s wife demands her share of her husband’s inheritance. July 20 Household serf of Count Sheremetev A. Mashkina v. retired twelfth-class official A. DeMazer Contested ownership of a house, income money and insurance expenses. Aug. 31 Kraiushkin (see above) See above. Oct. 18 Collegiate Registrar’s wife A. Gukova Contested will. One judge removed because of his legal claim against Gukova’s husband. Oct. 17 Moscow Merchant A. F. Bovastro v. Collegiate Councilor V. F. Mit’kov Contested ownership of a “chocolate machine.” Nov. 29 Gukov and Mit’kov (see above) See above. Data source: TsIAM 92.9.1092. Yet another factor promoting a single legal system in the core provinces of the empire actually resulted from what is commonly thought of as a defect— namely, the notorious Nicholaevan over-centralization, which concentrated key decision-making authority in the non-estate provincial Judicial Chambers and in the Governing Senate.36 This is not to suggest that lower-court proceedings were always a mere formality; in many cases, the most interesting action took place precisely there (for example, in the Blaginin debt-related inheritance case, where the parties were a clerk from Orenburg Creditors and Debtors in Pre-Reform Courts 293 province and a Moscow townswoman).37 As noted by Ilya Selivanov, the head criminal judge in Moscow in the 1850s, the function of the County Court was to impose comparatively severe sentences that would be reduced after further review.38 But, higher-tier courts could also simply rule to affirm the lower court decision. Nevertheless, numerous other examples suggest that province-level Civil and Criminal Chambers had the real authority, responsibility, and legal expertise, compared to the estate-based first tier, and that the lower courts functioned as the Chamber’s subdivisions, essentially doing its busy work.39 In criminal cases, the Chamber was required to review all but the most minor convictions, and in civil ones, all disputes involving more than 30 rubles could be—and virtually invariably were—appealed by the losing side to the Chamber.40 One of the most illustrative cases is the debt proceedings of a widow of a kamer-lakei (servant at the imperial court) Nastasia Chizhikova, in which the court ordered a sale of the house that belonged to a woman who signed Chizhikova’s debt as a surety.41 From this routine and uncomplicated debt case, one gathers that the County Court was not a judiciary organ in its own right because the Chamber oversaw, reviewed, and second-guessed every step of the litigation, no matter how minor. Chambers of Criminal and Civil Justice reviewed every case of any consequence, sometimes in excruciating detail, and thus largely obviated the already eroded estate-based court structure. In sum, the alleged fragmentation of the court system o