senting judge argued that the clause was a separate agreement motivating Surovshchikov to repay on time and compensating Nikitin for his possible loss, since he otherwise might not have lent such a large sum of money. This ruling shows the County Court, despite its 298 Debt and the Law insufficient force to channel the proceedings and despite the Chamber’s oversight, was still being independent-minded enough to find it necessary to list all these arguments. Even more importantly, the judges were well oriented in the legal issues, despite the stereotype about lower-level court judges being untrained in the law and completely dependent on their secretaries. Or should we imagine that this court’s secretary prepared different opinions for different judges? While in this instance the debtor won the case, it is important to note that the entire litigation only contested the penalty clause: as to the baths themselves, Nikitin quickly seized them. This case clearly contradicts the commonly made observation that the pre-reform legal system was geared against the creditor; rather, the effect of this ruling seems to have been to prevent Nikitin’s unjust enrichment and to emphasize the fact that the entire point of a mortgage is that it is secured by real property and nothing else. The exchange of petitions ended when “all the evidence had been presented,” after which neither party was permitted to submit any additional petitions or claims. Who made this determination was left unclear. The secretary of the court then compiled a summary of all the pleadings (zapiska), prepared according to specified rules. The parties reviewed the summary for accuracy, made additions they thought were necessary, and signed at the end. The secretary then listed applicable statutes, which was a much easier task after the Digest of the Laws was published in 1832. Once the case was ready for trial, a hearing was held, during which the zapiska was read out to the judges. Although these hearings were by no means “public,” they were not “secret” either: the small courtrooms—more closely resembling offices—and adjacent corridors and stairways seem to have been crowded by staff and visitors. The parties and their lawyers could be present during the hearing and were allowed to give oral “explanations” but not to present any new evidence, claims, or arguments.55 Many writers on Russian law have claimed that these all-important case summaries were “unreliable” and placed undue power in the hands of the court secretary, who could slant the case in favor of one of the parties.56 Vasilii Gettun recalled that his boss, Field Marshal Count Kamenskii, did not trust these extracts but preferred to read the original.57 However, I found exactly the opposite to be the case. Most cases that I reviewed contain pencil marks on the petitions showing the alterations made during the preparation of the digest. I have not been able to locate any material alterations in any of the summaries. At most, secretaries slightly improved the summaries by Creditors and Debtors in Pre-Reform Courts 299 removing superfluous verbiage and misspellings, but even this happened only rarely. Typically, secretaries merely changed all first-person pronouns to third-person and kept the text of each petition intact. For example, in the case of collegiate councilor’s wife Strekalova, the secretary simply changed the pronouns, dropped some of the most extreme verbiage, and changed Strekalova’s lawyer’s misspelling of the word sekverst (sequester) to the standard sekvestr.58 Even if a secretary did misrepresent one side’s arguments, the litigants were required by the law to review the digest, note anything they did not agree with, sign it, and, if they felt necessary, make oral explanations in person in front of the judges. This right was not a mere formality but was widely deployed in actual cases. For example, in the Nikitin case mentioned above, the colonel examined the digest and noted his objection to the fact that it incorrectly named Surovshchikov, rather than his wife, as the borrower. This right was exercised even in criminal cases in which defendants’ rights were much less protected. For example, merchant Mokhov’s case started as a debt collection against a merchant woman named Levi, who was able to leave Moscow without having to “secure” the claim against her.59 The litigation turned against him, and he was subjected to a criminal accusation of not proving a denunciation (izvet)60 and of including in his court papers an improper (neprilichnoe) expression about the actions of the joint session of Moscow County Court and the magistrate, as well as “irrelevant” language in his receipt relating to his complaint against the police. After the summary of these criminal charges was prepared, he was able to add two large pages of very small handwriting, which in his view must have better stated his ­position than his own prior petitions, since these had been accurately summarized by the secretary. After successfully arguing that the type of denunciation that he made was not punishable, nor were “irrelevant” expressions, he was only given a warning for his choice of words. As another example, the case of Moscow merchant Stepan Tikhomirov began as a regular debt collection but was transferred to the criminal court when the debtor, merchant Iakov Chistiakov, denied having signed the bill of exchange.61 In 1867 Chistiakov decided to hire a new-style barrister to represent him in the Criminal Chamber; the barrister was allowed to “comment” on the case even after it had already been presented to the judges. Finally, even in the previously discussed fraud case of Gubernial Secretary Aleksei Zaborovskii, who was rather roughly treated by the police, he was allowed in 1846 to review the case summary and did not hesitate 300 Debt and the Law to petition the Criminal Chamber to be allowed to appear before it in person when he felt that the written record was not sufficient to properly present his defense.62 None of this is, of course, to deny that Russian pre-reform civil and criminal procedure was written rather than oral. What is surprising is the fact that the parties often seemed to have preferred it that way. The procedure that, since the days of Peter the Great, had provided for simplified oral pleadings (sud po forme) as an alternative to the usual lengthy procedure was only rarely used, as shown by my own research and by one other legal historian. In the cases considered in this study there were only a handful of references to litigants using this procedure, but even in such instances, they preferred to exchange written pleadings whenever the court would allow it. For example, sud po forme was the required procedure at the Moscow Equity Court, which had jurisdiction over all money suits between parents and children, and this is where a wealthy merchant Savinov sued his daughter for 200,000 rubles.63 Although the parties were required to meet in court to present their arguments, at every court date, either only one party showed up or none at all. The daughter’s husband, who represented her, even argued that he was not required to have face-to-face meetings with his father-in-law, according to the Provincial Statute of 1775 and according to the Civil Code. Savinov’s representative, the chancery clerk Nechaev, pursued the case through the customary exchange of written statements, despite the court’s repeated attempts to have both parties face each other. In the end, the court decided the case not on the basis of a face-to-face oral trial but on the basis of the documents that the parties submitted. The decision itself was a multi-stage process: after hearing the case, the judges recorded and signed their decision (rezoluitsiia) in the court’s journal. The next step was to combine the zapiska with the decision and produce the official case record (protokol), until which point an individual judge could still change his mind and record his new opinion in the journal. After the protokol had been signed, no more changes were permitted. The parties were then notified in writing and assigned a date to appear in court, review the decision, and sign off, whether they were satisfied with the decision or intended to appeal. The decision was considered to acquire its legal force when the protokol was signed, even though it was not yet announced to the parties. This was different from “final legal force” when it was the kind of case that could not be appealed or the party that intended to appeal missed the deadline for filing it. In its decision, the court had to list the ways it was to be executed and forward it directly to the applicable police authorities for execution. Creditors and Debtors in Pre-Reform Courts 301 Debt cases show that claims that pre-reform law “rejected” adversarial proceedings in favor of the inquisitorial system are exaggerated.64 The term “inquisitorial procedure” refers to the judges’ overall control over the proceedings and the balance of power in criminal prosecutions significantly favoring the state.65 The judge is supposed to take an active part in questioning the parties and their witnesses. Inquisitorial procedure is associated with the Continental legal systems from which Russian law borrowed freely in the eighteenth century, in contrast with the “adversarial” common law systems, in which the famous English Court of Chancery was an important exception, employing written non-public proceedings. However, the distinction of inquisitorial and adversarial procedure was most directly observable in criminal cases and is much less relevant to civil ones, in which “the determination of what issues to raise, what evidence to introduce, and what arguments to make is left almost entirely to the parties” by either of the two Western legal traditions.66 These differences were present in Russian procedures as well, contradicting John LeDonne’s claim that Russian “judicial procedure so lacked autonomy and recognition that it was not even clear whether a distinction existed between civil and criminal procedure.”67 Moreover, while lawyers trained in the common law tradition are accustomed to thinking that the adversarial system is the best type of procedure, recent European and American legal practice has tended to merge the two types of procedures in order to mitigate their worst features.68 In civil cases in particular, English procedure has recently witnessed “an erosion of the adversary and orality principles, marked by increasing intervention by the court . . . and . . . a greater reliance on the use of written materials.”69 Jurist Cyril Glasser has noted that this tendency could improve the “inchoate” English discovery system.70 In the United States, many federal judges have long abandoned their traditionally dispassionate attitude in the famous movement “to adopt a more active, ‘managerial’ stance.”71 More active involvement by judges is thought to be more suitable for complex cases with large numbers of witnesses and a voluminous documentary record.72 Legal scholars have noted that in actual legal practice, a purely adversarial civil trial is no more possible than a purely inquisitorial one, given that the judge must exercise his discretion and that it is therefore impossible to determine the winning side objectively.73 It is thus more correct to discuss adversarial or inquisitorial elements in civil procedure. In other words, procedural rules can be placed on a sliding scale, and while the Russian rules were firmly located on the inquisitorial end of the spectrum, this does not mean that Russian litigants did not have an 302 Debt and the Law opportunity to match wits against their opposing side. Thus, I suggest that when discussing Russian civil procedure on the eve of the judicial reform of 1864, the ideal model should be an effective form of merger between the two types of procedure, not a triumphant progress of the common law archetype. Depen