n the basis of the empire’s estate structure existed more on paper than in real legal practice. Court cases, as well as legislation, show that the estate-based court organization was eroded almost from the moment it was introduced, in part because of practical considerations of judging cases with multiple plaintiffs and defendants and in part because of the early-nineteenth century drive for centralization, so that the all-estate provincial courts, applying the same laws and staffed by professional judges, quickly became the key locus of Russian legal practice and thus should be seen as precursors of the post-reform trial courts. Pre-Reform Civil Procedure Memoirist and legal official Vasilii Gettun quipped that civil cases were more complicated than criminal ones because they presented two extreme positions, and officials therefore needed considerable caution and perceptiveness to avoid making judicial mistakes. By contrast, criminal cases were difficult 294 Debt and the Law to review only in cases of blatant misconduct.42 A pre-reform civil case began when a plaintiff submitted a petition to the appropriate lower-level court or when the debtor raised a legal objection during the police collection procedure.43 The proper lower-level court was the one that had jurisdiction over the defendant’s legal estate in the locale where the defendant resided or owned property.44 Unless a debtor raised one of the enumerated objections, the police collection against him continued even after the case was transferred to a court.45 This meant that he or she was required to “secure” the suit by posting the contested amount of money or by being arrested.46 Once the suit was initiated, parties exchanged written petitions responding to each other’s claims and presenting evidence. This exchange was the longest part of the proceedings. The 1716 rule allowing only two rounds of petitions was obviously not feasible, and already in the eighteenth century, many suits involved more than thirty rounds. Rather than try to require another, more practicable number, the law was left in suspense, without any set limit.47 The law permitted one month for the first round of petitions and from two to six months for the second round, thus making it easy for the parties to delay the proceedings.48 In addition, the court could make information requests of its own; for example, in an inheritance case, it could require the heir to produce documents confirming his relation to the deceased, or if a litigant referred to a document without producing it, the court could demand to see it. Interlocutory appeals were permitted and could further delay a case.49 The parties could reach a settlement (mirovaia sdelka), which the court had to review to ensure that it was truly voluntary.50 Actual cases show that individual litigants controlled the pace of a lawsuit in practice, as well as in theory. The open-ended procedural framework in pre-reform courts allowed even persons of moderate means, connections, and education to formulate a litigation strategy and to pursue it with minimal expense. This is illustrated by the litigation regarding the inheritance left by Lieutenant-Colonel Andrei Blaginin, a typical Nicholaevan soldier of serf origins who became commissioned at age thirty-one and thus gained hereditary nobility.51 After retiring in 1839 at only age forty-one, he lived in a small wooden house in Moscow on his pension of 666 rubles per year, never marrying and keeping no servants. Instead, he met Anna Gavrilova Antonova, an illiterate daughter of a household serf from the backwater Zaraisk County who had managed to move to Moscow and enroll as a townswoman. Blaginin visited Antonova, ten years his junior, twice a day at her apartment, and boarded with her until in June 1849 he became ill with chest pain and heart palpitations aggravated Creditors and Debtors in Pre-Reform Courts 295 by his love for “hot” (i.e., alcoholic) beverages. On June 9, Antonova went to check on him and found him dead in his bed. She summoned the police, who sealed up the house and inventoried all the property inside. Typically, the next step would be for Blaginin’s heirs, if any, to take over his property; however, Antonova immediately submitted for collection a debt note for 600 silver rubles issued by Blaginin two years previously. Her petitions did not anticipate any challenge to the collection and requested that the house be rented out until the case was resolved. However, the County Court ruled to wait until the legal heirs had been notified. In July, the court heard back from Andrei’s brother Petr, a retired non-commissioned officer serving as a petty clerk in his native Troitsk in the south Urals. Petr claimed the inheritance for himself and for his two married sisters, although he had no money to come to Moscow himself. At first he did not know about the house, but he asked the police to send him any property or cash left from his brother’s estate. He also asked the police to investigate the validity of any debt claims against the estate—that is, whether they were properly witnessed and notarized. Petr’s petitions to the court are remarkable for their clear style, good handwriting, and extreme attention to detail. Petr asked why there was only one witness to the property inventory, why the house was located on someone else’s plot of land, and why it was—in his opinion—undervalued, whether Andrei had received his last pension installment, whether the police had checked if Andrei’s acquaintances or his—nonexistent—servants stole his property, and whether Andrei’s creditors had at any point lived in his house and whether they had somehow been able to take advantage of him. He was also unsure about his brother’s actual social standing, writing about completely fantastical “teams of horses” and “fur garments.” Petr’s petitions sound as if he had an absolute and indisputable right to know about all of these things and that some large-scale conspiracy to defraud him might have been brewing, perhaps even with police participation. However, he skillfully managed to avoid making his claims sound offensive or target specific legal officials or institutions. It is unclear whether Petr’s paranoid style benefited his case by persuading court personnel in Moscow that he was more trouble than he was worth, but at least they did not harm him, considering the outcome of the case. When he demanded to see the original debt documents so that he could decide whether to contest them, they were mailed to him, and in July 1850 he wrote to the court, arguing that they were invalid because they were written on the 296 Debt and the Law wrong variety of stamped paper and not witnessed. He did not stop there but listed other reasons he thought Antonova’s claim was suspicious—for example, that a 600-ruble loan was secured by a house that was worth only 100. Petr also claimed that Antonova had lived with Andrei for several years, that she forged the note, and that her “enterprising” character was proved by the fact “that she dared, without any permission from the local police and contrary to existing laws to spend a significant sum on the funeral and the wake.” Petr could not be more specific on what kind of self-interest induced Antonova to pay these expenses. This exchange continued for most of 1850 and 1851, until the parties were finally summoned to court. There is no indication that Petr ever made it to Moscow in person, and there is no mention of any other person who helped him prepare or submit his petitions. It seems that he conducted the entire litigation by mail from Troitsk. The joint session of the County Court and the Magistrate Court acknowledged Petr as Andrei’s heir on February 27, 1852 and ordered payment of Antonova’s funeral expenses out of his estate but ruled that Antonova could not collect her debt because the note was written on the wrong kind of paper and even fined her for “incorrectly bringing the suit.” The court also ignored the ambiguous result of the handwriting analysis and ruled that Andrei’s signature was not genuine. Interestingly, Antonova appealed the case to the Civil Chamber, lost her appeal, and decided not to pursue the case to the Senate. This uncommonly well-detailed case record raises several key questions about pre-reform legal culture and legal practice. First, we see that central and local officials, litigants, and institutions could interact perfectly seamlessly, showing that the law under Nicholas I could operate as a single fairly efficient system despite the empire’s estate system and size. Second, the case shows that pre-reform legal culture, while clearly appearing as somewhat amateurish compared to post-reform law, could be effective in enabling individuals to identify and pursue their interests in court and that legal cases that did not involve strong incentives for corruption or delay could be conducted efficiently and inexpensively. Finally, it is remarkable that Petr Blaginin managed to maintain an extremely proactive and even aggressive stance during the proceedings, despite being somewhat irrational and living very far away. Antonova, in turn, was herself a remarkably active participant in the legal culture, despite her humble origins. Compared to the two litigants, the court itself appears reactive, even aloof, and its only “inquisitorial” action was the obvious step of asking Petr to confirm his relation to his late brother. Creditors and Debtors in Pre-Reform Courts 297 Wealthier litigants who could afford good legal advice were more likely to cite sophisticated legal concepts in their petitions, although they could at the same time supplement them with the kind of speculative and circumstantial arguments used by Petr Blaginin. The case of Colonel Nikolai Nikitin was litigated in the same County Court at the same time as the Blaginin case, and, similarly, it involved parties with equal social and economic status.52 The difference was that Nikitin was a wealthy moneylender and the family of his debtor, State Councilor Surovishchikov, had for decades owned hugely profitable public baths in Moscow.53 This case shows even more confidence by the litigants in their dealings with the court. Nikitin had loaned the staggering sum of 100,000 rubles to Surovshchikov’s wife, on the condition that the debtor, Surovshchikov, was to pay a 15,000-ruble penalty if he failed to repay the loan on the due date. Surovshchikov missed the deadline but was unwilling to pay the penalty and started a lawsuit. The legal contest regarding the validity of the penalty clause took the familiar shape of a seesaw-like exchange of petitions. Surovshchikov’s position strikingly combined legally sophisticated arguments with arguments bordering on the ridiculous. He claimed that he did not authorize his wife to borrow money on such unfavorable conditions and at the same time accused Nikitin of usury and of showing insufficient respect by not addressing Surovshchikov by his name and patronymic. Surovshchikov also had one of the judges removed from the panel on the grounds that he was Nikitin’s friend. Nikitin objected that the whole point of the clause was that Surovshchikov agreed to pay 15,000 rubles in the event of default, without any contest, and that his wife was authorized to borrow money on any conditions. The court’s only attempt to be proactive was in denying one of Surovshchikov’s information requests, which was reversed by the Senate after an interlocutory appeal, showing the court to be largely powerless to direct the proceedings. The ruling by two of the three judges held on June 1, 1853, was that Surovshchikov had to pay only 100,000 rubles. One judge ruled that his wife was only authorized to mortgage the baths for 100,000, and the other held that under Russia’s civil code, penalty clauses were prohibited for mortgages of real estate and that here the clause was part of the debt document and not a separate contract.54 The dis