ding on the individual case, what I have discussed here can be characterized as an adversarial element within the inquisitorial model or, conversely, as lax case management by the courts. In any event, these cases suggest that the major problem with pre-reform courts was not that they employed inquisitorial procedure but rather the fact that it was not inquisitorial enough. “Formal Proofs” in Practice: Handwriting Experts and Forgery Another often-criticized feature of pre-reform law was its rules of evidence—­ namely, its reliance on so-called formal proofs long after they were abandoned by other Western legal systems. Formal proofs reflected the attempt to achieve rational legal certainty and predictability by depriving judges of discretion in evaluating evidence.74 The various types of proofs were ranked according to their evidentiary force: a personal confession was preferred, followed by the testimony of two sworn witnesses, documentary proof, and a judicial oath.75 Debt cases sometimes involved witnesses or confessions, but the analysis of written documents was far more important than oral testimony. Pre-reform evidence rules were widely criticized by later writers for requiring judges to ignore much pertinent evidence and for placing excessive value upon confessions.76 Critics correctly point out that formal proofs ensured less, rather than more, certainty in courts’ rulings. More recent work, however, shows that such broad generalizations do not exhaust the subject. For instance, Elisa Becker has argued that the quest for legal certainty embodied in the system of formal proofs actually promoted the rise of forensic expertise, particularly forensic medicine.77 Becker discovered that medical expertise was privileged second only to confession and was thus legally insulated from “legal evaluation, challenge, or criticism,” although she did not examine legal practice to determine how medical testimony was used in real cases.78 According to Becker, “ironically, the inquisitorial system that reformers such as [A. F.] Koni disparaged, in fact, granted the physician the legal status, probative weight, and unfettered discretion that such reformers would seek for medical experts in the postreform period . . . the limitation on judicial discretion (imposed by the rules of proof ) entailed the Creditors and Debtors in Pre-Reform Courts 303 displacement of that discretion to the physician . . . the physician and his form of knowledge—in theory and practice—enjoyed basically unconstrained discretion, autonomy, and immunity from external attack.”79 By ­contrast, I argue that the use of document analysis in debt cases actually served to undermine rather than reinforce the system of formal proofs—not because handwriting experts were challenged in court but because the way the analysis was conducted led to ambiguous results and forced judges to exercise their discretion. Handwriting identification, as Jennifer Mnookin has pointed out, is “an unusual form of expert evidence because it was the first kind of expertise that was primarily forensic, invented specifically for use in the legal arena.”80 Unlike doctors, professional handwriting experts generally do not exercise their skills outside the courtroom in a sizable community of other professionals. In Anglo-American law, this accounts in part for lawyers’ uneasiness about handwriting identification. Until 1854, English courts prohibited any handwriting comparison, especially by handwriting experts, as did most U.S. courts until the first half of the nineteenth century.81 The four-fold rationale for this prohibition was so curious and logically indefensible that it reminds us how contingent is the very notion of legal rationality: (1) the party introducing a writing sample would in turn also need to prove its authenticity (the rejoinder to this is why not do so if the document is important to the case?); (2) the sample could misrepresent the individual’s handwriting (but any other type of evidence also can potentially be misleading); (3) illiterate jury members would not be able to evaluate the analysis (which was originally a key issue in English practice but became irrelevant as literacy spread in the nineteenth century); and (4) the professional expert could be unreliable (but so can any witness testimony).82 Thus, instead of the expert handwriting comparison, AngloAmerican law relied on the procedure of handwriting recognition by someone personally acquainted with the writer and with his hand. In the nineteenth century, this practice began to change as credit networks became more reticulated and impersonal and personal connections between the writer and the witness became less common, so that handwriting experts were gradually allowed to testify, although they were not securely established in the United States until late in the century.83 In Russia the development of handwriting identification followed Western European patterns, experimenting with a variety of arrangements before “scientific” handwriting experts appeared in the second half of the nineteenth 304 Debt and the Law century.84 The earliest court cases involving handwriting identification date from the sixteenth century. As in early modern Western Europe, these cases involved disputed wills rather than debt instruments; they were carried out by senior court staff (diaki).85 Subsequently, Russian law followed the Continental model in allowing handwriting expertise to be used as evidence.86 The experts were engaged by the court and not by the parties to the case. In the mid-nineteenth century, Russian courts experimented with two kinds of experts: one method was to poll large numbers of court clerks.87 The alternative, parallel to developments in Anglo-American law, was to employ respectable calligraphy and drawing teachers.88 The Russian case was peculiar because instead of employing only one expert, courts used a panel of four or five teachers from different schools. I have not located any cases from pre-reform courts when individual experts were used instead of a panel. Not surprisingly, panels rarely reached full consensus, thus leaving it to the court to interpret their usually rather intricate findings and thereby to exercise the very discretion that was supposed to be eliminated by the system of “formal proofs.” The most notable feature of handwriting comparison by court clerks is the large number of individual clerks invited from those courts that were equal in rank to the one in which the comparison was performed. One example of how the procedure operated is supplied by the inheritance case of Andrei Blaginin, used throughout this study to illustrate various features of the pre-reform legal system.89 After Andrei’s brother, Petr, contested the validity of the debt note issued to Andrei’s caretaker, Anna Antonova, the Moscow Aulic Court ordered a handwriting comparison with the account books of the city treasury, which Andrei signed each month to get his pension. The comparison was conducted by court clerks, and the results were sharply divided: the officials from the first and second departments of the Moscow Magistrate Court and the second and third departments of the Aulic Court concluded that the signature on the debt note “had resemblance” to Blaginin’s undisputed signature. The officials from the first department of the County Court judged that the signature “in the character of some letters has small resemblance, but complete resemblance cannot be observed.” Finally, the officials from the Orphan Court thought that “the handwriting had no resemblance.” The results were obviously far from certain, and the “experts” themselves were far from clear, limiting themselves to a rather weak “has resemblance”; had they been really sure, they would have said “has strong resemblance” or “has perfect resemblance.” Strangely, the judges interpreted Creditors and Debtors in Pre-Reform Courts 305 these findings to mean that the writing on the note was not Blaginin’s and noted this in its decision, ruling against Antonova. In the Blaginin case, the size of the panel was not specified, but the forgery case of a merchant’s son, Klavdii Rudnev, appears to have been fairly typical. Rudnev confessed to forging bills of exchange in his father’s name. However, rather inconveniently for the investigation, fifteen court secretaries from “the courts equal in rank to the Moscow Magistrate” found that the allegedly forged signatures were “similar” to the senior Rudnev’s genuine ones, thus implicating Klavdii’s father in the case.90 A slightly different approach to handwriting identification by court clerks can be found at the same County Court at the same time. In the case of major general’s wife Tvorogova, a grand-niece sued her great-aunt’s heirs for debt pursuant to a note that the old lady allegedly issued shortly before her death.91 The defendant, Prince Sergei Dolgorukov, was an ambitious young bureaucrat in the beginning of the suit, and at its end he was one of the empire’s highest-ranking civil servants; not surprisingly, he was able to delay the proceedings for several years by not finding the right kind of document for handwriting comparison. After the court carried out a handwriting analysis anyway, using only the plaintiff ’s papers, Dolgorukov had this comparison overturned through a collateral appeal but had to finally provide his own papers. Altogether there were three comparisons, the first two conducted at the Moscow Criminal Chamber, which compared the debt note to a registered power of attorney and to a receipt relating to a property sale; the third was conducted at the Civil Chamber and used all available documents. The first expertise involved 180 officials, of whom 22 judged the documents to be “completely similar,” 6 to “have small similarity,” 146 as “not having any similarity,” and another 6 “gave a conclusion that did not contain a positive definiteness.” The second expertise involved 182 officials, of whom 164 found that the signatures were “similar,” and 18 found that they were “similar in some letters.” Finally, the third expertise involved 124 officials, of whom 98 found “similarity,” 18 found “some similarity,” and 6 found “no similarity.” Taken together, of these 486 persons, 283 affirmed similarity, 152 denied it, and 51 gave an indeterminate conclusion. With these results, first the Moscow County Court and then, on appeal, the Moscow Civil Chamber and the Seventh Department of the Senate ruled in Tvorogova’s favor. However, Dolgorukov appealed further, and the joint session of Moscow Senate departments held that 283 officials did not constitute a proper majority because that number included 146 officials who had originally denied any 306 Debt and the Law resemblance during the first comparison. Another comparison was ordered, whose results we do not know, although the case dragged on into the 1870s. The strategy of using a large number of “experts” was clearly not very reliable in practice, nor was the practice of taking a vote of each individual expert any more helpful than recording their collective opinion. Pre-reform courts also experimented with other solutions, such as using a smaller number of clerks or using a combined panel of experts; for example, in a debt-related case of witness bribery in the mid-1860s, the panel consisted of a secretary of the local magistrate, two teachers, a court investigator, and an official “for special assignments.”92 In another case that originated outside the city of Moscow, involving the merchant’s son Aleksandr Prokofiev, only four local court secretaries conducted the first identification and found that the signature on the debt instrument “did not resemble” the debtor’s actual signature. The second identification, conducted by nineteen secretaries, had the same result. Chiefly based on this evidence, Prokofiev was convicted of forgery and sentenced by a joint session of the Moscow Aulic Court and the Magi