strate Court to be stripped of his estate privileges, branded, punished with ninety lashes, and exiled to Siberia.93 Another method of handwriting identification that became particularly popular in the 1860s was to invite four or five teachers of calligraphy and drawing. The use of the calligraphy and art communities as a “breeding ground” for handwriting experts, as Mnookin has pointed out, was also the norm in nineteenth-century Anglo-American law.94 In Russian legal practice, as Krylov could not have known without studying archival materials, there developed a group of calligraphy and drawing teachers who were invited to serve as handwriting experts over and over throughout the 1860s. The service list of one of these teachers, who served as an expert in many of the cases in this study, was fortunately preserved.95 Aleksandr Trofimovich Skino was born in 1826 in a Greek family settled in the town of Nezhin and had no landed property. He studied at the Second Moscow Drawing School, and in 1847 he joined the First Moscow County School as a drawing and calligraphy teacher. In 1849 he was hired by the First Moscow Gymnazium. Throughout the 1850s he moved through the ranks, becoming a collegiate secretary in 1856 and two years later receiving from the “Gracious Sovereign Emperor” a diamond ring with a ruby as a reward for presenting the tsar with a model of one of the Kremlin towers cut out of wood. He also received occasional rewards of money from his superiors for excellent service, as well as “gratitudes” in 1864 and 1870. In 1866 he was promoted to titular Creditors and Debtors in Pre-Reform Courts 307 c­ouncilor. His annual salary in the 1860s was approximately 400 rubles, which was comparable to the salary of a midlevel retail clerk. All this detail is important to show that Skino was not a stereotypical radicalized intelligentsia member but rather a reliable civil servant, highly valued and promoted by his ­superiors—a good indication for the courts of his reliability as an expert witness. The cases I have reviewed that involved identifications by Skino and his colleagues involved much more sophisticated conclusions than identifications performed by court secretaries. For example, in the forgery case of Moscow merchant Aleksandr Smirnov, the debtor challenged signatures on several of his debt documents.96 However, the calligraphy teachers not only confirmed his handwriting on these documents but also determined that he intentionally modified his handwriting when signing papers at the police station. On the basis of this identification, the Criminal Chamber held the debt notes to be genuine and returned them to the police for collection. However, even calligraphy teachers could fail to agree, forcing courts to consider other evidence, which is what happened in the case of Moscow merchant Ilia Shatov.97 Together with a partner, another Moscow merchant, Taras Kalinin, Shatov contracted with the government to transport wool cloth to Nikolaev for the Black Sea fleet. Kalinin presented as collateral to the government his stone house, valued at 10,400 silver rubles, while Shatov presented two deposit tickets, one to the Deposit Treasury and the second to the Loan Bank, totaling 2,755.75 rubles. Subsequently, Shatov claimed that he discharged all of his obligations to Kalinin by presenting a receipt, but Kalinin claimed that the signature on it was not his. A handwriting identification conducted largely by the same teachers mentioned above was only able to establish “some resemblance” to Kalinin’s handwriting. The court interpreted these ambiguous results to mean that the receipt was forged. However, Shatov did not confess to anything, and the only other evidence in the case was testimony by one witness, which was not enough to convict him, and he was only “left under suspicion” of knowingly presenting a forged document. In another similar case, that of Moscow merchant Stepan Tikhomirov, the court conducted two identifications of the writing on a bill of exchange.98 The first one, by secretaries of the Provincial Office (Gubernskoe pravlenie), the Provincial Treasury, and the Commercial Court (“official places,” equal in rank to the Criminal Chamber), found that the debtor’s writing “had resemblance” to the signature on the note, whereas the defendant’s did not. However, the second comparison, carried out by calligraphy teachers Sabinin, 308 Debt and the Law Kondyrev, and Skino, determined that the debtor’s handwriting “did not have resemblance” to that on the debt note. The debtor must have been confident of his ability to change his signature and dismissive of the experts’ ability to detect his forgery because two witnesses later testified that the debtor asked for a postponement on his debt, threatening otherwise to deny his signature. Although it has been used widely in many different legal systems, handwriting identification has often been criticized as unreliable. The solution that pre-reform Russian courts eventually adopted was very similar to that of U.S. courts—namely, to use a small group of experts well known to judges for their professional ability and reliability. Identifications by a handful of calligraphy teachers were certainly more manageable than those by crowds of court secretaries, but as individual debt cases show, they still came far short of the rational certainty demanded by the doctrine of formal proofs. When no other proofs, such as confession or sworn witnesses, were available, courts had to exercise their own judgment about the debt documents’ authenticity. Thus, from the perspective of the law of evidence, debt cases represent yet another direction from which pre-reform legal system was being undermined and even dismantled long before 1864. This chapter has argued that some of the most commonly criticized features of pre-reform justice operated quite differently than expected in actual practice. Estate-based justice could not be fully implemented because all important decisions were reviewed by the all-estate provincial courts and because many cases involved individuals from different estates, causing even the first-tier courts to operate as a single unit. Moreover, the exchange of written petitions that was at the heart of pre-reform civil procedure was largely left to individual parties’ discretion. While Russian law was inquisitorial in many important respects, in practice it retained some important adversarial features. Finally, debt cases highlight the fact that Russia’s archaic ­evidence system could not in practice eliminate judicial discretion because the techniques of handwriting identification necessary to analyze debt documents necessarily involved a discretionary and even arbitrary element. For all its peculiarities, pre-reform court procedure was more viable and dynamic than has previously been recognized. It depended heavily upon individual discretion and initiative, much like Russia’s culture of private credit, to which it was closely linked. One may therefore argue that the ­biggest weakness of pre-reform justice was its complete reliance on an Creditors and Debtors in Pre-Reform Courts 309 i­nstitutional and procedural framework that left too much discretion to private individuals with their own interests and strategies. In other words, pre1864 courts represented an alternative disciplinary regime to the one that appeared in late imperial Russia and featured posh lawyers, journalists, and eventually parliamentary politicians who appropriated and flexibly interpreted the language of power and the meaning of legal norms, serving as mediators between the public and the autonomous system of legal rules. By contrast, the law in pre-reform Russia depended only on a combination of strict legal forms internal to the system and the innumerable individual relationships, interests, and strategies whose disciplinary powers lay largely outside the world of the law.99 While today we are accustomed to the former model, we can’t conclusively establish that the latter was as “archaic” as it has often been ­represented or even that it was necessarily weak and inefficient. Conclusion T his b o o k has engaged with two longstanding stereotypes about Russia that to this day continue to shape both academic analyses and popular views. The first stereotype is that there is something fundamentally wrong with the way Russians have historically dealt with challenges and anxieties related to wealth, money, and capitalism. Russians were either unable to get wealthy or else did not want to. The reasons usually given for this deviance range from unfavorable natural and economic conditions to cultural backwardness and the harmful influence of the autocratic state. Each of these arguments has been either questioned or undermined individually, but well-rounded histories of money and capitalism that use a variety of historiographical perspectives and that are so common to students of English or U.S. history are still absent in the case of Russia. This book, therefore, has sought to revive the debate about the role of money and property in Russian history and culture by examining private credit: that is, practices, beliefs, and relationships going far beyond the confines of economics or economic history to affect virtually every aspect of culture, society, and government. The period of social and political innovation and unrest in the 1860s and 1870s that accompanied the Great Reforms involved a transformation of Russia’s financial structure, but large new banks only complemented the existing network of informal personal credit without supplanting it. Often assumed to be expensive or even predatory, this credit was not any more abusive than today’s “capitalist” consumer loans. Debt certainly did reflect hierarchies of power and sometimes involved ruthless exploitation, but taken 311 312 Conclusion as a whole, it operated through mutual cooperation and existing links of kinship, service, and personal acquaintance. The network of private credit linked individuals of all social and legal categories, men and women, into a large and amorphous stratum of property owners who—despite their often-observed political conservatism—actively defined, protected, and promoted their economic and personal interests. This was accomplished in part through interpersonal negotiation and cooperation and in part through the use of legal and administrative channels, including legal formalities, litigation, and interaction with various officials. But above all, the network of debt was driven by a set of shared cultural attitudes and practices. In order for credit to function, most participants had to believe that borrowing was unavoidable and even desirable, that debts had to be repaid, that charging interest was permissible, and many other things. They also had to engage in a set of rituals to find a lender, ask for a loan, determine the borrower’s creditworthiness, and ensure repayment. These attitudes and practices changed slowly, but they did change, as I argue, in the same direction that was common to other major economic and legal systems that in the late eighteenth and nineteenth centuries gradually limited debt imprisonment, partially lifted interest rate restrictions, and introduced bankruptcy discharge at least for the wealthier classes. I have not romanticized the informal credit network based on personal connections; most people today try to avoid loan sharks and would rather use a credit card than borrow from their boss or their neighbors. But the question of the role of credit in our society and especially of its alternative sources and structures is as important as ever, and it is instructive to investigate how these were regarded and addressed in the past. Specifically, the role of personal acquaintance, family, and local community may easily become far more important when the capitalist market becomes less accessible even to the propertied and educated classes. Just as in