---
source_url: "https://www.scribd.com/document/903628600/Napoleons-Attempts-to-Make-His-Campaigns-Self-Financing"
final_url: "https://www.scribd.com/document/903628600/Napoleons-Attempts-to-Make-His-Campaigns-Self-Financing"
provider: "exa"
text_sha256: "7286b8407cc76849aa142ffc55a5d035c80903224735cb723dd39d3e34c014eb"
title: "Napoleon's War Financing Strategies | PDF | First French Empire | Napoleon"
content_kind: "page_text"
---

Napoleon's War Financing Strategies | PDF | First French Empire | Napoleon

# Pierre Branda, «Did the war pay for the war?

An assessment of Napoleon’s attempts to make his campaigns self-financing», Napoleonica. La Revue, n°3, décembre 2008 - février 2009 1 Did the war pay for the war? An assessment of Napoleon’s attempts to make his campaigns self-financing Pierre Branda

 ABSTRACT “You must make it your guiding principle that the war must feed the war,” Such was Napoleon’s recommendation to Marshal Soult in 1810. The Duke of Dalmatia was also told to take “the most efficient measures possible to provide for the pay and material needs of your army”. The three methods used to achieve this goal were: the seizure of money and property (so-called ordinary contributions or saisies ordinaires); the financial gain derived from peace treaties; and the amounts saved via the policy of using allied troops or by having French soldiers maintained by the allied states in which they were stationed. This article is firstly a discussion of this, Napoleon’s attempt to make his campaigns abroad self-financing and secondly an assessment as to whether he succeeded. It includes four appendices giving the financial details.

Pierre Branda, «Did the war pay for the war? An assessment of Napoleon’s attempts to make his campaigns self-financing», Napoleonica. La Revue, n°3, décembre 2008 - février 2009 2 Did the war pay for the war? An assessment of Napoleon’s attempts to make his campaigns self-financing Pierre Branda*

 “You must make it your guiding principle that the war must feed the war,” Such was Napoleon’s recommendation to Marshal Soult when he appointed the latter général en chef of the Army of the South in Spain.1 The Duke of Dalmatia was also told to take “the most efficient measures possible to provide for the pay and material needs of your army”. The theory expounded by Napoleon was that his campaigns abroad should be self-financing. The three methods used to achieve this goal were: the seizure of money and property (so-called ‘ordinary contributions’ or saisies ordinaires); the financial gain derived from peace treaties; and the amounts saved via the policy of using allied troops or by having French soldiers maintained by the allied states in which they were stationed. Once the army had been equipped and clothed in France at the expense of the French Treasury, it was expected to be self-sufficient thereafter. And there was nothing new about this approach; it had long been the practice of all the armies of the world. Bonaparte, as commander in chief of the army in Italy, had received the same instructions for his first campaign. However, as might be expected given his character, Napoleon was not content to let an old principle be applied loosely. As with all other areas of the State, he wanted to organise this source of revenue in his own way, to the extent that it was to become one of the decisive elements of his foreign policy. The campaign administrators (commissaires de guerre) and the army’s paymasters (trésoriers-payeurs) kept a precise record of the money and property seized during the course of military operations. They also maintained accounts showing not only what was needed to provide for the soldiers’ requirements (pay, food, material) but also what was left over. The amounts obtained under the terms of peace treaties were also carefully monitored, up to the final payment by the country in question. A separate set of accounts was kept for each campaign. Napoleon insisted on knowing the financial gains from each of