

Pierre Branda, «Did the war pay for the war? An assessment of Napoleon’s attempts to make his campaigns self-financing», Napoleonica. La Revue, n°3, décembre 2008 - février 2009 4 There was a large amount of requisitioning (food, cattle, goods, hardware) during the wars. As a rule, it was carried out under the authority of the commissaries (commissaires ordonnateurs), who themselves took their orders from the Paymaster general (Intendant général) of the Grande Armée (Comte Daru). Here again, it was a matter of compensating for the organisational failings of the Grande Armée, particularly regarding provisions. The rapidity of troop movements during the campaigns placed huge strain on the army’s logistical support structure. As a result, soldiers had to live off the land as best they could.3 The final statement for the Domaine Extraordinaire4 (see appendix) shows that the lion’s share of the ‘ordinary contributions’ (amounting to over 800 million francs) went towards covering military expenditure in situ. The ensemble of elements confiscated, the “natural” consequence of military operations, was part of what came to be called ‘ordinary’ contributions, as opposed to the ‘extraordinary’ contributions exacted as per the terms of the peace accords or alliance treaties, which I shall discuss in the next section.

## II) ‘Extraordinary contributions’: the financial side to diplomatic treaties

 During the Consulate, the payments received as a result of the diplomatic treaties went towards balancing the State budget. For example, the sale of Louisiana to the United States brought in 50 million francs. The alliance with the Cisalpine Republic, which was to become the Kingdom of Italy in 1805, provided over 300 million francs for the financing of the French army stationed in Italy. As for Spain, she had to pay nearly 75 million francs. Altogether, France received over 450 million francs by these means. After Austerlitz, Napoleon changed the system. The millions garnered from the signature of diplomatic agreements no longer brought direct relief to the Imperial budgets. This was Napoleon’s intention. “If [according to Napoleon] the war was to feed the war, then peace, after victory, should furnish the rewards”.5 And these “rewards” were to benefit the army and the army alone. Napoleon determined to have the contributions placed in a fund for

 3 For further discussion of these issues, see Alain Pigeard, L’Armée de Napoléon, Tallandier, 2000, p. 281-297. 4 See Pierre Branda, « La guerre a-t-elle payée la Guerre? », in Thierry Lentz (ed.), Napoléon et l’Europe, Fayard, 2005, p. 258-273. 5 Charles Lesage, Napoléon, créancier de la Prusse, Hachette, 1924, p. 82.

Pierre Branda, «Did the war pay for the war? An assessment of Napoleon’s attempts to make his campaigns self-financing», Napoleonica. La Revue, n°3, décembre 2008 - février 2009 5 the Army’s exclusive use.6 His aim was to have the funds to reward the most deserving soldiers and to erect structures in France that celebrated the glory of the Empire and its military might, at the losers’ expense. To this end, an entity known as the Extraordinary crown domain (Domaine Extraordinaire de couronne) was created, “comprising land and property that the Emperor, exercising his right to peace and to war, acquired in the course of military conquests or treaties”. This state within a state, whose income and expenditure was not controlled in any way or governed by any law, was to be managed at the sovereign’s complete discretion. It was a “slush fund”, but one which was entirely above board. Once the military operations had been completed, each major town or city, each state occupied by the French army was assigned a contribution commensurate with its level of wealth. And this took no account whatsoever of the amounts already exacted by the army paymasters (intendance) during the war, nor did it include the ‘unauthorised’ seizures made by officers and other lower ranks. As Napoleon wrote to Daru: “If they [the Prussians] want to bring to account stealing that individual officers may have undertaken, instead of them being in debt to me, it will be I who am indebted to them”.7 All told, Europe as a whole, apart from Italy, had to pay ‘extraordinary contributions’ worth about 414 million francs between 1805 and 1813. A list is given in the appendix. Of this total, only 276 million was actually paid into the coffers of the ‘extraordinary domain’ (Domaine Extraordinaire). Prussia, for example, never completely settled all its ‘extraordinary contributions’. This led to a period of occupation lasting nearly seven years, as the territory could not be liberated until all the payments had been made. However, as the historian Michel Kerautret points out, “the issue of this contribution was to poison (and the term is not excessive) Franco-Prussian relations for the years following [the peace of Tilsit]”.8 The funds contained in the ‘extraordinary domain’ (Domaine Extraordinaire) enabled Napoleon to distribute millions of francs to the dignitaries in his regime and to erect monuments in Paris. He also lent 154 million francs to the French Treasury, which I have included in my calculation of the self- financing war. In total, the ‘extraordinary contributions’ brought in over 600 million francs (454 million paid directly and 154 million borrowed from the ‘extraordinary domain’ (Domaine Extraordinaire)).