

Pierre Branda, «Did the war pay for the war? An assessment of Napoleon’s attempts to make his campaigns self-financing», Napoleonica. La Revue, n°3, décembre 2008 - février 2009 7 166,000 men were engaged at the various stages of the campaigns in Germany and Spain that year) and in 1812 (60 million francs). As for total savings, I estimate these to be over 253 million francs. Whilst this figure is no more than a rough estimate, nonetheless it gives an order of magnitude in assessing as closely as possible how far the war financed the war. Through the use of allied contingents (253 million) and by dispatching French troops to satellite states (129 million), the imperial finances thus made savings totalling over 380 million francs. Income generated by the war as a proportion of total military financing My examination of the various methods used to make the war pay for itself produced the following estimates: – 809 million francs in ‘ordinary contributions’ – 607 million francs in ‘extraordinary contributions’ – 352 million francs in savings achieved through the use of allied conscripts and the sending of French troops to be stationed abroad This gives a total of around 1.8 billion francs. Though large, this figure needs to be seen in the context of the additional expenditure incurred by the imperial finances as a result of the war. Once the peace of Amiens had broken down, the breakeven point of around 500 million francs, obtained in year X (1802), ceased to apply. Over three billion francs needed to be found. Napoleon’s self-financing war supplied just over 600 million. To fill the deficit, France resorted to new tax duties (over 1.2 billion in tax on alcohol and tobacco, 80 million in additional taxation and 137 million in customs duties), the sale of property (232 million) and deposits by officers of the state (59 million). Furthermore, the Banque de France and Napoleon himself (via his civil list) lent money to the French Treasury. The final deficit of around 500 million francs in unpaid expenditure was left for the First Restoration. By comparing these figures to those for the self-financing war, we get a clearer picture of the way in which the various methods of war financing fit together. Only slightly more than two fifths (42%) of the additional cost incurred by the war was actually covered by the war itself.9 The lion’s share (nearly 58%) was met using French resources, namely taxation, the selling of national or communally owned properties, money from the Banque de France or was just left as deficit (finally paid by the First and Second Restorations).

 9 This proportion is obviously much smaller if you include all the military expenditure. It would amount to just over 26% if you include the 6.74 billion francs spent in total from An X (1802) to 1814.

Pierre Branda, «Did the war pay for the war? An assessment of Napoleon’s attempts to make his campaigns self-financing», Napoleonica. La Revue, n°3, décembre 2008 - février 2009 8 In other words, the war fell a long way short of paying its way in full. But with so many imperial victories, why such a limited amount? In the first place, the conflict was not confined to battles on land. Around one-third of military spending was devoted to the imperial navy, and it was very difficult for overseas victories or conquests to pay for themselves. In actual fact, France lost virtually all its colonies after Trafalgar. And despite the heroic exploits of the Surcouf brothers, privateers could provide only very limited resources. And even though Napoleon sought to limit his maritime engagements, he nonetheless invested heavily in ship building and harbour infrastructure, at great expense. Second, the incessant round of military campaigns meant the constant conscription of fresh troops and the never-ending need for replacement equipment. The 75% increase in military spending in the 1805 to 1812 period bears eloquent witness to the increasing costs. Third, the defeated powers were not always very well off. This was not only true for Spain and Russia but also for Austria, frequently in a situation of quasi-bankruptcy. Prussia had the greatest difficulty paying its contributions. The financial clout of the German states, as significant as it was, could not be enough to meet the entire cost of the war. And all these countries were seriously affected by the continental blockade, particularly in 1810 and 1811. Ultimately, the only country genuinely capable of providing the French Empire with enough money to cover the cost of its wars was England, but that country was missing from his list of conquests. In fact France and England were the only two countries independently wealthy enough to withstand several years of war. April 1814 saw the fall of the Empire, but the story does not stop here. After the first abdication, the allies were relatively magnanimous towards France (no contributions were exacted), but it was not let off so lightly after Waterloo. Just as the Grande Armée had done, the allies demanded reparations, at a total cost of 1.4 billion francs (see appendix). All told, the sums exacted from France effectively cancelled out the nearly 1.8 billion francs obtained as a result of the war. In other words, the self- financing war turned out to be an advance that had to be repaid over future generations. So the war definitely did not pay for the war. But it was paid for (that is to say what could be paid in financial terms) and this must ultimately be Napoleon’s greatest quality, albeit indirectly. Despite the enormous sums needed, the French Empire was never at the root of any public bankruptcy, unlike the preceding regimes, from Louis XIV to the