

 * Pierre BRANDA is a specialist in financial and economic history.

 1 The draft of an order for the Duke of Dalmatia, Rambouillet 14 July, 1810, published in Napoléon raconté par l’écrit, p. 56-57, Catalogue librairie Rodolphe Chamonal et librairie Teissedre, December 2004.

Pierre Branda, «Did the war pay for the war? An assessment of Napoleon’s attempts to make his campaigns self-financing», Napoleonica. La Revue, n°3, décembre 2008 - février 2009 3 his victories, so as to better assess their profitability: “I did not make as much from this campaign as I did from the last”, he wrote to Mollien after Wagram.2 The accounts of the military administration are therefore a primary source of information when investigating whether the war paid for itself. It very likely that this accounts system was not perfect, and it could not have kept track of the army’s every action (or exaction). Plunder, theft and pillage were obviously not included. But my main focus here is how the war financed itself rather than an assessment of its cost. The cost of war could also be limited by other, more indirect, means. This included the supply of conscripts by allies and the stationing of French troops in foreign territories. Many of the treaties, in particular those with the German states and the Kingdom of Italy, stated that conscripts should be provided for the Grande Armée. The cost of maintaining these men was covered by the countries concerned, which eased the strain on the French Treasury. The stationing of French divisions or regiments at the expense of the host country, as in Italy, Hanover and Naples, was similarly financially attractive. I shall begin by looking at what the Grande Armée’s gains were while in enemy territory.

## I) Seizure of ‘ordinary contributions’

 Once the troops had entered enemy territory, army administrators went about organising a range of seizures, both in kind and in money. The enemy’s public finances were requisitioned and all taxes received were confiscated. In many cases, the local authorities (from the smallest village to the capital itself ) were also ordered to provide additional contributions. All these funds helped ease the financial pressure on the French Treasury, particularly with regard to the troop payroll. The net result, however, was to make the payment of army wages heavily dependent on the capacity of the occupied countries to pay their dues. In wealthy regions such as Germany, Prussia and Austria, the military administration was well provided for, but the situation was quite different in Poland, Russia and Spain. Delays in payment were therefore very common, largely as a result of this unpredictable financing system. In any case, the army had always taken a cautious approach to paying its soldiers. Payment took place at the very end of a campaign. In this way, those who were injured could be paid less and those that were missing did not have to be paid at all.

 2 General correspondence of Napoleon published by order of Emperor Napoleon III, n°15,901.