

 6 In the course of the campaign, the army paymasters (intendance militaire) were in charge of receiving and distributing these funds. Once the fighting was over, a settlement body (Caisse d’amortissement) had the task of managing the war monies, up until, that is, the creation of the Domaine extraordinaire in 1810. 7 Charles Lesage, op. cit., p. 25. 8 Michel Kerautret, Histoire de la Prusse, Seuil, 2005, p. 278.

Pierre Branda, «Did the war pay for the war? An assessment of Napoleon’s attempts to make his campaigns self-financing», Napoleonica. La Revue, n°3, décembre 2008 - février 2009 6 All in all, including ‘ordinary contributions’, France’s allies and the countries defeated by Napoleon paid directly or indirectly over 1.4 billion francs, in itself a considerable sum. Paradoxically, without the wars this system was in serious danger of grinding to a halt. In 1802, after the peace of Amiens, hundreds of thousands of men suddenly returned to France, threatening to throw the imperial finances into disarray; particularly if Napoleon wanted to maintain more or less the same-sized military strength, just in case. It is but a short step from this to saying that the Napoleonic system needed war to function…, but that is another story.

## III) Valuable allies

 When his armies were not at war, Napoleon had to “export” his soldiers, in one way or another, in order to lessen the financial burden of maintaining them. Fortunately, so to speak, from 1805 onwards a large number of men were engaged in military operations abroad. Napoleon was categorical on the matter to the Russian ambassador Alexander Kurakin, in 1811: “All troops that are too costly to maintain must be sent to enemy territory; this is how I use them and my finances are the better for it”. But enemy territories were not the only solution for dealing with soldiers that weighed too heavily on the imperial finances. Numerous regiments were stationed in Italy, Westphalia, Hanover or Naples, all countries administered by members of the imperial family (Murat, Eugène and Jérôme). This “family spirit” brought relief to the empire’s finances, saving the regime approximately 130 million francs. Foreign conscripts were an additional source of savings. As Napoleon’s influence grew in Europe, virtually all of his allies (willing or not) had to provide troops for the Grande Armée. The Kingdom of Italy and Spain were among the first countries to supply soldiers in this way for the 1805 campaign. The campaign in Prussia in 1806 saw soldiers called up from the German states, including Bavaria, Saxony and also Westphalia. Since the cost of maintaining these military units (pay, equipment, food) fell entirely upon their home country, this represented a further saving for the imperial finances, although no official figures indicate precisely by how much. My estimate draws on military statistics (these are reasonably precise in terms of troop numbers and the tours of duty undertaken by these contingents) and is based on the daily cost of maintaining one soldier during the Empire (less than two francs). According to my calculations (for the detail, please see the appendix), the most significant savings were achieved in 1809 (around 56 million francs – over