

While Archduke Karl was celebrating his victory at Aspern, Hofer, who called himself a ‘commander by appointment of the House of Austria’, was scoring successes on the Bergisel against the Napoleonic troops, prompting Emperor Franz to declare euphorically that Tyrol ‘shall never again be separated from the body of the Austrian imperial state’ and that the only peace treaty he would sign would be one that ‘binds this land indissolubly to My Monarchy.’

However, the Emperor was not able to keep his promise – after the defeat at Wagram was compelled to conclude the treaty of Schönbrunn and accept the loss of Tyrol. Although Hofer fought on, his endeavours were in vain: on 1 November 1809, he was definitively defeated at the last battle on the Bergisel. He himself had to take flight and at the beginning of 1810 was betrayed to the French for 1,500 gulden by the peasant Franz Raffl. Hofer was arrested on the Pfandleralm, sentenced to death by a court martial in Mantua and shot on 20 February 1810.

Opinion on Andreas Hofer’s martyrdom has been strongly polarized: while he is revered in conservative Catholic circles as a freedom fighter, critics draw comparisons with the present-day Taliban movement. The comparison is corroborated by his religious tirades against Jews, Freemasons and proponents of the Enlightenment, and also by his decree forbidding women, on pain of rough justice, ‘to wear too little on their breasts and arms, or to cover them with transparent rags’. His betrayer was later called the ‘Judas of Tyrol’, carrying the saint-like veneration accorded him to the highest possible extreme by putting Hofer on the same level as Jesus Christ.

 Stephan Gruber 

Schönbrunn – the Habsburgs’ imperial showpiece Schönbrunn Palace is presented to the millions of...

Aspects

Choose from various themes to access and explore the history of the Habsburg Monarchy, for example 'work', 'love' or 'death'.

Periods

Journey through the different epochs of Habsburg history from the Middle Ages to the First World War.

All the members of the Habsburg dynasty. Read biographical notes and explore the historical context.
