

escape from military service. 12 On the other hand, the danger of such a prefer 
ence was to increase the feelings of injustice among the popular classes, thus 
augmenting their reluctance to serve. 
Napoleon extended the annual draft to annexed lands such as the Rhineland, 
Piedmont, Tuscany and the Netherlands. Satellite states adopted the French 
model in order to be able to provide troops to the Grande Armée. The Repub 
lic of Italy, located in the north of the Peninsula, was the first such state to in 
troduce conscription modeled after the French system. Before discussing con 
scription in that state, a brief background is necessary. Napoleon established 
that Republic in January 1802, becoming its president. In 1805, he transformed 
it into the Kingdom of Italy (regno d’Italia) with him as king and his stepson 
Eugène de Beauharnais as his viceroy. 13 The Italian Kingdom, which lasted till 
1814, consisted of regions formerly part of the Austrian Empire, Piedmont, 
the Duchy of Modena, the Venetian Republic and the Papal State. At its peak 
it covered an area of 84.000 km 2 with a population of 6,7 million inhabitants, 
about one-third of the Peninsula’s population. The administrative structure of 
the Republic and Kingdom was centralized and uniform and was modeled on 
the French example. The state was divided into départements, each run by a 
government-appointed prefect. On 13 August 1802, the authorities proclaimed 
mandatory conscription in the Italian Republic. 14 Men between the ages of 
twenty and twenty-five were eligible for a four-year military service. Exempt 
were widowers with children, priests, seminarians and the handicapped. Oth 
ers, like single sons, men who had a brother in the army and married men, were 
less likely to be drafted, or in the words of the decree, „the last to march“. 
Conscripts needed to be physically fit. A public drawing of lots, the sorteg 
gio, determined who would be drafted. To try and prevent draft dodging, the 
authorities restricted eligible conscripts’ movements, requiring them to have 
a passport and return home by a certain date. When moving within the state, 
conscripts needed to have an identity document. The decrees established pris 
on punishments for deserters and draft dodgers. 
The enforcement of conscription was a complex administrative process. It 
required the cooperation of a large number of officials and institutions on state, 
departmental, district and municipal levels. Conscription began when the au 
thorities announced the number of draftees, assigning each département a quota 
in proportion to their population. Département authorities then divided their 
12 Ibid., p. 424. 
13 On the Republic and Kingdom of Italy, see C. Zaghi, L’Italia di Napoleone dalla Cisalpina 
al Regno, Torino 1986; A. Pillepich, Milan capitale napoléonienne 1800–1814, Paris 2001; 
A. Grab, Napoleon and the Transformation of Europe, London 2003, pp. 159–165. 
14 Archivio di Stato di Milano (henceforth ASM), Ministero della Guerra (henceforth MG), car 
tella (henceforth c), 784. 