

Conscription and Desertion in France and Italy under Napoleon 105 to defend France. In August 1793, aiming to create a massive army of three quarters of a million soldiers, the Jacobin government proclaimed the levée en masse, which required unmarried, able-bodied men 18–25 years old to serve in the army. 7 However, a considerable decline in the size of the army in later years, due to war, disease and desertion, induced the Directory to proclaim the Loi Jourdan, introducing, for the first time, annual conscription (September 5, 1798). 8 The law stated: „Every Frenchman is a soldier and has the duty to defend his country.“ Males aged 20–25 were divided into five classes, one per year of age, and were called up for five years. The first class consisted of the youngest recruits and was the first to be recruited. Municipal authorities drew up the lists of draftees and a review committee examined them and rejected the unfit or soldiers who were smaller than 1,57 meters. The law served as the basis for the conscription system under Napoleon, who increasingly exerted efforts to improve the system and eliminate evasions and exemptions based on favouritism by local officials. 9 The government proclaimed the annual number of draftees, dividing it among the départements based on their population. Sub prefects then drew up the lists of eligible recruits in their cantons while Con seils de recrutement, with the help of physicians, determined who was fit for the draft. Mayors were in charge of explaining the procedure to local families and assuring that conscripts appeared on draft day. Prefects, who constituted the ultimate authority in the départements, were responsible for supplying their département’s quota. Indeed, it was one of their most important duties. They received instructions from the government and informed Paris about the execution of the levy in their département. Failing to provide their quota could even cost prefects their office. Drawing by lot (tirage au sort) became manda tory throughout France. As the years progressed, officials became more and more experienced, and conscription became an annual routine that left little room for mistake or ill-will. 10 Conscription rules allowed draftees to find replacements. 11 During the years 1806–1810, replacements constituted 4,5 % of the levies in France. Obvious ly, it gave an advantage to the wealthy, who could afford a replacement, and many viewed it as tantamount to granting them an exemption. The government knew that wealthy families had the clout and the means to dodge the draft and, through replacements, placated them without allowing them a wholesale

7 J. Godechot, Les institutions de la France sous la Révolution et l’empire, Paris 1968, pp. 359– 
362; A. Forrest, Soldiers of the French Revolution, Durham-London 1990, pp. 75–81. 
8 Godechot, Institutions (see note 7), pp. 499–503; Forrest, Soldiers (see note 7), pp. 83–85. 
9 Woloch, Regime (see note 3), p. 392. 
10 Ibid., p. 393. 
11 Ibid., pp. 397–404. 