

3 I. Woloch, The New Regime Transformations of the French Civic Order, 1789–1820, New 
York-London 1994, p. 425. 
4 F. Bundy, The Administration of the Illyrian Provinces of the French Empire, 1809–1813, 
New York-London 1987, pp. 410–412; A. Grab, The Politics of Finance in Napoleonic Italy 
(1802–1814), in: Journal of Modern Studies 3 (1998), pp. 127–143. 

… touched the most sensitive nerve of individuals, families and communities. 
It was an intrusion in private and social life, it could destroy the equilibrium 
of the family economy, it threatened delicate balances of interest within small 
communities based on trust by the arbitrary choice of who should depart“. 5 
Society’s resistance to conscription led to increased repression by the state, 
which further intervened into daily life. 
Finally, introducing the French model of conscription also affected cultural 
and ideological aspects. In the words of Michael Broers, „from the outset of 
the Revolution within France, conscription was … L’école de la nation, ‚the 
school of the Nation’, the means by which local and regional loyalties, habits 
and dialects were broken down in the course of serving the state.“ Indeed, the 
authorities viewed military service as an important way to mold peasants, the 
majority of the Napoleonic army, into French citizens. This was true about 
other European states as well. Napoleon regarded military service as an essen 
tial tool to strengthen unity and loyalty to his reign and integrate Europe under 
the French model. In conclusion, directly and indirectly, annual conscription 
played a major role in influencing and transforming European state and soci 
ety. It helped to undermine the traditional organization of European society 
and contributed to its transformation more than any other Napoleonic policy. 
Conscription aroused widespread opposition throughout the Napoleonic 
empire. The absence of an annual draft in the pre-revolutionary period and the 
lack of national consciousness made such a policy completely incomprehensi 
ble, alien and unacceptable for most recruits and their families. Hence, thou 
sands of draftees throughout Europe dodged the draft and deserted. Indeed, 
annual conscription was Napoleon’s most contested policy, causing a major 
struggle between state and civil society. It required the government to invest 
more resources and energy in enforcing that policy than any other program. 
Isser Woloch is correct to say: „With Napoleon, conscription became the bat 
tleground, the ultimate contest of wills between individuals and local commu 
nities on the one hand and a distant impersonal state on the other.“ 6 
This article examines the intense conflict between state and society over con 
scription in Napoleonic France and Italy. It explores the conscription law, its 
implementation, the methods employed by draftees to evade military service, 
the government’s policies designed to suppress resistance, and how successful 
the authorities were in enforcing conscription. 
As indicated earlier, revolutionary France was the first European country to 
establish a national conscripted army. The war against a broad European coali 
tion required revolutionary France to enlist as many French citizens as possible 
5 S. Woolf, Integration (see note 2), p. 156. 
6 I. Woloch, Napoleonic Conscription: State Power and Civil Society, in: Past and Present 111 
(1986), p. 101. 