

sympathized with them. Indeed, without this support their draft evasion would 
have been much more difficult, if not impossible. Draft dodging was especially 
widespread in inaccessible mountainous forested communities in France and 
northern Italy. Many young men left the communities in search of seasonal 
work and did not come back in time for the conscription. For example, this 
was common among agricultural workers in southern France who crossed the 
Pyrénées into Spain. At times, they were unaware of the call to arms. Francesco 
Mosca, the chief of police in the Kingdom of Italy, concluded unequivocally: 
„It is impossible to carry out a regular draft in the winter (in mountainous 
communities) since many inhabitants in those regions … go somewhere else to 
procure the means of subsistence.“ 23 Obviously, draft dodging placed a greater 
burden on people who stayed behind and often prevented prefects from pro 
viding their département quota on time. 
It was desertion, however, that the authorities dreaded the most. Augusto 
Caffarelli, the war minister of the Kingdom of Italy, spoke for many officials 
in Napoleonic Europe when he stated that desertion was „the first and prin 
cipal obstacle to the organization of the army of the Kingdom“, denouncing 
it as „the greatest offense of a soldier.“ 24 Deserters drained military manpower 
as well as provisions, stealing clothing and weapons that they sold. They also 
forced the state to invest considerable resources in efforts to hunt them down. 
Desertion caused demoralization among soldiers who did not desert, inducing 
them to abandon their units as well. Deserters spread horror stories among the 
civilian population of poor living conditions in the army and abusive treatment 
by officers, undermining the army’s reputation and encouraging draft dodging. 
Many deserters joined bands of brigands, adding to crime and public disor 
der. Finally, by disobeying such an important law and undermining a major 
program, deserters challenged state power, questioning the effectiveness of the 
government. 
It is hard to provide an accurate number of deserters during the Napoleonic 
period. Eugène estimated that during the years 1806–1810, 17.750 men de 
serted from the Italian army. 25 In France „(t)he Revolution and Empire drove 
hundreds of thousands of Frenchmen to seek their salvation from the armies in 
either desertion or insoumission.“ 26 In January 1813, after police campaigns and 
selective amnesties, the French government admitted that there were 50.000 
rebels, mostly army deserters, in France and the annexed lands. 27 Many desert 
ers left their units en route to the military camps, taking advantage of scarce es 
23 ASM, MG, c. 786, Mosca to war minister, 7 January 1810. 
24 ASM, MG, c. 284, Caffarelli to Eugène, 30 September 1806. 
25 ASM, MG, c. 784, Eugène to Napoleon, 20 October 1810. 
26 Forrest, Conscripts (see note 1), p. 70. 
27 Ibid. 

corting forces. Their unwillingness to sacrifice their lives for Napoleon’s impe 
rial policies, which they could not comprehend, homesickness and anxiety for 
their farms or workshops all played important roles in stimulating soldiers to 
desert. Poor living conditions in the barracks, partiality and corruption by offi 
cials in implementing conscription, and humiliation and abuses perpetrated by 
their officers all induced desertion. Giuseppe Olivieri and Giovanni Macchioni 
claimed that beatings caused them to desert. Preoccupied with the high rate of 
desertion and the impact that mistreatment had on the army’s reputation, the 
Napoleonic government called on officers to cease the abuses and treat their 
soldiers humanely. When mistreatment persisted, the authorities sentenced of 
ficers to prison for beating their soldiers. 
Help, sympathy and protection by their families and communities, along 
with the lack of rigor by local officials in pursuing deserters, encouraged sol 
diers to escape. One Italian prefect summed it up very well: „These youngsters 
find no other incitement to desert, but the security of being welcome in the 
homes of their relatives and friends and of being able to stay there peacefully. 
This proves the lack of vigilance or the indolence of the local authorities who 
certainly have the means to be informed of the return of those youngsters … 
[who can be] distinguished by the military cut of their hair.“ 28 Moreover, inad 
equate recruitment machinery, as in the Vosges in France, also facilitated eva 
sion of conscripts. Giuseppe Poccatezza, from the département of Basso Po, 
returned home after deserting in 1806 and stayed there for four years and even 
got married before moving to another town. 29 Deserters also fled to neighbour 
ing states, and in rare cases even defected to foreign armies. In sum, the preva 
lent resentment against conscription and insufficient conscription apparatus 
certainly facilitated and encouraged desertion. 
Not all deserters, however, were able to find security in their communities. 
Some were forced to wander and work at odd jobs. In the Saône-et-Loire some 
fifty refractories and deserters worked as woodcutters and the local economy 
depended on them. 30 Living on the run was obviously hard, and some desert 
ers, who became weary of outlaw life, chose to surrender to the authorities. The 
growing government pressure on the local authorities to fight against desertion 
and the improvement of the conscription machinery in later years forced an 
increasing number of deserters to turn to crime. As John Davis states, „Con 
scription was a direct recruiting sergeant“ to brigandage throughout the Italian 
Peninsula. 31 In France, as Allan Forrest shows, „the crime rate increased as a 