

28 ASM, MG, c. 283, 30 August 1803. 
29 ASM, MG, c. 295, testimony during his trial, 8 July 1812. 
30 Forrest, Conscripts (see note 1), p. 111. 
31 J. Davis, Conflict and Control: Law and Order in Nineteenth-Century Italy, Atlantic High 
lands, N. J. 1988, p. 76. 

Conscription and Desertion in France and Italy under Napoleon 111 consequence of desertion.“ 32 Having already violated the law, joining a band of bandits was not a very extreme move for many deserters, particularly if they could not find shelter in their communities. Brigand-deserters hid in mountainous and wooded areas and frequently op erated in the vicinity of national borders. They roamed in small armed bands, robbing travellers, attacking isolated farms, stealing food from local peasants and smuggling. Some spent many years on the run. Joseph Colognes from Auch stayed at large for twelve years. 33 The threat of the brigand-deserters to internal order was especially obvious during the insurrection they led in July 1809 in the Kingdom of Italy. Two of the most feared brigand-deserters in the département of Reno, Prospero Baschieri and Giacomo Lambertini, the former being a two-time deserter, led that revolt. 34 The insurgents caused serious dam age to state property, destroying among other things conscription records in many small towns, and forcing local officials to seek shelter in big cities. While draft dodging and desertion were the most common ways of evad ing military service, conscripts also used other methods to elude the authori ties. Conscripts enrolled in religious seminars without having any intention of pursuing an ecclesiastical career. Many clergymen, who viewed the French as infidels and opposed Napoleon because of his stormy relations with the Pope, were only too willing to accept these young men of draft age into seminars. In sisting that this exemption opened „a vast field to evade the conscription law“, Mosca explained, „(a)ll those who cannot claim reasons of health and can afford clerical robes appear in the episcopal curias which become their defenders and remove the best youth from the levy, although for many it is certain that once their conscription age passes they will abandon that robe and the church.“ 35 Getting married was another means to avoid the draft or at least to be placed among „the last to march“. Young conscripts married old women with whom they never lived. These fictional marriages were celebrated in a civil ceremony, and often conscripts paid the old brides to marry them. Draftees also resorted to self-injury, most commonly mutilating their right-hand index fingers, which were needed to press the trigger, and pulling out their canine teeth, which were needed to load their rifles. 36 Cutting off an index finger, however, was a familiar act and a crime the authorities punished. Inflicting damage to the eyes and fak ing various illnesses constituted other ways to receive fraudulent exemptions. 37

32 Forrest, Conscripts (see note 1), pp. 118–145. 
33 Ibid., p. 104. 
34 A. Grab, State Power, Brigandage and Rural Resistance in Napoleonic Italy, in: European 
History Quarterly 25 (1995), p. 56. 
35 ASM, MG c. 788, 15 April 1806; Della Peruta, Esercito (see note 19), pp. 226f. 
36 Forrest, Conscripts (see note 1), pp. 136f. 
37 Woloch, Regime (see note 3), pp. 409f. 