

Conscription and Desertion in France and Italy under Napoleon 107 share of draftees among their districts and the latter divided their quota among their cities and towns. The district councils compiled lists of eligible conscripts and those exempt, updating them frequently and sending them to their prefect and war minister. Recruitment councils, consisting of civilian and military of ficials, coordinated the efforts of the various administrators and institutions in each département. The cooperation of the local authorities was crucial since they frequently had close relations with the young draftees and their families and hence were instrumental in persuading them to obey the law. Many local officials tried their best to implement the new conscription rules, yet it was not uncommon that local authorities failed to enforce the law because of threats by the recruit’s family or because they themselves sympathized with the draftees. Eligible conscripts underwent a physical checkup to determine if they were fit to serve. On conscription day, draftees from various towns assembled in the district’s main town and were then escorted to the département capital where military officers received them and transferred them to military depots to begin their training. The prefect was the highest authority to enforce the conscription law within the département. Indeed, in the Kingdom of Italy conscription oc cupied more time and energy of the prefect than any other area. 15 The Napoleonic army comprised principally of peasants, who constituted the bulk of the European population. Military service was the greatest sacrifice the Napoleonic regime imposed on rural Europe. Disrupting their traditional way of life and separating conscripts for many years from their families, farms and communities, conscription was a traumatic experience for most of them. Unaccustomed to the annual draft and lacking national consciousness, con scripts found military service abstract and alien. Moreover, it subjected towns and villages to greater state interference and to frequent searches for deserters by the gendarmerie. It is no wonder, then, that conscription met with wide spread hostility and intense opposition throughout Europe. This resistance in satellite states and annexed regions was not motivated by anti-French nation alist feelings, or lofty political ideals, but rather constituted an effort by the conscripts and their communities to protect their economic basis and tradi tional way of life against an intrusive state. The popular classes also resented the conscription law since it allowed the wealthy to buy themselves out of service. Moreover, rural enmity must also be viewed against the background of traditional suspicion by peasant communities towards armies that crossed their fields, destroyed harvests, requisitioned animals and lived off the land. More over, military officers represented the nobility, a class that exploited the peas ants. Aversion to military service was not restricted to the rural population but extended to the urban society. Throughout Europe, the anonymity of towns