

1 On the conscription law in France, see A. Forrest, Conscripts and Deserters. The Army and 
French Society during the Revolution and Empire, New York-Oxford 1989, pp. 34f., and id., 
Soldiers of the French Revolution, Durham-London 1990, pp. 83f. On conscription in Bel 
gium, R. Darquenne, La conscription dans le départment de Jemappes (1798–1813), Mons 
1970; on the Cisalpine Republic, A. Pingaud, Bonaparte Président de la République Italienne, 
2 vols., Paris 1914, vol. 2: pp. 186–196; C. Zaghi, L’Italia di Napoleone dalla Cisalpina al 
Regno, Torino 1986, pp. 541–544. 
2 For a useful summary of conscription in Napoleonic Europe, S. Woolf, Napoleon’s Integra 
tion of Europe, London-New York 1991, pp. 156–165. 

Conscription and Desertion in France and Italy under Napoleon 103 aimed at guaranteeing a constant supply of troops to his Grande Armée and at alleviating the military demands on the French people, thereby diminishing their opposition to conscription. Moreover, it saved Napoleon considerable amounts of money because those troops were subsidized by conquered lands. Except for Code Napoléon, building a military force through yearly con scription constituted the most significant Napoleonic reform program in oc cupied Europe. It greatly affected various policies and the population’s daily life. Annual conscription played a crucial role in laying the foundations of the modern European nation-state. Not surprisingly, it survived the Napoleonic period in a number of European countries. In France itself, the Bourbons en acted an annual draft in 1818. 3 Fiscally, forming a national army and paying for the French troops stationed on one’s territory constituted a major expenditure and required the authorities to find new methods to increase their revenues. Military spending constituted the largest item in every state’s budget, well over half of the expenses. 4 It caused deficits and prevented governments from devoting more resources to civilian projects. It forced the authorities to create an efficient financial apparatus and improve tax collection. Local authorities in the départements and the cities needed to allocate part of their financial resources to pay for the recruiting process. Most importantly, governments introduced new taxes and increased the burden on the population, creating much resentment. Politically, conscrip tion contributed considerably to the growing centralization of state power, one of the most important legacies of Napoleon. To enforce the draft and suppress resistance to it, the authorities needed to strengthen their coercive machinery. They expanded state bureaucracy and concentrated more power in their hands to enable them to implement conscription effectively. State and local officials spent an enormous amount of time to assure that their draft quota was fulfilled. The state augmented the police force and established the gendarmerie to search for deserters and draft dodgers. Consequently, state officials and police reached remote mountainous areas they had never arrived at before. The judicial sys tem was consolidated with the formation of new laws, decrees and courts that aimed at enforcing conscription and fighting against law violations. Forcing young men to leave their families, farms and communities for many years, conscription had a social and psychological impact on the population. It disrupted their daily routine, undermined their traditional way of life and threatened the family economy. In the words of Stuart Woolf, „(c)onscription