

speciali, modeled on the French conseils de guerre, to try deserters. 54 Verdicts 
could not be appealed. Penalties were much more severe than in the past, most 
notably, the death penalty was prescribed for soldiers deserting to the enemy 
or abroad a second time, for deserters who stole a horse or arms, and for lead 
ers of a desertion plot. Ten years in prison chained to an iron ball was the pen 
alty for deserters who fled abroad, stole military equipment, or escaped from 
prison. Finally, first-time deserters were sentenced to three years of hard labor. 
In addition, all deserters had to pay a fine of 1.500 lire. However, the severer 
penalties were not as intimidating as the authorities had hoped, both because 
numerous deserters were tried in absentia and because many soldiers believed 
that life in prison was preferable to service. 55 Billeting soldiers with families 
of deserters was a punishment the imperial authorities applied frequently in 
France. 56 Clearly, the government needed to show prudence, lest it fuelled 
more opposition. Besides, most families of deserters were too poor to afford 
hosting and nourishing another person. 
The repressive policy was mitigated by frequent amnesties designed to en 
tice deserters and draft dodgers back to the army. A typical amnesty decree 
allowed deserters one to two months to report to the authorities without be 
ing penalized, ordering those who were fit back to their battalions. At times, 
amnesties came to celebrate an important event such as Napoleon’s birthday 
or his marriage with Marie Louise, an event that was marked by an amnesty in 
France as well. 57 Prefects appealed to fathers to convince their sons to return 
to the army and ordered priests to announce the amnesties to their parishion 
ers. By declaring amnesty, the authorities aimed at obtaining additional troops, 
reducing public disorder and alleviating the pressure on the gendarmerie. Yet a 
frequent use of this measure meant an admission by the government that it was 
unable to eliminate evasion from the army and gave conscripts the impression 
that they could avoid the service with impunity. To entice people to support 
and cooperate with the state, the authorities offered monetary rewards for cap 
turing or providing information on deserters or refractories. Similar bonuses 
were also offered to gendarmes. 
The authorities also ordered the Church to help with conscription and 
preach to their flocks about the importance of serving in the army and the need 
to obey the law. In France, after the signing of the Concordat, the authori 
ties expected Church cooperation on this matter. 58 Of course, the state recip 
54 Ibid., pp. 188–192; Della Peruta, Esercito (see note 19), p. 278. 
55 Ibid., pp. 285f. 
56 Woloch, Conscription (see note 6), pp. 120f. 
57 Della Peruta, Esercito (see note 19), pp. 270f.; Woloch, Conscription (see note 6), p. 121; 
Forrest, Conscripts (see note 1), p. 213. 
58 Forrest, Conscripts (see note 1), p. 197–200. 