

reality the governed could not ignore. In sum, the Napoleonic conscription 
policy played an important role in advancing the modern central state and in 
launching the idea of nation and citizenship in France and other parts of Eu 
rope. 
Yet the conscription system had its limits and contained internal contra 
dictions, producing mixed results for the Napoleonic state. Conscription re 
mained the most controversial Napoleonic policy and met with popular resist 
ance until the end of the regime. Numerous conscripts refused to abide by the 
conscription law, which tore them away from their families and communities 
and threatened their traditional way of life. They defied the law by rebelling, 
dodging the draft and deserting. Many deserters resorted to crime and brigand 
age, which increased insecurity. This resistance reflected more than any other 
issue the population’s unwillingness to accept state power. Indeed, more than 
any other policy, conscription contributed to an estrangement between gov 
ernment and the governed, undermining stability, and in this sense weakened 
and challenged the state. The increase of the tax burden, which was necessary 
to equip the army, added much resentment toward the government. Moreover, 
military expenses consumed well over half of the state’s revenues, causing defi 
cits and delay of reform policies, another indication of hardships faced by the 
Napoleonic state. 
As for the role that conscription played in engendering national unity, the 
consequences were mixed here as well. Conscription brought together many 
men from different regions in France and Italy to fight under one banner, 
thereby encouraging them to overcome their provincialism and local loyalty 
and view themselves as a part of a larger national entity. And yet, the persistent 
and widespread opposition to military service demonstrated that many, if not 
most, conscripts remained uninfluenced by nationalist concepts and preferred 
to cling to their customs and traditions. 80 The process of turning peasants into 
Frenchmen or Italians was just beginning under Napoleon. 

80 Forrest, Conscripts (see note 1), p. 237.


