

114 Alexander Grab prefects were able to maintain tight control over municipal officials who were responsible for supplying their community quota of draftees. Above the pre fects stood the war minister, who received from them periodic reports on the recruitment conditions in their départements and sent them instructions. High lighting the importance of an Italian army, top officials often used national and civic rhetoric to justify the need for an army. In 1803 Melzi wrote: „Without a citizen army there is no motherland, there is no nation … an army must defend [the republic], make it respected abroad, and secure its internal tranquility.“ 49 The use of force was indispensable to combat resistance. Clearly, a campaign against deserters required an effective police force, and here the national gen darmerie constituted the main tool for combating law violators. In the Repub lic of Italy, the governments instituted the gendarmerie, imitating the French example. 50 Normally, the commander of the gendarmerie had wide powers and reported to the war minister. The gendarmerie’s patrols intimidated violators of the conscription law and contributed to a diminution of their threat. The gendarmerie also played an important role in fighting brigands and other types of disorder. In many cases, poor discipline and abusive conduct by the gen darmerie aggravated tension with the population, though, thereby reducing the effectiveness of that force. In May 1805, the interior minister of the Italian Kingdom observed that the gendarmerie „aroused repeatedly and in almost all the départements strong complaints for its dilatoriness, its disobedience to orders and for its offensive and frequently criminal conduct while exercising its functions.“ 51 In France and Italy resentment against the gendarmerie could lead to clashes with the local population when the latter resisted the arrests of de serters and refractories. To help the gendarmerie, the authorities established the national guard, which remained, however, for the most part poorly equipped and poorly trained – and highly ineffective. In 1809, the Italian government as signed fifty soldiers in each département, a parallel force of the French colonnes mobiles, 52 to help the gendarmerie in its police missions, including the hunting down of deserters and brigands. Towns and villages were subjected to searches and arrests by troops and police. Deserters who were captured were quickly marched to military camps. Establishing new courts and stiffer penalties for draft dodgers and desert ers constituted another step in bolstering the repressive system. This included harsher prison terms and higher fines. 53 On 18 May 1808, the authorities of the Kingdom of Italy established new military courts, the consigli di guerra

49 Foglio officiale (Milan, 20 April 1803), pp. 98f. 
50 Forrest, Conscripts (see note 1), pp. 229–235. 
51 ASM, Aldini, c. 79, 3 May 1805. 
52 Forrest, Conscripts (see note 1), pp. 211–213. 
53 Ibid., p. 188. 