

the turbulent year of 1809, insisting that priests needed to be supervised and 
watched. The authorities arrested a number of priests for anti-conscription ac 
tivity. Agostino Albini of Vicenza was arrested for speaking against conscrip 
tion, while Pietro Conti, a priest from Verona, was arrested for saying that 
conscription is a punishment from God. 44 
Fearing opposition and disorder, the authorities sometimes hesitated to 
impose conscription. Initially, the Directory exempted the Vendée from the 
Jourdan law. 45 At times, the authorities imposed smaller quotas where opposi 
tion was very strong. 46 Various rulers drafted convicts while others recruited 
men in foreign provinces for pay. The Neapolitan contingent in Spain consisted 
of convicts and brigands. And yet, those hesitations could not last for long. The 
more common reaction of the state was to try and repress resistance. Clearly, 
the Napoleonic authorities could not tolerate the opposition to conscription 
and needed to impose their will in this highly important area. Resistance to 
conscription menaced the integrity of the military program, caused public dis 
order and undermined their political power. Governments proclaimed a series 
of repressive measures designed to reinforce the conscription machinery and 
close loopholes. They centralized the drafting process, established new courts, 
stiffened punishments and expanded and reorganized the gendarmerie. Indeed, 
the efforts to enforce conscription more effectively were responsible more than 
any other government policy for the buildup of state power in Napoleonic 
France. 
Giving more power in the hands of département officials constituted the 
most important administrative change aimed at improving the execution of the 
draft policy. 47 In France and the Kingdom of Italy the prefects presided over 
the Department Council of Levy, the top conscription body in each départe 
ment, which gave the final approval to the lists of conscripts. The district and 
canton levy councils lost their autonomy and came under stricter control by 
the prefect. Like the French sous-préfets, 48 the Italian vice-prefects supervised 
the drawing up of conscript lists. They visited each canton in their districts, 
checked the lists, examined those who requested exemptions and had a physi 
cian check those who claimed to have a physical handicap. Through the vice 
prefects and their dominant position over the entire conscription hierarchy, the 
44 ASM, Aldini, c. 80, Giocciardi to Aldini, 10 January 1808. 
45 Woolf, Integration (see note 2), p. 160. 
46 Ibid. 
47 On the administrative changes in the Kingdom of Italy, see Bollettino delle leggi, 14 July 1805, 
pp. 397–407; Antonielli, Prefetti (see note 15), pp. 466–474; Della Peruta, Esercito (see 
note 19), pp. 151f., 168–179; Grab, Army (see note 19), pp. 43f.; in France, Forrest, Con 
scripts (see note 1), pp. 187–218. 
48 Forrest, Conscripts (see note 1), pp. 35, 193; Woloch, Conscription (see note 6), p. 107. 