;l|llllll1l|l|lllillll!lllinilllli|i||llliilllliilHll!llillllilII!!ttt|!!l!ilMiilS!ii!il> 


i^ 


r€>^^^  p 


THK 


PROGRESS 


THE    NATION, 


IX    ITS    VARIOUS 


C? 


arial  aiiit  (Brnniiniinil  Etlntiana, 


FROM  THE  BEGINNING  OF  THE  NINETEENTH  CENTURY. 


G.  E.  PORTEE,  Esq.  F.E.S. 

IXSTIT.  SAX.  SC.  PARIS,  COKEESP. 


A    NEW   EDITION. 


LONDON: 

JOHN   MURRAY,    ALBEMARLE    STREET. 

185L 


LONDON : 

Printed  Iiy  W.  Clowes  and  SoMs, 
Stamford-street . 


G 


CON  T  E  N  T  S. 


Prefaces xvii 

Introduction         ............         I 


SECTION  I.— POPULATION. 

Chapteh  I. 

Uncertainty  of  information  previous  to  present  century — Summary  of  population  in 
Great  Britain,  1801,  1811,  1821,  ;8.'51,  and  1841— In  Ireland,  1821,  18;J1,  and  1841 
— Kate  of  increase — Proportion  of  males  and  females — Population  of  England  and 
Wales  during  the  18th  century— Ages  of  population,  1821  and  1841 — Populativm 
of  France,  and  rate  of  its  increase— Birtlis,  Deaths,  and  Marriages,  in  England 
and  Wales — In  various  countries— Mortality  of  young  persons — Mortality  in  the 
Metropolis — In  Manchester — In  Middlesex — In  England  and  Wales — Mortality 
■with  reference  to  ages  in  England — In  Ireland— Baptisms,  Burials,  and  Marriages, 
in  England,  1801-1849— Proportions  in  difi'erent  counties— Mortality  in  Tavi- 
stock, 1779-1836 5 

Chapter  II. 
MEDICAL  STATISTICS. 

Neglect  of  the  subject  of  Medical  Statistics— Means  of  supplying  the  requisite  infor- 
mation— Introduction  of  Vaccination  —  Mortality  from  Small-pox  at  different 
periods  in  the  Metropolis — In  Ireland — Mortality  in  St.  Bartholomew's  Hospital 
— London  Hospital — St.  George's  Hospital— Manchester  Infirmary — Liverpool 
Infirmary — Lock  Hospital— Christ's  Hospital — Proportion  of  cures  and  deaths  in 
St.  Luke's  Hospital— Bethlem  Hospital — Pauper  limatics  and  idiots  in  England 
and  Wales,  1844  and  1847 — Lunatics  in  private  asylums— Proportions  of  deaths 
and  cures     ........•••••       37 

Chapter  III. 
OCCUPATIONS  OF  THE  PEOPLE. 

Change  in  relative  proportions  of  Agriculturists,  Traders,  &c.,  in  England,  Wales, 
Scotland,  and  Great  Britain — Employment  of  adult  males  in  the  United  Kingdom 
in  1831— Occupations  of  population  of  Great  Britain,  1841— Proportions  in  each 
county  of  England,  1811,  1821,  1831,  and  1841— Numerical  order  of  counties 
relatively  to  each  other  at  different  periods — Division  of  agricultural  population— 


CONTEXTS. 


Occupiers— Labourers — Great  Brltaiu  and  Ireland — Proportions  employed  iu  18.T1 
and  1S41  iu  raising  food — Advantage  of  knowing  the  proportions  into  which  popu- 
lation is  divided— Failure  of  attempts  to  ascertain  this  in  the  earlier  enumerations 
— Result  of  the  attempt  in  1841 — Excise  Licenses  granted  for  exercising  certain 
brauches  of  business — Division  of  emplo3meuts  in  Ireland,  1841 — Domestic  ser- 
vants in  United  Kingdom — Employment  of  adult  males  in  United  Kingdom  in 
1841 — Employment  in  textile  manufactures — In  factories — In  mines — In  manu- 
facture of  metals— Occupations  of  people  in  France — Classification  of  Land-owners 
— Division  of  the  soil    ...........       •')>'? 

Chapter  IV. 
PAUPERISM. 

Origin  and  progress  of  Poor  Laws — Act  43rd  Elizabeth — Amount  expended  at 
various  periods  for  relief  of  poor — Injurious  tendency  of  the  system — Means  em- 
ployed for  its  amendment — Sums  expended  for  poor  in  England  and  Wales  in  each 
year  of  the  present  century — Proportion  of  paj-ments  to  population  at  each  decen- 
nary enumeration — Results  of  law  of  1834 — Poor  Law  of  Ireland— Of  Scotland — 
Methods  followed  in  various  countries  for  relieving  the  poor — In  Norway — In 
Sweden — In  Denmark — In  Mecklenburgh — In  Prussia — In  Wiirtemberg — In  Ba- 
varia— In  the  Canton  of  Berne — In  France — In  Holland — In  Belgium — Labourers' 
earnings  in  England,  &c.        ..........       8G 

Chapter  V. 

EMIGRATION. 

Circumstances  under  which  Emigi-ation  may  be  desirable — Habit  of  non-interference 
on  the  part  of  Government — Private  associations  for  promoting  Emigration — Set- 
tlement in  South  Africa — Number  of  Emigrants  from  this  Kingdom,  1820-1849 — 
Arrivals  of  Emigrants  at  Quebec  and  New  York,  1829-1843 — Distribution  of 
Emigrants — Transportation  of  Criminals  to  New  South  Wales — Suggestion  for 
their  employment  in  British  America — Number  of  Convicts  transported,  1825-1841 
— Convict  establishment  in  the  Bermudas         .  .  .  .  .  .  .126 


SECTION  II —PRODUCTION. 

Chapter  I. 
AGRICULTURE. 

llmpossibilit}-  of  importing  any  large  proportion  of  Food  for  the  Population — Import- 
ations of  Wheat,  1801  to  1849— Comparative  smallness  of  its  amount — Numbers 
fed  with  Wheat  of  Home  and  of  Foreign  Growth— Increased  Productive  Power  of 
Great  Britain— Means  whereby  this  increase  has  been  effected— Deficiency  of 
statistical  information  connected  with  Agriculture  in  England — Improvements  in 
Scotland—  Inclosure  Bills  and  Average  Prices  of  Wheat  since  1760 — Com  Law  of 
1815— Conflicting  testimony  as  to  Agricultural  Distress  given  to  the  Committee 
in  1833 — Increased  Rents  since  1790 — Adaptation  of  the  Steam-Engine  to  the 
Draining  of  Fens— Effect  upon  Agriculturists  of  the  restoration  of  a  Metallic  Cur- 
rency—Land brought  under  Cultivation  since  1760— Compared  with  Increase  of 


CONTENTS. 


Population  since  18U1 — Surface  of  cultivated,  uncultivated,  and  unprofitable  Land 
in  each  division  and  County  of  the  United  Kingdom  in  182 7 — Proportion  of  culti- 
vated Land  to  the  Population  at  diffei-ent  periods  during  the  present  century — 
Probability  of  Population  outstripping  the  productive  powers  of  the  soil — Supposed 
influence  upon  this  question  of  the  extensive  construction  of  Railroads — Estimate  of 
the  Number  of  Horses,  the  employment  of  which  may  by  that  means  be  rendered 
unnecessary  ............     133 

ChAI'TER  II. 
MANTJFACTURES.— Woven,  &c..  Fabrics. 

Manufacturing  skill  of  England — Its  political  consequences  during  the  last  war — 
Introduction  of  woollen  manufacture — Prohibition  to  export  English  wool — Re- 
moval of  prohibition,  and  its  consequences — -Woollen  goods  exported — Number  of 
Woollen  Factories — Foreign  wool  imported — Production  of  wool  in  England  in 
1800,  1828,  and  1844 — Stuff  trade — Cotton  manufacture — Cotton  imported  since 
1800 — Cotton  goods  exported  since  1820 — Decreasing  cost  of  yarn — Advantages  of 
power-looms — Cost  of  weaving — Number  of  power-looms — Hand-loom  weavers — 
Labour  employed  in  spinning  and  weaving  factories — Diminished  proportion  re- 
quired to  produce  equal  effects  —  Increased  proportion  of  power-weaving— Progres- 
sive extension  of  cotton  factories — Power-looms  in  various  manufactures— Cotton- 
printing — Effect  of  removing  duty  on  printed  goods — Hosiery — Bobbin-net — Extent 
and  value  of  cotton  manufactures  in  1833 — Silk  manufacture — Its  progress  during 
and  since  prohibition — Export  of  silk  goods — Distribution  of  silk  factories,  and 
number  of  persons  employed  in  1835  and  1839 — Effect  of  high  duties  in  promoting 
smuggling — Linen  manufacture — Quantities  exported — Flax-spinning— Prices  of 
yam  and  canvas  at  difi'erent  periods — Wages — Improvements  in  spinning — Import- 
ations of  flax — Distribution  of  flax  factories,  and  number  of  persons  employed  in 
183',  and  1839 167 

Chapter  111. 

MANUFACTURES.— Woven  Fabrics. 

Progress  in  various  Foreign  Countries. 

France — Woollen  manufacture — Imports  and  production  of  wool — Protection  against 
foreign  manufactures — Cotton  manufacture — Disadvantages  through  the  duties 
on  foreign  coal  and  iron — Extent  of  manufacture — Quantity  of  cotton  imported 
since  1787 — Export  of  woollen  and  cotton  goods — Silk  manufacture — Its  extent 
and  progress — Exports — Germany — Cotton  manufactures — Prussian  commercial 
league — Russia — Swiss  Cantons      .........     234 

Chapter  IV. 

MANUFACTURES.— Iron— Steel— Brass— Copper— Plated  Wares— Glass — 

Hardwares. 

Increase  of  population  of  Birmingham — Fall  in  cost  of  goods — Quantities  exported, 
and  value  of  the  same — British  iron  exported — Quantity  and  value  of  brass 
and  copper  goods  exported — System  of  manufactures  pursued  in  Birmingham — 
Increase  of  population  of  Shefiield — Conversion  of  iron  into  steel — Quantity  of 
steel  exported — Value  of  plated  goods  exported — Glass  manufacture — Causes  which 
have  prevented  its  extension — Quantity  retained  for  consumption — Effect  of  high 
duties  in  limiting  consumption — Illicit  manufacture  ......     245 


vi  CONTENTS. 

Chapter  V. 

MANUFACTUKES.— Machinerv. 

v\as 
Importance  of  perfect  tools  and  inipiemeuts — Kecent  progress  of  manufacturing  skill 
in  their  production — llabbage's  calculating  machine — Foreign  mechanical  inven- 
tions perfected  and  adopted  in  England — Policy  of  allowing  the  exportation  of 
machinery — Impossibility  of  confining  the  knowledge  of  improved  machines  to  our 
own  countiy — Impolicy  of  the  attempt — Laws  restraining  artisans  from  going 
aboad — Their  repeal — Footing  upon'which  the  limited  exportation  of  machinery  is 
now  permitted — Progress  of  the  prohibitive  system — Value  of  machinery  exported     258 

Chapter  VI. 
MINING. 

Early  celebrity  of  the  mines  of  England — Iron — Quantity  made  at  different  periods 
from  1740  to  1848 — Tin— Produce  of  Cornish  mines  from  1750 — Increase  since 
1814 — Imports  and  exports  of  foreign  tin — British  tin  exported — Value  of  tin- 
plates  exported — Coppcr^Produce  of  Cornish  mines  from  1771  to  1786,  and  1796 
to  1848— Total  produce  of  English  mines  from  1820  to  1834 — Value  of  tin  and 
copper  raiised  in  Cornwall  at  different  periods  during  the  present  century — Lead — 
Concealment  practised  by  mine-owners  as  to  the  quantity  of  metal  produced — Coal 
— Advantage  of  steam-engine  in  coalmining — Davy's  safety-lamp — Its  effect  in 
increasing  the  product  of  coal-mines — Shipments  from  Newcastle  and  Sunderland 
in  each  year  from  1801  to  1849 — Shipments  from  Stockton  andSeaham — Prices  of 
coal  at  Newcastle  and  Sunderland  in  each  of  those  years — Prices  in  London  from 
1813  to  1850 — Quantity  of  coals  shipped  from  various  parts  of  the  kingdom  from 
1819  to  1849 — Produce  of  inland  collieries  — Salt — Quantity  annuallj-  produced — 
Reduction  and  repeal  of  Excise  duty  on  salt — Quantitj'  annually  consumed  since 
1801—  Quantity  exported  from  1827  to  1849 — Increased  consumption  since  repeal 
of  duty        .  .         .      ■ 267 


SECTION  III.— INTERCHANGE. 

Chapter  I. 

INTERNAL  COMMUNICATION. 

,  Great  facility  afforded  for  transport  in  Great  Britain — Advantages  thence  resulting 
—  Jealousy  on  this  account  of  Foreign  Coxmtries,  and  Commercial  Restrictions  for 
■which  it  is  made  the  pretext— Consc^quent  injury  to  those  Countries — Improve- 
ments in  Locomotion  projected  in  France  .......     287 

Chapter  II. 

TURNPIKE  ROADS. 

Length  of  Turnpike-roads  in  Great  Britain  in  1818  and  1829— Length  in  each  County 
in  1829— Improvement  of  Roads  in  Scotland— In  Ireland — Effect  upon  Society — 
Former  condition  of  Roads  in  England — Improvements  in  public  carriages  and 
greater  Speed  in  Travelling — Traffic  upon  Roads  and  Canals  as  given  in  evidence 
before  Parliament — Amount  of  Travelling  by  Stage-coaches  in  Great  Britain — 
Proportion  of  that  amount  connected  with  London — Number  of  Mail-coaches  in 
England,  Scotland,  and  Ireland      .         .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .291 


CONTENTS.  vii 

ClIAPTKU  III. 

CANALS. 

VACJE 

Beginning  of  Canal-making  in  England — Utility  of  the  Duke  of  Bridgewater's  Canals 
— Length  of  Navigable  Kivers  and  Canals  in  England — Inland  Navigation  in 
Ireland — Neglect  of  Natural  Facilities  in  that  Country — Improvement  of  the 
Shannon — Traffic  on  Grand  and  Koyal  Canals  and  River  Barrow — Ulster  Canal — 
Caledonian  Canal — Crinan  Canal — Canals  begun  and  finished  since  1801 — Canals 
of  France — of  America  .........  .     302 


Chapter  IV. 

STEAM  NAVIGATION. 

First  attempts  at  Steam  Navigation — Steam-Vessels  built,  1814  to  1849— Steam- 
Vessels  employed  in  British  Empire,  1849 — Annual  Progress,  1814  to  1849 — 
Changes  effected  by  this  Invention— Its  application  to  Commerce — Passage- Vessels 
to  America — To  the  West  Indies — To  India— Steam  Trading- Vessels  employed  in 
Coasting  and  Foreign  Trades — Steam- Vessels  belonging  to  various  Foreign  Coun- 
tries    •  .  .     315 


Chapter  V. 

RAILWAYS. 

Earliest  Employment  of  Railroads  in  England — Number  of  Acts  of  Pai'iiament  for 
incorporating  Railroad  Companies — Traffic  on  Liverpool  and  Manchester  Line — 
Railways  completed  'o  1849 — Railway  Traffic  and  Revenues  1845-9 — Effect  upon 
Post  Comnuinicatious  —  Anticipated  Improvements  —  Pecuniary  Saving  to  the 
Public — Railway  Accidents — Sums  expended  in  obtaining  Acts  of  Incorporation — 
Government  Survey  of  Lines  in  Ireland — Persons  employed  on  Railways — Rail- 
ways in  Belgium — In  America       .........     326 


Chapter  VI. 

COASTING  TRADE. 

No  Records  of  Coasting  Trade  earlier  than  1824 — Tonnage  employed,  1824  to  1849 
—  Proportion  emplojed  in  conveying  Coals  to  London — Influence  of  Corn  Trade 
iu  determining  Fluctuations  in  the  employment  of  Coasting  Vessels     .  .         .     340 

Chapter  VII. 
TRADE  BETWEEN  GREAT  BRITAIN  AND  IRELAND. 

Value  of  Goods  passing  bet-ween  Great  Britain  and  Ireland  in  diffwent  jears  between 
1801  and  1825 — No  later  Official  Account  kept — Trade  by  Steam- Vessels  between 
Ireland  and  Liverpool — S'alue  of  Agricultural  Produce  so  conveyed,  1831  and 
1832 — Number  and  Value  of  Live  Stock  imported  into  Great  Britain,  1801-1825, 
and  184G-9— Imported  into  Liverpool  and  Bristol,  1831,  1832,  and  1837 — Eggs 
Imported — Effect  upon  the  Markets  in  Ireland— Grain,  1815  to  1849 — Vessels 
emplojed  in  Trade  between  Great  Britain  and  Ireland,  1801-1849       .         .  .     342 


viii  CONTENTS. 

ClIAPTEK  VI II. 
WEIGHTS  AND  MEASURES. 


PAOE 


Necessity  of  establishing  Legal  Standards — Incouvenience  of  Local  and  Customary 
Weights  aud  Measures — Parliament;iry  Investigations— Acts  of  1824,  of  1S34  and 
of  183.5,  for  establishing  Uniformity  of  Weights  and  Measures  throughout  the 
Kingdom     ......•.•.•••     347 

ClIArTER  IX. 
FOREIGN  COMMERCE. 

Dependence  of  various  Countries  upon  each  other  for  Comforts  and  Conveniences — 
Peculiar  Advantages  of  England  for  prosecuting  Foreign  Commerce — Effect  of 
Wars  and  Commercial  Systems  upon  Foreign  Trade — Growing  Importance  of  its 
Commerce  to  England,  arising  out  of  its  increasing  Population— Influence  of 
e.\tended  Markets  in  preventing  ruinous  Fluctuations^Impossibility  of  long  main- 
taining existing  Corn  Laws— Progress  of  Foreign  and  Colonial  Trade,  from  1801 
to  1849 — Course  of  Trade  with  various  Countries— Opening  of  East  India  and 
China  Trades — Discriminating  Dutii-s  on  Sugar — On  Coffee — On  Timber — Con- 
tinental System — Return  of  Peace — Free-Trade  Petition  of  London  Merchants — 
Relaxation  of  Navigation  Acts — Reciprocity  Treaties — Registered  Tonnage— Ships 
built— Ships  Entered  and  Cleared  1801-1849 351 

Chapter  X, 

PROGRESS  OF  TRADE  IN  FOREIGN  COUNTRIES. 

Foreign  Trade  of  France,  1801  to  1848— Shipping  employed  therein,  1820  to  1848 — 
Proportions  of  National  to  Foreign  Shipping  employed  by  England,  France,  United 
States  of  America,  Sweden,  Norway,  and  Russia — Foreign  Trade  of  United  States 
of  America,  1801  to  1848 400 

Chapter  XI. 
PRUSSIAN  COMMERCIAL  LEAGUE. 

Declared  Object  of  the  League — States  of  which  it  is  composed — Motives  which  have 
led  to  its  adoption — Previous  Negotiations — Jealousy  of  English  Merchants  and 
Manufacturers — Effect  of  the  League  on  the  Manufacturers  of  Saxony  •         .     407 

Chapter  XII. 
CURRENCY. 

Bullion  Committee  of  1810— Reasons  suggested  for  Disagreement  on  the  subject  of 
CuiTency  between  the  "  Economists  "  and  the  "  Practical  Men  " — High  Prices  of 
Gold,  1809-1815 — Issues  of  Paper  Money  to  facilitate  Financial  Operations  of 
Government — Peel's  Act — Panic  of  1825 — Formation  of  branches  by  Bank  of 
England — Establishment  of  Joint  Stock  Banks — Number  established,  182G-1836 
— Advantages  of  having  only  one  Bank  of  Issue — National  Bank — Influence  of 
Currency  on  Prices—  Plan  for  Estimating  Rise  and  Fall  of  Prices — Effects  of 
abundant  or  deficient  Harvests  upon  Currency  and  Pricesr^-Table  of  Notes  in 
Circulation,  of  Bullion  held  by  the  Bank,  of  Exchanges  with  Hamburg  and  Paris, 
and  of  Comparative  Prices  of  Wheat  aud  Merchandise  generally,  in  each  Month, 
1833-1837 413 


C0N'1T.NTS. 

CiiAPTEu  XII r. 

COINAGE. 


PAOE 


Bad  State  of  the  Coinage  at  the  beginning  of  the  Century — Disappearance  of  Coin 

Bank  Tokens— Moneys'coined,  1801  to  1849 — Diminished  weight  of  Silver  Coins 

Proposal  of  Double  Standard — Copper  Coinage,  1821  to  1849     .  »  .         ,     4.35 

Ch-\pter  XIV. 

WAGES. 

Bad  Seasons  1795-1800 — Privations  of  Working  Classes — Decreased  Number  of  Mar- 
riages— Greater  competition  and  exertion  among  Labourers  when  Food  is  dear — 
Wages  not  readily  adjusted  to  fluctuations  of  Seasons — Influence  of  those  fluctua- 
tions upon  character  of  Labourers — Weekly  Wages  of  Artisans,  &c.,  18U0-1836 — 
Benefits  resulting  from  Cheap  Clothing — InsuflBciency  of  Charitable  Aid  as  a  Sub- 
stitute for  Kegular  Employment — Trials  of  the  Poor — Motives  for  Self-dependence 
— Wages  in  some  Foreign  Countries         ........     439 


Chapter  XY. 
MEASUREMENT  AND  CLASSING  OF  SHIPPING. 

Inaccurate  mode  of  Measuring  employed  from  1773  to  1835 — Various  consequent 
evils — Remedy  attempted,  1821 — Accomplished,  1835 — Imperfect  Classification  of 
Ships — Bad  consequences — Remedy  provided,  1834  ......     458 

Chapter  XVI. 

WAREHOUSING  SYSTEM. 

The  necessity  of  paying  Duties  on  Importation  unfavourable  to  Commerce — Pro- 
ductive of  Fraud — Warehousing  System  proposed  in  173-3 — In  1750 — Introduced 
in  1 803 — Unfavourable  Conditions  when  first  established — Gradual  Improvements — 
Disadvantages  still  resulting  from  the  original  Restrictions — Warehousing  Ports  in 
England — Scotland — Ireland — Prevention  of  Frauds  against  the  Revenue  by  means 
of  Warehousing  System  .         .         .         .         .         .         .         .         .         .461 


CONTENTS. 


SECTION  IV.— PUBLIC  REVENUE  AND  EXPENDITURE. 

Chapter  I. 

FINANCIAL  SITUATION  OF  THE  KINGDOM  AT  THE  BEGINNING  OF  THE 

PRESENT  CENTURY. 

PAOE 

Financial  Coiulition  at  the  close  of  the  ISth  Century — Triple  Assessment — Income- 
tax  Imposed — Repealed — Enormous  Government  Expenditure — Fallacious  show  of 
Prosperity — Misery  of  the  Working  Classes — Their  diminished  Command  of  the 
Necessaries  of  Life — EfiFect  of  Mechanical  Inventions  in  supporting  the  Country 
under  Difficulties  ...........     467 

Chapter  II. 

PUBLIC  INCOME  AND  EXPENDITURE. 

vGigantic  Expenditure  during  the  War — Consequent  Exhaustion  —  Gloomy  Forebod- 
ings of  Political  Writers  in  former  Times — Amount  of  Debt,  1793  to  1816 — Yearly 
Income  and  Expenditure,  1792  to  1849 — Debts  contracted,  1801  to  1821 — Sinking 
Fund — Dead--neight  Annuity — Conversion  of  Perpetual  into  Terminable  Annui- 
ties— Expenditure  beyond  Income  during  the  War — Income  beyond  Expenditure 
since — Plans  of  Finance — Budgets  .........     472 

Chapter  III. 
PRODUCE  OF  TAXES. 

Taxes  Imposed  1801  to  1849^Taxes  Repealed  1814  to  1849— Produce  of  Taxes  in 
proportion  to  Population — Probate  and  Legacy  Duties— Customs  and  Excise  Duties 
— "  Taxes" — Post-office  Duties — Duties  of  Protection — Retaliatory  Duties — Their 
eflFect  on  Foreign  Governments        .........     485 

\^' 

Chapter  IV. 

WAR  EXPENDITURE. 

Expenditure  in  last  years  of  War— Consequent  Exhaustion  and  Distress — Compara- 
tive Expenditure  in  ^^  ar  and  Peace — Votes  for  Army,  Navy,  Ordnance,  1801  to 
1849— Loans  and  Subsidies  to  Foreign  States — Value  of  Stores  furnished  to  our 
Allies  in  1814 504 

Chapter  V. 
MISCELLANEOUS  ESTIMATES. 

Civil  List  from  1701  to  1849 — Crown  Revenues — Pensions — Miscellaneous  Services- 
Salaries  in  Public  Departments        .........     509 

Chapter  YI. 
COUNTY  AND  PAROCHIAL  EXPENDITURE. 

Local  Taxation — Poor  Rates— County  Rates— Amount  levied  in  1844— Objects  to 
which  the  money  was  applied,  compared  with  1792    ......     516 


CONTENTS. 


SECTION  v.— CONSUMPTION. 


Chapter  I. 

PAOE 

Small  Number  of  Persons  in  England  who  live  without  gainful  Employment — Con- 
sequent gi'eat  Means  for  Enjoyment  and  for  accumulation  of  Capital — Unequal 
Division  of  the  Products  of  Labour — Growing  Improvement  in  this  respect — 
Increase  of  Luxuries  and  Elegancies,  and  consequent  general  Refinement  of  Man- 
ners— Improvement  in  Dwellings  of  Middle  Classes  seldom  extended  to  the  Houses 
of  Artisans  and  Labourers — Exception  in  this  respect  of  Sheffield         .         .  .     520 


Chapter  II. 

Houses:  Proportion  to  Inhabitants  in  England — In  Middlesex — In  Scotland^In 
Edinburgh — In  Ireland — In  Dublin — Rated  Value  of  Houses  at  different  Periods — 
Proportion  of  different  Classes,  and  Annual  Rental  — Number  of  Inhabited  Houses, 
and  progressive  Increase  greater  than  Increase  of  Population.  Bricks  :  Number 
made  in  England  and  Scotland         ......... 


r»o.f; 


Chapter  III. 

Male  Servants  :  Number  kept  in  different  Years — Expenditure  thus  occasioned — 
Number  of  Female  Servants,  and  Expense  of  maintaining  them,  in  1S31 — Number 
of  Servants  kept  in  Ireland,  and  Cost  of  their  Maintenance.  Carriages  :  Number 
kept  in  different  Years — Rate  of  Increase — Number  let  for  Hire — Expenditure 
under  these  Heads.  Horses:  Number  charged  with  Duty,  in  1838,  1840,  and 
1849 — For  Pleasure — For  Trade — Number  exempt  from  Dut}-.  Gold  and  Silver 
Plate  :  Quantities  made  during  the  War,  and  since — Improvement  in  quality 
of  Plated  Goods  a  probable  cause  of  the  lessened  use  of  Silver  Articles  .         .     529 


Chapter  IV. 

Food:  Want  of  information  concerning  the  Quantity  consumed  of  chief  Articles  of 
Human  Subsistence — Evils  resulting  from  this  Ignorance — Means  employed  for 
ascertaining  the  Produce  of  the  Soil  in  Belgium.  Sugar  :  Quantity  consumed  at 
various  periods  in  England  and  Ireland,  and  Revenue  thereon — Consumption  easily 
affected  by  Price — Diminished  Shipments  from  British  Colonies — Necessity  for 
enlarging  the  Market  of  Supply — Cost  to  the  Nation  of  the  protecting  Duty,  and 
consequent  Loss  to  the  Kevenue.  Coffee:  Quantitiesconsumed— Effect  of  Reduction 
of  Duties — Consumption  checked  by  Protective  Duties — Contrivance  for  lessening 
their  Amount.  Tea  :  Quantities  consumed — Past  History  of  the  Tea  Trade,  and 
Effect  of  Duties  upon  Consumption.  Malt  :  Consumption  at  various  Periods — 
Checked  by  Duties  and  by  Monopoly  of  Home-growers  of  Barley.  Spirits  :  Con- 
sumption of  Home-made  Spirits — Temperance  Movements  in  Ireland — Foreign  and 
Colonial  Spirits  consumed — Excessive  Duties  and  their  Consequences.  Wine: 
Quantities  consumed — Rates  of  Duty — Consumption  of  Wine  in  France.  Beer: 
Quantity  consumed,  and  Produce  of  Duty         ....... 


CONTENTS. 


Chapter  Y. 

rAOE 

Tobacco  :  Consumptiou  at  diftercnt  Periods — Effects  of  increased  Duties — Encourage- 
nieut  to  Suuigiiling — Complaints  of  liigh  Duty  on  the  part  of  the  Producers  iu  the 
United  States  of  America — Tlireatened  Retaliation — Probable  Consequence  of  such 
a  Course.  Paveu  :  Quantity  made  for  use  at  difl'erent  periods — Injudicious  Nature 
of  the  Tax  on  this  Article— Growing  Use  of  Paper— Effect  of  Reduction  of  Duty 
— Rapid  Extension  of  Sale  by  Repealing  the  Duty  on  Almanacs.  Soap  :  No  means 
of  distinguishing  its  Use  for  Personal  Purposes  from  that  caused  by  Manufacturing 
Processes — Frauds  caused  by  the  Duty — Impolicy  of  imposing  a  Duty  on  Soap — 
Mischief  of  Excise  Regulations — Annual  Consumption  of  Soap  at  various  Periods. 
Candles  :  Cotton  Manufactcues  :  Estimated  Consumption.  Silk  Manufac- 
ture: Estimated  Consumption — Linen  and  Woollen  Manufactlkes  :  Diffi- 
culty of  estimating  the  Value  used.  Ikon  :  Increased  Use  of  this  Material  for 
Ship-building.  Copper  :  Quantity  used.  Tin  :  Timber  :  Quantity  imported 
for  use  in  different  Years  afford  insufficient  data  for  estimating  the  use  of  Timber 
generally — Consumption  of  the  Metropolis— Cattle — Sheep — Coals — Gas  Lighting 
— Consumption  of  Food  in  Private  Families     .......     565 

Chapteu  VI. 

PRICES. 

Effect  of  prices  upon  Consumption — Cost  of  Ship-building  in  1805  compared  with  the 
Cost  in  1836 — Prices  of  Beef  and  Mutton — Of  various  Articles  of  Clothing — Prices 
of  Dress  at  Chelsea  Hospital  .........     587 


SECTION  VI.— ACCUMULATION. 

Chapter  I. 

Conditionsunder  which  Accumulations  occur — Proofs  of  increasing  Wealth — Greater 
Power  of  Accumulation  in  Peace  than  in  War,  because  of  the  Difference  of  the  Public 
Expenditure  under  the  two  Conditions — Probable  present  State  of  England  in  this 
respect  if  we  had  avoided  the  Wars  with  our  North  American  Provinces,  and  with 
the  French  Republic  and  Empire    .........     592 

Chapter  II. 
INCREASE  OF  PERSONAL  AND  REAL  PROPERTY. 

Forms  in  which  the  National  Accumulations  appear — Amount  of  Property  Insured 
at  different  Periods — Moral  and  Economical  Effects  of  Insurances — Accumulations 
iu  Life  Assurance  Offices— Property  devised  in  respect  of  which  Legacy  Duty  has 
been  paid  affords  an  insufficient  Test  of  the  Amount  of  Accumulations — Estimate 
of  Personal  Property  in  the  Kingdom  at  different  Periods— Capital  on  which 
Legacy  Duty  was  paid  in  Fifty- two  Years  to  1849— Yearly  Average  Amount,  com- 
pared with  the  Year  1848,  in  England,  Scotland,  and  Ireland— Savings  invested  in 
the  Security  of  Real  Estates,  and  in  their  Improvement— Assessments  on  Real 
Property,  shovjing  its  Value  at  various  Periods-  Savings  Banks  .  .  .596 


CONTENTS.  Mil 

ClIAPTEU  III. 
INVESTMENTS  OF  ACCUMULATION  FOR  PUBLIC  OBJECTS. 

PAOE 

Buildings  for  Public  Worship  in  England  and  Scotland — By  Parliamentary  Grants 
— By  Corporate  Bodies — By  Individuals — Bridges — Colleges — Hospitals,  &c. — 
Improvement  of  Towns  —  Liverpool  —  Neivcastle-on-Tyne  —  Docks  —  Canals — 
Railways — Turnpike-roads — Gas  Works  .  .  .  .  .  .  .017 

Chapter  IV. 

INVESTMENTS  FOR  COMMERCIAL  PURPOSES. 

Steam-Engines  in  Birmingham — Shipping — Steam- Vessels — Investments  in  Foreign 
Countries — Loans — Mines,  &c.,  in  British  Colonies — Investments  of  Foreigners  in 
our  Public  Funds  withdrawn,  and  replaced  by  Savings  of  British  Subjects — Live 
Stock — Investments  for  Improvemeut  of  Landed  Estates    .....     G25 


SECTION  VII.— MORAL  PROGRESS. 

Chapter  I. 

INTRODUCTION. 

Has  our  Moral  kept  pace  with  our  Material  Progress? — Diminution  of  Gross  and 
Sensual  Vice — General  prevalence  of  Selfishness— Wretchedness  of  our  Poor  Popu- 
lation— Multiplication  of  Criminal  Offenders — Reasons  for  expecting  Amendment 
in  this  respect       ............     630 

Chapter  II. 
CRIME. 

Multiplication  of  Crimes  against  Property — Diminution  of  Crimes  of  Violence — 
Number  of  Offenders  in  England  and  Wales,  1S05  to  1849,  and  Number  of  execu- 
tions— Increased  Proportion  of  Convictions  in  the  later  Years — Severity  of  our 
Criminal  Code  and  consequent  Impunity  of  Offenders — Reforms  in  the  Criminal 
Law — Historical  Sketch  of  their  Progress — Classification  of  Offences — Comparison 
of  1805  with  1841  in  respect  of  Criminals  and  Population  in  each  County — Com- 
parison of  Agricultural  with  Manufacturing  Counties — Classification  of  Offenders 
with  regard  to  ages — Increase  of  Juvenile  Offenders — Reformatory  Prison  at 
Parkhurst — Classification  according  to  Intellectual  Condition — Proportion  of  Sexes 
— Proportion  of  Educated  Offenders  to  Population  —  Analysis  of  Offences  com- 
mitted by  educated  Persons— False  Conclusions  drawn  from  French  Criminal 
Returns  concerning  the  Effects  of  Instruction.  Scotland  :  Superiority  of  its 
Criminal  Jurisprudence — Offenders,  1830  to  1849 — Classification  according  to 
Offences— Sex  and  Intellectual  Condition — Proportion  of  Convictions — Ages  of 
Offenders — Juvenile  Offenders — Analysis  of  Crimes  committed  by  educated  Per- 
sons. Ireland:  Educated  Offenders  not  distinguished  as  in  England  and  Scot- 
land—Comparative  Morality  of  different  Classes — Offenders  in  Ireland,  1805  to 
1812 — Proportion  of  Convictions— Offenders,  1822  to  1834,  and  Number  executed 
in  those  Years — Committals  and  Convictions  classified,  1835  to  1849,  and  Number 
executed — Extraordinary  Fluctuations  of  Numbers  in  different  Years — Propor- 
tionate Ages  of  Offenders — Incompleteness  of  Irish  Criminal  Returns — Numbers 
and  Proportions  of  Offenders  wholly  Ignorant,  and  who  could  read  and  write — 
Proportions  of  Juvenile  Offenders,  England,  Scotland,  and  Ireland— Improvements 
in  Prison  Discipline      ....•...>••     C33 


xn  CONTENTS. 

Chapter  TIT. 
MANNERS. 

PAGE 

Imperfect  \'iews  in  former  Times  conceruing  the  Means  proper  for  repressing 
Offenders — Drnukenness — Its  prevalence  in  1736 — Means  taken  for  its  suppression 
— Failure  of  those  Means — Quantity  of  Ardent  Spirits  consumed  then  compared 
•with  the  present  Time — Drunkenness  not  confined  formerly  to  the  Working 
Classes — General  Coarseness  of  Conversation,  and  in  Popular  Writers — Anecdote 
related  by  Sir  Walter  Scott— State  of  Morals  and  Manners  fifty  Years  ago,  as  stated 
in  evidence  before  the  House  of  Commons — Progressive  Improvement  occasioned 
by  the  general  spread  of  Information — Increased  Temperance  not  extended  to  Scot- 
land— Evidence  of  Sheriff  Alison — Infrequency  of  Prize-fighting  compared  with 
former  Times — Greater  refinement  of  the  Public  Press — General  Improvement  in 
personal  Morality  .         .         .         .  .         .         .         .         .         .     G73 


Chapter  IV. 

EDUCATION. 

Neglect  of  Public  Provision  for  Education  in  England— Consequent  Social  Evils 
— Duty  of  Government  to  provide  for  Instructing  the  People ;  enforced  by  Exer- 
tions of  Individuals  — Remedy  for  Inconveniences  of  increasing  Population — 
Absence  of  Crime  in  Mell-instructed  Communities  of  Nova  Scotia  and  Iceland — 
Joseph  Lancaster,  his  early  DiflSculties  and  subsequent  Success — His  Exertions  and 
Sacrifices — Committee  of  Council  for  Education — Opposition  to  the  Scheme  in  both 
Houses  of  Parliament — Number  of  Children  without  Instruction — Recent  Progress 
of  Public  Opinion  on  the  Subject  of  National  Education — Educational  Statistics — 
Imperfect  manner  in  which  the  Instruction  of  the  Poor  has  been  conducted — 
Statistical  Societies  of  Manchester  and  London — Normal  School  at  Battersea — Pro- 
portion of  Marriage  Registers  signed  with  Crosses  in  different  parts  of  England 
and  Wales — Education  in  Scotland,  18-25  and  1837 — National  Schools  of  Ireland 
established  in  1831 — Nature  of  opposition  offered  to  the  System— Former  Plans; 
their  Insufiiciency— Charter  Schools— Kildare  Street  Society— Children  taught  in 
National  Schools  of  Ireland,  1834  to  1849— Social  Benefits  of  the  System  to  Ireland     682 


Chapter  V. 
POSTAGE,  ETC. 

Legislative  Sanction  of  Mr.  Rowland  Hill's  Plans— Rapid  Progress  of  Public  Opinion 
regarding  them— Stationary  Condition  of  Post-oflSce  Revenue— Illicit  Convey- 
ance of  Letters— Number  of  Letters  that  passed  through  the  Loudon  General  and 
District  Post-offices  in  1839-40  and  1841  to  1849— Estimated  Number  of  Letters 
posted  in  the  United  Kingdom  before  and  after  the  Reduction  of  the  Rates,  and 
per-centage  Increase— Increased  Revenue  from  Post-office  in  1842 — Progress  of 
Post-office  Revenue,  1758  to  1849— Rates  of  Postage  charged  in  England,  Scot- 
land, and  Ireland  from  1710  to  1840— Effect  upon  the  Net  Revenue  of  successive 
Alterations  of  the  Rates— Newspapers— Excessive  Stamp  Duty  thereon  encouraging 
unstamped  Papers— Reduction  of  Duty  and  suppression  onilegal  Publications- 
Circulation  of  Newspapers,  and  Revenue  therefrom,  ISOl  to  1842— Number  of 
Papers  published  in  different  Divisions  of  the  Kingdom,  and  their  Circulation, 
1839  to  1849 709 


CONTENTS;  XV 

SECTION  VIII. 
COLONIES  AND  FOREIGN  DEPENDENCIES. 

Chapter  I. 
ADVANTAGES  OF  COLONIES. 

PAGE 

Erroneous  Views  entertained  on  the  Subject — Whence  arising — Restrictive  Colonial 
System ;  Mischief  resulting  from  it — Advantages  of  granting  Commercial  Freedom 
to  Colonies — Field  for  profitable  enterprise  offered  by  Colonies — Experience  neces- 
sary for  the  prudent  Government  of  Colonies — Frequent  Changes  of  Ministers 
unfavourable  to  this  end— Suggestions  for  establishing  a  permanent  Colonial  Council 
under  the  Secretary  of  State — Analogy  of  such  a  Plan  -with  that  pursued  by  the 
Government  of  India  —  Political  Advantages  of  possessing  Colonies  —  Negative 
Advantages  following  from  such  possession       .......     720 

Chapter  II. 

DEPENDENCIES  IN  EUEOPE. 

Gibraltar  :  Its  Population,  Trade,  and  Shipping.  Malta  :  Its  Importance  as  a 
Military  and  Naval  Station — Its  Area,  Population,  Trade,  Revenues,  and  Grain 
Monopoly — Restrictions  against  Printing — Abolition  of  those  Monopolies — Agricul- 
tural Produce — Shipping.  Ionian  Islands  :  their  Constitution,  Area,  Population 
Trade,  Shipping,  Exports,  Manufactures,  and  Productions — Education.  Heli- 
goland :  Advantages  of  its  Position — Former  Importance  as  a  Tradino-  Depot 
during  the  War    ..........  ^  ,     729 

Chapteu  III. 
DEPENT>ENCIES  IN  ASIA. 
^Origin  and  Progress  of  our  Indian  Empire-pCircamstances  under  which  its  Growth 

has  occurred — War  of  Aggression  against  Affghanistan ;  its  sinister  consequences 

Trading  Monopoly  of  the  East  India  Company ;  its  Relaxation  and  subsequent 
Abandonment — Amount  of  Trade  between  England  and  India — Quantities  imported 

of  various  Articles  of  Indian  Produce — Great  Commercial  Resources  of  India 

Probability  of  obtaining  Supplies  of  Products  hitherto  procured  from  the  Baltic  • 
Wool,  Flax,  Tallow,  Oil-seeds— Shipping,  Trade  of  Bengal ;  of  Madras ;  of  Bom- 
bay— Public  Revenues  and  Expenditure  of  British  India— Public  Debt — Constitu- 
tion of  Anglo-Indian   Government — Board  of  Control ;   its  unlimited   Power 

Successive  acquisitions  of  Territoi^  in  India — Wealth  drawn  Yearly  from  India  to 
England— Ceylon  :  its  Position  and  Acquisition— Population- Increased  produc- 
tion of  Coffee.  Cocoa-nut  Tree  :  its  various  Products  and  their  Advantages. 
Cinnamon:  Monopoly  abolished— Pearl  Fishery— Gems  and  Metals— Manufac- 
tures—Trade.  Mauritius  :  Population— Sugar  Production— Trade  with  England 
and  other  Countries       ...........     7.33 

Chapter  IV. 

SETTLEMENTS  IN  AUSTRALASIA. 

General  Description— Times  of  Settlement.  New  South  Wales:  Population — 
Disparity  of  Sexes — Immigrants — Sales  of  Waste  Lands — "  Bounty  Emigrants"— 
Agricultural  Emigrants  —  Convicts  —  Revenues  —  Productions  —  Wool  —  Whale 
Fishery — Trade — Shipping — Van  Diejien's  Land:  Population  —  Disparity  of 
Sexes— Productions  —Whale  Fishery— Export  of  Wool  —  Manufactures,  &c. — 
Trade — Shipping.  Western  Australia:  Population — Shipping— Stock.  South 
Australia:  Population— Sales  of  Public  Lands.  New  Zealand:  Population — 
Trade — Shipping  ...........     757 


xvj  C'ONTENTS. 

Chapter  V. 

DEPENDENCIES  IN  AFRICA. 

PAOK 

Cape  of  Good  Hopk  :  Popuhitiou— Imports  and  Exports— Shipping— Productions — 
Wine  — Whalo  Fishery— Stock  —  Farm  Produce  —  Timber— Harbours.  St.  He- 
lena :  Population — Imports— Shipping.  Ascension  :  Products.  Sierra  Leone  : 
Population — Emancipated  Slaves — Unhealthiness  of  Climate — Imports  and  Ex- 
ports— Shipping.  Settlement  on  the  Gambia:  Population — Trade.  Settlements 
ou  the  Gold  Coast:  Cape  Coast  Castle:  Accra:  DixCove:  Annamabok: 
Trade — Population.     Fernando  Po  :  Population 77.3 

Chapter  VI. 
BRITISH  AMERICA. 

Canada  :  Population,  Lower  Canada — Increase  by  Immigration — Population  of 
Upper  Canada  —  Imports  and  Exports — Shipping  —  Ship-building  —  Fisheries — 
Agriculture  —  Manufactures  —  Mills  —  Internal  Navigation.  New  Brunswick: 
Area — Population  —  Imports  and  Exports  —  Shipping  —  Sliip-building.  Nova 
Scotia  :  Population — Inequality  in  the  Numbers  of  the  two  Sexes — Imports  and 
Exports  —  Shipping — Ship-building  —  Fisheries — Harbours  —  Live  Stock.  Cape 
Breton:  Population — imports  and  Exports  —  Coals  —  Ship-building.  Prince 
Edward's  Island  :  Population — Imports  and  Exports — Tenure  of  Land — Stock — 
Ship-building.  Newfoundland  :  Area  —  Fisheries  —  Population  —  Imports  and 
Exports  —  Shipping  —  Ship-building.  Hudson's  Bay  Territory  :  Boundaries  — 
Extent.  Bermudas:  Population  —  Imports  and  Exports  —  Ship-building  —  Ship- 
ping   ..............     783 

Chapter  VII. 
WEST  INDIA  ISLANDS  AND  SETTLEMENTS. 

General  Description — Names  of  Colonies — Population — Imports  and  Exports — Trade 
with  the  United  Kingdom — Shipping — Productions — Slave  Trade ;  its  Abolition — 
Abolition  of  Slavery — Compensation  to  Slave-owners — Successful  Result  of  the 
Measure — General  List  of  the  Colonies  and  Dependencies  of  England;  the  Date 
and  Mode  of  Acquisition — Population — Forms  of  Government — Trade  with  the 
United  Kingdom — Proportion  which  the  Colonial  Trade  bears  to  the  whole  Trade 
of  the  Kingdom — Colonial  protective  System ;  its  injurious  consequences      .         .     799 


rHEFACE 


SECOND     EDITION. 


A  BOOK  which  professes  to  mark  the  progress  of  this  United  Kingdom, 
in  which  all  the  elements  of  improvement  are  working  with  incessant 
and  increasing  energy,  requires  to  be  from  time  to  time  brought  under 
revision,  in  order  to  the  proper  fulfilment  of  the  object  wliich  it  so 
professes. 

It  has  been  said,  that  any  work  which  should  faithfully  record  the 
onward  progress  of  England,  must  partake  of  the  nature  of  a.  periodical, 
so  great  are  the  changes  which  occur,  and  so  rapidly  are  they  found 
to  succeed  each  other.  This  remark  may  be  applied  with  peculiar 
propriety  to  the  present  time,  in  which  the  m.ost  zealous  advocates 
of  progress  may  see  their  hopes  outstripped,  and  their  most  sanguine 
wishes  brought  within  the  reach  of  accomplishment. 

Being  called  upon,  twelve  months  ago,  to  prepare  a  new  edition 
of  this  work,  I  liave  been  made  sensibly  to  feel  the  truth  of  these 
remarks.  To  render  the  volume  in  any  degree  worthy  of  acceptance 
on  the  part  of  the  public,  it  has  been  necessary  to  revise  the  whole, 
and  to  bring  down  the  information  which  it  gives  to  the  latest  prac- 
ticable period  of  time.  This  has  proved  a  work  of  much  labour,  and 
required  for  its  speedy  accomplishment  a  greater  portion  of  time 
than  could  be  taken  from  the  performance  of  other  and  more  onerous 
duties.  During  the  year  in  which  I  have  been  thus  engaged,  and 
in  which  these  sheets  have  been  passing  througli  the  press,  changes 


xviii  PREFACE  TO  THE  SECOND  EDITION. 

of  the  most  momentous  character,  affecting  our  commercial  relations, 
liave  been  crowned  with  legislative  sanction.  The  protective  system, 
which  only  a  few  years  ago  appeared  to  be  so  interwoven  w^ith  all  our 
habits  and  interests,  that  any  man  who  should  venture  to  raise  his  voice 
against  it  was  stigmatised  as  a  visionary  and  a  theorist,  has  suddenly 
yielded  to  the  force  of  argument,  and  is  abandoned  by  every  one  having 
valid  pretensions  to  guide  the  opinions  or  to  govern  the  decisions  of  the 
legislature. 

If  this  sudden  change  could  have  been  foreseen,  some  of  the  argu- 
ments might  possibly  have  been  spared  that  appear  in  the  following 
pages,  and  that  were  levelled  against  positions  which,  at  the  time,  were 
by  most  persons  deemed  impregnable,  but  which  are  now  and  for  ever 
given  up  as  no  longer  tenable  ;  for  it  is  not  to  be  conceived  that  a 
victory  so  signal  over  deep-rooted  prejudices,  and  which  has  been  gained 
by  changing  the  convictions  of  the  great  majority  of  those  by  whom  they 
were  entertained,  can  ever  be  reversed,  nor  that  circumstances  can  here- 
after arise  to  call  for  a  repetition  of  the  means  by  which  that  victory 
has  been  achieved. 

Since  the  first  appearance  of  this  work,  the  fifth  decennial  enumera- 
tion of  the  population  has  been  completed,  and  if  no  other  indication 
of  the  prosperity  of  the  country  were  to  exist,  we  might  justify  our 
assertion  of  that  prosperity,  by  the  simple  fact,  that  our  numbers  have 
increased  from  16,338,102,  in  1801,  to  27,041,031,  in  1841,  or  65^ 
per  cent.,  being  1^  per  cent,  per  annum.  This  rate  of  increase  could 
assuredly  not  have  been  maintained  without  a  concurrent  increase  in 
the  powers  of  production.  The  extent  to  which  our  progress  in  this 
respect  has  been  carried,  is  strikingly  seen  in  continually  increasing 
harvests,  raised  for  provisioning  the  people,  and  which  are  the  result  of 
progressive  applications  of  capital  to  the  land.  Great  as  has  been 
the  effect  thus  produced,  there  is  reason  for  believing  that  we  shall  see 
far  greater  results  from  the  same  cause  in  future  years.  When  our 
agriculturists  shall  have  been  made  to  feel  that  their  chief  dependence 
for  prosperity  must  be  upon  their  own  skill  and  "industry,  they  will  find 
that,  hke  their  fellow-subjects  employed   in  trading  and  manufacturing 


PREFACE  TO  THE  SECOND  EDITION.  xix 

pursuits,  they  too  are  able  successfully  to  compete  with  those  engaged 
in  the  same  pursuit  with  themselves  in  other  lands.  It  would,  indeed, 
be  difficult  to  show  why,  when  an  equal  degree  of  skill  and  energy,  and 
a  greater  amount  of  capital  are  employed  in  the  manufacture  of  wheat, 
our  farmers  should  not  be  able  to  undersell  the  foreigner,  as  we  now  are 
able  to  undersell  him  in  manufactures  of  cotton  and  hardwares.  This 
question  must  shortly  now  be  put"  to  the  proof,  and  I,  for  one,  have  no 
misgivings  as  to  the  result. 

It  was  felt,  that  when  legislative  protection  should  be  withdrawn  from 
the  cultivators  of  land,  it  could  not  long  be  continued  to  any  other  class 
of  producers.  Some  few  branches  of  industry  are  still,  although  in  a 
modified  degree,  subjected  to  this  "  bane."  The  progress  of  improve- 
ment in  our  silk  manufacture  is  still  impeded  by  a  protecting  duty  of 
15  per  cent.,  laid  upon  foreign  productions,  and  our  tariff  continues  to 
present  some  other  deformities,  although  more  has  been  done  in  the 
removal  of  such  during  the  past  few  years,  than  could  reasonably  have 
been  hoped.  Among  the  most  important  of  these  reforms,  is  one  which 
has  been  adopted  by  the  legislature  since  the  last  of  the  following  pages 
passed  through  the  press.  The  producers  of  sugar  in  our  colonies  and 
dependencies^  are  no  longer  secured  in  the  possession  of  a  home  market 
closed  against  foreign  rivals,  and  will  be  forced  in  a  very  few  years  to 
compete  with  these  on  equal  terms.  As  might  have  been  expected,  the 
cry  of  ruin  has  been  loudly  raised  by  our  colonists  against  this  measure 
of  justice  to  the  consumer,  yet  it  may  be  safely  predicted,  that  they  will 
manage  to  withstand  the  shock,  and  by  the  adoption  of  more  scientific 
and  economical  processes  in  the  cultivation  of  their  plantations,  and  the 
manufacture  of  their  products,  will  be  able  to  meet,  on  equal  terras,  the 
slave-gi'own  produce  of  Cuba  and  Brazil.  A  very  significant  fact  in  sup- 
port of  this  prediction,  is  seen  in  the  subsequent  formation  of  joint-stock 
associations  for  the  production  of  sugar,  in  our  intertropical  dependen- 
cies, promoted  by  men  practically  acquainted  with  the  subject,  and  who 
expect,  by  the  application  of  adequate  capital  and  the  substitution  of 
machinery  and  skilled  labour  for  a  part  of  the  mere  animal  drudo"ery 
hitherto  employed,  to  establish  such  a  degree  of  economy  in  their  pro- 


XX  rREFACE  TO  THE  SECOND  EDITION. 

cesses,  as  will  enable  them  to  undersell  in  the  markets  of  Europe,  the 
rivals  so  much  dreaded  by  the  old  race  of  planters,  many  of  whom  have 
neither  capital  nor  mental  resources  adequate  to  the  conflict. 

This  important  reform  redounds  much  to  the  credit  of  an  adminis- 
tration whose  advent  to  power  was  occasicmed  by  the  boldness  of  their 
predecessors  in  dealing  with  other  monopolies,  and  thus  bringing  upon 
themselves  the  political  hostility  of  those  whom  they  had  successfully 
combated.  Fearless  as  the  late  Government  were  in  striving  against 
the  prejudices  of  the  large  and  powerful  class  who  believed  themselves 
benefited  by  the  corn-laws,  they  yet  avoided  an  encounter  with  colo- 
nial interests,  strengthened,  as  these  were  sure  to  be,  by  the  honest 
but  most  mistaken  prejudices  of  the  Anti-Slavery  Association  and  its 
numerous  supporters.  AVithout  any  apparent  sacrifice  of  principle,  a 
change  in  our  sugar  duties  might  have  been  postponed  to  a  future 
session,  and  perhaps  to  a  future  Parliament.  A  bolder  and  a 
wiser  course  was  chosen.  Relying  upon  a  principle,  which  had  al- 
ready been  successfully  carried  out  in  dealing  with  our  external  corn- 
trade,  the  newly-appointed  Government  lost  no  time  in  testifying  to 
its  firmness  and  sincerity  by  placing  in  a  course  of  speedy  adjust- 
ment a  question  which,  by  a  more  timid  policy,  would  assuredly  have 
been  compromised ;  but  which,  thus  manfully  undertaken,  passed 
through  the  Legislature  with  scarcely  more  than  a  mere  semblance 
of  opposition.  The  corn  duties  and  the  sugar  duties  being  thus 
disposed  of  in  a  manner  fatal  to  the  continuance  of  monopolies,  it 
may  now  be  looked  upon  as  certain,  that  the  principle  contended 
for  in  the  following  pages— that  of  not  imposing  any  Customs'  duties, 
except  for  the  purpose  of  obtaining  revenue — must,  ere  long,  be  uni- 
versally acted  upon  by  Parliament.  When  this  shall  be  done,  the 
efltect  upon  our  foreign  commerce,  and,  therefore,  upon  the  sum  of  our 
comforts  and  conveniences,  must  needs  be  great  and  beneficial.  Our 
imports  being  increased  of  such  articles  as  we  can  buy  more  cheaply 
than  we  can  produce  them,  a  greater  amount  of  capital  will  be  dis- 
posable for  the  production  of  such  other  articles'  as  we  can  make  more 
cheaply  than  we  can  buy  ihem,  and  which  will  then  be  exported  in  pay- 


PREFACE  TO  THE  SECOND  EDITION.  xxi 

inont  for  our  increased  purchases.  By  this  means  labour  will  be 
economised  and  rendered  more  effective ;  so  that  we  shall  obtain  an 
equal  amount  of  comforts  and  conveniences  with  a  lessened  a])plication 
of  labour,  or,  what  is  better,  shall  command  a  greater  amount  of  them 
through  an  equal  expenditure  of  toil. 

Great  as  are  the  reforms  that  since  the  first  appearance  of  this  work 
have  been  adopted  in  our  commercial  legislature,  it  is  not  to  these 
alone  that  we  must  look  for  proofs  of  progress.  A  great  and  growing 
interest  has  been  evinced  during  the  past  ten  years  in  all  that  relates 
to  the  moral  condition  of  society  in  this  country  ;  which  direction  of 
the  public  mind  has  contributed  in  a  very  great  degree  to  the  attain- 
ment of  that  measure  of  success  which  has  attended  the  efforts  made  for 
bettering  the  physical  condition  of  the  labouring  class.  The  fact  that 
crime  is,  to  a  great  extent,  a  consequent  of  indigence,  was  urged  with 
effect  by  a  late  Minister  of  the  Crown  in  favour  of  relaxations  in 
our  fiscal  system,  as  affording  means  whereby  that  indigence  might  be 
modified  or  removed  ;  and  the  testimony  of  our  criminal  returns  has 
stood  in  proof  of  this  position.  It  has  further  been  demonstrated,  that 
the  effect  of  want  in  leading  to  criminality  is  greatly  aggravated  by 
ignorance,  which  in  itself  is  a  great  cause  of  want;  and  from  these 
considerations  the  minds  and  hearts  of  the  ruling  class  have,  at  length, 
been  awakened  to  the  duty  and  the  necessity  of  making  provision  for 
the  education  of  the  people. 

A  strong  proof  of  what  is  here  advanced  may  be  seen  in  the  address 
wTitten  by  the  First  Minister  of  the  Crown  when  recently  he  offered 
himself  for  re-election  as  representative  for  the  city  of  London.  In 
former  times,  and  on  such  occasions,  we  have  always  seen  prominently 
brought  forward  points  of  sectional  interests  and  matters  of  party  differ- 
ence, as  grounds  for  soliciting  suffrages ;  and  it  should  afford  matter 
for  the  greatest  satisfaction  that  recourse  must  now  be  had  to  higher 
and  nobler  motives  on  the  part  of  those  to  whom  the  great  task  of 
Government  is  confided.  In  his  address  of  last  July  to  the  citizens 
of  London,  Lord  John  Russell  thus  calls  attention  to  matters  in  the  fur- 
therance of  which  all  are  concerned,  and  as  to  which  none  can  pretend 


-\xii  PREFACE  TO  THE  SECOND  EDITION". 

to  have  any  peculiar  interest : — '*  Great  social  im])rovements  are  re- 
quired :  public  education  is  lamentably  imperfect ;  the  treatment  of 
criminals  is  a  problem  yet  undecided ;  the  sanitary  condition  of  our 
towns  and  villages  has  been  grossly  neglected.  Our  recent  discussions 
have  laid  bare  the  misery,  the  discontent,  and  outrages  of  Ireland : 
they  are  too  clearly  authenticated  to  be  denied ;  too  extensive  to  be 
treated  by  any  but  the  most  comprehensive  measures.  Should  you 
again  elect  me  your  member,  it  will  be  my  duty  to  consider  all  these 
important  matters  in  conjunction  with  those  whom  Her  Majesty  shall 
be  pleased  to  call  to  her  councils." 

In  the  front  rank  of  this  array  of  subjects  stands  the  imperfection  of 
public  education.  Nor  should  it  excite  surprise  to  find  the  importance 
of  this  matter  so  fully  recognised  by  one  who,  through  a  somewhat 
lengthened  public  career,  has  never  ceased  to  give  the  sanction  of  his 
name  and  character,  and  the  benefit  of  his  strenuous  exertions,  to 
jiromote  the  enlightenment  of  the  people.  The  consistency  of  conduct 
thus  evinced,  and  the  pledge  so  emphatically  and  so  recently  offered 
for  its  continuance,  should  give  the  greatest  hopes  to  those  who  have 
laboured  in  the  same  cause,  that  the  Minister  will  be  found  boldly  and 
worthily  to  complete  that  which,  as  a  private  citizen,  he  so  laboured  to 
accomplish. 

Nor  are  the  sanguine  hopes  of  the  advocates  for  national  education 
bounded  by  their  reliance  upon  the  declarations  and  implied  en- 
gagements of  men  in"  power.  The  plan  brought  forward  by  the 
Government  in  1839,  for  placing  under  the  control  of  a  Committee 
of  the  Privy  Council  the  expenditure  of  the  money  voted  by  Par- 
liament for  the  promotion  of  education,  was  all  but  defeated  in  the 
House  of  Commons ;  while,  in  the  PIousc  of  Lords,  an  adverse  address 
to  the  Throne,  proposed  by  the  Primate  of  all  England,  supported  by 
other  eminent  prelates,  and  enforced  by  the  head  of  the  Conservative 
party,  was  carried  by  an  overwhelming  majority.  If  on  that  occasion 
the  opposition  had  proved  successful,  and  power  had  passed  into  other 
hands,  as  the  result  of  the  hindrance  given  to  this  plan,  there  is  reason 
to  fear  that  the  reign  of  ignorance  in  this  country  might  have  been 


PREFACE  TO  THE  SECOND  EDITION.  xxiii 

indefinitely  prolonged.  All  honour  to  the  men  who,  supported  by  their 
convictions,  when  in  pursuit  of  that  which  they  held  to  be  right  and 
just,  disregarded  the  powerful  array  brought  against  them,  and  per- 
severed in  their  objects.  At  a  future  time,  but  upon  other  grounds, 
the  Government  was  more  successfully  opposed ;  and  those  who  but 
two  years  before  would  have  negatived  the  course  proposed  for  pro- 
moting national  education,  quietly  and  honestly  applied  themselves 
to  carry  it  forward.  They  had,  doubtless,  in  the  interval,  been 
brought  to  reconsider  their  opinions,  and  to  understand  how  deeply 
the  public  conviction  was  engaged  on  behalf  of  this  all-important 
question.  That  conviction  has  since  been  strengthened ;  so  that  we 
may  now  feel  assured  that  the  cause  of  enlightenment  is,  humanly 
speaking,  placed  beyond  reach  of  injury  from  the  conflicts  of  party. 
That  all  obstacles  will  now  be  withdrawn  from  the  extension  of  public 
education  in  this  country,  and  to  its  being  conducted  upon  principles  of 
justice,  separating  it  from  all  sectarian  objects,  and  giving  to  it  a  truly 
national  character,  is  more  than  we  can  expect ;  but  with  the  experience 
of  the  last  few  years,  showing  that  in  the  furtherance  of  a  good  cause, 
firmness  offers  the  surest  promise  of  success,  we  may  confidently  predict 
that  the  measures  to  be  brought  forward  for  rendering  public  edu- 
cation less  "  lamentably  imperfect "  than  it  now  is,  will  be  such  as  to 
satisfy  the  minds  of  all  who  see  the  necessity  for  such  a  course,  and 
that  they  will  be  so  supported  as  to  ensure  their  adoption  by  the  Legis- 
lature. 

G.  R.  P. 

London, 

30  November,  1846. 


PREFACE 


THIRD      EDITION. 


The  call  for  another  edition  of  this  volume  enables  me  again  to  appear 
before  the  public  with  a  detail  of  the  further  progress  of  the  United 
Kingdom. 

The  tables  by  which  that  progress  is  shown  in  the  following  pages 
are  mostly  brought  down  to  the  end  of  1849,  and — so  far  as  time  has 
hitherto  permitted — will  be  seen  to  bear  out  to  their  full  extent  the 
most  sanguine  expectations  of  those  who  expected  good  from  the 
changes  which  have  of  late  years  been  adopted  in  our  commercial 
policy. 

The  experiment  of  protection,  so  long  persisted  in,  has  at  length  been 
wholly  abandoned  in  principle,  and  to  a  great  degree  in  practice  also, 
by  the  Legislature,  a  change  which  has  been  received  by  the  great  bulk 
of  the  community  in  a  spirit  which  must  serve  to  convince  every  one 
of  the  hopelessness  of  any  effort  to  reimpose  the  shackles  which  were 
so  long  placed  upon  the  industry  of  the  nation.  The  evidences  of 
general  prosperity  brought  forward  in  the  following  pages,  are  indeed 
as  clear  and  conclusive  in  favour  of  a  free -trade  policy  as  any  of 
its  warmest  advocates  could  have  hoped  to  witness ;  and  it  is  not 
therefore  too  much  to  expect,  that  the  light  thus  thrown  upon  the 
subject  will  lead  to  the  early  abandonment  of  all  remaining  vestiges  of 
restriction  imposed  under  mistaken  views  by  our  ancestors,  while  these 
evidences  of  our  prosperity  may  have  the  further  good  effect  of  leading 


xxvi  PREFACE  TO  THE  THIRD  EDITION. 

foreign  Govcrnmonts  to  follow  a  course  thus  recommended  by  its  results 
to  their  adoption. 

In  one  important  brant-li  of  international  intercourse,  the  convictions  of 
the  connnunity  upon  the  subject  of  free-trade  have  outrun,  in  point 
of  time,  the  expectations  of  its  partisans.  Our  Na\'igation  Law, 
dating  from  the  time  of  the  Commonwealth,  and  regarded  by  suc- 
cessive generations  as  a  monument  of  human  wisdom,  had  indeed,  at 
various  times  since  the  year  1822,  been  subjected  to  modifications,  some 
of  which  were  of  an  important  character  ;  but  up  to  the  time  when  a  Com- 
mittee of  the  House  of  Commons  was  appointed,  in  1 847,  to  inquire  into 
its  ])olicv  and  operation,  few  persons  had  been  sanguine  enough  to  hope 
for  its  entire  removal  from  the  Statute-book.  The  light  thrown  upon 
the  subject  by  witnesses  examined  before  that  Committee,  and  before  a 
Committee  of  the  House  of  Lords,  appointed  with  the  same  object  in 
the  following  year,  served  to  show  how  void  of  all  real  advantage  to  the 
trading  interests  of  the  country  were  the  remaining  restrictions  imposed 
by  that  long-cherished  law,  and  has  led  to  its  speedy  abandonment.  On 
the  1st  day  of  January,  1850,  it  ceased  to  be  illegal  to  bring  to  our 
shores  for  consumption,  from  European  ports,  such  produce  of  the  other 
three  quarters  of  the  globe  as  we  might  require  ;  and  our  merchants 
are  now  empowered  to  convey  their  property  in  the  ships  of  any  country 
to  and  from  any  part  of  the  world,  as  well  as  to  buy  their  ships 
wherever  they  are  to  be  had  best  and  cheapest. 

Among  the  results  of  this  measure,  not  the  least  valuable  is  this, 
that  it  has  served  to  convince  foreign  Governments  that  our  previous 
commercial  reforms  were  adopted  by  us  in  good  faith,  and  with  full 
confidence  in  their  wisdom.  Already  this  conviction  has  produced 
considerable  effects.  The  Dutch,  against  whose  naval  power  our 
Navigation  Law  was  originally  and  chiefly  directed,  have  bastened  to 
place  their  system  in  agreement  with  our  own,  and  other  less  formidable 
rivals  have  promptly  followed  their  example.  The  Navigation  Law  of 
the  United  States  was  adopted  simply  as  a  measure  of  retaliation 
against  this  country,  and  has  naturally  and  necessarily  conformed  itself 
to   our  change  of  system.     Other  St<ates,  which   had  not  adopted  our 


PREFACE  TO  THE  THIRD  EDITION.  xxvii 

rule  of  rostric'tion  against  foreign  shipping,  have  been  led  by  onr  recent 
legislation  on  the  subject,  to  forego  the  intention  they  had  plainly 
intimated  of  following  that  rule,  and  thus,  a  most  undoubted  injury 
to  our  shipping  interest  has  been  averted. 

Another,  and  a  permanent  benefit  to  commerce,  has  been  gained  by 
the  repeal  of  a  law  which,  by  giving  a  fancied  security  to  our  ship- 
owners against  the  competition  of  foreigners,  took  away  from  them  the 
strongest  incentive  to  exertion,  and  to  the  adoption  of  measures  of 
economy,  as  well  in  the  management  of  their  business  as  in  the  con- 
struction of  their  ships.  In  this  last-named  particular,  a  great  saving 
may  now  be  made  by  them  in  some  of  our  chief  ship-building  ports, 
upon  the  cost  of  vessels  built  during  the  period  of  restriction  ;  and  it  is 
not  hazarding  much  to  predict,  that  by  these  means,  and  through  the 
operation  of  some  recent  measures  for  improving  the  character  and 
condition  of  the  masters  and  officers  to  whose  care  their  property  is 
intrusted,  the  shipping  interest  of  England  will  at  least  retain  that 
pre-eminence  over  the  commercial  marine  of  all  other  countries  which 
it  has  hitherto  enjoyed. 

In  the  spring  of  the  year  upon  which  we  have  now  entered,  a  sixth 
decennary  enumeration  of  the  population  of  the  United  Kingdom  will 
be  made.  So  soon  thereafter  as  the  result  can  be  known,  it  is  proposed 
to  issue  a  supplement  to  this  volume,  giving  the  numbers  ascertained, 
accompanied  by  remarks  and  calculations  upon  the  subject,  corre- 
sponding with  those  which  have  already  been  offered  in  relation  to 
each  previous  census. 

G.  R.  P. 

London, 

1  January,  1851. 


THE 


PROGRESS  OF  THE  NATION. 


INTRODUCTION. 

It  miist,  at  all  times,  be  matter  of  great  interest  and  utility  to  ascertain 
the  means  by  which  any  community  has  attained  to  eminence  among 
nations.  To  inquire  into  the  progi'ess  of  circumstances  which  have 
given  pre-eminence  to  one's  own  country  would  almost  seem  to  be  a 
duty.  If  this  remark  may  be  applied  with  propriety  to  any  people  and 
to  any  age,  assuredly  it  may  be  so  applied  to  this  country  and  to  the 
present  generation,  by  which  have  been  made  the  greatest  advances  in 
civilization  that  can  be  found  recorded  in  the  annals  of  mankind. 

The  task  here  pointed  out  has  usually  been  left  to  be  executed  by 
the  historian,  writing  in  some  age  subsequent  to  that  embraced  in  his 
inquiries,  and  it  has  been  urged  in  support  of  this  practice,  that  it  is 
only  after  events  have  been  cleared  from  the  mists  in  which  they  are 
too  commonly  enveloped  by  party  feelings  or  personal  interests,  that  a 
sober  and  dispassionate  estimate  can  be  formed  of  their  importance  and 
tendency.  To  a  certain  extent,  and  within  some  limitations,  this 
opinion  is  doubtless  well  founded,  and  if  the  inquiry  which  it  is  pro- 
posed to  pursue  in  the  following  pages  were  connected  with  party 
feelings  or  opinions,  or  if  the  results  were  made  to  rest  for  confirmation 
upon  deductions  drawn  from  abstruse  or  fanciful  theories,  very  little 
l)ractical  utility  could  be  expected  to  attend  the  task.  Such,  however, 
is  not  the  intention  of  this  work,  nor  are  such  the  means  by  which  its 
object  is  proposed  to  be  accomplished. 


2  PROGRESS  OF  THE  NATIOX. 

To  point  out  the  progress  of  the  nation, — not  of  this  or  that  section 
of  its  inhabitants,  but  the  progress  of  the  whole  social  system  in  all  its 
vanous  departments,  and  as  affecting  all  its  various  interests, — is  the 
object  proposed,  while  the  means  employed  for  its  accomplishment  have, 
as  far  as  possible,  been  sought  for  in  well-authenticated  facts,  and  the 
conclusions  which  these  suggest  are  supported  by  principles,  the  truth 
of  which  has  in  general  been  recognised. 

Many  circumstances  concur  in  pointing  out  the  advantage  of  adopting 
the  commencement  of  the  present  century  as  the  point  of  time  whence 
to  begin  the  inquiries  thus  set  on  foot. 

This  limitation  has  been  principally  influenced  by  the  fact  of  the 
legislative  union  between  Great  Britain  and  Ireland  having  taken  effect 
from  the  firet  day  of  the  century  ;  an  event  by  which  the  different  divi- 
sions of  the  United  Kingdom  were  first  brought  under  one  uniform 
system  of  government,  so  far  at  least  as  to  enable  writers  upon  public 
economy  to  consider  the  two  islands  as  one  comitry,  each  being  thence- 
forth necessarily  and  immediately  affected  by  the  situation  and  progress 
of  the  other. 

Another  motive,  which  has  had  considerable  weight  in  thus  limiting 
the  period  of  inquiry,  will  be  found  in  the  fact,  that  the  materials  which 
can  be  brought  in  aid  of  a  labour  of  this  kind,  and  which  relate  to  the 
occurrences  of  the  present  century,  are  vastly  superior  in  amount  and 
value  to  those  that  are  to  be  collected  from  any  existing  records  of 
earlier  date.  In  support  of  this  assertion,  it  will  be  sufficient  to  mention 
the  decennary  enumerations  of  the  population,  the  earliest  of  which, 
as  regards  Great  Britain,  was  made  in  1801.  These  returns  have 
supplied  an  amount  of  information  far  greater  than  any  before  possessed, 
upon  a  subject  the  consideration  of  which  enters  more  or  less  into  every 
question  connected  with  national  affairs. 

If  the  foregoing  circumstances  had  not  been  sufficient  to  determine 
the  propriety  of  thus  limiting  the  proposed  inquiries  in  point  of  time, 
the  fact  that  one-third  of  the  period  chosen  was  passed  in  a  state  of 
war,  while  in  the  other  two-thirds  this  country"  has  enjoyed  profound 
peace,  would  equally  have  led  to  the  adoption  of  that  limit  as  affording 


INTRODUCTION.  3 

nil  opportunity  for  making  a  comparison  between  the  tendency  of  such 
opposite  conditions  of  social  existence  to  promote  or  retard  the  progress 
of  society  in  its  various  relations,  whether  commercial,  financial,  poli- 
tical, or  moral. 

It  is  proposed,  then,  to  consider  what  has  been  the  progress  of  the 
nation  from  the  commencement  of  the  nineteenth  century,  under  eight 
general  heads  of  inquiry.     These  are — 

1.  Population. 

2.  Production — agricultural  and  manufacturing.    . 

3.  Interchange";  including  internal  communication  and  trade,  ex- 
ternal communication  and  commerce,  currency,  wages,  &c. 

4.  Public  revenue  and  expenditure. 

5.  Consumption  ;  under  which  head  will  be  considered  the  expendi- 
ture of  individuals  for  their  personal  enjoyment,  and  of  societies  or 
combinations  of  individuals  for  promoting  the  general  convenience,  as 
well  as  the  quantities  and  value  of  commodities  consumed. 

6.  Accumulation — as  shown  by  the  increase  of  national  works  and 
buildings,  of  commercial  and  agricultural  stock,  and  of  articles  which 
minister  to  the  comfort  and  convenience  of  individuals. 

7.  Moral  progress  ;  exhibiting  the  state  of  the  kingdom  in  regard  to 
crime,  its  amount,  prevention,  and  punishment,  and  the  progress  of 
education. 

8.  The  extent  and  condition  of  our  Colonies  and  foreign  depen- 
dencies. 

Towards  the  illustration  of  these  various  points,  parliamentary  and 
other  oflBcial  records  have  been  used  as  far  as  practicable,  and  these 
records  fortunately  are  sufficient  in  number,  extent,  and  variety,  to 
afford  data  upon  nearly  all  the  subjects  embraced.  The  extensive 
inquiries  that  have  been  instituted  from  year  to  year  by  the  Imperial 
Parliament,  upon  almost  every  branch  of  the  national  interests,  have 
made  available  to  our  purpose  an  amount  of  testimony  drawTi  from  the 
most  intelligent  and  experienced  quarters,  such  as  no  other  country  or 
government  in  the  world  has  ever  brought  together.     Individual  mera- 

B  2 


4  PROGRESS  OF  THE  NATION. 

bers  of  the  legislature  have  likewise  been  accustomed  to  call  upon  our 
public  depart uients  for  the  production  of  various  details,  with  the  view 
of  elucidating  all  matters  that  in  any  way  affect  either  the  interests 
of  particular  classes  of  their  constituents,  or  those  of  the  community 
at  large.  And,  recently,  the  executive  government  has  established  a 
department  for  the  collection  and  systematic  arrangement  of  informa- 
tion for  the  use  of  the  legislature  and  the  public,  which  has  been  in- 
strumental in  bringing  to  light  and  classifying  a  considerable  amount  of 
information  upon  nearly  every  topic  that  is  connected  with  the  apparent 
condition  of  society. 

These  various  channels  of  information  have  been  diligently  explored, 
and  freely  used,  wherever  they  could  be  made  available  to  the  purpose 
in  view ;  nor  has  recourse  been  had  to  any  less  conclusive  testimony, 
except  where  official  records  are  wanting,  or  for  the  purpose  of  cor- 
roborating those  records  in  cases  where  they  might  seem  to  call  for 
confirmation. 


[     5     ] 


SECTION  I. 
POPULATION 


CHAPTER  I. 

Uncertainty  of  information  previous  to  present  century — Summary  of  Population  in  Great 
Britain,  1801,  1811,  1821,  1831,  and  1841— In  Ireland,  1821,  1831,  and  1841— Rate  of 
increase — Proportion  of  Males  and  Females — Population  of  England  and  Wales  during 
the  18th  century — Ages  of  Population,  1821  and  1841 — Population  of  France,  and  rate 
of  its  increase — Births,  Deaths,  and  Marriages,  in  England  and  Wales — In  various 
countries — Mortality  of  young  persons — jMortality  in  the  Metropolis — In  Manchester — 
In  Middlesex — In  England  and  Wales — Mortalitj'  with  reference  to  ages  in  England — 
In  Ireland — Baptisms,  Burials,  and  Marriages  in  England,  1801-1849 — Proportions  in 
dilferent  Counties — Mortality  in  Tavistock,  1779-1836. 

The  information  tliat  existed  respecting  the  numbers  of  the  inhabitants 
of  this  country  was  exceedingly  vague  and  imperfect  up  to  the  end  of 
the  18th  century.  Till  then,  indeed,  all  knowledge  upon  the  subject 
of  our  population  was  little  more  than  conjecture.  In  the  course  of 
the  17th  century  the  value  of  correct  information  upon  this  interesting 
head  of  inquiry  began  to  be  felt  and  acknowledged,  and  in  the  follow- 
ing century  attempts  were  made  to  deduce  the  increase,  or  otherwise, 
of  the  population  from  the  difference  between  the  births  and  burials 
which  had  occurred  in  each  decennary  period,  commencing  from  the 
year  1700.  It  is  clear  that  this  plan  alone,  even  if  followed  with  abso- 
lute accuracy,  could  not  at  any  time  be  relied  on  for  exhibiting  the 
actual  numbers  of  the  people,  since  one  chief  element  of  the  computa- 
tion, the  number  of  people  existing  at  the  date  from  which  the  com- 
putation commenced,  was  unascertained.  But  it  is  well  known,  also, 
that  a  considerable  portion  of  the  people  in  England  have  never  been 
accustomed  to  avail  themselves  of  the  system  of  voluntary  registration 
of  their  children.  Hence  computations  from  such  materials  could  be 
considered  as  approximations  only  towards  the  establishment  of  data 
upon  this  leading  branch  of  social  economy. 

Previous  to  the  census  of  1801,  there  existed  no  official  returns  of 


6  PROGRESS  OF  THE  NATION.  [sec.  i. 

the  population  of"  either  England  or  Scotland,  and  the  earliest  enumera- 
tion in  Ireland  took  place  in  1813.  The  answers  obtained  under  the 
I'opulation  Acts  which  have  been  put  in  force  during  the  present  cen- 
tury, have,  however,  rescued  the  question  of  the  amount  of  our  popula- 
tion from  the  obscurity  in  which  it  was  previously  involved,  and  have 
furnished  data  of  the  most  valuable  kind  as  the  ground-work  for  various 
pol  i  t  i  cal  cal  c  ula  t ions. 

The  accuracy  of  the  enumeration  of  the  people  which  was  made  in 
1801  was  at  fir?t  impugned  by  several  writers;  but  although  it  is  pro- 
bable that  in  this  first  attempt  to  perform  an  arduous  operation  some 
errors  would  be  committed,  we  are  warranted,  by  the  result  of  subse- 
quent enumerations,  in  believing  that  the  census  of  1801  was  not  far 
from  correct.  The  presumption,  indeed,  would  be  that  any  errors  that 
might  have  been  made  would  be  errors  of  omission,  whereas  the  objec- 
tions all  went  to  charge  the  enumeration  with  inaccuracy  in  an  opposite 
direction.  The  agreement  that  has  been  established  by  subsequent 
enumerations  in  the  progressive  rates  of  increase  during  successive 
decennary  periods  affords  the  best  evidence  of  which  the  subject  is 
capable  in  favour  of  the  general  accuracy  of  the  first  account. 

In  noticing  the  controversy  here  alluded  to,  Mr.  Rickman  gives  the 
following  explanation  in  the  preface  to  his  Abstract  of  the  Answers  and 
Returns  made  under  the  Act  of  1831  : — 

"  Throughout  England  and  Wales  the  questions  were  issued  to  the 
'  Overseers  of  the  Poor'  (an  office  established  in  the  year  1752,  and 
too  well  known  for  explanation  to  Englishmen),  in  the  administration 
of  which  office  these  overseers  are  bound  to  relieve,  at  the  expense  of 
their  several  parishes  or  townships,  all  the  poor  who  can  substantiate 
their  claim  to  such  relief.  A  considerable  scarcity  had  occurred  in  the 
year  1795-6,  and  this  was  aggravated  almost  to  famine  in  the  year 
1800-1 ;  that  is  to  say,  the  defective  harvest  of  1800  raised  the  price 
of  wheat  to  110s.  per  quarter,  whereas  the  average  price  of  the  preced- 
ing ten  years  had  been  54^.  per  quarter.  The  poor,  therefore,  applied 
in  augmented  numbers  to  the  overseers,  and  as  relief  was  usually 
afforded  according  to  the  number  of  children  maintainable  by  each 
applicant,  the  overseers  could  not  fail  to  be  informed  of  the  full  number 
of  every  family,  infants  included,  in  March,  1801  (the  time  when  the 
Enumeration  Act  of  1800  was  carried  into  effect)  ;  and  in  parishes  not 
unusually  large,  were  almost  able  to  state  the  population  from  their 
personal  knowledge — certainly  able  to  detect  any  attempt  at  falsehood 
in  answering  the  inquiry  made  by  themselves,  from  house  to  house ; 
while  in  families  above  the  necessity  of  applying^or  relief,  the  number 
of  children  and  servants  is  too  well  known  to  be  falsified  with  success, 
did  any  conceivable  temptation  exist  for  misrepresentation.     Add  to 


cii.vr.  :.]  rOrULATIOX.  7 

tills,  that  the  overseers  acted  under  tlie  oljligatinn  of  an  oath  to  make 
returns  according  to  the  best  of  their  knowledge  and  belief,  and  that  in 
most  cases  there  are  two  or  more  overseers  in  each  parish  who  must  be 
])resumed  to  concur  in  wilful  falsehood,  before  the  truth  of  their  returns 
I  an  be  fairly  questioned.  It  is  almost  needless  to  add,  that  the  expense 
of  relieving  the  poor  in  England  and  Wales,  which  in  the  year  1800 
approached  the  sum  of  four  millions  sterling,  had  become  six  millions 
in  1811,  and  exceeded  that  sum  in  1821  ;  and  in  the  year  ending 
March,  1831  (ten  weeks  before  the  enumeration  took  place),  the  relief 
of  the  poor  had  amounted  to  6,800,000/.,  so  that  the  overseers  of  the 
})oor  have  had  but  too  much  reason  to  exercise  habitual  vigilance  as  to 
the  number  of  the  children  ever  since  the  Population  Acts  became 
decennial. 

"  The  poor  laws  of  Scotland  are  not  in  such  active  operation  as  to 
require  the  appointment  of  special  officers  ;  but  the  machinery  for  the 
execution  of  the  Population  Act  has  been  usually  deemed  more  perfect 
there  than  in  England,  inasmuch  as  it  is  committed  to  the  care  of  the 
official  schoolmaster  of  each  parish,  an  institution  peculiar  to  Scotland, 
which  has  existed  in  full  vigour  since  the  year  1G96  ;  and  as  the  office 
of  precentor  and  clerk  of  the  parochial  session  for  poor  relief  is  often 
combined  with  that  of  schoolmaster,  the  personal  knowledge  of  the 
number  of  children  in  every  family  appertains  to  the  schoolmaster  in 
Scotland  almost  as  effiictually  as  to  the  overseer  in  England  ;*  and  the 
habit  of  regularity,  together  with  the  official  knowledge  of  writing 
and  arithmetic,  implied  in  the  character  of  schoolmaster,  renders  the 
population  returns  of  Scotland  quite  as  authentic,  and  obviously  more 
methodical,  than  those  obtained  from  the  overseers  of  the  poor  in 
England." 

The  general  accuracy  of  the  population  returns  in  Great  Britain 
may  thus  be  said  to  be  placed  beyond  reasonable  doubt  ;  so  that  cal- 
culations founded  upon  and  fairly  deduced  from  those  returns  may  be 
received  with  confidence  as  evidence  upon  all  those  branches  of  inquiry 
which  are  capable  of  being  elucidated  by  them. 

The  following  table  exhibits  a  summary  of  the  numbers  of  inhabitants 
in  the  counties  of  England,  Wales,  and  Scotland,  respectively,  with  the 
number  of  men  employed  in  the  army,  navy,  and  commercial  marine,  at 
each  of  the  five  enumerations  that  have  been  made  during  the  present 
century,  showing  the  actual  per  centage  increase  that  has  occurred  in 
each  decennary  period. 

*  Considering  the  very  small  number  of  the  families,  or  rather  of  the  individuals  (for  a 
whole  family  is  seldom  or  never  so  supported),  who  receive  relief  from  the  parochial 
session  in  most  of  the  Scottish  parishes,  no  peculiar  opportunities  of  knowing  the  numbers 
of  the  people  can  be  attributed  to  the  schoolmaster  from  the  circumstance  of  his  filling  the 
office  of  session-clcrk. 


PROGRESS  OF  THE  NATION. 


[sec.  I. 


1801 


Number 


England 
"Wales 
Scotland 
Army,  Navy,  &c. 


Great  Britain 
Females 


8,331,43i 
541,546 

1,599,068 
470,598 


10,942.646 


5,492.3r)4 


ISll 


9,538,827 
611,788 

1,803,688 
640,500 


12,590.803 


6,269,650 


Increase 
per  Cent, 

14-50 
12-97 
12-92 


15-11 


14-15 


18-21 


11,261,437 

717,438 

2.093,4.56 

'319,300 


Increase 
per  Cent. 


(,254,613        15-71 


18-05 
17-27 
15-93 


14,391,631   I     14-12 


England 
Wales      .      .      . 
Scotland 
Army,  Navy,  &c. 

Great  Britain    . 

Females  . 


1831 


Number. 


Increase 
per  Cent. 


13,091,005  !  16-24 

806,182  j  12-36 

2,365.114  13- 
277,017  : 


16, .539,318        14-91 


8,375,780  I     15-45 


1S41 


Increase 
per  Cent. 


15,000,1.54  I  14-58 

911,603  j  13-07 

2.620,184  10-78 
188,453 


18,720,334        13-18 


9,515,824        13-61 


It  would  appear  from  these  figures,  that  althougli  the  positive  increase 
of  numbers  was  in  a  trifling  degree  greater  in  1841  as  compared  with 
1831,  than  it  was  in  1831  as  compared  with  1821,  the  per  centage  rate 
of  increase  has  been  less,  it  having  been  13"  18  in  the  latest  period 
against  14' 91  in  the  preceding  ten  years.  There  are  good  grounds  for 
believing  that  this  comparative  falling  off  in  the  rate  of  increase  is  not 
the  result  of  any  cause  directly  influencing  the  statistics  of  vitality; 
that  it  does  not  proceed  from  a  diminished  proportion  of  births  on  the 
one  hand,  nor  from  an  increased  proportion  of  deaths  on  the  other,  but 
has  been  occasioned  by  an  extension  of  emigration.  It  is  not  possible 
to  state  with  perfect  accuracy  the  number  of  persons  who  thus  leave 
this  khigdom  to  settle  in  British  colonies  and  foreign  countries.  The 
Custom-house  accounts,  and  the  records  of  the  Commissioners  for 
Emigration,  include  only  persons  who  embark  in  vessels  specially  fitted 
out  for  the  conveyance  of  emigrants ;  but  there  is  a  large  number 
beyond  these  of  passengers  in  trading  vessels,  and  of  families  taking  up 
their  residence  on  the  continent  of  Europe,  of  whom  no  account  is  pre- 
served. Confining  our  statement,  as  we  necessarily  must,  to  the 
numbers  officially  recorded  in  both  periods,  it  appears  that  the  emi- 
grants from  Great  Britain  during  the  ten  years  to  1831  amounted  to 
196,658,  while  in  the  ten  years  to  1841  they  amounted  to  499,871, 
showing  an  excess  in  the  latest  period  of  303,213  persons.  If  we  add 
this  number  to  the  enumerated  population  of  1841,  we  shall  find  that 
the  increase  during  the  ten  years  following  1831  was  at  the  rate  of 


CUAP.    I.] 


POPULATION. 


15"02  per  cent.,  which  is  in  a  slight  degree  greater  (Oil  percent.)  than 
the  rate  of  increase  between  1821  and  1831. 

It  is  known  that  some  part  of  the  emigrants  who  proceed  from  English 
ports,  and  especially  of  those  sailing  from  Liverpool,  are  natives  of 
Ireland,*  while  it  is  very  unusnal  for  English  emigrants  to  sail  from 
any  port  in  Ireland.  The  proportions  just  stated  are  for  this  reason  not 
correct ;  but  it  is  probable  that  the  number  of  unregistered  English 
emigrants  may  be  nearly  equal  to  the  Irish  who  swell  the  records  of 
English  ports ;  and  we  cannot,  perhaps,  be  far  wrong  in  believing  that 
there  is  no  serious  difference  one  way  or  the  other  between  the  rate  of 
increase  experienced  in  England  and  Wales  in  the  ten  years  ending 
with  1841,  and  that  rate  during  the  ten  years  ending  with  1831. 

The  returns  of  the  population  of  Ireland  made  under  the  Act  of 
1813  were  so  imperfect  that  it  would  be  impro])er  to  found  any  argu- 
ment upon  them  ;  and  the  following  table  has  accordingly  been  con- 
structed with  reference  to  the  enumerations  of  1821,  1831,  and  1841 
only. 


Leinster .  . 
Munster .  . 
Ulster  .  . 
Connaught  . 


1S21 


Males 


859,798 
960,119 
968,061 
553,948 


Females.  ToUl 


897,694    1,757,492 

975,493  ,1,935,612 

1,030,433    1,998,494 

556,281  :1, 110,229 


3,341,926    3,459,901  ,6,801,827 


1S31 


Males. 


927,877 
1,093,411 
1,113,094 

660,498 


3,794,880 


Females. 


981,836 
1,133,741 
1,173,528 

683,416 


3,972,521 


1,909,713 
2,227,152 
2,286,622 
1,343,914 


7,767,401 


Increase 
per  Cent. 


8-66 
15-00 
14-42 
21-00 


14-19 


Leinster 

Munster 

Ulster 

Connaught  

Army  serving'  in  Ireland,  not 
included  in  the  General  Ke- 
turn  of  the  Census  Commis- 
sion in  1841  


Males. 


Females. 


Increase 
per  Cent. 


963,747    1,009,984    1,973,731 
l,lS6,rjO  ,1,209,971    2, .3^6, 161 
1,161,797    1,224,576    2,386,373 
07,842       711,017  :1, 418, 859 


4,019,576 
16,798 


4,036,374 


4,155,548    8,175,124 
4,675         21,473 


3-35 
7-58 
4-36 


5-25 


4,160.223    8,196,597 


*  Stated  by  the  Census  Commissioners  for  Ireland  to  have  amounted  in  the  ten  years  to 
152,738  persons. 


10  TROGRESS  OF  THE  NATION.  [sec.  i. 

The  increase  between  1831  and  1841  is  at  the  rate  of  only  5}  per 
cent.,  wliile  in  the  preceding  period  of  ten  years,  it  was  14*19  per  cent. 
This  great  diftercnce  between  the  two  periods  caHed  for  examination ; 
and  as  the  result  of  this,  the  Census  Commissioners  have  adduced  vari- 
ous circumstances,  whereby  to  show  that  the  real  difference  is  not  nearly 
so  great  as  it  appears  to  be.  For  a  reason  already  given,  it  is  not  pos- 
sible to  state  correctly  the  number  of  emigrants  who  quitted  Ireland  in 
each  of  the  two  periods.  So  far  as  the  records  of  the  Custom-house 
avail,  it  appears  tliat  the  numbers  emigrating  from  ports  in  Ireland  dur- 
ing the  ten  \ears  to  1841  were  214,047  ;  the  Census  Commij-sionei-s  add 
to  these  152,738  Irish  emigrating  from  Liverpool ;  and  adding  further 
to  these  numbers  10  per  cent,  on  account  of  imperfect  returns,  make 
the  whole  number  of  emigrants  from  Ireland,  during  the  ten  years, 
403,459.  The  population  of  Ireland  is  further  kept  down  by  the 
numbers  who  continually  seek  a  living  in  other  parts  of  the  United 
Kingdom.  The  number  of  Irish-born  persons  living  in  England  and 
Scotland,  and  the  British  Islands,  at  the  last  enumeration,  was  419,256  ; 
while  the  residents  in  Ireland,  not  native-born,  was  only  34,608,  causing 
a  difference  in  the  population  of  384,648  persons,  besides  the  natural 
increase  therefrom  arising  during  the  ten  years.  We  have  no  means 
for  ascertaining  how  many  of  these  persons  quitted  their  native  island 
previous  to  1831  ;  the  Census  Commissioners  have  estimated  those  who 
left  Ireland  between  1831  and  1841  at  104,814  only.  A  further  allow- 
ance of  21,473  persons  is  claimed  for  the  army  and  the  families  of 
soldiers,  as  w^ell  as  for  the  recruits  furnished  to  the  armies  of  the  State 
and  of  the  East  India  Company,  said  to  have  amounted  to  39,179.  If 
all  these  persons  were  added  to  the  number  found  living  in  Ireland  in 
1841,  they  would  make  up  a  population  of  8,744,049,  and  would 
exhibit  a  rate  of  increase  during  ten  years  of  12^  per  cent. 

This  rate  of  increase  is  still  far  short  of  that  found  to  have  occurred 
between  1821  and  1831,  and  the  deficiency  would  be  further  increased 
by  restoring  to  the  population  of  1831  the  numbers  of  natives  who  left 
Ireland  during  that  period.  It  has  been  stated,  on  the  other  hand,  that, 
at  the  enumeration  of  1831,  a  powerful  influence  was  exercised  to  swell 
the  apparent  numbers  of  the  population,  with  a  view  to  serve  certain 
political  objects ;  and  that  the  plan  then  followed,  of  paying  the  enu- 
merators employed  in  proportion  to  the  numbers  returned,  tended  to  the 
same  result. 

The  result  of  the  inquiry  made  for  the  first  time  in  this  country  at 
the  last  census,  concerning  the  places  of  birth  of  the  inhabitants  of 
different  divisions  of  the  kingdom,  is  shown  in  the  following  state- 
ment:— 


CHAr.    I.] 


POPULATION. 


11 


English  born,  living  in  England 
„        M'alcs    . 


Scotland 
Guernsey,  &e-. 
Jersey   . 
Man       .      .      . 
Ireland  . 


Males. 

Females. 

Total. 

024, 132 

7,437,818 

14,461,0.50 

440,'Ji:5 

4.59,8(^)8 

900,721 

18,502 

l'.t,234 

37,790 

2,423   ■ 

2,043 

5,000 

4,601 

5,025 

9,086 

1,(520 

1,628 

3,254 

10,820 

10,732 

21 , 5.52 

7,. 503, 1.37 


7,930,888         15,440,025 


Scottish  born,  living  in  Scotland 
England 


AValcs   . 
(iuernsey,  &c. 
Jersey  . 
INlan 
Ireland  . 


England 
Wales    . 
Scotland     . 
Guernsey,  &c. . 
Jersey   . 
Man 


Males. 

Females. 

Total. 

147,800 

1,291,409 

2,439,269 

59,907 

42,1.58 

102,065 

797 

376 

1,173 

84 

68 

152 

158 

134 

292 

349 

306 

655 

4,993 

3,. 587 

8,585 

1,214,093 


Males. 
Irish  born,  living  in  Ireland 4,001,559 


143,151 

3,080 

66,. 502 

209 

045 

810 


4,220,956 


English  born 7,503,137 

Scottish  born 1,214,093 

Irish  bom 4,220,956 

Born  in  Channel  Islands  (Guernsey,  Jersey,  and  i 

Man) 5 

Born  in  British  Colonies 

Born  in  Foreign  Countries 

Not    specified   where    born,    including    Army,  \ 

Navy,  &c j 


44,379 

963 
29,680 

268,494 


1,333,098 

Females. 

4,138,957 

135,977 

2,196 

59,819 

248 

712 

907 

4,338,810 

Females. 
7,936,883 
1,3.38.098 
4,333;816 

52,708 

1,300 
18,710 

51,3.36 


Total  Population 13,281,702        13,737,856 


2,552,191 

Total. 

8,140,516 

284,128 

5,276 

126,. 321 

457 

1,3.57 

1,717 

8,. 559, 772 

Total. 
15,440,025 

2,552,191 
8,. 559, 772 

97,087 

2.263 
48,390 

319,830 
27,019,558 


Tlje  population  of  the  United  Kingdom,  as  found  at  the 
tions  of  1821,  1831,  and  1841,  was  as  follows: — 

1S21  1831 

Engl.and 11,201,437  13,091,005 

Wales 717,4.38  '800,132 

Scotland 2,093,4-50  2,365,114 

Army,  Navj',  &c 319,300  277,017 

Great  Britain 14,391.631  16,539,318 

Ireland 6,801,827  7,767,401 

Army,  Navy,  &c.,  Ireland 

Islands  in  the  British  Seas 89,503  103,710 

United  Kingdom 21,282,966         24,410,429 


enuraera- 


1841 

15,000,154 

911,003 

2,020,184 

188,453 


18, 


720,394 

175,124 

21,473 

124,040 


27,041,031 


The  places  of  birth  of  the  persons  composing  the  army  in  the  United 
Kingdom  do  not  appear  in  the  census  returns. 

The  proportions  which  the   two  sexes  bore  to  each  other,   and  the 


12 


PROGRESS  OF  THE  NATION. 


[sec. 


number  of  adult  males  living,   in  1831  and  1841,  in  different  parts  of 
the  kingdom,  Avere  as  follows  : — 


1831 

1841 

Males. 

Females. 

Males 

20  Years. 

Males. 

Females. 

Males 
20  Years. 

England 

48-71 

51-29 

24-44 

48-83 

51-17 

25-97 

AVales 

48-94 

51-06 

24-15 

49-11 

50-89 

23 -.51 

Scotland 

47-14 

52-86 

23-24 

47-39 

52-61 

23-93 

Great  Britain,  including  Army,  &c. 

49-36 

50-64 

2  5 -.52 

49-17 

50-83 

26-34 

Ireland 

48-85 

51-15 

24-04 

49-17 

.50-83 

26-04 

Great  Britain  and  Ireland     .     . 

49-20 

50-80 

23-91 

49-17 

50-83 

25-36 

Guernsey 

45-86 

54-14 

23-87 

45-38 

54-62 

25-02 

Jersey 

46-49 

53-51 

23-91 

45-43 

54 -.57 

24-16 

jNIan 

47-71 

52-29 

23-48 

47-96 

.52-04 

24-35 

Islands  in  British  Seas     .... 

46-81 

53-19 

23-73 

46-40 

.53-60 

24-43 

United  Kingdom    ...... 

49-18 

50-82 

23-91 

48-79 

51-21 

25-35 

It  will  be  seen,  on  comparing  the  proportions  of  1841  with  those  found 
to  exist  in  1831,  that  the  relative  number  of  adult  males  is  greater  now 
than  at  the  former  period  in  Great  Britain  and  in  Ireland.  The  smaller 
proportion  of  males  in  Guernsey  and  Jersey  is  probably  caused  by  the 
fact,  that  in  June,  1841,  a  considerable  part  of  the  male  population 
was  absent  on  distant  voyages,  it  being  much  the  practice  in  those 
islands  for  men  to  leave  them  early  in  the  spring  of  each  year,  and 
to  return  at  the  close  of  the  summer  in  time  to  undertake  the  more 
laborious  part  of  their  occupations  as  farmers  and  cultivators. 

The  result  of  the  foregoing  tables  shows  that  the  population  of  Great 
Britain  and  Ireland,  which  in  1821  amounted  to  21,193,458,  was,  at 
the  enumeration  in  1831,  24,306,719,  showing  an  actual  increase  in 
the  numbers  of  3,113,261  souls  in  ten  years;  the  per  centage  rate  of 
increase  during  that  interval  being  14"68,  or  very  nearly  one  and  a-half 
per  cent,  per  annum  ;  and  that,  at  the  last  enumeration  in  1841,  the 
numbers  were  26,916,991,  being  an  increase  since  1831  of  2,610,272, 
or  10" 74  per  cent.,  which  is  very  little  beyond  one  per  cent,  per 
annum.  Comparing  1841  with  1821,  it  appears  that  the  increase  in 
the  twenty  years  was — 

In  England 33-20  per  cent,  or  1-66  per  cent,  per  annum. 

Wales 27-06        „  1-35        „  „ 

Scotland 25-16        „  1-25        „  „ 

Ireland 20-50        „  1-02        „  „ 

The  United  Kingdom.  27-06        „  1-35        „  „ 

To  appreciate  fully  the  condition  and  progress  of  the  country,  as 
thus  indicated,  it  is  necessary  to  carry  back  the  inquiry  to  the  result  of 
the  computations  made,  as  already  mentioned,  from  the  registers  of 
baptisms  and  burials  during  the  eighteenth  century.  For  this  purpose, 
the  following  table  is  given  by  Mr.  Hickman,  on  the  authority  of 
Mr.  Finlaison,  the  Actuary  to  the  National  Debt  Office,  who  has  been 
engaged  for  a  series  of  years  in  a  sedulous  investigation  of  the  law  of 


CHAP.    I.] 


POPULATION. 


13 


mortality,  and  has  in  the  course  of  his  inquiries  subjected  the  materials 
thus  furnished  to  every  test  suggested  by  the  present  comparatively 
advanced  state  of  physical  and  statistical  science. 

Population  of  England  and  Wales,  includinr/  the  Army^  Navy,   and  Merchant   Service,   in  tlie 
7niddle  of  each  of  the  Years  given.* 


1700 
1710 
1720 
1730 
1740 
1750 


Increase 
per  Cent. 


5,134,516 
5,066,337 
5, 345,. 351 
5,687,993 
5,829,705 
6,039,684 


5-50 
6-41 

2-49 
3-60 


Years. 


1760 
1770 
1780 
1790 
1800 


Number. 


Increase 
per  Cent. 


6,479,730 

7,227,586 
7,814,827 
8,540,7.38 
9,187,176 


7-28 
11 -.54 
8-12 
9-29 
7 '56 


It  will  be  seen,  from  this  statement,  how  slowly,  when  compared  with 
later  periods,  the  population  increased  during  the  last  century.  The 
computation  made  for  the  middle  of  1710  even  exhibits  a  decrease 
during  the  ten  preceding  years.  The  country  was  indeed  at  war 
during  the  greater  part  of  that  period,  but  hostilities  were  not  then 
conducted  upon  so  extensive  a  scale  as  they  have  since  been  without 
causing  any  important  check  to  be  given  to  the  natural  increase  of  the 
population.  Neither  was  there  in  the  period  referred  to  any  con- 
siderable rise  or  fluctuation  in  the  prices  of  provisions,  and  in  each  of 
the  years  the  exports  of  wheat  were  considerably  in  excess  of  the 
imports.  The  increase  of  population  in  the  first  half  of  the  last  century 
appears  to  have  been  905,368,  or  17|-  per  cent.,  while  in  the  second 
half  it  am.ounted  to  3,147,492,  or  52tV  per  cent. 

For  the  purpose  of  comparison  with  the  corresponding  number  of 
years  in  the  present  century,  it  may  be  stated  that  the  increase  during 
thirty  years,  from  1770  to  1800,  is  computed  to  have  amounted  to 
1,959,590,  or  27tV  per  cent. ;  while  the  actual  increase  in  England 
and  Wales,  in  the  same  space  of  time,  between  1801  and  1831,  as 
found  by  enumeration,  reached  to  5,024,207  souls,  or  56|-  per  cent. 

The  following  statement  shows  the  total  number  of  persons,  dis- 
tinguishing the  place  of  their  birth,  and  males  from  females,  who  were 
living  in  England,  Wales,  Scotland,  Ireland,  and  the  British  islands  of 
Guernsey,  &c.,  at  the  enumeration  of  1841. 

*  Further  researches  into  this  subject  were  subsequently  made  by  Mr.  Rickman,  the 
result  of  which  is  given  in  the  Preface  to  the  Census  Returns  of  1841,  pages  36,  37.  It  will 
be  seen  that  the  numbers  for  1700  and  1750  are  considerably  greater  than  those  given  in 
the  former  estimate  : — 

Population  of  Englaml 
and  Wales,  deduced  from 
Years.  Baptisms  and  Burials.  Increase  per  Cent. 

1570  4,160,-321 

1600  4,811,718  15-66 

1630  5,600,317  16-38 

1670  5,773,646  3-09 

1700  6,045,008  4-70 

1750  6,517,035  7-81 


14 


TROGRESS  OF  THE  NATION. 
Population  in  1811. 


[sec.   1. 


liesittinp  in  England. 

English  born. —  Kcsidinjr  in  tlic  Coun- ■) 

tics  of  their  birth        3 

„  Residing  out   of  their  ) 

native  Counties    .      3 

Scottish  born 

Irish  born 

British  Colonial 

Foreigners,  and  British  subjects  born  \ 

in  foreign  lands 3 

Place  of  Birth  not  specified    .     .     .     • 


Hesiding  in   JJ'ales. 

Born  in  Wales  or  England. — Residing  1 

in  the  Counties  where  bom  3 

„       Residing  out  of  native  Counties 

Bom  in  Scotland 

Born  in  Ireland 

Born  in  British  Colonics    .    _. 
Foreigners,  and  British  subjects  born  \ 

in  foreign  lands 3 

Place  of  Birth  not  specified    .... 


Residing  in  Scotland . 

Bom  in  Scotland.— In  the  same  County 
,,  In  other  Counties    . 

Born  in  England 

Born  in  Ireland  ........ 

Born  in  British  Colonies 

Foreigners,  and  British  subjects  born  \ 

in  foreign  lands i 

Place  of  Birth  not  specified    .... 


Residirig  in  It:lands  in  the  British  Seas. 

Born  in  the  British  Isles. — In  the  same  7 

Island       3 

„  In  other  Islands   . 

Bom  in  England 

Bom  in  Scotland 

Bom  in  Ireland 

Born  in  the  British  Colonies  .... 
Foreigners,  and  British  subjects  bom  7 

in  foreign  lands 3 

Kot  specified  vvliere  bom 


Residing  in  Ireland. 

Irish  born. — Residing  in  Counties  where  | 

born 3 

„       Residing  out  of  Native  Counties 

Bom  in  England 

Bom  in  Scotland 

Foreigners,  and   British  subjects  bornl 
in  foreign  lands 3 


Males. 


Femiiles. 


5,900,960 

1,123,172 

59,907 

148,151 

480 

24,323 

G6,394 


7,323,387 


6,190,434 

1,247,384 

42,158 

135,977 

596 

14,305 

40,897 


7,671,751 


375,945 

64,968 

797 

3,080 

5 

400 

2,512 


398,448 

61,360 

376 

2,196 

7 

216 
1,293 


Total. 


12,091,394 

2,370,556 

102,065 

284,128 

1,076 

38,628 

107,291 


14,995,138 


Propor- 
tion 
per  Ont. 


774,393 

126,328 

1,173 

5,276 

12 

616 

3,805 


447,707 


463,896  i    911,603 


931,616 

216,184 

18,562 

66,502 

107 

1,561 

7,330 


1,241,862 


44,246 

133 

8,710 

591 

1,664 

20 

1,548 

644 


57,556 


3,800,987 

200,572 

10,820 

4,998 

2,199 


1,056,408 

235,061 

19,234 

59,819 

165 

1,215 

6,420 


1,988,024 

451,245 

37,796 

126,321 

272 

2,776 
13,750 


1,378,322   2,620,184 


52,537 

171 

9,296 

508 

1,867 

22 

1,212 

871 


96,783 

304 

18,006 

1,099 

3,. 531 

42 

2,760 

1,515 


66,484 


124,040. 


3,934,164 

204,793 

10,732 

3,587 

2,'272 


4,019,576   4,155,548 


7,735,151 

405,365 

21,552 

8,585 

4,471 


8,175,124 


80-7 

15-9 

0-6 
1-9 


0-02 
0-07 


100- 


84-9 

13-9 
0-1 
0-6 


0-1 
0-4 


100- 


75-9 
17-2 
1-45 
4-8 

0-1 
0-55 


100- 


78-03 

0-24 
14-5 
0-9 
2-9 
0-03 

2*2 

1-2 


100- 


94-62 

4-96 
0-26 
0-11 

0-05 


100- 


CHAP,    l.J 


rOPULATION. 

Population  in  1841 — continued. 


15 


Persons  ascertained  to  have  been 
Travelling  in  Great  Britain  during 
the  night  of  6th  June,  1841  .      .      . 

Army,  Navy,  &c.,  Great  Britain   . 

„  Ireland  .... 

Total  of  United  Kingdom  .... 


Males. 

Fpttiales. 

I    4,130 

187,484 

886 
969 

Total. 


5,016 

188,453 
21,473 


27,041,031 


The  ages  of  persons  living  in  any  community  form  a  very  important 
element  towards  the  profitable  examination  of  all  tables  of  population. 
It  must  be  regretted  that  the  late  Mr.  Rickman,  to  whom  the  country 
is  under  much  obligation  for  the  labour  bestowed  by  him  in  superin- 
tending the  enumerations  of  1821  and  1831,  did  not  attach  its  due 
amount  of  importance  to  this  particular  branch  of  the  inquiry ;  and  that, 
having  obtained  the  ages  of  persons  living  in  1821,  he  was  contented, 
at  the  next  enumeration,  with  ascertaining  the  number  of  males  twenty 
years  of  age  and  upwards,  assuming  that  the  proportionate  ages  in  any 
country  must  be  considered  invariable ;  and  that,  when  once  ascer- 
tained, as  they  had  been  in  1821,  it  must  be  a  needless  labour  to 
collect  them  in  future.  How  ill  founded  in  fact  this  assumption  was, 
has  been  proved  by  the  returns  of  1841 ;  and,  indeed,  it  is  surprising 
how  a  mind  so  acute  as  was  that  of  Mr.  Rickman  could  have  formed  the 
belief  that,  amid  constantly  varying  circumstances  of  health  and  disease, 
abundance  and  scarcity,  war  and  peace,  to  say  nothing  of  emigration, 
and  other  minor  disturbing  causes,  this  most  significant  indication  of 
the  condition  of  the  people  should  alone  remain  unchanged.  At  the 
enumeration  of  1821,  which,  according  to  Mr.  Rickman,  should  exliibit 
the  proportions  at  all  times  of  the  ages  of  the  population,  it  appeared 
that  the  number  of  males  twenty  years  of  age  and  upwards,  living  in 
England,  was  2424  in  each  10,000  of  the  population.  This  proportion 
wiis  increased,  in  1831,  to  2444  in  10,000  ;  and,  in  1841  to  25^7  in 
that  number.  Whether  the  maximum  proportion  has  yet  been  reached 
it  is  not  possible  to  say,  neither  is  it  possible  to  determine  what  is  the 
proportion  which,  under  the  ordinary  conditions  of  society,  w^ould  be 
maintained.  A  state  of  war,  which  selects  its  victims  for  the  most  part 
from  among  the  adult  male  population,  would  inevitably  change  the 
proportions  ;  and  it  is  no  doubt  one  result  of  the  peace  so  long  main- 
tained in  Europe,  that  the  number  of  adult  males  now  bears  so  much 
larger  a  proportion  to  the  aggregate  population,  than  it  bore  in  1821,  a 
few  years  after  the  termination  of  one  of  the  most  bloody  wars  that  ever 
stained  the  annals  of  history. 

The  following  table  exhibits  the  centesimal  proportions  of  persons 


16 


TKOGRESS  OF  THE  NATION. 


[sec.  1. 


living  at  various  ages  in  the  different  divisions  of  the  United  Kingdom, 
in  1821  and  184]   respectively:  — 


Kng 

anil. 

Wa 

les. 

Scot 

and, 

Ireland. 

1821 

1841 

1831 

1841 

18-^1 

1841 

IS'Zl 

1841 

Under  5  Years    . 

14-92 

13-23 

14-47 

13-37 

13-89 

13-16 

15-32 

15-25 

.5  to  10      „ 

13-04 

11-95 

13-42 

12-26 

12-62 

12-03 

13-55 

13-21 

10  „  \a      „ 

11-12 

10-87 

n-.5o 

11-19 

11-47 

ll-3,t 

12-19 

11-95 

l.'b  „  20      „ 

9-92 

9-96 

10-06 

10-11 

10-40 

10-33 

12-20 

11-61 

20  „  30      „ 

15-78 

17-87 

14-98 

16-69 

16-37 

17-56 

17-60 

17-61 

30  „  40      „ 

11-84 

12-95 

11-40 

12-06 

11-53 

12 -.58 

11-49 

11 -.57 

40  „  50      „ 

9-30 

9-63 

8-92 

8-99 

9-19 

<)-35 

7-72 

8-42 

50  „  GO      „ 

G-59 

G-42 

6-59 

6-82 

6-82 

G-27 

6-01 

G-06 

60  „  70      „ 

4-53 

4-36 

5-06 

4-95 

4-81 

4-40 

2-73 

2-76 

70  „  80      „ 

2-25 

2-13 

2-G2 

2-53 

2-21 

2-18 

0-96 

1-15 

80  „  90      „ 

0-GO 

0-58 

0-89 

0-93 

0-62 

0-69 

0-20 

0-28 

90  and  upwards  . 

0-O.j 

0-05 

0-09 

0-10 

0-07 

0-06 

0-03 

0-05 
*0-08 

It  nmst,  of  course,  be  of  the  first  importance,  as  respects  the  progress 
of  any  people,  that  the  productive  part  of  its  population  should  be  large 
in  proportion  to  the  number  of  children  on  the  one  hand,  and  of  aged 
persons  on  the  other,  who  must,  in  some  degree,  be  considered  as  depen- 
dent upon  those  in  the  active  period  of  life.  If  we  assume  that  this 
active  period  is  to  be  found  between  the  ages  of  fifteen  and  fifty,  the 
comparative  condition  in  this  respect  of  the  United  Kingdom,  in  1821 
and  1841,  will  have  been  as  follows: — 


Under  15 .  .  . 
Between  15  and  50 
Above  .50 .     .     . 


1831 


39-08 
46-90 
14-02 


36-05 
50-41 
13-54 


100-00  I  100-00 


1821 


39-39 
45-36 
15-25 


100-00 


1841 


36-82 
47-85 
15-33 


100-00 


Scotland. 


1831 


37-98 
47-49 
14-53 


1841 


36-58 
49-82 
13-60 


100-00      100-00 


Ireland. 


1831  1841 


41-06 

49-01 

9-93 


100-00 


40-41 
49-21 
10-38 


100-00 


It  thus  appears  that,  in  each  division  of  the  kingdom,  there  was  a 
larger  proportion  of  the  population  between  the  ages  of  fifteen  and  fifty 
in  1841  than  in  1821.  In  each  10,000  persons  living  there  were^ between 
those  ages- 


In  1821. 

In  1841. 

Increase. 

In  England    . 

4,690 

5,041 

351 

Wales  .     . 

4,536 

4,785 

249 

Scotland    . 

4,749 

4,982 

233 

Ireland 

4,901 

4,921 

20 

The  statement  exhibits  an  improvement  in  each  division  of  the  king- 
dom, but  to  a  very  much  smaller  extent  in  Ireland  than  in  Great 
Britain.  Taking  10,000  of  the  population  in  England  and  Ireland 
respectively,  it  appears  that  in  1841  there  were  in^that  number — 


Unascertained. 


CHAT.    I.] 


rorULATION. 


17 


Children  iiiulcr  1")  years   . 
Adults  between  15  and  50 
Klderly  iieoidc  between  50  and  GO 
Above  CO  years  old      .... 


Enj,'Uinil. 

3,005 

5,041 

642 

712 

10,tKM3 


Ireland. 

4,041 

4,921 

606 

432 

10,0(J<) 


The  establishing  of  a  department  for  the  systematic  registration  of 
births,  marriages,  and  deaths,  in  Enghind  and  Wales,  has  been  of  great 
nse  in  the  examination  of  questions  depending  upon  various  contin- 
gencies connected  with  human  life.  It  is  greatly  to  be  regretted  that  the 
system  was  not  at  once  made  to  embrace  Scotland  and  Ireland  ;  and  it 
affords  matter  of  much  surprise,  that  a  plan,  acknowledged  by  all  to 
have  been  highly  beneficial  where  applied,  has  not  hitherto  been 
extended  to  those  parts  of  the  kingdom. 

The  yearly  statements  of  the  Registrar-General,  beginning  at  Mid- 
summer, 1837,  were  made  to  terminate  on  the  oOth  June  :  but  in  the 
tables  for  the  year  1841,  it  was  judged  advisable  to  depart  from  this 
arrangement,  and  to  give  the  numbci's  for  the  entire  current  year.  The 
following  table  affords  means  for  comparing  the  result  of  the  proportion 
of  deaths  at  different  ages  registered  under  the  existing  law,  with  the 
proportion  recorded  in  the  parish  Registers  during  eighteen  y ''.rs,  as 
given  by  Mr.  Rickman  :  — 

Proportion  of  Deat/m  in  10,000  at  different  Ages. 


1838 

1839 

1840 

1841 

1843 

1846 

Five  Years, 
1838-1843 

Eighteen 

Years, 

1813-1830 

Vnder  5  years 

3,911 

3,959 

4,056 

3,892 

3,982 

4,119 

3,967 

3,451 

n  to  10        „ 

460 

476 

528 

520 

493 

415 

505 

424 

10  „   15        „ 

259 

272 

271 

265 

259 

246 

268 

265 

15  „  20        „ 

342 

354 

353 

351 

339 

329 

347 

343 

20  „  30        „ 

787 

796 

765 

780 

753 

762 

772 

781 

30  „  40        „ 

685 

677 

658 

658 

649 

641 

660 

672 

40  „  50        „ 

644 

629 

597 

605 

596 

604 

611 

60O 

50  „  60        „ 

640 

630 

596 

622 

620 

615 

619 

700 

60  „  70        „ 

820 

806 

768 

812 

814 

796 

802 

917 

70  „  80       „ 

858 

837 

829 

877 

881 

878 

855 

1,049 

80  „  90        „ 

515 

487 

496 

531 

526 

509 

511 

642 

90  „  100       „      1 
100  &  upwards  J 

79 

77 

83 

87 

88 

86 

83 

96 

Ages  unknown  . 

•• 

•• 

•• 

.. 

•• 

•• 

lo.aio 

10,000 

10,000 

10,000 

10,000 

10,000 

10.000 

10,000 

The  mode  at  present  employed  for  ascertaining  the  progress  of  the 
population  in  France  is  the  same  as  that  by  which  the  population  of 
England  and  Wales  has  been  calculated  for  the  eighteenth  century  ; 
and  the  law  of  that  country  respecting  the  registrations  of  births  and 
burials  is  so  strictly  enforced  that  there  is  good  reason  for  relying  upon 
the  general  accuracy  of  the  computations  derived  from  those  documents. 
It  would  not  be  satisfactory  to  draw  any  comparison  between  the  popu- 


18  PROGRESS  OF  THE  NATION.  [sec.  i. 

lation  returns  of  France  and  those  of  our  own  country  during  the  last 
thirty  years,  owing  to  the  great  changes  made  during  a  part  of  that 
time  in  the  extent  of  the  French  territory  ;  but  we  may  obtain  satis- 
factory means  of  comparison  by  carrying  back  the  inquiry  ten  years 
further,  to  a  time  before  additions  were  made  to  the  territory  of  the 
ancient  monarchy. 

In  1791,  a  committee  of  the  Constituent  Assembly,  appointed  for  the 
purpose  of  inquiring  concerning  the  population  of  the  kingdom,  reported 

that  it  amounted  to 26,363,000 

In  1817,  when  France  had  again  been  reduced  by  the 
treaty  of  Paris  to  its  ancient  limits,  the  population  returns 

gave  a  total  of 29,217,465 

In  1825,  the  numbers  were 30,451,187 

In  1831,  France  contained  a  population  of  .         .         .     32,560,934 
And  in    1841,  when   the   last   census  was  taken,  the 
numbers  were        ......  .         .     34,230,178 

The  increase,  according  to  these  statements,  has  amounted — 

Souls.  Per  Cent. 

In  50  years,  between  1791  and  1841,  to  7,867,178,  or  29|- 
40      „ 
26     „ 


1791 

„  1831 

„  6,197,934,  „  23* 

1791 

„  1817 

„  2,854,465,  „  10,^ 

1817 

„  1825 

„  1,233,722,  „  4^ 

1825 

„  1831 

„  2,109,747,  „  7 

6      „  » 

It  will  be  seen  that  these  rates  of  increase  are  widely  different  from 
those  which  have  marked  the  progress  of  population  in  this  kingdom. 
In  the  forty  years  previous  to  1841,  the  increase  of  numbers  in  England 
and  Wales  was  equal  to  79^^  per  cent.,  showing  an  advantage  in  favour 
of  England  in  the  proportion  of  more  than  three  to  one.  If  the  com- 
parison be  made  with  reference  to  the  period  between  1817  and  1841, 
it  will  be  found  that,  while  the  increase  in  the  French  population  was 
17*15  per  cent,  in  24  years,  or  after  the  rate  of  about  three-quarters 
per  cent-  ('715)  annually,  the  increase  in  the  United  Kingdom  was 
double  that  rate,  or  about  1^  per  cent.  (1'43)  annually.  According  to 
these  rates  of  increase,  the  population  of  the  United  Kingdom  would 
double  itself  in  about  52  years  ;  while,  at  the  rate  experienced  in  France, 
a  similar  effect  would  not  be  produced  in  less  than  one  hundred  years. 

In  both  countries  the  increase  here  stated  has  been  the  result,  not  of 
an  increased  proportion  of  births,  for  in  fact  the  births,  if  calculated 
with  relation  to  the  numbers  of  the  people,  have  diminished,  but  to  a 
lessened  proportion  of  deaths.  In  France,  the  births,  which  in  1817, 
were  in  tlu-  proportion  of  1  in  31,  wen;  in  1834,  in  the  proportion  of 
1  in  33-1;  while  the  deaths,  which,  in  1817,  were  1  in  39i,  were  dimi- 
nished in  1834  to  1  in  41.  In  England  the  proportions  of  births  and 
deaths,  at  different  periods  since  the  beginning  of  the  century,  and  pre- 


CllAl".    I.] 


POPULATION. 


19 


ceding  the  adoption  of  a  system  of  registration,  were  calculated  to  bo 
as  follows  : — 


For  ten  years  preceding  1811 

»  )) 

1821 

»  » 

1831 


Births,  one  in  31J 
Deaths,  „  533 
Births,  „  31^ 
Deaths,  „  60J 
Births,  „  34^ 
Deaths,     „       58i 


The  following  table,  taken  from  the  Reports  of  the  Registrar-General, 
gives  the  number  of  deaths  and  the  proportions  occurring  at  different 
ages  during  each  of  the  three  years  ending  30  June,  1838,  1839,  and 
1840,  and  during  the  entire  years  of  1841  and  1842. 

Number  of  Deaths  in  England  and  Wales,  and  the  Centesimal  Proportions  of  the  same  that 
occxirred  at  different  Ages. 


YEAR  ENDING  30th  JUNE, 

Ap;es  at  which  the  Deaths 

1838 

1839 

1840 

occurred. 

NumVier.   Per  Cent. 

Number.    Per  Cent. 

Number. 

Per  Cent. 

Under  5  years 

131,034 

39-11 

130,695     39-59 

141,747 

40 -.56 

5  years  and  under  10  years 

15,440 

4-60 

15,716        4-76 

18,459 

5-28 

10              „                15      „ 

8,684 

2 -.59 

8,994        2-72 

9,469 

2-71 

15              „                20      „ 

11,448 

3-42 

11,697  I     3-54 

12,345 

3-53 

20              „                30      „ 

26,363 

7-87 

26,289 

7-96 

26,722 

7-65 

30              „                40      „ 

22,954 

6-85 

22,349 

6-77 

22,992 

6  58 

40              „                50      „ 

21,595 

6-44 

20,752 

6-29 

20,889 

5-97 

50              „                60      „ 

21,437 

6-40 

20,797 

6-30 

20,854 

5-96 

60              „                70      „ 

27,482 

8-20 

26,613 

8-06 

26,824 

7-68 

70              „                80      „ 

28,748 

8-58 

27,639  ;     8-37 

28,982 

8-29 

80              „                90      „ 

17,263 

5-15 

16,102  i     4-87 

17,2.^)9 

4-96 

90              „              100      „ 
100  and  unwards    .... 

2, 529 
105 

}o-79  • 

2,403  ,1  0.77  1 
103  1  /  "  "  1 
8.58  1 

2,787 
121 

I  0-83 

Ages  unk 

lown  ..... 

874 

651 

335,956 

100- 

331,007    100- 

350,101 

100- 

Ages  at  which  the 

Deatl 

IS 

YEAR  ENDING  31st  DECEMBER, 

1841 

1842 

occurred. 

Number. 

Per  Cent. 

Number. 

Per  Cent. 

Under  5  years  .     . 

133,583 

38-92 

139,035 

39-82 

5  years  and  under 

10  ye 

ars 

17,868 

5-20 

17,208 

4-93 

10              „ 

15 

jj 

9,116 

2-65 

9,040 

2-59 

15               „ 

20 

12,056 

3-51 

11,832 

3-39 

20 

30 

26,811 

7-80 

26,279 

7-53 

30 

40 

22,609 

6-58 

22,644 

6-49 

40 

50 

20, 754 

6-05 

20,791 

5-96 

50 

60 

21,363 

6-22 

21,6.59 

6-20 

60 

70 

27.884 

8-12 

28,413 

8-14 

70               „ 

80 

30,094 

8-77 

30,769 

8-81 

80               „ 

90 

18,231 

5-31 

18,379 

5-26 

90               „               1 

00 

2,847 

0-87 

2,965 

0-88 

100  and  upwards    . 

no 

109 

Ages  unknown  . 

521 

396 

343,847 

100- 

349,519 

100- 

c  2 


20  PROGRESS  OF  THE  NATION.  [sec.  i. 

A  different  classification  as  respects  ages  has  been  adopted  by  the 
Registrar-General  in  his  more  recent  calculations.  The  following  table 
of  the  number  and  centesimal  proportions  of  deaths  at  different  ages  that 
occurred  in  England  in  the  seven  years  from  1838  to  1844,  is  deduced 
from  the  Appendix  to  the  Ninth  Annual  Report  of  that  gentleman. 


A 

gesat 

which  the  Deaths 

occurred. 

Numlier. 

Per  Cent 

Under  T) 

years 

. 

. 

. 

964,807 

39-66 

,') 

years 

and  under  10  years 

121,562 

4-99 

10 

?) 

15 

63,690 

2-62 

15 

ij 

25 

179,985 

7-40 

25 

j> 

35 

169,670 

6-97 

35 

5? 

45 

154,524 

6-35 

45 

» 

55 

147,727 

6-07 

55 

5> 

65 

171,814 

7-06 

65 

J> 

75 

210,565 

8-66 

75 

)) 

85 

182,941 

7-52 

85 

5) 

95 

60,664 

2-50 

95 

years 

and  upw 

ards 

2 

4,839 
,432,788 

0-20 
100-00 

Ages  unknown 

2 

3,860 

,436,648 

One  in 

One  in 

44-57 

48-77 

46-63 

43-02 

46-56 

44-76 

43-17 

46-33 

44-73 

44-61 

47-95 

46-26 

44-57 

47-63 

46-08 

This  table  has  a  greater  value  for  purposes  connected  with  the 
business  of  life  assurance  and  annuities,  fi-om  the  fact  that  the  enume- 
ration of  1841  occurred  in  the  middle  of  the  period  of  seven  years  which 
it  embraces. 

The  numbers  dying  in  proportion  to  the  population  during  those 
years,  as  ascertained  fi-om  actual  registration,  were — ■ 

Males.  Females.  Males  &  Females. 

One  in 

(1839 
1840 
1841 

^         fl841 
Year  ending  31st  Dec.  /  ^g^^ 

The  discrepancy  between  these  proportions,  and  those  assumed  at 
previous  periods,  will  serve  to  show  the  danger  of  relying  upon  esti- 
mates, however  carefully  made,  but  which  are  without  any  certain 
basis. 

The  estimated  proportions  of  deaths  in  the  course  of  the  preceding 
century  were — 

1700,  one  in  39i 

1710,  „  36,'g 

1720,  „  351 

1730,  „  31^ 

1740,  „  35^ 

1750,  „  40? 

1760,  „  41i 

Showing  a  continually  diminishing  mortality.  This  effect,  so  strongly- 
indicative  of  amendment  in  the  condition  of  the  people,  must  be  attri- 
buted to  the  coincidence  of  various   causes.     Among   these  may  be 


1770, 

one  in  41i 

1780, 

„      411 

1785, 

»       41^ 

1790, 

„       451 

179.5, 

»       471 

1800, 

,,       47^ 

CHAP.  I.]  POPULATION.  21 

mentioned,  the  less-crowded  state  of  our  dwellings  ;  the  command  of 
hotter  kinds  of  food  ;  the  superiority  and  cheaj^)ness  of  clothing ;  and 
prohahly,  also,  more  temperate  hahits  and  greater  personal  cleanliness. 
One  influential  cause  of  the  diminished  rate  of  mortality  will  be  found 
in  the  introduction  of  vaccination,  which  has  had  so  powerful  an  effect 
in  dimiuislung  the  rate  of  mortality  among  children  ;  besides  these,  the 
extensive  surfiice  drainage  which  has  been  going  forward  in  those  parts 
of  the  country  which,  owing  to  the  })resence  of  stagnant  waters,  were 
once  productive  of  intermittent  fevers,  has  added  to  the  general  healthi- 
ness of  the  country. 

The  superiority  of  this  country,  in  respect  of  the  comparative  rates 
of  mortality,  may  be  seen  in  the  following  statement  of  the  annual  pro- 
portions of  deaths  to  the  whole  population  in  the  different  countries 
named,  which  was  communicated  to  Mr.  Rickman  by  Sir  Francis 
D'lvernois,  a  gentleman  who  has  devoted  his  attention  for  many  years 
to  the  elucidation  of  various  phenomena  relating  to  the  law  of  mor- 
tality : — 

England  and  Wales,  one  death  in        59* 

Sweden  and  Denmark,  „  43 

Holland  and  Belgium,  „  43 

France „  40 

United  States  of  America,  „  37 

Prussia „  36 

Wurtemburg       .     .     .  „  33 

In  the  following  statement,  extracted  from  a  table  inserted  by  Mr. 
Senior  in  his  excellent  preface  to  the  "  Foreign  Connnunications,"  sent 
to  the  Poor  Law  Commissioners,  are  given,  on  competent  authority, 
generally  official,  various  particulars  relative  to  the  population  of  coun- 
tries in  most  parts  of  the  world. — See  p.  22. 

The  proportionate  number  of  children  born  in  any  country  cannot  be' 
taken  as  a  test  of  the  condition  of  the  people.  It  is  well  known  that  in 
climates  where  the  waste  of  human  life  is  excessive  from  the  combined 
causes  of  disease  and  poverty  affecting  the  mass  of  the  inhabitants,  the 
number  of  births  is  proportionately  greater  than  is  experienced  in  com- 
munities more  favourably  circumstanced.  Frequently,  and  indeed 
almost  always  in  old  settled  countries,  the  proportionate  number  of 
births  decreases  with  the  advance  of  civilization,  and  the  more  general 
difiusion  of  the  conveniences  and  luxuries  of  life.  In  fact,  the  popula- 
tion does  not  so  much  increase  because  more  are  born,  as  because 
fewer  die. 

The  bills  of  mortality  for  various  parishes  of  the  cities  of  London  and 
Westminster,  and  some  out-parishes  in  Middlesex  and  Surrey,  have 
been  ke])t  with  a  great  degree  of  accuracy  for  a  long  series  of  years, 
and  afford  the  means  for  testing  this  view  of  the  subject  by  giving  in 

*  Now  seen  to  be  incorrect. 


22 


PROGRESS  OF  THE  NATION. 


[sec.  I. 


certain  classes  the  ages  at  which  persons  have  died  in  every  year.  An 
examination  of  tliese  annual  bills  will  show  not  only  that  the  total 
number  of  deaths  has  decreased  in  a  most  remarkable  degree,  relatively 
to  the  amount  of  population,  but  also  that  the  proportion  of  persons 
under  twenty  years  of  age  in  the  whole  number  buried  has  been  pro- 
gressively (liminisliing. 


PLACES. 


Proportion  of 

Annual  Deaths 

to  the  wliole 

Population. 


AMERICA. 

Massachusetts  .     .     .      1  in  40 

Boston 1  in  41  7j 

New  York  (City)  .     .      1  in  30 
Carthagena  deColumbia   6  to  8  in  100 

Hayti Births  and 

Maranham  .     .     .     .  '  1  in  25 

EUROPE.  j 

Norway 1  in  54 

Sweden 1  in  41^ 

Russia 1  in  25^ 

Denmark     .      ,     .     .      1  in  40 
Mecklenburgh  ...      1  in  4C^ 

Saxony 1  in  34.i 

Wurtemburg     .     .     .      1  in  3l| 
North  Holland.     .     .      1  in  SO,*!, 

Belgium i   1  in  43 

France i  1  in  39^ 

Azores    .      .     .     .     .  l  1  in  48 

Genoa :  1  in  28| 


Proportion  of 

Annual  Births 

to  the  whole 

Population. 


8  to  10  in  100 
Deaths  equal. 
1  in  20 


1 

n28 

1 

n29 

1 

n23^ 
n34 

n  27 

n244 

in  27,15 
n  30^ 
n  30 

m  32^ 
m  19 

1  in20 


Proportion  of 

Annual  Marriages 

to  the  whole 

Population. 


SmaU. 


n  119 
n  117i 
n  132 
n  123 
n  124 
n  131 
nl47 
nl22fe 
n  144 
n  \3\{i, 


1  in  166 


Average 

Number  of 

Children  to  a 

Marriage. 


5 

4  to  5 
3  to  4 
5 


38  to  4J 
3  to  4 

4 
3'to4 


PLACES. 


AMERICA. 

Massachusetts  .     .     . 

Boston 

New  York  (Citj-)   .     . 
Carthagena  deColumbia 
Hayti 

Maranham  .... 

EUROPE. 


Norway  .     .     . 

Sweden  .     . 
Russia     . 
Denmark     . 
Mecklenburgh  . 
Saxony    .     .     . 

Wurtemburg     . 

North  Holland. 
Belgium. 
France    . 
Azores    .     . 
Genoa     .     .     . 


Proportion  of 

Legitimate  to 

Illegitimate 

Births. 


5  to  6 

1   to   1000 
(Proportion     of 
J     Illegitimates 
(    great. 

14  to  1 
16  to  1 

9§to  1 
9  to  1 
7  to  1 

m's  to  1 

15  to  1 
21  to  1 
13  to  1 

7  to  1 


Proportion  of  Children  that  die  before  they 
attain  their 


18th  Year. 


1  in  5  nearly 
27  in  100  ] 

One-half.  | 

Large  proportion 


f  Under  5  years! 
1        1  in  3         J 

lin6H 


49  in  100 


1  in  24 


53  in  100 


lin2i 


^  die  under  16  years. 

One-half. 

Iin3^ 
Before  14th  year  one-fourth. 
Before  14th  year  one-half. 

From  1  to 


34|  in  100 

1  in  7 
1  in5 

Nearly  half 
1  in  4 


1  in  10 
1  in4§ 
1  iti4 


45  in  100 


'} 


From  7  to  14 
1  in  45 
1  in  2? 
Iin2i 


48  in  100 


CHAP.  I.]  POPULATION.  23 

In  the  ten  years  from  1751  to  1760,  the  total  number  of  burials 
within  tiie  Bills  of  Mortality  was  205,279,  of  whom  10G,2G4,  or  51!^  per 
cent.,  were  under  twenty  years  of  age. 

Under  20  Years. 
From  1761  to  1770,    234,407,  of  whom  118,903  or  50.|  per  cent. 


1771  „  1780, 

214,605 

)» 

112,1.33  „ 

52i 

1781  „  1790, 

192,690 

96,126  „ 

492 

1791  „  1800, 

196,801 

» 

98,104  „ 

49J 

1801  „  1810, 

188,842 

)> 

90,. 397  „ 

47? 

1811  „  1820, 

190,568 

)» 

85,954  „ 

45,1, 

1821  „  1830, 

209,094 

» 

96,. 336  „ 

46i 

The  Census  Commissioners  for  1841  have  given  a  statement,  from 
which  the  following  abstract  is  made,  of  the  ages  of  348,018  persons, 
viz.,  175,843  males  and  172,175  females,  who  were  buried  in  the 
metropolis  during  the  ten  years,  1831  to  1840. 


Males. 

Females. 

Males  &  Females. 

Under 

'    5 

years 

65,484 

59,603 

125,087 

5  to 

9 

8,. 576 

7,902 

16,478 

10  „ 

14 

3,110 

2,824 

5,934 

15  „ 

19 

3,861 

3,933 

7,799 

20  „ 

24 

5,862 

5,675 

11,537 

25  „ 

29 

6,432 

6,637 

13,069 

30  „ 

34 

7,124 

6,9.30 

14,054 

35  „ 

39 

8,169 

7,4.35 

15,604 

40  „ 

49 

17,4<14 

14,7.30 

32,1.34 

50  „ 

59 

16,709 

14,640 

31,. 349 

60  „ 

69 

10,. 366 

17,256 

33,622 

70  „ 

79 

11,925 

16,014 

27,939 

80  „ 

89 

4,. 363 

7,. 509 

11,877 

90  „ 

99 

424 

1,032 

1,4.56 

100  ar 

id  U 

pwards 

29 
175,843 

50 

79 

172,175 

348,018 

The  proportion  of  persons  dying  under  twenty  years  of  age  is  thus 
seen  to  be  still  diminishing,  this  proportion  during  the  ten  years  ending 
with  1840  having  been  44v5-  per  cent. 

It  is  not  possible  to  state  the  numbers  of  persons  w^ho,  at  several 
periods,  have  inhabited  that  part  of  the  metropolis  which  is  included 
within  the  Bills  of  Mortality  ;  no  precise  calculation  can  therefore  be 
given  as  to  the  proportion  of  deaths  to  population  occurring  at  different 
intervals. 

It  will  appear,  from  inspection  of  the  above  tables,  that  the  improve- 
ment in  this  respect  which  has  been  progressive  since  the  middle  of  the 
last  century,  has  become  much  more  rapid  since  the  beginning  of  the 
present.  The  difference  observable  between  the  proportionate  number 
of  deaths  under  twenty,  in  the  decade  commencing  with  1751,  and  in 
that  ending  with  1800,  two  periods  the  extremes  of  which  are  separated 
from  each  other  by  a  space  of  fifty  years,  shows  an  improvement  of  only 
1;- per  cent.;  while  the  difference  experienced  in  the  ten  years  that 
occurred  between  1831  and  1840  shows  an  improvement  of  74  per  cent, 
as  compared  with  1751-60,  and  of  51  per  cent,  as  compared  with  1791- 


24  mOGRESS  OF  THE  NATIOX.  [snc.  i. 

1800.  It  must  l.>e  borne  in  mind,  that  the  improvement  here  spoken  of 
is  calculated  upon  the  actual  number  of  deaths  among  the  population  ; 
and  that  to  form  a  just  estimate  of  the  probability  of  life  among  the 
young  at  the  present  time  as  compared  with  former  periods,  the  number 
of  deaths  occiu'ring  under  twenty  should  be  calculated  not  upon  the 
number  who  have  died,  but  upon  the  number  of  the  entire  population. 
The  estimate  given  above  merely  compares  one  improvement  with 
another,  or  rather  shows  which  of  the  classes,  the  young  or  the  old,  has 
participated  most  largely  in  the  improvement  which  has  taken  place. 
In  1780,  the  annual  mortality  of  England  and  Wales,  according  to  the 
data  then  available,  was  1  in  40 ;  in  1801,  it  was  1  in  48  ;  and  in  1830, 
it  had  decreased  to  1  in  58.  Supposing  these  proportions,  which  have 
been  established  for  the  whole  of  England  and  Wales,  to  be  ap])licable 
to  London,  we  find  the  progressive  decrease  in  the  mortality  of  persons 
under  t^'enty  was  as  follows : — 

In  1780  the  deaths  under  20  years  of  age  were  1  in  76^ 
1801        „  „  „  1  „    96i 

1830        „  „  „  1  „  l-24a 

1S33        „  ,,  „  1  ,,  137 

being  not  ranch  more  than  one-half  of  the  proportion  who  died  under 
twenty  half  a  century  ago. 

In  noticing  the  subject  of  the  mortality  of  children,  Sir  Francis 
D'lveraois  observes,*  "If  the  different  States  of  Europe  were  to  keep 
and  publish  every  year  an  exact  account  of  their  population,  carefully 
stating,  in  a  separate  column,  the  precise  ages  at  which  children  have 
died,  that  separate  column  would  exhibit  the  relative  merits  of  the 
governments,  as  indicated  by  the  comparative  happiness  of  their  sub- 
jects. A  simple  statement  of  figures  would  then  be  more  conclusive 
upon  this  point  than  any  other  arguments  that  could  be  adduced."  It 
is  to  be  remembered,  however,  first,  that  a  government  cannot,  with 
reason,  be  held  to  be  the  source  of  all  the  circumstances,  favourable  and 
unfavourable,  which  affect  the  happiness  of  a  country ;  and  secondly,  that 
the  proposed  comparison  would  at  best  only  furnish  an  indication  as  to 
the  conduct  of  the  actual  government  of  any  country,  not  as  to  the  per- 
manent excellence  of  the  constitution. 

It  cannot  be  necessary  to  multiply  evidence  in  order  to  prove  that  the 
number  of  births  has  decreased,  and  is  still  decreasing,  in  proportion  to 
the  amount  of  population  in  this  kingdom.  The  abstracts  of  parish 
register  returns,  made  with  so  much  care  and  ability  by  Mr.  Rickman, 
and  continued  by  the  Census  Commissioners  of  1841,  may  be  taken  as 
conclusive  proofs  of  the  fact. 

It  was  for  a  long  time  the  practice  with  political' calculators  to  consider 
a  great  proportion  of  births  among  the  people  as  being  one  of  the  surest 

*  Tableau  des  Pertes,  &c.,  ch.  ii.,  p.  16. 


CHAP.  I.] 


POPULATION. 


25 


si<ms  of  a  country  being  in  a  flourishing  condition.  Under  certain  cir- 
cumstances there  can  be  no  doul)t  that  an  increase  of  numbers  thus 
brought  about  is  a  favourable  symptom.  In  thinly-peoj)h;d  but  fertile 
countries,  and  in  newly-settled  states,  this  will  generally  l)e  the  case  ;  but 
it  appears  an  error  to  consider  a  large  proportion  of  l)irths  as  necessarily 
a  symptom  of  improvement  in  well-peopled  territories  ;  and  it  might  with 
more  truth  be  asserted  that  the  contrary  condition  of  a  small  proportion 
of  births  is  indicative  of  ])rosperity  in  the  mass  of  the  people.  In  Ireland 
population  increases  almost  as  fast  as  in  England,  yet  the  people  improve 
but  little  in  their  condition.  Circumstances  which  have  increased  the 
rate  of  mortality  have  always  tended  to  increase  likewise  the  number 
of  births  ;  an  effect  which  is  produced  by  the  rise  in  the  wages  of  labour 
following  necessarily  from  a  diminution  in  the  number  of  labourers,  the 
class  which  for  the  most  part  furnishes  the  increased  proportion  of  deaths. 

On  the  other  hand,  the  increase  of  population  which  results  from  a 
diminishing  proportion  of  deaths  is  an  unerring  sign  of  advancing  pros- 
perity in  the  people. 

The  following  table  was  given  in  evidence  before  the  Committee  of  the 
House  of  Commons  which  sat  in  May  1830,  to  inquire  concerning  the 
returns  under  the  Population  Act : — 


Years. 

Population 

deduced  from 

Baptisms. 

Burials 

in  the  Ye.ar 

1780. 

Rates 

of  Registered 

Burials. 

1780 

7,953,000 

198,300 

Average  Burials, 
1780—1800. 

1 

in  40-10 

1780 

7,953,000 

192,000 

1 

in  41-42 

1785 

8,016,000 

192,000 

1 

in  41*75 

1790 

8,675,000 

192,000 

1 

in  45-18 

1793 

9,055,000 

192,000 

1 

in  47-16 

1800 

Enumerated 
Population. 

9,168,000 

192,000 

1 

in  47-75 

1810 

10,488,000 

Average  of  ten 
preceding  years. 

195,000 

1 

in  .53-78 

1820 

12,190,000 

201,000 

1 

in  60-65 

' 

Registered 
Burials  in  1820. 

1820 

12,190.000 

208,300 

1 

in  58-50 

The  small  rate  of  improvement  observable  in  the  latter  end  of  the  last 
century  is  no  doubt  the  effect  in  a  great  degree  of  the  deficient  harvests 
in  1795  and  1800. 

The  Report  of  the  Census  Commissioners  for  1841  contains  an  estimate 


26" 


mOGRESS  OF  THE  NATION. 


[sec.  I. 


of  the  "  Population  of  the  several  Counties  of  England  and  Wales,  cal- 
culated on  the  supposition  that  the  registered  haptisnis,  hiu'ials,  and 
marriages,  on  an  average  of  three  years,  in  1570,  1600,  IGoO,  1670, 
1700,  and  1750,  bore  the  same  proportion  to  the  actual  population  as  in 
the  year  1801."  This  estimate  was  compiled  by  the  late  Mr.  Rickman, 
and  was  handed,  with  other  of  his  papers,  to  the  Commissioners.  It  does 
not  pretend  to  accuracy  ;  and  if  even  the  materials  for  such  a  computation 
had  been  in  existence  in  every  parish  throughout  the  kingdom,  which  is 
far  from  being  the  case,  the  correctness  of  the  results  would  have  been 
rendered  more  than  questionable  by  reason  of  the  changes  that  must 
have  occurred  during  that  lengthened  period  in  the  sanatory  condition  of 
the  country.  A  statement  of  those  results  must,  however,  be  interesting ; 
and  will  command  respect  as  the  work  of  a  mind  possessing  singular 
acuteness,  and  having  great  experience  in  such  investigations. 


Years. 


1570 
1600 
1630 
1670 
1700 
1750 


Estimate  calculated  from 


Baptisms. 


3,852,122 

4,883,059 
5,527,780 
5,256,700 
5,728,430 
6,377,574 


Burials. 


4,167,362 
4,364,637 
5,798,176 
7,199,693 
6,661,698 
6,717,858 


4,461,178 

5,187,458 
5,475,594 
4,864,546 
5,744,896 
6,455,672 


Population 

according  to  the 

average  of  the 

:^  preceding 

Columns. 


4,160,221 

4,811,718 
5,000,517 
5,773.646 
6,045,008 
6,517,035 


It  has  been  supposed  that  the  general  healthiness  and  duration  of  life 
among  the  people  must  be  diminished  by  their  being  brought  together  in 
masses,  and  in  particular  it  has  been  objected  to  the  factory  system  of 
this  country,  that  by  this  means  it  has  added  to  the  sum  of  human  misery. 
To  combat  this  opinion,  it  will  be  sufficient  at  present  to  bring  forward 
the  case  of  Manchester,  wdiere  the  increase  of  population  has  been  great 
beyond  all  precedent,  owing  to  the  growth  of  its  manufacturing  industry. 

The  population  of  the  townships  of  Manchester  and  Salford,  at  each 
of  the  decennary  enumerations,  was  found  to  be  as  follows  : — 

1801      94,876 

1811  115,874  Increase  22  per  cent. 

1821  161,635    „    39i  „ 

1831  237,832    „    47   „ 

1841  353,390    „    48i   „ 

The  increase  during  the  whole  period  of  forty  years  being  258,514,  or 
272  per  cent,  upon  the  population  of  1801.  Much  of  this  increase  has 
arisen  from  continual  immigration  to  a  town  of  such  growing  manufac- 
turing prosperity.  The  degree  in  which  the  natural  condition  of  the 
population  has  been  thereby  affected,  will  be  seen  from  the  following 
figures,  which  exhibit  the  proportions  living  at  different  ages  in  Man- 
chester and  Salford,  compared  with  the  ])roportions  in  all  England  at  the 
Census  in  1841 : — 


CHAi'.  I  ]  POPULATION.  27 

Mancliester 

and  Salford.  England. 

Under  5  years 1,328  1,323 

5  and  under  10  years     1,070  ,1,1 9:> 

10          „          15      „         1,007  1,087 

15          „          20      „         1,004  996 

20          „          30      „         2,059  1,787 

30         „          40      „         1,549  1,295 

40         „          50      „            99G  963 

50          „          60      „            545  642 

60         „          70      „            306  436 

70         „          80      „            113  213 

80         „          90      „              21  58 

90  and  upwards      .     ,            2  5 


10,000  10,(XX» 


The  mortality  of  these  townships  in  the  middle  of  the  last  century,  as 
stated  from  the  parish  registers,  was  1  in  25  ;  in  1770, 1  in  28.  In  1811, 
when  the  population  had  jilready  very  greatly  increased,  the  rate  of  mor- 
tality had  sunk  considerably,  and  in  the  ten  years  ending  with  1830  was 
not  more  than  1  in  49  ;  a  low  rate,  if  we  take  into  the  account  the  fact 
that,  in  manufacturing  towns,  children  are  brought  together  in  a  much 
greater  proportion  than  the  average  of  the  kingdom. 

The  decrease  in  the  proportion  of  deaths  among  children  in  London 
has  already  been  mentioned.  It  is  not  easy  to  determine  satisfactorily 
the  number  of  deaths  of  aged  persons,  in  consequence  of  the  prevailing 
custom  of  persons  whose  worldly  circumstances  allow  of  their  doing  so, 
to  retire  in  the  evening  of  their  days  fi'oiu  the  crowded  city  to  the  country. 
We  may  mention,  however,  that  for  several  years  the  bills  of  mortality 
have  exhibited  a  continually  and  steadily  increasing  number  of  persons 
whose  deaths  can  be  ascribed  to  no  particular  disease,  and  who  are  stated 
to  have  vanished  from  the  scene  of  life  in  consequence  of  "  old  age  and 
debility." 

The  annual  mortality  of  the  county  of  Middlesex,  the  largest  propor- 
tion of  whose  population  belongs  to  the  metropolis,  was,  according  to  the 
parish  registers,  in  1801, 1  in  35,  having  been  computed  at  the  beginning 
of  the  preceding  century  at  1  in  25  ;  whereas  in  1830  the  rate  of  mor- 
tality had  diminished  to  1  in  45,  and  in  1840  was  only  1  in  53,  a  rate 
much  more  favourable  than  that  for  the  whole  of  France,  and  indeed  of 
almost  any  other  country  in  Europe,  and  materially  less  than  the  known 
rate  of  mortality  of  every  populous  city  out  of  the  United  Kingdom,* 
The  greater  mortality  of  cities,  as  compared  with  rural  districts,  has  been 
attributed  to  "  the  constant  importations  from  the  country  of  individuals 
who  have  attained  to  maturity,  but  having  been  previously  habituated  to 
frequent  exercise  in  a  pure  atmosphere,  and  to  a  simple  regular  diet,  are 
gradually  sacrificed  to  confined  air,  sedentary  habits,  or  a  capricious  and 
over-stimulating  food."t 

*  The  deaths  recorded  in  the  Civil  Register  for  1840  in  Middlesex  were  37,818,  which, 
for  a  population  of  1,576,036,  shows  one  death  for  41 -69  inhabitants. 
t  Elements  of  Medical  Statistics,  by  Dr.  F.  Bisset  Hawkins,  p.  54. 


28 


PROGRESS  OF  THE  NATION. 


[sec. 


The  following  abstract  of  the  detailed  statement  of  the  ages  of  3,938,496 
persons  buried  in  England  and  Wales  during  the  18  years,  from  1813 
to  1830,  is  taken  fron'i  Mr.  Riekmau's  Tables  of  1831. 


J=        o 

§^§ 

M 

—  o  « 

ir:  i.-^  ^;  ~  3^  :<)  -N  i:  35  1^  C  oc  c 

S 

cj               .-.—  — civiwicoor-.  c 

5  ^o 

** 

"S 

OS-.  -*r-.  t^xact^!NS^xr^05 

Q 

oc  •-:;  T*-  r:  r,  -)■  —  1,-  —  «  ?l  >-':  •« 

m  ;r  C  CC  C:  ■"  'I  t^  «;  —  L"?  rt 

e7„^^:^^^)»^c-:Ti<^ 

C:  o  >^  X  -?  —  t~  m  O  CO  O  C5  o 

Tf  in  u-  c  —  1"  Li  t^  o  «^  ir;  o  =5 

"  tc 

0 

oor-.  ■?>xcC'-'^00-tccO«^^ 

c  5 . 

- 

C-.  t-^  -t  C^  r-  X  O  CO   O  l^  !N 

p   0-3 

c  'S  5 


«?^C^3^C^i-Hi—i-(i 


(M  «>  Tj"  ;d  -t  "I"  'o  ~  i^  t-  I-';  "I*  o 

CO  F-cr-.~r— 1-5  0  00010 


M  "M  O  L"?  C  »  :r.  X  —  X  L-^  -f  rt 
CWOW-TTj'CC'-'n'MXC:  — 

c.  t^  ^  m  —  X  —  r-.  (>)  o  O  r7  ri 
oi^ot^uD-Jccwr^  —  con 

^xtr— '-.roxir;  —  orit^co 

Cc-.ic  —  t^cox-tcoxiTi-oeo 

CO  CO  '>2  O  C-.  X  C-.  X   C".  -^  -^  O  (N 

c^'rT— ^t-Tu-Tc'r— "--"x^oTx'^rr'-' 

-t  --'  CO  X  —  in  —  X  -^  -^  L-  3>I 

C-.  eoi^— '--riXiSiricO'- 


^  —  ~l<ic0wxr-.  O 


CO  Cr  ri  d  X  ?.  i~  ^  c  :r  55  X  CO 

C  ?)  CO  -t  ■--:  ~.  --r  X  c  ?<  1^  -+  iS 

t^Tt^'^rco  -f  CO  ~  '>r->r'M  -^  -»> 

COXinyj-t^M-M-i-XO— ''^ 

un  tc  CO  ~.  -f  X  "M  r — »■  1^  c.  CO  f^ 

<r.  m  — .  o  £  I-  X  5  -^  .n  -f  -M  CO 

ci' c^ ?r  c  t -  ri"  x' oT -^^ -c' — T u-f 
cr.  t2  t^  n  ".n  ^  X  .r.  — .  CO  CO  ^ 

• u 

>>  3 

'"OtC;Ocr:35S5CiJ»rvO  .-3 

t,      i-i^o^co-t>ntoi^oocr.  g 


X  .2 


CO  1^  m  —  r^  X  I 


0--C-.  iC35CO'-<00COr^CCS^2^ 

xins^-i-t^inTftococoo-tc^ 

XSC>JC0(NXmC0O(N  —  om 

c^r  12^ -*~  >rf  tc"  L-T  aT  otT  q"  oT  oo"  eo" 
t-roi^o;.—  oor^x-rtoo(N 


co>not^co>nc;mcmir»tC'N 

X  O  C-.  ^C  CO  O  "  tc  •M  CO  —  ~  O 

'i'  t^  ■*  to  t^  m  O  cr.  O  5C  C--  (M 
r^  i^  cc  Li  -f  (M  o  X  i^  Tt  ,-1 


C0'*Om  —  OAC^Q'-OCOCO 

cor-'^«o»nintcccot^'-coo 
CO  i-ii-cr-s><co>nxo-.  o 


!C 

c^ 

CO  to  'I'  CO 

CO  o  in 

oi 

r-i  -)> 

—  1^  t^  !M  o 

X 

'■", 

m 

O 

i-co 

CT.  CO  ■*  "*  CO 

i^ 

tc 

--tcct^rjr-.co"  tCCOXCO— 1 
X  —  tc  X  —  in  -t  •M  X  t-  —.  •>!  o 

cv  —  m  —.  — .  —  X  —  in  —  tc  CO  o 

co!>Jint^cc-+t^CC'-co-c 
in  c  CO  —  -f  CO  CO  in  tc  -r  c  ■-1 
cooixt^t^tcm'tcos^-' 


con  int^co-»'C^3^mo--tco 
t~  r-  -*  in  -t  -f  r-  —  m  r;  n  m  o 

CO      I— I— iric^coinxc-.  o 


C  -*  tc  -N  m  m  tc  c  in  t-  i^  CO  CO 

(MtCCOrfCXClcr.  (NCOt^ 


X  X  r?  -c 


tc  C-.  -f  -C  M  —  -H 
■  n  ri  C  X  Tl  ;J  2J 


Orfinx— -c  —  ~  —  ~x, 
cr.  r~  c  tc  •M  n  ro  CO  -t  (N  X 

WQOxi^t--tcin-*cos>< 


e>noincccocosco 
iT.      r-. .-.  (M  ec  -*  m  tc  t^  X  — .  c 


CHAP,  i]  rOPULATION.  29 

The  foregoing  table  of  deaths,  from  1813  to  1830,  (page  28,)  is  known 
to  be  incomplete,  through  the  omission  of  infants  who  died  before  baptism, 
and  who  were  not  registered,  and  because  no  account  was  taken  of  the 
deaths  of  persons  "at  sea,  or  in  the  army,  or  otherwise  abroad."  Mr. 
Finlaison,  the  Actuary  of  the  National  Debt  Office,  has  estimated  these 
omissions,  and  in  a  letter  addressed  to  the  Registrar-General,  and  j)ub- 
lished  in  the  First  Annual  Report  of  that  officer,  states  the  total  deaths  to 
have  amounted  in  the  18  years  to  4,300,691  persons  (2,347,821  males, 
and  2,112,870  females).  This  correction  is  of  importance,  as  it  enables 
us  better  to  compare  the  numbers  and  proportions  of  persons  dying  before 
the  establishing  of  the  office  of  registration  with  those  more  correctly 
ascertained  through  that  department ;  and  that  importance  is  increased 
by  the  fiict  that  the  greater  part  of  the  omissions  from  parish  registers  have 
occurred  with  regard  to  infants,  and  thus  gave  rise,  while  uncorrected,  to 
wrong  conclusions  regarding  a  fact  of  great  interest — the  ages  at  w  hich 
deaths  occurred.  According  to  the  uncorrected  table,  the  proportion  of 
deaths  that  occurred  in  each  1,000  were — 

Males.  Females.  Both  Sexes. 
Under  .')  years    ....     369                321  345 

Between  5  and  20  years    .     101  104  102 

Above  20  years .     .      .     .     530  575  553 

1000      1000      1000 

Rut  after  supplying  the  numbers  omitted,  according  to  Mr.  Finlaison's 
estimate,  we  find  the  proportions  to  be — 

Males.  Females.  Both  Sexes. 

Under  5  years    ....     406  375                392 

Between  5  and  20  years    .       87  96                  90 

Above  20  years.     ...     507  .529                518 

These  proportions  are  more  nearly  in  agreement  than  the  parish 
register  abstracts  with  the  numbers  found  in  the  civil  registers,  but  do 
not  altogether  agree  with  the  statements  deduced  from  the  latter.  If 
we  compare  the  number  of  deaths  recorded  under  the  different  systems 
for  the  years  1838  to  1840,  for  which  years  only  materials  exist,  it 
will  be  found  that  while  the  civil  registers  record  deaths  amounting 

to 1,041,160 

the  parish  registers  have  recorded  only  .  .  883,912 

showing  a  difference  of  .  .  .  •  157,248 

or  within  a  small  fraction  of  18  per  cent,  upon  the  smaller  number ;  the 
estimated  omissions  for  the  18  years,  1813  to  1830,  having  been  restored 
by  Mr.  Finlaison  to  the  extent  of  only  13^  per  cent.  It  is  impossible  to 
bring  the  two  statements  into  perfect  agreement,  and  we  can  only  regret 


30  rilOGRESS  OF  THE  NATION.  [sec.  i. 

that  the  value  of  correct  data  upon  these  subjects  was  not  earlier 
recognised. 

The  ages  of  persons  dying  are  not  given  for  Individual  years  in  the 
parish  register  abstracts  for  the  ten  years,  1831-40,  but  for  the  whole 
period,  which  alone  would  render  unsatisfactory  any  calculation  founded 
upon  that  document ;  but  besides  this  objection  we  have  the  further  facts 
that  a  large  proportion  of  deaths  are  not  recorded  at  all  in  the  parish 
registers,  and  that  in  the  ten  years  there  were  184,684  persons  buried 
whose  ages  were  not  ascertained. 

An  examination  of  the  returns  made  to  the  Registrar-General,  in  con- 
junction with  the  population  returns  for  1841,  shows  the  number  of 
persons  living  at  each  decennary  period  of  life  among  whom  one  death 
occurred  in  1841,  viz.  : — 

From  birth  to  10  years  .  24 '98 

11  to  20  years  .     .     .  150-27 

21  „  30    „  ...  104-31 

31  „  40    „  ...  90-81 

41  „  50    „  ...  72-44 

51  „  60    „  ...  47-31 

61  „  70    „  ...  24-56 

71  „  80    „  ...  11-15 

81  „  90    „  ...  5-00 

91  ,,100   „  ...  2-75 

Above  100   „  ...  2-17 

The  exclusion  from  parish  registers  of  all  unbaptized  infants  prevents 
any  correct  comparison  with  former  periods,  and  fully  accounts  for  the 
fact  that  while  the  deaths  occurring  among  children  up  to  10  years  of 
age  were,  in  1841,  1  in  24*98,  the  parish  records  show,  on  the  average 
of  10  years,  1831  to  1840,  only  1  in  35-54. 

It  has  been  noticed  by  several  writers,  that  in  the  tables  from  which 
the  foregoing  abstracts  have  been  compiled,  a  much  larger  proportion  of 
deaths  is  assigned  to  each  even  decennary  year  than  appears  in  the  year 
preceding  or  succeeding,  and  attempts  have  been  made  to  account  for 
this  circumstance,  by  supposing  that  some  particular  bodily  change  may 
occur  in  human  beings  at  those  periods  of  life.  It  does  not  appear  very 
likely  that  this  should  be  the  fact ;  and  the  circumstance  is  in  all  pro- 
bability owing  to  the  assignment  of  those  even  periods  by  survivors  in 
the  absence  of  any  more  precise  acquaintance  with  the  ages  of  persons 
deceased. 

This  tendency  is  found  to  be  equally  strong  in  Ireland ;  so  that  cal- 
culations founded  upon  individual  years  would  have  no  value.  It  may 
be  presumed,  however,  that  the  error  will  be  confined,  in  the  various 
cases,  to  the  decennary  periods  in  which  the  deaths  occurred,  and  that 
statements  ending  with  those  periods  will  be  corrc|ct. 

The  following  table,  which  is  calculated  from  data  contained  in  the 
Report  of  the  Census  Commissioners  for  Ireland,  gives  the  ages  of 
1,151,254  out  of  1,187,374  persons  who  died  in  Ireland  during  10 


CUAP.    I.] 


POPULATION. 


31 


years   between    6th   June,  1831,    and  the    Cth   June,  1841,  witli  the 
proportionate  mortality  at  each  period  of  life. 

Ages. 


Birth  to  1  year 
2  to  5  years 


6 
11 
21 
31 
41 
51 
61 
71 
81 
91 


10 
20 
30 
40 
50 
60 
70 
80 
90 
100 


Mall 

146,139 
83,329 
29,139 
40,725 
53,354 
42,941 
44,895 
56,986 
47,770 
37,894 
15,427 
4.369 


Ages  uot  specified  17,897 


Fumalo 

123,060 
82,589 
29,133 
42,534 
48,164 
43,644 
37,642 
51 , 532 
41,737 
32,103 
12,152 
3,996 
18.223 


Total. 

269,199 

165,918 
.58,272 
83,259 

101,518 
86,585 
82,537 

108,518 
89,507 
69,997 
27,579 
8,365 
36,120 


Per  Centago 
proportion. 

23-38 
14-41 

5-06 

7-23 

8-82 

7-52 

7-17 

9-43 

7-77 

6-08 

2-40 

0-73 


620,865 


566,509         1,187,374 


100- 


For  the  purpose  of  comparing  the  result  in  Ireland  with  that  in 
England,  as  shown  in  the  table  at  page  28,  the  following  statement  may 
be  consulted : — 


AGES. 


Born  and 

remaining 

alive  at  each 

period. 


Died. 


Died  in 
each  period 
of  each  1000 
remainin". 


FEMALES. 


Born  and 

remainin)^ 

alive  at  each 

period. 


Died. 


Died  in 
each  period 
of  each  1000 
remaining. 


Birth  to  5  years 

6  to  10  „ 

11  „  20  „ 

30  „ 

40  „ 

50  „ 

60  „ 

70  „ 

80  „ 

90  „ 

100  „ 


602,968 

373,500 

344,361 

303,636 

250,282 

207,341 

162,446 

105,460 

57,690 

19,796 

4,369 


229,468 
29.139 
40,725 
53,. 354 
42,941 
44,895 
56,986 
47,770 
37,894 
15,427 
4.369 


380 
78 
118 
175 
171 
216 
350 
453 
656 
779 
1000 


548.286 

342,637 

313,504 

270,970 

2-22,806 

179,162 

141 , 520 

89,988 

48,251 

16.148 

3,996 


205,649 
29,133 
42,534 
48,164 
43,644 
37,642 
51.532 
41,737 
32,103 
12,152 
3,996 


375 
83 
135 
177 
196 
210 
363 
463 
665 
752 
1000 


AGES. 


BOTH  SEXES. 


Born 

and  remaining 

alive  at  each 

period. 


Died. 


Birth  to  5  years 

6  to  10   „ 

11 

„  20   „ 

21 

„  -"io  „ 

31 

„  -10  „ 

41 

»  50   „ 

51 

„   60   „ 

61 

„   70   „ 

71 

„  80   „ 

81 

„  90   „ 

91 

„  100  „ 

1,151,254 
716.137 
657.865 
574,606 
473,088 
386,503 
303,966 
195,448 
105,941 
35,944 
8,365 


435 

58 
83 

101 
86 
82 

108 
89 
69 
27 


,117 
,272 

,259 
,518 
,.585 
,537 
,518 
,507 
,997 
,579 
,365 


Died  in 
each  period 
of  each  1000 
remaining. 


378 
81 
126 
176 
183 
213 
356 
458 
660 
766 
1000 


The  two  tables  nov\'  to  be  given  exhibit  the  movement  of  the  popula- 
tion during  the  progress  of  the  present  ccmtury.  The  first  of  these  tables 
records  the  number  of  registered  baptisms,  burials,  and  marriages,  in 
England  and  AVales  in  the  course  of  each  year  from  1801  to  1819,  and 


32 


TROGRESS  OF  THE  NATION. 


[sec.  I. 


the  second  gives  tlicir  annual  proportion  in  each  of  the  counties  of 
England,  cak-uhitetl  upon  the  amount  of  popuhition  therein  during  each 
of  the  quinquennial  periods  preceding  the  enumerations  of  1801,  1811, 
1821,  1831,  and  1841. 

Jiaptisms,  JSuriah,  and  Marriaffex,  in  Enf/hmd  and  Wales. 


YEARS. 

B.4.PTISMS. 

BUUIAL.S. 

Marriages. 

Males. 

Females. 

Total. 

Males. 

Females. 

ToUl. 

ISOl 

120,521 

116,508 

237,029 

101,352 

103,082 

204,4.34 

67,288 

1802 

139,889 

133,948 

273,837 

99,504 

100,-385 

199,889 

90,396 

1803 

150,220 

143,888 

294,108 

102,459 

101,269 

203,728 

94,379 

1804 

150,. 583 

144,009 

294,592 

91,538 

89,639 

181,177 

85,738 

1805 

149,333 

142,868 

292,201 

91,086 

90,154 

181,240 

79,586 

1806 

147,376 

144,553 

291,929 

92,289 

91,163 

183,452 

80,754 

1807 

1.53,787 

146,507 

300,294 

97,996 

97,855 

195,851 

83,923 

1808 

151,565 

144,  .509 

296,074 

102,614 

98,149 

200,763 

82,248 

1809 

1.52,812 

147,177 

299,989 

97,894 

93,577 

191,471 

83,369 

1810 

152,591 

146,262 

298,8.53 

104,907 

103,277 

208,184 

84,470 

1811 

155,671 

149,186 

304,857 

94,971 

93,572 

188,543 

86,. 389 

1812 

153,949 

148,005 

301,9.54 

95,957 

94,445 

190,402 

82,066 

1813 

160,685 

153,747 

314.432 

93,726 

92,7.51 

186,477 

83.860 

1814 

163,282 

155,524 

318,806 

103,525 

102,878 

206,403 

92,804 

181.5 

176,233 

168,698 

344,931 

99,442 

97,966 

197,408 

99,944 

1816 

168,801 

161,398 

330,199 

IO0.954 

102,005 

205,959 

91,946 

1817 

169,337 

162,246 

331,583 

101,040 

98,229 

199,269 

88,234 

1818 

169,181 

162,203 

331,384 

107,724 

105,900 

213,624 

92,779 

1819 

171,107 

162,154 

333,261 

106,749 

106,815 

213,564 

95,571 

1820 

176,311 

167,349 

343,660 

104,329 

104,020 

208,349 

96,833 

1821 

181,811 

173,496 

355,307 

107,482 

104,870 

212,352 

100,868 

1822 

190,508 

182,063 

372,571 

111,299 

109,116 

220,415 

98,878 

1823 

189,144 

180,616 

369,760 

119,649 

117,737 

237,386 

101,918 

1824 

189,401 

182,043 

371,444 

124,027 

120,047 

244,074 

104,723 

1825 

192,003 

183,0.50 

375,053 

129,727 

125,291 

255,018 

110,428 

1826 

194.527 

185.886 

380,413 

136,100 

132,061 

268,161 

104,941 

1827 

191,428 

182,758 

374,186 

128,991 

122,880 

2.51,871 

107,130 

1828 

200,333 

192,121 

392,454 

130,015 

125,318 

255,333 

111,174 

1829 

194,089 

186,156 

380,245 

134,525 

129,705 

264,230 

104,316 

1830 

194,200 

187,860 

382,060 

129,290 

124,777 

254,027 

107,719 

1831 

198,232 

190,890 

389,122 

142,185 

136,434 

278,619 

112,094 

1832 

197,255 

190,716 

387,971 

150,938 

147,223 

298,161 

116,604 

1833 

203,348 

196,695 

400,043 

147,393 

143,115 

290,508 

120,127 

1834 

205,935 

199,940 

405,875 

143,550 

139,547 

283,097 

121,884 

1835 

206,137 

198,930 

405,067 

144,287 

137,258 

281,545 

119,598 

1836 

204,985 

200,152 

405,137 

143,982 

1.37,703 

281,685 

120,849 

1837 

234,301 

228,. 592 

462,893 

171,597 

165,397 

.336,994 

112,727 

1€33 

236,941 

226,846 

463,787 

175,0.56 

167,491 

342,547 

113,123 

183'J 

2.52,080 

240,494 

492,. 574 

172,766 

166,218 

338,984 

123,166 

1840 

257,443 

244,860 

502,303 

182,421 

177,266 

359,687 

122,665 

1841 

262,714 

249,444 

512,158 

174,198 

169,649 

343,847 

122,496 

1842 

265,204 

252,. 535 

517,739 

176,594 

172,925 

349,519 

118,825 

1843 

270,577 

256,748 

527,325 

175,721 

170,724 

346,445 

123.818 

1844 

277,436 

263,327 

540,763 

181,126 

175,807 

356,933 

1.32;  249 

1845 

278,418 

265,103 

543,. 521 

177,529 

171,83V 

349,366 

143,743 

1846 

293,146 

279,479 

.572,625 

198,325 

191,990 

390.315 

145,664 

1847 

275,6.58 

264,307 

539,965 

214,375 

208,929 

423; 304 

135,845 

1848 

288,346 

274,713 

563,0.59 

202,949 

196.851 

399,800 

138,230 

1849 

295.249 

282.838 

578,087 

222,367 

219^091 

441,458 

141,599 

cH.vr.  I.] 


POPULATION. 


33 


The  following  table  of  the  Annual  Proportion  of  Baptisms,  Burials, 
and  Marriages,  to  the  Population  of  England,  is  calculated  upon 
an  average  of  the  Totals  of  such  Baptisms,  Burials  and  Marriages,  in 
the  five  years  preceding  the  several  enumerations  of  1801,  1811,  1821, 
1831,  and  1841 ;  distinguishing  the  several  counties. 


, 

1T9«-1800 

1806-1810 

1816-1820 

1826-1830  i 

1836-1841 

COUNTIES.    1 

1 

' 

Bap. 

Bur. 

Mar. 

Bap. 

Bur.  Mar. 

Bap. 

Bur. 

Mar. 

Bap. 

Bur. 

.Mar.  JBap. 

Bur. 

Mar, 

Bedford   .  1  in 

35 

51 

114 

.32 

48 

1.31 

33 

57 

123 

35 

54 

129  37 

52 

1.33 

Berks  .   .   „ 

34 

51 

148 

33 

,53  144 1 

33 

54 

140 

32 

52 

149  36 

49 

160 

Bucks  .   .   „ 

37 

50 

129 

32 

49 

129 

33 

53 

139 

34 

52 

140 

37 

47 

148 

Cambridge    „ 

33 

45 

118 

30 

30 

131 

30 

55 

117 

31 

45 

123 

34 

48 

1.39 

("Hester.  .   „ 

39 

51 

130 

32 

49  132 

34 

52 

127 

37 

52 

139 

43 

53 

153 

Cornwall  .   „ 

33 

58 

120 

31 

62  142 

32 

69 

146 

33 

64 

147 

35 

58 

1.39 

Cumberland   „ 

38 

54 

145 

34 

52 

132 

32 

54 

151 

32 

54 

163 

34 

50 

183 

Derby  .   .   „ 

35 

52 

138 

32 

58 

138 

34 

59 

146 

35 

54 

135 

40 

50 

143 

Devon  .   .   „ 

36 

49 

109 

32 

50 

113 

32 

59 

132 

35 

58 

1.32 

38  56 

142 

Dorset  .  •   „ 

41 

62 

142 

34 

56 

139 

34 

63 

144 

35 

58 

140 

36 

55 

153 

Durham  .   „ 

38 

43 

116 

32 

49 

131 

32 

53 

134 

32 

52 

138 

34 

48 

133 

Essex  .  .   „ 

35 

44 

126 

32 

45 

130 

34 

58 

146 

35 

52 

154 

37 

52 

171 

Gloucester.   „ 

37 

55 

127 

35 

61 

120 

35 

60 

111 

35 

61 

117 

38 

52 

125 

Hereford  .   „ 

40 

65 

183 

35 

60 

144 

36 

60 

170 

37 

57 

1.52 

38 

50 

162 

Hertford  .  .   „ 

33 

54 

161 

33 

57 

168 

33 

53 

171 

36 

56 

175 

38 

52 

183 

IJuntingdon   „ 

33 

46 

104 

32 

49 

134 

33 

61 

127 

34 

46 

131 

34 

53 

135 

Kent   .   .   „ 

30 

41 

116 

28 

38  115 

30 

50 

130 

33 

49 

143 

37 

47 

155 

Lancaster  ,   „ 

34 

47 

114 

28 

49 

115 

31 

51 

116 

34 

46 

115 

39 

56 

120 

Leicester  .   „ 

35 

49 

130 

36 

58 

134 

34 

56 

126 

36 

53 

127 

36 

49 

1.S7 

Lincoln.  .   „ 

32 

50 

117 

30 

49 

125 

31 

59 

134 

32 

51 

134 

34 

54 

144 

Middlesex  .   „ 

39 

37 

95 

39 

36 

94 

36 

45 

101 

31 

41 

103 

45 

50 

114 

jNIonmouth.   „ 

56 

72 

169 

45 

64 

146 

46 

66 

148 

45 

69 

131 

62 

66 

129 

Korfolk   .   „ 

32 

47 

126 

31 

50 

135 

31 

59 

129 

32 

52 

139 

35 

.50 

151 

Korthampton  „ 

42 

51 

130 

35 

53 

132 

34 

55 

129 

35 

50 

135 

38 

49 

137 

K  orthumberland,, 

47 

57 

139 

35 

54 

160 

37 

57 

1.39 

36 

52 

134 

40 

48 

125 

Nottingham   „ 

32 

51 

116 

32 

52 

119 

32 

54 

124 

31 

51 

122 

36 

50 

140 

Oxford  .  .   „ 

35 

53 

139 

33 

56 

141 

33 

57 

148 

32 

53 

141 

34 

48 

152 

Kutland   .   „ 

33 

50 

131 

33 

54 

161 

34 

62 

143 

33 

52 

137 

35 

53 

160 

Salop  .  .   „ 

34 

54 

142 

34 

59 

142 

34 

54 

148 

35 

53 

140 

35 

48 

1.51 

Somerset  .   „ 

39 

55 

139 

34 

53 

128 

33 

61 

140 

35 

58 

147 

38 

51 

159 

Southampton  „ 

34 

46 

104 

30 

46 

102 

31 

61 

128 

34 

56 

131 

38 

56 

147 

Stafibrd   .   ., 

34 

49 

124 

31 

52 

118 

31 

51 

123 

32 

51 

126 

35 

46 

118 

Suffolk  .  .   „ 

34 

56 

129 

31 

54 

132 

33 

65 

134 

35 

59 

137 

37 

53 

1.53 

Surrey  .  .   „ 

37 

42 

134 

35 

44 

129 

38 

49 

139 

38 

49 

129 

39 

53 

1.30 

Sussex  .  .   „ 

31 

55 

126 

28 

52 

128 

32 

68 

142 

33 

58 

142 

34 

59 

156 

Warwick  .   „ 

35 

52 

116 

34 

43 

119 

35 

48 

118 

34 

58 

120 

27 

32 

121 

Westmoreland  „ 

35 

50 

142 

31 

53 

137 

33 

52 

149 

32 

56 

152 

33 

48 

164 

Wilts  .  .   „ 

41 

60 

142 

34 

57 

138 

35 

63 

1.35 

35 

57 

148 

38 

52 

165 

Worcester .   „ 

34 

46 

137 

31 

51 

129 

33 

53 

140 

31 

51 

127 

33 

46 

143 

York,  E.Kiding,, " 
—  City&Ainsty,, 

39 

55 

129 

29 

48 

108 

33 

54 

-i 

35 
36 

51 
52 

1181 
113 

36 

50 

117 

—  N.  Riding  ,, 

36 

53 

142 

30 

51 

124 

34 

61 

147 

33  1  55 

144 

36 

54  146 

—  W.Riding  „ 

35 

49 

124 

31 

51 

123 

33 

57 

124 

35 

51 

131 

40 

52  129 

Summary  of  \ 

1 

the  Counties  I  » 

36 

48 

123 

32 

49 

121 

33 

55 

127 

34 

51 

128 

38 

51   135 

of  England  j 

34 


PROGRESS  OF  THE  NATION. 


[sec.  I, 


This  table  being  drawn  from  tlie  Pai'ish  Registers,  and  therefore 
known  to  be  incomplete,  is  yet  valuable  as  giving  means  for  comparing  the 
movement  of  the  population  at  different  periods.  The  following  table, 
which  applies  only  to  the  fom-  years,  1839  to  1842,  being  taken  from 
the  returns  of  the  Registrar-General,  is  more  nearly  In  accordance  with 
the  truth,  and  will  be  useful  as  affording  means  for  comparison  with 
those  returns  in  future  vears : — 


1839 

1S40 

1811 

1842 

COUNTIES 

i. 

Births. 

Deaths. 

Mar. 

Births. 

Deaths.' 

Mar. 

Births  ' 

Dcatlis. 

Mar. 

Births. 

Deaths. 

Mar. 

Bedford      .     . 

1  in       26 

49 

110 

26 

44 

119 

28 

47 

125 

26 

45 

131 

Berks    .      .      . 

„          28  1 

44  ! 

127 

28 

42 

125 

28 

41 

127 

29 

42 

128 

Bucks    . 

:,     34 ! 

56 

152 

34 

52 

160 

34 

49 

172 

33 

53 

165 

Cambridge 

:;     28  ■ 

45 

123 

28 

45 

121 

27 

40  1 

113 

27 

44 

118 

Chester 

33 

46 

156 

35 

42 

1.55 

33 

44 

168 

34 

45 

180 

Cornwall     . 

30 

54 

137 

30 

58 

149 

30 

54  1 

145 

29 

44 

136 

Cumberland    . 

34 

55 

177 

33 

51 

166 

32 

49  I 

175 

32 

51 

172 

Derby   .      . 

35 

52 

143 

34 

47 

1.57 

34 

55  ' 

162 

34 

51 

178 

Devon  . 

36 

57 

133 

36 

58 

131 

36 

56 

133 

35 

47 

126 

Dorset  . 

34 

57 

155 

34 

61 

143 

34 

58 

150 

34 

52 

1.58 

Durham 

27 

47 

119 

28 

43 

107 

26 

41 

121 

27 

42 

127 

Essex    . 

36 

51 

164 

35 

53 

165 

35 

52 

164 

34 

53 

167 

Gloucester . 

37 

56 

129 

37 

51 

121 

36 

47 

127 

36 

48 

134 

Hereford    . 

46 

59 

208 

44 

64 

205 

43 

58 

180 

41 

51 

176 

Hertford    . 

30 

51 

149 

30 

49 

173 

31 

46 

157 

29 

49 

169 

Huntingdon 

29 

55 

131 

29 

45 

137 

29 

49 

124 

29 

48 

127 

Kent 

36 

51 

146 

34 

48 

152 

35 

50 

148 

36 

47 

140 

Lancaster  . 

25 

35 

104 

26 

32 

109 

26 

35 

108 

25 

36 

116 

Leicester    . 

29 

48 

123 

29 

40 

133 

29 

43 

129 

31 

43 

147 

Lincoln 

„         31 

57 

137 

31 

52 

132 

31 

46 

132 

30 

53 

132 

Middlesex  . 

35 

.40 

104 

34 

42 

104 

33 

40 

107 

32 

42 

109 

Monmouth . 

25 

40 

83 

26 

38 

99 

26 

38 

120 

27 

42 

134 

Norfolk       . 

35 

50 

147 

34 

51 

146 

33 

49 

148 

33 

48 

139 

Northampton 

23 

49 

118 

29 

47 

125 

29 

47 

126 

29 

48 

138 

Northumberla 

ad  „         29 

48 

116 

28 

44 

115 

28 

44 

126 

28 

45 

144 

Nottingham 

.     .,         27 

48 

127 

28 

36 

126 

27 

41 

125 

28 

45 

129 

Oxford  .      . 

.     „         32 

51 

142 

32 

50 

139 

31 

49 

136 

31 

44 

134 

llutland 

.     «         31 

55 

155 

28 

53 

128 

29 

40 

129 

28 

50 

139 

Salop     . 

.     „         37 

50 

140 

34 

50 

155 

35 

48 

148 

36 

45 

151 

Somerset    . 

.     .,         33 

50 

145 

32 

48 

143 

32 

47 

138 

32 

49 

142 

Southampton 

.     „         36 

54 

143 

36 

55 

135 

35 

53 

127 

34 

50 

126 

Stafford       . 

.     „         32 

53 

122 

31 

51 

142 

32 

48 

145 

32 

46 

160 

Suffolk  .      . 

.     „         32 

50 

135 

31 

53 

135 

31 

49 

132 

31 

51 

145 

Surrey  . 

•     „         33 

42 

116 

32 

45 

117 

32 

42 

120 

31 

33 

125 

Sussex   . 

.     „         33 

56 

147 

35 

55 

145 

33 

54 

143 

33 

53 

150 

Warwick    . 

.     „         30 

47 

129 

30 

45 

142 

31 

46 

144 

31 

43 

147 

Westmorelanc 

„         35 

49 

164 

34 

43 

163 

35 

52 

170 

34 

i     55 

162 

^Vilts     .      . 

.     „         36 

58 

166 

37 

53 

164 

36 

51 

164 

36 

53 

168 

AVorcester  . 

.     „         20 

36 

78 

20 

33 

81 

19 

32 

84 

19 

;    31 

88 

York,  E.  Ridi 
and  City 

'^}„         34 

46 

100 

33 

43 

100 

31 

33 

107 

31 

45 

107 

N.  Kidin 

g    »     1     37 

60 

153 

37 

53 

1  146 

35 

59 

155 

36 

54 

159 

W.  Ridin 

g    „     1     27 

44 

121 

27 

43 

1  127 

28 

45 

133 

28 

!     46 

141 

Summary  of 

] 

the  Counties 

K,     1     31 

45 

125'- 

31 

45 

127 

31 

45 

129 

30 

45 

133 

of  England 

I 

It  has  been  usual  with  writers  on  political  economy  to  point  to  the 
diminished  proportion  of  marriages  and  births  as  evidence  of  increasing 


CHAP,  i]  POPULATION.  35 

prudence  on  the  pai-t  of  the  people,  who,  as  they  become  more  intelli- 
gent are  supposed  to  be  less  willing  to  undertake  the  charge  of  a  family 
until  they  shall,  in  some  measure,  have  secured  the  means  of  supportino- 
one.  It  may,  however,  be  doubted  whether,  under  ordinary  circum- 
stances, this  kind  and  degree  of  prudence  has  ever  been  extensively 
practised  in  any  civilized  community.  It  is  true  that,  in  years  of  scarcity, 
some  temporary  check  may  be  put  to  the  contracting  of  marriages  ;  but 
if  we  consider  how  small  the  proportion  of  individuals  in  a  community 
can  be,  who,  even  in  the  most  prosperous  times,  have  any  certain  assur- 
ance that  their  means  of  supporting  a  family  will  be  continued  to  them 
in  future  years,  we  must  perceive  that  this  "preventive  check"  can  never 
have  any  very  extensive  operation. 

The  real  cause  of  the  proportionate  decrease  in  the  numbers  of  mar- 
riages and  births  must  probably  be  sought  in  the  increased  duration 
of  life,  which  occasions  the  continuance  in  life  of  a  larger  number  of 
persons  of  ages  during  which  people  are  no  longer  liable  to  incur  the 
responsibilities  of  parents.  If,  instead  of  calculating  the  proportionate 
numbers  of  marriages  and  births  from  the  entire  population  of  this 
country,  the  estimate  were  made  with  reference  to  that  part  of  it  which 
is  still  in  the  vigour  of  life,  it  appears  probable  that  not  any  diminution 
whatever  would  be  found  in  those  proportionate  numbers. 

The  Parish  Registers  of  the  Borough  of  Tavistock  have  been  kept 
with  much  carefulness  for  a  long  series  of  years,  and  if  the  results  which 
they  exhibited  had  been  accompanied  by  statements  showing  the  number 
at  different  periods  of  the  population,  we  should  have  the  means  of 
tracing  the  condition  of  that  quarter  of  the  kingdom  as  regards  the 
movement  of  the  population,  and  of  thence  inferring  the  progress  in 
that  respect  of  the  kingdom  at  large  through  a  period  of  220  years. 
The  population  of  the  borough  at  each  of  the  five  enumerations  was 
as  follows : — 


Years. 

Population, 

1801 

3,420 

1811 

4,723 

1821 

5,483 

1831 

5,602 

1841 

6,272 

The  enumerations  of  the  people  having  been  taken  in  the  middle  year 
of  the  decennary  periods  in  the  table,  the  population  as  then  found  is 
assumed  to  be  the  mean  of  the  number  existing  throughout  the  10  years  ; 
and  with  this  data  we  find  that  the  proportions  of  births,  marriages,  and 
deaths  in  Tavistock,  at  the  four  decennary  periods  ending  with  1836, 
were  as  follow  : — 


d2 


Births. 

Marriages. 

Deaths. 

1797  to  1806 

1  in  2'J 

1  in    90 

1  in  37 

1807  „  1816 

„    29 

„     134 

„     46 

1817  „  1826 

„     35 

„     145 

„     49 

1827  „  1836 

„    37 

„     169 

.,     47 

36 


PROGRESS  OF  THE  NATION. 


[sec.  I. 


Table  showing  the  Xumber  of  Baptisms,  Male  and  Female,  tlie  Number  of  Twin  Births,  and  of 
lUet/ilimate  Children,  together  with  the  Number  of  Marriages  and  Burials,  in  each  Decennary 
Period  from  161"  to  1836.  taken  from  tlie  Parish  Registers  of  Tavistock. 


Years. 


Baptisms. 


Male.     Female. 


1617  to 

1627  „ 

1637  „ 

1647  „ 

1657  „ 

1667  „ 

1677  „ 

1687  „ 

1697  „ 

1707  „ 

1717  „ 

1727  „ 

1737  „ 

1747  „ 

1757  „ 

1767  „ 

1777  „ 

1787  „ 

1797  „ 

1807  „ 

1817  „ 

1827  „ 


1626 
1636 
1646 
1656 
1666 
1676 
1686 
1696 
1706 
1716 
1726 
1736 
1746 
1756 
1766 
1776 
1786 
1796 
1806 
1816 
1826 
1836 


490 
549 
456 
383 
379 
405 
445 
422 
441 
332 
353 
361 
360 
357 
355 
397 
431 
476 
579 
836 
808 
763 


511 
517 
454 
339 
387 
399 
404 
406 
418 
340 
339 
381 
377 
374 
399 
361 
422 
500 
571 
767 
726 
714 


Twin     Ulegi-     Mar-   I 
Birtlis.  timate.  I  riages. 


Burials. 


2 
14 
18 
15 
13 


33 

17 
21 
5 
4 
3 
10 
24 
19 
29 
20 
26 
38 
39 
53 
41 
47 
55 
63 
71 
64 
45 


244 

274 

228  I 

185  I 

206  I 

171 

177 

166 

180 

178 

174 

228 

223 

228 

281 

258 

282 

278 

379 

352 

378 

330 


1,371 
761 
1,163 
723 
974 
%0 
912 
978 
782 
870 
857 
873 
998 
883 
931 
713 
829 
795 
926 
1,027 
1,104 
1,191 


Note. — The  year  1626  was  one  in  which  the  plague  visited  Tavistock.  The  deaths  in  that 
year  were  575,  the  average  yearly  number  in  the  preceding  nine  years  having  been  88. 
From  and  after  1653  the  register  includes  all  births,  and  is  not  confined  to  tlie  number 
baptized.  Up  to  1680  the  entries  were  made  in  black  letter  or  German  text,  but  after 
that  time  the  mode  now  employed  has  been  used. 


A 


CHAP,  ir.]  MEDICAL  STATISTICS.  37 


CHAPTER  II. 

Neglect  of  the  subject  of  Medical  Statistics— Means  of  supplying  the  requisite  information 
— Introduction  of  Vaccination— Mortality  from  Sraall-pox  at  different  periods  in  the 
Metropolis — In  Ireland — Mortality  in  St.  Bartholomew's  Hospital — London  Hospital — 
St.  George's  Hospital — Manchester  Infirmary — Liverpool  Infirmary- — Lock  Hospital — 
Christ's  Hospital  — Proportion  of  Cures  and  Deaths  in  St.  Luke's  Hospital — Bethlem 
Hospital— Pauper  Lunatics  and  Idiots  in  England  and  Wales,  1844  and  1847 — Lunatics  in 
Private  Asylums — Proportions  of  Deaths  and  Cures. 

It  is  greatly  to  be  regretted  that,  up  to  the  present  period,  the  subject 
of  medical  statistics  in  this  country  has  been  little  attended  to — it 
might  almost  be  said,  wholly  neglected.  In  the  volume  published  in 
1829  by  Dr.  Bisset  Hawkins,  under  the  title  of  "  Elements  of  Medical 
Statistics,"  many  scattered  facts  bearing  upon  the  subject  have  been 
collected  together  with  industry  and  ability ;  but  the  extent  of  the 
materials  available  for  the  writer's  purpose  was  so  limited  that  the  work 
cannot  be  considered  as  at  all  affording  any  satisfactory  exposition  of 
the  subject.  The  principal  value  of  Dr.  Hawkins's  labours  will  perhaps 
be  found  to  consist  in  his  having  awakened  attention  to  the  subject,  so 
that  persons  who  possess  the  opportunity  may  undertake  the  registration 
of  facts  in  a  manner  which  will  enable  them  at  some  future  time  to  make 
a  valuable  addition  to  the  sum  of  our  economical  knowledge. 

The  hospitals  of  this  country,  so  numerous  and  so  liberally  supported, 
are  among  the  most  honourable  of  our  national  monuments.  The  feel- 
ings of  benevolence  which  prompted  their  erection  and  endowment  have 
been  shared  in  an  eminent  degree  by  the  members  of  the  medical  pro- 
fession, who  have  always  been  ready  to  devote  their  time  and  skill  to 
the  relief  of  the  miseries  of  such  of  their  fellow-creatures  as  are  found 
within  their  walls.  These  institutions  are  also  highly  esteemed  as  schools 
for  surgical  and  medical  practice  ;  so  that  whenever  any  medical  office 
attached  to  an  hospital  is  vacant,  it  it  usually  made  an  object  of  honour- 
able contest  who  shall  fulfil  its  gratuitous  duties ;  and  by  this  means  it 
most  commonly  happens  that  hospital  physicians  and  surgeons  in  this 
country  are  among  the  most  skilful  practitioners  of  the  age. 

For  this  reason,  the  records  of  our  public  hospitals  and  infirmaries,  if 
kept  with  regularity  and  upon  any  uniform  plan,  could  not  fail  to  afford 
a  fair  and  perfect  view  of  the  progress  of  the  curative  science  in  this 
country  ;  and  it  is  to  be  hoped,  that  being  made  aware  by  means  of  Dr. 
Hawkins's  volume,  as  well  of  the  value  of  such  information  as  of  its 
present  scanty  amount,  those  who  have  the  direction  of  these  establish- 


38  PKOGRESS  OF  THE  NATION.  [sec.  i. 

ments  will  be  careful  to  supply  the  deficiency  by  every  means  in  their 
power.  AVith  very  few  exceptions,  hospitals  in  this  country  derive  their 
origin  and  draw  their  support  from  private  sources,  for  which  reason 
they  are  under  no  sort  of  control  on  the  part  of  the  Government ;  and 
although  there  is  no  reason  to  doubt  the  readiness  of  those  by  whom 
their  affairs  are  conducted  to  communicate  freely  whatever  information 
may  come  within  their  reach,  it  is  cert<\in  that  there  is  no  authority  to 
direct  any  record  of  facts  according  to  a  prescribed  fomi,  by  which  means 
alone  the  full  value  can  be  given  to  information  of  that  nature. 

The  disadvantage  of  our  present  state  of  ignorance  upon  this  subject 
has  been  well  stated  by  Dr.  Hawkins  in  the  following  words: — "  No 
one  can  be  more  deeply  aware  than  myself  of  the  difficulties  and  even 
dangers  of  the  subject ;  of  the  dubious  authenticity  and  frequent  fluc- 
tuation of  the  necessary  details ;  and  of  the  precarious  nature  of  any 
general  principles  attempted  to  be  fi-amed  out  of  facts,  which  have,  for 
the  most  part,  endured  the  test  of  only  a  few  years,  and  which  have  only 
recently  become  the  object  of  inquiry  or  scrutiny.  But  an  extensive 
assemblage  and  classification  of  such  facts  possess  an  historical  and  local 
value,  whatsoever  may  be  the  fate  of  the  reasonings  deduced  from  them. 
Independently  of  the  light  which  this  study  throws  upon  medical  science, 
it  affords  the  most  valuable  illustrations  of  the  history,  manners,  and 
customs  of  mankind,  and  a  just  criterion  of  the  progressive  or  retrograde 
movements  of  society." 

The  foregoing  remarks  appear  necessary,  in  order  to  account  for  the 
unsatisfactory  amount  of  information  which  it  is  possible  to  bring  together 
in  the  present  work  upon  this  interesting  branch  of  inquiry.  Small  as 
that  amount  in  reality  is,  it  is  yet  greater  in  quantity,  and  more  precise 
in  its  details,  than  is  to  be  found  in  any  work  hitherto  published — a  cir- 
cumstance which  is  owing  to  the  ready  and  kind  assistance  that  has  been 
afforded  by  the  governors  and  medical  officers  of  some  of  the  hospitals 
in  the  metropolis  and  cliief  provincial  towns. 

The  introduction  of  vaccination  as  a  substitute  for  variolous  inocula- 
tion is  an  improvement  which  properly  belongs  to  the  present  century. 
The  discovery,  that,  by  thus  inducing  a  very  mild  complaint,  the  means 
of  escaping  a  most  formidable  disease  would  be  secured,  if  not  to  abso- 
lute certainty,  yet  to  such  a  degree  as  to  remove  from  the  mind  all 
dread  of  its  visitation,  was  made  in  1798,  but  although  the  attention  of 
the  medical  world  was  immediately  excited  in  the  most  intense  degree 
to  the  subject,  it  required  several  years  of  experience  before  the  value 
of  the  discovery  was  fully  recognised  by  medical  practitioners,  and  before 
the  public  were  sufficiently  weaned  from  their  previous  prejudices,  to 
avail  themselves  to  any  extent  of  the  blessing.  "It  was  not  until  1808, 
ten  years  after  the  first  introduction  of  the  vaccine  practice,  that  the 
medical  officers  of  the  Small  Pox  Ilosjjital  in  London  ceased  to  inoculate 


CU.Vl".    II.] 


MEDICAL  STATISTICS. 


39 


out-patients  for  the  small-pox  ;  and  so  slowly  did  tho  perfect  conviction 
of  the  value  of  the  suhstitute  make  its  way  in  their  minds,  that  it  was 
not  until  June,  1822,  almost  a  quarter  of  a  century  after  Dr.  Jenner's 
discovery,  that  the  practice  of  inoculating  was  discontinued  within  the 
walls  of  that  hospital. 

Tiiose  jjersons  wiio  are  old  enough  to  carry  back  their  recollection  to 
years  before  this  discovery  was  made,  or  who  have  since  visited  densely- 
peopled  countries  in  which  small-pox  has  prevailed,  will  readily  admit 
the  luippy  effects  of  vaccination  Of  all  the  diseases  to  which  mankind 
is  subjected,  at  least  in  temperate  regions,  there  is  not  one  which,  in 
modern  times,  has  proved  so  desolating  as  small-pox.  A  reference  to 
the  following  statement,  compiled  from  the  Weekly  Bills  of  Mortality 
during  130  years,  embracing  a  period  both  before  and  since  the  sub- 
stitution of  cow-pox,  will  exhibit  at  one  view  the  extent  both  of  the 
misery  which  the  old  disease  caused,  and  of  the  relief  which  society  is 
experiencing  from  the  adoption  of  its  milder  substitute  :  — 

Slnfemeiit  of  the  Total  Average  Mortality,  and  tlw  Arerar/r  3Iortnh'ti/  arisini/  from  Small-pox, 
within  tlie  Weekly  B'lls  of  3Iortality,  at  different  Periods  since  fie  commencement  of  the 
Eighteenth  Century  ;  showing  the  proportion  of  Deatlis  from  Small-pox  at  each  Period,  and  the 
Numbers  of  the  Population  comprehended  luithin  the  said  District  at  each  Decennary  Enume- 
ration in  the  present  Century. 


Period. 


1701  to 
1711  ., 
1721  „ 
1731  ., 

1741 ;, 

1751  „ 
1770  „ 
1780  „ 
17'J0  „ 
1800  „ 
1810  „ 
1820  ., 
1830  „ 


1710 
1720 
1730 
1740 
1750 
1760 
1779 
1789 
1799 
ISO.) 
1819 
182J 
1836 


Total 
Average 
Mortality. 


21.110 
23.826 
27,361 
26,047 
26,060 
20,849 
21,. 591 
19,517 
19,177 
18.891 
19,061 
20,680 
24,356 


Average 
Mortality 

from 
Small-Pox. 


1,372 

2,123 

2,257 

1,978 

2,002 

1,957 

2,204 

1,712 

1 ,  768 

1,374 

833 

715 

610 


Proportion 
of  Deaths 

from 

Small-Pox 

in  each 

1000 
Deaths. 


65 

89 
82 
76 

94 
102 
88 
92 
73 
43 
35 
25 


Year 

of 

Census. 


Population 
witliin  the 

Hills  of 
Mortality. 


1801 
1811 
1821 
1831 


746,953 

855,626 

1,011,951 

1,180,075 


It  is  sufficiently  remarkable  that  in  the  district  comprised  within  the 
Weekly  Bills  of  Mortality,  the  deaths  were  greater  in  the  year  1800  than 
they  had  been  in  any  one  year  during  the  century,  with  the  exception  of 
1710,  and  that  up  to  1801  inclusive,  the  burials  were,  scarcely  with  an 
exception,  in  excess  over  the  births ;  while,  on  the  contrary,  since  that 
period,  there  has  occurred  only  one  year  (1808)  in  which  the  opposite 
conditicm  has  not  been  exjjerienced.  The  annual  average  number  of 
births  in  the  metropolis  during  the  ten  years  from  1791  to  1800  was 
22,605,  and  the  annual  average  of  burials  24,270,  being  in  the  proper- 


40  PROGRESS  OF  THE  NATION.  [sf.c.  r. 

tion  of  107  burials  to  100  births.  In  the  ten  years  from  1811  to  1820, 
the  annual  average  of  births  was  28,489,  and  of  deaths  23,331,  reducing 
the  proportion  of  deaths  to  82  for  100  births.  But  this  does  not  offer 
an  accurate  gauge  of  the  comparative  mortality  of  the  two  periods,  be- 
cause there  has,  during  the  last  30  or  40  years,  arisen  a  practice  con- 
stantly increasing  among  persons  carrying  on  business  in  London  to 
reside  with  their  families  beyond  the  limit  embraced  by  the  Bills  of 
Mortality.  There,  consequently,  their  children  are  born  ;  but  many 
among  them,  the  mortal  remains  of  whose  ancestors  are  deposited  in 
burial-grounds  within  that  limit,  still  use  those  receptacles  as  the  last 
resting-places  for  themselves  and  their  families,  for  which  reason  the 
births  are  diminished  in  a  greater  proportion  than  the  burials.  The 
cause  here  assigned  has  operated  in  a  much  greater  degree  since  1820 
than  it  did  previous  to  that  date,  and  it  would  be  unprofitable,  therefore, 
to  pursue  the  inquiry  to  a  later  period. 

The  preceding  statement  has  been  derived  from  the  Yearly  Bills  of 
Mortahty,  as  compiled  by  the  Society  of  Parish  Clerks  ;  and,  although 
entitled  to  be  received  with  some  degree  of  confidence,  does  not  furnish 
so  correct  a  result  as  we  have  now  the  opportunity  of  obtaining  through 
the  oflfice  of  the  Registrar-General.  The  following  figures,  which  are 
taken  from  the  yearly  reports  of  that  department,  apply  to  the  whole 
metropolitan  district,  the  population  of  which  in  1841  was  1,915,104. 


Total 

Mortality 

Proportion 

Deaths  in  the 

from 

in  each  1000 

Years. 

Year. 

Small-Pox. 

Deaths. 

1838 

.')3.546 

3.817 

71 

1839 

46.100 

'  634 

14 

1840 

47.156 

1.240 

26 

1841 

46,292 

1,068 

23 

1842 

46,242 

367 

8 

1843 

49,477 

439 

9 

1844 

51.109 

1,804 

35 

1845 

48.318 

909 

19 

1846 

49,450 

257 

5 

1847 

60,442 

955 

16 

Average    49,813  1,149  23 

It  thus  appears,  that  although  of  the  above  10  years  2  were  years  in 
which  the  small-pox  was  experienced  with  unusual  virulence,  the  average 
yearly  mortality  by  that  once  fearful  disease  has  been  reduced  to  1  in 
1,680  of  the  population. 

It  was  at  one  time  sanguinely  expected  that  vaccination  would  speedily 
have  eradicated  the  scourge  for  which  it  has,  in  a  great  degree,  provided 
a  mild  and  safe  substitute.  This  expectation  has  not  hitherto  been 
accomplished  ;  and  it  appears  doubtful  whether  js-accination  will  ever 
be  successfully  applied  to  such  an  extent.  Inoculation  has  been  almost 
entirely  discontinued,  so  that  medical  men  now  commonly  refuse  to  per- 
form the  operation  when  applied  to  for  that  purpose.    Still,  from  time  to 


ciiAi".  11.]  MEDICAL  STATISTICS.  11 

time,  small-pox  appears,  and,  up  to  the  present  period,  the  applications 
for  admission  into  the  Small-pox  nosi)ital  on  the  part  of  patients  to 
whom  the  disease  has  been  casually  communicated  are  as  numerous  as 
they  have  ever  been  during  any  part  of  the  last  fifty  years.  In  the  course 
of  that  term  the  number  so  admitted  has  been  10. 077,  of  whom  the  large 
number  of  2,981  have  died,  being  in  the  proportion  of  27  to  each  100 
patients.  If  we  divide  the  whole  term  into  decennary  periods,  we  shall, 
however,  find  that  the  disease  has  of  late  put  on  a  milder  and  less  fatal 
form  than  that  in  which  its  visitations  were  made  at  the  commencement 
of  the  time  to  which  our  information  reaches,  and  if  we  examine  the  re- 
sult of  the  cases  in  the  five  years  from  1794  to  1798,  when  Dr.  Jenner's 
discovery  was  made,  it  will  be  seen  that  the  mortality  was  then  in  a 
higher  ratio  than  has  since  been  experienced,  the  number  of  deaths 
having  been  371  out  of  1,156  cases,  or  in  the  proportion  of  321  to  100. 

Years.        Admitted.  Died.  Proportion  of  Deaths. 

1794  to  1803       2,007  6U             30-5  in  100. 

1804   „  1813       1,330  410            30-8      „ 

1814   „  1823       1,336  38'.)             29-1      „ 

1824   „  1834       2,810  759             27-        „ 

1835   „  1844      3,494  809            23-1      „ 


10.977         2,981  27-1 


The  favourable  result  in  the  more  recent  years  can  hardly  have  been 
accidental,  for  accidents  of  this  nature  do  not  occur  in  regular  progi-es- 
sion  through  so  long  a  period  as  fifty  years,  and  the  statement  above 
given  fully  bears  out  the  opinion  expressed  in  regard  to  the  comparative 
mildness  of  the  disorder  as  it  now  exists,  and  the  degree  in  which  medi- 
cal treatment  has  been  successfully  aj)plied  in  arresting  its  ravages. 

The  Report  of  the  Census  Commissioners  for  Ireland  in  1841  contains 
an  elaborate  paper  by  Mr.  Wilde,  upon  the  deaths  occurring  in  that 
part  of  the  United  Kingdom,  during  the  10  years  ending  6  June,  1841, 
from  which  the  following  table  has  been  compiled,  showing  the  number 
of  deaths  from  small-pox,  and  the  proportion  which  they  bore  to  the 
total  deaths  in  each  years. 


Mortality 

Proportion  of  Deaths 

from 

from 

1  Small-Pox 

Years. 

Total. 

Small-Pox. 

in  each  lUOO  Deaths. 

ia3i-2 

148,539 

7,189 

48 

1833 

94,713 

4,329 

45 

1834 

96,623 

4,852 

50 

1835 

101,961 

5,809 

56 

1836 

123,114 

6,465 

52 

1837 

141,683 

7,102 

50 

1838 

130,222 

7,150 

55 

1839 

140, 23 J 

6,704 

47 

1840 

141,536 

6,254 

44 

months)  1841 

68,739 

2,152 

31 

Total 

1,187,374 

58,006 

48 

The  deaths  from   small-pox  during   the  same  period  in  the  city  of 
Dublin,  amounted  to  1,875,  the  total  deaths  having  been  49,580,  show- 


42 


PROGRESS  OF  THE  NATION. 


[sec.  I. 


ing  the  mortality  from  that  disorder  to  have  amounted  to  harely  38  in 
each  1,000  deaths,  a  result  very  favourable  to  the  metropolis  as  com- 
pared with  Ireland  generally. 

The  number  of  patients  admitted  into  St.  Bartholomew's  Hospital 
during  the  sixty  years  between  17i)0  and  1849  was  265,036,  and  the 
number  of  deaths  20,123,  being  at  the  rate  of  7'59  per  cent.  Stated  in 
quinquennial  periods,  the  numbers  and  proportions  have  been  : — 


Years. 


1790  to 
1795  „ 
1800  „ 
180.5  „ 
1810  „ 
181.5  „ 
1820  „ 
1825  „ 
18.30  „ 
1835  „ 
1840  „ 
1845  „ 


1794 
1799 
1804 
1809 
1814 
1819 
1824 
1829 
1834 
18.39 
1844 
1849 


Proportion 

Admitted. 

Died. 

of  Deaths 

per  Ct-nt. 

20,253 

1,.572 

7-76 

20,801 

1,6.57 

8- 

20,725 

1,674 

8- 

19,183 

1.527 

8- 

19,714 

1,442 

7-31 

13,959 

1,159 

8 -.30 

19,683 

1,454 

7-34 

23,62J 

1,643 

6-95 

28,104 

1,894 

7-25 

26,817 

2,206 

8-22 

25,623 

1,816 

7-09 

28,545* 

2,079 

7-28 

The  small  variation  observable  in  the  rate  of  mortality  among  the 
patients  in  this  hospital  during  the  whole  of  the  above  period,  extending 
to  more  than  half  a  century,  is  very  remarkable,  and  does  not  certainly 
warrant  any  conclusions  favourable  to  the  progress  of  the  curative  art 
in  general  during  that  interval.  In  the  latter  periods,  however,  a  large 
number  of  the  milder  cases  have  probably  been  sent  to  dispensaries, 
which  were  not  common  formerly.  Many  patients  are  also  now  treated 
at  their  own  houses,  from  want  of  room  in  the  hospitals,  in-patients 
being  only  admitted  in  the  more  serious  cases. 

The  returns  obtained  from  other  general  hospitals  and  medical  insti- 
tutions do  not  embrace  a  sufficiently  long  space  of  time  to  admit  of  any 
conclusions  being  drawn  from  them  as  to  the  progress  of  the  curative 
art.  Tliey  are  curious,  however,  as  presenting  results  very  different 
from  each  other  with  respect  to  the  mortality  of  their  patients.  That 
difference  is  no  doubt  capable  of  satisfactory  explanation,  for  it  would 
be  absurd  to  suppose,  that  if  the  regulations  and  other  circumstances 
attending  the  practice  of  different  hospitals  in  the  same  city  were  alike, 
the  rate  of  mortality  should  from  year  to  year  be  so  different.  The 
fair  inference  is,  that  the  regulations  are  not  the  same,  or  tiiat  they  are 
better  in  some  hospitals  than  in  others. 

We  have  seen  that  in  St.  B  irtholomew's  Hospital  the  rate  of  mortality 
has  never  been  greater  on  the  av(>rage  of  five  years  than  830  per  cent. ; 
in  sixty  years,  from  1790  to  1849,  the  average  "was  7-59  per  cent., 


*  In  addition  to  this  number,  there  were  admitted  in  1849,  478  cholera  patients,  of  whom 
198  died,  being  in  the  proportion  of  41*42  per  cent. 


CHAP.    II.] 


MEDICAL  STATISTICS. 


43 


and  in  the  concluding  five  years  of  the  series,  the  avernge  has  been  only 
7"28  per  cent  ;  whereas,  in  otlier  general  liospitals  of  this  metropolis, 
which  enjoy  the  advantage  of  medical  and  surgical  skill  on  the  part  of 
their  officers  in  nowise  inferior  to  that  of  the  officers  of  St.  Bartholo- 
mew's, the  average  rate  of  mortality  has,  in  the  period  of  fifteen  years, 
exceeded  9  J  per  cent.,  being  in  the  proportion  of  nearly  three  deaths  to 
two.  On  the  other  hand,  the  mortality  during  the  same  period  in  the 
Infirmary  of  Liverpool  has  been  evi>n  smaller  than  that  of  St.  Bartho- 
lomew's Hospital :  the  average  being  only  6"91  per  cent. 


> 

< 
s 
« 

Proportion 
of  l)eatli!* 
per  Cent. 

C  i^  —  >~.  « 

•  ao  'f  «  CO  «3 

Tf  O  O  irt  CO 

r-         (M  CI  W  t^  -H 

in         m  ;c  CO  in  t^ 

in         to  00  1—  o  t^ 

to  -i"  to  CO  -< 

CO  X  CO  m  X 

i)  CO  X  t'~  1^ 

t- 

■     z 

5 

■5 

a 

a 

.  If;  —  in  00  "* 

in 

^  *1  '^  CO  -* 
<M  -.O  «  CO  !0 

•* 

•*  m  o  OS  in 

X  CO  to  CO  in 

CO 

Patients. 

«a  00  o  in  00      s>i 
•  a;  21  r-  .^  -H      g 

m  CO  -H  CO  in 
m  -o  D  'M  iM 

X  X  tc  o  ^ 

in 
m 

O  —  "M  -)<  CO 

'^  t  zr  "**  3£ 

o 

35 

>• 

X 

< 

2 

H 

H 
t< 

X 

< 

•If  = 

•  ?i  «  o  ^  o 
o  --D  00  r^  00 

r~ 

X  —1        o  t^ 
i  X  -^  'fl  -N 

to 

6 

-f  in  i^  in  •* 

t-  X  —  in  CO 

3>1  -^  X  O  il 

CO 

in 

c  to  ->)  X  ^ 

35 

o 

2 
1 

•  IT-,  in  con  ^ 

CO 

o  X  X  CO  in 
CO  in  o  ^  •* 
1-1  -H  (M  smN 

t~  in  iM  35  o 
<M  -H  •.*  X  r- 

C^  O)  rt  rH  rt 

5 

35 

O  X  -^  CO  to 
i-i  X  t^  in  o 

35 

e 
1 

^  00  -*  ^  « 

eo  t^  <M  eo  irt 

•  t^  i^  t^  t^  00 

2 

00 

x" 

O  X  o  «o  to 

O  ■+  r-.  (N  !M 

CI  ^.  X  :r5  OJ 

in 

^  -*  X  o  o 

X  —  -+  3-.  — 
»^  X  t-  t^  X 

x" 

t^  S^  X  r^  to 

—  to  -f  -f  O 

X  i~  in  m  t^ 

O 
X 

CO 
x" 

< 

s. 

o 

« 
o 
H 

O 

ill 

£    G    &. 

—  -t"  «  m 
•    .  Tf  ^  r~  ^ 


(M  ^  O  — 

CO 

• 

■*  CO  O  X  1- 

to  -H  in  X  o 
O  35  o>ob  o 

to 

X  O  •j'  CO  3> 
CO  -*  O  X  X 

t^  X  X  to  in 

35 

O  -i"  X  35  CO 

c^  -4  m  CO  CO 

X  X  f-  t^  t^ 

X 

1 

in  -  -O  00 

•  •  ?1  C   3-.  — 

•  •  I'l  ?)  ^  !M 

X 

-+ 

X 

t~-  -^  —  in  '>\ 

(M  -N  -f  tC  — ' 
(M  ■>!  M  M  CO 

cl 

-*  r,  m  un  -t 
-*  t^  to  CO  o 
<N  ?l  (M  C)  <M 

in 

•M 

CO  ;n  to  CO  t^ 
5i  fi  ijj  fi  !N 

2 

S 
.2 
1 

(N  m  o  'f 
—  t^  -M  in 

•     •  X  »  00  ~ 

CO  in  m  -t<  3» 
CO  t^  CO  X  en 

r-.^^_^in^=--_0^ 

CO" 

-f  to  5  C  -' 

CO  5J  5i  •*  ^ 

CO  CO  CO  CO  CO 

in 

to 

•+  ;*  O  to  CO 
in  ^<  to  in  to 

o 

< 
o 

■  a 

Z 

i 

z 

2 

£  •■«    ■ 

r^  «  in  -f  t^ 
00  m  r~  cc  t^     • 

-t 

c^  1-  —  -M  ri      rj 

r-<    -    -H   -t    CO            CO 

o  o  ■*  2  ^-      ^ 

to       X  —  -o 
X         X  3-.  O 

X  o  t^  to  to 

35 

X 

3!  -*  CO  X  35 
C^  X  -^  -M  C-I 

to  to  i  i  r- 

to 
to 

g 

a 

o  Zn  -o  —  ^^'    • 

CO 
CO 

a^n  -t  n  n 

to 

to  —  ~  -f  -f 
C-.  CO  -O  -f  -M 
(N  CO  •M  0>)  Tl 

in        X  o  -o  CO  X 
in         c>)  X  1^  to  -tj 

CO           (?!  'M  m  S>l  !>> 

i 

m 

i 

1 

■*  CT  ?>  — '  1^        \  t- 
--  00  t~  ^  —     •       o 
(N  ^  c>j  in  in_^  •   \  ic 

in  in  —  t^  t~ 

CO  —  to  X  -f 
r~  X  — .  C5  (M 

in 

cnoo  O  O  rt 

CO  O  O  CO  3V 

CO  CO  CO  in  o 

X 

to 

in  5>i  35  m  o 

(M   -5  in  X  35 

to  O  — '  —  O 

co"  ■*"•*'■  .^jr^" 

i 

C^CTCTCTCTM                       CTCTCTCCW                        •-*>-t<^^<-t<                       ■^-^-f-f^' 
QC  00  00  «  00  00                     00  X  00  30  OO                      xxxxx                      xxxxx 

The  large  proportionate  number  of  deaths  in  the  Manchester  Infirmary, 


44 


PROGRESS  OF  THE  NATION. 


[sec.  I. 


one  of  the  Lcst-regnlated  hospitals  in  the  kingdom,  is  fnlly  accounted  for 
by  the  severity  of  the  accidents  to  which  the  lal)0uring  population  of  that 
town  are  liable.  From  this  cause  it  happened,  that  out  of  87  deaths 
that  occurred  in  the  intirmary  in  the  second  half  of  1844,  54  persons 
died  within  24  hours  after  their  admission. 

An  unfavourable  opinion  might  be  at  first  suggested  by  the  following 
statement  of  the  number  of  patients  who  have  died,  and  of  those  who 
have  been  cured,  at  the  Lock  Hospital,  during  each  decennary  period  of 
the  present  century.  It  must  be  remarked,  however,  that  the  plans  pur- 
sued in  this  hospital,  established  for  the  treatment  of  one  particular  dis- 
ease, have  undergone  considerable  alteration  during  this  time  ;  and  that 
although  the  proportion  of  fatal  cases  occurring  in  the  hospital  may  have 
increased  through  the  abandonment  of  a  course  of  practice  which  more 
speedily  removed  the  specific  disease,  and  occasioned  the  discharge  of 
the  patients  from  the  hospital,  there  is  good  reason  for  believing  that  the 
remedies  formerly  applied  with  apparently  such  good  results,  impaired 
the  constitution,  and  produced  a  tendency  to  various  chronic  disorders, 
which,  in  many  cases,  tended  to  shorten  life,  and  in  yet  more  rendered 
existence  miserable. 


Centesimal 

Years. 

Admitted. 

Died. 

Cured. 

Proportion. 

Deaths. 

Cures. 

1801  to  1810 

4,968 

57 

3,558 

1-147 

71-6 

1811    „    1820 

5,392 

38 

4,001 

0-704 

74-2 

1821    „    1830 

5,354 

47 

3,727 

0-877 

69-6 

1831    „    1840 

5,289 

50 

4,512 

0-945 

85-3 

1841    „    1844 

1,852 

3 

1,739 

0-162 

93-9 

(four  years.) 
1843    „    1849/ 

3,481 

3 

2,804 

0-086 

80-5 

26,336 

198 

20,341 

0-740 

77-2 

Among  the  tables  compiled  by  Dr.  Mitchell,  which  are  appended  to 
the  Supplementary  Report  of  the  Factory  Commissioners,  is  a  return 
of  the  number  of  children  in  Christ's  Hospital,  and  of  the  number  of 
deaths  that  have  occurred,  in  each  year,  for  twenty  years  from  1813  to 
1833.  It  will  be  seen  from  this  return  how  exceedingly  small  the  rate 
of  mortality  has  been  in  the  establishment  throughout  that  period.  This 
circumstance  is  highly  creditable  to  the  institution,  and  shows  how  very 
instrumental  in  preserving  life  during  the  years  of  childhood  are  "  sub- 
stantial clothing,  an  abundance  of  wholesome  food,  good  lodging, 
healthful  exercise  in  the  hours  allowed  for  recreation,  and  immediate 
attention  on  the  first  appearance  of  sickness  under  the  care  of  skilful 
medical  men."  These  are  favourable  circumstances,  which  have  at- 
tended the  institution  in  an  equal  degree  throughout  the  period  embraced 
in  the  table,  and  we  must  therefore  seek  for  some  other  reason  to  account 
for  the  yet  more  gratifying  fact,  that,  small  as  the  rate  of  mortality  has 


MEDICAL  STATISTICS. 


45 


been  during  the  whole  twenty  years,  there  has  been  a  constant  tendency 
to  its  decrease,  so  that  in  the  latter  years  of  the  series  still  fewer  deaths 
have  occurred  than  did  during  the  earlier  years  : — 


Year  to      Number  of 
Kaster.       Children. 


1814 
1815 
1816 
1817 
1818 


1819 
1820 
1821 
1822 
1823 


Deaths. 


1,019 
1,010 
1,031 
1,033 
1,037 


7 
6 

14 
11 
13 


5,130 


51 


1,038 
1,052 
1,029 
1,046 
1,028 


5,193 


12 
6 

11 
9 
6 


44 


Year  to 
Easter. 


1824 
1825 
1826 
1827 
1828 


1829 
18.'5() 
1831 
1832 
1833 


Number  of 
Children. 

Ueaths. 

1,046 

14 

1,070 

4 

1,085 

10 

1,107 

9 

1,104 

3 

5,412 

40 

1,110 

12 

1,126 

7 

1 ,  145 

5 

1,156 

7 

1,133 

5 

5,670 

36 

It  thus  appears,  that  in  the  first  five  years,  viz.,  from  1814  to  1<S18, 
the  annual  mortality  was  1  in  100  ;  that  in  the  next  five  years,  from 
1819  to  1823,  the  rate  was  only  1  in  118;  that  in  the  five  years  from 
1824  to  1828,  it  was  further  diminished  to  1  in  135  ;  and  that  in  the 
last  quinquennial  period  from  1829  to  1833,  the  annual  mortality  was 
no  greater  than  1  in  157i  of  the  children. 

During  the  whole  period  embraced  by  the  table,  the  children  in  Christ's 
Hospital  continued  under  the  same  management  as  regards  clothing, 
lodging,  and,  in  fact,  every  principal  circumstance  which  apparently  could 
exert  any  influence  upon  the  rate  of  their  mortality,  with  the  exception 
of  some  little  change  of  diet  in  the  partial  substitution  of  vegetable  for 
animal  food.  The  length  of  time  and  the  numbers  embraced  by  the 
return,  forbid  the  belief  that  the  favourable  result  has  been  the  effect 
of  accident ;  and  if  we  consider  that  the  originally  low  rate  of  mortality 
has  been  rendered  more  and  more  favourable  in  each  succeeding  five 
years,  it  is  hardly  possible  to  account  for  the  circumstance  by  any  other 
supposition  than  that  of  an  advance  towards  a  more  rational  mode  of 
discipline,  both  moral  and  medical,  than  was  practised  in  former  periods. 

The  favourable  circumstances  shown  by  Dr.  ^Mitchell  to  exist  in  this 
institution  during  20  years  to  1833,  are  still  experienced,  as  will  be  seen 
from  the  following  figures  : — 


Year  to 
Easter. 


1834 
1835 
1836 
1837 
1838 
1839 


Number  of 
Children. 


Deaths 


1,149 
1,163 
1,121 
1,126 
1,134 
1,150 

6,843 


12 
13 


58 


Y'ear  to    |  Number  of 
Easter.       Children. 


1840 
1841 
1842 
1843 
1844 
1845 


1,202 
1,245 
1,280 
1,324 
1,345 
1,371 

7,767 


Deaths. 


16 
14 

3 
12 

4 
19 

68 


46 


rROGKESS  OF  THE  NATION. 


[sec.  I. 


Tn  1840  several  deaths  occurred  from  measles  and  scarlet  fever, 
which  latter  disease  was  also  very  fatal  in  the  year  ending  Easter  1845. 

The  following  abstract  is  made  from  a  very  interesting  statement 
furnished  to  Rer  Majesty's  Government  by  the  officers  of  St.  Luke's 
Hospital  for  Lunatics.  This  abstract  presents,  upon  the  whole,  a  con- 
solatory view  of  the  progress  of  science  in  the  treatment  of  disease, 


PATIENTS  DEEMED  INCURABLE. 


17.54  to  1760 

1.5 

2 

4 

13-3 

26-6 

39 

2 

5 

5-1 

12-8 

1761  „  1770 

17 

^  , 

3 

,  , 

17-6 

31 

,  , 

6 

19-3 

1771  .,  1780 

15 

,  , 

2 

13-3 

29 

1 

9 

3-4 

31-0 

1781  „  1790 

37 

,  , 

9 

24-3 

56 

1 

5 

1-8 

9-0 

1791  „  1800 

77 

1 

22 

1-3 

28-5 

117 

4 

45 

3-4 

38-4 

1801  „  1810 

70 

,  , 

21 

30-0 

93 

2 

29 

2-1 

31-1 

1811  „  1820 

79 

,  , 

31 

. , 

39-2 

116 

47 

40-5 

1821  „  1830 

84 

,  , 

32 

38-1 

99 

3 

40 

3-0 

40-4 

1831  „  1834 

70 

,  , 

23 

, , 

32-8 

78 

. . 

19 

24-3 

1835  „  1844 

79 

2 

28 

2-5 

35-4 

95 

2 

27 

2-1 

28-4 

Total  No.  ] 

Total  No.  ] 

admitted,  \ 

5 

175 

1-9 

68-3 

admitted,  \ 

15 

232 

4-2 

64-8 

2.56  ! 

358   J 

under  the  most  distressing  form  in  which  it  visits  our  race.  The  table 
has  been  made  in  two  divisions — one  of  patients  deemed  curable,  the 
other  of  patients  deemed  incurable.  The  numbers  embraced  in  the  last 
category  are  too  few  to  admit  of  any  reasoning  in  regard  to  them,  but 
this  objection  does  not  apply  to  the  table  of  curable  patients.  The 
period  embraced  by  the  table  is  94  years,  extending  from  1751,  when 
the  hospital  was  founded,  to  1844,  during  which  time  17,540  patients 
were  admitted,  of  whom  16/JiG  were  deemed  curable.  Of  this  number 
7179  have  been  cured,  and  1316  have  died— the  average  centesimal 


tiiAP.  u.]  MEDICAL  STATISTICS.  47 

proportion  of  cures  being,  among  the  male.-,  87"3,  and  among  the 
females,  458;  while  the  deaths  have  been  ir4  among  males,  and  53 
among  females. 

Some  points  in  the  foregoing  table  require  explanation.  It  will  be 
seen  that  in  the  30  years  which  occurred  between  1781  and  1810  a  con- 
siderable decrease  in  the  number  of  cures  and  an  increase  in  the  number 
of  deaths  were  experienced  among  the  male  patients,  while  no  such  irre- 
gularity appears  in  the  case  of  the  females.  In  the  10  years  between 
1801  and  1811  the  male  cures,  which  between  1771  and  1780  had  been 
43  per  cent.,  were  diminished  to  32  j  per  cent. ;  and  the  deaths,  which 
in  tlie  earlier  period  had  been  no  more  than  7  per  cent.,  were  increased 
to  17t  per  cent.  On  referring  this  subject  to  the  medical  officers  of  the 
hospital,  we  received  the  following  explanation: — "The  increase  of 
deaths  among  the  males  during  the  period  between  1781  and  1800  is 
attributed  to  the  relaxation  of  the  rule  of  not  admitting  any  patient  who 
appeared  to  be  in  too  weak  a  state  of  bodily  health  to  take  medicines 
proper  for  their  lunacy,  or  requiring  the  attendance  of  a  nurse,  and 
which  rule,  subsequent  to  1810,  was  as  strictly  enforced  as  it  had  for- 
merly been  up  to  1781." 

The  proportion  of  cures  in  the  fir^t  and  last  decennary  periods  were 
more  fovourable  than  in  any  other  period  of  the  like  duration.  The 
favourable  proportions  fell  in  the  20  years  following  1760,  and  then 
occurred  the  relaxation  as  to  the  admission  of  patients  which  has  already 
been  explained.  Subsequently  to  1811  a  more  favourable  result  has 
been  obtained,  and  from  1820  this  improvement  has  been  experienced 
in  a  still  greater  degree.  On  this  subject,  the  gentlemen  to  whose  ex- 
planations reference  has  already  been  made,  say, — "  It  is  probable  that 
the  decreased  number  of  deaths  since  1810  may  be  attributed  to  a  gi'ow- 
ing  improvement  among  the  lower  classes  as  regards  their  personal 
habits,  and  to  an  increased  degree  of  skill  in  the  treatment  of  the  insane 
by  the  medical  officers."  These  causes  are  each  of  them  of  a  gratifying 
nature.  Let  us  hope,  as  regards  the  first  mentioned,  that  through  the 
continued  intellectual  and  moral  advancement  of  the  labouring  classes, 
they  may  be  weaned  from  those  habits  of  intemperance  wliich  hitherto 
have  formed  their  chief  reproach,  and  which  but  too  frequently  have  led 
to  those  aberrations  of  mind  which  have  peopled  our  lunatic  asylums. 
That  the  greater  number  of  patients  admitted  into  the  hospital  have  been 
females,  arises,  no  doubt,  from  the  circumstance  that  insanity  frequently 
follows  upon  child-bearing.  The  proportion  of  cures  has  also  been 
almost  uniformly  greater  among  the  women  than  among  the  men ;  and 
the  unfavourable  circumstances  that  attended  the  cases  of  males  between 
1781  and  1811  were  not  experienced  among  the  females. 

The  curative  system  pursued  in  Bethlem  Hospital  was  so  wholly 
changed  about  the  year  1820,  that  it  would  be  useless  to  carry  back  to 


48 


riiOGKESS  OF  THE  NATION. 


[sec.   I. 


an  earlier  period  any  inquiry  concerninp;  the  result  of"  the  cases  admitted 
into  tlie  establishment.  The  following  table  contains  a  statement  for 
each  year,  from  1820  to  1849,  inclusive  : — 


MALES. 

CcnteiiiinHl  propor- 
tions in  quin- 

FEMALES. 

Centesimal  propor- 
tions m  quin- 

quennial periods, 
including   the 

quennial  periods, 
includin.^■   the      " 

Admitted, 

number  remaining 

Admitted, 

number  remaining 

Years. 

including  the 

at  tlic  beginning 

iiicludim;  the 

nl  the  beginning 

Patients  rciimin- 

ing  nt  the 
comnienceiiicnt 

Cured. 

Died. 

of  each  period. 

I'litients  rem.-iin- 

inn  Ht  the 
commencement 

Cured. 

Died. 

of  each  period. 

ol  tlie  lint  rear. 

Cured. 

Died. 

of  tlie  first  year. 

Cured. 

Died. 

1820 

167 

28 

M 

180 

37 

6^ 

1821 

65 

25 

2 

85 

23 

7 

1822 

58 

23 

5 

29-8 

5- 

114 

49 

8 

34-8 

5-9 

1823 

60 

24 

4 

98 

52 

M 

1824 

69 

25 

3  J 

94 

38 

9) 

1825 

77 

31 

9  \ 

108 

43 

^'i 

1826 

69 

26 

1 

99 

47 

8 

1827 

68 

26 

11 

37-1 

7-1 

88 

40 

4 

42-2 

4-5 

1828 

89 

44 

6 

120 

68 

3 

1829 

81 

56 

8  j 

119 

73 

7  j 

1830 

87 

39 

.5  ^ 

123 

76 

8'! 

1831 

87 

35 

10 

137 

63 

3 

1832 

63 

23 

5 

33-7 

6-6 

101 

71 

3  I 

46-2 

3-2 

1833 

64 

25 

4 

127 

59 

7 

1834 

107 

50 

10  j 

118 

65 

2  j 

1835 

114 

40 

9^ 

148 

72 

11  \ 

1836 

121 

51 

11 

149 

87 

13 

1837 

127 

60 

13 

35-79 

7-51 

184 

97 

14 

48-07 

6-03 

1838 

126 

55 

10 

169 

120 

10 

1839 

122 

56 

12) 

178 

86 

10  j 

1840 

152 

69 

\2\ 

198 

111 

11  "\ 

1841 

117 

61 

23 

174 

99 

15 

1842 

140 

62 

15 

38- 

9-22 

204 

108 

7 

45-49 

5-60 

1843 

119 

57 

13 

177 

105 

12 

1844 

133 

60 

12) 

172 

72 

16 

1845 

122 

63 

\2\ 

211 

120 

11  "1 

1846 

142 

67 

5 

171 

96 

10 

1847 

138 

73 

11 

40-52 

5-45 

191 

112 

11 

44-80 

5-11 

1848 

140 

84 

10 

190 

83 

13 

1849 

150 

70 

10 

194 

106 

14 

Reckoning  males  and  females  together,  the  centesimal  proportions  of 
cures  and  deaths  in  the  quinquennial  periods  have  been — 


Years. 

Cured. 

Died. 

1820  to  1824 

32-8 

5-5 

1825  „  1829 

40- 

5-6 

1830  „  1834 

41- 

4-6 

1835  „  1839 

42-76 

6-67 

1840  „  1844 

42-29 

7-15 

1845  „  1849 

42-94 

2-25 

All  patients  who  are  admitted  on  the  curable  establishment  of  Bethlem 
Hos])ital,  and  who  are  not  discliarged  cured  or  otherwise  within  twelve 
months  from  the  date  of  their  admission,  are  disdiarged  at  the  end  of 
that  time,  unless  there  be  a  prospect  of  their  cure,  in  which  case  they 
are  retained  in  the  hos})ital. 


CHAP.    II.] 


MEDICAL  STATISTICS. 


49 


The  result  of  tlie  7595  patients  admitted  into  Bethlem  Hospital 
during  the  30  years  from  1820  to  1849,  distingui.shing  the  sexes,  and 
dividing  tlie  patient*  into  the  three  classes  of  curable,  incurable,  and 
criminal  lunatics,  will  be  seen  in  the  following  table  : — 


Frc 

m  1820  to  1849  inclusive. 

Curables. 

Incurables. 

Males. 

Females. 

Total. 

Males. 

Females. 

Total. 

Remained  in  hospital  1st  January,  \ 
1820,    including    those    out   on  > 
leave  of  absence J 

Admitted 

29 
2,779 

52 
4,163 

81 
6,942 

28 
96 

41 
101 

69 
197 

2,808 

4,215 

7,023 

124 

142 

266 

Discharged : — 

Cured 

Uncured 

By  request  of  friends 

Disqualified  cases       .... 

Convalescent  and  no  report 

Escaped      

Died 

Remaining  31st  December,  1840  : — 

Out  on  leave 

In  hospital 

1,343 
632 

69 
504 

25 

'155 

3 

77 

2,226 
1,127 

89 
404 

50 

'190 

5 
124 

3,569 

1,7.59 

158 

908 

75 

'3i5 

8 
201 

7 

"24 
6 

1 

46 

'"40 

24 

4 

19 

1 

""58 

"36 

31 
4 

43 
6 

1 

1 

104 

"'76 

2,808 

4,215 

7,023 

124 

142 

266 

From  1820  to  1849  inclusive. 

Criminals. 

Total. 

Males. 

Females. 

Total. 

Males. 

Females. 

Total. 

Remained  in  hospital  1st  January, -j 

1820,    including    those    out    on  !• 

41 

9 

50 

98 

102 

200, 

leave  of  absence ) 

Admitted 

201 

55 

256 

3,076 

4,319 

7,395 

242 

64 

306 

3,174 

4,421 

7,595 

Discharged  : — 

Cured 

58 

28 

86 

1,408 

2,278 

3,686 

Uncured 

3 

3 

635 

1,131 

1,766 

By  request  of  friends 

93 

108 

201 

Disqualified  cases       .... 

510 

404 

914 

Convalescent,  and  no  report     . 

25 

51 

76 

Removed  by  order  of  Secre- ) 
tary  of  State J 

20 

20 

20 

20 

Escaped      

1 

1 

2 

2 

1 

3 

Died 

67 

16 

83 

268 

264 

532 

Remaining  31st  December,  1844: — 

Out  on  leave 

, , 

, , 

3 

5 

8 

In  hospital 

93 

19 

112 

210 

.      179 

3S9 

242 

64 

306 

3,174 

4,421 

7,595 

In  the  year  1844  there  were  di.<charged  2G0  patients.     The  length  of 
time  in  which  they  had  remained  in  the  hospital,  iis  well  as  the  circum- 

E 


.50 


PROGRESS  OF  THE  NATION. 


[sec.  I. 


stances  under  which  they  were  discharged,  are  shown  in  the  following 
table : — 


Time 

Cured. 

By  request  of 
Friends. 

Disqualified 
Cases. 

Died. 

Uncured. 

Hospital. 

M. 

F. 

Tot. 

M. 

F. 

Tot. 

M. 

F. 

Tot. 

M. 

F. 

Tot. 

M. 

F. 

Tot. 

1  month    •      . 

2  months  .     . 

3  „       .     . 

4  „       .     . 

5  „       .     . 

6  „       .     . 

V      „     .    . 

8  „       .     . 

9  „       .     . 

10  „      .    . 

11  „       .     . 

12  „       .     . 

13  „       .     . 

14  „       .     . 

15  „       .     . 

16  „       .     . 

17  „       •     • 

18  „       .     . 

19  „       .     . 

20  „       .     . 

21  „       .     . 

22  „       .     . 

23  and  upwards 

'e 

17 
9 

10 
6 

i 

4 
5 

5 
12 
11 

10 
7 
5 

7 
1 
2 
2 
8 

ii 

29 

20 

20 

13 

5 

8 

5 

2 

2 

13 

1 

i 

*2 

2 

1 

1 
1 

'i 

"2 

1 
1 
1 

5 
2 
3 

1 

2 
'2 

1 
2 
3 

2 

6 
4 
6 

3 
2 
1 

4 
2 

1 
2 
2 

1 

7 
4 
2 
2 
2 
1 

'i 

15 
1 
1 

6 

'2 

'i 

si 

1 

's 

6 

'2 

1 

*i 

46 
2 

1 

14 

6 

'4 

1 

'2 

58 

70 

128 

6 

5 

11 

15 

11 

26 

6 

13 

19 

26 

50 

76 

The  number  of  lunatics  and  idiots  chargeable  to  the  parishes  of 
England  and  Wales,  in  the  month  of  August,  1844,  was  ascertained 
to  be  as  follows  : — 


In  589  Unions 
Under  Local  Acts 
Other  places    .     . 


LUNATICS. 

IDIOTS. 

Males. 

Females. 

Total. 

Males. 

Females. 

TotaL 

3,356 
443 
103 

4,294 
643 
134 

7,650 

1,086 

237 

3,636 
229 
105 

4,066 
229 
117 

7,702 
458 
222 

3,902 

5,071 

8,973 

3,970 

4,412 

8,382 

Of  the  above  17,355  persons,  there  were  maintained — 

Males.  Females.  Total. 

In  County  Lunatic  Asylums 2,003  2,221  4,224 

In  Licensed  Houses 1,319  1,629  2,948 

In  Union  Workhouses 2,088  2,592  4,680 

With  their  friends,  or  elsewhere .     .     .     .     2,254  2,790  5,044 

In  other  places,  not  in  union 208  -'         251  459 

7,872  9,483  17,355 


CHAT.     II.] 


MEDICAL  STATISTICS. 


51 


Their  ages  were — 


Not  exceeding  5  years 

5  to  10  years 
10  „  20 


20 
30 
40 
50 
60 


30 
40 
50 
60 
70 


70  and  upwards 

The  ages  not  ascertained  of  those  estimated  for  1 
other  places  not  in  union J 


56 

978 

a35 

733 
612 
722 
727 
725 


16,896 
459 

17,355 


If  to  those  chargeable  to  parishes  we  add  4072  private  patients,  viz., 
2161  males  and  1911  females,  we  have  a  total  of  21,427  individuals  in 
England  and  Wales  declared  to  be  of  unsound  mind,  or  1  in  775  of  the 
population. 

A  further  report  of  the  Commissioners  in  Lunacy  was  made  to  the 
Lord  Chancellor  in  June,  1847,  in  which  was  given  a  summary  of 
pauper  lunatics  and  idiots  in  England  and  Wales  on  the  1st  January 
of  that  year,  viz.  : — 

Males.  Females.  Total. 

Lunatics 4,499  5,930  10,429 

Idiots 3,637  3,999  7,636 


8,136 

Of  the  above  there  were — 

Males. 
In  County  Lunatic  Asylums  and  Hospitals     2,397 

In  Licensed  Houses 1,657 

In  Union  Workliouses 2,058 

With  their  friends,  or  elsewhere  .         .     .     1,965 

T      11.        1  J.  •         •      f  Lunatics      .  37 

In  other  places,  not  in  union /,, . 

(_  Idiots      .      .  22 


9,929 


8,136 


9,929 


Their  ages  were — 

Not  exceeding  5  years 
-   From  5  to  10  years  . 
„    10 
„    20 
„    30 


20 
30 
40 

40  „  50 
50  „  60 
60  „  70 
70  and  upwards 


The  ages  not  ascertained  of  those  in  places  not 
in  union 


17,952 
113 


18,065 


18,065 


Females. 

Total. 

2,745 

5,142 

2,104 

3,761 

2,573 

4,631 

2,453 

4,418 

40 

77 

14 

36 

18,065 


E  2 


52 


PROGRESS  OF  THE  NATION. 


[sec. 


The  total  number  of  persons  of  unsomul  mind  in  England  and  ^^^lles 
at  the  above  date  was  26,516,  thus  distributed  : — 

1.  In  County  Asylums,  Hospitals,  and  Licensed  Houses,  subjected  1  .„  226 

to  the  visitations  of  the  Commissioners J 

2.  In  Betlilem,  and  in  Naval  and  Military  Hospitals  not  subjected  1  g^g 

to  such  visitations J 

3.  Paupers  in  Union  Workhouses  and  places  under  local  Acts   .      .     .  8,986 

4.  Paupers  in  Gilbert  Unions,  and  other  places  not  in  union      .      .      .  176 

5.  Single  Patients  found  lunatic  by  inquisition 307 

6.  Single  Patients  in  private  houses,  in  charge  of  persons  receiving  1  jg^ 

profits ' 

7.  Excess  of  Pauper  Patients  in  "Workhouses,  &c 3,053 

8.  Criminals  in  Gaols 32 

26,516 


The  per  centage  proportions  of  cures  and  deaths  occurring  in  county 
and  other  public  lunatic  asylums,  dui-ing  the  five  years  1840  to  1844, 
were  as  follows  : — 


,,        .     A     1  Yearly      Yearly 

County  Asylum.  ^,^j.^^-      peatlik. 

Bedford 15-9         10-5 

Chester 30' 

Cornwall 13-4  7-9 

Dorset 15-6        12-2 

Gloucester 31" 

Kent 7' 

Lancaster 16-6         13-2 

Leicester 3G-1         11-3' 

Middlesex 6-7  9-1 

Norfolk 13-3         19-1 

Nottingham 24' 

Stafford 21' 


1 

11 

4 

7 

6 

12 

7 

10 

5 

10 

6 

13 

1 

11 

7 

9 

3 

19 

6 

9 

13 

County  Asylum.  ff^^J 

Suffolk 16-1 

York,  West  Riding .     .     .  17-1 

Bristol,  St.  Peter's  Hospital  20-3 


■  Yearly 

Deaths. 

10-8 

13-6 

19-7 


Exeter 47-6  12-4 

Lincoln 17  "9  15* 

Liverpool 62*7  16 '7 

Northampton      ....  30*3  14" 

Wameford,  near  Oxford    .  22*4  7*5 

York  Asylum      ....  7-9  6-8 

Friend's  Retreat,  York      .  8-2  5-7 


The  return  from  the  Glasgow  Lunatic  Asylum,  during  27  years  from 
1814  to  1840,  show  the  following  results: — 


Years. 

Admitted. 

Cured. 

Relieyed. 

Discharged. 

Died. 

Proportion  of 
Deaths.* 

1814  to  1818 

387 

151 

85 

32 

17 

1819  „  1823 

427 

176 

94 

90 

55 

10-39 

1824  „  1828 

400 

172 

105 

65 

49 

9-53 

1829  „  1833 

462 

217 

132 

37 

60 

10-25 

1834  „  1838 

534 

252 

130 

64 

70 

10-40 

1839  &  1840 

280 

144 

55 

28 

27 

6-17 

♦  Including  the  number  remaining  in  the  Asylum  at  the  beginning  of  each  period. 


III.] 


OCCUPATIOXS  OF  THE  PEOPLE, 


CHAPTER  III. 


OCCUPATIONS  OF  THE  PEOPLE. 

Change  in  relative  proportions  of  Agriculturists,  Traders,  &c.,  in  England,  Wales,  Scotland, 
and  Great  Britain —Employment  of  Adult  Males  in  the  United  Kingdom  in  1831— 
Occupations  of  Population  of  Great  Britain,  1841 — Proportions  in  each  County  of 
England,  1811,  1821,  1831,  and  1841  — Numerical  Order  of  Counties  relatively  to  each 
other  at  different  periods— Division  of  Agricultural  Population— Occupiers — Labourers 
— Great  Britain  and  Ireland — Proportions  emploj-ed  in  1831  and  1841  in  raising  food — 
Advantage  of  knowing  the  proportions  into  which  Population  is  divided — Failure  of 
attempts  to  ascertain  this  in  the  earlier  enumerations — Result  of  the  attempt  in  1841 — 
Excise  Licenses  granted  for  exercising  certain  branches  of  business  —  Division  of 
Emploj-ments  in  Ireland,  1841 — Domestic  Servants  in  United  Kingdom — Employment 
of  Adult  Males  in  United  Kingdom  in  1841 — Employment  in  Textile  Manufactures— 
In  Factories — In  Mines — In  manufacture  of  Metals — Occupations  of  People  in  France 
— Classification  of  Land-owners — Division  of  the  Soil. 


A  CHANGE  has  for  some  time  been  going  forward  in  regard  to  the  rela- 
tive proportions  of  the  inhabitants  of  this  country  who  are  employed  in 
agricultural  pursuits,  or  in  trade,  manufactures,  &c. 

The  following  table  will  show  the  variations  of  this  kind,  as  exhibited 
in  Great  Britain  by  the  three  decennary  enumerations  preceding  that  of 
1841 :— 

Comparative  Statement  of  the  Numbers  and  Occupations  of  Families  in  England,  ffales,  and 
Scotland,  in  tlie  Years  1811,  1821,  and  1831,  according  to  the  Population  Returns  of  those  Years 
respectively  ;  sluowing  also  tlie  Proportions  of  each  Class  in  Centesimal  Parts. 


England"^ 


Wales 


Scotland"^ 


Great    J 
Britain    I 


At  the 
end  of 
May  in 
each 
Year. 


Total 
Families. 


i.-™„i„,.,  .1    Emploved  in 

in  Agri-     „    '^"'^f- 
culture.     -Manufactures, 
1  &c. 


-All  other 
Families. 


1811 
1821 
1831 

1811 
1821 
1831 

1811 
1821 
1831 


2,012,391  '  697, .353  923, .588 
2.346,717  !  773,7.32  1,118,29.5 
2, 745, .336   761,348   1,182,912 


129,756 
146,706 
166,538 

402,068 
447,960 
502,301 


72,846 
74,225 
73,195 

125,799 
1.30,699 
126,. 591 


36,044 
41,680 
44,702 

169,417 
190,264 
207,259 


1811  2,544.215  ]  895.998  1,129.049 
1821  2,941,383  I  978;6.56  1,3.50;2.39 
1831  I  3,414,175  ;  961.134  !  1,434,873 


391,450 
4.54,690 
801,076 

20,866 
.30.801 
48; 641 

106,. 552 
126,997 
168,451 

.518,868 

612,488 

1,018,168 


Centesimal  Parts. 


A^-     Trade, 
culture.     &c. 


34-7 
33- 

27-7 


45-9 
47-6 
43-1 


56-2  !  27-7 

50-6  28-5 

43-9  26-9 

31-3  42-1 

29-2  42-5 

25-2  41-3 

35-2  44-4 

33-2  45-9 

28-2  42-0 


Others 


Total. 


20-4 
20-9 

29-8 


100 
100 
100 

100 
100 
100 

100 
100 
100 

100 
100 
100 


54  PROGRESS  OF  THE  NATION.  [sec.  i. 

No  comparison  can  be  strictly  made  between  the  proportions  shown  by 
the  foregoing  table,  and  the  result  of  the  census  of  1841,  when  the  occu- 
pations of  the  people  were  ascertained,  not  according  to  the  number  of 
families,  but  of  individuals.  We  are  enabled,  however,  to  compare  the 
two  periods,  with  reference  to  the  occupations  of  males,  20  years  of  age 
and  upwards,  living  in  1831  and  1841,  and  the  result  cannot  be  mate- 
rially different  from  that  which  would  have  been  shown  had  the  division 
been  made  as  before  into  families. 

England  and  Wales.  1831  ISil 

Employed  in  agriculture      ....  31'69  25*65 

„        in  trade,  manufactures,  &c.  39-11  43 '08 

otherwise       29-20  31-27 


100-  100- 


Scotland. 

Employed  in  agriculture      .     .     .     .  30-40  27-88 

„        in  trade,  &c 43-  46-60 

otherwise 26-60  25-52 


100-  100- 


Great  Britain. 
Employed  in  agriculture 
„        in  trade,  &c.  . 
„        otherwise 


31-51 

25-93 

39-65 

43-53 

28-84 

30-54 

100-  100- 


The  circumstance  which  most  requires  to  be  noticed  in  these  state- 
ments is  the  decrease  in  the  relative  number  of  families  employed  in 
agricultural  pursuits.  In  the  course  of  30  years  the  centesimal  pro- 
portion of  such  families  has  fallen  from  35*2  to  25'9,  showing  that  the 
quantity  of  food  for  the  production  of  which  the  labour  of  seven  families 
was  formerly  employed,  is  now  produced  by  the  labour  of  five  families. 
This  is  a  fact  of  considerable  importance,  if  considered  with  reference  to 
another  interesting  question,  that  of  the  capability  of  the  country  to 
continue  its  present  onward  course  with  respect  to  manufactures,  not- 
withstanding the  physical  impossibility  under  which  it  is  placed,  of 
adding  in  any  material  degree  to  the  extent  of  soil  whence  the  greater 
quantity  of  food  then  needed  must  be  derived. 

The  alteration  indicated  by  the  foregoing  tables  will  appear  in  a  more 
striking  point  of  view,  if  a  calculation  be  made  of  the  positive  increase  in 
number  of  the  families  in  each  of  the  three  classes,  during  the  20  years 
1811  to  1831.  It  will  then  be  seen  that,  while  the  increase  in  the  num- 
ber of  families  altogether  was  after  the  rate  of  34  per  cent.,  the  addition 
to  those  of  the  agricultural  class  has  been  only  7y  per  cent.,  those  of  the 
trading  and  manufacturing  class  having  received  an  accession  to  their 


CHAP.   III.] 


OCCUPATIONS  OF  THE  PEOPLE. 


numbers  of  27  per  cent.,  and  those  of  all  other  classes  having  been  in 
the  same  time  very  nearly  doubled  in  number. 

The  further  subdivision  of  the  population,  as  relating  to  males 
20  years  of  age  and  upwards,  which  was  made  in  1831,  somewhat 
varied  the  centesimal  proportions,  as  will  appear  from  the  following 
abstract : — 


s  >.'s-ai 

CT>      IR      u-^ 

C5 
0 

CI 

.2  5  =  =  §"2 
<9  5:  5  2  =*  a 

S  ?  is  £  »  * 

<N     ■*      ~ 

"1* 

«3     .-     00 

to 

'"' 

o~  <>r  m" 

00" 

in 

IfftI 

CT>  0  0 

CTi 

00  00  « 

Ci 

0 

tc 

CO    —     o> 

-f 

-2 

.«-> 

a 

Ut 

Im 

■Sl 

0    >< 

Oi    ^    -r 

0 

eS 

Cj 

CO 

00    ^    n 

I5 

C4 

Ch 

^ 

■^^ 

Ch 

CO 

0  00  a 

—      >•  ;o 

®   0    E 

ii§1 

C        —        -H 
m        t^        01 

0     I.-;     ^ 

(N 

=^  -a 

0 

to 

00 

CO 

0 

3   ^  S-S 

c 

a 

g 

S3  s  S 

0)         <J 

q"  --"  0" 

5     C5     t- 

00 

0 
0 

0 

5} 

0 

't 

"   ;„-  S  g  -3 

n    -^    n 

0 

00    0    0 

C3 

;=       S     .2    -5      5       g- 

;J>     d     C^ 

CO 

0 

5-S  ^  =  u  « 

ci    in    CT» 

■* 

._( 

t^              <7A 

c5 

0 

•?!  ?!?• 

1^     0      -t 

t^ 

CO 

t^     !M     0 

0 

-2 

09 

■X 

"7:  —   i^-^   ■»  ^ 

r^    c»    -r 

00 

vT 

-t"  w"  i>r 

oT 

hi 

C3 

CO 

u 

a 

r'r   0   ^   ~   t; 

-0      -t      «-T 

in 

-f 

=0" 

^1 

c      "a 

CI                1-1 

-" 

00 

CO 
in 

-Sil^ci       ^ 

0     CO     W 

0      -^       C5 

t^ 

m 

a 

0 
-*• 

(N 

CO 

J 

Z 

"S.  c  ii  -  c  •:  IS 

;5    c^    r5 

CO 

CO 

0 

in" 

w  -d         M 

r~    00    5-1 

£>■    2 

i  ^„  s 

-!•     0     t^ 

t^ 

5_ 

■^<     0      00 

38 

<» 

to 

m 

&3 

■g 

m 

"§ 

P»    1    ..-.  w 

CO      0      0 

0 

in 

c3 

— 

in 

;2 

D 

00      0      CO 
00       C3       05 

-t    cT  co" 

00 
oo" 

0 
0 

CM 

0 

'7'i 

0  0    s 

o 

0    =^.Q 

OS      i-H      0 

0 

^   "3 

-f 

!M 

0      .-; 

"  c  0.=! 

•J5 

s 

0              J 

i-H 

•V 

0 

^ 

0 

< 

0 

c 

s  =  s 

0      00      t^ 

•0      I^      00 

0 

CO 
CO 

0 

■*     t^     00 

--T  ~r  .rT 

-»>     ^      (N 

0^ 
00 

ci.2 

■^ 

Cmi 

■*        «0        r-. 

^ 

in 

0 

00     0     !M 

to 

"  2   * 

a>    t~    00 

0 

t- 

cT  -f  en 

Cr.     CT5     -^ 

1 

i 

0 

CI 

eo" 

eo" 

- 

•      •      • 

fl 

. 

•3 

• 

-3       •    -3 
0             » 

IS 

M   0  ^ 
111 

W     !?    CO 

2 

0 

A 

56  PROGRESS  OF  TIIP:  NATION.  [sec.  i. 

It  will  be  seen  that  the  proportion  of  males  20  years  of  age  and  up- 
wards is  greater  in  families  employed  in  agriculture  than  in  the  remain- 
ing classes  or  divisions,  and  it  may  be  inferred  that  the  population  does 
not  increase  so  rapidly  in  proportion  to  its  numbers  among  agi-icultural 
families  as  among  the  remaining  portions  of  the  people  — an  etFect  which 
may  probably  be  owing  in  some  degree  to  greater  longevity,  caused  by 
the  superior  healthfulness  of  the  country  ;  still  more,  perhaps,  to  the  less 
exciting  nature  of  country  employments  which  occasion  less  wear  and  tear 
to  the  animal  frame  than  is  experienced  in  towns,  where  the  interests  of 
men  bring  them  more  directly  into  collision,  and  where,  if  the  satisfaction 
attendant  upon  success  is  more  attainable,  the  harassings  and  disappoint- 
ments of  life  are  more  frequently  experienced  ;  but  in  addition  to  those 
causes  comes  the  fact,  that  there  is  a  constant  tendency  of  the  rural 
population  to  seek  employment  in  towns,  so  soon  as  that  period  of  life  is 
attained  at  which  occnpation  is  assumed,  while  there  is  no  tendency  on 
the  part  of  young  persons  born  in  towns  to  seek  employment  in  country 
districts. 

The  following  more  elaborate  table  of  the  occupations  of  the  popula- 
tion of  Great  Britain,  as  ascertained  in  1841,  has  been  compiled  from 
the  Reports  of  the  Census  Commissioners.  It  affords  the  best  abstract 
that  has  hitherto  been  attainable  upon  this  important  branch  of  political 
arithmetic. — See  pp.  57,  58. 

It  may  be  interesting  to  know  the  proportions  in  regard  to  occupations 
into  which  the  population  of  each  county  in  England  is  divided,  and  the 
variations  in  this  respect  which  each  has  undergone  during  the  thirty 
years  that  have  elapsed  between  1811  and  1841.  For  this  purpose  the 
following  two  tables  (pp.  59  and  60)  have  been  constructed.  The  first  of 
them  shows  the  centesimal  proportion  which  each  class  bore  to  the 
other  two  classes  at  the  several  enumerations  of  1811,  1821,  1831, 
and  1841 ;  while  the  second  table  shows  the  numerical  order  in  which 
each  county  stood  at  those  periods  relatively  to  the  other  counties. 
For  this  latter  purpose  the  population  has  been  divided  into  only  two 
classes,  viz. — agriculturists  and  others.  The  reason  for  this  classifica- 
tion will  be  at  once  apparent  on  inspection  of  the  first  table.  The 
glaring  discrepancies  observable  in  the  proportions  at  different  periods 
of  the  third  or  miscellaneous  class  of  the  population,  render  it  .evident 
that  no  very  precise  rule  has  been  used  for  determining  into  which  of 
the  two  non-agricultural  classes  a  considerable  number  of  families 
should  be  placed.  By  adopting  only  two  divisions  or  classes,  this  diffi- 
culty is  removed,  and  a  greater  degree  of  certainty  upon  the  subject 
is  attained.  The  persons  appointed  to  prepare  the^  returns  might  easily 
fall  into  errors  in  classing  traders  and  followers  of  professions ;  but 
could  hardly  fail  to  distinguish  from  all  others  those  families  who  drew 
their  support  from  agricultural  occupations. 


CH\r.  III.] 


OCCUPATIONS  OF  THE  PEOPLE. 


57 


_.    ,-- 

^ 

:r.       to  If:  cTi  c.  I-  ».':  o  —     o 

^ 

„ 

S     «  1- 

.r;       1.';  X  o  —  I  -  00  it  en    c-. 

S    5 

X 

9 

\n    n  o 

«3 

CO       a>r—ir;ot~0!CTl    to 

O 

«    C-.  -t 

Tt         . 

-«•'  •  (?reo'co'x"3>rco"x'"x"  ^^ 

X     — 

^ 

H 

I-      (M  00 

(N                   -<           .n  in    iM 

X    CO 

71 

Tt      0< 

O^   in__ 

to 

71 

r^    i.'i  -^ 

00         't  X  to      -f 

to     X 

-t 

IM      (N  "t 

X               J^  to      i.^ 

X      CI 

00     ^  l~ 

X 

"C  aj 

c>. 

i^    in 

-t  — 

^^    o 

i_i 

S 

C4 

CO 

in 

s  ?, 

to 

d 

1 

■a 
s 

mow 

00      00  !£> 

C-.  to  u-:  X  in  n    o 

-t    -* 

5& 

z 

d 

-t  CO  o  -  O  .r^     O 

o    o 

< 

^      «  ^ 

to  '71  —  ^  CO  X     t- 

l^      X 

<j 

>3    V 

Id  > 

Ol      t^  00 

to      32 

W° 

00      ^ 

X    -l-         -H 

to 

Q 

■ri    i-n 

^ 

S 

00      «  — 

o 

,-H                    t^  ^  to  m  CT5    CO 

-f    — 

_„ 

^  2 

i^.      (NO 

in                     00  i.n  CO  ^  32    1- 

o    o 

»  s 

O    00  00 

J^ 

in                   to           —-to 

-t     1-n 

32 

•a  !» 

s'  i  ="" 

• 

IN      •     •     .      •  ?)               »            — 

CO     i~ 

^ 

i 

—     -* 

to 

^ 

13 

s 

C 

r^    ^\n 

X       toi-nc2X  —  f^c^t^    CO 

X     3: 

I^ 

a 

O      O  «5 

(M 

O       m  X  —  X  3-1  <>)  I.-,  to    to 

'^     ^ 

i.n 

i-O      C  00 

C-. 

X         O  —  3-.  Ci  to  —  to  —      05 

1^ 

t^    iD  ir> 

CO     • 

—      •C^C0TI'7>?N3^C0—     r^ 

m     in 

^° 

t^    to  o 

3;.     CO 

« 

3^      ^ 

o 

«5      X  ?1 

^  — 

CO  3-.  o  i.":  to  X  x  1--.  X  r:    to 

o    to 

.. 

O      -f  CI 

i£  CO 

C5  35 1.-^  ur:  CO  t~  X  71  -t  i^    o 

X 

<?1       -*  C5 

t^  (N 

—  t^-t—  -*"XO—  035      (N 

32      X 

tf 

05      —  CO 

«3  CJ 

^<So-*'Km-fo\c^in    to" 

to      O 

5; 

s 

--    «J  t^ 

CO  00 

ClClS^rHr-I'I  —  <M3-.  -t      t^ 

E 

r-                  3-.  rj"       — 

rC    CO 

to"  32" 

to" 

CO      ^  J> 

£.  -t  CO  X  2J      S^ 

wi        ^- 

CI 

»  S 

00    ■^^  CI 

0 

SJ   d 

CO      CO  I'l 

00  "  '^  ■*  ^      (M 

i-n    t^ 

CO 

^ 

rs   Q> 

S>| 

a-,    r;  t~. 

•     • 

--H               C:  -*     CO 

-f     to 

,—1 

ij 

o 

00—      (N 

0    m 

to 

< 

s 

-^ 

<f\ 

"^    ^„ 

to 

^ 

"a 
S 

co" 

co" 

3 

Q 

-<      O  00 

r-       C 

S, 

O        L-^    •>< 

t^  to  —  ^;  X  to    — 

X     m 

?>     fcZ 

3^      ■*  00 

t^  o  i-n  X  o  o    o 

X      CO 

ci 

*3    4) 

1  = 

.-    00  00 

•      • 

....        o        —  to  X     o 

'-"■    ^ 

i-n 

o 

2    -tci 

CO           t^  o     to 

z 

CO 

■*  CO 

'^^  s. 

-J 

o 

§ 

— '    co" 

-* 

C5 

-*     t-  S>J 

CO  ^ 

OO                 r^C!  —  TtO'J     — 

i.n    IN 

1^ 

CO      C-.  00 

in  X                CO  —  c^  'M  3-.    i.n 

0    in 

0 

Q 

V  a 

CO 

CO  —                to  (N  CO  m  o    O 

0_^  r-^ 

rs    a, 

c  ;iH 

00     —  i-O 

50 

t^  t^    •    •    •  O           CO  i.n    X 

•f    i-n" 

32 

^^ 

^      O  00 

—                     —               X            Cl 

7>    n 

<B 

CO       r-< 

tr~     32 

to 

9 

"a 

■rT 

co" 

■a 

S 

a 

00      O  CO 

Ol-; 

CO  3:  o  in  to  71  o  un  o  X    -f 

CO       CO 

to 

a 

iri    00  00 

to  — c 

-*  —  L-^  ■--:  to  r^ — f  i-";  C  X     Ol 

X      — 

00    C 

^      Ci  «> 

-f  Tl 

X^tO  -f  -<  tO__C0  CO  3-.  O  to      32 

t    0^ 

-t 

5  ^ 

®  ^sa 

O  35 

t^  3-.  o  ■*  t^  1— 1  CO  aTo^x*"  TjT 

^r  32 

^^ 

o    ^co 

CO  » 

Xt^CM  — —  «  — —  S—    to 

to     CO 

t^     O  ■<1' 

0      !N 

CO 

o 

»— «        »-H 

-t" 

-t" 

•  60  a> 

.■-3 "" 

I 

• 

C3 

o 

^ 
^ 

.*§   ii 

•  •S 

• 

03 

z 

o 

£    • 
us 

o  s 

."3 
.S 

■-a 

3  -2 

s  s 
ir  £* 

1 

1 

5 

C3 

and  Merchant  Seamen   a 
ashore,  including  Navy  1 
and  Marines,  Fishermen, 

1 

e: 

"3 
ti  — 

■c  ? 
.2 

Medical   . 
pursuits  re(piiring  educati 
nment  Civil  Service 
ipal  and  panichial  Offices, 
itic  Servants  .... 

IS  ofinde])endent  means 
People,   Pensioners,  Paup 
atics,  and  Prisoners 

0     e     Ih 

—  s-i   "■ 

Hi 

■3 

=   g   "   a   ^ 

o 

^CS 

>.'2 
§3 

1 

■2^           2          -5:3  =  S^-5 

ill 

Sh      <,J<J 

1 

Z 

&<           C  wS  — i-< 

r-  — 

58 


PROGRESS  OF  THE  NATION. 


[sec.  I. 


o    cc  r: 

52 

—" 

1  — f  CO  rv  -t  in  in  -^ 

CO 

o    o 

3 

00     C-.  r^ 

CO  — ■  X  in  J-.  (^  CO  1  ~ 

.-H         CO 

Iti 

iC      -CM 

00  CN 

_  ^  „  00            m^-.^ 

r— ' 

OS       1— ' 

^ 

■q 

t''"  oc'w" 

(n" 

t-Tr-" 

rt*" 

OS      -t> 

-f" 

H 

^    t-. 

C>) 

<! 

oi 

O     00  lO 

CO  ^      in  OS 

^ 

0\     (N 

•^ 

S  a 

O     CO  t^ 

CO           r~  i-< 

t^ 

rt     t^ 

00 

13    OJ 

•     • 

'.'.'.              \  '~'J'* 

CO      00 

K 

0> 

•    * 

'  (n" 

eo"  -*'" 

oo" 

c« 

_a; 

<N 

<N 

g 
S 

4J 

2  U 

«^       05  rt 

00  IN  in  in  op  to 

Oi 

O     CS 

CS 

« 

Cb 

o    J-.  >n 

cs     O 

OS 

IfS       ■*  i-< 

•     • 

•    •      (N           CO  in 

CO 

t^    in 

<M 

g 
Q 

«1 

<N            ^ 

Tj-rf 

2    c5" 

?§" 

»• 

00      -^  fN 

o  — 

cjs  ■*           in  00 

r-( 

OS      i-l 

O 

V    M 

^  S2 

s^ 

in           00  OS 

CO 

CO       r-l 

in 

<) 

t3  aj 

;  ;        •  ;co 

CO      C3S 

c^ 

■J 

O" 

s 

M 

(N 

s 

si 

■*    in  in 

©  00 

r^-^cDOooOt^co 

(N 

CS     00 

t^ 

t^      t^  Ol 

CT  •* 

C0rt;O0000!O(MtD 

in 

CO     CO 

C 

l^    <N  3) 

«C  O 

I-H   rl  ^   Tf                    t^  (N 

CO 

■*      00 

CO 

r^  Z. 

^■2 

.-1      t^  —c 

-M 

(N 

00    rt 

o 

Sg 

!M 

CO 

.s 

t^    in  in 

-*■  o 

(Mos^DO-fr^mooc-f 

CO 

0\      00 

It- 

00    00  n 

0-.  CO 

m  0-.  o  -(■  Q  r^  tD  —  OS  -x) 

ini^-TCOOOSOOiM^C'M 

OS 

O     CO 

I-    t-  -f 

CO  (M 

00^ 

t-    o\ 

OS 

3 

IM      O  00 

r-l  05 

Cs;OC0r^(M'-CDint^-t 

t^ 

in    IN 

I^ 

c 
o 
o 

C-.     o--  \n 

■*  Xi 

•-ias(Ni-i(M-^rt(Mino 

OS 

OS     (M 

H 

O     ■*  t^ 

rt                              r^                l-H  in 

r^    OS 

t^ 

CO      i-< 

,.H 

t-    o 

00 

1 

s 

'•£» 

2  $f2 

t^  -tl^  CD  00 

CO 

t^      cs 

CO 

c 

OS  .-1  ,—1  .—  OS 

CO 

CO    r^ 

si 

(M      T)<  Cl 

cs               O  CO 

t-     (N 

o^ 

s 

5. 

t-     -t  t^ 

•      • 

r-l               -1"  in 

-* 

in    t>- 

co" 

r? 

£  >H 

a>       rl 

't  rt 

<M 

O     CO 

^ 

t-o 

'"' 

CO 

CO    to 

a-i 

<D 

OT 

<N 

eo" 

■*" 

'^ 

g 

1 

^ 

1 

O        Or-I 

cs  ^  O  '*'  to  O 

OS 

in    Ti< 

OS 

L. 

h 

in    CO  as 

r^  OS  (M  in  00  (?» 

00    in 

CO 

.5 

S"  c 

tC      00  02 

■*  C^  (O  OS  CO  OS 

t^ 

in    ^ 

t- 

1 

a  4" 

o'  in"o" 

•     • 

....  rH^crf     ^"oo'im" 

,_c 

(m"   cs" 

f.^ 

S  fe 

00     to  o 

....          CO                  in  xTi 

t^ 

t^       CO 

-f 

H 

P-° 

■*              rl 

in  CO 

CO    in 

C) 

8 
O 

O 

s 

r^  n 

in" 

<N     O  CO 

CO  in 

i-H  O                       -*  O  t^  OS  pH 

Tf 

OS      CO 

s^ 

oi    CI  CO 

o  00                (N  t^  m  CO  OS 

C^ 

5    S 

CO 

CM 

!r  2 

^    m  cji 

o 

OS  .-H                CO  s^  CO  ;o  in 

r-* 

CO__ 

.a 

!U    CO 

^  D 

r^    O)  'i" 

r- 

OS  r^    ...  CO           ^  in 

CS 

OS     ^ 

o" 

c>< 

00      O  05 

i-H      .      •      •  rH                cs 

Ol 

in    -- 

t^ 

^ 

t3o 

CO      <H 

00     ■* 

Oi 

<n 

CJ 

co" 

■*" 

J 

13 

in    cs  00 

pj  in 

•-ios«oo»noi-<s<it^in 

ini-iQ-*oo-.c«Dooinin 

U5;O'?'C0inc0OS00CD00 

t^ 

1-1     (N 

CO 

CO    ao  -f 

°°  "Zi 

00 

t^      00 

in 

«>    oi in 

CO  (M 

00^ 

OS^    ^ 

^ 

CO     ^ 

r~    t^  00 

-t  O) 

oioscot^o-^iniMcoos 

s<r 

t>r  -iT 

(M 

"  e 

53    S  t 

CO  00 

Ot^(Ni-HCNOSrH<M;D(M 

!>• 

in     r^ 

CO 

>>  ° 

O    (M  in 

co^    (N 

OS 

o 

(N"     r^" 

^'" 

Tl<" 

05 
Z 

O 
H 

o 
o 
o 

o      ,     .      . 

a  ••   • 
a 

o  <u    .    • 

us     ^ 

.s  § 

ll 

§^ 

el 

^  o 
cs  o 

1  •  • 

.2       § 

^  ".s 

5  °  t 

"Sis  i 

o  c3  a 

o  c  s 

1. 

6  a 

.    .    .  o    .^'S    .    . 
■-.3       oT 

.     .     .    «S          >"          0) 

2"  ■ 

a> 
a<  * 

3 

O   m 

0)    o 
^•5 

*  bD 

O 

^3 

"la    . 

.2  a 

3  -3   d) 

1o| 
a  0)  cj 

^la 

-3    CO    O 

5  afe 

"3 

o 

0 

,  •-<     t-  _rt            ^ 

g  _    O    J3  CO    O      ^ 

«    of  «    2    >  PL,    g    g- 

•'H  «  s  «  s 

>> 

a 

o 

HH      1 

^1 

;2; 

^                  Ci!j                   CJ    ^  ^     r^    iii    ^    O 

ciiAi'.  in.] 


OCCUPATIONS  OF  THE  PEOPLE. 


59 


Table  shoiriiif/  the  Centesimal  Proportion  tvhicfi  each  Class  of  the  Population  bore  to  tlie  other  two 
Classes  at  the  several  Enumerations  of  1811,  1821,  18.'}1,  and  1841. 


Agriculture. 

Trade,  Manufactures,  &c. 

Other  Classes. 

COUNTIliS. 

1811 

1821 

1831   1841 

ISll 

18,41 

1831 

1841 

1811 

1921  1831 

iKll 

Bedford    .... 

63-1 

61-9 

56-8   37-0 

27-9 

27-8 

25-7 

35-6 

9-0 

10-3    17-5 

27-4 

Berks  . 

53-5 

53-3 

45-2   32-7 

30-3 

31-7 

31-8 

25-3 

10 

2 

15-0  23-0 

42-0 

Bucks 

53-3 

57-6 

53-0   30-6 

33-4 

28-8 

26-4 

32-8 

11 

3 

13-6   20-6 

30-0 

Cambridge 

Gl-0 

60-7 

53-3! 39-3 

25-2 

27-2 

27-2 

25-3 

13 

8 

12-1    19-5 

35-4 

Chester     . 

36-8 

34-8 

25-2    15-1 

.51-8 

52-1 

53-9 

52-9 

11 

4 

13-1    20-9 

32-0 

Cornwall  . 

39-5 

37-7 

30-7 

20-9 

24-8 

30-3 

22-3 

24-7 

35 

7 

32-0  147-0 

54-4 

Cumberland 

38-3 

35-5 

30-5 

21-6 

40-3 

41-3 

34-5 

36-0 

21 

4 

23-2   35-0 

42-4 

Derby. 

38-2 

34-4 

27-5 

17-3 

42-2 

48-4 

43-0 

46-3 

19 

6 

17-2   29-5 

36-4 

Devon 

|41-6 

40-8 

34-8 

24-8 

39-0 

37-5 

32-7 

31-6 

19 

4   21-7132-5 

43-6 

Dorset 

48-4 

48-9 

43-4 

30-1 

35-8 

35-7 

30-1 

30-5 

15 

8 

15-4   26-5 

39-4 

Durham   . 

26-2 

20-5 

15-3|ll-9 

4-3-5 

44-0 

33-8 

37-3 

30 

3 

35-5   50-9 

50-8 

Essex 

55-2 

55-7 

52-9 

3'J-O 

27-5 

28-8 

28-0 

24-6 

17 

3 

15-5    19-1 

36-4 

Gloucester 

33-4 

32-1 

25-4 

17-4 

48-3 

49-8 

39-7 

36-3 

18 

3 

18-1   34-9 

46-3 

Hereford  . 

62-7 

61-8 

54-3 

34-8 

25-1 

25-7 

25-9 

23-6 

12 

2 

12-5    19-8 

41-6 

Hertford  . 

52-8 

51-5 

45-4 

31-7 

31-5 

30-3 

29-2 

31-7 

15 

7 

18-2   25-4 

36-6 

Huntingdon 

60-9 

61-9 

55-3 

40-5 

25-0 

28-2 

26-0 

25-6 

14 

1 

9-9    18-7 

33-9 

Kent   .     . 

35-5 

35-9 

32-6 

21-7 

36-7 

35-1 

30-3 

25-3 

27 

8 

29-0 1 37-1 

53-0 

Lancaster 

14-4 

11-2 

9-5 

6-7 

70-7 

74-9 

66-7 

62-9 

14 

9 

13-9 1 23-8 

30-4 

Leicester  . 

37-2 

35-4 

29-3 

20-1 

54-1 

55-1 

54-5 

48-9 

8 

7 

9-5   16-2 

31-0 

Lincoln     . 

58-7 

.59-4 

54-3 

40-0 

25-9 

26-9 

26-2 

24-4 

15 

4 

13-7    19-5 

35-6 

Middlesex 

4-1 

3-6 

3-1 

2-5 

61-0 

61-6 

55-4 

42-9 

34 

9 

34-8J41-5 

54-6 

Monmouth 

46-3 

42-6 

28-2 

15-4 

33-4 

43-5 

43-3'31-4 

15 

3 

13-9128-5 

53-2 

Norfolk    . 

50-1 

48-8 

44-7 

32-8 

36-7 

35-2 

34-3 

31-8 

13 

2 

16-0  21-0 

35-4 

Northampton 

49-7 

53-4 

46-8 

34-1 

39-4 

32-9 

32-9 

35-6 

10 

9 

13-7 

20-3 

30-3 

Northumberland 

29-0 

26-8 

20-9 

17-4 

43-8 

47-7 

29' 5 

37-5 

27 

2 

25-5 

49-6 

45-1 

Nottingham  . 

36-7 

35-3 

28-3 

20-2 

56-5 

56-6 

54-3 

51-1 

6 

8 

8-1 

17-4 

28-7 

Oxford      .     . 

54-6 

55-3 

48-1 

34-9 

30-6 

31-1 

29-8! 29-2 

14 

8 

13-6 

22-1 

3a -D 

Rutland    .     . 

56-9 

61-3 

54-9 

41-3 

28-9 

26-2 

26-3   24-3 

14 

2 

12-51 18-8 

34-4 

Salop   . 

42-3 

44-2 

36-8 

28-4 

42-5 

44-0 

34-9   28-9 

15 

2 

13-8   28-3 

42-7 

Somerset  . 

43-6 

42-8 

36-0 

25-0 

37-7 

36-9 

33-4   31-8 

18 

7 

20-3   30-6 

43-2 

Southampton 

42-0 

41-9 

35-2 

2.3 -3 

3.5-4 

34-2 

32-4   26-7 

22 

6 

23-9   32-4 

48-0 

Stafford    .     . 

29-4 

26-6 

21-7 

14-5 

54-3 

61-7 

52-2   47-5 

16 

3 

11-7    26-1 

38-0 

Suffolk      .     . 

55-5 

,55-9 

51-2 

38-2 

31-8 

31-6 

29-4   27-5 

12 

7 

12-5    19-4 

34-3 

Surrey      .     . 

17-1 

16-8 

13-4 

10-2 

48-5 

52-7 

45-5137-8 

34 

4 

30-5    41-1 

.52-0 

Sussex.      .     . 

54-9 

50-3 

42-6 j 30-5 

29-8 

35-5 

33-2   24-9 

15 

3 

14-2    24-2 

43-6 

Warwick  .     . 

30-8 

27-9 

21-9    14-4 

60-7 

65-2 

59-9    52-4 

8 

5 

6-9    18-2 

33-2 

Westmoreland 

49-0 

48-8 

40-6  27-8 

30-5 

36-4 

37-4   32-8 

20 

5 

14-8    22-0 

39-4 

Wilts  .      .     . 

54-1 

52-4 

48-5  36-3 

35-5 

35-6 

30-2   27-9 

10 

4 

12-0   21-3 

33-8 

Worcester 

40-5 

38-2 

32-1    25-2 

49-4 

47-6 

42-0 

41-7 

10 

1 

14-2    25-9 

33-1 

York,  E.  Riding 

40-1 

38-2 

35-2 

29-0 

35-7 

41-1 

29-3 

31-3 

24 

2 

20-7    35-5 

39-7 

„       N.  Riding 

46-2 

43-2 

44-1 

34-5 

30-3 

30-0 

27-7 

29-0 

23 

5 

26-8   28-2 

36-5 

„      W.  Riding 

23-1 

19-6 

18-2 

10-7 

64-8 

67-4 

69-4 

61-7 

12-1 

13-0    12-4 

27-6 

The  mode  of  computation,  adopted  in  1841  for  determining  the  occu- 
pations of  the  people,  differed  from  that  employed  at  the  three  precedino- 
periods,  so  that  no  perfect  comparison  can  he  made  as  to  the  result.  If 
we  exclude  from  the  examination  the  columns  for  1841,  it  will  be  seen 
that  eight,  or  one-fifth  part  by  number,  of  the  English  counties  main- 
tained unaltered,  during  20  years,  their  relative  positions  as  regards 
the  employments  of  their  inhabitants.     These  counties  were — 

Bedford,  which  is  chiefly  agTicultural ;  Somerset,  Devon,  and  Corn- 
wall, which  have  a  mixed  population  ;  and  Middlesex,  Surrey,  Lanca- 
shire, and  Warwickshire,  two  of  which  are  metropolitan  counties,  while 
the  remaining  two  are  at  the  head  of  the  manufacturing  counties. 


60 


PROGRESS  OF  THE  NATION. 


[sec.  I. 


Table  slioieing  the  Numerical  Order  in  which  the  different  Counties  of  England  stood  relatively 
to  each  other,  trith  reference  to  the  Proportional  Number  of  their  Population  u'ho  were  engaged 
in  Agriculture  or  otlierwise,  at  each  of  the  Decennary  Enumerations  of  1811,  1821,  1831,  and 
1841. 


ISll 

IS-. 

1 

1831 

1841 

COUNTIES. 

Ag"-         Other 

Agri- 

Other 

Agri-    1 

Other 

Agri- 

Other 

cultural   Classes. 
Class.    1 

cuUural 
Class.    1 

Classes. 

cultural 
Class.    1 

Classes. 

cultural 
Class. 

Classes. 

Bedford 

1 

42 

1 

42 

1           42 

10 

33 

Berks    .... 

12 

31 

12 

31 

14           29 

12 

31 

Bucks    .... 

13 

30 

7 

36 

7 

36 

7 

36 

Cambridge 

3 

40 

5 

38 

6 

37 

8 

35 

Chester      .     . 

31 

12 

32 

U 

34 

9 

34 

9 

Cornwall     . 

27 

16 

27 

16 

27 

16 

29 

14 

Cumberland    . 

28 

15 

29 

14 

28 

15 

26 

17 

Derby   .... 

29 

14 

33 

10 

32 

11 

32 

11 

Devon  .... 

24 

19 

24 

19 

24 

19 

22 

21 

Dorset  . 

18 

25 

16 

27 

17 

26 

21 

22 

Durham 

38 

5 

38 

5 

39 

4 

38 

5 

Essex     . 

8 

35 

9 

34 

8 

35 

3 

40 

Gloucester. 

34 

9 

34 

9 

33 

10 

31 

12 

Hereford    . 

2 

41 

3 

40 

4 

39 

4 

39 

Hertford    .      . 

14 

29 

14 

29 

13 

30 

15 

28 

Huntingdon     . 

4 

39 

2 

41 

2 

41 

5 

38 

Kent     .     .     . 

33 

10 

28 

15 

23 

18 

27 

16 

Lancaster  . 

41 

2 

41 

2 

41 

2 

41 

2 

Leicester    . 

30 

13 

30 

13 

29 

14 

30 

13 

Lincoln 

5 

38 

6 

37 

5 

38 

1 

42 

Middlesex 

42 

1 

42 

1 

42 

1 

42 

1 

Monmouth 

19 

24 

22 

21 

31 

12 

35 

8 

Korfolk 

15 

28 

17 

26 

15 

28 

16 

27 

Northampton  . 

16 

27 

11 

32 

12 

31 

13 

30 

Northumberland 

37 

6 

36 

7 

37 

6 

33 

10 

Nottingham     . 

32 

11 

31 

12 

30 

13 

28 

15 

Oxford  .      .      . 

10 

33 

10 

33 

11 

32 

14 

29 

Rutland      .      . 

6 

37 

4 

39 

3 

40 

2 

41 

Salop     . 

22 

21 

19 

24 

20 

23 

19 

24 

Somerset    . 

21 

22 

21 

22 

21 

22 

23 

20 

Southampton  . 

23 

20 

23 

20 

22 

21 

25 

18 

Stafford      .     . 

36 

7 

37 

6 

36 

7 

37 

6 

Suffolk  .     .     . 

7 

36 

8 

35 

9 

34 

9 

34 

Surrey  . 

40 

3 

40 

3 

40 

3 

39 

4 

Sussex  . 

9 

34 

15 

28 

18 

25 

18 

25 

Warwick    . 

35 

8 

35 

8 

35 

8 

36 

7 

AVestmoreland 

17 

26 

18 

25 

19 

24 

20 

23 

Wiltshire    . 

11 

32 

13 

30 

10 

33 

6 

37 

AVorcester  . 

25 

18 

25 

18 

26 

17 

24 

19 

York,  East  Kidin 

K 

26 

17 

26 

17 

23 

20 

17 

26 

„       North  Hiding 

20 

23 

20 

23 

16 

27 

11 

32 

„       West  Hiding 

39 

4 

39 

4 

38 

5 

40 

3 

If  the  returns  for  1841  are  included,  it  will  still  be  seen  that  there 
has  been  but  little  change  since  1811  in  the  relative  position  of  the 
counties  as  respects  agricultural  employment.  Berkshire,  Durham, 
Lancashire,  Leicestershire,  and  Middlesex,  occupy  the  place  which  they 
filled  in  1811  ;  Buckinghamshire,  Cumberland,  Devonshire,  Essex, 
Gloucestershire,  Kent,  Lincolnshire,  Northamptgnshire,  Northumber- 
land, Nottinghamshire,  Rutlandshire,  Shropshire,  Wiltshire,  Worces- 
tershire, the  East  and  North  Ridings  of  Yorkshire,  have  taken  a  higher 
relative   position  as   agricultural  divisions ;    while   all   the   remaining 


cii.vp.  III.]  OCCUPATIONS  OF  THE  TEOrLE.  61 

divisions  of  England  have  changed  their  rank  in  the  opposite  direction. 
As  regards  Monmouthshire,  the  alteration  has  been  occasioned  by  the 
great  increase  in  the  number  of  coal  mines  and  in  the  smelting  and 
manufacturing  of  iron  ;  and  the  change  that  has  taken  place  in  Sussex 
is  owing  to  the  rapid  growth  of  its  watering-places,  Brighton,  A\''orthing, 
and  Hastings. 

In  addition  to  the  general  divisions  of  the  people  into  three  great 
classes,  as  already  explained,  an  attempt  was  made  in  1831  to  subdivide 
the  males  20  years  of  age  and  upwards  ;  and  to  some  extent  that  attempt 
was  successful.  Among  the  males  employed  in  agriculture  a  very 
important  distinction  was  drawn  between  occupiers  of  land  who  employ 
labourers,  other  occupiers  of  land  who  cultivate  their  holdings  without 
such  assistance,  and  labourers  who  are  employed  by  occupiers  in  the 
first  subdivision.  The  proportion  of  the  population  in  Ireland,  which  is 
engaged  in  agricultural  pursuits,  is  more  than  double  the  proportion  so 
employed  in  Great  Britain  ;  but  the  subdivision  just  noticed  exhibits  in 
a  yet  more  striking  point  of  view  the  wide  difference  that  exists  in  the 
customs  and  condition  of  the  inhabitants  of  the  two  islands.  In  Great 
Britain  about  two-sevenths  of  the  agriculturists  were  in  1831  occupiers 
of  laud,  and  these  were  divided  in  nearly  equal  proportions  into  those 
who  do  and  those  who  do  not  employ  labourers :  the  agricultural 
labourers  form  the  remaining  five-sevenths  of  the  class.  In  Ireland 
only  about  one-thirteenth  part  of  the  agriculturists  above  twenty  years 
of  age  were  occupiers  employing  labourers,  while  the  remaining  twelve- 
thirteenths  were  divided  almost  equally  into  occupiers  without  labourers, 
and  labourers  for  others  who  are  not  occupiers.  The  average  number 
of  ^labourers  to  each  occupier  employing  them  is  by  no  means  equal  in 
the  two  parts  of  the  kingdom,  being  at  the  rate  of  4f  labourers  to  each 
employing  occupier  in  Great  Britain,  and  as  high  as  5  J  labourers  to 
each  employing  occupier  in  Ireland. 

The  course  adopted  by  the  Census  Commissioners  for  Ireland,  of 
ascertaining  the  occupations  of  the  people  in  families,  and  of  also  stat- 
ing the  employment  of  adult  males,  affords  another  element  for  the 
elucidation  of  questions  connected  with  the  progress  of  the  population. 
The  variance  between  the  Irish  and  the  English  returns  as  respects  the 
age  at  which  occupations  are  stated — viz.,  15  in  Ireland  and  20  in 
England — prevents  that  close  comparison  between  the  condition  of  the 
two  populations  wliich  it  would  be  interesting  to  make.  The  numbffi' 
of  families  in  Ireland  in  1841,  was  1,472,787,  of  w^hom  974,188,  or 
66*15  per  cent.,  were  engaged  in  agricultural  pursuits.  The  number 
of  males  15  years  old  and  upwards,  was  2,341,895,  of  whom  1,643,082, 
or  70*16  per  cent.,  were  employed  in  producing  food,  so  that  each  1000 
of  the  whole  number  of  families  furnished  1115  adult  males  to  the 
ranks  of  agi'iculture,  while  each  1000  famihes  in  those  ranks  furnished 


62  TROGRESS  OF  THE  NATION.  [sec.  i. 

1686  male  adults  occupied,  as  employers  or  labourers,  in  producing 
food.  From  the  data  above  given,  it  will  appear  how  very  different,  in 
regard  to  the  occupations  of  the  people,  are  the  populations  of  Great 
Britain  and  Ireland.  While  a  rapid  change  has  been  going  forward  in 
England  and  Scotland,  where  the  proportionate  number  of  persons 
engaged  in  agriculture  is  continually  and  rapidly  diminishing,  Ireland 
in  that  respect  continues  stationary,  or  indeed  moves  slightly  in  the 
contrary  direction. 

In  1831  the  division  of  the  people  as  regarded  occupations  was  such 
in  Great  Britain  that  315  persons  were  employed  in  raising  agricultural 
produce  for  themselves  and  685  other  persons  ;  i.  e.,  1000  persons  suf- 
ficed to  provide  food  for  3174  persons,  including  themselves.  In  1841, 
it  appears  that  251  persons  raised  the  food  necessary  for  themselves  and 
749  other  persons,  or  1000  persons  employed  in  agricultural  processes 
supplied  the  wants,  as  respects  food,  of  3984  persons,  including  them- 
selves. One  person  thus  raising  nearly  all  the  food  of  home  production 
consumed  by  four  persons. 

In  Ireland,  the  labour  of  657  persons  was  required  in  1831  to  raise 
the  food  demanded  by  themselves  and  343  other  persons ;  i.  e.,  1000 
persons  supplied  food  for  only  1522  persons,  including  themselves  ;  and 
in  1841,  it  required  the  laboui'  of  QQ2  persons  to  raise  a  supply  for 
themselves  and  338  others,  or  1000  persons  engaged  in  agricultural 
employment  as  farmers  and  labourers  provided  food  for  only  1511 
persons,  including  themselves. 

Some  considerable  allowance  must  be  made  for  the  quantity  of  agri- 
cultiu-al  produce  exported  from  Ireland,  and  for  the  quantity  imported 
into  Great  Britain  from  Ireland  and  from  foreign  countries,  but  we 
have  no  sufficient  data  available  for  determining  the  exact  degree  of 
that  allowance.  Without  taking  that  circumstance  into  the  account,  it 
would  appear  that  the  labour  of  1000  persons  in  Great  Britain  is  equal 
to  that  of  2636  persons  engaged  in  farming  operations  in  Ireland. 

We  have  seen  that  the  proportionate  number  of  persons  employed  in 
agriculture  in  Great  Britain  has  been  continually  lessening — a  fact 
which  might  have  been  foreseen  by  persons  acquainted  with  the  im- 
provements that  have  been  introduced  into  farming  operations  since  the 
beginning  of  the  present  century,  and  especially  of  late  years ;  but  it 
could  hardly  have  been  foreseen,  that,  while  the  population  has  made 
such  rapid  strides  as  we  know  it  to  have  made,  the  absolute  number  of 
the  population  engaged  in  agriculture  should  have  diminished.  This 
however  is  the  fact.  In  1831  the  number  of  adult  males  employed  in 
agriculture  in  Great  Britain  was  1,243,057  out  of  a  population  of 
16,539,318  ;  but  in  1841,  with  our  numbers  incrt3ased  to  18,720,394, 
the  adult  males  so  employed  were  only  1,207,989,  or  fewer  than  at  the 
preceding  census  by  35,068  persons. 


CHAP.  III.]  OCCUPATIONS  OF  THE  PEOPLE.  G3 

Increased  productive  power  on  the  part  of  the  inhabitants  of  any 
country  is  in  itself  an  evidence  of  the  progress  of  the  people  in  civiliza- 
tion. In  times  when  the  greater  part  of  the  productive  labour  of  a 
country  is  required  for  raising  the  necessaries  of  life,  the  means  of  ob- 
taining conveniences  or  the  productions  of  other  climates  must  be 
extremely  limited.  In  countries  where  the  labour  of  a  man,  applied  to 
the  cultivation  of  the  soil,  should  be  capable  of  producing  only  a  bare 
subsistence  for  himself,  it  is  plain  that  society  could  never  advance  in 
the  scale  of  civilization.  But  if,  by  means  of  improved  implements  or 
better  methods  of  culture,  the  labour  of  two  men  could  be  made  to 
provide  for  the  subsistence  of  three,  the  labour  of  the  third  man  would 
be  set  free  for  the  production  of  surplus  articles,  which  would  add  to  the 
sura  of  the  general  convenience.  It  is  long  before  communities  arrive  at 
such  a  state  of  improvement  as  will  admit  of  so  considerable  a  number  as 
one-third  of  the  population  being  spared  from  the  cultivation  of  the  soil. 
Ireland  is  not  much  advanced  beyond  tliis  state  at  present.  In  the 
absence  of  all  precise  information  in  regard  to  the  produce  of  the  soil 
in  this  kingdom,  only  an  approximation  to  the  truth  can  be  attained. 
Taking  the  best  data  that  can  be  had,  it  appears  that  the  labour  of  19 
families  is  required  to  produce,  annually,  1160  quarters  of  all  kinds 
of  grain,  being  at  the  rate  of  61  quarters  for  each  family.  Applying 
this  rule  to  the  case  of  Ireland,  it  will  appear  that  the  labour  of  42,737 
families  is  required  in  order  to  raise  the  average  quantity  of  grain  that 
has  been  annually  sent  to  England  and  Scotland  during  the  20  years 
fi'om  1825  to  1844.  If  this  number  of  families  be  deducted  from  the 
entire  number  who  are  employed  in  agriculture  in  Ireland,  it  will  be 
found  that  the  labour  of  931,451  families,  being  632  in  every  1000,  is 
required  for  raising  food  for  the  use  of  the  native  population.  Some 
abatement  must  indeed  be  made  from  this  large  proportion  on  account 
of  the  number  of  animals  reared  and  converted  into  food  for  the  con- 
sumption of  England  and  of  other  countries.  No  means  exist  for  ascer- 
taining the  precise  number  of  these  animals  ;  but  admitting  that  number 
to  be  very  considerable,  it  cannot  materially  alter  the  proportion  here 
stated. 

The  advantage  of  being  able  to  classify  and  compare  the  numbers  of 
the  population  who  have  applied  themselves  at  different  periods  to  dif- 
ferent pursuits  is  exceedingly  great,  as  enabling  us  to  estimate  and  to 
mark  the  progress  of  the  country.  It  is  to  be  regretted  that  the  attempt 
at  this  classified  enumeration,  which  was  made  at  the  census  of  1801, 
was  so  far  unsuccessful  that  it  would  be  wrong  to  build  any  argument 
upon  it.  On  this  subject,  Mr.  Rickman,  in  his  interesting  preface  to  the 
abstract  of  the  returns  of  1831  (page  ix),  says,  "  The  question  of  1801, 
relating  to  the  occupation  of  persons,  was  found  in  practice  to  produce 
no  valuable  result.     In  some  cases  a  householder  seemed  to  understand 


64  PllOGRESS  OF  THE  NATION.  ,  [sec.  i. 

that  the  females  of  his  family,  his  children  and  servants,  ought  to  he 
classed  with  himself ;  in  some  cases  he  returned  them  in  the  negative 
class,  as  being  neither  agricultural  nor  commercial ;  in  some  cases  ho 
omitted  them  entirely.  Thus  the  failure  of  the  question  became  mani- 
fest, and  the  worthless  answers  were  entered  without  attempt  at  cor- 
rection." 

The  failure  here  mentioned  occasioned  the  adoption  of  a  different 
course  at  the  enumerations  of  1811,  1821,  and  1831.  That  course 
and  its  result  cannot  be  better  stated  than  in  the  words  of  Mr.  Rick- 
man  : — 

"  The  question  concerning  occupation  or  employment,  as  amended  in 
the  Population  Acts  of  1811,  1821,  and  1831,  inquires  what  number  of 
families  (not  of  persons)  are  chiefly  employed  in,  or  maintained  by, 
agriculture  ?  How  many  by  trade,  manufacture  or  handicraft  ?  and 
how  many  families  are  not  comprised  in  either  of  these  classes?  and  in 
general  the  answers  appear  to  have  been  made  with  care  and  distinct- 
ness in  the  years  1811  and  1821:  but  a  more  particular  classification 
■was  thought  to  be  desirable  and  practicable  in  1831 ;  and  it  was  recom- 
mended to  the  Committee  of  the  House  of  Commons  to  ask  the  occupa- 
tion or  employment  of  every  male  20  years  of  age  ;  not  only  because  he 
is  then  usually  settled  in  his  vocation,  but  because  the  number  of  males 
under  20  years  of  age,  and  the  number  upwards  of  20  years  of  age,  was 
found  to  have  been  so  equal  in  the  enumeration  of  1821,  that  any  con- 
siderable deviation  from  that  obvious  proportion  was  likely  to  induce 
further  inquiry,  and  correction  in  every  case  suspected  of  error,  for  in 
the  enumeration  of  1821  the  males  under  20  were  3,072,392 — upwards 
of  20,  3,002,200,  including  all  the  males  whose  ages  were  then  ascer- 
tained. In  the  enumeration  of  1831,  the  males  known  to  be  under  20 
were  3,941,495 — upwards  of  20,  3,944,511  (the  army,  navy,  &c.,  are 
not  included  ;)  indeed  the  increase  of  population  in  Great  Britain  has 
not  been  materially  accelerated  or  retarded  since  the  year  1801,  having 
been  always  about  one  and  a  half  per  centum  per  annum." 

After  explaining  the  subdivisions  adopted  in  1831,  with  regard  to  the 
agricultural  class,  Mr.  Rickman  proceeds  : — 

"  The  number  of  those  employed  in  manufacture  is  next  asked,  and 
the  species  of  manufactures,  as  far  as  such  can  be  distinguished  and 
designated  in  a  note.  These  notes  are  collected  into  a  summary  at  the 
end  of  each  county,  not  in  columns,  which  was  impracticable,  but  in 
narrative,  such  as  each  individual  case  permitted  or  required. 

"  The  number  of  those  employed  in  retail  trade  and  handicraft,  as 
distinguished  from  manufacture,  appears  in  the  next  column  ;  this  was 
supposed  to  be  capable  of  subdivision,  and  after  much  consideration  and 
correspondence  with  the  members  of  Parliament  who  had  constituted  the 
Committee  on  the  Population  Bill,  a  list  was  issued  with  each  schedule, 


ciiAi'.  HI.]         OCCUPATIONS  OF  THE  PEOPLE.  65 

containing  100  of  the  most  usual  denominations  of  retail  trade  and 
handicraft. 

"  This  list  was  known  to  contain  far  less  than  the  entire  numher  of 
trades  in  large  towns,  especially  in  the  metropolis,  where,  in  the  result, 
no  less  than  426  sidjdivisions  of  trade  were  found  to  exist ;  but  a  greater 
number  than  100  would  have  been  inapplicable  and  even  perplexing  in 
rural  parishes,  and  the  space  left  at  the  bottom  of  the  list,  as  well  as  the 
list  itself,  was  so  attentively  and  correctly  filled,  that  the  defective  spe- 
cification does  not  exceed  one  in  112  males  uj)wards  of  20  years  of  age 
employed  in  retail  trade  or  handicraft ;  the  lists  returned  by  all  the 
parishes  constituting  the  metropolis  do  not  present  a  single  defect :  a 
remarkable  instance  of  accuracy." 

In  the  table  last  inserted,  showing  the  numerical  order  in  which  the 
counties  of  England  stood  relatively  to  each  other  as  regarded  the  occu- 
pations of  their  inhabitants  in  1811,  1821,  and  1831,  the  population  was 
divided  into  only  two  classes — agriculturists  and  others,  and  a  reason 
was  given  for  the  adoption  of  this  division  in  preference  to  that  made  in 
the  population  returns,  grounded  upon  the  degree  of  uncertainty  that 
accompanied  the  division  of  other  classes,  and  which  rendered  abortive 
all  attempts  to  separate  the  proportions  of  those  employed  in  "  trade, 
manufactures,  and  handicraft,"  from  the  division  comprehended  under 
the  description  of  "  all  other  families." 

That  degree  of  uncertainty  is  clearly  shown  in  the  "  Comparative 
statement  of  the  numbers  and  occupations  of  families,"  {see  page  53,) 
where  the  centesimal  parts  exhibited  by  the  three  divisions  were  stated 
to  have  been  as  follows  at  the  three  last  enumerations  in  Great 
Britain : — 


Years. 

Agriculture. 

Trade. 

Otliers. 

1811 

35-2 

44-4 

20-4 

100 

1821 

33-2 

45-9 

20-9 

100 

1S31 

2S-2 

42- 

2'J-8 

100 

It  would  appear  from  this  calculation  that  a  very  considerable  part 
of  the  population — 4  out  of  40 — had  withdrawn  themselves,  between 
1821  and  1831,  from  the  pursuits  of  trade,  manufactures,  and  handi- 
craft, a  circumstance  well  known  to  be  altogether  at  variance  with  the 
fact.  The  summary  of  the  returns  of  1831,  respecting  the  occupations 
of  males  20  years  of  age  and  upwards,  throws  considerable  light  upon 
the  subject,  by  exhibiting  them  under  several  subdivisions.  The  males 
belonging  to  the  families  included  in  the  non-agricultural  and  non- 
manufacturing  classes  were  then  given  under  four  distinct  heads  of 
description,  viz. :  — 

Capitalists,  bankers,  professional  and  other  educated  men. 

Labourers  employed  in  labour  not  agricultural. 

Other  males,  20  years  of  age,  except  servants. 

Male  servants,  20  years  of  age. 

F 


QO  mOGRESS  OF  THE  NATION.  [sec.  i. 

The  whole  number  of  males  included  under  these  heads  amounted  to 
1,137,270.  Of  these,  608,712  were  actually  employed  in  hihour  which, 
although,  strictly  speaking,  it  was  neither  manufacturing  nor  trading, 
was  yet  necessary  to  the  successful  prosecution  of  some  branch  of  trade 
or  nianufocturesj  such  as  mining,  road-malung,  canal-digging,  inland 
navigation,  &c.  The  number  of  male  domestic  servants  of  20  years  and 
upwards  amounted  to  78,G69.  As  for  the  males,  235,499  in  number, 
to  whom  no  particuhu-  calHng  has  been  assigned,  a  very  large  propor- 
tion of  them  were  doubtless  those  among  the  labouring  classes,  who  had 
arrived  at  ages  or  were  subject  to  infirmities  which  prevented  them  from 
longer  working.  It  may  thus  be  seen  how  very  small  is  the  proportion 
of  persons  arrived  at  maturity  who  are  not  employed  in  some  one  or  other 
of  the  occupations  whereby  the  sum  of  the  national  wealth  or  conve- 
nience is  advanced.  Without  making  any  allowance  for  the  superan- 
nuated or  infirm,  it  appeared  that  profitable,  and,  for  the  most  part, 
manual  occupations  might  be  assigned  to  3,494,622  persons  out  of 
3,944,511,  being  a  proportion  of  886  in  every  1000  males  20  years  of 
age  in  Great  Britain  ;  while  among  the  remaining  449,889  were  to  be 
found  a  large  proportion  whose  professional  labour  is  essential  to  the 
health,  the  instruction,  the  convenience,  and  the  security  of  their  fellow- 
citizens.  If  the  number  of  males  included  in  the  army  and  navy,  and 
as  seamen  in  registered  vessels  (277,017),  be  taken  into  the  calculation, 
the  proportion  of  114  males  not  employed  either  in  manual  labour  or 
some  other  species  of  active  occupation  in  every  1000  of  the  male 
population,  which  results  from  the  above  statement,  will   be  reduced 

to  106. 

It  will  be  seen,  on  referring  to  the  table  at  page  58,  that  the  number 
of  male  persons  20  years  of  age  and  upwards,  living  in  and  belonging  to 
Great  Britahi  in  1841,  was  4,932,453,  of  whom  1,207,989  w^ere  em- 
ployed in  agricultural  pursuits;  2,027,635  were  engaged  in  trade, 
commerce,  and  manufactures  ;  548,548  were  employed  in  imclassed 
labour  not  agricultural  ;  123,596  composed  the  army  of  the  United 
Kino-dom  at  home  and  abroad  ;  189,270  comprised  the  navy,  national 
and  mercantile,  fishermen,  &c, ;  61,331  were  engaged  in  the  learned 
professions — divinity,  law,  and  physic;  15,961  were  employed  in  the 
civil  service  of  government :  22,882  in  municipal  and  parochial  offices  ; 
163,657  were  in  domestic  service  ;  72,887  were  alms-people,  pensioners, 
paupers,  lunatics,  and  prisoners  ;  94,360  were  following  various  pursuits 
requiring  education,  including  those  engaged  in  imparting  knowledge  to 
others.  Of  the  remaining  404,337  adult  males,  129,855  were  ascertained 
to  be  persons  of  independent  means,  leaving  274,48:^  in  respect  of  whose 
occupations  no  particulars  were  given.  It  would  be  wrong  to  consider 
this  last-named  number  of  persons  as  living  without  occupation.  Tliey 
comprise  among  them  persons  who  slept  in  barns  and  tents  on  the  night 


CUAP.    Ill 


OCCUPATIONS  OF  THE  rEOrLn. 


67 


preceding  the  day  of  enumeration  ;  but  if  we  assume  that  the  whole 
number  were  unemployed,  they  and  persons  of  independent  means 
amount  to  no  more  than  82  in  each  1000  of  the  male  adult  population. 

Tiie  specification  given  in  the  population  returns  of  Ibol,  of  the  retail 
trades  and  handicrafts  followed  by  the  families  in  Great  Britain,  who 
were  represented  by  1,159,867  males  20  years  of  age  and  upwards, 
{see  p.  55),  was  not  calculated  to  throw  any  light  npon  the  inquiry 
wherein  we  are  engaged  ;  nor  could  it  in  any  considerable  degree  be 
made  useful  in  statistical  investigations.  That  s])ecification  would  lead 
to  many  erroneous  conclusions,  in  consequence  of  some  one  branch  of  a 
man's  trade  being  frequently  given,  to  the  exclusion  of  others  as  impor- 
tant. It  will  sufficiently  justify  this  objection  to  state  a  very  few  of  the 
anomalies  which  the  statement  presents.  Thus  there  were  in  England, 
according  to  this  specification,  5030  coach-makers,  and  but  1  coach-spring 
maker.  The  whole  kingdom  is  stated  to  give  employment  to  only  3 
coffin-makers,  each  of  whom  would  therefore  be  called  upon  to  provide 
about  300  coffins  daily  throughout  the  year.  One  drug-grinder  alone 
appears,  while  the  druggists  whom  he  is  to  supply  amount  in  number  to 
5423.  It  cannot  be  necessary  to  go  further  into  this  alphabet  of  trades 
in  order  to  show,  from  internal  evidence,  the  little  dependence  to  be 
placed  upon  it,  but  having  been  induced  to  test  the  list  in  some  of  its 
particulars  by  means  of  another  statement  which  cannot  be  otherwise 
than  accurate,  the  result  is  here  given. 

The  number  of  licenses  issued  by  the  Commissioners  of  Excise,  upon 
every  one  of  which  a  duty  is  levied,  affords  as  sure  an  indication  as  can 
well  be  had  upon  the  subject.  Some  men  may  carry  on  a  trade  for 
which  a  license  is  legally  necessary,  without  taking  one  from  the  office, 
but  it  may  be  presumed  that  nobody  will  pay  for  a  license  who  does  not 
pursue  the  calling  for  which  it  qualifies  him. 

The  following  list  of  the  number  of  excise  licenses  issued  to  certain 
classes  of  traders  in  1831,  the  year  to  which  the  specification  of  trades 
relates,  is  taken  from  the  Official  Tables  of  the  revenue,  &c.,  compiled 
by  the  Board  of  Trade.  By  its  side  we  have  placed  the  numbers  of 
persons  who,  according  to  the  population  abstract,  follow  the  several 
callings  mentioned. 


Description  of  Dealers. 


Brewers 
Maltsters    . 
Soap-makers    . 
Spirit-dealers  . 
Tea-dealers      . 
Tobacco-dealers 
"Wine-dealers  . 


Js  umber  of  Excise 
Licenses  issued. 


42,007 
12,716 
276 
67,. 500 
89,202 
150,843 
22,553 


Number  of  Trades, 

according  to  the 

Population 

Abstract. 


5,765 
6,970 
20 
4,031 
3,4.=i6 
2,224 
1,594 


F  li 


68  PROGRESS  OF  THE  NATION.  [sec  i. 

Many  licenses  for  brewing,  and  for  dealing  in  wine,  spirits,  and 
tobacco,  are  taken  out  by  publicans,  but  the  entire  number  of  this  class, 
including  all  the  keepers  of  "  beer-shops,"  who  do  not  of  course  take 
out  such  licenses,  amounts  to  no  more  than  61,231.  The  number  of 
licenses  granted  to  publicans  for  the  sale  of  spirits  or  wine,  in  addition 
to  beer,  in  1831,  was  only  20,638.  As  regards  tea-dealers,  the  discre- 
pancy would  not  be  remedied  by  comprehending  under  that  name  all 
who  figure  in  the  specification  as  grocers,  and  the  number  of  whom  (in- 
cluding the  numerous  tribe  of  green-grocers)  amounts  only  to  22,147. 
A  sufficient  number  of  tobacco-dealers  to  account  for  the  number  of 
licenses  will  not  be  got  together,  if  all  the  grocers,  tea-dealers,  and 
publicans  in  the  specification  are  taken  into  the  account.  It  must  be 
evident,  from  these  facts,  that  such  a  specification  as  this  is  perfectly 
useless. 

For  the  purpose  of  comparison,  the  number  of  excise  licenses  granted 
in  1841  for  carrying  on  the  trades  just  enumerated  is  here  given. 

Scotland. 

433 

1,680 

17 

15,720 

13,. 337 

13,661 

2,948 

The  statement  of  the  occupations  of  males,  20  years  of  age  and 
upwards,  in  Ireland  in  1831,  left  even  a  smaller  proportion  than  were 
found  in  Great  Britain  to  belong  to  the  non-labouring  part  of  the  com- 
munity. Out  of  1,867,765  males  of  mature  age,  1,277,054  were  classed 
as  agriculturists  ;  the  manuf^icturing  and  trading  classes  employed 
324,584  ;  the  labourers  not  employed  in  agriculture  were  stated  as 
89,876 ;  and  male  servants  20  years  of  age  and  upwards,  54,142  : 
leaving  only  a  residue  of  172,109  ])ersons  to  comprehend  the  ca])italists 
and  professional  men,  as  well  as  the  really  unproductive  members  of  the 
community.  These  numbers  exhibit  908  and  92  as  the  relative  propor- 
tions of  employed  and  unemployed  persons  in  Ireland  in  that  year,  and 
the  latter  class  must  be  diminished  by  the  clergy  and  members  of  the 
liberal  professions. 

In  the  specification  of  occupations  in  Ireland  in  1841,  the  age  of  15 
was  assumed  instead  of  20,  as  in  Great  Britain,  for  determining  the 
numbers  employed. 

It  will  be  seen  from  the  following  table,  that  out  of  2,341,895  male 
persons  15  years  of  age  and  upwards,  there  were  then  only  128,438,  or 
55  in  each  1000,  not  engaged  in  some  settled  occupation  ;  a  very  ex- 
traordinary result,  if  we  consider  the  tender  age  at  which  the  inquiry 
was  made  to  apply,  an  age  at  which  many  of  the  sons  of  persons  in  the 
middle  rank  of  life  would  be  still  engaged  in  study. 


England 

Brewers  .... 

.     44,232 

Maltsters      .     .      . 

.       9,286 

Soap-makers 

150 

Spirit-dealers    . 

.     56,012 

Tea-dealers  . 

.     82,063 

Tobacco-dealers     . 

.   158,. 344 

Wine-dealers     . 

.     24,170 

CIIAV.  III.] 


OCCUPATIONS  OF  TUE  PEOPLE. 


GO 


OCCUPATIONS. 


15  Yeiirs 

and  over. 


Ministering  to  Food — 

As  Producers 

Preparers 

Distributors 

Ministering  to  Clothing — 

As  Manufacturers  of  ^latcrials 

Handicraftsmen  and  Dealers 

Slinistcring    to   Lodging,    Furni-^ 
ture,  Machinery,  &c. 

Ministering  to  Health  . 

„  Charity 

„  Justice  . 

„  Education 

„  Religion 

Various  Arts  and  Employments 
not  included  in  the  foregoing 


Residue  of  Population  not  having^ 
specified  occupations,  and  in- 1 
eluding  unemploj-ed  persons,  j 
women  and  cluldren       .     .     .J 


Total   . 


Distribution  of  occupied  persons 
according  to  the  provinces  in- 
habited by  them,  distinguishing 
males  from  females,  and  adults 
from  children — 


Leinster 
Munster 


Ulster . 
Connaught 


Total 


1,594,682 
21,493 
26,907 

116,670 
95,912 

158,349 

4,081 

106 

19,483 

11,381 

6,054 

158,339 


2,213,457 
128,438 


2,341,895    1,677,681 


Under 
15  Years. 


102,952 
392 
205 

5,426 
2,738 

2,298 

1 


13 
1 

14,740 


128,768 
1,548,913 


542,409 
656,642 
632,146 
382,260 


2,213,457 


25,272 

29,788 
45,111 
28,597 


Fi;MAIJ:s. 


•15  Years 
and  over. 


Under 
15  Years. 


128, ."^5  I       18,512 


TOTAI,, 


1,307 

9,218 

513,192 
123,717 

3,488 

2,788 

147 

56 

5,414 

1,137 

289,005 


1,077,814 
1,451,846 


2,529,660    1,625, 


24 
34 

34,022 
9,647 

231 

1 


29,344 


1,844,401 
23,210 
30,364 

069,310 
2.32,014 

104,306 

6,871 

253 

19,541 

16,814 

7,192 

491,428 


91,821 
1,534,067 


128,768 


244,602 
256,049 
399,814 
177,349 


16,302 
21,909 
36,689 
16,921 


3,511,860 
4,603,204 


,175,124 


1,077,814  I       91,821 


828,585 

964,388 

1,113,760 

605,127 


3,511.860 


The  census  of  1831,  for  the  first  time,  made  us  acquainted  with  tlie 
number  of  domestic  servants  in  each  division  of  the  kingdom  ;  their 
numbers  then,  and  in  1841,  were  as  follows : — 


70 


PROGRESS  OF  THE  NATION. 
Domeftic  Scn-ants  of  all  Affen, 


[sec.  I. 


FEMALE  SERVANTS. 

MALE  SERVANTS. 

1831 

1841 

is:ii 

1841 

Number. 

Number 
in  each 

lOi-iU 
Females. 

Number. 

N  umber 
in  each 

I')00 
Females. 

Number. 

Number 
in  each 

1000 
Males. 

Number. 

Number 

in  each 

looo 

Males. 

England 
Wales      .     .     . 
Scotland. 
Ireland    .     .     . 

518,703 

42,274 

109,512 

233,155 

77 

102 

87 

63 

712,493 

52,672 

136,883 

260,400 

93 

113 

99 

63 

101,406 
3,324 

8,494 
98,742 

16 

8 

7 

26 

202,214 

9,484 

21,767 

295,766 

27 
21 
17 
73 

United  Kingdom 

923,646 

74     1,162,448 

1 

85 

211,966 

18 

529,231 

40 

Owing  to  the  imperfection  of  the  returns  relating  to  Ireland,  and  the 
frequent  changes  that  have  been  made  in  the  regulations  of  the  Excise 
Board,  the  following  table  (p.  71)  of  the  number  of  licenses  granted  for 
the  exercise  of  certain  branches  of  business  does  not  afford  the  requisite 
data  for  comparison  in  all  cases  between  the  three  periods  chosen.  In 
1801  and  1816  the  brewers'  licenses  did  not  include  tliat  very  numerous 
class  of  publicans  who  are  likewise  brewers,  but  who  swell  the  list  in  1833 
and  1841.  The  licenses  for  retailing  beer  were,  in  the  first  period, 
issued  by  the  magistrates,  and  no  record  of  their  number  is  procurable. 
AMth  respect  to  auctioneers,  tea  and  coffee  dealers,  glass  manufacturers, 
maltsters,  paper-makers,  and  dealers  in  spirits,  tobacco  and  wine,  the 
table  may  be  consulted  for  comparative  data. 

A  careful,  and  what  may  fairly  be  called  a  very  successful  attempt  was 
made  by  the  Census  Commissioners  for  Great  Britain  in  1841  minutely  to 
ascertain  the  various  employments  of  the  people.  On  all  previous  occa- 
sions, v.ith  the  exception  of  1831,  nothing  further  was  successfully  at- 
tempted in  this  direction,  than  to  divide  the  families  of  which  the  popu- 
lation was  made  up  into  three  classes,  viz. — 1st,  Agricultural ;  2nd, 
Manufacturing  and  Trading ;  and  3rd,  all  families  not  comprised  in  the 
other  two  classes.  The  result  of  those  attempts  has  been  shown,  and  it 
has  been  found  that  the  proportions  in  those  different  classes  have  been 
constantly  changing,  and  always  in  the  same  direction,  the  agricultural 
class  becoming  continually  smaller,  while  the  manufacturers  and  traders, 
on  the  other  hand,  have  been  as  regularly  increasing.  A  like  result  is 
exhibited  by  the  classification  of  1841,  as  will  be  seen  by  comparing  the 
following  figures  wdth  those  given  at  page  53,  in  which  the  occupations 
were  stated  as  they  now  are  repeated,  of  males  20  years  old  and  up- 
wards. The  proportions  of  that  part  of  the  population  at  the  two  periods 
are  divided  as  follows  : — 


OCCUPATIONS  OF  THE  PEOPLE. 


71 


1831 

Agriculture 31 '5 

Trade  and  Manufactures      .     .     3'.)*  7 
Other  Classes 28-8 

100- 


1841 

23-2 
44-6 
30-2 

100- 


The  numbers  from  which  the  above  proportions  are  derived  will  be 
found  in  the  table,  page  72. 


Table  referred  to  in  page  70. 


c-i  —  if^  ir:  r:  —  -f  I-';  t^  o  t~  --<  ci  O 

ec  "M  -M  CD  cc  X  ■  -  1  — h  u'^  r~  ic  — ■  — .  — 

-t  O  —  —   C  -M  -M  —  -^  -O  <M  OD  S  O 

(N  C  «  -f  cr.  -*  I  -  --o  -+  C--  O  — .  CO  -t  CO 

F-. 

(M  -r  f?  r?  —'  X  -o  -*  CM  «^  =-.  ^  ir;  -1< 

O00~.  J^r-.  —  —  -fCCiCMtO—  cr-.  CO 

■q 

■*  js  1-  rt       00           s-i  t^       o  —  ^ 

co-t~-x-i"       —           CO—       m  —  i~ 

H 

-t  c;0  CO  O       —                00       X       ?! 

c 

00  00      t--           -t           «  '/) 

ir;  t-  o       CO  in  —  X  t-  ir-.  o  -t  --0  —  CO 

-to—           -f            C-.  -■ 

Li  CO  !0       t^       —  Tf  i~  o  -o  -t  -M  'O  ;r. 

l?J  «0      •  -M      •      •             .      .  cc  Tj<       •      .      • 

CO  —  (M      -t-         Oi          —  COCO!M  —  —   ~. 

« 

u-                                     O 

-1<         00                                  CO         CO         — 

f-< 

■^ 

■^ 

OD 

OD 

'^ 

■O 

TJ<-*<C5tD-f'M00O-t<»n  —  WOO-* 
-+COO(M— r^mTj-OOO  00-l"(M-* 

H 

•*cot~.      t^mocnt— -*oco  —  ooo 
00C0-*       L-^- o6-*  —  coxcO-^co- 

c 

« 

«3  (M  Tj<  00         (N               I^a3-Ht-— <00     j 

co-^i^-cO       to           -r-M  —  =o       cr. 

o 

00 1-                         <N       m              j 

m       CO       —                i-";       CO       (N 

CO 

—       —                         —       — 

OC5to(>jmoO'MiSrtr~oocCr-i!i3 

^  -M  in  X  CO  X  ^  C  O  '-0  -o  C-.  -f  o  o 

r3 

!.-:>  irj  -f  ;C  35  -*  sq  r-  00  1^  •>!  «  CO  lO     ' 

X  CO  o  -f  '-o  'M  X  r^  in  in  in  —  -t  in  ■m 

e 

cO>!^oo<M       ir:irimzr.  nn^ntn 

—  -M  C-.  C>l  O  —  CM  CO  —  X  —  CO  CO  1^ 1" 

tr 

«  —  CO  O       00            —  >-';       -t  —  o 

<n  -t  ~  'S  '^         '^               <^W         X—  CM 

Tji  in  CO  00                         in       m       c^^ 

c 

-t  as                                  CO         Cl         i-c 

a 

'"' 

j^l .-       .--:  -f  —  X  -f  —  -f-  r-  ?!  00  -f 

to  -M  in  — .  — .  '-0  CO  -.O  ~  -t  r~  —  in  o  "M 

C-.  .n       -o  c~.  t:;  -f  oi  r-.  —  —  —  -J  t^ 

X  to  CO  ?i  r-  'M  —  CO  ~.  — .  in  -r  X  ~  vo 

•^ 

Lr:-)-     -c        cc-t:c-.r-t-f-trtt^ 

to  in  X  to  in  —  CM  t-  •*  X  —  1  -  t^  -  — 

o 

CC—         'M         C^               tM-l-         Wi-'O 

eo^Oin—       CO           CO  in       t^— -t 

H 

-o                       n      00      1-1 

Tj<o-.  coo—               xton 

•1- 

00  r^  cri       m  X  C  00  CO  in  o  O  to  O  O 

•3 

B 

•3 

tO'M'N         O         COCV-MtOXO-  XCO 
IMPltO      -CO         CO         (MCOCCOCI-  — . 

o"  '— "                      c'     — "     -m" 

li 

« 

(M         —                                  CM         — 

o 

CD 

•"• 

(X 

iH 

-^ 

CO  t^       t^  «  —  ir^  -*  *!  1^  ^5  :r-.  ~.  O 

.H 

X  O  O       (M  cr.  in  •M  t^  CO  O  to  —  O  CO 

c 

ooo       —  —  i^c<3>f:>ni--ocO'*r-i 

l^rfX         -J"          —  iniM^CO-tOJTfcl 

-5 

<0>-i      .CO         (M                C-.  rf—  00  —  tX> 

coto—    •-!"      CO           mt^  —  t^      in 

o 

o                       on 

t^        CO         (M                     to         (M         CM 

% 

rt-CO        00— <OWO^.  t^COWOT-* 

O  m  to  cs  (^^  c-^  X  to  :t>  to  r^  m  00  c  c-> 

00  CO       -!<  00    -.  —  t^  rt  —  o  o  =-.  o 

'frxMCMCOOcr;  x-)<x-*-r~i^cO 

c 

o:(N«s>)       o-^ini^Ccocs  —  — 

O  to  otox  —  inincMC5co-Mt^r-to 

'So 

(N—          to          C5                  —  -M          C-.  r-iO 

cococointo      o           cMX      CO  —  X 

c 

o                         eo      t^      — 

'I'lncot-—                -<*-*- 

w 

.    .    .  -^    

<a 

!a    .   .                    .   .   .^ ^    .   . 

O               3                                                           ^.                               O              — 

••••'£     -1     •     -M     •     •                             ...>...£.   g     ..     g     .     . 

• 

cer  Retailers    .     .     . 
ea  and  Cofiee  Dealers 
lass  Manufacturers     . 
altstcrs        .... 
aper  Makers  and  Staine 
)a])  Makers 

ealers  in  Spirits,  Whole 
„             „             Retail 
obacco  Manufacturers 
ealers  in  Tobacco  and 
ine  Dealers,  Wholesale 
„             Retail    . 

uctioncers  .... 

I'cwers 

■er  Retailers    .     .     . 
itto  under  Act  1  Will.  I 
ca  and  Coflbe  Dealers 
lass  Manufacturers     . 
altstcrs        .... 
iper  Makers  and  Staine: 
)ap  Makers 

ealers  in  Spirits,  Whole 
„            „            Retail 
ubacco  Manufacturers 
ealers  in  Tobacco  and  S 
'ine  Dealers,  Wholesale 
„             Retail    . 

.2 

J 

u 

V 

o  ^ 

.2  ^ 

II 

<  — —  r- ;;SiixS      r^  — P^                          --;:5^  — H;;Sii:^a      E-  — ^          1 

72 


TROGRESS  OF  THE  NATIOX. 


£ 

_ 

oo 

c~ 

=    1 

5 

00 

?? 

I^ 

TjT 

o" 

c^ 

■^^ 

o 

5^ 

« 

a- 

O 

o 

i-T 

00 

CO 

9.     ^ 

S 

o 

'^l 

Jo. 

00 

CI 

I— ' 

<  s 

t*^ 

1— ( 

o 

CO 

CI. 

-* 

o 

^  s 

o 

(M 

t^ 

»r; 

o  a;    . 

« 

»^ 

o 

Sec 

ill 

t- 

C^ 

1— 1 

00 

cc" 

■*" 

^'■ 

-T 

^ 

■"* 

&J 

xn 
•A 

CO 

o 

^  J 

no                                    o 

cc                 O                 c^                 O 
^                     ^                     00                     ^ 

^                        CS                         ,-.                         I.O 

T3  e  *j  -u  -a  >-■ 
,  c  —  c  =  c  = 
>.=  c  2  ?;  *  2 

oo 

u 

C5 

i 

olili-l 

C5 

00 

CO 

i 

C5 

i 

^^ 

co" 

co' 

2  •"  o  g 

o 

ta 

CO 

4.-=    C    3 

M  a>  k.  -^ 

n 

(Tl 

oc 

C-; 

r^ 

00 

3  >•  =  "^ 

2^2.1 

CI 

00 

ca 

o 

CO 

iT^ 

es   O--:   ». 

^ 

iJ   S  J3f 

m    ,  «.■«  5 

^_, 

^_^ 

Cl 

^^ 

■S  •>  o  =  ti 

•2  jjx  o  g  „• 

-^* 

a: 

in 

« 

1= 

«_ 
«" 

't 

'Tt" 

T) 

"      ""  "-  = 

.5  o-     S 

^^ 

_ 

-*• 

^  1 

5 

^■3       j^   m        C 

c 

« 

-* 

F- 

CO 

'ji 

t^ 

t^ 

oo" 

"c 

■^ 

Tj" 

«o 

tr> 

o 

C 

s  ^ 

ri  i^  1 

■* 

(N 

'^„ 

U                 2 

i; 

il 

K  e;     K        "^ 

'"' 

'^ 

t         -c         s         = 

"5-=  £-2  5  E:= 

S-5  i  g^r  c; 

^ 

CO 

3 

■* 
o 

00 

jT 

c-» 

-*• 

yj 

s 

■^    c  ^       '^       "^ 

i     ..  ,r    -^  ,- 

t 

^ 

-Tf 

^_, 

1 

•M 

Ol 

r;  _    *^    -  .—    —    ^ 

c^ 

(M 

oc 

^ 

1 

■^  i  ?-|  i  1  o 

t-. 

oc" 

-t 

C^ 

2J 

;-= 

5 

5 

1   ^-1  |3 

OD 

^ 

X^               *"*             1—               T 

"=    .       •  ? 

n 

n 

cr> 

»f5 

~  2;    '    t  c       i5 

Cl 

CO 

'I' 

O 

t> 

Ci 

E  i'H  °.>.-^'S. 

t^ 

o 

iO 

eo^ 

< 

SZJt'i^^ 

o 

1— 1 

i^ 

-f 

i'^ 

o 

C-. 

c; 

-*' 

(N 

CO 

■"^ 

•74 

1 

o 

t^ 

00 

^_f 

^          «^ 

CO 

*) 

(N 

.1          S 

co^ 

so" 

"„ 

2- 

^  "^  «—  r 

« 

50 

"  =  '  _ 

cc 

(N 

o 

t^ 

03         '^ 

O)            g 

rt" 

-* 

f=^         ^"^ 

• 

• 

• 

• 

Z   ? 

a 

C  "-^ 

*rt 

S  z 

^^ 

* 

-3 

J 

>  ~ 

— 

Ph 

r3 

^  "^ 

_d 

_5 

a 

O 

-* 

_3 

ll. 

oc 

^ 

-^ 

O 

•^ 

,"^ 

L*- 

c 

r*- 

;_, 

'"' 

r' 

cc 

^ 

'      ' 

CHAP.  HI.]  OCCUPATIONS  OF  THE  PEOPLE.  73 

The  detailed  account  of  tlic  occupations  of  the  pcojjle  in  Trelnnd 
divides  them  into  famiUos  (which  division  has  not  heen  retained  in  the 
Census  of  Great  Britain),  and  into  individuals  of  the  two  sexes  under 
15  years  of  age,  and  15  years  old  and  upwards.  As  already  remarked, 
no  very  accurate  comparison  can  therefore  he  made  in  this  respect  he- 
tween  the  population  of  Ireland  and  that  of  the  other  portions  of  the 
kingdom.  It  must  obviously  lead  to  error  if  we  were  to  base  our  calcu- 
lations upon  numbers  from  which  parties  living  between  15  and  20  years 
of  age  were  excluded  in  one  case  while  they  should  be  included  in  the 
other.  The  proportionate  number  between  those  two  periods  of  life, 
who  should  have  chosen  their  calling  or  employment,  must  vary  to  so 
great  a  degree  in  different  localities,  that  no  accurate  rule  could  well  be 
formed  for  determining  their  amount,  and  the  result  must  be  liable  to 
error,  whatever  proportion  might  be  assumed  for  the  estimate.  It  was 
at  one  time  intended  that  the  divisions  of  adults  from  children  in  the 
English  and  Scottish  returns  should  also  have  been  made  at  15  years  of 
age,  and  there  are  reasons  wdiich  seem  to  point  out  that  as  the  most 
fitting  age  for  the  purpose  with  reference  to  the  greater  part  of  the  popu- 
lation. It  is  much  to  be  desired  that  on  fixture  occasions  the  plan  pur- 
sued throughout  the  divisions  of  the  United  Kingdom  should  be  as  far 
as  possible  in  agreement. 

The  proportionate  numbers  of  families  engaged  in  the  great  di\isions 
of  employment  in  Ireland  in  1831  and  1841,  were  as  follows  : — 

1831  1841 

Agriculture 65-7  66*2 

Trade  and  Manufactures  .     .     .     17'4  23*9 

Other  Classes 16-9  9-9 

100-  100- 

The  gi'cater  proportion  of  traders  and  manufacturers  found  in  1841 
is  most  probably  the  result  of  greater  accuracy  on  the  part  of  the  enu- 
merators in  that  year.  There  was  not  equal  room  for  error  in  regard 
to  the  distinction  between  agricultural  and  non-agi-icultural ;  and  we  may 
assume  that  the  proportion  assigned  to  the  agricultural  classes  w^as  sub- 
stantially correct  in  both  years. 

The  proportionate  number  of  the  population  to  whom  occupations  are 
assigned  in  Ireland  is  somewhat  greater  than  that  assigned  in  Great 
Britain,  where  the  number  in  each  10,000  is  4164  against  4295  in 
Ireland.  * 

The  following  statement  presents  a  comparison  between  1831  and 
1841,  as  respects  the  families  of  Ireland  :— 

1831  1841 

Families  employed  in  Agriculture 884,339  974,188 

„  „  Manufactures  and  Trade  .     .         249,339  352,016 

Remaining  Families 251,368  146,583 

Total  number  of  Families       ....     1,385,066         1,472,787 


74  TROGRESS  OF  THE  NATION.  [sec.  i. 

It  appears  fi*om  those  figures  that  the  average  number  of  members  in 
each  family  has  slightly  diminished  since  1831.  In  that  year  the  average 
number  in  each  100  families  was  560 ;  whereas,  in  1841,  the  average 
number  was  found  to  be  only  555. 

Something  useful  was  effected  when,  as  the  result  of  previous  enume- 
rations, we  were  presented  with  the  numbers  and  proportions  of  the 
population  engaged  in  the  great  divisions  of  employment,  so  that  we 
could  estimate  in  this  respect  the  comparative  importance  of  agricultural, 
trading,  and  manufacturing  occupations.  This,  which  was  nearly  the 
extent  of  the  information  given  at  each  census  before  that  of  1841,  was 
far  from  satisfying  the  wishes  of  persons  who  desired  to  know  the  con- 
dition, and  to  watch  the  progi-ess  of  various  subdiAdsions  of  employment, 
that  so  they  might  be  able  to  mark  the  influence  upon  industry  of  legis- 
lative interference,  and  of  changes  in  our  foreign  relations.  At  the 
recent  census  much  of  this  desirable  knowledge  has  been  gained,  both 
in  Great  Britain  and  Ireland ;  and  thus  we  have  laid  a  gi-oundwork  for 
observation,  whereby  we,  and  those  who  will  come  after  us  in  future 
years,  may  be  enabled  to  avoid  some  of  the  errors  which  hitherto  have 
retarded  our  social  progress.  With  this  view  the  volumes  prepared  by 
the  Census  Commissioners  for  Great  Britain  and  Ireland  in  1841  must 
be  considered  as  of  the  greatest  value  to  future  legislators  and  states- 
men. 

All  that  can  be  attempted  in  these  pages  is  to  give  the  result  attained 
as  respects  a  few  of  the  more  important  branches  of  industry. 

On  comparing  the  numbers  of  male  servants  in  1831  and  1841,*  it 
is  evident  that  the  two  statements  cannot  have  been  made  up  on  the 
same  principle.  The  increase  from  211,966  to  529,231  is  very  far  be- 
yond any  that  can  actually  have  been  experienced.  The  English 
Census  Commissioners  for  1841  have  partly  accounted  for  the  apparent 
increase  in  the  number  of  male  domestic  servants  in  Scotland,  by  stating 
that  many  were  placed  in  the  list  who  should  more  properly  have 
appeared  as  farm  servants.  This  will  not,  however,  account  for  much 
of  the  increase,  the  whole  additional  number  assigned  to  1841  over  1831 
in  Scotland  being  no  more  than  13,273.  In  England  the  number  is 
doubled,  a  result  that  is  not  confirmed  by  the  retinms  from  the  Tax 
Office,  and  in  Ireland  the  numbers  are  nearly  3  to  1  when  compared 
with  1831.  If  we  assume  that  the  latest  return  is  correct,  it  appears 
that  in  the  United  Kingdoni  there  are  em])loyed  as  domestic  servants 
85  out  of  each  1000  females  living,  and  40  out  of  each  1000  males. 
Taking  males  and  females  together  it  would  appear  that  63  persons  in 
1000  are  thus  engaged  ;  while  in  1831  the  census  returns  give  only  47 
in  1000  of  the  population  as  domestic  servants. 

*  See  Table,  page  70. 


CHAF.    III.] 


OCCUPATIONS  OF  THE  TEOrLE. 


75 


Of  greater  importance  as  respects  the  result  of  their  hihour,  and  nearly 
equal  to  domestic  servants  numerically,  are  persons  engaged  in  the 
various  hranches  of  our  textile  manufacturers.  From  the  returns  of 
1841,  a  summary  of  which  is  here  given,  we  find  that  their  number  in 
the  United  Kingdom  was  then  1,465,485,  or  54  in  each  1000  of  the 
entire  population. 


GREAT  BUrfAI.N. 


Cotton 

Hose 

Lace 

Wool  and  Worsted    .     .     . 

Silk 

Flax  and  Linen    .... 

Total     .... 

Of  the  above- 
In  England  and  Wales,  and) 
Isles  in  the  British  Seas  .  f 
In  Scotland 

Total      .... 


20  Years     |    Under  20 
and  upwards        Years. 


138,112 
32,870 
7,013 
94.764 
31 ; 924 
3'J,433 


265,609 
78,512 


59,171 
5,005 
1,307 

23,576 
9,2.)3 

10.'.;08 


344.121   109.260 


84,202 
25,058 


344,121        109,260 


20  Years         Under  20 
and  upwards        Vears. 


104.470 
10,140 
19,785 
20,073 
26,781 
20,821 


75,909 
2,940 
7,242 
19,883 
15,775 
14,046 


211,070   135,795 


162,207 
48,863 


TOTAL. 


377,662 
50,955 
35,347 

167.2;)6 
83,773 
85,213 


800.246 


106,490  j     618,508 
29,305        181,738 


211,070       135,795  |     800,246 


Cotton  .... 
Lace       .... 

Wool  and  Worsted 

Silk 

Flax  and  Linen     . 
Fabric  not  specified 

Total     . 


1-5  Years        Under  15 
and  upwards        Years. 


4.224 

43 

4,220 

446 

24.008 

80,347 


15  Years         Under  15 
and  upwards        Years. 


276 

1 

47 

17 

800 

4.174 


113,288  !       5,315 


519 
70,7.54 

301 
107,957 
331,369 


190 

92 

2,725 

6 

5,844 
25,154 


512,625  '     34.011 


TOTAL. 


6,415 

655 

77,746 

770 

138,609 

441 ; 044 


665,239 


We  are  without  the  means  of  comparing  these  numbers  with  those  of 
former  years  ;  but  it  will  enable  us  to  form  an  adequate  judgment  con- 
cerning the  progi-ess  of  those  branches  of  industry  if  we  examine  the 
following  table,  which  particularises  the  number  of  factories  or  mills, 
and  the  amount  of  mechanical  power  and  human  labour  employed 
therein,  in  each  of  the  great  branches  of  textile  manufacture,  in  the 
several  divisions  of  the  kingdom,  as  ascertained  by  the  Inspectors  of 
Factories  in  1835  and  1839.— /See  pages  76-78. 


76 


rnOGRESS  OF  THE  NATION. 


[si:c 


1     2  "3     .               1 

* 

?  i  >'-5       ' 

«        ^        O        -w 

-h 

-^      in      >n      CO 

-f 

CTl          l.->           C»          — 

CO 

O           CO           O           C-l 

iH 

1  ^s^ 

O     ;  -H     .  ..-;     •  M     • 

-f^   ;  i~    ;  'n^   ;  'n_^   ; 

'^\    ' 

,c 

l^l-H 

!m"   "T  ■  T^r  '  -^ 

o 

m"               CO       '- 

— < 

2            " 

■N 

-^                                     1 

•M 

»i 

t-       o       y:       >>< 

in 

in       o       to       — 

CO 

•:::  c 

I-       .—       r^      C-) 

00 

1^       CO       1^       CO 

•2  = 

—      -O      -u-      -O      . 

CO     • 

c:   :"*„;<=>„;  <^„  : 

oo_   ; 

bo 

< 

c  2 

2     •^"   -jrf   'V-   ' 

in 

in 

c 

522 

CO       r^       O        (N 

t^ 

<35         CTl         <M          CO 

CO 

UO         C3        t^         00 

^ 

(>)         (N         00         to 

o 

•T3 

3    3) 

«      •  O      •  O      •  «^      • 

t^    • 

in     -in     'to     -co     ■ 

to     • 

^1 

>^ 

O                     O         5^ 

a> 

■*                     (M 

oc 

IM                     (M 

Tj< 

(N 

ci 

"a. 
S 

CO 

trS  =2 

^      in      c3      c> 

00 

O        t-        n        <N 

Tl< 

c  £  gZ^ 

«^      CT>      m      00 

O        1-       '^       «o 

05 

B 

00     -co     •  S^     -1^     • 

CO     • 

r-       .Irt       -r-       -CO       • 

1—*       • 

i  £  5  ^ 

>"(£^| 

O                         -^          r^ 

t^ 

t^                            0\ 

S 

1 

00                         1-1 

.?> 

'"' 

<M 

liS 

CO        00        oo        ^ 

^ 

o      o      in      <o 

^ 

o       t~    _  -f       \n 

-+       CO       -f 

<N 

CC       " 

■*     ;eO     ;  1?)     ;         . 

o_  ; 

^ 

o"    *            '  rt"    ' 

r>\ 

m" 

to" 

z 

O^m 

■"• 

'"' 

s 

Z 

:  : 

'  • 

— *-* 

--l-s 

'-='      CO       CO       -t 
•  CO     -to    -in    -4 

_  to 

E--S 

.  <;C         •   r-         .    JC        .   -^ 

£  '5 

•  C2      •            •  (M      • 

•  CO 

.  co_   .  r^     .  ^     . 

•  tb^ 

t. 

^ 

(m" 

'"^ 

'-' 

i2 

^      in      n      fM 

^ 

00       m       o       C35 

.  '^' 

T'li 

QJ 

•  r^     •          •  r^     •  s>) 

•  t^ 

•  i^    .in    •  ^    -co 

(^    s 

•  o     •         • 

•  «o 

•  1^       •  r- <       •  1— i       • 

•b 

1 

s== 

t— ' 

• 

-H 

-j-i 

?    (- 

S 

C^         t-        CO         CT> 

00      "*      t^      in 

>+ 

c 

•  (M      •             •  35      •  -< 

•  -f 

.  in     •          •  CO     • 

•  o 

'/;    rt 

•  rr       •              •  rH       . 

•  to 

.  in    • 

•  to 

> 

-C 

p- 

c 
a 

^ 

ij 

-iri 

^l?1 

r-l"! 

-\r< 

S 

1-        CO        C         c:^ 

r-<            CO            (M            P- 

r^ 

C)         -t>         -1"         00 

^          r—           (M          00 

OJ 

% 

0) 

^    ;  c>i    ;  "„  ;  o^  ; 

"i.  ; 

t^    -in    '00    •  o    • 

(£,         . 

o 

o"  *        * »"  *  ^"  * 

en 

t^"               p^" 

c" 

oj  iX 

H 

n 

in 

!N 

'^1'^     _ 

H« 

Mc 

-^l-M 

J?  J 

M 

t~        O         00         (M 

t^ 

■«*<        t^        00         CO 

(N 

&~ 

CO      •  -#      •  S>1      •  t^     • 

t^     • 

00     •  00     -SI     •  c^     • 

r»    O 

eS 

in    .  ri    •  r-    -in    • 

cn    • 

00      •  r)<      •  ,-(      -in      • 

s  * 

£2 

js 

C5                       CI 

<N 

CD                     rt 

Ol 

i 

•^ 

S 

O         00         IM         t^ 

r^ 

t^       to       -f       00 

in 

C3       •  O        •  — 1       •  —       • 

!N      • 

OJ      •  C>)      •  CM      •  O      • 

CO      • 

-t^ 

rt 

m    •  i-(    •  to    .in    • 

00      • 

00    •         .  to    • 

in     • 

t/j 

S 

O                in 

5D 

o 

-f 

-C 

r—t 

^ 

4  ^ 

to      in       00       m 

-f 

to       ^       r-       CO 

'M 

00     •          •  en     •  (M     • 

1  ~      .  -o      •  '-c      -co      • 

o 

E-^ 

«D       •                •  r-<       • 

C2      • 

C        •   ^        •   r-^        • 

CO     • 

t-    . 

tc 

f-^ 

"— ' 

'— ' 

<— < 

>> 

^  S 

"S. 

00      .      .     .CO      .  rt      . 

m    • 

t^    •  y->    .in     •  r~    • 

o    • 

Sm 

_s 

00 

05     • 

-)<•—• 

t^    • 

^1 

r2       iS 

^  .^ 

CO      in       !M       -t 

ri 

<Ti          O          <>I          — 

(M 

c 

<.o 

o     •          •  en     •  ^     • 

(M    •  m    •  ^    -co    • 

O      • 

in    •         - 1— <    "         ■ 

00    • 

O       .r-l       .,-H       • 

CO      • 

«-^ 

^H 

l-H 

t—l 

•  —    •  i2    •  —    '  2i, 

.  <e 

•  .2    .  t*    .^    .  ^ 

.  M 

a>      'o       o       a> 

"o 

O        "o         o         o 

s 

0)       o  ,    a>  ,    <u 

,     «* 

a>        o        «        s* 

H 

or"  or"  or"  or; 

o  ~ 

or"  op-*  or"  or^ 

o  rr^ 

'f-P- 

&^is?:j:^is?^ 

^  ? 

O— .  o^  c_,  o_ 

^    C&H    £ftH    5^    g 

^1 

o— ,  o^  o_  o_^ 

^1 

.    -T3=S^cj^a_,M 

"3  S 

r;:)c3--cj^j3r-)e3 

.—    C3 

&; 

D 

?;    =  tt—  u=  tc=:  to 

*  12  c-j:  C":  S--  s 

^   <5  ;i;  r'.  a  pr-,  u;  ^.  W 

S 

g     5|i|3|g| 

!i 

y. 

iS'Si 

o    ^  -r^j,^  -r^^  -g-j^  -r^ 

=  3) 

< 

<•,  a  r-^  K  r-.  W  li^  W 

■— V-^    '--V*-'    ^-^i"^    ^— 'f-^ 

^_* 

\^V"fc-'    >— v-^^    '— /^^    ^--V^^ 

, 

^ 

-a           •        -r!           • 

d 

-3-^        •       'O 

c3 

o 

c      „      c     rs 

O     " 

S                  C       rS 

O      '^ 

a 

to    -3      -"     i2 
-^    ?^    [»    vt; 

H 

^      S      «      a 

1  s  §  1 

W      ?=      crj      ►=! 

H 

ciiA.r.  Ill] 


OCCUPATIONS  OP  THE  PEOPLE. 


77 


f  _^ 

^ 

'-  -  >■'-, 

-r                X 

■^' 

rrj 

f- 

IZ  S.5 

•q    ■    ■    ■         ■ 

' 

,, 

CO 

,-                ~ 

-, 

•?  i 

-M 

(M 

•  .                •— 

— 

< 

=^1 

CO 

C3 

?? 

0)   3> 

r^ 

cc                c 

en 

-r 

^    • 

ir:     •    •    •  cc     • 

00    • 

•a 

<J 

•M 

« 

« 

o 

00 

00 
CI 

3-.                      « 

CO 

c  5  9_j 

o     • 

•       " 

S  £  *  c 

-* 

^■~    *      ■      ■ 

'       • 

_r  ■ 

c 

^ 

■"* 

:-• 

c  e;o 

CO                sr. 

r^ 

■- 

Oi 

1-T 

O                    00 

•o    •    •    • 

:  : 

1-^    • 

■~i 

^  o  5 

-»• 

-* 

t^ 

t'T 

1 

^  —  — 

z; 

-M 

ri 

C-. 

c;    • 

^ 

X 

X 

O                     '-C 

*-c 

•s  Si 

•  CO 

c-n 

H^ 

m  ^ 

tt> 

X 

mJS 

g 

.;{; 

l^ 

S5 

•  o 

-5  5 

-^ 

•  -^      •■•••• 

.  «-H 

> 

S^ 

•v^ 

£  5 

01 

•  X 

^               -o 

.  . 

t;; 

X  ti 

•  ?1 

•  (M 

:? 

_c 

J.- 

._ 

^                    00 

C5 

n              -t 

t^ 

> 

•^ 

^1         •        .         .   _!         . 

o 

a> 

r: 

CO 

«  y 

F- 

'^ 

^^ 

r) 

— ' 

K      • 

-M 

—  ir 

"V. 

*' 

=  2 

1 

E 

« 

f2 

t^ 

X 

X     • 

?:•••'-• 

X 

i'; 

-M 

~' 

^ 

oo 

o                iT: 

__ 

o  i 

X      •      •      • 

E-- 

•* 

•*    • 

I-J    •    •    • 

K  'S- 

tr 

>. 

u 

^    • 

« 

CO      • 

^  ^ 

s 

o< 

'^  5 

r- 

Z}    '....'..    , 

-*    • 

1  :::"': 

X 

5<    • 

.  K     .31     ,  ro     .  »i 

a, 

.  m     .  m     .  m 

o, 

"o 

o         O         o 

o 

,    o 

s 

mtun 

^i 

or"  o  ~  o ~ 
^fi^  f^  &?= 

i$ 

1^ 

O  ^     C   _;   ^   -J     O  ^ 

^"1 

P  —  ^c  ^  ^c  _, 

^■^ 

eZ"^ 

3 

i  l^i=l=l^ 

§2 

«  iiiiii 

s  s 

2 

g    —  u—  bt—  ti—  tc 

—  to 

^   E  ^=  ^E  if 

r:  i£ 

< 

^  SiiSsSi;iga 

^  'A. 

r*.  ^  S  —  i«  S 

s  w 

*=  ii; 

^ 

^      .    ,-<      • 

a 

-J           .       ^ 

• 

e3 

c             c     -t; 

o    - 

c              c 

"3 

O      " 

<; 

S          ?!         cS          C 

C3          ?          S 

c 

u 

1=    [3      1     -g 

^       "S          C 

"o 

K     ?=     -^     i: 

[2     ;?     •/ 

78 


TROGKESS  OF  THE  NATIOX. 


[sRC. 


^    5-3      . 

i'   £    i'  .-3 

w 

_       __ 

CO 

1  -^ 

3 

-   S  >-r^ 

_  C      _  X 

X 

E  £-2* 

1—    • 

(N      • 

CO 

H 

A^  E.S 

o  u 

«r 

C^          00 

to" 

CO 

oi 

n 

r^       i^ 

t^ 

cr  --  -^1  - 

._ 

—  c 

t^ 

X 

d  5.  ;_  M 
c  4  CO  X 

?^ 

< 

■3 

5  o 
c  £ 

in    • 

•    •  x    ;  o^  ; 

^    . 

• 

co" 

o" 

t~      o 

Co" 

'^Su 

•* 

-c       m  .— 

(M 

CO 

^ 

e 

n°° 

i  . 

o      « 

CO 

CO  5DW  X 

-J 

ce 

en       o 

m  to  X  ■+ 

•a 

"=  5 

:  :  ^l.  :  ^„  : 

in    • 

; 

(M  O  CO  O 

•■-_^ 

•<  ^ 

t^ 

■  C"      "   Tt"      ■ 

-M 

in^^'co^oo" 

1- 

o, 

s 

^ 

C^ 

X         CO 

CI 

Cl 

«      o 

m 

-*   M    ^.   r- 

to 

w 

ITS 

r^       1-1 

CO 

m  t^  O  5D 

o\     ' 

•    •  CO    -in    . 

iO  j!  ^  03 

CO 

c 

o  2  *  c 

t^ 

t-T  *  •*" 

C2 

• 

o"      -^to 

s 

r-« 

CO         (N 

to 

4) 

c 

?  c  ^ 

,_, 

-f      -f 

cr> 

cft  00  «o  -H 

-1< 

O 

(M 

CO        o 

in 

CO  o  ^  to 

CI 

•5   S-3 

Tj"          . 

•    '  ■»    •  ^    • 

i^    • 

^  't  X  rt 

m 

2^ 

f— * 

f—K 

O             l-H 

(M 

1 

3 

0-J=o> 

CO 

CO 

2 

:  : 

:::::: 

:  : 

—    tit 

to 

^ 

,- 

—1          -s 

in 

_ 

^ 

^1 

•    .    •  i~     .  -is 

X 

£  s 

•  Ti 

.     .      .(M      . 

•  in 

c^ 

tx 

in 

K     U 

0)   o 

.E  ■" 

rS 

(M 

^H             I- 

^ 

Tr— 

QJ 

•     •     •  C^     •  cc 

•  -f 

C    J 

$ 

*" 

•  Oi 

s 

« 

O         Oi 

m 

,_^ 

5;  a> 

c 

•  -M 

•     •     ;  O      -co 

X  -^ 

"til 

•  '^ 

•  CO 

C      •      • 

I? 

c 

cz" 

O; 

-Jf' 

~i?     ~ 

_. 

t- 

ki 

to 

-)"       00 

tc 

e2 

<M      • 

•    •  w    •  ri    • 

0_    ; 

-t" 

■<*<       f-i 

f-T 

c^ 

^   ** 

'^ 

o 

-l;< 

rt|-i 

cr  ^ 

O 

i-T         (M 

X 

CO 

>  :n 

2  I 

t^    • 

CO      •     •     • 

l>  ■£ 

"iC 

.    .-*    .6    • 

50       • 

C-.      •      •      • 

2  S 
E 

^ 

^■~ 

I-T         r-T 

co" 

t^ 

(M 

E 

-f 

O         00 

(M 

•'J' 

c^     • 

.      .  L.-       .  CN       • 

05      •      •       • 

2 

«: 

p— (     • 

•      -co      •  55      • 

Tj"      ' 

o    •    •     • 

M 

So 

n 

CO 

t^ 

^ 

C 

^ 

O         -h 

m 

t^  CO  — 1 

^ 

o  i 

c^     • 

•     •  cr-.     •  Tj<     • 

o 

f-::: 

1— t      • 

•<J"    • 

?i  ^) 

-* 

te 

^^ 

V 

>. 

m    £ 

a. 

(M      • 

•     T^     "*     • 

CO     • 

•  CO      • 

n 

E 

Oi      • 

'^'c 

<M 

o\ 

^  -^ 

CO        o 

•M 

t^           r^ 

X 

<.5 

o     • 

•     •  X     •  -t     • 

H 

CO      • 

CI      • 

■^ 

-+" 

-f 

to 

tn         tn         m 

•^ 

03 

'     •  C3 

o 

o       <u        V 

% 

o 

o       <u        o 

o 

o 

u 

^  JS 

H 

•   •  £ 

« 

is  I? 

5  '^  is  ?'  ?  ^ 

i:  ? 

Q 

.   .P-i 
o 

& 

H 

£  -  .=  -^   =  -^ 

^1 

s=  ■  ■  ' 

gg  •  •  • 

CJ 

r3  ^ 

-3    ci  _    c3  _)    c3 

-cf  =s 

u 

^!.S 

§iii§i 

§1 

§^•• 

_2 

"rt 

< 

=  '&=  '§c=  To 

?^  —  ;3  s  s  s 

:^^  •  •  • 

S 

s 

c 

?           C3           S 

"a 
H 

lift 

^           p          'T 

« 

P-          'J.          ~ 

<;n^ 

^  X  P^ 

CJiAr.  Ill] 


OCCUPATIONS  OF  THE  PEOPLE. 


79 


The  persons  employed  in  factories  in  tlic  several  divisions  of  the 
kingdom  are  in  very  different  projjortions  as  resj)ects  the  total  nnndjor 
of  persons  who  were  engaged  in  these  several  divisions  in  the  production 
of  woven  goods :  thus — the  total  nunilxn*  of  persons  so  engaged  in 
England  and  Wales  was  618,508,  and  the  nund)er  employed  in  factories 
was  349,454,  or  56"8  per  cent.  In  Scotland  the  factory  hands  were 
59,312  out  of  181,738  engaged  in  spinning  and  weaving,  or  32*6  per 
cent. ;  while  in  Ireland  the  factories  gave  employment  to  only  14,870 
out  of  GG5,"23'J  persons  engaged  in  this  branch  of  industry,  being  only 
2*2  per  cent. 

The  increase  in  the  number  of  factory  hands  between  1835  and  1839 
amounted  to  68,203,  or  19-20  per  cent.,  in  the  four  years  between  1835 
and  1839,  or  480  per  cent,  per  annum. 

If  measured  by  the  amount  of  labour  for  which  they  call,  our  mines 
are  not  of  nearly  so  much  importance  to  the  population  as  the  fabrics 
used  for  clothing ;  but  it  must  be  evident  that  this  mode  of  estimating 
the  comparative  merits  of  different  branches  of  industry  is  incorrect. 
A\  ithout  the  labour  of  the  118,233  persons  employed  in  the  coal  mines 
of  Great  Britain,  how  many  of  the  hands  employed  in  factories  must 
have  been  idle,  or  turned  to  other  pursuits  I 

Xnmher  of  Persons  Employed  in  Mines  in  Great  Britain,  1841. 


DESCRIPTION  OF  MINES. 


Coal  .  . 

Copper  . 
Lead 
Iron  . 

Tin    .  . 
ISIanganese 

Salt    .  . 


Mineral  not  specified 


Total  .... 

Of  the  above — 
In  England  and  AVales,  and  the  Isles ) 

in  the  British  Seas | 

In  Scotland 

Total  .... 


20  Years 

and 
upwards. 


83,408 

9,866 

9,427 

7,773 

4,602 

226 

242 

23,694 


139,238 


125,059 
14,179 


Under 
2U  Years. 


,475 
,428 
,932 
.679 
,349 
44 
24 
,523 


48,454 


42,919 
5.535 


133,238  j     48,454 


FEMALES. 


20  Years 

and 
upwards. 


1,185 

913 

40 

424 

68 

4 

2 

466 


3.102 


Under 
20  Years. 


1,165 

1,200 

20 

73 

82 

1 

490 


3,031 


2,662 
440 


2,628 
403 


3,102     !     3,031 

I 


TOT.VL. 


118,233 

15,407 

11,419 

10,949 

6,101 

275 

268 

31,173 


193,825 


173,268 
25,557 


11<3,825 


The  number  of  persons  employed  in  mining  operations  in  Ireland  is 
small,  and  the  returns  of  1841  do  not  admit  of  their  being  classified. 
They  were  as  follows  : — 

Males  15  Years  old  and  upwards      ....  3016 

„       under  15  Years .      .  47 

Females  15  Years  old  and  upwards  ....  28 

„        under  15  Years 5 


Total 3096 


80  TROGRESS  OF  THE  NATION.  fsnc.  i. 

A  further  enumeration  of  the  liands  eniphiyed  in  tlic  factories  of  tlic 
United  Kingdom  was  made  in  1847,  from  which  it  a}i))eared  that  in  the 
eight  years  between  that  time  and  1839  the  ninnber  had  increased  by 
121,240  hands,  or  28-62  per  cent.,  or  3-57  per  cent.  })er  annum. 

It  will  be  seen  from  the  following  figures  that  the  greater  part  of 
this  increase  has  occurred  in  England,  viz : — 

England  and  Wales       .      .      .     105, .588,  or  30-21  per  cent. 

Scotland 7,931   „    13-.37 

Ireland 7,721   „   51-92        „ 

Total     ,     .      .     .     121,240 

and  that  it  has  been  divided  between  the  five  branches  of  manufacture 
as  follows  : — 

Cotton .56,942,  or  21-95  per  cent. 

AVooUen IS,  588 1       ,-  ,„ 

AVorsted 20.550  5"    '*■'  -'         " 

Flax 14,771    „    33-96         „ 

Silk 10,389   „   30-27        „ 

Total     ....     121,240 

The  numbers  from  whicb  the  above  proj)ortions  are  derived  will  be 
found  in  the  Table,  page  81. 

The  number  of  persons  engaged  in  the  manufacture  and  working  of 
metals  in  Great  Britain  in  1841,  as  stated  by  the  Census  Commissioners, 
■was  as  follows  : — 


MALES. 

FEMALES. 

DESCRIPTION  OF  METALS. 

20  Years 

and 
upwards. 

Under 
20  Years. 

20  Years 

and 
upwards. 

Under 
20  Years. 

TOTAL. 

22,670 

1,503 

915 

553 

1,151 

6,375 
374 
266 
351 
491 

301 
120 

77 
196 
127 

150 
143 
35 
220 
204 

29,496 

2,140 

1,293 

Tin 

1,320 

Founders  and  Smelters,  metals  not  specified 

1,973 

Total     .... 

26,792 

7,857 

821 

752 

36,222 

Of  the  above- 
In  England  and  'Wales,  and  Isles  in  British  ) 

Seas j 

In  Scotland 

23,775 
3,017 

6,814 
1,043 

790 
31 

744 
8 

32,123 

4,099 

Total     .... 

26,792 

7,857 

821 

752 

36,222 

It  does  not  clearly  appear  upon  what  })rinciple  this  statement  has  been 
made  up.  If  it  were  possible  for  anybody  to  be  misled  by  it  into  the 
belief  that  the  whole  number  of  persons  employed  in  Great  Britain  in 
fashioning  the  various  metals  into  articles  of  use  amounted  to  the  com- 
paratively small  number  of  30,222  persons,  the  means  of  correcting  that 
error  are  at  hand,  and  in  the  same  volume.  It  will  there  be  seen  that 
the  number  of  blacksmiths  alone,  whose  occupation  it  certainly  is  to  give 


occur ATIONS  OF  THE  PEOrLE 


-  2  S 

,^ 

i:^  o  .r^ 

to 

I-  Ol  Ci 

X 

<n  —  X 

CO 

-*  to  t^ 

1^ 

CI  ir  "^ 

'M 

—  O  -M 

o 

CO  -1"  r-. 

1^ 

CI  CI  o 

c  o  ~. 

o 

^.Vi 

n 

^1  X;  5i 

CO^ 

•t  ^  00 

f 

CO  CO  -t 

O^X^-f 

ci 

X  CO  in 

1- 

00 

^ 

oo'^^w' 

uT 

co' 

•"-"irTcT 

Cl" 

d'c-rca" 

x" 

t^  co'  co" 

V 

CI  if^  o 

*1* 

1^ 

-H  (M 

in 

r-  CO    • 

m 

^  CI 

-t 

"^  O  CO 

J 

<M 

CO 

-3 

in 

8 

i-c  00  r^ 

«o 

t^  i-i  m 

CO 

^inco 

CI 

in  in  00 

X 

to  Q  X 
CO  ^CO 

-)< 

CO    *    ^H 

S 

c.  r-  to 

CO 

(N  lO  -H 

X  CO  CO 

X 

r^  O  «- 

m 

=.°A 

<!*, 

13 

r-  CO  O 

CI 

r-  —  m 

tc' 

X  X  -H 

X 

C  O  =5^ 

o 

X  to  CI 

■^ 

CO 

O 
H 

s 

t^  1  -  1  - 

'M 

CO  c  o 

o 

CO  o  o 

S 

^'co'-n" 

~ 

-t  C-.  to 

— ' 

C"r-"x" 

*-.J* 

u; 

l^  1— " 

■Xj 

(—1    CH 

(M 

rt  <M 

CO 

1— <  CI 

-f 

CO 

CI    O    35 

X4 

'^ 

^" 

CO 

«5  (N  CO 

s 

u3  m  o 

CO 

CO  1^  «o 

to 

-*  to  o 

o 

X  to  35 

CO 

35  CO  X 

CO 

m 

O  '~  eo 

00  —  « 

m  t^  CO 

cr^ 

m  ^  CO 
C-.  X  -* 

o 

to  to  in 

35 

to  Cl  35 

35 

4J 

1—  -t  .n 

o 

(M  C  ^ 

C-. 

-t  -i<  CO 

d 

CI 

C5  CO  CO 

C5 

I,  -J<  d 

■* 

M 

^—  r  ^  o 

-r 

-t  Ol  t- 

CO 

CO  -t  r- 

m 

too 

X 

CI  CO  1^ 

CO 

Cl  '^'  X 

in 

—  :-:  cjo 

CO 

—  Ol 

-f 

"" 

Cl  to  CO 

Cl 
Cl 

If.  i2  CO 

CO 

CO  CO  to 

CI 

t-  —1 

X 

CO  CO  :n 

X 

it2?g 

00 

(M  IQ 

CC/ 

_  CO  t- 

CO 

CO  en  in 

X 

35 

"rt 

^  CO  X 

(N  00 

o 

CI 

CO  CO 

COr-. 

in 

^ 

l-H   (N 

^ 

r— 1 

to  o 

t~' 

x"-t" 

Cl" 

^• 

Cl 

<; 

r-i  CO  m 

CO 

.-CTj-  -(. 

o 

CO  — 

t^ 

1-  m  — < 

CO 

35  X  in 

Cl 

'A 

r-H  t^  til 

CO 

2  s 

^ 

^  ^  35 

CO 

CI  CO  CO 

C^   35  1^ 

<; 

■T3 

I- 00^ 

to 

irj 

CI  CI 

^ 

^  in 

X 

'"' 

(n" 

^"l-" 

- 

in"c5" 

-1<" 

■>*  (M  •* 

o 

(M  C-.  O'l 

CO 

^o 

^_, 

0-.  X  X 

m 

in  o  -^^ 

35 

'^ 

cj  m 

in 

t^  m 

« 

_  CI  X 

o 

m  CI 

c;. 

r-:.:~.^ 

1^ 

— 

L-l    C-. 

o 

^ 

* 

-r  — 

rH  to 

1^ 

A 

S 

CI  co" 

co"^" 

t^ 

m  r^  't 

o 

CTj  —  CO 

t^ 

to  t- 

CO 

m  CO  r5 

O 

to  CO  X 

to  -?  fO 

CO 

-t  O  «c 

CO  -^  CO 

CO 

m  X 

-f 

C  Cl  ~. 

CO 

l^  — .  ~f 

J^ 

•^ 

a 

l^  t-  52 

I—" 

^  ^  -c 

to 

" 

f— 1 

Tf  CI  to 

CO  m 

C^ 

CO  ^  ^ 

Cl 

a 

CO 

CO  «o 

ai 

co'-t" 

CI 

^  rH   ^ 

Cl  ■* 

1^ 

to 

2 

< 

to  ^  00 

m 

00  ^  o 

(M 

(M  35 

to  CO  -* 

CO 

C5  o  t>. 

to 

C5  O  X 

r^ 

J) 

to  CO  to 

CT 

m  m  — 

<M 

>n(M 

X 

cnm  CO 

X 

in  CO  o 

en 

r~  m  -t 

t^ 

CO  =0  00 

00 

r^  Tj< 

(M 

CI  CI  CI 

1^ 

CO  ■* 

r^ 

t^  O  35 

t- 

kj 

1 

H 

00  Ci 

in 

rt  OI 

-t 

-*  -< 

in 

lO'Z^ 

c^ 

O 

o 

£ 

'^ 

CT 

" 

rH   CO 

-V 

en  «o  «3 

_, 

C  iMCO 

m 

■*  00 

CI 

C:  CO  in 

1^ 

l-CO^ 

^_, 

in  X  CO 

to 

r^  -f  C5 

r>\ 

CO  —  ^i 

»n 

to 

O  1-  to 

'T' 

r-c  CO  '^ 

CI 

X  3;  X 

to 

o 

CO  O^t-^ 

0^ 

CO  o 

■* 

1-c  C-.  -# 

in 

CI 

m  CO  -t 

T)< 

JZ 

co""--:" 

Ci 

^  ■* 

.—  CO 

in 

to  co" 

Q 

"' 

Cl 

l~  30  CO 

00 

-*r-o 

,^ 

t^    -*    ^H 

t^ 

X  CI  o 

o 

CO  CO  35 

o 

-*  ~  !T-. 

Cl 

CO  L':  CO 

c^ 

r^  1-  CO 

X 

CO  ^  -t" 

en 

X  O  m 

-H 

CI  —  -^> 

to  S  o 

-t« 

!/i 

3 

ul  l^  t~ 

o 

(M  X  i.~ 

CO 

CO  CI  CI 

t^ 

m  c-  CO 

X 

I-.  35   O 

to 

-*  to  35 

0 

w 

.o 

t^  — <  t^ 

^"^ 

t^  X  u; 

IM 

t^  in  C5 

^^ 

rt^cD"^" 

cT 

t>."cf  co" 

co" 

rH^m^l^ 

in 

^" 

S"" 

^  00  t^ 

1^ 

1-1  CO 

CO 

^Cl 

in 

f— 1 

f-^  CI 

tf 

T)<  CO  1^ 

m 

"< 

1— < 

(N 

r-H   Cl 

•* 

!? 

"*  ■*  O 

00 

X    CO    r- 

CI 

^t-co 

^ 

CI  t^  CO 

CI 

r^  ^^  .— 1 

X 

m  r-  X 

■^* 

^  rl<  1.-5 

o 

to  .^^  C 

CI 

X  to  ^ 

to 

X 

35  35  O 

35 

iC 

■3 

00  c;  Cl 

t~ 

C  ^1  -* 

t^ 

X  t~  C 

to 

i^  m  in 

1^ 

t^  CO  00 

35 

Cl  t~  l~ 

t^ 

< 

E 

«  l^  00 

CO 

CO  X  CO 

'I' 

eo  C  CI 

CO 

-*i^ 

CI 

■*  35  m 

35 

3rc"r-" 

r^ 

/— ■ 

,i> 

th  en 

s 

o\ 

rH  d 

CO 

CI 

rH  X  m 

in 

?. 

^ 

-^ 

Cl 

CO  -1"  CO 

o 

CO  -*  m 

in 

CO  CI  X 

CO 

CO  m  t^ 

X 

rH   «  X 

CI 

Cr.   X   rH 

X 

(M  — ■  00 

C>) 

C  "M  CO 

CO 

m  in  ci 

CO 

CO  X  CO 

un 

in  c  rH 

t^ 

to  I~  o 

■^ 

S 

t^  00  r- 

CO 

OJ  '^  »— 1 

CT) 

^  -f  CI 

f— " 

X  CO  X 

o 

3:  CO  CI 

t-_^ 

rH  X   Cl 

Cl 

a 

:3 

O  CO  00 

CO 

^  ceo 

I-~ 

CO  -tr- 

m 

CI  CO 

t- 

CI  cot- 

co" 

cr-+"c" 

1^ 

S 

—  cot- 

(M 

^  <M 

CO 

" 

Cl  in  Cl 

35 

.    .    . 

. 

tn 

•    •    • 

. 

.    .    . 

. 

.    .    . 

•    •    • 

• 

b< 

(- 

Si 

^ 

t-, 

"3 

O    C3      • 

O    cj      • 

c   eS     • 

o  a    • 

O    ZS      • 

C    C3      • 

fee  o 

tt  t> 

tX  ii 

fcC  « 

to  u 

tt  iJ 

0 

<>*  . 

. 

.<H    . 

. 

.-<;*-'   . 

. 

<^    . 

<>^   ' 

<;>^  . 

H 

.9  o  o  o 

, 

^_ 

C  :►.  X 

^^ 

.  t.-  00 

, 

.  'v  * 

tn  ^  X 

-tS 

"o 

C3 

o 

o 

J   ai  -H   m 

o 

<  r-r3  M 

c 

H 

H 

H 

£  g  =  S 

H 

cZ  g  i  i 

r-     ^     r*    ^ 

p.    6   '='    V 

'-'?HC0>-1 

0 

p;>^co>H 

^>^2^ 

f-i^H 

>HCOH 

CO  "^  2 

CO  "^2 

CO    _  X 

CO    ^  X 

eo  "^  X 

CO  '~  X 

ri     C  -H 

r^     C   r^ 

U    o    ^ 

1 1  o 

I.    o    4* 

t-    j;    O 

u  °  a 

t.     £      O 

O    u    > 

C   o-O 

O    i.    > 

O    v-    > 

^  >  > 

c    >    > 

t:  r.  a 

C   o  -O 

t=««!j 

►^  ^  <^ 

t^M<^ 

tM-^ 

t-p;<! 

^^^ 

82  PROGRESS  OF  THE  NATIOX.  [sec.  i. 

useful  forms  to  iron,  amounts  to  07,340 ;  of  nail-makers,  nearly  all 
of  whom  are  employed  upon  the  same  metal,  a  few  only  making  copper 
nails,  the  number  is  20,311  ;  brass-founders  and  braziers,  not  included 
in  the  above  table,  amount  to  13,064;  the  various  branches  of  cutlery 
employ  11,075  persons;  the  making  of  needles  and  })ins  furnishes  em- 
ployment to  3854  individuals  ;  there  are  3479  boiler-makers  ;  4298 
tile-makers  ;  5521  locksmiths;  9670 workers  in  tinned  plate  wares,  and 
smaller  numbers  of  persons  employed  in  making  a  great  variety  of 
other  metal  articles,  such  as  anchors  and  chain  cables,  anvils,  bits,  bolts, 
cocks,  tiles,  gi-ates,  ranges,  stoves,  rivets,  shot,  springs,  stirrups,  spurs, 
wire,  &c.  &c.,  comprehending  altogether,  with  the  number  given  in  the 
foregoing  table,  and  the  number  of  miners  employed  in  raising  the 
metals,  a  gross  nuiuber  of  303,368  persons,  whose  industry  is  given  in 
Great  Britain  alone  to  the  production  and  fashioning  of  iron,  copper, 
lead,  and  tin,  with  their  various  compounds. 

In  Ireland,  the  number  of  persons  engaged  in  mining  operations  is,  as 
already  stated,  only  3,096,  and  of  these  some  part  are  employed  in 
raising  coal,  so  that  it  is  not  possible  to  assign  with  accuracy  the  proper 
number  ensfasred  in  raisinsr  and  smelting  metals.  Besides  these  there 
were,  in  1841,  employed  in  various  handicraft  operations  with  metals, 
37,034  persons,  viz.  : — 

15  Years  and  over.  Under  15  Years.      Total. 


Males 
Females  . 

Total 

.     35,913 

308 

768 
45 

813 

36,681 
353 

.     36,221 

37,034 

Of  these,  there  were  25,185  blacksmiths,  6276  nailers,  2522  white- 
smiths and  tinplate  workers,  546  iron-founders,  929  braziers  and  copper- 
smiths, and  490  cutlers  and  tool-makers ;  the  remaining  1077  persons 
beimi  divided  among  a  variety  of  minor  employments.  It  thus  appears 
that  340,402  persons  apply  their  industry  to  the  raising,  preparing,  and 
fashioning  of  metals  in  the  United  Kingdom.  This  number  does  not 
include  persons  whose  employment  it  is  to  distribute,  either  wholesale  or 
retail,  the  articles  thus  fashioned. 

The  proportions  which  the  adult  male  population  employed  in  agri- 
culture bore,  in  1841,  to  the  whole  inhabitants  of  the  several  counties  of 
England,  Wales,  and  Scotland,  were  as  follows  : — 


Per  Cent.     :  Per  Cent. 

Bedford 11-37    i    Devon 6-01 


Berks 10-20 

Bucks 11-81 

Cambridge 11-97 

Chester 5-58 


Dorset 9-21 

Durham 3*60 

Essex 12-29 

Gloucester     .      .  ''.      .      .  5-99 


Cornwall 6-62        Hereford 12-30 

Cumberland  ....  7-03       Hertford 10-48 

Derby C'll    }    Huntingdon 12-25 


cirxr.  III.] 


OCCUPATIONS  OF  THE  PEOPLE. 


63 


E  NG  L  A  N  V—contin  uetl. 


Per  Cent. 

Kent 7-44 

Lancaster 2"  49 

Leicester 7*03 

Lincoln 13-28 

Middlesex 0-95 

Monmouth 5' 10 

Norfolk 10-37 

Nortlianipton      ....  11-02 

Isortliumberland      .      .      .  5-52 

Nottingham 9-69 

Oxford 10-55 

Ivutland 13-05 

Salop 9-25 

Somerset 8-35 


Per 
Southampton      ....      8- 

Stafford    .  ' 4- 

Suffolk 11- 

Surrey 3- 


Sussex 

Warwick 

Westmorland 

Wilts 

Worcester     .      .      .      . 

York,  East  Riding  . 
„      City  and  Ainsty 
„      North  Riding      . 
„      West  Hiding . 


Cent. 

57 

75 

91 

64 

99 

03 

63 

69 

45 

56 

63 

56 

61 


Anglesea 11-4 

Brecon 7-82 

Cardigan 9-71 

Carmarthen 10-03 

Carnarvon 9*70 

Denbigh 10-08 


WALES. 

Flint    .      . 

Glamorgan 

Merioneth 

Montgomery 

Pembroke 

Radnor     . 


6-52 

4-65 

11-37 

11-29 

8-76 
14-03 


SCOTI.AXD. 


Aberdeen       .... 

Argyle 8 

Ayr 5 

Banff 9 

Berwick 11 


8-32 
8-60 
32 
06 
76 
79 
25 
82 
65 


Bute 

Caithness 

Clackmannan      .... 

Dumbarton 

Dumfries 8-84 

Edinburgh 2-52 

Elgin  or  Moray  .      .      .      .       9-25 

Fife 5-30 

Porfar 4-20 

Haddington 11-24 

Inverness 10-21 


Kincardine 11-39 

Kinross 8-48 

Kirkcudbright    ....  9-63 

Lanark 2-34 

Linlithgow 6-74 

Nairn 10-54 

Orkney  and  Shetland    .      .  7-75 

Peebles 10-. 50 

Perth 8-30 

Renfrew 3-06 

Ross  and  Cromarty .     .     .  9-50 

Roxburgh 9-14 

Selkirk 8-70 

Stirling 5-77 

Sutherland 10-17 

Wigton 10-48 


The  distribution  of  the  population  of  France  in  regard  to  occupations 
offers  a  striking  contrast  to  the  distribution  wliich  has  been  shown  to 
exist  in  this  country.  In  a  paper  on  the  comparative  situation  of  the 
poor  in  France  and  England,  drawn  up  by  Monsieur  Frederic  Lullin 
de  Chateauvieux,  and  connniuiicated  to  the  late  Board  of  Commissioners 
for  inquiring  into  the  administration  and  operation  of  the  Poor  Laws  in 
England,  a  statement  is  given  in  which  the  French  population  is  divided 
into  classes  in  the  following  proportions  : — 


Total  population  

Tov.n  population 7,000,000 

Land  proprietors  and  their  families 20.000,000 

Agricultural  labourers  and  tlieir  families  .      .      .      .     3,000.000 
Artisans  employed  in  agricultural  districts    .      .      .     2,000,000 


32,000,000 


32,000,000 


84  PROGRESS  OF  TIIE  NATION.  [skc  i. 

Supposing  the  family  of  each  proprietor  of  land  to  consist  of  five  per- 
sons, France  contains  four  millions  of  proprietors,  wlio  are  subdivided 
by  31.  de  Chateauvieux  as  follows  : — 

Large  Proprietors.  Hectares  of  Land. 

1st  Class 42.409,  possessing  8,481,800 

2nd    „         51,622  „  4,516,925 

Moderate  Proprietors. 

1st  Class 86,069  „  4,819,864 

2nd    ,,         258,000  „  7,388,003 

Small  Proprietors. 

1st  Class 774,621  „  7,843,494 

2nd    „         2,787,112  „  12,650,914 

According  to  this  calculation  the  average  quantity  of  land  held  by 
each  individual,  in  the  two  classes  designated  as  large  proprietors, 
amounts  to  138  hectares,  or  340  English  acres  ;  the  average  quantity 
assigned  as  the  possession  of  moderate  proprietors  amounts  to  35^  hec- 
tares, or  88  English  acres ;  while  the  land  held  by  small  proprietors,  if 
equally  divided  among  their  whole  number,  would  amount  to  no  more 
than  5^  hectares,  or  14^  acres  for  each. 

In  the  collection  of  "  Documents  Statistiques  sur  la  France,"  published 
in  1835  by  the  Minister  of  Commerce  in  Paris,  the  number  of  landed 
proprietors  is  stated  to  be  10,896,682,  which  gives  only  11+  Enghsh 
acres  as  the  average  size  of  the  farms  in  that  country.  This  extent 
must,  however,  be  far  below  the  truth ;  and  as  there  can  be  no  doubt  of 
the  acciu-acy  of  the  numbers  as  stated  in  the  French  official  tables,  it 
is  probable  that  each  proprietor  has  been  reckoned  distinctly  for  each 
of  the  several  pieces  of  land  which  he  holds  in  separate  parishes  or 
communes. 

The  division  of  the  soil  of  France,  according  to  the  nature  of  its 
employment,  is  stated  by  M.  de  Chateauvieux  as  under  : — 

Hectares.  Euplish  Acres. 

Total  Superficies .53,702,871  equal  to  132,646,091 

Sterile  and  unimprovable 3,702,871  „  9,146,091 

Vineyards  and  plantations         ....  2,000,000  „  4,940,000 

Forests 6,842,623  „  16,901,279 

Pasture 1,157.377  „  2,858,721 

Meadow  land 5,000,000  „  12,3.50,000 

Artificial  grasses  (Lucerne,  &c.)    .     .     .  4^000,000  „  9,880,000 

Arable  laud 31,000,000  „  76,570,000 

53,702,871  132,646,091      . 

It  appears  from  this  division  that  in  each  100  parts 

4  are  devoted  to  the  production  of  liquids,  including  oil ; 
13^         , ,  , ,          of  wood,  which  is  chiefly  used  as  fuel ; 

20i         , ,  to  the  support  of  animals  ;  and 

62  , ,  to  the  production  of  cereal  grains,  &c. 

100 


CHAP,  in  ]  OCCUPATIONS  OF  THE  PEOPLE.  85 

About  4,500,000  hectares  (11,115,000  acres)  are  supposed  to  bo 
held  by  the  government  and  by  municipal  bodies. 

It  is  estimated  by  Monsieur  de  Chateauvieux,  that  among  the  small 
proprietors  of  hmd  in  France  1,243,200  are  possessed  of  various  quan- 
tities, none  of  them  exceeding  2  hectares  (about  5  acres)  ;  an  extent 
altogether  insufficient  for  the  support  of  a  family  consisting  of  the  average 
number  of  five  persons,  since  in  the  present  state  of  agriculture  in  that 
country  it  requires  1  hectare  and  23  ares  of  land  (3  English  acres)  to 
furnish  means  of  support  for  one  individual.  In  addition  to  the  hvnd, 
each  of  these  little  properties  is  supposed  to  comprise  a  dwelling  with  a 
small  garden,  in  which  vegetables  are  raised,  and  by  including  this 
addition  to  the  means  of  the  family,  three-fifths  of  their  wants  are  sup- 
plied. For  the  remaining  two-fifths,  the  individuals  composing  the 
families  of  these  small  proprietors  are  obliged  to  apply  themselves  to 
some  other  source,  and  in  so  far  partake  of  the  condition  of  labourers. 
In  some  cases,  the  freehold  thus  held  is  so  small,  that  the  proprietor  is 
only  distinguishable  from  the  mere  peasant  by  the  possession  of  his 
dwelling  and  garden.  In  the  wine-producing  districts  many  of  these 
peasant  proprietors  assist  as  vine-dressers  in  the  cultivation  of  the  larger 
properties,  and  in  this  way  a  family  is  said  to  add  about  200  francs  (N/.) 
in  the  season  to  its  otherwise  scanty  provision.  Where  circumstances 
permit  them,  these  labouring  proprietors  hire  land  in  the  vicinity  of  their 
estates  and  farm  the  whole,  or  it  frequently  happens  that  they  let  tlieir 
little  patches,  which  are  insufficient  for  their  support,  to  others  similarly 
circumstanced,  and  hire  themselves  as  farm  servants  on  larger  domains. 
A  great  many  among  the  farming  labourers  in  France  are  small  pro- 
prietors, and  we  may  suppose  that  such  would  naturally  meet  with  a 
preference  on  the  part  of  employers,  who  thus  have  an  assurance  of  their 
respectability,  and  a  security  for  their  good  conduct,  whicli  can  never  be 
given  to  the  employers  of  labourers  in  this  country,  where  they  have 
been  too  generally  dependent  in  part  for  their  support  upon  the  parish 
pay-table.  The  extent  to  which  the  subdivision  of  land  is  carried  in 
France,  under  the  operation  of  the  law  of  inheritance,  is  productive  of 
so  many  disadvantages  to  the  country  generally,  that  it  is  well  some 
good  can  be  ascribed  to  it,  which  may  tend,  in  however  small  a  degree, 
to  diminish  its  evils. 


86  PROGRESS  OF  THE  NATION.  [sec.  i. 


CHAPTER  IV. 

PAUPERISM. 

Origin  and  progress  of  Poor  Laws — Act  43rd  Elizabeth — Amount  expended  at  various 
periods  for  relief  of  Poor— Injurious  tendency  of  the  sj'stem — Means  employed  for  its 
amendment — Sums  expended  for  Poor  in  England  and  AVales  in  each  year  of  the  present 
century — Proportion  of  Paj-ments  to  Population  at  each  decennary  enumeration — Results 
of  Law  of  iS.'U— Poor  Law  of  Ireland — Of  Scotland— Methods  followed  in  various 
countries  for  relieving  the  Poor — In  Norway — in  Sweden — In  Denmark — In  Mecklenburgh 
— In  Prussia — In  AViirtcmberg — In  Bavaria — In  the  Canton  of  Berne — In  France — In 
Holland — In  Belgium — Labourers'  earnings  in  England,  &c. 

The  system  of  compulsory  maintenance  for  the  poor,  which  has  been  in 
operation  hi  England  and  Wales  since  the  43rd  year  of  the  reign  of 
Elizabeth,  has  at  various  times  afforded  occasion  for  warmer  controversy 
than  almost  any  other  matter  affecting  the  internal  condition  of  this 
country. 

The  attention  of  the  English  legislature  was  indeed  drawn  to  the  sub- 
ject of  the  maintenance  of  the  poor  more  than  two  hundred  years  before 
the  period  just  mentioned.  So  early  as  1388,  an  Act  was  framed  and 
passed,  providing  "  that  a  convenient  sum  shall  be  paid  and  distributed 
yearly  out  of  the  fruits  and  profits  of  the  several  churches,  by  those  who 
shall  have  the  said  churches  in  proper  use,  and  by  their  successors,  to 
the  poor  parishioners  in  aid  of  their  living  and  sustenance  for  ever." 
Until  the  era  of  the  Reformation,  when  so  many  richly-endowed  re- 
ligious establishments  were  seized  by  the  crown  and  appropriated  to 
secular  uses,  the  poor  had  generally  found  in  them  a  source  of  relief 
from  their  distresses.  It  would  appear;  however,  that  the  claims  of 
indigence  must,  even  before  the  suppression  of  religious  houses,  have 
exceeded  the  means  or  the  will  for  their  relief  on  the  part  of  the  possessors 
of  ecclesiastical  revenues,  for,  by  the  Act  27  Henry  VIII.,  the  officers 
of  towns  are  directed  to  collect  alms  for  the  pui'pose  of  keeping  "  sturdy 
vasabonds  and  valiant  beggars  "  to  continual  labour.  This  Act  further 
directs  "  every  preacher,  parson,  vicar,  and  curate,  to  exhort,  move, 
stir,  and  provoke  people  to  be  liberal  for  the  relief  of  the  impotent,  and 
for  keeping  and  setting  to  work  the  said  sturdy  vagabonds."  By  another 
clause  it  was  provided  "  that  a  sturdy  beggar  is  to  be  whipped  for  the 
first  offence,  his  right  ear  cropped  for  the  second  ;  and,  if  he  again  offend, 
to  be  sent  to  the  next  gaol  till  the  quarter  sessions,  there  to  be  indicted 
for  wandering,  loitering,  and  idleness  ;  and,  if  convicted,  shall  suffer 


CHAP.  IV.]  rAUTERISM.  87 

execution  as  a  felon  and  an  enemy  of  the  commonwcaltli."  The  inun- 
dation of  mendicancy  which  appears  at  this  time  to  have  overspread  the 
country,  had,  in  all  prohahility,  chiefly  originated  out  of  the  first  great 
breaking  up  of  the  feudal  system,  by  the  permission  given  in  the  pre- 
ceding reign  to  the  great  landed  proprietors  to  dispose  of  their  estates, — 
a  change  which  speedily  occasioned  the  dispersion  of  all  those  numerous 
bands  of  retainers  which  used  to  be  fed  by  every  lord  of  the  soil.  This 
state  of  things  could  not  but  be  aggravated  by  the  subversion  of  the 
religious  establishments  in  1539,  from  which  time,  until  the  close  of  the 
reign  of  Elizabeth,  many  statutes  were  passed  relative  to  vagrancy  and 
mendicity. 

The  reasons  already  offered,  when  viewed  in  connexion  with  the  then 
existing  condition  of  society,  will  perhaps  account  for  the  extent  of  the 
evil,  and  may  be  received  in  extenuation  of  the  harshness  of  the  law  by 
which  it  was  sought  to  provide  a  remedy.  Unhappily,  it  is  by  no  means 
peculiar  to  the  times  of  the  last  of  our  Henries,  and  his  immediate  suc- 
cessors, that  in  seeking  to  remove  a  pressing  evil,  the  symptoms  only 
should  be  dealt  with,  leaving  untouched  the  causes  of  the  mischief.  In 
our  own  day  we  are  forced  to  acknowledge,  that  the  same  unstatesman- 
like  and  unchristian  mode  of  dealing  with  this  subject  has  been  adopted 
by  us  as  was  pursued  300  years  ago  by  legislators  who  were  without 
the  experience  by  which  we  should  be  guided.  The  object  of  legisla- 
tion at  both  periods  has  been  the  management  of  paujjers,  while  the 
adoption  of  a  system  for  the  removal  of  pauj)erism  has  been  neglected. 
If,  instead  of  visiting  with  punishment  of  the  severest  kind,  those  who 
fell  into  a  condition  which  they  had  little  or  no  means  of  avoiding,  our 
Ancestors  had  set  themselves  to  provide  those  means  by  the  imparting  of 
knowledge,  and  the  inculcation  of  principles  of  independence,  as  well  as 
by  forbearing  to  place  shackles  upon  the  skill  and  industry  of  the  people, 
although  we  might,  no  doubt,  have  still  had  am.ple  opportunity  for  the 
exercise  of  benevolence  in  solacing  misfortune,  it  may  be  confidently 
believed,  that  the  legislature  of  our  day  would  have  been  relieved  from 
all  necessity  for  considering  any  system  of  poor  laws. 

It  is  to  the  Act  43rd  of  Elizabeth  that  we  owe  the  system  which,  till 
very  recently,  has  provided  in  England  and  Wales  for  the  compulsory 
maintenance  of  the  poor.  That  the  system  then  introduced  has  since 
been  greatly  abused  and  applied  to  purposes  which  did  not  enter  into  the 
contemplation  of  the  legislature  of  that  day  cannot  be  doubted.  The  chief 
provisions  of  the  Act  of  Elizabeth  gave  to  the  overseers  of  the  poor  power 
to  levy  upon  the  inhabitants  of  their  respective  parishes,  "  such  sums  as 
should  be  necessary  to  support  the  aged  and  infirm  parishioners,  and  for 
setting  to  work  all  persons  using  no  ordinary  and  daily  trade  of  life  to 
get  their  living  by."  Confined  within  this  limit,  laws  for  the  maintenance 
of  the  poor  appear  to  be  in  agreement  with  the  plainest  principles  of 
humanity,  which  enjoin  upon  every  one  the  duty  of  relieving  the  unde- 


88  PROGRESS  OF  THE  NATION.  [sec.  i. 

served  distresses  of  his  fellow-creatures.  Unhappily,  the  fund  thus 
directed  to  be  employed  for  the  necessary  relief  of  the  impotent,  and  for 
setting  to  work  persons  capable  of  labour,  has  been  applied  to  purposes 
wholly  opposed  to  the  spirit,  if  not  to  the  letter  of  that  law,  and  that  to 
a  degree  and  in  ways  which  have  proved  destructive  to  the  morals  of  the 
working  classes,  and  highly  injurious  to  the  interests  of  the  community. 

It  was  not  until  a  long  time  after  the  pjissing  of  the  Act  of  Elizabeth, 
that  the  disastrous  effects  just  alluded  to  sprung  out  of  its  provisions. 
So  recently  as  the  reign  of  George  II.,  the  amount  raised  within  the  year 
for  poor  rates  and  county  rates  in  England  and  ^^'ales  was  only  730,000/. 
This  was  the  average  amount  collected  in  the  years  1748-49-50.  In 
1775  the  amount  was  more  than  doubled,  having  been  1,720,000/.;  of 
which  sum  rather  more  than  a  million  and  a  half  was  expended  for  the 
relief  of  the  poor.  The  war  of  American  independence  had  been  com- 
menced, and  was  followed  by  hostilities  with  France,  the  vast  public 
expenditure  occasioned  by  which,  crippled  the  resources  of  the  people, 
and  aggravated  the  distresses  of  the  poor.  From  that  time  to  the  close 
of  the  last  French  war  in  1814,  the  sums  levied  for  poor  rates  were  in  a 
state  of  continued  progression.  The  average  sum  expended  for  the  relief 
of  the  poor  in  the  three  years  from  1812-13,  to  1814-15,  amounted  to 
6,123,177/.  ;  but  this  sum,  enormous  as  it  is,  has  since  been  surpassed  ; 
the  average  of  the  three  years,  1831,  32,  and  33,  was  6,875,552/.,  and 
the  amount  expended  in  the  single  year  ending  the  25th  of  March,  1818, 
was  even  greater  tlian  this  by  nearly  a  million,  having  been  7,870,801/. 
The  year  last  mentioned  was  one  of  great  hardship  to  the  poor,  in  con- 
sequence of  the  dearness  of  provisions  ;  the  average  price  of  wheat  during 
the  year  181 7  having  been  ^As.  2d.  per  quarter.*  The  increased  pressure, 
however,  was  not  sinuiltaneously  felt  throughout  the  kingdom.  In  Berk- 
shire, the  largest  amount  of  money  for  the  relief  of  the  poor  was  expended 
in  1812  ;  in  Nottinghamshire  and  Brecon,  the  most  expensive  year  was 
1816  ;  in  the  whole  of  Wales,  with  the  exception  of  Brecon,  Anglesea, 
and  Carnarvon,  it  occurred  in  1818,  which  was  also  the  dearest  year  in 
Devonshire,  Gloucestershire,  Northamptonshire,  Rutlandshire,  Surrey, 
Warwickshire,  and  the  East  and  North  Ridings  of  Yorkshire.  Cumber- 
land, Leicestershire,  and  the  West  Riding  of  Yorkshire,  were  called  itpon 
for  the  heaviest  contributions  in  1819.  Huntingdonshire  expended  most 
in  1826  ;  Bedfordshire  and  Lincolnshire  in  1829  ;  Middlesex,  Cambridge- 
shire, and  Anglesea,  in  1831 ;  and  Carnarvon  in  1832.  With  these 
exceptions,  the  largest  expenditure  was  made  in  every  county  in  the  year 
already  mentioned,  viz.,  between  the  25th  of  March,  1817,  and  the  same 
day  in  1818. 

A  feeling  had  long  pre\  ailed,  that  the  injurious  teridency  of  our  system 
of  poor  laws  was  aggravated  by  the  mode  of  their  administration,  and 

*  The  quantitj"  of  foreign  wheat  brought  into  consumption  in  the  two  j'ears,  1817  and 
1818,  exceeded  2,G0(),0tW  quarters. 


CHAP.  IV.]  PAUPERISM.  89 

inquiries  of  a  partial  nature  had  from  time  to  time  been  undertaken  by 
tiie  legislature,  with  the  hope  of  palHatinp;  the  mischief,  and  of  finding 
out  some  method  of  mitigating  the  evils  of  pauperism,  without  abandoning 
the  dictates  of  humanity.  Little  or  no  good  was  found  to  result  from 
those  inquiries.  The  subject  was  so  vast,  and  the  practical  evils  attend 
ing  it  were  so  widely  spread  and  deeply  seated,  that  it  required  an  inves- 
tigation far  more  laborious  and  minute  than  could  be  completed  by  any 
committee  of  Lords,  or  Members  of  the  House  of  Commons,  who  had  other 
and  pressing  calls  upon  their  attention.  Under  these  circumstances  it  was 
])erhaps  the  wisest  plan  that  could  be  adopted  by  the  Government  to 
appoint  a  Board  of  Commissioners,  wbo  should  make  "  a  diligent  and 
full  iuijuiry  into  the  practical  operation  of  the  laws  for  the  relief  of  the 
poor,  and  into  the  manner  in  which  those  laws  are  administered."  The 
Commissioners  thvis  appointed  were  persons  whose  education,  experience^ 
and  station  in  society,  eminently  qualified  them  for  carrying  on,  zealously, 
judiciously,  and  effectually,  the  laborious  task  intrusted  to  them.  The 
mass  of  information  which,  in  a  comparatively  short  space  of  time,  they 
collected  and  embodied,  affords  the  best  testimony  that  can  be  offered 
in  favour  of  their  fitness  for  the  undertaking.  The  report  which  was 
presented  to  the  Government  by  the  Commissioners  in  February,  1834, 
Mas  so  widely  circulated,  and  so  freely  canvassed,  that  it  cannot  be 
necessary  to  enter  upon  the  examination  of  its  various  details,  nor  could 
it  be  attended  with  any  profitable  result  to  discuss,  at  much  length, 
the  propriety  of  the  various  remedial  measures  which  it  proposed,  and 
which  were  in  great  part  adopted  by  the  legislature.  It  will  be  suflicient 
here  to  state,  that  the  opinion  before  so  generally  held  as  to  the  desirable- 
ness of  a  radical  change,  at  least  in  the  mode  of  administering  the  laws 
for  the  relief  of  the  poor,  was  strengthened  by  means  of  the  Report  of 
the  Commissioners  into  a  conviction  of  the  necessity  of  that  change  in 
order  to  arrest  the  rapid  and  total  demoralization  of  the  working  classes, 
which  was  fatally  counteracting  all  the  efforts  of  philanthropists  for  en- 
lightening the  minds  and  improving  the  condition  of  the  labouring  poor. 
The  Act  "  for  the  Amendment  and  better  Administration  of  the  Laws 
relative  to  the  Poor  in  England  and  Wales,"  received  the  Royal  assent 
on  the  14th  of  August,  1834,  but  although  it  has  now  been  for  more  than 
sixteen  years  in  operation,  it  is  not  yet  possible  to  judge  dispassionately 
the  effects  of  a  measure  which  is  hardly  second  in  importance  to  any  of 
the  legislative  reforms  brought  about  since  the  year  1830. 

The  following  table  (p.  90)  exhibits  the  amount  of  money  expended 
for  the  relief  of  the  poor  in  England  and  Wales,  the  number  of  inha- 
bitants, the  average  price  of  wheat,  and  the  number  of  quarters  of  that 
grain  for  which  the  money  so  expended  might  have  been  exchanged  during 
different  years  in  the  present  century. 


DO 


niOGRESS  OP  THE  NATIOX. 


Years. 


Sums  Kxpended 

lor  Relief  of 

tlie  I'oor. 


Population  of 

En^jlund  and 

Wales.* 


Average 

Price 

of  Wlicat 

per  (Quarter. 


Number  iif 
Quarters  of  Wheat 

for  wliicli  (lie 
Money  could  have 
beenllxchanged. 


£. 

s.  d. 

1801 

4,017,871 

8,872,980 

115  11 

1803 

4,0771891 

9,148,314 

57  1 

1811 

6,656,105 

10,163,676 

92  5 

1814 

6,2'J4,581 

10,775,034 

72  1 

1815 

5,418,846 

10,979,437 

63  8 

1816 

5,724,839 

11,160,557 

76  2 

1817 

6,910,925 

11,349,750 

94  0 

1818 

7,870,801 

11,524,389 

83  8 

1819 

7,516,704 

11.700,965 

72  3 

1820 

7,330,256 

11,893,155 

65  10 

1821 

6,959.249 

11,978,875 

54  5 

1822 

6,358,702 

12,313,810 

43  3 

1823 

5,772,958 

12,508,956 

51  9 

1824 

5,736,898 

12,699,098 

62  0 

1825 

5,786,989 

12,881,906 

66  6 

1826 

5,928,501 

13,056,931 

.56  11 

1827 

6,441,088 

13,242,019 

56  9 

1828 

6,298,000 

13,441,913 

60  5 

1829 

6,332,410 

13,620,701 

66  3 

1830 

6,829,042 

13,811,467 

64  3 

1831 

6,798,888 

13,897,187 

66  4 

1832 

7,036,968 

14,105,645 

58  8 

1833 

6,790,799 

14,317,229 

52  11 

1834 

6,317,255 

14.531,957 

46  2 

1835 

5,526,418 

14^703,002 

44  2 

1836 

4,717,630 

14.904.456 

39  5 

1837 

4,044,741 

15,105.909 

52  6 

1838 

4,123,604 

15, 307; 363 

55  3 

1839 

4,421,712 

15,508,816 

69  4 

1840 

4,576,965 

15,710,270 

68  6 

1841 

4,760,929 

15,911,757 

65  3 

1842 

4,911,498 

16,113,214 

64  0 

1843 

5,208,027 

16,314,671 

54  4 

1844 

4,976,093 

16,716,128 

51  5 

1845 

5,039,703 

16,917,585 

49  2 

1846 

4,954,204 

17,119,042 

53  3 

1847 

5,298,787 

17,320,499 

59  0 

1848 

6,180,764 

17,521,956 

64  6 

1849 

5,792,963 

17,723,413 

49  1 

693,234 
1,428,751 
1,440,455 
1,746,474 
1,702,2.55 
1,503,240 
1,470,409 
1,881,466 
2,080,748 
2,226,913 
2,  .557, 763 
2,940,440 
2,231,094 
1,850,612 
1,740,447 
2,083,221 
2,269,987 
2,084,855 
1,911,671 
2,125,772 
2,049,916 
2,3'.)8,966 
2,566,601 
2,736^717 
2,502,-528 
2,393,723 
1,540,853 
1,492,684 
1,275,494 
1,336,340 
1,459,288 
1,534,843 
1,917,065 
1,935,595 
2,050,048 
1,860,733 
1,796,199 
1,916,515 
2,360,460 


It  will  be  seen  from  this  table,  that  in  years  of"  dearth,  in  which  the 
largest  sums  have  been  distributed  to  the  poor,  the  tax  for  their  relief, 
if  estimated  by  its  equivalent  quantity  of  wheat,  has  borne  the  lightest 
upon  the  community.  The  money  expended  for  the  relief  of  the  poor 
in  1776  amounted  to  1,530,800/.,  and  might  have  been  exchanged  for 
802,165  quarters  of  wheat;  whereas,  in  1801,  when  the  amount  ex- 
pended exceeded  that  of  1776  by  162  per  cent,  the  quantity  of  wheat 
for  which  it  could  have  been  exchanged  was  lessened  by  13  per  cent. 
The  fact  is,  that  in  a  year  of  scarcity  and  high  prices,  while  even  the 
wealthiest  classes  feel  the  pressure  in  the  sliape  of  increased  rates, 
and  the  mass  of  the  community  in  a  diminution  of  the  means  of  con- 
sumption, it  is  a  natural  consequence  that  paupers  also  should  bear 
their  share  of  the  general  inconvenience,  and  should,  as  well  as  those  by 

*  The  numbers  given  in  this  column  for  the  years  1801,  1811,  1821,  1831,  and  1841,  arc 
those  ascertained  at  the  enumerations  of  those  years:  the  numbers  stated  for  intermediate 
ftnd  for  subsequent  years  are  computed  from  the  baptisms  and  burials,  and  from  the  rate  of 
increase  as  ascertained  at  each  census. 


CHAP.  IV.]  PAUPERISM.  91 

wliora  tliey  are  supported,  consume  less  food  than  In  ordinary  years.  It 
nuist,  too,  be  borne  in  mind  that  bread  absorbs  only  a  part,  although 
certainly  a  considerable  j)art,  of  the  poor  man's  expenditure,  and  that 
the  remaining  articles  required  for  his  sustenance  are  not,  equally  with 
grain,  affected  in  price  by  a  deficient  harvest. 

If  viewed  as  a  question  of  money  expenditure  only,  it  will  not  be  found 
that  the  sums  raised  for  the  relief  of  the  poor  bear  more  heavily  upon 
the  people  now  than  at  the  beginning  of  the  present  century.  If  the 
whole  sum  collected  for  that  purpose  in  each  of  the  years  when  the  enu- 
merations of  the  population  have  been  made  be  divided  in  equal  pro- 
portions among  all  the  inhabitants  of  England  and  Wales,  it  will  be 
found  that  the  payments  were  — 

s.  d. 

lu  1801 9  1  for  each 

1811 1.3  1    „ 

1821 10  7    „ 

18.31 9  9    „ 

1841* 6  0    „ 

The  increase  observable  between  the  first  of  these  periods  and  1831, 
amounting  to  7^  per  cent.,  is  assuredly  more  than  made  up  by  the 
increased  amount  of  capital  in  the  country.  The  greater  increase 
between  1801  and  1811  is  more  apparent  than  real.  If  allowance  be 
made  for  the  difterence  in  the  value  of  the  currency — the  price  of  gold 
having  been  4/.  I65.  per  ounce  in  1811 — it  will  be  found  that  the  pro- 
portion for  that  year  was  equivalent  to  Vds.  8f/.  for  each  person,  mea- 
sured in  currency  of  the  standard  value. 

It  is  not  asserted,  however,  that  because  the  proportional  sum  thus 
expended  had  increased  in  so  small  a  degree,  therefore  pauperism  had 
not  made  a  greater  advance  in  30  years  than  Ti  per  cent.  Owing  to  the 
operations  of  the  w^ar  and  a  succession  of  deficient  harvests,  the  prices  of 
almost  all  articles  required  for  the  support  of  life  were,  at  the  beginning 
of  this  century,  driven  up  to  a  distressing  height,  which  state  of  things 
continued  through  the  remaining  period  of  the  war,  and  for  one  or  two 
years  beyond  its  termination.  Since  then  the  fall  that  has  occurred  in 
the  prices  of  all  articles  comprising  the  poor  man's  expenditure  has  been 
so  gi'eat  thiit  we  may  fairly  estimate  it  to  be  fully  equal  to  the  simul- 
taneous fall  in  the  price  of  grain,  so  that  the  sum  of  9^.  9f/.  in  1831 
would  have  purchased  as  much  as  17^.  would  have  bought  in  1801. 
Applying  this  test,  W'C  tliall  find  that  the  weight  of  pauper  expenditure, 
in  proportion  to  the  population  at  the  two  periods,  was  as  7  in  1831  to 
4  in  1801. 

*  The  averages  in  the  years  following  1811  have  been — 

s.  d.  s.    d. 

In  1842    6  1|  In  1846  5  10^ 

1843  6  5i  1847  6  2i 

1844  6  Of  184S  7  \A 

1845  G  0}  1849  6  G.L 


92  TROGRESS  OF  THE  NATIOX  [sec.  i. 

Need  more  be  said  to  show  the  necessity  that  had  arisen  for  gra})])ling 
M'ith  an  evil  of  such  enormous  and  constantly-increasing  magnitude? — 
an  evil,  the  tencUnicy  of  which  was  to  set  against  each  other  different 
classes  of  the  coinnnniity,  to  dry  up  the  sources  and  to  blunt  the  feel- 
ings of  benevolence  on  the  part  of  those  who  are  made  to  contribute, 
while  it  engendered  dispositions  of  recklessness  and  idleness  among 
those  who  received  su])port.  Shall  we  be  wrong  in  ascribing  to  such 
compulsory  contributions,  administered  as  the  law  was,  a  quality  the 
very  reverse  of  that  ascribed  by  our  immortal  bard  to  mercy — 

"  it  is  twice  blessed, 


It  blesseth  liim  that  gives,  and  him  that  takes  ?" 

The  foregoing  table  (page  90)  exhibits  the  relief  which  was  afforded 
to  the  rate-payers  by  the  amendment  of  the  law.  In  the  year  ending 
25th  March,  1832,  the  sum  raised  and  expended  for  the  relief  of  the  poor 
in  England  and  Wales  had  amounted  to  7,036,968/.,  being  equal  to  an 
average  payment  for  the  whole  population  of  9s.  ll^d.  per  head.  In  the 
following  two  years  the  amount  was  somewhat  lessened  through  the 
vigilance  excited  on  the  part  of  parochial  authorities  by  the  inquiries  of 
the  Government  Connuissioners ;  and  in  the  first  year  that  followed  the 
amendment  of  the  law,  the  relief  to  the  rate-payers  amounted,  as  com- 
pared with  the  sum  just  stated,  to  1,510,550/.,  or  271  per  cent.,  the 
average  payment  per  head  having  been  7s.  6H.  The  relief  has  since 
been  even  greater  ;  the  average  payment  in  the  year  ending  25tli  March, 
1849,  the  latest  yet  ascertained,  having  been  no  more  than  Gs.  G^^d-  for 
each  member  of  the  community,  showing  a  saving  of  30  per  cent,  upon 
the  actual  payments  made  in  the  year  1831-2,  and  of  40  per  cent.,  if 
measured  according  to  the  increased  numbers  of  the  population. 

The  advantage  to  rate-payers  of  the  change  of  system  regarding  the 
rehef  of  the  indigent,  will  be  made  sufficiently  apparent  by  the  above 
figures,  but  something  beyond  this  result  is  required  in  order  to  justify 
that  change,  since  the  saving  of  money  might  have  been  effected  through 
the  sacrifice  of  our  social  duties,  and  at  the  expense  of  all  the  better 
feelings  of  our  nature.  The  charge  of  heartlessness  has,  in  fact,  been 
so  often  brought  and  urged  against  the  authors  of  the  change,  that  it 
may  be  well  to  inquire,  however  briefly,  whether  that  charge  be  well 
founded  or  otherwise. 

One  of  the  greatest  evils  which  had  grown  up  under  the  administra- 
tion of  the  old  poor  law,  was  the  practice  of  paying  the  wages  of  labour 
partly  out  of  rates  levied  for  the  relief  of  the  indigent  poor.  The  injus- 
tice of  this  i)ractice  is  now  fully  acknowledged.  It  was  unjust  towards 
those  persons  who  contributed  to  the  rates,  and  who,  if  even  they  gave 
employment  to  labourers,  could  not,  or  did  not,  adopt  that  method  of 
lessening  wages  ;  but  it  was  far  more  unjust  towards  the  labourers  them- 
selves, inflicting  upon  them  evils,  both  moral  and  physical,  which  were 
reflected  back  u])on  society  in  a  thousand  ways.     Under  such  a  system, 


cjiAi'.  IV.]  PAUrERISM.  93 

a  labourer  iti  an  agricultural  district  was  inevitably  rendered  a  pauper ; 
he  was  deprived  of  all  means  for  exercising  the  virtue  of  ])rudenee,  and 
became  almost  necessarily  imj)rovident ;  he  was  brought  to  hjok  upon  the 
parish  allowance  as  his  freehold  ;  and  if,  under  such  circumstances,  any 
spark  of  independence  remained  unextinguished  in  his  breast,  it  should 
have  been  received  as  evidence  of  a  de^rree  of  innate  virtue  deserving: 
of  the  highest  admiration. 

The  system  in  question  awarded  payment  for  labour,  not  according  to 
the  value  of  services  performed,  but  with  reference  to  the  number  of  the 
family  to  be  maintained,  whence  it  frequently  happened  that  in  order  to 
keep  down  the  rates,  employment  was  given  to  the  man  who,  by 
means  of  his  large  family,  was  a  burthen  upon  the  parish,  while  the 
prudent  and  industrious  man,  who  had  avoided  that  evil,  was  con- 
demned to  pass  his  days  in  idleness.  Payment  for  services  when  thus 
awarded,  were  kept  down  to  the  lowest  level  at  which  nature  could  be 
sustained,  and  at  seasons  when  it  no  longer  suited  the  former  to  give 
employment,  the  whole  labouring  part  of  the  rural  population  might  be, 
and  often  was,  thrown  for  subsistence  upon  the  parish  rates.  It  was 
clearly  not  in  the  power  of  any  individual  employer  to  act  upon  a 
ditFerent  system.  If  he  should  have  paid  his  labourers  a  rate  of  wages 
for  the  time  they  were  employed,  sufficient  for  the  decent  maintenance 
of  themselves  and  their  families  during  the  whole  year,  he  would  have 
been  found  also  to  pay,  in  the  form  of  poor  rates,  a  part  of  the  wages  of 
the  labourers  employed  by  his  neighbours,  which  would  have  been  un- 
just and  ruinous.  To  meet  this  evil  what  has  been  called  the  loork- 
house  test  was  adopted.  This  consisted  in  the  oiFer  to  give  relief  out  of 
the  parish  fund  only  ti.  those  applicants  and  their  families  who  would 
become  inmates  of  workhouses.  In  the  face  of  this  offer  the  farmer  has 
been  compelled  to  pay  the  labourer  the  full  amount  of  wages  needed 
for  his  continued  subsistence.  In  practice  it  has  been  found,  that  the 
farmer  who  should  dismiss  his  labourers  at  the  slack  season  has  but  a 
poor  chance  of  securing  their  services  at  other  times,  and  he  has  con- 
sequently been  induced  to  give  permanent  employment  to  the  more 
deserving  and  industrious  among  them. 

It  has  been  popularly  supposed  that  the  workliouse  test,  rendered 
necessary  by  the  abuses  here  shortly  described,  has  been  so  applied  as 
to  bring  great  hardship  upon  a  large  and  deserving  class  of  persons, 
when  from  any  circumstances,  whether  personal  or  general,  they  should 
be  temporarily  deprived  of  employment.  That  this  supposition  is 
erroneous  is  made  apparent  by  official  returns,  sliowing  the  number  of 
persons  receiving  aid  from  the  parish  funds  at  their  own  dwellings  as 
well  as  those  supported  in  Union  Houses.  From  these  returns  it  is 
shown  that  in  the  quarter  ending  at  Lady-day  in  each  year  from  1840 
to  1848  there  were  relieved  of  paupers — 


94 


PROGRESS  OF  THE  NATION. 


Yj-ari. 

In-door. 

Oil  t-iloor. 

Total. 

1840 

169.232 

1,030,297 

1,199,529 

1841 

192,106 

1,106,942 

1,299,048 

1842 

222,642 

1,204,545 

1,427,187 

1843 

23S.560 

1,300,930 

1,5.39,490 

1844 

230.818 

1,246,743 

1,477,561 

1845 

215.325 

1,255,645 

1,470.970 

1846 

200.270 

1,131,819 

1,332.089 

1847 

265,037 

1,456,313 

1,721,350 

1848 

265,140 

1,361,061 

1,626,201 

Among  these  the  adult  and  able-bodied  paupers  relieved  were — 


IN-DOOR. 

OUT-DOOR. 

TOTAL. 

iears. 

Through 

Sickness 

or 

Accident. 

From 

other 

causes, 

including 

Vagrancy. 

Total. 

TliroHwh 

Sickness 

or 

Accident. 

From 

other 

causes, 

including 

Vagrancy. 

Total. 

Through 
Sickness 

or 
Accident. 

From 
other  • 

causes, 
including 
Vagrancy. 

Total. 

1842 
1843 
1844 
1845 
1846 
1847 
1848 

10,922 
10,888 
11,4.58 
11,407 
11,258 
13,485 
15,084 

74,249 
88,308 
86,327 
76,216 
74,413 
109,739 
140,795 

85,171 
99,196 
97,785 
87,623 
85;671 
123,224 
155,879 

134,641 
146,704 
1.58,280 
167,277 
144.394 
202.403 
203.373 

192,078 
220,685 
175,419 
165,196 
152,352 
236,728 
307,086 

326.719 
367.389 
333,699 
332,473 
296,746 
433,131 
510,459 

145,-563 
157,592 
169,738 
178,684 
155,652 
215,888 
218,457 

266.327 
308,993 
261,746 
241,412 
226,765 
346,467 
447,881 

411,890 
466,585 
431,484 
420,096 
382,417 
562,355 
666,333 

From  what  has  been  here  said  and  from  the  foregoing  figures  it  must 
at  once  be  evident  that,  in  the  interest  of  the  labouring  class,  the  adoption 
of  some  plan  which  should  render  them  less  dependent  upon  their  em- 
ployers than  they  had  become  under  the  poor  law  as  administered  up  to 
1834,  was  absolutely  necessary,  and  that  the  course  pursued,  while  it  is 
the  best  adapted  to  that  end  of  any  that  could  be  proposed,  has  not  been 
used  for  the  oppression  of  the  poor. 

It  would  be  incorrect  to  suppose  that  the  amount  saved  by  the  payers 
of  rates  was  just  so  much  abstracted  from  the  sum  applied  to  the  relief 
of  indigence.  There  had  grown  up  under  the  administration  of  the  old 
law  a  variety  of  gross  abuses  which  intercepted  a  considerable  portion  of 
the  money.  Plunder  and  jobbing  of  all  kinds  were  the  usual  accom- 
paniments of  the  system,  and  it  is  by  no  means  surprising  that  persons 
who  were  allowed  to  benefit  themselves  in  this  manner  should  have  be- 
come violent  opponents  of  a  change  which  has  introduced  order  and 
economy  into  the  various  branches  of  parish  expenditure  whence  they 
had  previously  drawn  their  irregular  gains. 

The  power  steadily  enforced  upon  all  fitting  occasions  for  refusing 
relief  to  the  able-bodied,  except  within  the  workhouses,  has  'had  an 
effect  for  the  extent  of  which  it  is  difficult  fully  to  account,  in  converting 
the  idle  to  habits  of  industry,  and  by  that  means  increasing  the  demand 
for  labour,  since  employers  can  now  rely  upon  obtaining  its  value  for 
the  money  which  they  so  disburse.  The  following  extract  from  a 
letter  written  by  ]N[r.  WooUey,  formerly  a  land-agdnt,  now  an  Assistant- 
Commissioner  for  the  Commutation  of  Tithes,  and  addressed  to  Mr.  Gul- 
son,  one  of  the  Assistant  Poor  Law  Commissioners,  states  the  advantages 
to  the   labouring  population   of  a  measure  which   some  persons  have 


ciiAr.  IV.]  TAUPERISM.  95 

ventured  to  stigmatise  as  replete  with  cruelty  ;  and  draws  from  his  oh- 
servation  a  conclusion  which  cannot  but  be  gratifying  to  every  candid 
and  generous  mind  : — 

"  I  wanted  to  talk  with  you  on  the  almost  magical  effect  I  find  produced 
by  the  new  poor  laws  in  the  south.  There  I  had  seen  the  evil  in  its 
'riotings.'  I  saw  no  chance  but  ruin  or  change — prompt,  effectual, 
decided,  radical  change.  I  began  to  fear  the  thing  had  been  pushed 
too  far,  the  remedy  too  long  deferred  ;  but  I  am  perfectly  delighted  to 
find  that  I  was  mistaken.  The  change  has  been  nuide,  and  the  effect  is 
more  than  any  one  could  have  hoped.  I  have  in  my  professional  en- 
gagement as  Assistant  Tithe  Commissioner,  been  much  in  Sussex  and 
the  Weald  of  Kent.  I  have  seen  the  effect  on  the  poor-rates,  the 
character  of  the  population,  the  improvement  of  the  land — such  a 
change  !  I  have  talked  with  all  sorts  of  persons,  of  all  sorts  of  opinions 
on  other  subjects,  and  have  heard  but  one  opinion  on  this — that  the 
measure  has  saved  the  country. 

"  I  am  sick  of  the  pitiful  cry  attempted  to  be  raised  against  the 
measure,  and  especially  at  the  supposed  inhumanity  of  it.  Let  any 
man  see  the  straightforward  walk,  the  upright  look  of  the  labourer,  as 
contrasted  with  what  was  before  seen  at  every  step  in  those  counties. 
The  sturdy  and  idle  nuisance  lias  already  become  the  useful  industrious 
member  of  society.  No  man  who  has  not  looked  well  into  human  nature 
and  the  practical  working  of  the  wretched  system  of  pauperism,  can  form 
an  idea  how  different  is  sixpence  earned  by  honest  industry,  and  six- 
pence wrung  from  the  pay-table  of  a  parish  officer.  I  am  fully  con- 
vinced that  the  measure  has  doubled  the  value  of  property  in  many 
parts  of  the  kingdom. 

"  This  is  important ;  but  'pounds,  shillings,  and  pence  will  not  mea- 
sure the  value  of  the  change  in  character  which  is  already  visible,  and 
which  I  am  well  convinced  will  develop  itself  more  and  more." 

The  following  Table  (pp.  96,  97,)  exhibits  the  amount  expended  in 
each  county  for  the  rehef  of  the  poor  in  the  individual  years  when  the 
census  was  taken,  and  also  the  average  amount  per  head  that  would 
have  been  paid  on  this  account  in  each  county  if  the  burthen  had  been 
eqiudly  distributed  among  the  whole  number  of  the  inhabitants.  It 
appears  fi-om  this  calculation  that  although  the  actual  expenditure  was 
greater  in  1836-37  than  it  was  in  1801  by  the  sum  of  893,620/.,  or  a 
little  more  than  22  per  cent.,  the  virtual  diminution  has  been  upwards 
of  32  per  cent.  "When  compared  with  1811  the  saving  in  1841  amounts 
to  53  per  cent.  ;  it  is  41  per  cent,  upon  the  disbursements  of  1821,  and 
37  per  cent,  upon  those  of  1831. 

In  describing  the  proportionate  numbers  of  persons  engaged  in  agricul- 
ture and  in  other  pursuits  (Chap.  III.),  a  table  has  been  given  in  which 
is  stated  the  numerical  order  in  which  the  counties  of  England  stood 
relatively  to  each  other  in  those  respects  in  1811, 1821,  1831,  and  1841. 


9(5 


PROGRESS  OF  THE  XATIOX. 


c 

—  r?  r-.  i^ 

<C  CC  '^  o 

!>\ 

r-  ^  O 

t— 

-^  .^ 

^ctore 

w 

^ 

£■=  a 

^ "  '-* 

^-  ^^ 

>E. 

«■  t>.  C5  Ci 

X  ■*  -^  •.* 

Tj- 1-  r-.  ri< 

r-. 

O 

t-X  X 

t~ 

«  t-  in 

-c  rt 

X  X  m  in 

C5 

t- 

<g-E. 

<^ 

u 

00 

l:il 

(N  <N  O  — 

o 

^ 

in  -*  (M 

in 

2;Ocn 

?BC: 

■*  --  h--* 

°? 

to 

r-  C:  I-  O 

n 

(N  t-  =5 

«  o  to 

o  --  rh  » 

C-.  —  X  « 

o 

n 

O  CJ  X 

1— 

X   CI   r- 

1-^ 

=j  s » 

<=4  WO  r^ 

JC  rt  o  O 

C  -*  r-  — 

CO  ?:  Kr. 

o 

C  m  Tf 

to  -f 

-f  X  xin 

;c  C-.  X  t- 

cc 

CT 

rr  o  cj 

X    o  -^ 

"       o 

o  =-c 

"a  —  =  » 

00  ^  =^  uT 

t~  o  ^  o 

CI 

X 

CC  —  I^ 

in 

■*  -J  — 

o  in 

■*  r:  t-  in 

^ 

^ 

rt  —    iJ 

*— ' 

£  c  — 

O  C-.  ^  -o 

I— 

X 

—  r?  u~ 

^ 

C  in 

in  -o  -o  to 

t— 

m 

•-' 

1-1  r-i  rt 

■-^ 

i—  f-i 

^ 

^  1-1 

"^ 

3S 

u 

,_        tz 

<N  !^  — '  I— 

r-  -f  X  C'J 

en 

X 

CI  --o  ■* 

(M 

to  —  in 

t-  CO 

t-  --o  CI  r- 

CO 

fn 

—  °H  -° 

at) 

CJ  cc  t— 

to  —1 

O    w    '^ 

ir:  ir:  r-  i-H 

t-  c  -o  X 

tn 

(M 

to  «  'I' 

Cl  ~  o 

in  to 

o 

§  e:  o 

=ri—  Ot- 

00 re  (N  o 

X   CO   C   r- 

-N 

X 

(M  -*  O 

in 

«  CO  ■* 

^  to 

Ci  O  -*■  CI 

o 

X 

oe  ^  « 

o  C  O  •* 

r-  CO  =1  X 

r~ 

to 

10  C5  -^ 

■^      5 

Oi 

m£  3 

V.-.  X  -^  X 

l~ 

^  r-.  :m 

-f 

X  -M  — 

Cl  r: 



_ 

^ 

f-^ 

i"* 

^ 

'  ' 

<H. 

^  50  1.-;  t- 

-f  t-  X  CC 

X    C-.   r-    X 

t— 

C5 

CI  0?  !0 

t- 

r)"  -t  — 

C  t- 

-+  t-  1-  t~ 

to 

-H 

'"' 

*"* 

'^ 

1— 1  f— 1 1— 1 

"^ 

'"'" 

'^ 

i-l 
00 

— 

•  .     !=              toxt-  cii—xci  totot—ci  r-  -f  xr;  c^  i-i 

;  "S  2    1           CI  CO  I-  r^  x  c-  in  m  x  -c  X  eo  c;  ci  ci  CI  — 

-:5£l         XCO-*  xoi^c?  i-toto^  X  c.  i~  —  -t  t-~ 

V  x'^-!'"i^  t^-f'-t""cr  to  r-'in  —I  -f  CI  CI  ~.  — .  c  —  -*  X  ci  to  to  in  t-  ! 

p.  ^  ^  I    to  C  —  X  c  O  in  X  c  X  0-.  in  m  to  x  co  i^:  ■^'  ci  to  x  ci  m  -f  i~  i 


I    kM 


CI  ~ 


-^iincir:    i—ccx    rt^toci    x    t-    t-xo-. 


■  1—  I—  Cl     to  O  t-  '-O     C  —  t—  ~     ^ 

•1—  ClCI^  —  r-  1^  —  -<  Cl 


-t  X  o 

t-  -f  c 


r;    c    r^ 


eococi    ••i'CtDm    eot— -^ci    o    to    >— ■  —  co    O    i~~Oco    t— t— 

-      - ---cm     CO     I—     X  C  ^      ~-      C:  to  -)"      CO  -*     CI 


1  m  >-<  CO    X    ao 


c:  I  -  -*     05 

,.     _-     cfto^i-f    t-     to  C  ~     CI  X 
ex     ^     to     Xt-CO     — <     C->CI     CCI 


d    in 


"Ct-oo    dr-rix    cicicim 

•  --into    Mom-*    tor-i-ito 


->    X 
CI      X 


C  -"  CJ     CO 


^  CO  CI 

too 

m  ■*  X  CO 

CI 

'^ 

-*  CI  Ci 

X  X 

CI  -t  to  to 

to 

o 

■— I'^m     -^r~xr?     cv  CI 
c:  c^  in     X  CI  -*  O      

X  0-.  1-1     'i-  to  to  to 


1-ito  O  m  i-ict-  X 

u-tMI—  to  'ij'  -)"  t— xto  c 

-*ct— 05  >-i  O  '^cox  m 

'•+"-+'—"  r-"  ^r  cTto^co"  to" 

;  Cl  -o  m  CO  C  •<?  m  CI  o 


Cl  ■-•  m 

X  —  I- 

Cl  —  in 


ceo  cot— tcci  o  to 

ex  CO  C  —  Cl  X  «— 

CICl  t-tc^ci  to  d 

C:  X  CT.  -f  Cl  -*  X  X 


Si:„ 

.    ..o,.s Id       .-o       •  ••y,^       •■^r-S       •      • 

£-S|  -si?!  ^tti  i  ^  ill  -s  i^§  Ss  ^^^5  I  I 


CHAl'.    IV.] 


PAUPERISM. 


97 


=;.-oo=^c 

■71 

ir:  -r  1- 

CO 

-r 

o 

C  Cl 

f— t                 1-^                 «  <4     >— 1    >-^ 

^^ 

•*  t^  t~  «  30  ;0  O 

ifi  o  c  o 

O  -o  -t 

•o 

to 

to 

i-O  to  o 

r~ 

in 

-t 

«~  X 

in 

X 

to  to 

to 

t-  u-i  r^  r-  j;  X  t- 

00  c  cc  t^ 

l:^'* 

X 

to 

X 

!M  to  — 

^ 

CI  1-  c-.  1-  ri  1-  CI 

ir:  a,  «  I-. 

(M 

(- 

S  ^ 

•&     -.    W-.    C-.    1-    Tf    -t 

■^  -t  CO  fN 

c  c  -^ 

CO 

ir: 

to 

-t  X  t- 

CI 

CI 

to  CI 

-r 

o 

Sco 

-r 

r~  C  C  'M  2  2  «-- 

O  «  I^  CO 

O  —  CO  «5 

CI  —  -* 

X 

t- 

•o 

X  CO  -M 

^ 

— 

>v^ 

o 

^ 

t~'o  \p 

—  CO  T) 

-r 

Cl  to 

Cl  55  00  O  CO  O  Tf 

tct^oo 

—  C-.  t^ 

X 

n 

lO  X  ir; 

o 

Cl  — 

^^ 

•■^ 

^^ 

t-  00  «  -o  w  o  ^ 

~.  ~  ir  t'. 

—  X  i-O 

— 

to 

t^ 

o  to  to 

X 

to 

X  ~ 

tr) 

^ 

t^  — 

—_ 

^  r^  =;  i^  —  ff;  00 

Ol  O  -*  CO 

«£>  —  to 

o 

t^ 

(N 

r-  X  O 

to 

<-v 

ni 

Cl  to 

t^  CO  X 

tr; 

^ 

CI 

■n 

in 

C5  ~  tn 

-t 

m  o  ;r. 

in 

X  X 

m 

in 

^  -t 

X 

r-  00  t;  ?M  C  u-^  w 

—  O  X  CO 

C  CO  -«■ 

c. 

to 

or; 

t^  CO  ^ 

in 

f-, 

X 

-f  -t 

-t 

CO 

<=^  f  ~  r; «  '-.^  S  S 

C  X  1- 

o 

—  CO  o 

c^ 

-^1 

CO 

—  CO 

^ 

^         -M 

-' 

Cl  in 

r- 

O  t^  t^  O  3-.  0»  <£> 

f,  t^  00  -- 

«o  n  3-. 

to 

—  C  t~ 

to 

CI 

m  ^ 

t^ 

Cl  -- 

^" 

*-^ 

C-.  00  C5  t^  t^  <M  C^ 

o  o  -t  r". 

C  X  'O 

— 

t^ 

uO  to  L"^ 

X 

t^ 

t^ 

X   -H 

m 

o 

t^  o 

^ 

r^  O  -*  5-J  -C  -H  «3 

LT    t^   X   — 

5-1  X  — 

r^ 

(M 

to 

lO  CO  to 

'T) 

f-, 

_ 

C-.  CO 

X  C  -^  «5 

CO 

i~ 

1- 

-f 

r-c  -M   f-i  t^ 

If;  «c  CO 

Tl 

CO 

CO 

X  -M  C-! 

to 

-f 

m  d 

Cl 

C". 

-t  ci 

I- 

O  t-  CO  CO 

t^  -M  CO 

cq 

c^ 

■o 

-t  I-  to 

■M 

r-. 

to 

-i"  CO 

(-. 

^' 

-f  C)  -o  « 

^.  X  1^ 

c 

CO 

CO 

^  CO 

in 

r-H          1— » 

ss 

•o 

Cl--^ 

CO 

—  <M  •*  iT.  CO  ir^  O 

CI  X  I^  l^ 

-*  ^  o 

o 

-f 

X 

to 

X  in 

•■^ 

^^ 

^" 

«— ' 

0<NOOOOC^«22 

CO  35  ■*  I^ 

o  00  o 

CO 

^ 

r^ 

•*  -o  o 

^ 

X 

1^  CI 

to 

^ 

CO 

00  t-  -H  m  -t  t^  o 

•M  X  •?!  r-. 

CI  C.  CO 

ir:: 

X 

to 

to  X  CO 

r^ 

-t 

r- 

O  t^ 

<-, 

O  in 

—  O  C  <£>  —  '-':  i~ 

?:  CO  1?^  o 

I.-;  -o  — 

X  -*  en 

CI 

in 

It) 

X  r-. 

r-  X  — 

■>i 

<?l 

^) 

^ 

-* 

CI 

Cl  CI 

CO 

c 

X  Cl 

tc  .r:  .-  -f  u-  i^  -t 

I-  •?!-)■  — 

"^  ^  X 

,_. 

o; 

't 

Cl  CO  -M 

CI 

— ^ 

r^ 

Cl  CI 

-^ 

X  «-  -M 

CO  Cl 

r-          -M  — 

CO 

-f 

to" 

to 
to" 

^  c  «  —  -f  —  -o 

CO  i^  c;  CI 

X 

-t  =-.  CO 

r^ 

in 

CI 

X  in 

in  in 

•-* 

r-  X  —  •-=  -^  =-.  £1 

—  -—  ro  C 

1~  -^  is 

;^. 

CO 

to 

CO  CO  CO 

to 

to 

to 

m  X 

in 

er. 

in  C-. 

1~  O  JT!  ^  W  ■*  00 

CO  o  o  in 

X  'M  CV 

r> 

r^ 

o 

X  o  o 

o 

-f 

X 

to  >-i 

m 

X  o  -o 

to 

t^ 

■—  to  CO 

X 

X 

to 

l^  X 

m 

o 

^ 

'-' 

r—  »^  X 

t^  Cl 

Cl 

t^ 

coo 

X 

«5  —  -+  rt  r-.  «  :r- 

W  CO  X  — 

—  X  -o 

^. 

to 

o 

t^  j^  to 

Ci 

Cl 

._! 

t^  o 

M< 

00 

«22J*;:2i:: 

•*  'J'  X 

X 
co" 

(M 

Cl 

-*  to 

^  X 

co" 

-t" 

.... 

S 

. 

. 

. 

: 

: 

c 

— 

s^.s  ^ 

>•••••• 

.X^  "C  '^ 

--. 

.            . 

. 

• 

, 

,      . 

"4 

C3      . 

■  J  »^    X 

tu 

c  a' 

fcC  31 

— ^ 

•^  ""  Zi 

s 

^ 

>.5 

Illllll 

c 
'  "a     '  t^ 

«^  5    •  « 

■>   C  ;,  r! 

llj 

1 

To 

c 

c 

a 

ill 

cat: 

'3 

^' 

1 

1 

5 

E  o 

o 

s 

-5 

"o 

K^3 

'"c  !* 

98 


PROGRESS  OF  THE  NATION. 


[^ 


SEC.    I. 


The  following  table  repeats  the  information  as  regards  the  last 
of  those  years,  and  gives  a  further  column  showing  the  relation  of  the 
counties  to  each  other  in  respect  of  ])ayments  for  the  relief  of  the  poor. 
In  this  table,  No.  1  in  the  respective  columns  signifies  the  county  in 
which  are  the  greatest  number  of  agriculturists — the  county  in  which 
are  the  greatest  number  belonging  to  non-agricultural  classes,  and  the 
county  in  which  the  assessment  for  the  relief  of  the  poor  is  the  least, 
with  reference  to  the  population. 

Table  showing  the  Numerical  Order  in  which  the  different  Counties  of  England  stood  relatively  to 
each  other,  with  reference  to  the  Projxirtional  JVumber  of  their  Population  engaged  in  Agriculture 
or  otherwise,  at  the  Decennary  Enumeration  of  1841,  and  also  with  reference  to  the  burthen  of  Poor 
Rates  in  the   Year  1841-42. 


COUNTIES. 

Agri- 
cultural 
Qasses. 

Other 
Classes. 

Poor 
Rate 

Assess- 
ment. 

COUNTIES. 

Agri- 
cultural 
Classes. 

Other 
Classes. 

Poor 
Rate 
Assess- 
ment. 

Bedford    .     .     . 

10 

33 

28 

Monmouth     .     .     . 

35 

8 

3 

Berks  .... 

12 

31 

37 

Norfolk    .... 

16 

27 

34 

Bucks        .     .     . 

7 

36 

41 

Nortliampton 

13 

30 

32 

Cambridge    . 

8 

35 

35 

Northumberland 

33 

10 

14 

Chester    .      .     . 

34 

9 

5 

Nottingham  .     .     . 

28 

15 

12 

Cornwall  . 

2.) 

14 

9 

Oxford      .... 

14 

29 

38 

Cumberland  . 

26 

17 

4 

Rutland    .... 

2 

41 

23 

Derby.     .     .     . 

32 

11 

7 

Salop 

19 

24 

10 

Devon       .     . 

22 

21 

24 

Somerset  .... 

23 

20 

25 

Dorset      .     . 

21 

22 

36 

Southampton       .      . 

25 

18 

29 

Durham    .     .     . 

38 

5 

6 

Stafford    .... 

37 

6 

2 

Essex  .... 

3 

40 

39 

Suffolk       .... 

9 

34 

31 

Gloucester     . 

31 

12 

18 

Surrey       .... 

39 

4 

21 

Hereford.      .     . 

4 

39 

26 

Sussex       .... 

18 

25 

40 

Hertford  .     .     . 

15 

28 

30 

Warwick  .... 

36 

7 

11 

Huntingdon  . 

5 

38 

33 

Westmoreland    . 

20 

23 

20 

Kent   .... 

27 

16 

27 

Wilts 

6 

37 

42 

Lancaster 

41 

2 

1 

Worcester 

24 

19 

13 

Leicester 

30 

13 

22 

York,  East  Riding  . 

17 

26 

19 

Lincoln     .      . 

1 

42 

15 

„       North  Riding 

11 

32 

16 

Middlesex      .     . 

42 

1 

17 

„      West  Riding  . 

40 

3 

8 

Tt  appears  from  this  table  that  the  burthen  of  the  poor's  rate  in  pro- 
portion to  the  population  is  generally  greatest  in  the  most  agricultural 
counties.  Suffolk,  Norfolk,  Wiltshire,  Oxfordshire,  Buckinghamshire, 
Essex,  and  Cambridgeshire,  all  essentially  agricultural,  are  the  most 
heavily  burthened  w^ith  poor  ;  while  Lancashire,  the  West  Riding  of 
Yorksliire,  Cheshire,  Staffordshire,  Nottinghamshire,  and  Derbyshire, 
which  are  of  an  opposite  character,  enjoy  a  comparative  exemption  from 
that  burthen. 

Until  the  year  1838  the  poor  of  Ireland  were  entirely  without  legal 
provision  for  their  relief  From  time  to  time  the  state  and  condition  of 
the  poorer  classes  in  that  island  formed  a  subject  for  public  inquiry, 
forced  as  it  was  upon  the  attention  of  Parliament  by  the  ravages  of 
disease  brought  on  by  destitution.  There  were,  it  ife  true,  various  penal 
statutes  against  vagrancy,  which  had  mostly  fallen  into  disuse,  through 
the  impossibility  of  repressing  the  evil,  and  perhaps  also,  in  some  degree, 


cii.vr.  IV.]  PAUPERISM.  99 

through  their  uiiduo  severity,  the  })enalty  of  transportation  heing  awarded 
under  the  mere  autliority  of  a  Grand  Jury  presentment ;  l)ut  the  idea 
of  removing,  by  any  general  legishitive  provision,  the  necessity  for  acts 
of  vagrancy,  was  not,  until  the  date  above  mentioned,  acted  upon  by 
the  state.  County  infirmaries,  fever  hospitals,  dispensaries,  and  lunatic 
asylums  were  indeed  established  and  suppoi'ted,  in  whole  or  in  part,  by 
means  of  assessments  ordered  by  the  Grand  Juries.  There  were,  too, 
and  there  still  are,  many  charities  maintained  by  private  benevolence, 
unaided  by  either  general  or  local  taxation,  and  these  have  been  most 
liberally  supported,  chiefly  by  the  middling  and  even  the  poorer  classes. 
One  who  spoke  from  an  extensive  and  intimate  acquaintance  with  the 
subject — Dr.  Doyle — stated  in  evidence  before  a  Select  Conunittee  of 
the  House  of  Commons  that  sat  in  1830, — "  If  I  were  to  speak  till  the 
sun  went  down,  I  could  not  convey  a  just  picture  of  the  benevolence 
prevailing  in  the  minds  and  hearts  of  the  middling  classes  of  Ireland  ; 
but  it  is  sufficiently  proved  by  this,  that  the  poor  are  almost  supported 
exclusively  by  them,  although  they  form  a  class  not  over  numerous,  and 
subject  to  great  pressure  ;  still,  of  the  million  and  a-half,  or  two  millions 
now  expended  to  support  the  Irish  poor,  nearly  the  entire  falls  on  the 
farmers  and  other  industrious  classes."  By  the  word  farmers  we  must 
not  understand  the  generally  substantial  class  passing  under  that  name 
in  England,  but  persons,  for  the  most  part,  renting  and  cidtivating  with 
their  own  hands  from  two  to  ten  acres  of  land,  with  little  or  no  capital, 
and  too  often  subsisting  themselves  and  their  families  upon  the  lowest 
description  of  food. 

The  various  committees,  by  whom  this  subject  was  from  time  to  time 
considered,  appear  to  have  shrunk  from  the  responsibility  of  recom- 
mending for  adoption  in  Ireland  the  vmreformed  system  of  poor-laws 
as  administered  in  England  ;  but  in  the  session  of  1838,  when  some 
experience  had  been  gained  of  the  working  of  the  amended  law^  of 
1834,  an  Act  was  passed  "for  the  more  effectual  relief  of  the  destitute 
poor  in  Ireland,"  based  upon  the  provisions  of  the  reformed  English 
law,  and  conforming  to  it  as  nearly  as  the  different  circumstances  of  the 
country  would  permit,  the  administering  of  the  law  being  placed  under 
the  Poor  Law  Commissioners  of  England,  one  of  whom  is  to  reside  in 
Ireland. 

Some  opposition  to  the  execution  of  this  law  was  to  be  expected  at 
first,  where  rates  were  compulsively  levied  for  an  object  which  all  did 
not  equally  acknowledge  to  be  one  of  duty  and  necessity,  but  this  has 
now  almost  entirely  ceased,  and  the  law  is  administered  with  regularity, 
and  with  equal  advantage  to  all  classes  of  the  community.  In  the  lltli 
Report  of  the  Poor  Law  Commissioners  (dated  1st  May,  1845),  it  was 
stated  that  out  of  130  Unions  of  parishes  into  which  Ireland  is  divided 

u  2 


100  PROGRESS  OF  THE  NATION.  [sec.  i. 

for  tlio  purposes  of  the  Aet,  there  were  12G  in  which  the  law  had  been 
put  in  operation,  and  it  is  believed  that  at  this  time  the  remaining  four 
are  organized  and  in  action. 

The  delay  that  has  intervened  between  the  passing  of  the  Act  in  1838 
and  its  perfect  operation,  was  rendered  unavoidable  through  the  s)  stem 
of  "  the  workhouse  test,"  time  having  been  I'equired  for  the  erection 
of  so  many  buildings  adapted  for  the  purpose  in  all  parts  of  Ireland. 
The  expenditure  for  the  relief  of  the  poor,  as  stated  in  the  Reports  of 
the  Commissioners,  have  been  as  follows  : — 

Years.,  £• 

1840  4  Unions    .      .  37,057 

1841  37         ,,         .      .  110,275 

1842  92        „         .      .  281,233 

1843  106  „  .  .  244,375 

1844  112  „  .  .  269,. 529 

1845  112  „  .  .  280,945 

1846  123  „  .  .  425,183 

1847  130  „  .  .  803,684 

1848  131  „  .  .  1,835,310 

1849  131  „  .  .  2,177,650 

During  the  six  months  ending  31  March,  1848,  1849,  and  1850,  the 
expenditure  was  : — 

Years.  £. 

1848  807,146 

1849  977,671 

1850  658,175 

Expended  in  32  counties  of  Scotland,  comprising  880  parishes,  for  the 
relief  of  the  poor. 

On  .Management.  On  Litigation.  On  Actual  Relief.  Total. 

Y'ear  endincj  £.  £.  £.  £. 

14  May,  1847  43,168  5,023  385,743  433,934 

14  May,  1848  42,034  5,719  485,709  533,462 

It  cannot,  perhaps,  in  strictness  be  said,  that  Scotland  was,  until  1845, 
without  a  law  for  providing  means  of  relief  to  the  indigent ;  but  inas- 
much as  it  depended  upon  the  will  of  the  parties  who  should  have  fur- 
nished the  needful  funds  to  put  the  law  in  force,  and  as,  with  only  two 
exceptions,  the  heritors  in  the  different  Scottish  counties  refused  or 
omitted  to  tax  themselves  for  the  relief  of  their  less  fortunate  fellow- 
creatures,  it  may  be  said,  that  until  the  passing  of  the  Act  8  and  9 
"S'^ictoria,  c.  83,  there  was  no  legal  provision  made  for  the  poor  of  Scot- 
land. Voluntary  offerings,  to  a  small  amount,  were  indeed  always 
made  for  that  purpose,  and  intrusted  for  distribution  to  the  Kii-k  Session 
of  each  parish,  but  the  degree  of  relief  which  that  body  was  thus  em- 
powered to  afford  was,  in  almost  every  case,  so  limited  as  to  be  a  perfect 
mockery  of  charity.  Now  that  the  subject  has  been  investigated  by 
authority,  that  the  condition  of  the  destitute  poor  erf  Scotland  has  been 
laid  bare  to  the  world,  and  that  the  legislature  has  been  aroused  to  the 


CHAP   iT.J  PAUPERISM.  101 

performance  of  its  duty  towards  them,  it  may  seem  harsh  to  give  utter- 
ance to  feelings  which  could  hardly  ftiil  to  be  excited  by  an  examination 
of  the  evidence  presented  to  rarliament  in  1844.  It  requires,  indeed, 
no  small  degree  of  forl)(;arance  to  limit  all  comment  to  an  expression  of 
astonishment  that  in  any  country  calling  itself  Christian,  and  especially 
in  one  where  so  much  stress  is  laid  upon  the  outward  observances  of 
religion,  a  degree  of  heartless  neglect  as  regards  the  calls  of  humanity, 
such  as  is  recorded  by  the  Commissioners,  could  have  been  allowed  to 
exist. 

The  Act  above  cited  received  the  Royal  assent  on  the  4th  of 
August,  1845.  An  examination  of  its  provisions  leads  to  the  belief  that 
it  was  framed  with  a  greater  leaning  towards  the  prejudices  and  sup- 
posed interests  of  the  rich,  than  towards  the  wants  and  social  rights  of 
the  poor  ;  and  it  appears  probable,  that  at  no  distant  day  the  legisla- 
ture must  be  called  upon  to  remedy  some,  at  least,  of  its  deficiencies. 

It  is  a  common  error  to  suppose  that  the  institution  of  Poor  Laws  is 
peculiar  to  England.  Monsieur  de  Chateauvieux,  whose  "  RecJiercJins 
sur  la  situation  comparative  des  Pauvres  en  France  et  en  Amjletcrre^'  is 
contained  in  the  (Appendix  F)  to  the  Report  of  the  Commissioners  on 
the  Poor  Laws,  remarks  on  this  head,  that  "  the  existence  of  a  tax  in 
favour  of  the  poor  under  one  form  or  another,  may  be  recognised  in 
almost  every  fully-peopled  country."  He  instances,  in  support  of  this 
position,  the  distribution  of  wheat  in  consular  Rome  ;  and,  in  more 
recent  times,  the  alms  enjoined  by  the  Christian  religion  ;  the  bequests 
made  to  the  clergy  by  persons  in  order  to  ease  their  consciences,  and 
which  bequests  were  very  commonly  declared  by  the  donors  to  be  in- 
tended for  distribution  among  the  poor  ;  the  hospitals  and  infirmaries 
endowed  at  the  period  of  the  Crusades  ;  and  the  institutions  of  a  still 
later  period  for  the  maintenance  of  foundlings  and  for  supporting  and 
educating  the  children  of  the  poor. 

The  instances  here  cited  are,  however,  widely  different  in  their  cha- 
racter from  the  English  Poor  Laws,  either  as  regards  their  original 
object  or  their  modern  mode  of  administration.  AVhatever  sums  were 
given  or  bequeathed  under  the  different  forms  mentioned  by  Mons.  de 
Chateauvieux  were  voluntary  offerings,  sometimes  the  fruit  of  com- 
punctious visitings,  but  more  frequently  the  offspring  of  benevolent 
feelings,  and  the  objects  designated  for  relief  do  not  in  any  case  appear 
to  have  been  healthy  able-bodied  labourers,  or  their  families. 

Instead  of  endeavouring  to  institute  any  comparison  between  con- 
ditions of  society  so  dir^similar  to  our  own  as  those  here  referred  to,  it 
will  be  more  profitable  to  state  briefly  the  methods  at  present  employed 
in  various  civilized  communities  for  the  relief  of  their  distressed  poor, 
and  to  point  out,  as  well  as  the  limited  means  of  information  permit. 


102  PIIOGIIESS  OF  THE  NATION.  [sec.  i. 

the  apparent  effect  of  those  methods  upon  the  population  of  the  different 
countries. 

We  learn  from  returns  transmitted  by  English  Consuls,  in  conse- 
quence of  inquiries  made  through  Lord  Palmerston  by  the  Poor  Law 
Commissioners,  that  in  the  following  countries  of  Europe  the  poor  are 
acknowledged  to  possess  a  legal  claim  to  relief  from  the  rest  of  the 
community,  viz.,  Norway,  Sweden,  Russia,  Denmark,  Mecklenburg, 
Prussia,  Wurtemburg,  Bavaria,  and  the  Canton  of  Berne. 

In  Norway  relief  is  furnished  to  the  "  impotent  through  age,  cripples, 
and  others  mIio  cannot  subsist  themselves,  and  who,  in  the  country 
districts,  are  billeted  or  quartered  on  such  of  the  inhabitants  (house  and 
land-holders  in  the  parish)  as  have  the  means  of  providing  for  them. 
By  them  these  distressed  objects  are  furnished  with  clothing  and  food, 
and  they  are  in  return  expected  to  perform  such  light  services  as  they 
can.  Li  the  distribution  respect  is  had  to  the  extent  or  value  of  the 
different  farms,  and  to  the  number  of  the  indigent,  which  varies  greatly 
in  different  parishes.  In  some  they  have  so  few  poor,  that  only  one 
pauper  falls  to  the  lot  of  five  or  six  farmers,  who  then  take  him  in  rota- 
tion ;  whilst  in  other  parishes  they  have  a  pauper  quartered  on  every 
f^irm  or  estate  all  the  year  round,  and  on  the  larger  ones  several."  The 
wages  of  artisans  vary  from  55.  4c?.  to  7s.  2d.  per  week,  and  of  agricul- 
tural labourers  from  3d.  to  5hd.  per  day ;  in  the  former  case  food, 
lodging,  and  tools,  and  in  the  latter  case,  food  only  being  supphed  by 
the  employers.  In  ordinary  cases,  families  can  subsist  upon  their  earn- 
ings. They  consume  very  simple  food,  salt  herrings,  oatmeal  porridge, 
potatoes,  and  coarse  oatmeal  bread,  forming  the  greatest  part  of  their 
diet ;  once  or  twice  in  the  week  they  may  obtain  a  piece  of  bacon  or  salt 
meat,  and  those  who  live  on  the  coast,  or  near  to  rivers  and  lakes,  pro- 
cure fresh  fish.     Corn- brandy  is  in  general  use. .' 

Every  parish  in  Sweden  is  bound,  as  in  England,  to  support  its  OMm 
poor,  but  the  fund  for  that  purpose  is  supplied  by  voluntary  contribu- 
tions (a  large  portion  of  which  is  made  up  of  legacies  and  endowments), 
by  the  produce  of  certain  fines  and  penalties,  and  by  rates  levied  on  the 
inhabitants  in  proportion  to  their  means  of  contributing.  Mons.  de 
Hartsmandorf,  the  Secretary  of  State  for  Ecclesiastical  Affairs,  has  stated 
that  the  number  of  persons  who  received  relief  in  1829  was  63,348,  out 
of  a  population  of  2,780,132,  or  about  1  in  42.  Colonel  Forsell,  on 
the  other  hand,  affirms  that  in  1825  the  number  relieved  amounted  to 
544,064,  or  about  1  in  5.  Considering  that  in  the  city  of  Stockholm 
alone  there  are  83  separate  and  independent  boards  for  affording  relief 
to  the  poor,  the  estimate  of  Colonel  lorsell  appears  the  more  probable  of 
the  two.  The  law  is  severe  against  able-bodied  men  who  seek  relief, 
and  who,  if  they  are  without  property  and   employment,  and  neglect  to 


ciiAr.  IV.]  PAUPERISM.  103 

provide  themselves  with  any,  or  to  ohtain  sureties  for  the  payment  of 
their  taxes,  are  denominated  unprotected.  Such  persons  are  ]daced 
almost  at  the  disposal  of  the  police,  who  allow  them  a  fixed  period  in 
which  to  ohtain  employment.  If  they  fail  in  this  object  they  are  made 
to  labour  on  ])ublic  works. 

It  appears  that  under  the  existing  system  pauperism  has  increased  in 
Sweden  in  a  greater  ratio  than  the  population,  and  it  is  feared  that  the 
moral  efTeft  produced  upon  the  labouring  class  by  the  existence  of  a  fund 
upon  which  they  have  a  legal  claim  has  occasioned,  although  not  in  an 
equal  degree,  many  of  those  evils  which  the  same  system  has  brought 
about  in  England.  The  daily  wages  of  artisans  are  Is.  Id.,  and  of 
skilled  agricultural  labourers  Id.  or  8c?.,  while  the  unskilled  obtain  no 
more  than  ^d.  or  4f/.  Famihcs  can  subsist  upon  their  earnings.  Agri- 
culturists m  the  southern  provinces  live  upon  salt  fish  and  potatoes  ; 
in  the  northern  provinces  porridge  and  rye-bread  form  their  food. 
Artisans  sometimes  are  able  to  procure  a  little  meat.  The  annual 
expenditure  in  the  family  of  a  small  farmer  is  stated  by  Mr.  Liddell, 
the  English  consul  at  Gottenburg,  at  10/.  I85.  lOc/.  In  an  agricultural 
family  the  disbursements  are  about  two-tliirds  of  this  amount. 

The  social  condition  of  Russia,  where  the  great  bulk  of  the  people 
are  kept  in  a  state  of  serfdom  by  the  owners  of  the  soil,  is  so  little 
analogous  to  that  of  England,  that  it  would  throw  but  little  light  upon 
our  subject  to  explain  the  regulations  enforced  in  that  country  for  the 
maintenance  of  the  poor. 

In  Denmark  each  Kiobstaed,  or  market  town  (of  which  there  are  65 
in  the  kingdom),  and  each  parish  in  the  country,  forms  a  district  for  the 
management  of  its  own  poor.  All  persons  are  considered  entitled  to 
relief  "  who  are  unable  with  their  own  labour  to  earn  the  means  of 
subsistence,  and  thus,  without  the  help  of  others,  would  be  deprived  of 
the  absolute  necessaries  of  life." 

The  persons  to  whom  relief  is  given  are  divided  into  three  classes  : 
first — aged,  sick,  and  infirm  persons ;  second — oi'phans,  foundlings,  de- 
serted children,  and  the  children  of  parents  who  are  unable  to  support 
them ;  third — families  or  single  persons  who  are  unable  to  earn  a  suf- 
ficiency for  the  support  of  themselves  or  their  children. 

Paupers  of  the  first  class  are  provided  with  food,  lodging,  clothing, 
and  medical  attendance,  either  in  private  dwellings  or  in  establishments 
belonging  to  the  parishes.  Children  are  placed  in  private  families, 
wliere  they  are  brought  up  and  educated  at  the  expense  of  the  parish 
until  they  can  be  apprenticed  or  otherwise  placed  out  in  life.  Paupers 
of  the  third  class  are  so  relieved  that  they  may  not  be  without  the 
absolute  necessaries  of  life,  but  they  are  compelled  to  work  to  the  best 
of  their  ability  for  their  maintenance.  It  is  part  of  the  duty  of  those 
by  whom  the  system  is  administered  to  find  work  for  the  poor  at  the 


ItJi  riiOGllESS  OF  THE  XATIOX.  [siic.  .i 

usual  rate  of  Wciges  ;  where  the  amount  earned  is  insufficient,  assistance 
is  afforded,  not  in  money,  but  in  articles  of  food  and  clothing. 

The  Danish  law  has  established  the  principle,  ihat  every  person 
receiving  relief  under  the  Poor  Laws  is  bouad,  either  with  his  property 
or  his  labour,  to  refund  the  amount  disbursed  for  him.  On  relief  being 
afforded  to  a  pauper,  an  inventory  and  appraisement  of  his  effects  are 
made,  and  these,  after  having  been  marked  with  a  stamp,  are  delivered 
over  to  him  for  his  use  ;  any  person  who  receives  goods  so  marked,  either 
by  way  of  purchase  or  pledge,  must  restore  them  or  pay  their  value, 
and  is  besides  subject  to  fine.  The  parish  has  also  a  claim  upon  pro- 
l)erty  acquired  subsequent  to  the  granting  of  relief,  and  is  the  legal  heir 
to  the  effects  of  every  one  for  whom  it  is  under  advances.  Whenever 
a  person  refuses  to  pay  his  debt  to  the  parish  by  instalments,  he  may  be 
compelled  to  work  for  the  benefit  of  the  same,  and  if  he  attempts  to 
leave  the  parish  he  is  imprisoned.  The  amount  of  these  instalments  is 
awarded  in  proportion  to  the  means  of  the  pauper,  by  commissioners. 
Begging  is  prohibited,  and  when  committed  is  punished  by  imprisonment. 

The  money  required  for  relieving  paupers  is  contributed  to  a  paro- 
chial fund  by  householders,  landowners,  tradesmen,  and  even  by  servants 
and  labouring  mechanics ;  in  short,  by  all  persons  who  are  not  them- 
selves receiving  parish  aid,  and  who  can  contrive  to  pay  anything  without 
depriving  themselves  of  the  necessaries  of  life. 

The  introduction  of  this  system  into  Denmark  is  of  recent  date :  it 
did  not  come  into  operation  until  1803.  The  means,  therefore,  are  in 
our  hands  for  drawing  a  comparison  between  the  condition  of  the  poor 
and  of  the  country  generally  as  affected,  by  poor-laws,  and  that  condition 
as  it  existed  previous  to  their  adoption. 

It  is  stated,  that  before  the  introduction  of  the  present  Poor  Law 
system,  distress  among  the  poor  was  much  gi-eater  than  it  has  been 
since,  and  that  begging,  which  is  now  prevented,  was  then  quite  common 
throughout  the  country,  and  was  carried  on  in  the  most  rapacious  and 
importunate  form,  so  as  to  amount  to  a  heavy  exaction  on  the  peasantry, 
as  well  as  a  most  intolerable  annoyance  ;  for  "  the  beggars,  when  their 
demands  were  not  satisfied,  had  recourse  to  insolence  and  threats,  nay, 
even  to  acts  of  criminal  vengeance.  This  is  no  longer  the  case,  and  in 
so  far,  therefore,  the  present  system  has  been  beneficial."  ISlr.  Browne, 
our  Secretary  of  Legation  at  the  Court  of  Copenhagen,  gives,  however, 
a  not  very  satisfactory  account  of  the  working  of  the  system,  and  states 
that  it  has  produced  a  most  injurious  effect  upon  the  industry  of  the 
people  ;  that  it  has  lowered  the  middle  men  to  be  poor  men,  and  that 
it  has  converted  the  labouring  poor  into  paupers.  "  It  tends,"  says  Mr. 
Browne,  "  to  harden  the  heart  of  the  poor  man,  who  demands  with  all 
that  authority  with  which  the  legal  right  to  provision  invests  him. 
There  is  no  thankfulness  for  what  is  gotten,  and  what  is  given  is  afforded. 


cuAi'.  IV]  PAUPERISM.  lO-j 

Avitli  dislike  and  reluctance."  Among  the  disadvantages  attendant  upon 
the  system  of  compulsory  relief,  !Mr.  Browne  mentions  the  weakening  of 
principles  of  frugality,  the  encouragement  of  early  and  thoughtless 
marriages ;  the  hringing  up  of  children  with  examples  of  indolence  and 
inactivity  continually  before  their  eyes,  and  the  w(;akening  of  the  natural 
dependence  and  affection  of  parent,  children,  and  other  relatives.  "  The 
child  feels  his  parent  comparatively  needless  to  him,  he  obtains  support 
elsewhere,  and  the  parent  feels  the  obligation  to  support  his  child  greatly 
diniinished.  In  short,  being  comparatively  independent  of  each  other, 
the  affections  must  inevitably  become  blunted." 

A  man,  with  a  wife  and  four  children,  who  work  every  day  of  the 
week,  including  Sunday,  earn  among  them  about  twelve  shillings  sterling 
per  W'cek.  The  principal  food  of  the  labouring  people  is  rye-bread, 
groats,  potatoes,  coffee,  butter,  cheese,  and  milk  ;  provisions  are  cheap, 
and  with  prudence  and  economy,  the  earnings  of  a  family  are  sufficient 
for  their  subsistence. 

In  Mecklenburg,  also,  every  pauper  has  a  legal  claim  to  assistance. 
The  old  and  impotent  are  provided  with  food,  lodging,  and  fuel,  and 
able-bodied  persons  can  claim  to  have  work  and  a  dwelling  provided 
for  them.  Every  inhabitant  able  to  do  so  is  obliged  to  pay  poor-rates. 
In  towns,  the  subscriptions  are  called  voluntary,  but  if  these  should  fall 
short  of  what  the  overseers  consider  proper,  they  can  demand  more  :  the 
overseers  are  appointed  by  the  magistrates.  The  wages  of  artisans  vary 
from  7s.  to  10s.  6r/.  per  week  in  towns,  and  are  about  a  third  less  in  the 
country.  In  addition  to  money-wages,  working  men  are  boarded  and 
lodged  by  their  employers.  Labourers  in  the  country  are  paid  3*.  Q)d. 
per  week,  and  have  found  for  them  a  dwelling  with  a  garden,  pasture 
for  a  cow  and  two  sheep  in  summer,  and  provender  for  them  in  winter. 
With  these  advantages  they  are  enabled  to  procure  a  sufficiency  of  good 
sound  food,  and  occasionally  to  indulge  in  the  use  of  meat,  which  falls 
to  the  lot  of  the  working  classes  in  very  few  of  the  countries  on  the  con- 
tinent of  Europe. 

In  Prussia,  the  law  prescribes  that  every  town  and  every  village  com- 
munity must  support  its  own  members  when  in  distress,  provided  there 
are  no  relations  able  to  do  so.  The  owners  of  estates  are  under  a  similar 
obligation ;  so  that  the  sick,  and  those  who  are  impotent  through  age, 
have  all  their  absolute  wants  satisfied.  Each  town  and  village  is 
governed  by  its  own  particular  laws  and  customs,  with  regard  to  the 
management  of  the  poor.  The  only  point  in  which  all  these  communities 
can  be  said  to  agree,  is  in  the  appointment  of  a  body  called  the  armcii- 
direction,  or  society  for  the  poor,  who  undertake  the  collection  and 
distribution  of  the  funds,  and  of  the  different  sub-committees  to  whom, 
under  the  armcndirection,  the  care  of  the  poor  is  confided.     The  sub- 


106  PROGRESS  OF  THE  NATIOX.  [sec.  i. 

committees  are  formed  of  burgliers  chosen  from  different  districts  called 
armcnbczirhc,  into  ^vhicll  tlie  town  is  divided  for  that  purpose. 

The  necessary  funds  arc  obtained  principally  by  means  of  donations 
and  private  charity.  Every  householder,  every  inhabitant  of  a  floor,  or 
of  a  single  room,  is  visited  for  the  purpose  of  obtaining  subscriptions 
by  the  sub-committees.  These  donations  are  collected  monthly,  and 
thoir  amoimt  depends  entirely  upon  the  means  and  disposition  of  the 
donor.  No  rate  or  fixed  table  exists  by  which  the  sum  to  be  given  is 
regulated.  There  is  not  any  law  in  Prussia  which  authorizes  the  com- 
pulsory raising  of  funds  for  the  maintenance  of  the  poor ;  but  when  the 
olferings  of  private  charity  are  insuflacient  for  the  purpose,  the  general 
government  advances  money  from  funds  destined  to  other  purposes,  such 
as  paving,  lighting,  or  the  construction  of  roads. 

The  particular  circumstances  of  every  one  applying  for  relief  being 
almost  necessarily  known  to  some  of  the  members  of  the  sub-committee 
of  the  district  in  which  the  applicant  must  be  resident,  false  or  fraudulent 
applications  are  easily  detected ;  every  one  is  examined  by  a  medical 
man,  with  respect  to  his  bodily  and  mental  ability  to  maintain  himself, 
and  in  cases  where  this  ability  exists,  the  applicant  is  required  by  the 
police  to  -work.  Failing  to  comply  with  this  demand,  he  is  sent  to  the 
poor  workhouse  of  the  province,  where  he  is  compelled  to  be  hidustrious, 
and  is  taught  to  earn  a  livelihood.  Each  province  in  Prussia  contains 
one  of  these  workhouses,  in  which  paupers  are  employed  at  various  kinds 
of  work  and  service,  according  to  what  each  is  capable  of  performing. 
The  statements  given  in  the  Appendix  to  the  Report  of  the  Poor  Law 
Commissioners,  relative  to  the  effects  of  the  institutions  that  have  been 
described,  are  not  in  strict  agreement  with  one  another  ;  it  appears, 
however,  to  be  pretty  well  established,  "  that  the  pauper  possesses  a  legal 
right  to  assistance,  although  that  right  is  seldom  enforced,  because  the 
impotent  are  voluntarily  provided  for,  and  the  able-bodied  would  pro- 
bably be  sent  to  a  penal  workhouse." 

The  kingdom  of  Wurtemberg  is  among  the  countries  whose  inha- 
bitants possess  a  legal  claim  to  be  provided  with  the  necessaries  of  life 
from  the  general  funds  of  the  community.  The  population  is  divided 
into  the  two  classes  of  burgliers  and  settled  non-freemen,  or  heisitzers, 
in  the  proportions  of  about  nine-tenths  of  the  former,  and  one-tenth  of 
the  latter.  Burghers  become  so  by  inheritance  or  by  purchase,  and 
enjoy  the  right  of  participating  in  the  revenues  of  proj)erty  held  by  the 
particular  district  or  parish  to  which  they  belong.  Persons  may  become 
beisitzers  by  payment  of  a  smaller  sum  than  is  required  to  obtain 
hurgcrrccld^  but  they  do  not  by  that  means  acquire  any  interest  in  the 
property  just  alluded  to.  Every  person,  however,  Who  cannot  obtain 
the  necessaries  of  life  from  his  property,  his  labour,  or  his  trade,  nor 


CHAP.  IV.]  PAUPERISM.  107 

through  the  assistance  of  relation.'^,  has  a  chiim  for  support  on  tlic  ])arlih 
in  which  he  has  the  right  of  a  hurgher  or  a  heisitzer.  If  a  man  is  too 
poor  to  purchase  the  right  of  a  heisitzer,  he  is  assigned  as  such  hy  the 
police  of  some  parish,  without  payment  of  any  fine  of  admission.  The 
care  of  the  poor  is  carried  by  the  government  to  such  an  extent,  that  if 
in  times  of  scarcity  any  person  shouUl  perish  through  the  negh'ct  of  the 
overseers,  the  officers  guilty  of  that  neglect  would  be  prosecuted  with 
rigour. 

"  A  large  proportion  of  the  parishes  throughout  the  kingdom  possess 
a  fund  called  jjium  corpus,  arising  partly  from  voluntary  contributions 
and  other  casual  receipts,  but  principally  from  funds  which,  before  the 
Reformation,  had  been  employed  for  the  purposes  of  the  Roman  Catholic 
worship,  and  instead  of  being  confiscated  by  the  government,  as  was  the 
case  in  England,  were  directed  to  be  employed  for  charitable  purposes. 
In  the  year  1817,  and  during  the  dearth  that  prevailed  at  that  time,  an 
old  law  which  had  fallen  into  desuetude  was  revived,  according  to  which 
the  opulent  who,  after  having  been  applied  to  for  voluntary  contributions, 
should  not  come  forward  in  a  manner  suitable  to  their  property,  are  to 
be  taxed  by  the  magistrates  in  a  sum  conformable  to  their  income,  and 
according  to  all  the  circumstances  of  their  situation," 

Able-bodied  persons  who  claim  support  from  the  public  funds  are 
compelled  to  work  for  moderate  wages.  It  is  sometimes  difficult  to  find 
employment  for  the  poor,  on  which  account  there  are  in  the  capital  and 
some  other  places  public  establishments  for  employing  them  in  spinning 
and  similar  work.  In  most  of  the  towns  there  are  poor-houses  into 
which  aged  and  infii-ra  people  are  received  ;  and,  where  such  places  of 
refuge  are  not  provided,  the  poor  are  received  at  all  the  houses  in  the 
town  in  turn,  or  else  are  put  out  to  board  permanently  at  some  private 
house,  the  cost  of  their  maintenance  being  defrayed  out  of  the  local 
funds. 

Tlie  statement  from  which  the  foregoing  particulars  have  been  derived 
was  drawn  up  by  order  of  the  Wurtemberg  government  in  1834,  at  the 
request  of  the  English  minister.  At  the  conclusion  of  this  statement  we 
find  the  following  remarks,  which  seem  to  favour  the  opinion  that  the 
evils  which  have  been  experienced  in  this  country  are  inseparable  from 
the  system  of  establishing  a  legal  claim  for  relief  on  the  part  of  the  able- 
bodied  poor. 

"  If  we  now  compare  the  situation  of  one  of  the  poorest  of  the  "Wur- 
temberg poor  who  support  themselves  independently  by  their  labour, 
with  that  of  one  of  the  more  favoured  among  the  "Wurtemberg  poor  who 
lives  by  public  charity,  for  instance  the  inmate  of  a  hospital  and  even  of 
a  prison,  it  might  certainly  appear  that  the  condition  of  the  latter  is 
preferable  to  that  of  the  former. 

"  In  fact,  we  often  see  such  hospital  inmates,  and  even  prisoners, 


108  PROGRESS  OF  THE  NATION.  [sec.  i. 

attain  tlic  most  advanced  age,  while  many  a  poor  day-labourer  and 
artisan  sinks  at  a  much  earlier  age  under  the  weight  of  his  cares  and 
the  want  of  necessaries.  Many  an  inmate  of  a  hospital  and  many  a 
prisoner,  even  with  bodily  infirmities  and  sufTorings,  still  seems  to  find 
his  condition  quite  comfortable,  and  shows  himself  thankful  for  the  good 
he  enjoys,  while  many  a  day-labourer  or  artisan,  in  the  enjoyment  of 
good  bodily  health,  feels  himself  miserable  and  curses  his  existence  ;  in 
fact,  many  a  one  seeks  admission  into  the  hospital  wlio  would  be  very 
well  able  to  provide  himself  with  necessaries  by  his  work  at  homo.  Tiie 
man  often  separates  from  his  wife,  or  the  wife  from  her  husband  or  from 
the  children  to  be  received  into  the  hospital.  Many  a  one  does  not 
economise,  but  squanders  what  he  has,  and  does  not  work  in  order  to 
earn  something,  because  he  thinks  that  he  always  has  the  right  of  being 
received  into  the  hospital  as  a  last  resource.  In  many  places,  where 
there  are  rich  hos])itals  and  other  foundations,  the  number  of  the  poor  is 
proportionally  greater  than  in  places  where  less  is  done  for  their  support ; 
many  a  one  continues  to  beg  and  to  steal  w^ho  has  already  been  fre- 
quently imprisoned  for  these  offences,  because  he  finds  his  situation  in 
the  workhouse  very  tolerable  in  comparison  with  the  laborious  life  of  a 
poor  man  at  liberty." 

The  wages  of  artisans  are  in  towns  from  1  to  2g  florins  {Is.  8d.  to 
45.  2c?.),  and  in  the  country  from  4rd  of  a  florin  to  1  florin  (6|c?.  to  Is.  8d.) 
per  week,  in  addition  to  food  and  lodging.  Labourers,  who  are  likewise 
most  commonly  fed  and  lodged  by  their  employers,  receive  in  towns 
from  50  to  60  florins  (4/.  3s.  4d.  to  5^.)  and  in  villages  from  20  to  40 
florins  {11.  ISs.  Ad.  to  3/.  Qs.  Sd.)  per  annum.  AVhen  they  provide 
themselves  with  food  and  lodging,  they  receive  150  florins  (12/.  10^.) 
per  annum  ;  in  addition  to  which  they  are  furnished  with  food  and  fuel 
in  the  winter  under  the  market  price.  The  wife  and  children  may  earn 
from  40  to  50  florins  more.  With  these  means  they  can  provide  a 
sufficiency  of  wholesome  food,  including  meat  once  or  twMce  in  the  week. 

Every  town  and  village  in  Bavaria  must  have  an  institution  for  the 
relief  of  the  poor,  with  this  exception,  that  if  several  neighbouring 
villages  join  to  support  one  establishment  for  that  purpose  in  common, 
every  encouragement  is  given  to  them  for  that  end.  All  the  inhabitants 
are  bound  to  contribute  to  the  support  of  the  poor  in  their  district  ac- 
cording to  their  ability ;  every  one  is  also  bound  in  the  same  manner  to 
su])port  his  poor  relations. 

The  aged  and  helpless  poor  are  provided  for  in  houses  of  iwurishment. 
Other  paupers,  who  are  incapable  of  working,  but  who  yet  do  not  re- 
quire any  extraordinary  care,  obtain  relief  in  money,  which,  however, 
is  not  given  without  complete  proof  of  want  being  brought  forward  ;  the 
amount  is  made  to  depend  upon  the  price  of  provisions.  The  able- 
bodied  paupers  are  maintained  in  buildings  which  are  strictly  work- 


cuAF.  IV.]  PAUPERISM.  109 

houses  ;  bad  conduct  and  idleness  on  tlicir  part  are  piuiislied  by  the 
magistrates.  Marriage  is  not  allowed  between  jjcople  without  capital, 
unless  with  the  previous  permission  of  those  who  manage  the  poor  insti- 
tution of  the  district.  Clergymen  who  marry  such  people  without  that 
permission  are  liable  for  their  maintenance  in  case  of  their  becoming 
chargeable.  This  restriction  is  assigned  as  one  great  cause  of  the  want 
of  any  excess  of  population  in  Bavaria,  and  of  the  general  absence  of 
extreme  poverty  and  misery  in  that  country. 

Labourers  are  paid  at  the  rate  of  Sd.  per  day  in  the  country,  and 
from  8(/.  to  Is.  Ad.  in  the  towns. 

The  Canton  of  Berne  is  the  only  other  community  in  Europe  in  w  hieh 
the  inhabitants  have  a  legal  claim  to  support  when  in  poverty.  So  early 
as  the  17th  century,  it  there  became  the  law,  that  every  one  w\as  entitled 
to  receive  such  support  out  of  the  public  property  of  the  commune  to 
which  he  belonged ;  and,  if  this  property  should  fall  short  of  the  required 
amount,  then  from  the  landed  proprietors  of  the  commune,  as  well  as 
from  contributions  levied  upon  the  possessors  of  personal  property. 

The  abuses  which  have  grown  up  under  this  system  are  numerous 
and  serious.  Vagabondage,  improvidence,  imprudent  marriages,  and 
the  illicit  commei'ce  of  tlie  sexes,  have  all  been  favoured  by  the  prospect 
which  the  people  have  of  being  able  to  devolve  the  consequences  of  these 
delinquencies  upon  others.  All  means  of  obtaining  instruction  in 
general  knowledge,  and  of  acquiring  any  useful  art,  have  been  neg- 
lected ;  the  physical  and  intellectual  faculties  of  the  people  have  been 
deadened,  and  their  sense  of  honest  pride  has  been  so  blunted,  that  no 
one  blushes  at  being  know^n  to  live  upon  the  public  benevolence.  Expe- 
rience has  clearly  shown  that  the  number  of  poor  has  increased  in  pro- 
portion as  the  number  and  amount  of  the  resources  for  their  relief  have 
been  multiplied,  and  that  in  those  communes  which  possess  the  largest 
revenues  applicable  to  that  purpose,  the  population  is  the  most  back- 
ward, and  the  least  industrious.  In  the  answer  given  to  the  queries 
of  our  Poor  Law  Commissioners  by  the  government  of  the  Canton,  we 
find  it  stated  that  "  numerous  examples  might  be  cited  where  whole 
families  have  lived  in  dependence  upon  the  commune  from  year  to  year, 
and  even  from  generation  to  generation,  and  who  have  found  in  that 
resource  their  means  of  existence,  while  examples  of  a  contrary  nature 
are  extremely  rare." 

At  the  period  of  the  Revolution,  the  clergy  of  France  were  possessed 
of  property  valued  at  upwards  of  two  hundred  millions  sterling,  which 
was  confiscated  by  the  government,  and  sold  for  the  benefit  of  the  state. 
Out  of  the  revenues  derived  from  this  property  much  had  been  devoted 
to  uses  of  charity.  The  numerous  charitable  institutions  which,  at  the 
period  alluded  to,  existed  in  every  part  of  France,  for  the  relief  of  the 
sick  and  infirm,  and  for  the   sujjport  of  foundlings,  survived  in  great 


no  PIIOGRESS  OF  THE  NATION.  [sec.  i. 

part  the  social  disorders  of  tlie  Revolution,  and  in  some  cases  have  since 
received  augmentation.  In  the  present  day,  the  municipal  councils  of 
all  the  towns  in  France,  whose  population  exceeds  20,000,  and  of  some 
where  the  number  of  inhabitants  is  smaller,  set  apart  for  the  relief  of  the 
poor  certain  pro])ortions  of  the  town  revenues,  which  are  devoted  to  the 
support  of  hospitals,  or  placed  at  the  disposal  of  charitable  associations, 
— Bureaux  de  Bie/ifaisance.  The  revenues  out  of  which  these  sums 
are  assigned  are,  in  very  small  part,  derived  from  property  actually 
possessed  by  the  towns,  the  greater  proportion,  and  in  many  cases  the 
whole,  being  the  produce  of  "octroi"'  duties,  which  are  levied  upon  all 
articles  of  provision  brought  into  the  towns  for  consumption.  It  is, 
therefore,  only  in  form  that  this  tax  differs  from  the  assessments  for  the 
su})port  of  the  poor  in  England,  the  sole  difference  being,  that  with  us 
the  rates  form  a  direct  tax,  while  in  France  they  are  collected  indirectly, 
and,  therefore,  with  less  regard  to  economy.  Asylums  for  beggars,  and 
workhouses,  are  supported  in  France  at  the  expense  of  the  state,  but 
those  institutions  can  hardly  be  considered  as  belonging  to  the  subject 
under  examination,  being  used  chiefly  as  places  of  correction  for  the  idle 
and  dissolute,  under  the  direction  of  the  police. 

In  the  volnme  of  "  Documents  Statisques  sur  la  France,''  published 
under  the  authority  of  M.  Duchatel,  the  Minister  of  Commerce  in  that 
country,  it  is  stated  that  the  sums  devoted  to  charitable  purposes,  and 
for  the  support  of  foundling  hospitals,  in  the  chief  towns  of  France, 
amounted  in  1833  to  10,573,043  francs  (422,921?.)  The  sums  ex- 
pended in  the  same  year  in  the  Bureau  de  Bienfaisance,  in  the  different 
departments,  amounted  to  8,956,036  francs  (358,241/.),  and  the  number 
of  persons  among  whom  this  sum  was  distributed  in  their  own  dwellings 
was  695,932.  The  revenues  of  the  different  hospitals  and  almshouses 
in  France  are  likewise  stated  to  have  amounted,  in  1833,  to  51,222,063 
francs  (2,048,882/.),  and  the  expenditure  to  48,842,097  francs 
(1,953,683/.)  Tiie  number  of  distressed  persons  admitted  during  the 
year  into  these  establishments  was  425,049.  The  number  remaining  at 
the  beginning  of  the  year  having  been  154,253,  and  at  its  close  152,830, 
we  may  conclude  that  the  inmates  to  be  found  in  these  institutions  can 
seldom  be  much,  if  at  all,  below  150,000. 

It  appears  that  by  far  the  greater  part  of  the  funds  raised  for  charit- 
able purposes  is  disbursed  in  the  towns.  The  total  amount  of  money 
thus  raised  in  1833,  in  the  different  departments,  was  14,560,183  francs 
(582,407/.),  of  which  sum  nearly  three-fourths  were,  as  we  have  seen, 
appropriated  to  the  poor  in  the  principal  towns,  the  population  of  which 
is  to  the  rural  population  in  the  proportion  of  7  to  25,  According  to 
Mens,  de  Chateauvieux,  the  greater  part  of  the  mt)ney  raised  in  the 
departments  for  the  maintenance  of  the  poor,  and  wliich  is  not  disbursed 
in  the  large  towns,  is  applied  in  the  small   towns  and  villages  to  the 


CHAP.  IV.]  PAUPERISM.  1 1  I 

support  of  lunatic  asylums  and  foundling  hospitals.  With  this  partial 
exception,  France  is  without  any  public  provision  for  the  relief  of  its 
rural  poor,  and  it  becomes,  therefore,  highly  interesting  to  inquire  in 
what  manner  so  large  a  number  of  our  fellow-creatures  are  enabled  to 
meet  the  ills  and  accidents  of  life. 

In  order  to  pursue  this  inquiry  to  any  satisfactory  result,  it  is  neces- 
sary to  explain  the  peculiar  circumstances  in  wdiich  the  agrieultural 
population  is  placed  by  the  operation  of  the  law  which  ordains  the 
division  of  landed  property  among  all  the  children  of  the  family.  In  the 
"  Documents  Statisques  '  of  the  French  government,  it  is  stated  that 
the  total  number  of  proprietors  throughout  the  kingdom  is  10,896,682, 
giving  an  average  of  about  4^  hectares,  or  llj  English  acres  for  each 
proprietor.  But  there  is  reason  for  supposing  that  the  number  thus 
given  is  greatly  exaggerated  by  the  custom  of  registering  proprietors  for 
each  separate  commune  in  which  they  possess  property,  by  which  means 
the  same  person  may  be  reckoned  several  times  over.  It  is  besides 
obvious  that,  as  the  soil  is  not  equally  distributed  among  the  whole  body 
of  proprietors,  and  some  of  them  are  in  possession  of  estates  of  consider- 
able extent,  many  others  must  have  even  less  than  the  small  share  which 
would  result  from  its  equal  division.  In  fact,  it  will  be  found  that  the 
great  majority  are  unable  to  draw  from  their  possessions  sufficient  for 
the  subsistence  of  their  families.  Hence  it  arises  that  a  very  large  pro- 
portion of  proprietors  let  their  land,  and  hire  themselves  as  farm- 
servants  to  others,  or  follow  some  trade  or  handicraft  in  the  towns.  It  is 
also  common  among  the  families  of  these  peasant  proprietors,  that  on 
the  death  of  a  father  leaving  several  children,  among  whom  the  law 
provides  for  the  equal  distribution  of  the  land,  an  arrangement  is  made, 
under  which,  although  the  whole  number  are  registered  as  proprietors, 
which  it  is  their  pride  to  be,  the  management  of  the  property  is  left  in 
the  hands  of  one,  by  whom  a  pecuniary  allowance  is  made  to  the  rest 
according  to  the  circumstances  of  the  case. 

These  cases  occur  to  so  great  an  extent  throughout  the  kinn-dom 
that  it  is  probable  M.  de  Chatcauvieux  is  correct  in  the  opinion  ex- 
pressed by  him  in  the  paper  so  often  quoted,  that  the  number  of  pro- 
prietors in  actual  possession  and  administration  of  the  soil  does  not 
exceed  four  millions,  representing,  with  their  families,  a  population  of 
twenty  millions,  and  that  of  this  number  of  proprietors,  about  five- 
sixteenths  (1,243,200),  representing  a  population  of  6,126,000  indivi- 
duals, are  owners  of  small  parcels  of  land,  not  any  one  of  which  is 
of  greater  extent  than  two  hectares  (5  acres).  A  farm  of  this  extent 
is  wholly  inadequate  to  the  support  of  a  family,  and  it  is  more  than 
probable,  that  if  France  had  adopted  a  system  of  poor-laws  similar 
to  those  lately  in  force  in  this  country,  these  proprietors  would  speedily 
have  sunk  into  the  rank  of  paupers.  The  means  by  which,  in  the  absence 


112  PROGKESS  OF  THE  NATION.  [.sec.  i. 

of  such  a  system,  they  have  been  and  are  enabled  to  struggle  through 
life,  are  thus  described  byM.de  Chateauvieu.x : — "The  same  village 
includes  ])roprietors  of  different  grades,  and  in  different  social  positions. 
This  difference  is  observable  between  next-door  neighbours,  and  often 
between  those  even  who  dwell  under  the  same  roof.  The  proprietor 
of  10  liectares  is  the  friend,  the  brother-in-law,  the  uncle,  or  the  nephew 
of  one  who  possesses  only  two.  The  day-labourer  lodges  with  the  opu- 
lent cultivator  by  whom  he  is  employed,  and  the  necessity  which  ti)us 
arises  throughout  the  country  for  mixing  and  communicating  with  each 
other  brings  about  a  connexion  between  them.  Under  these  circum- 
stiinces,  the  wife  of  the  proprietor  of  20  hectares  will  not  leave  her  poor 
neighbour  without  help  at  her  lying-in  ;  her  trunks  being  well  provided 
with  linen,  she  will  lend  it ;  her  saucepan  is  well  fdled,  and  she  will 
provide  her  poor  neighbour  with  broth,  she  will  give  potatoes  to  her 
children,  and  even  bread  if  they  are  without  it.  These  helps,  distri- 
buted in  quantities  which  escape  statistical  remark,  and  througliout  all 
the  rural  districts  of  France,  are  not  given  in  the  form  of  charity,  but  as 
sin-ns  of  aood  neighbourhood  :  they  never  take  the  form  of  money,  but 
onlv  of  articles  needed  at  the  moment.  Those  who  have  been  the  objects 
of  these  good  offices,  return  them  to  the  donors  in  kind  and  according 
to  what  they  possess,  that  is,  with  their  labour  and  their  good  will.  If 
a  proprietor  stands  in  need  of  assistance,  either  for  removing  a  large 
piece  of  timber,  or  to  house  his  sheaves,  when  the  storm  threatens,  in  a 
moment  the  shoemaker  and  the  saddler  quit  their  shops,  and  all  run  to 
place  their  exertions  at  the  disposal  of  the  farmer,  who,  by  this  means, 
stores  his  harvest  in  safety,  a  glass  of  cider  sufficing  as  payment  for  the 
service. 

"  It  must  not  be  forgotten,  that  even  the  smallest  proprietors  have 
each  a  home  which  is  their  own  ;  that  their  bit  of  land,  however  limited, 
will  always  produce  some  fruits  and  vegetables  for  the  family  use ;  that 
they  can  generally  keep  a  goat,  and  very  frequently  rear  a  few  vines, 
])ossessing,  in  fact,  as  much  which  is  their  own  property,  as  the  peasant 
in  Ireland  can  only  procure  for  a  rent  of  five  guineas.  Notwithstand- 
ing the  breaches  which  the  Revolution  has  made  in  the  property  of  the 
communes,  many  of  these  still  possess  woods  and  commons,  which  are 
devoted  to  the  use  of  the  inhabitants. 

"  It  is  a  very  general  custom  throughout  France,  to  give  day-labourers 
small  plots  of  ground  to  cultivate  with  green  crops,  on  the  condition  of 
yielding  half  the  produce  to  the  proprietors,  the  expenses  of  cultivation, 
with  the  exception  of  the  labour,  being  contributed  in  equal  proportions. 
The  plan  most  usually  adopted  is  to  give  up  the  land  in  the  winter  to 
the  labourers^  under  the  condition  of  its  being  restored  in  the  beginning 
of  October  in  a  condition  to  be  sown  with  corn.  The  advantage  of  the 
proprietor  in  this  practice  is,  that,  sacrificing  half  a  crop,  he,   without 


cii.vr.  iv]  PAUPERISM  113 

any  trouble  to  hinisolf,  receives  his  land  carefully  cleaned  and  weeded 
ready  for  employment." 

This  system  doubtless  has  its  advantages,  and  it  is  not  anions'  the 
least  of  them,  that  it  enables  the  poorer  classes  of  the  rural  population 
to  struggle  through  existence  without  the  kind  and  degree  of  help  which 
is  atibrded  by  the  Poor  Law  system  of  England.  These  advantages 
are,  however,  accompanied  by  the  very  serious  drawback,  that  they  tend 
to  make  and  to  keep  the  people  poor.  In  this  country,  durin"-  the  last 
half  century,  we  have  seen  a  totally  different  plan  pursued ;  the  num- 
ber of  smaller  proprietoi-s  is  everywhere  greatly  lessened,  and  in  some 
districts  they  have  entirely  disappeared ;  the  yeoman,  if  he  has  not  by 
prudence  and  industry  been  enabled  to  advance  his  position  in  society, 
lias  sunk  into  the  labourer,  and  the  labourer  has  too  fre([uently  deo-ene- 
rated  into  the  pauper  ;  still  it  cannot  be  doubted  that,  by  thus  throwing 
together  several  small  holdings,  and  administering  them  as  one  property, 
the  productiveness  of  the  land  has  been  increased,  and  the  expense  of 
its  cultivation  lessened. 

Independently  of  the  constant  tendency  of  the  law  in  France  to  sub- 
divide the  land  into  minute  portions,  there  appears  to  be  another  power- 
ful cause  working  to  the  same  end  in  the  disposition  and  desires  of  the 
people.  This  fact  is  rendered  strikingly  apparent  by  the  Ibllowino-  re- 
plies given  by  Mr.  Scott,  the  British  Consul  at  Bordeaux,  to  the  queries 
circulated  at  the  instance  of  the  Poor  Law  Commissioners  : — 

"  What,  in  the  whole,  might  an  average  labourer,  obtaining  an 
average  amount  of  employment,  both  in  day-work  and  in  piece-work, 
expect  to  earn  in  a  year,  including  harvest-work,  and  the  value  of  all 
his  advantages  and  means  of  living? — A  common  labourer  alone  earns 
yearly,  all  advantages  included,  540  francs  (21/.  12a-.).  Owin"-  to  the 
scarcity  of  labourers,  no  distinction  as  to  wages  is  made  between  an 
able-bodied  and  a  common  labourer. 

"  What,  in  the  whole,  might  a  labourer's  wife  and  four  children,  ao-ed 
14,  11,  8,  and  5  years  respectively  (the  eldest  a  boy),  expect  to  earn  in 
a  year,  obtaining,  as  in  the  former  case,  an  average  amount  of  employ- 
ment ? — A  labourer's  wife  and  four  children  can  earn  by  labour  about 
300  francs  (12Z.)  per  annum,  viz. — 

Francs. 

The  wife 120 

Eldest  boy 80 

Child  11  years  old      .     .     .       50 
Child  8        „  ...       30 

Child  5        „  ...       20 

300 

"  Could  such  a  family  subsist  on  the  aggregate  earnings  of  the  father, 
mother,  and  children  ;  and  if  so,  on  what  food  ? — Certainly.  The  food 
varies   in  ditferent    districts.      Throughout   the   district  called   Landcs 


£. 

s. 

d. 

4 

16 

0 

3 

4 

0 

2 

0 

0 

1 

4 

0 

0 

16 

0 

12 

0 

0 

114  PllOGKESS  OF  THE  NATION.  [sec.  i. 

(licatli),  occupying  about  one-third  of  this  department,  the  food  consists 
of  rye-bread,  soup  made  of  millet,  cakes  made  of  Indian  corn,  now  and 
then  some  salt  provisions  and  \egetables,  rarely,  if  ever,  butcher's  meat ; 
their  drink,  water,  which  for  the  most  part  is  stagnant.  In  the  other 
parts  of  the  department  the  peasantry  live  better.  They  eat  wheaten 
bread,  soup  made  with  vegetables  and  a  little  grease  or  lard,  twice  a 
day,  potatoes  and  other  vegetables,  but  seldom  butcher's  meat ;  their 
drink  is  wine  or  piquette. 

"  Could  it  lay  by  anything,  and  how  much  ? — It  is  certain,  that  a 
iiimily  composed  as  above,  could  lay  something  by  from  their  gains  at 
the  end  of  the  year,  as  the  wants  of  the  lower  classes  are  much  fewer 
than  in  England ;  in  fact,  the  luxuries  of  tea,  &c.,  are  quite  unknown. 
For  the  causes  above  alluded  to  (extreme  carelessness  and  absence  of 
frugality),  few  of  the  peasants  have  any  surplus  at  the  end  of  the  year  ; 
on  the  contrary,  they  are  mostly  in  debt.  The  few  exceptions  may, 
with  ])roper  care,  have  6/.  to  SI.  in  advance  :  this  is  generally  employed 
in  the  purchase  of  a  bit  of  land." 

Those  among  the  labouring  population  of  England  who  have  been 
able  through  industry  and  frugality  to  save  something  out  of  their 
earnings,  have  a  readier,  and,  as  regards  the  community,  a  far  better 
opportunity  for  the  profitable  employment  of  their  money  than  is  oflered 
by  the  "  purchase  of  a  bit  of  land."  The  Savings  Banks,  wliichare  always 
open  to  take  the  smallest  sums,  whenever  they  can  be  spared,  and  to  make 
a  moderate,  but  certain  return  of  interest  on  the  deposits,  offer  a  much 
greater  incentive  to  prudence  than  would  generally  be  found  in  the 
desire  of  acquiring  a  rood  of  ground  ;  besides  which,  the  laws  which 
regulate  the  transfer  and  possession  of  real  property  in  this  kingdom 
are  so  complex  in  their  operation,  and  surrounded  by  so  many  diificul- 
ties,  that  it  would  be  quite  incompatible  with  prudence  for  any  ])oor 
man  to  venture  upon  so  uncertain  a  speculation  as  the  validity  of  a  title, 
if  even  the  expensiveness  of  the  deeds  rendered  such  a  course  possible 
to  him.  The  Savings  Bank,  on  the  contrary,  can  never  involve  those  who 
there  deposit  their  savings  in  any  expense  ;  the  safety  of  the  money  is  for 
the  most  part  guaranteed  by  its  investment  in  public  securities  :  so  long 
as  the  money  continues  in  deposit  it  produces  revenue  to  the  owner,  unac- 
companied by  any  contingencies  of  seasons  ;  and  at  any  moment,  when  the 
amount,  or  any  part  of  it,  is  required  to  meet  any  extraordinary  exigency, 
it  is  forthcoming  without  being  subject  to  any  chai"ge  for  management,  or 
to  deduction  of  any  kind  whatever.  The  degree  in  which  the  labouring 
classes  in  this  country  are  willing  to  avail  themselves  of  this  institution 
is  shown  by  the  fact  that  on  the  '20th  November,  1844,  out  of  1,012,475 
depositors  in  Great  Britain  and  Ireland,  the  large  proportion  of  564,642 
had  made  deposits  under  20/.  The  greater  part  must  indeed  have 
been  depositors  of  very  small  sums,  since  the  amount,  if  equally  divided 


CH.u'.  IV.]  PAUPERISM.  llo 

among  the  number  just  mentioned,  would  average  no  more  than 
Gl.  9^.  8d.  for  each.  The  regulations  under  which  Savings  Banks  are 
placed  limit  to  200/.  the  amount  that  can  be  deposited  by  any  one 
individual ;  and,  in  fact,  93  out  of  every  100  depositors  are  entitled  to 
balances  under  100/.,  the  aggregate  sum  of  their  savings  forming  more 
than  two-thirds  of  the  deposits  invested.  The  great  number  of  these 
small  depositors,  and  their  rapid  increase,  forms  one  of  the  best  features 
in  the  apparent  state  and  prospects  of  the  labouring  classes  in  this 
coimtry.  The  progress  of  deposits  in  Savings  Banks,  both  generally 
and  in  respect  of  this  class  of  depositors,  during  the  last  eighteen  years, 
will  be  found  in  the  sixth  section  (Chapter  TI.)  of  this  volume. 

The  following  statement  of  the  regulations  ado})ted  in  Holland, 
relative  to  the  support  of  the  poor,  is  derived  from  an  official  paper 
drawn  up  towards  the  close  of  the  year  1833,  by  order  of  the  Minister 
of  the  Interior  at  the  Hague,  and  communicated  to  the  ]^riti.<h  Minister 
at  that  court. 

At  the  time  of  the  incorporation  of  the  Netherlands  with  the  French 
empire,  the  laws  of  France,  including  those  relating  to  charitable  insti- 
tutions and  hospitals,  were  declared  to  be  in  force  in  the  Dutch  de- 
partments, but  were  only  partially  adopted  ;  and  on  the  separation 
of  the  Netherlands  from  France  in  1814,  a  royal  decree  was  made, 
replacing  the  French  laws  by  others  more  in  accordance  with  the  ancient 
institutions  of  the  country.  The  following  sketch  exhibits  the  i)rincii)al 
features  of  this  system,  as  it  existed  at  the  above-mentioned  date. 

The  principle  invariably  acted  upon  is  that  of  making  the  charge  of 
the  poor  rest,  in  the  first  place,  ui)on  the  different  religious  sects  to 
which  they  belong  in  each  parish.  When  the  means  possessed  by  the 
different  congregations  are  insufficient  for  this  purpose,  the  poor  may 
apply  for  assistance  to  the  local  civil  authorities,  by  whom  relief  is 
generally  affi)rded,  if,  after  due  investigation,  the  parties  applying  are 
found  deserving  objects.  In  several  cities  and  parishes,  a  separate 
administration,  responsible  to  the  municipal  authorities,  is  established 
for  that  portion  of  the  poor  who  are  not  members  of  any  religious 
sect;  in  other  towns  and  parishes  relief  is  afforded  either  by  the 
burgomaster  or  by  an  overseer  of  the  poor  nominated  by  that 
functionary. 

The  hospitals^  and  orphan-houses  are,  for  the  greater  part,  govern- 
ment establishments.  Some  few  are  maintained  either  wholly,  or  in 
part,  by  their  own  revenues.  All  are  admitted  inmates  of  these  esta- 
blishments, without  distinction  as  to  religion.  Foundlings  and  abandoned 
children  are  maintained  at  the  expense  of  the  place  wherein  they  are 
abandoned.  There  are  three  local  workhouses :  one  at  Amsterdam, 
one  at  Middleburgh,  and  one  in  the  commonalty  Nieuwe  Pekel  A,  in 
the   province  of  Groningen,    in   which    paupers  are    received  on  their 

i2 


116  PKOGRESS  OF  THE  NATION.  [sec.  i. 

application,  and  upon  condition  of  their  contributing  as  much  as  possible 
by  tlieir  laboui'  to  their  own  support.  There  are  further,  in  various 
places,  twenty-one  charitable  houses  of  industry,  where  work  is  prociu'ed 
for  paupers  who  are  in  immediate  want.  Besides  these  institutions, 
there  are  various  other  places  supported  by  societies  for  affording  relief 
in  certain  specified  cases  ,  some  for  granting  assistance  to  lying-in 
■women,  some  for  distributing  provisions  and  fuel  in  winter,  and  some  for 
the  relief  of  the  very  indigent. 

The  local  authorities,  in  all  cases,  exercise  control  over  the  receipts 
and  disbursements  of  charitable  unions  and  establishments,  the  officers 
of  which  are  bound  to  give  in  an  aimual  statement  to  the  government, 
in  order  to  its  presenting  a  report  on  the  subject  of  the  poor  to  the 
States-General. 

The  annual  average  receipts  of  the  established  charity-houses  and 
hospitals,  in  the  twelve  years  from  1820  to  1831,  w^ere  6,014,818 
guilders,  or  501,234/.  16^.  The  average  number  of  persons  who  had 
received  relief,  in  each  of  those  twelve  years,  was  241,513.  Pauperism 
appears  to  be  on  the  increase  in  Holland.  The  average  number  of 
persons  relieved  in  the  six  years  from  1820  to  1825  was  218,159  ; 
in  the  following  six  years  it  was  264,868,  being  an  addition  of  more 
than  20  per  cent. ;  in  1831,  the  last  year  of  the  series,  the  number  was 
279,730,  being  an  increase  of  nearly  30  per  cent,  upon  the  average  of 
the  earlier  years,  and  of  nearly  40  per  cent,  upon  the  numbers  of  par- 
ticular years  during  that  period.  The  proportion  borne  by  the  people 
relieved  to  the  remaining  part  of  the  population,  was  9*22  per  cent,  in 
1822,  or  rather  more  than  1  in  11 ;  the  proportion  in  1831  amounted 
to  11  40  per  cent.,  or  rather  more  than  1  in  9,  which  exceeds  the  pre- 
sent proportion  in  England. 

The  "  Poor  Colonies  "  of  Holland,  which  a  few  years  ago  excited 
great  interest  in  every  part  of  Europe,  owed  their  rise  to  a  benevolent 
society  founded  in  1818,  in  consequence  of  the  dearth  of  the  two  pre- 
ceding years.  The  members  of  this  society  bound  themselves  to  con- 
tribute each  a  weekly  sum,  amounting  to  not  more  than  a  halfpenny  of 
our  money ;  but  as  the  number  of  subscribers  very  soon  amounted  to 
20,000,  the  aggregate  sura  collected  was  considerable.  The  persons  to 
whom  the  management  of  the  fund  thus  raised  was  intrusted,,  early 
conceived  the  project  of  founding  colonies  among  the  heaths  which 
abound  in  that  country,  and  which  should  serve  as  asylums  to  different 
descriptions  of  paupers.  These  colonies  were  to  be  established  with 
various  objects.  Some  were  to  serve  for  the  repression  of  mendicity  ; 
some  as  asylums  for  the  poor  and  the  aged  ;  others  were  to  be  called 
free  colonies  ;  colonies  of  orphans  and  foundlings  ;  and  colonies  for  the 
advancement  of  agi-icultural  industry. 

In  the  first  year  of  its  formation  the  society  established  the  free  colony 


CUAP.    IV. J 


PAUPERISM. 


117 


of  Frcdcrik's-Oonl,  on  the  heath  near  to  the  provinces  of  Drcnt,  Fi'ics- 
land,  and  Overyssel.  This  colony  was  composed  of  52  small  farms,  the 
cultivation  of  which  was  commenced  hy  the  society,  and  it  was  peopled 
hy  persons  from  among  the  i)oorer  classes,  who  were  not  in  the  receipt 
of  alms.  In  1811)  the  society  proposed  to  the  directors  of  the  orphan 
asylums  throughout  the  kingdom  to  receive  for  a  certain  annual  payment 
any  number  of  orphan  children  six  years  of  age.  To  meet  the  new 
expense  thus  occasioned,  the  society  borrowed  280,000  florins.  The 
number  of  members  of  the  society  now  amounted  to  22,500,  and  their 
subscrii)tions  to  82,500  florins,  which  enabled  the  directors  to  establish 
two  otiier  free  colonies,  in  which  they  placed  500  families.  In  1820  a 
fresh  loan  of  100,000  florins,  joined  to  78,000  florins  of  subscriptions, 
oflTered  the  means  of  establishing  an  equal  number  of  families.  In  1821 
the  subscri])tions  amounted  to  121,000  florins,  and  a  further  loan  was 
raised,  amounting  to  300,000  florins,  the  whole  of  which  money  was 
employed  in  the  formation  of  free  colonies.  In  1822  the  first  colony  for 
the  repression  of  mendicity  was  established  by  the  society,  which  further 
undertook,  in  conjunction  with  the  government,  to  locate  in  other 
colonies  4000  orphans,  2500  indigent  persons,  and  1500  beggars.  The 
government  was  to  pay  45  florins  per  annum  for  the  maintenance  of  each 
orphan  during  16  years,  and  not  anything  for  the  other  settlers,  which 
reduced  the  payments  to  22'50  florins  for  each  individual  of  the  entire 
number.     The  society  has  not,   however,  been  able  fully  to  perform  its 


engagement. 


The  following  Statement  of  the  Progress  of  these  Pauper  Colonies,  as  regards  the  Number  of  tJteir 
Inhabitants,  is  taken  from  an  Official  Report,  drawn  up  by  order  of  the  Dutch  Government,  and 
includes  a  period  of  12  years,  from  1820  to  1831,  inclusive. 


Years. 


1820 
1821 
1822 
1823 
1824 
1825 
1826 
1827 
1828 
182!) 
1830 
1831 


Individual 

Members  of 

Poor  Families. 

(Free 

Colonies.) 


1,249 
1,737 
1,979 
2,2J5 
2,614 
3,227 
2,724 
2,560 
2,510 
2,626 
2.619 
2,694 


Orphans, 
Foundlings, 
or  abandoned 

Children. 


226 

365 

456 

475 

1,214 

2,174 

2,233 

2,059 

2,358 

2,340 

2,288 

2,297 


Individual 

Members  of 

Veterans' 

Families. 


TOTAL. 


300 
1,0.53 
1,061 
1,377 
1,581 
1,763 
1,826 
1,942 
2,111 
2,406 


1,475 

2,102 

2,735 

3,823 

4,889 

6,778 

231 

6,769 

401 

6,783 

562 

7,256 

543 

7,451 

473 

7,491 

456 

7,853 

In  a  country  where  pauperism  is  so  widely  spread  as  in  Holland,  the 
provision  thus  made  for  between  7000  and  8000  souls,  of  whom  three- 
tenths  are  children,  cannot  have  had  any  very  sensible  effect  in  checking 
the  evil.     According  to  Count  Arrivabene,  the  kingdom  of  the  United 


1  18  PROGRESS  OF  THE  NATION.  [sec.  i. 

Netherlands,  which  in  1827  included  a  population  of  6,166,854,  con- 
tained, at  that  time,  11,440  charitable  institutions,  which  contributed  to 
the  support  of  1,214,055  individuals,  being  only  a  very  small  fraction 
less  than  one-fifth  of  the  entire  population.  The  sum  expended  for  the 
relief  of  the  poor  in  the  same  year  amounted  to  12,821, 395  florins 
(1,068,450/.).  The  population  of  Holland  in  1827  was  2,307,661,  and 
assuming  that  the  circumstances  of  the  people  were  the  same  in  the 
Dutch  as  in  the  Belgian  provinces,  the  number  who  received  relief  from 
charitable  funds  would  be  454,304,  or  67  times  the  number  then  residing 
in  the  pauper  colonies.  The  number  of  1,214,055,  above  stated,  in- 
cludes the  ])auper  children  wdio  were  receiving  instruction,  and  some 
other  recipients  of  the  bounty  of  their  fellow-citizens,  whom  in  this 
country  we  should  not  exactly  class  as  paupers ;  but  when  allowance  is 
made  for  these,  the  amount  of  pauperism  will  still  remain  of  frightful 
magnitude. 

The  "  pauper  colonies  "  are  described  by  Mr.  Senior  as  "  large  agri- 
cultural workhouses,  and  superior  to  the  previous  workhouses,  only  so 
far  as  they  may  be  less  expensive,  or,  without  being  oppressive,  objects 
of  greater  aversion." 

"  It  is  scarcely  possible,"  he  continues,  "  that  they  can  be  less  ex- 
pensive. The  employing  persons  taken  indiscriminately  from  other 
occupations  and  trades,  almost  all  of  them  the  victims  of  idleness  and 
misconduct,  and  little  urged  by  the  stimulus  of  individual  interest,  in 
farming  the  worst  land  in  the  country — land  so  worthless  that  the  fee- 
simple  of  it  is  worth  only  24.9.  an  acre — at  an  expense  for  outfit,  exclusive 
of  the  value  of  the  land,  of  more  than  130/.  per  family,  and  under  the 
management  of  a  joint-stock  company  of  more  than  20,000  members, 
cannot  but  be  a  ruinous  speculation.  Nor  does  the  institution  appear 
to  have  repressed  pauperism  by  the  disagreeableness  of  the  terms  on 
which  it  offers  relief ;  we  have  seen,  on  the  contrary,  that  it  has  not 
prevented  its  steady  increase." 

The  details  respecting  the  "pauper  colonies"  of  Holland  have  been 
here  given  at  greater  length  than  would  otherwise  have  been  thought 
necessary,  from  the  sanguine  expectations  formed  by  many  persons  in 
England  of  their  success,  and  of  the  advantage  that  might  follow  the 
adoption  of  a  similar  system  in  this  country. 

^Vith  the  exception  of  the  canton  of  Berne,  some  particulars  relating 
to  which  have  been  given,  Holland  appears  to  have  been,  after  our  own 
country,  in  the  worst  position  of  any  nation  in  Eui'ope  in  regard  to  the 
state  of  pauperism.  To  what  is  this  attributable  ?  The  country  is 
densely  peopled,  not  so  densely  as  England  or  Irelanjl  indeed,  but,  with 
the  exception  of  these  countries,  of  some  of  the  Italian  states,  of  Belgium, 
and  of  the  Rhenish  provinces  of  Prussia,  more  thickly  than  any  other 
European  country.     It  is  not  to  this  circumstance,  however,  that  we  are 


CHAP.  IV.  I  PAUPERISM.  119 

to  look  for  the  solution  of  the  question,  hut  rather  to  the  existence  of  so 
many  thousand  endowed  institutions  for  the  relief  of  the  poor. 

The  receipts  of  the  administration  for  the  established  charity-houses 
and  hospitals  in  the  ditFerent  provinces  of  Holland,  taken  on  an  average 
for  each  year,  during  the  twelve  years  from  1820  to  1831,  amounted 
to  more  than  six  millions  of  guilders,  or  rather  more  than  half  a  million 
sterling,  viz, — 

Guilders. 

Revenues  of  properties  iin J  acknowledged  rights         .  2,461,883    26 

Proceeds  of  collections 1,320,551     48 

Subsidies  granted  by  parishes    .         .         1,779,719     67 
„  the  provinces     .  38,642     78 

1,818,302    45 

Kcvenucs  possessed  by  particular  institutions         .         .  414,021     13 

Total       ,         .         .         .     6,014,818    32 


The  average  population  of  the  provinces  during  the  same  period  is 
stated  to  have  amounted  to  2,292,350,  so  that  the  average  annual 
expense  per  head  has  been  equal  to  4^,  4:\d.,  an  expenditure  apparently 
small  when  compared  with  that  of  England  and  Wales,  which,  in  the 
year  ending  March  25,  1834,  was  equal  in  money  to  exactly  double  the 
rate  just  mentioned.  In  forming  this  estimate  it  should  be  borne  in 
mind,  however,  that  from  the  habits  of  the  people  and  the  comparative 
cheapness  of  provisions  in  Holland,  as  compared  with  England,  the 
expenditure  of  the  smaller  sum  in  the  first  named  of  these  countries  is 
more  nearly  equivalent  to  the  larger  payments  in  this  country  than  would 
at  first  appear.  The  amount  of  the  annual  earnings  of  a  labouring 
family  in  Holland  is  stated  to  be  from  12/.  lO.s-.  to  18/,  15s.,  while  the 
average  income  of  a  labouring  family  of  equal  size  in  England  is 
stated,  on  the  authority  of  many  hundred  returns  sent  from  various 
quarters,  to  amount  to  41/.  17?,  Sd.,  being  considerably  more  than 
double  the  sura  upon  which  the  family  of  the  Dutchman  is  obliged  to 
subsist. 

The  system  pursued  in  Belgium  in  regard  to  the  poor  is  in  most 
respects  similar  to  that  pursued  in  France,  whence  the  laws  under  which 
it  is  administered  were  for  the  greater  pai-t  derived  at  the  period  when 
Belgium  formed  an  integral  part  of  the  French  empire.  The  laws 
having  reference  to  this  subject,  which  were  made  during  the  continuance 
of  the  kingdom  of  the  United  Netherlands,  and  which  are  still  in  force 
in  Belgium,  are  few  in  number,  and  so  are  the  enactments  which  have 
as  yet  been  passed  since  the  separation  from  Holland  in  1830. 

Under  the  government  of  the  Directory,  three  laws  having  reference 
to  the  relief  of  the  poor  were  passed  in  1796,  by  which  the  property  be- 
longing to  almshouses,  wdiich  had  previously  been  confiscated,  was 
restored  to  these  establishments.  The  management  of  the  almshouses 
was  intrusted  to  commissioners  appointed  by  the  municipal  authorities. 


120  PROGRESS  OF  THE  NATION.  [sec.  i. 

The  revenues  of  all  those  situated  in  the  same  commune  were  united 
into  one  fund  for  the  connnon  sup})ort  of  the  whole,  and  in  every  commune 
there  were  appointed  one  or  more  hnrcaux  dc  hievfaisance,  for  adminis- 
tering relief  to  the  poor  in  their  own  houses.  The  administration  of 
each  of  these  bureaux  was  intrusted  to  five  persons,  and  the  funds  placed 
at  their  disposal  consisted  of  a  tax  of  ten  per  cent,  upon  all  public 
exhibitions  made  within  the  commune,  together  with  whatever  voluntary 
contributions  they  could  obtain. 

No  change  of  any  importance  appears  to  have  been  made  by  the  late 
or  present  government  of  Belgium  with  respect  to  the  management  of 
almshouses  or  bureaux  de  bienfaisance.  The  regulations  decreed  by 
the  French  Convention  for  the  repression  of  mendicity  and  vagrancy 
have  received  some  modifications  in  regard  to  the  law  of  settlement,  but 
it  is  not  necessary  to  state  the  particulars  here.  Those  regulations 
provided  that  every  person  found  begging  should  be  sent  to  his  ])lace  of 
domicile  ;  if  he  could  not  prove  any  domicile,  he  was  to  be  imprisoned 
for  a  year  ;  and  if  at  the  end  of  his  imprisonment  his  domicile  were 
still  unascertained,  he  was  to  be  transported  to  the  colonies  for  not  less 
than  eight  years.  A  person,  who  after  being  removed  to  his  domicile 
should  again  be  found  begging,  was  to  be  imprisoned  for  a  year,  and 
on  a  repetition  of  the  offence  the  punishment  was  to  be  doubled.  During 
imprisonment  he  was  to  be  set  to  work,  and  receive  monthly  one-sixth 
of  the  produce  of  his  labour,  and  at  the  end  of  his  imprisonment  another 
sixth :  the  remaining  two-thirds  was  to  belong  to  the  establishment  in 
which  he  was  confined.  For  the  third  offence  beggars  were  to  be  trans- 
ported. A  person  transported  was  to  work  in  the  colonies  for  the  benefit 
of  the  nation,  at  one-sixth  the  average  rate  of  wages  of  the  colony.  No 
person  was  to  be  transported  under  18  or  above  60  years  of  age.  Those 
under  18  were  to  be  detained  until  they  arrived  at  that  age,  when  they 
were  to  be  transported  ;  and  those  above  60  were  to  be  imprisoned  for 
life.  By  another  provision  every  person  convicted  of  having  given  any 
species  of  relief  whatever  to  a  beggar  was,  for  the  first  offence,  to  forfeit 
the  value  of  two  days'  labour,  and  on  the  repetition  of  the  offence,  this 
forfeit  was  to  be  doubled. 

As  might  have  been  expected,  the  provisions  of  this  decree  were 
found  too  severe  for  execution ;  and  after  having  remained  inoperative 
during  15  years,  the  law  was  replaced  by  the  imperial  decree  of  the  5th 
of  July,  1808. 

By  that  decree  each  department  was  directed  to  establish  a  depot  de 
mendicite,  to  which  all  persons  found  begging  were  to  be  arrested  and 
taken.  If  common  vagrants,  they  were  to  be  taken^to  prison.  While 
in  the  depot,  they  were  to  be  kept  under  severe  discipline,  and  made 
to  work  at  wages  to  be  regulated  by  the  prefect  of  the  departnKMit, 
two -thirds  of  their  earnings   Ijelonging   to  the  establishment,  and  the 


CHAP.  iv.J  PAUPERISM.  121 

roinaining  tliinl  to  be  ]);ii(l  to  tliem  on  quitting  the  depot.  The  expense 
of  these  depots,  which  was  at  first  shared  between  the  department  and  tiie 
general  government,  has  since  been  thrown  entirely  iij)on  the  department, 
which,  on  the  other  hand,  receives  the  cost  of  supporting  mendicants  from 
tlic  different  communes  in  which  they  have  their  settlement  (domicile  de 
secours). 

There  are  now  in  Belgium  six  depots  de  mendicite,  one  in  each  of  the 
provinces  of  Antwerp,  Brabant,  Flanders,  and  Hainault;  one  for  Naniur 
and  Luxemboiu'g,  and  one  for  Liege  and  Linibourg.  Almshouses  fur 
the  old  and  indigent,  and  hospitals  for  the  sick,  are  very  numerous,  and 
each  commune  possesses  its  bureau  de  bienfaisance  for  the  distribution 
of  out-door-relief.  The  annual  income  of  these  bureaux  amounted,  in 
1832,  to  212,325/.,  and  of  the  almshouses  to  165,835/.,  making  alto- 
gether 378,160/.  We  have  not  any  data  whence  to  calculate  the  whole 
sum  expended  for  relief  of  the  poor  in  Belgium,  nor  the  number  who 
receive  relief,  nor  are  there  any  means  of  determining  with  accuracy 
the  general  progress  or  diminution  of  pauperism  in  Belgium. 

The  Societe  de  Bienfaisance  Beige  was  established  in  1823,  on  the 
model  of  the  society  which  existed  in  Holland,  for  the  establishment  of 
agricultural  colonies,  and  contracted  with  the  government  to  receive 
1000  paupers  at  the  annual  sum  of  35  florins  (2/.  18^.  M.)  for  each. 
In  consequence  of  this  arrangement  beggars  were  sent  by  the  local 
authorities  either  to  these  colonies  or  to  the  dej)6ts  de  mendicite,  and  of 
late,  if  their  begging  was  unaccompanied  with  aggravating  circum- 
stances, the  previous  imprisonment  adjudged  by  the  penal  code  has  not 
been  inflicted. 

At  first  the  families  sent  to  the  colonies  founded  by  the  Societe  de 
Bienfaisance  were  placed  each  in  a  separate  farm,  on  which  were  a  house, 
barn,  and  stable,  two  cows,  sometimes  sheep,  furniture,  clothes,  and 
other  stock,  of  the  estimated  value,  including  the  land  (about  7i  statute 
acres),  of  133/.  65.  8^/.  sterling,  which  was  charged  against  them  as  a 
debt  due  to  the  society.  The  occupants  were  bound  to  work  at  fixed 
wages,  to  wear  a  uniform,  to  conform  to  certain  rules,  and  not  to  quit 
the  precincts  of  the  colony  without  leave.  A  part  of  their  wan-es  was 
retained  to  pay  the  advance  made  by  the  society,  a  further  portion  to 
pay  for  necessaries  furnished  from  time  to  time  by  the  society,  and  the 
remainder  was  paid  to  them  in  base  coin,  current  only  within  the  colony 
and  which  could  be  expended  only  in  shops  established  by  the  society 
within  its  limits.  It  was  soon  found  that  this  plan  could  not  be  persisted 
in.  The  land  was  badly  cultivated,  and  the  cattle  were  lost  for  want  of 
proper  food  and  attention.  The  society,  therefore,  in  1828,  took  back 
the  surviving  cattle,  and  throwing  all  the  farms  into  one,  employed  all 
the  colonists  indiscriminately  in  its  cultivation.  "  From  this  time,"  says 
Mens.  Ducpe'tiaux,  in  a  report  drawn  up  by  him  in  1832,   "  bound  thus 


1  22  PROGRESS  OP  THE  NATION.  [sec.  i. 

by  obligations  towards  the  society,  which  deprive  him  almost  entirely  of 
present  liberty,  without  any  hope  of  freedom  in  any  time  to  come,  the 
lot  of  the  inhabitant  of  these  so-called  free  colonies  is  very  similar  to 
tliat  of  the  serfs  in  the  middle  ages,  and  of  Russian  peasants  now  ;  it  is 
rather  less  fortunate  than  that  of  the  peasants  of  Ireland,  who  if,  like 
him,  they  often  have  nothing  to  assuage  the  pangs  of  luniger  but 
potatoes  and  coarse  bread,  have,  at  least,  the  power  of  disposing  freely 
of  their  actions,  and  removing  from  place  to  place  at  their  pleasure." 

These  Belgian  colonies,  therefore,  from  the  establishment  of  which 
so  much  good  to  the  community  was  predicted,  may  be  pronounced  a 
decided  failure.  They  have  merged  into  establishments  for  compulsory 
labour  ;  the  society  by  which  they  were  established  has  taken  up  the 
profession  of  farming,  and  the  colonists  differ  only  from  ordinary 
labourers,  in  working  under  the  penalty  of  being  treated  as  vagabonds 
in  case  of  the  unsatisfactory  performance  of  their  tasks. 

That  this  method  of  farming  has  been  unproductive  to  those  engaged 
in  it,  has  been  demonstrated  by  Mons.  Ducpetiaux,  the  inspector-general 
of  the  prisons  and  benevolent  institutions  of  Belgium,  in  the  following 
statement,  showing  the  number  of  labourers  employed  in  each  year  from 
the  establishment  of  the  colonies  to  the  year  1831,  the  expenditure  of 
the  society,  and  its  annual  receipts. 


Free 

Expenditure. 

Receipts. 

Years. 

Colonists. 

Be^ars. 

Florins 

Florins. 

1822 

127 

38,899 

50 

1823 

406 

, , 

93,532 

70 

1824 

537 

, . 

106,102 

72 

12,339     31 

1825 

579 

490 

102,1)83 

73 

25,740     74 

1826 

563 

846 

163,933 

45 

56,476     88 

1827 

532 

899 

168,754 

61 

50,677    38 

1828 

550 

774 

144,645 

28 

54,994    62 

1829 

565 

703 

174.011 

44 

98,523    .57 

1830 

546 

598 

127,358 

72 

67,718    72 

1831 

517 

465 

135,403 

81 

82,578    81 

The  sums  included  under  the  head  of  Expenditure  do  not  include 
many  of  the  expenses  of  the  administration.  They  consist  simply  of  the 
sums  remitted  to  the  director  for  defraying  current  expenses.  On  the 
other  hand,  the  sums  set  down  as  receipts,  instead  of  being  merely  the 
amount  of  the  net  profit,  are,  in  fact,  the  value  of  the  gross  produce. 
On  the  1st  of  July,  1834,  the  debts  due  by  the  society  amounted  to 
776,021  florins  (64,661/.),  while  the  whole  value  of  its  property  was 
only  536,250  florins  (44,698/.),  leaving  a  deficiency  of  239,771  florins, 
or  nearly  20,000/.  sterling. 

It  would  be  well  if,  against  this  pecuniary  loss,  there  could  be  reckoned 
any  moral  advantage  to  the  country  by  which  it  has  be^n  sustained  ;  but 
it  is  to  be  feared'  that  not  any  benefit  of  this  kind  has  resulted  from  the 
effort.  Captain  Brandreth,  who  visited  the  colonies,  and  whose  re])()rt  con- 
cerning them  is  inserted  in  the  Appendix  to  the  Report  of  the  Poor  Law 


CK.vr.  IV.]  PAUPERISM,  123 

(^ominissioncrs,  gives  us  reason  to  believe  that  in  this  respect  also  these 
colonics  have  failed  in  producing  any  good  result,  lie  says, — "  A  mono- 
the  colonists  there  were  a  few  whose  previous  habits  and  natural  dispo- 
sitions disposed  them  to  avail  themselves,  to  tlie  best  of  their  ability,  of 
tlie  benevolent  provisions  thus  offerecl  for  their  relief,  and  who  had  worked 
industriously,  and  conducted  themselves  well,  during  their  residence  in 
the  colony.  Their  land  was  cultivated  to  the  extent  of  their  means,  and 
their  dwelling-houses  had  assumed  an  appearance  of  greater  comfort, 
order,  and  civilization  than  the  rest.  But  these  were  too  few  in  number, 
and  the  result  too  trilling  to  offer  the  stimulus  of  emulation  to  others. 

"  Those  farms  that  I  examined,  with  the  above  exceptions,  were  not 
encoiu'aging  examples  ;  there  were  few  evidences  of  thrift  and  provi- 
dence, the  interior  of  the  dwellings  being,  in  point  of  comfort,  little,  if 
at  all,  removed  from  the  humblest  cottage  of  the  most  straitened  con- 
dition of  labourers  in  this  country. 

"  A  clause  in  the  regulations  allows  certain  of  the  colonists,  whose 
good  conduct  and  industry  have  obtained  them  the  privilege,  to  barter 
with  the  neighbouring  towns  for  any  article  they  may  want. 

"  The  nearest  towns  to  the  establishment  of  any  note  are  Hoogstraten 
and  Tournhout :  but  on  inquiry  I  could  not  find  that  any  intercourse  was 
maintained  with  them,  and  the  country  round  offered  no  evidences  of  the 
existence  of  a  thriving  community  in  the  centre,  exercising  an  influence 
on  its  traffic  or  occupations.  In  the  winter,  I  should  think  the  roads  to 
the  colonies  scarcely  practicable  for  any  description  of  carriages. 

"  From  what  I  saw  of  the  social  condition  of  the  colonists,  I  am  dis- 
posed to  insist  much  upon  the  inexpediency  of  assembling,  in  an  isolated 
position  especially,  a  large  connnunity  of  paupers  for  this  experiment. 

"  Admitting  the  physical  difficulties  to  have  been  much  less  than 
they  are,  and  the  prospect  of  pecuniary  advantage  much  greater  and 
more  certain,  the  moral  objections  to  the  system  woidd  outweigh  them. 
AV^ithout  the  example  of  the  better  conditions  of  society,  there  can  be 
no  hope  of  such  a  community  gi'adually  acquiring  those  qualities  that 
would  fit  the  members  of  it  for  a  better  condition  also.  One  or  two 
families,  established  in  the  neighbourhood  of  an  orderly  and  industrious 
community,  would  find  the  stimulus  of  shame,  as  well  as  emulation, 
acting  on  their  moral  qualities  and  exertions  ;  but,  as  in  the  present 
case,  where  all  are  in  a  condition  of  moral  debasement,  both  of  those 
powerful  stimuli  are  wantins;." 

A  skilled  artisan  in  Belgium  may  earn  in  summer  from  Is.  2d.  to 
Is.  6d.  per  day,  and  in  winter  from  lOd.  to  Is.  2d.  If  unskilled,  arti- 
sans will  earn  little  more  than  half  these  rates.  With  these  wages, 
joined  to  what  mciy  be  earned  by  the  wife  and  children,  a  family  may 
subsist  on  rye-bread,  potatoes,  and  milk.  It  is  but  rarely  that  they  can 
procure  meat.    In  towns  where  manufactures  are  carried  on,  the  situation 


121  FKOGRESS  OF  THE  NATION.  [sec.  i. 

of  artisans  is  better  than   that  just  described.     Agricultural  labourers 
are  generally  boarded  by  the  farmer  with  whom  they  work. 

The  hasty  sketch  which  has  here  been  given  of  the  system  of  poor- 
laws  and  their  results  in  other  countries  of  Europe  has  been  derived 
from  section  F  of  the  Appendix  to  the  Report  of  the  Commissioners  for 
inquiring  into  the  administration  and  practical  oj)eration  of  the  Poor 
Laws,  and  from  the  interesting  Preface  to  that  section  by  Mr.  Senior. 
It  does  not  appear  to  be  within  the  purpose  of  this  work  to  enter  more 
fully  into  a  description  of  the  condition  of  the  poor  in  other  countries. 
The  reader  who  is  desirous  of  acquiring  more  detailed  information  upon 
the  subject  is  referred  to  the  work  just  mentioned,  from  which  the  fol- 
lowing table  is  borrowed,  with  the  view  of  showing  the  comparative 
state  of  comfort  in  which  the  poor  in  our  own  country,  and  those  in  other 
European  communities,  are  able  to  live.  Among  the  questions  sent  to 
the  various  parishes  in  England,  it  was  asked, — "  What  in  the  whole 
mio-ht  an  average  labourer,  obtaining  an  average  amount  of  emjdoy- 
ment,  both  in  day-work  and  piece-work,  expect  to  earn  in  the  year, 
includinn-  harvest-work,  and  the  value  of  all  his  other  advantages  and 
means  of  living,  except  parish  relief?  and  what  in  the  whole  might  a 
labourer's  wife  and  four  children,  aged  14,  11,  8,  and  5  respectively 
(the  eldest  a  boy),  expect  to  earn  in  the  year,  obtaining,  as  in  the  former 
case,  an  average  amount  of  employment  V" 

The  answers  to  these  queries  from  85G  parishes  give,  for  the  annual  £.    s.   d. 

earnings  of  the  man,  an  average  of 27  17  10 

And  the  answers  from  668  parishes,  give,  as  tiie  annual  earnings  of 

the  wife  and  children,  an  average  of 13  19  10 

Annual  average  income  of  the  family £•11   17     8 

To  the  further  question — "  Could  such  a  family  subsist  on  the  aggre- 
gate earnings  of  the  father,  mother,  and  children,  and  if  so  on  what 
food  ? — xVnsvvers  were  returned  from  899  parishes  to  the  effect  exhibited 
in  the  following  table  : — 


COUNTIES. 


Number  of 
Parishes 
answerinj;. 


Bedford  . 
Berks 
Bucks 

Cambridge  . 
Chester  . 
Cornwall 
Cumberland 
Derby     . 
Devon    . 
Dorset    .     . 
Durham .     . 
Essex 

Gloucester  . 
Hereford 
Hertford       . 
Huntingdon 


15 
24 
27 
33 
12 
24 
33 

7 
18 
IG 
30 
38 
19 
16 
IG 

9 


No. 
(Simply.) 


Yes. 
(Simply.) 


Barely,  or 

without 

M  eat. 


3 

2 

2 

13 

*i 

2 
4 


With  Meat. 


11 

19 

1.5 

17 

5 

21 

13 

5 

9 

9 

20 

14 

7 

8 

8 

6 


PAUPERISM. 


125 


COUNTIPJS. 


Kent.     . 
Lancaster     . 
Leicester      , 
Lincoln   . 
ISliddlesex    . 
Monmouth   . 
Ts'orfolk  . 
!N()rtliani|)tou 
Nortliiiinbc'ilani 
Nottingham 
Oxford    .      . 
Rutland  . 
Salop. 
Somerset 
Southampton 
Stalibrd  , 
Sulfolk     .      . 
Surrey     . 
Sussex     . 
■Warwick 
Westmoreland 
Wilts.      .     . 
Worcester    . 
York  . 


Number  of 
Parishes 

answering. 

43 
14 
14 
14 

2 

7 
27 
14 
18 
li) 
21 

4 
19 
22 
43 
12 
26 
20 
(38 
31 
17 
24 
18 
65 

899 


No. 
(Simply.) 


3 
1 
4 

2i 
1 
3 
1 
1 
4 

71 


Yea. 
(.Simply.) 


1 

9 
5 

18 
4 
4 
7 
6 

16 

212 


Itaroly,  or 
without 
Meat. 


17 


125 


With  Meat. 


24 


4 

17 
11 
16 
11 
10 
1 
18 
14 
27 
10 
10 
13 
22 


12 

9 
28 

491 


126  niOGRESS  OF  THE  NATIOX. 


CHAPTER  V. 

EMIGRATION. 

Circumstances  under  which  Emigration  maybe  desirable — Habit  of  non-interferenre  on  the 
part  of  Government— Private  associations  for  promoting  Emigration— Settlement  in 
South  Africa— Number  of  Emigrants  from  this  Kingdom,  1820-18-4<.)--Arrivals  of 
Emigrants  at  Quebec  and  New  York,  1829-1843— Distribution  of  Emigrants— Trans- 
portation of  Criminals  to  New  South  AV ales— Suggestion  for  their  employment  in  British 
America— Number  of  Convicts  transported,  1825-1841 — Convict  establishment  in  the 
Bermudas. 

In  every  country  which  is  making  any  considerable  progress  in  the  arts 
of  life,  changes  will  from  time  to  time  occur  in  the  sources  of  employ- 
ment for  particular  classes  of  the  people,  which  must  be  felt  as  a  hard- 
ship by  individuals,  although  to  the  country  at  large  they  are  productive 
of  great  and  permanent  good.  The  introduction  of  the  power-loom, 
which  has  so  vastly  increased  the  productive  force  of  the  kingdom,  has 
worked,  and  still  is  working  injuriously  to  a  numerous  body  of  hand- 
loom  weavers  who  cannot  always  find  employment  in  other  branches  of 
industry  without  suffering  great  inconveniences  and  privations,  and  who 
are  liable  to  be  thrown  wholly  out  of  employment,  or,  at  best,  may  be 
obliged  to  submit  to  a  scale  of  wages  inadequate  to  their  wants. 

It  can  scarcely  be  doubted,  that  in  this  and  similar  cases,  a  well- 
digested  plan  of  emigration,  under  the  sanction  or  direction  of  the 
government,  might  be  rendered  efficacious  to  palliate  the  evil.  It  is 
true,  that  the  mischievous  effect  of  any  such  changes  may  be  but  tran- 
sient ;  that  the  increase  made  to  the  national  wealth,  and  the  additional 
calls  for  labourers  in  other  branches,  which  are  caused  by  the  very  cir- 
cumstance that  has  brought  about  the  misery  of  the  few,  would  speedily 
absorb  all,  and  more  than  all  the  hands  which  have  been  at  first  ren- 
dered idle.  But  the  misery  is  not  on  that  account  less  real  while  it 
lasts.  Experience  has  shown  that  uneducated  men  pass  with  difficulty 
and  unwillingly  from  occupations  to  which  they  have  been  long  accus- 
tomed, and  that  the  compulsory  state  of  idleness  to  which  they  are  for 
a  time  reduced  by  the  failure  of  their  wonted  employment,  too  fre- 
quently becomes  habitual.  When  this  lamentable  effect  has  been  pro- 
duced, the  unfortunate  victims  become,  almost  irrevocably,  permanent 
burthens  upon  the  community ;  and  their  wretchedness  is  made  a  theme 
for  declaimers,  who  would  fain  persuade  mankind  ^that  the  sacrifices 
necessary  for  the  onward  progi'css  of  society  are  too  great  for  the  advan- 
tacre,  if  indeed  they  are  willing  to  admit  that  what  is  attained  deserves 
in  reality  to  be  called  an  advantage. 


cnAi'.  V  ]  EMIGRATION,  127 

If  at  tlio  moment  when  the  usual  source  of  employment  became 
stinted,  and  while  yet  the  labourers  possessed  the  energies  of  their 
minds  unimpaired,  some  well-arranged  plan  of  emigration  were  offered 
to  them  under  the  sanction  of  government,  so  as  to  give  a  reasonable 
assurance  of  future  maintenance,  it  is  probable  that  a  large  portion  of 
them  would  gladly  embrace  the  offer,  and  the  advantage  to  the  propor- 
tion who  might  remain  would  be  scarcely  less  certain,  through  the  lessen- 
ing of  the  number  of  competitors  for  employment.  It  may  be  doubted, 
however,  w^hether  the  degree  of  watchful  care  here  supposed  on  the 
part  of  government,  if  it  were  directed  to  another  channel,  might 
not  be  so  employed  as  to  secure  a  greater  good  to  the  community 
at  large,  not  only  at  a  smaller  cost  to  the  country,  but  also  at  a 
less  present  sacrifice  on  the  part  of  the  destitute  labourers.  If  a 
Board  of  intelligent  men  were  appointed  in  the  metropolis,  to  whom 
representations  of  distress  arising  from  want  of  employment  might  be 
made  by  parochial  authorities,  while  demands  for  labouring  hands  were 
made  to  them  by  manufacturers  or  others  in  difterent  parts  of  the 
country,  who  might  be  in  the  opposite  condition,  a  much  smaller  outlay 
would  suffice  to  restore  the  equilibrium  of  labour  than  would  be  called 
for  to  convey  the  unemployed  to  distant  colonies,  wliile  the  persons  so 
transferred  would  be  subjected  to  fewer  cares  and  hardships,  and  would 
be  called  upon  to  make  fewer  sacrifices  of  feeling  than  must  always 
attend  the  renunciation  of  one's  native  land,  endeared  as  it  is  even  to 
the  poorest  and  humblest  by  the  ties  of  consanguinity  and  friendship, 
and  by  those  early  habits  and  associations  to  which  men  cling  with  the 
pertinacity  of  instinct.*  Times  and  occasions  might,  and  sometimes 
would  arise,  when  the  redundancy  of  labourers  in  one  district  could  not 
be  met  by  openuigs  in  other  quarters,  and  then  it  might  be  true  economy 
on  the  part  of  the  nation  to  provide  the  means  required  for  emigration, 
being  cnreful  so  to  direct  its  course  as  to  add  to  the  prospective  strength 
and  welfare  of  tiie  empire. 

It  has  been  too  much  the  practice  of  successive  governments  in  this 
country  to  deal  with  this  question  upon  the  principle  of  non-interference, 
and  to  leave  the  various  disarrangements  of  society  to  right  themselves. 
This  undoubtedly  they  may  at  length  do  in  every  country,  and  the 
sooner  in  proportion  to  the  general  diffusion  of  intelligence  among  the 
people  ;  but  it  is  a  true,  although  trite  remark,  that  all  governments 
are  instituted  for  the  benefit  of  the  people  ;  and  it  would  be  difficult  to 
show  that  it  is  not  as  much  the  duty  of  rulers  to  provide,  as  far  as  they 
can,  for  the  removal  of  a  domestic  calamity,  as  it  is  to  guard  the  people 
intrusted  to  their  care  from  foreign  outrage. 

*  The  plan  here  proposed  was  for  some  time  acted  upon  with  the  best  result  by  the  Poor 
Law  Commissioners,  through  whose  instrumentality  some  of  the  superabundant  agricul- 
tural labourers  of  Buckinghamshire  and  Bedfordshire  wore  removed  to  Lancashire,  where 
they  were  immediately  furnished  with  employment. 


128 


PilOGliESS  OF  THE  NATION. 


[« 


England  has  not  much  to  boast  of  in  regard  to  its  experiments  in 
colonization,  AVith  the  exception  of  the  settlements  in  Australia, 
and  that  of  Sierra  Leone,  our  colonies  have  all  been  the  fruits  of 
conquest.  A  few  ill-considered  efforts  made  during  the  last  fifteen 
years  are  all  that  the  government  has  done  for  the  advancement  of 
distant  colonies,  and  one  or  two  tritiing  grants,  obtained  from  parliament 
at  seasons  of  extraordinary  pressure,  constitute  the  only  direct  pecuniary 
assistance  that  has  been  rendered  for  the  same  purpose.  Recently  we 
have  witnessed  schemes  for  encouraging  emigration  set  on  foot  by 
])rivate  associations  for  their  own  profit,  the  interference  of  govern- 
ment having  been  for  the  most  part  limited  to  the  sale,  to  the  asso- 
ciations, of  districts  which  might  otherwise  have  continued  valueless 
deserts  for  ages. 

In  the  early  part  of  the  present  century,  although  the  cry  of  distress 
was  occasionally  loud  and  urgent  on  the  part  of  the  labouring  classes, 
that  distress  was  occasioned  more  by  the  dearness  of  provisions  than  by 
any  deficiency  of  employment,  as  a  remedy  for  which,  if  it  had  occurred, 
th(^  ranks  of  the  army  were  at  all  times  open.  The  return  of  peace 
threw  back  in  considerable  numbers  upon  the  community  the  surplus 
labourers  who  had  been  thus  absorbed,  two  deficient  harvests  occurred 
consecutively  in  aggravation  of  this  inconvenience,  and  in  the  year  1820, 


To  United 

To  British 

To  Australian 

To 

Total  Number 

Years. 

States  of 

North  American 

Settlements  and 

all  other 

of 

America. 

Colonies. 

New  Zealand. 

Places. 

Emigrants. 

1820 

1", 

921 

1,063 

18,984 

1821 

12,470 

*320 

404 

13,194 

1822 

11,282 

875 

192 

12,349 

1823 

8,133 

543 

184 

8,860 

1824 

7,311 

780 

119 

8,210 

1825 

8,741 

485 

114 

9,340 

1826 

12,818 

903 

116 

13,837 

1827 

12,648 

715 

114 

13,477 

1828 

12,084 

1,056 

135 

13,275 

1829 

13,607 

2,016 

197 

15,820 

1830 

30,574 

1,242 

204 

32,020 

1831 

49,383 

423 

58 

49,864 

1832 

32.980 

66,339 

3,792 

202 

103,313 

1833 

29 '225 

28,808 

4,134 

517 

62,684 

1834 

33,074 

40,060 

2,800 

288 

76,222 

1835 

26,720 

15,573 

1,860 

325 

44,478 

1836 

37,774 

34,226 

3,124 

293 

75,417 

1837 

36,770 

29,884 

5,054 

326 

72,034 

1838 

14,332 

4,577 

14,021 

292 

33,222 

1839 

33,536 

12,658 

15,786 

227 

62,207 

1840 

40,642 

32,293 

15,8.50 

1,9.58 

90, 743 

1841 

45,017 

38,164 

32,625 

2,786 

118,-592 

1842 

63,852 

54, 123 

8,534 

1,835 

128,344 

1843 

28,335 

23,518 

3,478 

1,881 

57,212 

1844 

43,660 

22,924 

2,229 

1,873 

70,686 

1845 

58,538 

31,803 

830 

2,330 

93,501 

1846 

82,239 

43,439 

2,347 

1,826- 

129,851 

1847 

142,154 

109,680 

4,949 

1,487 

258,270 

1848 

188,233 

31,065 

23,904 

4,887 

248,089 

1849 

219,450 

41,367 

32,191 

6,490 

299,498 

EMIGRATION. 


12'J 


the  evil  had  grown  to  so  great  a  lieight  that  the  goveniinoiit  undertook 
the  task  of  conveying  settlers,  and  locating  them  in  South  AiVica.  'J'hu 
annexed  table  (p.  128)  shows  the  niimher  of  persons  who  since  that  time 
have  emigrated  from  the  United  Kingdom  to  the  British  American 
colonies,  tlie  United  States  of  America,  the  Cape  of  Good  Hope,  and  the 
British  settlements  in  Australia  respectively. 

The  foregoing  statement  is  given  on  the  authority  of  Custom-house 
returns,  and  is  of  course  correct,  as  far  as  the  knowledge  of  the  officers  of 
that  department  extends.  From  other  documents,  equally  authentic,  we 
find,  however,  that  the  Custom-house  returns  are  exceedingly  defective. 
Tlic  following  statements  transmitted  by  the  chief  agent  for  emigrants 
at  Quebec,  and  by  the  British  consul  at  New  York,  exhibit  nutnbers 
greatly  exceeding  in  some  years  those  contained  in  the  former  table  : — 

dumber  of  Emigrants  who  hare  arrived  at  Quebec  in  each  of  tlie  15  years,  from 
182'J  to  1843. 


1829 

1830 

1831 

1832 

1833 

1834 

1835 

1836 

From 
England  and  Wales     . 

Ireland 

Scotland 

Hamburjrh  and  Gibraltar 
Kova  Scotia,    Ncwfound-1 

land.  West  Indies,  &c.  .J 

3,. 565 
9,614 
2,643 

123 

6,799 
18,300 
2,450 

451 

10,343 

34,135 

5,354 

424 

17,481 

28,204 

5,. 500 

15 

546 

5,198 
12,013 
4,196 

345 

6,799 
19,206 
4,591 

337 

3,067    12,188 

7,108    12,590 

2,127      2,224 

485 

225         235 

15,945 

28,000 

50,256  ,51,746    21,752 

30,933  jl2,527    27,722 

183T 

1838 

1839 

1810 

1841 

1842 

1S43 

From 

England  and  Wales     . 

5,580 

990 

1,586 

4,567 

5,970 

12,191 

6,499 

Ireland 

14, 53S 

1,456 

5,113 

16,291 

18,317 

25,. 532 

9,728 

Scotland 

1,509 

547 

485 

1,144 

3,559 

6,095 

5,006 

New  Brunswick  and  Nova  \ 

Scotia,  and  Ports  on  the  J. 

274 

273 

255 

232 

240 

556 

494 

River  St.  Lawrence      .  J 

Grand  Total,  387,908 

21,901 

3,266 

7,439 

22,234 

28,086 

44,374 

21,727 

Nuviber  of  Emigrants  who  have  arrived  at  New  York  in  each  of  the  13  years,  from 
1829  to  1841. 


From  England  and  Wales 
„      Ireland  .... 
„      Scotland 


1829 

1830 

1831 

1832 

8,110 
2,443 

948 

16,350 
3,497 
1,584 

13,808 
6,721 
2,078 

18,947 
6,050 
3,286 

11,501 

21,431 

22,607 

23,283 

From  tlie  United  Kingdom, 


1833        1834 

1835         1836 

163T 

1838 

1839 

1840 

1841 

Grand  Total. 

16,100     26,540 

16,749      59,075 

34,600 

13,059 

24,376 

41,500 

32, 40  J 

.348,230 

130  PROGRESS  OF  THE  NATION.  [sec.  i. 

By  returns  transmitted  from  Quebec  we  are  made  acquainted  with 
various  interesting  particulars  concerning  the  course  of  emigration 
towards  that  quarter,  and  among  those  particulars  are  occasionally  to 
he  found  statements  of  the  subsequent  distribution  of  emigrants  after 
their  arrival  at  Quebec. 

The  particular  parts  and  colonies  to  which  the  70,686  persons  pro- 
ceeded who  emigrated  in  1844,  were  as  follows:  — 

United  States  of  America 43,660 

North  American  Colonies,  viz. : — 

Canada    18,747 

New  Brunswick 2,489 

Nova  Scotia  and  Cape  Breton    .     .     .  747 

Newfoundland 684 

Prince  Edward's  Island 237 

22,924 

Australian  Colonies,  viz.  : — 

Sydney 1,179 

Port  Phillip 934 

South  Australia 47 

Van  Diemen's  Land 1 

New  Zealand 68 

2,229 

Texas 1 

Central  and  South  America 710 

British  West  Indies,  viz. : — 

Jamaica 126 

British  Guiana 142 

Trinidad 60 

Other  British  Settlements 168 

496 

Foreign  West  Indies 39 

East  Indies 176 

Hong  Kong 18 

China 9 

Mauritius 13 

Western  Africa  and  Madeira 250 

Cape  of  Good  Hope 161 

Total  .     .     70,686 


The  divisions  of  the   kingdom  from  which  they  took  their  departure 
were  as  under : — 

England. 

Cabin  passengers 4,070 

Other  emigrants,  viz. : — 
Adults— Males  ....     19,112 
Females   .     .     .     15,173 

34,285 

Children  under  14 : — 

Males 5,025 

Females 5,977 

11,902 

46,187 


Total  for  England  ....     50,257 


EMIGRATION.  131 


Scotland. 
Cabin  passengers  .... 

CG3 

Otlicr  emigrants,  viz.  : — 
Adults — Males  .... 
Females  .     .     . 

1,448 

2 
1 

G07 
234 

Children  under  14: — 

Males 

Females 

CCl 
.573 

)tland  . 

3,841 

• 

•     • 

Total  for  Sec 

4,504 

Ireland. 
Cabin  passengers     .... 

156 

Other  emigrants,  viz.  :^ 

Adults— Males 

Females.     .     .     . 

5,750 
5,823 

11 

4 

582 

187 

Children  under  14 : — 

IMales 

Females 

2,135 
2,052 

id    .     . 
Lingdom 

15,709 

•     • 

Total  for  Irelai 

15,925 

Total  for  the  United  f 

70,686 

Distribution  of  the  emigi'ants  who  arrivcil  at  Quebec  and  Montreal 
in  the  season  of  1837  : — 

I-ov'ER  Canada. 

City  and  District  of  Quebec 400 

District  of  Three  Rivers 300 

District  of  St.  Francis  and  Eastern  Townships     ....  1,500 

Citj' and  District  of  Montreal 1,000 

Ottawa  District 8CK) 


Upper  Canada. 
Ottawa,  Bathurst,  Midland,  and  Eastern  Districts   as  far 

as  Kingston,  included 3,000 

District  of  Newcastle  and  Township,  in  the  vicinity  of 

the  Bay  of  Quinte 1,800 

Toronto  (late  York)  and  the   Home  District,  excluding 

settlements  round  Lake  Simco 2,000 

Hamilton,   Guelph,   and    Huron    Tract,    and    situations 

adjacent 2,500 

Kiagara  Frontier  and  District,  including  the  line  of  the 

"VVelland   Canal,  and  round  the  head  of  Lake  Ontario 

to  Hamilton 2,000 

Settlements    bordering    on    Lake    Erie,    including    the 

London  District,  Adelaide  Settlement,  and    to   Lake 

Saint  Clair 5,000 


4,000 


Deaths  at  Marine  Hospital 92 

Gone  to  United  States 1,509 


16,300 


1,601 

Total 21,901 

K  2 


132  PHOGRESS  of  the  nation.  [sec.  I. 

It  was  estimated  by  the  very  active  and  intelligent  agent  of  the 
British  o-overnment  in  Canada,  Mr.  Buchanan,  who  possessed  the  best 
opportunities  for  forming  a  correct  judgment  on  the  subject,  that  the 
capital  conveyed  into  the  province  of  Canada  in  the  year  1834  by 
settlers,  amounted  to  at  least  1,000,000/.  of  sterling  money.  Several 
a^-icnlturists  took  with  them  superior  breeds  of  horses  and  cattle  ;  one 
iir  particular,  who  settled  near  Bytown,  on  the  Ottawa  River,  had  fifty 
head  of  cattle  of  the  most  approved  English  breeds. 

The  whole  of  the  labouring  portion  of  the  emigrants  are  reported  to 
have  found  immediate  occupation,  with  prospects  of  a  cheering  nature, 
so  that  nothing  but  industry  and  sobriety  on  their  own  part  would  be 
wantino;  to  render  their  future  course  as  free  from  worldly  cares  and 
ri^ks  as  can  be  hoped  for  in  this  life. 

If  we  assume  Mr.  Buchanan's  calculation  for  1834  to  be  applicable 
to  the  whole  number  of  persons  who  have  emigrated  during  the  25  years 
embraced  by  the  table  already  given,  the  amount  of  capital  taken  by 
them  from  the  United  Kingdom,  must  have  been  equal  to  40  millions 
sterling. 

A  larcje  proportion  of  the  emigrants  from  this  kingdom,  who  land  at 
New  York,  do  not  remain  in  the  United  States,  but  take  that  route  to 
Upper  Canada,  in  order  to  avoid  the  river  St.  Lawrence,  the  navigation 
of  which,  and  of  the  coast  near  its  mouth,  is  tedious  and  dangerous  in 
the  late  autumnal  months.     The  returas  of  Mr.  Buchanan  show  the 
number  of  vessels  wrecked  in  the  season  of  1834  to  have  been  17,  and 
the  lives  lost  to  have  amounted  to  731.     One  reason  assigned  for  this 
larse  proportion  of  losses,  and  for  the  comparative  safety  which  accom- 
panies the  voyage  to  New  York,  is  the  excessive  use  of  ardent  spirits, 
in  which  the  seamen  who  navigate  English  vessels  are  accustomed  to 
indulfTc,  and  to  which  the  sobriety  maintained  in   American  shipping 
affords  a  striking,  and,  for  our  countrymen,  a  very  humiliating  contrast. 
The  expatriation  of  criminals  is  a  species  of  emigration  of  a  character 
altogether  different  from  that  which  takes  place  through  the  voluntary 
movements  of  individuals.     Besides  the   great  end  of  all   punishment, 
the  deterring  of  offenders,  almost  the  only  object  kept  in  view  by  the 
o-overnment  in  the  establishing  of  penal  settlements,  has  been  that  of 
removing  out  of  the  way  of  perpetrating  further  mischief  against  .their 
fellow-citizens,  a  class  of  people  whose  energies,  if  api)lied  in  a  right 
direction,  might  tend  to  the  advancement  of  society.     Having  performed 
what  is  necessary  for  the   end  immediately  proposed,  the  government 
has  rested  satisfied,  as  though  it  had  done  all  that  was  demanded  of  it ; 
and  if,  in  the  course  of  events,  the  settlements  thus  peopled  by  English 
convicts  have  come  to  be  important  colonies,  the  result  has  happened 
without  any  direct  interference  of  the  government,  and  at  best  with  its 
permission  only. 


cuAi:  v.]  EMIGRATION.  133 

There  can  be  no  question  that,  by  ridding  the  community  at  home  of 
its  pestilent  members,  a  great  benefit  is  conferred  upon  all  the  ancII- 
disposed  members  of  society  ;  but  it  by  no  means  follows  that  all  the 
good  is  thus  attained  which  the  operation  might  be  made  to  yield.  It 
is  of  great  and  manifest  advantage  to  remove  from  cities  the  noxious 
matters  which  are  continually  accumulated  within  them  ;  but  we  should 
think  very  little  of  the  wisdom  which  simply  carried  away  the  mass  to 
a  situation  beyond  tlie  point  of  immediate  injury  to  the  inhabitants,  and 
which  there  left,  in  a  profitless  and  inert  condition,  an  agent  susceptible, 
under  other  circumstances,  of  contributing  to  the  support,  the  conve- 
nience, and  the  wealth  of  the  people.  And  yet,  what  more  has  hitherto 
been  done  with  regard  to  that  small  part  of  the  criminals  of  these  king- 
doms wliich  has,  at  an  enormous  expense,  been  sent  to  the  other  side  of 
the  globe?  Although  their  absence  has  doubtless  been  a  blessing  to 
society  in  this  country,  and  in  some  degree  also  a  benefit  to  the  colony 
which  has  received  them,  it  might  be  easily  shown  that,  by  pursuing 
a  different  plan,  the  system  of  transporting  convicts  might  have  been 
made  to  yield  advantages  much  gn;ater  than  it  has  ever  yet  realized. 

The  circumstances  which  must  first  strike  any  person  as  extraordinary 
in  regard  to  the  expatriation  of  criminals  from  this  country  is  the  choice 
of  the  station  to  which  they  have  been  sent.  That  a  country  which, 
like  England,  is  possessed  of  an  almost  boundless  tract  of  unsettled 
fertile  lands  within  four  weeks'  sail  of  her  own  shores,  should  in  pre- 
ference send  her  criminals  to  a  territory  which  cannot  be  reached  in  less 
than  as  many  months,  thus  swelling  the  expense  of  their  conveyance, 
is  a  course  which  requires  for  its  justification  some  better  reasons  than 
have  ever  yet  been  brought  forward.  The  safe  custody  of  convicts  is 
not  more  surely  attained  by  this  increase  of  distance  ;  and  it  may  even 
be  held,  that  a  body  of  them,  if  conveyed  some  hundred  miles  into  the 
interior  of  America,  would  find  it  as  difficult  to  escape  thence  as  they 
do  now  from  Australia,  where  they  are  necessarily  located  near  to  the 
shore.  It  remains  then  to  be  considered,  what  advantage  beyond  that 
of  safe  custody  attaches  to  New  South  Wales  as  a  criminal  settlement, 
which  would  not  be  realized  in  a  far  greater  degree  by  transporting 
offenders  to  the  interior  of  Canada. 

According  to  present  appearances,  and  the  knowledge  we  have 
obtained  concerning  the  nature  of  the  country,  it  does  not  appear  pro- 
bable that  Australia  can  ever  become  an  agricultural  country.  The 
long-continued  droughts  to  which  it  is  subject,  and  the  nature  of  the 
greater  part  of  the  soil,  seem  to  preclude  that  result.  It  can  never 
therefore  be  thickly  inhabited ;  and  although,  from  the  vast  extent  of 
the  territory,  many  more  settlers  than  at  present  reside  in  the  colony 
may  be  able  to  locate  themselves,  and  to  provide  employment  for  their 
convict  labourers,  with  some  advantage  to  themselves  as  individual.-,  it 


134 


rnocrvEss  of  the  xatiox. 


[s,:c 


appears  to  be  altogether  improbable  that  the  colony  can  ever  assume 
anything  approaching  to  the  importance  of  our  North  u:\.merican  posses- 
sions, either  in  regard  to  productiveness  or  population. 

In  New  Brunswick  and  Canada,  for  many  years  to  come,  works  might 
be  carried  forward  by  means  of  convict-labour,  which  would  speedily 
and  amply  repay  every  expense  attending  the  conveyance  of  the  convicts 
thither,  and  their  support  while  there ;  while  these  works  are  of  such  a 
nature  that  none,  siive  those  persons  to  whom  the  chai-ge  and  direction 
of  the  convicts  would  be  intrusted,  would  necessarily  be  brought  into 
contact  with  them. 

If  Q;an2:s  of  convict-labourers  were  placed  a  little  beyond  the  verge  of 
civilization,  and  employed  in  clearing  and  inclosing  lands,  constructing 
roads,  and  building  bridges  and  dwellings,  the  lands  thus  prepared  and 
improved  would  meet  with  ready  purchasers  at  prices  which  would  well 
repay  to  the  government  their  previous  outlay.  The  gangs  might  then 
be  moved  to  other  and  more  distant  spots,  and  employed  in  similar 
works  of  utility,  and  in  this  way  would  relieve  emigrants  from  many  of 
the  hardships  and  difficulties  which  they  are  now  doomed  to  encounter 
at  the  commencement  of  their  settlement. 

The  total  number  of  convicts  who  arrived  in  New  South  Wales  from 
this  kingdom  in  each  year,  from  1825  to  1841  incluj^ive,  was  as  fol- 
lows : — 


ENGilJSH. 

IRISH. 

YEARS. 

TOTAL. 

Males. 

Females. 

Males. 

Females. 

1825 

764 

140 

901 

Ill 

1,916 

1826 

679 

1,036 

100 

1,815 

1827 

1,239 

'342 

846 

160 

2,587 

1828 

1,589 

179 

752 

192 

2,712 

1829 

2,008 

319 

1,163 

174 

3,664 

1830 

2,0'J6 

128 

685 

316 

3,225 

1831 

1,437 

206 

692 

298 

2,633 

1832 

1,810            248 

928 

133 

3,119 

1833 

2,719 

377 

794 

261 

4,151 

1834 

1,923 

284 

781 

173 

3,161 

1835 

2,099 

179 

1,324 

, . 

3,602 

1836 

2,195 

274 

960           394 

3,823 

1837 

2,155 

235 

737           298 

3,425 

1838 

1,673 

172 

1,067            161 

3,073 

1839 

1,193  1         314 

372           414 

2,293 

1840 

1,201 

212 

912  1         249 

2,574 

1841 
Total  . 

301 

212 

1     >" 

249 

939 

27,031 

3,821 

j  »,127 

3,683 

48,712 

being  an  average  of  2865  per  annum.     The  total  number  of  the  same 
class  living  in  Van  Diemen's  Land  in  1840  was  19,4§9. 

There  is  unhappily  but  too  much  reason  for  believing  that  nearly  the 
whole  number  of  labourers  who  could  be  profitably  employed  in  the 
manner  suggested  might  be  furnished  from  the  criminal  population  of 


tuAr.  v.]  EMIGRATION.  13.j 

the  United  Kingdom,  unless,  indeed,  the  increasing  apprehension  of 
heing  condemned  to  years  of  (to  them)  profitless  toil,  should  he  found 
to  act  as  a  salutary  check  upon  the  commis.sion  of  offences,  an  effect 
which,  to  some  extent,  would  probahly  be  experienced.  In  the  mean- 
time let  us  inquire  as  to  the  degree  in  which,  su])posing  the  present  rate 
of  offences  not  to  be  so  checked,  it  might  be  possible  to  recruit  the 
gangs  of  convict-labourers. 

It  is  a  fact  as  notorious  as  it  is  deplorable,  that  in  all  our  populous 
cities  and  towns,  but  especially  in  the  metropolis,  there  are  considerable 
numbers  of  persons  whose  only  occupation  is  that  of  committing  de])re- 
dations  on  the  property  of  the  rest  of  the  community.  These  wretched 
characters,  who  are  well  known  to  the  police  under  the  name  of  reputed 
thieves,  spend  nearly  one-half  of  their  time  in  prison,  and  the  remainder 
in  the  perpetration  of  offences ;  and  it  is  difficult  to  say  at  which  of 
these  periods  they  are  employed  most  noxiously.  While  in  confinement 
they  are  supported  at  a  greater  expense,  and  with  a  larger  share  of 
worldly  comforts  than  can  be  commanded  by  a  great  number  of  our 
honest  and  industrious  poor,  in  return  for  which  their  employment  is 
either  that  of  perfecting  themselves  in  their  nefarious  arts  through  the 
instructions  of  villains  more  accomplished  than  themselves,  or  that  of 
teaching  others  less  experienced  in  criminality.  Our  prison  discipline 
has  hitherto  been  so  lax  in  this  respect,  that  a  youth  who  should  be 
confined  for  only  a  short  time  in  a  gaol,  is  certain  to  have  all  his  blunted 
feelings  of  virtue  obliterated,  while  his  vicious  propensities  are  in  a 
corresponding  degree  nurtured  and  strengthened.  He  has  perhaps 
yielded  to  some  strong  temptation  in  a  moment  of  weakness,  and,  but 
for  the  evil  influence  to  which  he  is  subsequently  exposed  in  a  prison, 
might  have  drawn  back  from  the  path  of  vice  upon  which  he  had  thus 
merely  entered  ;  but  let  him  once  be  so  exposed,  and  he  will  become  in 
all  probability  a  lost  character  for  the  remainder  of  his  life. 

The  mode  in  which  the  criminal  returns  of  the  kingdom  have  been 
hitherto  made  up,  does  not  enable  us  to  ascertain  the  number  or  pro- 
portion of  criminals  who  follow  lawless  courses  as  a  profession.  From 
the  ease  with  which  the  scene  of  their  operations  may  be  varied,  and 
owing  to  the  practice  among  them  of  giving  in  false  names,  it  must 
often  be  diificult,  and  sometimes  impossible,  to  ascertain  that  proportion 
with  any  near  approach  to  accuracy.  In  the  "  Gaol  Returns,"  annually 
made  to  Parliament,  an  attempt  is  made  to  su])ply  this  information  ; 
but  as  debtors  and  all  kinds  of  offenders,  as  well  those  committed  on 
the  summary  jurisdiction  of  magistrates,  as  the  graver  criminals  brought 
before  the  courts  of  assize,  are  included  in  these  returns,  they  do  not 
enable  us  to  draw  any  decided  inferences.  According  to  the  statements 
there  given,  about  one-fifth  of  the  delinquents  who  annually  pass 
through  our  gaols  have  previously  been  inmates  of  a  prison.     Out  of 


136  PllOGRESS  OF  THE  NATION.  [sec  i. 

each  100  of  these  relapsed  criminals,  56  have  appeared  once  before  at 
the  bar  of  criminal  justice  ;  20  have  appi^ared  twice  before  ;  D  have 
appeared  three  times  before  ;  and  15  have  previously  appeared  four  times 
or  more  to  answer  for  offences. 

The  fact  that  so  many  ill-disposed  persons  are  continually  let  loose 
upon  society  to  prey  upon  the  honest,  and  to  corrupt  the  weak  and 
ignorant,  is  a  circumstance  which  loudly  calls  for  remedy  on  the  part 
o1"  government,  which  would  surely  be  justified  in  removing  the  pesti- 
lena\  and  indeed  would  seem  to  be  under  an  obligation  of  duty  to  do 
so.  The  deo-ree  in  which  this  duty  is  incumbent  upon  the  government 
was  placed  in  a  very  strong  light  by  the  highest  criminal  judge  in 
the  kingdom,  when  he  expressed  a  doubt  whether  any  government 
is  fully  justified  in  awarding  punishments  for  crimes,  unless  it  has 
previously  taken  every  moral  precaution  within  its  power  for  their 
prevention. 

Accordin<T  to  the  Gaol  Returns  for  1834,  the  number  of  persons  who 
became  inmates  of  prisons  in  England  and  AVales  during  that  year, 
amounted  to  within  a  very  small  fraction  of  100,000,  of  whom  15,270 
had  on  one  or  more  previous  occasions  been  subjected  to  punishment. 
Many  of  the  offences  for  which  this  large  number  of  persons  were  com- 
mitted were  of  a  comparatively  trivial  character.  Vagrancy,  assaults, 
w  ant  of  sureties  arising  out  of  cases  for  breaches  of  the  peace,  trespasses, 
acts  of  petty  pilfering,  poaching,  offences  against  the  revenue  laws,  dis- 
orderlv  acts  on  the  part  of  apprentices  and  workmen,  and  various  other 
ofl'euces  for  which  magistrates  have  the  power  of  passing  summary 
sentences  of  imprisonment  for  periods  varying  from  a  week  to  twelve 
months — these  form  the  large  majority  of  the  causes  of  confinement ; 
but  even  these  offences — it  would  be  harsh  and  unjust  to  call  them 
crimes — are,  through  a  culpable  want  of  care  on  the  part  of  those  in 
authority,  unintentionally,  it  is  true,  but  unavoidably  visited  with  the 
severest  deo"ree  of  punishment,  in  the  destruction,  by  confinement  in  a 
prison,  of  all  those  moral  and  religious  restraints  which  chiefly  prevent 
men,  whose  natural  good  feelings  have  not  been  strengthened  by  educa- 
tion from  becoming  nuisances  to  society. 

The  Gaol  Returns  of  1844  show  that  in  10  years  there  has  been 
an  increase  of  more  tlian  25  per  cent,  to  the  number  of  persons  pg.ssing 
throuf^h  the  prisons  of  England  and  Wales ;  the  numbers  for  that  year 
havino-  been  126  000,  of  whom  28,841  had  on  one  or  more  previous 
occasions  been  committed  to  a  prison,  an  increase  of  nearly  90  per  cent, 
upon  the  number  of  regidives  in  1834.  It  is  to  be  hoped  that  this  pro- 
gress is  caused,  in  part  at  least,  by  more  vigilant  police  arrangements. 
AVe  have,  at  any  rate,  the  satisfaction  of  knowing,  from  the  reports  of 
the  chaplains  and  governors  of  some  of  the  principal  gaols,  that  a  great 
improvement  in  their  discipline  has  been  brougbt  about,  and  that  cou- 


CHAP,  v.]  EMIGRATION.  137 

finemcnt  in  a  prison  is  not  so  certain  now  as  it  was  formerly  to  consum- 
mate the  ruin  of  those  who  enter  it. 

If  the  contagion  of  bad  example  and  vicious  instruction  could  be 
avoided,  the  restraint  of  a  prison  might  perhaps  prove,  when  applied  to 
minor  offences,  as  good  a  corrective  as  any  other  punishment  ca])able  of 
general  application,  and  especially  when  a  system  of  irksome  labour  is 
engrafted  on  it.  The  suggestion  already  made  of  sending  away  crimi- 
nals to  labour  in  situations  where  none  would  be  within  the  noxious 
influence  of  their  evil  precepts  or  example  would  take  away  from 
imprisonment,  when  inflicted  on  less  grave  offenders,  the  reproach  to 
which  it  is  now  liable,  and  which  renders  it  the  most  imfit  instrument 
that  can  possibly  be  employed  for  correction,  both  as  regards  the  indi- 
viduals upon  whom  it  is  inflicted  and  society  at  large. 

Since  the  year  1824,  a  considerableestablishment  of  convicts  has  been 
kept  up  in  the  Bermudas,  employed  in  constructing  a  breakwater,  and 
in  perfecting  some  fortifications  at  Ireland  Island.  The  number  at 
present  so  maintained  is  about  1000.  The  works  upon  which  they  are 
employed  will,  it  is  expected,  be  shortly  completed,  when  the  couvicts 
will  be  withdrawn,  as  it  is  not  intended  to  make  the  Bermudas  a  penal 
settlement.  The  suffgestion  that  has  been  offered  in  remn-d  to  the 
employment  of  convict  labour  on  the  continent  of  North  America  is 
thus  not  unsupported  by  precedent,  although  the  nature  of  the  labour 
upon  which  the  Bermuda  convicts  have  been  engaged  is  somewhat  dif- 
ferent from  that  suggested  as  desirable  in  the  back-woods  of  Canada 
or  New  Brunswick.  If  good  has  been  found  to  result  from  this  experi- 
ment on  the  part  of  the  government,  there  can  be  no  reason  to  doubt 
that  an  equal  benefit  would  follow  the  plan  now  recommended,  as  a 
means  both  of  saving  a  considerable  expense  and  of  producing  a  good 
moral  effect  upon  the  idle  and  dissolute  among  the  lower  classes  in  this 
country. 


138  PROGllESS  OF  THE  NATION.  [sec. 


SECTION  IL—rRODUCTION. 


CHAPTER  I. 

AGRICIJLTURE, 

Impossibility  of  importing  any  large  proportion  of  Food  for  the  Population— Importations 
of  Wheat,  1801  to  1840^  Comparative  smallness  of  its  amount  —  Numbers  fed  with 
"Wheat  of  Home  and  of  Foreign  Growth — Increased  Productive  Power  of  Great  Britain 
—Means  whereby  this  increase  has  been  efl'ected — Deficiency  of  statistical  information 
connected  with  Agriculture  in  England — Improvements  in  Scotland — Inclosure  liills 
and  Average  Prices  of  "Wheat  since  1760— Corn-Law  of  1815 — Conflicting  testimony  as 
to  Agi-icultural  Distress  given  to  the  Committee  in  1833— Increased  Rents  since  1790 — 
Adaptation  of  the  Steam-Engine  to  the  Draining  of  Fens — Effect  upon  Agriculturists  of 
the  restoration  of  a  ^letallic  Cm-rency — Land  brought  under  Cultivation  since  1760 — 
Compared  ^^ith  Increase  of  Population  since  1801 — Surface  of  cultivated,  uncultivated, 
and  unprofitable  Land  in  each  division  and  County  of  the  United  Kingdom  in  1827 — 
Proportion  of  cultivated  Land  to  the  Population  at  different  periods  during  the  present 
century— Probability  of  Population  outstripping  the  productive  powers  of  the  soil 
— Supposed  influence  upon  this  question  of  the  extensive  construction  of  Railroads — 
Estimate  of  the  Number  of  Horses,  the  employment  of  which  may  by  that  means  be 
rendered  unnecessary. 

In  every  country  the  condition  of  its  agriculture  must  be  a  subject  of 
the  very  first  importance.  An  inconsiderable  state  or  colony  may,  it  is 
true,  without  much  danger  or  inconvenience,  exist  under  circumstances 
which  oblige  it  to  be  habitually  dependent  upon  the  soil  of  other 
countries  for  the  food  of  its  inhabitants  ;  but  a  very  little  inquiry,  and  a 
very  simple  calculation,  would  suffice  to  convince  us  that  this  can  never 
be  the  case  with  a  numerous  people.  To  supply  the  United  Kingdom 
with  the  single  article  of  wheat  would  call  for  the  employment  of  more 
than  twice  the  amount  of  shipping  which  now  annually  enters  our  ports, 
if  indeed  it  would  be  possible  to  procure  the  grain  from  other  countries 
in  sufficient  quantity  ;  and  to  bring  to  our  shores  every  article  of  agri- 
cultural produce  in  the  abundance  we  now  enjoy,  would  probably  give 
constant  occupation  to  the  mercantile  navy  of  the  whole  world. 

These  are  assertions  which  every  one  can  in  a  moment  verify  or  dis- 
prove, by  estimating  the  average  consumption  of  each  inhabitant  of  the 
lvin""dom,  and  multiplying  its  annual  amount  by  the  numbers  of  the 
population.  If  they  are  true,  it  must  be  equally^  true  that  every 
country  which  makes  great  and  rapid  progress  in  population  must  make 
equal  progress  in  the  production  of  food.  A  trifling  addition  to  the 
number  of  the  people  might  be  met  either  by  importations  from  abroad 


ClIAP.    I.] 


AGRICULTURE. 


139 


or  by  a  diminution  of  the  proportion  of  food  which  they  consume.  But 
the  first  of  these  expcnlients  is  impossible  when  any  great  accession  is 
made  to  the  popuhition  ;  and  it  is  a  proposition,  the  truth  of  which 
will  hardly  be  questioned,  that  where  the  people  are  deprived  of  any 
considerable  proportion  of  their  accustomed  supply  of  food,  it  is  highly 
improbable  that  tlieir  numbers  should  increase. 

It  has  been  shown  in  the  previous  section  how  greatly  and  how 
rapidly  the  population  of  the  United  Kingdom  has  increased  since  the 
beginning  of  the  present  century.  During  the  forty  years  that  inter- 
vened between  the  census  of  1801  and  that  of  1841,  that  increase 
amounted  to  10,700,000  souls,  and  at  the  present  time  (1850)  may 
have  reached  13,000,000,  a  number  probably  equal  to  the  entire  popu- 
lation of  Great  Britain  in  1811. 

This  increase  of  inhabitants  would  be  sufficient,  as  already  remarked, 
to  contradict  the  idea  of  any  great  inadequacy  in  the  quantity  of  food, 
if  the  observation  and  experience  of  every  one  did  not  enable  him 
otherwise  to  disprove  such  a  position ;  and  as  it  is  equally  impossible  to 
believe  that  the  increasing  wants  of  the  people,  during  the  above-men- 
tioned period  of  forty  years,  were  in  any  material  degree  met  by  sup- 
plies from  without,  the  conviction  is  irresistibly  forced  upon  us  that  a 
most  important  increase  in  the  amount  of  agricultural  products  must 
have  taken  place  within  the  kingdom.  It  is  not  necessary  for  us,  how- 
ever, to  rest  satisfied  upon  this  point  with  reasonings  and  calculations, 
however  convincing,  since  we  are  enabled  to  ascertain  with  precision, 
fi-om  custom-house  returns,  the  entire  quantity  of  grain  that  has  been 
imported  into  the  kingdom  for  each  one  of  a  long  series  of  years.  It  is 
equally  unnecessary  to  load  these  pages  with  numbers  and  lengthened 
tables  of  figures,  in  order  to  make  good  the  position  that  has  been  here 
advanced.  The  following  short  statement  of  the  quantity  of  wheat  and 
wheat  flour  that  has  been  imported  for  consumption  in  each  year  of  the 
present  century  will  suffice  to  show  how  insignificant,  when  compared 
with  the  wants  of  the  community,  have  been  the  supplies  which  we  have 
drawn  from  foreign  countries  : — 


Years. 

Quarters 

ISOl 

1,396,. 359 

1802 

498,359 

1803 

297,145 

1804 

398,067 

1805 

842,879 

1800 

280,776 

1807 

379,833 

*1808 

1809 

424,709 

1810 

1,491,341 

6,009,468 
Annual  Average      600,946 


Years. 

Quarters. 

1811 

238,366 

1812 

244,385 

1813 

425,5.59 

1814 

681,333 

1815 

1816 

225,263 

1817 

1,020,949 

1818 

1,593,518 

1819 

122,133 

1820 

34,274 

4,585,780 


Annual  Average     458,578 


*  The  exports  of  wheat  in  this  year  exceeded  th-e  quantity  imported. 


I-IO 


rnoGiiEss  OF  the  nation. 


[sec.  ir. 


.Years. 

Quarters. 

Years. 

Quarters. 

Years. 

Quarters. 

1S21 

2 

1831 

1,491,631 

1841 

2.619.702 

18-22 

1832 

325,435 

1842 

2;  977.. 302 

1823 

12,137 

1833 

82,346 

1843 

982,287 

1S2-1 

15,777 

1834 

64,653 

1844 

1,021,681 

1825 

525.231 

1835 

28,483 

1845 

313.245 

1826 

315.8'.)2 

1836 

24.S2G 

1816 

2.ii43.926 

1827 

572,733 

1837 

244,087 

1847 

4;612,111 

1828 

842.0.50 

1838 

1,8.34,4.52 

1848 

2,193.755 

1829 

1.. 364. 220 

18.39 

2,-590.734 

1849 

5, 634,. 341 

1,701,855 

1840 

2,389,732 

1830 

23,298,353 

5,349,927 

9,076,379 

Annual  Average 

907,638 

Annual  .\v 

erage  2,588,706 

534,992 

Annual  Average 

It  appears  from  this  statement,  that  in  the  ten  years  from  1801  to 
1810,  the  average  annual  import  of  wheat  into  the  kingdom  amounted 
to  600,946  quarters  ;  and  as  the  mean  number  of  the  pojmlation  during 
that  period  was  17,442,911  souls,  this  quantity  would  afford  a  very 
small  fraction  above  a  peck  for  the  annual  consumption  of  each  person. 
The  avera<Te  importation  in  the  ten  years  between  1811  and  1820  was 
458,578  quarters;  and  as  the  mean  number  of  the  population  had  in 
that  period  advanced  to  19,870,589,  that  number  of  quarters  would 
afford  each  person  one  gallon  and  a  half  towards  the  year's  consump- 
tion. In  the  third  period,  between  1821  and  1830,  the  average  annual 
importation  advanced  to  534,992  quarters  ;  but  the  population  had  ad- 
vanced in  an  equal  proportion,  so  that  the  annual  share  of  each  person 
in  the  foreign  supply  remained  the  same  (one  gallon  and  a  half)  as  last 
stated.  The  average  amount  of  importation  in  the  ten  years  from 
1831  to  1840  rose  to  907,638  quarters  ;  and  the  mean  numi)er  of  con- 
sumers in  this  period  having  been  25,601,119,  the  importations,  if  ftiirly 
divided  among  them,  would  have  given  annually  to  each  about  2i  gal- 
lons. 

In  each  of  the  three  periods  of  ten  years  into  which  the  foregoing 
statement  has  been  divided,  up  to  1830,  there  were  two  years  of  large 
importation  arising  from  deficient  harvests,  and  in  the  last  decennary 
period  there  occurred  four  years  of  this  character.  If  those  years  were 
excluded  from  the  calculation,  the  average  importations  would  of  course 
be  materially  lessened. 

During  the  last  nine  years  of  the  series,  viz.,  from  1841  to  1849,  the 
average  quantity  of  foreign  and  colonial  wheat  and  wheat  flour  taken 
for  home  use  advanced  to  2,588.706  quarters  per  annum,  which  quan- 
tity, divided  equally  among  the  increased  number  of  consumers,  would 
afford  nearly  6  gallons  per  annum  for  each  person. 

It  will  be  fresh  in  the  memory  of  most  persons  that,  in  addition  to 
several  years  of  somewhat  deficient  grain  harvests,  wg  have,  during  the 
period  included  in  these  nine  years,  been  visited  by  one  of  the  severest 
calamities  arising  from  the  influence  of  seasons  which  it  has  been  our  mis- 
fortune ever  to  encounter.    The  famine  caused  in  Ireland  by  the  destruc- 


cuAP.  I.]  AGRICULTURE.  I  11 

tion  of  the  potato  croj)  in  1847  will  long  be  reinembcred  with  feelings  of 
horror  by  all  who  were  by  any  eireumstances  brought  to  a  pergonal  know- 
ledge of  its  effeets,  and  will  ever  remain  as  a  dark  page  in  our  hi.-tory. 
During  its  continuance  food  of  various  kinds  was  sought  in  every  mar- 
ket open  to  us ;  the  laws  regulating  its  importation  were  suspended,  and 
our  navigation  law  was  placed  in  partial  abeyance.  It  must  be  clear 
that  under  such  circumstances  it  would  be  idle  to  attempt  to  draw  any 
fair  comparison  between  this  and  other  periods. 

The  foregoing  calculations  show  in  how  small  a  degree  this  country 
has  hitherto  been  dependent  upon  foreigners,  in  ordinary  seasons,  for 
a  due  supply  of  our  staple  article  of  food.  It  is  not,  however,  with  this 
view  that  those  calculations  are  brought  forward,  but  rather  to  prove 
how  exceedingly  great  the  increase  of  agricultural  production  must  h:ive 
been  to  have  thus  effectively  kept  in  a  state  of  independence  a  popula- 
tion which  has  increased  with  so  great  a  degree  of  rapidity.  To  show 
this  fact,  the  one  article  of  wheat  has  been  selected,  because  it  is  that 
which  is  the  most  generally  consumed  in  England ;  but  the  position  ad- 
vanced would  be  found  to  hold  equally  good  were  we  to  go  through  the 
whole  list  of  the  consumable  products  of  the  earth.  The  supply  of 
meat,  during  the  years  comprised  in  the  inquiry,  has  certainly  kept  pace 
with  the  growth  of  population  ;  and,  as  regards  this  portion  of  human 
food,  our  home  agriculturists,  during  the  largest  portion  of  the  whole 
period,  enjoyed  a  strict  monopoly. 

The  consumption  of  wheat  in  this  country  has  been  variously  esti- 
mated by  diflerent  writers.  Some  have  supposed  the  average  quantity 
used  by  each  inhabitant  to  be  eight  bushels  in  the  year,  while  others 
have  assumed  only  six  bushels  as  the  yearly  consumption  of  each  per- 
son. Using  the  foregoing  figures,  and  applying  them  to  each  of  these 
quantities,  we  may  find  in  what  degree  the  soil  has  been  rendered  in- 
creasingly productive  for  the  sustenance  of  our  growing  numbers.  In 
the  closing  years  of  the  last  century  there  occurred  a  succession  of  de- 
ficient harvests,  which  caused  a  considerable  importation  of  corn  into 
this  country  ;  but  previous  to  that  time  the  production  of  wheat  had 
been  about  adequate,  taking  one  year  with  another,  for  the  feeding  of 
the  inhabitants.  If  we  assume  this  state  of  things  to  have  lasted  up 
to  1801,  it  will  be  easy  to  find  in  what  degree  our  increasing  numbers 
have  been  fed  hy  means  of  importations,  and  therefore  in  w  hat  degree 
our  growing  wants  have  been  met  through  the  extension  of  agricidture 
and  by  improvements  in  its  processes. 

The  productions  of  Ireland  being  ordinarily  more  than  sufficient  for 
the  sustenance  of  its  population,  the  proposed  inquiry  will  necessarily 
be  confined  to  Great  Britain. 

The  mean  number  of  the  population  between  1801  and  1810  was 
11,769,725,  and  the  average  yearly  importations  of  wheat  and  wheat 


1  12  TROGRESS  OF  THE  NATION.  [sec.  ii, 

iioiir  during  those  years  having  heen  ()00,94G  quarters,  tlie  home-grown 
supply  sutheoil  for  the  food  of  11,108,771)  persons,  at  the  rate  of  8 
bushels  per  annum,  or  of  10,908,464,  at  G  bushels  per  annum.  During 
the  next  ten  years,  the  mean  population  was  13,494,217,  and  the  impor- 
tations averaged  458,578  quarters  yearly.  The  home  supply,  conse- 
quently, sufficed  for  13,035,639  persons,  at  the  rate  of  8  bushels,  or 
of  12,882,780,  at  the  rate  of  6  bushels  per  head.  There  was,  conse- 
quently, a  greater  home  produce,  equal  to  the  food  of  1,866,860,  or  of 
1,914,316  persons,  according  as  the  average  consumption  is  estimated 
at  8  or  at  6  bushels  yearly.  Between  1821  and  1830  the  mean  number 
living  in  Great  Britain  was  15,465,474,  and  the  average  yearly  impor- 
tation of  wheat  and  flour  were  534,992  quarters.  The  home-grown 
corn  sufficed,  therefore,  for  14,930,482  persons,  at  8  bushels,  or  for 
14,752,151  persons,  at  6  bushels,  and  the  productive  power  of  the  land 
was  increased,  so  as  to  feed  1,894,843  more  persons,  at  8  bushels,  or 
1,869,371  persons  at  6  bushels.  During  the  next  period  of  ten  years, 
ending  with  1840,  the  mean  population  was  17,535,826,  and  the  average 
yearly  importations  were  equal  to  the  consumption  of  907,638,  or  of 
1,210,184  pei-sons,  calculated  at  8  or  at  6  bushels  each.  Our  home 
produce,  therefore,  sufficed  for  either  16,628,188,  or  for  16,325,642 
persons,  and  the  increased  number  fed  from  our  own  soil  was  1,697,706 
or  1,573,491  persons.  Between  1841  and  1849  the  mean  number 
living  has  probably  been  19,592,824,  and  the  average  importations  have 
increased  to  2,588,706  quarters.  Our  home-grown  corn  has,  therefore, 
fed  17,004,118  persons,  at  8  bushels,  or  16,141,216,  at  6  bushels  per 
head  ;  and  the  additional  numbers  so  fed  have  been  375,930,  at  8 
bushels,  but  184,426  fewer  if  the  consumption  be  6  bushels. 

This  extraordinary  progressive  increase  is  shown  more  clearly  by  the 
following  figures,  from  the  last  line  of  which  we  may  also  see,  that  if 
the  population  of  this  kingdom  is  to  go  forward  with  the  like  rate  of 
increase,  we  must  either  apply  a  still  stronger  stimulus  than  has  yet 
been  used  for  increasing  the  productiveness  of  the  soil,  or  become  habi- 
tually and  increasingly  importers  of  foreign  grain.  That  the  first  of 
these  alternatives  is  possible,  nay,  even  easy  of  accomplishment,  is  a 
very  general  belief  among  persons  who  have  given  attention  to  the  sub- 
ject, and  among  whom  it  is  held,  that  by  the  judicious  application  of 
improvements  already  within  our  knowledge,  we  may  not  only  provide 
for  the  entire  population,  but  become  and  continue  for  some  years  to 
come,  exporters  of  grain,  as  we  were  up  to  nearly  the  close  of  the  last 
century. 

To  realize  this  result  it  is,  however,  necessary  that  great  exertions 
should  be  made  so  as  to  bring  into  the  most  profitable  operation  the  dis- 
coveries of  science  as  applied  to  agricultural  processes ;  and  it  is  clear 
that  this  result  camiot  be  brought  about  through  the  stimulus  of  high 


■] 


AGRICULTURE. 


H3 


prices,  because  from  the  moment  that  the  home  market  ceases  to  absorb 
the  whole  of  what  is  grown  within  the  kingdom,  the  price  must  fall 
below  that  of  the  foreign  markets  to  which  the  surplus  must  be  sent. 
It  is  rather  to  the  stimulus  of  low  prices  that  we  must  look  to  provide 
that  increased  quantity  which  is  to  make  up,  safely  and  satisfactorily,  to 
the  producer  for  falling  markets. 


Number  i.f 

Xuniber  of 

Number  of 

Number  of 

Add:tionnl 

Additional 

MeanN.inibir 

l'tr«on.  fed 

rorson*  fod 

Person-  f.d 

NumbL-r  i.f 

ot  li.e 

upnn  Foreign 

upon  Foriign 

upon  honie- 

upon  home- 

Populalion of 

Wheat. 

Wlieat. 

qruivn  Wheit, 

grown  Wheat, 

upon  bomc- 

upon  homi-- 

Great  Britain 

Pfttiinalin^-  the 

esiimatiog  tlit 

esiimaiing  ihe 

eRtimatint:  the 

grOK-n  Wheat. 

grown  (  om. 

durin'^  ciich 

Yearly  fon- 

Yearly  Con- 

Yearly  Con- 

estimating  the 

period  of  10 

si.ir.plion  «l 

•ui.iplionat 

sumption  at 

sumption  at 

Y'earlv  Coil- 

Yiarlv  (.on- 

Years . 

abiishL'l^per 

«  hushds  per 

bead. 

bead. 

8  bushels  por 

head. 

hiad. 

1801  to  1810 

11,769,72-) 

600,946 

801,261 

11,168,779 

10,968,464 

1811  „  1820 

13,494,217 

458,578 

611,437 

13,035,639 

12,882,780 

1,866,860 

1,914,316 

1821  „  1830 

15,465,474 

534,992 

713,323 

14,930,482 

14,752,151 

1,894,843 

1,869,371 

1831  „  1840 

17,535,826 

907,6.38 

1,210,184 

16,628,188 

16,325,642 

1,697,706 

1,573,491 

1841  „  1849  19,592,824 

2,588,706 

3^451,608 

17,004,118 

16,141,216 

375,930 

*  184,426 

It  is  shown  by  the  foregoing  table,  that  in  the  course  of  49  years  the 
increased  production  of  one  article  of  agricultural  produce  has  been 
equal  to  the  wants  of  5,835,339  persons,  at  the  rate  of  8  bushels  of 
wheat  in  the  year,  or  of  5,172,752  persons,  if  the  average  consumption 
be  only  6  bushels,  and  at  least  the  same  progress  has  attended  every 
other  branch  of  agricultural  industry.  In  what  degree  this  advancement 
is  to  be  experienced  hereafter,  no  one  can  pretend  to  foretel.  We  can, 
however,  estimate  with  tolerable  accuracy  our  future  wants,  by  assuming 
that  our  numbers  will  go  on  increasing  in  the  degree  that  has  hitherto 
been  experienced.  According  to  this  computation,  the  mean  number 
of  the  population  of  Great  Britain  between  1871  and  1880  will  have 
reached  29,378,421,  being  an  increase  in  40  years  of  11,842,595  per- 
sons, and  requiring  an  increased  supply  of  wheat  to  the  amount  of  that 
number  of  quarters,  at  the  rate  of  8  bushels  for  each,  or  of  8,881,946 
quarters,  at  the  rate  of  6  bushels  per  annum.  Carrying  on  the  compu- 
tation for  20  years  further,  to  the  end  of  the  present  century,  we  shall 
find  that  the  population  of  Great  Britain  will  then  exceed  40,000,000, 
and  will  consequently  require  an  increased  quantity  of  wheat,  and  of 
every  other  kind  of  agricultural  produce,  to  the  extent  of  150  per  cent, 
beyond  the  quantity  needed  in  the  period  between  1831  and  1840. 

Great  as  we  have  seen  the  increase  to  have  been,  since  the  beginning 
of  the  present  century,  in  the  production  of  agricultural  products  in 
Great  Britain,  there  is  reason  to  believe  that  a  far  more  profitable  result 


*  Smaller  number  than  in  the  previous  period. 


1  li  rrvOGKESS  OF  THE  NATION.  [sec.  ii. 

^vould  have  followed  from  the  amount  of  skill  and  enterprise,  and  the 
application  of  capital  to  which  that  increase  must  be  ascribed,  but  for 
the  restrictions  that  were  placed,  in  the  supposed  interests  of  our  agri- 
culturists, upon  the  importation  of  articles  of  food  from  other  countries. 
By  means  of  those  restrictions,  and  the  consequent  enhancement  of  the 
cost  of  living,  not  only  was  a  limit  placed  to  the  employment  of  labour 
in  other  branches  of  industry,  through  the  lessening  of  the  fund  out  of 
uhich  that  labour  would  have  been  rewarded,  but  the  land  itself  was 
virtually  and  injuriously  restricted  in  its  application ;  so  that  while  the 
energies  that  have  been  bestowed  upon  its  cultivation  have  been  chiefly 
limited  to  the  extension  of  the  growth  of  certain  descriptions  of  food, 
our  fcirmers  have  neglected  the  production  of  other  articles  for  which  a 
demand  would  then  have  arisen,  which  would  in  a  greater  degree  have 
given  employment  to  labour,  have  enabled  the  cultivators  to  pay  a  higher 
rent  for  the  use  of  the  land,  and  in  various  ways  would  have  added  to 
the  sum  of  the  nation's  prosperity. 

It  would  lead  to  a  digression  which  might  be  considered  out  of  place 
in  these  pages,  if  any  attempt  were  made  to  examine  the  question  of 
agricultural  distress,  as  to  which  so  much  has  been  said  year  after  year, 
during  a  very  large  portion  of  the  time  in  which  the  extension  of  tillage 
and  the  increase  of  production,  here  described,  have  been  going  forward  ; 
but  we  may  be  allowed  to  remark,  that  the  parties  who,  during  all  that 
time,   have   embarked  their  capitals  in  this  branch  of  industry,  must 
b.ave  been  actuated  by  motives  altogether  different  from  those  which 
influence  the  rest   of  mankind,  if  they  have,  year  after  year,    been 
content  to  accelerate  their  own   ruin  by  increasing  the  extent  of  their 
operations.     AYhile  the  total  number  of  fomilies  in   Great  Britain  in- 
creased, between  1811  and  1831,  from  2,544,215  to  3,414,175,  or  at 
the  rate  of  34  per  cent.,  the  number  of  families  employed  in  agriculture 
increased  only  from  895,998  to  961,134,  or  at  the  rate  of  7^  per  cent. 
The  increased  production  which  is  thus  seen  to  have  been  brought  about 
by  a  comparatively  small  addition  of  labour,  has  in  a  great  degree  re- 
sulted from  the  employment  of  capital  in  improving  the  soil,  in  draining 
and  manuring,*  in  throwing  down  a  great  part  of  the  fences  with  which 
our  forefathers  were  accustomed  to  divide  their  farms  into  small  patches ; 


*  The  use  of  crushed  bones  as  a  manure  was  first  introduced  in  ISOO;  but  the  practice  has 
not  been  extensively  adopted  until  within  the  last  twenty-five  years.  The  application  of  this 
manure  to  light  soils  is  now  very  general,  and  the  result  has  been  such  as  to  raise  the  value 
of  such  lands  most  materially.  The  increasing  demand  causes  large  quantities  of  bones  to 
be  imported  from  foreign,  and  sometimes  distant,  countries.  The  numerous  herds  of  cattle 
that  roam  in  a  state  of  nature  over  the  plains  of  South  America,  used  formerlj'  to  be  slaugh- 
tered for  the  sake  of  their  hides,  tallow,  and  horns,  which  were  brought  to  Europe.  Their 
bones  were  left  to  whiten  on  the  plains,  but  these  are  now  carefully  collected  together,  and 
ships  are  regularly  despatched  to  be  loaded  with  them  for  the  use  of  our  farmers.  Since 
1840  an  extensive  trade  has  been  carried  on  in  an  article  called  Guano — the  deposits  of 
birds  on  certain  islands  la  the  Pacific  and  ofi"  the  Coast  of  Africa ;  which  substance  has 


CHAP.  I.]  AGRICULTURE.  H.5 

through  tlie  use  of  improved  implements  of  husbandry,  and,  above  all, 
through  the  eniployment  of  a  better  system  of  cropping  by  rotation.  Nor 
should  we  omit  to  notice,  among  the  most  elfective  causes  of  tliis  im- 
proved condition  of  agriculture,  the  help  that  has  been  borrowed  from 
men  of  science.  In  particidar,  the  researches  of  Davy,  undertaken  at  the 
instance  of  the  Board  of  Agriculture,  about  the  beginning  of  the  present 
century,  and  the  more  recent  investigations  of  Liebig,  may  be  mentioned 
as  having  produced  the  happiest  results,  by  showing  the  various  resources 
we  can  command,  through  the  application  of  chemical  knowledge,  for 
remedying  the  defects  and  improving  the  natural  capabilities  of  diiferent 
soils.  It  may  bo  added,  that  the  great  agricultural  improvements  which 
have  taken  place  since  the  peace,  and  which  are  still  in  progress,  while 
they  negative  the  notion  of  an  uninterrupted  series  of  losses  on  the  part 
of  cultivators,  are,  in  a  great  degi-ee,  the  consequence  of  the  stimulus  to 
exertion  supplied  by  low  prices.  Had  prices  continued  high,  the 
farmers  would,  perhaps,  have  gone  on  in  their  old  course  ;  but  with  so 
considerable  a  fall  as  they  have  experienced  in  the  value  of  their  produce, 
such  a  course  would  have  been  attended  with  certain  ruin,  and  in  this 
way  the  improvements  they  have  made  may  be  said  to  have  been  forced^ 
upon  them. 

It  would  be  necessary  to  write  a  voluminous  treatise  on  husbandry, 
minutely  to  describe  the  steps  by  which  all  the  improvements  here 
pointed  out  have  been  attained,  and  to  show  how  they  have  combined 
for  the  production  of  the  good  effects  which  are  now  witnessed.  Our 
present  object  will  be  better  answered  by  describing  results  generally 
experienced  throughout  the  country,  than  by  any  minute  detail  of  pro- 
cesses, some  of  which  may  not,  even  yet,  meet  the  universal  assent  of 
practical  agriculturists. 

It  is  much  to  be  regretted  that  in  this  country,  rich  as  we  are  in  the 
possession  of  facts  connected  with  many  branches  of  social  economy,  we 
are  almost  wholly  uninformed  with  regard  to  the  statistics  of  agricul- 
ture. The  knowledge  we  have  upon  that  most  important  subject,  the 
quantity  of  land  in  cultivation  within  the  kingdom,  is  entirely  due  to  the 
industry  of  an  indi\'idual  whose  estimates  have  never  been  either  con- 
firmed or  questioned.  What  proportion  of  the  cultivated  land  is  applied 
to  the  production  of  any  one  article  of  food,  it  has  never  been  attempted 
to  ascertain.     We  know  every  rood  of  ground  that  is  employed  for  the 

been  found  to  possess  most  important  fertilising  properties.     The  number  of  tons  of  this 
fertiliser  that  arrived  in  our  ports,  in  each  year  from  1841  to  1849,  was  as  follows: — 


Years. 

Tons. 

1841 

2,881 

1842 

20,398 

1843 

3,002 

1844 

104,231 

1845 

283,300 

Years. 

Tons. 

1846 

89,203 

1847 

82,392 

1848 

71,414 

1849 

83,438 

146  PROGRESS  OF  THE  NATION.  [sec.  ii. 

cultivation  of  hops,  because  of  the  direct  financial  interest  which  the 
government  has  in  ascertaining  the  fact ;  but  it  docs  not  appear  to  be 
snlficiently  understood  how  the  national  interest  can  be  concerned  in  any 
kind  of  knowledge  that  does  not  yield  money  to  the  exchequer ;  and 
there  is  reason  to  believe,  that  if,  in  the  absence  of  compulsory  powers 
conferred  by  the  legislature,  any  comprehensive  measure  were  adopted 
by  the  government,  with  a  view  to  ascertain  the  actual  condition  of  the 
country,  as  regards  its  agriculture,  so  much  jealousy,  and  so  many 
groundless  fears  would  be  excited  in  the  minds  of  the  persons  from 
whom  the  information  must  be  sought,  that  the  returns  obtained  would 
be  extremely  erroneous,  or  so  incomplete  as  to  be  of  little  value. 

An  endeavour  to  obtain  a  part  of  this  knowledge  was  made  about  40 
years  ago  in  Scotland,  by  a  spirited  individual,  the  late  Sir  John  Sinclair, 
by  whom  the  clergy  of  that  part  of  the  island  were  induced  to  prepare 
those  accounts  of  their  respective  parishes,  the  collection  of  which  is  well 
known  imder  the  name  of  the  "  Statistical  Account  of  Scotland."  The 
property  of  this  work  was  generously  made  over  by  Sir  John  to  the 
Society  established  in  Scotland  for  the  benefit  of  the  sons  and  daughters 
of  the  clergy ;  and  the  managers  of  that  Society  have  since  undertaken 
to  produce  a  new  "  Statistical  Account  of  Scotland,"  for  the  preparation 
of  which  they  secured  the  assistance  of  the  parochial  clergy — a  body  in 
every  w^ay  qualified  for  the  correct  performance  of  the  task.  This  inte- 
resting work  has  been  recently  completed,  and  from  an  examination 
of  its  contents,  it  must  be  allowed  that  the  superintending  committee 
are  fully  justified  in  the  announcement  made  in  their  advertisement, 
that  "  they  now  present  not  merely  a  new  statistical  account,  but,  in  a 
great  measure,  the  statistical  account  of  a  new  country."  There  has 
not  been  a  single  parish  described  in  which  improvements  of  some  kind 
or  other,  and  in  many  cases,  to  a  great  extent,  are  not  stated  to  have 
been  accomplished.  A  few  extracts  have  been  taken  at  random  from 
the  work,  and  are  here  inserted  to  illustrate  the  various  forms,  as  well 
as  the  degree,  in  which  those  improvements  have  shown  themselves. 

Jedburgh^  RoxhurgJishire. — "  Since  the  period  when  the  last  statis- 
tical account  was  written,  the  state  of  the  parish  has  been  much  im- 
proved ;  farms,  which  were  entirely  pastoral,  now  bear  luxuriant  crops, 
the  fields  have  been  neatly  inclosed  with  hedges,  waste  ground  has  been 
planted,  the  style  of  dwelUng-houses  is  now  vastly  superior,  the  means 
of  communication  have  been  greatly  enlarged,  the  population  has  been 
nearly  doubled,  and  all  classes  seem  to  enjoy  a  large  share  of  the  com- 
forts of  civilized  society." 

Melrose,  Roxhurghsliire. — "The  chief  circumstance  in  which  the  pre- 
sent differs  from  the  past  state  of  the  parish,  is  the  general  enlargement 
of  the  farms.  Except  in  the  case  of  a  carrier  or  miller,  who  rents  a  few 
acres  to  furnish  fodder  for  his  horses,  a  small  farm  is  nearly  unknown. 


CHAP.  1.]  AGRICULTURE.  147 

The  displacing  of  the  old  small  tenants  was  at  first  viewed  with  deep 
regret;  but  the  introduction  of  a  better  and  more  spirit(>d  style  of  agri- 
culture which  innaediatidy  followed,  the  rapid  improvement  of  the 
country,  which  in  a  limited  ])eriod  has  raised  the  rental  of  this  parish 
from  4000/.  nearly  to  20,000/.  a-ycar,  besides  the  improved  condition 
of  the  agricultural  labourers,  seem  to  show  that  it  was  a  change  for  the 
better.  The  land  is  divided  into  a  limited  number  of  great  farms,  and 
the  tenants,  men  of  capital  and  intelligence,  are  enabled  to  give  the  best 
effect  to  the  virtues  of  the  soil,  and  the  great  body  of  the  people  live 
quietly  under  them  as  farm  servants  and  hired  labourers,  having  no  care 
but  to  do  their  work  and  receive  their  wages." 

Parish  of  Kinnettles,  Forfarshire. — "  There  is  not  only  a  greater 
extent  put  under  corn  crop,  green  crop,  and  artificial  grasses,  but  the 
same  extent  yields  a  produce  very  much  superior,  both  in  quantity  and 
quality,  to  the  produce  of  former  times.  Indeed,  it  may  with  safety  be 
said,  that  the  produce  of  grain  and  green  crop  is  about  double  of  what 
it  was  in  1792.  Since  that  period  the  progress  of  agriculture  has  been 
rapid." 

Moffat,  Dumfries-shire. — "  In  the  cultivation  of  the  arable  soils,  a 
very  great  improvement  has  been  made  ;  and  by  removing  obstructions, 
duly  manuring  and  working  the  lands,  observing  a  proper  improved 
rotation,  and  keeping  down  or  destroying  noxious  weeds — and  further, 
by  cultivating  the  most  valuable  crops — it  is  not  too  much  to  say,  that 
within  forty  years  the  returns  of  the  arable  soils  have  become  far  better, 
as  well  as  more  abundant. 

"  Let  any  one  now  look  into  the  cottages,  and  he  will  find  them  nearly 
or  fully  as  comfortable  as  the  farm-houses  were  forty  years  ago ;  and 
let  him  compare  the  dress  of  the  cottagers  and  their  mode  of  living 
with  that  of  the  formers  at  the  above  distance  of  time,  he  will  find 
that  at  present  they  are  not  greatly  inferior." 

Applcgarth,  Dumfries-shire. — "  The  difference  between  the  present 
state  of  the  parish  and  that  which  existed  at  the  time  of  the  last  statis- 
tical account,  is,  as  may  naturally  be  expected,  very  great,  though  from 
the  want  of  minuteness  in  that  account,  it  is  not  easy  to  point  out,  in 
many  particulars,  the  precise  degree  of  improvement.  The  mode  of 
living  is  more  comfortable,  while  the  good  old  habits  of  domestic  economy- 
have  not  been  impaired.  The  management  of  the  land  is  more  judicious, 
and  of  course  it  is  greatly  more  productive." 

Dundee. — "  The  land  under  tillage  may  be  said  to  be  in  a  very 
inqn-ovod  state,  no  labour  nor  expense  being  spared  to  render  it  highly 
productive,  and  there  are  no  particular  obstacles  to  improvement.  The 
following  is  about  the  average  number  of  acres  at  present  producing 
different  kinds  of  grain,  and  the  annual  gross  amount  of  i  aw  produce  : — 

l2 


148 


TROGRESS  OF  THE  NATION. 


[sec. 


£ 

Wheat,      343  acres,  at  32  bushels  per  acre,  and  7s.        per  bushel,  3,841  12 

Barley,      C61        „        44        „            „             „     3s.  6d.           „  5,089  14 

Oats,          762        „        48       „            „             „     2s.  9(/.           „  .5,029 

Potatoes,  470        „        £10  per  acre 4,700 

Turnips,    .521        „           12      „            6,252 

Grass,        635  acres,  averaged,  new  and  old,  at  £7  per  acre    .     .     ,  4,445 

Ditto,        555      „      inferior  pasture  and  waste,  at  £1  per  acre  .    .  555 


s. 

d. 

2 

0 

4 

0 

4 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

£29,912  10    0 


Tlie  following  table  of  the  number  of  Inclosure  Bills  passed  by  Par- 
liament, and  of  the  average  prices  of  wheat  in  England,  will  give  a 
tolerably  correct  idea  of  the  progress  of  agriculture  in  that  part  of  the 
kingdom  during  each  of  the  90  years  between  1760  and  1849.  For 
the  convenience  of  examination,  this  table  is  divided  into  nine  periods, 
each  consisting  of  ten  years  : — 


YEARS. 

Number  of 
Inclosure 

Average 
Price  of 

YEARS. 

Number  of 
Inclosure 

Average 
Price  of 

YEARS. 

S'umber  of 
Inclosure 

Average 
Price  of 

Bills 
passed. 

Wheat. 

Bills 
passed. 

Wheat. 

Bills 
passed. 

Wheat. 

s.  d. 

s.     d. 

S.     d. 

1760 

24 

36  6 

1790 

26 

53  2 

1820 

40 

65  10 

1761 

21 

30  3 

1791 

I   38 

47  2 

1821 

25 

54  5 

1762 

39 

39  0 

1792 

41  9 

1822 

13 

43  3 

1763 

31 

40  9 

1793 

46 

47  10 

1823 

9 

51  9 

1764 

66 

46  9 

1794 

42 

50  8 

1824 

12 

62  0 

1765 

60 

52  0 

1795 

39 

72  11 

1825 

24 

66  6 

1766 

49 

43  1 

1796 

75 

76  3 

1826 

20 

56  11 

1767 

35 

64  6 

1797 

86 

52  2 

1827 

22 

56  9 

1768 

\      60 

60  6 

1798 

52 

50  4 

1828 

16 

60  5 

1769 

45  8 

1799 
1800 

65 

66  11 

1829 
1830 

24 

66  3 

385 

45  10 

469 

55  11 

205 

58  5 

1770 

63 

41  4 

63 

110  5 

21 

64  3 

1771 

67 

47  2 

1801 

80 

115  11 

1831 

9 

66  4 

1772 

70 

50  8 

1802 

122 

67  9 

1832 

12 

58  8 

1773 

65 

51  0 

1803 

96 

57  1 

18.33 

15 

52  11 

1774 

62 

52  8 

1804 

104 

60  5 

1834 

16 

46  2 

1775 

42 

48  4 

1805 

52 

87  1 

1835 

4 

39  4 

1776 

58 

38  2 

1806 

71 

76  9 

18.36 

10 

48  6 

1777 

99 

45  6 

1807 

76 

73  1 

1837 

10 

.55  10 

1778 

66 

42  0 

1808 

91 

78  U 

1838 

19 

64  7 

1779 

68 

33  8 

1809 
1810 

92 

94  5 

1839 
1840 

20 

70  8 

660 

45  0 

847 

82  2 

136 

56  9 

1780 

45 

35  8 

122 

103  3 

14 

66  4 

1781 

25 

44  8 

1811 

107 

92  5 

1841 

22 

64  4 

1782 

15 

47  10 

1812 

133 

122  8 

1842 

11 

57  3 

1783 

18 

52  8 

1813 

119 

106  6 

1843 

11 

50  1 

1784 

15 

48  10 

1814 

120 

72  1 

1844 

8 

51  3 

1785 

23 

51  10 

1815 

81 

63  8 

1845 

50-10 

1786 

25 

38  10 

1816 

47 

76  2 

1846 

54  8 

1787 

22 

41  2 

1817 

34 

94  0 

1847 

69  9 

1783 

34 

45  0 

1818 

46 

83  8 

1848 

50  6 

1789 

24 

57  2 

1819 

44 

72  3 

1849 

44  3 

246 

45  9 

8.53 

88  8 

66 

55  11 

A  general  Inclosure  Act  was  passed  in  1835,  under  which  a  Board  of 
Commissioners  has  been  appointed  to  facilitate  the  inclosure  of  com- 


CHAP.  I.]  AGlilCULTURE.  149 

raons,  and  from  the  yearly  reports  of  the  Commissioners,  it  appears  that 
in  the  five  years  from  1845  to  1849,  applications  have  been  made  to 
them  in  4i)8  separate  cases,  some  of  which  are  too  small  to  have  been 
made  the  subject  of  a  private  separate  Act  of  Parliament,  and  which, 
in  the  aggregate,  embrace  an  area  of  273,967  acres. 

In  the  ten  years  from  17  GO  to  17G9,  when  the  average  number  of 
iuliabitants  of  England  and  Wales  w^as  6,850,000  souls,  the  quantity  of 
wheat  produced  was  more  than  sufficient  for  home  use  by  1,384,561 
quarters — an  inconsiderable  (juantity,  and  so  near  to  the  then  wants  of 
the  people,  that  the  deficient  harvests  of  1767  and  1768  occasioned  the 
importation  of  the  comparatively  large  quantity  of  834,669  quarters. 
There  were  no  means  employed  during  that  period  for  ascertaining  the 
prices  of  grain  with  the  correctness  that  has  since  been  attained,  and 
those  given  in  the  table  cannot  be  received  with  confidence.  If  the  Eton 
price  then  bore  the  same  proportion  it  has  since  borne  to  the  average 
])rice  as  computed  for  advertisement  in  the  London  Gazette,  and  which 
is  about  10s.  per  quarter  below  that  given  in  the  Eton  records,  the 
average  price  of  wheat  must  have  been  then  about  37^.  per  quarter. 
At  this  price  agriculture  appears  to  have  been  considerably  stimulated, 
the  number  of  Inclosure  Bills  passed  by  the  legislature  having  been  385.* 
This  stimulus  was  continued  through  the  next  decennary  period,  when 
the  number  of  Inclosure  Bills  was  increased  to  660.  This  second  period 
comprised  five  years  of  export  and  five  years  of  im})ort,  the  imports  pre- 
ponderating in  quantity,  but  not  considerably.  The  mean  number  of 
the  population  had  in  the  mean  time  advanced  to  7,520,000  souls,  and 
the  average  price  of  wheat,  as  ascertained  for  insertion  in  the  London 
Gazette,  was  45^.  per  quarter.  In  the  next  period,  viz.,  from  1780  to 
1789,  the  mean  number  of  the  inhabitants  had  reached  8,170,000  souls, 
but  the  supply  of  wheat  was  brought  more  nearly  to  a  level  with  the 
demand.  Owing  to  the  fluctuations  of  seasons,  six  of  the  ten  years  were 
years  of  export,  and  four  were  years  of  importation,  but  the  excess  of 
the  quantity  brought  in  over  that  sent  out  was  no  more  than  233,502 
quarters.  The  average  price  for  the  whole  number  of  ten  years  was 
455.  9d.,  having  once  been  as  high  as  525.  Sd.  In  two  of  the  exporting 
years,  viz.,  1785  and  1789,  the  average  prices  for  the  year  were  above 
50*'.  per  quarter.  The  number  of  Inclosure  Bills  fell  off  during  this 
period  to  246. 

In  the  next  period  of  ten  years,  from  1790  to  1799,  England  ceased 
to  be  an  exporting  country  for  wheat.    In  1792  the  price  fell  to  41^.  9d., 

*  In  the  year  1689  an  Act  was  passed  allowing  a  bounty  of  fiv  (,■  shillings  per  quarter  upon 
all  British-grown  wheat  exported  when  the  home  price  did  not  exceed  48s.  per  quarter. 
This  Act  was  modified  in  177o,  so  that  the  bounty  was  not  payable  after  the  average  price 
cxccctled  44s.  per  quarter,  and  in  1815  the  bounty  was  repealed.  In  point  of  fact,  no  bounty 
could  liave  been  claimed  in  any  year  after  1792,  when  the  average  jjricc  for  the  wiiole  year 
was  only  41s.  'Jd. 


150  niOGRESS  OF  THE  NATION.  [sec.  ii. 

and  a  considerable  quantity  was  shipped  abroad  ;  bnt  this  was  the  hist 
occasion  on  which  our  farmers  found  relief  in  foreign  markets  for  an 
over-abundant  stock  of  grain.  The  war  of  the  French  Revolution 
immediately  followed,  and  in  1795  a  scries  of  deficient  harvests  began, 
^\  liicli  forced  up  the  prices  of  agricultural  produce,  and  caused  a  great 
additional  number  of  Inclosure  Bills  to  be  passed. 

The  deficiency  was  aggravated  to  a  dearth  in  1800  and  1801  ;  the 
price  of  wheat  was  driven  up  to  the  then  unprecedented  height  of 
libs.  lid.  per  quarter  ;  and  a  considerable  breadth  of  land  was  addition- 
ally brought  under  the  plough,  the  number  of  Inclosure  Bills  passed 
during  the  ten  yeare  from  1800  to  1809  reaching  to  847.  A  trifling 
export  of  wheat  in  1808,  during  which  year  the  average  price  of  that  grain 
was  785.  lid.  per  quarter,  was  not  the  consequence  of  any  commercial 
demand  from  other  countries,  but  was  occasioned  by  military  operations 
in  the  Peninsula.  In  1810,  the  first  year  of  the  next  decennary  period, 
we  experienced  the  effects  of  another  deficient  harvest,  and  imported  a 
million  and  a  half  quarters  of  wheat.  This  fact  is  worthy  of  remem- 
brance, as  being  in  a  remarkable  degree  illustrative  of  the  axiom,  that 
no  difficulties  interposed  by  governments  are  adequate  to  prevent  the 
transmission  of  goods  to  a  profitable  market.  A  large  proportion  of  the 
foreign  grain  at  that  time  brought  for  consumption  to  this  country  was 
the  produce  of  the  soil  of  our  then  bitterest  enemy  ;  and  it  surely  should 
be  sufficient  for  us  to  call  to  mind  this  fact,  coupled  with  the  remem- 
brance of  the  deadly  character  then  assumed  by  the  contest  betw'een 
France  and  England,  to  be  convinced,  that  so  long  as  we  possess  the 
means  of  paying  for  the  food  which  other  countries  can  spare,  we  never 
need  be  without  an  adequate  supply  of  the  necessaries  of  life.  The 
average  price  of  wheat  in  1810  was  103*.  Sd.  per  quarter ;  but  this  rate, 
owing  to  the  then  depreciated  state  of  our  currency,  was  not  equal  to 
more  than  about  90^.  if  paid  in  gold.  In  1812  the  price  advanced  to 
122^.,  but  the  depreciation  of  the  currency  was  then  still  greater;  and 
tlie  real  price  was  not  beyond  5/.  per  quarter — a  price  sufficiently  high, 
however,  to  cause  the  application  of  much  additional  capital  to  agricul- 
tural pursuits,  so  that  in  this  year  133  Inclosure  Bills  were  passed, 
being  the  largest  number  on  record  in  any  one  year.  The  impulse  thus 
given  continued  to  operate  for  some  time.  It  will  be  seen  by  inspection 
of  the  table,  that  853  Inclosure  Bills  received  the  Royal  Assent  in  the 
ten  years  between  1810  and  1820;  but  the  increased  production  thus 
brought  about,  together  with  the  much  diminished  cost  of  transport 
from  foreign  countries,  caused  so  great  a  reaction  in  the  markets  for 
grain,  that  the  average  price  of  wheat  for  the  year  1814  fell  to  a  rate 
which,  measured  by  the  standard  price  of  gold,  was  not  more  than  54^. 
per  quarter. 

In  this  state  of  things  the  cry  of  distress  among  the  owners  and  occu- 


ciiAr.  I.]  AGRICULTURE.  151 

piers  of  land  became  exceedingly  urgent,  and  the  Houses  of  Parliament 
so  fully  sympathized  with  them  as  to  pass  an  Act  in  1815,  by  which  the 
monopoly  of  the  home  market  was  secured  to  the  British  grower  of  corn 
until  the  average  price  of  wheat  shoidd  reach  80*.  per  quarter,  and  that 
of  other  grain  should  attain  a  proportionate  elevation. 

For  some  time  but  little  opportunity  was  given  for  judging  of  the 
efficacy  of  this  law.  A  deficient  harvest  in  181 G  caused  prices  to  rise 
so  high  as  to  render  the  Act  inoperative.  In  1817  the  harvest  was  again 
bad  ;  during  that  year  and  1818  more  than  2,500,000  quarters  of  wheat 
were  imported,  and  the  prices,  although  not  nominally  so  high  as  they 
had  been  in  previous  years,  were  extremely  burdensome  to  the  people, 
owing  to  the  operation  of  the  restoration  of  the  currency,  which  was 
then  in  progress. 

The  previous  occasions  of  deficient  harvests  which  have  been  noticed 
were  always  followed  by  the  application  of  additional  capital  for  bringing 
waste  or  common-field  lands  into  arable  cultivation ;  and  it  may  in 
some  measure  be  owing  to  the  circumstance  of  those  previous  inclosures 
having  greatly  reduced  the  quantity  of  waste  land  applicable  to  this 
purpose,  that  the  number  of  Inclosure  Bills  has  since  been  materially 
diminished. 

The  number  of  Inclosure  Bills  passed  in  the  ten  years  between  1820 
and  1830  was  only  205,  not  one-fourth  part  of  the  number  passed  in  the 
preceding  period  of  the  like  duration — a  disproportion  which  is  the 
more  remarkable  from  these  circumstances  : — that  the  increase  of  popu- 
lation, which  between  1811  and  1821  amounted  to  2,G45,738,  was 
3,113,261  between  1821  and  1831  ;  and  that  the  foreign  supply  during 
the  first  of  these  intervals  was  nearly  double  that  obtained  in  the  latter 
period.  The  disproportion  betw'een  the  average  prices  experienced  in 
the  two  divisions  of  time  was  not  so  great  in  reality  as  in  appearance, 
owing  to  the  depreciation  of  the  currency  already  noticed  ;  but  still  when 
full  allowance  has  been  made  for  this  consideration,  it  will  be  found  that 
the  fall  of  price  was  nearly  25  per  cent.  The  periods  of  ten  years 
chosen  for  making  the  comparison  are  suflficiently  long  for  avoiding  the 
objection  that  the  seasons  were  less  genial  in  the  one  case  than  in  the 
other ;  and  it  would  be  impossible  even  without  other  evidence  of  the 
fact,  to  arrive  at  any  other  conclusion  than  that  a  larger  amount  of  pro- 
duce has  been  continually  drawn  from  a  given  portion  of  gi'ound  than 
was  obtained  in  general  at  the  beginning  of  the  century. 

Between  1830  and  1844,  a  period  of  15  years,  only  202  Inclosure 
Bills  were  passed,  being  on  the  average  nearly  30  per  cent,  fewer  than 
in  the  preceding  10  years,  and  only  about  one-sixth  of  the  yearly  num- 
ber passed  between  1810  and  1820.  In  the  meanwhile,  the  population 
has  advanced  with  accelerated  rapidity,  while  the  importations  of  foreign 


152  PROGRESS  OF  THE  NATION.  [sec.  n. 

^vlloat  liave  kept  pace  with  tliat  advance,  as  is  shown  by  the  tahle  at 
page  143  of  this  volume. 

The  Select  Committee  of  the  House  of  Commons,  which  sat  in  1813 
to  inquire  into  the  state  of  the  corn  trade,  stated  in  their  Report,  that 
through  the  extension  of,  and  improvements  in,  cultivation,  the  agri- 
cultural produce  of  the  kingdom  had  been  increased  one-fourth  during 
the  ten  years  preceding  the  time  of  their  inquiry. 

Earl  Fitzwilliam,  whose  practical  acquaintance  with  the  subject  of 
agriculture  few  persons  will  question,  has  expressed  unequivocally  his 
belief  that  the  land  has  of  late  years  been  made,  by  means  of  better 
farming,  to  yield  an  increased  quantity  of  produce.  The  following 
passage,  in  which  this  opinion  is  given,  occurs  in  his  "  Second  Address 
to  the  Landowners  of  England  on  the  Corn  Laws,"  published  in  April, 
1835  : — "  It  is  somewhere  about  twenty  years  since  we  began  to  hear 
prophetic  annunciations  of  this  approaching  abandonment  of  the  soil. 
That,  in  the  years  which  intervened  between  1810  and  the  peace, 
wheat  was  extracted  by  a  sort  of  hot-bed  cultivation  from  soils  whose 
uatiu-al  sterility  has,  under  the  diminished  pressure  of  necessity,  and 
the  influence  of  more  genial  seasons,  rescued  them  from  the  plough, 
I  entertain  not  a  doubt  ;  but  I  must  confess  that  I  have  watched  in 
vain  for  any  extensive  fulfilment  of  the  prophecy.  On  the  contrary,  I 
am  satisfied  that  the  breadth  of  land  under  the  plough  (taking  that  as 
the  criterion,  though  it  is  none,  and  I  only  take  it  in  deference  to  those 
with  whom  I  am  arguing)  is  greater  than  it  was  in  1814,  and  that  the 
2>roduce  of  equal  surfaces  of  ploughed  land  has  increased  in  a  still  greater 
ratio^ 

The  opinion  thus  confidently  expressed  as  to  the  increased  produc- 
tiveness of  the  soil  of  late  years,  was  very  decidedly  contradicted  by 
various  agriculturists  who  were  examined  before  a  Committee  of  the 
House  of  Commons  in  1833.  On  that  occasion  some  of  the  witnesses 
stated,  that  owing  to  a  deficient  application  of  capital  to  the  land,  its 
annual  produce  had  fallen  oft"  in  quantity  from  one-sixth  to  one-fourth 
— one  gentleman,  indeed,  said  as  much  as  one-third — compared  with 
former  periods.  It  would  have  been  difficult,  under  any  circumstances, 
to  believe  that  such  a  state  of  things  could  possibly  be  found  existing, 
to  any  extent,  in  connexion  with  the  facts  of  an  opposite  character 
which  have  been  brought  forward  in  these  pages ;  but  a  slight  exami- 
nation of  the  evidence  given  befoi'e  the  committee  is  sufficient  to  explain 
the  apparent  inconsistency.  It  w'ill  be  evident  from  that  examination, 
that  in  every  case  where  diminished  production  is  asserted,  the  wit- 
nesses have  spoken  of  the  same  description  of  soil  —  "cold  clay  lands;" 
and  it  is  rather  illogically  argued,  that  because  these  lands  have  from 
time  inmiemorial  been  employed  for  the  production  of  wheat,  therefore 


ciiAv.  I.]  AGRICULTURE.  153 

a  diminution  of  produce  from  them  necessarily  establishes  the  fact  that 
the    rate  of  production    generally  is    diminished.     In   answer   to   this 
assertion  it  may  be  observed,  that  during  the  last  half  century  a  great 
revolution   has   taken  place  in  the  management  of  land,  and  that  by 
proper  attention   to  the    rotation  of  crops,    and   by  the  application  of 
capital  to  other  descriptions  of  soil,  these  soils  have  been  brought  to  a 
state  which  enables  the  farmer  to  draw  from  them  a  better  return  than 
would  follow  the  application  of  the  same  amount  of  labour  to  the  old 
wheat  lands.     If  reference  be  made  to  the  evidence  given  before  the 
Committee  of  the  House  of  Commons,  to  wdiich  the  numerous  petitions 
complaining  of  agricultural  distress  were  referred  in  1821,  it  will  be 
seen  that  at  that  time  almost  the  only  grain  produced  in  the  fens  of 
Cambridgeshire  consisted  of  oats.     Since  then,  by  draining  and  manur- 
ing, the  capability  of  the  soil  has  been  so  changed  that  these  fens  now 
produce  some   of  the  finest  wheat  that  is  grown  in  England  ;  and  this 
more  costly  grain  now  constitutes  the  main  dependence  of  the  farmers 
in  a  district  where,  a  quarter  of  a  century  ago,  its  production  was  scarcely 
attempted.      It  was  pretty  generally  understood  at  the  time  that  the 
appointment  of  the  Committee  of  1833  was  a  concession  made  to  those 
members  of  the  House  of  Commons  who  fancied  themselves  interested 
in  the  continuance  of  the  present  system  of  corn-laws,  and  accordingly 
the  whole  tendency  of  the  evidence  given  appears  to  have  been  to  make 
out  the  existence  of  distress  among  agriculturists,  the  amount  of  which 
would  be  aggravated  by  any  alteration  of  the   law.     Under  these  cir- 
cumstances, every  kind  of  testimony  which  would  bring  to  light  a  state 
of  things  adverse    to    the    continuance    of   protection  against  foreign 
importation,    was,  if  not    purposely  kept    back,  certainly  allowed    to 
appear  with    reluctance ;    and  yet  a    body  of  evidence  which   proves, 
from  facts  which  cannot  be  controverted,  that  all  is  not  barrenness  and 
desolation  in  our  fields,  is  to  be  found  in  almost  every  page  of  that 
voluminous  Report.     Everywhere,  the  condition  of  agricultural  labourers 
is  stated  to  be  visibly  amended  ;  while  towns  in  agricultural  districts, 
which  are  dependent  upon  the  farming  interests,  have  uniformly  improved 
in  extent,  and  in  every  other  circumstance  which  indicates  prosperity. 
Nor  has  the  situation  of  the  landowner  been  less  materially  improved, 
so  far  at  least  as  his  condition  depends  upon  the  rent  which  he  receives 
for  his  land.     With  scarcely  any  exception,  the  revenue  drawn  in  the 
form  of  rent,  from  the  ownership  of  the  soil,  has  been  at  least  doubled 
in  every  part   of  Great    Britain  since  1790.      This  is  not  a  random 
assertion,  but,  as  regards  many  counties  of  England,  can  be  proved  by 
the  testimony  of  living  witnesses,  while  in  Scotland  the  fact  is  notorious 
to  the  whole  population.      In    the    county  of  Essex,  farms    could  be 
pointed  out  which  were  let  just  before  the  war  of  the  French  Revolution 
at  less  than  10^.  per  acre,  and  which   rose  rapidly  during  the  progress 


154  niOOrvESS  of  the  nation.  [sec.  II. 

of  that  contest,  until  in  1812,  the  rent  paid  for  them  was  from  455.  to 
505.  per  acre.  This  advance  has  not,  it  is  true,  been  maintained  since 
the  return  of  peace  :  in  1818  the  rent  was  reduced  to  355.,  and  at  the 
present  time  is  only  20^.  per  acre,  which,  however,  is  still  more  than 
double  that  which  was  paid  in  1790.  In  Berkshire  and  Wiltshire 
there  are  farms  which  in  1700  were  let  at  145.  per  acre,  and  which  in 
1810  produced  to  the  landlord ^i  rent  of  705.,  being  a  five-fold  advance. 
These  farms  were  let  in  1820  at  505.,  and  at  this  time  pay  305.  per 
acre,  being  114  per  cent,  advance  upon  the  rent  paid  in  1790.  In 
Staffordshire  there  are  several  farms  on  one  estate  which  were  let  in 
1790  at  85.  per  acre,  and  which  having  in  the  dearest  time  advanced  to 
35s.,  have  since  been  lowered  to  205.,  an  advance,  after  all,  of  150  per 
cent,  within  the  half  century.  The  rents  here  mentioned  as  being  those 
for  which  the  farms  are  now  let,  are  not  nominal  rates  from  which 
abatements  are  periodically  made  by  the  landlord,  but  are  regularly 
paid,  notwithstanding  the  depressed  prices  at  which  some  kinds  of 
agricultural  produce  have  been  sold. 

In  Norfolk,  Suffolk,  and  Warwickshire,  the  same,  or  nearly  the 
same,  rise  has  been  experienced  ;  and  it  is  more  than  probable  that  it 
has  been  general  throughout  the  kingdom.  During  the  same  period 
the  prices  of  most  of  the  articles  which  constitute  the  landlord's  expen- 
diture have  fallen  materially  ;  and  if  his  condition  be  not  improved  in 
a  corresponding  degree,  that  circumstance  must  arise  from  improvidence 
or  miscalculation,  or  habits  of  expensive  living  beyond  what  would  be 
warranted  by  the  doubling  of  income  which  he  has  experienced  and  is 
gtill  enjoying. 

The  opinion  that  has  been  stated  in  regard  to  the  altered  system  of 
farming,  and  which  has  caused  light  soils  to  be  applied  to  uses  for 
which,  in  former  times,  the  heavy  lands  alone  were  considered  fit,  is 
corroborated  by  a  communication  made  to  the  Poor  Law  Commissioners 
from  Worcestei-shire,  and  inserted  in  the  Appendix  (C.  p.  419)  to  their 
Report : — "  Looking  to  the  rent-rolls  (land-tax  and  other  documents) 
of  former  times,  it  will  be  found,  that  whilst  stiflf  (wheat  and  bean)  land 
has  stood  still,  or  is  rather  deteriorated  in  value,  the  light,  or  what  is 
called  poor  land,  from  an  improved  system  of  cropping,  has  risen  most 
considerably.  I  should  say,  proportionally,  that  where  stiff  land  yields 
a  rent  of  22s.  to  255.  an  acre,  the  light  land  will  bring  from  305.  to  355.  ; 
and  what  makes  the  latter  more  sought  after  now-a-days  is,  that  it  re- 
quires fewer  horses,  and  those  of  inferior  strength,  less  manual  labour 
to  keep  it  clean,  and  the  farmers  can  '  get  upon  it '  in  all  weathers,  and 
thereby  secure  more  regular  crops." 

Among  the  agents  employed  for  the  improvement  of  agriculture  we 
have  now  to  mention  the  steam-engine.  The  fens  in  Cambridgeshire, 
Lincolnshire,  and  other  eastern  counties  in  which  the  low  lands  known 


cii.vr.  1.]  AGllICULTURE.  155 

as  the  Bedford  Level  occur,  were  formerly  very  imperfectly  relieved 
from  their  surplus  water  by  means  of  windmills,  and  to  a  considerable 
extent  tliey  are  so  still.  Where  this  is  the  case,  the  fanuer  has  some- 
times to  witness  the  frustration  of  all  his  hopes  for  the  year,  almost  at 
the  very  period  of  their  expected  accomplishment.  It  frequently 
happens,  that  when  rain  falls  in  large  quantities  near  the  time  of 
harvest  there  is  not  a  breath  of  wind  to  move  the  sails  of  his  mill, 
and  the  field  in  which  the  yellow  grain  was  waving  is  speedily  con- 
verted into  a  lake.  Some  of  the  land  thus  circumstanced  is  among  the 
most  fertile  in  the  kingdom,  consisting  of  a  bed  of  decomposed  vege- 
table matter  thirty  feet  in  depth,  and  yielding  crops  of  from  four  to  five 
quarters  of  wheat  per  acre.  By  the  substitution  of  steam-power  for 
the  uncertain  agency  of  wind,  the  crop  is  now  secured  from  the  disaster 
we  have  mentioned.  The  expenditure  of  a  few  bushels  of  coals  places 
it  at  all  times  in  the  farmer's  power  to  drain  his  fields  of  all  superfluous 
moistm'e,  at  a  comparatively  inconsiderable  cost.  It  has  been  found 
that  an  engine  of  the  power  of  ten  horses  is  sufficient  for  draining  1000 
acres  of  land,  and  that  on  the  average  of  years  this  work  may  be 
performed  by  setting  the  engine  in  motion  for  periods  amounting,  in 
the  aggregate,  to  20  days  of  12  hours  each,  or  240  hours  in  all. 
Several  engines  have  been  erected  for  this  purpose  within  the  last  three 
or  four  years,  some  of  them  having  the  power  of  60  or  70  horses  ;  each 
of  these  large  engines  is  employed  in  draining  from  6000  to  7000  acres 
of  land.  The  cost  of  the  first  establishment  of  these  engines  is  stated  to 
be  1/.  per  acre,  and  the  annual  expense  of  keeping  them  at  work  '2s.  Gd. 
per  acre.  This  plan  is  found  to  bring  with  it  the  further  advantage,  that, 
in  the  event  of  long-continued  drought,  the  farmer  can,  without  appre- 
hension, admit  the  water  required  for  his  cattle  and  for  the  purpose  of 
irrigation,  secure  in  the  means  he  possesses  of  regulating  the  degree  of 
moisture,  if  the  drought,  as  is  frequently  the  case,  should  be  followed  by 
an  excess  of  rain. 

The  assertion  made  by  many  persons  who  were  examined  before  the 
Committee  in  1833,  that  the  capital  engaged  in  agricultural  pureuits 
has  of  late  years  been  much  diminished  through  the  losses  of  farmers, 
and  that  its  amount  is  now  inadequate  to  the  proper  development  of  the 
powers  of  production,  may  well  be  questioned  in  the  circumstances  of 
abundance  which  have  to  so  great  a  degree  kept  down  the  necessity  for 
importing  foreign  grain  to  supply  the  demands  of  our  constantly-in- 
creasing and  fully-employed  population. 

It  is  the  fashion  among  persons,  in  and  out  of  Parliament,  who  com- 
plain of  the  distressed  state  of  the  agricultural  interest,  to  inveigh  against 
the  measure  adopted  in  1819  for  regulating  the  restoring  of  the  metallic 
currency,  as  one  which  has  brought  ruin  and  desolation  among  the 
farmers.     That  measm-e,  in  conjmictiun  with  the  law  of  1826,  which 


156  PROGRESS  OF  THE  NATIOX.  [sec.  ii. 

prohibited  the  issue  of  notes  for  less  sums  than  5/.,  is  said  to  have 
deprived  the  occupiers  of  kmd  of  the  resource  they  previously  had  in 
the  country  banker,  who  was  always  willing  to  accommodate  them  with 
the  loan  of  his  notes.  Let  us  suppose  that  those  who  thus  complain 
should  succeed  in  their  endeavours  to  procure  the  repeal  or  modification 
of  these  alleged  injurious  laws — what  would  be  the  best  result  they 
could  anticipate  ?  They  might  not  be  forced  to  bring  their  produce  so 
early  to  market,  and,  by  keeping  it  back,  might  for  a  time  raise  the 
price  and  check  consumption.  Let  us  imagine  that  this  effect  is  pro- 
duced to  the  extent  of  one-tenth  of  their  crops.  In  the  next  year  this 
operation  would  be  repeated,  and  the  surplus  on  hand  would  amount  to 
one-fifth,  and  even  more,  because,  by  the  ap])lication  of  the  banker's 
capital,  larger  harvests  would  be  obtained.  It  is  but  little  likely  that 
with  so  large  a  surplus  produce  on  hand,  prices  could  be  so  long  main- 
tained above  their  natural  level ;  but  let  us  suppose  that  all  the  farmers 
in  the  kingdom  should  act  upon  this  system  for  ten  years,  in  what  respect 
would  their  situation  be  benefited  at  the  end  of  that  time  ?  They  would 
have  in  their  rick-yards  produce  equal  to  at  least  one  year's  consump- 
tion beyond  the  ordinary  stock,  and  this  surplus  would  be  actually  and 
purely  surplus,  and  altogether  unsaleable,  except  at  prices  which  would 
create  markets  for  it  in  other  countries. 

The  result  here  supposed  appears  to  be  that  which  would  necessarily 
follow  a  re-enactment  of  the  Bank  Restriction  Act,  from  placing  ficti- 
tious capital  in  the  farmers'  hands,  if  such  a  measure  could  be  adopted 
without  at  the  same  time  influencing  prices  generally  throughout  the 
country.  But  it  is  idle  to  suppose  that  the  efi'ect  of  making  any  great 
permanent  addition  to  the  currency  would  be  limited  to  agi'icultural 
produce.  Theory  and  experience  unite  in  showing  that  a  general  rise 
of  prices  must  unavoidably  follow  any  such  addition.  Under  these  cir- 
cumstances, the  only  person  to  be  benefited  is  the  man  who  has  pecuniary 
obligations  to  discharge,  the  amount  of  his  gain  being  the  unerring 
measure  of  his  creditor's  loss.  This  effect,  besides,  can  have  no  opera- 
tion except  upon  engagements  contracted  before  the  enlargement  of  the 
circulation  ;  all  future  operations  would  be  governed  by  the  new  state 
of  things ;  and  thus,  for  the  sake  of  procuring  relief  for  a  limited  class 
of  persons,  certain  injustice  is  to  be  committed  upon  others,  our  foreign 
commerce  is  to  be  subjected  to  hazardous  experiments,  the  employments 
of  our  artisans  are  to  be  circumscribed,  and  the  whole  relations  of 
society  disarranged. 

It  is  not  possible  to  state  the  amount  of  land  which  has  been  brought 
into  cultivation  under  the  Inclosure  Acts  of  which  mention  has  been 
made.  In  a  Report  drawn  up  by  a  Committee  of  the  House  of  Com- 
mons, which  sat  in  17U7  to  inquire  into  the  state  of  the  waste  lands,  an 
estimate  is  given  of  the  number  of  acres  which  had  been  comprised  in 


cjiAP.  1.]  AGRICULTURE.  157 

tlie  Inclosure  Bills  carried  into  execution  between  1710,  when  the  first 
Inclosure  Bill  was  passed  in  England,  and  the  time  of  the  inquiry.  If 
the  estimate  of  this  Committee  be  taken  as  the  Vuisis  of  a  further  calcu- 
lation, it  will  be  found  that  the  whole  number  of  acres  brought  into  cul- 
tivation from  the  beginning  of  the  reign  of  George  III.  to  the  end  of  the 
year  1^41)  has  been  7,350,577  : — 


Years. 

Acres. 

Years. 

Acres. 

om  1760  to  1769 

704,550 

From  1810  to  1819 

1,560,990 

„     1770   „    1779 

1,207,800 

„     1820   „    1829 

375,150 

„     1780   ,,    1789 

450, 180 

„     1830  „    18.39 

248,880 

„     1790   „    1799 

858,270 

„     1840   „    1844 

120,780 

„     1800  „    1809 

1,550,010 

„     1845   „    1849 

273,967 

Total     .     .     , 

7,350 

.577  Acres. 

The  proportion  brought  into  use  since  the  commencement  of  the 
present  century  has,  according  to  this  estimate,  been  4,129,777  acres, 
three-fourths  of  which  were  so  apjiropriated  in  the  first  twenty  years. 
It  may  serve  to  illustrate  the  position  that  has  been  advanced  con- 
cerning the  improved  methods  of  cultivation  parsued  during  recent 
years,  if  the  proportionally  decreasing  quantities  of  land  brought  into 
use  during  the  four  decennary  periods  from  1801  to  1841,  and  subse- 
quently, are  exhibited  in  contrast  with  the  increase  of  the  population 
during  the  same  period  in  the  United  Kingdom  : — 


Inclosure 

Increase  of 

Years. 

liills. 

Acres. 

Population. 

1801  to  1810, 

inclusive, 

906 

1,657,980 

2,209,618 

1811    „    1820 

!J 

771 

1,410,930 

2,645,7.38 

1821    „    1830 

)> 

186 

340^380 

3,113,261 

1831    „    1840 

)> 

129 

2.36,070 

(estimated) 

2,610,272 

1841    „    1849 

„ 

66 

369,127 

1,044,108 

Some  fm'ther  light  will  be  thrown  upon  this  subject  by  the  insertion  of 
a  statement,  distinguishing  the  quantities  of  land  which  were  in  a  state 
of  cultivation  from  those  of  land  uncultivated  but  improvable,  and  from 
unprofitable  wastes  in  the  several  counties  of  each  division  of  the  kinf^- 
dom,  as  computed  in  the  beginning  of  1827.  This  statement,  which 
•was  drawn  up  by  Mr.  William  Couling,  a  civil  engineer  and  surveyor, 
was  delivered  in  by  him  when  examined  before  the  Select  Committee  of 
the  House  of  Commons,  appointed  in  that  year  to  inquire  into  the  sub- 
ject of  Emigration  from  the  United  Kingdom.  It  does  not  pretend  to 
absolute  accuracy ;  but  considerable  knowledge  and  industry  havino- 
been  employed  in  preparing  it,  the  statement  may  be  received  as  a  near 
approximation  to  the  truth,  and  as  the  best  evidence  that  can  be  adduced 
on  the  subject.  In  support  of  his  statement,  Mr.  Couling  told  the  Com- 
mittee that  his  calculations  were  for  the  most  part  the  result  of  personal 
inspection,  he  having  carefully  examined  the  greater  part  of  106  coun- 
ties, and  partially  travelled  over  the  remaining  11,  the  aggregate  length 
of  his  journeys,  fur  the  purpose,  having  exceeded  50,000  miles.  Mr. 
(Jouling  further  assured  the  Committee,  that  where  he  had  not  enjoyed 


158 


rrtOGRESS  OF  THE  NATION. 


[SF.C.    11. 


the  means  of  making  personal  inspection,  he  had  consulted  and  availed 
himself  of  the  very  best  authorities  for  completing  his  estimates. 


ENGLAND. 

1 

1 

COUNTIES. 

Cultivated,    i 

Uncultivated. 

Unprofitable. 

Summary. 

Bedford 

248,000 

31,000 

17,320 

296,320 

Berks  .... 

3S0,(X10 

75,000 

28,840 

483,840 

Buckingliam 

4K),()00 

5,0(M1 

28,600 

473,600 

Cambridge     . 

500,000 

17,000 

32,120 

549,120 

Chester 

5'J4,000 

40,000 

39,280 

673,280 

Cornwall  . 

550,000 

190,000 

101),  280 

849,280 

Cumberland  . 

070,000 

1.50,000 

125,920 

945,920 

Derby       .      .      . 
Devon       •      .      . 

500,000 

100,000 

56,640 

656,640 

1,200,000 

300,000 

150,560 

1,650,560 

Dorset 

573,000 

25,000 

45,200 

643,200 

Durham    . 

500,000 

100,000 

79,040 

079,040 

Kssex  .... 

900,000 

10,000 

70,480 

980,480 

Gloucester 

750^000 

6,000 

47,840 

803,840 

Hants 

<)00,000 

80,000 

61,920 

1,041,920 

Hereford  . 

4'.)5,000 

24,000 

31,400 

550,400 

Hertford  . 

310,000 

8,000 

19,920 

337,920 

Huntingdon  . 

22i),000 

3,000 

13,800 

230, 8tX) 

Kent    .... 

i)00,000 

20,000 

63,080 

983,680 

Lancaster 

850,000 

200,000 

121,840 

1,171,840 

Leicester  . 

480,000 

5,000 

29,560 

514,560 

Lincoln 

1,465,000 

180,000 

113,720 

1,758,720 

iliddlesex 

155.tX)0 

17,000 

8,480 

180,480 

Monmouth     . 

270^000 

30,000 

18,720 

318,720 

Is  or  folk     . 

1,180,000 

78,  two 

80,880 

1,338,880 

Northampton 

555,000 

50,000 

45,880 

650,880 

Northumberland 

900,000 

160,000 

137,440 

1,197,440 

Nottingham   . 

470,000 

28,000 

37,680 

535,680 

Oxford 

403,000 

.50,000 

28,280 

481,280 

Rutland    .     . 

8'J,000 

1,000 

5,360 

95,300 

Salop   .     .     . 
Somerset  . 

730,OtX) 

20,000 

48,240 

858,240 

900,000 

88,000 

62,880 

1,050,880 

StafiFord    .     . 

560,000 

85,000 

89,720 

734,720 

Suffolk      .      . 

820,000 

88,000 

59,680 

907,080 

Surrey      .     . 
Sussex 

400,000 

50,000 

35,120 

485,120 

625,000 

170,000 

141,320 

936,320 

Warwick  . 

5io;ooo 

30,000 

37,280 

577,280 

Westmoreland 

180,000 

110,000 

198,320 

488,320 

Wilts   .      .     . 

500,000 

200,000 

182,560 

882,560 

Worcester 

400,000 

30,000 

36,560 

466,560 

York    .     .     . 

2,500,000 

600,000 

715,040 

3,815,040 

25,632,000 

3,454,000 

3,256,400 

32,342,400 

WALES. 

Anglesea 

150,000 

10,000 

13,440 

173,440 

Brecknock 

300,000 

80,0(X) 

102,560 

482,560 

Cardigan  . 

245,000 

80,(X)0 

107,000 

432,000 

Carmarthen  . 

342,000 

60,000 

221,360 

623,360 

Carnarvon     • 

160,000 

60,000 

128,160 

348,160 

Denbigh  . 

360,000 

20,000 

25,120 

405,120 

Flint    .     .     . 

130,000 

10,000 

16,160 

156,160 

Glamorgan     . 
Merioneth 

305,000 

60,000 

141,880 

506,880 

350,000 

20,000 

54,320 

424,320 

Montgomery 

240,000 

100,000 

196,960 

536,960 

Pembroke 

300,000 

20,000 

70,400 

390,400 

Radnor     . 

235,000 

10,000 

27,640 

272,640 

!  3,117,000 

530,000 

1,105,000 

4,752,000 

CIlAl'.    I.] 


AGRICULTUIIE. 


159 


SCOTLAND. 


CorNTII^:.                       Cultivated. 

L'liciiltivatccU 

Unprofitaljle. 

Summary. 

Aberdeen       ....          3(M),000 

4.50,000 

.520,740 

1 

1,270,740 

Argyle      .      . 

1       308,  (XK) 

6fX),0,jO 

!  1,524,000 

2,432,000 

Ayr      .     .     . 

1       2'.f2,()m 

300,000 

i       432,000 

l,024,0fX) 

Baiiir  .     ,     . 

1       1-JU,(X)0 

130,0(X) 

70,000 

320,000 

Berwick    .     . 

1G(),(HX) 

100,000 

25,600 

285,600 

Bute    .     .     . 

(;(),u(j() 

40,000 

65,000 

1G5,00(J 

Caithness . 

70,000 

75,0(X) 

250,680 

395,680 

Clackmannan 

•2:2.000 

5,000 

3,720 

30,720 

Cromarty . 

1         2o;(XX) 

5,000 

14,690 

.39,690 

Dumbarton    . 

70,tX)0 

50,000 

27,200 

147,200 

Dumfries  . 

212. (too 

320,000 

1       620,000 

1,152,0(X) 

Edinburgh     . 

181 /XK) 

20,000 

1         29,400 

2.30,400 

Elgin  .      .     . 

1       120,000 

2fX),(XX) 

217,600 

537,600 

Fife     .     .     . 

2(K).0(X) 

85,000 

1         37,560 

322,560 

Forfar.     .     . 

1       200.000 

220,000 

117,600 

537,600 

Haddington  . 

!        lOiJ^OOO 

30,000 

30,000 

160,000 

Inverness 

,       50o;(KX) 

750,000 

1,694,000 

2,944,000 

Kincardine    . 

1        110. (XK) 

50,000 

42,870 

202,870 

Kinross     . 

;50.(M)0 

10,000 

13,120 

53,120 

Kirkcudbright 

110,(_IOO 

2(XJ,000 

254,480 

.564,480 

Lanark 

220,000 

195,000 

141,800 

556.800 

Linlithgow 

50,000 

10,000 

11,680 

7i;680 

Nairn  . 

70,000 

30,000 

28,000 

128,000 

Peebles     .      . 

104,000 

80,000 

46,400 

230,400 

Pertli  .      .      . 

500,  (X)0 

550,000 

C06,.320 

1,656,. 320 

Ilenfrew   . 

100,000 

20,000 

34,240 

154,240 

Ross     . 

301,000 

545,000 

929,830 

1,775,830 

Roxburgh 

200,000 

100,000 

157,600 

457,600 

Selkirk      .      . 

85,000 

30,000 

53,320 

168,320 

Stirling     . 

200,000 

50,000 

62,960 

312,960 

Sutherland     . 

150, 0(K) 

600,000 

372,560 

1,122,560 

Wigton     .     . 

100,000 

100,000 

88,960 

288,960 

5,265,000 

5,950,000 

8,523,930 

19,738,930 

IRELAND. 

Antrim 

336,400 

218,870 

119,136 

674,406 

Armagh 

166,000 

92,430 

51,233 

309,663 

Carlow 

173,000 

34,000 

15,021 

222,021 

Cavan . 

265,400 

160,500 

61,720 

487,620 

Clare   . 

579,000 

104,400 

88,044 

771,444 

Cork    . 

1,188,000 

361,000 

150,056 

1,699,056 

Donegal 

507,000 

417,920 

175,951 

1,100,871 

Down  . 

349,000 

126,170 

89,481 

564,651 

Dublin 

159,130 

49,920 

21,071 

2.30,121 

East  ]Meath    . 

465,000 

40,120 

26,078 

531,198 

Fermanagh    . 

254,000 

120,500 

84,689 

459,189 

Galway 

829,200 

532,040 

242,479 

1,603,719 

Kerry  .... 

556,300 

348,410 

144,483 

1,049,193 

Kildare     .     . 

259,990 

87,670 

35,875 

383,535 

Kilkenny. 

403,100 

58,100 

25,367 

486,567 

King's  County    . 

341,310 

80,900 

34,954 

457,164 

Leitrim     .     .     . 

222,250 

128,200 

64, 189 

414,639 

Limerick  .      . 

460,000 

114,110 

52,425 

626,. 535 

Londonderry 

279, 4tW) 

172,070 

80,214 

531,684 

Longford  .     . 

121,900 

41,460 

53,963 

217,323 

Louth  .... 

157;  (MX) 

12,000 

10,415 

179,415 

Mayo  .... 

502,  •MK) 

565,570 

212,302 

1,280,772 

Monaghan      .     . 

257, 0(X) 

12,01X) 

21,952 

290,952 

Queen's  County  . 

311,100 

47,120 

22,966 

381,186 

Roscommon   . 

348, 0(X) 

122,460 

91,113 

561,. 573 

Sligo    .... 

143,500 

189,930 

66,953 

400,383 

Tipperary 

693,200 

113,490 

92,329 

899,019 

160 


rrvOGRESS  OF  THE  NATION. 
IRELAND— co«<;rt?/erf. 


[sec.  II. 


Tyrone  . 
Waterfi.rd 
■\Vestmcath 
Wexford  . 
AVicklow  . 


Cultiv.it.eJ. 


539,900 
348,500 
287,330 
340,470 
281,000 


12,125,280 


Uncultivated. 


135,020 

44,220 

51,2tK} 

156,200 

162,000 


4,900,000 


Unprolitable.  i      Summtiry. 


91,988 
33,016 
36,581 

.58,828 
61,792 


2,416,664 


766,908 
425,736 
375,111 

.555,498 
504,792 


19,441,944 


BRITISH  ISLANDS. 


Man 


95,000 


Scilly,  Jersey,  Guernsey,  i  )      ^o  n,^ 

AUlerney,  t^urk,  &c.   .   ■  j      ^^'^-^ 

Orkneys  and  Shetland  ,  220,000 


383,690 


23,000 

31,000 

112,000 


22,800 

30,669 

516,000 


166,000 


,569,469 


140,800 
130,359 

848,000 


1,119,159 


RECAPITULATION. 


England    . 
Wales  . 
Scotland   . 
Ireland 
British  Islands 


25,632,000 
3,117,000 
5,265,000 

12,125,280 
333,690 


46,522,970 


3,4.54,000 

530,000 

5,950,000 

4,900.000 

166,000 


15,000,000 


3,256,400 
1,105,000 
8,523,930 
2,416,664 
569,469 


15,871,463 


32,342,400 

4,7.52,000 

19,738  930 

19,441,944 

1,119,159 


:7, 394, 433 


Annual 

Arable 

Meadows, 

Wastes, 

Value  of 

Incapable 

and 

Pastures  and 

capable  of 

Wastes  in 

of 

.Summarv. 

Gardens. 

Marshes. 

Improvement. 

their  present 
state. 

Improvement. 

Statute 

Statute 

Statute 

Sterling 

Statute 

Statute 

Acres. 

Acres. 

Acres. 

Pounds. 

Acres. 

Acres. 

England 

10,252,800 

15,379,200 

3,454,000 

1,700,000 

3,256,400 

32,342,400 

Wales    ,     .     , 

890,570 

2,226,430 

530,000 

200,000 

1,105,000 

4,752,000 

Scotland     . 

2,493.9.50 

2,771,050 

5,950.000 

1,680,000 

8,-523,930 

19,738,930 

Ireland  . 

5,389,040 

6,736,240 

4,900,000 

1,395,000 

2,416,664 

19,441,944 

British  Islands 

109,630 

274,060 

166,000 

25,000 

569,469 

1,119,1.59 

19,135,990 

27,386,980 

15,000,000 

5,000,000 

15,871,463 

77,394,433 

It  appears  from  this  statement,  that  up  to  the  beginning  of  1827,  the 
number  of  statute  acres  in  cultivation  in  the  United  Kingdom,  includ- 
ing" under  that  description  meadows  and  pastures,  amounted  to 
40,139,280,  being  as  near  as  possible  two  acres  for  each  inhabitant, 
the  aggregate  population  at  the  end  of  1826  having  been  23,061,414 
souls.  The  land  included  in  the  Inclosure  Bills  passed  since  that  year, 
estimated  by  the  rule  before  described,  has  amounted  to  no  more  than 
718,657  statute  acres,  while  the  numbers  added  to  tlw  population  have 
been  6,200,000  souls,  thus  affording  not  one-eighth  part  of  an  acre  per 
head  for  each  additional  inhabitant.     I'liis  must  1)0  considered  a  further 


CHAP.  I.]  AGRICULTURE.  161 

])ro()f  of  the  generally  increased  productiveness  of  the  soil  during  the 
last  few  years. 

The  land  in  cultivation  at  the  beginning  of  the  century,  computed 
from  Mr.  Couling's  statement,  in  connexion  with  the  number  of 
Inclosure  Bills,  was  42,881,880  statute  acres,  and  the  population  having 
at  that  time  been  16,338,102,  the  proportion  of  cultivated  land  was 
260  statute  acres  for  each  100  inhabitants. 

The  additions  since  made,  by  computation,  to  the  cultivated  land* 
and  to  the  population  have  been  4,129,777  acres  and  12,669,107  inhabit- 
ants ;  so  that  for  every  100  individuals  added  to  the  population  only 
32  acres  have  been  brought  into  cultivation,  being  about  a  rood  and  a 
quarter  for  each  person.  If  the  whole  breadth  of  land  now  in  cultiva- 
tion were  divided  equally  among  the  population,  one  acre  and  two-thirds 
of  an  acre  would  fall  to  the  lot  of  each.  It  thus  appears  that  10,000 
acres  of  arable  and  pasture  land,  v/hich,  as  cultivated  in  1801,  sup- 
ported 3810  inhabitants,  do,  at  the  present  day,  owing  to  the  improve- 
ments brought  about  iu  the  art  of  agriculture,  support  5997  inha- 
bitants. 

If  the  division  of  the  cultivated  land  into  arable  and  pasture,  made 
by  Mr.  Couling,  be  correct,  the  number  of  statute  acres  at  present 
luider  cultivation  by  the  spade  and  plough  in  the  United  Kingdom  is 
about  two-fifths  of  the  whole  cultivated  land  of  the  country.  Supposing 
the  same  j)r»)portion  to  be  preserved,  if  the  whole  of  the  improvable  land 
now  uncultivated  were  brought  to  its  full  use,  an  addition  would  be 
made  to  the  arable  and  garden  land  of  6,000,000  of  acres ;  and  if  the 
scale  of  productiveness  were  continued  at  its  present  amount,  this  quan- 
tity would  furnish  food  for  8,726,000  people — a  number  which,  at  its 
present  rate  of  progression,  will  have  been  added  to  our  population  in 
less  than  a  quarter  of  a  century  from  the  present  time.  It  is  certain, 
however,  that  the  land  which  has  hitherto  lain  neglected  is  not  of  the 
average  fertility,  and,  in  the  case  assumed,  of  no  further  improvements 
being  brought  about  in  the  processes  of  agriculture,  the  limit  of  pro- 
duction would  be  overtaken  by  the  population  at  an  earlier  ])eriod  than 
that  now  mentioned.  This,  however,  is  a  state  of  things  by  no  means 
likely  to  arrive.  On  the  contrary,  there  is  every  reason  to  hope  and  to 
expect  that  the  improvements  which  of  late  years  have  been  begun  in 
the  processes  of  husbandry,  are  very  far  from  having  reached  their 
\itmost  limit.  Even  in  England,  where  the  advances  hitherto  made 
have  been  so  great  as  to  place  our  farmers  before  those  of  many  other 
countries,  much  may  yet  be  done  by  introducing  the  profitable  practices 
of  some  districts  into  the  remaining  parts  of  the  kingdom,  and  by  the 
consolidation  of  small  holdings  into  farms  of  greater  size,  in  the  hands 

*  This  calculation  proceeds  upon  the  supposition  that  not  any  of  the  land  inclosed  waa 
previously  cultivated ;  which,  however,  is  far  from  having  been  the  case. 

M 


162  PROGKESS  OF  THE  NATION.  [sec.  u. 

of  men  possessed  of  both  capital  and  intelligence,  as  well  as  by  the  pro- 
bable discovery  of  still  sujierior  metliods  of  cultnre,  through  the  labours 
of  experimentalists  and  the  researches  of  men  of  science.  It  has  been 
affirmed,  that  in  Wales  the  land  does  not  produce  half  of  what  it  is 
capable  of  producing  ;  and  that  if  all  England  were  as  well  cultivated 
as  Northumberland  and  Lincoln,  it  would  produce  more  than  double 
the  quantity  that  is  now  obtained.  We  have  seen  that  out  of  :236,343 
males,  20  years  of  age,  who  were  occupiers  of  land  in  England  in  1831, 
the  large  proportion  of  94,883  employed  no  labourers,  while  the 
remaining  number  of  occupiers  (141,460)  employed  among  them  only 
744,407,  being  in  the  proportion  of  Sj-  labourers  to  each  farmer.  This 
shows  that  a  considerable  number  of  their  holdings  must  have  been  of 
small  extent,  and  that  consequently  the  amount  of  capital  and  know- 
ledge requisite  for  the  full  development  of  the  powers  of  the  soil  was 
not  applied  to  it.  The  proportion  of  labourers  required  for  the  efficient 
cultivation  of  a  given  extent  of  land  must  of  course  vary  with  local  cir- 
cumstances, such  as  the  natvu'o  of  the  soil  and  the  uses  to  which  it  is 
applied.  It  has  been  stated  by  a  good  practical  authority,  that  "  three 
labourers  to  100  acres  are  a  full  complement,"  but  that  many  persons 
whose  means  are  circumscribed  do  not  employ  more  than  two  labourers 
for  tilling  that  extent  of  land. 

In  Scotland,  where,  within  the  experience  of  the  present  generation, 
the  most  marked  improvement  has  been  effected  in  agriculture,  the  evil 
just  pointed  out  still  exists  in  a  much  greater  degree  than  in  England. 
In  1831,  of  79,853  males,  20  years  of  age,  occupiers  of  the  soil, 
53,966,  being  more  than  two-thirds  of  the  number,  did  not  employ 
labourers,  while  the  25,887  who  did  not  depend  wholly  upon  the  labour 
of  their  own  hands  for  tilling  the  land,  gave  employment  to  no  more 
than  87,292  labourers,  being  only  31  labourers  to  each  holding.  In 
Ireland,  the  system  of  parcelling  out  the  land  to  numerous  cottiers, 
whose  scanty  means  do  not  enable  them  to  grow  more  than  suffices  for 
their  own  consumption,  while  the  stipulated  rent  is  frequently  ])aid  by 
liibour  and  not  in  money,  prevails  to  an  extent  which  renders  it  the  most 
fruitful  source  of  misery  to  that  country.  Out  of  108,608  males,  20 
years  old,  occupying  land  in  Ireland  in  1831,  more  than  three-fourths 
(87,819)  came  under  the  class  just  described.  On  the  other  hand, 
those  few  farmers  who  em})loy  the  labour  of  others  do  so  to  a  gr'eater 
extent  on  the  average,  than  English  farmers,  the  proportion  being 
7y  labourers  to  each  farmer. 

The  distinction  drawn  in  1831  between  the  occupiers  of  land  who  do 
and  those  who  do  not  employ  labourers  was  not  made  at  either  previous 
census,  so  that  we  have  no  means  of  judging  by  su(?h  an  indication  of 
the  progress  of  agricultural  improvement ;  but  it  is  well  known  that  the 
tendency  of  late  years — at  least  in  England  and  Scotland — has  been  to 


cuAP.  I.]  AGllICULTUKE.  1G3 

enlarge  the  size  of  farms,  and  to  place  tliem  under  tlic  charge  of  men 
possessed  of  capital,  who  have  enjoyed  a  degree  of  instruction  heyond 
that  which  fell  to  the  lot  of  farmers  in  those  days,  the  departure  of 
which  is  deplored  by  the  poet, 

"When  every  rood  of  ground  maintain'd  its  man." 

By  the  employment  of  means  such  as  have  here  been  indicated,  there 
can  be  no  doubt  that  for  a  much  longer  period  than  twenty  years,  the 
soil  of  these  islands  will  continue  to  yield  the  largest  proportion  of  the 
food  of  the  inhabitants ;  and  when  at  length  the  increase  of  population 
shall  have  passed  the  utmost  limit  of  production,  there  can  be  no  reason 
to  doubt  that  we  shall  still  obtain,  in  full  sufficiency,  the  food  that  we 
shall  require.  The  limited  extent  of  cultivable  land  necessarily  limits 
also  the  number  of  labourers  employed  upon  it ;  the  additional  hands 
will  consequently  have  to  betake  themselves  to  the  manufacture  of 
articles  desired  in  other  countries,  where  a  different  order  of  things  will 
exist,  and  those  hands,  while  there  exists  no  obstacle  to  the  admission 
of  foreign  grain,  will  be  as  effectually  engaged  in  producing  food,  when 
employed  in  the  cotton-mills  of  Lancashire,  and  the  iron-mines  of 
Yorkshire  and  Staffbrdsliire,  as  if  their  industry  were  applied  directly  to 
the  cultivation  of  the  soil. 

It  has  been  seen  that  the  meadows  and  pastures  of  the  United  King- 
dom amount  to  27,000,000  of  acres,  or  about  three-fifths  of  the  land 
hitherto  brought  under  cultivation.  The  whole  of  this  meadow  and 
pasture  land,  with  the  exception  of  that  part  required  for  the  production 
of  fodder  and  pasturage  for  horses  used  for  pleasure  or  for  trading 
])urposes,  is  used  equally  with  arable  laud  for  the  production  of  human 
food. 

A  very  general  opinion  now  prevails,  that  by  means  of  the  extension 
of  railroads  throughout  the  country,  a  large  proportion  of  the  pasture 
land  here  spoken  of,  as  well  as  that  important  portion  of  the  arable  land 
which  at  present  is  employed  in  raising  grain  for  horses,  will  be  rendered 
more  directly  available  than  at  present  for  the  service  of  man.  It  is 
said  that  the  successful  establishment  of  the  railroad  between  Liverpool 
and  Manchester,  a  distance  of  little  more  than  30  miles,  has  had  the 
effect  of  dismissing  from  that  particular  emplo}Tnent  1000  horses.  Tlie 
great  extent  and  peculiar  nature  of  the  traffic  between  the  two  towns 
here  mentioned  will  not  justify  the  expectation  of  a  similar  saving 
through  the  establishment,  in  other  quarters,  of  railroads  of  the  like 
extent ;  but  the  saving  fi-ora  this  source  might  certainly  be  productive 
of  some  effect,  in  placing  at  a  somewhat  greater  distance,  than  would 
otherwise  be  the  case,  the  time  when  the  United  Kingdom  will  cease  to 
produce  the  principal  part  of  the  food  of  its  inhabitants.  It  is  not 
necessary  for  us,  in  order  to  convince  ourselves  of  this,  to  adopt  any  of 

m2 


1G4  PEOGRESS  OF  THE  NATION.  [sec.  ii. 

the  extravagant  calculations  wliioh  have  been  offered  upon  the  subject. 
The  tendency  towards  exaggeration  in  the  estimate  of  prospective  ad- 
vantage is  at  all  times  great,  and  it  appears  to  amount  almost  to  a 
moral  necessity  that  projectors  should  deceive  themselves  upon  such 
p.i.its.  Against  the  effects  of  such  exaggerations  proceeding  from 
persons  of  that  class,  the  public  mind  is  usually  pretty  well  preserved, 
but  the  mischief  becomes  of  a  more  serious  nature  when  extravagant 
estimates  are  advanced  and  supported  by  such  a  body  as  a  Committee 
of  the  House  of  Commons,  the  members  of  which  are  called  upon  to 
form  a  calm  and  reasonable  judgment  on  the  testimony  brought  before 
them  by  interested  or  over-sanguine  parties,  while  their  knowledge  of 
the  subjects  submitted  to  their  investigation  ought  to  be  such  as  should 
at  least  preserve  them  from  the  adoption  and  advocacy  of  any  very 
glaring  absurdities.  In  a  Report  presented  by  a  Committee  appointed 
to  inquire  into  the  subject  of  railroads,  it  is  gravely  stated  that  the 
effect  of  constructing  railroads  between  the  principal  towns  of  the 
kingdom,  would  be  to  render  unnecessary  no  fewer  than  a  million  of 
horses.*  A  very  slight  examination  of  the  documents  bearing  upon 
this  question,  within  their  reach,  would  have  sufficed  to  ])reserve  the 
Committee  from  hazarding  so  extravagant  an  assertion.  The  extent  of 
turnpike-roads  in  Great  Britain,  as  they  existed  in  1829,  amounted  to 
24,541  miles ;  and  if  the  whole  of  these  roads  were  converted  into 
railroads,  and  the  traffic  upon  every  part  of  them  were  fully  equal  to 
that  already  mentioned  as  the  estimate  for  the  Liverpool  and  Man- 
chester line,  the  number  of  horses  that  would  by  such  means  be  ren- 
dered superfluous  would  amount  to  only  785,312.  It  would  be  greatly 
beyond  the  mark  to  estimate  the  saving  at  one-fourth  of  this  number,  or 
less  than  one-fifth  of  the  million  stated  in  the  Committee's  Report. 
But  much  more  direct  means  of  testing  the  accuracy  of  the  Committee's 
estimate  were  at  hand,  furnished  by  detailed  returns  made  from  the  Tax 
Office  of  the  number  of  horses  in  respect  of  which  assessed  duties  were 
charged  in  1832,  and  which,  including  horses  used  in  trade  and  that 
description  of  farm  horses  not  wholly  used  in  husbandry,  upon  which 
the  duty  is  still  retained  (124,076),  amounted  to  no  more  than  340,678. 
However  much  the  railroad  system  may  be  extended,  it  is  certain  that  a 
very  large  proportion  of  these  animals  must  still  be  kept.  Nearly  all 
those  employed  for  pleasure,  and  for  the  internal  trade  of  towns,  as' well 
as  the  whole  of  those  used  on  farms,  would  be  continued. 

A  further  examination  of  the  returns  made  by  the  Tax  Office  proves 
that  the  anticipation  of  the  Committee  of  the  House  of  Commons  has 


*  In  many  cases  -where  railroads  have  been  opened,  it  has  been  frfund  that,  although  the 
use  of  horses  has  been  discontinued  upon  the  direct  line,  the  increased  traffic  has  made  it 
necessary  to  employ,  for  bringing  travellers  to  the  railroad,  at  least  as  great  a  number  of 
horses  as  had  been  displaced. 


CK.U\    I.] 


AGRICULTUnE. 


165 


not  hitherto  bson  realized-  In  1823,  the  first  year  following  the  repeal 
of  the  duty  on  horses  used  in  husbandry,  and  when  the  railway  system 
had  no  existence,  the  number  of  all  kinds  of  horses  chargeable  with 
duty  was  305,275,  whereas  in  the  latest  year  to  which  the  statements 
reach  (1848-9)  the  number  chargeable  w^as  317,319,  a  result  which 
completely  refutes  the  notion  of  any  serious  diminution  in  the  number  of 
horses  employed  by  reason  of  the  opening  of  railroads. 

There  are  not  any  documents  from  which  the  number  of  horses  kept 
in  this  country  can  be  ascertained.  The  elements  fur  such  a  comjjuta- 
tion,  which  never  were  very  complete,  have  of  late  years  been  rendered 
much  less  so,  through  the  repeal  of  the  taxes  levied  upon  horses  used 
for  various  employments.  These  taxes  having  existed  up  to  1822,  a 
statement  is  here  given  of  the  number  of  each  description  of  horses 
charged  to  the  duty  in  1821,  with  the  numbers  for  some  recent  years, 
of  horses  in  respect  of  which  the  tax  is  continued  : — 


Year  ending  5th  April 


Horses  used  for  riding  or  drawing  carriages  : — 

By  persons  keeping  1  horse 

n  "^       » 

»i  3     „ 

»  *     j> 

n  5      „ 

6     „ 

„  7  &  8 

>>  "      » 

„  10  to  12 

„  13  to  16    

17     „ 

>»  18     „ 

>»  ^•'      )) 

„  20  and  upwards .... 

Total  number  charged  progressively     .      .     .      . 

Horses  let  to  hire 

Race  Horses 

Horses  not  exceeding  13  hands  high     .      .      .      . 

Horses  ridden  by  farming  bailiffs 

Horses  ridden  by  butchers 

Horses  not  whollj'  used  in  husbandry    .      .      .      . 
Horses  used  in  trade 

Horses  used  in  husbandry,  charged  at  various 
rates  of  duty,  according  to  the  rent  of  the  farm, 
&c.,  and  which  have  been  repealed  in  and  since 
1822 

Total  number  upon  which  duties  were  charged    . 


1S21 

1844 

1S48 

18^19 

No. 

No. 

No. 

No. 

117,017 

83,471 

78,335 

76,721 

28,086 

.33,680 

34,719 

33,825 

11,004 

11,421 

12,242 

11,822 

6,144 

5,971 

6,496 

6,332 

3,410 

2,958 

3,109 

2,982 

2,394 

2,120 

2,280 

2,234 

2,532 

2,234 

2,295 

2,035 

648 

569 

730 

799 

1,635 

1,186 

1,178 

1,136 

541 

757 

754 

727 

102 

100 

102 

92 

54 

72 

144 

147 

95 

1 1 

115 

95 

1,128 

1,230 

1,352 

1,377 

174,790 

145,846 

143,851 

140,374 

1,616 

1,859 

1,777 

1,819 

579 

1,038 

1,530 

1,476 

11,536 

21,736 

22,008 

21,536 

1,010 

40 

31 

37 

3,631 

3,281 

4,755 

4,261 

135,542 

,  , 

•• 

129,709 

147,401 

147,766 

323,704   303,569   321,353   317,319 


832,726 


exempt    exempt  ,  exempt 


1,161,430  |303,569    321,353    317, 31y 


It  appears  from  this  table,  that  of  the  horses  liable  to  duty  there  are 
not  more  than  180,000,  out  of  which  the  saving  contemplated  by  the 
Committee  can  be  made.  But  the  returns  from  the  Tax  Office  do  not 
include  horses  used  in  posting,  in  stage-coaches,  mail-coaches,  or 
hackney-coaches.     The  duties  paid  by  the  owners  of  these  animals  are 


166  PROGRESS  OF  THE  NATION.  [si^c.  ii. 

collected  by  a  difFerent  department  of  the  revenue,  and  tlie  duty  being 
calculated  'upon  the  amount  of  work  performed,  no  return  is  made  of 
the  number  of  horses  kept  by  each  employer.  In  Middleton's  "  Survey 
of  Middlesex,"  the  number  of  such  horses  was  estimated  at  100,000  for 
the  whole  of  England  and  Wales  ;  Mr.  M'Culloch  states,  as  the  result 
of  more  recent  inquiries,  that  "  if  the  number  of  such  horses  m  Great 
Britain  is  now  estimated  at  125,000,  we  shall  be  decidedly  beyond  the 
mark." 


CHAP.  II.]  MANUFACTURES.  1G7 


CILVPTER  11. 

MANUFACTURES. 

Woven,  &c.  Fabrics. 

Manufacturing  skill  of  England — Its  political  consequences  during  the  last  war — Intro- 
duction of  woollen  manufacture — Prohibition  to  export  English  wool — Removal  ot 
prohibition,  and  its  consequences — Woollen  goods  exported — Number  of  Woollen 
Factories — Foreign  wool  imported — Production  of  wool  in  England  in  1800,  182S,  and 
1844 — Stuflf  trade — Cotton  manufacture — Cotton  imported  since  1800— Cotton  goods 
exported  since  1820— Decreasing  cost  of  yarn — Advantages  of  power-looms — Cost 
of  weaving — Number  of  power-looms — Hand-loom  weavers — Labour  employed  in 
spinning  and  weaving  factories — Diminished  proportion  required  to  produce  equal 
etfects— Increased  proportion  of  power-weaving- Progressive  extension  of  cotton 
factories— Power-looms  in  various  manufactures — Cotton-printing — Effect  of  removing 
duty  on  printed  goods — Hosiery — Bobbin-net — Extent  and  value  of  cotton  manufactures 
in  1833— Silk  manufacture— Its  progress  during  and  since  prohibition— Export  of  silk 
goods — Distribution  of  silk  factories,  and  number  of  persons  employed  in  1835  and 
183t — Effect  of  high  duties  in  promoting  smuggling— Linen  manufacture  — Quantities 
exported — Flax-spinning — Prices  of  yarn  and  canvas  at  different  periods— Wages  — 
Improvements  in  spinning— Importations  of  flax — Distribution  of  flax  factories,  and 
number  of  persons  employed  in  1835  and  1839. 

England  has  long  stood  pre-eminent  for  the  skill  of  its  inhabitants  in 
manufactures  of  various  kinds.  But  for  that  skill,  and  the  extraordinaiy 
degree  of  development  which  it  has  experienced  during  the  past  half 
century,  it  is  not  possible  to  conceive  that  this  country  could  have 
made  the  financial  efforts  which  enabled  us  to  carry  on  the  long,  and, 
beyond  all  precedent,  the  expensive  war  of  the  French  Revolution.  It 
has  been  a  common  assertion  with  a  very  powerful  class  in  the  com- 
munity, that  the  extraordinary  efforts  here  alluded  to  were  principally, 
if  not  entirely,  made  at  the  expense  of  the  proprietors  of  the  soil. 
This  position  can  only  be  rendered  tenable  by  showing  that  the  condi- 
tion of  those  proprietors  during  the  war  was  one  of  privation  and 
sacrifice,  whereas  it  is  notorious  that  the  direct  contrary  of  such  a  state 
of  things  was  experienced  ;  that  through  the  enhanced  prices  of  all 
kinds  of  agricultural  produce,  rents  were  more  than  doubled  ;  and 
that  the  landlords  were  then  enabled  to  assume  a  scale  of  expensive 
living,  to  continue  which,  after  the  return  of  a  more  natural  order  of 
things,  they  had  recourse  to  restrictions  upon  the  importation  of  food, 
which  were  long  felt  as  an  injury  by  all  other  classes,  although  tliey 


168  PROGRESS  OF  THE  NATION.  [sec.  ii. 

may  not  have  been  equally  successful  in  perpetuating  high  rents  and 
prices. 

It  is  to  the  spinning-jenny  and  the  steam-engine  that  we  must  look 
as  having  been  the  true  moving  powers  of  our  fleets  and  aruiies,  and 
the  chief  support  also  of  a  long-continued  agricultural  prosperity. 
The  views  developed  in  the  preceding  pages  go  far  to  show  that  it  was 
owing  to  the  effects  of  these  powerful  agents  in  providing  employment 
for  a  large  proportion  of  our  rapidly  increasing  population,  that  the 
system  under  which  the  introduction  of  human  food  into  this  country  was 
regulated  or  restricted,  was  capable  of  producing,  in  any  degree,  that 
higher  scale  of  prices,  as  compared  with  other  countries,  which  the 
agi'iculturists  of  Great  Britain  received  for  their  produce.  Restore  to 
their  former  proportions  the  numbers  of  the  people  who  live  by  agri- 
cultural employments,  and  of  those  who  live  by  manufacturing  industry, 
while  at  the  same  time  you  retain  the  increased  productiveness  of  the 
soil,  and  it  would  not  be  long  before  the  prices  of  farming  produce 
would  fall  at  least  to  the  level  of  the  prices  of  surrounding  countries. 
So  long  as  the  disproportion  of  the  two  classes  is  maintained  at  its 
present  rate,  it  is  probable  that  England  will  continue  a  non-exporting 
country  in  regard  to  provisions,  and  that  the  prices  of  food,  while  even 
the  utmost  freedom  of  importation  is  allowed,  will  always  be  greater  here 
than  in  neighbom-ing  kingdoms,  by  all  the  cost  of  transport,  enhanced 
by  the  ordinary  profits  of  trade. 

Tlie  manufacture  of  woollen  goods  is  said  to  have  been  introduced 
into  this  country  by  the  Romans ;  but  the  tradition  is  not  confirmed  by 
any  certain  records.  There  is  no  doubt  that  broad-cloths  were  made 
in  England  as  early  as  the  close  of  the  twelfth  or  besiinninfif  of  the 
thirteenth  century  ;  but  the  Flemings  were  at  that  time  far  more 
advanced  in  the  art  than  our  countrymen,  and  a  considerable  part  of 
the  cloths  then,  and  for  a  long  time  afterwards,  worn  in  this  country, 
were  made  in  Flanders  from  wool,  the  produce  of  English  flocks. 

From  a  very  early  period  the  woollen    manufacture   has  been    an 

object  of  the  especial  protection  of  the  English  government.     Originally, 

indeed,   the  freest    exportation   of  British  wool   was  allowed ;  but   in 

1660  it  was  strictly  prohibited,  and  this  law  remained  in  force  until 

1825.     The  prohibition  w^as  grounded  upon  the  belief  that  the  long- 

i  staple  or  combing  wool  of  England  is  superior  for  some  manufacturing 

purposes  to  that  of  any  other  country,  and  that  by  keeping  the   raw 

(■/material  at  home  we  should  secure  to  ourselves  the  exclusive  manu- 

''  facture  of  certain  fabrics.     The  mistaken  policy  of  this  selfish  system  has 

been  rendered  fully  apparent  since  its  abandonment.     No  sooner  were 

the  French  manufacturers  able  to  procure  the  combing  wool  of  England, 

than  they  set  their  ingenuity  at  work  to  profit  fully  from  the  concession, 

and  produced  new  stuffs  from  English  wool  superior  to  any  that  we  had 


CHAP.  II  ]  MANUFACTURES,  16'9 

ever  ])rodiiced  in  this  country.  Thus  stimulated,  our  manufacturers 
also  aj)plied  themselves  to  the  discovery  of  superior  processes,  and  in  the 
course  of  a  very  few  years  have  produced  merinos  and  other  stuffs 
in  every  resi)ect  equal  to  the  fabrics  of  France.  By  this  means  our 
stuff  manufacture  has  received  an  important  impetus.  In  tiie  five  years 
from  1820  to  1824,  while  the  prohibition  to  export  English  wool  wa.^ 
still  in  force,  the  average  annual  shipments  of  that  description  of  woollei. 
goods  amounted  to  1.064,441  pieces.  In  the  five  years  following,  during 
which  the  removal  of  the  restriction  occurred,  the  average  annual  export 
of  such  goods  amounted  to  1,228,239  pieces  ;  and  in  the  uext  quin- 
quennial period,  from  1830  to  1834,  the  average  rose  to  1,505,993 
pieces  ;  between  1835  and  1839,  the  average  export  was  1,429,057 
pieces  ;  and  during  the  five  years,  1840  to  1844,  it  reached  2,128,212 
pieces,  being  exactly  double  the  quantity  exported  during  the  last  five 
years  in  which  the  prohibition  existed :  thus  furnishing  a  satisfactory 
answer  to  those  persons  who  predicted,  as  a  necessary  consequence  of  a 
departure  from  a  restrictive  policy,  the  absolute  ruin  of  that  branch  of 
our  export  trade.  In  1337,  with  the  intention  of  insuring  to  the  manu- 
fticturers  the  full  advantage  of  the  home  market,  an  Act  was  passed 
forbidding  any  one  to  wear  cloths  of  foreign  manufacture  ;  but  this  law, 
which  was  never  very  strictly  enforced,  was  soon  after  repealed. 

The  value  of  woollen  goods  exported  from  England  in  1700  was 
about  3,000,000/.  At  the  beginning  of  the  present  century,  not- 
withstanding the  great  extent  to  which  articles  made  of  cotton  had  in 
the  intermediate  time  been  substituted  for  woollen  clothing,  the  value 
of  our  exports  of  woollen  goods  amoimted  to  about  double  that  sum. 
We  have  not  any  record  of  the  quantity  of  goods  exported  at  these 
periods,  but  as  the  price  of  wool  at  the  end  of  the  last  century  was 
more  than  double  what  it  had  been  at  the  beginning,  it  is  probable  that 
the  number  of  yards  and  pieces  sent  away  was  not  much,  if  at  all, 
greater  at  the  later  than  it  had  been  at  the  earlier  period.  It  will  be 
seen  from  the  following  table  that  the  value  of  our  exports  of  woollens 
has  not  become  greater  since  the  beginning  of  this  century ;  but  owing 
to  the  diminished  price  of  wool,  and  the  great  economy  that  has  been 
attained  in  various  manufacturing  processes,  the  quantities  have,  on  the 
whole,  considerably  increased.  Tiie  largest  export,  in  point  of  value, 
that  ever  took  place,  occurred  in  the  year  1815,  when,  owing  to  the 
interruption  of  intercourse  with  the  United  States  of  America  in  the 
two  preceding  years,  the  quantities  sent  to  that  country  were  unusually 
great.  The  number  of  pieces  exported  to  all  parts  in  that  year  was 
1,482,643,  the  number  of  yards  12,173,515,  and  the  total  value 
9,381,426/.,  of  which  4,378,195/.  was  sent  to  the  United  States. 


170 


PROGnESS  OF  TnE  NATION". 


[sec.   II. 


ill 

S  »  "S  t^  s  oo  <i~  1^  -^  .—  X  ~  c^  —  c^  «  r?  X  ■>)  c  —  «  r^  C-.  i.*;  c?  «  o  3^1  '^  X  J>i  X  X  ~; 
22  --s  M  --o  K  c?  -o  ^  X  u~  -f.  r^  -f  -.t  O  -.;:  —  r-  r?  I-  —  o  1-  -o  -t  ..-^  1-  ^  c?  K  —  =  w  ri  r4 
"^t^'-t^—  —  X  —  i.TCi;rx-.n-s::oc-i'-fx>--t«r-.  c«x-j;cr'?ix  —  —  oxi- 

Vtf  --  22  r:  C  -»■  ;r  -M  X  -^  re  .-  v;  .--:  r-  r-  X  r)  •.*  -f  ;::  C  — .  u-Mn  —  t^  X  ic  c  -*  c?  I,-:  ti  er;  5^ 

c  t-  t-  «  ir;  o  5C  o  i--;  ti  tr  -t  I.':  uT  Tt  -t  o  u't  !£  i.-  tj  t^  Tf  vn  «c  m  ur:  i.-  ic  X  t^  ;c  «r  ir:  1^ 

Sundries 
nitod. 

^nuMummmm^MmmmMimmu 

iiii^^igli§li=liSSili|S5S|iii5|||gsi 

■ili 

IIS  i  ft  1  s  s  ^i  g  i  i  i  1  i  1  i  i  g  B  i  ^^ 

„      „„               =N«o;*-C5:^gj:-;rj 

B  tc 

OS  '2 

as 

igiiii^liiisgisiiii^^iiiiii^si^sSig 

3giiyigiSiii52s5ii§iipgigiggHiiPi 

II 

c  S 

r?  ^  :n  ?i  —  rt  —  r-  jg  —  ?)  —  ^  3^  ^  !>)  c>  —  r?  M  r:  ■*  -M  -M  cc  71  ?)  —  --  «  (M  !M  rt  -*  ui 

£ 
c 

r^'rrr^^'rts^■~«ri^^"cc';N'<N"3>^c«^--'^-"^'■I>^<^^^'~^'~s>^^'--"-'-'-^ 

IjJ 

Ji^liiiiHiiiiii^lSigiiillGiliSiSiii 

mumBmiMM^^mMMm^zzmumn^i 

£SSss2U:;5=:^-a-5g5  =  ;;-s-i;^g:;?lSV:?;^?5y,g255; 

iiiiiiiiiiiiiiii5iigiiiiis?!g5S5eigii 

^55 

iiiiiSiii^iiiiiiigigliisiSilimgg=iS 

o2 
li 

ii?ig£imigiiii^i§ilSisgligBSlisi^^i 

^i5§iiigipiigiiiii§geiiii^2^^^i^iii 

»! 

^^^iiliiiiMISiiiiiiiiiiiiSiiiiiSli 

CHAP.    II.] 


MANUFACTURES. 


171 


An  Account  of  tlte  Quantities  of  British  Sheep  and  Lambs'   Wool  an/1  Woollen  I'am   Exported 
from  (lie  Unlteil  Kint/dom  in  the   Year  18+'J  ;  spi-rifijinrj  the  Countries  to  which  tliey  were  sent. 


COUNTRIES  TO  WHICH  EXPORTED. 


Uriti-ih  Sheep 

and 
Lambs'  Wool. 

Worried  Y.rn 

(including;  Vnrn  of 

Wool  or  «"or.t>-d, 

mixed  wilh  other 

Malcrii.U). 

lbs. 

lbs. 

"248 

1,125,032 
10,002 

3,317 

17,328 

y65 

17.136 

5,549,621 

610.486 

2,305,513 

2,066,131 

2,012,240 

8,482,812 

304,959 

5,903 

a3,507 

5,600 

3,488 
157,200 

205 

627 

500 

170 

50 

20 

3.803 

56 

2,103 

60 

21,130 

300 

566 

17,240 

168,485 
6,186 

56 

40,447 

11,2W,472 

11,773,020 

Russia 

Sweden 

Korway 

Denmark 

Prussia 

(ierniany 

Holland 

Helj^ium 

Trance      

Tortugal,  Azores,  and  Madeira 

Spain  and  the  Canaries 

Gibraltar 

Italy 

Mafta 

Tiiricey 

AVestern  Coast  of  Africa 

Cape  of  Good  Hope 

East  Indies  and  China 

British  Settlements  in  Australia       .... 
British  Colonies  in  North  America  .... 

British  "West  Indies 

foreign  West  Indies 

United  States  of  America 

Mexico  and  States  of  South  America     . 

The  Channel  Islands 

Total 


An  Account  of  the  Quantities  of  Wool  of  tlte  Alpaca  and  Llama  Tribe  Imported  into  the  United 
Kingdom  in  the  Year  1849  ;  and  oftlie  Quantities  He-exported  during  tlie  same  Period,  and  the 
Countries  to  which  they  were  sent. 

lbs. 
Quantities  Imported  into  the  United  Kingdom    .     .       1,655,300 

Quantities  Re-exported  : —  lbs.       

To  Belgium 85,898 

„  France 855 

„  Sweden 33,139 

„  Ilanse  Towns 5.890 

— 126.082 


An  Account  of  the  Quantity  of  Mohair  (or  Goats'  Wool)  Imported  into  the  United  Kingdom  in 
tlte  Year  1849 :  and  of  the  Quantity  Re-exported  during  the  same  period,  and  the  Countries  to 
which  tlwy  were  sent. 

lbs. 
Quaatities  Imported  into  the  United  Kingdom      .     .     2,536,031 

Quantities  Re-exported : —  lbs.        

To  Russia ,  670 

„  Holland 21,340 

„  Belgium 31,679 

„  France 25,976 

„  United  States  of  America   ....     50,480 

130,145 


172 


PROGRESS  OF  THE  NATION. 


Statement  cf  the  Number  of  h'oollen  and  Worsted  Factories  in  operation  in  d^ffei 
United  Kim/dom,  with  tlie  Engines  and  their  Horse  Power,  and  tie  Num. 
Persons  employed  therein,  in  the  Year  IS.'J'J. 


[sec.  n. 

rre^it  Parts  of  the 
\ber  and  Ayes  of 


1 

i:ii^land. 

Wales. 

Scotland. 

Ireland. 

Uniud  K 

inj^Jora. 

AVoollen  Mills— 

At  work 

Empty     .... 
"Worsted  Mills— 

At  work       .     .     . 

Empty    .... 

1,029 
47 

416 
2 

150 
11 

112 
5 

31 

7 

1,322 
70 

416 
2 

E.          H.  P. 

E.    1 

4.P. 

E. 

H.  P. 

E. 

H.P. 

E.       1 

H.  P. 

Steam  Power — 

AVoollen  .... 

"VN'orsted 
^Vate^  Power— 

AVoollen  .... 

"Worsted       .     .     . 

558 
284 

778 
115 

10,827 
5,863 

6,884 
1,313 

4 
159    - 

26 
187 

37 
116 

624  ! 
1,198 

5 
39 

58         604 
284 

323     1,092 
115 

16,535 
5,863 

9,092 
1,313 

Persoxs. 

M.            F.         M.  1 

F. 

M.    1     F.        M. 

F.   1      M.      1        F. 

"Woollen- 

Under  10  years     . 

10  to  11       „ 

11  „  12      „ 

12  „  13      „        . 

13  „  14      „ 

14  „  15      „ 

15  „  16      „ 

16  „  17       „ 

17  „  18      „ 

18  „  19      „ 

19  „  20       „ 

20  „  21       „ 

21  and  upwards  . 

809 

810 

739 

796 

3,575 

2,407 

1,640 

1,223 

909 

931 

763 

781 

13,752 

619 

624 

563 

656 

2,720 

1,655 

1,329 

1,076 

7j4 

839 

673 

543 

5,814 

36 
53 
66 
64 

179 
64 
58 
29 
26 
22 
13 
16 

340 

17 

40 

20 

43 

115 

56 

32 

19 

9 

15 

4 

6 

101 

24 

32 

85 

43 

383 

170 

121 

67 

55 

67 

54 

45 

1,452 

13 
32 
24 
50 
522 
284 
211 
169 
168 
256 
135 
103 
561 

4 

26 

27 
19 
18 
16 
19 
19 
16 
456 

2 

36 

58 
62 
48 
51 
47 
59 
40 
207 

873 

895 

830 

903 

4,163 

2,668 

1,838 

1,337 

1,006 

1,039 

849 

8,j8 

16,000 

649 

696 

609 

749 

3,393 

2,053 

1,634 

1,312 

1,022 

1,157 

871 

692 

6,683 

Total     .     . 

29,135 

17,905 

956 

477 

2,548 

2,528 

620 

610 

',33,259 

21,520 

"^'orsted — 

Under  10  years     . 

10  to  11       „ 

11  „  12      „         . 

12  „  13      „ 

13  „  14      „         . 

14  „  15       „ 

15  „  16       „ 

16  „  17       „         . 

17  „  18      „         . 

18  „  19      „         . 

19  „  20      „        . 

20  „  21       „ 

21  and  upwards  . 

321 

485 

503 

607 

1,465 

1,030 

647 

380 

231 

167 

139 

141 

2,577 

417 

595 

670 

936 

2,575 

2,166 

2,023 

1,741 

1,624 

1,750 

1,364 

1,224 

5,854 

•• 

•• 

321 

485 

503 

607 

1,465 

1,030 

647 

380 

231 

167 

139 

141 

2,577 

417 

595 

670 

936 

2,575 

2,166 

2,023 

1,741 

1,624 

1,750 

1,364 

1,224 

5,854 

Total     .     . 

8,693    22,939 

.. 

..      ..  1  8,693 

22,939 

Total   of   persons    em-' 
ployed    in    "Woollen 
and    "Worsted    Fac- 
tories   , 

.137,828    40,844 
78,672 

1 
1 
956 

477 

2,548 

2,528 

620   610 

"17230^^ 

41,952 

44,459 

1,433 

5, 

076 

8t 

,411 

It  is  not  possible  to  measure  the  progress  of  this  branch  of  manu- 
facture by  means  of  the  export  trade,  which  is  of  far  less  magnitude 


CHAP.  11.]  MANUFACTURES.  173 

than  the  homo  demand  ;  nor  can  we  arrive  at  any  precise  estimate 
from  the  quantities  of  the  raw  material  which  have  been  procured  from 
abroad,  since  foreign  wool  has  always  formed,  an  uncertain  proportion  of 
the  material  used  for  our  cloth  manufactures.  Neither  does  the  growth 
of  the  population  of  particular  towns  and  districts  always  furnish  a 
certain  criterion  for  forming  a  judgment  upon  the  subject,  because  the 
manufacture,  which  was  at  first  spread  about  in  a  great  many  different 
parts  of  the  kingdom,  has  at  different  times  diminished  or  ceased  in 
some  places,  while  it  has  increased  in  others,  and  in  general  the  business 
has  been  carried  on  in  districts  where  other  branches  of  industry  have 
been  simultaneously  prosecuted;  so  that  it  is  not  possible  always  to 
determine  the  degree  in  which  the  increase  of  manufacturing  hands  is 
occasioned  by  one  particular  l)ranch  or  by  anotlier. 

The  total  number  of  woollen  factories  in  1^39,  and  of  the  persons 
employed  in  them,  who  form,  however,  only  a  small  part  of  those 
engaged  in  the  woollen  manufacture,  are  shown  in  the  preceding  table, 
compiled  from  returns  made  by  the  Inspectors  of  Factories. 

The  total  number  of  woollen  and  worsted  factories  at  work  in  1835 
was  returned  by  the  Inspectors  as  being  1313,  showing  an  increase  of 
132,  or  10  per  cent,  in  four  years.  The  total  number  of  persons 
employed  by  them  in  1835  was  71,274,  and  having  been  86,411  in 
1839,  the  increase  in  that  short  interval  was  15,137,  or  more  than 
20  per  cent. 

We  have  not  any  detail  of  the  quantity  of  woollen  goods  exported 
earlier  than  1815,  and  without  such  data  the  simple  statement  of  value 
affords  no  precise  knowledge  of  the  extent  of  shipments  of  goods  pro- 
duced from  a  material,  the  qualities  of  which  are  so  various,  and  the 
prices  of  which  have  so  greatly  fluctuated.  There  is  not  any  reason  for 
supposing  that  the  number  of  sheep  kept  in  this  country  has  fallen  off  in 
proportion  to  the  growth  of  the  population  ;  but  it  is,  on  the  contrary, 
believed  that  the  great  increase  of  town  population  has  caused  a  larger 
proportionate  consumption  of  mutton  than  formerly,  which  consumption 
has  been  met  through  the  introduction  of  the  turnip  husbandry ;  and  if 
there  be  any  foundation  for  such  belief,  it  follows  that  the  quantity  of 
wool  annually  furnished  by  our  own  flocks  must  have  increased,  while 
we  know  that  a  very  great  augmentation  of  our  imports  of  foreign  wool 
has  taken  place.  The  quantity  imported,  in  each  year  of  the  present 
century,  has  been  as  follows  : — 


fears. 

Pounds. 

Years. 

Pounds. 

Years. 

Pounds. 

1801 

7,371,774 

1809 

6,758,954 

1817 

14,061,722 

1802 

7,669,798 

1810 

10,914,137 

1818 

24,749,570 

1803 

5,;04,740 

1811 

4,732,782 

1819 

16,100,970 

1804 

7,921,595 

1812 

6,983,575 

1820 

9.775,605 

1805 

8,069, 7:i3 

1813  records 'lestrovedb^  fire. 

1821 

16,622,567 

1806 

6,775,636 

1814 

15,492,311 

1822 

19,058.080 

1807 

11,487,050 

1815 

13,640,375 

1823 

19,366,725 

180S 

2,284,482 

1816 

7,517,886 

1824 

22.564,485 

174 


rnOGKESS  OF  THE  NATION. 


[sec.  II. 


Years. 

Pounds. 

Years. 

Pounds. 

Y'ears. 

Pounds. 

1825 

43,816,966 

1834 

46.4.55,232 

1842 

45,881,630 

1826 

15,989,112 

1835 

42,172,532 

1843 

49,243,0'.(3 

1827 

29,115,311 

1836 

64,239,977 

1844 

65,713,761 

182S 

30,236,059 

1837 

48,379,708 

1845 

76,813,855 

1829 

21,516,649 

1838 

.52,594,355 

1846 

65,255,462 

1830 

32,305,314 

1839 

.57,379.923 

1847 

62, 592,. 598 

1831 

31.6.52,029 

1840 

49,436,284 

1848 

70,864,847 

1832 

28.142,489 

1841 

.56,170,974 

1849 

76,768,647 

1833 

38,046,087 

In  consequence  of  a  continual  depression  in  the  price  of  Britisli  wool, 
a  Committee  of  the  House  of  Commons  was  appointed,  in  1828,  to 
inquire  into  the  state  of  the  woollen  trade,  and  a  considerable  amount  of 
evidence  on  the  subject  was  collected  on  that  occasion.  The  estimates 
ofiered  to  the  Committee  were  indeed  without  the  sanction  of  any  certain 
authority ;  but  as  their  general  accuracy  seems  to  have  been  acknow- 
ledged at  the  time  by  many  persons  practically  experienced  in  this 
branch  of  trade,  we  are  justified  in  availing  ourselves  of  them,  in  the 
absence  of  more  precise  data. 

On  that  occasion  a  statement  made  by  Mr.  Luccock  was  produced, 
giving  the  estimated  numbers  of  sheep  kept  in  England  and  Wales  in 
the  year  1800,  and  distinguishing  the  long-woolled  from  the  short-woolled 
flocks.  According  to  this  statement  the  number  of  sheep  in  that  year 
a.nounted  to  19,007,607,  and  of  these  the  far  greater  proportion,  namely, 
14,854,299,  w^ere  short-woolled  sheep.  The  quantity  of  w'ool  yielded 
by  these  animals  was  estimated  at  393,236  packs  of  240  pounds,  or' 
94,376,640  pounds  in  all,  being  a  very  small  fraction  under  five  pounds 
for  each  fleece,  taking  one  with  another.  Mr.  Hubbard,  a  gentleman  of 
great  experience  in  the  wool  trade,  by  whom  Mr.  Luccock's  table  was 
brought  forward  in  1828,  then  expressed  his  belief  that  the  actual 
number  of  sheep  in  England  and  Wales  had  increased  one-fifth  since 
1800  ;  that  the  long-woolled  sheep  had  become  more  numerous  than  the 
short-woolled  ;  and  that  the  weight  of  the  fleece  had  so  much  increased, 
that,  one  with  another,  each  sheep  yielded  more  than  5,i  pounds  of 
wool. 

Assuming  these  estimates  to  be  correct,  it  appears  that  in  1800  the 
(juantity  of  wool  available  for  manufacturing  purposes,  exclusive  of 
that  produced  in  Scotland  and  Ireland,  was — 

Packs.  Pounds. 

From  flocks  in  England  and  Wales 393,236,  or  94,376,640 

Foreign  wool  imported 8,609,363 


Together    102,906,008 


If  between  1800  and  1828  the  number  of  sheep  had  increased  one- 
fifth,  it  is  probable  that  by  this  time  the  increase  has  at  least  reached 
to  one-third,  and  that  the  whole  nund)cr  in  Eiighmd  and  Wales  now 
amounts  to  25,343,476.  Assuming  further,  that  the  average  weight  of 
each  fleece  is  further  increased  in  the  degi'ee  estimated  by  Mr.  Hubbard, 


ca.vi".  II.]  MANUFACTUllES.  175 

the  whole  quantity  of  wool  now  applicable  to  uiaimfafturing  purposes 
mutt  be — 

Packs.  Pounds. 

From  flocks  in  England  and  "Wales 007,187,  or  14.5,72-1  880 

Foreign  wool  imported,  1849 76,708,647 

Together 22-2,40.3,. 527 

Showing  an  increase  since  1800  of  more  than  115  per  cent. 

During  this  interval  the  manufacture  has  increased  in  a  considerable 
degree  in  Yorkshire.  That  branch  of  it  which  depends  on  long  or 
combing  wool — of  which  the  quality  in  England  is  so  superior  to  that  of 
every  other  country,  that  we  may  be  said  to  possess  a  natural  monopoly 
of  it — is  chiefly  prosecuted  in  and  near  the  town  of  Bradford  in  that 
county.  The  extension  of  the  stuff  and  worsted  trade  of  thi.'s  country 
may  fairly  be  estimated  from  the  increase  of  the  population  in  the 
parish  of  Bradford,  which  is  stated  in  the  Government  returns  to  have 
been  as  under : — 

la  the  Year  1801  29,704 

„             1811  36,358 

„             1821  52,954 

„            1831  76,996 

„             1841  105,257 

Since  1831,  the  town  of  Bradford  has  been  very  greatly  enlarged. 
In  one  year  alone  (1833),  700  new  houses  wei'e  built  and  occupied,  and 
the  number  of  factories  has  been  increased  in  proportion. 

During  the  early  part  of  the  present  century,  the  manufacture  of 
bombazeens  at  Norwich  sufiered  a  very  great  depression,  which  was 
showm  by  the  trifling  increase  in  the  population  between  1801  and 
1811.  After  the  latter  year  this  branch  of  trade  recovered  in  a 
remarkable  degree,  and  with  its  prosperity  the  population  experienced 
a  rapid  increase,  the  difference  in  numbers  between  1811  and  1821 
having  been  38  per  cent.,  and  between  1821  and  1831,  21^  per  cent. 
The  increase  between  1831  and  1841  amounted  to  little  more  than  3^ 
per  cent.  For  reasons  already  given,  this  method  of  showing  the 
extension  of  other  branches  of  the  woollen  manufacture  is  not  equally 
available  ;  but  when  it  is  seen,  that  since  the  beginning  of  the  century 
the  ])opulation  of  the  principal  clothing  towns  in  Yorkshire  has  been 
far  more  than  doubled,  this  fact  must  be  taken  as  a  strong  corroboration 
of  the  opinion  already  expressed  as  to  the  general  prosperity  of  the 
manufiicture. 

ISOl  1841 

Population  of         Halifax     .     .     .        63,434  130,743 

„  Iluddersfiold      .         14,848  38,454 

„  Leeds  ....         53,102  152,054 

„  Kochdalc  .     .     .        39,766  84,718 

171,210        405,969 


176  PROGRESS  OF  THE  NATION.  [sec.  ix. 

The  increase  in  the  population  of  the  whole  "West  Riding  of  Yorkshire, 
the  chief  seat  of  the  woollen  manufacture  in  England,  was,  between 
1801  and  1841,  from  563,953,  to  1,154,101,  or  104  per  cent. 

In  the  interval  between  the  periods  here  contrasted  the  woollen 
manufacture  has  undergone  various  changes.  One  of  the  greatest  of 
these  changes  has  resulted  from  improvements  in  the  breed  of  English 
sheep,  in  which  it  has  been  more  the  object  to  obtain  a  greater  weight 
of  carcass  than  to  improve  or  preserve  the  quality  of  the  wool.  The 
fleece,  as  we  have  seen,  has  become  heavier,  but,  at  the  same  time,  the 
wool  of  the  short-wooUed  sheep  is  coarser ;  and  for  the  production  of 
cloth  of  similar  quality  to  that  which  thirty  years  ago  was  produced 
wholly  from  Bfitish  wool,  it  is  now  necessary  to  use  an  admixture  of 
imported  wool.  This  remark  applies  to  South  Down  sheep,  the  wool  of 
which  is  used  for  baizes,  flannel,  blanketing,  druggets,  and  low-priced 
cloths.  The  proportion  of  these  sheep,  however,  has  much  diminished 
relatively  to  the  number  of  sheep  yielding  long  or  combing-wool,  and 
which  is  employed  for  the  manufacture  of  stuffs  and  worsted  fabrics,  a 
branch  of  business  which  has  taken  a  very  important  stride,  and  is  still 
increasing  in  a  very  rapid  manner. 

A  curious  trade  has  of  late  years  been  introduced,  that  of  importing 
foreign  woollen  rags  into  England  for  the  purpose  of  re-manufacture. 
These  are  assorted,  torn  up,  and  mixed  with  English,  or  more  commonly 
with  Scotch  wool  of  low  quality,  and  inferior  cloth  is  made  from  the 
mixture  at  a  price  sufficiently  moderate  to  command  a  sale  for  exportation. 

By  this  means  a  market  is  obtained  for  wool  of  a  very  low^  quality, 
which  might  otherwise  be  left  on  the  hands  of  the  growers. 

The  best  blankets  are  made  from  unmixed  British  wool,  and  this  trade 
has  experienced  a  very  great  increase.  The  tow-n  and  parish  of 
Dewsbury,  at  which  carpets  are  made,  has  increased  in  population, 
between  1801  and  1841,  from  11,752  to  23,806,  or  102  per  cent. 

The  great  and  continually  iucreasing  cheapness  of  cotton  manu- 
factured goods  has  caused  them  in  a  great  degree  to  supersede  the 
lower  qualities  of  woollen  cloths  among  the  labouring  population  of 
England  ;  and  as  we  are  less  able  to  rival  continental  manufacturers  of 
woollens  than  to  maintain  our  superiority  in  the  spinning  and  weaving 
of  cotton,  it  is  not  probable  that,  unless  new  markets  shall  be  opened, 
any  very  rapid  extension  will  in  future  be  given  to  our  manufacture  of 
woollen  cloths.  As  regards  worsted  and  stuff  goods  the  case  is  different ; 
and  it  has  of  late  been  an  increasingly  prevailing  opinion  among  the 
more  intelligent  persons  engaged  in  that  branch,  that  our  present  amount 
of  trade  in  those  goods  is  trifling  compared  to  vvhat  it- is  likely  to  become 
hereafter. 

The  rise  and  progress  of  the  cotton  manufacture  in  Great  Britain 
f 


CHAP.  ii.J  MANUFACTURES.  HI 

form  perhaps  tlie  most  extraordinary  page  in  the  annals  of  human 
industry.  It  is  not  necessary  on  this  occasion  to  trace  its  early  growth, 
or  to  descrihe  the  mechanical  inventions  by  means  of  which  it  has  come 
to  exercise  so  powerful  an  influence  upon  the  destinies  of  the  civilized 
world.  It  will  be  suflficient  here  to  describe,  by  their  effects,  the  gigantic 
strides  which  have  been  made  in  the  cotton  manufacture  since  the 
beginning  of  this  century,  referring  those  persons  who  wish  for  earlier  or 
more  detailed  accounts  to  the  Memoir  of  Mr.  Kennedy,*  the  History  of 
Mr.  Baines,f  and  the  Essay  of  Dr.  Ure.J 

In  the  year  1800,  the  quantity  of  cotton  imj)orted  for  use  into  the 
United  Kingdom  was  50,010,732  pounds,  having  been  only  31,447,605 
pounds  in  1790,  and  17,992,882  pounds  in  1785.  The  total  value  of 
manufactured  cotton  goods  exported  in  1800  was,  5,406, 501Z.,  having 
been  1,662,369/.  in  1790.  At  the  earliest  of  these  two  dates.  Sir 
Richard  Arkwright's  inventions  had  very  recently  been  thrown  open  to 
the  public  by  the  setting  aside  of  his  patent  in  the  Court  of  King's 
Bench.  The  first  steam-engine  constructed  for  a  cotton-mill  was  made 
by  Mr.  Watt  in  1785,  and  put  to  use  at  Papplewick  in  Nottinghamshire  ; 
it  was  four  years  later  that  the  application  of  steam  power  to  the  same 
purpose  was  first  made  in  Manchester.  In  the  year  1800,  the  number 
of  such  engines  in  that  town  had  increased  to  32,  the  aggregate  power 
of  which  was  estimated  as  equal  to  the  labour  of  430  horses.  This 
increase  shows  that  a  great  impulse  had  been  given  to  the  manufacture, 
which  already  was  considei'ed  to  be  a  thing  of  great  national  importance. 
If,  however,  we  measure  its  amount  at  that  time  in  comparison  with 
the  extension  which  it  has  since  received,  the  cotton  trade  of  1800 
dwindles  into  insignificance.  At  that  time  the  application  of  the  im- 
proved machinery  was  confined  to  the  production  of  yarn  ;  for  although 
Dr.  Cartwright's  power-loom  was  invented  as  early  as  1787,  the  first 
practical  application  of  his  machine  was  not  made  until  1801,  when  a 
weaving  factory  was  erected  by  Mr.  Monteith,  at  Pollockshaws,  near 
Glasgow,  and  furnished  with  200  self-acting  looms.  Nor  was  it  imtil 
after  several  years  had  elapsed,  that  the  imperfections  and  difficulties 
attendant  upon  this  new  speculation  were  overcome,  and  that  this 
interesting  invention  was  rendered  a  profitable  instrument  in  the  hands 
of  that  enterprising  gentleman. 

The  progress  of  the  manufacture  since  that  time  may  be  seen  by 
inspection  of  the  following  table,  in  which  are  stated  the  quantity  of 
cotton  annually  worked  up  in  the  kingdom,  and  the  value  of  tliat  part  of 
the  resulting  manufactured  goods  which  was  exported  : — 

*  Paper  on  the  Rise  and  Progress  of  the  Cotton  Trade,  in  Vol.  III.  of  the  Jlemoirs  of  the 
Manchester  Literary  and  Philosophical  Society.     1819. 

t  History  of  the  Cotton  Manufacture  in  Great  Britain,  by  E.  Baines,  Jun.,  Esq.     1835. 
I  The  Philosophy  of  Manufactures,  by  Dr.  Ure.     18.33. 

N 


ns 


PROGRESS  OF  THE  XATION. 


[sec.    II. 


Years. 


1801 

1802 

1803 

1804 

1805 

1806 

1807 

1808 

1809 

1810 

1811 

1S12 

1813 

1814 

1815 

1816 

1817 

1818 

1819 

1820 

1821 

1822 

1823 

1824 

1825 

1826 

1827 

1828 

1829 

1830 

1831 

1832 

1833 

1834 

1835 

1836 

1837 

1833 

1839 

1840 

1841 

1842 

1843 

1844 

1845 

1846 

1847 

1848 

1849 


Quantity  of  Cotton 
Wool  taken  for 
consumption. 


lbs. 

54,203,433 

56,615,120 

.52,251,231 

61,364,158 

58,878,163 

57,524,416 

72,748,363 

41.961.115 

88;46i;i77 

123,701,826 

90,309,668 

61,285,024 

.50,966,000 

53,777,802 

92,. 525, 9.51 

86,815,021 

116,7.57,526 

162,122,705 

133,116,851 

152,829,6^3 

137,401,549 

143.428,127 

186,311,070 

141,038,743 

202,546,869 

162,889,012 

249,804,396 

208,987,744 

204,097,037 

269,616,640 

273,249,653 

259,412,463 

293,682,976 

308,602.401 

333,043,464 

363,684,232 

368,445,035 

455,036,755 

352,000,277 

528,142,743 

437,093,631 

473,976,400 

581,303,105 

554,196,602 

679,063,621 

401,925,542 

399,753,279 

639,000,371 

775,469,008 


Value  of  Goods  Exporttil. 


Official. 


£. 

7,050,809 

7,624,505 

7.081,441 

8,746,772 

9,. 534. 465 
10,489^049 
10,309,765 
12,986,0'J6 
19,445,966 
18,951,994 
12,013,149 
16,517,690 
Records  destroyed  by  fire. 


Real 
or  Declared. 


17,655,378 
22,289,645 
17,564,461 
21,259,224 
22,. 589, 130 
18,282,292 
22,531,079 
22,-541,615 
26,911,043 
26,544,770 
30,1.55,901 
29,495.281 
25,194^270 
33,182,898 
33,467,417 
37,269,432 
41,050,969 
39,357,075 
43,786,255 
46,337,210 
51,069,140 
52,a33,278 
58,578,442 
51,130,290 
64,812,528 
67,917,021 
73,152,251 
69,798,131 
68,684,891 
82,189,599 
91,039,574 
93,665,834 
93,685,819 
82,237,190 
93,185,104 
112,416,294 


20,033,132 
20,620,956 
15,. 577. 31)2 
16,012,001 
18,767.517 
14,699^912 
16,516,743 
16,093,787 
17,218,724 
16,326.604 
18,452^987 
18,359,-526 
14,093.-369 
17,637,165 
17,244,417 
17,5.35,006 
19,428,664 
17,257,204 
17,398,392 
18,486,400 
20,513,585 
22,128,304 
24,6-32,058 
20,597,123 
24,147,726 
24,-550,376 
24,668,618 
23,499,478 
21.674,598 
23,447,971 
25,805,348 
26,119,331 
25,599,826 
23,.'W3,225 
22,681,200 
26,771,432 


The  quantity  taken  for  consumption  previous  to  1820  has  hccn  found 
by  deducting  the  quantity  exported  from  the  quantity  imported  in  each 
year.  By  this  method,  although  the  quantity  stated  in  individual  years 
may  not  be  correct,  as  the  stock  in  hand  at  the  end  of  each  year  will  of 
course  vary  from  the  stock  in  hand  at  the  beginning,  yet  by  taking  a 
series  of  years,  one  with  another,  the  quantities  may  b^  relied  on  as  being 
substantially  right.  From  1820  downwards,  the  quantities  stated  are 
those  actually  taken  by  the  manufacturers  in  the  course  of  each  year. 

The  circumstance  that  will  first  strike  any  person  who  consults  the 


cuAP.  II.]  MANUFACTURES.  179 

foregoing  table,  is  the  comparative  sluggishness  of  the  trade  from  the 
beginning  of  the  century  until  the  return  of  peace.  It  has  been  seen 
that  the  eflect  of  the  general  adoption  of  Arlcwright's  invention  for  spin- 
ning was  to  treble  the  manufacture  in  15  years.  At  this  point  it  may 
almost  be  said  to  have  stopped,  and  in  fact  the  quantity  of  raw  material 
manufactured  in  each  of  the  last  two  years  of  the  war  was  smaller  than 
that  consumed  in  1801.  No  sooner  had  peace  returned,  however,  than 
new  life  was  infused  into  the  trade.  In  five  years  the  quantity  of  cotton 
spun  was  trebled  ;  in  another  five  years  it  was  four  times  what  it  had 
been  in  the  last  year  of  war  ;  at  the  expiration  of  another  period  of 
equal  duration,  more  than  five  times  that  quantity  passed  through  the 
manufacturers'  hands,  and  the  same  rate  of  progression  has  been  since 
continued,  the  quantity  used  in  1835  having  been  fully  six  and  a  half 
times  greater  than  that  used  in  1813,  while  in  the  following  nine  years 
there  has  been  an  increase  of  two-thirds,  or  66  per  cent.,  upon  the 
quantity  of  1835,  so  that  our  manufacturers  have  worked  up  eleven 
times  the  quantity  spun  in  1813. 

The  progress  of  the  export  trade  in  cotton  goods  has  been  more 
regular  throughout  the  period  embraced  in  the  table.  Judging  from 
the  "  official  value,^'  under  which  every  yard  or  pound  is  estimated  at 
an  unvarying  rate,  it  appears  that  the  quantity  of  these  goods  exported 
was  nearly  three  times  as  great  at  the  close  of  the  war  as  it  had  been  at 
the  beginning  of  the  century — a  fact  which  seems  to  prove  that  the 
capability  of  the  population  of  this  country  to  command  the  purchase  of 
this  the  cheapest  kind  of  clothing,  must  have  diminished,  the  increased 
exports  having  left  a  much  smaller  quantity  for  the  use  of  a  population 
increased  in  the  meanwhile  by  more  than  two  millions  of  souls. 

It  is  only  of  late  years  that  the  accounts  have  been  so  given  as  to 
show  the  actual  quantities  of  the  different  descriptions  of  cotton  goods 
exported.  The  following  statement  contains  the  summary  of  the  ship- 
ments in  each  year  from  1820  to  1849  : — See  page  180. 

If  the  first  and  last  lines  of  this  table  are  compared,  it  will  be  seen, 
that  while  the  number  of  yards  exported  in  1849  is  greater  by  430  per 
cent,  than  the  number  exported  in  1820,  the  increase  in  the  declared 
value  is  only  42  per  cent ;  the  average  price  per  yard,  which  in  1820  was 
12|^/.,  having  fallen  in  1849  to  Sf^.  The  quantity  of  twist  exported 
has  increased  during  the  same  period  in  the  proportion  of  6  to  1,  while 
the  increase  in  the  declared  value  is  only  in  the  proportion  of  about  5  to  2. 
The  average  price  of  twist  in  1820  was  2s.  D^d.,  and  in  1849  was  little 
more  than  lOld.  per  pound.  If,  in  addition  to  these  values,  we  take 
account  of  the  reduction  that  has  occurred  in  the  price  of  raw  cotton, 
we  may  be  enabled  to  form  some  judgment  as  to  the  economy  which  has 
been  introduced  into  the  process  of  manufacture  during  the  last  30 
years,  and  be  besides  able  to  apportion  the  degrees  of  that  economy 

n2 


180 


PROGRESS  OF  THE  NATIOX. 


[SEC.  n. 


r3 
°1 

_3 

X  1-  -!■  -*■  t-  to  rv  in  1-  -^  -+  -f  -M  —  —  -f  X  CO  to  m  x  x  x  r-  x  —  to  m  c  •'. 
-r  X  M  Q  X  i-i  tr  vo  —  —  ,o  c  ~  w  X  c  in  -M  ri  i~  ^  i .  -f  r — r  r:  ri  -m  c  w 

«^  1-  1-  2  -  in  CO  r-  rj.  5  to  -N  CO  -^  in  CO  o  -^  I-  CO  !o  ^  CO  C5  CO  CO  X  :m  CI  r- 

.  tr  CO  X  ;r  oi  r-.  CO  t^  -c  m  X  t~  X  «r  CO  X  CI  »  t^  O  X  o;  ^.  t^  m  cr.  c.  CO  —  in 
^  —  r-.  —  c)  in  m  --.  CO  -*  CO  (M  in  trv  X  -<  (M  CO  31  -*  o  o  cr.  t^  ■*  O  .-<  CT-.  CO  00  t^ 
^mosMco-+eocooinrfc^cO'^ini->toinp—into^tO'*Xi—  inco-ot^ 

totot^ts»aO'tt-t-t-csr^t^»Oci-fO-*-)<-*cO'-cointoinco'M«o 

e 
a 

>" 

B 

E-i 

s 

> 

1 
1 

£. 
826,639 
305,823 
697,582 
625,946 
135,3/6 
206,729 
491,338 
545,578 
595,405 
970,874 
133,741 
975,019 
722,759 
704,024 
211,015 
"06,589 
120,366 
955,942 
431,869 
858,193 
101,308 
266,968 
771,464 
193,971 
988,584 
963,235 
882,048 
957,980 
927,831 
704,089 

c^iNC>l«coeoeoeoeow-*co-<*'*in>fi«o«Dt--;at^t^r^t~^«ot^mmto 

-3 

B 

1 

mcixtoo-t  —  -^"'-H-H(^IQO-r-xxtDXt^^c^coS5<^^tC35lno^(^^-< 
|^^otoxr-lC■>o^^^nln-f■^lnotocr:-^^oo-*c^— Cit^t^toin-i<tooo 
coco-ti<c:!into;ot^t^c>ico-*--''-''ti-'C^t£^iMinXi-iOxr^t— — <!M 

(Mtoinxinf-H-r-xinr—in^-r^tox-t'^^intotoOcoto^^O-tdO^-'N 
co'NC5t^O'l"X(^C-f-J''Mtocit^^— .  inoxi^citoc)-t-+c-.  I^COO 
Cinincototi^Xin-*toxtoto-*'M— ■-tinto-cci-rcoin  —  xcixin 

C0r-<;or-coci!><^0  —  -*coinO-ocoxcO'*inxcOt^CXin  —  oicci 
<M(N(M<NCOe^'*-*mtOCO«Ot^t^lt-XXOf—  O^OCO-tCOCOOCNCO-* 

a  S 

O 

3 

"a 
> 

1 

cr:in'ttor^t^<McoincO(MCOi^C5-*inc»-tt^oc^-.3XXto5^(N(N 
X3-.  co-HCOXcrnntoxmt-o  —  ^xciC5(Mcoc-.  COCO  —  x-(>-)<^x 
m  o:  m  o  CO  1^  -*  m  1^  X  "  to  o  CO  o  C)  in  ^  —  t~  c  i~  :s  m  to  CI  -H  .—  m  o 

.  :  to  3-.  CI  o  n  C-.  m  -H  m  — <  in  X  in  -H  m  o  X  cj  —  CO  m  to  o  in  ^>  to  to  X  ci  to 

-+*C2—  OCltO  —  CO-l<--S-ft^  —  I^COr l''M«tO'-tC^(NXC'M  —  tO-fl~ 

^COt^t^XSSt^.^—  O.-'-''-C0— 'OIC0O-.  —  COCICIOOCI— 'C  —  CCJ 

2 

o 
O 

a 

o 

> 
•3 
u 

O 

mm^rnHMmmmmnMBMiM^ 

=^.t^liiii2iisiiiii5iiiigi3iiS!si 

t^r^t-t--xxint^totot^tointot^xr;-.oxxxi^cot^xxt^xt^CTs 

'^ 

ism^^^mmum^m^mmMimm 

i^iiiisiisgSiiiesiigisisiiiiiil 

M%^^^MBnmm^^mmmM%^M%^ 

B 
O 

B 

& 

o 
o 

s 
> 

1 
1 

Igii^iigiil^iiBiiiiigiiiiiisSS 

^' I^IIII^RWIi  ^S?-|i  Willi  iiittl^ 

mintointo:oTfininintotoininto!£>t^!St^t^t^t^ccxo5C505Xt^CTi 

;2 

486 

131 

705 
384 
786 
7S3 
180 
956 
344 
032 
261 
0116 
864 
158 
525 
179 
256 
845 
656 
373 
732 
311 
205 
423 
780 
454 
488 
785 
525 

113,682 
122,921 
151,162 
152,184 
170,091 
158,039 
138,159 
183,940 
189,475 
222,504 
244,799 
239,191 
259,493 
259,519 
283,;i50 
277,704 
324,467 
286,164 
363,357 
380,168 
433,114 
421,884 
4.35,519 
562,575 
623,249 
678,415 
6'.l7,8()9 
.541,143 
6.51,087 
7-95,112 

^ 

C  —  oico-fintot^x3!0— iirjco-i<into»^xc50'-<<Nc<5-*m«or^ooa> 

'MCI'M'M'M'N'MiM(Mt>JCOCOCOCOCOCOCOCOeOCO-*-l'-i'-*-»'-)'-C-*'t-t< 

xxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxx 

which  appertain  to  the  spinning  and  to  the  weaving  branches  of  the 
manufacture  respectively.  It  is  necessary,  however,  tliat  for  this  pur- 
pose the  average  quahties  of  both  cloths  and  twist  shoukl  have  been  the 


n.J 


MANUFACTURES. 


181 


same  at  bi)tli  periods,  which  it  is  rotasonable  to  suppose  might  ha  tho 
case  where  the  markets  are  so  numerous,  and  the  quantities  shijjped 
so  hirge.  The  diminution  of  value  in  the  twist  appears  to  amount  to 
G3  ])er  cent.,  and  in  the  cloth  to  73j  per  cent. 

The  variations  in  the  value  of  cotton  goods  and  yarn,  so  far  as  the 
same  can  he  inferred  from  the  average  value  of  the  quantities  exported 
in  each  year,  from  1830  to  1849,  have  been  as  follows : — 

Artvaf/e  Value  per  Yard  of  White  or  Plain,  and  of  Printed  or  Dyed  Cotton  Manvfactures,  and 
per  Pound  Weiyht  of  Tuiist  or  Cotton  Yarn  Exported  from  tlu:  United  Kingdom,  in  each  year 
from  1830  to  1849. 


White  or  Plain 

Printed  or  Dyed 

Twist  or 

Goods. 

Goods.  ' 

Yarn. 

Years. 

d. 

d. 

d. 

1830 

6-434 

9-073 

15-346 

1831 

6-686 

8-033 

14-943 

1832 

5-415 

6-722 

14-979 

1833 

5-403 

6-691 

15-984 

1S34 

5-506 

6-723 

16-352 

1835 

5-272 

7-094 

16-459 

18.36 

5-907 

7-048 

16-656 

1837 

5-104 

6-501 

16  1.37 

1833 

4-817 

6-087 

15-564 

183J 

4-757 

6-041 

15 -.573 

1840 

4-324 

5-705 

14-386 

1841 

4-103 

5-666 

14- 153 

1842 

3-632 

5-061 

13-568 

1843 

3-423 

4-815 

13-394 

1844 

3-487 

4-917 

12-107 

1845 

3-417 

4-860 

12-365 

1840 

3-217 

4-796 

11-685 

1847 

3-573 

4-872 

11-889 

1848 

2-923 

4-190 

10-474 

1849 

2-854 

4-1.31 

10-762 

The  following  statement,  which  is  taken  from  Mr.  Dugald  Bannatyne's 
paper  on  the  cotton  manufacture  inserted  in  the  "  Encyclopaedia  Britan- 
nica,"  places  in  a  very  striking  light  the  reduction  that  has  been  effected 
by  machinery  in  the  cost  of  spinning. 

Prices  of  Cotton-yarn,  100  hanks  to  tlie  lb.,  in  tlie  following  years  : — 


Years, 

1786 

1787 

1788 

1789 

1790 

1791 

1792 

1793 

1794 

1795* 

1796 

1797 

1798t 


s. 

d. 

38 

0  per  lb. 

38 

0       „ 

35 

0      „ 

34 

0      „ 

30 

0       „ 

29 

9       » 

16 

1       „ 

15 

1       » 

15 

1       ,, 

19 

0       „ 

19 

0       „ 

19 

0       „ 

9 

10       „ 

Years. 

s.    d. 

1799 

10  11  per  lb 

1800 

9     5       „ 

1801 

8     9      „ 

1802 

8    4      „ 

1803 

8    4      „ 

1804 

7  10      „ 

1805 

7  10      „ 

1806 

7     2      „ 

1807 

6     9      „ 

After 

many  fluctuations  in 

1829 

3    2      „ 

1832 

2  11       „ 

♦  Spun  from  Bourbon  cotton. 


t  Spun  from  Sea  Island  cotton. 


182 


PROGRESS  OF  THE  NATION. 


[SF.C. 


The  variations  in  price  of  cotton-yarn  of  various  degrees  of  fineness 
in  each  year,  from  1883  to  1844  have  been  as  follows  : — 


Yarn  ^ 

'o.  30. 

Yarn  N 

0.  100. 

Yarn  N 

0.  170. 

Price  per  lb. 

Price  per  lb. 

Price 

per  lb. 

YEARS. 

Cotton. 

Y^'arn. 

Cotton. 

Yarn. 

Cotton. 

Yarn. 

Dec. 

d. 

d. 

d. 

s.    d. 

d. 

«.    d. 

1833 

Sh 

121 

14 

3     3 

19 

7  10 

1834 

9| 

15§ 

17 

3     6 

22 

7  10 

1833 

4 

14^ 

17 

4    3 

28 

8     9 

1836 

10 

15j 

20 

5    6 

31 

10    4 

1837 

8 

12^ 

17 

3    6 

2.3 

8     6 

1838 

6? 

1-2 

16 

3     9 

29 

9    6 

1839 

5- 

11 

14 

4     1 

27 

8    4 

1840 

9% 

13 

3     7 

21 

7     7 

1841 

12 

3    0 

18 

7     1 

1842 

5' 

8| 

10 

2    9 

17 

6    8 

1843 

4| 

9 

11 

2  11 

17 

6     9 

1844 

4| 

9^ 

11 

2  11 

17 

6     9 

This  subject  has  had  further  light  thrown  upon  it  by  the  inquiries  of 
the  Factory  Commissioners,  from  whose  report  the  following  tables  have 
been  extracted  : — 

Avernqe  Price  of  Cotton,  compared  with  Ttcist,  at  diffei-ent  Periods  during  the  present  Century. 


PERIODS. 


From  Dec, 


July, 
Dec, 
July, 
Dec, 
July, 
Dec, 
July, 
Dec, 
July, 
Dec, 
July, 
Dec, 
July, 
Dec, 
July, 
Dec, 
July, 
Dec, 
July, 
Dec, 
July, 
Dec, 
^uly, 
Dec, 
July, 
Dec, 
July, 
Dec, 
July, 


1802  to 
180.5  „ 
1806  „ 
1S07  „ 

1808  „ 

1809  „ 

1809  „ 

1810  „ 

1810  „ 

1811  „ 

1811  „ 

1812  „ 

1812  „ 

1813  „ 

1813  „ 

1814  „ 
1814  „ 
1813  „ 
1813  „ 
1816  „ 

1816  „ 
1S17  „ 

1817  „ 

1818  „ 

1818  „ 

1819  „ 

1819  „ 

1820  ,. 

1820  „ 

1821  „ 

1821  „ 

1822  „ 

1822  „ 

1823  „ 


Dec, 


July, 
Dec, 
July, 
Dec, 
July, 
Dec, 
July, 
Dec, 
July, 
Dec, 
July, 
Dec, 
July, 
Dec, 
July, 
Dec, 
July, 
Dec, 
July, 
Dec, 
July, 
Dec, 
July, 
Dec, 
July, 
Dec, 
July, 
Dec, 


805 
806 
807 
808 
809 
803 
810 
810 
811 
811 
812 
812 
813 
81.3 
814 
814 
815 
813 
816 
816 
817 
817 
818 
818 
819 
819 
820 
820 
821 
821 
822 
822 
823 
823 


Cotton, 
per  lb. 


d. 
19-6 
19-08 
21-54 
24-83 
26-83 
20-73 
20-93 
19-73 
17-96 
17-43 
17-81 
18-24 
24-75 
25-12 
33-52 
31-67 
25-72 
26-53 
20-47 
20-73 
22-3 
20-44 
20-46 
21-13 
14-49 
^13-65 
14-44 
11-62 
9-82 
9-91 
9-23 
8-34 
7-8 
8-24 


Twist 
Sold, 
per  lb. 


d. 

39-8 

36-18 

36-70 

38- 

41-91 

37-01 

40-79 

38-51 

34-40 

28-71 

29-72 

23-09 

35-46 

35-08 

46-92 

45-40 

37-48 

38-44 

37-74 

33-8 

34-65 

33-6 

34-55 

32-95 

30-85 

27-53 

26-03 

21-40 

20-11 

19-45 

19-27 

19-14 

19-23 

19-63 


Average 
Number. 


25-9 

25' 

25-78 

24-61 

24-37 

24-69 

22-97 

22-96 

23-03 

23-59 

23-15 

24-45 

25-22 

25-52 

25-06 

26- 

23-65 

25- 

25-1 

25-3 

25-7 

25-46 

25-6 

23-4 

24-53 

24-95 

25-70 

25-18 

25-73 

25-53 

25 -.^4 

25-6 

25-6 

25-34 


Diflference. 


d 
20 
17 
15 
13 
15 
16 
19 
18 
16 
11 
11 
10 
10 

9 
13 
13 
11 
11 
17 
13 
12 
13 
14 
11 
16 
13 
11 

9 
10 

9 
10 
10 
11 
11 


cu.vr.  II.] 


MANUFACTURES. 
Acerat/c  Price  of  Cotton,  §'c. — continued. 


1S3 


PERIODS. 


Cotton , 
per  lb. 


From  Dec, 

»  Ju'y, 

„  Dec, 

„  July, 

„  Dec, 

»  July, 

„  Dec, 

,,  July, 

„  Dec, 

»  July, 

„  Dec, 

»  July, 

„  Dec, 

»  July, 

„  Dec, 

,.  July, 

„  Dec, 

„  July, 


1SS2.3  to 

1824  „ 
1S24  „ 

1825  „ 

1825  „ 

1826  „ 

1826  „ 

1827  „ 

1827  „ 

1828  ., 

1828  „ 

1829  „ 
1829  „ 
18:«)  „ 
18:50  „ 

1831  „ 

i8;n  ., 

1832  ., 


July, 
Dec, 
July, 
Dec, 
July, 
Dec, 
July, 
Dec, 

July, 

Dec, 
July, 
Dec, 
July, 
Dec, 
July, 
Dec, 
July, 
Dec, 


1824 
1824 
1825 
1825 
1826 
1826 
1827 
1827 
182S 
1823 
1829 
1829 
1830 
1830 
1831 
1831 
1832 
1832 


d. 

8-81 

8-78 

14- 

13-06 
7-6 
6-82 
6-95 
7-34 
6-26 
6-64 
6-23 


Twist 
.Sold, 
per  lb. 


d. 
l'.)-41 
19-09 
22-34 
19-11 
16-5 
15-17 
14-97 
14-77 
13- 
13-3 
12-96 
13-43 
13-28 
12-72 
12-82 
12-.37 
12-76 
12-61 


Average 
Number. 


25-9 
26-1 
26-2 
29-1 
27-73 
SO- 
SO- 95 
30- 
27-41 
28 -.33 
28-23 
29-69 
27-85 
26-77 
28-58 
27-40 
29-43 
29-52 


d. 

10-6 
10-31 
8-26 
6-05 
8-9 
8-35 
8-02 


7-43 
6-74 
6-66 
6-73 
7-09 
6-27 
5-90 
6-17 
5-55 
5-79 
5-37 


Comparative  Cost  of  Cotton  Yarn  in  1812  and  1830. 


Hanks  per  Day,  per 
Spindle. 


40 
60 
80 
100 
120 
150 
200 
250 


181-2 


2- 
1-5 
1-5 
1-4 
1-25 
1- 
•75 


1830 


2-0 
2- 
1-8 
1-65 
1-33 
-90 


I'rice  of  Cotton  and 
Waste,  per  lb. 


1812 


s.  d. 

1  6 

2  0 
2  2 
2  4 
2  6 

2  10 

3  4 

4  0 


1830 


s.  d. 

0  7 

0  10 

0  lU 

1  r 

1  4 
1  8 
3  0 
3  8 


Labour,  per  lb. 


1812 


s.  d. 

1  0 

1  6 

2  2 

2  10 

3  6 
6  6 

16  8 

31  0 


1830 


O.-i 


Cost  per  lb. 


181,2 


20    0 

35     0 


1830 


s.    d. 
1     2| 

1  10^ 

2  6* 


3 

4 

6 

14 

28 


The  following  statement  of  the  advantages  gained  by  the  employment 
of  the  power-loom  is  given  by  Mr.  Baines,  on  the  authority  of  a  manu- 
facturer : — 

"  A  very  good  hand-ioeaver,  25  or  30  years  of  age,  will  weave  tico 
pieces  of  9-8ths  shirting  per  week,  each  twenty-four  yards  long,  con- 
taining 100  shoots  of  weft  in  an  inch  ;  the  reed  of  the  cloth  being  a 
forty-four  Bolton  count,  and  the  warp  and  weft  forty  hanks  to  the 
pound. 

"  In  1823,  a  steam-loom  weaver,  about  15  years  of  age,  attending  two 
looms,  could  weave  seven  similar  pieces  in  a  week. 

"In  1826,  a  steam-loom  weaver,  about  15  years  of  age,  attending  to 
four  looms,  could  weave  twelve  similar  pieces  in  a  week  ;  some  could 
weave  fifteen  pieces. 

"  In  1833,  a  steam-loom  weaver,  from  15  to  20  years  of  age,  assisted 
by  a  girl  about  12  years  of  age,  attending  to  four  looms,  could  weave 
eirjhtcen  similar  })ieces  in  a  week  ;  some  can  weave  ticcnty  pieces.  ' 


184 


PROGRESS  OF  THE  NATION. 


[SF.C.    II. 


The  progressive  improvements  thus  given  by  Mr.  Baincs  have  con- 
tinued to  the  present  time;  in  1845  a  steam-loom  weaver  about  15 
yeare  of  age,  attending  to  two  looms,  could  weave  11  pieces  of  the 
same  cloth  ;  and  a  steam-loom  weaver,  1 G  to  20  years  of  age,  assisted 
by  a  g-irl  about  14  years  of  age,  attending  to  four  looms,  could  weave 
22  similar  pieces  in  a  week. 

The  followinsT  table  will  show  the  effect  which  these  successive  im- 
provements  had  in  diminishing  the  price  of  cotton  cloths  ;  the  same 
article— a  piece  of  calico  known  in  the  trade  as  72| — is  given  throughout. 


Prices 

Prices 

Selling  Price 

Earninc- 

of  till' 

Prices 

Prires 

Selling 

Price 

Earnings 
of  the 

Yeaks. 

paid  for 

paid  for 

of  72J 

Years. 

paid  for 
Weaving. 

paid  for 

of- 

-'i  . 

Weavers 

Weaving. 

Cottons. 

Calicoes. 

per  Week. 

Cottons. 

Calicoes.; 

per  Week. 

s.   d. 

s.    d. 

£.    s.     d. 

s.     d. 

S.    d. 

s.      d. 

s. 

d. 

s.     d. 

1814 

3     0 

2    6 

1     8     0 

1823 

1      4 

0     6^ 

8 

9 

1815 

3     0 

1     8 

1     5     6 

1830 

1     4 

0     6^ 

8 

3 

1816 

2     6 

1     8 

1     2    0 

14     0 

1831 

1     4 

0     61 

8 

9 

12     0 

1817 

2     6 

1  10 

1    0    71 

1832 

1     4 

0    7i 

8 

0 

1818 

2     6 

1  10 

1     1     H 

1833 

1     4 

0    9i 

8 

6 

1819 

2    0 

1     2 

17    8 

1834 

1     4 

0  10 

9 

0 

1820 

2    0 

1     1 

15    yf 

1835 

1     4 

0  10 

9 

9 

12     6 

1821 

1     8 

0  11 

15    83 

14     0 

1836 

1     4 

0   93 

10 

0 

1822 

1     8 

0  10 

14    6.1 

1837 

1     4 

0    7 

8 

3 

1823 

1     8 

0  lOi 

14     5 

1838 

1     3 

0    7 

8 

3 

11      0 

1824 

1     8 

0  lOi 

14    0 

lS3'.t 

1     3 

0    7i 

8 

0 

( 

14    0 

) 

1840 

1     3 

0    6 

7 

3 

1825 

1     8 

1     2- 

to 

>13     0 

1841 

1     21 

0    6i 

7 

0 

9     9* 

1 

18    6 

1 

1842 

1     l| 

0    5^ 

5 

9 

1826 

1     6 

0    8 

10    6 

1843 

1     14 

0    4^ 

5 

9 

1827 

1     6 

0    71 

10    3 

1844 

1     \\ 

0     4| 

6 

9 

11     0 

1828 

1     4 

0    7' 

10     2 

The  reductions  made  previously  to  the  time  embraced  by  the  fore- 
going table  are  shown  by  the  following  list,  which  was  given  in  to  the 
House  of  Commons  in  1812,  on  occasion  of  the  inquiry  then  made  into 
the  effects  of  the  Orders  in  Council,  issued  in  1808,  in  retaliation  of  the 
Berlin  and  Milan  decrees  of  Napoleon. 

Prices  paid  for  Weaving  Twenty-four  Yards  (f  Cambric  at  Stockport,  in  Ciieshire. 


Years. 

s. 

Years. 

s. 

Years. 

s. 

1802 

25 

1806 

15 

1810 

12 

1803 

19 

1807 

13 

1811 

10 

1804 

15 

1808 

12 

1812 

10 

1805 

18 

1809 

13 

The  quantity  of  twenty- four  yards  above  stated  is  as  much  as  a  good 
workman  will  produce  of  this  description  of  cloth  in  a  week.  The  low 
wages  paid  for  making  the  same  in  the  latter  years,  when  every  article 
of  provisions  was  excessively  high  in  price,  and  when,  even  at  these 
insufficient  rates,  but  little  employment  was  to  be  hadj  caused  great  and 
wide-spread  misery  among  the  manufacturing  population. 


*  Short  time,  and  six  weeks  "  turn  out." 


CAP.  11.]  MANUFACTUllES.  1^5 

The  following  statement  of  the  progress  of  the  power-loom  is  taken 
from  Mr.  Baines's  "  llis^tory  of  the  Cotton  Manufacture  :" — 

"  In  1813  there  were  not  more  than  2400  power-looms  in  use;  yet 
this  was  enough  to  alarm  the  hand-loom  weavers,  who,  attributing  to 
machinery  the  distress  caused  by  the  Orders  in  Council  and  the  Ameri- 
can war,  made  riotous  o])position  to  all  new  machines,  and  broke  the 
power- looms  set  up  at  West  Houghton,  Middleton,  and  other  places. 
Nevertheless,  the  great  value  of  the  power-loom  having  now  been 
proved,  it  was  adopted  by  many  manufacturers,  both  in  England  and 
Scotland :  and  it  will,  no  doubt,  in  time  supersede  the  hand-loom.  The 
rapidity  with  which  the  power-loom  is  coming  into  use  is  proved  by  the 
following  table,  the  particulars  of  which  were  stated  by  11.  A.  Slaney, 
Esq.,  M.P.,  in  the  House  of  Commons,  on  the  13th  of  May,  1830,  and 
which  rest  on  the  authority  of  Mr.  Kennedy  : — 

"  Number  of  Power-Looms  in  England  and  Scotland. 

In  1820.  In  1S29. 

In  England 12,150  45,500 

In  Scotland 2,000  10,000 

Total 14,150  .'J5,500 

"  This  number  would  appear  to  have  been  somewhat  underrated. 
Dr.  Cleland  states  that,  in  1828,  the  Glasgow  manufacturers  had  in 
operation,  in  that  city  and  elsewhere,  10,783  steam-looms,  and  2060 
more  in  preparation  :  total  12,843.  He  supposes  there  was  an  increase 
of  10  per  cent,  between  1828  and  1832,  which  would  make  the  number 
14,127  in  the  latter  year.  This  is  independent  of  other  parts  of  Scot- 
land, unconnected  with  Glasgow.  In  1833,  evidence  was  given  before 
the  Commons'  Committee  on  Manufactures,  Commerce,  &c.,  that,  in  the 
whole  of  Scotland,  there  were  14,970  steam-looms.  Vsq  may  therefore 
safely  take  the  number  of  power-looms  in  Scotland  at  the  present  time 
(1835)  at  15,000. 

"  In  England,  the  great  increase  took  place  during  the  years  of 
speculation,  1824  and  1825  ;  and  comparatively  few  power-loom  mills 
were  built  betwixt  that  time  and  1832.  But  in  1832,  1833,  and  the 
former  part  of  1834,  the  trade  has  been  rapidly  extending ;  many  mills 
have  been  built,  and  many  spinners  have  added  power-loom  factories  to 
their  spinning-mills. 

"  Mr.  W.  R.  Greg,  an  extensive  spinner  and  manufacturer  at  Bury, 
gave  evidence  before  the  Select  Committee  of  the  House  of  Commons 
on  Manufactures,  &c.,  in  August,  1833,  that  the  number  of  power- 
looms  had  very  materially  increased  of  late  years  in  and  about  Bury, 
and  also  at  Stockport,  Bolton,  Ashton,  and  in  Cheshire.  He  stated  that 
he  did  not  know  any  person  who  was  then  building  a  spinning-mill  with- 
out the  addition  of  a  power-loom  mill. 


186  niOGRESS  OF  THE  NATIOX.  [sec.  ii. 

"  JNlr.  Kennedy's  estimate  for  1829  was  probably  too  low  for  England, 
as  well  as  for  Scotland :  at  ail  events,  tliere  are  good  reasons  for  be- 
lie^'ing  that  there  must  now  be  85,000  power-looms  in  England.  This 
conclusion  is  deduced  from  a  computation  of  the  number  of  workmen 
cmjjloyed  in  power-loom  weaving,  founded  on  actual  returns,  obtained 
by  the  Factory  Commissioners  fi'om  the  cotton-mills  in  Lancashire  and 
Cheshire.  It  is  also  supported  by  the  calculations  of  Mr.  Bannatyne, 
and  Messrs.  Samuel  Greg  and  Co.,  the  spinners  and  manufacturers  of 
Bury.  At  the  present  time  (1835),  the  machine-makers  of  Lancashire 
arc  making  power -looms  with  the  greatest  rapidity,  and  they  cannot  be 
made  sufficiently  fast  to  meet  the  demands  of  the  manufacturers.  The 
result  we  have  arrived  at  is  as  follows  : — 

Estimated  N'ttmher  of  Power-Looms  in  Great  Britain  in  1833. 

In  England 85,000 

la  Scotland 15,000 


Total       .       .     100.000 


"  AYhile  the  number  of  power-looms  has  been  multiplying  so  fast, 
the  hand-looms  employed  in  the  cotton-manufacture  are  believed  not  to 
have  diminished  between  1820  and  1834,  but  rather  to  have  increased. 
In  the  former  year  they  were  estimated  by  Mr.  Kennedy  at  240,000. 
In  1833,  Mr.  Grimshaw,  a  spinner  and  manufacturer  of  Colne,  gave 
his  opinion  before  the  Committee  of  the  Commons  on  Manufactures,  &c., 
that  the  number  of  hand-loom  cotton  weavers  in  the  Kingdom  was 
about  250,000  ;  whilst  Mr.  George  Smith,  manufacturer,  of  Manchester, 
estimated  them  at  only  200,000.  In  the  year  1834,  several  intelligent 
workmen  and  manufacturers  from  Glasgow  gave  evidence  to  the  Com- 
mons' Committee  '  On  Hand-loom  Weavers,'  that  there  were  45,000  or 
50,000  hand-loom  cotton-weavers  in  Scotland  alone." 

Since  the  publication  of  Mr.  Baines's  volume,  returns  have  been 
made  by  the  Inspectors  of  Factories  of  the  number  of  power-looms  ac- 
tually in  use  in  factories  at  the  end  of  the  year  1835,  in  each  county 
of  Great  Britain  and  Ireland.  From  these  returns,  an  abstract  of  which 
is  given  in  this  chapter,  it  appears  that  the  total  number  of  self-acting 
looms  in  the  United  Kingdom  employed  for  weaviug  cotton,  was  at 
that  time  109,626  ;  thus  proving  the  accuracy  of  the  foregoing  calcu- 
lations. 

It  does  not  appear  likely  that  any  considerable  addition  will  in  future 
be  made  to  the  number  of  hand-looms  employed  for  cotton -weaving  ; 
whereas  the  machine -makers  of  Lancashire  have  at  different  periods  been 
engaged  to  the  full  extent  of  their  power  in  constructing  power-looms ; 
so  that  their  number  increases  continually.  AVe  should  be  wrong,  how- 
ever, if  we  inferred  that  hand-looms  are  lying  unemployed.  Power- 
looms  have  not  hitherto  been  found  generally  applicable  to  the  prod uc- 


cii\r.  II.]  MANUFACITJIIES.  187 

tion  of  fine  cloths,  or  what  are  called  fancy  goods.  The  demand  for 
■  these  fluctuates  considerably,  and  is  at  times  greater  than  can  be  readily 
supplied.  In  the  Report  of  the  Select  Committee  of  the  House  of 
Commons,  appointed  in  the  summer  of  1834,  to  examine  the  numerous 
petitions  presented  by  the  hand-loom  weavers,  we  find  a  statement  given 
in  evidence  by  Mr.  Makin,  a  manufacturer  of  Bolton,  to  the  following 
effect : — "  I  know  that  there  is  at  present  no  surplus  of  weavers.  I  go 
nine  miles  fi-om  the  seat  of  my  manufacture  on  one  side  to  get  weavers, 
and  I  am  putting  out  work  nine  miles  across  the  country  in  another 
part  to  get  weavers  ;  and  if  I  knew  where  I  could  get  a  certain  descrip- 
tion of  weavers,  by  going  nine  miles  another  way,  I  should  go.  But  it 
is  a  strange  fact,  that,  whilst  the  demand  for  hand-loom  cloth  is  greater 
than  the  production,  yet  the  wages  do  not  rise  ;  and  in  about  two  months 
from  this  time  (July,  1834)  I  know,  from  the  experience  of  past  years, 
that  there  will  be  demands  for  thousands  of  weavers  more  than  can  be 
obtained." 

The  fact  stated  by  Mr.  Makin,  although  seemingly  at  variance  with 
the  ordinary  law  of  demand  and  supply,  may  admit  of  this  solution  ; — 
that,  when  they  can  be  furnished  within  a  certain  limited  price,  hand- 
loom  cloths  meet  with  an  extensive  sale ;  but  that,  when  that  limit  is 
passed,  other  goods  of  home  production,  or  similar  goods  of  foreign  make, 
come  into  successful  competition  with  them  ;  so  that  the  manufacturers 
are  not  enabled,  by  the  most  extensive  demand,  to  increase  the  rate  of 
■wages  paid  to  the  weavers. 

A  considerable  amount  of  very  valuable  and  authentic  information 
respecting  the  amount  of  labour  employed  in  the  spinning  and  weaving 
factories  of  this  kingdom,  was  embodied  in  their  reports  by  the  Com- 
missioners appointed  to  collect  information  as  to  the  employment  of 
children  in  tactories,  and  subsequently  by  the  gentlemen  ap})ointed  as 
Inspectors,  under  the  Act  of  1833,  for  regulating  the  labour  of 
children. 

The  following  calculation,  made  by  Mr.  Stan  way,  under  the  direction 
of  Mr.  Cowell,  one  of  the  Commissioners,  and  inserted  in  the  Supj)le- 
mentary  Report  of  the  Factory  Commissioners  (Part  I.,  pp.  137,  138), 
is  perhaps  as  near  an  approximation  to  the  truth  as,  from  the  nature  of 
the  subject  (the  numbers  continually  fluctuating),  it  is  reasonable  to 
expect.  Being  founded  upon  actual  and  extensive  returns,  the  state- 
ment may  be  received  as  substantially,  although  not  perhaps  minutely, 
correct. 

"  The  subsequent  calculation  does  not  aim  at  fixing  the  whole  num- 
ber of  operatives  dependent  upon  the  cotton  trade  for  subsistence,  but 
only  of  that  part  of  the  operative  body  which  earns  a  livelihood  in  cotton 
factories,  moved  by  iwicer,  and  is  employed  in  carrying  on  the  preparing, 


1S8  PROGllESS  OF  THE  NATION.  [sec.  ii. 

spinning,  weaving,  and  accessary  mechanical  departments  within  the 
walls  of  them. 

"  It  does  not  comprehend  hand-loom  weavers,  printers,  bleachers, 
dyers,  cotton -tiu'cad  lace-makers  (an  enormons  and  growing  branch  of 
the  cotton  manufacture),  and  many  other  branches  of  manufacture,  either 
arising  out  of,  or  immediately  dependent  upon,  the  spinning  of  cotton  by 
power.  It  comprehends  those  operatives  alone  who  habitually  work  in 
cotton  factories.  It  shows  their  body  to  consist  of  212,800  persons,  and 
to  earn  annually  the  enormous  sum  of  5,777,434/. 

"  The  total  quantity  of  cotton  consumed  in  the  spinning  of  yarn,  in 
Great  Britain,  in  1832,  as  stated  in  '  Burn's  Conimercial  Glance,'  was 
277,260,490  lbs.;  and  of  this  quantity,  27,327,120 lbs.  was  consumed 
in  Scotland,  leaving  for  the  consumption  of  Elngland  249,933,370  lbs. 

"  The  net  loss  of  cotton  in  spinning  is  estimated  variously  by  different 
individuals.  In  the  calculations  of  Mr.  Kennedy,  made  use  of  by  him 
in  a  paper  published  in  the  'Transactions  of  the  Manchester  Literary 
and  Philosophical  Society,'  it  is  taken  at  1^  oz.  per  lb.  ;  while  Mont- 
gomery, in  his  '  Theory  and  Practice  of  Cotton-Spinning,'  computes  it 
at  14  oz.,  and  Burn  at  If  oz. ;  but  as  the  amount  taken  by  Mr.  Kennedy 
is  that  which  appears  to  be  generally  considered  correct,  it  is  adopted 
in  these  calculations. 

"  If,  then,  from  the  quantity  given  above,  we  deduct  1^  oz.  per  lb., 
or  23,431,253  lbs.,  we  shall  have  the  total  weight  of  yarn  produced 
226,502,117  lbs. 

"  The  average  number  of  hanks  in  each  pound  of  yarn  spun  is  con- 
sidered, by  apparently  a  majority  of  persons  conversant  with  the  subject, 
to  be  40.  Montgomery  takes  the  average  counts  spun  in  Great  Britain 
at  50,  which  taking  into  account  the  finer  average  numbers  spun  in  Scot- 
land than  in  England,  would  fix  the  counts  nearly  as  above  stated. 

"  The  returns  made  to  the  Lancashire  forms  of  inquiry,  as  given  in 
previous  tables,  show  an  average  of  finer  counts  than  40,  but,  as  the 
returns  were  better  made  from  the  fine  mills  than  from  the  coarse,  and 
from  jNIanchester,  where  the  finer  yarn  is  spun,  than  from  the  country, 
it  is  evident  that  lower  numbers  ought  to  be  taken  than  those  shown  in 
the  returns ;  and  as  the  general  opinion  appears  to  be  in  favour  of  40, 
this  average  is  adopted. 

"  Three  mills,  in  diiFerent  situations,  and  of  average  capabilities, 
made  a  return  of  the  quantity  produced  by  them  in  the  month  ending 
the  4th  May,  1833  ;  and,  as  the  average  counts  of  the  whole  were  39-98 
hanks  to  the  lb.,  and  as  they  also  gave  the  number  of  hands  employed 
in  spinning  during  that  month,  and  the  duration  of  their  labour,  they 
furnished  data  from  which  may  be  easily  calculated  the  total  number 
employed  in  factories  in  England  in  preparing  and  spinning  cotton. 


oiiAP.  II.]  MANUFACTURES.  189 

"  In  the  mill  of  the  first,  344  persons  in  the  spinning  department, 
working  '2l(j  hours,  produced — 

18,000  lbs.  of  Nos.  30  to  32' 

18,00f)  lbs.  of  Nos.  38  to  42 

2,400  lbs.  of  Nos.  ir)0  to  170 

"  In  the  second  mill  245  hands,  working  270  hours,  produced — 

1,79.5  lbs.  of  No.  12 

4,235  lbs.  of  No.  22 

33,838  lbs.  of  No.  40 

"  And  in  the  third,  110  hands,  working  286  hours,  produced — 

16,700  lbs.  of  No.  40 

"  The  average  counts  of  the  three  being,  as  before  stated,  39-98,  and 
the  produce  95,018  lbs. 

"  The  total  number  of  hours  worked  will  therefore   be  344x276  + 


245  X  270  +  110  X  286  =  192,554;  and  the  produce  of  each  person 
per  hour,  ^^  =  0-49,346  lbs. 

"  The  usual  estimate  of  300  working  days  per  annum  of  IH  hours 
each,  or  69  hours  per  week,  would  give  0*49,346  x  11*5  x  300  = 
1,702,437  lbs.  the  produce  of  each  person  per  annum,  and  ^  ^ll'^si^  — 
133,045,  the  number  of  persons  employed  in  the  preparation  and  spinning 
of  cotton  in  England. 

"  On  examination  of  Supplement  (Z*)  it  will  be  seen  that  in  the  67,819 
persons  of  whom  returns  were  made  to  the  Commission,  there  were 
42,401  engaged  in  preparing  and  spinning  cotton,  23,920  in  the  weaving 
department,  and  1,498  as  engineers,  mechanics,  roller-coverers,  &e. 

"  If,  then,  the  same  proportions  are  taken  as  existing  in  the  total 
number  of  cotton-workers  which  are  found  in  the  returns  made  to  the 
Lancashire  forms  of  inquiry,  the  number  of  persons  engaged  in  the 
manufacture  of  cotton-cloth  in  factories  will  be  75,055,  and  of  those 
employed  as  engineers,  &c.,  4,700  ;  making,  with  the  133,045  in  the 
spinning  department,  a  general  total  of  212,800  persons  engaged  in 
cotton-factories. 

"  Which  total  number  of  212,800  persons  may  be  divided  and  dis- 
tributed, by  adopting  the  proportions  given  in  the  returns  made  to  the 
Lancashire  fonns  of  inquiry,  so  as  to  show  the  probable  number  of  per- 
sons employed  in  each  of  the  eight  branches  or  departments  of  cotton- 
working,  and  the  aggregate  amount  of  their  net  earnings  per  month." 

*  statement  of  the  distribution  of  67,819  hands  into  eight  difTerent  branches  or  depart- 
ments of  cotton  working,  given  in  a  previous  page  of  the  Supplement. 


190 


PKOGllESS  OF  THE  NATION. 


[sec.  II. 


Kmploycd  in 


Cleaning  and  spread 

cotton    . 
Carding    . 
Mule-spinning    . 
Throstle-spinning 
Ixeeling     . 
AVeaving  . 
Roller-covering  . 
Engineers,  &c.    . 

Total. 


n.| 


Males.       Females 


1,330 

10,361 
22,727 

793 


20,440 

261 

3,759 


2,319 

15,062 

5,196 

3,  two 

11,208 

28,566 

389 

34 


60,393 


65,774 


Cliildren  under  18  Years  of  Age. 


Males. 


In  the 
direct 

Employ 
of 

Masters. 


951 

4,983 
3,038 
1,409 

182 

4,581 

19 

151 


15,314 


In  tlie 
direct 
Kmjilov 
of  Ope- 
ratives. 


461 

23,634 

25 

25 

2,582 

3 

9 


26,742 


In  the 
direct 

Employ 
of 

Masters. 


31 

78 
257 
100 

204 

i'j 


689 


12 


345 

,099 
,255 
,203 
,306 
,109 
31 
3 


26,351 


In  the 
direct 
Employ 
of  Ope- 
ratives. 


458 

,663 

19 

76 

,261 

22 


13,505 


Eg 


13 

163 

82 
160 
119 
119 


656 


Employed  in 


Cleaning  and  spreading 

cotton  . 
Carding    . 
Mule-spinning     . 
Throstle-spinning 
Keeling    , 
Weaving  . 
Roller-covering  . 
Engineers,  &c.    . 

Total. 


Proportion 
whose  Age 
and  Sex 
are  uncert.iin, 
from  a  defi- 
ciency in  the 
Returns. 


819 
364 


2,Ui3 


3,376 


Total 

Number 

Employed. 


4,998 

40,484 
65,216 

7,70'J 

14,633 

75, 050 

725 

3,975 


212,800 


A  girregate 
Amount  of 

Montlily 
Net  Karniniis. 


£.        s.     d. 
8,631   19     6 


75,276  10 
131,660  17 

11,615  10 

22;817  8 

108,663  16 

1,764  18 

15,987  0 


444,481  1  1 


The  foregoing  table  was,  as  already  explained,  constructed  in  order 
to  show,  from  the  result  of  partial  returns,  the  probable  number  of 
persons  employed  in  the  various  cotton-mills  throughout  the  kingdom, 
divided  according  to  their  different  employments.  More  extensive 
returns  have  since  been  obtained  by  the  Factory  Inspectors,  and  it  is 
satisfactory  to  observe  how  nearly  these  later  and  more  detailed  returns 
bear  out  the  estimate  formed  by  Mr.  Stanway,  and  adopted  by  the 
Commissioners.  It  will  be  seen  that  the  computation  made  by  Mr. 
Stanway  gives  212,800  as  the  number  of  persons  of  all  ages  employed 
in  spinning  and  weaving  factories  in  the  United  Kingdom  ;  while  the 
actual  flumber  given  in  to  the  Inspectors  in  1835  amounts  to  220,143 
persons,  being  a  difference  of  only  7,334,  or  not  quite  3^  per  cent. 
Before  giving  the  summary  of  the  statements  made  by  the  Inspectors  in 
1835  and  1839,  it  may  be  satisfactory  to  insert  the  following  particulars 
derived  from  returns  made  to  the  Commissioners,  by  the  proprietors  of 
225  cotton  mills  in  Lancashire  : — 


CHAP.   II.] 


MANUFACTURES. 


IDl 


55    «(!,     jDa 


oi  oi  ■-:^  1-  I-  -^  ■':  r- 


S  e  5     i^-J 


JO  xoid.ua 


JO  Xo|diu3 

)33J!P  3t{]  U] 


CO     -1't~-r^t^«pcOmo 
i~     o  'M  CO  —  C  CO  rt  -f 

en     rti'cc^tr!  >—  W  f-" 


O    OCO««5Minopo 


CTs  in  < 

35    »fit^5C05»>n'^ir5 

to     QC~«X>-f'-CO 


c^ 


comccco^D-^'-'t-. 


<N     00C0O-^'OO« 


o»    00  ifs  eo  o  00  to 

O     05  (N  f-*  CO  CO 


S>-iooococ50oom 
■*"^oocooOlr5ool^^ 

O      O  CO  r-^  CO  CO  i^ 


(M      to  CT» --<  CO  ■*  CO  O  t^ 


*S3Aitiijado 
JO  Xolriuig 
)JdJip  311)  Ul 


CO  t^tDiM^O)-+000 
O  (Nt^COClCOO'-'J'O 
00      O  05  00  O  00  (N  >-c 


JO  «o|<lui;j 

J03JIP  oiu  uj 


-t  oi^tocooeooi?) 
CO  o-tir^coi— ia050t~- 
t^    to  CO  o  <^^  CO  CO 


I  1^  CO  00  5>1  in  t^ 


t^     (M  5^  CO  rt  I—  rt 


r~     ^  .-c  ?.!  ,-1  -+  o  -*  i^ 
^     — -i  ..-  CO  CO 

:  tC   CO  r-l 


■^:-^^. 


.g    •  o  «3  c  o 

S     "^  ca  .=  r: 
r_  c^  sO 

??    O  ^  "S  •=    V 

?    !-  !C  ^  Ta 


S.H  o^» 


■<iJ        5 


;  —•  —    r*    o 


-Ss'S 


^r)05cotot^r>.050 

C  O  ~  --  -^  ci  Ol  i.T 

»o  cr-  o  O  1^  »c  to  •: 

.  ;  r-  05  ift  «~.  iM  1^  i!^  O 


».  I  X  c    . 


•SOAIlEJOtlo 
JO  Aoiduia 
laaup  am  u] 


JO  Xo|dui:i{ 
loajip  am  ui 


*S3all»J3do 
J.)  ioicUuy 
toajtp  3q)  a 


■!IJ31SB|\; 

JO  Joidui-J 
)33jtp  aqi  U] 


CO  ■>!  -!•  t^  >~  C  ^  t^ 

C-.  O  X  if^  to  Tl  CO  to 

I-':  C-.  I  -  -t  to  cr.  Ti  -M 
^''?ro"?r-f'eo'"     F-T 


(?)  CO  ^  to  -f  !»  t>. 

-!■  to       (M  irs 
^1-  CO 

oi  i-T 


I— I  m  -*  I^  l~  OD 


r-'t^'MOOOOCOr-lCO 


CO  00  00  05  00  o  to  < 
O  CO  CO  -t  o  o 


t~  00  to  0-.  m  ^  I 


■<t  CO  'M  C>1  IM  I 

CO  l^  to         F-" 


192 


rUOGKESS  OF  THE  NATIOX. 


[sec.   II, 


^ 


&1 

■^ 


^^ 


•s  "^ 


«  V. 


^ 


<M 

00 

^ 

^ 

1-^ 

•M 

o 

^■^ 

00 

■M 

-f 

CO 

CTl 

m 

iy 

m 

So 

'rt 

in 

Id 

00 

-)< 

in 

CO 

t- 

o 

05 

o 

1— t 

in 

CO 

r-^ 

s 

^ 

r— 1 

(—( 

o 

<M 

t—t 

(N 

o" 

(M 

f.^ 

(N 

TjT 

o 

CO 

(M 

00 

CO 

Ol 

p 

^ 

(N 

"^'? 

• 

o 

(N 

CD 

-f 

■* 

t^ 

CO 

(N 

ov 

•* 

Cs 

O    i> 

s 

CJ 

CO 

C^ 

CD 

CO 

CO 

Tf 

CT> 

(N 

t^ 

35 

'^^ 

CO 

£  _o' 

CV 

o 

(>) 

(M 

(N 

Ol 

<M 

r^ 

en 

in 

CD 

i 

(N 

CD 

o 

CO 

■^'S. 

CD 

M 

in 

is 

~  a; 

b 

CD 

^''" 

im" 

(m" 

35 

(N 

l-H 

y. 

eS 

CD 

«2 

rH 

CT> 

^ 

in 

r- 

^^ 

cri 

t^ 

m 

(M 

05 

35 

in 

8 

Ol 

in 

(M 

00 

-t 

00 

t^ 

in 

(N 

CO 

p 

m 

» 

CD__ 

CO 

(N 

^ 

t^ 

oo__ 

•* 

m 

CO 

? 

^ 

lO 

'^'^ 

o 

in 

t^ 

o 

,_i 

^ 

A 

^^ 

CD 

00 

s 

i, 

C5 

oc 

CD 

i_^ 

in 

oo 

_, 

CD 

in 

CO 

o 

00 

CO 

CO 

-1- 

o 

in 

in 

m 

O 

o 

t^ 

m 

o 

Ol 

u 

A 

o 

o 

in 

CD 

^« 

—< 

»- 

t^ 

5 

Tj< 

■*^ 

in 

en 

>* 

s 

o 

CO 

-f 

(M 

CO 

im" 

,_i 

t^ 

^ 

'^ 

CO 

m 

CO 

,_ 

(N 

in 

00 

^ 

o 

(N 

o 

0^ 

t^ 

in 

O 

00 

o 

CO 

> 

S 

m 

r^ 

(M 

CO 

in 

? 

CO 

t^ 

in 

CO 

CO 

in 

5 

Ci 

CO 

00 

O 

(N 

m 

CD^ 

(M 

35 

"rt 

< 

S 

crj 

<N 

d: 

IN 

o" 

CD 

00 

CO 

in 

in 

m 

.Q 

(M 

-t 

,_, 

m 

C^ 

-* 

O) 

n 

^^ 

35 

00 

t^ 

^__, 

o 

0) 

f>\ 

CD 

C5 

00 

o 

^n 

CD 

o 

35 

CD 

CO 

i 

rt 

« 

CO 

O 

CO 

CO 

-f 

O 

00 

<N 

in 

in 

<M 

1 

0)  „ 

-* 

^H 

o 

(N 

35 

i-~ 

CO 

£ 

(M 

Ol 

CO 

i  -. 

Or3 

c» 

C?5 

CO 

1— ( 

in 

o 

m 

(M 

rH 

M 

"* 

CD 

in 

CD 

P— 4 

P^  S 

t^ 

CD 

I^ 

in 

CO 

o 

CO 

o 

CO 

I--. 

Tf 

'i" 

CO 

m 

cs 

"rt 

liD 

'^ 

o_ 

00 

(M 

CD 

35 

00 

(N 

(N^ 

CO 

S 

«" 

,—1 

co' 

,-4 

co" 

im" 

t^ 

(N 

(M 

Ci 

o 

00 

-f 

0>) 

^ 

^ 

^ 

CO 

CO 

in 

CO 

<N 

^^ 

2 

CO 

CD 

CD 

CO 

CO 

CD 

CO 

CO 

00 

Rj 

i 

(M 

O 

o\ 

1— 1 

»— 1 

in 

00 

00 

35 

^2 

'^ 

in 

t^ 

^ 

35 

ll 

00 

t^ 

-H 

C5 

CD 

^ 

c^ 

t^ 

35 

CD 

CD 

CO 

CO 

CO 

-f 

in 

O 

CD 

(M 

00 

CO 

(M 

35 

in 

m 

in 

CD 

01 

-* 

in 

• 

-* 

in 

(M 

CD 

2 

s 

•^ 

CO 

35 

'"' 

2 

s 

<£> 

Tf 

(N 

CO 

CO 

00 

^ 

CO 

35 

£ 

5 

CS 

00 

Oi 

i^ 

f> 

t^ 

00 

00 

CD 

a 

i 

05 

CO 

o_ 

CO 

in 

CO 

c  » 

in 

a>>i 

.IJ 

co" 

co" 

b 

X 

>o 

00 

<N 

CD 

05 

(N 

r- 

Oi 

en 

o 

-f 

-f 

00 

fl) 

(N 

00 

O 

<>) 

t- 

oo 

CO 

in 

Tt< 

(M 

'rt 

-1< 

00^ 

^ 

o_ 

" 

't 

in 

00 

s 

c>r 

-*' 

T)-" 

>. 

G. 

«^ 

CO 

C>) 

(?) 

CO 

-f 

-f 

O    X 

6 

^  a.' 

H 

^■g 

So 

.:^ 

_o 

C5 

CO 

(N 

CO 

CO 

t^ 

o 

co 

CD 

o 

in 

35 

00 

•^^ 

O 

OS 

00 

c^ 

o\ 

r^ 

in 

(M 

CD 

J? 

CD 

»— < 

o_ 

1— ' 

C-l 

< 

^'' 

-- 

t 

c% 

.          " 

g 

■I 

Q 

i5 

c 

r3 

<; 

be 

/•~^ 

tc 

2 

• 

-S 
-3 

.s 

C 

t. 

} 

r3 
C 
c3 

u 

X 

s 

3 

3 

3 
C3 

1^ 

0) 

u 
o 

V 

1 

>> 

rD 

s 

o 

a 
o 
C 

a 

o 
o 

.5 

-a 
5g 

4 
3 

o 

1 

'S 

0 

3 

ft 

3 

C3 

r", 

o 

o 

o 
H 

CHAP.    II.] 


MANUFACTURES. 


103 


Sldtcmi'nt  (if  the  ^iimhcr  of  Cotton  Factories  in  operation  in  different  parts  of  llw  United  Kin</- 
dinn,  u'illi  tlie  Nunil)er  and  Power  of  tlie  F,nyines,  and  tlie  Number  and  Ayes  of  Persons 
employed  therein  in  the  Year  183'.). 


I'.ng 

land. 

Wales. 

Scot 

ami. 

Ireland. 

United  h 

iiiyilom. 

Mills  at  Work  . 

1, 

598 

5 

192 

24 

1,819  1 

Mills  Empty      . 

88 

•• 

6 

1 

95 

E. 

II.  P. 

E. 

II.P. 

E. 

II.P. 

E. 

H.P. 

E. 

II.  V. 

Steam  Power    . 

1,422 

40,.5;!0 

7 

108 

193 

5,612 

19 

517 

1,041 

40,827 

Water  Power    . 

574 

9,537 

5 

140 

73 

2,728 

22 

572 

674 

12,977 

M. 

F. 

M. 

F. 

M. 

F. 

M. 

F. 

M. 

F, 

Persons 
T'nder  10  years  . 

1,022 

673 

7 

1 

79 

57 

1 

1 ,  109 

731 

10  to  11       „       . 

1,451 

980 

14 

147 

120 

6 

9 

1,618 

1,109 

11  „  12      „       . 

1,G67 

1,178 

14 

5 

180 

170 

9 

1 

1,870 

1,.3.54 

12  „  13      „       . 

2,227 

1,745 

14 

23 

249 

2.54 

19 

5 

2,509 

2,027 

13  „  14       „       . 

9,802 

10,476 

69 

56 

1,.308 

2,159 

173 

243 

11,442 

12,934 

14  „  15       „       . 

9,769 

10,068 

16 

53 

1,144 

2,214 

158 

251 

11,087 

12,. 586 

15  „  10       „       . 

7,00;) 

9,2.58 

16 

46 

818 

1,975 

150 

235 

7,993 

11,514 

16  „   17       „       . 

5,156 

8,117 

9 

43 

534 

1,840 

106 

192 

5,805 

10,192 

17  „  18      „       . 

4,446 

7,470 

28 

59 

3)6 

1,854 

90 

201 

4,900 

9,. 584 

18  „  19      „       . 

5,000 

9,302 

8 

50 

373 

2,103 

65 

280 

5,446 

11,7.35 

19  „  20      „       . 

3,693 

7,872 

10 

48 

313 

1,835 

55 

191 

4,071 

9,946 

20  „  21       „       . 

3,705 

6,974 

7 

33 

287 

1,479 

80 

226 

4,079 

8,712 

21  and  upwards. 

44,819 

44,167 

164 

217 

5,116 

8,. 576 

853 

1,023 

50,952 

53,971 

Total     .     . 

99,8.56 

118,280 

376 

634 

10,944 

24,624 

1,765 

2,857 

112,941 

140,395 

218 

,136 

1,0 

10 

35, 

568 

4,622 

259, 

136     , 

The  numbers  given  In  the  foregoing  summary  have  reference  only  to 
those  branches  of  the  cotton  manufacture  which  are  carried  on  in 
spinning  and  weaving  factories,  and  do  not  include  the  persons  employed 
in  printing  and  dyeing,  nor  the  numerous  hand-loom  weavers,  with  many 
other  branches  of  the  manufacture,  and  the  great  numbers  who  are 
otherwise  directly  or  indirectly  dependent  upon  it  for  support.  Mr. 
M'Culloch  has  estimated  that,  "allowance  being  made  for  old  and 
infirm  persons,  children,  &c.,  dependent  upon  those  actually  employed 
in  the  various  departments  of  the  cotton  manufacture  ;  and  in  the  con- 
struction, repairs,  &c.,  of  the  machinery  and  buildings  required  to  carry 
it  on,"  the  entire  cotton  manufacture  "  must  furnish,  on  the  most 
moderate  computation,  subsistence  for  from  1,200,000  to  1,300,000 
persons." 

If  we  were  to  apply  Mr.  Stanway's  method  of  computation  in  order 
to  discover  the  number  of  persons  employed  in  factories  at  various 
periods,  we  should  find  that,  for  spinning  the  quantities  of  cotton  used 
in  1801  and  subsequent  periods,  the  following  numbers  of  persons  would 
be  required : — 

o 


194 


PROGRESS  OF  THE  NATION. 


[sec.   II. 


Years. 

Persons. 

Year<:. 

Persons. 

ISOl 

26,92'J 

1826 

80,918 

1806 

28,626 

1831 

135,742 

1811 

44,863 

1834 

153,.304 

1816 

48.0;)4* 

1839 

174,803 

1821 

68,2.57 

1844 

275,-308 

These  numbers  are  exclusive  of  the  persons  who  were  employed  in 
weaving  in  factories,  and  who,  according  to  Mr.  Stanway's  estimate, 
amounted,  in  1832,  to  75,055. 

It  would  by  no  means  furnish  a  correct  view,  however,  if  the  amount 
of  labour  required  for  the  conversion  of  the  given  quantities  of  cotton 
into  yarn  at  the  above-mentioned  periods  were  taken  at  an  uniform  rate. 
The  vast  improvements  made  during  late  years  in  the  machinery 
npplied  to  spinning  has  caused  such  an  economy  in  the  application  ol 
labour,  that  not  one-half  of  the  number  of  persons  is  now  required  for 
carrying  forward  the  various  manufacturing  processes  with  a  given 
weight  of  cotton,  that  were  employed  for  producing  an  equal  result 
thirty  years  ago.  This  fact  will  be  sufficiently  illustrated  by  the 
following  statement,  taken  from  the  books  of  Mr.  Thomas  Houldsworth, 
an  eminent  cotton  spinner  of  Manchester,  and  laid  before  the  Committee 
on  Manufactures,  Commerce,  Sec,  which  sat  in  1833.  This  statement 
will  further  show  that,  notwithstanding  the  great  reduction  in  the  rate  of 
wages  which  has  necessarily  accompanied  the  introduction  of  improved 
machinery,  the  actual  money-earnings  of  the  operative  spinner  are 
greater  now  than  they  were  at  tlie  beginning  of  the  century,  and  that  his 
command  of  the  necessaries  of  life  places  him  in  a  far  more  advantageous 
position  than  he  then  occupied. 


Work  turned  off 

Prices  from 

Quantities  which  a 

bv  one  Spinner 

\\a 

ges  per  Week. 

Hours 

Greenwich  Hospital 

Week's  Net  Earnings 

Years. 

per  Week. 

of 

Work 

per 

Week. 

Records. 

would  purchase. 

lbs. 

Nos. 

Gross. 

Piecers. 

Net. 

Flour 
per  Sack. 

Flesh 
per  lb. 

lbs.  of 
Flour. 

lbs.  of 
Flesh. 

s. 

d. 

s.     d. 

s. 

d. 

«.      d. 

d.       d. 

1804 

12 

180 

60 

0 

27    6 

32 

6 

74 

83    0 

6  to  7 

117 

62i 

9 

200 

67 

6 

31     0 

36 

6 

74 

83    0 

6    „    7 

124 

73 

1814 

18 

180 

72 

0 

27     6 

44 

6 

74 

70    6 

8 

175 

67 

J  J 

24 

200 

90 

0 

30    0 

60 

0 

74 

70    6 

8 

239 

90 

1833 

180 

.54 

8 

21     0 

33 

8 

69 

45    0 

6 

210 

67 

5  > 

19 

200 

65 

3 

22    6 

42 

9 

69 

45    0 

6 

267 

85 

"  The  sack  of  flour  is  taken  at  280  lbs. 

"  The  above  is  the  result  of  an  average  of  several  men's  work  at  the 
different  periods." 

It  will  be  seen  that,  in  1833,  the  number  of  hours  employed  during  the 
week  was  69,  instead  of  74,  which  it  had  been  in  the  former  years. 
But  for  this  reduction  in  tlie  time  of  working,  th€  net  earnings  would 

*  Beginning  of  Peace.     In  1814,  the  last  year  of  war,  the  number  would  be  26,71.5. 


cuAP.  II.]  MANUFACTURES.  195 

have  been  for  No.  180,  3C)s.  Ir/.,  and  for  No.  200,  45.5.  10^. ;  and  the 
quantities  of  flour  and  meat  would  have  been  for  No.  180,  224  lbs.  and 
72  lbs.,  and  for  No.  200,  285  lbs.  and  91  lbs.,  respectively. 

The  result  of  the  foregoing  table  is  corroborated  by  Mr.  Baltbage, 
who,  in  his  "  Economy  of  Manufactures,"  (pp.  337-9,  fourth  edition,) 
gives  the  following  statement : — 

"  A  machine  called  in  the  cotton  manufactui'e  a  '  stretcher,'  worked 
by  one  man,  produced  as  follows :  — 


Years. 

Pounds  of 
Cotton  Spun. 

Roving  Wages 
per  Score. 

s.     d. 

Rate  of  Karning 
per  Week. 

s.    d. 

1810 

400 

1     3.^ 

25  10 

1811 

600 

0  10 

25    0 

1813 

850 

0    9 

31   lO.i 

182.3 

1000 

0    7i 

31     .3' 

"  Tlie  same  man  working  at  another  stretcher,  the  roving  a  little  finer, 
produced : — 


Rovinj  W.iges 

Rate  of  F«imin; 

Pounds  of 

per  Score. 

per  Week. 

Years. 

Cotton  Spun. 

5.      d. 

S.     d. 

1823 

900 

0    7^ 

28      1^ 

1825 

1000 

0    7 

27     6 

1827 

1200 

0    6 

30    0 

1832 

1200 

0    6 

30    0 

"  In  this  instance,  production  has  gradually  increased,  until,  at  the  end 
of  22  years,  three  times  as  much  work  is  done  as  at  the  commencement, 
although  the  manual  labour  employed  remains  the  same.  The  weekly 
earnings  of  the  workmen  have  not  fluctuated  very  much,  and  appear  on 
the  whole  to  have  advanced ;  but  it  would  be  imprudent  to  push  too  far 
reasonings  founded  upon  a  single  instance. 

"  The  produce  of  480  spindles  of  '  mule-yarn  spinning  '  at  different 
periods  was  as  follows  : — 


Wages 

Hanks,  about  forty 

per 

•  Thousand. 

Years. 

to  the  pound. 

S.     d. 

1806 

6,668 

9    2 

1823 

8,000 

6     3 

18S2 

10,000 

3    8 

"  The  subjoined  view  of  the  state  of  weaving  by  hand  and  by  power- 
looms  at  Stockport,  in  the  years  1822  and  1832,  is  taken  from  an  enu- 
meration of  the  machines  contained  in  sixty-five  factories,  and  was 
collected  for  the  purpose  of  being  given  in  evidence  before  a  Committee 
of  the  House  of  Commons. 

In  1822.       In  1S32. 
Hand-loom  weavers 
Persons  using  power-looms 
Persons  to  dress  the  warp  . 

Total  persons  emploj'ed 
Power-looms 1,'J70 

0  'J 


2,800 

800 

2,000  decrease 

657 

3.059 

2,402  increase 

98 

388 

290  increase 

3,555 

4,247 

692  increase 

1,'J70 

9,177 

8,207  increase 

196  mOGRESS  OF  THE  NATION.  [sec.  n. 

During  this  period  tho  number  of  hand-looms  in  employm3nt  diminished 
live-sevenths,  whilst  that  of  power-looms  increased  to  more  than  five 
times  its  former  amount.  The  total  number  of  workmen  increased  about 
one-tliird  ;  but  the  amount  of  manufactured  goods  (supposing  each  power- 
loom  to  do  only  the  work  of  three  hand-looms)  was  three  and  a  half 
times  as  large  as  it  was  before. 

'"  In  considering  this  increase  of  employment,  it  must  be  admitted 
that  the  two  thousand  persons  thrown  out  of  work  are  not  exactly  of 
the  same  class  as  those  called  into  employment  by  the  power-looms.  A 
hand-weaver  must  possess  bodily  strength,  which  is  not  essential  for  a 
person  attending  a  power-loom  :  consequently  women  and  young  persons 
of  both  sexes,  from  fifteen  to  seventeen  years  of  age,  find  employment 
in  power-loom  factories.  This,  however,  would  be  a  very  limited  view 
of  the  employment  arising  from  the  introduction  of  power-looms ;  the 
skill  called  into  action  in  building  the  new  factories,  in  constructing  the 
new  machinery,  in  making  the  steam-engines  to  drive  it,  and  in  devising 
improvements  in  the  structure  of  the  looms,  as  well  as  in  regulating  tlu^ 
economy  of  the  establishment,  is  of  a  much  higher  order  than  that 
which  it  had  assisted  in  superseding ;  and  if  we  possessed  any  means  of 
measm'ing  this,  it  would  probably  be  found  larger  in  amount.  Nor  in 
this  view  of  the  subject  must  we  omit  the  fact  that,  although  hand-looms 
vould  have  increased  in  number  if  those  moved  by  steam  had  not  been 
invented,  yet  it  is  the  cheapness  of  the  article  manufactured  by  power- 
looms  which  has  caused  this  great  extension  of  their  employment;  and 
that,  by  diminishing  the  price  of  one  article  of  commerce,  we  always  call 
into  additional  activity  the  energy  of  those  who  produce  others.  It 
appears  that  the  number  of  hand-looms  in  use  in  England  and  Scotland, 
in  1830,  was  about  240,000 ;  nearly  the  same  number  existed  in  the 
year  1820  ;  whereas  the  number  of  power-looms,  which  in  1830  was 
55,000,*  had,  in  1820,  been  14,000.  When  it  is  considered  that  each 
of  those  power-looms  did  as  much  woi-k  as  three  worked  by  hand,  the 
increased  producing  power  was  equal  to  that  of  123,000  hand-looms. 
During  the  whole  of  this  period  the  wages  and  employment  of  hand-loom 
weavers  have  been  very  precarious." 

In  the  cotton -mill  of  Messrs.  Houldsworths,  in  Glasgow,  a  spinner 
employed  on  a  mule  of  33G  spindles  and  spinning  cotton  120  hanks  to 
the  pound,  produced,  in  1823,  working  74i  hours  in  the  week,  4G  pounds 
of  yarn,  his  net  weekly  earnings  for  which  amounted  to  265.  Id.  In  1833, 
the  rate  of  wages  having  in  the  meanwhile  been  reduced  13i  per  cent., 
and  the  time  of  working  having  been  lessened  to  69  hours,  the  spinner 
was  enabled,  by  the  greater  perfection  of  the  machirfery,  to  produce 
on  a  mule  of  the  same  number  of  spindles,  52^  pounds  of  yarn  of  the 
same  fineness,  and  his  net  weekly  earnings  were  advanced  to  29.?.  10^. 

*  The  number  estimated  by  Mr.  Kennedy  in  182J. 


cii.vr.  II.]  MANUFACTURES.  1&7 

But  a  mucli  more  consideral)lc  economy  than  this  has  been  produced 
in  cotton-mills  by  increasing  the  size  of  the  mules.  Mr.  Cowell,  in  his 
"  Explanatory  Preface  to  the  Tables  relative  to  Cotton  and  Silk  Mills 
in  the  Lancashire  District,"  inserted  in  the  Supplementary  Report  of 
the  Factory  Commissioners,  gives  the  following  example  of  the  effect  of 
this  imj)rovement,  as  regards  the  cost  of  the  yarn  and  the  earnings  of 
the  Sjjinner. 

"  In  the  year  1833,  in  two  fine  spinning-mills  at  Manchester,  while 
I  was  in  the  town,  a  spinner  could  produce  16  pounds  of  yarn  of  the 
fineness  of  200  hanks  to  the  pound,  from  mules  of  the  productive  fer- 
tility of  300  to  324,  working  them  69  hours ;  and  the  quantity  that  he 
turned  off"  in  69  hours  more  frequently  exceeded  16  pounds  than  fell 
short  of  it. 

"  These  very  mules  were  being  replaced  by  others  of  double  power 
while  I  was  at  Manchester.  Lei  us  examine  the  effect  on  the  spinner's 
earnings: — Li  the  early  part  of  last  year  he  produced  16  pounds  of 
}  arn  of  No.  200  from  mules  of  the  power  of  300  to  324  tpindles.  Con- 
sulting the  list  of  prices,  I  perceive  that  in  May  he  was  paid  3s.  Qd.  a 
pound  ;  this  gives  54s.  for  his  gi-oss  receipts,  out  of  which  he  had  to  pay 
(I  will  put  the  amount  high)  13s.  for  assistants.  This  leaves  him  with 
41s.  earnings.  His  mules  have  their  productive  fertility  doubled  ; 
they  are  converted  into  mules  of  the  power  of  648 ;  he  is  now  paid 
2s.  5d.  a  pound  instead  of  3s.  Qd.  ;  but  he  produces  32  pounds  of  yarn 
of  the  fineness  of  200  hanks  to  the  pound  in  69  hours  ;  his  gross  receipts 
are  immediately  raised  to  77s.  id.  I  will  now  admit  that  he  requires 
Jive  assistants  to  help  him,  and  averaging  their  cost  at  5s.  apiece,  their 
labour  will  cost  him  25s.,  and  to  avoid  all  cavil,  I  will  add  2s.  extra ; 
then  deducting  27s.  from  his  gross  receipts,  there  remains  a  sum  of 
505.  id.  for  liis  net  earnings  for  69  hours'  work  instead  of  41s.,  an  increase 
of  more  than  20  per  cent.,  while  the  cost  of  the  yarn  is  reduced  13f/.  per 
pound." 

An  effect  such  as  has  just  been  described  can  only  be  produced  while 
the  trade  is  in  a  course  of  rapid  extension.  If  the  productive  power  of 
the  machines  were  doubled  without  a  corresponding  increase  in  the 
demand,  it  is  clear  that  the  operative  spinners  could  not  receive  a  greater 
amount  of  weekly  earnings,  but  that,  on  the  contrary,  many  of  them 
would  be  thrown- out  of  work,  and  a  competition  for  employment  would 
thence  arise  which  must  occasion  a  reduction  in  their  actual  receipts. 
Considered  in  this  point  of  view,  the  prosperity  of  this  branch  of  national 
industry  becomes  a  subject  of  the  greatest  importance — an  importance 
far  beyond  all  calculation  of  mere  shillings  and  pence.  The  tendency 
of  all  improvements  in  the  various  processes  of  the  cotton  manufacture 
is  the  abridgment  of  human  labour,  but  hitherto,  such  has  been  the 
gigantic  progress  of  the  trade,  as  to  give  full  employment  to  the  hands 


198  PROGRESS  OF  THE  NATION.  [sec.  n. 

who,  in  a  less  prosperous  state  of  things,  would  have  been  thrown  out 
of  work.  Nor  is  this  all.  The  assistants  of  the  spinners,  who,  from 
their  occupation  in  joining  the  threads  broken  in  the  sjnnning,  are  called 
jnecers,  and  who  are  much  more  numerous  than  the  spinners  themselves, 
are,  while  thus  employed,  qualifying  themselves  to  become  spinners 
when  they  grow  up.  llitherto  the  demand  for  workmen  of  that  kind 
has  been  sulliciently  great  to  absorb  all  who  have  thus  been  qualified, 
.and  to  cause  them  to  receive,  as  spinners,  adequate  and  even  liberal 
wages.  Piecers  are  generally  employed  in  the  proportion  of  four  to  one 
spinner,  but  one  of  these  four  is  generally  a  girl,  who  does  not  in  after- 
life become  a  spinner,  but  is  transferred  to  some  other  department  of  the 
mill.  It  is  further  probable  that,  of  the  three  boys,  one  may  cease  to 
work  in  a  factory,  but  even  then  the  number  of  candidates  for  employ- 
ment as  spinners  will  be  continually  doubled  in  the  course  of  a  few 
years,  and  if  we  had  no  other  means  for  ascertaining  the  progressive 
extension  of  the  manufacture,  the  fact  of  the  continual  absorption  of 
these  fresh  hands  would  prove  how  great  that  extension  must  be — that 
it  must  have  continued  with  a  constantly  accelerated  speed  in  order  not 
to  lower  the  earnings  of  the  operative  spinners,  whose  ranks  are  thus 
increased  in  a  geometrical  ratio. 

Provided  nothing  shall  occur  to  prevent  the  cotton  manufacture  of 
this  country  from  developing  itself  in  the  same  extraordinary  manner  as 
it  has  dt)ne  during  the  last  thirty  years,  the  new  candidates  for  employ- 
ment will  of  course  receive  the  same  encouragement  as  those  have 
experienced  who  have  preceded  them.  But  this  is  a  state  of  things 
liable  to  be  deranged.  There  are  many  causes  which  might  contribute 
to  this  derangement.  A  war,  however  much  on  other  grounds  to  be 
deplored,  might  in  this  respect  be  among  the  least  fatal  of  the  checks 
to  our  manufacturing  industry,  since  it  would  offer  another  employment 
in  the  place  of  those  which  would  be  abridged.  The  closing  of  foreign 
markets  through  the  increasing  skill  or  the  jealousy  of  manufacturers 
in  other  countries,  and  a  falling  off  in  the  hitherto  continually  augmented 
supply  of  the  raw  material,  are  among  the  more  obvious  of  those  adverse 
circumstances.  The  closing  against  us  of  some  accustomed  channels  of 
trade  has,  at  various  times,  been  experienced  ;  but  the  degree  of  distress 
which  it  would  otherwise  have  occasioned  has,  in  a  short  time,  been 
removed  by  the  demands  of  new  customers,  who  have,  in  a  measure, 
been  compelled  to  become  such  by  the  continually  diminishing  prices  of 
our  coods.  It  will  be  seen,  in  a  future  section  of  this  work,  in  how 
great  a  degree  these  counteracting  causes  have  operated  during  the  last 
forty-five  years  ;  but  although  hitherto  the  favourable  have  always  more 
than  counterbalanced  the  unfavourable  circumstances  that  have  affected 
the  demand  for  our  products,  it  can  hardl}-  be  hojjcd  that  the  same  good 
fortinie  will  always  attend  us  :  that  "  new  worlds  "  are  to  be  continually 


cu.vr.  II.]  MANUFACTURES.  199 

"  called  into  existence  "  as  fast  as  the  improvement  of  our  spinning  and 
weaving  machinery  may  require  new  customers ;  or  tliat  another  India 
will  offer  a  market  in  which  we  can  undersell  the  native  manufat.-tures 
of  fahrics,  the  raw  material  for  which  is  grown  upon  their  own  soil,  and 
which  from  time  immemorial  have  been  among  the  chief  staples  of  their 
country. 

The^e  forebodings  might,  it  is  true,  have  been  advanced  with  appa- 
rently equal  reason  at  any  time  during  the  period  in  which  the  cotton 
manufacture  of  England  has  been  attaining  to  the  magnitude  which  it 
lias  now  reached,  and  which  it  has  been  endeavoured  faintly  to  sketch. 
According  to  present  appearances  there  has,  indeed,  hardly  ever  been  a 
time  in  which  those  forebodings  might  not  have  been  lu-ged  with  greater 
reason  than  now,  when  the  real  demands  of  consumers  in  almost 
every  part  of  the  world  are  giving  unremitted  employment  to  every 
spindle  and  loom  throughout  the  kingdom  He  must,  however,  have 
read  the  page  of  history,  and  especially  of  commercial  history,  to  very 
little  purpose  who  has  not  perceived  that,  when  least  dreaded  and 
expected,  changes  will  sometimes  arise  which  no  foresight  could  predict, 
no  prudence  or  exertion  avert.  The  better  understanding  of  the  prin- 
ciples of  trade  on  the  part  of  those  to  w  horn  the  business  of  legislation 
is  confided  will,  we  may  hope,  do  much  to  prevent  the  dreaded  reverses  ; 
an  increasing  degree  of  enlightenment  among  the  rulers  of  other  countries, 
leading  them  to  a  greater  encouragement  of  commercial  intercourse,  may 
do  more  ;  and  it  is  to  be  hoped  and  expected  that  the  example  in  this 
respect  set  within  the  last  few  years  by  England,  in  abandoning  restric- 
tions which  were  so  long  and  pertinaciously  held  by  her,  may  overcome 
those  prejudices  in  the  minds  of  foreigners,  which  our  commercial  suc- 
cess in  spite  of  those  restrictions  has  fostered,  and  that  a  spirit  of 
lil)erality  between  nations  will  be  henceforward  acknowledged  as  the 
truest  means  for  promoting  the  prosperity  of  each.  When  all  this  shall 
be  accomplished,  however,  constant  vigilance  will  be  required,  not  indeed 
for  what  is  called  the  protection  of  our  great  manufacture,  but  to  avert 
or  to  remove  obstacles  as  they  may  present  themselves,  and  especially  to 
relieve  the  springs  of  industry  from  those  which  yet  remain  of  the 
shackles  by  which  its  energy  has  in  former  times  been  cramped.  Much 
has  been  done  to  this  end  already  during  late  years,  by  reforming  our 
tariff,  and  we  may  confidently  hope  that  whatever  remains  to  be  effected 
in  this  respect  will  be  completed  by  following  out  the  same  enlightened 
policy  under  which  so  many  reforms  have  already  been  brought  about 
in  oiu"  commercial  system.  Any  further  observations  on  this  branch 
of  the  subject  may,  with  more  propriety,  be  deferred  to  that  part  of 
this  work  which  will  be  devoted  to  the  consideration  of  our  external 
connnerce. 

The  following  table  (\)Sige  200)  of  the  number  of  power-looms  used 


200 


TROGRESS  OF  THE  NATION. 


[- 


in  the  various  mnniifaotnres  of  this  country  in  1835  has  hccn  compiled 
from  returns  obtained  by  the  Inspectors  of  Factories,  and  laid  before 
Parliament.  ^  , 

Statement  of  the  Xtnnber  of  Power- Looms  used  in  Factories  in  t/ie  United  Kingdom,  at  the 
end  of  the  Year  1S35,  distinguishing  CountieSj  and  the  Branch  of  Manufacture  in  ivhich  the 
same  are  vsed. 


COUNTIES.  • 

Cotton. 

Woollen. 

Silk. 

Flax. 

Mixed 
Goods. 

Total. 

Lancaster       .... 

01,176 

1,142 

366 

62,684 

AVestraoreland    . 

8 

•, 

8 

Chester    . 

*  22,'491 

8 

414 

22,913 

Derby 

2,403 

166 

2,569 

York   .      . 

4,039 

3,770 

7,809 

Stafford    . 

336 

.. 

ii9 

455 

Devon 

,  ^ 

80 

80 

Essex  . 

106 

106 

Kent   .      i 

. . 

12 

Leicester  . 

40 

'89 

129 

Middlesex 

8 

8 

Norfolk    . 

300 

300 

Somerset  . 

*74 

156 

230 

Warwick  . 

25 

25 

Worcester 

"7 

7 

Gloucester 

4 

4 

• 

^Montgomery 

. 

4 

1 . 

4 

Cumberland 

186* 

186 

Durham    . 

,  . 

29 

29 

Northumberland 

•• 

"& 

•• 

•• 

6 

Total  in  England     . 
Lanark     

90,679 

5,105 

1,714 

41 

25 

97,564 

• 

14,069 

,. 

, , 

14,069 

Renfrew   . 

1,339 

, . 

26 

1,365 

Dumbarton    . 

534 

534 

Bute    .      .      . 

94 

94 

Ayr     .     .     . 

736 

736 

Kirkcudbright 

90 

.. 

90 

Ferth  .      .      . 

421 

J , 

. . 

421 

Aberdeen 

248 

142 

390 

Roxburgh 

'22 

22 

Total  in  Scotland     . 
Waterford      ... 

17,531 

22 

•• 

168 

17,721 

339 

., 

339 

Wexford  . 

67 

, , 

67 

Kildare     . 

52 

52 

Dublin      . 

23 

23 

Antrim     . 

340 

340 

Down  . 

•     425 

425 

Armagh    . 

170 

•• 

166 

270 

Total  in  Ireland .     . 

1,416 

•• 

100 

1,516 

■ — s — 

SUMMARY. 

England 90,679 

5,105 

1,714 

41 

25 

97,564 

Scotland 17,531 

22 

168 

17,721 

Ireland 

1,416 

•• 

100 

1,516 

United  K 

ing 

Jon 

1      . 

109,626 

5,127 

1,714 

309  . 

25* 

116,801 

*  The  materials  used  are  worsted,  cotton,  silk,  and  India-rubber  thread ;    the  articles 
manufactured  are  girths,  belts,  braces,  garters,  and  the  like. 


CHAP.  II.]  MANUFACTUltES.  201 

The  art  of  printing  on  woven  fabrics  is  of  very  ancient  origin.  Ander- 
son, in  his  "  History  of  Commerce,"  states  that  it  was  first  practised  in 
London  in  1G7G.  The  first  cotton  printer  in  England  is  said  to  have 
been  a  Frenchman,  whose  print-ground  was  at  Richmond,  on  the  banks 
of  the  Thames.  Owing  to  the  interference  of  parUament,  first  by  tlie 
imposition  of  heavy  duties,  and  afterwards  by  more  direct  restrictions, 
the  trade  was  destroyed  in  1720.  The  object  of  the  legishiture  in  this 
proceeding  apjiears  to  have  been  the  encouragement  of  the  silk  and 
woollen  manufactures.  The  restriction  against  wearing  printed  fabrics, 
of  which  cotton  formed  a  part,  was  repealed  in  1736,  and  it  was  com- 
puted that,  in  1750,  as  many  as  50,000  pieces  of  goods  made  of  linen- 
warp  and  cotton-weft  were  printed  in  England.  At  that  time  no  means 
had  been  devised  for  spinning  cotton-yarn  of  a  strength  which  fitted  it 
for  forming  the  warp.  In  aljout  fifteen  years  thereafter,  the  printing 
business  was  introduced  into  Lancashire,  and  from  that  time  appears  to 
have  grown  in  proportion  to  the  increase  of  the  cotton  manufacture. 
But  it  is  only  during  the  present  century  that  this  branch  of  industry 
has  attained  to  any  considerable  importance.  In  consequence  of  the 
duty  imposed  upon  printed  cottons,  w^e  are  acquainted  with  the  quantity 
which  has  undergone  the  process  at  diflferent  periods  up  to  the  year  1831, 
when  the  duty  was  wholly  repealed. 

Yards. 

The  quantity  printed  in  ITSG  was     .     .     .       20,621,797 

In  1800,  it  had  increased  to 32,869,729 

In  1814,  it  had  further  increased  to  .      .      .     12-1,61.3,472 
And  in  1830,  it  had  reached  to    ....     .347,4.")0,2a9 

being  more  than  ten  times  the  quantity  printed  at  the  beginning  of  the 
century,  w^hile  on  the  other  hand  it  is  less  by  104,973,292  yards  than 
the  quantity  exported  in  1849.  The  quantity  printed  in  1830,  after 
providing  199,799,466  yards  for  exportation,  left  147,650,833  yards 
for  use  at  home. 

This  great  increase  must  be  ascribed  to  the  improved  contrivances  and 
processes  which,  in  the  interval  have  been  introduced.  By  some  of 
these,  processes  w  hich  formerly  occupied  many  weeks  are  now  performed 
in  a  few  hours,  effecting  a  great  saving  of  labour  and  in  the  amount  of 
capital  required.  The  substitution  of  metallic  cylinders  on  which  the 
patterns  are  engraved,  in  place  of  wooden  blocks,  was  first  practised 
about  1785,  and  at  once  effected  a  great  saving.  The  process  of 
engraving  the  entire  surface  of  these  large  cylinders  was,  however,  a 
very  expensive  operation  ;  it  was  consequently  a  more  important  im- 
provement when  the  system  was  introduced  of  engraving  the  pattern 
upon  a  small  steel  cylinder,  and  thence  transferring  it  by  pressure,  first 
to  softened  steel,  and  then,  this  being  hardened,  to  copper  cylinders ; 
in  the  manner  which  has  since  been  used  for  multiplying  plates  used  for 
printing   bank-notes.     By  this  means  the    engraved   patterns   can    be 


202  PliOGllESS  OF  Tim  NATION.  [sec.  ii. 

transferred  to  almost  an  indefinite  nnmber  of  cylinders  at  a  trilling 
expense.  The  small  cylinder  npon  which  the  engraving  is  first  snnk 
is  called  the  die,  the  second  cylinder  to  which  the  pattern  is  transferred 
in  relief  is  called  the  7nill.  This,  when  hardened,  will  give  the  required 
imj)ression  to  a  great  number  of  cylinders  made  of  the  softer  metal,  and 
as  the  die  can  likewise  be  made  to  give  up  its  pattern  to  several  mills, 
a  sufficient  number  of  cylinders  can  always  be  produced  from  one 
engraving. 

The  introduction  of  this  great  improvement  took  place  about  1H08, 
and  has  had  a  powerful  effect  in  extending  the  trade  of  the  country. 
At  this  time,  cylinders  thus  made  and  engraved,  after  the  novelty  of  the 
pattern  is  gone  by  in  England,  are  exported  to  various  parts  of  Europe 
and  America. 

The  policy  of  subjecting  such  an  article  as  printed  cottons  to  the 
burthen  and  restrictions  of  the  excise  laws  w'as  always  much  questioned. 
To  preserve  our  export  trade,  it  was,  of  course,  necessary,  during  the 
continuance  of  the  duty,  to  grant  a  drawback  upon  shipment  equal  to 
the  amount  of  the  duty.  The  net  revenue  derived  from  the  tax,  on  an 
average  of  the  ten  years  preceding  its  repeal,  was  a  little  more  than 
600,000/.  per  annum  ;  but  in  order  to  realize  this  sum  to  the  Exchequer, 
the  gross  amount  of  duty  levied  during  the  same  time  averaged 
1,850,000/.  per  annum,  more  than  two-thirds  of  the  same  being  repaid 
as  drawback  upon  quantities  exported.  This,  in  itself,  was  a  great  and 
acknowledged  evil :  it  held  out  temptation,  and  opened  the  door  to 
frauds,  which,  it  is  w'ell  known,  were  committed  to  a  considerable  extent ; 
and  besides  this  crying  evil,  the  interference  of  revenue  regulations 
placed  many  obstacles  in  the  way  of  experiments  and  improvements  as 
we  have  since  happily  been  able  to  ascertain.  Without  entering  into 
any  minute  explanations  upon  the  subject,  it  may  be  stated,  in  proof  of 
this  assertion,  and  upon  the  authority  of  a  gentleman  thoroughly  and 
intimately  conversant  with  all  the  details  of  calico  printing,  that,  upon 
the  same  premises,  with  the  same  capital,  and  employing  the  same 
amount  of  labour,  double  the  quantity  of  cloths  are  now  printed  which 
were  printed  previous  to  the  repeal  of  the  duty,  and  to  the  consequent 
removal  of  the  revenue-oflficers  from  the  print  works. 

Another  very  great  improvement  has  been  effected  of  late  years. .  At 
first,  only  one  colour  could  be  imparted  to  the  pattern  on  the  cylinder ; 
and  if  more  than  one  colour  were  required,  it  was  necessary  to  resort 
to  a  different  process,  and  to  print  the  several  colours  by  different 
operations.  This  disadvantage  was  at  length  partially  got  over  ;  so 
that,  five  years  ago,  printers  were  enabled  to  impart  two,  and  even  three 
colours  by  means  of  cylinders  ;  and  it  is  now  common  to  print  five  colours 
at  one  operation.  The  vast  improvement  which  has  latterly  been 
produced  in  the  style  and  execution  of  printed  cotton  goods  is  matter  of 


CH.vp.  ii]  MANUFACTURES.  203 

such  common  observation,  that  it  cannot  bo  necessary  to  enlarge  upon  it 
here  :  but  for  it,  the  cotton  manufacture  could  not,  in  this  branch,  have 
stood  against  the  powei'ful  rivalry  to  which  it  has  of  late  been  subjected 
by  our  silk  manufacture.  -This  improvement  has  been  assisted  by  the 
discovery  of  a  method  for  imparting  to  cotton  fabrics  the  brilliant  red 
colour  of  cochineal,  which  was  previously  applied  to  woollens  only.  This 
is  eflectcd  by  simply  passing  a  current  of  steam  on  to  cloth  to  which  the 
cochineal-dye  has  previously  been  applied,  that  process  having  the  effect 
of  fixing  the  colour. 

It  is  not  possible  to  make  any  very  satisfactory  estimate  of  the  growth 
and  progress  of  the  manufacture  of  hosiery.  The  greater  part  of  our 
knowledge  concerning  it  is  due  to  the  personal  exertions  of  Mr.  Fclkin, 
a  merchant  of  Nottingham,  the  carefulness  and  accuracy  of  whose 
investigations  are  generally  recognised.  These,  however,  a})ply  only  to 
recent  years,  and  we  cannot  put  e({ual  faith  in  the  results  offered  by 
previous  inquirers. 

The  chief  seats  of  the  hosiery  manufacture  are  the  counties  of  Derby, 
Nottingham,  and  Leicester,  in  the  last  named  of  which  nearly  all  the 
frames  in  which  wool  is  employed  are  to  be  found,  while  Nottingliam 
contains  the  largest  number  of  frames  for  the  production  of  cotton 
hosiery.  The  use  of  silk  in  this  branch  of  manufactiu'e  is  almost  wholly 
contined  to  Derby  and  Nottingham. 

Blackner  estimated  that  in  1812  there  were  29,590  stocking  frames 
at  work  in  all  the  branches.  Thirty  years  before  that  time  the  number 
had  been  estimated  at  20,000.  If  we  are  to  judge  from  the  localities 
assigned  to  the  frames  in  1812,  it  would  appear  that  rather  more  than 
one-third  were  employed  in  producing  cotton  hose,  and  that  about 
one-half  were  used  for  woollen  goods,  l)ut  no  very  accurate  estimate  of 
the  proportions  can  be  formed  from  the  locality  of  the  machines.  In 
1833,  a  meeting  was  held  of  delegates  from  the  frame-work  knitters, 
when  a  resolution  was  formed  for  dividing  the  seat  of  the  hosiery 
manufacture  into  districts,  with  the  view  of  obtaining,  among  other 
things,  exact  details  of  the  number  and  description  of  frames,  the  amount 
of  labour  employed  in  them,  and  such  further  particulars  as  might 
enable  the  workmen  to  co-operate  for  the  more  effectual  protection  and 
advancement  of  their  interests.  The  resolution  tluis  formed  was  not, 
indeed,  carried  into  effect  in  the  manner  nor  with  the  objects  proposed  ; 
but  was  of  advantage,  by  its  having  been  the  means  of  drawing  the 
attention  of  Mr.  Felkin  to  the  subject,  who  drew  up  an  estimate  of  the 
extent  of  the  manufacture  in  its  various  branches,  which  was  believed 
to  present  a  sufficiently  accurate  approximation  to  the  condition  of  the 
trade  at  that  time  to  answer  all  practical  purposes.  The  following  is 
Mr.  Felkin's  estimate  for  1833. — See  page  20-1. 


204 


PROGRESS  OF  TUE  NATION. 


[sec.  11. 


S  5 ' 


3  '-ri 

CO  o  in       •— I  ri  c^       c> 


—  C.5S2SSSS   IS 


«.5«t?  c  o  c  2  £  £  5 
|t3       c  ir:  m  o  o  C  00 


'  -t  X  -M         — 


'?     I 


£   . 


c  c  c 

oc  -r  -I- 

OC  C:  00  T>  CT  O  ^ 


-*  •-  s 

'•^  ~  in 


—  —  ^ 

o  c  ^ 


So  J 


»S  £  .n 


■oc  o  >  3 
•^  "5  R  § 

"5  S  >2 


&.   r  S 
m   CI   o 


i° 


s.§ 


M—      o     -=  — 


g25 


o  o  c;  J 
.  ceo; 

(M  C  -O  - 

O   w  l^  r 

.»      oT 


^       ~-^^ 


-2^  ^ 


c "::;  .S 

III 

5    t»' 


_  ^        o 


(^ 


CCOOOSO     lO 


C3  u  ^ 
c   =*  a  c 


o  ^'  s  t"  S  ~  2  ^     S     I  =  o  -"s  2  I  s 


^  ...      -3 


-^^l*^ 


C   s*  C   ^^   m 


.£  S--5 


.=  .=1  =  5^ 


£  ^    ^  Si 
*  s  s . 


^  S-3 


si  -^  — 
>   o   _ 

g 

yj 

2-5  — 

■S 

.^  o  to 

C   j;--- 

o 

C   — C 

^ 

, '-;         — 

_e  — ■  — , 

=3 

^£12 

c  '^  — 

3D 

.s:5  tp 

i) 

C   i^   s 

c   c  ^ 

S 

o 

^^c^ 

.2  tt  r; 

o 

13  o  ^^ 

^ 

s  c  ^ 

325 

C   -  — " 

•«.:=  > 

o  i  s 

S  g  o 
fi  c  c 

Ml^ 

c3 

r:  :i  M 

& 

I— 1  1— 1  1— c 

'■s-n^ 

c^ 

g   iO 


o  =S 

'O  t< 

C5  T! 

S    ^ 

.  S  >=  2 

O  "" 

5+j  ~^n.- 

5  "§ 

C  -M  OO 

l^  O   r^ 

C    =! 

.^ 

■J.  -2 

|if 

~    " 

s-^" 

is. 

.=    tX3 

C     !h 

'i% 

—   a        e3 


•£,  <B 


CHA)-.  II.]  MANUFACTURES.  205 

At  the  meeting  of  the  British  As.'^ncialion  at  York,  in  1844,  Mr. 
Fclkin  read  a  very  elaborate  report,  which  has  since  been  printed,  on 
the  hosiery  trade,  and  the  condition  of  the  frame-work  knitters.  Tlie 
survey  and  census  upon  which  Mr.  Felkin  founded  his  report,  were 
made  in  the  spring  and  sununer  of  1844,  as  far  as  respects  the  midhind 
counties  of  EngUuid,  by  agents  whom  he  employed  for  that  purpose. 
The  estimate  for  the  remaining  parts  of  the  kingdom  were  adopted  and 
considered  correct  by  INIr.  Felkin,  whose  intimate  acquaintance  with 
the  condition  of  the  manufacture  in  all  its  branches  enables  him  to  form 
an  accurate  judgment  upon  the  subject. — See  Table,  page  206. 

Since  1812,  when  Mr.  Blackner  made  the  estimate  of  29,590  frames 
as  the  total  of  what  were  used  in  the  United  Kingdom,  many  frames 
have  been  widened  so  as  to  make  two  stockings  at  once,  which  was  not 
the  case  before.  The  quantity  of  cotton  hosiery  goods  made  in  1833  was 
estimated  by  Mr.  Felkin  to  have  increased  more  than  fifty  per  cent,  iu 
the  preceding  twenty  years — an  opinion  which  agi-ees  with  the  fact  which 
everybody  must  have  observed,  that  the  use  of  cotton  stockings  has, 
during  that  time,  been  superseding  those  of  woollen  to  a  great  extent 
among  the  female  part  of  the  population.  It  will  also  be  seen  from,  the 
statement  of  Mr.  Felkin,  that  the  number  of  frames  employed  for  making 
cotton  goods,  which  in  1812  was  about  one-third  the  whole  number 
employed,  formed  about  one-half  in  1833,  or  16,300  out  of  33,000 
frames. 

The  making  of  stockings  is  altogether  a  domestic  manufacture,  being 
carried  on  in  the  dwellings  of  the  workmen.  Some  of  these  persons 
possess  frames,  which  are  their  own  property,  but  the  greater  part  use 
frames  which  belong  to  the  master-manufacturers  by  whom  the  work- 
men are  employed,  and  who  are  paid  by  those  workmen  an  annual  rent, 
varying  from  forty  shillings  to  five  pounds,  according  to  the  size  and 
ca])ability  of  the  frame. 

The  bobbin  net  manufacture  has  altogether  risen  up  during  the 
present  century,  and  in  a  comparatively  small  number  of  years  has 
become  an  object  of  national  importance,  finding  employment  for  between 
150,000  and  200,000  persons,  whose  wages  amount  to  2,500,000/.  per 
annum,  as  stated  in  a  memorial  addressed  in  June,  1834,  to  the  Lords 
of  the  Treasury  by  the  princi])al  merchants  and  manufacturers  engaged 
in  the  bobbin-net  trade. 

The  first  successful  attempt  at  producing,  by  means  of  machinery, 
net-work  bearing  the  characteristics  of  lace,  was  made  in  1809  ;  and 
this  machine,  rude  in  its  construction,  and  slow  and  inefficient  in  its 
operation,  in  comparison  with  the  improved  machinery  now  emjdoycd 
for  the  same  purpose,  was  the  subject  of  a  patent,  the  possessors  of  which 
realized,  during  the  continuance  of  their  exclusive  right,  very  large 
fortunes.     Since  the  expiration  of  this  patent,  the  machinery  of  the  frame 


206 


PIIOGRESS  OF  THE  NATION. 


[sec.    II. 


1 

CO 

s 

0 

c 

CO 

{i;     O     a;     X 

I^ 

l-^ 

1^ 

in 

t^ 

■-*<" 

co" 

00" 

co" 

to 

(n" 

->l« 

CO 

en 

CD 

CO 

0 

<M 

in 

'-> 

cf 

S=    i 

r^ 

0 

0 

g 

t^ 

<M 

in 

(M 

«ll-^ 

■-<< 

« 

^ 

«^ 

".- 

«  c  "^ 

icT 

cd" 

■*" 

CO 

in 

CD 

-t 

:d 

0=^ 

<;•» 

-1< 

<-, 

0 

£ — 

gsss 

0 

0 

0 

■— 

O     C     Q 

0 

C  Q  0  0 

c  0  0  in 

O    —    5 

0 

CO 

s 

(Ti 

O      <M      -* 

X' 

CO 

C  C  -t  CO 

0 

0 

o_o_o_o^ 

0 

Oi 

1— t 

ei 

'M 

O 

^    t^    r^ 

so 

CTi 

00  c  00  rr 

c^ 

(75 

1— "ccT^'o" 

0 

c^ 

3? 

(N 

1-1    t^ 

•^^   Tt   CO  1— 

CO 

CD  (M  -*  1-1 

(M 

'1' 

" 

CO 

m 

" 

CO 

0^ 

0!?! 

C 

8  8H 

0 
0 

0 

8SSS 

0 

0 

8888 

g 

8 

c  ^ 

^ 

o 

o     o  -g  c 

0 

0000 

0 

0 

c  0  0  0 

0 

CD 

CD 

^  3 

^O 

^      00  "0 

a 

^ 

0 

s 

-t  -+  CD  00 
CO  CO   ~.  1~ 

ci 

9 

coco 

(M  l~  C-l  C 

§ 

CO 

in 

0 

°&. 

Tf 

fi  in 

00 

'o_ 

,,  CO—   rl 

CO 

I— 

^^ 

(>r 

^^ 

(n" 

in" 

o 

0     (N      ^ 

!D 

0 

0000 

0 

^ 

Q 

0 

■S 

CT! 

0    in    ,Z< 

in 

c 

0  C'  c  0 

in 

o      .S 

o_ 

in    «o    0 

(N 

0 

00  in  m  ^ 

5i 

0 

0 

0 

^ 

'5   o  iJ 

'M 

?» 

t^     (N     t^ 

0 

,_4 

r^  't  in  Tfi 

c^ 

c 

0 

CO 

in 

^        rt 

in 

Ci 

m 

t-  .-1  (M 

CO 

in 

in 

-f 

^    s 

*"* 

'"' 

<N 

CD 

CD 

0 

c 

000 

c 

(2 

SQSg 

- 

0 

c 

0 

o 

CD 

0 

t^            CS 

t^ 

0    c^    0 

0 

o^S^c^o^ 

^ 

0 

0 

0^ 

.;:^    -    1^ 

^ 

n 

0    t^    t^ 

t^ 

0 

cD^'^fc^rd' 

0 

0 

0 

oT 

-i' 

(M      t~ 

-t 

c 

r-  — 1  l~  ;r5 

0 

>      ^ 

m 

c  r:  CD 

0 

0 

'"         r>S 

of 

•>!" 

un 

00" 

00" 

la 

rN     CD     00 

^ 

0 

CD  CD  0  in 

CO 

CD 

-f  «  CD  -)• 

CO 

CD 

CO 

„  c.        g 

0     C      'T 

t^ 

in 

CO  CO  -x  -i- 

01 

—  Ol  t~  — 

00 

00 

CD 

S's'r  E 

c 

o_ 

CO      (M      f-i 

00 

cr.  CO  !N  ^ 

00 

^ 

C  —  CO'  CO 

0 

I^ 

'iC 

«s 

o  =  =  3 

,_, 

<N 

CO 

CD 

•*    ^     F- 

-+ 

c; 

Ol          rl 

-* 

(M 

^2     fS 

01 

— 

— 

•* 

o 

0 

c 

m 

0 

-f 

-t 

CD 

c     •     •     • 

CD 

o 

tN 

rM 

CM      •     •      • 

CO 

CD 

z 

o 

(M 

•M 

CI 

a. 

o 
Z 

0 

0 

-f 

c    .    .    . 

■* 

in 

0      •      •      • 

m 

CD 

m 

^1 

(M 

CI 

rt< 

-t 

^ 

00 

CD 
OX 

[ 

£  ;S  5  X 

d 

(r> 

0 

^ 

01 

-t    •    •    • 

CD 

0-1 

CD    •  in    • 

^3 

X 

ij; 

ic 

^ 

5i 

u'; 

CO      •      •      • 

CO 

CD 

CO 

CD 

5|'3- 

CD 

CD 

^ 

'"' 

03 

!K 

CO      -- 

-c 

CD 

^ 

~. 

j_, 

00  CO  •-  ■* 

r~ 

s 

0 

0 

-f 

00 

CO 

cr:  rM  CO  -- 

in 

CTi 

d 

-f 

;  -t     •     • 

C^ 

0 

t~  cri  CO  CO 

-* 

't 

c; 

Z 

CD 

CD 

t-T 

^         i-h" 

r^ 

00" 

H 

1— « 

tc   . 

,~ 

CO      I^      00 

jj 

■* 

t^  r;  ?l  CO 

C 

^ 

^ 

in 

11 

d 
Z 

^ 

0      0      -f 

•* 

-f  -t-  CD  CO 

-h 

CD 

CD 

CO 

r-l       tC      -H 

0 

m 

m  X  0  't 

•* 

in 

O  '^ 

»-4 

1    'M 

in 

'f          r- 

CT 

-f 

Z  • 

1 

.1—' 

^^ 

>, 

o 

to    CO 

-i" 

_5 

m      oo  t^ 

^ 

iM 

S-l 

CD 

^ 

d 

»o 

0    0 

in 

m    •  ^ 

55 

S 

Z 

c£; 

n-        CD 

'*„ 

03 

(>)      -CM 

CO 

.... 

00 

C 

r-H 

co" 

^ 

in 

.  .  . 

.,—'>—, 

,_*_ 

,— ^^ 

. 

V) 

Cm 

0     _     ^ 

C<-4 

"3    . 

cj 

<^  .  .  . 

a 
o 

.... 

. 

c3 

ci 

C    C 

fc< 

^ 

fcJ3    •     • 

i  *f  * 

c5 

•^ 

o 

^ 

o 

0        "ot 

0    00    6/0 

to 

p 

p- 

o 

w 

o 

c  o 

c  .    & 

5    "    rn     "3 

0  oT  • 
W  0 

c  c 

^  is 

0  .~   c" 

111 

•    •  01  0 

5   3  ,„  "   ^ 
S  .=   £   S   >= 
;  t-  >  '  ci 

CHAP.  II.]  MANrFACTURES.  '207 

has  been  most  importantly  sim])lifio(],  and  its  efficiency  increased  ;  so 
that,  by  the  appHcation  of  an  equal  amount  ot"  labour,  twelve  times  tlie 
quantity  of  net  is  now  produced  which  could  have  been  previously  made, 
and  a  quantity  of  the  finished  manufacture  is  now  sold  for  2s.  C)(l., 
which,  during  the  continuance  of  the  patent,  was  sold  for  51.  The  ex- 
tent to  wliich  the  bobbin-net  manufacture  has  since  reached  may  be  seen 
from  the  following  statements  drawn  up  in  1836  by  Mr.  Felkin.  who  has 
been  personally  interested  in  the  trade  from  its  commencemcnit,  and  pos- 
sesses all  the  requisite  facilities  for  preparing  an  accurate  estimate 
concerning  it : — 

Statistics  of  the  Bobbin-Net  Trade. 
Capital  employed  in  spinning  and  doubling  the  yarn : — 
Fixed  capital  in  35  spinning  and  24  doubling  factories — 724,000  spinning,  £. 

296,700  doubling  spindles 71."), 000 

Floating  capital  in  spinners'  and  doublers'  stock,  and  necessary  sundries    200,000 

91.5,000 

Deduct  one-sixth,  employed  for  foreign  bobbin-net  trade 155,000 

Total  capital  employed  in  spinning  and  doubling  for    £■ 

English  bobbin-net  trade 700,000 

Capital  employed  in  bobbin-net  making  : — 

Fixed  capital  in  factories,  principally  for  power-machines 85,000 

„  power-machines,  averaging  11  quarters  wide      ....     170,000 

„  hand-machines,  averaging  9  quarters  wide 267, 0(X) 

Floating  capital  in  stock  on  hand,  power-owners 150,000 

hand-owners 250,000 

922,000 

Capital  in  embroidering,  preparing,  and  stock 250, OCO 

Total  capital  employed  in  the  trade £1,932,000 

The  value  of  the  materials  used  is  as  follows  : — 

s.  d.  £. 

6,00)  lbs.  cotton  yarn,  No.  130    at      7  6  2,2.50 

10,000                    „                     140    „       8  0  4,000 

75,000                     „                     1.50    „       8  9  32,812 

85,000        „        160  „   9  6  40,375 

95,000        „        170  „  10  7  .50,270 

350,000        „         180  „  12  0  210,000 

250,000        „         190  „  14  0  175,000 

220.000        „         200  „  16  0  176,000 

60,000        „        210  „  18  6  55,500 

9,000        „        220  „  21  3  9J.563 

1,160,000  lbs.  j'arn  "  775,770 

20  per  cent,  discount     .     .     151,1.54 

£. 

Net  value  of  3'arn 604,616 

Value  of  silk  used 40,000 

AVages,  interest,  wear  and  tear,  &c.  .      .     .     732,2-34 

Value  of  rough  goods 1,376,850 

2(X), 000  pieces,  gassed,  .3rf. 2,500 

3(Ml!(K10       „       bleached,  \0d 12,. 500 

3CX),0t)0       „       dressed,  Is.  9d 26,000 

One-third  figured,  cost 3.50,000 

200,000  pieces,  wide-nets,  finished,  l.f.  Cf/ 15,000 

100.000       „        quillings,  3.S- 15,000 

£1,797,8.50 


208 


PROGRESS  OF  THE  NATION. 


[sr.c.  II. 


The  number  of  macliines,  exclusive  of  1G5  not  at  work,  is  3,547,  of 
tlie  following  flescri])tions  : — 


PLain    . 
Qiiillinj 


Kotary. 


1,293 

247 

45 


1,585 


116 
116 

188 


420 


Lever. 


16 
761 
448 


1,225 


Travers 
Warp. 


152 
152 


Pusher- 
Grecian. 


165 


165 


Total. 


1,425 
1,124 

998 


3,547 


The  parts  of  the  kingdom  in  which  these  machines  are  employed,  are — 


Nottinghamshire  . 
Leicestershire 
DerV)yshirc 
"West  of  Endand  . 


372 

207 
192 
654 


1,425 


Quillings.'    Fancy. 


,006 
37 
49 
30 


1,122 


782 
99 
14 

103 


998 


2,160 
343 
255 

787 


3,545 


Quantity  of 
Yarn  used. 


lbs. 
640,  ()00 
1(X),000 
100,000 
320,000 


1,160,000 


The  quantity  and  value  of  the  rough  goods  produced  by  the  different 
kinds  of  machines  are — 

Square  Yards. 

Rotary 15,827,843 

.       8,327,240 

.       2,627,1.37 

811,650 

325.188 


I, ever 
Circular    . 
Pusher-Grecian 
Ti-avers  Warp 


£. 

662,255 

476,959 

141.864 

41,574 

54,198 


27,919,063 


1,376,850 


The  number  of  machine  owners  is  837,  of  whom — 


302  possess  only  1  machine. 

203        „  „     2 

212        „       from  3  to    5  machines. 
69        „  „     6  „   10        „ 

24        „  „    11  „  20        „ 

10        „  „   21  „  30        „ 


5  possess  from  31  to    40  macliines. 

4  „  41  „     50        „ 

5  „  51  „  100  „ 
1  „  104  „ 
1             „                       120         „ 

and  1  „  200        „ 


The  power  of  the  different  kinds  of  machines  as  to  the  width  of  the 
bobbin-net  produced,  is — 


Width  stated  in 
Quarters. 

Rotary. 

Circular. 

I>ever. 

Pusher- 
Grecian. 

Travers 
Warp. 

Total. 

4-Quarter 

, . 

1 

5 

2 

8 

5       ,, 

12 

8 

4 

24 

3 

51 

G       ,, 

26 

52 

110 

61 

117 

366 

7       ,, 

12 

57 

148 

25 

20 

262 

8       ,, 

496 

240 

321 

18 

9 

1,084 

9       ,, 

19 

32 

113 

3 

1 

168 

10       ,, 

313 

25 

192 

16 

•  • 

546 

11       ,, 

41 

2 

122 

7 

.. 

172 

12       ,, 

622 

4 

184 

6 

816 

13       ,, 

17 

12 

29 

14       ,, 

4 

5 

J.. 

9 

15       ,, 

1 

2 

3 

16       ,, 

22 

9 

31 

20       ,, 

2 

•• 

2 

1,585 

420 

1,225 

165 

.5. 

3,547 

cuxi\  II  ]  MANUFACTURES.  209 

Til c  wages  of  persons  employed  in  the  difFcront  branches  of  the  manu- 
facture vary  according  to  the  kind  of  work  produced.     The  net  earnings  of 

Men  arc  from  12,s'.  to  3:is.  per  week,  averaging  about  16s. 
Women       „        3s.  to  12s.        „  „  6s. 

Children    „        Is.  Gd.  to  5s.    „  „  2s.  6d. 

Successive  improvements  in  the  arrangement  of  the  machines  had 
caused  those  first  constructed — the  Travers-warp  machines — to  go  out 
of  use,  and  a  great  number  of  them,  which  had  cost  300/.  each,  were 
sold  and  broken  up  for  the  value  of  the  iron  which  they  contained. 
It  has  been  found  recently,  that  by  a  slight  alteration  these  machines 
may  be  adapted  to  the  production  of  fancy  nets  ;  such  of  them  as 
remained  have  been  thus  modified  at  a  small  expense,  and  employed  for 
the  production  of  fabrics  of  continually-increasing  beauty  and  value, 

Mr.  Felkin  has  kindly  furnished  the  following  particulars  respecting 
this  interesting  branch  of  manufacture,  showing  the  position  which  it 
occupied  in  1844. 

"  The  number  of  mills  for  spinning  and  doubling  fine  yarns  is  greatly 
increased  since  1*^36,  but  the  increased  product  is  chiefly  employed  for 
warps  in  Bradford,  Coventry,  and  Spitalfields,  for  the  production  of 
mixed  goods.  The  capital  employed  in  producing  yarns  for  English  lace 
is  about  the  same  as  in  1836 — 

£.  £. 

Say 700,000 

Fixed  capital  in  45  factories 90,000 

„  1750  steam  power  machines,  1  .-,o(^  Q,^r> 

averaging  l.'i  (quarters  wide  J  "     ' 
,,  1450  hand  machines,  average  1  ,  -,,  nnn 

10  quarters  wide       .      .  °.  p^O-OOO 
Floating  capital  in  rough  goods  in  process  of)  rnn  nnft 

making j  "^     ' 

„  process   of   embroidering  1  „^  ^^ 

and  finishing       ...  J         ' 

1,320,000 

Total  capital  employed  in  the  trade     .     .     ,£2,080,000 


"The  only  improvement  introduced  since  1833  in  the  machinery  for 
making  plain  nets  has  consisted  in  a  contrivance  for  obtaining  greater 
speed  in  the  working.  Several  patents  have  been  taken  out  for  im- 
provements in  the  style  of  the  goods  produced,  and  for  modes  of  adapting 
the  jacquard  frame.  The  main  object  sought  by  the  patentees  has  been 
the  introduction  of,  patterns  in  close  imitation  of  pillow  lace,  and  espe- 
cially of  Netherland  lace,  and  their  success  in  this  object  has  been  very 
great. 

"  The  cheapness  of  these  beautiful  fabrics  is  calculated  to  excite 
astonishment.  A  yard  in  length  of  12-quarter  wide  plain  net,  may  now 
be  bought  for  one  shilling.  A  yard  of  platt  net,  of  the  same  width,  is 
worth  from  20s.  to  5/.  The  machine  employed  to  make  the  former 
would  cost  in  its  construction  250/,,  while  tlie  platt  net  machine  would 

p 


210  PROGRESS  OF  THE  NAIION  [sec.  ii. 

cost  from  500Z.  to  lOOOZ.  Fancy  goods  of  all  qualities,  from  one 
farthing  to  '20s.  per  yard,  are  at  all  times  being  made,  and  often  in  the 
same  establishment. 

"In  1837,  the  fancy  productions  of  Nottingham  were  so  far  out  of 
favour  with  the  public,  that  the  embroiderers  were  reduced  to  one-third 
of  their  former  number,  and  those  employed  were  earning  miserable 
wages  ;  but  during  the  last  three  or  four  years  so  great  has  been  the 
improvement  in  the  taste  and  style  of  those  goods,  that  the  demand  for 
them  has  been  continually  increasing  at  rising  prices,  and  the  wages 
of  the  workjjeople  have  risen  proportionally.  This  result  has  principally 
been  owing  to  the  application  of  the  jacquard  machine  to  this  branch  of 
manufacture ;  a  result  which  has  not  been  accomplished  without  great 
difficulty. 

"  The  tcarp-Iace  manufacture  is  usually  carried  on  separately  from  the 
bobbin-net  branch.  The  machinery  engaged  in  it,  is  chiefly  employed 
by  15  firms  in  the  town  of  Nottingham  and  the  neighbourhood. 

"  The  warp  machine,  which  is  a  very  beautiful  modification  of  the 
stocking  fi-ame,  is  used  for  the  production  of  articles  of  the  most  varied 
texture,  from  the  stoutest  cloth  to  the  lightest  gossamer  net-work. 
There  are  either  plain  or  fancy  goods ;  for  the  latter  kind,  the  jacquard 
machine  is  connected  with  it,  and  very  splendid  patterns  are  thus  pro- 
duced. At  this  time  (September,  1845)  800  warp-frames  are  employed 
in  making  lace  goods,  300  being  worked  with  silk,  and  500  with  cotton 
yarn.     These  frames  would  cost  in  their  construction,  about  100,000/. 

"  They  give  employment  to  altogether  about  4500  hands,  viz. — 

200  Overlookers,  smiths,  &c at  40s.  per  week. 

100  Machine  hands 30 

400  Ditto 25 

500  Ditto 20 

.500  Ditto 15 

1,000  Females,  mending,  putting  up,  &c 10 

1,500  Females  and  children,  drawing,  carding,  &c.,  Is.  6d.  to   8 

200  Children,  winding 3  „ 

100  Bleachers,  dressers,  clerks,  &c.,  at  various  wages. 

"  The  sum  paid  in  wages,  during  1844,  was  about  165,000/.     The 

materials  used  in  that  year,  were  40,000  lbs.  raw  silk  ;  value  30,000/. 

„  „  600,000  lbs.    „     cotton    „      25,000/. 

The  finished  goods  were  of  the  value  of  350,000/.,  viz. : — cotton  goods, 

200,000/.,  and  silk  goods,  150,000/. 

"The  3200  machines  were,  in  1844,  employed  and  produced,  as 
follows : — 


CHAP.    II.] 


MANUFACTURES. 


211 


Machines. 

.500  Common  plain  cotton  net,  usin" 

200  Finer  ditto „ 

100  Brussels'  ground  ditto  .     .    „ 

600  Expensive  fancies,  ditto    .    „ 

300  Plain  silk  net 

50  Fancy  ditto 


11)8. 

.')70,000 

120,000 

.WjCWO 

240,000 


Yarn.  «. 

No.  120  at  4 

200     10 

250     18 

190     10 


d. 

6  per  lb. 
0      „ 
0       „ 
0      „ 


Value  in 

Rough  Goods. 

£.  £. 

128,250     250,000 

60,000     100,  (M)0 

45,  (XK)       75,000 

120,000     450, 0(K) 

.      .      .     300,000 

•      .      .       50,(X)0 


1,750  Steam-power  machines. 
850  Cotton  fancies     .      .      .      .    „       640,000  140       5     6 

250  Cotton  quillings  .      .      .      .    „       150,000  170       7     0 

300  Plain  cotton „       180,000  180      8    0 

50  Silk  fancies 


176,000  637,000 

.52,500  1.30,000 

72,000  150,000 

.      .      .  37,000 


1,450  ilandmachines.  1,950,000  653,750  2,179,000 

Embroidering 330,' 000 

Finishing,  sale  expenses,  interest,  and  profits 486  000 

Produce  of  plain-finished  goods 1,205,000  

„  fancy  and  embroidered  ditto    ,     .     ,       1,790,000 


Total  returns  of  bobbin-net  manufacture,  1844 


£2,995,000 


Among  the  machines  employed  in  making  fancy  goods,  there  were 
abont  120  platt  machines,  and  200  ^Nlecldin  machines,  to  which  the 
jacqnard  frame  was  attached. 

The  persons  employed  in  making,  finishing,  &c.,  the  above,  and  their 
rates  of  wages,  were  as  follows  : — 

5,800  Machine-hands,  viz. : — 800  youths,        at  10s.  per  week. 
1,000  young  men      15s.  „ 

2,000  men     .      ,      18s.  „ 


1,200 

» 

24s. 

400 

)> 

30s. 

300 

n 

35s. 

100 

n 

40s. 

Total 


5,800 


50 

50 

200 

2,900 

650 

150 

8,400 

2-W 

620 

50 

80 

70 

.500 

2,000 

2,000 

180 

50 

25 

25 

50,000 

50 


Engine-men at  25s.  per  week. 

Stokers 15s.  ^^ 

Warpers 25s.  „ 

Threaders  and  winders  (boys) 5s.  „ 

Smiths,  moulders,  &c 30s.  „ 

Point,  guide,  &c.,  makers 25s. 

Menders  of  rough  goods  (females)   ....  4s.  „ 

Clerks  and  warehousemen 40s.  „ 

Single  machine  owners  and  overlookers      .     .  40s.  „ 

Gassers 25s.  „ 

Bleachers 25s.  „ 

Dressers'  overlookers 40s.  „ 

Female  dressers 10s.  „ 

Corders,  drawers,  &c.  (children)       ....  5s.  „ 

"White  menders  and  folders 10s.  „ 

Porters,  &c 18s.  „ 

Carters i-,. 

Designers     ,     .     • 40s. 

Readers  in 15s. 

Embroiderers,  when  employed   .     .     .     .     5s.  to  6s.  „ 
Travellers  at  120/.  a-year  each. 

p  2 


-212  PROGRESS  OF  THE  NATION.  [sec.  ii. 

The  produce  of  the  manufecture  passes  through  the  hands  of  about 
100  firms,  all  of  whom,  except  two,  arc  resident  in  Nottingham. 

lbs.  £. 

The  raw  cotton  wool  used  was  about  2,.')()0,tXX),  cost  230,000 
The  raw  silk  used 123,300     „     130,000 

For  a  small  part  of  the  goods  made,  cotton  is  used,  spun  into  460  hanks 
to  the  pound  weight,  the  price  of  which  is  121.  IQs.  per  lb. 
About  730  machines  are  in  the  West  of  England. 

„      310  „  Derbyshire. 

„        60  „  Leicestershire. 

„  2,100  „  Nottingham  and  its  immediate  vicinity. 

About  three-fifths  of  the  goods  made  are  consumed  within  the  kingdom. 

Various  estimates  have  been  formed  concerning  the  extent  and  value 
of  the  cotton  manufacture  in  this  kingdom.  Mr.  Dugald  Bannatyne, 
in  the  Supplement  to  the  "  Encyclopaedia  Britannica,"  and  Mr.  M'Cul- 
loch,  in  the  second  edition  of  his  "  Dictionary  of  Commerce,"  have  both 
estimated  the  value  of  goods  amiually  manufactured  at  the  sum  of 
thirty-four  millions,  and  Mr.  M'Culloch  estimates  the  capital  employed 

at  the  same  sum,  viz. : — 

£. 
Capital  employed  in  the  purchase  of  the  raw  material  .       4.000,000 
„  „  „  paj-ment  of  wages    ....     10,000,000 

„       invested  in   spinning- mills,  power  and  hand- 
looms,  warehouses,  stocks  in  hand,  &c.   .      .     20,000,000 

£34,000,000 

The  value  of  the  good.^  annually  produced  is  made  up,  according  to 

Mr.  M'Culloch's  estimate,  as  follows  : — 

£. 

Raw  material,  240,000,000  lbs.  at  7c?.  per  lb 7,000,000 

"Wages  of  800,000  weavei'S,  spinners,  bleachers,  &c.,  at 

22/.  10s.  a-year  each 18,000,000 

Wages  of  100,000  engineers,  machine-makers,  smiths, 

masons,  joiners,  &c.,  at  30/.  a-year  each  ....  3,000,000 
Profits  of  the  manufacturers,  wages  of  superintendence, 

sums  to  purchase  the  materials  of  machinery,  coals, 

&c 6,000,000 

£34,000,000 

In  the  latest  edition  of  the  Commercial  Dictionary  (1849),  Mr. 
M'Culloch  gives  the  sum  of  forty-seven  millions  as  the  total  estimate 
of  the  capital  employed  in  the  manufticture,  and  of  thirty-six  millions  as 
the  value  of  the  goods  annually  made,  and  in  arriving  at  those  totals, 
makes  a  somewhat  different  division  of  the  sums  under  their  different 

heads,  thus : — 

£. 
Capital  employed  in  the  purchase  of  the  raw  material  .      4,000,000 
„            „            „         payment  of  wages    .      .     .  -• .       8,000,000 
„       invested  in  spinning-mills,  &c 3.t,000,000 

£47,000,000 


riiAr.  II.]  MANUFACTUllES.  213 

£. 
Kaw  material,  500,000,0(X)  lbs.,  at  :Vi.  per  lb.        .      .      .     10,003,000 
Waj^es  of  .'J42,000  spinners,  weavers,  bleachers,  &c.,  at 

24/.  a-ycar  each •.      .     13,000,000 

Wages   of  80,000  engineers,  machine-makers,  smiths, 

masons,  joiners.  &c.,  at  50/.  a-year  each       ....       4,000,000 
Profits  of  the  manufacturers,  wages  of  superintendence, 

sums  to  purchase  the  materials  of  machinery,  coals, 

&c 9,000,000 

£36,000,000 

Mr.  Baines,  who  was  at  considerable  pains  to  ascertain  the  correct- 
ness of  the  earlier  estimates,  has  given  the  following  statement,  some- 
what different  in  its  details,  but  arriving  substantially  at  the  same  result 
as  was  given  by  jNIessrs.  Bannatyne  and  M'Culloch : — 

Extent  and  Value  of  the  British  Cotton  Manufacture  in  1833. 

Cotton  wool  imported lbs.  303,656,837 

„  consumed  in  the  manufacture 282,675,200 

Yarn  spun  (deducting  H  oz.  per  lb.  for  loss) 256,174,400 

Number  of  hanks  spun  (averaging  40  to  the  lb.)      .  hanks  10,246,976,000 
Length  of  yarn  spun  (840  yards  to  the  hank)      .     .miles    4,890,602,182 
Value  of  the  cotton  wool  consumed,  at  76?.  per  lb.   .     .     .         £8,244,693 
A'alue  of  the  cotton  exports — goods    .     .     .£13,754,992 
„  »  „  yarn      ,      ,     .        4,704,008 

£18,459,000 
Value  of  manufactures  consumed  at  home     .     12,879,693 

Total  value  of  the  manufacture £31,3.38,693 

Capital  employed  in  the  manufacture .34  OOO  000 

Quantity  of  cotton  goods  exported  in  1832  : — 

White  or  plain  cottons   ....  yards  259,493,096 
Printed  or  dyed  cottons       .     .     .       „      201,552,407 

461 , 045 , 503 

Number  of  persons  supported  by  the  manufacture  .     .     .  1,500,000 

„  operatives  in  the  spinning  and  weaving  : — 

Factories — in  England 200,000 

„  Scotland 32,000 

„  Ireland 5,000 

237,000 

Wages  earned  by  the  factory  operatives £6,044,000 

Power  moving  the  factories— steam    33,000  horses. 
„  „  „  water     11,000 

horsepower.  44,000 

Number  of  spindles 9,333,000 

„  power-looms 100,000 

„  hand-loom  weavers 250,000 

Wages  earned  by  ditto £4,375,000 

It  is  only  within  the  last  twenty-five  years  that  the  silk  manufacture 
can  be  said  to  have  been  firmly  established  in  this  country.  Silk  goods 
have,  indeed,  been  made  in  England  since  the  time  of  Edward  the  Third, 
and  at  various  times  measures  intended  to  act  for  the  protection  of  the 
raanufactiu-ers  have  been  passed  by  the  legislature.  With  this  view, 
the  importation  of  silk  goods  manufactured  in  other  countries  was  strictly 


214  PROGRESS  OF  THE  NATION.  [sec.  ti. 

prohibited  in  1765,  and  this  system  continued  in  force  during  a  long 
series  of  years,  such  goods  being  expressly  excluded  from  the  benefit  of 
the  treaty  of  commerce  concluded  with  France  in  1786. 

By  this  prohibitory  law,  the  English  silk  manufacturers  were  legally 
secured  in  the  exclusive  possession  of  the  home  market,  from  which,  in 
the  then  imperfect  condition  of  the  manufacture,  they  would  otherwise 
have  been  driven  by  the  superior  fabrics  of  foreign  looms.  Protected 
trades  arc,  ahnost  invariably,  carried  on  without  that  regard  to  economy 
in  the  processes  which  is  necessary,  in  order  to  provide  for  their  exten- 
sion, by  bringing  the  protected  article  within  the  reach  of  a  larger 
number  of  consumers.  Hence  it  arose  that  silk  goods  came  to  be  looked 
upon  as  mere  luxuries,  the  use  of  which  must  be  confined  to  the  richer 
classes ;  and  this  state  of  things  was  aggravated  by  their  being  thence 
considered  fit  objects  of  taxation.  Heavy  duties  were  imposed  upon 
the  importation  of  raw  and  thrown  silk  ;  the  manufactured  goods  made 
of  a  material,  the  cost  of  which  was  thus  enhanced,  continued  beyond 
the  reach  of  the  multitude,  and  the  manufacturers  were  consequently 
liable  to  considerable  and  violent  vicissitudes  from  every  change  of 
fashion.  On  the  other  hand,  those  manufacturers  feeling  themselves 
secure  in  the  legal  monopoly  of  the  home  market,  were  without  the 
necessary  stimulus  to  improvement,  and  additional  temptations  were 
consequently  held  out  to  tlie  smuggler  to  introduce  the  superior  pro- 
hibited goods  of  France.  The  slow  progress  made  in  this  branch  of 
manufacture  in  England,  under  this  system  of  duties  and  restrictions, 
may  be  seen  from  the  following  table  of  the  quantities  of  raw  and  thrown 
silk  imported  at  various  times  into  the  kingdom,  from  the  year  1765, 
when  the  prohibition  of  foreign  silk  goods  was  enacted,  until  the  end 
of  lS4:d.—See  page  215. 

During  all  the  period  embraced  in  this  table,  up  to  1824,  the  silk 
trade  of  England  was  one  continued  alternation  of  prosperity  and  dis- 
tress. That  the  former  condition  prevailed  is  proved,  however,  by  the 
increasing  amount  of  the  manufacture,  comparing  one  period  with 
another  ni  the  course  of  years.  In  1824  the  system  here  described  was 
wholly  changed.  The  high  duties  of  5^.  Qd.  per  lb.  imposed  vipon  raw 
silk,  and  of  lis.  Sd.  per  lb.  upon  thrown  silk,  were  reduced ;  the  former 
to  dd.,  and  the  latter  to  7s.  Qd.  per  lb.  These  rates  were  afterwards 
further  reduced;  that  on  raw  silk  to  Id.,  and  that  on  thrown  silk  to 
Ss.  Gr/.  per  lb. :  a  regulation  of  the  Custom-house  permitting  the  latter 
duty  to  be  drawn  back  upon  the  exportation  of  the  goods  into  which 
foreign  thrown  silk  is  converted  ;  and  in  1845  the  duties  on  importation 
were  wholly  repealed.  In  1824  the  system  of  prohibition  against  the 
importation  of  foreign  manufactured  silk  goods  was  prospectively  re- 
,pealed,  and  a  scale  of  duties  adopted,  under  which  such  goods  might  be 


MANUFACTUKES. 


215 


imported ;  but  in  order  to  afford  the  silk  manufacturers  the  opportunity 
of  disposing  of  their  stocks  of  goods  already  made,  and  of  otherwise  ])re- 
paring  for  foreign  competition,  such  im])ortations  were  not  allo\\ed  to 
take  place  until  after  the  5th  of  July,  182G, 


AVERAGli  IMl'OKTATION. 


Uiiw. 

A\'aste.     1     'riirown. 

Total. 

lbs. 

lbs 

lbs. 

lbs. 

1705,  6,  and  7,  commencement  of  prohibi-1 
tion J 

1785,  6,  and  7,  twenty  years  after  prohibi-  i 
tion J 

1801  to  1812      

352,000 

.. 

363,000 

715,000 

544,000 

, . 

337,000 

881,000 

760,000 

, , 

350,000 

1,110,000 

1815,  IG,  and  17,  first  years  of  peace,  and  50  1 
years  after  proliibition  was  commenced  j 

1,095,000 

27,000 

293,000 

1,415,000 

7 

1821,  22,  and  23,  last  three  years  prior  to  \ 
the  change  of  system j 

1,970,000 

74,000 

355,000 

2,399,000 

Years. 

Kaw. 

Waste. 

Thrown. 

Total. 

lbs. 

lbs. 

lbs. 

lbs. 

1814 

1,504,235 

29,234 

586,505 

2,119,974 

1815 

1,069,596 

27,971 

377,822 

1.475,. 389 

1816 

873,414 

4,162 

210,758 

1,088,334 

1817 

1,343,051 

49,055 

294,553 

1,686,659 

1818 

1,444,881 

86,940 

391,166 

1,922.987 

1819 

1,446,097 

71, .331 

331,125 

1,848,553 

1820 

1,622,799 

94,883 

309,953 

2,027,635 

1821 

1,864,513 

105,047 

360,248 

2,329,808 

1822 

1,993,764 

64,921 

382,878 

2,441,563 

1823 

2,051,895 

.52,. 362 

363,864 

2,468,121 

1824 

3,414,520 

133,257 

463,271 

4,011,048 

1825 

2,848,506 

1'J5,910 

559,642 

3,604,058 

1826 

1,964,188 

, . 

289,. 325 

2,253,513 

1827 

3,759,138 

, , 

454,015 

4,213,1.53 

1828 

4. 162,. 550 

, , 

385,262 

4,547,812 

1829 

21719,962 

172,239 

2,892,201 

1830 

3; 77 1,969 

485,013 

436,535 

4,693,517 

ia3i 

3,035.832 

762,258 

514,240 

4,312,-330 

1832 

3,3)1,721 

651,594 

329,932 

4,373,247 

1833 

3,838,795 

654,381 

268,367 

4,761,543 

1834 

3,346,751 

1,009,932 

165,768 

4,522,451 

1-835 

4,151,008 

1,382,872 

254, 578 

5,788,458 

1836 

4,2.39,254 

1,524,968 

294,201 

6,058,423 

1837 

3,520,105 

867,456 

211,298 

4,598,859 

1838 

3,595,816 

952,305 

242,135 

4,790,256 

1839 

3,409,754 

1,027,547 

228,643 

4,665,944 

1840 

3,794,466 

736,649 

288,147 

4,819,262 

1841 

3,146,705 

1,343,815 

266,651 

4,757,171 

1842 

3,856,867 

1,424,192 

363,524 

5, 644,. 583 

1843 

3,554,904 

1,482,880 

333,602 

5,371,386 

1844 

3,918,282 

1,761.424 

405,927 

6,085,633 

1845 

4,058,737 

1,406; 720 

483,706 

5,949,163 

1846 

3,968,391 

887,936 

392,267 

5,248,594 

1847 

3,571.451 

1,150,3.52 

257,648 

4,979.451 

1848 

4, 135; 335 

1,040,704 

1,027,353 

6,203^312 

1849 

4,411,263 

1,375,808 

482,108 

6,269,179 

In  tlie  years  1826  to  1829  the  waste  is  included  wit 

h  the  raw  silk. 

An  immediate  and  great  increase  was  made  in  the  consumption  of 
silk  goods  by  this  reduction  in  the  cost  of  the  material.  Every  throwing- 
mill  and  every  loom  was  put  in  constant  employment,  and  a  great  in- 
crease was  made  in  the  number  of  these  establishments.     The  number 


216  TROGRESS  OF  THE  NATION.  [sec.  ii. 

of  throwing-inills  in  different  parts  of  the  country  was  raised  from  175 
to  ■2C^(),  and  the  number  of  spindles  from  780,000  to  1,180,000  ;  yet 
notwithstanding  this  additional  productive  power,  it  was  not  possible  for 
the  throwsters  to  keep  pace  with  the  demands  of  the  weavers,  who  were 
frequently  kept  w-aiting  during  whole  months  for  silk  to  enable  them  to 
complete  the  orders  which  they  had  in  hand. 

This  full  tide  of  prosperity  was  checked  by  the  commercial  panic 
which  occurred  at  the  close  of  1825;  and  as  the  admission  of  foreign- 
made  silk  goods  first  took  place  during  a  time  of  general  depression,  a 
great  clamour  was  raised  on  the  part  of  the  home  manufacturers  against 
the  relaxation,  which  was  said  to  be  the  chief,  if  not  the  only  cause  of 
the  distress  that  had  overtaken  the  trade.  This  distress,  however,  soon 
passed  away,  so  that  in  the  year  1827  a  larger  quantity  of  silk  was 
manufactured  in  this  country  than  had  ever  before  passed  in  an  equal 
time  through  our  looms.  It  is  not  by  selecting  a  single  year  that  a 
proper  judgment  can  be  formed  upon  such  a  subject,  but  the  foregoing 
table,  which  details  the  importations  of  thirty-six  years,  t'in  of  which 
were  years  of  unqualified  prohibition,  is  sufficiently  extensive  to  afford 
means  for  deciding  the  degree  of  advantage  which  has  attended  the 
relaxation.  It  will  be  seen  from  this  table,  that,  in  the  ten  years  pre- 
ceding 1824,  the  quantity  of  raw  and  thrown  silk  used  by  our  manufac- 
turers amounted  to  18,823,117  lbs.,  being  an  average  of  1,882,311  lbs. 
per  annum  ;  that,  in  the  ten  years  immediately  following  the  change  of 
system,  the  quantity  used  was  36,780,009  lbs.,  or  3,678,001  lbs.  per 
annum,  being  an  increase  over  the  average  of  the  former  period  of  95 
per  cent. ;  and  that,  in  the  sixteen  years  ending  with  1849,  the  consump- 
tion was  66,376,645  lbs.,  or  4, 148,540  lbs.  per  annum,  being  an  increase 
of  120  per  cent,  upon  the  quantity  used  under  the  restrictive  system. 

It  is  further  remarkable  that,  notwithstanding  the  great  increase  in 
the  quantity  of  silk  employed  in  our  looms,  the  quantity  of  thrown 
silk  imported  has  not  at  all  augmented  during  the  last  sixty  years, 
but,  on  the  contrary,  has  sensibly  diminished.*  The  spur  of  competition 
has  driven  forward  the  manufacture  in  both  its  branches.  Improved 
machinery  has  been  introduced  into  our  throwing-mills,  the  effect  of 
which  has  been  to  lessen  most  materially  the  cost  of  the  process ;  and, 
by  the  adoption  and  improvement  of  the  ingenious  machinery  of 
Jacquard,  our  weavers  are  now  enabled  to  produce  fancy  goods,  the 
quality  of  which  is,  with  a  few  exceptions  of  little  importance,  fully 
equal,  and,  as  regards  some  sorts  superior,  to  the  quality  of  goods 
made  in  France,  although  the  cost  of  production  is  not  yet  reduced  to 
the  level  of  that  country. 

*  An  exception  to  this  remark  is  furnished  by  the  importations  of  184S,  when,  owing  to 
the  troubled  state  of  the  continental  scats  of  the  silk  manufacture,  England  afforded  th6 
only  market  to  which  foreign  throwsters  could  witli  safety  send  their  goods. 


cjiAP.  II.]  MANUFACTURES.  217 

The  charge  made  by  English  throwsters,  previous  to  1824,  for  con- 
verting raw  silk  into  organzine  was  about  10s.  per  lb.  At  that  time 
the  duty  imposed  upon  foreign  organzine  was  145.  Sd.,  or  ds.  2d.  beyond 
the  duty  upon  raw  silk,  and  yet  a  much  larger  proportion  of  the  material 
used  in  our  silk  looms  was  then  thrown  abroad  than  has  since  been  the 
case.  In  the  ten  years  preceding  1824,  it  will  be  seen  that  the  weight 
of  thrown  silk  imported  was  equal  to  23|  per  cent,  of  the  weight  of  raw 
silk,  whereas  the  quantity  imported  in  this  state  of  preparation  during 
the  ten  years  ending  with  1844,  has  not  exceeded  7|  per  cent,  of  the 
weight  of  the  silk  thrown  in  the  mills  of  this  country  ;  and  at  this  time 
we  are  exporters  of  British  thrown  silk  to  Germany,  thus  proving  the 
ability  of  our  throwsters  to  meet  their  Continental  rivals  in  third 
markets. 

Now  that  our  throwsters  have  been  for  more  than  twenty  years  exposed 
to  competition  with  foreigners,  they  have  succeeded  in  bringing  down  their 
charge  from  lO^.  to  from  3s.  to  5*.  per  lb  ,  the  rate  depending  upon  the 
quality  of  the  silk.  The  better  the  (juality  the  lower  the  charge  :  a  fact 
which  arises  chiefly  from  the  throwster  making  good  the  waste  which 
occurs  in  the  process,  and  which  is  greatest  when  the  quality  of  the  silk 
is  worst. 

When  the  prohibition  to  the  importation  of  foreign  silk  goods  was 
removed,  a  duty  was  imposed  of  30  per  cent,  ad  valorem,  which  was 
soon  after  altered  to  specific  rates  per  pound,  so  calculated  upon  different 
kinds  of  goods  as  to  be  equal,  in  most  cases,  to  30  per  cent,  upon  the 
presumed  value,  this  rate  being  assumed  as  the  maximum  of  protection 
which  in  any  case  it  was  desirable  to  afford  to  the  English  manufacturers. 
Apart  from  all  considerations  of  a  maximum  as  between  the  consumers 
and  manufacturers  in  this  country,  however,  it  was  found  impossible  to 
adopt  any  higher  scale  of  protection,  on  account  of  the  encouragement 
which  would  thereby  be  given  to  smugglers,  and,  in  fact,  while  arranging 
the  specific  duties  chargeable  on  the  weight  of  the  goods,  it  was  on 
this  account  found  necessary  to  fix  the  rate  upon  plain  goods  on  a  scale 
equal  to  no  more  than  25  per  cent,  on  the  value,  while  the  higher  per 
centage  was  retained  upon  other  goods,  the  smuggler's  charge  on  which 
was  higher.  The  reason  why  this  charge  was  less  upon  plain  than  upon 
fancy  fabrics  was  this — the  latter,  being  made  to  answer  the  immediate 
demands  of  ever-varying  fashion,  were  required  by  the  purchasers  to  be 
delivered  to  them  without  delay,  while  plain  goods,  which  would  be 
equally  valuable  at  all  times,  could  be  kept  back  by  the  smuggler  to  a 
more  favourable  opportunity  for  eluding  the  government  officers. 

For  some  time  before,  and  after  the  opening  of  our  markets  to  the 
fabrics  of  other  countries,  it  was  firmly  believed,  and  loudly  asserted,  by 
many  persons  experienced  in  the  trade,  that  such  a  measure  would  bring 
certain  ruin  upon  the  silk  manufacturers  of  England,  who,  being  accua- 


2 IS  PHOGRESS  OF  THE  NATIO?^.  [sec.  ii. 

tomed  to  work  for  only  the  higher  ranks  of  society,  had  constantly 
experienced  the  evils  attendant  upon  a  limited  market,  and  had  been 
kept  in  dread  of  competition  from  without ;  the  successful  adventures  of 
contraband  dealers  having,  under  such  circumstances,  been  frequently 
productive  of  temporary  stagnations,  which  involved  the  manufacturers 
and  their  workmen  in  distress.  The  experience  of  twenty-five  years 
has  now  served  to  show  how  groundless  were  these  fears  ;  that  by  reducing 
the  prices  of  their  goods,  which  they  were  enabled  to  do  through  the 
reduction  of  thx3  duty  and  the  improvements  in  their  machinery,  the 
market  would  be  so  extended  as  to  include  among  their  customers  a  far 
larger  part  of  the  population  ;  and  that,  stimulated  by  the  rivalry  of 
foreign  manufacturers,  such  improvements  would  be  effected  in  the 
quality  of  our  fabrics,  as  would  fit  them  for  successful  competition  with 
the  most  beautiful  productions  of  foreign  looms.  It  is  strictly  correct 
to  assert,  that  with  free  permission  to  import  upon  even  a  high  scale  of 
duties,  our  silk  manufacturers  suffer  less  at  present  from  foreign  compe- 
tition, than  they  did  in  the  days  of  prohibition,  when  the  quantity  of 
smuggled  goods  amounted  to  only  a  small  proportion  of  that  now  legally 
imported.  In  1810,  when  the  smuggler's  difficulties  were  increased  by 
the  war,  the  quantity  of  contraband  silks  brought  into  consumption  in 
this  country  was  felt  to  be  so  injurious  to  the  manufacturers,  that  they 
formed  themselves  into  an  association  for  the  prevention  of  smuggling. 
Again,  in  1818  and  the  following  year,  numerous  petitions  were  pre- 
sented to  Parliament  by  the  silk -weavers  of  Spitalfields  and  of  Coventry, 
complaining  of  this  illegal  competition,  and  stating  that,  by  means  of 
it,  "  The  demand  for  manufactured  goocls  had  for  some  time  past  so  de- 
creased, as  to  afford  serious  ground  of  alarm  to  the  manufacturers,  and 
to  threaten  the  existence  of  the  silk  manufacture  of  this  country."  In 
one  of  these  petitions,  it  was  stated,  that  operative  weavers  who  used  to 
earn  from  30s.  to  40^.  per  week,  were  at  that  time  able  to  earn  no  more 
than  lO.s.  or  ll.?. 

The  fact  last  stated  was  by  no  means  peculiar  to  the  time  embraced 
in  the  petition.  The  system  under  which  the  trade  bad  been  regulated 
for  more  than  half  a  century  had  familiarized  the  country  with  the 
complaints  of  the  silk-weavers,  who  were  constantly  liable,  on  any 
change  of  fashion,  to  be  thrown  out  of  employment;  and  the  high. rate 
of  whose  wages  when  fully  employed,  being  unaccompanied  by  prudent 
preparation  for  a  fall  in  wages,  only  served,  by  multiplying  their  wants, 
to  render  the  reverse  more  distressing  when  it  came. 

Since  the  year  1824,  when  the  shackles  were  partially  removed  from 
the  trade,  the  silk  manufacture  in  all  its  branches  has  spread  itself  into 
various  districts,  and  is  conducted  upon  a  scale,  and  according  to  prin- 
ciples which  admit  of  so  great  a  degree  of  economy,  as  not  only  to  place 
the  products  of  our  silk  looms  within  the  reach  of  the  humbler  classes 


".] 


MANUFACTURES. 


219 


of  the  community  in  this  country,  but  to  enaljlo  us  successfully  to  com- 
pete in  other  markets  with  goods  produced  in  foreign  countries.  The 
important  reduction  in  the  duties  upon  foreign  silk  goods  which 
was  effected  by  the  Government  in  1846.  must  tend  to  further  im])rove- 
ment  in  the  same  direction.  The  declared  value  of  British  manufac- 
tured silk  goods,  exported  from  the  United  Kingdom  in  each  year  since 
li)20,  has  been  as  follows  : — 


Years. 

£ 

Years. 

i. 

Years. 

£. 

1820 

371 

755 

18.30 

521 

,010 

1840 

792 

648 

1821 

374,473 

1831 

.578 

874 

1841 

788 

894 

1822 

381 

703 

1832 

529 

990 

1842 

590 

189 

182.3 

3.51 

409 

18.33 

737 

404 

1843 

667 

952 

1824 

442 

5'j6 

1834 

6.36 

419 

1844 

736 

455 

1825 

296 

736 

1835 

972 

031 

1845 

766,405 

1826 

168 

801 

18.3G 

917 

822 

1846 

837 

577 

1827 

2.36 

344 

1837 

503 

673 

1847 

985 

626 

1828 

25.5 

870 

18.38 

111 

280 

1848 

588 

117 

1829 

267 

931 

1839 

868 

lis 

1849 

998 

334 

It  is,  perhaps,  not  the  least  surprising  of  the  effects  which  have  fol- 
lowed the  total  alteration  of  our  system  in  regard  to  this  manufacture, 
that  this  country  now  regularly  exports  silk  goods  to  a  considerable 
value  to  France  :  these  exports  amounted,  in 


31  to  43,~462  \ 
J2  „  75,187  \ 
53  „  76,525  ) 


1831  to  43,462 

1832 

1833 


and  were  increased  in 


r  1842  to  181,924 

1843  „  148,222 

1844  „  159,680 

1845  „  1.39,772 

1846  „  172,424 

1847  „  171,764 

1848  „  57,414 

orming  nearly  three-fifths  of  the  expoi'ts  of  those  goods  made  to  the 
whole  of  Europe.  Tlie  most  considerable  part  of  our  export  of  silks  is 
made  to  our  North  American  Colonies,  the  West  India  Islands,  and  the 
United  States  of  America. 

The  number  of  silk-mills  in  the  townships  of  Manchester  and  Salford, 
which  in  1S20  was  no  more  than  five,  had  increased,  in  1832  to  sixteen. 

The  following  table,  given  on  the  authority  of  the  Inspectors  of  Fac- 
tories, will  show  the  number  and  distribution  of  silk  factories,  and  the 
number  of  persons  employed  in  them  at  the  beginning  of  1835,  and  in 
1839. -Seepage  220. 

Except  in  the  preliminary  branch  of  the  manufacture — throwing — 
it  has  not  hitherto  been  found  practicable  to  apply  machinery  to  any 
great  extent  for  simplifying  the  processes  of  manufacturing  the  finer 
kinds  of  silk  goods,  or  for  economizing  the  cost  of  their  production. 
For  this  reason,  the  improvements  effected  in  the  quality  of  silken 
fabrics  are  more  the  result  of  individual  effort,  than  the  improvements 
in  those  other  branches  of  manufacture  to  which  mechanical  invention 
has  been  so  successfully  applied  in  this  country.  Among  the  causes  to 
which  the  continued  superiority  of  French  silk  weavers,  in  some  articles 


220 


PROGRESS  OF  THE  NATION, 


[sec.   II. 


if^  1^  -^  .r^  o  "M  1^ — h  oc  ao  N  oc  :rv 

CO  -M  o  rr  o  m  —  1^  X  X 

t^ 

CO  c-. 

CI 

rt 

c^iOO-NcsXiOoocrir-Tfcooo 

COTfc-.  CD  —  C^COiOX^ 

^ 

X  ■* 

X 

e 

(M  rt  1^  1^  Tt  (M  O         C>)  ^         O  (>» 

•CO         X  T  — --1 —-*!?<  — 

05 

CD 

CO 

o 

o 

2 

H 

O  !N                  rH                  rt          1./^  _H 

C5 

o 

s 

c< 

CO 

?■§ 

M 

t^OOOOOi-^tNr-Oi-CfNJ)-* 

c0(Mcom=^Ot^C0'-'C0 

to 

—  r- 

Tf 

(H       >^ 

i-i  -^  ^  30  •*  (M  (TJ         (N  JO         Tf  r^ 

OCOlOOOCJSCO^COCD 

•^ 

0-* 

Oi 

GJ    O 

•  'N         -to—               Tt  !M  --t 

05 

in 

-* 

e 

1! 

O  "<               --<                           «  f-^ 

rH 

C". 

o 

b 

'^ 

CI 

oo«^oo;ci^'^>nt^cr>'^       om 

OO-fx  —  in't-i'i^tN 

^ 

in  d 

X 

rt 

i 

W  CO  O  00  ^  5^  CO         ■*  CO         r-  (M 

CO  —  CO  O         COCDCOOO 

•  —       -^  m                          CO 

o 

X 

X 

m  00            (N           Tf    •  in  r^ 

o_ 

'rt 

"*                                        -< 

c' 

o 

S 

t^^^icO-f  —  —  ooc0-oxr:-t<:rj 

CI  —  —  -f  o  -^  m  C5  cT!  t^ 

m 

X  o 

CO 

m 

«  ^  O  ri  -M  O  ~  rt  —  ■*  ?J  m  (>) 

(N(?JinO-<l>C0C^t^t^X 

m 

CO  CI 

-1" 

"3 

■^— '(N-^TJ"          r-l-^          OO 

•  —       m  CO                ,-1       — 

« 

o 

S 

0\^                                                        -1 

r^ 

X 

00 

[K 

i» 

t-i      iriOrHi-ioi      (N;o      coot 

OCOCO'*— t^t-OJOOX 

cN     o  CO     —  e>i     —  — 

05 

CO  c» 

-t< 

o 

S: 

-i 

1^  -*                                           •  iXl 

<N                               ■* 

o 

1— 1 

< 

s 

■^ 

rf 

-f 

J 

c^  —  ojiooc'jooooirj'Noo 

r-x  —  t-ocoxxino 

CD 

Tf  in 

in 

2 

«>  Tt  t (>  !N  t-  CO  <?>  to  !M  ^  O  -t 

Tt       r-.  —  inTt-j^-tincn 

Tt< 

^  CI 

e8 

00  -t  rt         in               c>)         (N  -* 

■*  CO                    —        — 

in 

CI 

X 

e 

r-T                                                             rS 

" 

cd" 

CD 

«<   XI 

:£ 

if  -^ 

■£•3 

r^  (N  CO  i.n  C-.  i-i  ri  rt  5C  O         m  3i 

r~  CO  m  X       OT  CO  in  -*  i.'5 

CD 

o 

o 

P5  2 

s 

r-c  !M  OO                  O                  3-1           O  r-H 

CO       o  O            c^  —       -* 

o 

"* 

CO 

rt 

co^^rt                 '"'  :  "* 

in 

CO 

"a 

" 

S 

'"' 

c» 

cT 

» 

or5-o-fr^Or^-*F-t-i-iinm 

05      m  X  CO      X  in  —  CO 

-+ 

t^ 

^__, 

•-i^-N'MI>J!MO         (>)t^         O-M 

_  <M  I-  —    ^      c>)  CO  m 

CO 

-t  — '                ^                              CO  ^ 

CO 

t^ 

c  Si_ 

s 

s           •'^                 • 

»* 

^ 

1  = 

Cb 

3 

|| 

«)  CD -t  M  ■*  <^  f^         'n  I^         (N  !M 

Or-           o\           mo 

CO               ;         i"^ 

!-  X  !M  m  o           m  ci  (?)  o 

X 

-*" 

CI 

J 

o  —      m  -r                        CO 

r: 

'^    . 

in 

'^ 

S 

i 

to  00  X  ?!  o  o  m  7a  -f  t-  CC  -f  o 

X  CO  O  to  CO  CO  CO  —  CD  CO 

^__, 

CI  CI 

m 

CO  ^  (M  't"  r^  i^  m  CO  ^  CO       X  i^ 

(N         Q  O         —         t-  CO  CO 
;            CO  (M 

m 

CI 

t-t 

"3 

■*  ■-<                rH                (M         t^ 

X 

C5 

_    =8 

S 

S    <U 

'"' 

CO 

CO 

Cl^-i'lM-t'^CnTfOTCO           r^in 

m  CI  —  CO      oi  05  X  CO  CO 

X 

X 

CO 

pa  c 

rl   rt   ^1   CO   Ca           ■*                    CT.            -t> 

un      CO  -f                    CO  CI 

CI 

X 

cS 

15 

^„"                "  : " 

.             CI  —     ; 

'^ 

-f 

00 

E 

'^ 

Cl" 

cf 

•  •  -t 

m 

in 

O   n 

•    •  CI 

CI 

•    • 

CI 

a>'C 

^  o 

J. 

z^ 

^ 

CO  o)  X  in  -t  o  X  I-]  ;m  t^  .->  CO  Tf 

—  CO  —  CO  —  —  CI  in  rj-  X  X 

,__« 

r—    ,_( 

X 

X  -<                                              !M 

CI  — 

CO 

CO 

•^ 

CI 

CI 

<: 

— — 

s 

o 

fee 

2 

fc. 

0 

TS 

n   • 

?^ 

)^         ■■•••■«.■•••• 

"3 

=s  a 

"  u 
IBM 

■13 

g 
C 

^        .,          

tc 

'S 
"3 

w 

c 3 

i  '  '  '  i  ' 

-S     •     •     •  o    • 

i  Tc_-  ^  -^    *      "o    '  "S"^ 

o 

jO 

-««>-2>ig^><g««-S- 

S  =  ^  2  •;  -^  >>-^  ^  o    „ 

H 

h 

•^•S  £-2  >  £  s^  get:  c  gt: 

Z^'i^O  V2  'M  Vj  '7^^  ^  P  >* 

;5s;uf;afiKC  =  =;^-:;;s 

e„,u-.  II.]  MANUFACTURES.  221 

Statement  of  the  Niimher  and  Power  of  Silk  Factories  in  operation  in  different  parts  of  lite  United 
Kinc/diim,  with  the  N timber  and  Af/es  of  Persons  emploi/vd  therein  in  the  Year  1839. 


England. 

Wales. 

Scotland. 

Ireland. 

United  Kinirdom. 

Mills  at  Work   .... 
„    Empty 

263 
23 

•• 

5 

268 
23 

E. 

H.P. 

E. 

H.P. 

E. 

H.P. 

E. 

H.P. 

E. 

H.P. 

Steam  Power     .... 
AVater  Power    .... 

201 
109 

2,309 
922 

•• 

.•• 

6 

148 

•' 

•• 

207 
109 

2,4.57 
922 

M. 

F. 

M. 

F. 

M. 

F. 

M. 

F. 

M. 

F. 

Persons  under  10  years    . 
„         10  to  1 1       „ 

.,         11  »  12      „       . 
„         12  „  13      „       . 
„         13  „  14      „       . 
„        14  „  15      „       . 
„         15  „  16      „       . 
„        16  „  17       „       . 
„         17  „  18      „       . 
18  „  19       „       . 
„         19  „  20       „       . 
„         20  „  21       „       . 
„        21  and  upwards 

1,028 
786 
793 
7.52 

1,005 
787 
573 
398 
341 
290 
248 
250 

3,396 

1,457 
1,154 
1,218 
1..327 
1,835 
1,667 
1,672 
1,523 
1,460 
1,409 
1,280 
1,120 
5,701 

•• 

•• 

3 
3 

4 

5 

33 

15 

14 

8 

11 

9 

8 

3 

100 

4 
15 
18 
37 
63 
49 
47 
50 
44 
48 
43 
28 
101 

•• 

1,031 
789 
797 
757 

1,0.38 
802 
5S7 
406 
352 
299 
256 
2.53 

3,496 

1,461 
1,169 
1,236 
1,.364 
1,898 
1,716 
1,719 
1.573 
1 ,  504 
1,4.57 
1,323 
1,148 
5,802 

Total .     .     . 

10,647  1  22,82.3 

•  • 

..   '216 

.547 

in.SG3 

23.370 

33,470 

7 

G3 

34,233 

of  their  manufecture,  must  be  attributed,  may  be  instanced  the  kind  of 
education  which  they  receive,  and  by  means  of  which  so  many  among 
those  who  are  engaged  in  the  labour  of  weaving — an  operation  which 
among  us  is  mere  drudgery— are  enabled  to  contribute  to  the  perfect- 
ing of  their  art,  by  the  invention  of  new  patterns.  As  regards  the 
texture  only  of  silk  fabrics,  English-made  goods  are  now  fully  equal  to 
the  best  that  are  produced  by  our  neighbours.  The  greater  cheapness 
of  the  necessaries  of  life  in  France,  as  compared  w  ith  England,  gives  an 
advantage,  in  point  of  price,  to  the  French  weaver  over  his  English  com- 
petitor ;  and  this  advantage  is  of  course  the  greater  in  those  descrip- 
tions of  go(Kls  into  the  cost  of  which  labour  enters  in  the  greatest  pro- 
portion— such  as  gauzes,  and  other  light  and  fancy  fabrics.  We  have 
seen,  however,  that  as  regards  other  kinds  of  silk  goods,  our  manufac- 
turers are  already  enabled  to  compete  with  their  formidable  rivals  in 
markets  which  are  equally  open  to  both,  and  that  we  are,  in  fact^  ex- 
porting continually  the  produce  of  our  silk-looms  to  France  itself. 

It  will  scarcely  be  affirmed  that,  in  this  respect,  the  manufacturers  of 
England  would  have  stood  in  so  advantageous  a  position,  had  the  old 
prohibitory  system  been  maintained.  Up  to  the  very  moment  of  the 
legal  admission  of  foreign  silk  goods  no  improvement  was  perceptible  in 
tlu»  quality  or  fashion  of  our  own  :  by   the  most  cursory  glance,   the 


222  PROGRESS  OF  THE  NATION.  [sec.  ii. 

difference  between  the  fabrics  conkl  be  distinguished,  and  yet,  notwith- 
standing the  facility  thus  afforded  for  the  detection  of  contraband  goods, 
the  ingenuity  of  the  smuggler  was  at  all  times  successful  to  insure  their 
introduction  ;  and  this  irregular  competition  was  the  more  ruinous,  as 
the  forei2;n  goods  had  not  been  subjected,  in  the  country  of  manufacture, 
to  the  lieavy  impost  then  placed  upon  the  raw  material  in  England. 
It  was  a  bold  measure  on  the  part  of  the  government  of  that  day,  in  the 
face  of  so  much  prejudice  as  existed,  to  remove  the  prohibition  to 
import  foreign  silk  goods,  which  prohibition  had  always  been  declared 
indispensable  to  the  existence  of  the  manufacture  in  England.  The 
good  effect  of  the  change  was  made  immediately  apparent  by  the  in- 
creased quantity  of  the  material  employed  ;  and  at  the  present  time  it 
may  be  affirmed  that,  through  the  extension  of  the  use  of  silks  to  nearly 
all  classes,  the  manufacture  is  rendered  in  a  great  measure  safe  from  the 
ruin  with  which  it  was  formerly  threatened  at  every  change  of  fashion. 
Its  condition  would  long  since  have  been  still  more  favourable  if,  instead 
of  the  enormous  protecting  duty  of  30  per  cent,  imposed  upon  the 
importation  of  foreign  silk  goods,  a  reasonable  rate  of  duty  had  been 
adopted  ;  and  even  if  our  silk  manufacturers  had  been  left  without  the 
so-called  "  protection  "  of  any  duty  at  all,  there  does  not  appear  reason 
to  doubt  that  it  would  not  only  have  stood  its  ground  among  our 
principal  branches  of  industry,  but  that  the  skill  of  our  artisans  would 
have  enabled  them  successfully  to  rival  those  of  other  countries. 

If  there  be  any  foundation  for  this  assertion,  the  existing  "  protection" 
must  be  considered  exceedingly  costly  to  the  nation.  It  enhances  by 
the  whole  rate  of  the  import  duty  the  price  of  all  the  goods  made  at 
home,  and  is  therefore  equal  to  a  yearly  tax  of  nearly  four  millions  of 
money  levied  upon  the  community  without  yielding  any  proportionate 
advantage  to  the  Exchequer,  or  even  to  the  trade  for  the  supposed 
benefit  of  which  it  is  kept  up.  That  English-made  silk  goods  are 
actually  dearer  by  all  the  amount  of  the  duty  than  the  like  goods  of 
foreign  make,  is  proved  by  the  fact  of  large  importations  of  such  goods 
beino-  made  from  abroad.  That  but  for  the  enervating  effect  of  the 
protection  they  need  be  dearer,  it  would  be  very  difficult  to  show.  We 
have  the  raw  material,  one  quality  with  another,  as  cheap  as  our  rivals 
can  procure  it.  We  have  better  machinery,  capital  in  abundance,  and 
manufacturing  skill  and  commercial  combinations  which,  applied  to 
unprotected  branches  of  industry,  set  those  of  all  other  countries  at 
defiance.  If  we  are  behind  them  in  any  respect,  it  is  in  the  possession 
of  taste  in  the  invention  of  patterns  and  the  combination  of  colours  ;  but 
that  this  want  of  taste  is  not  inherent  in  the  people,  is  proved  by  the  fact, 
that  the  handsomer  imported  designs  of  the  French  manufiicturers  are 
always,  as  soon  as  seen,  preferred  to  our  own.  Make  it  apparent  to  the 
English   manufacturer   that   he  must  enter   the   field   of  competition 


II.] 


MANUFACTURES. 


223 


on  equal  terms  with  his  rival,  and  tins  disadvantage  would  soon  he 
overeome. 

There  is  another  great  evil  attendant  upon  the  present  high  rates  of 
duty.  These  rates  heing  beyond  the  cost  of  smuggling,  a  very  large 
proportion  of  the  silk  goods  shipped  from  France  for  England  have 
uniformly  found  their  way  into  use  without  passing  through  the  Custom- 
house. The  following  statement  shows  the  extent  to  which  tiiis  con- 
traband trade  has  been  carried  on  since  the  markets  of  England  were 
opened  to  foreign  manufacturers.  In  the  course  of  seventeen  years, 
from  1827  to  1843,  fifty  parts  in  one  hundred  of  the  silk  goods  shi])ped 
from  France  to  England  arc  thus  seen  to  have  been  smuggled. 


Years. 


Exported 
I  from  France 
to  England. 


1827 
1828 
1829 
1830 
1831 
1832 
1833 
ia34 
1835 
1836 
1837 
1838 
1839 
1840 
1841 
1842 
1843 


lbs. 
224,880 
335,051 
211,842 
289,034 
303,642 
312,877 
351,085 
317,508 
298,780 
283,646 
268,164 
393,085 
505,236 
625,317 
624,269 
503,278 
484,433 


6,332,132 


Entered  at 
Custom- 
houses in 
England. 


lbs. 
104,040 
1.56,216 
115,918 
119,826 
149,187 
146,665 
148,196 
175,562 
168,772 
179,977 
166,723 
244,626 
255,245 
267,477 
254,120 
2.50,306 
276,256 


3,179,112 


Quantity 

shipped 

more  than 

entered. 


lbs. 
120,840 
178,835 
95,924 
169,208 
154,455 
166,212 
202,889 
141,946 
130,008 
103,669 
101,441 
148,459 
249,991 
357,840 
370, 149 
252,972 
208,182 


3,153,020 


Centesimal 
Proportions. 


Entered. 


Not 
Entered. 


46-26 
46-62 
54-72 
41-45 
49-13 
46-87 
42-21 
55-29 
56-45 
63-45 
62-17 
62-23 
50 -.52 
42-77 
40-70 
49-73 
57-02 


50-20  I     49-SO 


The  duty  received  on  3,173,676  lbs.  of  silk  manufactures  during  the 
above  17  years  amounted  to  3,136,091/.,  which  is  at  the  rate  of  Ids.  9d. 
per  lb.  During  the  same  period,  the  regular  importations  from  France 
amounted  to  3,179,112  lbs.  weight,  which  is  about  equal  to  the  whole 
quantity  on  which  duty  was  paid.  l"lie  sum  received,  if  collected  upon 
the  whole  quantity  shipped  from  France  to  England,  would  have  been 
equal  to  a  very  small  traction  less  than  10s.  per  lb.  The  trade  of  the 
smuggler  would,  in  all  probability,  have  been  prevented,  as  regards  silk 
goods,  if  the  duty  had  been  fixed  at  10^.  per  lb.,  which  would  still  have 
been  a  very  high  protecting  duty,  and  the  revenue  would  have  been  as 
great  at  the  lower  as  it  has  proved  at  the  higher  rate,  while  the  gain  to 
the  consumers  in  England  would  have  been  9^.  9d.  per  lb.  in  the  price  of 
the  manufactures  produced  and  imported.  These  have  amounted  to 
79,217,862  lbs.,  including  all  qualities,  which  gives  a  sum  of  38,618,708/. 
lost   to    the   great  bulk  of  the  community  in  17  years,  through  the 


224  PROGRESS  OF  THE  NATION.  [snc.  n. 

operation  of  excessive  duties  placed  for  the  supposed  benefit  of  only  one 
branch  of  nianuftictures,  and  which  those  engaged  in  it  h<ave  continually 
declared  to  be  in  a  condition  of  adversity. 

In  1846  a  considerable  abatement  was  made  in  the  rates  of  duty 
chargeable  on  foreign  silk  manufEictures,  one  effect  of  which  change  has 
been  to  bring  the  regular  importations  more  nearly  into  agreement  with 
the  French  official  accounts,  thus : — 


I'ears. 

Exported  from 

France 

to  Eiijjland. 

Entered  at 

Custom-house  in 

England  for  France. 

lbs. 

lbs. 

1846 

405,222 

410,773 

1847 

480,308 

418,4.33 

1848 

715, .323 

716,278 

The  linen  manufacture  has  very  long  been  prosecuted  in  England, 
and  about  the  end  of  the  seventeenth  century  was  indirectly  encouraged 
in  Ireland  by  an  act  of  legislative  oppression,  such  as  it  would  not  be 
possible  to  enforce  in  this  country  at  the  present  day. 

The  woollen  manufacturers  of  England,  alarmed  at  the  rapid  progress 
then  being  made  in  Ireland  in  that  branch  of  industry,  induced  the 
Houses  of  Parliament  to  interfere  with  the  king  (William  III.)  for  its 
suppression.  In  his  answer  to  their  address,  the  king  made  the  follow- 
ing promise : — "  I  shall  do  all  that  in  me  lies  to  discourage  the  woollen 
manufacture  in  Ireland,  and  encourage  the  linen  manufacture,  and  to 
promote  the  trade  of  England."  Nor  was  this  an  empty  promise. 
Through  the  interference  of  the  king  with  the  Irish  Houses  of  Parli- 
ment,  an  Act  was  passed  prohibiting  the  exportation  of  all  woollen 
goods  from  Ireland,  except  to  England  ;  an  exception  which  could  not 
operate  to  the  relief  of  the  Irish  manufacturer,  since  prohibitory  duties 
were  already  laid  against  their  importation  into  this  country. 

As  some  compensation  for  this  act  of  injustice,  various  regulations 
were  at  different  times  made  for  the  encouragement  of  the  linen  manu- 
facture in  Ireland  ;  although  it  is  doubted  whether  those  regulations 
did,  in  reality,  effect  anything  towards  the  establishment  of  the  manu- 
facture upon  a  healthy  footing.  Among  other  modes  of  encourage- 
ment, a  bounty  was  paid  upon  the  exportation  of  linen  from  Ireland, 
which  was  in  force  for  more  than  a  century,  and  ceased  only  in  1830. 

It  is  not  possible  to  trace,  with  any  certainty,  the  growth  of  the  linen 
manufacture  in  either  part  of  the  kingdom,  (^otton  and  silk  being 
productions  of  foreign  growth,  the  quantities  which  pass  through  our 
custom-houses  form,  of  course,  a  correct  measure  of  the  growth  of  those 
manufactures  as  far  as  quantity  is  concerned  ;  but  flax  is  a  production 
of  our  own  soil,  as  well  as  an  article  of  foreign  commerce,  and  the 
quantity  imported  from  abroad  gives  therefore  only  an  imperfect  test  of 
the  quantity  of  linen  produced  in  our  looms.  The  immense  extension 
of  our  cotton  fabrics  has  necessarily  limited  the  growth  of  our  linen 


cn.vi'.  II.] 


MANUFACTURES. 


225 


manufacture,  yet  there  is  every  reason  for  believing  that  it  has,  not- 
withstandinp;,  been  very  considerable. 

The  following  table  will  show  the  quantities  of  linen  goods  which 
were  exported  from  Ireland  in  different  years,  from  1800  to  1825  ;  sub- 
se(iuently  to  which  year  no  account  has  been  taken  at  the  custom-houses 
of  either  England  or  Ireland,  of  the  commercial  intercourse  between  the 
two  parts  of  the  kingdom. 


Yeais.     I  To  Great  Britain.   To  Foreign  Parts, 


Yards. 

Yards. 

1800 

31,<)78,039 

2,585,829 

1802 

33,246,943 

2,368,911 

1804 

39,837,101 

3,. 303,. 528 

1806 

35,245,280 

3,880,961 

1808 

41,9.58,719 

2,033,367 

1810 

32, 584,. 545 

4,313,725 

1812 

33,320,767 

2,. 524, 686 

1814 

39, 5.3,),  443 

3,463,783 

1815 

37,986,-359 

5,496,206 

1816 

42,. 330, 118 

3,299,511 

1817 

50,288.842 

5,941,733 

1818 

44,746,3.54 

6,178,9.54 

1819 

34,957,396 

2,683,855 

1820 

40,318,270 

3,294,948 

1821 

45, 519,. 509 

4,011,6.30 

1822 

43,226,710 

3,. 374, 993 

1823 

48,0<;6,591 

3,169,006 

1824 

46,406,950 

3,026,427 

1825 

52,559,678 

2,5.53,587 

Total. 


Yards. 
34,. 563, 868 
35,615,8.54 
43,140,629 
39,12(;,241 
43,992,086 
36,898,270 
35,845,4.53 
43,003,226 
43,482,565 
45,729,629 
56,230,575 
50,925,308 
37,641,251 
43,613,218 
49,-531,1.39 
46,601,703 
51,2.35,-597 
49,493,377 
55,113,265 


It  will  be  seen  from  the  next  statement,  that  a  large  proportion  of  the 
exports  of  linen  from  Ireland  to  Great  Britain  has  been  re-exported  to 
foreign  countries. 

British  and  Irish  Linen  and  Sailcloth  exported  from  the  United  Kingdom,  in  each  year  from 

1820  to  1833. 


Years, 

British  Linen. 

Irish  Linen. 

British  Sailcloth. 

Y'ards. 

Yards. 

Ells. 

1820 

24,066,914 

12,455,419 

1,226,3.35 

1821 

28,199,765 

15,408,561 

1,339,104 

1822 

33,762,229 

15,931,939 

1,259,919 

1823 

.34,624,512 

16,765,928 

1,206,715 

1824 

43.879,893 

17,9.33,195 

1,593,291 

1825 

33,643,655 

16,023,208 

1,879,. 506 

1826 

23,619,428 

10,868,407 

4,343,924 

1827 

38,280,766 

14,022,496 

2,211,529 

1828 

44,-5,55,341 

11,924,603 

2,962,-393 

1829 

43,499,268 

11,924,918 

1,768,093 

1830 

46,232,243 

13,244,269 

1,922,211 

1831 

50,799,723 

14, 7,38,. 358 

2,928,464 

18.32 

.37,-347,193 

9,960,347 

2,182,-367 

1833 

51,393,420 

9,. 561, 277 

2,229,777 

Irish 
Sailcloth. 


Ells. 
18,117 
12,153 
16,0-39 
32,239 
66,185 
51 , 104 
55,178 
52,413 
83,903 
51,256 
32,550 
28,185 
41.1-50 
48,035 


The  accounts  subsequent  to  1833  do  not  distinguish  Irish  from 
British  linens.  The  exports  from  the  United  Kingdom  from  1834  to 
1840  of  all  kinds  of  linen  goods,  and  of  flax  yarn,  have  been  as 
follows : — 

Q 


226 


PROGRESS  OF  THE  NATION. 


[sec.  II. 


Linen  exported  from  the  United  Kingdom 

in  each  Year,  from  1834  to  1849. 

Entered  by  the  Yard. 

Tliread, 

Tapes,  and 

Small  Wares. 

Declared 

Value. 

Linen  Yarn. 

Total 

Years. 

Yards. 

Declared 
Value. 

Pounds. 

Declared 
Value. 

Declared 

Value. 

1834 
1835 
1836 
1837 
1838 
1839 
1840 
1841 
1842 
1843 
1844 
1845 
1846 
1847 
1848 
1849 

67,834,305 
77,977,089 
82,088,760 
58,426,333 
77,195,894 
85,256,542 
89.373,431 
90,321,761 
69,232,682 
84,172,585 
91,283,754 
83,401,670 
84,799,369 
89,329,310 
89,002,431 
111,259,183 

£. 
2,357,991 
2,893,139 
3,238,031 
2,063,425 
2,717,979 
3,292,220 
3,194,827 
3,200,467 
2,217,373 
2,615,566 
2,801,609 
2,830,784 
2,631,809 
2,759,094 
2,597,573 
3,209,539 

.£. 
85,355 
99,004 
88,294 
64,020 
102,293 
122,747 
111,261 
147,088 
129,376 
187,657 
223,191 
205,586 
198,999 
199,757 
205,216 
284,291 

1,. 533, 325 
2,611,215 
4,574,504 
8,373,100 
14,923,329 
16,314,615 
17,733,575 
25,220,290 
29,490,987 
23,358,352 
25,970,569 
23,288,725 
19,484,203 
12,688,915 
11,722,182 
17,264,033 

£. 
136,312 
216,635 
318,772 
479,307 
746,163 
818,485 
822,876 
972,466 
1,025,551 
898.829 
1, 050 ; 676 
1,060,566 
875,405 
649,893 
493,449 
732,065 

£. 
2,579,658 
3,208,778 
3,645,097 
2,606,752 
3,566,435 
4,233,452 
4,128,964 
4,320,021 
3,372,300 
3,702,052 
4,075,476 
4,096,936 
3,706,213 
3,608,744 
3,296,238 
4.225,895 

Within  the  last  few  years  the  proportion  of  Irish  linen  shipped  from 
England  has  been  continually  increasing,  owing  to  the  greater  facility 
of  intercourse  oflered  by  steam  vessels,  which  occasions  a  larger  portion 
of  the  general  export  trade  of  the  United  Kingdom  to  be  carried  on 
from  the  ports  of  England. 

The  estimated  value  of  linen  goods  sold  in  the  different  linen  markets 
of  Ireland,  in  each  of  the  years  from  1821  to  1824,  was  stated  as  fol- 
lows, on  the  authority  of  the  Inspectors  appointed  by  the  Linen  Board  in 
Dublin,  and  the  statement  was  given  in  the  Appendix  to  the  Report 
upon  the  Linen  Manufacture  of  Ireland,  made  by  a  Committee  of  the 
House  of  Commons  in  1825.  There  is  not  any  document  in  existence 
which  brings  this  information  down  to  a  later  date. 


1*21 

1822 

1823 

1824 

Ulster .     . 
Leinster   . 
Rlunster    . 
Connaught 

£.           s.    d. 

2,066,122  16    8 

285,3.54  14     9 

68,870  13     9 

117,664  14    0 

£.           s.    d. 

2,127,529  16    4 

336,698  12     0 

82,202  13     1 

130,914     7     4 

£.           s.    d. 

1,968,180  16    6 

207,638  18    3 

95,195    8    3 

140,856  13     5 

£.           s.    d. 

2,109,309  10     2 

192,888     4     9 

110,421     0    3 

168,090    9     7 

2,538,012  19    2 

2,677,345    8    9 

2,411,871   16     5 

2,580,709     4     9 

It  was  not  until  quite  the  end  of  the  last  century  that  flax  spinning- 
mills  were  first  erected  in  the  north  of  England  and  in  Scotland.  Be- 
fore that  time  the  operation  of  spinning  was  altogether  performed  by 
women  in  their  own  dweUings.  Up  to  1814  the  yarn  spun  in  mills  was 
sold  to  weavers,  or  to  dealers,  who  acted  as  middlemen  between  the 
spinners  and  weavers ;  but  at  the  date  last  mentroned,  some  spinners 
became  also  manufacturers  of  linen.  It  was  at  a  still  more  recent 
period  that  power-weaving  was  applied  to  the  making  of  linen  fabrics 


citAr.  n] 


MANUFACTURES. 


227 


in  England  and  Scotland,  and  np  to  the  present  moment  fiax-?plnning 
maeliinery  has  not  heen  established  in  Ireland  upon  a  scale  snffi- 
ciently  large  to  supply  the  looms  of  that  country,  to  which  considerable 
(luantities  of  linen  yarn  are  sent  from  the  spinning  mills  of  Yorkshire. 

In  Scotland,  this  branch  of  manufacture  was  comparatively  small 
before  the  peace  in  1815.  The  town  and  neighboindiood  of  Dundee  has 
been  the  scene  of  a  most  remarkable  increase  in  the  linen  manufacture 
since  the  time  just  mentioned.  In  1814,  the  quantity  of  flax  imported 
into  that  town  for  use  in  the  manufactories  did  not  exceed  3000  tons, 
but  in  the  year  which  ended  31st  May,  1831,  the  import  was  more  than 
15,000  tons,  besides  upwards  of  3000  tons  of  hemp.  The  continued 
progress  of  the  manufacture  in  this  district  is  shown  by  the  fact  that,  in 
the  year  ending  31st  May,  1833,  the  imports  had  further  increased  to 
18,777  tons  of  flax,  and  3,380  tons  of  hemp.  The  quantity  of  linen, 
sailcloth,  and  bagging,  into  which  this  material  was  made,  and  which 
was  shipped  from  Dundee  in  the  same  year,  amounted  to  60,000,000 
yards,  being  probably  equal  to  the  entire  shipments  then  made  from  the 
whole  of  Ireland. 

The  improvements  made  in  the  flax-spinning  machinery  in  this  country 
are  rendered  sufficiently  apparent  by  the  following  statement,  taken  from 
the  Official  Tables  of  Revenue,  Population,  «S:c.,  of  the  United  Kingdom 
(Fart  III.,  page  395),  in  which  volume  it  was  inserted  on  the  authority 
of  the  oldest  and  largest  establishment  for  flax-spinning  and  weaving  in 
Leeds. 

Statement  of  the  Prices  of  Linen  Yarn,  and  of  Canvas  (No.  37J  ;  and  of  the  Wages  paid  at 
Leeds  for  Weaving  the  same,  in  each   Year,  from  1813  to  1833,  inclusive. 


Average  Size  of  an  Average  Bundle  of  i 
Yam,  estimated  in  leas  of  300  yards  I 
per  lb J 

Average  Selling  Price  of  such  Average ) 
Bundle  of  Yarn j 

Wages  of  Weaving  a  piece  of  Canvas, . 
>«o.  37,  36  inches  wide,  16  threads  warp, ' 
17  weft,  per  inch I 

Selling  Price  of  a  piece  of  Canvas,  No.  37 


1813 

1S14 

11-1 

11-1 

s.   d. 

s.   d. 

28    6 

29    5 

2    8 

2    8 

30    0 

30    0 

1815 

1816 

181T 

1818 

11-4 

11-2 

11-4 

11-3 

s.  d. 

s.  d. 

s.   d. 

s.   d. 

•21     7 

21     0 

19  10 

21     4 

2  10 

2    8 

2    6 

2    8 

28    0 

22    0 

20    6 

21     3 

1819 


11-6 

s.  d. 
18  10 

2     8 
23    0 


Average  Size  of  an  Average  Bundle  of  \ 
Yarn,  estimated  in  leas  of  300  yards  J 
per  lb ) 

1820  \  1821 

1 
1822  '  1823 

1824 

1825 

1826 

11-3 

12-4 

12-6 

12-9 

17-4 

21-5 

18-5 

«.  d. 

s.  d. 

s.   d. 

s.  d. 

s.  d. 

s.  d. 

s.  d. 

Average  Selling  Price  of  such  Average  1 
Bundle  of  Yarn J 

17    7 

16    2 

16    8 

15    7 

13    6    14    4 

12    6 

Wages  of  Weaving  a  piece  of  Canvas,  i 

1 
] 

No.  37. 36  inches  wide,  16  threads  warp,  > 

2    8 

2    8 

2    8  j  2    8 

2    6     2    7 

2    6 

17  weft,  per  inch 1 

1 

Selling  Price  of  a  piece  of  Canvas,  No.  37    23    0  [20    6 

1 

20    0   21     0 

1 

19    0    19    3 

18    0 

QJ 


228 


PROGRESS  OF  THE  NATION. 


[sec.  it. 


Statement  of  the  Prices  of  Linen  Yarn,  §c.— continued. 


Average  Size  of  an  Average  Bundle  of  j 
Yarn,  estimated  in  leas  of  3(X)  yards  I 
per  lb I 

Average  Selling  Price  of  such  Average ) 
Bundle  of  Yarn I 

"Wages  of  AVeaving  a  piece  of  Canvasa 
No.  37,  36  inches  wide,  16  threads  warp,  l 
17  weft,  per  inch I 

Selling  Price  of  a  piece  of  Canvas,  No.  37 


182T 


20-9 

s.   d. 
11     0 

2     6 
16    6 


1828 


s.   d. 
11     5 


2     6 
15    0 


1829 


s.  d. 
10     1 


2    6 
16    0 


1830 


26-6 

s.  d. 
10  10 

2    6 

17    0 


1831 


27-6 

5.  d. 
11     1 

2    6 
19    0 


1832 


31-5 

s.  d. 
10    3 

2    6 

18    6 


IS33 


37-1 

s.  (/. 
10    9 

2    G 
18    0 


Statement  of  tlie  Weekly  Rate  of  JVa(/es  paid  in  a  Flax  Spin/iinff  Jlill  near  Leeds,  in  tlie 

Year  1832. 
Average. 
s.    d. 


66  Children.  9  to  11  years 

old 

.     3 

H 

160        „         11  „  12 

.     3 

9.1 

144        „                   13 

.     3 

127        „                   14 

.     4 

9i 

113         „                    15          „ 

.     4 

99  Persons            16         „ 

.     5 

6 

Average. 

s.    d. 

100  Persons  17  years  old    .     . 

.     5  10} 

80        „       18        „ 

.     6    6 

58        „       19        „ 

.     7    4 

48        „       20        ,, 

.     7     9i 

(21 
"^^  (     r>    IC21  and'upwards  . 

.     8    2f 
.   16    7i 

The  above  rates  had  been  nearly  stationary  during  the  preceding 
twenty  years. 

It  will  be  seen  from  the  foregoing  table  that  the  length  of  a  pound  of 
yarn  of  average  fineness  was,  in  1813  and  1814,  only  3,330  yards,  and 
that,  in  1833,  yarn  of  the  average  quality  contained  11,170  yards. 
During  that  time  the  price  of  such  average  yarn  had  fallen  from 
29s.  bd.  to  IO5.  9c?.  per  bundle ;  so  that,  taking  the  quantity  into  the 
account,  the  price  of  yarn  has  fallen  in  twenty  years  to  one-ninth  of  the 
price  which  it  bore  at  the  close  of  the  war,  the  price  of  the  raw  material 
ha^^ng  fallen  in  the  same  time  about  one-half. 

The  further  progress  made  in  the  processes  of  flax-spinning  since 
1833  is  shown  by  the  following  figures  : — 


1834 
1835 
1836 
1837 
1838 
1839 
1840 
1841 


Average  Size  of  an 

Average  Bundle  of 

Yarn,  estimated  in 

Leas  of  3no  yards 

per  pound. 

39-13 

37-81 

37-3 

40-7 

43-2 

40-7 

36- 

36-3 


Average   Selling 

Price  of  such 

Average  Bundle 

of  Yarn. 

s.     d. 


11 
12 
12 
10 
10 
11 
10 
10 


Years. 


1842 
1843 
1844 
1845 
1846 
1847 
1848 
1849 


Average  Size  of  an 
Avcrage"Bundle  of 
Yarn,  estimated  in 
Leas  of  3u0  yards 
per  pound. 

35-3 

37- 

36-7 

36- 

35-6 

37-1 

30-8 

28-4 


Average  Selling 

Price  of  such 

Average   Bundle 

of  Yarn. 

s.     d. 


3 

9 
4 
2 
4A 


The  improvements  made  in  the  operation  of  flax-spinning  in  England 
arc  rendered  apparent  in  a  very  important  manner^  by  the  fact  that  we 
are  now  large  exj)orters  of  linen  yam  to  Ireland,  and  even  to  France  : 
the  earliest  shipments  to  the  latter  country  were  made  in  1833,  and 


CllAl'.     II.] 


MANUFACTUUES. 


2-29 


amounted  to  only  70,512  lbs.  ;  but  tbe  quantity  rapidly  increased  until 
1842,  when  it  reached  22,202,21)2  lbs.  In  that  year  the  French  govern- 
ment, yielding  to  the  representations  of  their  flax-spinners,  materially 
raised  the  rates  of  import  duty,  and  our  declared  exports  fi-U  to 
13,824,285  lbs.  in  1843,  and  13,546,757  lbs.  in  1844.  There  is  reason  to 
believe  that  the  services  of  the  smuggler  have  been  engaged  for  making 
good  in  part  the  difference  in  the  quantity,  and  it  is  quite  certain  that 
the  linen  manufacture  of  France  has  suffered  very  seriously  from  the 
increased  price  of  their  material,  which  has  diminished  their  export 
trade  in  linen  goods,  and  limited  their  sales  at  home.  This  export  of 
linen  yarn  is  a  new  branch  of  trade,  for  which  we  are  altogether  indebted 
to  the  perfection  of  our  spinning  machinery.  This  country  had  pre- 
viously been  a  constant  importer  of  linen  yarn,  but  there  is  at  present 
every  appearance  of  this  state  of  things  being  entirely  changed.  So 
recently  as  1827  our  weavers  used  very  nearly  four  millions  of  pounds 
of  foreign  yarn,  but  in  each  subsequent  year  this  quantity  has  been  dimi- 
nished, until  in  1834  it  amounted  only  to  about  one  million  and  a  half 
of  pounds,  and  in  1844  hardly  exceeded  one  million  of  pounds.  Our 
principal  foreign  customer  for  linen  fabrics  is  the  United  States  of 
America :  the  exports  to  that  country  in  1848  amounted  to  30,930,554 
yards,  the  declared  value  of  which  was  859,479/. 

The  following  table  exliibits  a  considerable  increase  in  the  consump- 
tion of  foreigng-rown  flax  during  the  last  ten  or  fifteen  years ;  but  it 
is  probable  that  the  growth  of  the  article  in  this  country  has,  in  the 
mean  time,  experienced  some  diminution.  It  has  been  already  men- 
tioned that  the  importations  of  flax  do  not  afford  any  accurate  test  of  the 
arowth  or  extent  of  the  manufacture. 


Statement  showing  the  Quantities  of  Flax  impoi-ted  and  consumed  in  the  United  Kingdom,  in  each 

Year  from  1820  to  1849. 


Years. 
1820 
1821 
1822 
1823 
1824 


Cwts. 


376, 170] The  duty  payable  during 
4'.U,582|  these  years  was  at  the 
607,540  >  rate  of  10/.  14.9.  6d.  per 
553,599 1  cwt.  on  dressed  Fla.\,  and 
739J651'    id.  on  undressed  B'lax. 

(Duty  reduced  to  4d.  per 
cwt.  upon  dressed  and 
undressed. 


1826 

697,488 

Do. 

M. 

1827 

896,889 

Do. 

'2i. 

1828 

882,289 

1829 

909,709 

1830 
1831 

955,112 

918,883 

>  Do. 

Id. 

1832 

984.869 

1833 

1,112,190 

Years. 
1834 
1835 
18.36 
1837 
1838 
1839 
1840 
1841 
1842 
1843 
1844 

1845 
1846 
1847 
1848 
1849 


794 

742,665 
1,511,428 

993,654 
1,615,905 


2  1 


Duty    reduced  to    Id. 
1J216,811    >  per  cwt.  upon  dressed 
1,256,322    I    and    undressed. 
1,338,213 


1,1.30,312  I 
1,422,992  I 
1,583,328   J 

1,418,323   \ 
1,147,092    I 
1,0.52,089 
1,463,661 
1,806,786 


\  Free. 


230 


PllOGRESS  OF  THE  NATION. 


[SKC.    II- 


Statement  of  the   Nitniher  mid   Power  of  Flax  Factories,  in  operation  in  different  parts  of  the 
United  Kingdom,  with  the  iVumbcr  and  At/es  of  Persons  employed  therein,  in  the  Year  1839. 


England. 

Wales. 

Scotland. 

Ireland. 

United  Kingdom. 

Mills  at  -work     . 

169 

183 

40 

392 

„     empty  .     . 

12 

•• 

7 

4 

23 

E. 

H.  P. 

E. 

H.P. 

E. 

H.P. 

E. 

HP. 

E. 

H.P. 

Steam  Power     . 

123       3,134 

160 

3,350 

32 

928 

315 

7,412 

Water  Power    . 

112        1,131 

•• 

91 

1,495 

37 

1,052 

240 

3,678 

Persons. 

M. 

F. 

M.' 

F. 

M- 

F. 

M. 

F. 

M. 

F. 

Under  10  years. 

130  ]         98 

22 

16 

9 

152         123 

10  to  11     „     . 

206  1       164 

22 

36 

3 

14 

231          214 

11  „  12    „     . 

248  i       141 

30 

37 

3 

22 

281   ;       200 

12  „  13      ,     . 

228  1       205 

. 

27 

53 

12            41 

267   1       2;)9 

13  „  14    „     . 

774  i       970 

878 

1.226 

350 

.535 

2,002  i  2,731 

14  „  15    „     . 

651      1,103 

., 

653 

1,017 

441 

745 

1,745 

2,865 

15  „  16     „     . 

443      l,0i)3 

391 

1,049 

269 

627 

1,103 

2.769 

16  „  17    „     . 

258         914 

216 

920 

179 

648 

653     2,482 

17  „  18    „     . 

153         902 

143 

903 

158 

552 

454  !  2,357 

18  „  19    „    . 

145          949 

117 

1,121 

181 

744 

443      2,814 

19  „  20    „     . 

99  1       803 

80 

1,015 

100 

534 

279 

2,352 

20  „  21     „     . 

114  I       672 

102 

942 

97 

518 

313 

2,132 

21  and  upwards 

1,929 
i  5,378 

3,181 

] 

2,057 

4,834 

988 

1,241 

4,974 

9,256 

Total    .     . 

11,195  j   .. 

.. 

4,733  :i3,169 

2,781  1  6,230 

12,8:17    30,594 

16,573 

17,907 

9,011 

43,491 

The  finest  kind  of  linen,  known  under  the  name  of  cambric,  is  im- 
ported by  us  from  France.  From  30,000  to  40,000  pieces  of  cambric, 
including  pocket  handkercliiefs,  are  every  year  introduced  ;  but  it  ap- 
pears probable  that  still  further  improvements  in  the  manufacturing 
processes  may  be  effected,  which  will  enable  our  weavers  to  produce 
goods  equal  to  any  made  iii  the  looms  of  France  ;  a  circumstance  wdiich 
is  now  at  least  as  probable  as  the  fact  would  have  appeared  fifty  years 
ago,  that  we  should  ever  furnish  the  natives  of  India  with  the  finest 
muslins,  instead  of  being  dependent  upon  their  industry  for  the  supply 
of  our  markets. 

The  extent  of  that  part  of  our  linen  manufacture  which  is  conducted 
in  factories,  and  which  is  the  only  part  as  to  which  statistical  details  are 
procurable,  upon  which  full  reliance  can  be  placed,  will  be  seen  from 
the  following  table,  compiled  from  returns  made  by  the  Inspectors  of 
Factories,  in  1835  : — See  page  231. 

It  will  be  observed,  on  examining  the  statements  already  given  of  the 
number  and  ages  of  persons  employed  in  the  cotton,  woollen,  flax,  and 
silk  factories  respectively,  throughout  the  kingdom,  that  the  proportion 
of  young  pei*sons  employed  in  the  silk-mills  is  much  greater  than  it  is 
in  any  of  the  other  three  branches,  and  that  the  proportion  of  adults  is 
consequently  much  smaller. 


cii.vr.  II.] 


MANUFACTURES. 


231 


_  1 

cr-.  -+  (M  o  -<  —  o\  -+  -M  :r-.  tr>  o  1-  -t  -*•  -c  -t> 

CO 

C5  — • 

CO 

jn     • 

p  00 

Oi 

CI 

B 

o 

H 

M                                           O. 

XD 

n  CO 

£S 

1 

•— . 

CO 

O   .K 

0) 

'tn!M-t<'MO<ri3i-f^lMOCOin(Mint£> 

00 

1^  CO 

00 

a 

(?)          r-.  O  ^                  00^ -<   .             ,C<3  C)  r-1          t^P-. 

l~      . 

°B. 

is 

'^„    • 

O  «5 

00 

,a> 

rt"                                 in~ 

o 

©"(tT 

'^f 

'"' 

(M 

rt 

^ 

tr.  r^  o  ic  a  ri  is  m  ao  x> -^  ^  -^  ^  o\  n  ro 

ira 

Ol  00 

in 

o 

^ 

(MCOwr^CTi— leooo-t           r-io— 1      cDO 

•— »    . 

2  5S 

C5 

H 

r-c  F-<                  .—                         CO  r^  r-l          «0 

o    • 

eo  CJ3 

CO 

«5 

rH                                 eo 

to 

eo 

o 

1 

i 

«o  i-1  CO  00  w  >-i  ^  oo  w           m  00  m  ;o  C5  oo 

o 

o^ 

o 

1 

■-iC0l^l-O-*^CO      •      '-t-Mt^        —  CO 

u;  i^ 

§ 

rH                  (N(N                  t^r-c««r-«^                  -# 

CO      * 

00    r-l 

-f 

." 

s 

<M 

-* 

m  -H 

>- 

b 

'" 

.-1 

> 

CO 

Oint^ooOTfr-c^ira       rtoot^^'Nco-- 

,-1 

9=2 

-H 

o 

O)        i-H  t^  03              CC  r3     •        f-<  CO  o        cr.  T-l 

in    . 

in  o 

o 

.o 

"rt 

-t            •        rt                     uo^ 

in    . 

in^-t 

.n 

< 

S 

(n" 

'-' 

-*" 

« 

ocD-fiMiritMin^oo      ocoooa>-fa3'^ 

CN 

-f  00 

-i< 

OO^COOt^CO'-ii-'iC     •-Hi^Ot^^  —  o 

C7S      • 

5S  S 

^2 

2 

1 

(M   ^                   00                .           r-l   r-1                    CO 

C  CO 

in 

e  V 

cf 

'^ 

CO  ^ 

00 

1^ 

£ 

He 

and 

lies. 

Tl<T».oo^r~T)<cncot^^(?J-fgao      l2^- 

C5 

en  OS 

1^ 

>—         W^i        (MOO                     (M-^CO-'tr^ 
CO                         r-<                     •  »-^ 

en     . 

2^ 

-* 

'-       ■< 

'"' 

" 

" 

CO 

» 

OOI^OOt^O         OCOr-.tMI^CSt^C^'GC 

CO 

00  05 

o 

S 

-1<<N            .^(N               CO                     CO'- 

i^    ' 

1— <  ^ 

Ci 

C   V 

V 

o\ 

b 

S 

— 1 1^  o  o  O  CO       1.1  o  t^      in  CO  —1       CT  t>. 

5?    . 

n  m 

00 

a> 

r-<^<       -«<       'M       o                oco-f       eot^ 

-H 

m  in 

-f 

•  ^H     •           '(O     •     •     •,— *-H^^     'O 

CO 

r^  »— 1 

^ 

2 

1 

.         •         .         .    .    .                  .  ro 

-f 

'^ 

tr> 

c  S 

S'"** 
5  2 

b 

li 

• 

lO      -H  c^           in           rH  -f  t^  o      CO  CO 

t^ 

-t  i-< 

C-l 

s 

s 

•             •rt..;©..         (MrtrH-eOr-l 

92 

C 

o 

cs 

"3 

.     .            .      .                              .CO 

-* 

""i 

m 

s 

t^(NT(<-Hy5!?»,-00-M  —  r^  —  CO-*^^'* 

CJ 

t=S'5 

i°l^ 

■"■ 

■"■ 

eo 

z  £^ 

"     • 

s 

n 

be 

ii 

. 

.5 

0        •     •     .     . 

k^ 

r/T 

^. 

-d 

tS 

H 

o 

o      .... 

'"2    "    * 
•  3    •    • 

-3 

My) 

2  -^ 

II 

W  J  .  .  . 

C3 

f^S 

W^ 

P 

o 

^    .    .    • 

•si 
"  fl 

M«- 

"d 

"rt 

o 

•^S'P  m^-s-ji  §-5 -5  o  &'2-5i2.a'~ 

^ 

^ 

232 


TROGRESS  OF  THE  NATION. 


[sec.  11. 


The  actual  proportions  in  which  persons  of  different  ages  were  em- 
ployed in  each  of  these  four  branches  of  industry,  in  1835  and  18oi), 
were  as  follows  : — 


1835 


1S39 


1. 


Ajjes. 

Cotton. 

Woollen. 

Flax. 

r  Silk. 

8    to    12     .     . 

12  „     13     .      . 

13  „     18     .      . 
Above  18     .     . 

.       3-7 
.       9-3 

.     29-8 
.     57-2 

6-7 
12- 

29-8 
51-5 

3-7 
12-2 
36-1 

48- 

20-9 

8-7 

30-8 

39-6 

100- 

100- 

100- 

100- 

Under    9  years 
Between9  and  13 
„      13    „     18 
Above  18    .     .     . 

4-75 
37-52 
57-73 

12-35 
39-59 
48-06 

4- 05 
44-00 
51-95 

2-80 
22-60 
34-19 
40-41 

100-  100-  100-  100- 

The  proportions  in  which  males  and  females  were  employed  in  1835 
and  1839,  were  : — 


Cotton. 
1835         18.39 

Males  .     .     45-7        43-5 
Females    .     54-3        56-5 


Woollen. 
1S35         1839 
52-5         48-5 
47-5        51-5 


Flax. 
1835        1839 

31-2        29-6 
68-8        70-4 


Silk. 
1835        1839 
33-2         31-7 
66-8        68-3 


100- 


100- 


100- 


100- 


100- 


100- 


100-         100- 

The  imperfection  of  the  returns  of  1835,  in  regard  to  the  mechanical 
power  used  in  factories,  did  not  allow  of  any  precise  calculations  in  re- 
gard to  the  proportions  in  which  that  power  is  used,  as  compared  with 
the  number  of  persons  employed  in  each  branch.  The  following  abstract 
contains  all  the  information  of  this  nature  that  can  be  gathered  fi'om 
the  returns  given,  both  in  1835  and  1839,  in  which  latter  year  the  state- 
ments are  more  complete. 

Siatemeitt  shoivinff  tlie  Amount  of  Mechanical  Power  used  in  Factories,  and  the  Number  of  Persons 
employed  in  each  JBranch,  in  tlie  Years  1835  and  1839. 

1835 


Description 
of 

Number 

of 
Factories, 
the  Power 
of  which 
is  given. 

Number  of 

Horse-power  of 

Steam-Engines  and  Water 

Wheels. 

Number 
of  Horses, 

Power 
actually 

Em- 
ployed. 

Number  of 

Persons 
Employed 
in  Factories 
the  Power 
of  which 
is  given. 

Factories. 

Steam 
Engines. 

Water 
Wheels. 

Total. 

Steam. 

Water. 

Total. 

Cotton    .     . 
Woollen .     . 
Flax  .      .      . 
Silk    .      .     . 

987 

740 

90 

131 

1,000 

528 

55 

118 

479 

462 

55 

41 

1,479 
990 
110 
153 

27,433 

10,300 

1,746 

1,343 

6,575     34,008 

4,703      15,003 

.528       2, -274 

332        1,675 

30,698 

13,536 

2,204 

1,460 

172,605 
46,685 
12,910 
18,390 

Total     . 

1,948 

1,701 

1,037 

2,738 

40,822    12,138 

52,960 

47,898 

^50,590 

1839 


Cotton     .      . 
"Woollen .     . 
Flax  .      .      . 
Silk    .      .      . 

1,819 

1,738 

392 

268 

1,641 
888 
315 
207 

674 

1,207 

240 

109 

2,315 

2,095 

555 

316 

46,827 

17,.3J8 

7,412 

2,4.57 

12,977 

10,406 

3,678 

922 

.59,804 

27,804 

1^,090 

3,379 

55,785 

25,564 

9,585 

2,977 

259,385 
86,446 
43,487 
34,318 

Total     . 

4,217 

3,051      2,2.30 

5,281 

74,094 

27,983 

102,077 

93,911 

423,636 

CHAT.    II.] 


MANUFACTUKES. 


233 


From  these  figures  it  appears,  tliat  the  number  of  persons  employed 
fur  each  mechanical  horse-])()wer  at  each  period,  was  :  — 

1815  is:jy 

In  Cotton  Factories      .     .      .       i>^  4J 

„  Woollen       „  ...       .'i.^  nearly.  3.^  nearly. 

„  Flax  „  .     .     .       5J  4^ 

„  Silk  „  ...     123  ll.J 

The  larger  proportion  in  the  silk  mills  might  be  expected  from  the 
greater  number  of  young  persons  employed  therein. 

The  progress  of  our  textile  manufactures  during  the  period  of  four 
years  will  be  apparent  from  the  following  statement  of  the  increase  or 
decrease  in  1839,  as  compared  with  1835,  of  the  number  of  factoi-ies 
at  work  or  empty,  and  of  the  number  of  persons  employed  therein,  in 
each  division  of  the  United  Kingdom  : — 


England. 

Wales. 

Scotland. 

Ireland. 

United  Kingdom. 

Inc. 

Dec. 

Inc. 

Dec. 

Inc. 

Dec. 

Inc. 

Dec. 

Inc. 

Dec. 

Mills  at  work — 

Wool       .     .     . 

343 

. , 

65 

,  , 

22 

,  ^ 

.. 

5 

425 

Cotton    .      .      . 

526 

, , 

33 

.. 

4 

555 

Silk   ...» 

32 

,  , 

. . 

"'1 

1 

30 

Flax        .      .     . 

17 

"13 

'i5 

45 

Mills  empty — 

Wool       .     .     . 

40 

11 

5 

, , 

7 

63 

Cotton    .      .      . 

46 

6 

1 

53 

Silk   .... 

"2 

., 

.. 

"i 

"  3 

Flax  .... 

12 

"7 

"4 

"*23 

Persons  Employed. 

AVool,  &c.— 

Under  13  years 

2,149 

74 

478 

,. 

91 

2,644 

13  to  18     „ 

11*573 

. . 

312 

1,136 

^^ 

.. 

49 

12,'972 

Above  18     „ 

3,808 

265 

,. 

913 

]. 

152 

4,834 

Total  .     .     . 

13,232 

, . 

651 

1,571 

292 

15,162 

Cotton- 

Under  13  years 

13,211 

,  , 

11 

2,834 

385 

16,441 

13  to  18     „ 

27,028 

,  , 

41 

3,8il 

... 

942 

31. '822 

Above  18     „ 

22,268 

ni 

1,504 

. . 

269 

23,870 

Total  .     .     . 

36,085 

. , 

141 

2,481 

826 

39,251 

Silk- 

Under  13  years 

311 

., 

42 

2 

355 

13  to  18    ,  , 

2, '255 

*50 

25 

2,' 280 

Above  18     „ 

1,664 

69 

[. 

22 

1,711 

Total      .       . 

3,608 

77 

49 

3,636 

Flax— 

Under  13  years 

1,641 

.. 

.. 

1,572 

236 

_ 

3,449 

13  to  18     „ 

1,131 

, , 

'.'.    3,180 

.. 

2,803 

7,'il4 

Above  18     „ 

8'M 

..    2,880 

.. 

2,769 

6,539 

Total      . 

380 

•• 

..    4,488 

•• 

5,336 

10,204 

234  PROGRESS  OF  THE  NATION. 


CHAPTER  Til. 

MANUFACTURES. 
Woven  Fabrics. 


Progress  in  various  Foreit/n  Countries. 


France  —  Woollen  manufacture  —  Imports  and  production  of  wool  —  Protection  against 
foreign  manufactures — Cotton  manufacture — Disadvantages  through  the  duties  on 
foreign  coal  and  iron — Extent  of  manufacture— Quantity  of  cotton  imported  since  17S7 
—Export  of  woollen  and  cotton  goods — Silk  manufacture— Its  extent  and  progi'ess — 
Exports — Germany — Cotton  manufactures — Prussian  commercial  league — Russia — Swiss 
Cantons. 

Having  thus  inquired  into  the  progress  of  this  nation,  as  regards  one 
great  class  of  its  manufactures, — woven  fabrics,  it  may  be  desirable  to 
see  in  what  degree  other  countries  have  kept  pace  with  us  in  the  de- 
velopment of  the  same  branch  of  industry.  The  materials  for  such  an 
inquiry  are  generally  scanty  and  unsatisfactory.  Statements  are,  indeed, 
frequently  pvit  forward  to  the  world  from  various  quarters  with  an  air 
of  confidence,  which  pretend  to  give  the  most  ample  information  upon 
different  branches  of  this  subject,  but  every  one  who  has  been  accustomed 
to  collate  and  compare  those  statements,  has  generally  found  reason  to 
distrust  their  correctness.  It  is  but  seldom,  indeed,  that  documents  of 
this  kind  are  furnished  upon  competent  authority  ;  and  where  this  is 
wanting,  it  will  always  be  more  safe  for  the  inquirer  to  depend  rather 
upon  collateral  circumstances,  as  to  the  truth  of  which  no  doubt  exists, 
than  to  rely  upon  unsupported  assertions,  however  plausibly  they  may  be 
offered. 

The  French  Government,  urged  to  an  alteration  of  the  restrictive 
system,  by  which  it  has  sought  to  foster  its  manufactures,  was  induced  a 
few  years  since  to  institute  an  inquiry  into  the  past  and  present  effects  of 
that  system,  and  in  the  course  of  that  inquiry  collected  together  some 
documents  which  bear  the  stamp  of  authenticity,  and  which  may  therefore 
be  used  with  confidence  in  the  comparison  which  it  is  proposed  to  make, 
as  to  the  manufacturing  progress  of  France  and  England.  A  consi- 
derable number  of  authentic  statements  of  the  same  nature  have  also 
been  collected,  with  great  industry,  by  Dr.  Bowring,  and  presented  to 
Parliament  in  his  interesting  reports  on  the  commercial  relations  of  the 
two  countries  ;  and  in  recent  years,  the  French  Government  has  published 
very  ample  statements  of  the  trade  of  the  kingdom,  so  that  it  will  hardly 


CHAP.    III.] 


MANUFACTURES. 


235 


be  necessary  to  have  recourse  to  any  unofficial  statement  in  this  part  of 
our  inquiry. 

The  woollen  manufacture  has  long  been  one  of  the  staples  of  France, 
and  the  excellent  quality  of  French  cloths  has  been  generally  acknow- 
ledged. In  some  branches  of  the  manufocture  the  French  clothiers  have 
taken  the  lead  ;  and  to  this  day  their  finer  woollens  find  a  market  in 
every  quarter  of  the  globe.  Under  these  circumstances,  there  can  be  no 
doubt  that  the  quantity  of  woollen  cloth  manufactured  in  France  has 
increased  with  the  growth  of  the  population  ;  and  it  appears  from  a 
table  inserted  in  the  "  Enquete,"  published  by  the  French  government, 
that  the  quantity  of  these  goods  exported  has  also  materially  increased 
during  the  last  half  century.  These  facts  are  shown  by  the  following 
statement  of  the  quantity  and  value  of  wool  imported,  and  of  v/oollen 
goods  exported,  in  the  years  1787,  8,  and  9,  and  in  each  year  from  1812 
to  1848:— 


Years. 


Wool  Imported. 


Weight. 


1787 
1788 
1789 
1812 
1813 
1814 

181.T 

1816 
1817 
1818 
1819 
1820 
1821 
1822 
182.3 
1824 
182.'} 
1826 
1827 
1828 
1829 
18.30 
18.31 
1832 
1833 
1834 
1835 
1836 
1837 
18.38 
1839 
1840 
1841 
1842 
1843 
1844 
1845 
1846 
1847 
184S 


Kilogrammes. 
7,842,085 
,780,747 
,860,087 
,.308,. 380 
,3.)4,4.'J5 
,8.32,472 
,431,269 
j785,675 
,612,891 
,854,231 
,428,420 
,912,291 
,876,661 
,117,731 
,481,659 
,409,956 
,6.39,108 
,4;35,228 
,.381,8.57 
,586,889 
,749,194 
,214,939 
,8.36,207 
,621,. 594 
,305,702 
,220,595 
,844,. 5.36 
,165,512 
,999,465 
,926,078 
,612,180 
,456,341 
,.323,741 
,951,769 
,603,370 
,784,982 
,761,206 
,017,619 
quantity 

not  stated. 


Value. 


Francs. 

14,. 391,. 500 

13,.544,4fK) 

17,061,(X)0 

30,627,885 

20,303,973 

7,699,057 

5,.348,7J2 

8,266,084 

16,015,862 

25,169,916 

10,612,687 

8,350,895 

11,690,328 

15,500,142 

9,318,820 

7,496,925 

7,836,484 

10,939,887 

11,1.30.922 

13, .3.10, 515 

9,275,611 

12,871,9.32 

5,2.53,089 

7,861,821 

19,139,629 

17,914,818 

34,218,973 

31,890,637 

18,997,429 

34,177,544 

31,937,089 

29,987,249 

45,897,373 

49,240,862 

49,807,776 

64,722,0.50 

71,145,423 

43,004,017 

39,847,223 

19, 835,. 543 


Woollens  Exported. 


Weight. 


Kilogrammes. 


1,761,281 
1,289,517 

700,843 
1,. 336, 801 
2,202,368 
1,508,012 
1,389,818 
1,. 3.50, 795 
1,494,137 
1,369,746 
1,101,615 
1,018,261 
1,141,268 
1,182,929 

982,849 
1,029,100 
ij 058, 922 
1,196,744 
1,029,472 
1,050,457 
1,434,026 
1,. 546, 991 
1,. 542, 247 
1,576.208 
2,018,292 
1^670,772 
2,297,741 
2,299,0.56 
2,325,771 
2,511,458 
2,402,643 
2, 566,. 551 
3,207,8.55 
3,183,349 
4,. 307, 472 
3,182.660 
3,498,027 


Value. 


Francs. 
21,811,900 
23,560,2(X) 
25,709,000 
38,. 303, 193 
27,. 539, 642 
13,711,202 
38,662,677 
68,007,529 
49,862,593 
44,971,455 
40,615,461 
43,. 383, 660 
39, 7  50,. 591 
40,528,113 
33,082,211 
36,4.36,512 
37,821,1.30 
29,848,406 
27,-369,125 
.30,025,776 
31,606,464 
27,690,1.38 
28,088,716 
.36,  .306, 600 
38,098,047 
39,437,014 
38,-366,902 
49,187,968 
43,428,066 
64,400,460 
60,. 588, 2)4 
61,072,105 
64,. 595, 741 
63,169,108 
78, 910,. 547 
104,007.160 
104,931^714 
1.33,814,478 
97,6(7,836 
83,221,418 


23«  PROGRESS  OF  TlIE  NATION.  [sec.  ii. 

To  enable  the  French  clothiers  to  compete  successfully  with  us  in 
foreign  markets,  a  bounty  on  exportation  is  paid  by  the  government 
equal  to  13?  per  cent,  on  the  value  ;  which  payment  is  calculated  to  be 
equal  to  the  duty  imposed  upon  foreign  wool,  for  the  supposed  benefit 
of  the  agricultui'ists  of  that  country.  The  design  of  that  duty  was  to 
raise  the  price  of  wool  of  native  growth  ;  and  it  was  thence  thought 
necessary  to  protect  the  manufacturers  against  the  competition  of  countries 
where  the  raw  material  is  cheaper,  by  prohibiting  the  importation  of 
woollen  cloths.  It  may  be  useful  to  inquire,  in  a  few  words,  what  has 
been  the  effect  of  this  double  protection. 

It  is  admitted  in  the  reply  made  by  the  Chamber  of  Commerce  of 
Carcassone,  in  November,  1834,  to  the  circular  letter  addressed  by  the 
Minister  of  Commerce  to  different  commercial  bodies,  in  September  of 
that  year,  that  the  immediate  effect  of  the  imposition  of  the  duty  of  33 
per  cent,  on  foreign  wool  proved  the  very  contrary  of  that  which  was 
intended  ;  that,  in  fact,  it  lowered  the  price  of  native  wool  from  1 2  to 
15  per  cent.,  which  reduction  progi-essively  increased,  until  in  1832  the 
diminution  of  value  amounted  to  25  per  cent.  The  duty  has  since  been 
reduced  to  22  per  cent.,  but  without  in  any  respect  influencing  the  price 
of  French-grown  wool.  The  reason  for  this  result,  so  contrary  to  the 
intentions  of  the  legislature,  has  been  thus  given : — "  Foreign  manu- 
facturers, no  longer  meeting  the  competition  of  French  buyers  in  the 
countries  of  production,  have  been  able  to  buy  their  material  of  manu- 
facture, at  cheaper  rates,  and  consequently  have  afforded  their  goods  to 
foreign  consumers,  previously  supplied  by  France,  at  a  proportionate 
reduction  of  price.  Deprived  of  wool  of  the  fine  qualities  necessary  for 
producing  the  cloth  which  before  had  been  made  by  them  for  exportation, 
the  French  clothiers  have  had  their  market  limited  chiefly  to  their  own 
country  ;  one  consequence  of  which  has  been,  that  their  purchases 
of  native  wool  have  been  diminished,  by  the  quantity  formerly  mixed 
with  foreign  wool  for  the  production  of  the  cloths  exported."  According 
to  this  view,  it  was  not  likely  that  the  growers  of  wool  should  be  benefited 
by  the  duty  imposed  for  their  encouragement,  and  this  opinion  has  been 
fully  borne  out  by  the  fact,  as  already  stated.  That  the  manufacturers 
have  not,  on  their  part,  profited  by  the  prohibition  of  foreign  woollens,  is 
rendered  fully  evident  by  the  constant  complaints  which  they  have  made 
of  a  falling  off  in  their  trade. 

In  1814  protection  was  continued  to  the  manufacturers,  with  the  under- 
standing that  the  prohibition  should  remain  for  no  longer  than  two 
years  ;  that  time  being  considered,  under  the  altered  circumstances  of 
the  commercial  world,  necessary  for  the  establishment  of  their  prosperity. 
Twenty  years  of  strict  monopoly  have  since  passed^,  and  the  complaints 
of  the  manufacturers  are  as  pressing  as  they  were  in  1814.  The  reason 
for  this  continued  state  of  adversity  in  regard  to  branches  of  industry 


CHAP.  Ill]  MANUFACITRES.  237 

for  which  France  enjoys  every  facility,  is  thus  stated  in  the  Report 
of  Messrs.  Villiers  and  Bowring,  on  the  Commercial  Relations  l)ct\vei'n 
France  and  England  : — "  Raw  produce  being  protected,  at  the  demand 
of  the  French  producer,  and  all  articles  necessary  to  existence  at 
the  demand  of  the  French  agriculturist,  high  prices  have  lessened 
consumption,  while  the  external  demand  has  been  considerably  dimi- 
nished. There  are  scarcely  any  protected  articles  in  which  France  can 
now  sustain  a  competition  with  other  countries  ;  and  the  improvement 
resulting  from  competition,  which  is  as  valuable  to  the  manufacturer 
as  it  is  to  the  public  at  large,  is  completely  checked.  The  manu- 
facturers themselves,  however,  have  in  their  turn  become  the  victims ; 
for  protection  does,  in  fact,  destroy  the  very  market  which  it  intends 
to  monopolize.  It  has  introduced  great  distress  among  six  millions 
of  inhabitants  of  the  wine  districts,  who  would  naturally  be  large 
consumers  of  home  produce.  In  France  the  agricultural  is  by  far  the 
most  numerous  class ;  and  if  the  sale  of  their  produce  is  prevented 
by  the  exclusion  of  what  other  countries  have  to  offer  in  payment,  the 
means  of  ultimately  dealing  with  the  manufacturer  are  destroyed. 
To  whatever  article  inquiry  is  directed,  the  results  will  be  found 
analogous." 

The  cotton  manufacture  in  France  labours  under  a  considerable 
natural  disadvantage  as  compared  with  that  branch  of  industry  in 
England,  arising  from  the  comparatively  high  price  of  fuel.  Another 
circumstance,  equally  unfavourable  to  the  French  manufacturer,  is  the 
high  price  of  iron,  and  consequently  of  machinery.  The  first  of  these 
evils  is  aggravated  by  the  imposition  of  a  duty  on  the  introduction  of 
coals  into  that  country,  for  the  protection  of  the  owners  of  forests  ;  and 
the  dearness  of  iron  is  chiefly  occasioned  by  a  similar  fiscal  absurdity, 
for  the  advantage,  first,  of  the  owners  of  forests,  the  value  of  whose 
property  would  suffer  if  encouragement  were  withdrawn  fi'om  the  iron- 
masters, who  are  their  customers  to  a  great  extent ;  and,  secondly,  for 
the  supposed  benefit  of  those  iron-masters,  who  would  be  unable  to  carry 
on  their  works  in  the  face  of  foreign  importation. 

In  spite  of  these  unfavourable  circumstances,  however,  the  cotton 
manufacture  has  gi'eatly  increased  of  late  years  in  France.  The  quantity 
of  raw  cotton  imported  into  that  country  in  1812,  the  earliest  year  of  the 
present  century  as  to  which  we  have  any  statement,  was  6,343,230 
kilogrammes — about  14,000,000  pounds.  In  1815  the  importation 
amounted  to  36,000,000  pounds,  but  for  some  years  thereafter  the 
increase  did  not  continue  at  the  same  rate  of  progression,  so  that  in  1823 
the  quantity  consumed  was  somewhat  under  45,000,000  pounds.  In  the 
following  year  the  importation  was  61,000,000  pounds,  and  in  1833  had 
reached  78,000,000,  being  about  one-fourth  part  the  quantity  used 
during  that  year  in  this  country 


238  TROGRESS  OF  THE  NATION.  [sec.  ii. 

The  increase  has  since  gone  forward  with  at  least  an  equal  speed,  the 
quantity  of  cotton  used  hy  the  manufacturers  of  France  in  1843  having 
been  equal  to  132,000,000  of  pounds,  being  about  70  per  cent,  addi- 
tion in  ten  years,  and  about  2'2k  per  cent,  of  the  quantity  used  in  the 
same  year  in  the  United  Kingdom. 

These  quantities  do  not  afford  a  correct  view  of  the  French  cotton 
manufacture  up  to  1833,  because  a  considerable  quantity  of  cotton  twist 
of  fine  qualities  was  then  every  year  systematically  smuggled  into  the 
country.     The  government  has  been  supposed  to  connive  at  this  illegal 
traffic,  because  the  French  spinners  being  unable  to  produce  twist  of  a 
quality  fit  for  the   manufacture  of  muslins  and   fine   cloths,  the  very 
existence  of  their  largest  cotton  manufacturers  would  have  been  endan- 
gered or  destroyed  by  the  exclusion  of  the  material  which  they  employ. 
The  extent  to  which  this  illicit  trade  was  carried  is  thus  stated  in  the 
Report  of  Messrs.  Villiers  and  Bowring,  on  the  Commercial  Relations 
between  Great  Britain  and  France  (i)age  48)  :  — "  Of  English  manufac- 
tures,   cotton-twist   is   among   those  whose  fraudulent   introduction  is 
the  most  extensive  and  irrepressible.     It  makes  its  way  both  by  land 
and  sea,  in  spite  of  all  interdictions,  to  a  continually  increasing  amount. 
The  qualities  principally  in  demand  are  the  higher  numbers,  which  the 
French  mills  cannot  produce,  or  produce  only  at  an  extravagant  price. 
An    official  return  states  that  the  French  number  180,  which  can  be 
bought  in  England  at  18  fi'.  per  kilogramme,  sells  in  France  at  39  fr. 
to  40  fr.     The  same  quality  of  French  manufacture,  to  which  no  risk 
of  seizure  attaches,  will,  it  is  said,  produce  42  h\,  the  two  or  three  francs 
of  difference  being  paid  for  the  additional  security.     The  numbers  prin- 
cipally introduced  are  from   170  to  200,  and  are  employed  chiefly  for 
the  fabrication  of  bobbin-net  (tulle).     But  there  is  also  a  large  demand 
for  English  cotton  chains  at  Tarrare,  and  they  are  so  necessary  for  the 
existence  of  that  manufacture,  that,  by  the  connivance  of  the  Custom- 
house authorities,  no  seizures  take  place  after  the  article  is  lodged  in 
the  warehouse  of  the  manufacturer.     He  has  then  to  support  an  addi- 
tional cost  of  from  30  to  40  per  cent.,  the  whole  of  which,  (by  the  con- 
nivance of  the    Government)    goes  to    the    contraband    traders.     The 
amount  of  iUicit  introduction  is  calculated  at  above  twelve  millions  of 
pounds." 

Since  the  time  when  this  report  was  written  some  relaxation  has  been 
made  in  the  French  tariff,  and  by  a  royal  ordonnance,  bearing  date  8th 
July,  1834,  the  importation  of  cotton  yarns  above  a  certain  degree  of 
fineness  is  permitted  on  payment  of  a  duty  equal  to  about  half-a-crown 
per  pound,  which  is  equivalent  to  45  per  cent,  upon  the  value  of  those 
qualities  which  are  mostly  imported  into  France.  At  this  rate  of  duty 
some  fine  English  yarns  are  regularly  introduced,  but  the  charge  of 
the  smuggler  being  below  that  of  the  Custom-house,  a  much  larger 


ciiAr.  in.] 


MANUFACTURES. 


239 


quantity  is  still  illicitly  imported,  and  it  does  not  appear  that  the  spin- 
ning-trade in  this  country  has  heen  much  if  at  all  affected  by  this  sub- 
stitution of  a  high  duty  for  the  former  prohibition. 

The  following  table  of  the  quantity  and  value  of  cotton  imported  into 
France,  and  of  cotton  manufactures  exported  from  that  country,  from 
17^7  to  1781),  and  from  1812  to  18-48,  is  taken  fi'om  the  "  Enquete 
Relative  a  Diverses  Prohibitions,"  published  from  authority,  and  fi'om 
the  yearly  statements  of  the  Director-General  of  the  Customs: — 


1787 
1788 
1789 
1812 
1813 
18U 
1815 
1816 
1817 
1818 
1819 
1820 
1821 
1822 
1823 
1824 
1825 
1826 
1827 
1828 
1829 
1830 
1831 
1832 
1833 
1834 
1S35 
1836 
1837 
1838 
1839 
1840 
1841 
1842 
1843 
1844 
1845 
1846 
1847 
1848 


Cotton  Imported. 


Weiglit. 


Kilo{;rammes. 
4,466,000 
5,4.3'J,424 
4,760,221 
6,343,230 
9,638,842 
8,181,710 
16,414,606 
12.115,042 
13,370,3L'8 
16,974,159 
17,010,401 
20,203,314 
22,586,615 
21,572,413 
20,. 35.3,. 552 
28,030,085 
24,667,312 
31,914.494 
29,684^.385 
27,375,163 
31,839,001 
29,260,4.'J3 
28,229,487 
33,6.36,417 
35,609,819 
36, 934,  .5.36 
38,759,819 
44,331,604 
43,828,462 
51,2.58,620 
40,5.34,278 
.52,941,581 
55,870,483 
57,-326,567 
59,999,857 
62,411,9.54 
72,919,971 
71,564,545 
56,603,366 
56,228,872 


Value. 


Francs. 
42,903,100 
36,637,600 
33,274,000 
35,115,6&3 
54, .556, 716 
.32,7.37.609 
32,829^212 
19,849,228 
25,521,051 
30,945,259 
32,2.32,948 
36,825,157 
41,. 366, 675 
39,696,083 
37,006,940 
49,187,624 
44,061,717 
56,-3.53,941 
51,918,941 
49,143,991 
57,139,657 
51,760,582 
49,441,816 
58,442,869 
62,289,758 
65,0.54,164 
67,7.32,115 
76,812,763 
76,220,787 
89,464,781 
71,204,784 
94,005,975 
98,549,849 
101,820.678 
107,082,894 
110,826,157 
129,255,980 
128,076,702 
83,107,902 
50,702,648 


Cotton  Manufactured  Goods  and 
Yarn  txported. 


Value. 


Kilogrammes. 


792,789 
837,663 
331,995 
314,969 
1,020.1-32 
841,370 
784,766 
9-37,7.56 
1.-369,160 
1,709,028 
1,107,075 
1,2;)2,515 
1,751,975 
1,847,417 
1,629,766 
1,987,678 
1,977,162 
2,251,265 
2,3-39,065 
2,-360,944 
2,-3-53,474 
2,4-38,742 
2.289,828 
2,578,206 
2,7-34,345 
2.836,674 
3,406,4.38 
3,675,642 
4, 559,. 566 
4,416,314 
3. 168, .362 
3,895,826 
5,682,972 
6,510,201 
8,295,984 
7,. 309, 890 
6,239,869 


Francs. 
21,227,200 
4.55,400 
289,  (K)0 
.507,938 
.5.32,058 
187,844 
698,840 
(K)2,698 
419,106 
748,361 
606,547 
120,0.58 
-534, (J61 
284.678 
812,4-55 
829.074 
190^495 
64(5,785 
.522,211 
72  J,  7-37 
790,840 
6-36,1.50 
615,0.59 
123.426 
007,i;33 
416,016 
187,316 
999.740 
823 ; 149 
826.0-55 
725^051 
033,064 
.366.437 
742;  4.37 
.576;  847 
515,260 
723,996 
759,314 
.303,. 538 
518,098 


57 

.53 

62 

65 

64 

80 

85 

109 

105 

72 

82 

117 

127 

139 

53 

44 


The  countries  to  which  France  exported  woollen  and  cotton  goods  in 
1838,  with  the  value  of  those  exported,  are  shown  in  the  following  table, 
which  is  likewise  taken  from  the  "  Fnquete  :" — 


240 


PROGRESS  OF  THE  NATION. 


[sec. 


col'ntril:s. 


England 

Holland 

Belgium 

Sweden  and  Norway  . 

Russia 

Austria 

Prussia 

Germany 

Switzerland 

Sardinian  States  .  .  •  . 
Tuscany  and  Roman  States  . 
Naples  and  Sicily  .     .     .      . 

Spain 

Turkey  and  Greece    . 
Egypt 

Barbary  States  .  .  .  . 
Algiers  and  Coast  of  Africa. 
Enitcd  States  of  America     . 

Hayti 

Foreign  SVest  Indies  . 

Mexico 

Columbia 

Buenos  Ajtcs 

ChiU 

Peru 

Brazil 

Foreign  India 

French  Colonies  .  .  .  . 
Other  Countries    .     .     .     . 


Value  of  Exports. 


Woollens. 


Cottons. 


Francs. 

,650.105 
242,623 

,062;04.'} 

6S.0'.»3 

171 ;  143 

128,3L)6 

104.0'J5 

,389.634 

,o;t3;ot)8 

,093,149 

,505,868 

620,871 

,.329,175 

,818,906 

,017,094 

,115,399 

683,149 

,207,054 

149,891 

84,227 

278,601 

23,826 

168,887 

280,999 

970,665 

377,957 

46,081 

771,302 

210,210 


Fr.!  36,663,351 


Francs. 
513,296 
585,634 
6,763,941 


2.53,897 
2,667,009 
2,440,357 
5,467,417 

5 19,. 580 

1,186,493 

14,340,647 

398,093 

218*491 

582,5.39 

5,739,9.55 

1,830,089 

1,135,6.51 

1, 690 ; 844 

45,, 325 

2.36,983 

262,519 

74,387 

l,212;il7 

185,. 306 

7,116,745 

892,000 


56,359,315 


Or  sterling  £      1,466,534         2,254,372 


The  silk  manufacture  lias  long  been  carried  on  in  France  to  an  ex- 
tent which  has  caused  it  to  be  considered  one  of  the  most  important 
branches  of  the  national  industry.  The  raw  material  being  principally 
produced  in  the  country,  there  are  not  any  means  of  ascertaining  pre- 
cisely the  quantity  that  is  employed  in  its  looms.  At  the  breaking  out 
of  the  French  revolution,  the  estimated  quantity  of  native  silk  produced 
was  one  million  of  pounds.  The  tables  published  by  Count  Chaptal  of 
the  production  of  diiferent  departments  in  the  five  years  from  1808  to 
1812  give  an  annual  average  of  about  950,000  pounds.  There  had 
consequently  been  no  increase  during  twenty  years  —the  whole  of  which 
period  had  been  passed  in  a  state  of  war.  Between  1812  and  1820  we 
have  no  estimate  of  the  progi-ess  of  production  :  in  the  latter  year  the 
quantity  is  said  to  have  amounted  to  1,350,000  pounds,  but  there  are 
reasons  for  believing  that  this  estimate  is  somewhat  below  the  truth. 
The  facts  collected  by  Dr.  Bowring  in  his  official  inquiry  show  that  the 
annual  produce  of  France  in  1832  was  about  3,000,000  pounds.  The 
averafre  annual  weight  of  foreign  silk  imported  into  France,  after  de- 
ducting the  quantity  re-exported,  was  then  about  1,000,000  pounds. 
There  are  not  any  tables  of  the  quantities  imported  at  earlier  periods, 


CHAP.  III.]  MANUFACTURES.  241 

but  roasons  are  glvon  for  lu-lieving  that  although  the  average  importa- 
tions have  since  been  (loul)le(l,  th(i  relative  proportions  of  native  and  of 
foreign  sillc  have  been  pretty  steadily  preserved,  and  that  importation 
has  only  kept  pace  with  the  increase  in  quantity  of  the  native  naterial. 
It  is  estimati'd  that  the  total  value  of  the  silk  manufactures  of  France 
is  200,000,000  of  francs,  or  about  8,000,000/.,  four-sevenths  of  which 
consist  of  the  value  of  the  material  used,  the  remaining  three-sevenths 
of  value  being  added  for  labour  and  profit.  The  result  of  the  manu- 
facture in  both  countries  is  placed  in  very  striking  contrast  by  the  fact, 
that  while  two-thirds  of  the  silk  goods  made  in  France  are  export(>d 
— leaving,  consequently,  for  the  use  of  her  34,000,000  of  inhabitants, 
silk  fabrics  below  the  value  of  3,000,000/.  sterling, — the  export  of  English- 
made  silk  goods  does  not  amount  to  one-tenth  of  the  quantity  that  passes 
through  our  looms,  and  is  more  than  replaced  by  the  goods  of  foreign 
manufacture  imported  for  use  ;  so  that,  taking  into  the  calculation  tlie 
diderence  in  the  number  of  the  people,  and  the  greater  cost  of  produc- 
tion, the  consumption  of  silk  goods  is  more  than  five  times  as  great  in  the 
United  Kingdom  as  it  is  in  France. 

"  It  appears,"  says  Dr.  Bowring,  in  his  second  Report  on  the  Com- 
mercial Relations  between  France  and  England,  "  that  before  the  legal 
introduction  of  French  manufactured  goods  into  England,  the  exports 
from  France  had  gone  on  progressively  from  an  amount  of  1,744,105  fr. 
in  1818,  to  6,104,103  fr.  in  1825.  The  difference  in  the  cost  of 
production  at  that  time  was  hardly  less  than  40  per  cent.  ;  so  that  the 
amount  of  smuggling  did  not  represent  a  less  sum  than  340,000/.  per 
annum." 

"  According  to  the  estimates  of  the  French  and  English  Custom- 
houses, it  would  appocir  that  the  difference  of  weight  between  the  ma- 
nufactured silks  exported  from  France,  and  those  regularly  imported 
into  England,  from  1825  to  1831,  averaged  134,400  pounds;  and  that, 
from  1829  to  1831,  the  average  was  equal  to  about  140,000  pounds 
weight." 

A  considerable  revolution  in  the  practice  of  the  producers  of  silk  has 
been  introduced  of  late  years  into  the  southern  provinces  of  France.  A 
very  interesting  paper  upon  this  subject  was  furnished  to  Dr.  Bowring 
by  ^lessrs.  Thomas,  Frcres,  of  Avignon,  and  is  inserted  in  his  second 
Report  on  the  Commercial  Relations  between  France  and  Great  Britain. 
The  following  extract  from  that  ])aper  will  serve  to  account  for  the  great 
increase  experienced  in  the  production  of  silk,  when  compared  with  the 
early  part  of  the  century  :  — 

"  The  cultivation  of  mulberry  trees  was  for  a  long  period  only  an 
accessory  branch  of  the  income  derived  from  their  estates  by  the  little 
as  wx'll  as  by  the  larger  proprietors  ;  thc'.r  cultivation,  as  compared  with 
that  of  grain,    forage,  and  other  articles  pecidiar  to  certain  districts, 

R 


'2  12  TKOGRESS  OF  THE  NATION.  [sec.  ii. 

such  as  saffi'on  and  madder  in  this  country  (Vaucluse),  oil  and  tohacco 
in  Provence,  c^e.,  was  the  less  thought  of  because  the  rearers  of  silk- 
worms, notwithstanding  the  great  importance  of  the  article,  considered 
as  a  whole,  in  the  south  of  France,  were  so  much  under  the  influence  of 
long-staniling  practice.  i)rejudices,  and  ancient  absurdities,  that  the  ma- 
nagement of  their  business  was  unintelligible,  and  its  production  most 
uncertixin  ;  whereas  had  they  proceeded,  as  they  at  length  did,  on  sound 
principles,  guided  by  the  simplest  elements  of  chemistry,  they  would 
have  rendered  these  harvests  more  certain  than  those  of  any  other  crop. 
These  rearers  of  silk-worms  differed  materially  in  their  method  of  pro- 
ceeding ;  sometimes  the  farmers  sold  the  mulberry  leaves,  or  gave  them 
in  consideration  of  a  participation  in  the  profits,  to  some  rearer  of  silk- 
worms, who  devoted  his  particular  attention  to  the  worm  alone  :  some- 
times the  leaves  were  sold  to  other  rearers,  who,  from  the  excessive 
numbers  they  hatched,  were  not  able  sufficiently  to  provide  them  with 
leaves.     AVithin  so  late  a  period  as  twenty  years  back,  so  irajicrfect 
were  the  methods  pursued,  that  on  a  farm  furnishing  leaves  for  ten  or 
twelve  ounces  of  silk-worms'  eggs,  which  should  produce  from  80  to 
100  pounds  of  cocoons  per  ounce,  it  was  considered  a  good  crop  if  five 
or  six  pounds  altogether  were  produced.     It  was  not  until  towards  the 
close  of  the  reigu  of  Napoleon,  when    the  active  spirit  of  the  nation 
sought  other  fields  for  exertion  than  the  field  of  battle,  that,  guided  by 
the    studies   and   examples    of  some    enlightened    agi-iculturists  —  and 
amongst  others  those  of  Dandolo— and  stimulated  by  the  high  prices  to 
which  silk  had  been  advanced,  our  people  of  the  south  devoted  them- 
selves, with  that  ardour  which  marks  their  character,  to  the  cultivation 
of  the  mulberry-tree,  and  to  the  rearing  of  the  silk-worm.     Many  of 
the  large  proprietors  united  their  efforts  to  those  of  a  multitude  of  little 
planters  of  the  mulberry-tree  and  rearers  of  the  silk-worm,  and  it  was 
then  that  establishments  were  formed,  which,  by  their  importance,  and 
the  certainty  and  value  of  their  results,  would  have  excited  astonish- 
ment at  the  commencement  of  that  age." 

The  raw  silk  of  France  is  of  very  excellent  quality.  This  arises 
principally  from  the  nature  of  the  soil,  which  is  favourable  to  the  pro- 
motion of  that  degree  of  vigom'  in  their  vegetation,  which  gives  to  mul- 
berrv  leaves  a  quality  that  imparts  to  the  silk  produced  a  great  degree 
of  fineness,  joined  to  a  brilliant  colour.  The  dealers  have 'besides 
adopted  a  system  which  proves  an  effectual  security  against  fraud  in 
the  sale  of  silk.  AVhen  reeled,  it  is  sent  to  an  establishment  called  the 
condition,  in  which,  by  exposure  to  a  high  temperature,  all  superfluous 
moisture  is  evaporated,  and  the  true  weight  ascertained.  It  is  upon 
certificates  of  this  weight,  signed  by  the  officers  "of  the  establishment, 
that  sales  are  effected.  A  very  careful  investigation  of  this  subject 
carried  on  at  Lyons,  leads  to  the  belief  that,  by  this  means,  the  purity 


citAi-.  Ill]  MANUFACTURES.  243 

of  the  material  is  tested  with  very  great  accuracy.  Until  a  recent 
period,  the  exportation  of  native  raw  silk  was  forbidden  by  the  French 
Government,  under  the  belief  that  their  manufacturers  were  thereby 
secured  in  the  possession  of  an  advantage  over  their  rivals  in  other 
countries.  This  circumstance  formed  a  subject  of  complaint  on  the  part 
of  our  silk-weavers,  who  were  'thus  placed  at  a  disadvantage  in  com- 
])eting  with  goods  made  of  a  better  material  than  they  were  able  to 
procure.  This  cause  of  complaint  has  now  been  removed.  Yielding 
to  the  representations  made  by  the  Commercial  Commissioners  of  this 
country,  the  French  Government  has  legalized  the  exportation  of  native 
silk,  both  raw  and  thrown,  at  a  moderate  rate  of  duty  ;  a  concession 
which,  by  promoting  production,  is  of  advantage  to  the  agi-icultural 
interest  in  the  south  of  France,  without  inflicting  any  real  injury  on  the 
manufacturers  of  that  country. 

A  considerable  impulse  has  been  given  to  manufacturing  industry  in 
ditFerent  parts  of  Germany  within  the  last  twelve  years,  and  especially 
since  the  formation  of  the  Prussian  Commercial  League.  In  Prussia 
itself  many  cotton-spinning  mills  have  been  erected  since  1833,  and 
large  capitals  have  been  invested  in  machinery.  In  Saxony,  the  manu- 
facture of  hosiery  has  become  considerable  in  amount,  and  the  goods 
produced  are  so  low  in  price  that  exports  have  sometimes  been  made  to 
England  in  the  face  of  a  consumption  duty  of  10  per  cent,  on  the  value. 
The  cotton  manufacture  has  also  been  successfully  undertaken  in  Bavaria, 
in  Wiirtemberg,  and  in  some  others  of  the  states  included  within  the 
league.  These  attempts,  however,  are  for  the  most  ])art  of  such  recent 
origin,  that  it  is  hardly  possible  to  form  any  certain  estimate  as  to  their 
ultimate  results.  At  present  it  is  only  through  the  imposition  of  a 
considerable  import  duty  in  the  German  States,  that  their  cotton  goods 
generally  are  able  in  any  way  to  compete  with  English  fabrics ;  but  it  is 
altogether  impossible  to  say  how  long  this  state  of  things  may  continue, 
and  it  may  reasonably  be  expected,  that  the  German  artisans  will  in 
time  acquire  a  degree  of  skill  and  experience,  which,  aided  by  the  lower 
cost  of  subsistence  in  Germany,  as  compared  with  England,  will  render 
their  rivalry  formidable  to  Manchester  and  Paisley,  at  least  in  neigh- 
bouring countries,  if  not  in  more  distant  parts  of  the  world. 

It  has  long  been  the  policy  of  the  Russian  Government  to  afford  pro- 
tection to  its  own  manufacturers  by  prohibiting  the  goods  of  other 
countries.  At  present  nearly  the  whole  amount  of  the  exports  from 
this  kingdom  to  Russia  consists  of  cotton  yarn,  which  is  there  woven 
into  all  kinds  of  fabrics,  from  the  coarsest  fustians  to  fine  cambrics. 
The  establishments  for  this  purpose  are  under  the  immediate  patronace 
of  the  Russian  government,  and  it  is  said  that  the  goods  produced  are 
so  good  in  quality  as  to  equal  those  of  English  make ;  but  in  regard  to 
the  cost  of  production,  the  advantage  is  still  greatly  with  us,  and  so  it 

R  2 


244  TROGRESS  OF  THE  NATION.  [sec.  ii. 

■svill  probably  remain  so  long  as  Russia  sliall  maintain  the  policy  of  pro- 
tecting its  artisans  from  tlie  competition  of  other  countries. 

In  several  of  the  Cantons  of  Switzerland  the  manufacture  of  woven 
fabrics  has  been  steadily  and  prosperously  pursued  of  late  years.  So 
little  of  what  is  called  protection  has  been  accorded  to  the  Swiss  manu- 
facturer, that  until  this  time  there  has  not  been  any  Custom-houses  in 
the  Cantons  from  which  to  obtain  returns  of  imports  and  exports,  where- 
by to  ascertiiin  the  comparative  progress  of  these  branches  of  industry. 
Free  trade,  in  the  fullest  extent  of  the  term,  has  been  tried  in  these 
Cantons,  and  although,  as  already  observed,  we  are  luiable  to  bring 
forward  an  array  of  figures  in  proof  of  its  success,  we  know  that  in  spite 
of  the  disadvantages  of  geogra])hical  position,  and  notwithstanding  the 
comparative  scarcity  of  capital,  the  raw  cotton,  which  is  obtained  by  a 
tedious  and  expensive  land  carriage,  is  converted  into  febrics  which  com- 
pete successfully  in  every  market  with  the  products  of  our  looms  ;  and 
that  the  silk  and  linen  goods  of  Switzerland,  which  are  excluded  by  fiscal 
regulations  from  neighbouring  countries,  find  customers  in  a  wider  and 
more  profitable  field  on  the  other  side  of  the  Atlantic.  If  we  take  into 
account  the  small  natural  resources  of  the  Swiss  manufacturers,  it  may 
with  truth  be  asserted  that  no  people  have  made  greater,  or  even  as 
great,  progress  as  they  have  done  during  the  last  twenty-five  years. 
Switzerland  has  been  strongly  lu-ged  to  join  the  Prussian  Commercial 
League,  and  by  that  means  to  secure  twenty-four  millions  of  consumers 
for  its  cheap  manufactures  ;  but  satisfied  with  their  present  condition  and 
future  prospects,  and  jealous  as  to  the  possible  effect  of  permitting 
foreigners  to  interfere  in  any  way  with  their  concerns,  the  Cantons  have 
hitherto  declined  to  accept  the  proffered  advantage. 


cuAi'.  iv.J  M.VNUFACTUliES.  215 


CHAPTER  IV. 

JI  A  N  IT  F  A  C  T  U  R  E  S. 

Iron^Steel — Brass — Copper — Plated  Wares — Glass — IIardwares. 

lucrease  of  population  of  Birmingham — Fall  in  cost  of  goods— Quantities  exported,  and 
value  of  the  same — British  iron  exported — Quantity  and  value  of  brass  and  copi)er  goods 
exported — System  of  manufactures  pursued  in  Birmingliam — Increase  of  population  of 
Sheffield — Conversion  of  iron  into  steel — Quantity  of  steel  exported — Value  of  plated 
goods  exported — Glass  manufacture  —  Causes  which  have  prevented  its  extension — 
Quantity  retained  for  consumption — Effect  of  high  duties  in  limiting  consumption — 
Illicit  manufacture. 

There  are  ranny  branches  of  manufocturing  industry  in  this  country 
which  are  of  considerable  importance  from  tlie  number  of  hands  to  whom 
they  give  employment,  but  as  to  the  amount  or  progress  of  which  it  is 
not  p(;ssible  to  form  any  other  than  a  conjectural  or  at  best  an  approxi- 
mative ophiion. 

Among  the  manufactures  thus  circumstanced  may  be  mentioned  those 
of  hardware,  plated  goods,  and  earthenware.  The  materials  of  which 
these  articles  are  made  are  for  the  most  part  produced  at  home ;  and 
as  the  goods  manufactured  have  never  been  subjected  to  duty,  no  means 
exist  whereby  to  judge  of  the  increase  or  otherwise  of  their  quantity.  It 
was  atone  time  thought  practicable  to  estimate  the  progress  of  the  manu- 
facture carried  on  at  the  Potteries  in  Staffordshire,  by  ascertaining  the 
quantity  of  raw  material  conveyed  into  the  district  on  the  canals ;  but 
attempts  which  have  been  made  to  procure  a  statement  of  the  tonnage 
so  conveyed,  have  not  hitherto  met  with  any  success,  owing  probably  to 
a  misconception  on  the  part  of  the  managers  of  the  canals  as  to  the  mo- 
tive which  has  prompted  the  inquiry.  In  proportion  as  the  value  of  such 
information  to  tiie  community  becomes  better  known,  we  may  hope  that 
the  avenues  to  it  will  be  less  jealously  giiarded,  and  that  a  general 
willingness  to  communicate  information  will  ere  long  take  the  place  of 
that  feeling  which  seeks  advantage  from  concealment. 

^Vith  regard  to  the  manufacture  of  hardwares,  we  can  have  no  doubt 
as  to  its  extension  if  we  compare  the  population  of  Birmingham  as  given 
at  each  census. 

In  1801  it  consisted  of   73,670  souls. 
1811  „  85,755     „ 

1821  ,,  100,722     „ 

18;U  „  146,986      „ 

1841  „  181,116      ,, 


246 


PROGRESS  OF  THE  NATION. 


[sec.  II. 


So  that  the  number  has  been  increased  by  nearly  150  per  cent,  in  forty 
years.  It  will  be  observed  that  the  increase  which  occurred  during  the 
ten  years,  from  1821  to  1831,  amounted  to  upwards  of  54  per  cent,  upon 
the  population  as  it  existed  at  the  beginning  of  the  century. 

The  increase  of  buildings  in  the  town  of  Birmingham  during  the  ten 
years  between  1821  and  1831,  amounted  to  38  per  cent.,  and  the  greater 
number  that  were  being  built  in  1831,  as  compared  with  1821,  showed 
that  the  increase  was  still  progressive,  as  fully  appeared  in  1841. 


Years. 
1821 
1831 
1841 


Houses 
Inhabited. 

21,487 
29,656 
36,121 


Houses 
BuiWinj;. 

148 

551 

323 


flousps 
Uninhabited. 
1,461 
2,111 
3,847 


Total. 
23.096 
32,318 
40,291 


The  extension  of  the  manufacture  of  which  this  growth  of  population 
exhibits  indubitable  proof,  has  been  accompanied — or,  perhaps,  to  speak 
more  correctly,  has  been  occasioned — by  improvements  in  the  methods 
of  production,  which  have  lowered  the  prices  of  goods  in  a  manner  cal- 
culated to  insure  a  continuance  of  prosperity  to  those  engaged  in  the 
manufacture,  by  extending  the  number  of  consumers.  This  fact  is 
shown  by  Mr.  Babbage,  who  has  given  the  following  table  "  extracted 
from  the  books  of  a  highly  respectable  house  at  Birmingham." 


DESCRIPTION. 


Anvils cwt. 

Awls,  Liverpool  blades       ....    gross 

Candlesticks,  iron,  plain 

„  „     screwed 

Bed  screws,  6  inch,  square  head  .     .    gross 
„  „        flat  head  .     .     .       „ 

Currycombs,  6  barred dozen 

„  8  barred •      „ 

„  patent,  6  barred      .     .       „ 

„  „       8  barred      .     .       „ 

Fire  irons,  iron  head.  No.  1    ....     , 

No.  2 

„  »  No.  3 

No.  4 

Gun  locks,  single  roller      ....     each 
Locks,  It  brass,  port,  pad        ...       „ 
„        2.^  inch,  3  keyed  till  locks      .       „ 

Shoe  tacks gross 

Spoons,  turned,  iron  table       .      .      .       ,, 
Stirrups,  common,  tinned,  2  bar  .      .  dozen 
Trace  chains,  iron cwt. 


Reduction 

1812 

1833 

per  Cent. 

in  Price  of 

1812. 

«.     d. 

s.     d. 

25    0 

14    0 

44 

3     6 

1     0 

71 

3  lOi 
6     4 

2    3.V 

41 

3    9 

41 

7     6 

4    6 

40 

8     6 

4    8 

45 

4     Oi 

1     0 

75 

5     5l 

1     5 

74 

7  ^ 

8  6f 

1     4 

1     5 

80 

1  10 

79 

0    7| 
0     8.i 

53 

1     6- 

53 

1     8[ 

1  lol 

0     9l 

53 

0  lOl 

53 

7     21 

1   W 

73 

16     0" 

2    6 

85 

2    2 

0    9 

65 

5    0 

2    0 

60      • 

22    6 

7    0 

69 

7     0 

2    9 

61 

46     9i 

15    0 

68 

The  interval  that  occurred  between  the  dates  here  contrasted  was 
twenty  years,  and  it  will  be  seen  that  during  that  -time,  in  a  pretty  ex- 
tensive list  of  articles,  the  reduction  in  price  on  some  was  40  per  cent., 
while  on  others  it  went  to  the  almost  incredible  extent  of  80  to  85  per 
cent.      The  cost  of  the  material  employed  had,  it  is  true,  fallen  very 


CHAP.    IV.] 


MANUFACTURES. 


247 


considerably  iu  the  interval,  but  this  can  have  had  but  little  influence 
in  reducing  prices,  when,  as  is  the  case  with  nearly  all  the  articles  com- 
prised in  the  list,  the  first  cost  of  the  material  forms  only  a  minute  por- 
tion of  the  value  of  the  finished  article. 

The  degree  in  which  tiiis  reduction  in  their  cost  has  occasioned  an 
increase  in  the  number  of  foreign  customers,  may  be  gathered  from  the 
amount  of  hardware  and  cutlery  exported  at  different  periods  during 
the  present  century  :  viz. — 


Years. 

Tons. 

1805 

4,288 

1806 

4,629 

1807 

4,669 

1808 

2,673 

1809) 

to 

Records  destroyed 

1811) 

1812 

5,854 

1813 

Records  destroyed 

1814 

6,162 

1815 

15^472 

1816 

13,914 

1817 

8,1'.K) 

1818 

11,057 

1819 

8,699 

1820 

6,697 

1821 

9,037 

1822 

10,466 

1823 

10,375 

1824 

12,285 

1825 

10,980 

1826 

9,627 

1827 

12,443 

Years. 
1828 
1829 
1830 
1831 
18.32 
1833 
1834 
1835 
1836 
1837 
1838 
1839 
1840 
1841 
1842 
1843 
1844 
1845 
1846 
1847 
1848 
1849 


Tons. 
12,100 
13,028 
13,269 
16,799 
15,294 
16,497 
16.275 
20 j 197 
21,072 
13,. 372 
15,295 
21,177 
14,995 
17,667 
15,212 
17,183 
22,552 
20,755 
19,615 
20,614 
18,105 
23,421 


The  value  of  these  exports  since  1820,  as  declared  by  the  merchants 
at  the  time  of  shipment,  was  : — 


Years. 

£. 

1820 

949,085 

1821 

1,237,692 

1822 

1,. 334, 895 

1823 

1,264,441 

1824 

1.454,2(6 

1825 

1^391,112 

1826 

1,169,105 

1827 

1,392,870 

1828 

1,335,617 

1823 

1,. 389, 515 

18.30 

1,410,936 

1831 

1,620,631 

18.32 

1,4.33,297 

18.33 

1,466,. 361 

1834 

1,485,233 

Years. 

£. 

1835 

1,8.33,042 

1836 

2,271,313 

18.37 

1,460,807 

1838 

1,498,327 

1839 

1,828,521 

1840 

1,349,1.37 

1841 

1,623,961 

1842 

1,338,487 

1843 

1,745,519 

1844 

2,179,087 

1845 

2,183,000 

1846 

2,180,587 

1847 

2,341,981 

1848 

1,850,460 

1849 

2,201,315 

A  much  more  striking  progress  has  been  made  in  the  exportation  of 
British  iron  in  an  vmmanufactured  state.  The  quantities  supplied  to 
other  countries  by  Great  Britain  in  each  year  of  the  present  century 
have  been  :  — 


248 


PROGRESS  OF  THE  NATION. 


[sr.c.  II. 


ISO  I 
1802 
1803 
180-t 
1805 
1806 
1807 
1808 

lai;)) 

to  > 
1811' 
1812 
1813 
1814 
1815 
1816 
1817 
1818 
1810 
1820 
1821 
1822 
1823 
1824 
1825 


Bar  Iron. 


Tons. 
3,001 
5,45<,» 
3,574 
0,064 
6,594 
4,1'.>4 
5,172 
9,0J6 


Pig  Iron. 


Tons. 
1,,583 
1,815 
1,532 
2,237 
3,276 
2,.54'.» 
2.'.)25 
3,388 


Records  destroyed 


13,196 
Records 
15,468 
18,223 
20,870 
34,310 
42,0;i5 
23,765 
36,848 
34,093 
33,3:t5 
33,138 
25,781 
25,613 


4,066 

destroyed. 

307 

166 

953 

4,057 

3,048 

<;06 

2,746 

4,484 

5,095 

7 ,  545 

2.0i3 

2;S15 


Castings. 


Ton 


1,694 
1,.593 
1,797 


2,349 

5,034 
5,320 
6,388 
6,-322 
6,303 
7,270 
5,186 
4,506 
41810 
5;  730 
6,717 
5,944 


1820 
1827 
1828 
1829 
1830 
1831 
1832 
1833 
1834 
1835 
1836 
1837 
1838 
183) 
1840 
1841 
1842 
1843 
1844 
1845 
1846 
1847 
1848 
1849 


Bar  Iron. 


Tons. 

33,253 

45,284 

51,108 

56,178 

5;i,8S5 

64;012 

74,024 

75,333 

70,809 

107,715 

97,762 

95,663 

141,923 

136,452 

144,719 

189,249 

191,. 301 

r.)8,774 

249,915 

153,813 

145,475 

214,874 

321,134 

376,118 


Pig  Iron. 


Tons. 

6,563 

7,095 

7,826 

8,931 

12,036 

12,444 

17,560 

22,988 

21,788 

33; 073 

33,880 

44,. 387 

48,554 

43,460 

49,801 

85,806 

93,851 

154,770 

99,  %0 

77, .361 

15!i,163 

176,080 

175,650 

161,775 


Castings. 


Tons. 

5,940 

6,292 

6,205 

8,219 

8.854 

10,. 301 

12,495 

14,763 

13,870 

12,004 

19,891 

12,373 

14,942 

10,8.36 

9,880 

14,077 

15,9.34 

10,500 

18,909 

22,030 

20,160 

20,. 321 

19,371 

16,. 549 


The  quantity  and  value  of  brass  and  copjjer  manufactures  exported 
in  each  year  from  1805,  the  earliest  year  of  which  we  have  any  record, 
are  as  under.  It  is  only  in  this  branch  that  any  estimate  can  be  formed 
of  the  progress  of  these  manufactures,  but  there  is  no  reason  to  doubt 
that  the  home  demand  has  at  least  kept  pace  with  that  from  foreign 
countries.  The  value  previous  to  1814  is  given  according  to  the  official 
rates,  but  on  and  after  that  3'ear  the  real  or  declared  value  is  stated. 


1805 
1806 
1807 
1803 
1809 
1810 
1811 
1812 
1813 

1814 
1815 
1816 
1817 
1818 
1819 
1820 
1821 
1822 
1823 
1824 
1825 
1826 


Quantity.     Official  Value, 


Cwts. 

85,0.54 

71,154 

91,422 

79,210 

89,752 

79,. 584 

64,210 

87,. 508 


£. 
382.740 
320,l;.8 
411,399 
3.56,442 
403.888 
358.132 
288/945 
3j3,784 


Records  destroyed. 


73,248 
124,426 
128,044 
161,128 
148,490 
115,998 
145,124 
149,444 
135,956 
123,982 
120,048 

90,0.54 
116,. 584 


Real  Value 
479,518 
753.604 
675,00  4 
795.843 
81 1; 191 
669,403 
738,486 
678,976 
597,861 
543,618 
523,4S'.» 
485,118 
571,149 


Years. 


1827 
1828 
1829 
1830 
1831 
1832 
1833 
1834 
1835 
1836 
1837 
18.38 
1839 
1840 
1841 
1842 
1843 
1844 
1845 
1846 
1847 
1848 
1849 


Quantity. 


C^^^s. 
147,222 
128.106 
163,241 
189,.5<.'2 
181,951 
213,482 
1.2,974 
205,900 
242,095 
204,835 
2.50,105 
265,204 
272,141 
311,1.53 
327,247 
395,210 
364,128 
388,882 
372,097 
325,083 
316,015 
282,422 
409,003 


Real  Value. 

jfc'. 

786,955 

678,786 

812,366 

807,. 344 

803, 124 

916,563 

884,149 

961,823 

1,094,749 

1,072,344 

1,166,277 

1,221,732 

1,280,506 

1,4,50,464 

1,523,744 

1,810,742 

1,644,248 

1,736,. 545 

1,694.441 

1,-558,187 

1,541,868 

1,2.57,944 

1,875,866 

ciiAV.  IT.]  MANUFACTURES.  0|9 

Tlie  largest  shipments  of  these  manufactures  arc  made  to  India  ;  the 
markets  of  IIi^du^tan,  in  1844,  took  from  us  141,237  cvvt.,  valued  at 
611,109/,  a  quantity  nearly  double  the  amount  of  the  shipments  to  all 
parts  of  the  world  in  1814.  France  is  our  next  most  considerable  cus- 
tomer, having,  in  1844,  taken  103,214  cwt.,  valued  at  453,405/.  ;  to 
the  whole  of  our  colonies  and  dependencies,  exclu?ive  of  India,  we  sent 
only  18,739  cwt.,  valued  at  80,232/.  The  United  States  took  43,811  cwt., 
valned  at  197,289/. ;  leaving  81,881  cwt.,  valued  at  394,510/.  for  the 
supply  of  the  rest  of  the  world. 

The  greater  part  of  the  articles  most  commonly  manufactured  at 
Birmingham  are  not  produced  in  extensive  factories  in  which  largo 
capitals  must  be  employed  for  the  erection  of  machinery.  Almost  all 
the  small  wares  of  the  district  are  made  by  workmen  who  undertake, 
each  one  in  his  particular  line,  to  execute  orders  received  by  the  mer- 
chants and  agents  settled  in  the  town.  The  profitable  performance  of 
their  contracts,  however,  calls  for  the  employment  of  a  cheaper  kind  of 
power  than  is  at  the  command  of  men  who,  like  these  workmen,  hav(; 
little  or  no  capital ;  and  this  course  of  business  has  opened  a  channel 
for  the  employment  of  money  in  the  town,  in  a  manner  which  is  found  to 
be  profitable  to  those  who  engage  in  it,  and  advantageous  to  the  suiall 
manufacturer.  The  ])lan  alluded  to  is  this.  A  building  containing  a 
gi'eat  number  of  rooms  of  various  sizes,  is  furnished  with  a  steam-enijine, 
working  shafts  from  which  are  placed  in  each  apartment  or  workshop, 
which  is  likewise  furnished  with  a  lathe,  benches,  and  such  other  conve- 
niences as  are  suited  to  the  various  branches  of  manufacture  for  which 
the  rooms  are  likely  to  be  needed.  When  a  workman  has  received  an 
order  for  the  supply  of  such  a  quantity  of  goods  as  «ill  occupy  him  a 
week,  or  a  month,  or  any  other  given  time  for  their  completion,  he  hires 
one  or  more  of  these  rooms,  of  sizes  and  with  conveniences  suited  to  his 
particular  wants,  stipulating  for  the  use  of  a  certain  amount  of  steam- 
power.  He  thus  realizes  all  the  advantage  that  would  accompany  the 
possession  of  a  steam-engine  ;  and  as  the  buildings  thus  fitted  up  are 
numerous,  competition  on  the  part  of  their  owners  has  brought  down  the 
charge  for  the  accommodation  they  offer  to  the  lowest  rate  that  will 
ensure  to  them  the  ordinary  rate  of  profit  on  the  capital  employed. 

Before  the  introduction  of  this  system,  the  trade  of  Birmingham  was 
for  the  most  part  carried  on  by  men  of  large  capital,  who  employed  jour- 
neymen, and  gave  a  considerable  credit  to  the  merchants  who  dealt  with 
them.  At  present  those  merchants  themselves  employ  the  workmen,  who 
can  give  no  credit,  but  receive  pa)  ment  in  ready  money  at  the  end  of 
every  week  for  such  part  of  their  goods  as  they  can  then  deliver  in  a 
finished  state. 

In  this  way  the  proiit  of  the  intermediate  dealer  is  saved,  and  this 
circumstimce  will,  in  part,  account  for  the  great  diminution  that  has 


2-30  niOGRESS  OF  THE  NATION.  [sec.  ii. 

occurred  in  the  prices  of  the  different  articles  contained  in  the  table 
already  given. 

The  prosperous  state  of  the  manufacture  of  cutlery  may  be  fairly  in- 
ferred from  the  increase  in  the  population  of  Sheffield,  from  which  town 
proceeds  nearly  all  the  cutlery  which  is  made  in  this  kingdom,  including 
a  great  part  of  the  "London  made''  knives  and  razors,  stamped  with 
the  names  of  metropolitan  cutlers,  who  avail  themselves  of  a  prejudice 
on  the  part  of  the  public,  to  charge  an  exorbitant  ])rofit  on  their  "  town- 
made  "  goods. 

The  population  of  Slieffield  at  each  of  the  five  decennary  periods,  end- 
ing; with  1(S4:1,  was  as  follows  : — 


Years. 

ropulation. 

Increase  per  Cent. 

1801 

45,755 

ISU 

53,2.31 

16 

1821 

65,275 

22 

18.31 

91,692 

40 

1841 

111,031 

21 

The  comparative  situation  and  apparent  prospects  of  the  town  at  the 
enumerations  of  1821,  1831,  and  1841,  may  be  inferred  from  the  returns 
made  under  the  Population  Acts  :  viz. — 

Houses  Houses  Houses 

Years.  Inhabited.  Building.  Uninhabited.  Total. 

1821  13,381  80  1,664  15,125 
1831  18.331  468  914  19,713 
1841     20,705        176        2,989       23,870 

One  branch  of  manufacture  carried  on  in  Sheffield  has  been  very 
greatly  extended  during  the  last  few  years,  until  it  has  now  become  of 
considerable  importance  ;  this  is  the  conversion  of  iron  into  steel,  a 
process  which  is  performed  to  the  extent  annually  of  many  thousand 
tons,  a  considerable  part  of  which  is  exported  in  an  unwrought  form. 
The  town  of  Sheffield,  in  1835,  contained  fifty-six  furnaces  for  converting 
iron  into  steel ;  beside  which,  there  were  sixty-two  establishments,  con- 
tainino;  554  furnaces,  for  moulting  steel.  The  original  conversion  of  the 
metal  into  blistered  steel  occasioned  the  use  of  about  12,000  tons  of 
coal  in  the  form  of  coke,  and  the  subsequent  processes  required  about 
81,000  tons  in  addition.  The  various  manufactures  of  cutlery  and 
plated  goods  carried  on  in  the  town  consumed  about  200,000  tons,  and 
38,000  tons  was  the  estimated  allowance  for  the  working  of  steam- 
engines,  of  which  there  were  then  seventy-four,  of  the  aggregate  power 
of  1353  horses.  If  to  these  quantities  are  added  184,000  tons,  as  fuel 
for  household  purposes,  it  will  appear  that  the  entire  consumption  of 
coal,  in  Sheffield,  amounted,  in  1835,  to  515,000  tons,  the  whole  of  which 
-was  taken  from  collieries  in  the  immediate  vicinity  of  the  town.  Five- 
sixths  of  the  iron  used  for  manufacturing  purposes  in  Sheffield,  is  of 
foreign  production  ;  only  2000  out  of  12,000  tons  consumed  in  the  year 


ciiAr.  IV.] 


MANUFACTURES. 


251 


is  of  British  origin.     The  cost  of  tlie  fuel  forms  just  one-third  part  of 
the  expense  of  converting  and  casting  steel. 

The  progress  of  this  particuhir  branch  of  trade 
from  the  following  statement  of  the  quantity  of  unwn 
in  each  year,  from  1814  to  1849  : — 


Years. 

1814 

1815 

1816 

1817 

1818 

1819 

1820 

1821 

1822 

1823 

1824 

1825 


Tons. 
323 
1,221 
917 
475 
704 
494 
326 
515 
564 
479 
570 
533 


Years. 

1826 

1827 

1828 

1829 

1830 

18:31 

1832 

1833 

1834 

1835 

1836 

1S37 


Tons. 

472 

535 

917 

714 

832 

1,207 

1,112 

1,587 

1,709 

2,810 

3,014 

2,432 


may  he 

understood 

ought  steel  exported 

Years. 

Tons. 

1838 

2,946 

1839 

3,974 

1840 

2,583 

1841 

4,116 

1842 

3,303 

184.3 

3,199 

1844 

5,121 

1845 

7,015 

1846 

8,467 

1847 

9,787 

1848 

6,912 

1849 

8,095 

Our  principal  market  for  unwrought  steel  is  found  in  the  United 
States  of  America.  The  quantities  sent  there  in  each  of  the  thirty-five 
years  from  1815  to  1849,  were  as  follows : — 


Years. 

Tons. 

Years. 

Tons. 

Years. 

Tons. 

1815 

774 

1827 

227 

1839 

2,695 

1816 

497 

1828 

518 

1840 

1.202 

1817 

249 

1829 

330 

1841 

2^535 

1818 

224 

ia30 

3)7 

1842 

1,507 

1819 

124 

1831 

852 

184;3 

1.336 

1820 

85 

1832 

686 

1844 

2,376 

1821 

274 

1833 

970 

1845 

3,633 

1822 

288 

1834 

1,039 

1846 

4, 132 

1823 

233 

1835 

1,886 

1847 

5,428 

1824 

173 

1836 

1,952 

1848 

4,607 

1825 

130 

1837 

1,447 

1849 

5,216 

1826 

137 

1838 

1,036      - 

It  will  be  observed,  that  the  first  few  years  of  the  series  present  larger 
quantities  than  were  afterwards  required.  This  circumstance  is  accounted 
for  by  the  fact,  that  no  shipments  took  place  from  this  country  to  America 
in  the  years  immediately  preceding,  during  which  time  we  were  at  war 
with  the  United  States.  The  exportation  of  1815,  the  first  year  of 
renewed  intercourse,  has,  however,  been  greatly  exceeded  of  late,  giving 
the  ap))earance  of  a  steady  as  well  as  rapid  extension  of  the  trade. 

The  manufacture  of  plated  goods,  which  is  carried  on  in  Sheffield  and 
Birmingham,  is  one  of  those  branches  of  industry,  the  progi-ess  of  which 
we  have  no  means  of  ascertaining.  The  quantity  exported  forms  no 
indication,  and  in  foct,  there  is  not  in  foreign  countries  any  reason 
equally  cogent  with  that  existing  in  England  for  the  use  of  plated  goods ; 
for,  so  far  at  least  as  we  know,  there  is  not  any  other  country  in  which  a 
duty  is  levied  upon  articles  of  use  and  luxury,  made  of  gold  and  silver. 
The  imposition  of  this  duty  has  no  doubt  given  encouragement  to  the 
production  of  plated  wares  for  home  use,  but  not  for  exportation,  since 
the  duty  ]>aid  upon  articles  fashioned  entirely  with  the  more  precious 
material  is  repaid  to  the  exporter. 


252  PROGllESS  OF  THE  NATION.  [sec,  ii. 

The  declared  value  t»f  plated  goods  exported  in  the  years  1831,  1832, 
and  1833,  uas  no  more  than  22,295/ ,  20,727/.,  and  24,209/.,  respec- 
tively ;  ahout  two-thirds  of  these  amounts  were  sent  to  different  colonies 
and  dependencies  of  the  British  empire,  and  principally  to  India. 

Our  makers  of  plated  wares  have  an  advantage  over  all  others,  from 
the  perfection  of  the  machinery  used  in  this  country  for  rolling  metals. 
The  difference  thus  caused,  if  estim.ated  in  money,  is  in  favour  of  p]nglish 
manutactiu'crs,  as  compared  with  those  in  France,  in  the  proportion  of 
seventeen  to  thirteen  in  the  cost  of  the  material  employed.  It  has  been 
estimated,  that  the  value  of  articles  of  this  manufticture  Tised  in  the 
United  Kingdom,  amounts  to  1,200,000/.  per  annum  ;  while  in  France 
the  consumption  does  not  exceed  in  value  40,000/.  sterling  per  annum, 
an  equal  value  being  also  exported  from  that  country,  principally  to 
Holland,  Belgium,  Spain,  the  Sardinian  States,  Germany,  the  United 
States  of  America,  and  3fexico. 

The  declared  value  of  British-made  plate,  plated  ware,  jewellery,  and 
watches,  exported  from  the  United  Kingdom,  the  whole  of  those  articles 
being  included  together  in  the  Custom-house  returns,  was  as  follows, 
during  the  twenty-three  years  from  1827  to  1849 : — 


Years. 

£. 

Years. 

£. 

Years. 

£. 

1827 

lG'.),4r)6 

1835 

231,903 

1843 

172,008 

1828 

181,973 

183r, 

338.889 

1844 

269,6.50 

1829 

177,830 

1837 

258,076 

1845 

294,145 

1830 

l'.iO,515 

1838 

240,584 

1846 

245,030 

1831 

188,144 

1839 

274,305 

1847 

283,(t37 

1832 

173,593 

1840 

204,427 

1848 

234,046 

1833 

179,283 

1841 

214,126 

1849 

233,058 

1834 

192,269 

1842 

201,511 

Of  the  shipments  made  in  1844,  amounting  to  269,650/.,  the  East  Indies 
took  to  the  value  of  38,364/. ;  the  West  India  colonies,  13,122/. ;  other 
British  possessions,  48,638/. ;  the  United  States  of  America,  60,788/. ; 
and  Italy,  7,691/. ;  leaving  101,047/.  for  the  value  of  shipments  to  all 
other  parts  of  the  world. 

Our  glass  manufacture  has  been  hitherto  placed  under  circumstances 
which,  while  they  enable  us  to  ascertain  the  importance  of  the  art  as  a 
branch  of  national  industry,  have,  until  the  repeal  of  the  duties  in  1845, 
in  a  great  degree  prevented  its  extension. 

The  (mly  reasons  that  can  be  shown,  why  the  demand  for  an  article 
so  generally  useful  and  desirable  as  glass  should  not  have  kept  pace 
with  the  growth  of  our  po])ulation,  and  with  the  increase  of  our  means 
of  commanding  the  conveniencies  of  life,  are  these — that  it  has  been 
loaded  with  excessive  duties,  and  that  the  processes  of  the  manufacture 
have  been  so  interfered  with  by  regulations  necessary  for  the  collection 
of  those  duties,  as  to  prevent  the  introduction  of ^  many  improvements. 
A  further  cause  may  perhaps  be  found  in  the  fact,  that  in  order  to  work 
profitably  under  those  regulations,  it  has  been  necessary  to  carry  on  the 


C11.V1-.  IV.]  MANUFACTUKES.  253 

manufacture  upon  so  large  a  scale,  as  to  create  a  virtual  monopoly,  of 
some  of  its  branches  at  least,  in  the  hands  of  a  few — a  state  of  things 
generally  unfriendly  to  improvement. 

England  possesses  within  herself  nearly  all  the  materials  of  which 
glciss  is  composed,  and  can  procure  tlie  rest  from  abroad  at  as  cheap  a 
rate  as  any  other  manufacturing  country.  The  fuel  necessary  for  the 
jn'occsses,  and  which  forms  a  large  part  of  the  cost  of  the  manufacture, 
we  have  on  better  terms  than  any  other  country  ;  and  yet,  although  the 
whole  of  the  duty  charged  is  drawn  back  on  exportation,  there  are  not 
any  countries  in  which  any  considerable  quantity  of  glass  is  made  where 
its  price  has  allowed  our  manufacture  to  be  brought  into  competition 
with  their  own. 

The  effect  of  enhancement  of  price  upon  the  home  consumption  of 
any  article,  not  of  absolute  necessity,  is  made  sufficiently  striking  l)y 
the  fact,  that  in  1801,  with  a  population  of  sixteen  millions,  the  quantity 
of  glass  used  was  325,529  cwts. ;  and  in  1833,  with  a  population  of 
twenty-five  millions,  the  quantity  was  no  more  than  363,4G8  cwts. ;  an 
increase  of  less  than  one-eighth,  while  the  population  had  increased  in 
the  proportion  of  one-half.  That  some  economical  improvements  have 
been  introduced  into  the  processes  of  glass-making,  notwithstanding  the 
obstacles  presented  by  Excise  regulation,  is  rendered  apparent  by  the 
fact,  that  the  prices  have  fallen  very  considerably  within  the  last  few 
years ;  while  the  quantity  used  has  been  (although  in  only  a  small 
degree)  increasing.  Tlie  fall  in  price  has  been  proceeding  gradually, 
from  year  to  year,  just  in  such  a  manner  as  would  accompany  the  em- 
])loyment  of  more  economical  modes  of  working.  Since  1827,  and  up 
to  the  time  when  the  Excise  duty  was  repealed,  the  reduction,  taking 
one  article  with  another,  in  a  long  list  furnished  by  a  respectable  manu- 
facturer, has  been  25  per  cent,  upon  tlie  price  of  those  articles  which  are 
of  common  use. 

The  quality  of  English  glass  is  considered  good.  As  regards  the  most 
costly  branch  of  the  manufecture — plate  glass,  our  manufacturers  have, 
within  tlic  last  few  years,  successfully  rivalled  the  French  makers,  so 
that  English  plate  glass  is  now  even  preferred  to  French.  There  yet 
remains  much  to  be  done,  however,  towards  perfecting  this  beautiful 
manufacture. 

The  quantities  of  glass  made  and  retained  for  consumption  in  Great 
Britain,  in  each  year  from  1789  to  1844,  are  shown  in  the  following 
table,  from  which  it  will  be  seen,  that  notwithstanding  the  augmentation 
of  the  population,  which  during  the  fifty-six  years  embraced  by  the  table, 
lias  amounted  to  more  than  eighty  per  cent.,  there  has  been  no  increase 
whatever,  but  the  contrary,  in  the  consumjition  of  most  descriptions  of 
l^ritish  glass. 


251 


niOGKESS  OF  THE  NATION. 


[si;c.  II. 


QUANTITIES  of  GLASS  retained  for  HOME  CONSUMl  TION. 

Net 

" 

Revenue  of 

Years. 

Flint  and 
Plate. 

Plate. 

Broad. 

Crown,  or 
tJerman 
Slieet. 

Common 
Hot  tie 
Glass. 

Plate,  &c., 
Imported. 

Customs 
and  lixcise. 

Cwts. 

Cuts. 

Cwts. 

Cwts. 

Cwts. 

Cwts. 

Feet. 

£. 

1789 

48,245 

24,194 

81,403 

185,296 

1,114 

13,502 

159,448 

17'jO 

44,527 

21,302 

81,285 

215,034 

1,270 

11,375 

160,057 

1791 

45,9'.,0 

21,924 

76,185 

242,684 

1,871 

15,095 

163,911 

1792 

51,419 

22,214 

75,610 

238,127 

1,858 

28,004 

167,866 

1793 

55,267 

21,519 

80,225 

250,192 

1,642 

20,736 

177,407 

1794 

67.615 

20,607 

83,940 

227,476 

2,593 

223 

178,958 

1795 

49,218 

21,694 

47,881 

205,330 

3,327 

2,010 

183,749 

1796 

49,166 

26,254 

53,538 

165,065 

2,081 

10,076 

176,944 

1797 

48,463 

25,971 

58,235 

147,865 

1,640 

4, 598 

174,092 

1798 

49,938 

20,621 

50,790 

105,096 

1,313 

409 

156,380 

1799 

55,987 

19,690 

41,  .571 

132,475 

1,867 

51 

164,659 

1800 

61,748 

19,874 

55,821 

159,334 

2,235 

1,958 

188,240 

1801 

57,663 

19,381 

61,389 

187,096 

2,775 

752 

195,414 

1802 

59,483 

20,948 

67,401 

199,939 

2,850 

267 

209,470 

1803 

69,764 

16,626 

81,501 

239,297 

2,402 

3,454 

241,856 

1S04 

62,656 

12,741 

68,678 

223,174 

1,927 

567 

219,979 

1805 

64,311 

16,701 

97,096 

215,094 

2,556 

285,937 

1806 

59,027 

16,224 

84,949 

183,832 

1,561 

316,059 

1807 

61,587 

10,855 

83,512 

252,3.32 

131 

327,077 

1808 

64,682 

12,145 

89,544 

283,498 

149 

325,565 

1809 

66,815 

11,151 

91,938 

263,390 

88 

349,590 

1810 

68,872 

9,176 

69,252 

252,872 

120 

318,831 

1811 

70,301 

9,646 

86,338 

253,983 

128 

360,989 

1812 

60,248 

7,010 

91,881 

260,664 

48 

364,686 

Tlint. 

1813 

28,902 

10,542 

7,013 

68,824 

159,217 

85 

12 

509,623 

1814 

32,503 

9, 

139 

8,609 

60,170 

139,746 

110 

6 

425,235 

1815 

34,903 

7, 

021 

8,453 

59,584 

160,175 

256 

408,820 

1816 

25,959 

3, 

641 

,6,140 

55,502 

155,595 

167 

325,963 

1817 

27,827 

3, 

426 

8,374 

73,259 

113,0.)5 

178 

419,886 

1818 

33,948 

7, 

647 

8,319 

83,986 

200,011 

223 

548,309 

1819 

33,314 

7, 

555 

8,250 

84,006 

235,975 

199 

5.58,216 

1820 

29,437 

8, 

822 

7,782 

70,253 

167,208 

202 

469,609 

1821 

28,717 

9, 

761 

8,036 

76,887 

133,550 

203 

481,652 

1822 

28,892 

9, 

661 

8,353 

83,799 

149,754 

294 

.506,987 

1823 

33,443 

11, 

776 

9,172 

87,153 

184,672 

271 

544,920 

1824 

32,568 

13, 

564 

9,300 

104,489 

229,134 

277 

645,172 

1825 

35,164 

15, 

168 

8,386 

118,217 

248,616 

307 

54 

669,786 

1826 

45,262 

12, 

528 

8,118 

98,380 

248,103 

341 

588 

622,216 

1827 

45,058 

14, 

335 

7,611 

99,711 

218,033 

531 

362 

615,056 

1828 

51,063 

17, 

071 

6,956 

90,603 

224,864 

750 

1,092 

602,632 

1829 

49,001 

14, 

299 

6,869 

97,134 

209,862 

,  , 

1,763 

666,520 

1830 

48,063 

13, 

057 

4,845 

84,178 

165,. 549 

104 

1,43(5 

542,595 

1831 

48,887 

14, 

796 

5,915 

83,. 527 

143,989 

104 

863 

534,590 

1832 

49,552 

11, 

990 

5,304 

to,  2.53 

151,705 

25 

707 

555,303 

1833 

53,878 

14, 

258 

6,306 

110,649 

158,270 

65 

1,193 

621,4.52 

1834 

52,711 

17, 

334 

6,766 

113,225 

184,315 

54 

656 

682,822 

1835 

43,936 

16, 

941 

5,847 

115,899 

201,613 

19 

624 

663,2.36 

1836 

86,866 

19, 

993 

7,629 

117,041 

249,145 

18 

729 

652,225 

1837 

78,121 

21, 

640 

7,1!.0 

102,016 

247,446 

38 

1,399 

•6.37,947 

1838 

81 , 594 

23, 

992 

6,575 

116,018 

243,046 

31 

1,037 

688.8.35 

1839 

82,309 

26, 

465 

8,514 

118,510 

252,808 

63 

1,033 

718,347 

1840 

82,486 

31, 

200 

9,049 

119,230 

232,834 

613 

1,183 

729,381 

1841 

74,444 

22, 

088 

104,331 

1!  0,257 

533 

1,057 

618,017 

1842 

68,098 

18, 

3i)6 

98,832 

161,537 

420 

1,989 

.^;66,122 

18^3 

72,354 

17, 

047 

112,048 

107,795 

716 

2,250 

600,367 

1844 

83,712 

24, 

405 

116,522 

193,108 

1,671 

2 

,533 

653,839 

If  the  first  and  last  years  of  the  series  are  comjKired,  it  will,  iiidccc], 


cii.vr.  iv.J  MANUFACTUIIES.  255 

iippear  that  there  is  an  increase  of  rather  less  that  24  per  cent.  ;  hut 
hy  tciking  an  average  of  tlie  three  years  from  17^*3  to  17111,  and  from 
l<So2  to  1834,  it  will  he  seen  that  the  annual  consumption  in  the  former 
])eriod  was  3G2,GD1  cwts.,  and  in  the  latter  period  342,172  cwts.,  exhi- 
hiting  an  actual  falling-oft'  to  the  extent  of  5^  per  cent.  In  1835  a 
reduction  of  two-thirds  was  made  in  the  rate  of  Excise  duty  on  flint 
glass,  which  was  followed  hy  a  great  immediate  increase  of  consumption 
of  that  kind. 

It  is  principally  to  the  complicated  regulations  of  the  Excise  that  this 
want  of  ])rogress  in  our  glass  manufacture  must  he  attributed.  Those 
regulations,  might,  indeetl,  have  been  indispensable  in  order  to  protect 
the  revenue  and  the  fair  dealer  from  frauds  on  the  part  of  less  scru- 
pulous manufacturers  ;  but  this  fact  alone  should  long  ago  have  served 
to  convince  the  legislature  of  the  impolicy  of  continuing  to  tax  any 
branch  of  domestic  industry  as  to  which  it  occurs.  The  business  of 
glass-making  is  one,  the  success  of  which  depends  in  a  peculiar  degree 
upon  the  right  application  of  scientific  principles ;  and  when  it  is  con- 
sidered that  a  departure  from  any,  the  minutest  of  the  many  arbitrary 
regulations  prescribed  by  Act  of  Parliament  for  conducting  this  manu- 
facture, would  subject  the  party  so  acting  to  heavy  penalties,  our  wonder 
is  excited,  not  that  so  little  improvement  should  have  been  made  in  the 
})rocesses,  but  that  the  necessity  should  not  have  been  earlier  acknow'- 
ledged  of  affording  the  utmost  encouragement  for  conductmg  experi- 
ments, without  which  it  is  vain  to  hope  for  the  attainment  of  excellence. 

That  the  limitation  in  the  quantity  of  glass  used  in  this  country  is  not 
wholly  owing  to  the  regulations  whereby  improvements  are  prevented, 
but  is  also  occasioned,  in  ])art,  by  the  excessive  amount  of  the  duty  im- 
posed, is  made  aj)parent  by  the  facts  which  accompanied  various  altera- 
tions in  the  rates  of  those  duties.  In  1794  an  increase  of  50  per  cent, 
was  made  upon  the  then  existing  rates  of  duty,  the  effect  of  which  upon 
the  internal  consumption  of  the  kingdom  was  very  striking.  In  the 
three  years  preceding  the  alteration,  the  average  annual  quantity  re- 
tained for  home  use  of  all  kinds  of  British  glass,  was  373,782  cwt. ; 
while  in  the  three  years  following  that  in  which  the  duties  were  aug- 
mented, the  average  annual  consumption  was  only  299,560  cwt.  ;  show- 
ing a  falling-off  of  one-fifth  between  the  two  periods.  In  1812  the  rates 
of  duty  were  doubled,  and  the  annual  consumption,  which  on  the  average 
of  three  years  ending  in  1811  amounted  to  417,911  cwt.,  fell  on  the 
average  of  the  three  years  following  the  alteration,  to  264,931  cwt., 
showing  a  decrease  of  36  per  cent,  upon  the  larger  quantity.  It  places 
in  even  a  stronger  point  of  view  the  intimate  connexion  existing  between 
the  rate  of  duty  and  the  progress  of  consumption,  if  we  examine  the 
effect  that  has  followed  upon  reductions  of  the  duty.  In  1819,  in  con- 
sequence of  the  progressive  falling-off  in  the  manufacture  of  plate  glass, 


256  rnOGIlESS  OF  THE  NATION.  [sec.  n. 

and  consoquently  in  the  produce  of  the  duty  during  the  six  years  in 
■svliich  the  high  rate  had  been  levied,  the  duty  on  that  description  of 
gUiss  was  lowered  from  4/.  I85.  per  cwt.  to  3/.  per  cwt.  The  (juantity 
made  annually,  on  the  average  of  three  years  preceding  18U),  was 
4905  cwt.,  yielding  24,035/.  to  the  revenue;  whereas  in  the  three  years 
following  that  in  whicli  the  reduction  was  made,  the  average  quantity 
amounted  to  9415  cwt.,  yielding  to  the  revemie  28. 244Z.  Since  that 
time  the  average  annual  consunij)tion  has  reached  24,000  cwts.,  pro- 
ducing upwards  of  75,000/.  annually  to  the  Exchequer. 

The  pernicious  effect  of  the  glass  duties  was  apparent  from  the  con- 
trast exhibited  by  this  manufacture  to  others  not  subjected  to  similar 
disadvantages  ;  and  it  cannot  be  necessary  to  do  more  than  point  to 
this  contrast  as  an  argument  in  justification  of  the  abandonment  of  the 
impost. 

There  were,  however,  other  reasons,  distinct  from  the  direct  o])era- 
tions  that  have  been  pointed  out,  which  rendered  the  system  under  whicli 
the  glass  duties  were  levied  peculiarly  pernicious.  The  free  progress 
of  invention  and  improvement  was  by  this  means  prevented,  not  only  in 
the  manufacture  of  glass,  but  also  in  many  other  arts  and  sciences  to 
which  glass  is  subsidiary.  A  manufacturer  who  by  his  skilful  combina- 
tions had  succeeded  a  few  years  since  in  making  great  improvements 
in  the  quality  of  bottle  glass,  was  stopped  in  his  operations  by  the 
Excise  officers,  on  the  plea  that  the  articles  which  he  produced  were  so 
good  in  quality,  as  not  to  be  readily  distinguished  from  flint  glass,  to 
which  description  a  higher  rate  of  duty  attached ;  the  danger  to  the 
revenue  being,  that  articles  made  of  the  less  costly  and  less  highly  taxed 
ingredients,  would  be  used  instead  of  flint  glass.  In  every  other  coun- 
try but  this,  and  since  1845  in  this  also,  manufacturers  are  at  liberty 
to  make  any  article  of  glass  out  of  that  particular  material  or  com- 
position which  will  best  answer  their  purpose  ;  and  consequently  many 
articles,  the  making  of  which  it  was  contrary  to  the  Excise  regulations 
to  permit  in  our  glass-houses,  were  necessarily  imported  from  the 
Continent,  notwithstanding  the  heavy  rate  of  duty  to  which  they  were 
subjected  at  our  Custom-houses,  Among  these  may  be  mentioned 
glass  for  optical  instruments,  which  has  hitherto  been  almost  wholly 
imported,  because  the  regulations  enforced  by  the  Excise-office  so 
long  prevented  the  carrying  forward  of  processes  necessary  for  im- 
parting to  it  that  property  upon  which  its  excellence  must  altogether 
depend. 

Tliere  was  yet  another  reason  for  abandoning  the  duty  upon  home- 
made glass.  The  ingredients  of  which  glass  is  composed  are  exceed- 
ingly cheap,  and  the  art  is  at  the  same  time  so  simple,  and  calls  for  the 
use  of  so  few  accessaries,  that  it  can  be  successfully  followed  by  almost 
any  person  of  ordinary  aptitude  for  manual  operations,  working  with 


cjfAP.  IV.]  MANUFACTURES.  257 

simple  and  uncostly  implements.  The  facility  with  which  glass  can  he 
niaclc  upon  a  snuill  scale  is  greater  now  than  formerly,  and  is  continually 
increasing,  through  the  advance  of  chemical  knowledge.  In  former 
times  the  preparation  of  alkalis  used  for  the  manufacture  required  pre- 
mises of  considerahle  dimensions,  hut  the  alkali  now  ahundantly  oh- 
tained  from  common  salt  is  admirably  qualified  by  its  purity  for  the 
purpose,  and  it  is  well  known  that  flint-glass  was  fraudulently  made  in 
great  abundance  in  small  attics  and  cellars,  to  the  injury  alike  of  the 
revenue  and  of  the  fair-dealing  manufacturer.  While  the  temptation 
was  suffered  to  remain,  it  was  altogether  impossible  to  put  a  stop  to  this 
illicit  manufacture,  and  nothing  short  of  the  total  repeal  of  the  duty 
could  have  proved  effectual  to  that  end. 

The  measure  thus  advocated  was  adopted  by  the  legislature  in  the 
Session  of  1845.  Thenceforward  the  manufacturers  of  glass,  in  all  its 
forms,  were  relieved  from  the  payment  of  duty,  and  from  the  inter- 
ference of  revenue  officers.  Of  the  advantageous  result  of  this  measure 
there  cannot  exist  any  doubt  whatever.  The  manufacturers  immediately 
reduced  their  prices,  in  all  cases,  to  the  full  amount  of  the  duty,  and  in 
many  cases  beyond  it,  and  it  may  be  confidently  predicted,  that  through 
the  employment  of  this  beautiful  material  for  objects  which  its  price  for- 
merly forbade,  the  manufacture  must  experience  a  great,  immediate, 
and  permanent  extension. 


258  PROGRESS  OF  THE  NATION.  [sec.  ii. 


CHAPTER  V. 

MANUFACTURES. 
MAcniNERr. 

Importance  of  perfect  tools  and  implements— Recent  progress  of  manufacturing  skill  in 
their  production — Babbage's  calculating  machine — Foreign  mechanical  inventions  per- 
fected and  adopted  in  England — Policy  of  allowing  the  exportation  of  macliinery — 
Impossibility  of  confining  the  knowledge  of  improved  machines  to  our  own  country — 
Impolicy  of  the  attempt — Laws  restraining  artisans  from  going  abroad — Their  repeal — 
Footing  upon  wluch  the  limited  exportation  of  machinery  is  now  permitted— Progress 
of  the  prohibitive  system — Value  of  machinery  exported. 

In  no  branch  of  manufacturing  skill  has  more  important  and  rapid  pro- 
gress been  made  of  late  years  in  this  country,  than  in  the  production  of 
manufacturing  implements  and  machinery.  The  extent  to  which  this 
progress  has  been  carried,  is  such  as  to  make  it  difficult  to  point  out 
any  leading  mechanical  process,  the  details  of  which  have  not  been,  by 
this  means,  simplified,  and  the  article  produced  brought  nearer  to  perfec- 
tion. 

The  great  importance  of  this  fact  to  a  manufacturing  people  scarcely 
needs  to  be  insisted  on.  Without  superior  tools  and  implements,  how 
many  valuable  inventions  now  used,  and  which  minister  extensively, to 
the  advantage  and  comfort  of  society,  must  have  remained  unapplied, 
if  they  had  even  at  all  suggested  themselves  to  the  minds  of  the  inge- 
nious men  by  whom  they  have  been  conceived  !  How  many  elaborate 
pieces  of  mechanism,  without  which  those  inventions  could  not  be  car- 
ried into  practical  operation,  must  have  remained  unconstructed  for 
want  of  the  equally  elaborate  tools  necessary  for  their  production,  and 
for  those  nice  adjustments  upon  w'hich  the  success  of  the  inventions 
depends ! 

The  calculating  machine  of  Mr.  Babbage,  the  conception  and  perfect- 
ing of  which  afford  proofs  of  genius  and  perseverance — rare  in  their  de- 
gree, and  still  more  rare  in  their  combination — jhat  would  cast  lustre 
upon  any  age  or  country,  could  not  have  been  executed  by  means  of 
the  imperfect  tools  which  even  a  very  few  years  ago  were  in  the  hands 
of  our  most  able  machinists.     To  the  efforts  made  for  the  completion  of 


CHAP,  v.]  MANUFACTURES.  259 

this  machine,  the  world  is  iiuU'bted  for  the  possession  of  some  of  the 
most  beautiful  tools  hitherto  invented  ;  and  if  no  other  benefit  should  re- 
sult from  this  triumph  of  human  thought,  the  time,  and  money,  and  talent 
bestowed  upon  the  work  will  have  been  amply  productive  to  the  coun- 
try, althouiih,  as  is  too  frequently  seen,  the  recompense  of  the  inventor 
may  be  limited  to  a  barren,  and  in  its  highest  degree,  even  to  a  post- 
humous fame. 

Some  part  of  our  cotton-spinning  machinery  is  of  foreign  invention  ; 
but  the  state  of  the  mechanical  arts  not  being  sufficiently  advanced  for 
that  purpose  in  their  own  countries,  the  inventors  have  been  obliged  to 
resort  to  English  workshops  for  the  means  of  perfecting  their  conce])- 
tions,  and  our  factories  ottering  at  the  same  time  the  largest  and  most 
})rofitable  field  for  the  employment  of  these  machines,  our  cotton  manu- 
factiu'c  has  thus  fairly  profited  from  ingenuity  which  it  has  mainly  con- 
tributed to  foster.  One  of  the  most  successful  spinning  fi-ames  used  in 
the  factories  of  Lancashire,  was  the  invention  of  a  citizen  of  the  United 
States  of  America,  and  has  been  thus  made  available  for  the  more  pro- 
fitable conversion  of  a  material,  our  largest  supply  of  which  is  derived 
from  that  country. 

The  necessity  for  the  employment  of  a  high  degree  of  skill  in  the  ad- 
justment of  machinery  for  manufacturing  purposes,  has  been  illustrated 
by  J)r.  Ure  in  his  work,  "  The  Philosophy  of  Manufactures,"  by  the 
following  anecdote  :  — 

"  A  manufacturer  of  Stockport  being,  not  long  ago,  about  to  mount 
200  power-looms  in  his  mill,  fancied  he  might  save  a  pound  sterling  in 
the  ])rice  of  each  by  having  them  made  by  a  neighbour  machine-maker, 
instead  of  obtaining  them  from  Messrs.  Sharp  and  Roberts,  in  Man- 
chester, the  principal  constructors  of  power-looms.  In  order  to  give 
his  fabricator  every  chance  of  success,  the  economist  surreptitiously  pro- 
cured iron  patterns  cast  from  one  of  the  looms  of  that  Company,  which, 
in  its  perfect  state,  costs  no  more  than  9/.  155.  His  200  looms  were  ac- 
cordingly constructed  at  Stockport,  supposed  to  be  fac-similes  of  those 
regularly  made  in  Manchester,  and  they  were  set  to  work.  Hardly  a 
day  passed,  however,  without  one  part  or  another  breaking  down, — in- 
somuch that  the  crank  or  tappet-wheels  had  to  be  replaced  three  times, 
in  almost  every  loom,  in  the  course  of  twelve  months.  The  fabric  of 
the  cloth  was  also  indifferent.  The  proprietor,  perplexed  beyond  mea- 
sure, inquired  of  a  neighbour  who  worked  similar  power-looms  made  by 
the  Manchester  machinicians,  whether  his  wheels  likewise  went  to  pieces 
every  other  day,  and  learned  to  his  mortification,  that  not  one  of  them 
had  broken  in  the  course  of  working,  but  that  the  four  or  five  spare 
onesj  originally  sent  from  Manchester  along  with  his  236  power-looms, 
were  unused  and  quite  at  his  service.  The  old  proverb  of  '  Penny  wise 
and  pound  foolish'  never  had  a  better  illustration.     His  weaving  fac- 

s  2 


260  PROGRESS  OF  THE  NATION.  [sec.  n. 

tory  had  been  most  irregular  and  unproductive,  while  that  of  his  neigh- 
bour had  been  uniformly  prosperous." 

The  circumstances  that  have  just  been  mentioned  seem  naturally  to 
lead  to  a  consideration  of  the  policy  which  so  long  prevailed,  of  prohibit- 
ing the  exportation  of  machinery  from  this  country.  It  may  be  conceded 
that,  in  cases  where  an  individual  or  a  nation  is  in  the  possession  of 
sui)erior  manufacturing  processes  whereby  greater  profits  can  be  realized, 
it  is  natural  to  use  every  fair  means  for  keeping  those  advantages  out  of 
the  hands  of  foreign  competitors.  It  is  clear  that  these  competitors  could 
have  no  just  reason  for  complaining,  if  we  preferred  our  own  profit  to 
theirs.  Neither  would  the  inventors  of  the  machinery  have  much  cause 
for  complaint,  if  the  legislature  should  pass  laws  under  which  the  manu- 
facturers of  this  country  would  be  secured  in  the  monopoly  of  home  in- 
ventions. Machine-makers  have,  so  far,  a  contrary  interest  to  the  manu- 
facturers,— that  they  are  benefited  by  the  extension  of  the  use  of  their 
machines,  while  the  apparent  advantage  of  the  manufacturers  consists 
in  confining  that  use  to  themselves.  To  prohibit  the  exportation  of  his 
wares  may  therefore,  at  first  sight,  appear  to  be  as  great  a  hardship  upon 
the  machinist  as  it  would  be  upon  the  weaver  of  cotton,  if  his  produc- 
tions were  confined  to  the  home  market ;  but  the  cases  are  not  in  all 
respects  parallel.  By  the  restriction  last  supposed,  the  extension  of 
the  weaver's  trade  would  be  in  a  great  measure  limited  to  the  slow 
natural  increase  of  the  people  in  the  country  of  production ;  whereas 
the  confining  to  that  country  of  a  machine,  by  means  of  which  better 
or  cheaper  goods  can  be  made,  will  be  followed  by  nearly  the  same 
effect  as  if  the  exportation  of  the  improved  machines  were  allowed, 
since  the  greater  quantity  of  goods  produced  by  their  means,  and  for 
which  in  consequence  of  their  superiority  or  cheapness,  a  foreign  demand 
would  be  kept  up,  must  cause  a  gi-eater  number  of  the  machines  to 
be  used  at  home,  and  it  can  be  of  no  moment  to  the  maker  of  those 
machines,  whether  his  customers  reside  in  the  United  Kingdom,  or  in 
France  or  Germany. 

The  state  of  things  which  has  been  here  supposed  cannot,  however, 
have  any  existence  in  reality.  It  has  never  been  found  practicable  to 
adopt  regulations  whereby  the  exportation  of  machinery  can  be  wholly 
prevented.  Where  the  invention  is  the  object  of  a  patent,  an. accurate 
and  complete  drawing  and  description  can  be  procured  by  any  one 
without  trouble  ;  and  by  the  transmission  of  these,  any  engineer  of  ordi- 
nary capacity  can  in  most  cases  construct  a  machiue  which  will  at  least 
answer  as  a  very  tolerable  substitute  for  that  made  under  the  inspection 
of  the  inventor.  In  more  complicated  inventions,  it  mostly  happens 
that  the  only  part  of  the  machine  which  is  difficult  of  execution,  is  of 
small  dimensions,  and  it  is  consequently  easy  to  convey  it  illicitly  out  of 
the  kingdom.     Under  these  circumstances,  it  appears  to  be  the  most 


civr.  v.]  MAXUFACTUr.ES.  2h'l 

prudent  course  to  legalize  the  trade,  and  thereby  to  secure  for  a  part 
of  the  community  a  profitable  source  of  employment.  Nor  would  the 
manufacturers  in  this  kingdom  have  any  right  to  complainof  the  facilities 
thus  given  to  their  foreign  rivals.  The  inventions  which  they  would 
seek  to  retain  for  their  own  advantage  have  cost  them  neither  labour  nor 
expense.  In  fact,  they  can  in  no  case  have  any  plea  for  such  a  restric- 
tion, except  that  of  the  general  advantage  of  the  community,  and  the 
eases  can  be  but  very  few  in  which  that  plea  can  be  successfully  urged. 
'J'he  interest  of  the  bulk  of  the  people  uuist,  on  the  contrary,  always  be 
best  promoted  by  that  policy  which  gives  the  utmost  freedom  to  industry, 
and  which  tends  to  lower  the  prices  of  articles  of  consumption.  Laws 
which  prohibit  the  communication  of  facilities  and  improvements  are 
liable  to  be  imitated  by  other  nations,  either  in  a  spirit  of  retaliation, 
or  possibly  from  a  belief  in  their  wisdom,  and  both  these  reasons  may 
be  expected  to  ojjerate  most  freely  when  the  example  has  been  set  by  a 
successful  and  powerful  nation.  Let  us  imagine  that  the  American 
(vongress,  impressed  with  the  wisdom  of  our  old  system  of  restrictions, 
or  stung  with  a  feeling  of  jealousy  of  our  manufacturing  superiority,  had 
passed,  and  could  have  enforced  a  law  forbidding  the  communication  to 
foreigners  of  the  inventions  of  American  citizens,  so  that  the  machines 
already  spoken  of  as  being  derived  from  that  country  must  have  been 
brought  into  operation  there  and  there  only.  It  is  far  from  being  certain 
that  while  by  the  adoption  of  this  course,  England  would  have  sustained 
a  considerable  injury,  the  American  people  vi^ould  have  derived  any  sub- 
stantial benefit.  In  the  fair  and  legitimate  course  of  dealing  between 
two  people,  it  is  so  far  from  being  true  that  what  one  of  them  gains  the 
other  must  necessarily  lose,  that  on  the  contrary,  few  things  are  more 
certain  than  that  both  may  be,  and  almost  universally  will  be,  gainers 
by  their  transactions.  But  neither  does  it  follow,  that  in  unprofitable 
dealings,  what  one  loses  must  be  gain  to  the  other ;  both,  on  the  con- 
trary, may  lose,  and  in  the  long  run,  this  is  almost  sure  to  be  the  result. 
In  the  case  supposed,  America  would  lose  an  excellent  customer  for  a 
large  amount  of  her  raw  produce,  and  her  citizens  would  consequently 
be  deprived  of  many  articles  of  English  manufacture,  which  they  cannot 
procure  so  good  nor  at  so  cheap  a  rate  elsewhere.  The  capital  required 
for  caiTving  on  the  cotton  manufacture  upon  a  large  scale  would  be 
withdrawn  by  them  from  other  pursuits  in  which  it  is  profitably  embarked, 
and  while  a  few  might  possibly  be  gainers,  the  many  would  be  subjected 
to  certain  loss. 

I^'he  laws  prohibiting  the  exportation  of  machinery  from  this  country 
have  been  of  late  years  very  considerably  relaxed,  and  at  length  have 
been  repealed.  Previous  to  1825,  the  jealousy  of  our  legislature  in 
regard  to  the  progress  of  foreign  manufactures  was  extended  so  far  as 
to  interfere  with  the  natural  riiiht  even  of  workino;  artisans  to  transfer 


262  PROGRESS  OF  THE  NATION.  [skc.  ii. 

their  industry  to  countries  wliere  it  could  be  most  profitably  exerted. 
Any  man  who  had  acquired  a  practical  knowledge  of  manufacturing 
processes  was  thereby  rendered  a  prisoner  in  his  own  country ;  and  not 
only  might  the  arm  of  the  law  be  interposed  to  prevent  his  quitting  his 
native  shore,  but  heavy  penalties  were  imposed  upon  all  persons  who 
should  abet  the  expatriation  of  one  of  our  artisans.  This  disgraceful 
law  has  hapj)ily  been  expunged  from  our  Statute-book.  Its  futility  and 
impolicy  were  well  described  in  the  following 

"  Resolutions  of  the  Committee  appointed  to  inquire  into  the  state  of 
the  Law  of  the  United  Kingdom,  and  its  consequences,  respecting 
Artisans  leaving  the  Kingdom  and  residing  abroad,  &c.  Reported 
to  the  House  of  Commons,  21st  May,  1824. 

"  1.  That  it  appears  by  the  evidence  before  this  Committee,  that 
notwithstanding  the  laws  enacted  to  prevent  the  seduction  of  artisans  to 
go  abroad,  many  able  and  intelligent  artisans  have  gone  abroad  to  reside, 
and  to  exercise  their  respective  arts  in  foreign  countries  ;  and  that  it  is 
extremely  difficult,  if  not  impossible,  in  this  country,  by  any  mode  of 
executing  the  present  laws,  or  by  any  new  law,  to  prevent  artisans  who 
may  be  so  determined  from  going  out  of  the  country. 

"  2.  Tiiat  although  the  penalties  which  the  laws  inflict  on  artisans  who 
disobey  them,  are  not  distinctly  understood  by  the  workmen,  yet  an 
unfavourable  opinion  is  generally  entertained  by  them  of  the  partial  and 
oppressive  operation  of  these  laws,  as  preventing  them  from  taking  their 
labour  and  art  to  the  best  market ;  whilst  all  other  classes  of  the  com- 
munity are  permitted  to  go  abroad,  and  to  take  their  capital  with  them 
wherever  they  think  proper. 

"  3.  That  it  appears  also  by  evidence,  that  many  British  artisans  residing 
abroad  have  been  prevented  from  returning  home,  from  an  erroneous 
opinion  that  they  have,  by  going  abroad,  violated  the  laws  of  their  country, 
and  con?C(juently  incurred  penalties  under  them. 

"  4.  That  in  the  opinion  of  this  Committee,  it  is  both  unjust  and 
impolitic  to  continue  these  laws ;  they  therefore  recommend  their  entire 
repeal,  and  that  artisans  may  be  at  liberty  to  go  abroad  and  to  return 
home  whenever  they  may  be  so  disposed,  in  the  same  manner  as  other 
classes  of  the  community  now  go  and  return." 

In  and  after  1825,  permission  might  be  had  for  the  exportation  of  all 
the  more  common  articles  of  machinery.  A  long  list  was  given  of  various 
articles  or  classes  of  machinery  the  exportation  of  which  was  prohibited, 
but  a  discretionary  power  of  relaxing  the  law  was^given  to  the  Board  of 
Trade,  the  branch  of  the  government  to  which  it  seems  most  fitly  to 
belong,  and  which  decided  upon  each  application,  as  it  was  made  by  the 
persons  seeking  to  export,  according  to  the  merits  of  each  particular  case. 


CHAP,  v.]  MANUFACTURES.  263 

rndor  tliis  system,  the  practice  was  uniform  in  regard  to  so  many  articles, 
that  hut  Httle  difficulty  was  cx])ericiiced  hy  the  merchants,  who  in 
general  know  as  to  what  machines  or  implements  the  indulgence  would 
he  extended,  and  from  what  it  would  he  withheld,  with  nearly  as  much 
certainty  as  they  would  have  known  if  each  ohject  had  hcen  scheduled 
in  an  Act  of  Parliament.  The  principal  advantage  of  this  discretionary 
power  vested  in  the  Board  of  Trade  consisted  in  its  leaving  to  that  Board 
the  power  of  regulating  the  matter  according  to  the  changing  interests 
of  commerce. 

The  policy  of  restricting  this,  which  might  hecomc  an  important  l)ranch 
of  trade,  was  the  suhjcct  of  lahorious  investigation  hy  Committees  of  the 
House  of  Commons  which  sat  in  1824  and  1825.  The  concluding 
])aragraph  of  the  report  made  by  the  Committee  in  1825  explains  the 
reasons  why  it  was  thought  expedient  to  leave  the  list  of  j)rohihition3 
unrepealed,  and  shows  that  the  result  of  their  inquiry  left  no  doubt  on 
the  minds  of  the  members  of  the  Committee  as  to  the  inexpediency  of 
the  existing  system.     The  paragraph  here  alluded  to  is  as  follows: — 

"  Although  your  Committee  are  impressed  with  the  opinion  that  tools 
and  machinery  should  be  regulated  on  the  same  principles  as  other  articles 
of  manufocture,  yet  inasmuch  as  there  exist  objections  in  the  mind  of 
many  of  our  manufacturers  on  this  subject  which  deserves  the  attention 
of  the  legislature,  and  as  it  is  possible  that  circumstances  may  exist  which 
may  render  a  prohibition  to  export  certain  tools  and  machines  used  in 
some  particular  manufactures  expedient,  your  Committee  beg  to  recom- 
mend that  until  an  alteration  can  be  made  in  the  laws  on  this  subject, 
II.  M.  Privy  Council  should  continue  to  exercise  their  discretion  in 
permitting  the  exportation  of  all  such  tools  and  machinery  now  prohibited 
as  may  appear  to  them  not  likely  to  be  prejudicial  to  the  trade  or  manu- 
factures of  the  United  Kingdom." 

England  is,  beyond  all  other  countries,  interested  in  the  most  perfect 
freedom  being  given  to  this  as  well  as  to  every  other  branch  of  commerce. 
Placed  beyond  all  comparison  at  the  head  of  civilization  as  regards 
manufacturing  skill,  with  capital  far  more  ample  than  that  possessed  by 
any  other  people,  with  cheap  and  inexhaustible  supplies  of  iron  and  fuel, 
and  with  institutions  every  way  favourable  to  the  utmost  development  of 
the  industry  and  ingenuity  of  her  citizens,  she  must  always  be  able  at 
least  to  maintain  her  superiority  of  position  where  circumstances  are  in 
other  respects  equal  ;  and  be  ready  to  turn  to  the  utmost  advantage 
every  improvement  which  may  reach  her  in  common  with  less  powerful 
rivals. 

It  is  besides  more  than  probable  that  the  system  which  has  been 
adopted  only  with  the  view  of  protecting  manufactures  may,  like  other 
l)rotective  enactments,  be  actually  prejudicial  to  the  interest  which  it 
was  designed  to  benefit.     The  objects  as  to  which  prohibition  continued 


26=4  rUOGRESS  OF  THE  NATIOX.  [sr.r.  ii. 

to  the  last  to  bo  enforced  were  principally  connected  with  the  spinning 
and  weaving  of  cotton,  wool,  antl  tlax,  branches  of  mannfacture  in  whicli 
improvements  are  continually  going  forward.  The  importance  of  these 
mprovenients  will  be  at  once  understood  when  it  is  stated  that  many 
anumg  them  are  calculated  to  introduce  an  economy  into  the  process 
amounting  to  from  2i  to  5  per  cent,  upon  the  cost  of  the  fabric.  This 
advantage  it  would  of  course  be  the  object  of  every  manufacturer  to 
realize  as  speedily  as  possible  ;  but  except  in  the  case  of  those  who 
possess  large  capitals,  none  will  care  to  throw  away  or  to  sell  at  the  mere 
worth  of  the  materials  their  old  machines  which  have  cost  considm-able 
sums,  and  they  continue  therefore  to  use  them  at  a  disadvantage  ; 
whereas,  if  the  markets  of  the  continent  of  Euro])e  were  open  to  them,  in 
which  they  might  find  purchasers  for  the  machines  of  which  they  are 
now  in  a  manner  compelled  to  continue  the  use,  they  would  not  hesitate 
at  once  to  place  themselves  in  the  most  advantageous  position^  for 
carrying  on  their  processes.  Their  discarded  machinery,  having  the 
recommendation  of  cheapness,  and  being  at  the  same  time  equal,  if  not 
superior,  to  that  in  general  use  abroad,  would  doubtless  meet  with  ready 
buyers  there. 

Ttie  first  Act  passed  by  the  English  Parliament  for  preventing  the 
exportation  of  machinery  is  dated  in  1696.  This  Act  prohibited  the 
exportation  of  Lee's  stocking-frame,  a  machine  which  was  invented  in 
1600.  The  next  in  order  among  these  restrictions  was  passed  in  1750, 
and  consequently  after  an  interval  of  more  than  half  a  centui'y.  It  is 
worthy  of  remark,  that  this  Act  was  intended  for  the  protection  of  the 
woollen  and  silk  manufactures.  The  first  of  these  branches  of  industry 
had  previously  flourished  in  England  for  more  than  250  years  without 
this  protection ;  and  as  to  the  silk  manufacture,  the  tools  and  utensils 
employed  in  which  were  prohibited  from  being  exported  in  this  Act,  it 
was  then  only  in  its  infancy  among  us,  and  it  never  took  firm  root  as  one 
of  the  branches  of  the  national  industry  until  the  mounds  and  fences 
raised  up  by  the  legislature  for  its  protection  had  been  all  removed,  and 
it  was  left  to  work  its  way  exposed  to  competition  from  the  then  more 
accomplished  artisans  of  France.  Another  interval  of  twenty-four  years 
passed  before  any  further  Act  of  the  same  nature  was  passed.  The  next 
law  passed  in  1774,  prohibited  the  exportation  of  certain  tools  used  in  the 
cotton  and  linen  manufacture.  From  that  time  the  system  of  prohibition 
appears  to  have  been  in  great  favour  with  the  legislature  ;  the  Acts  which 
were  passed  forbidding  the  exportation  of  implements  having  followed 
each  other  with  rapidity,  and  descending  some  of  them  to  objects  of  a  very 
trifiiiig  nature,  such  as  "  presses  and  dies  for  horn  buttons,"  "  engines 
for  covering  whips,"  "tools  for  pinching  of  glass"  —  in  fact,  anything  for 
which  it  appears  to  have  been  thought  worth  while  on  the  part  of  any 
class  of  manufacturers  to  seek  what  they  considered  protection  at  the 


CHAP,    v.] 


MANUFACTURES. 


265 


hands  of  tlio  legislature  through  a  monopoly  of  the  implements  rof[uir(Ml 
for  the  production  of  their  goods. 

The  suhject  having  again  heen  brought  under  the  consideration  of  a 
Committee  of  the  House  of  Commons,  principally  at  the  urgent  instance 
of  the  members  of  our  chief  manufacturing  towns,  and  a  report  having 
been  made  recommending  the  removal  of  all  remaining  restrictions,  a 
clause  to  that  effect  was  inserted  in  the  Customs  Duty  Bill,  G  and  7  Vic- 
toria, c.  84,  and  machinery  of  all  kinds  may  now^  be  as  freely  exported 
as  any  other  British  manufacture.  It  is  early  yet  to  judge  correctly  of 
the  consequences  of  this  measure,  which  took  effect  from  August,  1843. 
It  has  indeed,  been  followed  by  one  result  which  could  hardly  have 
been  anticipated.  The  French  Government,  which  had  offered  as  an 
excuse  for  augmenting  the  import  duty  upon  linen  yarn,  our  refusal  to 
allow  the  exportation  of  flax-spinning  machinery,  and  the  consequent 
disadvantage  at  which  French  spinners  were  placed,  have,  now  that  the 
repeal  is  w^ithdrawn,  lent  a  favourable  ear  to  the  representations  of  their 
machine-makers,  and  have  placed  a  heavy  import  duty  upon  the  very 
article  the  withholding  of  which  from  them  was  represented  as  a 
grievance. 

Considering  the  perfection  to  which  this  branch  of  manufacture  has 
been  brought  in  this  country,  the  value  of  machinery  exported  under 
this  system  of  restriction  has  been  quite  insignificant,  so  far,  at  least,  as 
undisguised  trade  is  concerned.  The  following  table  shows  the  declared 
value  of  the  shipments  of  machinery  and  mill-work  in  each  year  from 
1822  to  1840  :— 


Years. 

£. 

1822 

116,220 

18-23 

157,146 

1824 

12  1,644 

1825 

212.420 

1826 

228,505 

1827 

201,822 

182S 

262,115 

1829 

253,984 

1830 

207,767 

1831 

105,491 

Vears. 

£. 

1832 

92,715 

1833 

127,064 

1834 

211,982 

1835 

307.951 

1836 

302.0:)2 

1837 

493,468 

183S 

627,430 

1839 

683.285 

1840 

593,064 

Years. 

£. 

1841 

551,361 

1842 

554,653 

1843 

713,474 

1844 

776.255 

1845 

904,961 

1846 

1,117,470 

1847 

1,263,016 

1848 

817,656 

1849 

700,631 

The  increase  in  the  amount  during  the  last  ten  years  of  the  series  is 
caused  mainly  by  greater  shipments  to  Europe.  Before  that  time,  at 
least  one-half  of  the  value  of  the  shipments  was  made  up  by  the  demands 
of  our  own  colonies  and  dependencies.  How  far  this  condition  of  things 
has  been  altered  will  be  seen  by  the  following  figures,  which  show  the 
value  of  machinery  shipped  to  foreign  countries  in  Europe  : — 


Years. 

£. 

Vears. 

£. 

Years. 

£. 

1831 

29,030 

1837 

280,154 

1843 

536,560 

1832 

44,0)5 

1838 

389.36) 

1844 

578,969 

1833 

.58,551 

1839 

431,201 

1845 

596,124 

1831 

104,267 

1840 

374,036 

1846 

752,910 

1835 

152,159 

1841 

325,992 

1847 

851,4.36 

1836 

166,432 

1842 

363,099 

184S 

588,229 

266  PliOGKESS  OF  THE  NATION.  [sec.  ii. 

In  the  extraordinary  state  of  progression  that  lias  attended  the  various 
branches  of  our  staple  niaiuifactiuvs,  and  of  our  mining  oj)erations,  the 
system  of  prohibition  as  affecting  the  exportation  of  machinery  has  not 
produced  so  much  effect  as  might  have  been  expected  vipon  the  pros- 
perity of  our  machinists.  Their  trade  has  partaken  of  the  general 
extension,  but  certainly  not  to  the  degree  that  would  have  attended  it 
under  a  different  system.  At  the  present  moment,  our  engineers  and 
millwrights  may  be  said  to  have  as  much  work  upon  their  hands  as  the 
number  of  their  workmen  enables  them  to  undertake,  and  skilled  artisans, 
such  as  they  must  employ,  are  not  to  be  formed  without  a  long  course 
of  instruction. 

It  would  fill  many  large  volumes  to  describe  the  numerous  inventions 
which  during  the  present  century  have  imparted  facility  to  our  manu- 
facturing processes,  and  given  perfection  to  the  articles  made.  It  will 
not  be  expected,  therefore,  that  any  enumeration  of  those  inventions 
should  be  attempted  in  these  pages.  A  description  of  all  the  improve- 
ments which  have  been  made  in  steam-machinery  alone,  since  the 
beginning  of  this  century,  would  lead  to  investigations  that  could  be 
profitably  entered  upon  only  in  a  treatise  on  mechanics. 


VI.]  MINING.  2G7 


CHAPTER  VI. 

MINING. 

Early  celebrity  of  the  mines  of  England  —  Iron — Quantity  made  at  difTcrent  periods 
from  1740  to  1848 — Tin— Produce  of  Cornish  mines  from  1750 — Increase  since  1814 
—  Imports  and  exports  of  foreign  tin — British  tin  exported — Value  of  tin-plates  ex- 
ported—Copper—Produce of  Cornish  mines  from  1771  to  1786,  and  1796  to  1848 — 
Total  produce  of  Enghsh  mines  from  1820  to  1834— Value  of  tin  and  copper  raised  in 
Cornwall  at  different  periods  during  the  present  century— Lead— Concealment  practised 
hy  mine-owners  as  to  the  quantity  of  metal  produced — Coal — Advantage  of  steam-engine 
•  -in  coal-mining — Davy's  safety-lamp — Its  effect  in  increasing  the  product  of  coal-mines — 
Shipments  from  Newcastle  and  Sunderland  in  each  year  from  1801  to  1849 — Shipments 
from  Stockton  and  Seaham  -  Prices  of  Coal  at  Newcastle  and  Sunderland  in  each  of  those  . 
years  -Prices  in  London  from  1813  to  1850— Quantity  of  Coals  shipped  from  various 
parts  of  the  kingdom  from  1819  to  1849 — Produce  of  inland  collieries— Salt — Quantity 
annually  produced— Reduction  and  repeal  of  Excise-duty  on  salt — Quantity  annually 
consumed  since  1801 — Quantity  exported  from  1827  to  1849 — Increased  consumption 
since  repeal  of  duty. 

From  the  very  earliest  period  to  whieli  record  or  even  tradition  can 
reach,  this  country  has  been  celebrated  for  its  mineral  treasures.  It  is" 
not  intended  to  carry  back  our  inquiries  to  the  time  when  the  Plioenicians 
traded  to  "  the  tin  islands  of  Britain,"  described  by  Herodotus  under 
the  name  of  Cassiterides,  or  to  discuss  whether  the  rings  and  money  of 
iron  which  Caesar  states  to  have  been  in  the  possession  of  the  Britons,  at 
the  time  of  the  Roman  invasion,  were  really  the  produce  of  this  country, 
or  whether,  as  some  persons  have  supposed,  they  w^ere  acquired  in  barter 
for  tin.  Our  inquiry  into  the  progress  of  raining  as  a  source  of  national 
wealth  must  necessarily  be  limited  to  a  period  comparatively  recent,  and 
to  statements  of  the  results. 

No  statement  has  ever  been  made  which  pretends  to  perfect  accuracy 
in  regard  to  our  production  of  iron. 

The  quantity  made  in  England  and  Wales  in  1740  was  estimated  at 
17,350  tons,  the  produce  of  fifty-nine  furnaces,  in  which  only  charcoal 
was  used.  Between  that  time  and  1788  the  plan  of  smelting  iron-ore 
by  means  of  coke  was  introduced,  and  in  the  latter  year  there  were  in 
England,  Wales,  and  Scotland,  eighty-five  furnaces,  producing  annually 
68,300  tons  of  iron,  of  which  quantity  55,200  tons  were  smelted  with 
coke.  In  1796,  in  consequence  of  a  tax  projected  by  Mr.  Pitt,  upon 
coals  at  the  pit,  but  which  was  not  imposed,  a  careful  inquiry  was  made 
as  to  the  condition  and  extent  of  the  iron-works  that  would  liave  been 
affected  by  such  a  measure.  On  this  occasion  it  appeared  that  there 
were — 


2ti8 


niOGIlESS  OF  THE  XATIOX. 


[sec.  II. 


Tons  of  Tron. 
In  England  and  Wales  10 1  furnaces,  producing  108,793 
„    Scotland    ...        17         „  „  16.086 


Total 


121 


124,879 


In  1802  it  was  fiirthor  estimated  tliat  forty  additional  furnaces  were 
in  use  in  England  and  Wales,  and  seven  in  Scotland — the  total  annual 
production  of  iron  amounting  to  170,000  tons  in  the  year.  In  180G  a 
Bill  was  introduced  into  the  House  of  Commons  by  the  Minister  for 
imposing  a  duty  of  21.  ])er  ton  upon  all  pig-iron  made  in  the  kingdom. 
This  Bill  was  afterwards  withdrawn,  but  the  attempt  occasioned  in(juirics 
to  be  set  on  foot  respecting  the  quantity  of  metal  produced,  and  it  was 
stated  then  to  amount  to  250,000  tons  annually. 

The  following  estimate,  beginning  with  1823,  is  said  to  have  been  made 
with  great  care  by  the  manager  of  one  of  our  largest  iron  smelting  esta- 
blishments. The  tables  already  given  of  the  consumption  of  foreign  iron, 
and  the  exportation  of  that  of  home  manufacture,  when  coupled  with  the 
undoubted  fact  that  this  metal  is  used  in  the  kingdom  to  a  continually 
growing  extent,  and  that  it  is  now  used  for  purposes  to  which  it  was  never 
before  applied,  sufficiently  attest  the  increasing  productiveness  of  our 
iron-works  : — 


South  "Wales    . 
Staffordshire    . 
Shropshire. 
Yorkshire  . 
Scotland 
Derbyshire 
North  Wales    . 
Other  places    . 

Total 


1S33 

1825 

1828 

1830 

Tons. 

Tons. 

Tons. 

Tons. 

182,323 

223,520 

279,512 

277,643 

133,590 

171,735 

219,492 

212,604 

57,923 

86,320 

81,224 

73,418 

27,311 

35,308 

32,968 

28,926 

24, 500 

2'.).  200 

37,700 

37,500 

14,038 

19,1S4 

22,360 

17,999 

13,100 

25,168 

2,379 

3,000 

4,160 

5,327 

442,066 

581,367 

702,584 

653,417 

1 
1 

The  quantities  contained  in  this  table  agree  with  the  evidence  given 
before  the  Committee  on  Import  Duties  in  1840,  by  Sir  John  Guest, 
the  proprietor  of  the  Dowlais  iron-works  in  Glamorganshire.  According 
to  Sir  John  Guest,  the  manufacture  remained  stationary  between  1823 
and  1831,  when  it  again  began  to  advance,  and  in  1835  there  were  good 
grounds  for  estimating  the  quantity  made  at  a  million  of  tons.  In  the 
following  year  the  estimate  was  1,200,000  tons,  and  in  1840  it  reached 
1,500,000  tons.  A  statement  was  prepared  in  October  of  that  year  by 
one  of  our  most  intelligent  iron-masters,*  giving  the  number  of  furnaces 
in  blast  and  out  of  blast,  and  the  number  of  tons  of  iron  made  at  each 
work  in  Great  Britain.  It  was  there  shown  that  the  annual  product, 
exclusive  of  Ireland,  amounted  to  1,396,400  tons  ;  theHumber  of  furnaces 
in  blast  was  402,  of  which  number  162  employed  the  process  of  blasting 
with  hot  air.     The  manufacture  was  in  this  statement  distributed  as 


*  Mr.  Jessop,  of  Butterley,  in  Derbyshire. 


CH.vr.  VI.] 


MINING. 


269 


follows  among  the  various  divisions  of  the  kingdom,  and  an  estimate  was 
offered  of  the  quantity  of  coal  used  in  the  manufacture,  viz. : — 

Tons  of  Iron  Tons  of  Coal 

Made.  Used. 

Forest  of  Dean      .     .     •     .       15,500  60,000 

South  Wales .505,000  1,436,000 

North      ,,         26,500  110,000 

Northumberland    ....       11,000  38,500 

Yorksliire 56,000  306,500 

Derbyshire 31,000  129,000 

North  Staffordshire     .     .     .       20,500  83,000 

South              „              ...     407.150  1,582,000 

Sliropshire 82,750  409,000 

Scotland 241,000  723,000 


1,3J6,400  4,877,000 

Coals  used  in  converting  to  wrought  iron        2,000,000 


Total 


6,877,000 


The  commercial  depression,  which  continued  for  about  four  years  after 
Mr.  Jessop's  statement  was  compiled,  led  our  iron-masters  to  diminish 
the  scale  of  their  operations  in  order  thereby  to  lessen  their  losses.  A 
statement  was  drawn  up  in  1842,  under  the  direction  of  an  association 
of  the  Yorkshire  and  Derbyshire  iron-masters,  showing  the  quantity  of 
iron  made  during  the  first  six  months  of  that  year,  in  Yorkshire,  Derby- 
shire, Staffordshire,  Shropshire,  South  Wales,  and  Scotland,  as  under : — 

Tons. 
South  AV  ales.      .      .     .     158,713 
Scotland 135,460 


Yorkshire 

Tons. 
.      .       23,471 

Derbyshire    . 
Staffordshire.      . 

.      .        13,795 
.      .     151,130 

Shropshire     . 

.      .       40,643 

Together 


523,214  Tons 


equal  to  1,046,428  tons  per  annum.  The  quantity  made  in  the  above 
divisions  of  the  kingdom,  in  1840,  according  to  Mr.  Jessop,  was  1,343,400 
tons, — showing  a  diminished  production  at  the  rate  of  296,972  tons,  or 
more  than  22  per  cent. 

The  number  of  furnaces  in  and  out  of  blast,  and  the  quantity  of  iron 
made  in  different  parts  of  Great  Britain,  in  each  of  the  years  1847  and 
1848,  is  here  given  upon  what  is  considered  good  authority :  — 


North  Staffordshire 
South  „ 

Sliropshire 
Derbyshire 
Yorkshire  . 
Newcastle-on-Tyne 
North  Wales    . 
South       „ 
Scotland     . 


FURNACES. 

IRON 

MADE. 

In  Blast. 

Out  of  Blast. 

184T 

1848 

184T 

1848 

184T 

1848 

No. 

No. 

No. 

No. 

Tons. 

Tons. 

16 

14 

3 

7 

65,520 

67,080 

77 

112 

62 

25 

320,320 

465,920 

28 

31 

6 

4 

88,400 

111,020 

20 

20 

10 

10 

95,160 

78,000 

23 

20 

0 

11 

67.600 

59,800 

24 

17 

12 

15 

99,840 

94,380 

5 

5 

6 

9 

16,120 

22,256 

151 

133 

45 

57 

706,680 

631,280 

89 

94 

41 

36 

53 J, 968 

564,000 

433 

i  452 

190 

174 

1,999.603 

2.093.736 

270 


PROGRESS  OF  THE  NATION. 


[sec.  II. 


Records  of  the  produce  of  the  tin  and  copper  mines  of  Cornwall  were 
long  kept  with  considerable  regularity.  The  following  tiible  shows  the 
produce  of  the  Cornish  tin  mines,  according  to  these  records,  from  1750 
to  the  most  recent  period  recorded  : — 


Years. 

Tons. 

Years . 

Tons. 

Years. 

Tons. 

Y'ears. 

Tons. 

17.^)0 

2,876 

1772 

3,159 

1793 

3.202 

1814 

2.611 

1751 

2,273 

1773 

2,852 

1794 

3.351 

1815 

2,941 

1752 

2,550 

1774 

2,458 

1795 

3.440 

1816 

3,348 

1753 

2,516 

1775 

2,619 

1796 

3.061 

1817 

4,120 

1754 

2.714 

1776 

2,6.52 

1797 

3,240 

1818 

3,745 

1755 

2,757 

1777 

2,770 

1798 

2,820 

1819 

3,068 

1756 

2.774 

1778 

2,515 

1 799 

2,862 

1820 

2,775 

17.57 

2,752 

1779 

2,678 

1800 

2,. 522 

1821 

3,1.32 

1758 

2,720 

1780 

2,926 

1801 

2,328 

1822 

3,1.37 

1759 

2.637 

1781 

2,610 

1802 

2,627 

1823 

4,031 

1760 

2,717 

1782 

2.546 

1803 

2,914 

1824 

4,819 

1761 

2.395 

178;5 

2.570 

1804 

2,993 

1825 

4,170 

1762 

2,584 

1784 

2,685 

1805 

2,742 

1826 

4,406 

176.3 

2,7.36 

1785 

2,885 

1806 

2,855 

1827 

5,316 

1764 

2,618 

1786 

3,3j9 

1807 

2.426 

1828 

4,6>.i6 

1765 

2,7,57 

1787 

3,204 

1808 

2.330 

1829 

4, 3  JO 

1766 

3.055 

1788 

3;  352 

1809 

2,508 

1830 

4,183 

1767 

2.850 

1789 

3,405 

1810 

2,006 

1831 

4,093 

1768 

2;  667 

1790 

3,193 

1811 

2,. 384 

1832 

3,988 

1769 

2,898 

1791 

3,470 

1812 

2,373 

18.33 

3,791 

1770 

2,977 

1792 

3,809 

1813 

2,324 

1834 

4,180 

1771 

2,823 

The  trifling  degree  of  fluctuation  observable  in  the  amount  of  metal 
produced  throughout  the  whole  period  embraced  by  this  table,  with  the 
exception  of  the  last  twenty  years,  is  very  remarkable.  If  the  whole 
ninety-five  years  are  divided  into  periods  of  five  years,  the  average 
produce  will  be  as  follows  : — 


Years. 

Tons. 

Y'ears. 

Tons. 

1750  to  1754 

2,. 585 

1795  to  1799 

3.084 

1755  „  1759 

2,728 

1800  „  1804 

2:676 

1760  „  1764 

2.610 

1805  „  1809 

2;. 572 

1765  „  1769 

2,845 

1810  „  1814 

2,339 

1770  „  1774 

2,853 

1815  „  1819 

3,444 

1775  „  1779 

2,647 

1820  „  1824 

3,578 

1780  „  1784 

2,667 

1825  „  1829 

4,595 

1785  „  1789 

3,249 

1830  „  1834 

4,047 

1790  .,  1794 

3:405 

The  increase  observable  in  the  produce  of  the  last  twenty  years 
is  the  more  remarkable,  because,  within  that  time,  the  produce 
of  the  tin  mines  of  Banca  has  been  greatly  augmented.  Until  1817 
the  mines  of  Cornwall  aftbrded  a  considerable  supply  of  this  ■  metal 
to  China,  the  shipments  amounting  in  some  yeai*s  to  800  tons  ;  but 
since  the  restoration  of  the  island  of  Banca  to  the  Dutch,  its  mines 
have  been  rendered  so  productive  as  to  supply  the  markets  of  China 
and  India,  and  to  furnish  in  addition  a  large  quantity  of  tin  for  the 
continent  of  Europe. 

The  importations  and  re-exportations  of  foreign  (Banca)  tin  during  the 
last  thirty  years  have  been —  • 


MINING. 


2T1 


Vuars. 

ImporicJ. 

Uc-txportcil. 

Vi  ars. 

Imported. 

Re-exported. 

Years. 

Imported. 

Re-exported. 

(^vts. 

Cwts. 

Cwta. 

Cwts. 

Cwts. 

CwU. 

1820 

i,3o;» 

3,047 

1830 

15,. 539 

10,426 

1840 

9,311 

6,5'.i4 

1821 

1,106 

652 

ia3i 

8,099 

12,226 

1S41 

28,435 

25,. 345 

1822 

1 ,  536 

1,909 

1832 

29,203 

21,720 

1842 

11,112 

12,412 

1823 

6,41)1 

5,. 502 

18:W 

35,124 

39,8.50 

1843 

31,186 

13,007 

1824 

6.420 

4,709 

1834 

46,769 

46,685 

1844 

12,085 

19,153 

1825 

4.213 

4,709 

1835 

19,704 

23,795 

1845 

25.568 

18,347 

1826 

3.3'.t4 

5,647 

1836 

23,335 

17,231 

1846 

5,262 

21,039 

1827 

2,217 

2,938 

1837 

29,101 

29.216 

1847 

23^307 

11,471 

1828 

3,386 

3,258 

1838 

30,723 

21,034 

1848 

5,979 

8,341 

1829 

2;674 

2,581 

1839 

18,241 

22.766 

1849 

35,826 

8,940 

Notwithstanding  the  competition  thus  experienced  by  the  tin  miners  of 
Cornwall,  the  demand  from  foreign  countries  for  English  tin  has  continued 
to  be  considerable,  and  the  exportation  of  tin  plates  has  of  late  increased. 

The  quantities  of  British  tin  exported  have  been — 


Years. 

Cwts. 

Years. 

Cwts. 

Years. 

Cwts. 

Years. 

Cwts. 

1820 

25,852 

1828 

41,427 

1836 

11,152 

1843 

36,396 

1821 

29,229 

1829 

33,215 

1837 

17,271 

1844 

22,216 

1822 

35,843 

1830 

30,425 

1838 

25,086 

1845 

11,526 

1823 

26,364 

ia3i 

21,763 

1839 

29,307 

1846 

23,<i03 

1824 

36.890 

1832 

31,838 

1840 

36.885 

1847 

34,882 

1825 

34,237 

1833 

24,989 

1841 

23,340 

1848 

35,946 

1826 

43,645 

1834 

9,351 

1842 

61,763 

1849 

35,292 

1827 

49,474 

1835 

7,765 

No  record  is  kept  at  the  Custom-house  of  the  quantiti/  of  tin  plates 
exported,  but  the  progress  of  this  branch  of  industry  may  be  inferred 
from  the  following  statement  of  the  value  of  the  annual  exportations,  as 
declared  by  the  merchants  at  the  time  of  shipment : — 


Y'ears.         £. 

Years. 

£. 

Y'ears.         £. 

Years.         ^e. 

1815     275,136 

1824 

2:33,115 

1833     268,742 

1842     363.685 

1816     289,390 

1825 

185,251 

1834     324,5.59 

1843     427,994 

1817     239,062 

1826 

223,460 

1835    381,076 

1844     506,691 

1818    277.458 

1827 

281,9.58 

1836     387,951 

1845     637.. 507 

1819     167,843 

1828 

245.453 

1837     371,848 

1846     659,851 

1820     160,671 

1829 

212.526 

1838     459,176 

1847     485.073 

1821     161,299 

1830 

231.922 

1&39     372.026 

1848     .553.175 

1822     175,280 

1831 

215,446 

1840    360,816 

1849     727,825 

1823    209,143 

1832 

231,652 

1841     390,621 

Tiie  English  tin  miner  had  long  a  fancied  protection  against  the 
foreign  producer  by  an  import  duty  of  505.  per  cwt.  This  duty  was 
reduced  in  1842  to  65.  per  cwt.  :  both  rates  being  equally  inoperative, 
since  our  production  of  this  metal  is  uniformly  greater  than  our  con- 
sumption, under  which  state  of  things  it  would  be  absurd  to  suppose  that 
any  foreign  produce  could  enter  injuriously  into  competition  with  that  of 
our  own  mines. 

Tlie  produce  of  the  copper  mines  of  Cornwall  has  increased  in  a  much 
greater  proportion  than  that  of  the  tin  mines,  as  appears  by  the  following 
statement  of  the  annual  produce  of  the  former  from  1771  to  1786,  and 
from  179G  to  1848  :— 


PROGRESS  OF  THE  NATION. 


[sec.    II. 


Years. 

Tons. 

Years. 

Tons. 

Years. 

Tons. 

Years. 

Tons. 

1771 

0.347 

1796 

4,9.')0 

1814 

7,936 

1832 

11,947 

1772 

3,3:)6 

1797 

5,210 

1815 

6,607 

1833 

11.191 

1773 

3.320 

1798 

5,600 

1816 

7,045 

1834 

11,224 

1774 

3,630 

1799 

4,923 

1817 

6,608 

1833 

12,270 

1773 

3.5>16 

1800 

5,187 

1818 

6,714 

1836 

11,647 

1776 

3,r)32 

1801 

5,267 

1819 

7,214 

1837 

10,823 

1777 

3,386 

1S02 

5.228 

1820 

7,364 

1838 

11.527 

1778 

2.96.5 

1803 

5.616 

1821 

8,163 

1839 

12,4.50 

1779 

3,734 

1804 

5,374 

1822 

9,331 

1840 

11,037 

1780 

2. '.132 

180.T 

6,234 

1823 

7,928 

1841 

9,987 

1781 

3.4.M) 

1806 

6.863 

1824 

7,824 

1842 

9.896 

1782 

3.375 

1807 

6,716 

1823 

8;  226 

1843 

10.926 

1783 

4,296 

1808 

6,795 

1826 

9,026 

1844 

11.246 

1784 

4.3*6 

180;> 

6,821 

1827 

10,311 

1845 

12,23) 

1785 

4,434 

1810 

5,682 

1828 

9,921 

1846 

12,448 

1786 

4,787 

1811 

5.948 

1829 

6,6.56 

1847 

11,966 

1812 

7,248 

1830 

10,748 

1848 

12,870 

1813 

8.166 

1831 

12.043 

Tlie  productive  power  of  the  Cornish  copper  mines  has  thus  been 
increased  more  tlian  threefold  in  the  last  sixty  years.  No  statement  can 
be  given  of  the  total  quantity  of  copper  raised  in  the  United  Kingdom 
before  1820;  from  that  year  until  1834  the  produce  was — 

Years. 
1832 
1833 
1834 


Years. 

Tons. 

Years. 

Tons. 

Years. 

Tons. 

1820 

8,127 

1824 

9,705 

1828 

12,188 

1821 

10.288 

1825 

10.358 

1829 

12,0.57 

1822 

11,018 

1826 

ll.o;i3 

1830 

13,232 

1823 

9,679 

1827 

12,326 

1831 

14,683 

Tons. 
14,4,50 
13,260 
14,042* 


The  value  of  this  metal  now  annually  raised  in  the  kingdom  exceeds 
one  million  sterling,  being  more  than  double  the  value  of  the  quantity 
annually  produced  in  the  beginning  of  the  present  century. 

The  money  value  of  the  tin  and  copper  raised  in  the  county  of  Corn- 
wall at  different  periods  of  the  present  century,  has  been — 


Y'ears. 


Price  per  Ton. 


Total. 


1801 
1806 
1811 
1816 
1821 
1826 
1831 
1834 


Tin  . 
Copper 
Tin  . 
Copper 
Tin  . 
Copper 
Tin  . 
Copper 
Tin  . 
Copper 
Tin  , 
Copper 
Tin  . 
Copper 
Tin  . 
Copper 


5477221 
76,313/  i 
,027  ) 
.845/ 

( 
1 

>,730i 
i,832j 
5,074) 
!,971  J 
.300,845) 
806,090/ 
321,860) 
887,902/ 


254 

4 

344 

730 

337.336 

563^748 

383^346 

541,737 

242, 

628 

348 


£. 
731,035 

,074,872 

901,078 

925,083 

871,562 

,137,045 

,106,933 

,209,762 


£.     s.  d. 

101     0  0 

120  10  0 

141   10  0 

114  10  0 

77  10  0 

79    0  0 

73  10  0 

77     0  0 


Standard 

of 
Copper. 


£. 
117 

138 

126 

109 

111 

123 

100 

114 


*  Tlie  produce  of  copper  smelted  since  1834  from  English  ore  cannot  be  accurately  dis- 
tinguished from  that  of  foreign  origin.  The  follow  ing  quantities  are  offered  as  an  approxi- 
mate to  the  truth  : —  -• 


Y'ears. 

Tons. 

Years. 

Tons. 

Y'ears. 

Tons. 

Y'ears. 

Tons. 

18.35 

14,470 

1838 

12,570 

1841 

12,830 

1846 

14,950 

18.36 

14.770 

1839 

14,670 

1844 

14,840 

1847 

13,780 

1837 

10,150 

1840 

13,020 

1845 

14,900 

1848 

14,720 

CHAP.  VI.]                                                  MINING.  273 

The  value  of  metallic  copper  smelted  in  England,  from  native  and 

from   foreign   ore,   in  each  year  from  1844  to   1848,  as  given  in  the 
Mining  Almanac,  was  as  follows  : — 


Years. 

From  British  Ore. 

From  Foreign 

Ore. 

Total. 

£. 

2,096,454 

1844 

£. 
1.081»,603 

1,006,851 

1845 

1,028,. 53;-) 

798,528 

1,827,063 

1846 

1,073, '.124 

848,677 

1,922,601 

1847 

<.lt;.-),(;61 

6(10,038 

1.655,699 

1848 

'.(43.846 

631,643 

1,575,489 

The  increase  thus  shown  in  the  value  since  the  peace,  and  which  ap- 
parently amounts  to  more  than  60  per  cent.,  is  really  much  beyond  that 
rate.  In  1813,  tlie  last  year  of  the  war  with  France,  the  price  of  tin 
was  134/.,  and  of  copper  113/.  per  ton,  estimated  in  a  currency  depre- 
ciated to  the  extent  of  29  per  cent.  If  the  copper  and  tin  produced  in 
Cornwall  in  that  year  had  been  exchanged  for  gold  at  their  market 
prices,  they  would  have  procured  only  181,270  ounces  of  the  more  pre- 
cious metal  ;  whereas  the  produce  of  1834,  if  similarly  exchanged,  now 
that  the  currency  has  been  restored  to  its  par  value,  would  procure 
310,693  ounces  of  gold,  showing  an  increase  in  the  real  value  over  the 
produce  of  1813  of  71  per  cent. 

There  are  no  means  by  which  to  ascertain  the  progress  made  at  any 
time  in  the  productiveness  of  the  lead  mines  of  this  kingdom.  To 
answer  private  purposes,  the  individuals  by  whom  some  of  the  most  pro- 
ductive of  those  mines  are  worked,  studiously  conceal  the  amount  of 
metal  which  they  raise.  Various  conjectural  estimates  have  been  made 
as  to  that  amount,  but  little  dependence  can  be  placed  upon  their 
accuracy ;  and  even  if  we  could  determine  which  of  those  estimates  is 
nearest  to  the  truth,  this  would  afford  no  help  towards  forming  a  com- 
parison between  ditierent  periods.  Neither  is  any  light  thrown  upon  the 
subject  by  our  Custom-house  records,  since  the  amount  of  our  exports  of 
lead  is,  in  a  great,  degree,  governed  by  the  comparative  productiveness 
of  the  mines  of  other  countries,  and  particularly  by  those  of  Adra  in 
Spain.  The  extent  to  which  these  are  wrought  appears  to  fluctuate  con- 
siderably fi'om  one  year  to  another. 

The  value  of  the  mineral  products  of  England  would  be  greatly  in- 
ferior to  M'hat  it  actually  is,  were  it  not  for  the  abundant  supply  of 
good  coal  found  in  various  districts  of  the  kingdom.  It  cannot  here  be 
necessary  to  point  out  the  many  advantages  which  we  derive  from  the 
possession  of  our  coal  mines,  the  sources  of  greater  riches  than  ever 
issued  from  the  mines  of  Peru,  or  from  the  diamond  grounds  at  the  base 
of  the  Neela  Mulla  mountains.  But  for  our  command  of  fuel,  the  in- 
ventions of  Watt  and  Arkwright  would  have  been  of  small  account,  our 
iron  mines  must  long  since  have  ceased  to  be  worked,  and  nearly  every 
important  branch  of  manufacture  which  we  now  possess  must  have  been 
rendered  impracticable,  or  at  best  have  been  conducted  upon  a  compara- 
tively insignificant  scale. 

T 


274  PROGRESS  OF  THE  XATIOX.  [sec.  n. 

If,  on  the  one  hand,  our  gi-oat  mechanical  inventions  owe  so  much  to 
the  abundance  and  consequent  cheapness  of  our  fuel,  it  is  no  less  true 
that  some  of  these  inventions  have,  on  the  other  hand,  materially  assisted 
of  late  years  in  bringing  about  that  abundance.  But  for  the  invention 
of  the  steam-engine,  a  large  proj)ortion  of  the  coal  mines  now  profitably 
worked  could  not  have  been  opened,  or  must  have  been  abandoned.  It 
is  well  known  that,  by  the  consumption  of  one  bushel  of  coals  in  the  fur- 
nace of  a  steam-boiler,  a  power  is  produced  which  in  a  few  minutes  will 
raise  20,000  gallons  of  water  from  a  depth  of  350  feet ;  an  effect  which 
could  not  be  produced  in  a  shorter  time  than  a  whole  day,  through  the 
continuous  labour  of  twenty  men  working  with  the  common  pump.  By 
thus  expending  a  few  pence,  an  amount  of  human  labour  is  set  free,  to 
employ  which  would  have  cost  50^\  ;  and  yet  this  circumstance  is  so  far 
from  having  diminished  the  demand  for  human  labour,  even  in  the  actual 
trade  where  the  economy  is  produced,  that  it  has  certainly  caused  a  much 
f^reater  number  of  persons  to  be  employed  in  coal-mhiing  than  could 
otherwise  have  been  so  set  to  work.  Another  advantage  which  coal- 
miners  more  especially  have  received  from  the  hand  of  science  is  derived 
from  the  safety-lamp  of  Davy — a  discovery  which,  if  estimated  by  the 
amount  of  the  actual  good  it  has  done,  must  be  considered  one  of  the 
o-reatest  made  in  our  age  and  country.  Many  productive  mines  are  now 
wrought,  and  old  collieries  have  been  re-opened,  which  must  have  lain 
useless  but  for  the  invention  of  the  Davy  lamp. 

The  science  of  mining  m  all  its  branches  has,  besides,  made  great 
advances  within  the  present  century.  It  was  stated  by  the  Rev.  Adam 
Sedgwick,  Woodwardian  Professor  of  Geology  in  the  University  of 
Cambi'idge,  in  his  examination  in  1830  before  a  Committee  of  the 
House  of  Commons,  that  "  a  great  deal  of  coal  appears  formerly  to  have 
been  left  under  ground,  in  consequence  of  a  want  of  general  plans  or 
maps  of  the  underground  workings  ;  a  number  of  excavations  have  taken 
place,  independently  of  each  other,  and  the  consequence  is,  there  is  a 
great  number  of  piers  or  large  barriers  between  the  old  coal -works, 
some  of  which  it  may  be  almost  impossible  to  remove."  It  was  likewise 
the  custom  in  working  the  mines,  to  leave  large  pillai-s  of  coal,  in  order 
to  support  the  roof;  so  that  at  the  depth  of  100  fathoms,  little  more  than 
40  per  cent,  of  the  coal  was  abstracted,  and  the  remainder  was  given 
up  as  lost.  In  1795  an  attempt  was  made  to  substitute  wooden  pillare 
for  a  part  of  the  coal  previously  left,  and  this,  to  a  certain  extent,  was 
successful.  At  that  time  it  was  not  attempted  to  remove  more  than 
one-half  of  each  alternate  pillar  of  coal,  still  leaving  between  40  and  50 
per  cent,  of  the  coal  in  the  mine.  In  1810  an  improvement  in  this  sys- 
tem was  introduced,  by  means  of  which  every  intermediate  pillar  was 
wholly  removed,  and  a  part  of  the  adjoining  pillars  was  likewise  taken 
away  ;  and  by  working  thus,  about  80  or  90  parts  out  of  every  100  were 
brought  to  market.     It  was  in  the  year  1815  that  Sir  Humphry  Davy 


CHAP.    VI.] 


MINING. 


275 


brought  the  safety-lamp  into  use,  and,  in  the  opinion  of  Mr.  I^uddle,  an 
intelligent  and  experienced  coal-engineer,  who  was  examined  in  1^530 
before  the  Committees  of  Lords  and  Commons  concerning  the  coal  trade, 
"  this  operated  as  a  complete  renovation  to  many  of  the  collieries  which 
were  then  in  a  state  of  exhaustion.  By  its  means,  combined  with  the 
system  of  artificial  propping,  every  particle  of  coal  can  now  be  got  out  of 
the  mine  before  it  is  abandoned." 

The  following  tables,  exhibiting  the  amount  of  shipments  of  coals  made 
from  the  Tyne  and  the  Wear  in  each  year,  from  1801  to  1849,  may 
throw  some  light  upon  this  subject.  It  appears  from  these  tables,  that 
the  average  annual  shipments  from  Newcastle  and  Sunderland,  in  the 
five  years  ending  with  1818,  exceeded  the  average  shipments  of  the  pre- 
ceding five  years,  by  upwards  of  300,000  tons,  or  12^  per  cent.  If  those 
preceding  five  years  are  compared  with  the  five  years  ending  with  1835, 
it  will  be  found  that  the  increased  shipments  in  the  latter  period  amount 
to  900,000  tons  per  annum  ;  being  more  than  35  per  cent,  beyond  the 
shipments  at  the  earlier  period,  and  exceeding  the  shipments  during  the 
first  five  years  of  the  century  by  more  than  fifty  per  cent.,  and  if  we 
carry  forward  the  comparison  to  the  five  years  ending  with  1849,  it  will 
be  found  that  the  average  shipments  exceeded  those  made  during  the 
last  five  years  of  the  war,  viz.,  1809  to  1813,  by  2,997,985  tons,  being 
117  per  cent,  increase,  and  exceeding  the  shipments  between  1801  and 
1805,  by  142  per  cent. 

Table  of  the  Quantity  of  Coals  shipped  from  the  Port  cf  Newcastle  in  each  Year  from  1801  to 
184'J,  distinguisliing  the  Shipments  Coastwise  from  those  made  to  Foreign  Parts. 


Years. 

Coastwise. 

To  Forei;^!! 
Parts. 

Total. 

Veai3. 

Coastwise. 

To  Foreign 
Parts. 

Total. 

Tons. 

Tons. 

Tons. 

Tons. 

Tons. 

Tons. 

1801 

1,198,308 

133,562 

1,331,870 

1826 

2,099,867 

165,943 

2,265,810 

1802 

1,310,393 

116,600 

1,426,993 

1827 

1,811,924 

173,.3.55 

1,985,279 

1803 

1,338,613 

117,548 

1,456,071 

1828 

1,921,467 

157,211 

2,078,678 

1804 

1,536,812 

139,360 

1,676,172 

1829 

1,9.56,829 

163,380 

2,120,209 

1805 

1,464,991 

131,366 

1,. 596, 357 

1830 

2,167,355 

197,308 

2,. 364, 663 

1806 

1,558,934 

123,710 

1,682,644 

1831 

2,097,617 

161,247 

2,258,864 

1807 

1,404,367 

76,674 

1,481,041 

18.32 

1,809,412 

197,. 3.37 

2,006,749 

1808 

1,640,681 

42,402 

1,683,083 

18.33 

1,926,205 

2.33,709 

2,159,914 

1809 

1,428,610 

36,143 

1,464, 7  :)3 

18.'i4 

2,022,226 

2.30,. 342 

2,252,368 

1810 

1,643,977 

45,733 

1,689,710 

18.35 

2,266,531 

313, 107 

2,579,638 

1811 

1,678,401 

47,528 

1,725,929 

1836 

2,280,713 

415,849 

2,696,562 

1812 

1,671,177 

66,210 

1,7.37,387 

1837 

2,392,494 

476,1.57 

2,868,651 

1813 

1,548,087 

33,116 

1,587,203 

1838 

2,459,728 

554, 175 

3,013,903 

1814 

1,720,230 

84,763 

1,805,013 

1839 

2,139,321 

558,052 

2,717,373 

1815 

1,723,054 

112,450 

1,835,504 

1840 

2,281,-343 

593,911 

2,875,2.54 

1816 

1,797,100 

116,025 

1,913,125 

1841 

2,397,977 

750,585 

3,148,562 

1817 

1,650,889 

1.37,262 

1,788,151 

1842 

2,350,480 

866,281 

3,216,761 

1818 

1,780,458 

126,521 

1,906,979 

1843 

2,289,531 

815,4.34 

3,104.965 

1819 

1,695,965 

105,297 

1,801,262 

1844 

1,999,338 

602,1.52 

2, 601,. 550 

1820 

2,004,759 

118,788 

2,123,557 

1845 

2,443,982 

1,069,737 

3,513,719 

1821 

1,834,650 

127,457 

1,962,107 

1846 

2,302,606 

1,064,327 

3,366,9*3 

1822 

1,736,171 

143,365 

1,879,536 

1847 

2,618,941 

1,00.(,641 

3,628,582 

1823 

1,958,109 

121,. 391 

2,079,500 

1848 

2,273,674 

994,299 

3,267,973 

1824 

1,822,148 

129,966 

1,932,114 

1849 

2,143,380 

834,005 

2,977,385 

1825 

1,820,626 

136,266 

1,956,892 

T   -J 


276 


P]10GRESS  OF  THE  NATION. 


[sec 


Table  of  the  Quantitt/  of  Coals  shipped  from  the  Port  of  Sunderland  in  each  Year,  from  1801  to 
1849,  distiiiffuishinff  the  Shipments  Coastwise  from  those  made  to  Foreign  Parts. 


Years. 

Coastwise. 

To  Foreign 
Harts. 

Total. 

Years. 

Coastwise. 

To  Foreign 
Parts. 

Total. 

Tons. 

Tons. 

Tons. 

Tons. 

Tons. 

Tons. 

1801 

612,197 

12.607 

624,804 

1826 

1,455,988 

38,419 

1,494,407 

1802 

803,449 

82.694 

891,14.3 

1827 

1,387,109 

39,625 

1,426,734 

1803 

792,207 

26,942 

819,149 

1828 

1,3,50,354 

60,743 

1,411,097 

1804 

793.812 

11.029 

804.841 

1829 

1,497,059 

1805 

830,263 

15,782 

846,045 

1830 

1,387,426 

1806 

811,618 

7,424 

819,042 

1831 

1,256,396 

1807 

775,987 

11,331 

787,318 

1832 

1,201,152 

1808 

923,8.50 

5,455 

929,305 

1833 

1,176,176 

176, '487 

1,352,663 

1809 

8.58,944 

2,579 

861,523 

1834 

952,087 

149,956 

1,102.043 

1810 

982,388 

5,086 

987,474 

1835 

929,187 

154,538 

1,083,725 

1811 

876,996 

4.583 

881,579 

1836 

971,458 

170,367 

1,141,825 

1812 

897,964 

8;343 

906,307 

1837 

932,135 

242,463 

1,174,598 

1813 

919,947 

4,715 

924,662 

1838 

948,429 

308,168 

1,2.56,597 

1814 

989,090 

29,228 

1,018,318 

1839 

913,960 

370,620 

1.284,580 

1815 

895,443 

45.021 

940,464 

1840 

868,228 

442,987 

i;311,215 

1816 

1.027.371 

42,215 

1,069,586 

1841 

937,995 

408,515 

1,346,510 

1817 

964,250 

30,811 

995,061 

1842 

8.59,231 

364,886 

1,224,117 

1818 

1,038,245 

41,973 

1,080,218 

1843 

877,451 

305,991 

1,183,442 

1819 

1,002,893 

40,995 

1,043,885 

1844 

826.702 

220,434 

1,047,136 

1820 

1,102.327 

38,227 

1,140,5,54 

1845 

1,536,654 

428,400 

1,965,054 

1821 

1,050;443 

38,624 

1,089,067 

1846 

1.. 582, 218 

478,505 

2,060,723 

1822 

1,051,840 

43,509 

1,095,349 

1847 

1,871,171 

476,446 

2,347,617 

1823 

1,317,385 

41,198 

1,358,1383 

1848 

1,911,812 

498,158 

2,409,970 

1824 

1,301,645 

42,082 

1,343,727 

1849 

1,771,215 

447,280 

2,218,495 

1825 

1,382,759 

41,157 

1,423,916 

Within  the  last  few  years,  a  considerable  coal  business  has  been 
carried  on  from  the  port  of  Stockton,  on  the  river  Tees,  and  from  Sea- 
ham,  an  artificial  harbour,  on  the  coast  between  the  Tees  and  the  Wear, 
to  which  a  railroad  has  been  carried  from  one  of  the  largest  collieries 
in  the  northern  district.  The  first  shipment  of  coals  from  Stockton 
occurred  in  1822,  when  the  total  quantity  was  only  1224  tons.  This 
shipment  appears  to  have  arisen  from  some  accidental  circumstance  ;  for 
no  further  shipments  from  that  port  occurred  until  1826.  No  return 
was  made  during  the  four  years  from  1829  to  1832  inclusive,  in  which 
time  Seaham  harbour  was  completed  ;  but  from  1833,  the  shipments 
from  that  place  and  Stockton,  with  which  port  it  is  connected  for  revenue 
purposes,  have  been  regularly  included  in  the  Parliamentary  Returns. 
If  the  quantity  sent  from  Stockton  be  added  to  the  shipments  from 
Newcastle  and  Sunderland,  which  are  the  shipping  ports  whence  these 
exports  would  previously  have  been  made,  it  will  be  found  that  the  ship- 
ments in  1849  exceeded  those  of  1801  by  3,754,328  tons:  being  190 
per  cent,  increase  upon  the  shipments  of  1801,  and  102  per  cent,  increase 
upon  those  of  1814. — Seepage  277. 

The  progressive  increase  in  the  shipments  from  the  Newcastle  coal 
district,  as  shown  by  these  tables,  has  not  been  the  result  of  any 
stimulus  given  by  advancing  prices.  The  rates  at  which  coals  have 
been  sold  in  London  do  not  afford  any  correct  view  of  the  prices  paid 
to  the  coal-owners,  because  the  freight  and  charges  incurred  in  convey- 


MINING. 


277 


Quantity  of  Coals  shipped  from  the  Port  of  Stockton  from  1822  to  1849,  distinrinishinf/  tlip  S/tip. 
nii-nts  Coastwise  from  those  /nadr  to  Foreign  Parts. 


Years. 

Coastwise. 

To  Foreign 
Parts. 

Total. 

Years. 

Coastwise. 

To  Foreign 
Parts. 

Total. 

Tons. 

Tons. 

Tons. 

Tons. 

Tons. 

Tons. 

1822 

1,224 

1,224 

1840 

1,367,532 

132,842 

1,. 500,. 374 

1826 

10,754 

10,7.54 

1841 

1,483,618 

169,. 345 

1,6.52,963 

1827 

32,182 

32,182 

1842 

1,. 501,. 596 

180,808 

1,862,404 

1828 

66,051 

66,051 

1843 

1,446,069 

224,593 

1,670,662 

1833 

578,800 

3,700 

582,500 

1844 

1,415,638 

2.37,166 

1,6,52,804 

1834 

623,484 

9,988 

6.33,472 

1845 

816,3.59 

128,626 

944,985 

1835 

677,941 

26,840 

704,781 

1846 

662,279 

148,110 

810,389 

1836 

916,440 

36,943 

953,333 

1847 

727,812 

134,073 

861,885 

1837 

1,145,837 

46,516 

1,192,-353 

1848 

556,9.50 

105,094 

662,044 

1838 

1,219,938 

86,699 

1,. 306, 637 

1849 

402,225 

112,897 

515,122 

1839 

1,308,778 

111,707 

1,420,485 

ing  them  to  the  metropohs  are  constantly  varying  ;  and  this  will  be 
found  especially  the  case,  if  a  comparison  is  made  between  years  of 
war  and  peace.  The  anxiety  that  has  long  been  shown  by  the  Legisla- 
ture to  shield  the  consumers  of  coals  in  London  from  unfair  practices 
on  the  part  of  the  dealers,  has  led  to  the  compulsory  registration  of  prices. 
So  long  ago  as  the  reign  of  Queen  Anne,  an  Act  was  passed,  requiring 
the  shipper  of  coals  to  give  a  certificate  with  each  cargo,  setting  forth 
the  quantity,  quality,  and  price  paid  for  the  same  ;  and  this  certifi- 
cate, on  the  arrival  of  the  ship  in  London,  was  delivered  to  an  officer  at 
the  Mansion  House,  for  the  inspection  of  the  public.  The  prices. 
in  these  certificates  are  stated,  up  to  1825,  for  Newcastle  chaldrons 
of  53  cwts.  each  ;  from  that  time  until  1832,  the  imperial  chaldron, 
equal  to  25i  cwts.,  was  the  standard ;  and  since  1832,  the  rates  have 
been  given  per  ton  weight.  To  simplify  the  matter  the  prices  for  the 
whole  period  here  given,  viz.,  from  1801  to  1845,  are  reduced  to  those 
paid  per  ton : — 

Statement  of  the.  Prices  paid  at  Newcastle  and  Sunderland  for  Coals  of  the  first  Quality  shipped 
for  London,  at  the  beginning  of  June  in  each  gear,  from  1801  to  1845. 


Years. 

Per  Ton. 

Years. 

Per  Ton. 

Years. 

Per  Ton. 

s.     d. 

s.     d. 

S.     d. 

1801 

10     4 

1816 

13    0 

1831 

12     4 

1802 

10     4 

1817 

13    0 

1832 

12     3 

1803 

10     4 

1818 

13    0 

18.33 

10     6 

1804 

11     6 

1819 

13    0 

1834 

10     9 

1805 

11     6 

1820 

13    0 

1835 

11     0 

1806 

11     6 

1821 

12    8 

1836 

10     6 

180r 

11     6 

1822 

11  11 

1837 

10    0 

1808 

11     6 

1823 

12    8 

1838 

10     6 

1809 

13     0 

1824 

13    0 

1839 

10     6 

1810 

13     0 

1825 

12    8 

1840 

10     6 

1811 

;     13    0 

1826 

13    6 

1841 

10    6 

1812 

13    0 

1827 

13    6 

1842 

10     0 

1813 

1     13    0 

1828 

13    6 

1843 

10     0 

1814 

13     0 

1829 

12     9 

1844 

10     0 

1815 

1     13    0 

1830 

12    4 

1845 

8     0 

The  price  in  the  years  from  1846  to  1850  has  been  between  9s.  and  10s.  per  ton. 


278 


PROGRESS  OP  THE  NATION. 


b 


The  best  qucality  of  coals  is  given  in  all  cases ;  and  the  period  chosen  for 
the  quotation  is  the  beginning-  of  June  in  each  year,  at  which  time  there 
is  less  probability  of  accidental  fluctuations  than  during  the  winter  season. 

The  following  statement  of  prices  paid  in  London,  in  July  of  each 
year,  from  1813  to  1850,  will  show  how  materially  the  inhabitants  of 
this  city  have  benefited  through  the  i-eduction,  and  subsequently  the 
repeal,  of  the  duty  charged  upon  sea-borne  coals.  It  also  exhibits  the 
rate  of  freiofht  and  charges  between  Newcastle  and  the  river  Thames. 


Slatement  of  the  Prices  of  the  best  Neii'castle  Coals  at  the  Coal  Exchange,  London,  in  the  Month  oj 
July  in  evert/   Year,  from  1813  to  1850. 


Duty  7j.  6(/.  per  Ton. 


Years. 


1813 
1814 
1815 
1816 
1817 
1818 
1819 
1820 
1821 
1822 
1823 


Per  Ton. 


s.  d. 

42  0 

44  8 

39  0 

34  8 

31  9 

32  9 
30  7 
30  7 

32  6 
30  4 

33  4 


Duty  4i 

per  Ton . 

Duty  re 

pealed. 

Years. 

Per  Ton. 

Years. 

Per  Ton. 

Years. 

Per  Ton. 

s.     d. 

s.  d. 

s.    d. 

1824 

33  4 

1835 

20  3 

1843 

20  3 

182.) 

23  6 

1836 

21  9 

1344 

24  6 

1826 

25  3 

1837 

22  9 

1845 

17  3 

1827 

28  3 

1838 

22  9 

1846 

14  6 

1823 

27  6 

183) 

23  0 

1847 

17  0 

1823 

23  6 

1840 

22  9 

1848 

14  6 

1830 

27  6 

1841 

20  3 

1849 

15  6 

1831 

22  9 

1842 

20  6 

1850 

13  6 

1832 

19  6 

1833 

15  9 

1834 

19  0 

The  table  next  offered  shows  that  the  quantity  of  sea-borne  coals,  the 
produce  of  our  mines,  has  been  increased  since  1819,  from  4,365,040  to 
11,380,745  tons  in  1849,  or  at  the  rate  of  160  per  cent.— ,S'ee  page  279. 

The  quantity  of  coals,  of  the  transmission  of  which  any  record  can 
be  kept  at  our  Custom-houses,  exhibits,  however,  but  very  imperfectly 
the  progress  of  the  supply  of  this  kind  of  fuel.  The  seat  of  various 
manufactures  having  in  great  part  been  determined  by  the  presence,  in 
certain  districts,  of  cheap  fuel,  and  the  growth  of  population  having 
by  that  means  been  greatest  in  or  near  to  some  of  our  principal  coal- 
fields, the  quantity  of  fuel  brought  into  consumption  without  the  neces- 
sity of  its  being  shipped,  and  thereby  coming  under  the  cognizance  of 
the  Custom-house,  is  constantly  increasing  in  a  much  greater  degree 
than  that  of  sea-borne  coal.  Lancashire,  the  West  Riding  of  York- 
shire, Nottingham,  Derby,  Leicester,  Birmingham,  Wolverhampton, 
Coventry,  and  the  Potteries  in  Staffordshire,  ai-e  all  supplied  with  this 
necessary  element  of  manufactures  at  their  own  doors,  for  which  reason 
it  is  quite  impossible  to  ascertain  the  amount  of  fuel  there  consumed. 
It  is  certain,  however,  that  every  increase  in  the  amount  of  the  manu- 
factures produced  in  those  districts  must  be  taken  as  an  evidence  of  the 
increased  production  of  coals.  The  establishment  of  canals,  and,  more 
recently,  of  railroads  has,  besides,  had  the  effect   of  bringing   many 


CH.vr.  VI. J 


MINING. 


279 


Statement  of  the  Quantiti/  oj  Coals  shipped  Coastioise  from  Ports  of  Great  Britain  to  other  Paris 
of  Great  Britain,  to  Ireland,  to  the  British  Cvlonii-s.  and  to  Foreii/n  Countries,  in  each  Year 
from  ISVJto  184'J. 


Years. 

To  Ports  in 
Great 

To  Ireland. 

To  British 
Colonies. 

To  Foreign 
Countries. 

1 

1   To  all  Parts. 

UDiain.        1 

Tons. 

Tons. 

Tons. 

Tons. 

Tons. 

1819 

3,459,508 

669,660 

71,497 

164,-375 

4.365,040 

1820 

3,947,908 

606,400 

90,447 

l.")8,672 

4.803,427 

1821 

3,731,908 

644,787 

90,423 

170,941 

4,638,059 

1822 

3,810,233 

694,024 

111,822 

172,754 

4,788,833 

1823 

4,372,839 

693,413 

89,713 

163,662 

5,319,627 

1824 

4,308,-571 

691,429 

99,. 575 

179,617 

5,279,192 

1825 

4,384,433       695,832 

114,264 

197,234 

5,331,763 

1826 

4,730,307       7 

79,584 

123,437 

223,219 

5,856,547 

1827 

4,440,318       650,728 

123,109 

244,222 

5,458,377 

1828 

4,507,935  1     740,071 

128,092 

227,709 

5,603,807 

1829 

5,014,132  !     840,246 

128,893 

240,8.54 

6,224,125 

1830 

,  , 

145,204 

357,288 

,1 

1831 

! 

152,278 

356,419 

\         * 

1832 

•  •            1 

173,508 

414,938 

|1 

1833 

5,8.59,179  'l 

t 

192,082 

442,366 

6,493,627 

1834 

5,822,561 

; 

189,838 

425,417 

6,437,816 

1835 

6,117,993 

189,722 

546,338 

6,854,053 

Shipped 

EX 

PORTED. 

v„,,-        Coastwise  to  Ports 
"''^rs.      1  in  Great  Britain 
i      and  Ireland. 

To  Br 

Color 

tish 
ies. 

To 

C( 

Foreign 
juntries. 

To  all  Parts. 

Tons. 

Ton 

s. 

Tons. 

Tons. 

1836 

6,472,404 

197. 

724     1 

719,144 

7,383,272 

1837 

7,030,691 

247, 

125     1 

866,485 

8,204,-301 

1838 

7,190,433 

260, 

984 

1, 

0.52,725 

8,504,142 

1839 

7,223,013 

254, 

331 

1, 

195,086 

8,672,4.30 

1840 

7,475,877 

299, 

631     '       1, 

.306,682 

9,082,190 

1841 

7,649,899 

351, 

097     1       1, 

497,197 

9,498,193 

1842 

7,643,469 

352, 

054     1       1 , 

647,450 

9,648,973 

1843 

7,447,084 

318, 

914  !    i; 

547.297 

9.313,235 

1844 

7.377,862 

324, 

425 

1, 

429,746 

9,132,033 

1845 

8,723,468 

403, 

710 

2, 

121,572 

11,254,7.50 

1846 

8,-305,442 

415. 

919 

2, 

115,189 

10,836,550 

1847 

8,874,599 

382, 

401     1       2, 

100,760 

11,357,760 

1848 

9,074.079 

421, 

110            2. 

364,190 

11,859,379 

1849 

8.552.70 

6 

417, 

080 

2, 

410,959     : 

11,380.745 

places  within  the  reach  of  inland  collieries,  which  were  formerly,  in  this 
respect,  dependent  altogether  upon  supplies  brought  by  sea.  So  long 
ago  as  1816,  it  was  a  matter  of  complaint  on  the  part  of  the  coal-owners 
of  Northumberland  and  Durham,  that  they  were  thus  subjected  to  great 
and  increasing  competition,  and  a  deputation  from  that  body  was  then 
sent  throughout  the  kingdom  to  inquire  into  the  quantity  of  coals  passing 
by  inland  navigation  and  by  railroads  in  different  parts  of  the  country. 
In  a  report  made  by  the  members  of  this  deputation,  it  was  stated  that 


*  In  consequence  of  the  repeal  of  the  coasting  duty  on  coals,  the  Custom-house  has  ceased 
to  keep  any  record  of  tlie  shipments,  and  no  return  of  the  quantities  in  these  years  has 
been  called  for  by  Parliament. 

t  Including  shipments  to  Ireland. 


280  TROGllESS  OF  THE  NATION.  [sec.  ii. 

the  quantity  thus  distributed  amounted  to  4,078,508  Newcastle  chal- 
drons, or  10,808,040  tons,  namely — 

In  Yorkshire 967,406  chaldrons,  or  2,563,626  tons. 

Derbyshire 355,554  „  942,218     „ 

Nottinghamshire    .      .      .  186,666  „  494,665    „ 

Leicestersliire    ....  66,666  „  176,665    ,, 

Warwickshire    ....  162,962  „  431,849    „ 

Staffordshire      ....  300,000  „  795,000    „ 

Quantity  that  passes  towards  the  Eastern  Sea  .     .     5,404,023    „ 
An  equal  quantity  believed  to  pass   towards  the 
AVest  and  South 5,404,023    „ 

Quantity  carried  by  canals  and  railways       .      .      .   10,808,046     „ 

The  quantities  here  given  can  have  been  nothing  more  than  an  ap- 
proximation to  the  truth.  If  at  all  correct  at  the  time  they  were  stated, 
we  may  be  certain  that  the  tonnage  must  be  far  greater,  now  that  the 
wants  of  the  country  are  so  multiplied  through  the  increase  of  popu- 
lation, and  the  still  greater  increase  of  manufactures,  and  that  the  means 
of  distribution,  also,  are  multiplied. 

The  great  consumption  of  inland  coal,  as  here  assumed,  will  not 
appear  excessive  to  those  who  have  inquired  into  the  subject.  For 
smelting  one  ton  of  iron  it  may  be  assumed  that  four  tons  of  coals  are 
required  ;*  and  as  the  quantity  of  iron  produced  in  the  country  amounts 
to  about  2,000,000  tons  in  the  year,  it  will  follow  that  8,000,000  tons  of 
coals  are  consumed  in  the  single  process  of  producing  pig  or  cast  iron.  To 
convert  this  comparatively  raw  material  into  bar  iron,  and  to  manufac- 
ture the  latter  into  the  numerous  articles  of  hardware  which  are  made, 
must  add  so  materially  to  the  consumption  of  coals,  that  we  should 
probably  be  within  the  truth  in  estimating  the  quantity  consumed 
throughout  the  kingdom,  in  all  the  various  branches  of  the  iron  trade, 
at  more  than  10,000,000  tons  per  annum.  The  town  of  Sheffield  alone, 
as  already  shown,  required  in  1835  for  manufacturing  purposes  about 
515,000  tons. 

There  is,  perhaps,  no  article  of  daily  use,  scarcely  even  excepting 
food,  which  it  is  more  important  to  the  population  of  the  United  Kingdom 
to  obtain  at  a  moderate  price  than  coal,  the  cost  of  which  enters  more  or 
less  into  the  price  of  almost  every  article  of  consumption.  There  can  be 
no  doubt  that  any  proposal  on  the  part  of  the  government  to  impose  an 
excise  duty  upon  this  necessary  of  life  would  meet  with  the  most 
determined  and  general  opposition,  as  being  oppressive  to  the  poor  and 
injurious  in  various  ways  to  the  prosperity  of  nearly  every  branch  of  the 
national  industry.  It  is,  therefore,  hardly  conceivable  that  the  people 
of  England,  generally  so  much  alive  to  their  persi^nal  interests,  should 

*  Mr.  David  Mushet  has  stated  that  "  a  ton  of  iron  is  made  at  some  furnaces  under  three 
tons  of  coals,  and  at  others  eight  or  nine  tons  are  required  for  the  same  purpose."  Owing 
to  the  recent  employment  in  Scotland  of  heated  air  for  smelting  iron  ore,  it  is  said  that  one 
ton  of  iron  is  produced  by  the  heat  given  out  by  two  tons  eight  cwt.  of  coals. 


CHAP.  VI.]  MIXING.  281 

have  submittcul,  as  tlicy  did  without  a  inurmur,  for  three-quarters  of  a 
century,  to  the  imposition  of  a  virtual  tax  upon  their  fuel,  far  greater  in 
degree  than  it  is  likely  that  any  minister  would  ever  he  tempted,  even 
under  the  heaviest  financial  difficulties,  to  propose.  The  tax  to  which 
allusion  is  here  made,  was  not  less  a  tax  hecause  it  assumed  the  guise  of 
a  trade  regulation  ;  it  was  even  inoi-e  injurious,  hy  reason  of  the  uncer- 
tainty of  its  rate,  than  any  lixed  impost  could  have  heen.  This 
regulation  prohahly  existed  so  long,  hecause  of  the  ignorance  of  the 
public  concerning  its  operation,  which  ignorance  would  not  have  attended 
upon  the  imposition  of  a  direct  tax.  The  following  brief  description  of 
the  regulation  in  question,  which  ceased  only  in  the  year  1845,  will 
prove  interesting  to  the  reader. 

The  "  limitation  of  the  vend  "  existed,  with  some  partial  interruptions, 
from  the  year  1771.  This  arrangement  was  no  less  than  a  systematic 
combination  among  the  owners  of  collieries  having  their  outlets  by  the 
Tyne,  the  Wear,  and  the  Tees,  to  raise  the  price  of  coal  to  consumers 
by  a  self-imposed  restriction  as  to  the  quantity  supplied.  A  committee 
appointed  from  among  the  owners  held  its  meetings  regularly  in  the 
town  of  Newcastle,  where  a  very  costly  establishment  of  clerks  and 
agents  was  maintained.  By  this  committee,  not  only  was  the  price  fixed 
at  whicli  coals  of  various  qualities  might  be  sold,  when  sea  borne,  for 
consumption  within  the  kingdom,  but  the  quantity  was  assigned  which, 
during  the  space  of  the  fortnight  following  each  order  or  "  issue,"  the 
individual  collieries  might  ship.  The  manner  in  which  this  combination 
was  conducted,  and  the  effect  which  it  could  not  but  have  upon  the 
interests  of  the  consumers,  will  best  be  understood  by  describing  the 
course  pursued  upon  the  opening  of  a  new  colliery.  The  first  thing 
to  be  determined  in  that  case  was  the  rank  or  "  basis''  to  be  assigned  to 
the  colliery.  For  this  purpose,  one  referee  was  appointed  by  the  owners 
of  the  colliery,  and  another  by  the  coal-trade  committee,  who,  taking 
into  view  the  extent  of  the  royalty  or  coal-field  secured,  the  size  of  the 
pits,  the  number  and  power  of  steam-engines  erected,  the  number  of 
cottages  built  for  workmen,  and  the  general  scale  of  the  establishment, 
fixed  therefrom  the  proportionate  quantity  the  colliery  would  be  permitted 
to  furnish  towards  the  general  supply,  which  the  directing  committee 
from  time  to  time  authorized  to  be  issued.  The  point  to  be  attained 
by  the  owners  of  the  colliery,  was  to  secure  for  their  establishment 
the  largest  basis  possible  ;  and  with  this  view  it  was  common  for  them 
to  secure  a  royalty  extending  over  fi'om  five  to  ten  times  the  surface 
which  it  was  intended  to  work,  thus  burthening  themselves  with  the 
payment  of  possibly  5,000/  per  annum,  or  more,  of  "dead  rent"  to  the 
owner  of  the  soil,  who,  of  course,  exacted  such  payment  in  return  for  his 
concession,  although  his  tenants  nnght  have  no  intention  of  using  it. 
Instead  of  sinking  one  or  two  pits,  which  would  afford  ample  facility  for 
working  the  quantity  which  the  mine  was  destined  to  yield,  a  third,  and. 


282  PROGRESS  OF  THE  NATION,  [sec.  ii. 

possibly,  a  foiirrh  pit  were  sunk,  at  an  enormous  expense,  and  without 
the  smallest  intention  of  their  being  used.  A  like  wasteful  expenditure 
was  made  for  the  erection  of  useless  steam  power,  and  to  complete  and 
give  an  appearance  of  consistency  to  the  arrangements,  instead  of  building 
200  cottages  for  the  workmen,  double  that  number  were  provided.  In 
this  manner  a  capital  of  160,000/.  to  200,000/.  might  be  invested  for 
setting  in  motion  a  colliery  allowed  to  raise  and  sell  only  such  a  quantity 
of  coal  as  might  be  produced  by  means  of  an  outlay  of  one-fourth  or 
one-fifth  of  that  amount.  By  this  wasteful  course,  the  end  of  the  colliery 
owners  was  attained  ;  they  got  their  basis  fixed — if  a  large  concern,  as 
is  here  supposed — say  at  50,000,  and  this  basis  probably  secured  for 
them  a  sale  of  25,000  chaldrons  during  the  year,  instead  of  100,000 
chaldrons,  which  their  extended  arrangements  would  have  enabled  them 
to  raise.  The  Newcastle  committee  met  once  a  fortnight,  or  twenty-six 
times  in  the  year,  and,  according  to  the  price  in  the  London  market, 
determined  the  quantity  that  might  be  issued  during  the  following 
fortnight.  If  the  London  price  was  what  is  considered  high,  the  issue 
was  increased,  and  if  low  diminished.  If  the  "  issue  "  wei'e  twenty  on 
the  1000,  the  colliery  here  described  would  have  been  allowed  to  sell 
(20  X  50)  1000  chaldrons  during  the  ensuing  fortnight.  The  pit  and 
establishment  might  be  equal  to  the  supply  of  3000  or  4000  chaldrons  ; 
orders  might  be  on  the  books  to  that  extent  or  more  ;  ships  might 
be  waiting  to  receive  the  largest  quantity,  but  under  "the  regulation  of 
the  vend,"  not  one  bushel  beyond  the  1000  chaldrons  could  be  shipped 
until  a  new  issue  should  be  made.  By  this  system  the  price  was  kept 
up  ;  and  as  regards  the  colliery  owners,  they  thought  it  more  for  their 
advantage  to  sell  25,000  chaldrons  at  305.  per  chaldron,  than  to  sell 
100,000  chaldrons  at  the  price  which  a  free  competition  would  have 
brought.  If,  under  this  system  of  restriction,  any  undue  profit  was 
obtained,  nothing  can  be  more  certain  than  that  competition  for  a  portion 
of  this  undue  profit  would  cause  the  opening  of  new  collieries  until  the 
advantage  should  be  neutralized  ;  and  this  result  of  the  system  at  length 
became  apparent.  Lvery  new  colliery  admitted  into  the  "  vend  "  took 
its  share  in  the  '•  issues,"  and  to  some  extent  limited  the  sales  of  all  the 
rest.  The  disadvantage  during  all  this  time  to  the  public  at  large  is 
incontestable.  The  great  staple  manufactures  of  the  country,  being 
located  in  inland  coal  districts,  happily  did  not  suffer  from  this  combi- 
nation ;  but  in  other  innumerable  processes  which  require  the  aid  of  heat, 
and  which  are  carried  on  in  cities  and  places  where  coal  is  not  found,  the 
addition  to  the  cost  of  fuel  thus  occasioned  placed  the  manufacturers  at 
a  great  disadvantage,  while  the  other  inhabitants  of  those  cities,  and 
especially  the  poor,  were  very  greatly  injured  by  it.  The  loss  to  the 
.  community  at  large,  through  the  unprofitable  investment  of  unnecessary 
capital,  no  one  can  dispute. 

There  was  another  consequence  resulting  from  this  limitation  of  the 


CHAP  VI.]  MINING.  283 

home  coal  trade  vvliich  it  is  necessary  to  state,  as  it  was  productive  of 
great  national  evil. 

The  owners  of  collieries  being  restricted  in  their  fortnightly  issues  to 
quantities  which  their  establishments  enabled  them  to  raise  in  three  or 
four  days,  were  naturally  desirous  of  finding  for  their  men  during  the 
remainder  of  the  time  some  employment  which  should  lessen  the  ex|)ense 
of  maintaining  them  in  idleness,  and  spread  over  a  larger  quantity  of 
product  the  fixed  expenses  of  their  establishments  and  their  dead  rents. 
To  this  end  coals  were  raised  which  must  find  a  sale  in  foreign  countries; 
and  it  practically  resulted  that  the  same  quality  of  coals  which,  if 
shipped  to  London,  were  charged  at  305.  ^d.  per  Newcastle  chaldron, 
were  sold  to  foreigners  at  I85.  for  that  quantity,  giving  a  preference  to 
the  foreign  buyer  of  40  per  cent,  in  the  cost  of  English  coal.  By  this 
means  the  finest  kinds  of  coal  used  in  London,  at  a  cost  to  the  consumer 
of  about  3O5.  per  ton,  might  be  had  in  the  distant  market  of  St.  Peters- 
burg for  155.  to  I65.,  or  little  more  than  half  the  London  price.  Nor 
was  this  the  worst  effect  of  the  system.  In  working  a  colliery,  a  great 
proportion  of  small  coul  is  raised.  The  cost  to  the  home  consumer, 
under  the  system  of  limitation,  being  exaggerated,  and  the  freight  and 
charges  being  equally  great  upon  this  article  as  upon  round  coal,  very 
little  small  coal  would  find  a  market  within  the  kingdom,  except  on  the 
spot  where  it  was  raised ;  and  as  the  expense  of  raising  it  must  be 
incurred,  the  coal-owners  were  forced  to  seek  elsewhere  for  a  market  at 
any  price  beyond  the  mere  cost  of  putting  it  on  board  ship.  By  this 
means,  "  nut-coal,"  which  consists  of  small  pieces,  free  from  dust,  which 
have  passed  through  a  screen,  the  bars  of  which  are  five-eighths  of  an 
inch  apart,  were  sold  for  shipment  to  foreign  countries  at  the  low  price 
of  35.  per  ton.  The  intrinsic  quality  of  this  coal  is  quite  as  good  as 
that  of  the  round  coal  from  the  same  pits ;  it  is  equally  suitable  for 
generating  steam,  and  for  general  manufacturing  purposes ;  and  thus 
the  manufacturers  of  Denmark,  Germany,  Russia,  &c.,  obtained  the 
fuel  they  required,  and  without  which  they  could  not  carry  on  their 
operations,  at  a  price  not  only  below  that  paid  by  English  manufacturers, 
but  for  much  less  than  the  cost  at  which  it  was  raised.  The  coal-owner 
might,  it  is  true,  have  sold  this  small  coal  at  home  at  a  better  price  than 
he  obtained  from  his  foreign  customer,  but  every  ton  so  sold  would  have 
taken  the  place  of  an  equal  quantity  of  large  coal,  upon  which  his  profit 
was  made,  and  by  such  home  sale  he  would  by  no  means  have  lessened 
his  sacrifice,  but  the  reverse. 

In  this  way  during  three-quarters  of  a  century  every  person  using 
sea-borne  coal  in  Great  Britain  was  exorbitantly  taxed  for  the  benefit  of 
rival  manufacturers  in  other  countries. 

It  has  been  stated,  that  the  coal-owners  of  Durham  and  Northumber- 
land have  it  seriously  in  contemplation  at  this  time  (Nov.  1850)  to 


284 


I'llOGRESS  OF  THE  NATION. 


[sec.  II. 


recur  to  the  system  here  described,  with  perhaps  some  modifications. 
It  seems  hardly  probable,  however,  that  they  should  do  so,  seeing  that 
they  would  have  to  meet  all  the  difficulties  which  forced  them  in  1845 
to  break  up  their  combination,  and  that  the  facilities  for  competition  on 
the  part  of  owners  of  inland  coal-fields  are  far  greater  now  than  they 
were  in  1845,  while  through  the  extension  of  railways,  these  facilities 
are  being  continually  augmented. 

Among  the  mineral  productions  of  England,  salt  has  long  been  an 
article  of  considerable  importance,  llie  mines  from  which  English  salt 
is  produced  in  the  fossil  or  solid  form,  are  situated  in  Cheshire,  near 
the  town  of  Northwich.  Brine  springs  are  also  found  in  the  same 
neighbourhood,  as  well  as  in  other  counties,  and  chiefly  in  Staffordshire 
and  Worcestershire.  Nearly  the  whole  of  the  fossil  or  rock  salt  that  is 
raised  is  exported,  some  to  Ireland,  but  the  principal  part  to  the  north 
of  Europe.  A  small  quantity  is  used  to  strengthen  the  brine  yielded  by 
salt-springs,  from  which  the  salt  used  for  domestic  purposes,  and  also  a 
large  part  of  what  is  exported,  is  produced  by  evaporation. 

The  chief  part  of  the  Cheshire  salt,  both  fossil  and  manufactured,  is 
sent  down  the  river  Weaver  to  Liverpool,  for  distribution  and  exporta- 
tion ;  only  a  small  proportion  being  conveyed  to  other  places  by  canal 
and  land  carriage.  The  white  salt  made  from  the  Staffordshire  springs 
is  chiefly  exported  from  Hull,  while  that  from  Worcestershire  finds  an 
outlet  at  Gloucester.  The  following  table  exhibits  the  quantities  of 
white  and  rock  salt  sent  down  the  river  Weaver  in  each  year  from  1803 
to  1844  :— 


Years.      Rock  Salt.  White  Salt.       Total 


1803 
1804 
1805 
1806 
1807 
1808 
1809 
1810 
1811 
1812 
1813 
1814 
1815 
1816 
1817 
1818 
1819 
1820 
1821 
1822 
1823 


Tons. 
57,699 
57,087 
60,830 
52,620 
54, 187 
47,916 
63,520 
50,. 564 
49,277 
54,140 
47,230 
101,075 
88,741 
74,286 
59,446 
93,582 
85,935 
82.956 
91 ; 867 
110,785 
125,658 


Tons. 
122,537 
126,775 
180,498 
157,124 
180,165 
123,693 
192.590 
205^800 
120^487 
159,364 
149.074 
233^249 
236.373 
121,728 
148,709 
214,931 
179.939 
188.808 
147,822 
151,431 
170,401 


Tons. 
180,236 
1831862 
241.328 
2091744 
234,352 
171,609 

I  256.110 

!  256,364 
169,764 

I  213,504 

I  196.304 
3341324 

;  325.114 
196.014 

I  208.155 
308,513 

'  265.874 
271,764 
239,689 
262.216 
296,059 


Rock  Salt.   White  Salt.  :      Total. 


1824 
1825 
1826 
1827 
1828 
1829 
1830 
1831 
1832 
1833 
1834 
1835 
1836 
1837 
1838 
1839 
1840 
1841 
1842 
1843 
1844 


Tons. 

121,459 

89,551 

51,522 

45,829 

66,883 

82,830 

97,077 

90,742 

94.400 

95 1706 

82,179 

61,505 

83,637 

82,998 

98,419 

108,380 

121,4.58 

109,355 

104,299 

71,632 

91,693 


Tons. 

I  162,365 

\   252,876 

232.026 

271 1535 

!  289,225 

321,462 

'  336.245 

:  301,679 

'  345,896 

383,669 

I  376,220 

i  298.543 

i  295.816 

I  334,239 

I  3i)0.840 

378,8.55 

431,706 

360.833 

3451571 

I  476.014 

I  461,419 


Tons. 
283,824 
342.427 
283,528 
317,364 
356,108 
404,292 
433,. 322 
392,421 
440,296 
479,375 
458,399 
360,048 
379,453. 
417,237 
489.259 
487,235 
5.53,164 
470,188 
449,870 
547,646 
553,112 


If  to  the  quantity  here  stated  100,000  tons  of  white  salt  are  added 
annually  for  the  produce  of  springs  in  other  counties,  and  for  that  part  of 


CH.vr.  VI.] 


MINING. 


285 


the  Cheshire  salt  which  is  not  sent  toLiverpool,  it  is  probable  that  the  total 
produce  of  this  mineral  in  England  will  be  very,  nearly  ascertained. 

Up  to  the  year  1823,  salt  was  subject  to  an  Excise  duty  of  fifteen 
shillings  per  bushel,  which  was  reduced  in  that  year  to  two  shillings  ; 
and  since  the  5th  of  January,  1825,  the  duty  lias  been  wholly  repealed. 
The  following  table  shows  the  total  quantity  of  salt  made,  and  the 
proportion  taken  for  consumption  in  each  year  from  1801  to  1817,  the 
latest  period  to  which  the  account  was  called  for  by  Parliament  previous 
to  the  repeal  of  the  duty ;  subsequent  to  that  event  there  are  of  course 
no  means  for  obtaining  such  information.  We  may,  however,  make  an 
approximation  towards  the  truth  for  the  eighteen  years  from  1827  to  1844 
by  means  of  the  preceding  table,  and  of  the  statements  which  will  be 
found  below  of  the  quantities  exported  during  those  years,  the  difference 
between  the  quantities  produced  and  exported  representing  the  internal 
consumption  of  the  country. 


Bushels  made. 


Bushels  taken 

for 
Consumption. 


1801 
1802 
1803 
1804 
1805 
1806 
1807 
1808 
1809 


9,469,491 

9,-582,713 

8,741,808 

8,933,324 

10,210,004 

10,891,085 

10,872,672 

8,903,162 

9,849,499 


1,822,683 
1,863,402 
1,91)6,261 
2,065,776 
1,951,602 
1,910,453 
1,912,462 
1,907,273 
1,965,161 


Bushels  made. 


1810 
1811 
1812 
1813 
1814 
1815 
1816 
1817 


11,929,728 
10,387,932 

9.468,689 
11,067,603 
12,182,497 
15,084,644 
11,559,950 

9,357,482 


Bushels  taken 

for 
Consumption. 


1,999,486 
2,038,252 
2,047,392 
2,037,931 
2,045,892 
2,136,912 
2,003,243 
1,933,674 


Bushels  of  Rock  and  White  Salt  exported  in  each  year  from  1827  to  1849. 


Years. 

Bushels. 

Years. 

Bushels. 

Years. 

Bushels. 

1827 

7,475,025 

1835 

8,317,029 

1843 

12,946,453 

1828 

8,993.124 

1836 

9,622.427 

1844 

13,476.884 

1829 

10,574,951 

1837 

9,961,884 

1845 

14,319,482 

1830 

10,499,778 

1838 

11,338,662 

1846 

12,876,381 

1831 

9,932,214 

1833 

11,837,594 

1847 

16,271,927 

1832 

10,561,861 

1840 

12,847,663 

1848 

18,959,322 

1833 

11,670,434 

1841 

10,637,953 

1849 

18,604,907 

1834 

11,093,674 

1842 

10,776,129 

Of  the  quantity  exported  in  the  year  1848, — 

Russia  took 1,880,743  bus): 

Denmark 522.400 

Prussia 2,812.700 

HoUand 1,183,648 

Belgium        .     .     .     • 1,347,714 

Sweden  and  Norway 261,919 


Germany 
British  North  American  Colonies 
I'nited  States  of  America     . 
Western  Coast  of  Africa 

British  India,  &c 

New  South  Wales 

South  America  and  West  Indies 
Guernsey,  Jersey,  &c 


269,604 

2,015,162 

7,055,424 

497,598 

737,307 

210,969 

115,040 

49,094 


els 


Assuming  the  correctness  of  the   estimate  first  given  respecting  the 
production  of  salt,  and  deducting  from   the  quantities  assigned  to  each 


Years. 

Bushels. 

Years. 

Bushels. 

1S33 

11,504,566 

1839 

11,651,816 

1834 

11,242,286 

1840 

13,278,927 

1835 

10,084,891 

1841 

12,169,607 

1836 

9,555,733 

1842 

11.218,681 

1837 

10,727,616 

1843 

12.9.59,407 

1838 

12,171,698 

1844 

12,647,616 

286  PROGRESS  OF  THE  NATIOX.  [sec.  ii. 

of  the  years  from  1827  to  1844,  the  quantities  exported  in  those  years, 
it  will  be  found  that  the  quantity  retained  for  use  within  the  kingdom 
was  in  each  of  those  years  as  follows  : — 

Years.  Bushels. 

1827  9,219,-535 

1828  9,251,196 

1829  9,5>.16.729 

1830  10,833,102 

1831  9,764,626 

1832  11,049,979 

The  average  of  these  quantities  is  11,051,555  bushels,  while  the  average 
consumption  of  the  eight  years  from  1801  to  1808,  as  given  by  the 
Excise  table,  was  1,928,739  bushels,  showing  thus  an  increase  between 
those  periods  of  more  than  470  per  cent. 

During  the  continuance  of  the  high  duty,  the  proprietors  of  salt- 
works charged,  in  addition  to  the  duty,  more  than  double  the  price  which 
they  now  demand,  as  an  equivalent  for  the  greater  capital  embarked  and 
the  increased  risk  attending  the  business. 

Since  the  repeal  of  the  duty,  salt  has  been  much  more  used  than  for- 
merly by  the  poor,  in  many  parts  of  the  country,  for  salting  provisions ; 
and  it  has,  besides,  been  applied  to  many  purposes  in  the  arts,  as  a  sub- 
stitute for  kelp,  barilla,  and  potash,  in  the  manufacture  of  glass  and 
soap,  and  also  in  the  manufacture  of  bleaching  salts  ;  purposes  to  which 
it  would  not  have  been  applied  but  for  the  great  reduction  in  its  price. 


cjiAP.  I.]  INTERNAL  COMMUNICATION.  287 


SECTION  III.— INTERCHANGE. 

CHAPTER  I. 

INTERNAL  COMMUNICATION. 

Great  facility  afforded  for  Transport  in  Great  Britain — Advantages  thence  resulting^ 
Jealousy  on  this  account  of  Foreign  Countries,  and  Commercial  Restrictions  for  which 
it  is  made  the  pretext  —  Consequent  injury  to  those  Countries  —  Improvements  in 
Locomotion  projected  in  France. 

There  is  not  any  circumstance  connected  with  the  internal  condition 
of  England  which  more  strongly  excites  the  admiration  and  tlie  envy  of 
foreigners  than  the  degree  of  perfection  to  which  we  have  hrought  our 
means  of  internal  communication.  The  skill  and  labour  that  have  been 
applied  to  this  object  are  among  the  chief  exciting  causes  of  that  high 
degree  of  activity  which  characterises  and  pervades  the  productive 
classes  in  every  part  of  the  country.  The  perfection  to  which  we  have 
carried  the  means  of  transporting  persons  and  property  from  one  part 
of  the  kingdom  to  another  has  indeed  become  one  of  our  national 
characteristics. 

Placed,  by  its  insular  condition,  in  circumstances  which  render  efforts 
of  that  kind  less  indispensable  than  would  have  been  necessary  if  our 
country  had  formed  part  of  the  interior  of  a  continent,  we  have  done 
more  than  any  other  nation  of  Europe,  for  facilitating  communications 
from  and  to  every  nook  and  corner  of  the  land.  If  we  examine  the  map 
of  England,  we  shall  find  that,  as  regards  one  mode  of  public  commu- 
nication, there  is  not  any  spot  south  of  the  county  of  Durham  at  a 
greater  distance  than  fifteen  miles  from  water  conveyance.  In  the 
largest  part  of  the  area  thus  described,  that  distance  is  not  greater  at 
any  spot  than  ten  miles,  while  in  that  portion  which  is  the  principal  seat 
of  our  manufactures,  canals  have  been  constructed,  or  rivers  rendered 
navigable,  so  as  to  provide  means  for  cheap  and  easy  communication 
from  the  very  heart  of  each  town  to  every  other  part  of  the  kingdom, 
and  to  our  chief  commercial  ports.  By  this  means,  the  raw  materials 
of  manufactures  are  delivered,  unencumbered  with  heavy  charges,  at 


288  PROGRESS  OF  THE  NATION.  [sec.  hi. 

the  doors  of  our  factories,  and  tinished  goods  are  carried  away  from 
them  with  the  utmost  fticility  and  economy,  for  distribution  to  the  dif- 
ferent markets  of  the  civilized  world. 

The  advantages  to  a  commercial  people  of  roads  u})on  which  they 
can  pass  at  all  times  with  comfort  and  celerity  between  distant  markets 
can  hardly  be  appreciated  too  highly.  By  this  means  the  peculiar  wants 
and  capabilities  of  every  part  of  the  community  come  to  be  understood, 
and  arc  supplied  on  the  one  hand,  or  made  available  on  the  other,  to  a 
degree  which  could  never  be  attained  by  correspondence  with  local 
agents,  whose  information  would,  in  general,  be  limited  to  the  circum- 
stances of  the  spots  upon  which  they  reside.  The  extent  of  our  facilities 
in  this  respect  has  been  viewed  by  our  continental  neighbours  as  one 
great  cause  of  our  commercial  superiority,  and  has  been  brought  for- 
ward by  their  public  economists  as  some  justification  of  that  degree  of 
commercial  jealousy  which  leads  them  to  maintain  a  system  of  restric- 
tions, sufficiently  inconvenient  to  us,  but  far  more  hurtful  to  the  coun- 
tries by  which  it  is  enforced.  This  dread  of  our  superiority  in  the  means 
of  internal  commmiication,  our  viahilite  immense,  has  been  brought  for- 
ward by  the  French  Minister  of  Commerce,  and  stated  in  a  public  docu- 
ment as  affording  a  sufficient  reason  why  our  coal  and  iron  should  not 
be  suffered  freely  to  compete  with  the  produce  of  the  mines  and  forges 
of  France,  not  considering  that  the  possession  of  abimdant  and  cheap 
supplies  of  these  minerals  would  effect  more  towards  the  rapid  removal 
of  all  existing  disparity  in  this  respect  between  the  two  countries,  than 
our  neighbours  could  reasonably  hope  to  accomplish  at  the  end  of  a  long 
series  of  vears  of  restrictions  and  prohibitions.  The  proper  understand- 
ing of  this  question  is  a  matter  of  so  much  importance,  that  it  is  desir- 
able to  offer  a  few  facts  drawn  from  the  circumstances  of  France,  in 
illustration  and  support  of  the  opinion  just  expressed. 

In  the  whole  range  of  the  science  of  public  economy  there  is,  per- 
haps, no  principle  more  easily  or  more  clearly  demonstrable  than  the 
advantage  of  possessing,  at  the  cheapest  possible  rates,  the  raw  materials 
of  manufacture,  and  it  may  with  equal  facility  be  shown,  that  of  all  those 
materials,  there  is  not  one — unless,  indeed,  food  may  be  so  considered, 
which  is  of  more  universal  importance  than  iron.  In  the  first  Report 
of  Messrs.  Villiers  and  Bowring  on  the  Commercial  Relations  between 
France  and  Great  Britain,  the  following  curious  calculation  is  given,  in 
order  to  show  how  severe  a  loss  is  entailed  by  the  high  price  of  iron 
upon  one  class  of  persons  in  France — the  cultivators  of  the  soil : — "  The 
lands  cultivated  in  France  are  supposed  to  amount  to  22,818,000  hec- 
tares, equal  to  57,045,000  acres  English,  and  it  is  calculated  that  a 
team  of  oxen  would  cultivate  15  hectares  ;  hence  the  quantity  of  ploughs 
employed  in  France  is  estimated  at  about  1,500,000.  M.  de  la  Roche- 
foucault  represents  the  annual  use  and  waste  of  iron  at  40  kilogrammes 


"5 

CHAP.  I.]  INTERNAL  COMMUNICATION.  289 

per  team,  but  it  has  been  more  frequently  estimated  at  50  kilogrammes, 
making  for  the  whole  consumption  75,000,000  kilogrammes  of  iron, 
which,  at  90  francs  per  100  kilogrammes,  consumes  67,500,000  francs, 
equal  to  2,700,000/.  sterling.  Now,  though  this  estimate  is  too  high 
for  an  average  calculation,  it  is  undeniable  that  the  iron  could  be  im- 
ported from  foreign  countries  at  half  the  price,  and  the  loss  to  agricul- 
ture alone  must  be  taken  at  above  one  million  sterling  per  annum." 
This  calculation  is  probably  excessive,  since  it  is  well  known  that  the 
primitive  mode  of  cultivation  adopted  through  a  great  part  of  France 
does  not  call  for  the  use  of  the  plough,  nor  admit  of  the  employment  of 
teams  of  oxen  or  horses ;  but  this  circumstance  does  not  materially 
affect  the  argument,  since  the  proportionate  loss  is  as  great  upon  farms 
where  the  better  modes  of  culture  prevail,  and  it  is  further  probable 
that  the  excessive  price  of  iron  may  act  in  preventing  the  adoption  of 
those  better  modes  of  culture  in  other  situations.  In  whatever  way  the 
case  may  be  considered,  it  will  be  seen  that  the  high  price  of  iron  acts 
directly  to  enhance  the  cost  of  food,  and  thus  is  detrimental  to  the  whole 
community. 

In  another  way,  more  immediately  connected  with  this  branch  of  our 
subject,  the  high  price  of  this  article  of  prime  necessity  acts  detriment- 
ally to  the  community.  It  was  given  in  evidence  before  the  Committee 
of  the  House  of  Commons,  which  sat  in  1833,  to  inquire  as  to  the  tolls 
to  be  placed  on  steam  carriages,  that  every  coach  which  travelled  be- 
tween London  and  Birmingham  distributed  about  eleven  pounds  weight 
of  wrought  iron  along  the  line  of  road  between  those  two  places.  This 
line  of  road  being  more  than  ordinarily  level,  and  being  kept  in  a  state 
of  the  most  perfect  repair  at  all  times,  may  be  supposed  to  cause  as 
little  wear  to  the  wheels  of  carriages  and  the  shoes  of  horses  as  can  well 
be  experienced  upon  a  common  road,  and  far  less  than  would  be  expe- 
rienced on  the  roads  of  France.  If  it  were  possible  to  estimate  the 
number  of  miles  travelled  over  by  the  various  wheel  carriages  used  in 
that  country,  where  almost  all  locomotion  is  carried  forward  upon  the 
roads,  the  amount  of  loss  arising  from  this  source  must  needs  be  found 
enormous.  If  the  wear  were  no  greater  than  upon  the  hard  and  level 
road  between  London  and  Birmingham,  the  loss  of  iron  upon  every 
journey  performed  between  Marseilles  and  Paris  would  amount  to 
twenty-five  kilogrammes,  one-half  of  the  cost  of  which  might  be  saved 
by  freely  admitting  the  iron  of  other  countries. 

The  loss  entailed  upon  the  inhabitants  of  France,  through  the  bad- 
ness and  insufficiency  of  the  roads  in  many  parts,  may  be  exemplified  by 
the  fact,  which  is  stated  on  the  most  respectable  authority,  that  a  few 
years  ago,  in  a  part  of  the  department  of  Vaucluse,  the  price  of  wheat 
was  25  per  cent,  greater  than  the  price  at  the  nearest  market,  which  is 
only  twenty-two  English  miles  distant.     In  this  case  the  means  of  trans- 

u 


290  PROGRESS  OF  THE  NATION.  [sr.c.  in. 

port  were  so  imporfcct,  that  goods  of  all  kinds  were  conveyed  upon  the 
hacks  of  hoi-ses  or  mules. 

The  French  government  has  of  late  years  heen  engaged  in  the  pro- 
secution of  inquiries  with  a  view  to  the  estahlishing  of  various  lines  of 
railroads,  between  different  places  of  commercial  importance  within  the 
kingdom,  and  under  the  sanction  of  the  Legislative  Chambers,  several 
principal  lines  or  trunks,  with  various  branches,  have  been  constructed, 
and  others  undertaken. 

Besides  the  great  enhancement  of  its  cost  which  would  be  occasioned 
by  the  greater  use  of  French  iron,  it  is  quite  impossible  that  so  large  a 
quantity  of  the  material  as  would  be  required  for  carrying  out  these 
projects  should  be  supplied  without  having  recourse  to  foreign  supply. 
The  employment  of  French  iron  would  be  also  unadvisable  because  of 
its  quality,  which  is  not  so  well  adapted  for  making  rails  as  English  iron, 
and  would  therefore  occasion  a  greater  constant  expense  for  keeping  the 
lines  iu  repair. 


CHAP.  II.]  TURNPIKE  ROADS.  291 


CHAPTER  11. 


TURNPIKE    ROADS, 

Length  of  Turnpike-roads  in  Great  Britain  in  1818  and  1829 — Length  in  each  County  in 
1829— Improvement  of  Roads  in  Scotland — In  Ireland — Effect  upon  Society — Former 
Condition  of  Roads  in  England — Improvements  in  public  Carriages  and  greater  Speed 
in  Travelling — Traffic  upon  Roads  and  Canals  as  given  in  evidence  before  Parliament 
— Amount  of  Travelling  by  Stage-coaches  in  Great  Britain — Proportion  of  that  Amount 
connected  with  London— Number  of  Mail-coaches  in  England,  Scotland,  and  Ireland. 

The  chief  improvement  made  of  late  years  in  England  in  regard  to 
turnpike-roads,  has  consisted  in  reconstructing  them  upon  more  scien- 
tific principles  than  were  previously  employed,  an  advantage  which  is 
mainly  owing  to  the  exertions  of  the  late  Mr.  M'Adam,  whose  plans 
have  been  adopted  generally  throughout  the  kingdom,  as  well  as  in 
several  foreign  countries.  England  had  long  been  provided  with  roads 
in  every  quarter  ;  yet  we  find,  from  Parliamentary  returns,  that,  between 
1818  and  1829,  the  length  of  turnpike-roads  in  England  and  "Wales 
was  increased  by  more  than  one  thousand  miles.  In  the  Report  of  the 
Select  Committee  on  the  Turnpike  Roads  and  Highways  of  England 
and  Wales,  which  sat  in  1820,  a  summary  of  the  extent  of  these  roads 
is  given  as  it  existed  in  1818.  That  summary  was  collected  fi-om 
16,955  returns  made  by  the  surveyors  of  highways  in  9822  parishes, 
5217  townships,  and  1916  hamlets  or  other  places,  leaving  a  deficiency 
of  returns  ft-om  only  120  places. 

At  the  time  to  which  those  returns  have  reference,  there  existed — 

Miles. 
In  England  and  'Wales,  paved  streets  and  turnpike 

roads  to  the  extent  of 19,725 

Other  public  highways 95,104 

Total 114,829 


If  we  suppose  that  all  the  turnpike-roads  then  existing  were  of  the 
statutable  breadth  of  sixty  feet,  they  would  have  covered  212  square 
miles,  or  about  136,000  acres.  If  all  the  other  public  highways  were 
on  the  average  thirty  feet  wide,  they  would  have  covered  540  square 
miles,  or  346,000  acres,  making  altogether,  in  1818,  482,000  acres. 

u2 


292 


PROGRESS  OF  THE  NATION. 


[sec. 


We  further  find,  from  the  Report  of   the  Lords'  Committee  upon 
Turnpike  Trusts,  that  in  the  year  1829  the  extent  of  turnpike-roads 


was- 


Miles. 

In  England 1^.2-i-t 

Wales V>'-i^ 

20,875 

Scotland 3,666 

Total  in  Great  Britain    .     .     .  


24,541  Miles. 


Their  distribution  through  the  respective  counties  is  shown  in  the  fol- 
lowing— 

Stimmari/  of  Beturns  made  hi/  the  Clerks  of  the  Peace  and  tlie  Clerks  of  the  Roads,  of  tite  extent  of 
Turnpike  Roads  in  the  different  Counties  of  Great  Britain,  corrected  to  the  Year  1829. 


England. 

Miles. 

Bedfordshire 238 

Berkshire 319 

Buckingliamshire    ....  165 

Cambridgeshire      ....  278 

Cheshire 349 

Cornwall 318 

Cumberland 215 

Derbyshire 574 

Devonshire 782 

Dorsetshire 347 

Durham 359 

Essex 249 

Gloucestershire       ....  840 

Hampshire 810 

Herefordshire    .      .     .     .     .  553 

Hertfordshire 170 

Huntingdonshire    ....  146 

Kent 586 

Lancashire 631 

Leicestershire 445 

Lincolnshire 538 

Middlesex 158 

Monmouthshire      ....  315 

Norfolk 271 

Northamptonshire.      .     .     .  358 

Northumberland     ....  479 

Kottinghamsliire    ....  302 

Oxfordshire 342 

Kutlandshire 18 

Shropshire 988 

Somersetshire 746 

Staffordshire 630 

Suffolk 279 

Surrey 281 

Sussex 623 

Warwickshire 477 

Westmoreland 284 

Wiltshire 768 

Worcestershire .565 

Yorkshire 1,448 


Wales 


Total 


18,244 


Anglesea 

Brecknockshire 

Cardiganshire   . 

Carmarthenshire 

Carnarvonshire 

Denbighshire     . 

Flintshire     . 

Glamorganshire 

Merionethshire 

Montgomeryshire 

Pembrokeshire. 

Radnorshire 


Total 


Miles. 

25 
169 
250 
319 
129 
165 

85 
355 
261 
450 
173 
250 


2,631 


Scotland. 

Aberdeenshire       .      .     .     ,     232 

Ayrshire 

486 

Banffshire    . 

123 

Berwickshire     . 

126 

Clackmannanshire 

71 

Dumbartonshire 

57 

Dumfriesshire  . 

251 

Edinburghshire 

273 

Elginshire    . 

26 

Forfarshire 

131 

Haddingtonshire 

120 

Kincardineshire 

96 

Kirkcudbright 

216 

Lanarkshire 

374 

Linlithgowshire 

117 

Nairnshire   . 

9 

Peeblesshire 

113 

Perthshire    . 

225 

Renfrewshire    . 

195 

Roxburghshire 

193 

Selkirkshire 

.       23 

Stirlingshire      .     r- 

158 

Wigtonshire 

51 

Total 


3,666 


CHAP.  II.]  TURNPIKE  llOADS.  293 

If  we  allow  150  miles  for  the  deficient  returns  of  1818,  and  which  is 
somewhat  ahove  the  average  given  by  the  16,1)55  returns  actually 
made,  we  .shall  find  an  increase  of  exactly  1000  miles  in  England  and 
Wales  ;  but  this  increase  is  of  little  importance  if  viewed  compara- 
tively with  the  improvements  introduced  into  their  construction  and 
management. 

As  regards  the  highways  of  Scotland,  we  have  more  precise  informa- 
tion given  in  the  Reports  of  the  Board  of  AVorks,  constituted  in  1^03, 
for  constructing  roads  and  bridges  in  the  uncultivated  districts  of  that 
country.  Since  its  formation,  that  Board  has  caused  the  construction  of 
1186  miles  of  roads,  and  more  than  1000  bridges. 

By  this  means,  according  to  the  opinion  of  the  late  Mr.  Telford,  o° 
whose  opportunities  for  forming  a  correct  judgment  upon  the  subject 
few  persons  will  question,'  we  have  advanced  civilization,  in  the  districts 
principally  affected,  by  at  least  one  hundred  years.  The  manner  in 
which  this  advancement  has  shown  itself  in  one  part  of  the  country  was 
thus  described  in  the  evidence  given  by  Mr.  Loch,  before  the  Select 
Committee  on  Public  Works  in  Ireland,  of  which  committee  he  was  a 
member,  and  which  sat  in  the  Session  of  1835  : — 

"  A\Tien  I  first  became  acquainted  with  the  Highlands,  the  great 
proportion  of  the  people,  in  place  of  being  immediate  tenants  of  the 
landlord,  held  of  the  different  tacksmen.  Since  then  almost  all  per- 
sons occupying  land,  and  I  do  not  confine  my  observations  to  Suther- 
land alone,  though  principally  to  it,  have  become  immediate  tenants  to 
the  landlord.  They  were  extremely  irregular  in  their  habits,  being 
poachers  on  the  river,  and  smugglers,  and  since  then,  in  Sutherland, 
they  have  given  up  both,  and  have  become  most  industrious  workmen 
in  every  class  of  agricultural  labour.  It  was  necessary,  at  the  period  I 
mention,  to  get  ploughmen  from  Elgin,  and  that  side  of  the  Moray 
Firth,  and  there  was  not  a  person  who  could  build  a  stone  wall,  the 
ordinary  mode  of  enclosing  land  in  that  country.  But  it  is  so  much  the 
reverse  at  the  present  moment,  that  almost  every  ploughman  in  the  county 
is  a  native,  and  they  are  now  the  best  builders  of  stone  walls  in  the 
North,  in  consequence  of  which  they  are  employed  in  all  the  adjacent 
counties.  A  great  improvement  has  taken  place  also,  arising  from  the 
greater  extension  of  the  English  language.  When  the  children  on  the 
coast-side  formerly  came  out  of  school,  though  they  were  taught  to  read 
English  in  the  school,  they  spoke  nothing  but  the  Gaelic  language  ;  now 
when  they  play  after  school  hours  on  the  coast-side,  they  all  speak  English. 
Nothing  has  tended  so  much  to  this  as  the  institution  of  Gaelic  schools, 
which  were  founded  with  the  object  of  preserving  that  language ;  but 
the  fact  is,  the  moment  persons  have  acquired  the  facility  of  reading 
Gaelic,  they  find  it  of  no  use,  and  immediately  leave  it,  and  ti.vich  them- 
selves English." 


294  PROGRESS  OF  THE  NATION.  [skc.  iii. 

The  moral  improvement  here  pointed  ont  is  ascribed  by  Mr.  Loch 
to  the  formation  of  roads  by  the  Government  since  1803,  and  a  like 
effect  has  been  experienced  in  at  least  an  equal  degree  in  Ireland, 
Mr.  Griffith,  speaking  upon  the  subject  in  1822,  thus  expresses  him- 
self:— 

"  The  fertile  plains  of  Lim.erick,  Cork,  and  Kerry,  are  separated 
from  each  other  by  a  deserted  country,  hitherto  nearly  an  impassable 
barrier.  Tliis  large  district  comprehends  upwards  of  900  square  miles  ; 
in  many  places  it  is  very  populous.  As  might  be  expected,  under 
such  circumstances,  the  people  are  turbulent,  and  their  houses  being 
inaccessible  for  want  of  roads,  it  is  not  surprising  that  during  the  dis- 
turbances of  1821  and  1822  this  district  was  the  asylum  for  whiteboys, 
smugglers,  and  robbers,  and  that  stolen  cattle  were  drawn  into  it  as  to 
a  safe  and  impenetrable  retreat.  Notwithstanding  its  present  desolate 
state,"  adds  Mr.  Griffith,  "  this  country  contains  within  itself  the  seeds 
of  future  improvement  and  industry." 

In  reporting  upon  the  state  of  the  same  district  in  1829,  only  seven 
years  after  the  above  unfavourable  description  was  given,  but  during 
which  interval  several  roads  had  been  opened  through  it,  the  same  intel- 
ligent gentleman  states  as  follows  : — 

"  A  very  considerable  improvement  has  already  taken  place  in  the 
vicinity  of  the  roads,  both  in  the  industry  of  the  inhabitants,  and  the 
appearance  of  the  country  ;  upwards  of  sixty  new  lime-kilns  have  been 
built ;  carts,  ploughs,  harrows,  and  improved  implements,  have  become 
common ;  new  houses  of  a  better  class  have  been  built,  new  enclosures 
made,  and  the  country  has  become  perfectly  tranquil,  and  exhibits  a 
scene  of  industry  and  exertion  at  once  pleasing  and  remarkable.  A 
large  portion  of  the  money  received  for  labour  has  been  husbanded 
with  care,  laid  out  in  building  substantial  houses,  and  in  the  purchase 
of  stock  and  agi'icultural  implements,  and  numerous  examples  might  be 
shown  of  poor  labourers  possessing  neither  money,  houses,  nor  land,  when 
first  employed,  w^ho  in  the  past  year  have  been  enabled  to  take  farms, 
build  houses,  and  stock  their  lands." 

In  a  report  made  in  the  year  1824,  by  the  late  Mr.  Nimmo,  a  gentle- 
man to  whom  Ireland  is  much  indebted  for  the  suggestion  and  execu- 
tion of  many  plans  of  enlightened  improvement,  it  is  stated  that  in  a 
part  of  the  county  of  Kerry,  "  a  few  years  ago  there  was  hardly  a 
plough,  car,  or  carriage  of  any  kind  ;  butter,  the  only  produce,  was 
carried  to  Cork  on  horseback ;  there  was  not  one  decent  public-house, 
and  only  one  house  slated  and  plastered  in  the  village  :  the  nearest  post- 
office  thirty  miles  distant.  Since  the  new  road  was  made,  there  were 
built  in  three  years  upwards  of  twenty  respectable  two-story  houses,  a 
shop  with  cloth,  hardware,  and  groceries ;  a  comfortable  inn,  a  post- 
office,  bridtiwell,  new  chapel,  a  quay  covered  with  limestone  for  manure, 


ciiAi'.  ir.J  TURNPIKE  llOADS.  295 

a  salt-work,  two  stores  for  oats,  and  a  considerable  traffic  in  linen  and 
yarn."  This  gratifying  statement  describes  only  the  first  beginning  of 
improvement.  When  seven  more  years  had  passed,  the  population 
amounted  to  more  than  1100  ;  in  1841  they  exceeded  1500  souls.  The 
twenty  houses  spoken  of  by  Mr.  Xinimo  were  increased  to  more  than  250, 
forming  the  flourishing  town  of  Cahirciveen,  which  is  the  centre  of  a 
considerable  import  and  export  trade.  These  advantages,  which  are 
still  only  beginning  to  develop  themselves,  have  originated  in  the  making 
of  about  seventy  miles  of  new  road,  on  a  level  line. 

It  is  stated  in  the  Reports  of  the  Commissioners  of  Public  Works  in 
Ireland,  a  Board  established  by  Act  of  Parliament  in  1831,  that  "the 
benefits  which  the  country  has  derived  from  the  construction  of  roads 
carried  by  the  aid  of  government  contributions  through  extensive  poor 
uncultivated  districts,  which  were  previously  without  means  of  communi- 
cation, continue  to  manifest  themselves  in  the  most  satisfactory  manner. 

"  The  very  great  benefit  which  the  country  has  derived  from  the 
formation  of  these  roads  has  been  repeatedly  represented;  nothing, 
however,  short  of  witnessing  the  effects  produced  can  give  an  adequate 
impression  of  their  value. 

"  These  roads  have  been  the  means  of  fertilising  the  deserts,  and  of 
depriving  the  lawless  disturbers  of  the  public  peace  of  their  place  of 
refuge,  affording  them  at  the  same  time  resources  for  an  active,  honest, 
industry,  of  which,  we  must  do  them  the  justice  to  observe,  they  have 
not  shown  any  indisposition  to  avail  themselves. 

"  In  traversing  a  country  covered  with  farms,  and  in  a  high  state  of 
cultivation,  showing  every  sign  of  a  good  soil,  and  of  amply-remune- 
rating produce,  it  becomes  difficult  to  credit  the  fact  that  ten  or  twelve 
years  since  the  whole  was  a  barren  waste,  the  asylum  of  a  miserable 
and  lawless  peasantry,  who  were  calculated  to  be  a  burthen  rather  than 
a  benefit  to  the  nation ;  and  that  this  improvement  may  entirely  be 
attributed  to  the  expenditure  of  a  few  thousand  pounds  in  carrying  a 
good  road  of  communication  through  the  district." 

Among  the  subjects  to  which  the  Commissioners  appointed  in  1835 
for  inquiring  into  the  condition  of  the  poorer  classes  in  Ireland  extended 
their  investigations,  the  state  of  the  public  roads  was  included.  From 
the  evidence  given,  the  roads  between  market  towns  are  in  good  repair, 
and  so  improved,  in  comparison  to  their  former  condition,  that  a  horse  is 
now  able  to  carry  to  market  twice  or  thrice  the  load  that  he  used  to 
draw  twenty  years  ago.  This  improvement  is  most  apparent  "  in  the 
neighbourhood  of  resident  proprietors'  seats,  and  through  their  estates, 
as  they  take  care,  by  means  of  their  local  influence,  to  have  the  county 
money  laid  out  on  the  roads  upon  and  near  their  own  property." 

The  almost  magical  effect  ascribed  to  the  opening  of  the  new  roads 
in  Ireland  was,  at  a  i)eriod  not  very  distant,  experienced  in  England, 


296  jN)^  PROGRESS  OF  THE  NATION.  [sec.  hi. 

even  within  what  is  now  only  a  four  hours'  journey  from  London.  An 
inliabitant  of  Horsham,  in  Sussex,  hitely  living,  remembers,  when  a 
boy,  to  have  heard  from  a  person  whose  father  carried  on  the  business 
of  a  butcher  in  that  town,  that  in  his  time  the  only  means  of  reaching 
the  Metropolis  was  either  by  going  on  foot,  or  riding  on  horseback,  the 
latter  of  which  undertakings  was  not  practicable  at  all  periods  of  the 
year,  nor  in  every  state  of  i\w  weather — that  the  roads  were  not  at  any 
time  in  such  a  condition  as  to  admit  of  sheep  or  cattle  being  driven 
upon  them  to  the  London  markets,  and  that  for  this  reason  the  farmers 
were  prevented  sending  thither  the  produce  of  their  land,  the  immediate 
neighbourhood  being,  in  fact,  their  only  market.  Under  these  circum- 
stances, a  quarter  of  a  fat  ox  was  commonly  sold  for  about  15s.,  and 
the  price  of  mutton  throughout  the  year  was  only  five  farthings  the 
pound.  Horsham  is  oG  miles  from  London,  and  the  journey  between 
the  two  places  by  the  turnpike-road  now  occupies  less  than  four  hours  ; 
before  the  opening  for  traffic  of  the  Brighton  Railway,  more  than  30 
stage-coaches  travelling  at  this  rate  passed  through  Horsham  every  day, 
on  their  way  from  and  to  the  Metropolis,  in  addition  to  numerous  private 
carriages  and  post-chaises ;  the  traffic  of  goods — principally  coal  and 
agricultural  produce — carried  on  in  the  district  of  which  Horsham  is  the 
centre,  exceeded  40,000  tons  a  year,  besides  which,  the  road  was  con- 
stantly covered  with  droves  of  cattle  and  flocks  of  sheep. 

The  imperfection  thus  described  as  formerly  existing  in  Sussex,  was 
by  no  means  confined  to  that  county.  In  Arthur  Young's  "  Tour  in 
the  North  of  England,"  published  in  1770,  he  gives  the  following  de- 
scription of  the  turnpike-road  between  Preston  and  Wigan,  a  spot  which 
is  now  become  a  centre  for  railway  operations : — "  I  know  not,  in  the 
whole  range  of  language,  terms  sufficiently  expressive  to  describe  this 
infernal  road.  To  look  over  a  map,  and  perceive  that  it  is  a  principal 
one,  not  only  to  some  towns,  but  even  whole  counties,  one  would  natur- 
ally conclude  it  to  be  at  least  decent ;  but  let  me  most  seriously  cau- 
tion all  travellers  who  may  accidentally  purpose  to  travel  this  terrible 
county,  to  avoid  it  as  they  would  the  devil,  for  a  thousand  to  one  but 
they  break  their  necks  or  their  limbs  by  overthrows  or  breakings- down. 
They  will  here  meet  with  ruts,  which  I  actually  measured,  four  feet 
deep,  and  floating  with  mud,  only  from  a  wet  summer, — what,  there- 
fore, must  it  be  after  a  winter  ?  The  only  mending  it  receives  in  places 
is  the  tumbling  in  some  loose  stones,  which  serve  no  other  purpose  but 
jolting  a  carriage  in  the  most  intolerable  manner.  These  are  not  merely 
opinions,  but  facts,  for  I  actually  passed  three  carts  broken  down,  in 
these  eighteen  miles  of  execrable  memory." 

The  benefits  which  resulted  from  the  improvement  of  roads  in  this 
and  other  parts  of  the  country,  were  not  confined  to  the  particular  spots 
where  those  improvements  have  been  made,  but  were  shared  by  the 


CdiJAr.  It]  TURNPIKE  IlOAli^.  '    ^ 


297 


country  generally.  This  fact  was  formerly  so  ill  understood,  that  when 
it  was  in  contemplation  to  extend  turnpike-roads  from  the  Metropolis  to 
more  distant  points  than  those  to  which  they  had  hefore  been  carried, 
the  fanners  in  the  metro])olitan  counties  petitioned  Parliament  against 
the  plan,  fearing  lest  their  market  being  invaded  by  so  many  compe- 
titors, who  would  sell  their  produce  more  cheaply,  they  should  be  ruined. 
The  comparative  rent  of  land  in  the  neighbourhood  of  London,  and  in- 
deed of  every  large  town,  now  that  so  much  more  facility  of  communi- 
cation has  been  attained,  is  a  sufficient  answer  to  the  apprehensions  then 
expressed.  Without  thus  increasing  the  means  of  supply,  it  is  mani- 
festly impossible  greatly  to  increase  the  population  of  towns  ;  by  restrict- 
ing their  population,  the  growth  of  commercial  and  manufacturing  iu;;^ 
dustry  would  be  arrested,  the  augmentation  of  the  capital  of  the  country 
would  proceed  but  slowly,  if  at  all,  and  the  nation  would  continue  sta- 
tionary, or  its  progress  would  at  best  be  hardly  perceptible.  In  such 
a  state  of  things  it  would  be  vain  to  expect  that  any  advances  should  be 
made  towards  the  attainment  of  rational  freedom,  or  the  improvement 
of  our  social  institutions;  and  if,  notwithstanding  these  circumstances, 
population  were  to  increase,  the  mass  of  the  people  must  continually  be- 
come poorer,  they  would  be  more  and  more  driven  to  the  habitual  use 
of  the  lowest  descriptions  of  food,  and,  instead  of  the  gratifying  spectacle 
now  exhibited,  of  a  people  steadily  advancing  in  the  attainment  of  the 
arts  and  the  blessings  of  civilization,  we  should  gradually  sink  into  a 
state  of  barbarism,  and  might  in  the  end  be  degraded  to  the  lowest  scale 
of  intelligence  compatible  with  human  nature. 

The  improvements  made  in  the  mode  of  constructing  roads,  and  the 
state  of  perfect  repair  in  which  they  are  maintained,  led  to  correspond-  i 
ing  improvements  in  the  form  and  construction  of  our  public  carriages, 
and  in  everything  connected  with  their  management  and  performance. 
Very  considerable  improvements  in  these  respects  had  been  made  in  the 
second  half  of  the  last  century.  In  1742,  the  one  stage-coach  that  tra- 
velled between  London  and  Oxford  began  the  journey  at  seven  in  the 
morning,  and  did  not  reach  its  destination  until  the  evenino-  of  the  fol- 
lowing day,  resting  at  High  Wycombe  during  the  intervening  night. 
The  same  journey  has  since  been  regularly  performed  by  coaches  in 
six  hours,  and  the  express  trains  of  the  Great  A^'estern  railway  now 
make  the  journey  in  less  than  an  hour  and  a  half.  It  will  serve  to 
show  the  degree  of  improvement  that  had  been  attained  at  the  close 
of  the  last  century,  to  state,  that  the  author  well  remembers  in  the 
summer  of  1798,  leaving  the  town  of  Gosport  at  one  o'clock  of  the 
morning  in  the  "  Telegraph,"  then  considered  a  "  fast  coach,"  and 
arriving  at  the  Golden  Cross,  Charing  Cross,  at  eight  in  the  evening, 
thus  occupying  nineteen  hours  in  travelling  eighty  miles,  being  at  the 
rate  of  rather  more  than  four  miles  an  hour.    Our  countrymen  who  visit 


298  TKOGRESS  OF  THE  NATION.  [sec.  hi. 

France  complain  of  the  slow  pace  of  the  diligence  in  that  country,  not 
remembering  that  it  is  equal  to  that  which  was  ordinarily  accomplished 
in  this  country  less  than  forty  years  ago.  On  all  the  principal  roads 
communicating  with  London,  the  rate  of  travelling  by  the  turnpike- 
roads  is  now  nearly  or  quite  ten  miles  an  hour,  nor  is  it  in  celerity 
alone  that  improvement  has  been  made.  It  might  have  been  supposed 
that,  to  attain  so  high  a  degree  of  speed,  the  personal  safety  of  passen- 
gers would  be  further  endangered,  but  the  very  contrary  is  the  fact,  so 
that,  notwithstanding  the  rapidity  with  which  we  are  whirled  along,  the 
number  of  accidents  is  actually  lessened,  a  result  produced  by  the  better 
construction  of  the  carriages,  the  greater  perfection  of  the  harness,  the 
absence  of  such  obstacles  as  were  described  by  Arthur  Young,  and, 
more  than  all,  by  the  superior  character  of  the  drivers,  a  steady,  well- 
conducted,  and  sober  class  of  persons  having  taken  the  place  of  men 
■with  habits  and  characters  the  very  reverse. 

If  previous  to  the  adoption  of  the  improvements  here  noticed  in  the 
construction  and  maintenance  of  our  turnpike-roads,  the  above  results 
had  been  anticipated,  the  prediction  would  have  been  thought  wild  and 
chimerical ;  but,  witnessing  as  we  do  those  results,  we  are  now  so  far 
from  considering  them  as  the  limit  of  our  onward  progress,  that  we  rea- 
sonably look  for  a  series  of  further  improvements  in  locomotion,  of  which 
railways  and  steam-carriages  may  be  only  among  the  first  steps,  and 
which  will  do  more  for  us  and  our  descendants  than  turnpike-roads  and 
railways  have  done  for  our  immediate  predecessors  and  ourselves  in  faci- 
litating intercourse  between  different  parts  of  the  kingdom,  in  opening 
distant  markets,  in  economising  the  cost  of  transport,  and  in  equalising 
the  prices  of  produce  throughout  the  kingdom,  for  the  general  benefit  of 
the  community. 

It  is  a  difficult  thing  to  obtain  accurate  estimates  of  the  amount  of 
traffic  upon  roads  or  canals.  In  ordinary  cases  no  one  is  interested  in 
keeping  an  account  of  the  number  of  vehicles  or  of  passengers,  or  the 
quantity  of  goods  conveyed  upon  the  roads  ;  and  as  the  property  in 
canals  belongs  to  individuals  or  to  private  associations,  it  is  judged  pru- 
dent to  conceal  such  facts,  lest  the  knowledge  of  them  should  encourage 
rivalry.  The  only  occasions  on  which  information  of  this  kind  is  col- 
lected and  made  public,  are,  when  the  promoters  of  some  new  under- 
taking are  desirous  of  making  out  a  case  in  favour  of  their  own  project, 
and  it  must  be  obvious  that  statements  thus  proffered  are  liable  to 
some  exaggeration,  and  must  be  received  with  caution.  In  the  way 
here  mentioned  much  information  has  been  given  in  evidence  before 
Committees  of  the  House  of  Commons,  appointed  to^examine  the  nume- 
rous railway  bills  brought  forward,  and  in  the  absence  of  more  extensive 
and  authentic  returns,  selections  from  the  information  thus  given  may  be 
interesting. 


TURNPIKE  ROADS. 


290 


■^ 

■"  o 

~ 

•    •  5 

•    •  5  ■■+  5 

•      -.      ■      •      • 

s? 

u 

:_ 

o 

in  o  00 

in 

so 

00  (O  a> 

00 

c 
o 

. .  .1 

2                      ^' 
5      .    .    .    .'5    • 

oj 

to 

2                    '• 

O 

00                               !M 

-i         (0 

^ 

00 

O 

o 

n 

5^    3 

§ 

%i 

•    •« 

• 

in 

.      .      •      .  C5 

.    .    .  ^ 

• 

. 

-t    . 

IF-  2 

H 

f—i 

00 

« 

00 

•4< 

<     £ 

'^ 

« 

.1 

?? 

«  ifS 

S5    ??S8 

to            Q  •^ 
—            O  « 

00 

CO        -H               (N 
■^         rl               in 

S  >.S 

c 
o 

o 

00  O 

N       t~-  o  — 

(N            to  to 

to 

C5      o          o 

2j=  « 

CO 

•  «  IM 

. 

to    •  t^  as  in 

«         •  W  «      • 

. 

« 

H 

Tl 

—  -M 

O         to  00  C5 

in         •M  00 

»— • 

rH                  i-H 

Cl  rH 

»-H 

>— < 

S 

Si      » 
=5     1- 

t^ 

3         00 

2? 

-*  oooto  t>- 

ci    in  •*  00  in 

to 

a> 

in 

to      00  •*         O  h-  O 

«    t^  -#       m  ■>!  oo 

t^    t^  — <  c>i  to 

<N 

en 

ifS 

O        «D 

00 

eo  cc  oi  •*  in 

O    r~  s>j  t^  t- 

« 

00 

o 

f-    rt  c^      o  ci^ 

c 

o 

-f 

to  -f  'M  o»  in 

to    1-  r^(N  tf 

(M 

o 

IT)    t~  m     •  -t<  —  -N 

on 

m 

r~ 

«      pH  30         »  -M  00 

<— t      1—1 

<N 

s    ^ 

•s 

Q 

00               O 

s§ 

.     .     . 

.  8  •  .  • 

. 

. 

CI               O 

e  * 

o 

to           to 

=  XI 

c« 

M          ?) 

z 

o 

in 

o 

i  J 

o 

8 

8S 

o               c 
o                o 

o 

....  (-3 

• 

• 

11 

» 

t^ 

00      in 

in 

O 

tc  « 

oo                 o 

<N 

00 

«  cc 

CI                        « 

^ 

" 

-*  in 

o 

■»t< 

w      o 

-c 

Q 

o  to 

■~-                o 

o 

c  o 

^•3 

(N 

o    -o 

.    .    .    •  o 

o        .     .     -x     •     • 

z; 

£  « 

t^ 

-*     m 

CC 

c^ 

O  -H 

o               o 

3^ 

I-^ 

in 

ir^  r- 

CI                        CI 

?: 

'^ 

~'^— . 

gi.?^' 

tTl 

(-•^  -M  CO 

CO 

O  ^)  ^  »  s 

■M      to  -f  C-.  -f 

m    «  -f  -^  ■+ 

^ 

r^ 

—  ^M 

00     00  -*  t-  -t  o  -f 

-t 

■M  CC  O 

O  —  d  X'  --0 

« 

-^^ 

m    to  iM  in  -)"  t^  X 

c  ^  •-;  S 

o 
!5 

—  to  -M 

o 

—  X  -f  to  « 

c-l    t-  «  r?  Tf 

'^ 

r~ 

t^  t^ 

^    m  cr.  ^.  ■*  ^  to 

ir^ 

O  in  O 

to 

in  C!  in  r^  in 

t-     Cl  —  -*  to 

t^ 

O  ^  t^ 

m    -f  -f  to  L-  t^  ^ 

■^ 

t^  ^  in  o  00 

—      ■*  05  00  (N 

r~ 

C  w  m 

-■IP 

S^  —  — 

CI 

—  ^  (M  S^  rt 

eo    't  in      m 

00 

'N 

rs  ~ 

-1-  S  «  m  — 

- 

ec 

- 

, 

^ 

— '— , 

,—-~ 

_y^_ 

>. 

-^ 

1 

m 

•:3 

^ 

c 

s- 

<; 

<! 

O 

c 

£  _ 
2  - 

.S  - 

00     ''"2 ,—   rf'-'o* 

.b=-n^^  2  S;S  5  s  ga  §  g  5  5 

^  —  —  w         xiZ<5«5><y3        K  _;  «  .; 

-3 

i 

3    ? 

1 

o 
"3 

0-? 

d     •     *     •     •  K     •    • 

■At       £  s;     5 

^   o     .go     .   g. 

5     c3;3.575^ 

The  calculations  as  to  the  number  of  passengers  conveyed  by  stage- 
coaches upon  the  different  lines  of  road  embraced  by  the  foregoing 
estimates,  were  for  the  most  part  grounded  upon  information  furnished 
by  the  vStamp  Office  in  London,  in  which  department  the  necessary  par- 
ticulars are  registered,  upon  the  issue  of  the  license,  without  which  no 
person  is  allowed  to  convey  passengers  for  hire  from  one  part  of  this 
kingdom  to  another.  In  order  to  obtain  some  approximation  to  the  ex- 
tent of  travelling  by  such  means  in  England,  a  careful  calculation  has 


300  rilOGRESS  OF  THE  NATION.  [sec.  hi. 

been  made  upon  the  whole  of  the  returns  so  made  to  the  Stamp  Office, 
and  the  licenses  for  which  coaches  were  in  operation  at  the  end  of  the 
year  1834.*     The  method  followed   in  making  the  calculation  has  been 
to  ascertain  the  performance  of  each  vehicle,  supposing  that  perform- 
ance to  have  been  equal  to  the  full  amount  of  the  permission  conveyed 
by  the  license,  reducing  the  power  so  given  to  a  number  equal  to  the 
number  of  miles  which  one  passenger  might  be  conveyed  in  the  course 
of  the  year ; — for  example  :  a  coach  is  licensed  to  convey  15  passengers 
daily  from  London  to  Birmingham,  a  distance  of  112  miles.     In  order 
to  ascertain  the  possible  performance  of  this  carriage,  during  the  year, 
if  the  number  of  miles  is  multiplied  by  the  number  of  journeys,  and 
that  product  multiplied  again  by  the  number  of  passengers,  we  shall 
obtain,  as  an   element,  a  number  equal   to  the  number  of  miles  along 
which  one  person  might  have  been  conveyed :  viz.  112  X  365  x  15  = 
613,200.     In  this  case  the  number  of  miles  travelled  is  40,880,  along 
which  distance  15  persons  might  have  been  carried  during  the  year ; 
but,  for  the  simplification  of  the  calculation,  the  further  calculation  is 
made,  which  shows  that  amount  of  travelling  to  be  equal  to  the  convey- 
ance of  one  person  through  the  distance  of  613,200  miles.    Upon  making 
this  calculation  for  the  whole  number  of  stage-coaches  that  possessed 
licenses  at  the  end  of  the  year  1834,  it  appears  that  the  means  of  con- 
veyance thus  provided  for  travelling  were  equivalent  to  the  conveyance 
during  the  year  of  one  person,  for  the  distance  of  597,159,420  miles, 
or  more  than  six  times  the  distance   between  the   earth  and  the   sun. 
Obsen-ation  has  shown  that  the  degree  in  which  the  public  avail  them- 
selves of  the  accommodation  thus  provided  is  in  the  proportion  of  9  to 
15,  or  3-5ths  of  its  utmost  extent.     Following  this  proportion,  the  sum 
of  all  the  travelling  by  stage-coaches  in  Great  Britain  may  be  repre- 
sented by  358,295,652  miles ;  if  we  exclude  from  the  calculation  all 
very  young  children,  as  well  as  persons  who  from  their  great  age  and 
bodily  infirmities  are  unable  to  travel,  there  will  probably  remain  in 
England   10,000,000  of  persons  by  whom    that  amount  of  travelling 
might  be  accomplished  ;  but  it  is  well  known  that  a  very  large  propor- 
tion of  the  population  are  not  placed  in  circumstances  that  require  them 
to  travel,  and  if  even  it  were  otherwise,  that  they  would  not  avail  them- 
selves of  a  mode  of  conveyance  so  comparatively  costly  as  a  stage-coach. 
We  shall  probably  go  to  the  utmost  extent  in  assuming  that  not  more 
than   l-5th,  or  two  millions  of  persons,  travel  in  that  manner,  and  it 
places  in  a  strong  point  of  view  tiie  activity  which  pervades  this  country 
when  we  thus  arrive  at  the  conclusion,  that  each  of  those  persons  must 
on  the  average  have  travelled  on  land  by  some  public  conveyance  180 
miles  in  the  course  of  the  year  1834.     This  calculation  was  exclusive  of 

*  The  progressive  opening  of  railways  since  1834  would  interfere  materially  with  the 
correctness  of  any  calculation  based  upon  the  Stamp  Office  returns  of  later  years. 


CHAP.  II.]  TURNPIKE  ROADS.  301 

all  travelling  in  post-chaises,  in  private  carriages,  and  by  steam-vessels, 
the  amount  of  which  there  are  not  any  means  for  estimating. 

It  affords  a  good  measure  of  the  relative  importance  of  the  Metro- 
polis to  the  remainder  of  the  country,  that  of  the  above  number  of 
597,159,420,  the  large  proportion  of  409,052,644  is  the  product  of 
stage-coaches  which  are  licensed  to  run  from  London  to  various  parts 
of  the  kingdom.  The  licenses,  which  have  formed  the  groundwork  of 
the  calculations,  include  all  public  conveyances  proceeding  between  one 
part  of  England  and  another  part  of  England,  as  well  as  those  convey- 
ances which  travel  between  England  and  Scotland,  but  not  such  as  begin 
and  end  their  journeys  in  Scotland  ;  and  the  travelling  in  Ireland  is 
wholly  excluded. 

"^riiere  were  in  1837,  54  four-horse,  and  49  pair-horse  mail-coaches  in 
England.  The  greatest  speed  attained  by  any  of  these  was  10|  miles 
per  hour,  and  the  slovvest  speed  of  any  6  miles,  the  average  of  the  whole 
being  81  miles  per  hour.  There  were  besides  30  four-horse  mails  in 
Ireland,  and  10  in  Scotland.  The  number  of  stage-coaches,  including 
mails,  licensed  by  the  Commissioners  of  Stamps  at  the  beginning  of 
1837,  was  3026.  Of  this  number  about  one-half  (1507)  began  or 
ended  their  journeys  in  London. 


302  riiOGRESS  OF  THE  NATION.  [sec.  m. 


CHAPTER  III. 


CANALS. 


Beginning  of  Canal-making  in  England — Utility  of  the  Duke  of  Bridgewater's  Canals — 
Length  of  Navigable  Kivers  and  Canals  in  England — Inland  Navigation  in  Ireland — 
Neglect  of  Natural  Facilities  in  that  Country  —Improvement  of  the  Shannon — Traffic 
on  Grand  and  Royal  Canals  and  River  Barrow  —  Ulster  Canal — Caledonian  Canal — 
Crinan  Canal — Canals  begun  and  finished  since  1801 — Canals  of  France — Of  America. 

The  greatest  era  of  caual -constructing  in  England  was  during  the  latter 
half  of  the  last  century.  Some  efforts  were  made  at  earlier  periods  for 
the  introduction  of  this  kind  of  inland  navigation,  but  were  without 
success  :  and  we  may  fairly  date  the  origin  of  English  canals  from  the 
Act  of  1755,  under  the  authority  of  which  a  canal  about  11  miles  in 
length  was  executed,  which  commences  in  the  river  Mersey,  at  the  mouth 
of  Sankey-brook,  alongside  which  it  runs  in  a  northerly  direction  to 
Gerrard's  Bridge  and  St.  Helen's. 

In  1759,  before  the  Sankey-brook  Canal  was  finished,  the  Duke  of 
Bridgewater  obtained  his  first  Act  of  Parliament,  empowering  him  to 
construct  those  stupendous  works  which,  from  the  boldness  of  their  de- 
sign and  the  masterly  manner  of  their  execution,  have  justly  obtained  for 
himself,  and  for  James  Brindley,  the  extraordinary  self-taught  genius 
by  whom  they  were  planned  and  executed,  a  renown  of  the  highest 
order.  These  works,  carried  forward  in  defiance  of  natural  diflliculties, 
which  were  at  that  time  deemed  insurmountable,  opened  a  new  era  in 
the  annals  of  inland  navigation,  and  though  they  may  since  have  been 
equalled,  have  never  been  surpassed. 

The  great  public  utility  of  these  canals  of  tlie  Duke  of  Bridgewater, 
and  the  immense  revenues  which  they  have  continued  to  produce  to  their 
proprietors,  have  acted  as  powerful  incentives  to  the  undertaking  of 
similar  works.  The  navigable  canals  used  for  the  transport  of  goods 
and  produce  in  England  alone  are  estimated  now  to  exceed  2200  miles 
in  length,  while  the  navigable  rivers  exceed  1800  miles,  making  together 
more  than  4000  miles  of  inland  navigation,  the  greatest  part  of  which 
has  been  created  or  rendered  available  during  the  last  eighty  years. 

In  the  Report  of  the  Select  Committee  of  the  House  of  Commons  on 
the  State  of  the  Poor  in  Ireland,  which  sat  in  1830,  it  was  with  truth 
remarked,  that  "  the  effect  of  opening  lines  of  inland  navigation,  when 


fUAP.  in.]  CANALS.  303 

formed  upon  proper  scientific  principles,  and  executed  with  due  economy, 
has  been,  on  the  concurrence  of  all  testimony,  the  extension  of  improved 
agriculture,  the  equalisation  of  prJces  of  fuel  and  provisions  in  difierent 
districts,  the  diminishing  the  danger  of  scarcity  in  both  of  these  neces- 
saries of  life,  and  advancing  the  general  improvement  of  the  condition 
of  the  people  by  the  creation  of  a  new,  vigorous,  and  continued  demand 
for  labour." 

^lost  of  the  works  of  this  kind  that  have  been  executed  have  produced 
to  the  adventurers  an  adequate  return  for  the  capital  expended.  This 
in  itself  may  be  considered  a  sufficient  test  of  their  iitility ;  but  even 
where  the  proprietors  have  not  reaped  a  fair  advantage  for  their  outlay, 
it  does  not  necessarily  follow  that,  as  regards  the  country  at  large,  the 
money  has  been  ill  bestowed.  On  this  head,  the  remarks  of  the  late 
Mr.  Nimrao,  upon  the  effects  of  the  canals  cut  in  Ireland,  will  be  found, 
with  some  modifications,  to  be  generally  applicable.  He  observes,  "  the 
inland  navigations  of  Ireland  are  chiefly  remarkable  for  being  undertaken, 
not  to  facilitate  any  existing  trade,  but  chiefly  to  promote  agriculture  in 
the  fertile  districts  of  the  interior,  to  create  a  trade  where  none  had 
previously  existed,  and  to  furnish  employment  for  the  poor.  The  success 
in  this  way  has  been  w'onderful,  and  though  the  adventurers  have  not  yet 
been  repaid,  and  perhaps  never  will  be,  the  benefit  to  the  public  and 
landed  property  of  the  kingdom  has  been  great  and  manifest.  The 
nation  has  been  saved  the  payment  of  a  bounty  of  100,000/.  per  annum 
for  bringing  corn  to  Dublin,  for  in  place  of  this  being  the  case  that  city 
has  now  become  one  of  the  first  corn-ports  of  Euro})e  ;  and  Ireland  in 
general,  which  half  a  century  ago  imported  corn  to  the  value  of  half  a 
million  annually,  has  now  a  surplus  produce  in  that  article  to  the  value 
of  4,000,000/.  per  annum,  while  the  whole  expenditure,  whether  in  public 
or  in  private  works  of  navigation,  even,  including  the  interest  paid  on 
loans,  hardly  amounted  to  3,000,000/. ">;Jv 

The  advantages  thus  strikingly  brought  forward  by  Mr.  Nimmo  have 
resulted  from  means  of  internal  intercourse,  which,  when  contrasted  with 
those  accomplished  in  England,  must  appear  insignificant,  The  Mhole 
extent  of  navigable  canals  at  this  moment  available  in  Ireland  does  not 
exceed  300  miles,  and,  including  navigable  rivers,  the  entire  water- com- 
munication is  not  much  beyond  500  miles  for  the  whole  island.  ^Vhat 
the  condition  of  that  fertile  country  might  become  if  its  means  of  commu- 
nication were  placed  upon  an  equal  footing  with  those  of  the  midland  and 
southern  counties  of  England,  is  a  question  of  the  highest  interest  to 
every  one  who  has  at  heart  the  moral  and  intellectual  advancement  of 
the  Irish  people,  and,  as  a  consequence,  the  general  prosperity  of  the 
United  Kingdom. 

It  is  not  the  least  singular  part  of  the  case,  that,  while  so  much  luis 
been  done  in  England  to  supply  a  natural  deficiency  of  water-communi- 


304  rnoaHESS  of  the  nation.  [sec.  m. 

cation,  the  existing  facilities  for  executing  such  works  in  Ireland  liave, 
on  the  contrary,  been  of  the  most  encouraging  description.  The  neglect 
which  these  facilities  have  met  with  is-not  to  be  accounted  for  upon  the 
generally  operating  principle,  that  where  nature  has  done  much,  there 
human  ingenuity  is  less  called  forth.  The  nc^gl^ct  of  the  people  to  take 
advantage  of  the  boons  of  nature  has  for  the  most  part  been  such  as  to 
render  them  of  none  effect.  The  Shannon,  the  most  majestic  river  in 
the  United  Kingdom,  which,  with  its  lakes  and  lateral  branches,  receives 
the  drainage  of  a  considerable  portion  of  Ireland,  and  aj)pears  formed 
by  nature  to  act  as  the  great  artery  of  the  island,  for  facilitating  its 
agricultural  and  commercial  operations,  by  marking  out  a  line  for  the 
expeditious  and  cheap  conveyance  of  produce  and  merchandise,  required 
only  a  little  assistiince  from  art  to  bring  all  its  usefulness  to  bear  upon 
the  prosperity  of  the  country  ;  yet  this  little  was  long  withheld,  and  the 
grand  designs  of  nature  frustrated  through  the  apathy,  or  something 
even  less  excusable,  of  the  people  or  government,  so  that  this  river  was 
not  inaptly  compared  to  a  sealed  hook.  This  noble  stream  flows  during  its 
course  230  miles  through  the  centre  of  the  island,  and  may  be  said  to 
offer  the  blessings  of  commerce  and  its  civilizing  results  to  10  out  of  32 
of  the  counties  into  which  Ireland  is  divided. 

The  great  capabilities  of  the  river  Shannon  have  been  long  acknow- 
ledged. At  the  Summer  Assizes  of  1794,  the  Hish  Sheriffs  and  Grand 
Juries  of  the  counties  of  Roscommon,  Leitrim,  Mayo,  Galway,  Clare, 
Limerick,  King's  County,  and  Tipperary,  resolved  that  "  the  com- 
pleting of  the  navigation  of  the  river  Shannon,  and  the  great  rivers 
adjoining  thereto,  from  Lough  Allen  to  Limerick,  will  tend  effectually 
to  improve  and  open  the  home  and  foreign  markets  to  the  produce  of 
more  than  2,000,000  of  acres  of  land  in  the  heart  of  the  kingdom  ;  and 
that  the  execution  of  this  great  navigation  will  effectually  advance  the 
commerce,  manufactures,  agriculture,  and  population  of  this  kingdom, 
and  the  consequent  strength  of  the  empire  at  large." 

Through  an  imaccountable  want  of  enterprise  and  even  common 
worldly  forethought  on  the  part  of  those  landholders  whose  properties 
would  have  been  improved  by  following  up  the  recommendation  embodied 
in  the  foregoing  resolution,  nothing  eff(;ctual  to  that  end  was  done  during 
the  forty  years  that  followed  this  declaration.  In  the  three  years  fi-om 
1818  to  1820  Parliament  indeed  voted  21,000/.  for  making  or  repairing 
works  on  the  Shannon,  but  these  grants  appear  to  have  been  expended 
with  but  little  judgment. 

In  a  Report  addressed  to  the  Government  so  recently  as  the  30th  of 
April,  1833,  by  Colonel  Burgoyne,  the  Chief  Commissioner  of  the 
Board  of  Public  Works  in  Ireland,  the  neglect  here  mentioned  is  thus 
noticed :  "  It  is  indeed  surprising  to  find  so  noble  a  river,  running 
through  so  fine  a  country,  in  such  a  state  of  neglect.     The  soil  on  its 


CHAP.  III.]  CANALS.  305 

hanks  is  of  the  most  fertile  nature ;  iron,  marble,  slate,  and  various 
other  productions  of  superior  quality  are  also  to  be  found  in  abundance. 
Though  great  capabilities  exist  for  easy  intercourse,  a  perfect  stagnation 
unhapj)ily  prevails  ;  and,  where  forests  of  masts,  and  the  bustling  activity 
of  commerce  should  be  witnessed,  the  scene  is  desolate  and  only 
varied  occasionally  by  the  passage  of  some  straggling  boat,  which  with 
difficulty,  and  perha])s  with  only  half  a  cargo,  is  striving  to  make  its 
way  to  one  of  the  Dublin  canals.  There  is,  perhaps,  no  part  of  the 
British  dominions  where  such  an  opening  is  presented  for  prospective 
advantages." 

From  a  very  remote  period,  almost  the  only  use  made  of  this  river, 
through  a  great  part  of  its  course,  was  to  convert  it  into  a  fish-pond  ;. 
its  channel  was  artificially  obstructed,  and  rapids  were  created  in  order 
to  provide  "  eel  and  salmon  weirs,  which  were  established  at  pleasure, 
under  authority  of  the  proprietors  of  the  banks,  and  presented  the 
greatest  difficulties  in  the  way  of  navigation." 

At  length  the  improvement  of  this  river  w^as  taken  seriously  in  hand 
by  Government.  Accurate  surveys  of  the  whole  of  its  line  w'ere  made 
by  competent  engineers,  whose  reports  were  laid  before  Parliament : 
plans  were  formed  for  rendering  the  stream  navigable  throughout  its 
course,  from  Lough  Allen  in  the  county  of  Leitrim  to  its  mouth ;  and 
an  Act  was  passed  on  the  Uth  of  September,  1835  (5  &  6  Wm.  IV., 
c.  67),  authorizing  the  completion  of  the  necessary  works  under 
Commissioners  nominated  by  the  Treasury,  with  power  to  remove 
obstructions  and  to  annul  any  private  rights  that  might  exist  unfavour- 
able to  the  object,  making  compensation  for  the  same.  The  expense 
of  these  works  was,  in  the  first  instance,  to  be  wholly  defrayed  out  of  the 
public  revenue  ;  one-half  of  the  sum,  whatever  it  might  be,  to  be  made 
a  free  grant,  and  the  other  half  to  be  repaid  by  twelve  half-yearly 
instalments,  out  of  the  surplus  tolls  ;  and  in  the  event  of  these  being 
insufficient,  power  was  giveu  to  the  Commissioners  to  raise  the  defi- 
ciency by  a  local  rate  or  assessment  upon  the  adjoining  counties  and 
districts,  in  proportions  and  according  to  the  particular  extent  of  the 
benefits  which  each  may  be  supposed  to  have  derived  from  the  improve  - 
ments. 

The  money  expended  by  the  Government  Commissioners  in  the  execution 
of  their  task  amounted,  at  the  end  of  1849,  to  upw^ards  of  500,000/.,  by 
means  of  which  various  improvements  have  been  made  in  the  navigation 
below  Limerick,  and  the  river  has  been  thrown  uninterruptedly  open 
between  that  city  and  Lough  Allen,  a  distance  of  143  miles  in  a  direct 
course  ;  so  that  this  noble  river  has  been  made  available  for  steam-boats 
and  other  vessels  of  considerable  burthen  from  its  mouth  to  Lough  Allen, 
opening  a  continuous  navigation  of  more  than  190  miles,  and  providing 

X 


306  PROGRESS  OF  THE  NATION.  [sec.  in. 

an  excellent  water-communication  between  Limerick  and  Dublin,  and 
the  manufacturing  towns  in  the  north  of  England. 

It  is  questionable  whether  the  mode  adopted  for  obtaining  repayment 
of  half  the  cost  of  the  works  be  the  most  judicious  that  could  have  been 
found.  It  certainly  aj)pears  equitable  that  those  who  will  in  a  peculiar 
manner  benefit  by  the  improvements  should  repay  at  least  a  part  of  the 
cost :  and  if  the  proprietors  of  estates  thus  circumstanced  had  been 
called  upon  to  contribute  towards  the  gradual  extinction  of  the  debt 
incurred  to  the  public,  they  could  have  had  no  just  cause  of  complaint, 
since  they  would  liave  found  themselves  benefited  in  a  far  greater  degree 
than  could  be  counterbalanced  by  the  charge.  But  it  is  of  the  very 
gi-eatest  importance  that  the  high  roads  of  commerce,  and  especially 
where  a  traffic  has  to  be  created,  should  not  be  encumbered  with  heavy 
tolls.  Bv  biirthening  the  navigation  at  the  very  commencement,  when 
encouragement  is  most  needed,  with  so  heavy  a  sum  annually  as  one- 
twelfth  part  of  the  whole  expenditure,  it  is  much  to  be  feared  that  the 
rate  of  toll  must  be  fixed  so  high  as  to  act  as  a  considerable  discourage- 
ment. It  may  be  questioned  whether  it  would  not  be  more  for  the 
advantage  of  the  landowners  themselves  m  the  counties  through  which 
the  navigation  is  carried,  at  once  to  charge  themselves  with  the  gradual 
redemption  of  the  debt,  rather  than  attempt  to  throw  the  burthen 
upon  the  public  at  large.  The  course  proposed  may  place  an  obstacle 
in  the  way  of  that  free  intercourse  by  which  new  markets  might  be 
opened  for  their  products,  and  the  resources  of  the  soil  might  be 
rendered  capable  of  a  full  development,  through  the  ample  sup{)ly  of 
manures  essential  to  the  perfection  of  agricultural  labours,  and  which, 
although  lying  comparatively  at  their  doors,  had  previously  been  un- 
attainable through  the  absence  of  a  ready  and  especially  a  cheap  mode 
of  conveyance. 

There  are  considerations  connected  with  the  peculiar  circumstances 
in  which  the  popidation  of  the  south  and  west  of  Ireland  are  placed, 
which  seem  to  give  additional  cogency  to  the  reasons  here  urged  in 
favour  of  cheapening  the  means  of  transport.  What  is  principally 
wanted  towards  ameliorating  the  physical  condition  of  the  working 
classes  of  Ireland,  is  a  steady  market  for  their  labour.  It  was  the  want 
of  certain  employment  which,  until  the  establishment  of  a  poor  law,  drove 
them  of  necessity  into  the  system  of  hiring,  each  one  for  himself,"  one  or 
two  acres  or  even  a  few  roods  of  ground,  at  an  exorbitant  rent,  as  the 
only  resource  left  against  absolute  starvation.  Let  the  value  of  farms 
be  improved  by  the  means  above  stated,  and  there  can  exist  no  reason 
why  their  proprietors  should  not  retain  the  occupation  of  the  land,  and 
give  continuous  employment  to  an  adequate  numbdr  of  labourers.  The 
improvement  of  internal  navigation,  the  opening  of  roads,  and  the  con- 


CHAP.  HI.]  CANALS.  307 

struction  of  bridges,  during  their  progress,  give  employment  to  great 
numbers  of  labourers,  who,  in  proportion  as  these  works  are  completed, 
by  that  very  means  find  a  demand  for  their  labour  created  which  is  calcu- 
lated to  avert  some  of  the  difficulties  that  have  been  found  to  accompany 
the  early  stages  of  a  poor  law. 

The  Commissioners  for  Inquiring  into  the  Condition  of  the  Poorer 
Classes  in  Ireland,  proposed,  in  their  Third  Report,  the  appointment  of  a 
Board  of  Improvement,  which  should  have  power  "  to  enforce  improve- 
ments in  property  at  the  expense  of  the  property  improved,"  upon  the 
same  principle  as  that  adopted  in  the  laws  which  form  the  constitution 
of  the  Bedford  Level  Corporation  in  England  :  that  draining  and  fencing, 
wherever  necessary,  should  be  enforced  by  law  under  the  directions  of 
Local  Commissioners  to  be  appointed  in  every  district,  and  who  should 
be  under  the  control  of  the  Board  of  Improvement :  that  the  funds  re- 
quired for  carrying  on  such  works,  and  for  the  making  of  roads  and 
bridges,  might  be  advanced  by  the  issue  of  Government  Exchequer  Bills, 
the  interest  and  redemption  of  which  should  be  provided  for  by  means 
of  rates  made  upon  the  property  in  each  district :  and  that  in  order  to 
instruct  the  cultivators  in  the  best  methods  of  managing  their  land, 
model  farms  should  be  established  in  every  district,  and  each  farm  be 
placed  under  ihe  direction  of  a  person  competent  to  give  instructions,  and 
practically  to  exhibit  their  value,  by  introducing  the  most  approved  course 
of  cropping  upon  the  farm  under  his  care. 

Superadded  to  these  preparations,  the  Commissioners  strongly  recom- 
mended an  extensive  system  of  emigration,  "  not  by  any  means  as  the 
main  relief  for  the  evils  of  Ireland,  but  as  an  auxiliary  essential  to  a 
commencing  com'se  of  amelioration." 

Having  brought  these  preparations  into  operation,  the  Commissioners 
are  of  opinion  "  that  provision  should  be  made  by  law  towards  the  relief 
of  the  aged  and  infirm,  orphans,  helpless  widows  with  young  children, 
and  destitute  persons  in  general." 

Two  methods  are  pointed  out  in  the  Report  whereby  the  funds  for  this 
purpose  may  be  provided.  One  of  these— to  the  adoption  of  which  the 
majority  of  the  Commissioners  were  inclined — suggests  that  those  funds 
"  should  be  provided  in  part  by  the  public  through  a  national  rate,  and 
in  part  by  private  associations,  which,  aided  by  the  public,  should  be 
authorized  to  establish  mendicity  houses  and  alms-houses,  and  to  admi- 
nister relief  to  the  poor  at  their  own  dwellings,  subject,  however,  to  the 
superintendence  and  control  of  the  Poor  Law  Commissioners."  The 
second  method  pointed  out  is,  that  "  the  whole  of  the  funds  should  be 
pro^'ided  by  the  public,  one  portion  by  a  national  rate,  and  another  by 
a  local  rate,  and  should  be  administered,  as  in  England,  by  the  Board 
of  Guardians  of  each  district." 

Allusion  has  already  been  made  (p.  61)  to  the  different  proportions 


308  PROGRESS  OF  THE  NATION.  [sec.  in. 

in  which  the  population  of  Groat  Britain  and  of  Ireland  arc  engaged 
in  agricultural  pursuits.  It  is  calculated  that  by  draining  and  reclaim- 
ing bogs,  about  five  millions  of  acres  may  be  additionally  brought  into 
cultivation  in  Ireland,  when  the  quantity  of  cultivated  land  would  amount 
to  1 9,600,000  acres.  If  the  proportionate  number  of  labourers  employed 
upon  this  quantity  of  land  were  assimilated  to  the  number  employed  in 
England,  it  would  give  occupation  to  about  605,000  labourers,  being 
very  few  beyond  one-half  the  number  of  male  agricultural  labourers  of 
Ireland,  as  ascerti\ined  at  the  census  of  1841. 

The  course  here  proposed  could  not  be  otherwise  than  gradually 
adopted,  and  we  may  hope  that  in  the  same  degree  the  Irish  people  may 
be  brought  to  exhibit  other  evidences  of  their  improved  condition — that 
they  may  avail  themselves  of  the  great  natural  facilities  which  their 
country  offers  for  extended  commercial  intercourse,  and  for  the  estab- 
lishment of  manufactures.  "  It  has  been  questioned,"  say  the  Commis- 
sioners, from  whose  Report  so  many  quotations  have  already  been  made, 
"  whether  Ireland  possesses  sufficient  coals  within  herself  for  manufac- 
tures ;  but  coals  are  now  carried  to  Ireland  so  rapidly  and  at  so  little 
cost  from  the  English  collieries,  that  manufactures  cannot  now  be  pre- 
vented from  spreading  in  Ireland  by  want  of  fuel.  What  they  are 
prevented  by  is  want  of  order,  of  peace,  of  obedience  to  the  laws,  and 
that  security  of  property  which  never  can  exist  until  the  general  habits 
and  condition  of  the  people  are  thoroughly  improved." 

Various  sums  have  from  time  to  time  since  the  Union  been  granted 
by  the  Imperial  Parliament  for  the  promotion  of  public  works,  with  the 
view  of  providing  employment  for  the  people  in  Ireland ;  but  although 
these  grants  amount  in  the  aggregate  to  a  large  sum,  their  application 
has  been  productive  only  of  partial  and  temporary  good. 

That  the  sums  so  expended  by  the  country  at  large  for  the  improve- 
ment of  internal  communications  in  Ireland  have  not  been  unproductive, 
may  be  fairly  inferred  from  the  following  statement  of  traffic  upon  the 
Grand  and  Royal  Canals  and  the  Barrow  Navigation,  on  the  average 
of  the  three  years  1821  to  1823,  when  compared  with  the  average  of 
the  three  years  from  1831  to  1833  : — 

Average  of  Traffic    Average  of  Traffic 

1821  to  1823.  1831  to  1833. 

Tons.  Tons. 

Grand  Canal 140,236  227,169 

Koyal  Canal 88,190  141,973 

River  Barrow,  down      .      .  23,770  35,487 

„              up           .      ,  19,478  30,558 


Tons     .      .     271,074  435,187 


Showing  an  increase  of  traffic  in  ten  years  amounting  to  60  per  cent.^ 

*  There  does  not  appear  to  have  been  any  increase  in  the  traffic  since  1833. 


cuAF.  ui.J  CANALS.  300 

The  Grand  and  Royal  Canals  of  Ireland  were  constructed  upon  a 
scale  of  magnitude  far  greater  than  was  necessary,  and  consequently 
at  a  much  more  considerable  cost  than  would  have  sufficed  for  the 
attainment  of  the  objects  in  view ;  still  there  is  reason  to  hope  that  as  a 
money  speculation  they  might  be  brought  to  pay  the  proprietors,  when, 
as  we  may  hope,  the  resources  of  the  country  shall  be  further  developed 
than  they  are  at  present.  From  the  beginning  of  the  present  century  to 
the  year  1846  Parliamentary  grants  were  made  in  favour  of  public 
works  in  Ireland,  amounting  to  more  than  2,000,000/.,  and  expended 
chiefly  upon  undertakings  connected  with  this  branch  of  our  inquiry. 

It  appears  that  a  proper  appreciation  of  the  value  of  inland  navigation 
to  the  country  is  far  from  being  generally  felt  in  Ireland.  So  long  ago 
as  the  year  1824,  a  canal  was  projected,  and  an  Act  of  Parliament  ob- 
tained, at  the  instance  of  some  influential  noblemen  and  gentlemen 
connected  with  the  north  of  Ireland,  authorizing  the  formation  of  an 
incorporate  company  for  the  construction  of  the  necessary  -w  orks  to  con- 
nect Lough  Erne  with  Lough  Neagh,  and  thus  by  a  cutting,  forty-six 
English  miles  in  length,  to  render  available  a  continuous  navigation  of 
130  miles.  Tiie  navigation  as  proposed  would  intersect  Ireland  from  east 
to  west,  passing  through  populous  and  fertile  agricultural  districts,  where 
theretofore  the  only  practicable  method  of  conveying  the  produce  of  the 
soil  to  market,  or  to  the  ports  of  shipment,  was  the  tedious  and  expen- 
sive one  of  carriage  on  the  backs  of  horses.  The  whole  cost  of  the 
undertaking  was  under  200,000/.,  of  which  sum  Government  con- 
sented to  advance  three-fifths,  at  a  low  rate  of  interest ;  yet  it  has  only 
been  after  years  of  anxious  efforts  on  the  part  of  the  promoters,  that 
subscribers  could  be  found  willing  to  advance  the  remaining  two-fifths. 
This  work,  under  the  name  of  "The  Ulster  Canal,"  has  been  com- 
pleted according  to  the  plans  of  the  late  jN^'.  Telford,  and  promises  to  '^-^'^^^^ 
produce  great  advantages  to  the  counties  of  Fermanagh,  Tyrone, 
Donegal,  Leitrira,  and  Cavan.  It  was  partially  opened  for  use  in 
November,  1837,  and  completed  a  few  years  thereafter.*  During  its 
progress  this  work  proved  a  great  blessing  to  the  district  through  which 
it  passes ;  it  gave  constant  employment  at  fair  wages  to  a  great  number 
of  labourers,  and  was  the  means  of  reclaiming  many  among  them  from 
those  habits  of  reckless  indifference  and  that  passion  for  ardent  spirits 
which  are  so  fatal  to  the  happiness  of  the  working  classes  in  Ireland. 
AMtli  the  power  of  saving  out  of  their  wages,  the  habit  has  arisen.  The 
whiskey -shop  has  been  abandoned,  and  several  among  those  who  were 


*  The  Ulster  Canal  has  now  been  for  some  time  opened  for  traffic,  and  promises  to  be  of 
great  and  increasing  benefit  to  the  district  through  which  it  passes,  by  affording  an  outlet 
for  agricultural  produce.  It  was  of  great  use  in  1847  in  conveying  food  in  the  contrary 
direction  from  the  ports  to  the  interior  of  the  country.  It  has  not  hitherto  yielded  any 
revenue  to  the  shareholders. 


310  PROGRESS  OF  THE  NATION.  [sec.  m. 

first  employed  laid  by  sufficient  money  to  enable  them  to  emigrate  to 
the  United  States  and  to  Canada,  where  they  have  constituted  them- 
selves proprietors,  and  have  before  them  the  certainty  of  future  comfort 
and  independence. 

Very  early  in  the  present  century  the  Caledonian  Canal  was  projected 
and  commenced.  This  truly  magnificent  work  consists  of  a  series  of 
canals  and  navigable  lochs,  extending  from  Corpach  Basin,  in  the  tide- 
way of  Loch  Eil,  at  the  north  end  of  Linnhe  Loch,  near  Fort  William, 
to  the  Moray  Firth,  on  the  west  side  of  Inverness.  The  total  length  of 
this  navigation  is  60.^  miles,  of  which  23  miles  are  artificial  cutting, 
and  the  remaining  37  miles  are  natural  lochs  or  lakes  wdiich  have  been 
rendered  navigable.  This  canal  being  projected  chiefly  with  a  view  to 
facilitate  the  trade  between  the  Baltic,,  the  western  ports  of  Scotland, 
and  Ireland,  is  15  feet  deep  throughout ;  its  surface  breadth  is  120  feet, 
and  its  breadth  at  bottom,  50  feet.  Its  summit  level  is  91  feet  above 
the  sea  at  low  water ;  it  has  28  locks,  which  are  each  172  feet  long. 
Eight  of  these  locks,  situated  at  the  eastern  side  of  this  navigation,  to 
which  the  name  of  Neptune's  Staircase  has  been  given,  are  considered 
to  be  works  of  the  very  first  order,  and  attest  the  skill  of  the  engineer, 
the  late  Mr.  Telford.  The  cost  of  this  canal,  according  to  the  Report  of 
the  Commissioners  appointed  for  superintending  its  execution,  has  been 
1,149,613/.  :  it  was  opened  for  traffic  in  October,  1822,  but  has  hitherto 
been  little  used,  and  as  a  speculation  may  be  considered  unprofitable; 
the  tolls  received  when  set  against  the  cost  of  maintaining  the  canal, 
leaving  a  deficiency  exclusive  of  any  charge  for  interest  on  the  capital 
expended.  This  result  has  been  in  part  attributed  to  the  discriminating 
duties  upon  European  timber  in  favour  of  our  North  American  colonies, 
which  materially  interfered  with  the  branch  of  trade  upon  which  reli- 
ance was  chiefly  placed  for  producing  an  adequate  return  for  the  capital 
expended. 

It  appears  from  the  Reports  made  by  the  Commissioners  to  whom  the 
management  of  this  canal  is  intrusted,  that  the  traflfic  upon  it  was  pro- 
gressively increasing.  In  the  winter  of  1836-37,  several  Baltic  trading 
vessels  passed  through,  and  the  further  employment  of  steam-vessels 
opened  a  considerable  traffic  in  sheep  and  black  cattle  between  the  High- 
lands and  Glasgow.  This  last-mentioned  object  is  greatly  facilitated 
by  the  Crinan  Ship  Canal,  a  cutting  9^  miles  in  length,  and  12  to  15 
feet  deep,  across  an  isthmus  in  Argyleshire,  lying  between  Loch  Crinan 
and  Loch  Gilp.  The  summit  level  of  this  canal  is  58  feet  above  the 
level  of  the  sea,  and  is  attained  by  means  of  15  locks.  The  distance 
which  by  this  short  cutting  is  saved  between  the,  termination  of  the 
Caledonian  Canal  at  Fort  William  and  Glasgow  is  70  miles.  Besides 
the  cattle  trade  already  mentioned,  the  number  of  passengers  by  steam- 
boats is  considerable,  and  constantly  increasing,  having  been  11,344 


CHAP,  iii.j  CANALS.  311 

in  1835,  and  17,862  in  1836  :  this  canal  admits  vessels  of  160  tons 
burthen. 

There  passed  upon  the  Caledonian  (Janal  in  the  year  between  1st 
3Iay,  1836,  and  30th  April,  1837— 

Vessels  from  tlic  West  to  the  East  Sea    .     .     .  216 

„  „  East  to  the  West  Sea    .     .     .  249 

Passages  on  parts  of  the  canal 578 

„       made  by  steam-vessels 199 

1242 

The  tonnage  rates  upon  which  amounted  to  2,520/. 
The  canals  begun  and  completed  since  1800  within  the  United  King- 
dom are — 

Miles. 

Baybridge  Canal Sussex Length  3| 

Birmingham  and  Liverpool     ....  Staffordshire,  Shropshire,  and  Cheshire  .     .  39 

Bude  Haven  and  branches       ....     Cornwall  and  Devonshire 45 

Carlisle Cumberland Hi 

Croydon Kent  and  Surrey 9i 

Glastonbury Somersetshire 13j 

Grand  Surrey Surrey 4 

Grand  Union Leicestershire  and  Northamptonshire      .     .  45 

Leeds  and  Liverpool  (branches)  .     .     .     Yorkshire  and  Lancashire 7 

Leven Yorkshire 3 

Liskeard  and  Looe Cornwall 55 

Macclesfield Cheshire 29| 

Newport  Pagnell Buckinghamshire l| 

North  Walsham  and  Dilham   ....     Norfolk 7 

North  Wilts AViltshire 8 

Portsmouth  and  Arundel,  and  branches     Sussex  and  Hampshire 16 

Regent's ^liddlesex 8A 

Kochdale Yorkshire  and  Lancashire 3l| 

Royal  Military Kent  and  Sussex 30 

Sankcy-brook  (extension) Lancashire 3^ 

Sheffield Yorkshire 4 

Tavistock Devonshire 6 

Tliames  and  Medway Kent 7^ 

Wey  and  Arun Surrey  and  Sussex 18 

Wilts  and  Berks Wiltshire  and  Berkshire 52 

Caledonian Inverness-shire 60i 

Edinburgh  and  Glasgow  Union    .     .     .  Stirlingshire,    Linlithgowshire,    and    Edin- 
burghshire     30 

Glasgow,  Paisley,  and  Ardrossan       .     .  Aj'r,  Renfrew,  and  Lanarkshire     .     .     .     .  11 

Glenkenns Kirkcudbrightshire 25^ 

Ulster Fermanagh,  &c 46 

Total     .     .     .     5825 

A  statement  was  some  years  since  laid  upon  the  table  of  the  House 
of  Commons  containing  an  account  of  the  tonnage  received  upon  goods 
— principally  salt — conveyed  upon  the  river  Weaver,  which  was  ren- 
dered navigable  at  an  early  part  of  the  eighteenth  century.  Tolls  of 
this  kind  are  usually  received  by  private  associations,  and  it  is  there- 
fore difficult  to  obtain  any  statements  of  their  amount,  which,  as  the 
rates  are  seldom  varied,  would  afford  a  good  test  of  the  progress  of  the 
traffic  carried  on.  It  will  be  seen  from  the  following  figures  that  the 
quantity  of  goods  conveyed  upon  the  Weaver  amounted  in  1836-7  to 
nearly  double  what  it  was  at  the  beginning  of  the  present  century :  — 


312 


PHOGRESS  OF  THE  NATION. 


[sec.    III. 


All  Account  of  the  Gross  Amount  of  Tonnage  Dues  received  on  the  River  Weaver  and  the  Weston 
Canal,  in  each  Year  from  1801  to  1837. 


1800—  1 

1801—  2 

1802—  3 
1S03—  4 

1804—  5 

1805—  6 

1806—  7 

1807—  8 

1808—  9 
1809—10 
1810—11 
1811—12 
1812—13 


Gross 

Amount  of 

Tonnage 

received. 


£. 
15.407 
16.490 
U.S(T,) 
14,023 
15,659 
17,570 
16,630 
17,524 
17,076 
21,744 
23.846 
16,379 
20,590 


Years. 


1813—14 
1814—15 
181. 5 -16 
1816—17 
1817—18 
1818—19 
1819—20 
1820—21 
1821-22 
1822—23 
1823—24 
1824—25 


dross 

Amoui.t  of 

Tonnage 

receiveil. 


£. 
18,357 
29.091 
23; 194 
13.169 
15,600 
22,474 
19,116 
19,062 
16,701 
17,758 
21,122 
21,. 332 


1825—26 
1826—27 
1827—28 
1828—29 
1829—30 
1830—31 
1831—32 
1 832-. 33 
1833—34 
1834—35 
1835—36 
1836—37 


Gross 

Amount  of 

Tonnajje 

received. 


£. 
22,988 
20,868 
23,017 
26,594 
28,046 
30,221 
28,870 
29,800 
32,156 
29,384 
26,270 
27,916 


The  whole  extent  of  the  canals  existing  in  France  at  the  end  of  the 
last  century  was  very  little  beyond  500  English  miles.  Eleven  lines, 
some  of  which  were  indeed  projected  and  even  begun  before  the  French 
Revolution,  have  since  been  completed,  or  are  now  on  the  point  of  being 
so.  These  canals,  eleven  in  number,  are  together  1250  English  miles 
long,  and  have  cost  the  French  Government  more  than  ten  millions 
sterling.     The  eleven  canals  are — 

Miles. 

1.  Rhone  and  Rhine  Canal  from  St.  Jean  de  Losne  to  Strasburg     .      Length  203 

2.  Somme                     „            „       St.  Limin  to  St.  Valery 911 

3.  Ardennes                 „            „       Donchery  to  Neufchatcl  and  Vouziers  .      .  eT 

4.  Burgundy                „            „       Roche  sur  Yonnc  to  St.  Jean  de  Losne  .      .  141 

5.  Nantes  and  Brest  „            „       Kantes  to  Brest 218 

6.  lUe  and  Ranee        „            „       Rennes  to  Dinau 50 

7.  Blavet                      „            „       Pontivy  to  Hennebon 34^ 

8.  Aries  and  Bouc      „            „       Aries  to  Bouc 27^ 

9.  Nivernais                „            „       Auxerre  to  Decise 103 

10.  Berry                       „            „       Rhimbe  to  Sancoins,  Tours,  and  Montlu9on  186 

11-  Loire                        „            „       De'goin  to  Briare 134 

Total  ....    12491 


Some  magnificent  works  of  this  kind  have  been  executed  in  the 
United  States  of  America,  where  in  1840  canals  were  in  actual  opera- 
tion, affording  4032  miles  of  artificial  inland  navigation,  distributed  in 
the  several  States  as  follows  : — 


Canals. 

Miles. 

Maine     . 

.      1 

.50-50 

New  Hampshire 

.     5 

11-13 

Vermont 

.     3 

1-06 

Massachusetts 

.     6 

103 -.50 

Connecticut 

2 

61 -.50 

New  York    .     . 

.   14 

985-94 

New  Jersey 

.     3 

147-75 

Pennsylvania    . 

.   16 

973-81 

Delaware 

.     1 

13-63 

Maryland     . 

.     1 

136- 

Virginia       .     . 

.     4 

216-25 

Canals.      Miles. 

North  Carolina 

.     2 

13-50 

South  Carolina. 

,     8 

.52-45 

Georgia 

.     2 

28- 

Alabama 

.     2 

51-75 

Louisiana     . 

.     4 

99-25 

Illinois    ,     .     .  J  . 

.     1 

105-90 

Indiana  .... 

.     2 

217- 

Ohio 

.   10 

764- 

Total 

4,0.32-92 

CI1.U-.  III.]  CAXALS.  :313 

Most  of  the  canals  constructed  on  the  continent  of  Europe  have  been 
executed  at  the  expense  of  the  governments  of  the  countries  in  which 
they  are  situated.  In  England,  nearly  all  our  canals  owe  their  exist- 
ence to  the  efforts  of  individuals  or  of  joint-stock  associations.  In  the 
United  States  of  America  they  have  been  made  by  associations  of  indi- 
viduals, and  by  the  legislatures  of  the  separate  States,  aided  occasionally 
by  subscriptions  on  the  part  of  the  general  government,  and  by  loans  ob- 
tained in  England. 

The  splendid  canal  which  connects  the  waters  of  the  Hudson  with 
Lake  Erie  surpasses  by  far  in  extent  any  similar  work  in  Europe,  and 
it  is  questioned  whether  any  integral  line  of  artificial  navigation  in  China 
is  of  equal  extent.  It  measures  363  miles,  and  is  as  remarkable  for 
the  rapidity  with  which  it  was  completed,  as  for  its  extent.  The  difference 
in  level  to  be  overcome  was  688  feet,  and  required  84  locks.  The  work 
was  projected,  and  surveys  were  made,  by  order  of  the  legislature  of 
New  York  in  1808  ;  but  difficulties  of  various  kinds,  among  which  was 
the  war  wdth  England,  prevented  the  actual  beginning  of  the  work  until 
July,  1817  ;  it  was  completed  in  October,  1825,  at  an  expense  of  more 
than  ten  millions  of  dollars.  An  enlargement  of  this  canal  was  ordered 
by  the  State  Legislature  to  be  undertaken  in  1835.  The  cost  of  this 
enlargement  was  estimated  at  more  than  23  millions  of  dollars.  More 
than  ten  millions  had  been  expended  in  1841.  Another  canal,  64  miles 
long,  was  finished  in  1823,  connecting  the  Erie  Canal  with  the  waters  of 
Lake  Champlain,  and  cost  1,200,000  dollars.  The  utility  of  these  canals 
to  the  country  through  which  they  pass  may  be  estimated  from  the  amount 
of  the  tolls  collected,  which  in  the  18  years  from  1831  to  1848  was  as 
follows : — 


Years. 

PoUars. 

Years. 

Dollars. 

Years. 

Dollars. 

1831 

1,194, (510 

1837 

1.238,896 

1843 

1,982,623 

1832 

1,196,008 

1838 

1,518.299 

1844 

2,1.54,2.34 

1833 

1,422,605 

1839 

1,617,246 

1845 

2,067,061 

1834 

1,294,649 

1840 

1,697,334 

1846 

2,461,975 

183.5 

1,492,811 

1841 

1,931,491 

1847 

3,333,347 

1836 

1,614,336 

1842 

1,664,904 

1848 

2,947,881 

The  Erie  Canal  is  the  property  of  the  State  of  New  York,  which  has 
also  constructed  and  derives  a  revenue  from  six  other  canals,  the  aggre- 
gate length  of  which  is  220  miles  The  tolls  collected  on  the  seven 
canals  from  1843  to  1848  were  : — 


Years. 

Dollars. 

Years. 

Dollars. 

Years. 

Dollars. 

1843 

2,082,145 

1845 

2,646,117 

1847 

3,6.35,380 

1844 

2,446,038 

1846 

2,756,120 

1848 

3,279,443 

The  Delaware  and  Hudson  Canal,  109  miles  long,  is  the  property  of 
an  incorporated  company :  its  cost  w'as  2,200,000  dollars,  and  its  prin- 
cipal use  is  the  conveyance  of  coals  from  the  Pennsylvanian  mines  on  the 
Lackawana  river  to  the  city  of  New^  York.  An  extension  of  this  canal, 
36  miles  in  length,  has  been  completed  by  another  private  company. 


314  niOGllESS  OF  TIIK  NATION.  [sec.  hi. 

The  State  of  Pennsylvania  lias  not  been  backward  in  promoting  similar 
improvements.  In  a  report  made  by  the  Canal  Commissioners  to  the 
State  Legislature,  dated  31st  December,  1835,  it  is  stated,  that  "up- 
wards of  600  miles  of  canals  and  slack-water  navigation  "  have  been 
completed  since  1825,  in  addition  to  nearly  120  miles  of  railroads. 
The  success  which  has  attended  those  works  undertaken  by  the  State 
has  stimulated  private  adventurers  to  em.bark  in  similar  undertakings  ; 
so  that  at  the  time  the  Commissioners  made  their  report,  "  there  were 
completed,  or  in  course  of  construction,  about  400  miles  of  canal,  and 
520  miles  of  railroad  belonging  to  companies,  swelling  the  aggregate  to 
1000  miles  of  canal,  and  640  miles  of  railroad,  within  the  common- 
wealth." The  most  important  of  these  works  is  that  belonging  to  the 
State,  and  which  connects  Philadelphia  with  Pittsburg,  a  distance  of  394 
miles.  The  tolls  collected  on  the  State  canals  and  railroads  in  1835 
amounted  to  684,357  dollars.  In  the  State  of  Ohio,  which  scarcely  half 
a  century  ago  was  a  perfect  wilderness,  there  are  at  this  time  in  active 
and  profitable  operation  nearly  400  miles  of  artificial  navigation.  The 
Ohio  Canal,  which  connects  Lake  Erie  (and  consequently  the  city  of 
New  York)  with  the  Ohio  river,  is  324  miles  long,  and  was  completed 
in  October,  1832,  little  more  than  seven  years  from  the  date  of  its  com- 
mencement. By  the  works  here  described  an  uninterrupted  line  of 
navigation  has  been  secured  from  the  Bay  of  New  York  to  the  Gulf  of 
Mexico,  affording  means  for  expediting  the  produce  of  the  various  States 
through  which  it  is  carried,  and  thus  doing  more  towards  developing  the 
resources  of  the  country  than  might  otherwise  have  been  effected  in  the 
course  of  centuries. 

The  canals  that  have  been  thus  noticed  form  but  a  small  part  of  the 
artificial  inland  navigation  of  the  United  States,  as  appears  from  the  list 
already  given.  The  individual  works  are,  indeed,  too  numerous  to 
admit  of  their  description  here  ;  but  enough  has  been  said  to  show  the 
energy  with  which  these  public  improvements  are  taken  up  and  com- 
pleted by  the  American  citizens,  and  to  prove  the  judgment  with  which 
their  estimates  of  advantage  have  been  formed.  The  New  York  canals 
were  executed  with  the  capital  borrowed  on  credit  of  the  State  :  already 
a  large  part  of  their  cost  has  been  realized  from  the  tolls,  and  in  a  few 
years  the  State  will  be  in  possession  of  an  unincumbered  and  splendid 
income  from  this  source,  which  M-ill  lighten  considerably  the  burthen  of 
taxation  to  the  community.  ^ 


STEAM  NAVIGATION.  315 


CHAPTER  IV. 

STEAM    NAVIGATION. 

First  Attempts  at  Steam  Navigation— Steam-Vessels  built,  1814  to  1849— Steam-Vessels 

employed  in  British  Empire,  1849 — Annual  Progress,  1814  to  1849 — Changes  ell'ected  by 

Kthis  Invention — Its  Application  to  Commerce — Passage-Vessels    to    America — To  the 

West  Indies — To   India— Steam  Trading  Vessels   employed   in  CoaTsting  and  Foreign 

Trades— Steam-Vessels  belonging  to  various  Foreign  CountrfesT 

The  ajiplication  of  steam  power  to  the  purpose  of  propelling  vessels 
through  the  water,  although  proposed  one  hundred  years  ago  by  Jona- 
than Hulls,  and  attempted  in  France,  in  the  United  States  of  America, 
and  on  the  Forth  and  Clyde  Canal  between  the  years  1781  and  1790, 
was  not  succesfully  accomplished  until  after  the  beginning  of  the  pre- 
sent century.  The  first  practical  application  of  this  important  improve- 
ment was  made  by  Fulton,  who,  putting  in  execution  the  instruction  he 
had  gained  from  Mr.  Miller  of  Dalswinton,  by  witnessing  his  experi- 
ments on  the  Forth  and  Clyde  Canal,  established  a  steam-boat  in  1806 
or  1807  which  plied  successfully  on  the  river  Hudson,  between  New 
York  and  Albany — a  distance  of  160  miles.  The  first  steam-boat  that 
was  worked  for  hire  in  this  kingdom  was  the  Comet,  a  small  vessel  of 
40  feet  keel  and  10^  feet  beam,  with  an  engine  of  three-horse  power, 
which  plied  with  passengers  on  the  Clyde  in  1811  ;  two  years  later  the 
Elizabeth,  of  eight-horse  power,  and  the  Clyde,  of  fourteen-horse  power, 
were  placed  on  the  same  river.  Since  that  time  the  progress  of  this 
invention  has  been  rapid  to  a  degree  that  could  never  have  been  anti- 
cipated. 

From  a  return  made  by  the  Registrar-General  of  Shipping,  it  appears 
that  in  the  year  1849  there  were  employed  at  different  ports  in  the 
United  Kingdom,  and  her  colonies,  1296  steam-vessels,  the  aggregate 
bui'den  of  which  was  177,310  tons,  viz. : — 


Vessels. 

Tons. 

In  the  Ports  of  England     . 

.      .     865 

103,154 

„             Scotland    . 

.      .     166 

29,206 

„              Ireland 

.      .      HI 

26,369 

In  Guernsey,  Jersey,  &c.    . 

7 

955 

In  the  Colonies  .... 

.      .      147 

17,626 

1,296  177,310 


316 


rilOGRESR  OF  THE  NATION. 


[sec.    Til. 


These  were  exclusive  of  vessels  belonging  to  Government. 

The  number  and  tonnage  of  stcarn-vessels  built  and  registered  in  the 
United  Kingdom  and  the  British  Colonies,  in  each  year  from  1814  to 
1849  have  been  as  follows  :  — 


St  ram 

'essel.t  Built  (tnil  Jicpistcred  in  the  Uni 

cdK 

ingdom  and  the  British  Cohnies. 

Years. 

E 

i^'laml. 

Scotland. 

Ireland. 

United 
Kingdom, 

Plantations. 

Total. 

Vess. 

Tons. 

Vess. 

Tons. 

Vess. 

Tons. 

Vess. 

Tons. 

Vess. 

Tons. 

Vess. 

Tons. 

1814 

5 

285 

5 

285 

1 

387 

6 

672 

1815 

2 

"161 

7 

625 

9 

786 

1 

608 

10 

1,394 

1816 

4 

298 

. , 

270 

8 

568 

1 

670 

9 

1,238 

1817 

4 

227 

4 

194 

7 

421 

3 

1,633 

9 

2,0.54 

1818 

3 

1,124 

3 

216 

6 

1,340 

3 

1,198 

9 

2,538 

1819 

2 

175 

2 

167 

4 

342 

4 

342 

1820 

3 

102 

4 

403 

'i50 

8 

655 

"i 

'il6 

9 

771 

1821 

12 

1,463 

10 

1,545 

22 

3,008 

2 

258 

23 

3,266 

1822 

23 

2,080 

4 

369 

, , 

27 

2,449 

1 

185 

28 

2,634 

1823 

17 

2.344 

2 

125 

, , 

19 

2,469 

1 

52 

20 

2,521 

1824 

12 

i;687 

5 

547 

17 

2,234 

17 

2,234 

1825 

19 

2,600 

5 

403 

, , 

24 

3,003 

5 

l,'i89 

29 

4,192 

1826 

50 

5,920 

22 

2,718 

72 

8,638 

4 

404 

76 

9,042 

1827 

18 

2,264 

9 

994 

'ii8 

28 

3,376 

2 

408 

30 

3,784 

1828 

25 

1,687 

5 

352 

30 

2,039 

1 

246 

31 

2,285 

1829 

13 

1,080 

3 

671 

16 

1,751 

16 

1,751 

1830 

10 

931 

8 

814 

18 

1,745 

i 

"481 

19 

2,226 

1831 

24 

2,034 

7 

695 

31 

2,749 

5 

1,687 

36 

4,436 

1832 

19 

943 

14 

1,908 

,  , 

33 

2,851 

5 

1,239 

38 

4,090 

1833 

27 

1,964 

6 

964 

33 

2,928 

3 

1,017 

36 

3,945 

1834 

26 

3,453 

10 

1,675 

36 

5,128 

3 

628 

39 

5,756 

1835 

63 

6,844 

23 

4,080 

86 

10,924 

2 

357 

88 

11,281 

1836 

43 

5,924 

20 

2,834 

,  , 

63 

8,758 

6 

492 

69 

9,700 

1837 

53 

6,223 

22 

4,4,88 

958 

78 

11,669 

4 

478 

82 

12,147 

1838 

66 

6,286 

18 

3,263 

.. 

84 

9,549 

3 

288 

87 

9,837 

1839 

43 

2,885 

18 

2,968 

286 

62 

6,139 

3 

383 

65 

6,522 

1840 

59 

6,186 

16 

4,110 

.. 

75 

10,296 

3 

461 

78 

10,757 

1841 

38 

3,158 

9 

7,863 

1 

'342 

48 

11,363 

6 

1,028 

54 

12,391 

1842 

47 

9,605 

10 

2,999 

1 

1,112 

58 

13,716 

9 

1,215 

67 

14,931 

1843 

39 

3,858 

7 

2,271 

,  , 

46 

6,129 

7 

610 

53 

6,739 

1844 

50 

3,3.50 

13 

2,4.56 

307 

65 

6,113 

8 

817 

73 

6,930 

1845 

42 

6,544 

23 

4,3.50 

65 

10,894 

8 

1,056 

73 

11,950 

1846 

59 

11,831 

14 

3,399 

4 

'726 

77 

15,9.56 

11 

1,216 

88 

17,172 

1847 

78 

7,929 

24 

7,915 

326 

103 

16,170 

12 

1,163 

115 

17,333 

1848 

80 

5,343 

32 

9,381 

610 

114 

15,334 

14 

1,142 

128 

16,476 

1849 

43 

5,919 

24 

6,516 

63 

68 

12,498 

12 

982 

80 

13,480 

The  celerity  and  the  certainty  with  which  voyages  are  performed  by 
the  aid  of  steam-power,  joined  to  their  superiority  in  regard  to  safety, 
have  long  occasioned  steam-vessels  to  be  preferred  as  passage-vessels 
wherever  they  can  be  employed ;  and  within  the  last  few  }  ears  they 
have,  in  a  great  degree,  superseded  the  use  of  sailing-vessels  for  trading 
purposes  also,  where  the  distance  to  be  accomplished  is  not  very  great, 
and  where  the  bulk  of  the  goods  to  be  conveyed  is  not  considerable 
in  proportion  to  their  value.  A  very  large  portion  of  the  trade  between 
Hamburg  and  the  ports  of  the  United  Kingdom  is,  now  carried  on  by 
means  of  steam -vessels. 

The  progress  in  each  year,  from  their  first  introduction,  has  been  as 
follows : — 


CUAP.    IV. J 


STEAM  NAVIGATION. 


317 


3 

1   ^ 

c 

ca  cc  ri  o  "  1  -  CO  -f  .'-.  CO  ri  r~  00  O  I'l  C-:  -f  ir:  —  1^  .rj  —  — .  v:  -r  — .  1 ,  ,r.  o  d  '.o  Ti  -f  i~  '/^j  ^ 

I.-:  CO  -•  >--:  -t  '.-:  -f  CO  -M  •.-:  co  »  .r:  -.  co  X  -<•  -f  -^  —  co  -M  -j  -x  — .  co  C  -r  co  -o  i  -  b  co  .-  i  -  oo 
-t  -o  o  a-.  -)>  o  oi  •«  r-  —  r-  'M  ^-  -t  O  -M  -t  4  y5  c  I-  .r.  C-.  'M  1  -  I  -  CO  XI  c^.  ^  ta  ■?!  1  -  .-:  o  o 

„rH^,-(Mir|«COC<5rtW-T't'n!CCDI-0000O--6  —  --'MCO-ToSli 

1 

-2:22s?35s^2i§isy^si^iiii.^geiii|pA'^ 

J 

iiisioiiiiiiiiiiisggiiiiiiiig^giiiiii 

i 
> 

-^«^ooooo,o;;.oo>22oS22J:S5?5S^^^:S^^SSSf238g|?j^g 

a 

3 

^^^^^^ll^l^S^lllllg  J|||£|| 

'-' 

1^ 

••;••■•••     •  (N  (N(N(>J  5^  (MCOTt<  '*in«5«!t^OO«C0«T)'     •  W  «  «5  lO  O  t^ 

fi 

"1  So 

^3 

t2 

1 

-2225;^gSo3S||.-,g||||^|^2|||||||gfi|2J__ 

■3 

C 

2 

. .  .ssiiiiiisismsiggii^issiiisiigii 

c^-^-*ini!r>(ot^t^<c<^n<x>t--^t^t^'-j-^t^t^cc'>}n-^(o 

i 
> 

.     .     :--««^^0^=0;2^^g;-gOg<^COj-£5^g=.0.0.5jj-^g.3|^ 

13 

C 

1 

§ 

-iisiiSii^iiiiiiiSiisiiiSoiiiiiiiiii 

^<?«(N!N(Nw*in-*ininint-t-ooa>  —  wcoocj3»o3ajo-i  —  (M^cn 

> 

^'"'-**^2^S^S^SgS£^SSJ2f:j:|gg|g^||ggg|g22:| 

> 

c 

coo. ^  00  22  J^222Sgi?5Sg^S5^SS5?ii2SgSsS 

i 
> 

:«--2=^SSSg2SSS|§|||3||^|g||g|||gg|| 

2 
>< 

iililllliliiiliillliillliiiiiiiiiill 

— 

AVhen  the  public  has  been  for  some  time  accustomed  to  the  posses- 
sion of  any  great  improvement,  the  difficulties  and  disadvantages  which 
it  has  been  the  means  of  removing  cease  to  be  remembered,  and  we  no 
longer  value  at  their  just  rate  the  benefits  which  it  has  brought.  The 
following  paragraph,  extracted  from  a  popular  journal,  places  in  so 
strong  and  just  a  point  of  view  some  of  the  advantages  which  we 
owe  to  steam  navigation,  that  no  apology  is  required  for  its  insertion 
here  : — 

"  It  is  scarcely  half  a  century  ago  since  tilt-boats  for  the  conveyance 
of  passengers  to  and  from  London  to  Gravcscnd  were,  in  shape  and 


318  niOGRESS  OF  THE  NATION.  [sec.  hi. 

speed,  just  what  the  Trinity-house  hanast-hghters  are  at  present,  and 
taking  four  tides  and  more  for  the  completion  of  the  voyage.  They 
were  succeeded  by  the  Dundee  boats,  which  were,  as  fast  sailers,  both 
the  wonder  and  admiration  of  all  who  witnessed  the  iinprovement. 
They,  however,  were  of  the  most  inconvenient  nature,  as  the  passengers 
were  frequently  not  only  called  upon  to  embark  in  the  middle  of  the 
night,  in  order  to  have  the  first  of  the  flood,  and  after  tacking  and  beat- 
ins  about,  together  with  sometimes  too  much  wind,  sometimes  too  little 
wind,  or  none  at  all,  besides  being  huddled  in  a  low  inconvenient  cabin, 
were  frequently,  after  being  six  or  eight  hours  on  the  water,  compelled 
to  land  at  Woolwich,  Blackwall,  or  Greenwich,  and  then  have  to  find 
their  way  in  the  best  manner  they  could  to  the  metropolis.  At  length 
the  progress  of  science  introduced  steam  for  the  ferry,  which,  however, 
at  first,  generally  took  from  five  to  seven  hours  to  arrive  in  London,  a 
length  of  time  it  was  considered  a  desideratum  to  lessen.  On  Sunday 
last  the  Diamond  started  from  the  Gravesend  pier  at  4  p.m.,  landed  her 
passengers  in  London  and  returned,  and  at  9  minutes  before  8  o'clock 
was  again  at  her  moorings  oflF  the  town  pier :  thus  performing  the  two 
voyages,  a  distance  of  G4  miles  in  3  hours  and  40  minutes,  including 
stoppages."  It  should  have  been  stated  that  the  vessel  had  the  ad- 
vantage of  a  favourable  tide,  both  in  ascending  and  descending  the 
river. 

The  facility  in  moving  from  place  to  place,  joined  to  the  great 
economy,  both  of  time  and  of  money,  that  has  accompanied  the  adop- 
tion of  this  mode  of  propelling  vessels,  has  excited  the  locomotive  pro- 
pensities of  the  English  people  in  a  most  remarkable  degree.  The 
countless  thousands  who  now  annually  pass  in  steam-packets  up  and 
down  the  river  Thames,  seem,  almost  wholly  to  have  been  led  to  travel 
by  the  cheap  and  commodious  means  that  have  been  thus-  presented 
to  them,  since  the  amount  of  journeying  by  land  is  by  no  means  lessened. 
The  number  of  passengers  conveyed  between  London  and  Gravesend  by 
steam-packets  in  1835  was  ascertained  by  the  collector  of  the  pier-dues 
at  the  latter  town  to  have  been  670,452,  not  one  in  a  hundred  of  whom 
would  have  been  induced  to  make  use  of  the  Dundee  boats  just  de- 
scribed. It  was  stated  in  evidence  before  a  Committee  of  the  House  of 
Commons  in  1836,  that  at  least  1,057,000  passengers,  including  those 
to  and  from  Gravesend,  pass  Blackwall  in  steam-vessels  every  year.  In 
confirmation  of  the  fact  that  the  establishment  of  additicmal  facility  in 
travelling  is  embraced  by  persons  who  would  not  otherwise  be  induced 
to  quit  their  homes,  we  may  refer  to  the  continually  increasing  number 
of  licenses  for  stage-coaches  issued  every  year  from  the  Stamp  Oflice, 
and  to  the  great  and  constantly-increasing  number  "of  omnibuses  which 
are  continually  traversing  the  great  thoroughfares  of  London  without 
displacing  the  hackney-carriages  which  were  previously  in  use.     The 


ciiAr.  IV.]  STEAM  NAVIGATION.  .'',19 

number  of  passengers  conveyed  by  the  Hull  and  Sclby  steam-packets 
in  the  12  months  which  preceded  the  opening  of  tlie  Leeds  and  Sulby 
Railway  was  33,882,  whereas  in  the  12  months  that  followed  that  event 
the  number  conveyed  was  62,105. 

Tlie  published  lists  of  steam-vessels  belonging  to  different  ports  in 
the  United  Kingdom  show  the  extent  to  which  this  new  mode  of  voy- 
aging is  adopted  by  the  public.  Scarcely  any  two  ports  of  consequence 
can  be  pointed  out  between  which  steam  communieation  is  not  main- 
tained as  well  for  the  conveyance  of  passengers  as  for  the  transmission 
of  goods.  Besides  tliis,  the  counnunication  is  regularly  maintained  with 
all  the  principal  neighbouring  ports  on  the  continent  of  Europe.  From 
London  vessels  proceed  to  the  French  coast  almost  every  day :  to  Hol- 
land three  times  a-week  ;  to  Belgium  as  frequently  ;  to  Hamburg  twice 
a-week,  and  to  Lisbon  and  (^adiz  every  week.  From  the  coast  of  Kent, 
Sussex,  and  Hampshire,  daily  departures  take  place  to  France.  From 
Hull  three  vessels  depart  every  week  for  Hamburg,  and  one  is  de- 
spatched to  Rotterdam  ;  the  greater  part  of  the  important  traffic  which 
formerly  was  carried  on  in  sailing-vessels  between  those  ports  is  now 
conveyed  through  the  more  quick  and  certain  agency  of  steam. 

The  table  next  to  be  given  is  interesting,  because  it  exhibits  a  com- 
plete statistical  history  of  steam  navigation,  as  applied  to  commercial 
purposes  in  this  country,  from  its  first  adoption  to  the  end  of  1849. 
One  of  the  most  remarkable  circumstances  connected  with  this  history 
is  the  extraordinary  rapidity  of  its  development.  When  first  adopted, 
few  persons  were  so  sanguine  as  to  suppose  that  the  utility  of  steam- 
vessels  would  ever  be  experienced  except  in  inland  river  navigation,  or 
for  short  distances  along  the  coast ;  a  very  few  years  have  sufficed  for 
their  general  introduction  in  all  the  seas  and  rivers  of  Europe,  and  at 
this  moment  their  employment  serves  as  a  means  of  drawing  closer  the 
connexion  between  the  old  and  the  new  world.  Large  and  powerful 
steam-ships  are  now  constantly  passing  between  this  kingdom  and  the 
United  States  of  America,  introducing  thus  a  degree  of  certainty  into 
the  correspondence  between  the  two  countries  which  cannot  fail  to  be 
of  immense  advantage  to  the  most  important  branch  of  foreign  trade  in 
which  our  merchants  are  engaged.  Twice  in  each  month  mails,  pas- 
sengers, and  specie  are  conveyed  between  England  and  her  West 
Indian  colonies,  and  by  the  same  means  communications  are  kept  open 
with  ^lexico  and  a  great  part  of  South  America.  The  voyage  made 
in  1826  by  the  '  Enterprize '  to  Calcutta  was  considered  a  failure,  and 
doubtless  had  for  a  time  considerable  influence  in  deterring  our  mer- 
chants from  undertaking  distant  steam  voyages.  Other  experiments  of 
the  same  kind  have  since  been  made,  however,  and  with  perfect  success. 
The  years  that  have  elapsed  since  the  voyage  of  the  '  Enterprize '  was 
accomplished,  have,  as  might  reasonably  be  expected,  brought  forward 


3^0  PROGHESS  OF  THE  NATION.  [sec.  hi. 

many  improvements,  in  what  was  then  an  infant  science  ;  and  altliongh 
we  may  not,  perhaps,  witness  in  oin*  day  the  establishment  of  a  line  of 
trading  packets  to  India,  rcnmd  the  Cape  of  Good  Hope,  this  will  be 
principally  owing  to  the  greater  facility  that  attends  the  communication 
through  the  Mediterranean,  and  not  because  the  other  route  is  imprac- 
ticable or  even  difficult. 

A  Committee  of  the  House  of  Commons  was  appointed  in  June, 
1837,  to  inquire  into  the  best  means  of  establishing  a  communication  by 
steam  with  India  by  way  of  the  Red  Sea.  The  inquiry  thus  begun  was 
cut  short  by  the  sudden  termination  of  the  session,  but  the  evidence  col- 
lected by  the  Committee  contained  information  of  great  interest,  tending 
to  show  the  advantages  to  commerce  that  must  result  from  the  great 
acceleration  of  correspondence  that  would  be  thus  accomplished. 

It  was  stated  to  this  Committee  by  Sir  John  Hobhouse,  then  Presi- 
dent of  the  Board  of  Control,  that  in  August,  1834,  the  Directors  of 
the  East  India  Company,  acting  in  furtherance  of  a  recommendation 
made  by  a  Connnittee  of  the  House  of  Conmions,  which  sat  in  that 
year,  sent  directions  to  the  Governor-General  of  India  to  despatch  a 
steam  ship  at  stated  periods  from  Bombay  to  Suez.  In  order  still  fur- 
ther to  expedite  the  transmission  of  mails  between  India  and  England, 
the  Governor  of  Bombay,  and  subsequently  the  home  authorities  in 
England,  established  a  dromedary  post  from  Bagdad  to  Damascus,  and 
thence  to  Beyrout,  on  the  coast  of  the  Mediterranean,  to  which  port 
the  voyage  of  the  steam-vessel  that  before  plied  to  Alexandria  was 
extended. 

The  speedy  consequence  of  all  these  arrangements  was  a  much  more 
rapid  communication  with  India  than  had  ever  before  been  known  ;  in 
confirmation  of  which  fact,  and  ta  show  the  opinion  upon  this  impoi-tant 
subject  formed  by  the  most  competent  judges,  the  following  extract  is 
given  from  a  despatch  sent  in  September,  1836,  by  the  Government  of 
Bombay,  to  the  Court  of  Directors  : — "  We  beg  leave  to  offer  to  your 
Honourable  Court  our  congratulations  on  the  rapidity  with  which  your 
wishes  have  of  late  been  conveyed  to  all  parts  of  your  Indian  posses- 
sions. The  three  last  overland  mails  have  brought  despatches  from 
London  to  Bombay  in  58,  45,  and  64  days ;  and  those  intended  for 
Calcutta  have  been  forw^arded  in  10  days.  We  have  witnessed  the 
energetic  impulse  this  early  intelligence  has  given  to  the  mercantile  in- 
terest, and  the  unbounded  satisfaction  it  has  diffused  throughout  all 
classes  of  the  community.  It  is,  indeed,  undeniable,  that  a  quick  inter- 
change of  information  is  of  the  first  advantage  in  commerce,  and  in  the 
conduct  of  all  public  business,  while  it  is  equally  true  that  its  effect  on 
the  minds  of  those  who  serve  the  Honourable  Comjiany  long  and  faith- 
fully in  this  distant  land,  is  to  deprive  the  painful  feeling  of  separation 
from  their  homes  and  country  of  half  its  bitterness.     We  beg  respect- 


CHAP.  IV.]  STEAM  NAVIGATIOX.  321 

fully  to  press  those  reflections  on  the  notice  of  your  Honourable  Court, 
with  our  earnest  prayer  that  you  will  ere  long  grant  to  India  the  ninch- 
desired  boon  of  frecpicnt  and  regular  communication  with  Euroj)C  by 
the  employment  of  a  suificient  uumber  of  steam-vessels  for  that  pur- 
pose." The  despatch,  from  which  the  foregoing  extract  is  taken,  arrived 
in  England  early  in  the  year  1837,  and  no  time  was  lost  in  attempting 
to  carry  into  effect  the  recommendation  which  it  conveyed.  At  first  a 
negotiation  was  opened  with  some  private  indi^-id^als,  who  proposed  to 
perform  the  service  required  by  means  of  a  joint-stock  company  ;  but 
so  many  serious  objections  to  this  course  were  urged  by  different 
branches  of  the  Government  that  it  was  abandoned,  and  early  in  June, 
1837,  an  arrangement  was  concluded  between  the  Government  and  the 
Directors  of  the  East  India  Company  for  the  establishment  of  a  regular 
monthly  steam  communication  between  this  country  and  India,  by  way 
of  the  Red  Sea,  upon  the  following  basis  : — 

"The  Government  undertakes  the  transmission  of  the  monthly  mails 
between  Great  Britain  and  Alexandria,  at  the  sole  charge  of  the  public, 
and  the  East  India  Company  undertakes  the  transmission  of  these  mails 
between  x\lexandria  and  Bombay,  upon  condition  that  one-half  of 
the  expense  incurred  in  the  purchase  and  navigation  of  steam-vessels, 
and  of  any  other  expense  incurred  in  the  service,  is  defrayed  by  the 
Government,  which  is  to  receive  the  whole  money  collected  for  postage 
of  letters  between  London  and  Bombay."  This  arrangement  was  to 
take  immediate  effect,  and  the  steam-vessels  belonging  to  the  East 
India  Company  were  ordered  to  be  employed  forthwith, — two  for  the 
conveyance,  on  alternate  months,  of  the  mails  from  Bombay  to  Mocha, 
and  the  third  for  their  further  conveyance  from  Mocha  to  Suez.  A 
further  economy  of  time  of  from  four  to  six  days  being  obtainable  by 
sending  the  mails  overland  to  Marseilles  instead  of  transmitting  them 
by  steam-packets  from  Falmouth  through  the  Straits  of  Gibraltar,  it 
was  arranged  that  on  the  6th  of  every  montli  a  Government  messenger 
should  be  sent  in  charge  of  the  India  mail  from  London  to  Marseilles, 
fi-om  which  port  steam -packets  are  despatched  three  times  every  month 
by  the  French  Government.  By  this  arrangement  the  distance  is 
shortened  to  the  extent  of  more  than  1000  miles  :  the  direct  distance  by 
way  of  Mar-^eilles  and  Malta  being  5238,  and  by  way  of  Falmouth  and 
Malta  6310  miles;  the  distance  by  the  Cape  of  Good  Hope  is  10,580 
nautical  miles. 

The  mail  communications  between  this  kingdom  and  its  eastern 
empire  continued  on  the  above  footing  until  1841,  when  the  Govern- 
ment entered  into  a  contract  for  the  conveyance  of  the  mails  between 
England  and  Egy})t,  with  the  Peninsular  and  Oriental  Steam  Naviga- 
tion Company,  which  undertook  further  to  employ  powerful  steam- 
vessels  for  the  ciirrying  of  letters  and  passengers  between  Suez,  Ceylon, 

V 


322  PROGRESS  OF  THE  NATION.  [sec.  in. 

Madras,  and  Calcutta,  towards  the  expenses  of  which  the  East  India 
Company  undertook  to  contribute  20,000/.  per  annum  for  live  years. 
When  this  arrangement  had  been  for  some  time  in  operation,  a  further 
extension  of  the  phin  was  found  necessary,  and  an  agreement  was  made, 
to  the  effect  that  the  Government  should  contribute  50,000/,  per  annum 
towards  the  expense  of  the  line  of  steam-packets  between  Bombay  and 
Suez,  115,000/.  per  annum  for  the  service  between  Calcutta  and  Suez, 
and  45,000/.  for  the  service  between  Ceylon  and  Hong-Kong,  making 
in  all  210,000/.,  of  which  sum  one-third,  or  70,000/.,  is  repaid  by  the 
East  India  Company. 

In  return  for  this  outlay,  the  Government  and  the  public  have  the 
advantage  of  steam  communication  twice  in  each  month  with  India,  and 
monthly  with  China,  by  means  of  powerful  and  splendid  vessels,  which 
have  hitherto  answered  every  expectation  that  had  been  raised  respect- 
ino-  their  safety  and  regularity.  The  apparently  large  cost  at  which 
this  intercourse  is  secured  sinks  into  insignificance  when  we  consider  the 
mao-nitude  of  the  national  interests  that  are  involved,  and  the  countless 
advantages  that  must  attend  upon  the  rapid  transmission  of  political  and 
mercantile  intelHgence  connected  therewith. 

The  number  of  letters  and  newspapers  received  at  the  ship-letter 
department  of  the  Post-ofiice  from  and  to  Ceylon,  Bombay,  Madras, 
and  Calcutta,  in  each  of  the  three  years  ending  5th  October,  1834,  1835, 
and  1836,  were  as  follows  :  — 

1834  1835  1836 

From  Ceylon      ....       6,279  4,204  7,278 

„      Bombay    ....     35,536  40,505  33,306 

„      Madras     ....     29,371  37,738  38,720 

„     Calcutta    ....     87,747  84,894  100,611 


158,933  167,341  '  179,915 


To  Ceylon 8,639  8,326  9,673 

„  Bombay 24,126  24,862  24,078 

„  Madras 35,285  35,250  35,470 

„  Calcutta 37,689  38,341  42,712 


105,739  106,779  111,933 


In  the  last  of  these  three  years,  the  number  of  letters  from  India, 
exclusive  of  those  addressed  to  soldiers  and  seamen,  was  149,504  ;  the 
letters  to  soldiers  and  seamen  were  9856 ;  the  number  of  newspapers 
was  12,649,  and  of  franked  letters  7906,  making  together  179,915,  as 
above  stated. 

The  increase  in  the  number  of  letters  and  newspapers  passing  between 
England  and  our  possessions  in  India,  has,  as  it  was  reasonable  to  expect 
it  would  have  most  importantly  increased  since  the  establishment  of 
regular  mail  communications,  as  appears  from  the  following  figures : — 


niAP.  IV.  j 


STEAM  NAVIGATION. 


323 


Inwards 
Outwards 


1S43 

1814 

1845 

Letters. 

Ne\v.spapers. 

Letters. 

Newspapers. 

Letters. 

Newspapers,' 

350,767 
370,038 

112,058 
429,028 

397,657 
441,925 

111,444 
536,378 

505,192 
448,335 

154,940 
686,561 

720,805       541,086 

839,582 

647,822 

953,527 

841,501 

1,261,891 

1,48 

',404 

1,79 

5,028 

It  must  be  remembered,  that  the  alterations  made  in  1833  in  the 
constitution  of  the  East  India  Company  have  tended  to  give  a  great 
and  a  growing  degree  of  animation  to  the  commercial  correspondence 
between  India  and  Europe  beyond  that  which  existed  before  that  time. 

There  is  reason  for  believing  that  the  passage  by  the  Mediterranean 
route  to  India  may  be  further  facilitated  by  the  construction  of  a 
railroad  between  Cairo  and  Suez,  which  would  open  a  more  direct 
communication  than  the  dromedary  post  already  mentioned.  The 
isthmus  has  been  surveyed  for  this  object  by  an  English  engineer, 
and  a  considerable  part  of  the  materials  for  the  railway  has  been  col- 
lected by  the  Pacha  of  Egypt.  AVhen  finished,  the  distance  between 
Cairo  and  Suez  (80  miles)  might  be  traversed  in  four  hours.  The 
traffic  between  these  places  is  at  present  considerable  in  the  articles 
of  coffee,  drugs,  and  grain.  If  the  time  consumed  in  passing  across 
the  desert  were  reduced,  as  it  might  then  be,  to  four  hours,  and  the 
charge  for  conveyance  were  moderate,  tiie  trade  would  assuredly  be 
much  increased,  and  other  goods  would  find  their  way  from  India  to 
Europe  by  the  same  means.  Silk,  spices,  gums,  shawls,  and  various 
other  articles  which  are  valuable  in  proportion  to  their  bulk,  would  be 
sent  by  this  route  rather  than  round  by  the  Cape  of  Good  Hope,  because 
the  saving  of  time  would  more  than  compensate  for  the  difference  in 
the  expense.  It  is  calculated  that  goods  of  the  description  just  men- 
tioned might  be  sent  from  Bombay  to  Marseilles  in  thirty  days ;  and, 
with  regard  to  a  package  of  Cachemere  shawls,  valued  at  20,000/., 
there  can  be  no  doubt  which  route  would  be  preferred.  As  to  the  risk 
of  plunder,  it  is  well  known  that,  through  the  exertions  of  the  ruler  of 
Egypt,  the  property  of  travellers  passes  now  as  safely  throughout  that 
country  as  it  does  between  London  and  Manchester. 

Another  project,  the  cutting  of  a  ship-canal  between  the  Mediter- 
ranean and  the  Arabian  Gulf,  has  been  seriously  proposed,  and  surveys 
have  been  made  which  seem  to  show  the  reasonableness  of  the  proposal. 
Such  a  shortening  of  the  route  between  Europe  and  Asia  must  be  fol- 
lowed by  consequences  the  importance  of  which  to  this  commercial 
country  it  would  not  be  easy  to  estimate. 


y2 


324 


mOGRESS  OF  THE  NATION. 


[sec.    III. 


CC^'N  —  0000  5".  O-JTlD-hCOin  —  c?t^-O-H0C'i~C'J'J-"00i 

'  ■  -t  ;m  c^  ■-' 1-';  =c  n  t^  u:  X  — •  ~.  I- < 

M  tc  —  O  (M  ::v  CV  fM  t^  —  CV  (N  —  CO  --  •-• 

(MClt0OQ035«0p-<*"35;DOJsCc"o—  IMOOO!M«OOtDWO! 
!-■  —■  CI  (M  (M  CO  -t  ■ 

. .  _ . J  r-  00  ifi  (N  d  "O  ;o  C  o  r- 

-     - „.  _.     .   _j  (>|  r-.  00  t^  r^  ;£!  —  Tl>  cc  CO  O  O  ■*  t-  CO 

i-rr-rr-''<N"(M''i?r(M'"<M"eo'~co'~co  eo  co  co  co 


i«O;O(NtO(NtD-*tD«D-#00t£>^00->O'^'M  —  'JOOi-^COCO-^O 
'■—in'+tDOopr — fcoo— '"M— 'C0OtJ00i^OC0t^i-i«c«:^.  t^ 

l-^t^l^OOO^CIOtDtOCOO'CCOOmOOGCiCO'n-^  —  OiniMCO 

i-Tc^^i-Tr-i  o  I'l  CI  tor>i<n  CO  -vD  CO  :rs  tc  C-.  o  '^^  I 


r-Xco-^c^r-i'Mcor— >—'>-'!  r^t~oot^coc5-*<c~.  I 


.  00  C-.  CO  >-'  "f^  ■*  «£> 


oor^tointo(Nt^O(NOoomt^>ocnot"-i-<i^moo>ncoc^(Nt^<o 

CO!M05000<NOOopr^COC5COOOCTi^t^<CiS'-Cnt~-QOr-i;r>0'nOO 

•  eoot^(05^cooo-^coo5ooto«;co-#C5avcocoa)a)cO'-<'ncoinQOi-i 


(MCriiflC-.  t^r-^<t~~-+t^C0!Mt^C5'M 


r-.  —  ^  fM  ~.  t»  —  ID  »  CO  '^  CO 


1— <i— 11— ((^^:^^Q'^cocococo■ 


lr;  in  o  ^  cci 


•<-<  —  <N(N(M-<t-*-<l'^'nir:i^00i-<C>)<MO(N-<S^'#5OOi-<^ 

i-r^'"rt'"!M"c^'~(M'~cr(?r(N'~CO^Co'l^'~Co'"co'~CO" 


crco-fco-*'^— '-f— '0~ii~.  oo-Hi^~-,r!ir^o^^cic.  r--i<riOri 
tn  -f  -M  "M  CO  C".  --n  CO  -f  o  i-'^  CO  o  C-.  t~-  oi  CO  o  ~  if:  -)•  :r.  CI  =".  C-.  cr;  00  CT>  o 
,—  i^-toco-—  coxc--'0-t'-«oc-.  cot^i" """    ■■      "" 


ic  ~.  o  ^  CI  ir^  -*  — 1  C  05  d  c) 


■  10  cj  CO  r-  :r5  X  o  "T--  'vO  00  GO  1 


iCimcOOOOi-<C)uOI~r— i-*<«O000G00«^t-~t— Ol^OQOOOCTlCl 

rcrcrcrcrcrcrcrcrcrco"eo"co"co'~pf'*' 


■-Hcic£)r-icrsootDoooct^oi-~crirttco-i'^^C:=iC<inc:icoc)ir;co 


I  I— I  CO  o  -vi  o  '^  r^  I--  C5  r".  >— '  ci  1 


if^  -f  -c  ".';  «c  r-  r-  I 


:  «D  lO  t^  c»  t^  O  O  ( 


^.  ^  ^^  .-  V.-,  .-  w  O  (N  (M  i-H  C»  O  CO  CJ  CO  -t  -f  CO  O  CV  O  Cl  1^  ^  to  CTS  O 

toco^osi^r-TfOOCjr-icoocor^oociocotOQOcr.oO'^Oina".  «o 

■-r^i-r.-rcrcrcrcrcrco'"co  co  co  -*  ■*  •* 


c■^clc^«ooo!c:ll^-""-'^ooo•^'oooooo1— icoocj:o>f;r-co>f;d>nrt 
C);o  —  i^'rimoOcc-fOOtoo-toot^cicocici-H^m'tcoo 

■  in  CO  CO  O  Cl  '-'i  ^  ^  t^  CO  O  1~  •—  O  ~  O  ^  t-  «C  00  ^  O  cr-.  CO  O  -C  C.  00 


C)  -*  CO    t^  r-l  t-  CO  CO  «^  O  CI  ^  O  —  O  C-.  1^  in  00  CI  l-O  O  r- 

1—1        r-irHint>-;Dmtot^x«:c2^^eO'n 


T^m'^Tr-*inir;Ti"tt't^«--oo 


t^cicomr-«.r;ci-)>cotoco-*o>-idO-*in'-ii-':t^r^3".  cstcci'+oo 
c:  ■*  ~.  i;::  CO  00  t^  i-T  ■-<  'J'  OS  d  CI  "iT  ci  -I"  o  Oi  L'^  1^  t-  •*  •*  00  O  00  -+  O 
•  -t~cOr-<-o'M;£)t^;o(r>'5j'cit^.-ir-ir>ciintoo3-.  comcococ-.  coto 


r-li-li-<CICICOC0C0CO-*i 


:  iC  »C  5£)  O  CO 


(TJ  C5  C75  i;0  ■*  < 

'  in  CI  CO  CO  CO  ■ 

.  rH  PH  1-1  nl  CO  ■ 


icit^or^t^i-iooincieococot^cii^co-focoinr — f 


,-i,-i,_irtC^(MCicjcicocococoroco 


in  00  «o  «o  CO  -f  1-'^  c  -t  — '  !o  CI  in  -t  ci  o  to  t^  m  ■— '  in  -f  o  —  o  to  CI  to  If;  lo 
O  CI  C-.  -^  i^  CO-  c-j  ci  r-c  00  o  1-^  o  CO  m  o  ^  t^  CI  cj  o  00  i~  CO  to  —  t^  1-1  <»  -^ 
moin'-<ot^~iO-*c-.  inocotoi^tDCim^Hmmt^CT>'*^Htococ:r^in 

cf  •->  >n -f  t^ '>\  t^  '^rcn^  trTco"!-"'  :DoorSa^^<nm^  -h  co  oo  -+  ci  ci  co 

c4comciininco>—  t^i--tDinr-<tooocii^>f:ci.—  Otoooccicio-foo 

r-ici-*r-C'.  ~.  Ci— icimr^i— iinto05C".  C505~.  ocot^ciosoci 


■-ii-ii-<i-ir-iClCIC5CICIClClClC0C0C0C0C0't't 


c.  oovn-*cotoC'+^citocicr.  ct^ooooi— i^to-tto>f;cocoocoooT*>eo 
ooi— 'COooto^HOC.  c~.  cr:r^tor^t^cocooci^intocOr-<comO'^'-iCi-T 
i-ici-*ootcoo-*mr^t^ot^ccci~Ti<i^  in»^  i—  ^  to  m  c-.  -t  ci  m  co 

1— 1  CI  -^  m  in  to  t~  t^  o»  C  —  CI  m  m  m  >c  m  m  -(•  in  to  1^  1^  r-  00 


—  -M  CO  -t  '^  to  1^  CO  ~.  C  ^  Cl  CO 
CI  CI  M  CI  CI  CI  CI  CI  CI  CO  CO  CO  ! 


;  CO  -f  -f  -f 


X   X  X  Xj  Xj  X  X   X  X^  X^  X^  Xj  X   X^  X  X   X   X  X  X  X,  X 


-f  m  CO  r-  X  C-. 
.     .  -t  -t  -t  -t  -r  -f 

X  X  X  X  X  X  X  X 


cuAr.   iv.j 


STEAM  NAVIGATION. 


:v2t 


The  following  tabic,  which  has  been  compiled  chiefly  from  Consular 
returns,  will  show  that  it  is  not  in  England  alone  that  this  great  inven- 
tion has  been  encouraged.  Every  European  power  of  eminence  that 
contains  a  seaport  within  its  territory,  as  well  as  several  of  the  minor 
states,  have  vessels  steamin<j  under  their  respective  flags.  In  the  United 
States  of  America  this  method  of  conveyance  for  passengers  and  goods 
has  been  adopted  with  all  the  energy  for  which  the  American  citizens 
are  so  remarkable. 


I'orts. 


Russia . 
Sweden     . 

Norway    . 
Denmark. 
Prussia 
Mecklenburn 
Hans  Towns 


Hanover  . 
Netherlands 


Belgium 
France 


Spain   . 

Portugal  . 

Sardinia  . 

Tuscany  . 
Two  Sicilies 

Austria  . 

Turkey  . 

Barbary  States 

United  States 

of  America 


Texas .     . 
Mexico 
Venezuela 
Chili    ,     . 
Brazil  . 
Peru    . 


St.  Petersburg,  Riga,  Odessa  . 

Stockhohn,  Gottcnburg,  Carl- 1 
scrona,  and  Ystad.      .      ,      J 

Christiania 

Copenhagen,  Elsinore  . 

Dantzig 

Rostofk 

Liibeck 

Hamburg 

Bremen 

Embden 

Amsterdam 

Rotterdam 

Antwerp,  Ostend,  &c.   . 

Calais,  Havre,  Granvillo,"i 
St.  JIalo,  Cherbourg,  Brest,  I 
Nantes,  Charente,  Bordeaux,  1 
Bayonne,  Marseilles,  Corsica/ 

Coruna,  Cadiz,  Barcelona  . 

Lisbon,  Oporto 

Genoa,  Cagliari 

Leghorn  

Naples,  Palermo      .... 

Trieste  and  Venice. 

Constantinople 

Alexandria 

Tunis 

Portland,  New  York,  Lakes"! 
Champlain,  &c.,  Philadel-  j 
phia,  Baltimore,  Norfolk,  !> 
Charleston,  Savannah,  Mo-| 
bile,  and  New  Orleans    .      .J 

Galveston 

Vera  Cruz 

Caracas 

Valparaiso 

Rio  Janeiro,  Bahia  .... 

Lima 


No.  of 
Steam 

Vessels. 


7 
1 
7 
31 
3 

119 

13 
10 
12 
4 
.5 
16 
14 


Their 
Af,'gregate 
Tonuage. 


15,203 


1, 


,.312 

,.568 
96 

200 
,054 

986 

i;ioo 

35 

1,460 

12,200 

3,464 

not  given 

in  every 

case. 

3,621 
2,167 
4,240 
1,3.56 
2,135 
5,9,57 
4,315 
not  stated 
90 


261    not  stated 


1.30 
2,690 

122 
1,.360 
not  stated 
1,400 


Aggregate 

Power 
of  steam 
Engines. 


6,982 

3,275 

640 

1,068 

56 

52 

560 

860 

342 

25 

616 

3,750 

1,030 


9,027 

1,450 
815 

1,265 
530 
910 

1,620 

1,864 

644 

18 


not  stated 


645 

35 

360 

1,833 

360 


Largest  Vessels. 


Tonnage.    Power, 


2,049 

842 

500 

260 

55 

120 

820 

560 

289 

35 

485 

707 

1,600 

600 

600 
420 
600 
540 
540 
687 
814 
963 
90 


1,000 


95 
800 
122 
680 
420 
700 


540 

200 

120 

180 

32 

40 

240 

160 

75 

25 

160 

400 

5(X> 


4.50 

180 
160 
ISO 
210 
260 
160 
300 
220 
18 

not 
stated. 

45 
180 

35 
180 
140 
180 


It  is  not  unlikely  that  the  returns  from  which  the  above  abstract  luis 
been  made,  may  omit  some  vessels  of  this  kind  in  their  enumerations, 
but  these  omissions  cannot  be  to  any  great  extent ;  and  it  thus  appears 
that  the  progress  made  by  this  country  in  the  adoption  of  this  new  and 
great  invention  is  fully  equal  to  everything  hitherto  accomplished  by  all 


other  countries  in  the  aggregate. 


326  PROGRESS  OF  THE  NATION.  [sec.  hi. 


CHAPTER  V. 


RAILWAYS. 


Earliest  Emploj-ment  of  Railroads  in  England— Number  of  Acts  of  Parliament  for  incorpo- 
rating' Railroad  Companies — Traffic  on  Liverpool  and  Manchester  Line — Railways  com- 
pleted to  1849 — Railway  Traffic  and  Revenues  1S45-9 — Effect  upon  Post  Communications 
—Anticipated  Improvements — Pecuniary  Saving  to  the  Public— Railway  Accidents — 
Sums  expended  in  obtaining  Acts  of  Incorporation— Government  Survey  of  Lines  in 
Ireland Persons  employed  on  Railways— Railways  in  Belgium — In  America. 

It  has  been  said  that  railways  were  first  brought  to  use  in  this  country 
at  the  beoinning  of  the  seventeenth  century,  when  they  were  employed 
in  some  of  the  Newcastle  collieries.  The  railways  then  constructed 
were,  however,  very  different  from  the  scientifically-constructed  works 
to  which  we  are  now  accustomed  to  apply  that  name,  and  it  was  long 
before  any  progress  was  made  towards  their  improvement.  They  were 
at  first  constructed  altogether  of  timber,  and  it  was  not  until  1767  that 
the  first  experiment  was  made,  and  that  upon  a  very  small  scale,  to 
determine  the  advantage  of  substituting  iron  for  the  less  durable  mate- 
rial. Nor  does  it  appear  that  this  experiment  was  successful  or  followed 
by  any  practical  result,  for  in  a  volume  published  by  Mr.  Carr,  in  1797, 
he  sets  up  his  claim  to  be  considered  the  inventor  of  cast-iron  rails. 
The  railways  which  were  constructed  up  to  the  beginning  of  the  present 
century  were  all  private  undertakings,  and  each  was  confined  to  the 
use  of  the  establishment — generally  a  colliery — in  which  it  occurred. 
The  public  railways  of  England  are  strictly  creations  of  the  present 
century.  It  was  in  1801  that  the  first  Act  of  Parliament  for  the  con- 
struction of  a  work  of  this  kind  received  the  sanction  of  the  legislature. 
The  following  t<able  shows  that  the  total  number  of  Acts  passed 
since  that  time  has  been  1111,  of  which  615  were  for  new  lines  of  rail- 
way. 


CHAP. 

v.] 

RAILWAYS. 

327 

Number  of  Acts  of  Parliament  for 

congtructinff  Railways,  1801-1849. 

I'or  extension  j 

■ 

For  extension 

of  existing 

of  existing 

Years. 

For  New 
Lines. 

Lines,  and  for     ^^^^ 
jiving  amended 

and  enlarged  j 
Powers.        I 

Years. 

For  New 
Lines. 

Lines,  and  for 

^ivingamcnded 

and  enlarged 

Powers. 

Tola!. 

1801 

1 

1 

1828 

5 

5 

10 

1802 

2 

2 

1829 

5 

4 

9 

1803 

1 

v.        1 

1830 

5 

3 

8 

1804 

1 

1 

1831 

5 

4 

9 

1805 

.. 

1            1 

1832 

5 

4 

9 

1806 

, . 

2                 2 

1833 

5 

6 

11 

1808 

1 

1 

1834 

5 

9 

14 

1809 

3 

3 

1835 

8 

11 

19 

1810 

1 

1                 2 

1836 

29 

6 

35 

1811 

3 

1            I       4 

1837 

15 

27 

42 

1812 

2 

1 

3 

1838 

2 

17 

19 

1814 

1 

1 

2 

1839 

3 

24 

27 

1815 

. . 

1 

1840 

. . 

24 

24 

1816 

1 

, . 

1841 

1 

18 

19 

1817 

1 

1842 

4 

18 

22 

1818 

1 

, . 

1843 

5 

19 

24 

1819 

1 

1844 

26 

22 

48 

1820 

. . 

"i 

1845 

76 

44 

120 

1821 

2 

1 

3 

1846* 

225 

45 

270 

1822 

1 

1847* 

115 

75 

190 

1823 

1 

1848* 

28 

57 

85 

1824 

2 

1 

3 

1849 

34 

34 

1825 
1826 
1827 

g 

1 

1 

5 

9 

11 

6 

10 

1 

Total 

615 

496 

1,111 

The  sums  which  Parhament  has  authorized  various  companies  to 
raise  for  the  construction  of  railways  in  each  year,  from  1826  to  1849, 
are  as  follows  : — 


Years. 

£. 

1826 

1,687,653 

1827 

251,608 

1828 

424,000 

1829 

904,125 

Years. 
1830 
1831 
1832 
1833 


£. 

735,650 
1,799,875 

567,685 
5,525,333 


Average  of  4  years 


816,846 


Average  of  4  years     2,157,136 


Years. 
1834 
1835 
1836 
1837 


£. 

2.312,053 

4,812,8a3 

22,874,998 

13,521,799 


if  ears. 

£. 

1838 

2,096,198 

1839 

6,455,797 

1840 

2,495,032 

1841 

3,410,686 

Average  of  4  years  10,880,421 


Average  of  4  years     3,614,428 


Years. 
1842 
1843 
1844 
1845 


£. 

5,311,642 

3,861,350 

17,870,361 

60,824,088 


Average  of  4  years  21 ,  966 ,  860 


Years. 

£. 

1846 

132,096,224 

1847 

40,397,395 

1848 

14,620,471 

1849 

3,1.55,a32 

Average  of  4  years   47 ,  567 ,  355 


*  These  numbers  include  new  lines  and  extensions. 


328 


PKOGllESS  OF  THE  NATION. 


[sec. 


The  total  amount  thus  sanctioned  during  the  above  24  years  was 
348,012,188/.,  and  the  yearly  average  14,500,508/. 

It  is  a  singular  fact,  that  of  all  the  railways  constructed  and  contem- 
plated up  to  the  opening  of  the  Liverpool  and  Manchester  line,  not  one 
was  undertaken  with  a  view  to  the  conveyance  of  passengers.  In  the 
prospectus  published  by  the  projectors  of  that  work,  it  was  indeed  held 
out  as  probable  that  one-half  of  the  number  of  persons  then  travelling 
by  coaches  between  the  two  towns  might  avail  themselves  of  the  railway 
in  consideration  of  the  lower  rate  for  which  they  would  be  conveyed, 
and  the  Directors  expected  to  realize  an  income  of  20,000/.  per  annum 
from  that  source  ;  but  the  chief  inducement  held  out  to  subscribers  was  the 
conveyance  of  raw  cotton,  manufactured  goods,  coals,  and  cattle.  The  fol- 
lowing table  (see  ■p.  329),  containing  a  statement  of  the  actual  traffic  upon 
the  railway  from  its  opening  in  Se})tember,  1830,  to  Midsummer,  1836, 
and  fi'om  the  1st  of  July,  1840,  to  the  1st  of  July,  1845,  will  show  how 
much  the  anticipations  of  the  projectors  were  at  variance  with  the  result. 
The  great  success  attending  this  splendid  work  being  in  a  principal  de- 
gree attributable  to  the  passengers  conveyed  by  it,  the  cliief  inducement 
/thenceforward  to  embark  in  similar  undertakings  has  been  the  number 
/of  travellers  and  not  the  amount  of  goods  to  be  conveyed.  Hitherto 
it  has  been  found,  in  nearly  every  case  where  a  railroad  adapted  for 
carrying  passengers  has  been  brought  into  operation,  that  the  amount 
of^  travelling  between  the  two  extremities  of  the  line  has  been 
quadrupled. 

In  the  case  of  the  Liverpool  and  Manchester  Railway,  the  income 
derived  from  passengers  enabled  the  Company  to  meet  a  large  amount 
of  extraordinary  expenses,  and  to  divide  regularly  10  per  cent,  annually 
upon  the  capital,  although  the  outlay  in  the  construction  of  the  work 
was  more  than  double  the  sum  contemplated  in    the  original  estimates. 

The  progress  of  traffic  on  the  London  and  Birmingham  Railway  in 
each  half-year,  to  30th  June,  1845,  has  been  as  follows :  — 


Half-year  ending 


30th  June, 
31st  Dec. 
30th  June, 
31st  Dec. 
30th  June, 
31st  Dec. 
30th  June, 
31st  Dec. 
30th  June, 
31st  Dec. 
30th  June, 
31st  Dec. 
3()th  June, 


1833. 
1840. 
1841 . 
1842. 
1843. 
1844 '. 
1845. 


Miles  Travelled. 


267,144 
341,420 
327,930 
394,688 
354,322 
413,272 
372,532 
407,840 
360,784 
419,963 
371,331 
480,637 
615; 904 


17,391,035 
22,284,830 
21,675,287 
25,931,163 
23,399,936 
27,1.56,212 
24,144,243 
26,563,216 
23,395,261 
26,983,482 
24,664,979 
31,122,185 
38,758,260 


Receipts. 


270,241 
343,910 
343,194 
405,040 
382,452 
429,023 
388,288 
420,958 
385,104 
432,357 
405,768 
4.50,478 
'447,190 


CHAP,    v.] 


II.VILWAYS. 


3-29 


Statement  of  the  actual  Traffic  upon  the  Liverpool  ami  Mancliesler  Railway,  from  Sept.,  IS.'JO,  to 
Miihummer,  183H,  and  from  \iit  July,  1840,  to  \st  July,  1845. 


l-'rom  16tli  '    From  1st  I  From  1st 

Sept.  to    '      Jan.  to         July  to 

31st  Dec,  ,  .10th  June, '  31st  Dec, 

1830  1831      I      1831 


From  1st 

Jan. to 

30lh  June, 

1832 


From  1st 

July  to 

31sf  Dec, 

1832 


From  1st 

Jan.  to 

30th  June, 

1833 


Merchandise  between  Liver- ' 
pool  anil  .Manchester     . 

Road  traffic 

Between  Liverpool  and  Bol-  i 
ton  Junction.      ... 

Coal ; 

Passengers  booked  at  Com-  ] 

pany's  offices.      .      .      .      j 

Number  of  Trips^ 

^Vith  Passengers    . 

„      Goods      .      .      .      . 

„      Coal 


Tons. 
1,433 


2,630 
No. 
71,951 


Tons. 

35,865 

378 

6,827 

2,839 
No. 
188,726 

2,2.')9 

1,873 

293 


Tons. 
52,224 

2,347 

10,917 

8,396 
No. 
256,321 

2,944 

2,298 

150 


Tons. 
54,174 

3,707 

14,720 

29,456 

No. 

174,122 

2,636 

2,248 

234 


Tons. 
61,995 

6,011 

18,836 

39,940 

No. 
182,823 

3,363 

1,679 

211 


Tons. 
68,284 

8,712 

19,461 

41,. 375 

No. 
171,421 

3,262 

2,244 

164 


Merchandise  between  Liver- ' 
pool  and  Manchester    . 

lioad  traffic 

Between  Liverpool  and  Bol-  ' 
ton  Junction  .... 

Coal ; 

Passengers  booked  at  Com- 
pany's oflSces       .     .     .      _ 
Number  of  Trips — 
With  Passengers    . 

„     Goods      .     .     .     . 
„     Coal 


From  1st 

July  to 

31st  Dec, 

1833 


Tons. 
69,806 

9,733 

18,708 

40,134 

No. 

215,071 

3,2.53 

2,587 

37 


From  1st 

Jan. to 

30th  June, 

1834 


Tons. 
69,-522 

15,201 

19,633 

46,039 

No. 

200,676 

3,317 

2,499 

32 


From  1st 

July  to 

31st  Dec, 

1834 


Tons. 

72,577 

11,482 

22,321 

53,298 

No. 

235,961 

3,325 

2,108 

161 


From  1st 

Jan. to 

30th  June, 

1835 


Tons. 
76,448 

12,282 

24,917 

55,444 

No. 

205,741 

3,222 

2,X)91 

355 


From  1st 

July  to 

31st  Dec, 

1835 


From  1st 

Jan.  to 

30th  June, 

1836 


Tons. 
79,114 

15,015 

22,858 

60,802 

No. 

268,106 

2,347 

2,132 

473 


Tons. 
81,415 

14,983 

21,219 

68,893 

No. 

202,848 

3,3.53 

2,157 

536 


Passengers  booked  at  Company's  offices 
Cattle,  sheep,  and  pigs,  conveyed     . 


From  1st 

July  to 

31st  Dec, 

1810 


From  1st 

January  to 

1st  Julv, 

1811 ' 


Goods 
Coal    . 


No. 
394,711 

33,884 
Tons. 
88,483 
46,809 


No. 

323,549 

42,336 

Tons. 

I 137, 910 


From  1st 

Julv  to 

31st  Dec, 

1811 


No. 

320,323 

.34,110 

Tons. 

(87,060 

i 47,304 


From  1st  From  1st 

January  to  Julv  to 

1st  July,  31st  Dec, 
1842  1842 


No. 
304,100 
47,771 
Tons. 
78,606 
51,384 


No. 
344, 5a3 
33,076 
Tons. 
81,983 
45,574 


From  1st 

January  to 

1st  July. 

1813 

From  1st 

Julv  to 

31st  Dec, 

1813 

From  1st 

January  to 

1st  July, 

1811 

From  1st 
July  to 

31st  Dec. 
1841 

From  1st 

January  to 

1st  July, 

1845 

Passengers  booked  at  Company's  offices 
Cattle,  sheep,  and  pigs  conveyed     .     . 

No. 
287,830 
49,569 
Tons. 
84,150 
44,542 

No. 
345,079 
47,400 
Tons. 
94,292 
54,292 

No. 
290,197 
54,642 
Tons. 
93,819 
57,640 

No. 

362, 149 
49,096 
Tons. 

108,013 
58,282 

No. 

*533.388 

60,709 

Tons. 

108,224 

Coal 

75,114 

*  Including  third-class  passengers,  not  previously  taken. 


330 


PROGRESS  OF  THE  NATION. 


[sec.    III. 


The  aggregate  length  of  railways  completed  and  in  use  in  the  United 
Kingdom,  at  the  end  of  the  year  1849,  was  591)6  miles,  of  which  4656 
were  in  England,  846  in  Scotland,  and  494  in  Ireland.  It  is  stated  in 
the  Report  of  the  Commissioners  of  Railways,  dated  10th  July,  1850, 
that  "  these  5996  miles  of  railway  represent  a  capital  of  ahout 
197,500,000/.,  showing  an  expenditure  of  about  33,000/.  per  mile  in  the 
construction  of  the  line  and  the  provision  of  the  necessary  plant  and 
material  for  working." 

The  number  of  railway  passengers  conveyed  in  carriages  of  various 
classes  in  each  of  the  five  years  ending  with  30th  June,  1849,  was  as 
follows : — 


Year 

ending 
30th  June. 


Length 

of 

Railways 

open. 


Xumber  of  Passengers. 


1st  Oass. 


2nd  Class. 


Parliamentary  | 
and  3rd  Class. 


Mixed. 


1845 
1846 
1847 
1848 
1849 


Miles 

2,343 

2;  765 

3,603 

4,478 

5,447 


5,474,163 
6,160,354 
6,572,714 
7,190,779 
7,078,690 


14,325,825 
16,931,066 
18,699,288 
21,690,509 
23,392,450 


13,135,820 
18,506,437 
22,850,804 
28,334,018 
29,810,834 


8.55,445 

2,193,126 

3,229,357 

749,764 

116,185 


33,791,2.53 

43,790,983 
51,352,163 
57,965,070 
60,398,159 


The  receipts  fi'om  passengers   and  for  goods,  cattle,  &c.,  in  each  of 
the  same  years  were  : — 


Year 
ending 

30th 
June. 

Receipt  from  Passengers. 

Goods, 
Cattle,  Sec. 

1st  Class.       2nd  Class.     3rd  Class. 

Parliamen- 
tary Class. 

Mixed 
Class. 

Total  from 
Passengers. 

ToUl. 

1845 
1846 
1847 
1848 
1849 

£.        1        £.               £. 
1,516,'805    1,598,115   6.51,903 
1,661,898    1,937,947    7.38,474 
1,675,759    2,048.080    737,452 
1,792,533  ,2,352,153    661,038 
1,889,646   2,502,588    6.51,. 366 

£. 

293*732 

539,977 

902,851 

1-059,785 

£. 

209,518 

93,164 

146,734 

11,807 

2,590 

£. 
3,976,341 
4,725,215 
5,148,002 
5,720,382 
6,105,975 

£. 
2,233,373 
2,840,354 
3,362,884 
4,213,170 
5,094,926 

£. 
6,209,714 
7, 565,. 569 
8,510,886 
9,9^3,552 
11,200,901 

It  might  have  been  expected  that  the  greater  facility  of  personal 
communication  between  Liverpool  and  Manchester  afforded  by  the  rail- 
road would  have  diminished  in  a  very  sensible  degree  the  number  of 
letters  jwissing  between  the  two  towns.  Such,  however,  is  not  the  fact ; 
the  Post-office  revenue  derived  from  such  letters  having  been  actually 
increased  more  than  6  per  cent.,  as  appears  by  the  following  state- 
ment : — 


Total  Amount 

Cost  of 

Total  Amount 

Cost  of 

Years. 

of  Postage. 

Conveyance. 

Years. 

of  Postage. 

Conveyance 

£. 

£. 

£. 

£. 

1828 

13,432 

223 

1831 

13,,506 

465 

1829 

12,759 

223 

1832 

lj3,.3.36 

.535 

1830 

12,701 

223 
223 

1833 
Average 

14,556 

645 

Av 

cragc    12,964 

13,799 

548 

CKAP.  v.]  HAILWAYS,  331 

llie  nuiil  was  first  sent  by  the  railway  on  the  11th  November,  1830. 
The  result  liere  stated  is  no  doubt  attributable  to  the  celerity  with 
which  letters  are  conveyed  and  answers  despatched.  Since  the  opening 
of  the  railway  between  the  two  towns,  the  dehveries  of  letters  are  as 
frequent  and  as  rapid  as  the  deliveries  by  the  twopenny  post  between 
the  opposite  ends  of  London.  The  Post-office  authorities  lost  no  time 
in  availing  themselves  of  the  means  which  railways  offer  for  expediting 
the  transmission  of  letters.  The  London  mails,  which  are  despatched 
at  eight  o'clock  in  the  evening,  now  arrive  at  Manchester  and  Liverpool 
in  time  for  the  delivery  of  letters  at  the  commencement  of  business 
hours  on  the  following  day,  and  of  course  the  transmission  of  letters 
from  these  towns  to  the  metropolis  is  equally  rapid.  Besides  this,  there 
are  740  mail-bags  taken  up  and  delivered  every  day  at  the  various  sta- 
tions along  the  line,  affording  a  stimulus  to  business  which  cannot  fail 
to  be  beneficial.  The  like  advantage  has  been  and  will  continue  to  be 
made  available  upon  other  lines  as  completed,  so  that  the  fulfilment  of 
the  reasonable  expectations  formed  from  this  application  of  steam  power 
will,  before  long,  bring  Edinburgh,  in  this  respect,  almost  as  near  to  the 
metropolis  as  any  one  of  the  towns  which  lies  beyond  the  limit  of  the 
threepenny  post  delivery  w^as  placed  only  a  few  years  ago.  Under  the 
then  existing  regulations,  indeed,  it  took  as  long  a  time  to  convey  a 
letter  from  Kingsland  to  Camberwell,  a  distance  of  only  5  miles,  as  will 
then  suffice  for  its  transmission  from  the  Scottish  to  the  English  capital. 

It  would  be  unreasonable  to  limit  our  anticipations  of  improvement 
under  the  railway  system  to  results  equal  to  what  has  been  hitherto 
obtained.  The  first  work  of  the  kind,  which  has,  and  that  unexpectedly, 
produced  a  marked  economy  of  time  in  travelling,  was  opened  in  Sep- 
tember, 1830,  and  at  once  achieved  so  much  in  this  respect,  that  the 
highest  aim  on  the  part  of  the  projectors  of  most  similar  undertakings 
for  a  time  was  to  equal,  without  a  thought  of  siu-passing,  its  perform- 
ance. Already,  however,  have  the  able  engineers  engaged  upon  these 
works  contrived  means  for  throwing  that  performance  into  the  shade. 
The  distance  between  London  and  Exeter,  193|  miles,  is  now  constantly 
accomplished  in  four  hours  and  a  half,  and  it  forms  a  subject  of  com- 
plaint that  the  distance  between  London  and  Liverpool,  210  miles, 
occupies  so  long  a  time  as  six  hours  ! 

If  it  is  unreasonable  to  set  limits  to  the  amount  of  improvements  in 
those  particulars  which  have  been  here  considered,  it  must  be  equally 
unreasonable  and  indeed  impossible  to  limit  the  modes  in  which  this 
new  agent  in  civilization  may  be  brought  to  minister  to  the  profit  and 
convenience  of  society.  It  seems  scarcely  possible  to  assign  bounds  to 
the  good  that  will  follow  from  the  cheap,  easy,  and  rapid  communication 
it  will  offer  between  all  parts,  however  distant  from  each  other,  of  the 
kingdom.     Every  spot  will  by  this  means  obtain  a  wider  market  for  its 


332  PROGRESS  OF  THE  NATION.  [sec.  ni. 

productions,  and  have  a  wider  field  whence  to  draw  its  supplies.  A 
great  part  of  the  money  now  actually  expended  upon  the  conveyance  of 
persons  and  goods  will  be  saved  to  the  country,  and  become  available 
capital  for  the  extension  of  its  commerce,  and  the  completion  of  still 
further  improvements.  According  to  a  published  statement  of  the 
working  of  the  Liver))ool  and  Manchester  line,  it  appears  that  the  gain 
thus  produced  to  the  public  at  large  on  that  single  road  amounts  to  very 
little  short  of  a  quarter  of  a  million  annually,  viz.  : — 

£. 

2«.  6d.  each  on  500,000  passengers 62,500 

2s.  6rf.  per  ton  on  450,000  tons  of  merchandise 56,250 

2s.  Od.  per  ton  on  1,-240,(HX)  tons  of  coal  for  the  use  of  Liverpool  and 
ilanchester,  the  price  of  that  article  having  been  reduced  to  that 
extent  by  the  opening  of  the  railroad 124,000 

£242,750 

In  addition  to  this  saving,  it  is  fair  to  reckon  the  gains,  beyond  the 
ordinary  profits  of  stock,  yielded  to  the  proprietors  of  the  undertaking. 
The  gain  upon  other  and  longer  lines  will  be  greater  in  respect  of  pas- 
sengers, although  it  may  not  generally  prove  equal  to  what  is  here 
stated  with  reference  to  merchandise  ;  but  it  cannot  fail  to  be  every  way 
of  immense  importance,  and  to  add  most  materially,  in  the  course  of 
years,  to  the  available  resources  of  the  country.  / 

There  are  other  modes  and  particulars  in  which  railroads  will  prove 
themselves  of  benefit,  but  which  are  too  numerous  and  too  obvious  to 
render  their  more  particular  notice  in  these  pages  either  necessary  or 
desirable. 

For  some  time  after  the  adoption  of  railway  travelling,  a  very  ex- 
aggerated notion  was  entertained  by  the  public  in  regard  to  the  personal 
danger  necessarily  attendant  upon  it.  It  is  now  seen  that  such  danger 
is  exceedingly  small.  In  the  official  Report  of  the  Railway  Commis- 
sioners for  1849,  the  following  comparative  statement  is  given,  from 
which  it  appears  that  the  proportion  of  the  number  killed  to  those  con- 
veyed was,  in  184S,  1  in  286,934,  and  in  1849,  1  in  316,047  ;  while 
the  proportion  of  persons  receiving  injury  short  of  death  was,  in  1848, 
1  in  264,661,  and  in  1849,  1  in  341,398.  These  proportions  embrace 
the  whole  number  of  casualties,  however  arising ;  but  if  we  take  into 
the  account  only  those  cases  which  resulted  from  causes  beyond  the 
control  of  the  suflTerers,  we  shall  find  that  in  1848  the  killed  were  1  in 
2,520,034,  and  the  injured  1  in  362,255  ;  and  that  in  1849  the  killed 
were  no  more  than  1  in  3,192,077,  and  the  injured  1  in  665,016. 
Limiting  the  calculation  to  the  cases  of  passengers,  the  proportion  killed 
from  causes  beyond  their  ovm  control  was,  in  1848,  1  in  6,440,087,  and 
in  1849,  1  in  12,768,308  ;  while  the  proportion  injured  was,  in  1848, 
1  in  452,818,  and  in  1849,  1  in  760,018. 


RAILWAYS. 


333 


Comparative  Statement,  slunoing  the  Number  and  Description  of  Persons  Killed  and  Injured  on  all 
t/ie  Railways  open  for  Traffic  in  tlie  United  Kingdom  during  the  Years  1848  and  1849,  tvyether 
with  the  Number  of  Passengers  conveyed,  and  tlie  Length  of  Railway  open  during  ttie  same 

Periods. 


UESCKIl'TlON  OF  PERSONS. 

Year  ending 
31st  Dec,  1848. 

Year  en(liti;» 
31st  Dec,  I8iy. 

Killed. 

Injured. 

Killed.  1   Injured. 

Passengers  killed  and  injured  from  causes  beyond  their" 
own  control ^ 

Passengers  killed  and  injured  owing  to  their  own  mis- 
conduct or  want  of  caution j 

9 
12 

128 

7 

5 

18 

84 
12 

Total  passengers  killed  and  injured     . 

Servants  of  companies  or  of  contractors  killed  and  in- ) 
jurcd  from  causes  beyond  their  own  control      .      .     .  J 

Servants  of  companies  or  of  contractors  killed  and  in-| 
jured    owing   to   their  own   misconduct   or  want  of}" 

21 

13 

125 

41 

1 

1 

135 
32 
42 

10 

23 

14 

113 

48 

1 
3 

96 
12 
67 

Trespassers  and  otlier  persons,  neither  passengers  nor  1 
servants,  killed  and  injured  by  improperly  crossing  or!- 
standing  on  the  railway ' 

One  person  run  over  and  killed  at  a  crossing  through  1 
misconduct  of  an  engine-driver 1 

A  child  killed,  and  another  injured,  in  consequence  of  i 
an  engine  getting  oti'  the  rails,  and  running  into  an  /■ 
adjoining  house ' 

11 

1 

Total 

202 

219 

202 

1^7 

Number  of  passengers  conveyed  during  the  same  periods         57,960,784 

63,841,539 

The  laissez  faire  system,  which  is  pursued  in  this  country  to  such  an 
extent  that  it  has  become  an  axiom  with  the  Government  to  undertake 
nothing  and  to  interfere  with  nothing  which  can  be  accompli;lied  by 
individual  enterprise,  or  by  the  associated  means  of  private  parties,  has 
been  pregnant  with  great  loss  and  inconvenience  to  the  country  in  car- 
rying forward  the  railway  system.  Perhaps  there  never  was  an  occa- 
sion in  which  the  Government  could  with  equal  propriety  have  interfered 
to  reconcile  the  conflicting  interests  involved,  and  to  prevent  public 
injury  arising  from  the  false  steps  so  likely  to  be  made  at  first  in  brino^- 
ing  about  a  total  revolution  in  the  internal  communications  of  the 
country.  It  is  not  meant  by  these  remarks  to  infer  that  Government 
should  have  taken  into  its  own  hands  the  construction  of  all  or  any  of 
the  railroads  called  for  by  the  wants  of  the  community  ;  but  only  to 
suggest  the  propriety  and  advantage  that  must  have  resulted  from  a 
preliminary  inquiry,  made  by  competent  and  uninterested  professional 
men,  with  a  view  to  ascertain  the  comparative  advantages  and  facilities 
offered  by  different  lines  for  the  accomplishment  of  the  object  in  view. 
If  this  course  had  been  adopted  before  any  of  the  numerous  projects 
were  brought  forward  for  the  construction  of  hues  of  railway  between 
all  imaginable  places,  and  if  it  had  been  laid  down  as  a  rule  bv  the 


334  PROGRESS  OF  THE  NATION.  [sec.  m. 

legislature  tbar  no  such  projected  line  could  be  sanctioned  or  even  en- 
tertained by  Parliament  which  was  not  in  accordance  with  the  reports 
and  recommendations  of  the  Government  engineers,  the  saving  of  money 
would  have  been  immense.  The  expensive  contests  between  rival  com- 
panies, in  which  large  capitals  have  been  so  needlessly  sunk,  would  then 
have  been  wholly  avoided  ;  and  it  might  further  have  followed  from 
this  cause,  that  a  kind  of  public  sanction  having  been  given  to  particular 
lines  and  localities,  nuich  of  that  personal  opposition  which  has  thrown 
difficulties  in  the  way  of  works  of  great  and  acknowledged  utility  would 
never  have  been  brought  forward.  The  Parliamentary  contests  here 
alluded  to,  have,  in  truth,  been  between  private  individuals,  and  the 
victory  has  often  remained  with  that  one  of  the  contending  parties 
who  could  interest  the  greatest  number  of  legislators :  whereas,  if  the 
lines  had  been  selected  as  the  best  that  could  be  chosen,  and  sanctioned 
by  men  of  professional  skill  and  character,  the  legislature  could  never 
have  listened  to  the  pretensions  of  parties  who,  through  the  use  of  family 
or  personal  influence,  have  in  too  many  cases  set  up  a  show  of  opposition 
in  order  to  extort  exorbitant  sums  under  the  name  of  compensation. 
The  published  Reports  of  some  of  the  Railway  Companies  have  put  us 
in  possession  of  the  enormous  sums  which  have  been  spent  directly  in 
these  parliamentary  contests,  and  it  might  be  considered  a  sufficient 
justification  of  the  remarks  here  made,  to  point  to  the  following  figures. 
These,  however,  form  only  a  part  of  the  expenditure  incurred  in  over- 
coming, or,  to  speak  more  correctly,  in  buying  off  opposition,  and  which, 
as  it  enhances  the  cost  of  the  undertaking,  must  be  taken  back  from 
the  public  by  the  proprietors  of  the  roads  in  the  form  of  excessive  fares 
and  tolls. 

Statement  of  Parliamentary  Expenses  incurred  in  obtaining  Acts  of  Incorporation  for  the  following 

undertakings : — 

£.  £. 


Birmingham  and  Gloucester  ,     .  22,618 

Bristol  and  Gloucester  .      ,      .     .  25,589 

,,          Exeter 18,592 

Eastern  Counties 39,171 

Great  Western 89,197 

„      North  of  England    .     .      .  20,526 

Grand  Junction 22,757 

Glasgow,  Paisley,  and  Greenock  .  23,481 

London  and  Birmingham  .     .     .  72,868 


London  and  South-Western    .     .  41,467 

JIanchester  and  Leeds .      .      .     .  49,166 

Midland  Counties 28,776 

North  Midland 41,349 

Northern  and  Eastern  .      .      .      .  74,166 
Sheffield,  Ashton-under-Lyne,  and 

Manchester 31,473 

South-Eastern 82,292 


In  some  cases  the  suras  here  given  contain  the  expenses  of  sui'veying 
and  other  disbursements,  which  necessarily  precede  the  obtaining  of  the 
Act  of  Incorporation.  On  the  other  hand,  they  exhibit  only  the  costs 
defrayed  by  the  proprietors  of  the  railway  to  the  exclusion  of  the  ex- 
penses incurred  by  the  different  parties  by  whom  the  applications  were 
opposed  in  Parliament.  It  is  understood  that  the  most  glaring  of  the 
above  cases  is  completely  eclipsed  by  the  charges  attending  the  contests 


CHAP,  v.]  RAILWAYS.  335 

of  tlie   various  lines  projected  to  Brighton.       No   statement  of  those 
expenses  has  hitherto  been  published. 

The  plan  above  alluded  to  was  taken  up  as  regards  Ireland,  and,  on 
the  motion  of  the  Marquess  of  Lansdowne,  an  Address  was  presented  to 
the  Crown  by  the  House  of  Lords,  in  compliance  with  which,  Commis- 
sioners were  nominated  in  October,  183G,  to  consider,  '■'■first,  as  to  a 
general  system  for  Railways  in  Ireland,  in  such  manner  either  by  caus- 
ing surveys  to  be  made  of  the  leading  lines,  or  otherwise,  as  may  best 
serve  to  guide  the  legislature  in  the  consideration  of  the  projects  that 
may  be  brought  before  it.  Secondli/,  as  to  the  best  mode  of  directing 
the  development  of  the  means  of  intercourse  to  the  channels  whereby 
the  greatest  advantage  may  be  obtained  by  the  smallest  outlay ;  taking 
into  c(msideration  not  only  the  existing  means  which  the  country  presents, 
but  those  which  may  be  anticipated  from  the  resources  which  may  in 
future  be  developed.  Thirdly,  to  inquire  as  to  the  port  or  ports  on  the 
west  or  south  coast,  whence  the  navigation  to  America  may  be  best 
carried  on  by  steam  or  sailing  vessels ;  and  to  investigate  particularly  the 
facilities  for  the  construction  of  lines  of  railroad  across  Ireland  to  such 
port  or  ports,  in  connexion  with  the  greatest  possible  collateral  benefits 
to  internal  communication.  K\\<\,  fourtldy ,  to  inquire  into  all  such  matters 
as  may  appear  essential  to  the  useful  prosecution  and  result  of  the  in- 
vestigations. 

A  preliminary  Report  was  made  by  the  Commissioners,  in  the  month 
of  March  following  their  appointment,  and  laid  before  Parliament,  in 
which  report  promise  was  given  to  present,  as  early  as  possible,  the  full 
result  of  their  investigations,  accompanied  by  statistical  information  of 
the  most  interesting  nature,  which  would  bring  to  the  knowledge  of  the 
public  various  circumstances  connected  with  the  condition  and  prospects 
of  Ireland,  as  to  which  no  sources  of  inquiry  have  previously  been 
opened. 

The  Report  thus  promised  was  presented  to  Parliament  in  1838,  and 
fully  accomplished  the  promise  of  its  authors.  It  was  at  once  ac- 
knowledged to  be  one  of  the  most  valuable  statistical  documents  ever 
produced  on  the  subject  of  Ireland,  and  has  since  been  continually  used 
as  a  great  storehouse  of  facts  connected  with  that  island,  not  only  as  re- 
gards its  wants  and  capabilities  for  the  development  of  the  railway 
system,  but  also  with  respect  to  its  general  resources,  and  the  degree  in 
which  these  had  been  made  available.  Various  circumstances  combined 
to  prevent  the  specific  recommendations  of  the  Commissioners  from  being 
adopted  by  the  Government,  and  the  long  season  of  commercial  diffi- 
culty which  followed  the  presentation  of  the  Report  equally  prevented 
the  employment  of  private  enterprise  to  that  end.  When,  however,  that 
season  of  gloom  had  disappeared,  the  Report  of  the  Irish  Railway  Com- 
missioners became  a  text-book  in  the  hands  of  speculators,  and  a  guide 


33G 


PROGRESS  OF  THE  NATION. 


[sec.    III. 


in  various  ways  to  the  Govoniraont  and  to  the  Committees  of  the  Houses 
of  Parliament  to  which  railway  projects  in  Ireland  have  from  time  to  time 
been  referred. 

If  the  adoption  of  railway  travelling  has  been  the  means  of  depriving 
of  employment  many  per.^ons  who  were  previously  engaged  on  the  vari- 
ous turnpike  roads  of  the  kingdom,  it  has,  on  the  other  hand,  created  a 
considerable  amount  of  work  upon  the  several  lines.  The  following 
figures,  taken  from  a  Parliamentary  Return,  show  the  number  of  persons 
who  were,  in  various  capacities,  employed  by  railway  companies  on  the 
30th  June,  1849:— 


Secretaries  or  managers       .      .  156 

Treasurers 32 

Engineers 107 

Superintendents 314 

Storekeepers    120 

Accountants  or  cashiers       .     .  138 

Inspectors  or  timekeepers    .      .  490 

Station-masters 1,300 

Draughtsmen 103 

Clerks 4,021 

Foremen 709 

Engine-drivers 1,839 

Assistant  drivers  or  firemen     .  1,871 


Guards  or  breaksmen   .     .     .  1,631 

Artificers 10,803 

Switchmen 1,540 

Gate-keepers 1,361 

Policemen  or  watchmen    .     .  1,.508 

Porters  or  Messengers  .     .     .  8,238 

Plate-layers 5,508 

Labourers 14,029 

Miscellaneous  employment     .  144 


Total 


55,968 


At  the  same  date,  there  were  employed  upon  lines  of  railway  under 
construction  103,816  persons,  of  whom  16,144  were  artificers,  and  84,473 
were  labourers  and  foremen.  The  remaining  3,199  persons  consisted  of 
policemen,  porters,  clerks,  draughtsmen,  inspectors,  accountants,  secre- 
taries, &c.  A  large  part  of  the  labourers  engaged  in  the  construction 
of  railways,  would  have  to  seek  other  em])loyments  as  the  lines  should  be 
completed,  but  on  the  other  hand,  a  greater  number  of  educated  persons 
would  then  be  called  into  action  for  working  the  railways. 

The  railways  ystem  has  been  successfully  introduced  into  Belgium,  in 
which  country  various  lines,  extending  to  nearly  400  English  miles,  are 
now  in  full  operation.  The  nature  of  the  country  is  most  favourable  for 
the  construction  of  such  works,  requiring  for  the  most  part  neither  tun- 
nelling, nor  deep  cutting,  nor  costly  embankments. 

The  greater  part  of  the  Belgian  railways  were  constructed  hy  the  Bel- 
orian  Government,  and  are  worked  for  the  benefit  of  the  state  as  follows  : — 


Line  of  the  North — Brussels  to  Antwerp      .     . 
„  "^'est— ^lalines  to  Ostend      .     • 

„  East— Malines  to  Prussian  frontier 

„  South— Brussels  to  French  frontier 

Ghent  to  French  frontier  and  Tournay    . 

Braine-le-Comte  to  Namur 


Length  in 
English  Miles. 

QTi 
-'  I 

82| 
51 
48 
4} 

326f 


Cost  in 

English  Money. 

£. 

305,042 

618,728 

1,691J577 

613.585 

349,422 

536,000 


£4,114,354 


The  average  cost  per  mile  of  the  whole  is  12,611/.,  but  this  does  not 


RAIIAVAYS. 


337 


include  the  buildings  for  stations,  nor  the  cost  of  locomotive  engines. 
By  including  these  items  the  total  outlay  of  the  Government  when  the 
whole  of  the  lines  were  opened  for  traffic,  amounted  to  5,373,200/.  or 
16,470/.  per  English  mile. 

The  funds  for  the  construction  of  these  works  were  provided  by  loans, 
the  interest  upon  which,  amounting  to  244,521/.  per  annum,  has  not 
hitherto  been  fully  met  by  the  profits  of  the  lines.  The  progress  of 
railway  travelling,  and  of  the  gross  and  net  receipts  upon  the  various 
lines  since  the  first  section  was  opened  for  traffic,  and  up  to  the  close  of 
1847,  have  been  as  follows  : — 


1835 
1836 
1837 
1838 
1839 
1840 
1841 


421,439 
871,307 
1,382,577 
2,238,303 
1,952,731 
2,199,319 
2,639,744 


Gross 
Receipts. 


10,760 
33,005 
56,680 
123,913 
169,093 
213,406 
249,053 


Net 
Receipts. 


£. 

4,009 
15,760 

9,085 
13,967 
46,834 
83,226 
74,900 


1842 
1843 
1844 
1845 
1846 
1847 


Passengers. 


2,724,104 
3,085.349 
3,381^529 
3,470,678 
3,700,111 
3,746,390 


Gross 

Net 

Receipts. 

Receipts. 

£. 

£. 

298,462 

110,449 

359,777 

140.713 

449,219 

218,602 

496,128 

243,265 

546,236 

256,405 

.593,445 

220,690 

It  is  more  than  probable  that  if  the  Belgian  railways  had  been  con- 
structed by  means  of  private  capitalists,  the  rate  of  fares  would  have 
been  much  higher  than  those  adopted  by  the  Government,  which  has 
been  contented  for  a  time  to  draw  its  profit  indirectly  from  the  general 
impetus  which  so  greatly  improved  a  system  of  transport  could  not  fail 
to  give  to  the  business  of  the  country,  rather  than  from  an  immediately 
remunerative  rate  of  fares.  The  loss,  by  reason  of  the  excess  of  the 
interest  upon  the  railw^ay  loans  over  the  net  receipts  of  the  lines,  has 
been  only  nominal,  since  the  nation  at  large,  which  has  made  good  the 
deficiency,  has  saved  it  in  the  diminished  charges  of  conveyance  which 
in  one  shape  or  other  has  necessarily  proved  an  advantage  to  every 
individual  in  the  kingdom  ;  and  even  with  respect  to  the  railways  them- 
selves, if  viewed  as  a  money  speculation,  it  is  probable  that  the  surplus 
revenue  which  they  will  in  future  yield,  will  come  to  be  of  serious  ad- 
vantage to  the  state,  and  that  the  more  speedily  because  of  the  lowness 
of  the  fares  and  charges,  which  has  stimulated  the  people  to  embrace 
the  benefits  of  rapid  transit. 

It  should  be  stated  that  the  net  receipts  as  given  in  the  foregoing 
table  do  not  fully  exhibit  the  profits  of  the  lines,  because  the  Belgian 
Government  makes  no  allowance  for  the  conveyance  of  mails,  nor  for 
the  passing  of  troops.  The  fares  charged  upon  the  Belgian  railways 
do  not  exceed  one  penny  per  English  mile  for  passengers  in  first  class 
carriages,  the  fares  in  the  inferior  classes  being  proportionately  low% 

The  line  between  Brussels  and  Malines  has  been  opened  for  traffic 
since  the  7th  of  May,  1835,  and  in  the  first  vear  thereafter  563. 2 10 


338 


PROGRESS  OF  THE  NATION. 


[- 


persons  had  been  eonveyed  npon  it.  During  the  first  month  that  fol- 
lowed the  opening  of  the  1-4  miles  from  Malines  to  Antwerp,  there  were 
conveyed  upon  the  whole  line  101,479  passengers.  The  railroads  in 
Belgium  having  been  constructed  at  a  cost  comparatively  inconsider- 
able, the  fares  are  fixed  on  the  most  moderate  scale ;  the  whole  journey 
from  Brussels  to  Antwerp,  which  is  performed  in  from  1  hour  25  min. 
to  1  hour  45  min.,  costs  no  more  to  the  traveller  than  one  franc,  or 
tenpence  English  money.  Before  the  opening  of  the  railway  the  num- 
ber of  passengers  between  Brussels  and  Antwerp  is  said  not  to  have 
exceeded  on  the  average  80,000  yearly,  at  the  cost  to  each  person  of 
2s.  Qd.  to  45. 

The  first  construction  of  raih'oads  in  the  United  States  is  of  still  more 
recent  date  than  the  canals  of  that  country.  The  earliest  (the  Quincy 
Railroad,  in  Massachusetts,  three  miles  in  length)  was  undertaken  in 
1825,  and  was  intended  for  the  conveyance  of  heavy  materials  only,  as 
was  the  case  with  the  early  railroads  in  this  country.  The  success  of 
the  Liverpool  and  Manchester  line,  as  a  means  of  rapid  travelling,  has 
stimulated  the  energies  of  the  American  citizens  m  this  direction  to  an 
extraordinary  degree,  and  already  nearly  200  joint-stock  associations 
have  been  incorporated  for  the  construction  of  railroads  in  almost  every 
part  of  the  Union.  Only  a  part  of  the  works  thus  contemplated  have 
hitherto  been  completed,  but  many  others  are  in  progress.  The  extent 
of  the  lines  completed  in  each  State  in  1849,  was  as  under  : — 


No. 

Extent  i 

Sums  Ex- 

No. 

Extent 

Suras  Ex- 

STATES. 

of  Rail- 

in     1 

pended  in  tlieir 

STATES. 

of  Rail- 

in 

pended  in  their 

ways. 

Miles. 

Construction. 

ways. 

Miles. 

Construction. 

Dollars. 

Dollars. 

Elaine 

2 

64 

1,200,000 

South  Carolina. 

3 

241 

5,493,678 

Kew  Hampshire 

5 

212 

7,774,502 

Georgia  . 

5 

605 

6,-550,308 

Massachusetts     . 

31 

1,056 

46,305,878 

Florida   .      .     . 

3 

54 

2.30,000 

Ehode  Island 

1 

48 

2,600.000 

Alabama 

2 

113 

950  000 

Connecticut  . 

3 

147 

2,884,123 

^Mississippi  . 

4 

276 

768.000 

New  York 

22 

840 

27,355,144 

Kentucky    . 

1 

29 

450,000 

Pennsylvania 

35 

974 

23,745.290 

Ohio  .... 

4 

133 

4,354,3Lll 

New  Jersey  .     . 

8 

206 

6,780,000 

Indiana  . 

1 

86 

212,000 

Delaware . 

1 

17 

600,000 

Michigan 

5 

354 

6,7yO,928 

Maryland .     . 

5 
9 

360 
371 

12,473.000 
6,364,506 

Virginia   .     . 

North  Carolina  . 

2 

254 

3,400,000 

Total   .      . 

152 

6,440 

167,731,748* 

So  recently  as  1840,  the  aggregate  length  of  the  railways  open  for 
traffic  in  the  United  States  was  only  3332  miles,  and  the  money  spent 
in  their  construction  was  96,529,940  dollars,  or  20,110,404/.  In  addi- 
tion to  the  above  152  lines,  there  were,  in  1849,  numerous  other  rail- 
ways under  construction  in  the  various  states.  In  those  of  New  England 
alone  there  were  then  more  than  20  lines  in  progress,  which  when  com- 


*  Equal  to  £34,944,114  sterling. 


riiAi-.  v.]  RAILWAYS.  339 

pletcd  will  add  more  than  800  miles  to  the  railways  of  the  United 
States. 

The  average  cost  per  mile  of  the  above  works  has  been  26,045  dollars, 
or  5426/. 

The  New  York  and  Erie  Railroad,  the  greatest  work  of  the  kind  that 
was  ever  undertaken,  was  begun  in  November,  1835.  Its  entire  length 
from  the  city  of  New  York  to  Portland  and  Dunkirk,  on  Lake  Erie, 
will  be  506  miles.  The  capital  of  the  company  is  ten  millions  of  dol- 
lars, or  about  4120/,  per  mile.  The  South  Carolina  Railroad  from 
Charleston  to  Hamburg,  a  distance  of  136  miles,  is  a  successful  under- 
taking, which  was  begun  in  1830,  and  opened  for  use  throughout  in 
1833.  It  is  built  on  piles,  and  the  difference  of  level  is  overcome  some- 
what in  the  manner  proposed  in  this  country  by  Mr.  Palmer,  i.  e.,  by  means 
of  the  varying  lengths  of  the  posts  or  piles  employed.  Since  the  first 
construction  of  this  work  it  has  been  judged  advisable  to  fill  in  the 
piles  with  earth,  converting  them  into  an  embankment,  and  thus  the 
cost  of  the  line  has  been  much  enhanced.  Even  with  this  additional 
expense,  however,  the  whole  cost  has  been  only  1,336,615  dollars,  or 
1312/.  4s.  per  mile,  including  locomotive  engines  and  carriages. 

A  still  greater  work  than  either  of  the  foregoing — the  Charleston  and 
Cincinnati  Railroad — has  been  projected,  with  the  view  of  opening  a 
communication  between  the  valleys  of  the  Ohio  and  the  Mississippi  and 
the  Atlantic  Ocean.  The  country  between  the  two  cities  has  been  ex- 
plored in  various  directions,  and  surveys  are  now  in  progress  for  deter- 
mining which  line  offers  the  least  difficulty  with  the  greatest  prospective 
advantages.  It  is  not  necessary  to  offer  any  further  description  of  these 
undertakings.  Enough  has  been  said  to  show  that,  however  rapidly  we 
may  proceed  in  the  execution  of  such  works  in  this  country,  we  are 
pretty  sure  to  be  rivalled  in  that  respect  by  the  enterprising  and  inde- 
fatigable citizens  of  the  United  States. 

The  extent  of  railways  in  English  miles,  open  for  traffic  in  the  dif- 
ferent states  of  Germany,  in  October,  1850,  was  as  follows  : — 

Miles. 

Prussia 1820 

Austria 920 


Saxony 260 

Bavaria 354 

Hanover      .      .      .      .      .  250 

Hesse  Cassel     ....  170 

Baden 170 

Wurtemburg    ....  124 

Holsteia 96 


Miles. 

Anhalt  Cothen       ...  10 

Brunswick 60 

Lauenburg  8 

Mecklenburg     ....  112 

Hesse  Darmstadt  ...  52 

Nassau 29 

Total  ....  4435 


Z  A 


340 


PROGRESS  OF  THE  NATION. 


[sec.    III. 


CHAPTER  VI. 


COASTING    TRADE. 

No  Records  of  Coasting  Trade  earlier  than  1824 — Tonnage  employed,  1824  to  1849— Pro- 
portion emploj-ed  in  conveying  Coals  to  London — Influence  of  Corn  Trade  in  determining 
Fluctuations  in  the  employment  of  Coasting  Vessels. 

The  Custoiii-house  does  not  contain  any  records  from  which  the  amount 
of  our  coasting  trade  in  general  can  be  ascertained  for  any  period  earlier 
than  1824.  From  that  year  to  1849  the  tonnage  of  coasting  vessels 
that  entered  inwards  at  ports  in  Great  Britain  from  other  ports  in  Great 
Britain,  including  their  repeated  voyages,  has  been  as  follows  :  — 


Years. 

Tons. 

Years. 

Tons. 

Years. 

Tons. 

1824 

8,552,177 

1833 

8,358,454 

1842 

9,636,563 

1825 

8,651,783 

1834 

8,774,326 

1843 

9,566,275 

1826 

8,870,582 

1835 

9,054,769 

1844 

9,615,434 

1827 

7,448,252 

1836 

9,157,100 

1845 

10,974,831 

1828 

7,987,604 

1837 

9,207,266 

1846 

10,569,279 

1829 

8,027,475 

1838 

9,226,777 

1847 

10,923,186 

1830 

8,240,654 

1839 

9, 433, .511 

1848 

11,053,563 

1831 

8,255,630 

1840 

9,615,661 

1849 

10,489.414 

1832 

8,393,068 

1841 

9,676,293 

It  has  been  already  shown  (section  2,  chap,  vi.)  how  large  an  amount 
of  tonnage  is  engaged  in  the  conveyance  of  coals  coastwise  between 
diflFerent  parts  of  the  kingdom.  The  arrivals  in  the  port  of  London  alone 
in  the  nineteen  years  from  1831  to  1849,  were — 


Years. 

Shi})S. 

Tons  of  Coals. 

Years. 

Ships, 

Tons  of  Coals 

1831 

7,006 

2,053,673 

1841 

10,316 

2,909,562 

1832 

7,528 

2,149,820 

1842 

9,691 

2,754,719 

1833 

7,077 

2,014,804 

1843 

9,593 

2,663,114 

1834 

7,404 

2,080,547 

1844 

9,466 

2.563,166 

1835 

7,958 

2,299,816 

1845 

11,987 

3,463,630 

1836 

8,162 

2,398,352 

1846 

10,488 

2,975.627 

1837 

8,720 

2,629,321 

1847 

11,911 

3,302,425 

1838 

9,003 

2,582,770 

1848 

12,267 

3,479,189 

1839 

9,340 

2,638,256 

1849 

11,798 

3,380,786 

1840 

9,132 

2,589,087 

It  is  to  be  regretted  that  the  statements  of  our  coasting  trade  during 
earlier  years  cannot  be  procured,  as  it  is  evident  that  this  is  the  only 
branch  of  home  traffic  capable  of  being  measured  by  Custom-house 
records,  as  to  its  amount  and  progress.  The  falling  off,  exhibited  above, 
in  the  coasting  tonnage  of  1827,  and  some  subsequent  years,  as  compared 
with  the  first  three  years  of  the  series,  is  very  remarkable.  The  only 
circumstance  which  seems  to  offer  any  explanation  of  the  diminution,  is 


CHAI-.  VI.]  COASTING  TRADE.  341 

the  fact  of  the  importations  of  foreign  grain  having  been  on  the  average 
of  the  five  years  from  1827  to  1831,  nearly  double  the  average  import- 
ations in  the  three  years  from  1824  to  1826.  The  foreign  grain  being 
brought  principally  to  the  markets  where  it  was  required  for  consump- 
tion, the  services  of  coasting  traders  would  be  so  far  not  required. 
During  the  same  time,  and  subsequently  to  1831,  the  importations  of 
grain  into  Great  Britain  from  Ireland  have  also  been  very  considerably 
greater  than  they  were  up  to  1827,  and  this,  while  it  may  also  partly 
account  for  the  diminution  in  the  English  coasting  trade,  will  explain 
in  some  degree  the  increase  that  occurred  about  the  same  time  in  the 
tonnage  of  vessels  from  Ireland,  as  shown  in  the  following  cha])ter  :  the 
increased  average  size  of  the  vessels  since  1825  is  owing  to  the  partial 
employment  of  steam-vessels. 

The  peculiar  nature  of  the  laws  which  have  regulated  our  trade  in 
foreign  corn  has  occasioned  accounts  to  be  kept  of  the  quantities  as 
well  as  the  prices  of  grain  sold  in  certain  specified  markets  throughout 
the  kingdom.  Some  changes  have,  at  different  times,  been  made,  as 
regards  the  particular  markets  m  which  these  registers  must  be  kept ; 
in  some  it  has  been  abandoned,  and  others  have  been  made  to  supply 
their  places.  A  great  addition  to  their  number  was  made  in  1842. 
Among  these  places  there  are  128  where  registers  have  been  kept  con- 
tinuously since  1825,  and  from  these  it  appears  that  the  quantity  of 
home-grown  wheat  sold,  has,  during  that  time,  very  much  increased. 
The  returns  of  1825  show  that  the  sales  in  these  markets  amounted  to 
1,993,564  quarters,  and  in  1834  had  advanced  to  2,816,841,  showing 
an  increase  in  ten  years  of  41  per  cent.  The  ditference  of  price  obtain- 
able in  these  two  years,  may  have  had  some  efiect  upon  the  quantities 
brouffht  to  market,  and  the  difierence  in  the  number  of  mouths  to  be 
fed  must  also  be  taken  into  the  account ;  but  these  causes  together  do 
not  seem  sufficient  to  account  for  such  an  increase  as  that  which  actually 
occurred,  and  some  part  of  it  is,  no  doubt,  owing  to  the  improved  con- 
dition of  the  people,  which  enables  them  in  a  greater  degree  than  for- 
merly to  command  the  necessaries  of  life.  The  changes  subsequently 
made  in  the  list  of  markets  making  these  returns  render  it  impossible  to 
continue  the  comparison  to  the  present  time. 


342  PROGRESS  OF  THE  NATION.  [sec.  iii. 


CHAPTER  VII. 


TRADE  BETWEEN  GREAT  BRITAIN  AND  IRELAND. 

Value  of  Goods  passing  between  Great  Britain  and  Ireland  in  different  years  between  1801 
and  1825—  No  later  Official  Account  kept— Trade  by  Steam- Vessels  between  Ireland  and 
Liverpool— Value  of  Agricultural  Produce  so  conveyed,  1831  and  1832— Number  and 
Value  of  Live  Stock  imported  into  Great  Britain,  1801-1825,  and  1846-9— Imported  into 
Liverpool  and  Bristol,  1831,  1832,  and  1837— Eggs  imported— Effect  upon  the  Markets  in 
Ireland— Grain,  1815  to  18-19— Vessels  employed  in  Trade  between  Great  Britain  and 
Ireland,  1801-1849. 

The  value  of  produce  and  merchandise  that  have  been  the  objects  of 
trade  between  Great  Britain  and  Ireland,  in  various  years  since  the 
Union,  has  been  stated  in  papers  laid  before  Parliament,  as  follows : — 

Imports  into  Ireland  from     Exports  from  Ireland  to 
Years.  Great  Britiiin.  Great  Britain. 

£.  £. 

1801  3,270,350  3,537,725 

1805  4,067,717  4,288,167 

1809  5,316,557  4,588,305 

1813  6,746,353  5,410,326 

1817  4,722,766  5,696,613 

1821  5,338,833  7,117,452 

1825  7,048,936  8,531,355 

No  account  of  this  trade  can  be  given  for  any  year  subsequent  to 
1825,  the  commercial  intercourse  between  Great  Britain  and  Ireland 
having  at  the  end  of  that  year  been  assimilated  by  law  to  the  coasting 
traffic  carried  on  between  the  different  ports  of  England  ;  and  with 
the  exception  of  the  single  article  of  grain  (as  to  which  it  was  considered 
desirable  by  the  legislature  to  continue  the  record),  we  have  now  no 
official  register  of  the  (quantity  or  value  of  goods  or  produce  received 
from  or  sent  to  Ireland.  That  this  traffic  has  greatly  increased  in  all 
its  branches  there  can  be  no  doubt ;  and  this  increase  may  partly  be 
attributed  to  the  abolition  of  the  restrictions  that  existed  up  to  1825, 
but  probably  still  more  to  the  employment  of  steam-vessels  upon  an  ex- 
tensive scale.  To  show  the  extent  to  which  the  traffic  has  been  carried 
by  this  means,  a  statement  was  furnished  to  a  Committee  of  the  House 
of  Commons  by  the  manager  of  a  company  trading  with  steam-vessels 
between  Ireland  and  Liverpool,  of  the  quantity  and  value  of  agricul- 
tural produce  imported  into  that  one  port  from  Ireland  in  1831  and 


CHAP.    VII.] 


ENGLISH  AND  IRISH  TRADE. 


313 


1832.  From  this  statement  it  a])pears  that  the  annual  value  of  the 
trade  was  about  4.^  millions  sterling,  which  was  in  great  part  made  up 
of  articles  that  could  not  have  been  so  profitably  brought  to  England  by 
any  previously  existing  mode  of  conveyance — such  as  live  cattle,  horses, 
sheep,  and  pigs  ;  the  value  of  which  amounted,  in  1831,  to  1,760,000/., 
and  in  1832  to  1,430,000/.  During  the  same  two  years  the  value  of 
Irish  agricultural  produce  brought  to  the  port  of  Bristol  averaged  about 
one  million  sterling.  The  whole  number  of  cattle,  horses,  sheep,  and 
pigs,  sent  from  Ireland  to  the  various  ports  of  England  and  Scotland,  in 
different  years,  from  1801  to  1825,  was  as  under : — 


Cattle  . 
Horses 
Sheep  . 
Pigs     . 


31,543 

669 

2,879 
1.968 


1805 


21,862 
4,114 

10,938 
6,383 


1809 


17,917 
3,264 
7,572 
4,712 


1813 


1831 


48,973 
3,904 
7,508 

14,521 


45,301 

848 
29,460 
24,193 


26,725 

2,392 

25,310 

104,501 


IsiS 


63,519 

3,1.30 

72,161 

65,919 


A  return,  showing  the  number  of  live  animals  shipped  to  Great  Bri- 
tain from  Ireland  in  each  of  the  four  years  from  1846  to  1849,  has  been 
presented  to  Parliament  by  the  authorities  of  the  Custom-house,  who 
collected  the  same  at  the  several  ports  of  shipment  from  the  best  sources 
that  were  open  to  them.  The  errors,  if  any,  in  this  return,  will  all  be 
errors  of  omission  : — 


1846 


18  it 


Oxen,  Cows,  and  Bulls 

Calves 

Sheep  and  Lambs 
Swine 


186,483 

6,363 

2.59,2.57 

480.827 


189,960 

9,992 
324,179 
106.407 


1848 


1849 


196,042 

7,086 
255,682 
110,787 


201,811 

9,831 

241,061 

6S.0.53 


The  great  falling  off  apparent  in  the  number  of  swine  is,  no  doubt, 
attributable  to  the  failure  of  the  potato  crop  and  its  consequences. 

The  numbers  sent  to  Liverpool  and  Bristol  alone,  in  1831  and  1832, 
were  : — 


Liverpool. 


1831 


1832 


Bristol. 


1831 


1832 


Cattle 91,911  '     71,318  6,078  i  4,077 

Horses  and  Mules    .     .  i           539  708  159  !  190 

Sheep 160,487  98,-337  11,640  \  4,446 

Pigs     I  156,001  149,090  84,107  85,619 


The  statement  above  mentioned  of  the  imports  into  Liverpool  occa- 
sioned considerable  surprise  at  the  time  it  was  made,  from  the  greatness 
of  its  amount ;  but  it  would  appear  that  this  branch  of  trade  has  since 


344  PROGRESS  OF  THE  NATION.  [sec.  hi. 

gone  on  increasing  in  a  most  extraordinary  degree,  as  will  be  seen  from 
the  following  accomit  of  the  number  and  value  of  live  animals  brought 
from  Ireland  to  Liverpool  in  the  year  1837  : — 


84,710  Black  Cattle,  at  16/.  each 

316  Calves  45s. 

225,050  Sheep  40s. 

24,669  Lambs  18s. 

595,422  Pigs  50s. 

3,414  Horses  20Z. 

319  Mules  8/. 


1,365,360 

711 

450,100 

1,488,555 

68,280 

2,552 


Total  Value     .     .      .       £3,397,760 


The  average  value  here  assigned  to  the  several  kinds  of  animals  is 
given  on  the  authority  of  an  intelligent  gentleman  resident  at  Liverpool, 
and  who  is  practically  acquainted  with  the  trade. 

The  value  in  money  of  one  seemingly  unimportant  article — eggs, 
taken  in  the  com-se  of  the  year  to  the  above  two  ports  from  Ireland, 
amounts  to  at  least  100,000/.  The  progress  of  this  trade  affords  a 
curious  illustration  of  the  advantage  of  commercial  facilities  in  stimu- 
lating production  and  equalising  prices.  Before  the  establishment  of 
steam-vessels,  the  market  at  Cork  was  most  irregularly  supplied  with 
eggs  from  the  surrounding  district ;  at  certain  seasons  they  were  exceed- 
ingly abundant  and  cheap,  but  these  seasons  were  sure  to  be  followed 
by  periods  of  scarcity  and  high  prices,  and  at  times  it  is  said  to  have 
been  difficult  to  purchase  eggs  at  any  price  in  the  market.  At  the  first 
opening  of  the  improved  channel  for  conveyance  to  England,  the  resi- 
dents at  Cork  had  to  complain  of  the  constant  high  price  of  this  and 
other  articles  of  farm  produce ;  but  as  a  more  extensive  market  was 
now  permanently  open  to  tbem,  the  farmei'S  gave  their  attention  to  the 
rearing  and  keeping  of  poultry,  and  at  the  present  time  eggs  are  pro- 
curable at  all  seasons  in  the  market  at  Cork,  not,  it  is  true,  at  the  ex- 
tremely low  rate  at  which  they  could  formerly  be  sometimes  bought, 
but  still  at  much  less  than  the  average  price  of  the  year,  A  like  result 
has  followed  the  introduction  of  this  great  improvement  in  regard  to  the 
supply  and  cost  of  various  other  articles  of  produce. 

It  has  been  mentioned  that  when,  in  order  to  save  the  yearly  salaries 
of  one  or  two  junior  clerks,  it  was  determined  to  cease  keeping  any 
official  record  of  the  commercial  intercourse  between  Great  Britain  and 
Ireland,  an  exception  was  made  as  regards  grain  and  flour,  that  trade 
being  of  great  personal  interest  to  our  legislators.  The  following  state- 
ment exhibits  the  quantities  of  those  kinds  of  produce  sent  to  us  from 
Ireland  in  each  year  from  1815  to  1849  : — 


CHA1-.    VII. J 


ENGLISH  AND  HUSH  TRADE. 


345 


Statement  of  the  Quantity  of  various  kinds  of  Grain  and  Meal  brought  into  Great  Britain  from 
Ireland,  in  each   Year  from  181")  to  184'.t. 


Years. 

Wheat 

anil  Wheat 

Flour. 

1 
Barley 
and 
Barley  .Meal. 

Uye. 

IJals 
and  Oatmeal. 

Indian 
Corn. 

1 
Beans. 

Veaa. 

of  Giuiii  and 
Meal. 

Qrs. 

Qrs. 

Qrs.     1 

Qrs. 

Qrs. 

Qrs. 

Qrs. 

1815 

189,544 

27,108 

207  ' 

597,537 

6,796 

821,192 

1816 

121,631 

62,254 

43 

683,714 

6,223 

873,865 

1817 

.59,025 

26,766 

614 

611,117 

2,287 

699,809 

1818 

108,230 

25,387 

4 

1,069,385  I 

,    , 

4,845 

1,207,851 

1819 

154,031 

20,311 

2 

789,613 

,  ,                ' 

3,904 

967,861 

1820 

404,747 

87,095 

134 

916,250 

1 

8,893 

1,417,120 

1821 

569,700 

82,884 

550 

1,162,249 

7,433 

1,822,816 

1822 

463,004 

22,532 

353 

569,237 

7,963 

1,063,089 

1823 

400,068 

19,274 

198 

1,102,487 

6,126 

1,528,1.53 

1824 

356,408 

45,872 

112 

1,225,085 

, , 

6,547 

1,634,024 

1825 

396,018 

165,082 

220 

1,629,8.56 

12,786 

2,203,962 

1826 

314,851 

64,885 

77 

1,303,734 

7,190 

1,452 

1,692,189 

1827 

405,255 

67,791 

256 

1,343,267 

1,'765 

10,037 

1,372 

1,829,743 

1828 

652,. 584 

84,204 

1,424 

2,075,631 

280 

7,068 

4,944 

2,826,1.35 

182,t 

519,493 

97,140 

568 

1,673,628 

39 

10,444 

4,503 

2,305,806 

1830 

529,717 

189,745 

414 

1,471,2.52 

28 

19,053 

2,520 

2,212,729 

1831 

.557,520 

185,409 

515 

1,655,934 

563 

15,039 

4,663 

2,419.643 

1832 

.572,586 

123,068 

294 

1,890,321 

3,037 

14,512 

1,916 

2,605,734 

1833 

844,201 

107,519 

167 

1,762,519 

117 

19,103 

2,645 

2,736,281 

1834 

779,504 

217,568 

982 

1,713,971 

75 

18,770 

2,176 

2,733,046 

1835 

661,773 

1.56,176 

614 

1,813,101 

24,234 

3,447 

2,659,345 

1836 

598,756 

182,867 

483 

2,126,693 

Malt. 

17,603 

2,920 

2,929,322 

1837 

534,465 

187,473 

1,016 

2,274,675 

4,174 

25,630 

2,860 

3,0.30,293 

1833 

542,583 

156,467 

628 

2,742,807 

5,001 

21,584 

5,232 

3,474,302 

183J 

258,331 

61,675 

2,331 

1,904,933 

2,552 

11,535 

1,484 

2,242,841 

1840 

174,440 

95,954 

122 

2,037,836 

3,456 

14,753 

1,403 

2,327,964 

1841 

218,708 

75,. 568 

172 

2,539,380 

4,935 

15,907 

855 

2,855,-525 

1842 

201,998 

50,286 

76 

2,261,434 

3,046 

19,931 

1 ,  550 

2,5.38,221 

1843 

413,466 

110,449 

371 

2,648,033 

8,643 

24,329 

1,192 

3,206,483 

1844 

44(),153 

90,655 

264 

2,242,300 

8,153 

18,580 

1,091 

2,801,206 

1845 

779,113 

93,095 

165 

2,353,985 

11,154 

12,745 

1,644 

3,251,901 

1846 

393,462 

92,854 

1,311,591 

14,668 

2,227 

1,814,802 

1847 

184,222 

47,. 577 

1,498 

'       703,462 

22,361 

4,6.59 

963,779 

1848 

304,872 

80,076 

15 

:  1,546,568 

12,314 

2,572 

1,946,417 

1849 

233,445 

44,678 

419 

1,122,067 

22,420 

3,368 

:   1,426,397 

III  the  absence  of  all  further  Custom-house  records,  the  following 
table  of  the  number  and  tonnage  of  vessels  in  which  the  trading  inter- 
course with  Ireland  has  been  carried  on  during  each  year  of  the  present 
century,  will  afford  a  pretty  correct  view  of  its  amount  and  progress  : — 

Statement  of  the  Number  and  Tonnage  of  Vessels,  including  their  repeated  Voyages,  that  entered 
the  Ports  of  Great  Britain  from  Ireland,  and  that  left  the  Ports  of  Great  Britain  for  Ireland, 
with  Cargoes,  in  each  Year  from  1801  to  1849. 


Inwards. 

Outwards. 

In\ 

ards. 

Outwards. 

Years. 

Ships,   j      Tons. 

Ships. 

Tons. 

Ships.     1 

Tons. 

Ships. 

Tons. 

1801 

5,360  1  456,026 

6,816     582,033 

1812 

io,8ia 

925,736 

10,0.53 

867,342 

1802 

5,820  !  461,328 

5,540      449,350 

1813 

8,569 

718,851 

9.096 

773,286 

1803 

5,796 

504,884 

5,656      502,279 

1814 

7,. 562  1 

613,898 

8,719 

715.171 

1804 

5,643 

490,4.55 

6,148     557,279 

1815 

8,462  1 

680,3.33 

9,602 

776,313 

1805 

6,306 

566,790 

6,875     .598,720 

1816 

7,575 

621,273 

8,861 

721,772 

1806 

6,907 

578,297 

7,032      586,728 

1817 

9,186  1 

770,. 547 

9,530 

762,770 

1807 

Ko  returns  can  be  procured  for  this  vear. 

1818 

7,969 

644,896 

8,863 

763,622 

1808 

8,477      768,264  i  7.. 560  1  696,473 

1819 

8,575 

699,885 

9,751 

795,495 

1809 

7,041      600,898  !  7,011  1  580.587 

1820 

9,229 

7^3,750 

8,451 

734,716 

1810 

8,403      713,087  '  9,121  |  763,488 

1821 

9,440 

819,648 

9,266 

801,007 

1811 

9,014 

789,097 

8,216 

703,738 

1822 

9,562  ' 

832,927 

9,935 

828,114 

346 


rilOGRESS  OF  THE  NATION. 


[sec.  hi. 


Statement  of  the  Number  and  Tonnage  of  7  'esseh,  including  their  repeated  Voyages,  that  entered 
the  Ports  of  Great  Britain  from  Ireland,  and  that  left  the  Ports  of  Great  Britain  fur  Ireland, 
with  Cargoes,  in  each  Year  from  ISOl  to  184'J — continued. 


Years. 

Inwards. 

Outwards. 

Years. 

Inwards. 

Outwards. 

Ships. 

Tons. 

Ships. 

Tons. 

Ships. 

Tons. 

Ships. 

Tons. 

1823 

9,382 

786,637 

9,937 

814,383 

1837 

10,299 

1,202,104 

16,347 

1,585,624 

1824 

7,534 

615,396 

10,989 

905,449 

1838 

10,312 

1,264,975 

15,908 

1,556,216 

1825 

8,922 

741,182 

10.981 

922,355 

1839 

9,221 

1,176,893 

17,335 

1,708,243 

1826 

6,388 

632,972111,599 

1,055,870 

1840 

9,423 

1,1.50,395 

17,369 

1,677,204 

1827 

7,411 

737,752  11,083 

1,044,093 

1841 

10,005 

1,200,457 

16,520 

1,628,358 

1828 

8,790 

923,505  12,339 

1,167,280 

1842 

9,060 

1,148,907 

17,453 

1,682,828 

1829 

8,922 

906,158  13,478 

1,286,168 

1843 

10,104 

1,255,901 

16,760 

1,670,574 

1830 

8,453 

880,965  13,144 

1,245,647 

1844 

10,147 

1,349.273 

16,948 

1,817,756 

1831 

9, 02  J 

921,128  13,158 

1.246,742 

1845 

11,481 

1,511,023 

19,785 

2,111,481 

1832 

9,705 

1,026,613  14, 6:»4 

1^417,533 

1846 

9,133 

1,416,130 

19,624 

2,211,696 

1833 

9,476 

1,041,882  14,227 

1,378,556 

1847 

8,085 

1,2'J6,610 

17,935 

2,047,387 

1834 

10,026 

1,100,38.(14,560 

1,440,617 

1848 

9,109 

1,470,309 

18,941 

2,153,054 

1833 

10,116 

1,138,147  14,608 

1,473.255 

1849 

8,607 

1,478,059 

18,000 

2,159,954 

1836 

9,820 

1,179,062  14,725 

1,4,)0,788 

* 

If  we  compare  the  amount  of  the  tonnage  employed  in  1801,  with  that 
of  1849,  we  shall  find  that  it  bears  the  proportion  of  100  to  350,  showing 
an  increase  of  250  per  cent.  It  will  further  be  seen,  that  this  increase 
has  been  much  more  rapid  during  the  years  in  which  steam-vessels  have 
been  so  much  brought  into  use,  than  it  was  in  the  preceding  years  of 
the  series.  Up  to  1826  the  increase  fi'om  1801  was  no  more  than  Q'2 
per  cent.,  showing  a  mean  annual  increase  of  2|  per  cent.,  whereas  in 
the  23  years  following  1826,  the  increase  from  1801  has  been  188  per 
cent.,  or  8  per  cent,  annually. 

The  apparent  discrepancy  since  1825  between  the  tonnage  inwards 
and  outwards,  as  stated  in  the  foregoing  account,  arises  thus  : — When, 
in  1826,  the  trade  between  Great  Britain  and  Ireland  was  first  placed 
on  the  footing  of  a  coasting  trade,  it  was  considered  that  to  give 
returns  of  the  duties  inwards  and  clearances  outwards,  both  in  Great 
Britain  and  Ireland,  would  present  an  exaggerated  view  of  the  inter- 
course between  the  islands,  and  the  accounts  have  therefore  been  made 
to  show  only  the  clearances  from  Great  Britain  to  Ireland,  and  the 
arrivals  in  Great  Britain  from  Ireland.  The  great  difference  between 
the  clearances  and  entries  arises  from  the  fact,  that  the  shipments  to 
Ireland  are  more  bulky  than  the  receipts  from  Ireland,  causing  many 
ships  to  return  to  Great  Britain  in  ballast,  of  which  no  account  is  taken, 
while  others,  after  discharging  in  Ireland,  proceed  thence  on  distant  and 
foreign  voyages. 


CHAP,  viii.l  WEIGHTS  AND  MEASURES.  317 


CHAPTER  VIII. 


WEIGHTS    AND   MEASURES. 


Necessity  of  establishing  Legal  Standards — Inconvenience  of  Local  and  Customai-y  Weights 
and  Measures — Parliamentary  Investigations— Acts  of  1824— of  1834  and  of  1835,  for 
establishing  Uniformity  of  Weights  and  Measures  throughout  the  Kingdom. 

In  every  country  where  advances  have  been  made  towards  civilization, 
and  where  the  mode  of  traffic  among  the  people  has  gone  one  step  beyond 
the  rudest  system  of  barter,  it  has  been  found  necessary  for  the  Govern- 
ment to  interfere,  in  order  to  establish  standards  whereby  to  ascertain 
the  quantities  by  weight  or  measure  of  things  which  form  the  objects 
of  purchase  and  sale.  This  interference  is  necessary  in  order  to  prevent 
frauds  and  endless  disputes  ;  and  when  a  system  of  weights  and  measures 
has  been  adopted,  which  in  this  respect  introduces  certainty  into  the  deal- 
ings of  traders  and  consumers,  a  great  benefit  will  have  been  conferred 
upon  both  chisses.  It  has  commonly  happened  in  various  countries,  from 
the  subject  not  having  been  well  understood,  that  the  settlement  of  this 
important  point  has  been  delegated  by  the  general  government  to  various 
local  bodies  in  different  parts  of  the  same  country,  and  by  this  means 
a  want  of  uniformity  has  been  produced,  which  is  at  least  very  inconve- 
nient to  the  community  at  large.  The  introduction  of  such  a  state  of 
things  is  the  more  to  be  regretted,  because  of  the  great  pertinacity  Avith 
which  people  adhere  to  customs  of  this  kind,  when  once  they  have 
been  suffered  to  take  root.  At  the  very  beginning  of  the  French  Revo- 
lution, the  National  Convention  of  France  passed  a  decree,  with  the 
object  of  establishing  entire  uniformity  of  weights  and  measures  in  that 
country.  This  decree  was  recommended  to  the  cordial  acceptance  of 
the  people  as  one  of  the  greatest  benefits  which  the  legislature  could 
bestow  upon  the  citizens,  and  at  the  same  time  any  infringement  of 
the  law  was  declared  to  be  highly  penal ;  half  a  century  has  since 
elapsed,  and  although  during  the  whole  of  that  time  the  Govei-nment 
has  in  every  proper  way  sought  to  give  a  practical  effect  to  the  new 
system,  which  is  further  recommended  by  the  scientific  character  and  the 
simplicity  of  its  principles  and  arrangements,  yet  to  this  hour  weights 
and  measures  established  by  law  have  not  been  adopted  in  the  largest 
part  of  French  provincial  towns,  where  in  all  dealings  between  shop- 


348  niOGRESS  or  the  nation.  [sec.  m. 

keepers  and  their  customers,  the  old  modes  of  weighing  and  measuring 
are  still  pursueil. 

The  great  inconvenience  attending  such  a  want  of  uniformity  in  this 
country  had  long  been  acknowledged,  and  at  various  times  efforts  had 
been  made  for  remedying  the  evil.  A  Committee  of  the  House  of  Com- 
mons was  appointed  in  1790  to  investigate  the  subject,  and  to  suggest 
a  remedy,  but  no  practical  result  followed  fi-om  the  inquiry.  In  seasons 
of  war  the  importance  of  such  questions  is  generally  forgotten  amidst 
more  pressing  calls  upon  the  attention  of  the  Government  and  the  public. 

Accordingly  nothing  further  was  attempted  on  this  head  until  1814, 
in  which  year  another  Committee  of  the  House  of  Commons  was  ap- 
pointed ;  but,  if  we  except  the  eliciting  of  opinions  upon  the  subject 
from  eminent  men — such  as  Dr.  Wollaston  and  Professor  Plaj^air — 
this  Committee  also  was  unproductive  of  good.  In  1818  a  Commission, 
consisting  of  Sir  Joseph  Banks,  Sir  George  Clerk,  Mr.  Davies  Gilbert, 
Dr.  Wollaston,  Dr.  Young,  and  Captain  Kater,  was  appointed  by 
Government  to  devise  some  practical  remedy  for  the  evil.  The  conse- 
quent labours  of  these  eminent  men  cannot  be  said  to  have  been  useless, 
because  their  investigations  led  to  scientific  discoveries  which  simplified 
the  question,  and  pointed  out  the  means  available  for  preserving  or 
restoring  accurate  standards  both  of  weight  and  measure.  The  inves- 
tigations of  the  Commission  did  not,  however,  lead  to  any  immediate 
legislative  act ;  and  it  was  not  until  four  years  had  elapsed  that  a  Bill 
to  regulate  weights  and  measures  was  introduced  into  the  House  of 
Commons  by  Sir  George  Clerk,  one  of  the  members  of  the  Commission. 
This  Bill  did  not  pass.  It  was  again  introduced  by  the  same  gentleman 
in  the  following  year  (1823),  when  it  passed  the  House  of  Commons, 
but  was  not  carried  through  its  stages  in  the  Lords.  A  better  fortune 
awaited  the  measure  in  1824,  when  an  Act  for  ascertaining  and  establish- 
ing Uniformity  of  Weights  and  Measures  received  the  Royal  Assent. 
By  this  Act,  the  old  standards  of  weight  and  linear  measure,  that  had  been 
long  in  use  in  England,  were  adopted  and  made  applicable  to  the  whole 
kingdom,  while  the  measures  of  capacity  were  changed  and  rendered 
uniform.  The  old  standard  IVine  Gallon  contained  231  cubic  inches  ; 
the  Ale  and  Beer  Gallon,  'I^^  cubic  inches  ;  the  Corn  Gallon,  268t 
cubic  inches  ;  and  the  Scots  Pint^  103|-  cubic  inches.  These  measures, 
wdth  all  other  local  measures  of  every  description,  were  abolished,  and 
instead  of  them  a  measure  called  an  Imperial  Gallon  was  established. 
This  gallon  was  declared  to  contain  ten  pounds  avoirdupois  weight  of 
distilled  water,  weighed  in  air,  at  a  temperature  of  ^2  degrees  of 
Fahrenheit's  thermometer — the  barometer  being  at  30  inches.  The 
content  of  the  Imperial  Gallon,  thus  computed,  is  found  to  be  277-274 
(rather  more  277i)  cubic  inches.  A  mode  of  verifying  this  measure, 
and  also  of  verifying,  by  its  means,  both  linear  measure  and  weight,  is 


CH.vr.  viii]  WEIGHTS  AND  MEASURES.  319 

pointed  out  by  establishing  mutual  relations  between  the  three,  thus  :  — 
The  contents  of  the  cube  of  the  sixth  part  of  the  length  of  the  pendulum 
vibrating  seconds  in  the  latitude  of  London,  at  the  level  of  the  sea,  and 
in  a  vacuum  (which  has  been  made  the  element  for  establishing  linear 
measure),  is  so  very  near  the  contents  of  the  Imperial  Standard  Gallon, 
that  the  difference  is  only  three-tenths  of  a  cubic  inch  ;  the  cube  of  the 
sixth  part  of  the  length  of  the  pendulum  containing  277'578,  while  the 
Imperial  Gallon  contains  277"274  cubic  inches  ;  and  the  tenth  part  of 
the  weight  of  an  imperial  gallon  of  water,  at  a  temperature  exactly  one- 
sixth  part  of  the  distance  between  the  points  of  freezing  and  boiling,  is 
an  Imperial  Standard  Avoirdupois  Pound.  The  standards  of  both 
weights  and  measures  are  thus  rendered  so  far  invariable  in  future,  that 
they  are  found  to  be  independent  of  all  artificial  measurements  and 
graduations,  and  can  be  at  once  referred  "  to  nature  alone  for  their  pro- 
totypes." This  is  assuredly  a  great  improvement  over  the  old  system, 
which  made  a  grain  of  corn,  the  human  foot,  and  the  distance  to  which 
a  man  can  extend  his  arms— all  things  which  are  manifestly  liable  to 
considerable  diversity — the  elements  whence  to  determine  weight  and 
measure. 

This  law,  which  came  into  operation  on  the  1st  of  January,  1826, 
failed,  during  the  nine  years  of  its  existence,  to  produce  a  satisfactory 
degree  of  uniformity  in  practice  throughout  the  kingdom  :  ic  proved, 
however,  in  a  high  degree  useful,  as  it  paved  the  way  for  the  more 
perfect  measures  adopted  in  1834  and  1835,  under  which  we  are  now 
acting,  and  which  could  probably  not  have  been  enforced  but  for  the 
preparation  of  the  public  mind  which  resulted  from  the  previous  step 
towards  improvement.  By  the  law  now  established,  a  very  high  degree 
of  simplification  has  been  attained.  The  units  of  weight  and  measure 
adopted  in  1824  are  continued,  and  their  universal  adoption  through 
the  kingdom  is  made  imperative.  Besides  this,  all  modes  of  measuring 
which  admitted  of  uncertainty  are  declared  illegal.  A  bushel  or  gallon 
of  some  kinds  of  articles  was  formerly  not  merely  the  quantity  which 
the  measure  would  contain  within  it,  but  a  superaddition  of  as  much 
more  as  could  be  heaped  upon  it  in  the  form  of  a  cone.  Other  articles 
were  measured  without  this  cone — the  first  mode  of  proceeding  being 
called  heap-measure,  and  the  second  strike-measure,  from  the  employ- 
ment of  a  roller  to  remove  or  strike  off  all  of  the  article  measured 
which  stood  above  the  level  of  the  rim  of  the  measure.  Strike-measure 
is  now  declared  to  be  the  only  legal  mode  for  determining  the  quantity 
of  all  descriptions  of  dry  goods  in  measures  of  capacity.  The  uncertainty, 
and  consequently  the  possible  unfairness,  of  heaped  measure,  was  de- 
monstrated by  the  clerk  of  Covent  Garden  Market,  who  stated,  in  his 
evidence  given  before  a  Committee  of  the  House  of  Commons,  that  he 
had  employed  two  different  persons  to  measure  each  a  peck  of  nuts,  and 


350  PROGRESS  OF  THE  NATION.  [sec.  hi. 

that  oue  of  them  put  eleven,  while  the  other  could  put  only  ten  quarts 
in  and  on  the  measure.  A  mode  of  ascertaining  (juantity,  which  thus 
admitted  of  variations  amounting  to  ten  per  cent.,  according  to  the 
skilfulness  of  the  measurer,  was  one  which  called  loudly  for  alteration, 
and  any  system  which  in  this  respect  had  left  people  at  liberty  to  con- 
tinue the  old  practice,  would  have  been  highly  unsatisfactory. 

All  local  or  customary  weights  or  measures  are  abolished  throughout 
the  kingdom,  under  heavy  penalties.  That  previously  uncertain  quan- 
tity, a  Stone,  is  now  invariably  14  imperial  pounds,  eight  of  which  form 
the  hundredweight ;  and,  with  the  exception  of  gold,  silver,  platina, 
diamonds,  or  other  precious  stones  (for  ascertaining  the  quantities  of 
which  Troy  weight  is  still  allowed),  all  articles  which  are  weighed  must 
now  be  sold  by  the  imperial  pound. 

One  imperfection  has  been  allowed — inadvertently,  perhaps — to  creep 
into  the  new  system.  ^Mien  heaped  measure  was  used,  it  was  seen  to 
be  necessary  to  prescribe  by  law  the  shape  as  well  as  the  cubic  contents 
of  the  measure  used,  because  the  size  of  the  cone  heaped  above  the 
level  of  the  rim  depended  upon  the  area  of  its  base.  If  two  vessels 
were  made  having  the  same  cubic  contents,  but  one  of  which  was  more 
shallow  than  the  other,  the  quantity  heaped  upon  such  shallower  vessel 
would  of  course  be  greater  than  where  a  deeper  but  narrower  vessel  was 
used.  It  seems  to  have  been  considered  that  when  this  cone  was  no 
longer  permitted  to  be  added  to  the  measure,  the  form  became  imma- 
terial. This  is  found  to  be  incorrect.  Some  articles,  such  as  corn, 
are  made  to  lie  closer  together  when  subjected  to  pressure,  and  for  this 
reason  a  deep  vessel  will  hold  a  larger  quantity  than  one  having  the 
same  cubic  contents,  but  which  is  more  shallow  in  form.  It  has  been 
ascertained  by  experiments  carefully  conducted  by  Dr.  Anderson,  and 
given  in  evidence  before  a  Committee  of  the  House  of  Commons,  "  that 
wheat  measured  in  a  bushel-measure  which  was  11|  inches  deep, 
weighed  56  lbs.  6f  oz.  ;  and  that  the  same  wheat,  measured  under  the 
same  circumstances  in  a  bushel  8i  inches  deep,  weighed  no  more  than 
56  lbs.  0\  oz.,  making  a  deficiency  of  rather  more  than  one  in  150 — a 
loss  of  some  moment  where  large  quantities  are  delivered." 

The  use  of  any  soft  metal  or  alloy,  such  as  lead  and  pewter,  for 
making  weights,  is  forbidden,  because  of  the  facility  they  would  afford 
for  falsification,  and  the  loss  to  which  they  would  be  speedily  subjected 
in  use  through  abrasion. 


IX.]  FOREIGN  COMMEllCE.  351 


CHAPTER  IX. 

FOREIGN    COMMERCE. 

Dependence  of  various  Countries  upon  each  other  for  Comforts  and  Conveniences — Peculiar 
Advantages  of  England  for  prosecuting  Foreign  Commerce — Effect  of  M'ars  and  Com- 
mercial Systems  upon  Foreign  Trade — Growing  Importance  of  its  Commerce  to 
England,  arising_out  of  its  increasing  Pojjulatiqn — Influence  of  extended  Jlarkets  in 
preventing_ruiii9US_J:'luctuations-  Impossibility  of  long  maintaining  existing  Corn 
Laws — Progress  of  Forc^u  and  ColoniiU_Tradej_from  _1801_to  1849— Course  of  Trade 
Avith_yariQUS_3S>ljn tries  Opening  of  East  India  and  China  TTradcs — Discninlnafrng"" 
Duties  on  Sugar— On  Coffee — On  Timber— Continental  System — Return  of  Peace — 
Free-Trade  Petition  of  London  Merchants— Relaxation  of  Navigation  Acts— Reciprocity 
Treaties— Registered  Tonnage— Ships  built — Ships  Entered  and  Cleared  1801-1844. 

There  are  but  few  countries  so  circumstanced  with  regard  to  their 
natural  capabihties  of  soil  and  climate  as  to  be  independent  of  all  other 
countries  for  the  supply  of  many  of  those  productions  which  have  become 
necessary  to  the  comfort,  if  indeed  they  be  not  indispensable  requisites 
to  the  well-being,  of  their  inhabitants.  England  is  assuredly  not  one  i 
of  those  countries,  andforeign  commerce  is  to  its  inhabitants  a  thing  of  J 
social,  if  not  of  ])hysical,  necessity.  But  for  our  traffic  in  foreign  pro- 
ductions, even  the  home  trade  of  England  would  be  without  a  great  part 
of  the  activity  by  which  it  is  distinguished,  because,  as  regards  what  is 
yielded  by  our  own  soil,  each  part  of  the  kingdom  is  nearly  independent 
of  every  other  part.  The  South  has  no  need  to  draw  its  supplies  of  grain 
from  the  North,  nor  does  the  West  require  to  receive  the  cattle  bred  in 
the  East.  With  respect  to  our  minerals,  a  great  part  even  of  these  are 
found  in  different  and  distant  parts  of  the  island ;  so  that  in  almost  every 
case  that  part  of  the  produce  of  our  industry  which  exceeds  in  each  par- 
ticular branch  the  wants  of  the  population  engaged  for  its  supply  must 
seek  a  market  in  other  countries,  and  be  there  exchanged  for  such  articles 
of  conveniedce  as  Nature  refuses  to  yield  to  us  in  sufficient  cheapness 
or  abundance  from  our  own  soil. 

The  geographical  position  and  capabilities  of  England  furnish  her 
with  ad\  antages  for  the  prosecution  of  this  foreign  commerce  far  greater 
than  are  possessed  by  any  other  country  of  equal  extent.  To  these  ad- 
vantages we  have  added  a  spirit  of  industry,  fostered  l)y  our  free  insti- 
tutions, and  a  degree  of  commercial  enterprise,  beyond  those  of  any 


352  PROGRESS  OF  THE  NATION.  [sec.  hi. 

other  people  eltlier  ancient  or  modern,  with,  perhaps,  the  recent  excep- 
tion of  the  United  States  of  America.  But  although  the  amount  of  our 
foreign  trade  is  greater  than  that  of  any  other  country,  it  by  no  means 
follows  that  it  is  as  great  as  it  should  be,  or  as  it  would  long  since  have 
become,  if  left  to  its  own  free  course.  Considering  all  the  natural  and 
acquired  advantages  that  we  possess  for  this  purpose,  it  should  rather 
excite  regret  that  our  commerce  is  so  small,  than  engender  pride  be- 
cause it  is  so  large.  Requiring,  as  we  do,  so  many  of  the  productions 
of  other  climates,  and  capable  as  we  are  of  commanding  them  by  means 
of  our  own  products  and  manufactures,  wliich  are  objects  of  universal 
desire  in  almost  every  climate  ;  to  what  can  we  attribute  it,  but  to  the 
evil  consequences  of  wars  and  the  still  more  baleful  consequences  of  ill- 
considered  systems  of  commercial  laws,  that  we  have  not  commanded  the 
whole  habitable  world  for  our  market,  and  that  the  28,000,000  inhabit- 
ing the  British  Islands  should  furnish  a  more  important  array  of  cus- 
tomers than  all  other  civilized  communities,  even  when  we  include  with 
the  latter  the  inhabitants  of  our  many  colonies  and  populous  dependen- 
cies, of  the  direct  trade  with  which  we  so  long  reserved  to  ourselves 
the  monopoly  ? 

The  argument  in  favour  of  the  greater  comparative  value  to  a  country 
of  its  home  than  of  its  foreign  trade,  which  has  been  founded  upon  the 
greater  economy  and  celerity  with  which  the  operations  of  the  former 
are  conducted,  is  far  from  being  always  correct  when  applied  to  England. 
The  trading  communication  between  the  south  and  east  coasts  of  Great 
Britain  and  the  north  and  west  shores  of  many  European  countries,  is 
kept  up  with  greater  facility  and  economy  than  the  traffic  between  some 
of  our  distant  counties.  The  time  and  money  expended  in  conveying  a 
bale  of  goods  from  Manchester  to  London,  by  canal  or  by  the  ordinary 
road,  are  greater  than  are  required  for  its  conveyance  from  London 
to  Rotterdam,  and  the  charge  made  for  the  cartage  of  a  puncheon  of 
rum  from  the  West  India  Docks  to  Westminster  exceeds  the  charge 
that  would  be  made  for  conveying  the  same  puncheon  of  rum  from  those 
docks  to  Hamburg.  Even  in  those  branches  of  foreign  commerce  wdiere 
from  the  length  of  the  voyage  a  considerable  time  must  elapse  between 
the  shipment  of  goods,  their  reception  and  sale  abroad,  and  the  trans- 
mission of  returns  to  the  hands  of  the  shipper,  a  remedy  for  the  evil  of 
delay  has  been  found  in  the  operation  of  commercial  bankers,  whose 
dealings  consist  in  the  purchase  and  sale  of  bills  of  exchange,  and  are 
founded  upon  the  varying  necessities  of  different  individual  traders. 

In  this  country,,  limited  as  it  is  in  geogi-aphical  extent,  and  where,  as 
has  been  shown  in  a  former  section  of  this  work,  population  is  to  all 
appearance  fast  overtaking  the  capability  of  the  soil  to  yield  the  neces- 
sary amount  of  food,  we  have  a  motive  which  every  year  becomes 
more  and  more  cogent  for  giving  the  greatest  possible  facilities  to  our 


(U.iV.    IX. J 


FOREIGN  COMMEIICK. 


353 


commercial  intercourse  with  other  countries.  We  have  seen  that,  in 
the  twenty  years  that  ehipsed  between  1811  and  1831,  the  increase  in 
the  total  number  of  families  in  Great  Britain  was  8^9,960,  or  at  the 
rate  of  34  per  cent,  upon  the  numbers  of  1811,  while  the  increase  in 
the  number  of  families  employed  in  agriculture  was  only  65,136,  or  but 
little  more  than  2^  per  cent. ;  tlie  remainder,  amounting  to  804,824 
families,  having  betaken  themselves  to  trading  and  manufacturing  , 
employments. 

The  Census  returns  for  1841  are  still  more  decisive  in  this  respect, 
and  show  a  positive  diminution  in  the  number  of  persons  employed  in 
agriculture  in  that  year,  as  compared  with  1831. 


1831 

Total 
Population. 

Males  Twenty  Years  old  and  upwaids  employed  in 
Agriculture. 

Occupiers 
employing 
Labourers. 

Occupiers  not 
employing 
Labourers. 

1 
Agricultural             ^      , 
Labourers.              i"u«i. 

England 

"Wales 

Scotland 

Army  and  Navy     . 

13,091,005 

806,182 

2,365,114 

277,017 

141,460 

19,728 
25,887 

94,883 
19,966 
53,966 

744,407 
55,468 
87,292 

980,750 

95,162 

167,145 

16,539,318 

187,075 

168,815 

887,167 

1,243,057 

1841 

Total 
Population. 

Males  Twenty  Years  old  and  upwards  employed  in 
Agriculture. 

Farmers 

and 
Graziers. 

Gardeners, 
Nurserymen, 
and  Florists. 

Agricultural 
Labourers. 

Total. 

England 

Wales 

Scotland 

Army  and  Navy    . 

15,000,154 

911,003 

2,620,184 

188,453 

194,596 
31,807 
.50, 732 

42,364 
1,141 
5,727 

724,625 

47,447 

109,550 

961,585 

80,395 

166,009 

18,720.394          277,135 

49,232 

881,622     1     1,207,989 

Hitherto  our  increased  numbers  have  mostly  found  an  adequate  supply 
of  food  by  lueans  of  the  improvements  that  have  been  introduced  in 
agricultural  processes,  and  that  large  proportion  of  our  augmented 
population  which  has  thus  been  fed  from  the  produce  of  our  soil  has 
fouud  profitable  employment  in  various  ways  without  producing  an 
adequate  increase  to  the  amount  of  foreign  commerce.  This  is  a  state 
of  things  which  cannot  continue  indefinitely  in  progress.  We  cannot 
reasonably  expect  that  the  soil  can  always  be  made  to  yield  increasing 
harvests  to  meet  the  constant  augmentation  of  the  population,  nor  that 

2  A 


354  PROGRESS  OF  THE  NATION.  [sec.  hi. 

the  labours  of  our  artisans,  whose  additional  numbers  must  be  reckoned 
yearly  by  hundreds  of  thousands,  can  continue  to  tind  profitable  employ- 
ment in  a  sphere  thus  made  narrower  from  year  to  year.  The  onward 
progress  of  our  population  cannot  be  checked  without  the  arrival  of 
reverses  which  would  plunge  the  greater  part  of  the  nation  into  a  state 
of  misery  which  it  is  painful  to  contemplate,  and  on  the  other  hand 
such  a  check  can  only  be  averted  by  a  great,  a  rapid,  and  a  permanent 
extension  of  commercial  relations  with  countries  whose  inhabitants,  being 
in  ditferent  circumstances  to  those  which  have  been  here  described,  may 
be  willing  to  exchange  the  products  of  their  soil  for  the  results  of  our 
manufacturing  industry. 

We  have  happily  now  entered  upon  a  course  of  legislation  on  com- 
mercial subjects,   which,   when  fully  carried  out,  must  idealize  advan- 
tages in  this  direction  which  are  more  and  more  becoming  matters  of 
necessity  to  this   country.      That  the  system   of  free  trade,  by  which 
expression  is  meant  unrestricted   intercourse  with  foreign  countries,  in 
which  no  one  country  shall  be  placed,   by  regulations  or  differential 
duties,  at  a  disadvantage  with  any  other,  and  no  Customs  duty  shall  be 
levied  for  any  purpose  whatever  save  the  necessary  one  of  revenue — a 
system  in  which  the  fallacy  of  j)rotection  shall  be  utterly  disowned  and 
abolished  —  that  this  system  must  be  progressively  carried  out  by  us 
to  its  utmost  limit,  is  now  seen  to   be  among  the  most  settled  of  cer- 
tainties.    To  persons  who  have  observed  the  effects  of  such  relaxations 
in  our  tariff  as  have  already  been  carried  into  effect,  the  result  of  such 
a  perfecting  of  the  system  as  is  here  described  cannot  be  at  all  doubtful. 
That  the  capital,  skill,  and   energy  possessed  and  exercised  by  the  in- 
habitants of  these  islands  will,  when  unfettered,  carry  us  forward  to  a 
degree  of  commercial  and  manufacturing  prosperity  of  which  the  world 
has  hitherto  seen  no  example,  it  required  little  boldness  to  foretel ;  and, 
that  this  prosperity  will  be  attained  to  a  very  high  degree,  although  the 
example  of  England  should  fail  to  convince  the  governments  of  other 
countries,  and  to  be  followed  by  them,  does  not  admit  of  any  doubt. 
But  it  is  not  conceivable  that  our  example,  which,  on  all  other  occasions 
has  furnished  motives  of  action,  shall  cease  to  do  so,  when  seen  to  be 
fraught  with  so  large  a  measure  of  good  as  hitherto  has,  and  as  no  doubt 
will  continue  to  accompany  our  course  ;  and  it  cannot  but  add  greatly 
to  the  feeling  of  gratification  called  forth  by  the  changes  now  in  progress, 
to  believe  that  the  sum  of  our  prosperity  shall  be  increased  through  the 
advancement  of  the  general  happiness.      Shall  we,  then,  too  greatly 
flatter  ourselves  if  we  hope,  that  the  nations  of  the  world,   too  long 
divided  by  hatred  in  war,  and  jealousy  in  peace,  siiall  be  brought  to  see 
and  act  upon  the  conviction  that  the   happiness  and 'prosperity  of  each 
must  tend  to  increase  the  happiness  and  prosperity  of  each  and  all  other 
nations  ? 

In  seasons  of  general  prosperity,  when  the  productive  classes  are  fully 


C.I  AT.  i.x.j  FOREIGN  COMMERCE.  355 

and  profitably  employed,  it  is  always  found  that  a  stimulus  is  given  to 
consumption,  and  it  very  frequently  has  ha])pcned  that  the  effective 
demand  for  uuuuifactured  goods  thus  created  has  excited  increased 
production  to  a  degree  beyond  what  has  been  immediately  required. 
AVhen  circumstances  change,  and  a  check  is  given  to  consumption,  those 
persons  who  have  been  led  tlnis  to  apply  an  additional  amount  of  capital 
and  labour,  arc  exposed  to  considerable  losses,  and  it  must  be  obvious 
that  the  danger  of  encountering  the  evil  is  greater  in  proportion  as  the 
market  which  they  supply  is  circumscribed.  If  limited  to  one  country, 
which  is  suffering  under  circumstances  of  depression,  the  distress  of  the 
producers  must  be  highly  aggravated,  but  if  they  are  accustomed  to 
carry  on  commercial  dealings  with  many  foreign  lands,  it  is  not  probable 
that  all  will  beat  the  same  time  under  depression  ;  the  evil,  as  far  as 
the  producers  are  concerned,  will  be  easily  remedied,  and  a  small  reduc- 
tion in  the  price  of  their  goods  will  then  cause  such  an  increased  demand 
in  foreign  countries  as  will  greatly  palliate,  if  it  do  not  remedy,  the 
mischief  arising  from  fluctuations  in  the  home  demand. 

If  the  view  taken  in  these  pages  of  our  condition  and  prospects  has 
any  true  foundation,  it  was  quite  impossible  that  the  remaining  branches 
of  the  restrictive  system  to  which  the  legislature  of  this  country  so  long 
and  so  pertinaciously  adhered,  could  be  much  longer  continued,  and 
that  we  should  still  empower  the  comparatively  few  amongst  us  "  who 
have  obtained  the  proprietary  possession  of  the  soil,  to  increase  ar- 
tificially the  money  value  of  their  estates,"*  by  means  of  a  monopoly 
which  threatened  to  be  destructive  of  the  happiness  and  social  pro- 
gress of  the  nation.  The  evils  consequent  upon  persistance  in  a  system 
of  \'irtual  exclusion  were  imminent;  they  were  not  of  a  nature  to  be 
put  aside  or  delayed  by  temporising  measures ;  it  would,  therefore, 
seem  most  in  agreement  with  true  wisdom  at  once  to  meet  the 
difficulty,  and  to  determine  upon  the  adoption  of  a  decisive  change  of 
system. 

By  following  such  a  course,  we  must  of  necessity  give  full  freedom 
to  the  productive  industry  of  the  country  in  all  its  branches,  including 
among  the  rest  that  class  for  whose  supposed  benefit  we  so  long  sub- 
mitted to  a  contrary  system  ;  for  it  would  be  absurd  to  suppose  that 
in  a  state  of  things  such  as  has  here  been  contemplated,  with  a  con- 
stantly increasing  number  of  customers,  our  agriculturists  must  not 
share  in  the  general  prosperity,  and  that  they  should,  under  any  circum- 
stances, fail  to  obtain  a  return  for  their  capital  and  labour  equal  to  that 
i-ealized  by  all  other  classes  in  the  community  :  beyond  this  they  can 
have  no  right  to  claim  any  advantage. 

The  amount  and  progress  of  the  foreign  and  colonial  trade  of  the 
United  Kingdom  in  each  year  from  1801  to  1849,  with  the  exception  of 

*  Letters  on  the  Corn  Laws,  by  H.  B.  T. 


356 


PROGRESS  OF  THE  NATION. 


[sec.    111. 


1813,  the  records  of  which  year  were  hiirned  with  the  Custom-house,  are 
given  in  the  foUowing  ahstract :  — 

Statement  of  the  Amount  of  the  Foreign  and  Colonial  Trade  of  the  United  Kingdom,  specifying 
the  Official  Value  of  Foreign  and  Colonial  Merchandise  imported  and  re-exported,  and  the 
Official  and  Real  or  Declared  Value  of  British  and  Irish  Fioduce  and  3Ianvfactures  exported 
in  each  Year  from  1801  to  1849. 


OFFICIAL  VALUE. 

Real  or  Declared 

Value  of 
Britisli  ami  Irish 

Years. 

Imports  of 

Exports  of 

Exports  of 

Foreign  and 

Foreign  and 

Britisli  and  Irish 

Prod  uce 

Colonial 

Colonial 

Pfoduce  and 

and  Manufactures 

Merchandise. 

Merchandise. 

Manufactures. 

Exported. 

£. 

£. 

£. 

£. 

1801 

31,786,262 

10,336,966 

24,927,684 

39,730,659* 

1802 

29,826,210 

12,677,431 

25,632,549 

45,102,330* 

1803 

26,622,696 

8,032,643 

20, 467,. 531 

36,127,787* 

1804 

27,819,5.52 

8,938,741 

22,687,309 

37,135,746* 

1805 

28,561,270 

7,643,120 

23,376.941 

38,077,144 

1806 

26,899,658 

7.717,555 

25, 861 ; 879 

40,874,983 

1807 

26,734,425 

7,624,312 

23,391,214 

37,245,877 

1808 

26,795,540 

5,776,775 

24,611,215 

37,275,102 

1809 

31,7.50,557 

12,750,358 

33,542,274 

47,371,393 

1810 

39,301,612 

9,357,435 

34,061,901 

48,438,680 

1811 

26,510,186 

6,117,720 

22,681,400 

32,890,712 

1812 

26,163,431 

9,533,065 

29,508,508 

41,716,964 

1813 

Records  destroy 

ed  by  fire. 

1814 

33,7.55,264  ' 

19,365,981 

34,207,2.53 

45,494,219 

1815 

32,987,396 

15,748,5.54 

42,875,996 

51,603,028 

1816 

27,431,604 

13,480,780 

35,717,070 

41,657,873 

1817 

30.834,299 

10,2J2,684 

40,111,427 

41,761,132 

1818 

36;885,182 

10,859,817 

42,700,521 

46,603,249 

1819 

30,776,810 

9,904,813 

33,. 534, 176 

35,208,321 

1820 

32,438,650 

10,555,912 

38,395,625 

36,424,652 

1821 

30,792,760 

,10,629,689 

40,831,744 

36,659,630 

1822 

30,.500,0:)4 

9,227,589 

44,236,533 

36,968,964 

\         1  OCiO 

35,798,707 

8,603,904 

43,804,372 

35,458,048 

IS24 

37,552,935 

10,204,785 

48,735,551 

38,. 396, 300 

1825 

44,137,482 

9,169.494 

47,166,020 

38,877,388 

1826 

37,686,113 

10, 076; 286 

40,965,735 

31,. 5.36, 7  23 

1827 

44,887,774 

9,830,728 

52,219,280 

37,181,335 

1828 

45,028,805 

9, 946,. 545 

52,797,455 

36,812,756 

1829 

43,981,317 

10,622,402 

56,213,041 

35,842,623 

1830 

46,245,241 

8,550,437 

61,140,864 

38,271,597 

1831 

49,713,889 

10,745,071 

60.683,9.33 

37,164,372 

1832 

44,586.741 

11,044,869 

65,026,702 

36,450,594 

1833 

45,952^551 

9,833,753 

69,989,339 

39,667,347 

1834 

49,. 362;  811 

11,562,036 

73,831,5.50 

41,649,191 

1835 

48,911,542 

12,797,724 

78,376,731 

47,372,270 

1836 

57,023.867 

12,391,711 

85,229,837 

53,. 368, 571 

1837 

54,737,301 

13,233,622 

72,. 548,047 

42,069,245 

1838 

61,268,320 

12,711.318 

92,4.59,231 

50,060,970 

1839 

62,004,000 

12,795,990 

97,402,726 

53,2.33,580 

1840 

67,432,964 

13,774,306 

102,705,-372 

.51,406,430 

1841 

64,377,962 

14,723,1.51 

102,180,517 

51,634,623 

1842 

65,204,729 

13,. 584, 158 

100,260.101 

47,381,023 

1843 

70,093,3.53 

13,956,113 

117,877:278 

52,278,449 

1844 

85,441,5.55 

14,397,246 

131, 564,. 503 

58,584,292 

1845 

85,281,958 

16,280,870 

134,. 599, 116 

60,111,081 

1846 

75,9.53,875 

16,296,162 

1.32,288,345 

57,786,875 

1847 

90,921,866 

20,0.36,160 

126,130,986 

58,842,377 

1848 

93,547,134 

18. .368, 113 

132,617,681 

52,849,445 

1849 

105,874,607 

25,. 56 1.830 

164,. 539.. 504 

63,596,025 

*  The  declared  value  of  British  and  Irish  produce,  &c.,  exported  in  the  years  1801  to 
1804,  applies  to  Great  Britain  only,  the  real  value  of  exports  from  Ireland  nothaving  been 
recorded  earlier  than  1805.     Tlie  exports  from  Ireland  a^re,  however,  inconsiderable. 


cn.vr.  IX  ]  FOREIGN  COMMERCE.  357 

The  rates  of  valuation  employed  for  coTn])utitii>-  the  amounts  given 
under  tlu;  head  of  official  va/tie  were  fixed  in  the  y(!ar  1G*J4,  and  have 
not  since  been  altered,  so  that  the  sums  thus  stated  must  not  be  sup- 
posed to  give  any  accurate  exhibition  of  the  value  of  goods  imported 
and  exported.  This  system  of  valuation  has  been  preserved  in  the 
public  accounts,  because  it  has  been  supposed  to  afford  a  correct  mea- 
sure of  the  comparative  quantity  of  merchandise  which  has  made  up  the 
sum  of  our  annual  commercial  dealings  with  other  countries.  It  is, 
])erhaps,  impossible  to  ascertain  with  absolute  correctness  the  value  of 
all  the  foreign  and  colonial  merchandise  imported,  because  of  the  great 
range  of  qualities  and  consequently  of  value  as  regards  many  of  the 
principal  articles  of  commerce,  and  which  value  cannot  bo  accurately 
estimated  before  the  goods  are  landed  and  submitted  to  inspection  ;  it 
would,  liowever,  be  not  only  possible  but  easy  of  accomplishment,  to 
arrive  at  a  satisfactory  approximation  to  the  truth,  if  some  competent 
persons  in  various  lines  of  business  were  employed  every  year  to  affix  an 
average  value  to  the  different  descriptions  of  goods  that  had  been  im- 
ported in  the  course  of  the  preceding  year,  and  which  average  value 
should  be  used  by  the  computers  at  the  Custom-house  for  ascertaining 
the  amount  of  the  year's  commercial  dealings.  The  fallacy  of  the  pre- 
sent system  will  be  at  once  apparent  if  the  amounts  given  as  the  official 
value  of  imports  and  exports  in  any  one  year  are  brought  into  compa- 
rison. On  the  supposition  of  the  correctness  of  the  Custom-house  valu- 
ations, our  foreign  and  colonial  trade  must  long  since  have  proved  the 
ruin  of  our  merchants,  since  the  value  assigned  to  the  exports  is  enor- 
mously greater  than  that  given  to  the  imports.  To  instance  the  first 
and  last  years  of  the  series  in  the  following  table,  the  loss  of  the  country 
in  1801  must  have  amounted  to  3,478,388/.,  and  in  1849  to  84,226,787/. 
The  adoption  of  a  second  method  for  recording  the  value  of  the  ex- 
ports of  British  and  Irish  produce  and  manufactures,  according  to  the 
declaration  of  the  exporters,  affords  better  means  for  judging  as  to  the 
actual  progress  of  our  foreign  trade,  since  it  is  certain  that,  taking  one 
year  with  another,  the  amount  of  the  shipments  so  made  must  be 
brought  back  to  us  together  with  the  ordinary  rate  of  profit.  If  the 
foregoing  table  be  taken  in  this  way  as  the  test  of  the  progress  of  our 
foreign  trade,  during  the  present  century,  it  will  be  seen  that,  from 
1819  to  the, year  1835,  httle  or  none  was  made — that  in  fact  the 
amount  of  our  foreign  trade  had  not  then  been  equal  to  that  which 
was  carried  on  during  some  of  the  years  when  we  were  at  war  with 
nearly  all  Europe,  nor  to  that  of  the  first  five  years  of  peace  that  fol- 
lowed. The  average  annual  exports  of  British  produce  and  manufactures 
in  the  decennary  period  from  1801  to  1810  amounted  to  40,737,970/. 
In   the  next  ten  years,  from   1811   to  1820,  the  annual  average  was 


358  PROGRESS  OF  THE  NATION.  [sec.  hi. 

41,484,461/.  ;  from  1821  to  1830  the  annual  average  fell  to  30,507,623/. 
Since  that  time  the  amount  has  been  jn'ogressively  advancing,  and  in  the 
next  decennary  period  (1831  to  1840)  the  average  was  45,244,257/.; 
while  in  the  nine  years  that  close  the  series,  the  average  value  of  our 
exports  reached  55,896,021/. 

With  1831  were  begun,  under  the  auspices  of  the  late  Lord  Syden- 
ham, a  series  of  fiscal  reforms  far  too  numerous  to  be  particularised 
here.  In  the  eight  years  during  which,  excepting  one  short  interval  in 
1834-5,  he  officiated  as  Vice-President  and  then  as  President  of  the 
Board  of  Trade,  that  minister  carried  through  the  House  of  Commons 
reductions  and  modifications  of  duties  affecting  more  than  700  articles 
of  importation.  The  individual  effbct  of  these  reforms  may  not  have 
been  great,  but  in  their  aggregate  they  were  followed  by  the  happiest 
results.  Among  the  measures  here  alluded  to  were  several  which 
affected  our  commerce  with  France,  and  especially  the  equalising  of  the 
duties  u])on  wine,  the  produce  of  that  country,  with  the  rates  charged 
upon  other  foreign  wines.  During  subsequent  years,  and  until  this  time, 
the  legislatures  of  France  have  done  little  or  nothing  in  liberalising  its 
tariff;  but,  on  the  contrary,  duties  materially  affecting  the  industry  of 
England  have  been  increased  by  them  with  the  declared  intention  of 
discouraging  certain  branches  of  our  trade  ;  and  yet  (so  true  is  it  that  a 
nation  cannot  sell  without  buying),  their  augmented  sales  to  us  of 
French  produce  have  been  accompanied  by  continually  augmented  pur- 
chases from  us  in  return.  The  value  of  our  exports  to  France,  which 
in  1830  amounted  to  only  475,884/.,  has  since  reached  to  more  than 
six-fold  that  sum,  and  it  is  a  fair  presumption,  that  had  our  fiscal  reforms 
been  met  in  a  corresponding  spirit  by  the  French  legislature,  the  trade 
between  the  two  countries  would  by  this  time  have  reached  an  amount 
more  consistent  than  it  is  with  the  interests  of  the  two  people,  and  more 
in  proportion  to  the  wants  and  desires  of  upwards  of  sixty  millions  of 
people. 

The  imperfect  manner  in  which  the  Custom-house  accounts  were  for- 
merly called  for  by  Parliament,  and  the  subsequent  destruction  of  the 
Custom-house  by  fire,  do  not  allow  of  any  analysis  being  made  of  the 
foregoing  statement  for  all  the  earlier  years  of  the  series.  The  follow- 
ing abstract  (pages  359  and  360),  exhibiting  the  course  of  our  export 
trade  from  1805  to  1811,  and  from  1814  to  1849,  will  show  in  how  great 
a  degree  it  has  been  owing  of  late  years  to  the  enterprise  of  our  mer- 
chants in  seeking  new  and  distant  fields  for  commercial  operations  that 
the  money-value  has  been  maintained  of  the  produce  and  manufac- 
tures of  the  kingdom  which  have  been  exported,  and  that  we  have  been 
able  to  command  and  to  consume  to  a  greater  extent  than  formerly  the 
productions  of  other  countries. 


cii.vr.  IX.] 


FOREIGN  COMMERCE. 


359 


'5  -♦' 

s  » 

o   _ 

fi 

1^ 


ft.  -s 


C5  ^ 


v> 


U  S  S  5  '^  ■?<  --^  •-■  ■'-  'J  i  5  '^  2J  ®  2  ;3  :s  v? 

3    li    S    -n    -t  —  o  —  ~.  00  rt  56  1^  «  >-  O^  K^  cc_  ■x 

r  _J~  ^^  -jT  -m'  l^  C<  'M  -"  «0  M  O  '-'>  ?l  C 

'■*i  5  «  ^  "o  ?.  o  g  5  g  2  5  -  «  2J  ??  S  " 


3»      (N      (N 


CI    ^ 


oi    I-    ec     v2 


o^-~o^5^g^;--5^jJoog»=cac-^ 


l-T  35  r-  -f  Q  J^ 

t^  «  c^  ^  -*  w 

00  Tfi  in  O  «P  ^ 

cT  o  «o  00  in  >-" 


i^     iJ      ^      CO     t^     «      «      <M     ^-^    00^    ""^ 
-o"   rt"   r,"   -T   trT   «r   —<'"   T'f   !^     00     C"! 

-«    cc    -*    in    C5    tr 


—    -*    rr 


f^T    S^     <?)      I-l      W     W      'H      (N      rt      -# 


r^ 

A 

n 

in 

-1" 

-t 

Ol 

•* 

I—* 

o 

tD 

rt 

•* 

-s  g 


in  00  '-<  c; 

t^  -i<  X  o  2 

00  ?"■  r-  o  CO 

iD  o  ^  ^  S'' 

in  o  1^  ^  i^- 

,-  00  (N  p-<  00 


to     "^     00     O     -f     —     30 


O      ~      !'>      ~ 


I      S 


■2  E  S -5 


(M      00     •-      O 
rf      to       O       "^ 


_       _  _  t^     t— 

ri    «    00    00    r^    t^    O^   S'l^   0_  in^ 

--r  F-T  tcT  ^  Qc.  ^^  O  r^  <— '  c 
i--oot~-*«^«t^ao:DC5 
r^  coinin*^in»n»n'^'=l* 


n      CM      -t      "*      ■*      00      (M 

„    „    .-    «3    r^    e-.    «    ■—    t 

QOS^OOOJOOWCsOlN 


'-^  Z^ 


—   3:  to  —  00  O  -- 

o,  tc  ^  m  ^  -J 

W  00  Cl  !^  ~  00^ 

^  c^  --  in  t^  o  "^ 


o»  35  in  to 

-,  .  -  -   i-n  ~  " 

p— «  CO  in  W 

oo'  in"  S  O  ^"  s"  ^    I*i  !2 
in?;eoin«jrr;S 

■M  in  a-.  ■*  o~-  00  ■M  oo 

~  cT  '^'^  CO  to  50  in  to  t-  ^ 


CO 


te 


3s   00 


00  O  O  to  CO  -f 


^-  cs 


CO  to 
to  in 


—  C  CJ 

00  •*  in 
c!  r>  -* 


■*untDCO'?lta^t-in 

aO~I^I^COtD3!— 'CO 

in  00  <?!  00  X  CO  --^  -T^  -• 

6coiniMtot-3;3^« 
553^coinxc5S>coa3  „„„„-- 

S«r  (N  Co"  of  (n'  IN  «  (N  «  Co'  «  CO  9^  CO  -J"  CO  CO  CO  CO  ^  t 


<M   Ci 


to  to 


o-<*ooins^s;g5' 

to'^toc^inco-'^F— 
O  r~  ■*  —  •*  ^  ^  ~'_ 

to"  co""  in"  co"  ■^^  >?>  ^  ^'  £2  ri? 
in  to 


ri<N«g?g;5£^S^5S5SSS 


S03    o    ^^    ^    2J 
-.     ~     —       -  "^    "^    ■"!,      -      - 


r-    I— I    t^    to    X 


CO     CO 


CO    in 
CO     CO 


otoco*>'*<^'^r;£^ 


,-1    31    in    «N 


to    in    r-    CO 


S  Ln  to  31  CO  i2 

as  >^  •*  ^  —^  ^^ 

in'  ■*'  -*"  i-'^"  2  5 

in  to  X  X  CO  -. 

to    O    t^  "^  '^  "5  ^„  ^ 

X    S    c^'  »"  t-T  t-T  r-'  to 


to      O     CO     t^      "^     ^ 

X    —    00    t~    2    p 

en     "l"     m     in    ^     r- 


31      3! 

CO     i-"^ 


O      O      3s      1^      '^ 


PI     00 

oo"  to" 


O     O     O     C3i 

00    to    CO    in 


in    CO    ^    to    31 


eo    •— •    ^    3*    *<^    *^    <?' 


_.    X    «    -*    S 
to    o    o    s'l    CO 


CO  I-"  ^  X  31  in 

"  t-  to  o  O  S 

F-  S-.  CO  -i*  X  X 

..*  F-«  ^iH  .— I  .^  3> 


bo     5 

— '  sT 


to      X     t^     "-^  ^  CO 

t^    CO     in     X  t  -S 

in    to    eo    t—  ^-  s^^ 

o'  ^''  t~r  »r  co" 

in     31    -*  (N  rt 


^^1222222222222222 


360 


PKOGRESS  OF  THE  NATION. 


[sr.c.   III. 


B        -Si 


00  t^ 

m 

no 

CO 

CO 

on 

ft 

^ 

o  o  o 

CO  CO 

en 

(N   (N 

CO 

r^ 

in 

in 

CO 

05 

'N 

lO 

o  S  ^ 

<N  (N 

Ci  00 

n    « 

m 

r^ 

o 

•* 

in 

CO 

in 

r- 

CO  o 

t^ 

tfi     o 

00 

CO 

-* 

o 

"s 

,  t «  c» 

^^ 

CO 

^^ 

(K 

o 

no 

o 

O   CO   CD 

•*    r^ 

Ci 

-♦   -H 

CO 

O) 

* 

CO 

Hi  00  <M 

(M 

C" 

CO 

CO 

rr> 

o 

o  S5  3 

r^ 

00  ^ 

no 

H 

't  O 

00 

CO 

Oi 

m  rt 

t- 

GO 

CO 

,-J> 

,_ 

CO 

fM 

O  CO  — 

— <   1^ 

(N 

00  o 

on 

OO 

(M 

CO 

«  CO 

CO 

CO 

CO 

CO 

rf 

■>1< 

in 

■* 

in  in  m 

in  -* 

in 

in  CD 

in 

m 

CO 

2  • 

2  >-s 

^     '■       '• 

• 

e-ss 

''I'S 

01 

i 

"tf  C  y. 

in  to 

Ol 

m 

r- 

CO 

f-^ 

no 

no 

-f 

m  1^  o 

CD   00 

CO 

00  (N 

o 

Ci 

in 

OO 

<=  S  c  . 

O   CO 

CC 

CO 

-f 

t^ 

CO 

CD 

CO 

O  r~  -- 

"M  -M 

o 

CO 

a  S  J-^ 

O   C5 

m 

(M 

CO 

CO 

o 

't 

00 

C!  (M  <N 

r^   O 

C5 

in  Ci 

o 

o 

o 

in 

«<  5-5 

'-?§  S 

■n 

in 

O) 

fN 

r- 

1^ 

in 

(M 

CD  t^  (N 

c>i  in 

CO 

Ci  m 

GO 

■* 

m 

IM 

Isll 

on 

r^ 

■^ 

r^ 

no 

m 

(N  (N  O 

^  r- 

(N 

CO  00 

t^ 

t^ 

Ol 

-+ 

■*  o 

1—* 

CO 

(M 

00 

i-H 

00 

CI 

CO 

t^  O  (N 

1—  o 

■* 

^   Ci 

m 

o 

00 

(N 

"g'^ 

M 

O   Tt 

in 

CO 

■* 

'^ 

m 

■* 

in 

^ 

■*  CO  CO 

in  ■* 

in 

in  in 

in 

in 

m 

t^ 

(£3    \n 

(M 

T(" 

s 

CO 

^ 

^ 

in 

CO 

1—  0»  OS 

CO  ■* 

'O 

s$ 

CO 

1-^ 

rr) 

bo3 

^       00 

(M 

CO 

in 

•* 

no 

CO 

00  CO 

CO  00 

00 

O  00 

00 

CO 

00 

t^ 

CO 

00 

t^ 

t^ 

in  in  -"ii 

in  OO 

o 

Ci  O 

o 

t^ 

m 

CO 

"E- 

cj  00  m 

o 

m 

CO 

no 

O 

<^^ 

no 

(N 

in  '*  in 

'*  CO 

CO 

CO  ^ 

lO 

Ci 

no 

Cl 

ll 

CO 

CO 

r~ 

t^ 

CO 

CD 

—  00  rt 

CO  in 

t^  CO 

-* 

o 

Ci 

in 

00   05 

O 

'^^ 

05 

!N 

—^ 

tN 

o 

CO  (N  1-1 

O   00 

Ci 

r-l   -* 

■* 

m 

Ci 

m 

^ 

" 

" 

" 

" 

" 

" 

1— I  ^^  1— 1 

'~* 

"  " 

" 

■^ 

■^ 

■s   ■= » 

30  00 

^ 

en 

CO 

m 

CO 

no 

-* 

^ 

00  05  CO 

m  c 

O) 

00  m 

CO 

rrf 

CD 

Nor 
cai 

S  ill 

idit 

't   O 

GO 

r^ 

CO 

•^ 

O  CD  00 

CD   i^ 

m 

CO  CO 

Tt< 

CO 

-M 

t^  00 

in 

(N 

"v 

*-'„ 

CO 

t~ 

r^ 

00  <N  00 

O   C5 

CO 

CO   --I 

CO 

m 

-* 

t^ 

—  *■  .—  -H 

;+jO  « 

m 

f-H 

in 

o 

f— 1 

in 

00 

r^ 

m  -*  (M 

^   rj" 

C" 

(N  m 

c^ 

CD 

r^ 

t^ 

1  B  §1^ 

t^ 

C5 

00  CO   <N 

m  <M 

<M  -f 

O 

c^ 

O 

CO 

tC   C5 

CO 

in  CO 

no 

in 

5''a^ 

-*  O 

-* 

^ 

T)< 

•* 

^ 

in 

CO 

m 

m  t^  CO 

m  Tf 

-t 

in  to 

CD 

m 

CO 

^ 

s^ 

in  in 

CO 

CO 

(N 

c: 

31 

m 

in 

in 

O  tC  o 

!?J   1^ 

•^ 

C   Ci 

O 

Ci 

00 

a  a 

r^ 

no 

c 

^ 

CO   O   !N 

'^  o 

t^  CO 

CD 

CO 

o 

CM 

M  s 

CO 

(M 

CO 

Ci 

Tf 

CO 

(?) 

t^   (M   O 

CD  00 

m 

O  00 

■* 

O 

»l 

s^  O  CO 

(M 

CO 

OO 

C5 

Tf 

00 

m 

in 

m  — .  CO 

GO   00 

c 

cc   (M 

(-1 

■^ 

T1> 

,_i 

CO 

00   CO   00 

O     CI 

CO   ■* 

o 

■■f^ 

CO   00 

^^ 

c 

-* 

in 

00 

in 

Tt 

CO 

m   C30  !N 

c  m 

o 

Ci   ^ 

00 

Ci 

in 

Ci 

(§=5 

m  -* 

CO 

C-. 

in 

r- 

CO 

C 

!M 

•* 

t^  00  m 

t^  CO 

m 

t^  »^ 

CD 

o 

Ci 

^ 

'"' 

'~* 

'"' 

00  o 

(N 

•* 

CO 

o 

00 

CO 

o» 

^ 

00  0>-  t)< 

^  ■* 

CO 

—  •* 

no 

(M 

en 

c^ 

^   CO 

00  un 

o 

^• 

CO 

■'I' 

■* 

CO 

CO 

^ 

OO 

CO 

CO  o»  ^ 

O  ■* 

CO 

t^  r~ 

CO 

CO 

CO 

CO 

•- 

CJC>»  >- 

in 

m 

m 

,^ 

rf 

CO 

o 

,^ 

in  CO  CO 

t^  CO 

CO   CO 

(Ti 

on 

_^ 

m 

ira 

CD 

c^ 

CO 

00   (N 

■* 

(M 

t^ 

CO 

•* 

r^ 

in 

O  CO  (N 

^  -* 

m 

Ol      Ci 

>^ 

Tt  rf 

^ 

-* 

■* 

■* 

•<1< 

in 

CO 

in 

CO  -t^   05 

00  t^ 

Ci 

^  o 

o 

Ci 

CO 

c 

«o  =~. 

^ 

'N 

CO 

in 

^ 

t^ 

;m 

no 

C5   00-  Ci 

o  -* 

SJ  £^ 

O 

-+ 

CD 

m  in  in 

no 

c 

CO 

o 

•— ' 

o 

o 

in 

1^  IM  -* 

m  CO 

in  d 

CA 

O 

CO 

00 

■- 

•V^    oo 

m 

CO 

© 

r^ 

CO 

CD 

no 

m 

t^  t^  m 

CO  (N 

m 

in  CO 

r^ 

-Ti 

fN 

•* 

CD 

^ 

•^ 

< 

LO 

•_i 

•-' 

■* 

00  CO  CO 

00  J^ 

t^ 

CD  00 

00 

o 

-rf 

^ 

^ 

•^ 

^    -'    ^ 

—   -H 

-^ 

^  ^ 

'-' 

(N 

'- 

(N 

2S  =5 

r^ 

o 

-, 

Q 

^ 

t~- 

m 

^ 

•*   Tf   CO 

^ 

00  00 

(T) 

(TV 

O  <N  CD 

5 

—  o 

(.^ 

^ 

^ 

!M 

(M 

CO   (N  O 

o  m 

CO 

CO  O 

OX 

t^ 

t^ 

'=t}eo  C5 

CO 

o\ 

CO 

00 

,_ 

^^ 

,_^ 

CO 

CO  CD  00 

■*  00 

•>*  rt 

^ 

ro 

,^ 

00 

|l 

CD 

r^ 

s? 

Ol 

CO 

(M 

O 

00 

^  -*  S^ 

CO  00 

Ci 

(M   (N 

t^ 

CO 

in  CD 

t~- 

CO 

m 

CO 

00 

00 

05 

r- 

O  CO  Ci 

C5   C5 

o 

1^  S 

s 

o 

o 

Zl 

■^      00 

^ 

o 

t^ 

C5 

Vi 

CO 

^_^ 

rrs 

m  o  C2 

rr, 

in 

on 

o  00  r^ 

00  (M 

E  o 

in 

rt  CD  ^ 

m  00 

1-^ 

c 

-* 

^§  1 

CO 

r^ 

CO 

m 

CO 

c; 

no 

O  —  CO 

C   O 

■^ 

CO 

l**^ 

1^ 

C5 

o 

o 

05 

(M 

CO   CO   GO 

m  CO. 

^1 

5>1   Ci 

o  -s 

CO 

C5 

in 

^   CO   C^ 

—  O 

O 

CO  O 

CO 

(Ti 

!-! 

Ci 

^- 

00  00 

00 

t^ 

Ol 

C5 

o 

o 

05 

;:: 

(M  <M  S^ 

CO   ^ 

-f' 

-t"  in" 

•^ 

co" 

r>r 

Co" 

e 

00  o 

o 

^_, 

w 

CO 

■^ 

m 

CD 

00  e»  o 

^ 

CO 

CO 

CO 

CO 

CO  CO   rt. 

-+  -* 

^  -c 

-f 

-t 

-t 

.+ 

!2 

00 

CO 

00  00  GO 

00  cc 

00 

00  OO 

00 

GO 

GO 

00 

—  - 

- 

cuAP.  IX.]  FOREIGX  COMMERCE.  361 

That  ])art  of  our  commerce  which,  being  carried  on  with  the  ricli  and 
civilized  inhabitants  of  European  nations,  should  present  the  greatest 
field  for  extension,  had,  it  will  be  seen,  fallen  off  under  this  aspect  in  a 
remarkable  degree.  The  average  annual  exports  to  the  whole  of  Europe 
were  less  in  value  by  nearly  20  per  cent.,  in  the  five  years  from  1832  to 
1836,  than  they  were  in  the  five  years  that  followed  the  close  of  the  war ; 
and  it  afiin-ds  strong  evidence  of  the  unsatisf;ictory  footing  upon  which 
our  trading  regulations  with  Europe  svere  established,  that  our  exports 
to  the  United  States  of  America,  which  with  a  population  of  only 
twelve  millions,  and  removed  to  a  distance  from  us  of  3000  miles  across 
the  Atlantic,  then  amounted  to  more  than  one-half  of  the  value  of  our 
shipments  to  the  whole  of  Europe,  with  a  population  fifteen  times  as 
great  as  that  of  the  United  States  of  America,  and  with  an  abundance 
of  productions  suited  to  our  wants,  which  they  are  naturally  desirous  of 
exchanging  for  the  products  of  our  mines  and  looms. 

The  quantity  and  value  of  all  the  principal  articles  of  British  produce 
and  manufactures  that  were  exported  in  each  of  the  tvventy-two  years  from 
1827  to  1848,  and  the  proportions  in  which  those  shipments  were  made 
to  diflferent  countries,  are  show^n  in  the  following  tables  (pp.  362-367), 
which  thus  exhibit  the  most  accurate  view,  that  can  be  given  by  any 
Custom-house  document,  of  the  actual  and  relative  importance  of  each 
branch  of  our  foreign  commerce. 

Some  few  remarks  appear  to  be  necessary  here,  in  order  to  prevent 
our  falling  into  mistakes  as  regards  our  foreign  trade  with  some  of  the 
countries  particularised  in  the  annexed  table  (pp.  362-367).  Under 
the  head  of  Prussia,  we  see  a  value  assigned  to  the  exports  which  is 
quite  inconsiderable,  and  which,  if  left  unexplained,  might  lead  to  a 
very  wrong  conclusion.  A  very  small  part  of  the  British  goods  which 
find  their  way  to  Prussia  for  consumption  are  exported  direct  to  any 
Prussian  port :  some  of  those  goods  pass  through  the  Netherlands  to 
the  Rhenish  provinces,  and  still  more  are  shipped  to  Hamburg  and  other 
ports  in  the  North  of  Germany,  whence  they  are  forwarded  by  land- 
carriage  to  the  interior.  In  an  ofiicial  statement  compiled  at  Berlin,  to 
show  the  amount  of  importations  into  the  Prussian  States,  as  to  which 
this  kingdom  was  interested  in  the  years  1832,  1833,  and  1834,  the 
value  is  thus  given  :  — 

1832  1S33  1834 

British  Produce  and  .Manufactures      .£13,712,700  £12,S26,.380  £10,531,010 

Other  Goods  (Colonial  Produce,  &c.)   .       5,012,-300  4,655,050  5,583,760 

18,725,000  17,481,4.30  16,114,770 

The  rates  of  valuation  appUed  in  the  computation  of  these  amounts 
are  very  greatly  exaggerated  ;  but  when  the  necessary  allowance  shall 
be  made  for  this  fact,  it  will  still  be  found  that  the  Prussians  are  far 
better  customers  to  our  manufacturers  than  would  appear  upon  the  face 
of  our  public  documents. 


362 


PROGRESS  OF  THE  NATION. 


S 


p  00 


a,  s 


t^S 


"fe^ 


i^  u.  r^  !-•  t^  ^j^  ^  ^ju  '.'.■    .'I  r^   Jj  ^-L^  ' ^  yu  1^  'jN  t^  ^i,J  fj 

t^  —  C>135(Nj;-^-C-OC5I^CCW'-':~r-.  005500 


in    o  Q  — 
(N    o  >n  C-. 


. ;  <N  L'^  ^  1^  00  CI  00  00  C^  -t>  r:  Q  1^  -+  C>>  -5  '^  I^  --  00 


to    <N  cr-  o) 


(N  — 


I  Tj-  00  iC  CO  -Xi  I 


-i  00  cr.  (M  ^O  CO  i.-^  00  ■M  t^  in  O  00  -«  I 


•  to  35  1^  to  00  I—  «Ji 


•  OT  O^  '^  t^ 


e<50csir;'*n-i>)coo  —  iM-*oitot^i^«-*s-.  -H 

,  ;  orw'>-<"-*'t=^r-"o'o'-o'c'~«'c«'"in'o  c'cr!M"T*"i-ri-J~ 

c+joototcc^«'i"i^>--:  —  otowtMntDX-fsicco 

CO  nHiTS'tt^  —  to  «         "Sfs-ICM         5^ 


t~.    <n  <n  ox 


00    •*  to  -^ 
m    I—  (M  Q 

i-c  «  « 


in  <N  I—  r- 


«  « 


(McTiOO  —  irsoowciW  —  O—it^r-ocooin-*-* 

STt  w  in  1^ — )<  .~.  <M  cc  ~-  cc  r-  «  c  «c  tc  r?  —  c  — 
>noc-.  —  inoo^eoo-f-^oom-tiM-fS-.  tcoi 


i~    O  O  r^ 

~f    m  »-  o 

<0      CO  !M  F-< 


,!— cninc.  -^in— "tooot^^WdiOintoinoo^in 
'^^cOiTiinoiTi'inQOoo-ftoinco-^cooc  —  cow-H(M 


m  (>)  Si  to 

■—   CO  n 


C  «>»  00  to  to  1 


00  •— <^^cootDcoc(^^■*'nc;^^■ 


cs  --  — •  in 
O  in  to  Q 


,;r— •*'>*«oooo 


.-     (M  C< 


.  !  f—  t^  »  (M  '^^  ?i  CM 

■+!  c.  in  in  c.  cr.  -*  oo 

—      —  to  o 


cc--cr)oa>'Mino3;cOT)'to 
0C3-.  cotc^>occcr^  —  OO'.':-* 
to  3;  -.c  ^.  X'  -M  ^M  CO  in  X  to  ■* 

;m  in  f—  X  r-  CO  i~  o  -*  O  X  o 
Ot^-*C0  3-.  coocicoinx^ 
to  r-.  ■n       CO  •*  r-i      X 


<M     to  00  o 

CO      (M  to  ■* 

X    ■*  r^  (N 


CO  X  -M  —  J^  O      in 

m  ■*  05  X  3-.  to      ■*      X  to  to  •*  C  to  I 


r^    X  CO  to 


•  CO  '—  33  to  to 


.;o5Ccoxt^co    S'l    intocoxi 

t+Jx-*to  —  t--to    i^X    t^OI>JC0> 

-^  ^-  I— <  .*     o    -^  ^-  t 


5^  (M  _        ^ 


o    ^  CT  o 

1—         m  CO 

i-i  <N  CO 


:£  t«  z  C  t.  c  =:  M  fe  e- 


—     ,  sj  ' 


"H  .^  C  OS  2     ^ 


in  t^ 
t^  X 

m  r-< 


o  ifS 

CO  -< 

in  to 


^  ^ 


O  »n 

•  -h'x" 


» 

m  rM  -H  r~  —  m 

c  L"  CO  -+  -^  in 
X  (M  IM  (M  c  in 

o 

x-t>-*coinococOin-t 
ooo-fxt^  —  toco  —  tcx 

CO^(N(MtOO  —  CO^tO 

in 

o 

CO 

'   '^ 
•    in 

in  o 
(N  in 

•  Tj<  in    • 

■M  in 

00 

.  ;  m  X  't  in  3--  CO 

■-K  CO  CO  to  35  X  t^ 

o 

.— iin  —  Q  —  o-^'(^^'*'OX    • 
35  35  CO  -3"  to  m  o  C  fM  CO  to     • 
Tt  I—          X      m  (>>  cj      in 

•      .         rf 

oc 

to  3:  (M  O  m  ^ 

CO  35  X  ^  -*  O 

3-.  to  in  00  —  -^ 

to 

CO 

X  to  o  !>>  M  c^  in  35  X  X  -N  in 

CO  —  -tOinini^rfinr fco 

C5C3-.  X  —  —  35  —  -^fCXCO 

m  (N  35 

"*  '-'^  3! 

t^  Tj-  o 

CO  —  X     • 

^  —  S 

to  (N 

m  to 
X  n 

,  ;  X  <N  CO  —  3-.  rj< 
CO                  rH  i—<  CO 

2 

Oi 

X  in  r^  35  — .  X  X  to  ~-  — >  in 

35-*(MC0CCOC0t^C0-tX 
Tf  35              CO         ^  ^-  rM         ^H 

•  •  m  — 

•  •        CO 

«- 

O  —  3-.  to  X  00 
t^  CO  O)  —  CO  — 
05  r^  r-  3:  CO  to 

to 

(M  T*<  t^  to  •*  ^  to  S^  05  to     ■* 

in-H<x  —  —  -Mtoin-^os'  o 

C5Ct0  35-^XC^t-C5-->     t^ 

to 

1—  35  X 

o  in  in 
<r^  t^  in 

X  in  to    • 
in  r-     • 

—  ox 

to  o 

,  ;  X  to  -;  -I-  -t  '^ 
-+<  O  ■*  CO  C  r-  in 

to  c  to  35  m  X  in  fM  ^  t^    — 

^O!?)C0'>>Tt<-)'-tOC0      CO 
'I"  -*               O         O  35  (M            in 

•     .         tC 

5  o  ca  t;  ^i2  ' 

■'coo-  S 

■  o  £  5  '"■ 

4) 


CHAl',    IX.] 


FOREIGN  COMMERCE. 


363 


_ 

_ 

i.' 

^ 

2< 

~^ 

,_ 

,^ 

00  Q  00 

in  4  -. 

3 

m  o 

-t  Ni-.':  to  -i- 

-, 

- 

iT. 

~ 

^ 

-fi 

^ 

—   -^  '-O  Tl  l~  -M 

D 

O 

» 

l~ 

eo 

to 

o 

-f  X 

(N  •N  l~  in  —  CO 

to 

CI 

'  --^^a 

(m" 

-t" 

eo" 

^^ 

to 

(N 

•  cc  r^  in 

,^ 

x"in"   • 

in"fM"o"x"to  — " 

. 

„' 

CI 

CI 

,^ 

S>l 

•  m  00  to 

X 

Si 

—  CO  eo  in  o  «t 
—  to  to  to  -T 

O 

eo 

to 

r-  —  eo 

r^ 

CO 

eo 

"^ 

(N"eo" 

o 

(N 

^ 

^ 

CT>  O 

Ol 

(N 

eo 

00 

■* 

IN  ?:  -f  t~ 

in 

J-.  O 

to  to  CT-.  -*  --  in 

m 

^ 

en 

J^ 

5© 

in 

•*  to  C»  :T. 

X  — 

CO  3-.  r~  to  "M  CO 

O^ 

«_!>» 

in_ 

00 

"N 

in 

o_ 

r-  O  O  -N 

c 

C-.  --o 

eo  31  to  in  s-i  I'l 

to 

^_ 

r^ 

.  rc 

oo" 

■n" 

o" 

«o 

to 

^r^ '^"i^ 

co" 

-t"jr  • 

o  35*  o"  — '  tcT  3r 

o" 

3i 

•  -»■ 

r>- 

-f 

t^ 

—  t^  00  »n 

-I-  in    • 

eo  3-.  to  eo  35  35 

to 

-* 

00 

^< 

to^to_eo 

X  -* 

to" 

--  Tf  X  X  ■N 

CO 

to 

5 

IN 

^ 

IN 

00 

(N 

to 

O  O"-  oo 

X 

£  "^ 

o  to  O  IN  r~  •* 

O  "N  X  to  —  (N 

2; 

»2 

o 

ffl 

t^ 

eo 

m  00  -N 

!M 

to  " 

eo 

^ 

"t. 

«_ 

t~ 

(N 

" 

o» 

m  in  in 

?» 

r-  X  to  eo  X  in 

05 

eo 

•  «" 

o" 

oo" 

•  (N  r-  — 

t^ 

CI  — 

CO  —  in  in  to  t^ 

in 

•» 

00 

in 

t^  IN 

■N  l~  —  —  X 

S 

to 

^ 

t 

in 

'  c^S^w 

in 

in  -:)< 

^  un  in  X  eo 

eo 

to 

eo" 

<n"(n" 

t^ 

in" 

35 

eo 

^ 

en 

to 

T*< 

00 

to 

in  00  -f 

8 

5^  ^ 

X  eo  (N  eo  O 

1 

■»♦< 

O 

r~ 

o 

00 

eo 

i^ 

IN  O  O 

t-  IN 

to  c  in  -  -< 

35 

;o 

(N^ 

a^ 

m 

r^  X  — ' 

t^ 

(N  X 

m  35  —  —  to 

■^ 

in 

•  ec' 

-f" 

o" 

in" 

to" 

„" 

•  in  *.  CO 

eo" 

x"cr 

•  co"-i'"o"«"in 

• 

t^" 

o" 

•«5 

^ 

to 

•  r^  CO  -f 

to  C5 

•  X  f  to  o  t-- 

in 

n 

-1< 

O  f  in 

to 

in 

m  —  to  1^  -N 

CO 

-t 

l« 

<N 

«o 

eo 

^^ 

S4 

r^  35  CO 

^_^ 

eo  X 

O  —  Ot-eo 

•* 

CI 

r* 

OJ 

r^ 

in 

(N  ■*  O 

eo 

X  in 

in  1-  r-  —  O 

eo 

ir 

"*-, 

5^ 

*1 

in 

•* 

i^ 

CO  ?l  ^^ 

m 

m  X 

IN  eo  X  '-o  C 

to 

CO 

• 

• «" 

r^ 

in 

cT 

oo" 

■*" 

•  ^  ^^  to 

eo 

CO  X 

•  X  X  3:  —  35 

-r 

•* 

•  ^ 

00 

eo 

<n 

'  00  00  r^ 

to 

in  ■N 

•  Tf  CO  eo  in  o 

IN 

to 

co" 

7^ 

eo 

C^^m^co 
(n"cn" 

to 

ctT 

CI  IN  CO  to  ■* 

CO 

Eo' 

^^ 

05 

~^ 

(N 

o 

r- 

to 

r^  eo  00  eo 

ai 

$5 

I—  eo  (N  to  35 

to 

r^ 

■* 

IN 

O 

(N 

t^ 

Ci 

to  CO  -*  ■?-. 

(N 

m  o  t^  IN  to 

SJ 

5^ 

o_ 

o_ 

o 

!N 

to 

CO 

rj.  — .  -C  t^ 

O 

CO  -i" 

t^  —  _  O  rl- 

o 

in 

o" 

.  ^ 

m 

(n" 

^ 

-*" 

^ 

o"«--~oo"— " 

X 

<n"x" 

•  to" CI  cfox 

•*" 

^H 

•  to 

OS 

CO 

t^ 

—  in  CO  -N 

eo  1^ 

•  —  in  eo  -*  to 

oo 
eo" 

eo 

oo^oo^eo 
— "(n" 

3 

to" 

(N  -f  to  in  eo 
(n" 

eo 

J^ 

00 

00 

in 

^^ 

^_, 

m 

CO  in  ^ 

to 

in  fN 

eo  C  O  O  — 
O  '?  -r  m  t^ 

to 

s 

-^ 

o 

00 

C^ 

00 

'f 

CI   'Ti   O 

t- 

—  to 

35 

CI 

w_ 

uT 

s 

00 

t^ 

to 

00 

t^  c  «^ 

■*  o 

t-  c  in  35  ^ 

35 

to 

tS 

•  O 

Ti 

un" 

■'1' 

c" 

•  — 1  IN  r^ 

'>l 

eo  CO 

•  IN  to  X  X  O 

35 

CI 

•  c 

in 

.  X  —   -:i 

t^ 

IN  o 

•  CO  --<  in  —  o 

Tl 

!0_ 

eo" 

c4 

eo 

mtojN 

— "co" 

to 

X  CO 

-*" 

CI  in  t^  X  eo 
in" 

CO 

X 

eo 

00 

91 

(N 

8 

~ 

05 

r^ 

T)>    -+    X 

X 

in  ss 

■-"  eo  1—  35  ^  in 

2P 

to 

00 

l-- 

00 

eo 

00 

■*  O  3^ 

(N 

—  *» 

35  -<  35  X  t^  -H 

52 

cr> 

in 

<N 

eo 

00 

Tl" 

Ct-CO^ 

t^ 

eo  O 

f^  ^-  "N  eo  CO  to 

-* 

r^ 

m 

5D 

05 

eo" 

<N 

•  cr.  00  H" 

C  r^ 

to"— '  x' of -"^" 

CI 

« 

•  do 

in 

00 

5 

to 

—  o 

-M 

(N 

to  2>l  (N 

in 

X  CO 

(N  in  eo  t-  eo 

eo 

X 

■*" 

-Teo" 

in" 

eo" 

to" 
eo 

in 

t>. 

eo 

(N 

^ 

1^ 

to 

00 

(N 

O  fN  — 

X 

3>1  g 

CO  ci  35  m  -*  to 

35 

(N 

ro 

-* 

3^ 

in 

t^ 

m  i-i  CO 

Tf  r^  O  35  CO  to 

m 

f3 

r- 

o_ 

1^ 

c^. 

'-< 

CO  IN  => 

CO 

S  X 

tr5  3-.  —  X  -<  ■* 

35 

eo 

•  o" 

in" 

o" 

o" 

in 

-T 

•  t^  CO  t-- 

—'■ 

x"in" 

.-H"eo"o"-*"o"x" 

o" 

— " 

•  m 

':o 

Ol 

to 

CO 

•  -  X  m 

^ 

—  3-- 

M  «  !^  i  IN 

CI 

X 

«: 

o 

eo 

eo  in  -M 

to 

C^tO 

CO 

""^ 

co" 

1— t  CO 

t^ 

in" 

eo 

. 

, 

'"7'  ■ 

00 

1    ^ 

a 

"a    '    ' 

o 
■  "o    ■    ■ 

.^ 

"*    •      • 

* 

a> 

, 

, 

' 

"2 

c 

c3     . 

.    .    .  a    .    . 

f? 

c 

O 

-a 

C3 

C.1 

Java,  &  other 
Indian  8cas 
L'  Islands      . 

tj  s 
■5  S 

3 
CO 

"2 

_3 

'E  -3 

'S 
o 

'E 

.  o    . 

S 
•  ■<    • 

.  "o    . 
.  2 

.    .    .^    .    . 

o 

o 
.    .  ^    .    . 

_rt 

5 
c 
o 

X 

1 
o 

b^ 

-5    _, 

3  3 

^ 
^ 

o 

o 

-3    3 
eS    cJ 

a 

-5  =* 

C3 

"a  m 

N  = 
ca 

1)  — 

»  .2      —  cj  -r  o  .H  * 

o-E       a3-c«S 

uatemal 
olumbia 
razil    . 
;ates  of 
hili      . 
cm 

"3 

3 
x 

5; 

Z 

t»-  ^ 

U5 

ss 

■^ 

'•^ 

X 

^ 

z 

55 

ca     = 

y 

I^Sr- 

C!  CJ  K  X  'J  i. 

- 

364 


PROGKESS  or  THE  NATION. 


[si-c. 


,-  - 

^  » 

_, 

^ 

un 

X  X  0  00 

t^  to  rM 

CO 

-  0 

(>)  X 

^ 

_ 

0 

C  X 

_. . 

= 

■*    t^  0 

0 

=1  c? 

0 

CO 

X  CO 

0  CO  1 

1^ 

F-"     to 

r-  t^  r^  CO 

in 

to  <N  -)«  C 

5 

w 

m  in 

in 

o 

Tj<    t^ 

O  i-T 

~ 

t^ 

i 

0 

?l 

"0  n 

0  to  c>> 

Cl 

r-.  0  to  M  I 

n  to 

X 

CO^O^I 

^  0 

0  G^ 

_o_ 

00 

^  uo  <^^ 

■o  00  i^f-T 

^ 

-T 

^ 

o'c' 

r-Tto's^' 

x' 

— 'co' 

^  r-  in 

_, 

,_J^ 

o'crx'"'-r 

cr 

r-T 

•  m' 

^m 

- 

F^ 

Xin(Nt^-*tooxO  —  coco 

0 

CO  eo  ■* 

3) 

-t 

•^ 

-•  C>) 

in 

un 

-* 

-* 

•^ 

CO 

t^  to  F^ 

Ot  IM 

X) 

(M 

in  to 

CO 

(n" 

to' 

co" 

— ' 

O) 

(N 

cf 

— 

— 

r^ 

o  in 

-♦I  ri 

-1"  oc  ci 

^_^ 

Ci  t^  ^. 

to  t^  CO 

t^ 

is 

00  -f 

_ 

X 

^_, 

0  "* 

— 1  t^  S>1  r*  to  t^ 

00  0 

Q 

<M  t^ 

c^  i^  00 

^  "^ 

in 

rC  CO  CO  0  -N  to 

5^  0  0  3-1 

0 

•*  — 

i2  '^' 

m 

s  ^ 

T.  in 

s 

■>* 

a:  "* 

X  to 

CO 

z: 

<fj  !M  00  X  «^  (M 

•0 

m  (»  0 

3-.  Tj< 

CJ  X 

t^  -* 

-• 

F-t 

n 

^c-^to^ 

a 

t 

■M^to'^ 

,-r 

^■~ 

„" 

_' 

to 

rt  to 

^  — 

,D 

-T 

—  0 

-^'f-' 

x't-T 

(m' 

t>.'x'rjr 

ci 

— '—T 

•  —  in' 

m  00 

c 

CO 

t^ 

eo  0  Tf  ^  to  0 

oj  C-. 

ci  t- 

0 

■-1  in 

CJ 

ci 

X 

a 

M 

-c(N 

o 

-^ 

-1" 

0 

1— « 

m 

0 

in  !M 

r^   CI 

0 

-* 

■*    Tf 

(N 

Q 

u 

1 

c< 

to' 

K 

"^ 

I^ 

" 

^ 

S>l 

<M 

C2(Nt^«0-*000000'*(N 

r:  CO 

■+ 

f^ 

m  to  X  m 

IN 

^ 

in 

tJi  CU  t^ 

? 

to 

cr;r^ 

■* 

*> 

r-  o  r^  t^  O 

CO 

(N 

in 

c^  CO  0  to  — 

C^ 

CO  to  -^ 

cn  (M  in  CO 

to 

0  0  t^ 

CO  I~- 

eo 

m  CO  «  FH 

c; 

o 

l^ 

tOX 

—  X 

C-.  0  l^  t^ 

c^  tn 

in  1^ 

0  o_ 

m 

■*  to 

in 

C5  X  in 

_  0 

g 

OD 

^  Cl  w 

p— <  O 

co'"oo'"r*"T4r-)r(-^"m  to" to 

^_, 

to  0  T)> 

1-^  cT 

^ 

■M 

to' 

co'c'ci' 

tc' 

in  fh 

•  x' 

in  to  oo  to  to  00  CO 

C-.  Tf  CO  1- 

■*  r^  to  (N  (N  C-. 

CO 

0 

■* 

X  <2  0 

w 

m 

"$ 

fH 

00    r^ 

—  (N-* 

^« 

in 

C- 

in 

0^ 

CO 

f— « 

~.  i^ 

—  to 

to 

(N 

in 

(N 

5ri 

'^ 

to"  CO 

(M 

^ 

'^ 

(M 

"^ 

«    « 

-*  rt< 

_ 

O  !M  O 

-^ 

un  !M  t^  ^  -* 

C-. 

r^  ^  0  X  X 

^ 

CO 

ci  m  to 

(M  m  0  0 

<N 

in  r^ 

a  o 

to 

« 

in  to 

-*  — 

in 

r;  0  0  X 

in 

0 

m  X  1^ 

tc* 

S^^ 

<M 

^ 

e» 

=-.  C3  t^  « 

to 

f^ 

^ 

X  X 

0  to_^ 

t^ 

to  CI 

in 

in 

0^ 

C-.  to  0 

(N 

'-' 

-^ 

i 

S 

^  00  c^ 

-f  rj- 

to 

ct' 

^ 

-^' 

~C0' 

t^  .--. 

in'cT-t 

r- 

^"cT 

co'of 

isj" 

in' 

^ 

^'0' 

C5 

^ 

t^  r-< 

•;ir 

CO  c> 

o 

i-^ 

-*  CO  !N  IM 

m 

co 

0  X  X  1^ 

t- 

Oi 

Tt  m 

to 

""I 

00  -H 

CO  (N 

0 

'-' 

Ci 

CO 

o-^  o\ 

'^ 

CO 

Oi 

tC  CO 

(M 

•s 

-" 

to  CO 

^ 

~C0' 

c^ 

'^ 

s 

m  «  00  — < 

^^ 

^ 

t- 

C  3'1  -M  C  X  C^ 

X 

t~- 

1^ — f 

n  — 

-t 

CO 

to 

to  X  -f  2») 

^^ 

r-H    in 

? 

t--  — 

CO  00 

-M 

r- 

-f 

—  X 

0  -t 

CO 

■7-1  to 

X 

X 

(M  cr. 

t^  (N 

-*  CM  X 

^ 

^ 

F-  00 

-  ■* 

X 

c 

X 

c 

0 

?1  C) 

to  X  t^ 

CO 

to  t^ 

in  cj 

to  0 

Tj< 

—  t^ 

in 

in 

C5  X 

.  ■"!, 

■Q 

T)< 

=*^sV 

t^i-T 

CO~^"c"to"<M''to"  00"'-+'co' 

* 

co'x"'co' 

vr©'-*  t-" 

x' 

-f'c' 

-f' 

t-'i?r 

. 

•0' 

s 

OD 

CO  CO  CI  F^ 

-* 

I^  !M 

^  (M  CO  Cl 

eo 

Tt    ^ 

X 

^ 

T* 

p^ 

to  r-< 

1—4  r—t 

CO 

to 

CD__0 

cn 

0 

-* 

0 

m  3^ 

f"  <N 

-* 

(M 

rf  CO 

CO 

J> 

I— 1 

in 

Co' 

r- 

(M 

•— t 

•-^ 

(N 

f^ 

^ 

fc^ 

<N  m 

to  (TJ 

in 

C-. 

C  to 

_. 

^  CO 

i^  (N  CT  to  X  m 

-*  C-. 

^ 

0 

CO 

^X 

^ 

•*  1^ 

(M 

^  C>) 

—  to 

^ 

X  ^ 

^  -f 

t^ 

t- 

CO  -+  0  m  (N  CO 

to 

0  CJ 

X  -* 

^ 

c 

r-  •*  O  'I'  CO  ■* 

»— " 

C-l 

^^ 

!N  1^ 

r^   C^ 

X 

^^ 

CO  m 

!M  in 

X  0 

o_ 

CT-.  rl 

0 

X  in 

X 

s 

OD 

-j  oj  tr.  00  — 

~ 

90 

to' 

^ 

"x'o'-f'co'-t" 

in 

^ 

c'-o 

"cTx' 

1^' 

CO 

C-. 

Co'cf 

t^" 

cTtc' 

', 

'  in' 

-«c  -^ 

t^  o 

oc 

—  -*  CO  0  '^ 

to  UD 

X  CO 

a 

<M 

t^ 

to  C-. 

5^ 

,B 

iH 

o  ^ 

tN  <N 

■^ 

-t  X  CO 

^ 

1— ( 

to  — • 

C^ 

Tf  -* 

CO 

V 

^ 

in 

CO 

<N 

" 

" 

!M 

"^ 

1 

zs  o 

-*  !M 

to 

in 

23 

t^ 

to  CO 

CO  ^ 

0  (M  0  X  0  <M  !N 

0 

C5 

eo  c  0 

to 

CO 

X  5> 

^^ 

(M  S 

00  CO 

in 

« 

0 

(N  to 

C-.  CO 

c 

—  52 

ci  0 

in 

t^  t^  CO 

05  CO  to  X 

CO 

ts 

» 

Tj"  00 

in  1^ 

00 

— ' 

f^ 

X 

C".  to 

^  !>!  t^ 

r^ 

0  t^ 

in 

X 

0  CO 

— < 

eo  to  fj 

_  t^ 

s 

« 

iS'-^ 

to 

in 

^ 

X 

in't-' 

#^'"^r 

t- 

'c 

~rin 

~-t'x' 

co' 

^ 

f^ 

^'x' 

-t' 

I 

0 

I  ^ 

s 

OD 

OD  ^ 

^ 

r-^ 

to  X 

CO  -+  ro  to  ^' 

l^ 

t^  ■^^  to  r^ 

■Tl 

in 

N 

r-  to 

to 

•—1 

fH 

I^ 

S>J 

in 

00  (M 

CN 

(?) 

Tj<    Tf 

(N 

c 

'B 

■^ 

»n  CO 

IM 

^ 

-" 

-N 

■"• 

1 

cot^>nT*<eooo^o 

^ 

m  m 

r^  — 

C" 

to 

—  000 

f^ 

0 

in 

CO  -*  CO 

c>o 

in 

223 

(M 

^^  Tl"  00  O  'M  o  Cl 

'^ 

~.  X 

-f  CO 

CO  -f 

CO 

Tl" 

0 

<N 

r^ 

^ 

CC 

O)  to  rf  T)<  I'J 

~. 

tf 

0 

cr  r: 

-.  X 

— _ 

c 

-M  0 

J-'  '~^ 

X 

-* 

m 

0  CO' 

CO 

s^ 

-^ 

0 

^L"l 

.  " 

rs 

UD 

-J.}  eo":?!"!--."-^' 

in 

oc' 

— T 

x'-t" 

in'x 

-f'n' 

^J 

_*r 

to' to 

^to't^ 

— " 

X 

!m' 

-*'co' 

CO 

^ 

^ 

co'— ' 

•  t^ 

^ 

^'=oc 

i^  00 

oc 

-t 

•t 

I^  •?! 

?5 

X 

-f 

ct 

0 

p-( 

to  ^ 

»— < 

in 

C  CO 

'^ 

"  CI 

X 

S  -M 

t^ 

^^ 

C) 

^ 

to 

rf 

s 

53 

-"'" 

•t 

co' 

C>1 

-" 

CO 

'- 

C)  — 

CO  00  to  to 

^TJ 

t^ 

s  '-'^  ^■ 

-t  to 

-+ 

in 

to  c 

in  to 

^.^ 

0 

«-  x-t< 

,^  ,_ 

in 

X 

c;.  c>) 

—  -r 

CO 

'N 

-f  CO 

0 

in 

S  X 

to  C) 

CO 

X 

0  CO 

•*  IC  05 

.^. 

.■S 

jr 

-f  -f 

R.®- 

~ 

S  X  -f 

0  to 

^'— 

0  to 

-t  -* 

-f 

0^ 

0  c^- 

X 

to  l^t^ 

^ 

CO 
OD 

'"'is' 

■m'co' 

^ 

00 

0  -+ 

""w-T 

a;  to 

to' to' 

,__, 

~to'5o"cO 

"n-'co' 

in 

0' 

Tt'cT 

x' 

. 

crT 

eo 

•  oT 

1-  C  CO 

;3; 

^ 

t^  in 

•*  X  rj.  0 

(>>  to 

!M 

m  r— 

X 

•* 

^ 

1— 1 

X 

X 

to 

S>1 

C^ 

-tf  F- 

SO 

CO 

•* 

eo 

(N 

^' 

CO 

"" 

^ 

i>j 

^ 

-I 

CO  oc 

_.  „, 

•M 

» 

S' 

^_, 

-)•  -t  X  to 

_; 

^_^ 

to  in 

CO  ^ 

^ 

^ 

0 

ITJ  to 

m 

—  eo 

in 

CO'  o 

•M 

^i 

X 

CO  1- 

to  r; 

s 

<N  CO 

CO 

c-j  X 

-i<  — 

m 

^^ 

w 

-t_co_ 

-t  CO 

to 

-^ 

."*."*  '-^ 

r^    0 

^ 

to 

C-- 

eo  ^ 

eo 

C  ^ 

00 

^ 

Gt 

«+jg~K 

*      ^M 

^ 

^r\ 

*. 

* 

,-H 

in  CO 

^  r^ 

^ 

to 

—  CO 

CI  in 

0  CO 

to 

tr.  t-  -M 

^H 

•<5 

t^  C-. 

to 

X  m 

■"--•g 

-t 

•^^  -)•  0  t^ 

eo 

IN  to  X 

to 

^ 

^ 

1^   l-H 

fH 

T»< 

m 

X 

in 

^o_ 

t-^ 

05  — 

r-i  t- 

(N 

■* 

-* 

CI 

(^ 

'-^'~ 

^ 

:m' 

-' 

'-'" 

(n' 

^ 

" 

" 

•-B 

•    0 

~  0      • 

a 

^ 

cfi 

0 

tj 

Q> 

"^ 

•1 

1 

0 

S 

0 

e3 

S 

•         • 

a 

*      0 

'"' 

*  c 
0 

•  S 

d 

u 

"StH 

!^ 

'"' 

i 

93 

z 

O 

m   o 

o  o 

bJ 

csg 

a 

0 

-3 

"3 
0 

S-r 

C 

2 

0 

C 

5  -^-^ 

0 
o" 

0 
0 

-5  -? 
0  5 

0  0 

~3 
J 

-3 

■  _3 

S  -3 

OF* 

-J  «* 

-/3  ^ 

a 
0 

3 

0 

d 

= 

V 

^ 

5 

'V 

0 

3     . 

'5 

"5 

5       H 

C3 

>> 

0 

3  2 
.2  s 

"c 

ll 

.X.] 


FOKEinX  rOMMF.llCE. 


365 


00 

^ 

r^ 

i-^ 

CO 

m 

-f  —  Ol 

.n 

n  o  -t 

C7-. 

cr 

_ 

_ 

T 

-f 

,^ 

-+ 

CI 

CO  CO   ?) 

-t 

CO 

o 

CO 

-V 

>n 

O 

o 

-   (M  O 

o 

cc  —  00 

— ' 

CO 

M 

Ci.' 

<- 

Vj 

O 

^■ 

o 

in 

,_^ 

^ 

r-j 

(M  1^  "t 

^ 

c^ 

CI 

I~ 

rn 

p^ 

CO 

p^ 

o 

o 

in  CO  — 

•t 

-f  -f 

:-~ 

t- 

C" 

in 

1— ■ 

(M 

m  i~  i-i 

(M 

CO 

-t 

li^ 

O 

'JJ 

CO 

»— * 

«o 

(N 

'" 

CO  CI 

-^ 

t^ 

CI 

■^ 

g 

OJ 

ca 

m 

(N 

o» 

i-i  i-»  t-» 

-f 

05  in  CO 

00 

00  -*  CO  O  CO 

^ 

o 

CI 

§ 

^ 

00 

CO  CO  CO 

35 

CO 

CO 

to 

C-. 

m 

in 

00^  -t 

■* 

o  d  ci 

CO 

in 

1.'.- 

CD 

'-'J 

CO 

t^ 

CI 

^"  , 

•    in 

m 

CO 

(N 

:?: 

•  o  —  -t 

O 

OD  -f  CO 

•  -f 

CO 

-f 

1^ 

00 

CI 

•n 

-c 

en 

o 

<-r. 

•* 

i~  in  1- 

CO  — 

CO 

CO 

CO 

CO 

t~ 

o-*^ 

CT- 

Ol 

l^ 

j^ 

(N 

CO  <M 

r~ 

(N 

oo 
in 

o 

in 

m 

^H  ^-  '^ 

-1'r~0  CO-" 

C^ 

CO 

rr. 

_ 

CO 

,^ 

_ 

TT) 

Tf 

—  -*  O 

—  CO  c?  O  !M 

CO 

CO 

if^ 

■o 

O 

00 

(M 

IM  ■*  0>l 

t^ 

•n  ::;  -f 

"— ' 

^ 

-■ 

-- 

in 

rt 

<^ 

00      • 

•    -c 

•~D 

T) 

fM 

rt" 

in 

•  —  (MO 

CO 

CO  t^  in 

in  00 

c 

— 

r. 

— 

in 

— 

^ 

in 

03 

m  00  r> 

t^ 

•* 

(M 

(M 

i^  00 

0(; 

c  o 

CO 

r- ' 

l^ 

w' 

CO 

CO 

CO 

■^ 

^ 

^  *l 

m 

(N 

CI 

in 

(N 

00 

^_^ 

fN 

^ 

■i< 

00 

m  in  CO 

no 

t^  C5  •* 

^ 

1- 

^ 

CO 

^ 

-*  m 

O 

^ 

00 

CO 

CO 

CO 

00 

(N  <M  en 

CO 

O  CO  r^ 

O 

o 

00 

CO 

o 

1^ 

m  -*  00 

o 

00  C!  m 

1- 

00 

1^ 

-t 

'-'. 

CO 

CO 

o 

in    • 

•      05 

-T> 

CO 

Oi 

.  CO  >-<  — 

_ 

00  ■*  CO 

.  ^ 

cr^ 

— 

.— 

-+ 

-f 

^ 

•o 

CO 

o 

^ 

•* 

e§  °*  "* 

<N  t^ 

CO 

■^ 

rr) 

CO 

(Ji 

CO 

c; 

t^ 

m  CO 

CI 

i^ 

w; 

o 

CO 

I.-: 

(N  M 

CO 

- 

-? 

c^ 

^ 

r-i 

'f 

(T-. 

^_^ 

in 

--  -*  (M 

^__, 

;m  -<  r- 

in  d 

-f  CI 

CO 

m  in 

r^ 

~^ 

in 

t^ 

883 

-H 

-C  O  CO  CO  I- 

CO  00  -f  Tj<  CI 

^ 

CI 

Oi 

o 

>n 

'f 

CO 

(N 

-I" 

CO  C3  t-  !M   r: 

in 

O  C 

■^ 

CO 

o»    ■ 

•    m 

o> 

»•* 

^ 

(T- 

t^ 

•  r~  •*  c^ 

in 

00  'I'  CO 

—  00 

CO 

-^ 

00  CO 

O 

-)> 

C5 

CO 

nr 

fT) 

CO 

■*  O  CO 

rr5 

cr;  CO 

w  in 

m  oc 

CO 

in 

00 

IM 

(N 

C; 

-* 

CO 

m 

^ 

S-l  (N 

t^ 

(N 

s 

CI    00    —    CO    m 

C5      (35      CI      O      00 

r-1    ,-1    in    't    CO 


e0O35    O    CO       coco 
F-  t^  r~    CI     CI  CO       t^  -^ 

<T>  c.  a^    in  ceo   cot^ 


in  CO  CO  c 


-t  t-  in  o  00  CO 
00  in  d  00  CI  -* 


o\  ^  n  n 


C5  —<  CO  c  en 
CO  CO  ;^  c^  in 
o  t^  "^  CO    "^ 


1—  00  CO  CO  -*  o 
r^  C-.  CO  CJ  O  r- 


t^  CI 

CI  -H 

CO  r-l 


t^  00  CI 


>  l-~  CO  CI   ^-  f^  o 

'^  00  CTl      O      CO  CO 
O  C5  CO      GO      00  CO 


CO  I^  —  CO 
Cf         -h" 


r~  CO    CO     CI    o    CI 

CO  m    m    CO    00    CO 

— -  .—      CO      CO      t^      CO 


r^  f-H  c^  CI  c  CO 
m  -f  CO  ~  CO  I-- 
^  -+  —     CO     t-  1^ 


-f  m  t^  in 

O  -H  ■*   35 
CO  CO  CO  fH 


CO    H«    in    F^    CO       F- 

r-    O    C    CO    CO 


•  CI  CO  C    m     m  en 

en  en  35    d    oo  CO 
O  CO  CI    C    in  T* 


O   00    —   r^ 


m  m  -^  00  00 

t^  r-  05  c  CO 

en  CO  t^  00  in 

cf  00*^  eo"  CO  — I 


n    —    CI  o 


in  m  o 

CO  -t'    - 

-r<>  m  t--.    35    en  d 

-"  -^  F^    00    CO  o 


05     00     CI     oo     I^ 

d    00    m    r^    CO 

00     CO      00     t^     CO 


.—  coco    d    ind      -*d 

3:  in  CO     d      O  CI         CO  t^ 

d^CO        l-l        COOO  t^r-l 


CI  ■*  CO  CI 

CO  r>  O  CO 

m  CO  en  CO 


in    CO    -*    >- 


.  t^  d      35      Tf  d 


C  CO  00  CO 


^  •  "l-^  -c^S'-S 


=3    2 


^1 


o  j,^  is  3 


11' 


«  ■:=  ^  —      ^    ■  ^"^ 


§•§=-5^; 


"^       c« 

£   •  o 


>        t; 


.2  S  a< 


O  e3   cj   d 

2-C--S2 

t.  "w  o  ~  "^  .ee  a 
<  -sj  Ch  i:     u  X 


^|£ 


s:-/^  =  N 


ert  "^    5  ^  "^  '^  "^ 


•  ^  w  a). 


5-^ 

2-^ 


,2    "^  -5    cS 

^    —    ri  ^^ 


1)  <) 


P5  71  C^  C^  fc<  K  Sti         ^ 


366 


PROGRESS  OF  THE  NATION. 


[^ 


y4n  Account  of  the  Declared  Value  of  British  and  Irish  Produce  and  Manufactures  Exported 
from  the  United  Kingdom,  specifying  the  various  Countries  to  which  Exported,  in  the  Years 
1846,1847,    184S,  and  184'.). " 


COINTRIES. 


184G 


Russia,  Northern  Ports  .... 
„        Ports  within  the  Black  Sea 

Sweden 

I\orwny 

Denmark  (including  Iceland)  .     . 


Prussia. 


Meikknburg-Schwerin 

Hanover i 

Oldenburg  and  Kniphauscn 

Hanseatic  Towns 

Heligoland 

Holland 

Belgium 

Channel  Islands 

France  

Portugal,  Proper 

„  Azores 

„  Madeira 

Spain,  Continental,  and  the  Balearic  1 

Islands ) 

„      Canary  Islands 

Gibraltar 

Italy,  with  the  adjacent  coast  of  the 
Asiatic,  and  the  Islands,  viz.  :^ 
Sardinian  Territories    .... 

Duchy  of  Tuscany 

Papal  Territories 

!Naples  and  Sicily 

Austrian  Territories     .... 

Malta  and  Gozo 

Ionian  Islands 

Kingdom  of  Greece 

Turkish  Dominions,  exclusive  of  Wal-I 

lachiaand  Moldavia,  Syria  and  Egypt ) 

W'allachia  and  Moldavia      .... 

Syria  and  Palestine 

Egypt,  Ports  on  the  Mediterranean    . 

Tunis 

Algeria 

Morocco 

Western  Coast  of  Africa     .... 
Colonial  Territory  of  the  Cape  of  Good  1 

Hope i 

Eastern  Coast  of  Africa      .... 
African  Ports  on  the  Red  Sea.      .      . 

Cape  Verd  Islands 

Ascension  and  St.  Helena,  Islands  of. 

Madagascar 

Mauritius 

Arabia  (exclusive  of  Aden) 

Aden 

Persia 

British  Territories  in  the  East  Indies 
Islands  of  the  Indian  Seas,  viz. : — 

Java -• 

Philippine  Islands 

Other  Islands 

China  and  Hong  Kong  .      .      .      .  -  . 
British  Settlements  in  Australia   .     , 

South  Sea  Islands 

British  Morth  America 

„        West  Indies  and  British.Guiana 
Honduras,  British  Settlements      .      . 


1S47 


£. 

1,586,235 

138,913 

146.654 

183,818 

340,318 

544.035 

36. '.176 

218,111 

25.134 

6,326,210 

101 

3.576.46^  i 

1,1.)S.034 

414,567 

2,715,963 

969,757 

57,146 

39,358 

769,793 

49,816 
605,693 


474,622 
919.173 
281,516 
993,730 
721,981 
255,033 
171.731 
194,029 

1,749,125 

195.1.54 
267.618 
495^674 

25,928 

22,188 

421,620 

480,979 

5,041 
'  350 
2.505 
28,309 
2,580 
310,231  I 
7,822  I 
14,. 594  ' 
3,091 
6,434,456 

355,009 

92,806 

2,H03 

1,791,439 

1,441,640 

.53.724 

3.308,059 

3. 2.53;  420 

2.52,167 


1848 


£. 
1,700,733 
143,810 
179,367 
169,149 
253,701 
.5.53,968  j 
105,104 
147,357 
26,080  I 
6,007,366  I 
250  I 
3,017,423  i 
1,059,456 

.542,191  I 

2,554,283 

889,916  ! 

42,980  I 

33,853 

770,729 

30,680 
466,845 


355,366 
637,748 
181 ; 894 
636; 6 JO 
537,003 
195,836 
143,426 
233,913 

2,363,442 

213,547 

415,292 

538,308 

6i7 

13,881 

16,231 

518,420 

688,208 

13,7.51 

'505 

4,145 

31 ; 378 

223,563 

ii,488 

029 

5,470,105 

357,870 

104,486 

307 

1.. 503, 969 

1.644,170 

25,368 

3,233,014 

2,102,-577 

170,947 


1849 


£. 

1,692,006 

233,220 

162,819 

150,117 

2^6,466 

404, 144 

37.648 

141,2.i0 

11,287 

4,669,2.59 

321 

2,823,258 

823,968 

599,. 583 

1,024; 521 

1,175,7-18 

55,360 

40,822 

616,878 

45,832 
750,257 


611,992 
751,953 
152,746 
695,666 
494,525 
379,467 
178.831 
284; 834 

2,664,281 

193,898 

258,186 

509,876 

244 

8.8;  0 

21,9^16 

.571,022 

645,718 


o'.iO 

3,324 

31,728 

169,308 

is,. 377 

6,279 
5,077,247 

.336.843 

143; 897 

■742 

1,445,959 

1,463,931 

^   47,401 

1,9£0,592 

1,434,477 

112,352 


1,379,179 

186,9!i6 

185,027 

182,336 

353,599 

428,748 

106,784 

150,927 

5,650 

5,386.246 

357 

3,499,937 

1,4.57,584 

6.34,125 

1,951,269 

979,-597 

58,406 

.35,009 

623,136 

.58,378 
533,481 


740,806 
777,273 
202,518 
1,115,260 
658,992 
387,744 
165,805 
288,847 

2,373,669 

218,577 

338.366 

638,411 

3,228 

12,551 

65.101 

620,371 

.520,896 

5,489 

1,250 

1,774 

23,312 

234,022 

14,. 564 

•2,568 

6,803,274 

382,055 

80,997 

1.057 

1,-537,109 

2,080,364 

29,314 

2,280,386 

1,821,146 

206.244 


FORKIGN  COMMKRCE, 


367 


An  Account  of  the  Declared  I  'alue  of  British  and  Iriult  Produce  and  Manufactures  Exported 
from  the  United  Kine/dom,  At. — continued. 


COUNTRIKS. 


Foreign  West  India  Islands,  viz. : — 

Cuba 

Porto  Rico 

Guaiialoupe 

Martinique 

Cura9oa   

St.  Croi.x 

St.  Thomas 

French  Guiana 

Dutch  Guiana 

Hayti 

United  States  of  America   .... 

Mexico 

Central  America 

New  Granada 

Venezuela 

Ecuador     

Brazil 

Oriental  Republic  of  the  Uruguay 
Buenos  Ayres,  or  Argentine  Republic 

Chili 

Bolivia 

Peru 

Falkland  Islands 

Russian  Settlements  on    tlie    North  1 

West  Coast  of  America    ...      J 

Greenland  and  Davis'  Straits  .      .      . 

Total    .     .     . 


£. 

8+4,11-2 

4,  .533 

580 

318 

6,877 

4.. 576 

446.317 

1,620 

136,113 

6,830,460 

303,685 

68,500 

219,533 

245,0.59 

7.435 

2, 749; 338 

153,479 

34,002 

959,322 

4,4'J3 

820,533 

3,117 

9,438 


£. 
896,554 
16,822  1 
164 

196  I 

1,089  i 

14; 797  I 

3S6,5J9  I 

"i,466  ■ 
192, 03J 
10,974.161 
100.688 
86,983  1 
145,606  ' 
182,279  ; 

2,. 568, 804 
334,083 
156,421 
866,. 325  : 
22,375 
600,814  ; 
2,083  j 

8,193 


£. 
733,169 
1,017 

218 


4,074 
171,660 

"  380 

88,067 

9,564,903 

945,937 

73,146 

247,916 

56.066 

6,094 

2,067,302 

1.56,759 

449.194 

967,303 


£. 
1,0.36,153 
2,910 

93 

9,966 

9.067 

383,023 

'i,790 

109,. 306 

11,971,028 

779,059 

117,933 

331,112 

178,998 

9.689 

2,444;715 

36,666 

1,362,909 

1,089,914 


8.53,129 

878.251 

717 

6,173 

3,409 

6,417 

43 

702 

57,786,876  ;  58,842,377      52,849,4t5     63,536,025 


Spain_ appears,   from  the 
very  inconsiderable   amount 


same  table,  to  take  from  us  goods  to  a 
and  there  can  be  no  doubt  that,  if  the 
political  troubles  of  that  country  were  at  an  end,  and  if  a  more  rational 
system  of  commercial  policy  than  has  hitherto  been  pursued  were 
adopted  by  the  Spanish  Government,  our  trade  vnth  Spain  must  increase 
in  a  most  important  degree.  Still  that  trade  is  at  present  much  greater 
in  reality  than  it  is  in  appearance  ;  a  large  part  of  the  goods  exported 
from  this  country  to  Gibraltar  and  to  Portugal  being  afterwards  intro- 
duced clandestinely  into  the  Spanish  provinces.  The  extent  of  the  con- 
traband trade  carried  on  at  Gibraltar  is  strikingly  exhibited  by  the  fact, 
that  the  annual  importation  of  tobacco  into  that  colony  amounts  to  from 
six  to  eight  millions  of  pounds  ;  nearly  the  whole  of  which  is  purchased 
by  smugglers,  and  introduced  by  them  clandestinely  into  Spain. 

The  value  of  our  exports  to  the  whole  of  the  West  Coast  of  Africa 
averaged,  during  the  five  years  ending  with  1844,  the  sum  of  482,326/. 
per  annum.  More  than  one-half  of  this  amount  was  taken  by  the  British 
Settlements  on  the  Gambia,  Sierra  Leone,  Cape  Coast  Castle,  and 
Accrah,  leaving  little  more  than  200,000/.  for  the  remaining  parts  of 
the  country,  embracing,  between  the  river  Gambia  and  Angola,  nearly 
four  thousiind  miles  of  coast,  and  containing  upon  a  moderate  estimate 
30,000,000  of  inhabitants.     These  people  must  not  be  considered,  as 


368  PROGRESS  OF  THE  XATIOX.  [sec.  hi. 

regards  commercial  objects,  in  the  same  light  as  those  who  enjoy  a 
greater  degree  of  civilization ;  but  the  experience  of  the  last  40  years 
affords  sufficient  proof  of  the  value  which  the  trade  with  the  negro 
population  might  be  made  to  assume.  In  1808  the  whole  quantity  of 
palm  oil  imported  did  not  exceed  200  tons ;  in  1836  it  amounted  to 
13,850  tons;  in  1844  to  20,732  tons;  and  in  1849  to  44,666  tons. 
Thirty  years  ago  African  timber  was  unknown  to  us,  and  our  annual 
importations  have  since  amounted  to  more  than  20,000  loads.  This  in- 
crease has  taken  place,  too,  under  the  most  nnfavoiu'able  circumstances. 
The  whole  country  is  disorganized,  and  except  in  the  innnediate  vicinity 
of  the  towns,  the  land  lies  waste  and  uncultivated,  the  wretched  natives 
living  under  constant  dread  of  being  carried  off  into  slavery.  The 
legitimate  trade  of  our  vessels  when  on  the  AMcan  coast  is  continually 
impeded  by  the  appearance  of  slave- traders,  on  the  arrival  of  which, 
the  natives  quit  all  other  occupations  and  proceed  on  marauding  expe- 
ditions, to  seize  the  members  of  some  neighbouring  tribe,  and  sell  them 
as  slaves.  Until  a  sufficient  number  of  these  poor  creatures  is  collected 
to  crowd  the  vessel  of  the  slave-trader  all  other  occupations  are  stopped  ; 
and  it  is  not  merely  the  loss  of  time  and  consequent  expenses  thus  oc- 
casioned that  are  to  be  deplored,  but  the  great  waste  of  life  among  the 
crews  of  the  English  traders  while  uselessly  detained  upon  an  unhealthy 
coast.  Everywhere  are  to  be  seen  the  baleful  effects  of  this  traffic, 
producing  desolation  where  Nature  has  been  prodigal  of  her  gifts. 
According  to  Mr.  Laird,  one  of  the  most  intelligent  travellers  to  that 
region,  "  The  Delta  of  the  Niger  alone,  if  cleared  and  cultivated, 
would  sup])ort  a  population  in  proportion  to  its  area  far  exceeding  any- 
thing known  in  Europe.  Its  square  surface  is  equal  to  the  whole  of 
Ireland  ;  it  is  intersected  in  all  directions  by  navigable  branches  of  the 
parent  stream,  forming  so  many  natural  channels  for  conmiunication :  it 
is  altogether  composed  of  the  richest  alluvial  soil,  which  now  teems  with 
a  rank  luxurious  vegetation,  comprising  all  the  varieties  of  the  palm- 
tree,  besides  teak-wood,  cedar,  ebony,  mahogany,  and  dye-woods :  the 
sugar-cane  grows  wild  in  the  bush,  and  the  palm-nut  rots  upon  the 
ground  unheeded  and  neglected.  The  popvilation  of  this  Delta  I 
should  consider  does  not  exceed  half  a  million." 

If  the  population  of  this  region — and  there  are  many  others  to  which 
the  same  description  might  be  ajjplied — were  weaned  from  their  present 
habits  of  violence,  and  if  advantage  were  taken  of  their  desire  for  ob- 
taining some  kinds  of  European  manufactures,  to  engage  them  in  the 
cultivation  of  the  sttil,  can  it  be  believed  that  our  commercial  dealings 
with  them  would  continue,  as  it  is  at  present,  scarcely  greater  in 
amount  than  the  value  of  the  eggs  brought  annually  f^'om  Ireland  to  the 
single  port  of  Liverpool  ?  Among  the  objects  to  which  the  industry 
of  xVfricans  could  be  profitably  applied,  perhaps  the  most  important  is 


CHAP.  IX.]  FOREIGN  COMMERCE.  3^)9 

the  article  of  gotten.  Its  cultivation  does  not  call  for  any  great  amount 
of  labour  ;  the  returns  are  speedily  obtained  ;  the  market  for  it  is  con- 
tinually being  extended  ;  and,  as  regards  this  country,  it  is  a  matter  of 
very  high  importance  that  the  million  of  persons  who  are  dependent  for 
their  daily  subsistence  upon  the  regular  supply  of  that  material,  should 
have  the  chances  of  disappointment  lessened,  as  far  as  possible,  by  ex- 
tending the  number  of  the  producers,  and  multiplying  the  regions  in 
which  they  are  found. 

There  is  reason  to  believe  that  the  goods  exported  from  the  United 
Kingdom  to  our  North  American  Colonies  do  not  all  remain  for  the 
consumption  of  the  colonists,  but  that  a  portion  is  conveyed  across  the 
Saint  Lawrence  into  the  territory  of  the  United  States.  On  the  other 
hand,  some  shipments  made  apparently  to  the  United  States,  accompany 
English  settlers,  who  proceed  through  the  States  to  their  ultimate  des- 
tination in  Upper  Canada ;  but  the  value  in  both  these  cases  must  be 
comparatively  unimportant.  Of  the  exports  to  the  British  West  Indies, 
some  part  is  shipped  in  transitu,  and  goes  for  consumption  to  Cuba, 
and  to  ports  on  the  Mosquito  coast.  The  whole  amount  assigned  to 
Turkey  does  not  properly  belong  to  our  trade  with  that  country,  some 
part  being  sent  forward  to  Asia  Minor  and  Persia.  With  regard  to 
the  exports  to  our  West  India  Colonies,  it  may  further  be  observed, 
that  the  value  of  late  years  has  materially  fallen  off,  which  fact  is  pro- 
bably owing,  in  part,  to  the  peculiar  nature  of  the  population,  for  the 
supply  of  which  given  quantities  of  stores  and  clothing  wore  formerly 
required,  without  reference  to  their  cost  in  this  country  ;  so  that  the 
reduction  in  price  of  the  generality  of  articles  which  make  up  the  sum  of 
our  exports  has  not  been  followed  by  much,  if  any,  increased  consump- 
tion. Besides  this,  goods  were  in  former  years  sent  to  Jamaica,  intended 
for  the  supply  of  the  neighbouring  continent,  to  which  shipments  are 
now  made  direct  from  this  country- 
It  will  be  seen  that  the  value  of  our  exports  to  India  and  China  didS 
not  experience  any  increase  until  after  the  partial  opening  of  the  trader/ 
in  1814.  Since  that  time,  and  particularly  since  1826,  a  considerable 
improvement  has  taken  place  in  the  amount  of  our  commerce  with  India  ; 
so  that,  contrasting  its  amount  in  1849  with  that  in  1814,  there  is  found 
an  increase  of  more  than  190  per  cent.  The  recent  opening  of  the  trade 
with  China  is  calculated  to  add  still  more  importantly  to  the  value  of  our 
commerce  with  that  quarter  of  the  world.  Although  this  trade  at  first 
might  be  accompanied  by  losses  to  those  who  engaged  in  it  without  pos- 
sessing the  requisite  degree  of  knowledge,  it  could  not  be  doubted  that 
a  few  years'  experience  on  the  part  of  our  merchants  would  enable  them 
to  draw  very  great  advantages  from  commercial  intercourse  with  a  people 
so  enterprising  and  so  keenly  alive  to  the  benefits  resulting  from  foreign 
trade  as  the  Chinese  are  now  allowed  to  be.     Already  the  consumers 

2  B 


370 


PROGRESS  OF  THE  NATION. 


[sec.    IIT. 


in  this  country  have  benefited  by  the  opening  of  the  trade  with  China, 
in  the  greatly  diminished  price  of  an  article  of  general  and  dally  con- 
sumption ;  and  there  is  every  reason  to  hope  that  the  individual  skill 
and  enterprise  now  directed  to  this  trade  will  succeed  in  making  con- 
tinual additions  to  its  amount,  until  it  bears  a  more  reasonable  propor- 
tion than  it  has  hitherto  done  to  the  trading  capabilities  of  the  inhabit- 
ants of  that  thickly-])opidat(!d  country.  This  trade  was  thrown  open 
on  the  expiration  of  the  East  India  Corapany's_Chaxte^in  April^_1834. 
Since  that  time  the  declared  value  of  English  manufactures  exported  to 
China  has  been — 


Years. 

£. 

1834 

842,852 

1835 

1,074,708 

1836 

1,326,388 

1837 

678.375 

1838 

1,204,356 

1839 

851,969 

Years. 

i". 

1840 

524,198 

1841 

862,. 570 

1842 

969,381 

1843 

1,456,180 

1844 

2,305,617 

Years. 
1845 
1846 
1847 
1848 
1849 


£. 
2,394,827 
1,791,439 
1,503,969 
1,445,959 
1,537,109 


Previously  to  1834  no  distinction  had  been  made  in  the  Custom-house 
records  between  the  exports  to  India  and  those  made  to  China,  nor  will 
this  deficiency  of  information  be  supplied  by  the  statement  of  the  amount 
of  shipping  employed  in  the  trade,  because  a  great  part  of  the  trading 
intercourse  of  British  subjects  with  China  is  carried  on  through  the 
intermediate  ports  of  India ;  and  this  was  the  case  to  a  greater  degree 
formerly  than  it  is  at  present.  As  the  best  source  of  information  that 
is  open  to  us  upon  this  subject,  the  following  statement  is  given, 
showing  the  number  and  tonnage  of  vessels  that  cleared  out  from  the 
United  Kingdom,  for  China,  and  that  entered  inwards  from  that  king- 
dom, in  each  year  fi-om  1830  to  1849  : — 


Years. 

OUTWARDS. 

INWARDS. 

British. 

Foreign. 

Total, 

British. 

Ships. 

Tons. 

Ships. 

Tons. 

Ships. 

Tons. 

Ships. 

Tons. 

1830 

16 

21,033 

2 

789 

18 

21  822 

22 

27,782 

1831 

22 

28,081 

3 

1,126 

25 

29 '207 

21 

27,889 

1832 

19 

24,648 

2 

794 

21 

25,442 

20 

25,237 

1833 

25 

29,627 

3 

1,087 

28 

30,714 

21 

27,985 

1834 

16 

8,887 

4 

1,476 

20 

10,363 

30 

29,308 

1835 

23 

21,218 

23 

21,218 

67 

35,427 

1836 

38 

24,099 

38 

24,099 

80 

40,686 

1837 

26 

17,694 

2 

872 

28 

18,566 

62 

.32,212 

1838 

31 

16,175 

3 

1,510 

34 

17,685 

58 

32,333 

1839 

19 

10.404 

2 

1,113 

21 

11,517 

47 

26,261 

1840 

10 

2,942 

3 

1,082 

13 

4,024 

34 

20,056 

1841 

31 

13,738 

3 

1,381 

34 

15,119 

52 

23,344 

1842 

63 

28,297 

2 

1,067 

65 

29,364 

73 

.32,818 

1843 

73 

32,298 

3 

1,690 

76 

33,988 

84 

39,712 

1844 

78 

32,. 534 

5 

2,110 

83 

34,644 

104 

45,605 

1845 

86 

34,.3Jl 

4 

1,396 

90 

35,787 

121 

51,802 

1846 

78 

31,620 

4 

2,404 

82 

34,024^ 

123 

53,593 

1847 

73 

29,605 

6 

3,095 

79 

32,700 

125 

51,948 

1848 

70 

28,984 

5 

2,434 

75 

31,418 

95 

41,599 

1849 

71 

28,869 

3 

1,472 

74 

30,341 

98 

44,408 

CHAP    ix]  FOREIGN  COMMERCE.  371 

The  discriminating  duties  which,  until  hitely,  have  been  charged 
upon  certain  articles  of  East  India  produce,  naturally  tended  to  prevent 
nierease  in  that  branch  of  our  trade.  A  wiser  policy  is  now  recognised 
and  followed,  and  will  no  doubt  be  productive  of  solid  advantages 
to  the  people  of  this  country,  as  well  as  to  the  natives  of  Ilindus^tan. 
The  capabilities  of  that  vast  region  arc  hitherto  but  very  imperfectly 
known  in  Europe  ;  and,  indeed,  until  the  Act  of  1833,  which  prohibited 
the  East  India  (Company  from  trading,  and  which  gave  to  ]5i'itish-born 
subjects  the  right  to  settle  for  commercial  and  agricultural  purposes  in 
Dritish  India,  there  was  but  little  inducement  to  cultivate  that  field  of 
in(iuiry.  Since  that  right  has  been  conceded,  the  attention  of  the  public 
has  been  forcibly  drawn  to  the  subject.  A  committee  of  gentlemen 
conversant  with  the  capabilities  of  India,  and  well  informed  as  to  the 
trading  and  manufacturing  wants  of  England,  was  employed  for  some 
years  upon  this  subject,  under  the  auspices  of  the  Royal  Asiatic; 
Society  ;  and  it  is  confidently  hoped,  that  through  the  exertions  of  the 
gentlemen  forming  that  committee,  many  branches  of  industry  may  be 
fostered  in  India,  which  will  afford  supplies  to  our  artisans  of  several 
articles  better  in  quality  and  at  a  less  cost  than  the  same  goods,  or  sub- 
stitutes for  them,  are  now  procured  from  other  countries.  Nor  is  it  only 
by  the  encouragement  of  new  branches  of  commerce  that  the  two  coun- 
tries are  to  experience  benefit.  Much  may  be  done  to  give  encourage- 
ment to  the  production  and  transmission  of  articles  already  imported. 
The  discriminating  duty  so  long  continued  upon  East  India  ^iigar,  for 
the  advantage  of  the  ^^  est  India  planters,  has  been  repealed ;  and  we 
now  have  reason  to  know  that  the  application  of  British  skill  and  capital, 
for  the  manufacture  of  sugar  in  India,  can  be  employed  successfully  in 
producing  improvement  in  its  quality,  so  as  to  make  it  serve  every  pur- 
pose to  which  the  produce  of  the  West  Indies  used  to  be  exclusively  ap- 
plied. There  is,  perhaps,  no  one  circumstance  that  would  tend  so  much 
to  increase  the  commerce  of  India  as  the  opening  of  good  coacjg.  The 
course  of  the  great  rivers  is  at  present  available,  at  least  during  part  of 
the  year,  for  the  conveyance  of  Indian  products  tow^ards  the  coast ;  but 
this  means  of  transport  is  of  but  little  avail  for  the  return  trade  ;  and 
even  the  partial  f^icility  of  water  conveyance  is  confined  to  only  a  small 
part  of  the  peninsula.  Good  roads  would  be  practicable  at  all  periods 
of  the  year,  and  in  every  part  of  the  country ;  and  would  be  equally 
available  for  the  transmission  of  English  goods  to  the  inner  and  upper 
provinces  of  India,  as  for  the  conveyance  of  their  products  to  the  coast. 
This  improvement  is  especially  needed  in  some  of  the  cfitton -yielding- 
districts,  where  the  present  expensive  mode  of  conveyance  upon  the 
backs  of  oxen  acts  most  injuriously,  by  enhancing  the  cost  of  an  article 
which  it  is  of  the  utmost  importance  to  our  Lancashire  manufacturers  to 
receive  as  abundantly  and  at  as  cheap  a  rate  as  possible.    As  a  political 

2  B  2 


372  PROGRESS  OF  THE  NATION.  [sec.  in. 

measure,  the  construction  of  roads  in  India  would  prove  highly  advan- 
tageous. Their  cost  would  be  quickly  and  amply  repaid  by  the  improving 
revenues  of  the  country,  and  by  the  grateful  feelings  that  would  be  raised 
on  the  part  of  the  native  population.  The  inhabitant  of  Western  Europe, 
who  has  always  been  accustomed  to  have  brought  to  his  door  every  article 
that  he  can  desire,  and  that  his  means  can  purchase,  can  have  but  a 
faint  idea  of  the  various  privations  experienced  by  great  multitudes  of 
the  inhabitants  of  Hindustan,  and  it  may  be  confidently  said  that  the 
Government  that  should  place  within  the  reach  of  the  poor  cultivators 
an  ample  sui)ply  of  .^,— an  article,  the  obtaining  of  which  never  costs 
us  a  thought, — would  be  sure  to  receive  the  blessings  of  milhons.  It  has 
been  stated  by  a  gentleman,  acquainted,  by  long  residence  in  different 
parts  of  India,  with  the  practices  and  capabilities  of  the  country,  that 
the  difference  in  the  cost  of  transporting  goods  along  the  present  ill- 
formed  roads  in  the  rude  carts  or  hackerys  of  the  natives,  is  less  by  six- 
sevenths  than  the  cost  of  conveyance  on  the  backs  of  oxen — a  course  so 
commonly  rendered  necessary  tlu'ough  the  absence  of  everything  to 
which  the  name  of  a  road  can  be  applied.  In  the  level  plains  of  Can- 
deish,  and  in  many  other  parts  of  Hindustan,  cgtton-wool.  freed  from 
the  seed,  could  be  sold  on  the  spot  with  a  profit  to  the  cultivators  at  one 
penny  per  pound, — a  cost  which  is  trebled  or  quadrupled  by  the  expense 
of  conveyance  to  the  ports  of  shipment. 

A  discriminating  duty  at  the  rate  of  28i\  per  cwt.,  or  50  per  cent., 
Mas,  until  lately,  imposed  upon  ooiikc*.  the  growth  of  the  British  posses- 
sions in  India,  for  the  presumed  benefit  of  the  planters  in  our  Western 
Colonies.  L'ntil  1825,  this  discriminating  duty  amounted  to  56s.  per 
cwt.,  but  was  at  that  time  comparatively  but  httle  felt,  because,  owing 
to  the  excessive  duty  levied  upon  all  descriptions  of  coffee,  the  con- 
sumption of  the  kingdom  was  below  the  supply  obtained  from  our  West 
India  colonies,  and  as  the  surplus  had  to  seek  a  market  in  foreign 
countries,  the  prices  of  every  description  of  coffee  were  necessarily 
governed  by  the  demands  of  the  "world  in  general.  In  the  year  just 
mentioned  the  duties  previously  levied  upon  all  kinds  of  coffee  were 
reduced  to  one-half  The  produce  of  the  British  plantations  in  America, 
thenceforward  until  1842,  was  admitted  to  consumption  at  the  rate  of 
6cZ.  per  lb.,  or  56s.  per  cwt.  East  India  coffee  from  British  possessions 
was  charged  9c?.  per  lb.,  or  84s.  per  cwt.,  and  all  other  kinds'  were 
charged  Is.  M.,  or  140s.  per  cwt.,  amounting  to  a  prohibition  against 
their  consumption.  In  1842,  the  duty  on  coffee  from  all  British 
possessions  was  reduced  to  Ad.  per  lb.,  and  all  other  coffee  was  admitted 
at  %d.  per  lb.  until  1844,  when  the  duty  on  foreign  coffee  was  lowered 
to  6f?.  per  lb.  The  consequence  of  the  reduction  in  1825  was  to  increase 
/  the  annual  consumption  of  coffee  from  about  8,000,000  lbs.  in  1824  to 
"  22,000,000  lbs.  in  1830,  which  increase,  as  might  be  expected,  occurred 


ciiAV.  IX.]  FOREIGN  COMMERCE.  373 

almost  entirely  with  the  produce  of  our  West  India  colonies,  and  as  the 
power  of  production  in  these  colonies  is  limited,  and  by  this  increased 
demand  consumption  had  overtaken  that  limit,  the  price  of  West  India 
coffee  was  driven  up  to  a  rate  so  high  that  the  difference  of  28s.  per  cwt. 
did  not  prevent  the  use  of  an  increased  quantity  of  the  produce  of  our 
Indian  possessions.  The  price  of  fine  Jamaica  coffee,  which  at  the  time 
the  duty  was  reduced  was  about  90^.  per  cwt.,  advanced,  through  the  ■ 
demands  of  the  consumers,  to  125a-.  per  cwt.,  but  without  producing  any 
increased  production.  The  quantity  annually  imported  of  British  plan- 
tation coffee,  in  the  five  years  that  preceded  the  reduction  of  the  duty 
in  1825,  averaged  30,280,360  lbs.,  and  the  average  quantity  imported 
in  the  five  years  from  1832  to  1836  reached  only  19,812,160  lbs., 
being  a  reduction  of  34  per  cent,  in  the  supply,  notwithstanding  an 
advance  of  39  per  cent,  in  price,  thus  proving  beyond  all  cavil  the 
inability  of  the  West  India  planters  to  keep  pace  with  the  wants  of  the 
English  consumers.  In  September,  1835,  our  tariff  was  so  far  modified, 
that  coffee  imported  from  the  Britiih  possessions  in  India,  if  accompanied 
by  a  certificate  of  its  being  the  actual  produce  of  those  possessions, 
was  admitted  to  consumption,  on  payment  of  the  same  rate  of  duty  as 
British  plantation  coffee.  The  quantity  of  East  India  coffee  taken  for 
consumption  while  the  duty  remained  at  9c?.  per  lb.,  advanced,  because 
of  the  increasing  price  of  West  India  coffee,  as  already  noticed,  from 
about  300,000  lbs.  per  annum,  to  about  1,500,000  lbs.  The  assimila- 
tion of  the  rates  of  duty  did  not  take  effect  until  two-thirds  of  1835  had 
elapsed,  but  in  that  year  the  consumption  of  East  India  coffee  advanced 
to  5,596,791  lbs.,  and  in  1837  reached  9,114,793  lbs.  A  few  years 
must  necessarily  elapse  before  the  production  of  coffee  can  be  increased 
in  any  particular  place  ;  but  experience  has  proved  that  there  was  good 
reason  to  expect  that  the  stimulus  thus  afforded  would  not  be  checked  in 
our  Eastern,  as  it  has  been  in  our  Western  possessions,  through  natural 
c<auses,  and  that  continually  growing  supplies  might  be  furnished,  until 
the  English  public  should  no  longer  be  forced  to  pay  a  monopoly  price 
for  this  agreeable  article  of  food.  That  time  has  now  arrived.  The 
importations  of  coffee  from  our  own  possessions  has  gone  beyond  the 
wants  of  the  consumers,  and  the  protecting  duty  still  offered  by  the  tariff 
has  ceased  to  operate  in  favour  of  the  colonial  grower.  The  quantities 
received  from  Ceylon,  which  in  1835  were  under  2,000,000  lbs.,  exceeded 
35,000,000  lbs.  in  1849. 

If  the  sound  principles,  that  no  duties  should  be  levied  except  for 
purposes  of  revenue,  and  that  it  is  both  ynjust  and  unwise  to  tax  the 
whole  community  for  the  supposed  benefit  of  a  part,  were  recognised 
and  fully  acted  upon,  so  that  the  price  of  any  important  article  were  not 
enhanced  by  means  of  the  duty  in  a  greater  degree  than  the  actual 
amount  of  the  duty,  there  can  be  no  doubt  of  the  advantages  that  would 


374  PROGRESS  OF  THE  NATION.  [sec.  m. 

result  to  the   country  at   large,  through  all  its  various  intercuts,  by 
the  increased  activity  that  would  be  imparted  to  its  foreign  commerce. 

Much  has  been  done  during  the  last  few  years,  beyond  what  has  been 
already  particularly  noticed,"  to  simplify  our  tariff  and  to  reduce  or 
abolish  duties  charged  upon  the  raw  materials  of  manufacture,  and  there 
is  every  reason  for  believing  that  the  subsequent  extension  of  our  foreign 
trade  has  been  mainly  owing  to  that  cause.  There  is  still  something  to 
be  done  in  this  way.  The  two  great  monopolies  of  corn  and  timber,  the 
first  maintained  for  the  assumed  benefit  of  the  possessors  of  land,  the 
second  conceded  to  the  clamour  of  a  certain  class  of  ship-owners,  al- 
though importantly  modified  since  the  first  publication  of  this  work,  were, 
when  the  last  edition  of  it  appeared,  the  chief  remaining  obstacles  to  the 
growth  of  our  commercial  relations  with  European  nations.  The  most 
grievous  of  those  two  monopolies,  that  which  condemned  the  people  to 
pay  more  for  their  food  than  was  paid  by  the  inhabitants  of  other  coun- 
tries, has  at  length  been  swept  away,  and  there  are  strong  grounds  for 
belie^^ng  that  the  duty  on  timber,  which  is  essentially  a  raw  material  of 
the  greatest  importance  to  every  branch  of  manufacture,  must  shortly  be 
wholly  abolished  also. 

It  is  a  mistake  to  suppose,  as  generally  is  done,  that  the  high  discri- 
minating duty  upon  timber  was  originally  imposed  for  the  benefit  either 
of  the  North  American  colonists,  or  of  the  English  ship-owners  ;  neither 
the  one  nor  the  other  of  those  parties  was  thought  of  in  the  business  any 
further  than  as  they  might  be  made  the  means  of  relieving  the  con- 
sumers of  timber  in  this  country  from  the  evil  consequences  resulting  to 
them   through  our  exclusion  from  ports  in  the  Baltic.     The  discrimi- 
nating duty  was  not  intended  to  have  been  continued  after  the  necessity 
out  of  which   it  arose   should  have  passed  away  with    the    return  of 
peace.       The  duty  upon  a  load   (fifty  cubic  feet)  of  European  timber, 
which  at  the  beginning  of  the  war  had  been   6s.  Sd.,  was  raised  by  in- 
considerable steps  to  275.  2d.,  in  1806 ;  this  rate  was  doubled  in  1811, 
and  in  1813  the  duty  was  further  advanced  to  655.     Colonial  timber 
was  admitted  free  of  duty  up  to  1798,  when  it  was  subjected  to  3  per 
cent,  ad  valorem  ;  from  1803  to  1806  the  ad  valorem  rate  was  changed 
to  a  specific  duty  of  about  2s.  per  load,  and  in  the  latter  year  was  again 
altogether  removed.     In  1821,  in  consequence  of  the  recommendations 
of  Committees  of  the  two  Houses  of  Parliament,  the  system  was   so  far 
altered  that  the  rate  upon  European   timber  was  reduced  to  555.,  while 
upon  colonial  timber  a  duty  was  imposed  of  IO5.  per  load,  and  those 
rates  were  continued  to  the  year  1840,  when  I5.  6d.  per  load  was  added 
to  them  respectively.     In  October,  1843,  the  duties  were  reduced   to 
255.  per  load    on  foreign  timber,  and  325.  per  load  on  foreign  deals, 
and  to  I5,  per  load  on  timber,  and  25.  per  load  on  deals  the  produce  of 
British  possessions.     Further  modifications  of  the  duties  upon  foreign 


cHAr.  :.v.]  FOREIGN  COMMERCE.  375 

timber  were  adopted  in  the  session  of  1846,  so  that  on  the  5th  of  April, 
Lsn,  unsawn  wood  was  achnitted  at  20s.,  and  deals  and  battens  at  2(js. 
per  load;  which  rates  were  further  reduced  on  the  5th  of  A])ril,  1848, 
to  lbs.  and  205.  respectively. 

The  colonial'  timber  trade  cannot  be  said  to  have]  existed  previous  ]/ 
to  1803.  In  the  fifteen  years  that  occurred  from  1788  to  1802,  while 
our  importations  of  European  fir  timber  amounted  to  nearly  3,000,000 
loads,  we  imported  from  the  American  colonies  only  19,42y  loads.  In 
1803  the  quantity  so  imported  was  10,113  loads,  but  from  that  time 
it  increased  rapidly  ;  first  from  the  stimulus  of  high  prices  occasioned 
by  the  events  of  the  war,  and  afterwards  in  consequence  of  the  greater 
preference  given  to  colonial  timber  by  our  tariff.  The  price  of  Memel 
timber,  which  in  1802  had  been  785.  per  load,  with  a  duty  of 
I65.  lOd.,  advanced  in  1807  to  1505.,  and  in  1809  to  3205.,  the  duty 
having  in  the  mean  time  been  raised  to  275.  2d.,  as  above  stated.  Under 
these  circumstances,  it  might  perhaps  be  wise  to  stimulate  the  importa- 
tion of  colonial  timber ;  but  so  soon  as  the  return  of  peace  again  opened 
to  us  our  old  channels  of  supply,  there  could  be  no  good  reason  for  bur- 
thening  the  people  with  a  heavy  tax,  only  a  small  part  of  which  found 
its  way  to  the  Exchequer,  and  all  that  could  with  propriety  have  been 
asked  by  the  parties  who  had  embarked  their  capitals  in  the  new  trade 
was  a  reasonable  term  during  which  they  might  withdraw  from  its  pro- 
secution. 

That  the  changes  here  noticed  in  our  duties  for  protection  have  not 
been  productive  of  evil  to  the  colonial  wood  trade  is  made  evident  by 
the  quantities  since  imported  from  our  American  pos:je=sions,  and  from 
foreign  countries  : — • 

Colonial.  Foreign.  Imported. 

Years.                  Loads.  Loads.  Loads. 

1843  922,087  395,558  1,317,645 

1844  941,221  544,136  1,485,357 

1845  1,281,974  675,840  1,957,814 

1846  1,214,442  810,497  2,024,939 

1847  1,086,070  809,752  1,895,822 

1848  1,102.254  701,080  1,803,334 

1849  1,047,.320  580,372  1,627,692 

In  every  civilized  country  jimber  is  an  article  of  consumption  of  the 
very  first  necessity,  and  where,  as  in  this  country,  our  forests  do  not 
supply  it  in  the  necessary  abundance,  its  importation  should  be  rendered 
as  free  as  possible.  If,  through  the  necessities  of  the  Government,  it 
should  be  found  necessary  to  tax  this,  which  may  be  called  one  of  the 
chief  raw  materials  of  manufacture,  without  which,  in  fact,  scarcely  any 
other  manufacture  could  be  carried  on,  it  would  be  some  consolation  to 
know  that  the  tax  answered  its  legitimate  purpose,  and  perhaps  stood  in 
the  place  of  some  other  equally  objectionable  impost.  Owing,  however, 
to  the  discriminating  duties  in  favour  of  the  timber  of  our  northern 
colonies,  a  sum  at  least  equal  to   the  amount  that  now  finds  its  way 


376  niUGIlESS  OF  THE  NATION.  [sec.  hi. 

under  this  head  to  the  Exchequer  is  lost  to  the  public,  its  only  use  being 
to  afford  cinployuient  to  a  number  of  old  and  worn-out  ships,  which  it 
would  be  more  advantageous  to  the  country  to  buy,  and  then  break 
them  up  and  sell  their  materials  for  fuel,  than  it  would  be  to  continue 
the  present  modified  system. 

Owing  to  the  mode  employed  up  to  1843  for  calculating  the  duties 
upon  planks,  deals,  and  battens,  which  were  taxed  by  the  great  hundred 
in  classes,  according  to  certain  specified  limits  of  dimension,  it  was  not 
easy  to  estimate  the  actual  quantity  of  w^ood  brought  for  consumption 
into  the  country.  Such  an  estimate  was  carefully  made  at  the  Custom- 
house with  reference  to  the  importations  of  1833,  and  from  this  it  ap- 
pears that  the  quantity  imported  that  year,  expressed  in  loads,  amounted 
to  1,163,518,  and  the  duty  collected  to  1,285,379/.,  being  at  the  average 
rate  of  22s.  lid.  per  load.  If  the  duty  upon  the  whole  of  this  quantity 
had  been  charged  at  the  rate  imposed  upon  European  timber,  the  pro- 
portion brought  from  the  colonies  would  no  doubt  have  been  reduced, 
and  the  supplies  from  the  Baltic  must  have  been  proportionally  increased, 
by  which  means  the  price  in  the  countries  of  production  would  have  been 
raised,  and  this  circumstance  would  so  far  have  acted  in  diminution  of 
the  advantage  accruing  to  the  country  through  the  greater  receipts  at 
the  Exchequer ;  but  when  an  ample  allowance  has  been  made  on  this 
account,  it  will  be  found  that  the  loss  to  the  .public  at  large,  through 
adherence  to  the  present  system,  amounted  to  nearly  or  quite  one  mil- 
lion and  a  half  of  money  in  that  one  year.  The  importations  in  the 
years  that  have  since  elapsed  have  been  much  greater  than  those  of  1833, 
and  the  loss  was  consequently  for  some  years  still  more  than  the  sum 
here  mentioned.  It  is  the  opinion  of  well-informed  men,  who  were  ex- 
amined before  the  Select  Committee  of  the  House  of  Commons  which  sat 
in  1835  to  consider  this  subject,  that  by  a  return  to  a  more  wholesome 
state  of  the  trade,  the  price  in  the  countries  of  production  in  Europe 
would  be  raised  only  temporarily,  and  that  so  soon  as  time  had  allowed 
of  the  erection  of  new  saw-mills,  and  of  other  arrangements  necessary 
for  an  enlargement  of  the  trade,  the  price  would  again  subside  to  its 
former  and  natural  level,  the  supply  of  growing  timber  in  those  coun- 
tries being  equal  to  any  demand  that  could  possibly  arise  by  that  means. 

But  if  these  gentlemen  should  have  taken  too  sanguine  a  view  of  the 
capabilities  of  the  various  countries  to  which  we  have  hitherto  and  for- 
merly resorted  for  a  sup})ly  of  timber,  there  are  other  districts  to  be 
explored  into  which  the  woodman's  axe  has  never  yet  penetrated,  with 
a  view  to  the  supply  of  AV'estern  Europe,  whence  we  may  draw  supplies 
for  ages  to  come  of  a  quality  equal  to  everything  that  can  be  wished, 
and  adapted  to  purposes  which  it  is  now  difficult  to  satisfy.  From  the 
forests  of  Al])ania,  as  well  as  those  of  Circassia,  and  all  the  coasts  of 
the  Black  Sea  and  the  banks  of  the  Danube,  we  may — if  political,  and 


cu.vr.  IX.]  FOREIGN  COMMERCE.  377 

still  more,  if  fiscal  obstacles  are  removed — draw  inexhaustible  supplies 
of  the  finest  \vood,  including  oak  of  the  largest  size,  and  at  prices  more 
advantageous  than  any  other  countries  have  ottered,  at  least  in  modern 
times. 

Under  these  circumstances,  we  are,  without  any  adequate  or  legiti- 
mate motive,  shutting  against  our  manufocturers  markets  which  were 
formerly,  and  would  be  again,  of  considerable  importance  to  them,  and 
are  at  the  same  time  giving  advantages  to  our  manufacturing  rivals,  of 
which  they  are  by  no  means  slow  to  avail  themselves.* 

The  official  value  of  goods  imported  has  a  nearer  agreement  with  the 
actual  value  than  has  been  maintained  between  the  official  and  the  actual 
values  of  British  manufactured  goods  exported.  The  greater  part  of 
our  importations  consists  of  produce  in  its  raw  or  unmanufactured  state,  » 
or  of  products  in  a  state  of  preparation  which  has  not  called  for  any  , 
great  amount  of  labour,  and  as  to  which  there  is,  consequently,  but  little 
room  for  economizing  the  cost.  Our  exports,  on  the  contrary,  consist  ^ 
in  great  part  of  goods  upon  the  preparation  or  manufacture  of  which 
a  great  amount  of  labour  has  been  expended  ;  and  as  the  mechanical 
inventions  of  the  last  fifty  years  have  introduced  the  most  important 
degrees  of  economy  into  nearly  every  process  of  manufacture,  the  prices 
of  such  goods  fixed  180  years  ago  have  become  exceedingly  wide  of  their 
true  value.  The  error  which  might  thus  have  been  exhibited  by  the 
Custom-house  returns,  has  been  rectified  by  the  plan  of  obliging  the  mer- 
chants at  the  time  of  shipment  to  declare  the  real  value  of  British  goods 
exported.  The  only  course  effectual  for  correcting  the  error  in  valua- 
tion in  the  case  of  foreign  goods  imported,  would  be  to  contrast  the  quanti- 
ties so  brought  into  the  country  at  various  periods.  Such  an  account  it  is 
impossible  to  present ;  if  even  it  were  procurable,  its  bulk  would  prevent 
its  insertion  in  these  pages,  and  to  render  it  a  fjiithful  record  it  would 
be  necessary  to  accompany  it  by  many  voluminous  explanatory  statements. 
/  The  opening  of  the  present  century  found  this  country  involved  in 
war,  but  at  the  end  of^lSOljhe  Peace  of  Amiens  was  signed,  and  it  will 
be  seen  (Table,  page  356)  that  the  value  of  British  goods  exported  in 
,  1802  exceeded  by  more  than  5,000,000/.,  or  13  per  cent.,  the  value 
exported  in  1801.  The  recurrence  of  war  in  1803  put  an  end  to  this 
improvement,  and  brought  our  exports  below  the  amount  of  1801.  We 
have  not  the  means  of  analyzing  our  foreign  commerce  in  any  year  earlier 
than  1805,  but  in  that  and  the  two  following  years  it  will  be  remarked 
y   that  rery  nearly  one-third  of  our  foreign  export  trade  was  carried  on 

*  The  full  merits  of  this  very  important  question  may  be  learned  by  consulting  the 
evidence  given  before  the  Committee  of  1835,  referred  to  in  the  text,  and  also  from  an 
article  in  the  fourth  number  of  the  "  British  and  Foreign  Quarterly  Review,"  which  was 
written  by  one  of  the  most  intelligent  witnesses  examined  on  that  occasion — the  late 
Mr.  J.  D.  Hume. 


37  S  rnOGllESS  OF  THE  NATION.  [sec.  hi. 

■with  the  United  States^  of  America.  Under  the  then  existing  circum- 
stances of  the  country,  ^vith  tlie  ports  of  the  Continent  shut  against  us 
as  completely  as  the  power  of  Napoleon  enahled  him  to  accomplish  that 
ohject,  this  trade  was  of  peculiar  importance  to  us,  not  only  because  it 
gave  employment  to  our  manufacturing  population,  but  also  because  it 
]M-ovided  us  with  the  means  of  meeting  tlie  foreign  expenditure  of  the 
Government  occasioned  by  the  operations  of  the  war.  The  merchants  of 
the  United  States  were  at  that  time  accustomed  to  sell  their  produce  in 
the  continental  markets  to  a  much  greater  amount  than  their  purchases 
in  those  markets ;  while,  in  their  dealing  with  this  country,  the  practice 
was  directly  the  reverse,  and  they  had  every  year  a  large  balance  to  pay 
to  this  country.  The  means  of  liquidating  this  balance  were  furnished 
by  the  excess  of  their  continental  sales,  the  amount  of  which  was  paid  to 
the  agents  of  the  English  Government  for  bills  upon  the  Treasury,  which 
came  as  a  remittance  to  our  exporting  merchants,  and  thus  were  funds 
placed  at  the  disposal  of  our  armies,  and  the  payment  of  subsidies  was 
accomplished  which  must  otherwise  have  drained  this  country  of  every 
guinea  which  it  possessed.  At  the  end  of  IHOG,  Napoleon  aimed  an 
additional  and  severe  blow  at  this  country  by  means  of  his  famous 
liedia -diicree,  whereby  he  declared  all  the  ports  of  Great  Britain  in  a 
state  of  blockade,  and  forbade  all  trading  with  us  or  in  the  articles  of  our 
j)roduce  and  manufactures,  declaring  such  to  be  subject  to  seizure  and 
condemnation  wherever  they  were  found,  and  forbidding  the  importation 
into  the  countries  under  his  control,  which  then  included  nearly  all  con- 
tinental Europe,  of  any  goods  of  such  kinds  as  were  included  among  the 
liome  or  colonial  productions  of  this  country,  unless  they  should  be  ac- 
companied by  certificates  showing  their  origin  to  have  been  other  than 
British.  The  consequent  measures  of  retaliation  adopted  by  the  English 
government,  were  so  far  from  averting  the  evil  consequences  of  this 
Berlin  decree,  that  they  proved  directly  and  immediately  injurious  to 
our  trade,  in  a  greater  degree  than  all  the  efforts  of  the  enemy  would 
probably  have  succeeded  in  accomplishing.  Our  Orders  in  Council, 
issued  in  the  course  of  1807,  served  indeed  only  to  give  eflficacy  to  the 
])aper  blockade  of  Napoleon,  against  which  the  whole  trading  community 
of  the  world  would  have  been  arrayed  but  for  the  notable  expedient  of 
the  English  Govermnent.  By  these  Orders  in  Council  it  was  declared, 
as  the  only  condition  upon  which  neutrals  might  trade  with  countries 
not  at  peace  with  Great  Britain,  that  the  vessels  in  wliich  that  trade  was 
carried  on  should  touch  at  some  port  in  this  country,  there  to  pay  such 
amount  of  Customs  duties  as  should  be  imposed  by  the  British  Govern- 
ment, and  any  vessel  found  to  have  on  board  the  certificate  of  origin 
required  by  the  French  Government  was  declared  la\<ful  prize.  In  an- 
swer to  these  Orders  in  Council,  Napoleon  issued  his  decree  from  j\|ila.n, 
dated  27th  September,  1807,  in  which  it  was  declared  that  any  ship  that 


cuAi'.  IX.]  FOllEIGN  COMMERCE.  379 

should  have  paid  any  tax  to  the  British  Government,  or  that  had  sub- 
mitted to  be  searched  by  any  British  authorities,  was  thereby  denation- 
alized, and  became  good  and  lawful  prize  ;  and  in  order  to  give  full 
effect  to  this  decree,  it  was  provided  that  any  person  on  board  a  foreign 
vessel  arriving  at  a  port  in  France,  who  should  notify  to  the  authorities  the 
fact  of  such  vessel  having  visited  an  English  port,  or  of  its  having  sub- 
mitted to  be  searched,  should  be  entitled  to  receive  one-third  of  the  net 
value  realized  from  the  sale  of  the  vessel  and  cargo.  Further  to  cir- 
cumvent the  designs  of  the  French  Government,  a  system  of  providing 
neutral  vessels  with  forged  papers,  by  means  of  which  they  might  elude 
the  vigilance  of  the  French  authorities,  was  encouraged  by  the  English 
Government ;  and  thus  in  spite  of  all  the  hazard  attending  this  course  of 
very  questionable  morality,  a  considerable  amount  of  trade  was  carried 
on  in  vessels  bearing  the  flag  of  Pappenburg,  Oldenburg,  and  other  petty 
continental  powers.  Such  an  expedient  was  clearly  not  one  which  the 
government  of  the  United  States  of  America  could  adopt  for  the  prose-  j 
cution  of  trade  with  Europe  ;  and  finding  that  the  American  flag  was 
thus  effectually  excluded  from  the  ports  of  the  Continent,  that  goveni- 
ment  interdicted  altogether  the  trade  of  its  subjects  with  either  of  the 
belligerents,  first,  by  blockading  her  own  ports,  and  next,  by  a  law  for- 
bidding intercourse  with  the  belligerents,  while  it  allowed  of  trade  with 
other  parts  of  the  world,  and  which  provided  for  the  renewal  of  trading 
relations  with  either  of  the  interdicted  nations  which  should  rescind  its 
obnoxious  regulations.  The  return  to  wisdom,  in  this  respect,  was  firstj 
evinced  by  Fj;ance,  and  war  was  declared  against  this  country  by  the 
United  States. 

It  will  be  clear,  from  the  preceding  recital,  that  the  great  advantages 
which  we  had  derived  from  our  trade  with  America,  as  already  described,  ' 
must  have  ceased  when  the  blockade  of  their  ports  was  enforced  ;  and  ■ 
accordingly  we  find  that  the  amount  of  our  exports  became  altogether 
inadequate  to  meet  our  public  expenditure  abroad,  the  foreign  exchanges 
turned  ruinously  against  this  country,  and  the  drain  of  the  precious 
metals  was  such  that  the  price  of  gold  rose  from  8O5.  per  oz.,  at  which 
price  it  had  been  stationary  during  the  six  preceding  years,  to  91s.  per 
oz.  in  1809,  to  ^Is.  6d.  in  1811,  to  105s.  in  1812,  and  to  110s.  in  1813 ; 
these  prices  being  respectively  14,  20,  25,  and  29  per  cent,  above  the 
Mint  price  of  77s.  lO^d.  per  oz.  During  this  period  the  evil  conse- 
quences of  this  state  of  things  was  aggravated  by  the  great  quantities  of  . 
foreign  goods,  beyond  the  wants  of  the  consumers,  that  were  accumulated 
in  our  warehouses,  and  for  which  no  market  could  be  found.  These 
goods  were  either  actually  the  property  of  English  merchants,  having 
been  received  in  return  for  manufactures  exported,  or  were  virtually  so 
through  advances  made  to  the  owners,  in  addition  to  the  freight,  in- 
surance, and  other  charges  which  had  been  incurred  upon  them.     Such 


3?0  PROGRESS  OF  THE  NATION.  [sec.  hi. 

of  our  manufacturers  as  had  the  means  of  doing  so,  had  accumulated 
large  stocks  of  goods  in  their  stores,  but  one  after  another  their  means 
of  employing  workmen  fell  off,  so  that  in  the  beginning  of  1811  the  state 
of  dislress  among  all  the  trading  classes  had  arisen  to  a  most  alarming 
height ;  meetings  were  held  in  the  city  of  London  to  consider  as  to  the 
course  to  be  pursued  to  mitigate  the  evil,  and  a  Select  Committee  of  the 
House  of  Commons  was  appointed  with  the  same  view.  The  distress 
was  partially  alleviated  by  the  issue  of  Exchequer  bills  on  loan  to  the 
merchants,  but  effectual  relief  was  not  obtained  until  the  tide  of  pros- 
perity began  to  turn  away  from  the  ruler  of  France,  and  the  continental 
nations  casting  off  the  shackles  in  which  he  had  bound  them,  leagued 
i^^  together  in  alliance  with  England,  for  the  recovery  of  their  independ- 
1  ence :  their  ports  were  then  of  course  open  to  our  commerce,  and  the 
goods  which  had  been  accumulating  in  our  docks  and  warehouses  were 
distributed  to  willing  purchasers. 

The  desire  of  obtaining  British  manufactured  goods  and  colonial  pro- 
duce was  exhibited  on  the  part  of  the  inhabitants  of  the  Continent  in  a 
\/  remarkable  manner  during  the  years  which  immediately  followed  the 
promulgation  of  the  Berlin  decree.  This  scheme  for  the  destruction  of 
our  trade  was  not  confined  to  France,  but  was  adopted  likewise  by  the 
eovernments  of  Austria,  Prussia,  the  States  of  the  Germanic  Confede- 
ration, Russia,  Holland,  and  the  Italian  States,  then  leagued  with 
France  against  this  country  ;  and  neither  trouble  nor  precaution  was 
spared  in  order  to  ensure  its  complete  adoption.  So  great,  however, 
was  the  desire  of  obtaining  the  prohibited  articles,  that  all  the  efforts  of 
the  French  Commissioners  were  of  little  avail,  and  the  export  trade  of 
the  country  was  maintained  during  the  years  in  which  the  continental 
system  was  enforced,  at  a  level  nearly  as  high  as  it  had  previously  ac- 
quired. The  well-informed  author  of  a  pamphlet,  published  in  1835, 
entitled  '  England,  Ireland,  and  America,'  says,  when  speaking  on  this 
subject : — "  It  would  be  amusing,  and  full  of  romantic  interest,  to  detail 
some  of  the  ten  thousand  justifiable  arts  invented  to  thwart  this  un- 
natural coalition,  which,  of  necessity,  converted  almost  every  citizen  of 
Europe  into  a  smuggler.  Bouriennc,  who  was  himself  one  of  the  Com- 
missioners appointed  to  enforce  these  prohibitions  at  Hamburg,  gives 
some  interesting  anecdotes  in  his  Memoirs  under  this  head.  The  writer 
is  acquainted  wdth  a  merchant  who  was  interested  in  a  house  that  em- 
ployed 500  horses  in  transporting  British  goods,  many  of  which  were 
landed  in  Sclavonia,  and  thence  conveyed  overland  to  France,  at  a 
charge  of  about  28/.  per  cwt.,  more  than  fifty  times  the  present  freight 
of  merchandise  to  Calcutta  !"  In  the  plenitude  of  his  power,  Napoleon 
was  unable  to  prevent  the  clandestine  introduction  and  sale  of  English 
goods  in  the  very  capital  of  his  empire  ;  he  was,  besides,  led  occasion- 
ally to  relax  the  system  so  far  as  to  grant  licenses  for  the  introduction 


CHAi'.  IX.]  rOREIGN  COMMERCE.  381. 

of  British  and  colonial  goods.  Those  licenses,  which  were  given  to  some 
fjivoured  individuals  among  his  staff  and  court,  were  sold  to  the  mer- 
chants ;  and  it  has  been  stated,  that  as  much  as  a  million  of  francs  — 
40,000/. — has  been  realized  from  the  sale  of  one  of  these  commercial 
indulgences. 

It  has  been  often  brought  as  matter  for  reproach  against  the  ministry 
of  that  day,  that  in  the  negotiations  at  Vienna,  which  followed  the 
downfall  of  Napoleon,  the  commercial  interests  of  this  country  were  1 
heedlessly  abandoned.  It  can  hardly  be  denied  that  the  minister  by 
whom  England  was  represented  at  the  Congress  of  Vienna,  knew  but  ]x 
little,  and  cared  as  little,  about  commercial  matters  ;  and  that  certain 
of  the  better-informed  diplomatists  of  other  countries  were  not  backward 
to  take  advantage  of  his  ignorance  and  supineness.  Conquests,  which 
offered  wide  and  improving  fields  for  commercial  and  manufiicturing 
enterprise,  were  given  up  as  it  were  through  complaisance ;  and  the 
whole  subject  of  trade  was  abandoned,  apparently  lest  the  pursuit  of 
what  might  be  called  our  selfish  interest  should  tarnish  the  laurels  we 
had  gathered  in  the  fields  of  slaughter.  The  amount  of  the  sacrifices 
thus  made  it  would  be  impossible  to  estimate  ;  but  at  however  high  an 
I  amount  they  may  be  reckoned,  it  is  probable  that  we  have  since  sutferi'd 
)far  more  through  our  long  persistence  in  a  system  of  restriction  and  pro- 
\hibition.  This,  although  it  might  have  been  comparatively  inoperative 
during  the  period  of  war,  could  not  fail  to  be  viewed  with  jealousy  and 
anger  so  soon  as  peace  enabled  other  nations  to  turn  their  attention  to 
foreign  commerce.  The  pertinacity  with  which  we  so  long  adhered  to 
our  navigation  law^s,  and  the  numerous  anti-social  vices  that  were  suf- 
fered to  deform  our  tariff,  were  calculated  to  foster  this  spirit  of  jealousy 
on  the  part  of  others,  and  to  provoke  them  to  acts  of  retaliation,  from 
which  we,  as  the  most  commercial  nation,  were  sure  to  be  the  greatest 
sufferers.  The  ministry  of  that  time  was  supported  in  this  adherence 
to  a  system  of  restriction  by  many  commercial  men,  whose  modes  of 
business  being  adapted  to  that  system,  they  dreaded  lest  its  relaxation 
might  be  followed  by  personal  loss  to  themselves ;  and  it  was  their  en- 
deavour, in  which  they  too  well  succeeded,  to  persuade  the  Government 
and  the  legislature  that  any  change  of  system  must  tend  to  destroy  the 
foreign  commerce  of  the  country.  It  has  been,  unfortunately,  the  comA 
mon  practice  in  this  country,  when  legislating  upon  commercial  mattei's,! 
to  consider  the^  interests  of  the  merchants  actually  engaged  in  its  pro-/ 
secution,  and  not  the  advantage  of  the  trade  itself,  which  is  always  best' 
promoted  by  attention  to  the  interests  of  the  consumers,  rather  than  by 
assisting  the  merchants  to  obtain,  by  means  of  what  is  called  protec- 
tion, an  unnatural  rate  of  profit. 

The  narrow  views  which  have  been  here  explained  were  not  univer- 
sally held  by  mercantile  men.    In  the  year  1.820  a  considerable  number 


3S2  PROGKESS  OF  THE  NATION.  [sec.  tii. 

of  the  most  wealthy  and  enterprising  houses  in  London  joined  in  a  peti- 
tion to  the  House  of  Commons,  embodying  principles,  the  justice  and 
liberality  of  which  will  assure  to  them  the  assent  at  all  times  of  en- 
lightened men,  and  reference  will  long  be  made  to  this  petition  as  to 
the  deliberate  opinions  of  practical  and  experienced  merchants  upon 
points  which  they  are  peculiarly  fitted  to  understand. 

This  petition  was  in  the  following  terms  : — 

"  To  the  Honourable  the  House  of  Commons  of  the  United  Kingdom 
of  Great  Britain  and  Ireland. 

"  The  humble  Petition  of  the  undersigned  Merchants  of  the  city  of 
London, 

"  Sheweth, — That  foreign  commerce  is  eminently  conducive  to  the 
wealth  and  prosperity  of  a  country  by  enabling  it  to  import  the  commo- 
dities for  the  production  of  w^hich  the  soil,  climate,  capital,  and  industry 
of  other  countries  are  best  calculated,  and  to  export  in  payment  those 
articles  for  which  its  own  situation  is  better  adapted. 

"  That  freedom  from  restraint  is  calculated  to  give  the  utmost  exten- 
sion to  foreign  trade,  and  the  best  direction  to  the  capital  and  industry 
of  the  country. 

"  That  the  maxim  of  buying  in  the  cheapest  market,  and  selling  in 
the  dearest,  which  regulates  every  merchant  in  his  individual  dealings, 
is  strictly  applicable  as  the  best  rule  for  the  trade  of  the  whole  nation. 

"  That  a  policy  foiuided  on  those  principles  would  render  the  com- 
merce of  the  world  an  interchange  of  mutual  advantages,  and  diffuse 
an  increase  of  wealth  and  enjoyments  among  the  inhabitants  of  each 
state. 

"  That,  unfortunately,  a  policy  the  very  reverse  of  this  has  been,  and 
is,  more  or  less,  adopted  and  acted  upon  by  the  Government  of  this  and 
of  every  other  country,  each  trying  to  exclude  the  productions  of  other 
countries,  with  the  specious  and  well-meant  design  of  encouraging  its 
own  productions ;  thus  inflicting  on  the  bulk  of  its  subjects,  who  are 
consumers,  the  necessity  of  submitting  to  privations  in  the  quantity  or 
quality  of  commodities  ;  and  thus  rendering  what  ought  to  be  the  source 
of  mutual  benefit  and  of  harmony  among  states,  a  constantly-recurring 
occasion  of  jealousy  and  hostility. 

"  That  the  prevailing  prejudices  in  favour  of  the  protective  or  restric- 
tive system  may  be  traced  to  the  erroneous  supposition  that  every 
importation  of  foreign  commodities  occasions  a  diminution  or  discou- 
rao"ement  of  our  own  production  to  the  same  extent ;  whereas  it  may 
be  clearly  shown,  that  although  the  particular  description  of  production 
which  could  not  stand  against  unrestrained  foreign  competition  Mould 
be  discouraged  ;  yet  as  no  importation  could  be  continued  for  any  length 
of  time  without  a  corresponding  exportation,  direct  or  indirect,  there 
would  be  an  encouragement,  for  the  purpose  of  that  exportation,  of  some 


CHAr.  IX.]  FOREIGN  COMMERCE.  383 

other  production  to  which  our  situation  might  be  better  suited  ;  thus 
aflTortling  at  least  an  equal,  and  probably  a  greater,  and  certainly  a  more 
beneficial  employment  to  our  own  capital  and  labour. 

"  That  of  the  numerous  protective  and  prohibitory  duties  of  our  com- 
mercial code,  it  may  be  proved,  that  while  all  operate  as  a  heavy  tax 
on  the  community  at  large,  very  few  are  of  any  ultimate  benefit  to  the 
classes  in  whose  favoiu*  they  were  originally  instituted,  and  none  to  the 
extent  of  the  loss  occasioned  by  them  to  other  classes. 

"  That  among  the  other  evils  of  the  restrictive  or  protective  system, 
not  the  least  is,  that  the  artificial  protection  of  one  branch  of  industry  or 
source  of  production  against  foreign  competition,  is  set  up  as  a  ground 
of  claim  by  other  branches  for  similar  protection  ;  so  that  if  the  reason- 
ing upon  which  restrictive  or  prohibitory  regulations  are  founded  were 
followed  out  consistently,  it  would  not  stop  short  of  excluding  us  from 
all  foreign  commerce  whatsoever.  And  the  same  train  of  ai'gument, 
which,  with  corresponding  prohibitions  and  protective  duties,  should 
exclude  us  from  foreign  trade,  might  be  brought  fonvard  to  justify  the 
re-enactment  of  restrictions  upon  the  interchange  of  productions  (uncon- 
nected with  public  revenue)  among  the  kingdoms  composing  the  union, 
or  among  the  counties  of  the  same  kingdom. 

'"  That  an  investigation  of  the  effects  of  the  restrictive  system,  at  this 
time,  is  peculiarly  called  for,  as  it  may,  in  the  opinion  of  the  Petitioners, 
lead  to  a  strong  presumption  that  the  distress  v^hichnow  so  generally  pre- 
vails is  considerably  aggravated  by  that  system  ;  and  that  some  relief 
may  be  obtained  by  the  earliest  practicable  removal  of  such  of  the  re- 
straints as  may  be  shown  to  be  most  injurious  to  the  capital  and  industry 
of  the  community,  and  to  be  attended  with  no  compensating  benefit  to 
the  public  revenue. 

"  That  a  declaration  against  the  anti-commercial  principles  of  our 
restrictive  system  is  of  the  more  importance  at  the  present  juncture, 
inasmuch  as  in  several  instances  of  recent  occurrence,  the  mer- 
chants and  manufacturers  in  foreign  states  have  assailed  their  respec- 
tive governments  with  applications  for  further  protection  or  prohibitory 
duties  and  regulations,  urging  the  authority  and  example  of  this 
country,  against  which  they  are  almost  exclusively  directed,  as  a 
sanction  for  the  policy  of  such  measures.  And  certainly,  if  the  reason- 
ing upon  which  our  restrictions  have  been  defended  is  worth  anything, 
it  will  apply  in  behalf  of  the  regulations  of  foreign  states  against  "us. 
They  insist  upon  our  superiority  in  capital  and  machinery,  as  we  do 
upon  their  comparative  exemption  from  taxation,  and  with  equal  foun- 
dation. 

"  That  nothing  would  more  tend  to  counteract  the  commercial  hos- 
tility of  foreign  states  than  the  adoption  of  a  more  enlightened  and  more 
conciliatory  policy  on  the  part  of  this  country. 


384  PROGRESS  OF  THE  NATION.  [sec.  hi. 

"  That  altliouyJi,  as  a  matter  of  mere  diflomacij,  it  may  sometimes  an- 
swer to  hold  out  the  removal  of  jmrticular  prohibitions,  or  high  duties,  as 
depcndiufj  vpon  corresjwndinq  coneessions  hy  other  states  in  our  fawmr,  it 
does  not  follow  that  we  should  maintain  our  restrictions  in  cases  ichere  the 
desired  concessions  on  their  part  cannot  he  obtained.  Oar  restrictions 
ivould  not  be  the  less  prejudicial  to  our  otcn  capital  and  industry,  because 
other  (jovernments  persisted  in  preserving  impolitic  regulations. 

"  That,  upon  tlie  whole,  the  most  liberal  would  prove  to  be  the  most 
politic  course  on  such  occasions. 

"  That  independent  of  the  direct  benefit  to  be  derived  by  this  country 
on  every  occasion  of  such  concession  or  relaxation,  a  great  incidental 
object  would  be  gained  by  the  recognition  of  a  sound  principle  or  stand- 
ard to  which  all  subsequent  arrangements  might  be  referred,  and  by 
the  salutary  influence  which  a  promulgation  of  such  just  views  by  the 
legiskiture,  and  by  the  nation  at  large,  could  not  fail  to  have  on  the 
policy  of  other  states. 

"  That  in  thus  declaring,  as  your  Petitioners  do,  their  conviction  of 
the  impolicy  and  injustice  of  the  restrictive  system,  and  in  desiring  every 
practicable  relaxation  of  it,  they  have  in  view  only  such  parts  of  it  as 
are  not  connected,  or  are  only  subordinately  so,  with  the  public  revenue. 
As  long  as  the  necessity  for  the  present  amount  of  revenue  subsists, 
your  Petitioners  cannot  expect  so  important  a  branch  of  it  as  the  Cus- 
toms to  be  given  up,  nor  to  be  materially  diminished,  unless  some  sub- 
stitute, less  objectionable,  be  suggested.  But  it  is  against  every  re- 
strictive regulation  of  trade  not  essential  to  the  revenue — against  all 
duties  merely  protective  from  foreign  competition — and  against  the 
excess  of  such  duties  as  are  partly  for  the  purpose  of  revenue,  and 
partly  for  that  of  protection, — that  the  prayer  of  the  present  Petition  is 
respectfully  submitted  to  the  wisdom  of  Parliament. 

"  Your  Petitioners  therefore  humbly  pray,  that  your  honourable 
House  will  be  pleased  to  take  the  subject  into  consideration,  and  to 
adopt  such  measures  as  may  be  calculated  to  give  greater  freedom 
to  foreign  commerce,  and  thereby  to  increase  the  resources  of  the 
State.'" 

AV'ith  the  single  exception  of  the  passage  printed  in  italics,  the  fore- 
going petition  is  highly  honourable  to  the  accomplished  economist*  by 
whom  it  is  imderstood  to  have  been  drawn  up,  and  to  the  many  eminent 
merchants  by  whom  it  was  subscribed.  It  may  be  fairly  admitted  that 
the  light  which  it  has  thrown  on,  and  the  attention  which  it  has  been  the 
^means  of  drawing  towards,  the  subject,  have  tended  in  a  powerful 
-  manner  to  bring  about  the  successive  relaxations  which,  since  its  pre- 
sentation to  Parliament,  have  been  made  in  our  conimercial  code.     Tlie 

*  Mr.  Thomas  Tooke. 


CHAP.  IX.]  FOREIGN  COMMERCE.  385 

degree  of  success  by  which  it  has  thus  been  foUowed,  uuist  make  it  a 
matter  of  great  regret  that  it  should  contain  anything  capable  of  being  ])cr- 
verted  to  an  opposite  end.  The  author  of  the  petition  would  be  amonfr 
the  first  to  disclaim  the  advocacy  of  any  disingenuous  diplomacy,  fortifying 
iiimself  in  this  disclaimer  by  the  whole  tenor  of  the  document,  and  espe- 
cially by  the  ([ualifying  clause  that  follows  the  objectionable  paragra])h. 
It  is  unfortunate,  however,  that  the  course  of  proceeding  which  it  sug- 
gests has  in  many  instances  been  since  adopted  by  the  English  Govern- 
ment. It  has  been  seen  on  these  occasions  that,  by  the  relaxation  of 
some  restriction,  or  the  abolition  of  some  protective  duty,  a  positives 
good  would  arise  to  the  trade  of  this  country ;  but  it  has  been  seen,  at 
the  same  time,  that  this  reform  would  be  also  beneficial  to  the  commerce 
of  some  other  country  ;  and  it  has  been  thought  desii-able  to  render  the 
relaxation  doubly  profitable  to  ourselves,  by  making  it  the  equivalent 
for  some  corresponding  relaxation  in  favour  of  English  commerce  on  the 
part  of  the  country  that  would  participate  in  the  improvement.  From 
some  cause  or  othei', — probably  the  misconception  of  our  motives,  or  the 
fear  of  being  overreached, — it  has  generally  happened  that  it  has  been 
thought  unwise  to  grant  the  price  we  have  demanded  for  the  alteration, 
and  we,  having  made  our  relaxation  dependent  upon  the  payment  of 
that  price,  no  longer  feel  oiu'selves  at  liberty  to  persevere  to  our  own 
profit  in  a  course  which  we  should  otherwise  be  glad  to  adopt. 

1o  illustrate  this  matter,  let  us  suppose  that  our  Government  shoidd 
become  convinced,  through  the  successful  operations  of  the  sniuc-nler, 
that  the  present  duty  (1838)  of  22^.  Qd.  per  gallon  upon  foreign 
spirits  is  injuriously  high — that  by  reducing  it  to  one-half  tliat  rate  the 
revenue  would  be  benefited,  and  the  foreign  trade  of  the  country  in- 
creased. Such  a  reduction  would  be  manifestly  to  the  advantao-o  of 
France,  and  our  Government  would  be  expected  and  urged  to  demand 
from  that  country  some  equivalent  concession — such,  for  example,  as 
the  admission  of  our  cotton  manufactures  at  moderate  rates  of  duty. 
A  negotiation  to  this  end  being  opened,  the  reduction  on  our  part  may 
be  made  to  depend  upon  our  obtaining  the  concession  demanded  of  the 
French  Government.  If  this  should  be  granted,  there  can  be  no  doubt 
but  that  the  joint  benefit  would  be  greater  than  that  to  be  drawn  from 
the  simple  reduction  of  the  duty  on  foreign  spirits  ;  but  how  many  cir- 
cumstances are  there  which  may  oppose  themselves  to  the  granting  of 
the  concession  demanded  fi-om  our  neighbours?  Their  Government  may 
be  indisposed  to  make  it,  from  imagining  that  the  war  of  the  smu^^ler 
against  our  revenue  would  of  itself  soon  compel  our  legislature  to  make 
the  proposed  reduction  ;  or  the  "  protected"  cotton-manufiicturers  of 
France  nuiy  prove  too  powerfnl,  and  may  influence  the  rejection  of  the 
treaty.  From  some  cause  or  other  the  restriction  a^-ainst  our  manufac- 
tures may  be  continued,  and  in  that  case  the  dignity  of  our  Government 

2  c 


380  TROGRESS  OF  THE  NATION,  [sec.  hi. 

\vill  not  allow  it  to  proceed  in  the  business,  until  the  loss  to  the  revenue 
may  have  reached  a  pitch  which  can  be  no  longer  borne.* 

AVhen  communities   in  general   shall  Ijecome    more   enlightened,  in 

^  regard  to  the  ])rinciples  that  should  regnlute  conunerce,  such  negotia- 
tions as  that  above  described  can  never  occur.  Connnereial  treaties 
will  then  be  unknown,  because  each  country  will  be  led  to  adopt  plans 
that  will  be  of  advant<ige  to  itself,  unchecked  by  the  consideration  that 
some  part  of  that  advantage  may  be  shared  by  others  ;  and  not  only  so, 
but  will  be  induced  the  more  readily  to  pursue  those  plans  for  the  very 
reason  that  others  wull  participate  in  tlie  benefit,  assured  that  the  pros- 
perity of  its  neighbours  must  always  have  a  beneficial  influence  upon  its 
own  condition. 

The  part  of  our  restrictive  system  which  was  viewed  with  the  greatest 
favour  among  all  classes,  was  embodied  in  the  measure  generally  known 
under  the  name  of  the  ^vigatioB.Act.  The  foundation  of  this  Act 
was  laid  during  the  Protectorate,  and  the  system  was  perfected  by  the 
I  12  Charles  II.,  chap.  18.  This  Act  provided,  that  no  merchandise  of 
)  either  Asia,  Africa,  or  America,  should  be  imported  into  Great  Britain 
;  in  any  but  English-built  ships,  navigated  by  an  English  commander, 
and  having  at  least  three-fourths  of  their  crew  English.  Besides  this 
exclusive  right  imparted  to  British  shipping,  discriminating  duties  were 
imposed,  so  that  goods  which  might  still  be  imported  in  foreign  ships 
from  Europe  were  in  that  case  more  highly  taxed  than  if  imported 
under  the  English  flag.  The  system  here  described  continued  to  be 
steadily  and  pertinaciously  maintained  during  more  than  16D  years, 
and  was  looked  upon  as  a  monument  of  wisdom  and  prudence,  to  which 
was  mainly  attributable  the  degree  of  commercial  greatness  to  which 
v/e  had  attained.  U  May  we  not  hope  that,  with  the  present  amount  of 
our  knowledge,  it  would  be  difficult  to  arrive  at  any  such  conclusion,  or 
to  believe  that  the  trade  of  any  country  could  possibly  be  promoted  by 

^  compelling  the  merchants  to  employ  diiai-  instead  of  cheap  ships  ?  The 
earliest  deviation  from  the  Navigation  Act  that  was  sanctioned  by  Par- 
liament, arose  out  of  the  treaty  with  the  United  States  of  America,  in 
18]Ji.     The  States,  soon  after  the  establishment  of  their  independence, 

s^  had  passed  a  navigation  law  in  favour  of  their  shipping,  similar  in  all 
its  main  provisions  to  the  English  law  ;  and  it  affords  an  instructive 
lesson,  that  the  practical  carrying  out  of  this  restrictive  system  to  its 
fullest  extent  by  the  two  nations  was  found  to  be  so  unproductive  of  all 
good  eflfect,  as  to  call  for  its  mutual  abandonment.  (  By  this  treaty,  the 

*  Since  183S,  the  duty  on  brandy  (having  been  intermediately  raised  to  22s.  lOrf.)  has 
been  (JMarch,  1846,)  reduced  to  15.?.  per  gallon,  and  the  consu^r.ption,  which  in  1838  was 
1,203,43,5  gallons,  yielding  1,3.J3,C14/.  to  the  revenue,  advanced  in  1849  to  2,187,500  gallons, 
producing  a  revenue  of  1,039,463/.,  not  any  equivalent  having  been  required  from  the 
Government  of  France. 


CH.vr.  IX.]  FOREIGN  COMMERCE.  387 

ships  of  the  two  countries  were  placed  reciprocally  upon  the  same  footing 
in  the  ports  of  England  and  the  United  States,  and  all  discriminating 
duties  cliargoable  upon  the  goods  which  they  conveyed  were  mutually 
repealed.  It  adds  greatly  to  the  value  of  this  concession,  that  it  was] 
made  by  no  disciple  of  free-trade  doctrines,  but  was  forced  by  the  very! 
consequences  of  the  system  itself,  from  a  Government  strenuously' 
oj)posed  to  all  change;  in  the  direction  of  relaxation.  From  that  moment 
it  became  easy  to  foretel  the  abandonment  of  our  long-cherished  system 
of  protection,  since  every  country  that  desired  to  remove  the  disadvan- 
tage under  which  we  had  placed  its  trade  or  shipping,  had  it  thenc(!- 
forward  in  its  power,  by  ado])ting  our  plans  in  the  spirit  of  retahation, 
to  compel  us  to  a  relaxation  of  our  code.  It  is  worthy  of  remark  that, 
amidst  all  the  complaints  that  have  been  made  by  British  shipowners, 
of  the  abandonment  of  their  interests  by  their  Government,  it  has  never 
been  attempted  to  question  the  propriety  of  the  American  treaty,  nor  to 
complain  of  its  results. 

With  the  exception  here  noticed,  the  restrictive  system  was  con- 
tinned  in  full  force  until  1822,  when  Mr,  A\'allace,  then  President  of 
the  Board  of  Trade,  introduced  five  bilfs  M'hicli  efltjcted  a  very  im- 
portant alteration.  Of  these  bills  (3  Geo.  IV.,  cc.  41,  42,  43,  44,  and 
46)  the  ^bject  of  the  firjit  was  to  repeal  various  obsolete  statutes  that 
were  enacted  in  relation  to  foreign  commerce  before  the  passing  of  the 
Navigation  Act.  The  secoiid  bill  repealed  various  laws  dating  .from 
the  Navigation  Act  downwards,  including  those  parts  of  the  Navigation 
Act  itself  whicii  enacted  that  goods  of  the  growth,  produce,  or  manu- 
facture of  Asia,  Africa,  or  America,  should  not  be  imported  into  this 
country,  except  in  British  ships  navigated  as  already  described,  and  that 
no  goods  of  foreign  growth,  production,  or  manufacture,  shall  be  brought 
into  England  from  Europe  in  any  foreign  ship,  except  from  the  jdace  of 
their  production,  or  from  the  ports  whence  they  are  usually  brought, 
and  in  ships  belonging  to  the  countries  of  production  or  accustomed 
shi])ment.  The  thijd  bill  was  intituled  "  An  Act  for  the  encourage- 
ment of  navigation  and  commerce,  by  regulating  the  importation,  of 
goods  and  merchandise,  so  far  as  relates  to  the  countries  or  places  from 
whence,  and  the  ships  in  which,  such  importation  shall  be  made."  By 
this  Act,  certain  enumerated  goods  were  allowed  to  be  brought  to  this 
country  from  any  port  in  Europe,  in  ships  belonging  to  the  port  of  ship- 
ment. Ships  belonging  to  Holland,  which,  by  the  Navigation  Act,  had 
been  forbidden  to  enter  English  ports  with  cargo,  were  placed  upon  the 
same  footing  as  the  ships  of  other  countries.  South  American  produce, 
which,  before  the  passing  of  this  Act,  could  be  brought  only  from 
certain  ports  of  Spain  and  Portugal,  were  now  permitted  to  be  imported 
direct  from  the  places  of  growth  in  ships  of  the  country,  the  only  ex- 
ception to  this  concession  being  against  places  to  which  British  ships 

2  c  2 


3SS  PROGRESS  OF  THE  XATIOX.  [sec.  hi. 

were  not  admitted  for  the  purposes  of  trade.  The  regulation  of  the 
trade  between  our  possessions  in  America  and  the  West  Indies,  and 
other  places  in  the  same  quarters,  was  the  object  of  the  IklLuUi  bill. 
It  permitted  the  importation,  subject  to  specified  duties,  into  certain 
ports,  of  various  articles  from  any  foreign  country  in  America,  or  port 
in  the  AVest  Indies,  either  in  Britisli  vessels,  or  in  vessels  belonging  to 
the  country  or  place  of  shipment,  and  the  goods  so  imported  might  be 
again  exported  to  any  other  colony,  or  to  the  United   Kingdom.     The 

.^^  bill  also  applied  to  the  regulation  of  the  trade  of  our  Western  colo- 
nies. By  its  principal  provision  it  was  made  lawful  to  export,  in  British 
ships,  from  any  colony  to  any  foreign  port  in  Europe  or  Africa,  any 
goods  that  have  been  legally  imported  into  the  colony,  or  which  were  of 
its  own  growth  or  manufacture  :  and  it  was  further  made  lawful  to 
export  certain  enumerated  articles,  in  British  ships,  to  any  such  colony 
fi'om  any  foreign  port  in  Europe  or  Africa.     By  means  of  these  relaxa- 

I  tions,    the    colonists   were   enabled    to    draw  their   supplies  from   any 
country  in  Europe,  Africa,  or  America,  and  to  send   their  produce  in 

I  return  to  such  markets  as  should  hold  out  the  greatest  inducements. 
In  the  year  following  that  in  which  these  Acts  were  passed,  a  notifica- 
tion was  made  to  our  Government  by  Prussia,  that  unless  and  until  some 
relaxation  of  our  system  was  made  in  favour  of  the  ships  of  that  country, 
heavy  retaliatory  duties  would  be  imposed  upon  English  shipping  that 
should  enter  any  Prussian  port.  It  is  surprising,  considering  the  suc- 
cessful stand  made  eight  years  before  by  the  United  States,  that  so  long 
a  time  should  have  been  allowed  to  elapse  before  the  continental  nations 
proceeded  to  force  us  into  the  adoption  of  a  more  liberal .  course,  by 
making  us  in  turn  the  victims  of  our  anti-social  system.  The  adoption  of 
this  natural  policy  on  the  part  of  Prussia  would  assuredly  have  been 
soon  followed  by  a  similar  movement  in  other  countries,  and  our  mer- 
chants and  shipownei's  became  immediately  clamorous  for  the  inter- 
ference of  the  Government  to  obtain  the  removal  of  the  duties  imposed 
by  Prussia.  It  was  under  these  circumstances  that  what  are  called  the 
iteciprocity  Acts  (4  Geo.  IV.,  c.  77,  and  5  Geo.  IV.,  c.  1)  were  passed. 
These  Acts  authorized  His  Majesty,  by  Order  in  Council,  to  permit  the 
importation  and  exportation  of  goods  in  foreign  vessels,  on  payment  of 
the  same  duties  as  were  chargeable  when  imported  in  British  vessels,  in 
favour  of  all  such  countries  as  should  not  levy  discriminating,  duties 
upon  goods  imported  into  those  countries  in  British  vessels ;  and  further 
to  levy  upon  the  vessels  of  such  countries,  when  frequenting  British 
ports,  the  same  tonnage  duties  as  are  chargeable  on  Britisli  vessels.  A 
power  was,  on  the  other  hand,  given  to  the  Crown  by  these  Acts  of  Par- 
liament, to  impose  additional  duties  upon  goods  apd  shipping  against 
any  countries  which  should  levy  higher  duties  in  the  case  of  the  employ- 
ment of  British  vessels  in  the  trade  with  those  countries.     The  conces- 


cHAr.  ix.l  FOREIGN  COMMERCE.  389 

sions  thus  made  met  with  only  a  feeble  opposition,  the  principal  Act 
having  passed  the  Commons  by  a  m.ajority  of  5  to  1. 

Under  the  authority  of  these  Acts  of  Parliament  reciprocity  treaties 
have  been  concluded  with  tin;  following  countries : — 


France. 

Austria. 

Russia. 

Sweden  and  Norway. 

Denmark. 

Netherlands. 

Prussia. 

Lubeck. 

Bremen. 

Hamburg. 

Hanover. 

Mecklcnl)urg  Srliwcrin. 

Mecklenburgh  Strclitz. 

Oldenburg. 

Frankfort. 


Portugal. 

Sardinia. 

Two  Sicilies. 

Greece. 

Turkey. 

United  States  of  America. 

Mexico. 

Texas. 

Uraguay. 

Bolivia. 

Venezuela. 

New  (Iranada. 

Escuador  (Equator). 

Rio  de  la  Plata. 

Brazil. 


( 


A  great  depreciation  has  undoubtedly  taken  place  in  the  value  of 
ships  in  this  country.  If,  while  the  prices  of  all  other  kinds  of  ])ro- 
perty  had  undergone  reduction,  the  price  of  ships  had  been  exempted 
from  alteration,  it  would  have  been  extraordinary,  and  a  circumstance 
by  no  means  favourable  to  commerce.  It  is  not  possible  to  estimate 
proportionally  the  degree  in  which  this  general  abatement  of  prices  has 
affected  shipping.  One  ship  differs  from  another  in  those  qualities 
which  determine  its  marketable  value  ;  and  not  only  so,  but  each  ship 
is  continually  undergoing  a  change  in  those  qualities.  It  may  be  fiiirly 
presumed,  however,  that  the  general  fall  of  prices  has  not  borne  harder 
upon  the  owners  of  ships  than  upon  the  holders  of  other  kinds  of  pro- 
perty, since  we  find  from  public  documents,  as  shown  in  this  volume, 
that  the  number  and  tonnage  of  vessels  built  since  that  fall  became 
matter  of  complaint,  have  been  greater  than  they  were  during  years 
which  are  now  pointed  out  as  periods  of  prosperity  by  the  shipping  in- 
terest. The  materials  of  which  ships  are  built  all  participated  in  the  fall 
— wood,  hemp,  iron,  copper,  sail-cloth, — every  article  that  can  be  men- 
tioned as  portions  of  a  ship  or  of  her  stores,  had  become  cheaper,  and  as 
new  ships  could  be  profitably  employed  upon  lower  terms  than  those  built 
in  dearer  times,  the  owners  of  the  latter  were  of  course  compelled  to 
accept  of  less  remunerative  rates  of  freight.  Their  value  in  the  market 
was,  of  course,  affected  by  the  same  circumstance,  and  as  no  man  likes 
to  see  his  property  made  less  valuable,  their  owners  became  discon- 
tented. Overlooking  the  obvious  cause  of  depression,  and  seeing  that 
not  only  were  they  underbid  by  the  owners  of  British  ships  built  with 
cheaper  materials,  but  also  by  the  foreign  shipowner,  whose  vessel  was 
built  still  more  cheaply,  they  forgot  the  circumstances  wliich  had  in  a 
manner  compelled  the  Government  to  relax  our  navigation  laws,  and 


300  TROGRESS  OF  THE  NATION.  [sec.  hi. 

attributed  their  losses  and  disappointments  to  the  reciprocity  treaties. 
/With  this  feeling  a  deputation  of  shipowners  waited  upon  Mr.  Huskis- 
\l  son,  when  President  of  the  Boiird  of  Trade,  to  remonstrate  against  the 
linjustice  of  the  new  system,  which  obliged  them  to  enter  unprotected 
iinto  competition  with  foreign    shipping  built  and   navigated  so  much 
more  cheaply  than  their  own.     To  meet  this  complaint  in  the  manner 
that  apjieared  most  obviously  fair  to  all  parties,  Mr.  lluskisson  proposed 
to  grant  to  the  builders  of  ships  in  this  country  a  drawback  equal  to  the 
full  amount  of  any  duty  that  bad  been  paid  upon  the  materials  used  in 
their  construction  and  equipment.     For  very  obvious  reasons,  this  pro- 
posal was  not  fovourably  received  by  the  complainants,  who  dreaded 
lest  the  Government,  by  acting  upon  Mr.  Iluskissou's  suggestion,  should 
give  a  fresh  stimulus  to  ship-building  at  home,  and  raise  up  new  com- 
petitors, who  would  be  able  to  rival  them  successfully  in  every  branch 
of  commerce. 

There  is  not  any  class  of  persons  in  this  country,  with  the  excejjtion 
/  perhaps  of  the  landowners,  which  has  made  such  loud  and  continued 
i  complaints  of  distress  as  the  shipowners  have  done  since  the  peace  in 
\  1815.  These  gentlemen  form  a  numerous,  wealthy,  and  influential 
body,  and  acting  as  they  do,  in  concert,  with  an  organized  committee  to 
watch  over  their  interests,  they  have  always  been  able  to  command  at- 
tention to  their  representations,  and  occasionally  to  defeat  such  measures 
of  Government  as  were  seemingly  opposed  to  their  interests.  It  is  not 
intended  to  question  here  the  importance,  in  a  political  point  of  view,  of 
our  mercantile  marine ;  that  importance  has  always  been  considered 
so  great  that  if  a  sacrifice  were  needed  on  the  part  of  the  nation,  in 
order  to  keep  up  the  number  and  eflSciency  of  our  trading-vessels,  there 
would  be  little  question  as  to  the  propriety  of  such  a  course.*  In  ad- 
mitting this,  it  is  by  no  means  intended  to  allow  that  any  such  sacrifice 
is  necessary,  or  that  the  activity  of  om*  merchants  would  not  furnish  an 
adequate  amount  of  employment  in  those  branches  of  commerce,  where 
British  vessels  can  be  advantageously  employed,  without  the  necessity 
for  inciting  them  by  discriminating  duties  to  embark  in  any  course  of 
trade  which  may  tend  to  injure  other  classes  of  the  community.  If  this 
position  be  correct,  it  would  be  difficult  to  show  why  ships,  the  tools 
merely  with  which  merchants  work,  should  be  more  considered  than 
the  traffic  itself  for  the  conveyance  of  which  they  are  constructed,  why 

*  It  seems  deserving  of  remark  that  the  importance  to  the  country  of  keeping  up  our 
mercantile  marine  "as  a  nurserj-  for  seamen"  to  man  the  national  fleet,  has  been  in  some 
degree  forgotten  when  encouragement  has  been  given  to  steam  navigation,  one  of  the  most 
certain  consequences  attending  that  great  invention  being  importantly  to  lessen  the  pro- 
portion of  seamen  required  for  carrying  on  a  given  amount  of  trdde.  On  tlie  other  hand, 
it  is  certain  that  in  tlie  event  of  war  breaking  out,  the  whole  system  of  naval  armaments 
will  be  changed  by  means  of  this  great  invention,  and  that  a  much  smaller  number  of 
vessels  and  of  seamen  than  have  formerly  been  required  would  need  to  be  employed. 


CH.vr.  ix.j  FOKEIUN  COMMERCE.  301 

they  should  be  looked  upon,  as  they  generally  have  been  in  this  country, 
not  as  the  means  of  commerce,  but  as  its  end. 

It  has  been  a  fruitful  source  of  complaint,  from  year  to  year,  on  the 
part  of  the  owners  of  British  ships,  that  a  large  and  increasing  amount 
of  foreign  tonnage  enters  the  ports  of  the  United  Kingdom,  and  tliey 
have  been  so  accustomed  to  look  with  jealousy  upon  these  foreign  rivals, 
that  they  cannot  forbear  complaining  of  the  competition  at  periods  when 
it  is  notorious,  and  even  acknowledged  by  themselves,  that  British  vessels 
find  full  employment  at  rates  of  freight  which  are  more  satisfactory  to 
themselves  than  beneficial  to  the  trading  interests  of  the  country.  In 
years  of  great  commercial  excitement,  when  the  demand  for  shippinr!-  is 
unusually  great,  it  is  of  great  advantage  to  British  shipowners  that  our 
merchants  should  be  able  to  employ  foreign  vessels.  If  the  tonnage 
under  British  register  were  sufficiently  great  to  answer  the  possible 
demands  of  any  extraordinary  year,  what  would  become  of  the  surplus 
of  that  tonnage  during  years  of  ordinary  employment  ?  Home  competi- 
tion would,  in  such  cases,  inevitably  bring  down  the  rates  of  freight 
below  the  scale  that  would  remunerate  the  owners ;  whereas  now  that 
the  merchants  are  free  to  supply  their  wants  in  foreign  parts,  they  will 
do  so  no  longer  than  necessity  obliges  them,  and  that  necessity  beino- 
over,  the  reasonable  amount  of  British  tonnage  finds  its  usual  employ- 
ment at  the  usual  scale  of  compensation.  In  years  when  the  employ- 
ment of  British  ships  is  greatest,  there  is  the  largest  proportionate  use 
of  foreign  shipping,  and,  on  the  contrary,  during  years  of  commei-cial 
depression,  the  proportionate  use  of  foreign  tonnage  is  always  found  to 
be  the  least. 

If  it  were  not  for  the  political  consideration  before  alluded  to,  which 
causes  us  to  look  to  our  mercantile  marine  more,  perhaps,  than  would  be 
necessary  if  a  good  system  were  adopted  for  recruiting  the  national  fleet, 
no  one  could  have  questioned  that  the  true  interests  of  commerce  would 
require  that  we  should  employ  the  ships  of  any  country  which  would 
best  and  cheapest  perform  the  office  of  conveying  merchandise  to  and 
from  our  shores.  It  is,  indeed,  no  longer  doubtful  whether,  all  restric- 
tions imposed  on  our  foreign  commerce  in  favour  of  our  own  flag  bein"- 
abolished  through  the  repeal  in  1849  of  our  navigation  laws,  English 
vessels  are  able  successfully — nay,  triumphantly — to  compete  with  the 
ships  of  every  other  country.  It  is  a  fact,  that  in  our  trade  with  the 
United  States  of  America,  a  continually-increasing  proportion  of  British 
tonnage  has  of  late  years  been  employed.  In  1821,  the  proportion  of 
British  vessels  which  entered  the  ports  of  the  United  States  was  7i  per 
cent.,  compared  with  the  American  tonnage  employed  in  the  foreign 
trade  of  the  States  ;  while,  in  1835,  that  proportion  was  increased  to 
39  per  cent.,  which  proportion  was  maintained  in  1844,  and  increased  in 


392 


TKOGRESS  OF  THE  NATION, 


[l^EC. 


1849,  to  55 J  per  cent. :  the  actual  numbers  in  each  of  the  twenty-eight 
years  from  1821  to  1849,  have  been  as  follows  :  — 


Years. 

British  Tons. 

American  Tons. 

Years. 

British  Tons. 

American  Tons 

1821 

55,188 

765,098 

1836 

544,774 

1,25.5,384 

1822 

70,669 

787,961 

1837 

543,020 

1,299,720 

1823 

89,553 

775,271 

1838 

484,702 

1,302,974 

1824 

67,351 

850,033 

1839 

495,353 

1,491,279 

1825 

63,036 

880,754 

1840 

582,424 

1,576,946 

1826 

69.2;)5 

942,206 

1841 

615,623 

1,631,909 

1827 

99,114 

918,361 

1842 

599,-502 

1,510.111 

1828 

104,167 

868,381 

1843 

453,894 

l,44;?.5-jr! 

1829 

86,377 

872,949 

1844 

766,747 

1,977,438 

1830 

87,231 

967,227 

1845 

753,882 

2,035,486 

1831 

215,887 

922,9.52 

1846 

81.3,287 

2,151,114 

1832 

288,841 

94;t.622 

1847 

99.3,210 

2,101,3.j9 

1833 

383,487 

1,111,441 

1848 

1,177,104 

2,.39.3,482 

1834 

453,495 

1,074,670 

1849 

1,482,707 

2,658,321 

1835 

529,922 

1,352,653 

The  increase  in  British  shipping  between  the  first  and  the  last  years 
of  the  series  is  2584  per  cent.  ;  but  the  increase  in  American  shipping 
during  the  same  time  has  been  nearly  248  per  cent. ;  and  in  the  face  of 
this  positive  increase  of  employment  we  have  not  heard  any  complaints 
from  American  shipowners  against  the  system  of  reciprocity  under  which 
the  far  greater  proportionate  increase  of  British  shipping  has  occurred. 
If  all  the  foreign  tonnage  that  entered  the  ports  of  the  United  States  in 
each  of  the  years  1821,  1835,  and  1849,  were  compared  with  the  Ame- 
rican tonnage  in  those  years  respectively,  it  would  be  found  that,  in  1821, 
the  proportion  was  10-65 ;  whilst,  in  1835,  it  was  47*42  of  foreign  to 
100  American,  and  in  1849,  it  was  64-36.  If,  then,  we  compare  in  the 
same  way  the  British  and  foreign  tonnage  that  entered  the  ports  of  the 
United  Kingdom  in  the  same  years,  it  will  be  found,  that  in  the  former 
year  the  proportion  was  27  per  cent.  ;  while,  in  1835,  it  was  35^  per 
cent.,  and  in  1849,  41*67  per  cent.  If  we  then  turn  to  the  halcyon 
days  of  British  shipowners — the  days  to  which  they  are  accustomed  to 
refer  as  the  period  of  their  greatest  prosperity— we  shall  find  that  this 
prosperity  was  certainly  not  occasioned  by  the  absence  of  competition 
on  the  part  of  foreign  vessels ;  for  in  each  of  the  years  as  to  which  the 
records  have  been  preserved,  which  occurred  between  the  beginning 
of  the  century  and  the  termination  of  the  war,  the  proportion  of  foreign 
to  British  shipping  which  entered  our  ports  was  far  greater  than  it  is  at 
})resent : — 

In  1801  for  100  tons  British,  there  were  84' 56  tons  foreign. 

1802  „  „  36-02 

1803  „  „  57-19  „ 

1804  „  „  67-11 

1805  „  „  72-58  „ 

1806  „  „  67-77  „ 

1809  „  „  80-88  „ 

1810  „  „  131-27         .,  „ 

In  whichever  way  we  estimate  the  amount  of  our  foreign  and  colonial 


cH.\r.  ix]  FOREIGN  COMMERCE.  393 

commerce,  whether  by  the  "  official  value  "  of  the  Custom-house,  or  the 
declared  value  of  the  exporters,  we  shall  acquire  a  very  imperfect  test 
of  its  importance.  It  is  not  according  to  the  money  value  of  the  goods, 
but  according  to  the  amount  of  industry  which  has  been  set  in  motion 
for  their  j)i-od action,  that  we  should  estimate  our  exports ;  while,  on  the 
other  hand,  it  is  the  quantity  and  not  the  money  value  of  the  foreign 
productions  that  we  receive  in  return,  that  forms  the  true  measure 
of  the  sum  of  enjoyment  which  they  occasion  to  the  country.  The 
amount  of  tonnage  employed  for  the  conveyance  of  these  products  from 
and  to  our  shores  forms,  perhaps,  a  much  better  measure  of  the  pro- 
gress of  our  foreign  trade  than  any  computations  of  their  cost  in  money. 
If,  then,  we  contrast  the  amount  of  shipping  that  entered  and  left  our 
ports  in  the  two  years  1802  and  1830,  we  find  that  in  the  former  year 
it  amounted  to  rather  less  than  half  the  tonnage  employed  in  1836  ;  the 
numbers  being  3,448,060  and  7,061,069  respectively.  In  1814,  the 
first  year  of  peace,  the  tonnage  employed  amounted  to  no  more  than 
3,764,428  ;  but  since  that  time  the  quantity  has  progressively  increased, 
somewhat  slowly  at  first,  but  more  rapidly  of  late  years.  The  average 
of  the  five  years,  1814  to  1818,  was  4,147,257  tons.  The  averages 
during  subsequent  periods  have  been  as  follows : — 


5  years 

1819  to  1823    4,200,332  tons. 

5      „ 

1824  „  1828     5,332,122     „ 

•''      .. 

1829  „  1833     5,916,311     „ 

•'■>      » 

1834  „  1838     7,056,097     „ 

6      „ 

1839  „  1844     9,514,123     „ 

5      „ 

1845  ,,  1849  13,216,620     „ 

numbers  in  eacl 

of  the  last  five  years  of  the  series 

Years.             Tons. 

Years, 

Tons. 

1845         12,077,305 

1848 

13,306,626 

1846         12,415,586 

1849 

14,004,388 

1847         14,279,196 

The  number  and  tonnage  of  registered  ships  belonging  to  the  United 
Kingdom  and  its  dependencies  from  1803,  the  earliest  year  to  w4iich  the 
record  extends,  down  to  1849,  are  shown  in  the  following  table.  In 
comparing  the  amount  of  tonnage  that  existed  during  the  war  witli  the 
amount  since  on  the  registry,  it  must  be  borne  in  mind,  that  in  the  for- 
mer period  a  considerable  part  of  our  mercantile  marine  was  employed 
in  the  public  service,  for  the  conveyance  of  troops  and  warlike  stores, 
and  that  during  a  time  of  peace  a  smaller  number  of  ships  will  suffice 
for  carrying  on  a  given  amount  of  traffic  than  are  required  during  war, 
when  they  are  liable  to  detention  for  convoy.  In  addition  to  these  cir- 
cumstances, we  must  bear  in  mind  the  fact  already  mentioned,  that 
where  steam-vessels  are  employed,  tiic  celerity  of  their  movements  occa- 
sions a  great  saving  in  the  tonnage  required. 


394 


riiOGllESS  OF  THE  NATION. 


Vessels 

belonging  to  the  United  Kingdom  and  iti^ 

Depeiidenc 

'es. 

Years. 

United  Kin 

gilora  and  Pos- 

Colonies. 

Total. 

sessions 

in  Europe. 

Ships. 

Tons. 

Ships. 

Tons. 

Ships. 

Ton.s. 

1803 

18,068 

1,986,076 

2,825 

181,787 

20,81)3 

2,167,863 

1804 

13,870 

2,077,061 

2,;.04 

191,509 

21,774 

2,263,570 

1805 

19.027 

2,0,-2,439 

3,024 

190,953 

22,051 

2,283,442 

1806 

19;315 

2,079,914 

2,867 

183,800 

22,182 

2,263,714 

1807 

19;373 

2,0.6,827 

2,917 

184,794 

22,290 

2,281,621 

1808 

19,580 

2,1.30,396 

3,066 

194,423 

22^646 

2,324,819 

1809 

19,882 

2,167,221 

3,138 

201,247 

23,070 

2,368,463 

1810 

20,253 

2,210,661 

3,450 

215,383 

23,703 

2,426,044 

1811 

20,478 

2,247,322 

3.628 

227,452 

24,106 

2,474,774 

*1814 

21,550 

2,414.170 

2;  868 

202,795 

24,418 

2,616,965 

1315 

21.869 

2,447,831 

2:991 

203,445 

24,860 

2,681,276 

1816 

22.026 

2,504.290 

3,775 

279.643 

25,801 

2,783,933 

1817 

21,775 

2,421,354 

3,571 

245,632 

25,346 

2,664,986 

1818 

22,024 

2,452,608 

3,483 

221,860 

25,507 

2,674,468 

1819 

21,997 

2,451,597 

3,485 

214.799 

25,482 

2,666,396 

1820 

21,969 

2,439,029 

3,405 

209,564 

25,374 

2,648,593 

1S21 

21,652 

2,355,853 

3,384 

204,3.50 

25,036 

2,560,203 

1822 

21,238 

2,315,403 

3,404 

203,641 

24,642 

2,519,044 

1823 

21,042 

2,302,867 

3,500 

203,893 

24,542 

2,506,760 

1824 

21,280 

2,348.314 

3,496 

211,273 

24,776 

2,559,587 

1825 

20,701 

"  2,328,807 

3,579 

214,875 

24,280 

2,-553,682 

1826 

20,968 

2,411,461 

3.6.57 

224,183 

24,625 

2,635,644 

tl827 

19,524 

2,181,138 

3,675 

279.362 

23,199 

2,460,500 

1828 

19,646 

2,193,300 

4,449 

324; 891 

24,095 

2,518,191 

1829 

19,110 

2,199,959 

4,343 

317,041 

23,453 

2,517,000 

1830 

19,174 

2,201,592 

4,547 

330,227 

23,721 

2,531,819 

1831 

19,4.50 

2,224,356 

4,792 

357,608 

24,242 

2,581,964 

1832 

19,664 

2,261,860 

4,771 

3.56,208 

24.435 

2,618.063 

1833 

19,689 

21271,301 

4,6% 

363,276 

24,385 

2,634,577 

1834 

19,975 

2;312;355 

5,080 

403,745 

25.055 

2,716,100 

1835 

20,300 

2, 360 ; 303 

5,211 

423,458 

25,511 

2,783,761 

1836 

20,388 

2,349,749 

5,432 

442,897 

25,820 

2,792,646 

1837 

20,536 

2,333,521 

5,501' 

4.57,497 

26,037 

2,791,018 

1838 

20,912 

2,420,759 

5,697 

469,842 

26,609 

2,890,601 

1839 

19,781 

2,401,346 

6.075 

497,798 

25,856 

2,899,144 

1840 

20,685 

2,584,408 

6,308 

543,276 

26,993 

3,127,684 

1841 

23,461 

2,935,399 

6,591 

.577,081 

30,0.52 

3,512,480 

1842 

23,954 

3,041,420 

6,861 

578,430 

30,815 

3,619,850 

1843 

23,898 

3,007,581 

7.085 

580,806 

30,983 

3,588,387 

1844 

24,016 

3,044.392 

7,304 

592,839 

31,320 

3.637,231 

1845 

24,388 

3,123,180 

7,429 

5P0,881 

31,817 

31714.061 

1846 

24,771 

3,199.785 

7,728 

617,327 

32,499 

3,817,112" 

1847 

25,200 

3,307,921 

7,788 

644,603 

32,988 

3,952,524 

1848 

25,638 

3,400,809 

8,034 

65i;351 

33,672 

4,052,160 

1849 

25,&02 

3,485,958 

8,188 

658, 157 

34,090 

4,144,115 

The  number  and  tonnage  of  merchant  vessels  built  and  registered  in 
the  British  dominions  in  each  year,  from  1801  to  1849,  with  the  excep- 
tion of  1812  and  1813,  (the  records  of  which  were  destroyed),  are  given 
in  the  following  table  (p.  395). 

It  will  be  seen,  that  the  amount  of  new  vessels  has  been  much  greater 
during  the  last  twenty-five  years  than  it  was  during  the  former  part  of  the 
century.  The  casualties  to  which  ships  are  liable  are  evidently  greater 
during  war  than  in  peace  ;  and  we  should  assuredly  have  required,  on 

*  The  Records  of  1812  and  1813  were  destroyed  at  tlie  burning  of-the  Custom-house. 

t  A  new  Registry  Act  (6  Geo.  IV.,  c.  110)  came  into  operation  this  year;  previously 
to  that  time  many  vessels  which  had  been  lost  from  time  to  time  were  continued  iu  the 
registry,  no  evidence  of  their  loss  having  been  produced. 


IX.] 


FOREIGN  COMMEUCE. 


395 


Statement  of  the  Number  and  Tonnar/e  of  Vessels  Built  and  Rec/ixtercd  in  tlie  United  Kint/dttm 
and  its  Dependencies  in  vnrious   Years  since  1801. 


Years. 

United  K 

njfdom,  nntl 

Colonies. 

ISritisl 

Empire. 

I'ossessions  in  fc.uro(ie. 

Ships. 

Tons. 

Ships. 

Tons. 

Ships. 

Tons. 

1801 

1,065 

122,. 593 

1802 

, , 

, , 

1,281 

137,. 508 

1803 

1,407 

135,692 

1804 

]  \ 

991 

95,979 

1805 

1,001 

89,584 

1806 

772 

69,198 

1807 

770 

68,000 

1808 

568 

57,140 

1809 

, , 

, , 

596 

61,396 

1810 

.  , 

685 

84,891 

1811 

870 

115,638 

1814 

706 

86*675 

158 

11, '874 

864 

97,949 

1815 

912 

102,903 

271 

25,637 

1,183 

128,. 540 

1816 

852 

84,676 

422 

32,725 

1,274 

117,401 

1817 

758 

81,210 

.324 

23,219 

1,082 

104,429 

1818 

7.53 

86,911 

306 

17,455 

1,0.59 

104,. 366 

1819 

775 

88,985 

350 

23.188 

1,125 

112,173 

1820 

635 

68,142 

248 

16^449 

883 

84,. 582 

1821 

.597 

59,482 

275 

15,365 

872 

74,847 

1822 

571 

51,. 5.33 

209 

15,611 

780 

67,144 

1823 

604 

63,788 

243 

22,240 

847 

86,028 

1824 

837 

93,219 

342 

50,522 

1,179 

143,741 

1825 

1,003 

124,029 

536 

80,895 

1,539 

204,924 

1826 

1,131 

119,086 

588 

86,554 

1,719 

205,640 

1827 

911 

95,0.38 

529 

68,908 

1,440 

163,946 

1828 

857 

90,069 

464 

.50,844 

1,321 

140,913 

1829 

734 

77,635 

416 

39,237 

1,150 

116,872 

1830 

750 

77,411 

367 

32,719 

1,117 

110,130 

1831 

760 

85,707 

376 

34.2'JO 

1,136 

119,997 

1832 

759 

92,915 

386 

43,3  7 

1,145 

136,312 

1833 

728 

92,171 

431 

.52,476 

1,1.59 

144,647 

1834 

806 

102,710 

425 

55,817 

1,231 

158,. 527 

1835 

916 

121,722 

455 

63,230 

1,371 

184,9.52 

1836 

709 

89,636 

376 

49,976 

1,150 

156, 24f) 

1837 

1,005 

135,922 

510 

71,. 306 

1,515 

207,228 

18.38 

1,147 

161,459 

606 

79,947 

1,753 

241,406 

1839 

1,278 

186,903 

703 

10:),  025 

1,981 

295,928 

1840 

1,406 

216,949 

771 

143,288 

2,177 

360,237 

1841 

1,192 

168,309 

668 

132,857 

1,860 

301,166 

1842 

971 

133,275 

558 

75,662 

1,-529 

208,937 

1843 

736 

85,373 

494 

55,904 

1,230 

141,277 

1844 

731 

96,876 

525 

69,857 

1,256 

166,733 

1845 

890 

124,919 

6.38 

90,696 

1,528 

215,615 

1846 

841 

127,498 

745 

113,558 

1,586 

241,056 

1847 

981 

149,924 

756 

155,313 

1,737 

305,237 

1848 

878 

125,940 

655 

101,988 

1,533 

227,928 

1S49 

771 

121,266 

*608 

109,518 

1,379 

230,784 

that  account,  to  build  a  larger  number  between  3  801  and  1813  than  sub- 
sequently, but  for  the  number  of  foreign  trading  vessels  captured  between 
those  years  and  .admitted  to  the  privileges  of  a  British  register.  There 
is  not  any  existing  account  of  the  actual  number  so  admitted  in  each 
of  the  years,  but  a  parliamentary  return  gives  the  number  and  ton- 
nage of  foreign-built  vessels  thus  privileged,   and  which  continued  in 


*  The  returns  for  the  colonies  not  having  been  all  received  when  this  account  was  made 
up,  the  numbers  for  1349  cannot  be  accurately  given,  and  are  below  the  truth. 


396 


PKOGKESS  OF  THE  NATION. 


[sec.  III. 


existence  on  the  30th  September  of  each  year,  from  1792  to  1812: 
these  vessels  form  part  of  the  tonnage  included  in  the  statement  ah-eady 
given. 

Stalemeiit  of  the  jVumber  and  Tonnage  of  Prize  Ships  admitted  to  British  Registry,  which 
continued  in  existence  on  the  SOth  of  September  (f  each  Year  from  ISOl  to  1812. 


1801 
1802 
1803 
1804 
1805 
1806 


Ships. 


2,779 
2,827 
2.286 
2^533 
2.520 
2;. 564 


Tons 


369,563 
358.577 
307,370 
337,443 
33.1,763 
342,248 


Sbips. 


Tons 


1807 
1808 
1809 
1810 
1811 
1812 


2,764 
3,222 
3,547 
3,903 
4,023 
3,899 


377,. 519 
448.758 
493,327 
534,346 
536,240 
513,044 


It  is  a  singukir  fact,  that  notwithstanding  the  importance  which  lias 
always  heen  assigned  to  the  subject  of  the  employment  of  shipping  in 
this  country,  there  are  not  any  public  documents  in  existence  from  which 
a  perfect  account  can  be  compiled  of  the  number  of  vessels  and  their 
tonnage  that  entered  the  ports  of  the  United  Kingdom,  and  cleared 
from  the  same  in  the  years  that  occurred  between  1801  and  1814.  In 
this  latter  year  the  Custom-house  of  London  was  destroyed  by  fire,  and 
for  all  information  connected  with  that  branch  of  the  public  service, 
which  refers  to  years  preceding  that  event,  we  are  obliged  to  depend 
upon  returns  that  had  already  been  made  to  Parliament.  All  that  it  is 
possible  to  obtain  from  this  source  has  been  used  in  the  compilation  of 
the  following  tables  (pp.  397-8),  the  blanks  in  which  it  will  not  be 
possible  ever  to  supply.     Since  1814  the  documents  are  complete. 

These  tables  prove,  to  demonstration,  that  the  gloomy  forebodings 
of  English  shipowners,  as  already  explained,  have  altogether  failed 
of  realization.  It  is  a  well-known  fact,  that,  as  regards  Prussia,  to 
which  country  they  looked  with  the  'greatest  degree  of  apprehension, 
her  mercantile  navy  has  been  most  markedly  diminished  in  amount 
since  the  commencement  of  our  reciprocity  agreement  with  that  country. 
Our  shipping,  on  the  contrary,  is  far  from  having  been  diminished  by 
admitting  this  amount  of  foreign  rivalry.  Having  amounted,  on  the 
average  of  the  three  years  1824  to  1826,  to  2,582,971  tons,  it  was  in- 
creased on  the  average  of  the  three  years  ending  with  1836,  to  2,761,169 
tons,  and  in  the  three  years  ending  with  1849,  to  4,049,600  tons:  If 
we  compare  the  average  amount  of  British  and  foreign  toimage  that 
entered  the  ports  of  the  United  Kingdom  at  the  earliest  and  latest  of 
these  triennial  periods,  we  shall  find,  that  while  that  under  the  British 
flag  has  increased  from  1,964,183  to  4,797,279  tons,  or  2,833,096  tons, 
the  average  amount  of  foreign  tonnage  so  entering  has  increased  only 
from  803,896  to  2,083,347,  or  1,279,451  tons. 


cn.\r.  IX.] 


rOREIGN  COMMERCE. 


397 


Statement  of  tfie  Number  and  Tonnage  of  Vessels,  British  and  Foreign,  tlial  entered  the  Ports 
of  tite  United  Kingdom,  exclusive  of  the  intercourse  between  Great  Britain  and  Ireland  and 
of  the  Coasting  Trade,  in  each  Year  from  1801  to  1849,  sq  far  as  the  same  can  be  made  up 
from  record.i  at  the  Custom-huuse. 


Years. 


1801 
1802 
1803 
1804 
1805 

1806 
1807 
1808 
1809 
1810 

1811 
1814 
1815 

1816 
1817 
1818 
1819 
1820 

1821 
1822 
1823 
1824 
1825 

1826 
1827 
1828 
1829 
1830 

1831 
1832 
1833 
1834 
1835 

1836 
1837 
1838 
1839 
1840 

1841 
1842 
1843 
1844 
1845 

1846 
1847 
1848 
1849 


British. 


Ships. 

4,987 
7,806 
6,264 
4,865 
5,167 

5,211 


5,615 
5,154 


8,975 
8,880 

9,744 
11,255 
13,006 
11,974 
11,285 

10,810 
11,087 
11,271 
11,733 
13,516 

12,473 
13,133 
13,436 
13,659 
13,548 

14,488 
13,372 
13,119 
13,903 
14,295 

14,347 
15,155 
16,119 
17,635 
17,883 

18,525 
18,987 
19,500 
19,687 
21,001 

21,273 
24,017 
21,783 
23,646 


Tons. 

922,594 

1,333,005 

1,115,702 

904,932 

953,250 

904,367 


938,675 
896,001 


1,290,248 
1,372,108 

1,415,723 
1,625,121 
1,886, 394 
1,809,128 
1,668,060 

1,599,274 
1,664,186 
1,740,859 
1,797,320 
2,144,598 

1,950,630 
2,086,898 
2,094,357 
2,184,525 
2,180,042 

2,367,322 
2,185,980 
2,183,814 
2,298,263 
2,442,734 

2,505,473 
2,617,166 
2.785,387 
3,101,650 
3,197,501 

3.361.211 

3,294,725 
3,545,346 
3.647,463 
4,310,639 

4,294,733 
4,942,094 
4,565,5.33 
4,884,210 


Foreign. 


Ships. 

5,497 
3,728 
4,254 
4,271 
4,517 

3,793 
4,087 
1,926 
4,922 
6,876 

3,216 
5,286 
5,314 

3,116 
3,3;)6 
6,238 
4.215 
3;  472 

3,261 
3,389 
4,069 
5,653 
6,968 

5,729 
6.046 
4,955 
5,218 
5,359 

6.085 
4,546 
5,505 
5,894 
6,005 

7,131 

7,343 

8,679 

10,326 

10,198 

9,527 
8,054 
8,541 
9,608 
11,651 

12,. 548 
14.789 
13,100 
13,426 


Tons. 

780,155 
480,251 
638,104 
607,299 
691,883 

612,904 
680,144 
283,657 
759,287 
1,176,243 

687,180 
599,287 
746,985 

379,465 
445,011 
762,457 
542,684 
447,611 

306,256 
469,151 
582,996 
759,441 
958,132 

694,116 
751,864 
634,620 
710,303 
758,828 

874,605 
639,979 
762,085 
833,905 
866,990 

988,899 
1,005.940 
l,21i;666 
1,331,365 
1,460,294 

1,291,165 
1,205,303 
1.301,950 
1,402,13S 
1,735,079 

1,806,282 
2.253,933 
1^960,412 
2,035,690 


Total. 


Ships. 

10,484 

11,534 

10,518 

9,136 

9,684 

9,004 


10.  .537 
12,030 

14,'261 
14,194 

12.860 
14;651 
19,244 
16,189 
14,757 

14,071 
14,476 
15,340 
17,386 
20,484 

18.202 
19^179 
18,391 
18,877 
18,907 

20,573 
17,918 
18,624 
19,797 
20,300 

21,478 
22,498 
24,798 
27,961 
28,081 

28,052 
27,041 
28,041 
29,295 
32,652 

33,821 
.38,806 
.34,883 
37,072 


Tons. 

1,702,749 
1,813,256 
1,753,806 
1,512,231 
1,645,133 

1,517,271 


1,697,962 
2,072,244 


1,889,. 5.35 
2,119,093 

1,795,188 
2,070,132 
2,648,851 
2,351,812 
2,115,671 

1,995,. 530 
2,1.33,337 
2,323,855 
2,. 5.56, 761 
3,102,730 

2,644,746 

2,8.39,762 
2,728,977 
2,894,828 
2,938,870 

3,241,927 
2,825,959 
2,945,899 
3,132,168 
3,. 309, 724 

3,494.372 
3,623^106 
3,997,053 
4,433,015 
4,657,795 

4,652,376 
4,500,028 
4,847,296 
5,049,601 
6,045,718 

6,101,015 
7,196,033 
6,525,945 
6,919,900 


398 


PROGRESS  OF  THE  NATION. 


[sec.  hi. 


Statement  of  the  N^umber  and  Tonnage  of  I'easels,  Sritish  and  Foreign,  that  cleared  from  the 
Ports  of  the  United  Kingdom,  exclusire  of  the  intercourse  between  Great  Britain  and  Ireland, 
and  of  the  Coasting  Trade,  in  each  Year  from  1801  to  1849,  so  far  as  tlie  same  can  he  made 
up  from  records  at  the  Custom-house. 


OUrWAUDS. 


Years. 


ISOl 
1S02 
1803 
1804 
1803 

1806 
1807 
1808 
1809 
1810 

1811 
1814 
1815 

1816 
1817 
1818 
1819 
1820 

1821 
1822 
1823 
1824 
1825 

1826 
1827 
1828 
1829 
1830 

1831 
1832 
1833 
1834 
1835 

1836 
1837 
1838 
1833 
1840 

1841 
1842 
1843 
1844 
1845 

1846 
1847 
1848 
1849 


British. 


Ships. 

7, '471 
5,523 
4,983 
5,319 

5,219 


5,488 
3,969 


8,620 
8,892 

9.044 
10;713 
11,445 
10,250 
10, 102 

9,797 
10,023 

9,666 
10,157 
10,848 

10,844 
11,481 
12,248 
12,636 
12,747 

13,791 
13,232 
13,266 
13,633 
13,948 

14,207 
14, 567 
15,907 
17,068 
17,633 

18,464 
18,785 
19,334 
19,788 
20,231 

21,079 
22,669 
21,177 
22,328 


Tons. 

1,177^224 

950,787 
•i(30,007 
971,496 

890,574 


950,565 
860,632 


1,271,952 
1,338,688 

1,340,277 
1,558,336 
1,715.488 
1,562,332 
1,549,508 

1,488,64^1 
1,533,260 
1,546,976 
1,657,533 
1,793,994 

1,737,423 

1,887,682 
2,(«6,3j7 
2,063,179 
2,102,147 

2,300,731 
2,229,269 
2,244,274 
2,236,323 
2,419,941 

2,531,577 
2,. 547. 227 
2, 876 ; 236 
3,036,611 
3,292,984 

3,429,279 
3,375,270 
3,635,833 
3,8.52,822 
4,235,451 

4,333,415 
4,770,-370 
4,724.027 

4,785:428 


Foreign. 


Ships. 

3". '532 
3,672 
4,033 
3,932 

3,459 
3,846 
1,832 
4,530 
6,641 


4,622 
4,701 

2,579 
2,905 
5,399 
3.795 
2,969 

2,626 
2,843 
3,437 
5,026 
6,075 

5,410 
5,714 
4,405 
5,094 
5,158 

5,927 
4,391 
5.230 
51823 
6;  047 

7,048 

7.461 

8^520 

10,608 

10,440 

9,786 
8,375 
8.703 
9,816 
12,2-36 

13,323 
15,2.56 
13,645 
15,275 


Tons. 

457,580 
574,420 
587,840 
605,821 

568,170 
6.31,910 
282,145 
699,750 
1,133,527 


602,941 
751,. 377 

3)9,160 
440,622 
731,649 
.556,511 
433,328 

383,786 
457,. 542 
563,571 
746,707 
905,520 

692,440 
767,821 
608,118 
730,250 
758,368 

836,051 
651,223 
758,601 
852,827 
905,270 

•1,035,120 
1,036,738 
1,222,803 
1,398,096 
1,488,888 

1,336,892 
1,252,176 
1,341,4.33 
1,444,-346 
1,796,136 

1,921,156 
2,312,793 
2,056,6.54 
2,299,060 


Total. 


Ships. 

10,"  803 
9,195 
9,076 
9,251 

8,678 


10,1  13 
10,610 


13,242 
13,593 

11,623 
13,618 
16,844 
14,045 
13,071 

12,423 
12,866 
13,103 
15,083 
16,923 

16,254 
17,195 
16,653 
17,7-30 
17,905 

19,718 
17,683 
18,516 
19,462 
19,995 

21,255 
22.028 
24; 427 
27,764 
28,073 

28,250 
27.160 
28^043 
29,604 
32,-527 

34,402 
37,925 
34,822 
37.603 


Tons. 

1,6.34,"  804 
1,523,207 
1,493,856 
1,577,317 

1,467,744 


1,650,315 
1,999,159 

2,874,893 
1,150,065 

1,739,437 
1,998,958 
2,4.30,137 
2,118,843 
1,982,836 

1,872,430 
1,996,802 
2,110,547 
2,404,240 
2,699,514 

2,429,865 
2,655,503 
2,614,515 
2,793,423 
2,860,515 

3,196,782 
2,880,492 
3,002,873 
3,149,152 
3,325,211 

3,566,697 
3,583,965 
4,099,039 
4,494,707 
4,781,872 

4,766,171 
4,627,446 
4,977,266 
5,297,168 
6,031,587 

6,-314,571 
7,083,163 
6,780,681 
7,084,488 


The  following  table  shows  the  course  of  the  import  and  export  trade 
of  tliis  country,  in  each  of  the  years  1802,  18U,  1835,  and  1849  :— 


CH\r.  IX.] 


FOREIGN  COMMERCE. 


309 


"3 

■S  S  o 

in^  —  <»«t^>-iin;o 

S 

eot^o  —  —  r^—  ~.-< 

^ 

c^;oeoooiD^r-oo  — 

?'  ?  t"  ";"  7"  T  T  ^'  V 

o 

1^1 

lO           l-H           ^ 

1 

M  CO  o  m  iM  cj  .n  1—  o 
•n      FH      rt 

1 

9> 

'5    <=- 

_ 

00 

00  o  ^  WM  <n  r-  Cf.  :o 

3 

1^  o  ir^  t-  cc  -1"  c^'  CO  i~ 

X 

iH 

o  »  £•? 

—  -fo-»'aj«coo-f 

■Jl  1  -  ~.  'M  ^  X.  C  X  1  - 

X 

o  J-.  o  CO  '.'-.  00  aj  oc  r? 

Si 

a>  ^  >-':  CO  —  CO  "M  3-.  1  - 
c.  t^  1^  o  X  CO  •>!  a  -t 

-r 

— -c  =  o. 

■r:  CO  CT.-  «t-  ?!  0-. 

-t  —  3-.  en  ..-;  .r:  -^  -t  ^ 

X 

==ti 

1^  —  ~.  «  O  ^  « 

35 

l-C^^COX  —  COr- 

^„ 

n              — " 

«r 

eo'     ^ 

1^ 

1j 

Sis 

:r.  —  ~:  -f  — .  —  00  00  o 

o 

3-.  t^  I.O   -O  t^  O  •—   X  r-. 

o 

t~(N5Ot£i<M<N00'*O» 

o 
o 

in3-.  1— o-H-rfmoo 

o 

^^i«j;-^-- 

=      9. 

■*                     (M 

o 

Oi          P^ 

O 

in 

OJ 

a 

C"^    ^ 

OD 

5  e  « 

iJil 

OiCOrJ'-^.-JCOaJOO 

s; 

coeO'*50!DOooo:«o 

p_l 

-H 

to  CO  s^  o  3-.  «  O  —  CI 

»- 

iTM^  3-.  X  'r^  m  3-.  33  o 

CI 

<.2  —  o 

ir.  -M  00  l~  '^  O  —  --O  — 

Cl 

m' irT  c^  — '  co"  x"  3;' itT™:' 

i-*^ 

--  -c  =  "H. 

—  I-  —  oox-r-o  —  eo 

.-•^r-Op-t-CCOCO 

i 

§  =  -^s 

<=l" 

tc  ^  «      a<      ^ 

co" 

^■^ 

< 

< 

2   .   c 

^ 

t^  3-.  L-^  —  -M  O  -O  CI  a>i 

o 

1 

o  O  CO  X  ■ri  -M  CO  CO  CO 

o 

z 

ir;  tc  ^  t^  W  1^  — 1  O  o 

o 

O  3-.  C  X  —  3:  -!•  O  -a: 

o 

iH  4t"  o  «  i  o  •?)  6  (N 

B        O 

O                  •-I 

;c                    S-l 

^         CU 

o 

■* 

*j          CJ 

X 

3   c    2     • 

—  t^rttOX-fl^OOO 

(N 

C'j  i-o  1^  CO  X  in  CO  -H "-'; 

X 

-H 

V-l\ 

oo  o  -j:  c  «-T  —  —  r:  o 

CO 

1.-  ir:  t-  -3  X  -+  cr.  43  t^ 

o 

c^  L-:  «;  :r.  -o  o  —  I-  i-i 

« 

,-.  t^  -J.  _  ^  31  — ,  O  in 

« 

<l^s 

—  rt  ?!  ?;  cc  ?r  -f      -^ 

35 

13  ^       1-  X  m  —       in 

^ 

—  -c  r  B* 

w  X       00  -r  —  r-       -c 

r^ 

■MX            to   -?   —   -t            rt 

CO 

^                     CO 

«^ 

1                    CO 

i^ 

7>  '*-   £   ^ 

r-i 

.— ( 

.— 1 

.—1 

-§=£ 

_. 

1  .  c' 
c      o 

O  =-.  C>  W  ^  O  ■>)        Q 

O  t^  .-«  •*  'C  ■*  1^     •  O 

ir:  «  i  i  a>  O  «    '  w 

8 
8 

X  35  CO  —  ?!  C  "t         CO' 

c 

c^  to  in  ■ f  t~  to    -to 

WWI^-OtoO^W        (N 

U         3. 

«J 

o 

*j         o 

9 

s  c  5    • 

Liooooeo-fOt^      00 

O  I-  —  4D  •4'  t^  (M         Tf 

CO 

r-inx'tcooto      — 

^ 

o  §  5"= 

1!^ 

^  r~  S  C  to  1^  -r       <M 

S^gJi. 

i-x^ao«c^«o       'i" 

■M 

in  CI  .—  X  -t  o  o       o 

X 

■<   *  r*  o 

X  t^  p-  I,  -^  t^  r~     •  zD 

CO 

-f  O  CO  .—  x"-*'  35       •  CO 

eg  to  CI       to  -+  o       ^ 

•* 

—  it;  c'cL 

t^  ;o—       eo      «o       CO 

CO 

s^.s^s 

3 

O           r-           CI 

to 

■£  ^  2  S 

fm^ 

r-^ 

f^ 

F— I 

.    .    .  ca    •    •    • 

•      •       •    CS       . 

o 

^^          t^ 

5 

•f  -1  •  •  • 

1        ScS 

.13     . ''-     . 

3 

•  o     '  -<"   u     •     ' 

•a    '  ti  u 

u               C 

U                  -7^ 

fj 

> 

"i'lj  ■  ■ 

•  '^     .       -^     .     . 

,  •«     .       *-* 

J 

'  T3     •  m    -• 

1       •--= 

1      :S^ 

rf4 

•   ci     •  "    C     •     ' 

*    o      *  "^    fi 

o 

•r 

< 

or  States 
Europe  ( 
irica   . 
,  in  West 
est  Indie; 

nd  India 

3 

States 
rope  ( 

West 
.  Indie 

^    -.2 

h2     ^ 

o 

3 

u 

uropcan  Kingdoms  i 
ritisli  Dominions  in 
nitcd  States  of  Ame 
oreign  (Colonies,  &(■., 
ritish  Colonies  in  W 

frica 

ape  of  Good  Hope  a 
ew  South  Wales,  &c 
rccnland  and  South 

2  £  s  J^ 

^ 

l-l'c.S  2 

2 

uropean  Kii 
ritish  Domii 
nitod  States 
oreign  Coloi 
ritish  Colon 
frica,   . 

°  —  — 

c=    ^    •- 

WC3ptL^P5■<;;JJ?;0 

K  :q ;:;  Pi,  ::a 'ii  Cj  ;<  ;; 

400 


PROGRESS  OF  THE  NATION. 


[snc.  III. 


CHAPTER  X. 

PROGRESS  OF  TRADE  IN  FOREIGN  COUNTRIES. 

Foreign  Trade  of  France,  1801  to  184S— Sliipping  employed  therein,  1S20  to  1848— Propor- 
tions of  National  to  Foreign  Shipping  employed  by  England,  France,  United  States  of 
America,  Sweden,  Norway,  and  Russia — Foreign  Trade  of  United  States  of  America, 
1801  to  1848. 

The  foreign  trade  of  France  has  increased  greatly  since  the  peace. 
During  the  continuance  of  war,  the  commerce  of  her  Atlantic  ports  was 
completely  ruined  by  our  cruisers  ;  at  Havre,  which,  from  its  being  the 
centre  of  the  trade  with  the  United  States,  has  been  called  the  Liverpool 
of  France,  a  great  part  of  the  houses  were  then  shut  up  ;  the  stores  and 
harbours  were  empty  ;  and  it  is  no  figure  of  speech  to  say  that  grass 
grew  in  the  streets.  The  traffic  across  the  frontiers  of  Spain,  Italy,  the 
Netherlands,  and  the  Rhenish  provinces  was  not  equally  interrupted, 
and  may  even  have  been  pursued  with  greater  activity,  because  of  the 
blockade  of  the  ports,  while  the  trade  carried  on  within  the  Mediterra- 
nean, although  greatly  harassed  and  interrupted,  was  by  no  means  an- 
nihilated, as  was  the  case  with  that  of  the  French  ports  in  the  English 
Channel. 

The  following  table  shows  the  amount  of  the  import  and  export  trades 
of  France  in  each  year,  from  the  beginning  of  the  century  to  the  close 
of  1848,  reduced  to  English  money  at  the  exchange  of  25  francs  to  the 
])oand  sterling : — 


1801 
1802 
1803 
1804 
1805 
1806 
1807 
1808 
1809 
1810 
1811 
1812. 
1813 
1814 
1815 
1816 
1817 
1818 
1819 
■  1820 
1821 
1822 
1823 
1824 


Imports. 


Exports. 


16,609,167 
18,597,986 
17,1^5,086 
17,616,681 
19,676,230 
19,073,481 
15,728,104 
12,804,756 
11,469,964 
13,466,536 
11,942,464 
8.319,480 
lo; 043, 420 
9^558,236 
7,936,648 
10,462,766 
13,592,010 
14,276,558 
12,368,931 
14,525,575 
15,777,694 
17.047,168 
14^473, 129 
18.194,464 


£. 
12,177,240 
12,973,046 
13,835,118 
15,181,252 
14,985,375 
18,1^8,434 
15,022,963 
13,232,196 
13,273,824 
14,601,340 
13,116,232 
16,745,848 
14,170.292 
13,842,116 
15,908,174 
18,528,842 
15,791,494 
17,968,261 
16,619,177 
18,196,727 
16,190,583 
15,406,748 
15.630,177 
17,021.676 


1825 
1826 
1827 
1828 
1829 
1830 
1831 
1832 
1833 
1834 
1835 
1836 
1837 
1838 
1839 
1840 
1841 
1842 
1843 
1844 
1845 
1846 
1847 
1848 


Imports. 


£. 
21,-544,896 
22,589,144 
22,632,169 
24,307,172 
24,654,136 
25,. 533, 537 
20,513,022 
26,114,893 
27,731,030 
28,807,772 
30.429,067 
36,223,014 
32,311,718 
37,482,179 
37,878,857 
42,091,440 
44,856.969 
45,681,328 
47,476,366 
47,717.635 
49,605,649 
50,250,684 
51,612,000 
28,332,000 


Exports. 


26,691,764 
22,420,340 
24,096,071 
24,336,905 
24,312,746 
22,906,-562 
24,726,796 
27,851,285 
30,6.52,652 
28,588,201 
33,376,-545 
38,451,390 
30,323,898 
38,236,306 
40,133,271 
40,436,901 
42,614,304 
37,610,036 
39,678,488 
45,871,-526 
47,497,548 
47,213,276 
41,972,000 
37,456,000 


f'H.vr.  X.I 


TRADE  IN  FOREIGN  COUNTRIES. 


401 


Tlie  object  vvitli  which  the  foregoing  table  is  inserted  is  to  show  how 
greatly,  and,  still  more,  how  rapidly  the  foreign  and  colonial  trade  of 
France  has  gone  on  increasing  during  the  last  twenty-nine  years.  The 
aggregate  amount  of  imports  and  exports  in  1824  was  35,81(3,140/.  ; 
and  in  1847  *  it  reached  90,584,000/. ;  being  an  increase  in  twenty-three 
years  of  160  per  cent. 

The  official  returns  of  the  French  Government  relative  to  thfj  ship- 
ping employed  in  the  foreign  and  colonial  trade  of  that  country,  do  not 
embrace  an  earlier  period  than  1820;  the  following  statement  is  there- 
fore necessarily  limited  to  the  years  from  1820  to  1848,  inclusive ; 
during  w^hich  period  the  tonnage  employed,  distinguishing  that  under 
the  national  flag  from  foreign  vessels,  was  as  follows  : — 


Years. 

INWARDS. 

Total. 

French. 

Foreign. 

Ships. 

Tons. 

Ships. 

Tons. 

Ships. 

Tons. 

1820 

3,730 

335,942 

4,337 

3.54,556 

8,067 

690,498 

1821 

3,493 

316,243 

4,310 

367,092 

7,803 

683,3.35 

1822 

3,282 

285,560 

4,456 

423,041 

7,738 

708,604 

1823 

2,5.59 

229,129 

4,016 

423,162 

6,575 

652,291 

1824 

3,387 

316,480 

4,184 

438,005 

7,571 

754,485 

1825 

3,387 

329,735 

4,218 

414,670 

7,605 

744,405 

1826 

3,440 

355,776 

4,910 

544,682 

8,305 

900,458 

1827 

3,350 

353,102 

4,439 

475,509 

7,889 

828,611 

1828 

3,465 

346,591 

4,728 

527,639 

8,193 

874,230 

1829 

3,048 

331,049 

5,070 

581,755 

8,118 

912,804 

1830 

3,236 

340,171 

5,169 

669,283 

8,405 

1,609,454 

1831 

3,375 

333,216 

3,951 

461,194 

7,326 

794,410 

1832 

4,290 

399,948 

5,651 

714,638 

9,941 

1,114,586 

1833 

3,561 

358,157 

6,115 

622,735 

8,676 

980,892 

1834 

3,965 

394,486 

3,124 

736,918 

10,089 

1,131,404 

1835 

4,001 

407,999 

6,360 

766,033 

10,361 

1,174,032 

1836 

5,173 

550,121 

7,099 

839,345 

12,272 

1,439,466 

1837 

6,012 

561,502 

15,197 

1,528,618 

21,209 

2,090,120 

1838 

6,658 

626,070 

16,477 

1,705,646 

23,135 

2,331,716 

1839 

7,729 

694,210 

16,950 

1,729,987 

24,679 

2,424,197 

1840 

7,474 

658,378 

17,770 

1,822,884 

25,244 

2,481,262 

1841 

7,265 

693,449 

10,743 

1,287,388 

18,008 

1,980,837 

1842 

6,827 

669,604 

11,819 

1,426,527 

18,646 

2,096,131 

1843 

7,038 

690,416 

11,366 

1,430,549 

18,404 

2,120,965 

1844 

7,381 

751,712 

11,205 

1,421,435 

18,586 

2,173,147 

1845 

8,086 

828,753 

12,109 

1,500,478 

20,195 

2,329,231 

1846 

9,223 

952,423 

13,493 

1,743,598 

22,716 

2,696,021 

1847 

8,753 

968,596 

14,775 

1,955,391 

23, 528 

2,923,987 

1848 

8,313 

919,096 

8,899 

1,056,840 

17,212 

1,975,936 

*  The  political  events  of  1848  deprive  of  all  value  any  comparison  with  the  trade  of  that  year. 

2  D 


402 


TROGRESS  OF  THE  NATION. 


[sec.  iti. 


OUTWAKOS. 


Years. 


French. 


Ships. 


1820 

3,753 

1821 

3,552 

1822 

3,493 

1823 

3,316 

1824 

3,955 

1825 

3,908 

1826 

3,569 

1827 

3,522 

1828 

3,341 

1829 

3,101 

1830 

2,679 

1831 

3,671 

1832 

4,045 

1833 

3,675 

1834 

4,221 

1835 

4,292 

1836 

5,189 

1837 

5,876 

1838 

6,453 

1839 

7,371 

1840 

6,981 

1841 

7.115 

1842 

6,679 

1843 

6,956 

1844 

6,968 

1845 

7,994 

1846 

8,517 

1847 

8,'511 

1848 

8,762 

308,063 

5, 

290,483 

5, 

284,517 

5, 

222,744 

6, 

325,608 

6, 

354,307 

5, 

355,745 

5, 

346,370 

6, 

326,835 

5, 

316,462 

4, 

258,621 

4, 

326,253 

4, 

347,385 

4, 

318,840 

4, 

370,217 

5, 

387,139 

5, 

485,611 

6, 

566,705 

15, 

606,666 

16, 

681,360 

16, 

616,694 

17, 

713,870 

10, 

656,207 

11, 

698,476 

11, 

721,163 

11, 

844,482 

12, 

915,216 

13, 

960,550 

14, 

939,517 

9, 

Foreign. 
Ships.  Tons. 


,866 
,722 
,861 
,159 
,338 
,994 
,308 
,321 
,063 
,490 
,139 
,240 
,636 
,580 
,083 
,194 
,200 
,028 
,395 
,695 
,409 
,678 
,922 
,693 
,312 
,240 
,244 
,831 
,131 


408,673 

353,965 

357,719 

398,290 

415,241 

400,440 

432,672 

439,842 

460,519 

420,228 

370,518 

362,981 

461,704 

464,028 

518,216 

484,807 

570,436 

1,584,212 

1,665,220 

1,724,493 

1,773,056 

1,273,450 

1,383,907 

1,442,436 

1,399,823 

1,487,923 

1,678,351 

1,900,265 

1,093,833 


Total. 


Ships. 


619 
274 
354 
475 
293 
!^02 
877 
843 
404 
591 
818 
911 
681 
255 
304 
486 
389 
904 
848 
066 
390 
793 
601 
649 
280 
234 
761 
342 
893 


Tons. 


716 

644 

642 

621 

740 

754 

788 

786 

787 

736 

629 

689 

809 

782 

888 

871 

1,056 

2,150 

2,271 

2,405 

2,389 

1,987 

2,049 

2,140 

2,120 

2,332 

2,593 

2,860 

2.033 


736 
448 
236 
034 
939 
747 
417 
212 
3.54 
690 
139 
234 
089 
868 
433 
946 
047 
917 
886 
853 
750 
320 
114 
912 
986 
405 
567 
815 
350 


Those  persons  who  have  been  accustomed  to  look  with  jealousy  upon 
the  proportion  of  foreign  tonnage  engaged  in  the  trade  of  England,  will 
see,  from  the  foregoing  table,  how  small,  when  compared  with  this 
country,  is  the  proportion  of  vessels  under  the  national  flag  employed  in 
the  foreign  commerce  of  France.  The  following  tables  exhibit,  in 
centesimal  proportions,  the  degree  in  which  both  the  import  and  export 
commerce  of  England,  France,  and  the  United  States  of  America 
respectively,  have  been  carried  on  in  the  ships  of  each  country  for  a 
considerable  series  of  years : — 


THADE  IN  FOTIEIGN  COUNTRIES. 


403 


Centesimal  Proportions  of  Brilisli  and  Forei(in  Tonnage  employed  in  live  Import  and  Export 
Trniles  resjicc.tiveh/  of  tlie  United  Kin()iIom,  in  eucli  year  from  l.S2(l  to  \>^\\\. 


Years. 

Kntered  Inwards. 

Cleared  UiUwaids. 

Years. 

Entered  Inwards. 

Cleared  (Jutwards. 

Britisli. 

Foreign. 

British. 

Foreign. 

British. 

Foreign. 

British. 

Foreign. 

1820 

78-84 

21-16 

78-15 

21-85 

1835 

73-85 

26-15 

72-77 

27-23 

1821 

80-14 

19-86 

79-50 

20- 50 

1836 

71-41 

28-59 

70-97 

29-03 

1822 

78-00 

22-00 

77-08 

22-92 

18.37 

72-23 

27-77 

71-07 

28-93 

1823 

74-91 

25-09 

73-29 

26-71 

1838 

69-68 

30-32 

70-16 

29-84 

1824 

70-29 

29-71 

68-94 

31-06 

183J 

69-96 

30-04 

68-89 

31-11 

1825 

69-12 

30-88 

66-45 

33-55 

1840 

68-64 

31-36 

68-86 

31-14 

1826 

73-75 

26-25 

71-50 

28-50 

1841 

72-24 

27-76 

71-95 

28-05 

1827 

73-51 

26-49 

71-08 

28-92 

1842 

73-21 

26-79 

72-94 

27-06 

1828 

76-74 

23-26 

76-74 

23-26 

1843 

73-14 

26-86 

73-06 

26-94 

1829 

75-46 

24-54 

73-85 

26-15 

1844 

72-23 

27-77 

72-73 

27-27 

1830 

74-18 

25-82 

73-48 

26-52 

1845 

71-30 

28-70 

70-22 

29-78 

1831 

73-02 

26-98 

71-97 

28-03 

1846 

70-39 

29-61 

69-57 

30-43 

1832 

77-35 

22-65 

77-39 

22-61 

1847 

68-68 

31 -.32 

67-35 

32-65 

1833 

74-13 

25-87 

74-73 

25-27 

184S 

68-43 

31-57 

69-66 

.30-34 

1834 

73-37 

26-63 

72-91 

27 -OJ 

184J 

70-58 

29-42 

67-55 

32-45 

Centesimal  Proportions  of  French  and  Foreign  Tonnage,  and  of  American  and  Foreign  Tonnage 
employed  in  the  Import  and  Export  Trades  of  France  and  America  respectively,  between 
1820  and  1848. 


Years. 


1820 
1821 
1822 
1823 
1824 
1825 
1826 
1827 
1828 
1829 
18.30 
1831 
18.32 
1833 
1834 
18.35 
1836 
1837 
1838 
1839 
1840 
1841 
1842 
1843 
1844 
1845 
1846 
1847 
1848 


Entered  Inwards.  CleaKd  Outwards. 


French. 


48-65 

46-28 

40-30 

35-13 

41-94 

44-29 

39-51 

42-61 

39-65 

36-26 

.33-70 

41-94 

35-88 

3G-51 

34-87 

34-75 

38-22 

26-86 

26-84 

28-63 

26-53 

35- 

31-94 

32-55 

34 -.59 

35-58 

35-32 

33-12 

46-51 


Foreign. 


French. 


35 


42-9'8 

45-06 

44-30 

35-86 

43-95 

46-94 

45-12 

44-04 

41 -.50 

42-96 

41-11 

47 -.33 

42-93 

40-73 

41-67 

44-39 

45-98 

26 -.35 

26-70 

28-32 

25-80 

35-87 

32-16 

32-62 

34- 

36-20 

35-28 

33-57 

46-20 


Foreign, 


57-02 

54-94 

55-70 

64-14 

56-05 

53-06 

54-88 

55-96 

58-50 

57-04 

58-89 

52-67 

57-07 

.59-27 

58-33 

55-61 

54-02 

73-65 

73-30 

71-68 

74-20 

64-13 

67-84 

67-38 

66- 

63-80 

64-72 

66-43 

53-80 


L'xrrED  States  of  AMhBic.A 


Entered  Inwards. 


American.'  Foreign 


90 

37 

88 

68 

86 

65 

89 

24 

91 

48 

89 

91 

86 

96 

85 

25 

87 

57 

87 

99 

76 

60 

70 

72 

69 

11 

65 

42 

67 

84 

64 

86 

62 

92 

68 

72 

70 

47 

68 

88 

68 

90 

67 

32 

72 

97 

68 

32 

69 

09 

69 

15 

63 

26 

63 

01 

9-63 
11-32 
13-35 
10-76 

8-52 
10-09 
13-04 
14-75 
12-43 
12-01 
23-40 
29-28 
-30-89 
34-  .58 
32-16 
35-14 
37-08 
31-28 
29-53 
31-12 
31-10 
32-68 
27-03 
31-68 
30-91 
30-85 
36-74 
36-99 


Cleared  Outwards. 


Americjin.l  Foreign, 


90-64 
89 -.30 
87-13 
89-96 
90-99 
90-55 
89-00 
85-59 
87-69 
87-92 
78-14 
71-55 
69-67 
66-25 
68-94 
65-92 
62-32 
70-40 
70-28 
69-80 
68-93 
67-69 
70-33 
67  -  57 
68-82 
69-64 
65-18 
63-67 


9 -.36 
10-70 
12-87 
10-04 
9-01 
9-45 
11-00 
14-41 
12-31 
12-08 
21-86 
28-45 
.30-33 
.33-75 
31-06 
34-08 
37-68 
29-60 
29-72 
30-20 
31-07 
32-31 
29-67 
32-43 
31-18 
30-36 
34-82 
36-33 


2  D  2 


404 


PROGRESS  OF  THE  NATION. 


It  will  be  here  seen,  that  in  the  case  of  each  of  these  countries,  the 
proportionate  quantity  of  foreign  to  national  tonnage  has  been  gi-eater 
in  the  last  than  it  was  hi  the  commencing  year  of  the  series.  It  must, 
on  the  other  hand,  be  observed,  that  although  the  proportions  have 
thus  been  more  or  less  altered  in  a  manner  which,  when  applied  to 
England,  our  shipowners  are  accustomed  to  consider  unfavourable, 
the  actual  amount  of  the  national  tonnage  has,  in  each  case,  been 
greatly  increased.  If  that  increase  has  not  been  equal  to  the  increased 
amount  of  the  commerce  of  the  countries,  does  this  fact  not  show  that 
the  additional  capital,  which  it  is  evident  must  have  been  embarked 
in  commercial  pursuits,  has,  for  the  most  part,  been  engaged  more 
profitably  for  the  merchants,  and  more  advantageously  for  the  country, 
in  the  prosecution  of  the  trade  itself,  than  it  would  have  been  by 
making  additions  to  the  number  of  the  mercantile  marine  ?  To  suppose 
otherwise,  would  be  to  imagine  that  the  merchants  prefer  the  least  profit- 
able channels  for  the  employment  of  their  capital,  which  appears  absurd. 

Our  information  concerning  the  shipping  employed  in  most  other 
countries  is  very  scanty.  The  following  figures,  which  comprise  all  that 
can  be  readily  adduced  upon  the  subject,  will  serve  to  show  that  the 
facts  connected  with  the  shipping  employed  even  in  those  countries  to 
which  our  shipowners  look  with  the  greatest  jealousy  and  apprehension, 
are  by  no  means  calculated  to  justify  those  feelings : — 


Entered 

Inwards. 

Cleared  Outwards. 

National  Flag. 

Foreign 

Flag. 

National 

Flag. 

Foreign  Flag. 

Country  or 
Port'. 

Year. 

■3  = 

«  = 

|| 

e-5 

to 

Actual 

s-S 

Actual 

J -2 

Actual 

Actual 

Tonnage. 

11 

Tonnage. 

11 

Tonnage. 

ll 

Tonnage. 

s& 

o£ 

oo- 

UPh 

Sweden     . 

1830 

162,954 

48-97 

169,810 

51-03 

174,910 

48-99 

182,083 

51-01 

1831 

165,835 

50-64 

161,622 

49-36 

171,163 

51-09 

163,830 

48-91 

1832 

170,224 

49-27 

175,279 

50-73 

176,345 

49-67 

178,617 

50-33 

1833 

174,713 

49-69 

176,888 

50-31 

180,083 

49-95 

180,436 

50-05 

1834 

175,193 

46-90 

198,346 

53-10 

174,094 

45-76 

206,282 

54-24 

Norway    . 

1829 

17,827 

4-08 

419,588 

95-92 

32,930 

7-20 

424,277 

92-80 

1830 

9,257 

2-13 

424,646 

97-87 

25,807 

5-51 

442,368 

94-49 

1831 

17,622 

3-94 

428,777 

96-06 

33,065 

7-45 

410,405 

92-55 

Dantzig    . 

1829 

77,393 

52-86 

69,009 

47-14 

80,799 

53-95 

68,950 

46-05 

1830 

92,968 

55-45 

74,679 

44-55 

90,672 

54-88 

74,521 

45-12 

1831 

61,555 

61-69 

38,224 

38-31 

.58,900 

60-68 

38,165 

39-32 

ISS.") 

61,237 

64-77 

33,297 

35-23 

61,986 

65-19 

33,093 

34-81 

Russia  .    . 

1826 

84.886 

13-98 

.522,190 

86-02 

1827 

no;  9.58 

11-68 

838,390 

88-32 

1828 

59,412 

9-67 

554,696 

90-33 

1829 

62,. 528 

8-55 

669,470 

91-45 

1830 

124.110 

12-97 

832,626 

87-03 

1831 

120;.544 

13-51 

771,318 

86-49 

1832 

141,166 

15-51 

768,430 

84-49 

, 

1833 

135.696 

18-68 

590,612 

81-32 

1834 

120,5.54 

17-64 

562,846 

82-36 

1835 

142,634 

21-92 

507,860 

78-08 

'* 

^•] 


TRADE  IN  FOREKJN  COUNTRIES. 


40.5 


The  following  table,  compiled  from  the  returns  made  every  year  to 
Congress  by  the  executive  government,  shows  the  progress  of  the  trade 
of  the  United  States  during  the  present  century  : — 

Statement  of  tlie  estimated  Value  of  Foreign  Merchandise  Imported  into  tlie  United  States  of 
America,  and  of  American  and  Foreign  3Ierciiandise  Exported  from  those  Slates,  in  each  Year 
during  the  present  Century,  converting  Dollars  into  English  money  at  the  rate  of  Fifty  Fence  to 
the  Dollar. 


Y  ears 

ending 

30th  of 

September. 


1801 
1802 
1803 
1804 
1805 
1806 
1807 
1808 
1809 
1810 
1811 
1812 
1813 
1814 
1815 
181G 
1817 
1818 
181'J 
1820 
1821 
1822 
1823 
1824 
1825 
1826 
1827 
1828 
1829 
1830 
1831 
1832 
1833 
1834 
1835 
1836 
1837 
1838 
1839 
1840 
1841 
1842 
1843 
1844 
1845 
1846 
1847 
1848 


IMPORTS. 


£. 
200,731 
902,777 
462,313 
708,333 
125,000 
978,416 
869,765 
872,916 
375,000 
791,666 
125,000 
047,916 
584,375 
701,041 
308,349 
354,729 
574,661 
364,583 
155,552 
510,416 
038,592 
341,988 
162,347 
781,043 
070,849 
703,016 
559,180 
439,546 
519,276 
766.025 
498^140 
047,764 
524,648 
358,610 
228,279 
579,174 
372,7.53 
689,042 
769,202 
321,149 
655,453 
867,101 
596,020 
590,632 
428,034 
3.52,4.58 
530,341 
291,443 


E.\.POKrs. 


Produce,  &c., 

of 
United  States. 


£. 

9,890,2.50 

7,647,539 

8,792,908 

8,639,057 

8,830,625 

8,594,-526 

10,145,747 

1,965,322 

6,. 542, 8.54 

8,826,390 

9,4.36,258 

6,256,689 

5,220,031 

1,412,973 

9,578,000 

13,496,228 

14,231,979 

15,. 386,341 

10,620,174 

10,767,425 

9,098,310 

1(),3;)0,4.33 

9,824,042 

10,551,979 

13,946,822 

11,053,273 

12,275,352 

10,556,181 

11,604,206 

12.387,923 

12,766,052 

13,153,639 

14,649,519 

16,880,033 

21,081,052 

22,274,.3U8 

19,909,2.52 

20,007,046 

21,569,560 

23,728,257 

22,163,066 

19,-368,750 

16,207,038 

20,773,995 

20,687,453 

21.279,561 

31,332,805 

27,688,358 


Produce  of 

Foreign 
Countries. 


£. 
9,717,233 
7,'453,119 
2,832,098 
7,548,248 
11,078,964 
12,559,006 
12,425,741 
2,707,794 
4,.332,818 
5,081,519 
3,338,081 
1,769,817 
593,301 
30,243 
1,381,531 
3,570,532 
4,032,931 
4,047,227 
3,992,840 
3,768,339 
4,446,351 
4,642,957 
5,738,2.54 
5,278,575 
6,789,717 
5,112,419 
4,875,653 
4,498,953 
3,470,515 
2,997,391 
4,173,651 
5,008,223 
4,129,736 
4,856,835 
4,271,770 
4,530,491 
4,553,116 
2,594,331 
3,644,692 
3,789,648 
3,222,725 
2,441,986 
1,365,145 
2.392,680 
3;i97,256 
2,363,7.55 
1,668,941 
4,402,565 


Total  Exports. 


£. 
607,483 
100,658 
625,006 
187,305 
909,589 
153,552 
571,488 
673,116 
875,672 
907,909 
774,339 
026,506 
813,322 
443,216 
959,. 531 
066.760 
264,910 
433,568 
613,014 
535,764 
544,661 
033,. 390 
.562,296 
830,554 
736,539 
165,692 
151,005 
055,134 
074,721 
385,314 
939,703 
161,862 
779,255 
736,868 
352,822 
804,799 
462,368 
601,377 
214,252 
517,905 
385,791 
810,736 
572,183 
166,675 
884,709 
643,316 
051,746 
030,923 


The  great  difference  observable  between  the  value  of  the  imports  and 
that  of  the  exports  during  the  greater  part  of  the  years,  cannot  fail  to 
strike  tlie  least  careful  examiner.     This  arises,  in  some  part,  from  the 


-iOe  PROGRESS  OF  THE  NATION.  [sec.  nt. 

system  adopted  at  the  Custom-houses  of  tlic  United  States,  of  valuing 
merchandise,  both  imported  and  exported,  according  to  its  actual  worth 
at  the  time  in  the  place  where  it  is  landed  or  shipped.  It  must  be 
obvious,  that  uuder  this  plan,  the  value  of  imports  must  be  greater  than 
that  of  the  exports,  not  only  by  the  amount  of  the  merchant's  profit,  but 
also  by  the  freight  of  such  part  at  least  as  is  conveyed  in  ships  of  the 
United  States.  But  besides  this,  it  is  well  known  that  there  is  a  ten- 
dency for  foreign  capital  to  find  its  way  for  investment  to  the  United 
States,  wliere  it  yields  a  higher  rate  of  interest  than  can  be  realized  in 
Europe ;  and  provided  such  operations  are  confined  within  moderate 
limits,  and  restricted  to  objects  of  a  safe  and  profitable  nature,  they 
may  be  advantiigeous  alike  to  both  countries.  It  may  well  be  doubted, 
however,  whether  the  transactions  of  some  of  the  years  recorded  in  the 
tables  have  been  confined  within  the  wholesome  limits  here  pointed  out, 
and  whether  the  balance  of  imports  over  exports  has  not  been  sometimes 
applied  to  objects  of  a  merely  speculative  character.  That  excess  ap- 
peal's to  have  amounted  in  the  three  years  1834,  5,  and  6,  to  23,271,570/., 
or,  on  the  average  7,757,190Z.  per  annum.  The  trade  with  this  kingdom 
alone  in  those  three  years  exhibits  an  excess  of  imports  over  exports, 
to  the  amount  of  6,847,940/.,  or,  on  the  average,  2,282,646/.  per  annum  ; 
which,  as  it  amounts  to  20  per  cent,  upon  the  exports,  is  evidently 
gi'eater  than  can  be  accounted  for  by  the  freight  and  profit  together. 


CHAP.  xi.J  PRUSSIAN  COilMEKCIAL  LEAGUE.  107 


CHAPTER  XI. 


PRUSSIAN  COMMERCIAL  LEAGUE. 


Declared  Object  of  the  League— States  of  which  it  is  composed— Motives  which  have  led 
to  its  adoption— Previous  Negotiations— Jealousy  of  English  Merchants  and  Manufac- 
turers—Effect of  the  League  on  the  Manufacturers  of  Saxony. 

There  is,  perhaps,  no  measure  connected  with  our  external  commerce 
that  has  occasioned  so  much  discussion  in  the  present  day  as  the  Prusso- 
Bavarian  League,  which,  under  the  name  of  the  Zoll  Verein,  has  united 
for  the  purposes  of  trade  many  of  the  otherwise  independent  states 
of  Germany.  The  arrangements  for  perfecting  this  Union  were  in 
progress  during  many  years,  and  it  came  into  practical  operation  at 
the  beginning  of  183jL  Previous  to  that  time,  the  states  of  which  the 
Union  is  composed  did  not  allow  of  the  introduction  of  merchandise 
across  their  respective  frontiers  without  the  payment  of  a  duty ;  and  in 
some  cases,  where  domestic  industry  was  to  be  "  protected,"  the  import- 
ation of  many  articles  was  prohibited.  The  principle  of  the  Commercial 
League  is  to  destroy  all  the  frontier  custom-houses  between  the  leagued 
states ;  to  allow  of  the  freest  intercourse  between  the  subjects  of  all 
the  different  states  composing  the  union  ;  and  thus  to  give  to  the 
inhabitants  of  each  the  fullest  advantage  to  be  derived  from  a  com- 
munity of  interest,  and  from  extending,  in  a  most  important  degree,  their 
market*  for  supply,  and  the  field  for  the  exercise  of  their  industry. 
Duties  on  the  introduction  of  merchandise  from  countries  not  comprised 
within  the  Union  have,  since  the  1st  of  January,  1834,  been  collected 
at  one  uniform  rate  at  custom-houses  established  on  the  exterior  boun- 
daries of  the  frontier  states ;  and  a  principle  for  dividing  the  amount 
of  the  duties  thus  collected  has  been  adopted  between  the  governments, 
without  any  consideration  as  to  which  is  the  country  for  whose  imme- 
diate use  the  importations  are  intended,  or  to  any  circumstance  other 
than  the  proportionate  amount  of  population. 

The  following  table  exhibits  the  names  of  the  different  States  com- 
posing the  league,  the  area  of  each,  the  number  of  its  inhabitants,  and 
the  proportionate  amount  which  each  is  entitled  to  receive  out  of  the 
entire  collections  made  in  the  custom-houses  of  the  frontier  states : — 


408 


TKOGRESS  OF  THE  NATION. 


[sec.  hi. 


Area 

in 

ST.^TES  OF  German 

THE  CONFEDERATION.  Geographical 

Square 

Miles. 


Prussia    and    its    De-) 
pendencies     .     .     .J 

Bavaria 

Saxony    

'W'urtcmburg  . 
Electorate  of  Hesse  . 
Grand  Duchy  of  Hesse 
Thuringia  .... 
Grand  Duchy  of  Baden 
Duchy  of  Isassau  .     . 


8,248-38 
Free  City  of  Frankfort  4-33 


5,157-21 

1,477-26 
271-68 
385-15 
182-10 
179-25 
233-49 
279-54 
82-70 


Area       I 
in  English  ' 
Square 
Miles. 


Number 

of 

Inhabitants. 


109. 
31, 


126  13,800,126 

259  !  4,252,813 

1,595,668 

1,631,779 

700,327 


,749 
150 
,853 
793 
940 
915 
,750 


174,535 
92 


8,252-71 


174,627 


769,691 
908,478 
,232,185 
373,601 


25,264,668 
60,000 


25,324,668 


Deductions 
for 
Military 
and  Inde- 
pendent 
Districts. 


109,473 
1,695 

59,653 


170,821 


170,821 


Number 

of  Inhal>itants 

by  which  the 

Distribution 

of  Revenue  is 

regulated. 


13,690,653 

4,251,118 

1,. 595. 668 

1,631,779 

640.674 

769; 691 

908,478 

1,2.32,185 

373,601 


25,093,847 
60,000 


25,153,847 


Per 
'  Centa{,'e 
Proportions 

of 
tlie  Joint 
Revenue. 


54-56 

16-94 
6-36 
6 -.50 
2-55 
3-07 
3-62 
4-91 
1-49 


10(J-00 


100-00 


The  districts  coiniii'ehendcd  in  the  above  abstract,  under  the  title  of 
Thuringia,  comprise  : — • 

Square. 
German  Miles. 

Sa.xe  Meiningen 41-72 

„     Altenburg 23-41 

„     CoburgGotha 37-60 

Swarzburg  Sonderehausen  (Upper  Lordship) 16-90 

„  Eudolstadt  (Upper Lordship) 19-10 

Principality  of  Reuss  .     .     . 27-94 

"W'eimar  Eisenach 66-82 

Districts  belonging  to  Prussia  (included  in  the  area  of  that ) 

country) ; j 

Districts  belonging  to  the  Electorate  of  Hesse 

District  of  Kaulsdorf^  belonging  to  Bavaria 

233-49 


Population. 

146,324 

117,921 

129,740 

23,750 

50,332 

99,626 

226,664 

88,534 

25,153 
434 


908,478 


On  the  supposition  that  the  real  and  single  object  of  this  peaceful 
confederation  is  that  which  its  promoters  have  put  forth  to  the  world, 
viz.,  to  simplify  the  fiscal  arrangements  of  the  countries  by  which  it  is 
adopted — there  can  hardly  be  formed  two  opinions  in  regard  either  to 
its  wisdom  or  to  the  benign  influence  which  it  is  calculated  to  have  upon 
the  minds  and  feelings  of  those  who  are  brought  within  its  operation. 
It  seems,  however,  to  be  very  generally  believed  and  understood  that 
the  object  thus  avowed  is  not,  so  far  at  least  as  the  chief  mover  in  the 
plan  is  concerned,  the  only  or  the  chief  motive  which  has  led  to  its 
adoption,  but  that  political  views,  extending  beyond  the  interests  of  the 
present  day,  and  tending  to  the  aggrandizement  of  Prussia,  have  been 
the  real  incentives  to  the  scheme.     This  belief  is  greatly  confirmed 

*  The  per  centage  proportions  for  the  division  of  the  revenue  were  fi.xed  before  the  city 
of  Frankfort  joined  the  league.  The  same  proportions  are  still  preserved,  but  Frankfort's 
share,  calculated  upon  the  same  principle,  is  deducted  previous  to  the  apportionment  be- 
tween the  other  states  of  the  Union. 


CHAP.  XI.]  mUSSIAN  COMMERCIAL  LEAGUE.  409 

by  the  facts,  that,  for  a  time  at  least,  the  revenue  which  Prussia  draws 
as  her  share  of  the  duties  on  importation  would  not  be  of  as  great 
amount  as  her  previous  receipts  from  the  same  source ;  and  that  the 
unlimited  competition  which  is  now  afforded  to  the  manufacturers  of 
Saxony  must  act  injuriously  upon  various  branches  of  industry  within 
the  Prussian  states,  which  it  had  previously  been  the  policy  of  that 
government  to  encourage  and  protect.  The  obvious  conclusion  to  be 
drawn  from  these  circumstances  is,  that  Prussia,  in  consenting  to  give 
up  a  considerable  part  of  her  revenue,  and  to  forego  the  full  advantages 
of  branches  of  domestic  industry  to  which  she  had  previously  looked  as 
an  element  of  strength,  has  the  certainty  of  future  indemnification  to  an 
extent  beyond  the  amount  of  her  present  sacrifices ;  and  this  indemni- 
fication can  only  be  found  in  the  extension  of  her  poHtical  influence. 

It  may  be  asked  why,  if  this  result  be  so  certain  and  so  obvious,  the 
other  stiites  of  which  the  Union  is  formed  have  been  drawn  in  to  consent 
to  a  scheme,  which,  although  it  brings  tome  present  profit,  will,  in  the 
end,  be  productive  of  loss  to  them  in  the  same  proportion  which  Prussia 
will  then  realize  of  gain  ?  It  is  not  possible  to  go  into  an  examination 
of  tlie  motives  by  which  each  of  the  states  has  individually  been  swaved 
to  the  course  it  has  adopted,  but  there  are  two  incentives  common  to 
the  whole,  which  have,  probably,  more  than  all  others,  influenced  their 
determination.  "\Mth  the  exception  of  Prussia,  all  the  members  of  the 
league  would  immediately  enlarge  the  sphere  of  their  commercial  deal- 
ings in  different  proportions,  varying  from  sixfold  in  the  case  of  Ba- 
varia to  almost  seventyfold  in  the  case  of  Nassau,  and  more  than  four- 
hundredfold  in  that  of  the  city  of  Frankfort.  The  degree  of  activity 
which  this  would  give  to  the  population  in  all  their  various  relations, 
must  needs  occasion  an  accession  of  commercial  prosperity  which  would 
ensure  the  popular  favour  to  the  alteration.  This  is  one  of  the  incen- 
tives, and  perhaps  the  most  powerful  of  the  two.  Then  the  increase  of 
revenue  by  which  it  would  be  attended,  and  still  more  the  mode  of  the 
collection  of  that  revenue,  would  render  the  executive  governments  in 
so  far  independent  of  their  "  states"  or  legislative  chambers,  and  could 
not  fail  to  recommend  the  system  to  the  rulers  at  a  time  when  the 
temper  of  the  mass  rendered  the  absence  of  collision  upon  such  a  subject 
peculiarly  desirable.  We  may  add  to  these  reasons,  the  effect  that  had 
been  produced  upon  the  public  mind  throughout  the  smaller  states 
by  popular  writers,  wdio,  in  pointing  out  the  unity  which  the  league 
was  to  impart  to  Germany,  had  flattered  the  pride  of  the  people  by 
their  descriptions  of  the  power  and  influence  which  would  thence  be 
given  to  them  among  the  nations  of  Europe. 

It  has  been  mentioned,  that  the  arrangements  for  establishing  the 
ZoU  Verein  were  in  progress  during  several  years.  Conferences  upon 
this  subject  were    held  in  Darmstadt  as   early  as  1820,   between  the 


410  PKOGRESS  OF  THE  XATIOX.  [sec. 


III. 


agents  of  Bavai-ia,  Wurtembuvg,  Baden,  Nassau,  feaxony,  and  some 
other  less  important  states  ;  and  these  conferences  were  renewed  from 
time  to  time,  but  were  finally  broken  off  in  April,  1823.  Four  years 
afterwards,  a  treaty  was  concluded  between  AVurtemburg  and  Bavaria, 
the  same  in  principle  as  that  subsequently  formed  between  Prussia  and 
the  States,  which  comprise  the  existing  Union.  Next  followed  the  treaty 
of  Prussia  with  Hesse,  in  February,  1828  ;  and  in  the  following  Sep- 
tember, while  the  former  country  was  endeavouring  to  make  terms  with 
Wurtemburg  and  Bavaria,  and  to  induce  them  to  adopt  her  tariff — 
points  in  which  she  succeeded — a  third  association,  mnder  the  name  of 
the  Mittel  Verein,  or  middle  association,  was  formed  at  Cassel  between 
Saxony,  Hanover,  Hesse  Cassel,  Brunswick,  Hamburg,  "Weimar,  the 
towns  of  Frankfort  and  Bremen,  and  some  of  the  minor  German  states. 
The  first  and  leading  conditions  of  this  association  will  serve  to  mark  the 
feeling  of  jealousy  with  which  the  designs  of  the  parties  to  the  other  two 
leagues  were  viewed.  It  provided  that,  during  six  years,  none  of  the 
contracting  parties  should  relinquish  their  commercial  alliance,  nor  treat 
with  either  the  Bavarian  or  the  Prussian  league.  Prussia  soon  found 
means,  however,  to  detach  some  of  its  members  from  the  Mittel  Yerein, 
and  although  the  remaining  members  entered  into  a  new  treaty  in  1829, 
by  which  they  bound  themselves  to  continue  in  alliance  until  1840, 
some  of  its  more  important  branches  fell  off  from  it,  and  the  Mittel 
Verein  was  dissolved.  The  negotiations  by  which  these  results  were 
produced  occupied  some  years  in  their  discussion ;  and  it  was  not  until 
the  1st  of  January,  1834,  as  already  stated,  that  the  Zoll  Verein  took 
the  consistent  form  which  it  has  since  maintained. 

Many  of  the  independent  states  in  the  north  of  Germany  have 
hitherto  withstood  the  temptation  offered  by  Prussia  to  bring  them 
within  the  league  :  among  these  are  Hanover,  Brunswick^  Mecklenburg- 
Schwerin,  Oldenburg,  and  the  free  towns  of  Hamburg  and  Bremen. 

The  tariff  of  Prussia  was  more  unfavourable  to  the  admission  of 
English  goods  than  that  of  the  other  states  vdth  whom  she  has  made  this 
league ;  for  which  reason  its  progress  was  watched  with  considerable 
jealousy  by  the  merchants  and  manufacturers  of  this  country,  who  feared, 
with  great  apparent  reason,  that  their  trade  would  suffer  in  every  case 
where  additional  rates  of  duty  were  imposed.  From  the  manner  in 
which  the  trade  accounts  are  kept  at  our  custom-houses,  it  is  not 
possible  to  enter  upon  any  minute  examination  of  this  question,  because 
they  afford  us  no  means  for  separating  the  trade  carried  on  with  the 
countries  that  form  the  league  from  that  maintained  with  other  parts  of 
Germany.  If  we  include,  as  we  therefore  must  do,  the  shipments  of 
British  produce  and  manufactures  made  to  all  Germany,  in  each  of  the 
twenty-three  years  from  1827  to  1849,  it  will  be  seen  that  their  average 
annual  value  has  been  5,475,020/.  while  their  average  annual   value 


PRUSSIAN  COMMERCIAL  LEAGUE. 


Ill 


in  the  seven  years  that  preceded  the  commencement  of  the  league  on 
the  1st  January,  1834,  was  only  4,624,192/. 


Years. 

£. 

Years. 

£. 

Years. 

£. 

1827 

4,828,956 

18.35 

4,791,2.39 

1843 

6,651,042 

1828 

4, 573, 249 

1836 

4,624,451 

1844 

6,6.56,912 

1820 

4,662,566 

1837 

5,029,552 

1845 

7,095,795 

1S.W 

4,641,528 

1838 

5,144,123 

1846 

7,150,466 

18.11 

3,835,763 

1839 

5,-322,021 

1847 

6,8.39,935 

1832 

5,327,553 

1840 

5,627,844 

1848 

5,263,588 

18a3 

4,499,727 

1841 

6,017,854 

1849 

6,078,355 

1834 

4,683,589 

1842 

6,579,-351 

These  figures  do  not  afford  any  ground  for  complaint  on  the  part 
of  this  country,  and  it  is  probable  that  the  full  effects  of  the  Union 
in  discouraging  the  importation  of  foreign  manufactured  goods,  if  any 
such  effect  were  to  be  apprehended,  must  by  this  time  have  been 
experienced. 

The  cotton  manufacture  of  Saxony  has  already  become  of  twice  the 
extent  that  it  had  reached  before  the  Union,  while  the  linen  and 
woollen  manufactures  of  that  country  have  not  experienced  any  in- 
crease. The  reason  for  this  difference  is,  that  the  persons  engaged  in 
the  latter,  which  are  more  ancient  branches  of  industry  in  Saxony,  are 
so  far  "  protected,"  that  it  is  necessary  to  serve  a  regular  apprentice- 
ship, and  to  obtain  admission  into  the  guilds  or  corporations  established 
in  the  manufacturing  towns,  before  any  man  is  allowed  to  carry  on  the 
business ;  while  the  recently -established  cotton  manufacture  is  without 
restriction  or  regulation  of  any  kind,  so  that  any  person  who  can  pur- 
chiise  or  hire  a  loom  is  at  liberty  to  become  a  cotton  weaver. 

The  manufactures  are  encouraged  by  the  miserably  low  rate  of  wages 
in  Saxony.  It  is  stated  on  the  best  authority,  that  in  October,  1837, 
"  a  man  employed  in  his  loom,  working  very  diligently  from  Monday 
morning  until  Saturday  night,  from  five  o'clock  in  the  morning  until 
dusk,  and  even  at  times  with  a  lamp,  his  wife  assisting  him  in  finishino" 
and  taking  home  the  work,  could  not  possibly  earn  more  than  20  groschen 
(2s.  <dd.  sterling)  per  week,  and  that  another  man,  who  had  three  chil- 
dren aged  12  years  and  upwards,  all  working  at  the  loom  as  well  as 
himself,  with  his  wife  employed  doing  up  the  work,  could  not  earn  in  the 
whole  more  than  one  dollar  eight  groschen  (5^.  Ad.)  weekly." 

The  wretched  manner  in  which  the  poorer  classes  in  that  country 
sub.sist  may  be  inferred  from  the  fact  exhibited  by  official  statistical  re- 
turns, that  the  annual  consumption  of  meat  in  the  principal  manufactur- 
ing districts,  including  the  town  of  Chemnitz,  does  not  average  more 
than  twenty-eight  pounds  for  each  individual  of  the  population,  and  that 
at  least  one-half  of  this  quantity  consists  of  pork.  If  tliis  provision  were 
equally  divided  among  the  entire  number  of  inhabitants,  it  would 
amount  to  scarcely  more  than  half  a  pound  weekly  for  each  individual  ; 
but  as  the  actual  distribution  is  of  course  very  difierent  from  this,  it  is 


412  PROGRESS  OF  THE  NATION.  [sec.  in. 

probable  there  are  many  among  the  labouring  artisans  who  rarely,  if 
ever,  taste  animal  food.  The  quantity  of  cotton  hosiery  made  in  Saxony 
has  increased  greatly  of  late  years,  and  from  its  cheapness  has  not  only 
secured  the  monopoly  of  the  markets  afforded  throughout  the  Union, 
but  has  also  been  shipped  largely  to  the  United  States,  to  the  exclusion 
so  far  of  the  goods  made  at  Nottingham.  It  may  be  stated,  on  the 
respectable  authority  already  quoted,  that  cotton  gloves  are  furnished 
by  the  Saxon  manufticturers  as  low  as  six  groschen  or  i)(L  sterling  per 
dozen  pairs ;  stockings,  at  one  dollar  or  3*'.  per  dozen  pairs  ;  and  night- 
caps, at  eight  groschen  or  Is.  per  dozen.  Stout  cotton  caps,  which  are 
worn  by  the  carmen  and  common  people  in  that  part  of  Germany, 
having  stripes  in  six  different  colours  upon  a  black  ground,  cost  12 
groschen  per  dozen,  or  Ihd.  sterling  each. 

These  low  prices  are  not  the  result  of  the  same  cause  which  has 
gradually  reduced  the  cost  of  production  in  this  country.  Hitherto  the 
machinery  used  in  Saxony  has  been  of  the  commonest  sort,  so  that  the 
cheapness  of  the  manufactured  goods  has  been  owing  to  the  low  rate  of 
wages,  a  rate  which  compels  the  artisans  to  labour  long  and  diligently 
in  order  to  ensure  for  their  families  the  scantiest  supply  of  the  most 
common  of  the  necessaries  of  life.  The  capital  of  the  English  manufac- 
turer, which  empowers  him  to  employ  the  most  perfect  machinery,  joined 
to  his  greater  experience,  have  hitherto  enabled  him  to  compete  suc- 
cessfully in  most  branches  of  skilled  labour ;  but  these  are  advantages 
which  cannot  be  long  retained  in  competition  with  greatly  reduced 
wages.  The  profits  whicl;  the  Saxon  manufacturers  are  thence  enabled 
to  realize,  will  probably  lead  to  the  introduction  of  improvements  that 
will  place  our  dearer  processes  at  a  still  greater  disadvantage  ;  and  as 
it  is  anything  but  desirable  that  we  should  retain  our  present  relative 
position  through  the  increasing  hardships  of  our  operative  weavers,  there 
remained  but  one  course  open  to  us  in  order  to  avert  the  evil — that 
of  still  further  liberalizing  our  commercial  system,  and  especially  of 
lessening  the  cost  of  the  prime  necessaries  of  life,  by  abolishing  all 
restrictions  upon  the  importation  of  food. 

The  want  of  capital,  which  has  hitherto  been  the  chief  obstacle  to  the 
still  greater  extension  of  the  cotton  manufacture  in  Saxony,  would  in 
time  be  remedied  by  the  successful  operation  of  the  existing  establish- 
ments ;  but  the  manufacturers  in  that  country,  unwilling  to  wait-for  so 
gradual  a  development  of  their  resources,  _have  had  recourse  to  the 
expedient  of  establishing  joint-stock  companies.  The  total  capital  of 
associations  of  this  character  that  have  been  formed,  and  which  have 
proceeded  to  the  accomplishment  of  their  various  objects,  amounted  in 
October,  1837,  to  nearly  thirteen  millions  of  dollars^  about  two  millions 
sterling,  a  large  sum  for  that  country,  and  the  greater  part  of  which  is 
furnished  by  the  bankers  and  other  capitalists  of  Leipzig. 


CHAP,  xii.]  CURRENCY.  413 


CHAPTER  XII. 

CURRENCY. 

Bullion  Committee  of  1810 — Reasons  suggested  for  Disagreement  on  the  subject  of  Cur- 
rency between  the  "Economists"  and  the  "Practical  Men" — High  Prices  of  Gold 
ISOD-lSl") — Issues  of  Paper  Money  to  facilitate  Financial  Operations  of  Government^ 
Peel's  Act — Panic  of  1823— Formation  of  branches  by  Bank  of  England — Establishment 
of  Joint  Stock  Banks — Number  established,  1826-1836 — Advantages  of  having  only  one 
Bank  of  Issue — National  Bank — Influence  of  Currency  on  Prices — Plan  for  Estimating 
Rise  and  Fall  of  Prices — Effects  of  abundant  or  deficient  Harvests  upon  Currency  and 
Prices — Table  of  Notes  in  Circulation,  of  Bullion  held  by  the  Bank,  of  Exchanges  with 
Hamburg  and  Paris,  and  of  Comparative  Prices  of  Wlieat  and  Merchandise  generally,  in 
each  Month,  1833-1837. 

No  subject  of  public  and  general  interest  has,  during  the  last  thirty 
years,  been  more  frequently  or  earnestly  debated  and  examined  in  this 
country,  than  that  which  relates  to  our  system,  or  rather  our  practice — 
for  it  can  hardly  be  said  that  we  have  pursued  any  steady  system — as 
regards  currency  and  the  operations  of  banking.  Since  the  appoint- 
ment, in  1810,  of  the  Committee  of  the  House  of  Commons,  which  has 
been  so  celebrated  as  Tlie  Bidliou  Committee,  this  subject  has  repeatedly 
forced  itself  upon  the  attention  of  the  mercantile  part  of  the  })ublic  and 
of  the  Government,  and  at  each  recurring  'period  when  the  distress 
attendant  upon  the  derangement  of  money  operations  has  been  expe- 
rienced, the  whole  subject  has  been  submitted  to  so  much  examination, 
and  has  occasioned  such  keen  controversy  between  public  economists 
on  the  one  hand,  and  what  are  called  practical  men  on  the  other  hand, 
that  it  is  surprising  we  have  not  long  since  arrived  at  conclusions 
respecting  it  which  can  be  recognised  as  correct  by  all  parties,  and 
which  would  lead  to  the  adoption  of  principles  and  practice  by  means  of 
which  the  ruinous  alternations  now  constantly  recurring  would  be  ren- 
dered impossible.  The  subject  is  certainly  involved  in  difficulty,  but 
not,  assuredly,  to  such  a  degree  as  should  render  its  solution  impossible. 
Why  then,  it  will  be  asked,  is  the  public  to  this  moment  in  so  much 
doubt  and  perplexity  concerning  it,  and  why  are  our  commercial  men 
so  ill-informed  upon  the  subject  as  to  be  continually  liable  to  mistake 
appearances  which,  if  understood  aright,  should  guide  them  as  to  the 
propriety  of  extending  or  contracting  their  undertakings  ?     "Where  so 


414  PROGRESS  OF  THE  NATION.  [sec.  iti. 

iiiHii}'  and  such  high  authorities  are  found  to  disagree,  it  might  perhaps 
be  considered  bold  to  offer  an  opinion  as  to  which  of  the  parties  in  the 
controversy  is  right.  It  may  be  thought  still  more  presuni})tuous  to 
hazard  the  suggestiou  that  both  may  be  in  some  degree  wrong,  and  to 
remark  that  our  "  practical  men "  have  erred  because  they  reasoned 
from  partial  and  insutficient  promises,  and  sought  for  the  solution  of  a 
general  question  in  the  particidar  circumstances  that  passed  under  their 
own  limited  observation ;  while  the  theorists,  or,  as  it  has  become  the 
fashion  to  call  them,  the  "  bullionists,"  have  erred  because  they  have 
made  little  or  no  allowance  for  disturbing  influences,  the  operation  of 
which  has  been  palpable  to  every  man  actually  engaged  in  commercial 
pursuits.  By  this  means  the  "  practical  men  "  have  been  confirmed  in 
their  total  disbelief  of  the  doctrines  put  forth  by  the  "  bullionists,"  and 
these,  on  the  other  hand,  seeing  that  what  they  hold  to  be  the  most 
incontrovertible  truths  are  set  at  nought  by  their  opponents,  may  liave 
been  rendered  unwilling  to  enter  anew  upon  their  inquiries,  with  the 
view  of  determining  the  modes  and  degree  in  which  their  abstract 
principles  are  liable  to  disturbance  through  the  circumstances  insisted 
on — perhaps  too  urgently — by  their  opponents.  It  would  be  out  of 
place  in  this  work,  if  even  the  author  were  competent  to  the  task,  to 
attempt  to  settle  this  much-controverted  question :  the  foregoing  re- 
marks seem  necessary,  however,  in  order  to  account  in  some  degree  for 
the  fact,  that  on  a  point  which  involves  such  important  consequences, 
and  where,  for  want  of  its  being  settled,  commercial  ccmimunities  have 
been  periodically  visited  with  wide-spreading  ruin,  so  little  advance  has 
hitherto  been  made  towards  reducing  the  subject  of  currency  to  scientific 
rules  and  principles.  On  each  occasion,  when  the  money-market  has 
been  subjected  to  one  of  these  paroxysms,  clever  men  have  put  them- 
selves forward  to  explain  the  causes,  and  to  point  out  how  the  evil  may 
in  future  be  avoided  ;  and  to  those  who  will  be  at  the  pains  to  examine 
the  arguments  and  assertions  used  on  both  sides  of  the  controversy,  it 
must  be  curious  to  observe  how  complete  an  identity  of  opinion  and 
almost  of  expression  there  is  between  the  writers  who  have  advocated 
the  same  side  of  the  question  at  different  periods,  so  that  the  pamphlets 
put  forth  in  1811  or  in  1826  would  be  found  to  embody  all  the  principal 
arguments,  and  to  have  reference  to  the  same  set  of  circumstances,  as 
formed  the  staple  of  the  pamphlets  written  in  1837.  This  affords,  at 
least,  prima  facie  evidence  that  the  subject  has  been  exhausted  as  far 
as  reasoning  is  applicable,  and  that  our  want  of  agreement  in  regard  to 
it  may  be  the  effect  of  prejudice,  which  withholds  either  party  from 
giving  due  weight  to  the  facts  and  arguments  adduced  by  its  opponents. 
The  measure  adopted  in  1797  of  restricting  thx?  Bank  of  England 
from  paying  its  notes  in  specie,  while  it  continued  in  oj)eration,  placed 
the  currency  of  this  country  under  circumstances  wholly  dissimilar  to 


CKAi.  xn.]  CURRENCY.  415 

those  that  have  attended  it  either  before  or  since.  The  peculiar  opera- 
tion of  these  circumstances  was  besides  consideral)ly  exaggerated  by 
the  events  of  the  war,  and  by  the  peculiar  character  given  to  that  war 
during  the  seven  years  that  preceded  the  peace  of  Paris.  For  these 
reasons,  it  is  difficult  to  make  the  condition  of  the  currency,  as  marked 
by  the  price  of  gold  and  the  rate  of  the  foreign  exchanges  at  that  time, 
the  sole  test  of  the  soundness  of  the  practice  pursued  by  those  who 
managed  and  controlled  the  issue  of  cur  paper  currency.  During  the 
greater  part  of  the  period  alluded  to,  more  obstacles  were  opposed  to  the 
prosecution  of  our  foreign  trade  than  were  ever  at  any  other  time  put  in 
action.  Our  goods  were  excluded  from  almost  every  port  on  the  continent 
of  Europe,  and  the  difficulties  that  attended  the  importation  of  goods 
abroad  were  such  as  materially  to  enhance  the  cost  of  nearly  every 
article  brought  here  for  consumption.  At  the  same  time,  our  demand  for 
some  kinds  of  foreign  productions  was  increased  by  the  purchases  of  war- 
like stores  on  the  part  of  Government,  and  which  purchases  were  neces- 
sarily made  without  reference  to  their  prices.  As  an  instance  of  this, 
hemp  may  be  mentioned.  In  1793,  just  before  the  breaking  out  of  the 
war,  the  price  had  been  221  per  ton  ;  it  advanced  progi-essively  between 
that  time  and  the  peace  of  Amiens  to  86/.  per  ton,  but  in  1802  fell  to 
32/.  per  ton.  On  the  renewal  of  hostilities  the  price  again  advanced, 
and  in  1808  and  1809  reached  118/.  per  ton.  In  1815,  after  the  second 
overthrow  of  Napoleon,  the  price  fell  to  34/.,  and  it  has  since  gone  con- 
siderably below  that  rate.  On  the  other  hand,  all  those  descriptions  of 
goods  which  were  produced  by  us,  or  which  necessarily  came  here  from 
our  colonies  or  elsewhere,  in  quantities  beyond  our  own  wants,  were 
greatly  depressed  in  price.  At  the  same  time,  the  prices  on  the  Con- 
tinent of  the  goods  so  abundant,  and  so  depressed  in  our  markets,  were 
exorbitantly  high.  Gold  and  silver  were  the  only  articles  of  merchan- 
dise which  could  be  safely  taken  in  exchange  for  the  goods  of  which  we 
were  purchasers  from  the  Continent,  and  the  vessels  in  which  those  were 
brought  returned  from  our  ports  in  ballast,  while  the  prices  of  colonial 
produce  and  British  manufactured  goods  were  such  in  the  respective 
markets  as  would  have  rendered  their  introduction  into  continental 
])orts  profitable  to  a  most  exaggerated  degree.  These  circumstances, 
acting  in  conjunction  with  the  reasonable,  perhaps  unavoidable,  ten- 
dency of  the  Bank  Restriction  Act,  under  which  the  directors  of  that 
establishment  were  relieved  from  the  dangers  that  would  otherwise 
have  attended  any  departure  from  prudence  in  the  management  of  its 
issues,  caused  such  an  enhancement  of  the  prices  of  the  precious  metals, 
when  measured  by  the  paper  currency,  as  forced  all  our  metallic  money 
out  of  circulation.  In  times  of  war,  when  armies  are  to  be  kept  in 
motion,  gold  especially  is  greatly  in  requisition.  The  difference  in 
value  of  Bank  of  England  notes  and  gold,  estimated  at  the  Mint  price 


416  PROGRESS  OF  THE  NATION.  [sec.  hi. 

during  the  years  from  1803  to  1808,  was  no  more  than  21.  \os.  2d  per 
cent.  In  the  seven  following  years,  that  excess  in  value  of  gold  was 
raised  in  the  following  degrees : — 


Years. 

£.    s.    d. 

Years. 

£. 

s. 

d. 

1809 

14  7  7  per  cent. 

)813 

29 

4 

1  per  cent 

1810 

8  7  8 

1814 

14 

7 

7    „ 

1811 

20  2  7    „ 

1815 

13 

9 

6    „ 

1812 

25  16  8    „ 

The  fall  in  the  price  of  gold  which  occurred  in  1814  was  brought 
about  by  a  reversal  of  the  circumstances  that  have  been  explained  above. 
Trade  a^ain  flowed  through  its  natural  channels  ;  we  found  anxious 
customers  for  goods  with  which  our  warehouses  had  been  overloaded  ; 
prices  which  for  those  goods  had  been  ruinously  depressed,  rose  greatly 
and  rapidly ;  our  exports  became  suddenly  so  much  greater  than  our 
imports,  that  gold  flowed  back  into  this  country  with  greater  rapidity 
than  it  had  previously  left  us ;  and  if  at  this  time  the  currency  had 
been  managed  with  the  smallest  approach  to  prudence  and  ability,  the 
prices  of  gold  and  bank-notes  might  have  been  brought  into  agreement 
without  producing  any  of  those  commercial  disasters  which  have  usually 
attended  such  an  adjustment.  The  calculations  just  given  are  founded 
upon  the  prices  of  gold  in  the  month  of  August  in  each  year.  In 
December,  1814,  the  influx  of  gold  had  brought  down  its  price  to 
4/.  65.  6c?.  per  ounce,  or  9/.  19.s.  bd.  per  cent,  above  the  Mint  price, 
although  the  issues  of  the  Bank  of  England  had  been  increased  from 
23,844,050/.,  the  amount  in  circulation  at  the  end  of  1813,  when  gold 
was  5/.  10s.  per  ounce,  or  29/.  4.s.  Id.  per  cent,  above  the  Mint  price, 
to  28,232,730/.  Is  it  possible  to  doubt,  with  these  figures  before  us, 
that  if  the  Directors  of  the  Bank  had  contented  themselves  with  main- 
taining their  circulation  even  at  the  high  level  of  December,  1813,  the 
price  of  the  precious  metals  would  have  fallen  to  the  level  of  our  Mint 
price,  and  that  the  gold  and  silver  that  had  flowed  into  our  coffers  would 
have  remained  in  circulation  without  our  being  called  upon  to  undergo 
the  difficulties  and  losses  which  accompanied  the  resumption  of  specie 
payments  when  that  measure  could  be  no  longer  deferred  ? 

A  different  course  was  followed.  The  Government,  having  large 
financial  operations  to  make  in  winding  up  the  accounts  of  the  war, 
thought  it  most  profitable  to  effect  those  operations  in  a  redundant  paper 
currency  ;  the  Bank  Restriction  Act  was  renewed  fromx  time  to  time 
to  the  great  profit  of  that  establishment,  but  to  the  manifest  disadvan- 
tage of  all  other  -classes ;  an  opportunity,  the  best  that  could  possibly 
have  been  hoped  for  whereby  to  extricate  ourselves  from  a  false  and 
dangerous  position,  was  allowed  to  escape  unimproved,  and  the  gold 
which  had  sought  our  shores  was  again  driven  away  by  a  redundant 
inconvertible  paper  currency.'  The  conduct  of  the" Bank  of  England  in 
those  days  exhibited  a  most  lamentable  want  of  intelligence.     Being 


CHAP,  xii.]  CURRENCY.  417 

aware  of  the  approach  of  the  time  at  which  the  restriction  which  had 
heen  so  profitable  should  cease,  the  Directors  of  that  establishment 
made  a  large  provision  of  bullion,  which,  as  it  could  not  be  demanded 
in  payment  for  their  notes,  remained  in  their  coffers  uninfluenced  by 
the  rate  of  foreign  exchanges,  or  the  market  price  of  gold.  Had  this 
provision  been  accompanied  by  a  corresponding  diminution  of  their 
issues,  the  Directors  might  safely  have  pursued  the  course  which  they 
afterwards  unsuccessfully  adopted  in  anticipation  of  the  termination 
of  their  Restriction  Act ;  but  no  such  prudence  was  allowed  to  in- 
fluence their  conduct,  and  when  in  April  and  September,  1817,  notices 
were  given  to  pay  off  in  specie,  first  the  notes  in  circulation  dated  prior 
to  1816,  and  afterwards  those  issued  before  1817,  the  amount  of  the 
circulation  was  unusually  large,  and  the  price  of  gold  fully  3  per  cent, 
above  that  of  bank-notes.  Under  these  circumstances,  the  gold  was 
withdrawn  from  the  Bank  coffers,  so  that  in  August,  1819,  they  were 
nearly  exhausted,  and  it  was  necessary  to  hurry  through  Parliament  an 
Act  restricting  the  Directors  from  acting  any  further  in  conformity  with 
the  notices  they  had  given. 

In  the  same  year  (1819),  the  Act,  commonly  known  as  Mr.  Peel's 
Act,  was  passed,  which  provided  for  the  gradual  resumption  of  specie 
payments.  Under  the  provisions  of  this  law,  the  Bank  restriction  was 
continued  until  February,  1820,  from  which  time  till  October  in  the 
same  year,  the  public  was  entitled  to  demand  payment  of  notes  in 
l)ullion  at  the  rate  of  4/.  Is.  per  ounce.  From  October,  1820,  to  May, 
1821,  payment  might  be  demanded  in  bullion  at  the  rate  of  3/.  19s.  6d. 
per  ounce  ;  from  May,  1821,  to  May,  1823,  huUion  might  be  demanded 
at  the  Mint  price  of  3/.  17^.  \0^d.  per  ounce;  and  from  the  last-men- 
tioned date,  the  current  gold  coin  of  the  realm  might  be  demanded. 
The  provisions  of  this  Act,  as  regarded  the  periods  named,  were  anti- 
cipated, and  on  the  1st  of  May,  1821,  the  Bank  had  placed  itself  in  the 
position  to  meet  all  of  its  outstanding  engagements  that  should  be 
demanded  in  specie. 

Perhaps  there  never  was  in  the  whole  history  of  legislature  in  this 
country  any  measure  of  internal  policy  which  has  occasioned  such  warm 
and  long-continued  controversy  as  this  Act  for  the  resumption  of  specie 
payments.  Although  more  than  a  quarter  of  a  century  has  elapsed 
since  it  came  into  full  operation,  the  measure  is  still  assailed  with  viru- 
lence by  many  who  attribute  to  it  every  cloud  which  during  all  that 
time  has  obscured  the  commercial  horizon,  and  hitherto  scarcely  any 
session  has  been  suffered  to  pass  without  some  attempt  having  been 
made  to  induce  the  legislature  to  consent  to  its  repeal.  Mr.  Peel's  Bill 
in  reality  did  nothing  more  than  establish  certain  steps  or  gi'adations 
through  which  we  should  pass  in  order  to  arrive  at  that  which  had 
always  been  contemplated  and  declared  to  be  the  settled  purpose  of  the 

•2  E 


418  rilOGRESS  OF  THE  NATION.  [sec.  hi. 

legislature,  and  at  what  in  fact  would  have  become  law  by  the  simple 
cfHux  of  the  time  fixed  for  the  purpose  in  the  Bank  Restriction  Acts. 

The  most  fitting  and  best  time  for  recurring  to  a  legitimate  and 
wholesome  condition  of  the  currency  was,  as  we  have  seen,  suffered  to 
go  by  unimproved  ;  but  it  is  not  therefore  to  be  contended  that  our 
medium  of  exchange  was  for  ever  after  to  be  inconvertible  into  that  which 
it  professed  to  represent:  this  is  a  proposition  which  no  one  who  is  en- 
titled to  be  heard  with  attention  upon  this  subject  ever  ventured  to  put 
forth.  It  has  alw^ays  been  acknowledged,  on  all  hands,  that  at  some 
period  or  other  it  would  be  proper  to  employ  a  metallic  currency,  or 
that  which  is  equivalent  to  it,  paper  convertible  into  coin  or  bullion,  at 
the  pleasure  of  the  holder.  The  question  of  the  return  to  cash  pay- 
ments w^as  always  considered  to  be  one  of  time.  Whether,  now  that 
the  remedy  has  been  applied,  and  that,  choosing  to  attribute  to  its 
operation,  every  sinister  effect  that  has  since  attended  our  commercial 
progress,  the  advocates  who  w^ould  have  continued  the  restriction,  are 
disposed  to  adopt  the  use  of  inconvertible  paper  as  a  permanent  mea- 
sure, is  what  few  among  those  advocates  would  be  willing  to  avow, 
although  it  is  difficult  upon  any  other  ground  to  reconcile  their  subse- 
quent proceedings  with  common  sense.  Why  this,  the  richest  country 
in  the  world,  should  be  unable  to  effect  that  simplicity,  in  regard  to  its 
currency,  which  is  found  to  be  of  easy  attainment  by  the  poorest  states, 
is  an  enigma  very  difficult  of  solution.  Nothing  is  more  common  than 
to  hear  it  asserted  by  the  advocates  for  an  inconvertible  currency,  that 
if  the  statesmen  and  economists,  by  whom  the  return  to  cash  payments 
was  advocated  in  1819,  could  have  foreseen  the  consequences  which 
are  attributed — whether  justly  or  not,  is  the  question — to  that  measure, 
they  would  have  forborne  to  give  to  it  the  sanction  of  their  approval. 
In  particular,  Mr.  David  Ricardo  has  been  repeatedly  held  up  as 
having  recanted  the  opinion  expressed  by  him,  that  the  fall  in  prices  to 
be  brought  about  by  returning  to  a  metallic  standard  would  be  no  more 
than  the  difference  between  the  market  and  the  Mint  prices  of  gold, 
which  at  the  passing  of  Mr.  Peel's  Bill  did  not  exceed  4  per  cent. 
There  is,  in  truth,  no  w^arrant  whatever  for  this  assertion,  which,  like 
many  other  figments,  has  been  repeated  until  it  has  acquired  the 
authority  of  truth.  Mr.  Ricardo  never  did  assert,  and  never  could  have 
asserted,  that  when  we  should  return  to  specie  payments,  prices  would 
never  fall  more  than  4  per  cent,  below  their  level  at  the  time  the  bill 
was  under  discussion.  It  would  have  been  as  reasonable  to  affinn,  that 
if,  instead  of  returning  to  the  old  standard  price  of  gold,  31.  lis.  lO^d. 
per  ounce,  the  legislature  had  fixed  the  standard  at  the  actual  market 
price  of  the  time,  no  fluctuation  in  prices  would  ever  have  occurred  in 
future.  Between  June,  1833,  and  August,  1836,"  there  was  a  progres- 
sive rise  in  the  market  value  of  goods,  amounting,  in  the  whole,  to  35 


CHAP.  xiT.]  CURRENCY.  419 

])er  cent.,  and  during  all  that  time  we  were  acting  witli  a  currency 
l)ased  upon  gold  at  the  same  standard.  Will  it  be  contended  that  if, 
during  the  same  period  our  currency  had  consisted  of  inconvertible 
paper  promises,  a  like  iluctuation  in  prices  would  liave  been  impossible  V 
Is  it  not,  on  the  contrary,  probable  that  the  fluctuation  would  iiave  been 
much  more  violent?  It  is  precisely  when  prices  are  low  that  the 
advocates  of  extended  issues  of  paper  money  are  the  most  clamorous, 
their  single  object  being  to  enhance  the  nominal  value  of  their  goods. 
They  do  not,  or  will  not  see,  that  it  is  only  during  the  period  in  which 
the  advance  is  going  forward  they  can  experience  the  advantages  which 
they  anticipate.  When  the  rise  shall  have  fully  taken  place,  and  prices 
shall  have  adjusted  themselves,  there  will  no  longer  be  any  benefit ; 
but,  on  the  other  hand,  there  will  be  considerable  and  constant  danger 
of  a  fall,  which  may  be  occasioned  by  various  circumstances  that  would 
be  inoperative  under  a  different  condition  of  things.  In  truth  there  is 
no  safety  from  commercial  disasters,  in  other  words,  there  can  be  no 
permanent  prosperity  for  the  trading  and  producing  classes,  but  in  low 
and  moderate,  and  therefore,  steady  prices. 

It  is  generally  held  that  the  commercial  crisis  or  "  panic,"  as  it 
is  usually  called,  which  occurred  towards  the  end  of  1825,  was  brought 
on  by  the  conjoint  operations  of  the  Government  and  the  Bank  of  Eng- 
land. It  was  the  object  of  the  Government,  when  peace  was  fully 
established,  to  make  money  abundant,  and  consequently  cheap,  in  order 
to  carry  through  various  arrangements  whereby  the  permanent  charge 
upon  the  public  income  might  be  lessened.  By  the  means  adopted  to 
this  end,  the  market  rate  of  interest  was  so  far  reduced  at  the  beginning 
of  1822,  that  the  5  per  cent.  Annuities  were  raised  to  6  or  8  per  cent, 
above  par,  under  which  circumstances  more  than  140,000,000/.  of  that 
stock  was  converted  into  an  annuity  at  4  per  cent.,  on  terms  by  which 
the  annual  charge  to  the  public  was  reduced  by  1,122,000/.  In  1824 
the  Chancellor  of  the  Exchequer  was  enabled  to  effect  a  further  saving 
of  380,000/.  per  annum,  by  the  conversion  of  76,000,000/.  of  4  per  cent, 
into  3^  per  cent.  Annuities. 

If  the  fall  in  the  rate  of  interest  by  which  the  Minister  was  enabled 
to  effect  those  operations  had  occurred  through  natural  causes,  there 
could  be  no  question  as  to  the  propriety  of  the  step,  but  brought  about 
as  it  was  by  means  of  the  unnatural  and  forced  extension  of  bank 
issues,  it  is  hardly  to  be  doubted  that  the  mischief  resulting  from  that 
extension  has  been  productive  of  more  loss  to  various  classes  of  the 
community  than  can  have  been  compensated  to  the  nation  at  large  by 
the  saving.  With  a  reckless  disregard  of  consequences  to  a  degi*ee 
which  can  be  attributed  only  to  want  of  knowledge,  the  Directors 
of  the  Bank  of  England  forced  their  paper  into  circulation,  by  proffer- 
ing facilities  to  all  classes  of  the  community.    Money  was  lent  uj)on  the 

2  E  2 


420  PROGRESS  OF  THE  NATION.  [sec.  hi. 

mortgage  of  land  and  upon  the  deposit  of  stock,  in  addition  to  liberal 
advances  to  commercial  men,  through  the  more  legitimate  channels  of 
issue  ;  and  the  Directors,  at  the  same  time,  permanently  crippled  their 
means  of  controlling  the  currency  hy  investing  a  large  proportion  of 
their  issues  in  the  purchase  of  an  annuity  for  a  term  of  years,  known  as 
the  Dead  Weight  Annuity,  an  investment  which  must  always  be  least 
marketable  at  those  periods  when  it  would  be  most  desirable  that  the 
Bank  should  have  all  its  resources  at  command.  By  these  means 
speculation  was  excited,  the  business  transactions  of  the  country  were 
multiplied  unnaturally,  and  by  the  general  rise  of  prices  thus  occa- 
sioned, our  markets  became  overstocked  with  foreign  produce,  while 
the  export  trade  was  checked ;  the  quantity  of  mercantile  paper  thrown 
into  circulation  aggravated  the  evil. 

Between  the  beginning  of  1822,  and  the  month  of  April,  1825,  the 
Bank  had  increased  its  circulation  to  the  extent  of  four  millions.  At 
the  latter  date  it  was  possessed  of  bullion  and  coin  to  the  value  of  ten 
millions,  but  from  that  period  to  the  following  November,  the  drain 
upon  its  coffers  w'as  so  rapid  that  no  more  than  1,300,000/.  of  that 
amount  remained.  Alarmed  at  this  unequivocal  indication,  the  Direc- 
tors suddenly  diminished  the  circulation  to  the  extent  of  3,500,000/. :  a 
general  feeling  of  distrust  then  took  the  place  of  the  undue  confidence 
which  had  previously  pervaded  the  whole  country ;  the  notes  of  country 
bankers  were  returned  upon  them  to  such  a  degree  that  great  numbers 
failed ;  a  run  upon  several  London  bankers  was  followed  by  the  stop- 
page of  some  of  those  establishments ;  commercial  distress  of  the  most 
frightful  description  ensued  ;  and  such  w^as  the  want  of  confidence,  that 
the  wealthiest  merchants  were  driven  to  make  heavy  sacrifices  of  pro- 
perty in  order  to  provide  for  their  immediate  engagements.  To  use  a 
memorable  expression  of  Mr.  Iluskisson,  "  the  country  was  within  twenty- 
four  hours  of  a  state  of  barter."  In  this  state  of  things  there  was  no 
longer  any  evil  to  be  apprehended  from  increasing  the  paper  circulation, 
and  the  Bank  Directors  came  forward  with  promptitude  and  liberality 
to  the  assistance  of  the  trading  classes,  by  lending  money  upon  almost 
every  description  of  property  that  could  be  offered,  and  by  discounting 
bills  without  adhering  to  those  rules  by  which  they  have  ordinarily 
been  guided  in  conducting  this  part  of  their  business.  Between  the 
3rd  of  November  and  the  29th  of  December,  the  amount  of  mercantile 
bills  under  discount  at  the  Bank  of  England  was  increased  from  four 
millions  to  fifteen  millions ;  the  number  of  bills  discounted  on  one  par- 
ticular dav  having  been  four  thousand  two  hundred.  The  efforts  thus 
made  were  assisted  by  a  circumstance  purely  accidental.  A  box  con- 
taining one-pound  notes,  which  had  been  overlooked  at  the  time  when 
the  Bank  called  in  all  its  notes  under  five  poiinds,  was  discovered  at  the 
lucky  moment,  and  in  the  opinion  of  Mr.  Ilarman,  one  of  the  Directors 


CH.vr,  XII.]  CURRENCY.  421 

the  timely  issue  of  tliese  notes  "  worked  wonders — it  saved  the  credit 
of  the  country."  On  the  3rd  of  December,  1825,  the  amount  of 
Bank  of  England  notes  in  circulation  had  been  only  17,477,000/.  ;  but 
on  the  31st  of  tliat  month  was  increased,  by  the  means  hero  mentioned, 
to  25,700,000/.  This  great  increase  was  rendered  necessary  in  order 
to  replace  the  notes  of  country  bankers  that  had  been  suddenly  with- 
drawn from  circulation,  and  to  counteract  the  tendency  to  hoarding 
always  indulged  by  the  timid  in  periods  of  embarrassment ;  it  was  con- 
sequently not  followed  by  any  undue  rise  of  prices,  which  had  been 
suddenly  thrown  down  in  the  previous  convulsion ;  the  foreign  ex- 
changes again  turned  in  our  favour,  and  the  gold  which,  by  the  previous 
mismanagement  had  been  forced  abroad,  again  came  back.  The  value 
of  coin  and  bullion  in  the  Bank  in  the  last  weeks  of  February,  May,  Au- 
gust, and  November,  1825,  respectively,  was,  2,300,000/.,  4,300,000/., 
6,600,000/.,  and  8,900,000/. ;  in  the  February  following  it  amounted 
to  10,000,000/.  The  notes  of  the  Bank  in  circulation  in  the  same  weeks 
amounted  to — 

£.  1826 

24,900,000  .  .  February. 

21, '.too, 000  .  .  May. 

21,. 300, 000  .  .  August. 

19,'JOO,000  .  .  November. 

At  the  close  of  1826  the  currency  was  therefore  once  more  restored  to 
an  appearance  of  soundness. 

At  the  time  of  its  occurrence,  this  commercial  crisis  was  attributed 
by  many  persons  to  the  increase  of  paper  money,  put  into  circulation 
l)y  the  country  banks ;  and  in  the  parliamentary  inquiries  that  followed, 
the  principal  object  aimed  at  was  the  regulation  of  private  banks  of 
issue.  The  establishment  by  the  Bank  of  England  of  branches  in  dif- 
ferent parts  of  England,  was  suggested  and  recommended  to  that  esta- 
lishment  by  Lord  Liverpool,  then  at  the  head  of  the  Government,  as  a 
means  of  controlling  the  issues  of  private  bankers,  and  in  part  also  of 
substituting  a  more  secure  description  of  paper  for  that  which  circulated 
throughout  the  country.  The  principal  aim  of  Parliament  and  the 
Government,  on  that  occasion,  was  not  so  much  the  regulation  of  the 
currency,  by  means  which  would  prevent  the  recurrence  of  the  evils  re- 
sulting from  over  issues,  as  it  was  to  provide  for  the  ultimate  security  of 
the  holders  of  notes.  They  committed  the  mistake  too  commonly  made 
of  confounding  currency  with  solvency,  and  of  imagining  that  if  the 
issuers  of  notes  had  sufficient  capital  to  meet,  at  some  time  or  other,  the 
whole  of  their  engagements,  no  other  evil  was  to  be  apprehended. 

At  the  same  time,  provision  w^as  made  by  Parliament  for  the  esta- 
blishing of  joint-stock  banks,  which  should  be  banks  of  issue  ;  but  this 
being  considered  an  invasion  of  the  privileges  of  the  Bank  of  England 
— in  favour  of  which  establishment  no  other  bank  having  more  than  six 


422  TROGRESS  Of  THE  NATION.  [sec.  hi. 

partners  was  thought  to  be  entitled  legally  to  issue  notes — a  compromise 
was  made  with  that  establishment,  and  joint-stock  banks  of  issue  were 
not  permitted  to  carry  on  their  business  nearer  to  London  than  sixty- 
five  miles. 

If  the  views  of  the  legislature  had  been  directed  to  produce  a  system 
by  means  of  which  a  perfect  control  over  the  currency  would  be  secured, 
a  more  imlikely  method  of  attaining  that  object  than  the  establishment 
of  joint-stock  banks  could  hardly  be  imagined.  By  their  constitution, 
these  establishments  would  naturally  stand  high  in  the  public  estima- 
tion. AVith  large  paid-up  capitals  and  a  numerous  list  of  partners,  the 
more  ostensible  of  whom  were  usually  men  of  property  and  considera- 
tion, while  all  were  answerable  for  the  debts  of  the  company  to  the  full 
amount  of  their  fortunes,  the  public  would  take  their  paper  with  per- 
fect confidence,  and  as  considerable  local  influence  would  be  always 
exerted  in  their  favour,  the  case  must  be  extreme  indeed  which  would 
bring  on  a  run  against  them.  In  fact,  the  greater  the  degree  of  repu- 
tation and  credit  such  banks  enjoy,  the  greater  is  the  danger  of  their 
contributing  to  imsettle  the  currency.  It  has  been  shown  by  Colonel 
Torrens,*  that  except  these  banks  act  in  concert  with  the  Bank  of 
England,  their  influence  could  never  be  severely  felt,  for  otherwise  any 
over-issues  on  their  part  would  speedily  be  returned  upon  them  ;  but 
this  would  not  be  the  case  when  the  issues  of  the  Bank  of  England 
should  also  be  in  excess,  so  that  their  mismanagement  would  be  felt 
only  when  it  would  act  in  aggi'avation  of  the  mischief  caused  by  the 
great  regulator  of  the  currency. 

At  the  time  when  encouragement  was  given  to  the  formation  of  joint- 
stock  banks,  Parliament  took  measures  for  withdrawing  from  circulation 
all  notes  of  a  lower  denomination  than  5/. ;  the  granting  of  stamps  for 
smaller  notes  was  immediately  stopped,  and  fi-om  the  5th  of  April,  1829, 
it  was  declared  illegal  for  any  banker  to  issue  such.  The  policy  of  this 
measure  met  at  the  time  with  general  concurrence,  and  although  it  has 
since  been  clamorously  impugned,  both  in  and  out  of  Parliament,  the 
number  of  those  who  question  its  propriety  has  always  been  small. 

In  what  has  been  here  said  concerning  the  establishing  of  joint-stock 
banks  as  substitutes  for  other  banks  of  issue,  which  could  oflfer  less  satis- 
factory security  for  the  amount  of  their  engagements,  it  is  by  no  means 
intended  to  question  that  they  present,  in  that  respect,  great  advantages 
to  the  public.  But  it  may  well  be  doubted,  whether  those  advantages 
are  in  all  respects  such  as  were  in  contemplation  at  the  time  of  their 
formation.  Some  of  the  numerous  joint-stock  banks,  established  since 
1826,  are  not  new  establishments,  but  extensions  of  private  banks  pre- 
viously in  operation ;  others  of  them  do  not  issue  their  own  notes,  but 


*  Letter  to  Lord  Melbourne. 


CHAP.  X.I.]  CUKKEN'CY.  123 

circulate  the  notes  of  the  Bank  of  England,  under  an  agi-eemcnt  with 
that  corporation,  which  gives  to  them  certain  facilities  in  the  way  of 
discounts.  This  is  a  fact  well  known,  and  one  which  has  been  stated 
in  evidence  before  Parliamentary  committees  ;  but  it  is  not  so  well 
known  that,  in  making  these  arrangements,  the  Bank  of  England  does 
not  merely  give  permission  to  the  other  parties  to  send  bills  for  discount 
up  to  a  certain  sum,  but  stipulates  that  the  sum  so  required  shall  always 
reach  at  least  to  that  amount ;  providing  thus  for  the  extension  of  the 
issue  of  its  [own  paper,  whatever  may  be  the  wants  of  the  commercial 
world  or  the  rates  of  the  foreign  exchanges.  It  is  not  with  a  very  good 
grace  that  the  Bank  Directors,  while  thus  acting,  complain  of  the  ex- 
cessive issues  of  other  joint-stock  associations,  their  rivals  in  the  country 
districts.  There  is  no  doubt  that  a  competition  of  this  kind  is  likely  to 
have  an  injurious  effect,  and  that  the  spirit  of  competition  renders  all 
parties  less  prudent  than  they  might  otherwise  be  in  acting  upon  those 
indications  which  should  govern  the  amount  of  the  circulation.  In  the 
event  of  that  circulation  proving  redundant,  the  adoption  of  a  prudent 
course  by  one  or  more  establishments,  in  contracting  their  issues,  might 
only  offer  inducements  to  others  to  endeavour  to  turn  that  course  to  their 
own  peculiar  advantage,  by  filling  up  the  void  that  would  be  thus  occa- 
sioned. The  advantage  to  the  country  of  confining  to  one  establishment 
the  power  of  issuing  paper-money  has  of  late  .years  been  very  strongly 
insisted  on  by  a  principal  advocate  and  apologist  of  the  Bank  of  England. 
In  his  zeal  fur  the  interests  of  the  establishment  with  which  he  is  con- 
nected, that  gentleman  has  not  allowed  himself  to  express  a  doubt  as  to 
the  body  which  shall  be  intrusted  vnth  so  important  a  function.  The 
one  bank  of  issue  in  his  estimation  is,  without  doubt,  to  be  the  joint- 
stock  association  with  which  he  is  connected.  There  is,  however,  a 
third  alternative,  which  has  been  ably  advocated  by  the  late  iVIr- 
Ricardo,*  and  more  recently  by  Mr.  Clay,t  Colonel  Torrens,|  and  Mr. 
S.  Ricardo,§— that  of  the  establishment  of  a  National  Bank  "  under 
the  management  of  competent  functionaries,  qualified  by  the  possession, 
not  of  Bank  Stock,  but  of  economical  science ;  appointed,  not  by  the 
holders  of  Bank  Stock,  but  by  the  Government ;  responsible,  not  to 
their  co-proprietors,  but  to  Parliament ;  and  having  for  their  first  object 
and  primary  duty  the  protection  not  of  their  o\ni  corporate  property-, 
but  of  the  general  interest  of  the  nation."! 

*  Plan  for  the  Establishment  of  a  >'ational  Bank,  by  the  late  David  Ricardo,  Esq.,  M.P., 
1824. 

t  Speech,  on  moving  for  a  Committee  on  Joint-Stock  Banks,  with  Reflections,  &c.,  by 
W.  Clay,  Esq.,  M.P.,  1836. 

X  Letter  to  Lord  Melbourne,  on  the  recent  Derangement  in  the  Money  Market,  and  on 
Bank  Reform,  by  R.  Torrens,  Esq.,  1837. 

§  A  National  Bank  the  Remedy  for  the  Evils  attendant  upon  our  present  System  of  Paper 
Currency,  by  Samson  Ricardo,  Esq.,  1838. 

11  Torrens'  Letter;  2nd  Edition,  page  64. 


421  niOGKESS  OF  THE  NATION.  [sec.  m. 

It  is  not  necessary  to  enlarge,  in  these  pages,  upon  the  advantages 
that  might  be  derived  by  the  country  from  the  adoption  of  the  proposal 
here  mentioned.  Those  persons  who  are  alive  to  the  importance  of  the 
subject  will  not  satisfy  themselves  with  any  second-hand  arguments,  but 
will  of  course  refer  to  works  in  which  tlie  establishment  of  a  National 
Bank  is  advocated  by  men  whose  thorough  acquaintance  with  the  subject 
in  all  its  bearings  must  be  universally  acknowledged.  It  may  be  proper, 
however,  to  guard  against  misconception,  as  to  the  meaning  attached  to 
the  title  of  National  Bank.  It  is  not  meant  under  this  name  to  advo- 
cate the  establishment  of  a  bank  which  shall  be  subject  to  the  control  of 
the  minister  of  the  day,  which,  on  the  credit  of  the  country,  shall  issue 
notes  ad  libitum  to  meet  the  wants  or  wishes  of  the  Government,  or 
whose  paper  shall  be  inconvertible,  at  the  pleasure  of  the  holder,  into 
that  which  it  professes  to  represent ;  but  a  bank,  the  managers  of  which, 
although  appointed  by  the  Government,  shall  not  be  removeable  except 
by  a  vote  of  Parliament,  upon  proof  of  maladministration  ;  who  shall  be 
obliged  to  buy  or  to  sell  bullion  at  certain  fixed  prices,  which,  while 
they  would  yield  a  small  profit  to  the  establishment,  shall  not  hold  out 
any  inducement  to  speculative  sales  or  purchases  ;  and  who  shall  be  of 
ability  to  observe  and  to  understand  the  symptoms  of  any  approaching 
derangement  in  the  currency,  and  to  apply  the  necessary  remedies. 
All  experience  has  shown  the  mischief  that  results  from  the  operation  of 
banks  of  issue  in  connexion  with  executive  governments ;  and  the  bank- 
ing annals  of  our  own  country  afford  abundant  proofs  that  no  amount  of 
ability  employed,  in  conducting  the  operations  of  a  great  joint-stock 
association,  will  preserve  the  country  fi'om  mismanagement,  where  there 
is  any  private  interest  or  conflicting  duty  which  tempts  its  managers  to 
originate  or  to  tolerate,  and,  it  may  be,  to  aggi*avate  the  mischief. 

The  shock  given  to  mercantile  credit,  and  the  losses  encountered  by 
commercial  men,  in  1825,  were  of  a  nature  and  to  an  extent  not  likely 
to  be  soon  forgotten.  The  lesson  of  prudence  which  they  taught  was 
enforced  by  the  withdrawal  of  small  notes  from  circulation,  and  for  a 
considerable  time  speculation — at  least  in  any  extensive  degree — was 
unseen.  But  it  is  the  common  effect  of  long-continued  security  to  beget 
imprudence.  The  years  which  followed  the  panic  of  1825  were  marked, 
as  we  have  seen,  by  a  progressive  extension  of  our  chief  branches  of  in- 
dustry ;  the  operations  of  trade  and  manufactures  were,  with  some  fluc- 
tuations, accompanied  by  a  degree  of  general  prosperity  which  naturally 
engendered  the  desire  for  increasing  them,  and  this  desire  being  met, 
in  the  middle  of  1833,  by  some  relaxation  in  the  currency,  prices  began 
to  rise.  The  circulation  of  the  Bank  of  England,  which  throughout 
1832  had  been,  on  the  average,  18,139,000/.,  was  increased  to 
19,060,000/.  in  the  first  half  of  1833,  and  to  19,20t,000/.  in  the  second 
half  of  that  year ;  and  this  increase,  taken  in  conjunction  with  the  pre- 


CHAP.  XII. J  CUKKENCY.  425 

sumed  extension  of  issues  on  the  part  of  joint-stock  and  private  bankers 
— an  extension  which  was  rendered  practicable  only  through  the  greater 
circulation  of  Bank  of  England  notes — was  quite  sufficient  to  give  that 
stimulus  to  commercial  dealings  which  has  been  mentioned. 

It  is  a  point  that  has  given  rise  to  much  controversy,  whether  under 
the  regime  of  a  circulating  medium,  convertible  at  pleasure  into  gold, 
any  issues  of  paper  can  be  made  and  kept  out  to  an  excess  that  will  tend 
to  raise  the  general  prices  of  goods.  Nor  is  the  point  at  all  settled  among 
writers  of  the  greatest  authority  upon  the  subject.  By  those  who  deny  the 
possibility  of  such  a  result,  it  is  urged,  that  at  times  when  the  currency 
lias  been  full  to  redundancy,  the  prices  of  many  important  articles  of 
consumption  have  fallen,  and  that,  on  the  other  hand,  w^hile  the  circula- 
tion has  been  undergoing  a  process  of  contraction,  the  prices  of  some 
goods  have  risen.  The  reasoning  upon  the  subject,  in  the  Report  of  the 
Bullion  Committee  of  1810,  having  been  offered  when  the  notes  of  the 
Bank  of  England  were  inconvertible,  cannot  be  held  applicable  to  the 
present  altered  condition  of  things.  In  the  words  of  that  Report — "  An 
increase  in  the  quantity  of  the  local  currency  of  a  particular  country 
will  raise  prices  in  that  country  exactly  in  the  same  manner  as  an  in- 
crease in  the  general  supply  of  precious  metals  raises  prices  all  over  the 
world."  Many  circumstances  may  arise  to  occasion  the  rise  or  fall  in 
the  prices  of  some  kind  of  goods,  but  a  general  alteration  of  prices  can 
only  be  occasioned  by  a  permanent  alteration  in  the  amount  of  circu- 
lating money.  An  increase  in  the  quantity  of  specie,  arising  from  the 
greater  productiveness  of  the  mines,  would  raise  prices  in  all  countries 
alike,  and  would  therefore  occasion  no  serious  derangement,  nor  be  fol- 
lowed by  any  revulsion ;  whereas,  a  rise  occasioned  by  the  undue  exten- 
sion of  a  local  and  inconvertible  currency,  will  be  confined  to  the  country 
in  which  it  is  issued,  and  must  derange  its  commercial  relations  with 
foreign  markets.  It  must  be,  therefore,  at  all  times  an  interesting  and 
a  valuable  question  to  determine,  under  such  circumstances,  whether 
prices  are  actually  rising  or  falling,  or  stationary  ;  and  to  ascertain  the 
degree  of  such  rise  or  fall,  as  an  indication  of  the  state  of  the  currency. 
A  rise  or  fall  thus  caused  will  generally — perhaps  always — precede  a 
variation  in  the  foreign  exchanges  ;  and  if  ascertained,  and  a  timely 
remedy  were  applied,  the  evil  might  be  corrected  before  it  could  reach 
a  point  that  would  be  indicated  by  any  such  disturbance  of  foreign 
trade  as  would  affect  the  rates  of  exchange.  This  truth  has  long  been 
felt  and  acknowledged ;  but  it  has  at  the  same  time  been  held  impos- 
sible to  determine,  with  the  necessary  degree  of  accuracy,  whether  any 
and  what  degree  of  fluctuation  is  shown  by  the  prices  of  commodities 
generally.  The  disturbing  causes  above  alluded  to,  when  affecting 
articles  with  which  the  inquirer  is  more  particularly  conversant,  may, 
unless  the  investigation  is  extended,  give  an  impression  contrary  to  the 


126  niOGllESS  OF  THE  NATION.  [sec.  hi. 

feet.     With  regard  to  this  objection,  it  may  be  said  that  it  is  only  by  a 
practical  acquaintance  with  all  the  circumstances  by  which  markets  are 
temporarily  governed,  that  a  proper  allowance  can  be  made  for  every 
disturbing  cause.     With  the  possession  of  the  necessary  amount  of  prac- 
tical knowledge,  the  difficulty  of  course  ceases  ;  but  even  without  it,  if 
we  see  that  one  kind  or  a  few   kinds  of  goods  exhibit  a  tendency  in 
regard  to  price  different  from  that  exhibited  by  the  great  bulk  of  articles, 
it  must  be  easy  for  any  one  to  make  such  inquiries  into  the  facts  as  will 
qualify  him  to  correct  the  discrepancy  they  might  occasion,  or  to  show 
the  propriety  of  selecting,  from  among  the  list  of  articles  subjected  to 
examination,  those  which  from  extraneous  causes  would  interfere  with 
tlie  correctness  of  the  calculation.     There  is,  however,  another  difficulty 
to  be  surmomited  before  the  degree  of  fluctuation  in  prices  generally 
can  be  correctly  ascertained,  which  is  this : — Some  articles  of  merchan- 
dise are  sold,  and  their  prices  are  quoted  by  the  pound  or  gallon,  and 
others  are  quoted  by  the  hmidredweight  or  ton,  or  by  the  pipe,  while 
the  prices  upon  which  the  calculations  of  rise  or  fall  must  be  made  vary 
from  a  few  pence  for  some  articles,  to  more  than  one  hundred  pounds 
for  others.     How,  then,  it  has  been  asked,  can  any  conparison  be  made 
where  the   elements   or  data  for  that  comparison   exhibit  such  violent 
discrepancies  ?     This  difficulty  will  be  overcome  by  the  very  simple  ex- 
pedient of  reducing  to  one  common  element  the  price  of  every  separate 
article  in  a  long  list  of  articles,  whether  that  price  is  estimated  by  pence 
or  by  pounds,  and  then  calculating  the  fluctuating  price  of  each,  up  or 
down,  and  expressing  it  in  decimal  proportions.     In  this  manner  the 
rise  or  fall  of  a  halfpenny  in  the  price  of  a  pound  of  pepper,  quoted  at 
fivepence,  is  made  to  indicate  as  great  a  rise  or  fall,  and  to  exercise  as 
great  an  influence  in  the  scale,  as  a  rise  or  fall  of  5^.  in  a  quarter  of 
linseed,  quoted  at  bOs.,  or  of  10/.  in  a  ton  of  copper  quoted  at  100/.     In 
each  of  these  cases,  the  index  price,  whether  it  is  bd.,  bOs.,  or  100/., 
being  expressed  by  imity,  or  I'OOOO,  the  supposed  variations,  if  in  ad- 
vance, would  in  each  case  be  expressed  by  the  figures  I'lOOO— and  if 
in  reduction,  by  0*900.     Upon  this  principle  a  table   has  been   con- 
structed, taking  for  its  basis  or  index  the  prices  existing  in  the  first 
week  of  January,  1833,  and  exhibiting  at  the  beginning  of  every  sub- 
sequent month   the    average    fluctuations    that    have   occurred   in    the 
prices  of  each  one  of  50  articles  which   comprise  the  principal  kinds 
of  goods  that  enter  into  foreign    commerce.      The  sum  of  all  these 
prices  thus  ascertained  and  expressed  to  four  places  of  decimals,  when 
divided  by  the  number  of  articles  in  the  list,  will  exhibit  the   mean 
variation  in  the  aggregate  of  prices  from  month  to  month.    Such  a  table 
constructed   by  any   person    possessing  a  moderate    acquaintance  with 
the  general  state  of  trade  w ill,  it  is  thought,  exhibit  the  ^ariations  of 
prices  with  as  near  an  approach  to  accuracy  as  the  subject  admits,  and 


CHAP,    XII. 


CURRENCY.  427 


the  result  will  be  altogether  free  from  any  of  those  specious  fallacies 
which  are  often  found  to  lurk  at  the  bottom  of  speculative  investiga- 
tions. 

In  the  construction  of  this  table  it  was  desirable  to  make  choice  of  a 
period  whence  to  commence  the  calculations,  in  which  prices  were  con- 
sidered to  be  at  or  near  their  natural  level,  and  in  which  the  mercantile 
commimity  in  this  kingdom  were  believed  to  be  principally  engaged  in 
their  regular  and  legitimate  business ;  a  period,  in  fact,  which  should 
be  free  from  any  undue  depression  on  the  one  hand,  and  without  the 
excitement  of  speculation  on  the  other.  With  this  view,  and  also  be- 
cause it  would  embrace  a  time  sufficiently  long  for  showing  the  possible 
utility  of  such  calculations,  w^ithout  too  far  multiplying  the  labour,  the 
beginning  of  1833  was  chosen.  It  will  be  seen,  on  inspection  of  the 
table  hereafter  inserted  (pages  431-2),  that  in  one  respect  at  least  the 
choice  of  this  period  has  been  judicious.  During  the  six  months  by 
which  it  was  immediately  followed,  there  may  be  said  to  have  been  no 
fluctuation  in  prices,  but  in  the  month  of  July  there  occurred  a  sudden 
rise  of  3|  per  cent.,  which  was  increased  to  7  per  cent,  in  August,  and 
to  10  per  cent,  in  September;  from  which  time  prices  were  again  re- 
markably steady,  at  that  higher  level,  until  the  middle  of  the  following 
year.  Another  rapid  advance  was  then  experienced,  which  continued 
until  February,  1835,  when  prices  had  reached  to  16  per  cent,  above 
the  index  price  of  January,  1833.  At  this  further  advance  there  was, 
again,  considerable  steadiness  for  six  months,  when  a  fresh  impulse  was 
given,  which  carried  the  average  price  rapidly  upward,  with  an  unva- 
ried progression,  until  August,  1836.  It  will  be  seen  that  the  average 
was  then  very  nearly  35  per  cent,  higher  than  in  the  beginning  of  1833. 
The  measures  adopted  by  the  Bank  of  England  in  July  and  September, 
1836,  of  raising  the  rate  of  their  discounts,  from  4  to  4^  and  then  to  5 
per  cent.,  and  further  of  throwing  discredit  upon  a  class  of  mercantile 
bills  which  at  that  time  represented  a  very  large  part  of  the  floating 
commercial  engagements  of  the  country,  acted  instantaneously  upon  the 
prices  of  goods,  and  a  fall  began  which  was  more  rapid  than  the  rise 
which  has  been  described. 

A  gentleman,*  whose  views  upon  such  subjects  are  entitled  to  be  re- 
ceived with  very  great  respect,  gives  it  as  his  opinion,  that  the  abundance 
or  scarcity  of  circulating  money  has  little  or  no  influence  upon  prices, 
but  that  tliese  are  regulated  by  the  wants  and  capabilities  of  the  great 
body  of  the  consumers,  who  cannot  at  any  time  be  expected  to  use  more 
of  any  articles  because  they  may  have  a  greater  facility  in  raising 
money  for  commercial  purposes.  In  support  of  this  position,  it  is  urged 
th.at,  while  prices  generally  were  advancing  in  the  degree  that  has  been 

*  Mr,  Thomas  Tooke. 


428  PKOGKESS  OF  THE  NATION.  [sec.  hi. 

shown,  grain,  which  in  respect  of  the  amount  of  money  involved  in 
buying  and  selling  it,  is  perhaps  of  more  importance  than  all  the  other 
articles  that  together  form  the  sum  of  our  commercial  dealings,  was  as 
constantly  and  regularly  falling  in  price.  There  can  be  no  doubt  of  the 
fact  being  as  here  stated ;  but  there  cannot,  on  the  other  hand,  be  any 
doubt  that  this  fall  in  the  price  of  the  principal  article  of  food  was  the 
effect  of  natural  causes,  such  as  have  already  been  adverted  to  above, 
and  in  a  former  section  of  this  work ;  and  which  causes  could  not  fail 
to  have  })roduced  their  natural  effect  in  driving  down  the  price,  unless 
checked  by  such  an  issue  of  paper  money  as  could  only  have  been  kept 
in  circulation  under  a  system  of  restriction  from  specie  payments.  The 
objection  raised  by  the  accomplished  author  of  the  History  of  Prices  is 
no  doubt  true  in  the  long  run,  where  no  bank  restriction  is  allowed  to 
interfere.  It  is  no  doubt  true  that,  in  the  end,  the  prices  of  all  com- 
modities are  governed  by  the  wants  and  capabilities  of  the  consumers, 
taken  in  conjunction  with  the  cost  of  production.  But  this  is  not  the 
question  at  issue.  That  question  is,  whether,  as  a  consequence — a 
natural  and  almost  a  necessary  consequence — of  any  excessive  amount 
of  currency,  a  speculative  demand  for  goods  is  not  created,  one  of  the 
evils  attendant  upon  which  is,  that  it  cannot  be  sustained,  but  when 
the  immediate  cause  through  which  it  was  produced  is  withdrawn,  gives 
place  to  a  revulsion  ?  Owing  to  the  stimulus  given  to  production,  and 
the  check  offered  to  consumption — both  of  which  are  necessary  con- 
sequences of  high  prices — that  revulsion,  when  it  arrives,  finds  us  with 
glutted  markets,  and  with  a  mass  of  commercial  engagements  greater 
than  the  ordinary  wants  of  trade  should  occasion  :  the  consequences 
of  which  state  of  things  it  cannot  be  necessary  to  describe.  The  fact 
adduced,  that  while  the  prices  of  imported  articles  have  risen,  grain 
became  cheaper  in  a  greater  ratio,  may  be  considered,  under  a  restric- 
tive system  of  corn-laws,  as  one  cause  of  that  general  enhancement  of 
prices.  Owing  to  the  custom  which  prevails  in  our  grain  markets  of 
making  sales  at  a  short  period  of  credit,  a  smaller  sum  of  currency  is 
needed  for  carrying  on  the  trade  in  corn  than  would  be  required  for  the 
purchase  and  sale  of  an  equal  value  of  foreign  goods,  where  longer 
credits  are  usually  given.  The  amount  of  money  engaged  in  the  corn- 
trade  must,  however,  be  exceedingly  great,  so  that  any  material  fall  in 
the  price  of  corn  must  have  an  effect  upon  the  currency  equivalent  to 
an  increased  emission  of  bank-notes.*  With  our  foreign  corn  trade 
free,  this  consequence  would  not  ha])pen,   because  we  should  be  pre- 

*  It  must  also  be  borne  in  mind  that  of  the  whole  produce  of  grain,  a  portion,  which  has 
been  variously  estimated  at  from  a  half  to  two-thirds,,  is  never  brought  to  market  for  sale 
but  is  consumed  in  the  agricultural  districts,  and  employed  for  seed.  The  proportion  sold 
is,  however,  becoming  greater  every  year,  in  consequence  of  the  proportionatelj'  greater 
increase  of  the  non-agricultural  population,  and  the  greater  productiveness  of  the  soil. 


CHAP. 


ill.]  CURRENCY.  429 


served  from  those  violent  fluctuations  in  the  prices  of  farming  produce 
which  have  attended  upon  the  vicissitudes  of  seasons.  A  deficiency  in 
the  harvest  always  produces  a  more  than  equivalent  rise  in  the  price  of 
fanning  jjroduce  ;  so  that,  on  the  supposition  of  1000  (juarters  of  wheat 
being  re(juired  for  the  ordinary  wants  of  the  people,  if  the  supply  proved 
deficient  to  the  extent  of  100  quarters,  the  remaining  900  would  sell 
for  a  greater  amount  of  money  than  that  which  would  be  received  for 
1000  quarters  under  the  case  first  supposed ;  while  the  consec^uence  of 
an  increased  production  to  the  same  degree  would  be  so  to  depress 
prices,  that  1100  quarters  would  not  produce  so  great  an  amount  as 
the  900  quarters  in  the  one  case,  or  the  1000  quarters  in  the  other.  It 
would  be  incorrect,  therefore,  to  suppose  that  the  reduction  of  price  is 
compensated,  either  as  regards  the  receipts  of  the  growers,  or  as  it 
aflfects  the  money  value  of  the  entire  harvest,  by  the  increase  of  quantity, 
which  might  to  a  great  degree  be  the  case  if  the  trade  were  free  and 
prices  were  kept  more  effectually  than  now  at  their  natural  level,  by 
extending  the  markets  whence  to  supply  our  deficiency,  or  where  to 
send  our  superabundance. 

Mr.  Gregory  King,  in  his  computation  of  the  land  product  of  Eng- 
land, given  by  Dr.  Davenant,  states  that  a  defect  in  the  harvest  may 
raise  the  price  of  corn  in  the  following  proportions  : — 

Defect  of  1 -tenth,  raises  the  price  3-tenths. 
>»  ^11  »  "      » 

n  ^       5>  »  ^"       )) 

«  *      »  »i  28       „ 

>»  ^       „  ,,  45       „ 

If  we  adopt  these  proportions  as  the  basis  for  our  calculations,  it  will  be        £. 
found  that  1000  quarters,  when  the  supply  is  just  equal  to  the  wants  of  the 

consumers  will  sell — the  price  being  50s.  per  quarter — for 2,500 

If  the  harvest  should  prove  deficient  one-tenth,  the  remaining  nine-tenths, 

represented  by  900  quarters,  would  sell,  at  65s.,  for 2,925 

A  deficiency  of  one-fifth  would  leave  800  quarters,  which,  at  90s.,  would 

produce 3,600 

A  deficiency  of  three-tenths  would  leave   700  quarters,  which,  the  price 

being  advanced  to  130s.,  would  produce 4,550 

A  deficiency  of  four-tenths,  leaving  600  quarters  for  sale  at  190s.,  would 

produce 5,700 

A  deficiency  of  one-half  would  raise   the  price  to  275s.,  at  which  rate  500 
quarters  would  sell  for 6,875 

No  means  have  hitlierto  been  devised  for  ascertaining  the  actual  pro- 
duce of  com  in  the  country,  and  it  is  superfluous  to  say  that  the  above 
computation  can  be  at  the  best  only  a  reasonable  estimate.  Mr.  Tooke 
is  of  opinion  that  it  is  not  very  wide  of  the  truth,  "  from  observations  of 
the  repeated  occurrence  of  the  fact,  that  the  price  of  corn  in  this  country 
has  risen  from  100  to  200  per  cent,  and  upwards,  when  the  utmost  com- 
puted deficiency  of  the  crops  has  not  been  more  than  between  one-sixth 
and  one-third  of  an  average."  On  the  other  hand,  we  have  seen,  through 
the  consecutive  occurrence  of  three  favourable  harvests,  in  1833,  1834, 


430  TROGRESS  OF  THE  NATIOX,  [sec.  in. 

and  1835,  that  the  price  of  wheat  has  fallen  from  55^.  5c?.  to  3G*-.  0</. 
per  quarter,  although,  during  the  whole  of  those  years  every  branch  of 
industry  throughout  the  country  was  in  full  activity,  and  all  classes  of 
the  people  were  in  full  enjoyment  of  the  means  of  living.  It  is  to  the 
circumstances  that  ailect  the  labourers  and  artisans  of  the  country  that 
we  must  look  for  the  causes  that  influence  the  gi*eater  or  less  consump- 
tion of  corn.  The  classes  who  are  more  at  ease  in  their  circumstances 
subsist  in  a  far  greater  degi'ee  upon  more  costly  kinds  of  food,  and  do 
not  consume  more  bread  than  ordinary,  in  years  of  abundance.  This 
may  not  be  the  case  with  those  who  are  in  less  comfortable  circum- 
stances ;  but  with  regard  to  them,  even,  it  is  certain  that,  when  bread  is 
cheap,  they  do  not  increase  their  use  of  it  so  as  to  absorb  a  proportion 
of  their  earnings  equal  to  that  which  they  so  expend  in  scarce  or  ordi- 
nary seasons,  but  employ  a  greater  part  of  their  wages  in  the  purchase 
of  comforts  ;  and  this  consideration  renders  it  clear  why,  as  above 
stated,  so  large  an  amount  of  money  is  not  paid  for  an  increased  as  is 
paid  for  a  diminished  supply  of  this  first  necessary  of  life  ;  and  also 
why,  in  a  time  of  scarcity,  the  mass  of  the  town  population  being  driven 
towards  the  more  exclusive  use  of  bread — which  will  still  be  the  cheapest 
food  upon  which  they  will  subsist — the  demand  for  other  articles  of 
consumption  and  convenience  will  be  lessened,  and  their  prices  con- 
sequently diminished. 

AMierevcr  the  system  of  virtually  excluding  the  farming  produce  of 
other  countries  is  suffered  to  exist,  the  occurrence  of  a  harvest  of  more 
than  average  productiveness,  should  act  as  the  signal  to  those  who  have 
the  control  of  the  curreocy  to  be  more  particularly  on  their  guard 
against  the  consequences  of  redundancy,  which  should  be  prevented  by 
a  timely  lessening  of  the  sum  in  circulation.  This  doctrine  may  not 
be  very  palatable  to  those  who,  depending  upon  the  produce  of  the  soil, 
may  see,  as  its  practical  effect,  only  a  further  depression  in  the  price  of 
grain.  On  every  occasion  that  has  arisen  since  the  return  of  the  Bank  to 
specie  payments,  when  an  abundant  harvest  has  caused  great  depression 
in  the  prices  of  com,  it  has  been  the  fashion  to  attribute  the  consequent 
"  agi'icultural  distress "  to  a  deficiency  of  circulating  money,  and  a 
clamour  has  been  raised  against  the  law  which  prevents  the  issue  in 
England  of  notes  under  5/.  If,  on  such  occasions,  the  wish  of  these 
advocates  for  a  greater  abundance  of  paper  money  had  been  gratified, 
there  is  but  little  ground  for  believing  that  they  would  have  really  been 
benefited  as  they  desired  to  be,  at  the  expense  of  the  remaining  classes 
of  the  community,  because  the  same  system  which  tended  to  raise 
the  price  of  what  they  had  to  sell  would  equally  have  raised  the 
prices  of  all  they  required  to  buy ;  and  as  the  enhancement  of  prices 
would  in  all  cases  be  principally  the  effect  of  speculative  demand,  there 
is  reason  for  believing  that  speculators  would  not  choose,  as  an  object 


CHAP.    XII.] 


CURRENCY. 


431 


for  purchase,  an  article  which  was  known  to  be  held  in  undue  abun- 
dance, wliilo  other  articles  were  to  be  found  against  which  so  strong  an 
objection  would  not  apply  ;  and  for  this  reason  the  rise  in  the  prices  of 
agricultural  produce,  if  experienced  at  all,  would  be  so  in  a  less  degree 
than  the  prices  of  other  commodities,  a  result  which  would  be  highly 
detrimental  to  agriculturists. 

If  the  suggestion  that  has  been  here  thrown  out  is  entitled  to  any 
consideration,  it  is  clear  that,  to  enable  us  to  judge  with  correctness 
whether  the  currency  be  at  any  time  redundant  or  otherwise,  we  require 
to  ascertain  other  facts  than  that  of  the  amount  of  bank  notes  in  circu- 
lation. There  is,  perhaps,  no  single  circumstance  more  pregnant  with 
instruction  on  this  subject  than  a  general  rise  or  fall  of  prices  when 
viewed  and  adjusted  in  combination  with  local  or  temporary  causes  of 
disturbances,  ^^'ith  this  end  in  view  it  would  be  highly  instructive  if 
tables  of  prices  were  made  and  recorded,  at  short  intervals,  accompanied 
by  remarks  explanatory  of  any  peculiarities  which  may  be  thought  to 
offer  disturbance  to  the  correctness  of  their  result.  It  is  not  meant  by 
this  to  recommend  a  mere  record  of  the  prices  of  goods,  such  as  would 
be  afforded  by  a  collection  of  prices- current,  but  a  calculation  conducted 
upon  the  plan  already  described,  or  some  other  that  should  be  equiva- 
lent to  it,  and  w^hich  would  afford,  on  inspection,  a  correct  comparative 
view  of  the  average  fluctuations  that  should  occur.  Such  tables  would 
not  be  without  benefit,  even  when  they  had  been  continued  for  only  a 
few  years  ;  but  when  they  should  have  been  carried  over  a  considerable 
period  of  time,  and  the  results  which  they  would  present  could  be 
studied  in  conjunction  with  actual  occurrences,  we  might  be  enabled  to 
read  the  signs  they  would  present,  so  as  to  secure  ourselves,  with  cer- 
tainty, from  those  alternations  which  now  so  frequently  bring  alarm  and 
ruin  to  commercial  men.  The  following  table  is  offered  as  the  com- 
mencement of  such  a  series  of  calculations.  The  details  would  occupy 
a  very  considerable  space,  without  yielding  an  adequate  advantage,  for 
which  reason  the  results  only  are  presented : — 

Table,  showing  tlie  Amount  of  Bank  Notes  in  Circulation,  the  Rates  of  Exchange  with  Hamburg 
and  Paris,  and  the  comparative  Prices  of  Wheat,  and  of  Fifty  Articles  of  Commerce  {including 
Wheat),  at  the  beginning  of  each  Month,  from  January,  1833,  to  December,  1837. 


nank  of  England 

BulUon  held 

1 

Nolc»  in  Circula- 

Country Bank 

by  the 

Exchange 
with 

Exchange 

Comparative 

Coinpnralive 

MONTH. 

tion,  according  to 
the  Average 

Notes  in  Circula- 
tion, as  advertised 

Bank  of  England 
(averager,  as 

with  Paris, 
three  days' 

Price  of 
Wheat  in 

Price  of 
SO  Articles  in 

advertis^-d  in  the 
London  Gazette. 

in  the 
London  Gazette. 

advertised  iu  the 
London  Gazette. 

Hamburg. 

Sight. 

England. 

LondoD. 

£. 

£. 

£. 

1833.  Jan. 

17,9r2,000 

8,983,000 

13-14 

25-95 

1-0000 

1-0000 

Feb. 

18,318,000 

9.648,000 

13-144 
13-15* 

25-85 

0-9800 

1-0034 

Mar. 

18,731,000 

9;959,000 

25-90 

0-9752 

0-9999 

April 

19,319,000 

10,068,000 

13-15i 

25-90 

0-9785 

0-9995 

May 

19,430,000 

10,165.000 

13-1.5' 

25-90 

0-9892 

0-9933 

June 

19,312,000 

•• 

10,324,000 

13-15 

25-90 

0-9907 

0-9977 

July 

19,254,000 

10,673,000 

13- 15^ 

25-85 

0-9907 

1-0360 

432 


TROGRESS  OF  THE  NATION. 


[sec. 


Table,  showing  the  Amount  of  Bank  Notes  in  Circulation,  the  Bates  of  Exchange  with  Hamburg 
and  Paris,  ice. — continued. 


Bank  of  England 

Bullion  held 

Notea  ID  Circula 

Country  Bank 

bv  the 

Exchange 

Comparative 

Comparative 

lion,  accnrdini;  lo 

Notes  in  Circula- 

Bank of  EuRlnnd 

Exchango 

with  Paris, 

Price  of 

Price  of 

MONTH. 

the  Average 

tion,  as  advertised 

(average),  as 

with 

three  Days' 

Wheat  in 

50  Articles  in 

advcrlisiH\  in  the 
London  Gazelle. 

in  the 
London  Gazette. 

adverlisi  d  in  the 
London  Gazette. 

Hamburg. 

Sight. 

England. 

London. 

£. 

£. 

£. 

1S33.  Aug. 

19,526,000 

11,005,000 

13-13| 
13-1.3t 

25-75 

1-0200 

1-0717 

Sept. 

19,780,000 

11.078,000 

25-70 

1-0215 

1-0996 

Oct. 

19,823,000 

10,905,000 

13-llf 

25 -.50 

1-0015 

1-0951 

Nov. 

19,202.000 

, , 

10,461,000 

13-12i 

25-50 

0-9644 

1-0932 

Dec. 

18,659,000 

10,134,000 

13-11 

25-55 

0-9429 

1-0863 

1S34.  Jan. 

18,216,000 

10,152,104 

9,948,000 

13-10] 

25-40 

0-9166 

1-1094 

Feb. 

13,. 377, 000 

9,954,000 

13-11 

25-35 

0-S073 

1-0996 

Mar. 

18,700,000 

.  , 

9,829,000 

13-10 

25 -27^ 

0-8995 

1-1026 

April 

19,097,000 

10,191,827 

9,431,000 

13-11] 

25-40 

0-8826 

1-1014 

^lay 

18,978,000 

8,884,000 

13-12 

25-45 

0-8826 

1-0900 

June 

18,922,000 

,  , 

8,645,000 

13-111- 

25-45 

0-8811 

1-1029 

July 

18,895,000 

10,518,682 

8,659,000 

13-12' 

25-45 

0-8903 

1-1087 

Aug. 

19,110,000 

8,-598,000 

13-11 

25-321 
25-421 

0-8995 

1-1102 

Sept. 

19,147,000 

8,272,000 

13-12 

0-8826 

1-1191 

Oct. 

19,126,000 

10,154,112 

7,695,000 

13-12 

25-40 

0-8133 

1-1267 

Nov. 

18,914,000 

.  , 

7,123,000 

13-lU 

25-421 

0-7716 

1-1.307 

Dec. 

18,694,000 

6,781,000 

13-11 

25-40 

0-7793 

1-1470 

1835.  Jan. 

18,012.000 

10,659,828 

6,741,000 

13-101 
13-lOf 

25-40 

0-7607 

1-1503 

Feb. 

18,OJ9;000 

6,693,000 

25-40 

0-7562 

1-1606 

Mar. 

18,311,000 

6,536,000 

13-11 

25-45 

0-7546 

1-1681 

April 

18,591,000 

10,420,160 

6,329,000 

13-13 

25-621 

0-7391 

1-1637 

May 

18,. 542, 000 

6,197,000 

13.11f 
I3-I.3I 

25-45 

0-7251 

1-1580 

June 

18,460,000 

,  , 

6,1, 50^000 

25-60 

0-7297 

1-1672 

July 

18,315,000 

10,939,801 

6,219;000 

13-13] 
13- 14 
13-l4 
13-l4 

25-60 

0-7421 

1-1686 

Aug. 

18,322,000 

6,283,000 

25-60 

0-78.54 

1-1697 

Sept. 

18,340,000 

6,326,000 

25-60 

0-7732 

1-1855 

Oct. 

18,240.000 

10,420,623 

6,261,000 

25-62i 

0-7128 

1-1892 

Nov. 

17,930,000 

6,186,000 

13-141 
13-13| 

25-621 

0-6821 

1-2198 

Dec. 

17,321,000 

•• 

6,626,000 

25 -62 J 

0-6790 

1-2327 

1836.  Jan. 

17,262,000 

11,134,414 

7,076,000 

13-14 

25-65 

0-6666 

1-2555 

Feb. 

17,427,000 

7,471,000 

13-13i 
13-1.3i 

25-571 

0-7333 

1-2640 

Mar. 

17,739,000 

7,701,000 

25-55 

0-8259 

1-2762 

April 

18,063,000 

11,447,919 

7,801,000 

13-13| 

25 -.55 

0-8592 

1-2915 

May 

18,154,000 

7,782,000 

13-13 

25-50 

0-8870 

1-2990 

June 

18,051,000 

.. 

7,663,000 

13-1.3i 
13-121 

25- 52^ 

0-9222 

1-3120 

July 

17,899,000 

12,202,196 

7,362,000 

25-50 

0-9381 

1-3290 

Aug. 

17,940,000 

,  , 

6,926,000 

13-12 

25-40 

0-9381 

r.3460 

Sept. 

18,061,000 

6,325,000 

13-12 

25-35 

0-8907 

1-3287 

Oct. 

18,147,000 

11,733,945 

5,719,000 

13-1.31 
13-121 

25-371 

0-8740 

1-3233 

Nov. 

17,936,000 

5,257,000 

25-40 

0-9566 

1- 3-289 

Dec. 

17,361,000 

•• 

4,545,000 

13-121 

25 -.50 

1-1037 

1-2920 

1837.  Jan. 

17,422,000 

12,011,697 

4,287,000 

13-12 

25-55 

1-0953 

1-2682 

Feb. 

17,868,000 

4,032,000 

13-111 
13-lli 

25-42* 

1-0880 

1-2477 

Mar. 

18,178,000 

4,048,000 

25 -471 

1-0325 

1-2449 

April 

18,432,000 

ll,03i,063 

4,071,000 

13-13" 

25-60' 

1-0494 

1-22.55 

May 

18,480,000 

4,190,000 

13-132 
13-13| 

25-60 

1-0277 

1-1865 

June 

18,419,000 

4,423,000 

25-45 

1-0061 

1-1591 

July 

18,202,000 

10,872,437 

4,750,000 

13-13^ 

25-50 

1-0540 

•     1  - 1422 

Aug. 

18,462,000 

5,754,000 

13-14 

25-55 

1-1120 

1  - 1336 

Sept. 

18,814,000 

6,303,000 

13.1.31 

25-55 

1-0462 

1-1.321 

Oct. 

18,716,000 

10,142,049 

6,856,000 

13-13t 
13-131 

25-55 

1-0463 

1  - 1450 

Nov. 

18,344,000 

, . 

7,432,000 

25-55 

0-9444 

1-1586 

Dec. 

17,998,000 

8,172,000 

13-11| 

25-50 

0-9721 

1-1689 

XII.] 


CURRENCY. 


433 


The  circulation  of  notes  payal)le  to  bearer  in  England,  and  the 
amount  of  bullion  in  the  Bank  of  England,  at  the  end  oi'  each  (juarter, 
during  the  years  1838  to  1849,  was — 


YEARS. 


CIRCULATION— ENGLAND. 


Bank  ol' 
£n"lanil. 


Private  Banks. 


Joint  Stock 
Banks. 


Bullion 

in  the  Bank 

of 

England. 


1838.  March 
June 
Sept. 
Dec. 

1839.  March 
June 
Sept. 
Dec. 

1840.  March 
June 
Sept. 
Dec. 

1841.  March 
June 
Sept. 
Dec. 

1842.  March 
June 
Sept. 
Dec. 

1843.  March 
June 
Sept. 
Dec. 

1844.  March 
June 
Sept. 
Dec. 

1845.  March 
June 
Sept. 
Dec. 

1846.  March 
June 
Sept. 
Dec. 


1847 


March 
June 
Sept. 
Dec. 


1848.  March 
June 
Sept. 
Dec. 

1849.  March 
June 
Sept. 
Dec. 


18,987, 
19,047, 
19,359, 
18,469, 

18,298, 
18,101, 
17,960, 
16,732, 

16,818, 
16,871, 
17,263, 
16,446, 

16,537, 
16,632, 
17,481, 
16,972, 

16,9.'>i 
17,795 
19,714 
19,. 562 

19.539 
18,411 
19.132 
18,791 

21.122, 
21^327 
20,9.54, 
20,107, 

19.724, 
20,214, 
20,359, 
20,257, 

19,620. 
19,564, 
20,230, 
19,641, 

19,524, 
17,911, 
18,605, 
17,956, 

17,684, 
17,484, 
17,549, 
17,129, 

17,945, 
17,9.34, 
18,131, 
18:318. 


£. 

,000 

7,005, 

,000 

7,383, 

,000 

7,083, 

,000 

7,599, 

,000 

7,642, 

,000 

7,610, 

,000 

6,917, 

,000 

7,251, 

,000 

6,893, 

,000 

6,973, 

,000 

6,3.50, 

,000 

6,575, 

,000 

6,-322, 

,000 

6,444, 

,000 

5,768, 

»,000 

5,718, 

!,000 

5,299, 

),000 

4,995, 

LOOO 

5,098, 

>,000 

5,085, 

),000 

4,716, 

,(X)0 

4,. 503, 

>,000 

4,288, 

,000 

4,. 533, 

J, 000 

4,983, 

,000 

4,743, 

1,405 

4,338, 

,905 

4,442, 

t,130 

4,452, 

,435 

4,. 399, 

,495 

4,355, 

,415 

4,481, 

).000 

4,515. 

t,a3o 

4,457, 

),290 

4,390, 

,560 

4,526, 

t,270 

4,. 542, 

,430 

4,. 386, 

,600 

4,175, 

.,150 

3,528, 

1,600 

3,598, 

t,890 

3,628, 

»,020 

3,485, 

),630 

3,500, 

>,910 

3,466, 

1,390 

3,515, 

,060 

3,462, 

5.270 

3,539. 

472 
247 
811 
942 

104 
708 
6.57 
678 

012 
613 

801 
833 

579 
395 
136 
211 

455 
594 
259 

885 

506 
478 
180 
048 

646 
057 
.569 
808 

961 
110 
485 
246 

3.54 
140 
274 
006 

057 
282 
774 
273 

279 
.346 
319 
607 

975 
557 
.306 


£. 
3,921 
4,362 
4,281 
4,625 

4,617 
4,665 
4,167 
4,170 

3.940 
4,138 
3,630 

3,798 

3,644 
3,807 
3,311 
3,217 

2,990 
2,850 
2,819 
3,001 

2,862 
2,863 
2.763 
3,161 

3,. 502 
3,665 
3,1.58 
3,059 

3, 147 
3,131 
3,142 
3,162 

3.176 
3,128 
3,111 
3,138 

3,248 
3,088 
2,954 
2,410 

2,572 
2,573 
2,471 
2,567 

2,590 
2.661 
2,. 577 

2,601 


039 
2.56 
151 
546 

363 
110 
313 
767 

232 

618 
285 
155 

258 
055 
941 
812 

986 
532 
749 
590 

986 
779 
302 
033 

363 
104 
290 
434 

797 
097 
226 
340 

655 
190 
622 
498 

528 
442 
284 
222 

343 
630 
965 
114 

876 
.306 
234 

1.59 


29,913,511 
30, 792,. 503 
30,723,962 
.30,694,488 

30,557,467 
30,376,818 
2^,044,970 
28,154,445 

27,651,244 
27,983,231 
27,244,086 
26,819,993 

26,. 503, 837 
26,883,450 
26,-561,077 
25,908,023 

25,242,441 
25,641,126 
27,632,008 
27,649,475 

27,118,492 
25,778,257 
26,183,482 
26,485,081 

29,608,009 
29,735,161 
28,451,264 
27,610,147 

27.324.888 
27, 7-44;  642 
27,857,206 
27,901,001 

27. .312. 009 
27. 149.. 360 
27,732,186 
27,306,064 

27,314,8.55 
25.386.154 
25,735,658 
23,894,645 


23,855,222  15 

23,686,866  13 
23,506,-304  I  13 

23,197,3.51  15 

24,003,761  15 

24,111,253  15 

24,170,600  15 

24.4,59,183  17 


£. 
126 
722 
437 
302 

073 
344 
816 

887 

360 
434 
453 
511 

.339 
098 
975 
486 

006 
846 
816 
0.54 

420 
873 
2.50 
996 

784 
900 
022 


000 
000 
000 
000 

000 
000 
000 
000 

000 
000 
000 
000 

000 
000 
000 
000 

000 
000 
000 
000 

000 
000 
000 
000 

000 
000 
2.56 
416 

410 
610 
820 
925 

.535 
659 
352 
691 

583 
405 
703 
526 

866 
055 
493 
676 

684 
811 
383 

080,642 


471 
051 
068 
675 

987 
015 
224 
066 

015 
526 
782 
236 

210 
646 
678 
000 

197 
120 
254 


2  F 


434 


PROGRESS  OF  THE  NATION. 


[sec.   III. 


The  circulation  of  notes  in  Scotland  and  Ireland  respectively  in  each 
quarter  of  the  years  1842  to  1841),  was— 


YEARS. 


1842.  March 
•Tune 
Sept. 
Dec. 

1843.  March 
.Tune 
Sept. 
Dec. 

1844.  March 
June 
Sept. 
Dec. 

1845.  March 
June 
Sept. 
Dec. 


Scotland. 


£. 
2,811,109 
2,887,033 
2,648,549 
3,091,228 

2,457,604 

2,869,863 
2,659,176 
2,901,746 

2,610,712 

3,117,988 
2,940,456 
3,486,818 

2,9.50,870 
3,333,906 
3,341,397 
3,336,409 


Ireland. 


£. 
5, 596,. 37  5 
4,670,709 
4,469,037 
5,243,-380 

5,105,140 

4,839,880 
4,675,896 
5,8,50,839 

5,997,172 
5,. 568,. 577 
5,411,412 
6,845,321 

7,052,177 
6,494,132 
6,259,855 
7,404,366 


1846.    March 
June 
Sept. 
Dec. 


1847 


March 
June 
Sept. 
Dec. 


1848.  March 
June 
Sept. 
Dec. 

1849.  March 
June 
Sept. 
Dec. 


.'^cot.land. 


£. 
3,018,681 
3,508,655 
3,446,787 
3,787,151 

3,360,348 
3,647,314 
3,497,525 
3*  .341, 31 7 

2,951,937 
3,437,-587 
3,021,307 
3,276,826 

2,935,120 
3,380,902 
3,139,414 
3,212,448 


Ireland. 


£. 
7,444,960 
6,972,026 
6,-588,175 
6,515,414 

6,704,7.36 
5,464,951 
5,048,310 
5,196,116 

5,107,-335 
4,661,346 
4,265,280 
4,777,633 

4,401,750 
4,046,473 
4,133,928 
4,6.34,503 


An  Act  was  passed  in  1844,  renewing  for  ten  years  the  charter  of  the 
Bank  of  England.  By  this  Act,  which  was  represented  by  Sir  Robert 
Peel  as  "  the  complement  of  the  Act  of  1819,"  great  changes  were  in- 
troduced into  the  system  by  which  it  had  previously  been  attempted  to 
regulate  the  currency  of  the  country. 

The  privilege  of  issuing  paper  money  wathin  a  circle  of  sixty  miles 
radius  round  London,  was  continued  exclusively  to  the  Bank  of  Eng- 
land, but  with  the  following  restrictions.  The  establishment  was  divided 
into  two  departments  wholly  distinct  from  each  other,  placed  under 
separate  officers  and  keeping  separate  accounts.  One  of  these  depart- 
ments was  continued  for  the  ordinary  purposes  of  banking,  while  the 
other  was  created  for  the  single  purpose  of  regulating  the  issue  of 
notes,  the  amount  of  which  was  in  no  case  ever  to  exceed  fourteen 
millions  of  pounds  in  addition  to  the  actual  amount  of  gold  and  silver 
bullion  lodged  by  the  banking  department  in  the  department  of  issue. 
The  sum  of  14,000,000/.  which  the  Bank  is  thus  authorised  to  issue 
beyond  the  value  of  bullion  in  its  coffers,  is  made  up  of  11,000,000/.,  the 
amount  of  its  capital  which  has  been  lent  permanently  to  Government, 
at  3  per  cent,  interest,  and  3,000,000/.  of  pubhc  securities,  bearing  in- 
terest, which  the  bank  of  issue  is  empowered  to  hold  for  that  purpose. 
Under  this  system,  the  Bank  must  be  always  provided  with  the  means 
of  discharging  on  demand  all  its  notes  in  excess  of  14,000,000/.,  for 
which  remaining  sum  the  public  holds,  in  the  hands  of  the  Government, 
the  best  possible  security,  that  of  the  property  of  the  Bank,  No  question 
as  to  the  solvency  of  the  establishment  can,  therefote,  ever  arise,  while 
it  is  hardly  possible  to  conceive  that  a  drain  upon  the  treasure  of  the 


ciiAi'.  XII.]  OITRKENCY.  435 

Bank  sliould  ever  be  carried  so  far  as  to  reduce  its  outstaiidin"-  notes 
to  so  low  a  level  as  14,()0(),()()0/.  The  safety  of  the  Bank,  as  well  as 
that  of  the  public,  may  be  considered  as  secured,  so  far  as  the  question 
of  credit  is  at  stake.  It  remains,  however,  to  be  proved  whether,  under 
all  circumstances  that  may  arise,  the  security  of  the  public  is  thus 
equally  well  attained  as  respects  the  management  of  the  currency ;  and 
there  are  not  wanting  men  of  great  practical  experience  in  such  ques- 
tions, who  have  expressed  strong  doubts  upon  this  subject.  It  woidd 
be  out  of  place  to  enter  upon  the  controversy  here.  Those  who  desire 
to  know  the  opinions  to  which  reference  has  been  made,  will  naturally 
consult  the  writings  of  the  accomplished  men  wlio  have  published  their 
reasonings  uj)on  the  subject,  particularly  those  of  Mr.  Tooke  and  Mr. 
Loyd  (now  Lord  Overstone),  who  take  opj)osite  views  regarding  it,  and 
the  series  of  articles  written  by  Mr.  James  Wilson  on  "  Currency  and 
Banking,"  published  first  in  the  Economist  weekly  paper,  between 
March  and  May,  1845,  and  since  collected  in  an  octavo  volume.* 

It  must  be  evident  that  any  attempt  to  regulate  the  currency  by  con- 
trolling the  issues  of  the  Bank  of  England,  must  fail  of  its  object,  unless 
an  equal  control  were  exercised  over  the  issues  of  private  and  joint- 
stock  banks.  It  was  accordingly  provided  by  the  Act  of  1844,  that 
"no  person  other  than  a  banker,  who  on  the  6th  of  May,  1844,  was 
lawfully  issuing  his  own  notes,  shall  make  or  issue  bank-notes  in  any 
part  of  the  United  Kingdom."  The  privilege  of  such  issue  was  con- 
tinued to  those  persons  ;  but  the  amount  that  may  be  issued  in  each  case 
was  restricted  to  the  amount  which  constituted  their  actual  issues  upon 
the  average  of  the  two  preceding  years. 

Further,  the  most  perfect  publicity  was  provided  as  regards  the 
amount  of  issues  by  weekly  publications  thereof  in  the  London  Gazette. 

*  It  affords  a  strong  prima  facie  corroboration  of  the  view  taken  by  Mr.  Tooke  upon  this 
important  subject,  that  on  the  first  occasion  of  monetary  difficulty,  which  arose  in  1847, 
after  the  passing  of  the  Act  of  1844,  the  Bank  received  authority  from  the  Government  to 
disregard  the  restriction  which,  as  respects  its  issues,  was  imposed  by  the  existing  law. 


2  F  2 


436  PROGRESS  OF  THE  NATION.  [sec.  hi. 


CHAPTER  XIII. 

COINAGE. 

Bad  State  of  the  Coinage  at  the  beginning  of  the  Centur)' — Disappearance  of  Coin — Bark 
Tokens — Moneys  coined  1801  to  1849 — Diminished  weight  of  Silver  Coins — Proposal  of 
Double  Standard— Copper  Coinage  1821  to  1849. 

The  condition  of  the  country  in  regard  to  the  coined  money  in  circula- 
tion during  the  early  years  of  the  present  century  was  exceedingly 
unsatisfactory.  Of  silver  coin  issued  from  the  Mint  there  was  scarcely 
any.  The  shillings  and  sixpences  that  passed  from  hand  to  hand  by 
common  consent  were  almost  all  of  them  blank  pieces  of  silver,  intrin- 
sically worth  less  than  half  the  sums  at  which  they  were  current. 
Guineas,  half-guineas,  and  gold  pieces  of  the  value  of  seven  shillings, 
were  occasionally  seen ;  but  the  rapid  advance  in  the  market  price  of 
gold,  as  explained  in  a  former  Chapter,  at  length  eftectually  drove  all 
coins  of  that  metal  from  circulation.  The  place  of  guineas  was  sup- 
plied by  bank  notes,  of  the  denominations  of  one  and  two  pounds,  and 
to  provide  the  community  with  the  means  for  carrying  on  the  smaller 
transactions  of  daily  traffic,  different  expedients  were  successively 
adopted.  At  first,  Spanish  dollars  stamped  with  a  diminutive  impress 
of  the  King's  head  were  issued  by  Government,  at  the  rate  of  4:S.  Qd. 
each  ;  but  these  soon  disappeared,  and  the  Bank  of  England  was  au- 
thorised to  issue  "  tokens,"  and  put  into  circulation  pieces  of  the  respec- 
tive nominal  values  of  Is.  Qd.,  of  3^.,  and  of  os.  The  last  of  those  tokens 
consisted  of  Spanish  dollars,  the  original  impress  upon  which  was  re- 
moved, and  a  different  one  given  by  means  of  a  powerful  press.  "  The 
smaller  tokens — those  of  3^.  and  Is.  Qd. — were  intrinsically  so  for  below 
the  irnominal  value,  that  they  remained  in  circulation  until  called  in  ; 
but  the  dollars,  or  five  shillings  tokens,  were  so  much  nearer  in  value 
to  their  nominal  rate,  that  on  a  further  advance  in  the  market  price  of 
silver  bullion,  it  became  necessary  to  raise  their  nominal  value  10  per 
cent.,  causing  them  to  pass  for  5s.  Qd.  each. 


cifAr.  XIII.] 


COINAGE. 


437 


An  Account  of  the  Value  of  Gold  and  Silver  Moneys  coined  at  the  Mini  in  each  Year  from 

1801  to  1841). 


Years. 

(iold. 

Silver. 

Total. 

Years. 

Gold. 

Silver. 

Total. 

£. 

£. 

£. 

£. 

£. 

£. 

1801 

450,242 

53 

4,50,205 

1826 

5,896,461 

608,606 

6,. 505, 067 

1802 

437,018 

62 

437,080 

1827 

2,512,6.36 

33,020 

2,-545,656 

1803 

5%,  444 

72 

596,516 

1828 

1,008,559 

16,288 

1,024,847 

1804 

718,3'J7 

77 

718,474 

1829 

2,446,7.54 

108,260 

2,555,014 

1805 

54,668 

183 

54,851 

1830 

2,387,881 

151 

2,388,0.32 

1806 

405,105 

Nil. 

405,105 

1831 

587,949 

33,696 

621,645 

1807 

Nil. 

108 

108 

1832 

3,730,7.57 

145 

3,730,902 

1808 

371,744 

Nil. 

371,744 

1833 

1,225,269 

145 

1,225,414 

1809 

298,946 

115 

299,061 

1834 

66,949 

432,775 

499,724 

1810 

316,935 

121 

317,056 

1835 

1,109,718 

146,665 

1,256,-383 

1811 

312,263 

Nil. 

312,263 

1836 

1,787,782 

497,719 

2,285,501 

1812 

Nil. 

52 

52 

1837 

1,253,088 

75,385 

1,328,473 

1813 

519,722 

90 

519,812 

1838 

2, 855,. 364 

174,042 

3,029,406 

1814 

Nil. 

161 

161 

1839 

504,310 

390,654 

894,964 

1815 

Nil. 

Nil. 

1840 

207, 90f) 

207,900 

1816 

1,805,251 

1,805,251 

1841 

.378, "472 

89,496 

867,968 

1817 

4, 275  ,".3.37 

2,4.36,298 

6,711,635 

1842 

5,977,051 

192,654 

6,169,705 

1818 

2,862,373 

.576,279 

3,438,652 

1843 

6,607,849 

2.39,580 

6,847,429 

1819 

3,574 

1,267,273 

1,270,817 

1844 

3,563,949 

610,632 

4,174,-581 

1820 

949,516 

847,717 

1,797,233 

1845 

4.244,609 

647,6.58 

4,892,267 

1821 

9,520,758 

433,686 

9,9.54,444 

1846 

4;, 3,34, 912 

.559,. 548 

4,894,460 

1822 

5,356,787 

31,430 

5,388,217 

1847 

5,158,440 

125,730 

5,284,170 

1823 

759,748 

285,272 

1,045,020 

1848 

2,451,999 

35,442 

2,487,441 

1824 

4,065,075 

282,070 

4,347,145 

1849 

2,177,955 

119,592 

2,297,547 

1825 

4,580,919 

417,. 535 

4,998,4.54 

With  the  exception  of  an  insignificant  amount  of  small  coins  struck 
for  the  purpose  of  distrihution  as  alms  by  the  King,  and  known  as 
Maundy  Money — from  the  circumstance  of  its  being  given  away  on 
Maundy  Monday — there  was  not  any  silver  coinage  by  the  State  until 
1816.  Previous  to  that  year  12  oz.  of  standard  silver,  containing 
11  oz.  2  dwts.  of  pure  silver,  and  18  dwts.  alloy,  v/ere  by  law  to  be 
coined  into  &2  shillings  ;  but  in  that  year  an  Act  was  passed  making 
only  gold  coin  legal  tender  in  all  payments  of  more  than  40^.,  and  pro- 
viding that  the  pound  or  12  ounces  troy  of  standard  silver  should  be 
coined  into  66  shillings,  giving  to  the  State,  as  seignorage,  the  differ- 
ence between  the  market  price  of  silver  of  the  Mint  standard,  and  5^.  M. 
per  ounce.  Before  the  passing  of  this  Act  (56  Geo.  III.,  c.  68)  silver 
coin  of  standard  weight  and  fineness  was  a  legal  tender  to  the  amount 
of  25/.  The  market  price  of  silver  has  not  been  such  since  the  year 
1816  as  to  afford  any  temptation  for  melting  or  exporting  silver  coins 
issued  at  this  rate  of  depreciation,  and  the  country  has  continued  to  be 
amply  supplied  with  silver  coins  of  every  denomination. 

It  has  been  proposed  at  various  times,  by  persons  whose  names  give 
considerable  weight  to  their  recommendation,  that  we  should  adopt  a 
double  standard,  and  make  silver  as  well  as  gold  a  legal  tender  to  any 
amount.  Under  svich  a  state  of  the  law,  it  would  be  necessary  again  to 
coin  silver  money  of  standard  fineness  at  the  Mint  rate  of  55.  2d.  per 
ounce  ;    and  if,  owing  to  any  sudden    mercantile    demand,  or  such  a 


438 


PROGRESS  OF  THE  NATION. 


[sec.    111. 


commercial  derangement  as  we  have  too  often  witnessed,  it  should  ever 
become  profitable  to  export  silver,  we  might  then  be  subjected  to  very 
great  inconvenience.  On  the  other  hand,  it  must  be  allowed  that,  if 
such  an  option  as  that  supposed  were  given — viz.,  that  of  paying  in 
whichever  coin  might  best  suit  the  debtor, — the  Bank  of  England,  in 
meeting  a  foreign  demand,  might  occasionally  realize  large  profits,  from 
which  it  is  at  present  shut  out  ;  but  this  is  tlie  only  advantage  that  can 
be  anticipated  from  the  establishment  of  a  double  standard,  and  it  would 
surely  be  unwise  to  incur  the  risk  of  a  general  inconvenience  for  the 
sake  of  a  profit  that  might  possibly  result  to  a  private  body. 

Copper  coin  is  issued  from  the  Mint  at  the  rate  of  224Z.  per  ton,  or 
more  than  100  per  cent,  above  its  market  value  ;  there  can  hardly  be 
expected,  therefore,  to  arise  any  temptation  for  its  conversion  to  any 
other  purpose.  The  copper  coinage  which  was  issued  in  1797,  in  place 
of  the  old  defaced  Tower  halfpence,  was  of  the  intrinsic  value  of 
149/.  6s.  Sd.  per  ton  ;  but  as  the  market  value  of  the  metal  rose  in 
1806  to  200/.  per  ton,  it  has  since  then  been  thought  advisable  to  adopt 
the  rate  above  mentioned.  The  value  of  copper  coin  issued  since  the 
peace  has  been  as  follows  : — 


Years. 

£. 

Yeare. 

£. 

5  to  1820 

Nil. 

1836 

1,792 

1821 

2,800 

1837 

4,59? 

1822 

43,355 

1838 

1,56; 

1823 

32,480 

1839 

5,04(: 

1824 

Nil. 

1840 

3,136 

1825 

9,408 

1841 

3,808 

1826 

50,400 

1842 

Nil. 

1827 

19,712 

1843 

10,080 

1828 

2,464 

1844 

7,246 

1829 

1,568 

1845 

6,944 

1830 

2,464 

1846 

6,496 

1831 

7,392 

1847 

8,960 

1832 

448 

1848 

2,688 

1833 

Nil. 

1849 

1,792 

1834 

3,136 

1835 

2,688 

£242,457 

Previous  to  the  copper  coinage  above  mentioned,  as  having  been 
made  in  1797,  the  country  was  inundated  from  one  end  to  the  other  by 
coins  put  into  circulation  as  halfpence,  and  which  were  struck  by  trades- 
men or  other  private  adventurers.  The  encouragement  to  this  course 
was  found  in  the  then  existing  state  of  the  small  coinage.  The  halfpence 
put  into  circulation  by  private  parties  were  some  of  them  creditable 
specimens  of  the  art  of  coining  ;  and  all  of  them,  although  intrinsically 
below  their  nominal  value,  were  yet  considerably  nearer  to  it  than  the 
halfpence  otherwise  circulating.  When  the  State  undertook,  in  1797, 
to  issue  new  copper  coins,  the  circulation  of  these  private  tokens  was 
prohibited. 


CHAr.   XIV.]  WAGES.  4J9 


CHAPTER  XIV. 

WAGES. 

Bad  Seasons  1795-1800— Privations  of  Working  Classes— Decreased  Number  of  Marriages — 
Greater  competition  and  exertion  among  Labourers  when  Food  is  dear — Wages  not 
readily  adjusted  to  fluctuations  of  Seasons — Influence  of  those  fluctuations  upon  cha- 
racter of  Labourers — Weekly  Wages  of  Artisans,  &c.,  1800-1836— Benefits  resulting  from 
Cheap  Clothing — Insufficiency  of  Cliaritable  Aid  as  a  Substitute  for  Regular  Employ- 
ment ^Trials  of  the  Poor — I^lotives  for  Self-dependence — Wages  in  some  Foreign 
Countries. 

The  present  century  opened  inauspiciously  for  the  working  classes  in 
this  kingdom.  The  harvest  of  1795  had  been  very  deficient.  The 
quality  was  excellent,  but  the  quantity  so  short  that,  at  the  close  of  the 
season,  the  price  of  wheat  had  advanced  to  six  guineas  per  quarter.  The 
extraordinary  measures  that  had  been  adopted  by  Government  of  buying 
up  wheat  and  depositing  it  in  gi'anaries,  and  also  of  forcibly  seizing,  on 
the  high  seas,  neutral  vessels  loaded  with  grain,  and  compelling  the 
masters  to  sell  their  cargoes  to  the  government  agents, — measures 
exceedingly  objectionable  upon  many  grounds — had  the  effect  of  pre- 
venting a  still  greater  advance  of  prices,  which  might  otherwise  have 
occurred.  The  season  of  1796  was  favourable,  and  the  price  fell  from 
12:^5.  at  the  beginning,  to  56^.  at  the  end  of  the  year.  In  1797  the 
quality  was  bad,  and  the  quantity  deficient,  and  the  harvest  of  1798 
was  only  moderately  abundant ;  there  was  consequently  no  store  of 
grain  to  bring  in  aid  of  the  deficient  harvest  of  1799,  immediately  after 
which  the  price  rose  to  d'2s.  Id.  per  quarter.  In  1800  the  quality  was 
injured  by  excessive  rains,  and  the  quantity  was  so  short,  that  the 
average  price  of  wheat,  on  the  1st  of  January,  1801,  had  advanced  to 
139s.  per  quarter ;  every  other  article  of  provisions  being  propor- 
tionately dear.  Before  the  harvest  of  1801  was  secured,  the  price  of 
wheat,  in  the  London  market,  reached  I8O5.  per  quarter,  and  the  quar- 
tern loaf  was,  for  four  weeks,  as  high  as  Is.  lOJc?. 

The  privation  and  misery  which,  under  these  circumstances,  fell  to 
the  lot  of  the  poor,  were  exceedingly  gi*eat,  notwithstanding  the  anxious 
attention  given  to  the  subject  by  the  legislature,  and  the  exercise  of 
the   most  extensive  private  benevolence.     So  great  and  alarming  was 


440  PKOGRESS  OF  THE  NATION.  [sec.  hi. 

the  deartli,  that  it  became  a  matter  of  principle,  even  with  the  wealthy 
classes,  to  economise  as  mucii  as  possible  in  their  families  the  use  of 
the  principal  ai-ticle  of  food,  in  order  that  more  might  remain,  and  at  a 
less  exorbitant  price,  for  the  use  of  the  poor.  The  best  test  that  can  be 
offered  singly  of  the  privations  at  that  time  endured  by  the  bulk  of 
the  ])eople  is  to  be  found  in  the  marriage  registers.  The  numbers 
exhibited  therein,  for  each  of  the  years  from  1794  to  1801  inclusive, 
were  85  follow  : — 


Years. 

Marriage* 

1704 

71.797 

1795 

68,839 

1796 

73,107 

1797 

74,997 

Years. 

Marriages. 

1798 

79,477 

1799 

77,557 

1800 

69,851 

1801 

67,288 

It  is  curious  to  observe  how  intimate  a  relation  exists  between  the 
price  of  food  and  the  number  of  marriages.  The  falling  off  in  that 
number  observable  in  1795,  1800,  and  1801,  was,  in  each  year,  very 
marked  in  its  character.  The  harvest  of  1801  was  moderately  abun- 
dant, and  as,  in  addition  to  the  home  produce,  the  importations  of 
wheat  under  the  stimulus  of  a  bounty,  had  been  very  large  (sec.  2, 
cliap.  i.)  the  price  fell,  in  the  latter  part  of  the  year,  to  less  than 
half  what  it  had  been  before  the  harvest.  In  1802  the  crops,  although 
not  very  abundant,  }delded  enough,  with  a  small  importation,  for  our 
wants,  and  prices  became  still  more  moderate.  The  number  of  mar- 
riages in  England  in  these  two  years,  according  to  the  registers,  was 
90,396  in  1802,  and  94,379  in  1803.  In  March,  1804,  the  average 
price  of  wheat  was  as  low  as  49^.  Qd.  per  quarter,  but  the  harvest  in 
that  year  was  far  from  being  good,  and,  towards  Christmas,  the  price 
was  double  what  it  had  been  nine  montbs  before.  The  price  continued 
high  until  the  result  of  the  harvest  of  1805  could  be  known.  This 
proving  more  favourable,  and  a  considerable  quantity  of  foreign  grain 
having  been  imported,  prices  again  receded,  but  not  extensively.  The 
number  of  marriages  in  1804  and  1805  again  showed  the  restraining 
effect  in  this  respect  of  high  prices,  having  been  85,738  and  79,586, 
respectively. 

The  relation  that  subsists  between  the  price  of  food  and  the  number 
of  marriages  is  not  confined  to  our  own  country,  and  it  is  not  improbable 
that,  bad  we  the  means  of  ascertaining  the  facts,  we  should  see  the  like 
result  in  every  civilized  community.  We  possess  the  necessary  returns 
from  France,  and  the^e  fully  bear  out  tbe  view  that  has  been  given.  In 
1808,  the  price  of  wheat  being  52s.  bd.  per  quarter,  the  number  of  mar- 
riages in  that  country  was  220,933  ;  in  the  following  year  the  price  of 
wheat  fell  to  38s.,  or  27  per  cent.,  and  the  number  of  marriages  rose  to 
267,964;  in  1811  the  price  rose  to  67s.,  and  the  marriages  fell  off  to 
203,731.  Between  1816  and  1817  the  price  of  wheat  rose  nearly  50 
per  cent.,  and  the  marriages  diminished  from  249,247  to  205,877.    The 


cuAi".  XIV  J  WAGES.  Ill 

infliionco  here  ascribed  to  this  cause  has  been  even  more  striking  during 
the  three  years  ending  with  1835,  because  the  low  price  of  wheat  which 
continued  through  those  years  was  accompanied  by  a  constant  augmen- 
tation in  the  number  of  marriages.  The  average  prices  during  the  four 
years,  1832  to  1835,  and  the  number  of  marriages  that  occurred  in  each 
of  those  years,  were — 

Years.  Marriages.  s.  d. 

1832  242,469  52  0  per  quarter. 
18.3.3  203,553  38  0  „ 
ia34  271,220  34  3  „ 

1833  275,508  34     5  „ 

It  will  be  inferred  from  the  foregoing  details,  that  the  rate  of  wages 
adjusts  itself  but  slowly  to  the  varying  necessities  of  the  working  classes 
as  influenced  by  the  seasons.  It  may,  and  indeed  sometimes  does  happen, 
that  a  sudden  and  violent  rise  in  the  prices  of  the  necessaries  of  life  acts 
with  twofold  effect  against  the  industrious  poor.  In  order  to  provide 
the  wonted  supply  of  food  for  their  families,  men  employed  at  piece- 
work are  induced  to  task  their  labour  more  severely  than  usual,  and  by 
this  means  soon  create  against  themselves  a  scarcity  of  employment) 
which  induces  them  to  underbid  each  other  in  the  labour  market,  until 
they  end  by  procuring  in  return  for  greatly  increased  exertion  even  a 
smaller  amount  of  wages  than  they  had  received  before  the  high  price 
of  provisions  had  driven  them  to  severer  labour.  An  instance  of  the 
manner  and  degree  in  which  this  effect  has  been  produced,  was  given  in 
evidence  by  a  landowner  (Mr.  Milne)  before  a  Committee  of  the  House 
of  Lords,  on  the  Com  Laws,  which  sat  in  1814: — "I  wished  to  enclose 
a  farm  at  the  latter  end  of  the  year  1812,  or  the  beginning  of  1813.* 
I  sent  for  my  bailiff,  and  told  him  that  I  had  enclo.sed,  about  twenty- 
five  years  ago,  a  good  deal  of  land ;  that  the  enclosure  at  that  time 
cost  me  35.  per  ell  of  37  inches ;  that  a  neighbour  of  mine,  two  or 
three  years  ago,  had  made  similar  enclosures,  which  cost  him  5^.  per 
ell ;  that  I  thought  he  had  paid  too  much,  and  that  I  ought  to  do  it 
cheaper.  The  answer  I  got  from  my  bailiff  was, — that  provisions  were 
very  high,  that  the  labourers  were  doing  double  work,  and  that  of 
course  there  was  less  demand  for  labour  ;  and  that  he  could  do  these 
enclosures  last  year  at  a  cheaper  rate  than  I  had  ever  done  them  ; 
and  he  actually  executed  this  enclosure  at  about  2s.  6(f.  per  ell.  He 
again  came  to  me,  and  told  me  that  I  had  proposed  to  him  to  do  some 
ditching  and  draining  upcm  another  farm  which  I  did  not  intend  to  do 
till  about  a  twelvemonth  after,  from  the  circumstance  of  not  being  fully 
in  possession  of  the  whole  farm.  He  requested  that  I  would  allow  him 
to  do  it  that  season,  as  lie  could  do  it  so  much  cheaper,  and  that  a  great 

♦  Average  prices  of  wheat,  1812  122*.  8rf. 

1813  106«.  &d. 


442  PROGRESS  OF  THE  NATION.  [sec.  in. 

many  labourers  were  idle  frmn  having  little  work,  in  consequence  of 
those  employed  doing  double  work.  I  desired  him  to  go  on  with  that 
labour  likewise,  and  he  actually  contracted,  for  very  large  ditches,  at 
Qd.  an  ell,  which  I  do  not  think  I  could  do  now  under  from  l.s-.  to  Is.  Gd., 
in  consequence  of  the  fall  in  provisions." 

If  the  cost  of  living  to  a  labourer's  family  were  permanently  increased, 
there  can  be  no  doubt  that  wages  must  rise  proportionally ;  but  as, 
comparing  one  with  another,  in  the  different  years  that  make  up  the  sum 
of  a  labouring  man's  existence,  there  can  be  no  permanence  or  steadi- 
ness in  the  prices  of  articles  dependent  for  their  abundance  or  scarcity 
upon  the  seasons,  it  must  often  happen  under  our  present  system  that 
the  bulk  of  the  people  will  be  exposed  to  violent  alternations  of  plenty 
and  misery,  the  remedy  for  which  must  be  of  a  purely  moral  nature, 
and  cannot  be  conveniently  discussed  on  this  occasion. 

The  most  extensive  register  which,  in  point  of  time,  we  have  of  the 
rates  of  wages,  is  found  in  returns  made  to  Parliament  by  Greenwich 
Hospital.  Unfortunately,  however,  the  descriptions  of  artisans  em- 
ployed in  that  establishment  are  few,  and  their  occupations  come 
altogether  under  the  description  of  skilled  labour.  Besides  this,  the 
returns  made  up  to  1805  are  given  only  at  intervals  of  five  years ;  while 
the  rates  published  are  those  paid  to  masters  who  contract  for  the  per- 
formance of  the  work,  and  are  not  the  sums  received  by  the  workmen. 

No  one,  unless  he  shall  have  made  the  attempt  to  obtain  information 
of  this  kind,  can  be  aware  of  the  difficulty  opposed  to  his  success.  After 
many  and  long-continued  efforts  to  that  end,  it  is  not  possible  here  to 
bring  forward  many  authentic  or  continuous  statements  of  the  rates  of 
wages  in  this  country.  The  following  tables  (pp.  443-51),  comprise, 
indeed,  nearly  all  that  can  be  offered  on  the  subject  with  confidence  to  the 
reader.  Some  details  of  the  rate  of  wages  paid  to  agricultural  labourers 
might  have  been  added,  but  owing  to  the  vicious  system  which  prevailed 
until  lately  through  almost  every  part  of  the  kingdom  of  paying  a  part 
of  the  wages  of  such  labourers  out  of  parochial  rates,  the  addition 
would  not  have  given  any  greater  value  to  the  statement.  The  last 
column  of  the  table  pp.  443-45  contains  the  annual  average  price  of  wheat 
in  each  of  t^he  years.  If  the  variations  in  the  weekly  earnings  of  artisans 
are  examined  in  connexion  with  the  variations  in  the  price  of  this  first 
necessary  of  life,  it  will  at  once  be  seen  what  violent  alternations  of 
misery  and  comparative  plenty  must  have  been  experienced  by  the  working 
classes  in  this  country,  and  an  additional  argument  will  be  thence 
afforded  in  justification  of  the  repeal  of  the  law  which,  by  virtually  ex- 
cluding grain  of  foreign  growth,  was  made  to  aggravate  such  alternations. 

The  influence  which  these  alternations  have  upon  the  moral  character 
of  the  working  classes  is  greater  than  would  be  conceived  by  any  persons 
who  have  not  had  opportunities  for  observation  or  inquiry  upon  the  subject. 


CHAl".    XIV.] 


WAGES. 


143 


I' 
1 

3 

-»;                            %o  '^  ^z  '-D  fs  ••o  '-a  ^  ^  -^             ■■o 

Cl  IM  «  (M  <M  (N  (N  (N  (N  IN <-* 

c  o. 

"B«ooooo«o«D«o!c«fi«050«owte50co;ooooo<o«oo<oooototo-<  — 

•  osr^r^r^t^  —  -1'■*'^'■*-^•-t(^^-H.^^-^<■-*-*c5eo«oo•^<-*-t"^^««cOl^^T^a5^n 
•>rtsmM(Noico«c<3KW««cowwrti.Ortrtco«ccwco««coo?cor:cc7i'M 

o 

■5 

T3                                             00'  !--■  U5'  C"  «  O  •*  O  CO  O  O  1^  O  — '  eo  CO  W  «■  «  «'  «■  « 
^ (NIM-hOOSC-.  -HCr)CT>CS5<M-t-tOOOOOOOO 

1 

t3 oooooooooo o 

•5                                                     rt  rt  ^  rt  rt  rt   ^   0»   ,-.  ^                                                                                               ^ 

c  1; 

1^ 

-^ CO  oo  o  o  o  o  oo  ooc^o  o 

OOC405C-.  oooot^t^r^^xitoto^ccoco 

s 

.^                        ooo  oooo  ooooooo  oo                        o 

;    I    ;    ;    :    •<M(N<M(M<m<m<n<m«>]imi7|t)<;o<n(M^    •    •    •    •    •    -ao    •    •    •    • 

«                                       <N  S>»  S^  5>1  (N  <N  5^  CN  CM  (N  5^  (N  (M  (N  <N  T»                                        ^ 

ll 

c  o. 

5= 

■«00000«D«i;D<ri«OtD0050««tOtOOOOOOO«D500«OtD«0«-<— ■ 

•'F-«cccoe<^cococococococococococoeoeo^T^:cocococccocococ?eo^:ct■^^■M 

05 
> 

5 

o 

r 

5 

.»j*                            cooocooooo                                                  o 
t^r^t^r^t^t^r~r~t^co '■'^ 

,^                                        CO  CO  ^  CO  «0  O  O  «0  CO  ;0  (0  <0  O  O  O  O                                       O 

I     I     .'     .*     '.     .*  (N  (N  <M  IM  (M  !M  (M  (M  (M  (M  <N  ■>>  O  --  —  ■*     I     1     I     •     '     •  t^     '•     '•     •     I 
w                                       (N  IM  (N  C>)  (N  I^  C^  (>>  (N  'T*  5»l  C^  <N  5^  S^  <N                                        >-c 

If 

-gOOOOOcoOcoco<Ococococoeoco«ocooOOOO©«Ccocococo«OcoiftO» 

.a)J>35aOOO  —  (N(M(N'MOOOQOOO©35jria5CTs35COOOCOOOOOOOOOCOCO 
«  —  C^(Ml?>COCOCOC3COCOCOeOCOCO«000TCOC<5iM5>IJ^S^'?)S^(M(MS>lI'l!NC^iT>)3^ 

2 

Z 

ci 
<! 
O 

J3 
1 

< 

't-*-^lr)<T)<T^<T(<^>..n^ql^^■^^^^(^^;^^■^^    .    .    . 

p 
5 

.^                        oooooooooo                                           o 

_     ;     '.     \     !     \     I  00  00  00  00  00  »  00  00  00  ■*     •     •     '•     •     •     •     •     •     •     •     •  ■*     •     •     •     •     • 

^                                                           .^P^r^^Hl— <i-Hi— ll— It— 1.-^                                                                                                          1— 1 

c  S 

^                                                                 o oc o o ooo oooo o oo o 
O0350535ooaor^i--»^cococo«ococo 

.^                         o  o  o  o  o  o  o  oo  o  o  o  o  o  o  o                         o 
oi«mif5mu'2>n>f5mmin»nco(MiM'+ •*     •    •    •     • 

c  g, 
a;  o 

•^000000000000000c0cococo000coco000sococ0coe0?3 
.OOt^r^OO'Nr(<mcOCOCOCOi-i^^r-irti-(.-iOOO-»f-*-*-.J<C<30J'M5^<MC5S> 

> 

2'i5St3g20-<?^co-l'i.'5coi^»T!0-<<Nro-fL':!cor^oocnQ'-'Mco-finco 

OOOOOO^^'^^*^^'^^^^^^^^^!— «'>l'T^lMC*l'T*101(NC^010i?5c^C^COCCCOCO 

aoaoooaooOQOOoaoooooooooooooQOQOooooooooQOooaooOQOaDooooooQOoocoxi 

414 


puocJiiEss  or  THE  nation. 


[sec.  hi. 


a; 

z 

1 

ili 

"a 

t~  :N  X       "  -I"  "  -^  i^  o  O 

**cj^-*— i        cor-»'r^mf-^                  *' 

* 

(N  C><  5«        0(  !N  (M  C^  CO  Sj  (N 

Man- 
chester, 
Young 
Women. 

T3 
w 

-fct 

# 

«o                  o                  rt                  --                  Ift" 

t^ 

rs                   O                   CT>                   cv                   00 

> 
< 

5 

z 
< 

S 

3 

!C 

c?^a>«coooa>ooCTiOi35oo!Oor^«>»f3m-^Tj< 

Harrow- 
lord, 
Lanca- 
shire. 

■^ 

C*lrHi-Hi-Hi— li-H^HrH»-H 

c 

o 

■^000000(OOOOOOOOO^Oce<Dcoco;fiOcoOcoco;c;0;00 
.iOL';(NQOintoosTj<-*init-*5>>aiOsasc!OOoo(X>oooot^eD«ii.'5inmin»nin    •    • 

,o2 

■»; 

ooooooooooooootooo«o««>o«>o«oo 
^^oxiMWt--tDoot^t-oiOi050i-ivnmt^t^«o»«wcc 

< 

■«■ 

OO©OOOOOO50OOOOOOOO«5OOtC 

: 

cc 

c 

5 

13     1 
15     4 
17     8 
15    6 
13    2 
11     0 

-1-1 

!0-0  3^r-C;«D«0  3-.  too                                                                      O 

'-*                      r-^^ 

"^ 

w;oc;«ot^s>i'M--ctotoooo«ccc<o o 

-5 

"5 

'8881  o;  olSl  ^OJj  pouad  aqi  ^noqgnojqj  "Sti  oj  -sqi  uiojj 

o 
tc 

X 

5 
§^ 

Jl 

« 

cocooooooc                                            o 

oinicoomoirtii^i.'^                                                    o 

"B 

COOOOOOOOOOOOOCC 

to 

0^ 

.    . 

^iTi-rf^-^-^tnnoiOimo^oKfi'fi 

1 

■3 

■3 

16    0 
16    0 
16    0 
16    0 
16    0 
16     0 
16     0 
16     0 
16     0 
16     0 
16     0 
18     0 
18    0 
16     0 
16     0 
16    0 

ih'  0 

CO* 

o 

£ 

< 

' 

ooocooocoooooooooooooo 

inifiiOinir:iOiCitr:ifiinin^if:^knif:i^ifiir:ifiifico 

1" 
5 

"3     . 

ooocoooooc                                            o 

35I-.  r-.  cjcscn--  —  oo                                                     O 

rt  —  ^  —  ^ --  CI  C>)  !M  3^                                                                      Ci 

c    ■ 

s  £ 

"e 

ocooooocooto  to'*?  n  o 

o 
;o 

o  00  00  00  00  00  to  to  to  to  »ft  in  to  to  to 

« 

S>|rtP^r-lF^  —  >-<rtrt^--H-1^f-rt 

" 

C    1> 

■e 

toto<o^totocototocoto^toooo                            O 

00  00  00  00  00  —  —  — 00  00  00  00  00  ^  -H  — 00      •      •     • 

p^  ^^  _  ^C^  (M<N  _  — ,-  rt—  C>>  5^  I^                                       p-< 

> 

7, 

'X  X 

t^  GC  r; 
i  7.  00 

-* 
C  —  C')  «  ^  m  -o  r-  X  cr.  O  -H  5>i  CO  -t  in  O  i^  oc  cr.  C  —  -M  fT  -f  -2 

, 1 ^  —  —  —  —  —  oi  !M  I'l  7-1  ?i  •>!  '>)  ^)  •>!  "M  r:  CO  ro  r?  CO  CO 

*xxxxv:x=cx«cca:«x«»xxxxocxxxxx 

•o 

■                                       '" 1 

cii.vr.  XIV.1 


■\VAOES. 


115 


Average 
Price  of 
Wlieat  in 
Kngland. 

,•  C  I^  to  «  OC  -»•  «  C>I  O)  -^  ?■!  «  «3  -^  «  -M  "n  -t  «  —  C^  0  '.S  -JS  S  -O  -t  -i  00  I'l  -^  — .  y^ 

■^  —  X  1-  1  -  1  -  ~.  c  35  ■?!  0  t^  -xii^  C-.  00 1^  tg  in  *  0  «p  ••p  "-T  ■'  '-P  vo  '■*  '—  '-'■-  in  ^  M  -t 

z 

c  >. 

"3    t 

c  5J 

*      '                                    Tl  'M  I-I  •>!  ^  CI  ?3  •?!  ?!  tri  ri  ?1  ~1  ^ 

3 

■r. 

i 
i 

3 

II 

<  c  c  ~  z.  r  •-;  -^  -c;  ■-:  %:  v:  -J  -^  «c  ;s  to  40  tc  »  0  0  «c  ;o  '.D  0  »  «  <c  ca  -o  0  -^  0 

s.      rf. 

40     0 
40     0 
40    0 
40    0 
40     0 
42     0 
48    0 
48    0 
48     0 
4«     0 
48     0 
48     0 
48     0 
48     0 
48     0 
48     0 
48     0 
48     0 
48     0 
48     0 
48     0 
48     0 
48     0 
48     0 
48     0 
48     0 
48     0 
48     0 
48     0 
48     0 
48    0 
48     0 
48     0 

at 

•^000000000000000000000000000000000 
.««weoe2coW!D«)co;D-^«o«o^totO'>o;D;oco;D50«050'^;DO«otO'j50-.o 

73 

a 

2 
J 

■  f 

■~                            0000000000 -ooocoooooo 
^.    •    •    •    •    •    •    •  00  00  TO  in  m  m  in  in  i>)  ot  0  0  *»  S'l  '?i  "M  c^  ^1  ■?»  ?i    '•    '•    •    •    •    • 

1 

-s                                                                              oc  =  ococ  =  oo 

"is 

-a                                                               cooocooooeoooco-o 
.    •    •    • c  s  0  r-.  —  3-.  C-.  C-.  »  00  X  «  X  X  X  1- 

"a                        oooooocooo -000000 
inininininininininin«ininccr:-f • 

i 

o 

2 

■3                                  C0OOOOOOO--0                                                            0 

a;' 

a 

< 

z 

a 

ill' 

,*-  5  >. 

^  3  ? 

J2I. 
Ill 

-5                                                                            C0C0O35OX5^0-OCCCCCC 

^ gSgS3Sgf:x§SggggSg  •  •  • 

•^                                                 ooooo«ooooo«ocoooo 

^  =  ••••  =  =  =  ••■  =  =  -gSSSSSSg  -SSSSSSSi  '  '  ' 

c  _-5 

-3                                                  00000000     00000000 

2  = 

II. 

3 
J 

.    • ^?J— cr;  X— 'xxxxt^t^t-x    •    •    ■ 

r. 

1 

»  •  •  • a222222E:;222232;t2  •  '  • 

.0 

■>;                                                                                    m  in  m  oo^s>>  0*0^01^ 
.    •    '•    '•    '•    '•    '•    -   •    •    •    •    •    '    '    '■    '•    '•    '•    •  r^  r-  r^  in  m  -*<  (M  oi  iM  -M  -o    *    '•    '• 

i 

416 


PROGRESS  OF  THE  NATION. 


[sec.    III. 


Net  Weekly  Earnings  of  Factory  Hands  at  Manchester  in  full  Employment,  and  also  during  the 
period  of  Depression,  in  each  of  the  Years  1844  to  1849. 


1S44 

1845 

1846 

1847 

1848 

1849 

s. 

d. 

s.     d. 

«.     d. 

s.     d. 

.•!. 

d. 

s.     d. 

Card-room,  males 

.     .     .     .   :  13 

6.4 

13    8 

11     4 

1     7     9 

12 

0 

12    0 

,,          females   . 

. 

8 

o1 

8  10 

6     6 

3    4 

8 

9 

8     6 

Spinners  and  piecers 

10 

12    0 

10  10 

6  10 

11 

7 

12     0 

Power-loom  weavers,* 
female     .... 

male  and 
•     •     .      / 

10 

1 

9     9 

8  10 

4  10 

9 

0 

9     5 

Pow  er-loom  helpers'  . 

4 

7 

4    6 

4    3 

2     0 

4 

8 

4    8 

22 

4 

20    6 

20    8 

18     1 

19 

6 

19     3 

Note. — This  is  a  good  mill  on  coarse  work,  and  one  which  may  be  considered  a  fair 
average  of  wages. 


Weekly  Wages  paid  in  the  Years  1844  and  1849. 


Card-room,  males     . 

„  females 

Self-acting  spinners 

„          piecers  . 
Throstle  spinners,  females. 
Mechanics 


1844 

1849 

s.     d. 

s.     d. 

15    0 

12     0 

7     6 

7     6 

14     0 

15    6 

1     7     0 

7     9 

8    0 

7     6 

28     0 

28    0 

Average  Weekly  Wages  for  each  Individual,  iji  a  Mill  producing  Fine  Yarns  in  Mancliester,  in 
each  Year  from  1844  to  1849. 


Average  Weekly  Earnings  of  230  Hands  employed  in  one  Mill  in  Cotton  Spinning  in  Manchester, 
for  the  Years  184G  to  1849,  inclusive. 


s.  d. 

1846.  The  earnings  averaged    10  0     1  „     ,       ,    ^    „  ,  ,    ,,  -  „  ., 

,g,-  g  ^.  I  Per  head  of  all  ages  and  both  sexes,  of  8  years  of 

"  "  ^  ^"^]_  j     age  and  upwards,  working  12  hours  a-day. 


1848. 
1849. 


(Upon  the  half-year.) 


8  2 

9  4      Ditto        ditto,  only  11  hours  a-day. 


*  "Working  two  looms  only.  -• 

t  During  these  yeai-s  trade  was  bad,  and  the  working  of  the  mill  averaged  about  4  days 
a-week. 


CHAl'.    XIV.] 


WAGES. 


4J7 


An  Trnn  Work  in  Slnffor'hhire.  Average  Weekly  Earnings  from  1845  to  184'>. 


WURKMLN. 


I     1S16 


Colliers 

Miners 

Patchmen  and  labourers    . 
Masons,  smiths,  and  carpenters 
Fillers,  furnacers     .... 

Cinder-fillers 

Founders 

Refiners 

Puddlers — master    .... 
„  second  hand 

Bailers 

Rollers 

Rail-straighteners    .... 
Day-work  at  rails     .... 


s.  d. 

19  10 

19  1 

13  3 

14  9 
30  0 
22  0 
30  0 
35  0 
30  0 
18  0 
38  0 
62  0 
43  0 
10  0 


184T 


8.  d. 

20  d 

19  0 

11  8 

15  4 

3.5  0 

29  2 

35  0 

48  6 

31  0 

18  6 

42  0 

72  0 

46  0 

17  7 


1948 


8.  d. 
19  5 
16  0 
10  10 
13     3 


22 
23 

29 


39  0 

25  0 

15  0 

34  0 

49  0 

28  0 

17  0 


1849 


s.  d. 
16  3 
13  11 
10    6 

12  7 
25  11 
20  3 
23  11 
38  0 
23    0 

13  0 
29  0 
36  0 
22  0 
15     G 


Statement  of  the  Earnings  of  tlie  Workmen  at  Iron  Work.--  in  South  Wales,  during  each  Year  from 

1840  to  1845. 


WORKMEN. 


1840 


1841 


1842 


Colliers 

Miners. 

Patchmen  . 

Labourers . 

Fillers,  furnacers 

Cinder-fillers  . 

Founders 

Refiners 

Puddlers 

Bailers 

Rollers 

Rail-straighteners 

Day-work  at  rails 


per 


week 


8. 

d. 

s. 

d. 

21 

0 

20 

0 

19 

6 

17 

0 

18 

0 

16 

0 

15 

6 

14 

0 

36 

0 

23 

6 

23 

0 

20 

0 

36 

0 

23 

6 

46 

0 

36 

0 

34 

0 

30 

0 

32 

0 

69 

0 

30 

0 

20 

0 

22  6 

44  0 

30  0 

20  6 


s.  d. 

19  0 

16  0 
15  0 
12  0 

17  0 
14  0 

17  0 
32  0 
28  0 

18  0 
47  6 
30  0 
18  0 


1843 

1844 

1845 

s. 

d. 

s. 

d. 

s.    d. 

18 

0 

18 

0 

19    0 

15 

6 

15 

6 

17     0 

14 

0 

14 

0 

15    0 

11 

0 

11 

0 

12    0 

19 

0 

22 

0 

27    0 

16 

0 

18 

0 

18    0 

19 

0 

22 

0 

28    0 

30 

0 

31 

0 

40    0 

23 

0 

24 

0 

25    0 

22 

6 

24 

0 

30    0 

34 

0 

38 

0 

45    0 

25 

0 

25 

0 

30    0 

15 

0 

19 

0 

21     0 

Statement  of  Workmen's  Earnings  at  Iron  Works  in  North  Wales,  in  the  Years  from  1844  to  1849, 

both  inclusive. 


WORKMEN. 

1844 

1845 

1846 

184T 

1848 

1819 

£.  *. 

d. 

£.   s. 

d. 

£.   s. 

d. 

£.  .. 

d. 

£.    s. 

d. 

£.     8.     d. 

Colliers,*per  stent,  or 
eight  hours'  work 

under) 

•    .     ;■ 

0    1 

6 

0    2 

0 

0    2 

6 

0    2 

6 

0     2 

0 

0    1     91 

Labourers      .      .     per  week 

0    8 

6 

0    9 

6 

0  12 

0 

0  12 

0 

0  11 

0 

0  10    0 

Furnace-fillers    . 

„ 

0  14 

6 

0  15 

6 

0  19 

0 

0  18 

6 

0  18 

6 

0  17     6 

Cinder-fillers 

)>• 

0  14 

6 

0  15 

6 

0  19 

0 

0  18 

6 

0  18 

6 

0  17     6 

Furnace-keepers 

0  19 

6 

1     3 

0 

1     8 

0 

1     7 

0 

1     3 

0 

1     2    0 

Refiners   . 

0  16 

0 

1     5 

6 

1  12 

0 

1   10 

0 

1     4 

0 

1     1     0 

Puddlers  . 

1     2 

0 

1  12 

0 

1  12 

0 

1  12 

0 

1     6 

0 

1     4    0 

Heaters  or  bailers 

0  17 

0 

1     2 

0 

1     7 

0 

1     9 

0 

1     2 

6 

1     1     0 

Rollers     .     .      . 

1  10 

0 

2    7 

0 

3  16 

0 

3  17 

0 

2    6 

0 

2     4    6 

Kail-straighteners 

1  10 

0 

1     4 

0 

1  10 

0 

1   10 

0 

1     4 

0 

0  16     0 

Note. — The  advance  or  reduction  in  wages  during  the  above  periods  does  not  exactly  agree 
with  the  ratio  of  wages  earned  by  the  workmen  in  the  periods  above  stated,  such  alterations 
not  being  made  at  the  commencement  of  the  respective  years,  besides  the  wages  of  the  men 
being  affected  independently  of  the  rise  or  fall  in  wages  by  their  respective  departments 
being  carried  on  briskly  or  otherwise. 

The  above  gives  their  average  actual  earnings  for  the  years  specified,  as  nearly  as  they 
can  be  rendered. 


*  Miners'  earnings  are  from  \hd.  to  Id.  per  stent  below  the  colliers. 


448 


PROGRESS  OF  THE  NATION. 


[sec.    III. 


Comparative  Table  of  Wages  paid  to  different  Classe/t  of  Workmen,  at  Iron   Woi'ks  in  Staffordshire, 
in  the  Years  1844  to  1841),  inclusive. 


JUNE. 

1844 

184.5 

CLASSES  OF  WORKMEN. 

Rates  per 
Ton. 

Nominal 
Daily  Wage. 

Probable 

Earninj^s  in 

a  term  of 

12  Hours. 

Rates  per 
Ton. 

Nominal 
Daily  Wage. 

Probable 

Earnings  in 

a  term  of 

12  Hours. 

Colliers,  thick  coal     . 

„        thin  coal 
Miners 

„        boys   .... 

s.     d. 

s.  d.      s.  d. 
..       3  0 
..       2  6 
..       2  6 

S.  d.     s.  d. 
..        4  6 
..       3  8 
..       3  3 

1  0  to  2  0 

s.     d. 

s.    d. 
4     0 
3    0 
3    0 

s.  d.       s.  d. 

5  6 

4  0 

4  0 

1  0  to  2  6 

Blast-furnace-men : — 

Keepers    .... 
Fillers       .... 
Bridge-stockers,  &c. 

0     9 
0     9 
0    6i 

•• 

3  6  to  3  0 

o'ii 

0     8 

".'.       6*6 
4  6  to  3  6 

Forge  and  mill  men  : — 

Fuddlers,  1  st  hands 

„          2nd  hands 
Rollers,  Ist  hands     1 

„        assistants    1 
Heaters    .     .     .       ' 

,,        assistants 

8     0 

15  per 
cent,  otf 
prices. 

}.:  :: 

..       6  0 
2  6  to  4  0 

9     6 

No  dis-  \ 
count    1 
from     j 

prices.  J 

•• 

.. 

General  classes: — 

Engine-keepers  . 
Blacksmiths  . 
Carpenters     . 
Labourers 

:: 

3  0  to  3  6 
3  0  „  4  0 
2  8  „  3  6 
2  0  „  2  2 

.. 

.. 

..       4  0 
..       4  6 
..       3  6 
..       2  4 

Colliers,  thick  coal     . 

„         thin  coal 
Miners 

„       boys    .... 

Blast-furnace-men : — 

Keepers  .... 
Fillers  .... 
Bridge-stockers,  &c. 

Forge  and  mill  men  : — 

Puddlers,  1st  hands 
„  2nd  hands 

Rollers,  1st  hands 

„         assistants 
Heaters    . 

„         assistants 

General  classes  :— 

Engine-keepers  . 
Blacksmiths  . 
Carpenters     . 
Labourers 


1846 


d. 


0  lU 

0     8i 


10    0 


5  per   ] 
cent.    V 
added. 


s. 

d. 

s.  d.      s.  d. 

5 

0 

6  0  to  7  0 

3 

6 

4  0  „  5  0 

3 

6 

4  0  „  5  0 
1  0  „  3  0 

7  0 
5  0  to  4  0 


8  0 


184T 


1    Ok 
0    9" 


10     0 

j  5  per 
.'  cent. 
{  added. 


s.  d. 
5  0 
3  6 
3  6 


3  0  to  4  4 
3  0  „  5  0 
3  0  „  4  0 
2  2  „  2  6 


s.  d.      s.  d. 

6  0  to  7  0 
..  5  0 
..       5  0 

1  6  to  3  0 


..       7  0 
5  0  to  4  0 


80 
3  0  to  5  0 
fSO  ,,15  0 
1 4  0  „  5  0 
18  P  ,,10  0 
U  0  „   5  0 


CHAV    XIV.] 


WAGES. 


449 


Comparative  Table  of  Wages  paid  to  different  Classes  of  Workmen  at  Iron   Works  in  Staffordshire 

1844-49,  ^-c. — continued. 


JUNE. 

CLASSES  OF  WORKMEN. 

1848 

1849 

Rates  per 
Ton. 

Nominal 
Daily  Wage. 

Probable 

Earnings  in 

a  'I'erm  of 

12  Hours. 

Kates  per 
Ton . 

Nominal 
Daily  Wage. 

Probable 

Earnings  in 

a  Term  o( 

12  Hours. 

Colliers,  tliick  coal    . 

„        thin  coal 
Miners 

„       boys    .... 

Blast-furnace  men : — 

Keepers    .... 
Fillers      .... 
Bridge-stockers,  &c. 

Forge  and  mill  men : — 

Puddlers,  1st  hands 
„          2nd  hands 

Rollers,  Ist  hands    1 
„      assistants     1 

Heaters    .     .     .      | 
„      assistants    J 

General  classes : — 

Engine-keepers  . 
Blacksmiths  . 
Carpenters     . 
Labourers 

s.     d. 

0  'h 
0    7 

8     6 

10  per 
cent,  off 
prices. 

«.     d. 
4    0 
2     9 
2     9 

!■■! 

s.    d.     s.  d. 

5  0 
3     0  to  3  6 

3  6 

1  0  to  2  0 

46 
3  10  to  3  0 

7  0 

2  6  to  4  0 
6     0„120 

3  4  „  4  0 
6    0  „   8  0 
3    4  „  4  0 

3    0  „  4  0 

3     0  „  4  6 

3  6 

2  2 

S.     d. 

0  'h 

0     6 

7     6 

(  15  per 
•^  cent,  off 
I  prices. 

s.    d. 
3     6 
2     6 
2     6 

l-'l 

s.  d.      s.    d. 

..4     6 

3  0  to  3     3 

3    3 

l'6to2    0 

..  "4    0 

3  4  &  2    6 

..5    6 

2  4  to  3    8 
5  0  „  10    0 

3  0  „   3     6 
5  0  „    7     0 
3  0  „   3    8 

3  0„    3  10 

3  0  „   4    0 

..3     4 

2     2 

Note. — The  reason  why  the  nominal  wages  differ  from  the  earnings  in  12-hour  shifts  is 
that  the  day's  wage  is  fixed  upon  a  certain  quantity  of  cutting,  of  which  a  man  can  do  easily 
a  day  and  a  quarter  or  a  day  and  a  half  in  12  hours.  Then,  those  who  work  not  by  mea- 
surement, but  by  12-hour  shifts,  are  paid  higher  wages  than  the  nominal  rates. 


Average  List  of  Prices  paid  to  Workmen   employed  at   the  Iron  Works  in   South  Wales,  from 
Jiuiuary  1844  to  May  1849, /<er  Ton  of  20  cwt.  of  112  lbs. 


Colliers,  getting  large  coal,  per  ton . 
„  „        mixed,,  „ 

„  slack  „ 
Miners,  getting  ironstone 
Founders,  per  ton  of  iron  made  at ) 

burnt  furnaces J 

Fillers,    per  ton  of  iron  made  at ) 
burnt  furnaces / 


s. 

d. 

1 

^ 

0 

9 

0 

5^ 

4 

0 

0 

^, 

0 

3io 

Cinder-fillers,  per  ton  of 

at  burnt  furnaces  . 
Refiners,  per  ton  . 
Puddlers       „ 
BaUers  „ 

Rollers  „        ... 

Rail-straighteners,  per  ton 
Labourers,  per  turn  . 


iron  made  1 


0    2fe 

0  lo;^, 
3  4 


^^ote. — In  estimating  the  colliers'  and  miners"  earnings,  the  use  of  powder  and  candles  has 
been  deducted ;  from  the  former,  2s.,  from  the  latter,  2s.  6d.  per  week. 


2    G 


450 


PROGRESS  OF  THE  NATION. 


[sec.    III. 


Average  Jf'eek/i/  Earniiips  of  Workmen  employed  at  the  Iron  Works  in  &>uth   Wales,  from 
\ft  Januanj  18-U  to  VMh  May  1849. 


WORKV.EN. 

1844 

1845 

1S46 

184T 

1848 

1849 

.*.     d. 

«.     d. 

s.     d. 

s.    d. 

8.      d. 

*.     d. 

Colliers  .... 

13    0 

16     2 

20    4 

20    2 

16     1 

14    3 

Miners    .... 

10     7 

12     4 

15     7 

15     9 

12     1 

10     9 

Labourers     . 

11     0 

11     0 

12    8 

13     9 

11  10 

11     0 

Founders 

23     9 

26  11 

33    8 

33    5 

35    0 

30    4 

Fillers     .... 

2-2     0 

25  10 

29  10 

31     3 

32     7 

30    4 

Cinder-fillers     .      . 

21     0 

19    0 

21     8 

23    6 

22  11 

21     1 

Refiners  .... 

37     8 

39    3 

51     2 

40    7 

48     9 

39     6 

Puddlers 

22     7 

30    6 

35    8 

32    4 

30  11 

25     7 

Bailers    .... 

22     2 

32     7 

45     1 

38    8 

31     7 

23    0 

Rollers    .... 

33     7 

58  10 

72    0 

80    0 

60    9 

35     6 

Rail-straighteners  . 

20    2 

35     5 

49     7 

47     8 

36     8 

18    2 

Wages  of  different  Classes  of  Workmen  at  Iron  Works  in  Staffordshire,  in  August  1843  and  in 

January  1844. 


August  184; 

. 

January  1S44. 

Classes  of  Wobkme.v. 

Probable 

Nominal 

Probable 

Rates 

Nominal 

Earnings  in 

Rates 

Daily 
Wage. 

Earnings  in 

per  Ton. 

Daily  Wage. 

a  Term 

per  Ton. 

a  Term 

of  12  Hours. 

of  12  Hours. 

s.     d.     s.   d.       s.  ^. 

s.    d.      s.    d. 

s.     d. 

s.    d. 

s.   d.      s.   d. 

Colliers,  thick  coal 

3     0 

4     0 

3    0 

4     0 

„       thin  coal  .     . 

2     0 

2     8 

2    3 

3     0 

Miners 

2     0 

2     8 

2    3 

3     0 

„       boys.      .      .      . 

. . 

1     0to2    0 

1     0  to  2     0 

Blast-furnace  men . 

Keepers    .... 

0     8 

.. 

3    6  „  4     0 

0     8 

3     6  „  4     6 

Fillers 

Bridge-stockers,  &c. 

0     6 

)■' 

2     C  „  3    4 

(0     G 

]■■ 

2     6  „  3    G 

Forge  and  mill  men    . 

Puddlers,  1st  hands. 
„          2nd  hands 

}:o 

.. 

5    0 

7     6 

•• 

5     6 

Rollers,  1st  hands     . 

1  30  per  1 

f  25  per 

\ 

„        assistants    . 

1    cent.    1 

1   cent. 

I    .. 

Heaters    .... 

\     ofi-      [•■ 

•   •                       •   • 

\     ofi" 

•  •                       •  • 

,.        assistants     . 

J  prices.  J 

1  prices. 

General  classes: — 

Engine-keepers  . 

2    8  to  3     2 

2     8  to  3     2 

, , 

2  10  to  3     4 

Blacksmiths  . 

3    0  „  4    0 

3    0  „  4    0 

3     0  „  4     0 

Carpenters     . 

2     6  „  3    4 

2     6  „  3    4 

2     6  .,  3     G 

Labourers      .      .      . 

1    10  „  -1     0 

1  10 

.  .          2     0 

^ote. — The  way  to  ascertain  the  weekly  earnings  of  the  men  is  to  multiply  the  daily 
earnings  in  a  turn  of  12  hours  by  five,  because  almost  all  classes  of  the  men  work  only  five 
days  a-week  in  "  good  times."     In  "  bad  times"  there  is  generally  not  so  much  as  that  to 
give  them  to  do. 
The  only  e.xceptions  to  this  rule  are — 

Ist.  The  furnace-men  (blast-furnace  men)  who  work  every  day  regularly,  and  there- 
fore these  must  be  multiplied  by  six  for  the  week's  earnings. 
2nd.  The  engine-men,  blacksmiths,  carpenters,  and  labourers,  who  generally  have  six 
days  a-week. 


CHAP.    XIV. 


WAGES. 


451 


Table  of  IFages  paid  to  different  Classes  of  IVorkmsn  at  an  Iron  Work  in  Staffordshire,  in  tiie 
]\[ontk  of  June  in  each  Year  from  1844  to  184'.t  (probable  earninys  in  a  period  <f  12  lioursj. 


Classes  of  Workmen. 


l!^41 


1815 


IK  16 


184S 


18  ly 


Colliers,  thick  coal 
„        tliin  coal  . 

Miners 

„       boys 
Blast-furnace  men : — 
Keepers    .... 
Fillers        .... 
Bridge-stockers,  &c. 
Forge  and  mill  men  : — 
Puddlers,  1st  hands. 
„  '2nd  hands 

Hollers,  1st  hands    . 
,,        assistants    . 
Heaters    .     .     .     . 
„        assistants   . 
General  classes : — 
Engine-keepers  . 
Blacksmiths  . 
Carpenters     . 
Labourers 


s.  d.  s.  d. 
4  6 
3  8 
3  3 

1  0  to  2  0 


5  0 
3  6 
3  0 


6  0 
2  6  to  4  0 


4 

4 
1  Oto2 

6 
4 
3 


s.  d.      s.  d.\ ; 
G  0  to  7  0 
4  0  „  5  0 
4  0  „  5  0 
1  0  „  3  0 

7  0 
5  0 
4  0 

8  0 


4  0 

4  6 

3  6 

2  4 


d.     s.  d.  s.  d.     s. 

6  0  to  7  0  . .  5 
5  0  3  0to3 
5  0..        3 

1  6  to  3  0    1  0  to  2 


7  6! 
..        50, 

4  0 

8  0 

3  0  to  5  0 
8  0  „15  0 

4  0  „  5  0 
8  0  „10  0 
4  0  „  5  0 


s.  a.     s. 

4 
3  0  to  3 

3 
1  0to2 


4  6' 
3  10  j 
3    0 


7     0 


6  to  4 
0  „12 

4,,  4 
0„  8 

4  „  4 


4  0 
3  4 
2     G 


5    6 


2  4  to  3 

5  0  „10 

3  0  „  3 
5  0  „  7 
3  0  „  3 


3  0  „  4    0 

3  0  „  4     6 

3     6 


3  0  „  3  10 

3  0  „  4    0 

3    4 


The  following  facts,  which  are  given  upon  the  authority  of  the  gen- 
tleman who  lias  had  the  chief  practical  direction  of  an  extensive  work, 
will  serve  to  confirm  the  position  here  advanced,  and  will  show  how 
paramount  a  duty  it  is  for  those  whose  acts  and  deliberations  must  tend 
to  the  continuance  or  removal  of  so  unfavourable  a  state  of  things,  to 
give  their  earnest  and  most  careful  thoughts  for  the  introduction  of  a 
more  certain  and  stable  system. 

The  formation  of  a  canal  in  the  north  of  Ireland,  for  some  time 
artbrded  steady  employment  to  a  portion  of  the  peasantry,  who  before 
that  time  were  suffering  all  the  evils,  so  common  in  that  country, 
which  result  from  the  precariousness  of  employment.  Such  work 
as  they  could  previously  get,  came  at  uncertain  intervals,  and  was 
sought  by  so  many  competitors,  that  the  remuneration  was  of  the 
scantiest  amount.  In  this  condition  of  things,  the  men  were  im- 
provident to  recklessness ;  their  wages,  insufficient  for  the  comfortable 
sustenance  of  their  families,  were  wasted  in  procuring  for  themselves 
a  temporary  forgetfulness  of  their  misery  at  the  whiskey-shop,  and 
the  men  appeared  to  be  sunk  into  a  state  of  hopeless  degradation. 
From  the  moment,  however,  that  work  was  offered  to  them  which  was 
constant  in  its  nature  and  certain  in  its  duration,  and  on  which  their 
weekly  earnings  would  be  sufficient  to  provide  for  their  comfortable 
support,  men  who  had  been  idle  and  dissolute  were  converted  into  sober, 
hard-working  labourers,  and  proved  themselves  kind  and  careful  hus- 
bands and  fathers  ;  and  it  is  stated  as  a  fact,  that  notwithstanding  the 
distribution  of  several  hundred  pounds  weekly  in  wages,  the  whole  of 
which  must  be  considered  as  so  much  additional  money  placed  in  their 

2  G  2 


452  PROGRESS  OF  THE  NATION,  [sec.  hi- 

liands,  the  consumption  of  whiskey  was  jihsohitely  and  permanently 
diminished  in  the  district.  During  the  comparatively  short  period  in 
which  the  construction  of  this  canal  was  in  progress,  some  of  the  most 
careful  labourers,  men  who  most  probably  before  then  never  knew  what 
it  was  to  possess  five  shillings  at  any  one  time,  saved  sufficient  money 
to  enable  them  to  emigrate  to  Canada,  where  they  are  now  labouring 
in  independence  for  the  improvement  of  their  own  land. 

It  will  he  apparent,  fi-om  the  examination  of  the  foregoing  tables, 
that  although  at  certain  seasons  all  those  who  live  by  daily  wages  must 
have  suffered  privation,  yet  with  some  exceptions  tlieir  condition  has, 
in  the  course  of  years,  been  much  ameliorated.  The  exceptions  here 
alluded  to  arc  hand-loom  weavers,  and  others  following  analogous 
employments,  conducted  in  the  dwellings  of  the  workmen.  The  dimi- 
nution in  the  weekly  earnings  of  other  parties  has  been  but  small  in  any 
case,  and  certainly  not  commensurate  with  the  diminished  cost  of  most 
of  the  necessaries  of  life,  comprehending  in  this  list  most  articles  of  food, 
and  every  article  of  clothing.  By  this  means  they  have  acquired,  with 
their  somewhat  diminished  wages,  a  much  greater  command  than  for- 
merly over  some  of  the  comforts  of  life. 

It  is  true  that  the  necessity  under  which  most  labouring  men  are 
placed  of  purchasing  in  very  small  quantities  from  retail  dealers  who 
are  themselves,  perhaps,  unable  to  purchase  in  the  best  markets,  pre- 
vents their  deriving  in  every  case  the  full  advantage  of  diminished 
prices :  but  it  must  be  plain  to  everybody  that  at  least  in  one  respect 
the  condition  of  the  labouring  poor  is  greatly  mended.  The  reduction 
in  the  prices  of  all  kinds  of  manufactured  goods,  accompanied  as  it  is  by 
improvement  in  their  quality,  has  been  such  that  few  indeed  are  now  so 
low  in  the  scale  of  society  as  to  be  unable  to  provide  themselves  with 
decent  and  appropriate  clothing.  It  cannot  be  necessary  to  adduce  any 
evidence  in  support  of  this  fact,  which  is  obvious  to  every  one  who  passes 
through  the  streets  ;  so  great,  indeed,  is  the  change  in  this  respect,  that 
it  is  but  rarely  we  meet  with  any  one  that  is  not  in  at  least  decent  ap- 
parel, except  it  be  a  mendicant,  whose  garb  is  assumed  as  an  auxiliary 
to  his  profession.  Those  who  through  improvidence  or  misfortune  are 
unprovided  with  clothes  of  a  good  quality,  which  the  improving  customs 
of  the  people  have  made  necessary,  render  homage  to  the  feeling  whereby 
that  improvement  has  been  brought  about,  and  for  the  most  part  remain 
within  their  homes.  The  silk- weavers  of  London  who  are  located  in 
Spitalfields  and  Bethnal  Green  and.  their  vicinity,  are,  too  many  of 
them,  a  very  improvident  class  of  people,  so  that  many  are  unprovided 
with  any  other  clothing  than  their  working  dresses.  It  has  been  attri- 
buted to  this  circumstance  that  those  araono;  them  who  reside  in  the 
town  provide  themselves  with  amusement  by  keeping  pigeons,  great 
numbers  of  which  are  always  to  be  seen  in  Spitalfields,  while  those  who 


CHAI-.  XIV.]  WACJES.  153 

live  ill  tho  suburbs  employ  much  of  tlioir  leisure  time  in  the  cultivation 
of  flowers.  Before  the  repeal  of  the  heavy  duties  which  were  long  im- 
posed upon  raw  and  throwTi  silk,  and  when,  consequently,  silk  fal)rics 
were  too  costly  to  be  within  the  reach  of  any  but  the  easy  classes,  the 
hands  engaged  in  iheir  production  were  liable  to  be  affected  by  every 
change  of  fashion.  Periods  occurred  during  Mhich  for  many  months 
together  the  silk  weavers  of  Spitalfields  were  without  employment,  and 
their  condition  was  deplorable  in  the  extreme.  It  has  followed  from 
this,  that  many  benevolent  persons  have  at  various  times  established  cha- 
rities within  the  district,  which  have  had  the  effect  of  drawing  to  it 
great  numbers  of  the  labouring  poor,  and  it  has  accordingly  happened 
that  whenever  the  weavers  have  experienced  a  want  of  employment,  and 
the  public  sympathy  has  been  awakened  in  their  behalf,  a  considerable 
part  of  the  contributions  raised  for  their  relief  has  been  intercepted  by 
persons  following  other  employments,  and  who  have  found  it  no  difficult 
matter  to  impose  upon  the  persons  to  whom  the  distribution  of  relief  has 
been  intrusted.  The  inquiries  made  in  April,  1837,  by  Dr.  Kay,  in 
the  Spitalfields  district,  have  thrown  a  considerable  degree  of  light  upon 
the  subject  of  affording  extraneous  aid  in  periods  of  distress,  and  it  may 
!)e  well  to  state  here  very  briefly  some  of  the  results  of  his  investio-a- 
tions.  A  weaver  who  is  married  has  generally  two  looms,  one  for  him- 
self and  another  for  liis  wife ;  if  he  have  children,  these,  as  they  wrow 
up  to  be  seven  years  of  age  and  upwards,  are  set  to  assist  in  some  of  the 
auxiliary  operations  of  his  craft,  such  as  winding,  quilling,  and  picking 
the  silk,  and  at  the  age  of  twelve  or  thirteen  they  are  put  into  the  loom 
to  weave.  The  man  himself  may  be  employed  on  a  jacquard  loom,  and 
will  earn  on  an  average  255.  per  week,  or  on  a  velvet  or  rich  plain  silk, 
when  his  earnings  will  be  from  16s.  to  20s.  The  wife  will  cam  from 
10s.  to  125.,  and  the  gains  of  the  children  will  be  proportioned  to  their 
ages.  Altogether  the  man  who  is  master  of  four  looms  is,  in  ordinary 
times,  in  the  receipt  of  such  an  amount  of  wages  as  should  enable  him 
to  provide  against  at  least  the  ordinary  casualties  of  life,  and  the  fluc- 
tuations that  may  arise  in  the  demand  for  his  labour.  On  the  occurrence 
of  a  commercial  crisis, — for  the  silk  weavers  are  now  happily  not  so  de- 
pendent for  employment  as  formerly  upon  the  fashion  of  the  day, — the 
loss  of  work  occurs  first  amongst  the  least  skilful ;  the  children,  whose 
earnings  are  least,  are  the  earliest  put  out  of  work ;  next  the  wife  is 
without  employment,  and  it  must  be  an  extreme  case  which  takes  away 
any  considerable  part  of  the  man's  earnings.  Such  extreme  cases  may 
arise,  however,  and  it  may  be  well  to  inquire  in  what  degree  the  greatest 
probable  assistance  through  the  subscriptions  of  individuals  is  calculated 
to  repair  the  evil.  The  chief  manufacturers  are  of  opinion,  that  in 
times  of  ordinary  activity,  from  10,000/.  to  12,000/.  per  week  are 
usually  paid  as  the  wages  of  the  weaving  population  in  the  district.     At 


451  PROGRESS  OF  THE  NATION.  [sec.  hi. 

the  time  of  Dr.  Kay's  inquiry  it  was  believed  that  this  amount  was 
reduced  to  5000/.  or  6000/.  per  week.  The  depression  of  1825  6  was 
probably  greater  than  this,  and  extended  over  a  period  of  six  or  eight 
months ;  the  contributions  of  the  public,  which  amounted  to  30,000/., 
M'ould  therefore  not  supply  more  than  one-fifth  or  one-sixth  of  the  usual 
resources  of  the  population,  if  even  its  distribution  had  been  confined, 
which  it  was  not,  to  the  weaving  population.  In  1829  the  subscriptions 
amounted  to  about  10,000/.,  a  sum  scarcely  equal  to  the  deficiency  of 
two  weeks  as  experienced  in  the  beginning  of  1837.  Tiiis  considera- 
tion serves  to  show  how  important  it  is  that  we  should  endeavour  by 
every  legitimate  meaus  to  preserve  the  channels  of  labour  free  from 
obstructions,  and  in  how  great  a  degree  it  behoves  the  Government 
to  be  watchful  to  prevent  those  disturbances  and  alternations  in  the 
currency  which,  with  the  exception  of  a  state  of  war,  arc  the  most  ini- 
mical of  all  things  to  the  general  prosperity  of  the  trading  and  working 
classes. 

Want  of  providence  on  the  part  of  those  who  live  by  the  labour  of 
their  hands,  and  whose  employments  so  often  depend  upon  circumstances 
beyond  their  control,  is  a  theme  which  is  constantly  brought  forward  by 
many  whose  lot  in  life  has  been  cast  beyond  the  reach  of  want.  It  is, 
indeed,  greatly  to  be  wished,  for  their  own  sakes,  that  the  habit  were 
general  among  the  labouring  classes  of  saving  some  part  of  their  wages 
when  fully  employed,  against  less  prosperous  times ;  but  it  is  difficult 
for  those  who  are  placed  in  circumstances  of  ease  to  estimate  the  amount 
of  virtue  that  is  implied  in  this  self-denial.  It  must  be  a  hard  trial  for 
one  who  has  recently,  perhaps,  seen  his  family  enduring  want,  to  deny 
them  the  small  amount  of  indulgences,  which  are,  at  the  best  of  times, 
placed  within  their  reach.  The  habitual  exercise  of  forbearance  of  this 
kind  is  a  thing  which,  in  this  country  especially,  we  have  but  little  right 
to  expect  from  those  who  have  been  born  and  brought  up  under  a  law 
which  offered  a  premium  to  improvidence  ;  and  the  amount  of  savings 
deposited  in  provident  banks  by  the  poor  under  such  circumstances 
should  be  looked  upon  as  a  most  extraordinary  evidence  of  their  desire 
for  independence,  a  desire  which  cannot  be  too  anxiously  fostered  and 
encouraged  by  their  rulers.  We  have  seen  how  little  comparative 
relief  can  be  afforded  in  times  of  trial  by  even  the  most  liberal  assist- 
ance on  the  part  of  the  wealthy,  and,  indeed,  from  the  mode  of  it's  dis- 
tribution, this  help  is  often  productive  of  as  much  evil  as  good,  a  result 
from  which  the  providence  of  the  poor  is  altogether  free. 

Those  persons  who  have  been  bred  in  the  lap  of  ease,  and  whose  pas- 
sage through  life  has  been  unvisited  by  the  cares  and  anxieties  that 
attend  upon  the  children  of  labour,  are  very  inadequate  judges  of  the 
trials  on  the  one  hand,  and  of  the  means  of  surmounting  them  on  the 
other,  which  are  offered  to  those  who  must  always  form  the  most  nume- 


niAP.  XIV.]  WAGES.  455 

rous  class  in  every  community.  Happily  this  subject  has  been  cleared 
from  the  doubts  by  which  it  would  otherwise  be  obscured,  by  the  re- 
corded observations  and  opinions  of  men  who  themselves  have  struggletl 
successfully  against  those  difficulties,  and  have  made  the  most  of  the 
opportunities  yielded  by  a  life  of  labour.  One  of  these  prudent  and 
successful  men,  of  whose  labours  advantage  has  been  taken  in  a  former 
section  of  this  work,  Mr.  William  Felkin,  of  Nottingham,  thus  forcibly 
and  feelingly  gives  his  testimony  on  the  subject,  in  some  very  striking 
remarks  upon  the  appropriation  of  wages  by  the  working  classes,  which 
he  addressed  to  the  statistical  section  of  the  British  Association,  at 
its  meeting  in  Liverpool  : — 

"  If  any  one  intends  to  improve  his  condition,  he  must  earn  all  he 
can,  spend  as  little  as  he  can,  and  make  what  he  does  spend  bring  him 
and  his  ftimily  all  the  real  enjoyments  he  can.  The  first  saving 
which  a  working  man  effects  out  of  his  earnings,  is  the  first  step, 
and  because  it  is  the  first  step,  the  most  important  step  towards 
true  independence.  Now  independence  is  as  practicable  in  the  case 
of  an  industrious  and  economic,  though  originally  poor  workman,  as 
in  that  of  the  tradesman  or  merchant,  and  is  as  great  and  estimable 
a  blessing.  The  same  process  must  be  attended  to,  i.  e.,  the  entire 
expenditure  behig  kept  below  the  clear  income,  all  contingent  claims 
being  carefully  considered  and  provided  for,  and  the  surplus  held 
sacred  to  be  employed  for  those  purposes,  and  those  only,  which  duty 
and  conscience  may  point  out  as  important  or  desirable.  This  re- 
quires a  course  of  laborious  exertion  and  strict  economy,  a  little  fore- 
sight, and  possibly  some  privation.  But  this  is  only  what  is  common 
to  the  acquisition  of  all  desirable  objects.  And  inasmuch  as  I  know 
what  it  is  to  labour  with  the  hands  long  hours,  and  for  small 
wages,  as  well  as  any  workman  to  whom  I  address  myself,  and  to 
practise  self-denial  withal,  I  am  emboldened  to  declare  from  experience, 
that  the  gain  of  independence,  or  rather  self-dependence,  for  which  I 
plead,  is  worth  infinitely  more  than  all  the  cost  of  its  attainment ;  and 
moreover,  that  to  attain  it,  in  a  gi*eater  or  less  degree,  according  to 
circumstances,  is  within  the  power  of  far  the  greater  number  of  skilled 
workmen  engaged  in  our  manufactures.  Unhappily,  the  earnings  of  the 
industrious  workpeople  in  some  trades  have  been  at  times,  and  often  for 
a  long  time,  so  scanty  as  to  afford  scarcely  the  means  of  existence. 
The  hand-loom  weavers  and  common  stocking-makers  have  been  very 
distressing  cases  of  this  kind,  but  they  have  been  exceptions,  and  most 
powerfully  establish  the  general  position,  for  instances  have  not  been  of 
unfrequent  occurrence  in  both  these  trades,  of  workmen,  by  dint  of 
perseverance  and  economy,  emerging  from  the  mass  of  misery  around 
them,  and  placing  themselves  in  easy  and  happy  circumstances  " 

The  circumstances  that  gave  occasion  to  these  remarks  on  the  part 
of  Mr.  Felkin,  arose  out  of  the  commercial  pressure  which  bore  with 


456  PROGRESS  OF  THE  NATION.  [sec.  hi. 

peculiar  severity  upon  the  manufacturing  industry  of  Nottingham,  in 
the  early  part  of  1837.  To  relieve  in  some  degree  the  sufferings  of  the 
unemployed  workmen,  a  subscription  was  raised  amounting  to  5000/., 
and  expended  in  the  construction  of  a  road,  from  the  opening  of  which 
much  benefit  has  resulted.  The  account  which  Mr.  Felkin,  who  acted 
a  prominent  part  in  the  management  of  this  fund,  has  given  of  the 
result,  is,  in  many  respects,  highly  interesting.  Considerable  pains  were 
taken  to  ascertain  the  character  and  previous  condition  of  every  appli- 
cant for  employment,  and  complete  returns  were  obtained  with  regard 
to  1043  persons,  having  among  them  779  wives  and  2165  children, 
making  together  3987  persons.  Among  them  were  452  framework 
knitters,  whose  weekly  wages,  when  fully  employed,  averaged  11*-.  6H, 
and  176  of  the  wives  are  stated  to  have  earned  on  the  average  Is.  lOid. 
per  week.  There  were  496  lace-makers,  whose  weekly  earnings  had 
averaged  15^.  1^.,  while  182  of  their  wives  had  earned  on  the  average 
2s.  lirf.  per  week.  The  weekly  gains  of  the  remaining  93  persons 
employed  in  various  ways  had  averaged  16s.  4f/.,  and  34  of  their  wives 
had  earned  each  Is.  dd.  per  week.  The  average  weekly  earnings  of 
each  family  were  found  to  be  about  lis.  6d.,  as  given  by  themselves, 
but  it  is  known,  that  at  least  in  some  cases,  the  full  amount  was  not 
stated  by  them-  Among  all  these  cases  investigated,  "  eight  only  had 
been  pauperised  in  any  form."  The  average  period  during  which  the 
1043  families  had  been  only  partially  employed,  was  10  weeks  and  3 
days,  and  the  average  time  during  which  they  had  been  wholly  without 
work,  was  6  weeks  and  5  days.  Some  had,  of  course,  been  longer  un- 
employed than  others,  and  it  is  a  remarkable  fact  established  by  these 
inquiries,  "  that  men  with  five  or  six  children  supported  themselves  and 
their  families  under  the  circumstances  of  short  work  or  total  deprivation 
of  labour,  as  long  as  the  unmarried,  or  those  who  had  smaller  families." 
Not  one  of  the  1043  applicants  had  been  a  depositor  in  the  savings'  bank. 

The  circumstances  attending  the  condition  of  the  working  classes  in 
other  countries  differ  in  many  respects  from  those  which  influence  their 
condition  in  Great  Britain.  This  has  been  shown  already  in  a  former 
chapter,*  a  reference  to  which  will  sufficiently  explain  the  difficulty  of 
instituting  any  comparisons  on  the  subject. 

In  November,  1833,  instructions  were  addressed  by  the  Secretary  of 
State,  Lord  Palmerston,  to  certain  British  Consuls  residing  abroad, 
requiring  answers  to  certain  questions  having  reference  to  the  state  of 
agriculture,  and  to  the  condition  of  the  agricultural  peasantry  within 
the  districts  of  their  consulates.  Answers  received  from  the  Consuls  in 
various  parts  of  France,  Germany,  the  Netherlands,  and  Italy,  have 
been  presented  to  Parliament,  and  from  these  docuraexits  the  following 
abstract  is  taken  : — 

*  Section  I.,  Chapter  IV.,  Pauperism. 


CHAr.    XIT.] 


WAGES. 


457 


Counfrv  ami 
District. 

Hcsoription  of 
Servant. 

Yearly  Wafjes. 

Daily  \Va;,'OS. 

With 

or  Without 

Hoaril. 

With 
or  Without 
Dwellings. 

Fkance. 

Calais    . 

Ploughmen  . 
Shepherds    . 

100.S.  to  160s. 
250s. 

With 

J) 

With 

Labourers    .     . 

iyi. 

Without 

Boulogne    .     . 

Ploughmen  . 

l-i-is. 

)) 

With 

liabourcrs    . 

id. 

Without 

Without 

Havre    .     .     . 

1  Farm  Servants  1 
(      generally .      J 

160s.  to  240s. 

With 

With 

Brest     .     •      . 

Labourers    .     . 

48s.  to  120s. 

,, 

„ 

Nantes  .     .     . 

Ditto       .      .      . 

S.irf. 

Without 

Without 

Charente    . 

f  Farm  Servants  1 
(     generally  ,      i 
I/abourers    . 

60s.  to  160s. 

With 

With 

Bordeaux    . 

ild.  to  15rf. 

Without 

Without 

Bayonne      .      . 

Ditto       .     .     . 

,  , 

M.  to  \2d. 

^^ 

,, 

Marseilles  . 

Shepherds    .     . 

200s.  to  240s. 

With 

With 

Labourers    .     . 

^d.  'to  Id. 

)? 

Without 

Corsica .     .     . 

Ditto       .      .     . 

•• 

'  lid. 

Without 

» 

GERMANy. 

Dantzic 

Farm  Servants  . 

52s.  to  64s. 

With 

With 

liabourcrs    . 

4^d.  "t'o  Id. 

Without 

^j 

Mecklenburg  . 

Farm  Servants. 

lOOs. 

With 

5) 

Labourers    . 

id. 

Without 

Holstcin     .     . 

Farm  Servants. 

73s.  Cd.  to  100s. 

With 

j^ 

Labourers    . 

id. 

Without 

)) 

Netherlands. 

South  Holland 

Farm  Servants, 

200s.  to  250s. 

With 

Labourers    . 

3d.  to  4d. 

jj 

^ 

North  Holland 

Ditto       .     .     . 

20d. 

Without 

Without 

Friesland    . 

Farm  Servants  . 

50s.  to  166s.  8e?. 

With 

With 

I>abourers    . 

Gd.  to  16c/. 

Without 

Without 

Antwerp     . 

J' arm  Servants. 

78s.  M, 

With 

With 

Labourers    . 

bd. 

Without 

Without 

West  Flanders 

Farm  Servants . 

96s.  to'  104s. 

With 

With 

Italy. 

Trieste  .     .     . 

Labourers    . 

,. 

12rf. 

Without 

Without 

Ditto       .     .     . 

Gd. 

With 

With 

Istria     . 

Ditto       .      .      . 

8d.  to  lOd. 

Without 

Without 

Ditto       .     .     . 

4d.  to  5rf. 

With 

With 

Lombardy  . 

Ditto       .     .     . 

4d.  to  8c?. 

)J 

3) 

Genoa   .     .     . 

Farm  Servants . 

60s.  to  100s, 

,  . 

)) 

Labourers    . 

5d.  to  8c?. 

5) 

Without 

Ditto       .      .      , 

12ri. 

Without 

^j 

Tuscany     .     . 

Farm  Servants . 

40s. 

With 

With 

Labourers    . 

Gd. 

Without 

Without 

Tlie  usual  method  adopted  in  the  Venetian  States,  is  for  the  pro- 
prietor to  stock  the  land,  and  to  take  one-half  the  produce  for  his  rent, 
while  the  labourer  takes  a  portion  of  the  other  half  for  his  labour,  and 
this  portion  varies  according  to  the  nature  of  the  soil  and  the  circum- 
stances of  the  farm.  In  the  province  of  Venice  the  land  is  so  poor  as 
to  produce  only  six  measures  for  one  measure  of  wheat  sown.  In 
Friuli  the  produce  is  eight  for  one,  and  in  the  Polesine,  twelve  measures 
are  expected  fi-om  an  average  harvest.  The  returns  from  maize  are 
considered  to  be  double  those  obtained  from  wheat. 


458  PROGIIESS  OF  THE  NATION.  [sec.  hi. 


CHAPTER  XV. 

MEASUREMENT  AND  CLASSING  OF  SHIPPING. 

Inaccurate  mode  of  Measuring  emploj-ed  from  1773  to  1835 — Various  consequent  evils — 
Remedy  attempted,  1821 — Accomplished,  1833— Imperfect  Classification  of  Ships — Bad 
consequences — Remedy  provided,  1S34. 

The  statements  inserted  in  Chap.  IX.  give  correctly  the  tonnage  of 
mercantile  vessels  built  in,  and  belonging  to  the  United  Kingdom,  as 
the  same  is  expressed  on  the  registers  of  the  ships,  and  recorded  at  the 
Custom-house  ;  they  likewise  afford  sufficiently  accurate  data  for  ascer- 
taining the  comparative  amount  of  our  mercantile  marine,  at  different 
periods,  throughout  the  years  to  which  the  statements  apply  ;  but  they 
do  not  by  any  means  supply  correct  information  of  the  aggregate  bur- 
then of  the  ships  at  any  one  epoch.  This  want  of  accuracy  is  owing  to 
the  barbarous  system  which,  up  to  a  very  recent  date,  was  followed  for 
the  admeasurement  of  ships,  and  which  enabled  their  builders,  at  the 
sacrifice  of  some  essential  good  qualities,  to  procure  the  official  measure- 
ment to  be  very  greatly  below  the  actual  cubical  capacity  of  the  hold  of 
the  vessel,  which  capacity  it  was  pretended  to  insert  in  the  register.  The 
absurdity  of  computing  the  burthen  of  a  vessel  by  the  admeasurement 
of  the  length  and  breadth,  without  taking  any  account  of  the  depth, 
does  not  need  to  be  enforced.  Occasions  have  arisen,  where  ships  had 
their  holds  deepened  by  building  upon  the  sides,  so  as  to  add  from  one- 
fourth  to  one-third  to  their  cubical  capacity,  and  where,  owing  to  some 
contraction  of  the  width,  at  the  point  of  measurement,  the  tonnage 
recorded  in  the  register  has  been  actually  lessened. 

The  method  here  described  was  established  in  1773-4,  and  would 
probably  have  proved  in  general  accurate,  if  it  had  not  offered  an  in- 
ducement— by  means  of  duties  charged  on  the  registered  tonnage — to 
construct  ships  out  of  proportion.  If  the  evasion  of  a  portion  of  those 
duties  had  been  the  only  consequence  of  the  faulty  rule  of  admeasure- 
ment, the  evil  would  have  been  trifling  when  compared  with  that  which 
it  has  really  occasioned.  Under  the  rule  described,  tlie  greater  part  of 
our  merchant  vessels  are  the  most  unsightly  in  Europe,  and,  what  is  of 
far  more  consequence,  they  sail  badly,  and  are  very  unmanageable  in 


ciiAP.  XV.]  CLASSING  OF  SlIirPING.  ^50 

bad  weatluM-  and  on  a  loc-slioro  ;  for  this  last  reason  the  loss  of  life  that 
has  been  occasioned  has  been  exceedingly  great.  It  has  been  asserted 
by  a  gentleman  who  took  a  deep  interest  in  procuring  an  alteration  in 
the  law  of  admeasurement,  as  the  result  of  his  inquiries,  that  if  it  had 
been  necessary  to  enforce  an  application  to  the  legislature  by  such 
means,  he  could  easily  have  procured  numerous  signatures  to  a  petition 
in  which  every  person  signing  it  should  have  occupied  the  relation  of 
widow  or  child  to  those  whose  lives  had  fallen  a  sacrifice  to  the  un- 
manageable qualities  of  British  merchant  ships. 

The  evils  here  described  were  long  felt,  and  the  desirableness  of  y)ro- 
viding  a  remedy  acknowledged.  For  this  purpose  a  committee,  of  wliich 
the  late  Dr.  Thomas  Young,  Captain  Kater,  and  Mr.  Davies  Gilbert, 
were  members,  was  a]ipointed  by  the  Admiralty  in  1821.  On  that  occa- 
sion upwards  of  fifty  ships,  of  different  sizes  and  descriptions,  were 
examined,  and  it  was  ascertained,  that  owing  to  their  faulty  proportions 
the  weight  of  goods  which  they  were  capable  of  carrying,  exceeded  the 
measurement  toimage,  on  the  average,  in  the  proportion  of  four  to  three. 
The  evils  of  the  system  were  fully  exposed  by  the  inquiries  of  this  com- 
mittee ;  but  because  the  members  of  which  it  consisted  were  unable  to 
suggest  any  plan  by  means  of  which  mathematical  accuracy  could  at  all 
times  be  ensured,  no  practical  good  resulted  from  their  labours.  After 
this  the  matter  rested  until  1834,  when  another  committee  was  formed 
for  the  purpose  by  the  Board  of  Admiralty.  The  principal  members  of 
this  committee  were  Mr.  Davies  Gilbert  and  Captain  Beaufort  of  the 
Royal  Navy,  the  able  hydrographer  to  the  Admiralty,  by  whom  the 
subject  was  taken  up  in  a  way  at  once  scientific  and  practical ;  and  in 
consequence  of  their  report,  and  of  the  active  exertions  of  the  President 
of  the  Board  of  Trade,  Mr.  Poulett  Thomson,  a  law  was  passed  by 
which  the  evil  has  been  checked,  and  placed  in  a  course  of  gradual 
amendment.  It  will  be  long  before  this  remedy  shall  have  produced 
its  full  effect,  as,  of  course,  the  ships  that  were  in  existence  before  the 
alteration  of  the  system  will  be  still  employed  ;  the  temptation  to  build 
what  are  called  "  burthensome"  vessels  is  however  destroyed,  and  the 
advantage,  as  regards  new  ships,  is  all  in  favoiu'  of  the  adoption  of 
better  and  safer  proportions  in  their  form. 

Another  circumstance,  which,  although  it  had  not  the  force  of  a 
legal  provision,  exerted  a  bad  influence  in  regard  to  the  proper  con- 
struction of  merchant  ships,  has  lately  been  remedied.  For  a  long 
series  of  years  a  committee  of  gentlemen  connected  with  Lloyd's  Coffee 
House,  has  superintended  a  registry  of  the  qualifications  of  ships,  which, 
upon  the  reports  made  of  them  by  surveyors,  were  placed  in  different 
classes,  and  according  to  the  rank  thus  assigned  to  each,  the  preference 
was  given,  with  regard  to  employment  and  to  the  rate  at  which  the 
vessel,  or  goods  shipped  in  her,  could  be  insured,  and  of  course  also  to 


460  niOGllESS  OF  THE  NATION.  [sue.  iii. 

the  rate  of  freight  earned  hy  her,  which  was  always  diminished  in  pro- 
portion to  the  increased  cost  of  the  insurance  upon  the  goods.  Until  the 
year  1834  the  advancing  age  of  the  ship  was  always  held  to  he  conclu- 
sive evidence  as  to  her  deterioration,  so  that  a  vessel,  when  arrived  at  a 
certain  age,  was  invariahly  transferred  to  a  lower  class,  although,  from 
having  received  efficient  repairs,  she  might  be,  in  reality,  of  superior 
qualifications  to  those  she  held  at  the  time  of  the  first  survey  and  regis- 
tration. As  the  almost  inevitable  consequence  of  this  rule,  ships  were 
built  with  but  little  regard  to  durability,  and  if,  as  the  term  of  their 
highest  rank  elapsed,  repairs  became  necessary,  these  were  applied  as 
sparingly  as  possible  ;  and,  indeed,  it  usually  happened,  fi'om  the  faults 
of  their  original  construction,  that  they  were  undeserving  of  any  great 
expense  being  incurred  upon  them.  It  will  be  seen  how  greatly  this 
system  must  have  acted  in  aggravation  of  the  mischief  caused  by  the 
faulty  mode  of  admeasurement  just  described.  The  evil  at  length 
awakened  the  attention  of  a  few  spirited  individuals,  and  through  their 
exertions  the  system  has  been  thoroughly  reformed.  Ships  are  now  sub- 
jected to  frequent  surveys,  by  a  competent  body  of  able  and  well-paid 
officers,  and  they  are  classed,  not  according  to  the  time  that  has  elapsed 
suice  they  were  launched,  but  according  to  their  condition  at  the 
moment  of  the  survey.  By  this  means  a  sufficient  inducement  is  given 
to  build  them  of  good  materials  and  in  a  proper  manner,  and  further  to 
give  them,  as  often  as  is  needed,  thorough  and  substantial  repairs.  The 
underwriters,  who  formerly  could  place  but  little  confidence  in  the 
rating  of  a  ship  in  the  register,  now  have  full  reliance  upon  its  correct- 
ness, and  the  merchants  and  owners  share  the  advantage  in  the  lower 
rate  of  premium  demanded. 


CHAP,  xv:.]  WAREHOUSING  SYSTEM.  461 


CHAPTER  XVI. 

WAREHOUSING  SYSTEM. 

The  necessity  of  paying  Duties  on  Importation  unfavourable  to  Commerce — Productive  of 
Fraud — Warehousing  System  proposed  in  1733 — In  1750 — Introduced  in  1803 — Unfavour- 
able Conditions  when  first  established  —  Gradual  Improvements  —  Disadvantages  still 
resulting  from  the  original  Restrictions — Warehousing  Ports  in  England — Scotland 
—  Ireland  —  Prevention  of  Frauds  against  the  Revenue  by  means  of  Warehousing 
System. 

The  beginning  of  this  century  is  marked  by  an  exceedingly  great  im- 
provement in  our  Customs  regulations.  Previous  to  1803  it  was  required 
of  the  importers  that  they  should  pay  the  consumption  duties  upon 
almost  every  description  of  foreign  and  colonial  goods  at  the  time  of 
their  importation ;  a  system  which  tended  in  various  ways  to  limit  trade, 
by  crippling  the  resources  of  the  generality  of  our  merchants,  and  by 
giving  an  undue  advantage  over  others  to  the  few  who  had  the  command 
of  large  capitals.  By  this  system  the  prices  of  almost  all  goods  were 
increased  to  the  consumers,  who,  in  addition  to  the  ordinary  profits  of 
trading,  had  to  pay  an  additional  profit  to  reimburse  the  merchant  for 
the  advance  of  the  duty.  Unless  the  disturbing  influence  of  war  should 
force  trade  into  unnatural  channels,  it  was  impossible  that  while  such  a 
system  was  continued,  the  carrying  trade  of  the  country  could  experience 
any  extension.  The  amount  of  duty  that  had  been  paid  on  importation 
was,  indeed,  in  most  cases  returned,  under  the  name  of  bounty  or  draw- 
back, upon  the  goods  being  subsequently  re-exported;  but  by  this 
means  a  door  was  opened  for  fraud  upon  the  revenue  to  a  large  amount, 
and  where  transactions  were  honestly  carried  on,  the  interest  upon  the 
amount  of  duties,  between  the  time  of  their  being  paid  by  and  returned 
to  the  merchant,^  was  in  most  cases  lost,  because  it  was  not  possible  in 
any  way  to  recover  it  from  the  foreign  consumer. 

The  proposal  to  warehouse  some  descriptions  of  goods  without  ])ay- 
ment  of  duties  on  importation,  formed  part  of  the  Excise  scheme  brought 
forward  by  Sir  Robert  ^Valpole,  in  1733;  but  so  great  was  the  opposi- 
tion oftered  to  the  plan  by  the  ignorance  and  prejudices  of  party  men, 
and  probably  also  by  traders,  w^hose  schemes  for  defrauding  the  revenue 


462  PROGRESS  OF  THE  NATION.  [sec.  hi. 

would  by  its  means  have  been  frustrated,  that  the  intention  was  neces- 
sarily abandoned.  A  similar  proposal  was  afterwards  brought  forward 
and  ably  supported  by  Dean  Tucker,  in  1750,  but  in  vain.  Having  now 
for  nearly  50  years  experienced,  in  a  considerable  degree,  the  bene- 
fits of  the  warehousing  system,  it  is  difficult  for  us  to  account  for  the 
blindness  of  those  by  whom  it  was  so  long  successfully  opposed.  The 
advantages  which  we  now  derive  from  this  system  were  not  indeed  ex- 
perienced at  its  first  adoption.  Many  of  the  regulations  connected  with 
it,  which  now  impart  such  great  facilities  to  connnerce,  have  been  intro- 
duced progressively,  and  some  of  them  not  without  considerable  oppo- 
sition. For  a  long  time  after  the  passing  of  the  first  Warehousing  Act 
(43  Geo.  III.,  c.  132),  it  was  held  by  the  Government  to  be  a  boon 
especially  granted  to  the  mercantile  class,  and  every  application  made 
for  its  improvement,  or  for  obtaining  further  facilities  for  trade,  was  met 
and  resisted  in  this  spirit.  It  is  only  within  the  last  few  years  that  more 
enlightened  views  have  prevailed,  and  that  it  has  been  seen  and  acknow- 
ledged that  no  facilities  could  be  granted  to  the  general  body  of 
traders  that  would  not  prove  at  least  as  advantageous  to  the  country  at 
large.  An  account  is  always  taken  on  landing  of  the  weight  or  measure 
of  every  package  ;  and  until  within  the  last  few  years  it  was  rigidly 
exacted  from  the  merchants  in  every  case — with  the  exception  of  one 
article,  tobacco — that  the  duty  should  be  paid  not  upon  the  quantity 
remaining  at  the  time  of  the  goods  being  taken  for  consumption,  but 
upon  the  quantity  ascertained  at  lauding,  although  in  the  interim^  the 
packages  had  remained  in  the  sole  custody  of  the  revenue  officers, 
without  the  possibility  of  any  fraud  having  been  committed.  Further 
than  this,  if  the  goods,  instead  of  being  taken  for  consumption,  were 
exported  from  the  warehouses,  an  account  was  taken  of  the  weight  or 
measure  at  the  time  of  shipment,  and  the  merchant,  before  he  was 
allowed  to  remove  his  goods  from  the  custody  of  the  Crown,  was  com- 
pelled to  pay  the  full  consumption  duty  upon  such  part  as  had  wasted 
in  the  warehouse.  This  course  was  justified  under  the  plea  already 
mentioned,  that  the  privilege  of  warehousing  was  altogether  a  boon  to 
the  merchants ;  that  without  it  they  must  have  paid  the  duty  on  the 
full  quantity  imported,  and  would  have  been  entitled  to  drawback  only 
upon  the  part  actually  exported  ;  and  that  therefore  they  were  no  losers 
by  being  made  to  pay  the  duty  upon  the  quantity  deficient.  This  was 
a  specious  argument,  and,  being  held  by  those  who  had  the  power  of 
enforcing  their  opinions,  was  long  used  successfully.  A  minister  pre- 
pared to  take  a  more  enlarged  view  of  the  subject  at  length  broke 
through  the  rule.  He  saw  that,  but  for  the  privilege  of  warehousing 
without  payment  of  duties,  little,  if  any,  of  the  transit  trade  of  the 
country  would  have  existence  :  that  this  trade  offers  a  general  benefit 
to  the  community,  and  should  not  be  considered  a.s  profitable  only  to 


cH.vp.  XVI.]  WAREHOUSING  SYSTEM.  4G3 

those  by  whom  it  is  carried  on  ;  that  it  was  unjust  to  tlie  owners  of 
goods,  against  wliom  no  fraud  could  be  imputed,  to  visit  them  with 
penalties  because  of  the  waste  which  their  property  had  undergone  :  and 
that  to  require  the  payment  of  consumption  duty  upon  a  greater  quan- 
tity of  goods  than  was  actually  consumed,  was  in  so  far  to  substitute 
])i;nalties  for  taxation  ;  a  system  altogether  unequal,  and  therefore 
vicious.  From  that  time  to  the  present  the  Government  has  at  all  times 
been  willing  to  give  a  favourable  attention  to  the  representations  of  the 
merchants,  and  so  many  concessions  have  thus  been  made  from  time  to 
time,  that  our  Customs'  regulations,  as  adopted  in  some  ports,  are  now 
acknowledged  to  afford  almost  every  facility  to  the  trader  that  can  be 
made  compatible  with  the  due  security  of  the  revenue.  Among  the 
relaxations  that  have  been  thus  conceded  may  be  mentioned  not  only 
relief  from  the  payment  of  duties  on  deficiencies  ascertained  upon  re- 
exportation, but,  in  the  case  of  such  articles  as  are  subject  to  waste,  the 
duty  is  chargeable  only  upon  the  quantity  ascertained  to  exist  at  the 
time  it  is  taken  from  the  warehouse.  The  owner  may  "  sort,  separate, 
and  re-pack,"  any  goods  in  order  to  their  preservation,  or  to  effect  a  more 
ready  sale  or  shipment ;  wines  and  spirits  may  be  bottled  in  the  ware- 
house, without  payment  of  duty,  if  intended  for  subsequent  shipment ; 
and  woven  fabrics  imported  from  abroad  may  be  taken  out  of  warehouse 
without  payment  of  duty,  in  order  to  their  being  cleaned,  bleached, 
dyed,  or  printed,  upon  security  being  given  to  replace  the  same  under 
the  custody  of  the  revenue  officers.  In  fact,  the  principle  is  now  felt 
and  acknctwledged,  that  to  fiicilitate  in  every  way  the  operations  of 
honourable  commerce  must  prove  advantageous  to  the  community  at 
large. 

The  concessions  of  the  Government,  which  permitted  the  bringing  of 
certain  goods  into  consumption  upon  payment  being  made  of  the  duty 
upon  such  quantity  as  actually  exists  at  the  time  of  its  being  removed 
from  the  custody  of  the  revenue  officers,  was  occasioned  immediately 
by  the  circumstance  of  a  large  quantity  of  French  brandy,  9000  pun- 
cheons, having  remained  in  the  London  docks  so  long  that  the  strength 
and  quantity  were  diminished  in  such  a  degree,  that  the  duty  payable 
upon  the  portion  that  had  wasted  would  have  amounted  to  a  greater 
sum  than  the  market  value  of  the  brandy  remaining,  exclusive  of  the 
duty.  Under  these  circumstances,  although  the  improvement  in  quality 
occasioned  by  time  rendered  these  9000  puncheons  most  desirable  to 
the  consumer,  not  a  gallon  could  be  brought  into  use,  and  the  pro- 
prietors were  compelled  to  bring  over  supplies  of  brandy  which  had  not 
been  mellowed  by  age,  but  which  would  be  admitted  to  consumption 
upon  payment  of  duty  upon  the  quantity  of  spirit  which  each  cask  con- 
tained. The  folly  of  keeping  a  large  capital  thus  unproductively  locked 
up,  and  becoming  daily  less  valuable,  grew  at  length  so  apparent  to  the 


464  PROGRESS  OF  THE  NATION.  .      [sec.  hi. 

Government,  that  relief  was  aiForded  in  the  first  instance  to  the  owners 
of  these  specific  casks  of  spirits  ;  and,  the  door  having  been  thus  opened 
for  the  infraction  of  the  principle,  so  long  and  so  strenuously  defended, 
it  was  soon  after  abandoned,  and  the  rule  adopted  which  has  since 
been  followed,  and  which  is  more  in  consonance  with  a  just  and  liberal 
policy. 

It  is  much  to  be  regretted  that  the  full  advantages  of  which  the  ware- 
housing system  is  found  to  be  susceptible  were  not  recognised  at  the 
time  of  its  first  adoption.  The  Act  of  1803  specifically  permitted  the 
warehousing  of  the  most  important  articles  of  West  India  produce,  without 
payment  of  duty,  in  the  West  India  docks  ;  and  of  rice,  tobacco,  wine, 
and  spirits  in  the  London  docks :  besides  which,  the  permission  was 
given  to  warehouse  several  articles,  the  bulk  of  which  is  great  in  pro- 
portion to  their  value,  in  places  to  be  approved  by  the  Commissioners  of 
the  Customs,  and  a  more  numerous  assortment  of  goods  might  in  the 
same  way  be  deposited  in  wareiiouses  to  be  approved  by  the  Lords  of 
the  Treasury.  Although  the  Act  was  thus  confined  in  its  operation,  it 
contained  authority  to  the  Lords  of  the  Treasury  to  extend  its  pro- 
visions to  any  other  ports  in  Great  Britain,  and  also  to  the  warehousing 
of  goods  other  than  those  mentioned  in  its  various  schedules.  The 
power  thus  imparted  was  acted  upon  at  first  with  the  greatest  caution. 
The  construction  and  situation  of  the  warehouses  then  existing  in  the 
various  ports  of  the  kingdom,  and  which  had  been  built  without  refer- 
ence to  the  kind  of  security  required  by  the  Government,  were  such  that 
it  was  not  considered  consistent  with  the  interests  of  the  revenue  to  grant 
the  same  privileges  to  them  as  were  conceded  to  the  more  secure  ware- 
houses of  the  docks  in  London.  At  the  same  time  the  small  amount  of 
advantages  that  would  then  have  attended  the  construction  of  warehouses 
of  satisfactory  security  was  not  sufficient  to  induce  the  merchants  to 
make  any  efforts  for  obtaining  it ;  and  in  proportion  as  trade  increased, 
and  fresh  warehouses  were  needed,  these  were  built  on  the  old  plans, 
and  in  appropriate  situations,  to  meet  the  convenience  of  individual  mer- 
chants. Had  the  system  been  placed  at  once  upon  its  present  liberal 
footins:,  the  course  in  this  respect  pursued  at  the  outports  would  have 
been  different ;  warehouses  equally  secure  with  those  of  our  great  Lon- 
don establishments  would  have  been  at  once  erected,  instead  of  those 
just  described,  which  are  too  costly  to  admit  of  their  being  abandoned : 
and  the  effect  of  this  has  been  in  various  ways  injurious  to  commerce. 
The  merchants  at  the  outports,  feeling  jealous  of  those  in  London,  have 
always  importuned  the  Government  to  extend  to  themselves  the  indul- 
gences which  the  importers  in  the  metropolis  received,  and  to  which  they 
were  fairly  entitled  by  the  security  against  abuse  ^yhich  they  could  offer. 
On  the  other  hand,  the  Government,  feeling  how  difficult  a  thing  it  is  to 
convince  any  body  of  men  of  the  reasonableness  of  distinctions  which 


CHAP.    XVI. 


WAREHOUSING  SYSTEM. 


4G5 


ojjcratc  to  their  disadvantage,  has  been  more  slow  than  it  would  otherwise 
have  been  to  make  concessions  in  situations  where  they  would  be  unaccom- 
l)anied  by  risk  to  the  revenue ;  and  in  this  way  the  progress  of  the  wan;- 
liousing  system  has  been  more  slow,  and  up  to  the  present  moment  is 
less  favourable  to  commerce  than  it  is  capable  of  l)eing  made,  or  than  it 
would  have  proved  if  a  different  course  had  been  adopted  from  the  first. 
Tlie  privilege  of  warehousing  goods  without  payment  of  duty  was 
first  extended  to  Ireland  in  1824.  The  different  ports  in  the  United 
Kingdom  to  which  it  is  now  granted,  with  the  dates  of  its  first  conces- 
sion to  each,  are  as  follows : — 

ENGLAND. 

London,  1803  (East  India  goods  1799,  and  tobacco  1800). 
Liverpool,  1805  (tobacco,  1789). 


Bristol 1803 

Hull         1805 

Newcastle 1805 

Plymouth 1805 

rortsmouth       ....  1805 

Soutliampton    ....  1805 

Gloucester 1805 

Boston 1805 

Dover 1805 

Falmouth 1805 

Grimsby 1805 

Newhaven 1805 

Rochester 1806 

Lynn 1806 

"Whitehaven      ....  1806 

Ipswich 1806 

Lancaster 1806 

Exeter 1807 

Sunderland 1807 

Chester 1807 

Colchester 1808 

Weymouth 1809 

Poole 1810 

Dartmouth 1811 

Stockton 1815 

Shoreham 1819 

Whitby 1820 

Swansea 1821 

Milford 1821 

Bideford 1821 

Chichester 1822 

Barnstaple 1822 

Cowes 1823 


Eye 1823 

Bridgewater      .      .      ,      .  1823 

Yarmouth 1825 

Wisbeach 1825 

Goole 1827 

Chepstow 1823 

Carlisle 1830 

Maiden  (Essex)      .     .     .  1830 

Lyme 1831 

Bridport 1832 

Berwick 1833 

Cardiff 1834 

Ramsgate 1833 

Penzance 1836 

Shields 1836 

Truro 1837 

Faversham 1839 

Fleetwood 1839 

Hartlepool 1839 

Woodbridge      ....  1839 

Arundel 1840 

Scarborough     ....  1840 

Deal 1841 

Gainsborough  ....  1841 

Carnarvon 1842 

Mary  port 1842 

Preston 1842 

Workington      ....  1843 

Manchester       ....  1844 
Newport  (Monmouthshire)  1844 

Fowey 1848 

Folkestone 1849 


Greenock 

Port-Glasgow 

Leith . 

Dumfries 

Aberdeen     . 

Grangemouth 

Dundee  . 

Glasgow 

Montrose 

Borrowstoness 


SCOTLAND. 

1805  I 

1805 

1806 

1807 

1812 

1815 

1818 

1822 

1823 

1824 


Inverness 1835 

Irvine 

Arbroath 1836 

Alloa 1837 

Perth 1837 

Peterhead 1840 

Banff 1841 

Kirkaldy 1845 

Ayr 1847 

2  H 


466                                   PROGRESS  OF  THE  NATION.  [sec.  hi. 

IRELAND. 

Dublin 1824  i  Drogheda 1825 

Belfast 1824  '  Galway 1825 

Cork 1824  Londonderry     ....  1825 

Wexford 1824  Dundalk 1825 

Coleraine 1824  Ross 1834 

Sligo 1825  i  Westport 1836 


Limerick 1825 

Newry 1825 

AVaterford 1825 


BalUna 1845 

Skibbereen 1846 

Tralee     ' 1848 


Among  the  practical  advantages  that  have  attended  the  adoption  of 
the  warehousing  system,  may  be  mentioned  the  simphfication  of  the 
Custom-house  accounts,  and  the  abridgment  of  labour  in  the  revenue 
departments.  During  the  time  when  the  duty  was  exacted  on  the 
importation  of  goods,  and  was  returned  upon  their  re-exportation,  the 
machinery  of  the  Custom-houses  and  Excise-offices  throughout  the  king- 
dom was  complicated,  through  the  necessity  of  creating  checks  for  the 
prevention  of  frauds  on  the  part  of  the  exporting  merchants.  At  that 
time  the  largest  part  by  far  of  the  money  received  on  importation  was 
paid  back  on  the  subsequent  exportation  of  the  goods,  and  so  sys- 
tematically and  extensively  were  frauds  carried  on  under  this  system, 
that  many  large  fortunes  were  created  by  that  means,  notwithstanding 
the  enormous  fines  which  at  various  times  were  imposed  on  their  pos- 
sessors when  their  fraudulent  proceedings  were  brought  to  light.  One 
extensive  dealer  in  foreign  spirits  is  known  to  have  openly  boasted  to  the 
Commissioners  of  Excise,  on  the  occasion  of  paying  to  them  a  fine  of 
30,000/.,  that  he  was  still  very  largely  in  their  debt.  At  that  time,  and 
before  the  construction  of  docks  in  the  port  of  London,  large  cargoes  of 
valuable  goods — the  more  valuable  by  all  the  amount  of  duties  that 
had  been  paid  upon  them — were  deposited  in  private  vaults  and  ware- 
houses in  the  city,  w^here  they  were  exposed  to  pilfering  and  to  fraudu- 
lent admixtures  and  substitutions,  very  prejudicial  to  the  owners,  and 
for  the  amount  of  which  the  large  compensations  paid  by  the  dock  com- 
panies are  considered  to  have  formed  a  very  inadequate  compensation  to 
the  warehouse-keepers.  It  is  no  small  praise  of  the  warehousing  system 
to  say,  that  it  has  thus  removed  much  of  the  temptation  to  fraudulent 
proceedings  on  the  part  of  a  numerous  proportion  of  the  persons  to  whom 
trusts  of  this  kind  were  necessarily  confided. 


CHAP,  i]  FINANCE.  4G7 


SECTION  IV. 
PUBLIC  REVENUE  AND  EXPENDITURE. 

CHAPTER  I. 

FINANCIAL   SITUATION    OF    THE   KINGDOM   AT   THE    BEGINNING  OF  THE 

PRESENT  CENTURY. 

Financial  Condition  at  the  close  of  the  18th  Century — Triple  Assessment— Income-tax 
Imposed— Repealed  —  Enormous  Government  Expenditure —Fallacious  show  of  Pros- 
perity—Misery of  the  Working  Classes— Their  diminished  Command  of  the  Necessaries 
of  Life — Effect  of  Mechanical  Inventions  in  supporting  the  Country  under  DilBcultieg. 

In  order  to  give  an  intelligible  account  of  the  financial  state  of  the 
kingdom  at  the  beginning  of  the  present  century,  it  is  necessary  to 
explain  briefly  the  system  which  had  been  brought  into  operation  by 
Mr.  Pitt  during  the  preceding  three  years. 

In  Xovcraber,  1797,  that  minister  had  recourse  to  what  he  was  pleased 
to  call  "  a  perfectly  new  and  solid  system  of  finance."  The  public 
expenditure  of  that  year  amounted  to  25 1-  millions,  of  which  sum  only 
6h  millions  were  provided  for  by  existing  unmortgaged  taxes,  leaving 
19  millions  to  be  raised  by  extraordinary  means.  In  the  then  condition  of 
the  money-market  it  was  felt  to  be  impossible  to  borrow  such  an  amount 
in  the  ordinary  manner,  that  is,  providing  by  new  taxes  for  the  payment 
of  only  the  permanent  annual  burthen  occasioned  by  the  increased  debt ; 
and  a  new  impost,  calculated  to  produce  seven  millions,  was  sanctioned 
by  Parliament,  which  impost  was  to  be  continued  until  it  should,  in  con- 
junction with  the  produce  of  the  sinking  fund,  repay  the  twelve  millions 
that  would  be  still  deficient.  This  new  svstem  of  finance  micrht  have 
been  entitled  to  the  character  given  of  it  by  Mr.  Pitt,  if  it  had  not  been 
probable — nay,  certain — that  in  the  following  years  an  equal  expendi- 
ture must  be  met  by  similar  means,  until  the  seven  millions  would  prove 
inadequate  even  for  the  payment  of  the  annual  interest  of  the  sums  for 

2  II  2 


4b".'^  rROGRF.SS  OF  TITF,  NATION.  [sec.  iv. 

\Yhich  the  tax  was  imposed,  when  it  vrould  become  part  of  the  permanent 
burthens  of  the  country.  This  new  iuijjost,  to  which  tlie  name  of  "  triple 
assessment "  was  given,  was  in  fact  an  addition  made  to  the  assessed 
taxes,  "  in  a  triplicate  })roportion  to  their  previous  amount — limited, 
however,  to  the  tenth  of  each  person's  income," 

The  adoption  of  this,  or  some  similar  plan  of  financial  arrangement, 
was  hardly  a  matter  of  choice  with  the  m.inistcr,  by  whom  the  funding 
system,  as  ordinarily  practised,  could  not  have  been  any  further  pursued 
at  that  time.  Unfortunately  for  the  success  of  the  principle  which  it 
was  thus  sought  to  establish,  the  mode  in  which  it  Mas  proposed  to  raise 
the  seven  millions  of  additional  revenue  was  higlily  unpopular,  and 
indeed  it  has  always  excited  dissatisfaction  on  the  part  of  the  public  to 
be  called  on  for  the  payment  of  any  tax  from  which  they  have  not  the 
power  to  protect  themselves,  by  abstaining  from  the  use  of  the  taxed 
conunodity.  It  is  this  consideration  which  has  always  made  our  finance 
ministers  prefer  indirect  to  direct  taxation,  and  which  led,  during  the 
progress  of  a  long  and  expensive  war,  to  the  imposition  of  duties  that 
weighed  with  destructive  force  upon  the  springs  of  industry.  The  finan- 
cial diflBculties  by  w^hich  the  Government  was  then  embarrassed  may  be 
known  from  the  fact  that  a  loan  of  three  millions  was  raised  in  April, 
1798,  at  the  rate  of  200/.  3  per  cent,  stock,  and  55.  long  annuity  for 
each  100/.  borrowed,  being  at  the  rate  of  6^  per  cent.,  and  that  the  "  triple 
asesssment,"  which  was  calculated  to  produce  seven  millions,  yielded 
no  more  than  4^  millions.  In  the  following  December  the  triple  assess- 
ment was  repealed,  and  in  lieu  of  it  an  income-tax  was  imposed  at  the 
rate  of  10  per  cent,  upon  all  incomes  amounting  to  200/.  and  upwards, 
with  diminishing  rates  upon  smaller  incomes,  down  to  60/.  per  annum, 
below  which  rate  the  tax  was  not  to  apply.  This  tax  was  estimated  to 
produce  ten  millions  :  it  was  called  a  war  tax  ;  but  when  the  minister 
proceeded  to  mortgage  its  produce  to  defray  the  interest  of  loans  to  a 
large  amount,  such  a  name  appeared  to  be  little  better  than  a  delusion. 
Like  the  triple  assessment,  the  produce  of  the  income-tax  fell  greatly 
short  of  its  estimated  amount,  and  yielded  no  more  than  seven  millions,  a 
lai'ge  part  of  which  was  quickly  absorbed  to  defray  the  intei'est  of  loans 
for  which  it  was  successively  pledged.  In  1801,  after  deducting  the 
sums  thus  chargeable  on  it,  this  tax  produced  only  four  millions  towards 
the  national  expenditure.  In  proposing  a  loan  of  25^  millions  for  the 
service  of  that  year,  it  was  considered  inexpedient  to  mortgage  the 
income-tax  any  further,  and  new  taxes  were  imposed,  estimated  to  yield 
1,800,000/.  per  annum.  In  March,  1802,  peace  was  made  with  France, 
and  in  the  same  month  notice  was  given  by  the  Chancellor  of  the  Ex- 
chequer, Mr.  Addington,  of  his  intention  to  repeal  the  income-tax, 
which  was  felt  to  be  highly  op])ressive,  and  had  become  more  and  more 
odious  to  the  people.     In  ellcctiug  this  repeal,  and  at  the  same  time  to 


CHAr.  I  ]  FINANCE.  460 

keep  faith  with  the  puhlic  creditors,  to  wiioiii  its  produce  had  heen  mort- 
gaged to  the  extent  of  56^  millions  of  3  per  cent,  stock,  additional  taxes 
were  imjiosed  upon  heer,  malt,  and  hops,  and  a  considerable  increase 
was  made  to  the  assessed  taxes,  besides  which  an  addition,  under  the 
name  of  a  moditication,  was  made  to  the  tax  on  imports  and  ex])ort&, 
pr(;vionsly  known  under  the  name  of  the  convoy  duty. 

At  this  time  the  aggregate  amount  of   permanent    taxes   was  SSk 
millions,  exactly  double  what  it  had  been  at  the  breaking  out  of  the  war 
in  17i)3.  During  those  nine  years,  taxes  to  the  amount  of  280,000,000/., 
exclusive  of  the  cost  of  collection,  had  been  levied  from  the  people  ;  and 
a  few  words  are  necessary  in  order  to  account  for  the  seeming  contra- 
diction implied  in  the  fact,  that,  notwithstanding  this  ruinous  rate  of 
expenditure,  many  of  the  great  interests  throughout  the  country  wore 
the   outward  appearance  of  ])rosperity.      A  nation  engaged  in  an  ex- 
pensive war,  which  calls  for  the  systematic  expenditure  of  large  sums 
beyond  its  income,  may  be  likened  to  an  individual  spendthrift  during 
his  career  of  riot  and  extravagance ;  all  about  him  wears  the  aspect  of 
})lenty  and  prosperity,  and  this  appearance  will  continue  until  his  means 
begin  to  fail,  and  those  who  have  fattened  upon  his  profusion  arc  at 
length  sent  away  empty.  The  enormous  expenditure  of  the  Government, 
joined  to  the  state  of  the  currency  (as  already   explained),  necessarily 
caused  a  general  and  great  rise  of  prices :  as  regarded  agricultural  pro- 
duce, this  effect  w\as  exaggerated  by  the  ungenial  nature  of  the  seasons. 
Rents  had  risen  throughout  the  country  in  a  far  greater  degree  than  the 
necessary  expenditure  of  the  land-owners,  who  thence  found  their  situa- 
tions improved,  notwithstanding  the  additional  load  of  taxation.     The 
great  number  of  contractors  and  other  persons  dealing  with  the  Govern- 
ment had  derived  a  positive  benefit  from  the  public  expenditure,  and, 
being  chiefly  resident  at  the  seat  of  Government,  they  were   enabled 
greatly  to  influence  the  tone  of  public  opinion.     The  greater  command 
of  money  thus  given  to  considerable   classes   occasioned  an  increased 
demand  for  luxuries  of  foreign  and  domestic  production,  from  which  the 
merchants  and  dealers  derived  advantage.     There  were,  besides,  other 
classes  of  persons  who  profited  from  the  war  expenditure.     These  were 
the  producers  of  raanutactured  goods,  and  those  wdio  dealt  in  them,  and 
who  found   their  dealings  greatly  increased  by  means  of  the  foreign 
expenditure  of  the  Government  in  subsidies  and  expeditions,  the  means 
for  which  were  furnished  through  those  dealings  :  the   manufacturers 
were  at  the  same  time  beginning  to  reap  the  advantages  that  have  since 
been  experienced  in   a  more   considerable  degree  from   the   series   of 
inventions  begun   by  Hargreaves  and  Arkwright,  and  which  acted  in 
some  degree  as  palliatives  to  the  evil  effects  of  the  Government  pro- 
fusion. 


470  PROGRESS  OF  THE  NATION.  [sec.  it. 

As  in  the  case  of  the  spendthrift,  while  all  these  causes  were  in  opera- 
tion, there  was  an  appearance  of  prosperity,  and  those  who  were  pro- 
fiting ft'om  this  state  of  things  were  anxious  to  kee])  up  the  delusion. 
That  it  was  no  more  than  delusion  will  be  at  once  apparent  to  all  who 
examine  below  the  surface,  and  who  inquire  as  to  the  condition  of 
poverty  and  wretchedness  into  which  the  great  mass  of  the  people  were 
then  plunged.  In  some  few  cases  there  had  been  an  advance  of  wages  ; 
but  this  occun-ed  only  to  skilled  artisans,  and  even  with  them  the  rise 
was  wholly  incommensurate  with  the  increased  cost  of  all  the  necessaries 
of  life.  The  mere  labourer — he  who  had  nothing  to  bring  to  market 
but  his  limbs  and  sinews — did  not  ])articipate  in  this  partial  compensa- 
tion for  high  prices,  but  was,  in  most  cases,  an  eager  competitor  for  em- 
plo}Tnent,  at  the  same  or  nearly  the  same  wages  as  had  been  given 
before  the  war.  Nor  could  it  well  be  otherwise,  since  the  demand  for 
labour  can  only  increase  with  the  increase  of  the  capital  destined  for  the 
payment  of  wages  ;  and  we  have  seen  that  capital  was  so  far  from  being 
suffered  to  accumulate,  that  it  was  dissipated  by  the  Government  expen- 
diture more  rapidly  than  it  could  be  accumulated  by  individuals.  In 
London  and  its  vicinity  the  rates  of  wages  are  necessarily  higher,  be- 
cause of  the  greater  expense  of  living  than  in  country  districts ;  and  it 
is  asserted,  from  personal  knowledge  of  the  fact,  that  at  the  time  in 
question  there  was  a  superabundant  supply  of  labourers  constantly  com- 
peting for  employment  at  the  large  Government  establishments,  where 
the  weekly  wages  did  not  exceed  15s.,  while  the  price  of  the  quartern 
loaf  was  Is.  lOcL,  and  the  other  necessary  outgoings  of  a  labourer's 
family  were  nearly  as  high  in  proportion.  If  we  contrast  the  weekly 
wages  at  the  two  periods  of  1790  and  1800,  of  husbandry  labourers  and 
of  skilled  artisans,  measuring  them  both  by  the  quantity  of  wheat  which 
they  could  command,  it  will  be  seen  that  the  former  could,  in  1790, 
purchase  82  pints  of  wheat,  and  in  1800  could  procure  no  more  than  53 
pints,  while  the  skilled  artisan,  who  in  1790,  could  buy  169  pint5,  could 
procure  in  1800  only  83  pints,  To  talk  of  the  prosperous  state  of  the 
country  under  such  a  condition  of  things  involves  a  palpable  contradic- 
tion. It  would  be  more  correct  to  liken  the  situation  of  the  community 
to  that  of  the  inhabitants  of  a  town  subjected  to  a  general  conflagration, 
in  which  some  became  suddenly  enriched  by  carrying  off  the  valuables, 
while  the  mass  were  involved  in  ruin  and  destitution. 

It  may  be  objected  to  the  view  here  t^iken,  but  which  is  founded  upon 
facts  that  hardly  admit  of  controversy,  that,  had  the  condition  of  the 
country  been  such  as  is  represented,  we  must  have  sunk  under  the 
greater  efforts  we  were  so  soon  after  called  on  to  sustain ;  and  there  is 
every  reason  to  believe  that,  but  for  the  invention  of  the  spinning-jenny, 
and  the  iuiprovements  in  the  steam-engine,  which  have  produced  such 


CHAP.  1.]  FINANCE.  471 

■ilinost  magical  effects  upon  tlie  productive  energies  of  this  kingdom,  it 
would  liave  been  impossible  to  have  withstood  the  combination  with 
which,  single-handed,  we  were  called  upon  to  contend.  The  manner 
and  degree  in  which  these  powerful  agents  have  enabled  us  to  withstand 
and  to  triumph  over  difficulties  unparalleled  in  the  history  of  the  world, 
have  been  shown  in  a  preceding  section  of  this  inquiry. 


472  PROGRESS  OF  THE  NATION.  [sec.  iv. 


CHAPTER  II. 


PUBLIC  INCOME  AND  EXPENDITURE. 


Gigantic  Expenditure  during  the  \V<ar— Consequent  Exliaustion — Gloomy  Forebodings  of 
Political  Writers  in  former  Times— Amount  of  Debt,  1793  to  1816—  Yearly  Income  and 
Expenditure,  1792  to  1849— Debts  contracted,  1801  to  1821— Sinking  Fund— Dead-weight 
Annuity — Conversion  of  Perpetual  into  Terminable  Annuities — Expenditure  beyond 
Income  during  the  War— Income  beyond  Expenditure  since— Plans  of  Finance— Budgets. 

The  public  expenditure  of  England  during  the  war  which  was  begun  in 
1793,  and  continued  (with  short  intermissions  in  1801  and  1814)  until 
the  final  overthrow  of  Napoleon  in  1815,  was  conducted  throughout  upon 
a  truly  gigantic  scale.  In  1792,  the  last  year  of  peace,  the  entire  public 
expenditure  of  the  kingdom  was  19,859,123/.,  which  sum  included 
9,767,333/.  interest  upon  the  pubhc  debt.  In  1814  the  current  expen- 
diture amounted  to  76,780,895/.,  and  the  interest  upon  the  debt  to 
30,051,365/.,  making  an  aggregate  sum  of  106,832,260/.  paid  out  of 
the  public  exchequer  for  the  disbursements  of  that  one  year.  This  is 
the  largest  annual  outlay  ever  made  ;  that  of  the  previous  year  was 
within  one  million  of  the  same  amount. 

It  is  hardly  possible  to  conceive  that  the  public  expenditure  could 
have  been  long  continued  upon  this  scale  of  magnitude ;  the  state  of 
exhaustion  under  which  the  country  was  made  to  suffer,  during  the  first 
few  years  of  peace  that  followed,  sufficiently  attests  the  truth  of  this 
opinion.  The  financial  efforts  of  the  Government  had  been  made  for 
several  preceding  years  with  a  degree  of  lavish  profusion  that  was  con- 
tinually augmented  until  it  reached  the  height  above  mentioned  ;  the 
expenditure,  including  interest  upon  the  debt,  during  the  ten  years 
from  1806  to  1815  inclusive,  averaged  84,067,761/.  per  annum,  sums 
which,  until  the  years  in  which  they  were  actually  expended,  it  would 
have  been  considered  wholly  chimerical  to  expect  to  raise.  The  expe- 
rience of  that  period  has  shown  how  impossible  a  thing  it  is  to  judge 
correctly  from  the  past  as  to  the  growing  resources  of  our  country,  or  it 
might  be  confidently  affirmed  that,  during  the  concluding  years  of  this 
series,  we  had  assuredly  reached  the  limit  of  possibility.  Without  that 
experience  for  their  guidance,  our  ancestors,  in  former  but  not  very 


ci.u-.  ii]  INCOME  AND  EXPENDITURE.  4/3 

remote  times,  gave  way  to  gloomy  forebodings  as  to  their  future  pro- 
spects, at  which  wo  cannot  but  smik%  when  thinkhig  of  the  comparatively 
pigmy  ettbrts  which  called  them  forth.  Some  of  those  forebodings  have 
been  recorded  by  Sir  John  Sinclair,  in  his  work  on  the  public  revenue 
of  this  kingdom.  A  few  passages  upon  the  subject,  taken  from  that 
work,  and  with  the  dates  at  which  they  were  written,  may  not  be 
without  interest  to  the  reader  at  the  present  moment :  — 

1736.  "  The  vast  load  of  debt  under  which  the  nation  still  groans  is 
the  true  source  of  all  those  calamities  and  gloomy  prospects  of  which  we 
have  so  much  reason  to  complain.  To  this  has  been  owing  that  mul- 
tiplicity of  burthensome  taxes  which  have  more  than  doubled  the  price 
of  the  common  necessaries  of  life  within  a  few  years  past,  and  thereby 
distressed  the-  poor  labourer  and  manufacturer,  disabled  the  farmer  to 
pay  his  rent,  and  put  even  gentlemen  of  plentiful  estates  under  the 
greatest  difficulties  to  make  a  tolerable  provision  for  their  families." — • 
Tlie  Craftsman,  No.  50i>,  14th  February,  ]  736. 

At  the  time  this  gloomy  picture  was  drawn  the  public  debt  did  not 
exceed  50,000,000/.,  and  the  annual  charge  on  that  account  was  some- 
what under  2,000,000/.,  being  considerably  below  the  sums  added  to 
the  ])ublic  burthens  in  the  single  year  1814. 

1749.  "Our  parliamentary  aids,  from  the  year  1740  exclusively,  to 
the  year  1748  inclusively,  amount  to  55,522,159/.  I65.  3t/,,  a  sum  that 
will  appear  incredible  to  future  generations,  and  is  so  almost  to  the 
present.  Till  we  have  paid  a  good  part  of  our  debt,  and  restored  our 
country  in  some  measure  to  her  former  wealth  and  power,  it  will  be 
difficult  to  maintain  the  dignity  of  Great  Britain,  to  make  her  respected 
abroad,  and  secure  from  injuries  or  even  affronts  on  the  part  of  her 
neighbours." — Some  Be/iections  on  the  present  State  of  the  Nation,  by 
Henry  St.  John  Lord  Bolingbroke. 

The  debt,  to  the  effects  of  which  so  much  evil  is  here  attributed,  was 
still  under  80,000,000/.,  and  the  annual  interest  scarcely  more  than 
3,000,000/. 

1756.  "It  has  been  a  generally-received  notion  among  political 
arithmeticians,  that  we  may  increase  our  debt  to  100,000,000/.,  but 
they  acknowledge  that  it  must  then  cease,  by  the  debtor  becoming 
bankrupt." — Letters  by  Samuel  Ilannay,  Esq. 

In  the  few  years  that  preceded  the  publication  of  Mr.  Ilannay's 
letters  the  debt  had  been  somewhat  diminished,  so  that  it  amounted 
to  about  75,000,000/.,  and  the  annual  charge  on  the  country  to 
2,400,000/. 

1761.  "  The  first  instance  of  a  debt  contracted  upon  parliamentary 
security,  occurs  in  the  reign  of  Henry  VI.  The  commencement  of  this 
pernicious  practice  deserves  to  be  noted  ;  a  practice  the  more  likely  to 
become  pernicious  the  more  a  nation  advances  in  opulence  and  credit. 


174  PliOGRESS  OF  THE  NATION.  [sec.  iv. 

The  ruinous  efFects  of  it  are  now  become  apparent,  and  threaten  the 
very  existence  of  the  nation."  —  Hume's  History  of  England,  8vo 
edition,  1778,  vol.  iii.  p.  215. 

The  public  burthens  had  by  this  time  so  ftir  exceeded  the  possible 
limit  assi'nied  by  Mr.  llannay,  that  the  debt  amounted  to  nearly 
150,000,000/.,  and  the  annual  interest  to  4,800,000/.  The  amount 
v.as  somewhat  reduced  between  that  period  and  the  breaking  out  of  the 
American  war,  when  a  succession  of  loans  again  became  necessary. 
On  winding  up  the  accounts  of  that  contest,  the  debt  amounted  to 
268,000,000/.,  and  the  annual  charge  to  9,500,000/.  On  the  5th  of 
January,  1793,  just  before  the  beginning  of  the  war  of  the  French  Re- 
volution, the  debt  continued  nearly  the  same  as  at  the  beginning  of  the 
l)eace  (the  exact  amount  of  funded  and  unfunded  debt,  including  the 
value  of  terminable  annuities,  was  261,735,059/.,  and  the  annual  charge 
was  9,471,675/.)  From  that  time  to  the  peace  of  Amiens  hardly  a  year 
])assed  without  witnessing  some  increase  to  the  national  burthens,  so 
that  at  Midsummer,  1802,  the  capital  of  the  funded  and  unfunded  debt 
amounted  to  637,000,000/.  On  the  5th  of  January,  1816,  the  capital 
was  885,186,323/.,  and  the  annual  charge  was  32,457,141/.  The 
following  statement  exhibits  the  progressive  state  of  the  public 
income  and  expenditure,  from  1792  to  1849,  including  the  annual 
charge  on  account  of  the  public  debt ;  and  the  amount  of  money 
raised  by  loans  and  the  funding  of  Exchequer  bills,  with  the  amount 
and  description  of  stock  created,  and  the  annual  charge  in  respect  of  the 
same,  in  each  year  from  the  beginning  of  the  present  century. 

An  extraordinary  degree  of  delusion  is  observable  in  the  proceedings 
of  the  different  finance  ministers  by  whom  the  support  of  the  sinking- 
fund  was  advocated  during  the  war.  It  has  been  pretended  that  the 
purchases  made  by  means  of  that  fund  had  the  effect  of  keeping  up  the 
market  value  of  the  public  debt,  and  thereby  enabled  the  minister  to 
contract  loans  upon  more  advantageous  terms  than  without  this 
machinery  would  have  been  possible.  It  may  well  be  doubted,  how- 
ever, w'hether  the  repurchase  in  this  manner,  from  time  to  time,  of 
parts  only  of  that  surplus  portion  of  the  public  debt  which  was  created 
for  the  express  purpose  of  such  operations,  had  any  real  effect  in  raising 
the  price  of  the  remaining  portion  of  the  public  securities — in  other 
words,  whether  the  ])rice,  thus  factitiously  acted  upon,  of  the  larger 
amount  of  debt,  was  at  any  time  greater  than  the  price  would  have  been 
of  the  smaller  amount  of  debt  that  would  have  existed  if  the  sinking  fund 
had  not  been  created,  the  purchases  of  the  Commissioners  never  having 
in  fact  accomplished  more  than  the  repurchase  of  the  so-needlessly- 
created  part  of  the  debt.  It  lias  been  further  urged,  in  defence  of  the 
sinking  fund,  that  the  prospect  which  it  enabled  the  minister  to  hold  out 
of  the   speedy  redemption  of  the  whole  debt  had  the  effect  of  recon- 


INCOME  AND  KXPENDITURE. 


476 


Abstract   of  PtMic    /nrome    and   JC.vpendlturc  in    the    United  Kinydom,   in   each    Year  from 

1792  to  1849. 


Amnuni  of      i      receiveil  on 
Uevenuc  pHUl     account  of  Loans 
intoilie         \  ami  Exi;he<tiier 
Exchvquer,  the  \    BilU.  beyond 
Pruduireol       |      llie  Am..unl 
Tiixntion.       iredcemcil  in  tliej 
Yenr. 


Tot:il  Amount 
raise  J  for 
Public  Use*. 


1792 

1793 
1794 
1795 
1796 
1797 
17.18 
1799 
1800 
1801 
1802 
1S0:3 
1804 
1805 
1806 
1807 
1808 
1809 
1810 
1811 
1812 
1813 
1814 
1815 
1816 
1817 
1818 
1819 
1820 
1821 
1822 
1823 
1824 
1825 
1826 
1827 
182S 
1821 
1830 
1831 
1832 
1833 
1834 
1835 
1836 
1837 
1833 
1839 
1840 
1841 
1812 
1843 
1814 
1845 
1846 
1847 
1848 
1849 


19,258,814 

19,845,705 

20,193,074 

1  1,883,520 

21,454,728 

23,126,940 

31,035,363 

35,602,444 

34,145,584 

34,113,146  27 

36,368,149  14 

38,609,3921  8 

46,176,492  14 

50,897,706  16 

55,796,086  13 

59,339.321  10 

62,998.191  12 

63,719,4W  12 

67,144,542   7 

65,173,545  19 

65,037,8.50  24 

68,748,363  39 

71.134,503  34 

72,210,512  20 

62,264,546, 

52,055,9131 

53,747,795 

52,648,847, 

54,282,958' 

55,834,192; 

55,663,650 

57,672,999 

59,. 362. 403 

.57.273,869 

54,894,989 

.^4, 932, 518 

55, 187, 142' 

50,786,682 

.50,056,616 

46,424,440 

46,988,7.55 

46.271,326 

46,425,263 

45,8j3,.36) 

48,591,180 

46,475,194 

47,333,460 

47,844.891 

47 , 567 , 565 

48,084,360' 

46,965.631   1 

52,. 582; 81 7 

54.003,7,54 

53,060,354 

.53,7:10,13s 

51,546,2651  7 

.53,388,717  1  1 

52,951,749' 


£. 

877,956 
998,389 
464,831 
244,982 
.3.56,873 
858,503 
714,863 
030,. 52  t 
305,271 
635,254 
752,761 
.570,763 
849,801 
035,314 
432,934 
095,044 
298,379 
792,444 
143.9.53 
790.697 
64  1,282 
.563,603 
241,807 
514,0.59 


333,989 


853,037 
614,395 


,476,353 
,.593,945 
374,. 568 


19,2.58,814 
24,723,661 
27,191,463 
.50,348,351 
43,699,710 
53,483,813 
47,893,866 
57.317,307 
57,176,113 
61,418,417 
51,fK)6.4<)3 
47,-362, 15;! 
60,747,255 
67, 747,. 507 
68,831.430 
69,772^255 
75,093.235 
76,017,779 
74,936,986 
84,317,498 
89.828.547 
108,317.645 
105,698,106 
92.452,319 
62,778,605 
52,055,913 
53,747,795 
52,648,847 
54,232,958 
55,831,192 
55,663,6.50 
57,672,999 
59,-362,403 
57,273,869 
54,894,989 
54,932,518 
55,187.142 
50,786;6'2 
50,0.56,616 
46,424,440 
47,322,744 
46,271,-326 
46,425,263 
45,8J3,3G9 
48,591,180 
46,475,194 
47,-3.33,460 
47,844,899 
47,. 567,. 565 
48,937,-397 
43,580,026 
52,582,817 
54,003,754 
53,060,354 
53,790,1.38 
59,022,617 
54,982,662 
53,326,317 


Interest  pnid  on 
■'ublic  Debt. 
Funded 
d  Unfunded. 


£. 
767, 

437, 

890, 
810, 
841. 
270, 
.585, 
220, 
.381, 
945, 
855, 
699, 
72G, 
141, 
000, 
362. 
1.58, 
213, 
246, 
977. 
.546, 
031), 
051, 
576, 
938, 
43C,, 
8S(  I . 
807, 
1.57, 
9.55, 
921, 
215, 
066. 
060. 
076; 
23), 
095, 
1.55, 
118, 
3U, 
323, 
.522, 
504, 
514, 
243, 
489, 
260, 
454, 
331, 
450. 
428, 
26), 
4t5, 
253, 
077, 
141, 
.563. 
28.323; 


KXl'KXDITURK. 


Sum-*  applied 
to  redemption    i 
of  Public  Debt  IcurrcotAnnunl 
he>on.t  the      ,  Public 

Expenditure. 


333 

862 

904 

728 

204 

616 

518 

983 

.561 

624 

588 

864 

772 

426 

006 

685 ' 

982! 

867  1 

9461 

915  i 

.508  ■ 

239 

.365 

074 

751 

245 

244 

24  1 

846 

.301 

493 

905 

3.50  1 

237 

957  'i 

847 

506 

612 

858 

416 

751 

.507 

096 

610 

.598 

571 

233 

062 

718 

145 

120 

160 

459 

,872; 

,987  1 

,5311 

,517 

,961 


2.421 


1,826 
1.624 
3,163 
1,918 
4,104 
2,962 
5,261 
6,456 
9,900 
1 ,  195 
2,023 
4,667 
2,760 
1,935 
2,673 
5 
1.023 
1,776 
1,270 
1,.590 
1.985 


8 
1,.563 
4,143 


681 


814 
606 
130 
019 
457 
564 
725 
559 
725 
531 
028 
965 
003 
465 
858 
6.36 
784 
378 
050 
727 
885 
496 

016 


741 
,361 
891 


21,074  2 


£. 

7,670,109 

14,7.59,208 

1 17,851,213 

1-37,603,449 

30,334,087 

36,469,993 

-33,-541,727 

138,403,421 

139,439,706 

'41,-383,555 

j  29,693,619 

128,298,366 

38,649,486 

45,027,892 

45.941,205 

44; 250, 357 

49,984,105 

52.352,146 

-52.618,602 

-58.757,308 

210,816 

913,488 

780,895 

704,106 

231,020 

018,179 

843,728 

4.36,1-30 

-381,382 

070,825 

826,567 

746,110 

703,2.52 

5,59.741 

808,585 

560,446 

407,670 

919,522 

024,085 

781,882 

0.50,245 

235,735 

397,605 

884,649 

2.58,871 

641,333 

418,449 

903,629 

779,818 

735,. 584 

517,049 

870,3.53 

1.52.189 

l'88,840 

865,843 

361.416 

621,619 

.529.661 


Toiiil  Amoiii 

Paid  and 

Expen-led  ii 

the  Year. 


i  19 
18 

;i8 

'  18 
16 

!  16 
15 
17 
17 
18 
19 
19 

;2o 

121 

21 

20 

I  20 

22 
26 

25 


£. 

,859,123 

,197,070 

,742,117 

,414,177 

,175,291 

,740,609 

,127,245 

,624,404 

,821,267 

,-329,179 

,549,207 

,998,2-30 

,376,203 

169,318 

,941,211 

,613,042 

,143,087 

,566,013 

,865,548 

,735,223 

,7.57,324 

,943,727 

,832,260 

,280,180 

,169,771 

,281,238 

,3  48,. 578 

,406,509 

457,247 

,1-30,586 

10,624 

,223,740 

231,161 

,.520,753 

,081,073 

,823,321 

,171.141 

,835,137 

,078,108 

,797,156 

,379,692 

,782.026 

,678.079 

45,66  •,.309 

48,093,196 

49,116,839 

47.686,183 

49.. 3.57, 6  »1 

49.169,5.52 

50,185,729 

.50,945,169 

51,148,254 

52;211,00) 

53,386,603 

.50,943.830 

54.. 502, 947 

.54,185,136 

50,874,696 


476 


PROGRESS  OF  THE  NATION. 


s  = 


o  rt  C  1^  <-"■  i^       i  w  C  ~.  ?1  ■.'^  r;  50  'O 
cj    so  t^  cr:  x.  —  z-.      5Cc:~'S"t^o~.  ci 


*>■  >• 

c 

c  i 

o 
c 

"US 

I  o  r~'s>»  c  c^       O  O  t^  t^ ^S  to  >-<  -- 


■^^    ■*  If;  to  r-.  (N  n 

■<t  i«  -*  «  ift  >i^ 


eTt^m->tto-*-*rt(M 


tooo  — o  o-- 

-*< 

r-  «-*  tOO(N 

«  to  m  — 

■^  o  ■*  in  o  ■* 

iTi  «  ■*  ■* 

■5  =5 
■5S2 


o  : 
o  I 


0©s^in  =  o      coooinc<5»n-*o 


^^    —  ?)  —  C-.  ^M  r: 

«  ^  ^  f?  —  ?) 


L-  — .  C  c;  <N  C       O  to  c  O 


1^  fN  to  I^  «  !N 


rt       rt       ?)rtrtinoc<5 


t^  -)<  1^  ■* 

00  CC  — '  — 


S2 

^22 

^xoi 

00  -M 

mn  t- 

■  t^  X  c  C: 

•  cc  C;  00  to 
rN  ■*  «  t^ 


!M  r-.  •*  ri  r;  to 


S      c'i      c  S  o  5 


c  c  c  o 
c  S  c  5 

rf  C-.  L-  — . 

to  00  — '  -- 


f—      •—  n  X  ■^ 


to  «  r- 


B  z-i 


I      § 


•  (?j    •      —  = 


•  «    •      —  c 


rt  o      o  t^ 


:8 


■"'5  5 
E  *"  3 
e  i^ 


CO        gCC        OS  —  CO        _        w        w 


^  w  w         (_;         ^^  =^ 

c  £  2  c      c      o  S 


'■^  s§  -ggg 


'  Ss  c  o      c    'So 


(Mrt  O  -*  rt 


rt        rt        rt        rt  (M  -*  5^ 


to        (N  ifl 


tc  r-.  o  -- 


fiiAr.  II.]  INCOME  AND  EXPENDITniE.  477 

ciling  the  people  to  the  payment  of  a  larger  amount  of  taxes  than  they 
would  otherwise  have  been  willing  to  pay.  Allowing  that  the  cfFc-ct 
here  stated  was  produced,  we  may  still  doubt  the  wisdom  of  that 
Government  which  is  obliged  to  resort  to  a  juggle  in  order  to  reconcile 
the  people  to  its  measures,  and  especially  when,  as  in  the  case  under 
exaniiuation,  the  delusion  was  so  expensive  and  likely  to  prove  so  per- 
manently injurious  in  its  nature. 

The  average  rate  at  which  3  per  cent,  stock  was  created  between 
1793  and  1801  was  57/.  75.  Qd.  of  money  for  100/.  stock,  and  the 
average  market  price  during  that  period  was  61/.  175.  Qd.  for  100/. 
stock.  The  loss  to  the  public  upon  the  additional  sum  borrowed  in 
order  that  it  might  be  redeemed  during  that  period,  which  was 
49,055,531/.,  amounted  to  4i  per  cent.,  or  2,234,500/.  Between  1803 
and  the  termination  of  the  war,  the  average  price  at  which  loans  were 
contracted  was  60/.  75.  6c?.  per  100/.  stock,  and  the  average  market 
])rice  during  that  time  was  62/.  175.  Qd.  per  100/.  The  loss  was, 
tlierefore,  2+  per  cent,  upon  the  sum  redeemed  during  that  time, 
176,173,240/.  or  4,404,331/.,  making  together  an  amount  of  6,638,831/. 
absolutely  lost  to  the  public  by  these  operations.  This  amount,  reckoned 
at  the  average  price  of  the  various  loans,  is  equivalent  to  a  capital  of 
more  than  eleven  millions  of  3  per  cent,  stock,  with  which  the  comitry 
is  now  additionally  burthened  through  the  measure  of  borrowing  in  a 
depressed  market  more  money  than  was  wanted  in  order  to  its  being 
repaid  when  the  market  for  public  securities  was  certain  to  be  higher. 
The  fallacy  attending  this  system  is  now  so  fully  recognised,  that  it  is 
not  likely  any  minister  will  in  future  make  a  show  of  redeeming  debt  at 
the  moment  when  circumstances  compel  him  actually  to  increase  its 
amount  for  that  pui^pose. 

Another  error  of  a  still  more  important  nature,  involved  in  this  system, 
remains  to  be  noticed.  The  absurdity  of  borrowing  money  in  order  to 
extinguish  debt  could  never  have  been  seriously  adopted  but  with  the 
anticipation  of  the  good  effects  that  might  be  drawn  from  such  a  course 
after  the  necessity  for  further  borrowing  should  cease,  when  it  might  be 
beneficial  to  apply  towards  the  redemption  of  the  debt  the  high  scale  of 
taxation  which  that  system  rendered  practicable.  There  never  could 
have  existed  any  doubt  of  the  fact,  that  whenever  the  necessity  for 
borrowing  should  cease,  the  market  value  of  the  public  funds  would 
advance  greatly,  and  would,  therefore,  in  an  equal  degree  limit  the  re- 
deeming power  of  the  surplus  income,  however  arising.  The  knowledge 
of  this  fact  should  have  led  the  ministers,  by  whom  successive  additions 
were  made  to  the  public  debt,  to  the  adoption  of  a  course  which  would 
have  enabled  them  to  turn  this  rise  of  prices  to  the  advantage  of  the 
public,  instead  of  its  being,  as  it  has  proved,  productive  of  loss ;  and  this 
end  would  certaiidy  have  been  accomplished,  if  at  the  expense  of  a 


478  PROGRESS  OF  THE  NATION.  [sec.  iv. 

small  present  sacrifice  the  loans  had  been  contracted  at  a  high  rate  of 
interest,  instead  of  their  having  been  contracted,  as  for  the  most  part 
they  were,  in  3  per  cent,  annuities.  It  is  presumable  that,  if  the  bor- 
rowing had  been  restricted  to  the  sums  actually  wanted  from  time  to 
time,  without  thought  of  a  sinking  fund,  the  public  might  possibly  have 
had  to  pay  at  the  outside  a  quarter  per  cent,  more  of  annual  interest 
than  they  actually  paid.  At  this  rate  the  deficiency  of  income  compared 
with  expenditure,  between  1793  and  1815,  which  amounted,  as  will  be 
shown  in  the  next  table,  to  425,482,761/.,  would  have  occasioned  an 
addition  to  the  capital  of  the  debt  to  the  amount  of  455,266,554/.  of 
5  per  cent,  stock,  the  annual  interest  of  which  would  have  been 
22,763,327/.,  instead  of  a  nominal  capital  of  547,292,764/.,  with  the 
annual  additional  charge  of  20,690,871/.  At  the  close  of  the  war,  the 
nominal  capital  of  the  debt  would  have  then  amounted  to  724,285,729/., 
and  the  annual  charge  to  32,530,660/.,  instead  of  816,311,939/.  of 
capital,  and  30,458,204/.  of  annual  charge,  which  was  the  state  of  the 
unredeemed  pubhc  debt  on  the  5th  of  January,  1816.  The  Govern- 
ment would  then  have  been  in  the  most  favourable  position  for  taking 
advantage  of  the  lowering  of  the  rate  of  interest  which  was  certain  to 
follow,  and  many  years  before  the  present  time  the  whole  of  the  5  per 
cent,  annuities  might  have  been  converted,  without  any  addition  to  the 
capital,  into  annuities  of  the  same  amount,  bearing  interest  at  the  rate 
of  3^  per  cent.,  or  perhaps  lower.  Assuming,  however,  that  the  reduc- 
tion would  not  have  gone  lower  than  3^  per  cent.,  and  taking  into  con- 
sideration tlie  surplus  revenue  which  has  been  actually  applied  to  the 
redemption  of  debt  between  5th  January,  1816,  and  5th  January,  1849, 
which,  as  will  be  seen,  amounted  to  45,779,046/.,  the  funded  debt 
existing  on  5th  January,  1837,  would  have  amounted  to  678,506,683/., 
and  the  annual  charge  to  23,747,734/.,  instead  of  its  actual  amount 
773,168,316/.,  and  its  actual  annual  charge,  27,686,458/. ;  showing 
that  the  loss  entailed  on  the  country  by  the  plan  pursued,  of  funding  the 
debt  in  stock  bearing  a  nominal  low  rate  of  interest,  is  94,661,633/.  of 
capital,  and  3,938,724/.  of  annual  charge.  It  is  not  possible  to  calcu- 
late with  certainty  the  further  benefits  that  must  have  resulted  from  the 
repeal  of  five  millions  and  a  half  of  annual  taxes,  which  would  have 
been  practicable  beyond  the  amount  actually  repealed ;  but  it  is  pro- 
bably much  under-estimating  those  benefits  to  state,  that  among  their 
results  the  amount  of  public  income  over  expenditure  would  have  been 
so  far  augmented  that  the  unredeemed  debt  would  not  at  this  time  have 
exceeded  six  hundred  millions,  while  the  annual  charge  upon  the  same 
would  have  been  twenty-one  millions,  a  state  of  things  at  which,  if  the 
peace  of  Europe  should  continue  undisturbed,  and  if  our  progress  should 
only  equal  our  past  experience,  we  may  possibly  hope  to  arrive  in  about 
half  a  century. 


CHAP,  n  ]  INCOME  AND  EXPENDITURE.  479 

The  charge  of  inconsistency  on  the  part  of  our  finance  ministers  in 
those  (lays  is  fully  deserved  by  their  adoption  of  two  measures  having 
for  their  objects  results  exactly  opposed  to  each  other.  These  measures 
are,  first,  the  creation  of  what  is  called  the  dead-weight  annuity,  and 
secondly,  the  conversion  of  perpetual  annuities  into  annuities  for  lives 
or  for  terms  of  years  ;  the  efi'ect  of  the  first  being  to  bring  present  relief 
at  the  expense  of  future  years,  while  the  second  increases  the  present 
burthen  with  the  view  of  relieving  posterity.  When  the  measure  for 
commuting  the  half-pay  and  pensions  was  brought  forward  in  May, 
1822,  the  charge  upon  the  country  on  that  account  was  estimated  at 
about  five  millions.  This  was  necessarily  a  decreasing  charge,  and  from 
year  to  year  the  public  would  have  been  relieved  by  the  falling  in  of 
lives,  until  at  the  end  of  forty-five  years,  the  whole,  according  to  pro- 
bability, would  have  been  extinguished.  In  order  to  turn  to  present 
advantage  this  prospective  diminution  of  burthen,  it  was  attempted  to 
commute  the  whole  of  those  annually-diminishing  payments  into  an 
unvarying  annuity  to  last  during  the  whole  probable  term  of  forty-five 
years,  and  it  was  computed  that,  by  the  sale  of  a  fixed  annuity  of 
2,800,000/.,  funds  might  be  obtained  in  order  to  meet  the  diminishing 
demands  of  the  quarterly  claimants.  This  scheme  was  only  partially 
carried  into  execution  by  means  of  an  arrangement  made  with  the  Bank 
of  England,  under  which  that  corporation  advanced  to  the  Governm.ent, 
in  nearly  equal  payments,  during  the  six  years  from  1823  to  1828,  the 
sum  of  13,089,419/.  as  the  purchase-money  of  an  annual  annuity  of 
585,740/.  to  be  paid  until  1867.  The  result  of  this  operation  has  been 
to  save  the  immediate  payment  during  the  years  in  which  it  was  in  pro- 
gress of  9,574,979/.,  and  in  return  to  fix  upon  the  country  the  annual 
payment  for  thirty-nine  years  thereafter  of  585,740/. 

In  the  prosecution  of  the  opposite  plan  of  converting  perpetual  annui- 
ties into  annuities  terminable  at  stated  periods,  or  upon  the  occurrence 
of  certain  natural  contingencies,  the  amount  of  terminable  annuities  has 
advanced  from  1,888,835/.,  at  which  it  stood  at  the  end  of  the  war,  to 
3,755,099/.  at  the  beginning  of  the  year  1850.  It  would  occupy  consi- 
derable space  to  exhibit  the  progress  of  this  conversion  from  year  to 
year  ;  and  it  will  probably  suffice  to  exemplify  the  result  of  the  operation 
during  one  year  (1834).  In  that  year  the  perpetual  annuities  received 
in  exchange  amounted  to  6,500,169/.  of  capital,  bearing  an  annual 
charge  of  202,831/.,  and  there  were  granted  in  lieu  of  the  same — 

£. 

Annuities  for  lives 195,.'i37 

„         for  terms  of  years      ....     313,138 
Deferred  annuities 2,871 

Together     ....  £511,346 


•180  PROGRESS  OF  THE  NATION.  [sec.  iv. 

making  a  present  annual  increase  of  308,514/.  to  the  public  burthens  in 
order  to  ensure  the  earlier  extinction  of  the  charge  of  202,831/. 

It  is  not  necessary  here  to  inquire  which  of  these  two  modes  of  pro- 
ceeding is  preferable.  Under  different  circumstances  either  of  them 
might  be  wise  or  prudent,  but  it  is  quite  impossible  that  at  the  same 
time,  and  consequently  under  the  same  circumstances,  both  could  be 
either  wise  or  prudent,  and  the  minister  and  legislators  by  whom  the 
plans  were  proposed  and  sanctioned  must  be  allowed  to  have  stultified 
themselves  by  the  operations.  Of  the  two  courses  that  is  assuredly  the 
most  generous  under  which  the  parties  by  whom  it  is  adopted  subject 
themselves  to  additional  burthen  in  order  to  lighten  the  load  for  their 
successors,  and  indeed  it  would  seem  no  more  than  an  act  of  justice  on 
the  part  of  those  by  whom  the  debt  w^as  contracted  to  adopt  every  means 
fairly  within  their  power  for  its  extinction. 

It  is  singular  that,  with  so  much  experience  and  so  much  of  scientific 
acquirement  that  might  have  been  brought  to  the  correct  elucidation  of 
this  subject,  the  tables  first  adopted  for  the  creation  of  terminable  an- 
nuities were  incorrect,  to  a  degree  which  entailed  a  heavy  loss  upon  the 
public.  I'he  system  was  established  in  1808,  and  during  the  first  year 
of  its  operation  annuities  were  granted  to  the  amount  of  58,506/.  10^-. 
per  annum.  Of  that  amount  there  continued  payable  23,251/.  per 
annum  at  the  beginning  of  1827,  when,  to  adopt  the  calculation  of  the 
actuary  of  the  National  Debt,  as  given  in  a  Report  to  the  Chancellor  of 
the  Exchequer,  the  public  had  already  sustained  a  loss  of  more  than 
10,000/.  by  the  transactions,  besides  having  the  above  annual  sum  of 
23,251/.  still  to  pay  for  an  indefinite  term.  In  this  report  of  Mr.  Fin- 
laison,  he  states  that  the  loss  to  the  public  through  miscalculation  in 
these  tables  was  then  (April,  1827)  proceeding  at  the  rate  of  8000/.  per 
week,  and  during  the  three  preceding  months  had  exceeded  95,000/. 
The  discovery  of  this  blunder  had  been  made  and  pressed  upon  the  at- 
tention of  the  finance  minister  as  early  as  1819,  but  no  active  steps  were 
taken  to  remedy  it  until  1828,  and  even  then  the  rates  at  which  annui- 
ties were  granted  upon  the  lives  of  aged  persons  were,  after  a  time, 
found  to  be  so  unduly  profitable  to  the  purchasers,  that  the  Government 
was  again  obliged  to  interfere,  and  to  limit  the  ages  upon  which  life 
annuities  could  be  obtained. 

It  is  quite  impossible  that  any  similar  series  of  blunders  could  have 
been  committed  by  any  private  persons  or  association  of  individuals, 
whose  vigilance  would  have  been  sufficiently  preserved  by  their  private 
interest ;  and  it  is  disgraceful  that  the  Government,  which  could  at  all 
times  command  the  assistance  of  the  most  accomplished  actuaries,  should 
have  fallen  into  them.  It  is  yet  more  disgraceful  that,  after  the  evil 
had   been  discovered  and  pressed  upon  its  notice,  so  many  years  were 


CHAP.  11 1  INCOME  AND  EXPENDITURE.  481 

suffered  to  elapse  before  any  step  was  taken  to  put  a  stop  to  the  waste 
of  public  money. 

It  would  require  a  voluminous  account  to  explain  all  the  financial 
operations  of  the  Government  during  the  period  embraced  in  the  fore- 
going statements.  In  the  earlier  years  of  that  time,  while  on  the  one 
hand  the  minister  was  annually  borrowing  immense  sums  for  the  public 
service,  an  expensive  machinery  was,  as  we  have  seen,  employed  to  keep 
up  a  show  of  diminishing  the  debt,  by  which  means  the  people  were 
brought  to  view  with  some  degree  of  complacency  the  most  ruinous 
addition  to  their  burthens,  under  the  expectation  of  the  relief  which, 
through  the  magical  effect  of  the  sinking  fund,  was  to  be  experienced 
by  them  in  future  years.  The  establishment  and  support  of  the  sink- 
ino;  fmid  was  long  considered  as  a  master-stroke  of  human  wisdom. 
Having  since  had  sufficient  opportunity  for  considering  its  effects,  we 
have  arrived  at  a  different  conclusion,  and  can  no  longer  see  any 
wisdom  in  the  plan  of  borrowing  larger  sums  than  were  wanted,  and 
I)aying  in  consequence  more  dearly  for  the  loan  of  what  was  actually 
required,  in  order  to  lay  out  the  surplus  to  accumulate  into  a  fund  for 
buying  up  the  debt  at  a  higher  price  than  that  at  which  it  was  con- 
tracted. 

In  the  Fourth  Report  of  the  Select  Committee  on  Public  Income  and 
Expenditure,  which  was  printed  by  order  of  the  House  of  Commons  in 
1828,  there  are  three  statements  showing  the  difference  between  the 
])ublie  receipts  and  disbursements  in  the  ten  years  ended  5th  January, 
1802;  the  fourteen  years  ended  5th  January,  181G  ;  and  the  twelve 
years  ended  5th  January,  1 828  ;  an  abstract  of  which  is  here  given, 
and  the  statement  is  further  continued  for  the  twenty-two  years  ended 
5th  January,  1850:  — 

BALANCES  OF  INCOME  AND  EXPENDITURE. 
Ten  Years  ended  %>th  January ,  1802. 


£. 
Expenditure   .     .     447,812,773 
Income       .     .     .     258,659,322 


Expenditure  more 

than  Income      .  £189,153,451 


£. 

Raised  by  creation  of  debt  .     .  380,997,330 

Applied  to  redemption  of  debt  £180,^46,440 
Money  raised  for  Austria  .  .  4,000,000 
Discount  and  charges  of  receipt        2,416,497 


Balance  5th  Januarj',  1802   .     .         9,027,021 
Ditto,  ditto,  1792 4,546,029 


187,362,937 
193,634,443 

4,480,992 

£139,153,451 

'2  1 


482 


PROGRESS  OF  THE  NATION, 


[sec.  n 


Expenditure 
Income    . 


Fourteen  Years  ended  ot/i  JauiKiri/,  1810. 
£.  ^• 

l,059,r)S3.370      Raised  by  creation  of  debt   .     .  900,107,717 

82.'v'554.060      Applied  to  redemption  of  debt.  £651,052,051 
Raised  for  East  India  Company         2,500,000 

Discount,  &c 2,887,199 

657,339,830 


Expenditure  more 

than  Income      .  £236,329,310 


Balance,  5th  January,  1810 
Ditto,  ditto,  1802  .      .      . 


15,465,578 
9,027,021 


242,767,807 


6,438,557 


Income 
Expenditure 


Iwelve  Years  ended  5th  January,  18-28. 

£. 

670,198,286  Applied  to  redemption  of  debt. 

640,966,521  Discount  and  charges  of  receipt 


Raised  by  creation  of  debt 


Income  more  than 

Expenditure     .     £29,231,765 


£236,329,310 


£. 
580,454,452 

544,588 

580,999,040 
540,530,450 

40,468,590 


Balance  5th  January,  1816 
Ditto,  ditto,  1828  ,     .     . 


£15,465,578 
4,228,753 


11,236,825 
£29,231,705 


Twenty-tico  Years  ended  6th  January,  1850. 


Income    . 
Expenditure 


1,092,219,672 
1,075,045,391 


Income  more  than 

E.xpenditure    .      £10,547,281 


Applied  to  redemption  of  debt, 
beyond  the  amount  of  debt 
created     

Balance  5th  January,  1850    . 

Ditto,  ditto,  1828  .     •      .     .     . 


9,748,539 
4,228,753 


£. 
11,054,495 


.5,519,786 
£16,574,281 


It  appears  from  this  statement,  that  during  the  ten  years  from  5th 
January,  1792,  to  5th  January,  1802— 

£. 
The  public  expenditure  exceeded  the  income       ....     189,153,451 
Between  1802  and  1816  the  excess  of  expenditure  was    .     •     236,329,310 


Excess  of  expenditure  during  24  years  of  war 


425,482,761 


During   34   years   of  peace,  between  1810   and   1850,  the 
excess  of  income  over  expenditure  lias  been      ....       45,779,040 


citu'.  II. 1  INCOME  AND  EXPENDITURE.  483 

At  tli'ks  r;it(*  it  would  i(M[uir('  151(5  years  of  jieace  to  fancol  the  debt 
incurred  during  24  years  of  war,  or  18  years  for  1  ;  but  the  coniparitfon 
is  even  more  unfavourable  than  this,  because  at  the  time  of  borrowing 
the  rate  of  interest  is  high,  and  the  value  of  public  securities  low, 
whereas  at  the  time  of  TKiuidatiou  the  reverse  of  these  circumstances  is 
ex])erienced,  so  that  on  the  most  favourable  supposition  it  requires  15 
years  of  saving  in  peace  to  repair  the  evil  consequences  of  one  year  of 
war  exj)enditure  ;  at  which  rate,  our  successors  who  may  Ix^  living  about 
the  close  of  the  22nd  century  might,  if  during  all  that  time  the  nation 
should  remain  at  peace,  find  themselves  relieved  from  that  portion  of  the 
])ublic  debt  which  w^as  contracted  since  1792.  On  the  other  hand,  this 
])eriod  would  be  somewhat  hastened  through  the  extinction  of  that  part 
of  our  public  debt  which  consists  of  terminable  and  life  annuities. 

It  is  necessary  here  to  explain  briefly  the  financial  plans  which  have 
at  different  times  within  the  present  century  been  proposed  by  the 
Government  and  sanctioned  by  Parliament. 

At  the  breaking  out  of  the  war  in  1803,  it  became  necessary  to  meet 
as  far  as  possible  the  increased  expenditure  of  the  country  by  the  impo- 
sition of  new  taxes,  among  which  was  included  the  income  tax,  under 
the  name  of  a  property  tax.  The  greater  part  of  these  taxes  were  de- 
clared to  be  of  a  temporary  character,  and  were  to  cease  in  six  months 
after  the  re-establishment  of  peace.  It  soon  became  apparent,  however, 
that  to  adhere  to  this  stipulation  would  be  impossible,  since  the  exigen- 
cies of  the  country  required  the  contraction  of  loans,  the  interest  of 
which  could  not  be  provided,  except  by  the  gradual  appropriation  of 
one  portion  after  another  of  the  proceeds  of  the  war  taxes.  Under  these 
circumstances,  it  was  j)roposed,  in  1807,  by  Lord  Henry  Petty,  then 
riiancellor  of  the  Exchequer,  to  depart  from  the  usual  practice  of  con- 
fining the  financial  arrangements  to  the  current  year,  and  to  determine 
at  once,  as  far  as  was  possible,  the  amount  which  it  would  be  necessary 
to  raise  during  each  one  of  a  series  of  years,  providing  beforehand  the 
means  for  meeting  the  increasing  burthen.  It  was  assumed  that  the 
loans  to  be  raised  in  1807  and  the  two  following  years  should  be  each 
12,000,000/.;  that  for  1810  w^as  stated  at  14^000,000/.,  and  during 
each  of  the  ten  ensuing  years  the  amount  was  assumed  at  16,000,000/. 
It  was  calculated  that  the  interest  upon  those  loans  would  be  met,  uj) 
to  that  for  the  year  1811,  by  the  falling  in  of  annuities,  after  which, 
the  war  taxes  were  to  be  pledged,  at  the  rate  of  10  per  cent.,  upon  each 
loan  ;  5  per  cent,  to  pay  the  interest,  and  5  per  cent,  to  accumulate  as 
a  sinking  fund  for  discharging  the  principal.  The  deficiency  that  would 
be  occasioned  by  this  appropriation  year  by  year  of  the  war  taxes  was  to 
be  met  by  supplementary  loans,  for  the  interest  on  which,  and  to  provide 
a  sinking  fund  for  their  redemption,  it  would  be  necessary  to  impose 
new  taxes.     By  these  means   it  was  expected  that  the  country  would 

■2  I  2 


484  PROGRESS  OF  THE  NATION.  [sec.  iv. 

have  been  able  to  meet  the  charges  of  an  expensive  war  during  a  seiies 
of  years  with  only  a  moderate  addition  to  the  public  burthens.  The 
ministry,  of  which  Lord  Henry  Petty  formed  a  part,  having  gone  out 
of  office  before  the  next  annual  finance  arrangement  was  brought  for- 
ward, his  plan  was  abandoned,  and  no  attemj)t  has  since  been  made  by 
any  minister  to  form  financial  arrangements  embracing  the  circumstances 
of  future  years. 

The  explanations  offered  each  year  in  the  House  of  Commons  by  the 
Chancellor  of  the  Exchequer,  concerning  the  financial  condition  of  the 
country,  are  not  given  in  such  form  as  to  be  readily  understood.  In 
the  accounts  by  which  the  statements  are  accompanied,  the  interest  of 
the  debt  and  other  permanent  charges  are  not  included,  and  on  the 
other  hand  nothing  is  stated  regarding  the  })roduce  of  the  permanent 
taxes,  forming  what  is  called  the  consolidated  fund,  except  the  amount 
of  its  surplus  or  deficiency,  as  the  case  may  be,  after  providing  for  the 
permanent  charge  upon  it.  The  Budget,  as  it  is  the  practice  to  call 
this  annual  exposition,  explains  on  the  one  hand  the  sums  required  for 
the  public  service  during  the  year,  under  the  different  heads  of  Navy, 
Army,  Ordnance,  and  Miscellaneous  Services,  together  with  any  inci- 
dental charges  which  may  apply  to  the  year ;  and  on  the  other  hand 
are  given  the  icays  and  means  for  meeting  the  same.  These  ways  and 
means  consist  of  the  surplus  (if  any)  of  the  consolidated  fund,  the 
annual  duties,  and  such  incidental  receipts  as  come  in  aid  of  the 
national  resources. 

The  detail  of  these  budgets  would  consequently  throw  but  little  light 
upon  the  financial  condition  of  the  country,  if  even  they  had  been  pre- 
served in  an  authentic  form,  which  has  not  been  done.  Any  statements 
of  the  kind  that  could  be  offered  must  be  drawn  from  unauthorized 
publications,  in  which  they  have  been  given  without  regard  to  me- 
thodical arrangement,  while,  as  respects  some  years  of  the  series,  v*e 
should  seek  in  vain  for  any  statement  whatever. 


i 


■IIVI'.    III. J 


rilODUCE  OF  TAXES. 


485 


CHAPTER  TIT. 


PRODUCE   OF   TAXES. 


Taxes  Imposed  1801  to  1843— Taxes  Repealed  18U  to  1849— Produce  of  Taxes  in  pro- 
portion to  Population— Probate  and  Legacy  Duties— Customs  and  Excise  Duties  — 
"Taxes" — Post-office  Duties — Duties  of  Protection — Retaliatory  Duties — Their  effect  on 
Foreign  Governments. 


The  following  tables  exhibit,  1st,  the  estimated  amount  of  taxes  imposed 
under  each  of  the  five  chief  heads  of  revenue  ;  viz.,  Customs,  Excise, 
Stamps,  Taxes,  and  Post-office,  in  each  year  of  the  present  century  ; 
and,  2nd,  the  estimated  amount  of  taxes  repealed,  expired  or  reduced, 
in  each  year  from  the  peace,  in  1814,  to  the  present  time. 

Estimated  Produce  of  Taxes  imposed  in  each  Year  from  1801  to  1849. 


Years. 

Customs. 

Excise. 

Stamps. 

Taxes. 

Post-offce. 

Total. 

£. 

£. 

£. 

£. 

£. 

£. 

1801 

255,000 

435,000 

574,000 

306,000 

i5(r,boo 

1,720,000 

1802 

1,000,000 

2,000,000 

1,000,000 

4,000,000 

1803 

2,000,000 

6,000,000 

4,500,000 

12,500,000 

1804 

1,000,000 

1,000,000 

1805 

80,000 

490,000 

336,'000 

430,000 

230 

000 

1,560,000 

1806 

864,000 

1-36,000 

5,000,000 

6,000,000 

1807 

. . 

,  , 

.  , 

1803 

, , 

,  , 

206,'0OO 

200,000 

1803 

,  ^ 

,  , 

1810 

, , 

,  , 

1811 

866,600 

751,000 

1,617,600 

1812 

760,000 

5i.5,000 

226 

000 

1,495,000 

1813 

850*000 

130,000 

980,000 

1814 

288,685 

288,685 

1815 

176,772 

,  , 

176,772 

1816 

144,658 

230,000 

"400 

375,058 

1817 

6,691 

1,300 

7,991 

1818 

56 

1,300 

1,.356 

1819 

1,137,902 

1,957,000 

400 

3,102,302 

1820 

4,602 

115,000 

119,602 

1821 

42,642 

2 

200 

44,842 

1822 

,  , 

1823 

3,'800 

14, "796 

18,596 

1824 

45,605 

4 

'000 

49,605 

1825 

43,000 

5 

100 

48,100 

1826 

188,725 

. 

188,725 

1827 

21,402 

21,402 

1828 

1,963 

3 

.. 

1,966 

1829 

486 


I'UOGRESS  OF  THE  NATION.  [sec.  iv. 

Estiiiiateil  Produce  qf  Tajccst  imposed  in  each  Year  from  1801  to  1843 — continucil. 


Years. 

Customs. 

Excise. 

Stamps. 

Taxes. 

Post-office. 

Total. 

£. 

£. 

£. 

£. 

£. 

£. 

1830 

85,004 

611,000 

696,004 

1831 

626,206 

"210 

*i,170 

627,586 

1S32 

22,976 

21,550 

44,526 

1833 

IS.'M 

17,394 

181  ,'000 

198,394 

1835 

75 

5,500 

5,575 

1836 

797 

, , 

'2,394 

530 

3,721 

1837 

100 

100 

1838 

,  , 

ii733 

1,733 

183;) 

,  . 

1840 

1,160,226 

784,'000 

311,447 

2,155,673 

1841 

,  , 

1842 

160,822 

241,000 

128*167 

5,066,000 

5,-529,989 

1843 

.  , 

1844 

,  , 

1845 

19*000 

4*720 

*23.720 

1846 

"2,000 

120 

2,120 

1847 

. . 

1848 

84 

84 

1849 

" 

•• 

Estimated  Amount  of  Taxes  repealed,  expired,  or  reduced,  in  each  Year  from,  1814  to  1849. 


£. 

£. 

£. 

£. 

£. 

£. 

1814 

932^827 

, , 

9.32,827 

1815 

222,749 

. , 

, , 

222,749 

1816 

52,888 

2,863,000 

14,631,477 

17,. 547. -365 

1817 

864 

4,000 

, , 

31,631 

36,495 

1818 

9,000 

504 

9, .504 

1819 

10,913 

14,000 

23  ,'920 

195,651 

25,'0O0 

269,454 

1820 

4,000 

4,000 

1821 

19,932 

73 

4.51.-304 

471,-309 

1822 

153,146 

1,74.5,' 000 

2,955 

238,000 

2,139,101 

1823 

346, 5 J2 

1,456,000 

2,383,143 

4,185,735 

1824 

1,514,844 

274,554 

11,935 

l,801,a33 

1825 

2,804,357 

536,'000 

68,720 

267,162 

3,676,2.39 

1826 

766,615 

1,134,200 

66,400 

1,967,215 

1827 

i;738 

2,300 

80,000 

84,0-38 

1828 

36,327 

,  , 

15,671 

51,998 

1829 

126,406 

126,406 

1830 

551,470 

3,506.000 

,  , 

13,272 

4,070,742 

1831 

1,031,112 

529,000 

2,940 

25,000 

1,588,0.52 

1832 

247,746 

476,500 

7,' 162 

15,856 

747,264 

1833 

346,740 

626,000 

1.56,800 

402,588 

1,532,128 

1834 

305,817 

505,200 

31,204 

1,222,295 

2,064,516 

1835 

31,877 

1.31,. 500 

.. 

162,877 

1S36 

143,116 

536,500 

310,170 

, , 

32,'000 

1,021,786 

1837 

234 

, , 

234 

1833 

289 

289 

1831 

4,950 

2,'oOO 

56,. 308 

1,000 '000 

1,063,258 

1840 

5,000 

i.3,9-59 

18,959 

1841 

27,170 

27,170 

1842 

1,498,944 

97,422 

, , 

1,596,366 

1843 

171,521 

240  ,'000 

411,. 521 

1844 

286,431 

70.000 

102,379 

, , 

458,810 

1845 

3, 603,. 561 

932,000 

. , 

4,. 5.35,. 561 

1846 

735.228 

__ 

735,223 

1847 

344,886 

, , 

, . 

344,886 

1848 

.585,968 

, , 

, , 

585,968 

1849 

388,793 

388,798 

The  figures  which  apply  to  the  earlier  years  in  the  first  of  these  tables 
(1801  to  1803;  are  taken  from  the  budget-speeches  of  the  Chancellors 


ciiAi-.  in.]  rUODrCE  OF  TAXES.  487 

of  the  Exchequer ;  those  which  rehitc  to  the  subsequent  years,  cOS  well 
a.s  the  auiounts  given  in  the  second  taWe,  are  afforded  by  jjapers  prepared 
in  the  ditferent  revenue  departments,  and  biid  belWe  Parbainent. 

At  first  sight  these  statements  appear  in  a  high  degree  satisfactory, 
inasmuch  as  they  show  that  the  amount  of  duties  and  taxes  repealed 
since  1814  exceeds  the  amount  of  those  imposed  since  1801  by  more 
than  10  millions.  So  far  as  these  branches  of  the  revenue  are  con- 
cerned, the  public  income  in  1849  exceeded  that  of  1801  by  ID  millions 
— showing,  under  those  heads,  a  virtual  increase  of  29  millions  between 
the  two  periods.  If,  however,  we  submit  these  data  to  a  more  careful 
examination,  the  result  will  prove  far  less  flattering.  With  the  view  of 
testing  the  progress  of  this  very  important  subject,  the  following  state- 
ments are  offered,  in  which  the  actual  ])roduce  of  the  principal  heads  of 
taxation  is  given  at  the  periods  of  1811,  1821,  1831,  1841  (the  years 
in  which  the  census  has  been  taken),  and  in  1849 ;  and  some  calcula- 
tions are  offered  to  show  what  the  produce  should  have  been  propor- 
tionally to  the  increase  of  the  population  of  each  period. 

In  preparing  these  statements,  it  has  been  found  necessary  to  throw 
together  the  Customs  and  Excise  duties,  because  of  the  numerous  trans- 
fers effected  between  these  two  departments,  as  regards  the  collection  of 
revenue.  The  produce  of  these  two  branches  of  revenue  is  generally 
considered  to  afford  a  good  test  of  the  condition  of  the  people,  as  shown 
by  their  power  of  consuming  the  articles  upon  which  Excise  or  Customs 
duties  are  charged  ;  so  that  an  increase  in  their  produce  has  always 
lieen  held  to  indicate  an  increase  of  comforts  brought  within  the  reach 
of  the  mass  of  the  population.  The  amount  of  Customs  and  Excise 
duties  collected  in  1801  was  19,330,867/.  Since  that  time  new  duties, 
amounting  to  25,797,068/.,  have  been  imposed,  and  duties  that  produced 
31,935,840/.  have  been  repealed.  Under  these  circumstancas,  the 
amount  collected  in  1849  was  34,622,284/.,  being  15,291,417/.,  or  79 
per  cent,  beyond  the  collection  of  1801 ;  the  population  having  in- 
creased about  77^  per  cent.  If  a  similar  examination  is  made  in  regard 
to  the  produce  of  stamp-duties,  and  duties  under  the  management  of 
the  Board  of  Taxes,  it  will  be  found  that  under  the  first  of  these  heads 
the  increase  has  been  nearly  100  per  cent.,  and  under  the  head  of  Taxes 
the  increase  has  been  about  50  per  cent.  Under  the  remaining  head  — 
the  Post-office — we  are  still  in  what  may  be  called  a  transition  state  con- 
sequent upon  the  radical  change  in  the  rates  introduced  in  1839,  and 
no  fair  deduction  can  yet  be  drav/n  from  the  result  hitherto  experienced 
as  regards  revenue.  It  will  be  seen,  however,  that  in  1831,  when  the 
rates  were  at  their  highest,  the  deficiency  as  compared  with  population 
WHS  nearly  25  per  cent. 

That  the  increased  consumption  of  taxed  commodities  should  not  be 
greater  than  it  is,  as  compjired  with  the  consumption  in  1801,  must 
strike  every  one  with  surprise,  who  observes  the  increasing  power  of  the 


488 


PROGRESS  OF  THE  NATION. 


[^ 


mass  of  the  people  to  command  the  comforts  of  life  ;  but  this  fact  will 
assume  a  much  moi'e  instructive  shape  by  means  of  the  following  state- 
ments, which  pro\  e  that,  however  unsatisfactory  the  case  may  be  con- 
sidered at  this  moment,  it  was  far  more  so  at  the  earher  periods  to 
which  those  statements  relate,  and  that  the  change  for  the  better  may 
be  clearly  referred  to  the  modifications  which  of  late  years  have  been 
made  in  our  tarili'. 

StdfemeiU  of'  the  Proi/iess  of  the  Prhicipal  Brandies  of  the  Public  Revenue  at  different  Periods 
during  the  present  Century,  showing  the  actual  produce  of  Taxation,  and  its  produce  in  com- 
parison with  tlie  increased  Population. 


Customs  and 
Excise. 

Stamps. 

Taxes. 

Post-olTice. 

Total. 

1811 

Amount  collected  in  1801     . 
Duties   and   taxes   imposed  be-) 
tween  1801  and  1811     .     .     .J 

£. 
19,330,867 

15,877,600 

£. 
3,049,844 

1,104,000 

£. 
9,857,134 

11,236,000 

£. 
843,976 

380,000 

£. 
33,081,821 

28,597,600 

Amount  to  be  received  in  1811, ) 

by  computation f 

Amount  actually  collected  in  1811 

35,208,467 
37,466,568 

4,153,844 
5,703,913 

21,093,134 
19,819,722 

1,223,976 
1,352,538 

61,679,421 
64,342,741 

Amount  received    beyond    the  | 
computed  amount    .      .      .      .  j 

Amount  received  less  than  the  1 
computed  amount    .      .      .      .1 

2,258,101 

1,550,069 

1,273,412 

128,562 

2,663,320 

Amount  which  should  have  been  "j 
received,  taking  into  account  1 
the  increase  of  13.t  per  cent,  of  j 
population J 

39,961,610 

4,714,612 

2:^,940,707 

1,389,213 

70,006,142 

Amount  deficient  in  proportion  1 
to  increased  population      .      .  / 

Amount  in  excess  in  proportion  1 
to  increased  population      ,      .  j 

2,495,042 

989,.301 

4,120,085 

36,675 

5,66.3,401 

1821 

Amount  collected  in  1801 
Duties  and   taxes   imposed    be- ) 
tween  1801  and  1821   ...  J 

19,330,867 
21,681,566 

3,049,844 
1,147,042 

9,857,134 
11,751,000 

843,976 
609,600 

33,081,821 
35,189,208 

Duties  and  taxes  repealed,  &c.  \ 
between  1814  and  1821       .     .  J 

41,012,433 
4,1.34,173 

4,196,886 
23,993 

21,608,134 
15,310,567 

1,453,576 
25,000 

68,271,029 
19,493,733 

Amount  to  be  received  in  1821 ) 

by  computation j 

Amount  actually  collected  in  1821 

36,878,260 
38,765,814 

4,172,893 
6,513,599 

6,297,567 
7,814,690 

1,428,576 
1,383,538 

48,777,296 
54,477,641 

Amount   received    beyond   the  ) 
computed  amount    .      .     .     .  / 

Amount  received  less  than  the  ) 
computed  amount    ....  J 

1,887,.554 

■ 

2,340,706 

1,517,123 

45,038 

.   5,700,345 

Amount  which  should  have  been"! 
received,  taking  into  account  1 
the  increase  of  29'f  per  cent.  [ 
of  population J 

47,849,543 

5,414,329 

8,171,093 

1,853,578 

63,288,543 

Amount  deficient  in  proportion  \ 
to  increased  population      .      .  j 

Amount  in  excess  in  proportion  | 
to  increased  population     .      .  i 

9,083,729 

1,099,270 

356,403 

470,040 

8,810,902 

CIl.U'.    Ill  J 


PRODUCE  OF  TAXES. 


489 


SliitiiiK-iU  I't'  Ihr  PriXi>x>:.i  of  the  I'rinci/ial  Branches  of  the  Public  Revenue  at  different  Periods 
(liirini/  the  jjre.ienl  Century,  ^■(•.—continued. 


Customs  and 
Excise. 

Stamps. 

Taxes. 

Post-ofTice. 

Total. 

1831 

Aimtint  collected  in  1801 
Duties   anil   taxes    imposed  be- ) 
twecn  1801  and  1831     ...  J 

£. 
19,330,867 

23,308,271 

£. 
3,049,844 

1,162,051 

£. 
9,857,134 

11,752,170 

£. 
843,976 

618,700 

£. 
33,081,821 

36,841,192 

Duties  and  taxes  repealed,  &c.  ) 
between  1814  and  1831  .      .      J 

42,639,138 
19,660,519 

4,211,895 
476,353 

21,609,304 
18,225,249 

1,462,676 
105,000 

69,923,013 
38,467,121 

Amount  to  be  received  in  1831  1 

by  computation J 

Amount  actually  collected  in  1831 

22,978,619 
32,819,2.)6 

3,735,542 
6,947,829 

3,384,055 
4,864,343 

1,357,676 
1,530,206 

31,45.5,8'j2 
46,161,674 

Amount  received    beyond   the  ) 
computed  amount    .     .      .      .  / 

9,840,677 

3,212,287 

1,480,288 

172,530 

14,705,782 

Amount  which  should  have  been"! 
received,  taking  into  account  1 
the  increase  of  48.^  per  cent,  r 
of  population J 

34,123,249 

5,547,280 

5,025,322 

2,016,148 

46,711,999 

Amount  deficient  in  proportion  1 
to  increased  population     .      .  ) 

Amount  in  excess  in  proportion  ) 
to  increased  population     .     .  j 

1,303,953 

1,400,549 

160,979 

485,942 

550,325 

1S41 

Amount  collected  in  1801  . 
Duties   and   taxes  imposed   be- ) 
tween  1801  and  1841     .     .      .  / 

19,330,867 
25,374,042 

3,049,844 
1,185,334 

9,857,134 
12,063,617 

843,976 
618,7  00 

33,081,821 
39,241,693 

Duties  and  taxes  repealed,  &c.,1 
between  1814  and  1841       .     .  j 

44,704,909 
23,078,503 

4,235,178 
711,067 

21,920,751 
19,881,717 

1,462,676 
1,130,000 

72,323,514 
44,801,287 

Amount  to  be  received  in  1841 

by  computation 

Amount  actually  collected  in  1841 

21,626,406 
3.5,577,680 

3,524,111 
7,135,217 

2,039,034 
4,482,911 

332,676 
455,000 

27,522,227 
47,650,808 

Amount   received   beyond    the 
computed  amount    . 

13,951,274 

3,611,106 

2,443,877 

122,324 

20,128,581 

Amount  which  should  have  been  "j 
received,  taking  into  account  1 
the  increase  of  65^  per  cent,  j 
of  population J 

35,755,658 

5,826,530 

3,371,203 

550,024 

45,503,415 

Amount  deficient  in  proportion) 
to  increased  population      .      .  f 

Amount  in  excess  in  proportion  ) 
to  increased  population      .      .  ) 

177,978 

1 

1,308,687 

1,111,708 

95,024 

2,147,393 

It  is  shown  by  this  statemeut  that  although  the  amount  of  taxes 
received  in  1811  was  greater  than  the  computation  made  from  the  duties 
imposed  by  the  sum  of  2,663,320/.,  it  was  smaller  than  the  amount 
which  should  have  been  received  by  5,663,401/.,  when  we  take  into  the 
account  the  increase  which  had  been  experienced  in  the  numbers  of  our 
population. 


490 


I'KOGIIESS  OF  THE  NATION. 


Statement  of  the  Proi/ress  of  the  Principal  Branches  of  the  Public  Revenue  at  different  Periods 
during  the  present  Century,  At. — continued. 


Customs  and 
Excise.      1 

£.        ' 
19,330,867 

25,797,068 

Stamps.            Taxes. 

Post-oftice.   1       Total. 

1S49 

Amount  collected  in  1801 
Duties   and   taxes   imposed  be- 1 
tv.ecn  ISOl  and  1849     .      .      .  j 

£. 
3,049,844 

1,318,221 

£. 
9,8.57,134 

17,063,617 

£.        1        £. 
843,976  j  33,081,821 

618,700  j  44,797,606 

Dutie"  and  taxes  repealed,  &c.,  1 
between  1814  and  1849       .      .  J 

45,127,935     4,368,065 
31,935,840        910,868 

26,920,751 
19,881,717 

1,462,676  1  77,879,427 
1,130,000     53,858,425 

Amount  to  be  received  in  18491 

by  computation ) 

Amount  actually  collected  in  1849 

13,192,035     3,457,197 
34,622,284  i  6,867,548 

7,a39,034 
9,712,009 

332,676     24,021,002 
832,000     52,033,841 

Amount  received  beyond   the  ' 
computed  amount    .... 

21,430,189  [  3,410,351 

2,672',975 

499,324  :  28,012,83J 

Amount  which  should  have  been  ^ 
received,  taking  into  account  1 
the  increase  of  77^  per  cent,  f 
of  population ) 

23,415,968 

6,136,525 

12,494,285 

590,500 

42,637,278 

Amount  deficient  in  proportion  1 
to  increased  population      .      .  ) 

Amount  in  excess  in  proportion 
to  increased  population 

11,206,316        731,023 

2,782,276 

241,500 

9,396,563 

In  1821  the  amount  actually  collected  was  5,700,345/.  beyond  the 
computed  amount,  but  8,810,902/.  below  the  sum  that  should  have 
been  received,  considering  that  the  population  was  then  greater  by  29j 
per  cent,  than  it  was  in  1801.  Between  1821  and  1831  taxes  were 
repealed  beyond  what  were  imposed,  amounting  to  17,321,404/.,  and 
the  effect  of  this  reduction  was  immediately  seen  in  the  proportionally 
greater  consumption  of  articles  upon  which  the  old  or  moditied  duties 
were  continued.  The  amount  received  into  the  Exchequer  in  1831  was 
greater  than  the  amount  by  computation  to  the  extent  of  14,705,782/., 
and  was  within  550,325/.  of  the  sum  which  it  should  have  reached,  con- 
sidering the  increased  number  by  whom  it  was  contributed.  It  will 
further  be  seen  that  in  1841,  when  the  public  burthens  had  been  still 
further  reduced  by  3,933,665/.,  the  amount  of  duties  and  taxes  received 
was  greater  than  it  should  have  been  by  computation,  to  the  extent  of 
20,128,581/.,  and  greater  also  by  2,147,393/.  than  the  remaining  taxes 
would  have  yielded  at  the  same  rate  of  consumption  by  the  increased 
numbers  of  the  people. 

Between  1841  and  1849  taxes  on  consumption  were  repealed  and 
reduced  to  the  extent  of  8,501,225/. ;  but,  on  the  other  hand,  the 
income  tax,  assumed  to  yield  5,000,000/.,  has  been  imposed,  showing 
a  reduction  of  taxation  amounting  to  3,501,225/."  The  effect  of  these 
successive  reductions  is  very  significantly  indicative  of  the  situndness  of 
the  system  of  reducing  taxes  upon  articles  of  general  consumption,  the 


CHAP.  Ill  ]  PKODrCE  Ol'  TAXES.  491 

reveniu!  from  the  dilTbrent  sources  comprehendcMl  in  the  foregoing  table 
haviiio;  amounted  in  1H49  to  more  than  nine  millions  sterling  beyond 
th(^  computed  amount,  after  making  due  allowance  for  the  increase  of 
77^  per  cent,  to  the  number  of  consumers. 

At  each  of  the  periods  embraced  in  the  foregoing  calculations,  the 
produce  of  stamp  duties  was  materially  beyond  the  amount  which  they 
were  computed  to  yield,  and  even  beyond  that  which  they  should  have 
yielded,  taking  into  consideration  the  increase  of  the  population.  This 
result  is  no  doubt  ascribable  to  the  operation  of  the  probate  and  legacy 
duties,  which  are  collected  under  the  management  of  the  Stamp-office. 
It  is  in  the  nature  of  these  duties  to  be — more  than  almost  any  others — 
imavoidable.  If  a  heavy  tax  is  laid  upon  wine,  or  upon  male  servants, 
or  any  similar  object,  every  one  has  it  in  his  power  to  avoid  the  pay- 
ment, by  foregoing  the  use  of  the  taxed  article  ;  but  as  every  one  must 
die,  and  must  leave  his  property  behind  him,  and  as  few  persons  com- 
paratively, like  to  quit  the  world  without  making  such  a  disposition  of 
their  possessions  as  is  dictated  by  a  sense  of  justice,  or  by  feelings  of 
friendship  and  affection,  the  cases  will  be  few  in  number  wherein  pro- 
perty of  even  moderate  amount,  which  devolves  by  succession,  is  not 
brought  within  the  operation  of  these  duties.  The  motive  of  saving  to 
their  families  the  amount  of  the  legacy  duty,  which  might  otherwise 
influence  some  persons  to  omit  making  any  testamentary  disposition  of 
their  property,  is  removed  by  the  regulation  which  subjects  property  in 
such  cases  to  a  much  higher  rate  of  probate  duty  (generally  50  per 
cent.)  than  is  chargeable  when  a  will  is  proved.  If  we  except  those 
duties  which  operate  in  the  nature  of  moral  restraints — such,  for  in- 
stance, as  the  duty  upon  spirituous  liquors,  when  not  sufficiently  high 
to  excite  smuggling — there  are  not  any  taxes  to  the  effects  of  which 
some  social  evil  may  not  be  ascribed.  It  has  been  objected  to  the 
probate  and  legacy  duties,  that  falling  inevitably  upon  capital,  they  im- 
pair the  funds  applicable  to  the  maintenance  of  labour,  and  thereby 
diminish  the  future  production  of  the  country.  "  If,"  says  3Ir.  Ricardo, 
'•  a  legacy  of  lOOOZ.  be  subject  to  a  tax  of  100/.,  the  legatee  considers 
his  legacy  as  only  900/.,  and  feels  no  particular  motive  to  save  the  100/. 
duty  from  his  expenditure,  and  thus  the  capital  of  the  country  is  dimi- 
nished ;  but  if  he  had  really  received  1000/.,  and  had  been  required 
to  pay  100/.  as  a  tax  on  income,  on  wine,  on  horses,  or  on  servants, 
he  would  probably  have  diminished,  or  rather  not  increased,  his  expen- 
diture by  that  sum,  and  the  capital  of  the  country  would  have  been 
unimpaired."* 

*  '■  Principles  of  Political  Economy  and  Taxation,"  p.  166,  third  edition. 


492 


PROGRESS  OF  THE  NATION. 


[sec.    IV. 


„ 

^-  . 

o  3^  '.";  — 

--  -f  .-^  r?  -f 

—  -t  1^  !M  -f 

c  in  X  to  -)< 

to  —  CO  N  't 

OC  —  :^  — 

CO  "^  in  CO  X) 

CO  0>)  t-  X  to 

C^  X  C  O  55 

in  X  —  to  r- 

Js^ 

—  »  CC  — 1 

55  in  CD  o  r> 

0_^t-  O^m^^m 

•*  in  m  X  55 

■*  N  to  to  S<l 

"-«     — •  C  «  I'l 

^"iCaT— "o" 

cTin'cc  in'rH" 

r-TiN^x'^'o' 

m   (N  r-    55   o 

CO  x"x"'-"in" 

-*  O  O  O  m 

CO  —  CO  35  O 

I-  — <  t^  —  -l< 

^  in  cr.  -^ 

'"'v'"^'"!."^'*^ 

C  in  ?i  CO  CO 

r^  to  —<  IN  -N 

C__— _^— _-t_5>l^ 

^"^rT^r-*" 

m-^inin-^ 

i^'aTo'^'-o'"'/' 

■*  to  O  r^  X 

-t  co"o"55  -S 
iNcOCO  «  CO 

'""" 

—  -H  j>i  r)  (M 

Oi 

--jr^inr^iM 

O  CO  t^  55  -H 
•n  CO  55  ^  (N 

c»o-<-+co 

1^  ■*  ^M  r^ 

(-1 

■*  ^  Tf  o5  in 

CO  t^  55  -H  55 

c 

-H 

05  X  to  X  ■* 

CO  O  O  X  IN 

3> 

o5 

^    :  :  :  : 

•    >    •    • 

t^  35  C>»  to  t^ 

to  X  ^  -*  — 

CO  rt  X  —  to 

to  —  ^ 

0»  X  to  t-  (N 

O  in  o  IN  S'l 

aJ 

(M  ^  in 

X  X  IN  in  55 

55  to  in  t^  to 

S4 

0\   --H 

«  r-<  (N  IN  IN 

<N  CO  CO  CO  CO 

to  t^ 

m  -f  c  (M  -f 

55  IN  ^  to  X 

05  m  IN  ■*  35 

c 

o  o 

m  o  o  X  X 

--<  IN  55  C-.  CO 

C75  o  -*  r>.  to 

xf 

_  00  o 

to  ^  X  m  CO 

^  X  ■*  Tt  IN 

CO  ^H  in  55  X 

=4    :  '.  :  : 

•    •    •  in"^©" 

(rTto'c-f^N^aT 

rt'~co'"in'~co'"55'~ 

(Sa^S^O 

oo 

X  t^  CO  in  J5 

(M  to  •*  t^  CO 

O  IN  X  to  t^ 

Q  --  Tf  55  o 

CO  CO  IN  l>1  -H 

El^ 

CO  CO  IN  CO  r^ 

'^ 

^*^''^" 

05  !0  00  «5 

5  S  -*  t^  (N 

to  Q  r^  xt^ 
§c__c_5o_ 

m  t~  -H  (N  (N 

m  -^  t^  t^  X 

c 

oi  crs  Tf  o 

P  C-J  1^  Tf  C^ 

O  r^  in  in  in 

X  O  'N  IN  t^ 

t^  00  iC  => 

^  "t  to  55  00 

X  X  m  to  X 

>^' 

®  O 

^    o  s^Tcv  o 

CO  in  CO  5-.  -^ 

t^  in^r-TcM^iN'' 

in"     co"     in" 

to  X  O)  55  CO 

(M  1^  m  OT 

in  CO  O  5^  oo 

to  CO       to 

CO  55  CO  t^  — < 

JU 

«  «5  OO  H 

C.  (M  "  to 

■-I  CO  (N  <N  IN 

Q 

»-H 

l-H    »— 1    1— 1 

O 

00  in 

(?»  N  in  X  r- 

O  IN  X  to  CO 

to  r~  55  35  to 

c 

"t*  o 

to  ci  X  to  :r5 

X  in  t^  X  to 

i-c  -rC  CO  't  X 

to  !■) 

in  CO  C-.  X  CO 

CO  -*  ^  ^  ^ 

m  CO  5-  IN  -* 

■ai 

« 

•no 

<:4    :  :  :  : 

•     •     -CO  o 

CO  c^  CO  in  r^ 

to  -T-  t^  •*  X 

CO  CO  55  to  cr5 

^  m  CO  ^  O 

...      t^ 

IN  m  X  CO  ^ 

-*  OIN  Ot- 

a 

0} 

"-^ 

^^          r^-^ 

o__-*^-*_o^o 

(2 

g 

00  iM  r-.  M 

_).  ^  !0  --H  00 

t^  05  o  t^  to 

X  -f  5-.  Tf  O 

_i  to  -t  to  I-- 

Eh 

^1 

c:  ^  'f  -M 

m  r>J  CO  c  -+ 

5-.  ct  to  -t  r^ 

r^  to  55  O  CO 

5:  O  !M  to  O 

t^  X  «  CO 

O  CO  -M  r^  ■* 

X  5:  -M  --  OJ 

to  O  O  5.  X 

^  IN  '^  IN  55 

c+i    W^r-TcTo" 

cTin'^in'r-^m" 

Ci  C-.  to  to  t^ 

^  55  to  O^'^ 

55  -H  55"^*"  0 

1 

1— •  CO  cc  »n 

r-  CO  in  r^  t- 

O  ~  m  ^  35 

r^  -N  to  -*  X 

m  -*■  — 1  in  to 

^ 

eo 

in  to  to  55  OT 

X  55  ^  rH  IN 

^ 

■""^  '^ 

■*  O^J  —  O 

(M  00  -^  in  to 

CO  Tf  t^  to  in 

X  to  t^  O  t^ 

IN  0  >n  IN  IN 

in  'M  (N  ■* 

CO  to  '^^  CO'  go 

in  cr5  (M  t^  -* 

IN  to  55  in  ->ij< 

X  CO  0  X  to 

s 

■— 

cc  ^  CO  in 

C^  —  -N  Ol  CO 

t^  !N  (>1  55  ■N 

(NX                 r- 

in  0  in  to  X 

d 

n6 

, :    ^o^'* 

to~o">n'"— T^" 

cT-t"— '~5r 

to  -^"         co" 

.-<"in"^in"o" 

c+j    ^,-  CO  in 

«^  t^  00  in  CO 

55 

t^  r-^  t^  06  0 

b 

CO  CO  eo 

CO  CO  00  in 

X 

X  to  55  m^in 

O 
2 

P. 

in"5rt-."t-."x" 

o 

CO  -^ 

55  CO  to  O  ^ 

O  t^  5:  t^  in 

in  in  to  t^  CO 

^1 

1-^  CO 

00  .-  —  (N  IN 

—1  to  X  55  O 

<»J 

.  ®„^„ 

0__X  ^  r^^lN 

!N  t^  X  55  55 

Tf  to  0  to  — 

^    :  ;  :  : 

•    .    •  t^  1— 

a^<SoD^in 

■*"o"55"in"^" 

x"in"x'x"x" 

^   Si 

IN  i~  X  1^  m 

r-i  X   in   55  CO 

X  <— "  in  CO  X 

JP 

(M  C^ 

r^  CO  55  in  X 

r^  X  o  CO  -)" 

X  CO  X  l^  X 

(M 

IN  CO  CO  to  -* 

in  in  t^  X  X 

'" 

00  ^  in  p 
(M  CO  ■*  ^ 

■*  (N  m  to  m 

O  *»  t^  O  to 

J5  t^  ^  r-  t^ 

55  C5  CO  >ft  (N 

55  —  Ift  Tf   — 

0) 

O  to  in  CO  to 

■*  in  o  ^  X 

.—  CO  55  to  to 

O  CJ-.  C  CO 

m  in  m  o  00 

CO  m  t^  I^  X 

^  »--.  CO  X  X 

to  CO  in  IN  t^ 

*»o 

'^     W  N  -<  O 
r^  ^  t-  CO 

CO  to  C  -M  -< 

55  -*  t^  to  m 

in      IN  c^  CO 

0  'N  X  m  (N 

£ 

CO  to  to  !?)  CO 
—  ■+  O  t-  T'l 

^  t^  .-1  CO  >-• 

X  —  o 

—                         ^    Tj. 

^tOCOINr-. 

-H  ,-.  i?» 

«  IN  CO  S^ 

—  .- 

dl 

m  --  m  Q  (N 

f-  S>J  O  ■*  IN 

r^  m  0  0  to 

o 

55  55  X  to  X 

-t  CO  I^  <N  55 

a 

r^6 

<v?    :  :  :  : 

•    •    •   •  iT 

CO  b  O  -N  3 

to  O  to  CO  55 

.-<__tO^Tl-__r-i^O__ 

to  in  X  55  X 

to  Tji  t^  to  O 

in"5-rTi<"co"-r 

....  in 

't  55  55  to  (N 

55  -f<  -t  CO  'M 
X  -#  IN  to  O 

m  -+  X  '-  X 

i 

Ol 

in  -*  r^  t^  -* 

I  -  —  r~  t^  to 

r-'~c^''iN'~in'"in'~ 

»n"t-"  5r^"-)<" 

IN  to  in  in  to 

rx  i-i  n  i-i  ^ 

„• 

t^  00  CT-.  p 

C5  cr-.  Oi  S 

^  <N  CO  Tf  in 

to  r^  X  55  o 

-H  (N  eo  ■*  in 

to  t~  X  55  0 

>1 

oo  oo  o 

O  O  O  O  -H 

_  ^  ^  ^  oi 

t^  «^  t^  ao 

00  00  00  00  00 

X  X  X  X  X 

X  X  X  X  X 

X  X  X  X  X 

I'llODUCE  OF  TAXES. 


493 


lis 


3  .i^v 
E2f.S 


O  i£>  ^  CO  C/J 


«  in  (M  CO 


_  __  -       CI  '^  -t  00  —       r/j  ■ 

<X(  ir;  3".  CI  to       >r:  ir:  —  x  I-       <£  ■■ 


■  CO  04  lO  ci  —       -t  00  c.  r  -  3^ 


(N  -r  -t  -t  ci 


.  -t  Cl  — '        tC  X  CO  CO  r-.       c  —  '•'■^ 
VJc^i'HcOi^O       (Nincntr;-^       eocor^t^cD       «o«0"^-t       i--  -f  c^  £.  Oi       W—  -J 
C^.i-oooo      ooootN      incojsino      i-tccoo-t       -fi^cocoo      ^soco 


I   •<*    -*    T)<  Tj<    Tj<    T)< 


r»  •*  CO  s>  to 


USOpiOi-iOO        QOi-'ta-'*'        CTir~0-*5>>        OOOSOOOt,         ^-ii^, 

eoHPooinco      55t^«oeoeo      oo^oco^      c^2*oo-f      2';;S^3        -«,^ 


.  ;  t^  -t  -f  00  — < 

-+?  00  -r  O  in  oi 
in  00  »  —■  fN 


;  o  "N       (M  a>  d  in  CO 

■   r-.    I-  •*    35   3>J   .-    — < 

t  Ti  <£>        «!  1^  CO  C^  00 


CO  IM  CO  00  O 

t^coDOco      Qoci^into 


cococo-*"*      CO'*'*-*'*      ■*'*'*'*•*      Tj<*-**-*      •*m*-*'*      •*** 


IM  *  «5  00  * 


I  CO  t^  1^  w 


in  I--  CI  35 1>- 


m  oj  r-1  to  in 


(N35CO-HO0      co*ininr^ 


t^O0«D'*35       OC-.  o> 
OI  t^  *  35  t^        (M  C  l^ 


-»?  3:  ::  in  t-  t-~ 

tr  C  O  35  -^ 
^  (?»  O  -^  CO 


t^  CO  O  CI  to 


<N  O  —  O  to 

m  *  (N  ^  CO 


00  CO  *  to  35 


to  t-H  h-  to  35 

m  35 1^  — <  CI 

00  -<  O  ^  CJ 


m  35  00  S  o 

CO  t~  I-  35  O 

CO  -t  rt  in  to 


05  m  -t 
(35  in  * 

Cl  -H  CI 


o*ci-+ao      *ocooo      cicicoxf^      oocoocioo      ^ino 

~  »^  ^-^  ^*^  »_  .^  /^i  -rv  '-^  ^>         r^  — ^  r/^  ^i  »44         ^^  nn  —^  po  ^  f*.  rTi  rr, 


_  35  to  O  ^  t- 

Cm-»<M(NC«         (N  CI  CO  CO  CO 


.. r  -  ■   -       eooo  —  to—  -. 

(C»mTfi-*(N        COl?<<NC0CO        (NCICJ 


t^  i-H  to  --  O 


CO  CI  -H  CJ  CO 


00  in  35  m  00 


dooi^'*'^   cO'*i~~i 

m  X  in  to  CI   00  in  t^  00  — ' 


35  — <  ■*  CO  Q 

^  O  O  35  5 

C5  *  in  X  CO 


m  *  X  CI  --H 


in  •*  in  in  to 

CO  —  —  d  CI 


m  Tt-  to  «  CI 
X  to  in  o  * 


toinoxo      cxmtoci 
X  m  m  CO  CO      ■*  to  3-.  3;  o 


to  CO  O  CI  CO 

X  t^  m  35  CO 

O  to  —  -H  r^ 


■*   -H   to    O    -^ 
35  t~  CI  C   X 

CO  d  to  o  o 


C5tO*'NCT5        0^-t0t0t~-        tOtO 


in  35  1^  35  * 

xcO'*r^in      ciintoto-- 


X  ■*  Q  —  h- 


35  CI  3:  X  t- 

-^  I—  CI  CO  — 


CI  •*  : 

n  CI 


-^"  CO  1— '  1^  CO 
CI  in  d  CO  --I 


i~  r~  CO  — <  35 


in  CO  O  35  to 
CO  CO  in  CO  ^^ 
00  to  —  *  to 


i-H  *  t^  d  35 
O  -T  d  —  d 

r-  d  *  --  in 


o  ■*  X  CO  d 
m  to  in  t^  to 

O  c;  ■*  35  to 


i^  d  m  CO  to 


O  CO  CO  — '  to 
X  CI  X  to  CO 
d  CI  X  C  CO 


^  ^  -t  d  in  in 

O  *  X  CO  X 

in  35 1^  *  o 
d  --  to  --  CO 
CO  X  35  to  O 

t^  *  35  O  -- 

>—  35  m  o  CO 

*  O  3i  *  35 

*  o  so  —  X 

r-.  —  35  X  35 

CO  —  X  O  35 

35 1^  Tf  t^  in 

CO  -C  X 

CO  d  in 

O  35  O  —  3» 

O  O  d  —  CI 

-^  CO  d  d  — 

d  CO  *  CO  d 

d  d  CO  CO  ■* 

CO  •*  CO 

.       ^  _-        e0  3--  —  xeo 

:cOCXtO        ^dd— it^        dXXC0  35 


O  35  O  CI  t^ 

in  CO  c  X  to 
_  m  t^  —  O  X 

^  35  co'l^  —  * 

d  ■*-«•+  t^ 

1^  X  t^  *  d 


to  X  in  ■*  t^ 
^  d  d  — 1 1^ 

to  to  o  X  in 

x''*"*'~t^'d 
■*  —  d  —  to 
—  d  d  CO  — 


xt^tceoin  int^cod35 

c'cTto'o  to  to  CO  -f  --  X 

■*r^OtoO  c  to  to  CO 

I— d  CO  1—  d  d  •—  —  —  ■— 


CO  to  CI  CO  ■* 
— I  t^  to  to  35 
35  35  35  d  ■* 

r^  CO  35 1^  d 


in  t-  35 
r-H  r-  X 
t^  d  X 

co'^cr-jT 


in  ■*  CO  CO  CO 
C  in  X  -f  to 
35  c  d  C  CO 


-hU 


w  —  —  rjco  -fdintox 

xtot^*d  dX— '  —  * 

.:  to  35  CO  CO  —  d  d"35"o"i-r 

i-Hf^co  —  coin  35r-.tointo 

•*  C  «  35 1^  CO  to  ■*  m  o 


r~-Or-co--       ■*Oi--tO'— 
m  —  in  c  CO      t^  —  d  to  o 

'*d  —  C035        35-*tDC-- 


GN  =^  CO  O  X 
CO  t^-f  to  O 


d  S  •—  t^  X 

CO  35  r^  r-  I--. 


X  CI  to 
cf  CI  -t 

d  d  d 


nJ!^:?;^      tot^xs50      —  CI  CO-*  in      tot~-X3^o      — dc-i-*in      tct^x 
ddCldCI        CI  CI  CI  Cl  CO        cococococo       c«Pr^c^S       5i?-54'-ti        ^-^--t- 

XXXXX        XXXXX        XXXXX        OOXXXX        XXXXX        XXX 


494  TROGRESS  OF  THE  NATION.  [sec.  iv. 

It  might,  on  the  other  hand,  be  snggefitcd,  tliat,  while  these  duties 
are  accompanied  by  the  advantage  which  generally  attends  direct  taxa- 
tion, namely,  that  a  much  larger  part  of  their  produce  than  of  the 
produce  of  taxes  indirectly  collected  finds  its  way  into  the  public  trea- 
sury, they  are  likewise  free  from  the  evil  effect  commonly  ascribed  to 
direct  taxation,  that  it  engenders  irritation,  and  is  regarded  as  a  greater 
burthen  by  the  public  than  the  })ayment  of  duties  to  a  greater  amount 
upon  consumable  commodities.  The  legacy  and  probate  duties  are  in 
truth  not  felt  as  a  tax,  and  it  is  tliis  circumstance  which  has  exposed 
them  to  the  objection  urged  by  Mr.  Ricardo.  Another  and  apparently 
a  much  better-founded  objection  to  them,  as  levied  in  this  country, 
might  be  brought  forward,  namely,  the  partiality  shown  in  excluding 
from  their  operation  that  description  of  property  which,  from  its  gi-eater 
comparative  value  and  security,  is  called  real  property.  This  partiality 
has  always  been  felt  as  a  grievance,  and  the  sense  of  injustice  which  it 
is  calculated  to  awaken  is  of  more  moment  than  any  temporary  irritation 
that  may  accompany  the  demand  for  money  taxes,  which  soon  passes 
away,  and  will  be  felt  only  by  those  persons  who  have  given  little  or  no 
consideration  to  the  subject. 

The  foregoing  table  (pp.  492,  493),  containing  the  amount  of  capital 
upon  which  legacy  duty  has  been  paid  in  Great  Britain,  in  each  year 
from  1797  to  1848  is  of  importance,  as  affording  some  data  for  approxi- 
mating towards  an  estimate  of  the  amount  of  personal  property  held 
within  the  kingdom,  and  which,  it  is  thus  made  evident,  has  undergone 
continual  and  progressive  augmentation. 

It  should  be  stated,  that  some  part  of  the  capital  brought  to  charge 
in  each  year  consists  of  the  arrears  of  former  years.  These  arrears  of 
course  vary  from  year  to  year,  and  for  some  time  the  tendency  would 
naturally  be  towards  their  increase  ;  but  it  may  be  assumed  that  for 
many  years  past  this  has  not  been  the  case,  and  that  the  arrears  received 
in  each  year  have  borne  a  very  near  proportion  to  the  amount  applicable 
to  the  same  year  which  is  suffered  to  go  into  arrear.  It  must,  too,  he 
borne  in  mind  that  there  is  a  very  considerable  part  of  the  personal 
property  in  this  kingdom  which  at  the  deatli  of  its  possessors  is  not  sub- 
jected to  the  duty  on  legacies  :  the  amount  thus  exempted  it  is  not  pos- 
sible to  determine. 

Tlie  following  statement  gives  the  amount  of  revenue  received  for 
legacy  duty  and  pi-obate  duty  in  each  year  since  1823,  distinguishing 
the  sums  collected  in  the  different  divisions  of  the  kingdom  : — 


cn.vr.  III.] 


PRODUCE  OF  TAXES. 


405 


Jieltira  of  tlie  Total  Anwnnl  of  Ri:renve  receiveil  in  the  United  Kimjdom  in  eac'i  Yittir,  front 
bth  JaHiiari/,  1823,  to  ^t/i  Janiiuri/,  I84'.t,  fur  Stamp  Duti/  on  Ler/acins,  Prohntcs,  ArlminisI ra- 
tions and  Testatnentary  Inventorifs. 


Year  ending  5th  January. 

England  and  Wales. 

Scotland. 

Great  Britain. 

Ireland. 

1824— Legacies.     .     . 
Probates,  Admi-j 

£. 
930,881 

14 

d. 
6 

50 

£. 
359 

s. 
19 

d. 
2 

£.          s. 
981,241    13 

d. 

8 

16,296 

s.     d. 
14     5i 

nistrations.aud  | 
Testamentary   ( 
Inventories     .  J 

782,042 

18 

0 

38 

556 

10 

0 

820, 599     8 

0 

29,411 

10  10 

1825 — Legacies      .     , 
Probates,  &c.     . 

988 
805 

087 
222 

13 
14 

0 
6 

61 
46 

370 

718 

10 
0 

11 
0 

1,049,458    3 
851,940  14 

11 
6 

23,552 
31,112 

16     1 
16     7^ 

1826— Legacies       .     . 
Probates,  &c.     . 

992 
831 

100 
137 

13 

7 

2 
0 

64 
43 

805 
374 

13 
0 

9 
0 

1,056,P06     6 
874,511     7 

11 
0 

30,258 
34,552 

13    2^ 
0    0 

1827 — Legacies 

Probates,  &c.     , 

869 
762 

208 
45'J 

10 
9 

6 
0 

54 
52 

114 

578 

11 
0 

8 
0 

923,323    2 
815,037     9 

2 
0 

21,053 
38,102 

12    4 
9  11 

1828— Legacies       .     . 
Probates,  &c.    . 

967 
830 

377 

800 

3 

6 

6 
0 

65 
37 

676 

989 

2 
0 

9 
0 

1,033,053    6 
868,789    6 

3 
0 

35,750 
32,166 

0    9 
10    0 

1S2'J — Legacies       .     . 
Probates,  &c.    . 

1,105 

8a3 

250 

744 

18 
0 

8 
0 

65 
43 

043 

850 

10 
10 

1 
0 

1,170,294    8 
877,594  10 

9 
0 

27,557 
41,659 

14    .^i 
10    o' 

1S30— Legacies 

Probates,  &c.     . 

1,119 
835 

'j36 
273 

12 
0 

2 
0 

58 
42 

773 
709 

3 

0 

0 
0 

1,178,709  15 
877,982    0 

2 
0 

29,325 
46,400 

10     1 
17  10 

1831- -Legacies 

Probates,  &c.     . 

1,153 

857 

305 

909 

19 
0 

5 
0 

69 
46 

954 

029 

12 

10 

1 

0 

1,223,260  11 

903,933  10 

6 
0 

24,628 
37,125 

15    3 
15    3 

1832— Legacies       .     . 
Probates,  &c.     , 

1,075 
833 

264 
592 

9 
10 

2 
0 

69 
43 

194 
346 

14 
10 

6 
0 

1,144,459    3 
876,939     0 

8 
0 

19,3.53 

41,728 

3    3 
10    0 

1833     Legacies       .     . 
Probates,  &c.     . 

1,123 
803 

800 
911 

18 
10 

4 
0 

81 
41 

252 

268 

6 
0 

5 
0 

1,205,053    4 
845,179  10 

9 
0 

25,974 
39,508 

2    0 

10    0 

1834 — Legacies 

Probates,  &c.     . 

1,033 
839 

343 
041 

4 
0 

4 
0 

56 
46 

674 
422 

0 
0 

0 
0 

1,150,017    4 
885,463    0 

4 
0 

25,463 
38,543 

10    2i 
13  10 

1 835 — Legacies 

Probates,  &c.     . 

1,140 

864 

229 

393 

9 
10 

2 

0 

69 
67 

509 
455 

11 
0 

1 
0 

1,209,739    0 
931,848  10 

3 

0 

29,273 
44,324 

3  10.4 
10    0 

1S3G — Legacies       .     . 
Probates,  &c.     . 

1,106 
848 

364 
066 

13 
11 

5 
0 

72 
51 

518 
544 

10 

10 

3 

0 

1,178,883    3 
899,611     1 

8 
0 

27,284 
40,996 

7  10 
0    0 

1S37 — Legacies       .     . 
Probates,  &c.     . 

1,093 
861 

340 
046 

4 

18 

6 
0 

78 
55 

111 

873 

17 
0 

10 
0 

1,171,452    2 
916,919  18 

4 
0 

26,048 
40,541 

19     5 
10    0 

1838— Legacies       .     . 
Probates,  &c.     . 

1,103 
965 

303 

768 

9 
15 

7 
0 

76 
58 

662 
233 

8 
10 

1 

0 

1,179,965  17 
1,024,002     5 

8 
0 

29,008 
44,254 

18     4 
0     0 

1839— Legacies.     .      . 
Probates,  &c.     . 

1,207 
872 

704 
190 

4 
10 

6 
0 

74 
55 

296 
775 

19 
10 

2 
0 

1,282,001     3 
927, 'j66    0 

8 
0 

26,105 
48,427 

14     0 
0     0 

1840 — Legacies 

Probates,  &c.     . 

1,059 
831 

319     7 
220  10 

7 
0 

101 

48 

G18 
741 

8 
0 

10 
0 

1,160,937  16 
879,961  10 

5 
0 

27,443 
42,237 

8     1 
10     0 

1841— Legacies 

Probates,  &c.     . 

1,087 

898 

111 

6'JO 

19 
2 

9 
6 

89 
50 

070 
162 

18 
10 

8 
0 

1,176,182  18 
948,852  12 

5 
6 

26,394 
40,581 

9     4 
0    0 

1842— Legacies       .     . 
Probates,  &c.    . 

1,109 
915 

317 
354 

1 
19 

7 
6 

69 
57 

787 
955 

15 
0 

7 
0 

1.179,104  17 
'973,309  19 

2 
6 

30,020 
39,171 

14    7 
14    0 

1843— Legacies       .     . 
Probates,  &c.     . 

1,141 

860 

471 

496 

14 
13 

2 
6 

87 
62 

871 
342 

1 
10 

2 

0 

1,229,342  15 
922,839     3 

4 
6 

65,375 
49,548 

15    6 
0    0 

496 


PROGRESS  OF  THE  NATION. 


[sec.  iy. 


Beturn  if  the  Total  Amntnt  of  Kevenue 

for  Stamp  I) 

"','/ 

on  Lrffacies 

,  f'C. — contimird. 

Year  ending  5th  January. 

England  and  Wa 

es. 

Scotland. 

Great  Britain. 

Iieland. 

1844 — Legacies 

Probates,  &c.     . 

£. 
1,114,871 
879,367 

"6 
5 

d. 
6 
0 

£.       .1. 
86,8J7  18 
53,413    0 

d. 
6 
0 

£.         s 
l,20i,769 
932,780 

d. 
5     0 
5     0 

£.  s.  d. 
39,034  17  3 
66,184  10     1 

1845 — Legacies       .     . 
Probates,  &c.     . 

1,124,435 
902,219 

12 
15 

0 
6 

74,116  15 
64,632  10 

11 

0 

1,198,552 
966,852 

7  11 
5    6 

53,618  12  2 
61,031     9  10 

1846— Legacies       .     . 
Probates,  &c.     . 

1,178,866 
963,322 

6 
12 

9 
0 

88,073  15 
66,631  10 

5 
0 

1,266,940 
1,029,954 

2    2 
2    0 

61,629  18  1 
65,852     0     0 

1847 — T/Cgacies 

Probates,  &c.     . 

1,087,004 
915,045 

18 
19 

7 
6 

97,198  18 
67,533    0 

4 
0 

1,184,203 
982,578 

16  11 
19     6 

63,3.tO  19  0 
72,036  10    0 

1848— Legacies       .      . 
Probates,  &c.     . 

1,174,466 

978,820 

4 

7 

6 
0 

83,995  10 
82, 147     0 

3 
0 

1,258,461 
1,060,967 

14    9 
7    0 

61.061  4  8 
86,051   10     0 

1849 — Legacies       .     . 
Probates,  &c.     . 

1,057,691 
889,341 

3 
14 

9 
0 

93,485    4 
75,796  10 

6 
0 

1,151,176 
965,138 

8    3 
4    0 

72,488  6  4 
76,539    0    0 

But  for  the  great  productiveness  of  the  class  of  duties  just  considered, 
the  deficient  produce  of  taxation  during  the  war  and  for  the  few  years 
that  elapsed  after  its  close,  in  which  we  were  still  suffering  from  its 
financial  evils,  would  have  been  much  more  apparent.  The  progress  of 
Customs  and  Excise  duties,  as  computed  at  each  of  the  periods  embraced 
in  the  statement,  was  as  follows  :  — 


To  be  Collected 

by 
Computation. 


Duties,  Sic, 
Imposed  beyond 
Amount  repealed 

since  ISOl. 


1801 
1811 
1821 
1831 
1841 


1S49 


£. 

35,208,467 
36,878,260 
22,978,619 
21,626,406 

13,192,095 


I   .Deficient,  Excessive, 

Sums  actually  |   considering  considering 

Collected.      !     increased  '    increased 

I  Population,  j  Population. 


15,877,600 
17,-547,393 

3,647,752 

2,295,-539 
Repealed  beyond 

Imposed. 

6,138,772 


£- 
19,330,867 
37,466,568 
38,765,814 
32,S19,296 
35.577.680 


34.622.284 


2,495,042 

9,083,729 

1,303,953 

177.978 


11,206,-316 


Pursuing  this  inquiry  into  the  two  remaining  branches,  we   find   the 
followins  results :  — 


Duties,  &c.. 

Duties,  J.;c., 

Deficient 

Excessive 

Years. 

To  be  Collected 
bv 

Imposed  beyond 
Amount 

Repealed  beyond 
Amount 

Sums  actually 
Collected. 

Receipt, 
considering 

Receipt, 
considering 

Computation. 

Repealed  since 

Imposed  since 

increased 

increased 

1801. 

laoi. 

Population. 

•Population. 

Taxes. 

£. 

£. 

+■ 

f 

£. 

£. 

1801 

.   , 

. . 

9,857,1-34 

.. 

1811 

21,093,1.34 

11,236,000 

, , 

19,819,722 

4,120,985 

1821 

6,297,567 

, , 

3,559,567 

7,814,690 

356,403 

1831 

3,384,055 

Repealed  beyond 
Imposed. 

6,473,079 

4,864,343 

160,979 

1841 

2,0-39,034 

7,818,100 

4.482,911 

1,111,708 

1849 

7,039,034 

2,818,100 

•• 

9,712,009 

2,782,276 

CHAP,   in] 


PRODUCE  OF  TAXES. 


497 


iTo  be  (Jollecteil 
Years.     |  by 

Computation. 


1801 
1811 
1821 
1831 

1841 
1849 


£. 

1,223J 
1,42S. 
l,3r)7. 


970 
.570 
676 


Duties,  &r., 

Inipuseii  lieyond 

Amount 

Repealed  since 

I  Hill. 


Rums  actually 
Collecteil. 


332, 
332, 


676 
676 


Post  Office. 

£. 

380,000 
.'J84,G00 
513,000 
Repealed  lieyond 
Imposed. 
511,300 
511,300 


£. 

843,976 

1,352,538 

1,3^3,.53S 

1,530,206 

455,000 
832,000 


Deficient 
Receipt, 

considering 
increased 

Population. 


Excessive 
Receipt, 

ron.fidering 
i  ncreased 

Population. 


36 

470 
485 


675 
040 
,942 


95,024 


241 , 500 


The  revenue  denvecl  from  the  Post-office  was  in  1836  deficient  at  the 
rate  of  25  per  cent.,  when  examined  with  reference  to  the  increased 
population,  and  compared  with  its  productiveness  in  1801  ;  and  it  will 
be  observed  tha  less  had  then  been  done  since  the  peace  in  this  than  in 
any  other  branch  of  the  public  revenue  towards  the  relief  of  the  people. 
Tt  is  a  very  common  idea,  that  because  the  Government  performed  a 
service,  in  return  for  the  tax  imposed  on  the  transmission  of  letters — 
which  cannot  be  said  with  equal  propriety  in  regard  to  any  other  taxes 
— that  therefore  this  was  a  peculiarly  fair  and  fit  object  for  taxation, 
and  that  the  Government  would  even  have  been  justified  in  making  any 
addition  to  the  rates  of  postage  which  should  have  left  the  cost  of  con- 
veying a  letter  below  that  which  it  would  occasion  to  the  individual 
himself  to  convey  it.  This,  however,  is  a  very  narrow  point  of  view  in 
which  to  place  the  question,  and  one  which  leaves  altogether  out  of  sight 
the  fact  that  the  Government,  assuming  to  itself  a  strict  monopoly  in 
the  business,  thereby  shut  out  the  open  competition  of  individuals  and 
private  associations,  by  whom  the  service  might  be  performed  upon  terms 
more  advantageous  for  the  public. 

The  whole  subject  of  taxation  is  one  of  the  highest  importance,  and 
yet  it  is  to  be  feared  that  the  principles  by  which  it  should  be  governed 
are  but  partially  understood.  If  even  our  finance  ministers  had  at  any 
time  conceived  plans  for  establishing  this  subject  upon  a  sounder  footing, 
they  would  probably  have  been  withheld,  by  the  situation  in  which  this 
country  is  placed  through  the  burthen  of  its  obligations  to  the  public 
creditor,  from  attempting  any  great  experimental  alteration  of  the 
existing  system.  So  long  as  this  check  to  improvement  shall  operate, 
it  may  be  hopeless  to  advocate  the  adoption  of  any  radical  change,  but 
it  must,  under  any  circumstances,  be  of  advantage  to  know  the  facts 
that  have  accompanied  the  course  pursued. 

Among  the  reductions  effected  from  1831  inclusive,  several  are  of 
duties  which  were  partial  and  unjust  in  their  operation,  while  others 
were  highly  impolitic  in  their  tendency,  and  prevented  the  extension  of 

2  K 


498  PROGRESS  OF  THE  NATION.  [sec.  iv. 

certain  branches  of  industry.  Among  the  former  may  be  mentioned 
the  duty  upon  coals  carried  coastwise,  which  acted  in  aggravation  of  the 
natural  disadvantage  experienced  by  the  inhabitants  of  those  parts  of 
the  country  to  which  fuel  was  conveyed  at  a  great  expense,  while  the 
districts  in  which  coal  abounds,  and  where,  consequently,  its  cost  is 
small,  were  exempt  from  the  tax.  Among  the  duties  to  which  tlie 
charge  of  impolicy  is  applied  was  that  upon  printed  cottons,  the  evil 
effects  of  which  have  been  sufficiently  explained  in  a  former  section. 
The  discriminating  duties  upon  sugar  and  coffee,  the  produce  of  British 
possessions  in  India,  have  also  been  removed,  a  measure  which  could 
not  fail  to  have  the  best  effects  upon  oiu'  commerce  with  tliat  part  of 
the  world,  and  a  long  list  of  articles,  the  revenue  derived  from  which 
was  insignificant  in  amount,  but  hurtful  in  its  effects  upon  various 
branches  of  the  national  industry,  have  either  been  removed  from  the 
tariff  or  the  duties  upon  them  reduced  to  rates  that  are  merely  nominal. 
The  Custom-house  accounts  exhibited  in  1842  a  list  of  190  articles 
upon  which  duties  were  levied,  independent  of  such  as  were  not  con- 
sidered worth  enumerating,  but  were  described  as  "  all  other  articles," 
and  the  duties  upon  which,  in  that  year,  amounted  to  73,351/.  It  is  a 
curious  fact,  that  out  of  this  long  array  of  substances,  the  net  produce 
of  the  duties  upon  which  amounted,  in  1840,  to  23,341,813/.,  the  large 
proportion  of  93i  per  cent.,  or  21.872,508/.,  was  collected  upon 
eighteen  articles,  as  shown  in  the  following  list.  By  extending  the  list 
so  as  to  comprise  all  articles  which  yield  annually  10,000/.  and  upwards, 
it  will  be  found  to  comprehend,  altogether,  only  forty-five  articles, 
yielding  22,742,601/.,  or  97^  per  cent,  of  the  whole,  leaving  145 
articles,  besides  all  those  unenumerated,  and  which  yielded  599,212/., 
or  2i  per  cent,  of  the  produce. 

£.  I  £. 

Tea 3,472,864  Tallow 186,283 

Sugar  and  Molasses       .     .4,650,016  !  Silk  Manufactured  Goods    .  240,627 

Tobacco 3,588,192  1  Currants 201,577 

British    Plantation    and    )  ,  ^^  „  ,„  I  Sheep's  Wool        ....  132,689 

Foreign  Spirits     .      .       \'-,**0,^-*-  Corn 1,156,63J 

Wine 1,791,646  :  Raisins 138,203 


Timber 1,731,549 

Coffee 921,550 

Cotton  Wool       ....       648,937 
Butter 257,576 


£19,503,272 


Seeds 195,541 

Cheese 117,677 


2,369,236 
19,503,272 

£21,872,508 


PRODUCE  OF  TAXES, 


499 


£. 

Pepper    70,503 

Dye  and  Hard  Woods      .      .  67,304 

Turpentine 85,  l".t4 

Oils 87,869 

Lemons  and  Oranges  •      .     .  62,814 

Hides 41,442 

Furs 20,914 

Iron 21,819 

Indigo 39,825 

Licorice  Juice 26,534 

Leather  Gloves      .     ,     .     .  28,301 

Hice 24,610 

Bark 20,751 

Eggs 34,374 

Bristles 29,121 

Cork  Wood 24,795 

Platting  for  Hats  .     .     .     .  11,900 

£698,160 


£. 

Skins 19,026 

Woollen  Manufactures     .      .  20,61!) 

Glass       .......  23,048 

Ivaw  and  N\'aste  Silk    .      .      .  17,658 

Linen 13,712 

Nuts 13,874 

Nutmegs 15,040 

Brimstone 11,198 

Madder  and  Madder  Hoots  .  16,818 

Cocoa 20,944 


171,933 
698,160 

870,093 
21,872,508 

£22,742,601* 


*  Since  1842  the  Customs  duties  have  been  repealed  on  cotton  wool,  sheep's  wool,  various 
seeds,  turpentine,  oils,  hides,  furs,  iron,  indigo,  bark,  bristles,  cork  wood,  skins,  woollen 
manufactures,  raw  and  waste  silk,  linen,  brimstone,  madder  and  madder  roots ;  and  the  then 
existing  rates  have  been  reduced  on  sugar  and  molasses,  foreign  spirits,  timber,  butter, 
tallow,  silk  manufactures,  currants,  corn,  raisins,  and  cheese,  all  included  in  the  above  list. 

A  similar  examination  of  the  Custom-house  accounts  for  1849  shows  the  following  result 
of  these  important  clianges,  viz.,  that  upon  12  articles,  yielding  each  more  than  100,000/.,  the 
revenue  has  amounted  to  95^^  per  cent,  of  the  whole  ;  that  upon  14  articles,  yielding  each 
between  10,000/.  and  100,0()0/.,  the  proportion  was  beyond  2^  per  cent.,  while  all  other 
Articles,  the  revenue  from  each  of  which  was  less  than  10,000/.,  yielded  less  than  2  per  cent. 
of  the  j"early  amount,  which,  notwithstanding  the  abolition  and  reduction  of  duties  since 
1840,  to  the  e.xtent  of  7,479,683/.,  or  32-88  per  cent.,  yielded  in  1849  within  473,738/.,  or  about 
2  per  cent.  (2-08)  of  the  revenue  of  1840. 

Twelve  articles  above  100,000/.  per  annum: — 


Butter      . 
Coffee 
Corn    . 
Currants  . 
Kaisins 
Silk  Goods 

Colonial  and   Foreign  1  „ 
Spirits     .  ^  ^ 


£. 
1.37,844 
622,835 
561,481 
341,022 
151,768 
253,447 

^ 2,816,479 

£4,884,876 


Sugar  and  Molasses       .  4,126,504 

Tea 5,471,420 

Tobacco   4,408,018 

Wine 1,767,516 

Timber 618,455 


16,331,913 

4,884,876 

£21,276,789 


or  95-54 
percent. 


Fourteen  articles  between  10,000/.  and  100,000/.  :- 


£. 

Cheese 96,8.57 

Leather  Gloves      .     .     .  44,020 

Cocoa 17,675 

Eggs 35,646 

Embroidery      .     .      .      ,  12,301 

Figs 23,831 

Flowers,  Artificial       .      .  13,046 

Nutmegs 18,116 

Nuts 18,386 

Oranges  and  Lemons  .     .  64,679 


£344,557 


Pepper    . 
Rice  . 

Clover  Seed 
Tallow    .      , 


£. 
85,527 
16,466 
41,331 
94,619 


237,943 
344,557 

.582,.50o| 
21,276,789 


or  2-62 
per  cent. 


21,859,289 


Articles  under  10,000/ 409,574 


or  1-84 
'^^per  cent. 


£22,268,863 


2  K  2 


500  PROGRESS  OF  THE  NATION.  [sec.  iv. 

Is  it  possible  to  conceive  any  better  use  that  could  have  been  made  of 
a  surplus  of  revenue  to  the  extent  of  600,000/.,  than  in  repealing  all  this 
long  array  of  comparatively  unproductive  duties,  which  could  but  exer- 
cise a  prejudicial  effect  upon  commerce  ?  Some  part  of  those  unpro- 
ductive duties  were  imposed  for  what  is  called  the  protection  of  our 
manufactures,  and  some  others  because  of  the  Excise  duties  charged 
upon  the  like  articles  of  English  manufacture.  It  must  surely  be  bad 
policy  for  this  country  to  set  the  example  of  charging  duties  for  the  pro- 
tection of  domestic  industry.  Such  duties  must  long  ago  have  become 
wholly  inoperative,  through  the  perfection  and  economy  which  have  been 
attained  in  our  manufactories ;  and  if  perchance  this  should  not  be  the 
case  with  every  minute  branch  of  skilful  employment,  we  ought  to  have 
learned,  from  the  experience  of  former  relaxations,  that  the  true  and 
certain  way  to  ensure  improvement  is  to  throw  down  the  mounds  of  pro- 
tection. If  even,  against  all  probability  and  all  experience,  some  few 
sickly  and  exotic  branches  of  employment  should  leave  the  country,  the 
sacrifice  would  be  small  indeed  in  comparison  with  the  good  to  be 
attained  through  the  practical  carrying  out  of  a  princi])le  fioni  the 
universal  adoption  of  which  we  have  so  much  to  gain,  but  which  never 
will  be  generally  adopted  by  other  countries,  so  long  as  their  prohibitory 
or  protective  duties  are  countenanced  by  the  provisions — however  in- 
operative— of  our  tariff. 

Where  Excise  duties  are  charged  upon  articles  of  English  production, 
it  is  assuredly  only  justice  to  the  home  manufacturer  to  levy  equivalent 
duties  upon  the  admission  of  the  like  articles  from  foreign  countries  ;  but 
in  such  cases  it  were  well  to  inquire  whether  the  sums  received  afford  a 
sufficient  compensation  for  the  evils  always  attendant  upon  duties  levied 
in  manufactories.  The  Excise  duty  on  vinegar  made  in  the  United 
Kingdom  amounted  to  no  more,  in  1836,  than  26,313/.  1.?.  Id.,  and  the 
protecting  duty  on  foreign  vinegar  to  1,351/.  155.  lOd.  The  duties 
being  now  removed,  the  manufacturers  are  allowed  to  carry  on  their 
processes  freed  from  the  restrictive  rules  of  revenue  officers,  and  it  can- 
not be  doubted  that  they  must  always  produce  vinegar  at  a  price  whicli 
will  ensure  to  them  the  supply  of  the  home  market,  while  our  trade 
with  France  has  been  increased  in  a  manner  which  tends  to  secure 
for  us  the  good  wishes  and  co-operation  of  one  of  the  largest  and 
most  influential  classes  of  proprietors  in  that  country.  The  imposition 
of  an  Excise  duty  on  vinegar  was  long  justified  on  the  plea  of  care  for 
the  health  of  the  public,  which  was  to  be  protected  by  means  of  the 
revenue  officers,  who  would  prevent  the  use  of  any  deleterious  ingre- 
dients in  our  vinegar-yards,  a  plea  which  will  scarcely  meet  with  sup- 
porters at  the  present  day,  since  it  is  known  tha't  no  surveillance  will 
suffice  to  prevent  illegal  mixtures,  where  it  is  to  the  interest  of  manu- 
facturers to  make  them. 


(HAP.  III.]  niODUCE  OF  TAXES.  501 

The  Government  has,  shiee  1840,  acted  upon  the  suggestion  here 
thrown  out,  of  re])eaUng  many  of  the  comparatively  unpro.luctive 
Customs  duties  which  then  swelled  the  taritf,  and  we  see  that  the 
money  collected  upon  the  remaining  more  important  articles  amply 
compensates  for  the  amount  given  up. 

The  evil  effects  of  high  duties,  as  regards  consumption,  will  be  better 
shown  in  the  section  especially  treating  on  that  branch  of  our  subject. 

It  would  have  been  a  favourable  circumstance  for  commerce,  and 
consequently  for  the  progi-ess  of  social  improvement,  if  governments  had 
never  imposed  any  duties  upon  foreign  productions  excc])t  with  the 
single  object  of  obtaining  revenue.  Duties  of  regulation,  whatever  may 
be  the  motives  for  their  adoption,  are  always  in  their  ultimate  effects 
productive  of  more  evil  than  good,  a  fact  which  has  been  kept  out  of 
view^  principally  because  the  good,  which  is  frequently  very  doubtful  at 
best,  is  enjoyed  by  individuals  through  whom  it  is  rendered  apparent, 
while  the  evil  has  partly  consisted  in  the  absence  or  rather  the  preven- 
tion of  good,  and  has  operated  silently  but  most  injuriously  upon  the 
welfare  of  the  community  at  large. 

Duties  have  too  frequently  been  imposed  in  the  spirit  of  retaliation, — 
an  unwise  and  unworthy  spirit,  whether  adopted  by  individuals  or  by  na- 
tions, and  which  was  long  ago  thus  ably  exposed  by  Dr.  Franklin  : — 

"  Suppose  a  country,  X,  with  three  manufactures,  as  cloth,  silk,  iron, 
supplying  three  other  countries,  A,  B,  C,  but  is  desirous  of  increasing 
the  vent  and  raising  the  price  of  cloth  in  favour  of  her  own  clothiers. 

"  In  order  to  do  this,  she  forbids  the  importation  of  foreign  cloths 
from  A. 

"  A,  in  return,  forbids  silks  from  X. 

"  Then  the  silk-workers  complain  of  a  decay  of  trade. 

"  And  X,  to  content  them,  forbids  silks  from  B. 

"  B,  in  return,  forbids  iron- ware  from  X. 

"  Then  the  iron-workers  complain  of  decay. 

"  And  X  forbids  the  importation  of  iron  from  C. 

"  C,  in  return,  forbids  cloth  from  X. 

"  What  is  got  by  all  these  prohibitions  ? 

"  Answer. — All  four  find  their  common  stock  of  the  enjoyments  and 
conveniences  of  life  diminished." 

In  levying  duties  of  regulation,  governments  legislate  for  the  benefit 
of  the  producers  only  of  the  country,  leaving  out  of  sight  the  interests 
of  the  consumers — the  universal  class — all  of  whom  are  thus  placed  at 
a  disadvantage  for  the  supposed  profit  of  a  few  among  their  number. 
The  minister  acts,  without  doubt,  in  accordance  with  the  feeling  of  the 
majority,  when,  in  return  for  the  imposition  by  a  foreign  government  of 
any  duty  which  tends  to  limit  the  trade  of  some  of  the  producers  in  his 


502  PROGRESS  OF  THE  XAllOX.  [sec  i^. 

own  country,  he  attempts  to  punish  the  oifending  nation  by  aiming  a 
similar  blow  at  some  branch  of  its  industry.  The  doctrine  of  "  an  eye 
for  an  eye  and  a  tooth  for  a  tooth  "  is  never  more  fully  nor  more  fatally 
acted  upon  than  in  commercial  legislation,  although  in  the  present  day, 
and  in  our  own  country,  the  evil  tendency  of  this  anti-social  spirit  has 
been  demonstrated  until  it  has  become  hardly  possible  for  any  one  to 
hazard  an  argument  in  its  favour,  ^^'e  may  not,  in  every  case,  have 
imposed  retaliatory  duties  precisely  in  the  manner  supposed  by  Dr. 
Franklin,  but  our  adherence  to  the  principle  involved  in  them  is  still  but 
too  apparent,  and  especially  appears  whenever  it  is  proposed  to  remove 
or  relax  any  duty  upon  importation.  In  these  cases,  without  consider- 
ing whether  such  a  relaxation  will  be  beneficial  to  ourselves,  and  then 
adopting  it  accordingly,  we  have,  until  the  last  four  years,  sought  to 
render  the  measure  subservient  to  another  object,  that  of  producing 
a  corresponding  relaxation  on  the  part  of  the  foreign  country  of  pro- 
duction in  favour  of  some  branch  of  our  national  industry.  In  this 
endeavour  we  have  but  seldom  proved  successful.  The  feeling  of  com- 
mercial rivalry  too  generally  disposes  governments  to  imagine  that  any 
proposals  to  such  an  effect  must  have  some  covert  and  selfish  aim  ;  and, 
having  once  rendered  our  proposed  relaxation  contingent  upon  some 
corresponding  proceeding  on  the  part  of  another  country,  the  refusal  of 
our  offers  was  allowed  to  bind  us  to  the  continuance  of  a  course  known 
and  felt  to  be  prejudicial  to  ourselves.  The  course  which  we  have 
recently  adopted  of  taking  our  measures  on  these  subjects  independently 
of  the  conduct  or  policy  of  other  nations,  shows  greater  wisdom  and 
ma""nanimity,  as  well  as  greater  confidence  in  the  propriety  of  our  pro- 
ceedings, and  may  reasonably  give  us  the  full  assurance  that  the  course 
of  events  must  soon  lead  foreign  governments  to  the  willing  adoption  of 
principles  from  which  they  might  have  been  deterred  solely  through  mis- 
apprehension of  our  motives.  The  commercial  greatness  of  this  country 
was  achieved  under  the  prevalence  of  a  system  of  restriction  and  mono- 
poly, favoured  by  circumstances  altogether  diderent  from  those  in  which 
the  States  of  Europe  are  placed  at  this  time.  ^Ve  have  become  con- 
vinced that  a  rigid  perseverance  in  that  system  of  exclusiveness,  if  even 
it  were  practicable,  would  now  be  no  longer  profitable,  and  have  been  at 
much  pains  to  produce  this  conviction  in  the  minds  of  other  people  both 
by  means  of  the  press  and  by  negotiations,  but  we  too  long  left  compara- 
tively untried  the  strongest  argument  that  could  be  used  in  favour  of 
our  altered  views — that  afforded  by  our  unreserved  adoption  of  a  more 
liberal  policy.  The  success  that  accompanied  our  restrictive  regula- 
tions has  been,  not  unreasonably  perhaps,  mistaken  for  their  effect,  and 
it  was  required  from  us  that  we  should  give  to^  the  world  a  practical 
illustration  of  our  conversion  before  we  could  expect  to  produce  a  con- 
viction of  our  sincerity.     The  necessity  for  our  adoj)ting  such  a  course 


( uAi-.  111.]  rnoDucE  OF  taxes.  603 

was  shown  very  forcibly  during  the  discussions  in  the  American  Con- 
nress  wliicli  pieccded  its  adoption  of  the  tariff  of  1824,  and  which  are 
thus  described  in  the  despatch  of  our  inini.-ter  at  AVashington  to  Mr. 
( 'anning,  dated  30th  May  in  that  year  :  — "  The  example  of  Great  Bri- 
tain," says  Mr.  Addington,  "  has  been  adduced  as  the  main  support  of 
the  arguments  u.sed  on  either  side,  both  parties  admitting  with  ecjual 
zeal  and  admiration  the  fact  of  her  unrivalled  prosperity,  but  each 
ascribing  it  to  those  grounds  which  best  suited  their  own  line  of  reason- 
ing. The  recent  measures  adopted  by  her  for  the  liberalization  of  her 
external  commercial  system,  and  her  emancipation  from  her  ancient 
system  of  restriction,  are  pretty  generally  ascribed  by  the  advocates  of 
the  tariflp  to  a  desire  to  inveigle  other  nations  into  an  imitation  of  her 
example,  with  the  Intention,  as  soon  as  they  shall  have  embarked  suth- 
eiently  deeply  in  her  schemes,  of  turning  short  round  upon  them,  and 
resuming  to  their  detriment  her  old  system  of  protection  and  prohibition. 
This  scheme,  they  affirm,  Great  Britain  will,  by  her  superior  means,  be 
enabled  to  execute  without  hazard  to  herself."  The  following  passage, 
taken  from  Mr.  Addington's  letter  on  this  occasion,  will  show  how  prac- 
tically mischievous  to  ourselves  are  the  restrictions  which  we  lay  upon 
the  Importation  of  foreign  produce  :  — "  I  have  only  to  add,  that  had  no 
restrictions  on  the  importation  of  foreign  grain  existed  in  Europe 
generally,  and  especially  in  Great  Britain,  I  have  little  doubt  that  the 
tariff  would  never -have  passed  through  either  House  of  Congress,  since 
the  great  agricultural  States,  and  Penn.'^ylvania  especially,  the  main 
mover  of  the  question,  would  have  been  inditferent  if  not  opposed  to  its 
enactment." 


501  PROGRESS  OF  THE  NATION.  [sec.  iv. 


CHAPTER  IV. 


AVAR     EXPENDITURE. 


Expenditure  in  last  years  of  War — Consequent  Exhaustion  and  Distress— Comparative 
Expenditure  in  War  and  Peace — Votes  for  Army,  Navy,  Ordnance,  1801  to  184:9 — Loans 
and  Subsidies  to  Foreign  States — Value  of  Stores  furnislied  to  our  Allies  in  1814. 

In  examining  the  details  of  the  public  expenditure,  we  cannot  fail  to  be 
struck  with  the  exceedingly  great  proportion  that  is  absorbed  by  the 
expense  attending  tbe  naval  and  military  force  which  circumstances  have 
made  it  necessary  for  us  to  maintain.  In  the  last  year  of  the  war  (1814) 
the  sums  expended  for  the  army,  navy,  and  ordnance  service,  amounted 
to  71,686,707/.,  and  if  to  this  sum  is  added  the  interest  of  the  debt,  all 
of  which  had  been  incurred  in  the  prosecution  of  wars,  it  will  be  seen 
that  these  branches  of  expenditure  amounted,  in  that  one  year,  to 
101,738,072/.,  a  large  part  of  which  was  expended  in  foreign  countries, 
and  consequently  was  abstracted  from  the  capital  of  the  nation.  The 
drain  upon  our  resources  which  had  been  thus  in  operation  for  a  con- 
tinuous series  of  years  affords  alone  quite  sufficient  explanation  of  the 
state  of  exhaustion  in  which  the  country  was  placed  during  the  first  few 
years  that  followed  the  restoration  of  peace,  without  our  being  required 
to  ascribe  any  part  of  the  evil  to  the  cause  so  vaguely  assigned  at  the 
time,  namely, — the  transition  from  war  to  peace.  In  an  opposite  state 
of  circumstances,  where  the  transition  should  be  from  peace  to  war,  it  is 
easy  to  conceive  that  such  a  destruction  of  property  might  be  encoun- 
tered as  would  bring  on  a  considerable  derangement  of  the  commercial 
dealings  of  the  country;  but  that  the  return  of  peace,  accompanied  as  it 
is  by  a  remission  of  taxes,  and  by  the  opening  of  various  channels  that 
had  before  been  closed  against  our  trade,  should  })roduce  evils  of  the 
nature  alluded  to,  appears  little  better  than  a  practical  contradiction. 
The  country  did,  indeed,  at  that  time  exhibit  all  the  signs  of  exhaustion, 
and  the  single  fact  of  that  exhaustion  appearing  after  the  restoration  of 
peace  was  received  as  sufficient  proof  that  it  was  caused  by  the  cessation 
of  war.  The  ceasing  of  a  war  demand  for  various  articles  consumed  by 
the  army,  or  which  were  exported  to  provide  payment  of  our  loans  and 
subsidies  to  foreign  countries,  may  have  occasioned  loss  to  the  compara- 
tively small  number  of  individuals  who  had  supplied  the  Government,  or 
had  conducted  certain  liranches  of  the  export  trade ;  but  those  persons, 
and  those  departments  of  business,  must  have  been  insignificant  when 


(•live.  IV.] 


WAR  ]':xrENDlTUUE. 


505 


compared  with  the  great  mass  of  our  commercial  dealers,  who  must  have 
been  benefited  by  the  change.  Had  we  not  been  placed,  by  the  lavish 
expenditure  of  the  latter  years  of  the  war,  in  a  state  unfavourable  for 
taking  advantage  of  the  beneficial  alteration  in  the  years  that  imme- 
diately followed  the  final  overthrow  of  Napoleon,  they  must  have  been  to 
us  years  of  the  higliest  prosperity.  The  prices  of  those  articles  generally, 
of  which  we  were  buyers,  fell ;  while,  on  the  contrary,  the  goods  which 
we  had  to  offer  in  exchange  rose  in  value.  During  the  ten  years  between 
1805  and  1814  the  Government  expenditure  exceeded  800,000,000/.  ; 
and  although  some  considerable  part  of  this  amount  doubtless  came  back 
to  individuals,  and  prevented  that  expenditure  from  being  altogether  a 
loss  of  capital  to  the  country,  the  part  which  found  its  way  to  foreign 
lands,  without  producing  any  immediate  return,  was  greater  than  we 
could  bear  without  suffering,  and  was,  in  all  reasonable  probability,  the 
cause  of  the  diflSculties  wdiich  bore  so  hard  upon  our  merchants  in  the 
few  following  years,  and  before  the  benign  influence  of  peace  had  ade- 
quately remedied  the  evil. 

The  following  statement  shows  the  amount  expended  in  each  year 
from  1801  to  1849,  under  the  heads  of  navy,  army,  and  ordnance  ex- 
penses : — 

Amount  Expended  from  1801  to  1849. 


1801 
1802 
1803 
1804 
1805 
1806 
1807 
1808 
1809 
1810 
1811 
1812 
1813 
1814 
1815 
1816 
1817 
1818 
1819 
1820 
1821 
1822 
1823 
1824 
1825 
1826 
1827 
1828 
1829 
11830 
1831 
i882 
1833 
1834 


Navy. 


£. 

17,266,135 

12,037,162 

8,072,878 

11,921,551 

14,493,843 

16,143,628 

16,896,661 

17,685,3:)0 

19,372,061 

20,021,512 

19,202,679 

20,370,339 

21,833,522 

22,124,437 

16,073,870 

9,516,325 

6,473,063 

6,521,714 

6,395,553 

6,337,799 

6,107,280 

5,042,642 

5,613,151 

6,161,818 

5,849,119 

6,. 540, 634 

6,444,727 

5,667,970 

5,902,339 

5,309,606 

5,689,859 

4,882,835 

4,360,235 

4,503,909 


Army. 


Ordnance. 


£. 

17,752,947 

11,836,407 

13,488,080 

17,927,422 

19,790,181 

19,294,982 

19,373,101 

21,916,198 

23,910,222 

23,038,479 

29,160,530 

31,004,701 

44,241,285 

45,259,377 

35,321,544 

15,027,8J8 

9,718,066 

7,785,979 

8,998,037 

8,944,814 

9,138,845 

7,698,974 

7,351,992 

7,573.026 

7,579,631 

8, 297,. 361 

7,876,682 

8,084,043 

7,70;(,372 

6,991,163 

7,216,2:t3 

7,129,874 

6,5'.i0.n62 

6,4ii3,',,25 


£. 
2,197,186 
1,142,839 
2,029,799 
4,046,054 
5,105,426 
5,250,376 
4,260,079 
5,148,8.52 
4;  928, 674 
4,808,745 
4,495,816 
5,240,537 
5,241,628 
4,302,893 
3,248,759 
2,748,841 
1,417,648 
1,247,197 
1,243,6.39 
1,092,292 
1,183,727 
1,007,821 
1,364,. 328 
1,407,308 
1,567,087 
1,869,606 
1,914,403 
1,446,972 
1,569,150 
1,613,908 
1,472,944 
1,792,317 
1,314,806 
1,068,223 


Total. 


37,216,268 
25,016,408 
23,590,757 
.33,895,027 
3),  389, 450 
40,688,986 
40,529,841 
44,750,440 
48,210.957 
47,868^736 
52,859,025 
.56,615,577 
71,316,435 
71,686,707 
54,644,173 
27,293,064 
17,608,777 
15,554,890 
16,637,229 
16,424,905 
16,429,852 
13,749,437 
14,329,471 
15,142,1.52 
14,995,837 
16,707,601 
16,205,812 
15,198,985 
15,180,861 
13,914,677 
14,379,096 
13,805,026 
12,265.103 
12,006,057 


50(5 


TROGRESS  OF  THE  NATION. 
Amount  Expended  from  1801  to  1849 — continued. 


[^EC.   IV. 


1835 
1836 
1837 
1838 
1839 
1840 
1841 
1842 
1843 
1844 
1845 
1846 
1847 
1848 
1849 


Army. 


4,090,430 
4,205,726 
4,750,658 
4,520,428 
5,490,204 
5,597,511 
6,489,074 
6,640,163 
6,606,057 
5,858,219 
6,809,872 
7,803,464 
8,013,873 
7,922,287 
6,942,397 


£. 
6,406.143 
6,473,183 
6,521,716 
6,815,641 
6,542,662 
6,890,267 
6,418,422 
5,987,921 
5,997,156 
6,178.714 
6,744,589 
6,699,699 
7,540,405 
6,647,284 
6.549,109 


1,1.51,914 
1,434,059 
1,444..")23 
1.384,681 
1,951,210 
1,631,640 
i;815,132 
2,174,673 
1,910,704 
1,924,311 
2,109,707 
2,361,534 
2,947,869 
3,076,124 
2,332,031 


11.657,487 
12,112,968 
12,716,897 
12,720,750 
13,984,076 
14,119,418 
14,722,628 
14,802,757 
14,513,917 
13,961,244 
15,664,168 
16,864,697 
18,502,147 
17,645,695 
15, 823,. 537 


According  to  this  table,  the  national  defences  have  cost  the  country 
during  the  present  century  more  than  1200  millions  of  money  ;  52^  per 
cent,  of  which  was  expended  in  the  14  years  of  war,  and  the  remaining 
47t  per  cent,  has  been  incurred  in  the  35  years  of  peace,  viz. — 


Navy 
Army 
Ordnance 


Total 


14  Years, 
ISOl  to  1»14. 


35  Years, 
1815  to  1849. 


Total  49  Y'ears, 
1801  to  1849. 


£. 
237,441,798 
337,993,912 

58.198,'J04 


221,163,813 

289,940,492 

61,241,088 


4.58,605,611 
627,934,404 
119,439,992 


633,634,614   572,345,393  1,205,980,007 


The  average  annual  expenditure  under  these  three  heads  was,  in  the 
14  years  ending  with  1814,  45,259,615/. :  in  the  35  years  ending  with 
1849  it  has  fallen  to  16,352,725/.  If  we  confine  the  comparison  of  the 
expenditure  for  national  defence  to  the  six  years  ending  with  1836,  it 
will  be  found  that  the  average  amount  in  this  latter  period  was 
12,714,289/.,  or  less  by  72  per  cent,  than  it  was  previous  to  1814.  In 
the  16  years  between  1815  and  1830  the  average  annual  expenditure 
for  naval  and  military  purposes  was  18,751,108/.,  compared  with  which 
the  cost  in  the  six  years  ending  with  1836  exhibits  a  saving  of  32  per 
cent.  In  the  six  years  from  1809  to  1814  the  expenditure  for.  army, 
navy,  and  ordnance  services  was  348,557,438/.,  being  an  annual  average 
of  58,092,906/. 

One  source  of  public  expenditure  which  bore  very  hard  upon  our 
national  resources  during  the  war  consisted  of  the  amount  of  loans  and 
subsidies  paid  to  foreign  countries.  The  following  statement  shows  the 
expenditure  of  each  year  under  this  head  from  1793  to  1814.  The 
aggregate  sum  thus  abstracted  from  the  national  resources  in  those  22 
years  amounted  to  46,289,459/.,  of  which  about  two-thirds,  30,582,259/. 
-ftfere  expended  in  the  10  years  that  i)receded  1814. 


i         CJIAl'.    IV. J 


WAR  EXrENDITURE. 


607 


Statetiienl  of  the  Amount  of  Loans  and  Subsidies  paid  to  Foreir/ii   States  iti  eacli   Year  from  the 
Cominencement  of  the  War  in  17'J3,  to  its  close  in  1814. 


ITJ.i 
Hanover.  . 
Ht'sse  Cassel 
Sardinia   . 

1791 

Prussia 
Sardinia   . 
Hesse  Cassel 
Hesse  Darmstadt 
Baden 
Hanover  . 

1793 

Germany,  Imperial) 
Loan  (35  Geo.  HI.,  > 
c.  9.3)      .      .      .      .1 

Baden 

Brunswick 

Hesse  Cassel 

Hesse  Darmstadt 

Hanover  . 

Sardinia    . 

1T'J6 

Hesse  Darmstadt  . 
Brunswick 

1T9T 

Hesse  Darmstadt  . 
Brunswick 

Germany,  Imperial , 
Loan  (37  Geo.  HI., 

c.  5'J)       ....  I 

1T9S 
Brunswick 
Portugal  .... 

1T99 

Prince  of  Orange  . 
Hesse  Darmstadt  . 
Russia       .... 

1800 
Germany  .... 
German  Princes 
Bavaria     .... 
Russia       .... 

1801 

Portugal   .      .     . 
Sardinia    . 
Hesse  Cassel 
Germany 
German  Princes 

ISOi 

Hesse  Cassel 
Sardinia    . 
Russia 

1803 
Hanover  . 
Russia 
Portugal   . 

1804 

Sweden     . 
Hesse  Cassel . 

1805 

Hanover   . 


492,050 
190,623 
150,000 


1,226,495 
200,0(^)0 
4.37,105 
102,073 
25,196 
559,. 376 


833,273 


2,550,245 


4,600,000 

1,794 

97,722 

317,492 

79,605 

478,348 

150,000 


1 5, 724, 961 


20,076 
12,794 


57,015 
7, .571 

1,620,000 


7,000 
120,013 


20,000 

4,812 

825,000 


1,066,666 
500,000 
501,017 
545,494 


200,114 
40,000 
100,000 
150,000 
200,000 


33,451 

52,000 

200,000 


117,628 
63,000 
31,647 


20,119 
83,. 304 


32,870 

1,684,. 586 
127,013 

849,812 
2,613,177 

690,114 
285,451 

212,275 

103,423 
3.").3J1 


1800 
Hanover  . 
Hesse  Cassel 
Germany  . 

i8or 

Hanover  . 
Russia 
Hesse  Cassel 
Prussia     . 

1808 
Spain  . 
Sweden 
Sicily  . 


1809 


Spain  . 
Portugal  . 
Sweden     . 
Sicily  . 
Austria 

1810 
Hesse  Cassel . 
Spain  . 
Portugal  . 
Sicily  . 

1811 

Spain  . 

Portugal  . 

Sicily  . 

Portuguese  Sufferers 

1812 

Spain 

Portugal   .... 
Portuguese  Sufferers 

Sicily 

Sweden     .... 
Morocco   .... 

1813 
Spain  .... 
Portugal  . 
Sicily  .... 
Sweden 
Russia 

Russian  Sufferers 
Prussia 

Prince  of  Orange 
Austria     . 
Morocco   . 

1814 

Spain   .... 

Portugal   . 

Sicily  .... 

Sweden 

Russia 

Prussia 

Austria     . 

France  (advanced  to 
Louis  XVIII.  to 
enable  him  to  re- 
turn to  France)    . 

Hanover  .      .      .      . 

Denmark 


76,805 

18,982 

500,000 


19,8:19 
614,183 

45,000 
180,000 


1,497,873 

l,10n,n(K) 

300,000 


529,03;) 
600,000 
.300,0(X> 
3(MJ,000 
850, 0(X) 

45,150 
402.875 
,2.37;  518 
425,000 


595,847 


859,082 


2,897,873 


2,579,039 


2,110,543 


220,690 

1,8.32,168 

275,000 

39,555 


1  2,367,413 


1,000,000 

2,167,8.32 

60,445 

400,000 

278,292 

1,9.52 


1,000,000 

1,644,063 

600, 0(X) 

1,-320,000 

657,500 

200,000 

650,040 

200.000 

500,000 

14,419 


450,000 
1,300,000 
316,667 
800,000 
2,169,982 
1,319,129 
1,064,882 

200,000 

500,000 
121,918 


3,908,521 


6,786,022 


1  8,442,578 

Total      46,289,4.59 


508  TROGRESS  OF  THE  NATION.  [-ec.  iv. 

The  direct  payments  made  under  the  form  of  loans  and  subsidies  did 
not  form  the  whole  of  the  contributions  made  by  this  country  to  its 
allies.  Owing  to  the  complicated  form  in  which  the  public  accounts 
were  then  rendered  to  Parliament,  it  would  be  a  difficult  task  to  unravel 
the  whole  of  these  transactions.  It  will  perhaps  afford  a  sufficient  indi- 
cation of  the  extent  to  which  our  support  of  the  common  cause  was 
carried  to  state  the  value  of  the  arms,  clothing,  and  other  stores  that 
were  fui-nished  to  our  allies  in  the  year  1814,  and  which  were  all  in 
addition  to  the  subsidies  as  detailed  in  the  foregoing  statement. 

£. 

Austria — Arms  and  Clothing 410.751 

France — Arms  sent  to  the  South  of  France    .      .      .  31,932 

Hanover- — Arms  and  Clothing 239,879 

Holland — Arms  and  Clothing 267,759 

Oldenburg— Clothing 10,008 

Prussia — Arms 11,042 

Russia — Provisions  and  Stores 385,491 

Spain— Stores 136,338 

Miscellaneous — Arms    and   Clothing   supplied   to  1  „„  „ . . 

various  Foreign  Corps j  ^^.oia 

£1,582,045 


rilAP.    v.] 


MISCELLANEOUS  ESTIMATES. 


509 


CHAPTER  V. 


MISCELLANEOUS  ESTIMATES. 

Civil    List  from   1701    to    1849 — Crown    Revenues— Pensions— Miscellaneous   Services  — 
Salaries  in  Public  Departments. 

The  remaining  branches  of  ])ublic  expenditure  that  call  for  notice  are 
the  Civil  List,  or  the  provision  made  by  Parliament  for  the  support  and 
dignity  of  the  Crown,  including  the  salaries  and  expenses  of  the  various 
great  officers  of  state,  and  the  annual  votes  made  for  miscellaneous 
services. 

The  sums  disbursed  under  these  two  heads  in  each  year  of  the  pre- 
sent century  have  been  as  follow  : — 


1801 
1802 
1803 
1804 
1805 
1806 
1807 
1808 
1809 
1810 
1811 
1812 
1813 
1814 
1815 
1816 
1817 
1818 
1819 
1820 
1821 
1822 
1823 
1824 

I82r> 


Civil  List. 


i   Miscellaneous 
.Services. 


1,136,860 
1,140,8.39 
1,129,4^37 
1,810.215 
1,181,305 
1,180,923 
1,174,590 
1,173,117 
1,172.800 
1,170,343 
1,185,276 
1,237,370 
1,257,447 
1,236,210 
1,235,879 
1,216,270 
1,235,692 
1,235,692 
1,190,692 
1,071,758 
1,057,000 
1,057,000 
1,0.57,000 
1,0.57,000 
1.057.000 


£. 
1,745,917 
2,920,327 
1,972,430 
2,221,611 
2,141,552 
1,794,382 
1,. 506, 371 
1,576,378 
1,955,971 
1,691,272 
1,959,799 
1,9.50,031 
1,867,593 
2,480,677 
3,867,592 
2,438,459 
1,839,999 
2,634,916 
1,833,791 
2,488,781 
2,125,991 
2,105,797 
1,953,. 366 
1,449,148 
2,216,081 


Civil  List. 


,    Miscellaneous 
!        Services. 


1826 
1827 
1828 
1829 
1830 
1831 
18.32 
18.33 
18.34 
1835 
1836 
1837 
1838 
1839 
1840 
1841 
1842 
1843 
1844 
1845 
1846 
1847 
1848 
1849 


1,0.57,000 
1,057,000 
1,057,000 
1,0.57,000 
899,660 
511,314 
510,000 
510,000 
510,000 
510,000 
510,000 
444,066 
385,621 
.386,546 
387; 743 
389,022 
390,120 
390,307 
391,284 
3.<2,165 
393,051 
393,982 
395,245 
396,600 


£. 
2,. 566, 783 
2,863,247 
2,012,116 
2,485,661 
1,950,109 
2,854,013 
2,. 396, 921 
2,007,159 
2,061,395 
2,144,345 
2,279,310 
2,513,030 
2.792,540 
2,862,470 
2,523,625 
2,927,660 
2,959,757 
3,279,-363 
3,080,175 
2.726,147 
3^264,3.39 
3,561,067 
4,092,090 
3,911,2.31 


The  history  of  the  Civil  List  first  dates  from  the  accession  of  Queen 
Anne,  in  1701,  when,  in  consideration  of  an  annuity  of  700,000/.  settled 
upon  the  Queen  for  her  life,  the  proceeds  of  the  Crown  lands  and  of  cer- 
tain Excise  duties  which  had  been  granted  by  Parliament  to  Charles  11. 
and  his  successors,  were  surrendered  to  the  public.  The  sum  here  men- 
tioned was  applied  to  defray  the  expenses  of  the  Queen  and  her  house- 
hold, to  pay  the  salaries  of  her  ambas.=adors  and  other  representatives  in 


510  PROGRESS  OF  THE  NATION.  [sec.  iv. 

foreign  couutries,  and  to  provide  for  the  administration  of  justice  at 
home,  as  well  as  some  other  minor  charges  which  had  previously  been 
defrayed  by  the  Crown  out  of  the  revenues  that  were  relinquished.  This 
arrangement  ceased  at  the  death  of  the  Queen,  when  the  hereditary 
revenues  reverted  to  the  Crown  ;  but  the  precedent  made  by  Queen 
Anne,  as  here  described,  has  since  been  followed  at  the  accession  of 
each  succeeding  monarch.  At  the  beginning  of  the  reign  of  George  III., 
the  Civil  List  was  fixed  at  800,000/.  per  annum,  to  which  sum  additions 
were  made  from  time  to  time,  partly  on  the  ground  of  the  general  en- 
hancement of  prices  caused  by  the  depreciation  of  the  currency  :  the 
sums  paid  on  this  account  from  the  consolidated  fund  in  each  year 
from  1801  to  the  accession  of  George  IV.,  in  1820,  may  be  known  from 
the  foregoing  table.  By  the  arrangement  made  between  George  IV. 
and  the  Parliament,  in  1820,  some  part  of  the  charge  upon  the  Civil 
List  was  transferred  to  the  consolidated  fund,  and  the  payments  on 
the  former  account  were  fixed  at  850,000/.  per  annum.  On  the  acces- 
sion of  William  IV.  a  fresh  distribution  of  these  charges  was  made, 
expenses  which  had  no  immediate  connexion  with  the  royal  dignity 
were  transferred  to  the  consolidated  fund,  and  the  Civil  List  was  voted 
under  five  different  classes,  amounting  in  the  aggregate  to  510,000/. 
per  annum,  as  follows  : — 

1st  Class.— For  the  King's  Privy  Purse,  60,000/. ;  for  £. 

the  Queen,  50,000/ 110,000 

2nd      „       Salaries  of  the  Royal  Household.      .      .     .  130,300 

3rd      ,,        Expenses  of  the  Household 171,  ,500 

4th      ,,        Special  and  Home  Secret  Services    .      .      .  23,200 

5th      „       Pensions 75,000 

£510.000 

On  the   accession  of  Queen  Victoria,    a  Committee  of  the  House 

of  (Commons  was  appointed  to  inquire  into  the  subject  of  this  branch 

of   the    public  expenditure  ;    and  in  compliance  w^ith    the  report   and 

recommendation    of  that    Committee,    an    Act   was   passed,    in   which 

the  principle  adopted  in   1830  has  been  presei-ved,  and  the  Civil  List 

has  been  fixed  at  385,000/.  per  annum,   with  a  power  to  the  Crown 

to    f^rant    pensions    to    an  amount    not    exceeding    1200/.  in  any  one 

year.     The  heads  under  which   this  arrangement  is  comprised  are  as 

follow  : — 

£. 

1st  Class.— For  the  Queen's  Privy  Purse       ....  00,000 
2nd      „        Salaries  of  Queen's  Household  and  Retired 

Allowances 131,260 

3rd      „        Expenses  of  the  Royal  Household    .      .     .  172,500 

4th      „       Royal  Bountj',  Alms,  and  Special  Services  .  13,200 
5th      „        Pensions  to  the  extent  of  1,200/.  per  anijura 

6th      ,.        Unappropriated  Moneys 8,040 

£.385,000 


U1AI-.  v.]  MISCELLANEOUS  ESTIMATES.  511 

It  would  appear  from  a  return  that  was  laid  upon  tlie  table  of  the 
House  of  Lords  in  December,  1837,  that  during  the  three  reigns  of 
George  the  Tiiird,  George  the  Fourth,  and  William  the  Fourth,  the 
j)ublic  gained  considerably  by  the  arrangements  that  have  been  here 
(h'scribed.  In  the  first  of  these  reigns,  which  embraced  a  j)eriod  of 
.")yf  years,  the  sum  paid  to  the  Civil  List,  including  3,395,062/.  granted 
at  various  times  for  the  discharge  of  debts  contracted  on  that  account, 
amounted  to  56,975,451/.,  while  the  amount  of  the  King's  hereditary 
and  temporary  revenues  given  up  to  the  public  realized  75,138,695/., 
r-howing  a  gain  to  the  public  of  18,163,244/.  In  the  reign  of  George  IV., 
which  occupied  about  10^  years,  the  payments  to  the  Crown  were 
•'^,847,987/.,  and  the  receipts  by  the  public  19,732,732/.,  showing  a 
-aving  of  10,884,745/. ;  and  in  the  seven  years  which  comprised  the 
reign  of  William  IV.,  the  payments  were  3,561,593/.,  while  the  receipts 
were  21,913,388/.,  so  that  the  public  appears  to  have  gained  by  the  ar- 
rangement with  the  late  king  18,351,745/.  The  saving  effected  during 
the  reign  of  the  three  kings  amounted,  according  to  this  return,  to 
37,399,784/.  The  increasing  receipts  from  the  ceded  revenues  have, 
of  late  years,  made  the  bargain  more  favourable  to  the  public  than 
formerly,  but  it  must  be  kept  in  mind  that  many  charges  once  borne  by 
the  Crown  and  now  defrayed  by  the  public  are  not  included  in  this 
statement. 

The  Crown  is  entitled  to  certain  revenues  as  Duke  of  Lancaster,  and 
(while  there  is  no  heir  apparent)  as  Duke  of  Cornwall  also  ;  which 
revenues  have  not  hitherto  been  relinquished  to  the  public. 

The  difference  observable  between  the  amount  of  the  Civil  Li.-t 
granted  at  the  beginning  of  his  reign  to  William  IV.,  and  that  esta- 
blished in  1837,  was  occasioned,  first,  by  the  absence,  at  that  time,  of  a 
consort,  and  next,  by  the  new  arrangement  made  regarding  pensions. 
At  the  time  the  Civil  List  for  the  Queen  was  under  discussion,  it  had 
been  determined  to  examine,  by  means  of  a  Committee  of  the  House  of 
Commons,  into  the  propriety  of  continuing  the  various  pensions  there- 
unto paid  out  of  the  grant  of  75,000/.  per  annum.  As  it  could  not  be 
known  what  the  result  of  this  inquiry  might  be,  no  provision  could  pro- 
perly be  made  by  Parliament  for  meeting  the  charge  for  such  pensions 
as  it  might  be  thought  proper  to  continue,  and  the  point  was  reserved  to 
be  dealt  with  by  the  legislature,  as  might  be  thought  fit  at  a  future 
stage  of  the  proceeding,  when  the  needful  provision  would  have  to  be 
made  by  the  House  of  Commons.  The  arrangement  of  limiting  the 
amount  of  original  pensions  that  may  be  granted  in  any  one  year  to 
1200/.,  can  hardly  fail  to  prove  a  measure  of  economy  on  the  part  of  the 
public,  when  compared  with  the  arrangement  established  at  the  acces- 
sion of  AViiliam  IV.  On  the  suppo.sition  of  the  continuance  of  all 
existing  pensions  for  the   lives   of  the   individuals   by  whom  they  are 


512  PROGRESS  OF  THE  NATION.  [sec.  iv. 

enjoyed,  the  average  annual  reduction  from  mortality  would  not  be  less 
than  3000/.  })er  annum,  if  even  the  ages  of  the  recipients  were  so  low, 
on  the  average,  as  34  years,  which  is  certainly  much  under  the  actual 
average.  In  the  case  supposed,  there  would  therefore  be  a  progressive 
saving  from  year  to  year  of  1800/.,  until  tiie  death  of  the  existing  pen- 
sioners, when  the  amount  to  be  annually  provided  by  Parliament  would 
not  exceed  30,000/.  in  place  of  75,000/.  paid  under  the  former  arrange- 
ment. In  ])roportion  as  the  average  ages  of  the  pensioners  exceed  34 
years,  the  progressive  saving  will  be  greater,  and  the  ultimate  charge 
upon  the  public  less  than  here  stated. 

The  sums  included  in  the  foregoing  table  under  the  head  of  Mis- 
cellaneous Services  comprise  a  great  variety  of  objects,  and  necessarily 
differ  materially  from  year  to  year.  The  nature  of  these  services  will 
be  sufficiently  indicated  by  the  following  abstract,  which  is  taken  from 
th.e  Finance  Accounts  for  1849  : — 

£.  .0.  d. 

Civil  Contingencies 106,000     0     0 

Public  Works  and  Buildings,  including  New  Houses  of  Parliament  479,153     1   11 

Salaries  and  Expenses  of  Public  Departments 941,163  13    5 

Law  and  Justice 1,170,068    2    2 

Education,  Science,  and  Art 371,407  16    3 

Colonial  and  Consular  Services 405,859     7     5 

Superannuations  and  Retired  Allowances 194,448    6  10 

Special  and  Temporary  Objects 243,126    0     5 

£3,911,231     8    5 

The  charge  for  salaries  provided  for  in  the  grants  for  Miscellaneous 
Services  forms  only  a  small  part  of  the  yearly  expenses  incurred  for  that 
purpose.  Office-bearers  employed  under  the  different  Boards  for  the 
collection  of  the  Revenue  are  paid  out  of  the  receipts  of  the  depart- 
ments respectively,  their  salaries  being  considered,  as  in  fact  they  are, 
a  part  of  the  charges  of  collection,  and  the  net  proceeds  of  the  revenue 
being  all  that  is  paid  into  the  Exchequer.  It  cannot  make  any  real 
difference  to  the  public  whether  this  system  shall  be  continued,  or 
whether,  as  some  persons  have  recommended,  the  gross  amount  of  the 
collection  is  paid  into  the  Exchequer,  and  the  charges  of  the  respective 
Departments  are  issued  from  that  office.  It  has  been  supposed  that 
by  the  latter  mode  a  more  direct  and  efficient  check  would  be  ob- 
tained over  the  expenditure ;  but  this  could  hardly  be  the  -case,  if, 
as  may  be  presumed,  the  payments  must  be  made  upon  the  orders  of 
the  various  Boards  of  Commissioners,  who  are  at  present  responsible  for 
the  faithfid  and  economical  disposal  of  the  funds  that  come  under  their 
charge.  The  various  items  that  now  form  deductions  from  the  gross 
receipts  before  they  reach  the  Exchequer  are  alL  given  in  detail  in  the 
public  accounts,  and  are  as  much  subject  to  examination,  and  as  open  to 
aiilmadver.sion,  as  they  could  be  made  upon  any  other  plan. 


Years. 

£. 

1826 

3,285,022 

1827 

3,248,719 

1828 

3,204,398 

1829 

3,185,334 

1830 

3,120,034 

1831 

3,055,512 

1832 

2,934,144 

1833 

2,853,503 

ia34 

2,828,562 

1835 

2,786,278 

CHAr.  v.l  MISCELLANEOUS  ESTIMATES.  513 

No  statement  has  been  made  public  of  the  amount  paid  for  salaries 
in  tlic  various  departments  of  the  public  service  during  the  years  that 
elapsed  prior  to  1815.  During  the  war,  that  branch  of  expenditiu-e  had 
gone  on  at  a  constantly-increasing  rate  of  progression,  and  in  the  year 
just  mentioned  had  reached  the  sum  of  3,763,100/.  It  will  be  seen 
from  the  following  statement  that  in  the  20  years  that  followed,  reduc- 
tions to  the  amount  of  26  per  cent,  were  made.  These  reductions 
would  have  been  greater,  but  for  the  annual  allowances  that  it  has  been 
considered  just  to  make  to  persons  whose  offices  have  been  abolished, 
and  who  entered  upon  the  public  service  upon  the  faith  of  such  a  provi- 
sion being  made. 

The  charge  for  salaries  in  the  various  public  departments  of  the  king- 
dom in  each  year,  from  1815  to  1835,  was  as  follows : — 

Years.  £. 

1815  3,763,100 

1816  3,745,478 

1817  3,633,981 

1818  3,601.720 

1819  3,587,122 

1820  3,564,594 

1821  3,562,528 

1822  3,453,211 

1823  3,368,218 

1824  3,281,693 

1825  3,260,370 

The  number  of  persons  employed  in  the  various  departments  (exclu- 
sive of  Army,  Navy,  &c.),  and  the  amount  of  salaries  paid  in  each 
department  in  the  years  1815  and  1835,  are  shown  in  the  following 
table,  from  which  it  appears  that  the  reduction  since  the  war  has  been 
3787  persons  and  976,822/.,  being  about  14  per  cent,  in  the  number, 
and  26  per  cent,  in  the  amount.  It  appears  from  a  statement  pre- 
sented to  Parliament  in  1828,  but  which  exhibits  several  omissions, 
and  cannot  be  received  with  much  confidence,  that  the  reduction  in  the 
twelve  years  from  1815  to  1827  embraced  1686  persons,  and  413,532/., 
or  6  per  cent,  in  number,  and  11  per  cent,  in  amount:  according  to 
which  statement,  there  were  reductions  made  in  the  eight  years  from 
1827  to  1835  amounthig  to  2101  persons  and  563,290/.  of  annual 
charge,  or  8  per  cent,  in  number,  and  nearly  17  per  cent,  in  amount. 
The  reductions  between  1815  and  1835  would  have  appeared  much 
more  considerable,  but  for  the  addition  of  3913  persons  forming  the 
preventive  coast-guard  under  the  Commissioners  of  the  Customs,  and 
whose  salaries,  amounting  to  259,916/.  per  annum,  had  before  been 
paid  out  of  the  Navy  Estimates. 


2   L 


514 


PROGRESS  OF  THE  NATION. 


^ 

■ 

o     . 

00              ?1                    o  O                                                         (N 

00 

II 

o           o               —  =^                                            to 

03 

c^  :    :    :^„  :  i"^  ::  :^„^  :::::;:::  '^^ 

;  "^    ;    ;    • 

o 

1^ 

in                            ■—                                                05 

£ 

< 

Q 

a 

1   s 

in 

< 

z    a. 

..... 

xn 

00 

o    • 

in       cr.  o  i-> 

i 

? 

cicsr^      s^ira      ?opTt<           r-iaj>-'Ot^(Mooooi^ 

to       00  Q  o 
in       -t  ^  CO 

vj 

4^    QJ 

-tjioo       -Ci^       ^DOm           05       ooinr-ioyseSF- 

B 

z 

^r^0O(N'I^i-''rHi-.!?l..                         m,—  M           TftM 

O      •  CO  O  IM 

lO 

o 

SV3 

(N     >n                                                                                <N                         IM 

<M      o  CO  .n 

CO         !-< 

00 

Q 
a 
Pi 

<J! 

!? 

B 

s    « 

CO      CO     W         i-"                           <>>               00  t- 0^  i-i -^  en  rt  O  1-1 

Ttl   —   lfl             Tt< 

^ 

^      c 

CO    in                                   rt                        «               eo  ^ 

W  i-i  (M       in 

^^'^°l 

;;;;;;;                 '-'                      ^       ; 

CO    •  00 

-S 

S5  (S: 

V. 

_,,__ 

o 

coino-.  00r-Q0-*r^CO  —  CWr-OO'NCC«O-tQ0     m 
^O^Minwr^ooooOQco  —  i^cor^  —  -*50mi^.—  (M     en 

C-.  ^  (M  to 

§ 

^i 

o-.  r~  to  m 

_oO'nmcc;oin-*coo~5>)>nr-oo!NO'*ao<>)tD—    cv 

to  c:  t^  •* 

^ 

o  is 

VJot^t^o^i-'Oi  —  o^(N  r-T^f-Tt^ioT^  "M  eo^sq'     t^  as    to 

•  Co't^'o'lM" 

.§ 

in                rt.—  s^iM'?!                                   CO                ^.no) 

(N  ■*  (N 

m 

(?»  O  r^ 

•~ 

00 

2 

E-' 

•H 

1 

1   a 

(N-*oooo^OC5-^oo--t^Tj<;0-H(Ndr»'r^in(N^to    r^ 

O  t^  ^  S^  5^ 

z, 

Ol  i-H  (M  rH  <>)  CO  «  CO  CO                         S>>  M  r-c  00                    lO  ov     in 

00  to  a»)  O  r^ 

y 

a 

z    ^ 

OS        r-( 

00  to  O 

-o 

X 

^"to" 

1^ 

t/j 

1 

S 

r~QO       ocot^i^mtooo      coaooO"#'*0'Ncoini?)    r~ 

tD(N         COIMl^COOOcOOr^         OCI^CCI^-tCOt^tOO;©      CO 

m  -«  o  s>)  t^ 

0 

to  00  to  to  in 
m  m  -i"  r-.  t^ 

Vv 

C.2 

_t^in      00^— icoCTcsor^      coo~.  Oincococ-.  <mco    co 

c* 

n 

3   ^ 
1- 

<+J  co'co"  •  cf  in'~(M'"co'"a-r(>reo'"co'~  •  ^'ocTco^co'^^'^'t"*"     o^^  ■*" 

o'co"-*"— TV 

1 

a 

OOt^rt'N<Mrt(M                                              «0                     (MOOl— 1 

(M       CO  r-  r^ 

-4 

00 

(M 

in  0-.  00 

)^ 

iH 

^         n 

ino      rio^coincorio      tooim— imoo-*cO'-<«^    -^ 
in  a>      cq  (N  CO  CO  <M  CO      r^           <n  <>»  <m -^      i—      oo  o    os 

■*  00  to  t^  to 
■*  t^  ■*  r~  (T^ 

S      e 

(^ 

E  o| 

1— '            •                                                       •                           <M                            O 

-H       i-i  •*  cn 

3         S 

(rTo'i^r 

1 

Z      Pm 

.8 

•C" 

~ 

J 

"« 

' 

s 

3 

a, 

1 

•H 

B 

•  ■^ 

09 

_i 

J 

o 

09 

13 

1 

•  a 

bo 

•< 

-3 
3 

■^ 

!» 

tc 

>^i 

o 

1 

E- 
Z 

Is 

1 

1.. 

o 

1 

.2 

i 

1 

•11 

a 
a 

o 
O 

to 

Is 

c  (~- 

> 

a; 

02  a 

^    5. 

ri 

"S 

c 

5E 
C 

"o 
> 

c 

o 

"3 

do 

.2    D 

is 

5.S  5  g  c 

£  ^  -^  s  -S 

3  J°   M    t.  J= 

0) 

o 

i 

> 

o 
bO 

«    3      .    qj 

o  s    1 

a  ts  a*  <5 
^ci£5E  =3 

2  bO 
ll 

•a  d  5 

=  >^Q   g 
h  H  V 

^al-S 

-a  3  X 

HWPhUh     m         hSpu,-<«r^O<^0';Sh:;«!iu^oC> 

«      «^CjW 

_ 

HAT.    v.] 


MISCELLANEOUS  ESTIMATES. 


515 


00  (N        « 


— .        «  00        O  J:  ^> 

•M  O  1  -  CT.  -i>   O 

Tl  fM  O  rH  ,1  I, 


:  to  -t  -M  GO  O  03  !>)  irs  »f  -^  C 


(N  Oi  ^  -^  «  OS 


^-         ^ 


■*  Ol  >-•  (N  t^  00  00 


TtW  —  L':  —  —  -ttO 
«-*.-iCt^!;S-*Coo 

O   W   l-H   «  1— 


«OC'.'tTl"OC-X<£-f-Ct^OOXOCCD-ttD 
CO  r-  t^  JO  00  O  3-.  -o  rt<  «D  ^.  1£>  ^  '^  r:  00  lO 
i-T  Tf  i-"^  C-.  t£>  -H  C  O  O  «0  O  --  C  "N  -^  ^  l^ 


oooot-w>n*io»««eo>-<'-Ha!  «-*  —  »f3 

«  1-1  1-1  r-nn       o\ 


«e   -r  «   00   30  ~   -t   3-.    O   T'l   r- 

r^  t^  r^  -M  t^  O  ^.  1^  o  GO  CO 

(NOW—  3--00>nt^t^WC^ 

■-I  i-l  I—  05  ■-«  -^  c>» 


■M  C  'r:  C--  -XI  -f  GO  -t<  -)"  '?!  :r-.  CO  -M  3^  CO  CO 


O(M(N00fNi-iO5^—  r-c 


—  2^t^r^cO<N<NtCit^0001C300C^— . 


o  a 

_  oT  o  o 


C3   rri  y=    ir    —      3   ^^      ' 


?  >-  c  S 


.S  -  5  .S  c  ^  ^ 


^  «- 


ego  " 


50 


?B  go 
Oo." 


;2  i"^  "  §.2  § 


er-ii 


So'ir'^ 


0)  S  "  c; 

O    5    P    0* 


"^  ?3  i  ■ 


:.0, 


"3  «  3  *-,  ' 


•-    «  —  •«  «3 

C->r^eHO 


>>o     „  ^ 


<U  PS  SQ 


2  L  2 


516  PROGRESS  OF  THE  NATION. 


CHAPTER  VI. 

COUNTY  AND  PAROCHIAL  EXPENDITUEE. 

Local  Taxation— Poor  Rates — Countj'  Rates — Amount  levied  in  1844     Objects  to  wliich  the 
nionej'  was  applied,  compared  with  1792. 

The  expenditure  of  the  central  government  of  this  country  forms  by  far 
the  largest  part,  but  not  the  whole,  of  the  contributions  levied  from 
individuals  for  purposes  beyond  their  own  immediate  and  personal 
wants  or  gratifications.  We  are  now  in  a  great  measure  freed  from  the 
burthen  of  partial  taxation  ;  such  local  rates  as  exist  are  levied  for 
objects  peculiar  to  the  locality  in  which  such  contributions  are  raised. 
Some  few  of  such  partial  taxes  still  remain,  but  only  in  circumstances 
which  admit  of  this  plea  in  justification,  that  their  produce  is  applied  to 
purposes  peculiarly  advantageous  to  the  spot  in  which  they  are  levied. 
Of  this  kind  is  the  duty  upon  coals  charged  in  the  port  of  London,  in 
order  to  pay  the  cost  of  providing  suitable  approaches  to  London  Bridge. 
It  is  by  no  means  clear  to  everybody  that  the  object  mentioned  is  of 
that  strictly  local  advantage  which  justifies  the  imposing  of  a  partial  tax 
for  its  accomplishment ;  and  it  has  been  urged  that  it  is  for  the  general 
convenience  that  roads  and  bridges  which  facilitate  the  approach  to  the 
metropolis  should  be  constructed  and  maintained  at  the  general  charge 
of  the  country. 

For  the  most  part  taxes  levied  for  local  purposes  in  England  are  voted 
in  parochial  assemblies,  by  those  who  are  to  pay  them,  or  by  their  dele- 
gates or  representatives,  and  of  these  taxes  by  far  the  largest  part 
consists  of  an  assessment  for  the  support  of  the  indigent  poor.  The 
following  statement  exhibits  the  sums  raised  for  this  purpose,  and  their 
distribution  at  various  periods,  from  the  middle  of  the  eighteenth  century 
to  the  year  ending  25th  March,  1813,  and  thereafter,  for  every  year 
until  25th  March,  1849. 

Provision  has  been  made  by  various  statutes  for  defraying  certain 
miscellaneous  public  expenses  by  means  of  a  local  tax  imposed  by  the 
justices  of  the  peace  in  their  several  counties,  and  which  tax  bears  the 
name  of  a  County  Rate. 


COUNTY  AND  PAROCHIAL  EXPENDITUBE. 


517 


Average  of  I 
1748-49-50J 

1776 
Average  of  1 
1783-84-85 ( 

1803 

1812—13 
1813—14 
1814—15 

1815—16 
1816—17 
1817—18 
1818—19 
1819—20 

1820-21 
1821—22 
1822-23 
1823—24 
1824—25 

1825-26 
1826—27 
1827—28 
1828—29 
1829—30 


1830—31 
1831—32 
1332—33 
1833-34 
1834—35 

1835—36 
1836—37 
1837—38 
1838— 3J 
1839—40 

1840—41 
1841—42 
1842—43 
1843—44 
1844^45 

1845—46 
1846—47 
1847—48 
1848—49 


I'ayments 

Total  Sum       *''"Xr ''"' 
Assessed  and  „.,._„  „„  .i, 

Levied.        P?7r  r  ,  T 
'  tlie  Kenel  of 

the  Poor. 


£. 

730, 135 

1,720,316 

2,167,748 

5,348,204 

8,640,842 
8,388,974 
7,457,676 

6,934,425 
8,128,418 
9,320,440 
8,932,185 
8,719,655 

8,411,893 
7,761,441 
6,898,153 
6,833,630 
6,972,-323 

6,965,051 
7,784,352 
7,715,0.55 
7.642,171 
8,161,281 

8,279,217 

8,622,920 

8,606,501 

I  8,338,078 

I  7,373,807 

!  6, 354,. 538 
5,294,566 
'  5,186,389 
:  5,613,939 
[  6,014,605 

6,351,828 
6,552,890 
7,085,595 
6,847,205 
6,791,006 

6,800,623 
6,964,825 
7,817,429 
7,674,146 


40,164 

137,655 

163,511 

1,034,105 

1,861,073 
1,881,. 565 
1,763,020 

1,212,918 
1,210,200 
1,4.30,292 
1,300,534 
1,342,658 

1,375,868 
1,336,533 
1,148,230 
1,137,598 
1,212,199 

1,246,145 
1,362,377 
1,372,433 
1,280,328 
1,322,239 

1,-540,198 
1,646,493 
1,694,670 
1,713,489 
1,641,073 

1,523,058 
1,241,246 
1,251,113 
1,244,256 
1,423,441 

1,662,301 
1,732,222 
1,742,364 
1,818,720 
1,722,-302 

1,709,083 
1,719,485 
1,793,283 
1,847,402 


Sums 
Expended 

in  Law, 
Removals, 

&c. 


£. 

No  Account 

35,071 

91,996 

190,072 

325,107 
3.32,966 
324,664 


Sums 

Expended 

for  the  Relief 

of 

the  Poor 


254,412 
258,604 
202,527 


172,431 

126,951 

93,982 

63,412 

67,020 

69,942 
68,051 
84,730 
105,304 
95,397 

83,298 
76,385 
73,438 
70,252 


4,954,204 
5,298,787 
6,180,764 
5,792,963 


£. 

689,971 

1,521,732 

1  912,241 

4,077,891 

6,656,105 
6,2J4,584 
5,418,845 

5,724,506 
6,918,217 
7,8S)0,148 
7,531,650 
7,329,594 

6,958,445 
6.358,703 
5,773,096 
5,736,898 
5,786,989 

5,928,501 
6,441,088 
6,298,000 
6,332,410 
6,829,042 

6,798,889 
7,0-36,968 
6,790,800 
6,317,255 
5,526,418 

4,717,630 
4,044,741 
4,123,604 
4,421,713 
4,576,965 


4.760,929  I  6 

4,911,498  j  6 

5,208,027  7 

4,976,013  6 

5,033,703  6 


Total  Sums 
Kxpended. 


No  Account. 

1,694,458 

167,148 

302,070 

865,838 
511,863 


.508,8.53 

937,424 
128,417 
320,440 
832.184 
672; 252 

334,313 
695,236 
921,326 
874,496 
999,188 

174,646 
803,465 
670,433 
612,738 
151,281 

-339,087 
683,461 
739,882 
289,348 
370,018 

413,119 
412,938 
468,699 
829,381 
067,426 

493,172 
711,771 
035,121 
900,117 
857,402 

746,585 
094,657 
047,435 
710,617 


llie  principal  objects  for  which  provision  is  thus  made  are,  the  re- 
pairing of  bridges,  building  and  repairing  gaols,  houses  of  correction, 
shire-halls,  and  courts  of  justice ;  the  construction  and  support  of 
lunatic  asylums ;  the  expense  of  criminal  prosecutions  ;  the  conveyance 
of  prisoners  to  and  from  places  of  confinement  before  and  after  trial  ; 
the  apprehending  of  vagrants ;  the  expenses  of  coroners,  of  militia,  of 
county  elections,  and  various  minor  sources  of  expense. 


518 


PROGRESS  OF  THE  NATION. 


[sec.  t.       I 


The  amount  of  comity  rates  received  at  different  periods  in  the  pre- 
sent century  by  the  treasurers  of  counties  in  England  and  Wales  has 
been  as  follows  : — 


i'ear  ending 

2Jth  March. 

Year  ending 

20th  March. 

Year  ending  25th  March 

£. 

£. 

£. 

1801 

326,130 

1818 

646,466 

1834 

723,741 

1802 

317,977 

1819 

658,450 

1835 

671,082 

1803 

286,055 

1820 

698,868 

1836 

705,248 

1804 

231,389 

1821 

672,054 

1837 

638,047 

1805 

325,0^8 

1822 

615,298 

1838 

683,865 

1806 

338,685 

1823 

677,446 

1839 

741,407 

1807 

366,564 

1824 

568,536 

1840 

855,552 

1808 

350,128 

1825 

673, 3 J3 

1841 

1,026,035 

1809 

393,322 

1826 

736,099 

1842 

1,003,651 

1810 

436,447 

1827 

731,772 

1843 

1,051,878 

1811 

497,027 

1828 

723,197 

1844 

1,111,236 

1812 

502,223 

1829 

691,266 

1845 

1,046,412 

1813 

548,174 

1830 

708,007 

1846 

1,067,692 

1814 

573,504 

1831 

754,996 

1847 

1,076,9.54 

181.5 

.541,890 

1832 

761,901 

1848 

1,1.53,624 

1816 

557,963 

1833 

759,354 

1849 

1,381,132 

1817 

566,529 

The  amounts  received  and  disbursed  by  the  county  treasurers  in  the 
years  ending  Michaelmas,  1843  and  1844,  the  latest  for  which  the 
accounts  have  been  given,  were  as  follow : — 


Receipts.  1843 
£. 

Balance  in  hands  of  Treasurers  .     .     .  97,275 

County  Kate 741,612 

Allowance  from  the  Treasury      .     .     .  111,968 

Police  Rate 144,400 

Other  receipts 137,263 


£1,232,518         £1,193,068 


Disbursements.  £.  £. 

Balance  due  to  Treasurers      ....  6,465  6,314 

Expenses  of  Gaols 160,713  163,169 

„           Houses  of  Correction      .      .  140,907  131,048 

„          Prosecution  of  Prisoners     .  208,904  185,058 

Conveyance  of  Prisoners  to  Gaol     .      .  25,943  22,196 

„               Transports      ....  10,191  6,825 

Vagrants 7,794  7,811 

Maintenance  of  Pauper  Lunatics      .     .  20,044  21,754 

Shire  Hall,  Judges' Lodgings,  &c.     .      .  34,925  26,939 

County  Bridges 57,291  58,206 

Clerks  of  the  Peace 37,837  35,966 

Treasurers' Salaries 7,393  7,276. 

Coroners'  Bills 49,3s)0  51,843 

Inspectors  of  Weights  and  Measures     .  12,106  12,149 

Incidental  Expenses 109,4.57  107,704 

Expenses  of  Rural  Police 159,769  164,129 

Other  Expenses       62,576  62,675 

£1,111,255         £1,071,062 

No  means  are  afforded  for  comparing  the  rate  of  expenditure  under 
various    heads    with    the    payments    at    the    beginning    of   the    present 


CH.vr.  VI. J  COUNTY  AND  rAUOCHIAL  EXPENDITURE.  510 

century.     Such   an  account  has  been  given   for    1792,    and  is  as  fol- 
lows :  — 

•  £. 

Bridges 42,237 

Gaols,  Houses  of  Correction,  &c.       .     ,  92,319 

Maintenance  of  Prisoners 45,785 

Vagrants 10,807 

Prosecutions 34,218 

liieutenancy  and  Militia 16,976 

Constables 659 

Professional  Charges 8,990 

Coroners 8,153 

Salaries 16,315 

Incidental  Expenses 17,456 

Miscellaneous 15,890 

£315,805 

It  will  be  seen  from  the  foregoing  abstracts  that  the  expenses  occa- 
sioned by  criminal  prosecutions  and  by  the  maintenance  of  prisoners 
form  a  considerable  item  in  the  annual  disbursements.  This  was,  in 
1835,  a  subject  of  complaint  on  the  part  of  the  country  gentlemen, 
who  justly  contended  that  it  was  unfair  to  subject  them  to  the  cost  of 
repressing  crimes  committed  against  society  at  large.  It  will  be  seen, 
by  comparing  the  abstracts  above,  for  the  years  1792  and  1844,  that  the 
increase  in  this  branch  of  county  expenditure  has  been  out  of  all  pro- 
portion beyond  the  increase  of  the  population  ;  and  there  is  much 
reason  for  supposing  that  a  great  part  of  the  excess  has  been  occasioned, 
not  so  much  by  any  increase  in  the  number  of  prosecutions,  as  by  the 
want  of  an  efficient  control  on  the  part  of  the  magistrates.  In  support 
of  this  opinion,  it  may  be  stated,  on  the  authority  of  a  report  laid  before 
Parliament,  that  offences  prosecuted  in  the  borough  courts  in  Leeds, 
where  the  proceedings  are  properly  managed,  have  not  on  the  average 
exceeded  4/.  95.  Qd.  for  each  prosecution  ;  while  the  charge  for  prose- 
cuting the  like  offences  before  the  assizes  at  York,  have  amounted  on 
the  average  of  cases,  to  50/.  The  complaint  of  the  landowners  went 
to  the  principle,  as  already  explained,  and,  appearing  to  be  well 
founded,  a  vote  of  the  House  of  Commons  authorized  the  issue  of 
110,000/.  from  the  (Consolidated  Fund  to  defray  the  charges  that  might 
be  so  incurred  within  the  year.  This  sum,  owing  probably  to  the 
greater  \'igilance  induced  by  the  Parliamentary  inquiries,  was  found  to 
exceed  by  more  than  40,000/.  the  amount  required,  and  the  vote  was 
accordingly  reduced  in  the  following  year. 

As  regards  another  and  an  analogous  branch  of  expenditure — the 
repair  of  churches,  and  certain  expenses  attending  the  celebration  of 
public  worship  therein — no  means  exist  for  ascertaining  the  progressive 
amount  of  money  levied  in  various  parishes. 


520  TROGRESS  OF  THE  NATION.  [sec. 


SECTION  v.— CONSUMPTION. 


CHAPTER  I. 

Small  Number  of  Persons  in  England  who  live  without  gainful  Employment— Consequent 
great  Means  for  Enjoyment  and  for  Accumulation  of  Capital— Unequal  Division  of  the 
Products  of  Labour — Growing  Improvement  in  this  respect — Increase  of  Luxuries  and 
Elegancies,  and  consequent  general  Refinement  of  Manners— Improvement  in  Dwellings 
of  Middle  Classes  seldom  extended  to  the  Houses  of  Artisans  and  Labourers— Exception 
in  this  respect  of  Sheffield. 

In  every  community  the  power  of  consuming  must  be  measured  and 
controlled  by  the  power  of  producing.  The  extraordinary  degree  of 
producing  power  which  exists  in  this  kingdom  has  been  shown  in  the 
second  Section  of  this  work.  Not  only  is  the  proportion  of  persons  in 
the  community  who  pass  their  lives  in  active  industry,  labouring  with 
their  hands  or  their  heads,  greater  in  this  than  in  almost  every  other 
well-peopled  country  in  Europe,  but  the  amount  of  skilled  labour  per- 
formed in  a  given  time  by  any  given  number  of  our  countrymen  is  com- 
monly greater  than  that  accomplished  by  the  like  number  of  any  other 
people  in  Europe.  To  this  circumstance  it  is  in  great  part  owing,  that, 
with  a  hio-her  rate  of  daily  wages  paid  for  fewer  hours  of  toil  than  are 
required  in  other  countries,  our  manufacturers  have  been  able,  under 
otherwise  adverse  circumstances,  to  maintain  the  superiority  over  their 
rivals  Many  of  those  rivals,  both  in  France  and  in  Germany,  have 
contrived  to  possess  themselves  of  our  best  machines,  notwithstanding 
the  le2;al  prohibition  which,  until  lately,  existed  to  their  exportation  ; 
but  having  hitherto  been  unable  to  embue  their  workmen  with  the 
deo"ree  of  energy  and  skill  by  which  the  English  artisan  is  distinguished, 
are  in  general  unable  to  compete  with  us  in  any  but  the  commonest 
kinds  of  fabrics. 

The  proportion  of  persons  in  the  United  Kingdom  who  pass  their 
time  without  applying  to  any  gainful  occupation  is  quite  inconsiderable. 
Of  5,812,276  males,  twenty  years  of  age  and  upwards,  living  at   the 


cHAi-.  I.]  CONSUMPTION.  521 

time  of  the  census  of  1831,  there  were  said  to  be  engaged  in  some 
calling  or  profession  5,466,182,  as  under: — 

In  Agriculture •  2,470,111 

In  Trade  and  Manufactures 1,888,768 

In  Labour,  not  Agricultural 698,588 

In  Domestic  Service 132,811 

As  Bankers,  Clergymen,  Professional  Men,  &c.  .  275,904 

thus  leaving  unemployed  only  346,094,  or  rather  less  than  six  per  cent, 
of  the  whole,  which,  assuming  that  the  proportionate  number  at  each 
aac  continued  the  same  in  1831  that  it  was  found  to  be  in  1821,  is  not 
quite  a  quarter  per  cent,  beyond  the  number  living  in  1831  who  were 
70  years  of  age  and  upwards.  It  is  probable  that  this  number  of  unem- 
ployed persons  is  somewhat  understated,  and  that  noblemen  and  gentle- 
men residing  upon  their  estates,  many  of  whom  intrust  to  agents  everything 
connected  with  business  employment,  are  reckoned  among  the  number 
of  those  engaged  in  agriculture  ;  but  if  this  be  the  case,  it  cannot  very 
greatly  alter  the  calculation. 

At  the  last  census  (1841)  the  discrepancy  already  noticed  between 
the  returns  of  occupations  in  Great  Britain  and  in  Ireland — the  age 
selected  in  the  latter  division  of  the  kingdom  for  recording  employments 
being  15,  while  20  years  were  retained  for  that  record  in  Great  Britain — 
prevents  any  comparison  of  the  numbers  at  the  two  periods  for  the  whole 
kingdom ;  but  it  will  be  seen  on  referring  to  the  Table,  page  58,  in  this 
volume,  that  the  number  of  unemployed  adult  males  in  Great  Britain, 
in  1841,  was  only  274,482.  At  that  time  the  number  of  male  persons, 
70  years  old  and  upwards,  living  in  Great  Britain,  was  236,037,  the 
difference  between  the  two  numbers  forming  only  eight  persons  in  each 
IdOO  adult  males  under  70  who  could  then  be  designated  as  idle,  if  we 
assume  that  on  attaining  the  age  of  three-score  and  ten  there  was  a  cessa- 
tion of  employment. 

Where  so  large  a  projiortion  of  persons  apply  themselves  to  pro- 
ductive labour  with  so  many  natural  and  acquii-ed  advantages  as  are 
offered  in  this  country,  the  sum  of  human  enjoyment,  so  far  as  the  same 
can  be  said  to  depend  upon  the  possession  of  the  necessaries,  conveniences, ' 
and  luxuries  of  life,  must  needs  be  very  great,  since  the  whole  of  what 
they  produce  beyond  what  is  wanted  to  replace  the  capital  expended  in 
that  production,  must  be  either  consumed  by  them  or  added  to  the 
capital  of  the  country,  and  in  this  way  will  be  made  to  increase  the 
power  of  production  in  future  years. 

In  the  division  among  the  people  of  the  produce  of  the  national 
industry,  a  great  amount  of  inequality  is  no  doubt  observable, — an 
amount  greater,  perhaps,  than  is  consistent  with  the  degree  of  perfection 
to  which  human  institutions  may  at  some  time  be  brought  :  but  there  is 
reason  to  believe  that,  great  as  this  inequality  now  is,  it  was  in  former 
times  much  greater ;    and  that   hereafter,    when   the  accumulation  of 


522  PROGRESS  OF  THE  NATION.  [sfx.  v. 

capital  will  probably  still  further  than  at  present  exceed  the  increase  of 
population,  the  division  must  necessarily  become  more  equal ;  the  rich 
and  powerful  will  in  such  case  still  have  made  additions  to  the  sum  of 
their  enjoyments,  but  the  labourers  will  have  added  in  a  still  greater 
degree  to  their  means  of  comfortable  subsistence.  Whether,  in  any 
country,  and  at  any  given  time,  the  accumulation  of  capital  proceeds  in 
a  quicker  ratio  than  the  increase  of  population,  is  a  question  hiirdly 
capable  of  being  decided  by  direct  proof.  It  has  been  argued,  by  high 
authorities,  that  there  is  under  all  circumstances  a  tendency  in  popula- 
tion to  press  upon  the  means  of  subsistence.  If,  however,  we  look  back 
to  the  condition  of  the  mass  of  the  people  as  it  existed  in  this  country, 
even  so  recently  as  the  beginning  of  the  present  century,  and  then  look 
around  us  at  the  indications  of  greater  comfort  and  respectability  that 
meet  us  on  every  side,  it  is  hardly  possible  to  doubt  that  here,  in 
England  at  least,  the  elements  of  social  improvement  have  been  success- 
fully at  work,  and  that  they  have  been  and  are  producing  an  increased 
amount  of  comfort  to  the  great  bulk  of  the  people.  This  improvement 
is  by  no  means  confined  to  those  who  are  called,  by  a  somewhat  arbi- 
trary distinction,  the  working  classes,  but  is  enjoyed  in  some  degree  or 
other  by  tradesmen,  shopkeepers,  farmers, — in  short,  by  every  class  of 
men  whose  personal  and  family  comforts  admitted  of  material  increase. 
Higher  in  the  scale  of  society,  the  same  cause  has  been  productive  of 
increase  of  luxury,  of  increased  encouragement  to  science,  literature, 
and  the  fine  arts,  and  of  additions  to  the  elegancies  of  life,  the  indulgence 
in  which  has  acted  upon  the  condition  of  the  less-favoured  classes 
directly  by  means  of  the  additional  employment  it  has  caused,  and  indi- 
rectly also  by  reason  of  the  general  refinement  in  manners  which  has 
thus  been  brought  about. 

In  nothing  is  the  improvement  here  mentioned  more  apparent  than  in 
the  condition  of  the  dwellings  of  the  middle  classes.  As  one  instance, 
it  is  not  necessary  to  go  back  much  beyond  half  a  century  to  arrive  at 
the  time  when  prosperous  shopkeepers  in  the  leading  thoroughfares  of 
London  were  without  that  now  necessary  article  of  furniture,  a  carpet, 
in  their  ordinary  sitting-rooms :  luxury  in  this  particular  seldom  went 
further  with  them  than  a  well-scoured  floor  strewn  with  sand,  and  the 
furniture  of  the  apartments  was  by  no  means  inconsistent  with  this  pri- 
mitive, and,  as  we  should  now  say,  comfortless  state  of  things. .  In  the 
same  houses  we  now  see,  not  carpets  merely,  but  many  articles  of  furni- 
ture which  were  formerly  in  use  only  among  the  nobility  and  gentry : 
the  walls  are  covered  with  paintings  or  engravings,  and  the  a])artments 
contain  evidences  that  some  among  the  inmates  cultivate  one  or  more  of 
those  elegant  accomplishments  which  tend  so  delightfully  to  refine  the 
minds  of  individuals,  and  to  sweeten  the  intercourse  of  families. 

The  imj)rovement  here  noticed  has  not  hitherto  been  extended  in  an 


I 


CH.U-.  i.J  CONSUMPTION.  523 

equal  degree  to  the  dwellings  of  the  working  classes.  These,  especially 
in  large  towns,  are  still  for  the  most  part  comfortless,  and  even  unwhole- 
some, ill  furnished  and  ill  kept,  betraying  a  lamentable  want  of  jjelf- 
respect  in  their  inmates,  with  a  degree  of  recklessness  that  speaks  un- 
favourably for  their  moral  jjrogress.  The  inquiries  that  have  of  late  years 
been  made  on  the  subject  by  the  London  and  the  Manchester  Statistical 
Societies,  and  by  the  Central  Society  of  P^ducation,  have  brought  to  light 
an  amount  of  debasement  which  is  truly  appalling,  while  they  have 
served  to  indicate  the  means  through  which  the  evil  may  be  remedied, 
without  even  calling  for  any  great  pecuniary  sacrifice  on  the  part  of 
those  who  may  apply  themselves  to  the  good  work.  It  is  worthy  of 
remark,  that  this  comfortless  condition  of  the  dwellings  of  the  poor  is 
not  seen  in  all  localities.  In  some  places  where  no  other  appearances  in 
the  state  of  society  would  seem  to  indicate  it,  there  is  to  be  found  an 
extraordinary  degree  of  respectability  in  this  particular.  The  town  of 
Sheffield,  for  instance,  contains  a  large  manufacturing  population,  by 
no  means  remarkable  for  orderly  conduct.  The  town  itself  is  ill  built 
and  dirty,  beyond  the  usual  condition  of  English  towns ;  but  it  is  the 
custom  for  each  family  among  the  labouring  population  to  occupy  a 
separate  dwelling,  the  rooms  in  which  are  furnished  in  a  very  comfortable 
manner,  the  floors  are  carpeted,  and  the  tables  are  usually  of  mahogany  ; 
chests  of  drawers  of  the  same  material  are  commonly  seen,  and  so  in 
most  cases  is  a  clock  also,  the  possession  of  which  article  of  furniture 
lias  often  been  pointed  out  as  the  certain  indication  of  prosperity  and  of 
personal  repectahility  on  the  part  of  the  working  man.  It  would  be 
difficult  to  account  for  this  favourable  peculiarity  in  the  town  of  Sheffield, 
which,  in  this  respect,  offers  a  strong  contrast  to  other  manufacturing 
towns  in  the  same  county ;  but  it  is  greatly  to  be  desired  that  this  pe- 
culiarity should  be  made  to  cease  through  the  growing  desire  of  other 
communities  to  surround  themselves  with  the  like  comfortable  emblems 
of  respectahility.  In  large  towns,  whose  populations  are  in  a  great 
measure  made  up  of  workmen  and  their  families,  such,  for  instance,  as 
Leeds  or  Manchester,  the  progress  of  improvement  in  this  direction 
must  probably  be  left  to  the  operation  of  general  causes,  and  will  follow 
rather  than  lead  to  the  enlightenment  of  the  people  ;  but  in  the  seats  of 
our  principal  manufactures  there  are  to  be  found  many  villages  and 
small  towns,  the  greater  part  of  whose  inhabitants  are  engaged  in  the 
service  of  one  or  a  few  master  manufticturers,  and  whose  condition,  both 
physical  and  moral,  may  be  gi-eatly  influenced  by  their  employers.  A 
very  little  encouragement,  if  regard  be  had  to  the  feelings  of  those  who 
are  to  be  benefited,  and  especially  if  their  honest  pride  of  independence 
be  not  offended,  will  suffice  to  induce  habits  of  cleanliness,  order,  and 
propriety  in  their  families,  and  may  lead  to  a  degree  of  refinement  that 
will  wean  them  from  purely  sensual  indulgences,  which,  although  thev 


524  PROGRESS  OF  THE  NATION.  [sec.  v, 

may  not  be  criminal  in  themselves,  are  too  often  the  incentives  to 
criminal  courses.  Happily  we  are  not  without  examples  of  the  good 
that  may  be  thus  effected  by  judicious  kindness,  which  is  amply  repaid 
to  those  by  whom  it  is  exercised,  not  only  through  the  delightful  con- 
sciousness of  good  done  to  others,  but  even  in  a  wordly  point  of  view  by 
the  habits  of  steadiness  and  greater  industry  begotten  in  the  workmen.* 

If  these  examples  were  extensively  followed,  we  should  have  little 
cause  to  fear  lest  the  increasing  numbers  of  the  people  should  bring 
with  them  increasing  cares  to  the  working  classes.  Labour  is  the 
agent  which  in  every  country  provides  all  the  necessaries  and  conveni- 
ences of  life  which  are  consumed,  and  "  according  as  this  produce,  or 
what  is  purchased  with  it,  bears  a  greater  or  smaller  proportion  to  the 
number  of  those  who  are  to  consume  it,  so  will  the  nation  be  better  or 
worse  supplied  with  all  the  necessaries  and  conveniences  for  which  it  has 
occasion.'"t 

The  fact,  the  existence  of  which  is  shown  in  various  ways  in  these 
pages,  that  the  people  at  large  have  of  late  years,  notwithstanding  some 
occasional  checks,  obtained  in  England  a  continually  increasing  com- 
mand of  the  necessaries  of  life,  is  proof  sufficient  that  the  amount  of 
their  individual  industry  must  be  greater,  or,  what  is  the  same  thing  in 
effect,  must  be  more  skilfully  applied  than  it  formerly  was  when  their 
numbers  were  not  so  great,  and  when,  according  to  the  popular  (but  ill- 
founded)  belief,  it  must  have  been  easier  than  it  now  is  for  each  indivi- 
dual to  provide  for  his  comfortable  subsistence. 

*  At  the  meeting  of  the  British  Association  that  was  held  at  Liverpool  in  September, 
1S37,  this  subject  was  brought  forward  for  discussion  at  one  of  the  sections,  and  attention 
was  particularly  directed  to  the  establishment  of  the  late  Mr.  Thomas  Ashton,  of  Hyde, 
whose  consideration  for  the  physical  and  moral  well-being  of  his  workpeople  was  cited  as 
an  example  well  deserving  imitation  in  other  localities.  This  circumstance  is  mentioned 
here  not  so  much  with  the  view  of  paying  a  tribute  to  the  memory  of  a  gentleman,  the  good 
qualities  of  whose  heart  are  already  well  known  and  highly  appreciated,  but  in  order  to 
adduce  in  support  of  the  opinion  above  expressed  the  testimony  of  Mr.  Ashton,  who 
endeavoured  to  repudiate  all  claim  to  merit  on  that  ground,  by  declaring  that  for  every 
shilling  01  money  he  had  laid  out  in  providing  comfortable  and  respectable  dwellings  for  his 
workpeople,  and  furnishing  them  with  conveniences,  he  received  a  very  liberal  interest. 

t  Smith's  "  Wealth  of  Nations."     Introductory  chapter. 


CHAP.  II  ]  INHABITED  HOUSES.  525 


CHAPTER  II. 

Houses.  Proportion  to  Inhabitants  in  England— In  Middlesex — In  Scotland — In  Edin- 
burgh— In  Ireland — In  Dublin — Rated  Value  of  Houses  at  different  Periods — Propor- 
tion of  different  Classes,  and  Annual  Rental  -  Number  of  Inhabited  Houses,  and  progres- 
sive Increase  greater  than  Increase  of  Population.  Bricks.  Number  made  in  England 
and  Scotland. 

Houses. — TuE  number  of  houses  in  a  district  will  usually  bear  the  same 
relative  proportion  to  the  number  of  its  inhabitants  at  one  period  that  it 
has  borne  at  another.  In  different  countries,  and  even  in  different 
divisions  of  the  same  country,  we  find  a  wide  disagreement  between  the 
average  numbers  of  persons  inhabiting  each  house ;  but  custom  does  not 
in  this  respect  undergo  much,  if  any,  variation  in  the  same  locality, 
even  in  a  long  course  of  years,  so  that  a  statement  of  the  number  of 
inhabited  houses  existing  at  different  periods  in  any  locality  would  be 
found  very  nearly  in  agreement  with  the  progressive  numbers  of  the 
people. 

The  average  number  of  inhabitants  to  a  house  in  England  and  in  the 
county  of  Middlesex,  respectively,  at  each  of  the  periods  of  enumeration 
in  the  present  century,  will  sufficiently  illustrate  this  fact. 

Average  number  of  inhabitants  to  a  house — 

Years.  In  England.     In  Middlesex. 


1801 

5-67 

7-25 

1811 

5-68 

7-29 

1821 

5-76 

7-48 

1831 

5-62 

7-52 

1841 

5-4i 

7-59 

The  number  of  inhabited  houses  in  Scotland  and  Ireland  formed  no 
part  of  the  inquiry  made  under  the  Population  Acts  before  1821 ;  but 
in  that  year,  and  in  1831  and  1841,  the  numbers  were  ascertained,  and 
the  average  number  of  their  inhabitants  in  all  Scotland,  in  the  county 
of  Edinburgh,  and  in  all  Ireland,  in  those  years,  and  in  the  city  of 
Dublin,  at  the  two  earlier  periods,  were  as  follows  : — 


526  PROGRESS  OF  THE  NATION.  [sec 

Average  number  of  inhabitants  to  a  house — 


Years. 

In  Scotland. 

In  Eilinburf^b. 

In  Ireland. 

In  Uublin. 

1821 

6-13 

10-04 

5-95 

12-43 

1831 

6-42 

11-11 

6-21 

12-72 

1841 

5-04* 

5-94* 

6-54 

Ey  knowing  the  number  merely  of  liouses  in  the  kingdom  at  different 
periods,  we  do  not  obtain  any  test  of  the  condition  and  social  progress 
of  the  inhabitants  ;  but  we  may  arrive  at  some  correct  conclusion  in 
these  respects  by  knowing  their  estimated  value,  as  we  may  thence  infer 
the  amount  of  conveniences  which  they  offer  to  their  inmates.  The 
records  of  the  Tax  OflSce  are  not  available  for  an  earlier  period  than 
the  year  1812  ;  but  at  various  periods  commencing  with  that  year  they 
afford  some  means  for  judging  how  fur  the  general  improvement  has,  in 
this  particular,  kept  pace  with  the  onward  march  of  the  community  in 
England  and  Scotland. 

The  tax  on  inhabited  houses,  rated  in  three  classes,  viz.,  from  10/. 
to  20/.  ;  from  20/.  to  40/.  ;  and  above  40/.  of  annual  value,  in  the  years 
1812,  1821,  1831,  and  1833  respectively,  was  charged  upon  the  follow- 
ins  numbers :  — 


1812 

1821 

1831 

1833 

rom  10/.  to  20/.  Rental 

.     146,209 

172,708 

215,233 

227,604 

„       20/.  to  40/.      ., 

.       94,403 

108,878 

131,676 

130,445 

bove40/.  Rental     .     . 

.       56,438 

69,379 

83,708 

84,433 

297,050    350,965    430,617    442,482 

The  centesimal  proportions  of  the  different  classes  at  these  various 
periods  were : — 


I 


IS  12 

1821 

1831 

1833 

From  10/.  to  20/.  Rental     . 

49-22 

49-21 

49-98 

51-44 

„      20/.  to  40/.       „ 

31-78 

31-02 

30-58 

29-48 

Above  40/.  Rental     .     .      . 

19- 

19-77 

19-44 

19-08 

100-00    100-00    100-00    100-00 


The  annual  rental  of  these  houses,  as  rated  for  the  duty,  was — 

Years.  £.  Per  Cent.  Per  Cent. 

1812  8,495,802 

1821  9,414,430  increase  10-81  or  0-90  per  annum. 

1831  12,351,573        „        31-20  „  3-12  „ 

1833  12,603,912         „  2-04  „  1-02  „ 

The  number  of  exemptions  from  this  duty  has  always  been  very  con- 
siderable. Farm-houses,  and  cottages  inhabited  by  labouring  men, 
form  part  of  those  exemptions.  Previous  to  1825  the  tax  applied  to 
houses  of  no  greater  annual  value  than  5/.,  but  since  that  year  the 


*  The  enumerators  in  Scotland,  in  1841,  are  understood  to  have  returned  as  so  many 
houses  the  number  of  separate  apartments  or  flats  inhabited  by  distinct  families;  while, 
on  former  occasions,  the  number  of  distinct  houses  was  returned.  This  will  account  for 
the  great  discrepancy  observable  in  the  returns  of  that  year  as  compared  with  those  of 
1821  and  1831. 


eiiAP.  II  ]  INHABITED  HOUSES.  .027 

lowest  description  charged  has  been  of  10/.  rental.  The  number  of 
houses  between  5/.  and  10/.  annual  value,  charged  with  duty  in  each  of 
the  years  1812  and  1821  respectively,  was  127,009  and  130,859.  The 
total  number  of  inhabited  houses  in  England  in  1801  and  1811,  and 
in  England,  Scotland,  and  Ireland,  in  1821,  1831,  and  1841,  were — 


Years. 

Eni^land. 

Scotland. 

Ireland. 

1801 

1,467,870 

1811 

1,678,106 

1821 

1,9.51,973 

341,474 

1,142,602 

1831 

2,.326,0'22 

369,393 

1,249,816 

1841 

2,7r).'5,293 

503,357* 

1,328,839 

Assuming  that  the  population  increased  between  1811  and  1812  at 
the  mean  rate  of  progression  shown  between  1811  and  1821,  and  that 
the  increase  between  1831  and  1833  was  after  the  same  rate  as  that 
experienced  between  1831  and  1841,  the  numbers  living  in  Great 
Britain  in  the  above  four  years  respectively  were  — 

1812  12,776,286 

1821  14,391,631  increase  12-63  percent.,  or  1-40  per  annum. 

1831  16,262,.301  „         13-00  „  1-.30  „ 

1833  16,716,308         „  2-79  „  1-40  „ 

The  increase  in  the  number  of  houses  chargeable  to  the  duty,  viz  , 
from  10/.  rental  upwards,  was — 

Between  1812  and  1821  18-15  per  cent.,  or  2-01  per  annum. 

1821     „     1831  22-69  „  -2-27  „ 

„         1831     „     1833  2-75  „  1-37  „ 

On  the  houses  rated  above  40/.  the  increase  has  been — 

Between  1812  and  1821  22-93  per  cent.,  or  2-55  per  annum. 

„         1821     ,,     1831  20-65  „  2-06  „ 

„        1831     „     1833  0-86  „  0-43  „ 

The  increase  between  1812  and  1833  was — 

In  the  population 30-83  percent. 

In  houses  rated  at  10/.  to  40Z.    .      .     .     48-96        ., 
,,  upwards  of  40/.      .     49-60         „ 

The  house  duty  was  repealed  from  5th  April,  1834. 

It  appears,  from  the  foregoing  numbers  and  proportions,  that  while 
no  advance  has  been  made  in  the  relative  value  of  dwellings  chargeable 
with  duty,  the  increase  in  the  number  of  those  dwellings  has  been 
greater  than  the  increase  in  the  population ;  which  circumstance  is 
sufficiently  explained  by  the  fact  already  adduced,  that  the  number  of 
persons  engaged  in  rural  occupations,  and  by  whom  the  exemptions  from 
the  inhabited  house  duty  are  enjoyed,  has  not  increased  in  the  same 
ratio  as  the  increase  experienced  by  other  classes,  by  which  means  the 
proportionate  number  of  persons  inhabiting  rated  dwellings  is  greater 
now  than  formerly ;  and  as  it  has  necessarily  happened  that  the  great 
bulk  of  the  persons  forming  that  increase  are  su})phed  by  the  working 

*  See  Note,  page  526. 


528  PROGRESS  OF  THE  NATION.  [sec.  v. 

classes,  it  argues  strongly  in  favour  of  the  onward  progress  of  society, 
that  the  proportions  among  the  different  classes  of  houses  has  been  pre- 
served in  the  manner  already  stated. 

Bricks. — The  quantity  of  bricks  made  in  Great  Britain,  while  they 
were  subject  to  duty,  was  registered  by  the  Excise  ;  but  no  duty  having 
been  charged  upon  them  in  Ireland,  we  have  no  account  of  the  quantity 
made  there.  The  number  made  in  England  and  Scotland  respectively, 
at  different  periods  within  the  present  century,  has  been  as  follows  : — 


Years. 

England. 

Scotland. 

Total. 

1802 

698,596,954 

15,291,789 

713,888,743 

1811 

950,547,173 

18,765,582 

969,312,755 

1821 

899,178,510 

14,052,590 

913,231,100 

1831 

1,125,462,408 

27,586,173 

1,153,048,581 

1838 

1,427,472,263 

27,411,874 

1,454,884,137 

1839 

1,569,020,952 

42,267,633 

1,611,288,585 

1840 

1,677,811,134 

47,821,599 

1,725,632,733 

1841 

1,423,794,267 

38,463,308 

1,462,257,575 

1842 

1,271,872,112 

31,942,619 

1,303,814,731 

1843 

1,158,857,167 

25,531,499 

1,184,388,666 

1844 

1,420,730,745 

37,129,535 

1,457,860,280 

1845 

1,820,716,337 

57,321,332 

1,878,037,669 

1846 

2,039,656,766 

62,686,558 

2,102,343,324 

1847 

2,193,829,491 

66,097,395 

2,259,926,886 

1848 

1,461,035,726 

34,795,545 

1,495,831,271 

1849 

1,462,767,154 

41,193,952 

1,503,961,106 

The  great  increase  observable  in  some  of  the  later  years  was  no 
doubt  owing  in  gi'eat  part  to  the  increase  of  manufactories,  and  very 
recently  to  the  construction  of  railroads  and  other  public  works,  which 
liave  been  carried  on  to  a  far  greater  extent  proportionally  in  England 
than  in  Scotland.  It  will  be  seen  that  the  annual  use  of  bricks  in  Great 
Britain  has  more  than  doubled  within  the  present  century,  and  that  by 
far  the  greater  part  of  this  increase  has  occurred  since  1821,  the  differ- 
ence between  that  year  and  1847  having  been  more  than  1,200,000,000, 
or  above  130  per  cent.     The  duty  on  bricks  was  repealed  in  1850. 


CHAP.    III.] 


DOMESTIC  SEUV.\XT.'^. 


.V2,Q 


CHAPTER  III. 


Male  Sekvants.  Number  kept  in  different  Years— Expenditure  thus  occasioned — Number 
of  Female  Servants,  and  E.xpense  of  maintaining  them,  in  1831— Number  of  Servants 
kept  in  Ireland,  and  Cost  of  their  Maintenance.  Carriages.  Number  kept  in  different 
Years— Rate  of  Increase — Number  let  for  Hire  —  Expenditure  under  these  Heads. 
Horses.  Number  charged  with  Duty,  in  18.3S,  1840,  and  1849--For  Pleasure— For 
Trade— Number  exempt  from  Duty.  Gold  and  Silver  Plate.  Quantities  made 
during  the  War,  and  since— Improvement  in  Quality  of  Plated  Goods  a  probable  Cause 
of  the  lessened  Use  of  Silver  Arti(Ucs. 

SeT^ants. — TuE  number  of  persons  assessed  for  keeping  male  domestic 
servants  in  1812,  1821,  1831,  1841,  and  1849,  respectively,  was— 


1812 

18il 

1831 

1841 

1849 

Persons  keeping  1  servant  . 

37,339 

39,673 

50,938 

.55,720 

54,625 

„               2  servants       .     . 

13,03:i 

13,258 

16,125 

17,565 

18,322 

»               3        „ 

10,0.(8 

9,231 

10,257 

11,719 

12;  2.58 

4         ,, 

6,776 

6,604 

6,7.35 

6,945 

7,662 

5         „ 

4,62.5 

4,3ao 

4,164 

4,602 

4,734 

6         „ 

3,174 

2,904 

3,060 

3,158 

3,588 

7        „ 

2,310 

1,960 

2,004 

2,343 

2,356 

8        » 

1,528 

1,528 

1,721 

1,.595 

1,635 

9        „ 

1,287 

1,0,53 

988 

1,007 

1,132 

10        „ 

980 

700 

738 

826 

807 

„            11  and  upwards     . 

4,944 

4,456 

5,078 

5,369 

5,424 

86,093 

85,757 

101,808 

110,849 

112,543 

The  most  striking  fact  exhibited  by  these  numbers  is  the  actual  de- 
crease in  the  number  assessed  in  1821  as  compared  with  the  number  in 
1812.  Had  the  number  kept  pace  with  the  increase  in  population,  it 
would  have  amounted  in  1821  to  96,966,  or  13  per  cent,  beyond  the 
actual  number.  This  deficiency  there  is  every  reason  to  attribute  to 
the  exhaustion  consequent  upon  the  latter  years  of  the  war,  and  the 
increased  expense  of  living  during  the  greater  part  of  that  interval, 
which  much  discouraged  the  keeping  up  of  large  establishments. 
During  the  following  decennary  period,  the  country  had  recovered  in  a 
great  degree  from  the  state  of  things  just  described  ;  and  we  find  that 
the  number  of  male  servants  was  increased  by  16,051,  or  18-71  percent. 
In  1849,  the  last  year  for  which  the  returns  have  been  made,  the  num- 
ber was  further  increased  by  10,735,— which  is  less  than  one-half  what  it 
should  have  been  to  keep  pace  with  the  increase  of  population.  In  1835 
the  number  exceeded  that  in  1836  by  2160  servants,  and  exhibited  a 
progress  since  1831  exactly  commensurate  with  that  of  the  population. 

2  -M 


530 


PROGRESS  OF  THE  NATION. 


fSF.C.    V, 


For  the  falling  off  between  1835  and  1836  it  is  not  possible  to  assign 
any  reasonable  cause. 

It  is  probably  below  the  actua.  cost  if  we  estimate  the  expense 
attending  the  keeping  of  male  servants,  including  wages,  liveries,  and 
maintenance,  at  60/.  per  annum  for  each.  Colonel  Sykes,  in  an  estimate 
presented  by  him  to  the  Statistical  Society  of  London,  and  published  in 
its  transactions,  assumes  that  the  expense  is  70/.  per  annum  for  each. 
At  the  more  moderate  rate  of  60/.,  th.e  annual  amount  thus  expended  in 
Great  Britain  in  the  different  years  already  given  was  : — 


Years. 

£. 

1812 

5,165,580 

1821 

5,145,420 

1831 

6,108,480 

1836 

6,343,140 

Years. 

£. 

1839 

6,593,680 

1841 

6,6.50,940 

1849 

6,752,580 

If  tQ  the  expenditure  of  1841,  we  add  the  probable  expense  of  main- 
taining 902,048  female  servants — the  number  then  ascertained  to  be 
kept  in  Great  Britain,  averaging  the  expense  of  each  for  board  and 
w^ages  at  35/.  per  annum,  it  will  appear  that  the  expenses  incurred  for 
domestic  servants  in  that  year  was  altogether  38,222,620/. 

The  tax  on  servants  does  not  apply  to  Ireland,  where,  probably  for 
that  reason,  the  proportion  to  the  whole  po])ulation  of  male  servants 
kept  is  much  gi-eater  than  in  Great  Britain,  as  appeared  at  the  census  of 
1831.     The  number  of  domestic  servants  then  found  in  Ireland  was — 

Males 98,742 

Females 253,155 

If,  in  consideration  of  the  more  moderate  expense  of  living  in  that 
part  of  the  kingdom,  we  assume  that  it  costs  45/.  to  keep  a  man-servant 
and  25/.  to  keep  a  woman-servant,  we  have  a  further  yearly  expenditure 
under  this  head"  of  10,772,165/.,  making  the  charge  throughout  the 
United  Kingdom  amount  to  48,994,785/. 

Carriages. — The  number  of  carriages  with  four  wheels  assessed  in 
the  under-mentioned  years  was — 


1  carriage 

1       1812 

ISil 

1831 

1841 

1849 

Persons  keeping 

12,866 

13,897 

18,480 

18,642 

15,714 

2  caniages 

2,792 

2,834 

4,976 

7,215 

7,305 

3        „ 

657 

588 

983 

1,411 

1,421 

4 

180 

160 

236 

421 

506 

5         „ 

.   1             60 

55 

126 

186' 

252 

6         „ 

18 

6 

36 

108 

108 

7         „ 

7 

7 

21 

63 

49 

8        „ 

16 

8 

8 

18 

26 

9  anil  upward 

>     . 

20 

270 

66 

16,596 

1 

17,555 

24,886 

28,334 

25,447 

The  increased  use  of  carriages  with  four  wheels  between  1812  and 
1821  was  no  more  than  959,  or  5"77  per  cent.,  being  less  than  one-half 


iM>    in.]  CARiaAGKS.  531 

the  proportionate  increase  of  population  :  the  number  was  increased  in 
till'  next  ten  years  Iw  7331,  or  41^  per  cent.,  being  nearly  three  times 
as  LiieHt  as  the  increased  numbers  of  the  people.  Between  1831  and 
1  .s41  there  has  been  a  further  increase  of  3448  carriages,  or  at  the  rate 
(if  nearly  14  per  cent.,  while  the  increase  to  the  population  was  IH 
jier  cent.  In  the  20  years  between  1821  and  1841  the  use  of  carriages 
with  four  wheels  has  incn-ased  more  than  GO  per  cent.,  oi-  in  a  ratio 
double  that  of  the  increase  of  the  people. 

The  increased  use  of  carriages  with  two  wheels  has  been  even  more 
striking  than  this,  as  appears  from  the  following  figures  : — 

Years                   Number  of  ,  y^^^^  Number  of 

Two-wheel  Carriages.  i  '  Two-wheel  Carriages. 

1812                   27,286  I  1839  44,379 

1821                   .30,743  ■  1841  41,CC3 

1831                   49,331  I  1849  28,474 

The  increase  between  1812  and  1821  was  12-67  per  cent. 

„             1821    „  1831     „    60-46  „ 

During  tlie  next  ten  years  there  was  a  diminution  of  15  per  cent., 
which  still  leaves  an  increase  from  1812  of  52-69  per  cent.  The  more 
recent  decrease  in  the  number  of  both  two  and  four  wheeled  carriages 
is,  in  all  probability,  partly  the  result  of  improvements  in  hired  car- 
riages, the  number  of  which  in  1831  was  20,196,  and  in  1836  had 
increased  to  33,070,  or  63|  per  cent. ;  and  in  1849  to  41,621,  or 
106'08  per  cent.  The  great  facilities  afforded  by  railways  for  travelling 
may  also  have  contributed  to  this  result.  The  number  of  carriages  let 
for  hire  in  1812  was  5544,  and  in  1821  only  5480. 

The  progress  made  in  these  several  years  in  the  use  of  all  these 
descriptions  of  carriages  has  been  as  follows  : — 


1812 

1821 

1831 

1836 

1840 

1849 

Carriages  with  four  wheels    . 

16,596 

17,555 

24,886 

26,861 

28,334 

25,447 

,,             „     two         „ 

27,2S6 

30,743 

49,331 

45,242 

41,663 

28,474 

„         let  for  hire  . 

5,544 

5,480 

20,196 

31,937 

34,525 

41,621 

49,426    53,778    94,413   104,040   104,522    95,542 


It  is  assumed  by  Colonel  Sykes,  in  the  estimate  already  noticed,  that 
the  expense  attending  every  four-wheeled  private  carriage  is  about 
250/.  per  annum,  in  which  sum  he  includes  the  wages  and  maintenance 
of  servants,  which  he  has  put  down  at  70/.  for  each  ;  but  as  there  must 
be  at  least  two  servants  kept— a  coachman  and  a  groom  or  footman  for 
each  carriage — this  would  reduce  the  charge  to  1 10/.  per  annum  for  the 
wear  and  tear  of  the  carriage  and  harness  and  the  keep  of  the  horses, 
with  various  accessory  charges,  which  sum  is  probably  much  within  the 
average  charge.  It  may  be  fairly  assumed  that,  taking  the  four- 
wheeled  and  two- wheeled  carriages  together,  the  average  expense  is  not 
below  100/.  per  annum  for  each ;  and  if  we  add  to  these  the  same  rate 
for  the  earnings  of  each  carriage  let  for  hire,  we  shall  have  an  annual 

2  >i  2 


532 


PROGRESS  OF  THE  NATION. 


[sec.  v. 


expenditure  under  this  head  in  Great  Britain  in  each  of  the  above  years 
as  follows  : — 


Years. 

£. 

1812 

4,942,600 

1821 

5,377.800 

1831 

9, 441,. 300 

Years. 

£. 

1836 

10,404,000 

1841 

10.452,200 

1849 

9.554,200 

Horses. — Owing  to  the  many  alterations  that  have  been  made  since 
1814  in  the  duties  chargeable  in  respect  of  horses  kept  for  pleasure,  it 
is  hardly  possible  to  compare  the  numbers  so  kept  at  different  periods. 
As  regards  horses  kept  for  some  purposes  of  business,  the  duty  has  been 
repealed,  either  wholly  or  partially  ;  while  in  other  classes  of  employ- 
ment a  great  number  have,  upon  some  pretext  or  other,  been  exempted 
fi'om  payment  of  duty.  As  respects  most  of  the  classes  thus  favoured, 
the  numbers  were  not  distinguished  at  the  time  when  the  duties  were 
chargeable,  and  it  is  therefore  not  possible  to  ascertain  from  the  returns 
of  the  Tax  Office  the  number  of  horses  kept  for  pleasure  or  recreation 
at  different  periods,  nor  the  degree  in  which  their  use  has  been  in- 
fluenced by  the  imposition,  or  modification,  or  removal  of  the  tax,  and 
there  is  not  any  other  channel  of  information  on  the  subject  open  to  us. 

The  number  of  horses  used  for  riding  or  drawing  carriages  charged 
with  duty  in  1838,  1840,  and  1849,  was— 

183S 


Persons  keeping  1  horse 

2  horses 

3  „ 

4  „ 

5  „ 

6  „ 

7  to  8 

9      V 
10  to  12 
13  to  16 

17  „ 

18  „ 

19  „ 

20  and  upwards 


89,940 

33,333 

11,707 

6,168 

3,111 

2,153 

2,392 

595 

1,267 

782 

107 

108 

89 

1,221 

152,973 


1840 

89.319 

34,671 

11,770 

6,356 

3,276 

2,245 

2.280 

613 

1,253 

853 

49 

162 

96 

1,343 

154,286 


1849 

76,721 

33,825 

11,822 

6,332 

2,982 

2,234 

2,085 

799 

1,136 

727 

92 

147 

95 

1,377 

140,374 


There  were,  besides  the  above,  duties  charged  on — 

1838  1840  1849 

Horses  let  to  hire 2,201  2,179  1  819 

Race-horses 1,119  1^095  1,476 

Horses  for  riding,  or  drawing  carriages  ) 

not  exceeding  13  hands  high      .     !     .[22,456  22,.594  21,586 

Horses  ridden  by  farmers'  bailiffs      .      .             69  55  37 

„                butchers      ....       4,389  4,419  4,261 

Draught  horses  used  in  trade        .      .      .   125,813  132,342  147,766 

„        mules 344  ,381  343 


156,391    163,965    177,293 


CHAP.  Ill  ]  GOIJ)  AND  SILVER  PLATE.  533 

Exemption?  from  duty  on  horses  were  claimed   in  the  same  years  as 
follows  : — 

Kept  by  farmers  renting  less  than  500/.  I  ,g  ^.^ 

a-year J  '  *'  * 

Used  solely  for  husbandry 387,211 

Subject  to  duty  in  other  forms ;  viz.,  as  i 

employed  In   stage-coaches,    hackney- >    27,100  24,710          24, .356 

coaches,  and  post-chaises       .      .      .      .  ' 

Persons  serving  in  volunteer  corps     .      .  1.3,164          11,877           13,463 

Exempted  on  other  grounds     ....  59,375          60,849          59,942 


ISlO 

1S4» 

4  J,  709 

62,688 

3J2,749 

337,479 

535,485         539,894         497,928 


Gold  and  Si'lvcj-  Plate. — It  might  l)e  thought  that  the  (juantity  of 
gold  and  silver  plate  manufactured  for  use  at  different  periods  would 
afford  a  good  measure  of  the  prosperity  of  the  country  ;  and,  judging 
from  the  tacts  already  brought  forward,  as  well  as  from  the  observation 
of  what  is  passing  around  us,  we  might  have  supposed  that  during  the 
last  quarter  of  a  century  there  must  have  been  a  marked  increase  in 
this  employment  of  the  precious  metals  in  this  kingdom.  It  is  certain 
that  during  that  interval  the  use  of  many  utensils  made  of  silver  has 
been  adopted  by  a  much  more  numerous  class  of  society  than  before  ;  a 
remark  which  will  be  sufficiently  corroborated  by  the  fact  that  within 
that  period  it  has  first  been  customary  to  find  silver  forks  at  the  tables 
in  the  generality  of  taverns.  Before  the  termination  of  the  war  in  1815, 
this  article  of  domestic  convenience  was  uniformly  made  of  steel,  except 
among  families  in  decidedly  easy  circumstances,  or  in  the  first-rate 
raverns  ;  whereas  at  present  there  is  hardly  a  family  to  be  found  above 
the  rank  of  artisans,  whose  table  is  not  furnished  with  forks  made  of  the 
more  costly  material.  It  will  be  matter  for  surprise,  under  these  cir- 
cumstances, to  find  that  the  quantity  of  gold  and  silver  plate  made  and 
retained  for  home  use  within  the  kingdom  was  greater  in  weight  during 
the  eight  years  that  preceded  the  peace  than  it  was  during  the  like 
period  from  1830  to  1837  inclusive.  During  the  first  period,  viz.,  1807 
to  1814,  the  quantities  so  retained  for  use  were — of  gold  plate  50,750 
ounces,  and  of  silver  plate  8,290,157  ounces  ;  and  in  the  eight  years, 
from  1830  to  1837,  the  quantities  v/ere — of  gold  48,432  ounces,  and  of 
silver  7,378,651  ounces.  This  falling  off  is  the  more  surprising,  because 
of  the  unprecedentedly  high  prices  of  bullion  during  a  great  part  of 
the  first  of  these  two  periods,  whereby  the  difference  in  the  money  value 
was  rendered  much  greater  than  the  difference  as  here  stated  in  the 
weight. 

Some  suggestions  have  been  offered  with  the  view  of  accounting  for  a 
circumstance  seemingly  so  much  at  variance  with  every  other  indication 
of  increased  means  and  enjoyments  on  the  part  of  the  people  :  they  are 
stated  here  only  as  suggestions,  however,  and  are  not  relied  on  as 
affording  a  sufficient  or  satisfactory  solution  of  the  difficulty. 


53  4  PHOGRESS  OF  THE  NATION.  [sec.  v. 

First,  it  may  be  questioned  whether  the  fiict  of  the  depreciation  of 
paper,  wliile  it  enhanced  the  money  price  of  articles  made  of  gold  and 
silver,  did  not  also  occasion  many  persons,  as  a  measure  of  prudent  pre- 
caution, so  to  invest  a  part  of  their  wealth,  and  thereby  to  secure  the 
possession  of  a  certain  and  tangible  property  of  immediately  convertible 
value.  It  may  be  objected  that  persons  so  acting  were  prudent  over- 
much, and,  judging  from  the  course  which  events  have  since  taken,  such 
an  opinion  appears  well  founded  ;  but  any  one  who  can  recall  to  his 
recollection  the  dismal  aspect  then  ottered  by  the  political  horizon — when 
every  power  in  Europe  was  leagued  against  us,  and  the  necessary 
expenditure  of  the  country  was  carried  forward  upon  a  scale  which  it 
would  have  been  altogether  im])ossible  to  have  continued  for  even  a  few 
years  longer — will  hesitate  before  he  pronounces  such  a  precaution 
unwise.  Even  when  the  ambitious  designs  of  Napoleon  had  detached 
from  him  and  converted  into  enemies  the  allies  who  had  pursued  with 
hiui  the  object  of  destroying  the  power  and  resources  of  England,  there 
came  no  intermission  of  efforts  and  sacrifices  on  our  part ;  but,  on  the 
contrary,  every  ally  that  we  gained  in  the  field  helped  still  further  to 
exhaust  our  financial  means.  Let  us  suppose  that  the  battle  of  Waterloo 
had  been  lost,  or  even  that  it  had  been  less  decisive  in  its  results,  could 
the  public  expenditure  have  been  continued  on  anything  like  the  scale 
of  preceding  years,  while  at  the  same  time  faith  had  been  kept  with  the 
public  creditor  ?  Under  such  cii'cumstances  he  would  have  been  looked 
upon  as  a  man  of  forethought  and  wisdom  who  should  have  provided 
himself  with  a  species  of  convertible  property  that  was  independent  of 
the  stability  of  public  credit;  and  as  it  is  well  known  that  many  persons 
did  at  that  time  entertain  very  gloomy  forebodings  as  to  the  future  con- 
dition of  this  country,  it  is  not  unreasonable  to  suppose  that  some  would 
be  led  to  the  precautionary  course  that  has  been  here  suggested. 

There  was  at  the  same  time  another  circumstance  in  operation  alto- 
gether opposite  to,  but  not  incompatible  with,  what  has  been  stated,  and 
which  probably  led  to  the  same  desire  of  investing  money  in  the  purchase 
of  gold  and  silver  plate.  The  gains  of  persons  engaged,  either  as  owners 
or  tenants,  in  the  cultivation  of  the  soil,  had  been  out  of  all  proportion 
great,  and  that  for  a  length  of  time,  which  gave  an  appearance  of  per- 
manency to  their  prosperity.  It  has  been  already  stated  in  how  great 
a  degree  the  rent  of  land  had  advanced  during  the  progress  of  the  war, 
at  the  same  time  that  the  worldly  condition  and  habits  of  the  occupiers 
had  undergone  the  most  marked  improvement.  There  are  no  classes  of 
men  so  remarkable  in  this  country  as  its  nobility  and  country  gentlemen 
for  the  importance  which  they  attach  to  the  possession  and  transmission 
of  family  plate  ;  and  with  respect  to  the  farmers,^  the  alteration  in  their 
circumstances  and  character  must  have  caused  a  great  demand  on  their 
part  for  such  luxuries.     In  those  days  it  scarcely  required  the  passing 


ciiAr.  111. J 


aul,U  AXJ)  SILVER  PLATi:. 


535 


away  of  a  generation  in  order  to  see  in  fjirniors'  dwellings,  on  tiie  same 
estates,  spoons  of  wood  or  of  horn  give  place  to  others  of  silver.  It 
must  further  be  considered  that  luxuries  of  this  class  are  not  of 
a  perishable  nature  ;  that,  except  for  the  indulgence  of  ostentation, 
they  are  provided  in  the  same  family  once  for  all,  and  wo  must  not 
therefore  expect  that  any  sudden  increase  in  their  ([uantity  will  lead  to 
further  and  equal  additions  when  that  immediate  demand  shall  l)e 
satisfied.  The  improvement  that  has  been  made  in  the  manufacture  of 
])lated  wares  has  had  a  further  influence  in  diminishing  the  sale  of 
articles  subject  to  the  plate  duty,  although  it  may  have  led,  and  in  all 
})robability  has  led,  to  the  increased  consumption  of  the  precious 
metals.  Except  in  very  wealthy  families,  it  is  now  usual  to  see  many 
articles,  such  as  candlesticks,  plated,  where  formerly  they  were  seen  of 
silver,  or,  if  the  expense  of  such  was  too  great,  of  brass. 

The  combination  of  these  various  causes  may  probably  be  thought 
sufficient  to  account  for  the  fact  exhibited  by  the  following  table  of  the 
comparative  decline  experienced  in  this  branch  of  consumption.  The 
yeare  1824  and  1825  are  well  remembered  as  years  of  great  commercial 
excitement  and  apparent  prosperity,  and  it  is  curious  to  observe  the 
degree  in  which  that  excitement  acted  in  promoting  the  desire  of 
possessing  gold  and  silver  utensils.  The  increased  quantity  retained 
for  home  use  in  the  year  1825,  as  compared  with  1823,  was  equal  to 
29  per  cent,  on  gold,  and  50  per  cent,  on  silver  plate  ;  the  difference  in 
favour  of  1825,  as  compared  with  1824,  was  10  per  cent,  on  gold  and 
24  per  cent,  on  silver  plate. 

Number  of  Ounces  of  Gold  and  Silver  Plate  upon  loliich  Duty  was  Paid,  and  for  which  Draw- 
back was  Allowed,  showing  the  Quantiti/  retained  for  Home  Use,  in  each  Year,  from  fith 
January,  1800,  to  bth  January,  1850. 


Year 

Duty  paid  on 

Drawback  allowed  on 

Retained  for  Home  Use. 

pnrl<»1    nth 

January- 

Gold.    1       Silver. 

1 

Gold. 

Silver. 

Gold. 

Silver. 

ozs. 

ozs. 

ozs. 

ozs. 

ozs. 

ozs. 

1801 

5,2.51 

902,966 

77 

142,705 

5,174 

760,261 

1802 

4,619 

925,882 

19 

114,323 

4,600 

811,559 

1803 

5.1:37 

986,381 

66 

126,878 

5,071 

859,. 503 

1804 

5,445 

1,048,869 

10 

99,295 

5,435 

949,574 

1S05 

4,8.54 

902,788 

21 

114,829 

4,833 

787,959 

1806 

5,408 

1,(56,693 

9 

122,082 

5,399 

934,611 

1807 

5,372 

1,084,525 

43 

121,608 

5,329 

962,917 

1808 

6,056 

1,141,749 

20 

131,8.50 

6,036 

1,009,899 

isoy 

6,189 

1,159,412 

18 

90,516 

6,171 

1,068,896 

1810 

6,382 

1,242,208 

53 

71,116 

6,329 

1,171,092 

1811 

7,435 

1,. 341, 024 

102 

86,896 

7,333 

1,254,128 

1812 

6,212 

1,154,738 

34 

92,245 

6,178 

1,062,493 

1813 

5,891 

990,223 

34 

50,334 

5,8.57 

939,889 

1814 

6,115 

917,697 

19 

52,234 

6,096 

865,463 

1815 

6,779 

974,245 

29 

55,948 

6,750 

918,297 

1816 

7,492 

1,054,658 

495 

;     108,174 

6,997 

946,484 

1817 

7,002 

910,002 

836 

85,142 

6,166 

824,860 

1818 

5,827 

1,080,549 

2,001 

:     106,417 

i  3,826 

974,132 

181'.» 

5,881      1,293,586 

2,507 

98,777 

i  3,374 

1,194,709 

1820 

6,037 

1,230,104 

1,607 

'     116,, 507 

1  4,430 

1,113,597 

535 


PROGRESS  OF  THE  NATION. 


[sec. 


jyumber  of  Ounces  of  Gold  and  Silver  Plate  upon  which  Duty  tvas  Paid,  and  for  which  Draw- 
back was  Allowed,  S\-c. — continued. 


Year 

Duty  paid  on 

Drawback  allowed  on 

Retained  for  IlomeU.^e. 

ended  5th 
January. 

Gold. 

Silver. 

Gold. 

Silver. 

Gold. 

Silver. 

ozs. 

ozs. 

ozs. 

ozs. 

0Z9. 

ozs. 

1821 

6,651 

1,081,310 

3,735 

114,224 

2,916 

967,086 

1822 

5,434 

1,022,771 

1,436 

120,600 

3,998 

902.161 

1823 

6, 997 

1,027,722 

1,370 

64,783 

5.627 

962,939 

1824 

6,516 

1,073,244 

20 

97,016 

6,496 

976,228 

1825 

7,662 

1,258,658 

38 

70,482 

7,624 

l,18v',176 

1826 

8,486 

1,585,254 

81 

112,017 

8,405 

1,473,237 

1827 

7,108 

1,247,880 

71,493 

7,108 

1,176,387 

1828 

7,266 

1,207,887 

io 

60,910 

7,256 

1,146,977 

182:) 

7.106 

1,361,332 

2 

86,1.57 

7,104 

1,275,175 

1830 

6,441 

1,271,322 

12 

103,907 

6,429 

1,161,415 

1831 

5,716 

1,076,976 

6 

84,444 

5;  7 10 

9)2,532 

1832 

4,574 

826,0.52 

9 

100,127 

4,565 

725,925 

1833 

5,189 

914,036 

15 

79,659 

5,174 

834,437 

1834 

5,434 

879,117 

2 

72,005 

5,432 

807,112 

1835 

6,116 

1,0,50,232 

102,251 

6,116 

947,981 

1836 

6,678 

1,071,026 

"ie 

110,247 

6,662 

960,779 

1837 

7,966 

1,272,920 

. , 

164,064 

7,966 

1,108,8.56 

1833 

6,811 

1,178,568 

4 

177,. 539 

6,807 

1,001,029 

1839 

6,784 

1,195,483 

21 

161,458 

6,763 

1,034,025 

1840 

6,875 

1,270,330 

7 

155,923 

6,868 

1,114,467 

1841 

6,992 

1,203,266 

7 

179,904 

6,985 

1,023,362 

1842 

6,580 

1,149,070 

5 

160,495 

6,575 

988,575 

1843 

6,305 

1,026,046 

4 

171,. 574 

6,301 

854,472 

1844 

6,415 

911,220 

2 

122,689 

6,413 

788,531 

1845 

7,242 

1,025,412 

8 

170,987 

7,234 

854,425 

1846 

8,036 

1,158,050 

16 

181,759 

8,020 

976,291 

1847 

8,335 

1,188,736 

18 

167,513 

8,317 

1,021,223 

1848 

7,629 

1,049,268 

5 

161,483 

7,624 

'887,785 

1849 

6,810 

756,388 

103,136 

6,810 

647,252 

1850 

1 

7,373 

735,865 

"3 

76,759 

7,370 

659,106 

IV.]  FARM  PRODUCE.  537 


CHAPTER  IV. 

Food.  Want  of  Information  concerning  the  Quantity  consumed  of  chief  Articles  of  Human 
Subsistence — Evils  resulting  from  this  Ignorance — Means  employed  for  ascertaining  the 
Produce  of  the  Soil  in  Belgium.  Sugar.  Quantity  consumed  at  various  periods  in 
England  and  Ireland,  and  Revenue  thereon — Consumption  easily  afl'ected  by  Price — 
Diminished  Shipments  from  British  Colonies -Necessity  for  enlarging  the  IMarket  of 
Supply — Cost  to  the  Nation  of  the  protecting  Duty,  and  consequent  Loss  to  the  Revenue. 
Coffee.  Quantities  consumed — Eflect  of  Reduction  of  Duties — Consumption  checked 
by  Protective  Duties  —  Contrivance  for  lessening  their  Amount.  Tea.  Quantities 
consumed— Past  History  of  the  Tea  Trade,  and  Effect  of  Duties  upon  Consumption. 
Malt.  Consumption  at  various  Periods — Checked  by  Duties  and  by  ]Monopoly  of 
Home-growers  of  Barlej'.  Spirits.  Consumption  of  Home-made  Spirits — Temperance 
Movements  in  Ireland— Foreign  and  Colonial  Spirits  consumed — Excessive  Duties  and 
their  Consequences.  Wine.  Quantities  consumed— Rates  of  Duty — Consumption  of 
Wine  in  France.     Beer.  Quantity  consumed,  and  Produce  of  Duty. 

There  are  no  means  provided  by  which  the  consumption  of  the  prime 
necessaries  of  life  in  this  country  can  be  traced  at  different  periods.  It 
is  only  with  respect  to  those  few  articles  of  native  production  which  have 
been  subjected  to  the  payment  of  duties  that  any  provision  has  ever 
been  made  for  ascertaining  their  quantity  ;  and  as  the  chief  articles  of 
food  and  clothing,  when  of  such  production,  have  never  been  directly 
taxed  in  England,  we  have  always  been  ignorant  in  this  respect  regard- 
ing the  quantities  produced. 

The  want  of  tliis  information  has  been  fonnd  greatly  inconvenient, 
both  by  statesmen  and  by  writers  on  subjects  of  social  economy,  the  latter 
of  whom  have  frequently  had  recourse  to  the  expedient  of  computations 
founded  on  insufficient  data,  and  which  have  therefore  given  an  unsatis- 
factory character  to  their  writings.  In  estimating  the  growth  of  svheat 
in  England,  it  has  not  been  possible  to  assume  as  data  the  breadth  of 
land  appropriated  to  its  cultivation,  and  the  average  produce  of  the  land 
})er  acre,  both  those  elements  of  the  computation  being  unknown  ;  but 
the  number  of  the  consumers  being  known,  the  average  consumption  of 
each  individual  has  been  assumed,  and  the  total  quantity  consumed  has 
been  thence  deduced.  This  average  consumption  has  been  variously 
estimated  by  different  writers  at  from  six  to  eight  bushels  during  the 
year,  exhibiting  a  difference  of  one-third  in  their  calculations.  The 
population  of    England  and   Wale-   is   jirobably    at   this    time  (1850) 


538  PROGRESS  OF  THE  NATION.  [sec.  v. 

17,700,000,  and  the  difference  in  the  provision  needed,  according  as  the 
consinnption  eipials  one  or  other  of  the  quantities  named,  would  he 
4,425,000  quarters  per  annum.  In  former  times  a  still  farther  degree 
of  uncertainty  attended  the  estimate,  from  the  fact  of  a  considerahle,  but 
unascertained,  proportion  of  the  people  not  being  habitual  consumers  of 
wheaten  bi-ead.  Unless  in  years  of  scarcity,  no  part  of  the  inhabitants 
of  England,  except  perhaps  in  the  extreme  north,  and  there  only 
partially,  have  now  recourse  to  rye  or  barley  bread,  but  a  larger  and 
increasing  number  are  in  a  great  measure  fed  upon  potatoes,  and  it 
must  be  evident  that  any  computation  which  assumes  an  average  quantity 
in  a  case  liable  to  so  many  disturbing  influences,  must  be  at  best  only 
vague  and  unsatisfactory. 

The  importance  of  knowing  accurately  the  provision  made  for  the 
sustenance  of  the  people  is  surely  not  less  than  that  of  knowing  the 
yearly  produce  of  some  of  the  less  valuable  articles  of  commerce.  The 
condition  of  the  crop  of  indigo  in  Bengal  is  accurately  communicated  to 
the  merchants  in  London  at  the  earliest  moment  when  it  can  be  known, 
and  through  its  influence  upon  the  price  has  an  immediate  effect  in 
checking  or  in  promoting  the  consumption ;  but  as  regards  the  staple 
article  of  our  food,  no  systematic  attempt  has  ever  been  made  to  ascer- 
tain its  sufficiency  or  otherwise.  It  is  well  known  that  the  produce 
of  the  harvest  of  1837  was  so  far  below  the  average  consumption  of  the 
people,  that  before  the  grain  of  1838  could  be  brought  to  market  the 
stock  of  English  wheat  was  all  but  exhausted,  and,  but  for  the  supply  of 
foreign  corn  stored  in  our  granaries,  there  would  have  been  a  most  dis- 
tressing scarcity  before  any  fresh  importations  could  have  been  received. 
If  by  any  means  the  fact  of  this  deficiency  had  been  ascertained  when 
the  harvest  of  1837  was  got  in,  we  should  certainly  not  have  seen,  as  we 
did,  an  actual  fall  in  our  markets  immediately  following  that  harvest, 
nor  a  continuance  of  comparatively  low  prices  up  to  the  middle  of  1838. 
If  a  timely  warning  could  have  been  given,  a  moderate  but  still  an 
adequate  rise  in  price  would  have  been  the  immediate  consequence,  and 
the  consumption  would  have  been  by  that  means  so  influenced  that  we 
should,  in  all  probability,  have  avoided  in  a  great  degree  that  excessive 
rise  in  the  cost  of  bread,  which  was  then  productive  of  much  hardship 
to  our  labouring  classes,  and  which,  but  for  the  abundant  demand  for 
labour  throughout  the  kingdom,  would  immediately  have  occasioned 
general  and  wide-spread  distress. 

There  is  among  the  people  of  this  country  a  most  unaccountable  pre- 
judice against  the  adoption  of  any  organized  plan  on  the  part  of  the 
Government  for  obtaining  this  knowledge.  It  would  be  difficult  for  our 
farmers  to  point  out  any  mischief  that  could  result  to  them  from  such  a 
course,  and,  on  the  other  hand,  it  must  be  quite  unnecessary  to  explain 
the  kind  and   degree  of  advantage  which  the   country  generally,  and 


CHAT.    IV. J 


FARM  I'JIODI'CE.  539 


\\lilch  thoy  especially,  would  dorlve  from  the  possession  of  accurcate 
details  on  this  subject.  The  high  prices  to  which  corn  advanced  towards 
the  end  of  1838  were  of  but  little  advcUitage  to  fche  growers,  who  had 
fur  the  most  part  already  brought  their  stocks  to  market,  in  ignorance  of 
the  facts  which  afterwards  became  apparent  ;  so  that  the  benefit  of  the 
rise  was  almost  wholly  engrossed  by  the  importers  of  foreign  grain,  and 
this  would  certainly  not  have  been  the  case  if  any  accurate  estimate  of 
the  crop  of  1837  could  have  been  made. 

In  Belgium  every  kind  of  information  connected  with  the  production 
of  the  kingdom  is  obtained  with  considerable  accuracy,  by  means  of  a 
body  of  gentlemen  (usually  proprietors)  residing  in  different  localities, 
and  who  are  elected  in  the  respective  provinces,  for  purposes  of  local 
government,  by  the  same  persons  that  elect  deputies  to  the  legislative 
chamber.  The  functions  of  persons  thus  elected  are  in  many  respects 
similar  to  those  of  justices  of  the  peace  in  English  counties.  Having 
local  knowledge  concerning  the  condition  and  circumstances  of  the 
several  communes  in  their  districts,  they  are  enabled  readily  to  prevent 
or  to  detect  errors  in  the  returns  made  by  the  several  farmers  or  occu- 
) tiers,  and  there  is  therefore  every  reason  to  place  a  considerable  degree 
of  reliance  upon  the  accuracy  of  the  result.  This  result  is  annually 
presented  by  them  in  a  detailed  report,  which  is  printed  under  the 
authority  of  the  governor  of  the  province,  and  is  open  to  the  use  of  every 
one  of  the  inhabitants.  It  has  never  been  pretended  that  any  improper 
advantage  has  been  taken  of  the  knowledge  thus  acquired  ;  and  if  this 
can  be  said  of  Belgium,  w  here  the  members  of  the  legislative  chambers 
have  not  by  any  means  so  great  nor  so  direct  an  interest  in  the  landed 
property  of  the  kingdom  as  is  possessed  by  the  members  of  our  two 
Houses  of  Parliament,  there  cannot  surely  be  any  reason  to  dread  lest 
injury  should  thus  be  occasioned  in  England.  The  information  which  it 
appears  to  be  so  desirable  to  obtain  with  reference  to  the  whole  kingdom, 
is  already  procurable  with  the  greatest  facility  with  regard  to  each  in- 
dividual farm,  by  any  person  having  a  sufficient  interest  to  incite  him 
to  the  task.  The  landlord,  who  is  interested  in  extracting  a  due  pro- 
portion of  the  produce  of  a  farm  in  the  name  of  rent,  cannot  find  much 
ditficulty  in  correctly  estimating  that  produce.  A  similar  facility 
attends  the  operation  both  of  the  tithe-proctor  and  of  the  officers  of  the 
pari^^h.  The  information  is  therefore  already  procurable  by  every  one 
who  can  turn  it  to  the  disadvantage  of  the  farmer  :  and  all  that  is 
wanted  is  to  extend  it,  so  that  the  farmer  himself,  as  well  as  the  nation 
at  large,  may  be  enabled  to  profit  from  it.  If  the  members  of  our  two 
Houses  of  Parliament  belonged  exclusively  to  the  mercantile  and  manu- 
facturing classes,  there  might  be  some  appearance  of  prudence  in  con- 
cealment on  the  Dart  of  the  agriculturists,  but   in  the  actual  state  of 


•540  PROGRESS  OF  THE  NATION.  [sec.  v. 

things,  when,  with  scarcely  an  exception,  every  member  of  the  House  of 
Lords  draws  liis  revenue  from  land,  and  a  great  majority  of  the  House 
of  Commons  are  similarly  circumstanced,  it  is  quite  absurd  to  suppose 
that  any  measures  inimical  to  the  interests  of  those  who  possess  or 
occupy  the  soil  would  be  attempted  by  them. 

The  impossibility  of  estimating  correctly  the  consumption  of  the 
country  in  the  common  kinds  of  food  does  not  extend  to  many  other 
articles  of  use.  These  are  for  the  most  part  imported  from  foreign 
countries,  while  some,  which  are  of  home  production,  are  subject  to 
Excise  regulations,  and  their  quantities  are  thus  made  known.  In  order 
to  trace  the  power  of  consumption  at  different  periods  in  this  kingdom, 
it  will  suffice  to  select  a  few  of  the  more  important  articles  in  these  two 
classes.  The  five  several  years  in  which  the  census  has  been  taken, 
have,  for  an  obvious  reason,  been  adopted  for  the  purpose  of  making 
this  comparative  statement.  Owing  to  the  deficiency  of  information 
upon  which  reliance  can  be  placed  with  regard  to  the  pO})ulation  of 
Ireland  previous  to  1821,  it  will  not  be  possible  in  all  cases  to  embrace 
that  part  of  the  kingdom  in  the  calculations. 

Sugar. — The  Parliamentary  returns  relative  to  this  article  of  con- 
sumption did  not  until  of  late  years  correctly  indicate  the  quantity 
retained  for  use  within  the  kingdom.  It  is  the  practice  in  the  annual 
statements  prepared  at  the  Custom-house,  to  consider  every  ton  of 
refined  sugar  that  is  exported  to  be  equal  to,  and  to  represent  34  cwts. 
of  raw  sugar ;  and  this  larger  weight  is  deducted  in  respect  of  each  ton 
so  exported  from  the  quantity  upon  which  duty  is  paid,  in  order  to 
arrive  at  the  quantity  actually  used.  This  proceeding  involves  a  great 
and  palpable  error,  through  which  the  apparent  home  consumption  is 
made  to  vary  according  to  the  amount  of  the  exports  of  refined  sugar. 
The  actual  loss  through  waste  in  the  operation  of  refining  does  not  ever 
amount  to  more  than  5  per  cent.,  and  seldom  reaches  that  rate :  it 
would  therefore  be  more  correct  to  consider  a  ton  of  refined  sugar  to 
represent  21  cwts.  of  the  unrefined  material,  and  this  course  has  been 
adopted  in  the  following  computations.  The  statement  would  be  in- 
complete if  molasses,  which  is  sugar  in  a  liquid  form  combined  with 
water,  were  not  included.  The  proportion  which  this  should  bear  to 
sugar  in  a  crystalline  state  has  been  assumed  on  the  average  to  be  as 
3  to  8,  the  duty  being  imposed  on  the  two  descriptions  in  that  ratio. 
The  quantity  of  molasses  upon  which  duty  was  paid  in  1811  is  there- 
fore added,  considering  24  cwts.  to  be  equal  to  9  cwts.  of  crystalline 
sugar.  Through  the  prohibition  to  employ  grain  in  the  distilleries,  and 
the  consequent  substitution  of  sugar,  its  use  was  greatly  increased  in 
1811.     The  quantity  thus  employed  in  that  year  appears  to  have  been 


CH.<i'.    IV. 


SUG.VR. 


II 


544,192  cvvts.,  thus  reducing  its  aggregate  consumption  in  tlie  saccha- 
rine form  to  2,748,129  cwts.,  and  the  proportion  used  by  each  individual 
to  24  lbs.  'J  ozs. 


(iKF.AT   IJltlTAlN. 

l»Ol           1           l*tll           1        l>^ii 

1 

Quantity  cleared  for  consumption,  viz. : — 

Supar cwts. 

Molasses „ 

3,341,496 

3,398,367 

3,128,026 
21,428 

Total,  as  if  sugar       ....       „ 

Refined  sugar  exported  in  the  proper-  1 

tion  of  21  for  20 j       " 

Quantity  remaining  for  consumption     .       „ 
Rate  of  duty per  cwt. 

3,341,496 

350,639 

2,990,857 

20s. 
10,942,646 

3,398,367 

106,046 

3,292,321 

27s. 
12.. 596. 803 

3,149,454 

677,708 

2,471,746 

27.V. 
14,391,631 

Consumption  of  each  individual 

30  lb.  'Ji  oz.    j    29  ib.  4  "Z- 

191b.  3^02. 

Ireland. 

Average  of  Three 

Years  ended 

25  .March, 

1800 

1 

Average  of  Three] 

Years  ended       ' 

SJanuarv,       j           mn 

IS  10           1 

yuantity   of  sugar   retained    for  con- )        . 

sumption / 

Rate  of  duty per  cwt. 

Population 

Consumption  of  each  individual 

298,069 

17s.  6d. 
5,395,456 
6  ib.  3  oz. 

420,093 

27». 

5,9.50,917 

71b.  14ioz. 

380,608 

27«. 
6,801,827 
6  lb.  4|  oz. 

Owing  to  the  regulation  of  the  year  1826,  by  which  the  trading 
intercourse  between  Great  Britain  and  Ireland  was  placed  on  the  footing 
of  a  coasting  trade,  it  became  impossible  thereafter  to  state  the  con- 
sumption of  sugar  in  the  sereral  divisions  of  the  kingdom.  The  raw 
sugar  used  in  Ireland  is  for  the  most  part  imported  direct  from  the 
places  of  production  ;  but  refined  sugar  is  chiefly  supplied  to  Ireland 
from  Great  Britain,  and  no  account  of  the  quantity  is  kept  by  the  Cus- 
tom-house officers. 

While  it  is  necessary  to  raise  any  considerable  revenue,  and  so  long 
as  it  shall  be  thought  advisable  to  do  so  by  means  of  indirect  taxation,  it 
would  1)0  difficult  to  point  out  any  article  better  fitted  for  the  purpose 
than  sugar.  ^Vithout  being  one  of  the  absolute  necessaries  of  life,  long 
habit  has  in  this  country  led  almost  every  class  to  the  daily  use  of  it, 
so  that  there  is  no  people  in  Europe  by  whom  it  is  consumed  to  any- 
thing like  the  same  extent.  It  is  besides,  from  its  bulk,  in  proportion  to 
its  value,  not  likely  to  be  clandestinely  imported.  If  it  were  attempted 
to  subject  it  to  such  a  rate  of  duty  as  would  convert  it  into  an  object  of 
temptation  to  the  smuggler,  the  legitimate  consumption  would  fall  oft'  to 
such  a  degree  as  would  render  the  attempt  on  the  part  of  the  Govern- 
ment altogether  abortive.  The  action  of  the  smuggler,  which,  with 
regard  to  many  articles — such  as  tobacco  and  spirits— may  be  con- 
sidered to  form  the  natural  limit  to  taxation,  aflTords  therefore  no  criterion 
in  the  case  of  sugar,  but  we  may  find  in  the  foregoing  computations  a 


512 


PROGRESS  OF  THE  NATION. 


[SKC.    V. 


sufficiently  significant  indication  that  the  rate  of  duty  was  for  many 
years  after  the  war  continued  on  too  high  a  scale  ;  and  that  by  making 
a  great  reduction  in  that  rate  we  have  so  increased  the  consumption  as 
not  merely  to  give  an  impulse  to  trade,  but  also  to  increase  the 
revenue.  Confining  the  inquiry  to  Great  Britain,  it  appears  that  if  we 
take  population  as  an  element  in  the  computation,  tlie  revenue  did  not 
gain  by  the  increased  rates  imj)0sed  in  1805  : — 


Years.         Population.      Net  Revenue. 


1801 
1811 
1821 
1831 

1841 


!  10,942,646 
I  12,596,803 
I  14,391,631 
!  16,539,318 
* 18, 532, 335 


£. 
2,782,232 
3, 33a, 218 
3,660,567 
4,219,049 
4,686,241 


Rate  of  Dutv. 


j  Tax  per  Head. 


20s.  per  cwt. 

27s.         „ 

27s.         „ 

24s.         „ 

24s.  &  5  per  cent. 


d. 
1 

1| 


If  we  extend  the  calculation  so  as  to  embrace  Ireland,  the  result  will 
be  found  as  follows  : — 


1801 
1811 
1821 
1831 
1841 


Population. 


16,338,102 
18,547,720 
21,193,458 
24,029,702 
26,711,694 


Net  Revenue. 


Hate  of  Dutv. 


£. 
3,066,163 
t3, 183, 505 
4,077,706 
4,650,589 
5,114,3^0 


20s.  per  cwt. 

27s.         „ 

24s. 

24s.  &  5  per  cent. 


Tax  per  Head. 


d. 

9-04 

5-19 
10-17 
10-44 

9-95 


Of  all  articles  of  consumption  which  are  not  absolute  necessaries  of 
life,  sugar  is,  perhaps,  that  which  in  this  country  is  the  most  easily  acted 
upon  by  price. 

The  following  table  {see  p.  543),  which  includes  the  whole  kingdom, 
shows  the  quantity  of  sugar,  and  of  molasses  equivalent  to  crystalline 
sugar,  retained  for  consumption  in  the  United  Kingdom  in  each  year, 
from  1830  to  1849,  together  with  the  average  price  during  the  year, 
computed  from  the  Gazette  advertisements,  and  the  average  consumption 
of  each  individual  stated  in  pounds  and  decimal  parts  of  a  pound. 

If,  by  means  of  this  statement,  we  trace  from  year  to  year  the  fluctua- 
tions in  price,  we  shall  find  that  they  are  attended  by  corresponding 
fluctuations  in  the  consumption,  and  that  with  a  degree  of  regularity 
more  like  the  operations  of  a  piece  of  machinery  than  as  resulting  from 
circumstances  affecting  in  such  various  ways  and  in  such .  diflferent 
degrees  our  numerous  population.  With  one  exception  only,  that  of 
the  year  1835,  every  rise  in  price  has  been  accompanied  by  diminished 
consumption,  while  every  fall  in  the  market  has  produced  an  increased 
demand.  It  will  be  remembered  that  the  year  1835,  in  which  there 
appears  some  departure  from  the  uniformity  of  this  effect,  was  a  year  of 


*  Exclusive  of  the  Channel  Islands. 

t  .\llowing  734.659^.  in  respect  of  544,192  cwts.  of  sugar  used  in  the  distilleries. 


IV.] 


SUGAR. 


513 


1830 
1831 
1832 
1833 
1834 
1835 
1836 
1837 
1838 
1839 
1840 
1841 
1842 
1843 
1844 
1845 
1846 
1847 
1848 
1849 


Quantity  of 
Sugar  retained 

for 
Consumption. 


Cwts. 
4,147,350 
4,233,509 
3,974,627 
3,780,138 
4,013,919 
4,116,153 
3,676,496 
4,127,446 
4,089,453 
3,847,629 
3,606,038 
4,057,628 
3,868,466 
4,028,307 
4,129,443 
4,856,604 
5,238,656 
5,805,638 
6,188,487 
5,982.593 


Molasses 
equivalent 
to  Su^'ar 
taken  for 
Consump- 
tion. 


Cwts. 
126,595 
130,734 
212,508 
241,457 
190,492 
233,429 
246,405 
222,tX>7 
197,329 
199,987 
158,672 
150,696 
199,865 
168,558 
230,030 
234,700 
218,498 
239,483 
238,747 
304.624 


and  Molasses 

retained 

for 

Consumption. 


Average 
Price,        I 
per  London 
Gazette.     '' 


Cwts. 
4,273,945 
4,364,243 
4,187,135 
4,021,595 
4,204,411 
4,349,582 
3, 922, ',01 
4,349,453 
4,286,782 
4,047,616 
3,764,710 
4,208,324 
4,068,3^31 
4,196,865 
4,359,473 
5,091,304 
5,457,154 
6,045,121 
6,427,234 
6,287.217 


t.  d. 

25  Q^ 

23  8 

28  81- 


29 


29  2i 

33  qI 
40  9 

34  5 
a3  7 
39  4i 
48  7| 
38  3L 
37  4 
33  lU 

33  5' 
32  9 

34  5 
28  3 
23  9i 
26  4 


A  verage 

Average 

I'rice, 

Consump- 

incliKling 

tion  or 

the 

each 

Duty. 

Person. 

s.      d. 

lbs. 

49     OJ- 

19-94 

47     8 

20-11 

52  8>- 

53  7i 
53     2l 
57     9| 

19-00 

17-99 

18-31 

19-21 

64    9 

16-58 

58     5 

18-83 

57     7 

18-38 

63     4.i 

17-18 

73  1(^ 
63     5| 

15-28 

17-65 

62     5 

16-76 

59     2 

17-11 

58     7i 

17-59 

46     9 

20-33 

48     5 

21-57 

42     3 

23-64 

36       9:^ 

24-88 

38     4 

24-12 

great,  of  almost  universal,  excitement  throughout  the  kingdom.  Never 
before,  perhaps,  was  there  an  equal  number  of  public  works  in  operation. 
Every  man  who  was  able  and  willing  to  work  readily  obtained  emj)loy- 
ment  at  full  wages.  Every  loom  was  filled,  every  anvil  was  at  work, 
and,  to  crown  the  advantages  thus  enjoyed  by  our  labouring  population, 
the  chief  necessaries  of  life  were  procurable  at  prices  lower  than  had 
been  previously  known  by  the  existing  generation.  Under  these  circum- 
stances, it  cannot  be  matter  for  surprise  that  the  people  should  have 
expended  a  little  more  than  usual  of  their  earnings  upon  an  article  of 
consumption  so  universally  desired  as  sugar.  But  even  under  these  cir- 
cumstances of  comparative  ease,  the  average  consumption  of  1835  did  not 
attain  the  rate  which  it  reached  in  1830  or  in  1831,  when  the  market 
price  was  from  8.v.  to  10^.  per  cwt.  lower,  but  when  the  condition  of  the 
labouring  population  was  not  in  other  respects  so  prosperous  as  in  1835. 
It  will  be  observed  that  the  year  1845  is  marked  by  a  larger  consump- 
tion than  occurred  in  the  year  1831,  although  the  market  price,  exclu- 
sive of  duty,  wvis  higher  by  'i)s.  Id.  per  cwt.,  or  nearly  Id.  per  pound.  This 
result  was  obtained  through  an  abatement  in  the  duty,  which  took  effect 
only  from  the  14th  of  March,  1845,  exceeding  in  a  small  degree  that 
difference  in  price.  The  market-price  of  1831,  added  to  the  duty  then 
chargeable,  amounted  to  47s.  Sd.  per  cwt.,  while  the  cost  and  reduced 
duty  of  14*-.  per  cwt.,  in  1845,  amounted  together  to  46^.  dd.  The  expe- 
rience of  that  and  the  following  years  under  these  altered  circumstances 
comes  therefore  strongly  in  corroboration  of  the  fact  shown  by  previous 
computations.     If  we  estimate  the  consumption  for  the  year  ending  the 


5  1 1  PROGRESS  OF  THE  NATIOX,  [sec.  v. 

5th  of  April,  1846,  and  consequently  for  twelve  months  during  which 
the  reduced  duty  was  charged,  it  appears  that  the  average  quantity 
per  head  consumed  by  each  individual  of  the  population  was  21 'IB  lbs. 
Concurrently  with  the  reduction  in  the  rate  of  duty  chargeable  on 
sugar  the  produce  of  British  possessions,  a  reduction  was  also  made  in 
the  duty  upon  foreign  sugar,  the  product  of  free  labour,  from  63s.  and 
5  per  cent,  thereon  per  cwt.,  to  23s.  Ad.  per  cwt.  But  for  some  such 
modification  no  advantage  to  the  consumer  could  have  followed  any 
abatement  in  the  duty,  for  the  difference  would  have  been  simply  trans- 
ferred from  the  public  Exchequer  to  the  producers  of  British-grown 
sugar,  the  quantity  of  which  was  already  too  small  for  the  wants  of  the 
public.  The  limitation  of  this  change  in  the  manner  described  could 
not  be  justified  upon  any  correct  principle,  nor  was  it  probable  that  it 
could  be  long  maintained.  The  admission  of  all  foreign  sugar  at  the 
lessened  rate  of  duty  last  mentioned,  and  which  took  place  in  1846, 
caused  a  further  consumption,  and  consequently  an  increased  revenue, 
but  neither  the  sugar  trade  nor  any  other  trade  will  ever  be  placed  upon 
a  proper  footing  so  long  as  any  differential  duty  shall  continue  to 
deform  the  tariff.*  We  have  seen,  that  when  the  duty  charged  was  20.?. 
per  cwt.,  and  when  the  market  afforded  a  superabundant  supply  'admis- 
sible at  that  rate,  the  consmnption  of  Great  Britain  exceeded  30  lbs. 
per  head  in  the  year,  and  no  sufficient  reason  presents  itself  for  assuming 
that,  under  similar  conditions,  the  consumption  of  the  United  Kingdom 
would  exhibit  a  lower  average.  If  this  view  should  prove  correct,  the 
revenue  derived  from  sugar  at  20s.  per  cwt.  would  now  amount  to 
7,500,000/.  per  annum,  instead  of  3,574,4697.  as  in  the  year  1845. 

The  quantities  stated  in  the  foregoing  table,  as  the  yearly  consump- 
tion of  each  individual,  are  average  quantities,  calculated  on  the 
assumption  that  the  rich  and  the  poor,  the  nobleman  and  the  beggar, 
fare  alike  in  their  use  of  this  condiment.  It  would  be  difficult  to  dis- 
cover with  accuracy  the  consumption  of  the  various  ranks  into  which 
the  community  is  divided.  There  are  of  course  many  whose  use  of 
sugar  is  not  governed  by  its  market  price,  so  far  at  least  as  any  fluctu- 
ations that  we  have  experienced  would  be  likely  to  affect  them.  The 
outlay  for  this  article  forms  so  small  a  part  of  the  household  expenses 
of  the  easy  classes,  that  whether  the  price  should  be  sixpence  or  a 
shilling  per  pound  might  have  no  influence  in  increasing  or  diminishing 
its  use.  The  decrease  or  increase  of  the  quantity  consumed  throughout 
the  country  is  therefore  evidence  of  a  very  great  degree  of  fluctuation 
in  its  use  by  all  other  classes.  From  inquiries  carefully  made,  it  ap- 
pears probable  that  in  the  families  of  the  rich  and  middle  ranks  the 
individual  yearly  consumption  of  sugar  for  all  purposes  is  40  lbs. ;  if 

*  All  differential  duties  on  sugar  will  cease  on  the  5th  of  July,  1854. 


CHAP.    lY.] 


SUGAR. 


.045 


then  we  assume  that  one-fifth  of  the  families  in  the  kingdom  are  so  cir- 
cumstanced as  not  to  vary  their  mode  of  living  with  every  fluctuation 
in  the  market  prices  of  provisions,  we  shall  find  that  in  1831  the  average 
consumption  per  head  of  the  remaining  four-fifths  was  15  lbs.  2  ozs. 
In  1840  the  average  consunijjtion  was  15i  lbs.,  or  76^  lbs.  for  five 
persons,  one  of  which  taking  the  constant  quantity  of  40  lbs.  left  for 
each  of  the  remaining  four  only  9  lbs.  1  oz.  Applying  the  same  cal- 
culation to  the  consumption  of  1849,  it  will  be  seen  that  each  of  the  four 
would  consume  20  lbs.  2  oz.  Every  person  serving  on  board  one  of  Her 
Majesty's  ships  is  allowed  li  oz.  of  sugar  per  diem,  or  34  lbs.  3  oz. 
yearly  ;  and  the  allowance  given  to  aged  paupers  in  the  Union-houses  is 
1  oz.  j)er  diem,  or  22f  lbs.  per  annum. 

The  year  1840  exhibits  the  highest  average  price  and  the  lowest 
average  consumption.  The  effect  of  price  in  producing  this  result  will 
be  rendered  more  strikingly  apparent  by  comparing  somewhat  more  in 
detail  the  consumption  of  the  two  years  1839  and  1840.  The  deliveries 
of  sugar  from  the  warehouses,  and  the  average  prices  in  each  month  of 
those  two  years,  were  as  follows : — 


1839 


January 
February    . 
March   . 
April     . 
May       .      , 
June 

July       .     . 
August . 
September. 
October 
November. 
December  . 


Quantity.      Average  Price. 


Cwts. 
283,'.).'36 
281,828 
288,156 
2.31,723 
371.676 
332,045 
400,834 
411,071 
3.53,111 
275,662 
341,153 
286,462 


.?.  d. 

37  4-L 

36  ll{ 

40  4 

39  4 
42  9 

41  61 

40  1 

40  in 

40  2{ 

37  1 

38  4 
37  7f 


1S40 


Quantity.     Average  Price. 


Cwts. 
403,600 
337,141 
2.37,612 
316,440 
3.')4,329 
401,797 
3 12,. 526 
300,264 
321 , 1,37 
2.38,509 
200,334 
183,056 


j.  d. 

.37  10 

39  3.i 

40  3" 
42  9 
46  2h 

50  U" 

57  0| 

58  1 
57  10 
.57  7?- 
56  Oi 

51  8i 


The  great  advance  in  price  was  not  experienced  until  the  month  of 
July,  1840  ;  and  if  we  contrast  the  deliveries  from  the  warehouses  and 
the  average  prices  of  the  two  half-yearly  periods  of  1839  and  1840,  the 
following  is  the  result : — 


January  to  June 
July  to  December 


1S39 


Quantity.        Average  Price. 


Cwts.  I         s.      d. 

1,789,384  39     8f 

2,068,233  39     oi 


1840 


Quantity.         Average  Price, 


Cwts. 
2,0.59,919 
1,555,826 


s.     d. 
42  lOi- 
56     44 


An  advance  in  price  not  quite  equal   to  2d.  per  pound  thus  caused  a 
diminished  consumption  of  25,600  tons  in  six  months;  and  if  the  cal- 


5^6  PROGRESS  OF  THE  NATION.  [sec.  v, 

culation  of  the  average  consumption  be  made  for  the  half-year  in  which 
that  diminution  was  experienced,  it  will  be  found  that  it  was  at  the 
rate  of  only  12 ^  lbs,  per  annum  for  each  individual,  or  40  lbs.  per  head 
for  those  in  easy  circumstances,  and  only  6  lbs.  per  head  for  all  other 
classes. 

This  result  occurred  under  our  strictest  protective  system,  and  was 
occasioned  by  short  production  in  the  \\'est  India  colonies.  The  im- 
portations thence,  which  in  1831  amounted  to  200,000  tons,  did  not 
in  1840  exceed  110,000  tons;  and  although  during  the  interval,  by  a 
partial  reform  in  our  tarilf,  which  now  admits  sugar,  the  produce  of 
Bengal,  at  the  same  rate  of  duty  as  West  India  sugar,  we  thence  re- 
ceived an  additional  supply  equal  to  12,500  tons,  yet  the  importations 
of  sugar  in  1840  fell  short  even  of  the  greatly -diminished  consumption 
by  22,000  tons. 

If  this  state  of  the  trade  could  have  been  viewed  as  likely  to  continue, 
it  is  clear  that  the  wants  of  the  consumers  and  the  deficiency  in  the 
revenue  together  would  sooner  have  compelled  the  Government  to  re- 
model the  system  of  sugar  duties,  so  as  to  let  in  for  consumption  a 
sufficient  quantity  of  foreign  sugar.  If  the  approach  to  a  right  system — 
made  when  the  produce  of  Bengal  was  admitted  at  the  British  plantation 
duty — had  been  delayed  for  only  a  few  years  longer,  so  that  we  had  not 
received  increased  supplies  from  that  quarter,  it  is  evident  that  some 
such  measure  of  relaxation  must  have  been  adopted  in  1840.  When- 
ever it  might  be  introduced,  such  a  step  was  certain  to  be  strongly 
opposed  by  our  West  India  sugar-planters,  and  by  many  other  persons 
also,  who,  without  much  consideration,  have  chosen  to  identify  a  high 
price  of  sugar  with  the  happiness  of  the  lately-emancipated  slave  popu- 
lation of  our  West  India  colonies.  They  are  of  opinion  that  the  pro- 
tection afforded  to  these  colonies  involves  a  great  moral  question — that 
its  maintenance  is  to  the  people  of  England  a  great  moral  duty — that 
the  success  of  the  measure  of  emancipation  ought  never  to  be  jeopardized 
for  any  money  consideration — that  we  have  purchased  the  freedom  of 
the  cultivators  of  sugar  at  the  cost  of  twenty  millions  of  money  ;  and 
that  having  thus  converted  them  from  slaves,  in  which  condition  their 
owners  were  bound  to  supply  their  wants,  into  freemen  who  must  toil 
for  their  own  support,  it  would  be  cruel  to  place  them,  in  the  outset  of 
their  career  of  responsibility,  in  a  worse  position  than  that  which  they 
legally  occupied  at  the  moment  before  you  gave  them  freedom.  The 
argument  is  specious,  but  a  slight  examination  of  facts  will  serve  to 
convince  us  that  it  is  without  any  solid  foundation. 

In  what  respect,  it  may  be  asked,  is  the  freed  negro  placed  in  a 
worse  position  than  that  which  he  occupied  during  his  period  of  slavery? 
If  there  had  been  a  redundancy  of  labourers  for  whom  the  planter  was 
bound  to  provide,  irrespective  of  the  value  of  their  labour,  then  indeed 


CHAF.  IV.]  SUGAR.  547 

their  emancipation,  which  would  also  have  been  the  emancipation  of 
their  former  owners,  might  have  been  accompanied  by  the  evil  of  com- 
parative destitution.  But  the  reverse  of  this  position  is  notoriously  the 
fact,  and  it  is  because  of  the  insufficiency  of  labourers  and  the  high 
wages  which  they  are  consequently  .'djle  to  coiinnand,  that  the  planters 
have  been  so  loud  in  their  complaints,  for — hitherto  at  least — it  is  the 
planters  only  who  complain,  while  the  labourers  are  represented  as 
living  in  comparative  luxury.  Now,  as  well  as  before  the  emancipation, 
the  only  fund  from  which  the  negroes  must  be  supported  is  the  produce 
of  their  labour,  and  they  must  consequently  be  equally  well  off — plus 
their  liberty — as  they  were  before  their  freedom  was  granted.  When 
Parliament  so  munificently  voted,  and  the  nation  so  willingly  gave, 
twenty  millions  of  money  to  bring  about  this  blessed  change  in  their 
conditiun,  it  was  not  proposed  to  give  to  these  our  fellow-citizens  greater 
privileges  and  immunities  than  are  enjoyed  by  other  free  labourers  ;  but 
to  argue  that  a  higher  price  is  needed  for  the  products  of  their  labour 
than  the  price  at  which  the  same  products  are  yielded  elsewhere  and  by 
others,  is  to  affirm  that  something  more  than  freedom  was  designed  for 
them  by  the  generosity  of  the  nation. 

The  cost  to  the  people  of  this  country  of  the  diffi^-rential  duty  on 
sugar,  imposed  for  the  benefit  of  the  English  sugar  colonies,  had  become 
extremely  burthensome.  The  cost,  exclusive  of  duty,  of  3,764,710 
cwts.  retained  for  consumption  in  1840  was  9,156,872/.,  if  calculated  at 
the  Gazette  average  prices.  The  cost  of  a  like  quantity  of  l^razil  or 
Havana  sugar  of  equal  quality  would  have  been  4,141,181/.,  and  con- 
sequently we  paid  in  one  year  5,015,691/.  more  than  the  price  which 
the  inhabitants  of  other  countries  in  Europe  would  have  paid  for  an 
equal  quantity  of  sugar.  This,  how^ever,  is  an  extreme  view^  of  the  case. 
If  our  markets  had  been  open  at  one  rate  of  duty  to  the  sugar  of  all 
countries,  the  price  of  foreign  sugar  would  have  been  somewhat  raised, 
while  that  from  British  possessions  would  have  been  lowered,  but  it  may 
be  confidently  said  that  even  in  that  case  the  saving  would  have  been 
more  than  four  millions  of  money. 

Again,  if  the  public  had  thus  been  able  to  buy  sugar  at  about  the 
average  price  of  the  year  1 831,  we  may  fairly  assume  that  the  average 
consumption  per  head  would  have  been  as  great  in  1840  as  it  was  in 
1831,  and  in  this  case  the  revenue  upon  this  article  would  have  exceeded 
the  sum  received  by  more  than  1. 500,000/. 

The  differential  duty  on  foreign  sugar  in  favour  of  our  own  sugar 
colonies  was  most  extravagantly  great,  and  was  meant  to  act  as  a  prohi- 
bition against  its  consumption.  The  difference  was  49a-.  per  cwt.,  or 
b\d.  per  lb.  When  the  supplies  of  sugar  from  our  own  colonies  ex- 
ceeded the  home  demand,  this  protection  w^as  of  no  practical  elFect,  but 
for  many  years   it   operated  to  raise  the  price   of  British  plantation 

2  N  2 


518 


PROGRESS  OF  THE  NATION. 


[sec.  t. 


sugar,  and  thereby,  as  we  have  seen,  to  lessen  the  consumption.  It  was 
desirable  as  soon  as  possible  to  abolish  this  differential  duty  altogether, 
and  under  the  existing  law  this  result  will  be  reached  by  progressive 
stages  on  the  5th  July,  1854.  If  an  approach  to  such  a  result  had 
been  made  in  1837,  the  first  of  a  series  of  years  in  which  the  public 
revenue  proved  unequal  to  meet  the  yearly  expenditure,  the  effect  upon 
our  finances  would  have  been  most  beneficial.  Let  us  suppose  that 
while  the  rate  upon  British  plantation  sugar  continued  at  24.«;.  per  cwt , 
and  5  per  cent,  thereon,  the  produce  of  foreign  plantations  had  been 
admitted  at  30^.  per  cwt.  and  5  ])er  cent.,  the  result  to  the  revenue  in 
the  four  years,  1837  to  1840,  would  probably  have  been  as  follows: — 


is:5r 


1838 


1S39 


Consumption  at  the  same  average  rate  ]  :    .  _._ 
as  1831,  viz.,  20-11  lbs.  per  head   .      ,(*  ■*,''>> 

Quantity  imported  from  British  posses- 1 
sions .1 


Difference  required  to  be  supplied  byj 
foreign  sugar,  at  30s.  per  cwt.  and> 
5  per  cent ' 

Revenue  that  would  have  been  collected ^ 
if  all  the  British  plantation  sugar  im- 
ported had  been  consumed,  and  the  \ 
deficiency  supplied  by  foreign  sugar,  I 
at  the  rate  of  30s.  per  cwt.        .      .      .  j 

Revenue  actually  received       .... 

Difference  between  the  revenue  received ) 
and  that  which  would  have  been  col-  .- 
lected    ' 

Deficiency  of  the  public  income  to  defray  ) 
the  expenditure f 


Cwts. 

Cwts. 

4,757,151 

4,822,617 

4,147,177 

4,600,793 

609,974 

221,824 

£. 

£. 

5,891,573 

5,853,687 

5,026,878 

4, 893,. 580 

864,695 

960, 107 

655.760 

345,228 

Cwts.  Cwts. 

4,888,082  1  4,953,. 546 

4,029,955  I  3,151,991 
I 
858,127  !  1,801,5.55 


6,123,136 


£. 
6,808,958 


4,827,017  '  4,664,233 
1,296,119     2,144,725 

1,512,792  I  1,593.970 


It  appears  from  this  statement  that  if  the  deficient  supply  of  British 
plantation  sugar,  during  the  four  years  fi'om  1837  to  1840,  could  have 
been  made  good  from  sugar  of  foreign  growth  at  the  rate  of  30^.  per 
cwt.,  not  only  should  we  have  avoided  all  the  evils  attendant  upon  a 
deficient  revenue,  but  we  should  have  had  a  sm-plus  of  1,157,89G/.  to 
apply  towards  the  reduction  of  the  National  Debt.  The  difference  in 
the  four  years  to  the  public  income  would  altogether  have  exceeded 
five  millions  of  money. 

Coffee. — The  facts  exhibited  by  the  history  of  the  home  or  consump- 
tion trade  in  this  article  are  pregnant  with  lessons  of  great  value  as 
recfards  taxation.  There  are  but  few  articles  fitted  for  general  use 
wliich  have  been  subjected  in  an  equal  degree  to  alternations  of  high 
and  low  duties,  and  with  respect  to  which  we  are  consequently  enabled 
with  equal  certainty  to  trace  the  effects  of  taxation  in  contracting  or 
enlarging  the  enjoyments  of  the  people,  or  ttf  mark  the  comparative 
advantage  thus  produced  to  the  Exchequer. 

The  quantities  of  coffee  consumed  in   Great  Britain  in  each  of  the 


COFFEE. 


519 


five  yeai's  of  the  Census,  comparing  tlic  consumption  with  the  growth  of 
tlie  ])0])uhiti();i,  and  exhibiting  the  influence  of  high  and  low  duties,  arc 
-hown  by  the  fullowins  statement:  — 


Kate  of  Outy 

1         Sum         1 

Number  of 

per  Pound  on 

Population 

Average 
Consumption. 

Contributed 

Years. 

Pounds 

British 

of 

per  Head 
to  the 

consumed. 

Plantation 

Great  Britain. 

Coffee. 

Revenue. 

Uw. 

s.     d. 

lb.       07S.. 

d. 

1801 

750,861 

1      6 

10,942,646 

0     1-09 

1* 

1811 

6,  .3^0,122 

0     7 

12,596,803 

0     8-12 

1821 

7,327,283 

1      0 

14,391,631 

0     8-01 

6 

1831 

21.842,264 

0     6 

16,262.301 

1     5-49 

8 

1841 

27 , 2',)8 ,  322 

0    6 

18, 532;. 335 

1     7-55 

lOi 

It  appears  from  the  above  statement,  that  when  the  duty  amounted  to 
1a-.  6c/.  per  lb.,  the  use  of  coffee  was  confined  altogether  to  the  rich. 
The  quantity  used  throughout  the  kingdom  scarcely  exceeded,  on  the 
average,  1  0/.  for  each  inhabitant  in  the  year,  and  the  revenue  derived 
was  altogether  insignificant.  In  the  interval  between  1801  and  1811 
rlio  rate  of  duty  was  reduced  from  Is.  Qd.  to  7d.  per  lb.,  whereupon  the 
consumption  rose  750  per  cent.,  and  the  revenue  derived  was  increased 
more  than  threefold.  During  the  next  decennary  period  the  duty  was 
again  advanced  to  Is.  per  lb.,  by  which  means  the  progressive  increase 
was  checked  so  a^  to  render  the  consumption  actually  less  in  1821, 
taking  the  increased  population  into  account,  than  it  was  in  1811.  In 
1825  the  duty  was  again  reduced  to  one-half  the  previous  rate,  and  we 
see  that  in  1831  the  consumption  was  consequently  increased  14^ 
millions  of  lbs.,  or  nearly  200  per  cent.,  the  average  consumption  of  each 
individual  being  raised  from  8  to  21  ozs.  per  annum,  while  the  revenue 
was  increased  by  100,000/.  The  duty  on  coffee,  the  growth  of  the 
British  plantations  in  America,  was  continued  at  the  same  rate  until 
1842  ;  but  as  the  consumption,  after  the  reduction  of  duty  in  1825, 
speedily  overtook  the  power  of  production  in  those  plantations,  the 
quantity  used  was  necessarily  limited,  vmtil  the  market  price  should  be 
raised  so  high  as  to  admit  the  produce  of  British  India,  upon  which  a 
duty  of  9</.  per  lb.  was  chargeable.  This  in  effect  soon  occurred.  In 
1835  the  importations  from  the  British  West  Indies  were  less  tjifui 
15  millions  of  lbs.,  and  the  state  of  the  market  made  it  advisable  for  tiie 
dealer  to  pay  the  additional  duty  of  28^.  per  cwt.  upon  East  India 
coffee,  of  which  5,51)6,791  lbs.  were  thus  brought  into  consumption  in 
that  year,  but  without  augmenting  the  aggregate  quantity  used.  It 
being  thus  evident  that  the  supply  from  our  western  colonies  was 
incommensurate  with  the  wants  of  the  country,  and  that  even  the 
stimulus  of  a  high  monopoly  price  was  ineffectual  for  its  increase,  the 
tariff  was  moditied  at  the  end  of  1835  so  as  to  admit  coffee,  the  growth 
of  the  British  possessions  in  India,  at  the  low  duty  of  6r/.  per  lb.     Uptdi 


550  PROGRESS  OF  THE  NATIOX.  [sec.  v. 

this  the  consumption,  which  had  been  stationary  for  the  five  preceding 
years,  again  suddenly  started  forward,  to  be  again  checked  by  the 
inadequacy  of  even  the  enhu-ged  su])ply,  and  the  price  was,  by  this 
virtual  monopoly,  sustained  so  high  that  it  became  worth  the  while  of 
merchants  to  send  coffee,  the  growth  of  foreign  plantations,  and  which 
was  liable  to  pay  a  consumption  duty  of  Is.  3d.  per  lb.,  to  the  Cape  of 
Good  Hope  for  re?hipraent  to  this  country,  by  which  expensive  ceremony 
it  became  entitled  to  admission  at  the  modified  rate  of  9^?  per  lb.,  or 
28s.  per  cwt.  beyond  that  exacted  on  coffee  the  growth  of  British  pos- 
sessions, the  difference  in  the  market  price  being  more  than  equal  to 
this,  in  addition  to  all  the  charges  of  the  outward  and  homeward 
voyages.  The  injurious  effect  of  this  state  of  things  to  the  revenue,  and 
its  hardship  upon  the  consumer,  were  at  length  met  by  a  modificati(m  of 
the  duties,  which  afforded  temporary  relief,  but  which  still  left  an 
advantage  to  the  British  coffee-planter  over  the  foreign  producer  of 
Sis.  4d.  per  cwt. 

In  1842  the  duty  upon  British  plantation  coffee  was  reduced  to  4/7. 
and  upon  all  foreign  coffee  to  Sd.  per  lb.,  and  in  1844  this  latter  rate 
was  further  reduced  to  Qd.  per  lb.  The  quantity  consumed  in  each  year 
since  1841  has  been  — 

Years,  lbs. 

1846  36,754,5.54 

1847  37,441,.S73 


Years. 

lbs. 

1842 

28,519,646 

1843 

29,979,404 

1844 

31,332,.3S2 

1845 

34,293,190 

1848  37,07  7,.546 

1849  34,339,374 

It  could  not  fail  to  produce  a  powerful  effect  upon  commercial  legis- 
lation if  we  could  always  count  the  cost  of  interferences  with  the  natural 
course  of  trade.  If  it  could  be  shown  how  great  is  the  waste  of  property 
that  at  all  times  accompanies  attempts  to  favour  some  at  the  expense  of 
the  rest,  it  may  be  presumed  that  Government  would  hesitate  before 
they  entered  upon  so  hurtful  a  course.  The  following  estimate  exhibits 
an  amount  of  capital  thrown  away  as  effectually  as  if  it  had  been  cast 
into  the  sea,  in  order  to  take  advantage  of  the  privilege  of  bringing  into 
consumption,  at  the  duty  of  dd.  per  lb.,  coffee  that  was  otherwise  liable 
to  pay  Is.  Sd.  per  lb. 

Freight,  insurance,  landing,  and  shipping  charges  on 

£.    s.  d.  £. 

7,080  tons  shipped  from  Europe     .      .      .     at  10    6  8  per  ton,  73,160 

.5,060    „              „              West  Indies   .      .      -     4  17  0        „  24,540 

5,680    „              ,,              Brazil  ....      -     4  10  0        „  25,560 

2,0.30    „              ,,              Java     ....      -     2    0  0        „  4,060 

To  which  must  be  added  for  interest,  loss  of  weight,  and  deterioration 

of  quality,  including  risk  of  sea  damage,  on 

£.  s.   d.  £. 

7,080  tons  shipped  from  Europe     .      .     .      .  at   JJ    5    0  per  ton,     23,010 

10,740    „  „  West  Indies  and  Brazil,   -     2  10    0        „  26,850 

£177,180 


AP.  IT.]  COFFEE.  551 

In  estimating  the  cost  to  the  consumer  of  this  roundabout  operation, 
'  will  be  correct  to  assume  that  the  enhancement  of  price  upon  the 
iiole  quantity  used  is  governed  by  the  highest. rate  of  expense  to 
wiiich  any  part  is  subject,  since  it  is  evident  that  if  the  voyage  from 
lau"ope  were  not  undertaken,  the  coffee  might  be  as  advantageously 
M>lil  at  an  equivalent  reduction  in  price,  and  this  reduced  price  would 
(It'terniine  that  of  the  whole,  because  there  cannot  be  in  any  market 
two  prices  at  the  same  time  for  the  same  article.  It  appears,  therefore, 
that  the  price  of  all  the  coffee  used  in  this  country  in  1840  was  increased 
to  the  consumer  by  285.  per  cwt. — the  diff*erence  of  duty,  in  addition  to 
ISs.  Id.  per  cwt ,  the  expense  of  sending  coffee  from  Europe  to  the  Cape  of 
Good  IIoj)e  and  back.  This  increased  price  on  28,723,735  lbs.  amounted 
to  533,227/.,  bvit  the  higher  duty  was  received  on  14,228,404  lbs.,  givhig 
an  advantage  to  tlio  Exchequer  of  only  192,416/.  If  the  difference 
between  these  amounts  were  added  to  the  revenue  derived  from  coffee, 
it  would  make  the  rate  of  duty  equal  to  lO^c?.  per  lb.  upon  the  whole 
quantity  consumed,  and  it  is  clear  that  had  the  consumers  been  allowed 
to  pay  that  rate  of  duty  u])on  every  kind  of  coffee  that  comes  to  market, 
the  effect  to  them  woukl  have  been  the  same,  whila  the  revenue  would 
have  benefited  to  the  amount  of  340,811/.  If  there  had  been  no  dif- 
ferential or  protective  duty,  but  all  kinds  of  coffee  had  been  admitted 
at  the  duty  charged  on  that  of  the  British  plantations,  the  public  would 
have  had  the  means  of  expending  additionally  on  the  article  the  above- 
mentioned  sum  of  533,227/.,  which  w^ould  have  purchased  very  nearly 
twelve  millions  of  pounds,  and  thus  have  added  40  per  cent,  to  the  con- 
sumption, and  nearly  100,000/.  to  the  revenue. 

These  calculations  can  hardly  fail  to  convince  every  one  of  the  great 
importance,  commercially,  of  equal  and  moderate  duties ;  but  in  the 
particular  case  of  coffee  there  is  another  and  even  a  stronger  argument 
in  favour  of  such  a  system  of  duties.  It  was  given  in  evidence  before 
the  Committee  on  Import  Duties,  which  sat  in  1840,  that  since  the 
duty  on  British  plantation  coffee  was  reduced  to  6f/.  per  lb.,  there  have 
been  a  vast  number  of  coffee-shops  opened  in  London,  at  which  working 
men  are  served  at  a  low  price  ;  that  some  of  these  places  are  frequented 
daily  by  many  hundred  persons  who  used  formerly  to  resort  for  refresh- 
ment to  public-houses  ;  that  this  beneficial  change  in  the  habits  of  work- 
ing men  has  been  entirely  owing  to  the  cheapness  of  the  refreshment 
obtained,  and  that  any  advance  in  the  price  which  should  remove  this 
advantage  of  comparative  cheapness  would  have  the  effect  of  sending  the 
present  customers  of  coffee-shops  back  to  the  use  of  intoxicating  liquors. 

Tea  — The  lessons  taught  by  the  facts  above  detailed,  with  regard  to 
the  consumption  of  coffee,  are  abundantly  confirmed  by  the  history  of 
our  tea-trade.     There  are  not  any  records  in  exit^tence  to  show  the  con- 


552  mOGRESS  OF  THE  NATION.  [sec.  v. 

sumption  of  this  article  in  Great  Britain  only.  Until  tlic  opening  of  the 
China  tea-trade  in  1833,  tea  could  not  be  legally  imported  except  into 
the  port  of  London,  where  alone  the  duty  was  received  upon  all  that 
was  consumed  throughout  the  United  Kingdon.  The  following  compa- 
rative statement  of  the  consumption  at  the  periods  selected  must  there- 
fore he  considered  to  apply  to  Ireland  as  well  as  to  Great  Britain  : — 

Number  of  Population  of         ,  I  Contributions 

Years.  Pounds  Rate  of  Duty.  United         ConsurTp^L..'      P^' "'^^'^ 

consumed.  Kingdom.        "  =•      F  to  Revenue. 


lbs. 

i 

lb. 

ozs. 

«. 

d. 

ISOl 

20,237,753 

f  20per  cent,  under  2.<.6</.  per  lb.  1 
and  50  per  cent,  above  .      .  J 

16,338,102 

3-75 

1 

9* 

isn 

:  20,702,809 

96  per  cent,  on  value    .      .      .    , 

18,. 547, 720 

1-10 

4 

01- 

1S21 

22,892,913 

(96  per  cent,  under  2,«.  per  lb. 
\     and  100  per  cent,  above      . : 

21,193.4.58 

0-52. 

3 

6 

1831 

29,997.101 

Same  as  in  1821       .... 

24,029,702 

3-93     ' 

2 

9 

1841 

36,675,667 

•2s.  \d.  per  lb 

26,711,694 

5-96     1 

2 

11 

The  difference  in  the  proportionate  consumption  at  the  above  periods 
is  small,  when  compared  with  the  fluctuations  experienced  with  other 
articles.  During  the  wliole  of  the  time  down  to  1833,  the  trade  was 
held  as  a  monopoly  "strictly  in  the  hands  of  the  East  India  Company, 
and  the  consumption  was  checked  not  only  by  the  high  duty  and  the 
enhancement  of  the  price  by  reason  of  the  monojioly,  but  also  by  the 
mode  of  taking  the  duty  according  to  the  sale  price,  and  by  which 
means  the  monopoly  was  made  to  work  the  twofold  injury  of  increasing 
both  the  price  and  the  rate  of  duty.  On  the  opening  of  the  trade  in 
1833  it  was  justly  anticipated  that  the  market  price  of  tea  would  fall, 
and  consequently  that  the  produce  of  an  ad  valorem  duty  would  fall 
likewise,  for  which  reason  the  ad  valorem  rate  was  changed  for  such  a  fixed 
duty  as,  calculating  from  the  consumption  of  previous  years,  would  yield  to 
the  Exchequer  an  amount  of  revenue  equal  to  that  received  in  those  years. 

The  consumption  of  this  class  of  articles  affords  a  very  useful  test  of 
the  comparative  condition,  at  different  periods,  of  the  labouring  classes. 
If  bv  reason  of  the  cheapness  of  provisions  the  wages  of  the  labourer 
afford  means  for  indulgence,  sugar,  tea,  and  coffee  are  the  articles  to 
which  he  earliest  has  recourse,  and  his  family  partake  in  the  sober 
gi-atification.  On  the  other  hand,  it  will  often  happen  that  where  the 
power  of  buying  these  things  is  not  enjoyed,  the  small  sum  that  can  still 
be  spared  after  the  purchase  of  his  loaf  is  bestowed  in  procuring  that 
stimulating  ch'aught  which  is  then  more  than  ever  desired,  and  the  man 
is  driven  from  his  cottage  to  the  public-house.  We  may  thus  reconcile 
the  apparent  anomaly  which  has  been  so  often  remarked,  that  the 
Excise  revenue  maintains  its  level  during  even  lengthened  periods  of 
distress.* 

♦  For  an  illustration  of  this  remark,  see  page  309. 


(M.w.  ivl  MAI.T.  553 

Tli('  liistory  of  the  tea-trade  affords  abundant  proof  of  the  effect  pro- 
duced on  consum])tioii  by  alterations  in  the  rate  of  duties.  In  1784  the 
(hity  was  Is.  per  pound,  and  67  per  cent,  on  the  vahie,  and  the  quantity 
consumed  was  no  more  than  4,948,983  lbs.  In  the  following  year  the 
rate  was  reduced  to  1 2^  per  cent,  on  the  value,  and  the  consumption 
rose  in  that  and  the  two  following  years  as  under : — 


Years, 

lbs. 

1785 

10,856,578 

1786 

12,359,380 

1787 

17,047,054 

Similar  effects  had  followed  reductions  in  the  duty  at  former  periods. 
In  1746  a  reduction  equal  to  about  2s.  per  pound  caused  an  increase  in 
the  quantity  to  more  than  three  times  that  on  which  duty  had  been  paid 
in  1745.  In  1768  an  abatement  of  1.9.  per  pound  on  black  tea  caused 
the  consumption  to  increase  immediately  80  per  cent.,  and  when  in 
1773  the  shilling  duty  was  reimposed,  the  consumption  fell  back  to  its 
former  scale. 

Now  that  our  commercial  relations  with  China  appear  to  be  placed 
upon  a  secure  footing,  if  a  bold  measure  of  reduction  in  the  duty  on  tea 
should  be  adopted,  can  it  be  doubted,  with  these  historical  facts  before 
us,  that  the  Exchequer  would  soon  find  an  advantage  from  it,  while  the 
trade  and  manufactures  of  the  country  would  be  ])roportionately  bene- 
fited, and  the  people  of  this  country,  the  working  classes,  would  have  the 
>um  of  their  rational  enjoyments  enlarged  ? 

The  consumption  of  tea  has  greatly  increased  since  1841,  and 
aitliough  no  abatement  has  been  made  in  the  rate  of  duty,  an  equal 
benefit  to  the  consumer  has  been  experienced,  through  a  reduction  in 
tlie  import  price.     The  quantities  have  been  : — 

Years.  lbs. 

1846  46,740,344 

1847  46,314,821 

1848  48,734,789 

1849  50,021,576 

Malt. — The  use  of  malt  in  this  crmntry  has  fallen  off  materially 
during  the  last  hundred  years,  when  compared  with  the  numbers  of  the 
people ;  but  it  would  not  be  correct  to  attribute  this  circumstance 
wholly  to  the  effect  of  taxation,  although  there  can  be  no  doubt  that 
the  consumption  has  been  materially  checked  by  the  duty  imposed. 
The  introduction  of  tea  and  coffee  into  extensive  use  throug:hf)Ut  the 
kingdom  n)ust  necessarily  have  interfered  with  the  consumption  of  beer, 
and  the  same  effect  must  have  followed  the  increased  use  of  spirits,  only 
a  small  proportion  of  which  is  distilled  from  malted  grain. 

The  consumption  of  malt  at  various  periods  of  the  present  century,  in 
the  dilfereut  divisions  of  the  kingdom,  has  been  as  follows  : — 


Years. 

lbs. 

1842 

37,35.5,911 

1843 

40,293,393 

1844 

41,36.3,770 

1845 

44,193,433 

554 


TROGRESS  OF  THE  NATIOX, 


[sec 


England 

AND 

"MN'ales. 


Scotland 


1801 
1811 
1S21 
1831 
1841 

1801 
1811 
1821 
1831 
1841 


1801 

il811 
I  1821 
1831 
1841 


United 
Kingdom. 


1801 
1811 
1821 
1831 

1838 
1840 
1841 


Number  of 

Rate  of 

Budiels 

^ut^ 

per 

Consumed. 

Bushel.    1 

Bushels. 

s. 

fi. 

18,005,786 

1 

t 

23,982,749 

4 

26,13^.437 

3 

7| 

32,963,470 

2 

7 

30,956,348 

2 

1 

607.384 

0 

s 

1,012,236 

3 

1,305,659 

3 

7t 

4,186,955 

2 

7 

4,058,246 

2 

7 

1,030,175 

1 

i 

2,681,842 

2 

1,949,315 

3 

2,101,844 

2 

t 

1,149,691 

2 

7 

Population. 


Aversge    Coutribution 
Consiimp-     per  Head 
I      lion.        toKevenuc. 


19,643,345 

29,676.827 
29,3.'3,411 
39,252.269 
40,505,.o66 
42,456.862 
36,164,285 


2  7 


9,343,578 
10,791,115 
12,238,175 
13,897,187 
15,911,725 

1,599,068 
1,805,688 
2,0:i3,456 
2,365,114 

2,628,957 

5,395,4.56 
5,950,917 
6,801,827 
7,767,401 
8,179,359 

16,338,101 
18,547,720 
21,193,458 
24.029,702 
23;907,0J6 
26,443,495 
26,711,694 


Bushels. 
1-92 
2-40 
2-12 
2-37 
1-94 

0-38 
0-56 
0-62 
1-77 
1-54 

0-19 
0-45 
0-28 


0-27     i 

0 

14 

20 

60 

38 

•63 

•36 

•60 

j 

•35  : 

2     11 

2  2i 
4    6} 

3  llj 

0  3V 

1  2" 
1  0 
0  8J 
0  4^ 

1  n 

6  10 

4  lU 
4    2 
4    0 

^     ^ 
3     3? 


It  has  been  already  mentioned,  tluit  at  different  periods  during  the 
last  century  the  consumption  of  malt  in  England  was  greater,  in  pro- 
portion to  the  population,  than  at  any  subsequent  time.  The  average 
consumption  of  each  individual  in  each  decennary  year,  from  1740  to 
1790,  was  as  follows  : — 


Years.      Bushels.  Rate  of  Duty.  I          Years. 

s.    d.  I 

1740        3^78        0     6if  per  bushel.  1770 

1750        4-85            „                „  1780 

1760        4-29        0    9i^        „  17^0 


Bushels.   Rate  of  Duty, 
s.     d. 
3-33        0    9},^  per  bushel. 
3-94         1     44  ' 


The  great  increase  of  consumption  during  the  last  fifteen  years  has 
been  occasioned  by  the  repeal  of  the  duty  on  beer,  which,  while  it 
existed,  was,  in  fact,  an  additional  duty  on  malt.  The  number  of 
bushels  used,  and  the  proportion  when  compared  with  the  population  in 
each  of  the  twenty-one  years  from  1829  to  1^49,  were  as  follows : — 


Years. 

1829 
1830 
1831 
18.32 
1833 
1834 
1835 
18.36 
1837 
1838 
1839 


Bushels 
used. 

29,153,177 
32,962,454 
39,252,269 
37,390,435 
40,075,895 
41,145,596 
42,892,054 
44,-387,719 
40,551,149 
40,505,566 
39,315,824 


Consumption 
per  Head. 
Bushels. 
1-22 
1-37 
1-63 
1-53 
1^63 
1-65 
1^70 
1-78 
1-59 
1-56 
1-48 


Consumption 

I  ears. 

B'lshels 

per  Head. 

used. 

Bushels. 

1840 

42,456,807 

\-m 

1841 

36,164,285 

1-35 

1842 

35.851,407 

1^31 

1843 

35,693,884 

P29 

1844 

37,187,178 

1-34 

1845 

36,546,038 

1^30 

1846 

42,037,085 

1-49 

1847 

35,.307,813 

1^24 

1848 

^37..546,1.57 

1-31 

1843 

38,935,460 

1^3i 

cn.vr.  IV  ] 


SPIRITS. 


5f)i 


Tlie  tax  on  malt  lias  always  been  unfavourably  viewed  by  tlic  aoricul- 
tural  interest,  under  the  eonunon  but  unaecountable  impression  that  the 
amount  is  paid  by  the  producers,  and  not,  as  it  in  fact  is,  by  the  con- 
sumers. Under  this  impression,  the  endeavour  to  cause  its  repeal  has 
at  times  been  strenuously  made,  and  it  is  probable  that  it  would  not 
always  have  been  made  in  vain,  could  any  sufficient  substitute  for  the 
revenue  have  been  found  that  would  not  have  been  even  more  dis- 
tasteful to  landlords. 

The  importation  of  malt  from  foreign  countries  is  strictly  prohibited  ; 
and  a?,  from  some  cause  or  other,  not  very  well  understood,  barley 
brought  from  beyond  seas  cannot  be  profitably  malted  here,  our  land- 
owners enjoy  the  practical  monopoly  of  the  home  market.  The  foreign- 
grown  barley  that  is  sometimes  imported  is  used  for  grinding  and  other 
purposes  for  whicii  inferior  qualities  are  adapted,  and  thereby  admits  of 
a  more  extensive  use  of  the  superior  home-grown  barley  in  the  form  of 
malt.  When  the  corn  trade  was  free,  and  the  duty  on  malt  was  more 
reasonable  that  it  has  been  of  late  years,  we  have  seen  that  the  barley 
districts  of  England  afforded  an  abundant  supply  of  a  quality  adapted 
to  the  use  of  the  maltster. 


Spirits. — Owing  to  the  high  price  of  corn  in  1801  and  1811,  Parlia- 
ment interfered  to  prevent  the  distillation  of  spirits  except  from  sugar 
and  molasses.  The  derangement  thus  occasioned  prevents  any  accurate 
calculation  of  consum])tion  in  those  particular  years  ;  the  years  next  in 
succession  are  accordingly  assumed  for  the  following  comparison,  and 
the  population  during  those  years  has  been  computed  accordingly  : — 


Ireland 


Years. 


Number 

of 
Gallons. 


England   . . 


Scotland  .  ^ 


1802 
1812 
1821 
1831 
183S 
1840 
1841 

1802 
1812 
1821 
1831 
1838 
1840 
1841 


n  1802 

j  1812 

I     1821 

^     1831 

183S 

1840 

1841 


iJalls. 
3,464,380 
3,622,970 
4,12.5,616 
7,434,047 
7,930,490 
8,278,148 
8,166,983 

1,1. '58,538 
1,. 58 1,524 
2,. 383, 495 
5,700,689 
6.259,711 
6,180,138 
5,989,903 

4.713,038 
4, 009, .301 
3,311,462 
8,710,672 
12,2)6.342 
7,401,031 
6,435,443 


Kate  of 
Duty  per 
Gallon.   I 


Population. 


Average   Contrihation  { 

Con-       I    per  Head    1 

'sumption,   te  Revenue,  i 


s.     d. 
5     4i 

10  3 

11  8.i 
7     6 
7     6 
7  10 

7  10 

3  lO.V 

8  0| 


2  10^ 
5     Ij 


7| 
4 

4 
8 


9,490,132 
10,941,821 
12,2J8,175 
13,8;)7,187 
13,307,364 
15,710,271 
15,.911,725 

1,619,730 
l,a34,465 
2,0.13,456 
2, .365, 114 
2,543.961 
2,. 593, 061 
2,620,610 

5,431.002 
6,036,008 
6,801,827 
7,767,401 
8,035,771 
8,138,163 
8,179,3.59 


Galls. 
0-36 
0-33 
0-33 
0-.53 
0-51 
0-52 
0-51 

0-71 
0-86 
1-14 
2-41 
2-46 
2-38 
2-28 

0-86 
0-66 
0-48 
111 

1-52 
0-90 
0-80 


s.    d. 

\  ^i* 
3     5 

3  10| 

3  111 

3  10 

4  OJ 
4  0 


9 
11 

i 


8    41 


5* 

8* 

7^ 

i 


556 


PROGRESS  OF  THE  NATION. 


[sec. 


United 
Kingdom. 


1802 
1812 
1821 
1831 
1838 
1840 
1841 


of 
(Jallons. 


Galls. 

9,338,036 

9,213,795 

9, 822,. ^73 

21,84.5,408 

26,486,543 

21,859,337 

20,642,333 


R.ito  of  I 
Puty  per  1 
Gallon. 


Population. 


Average    Contribution 

Con-  per  Head 

sumption.'  to  Kevenue. 


16,560,864 
18,812,294 
21,11)3,458 
24,024,702 
25, 90/, 096 
26,443,495 
26,711,694 


Galls. 
0-56 
0-49 
0-46 
0-90 
1-02 
0-82 
0-77 


<l. 
3 

lit 


2 

3 

2 

4 

4    2i 

3  111 

3    10;!^ 


The  falling  off  in  the  consumption  of  spirits  in  Ireland  in  the  years 
1840  and  1841  is  one  of  the  most  remarkable  events  of  our  day.  It 
resulted  entirely  from  the  efforts  of  one  man,  the  Rev.  Theobald  Mathew , 
a  Catholic  clergyman,  who  availed  himself  of  his  power  of  influencing 
his  fellow-men  to  produce  a  sudden  change  in  the  habits  of  vast  num- 
bers, reclaiming  them  from  the  vice  of  drunkenness  and  its  accompanying 
evils  to  an  extent  which  nothing  short  of  the  fact  itself  could  induce  us 
to  think  possible.  "  Father  Mathew,"  to  use  the  name  by  which  he  is 
generally  known,  aware  of  the  command  over  themselves  which  many  of 
his  countrymen  have  occasionally  exhibited  in  keeping  their  vows  to  ab- 
stain for  some  limited  time  from  the  use  of  intoxicating  liquors,  led  vast 
numbers  of  them  to  pledge  themselves  so  to  abstain,  not  indeed  for  all 
future  time,  but  until  they  should  formally  signify  to  him  their  intention 
of  recurring  to  the  use  of  whiskey.  Many  have  been  led  thus  to  take  iij) 
the  pledge  of  abstinence,  because  they  can  lay  it  down  again  at  pleasure  ; 
but  as  the  renunciation  must  be  a  deliberate  act,  which  can  hardly  ever 
be  performed  at  the  time  when  the  temptation  is  upon  them,  and  as  some 
degree  of  weakness  would  be  implied  in  that  renunciation,  the  chances 
are  great  that  it  will  be  postponed  from  time  to  time,  until  tlie  habit  of 
sobriety  and  the  sense  of  personal  respectability  and  domestic  comfort 
which  it  brings  shall  have  removed  all  desire  for  resuming  a  course  of 
intemperance.  If  the  change  thus  brought  about  shall  prove  in  any 
degree  permanent,  Father  Mathew  must  be  acknowledged  one  of  the 
greatest  benefactors  that  the  people  of  Ireland  have  ever  known.  The 
degree  in  which  his  influence  extended  is  apparent  fi'om  the  following 
figures,  showing  the  quantity  of  spirits  distilled  in  Ireland,  and  the 
revenue  collected  thereon,  in  each  of  the  five  years  from  1837  to 
1841 :— 


Years. 

Gallons. 

Duty. 

1837 

11,235,635 

£1,310,824 

1838 

12,206,342 

1,434,573 

1839 

10,815,70,1 

1,261,832 

1840 

7,401,051 

936,126 

1841 

6,485,443 

864,726 

The  consumption  of  colonial  and  foreign  spit-its  in  Scotland  and 
Ireland  h;is  at  all  times  been  small  in  comparison  with  the  use  of  those 
articles    in    England.     Of   late   year^  home-made  spirits  have  alnidst 


SPIRITS. 


557 


wholly  taken  the  place  of  rum  and  hraiuly  in  Scotland  and  Ireland.  Of 
2,277,970  gallons  of  rnm  and  1,186,104  gallons  of  foreign  spirits  on 
which  consumption  duty  was  paid  in  1841,  there  were  2. 217,073  gallons 
of  rum  and  1,127,849  gallons  of  brandy  and  Geneva  used  in  England. 

For  the  reason  already  assigned  in  noticing  the  consumption  of  British 
.-pirits,  the  years  1801  and  1811  would  not  afl'ord  means  for  correctly 
comparing  the  consumption  of  different  periods,  and  the  results  for  1 802 
and  1812  are  accordingly  substituted. — See  p.  558. 

The  consumption  of  home-distilled  spirits  in  each  division  of  the  king- 
dom since  1841,  has  been  as  follows:  — 


Years. 

England,      i 

Scotland. 

Ireland. 

Total. 

Galls.        \ 

Galls. 

Galls. 

Galls. 

1842 

7, 9.%, 054  ! 

5,595.186 

5,2'J0,6.50 

18,841,890 

1843 

7,724,051 

5,593,798 

5,-546,483 

18,864,332  i 

1844 

8,234,440  \ 

5,922,948 

6,451,137 

20, 608,. 525 

1845 

9,076,381  1 

6,441,011 

7,605,196 

23,122,-588 

1846 

9,179,530  ' 

6,975,091  1 

7,9.52,076 

24,106.697 

1847 

8,409,165 

6,193,249 

6,037,383 

20,63  >, 797 

1848 

8,613,256 

6,. 548, 190  1 

7,072,933 

22, 23 1,. 379 

1849 

9,102,472 

6,935,003 

6,973,333 

23,010,808 

The  diminished  consumption  of  foreign  spirits  observable  in  1812  was 
occasioned  by  the  war  at  that  time  carried  on  with  all  the  countries  of 
Europe,  and  which  for  some  time  wholly  shut  out  from  our  ports  the 
produce  of  France  and  Holland.  The  trade  has  since  been  resumed 
without  any  check  except  that  caused  by  high  duties,  and  this  it  will  be 
seen  has  eftectually  kept  down  the  consumption.  In  1802,  with  a  duty 
of  lis.  4jc?.  per  imperial  gallon,  the  average  consumption  of  each  person 
in  England  somewhat  exceeded  one-fifth  of  a  gallon;  while  in  1841, 
with  a  duty  of  22.s.  \0d.  per  gallon,  the  average  consumption  was 
scarcely  more  than  one-third  of  that  quantity.  This  high  duty  was  first 
imposed  during  the  war,  and  was  then  intended  to  act  as  a  prohibition.  It 
would  be  ditficult  to  assign  any  good  reason  for  its  continuance  during 
the  long  period  of  peace  that  we  have  since  enjoyed.  Under  the  plea 
of  protection  to  agriculture  our  legislature  has,  in  modern  times,  always 
given  an  advantage  in  this  respect  to  home-made  corn-spirits  ;  but  the 
unreasonableness  of  such  a  protection,  when  it  amounted,  as  in  this  case, 
to  three  times  the  duty  upon  the  home-made  produce,  is  such  that  it 
would  scarcely  have  been  practicable  to  impose  it  upon  such  a  plea, 
although  it  received  a  ready  and  general  acquiescence  when  adopted  as 
a  measure  of  annoyance  to  an  enemy.  There  can  be  no  doubt,  how- 
ever, that  it  is  this  motive  of  giving  a  preference  to  our  farmers  over  the 
wine-growers  of  France,  or,  to  speak  more  correctly,  against  all  other 
classes  of  our  countrymen,  which  prevented,  until  the  year  1846, 
the  introduction  of  any  modification  during  all  the  many  years  that 
have  pa.ssed   since   the  original  plea  has  ceased  to  operate.     The  evil 


55S 


PROGllESS  OF  THE  NATION. 


[sec. 


RUM. 


Years. 

Gallons. 

Rate 

of 

Duty  per 

Gallon. 

Population. 

.\verage 
Consump- 
tion. 

Contribution 
per  Head 

to  the 
Revenue. 

,v.     d. 

Galls. 

.s.     rl. 

1802 

2,204,8^7 

0     03 
13     7| 

9.490,132 

0-23 

■2      1 

1812 

3,205,465 

10,941.821 

0-29 

4     0 

1821 

2.166,441 

13   ll.i 

12,298,175 

0-17 

2     ^ 

England.    < 

1831 

3;479,911 

9     0' 

13,8)7,187 

0  25 

2     3 

1833 

3,029,495 

9     0 

15,307,864 

0-19 

1     8i 

1841 

2,217,073 

9     4 

15,911,725 

0-14 

1     3.^ 

1802 

468,163 

9     0| 

13     7- 

13    11; 

1,619,730 

0-29 

2     7k 

1812 

286,569 

1,834.465 

0-15 

2    Oj 

Scotland.  • 

1821 

133,189 

2,093,456 

0-06 

0  10 

1831 

125,702 

9    0' 

2,365,114 

0-05 

0     ah 

1833 

86,460 

9    0 

2,543,961 

0-03 

0    3t 

0  4 

1841 

48,523 

9     4 

2,620,610 

0-02 

1802 

637,005 

5     6i 
10    3.^ 

5,451,002 

0-12 

0    8 

1812 

283,135 

6.036,008 

0-04 

0     5 

Ireland.      < 

1821 

19,685 

12     9' 

6;  801, 827 

o-oa3 

0    Oi 
0    Of 

0   o| 

1831 

18,984 

8     6 

7,767,401 

0-002 

1838 

19,701 

9     0 

8,055,771 

0-002 

[ 

1841 

12,374 

9     4 

8,179,359 

0-0015 

0    ol 

:                   ( 

1802 

3,310.065 

.. 

16,560,864 

0-20 

1     8^ 

1 

1812 

3,775,169 

18,812,294 

0-20 

2    8 

United      I 

1821 

2,324,315 

21,193,458 

0-11 

1     6 

Kingdom. 

1831 

3,624.597 

, . 

24,029,702 

0-15 

1     4 

1838 

3,135,651 

25,907,036 

0-12 

1    OA 
0    9i 

1841 

2,277,970 

26,711,694 

0-09 

FOREIGN  SPIRITS. 


Engl.\n'd.    ' 


Ireland. 


United 
Kingdom. 


Rate 

Average 

Contribution 

Years. 

Gallons. 

of 
Duty  per 

Consump- 
tion 

per  Head 
to  the 

Gallon. 

per  Head. 

Revenue. 

s.     d. 

Galls. 

s. 

d. 

1802 

1,982,790 

11     4^ 
24    9f 
22    7| 

0-209 

2 

4| 

4| 

1812 

166,018 

0-015 

0 

1821 

969,474 

0-079 

1 

1831 

1,217,971 

22    6 

0-086 

1 

lit 

1338 

1,176,252 

22     6 

0-074 

1 

8 

1841 

1,127,849 

22  10 

0-071 

1 

7^ 

1802 

3.56,157 

11     4| 

0-219 

2 

6 

1812 

21,3)5 

24     9i 
22     7% 

0-012 

0 

i 

1821 

34,601 

0-016 

0 

1831 

39,744 

22     6 

0-017 

0 

,  1838 

38,084 

22    6 

0-014 

0 

1841 

40,291 

22  10 

0-015 

0 

5 

1802 

92,630 

8     6 

0-018 

0 

1 

1812 

8,280 

12     7h 

0-001 

0 

1821 

9,325 

17     3  J 

0-001 

0 

1831 

10,483 

22     6 

0-001 

0 

l>i3S 

18,238 

22     6 

0-002 

0 

1841 

17,964 

22  10 

0-002 

0 

o| 

1  1802 

2.431,577 

0-150 

1 

■1 

1812 

195,693 

0-010 

0 

1821 

1,013.400 

0-049 

0 

1831 

1.268. i;i8 

22     6 

0-05t) 

1 

1838 

1,232,574 

22    6 

0-045 

1 

»f 

1841 

1,186.104 

22  10 

0-044 

I 

0 

WINE. 


659 


has  bocn  partially  counteracted  through  the  agency  of  contraliand 
traders  ;  but  the  remedy  thus  applied  thould  be  consiilered  as  the  sub- 
stitution of  a  greater  evil,  and  one  for  which  the  legislature  may  be  held 
morally  responsible  because  of  the  temptation  which  it  offers  for  the 
( omiiiission  of  crime. 

The  I'evenue  derived  from  the  consumption  of  foreign  spirits  amounted 
in  1800  to  1,382,718/.,  when  the  rate  of  duty  was  lis.  Id.  per  imperial 
gallon.  In  1841,  with  that  rate  advanced  to  225.  lOd.  per  gallon,  the 
revenue  amounted  to  no  more  than  1,354,079/. ;  the  sum  which  it  should 
have  yielded,  according  to  the  increased  rate  and  the  additional  popula- 
tion, was  3,840,279/.,  being  2,465,767/.,  or  179  per  cent,  beyond  the 
amount  really  collected. 

The  duty  on  foreign  spirits  was  reduced  in  March,  1846,  from 
22s.  lOd.  to  155.  per  gallon.  The  effect  of  this  change  upon  consumption 
and  upon  the  revenue  will  appear  from  the  following  figures  : — 


Years. 

1842 
18  W 

1845 


Gallons 
Consumed. 
1,097.41)8 
1,052,21)0 
1,037,937 
1,073,778 


Revenue, 
if. 

Years. 

Gallons 
Consumed. 

Revenue. 
£. 

1,252,467 

1846 

1,554,34S 

1,195,439 

1,201,3.39 

1847 

1,566.038 

1,174,365 

1,184,798 

1848 

1,6.32,743 

1,224,552 

1,225,809 

1849 

2,214,275 

1,659,659 

The  calculations  which  have  been  liere  made  concerning  the  consump- 
tion of  ardent  spirits  in  this  kingdom,  so  far  as  it  can  be  shown  by  the 
revenue  accounts,  will  afford  but  little  satisfaction  to  many  persons  who 
see  an  intimate  connexion  between  the  degree  of  that  consumption  and 
the  moral  condition  of  the  people.  It  appears  that,  taking  into  account 
home-made,  colonial,  and  foreign  spirits,  the  average  consumption 
throughout  the  kingdom  is  somewhat  greater  now  than  it  was  at  the 
beginning  of  the  century  ;  and  it  is  hence  inferred  that  the  vice  of 
intemperance  has  gained  an  accession  to  the  number  of  its  votaries. 
The  particular  examination  of  this  subject  belongs  more  properly  to 
another  Section  of  this  inquiry,  and  will  not  be  further  entered  upon 
here,  except  to  show  that  if  in  the  year  of  the  greatest  consumption  the 
quantity  used  had  been  equally  divided  among  the  people,  the  share  of 
each  would  have  been  not  quite  the  tenth  part  of  a  gill  per  diem,  a 
quantity  that  might  be  taken  with  impunity  by  anyone  advanced  beyond 
the  stage  of  infancy.  It  is  true  there  is  a  very  large  proportion  of 
people  in  this  country  who  never  taste  intoxicating  drink  ;  but  it  is  very 
possible,  and,  considering  the  general  progress  of  society  as  regards  the 
means  of  commanding  conveniences  and  luxuries,  it  is  even  highly  pro- 
bable, that  the  number  who  practise  this  degree  of  abstinence  is  conti- 
nually becoming  less  :  it  by  no  means  follows^  however,  that  an  absolute 
and  even  a  great  increase  in  the  general  consumption  of  ardent  spirits 
affords  certain  evidence  of  increased  intemperance.  It  might  even  ]>e 
that  the  quantity  consumed  tiiroughout  the  country  should  be  doubled, 


5G0 


PROGRESS  OF  THE  NATION. 


[sec.  v. 


^\hile  the  general   character  of  the  population  for  sobriety  would  be 
ini})roved. 

fHue.  —Although,  as  we  have  seen,  the  consumption  of  spirits  has 
increased  in  a  slight  degree  since  the  opening  of  the  century,  there  has 
not  been  any  corresponding  increase  in  the  use  of  wine,  denoting  the 
greater  addiction  of  the  people  to  habits  of  intemperance.  The  quan- 
tity of  all  descriptions  of  wine  used  in  the  United  Kingdom  at  different 
])eriods,  since  1801,  has  been  as  follows,  distinguishing  Great  Britain 
from  Ireland  : — 


GREAT  BRITAIN. 


1801 
1811 
1821 
1831 
1838 
1841 


5,838,592 
4,884,062 
4,180,474 
5,454,737 
6,504,038 
5.. 582. 385 


Average 
Consumption. 


Galls. 
0-533 
0-387 
0-290 
0-335 
0-364 
0-301 


Duty  per 
Head. 


IRELAND. 


Gallons. 


Average        Duty  per 
Consumption.      Head. 


1,038,118 
745,660 
520,. 584 
757,527 
6;!6,838 
602,575 


Galls. 
0-207 
0-125 
0-076 
0-096 
0-086 
0-073 


s.  d. 

0  9i 

0  lOf 

0  7i 

0  5f 

0  5t 

0  4| 


The  average  consumption,  and  the  amount  of  duty  contributed  per 
head,  in  the  whole  kingdom,  in  the  same  years,  were — 


Years. 

1801 
1811 
1821 


Average 
Consumption. 

Gallons. 
0-431 
0-304 
0-221 


Duty 
per  Head, 
s.     d. 
2     8| 
2    7^ 

1  lol 


Years. 

1831 
1841 


Average 
Consumption. 
Gallons. 
0-255 
0-267 


Duty 

per  Head. 

s.     d. 

1     ^ 


The  rates  of  duty  per  imperial  gallon  have  been  as  follows : — 


Years. 


1801 
1811 
1821 
1831 
1841 


GRE.\T  BRITAIN. 


French.     Other  Kinds 


10     2i 
13     Sk 


13 
5 
5 


d. 

It 

6 
6 


IRELAND. 


French.      Other  Kinds. 


s.     d. 


13     9 
5     6 


s.  d. 

3  11 

7  OA 

5  6 

5  6 


The  extent  to  which  the  people  of  this  country  are  accustonied  to  the 
use  of  wine  cannot  be  considered  commensurate  with  their  general 
power  to  obtain  the  conveniences  of  life.  The  consumption  was,  in 
former  times,  much  greater  in  proportion  to  the  population  than  it  has 
been  of  late  years.  In  1700  the  average  annual  consumption  of  each 
individual  in  England  and  Wales  amounted  to'  a  very  small  fraction 
below  an  imperial  gallon,  while  at  present  it  scarcely  exceeds  one-fourth 
of  that  quantity.     There  can  be  but  one  cause  assigned  for  this  change— 


riiAv.  iv.i  ^VI^•^:.  .vn 

excessive  duties.  In  France,  where  wine  may  be  bad  in  almost  every 
part  of  tbc  kingdom,  at  a  low  price,  and  wlicre,  except  a  trifling  "octroi " 
levied  in  the  towns,  the  produce  of  the  vineyard  is  nearly  duty  free, — 
the  average  annual  consum])tion  is  equal  to  rather  more  than  19  gallons 
by  each  individual,  or  more  than  seventy  times  the  consumption 
of  the  l"'nited  Kingdom.  One  effect  of  our  high  duties  has  been  to 
confine  importations  to  the  finer  kind.'j  of  wine,  which  arc  consequently 
witliin  the  reach  of  only  the  easy  cla.sses  ;  to  the  working  man  wine  is 
alto'i^ether  denied.  There  is  a  great  deal  of  excellent  wine  made  in 
Provence  and  Languedoc,  better  adapted  to  the  English  taste  generally 
than  the  finest  wines  of  Medoc,  and  which  could  be  sold,  with  a  good 
profit  to  the  importer,  for  less  than  sixpence  per  bottle,  independent  of 
duty.  If  the  rate  of  this  duty  were  fixed  so  low  as  to  admit  of  the  sale 
by  the  retailer  at  one  shilling  per  bottle,  it  cannot  be  doubted  that  the 
consumption  would  be  very  much  increased,  and  that  a  great  addition 
would  be  made  to  the  innocent  enjoyments  of  the  people.  It  would  still 
be  practicable  to  levy  the  present  high  rate  of  duty  upon  wines  of  the 
first  quality,  the  production,  and  necessarily  therefore  the  consumption, 
of  which  are  limited,  independently  of  the  duty.  It  is  .said  to  be  imprac- 
ticable to  levy  distinct  rates  of  duty  upon  different  qualities  of  the  like 
article,  and  that  the  imposition  of  a  duty  according  to  the  value  assigned 
by  the  Importer  might  open  the  door  widely  to  fraud  ;  but  it  has,  on  the 
other  hand,  been  suggested  that  every  difficulty  of  this  nature  may  be 
obviated  by  fixing  maximum  and  minimum  rates  of  valuation,  within 
which  the  declarations  of  the  merchant  must  be  made,  and  bv  giving 
to  the  officers  of  the  Customs  the  right  to  purchase  the  wine  at  the 
usual  advance  of  10  per  cent,  upon  the  declared  value,  whenever  they 
may  consider  that  value  to  be  much  below  what  the  wine  is  actually 
worth. 

It  appears  from  official  accounts  printed  by  the  French  government, 
that  the  quantity  of  wine  made  in  France  in  years  of  ordinary  or  average 
production,  amounts  to  924,000,000  imperial  gallons.  Of  this  quantity 
24,530,000  gallons  are  exj)orted  to  foreign  countries,  only  a  very  small 
proportion  of  which  is  consumed  in  this  kingdom.  The  population  of 
Denmark,  which  does  not  equal  the  number  of  the  inhabitants  of  our 
metropolis,  consume  more  French  whie  than  the  entire  population  of  the 
United  Kingdom.  In  former  times  the  taste  of  Englishmen  led  them 
to  a  far  greater  proportionate  use  of  F>ench  wine,  but  by  the  ill-judged 
Methuen  Treaty,  concluded  in  1703,  whereby  we  bound  ourselves  to 
impose  50  per  cent,  higher  duties  on  the  wine  of  France  than  on  that  of 
Portugal,  a  great  change  in  this  respect  was  gradually  brought  about, 
so  that  the  consumption  of  French  wine  was  in  time  reduced  to  a  quan- 
tity altogether  insignificant.  The  Methuen  Treaty  ceased  to  operate 
in  1831,  and  thenceforward  the  duty  charged  upon  wines  the  growth  of 

2  o" 


■)62 


PROGllESS  or  THE  NATION. 


[>r.c.  Y. 


all  foreign  countries  has  been  equalized.  The  proportionate  consumption 
of  French  wine  has  t^ince  increased  ;  but,  in  a  case  of  this  kind,  time  is 
required  in  order  to  bring  about  a  change  in  the  public  taste,  and  many 
years  will  probably  elapse  before  we  can  expect  by  any  such  means  to 
destroy  the  preference  tiiat  has  long  been  given  to  the  strong  and  highly- 
brandied  wine  of  Portugal. 

The  quantity  of  French  wine  of  all  qualities  sold  for  consumption  in 
the  United  Kingdom  in  each  year,  since  the  ])ence,  and  the  rates  of 
duty  chargeable,  have  been  as  follows: — 


1 

Years,     i 

Gallons.     ; 

Per  Gallon. 

Years. 

Gallons.      , 

Per  Gallon. 

1 
1815 

200,918 

s.    d. 
13    81 

1833     1 

232,. 5nO 

1 
.•!.    d. 
5    6 

1816 

123,567 

, , 

1834 

260,6.30 

>  J 

1817 

145,972 

, , 

1835 

271,661 

!  ) 

1818 

259,178 

, , 

1836     1 

352,063 

,  , 

1819 

213,616 

13     9 

1837     j 

438,594 

,  , 

1820 

164,232 

, , 

1838 

436,866 

>  > 

1821 

159,462 

1839 

378,0.36 

'  ' 

1822 
1823 

168,732 
171,681 

1 

1840 

341,841 

I    5a-.  Gd.  & 
\  5  per  cent. 

1824 

187,447 

,  , 

1841 

353,740 

.' 

1825 

525,579 

7     2.V 

1842 

360,6^2 

,> 

1826 

343,707 

7     3 

1843 

326,428 

1827 

311,289 

1844 

473,789 

, , 

1828 

421,469 

, , 

1845 

469,001 

, , 

1829 

365,336 

, , 

1846 

409,506 

, , 

1830 

308,294 

? ) 

1847 

397,329 

> » 

1831 

254,366 

5    6 

1848 

335,802 

,, 

1832 

228,627 

1           • 

1840 

.3.31,  GCO 

- 

The  increased  rate  of  consumption  in  the  later  years  of  the  series 
gives  no  greater  proportion  than  one  gallon  per  annum  among  sixty 
people.  The  consumption  of  Holland  amounts  to  one  gallon  per  head, 
the  hio-hest  government  and  municipal  duty  paid  in  any  city  of  that 
country  being  equal  to  2s.  b\d.  per  gallon.  In  Amsterdaiu  the  duties 
amount  to  Sd.  per  gallon,  and  in  Rotterdam  wine  is  consumed  free 
of  duty. 

Beer. — It  would  have  afforded  a  more  satisfactory  view  of  the  pro- 
gress of  consumption  with  regard  to  fermented  liquoi-s  and  spirits,  if  the 
quantity  could  have  been  stated  of  various  kinds  of  beer  used  at  the 
different  periods  in  this  country  chosen  for  cortiparison.  This  it  is  not 
possible  to  do  for  any  period  later  than  1829,  as  the  beer  duty  was 
wholly  repealed  in   1^30,  so  that  a  great  proportion  of  what  ^as  made 


iii:i:H. 


563 


in  tliat  year  did  nut  enter  into  the  revenue  accounts,  the  only  records 
in  which  such  information  can  be  found. 

The  number  of  barrels  of  strong  beer  and  of  table  and  small  beer 
consumed  in  Enuland  and  Wales  was, — 


Years. 


In  1801 

1811 
182) 
182J 


Strong  Beer. 


Table  and 
Smal\  Beer. 


Barrels. 
4,735,574 


Barrels. 
1,691,'j55 


5,902,903  1,649,564 
5,575,8.30  1,439,970 
6,559.210        1.530,419 


Elutes  of  Duty  per  UKrrel. 
Strong.   Table.     Small. 


8s.     ,     3s.     ,  Is.  4d. 
10s. 


3s. 
Is.  Whd. 


The  produce  of  the  duty  on  the  above  quantities,  and  the  average 
consumption  and  amount  of  duty  paid  per  head  in  England  and  Wales, 
were, — 


Years. 


Produce  of     |       Avera;;e         Average  Amount 
Duly.  I  Consumption.  of  Duty.  i 


^• 

Gallons. 

1801 

2,048,695  j 

24-76 

1811 

3,116,407  1 

25-19 

1821 

2,931,912  1 

20-53 

1829 

3,217,812  1 

21-10 

s.  d. 

4  4i 

5  9^ 

*  4 

4  8 


These  figures  do  not  afford  a  true  statement  of  the  consumption  of 
beer  by  the  people,  because  the  duty  was  paid,  and  consequently  the 
account  was  taken,  only  with  reference  to  that  which  was  brewed  for 
sale,  no  duty  having  ever  been  charged  on  beer  brewed  in  private 
families.  It  was  proposed,  in  the  budget  brought  forward  by  Lord 
Henry  Petty  in  1807,  to  subject  private  families  equally  to  payment  of 
the  duty ;  but  such  was  the  amount  of  selfish  clamour  raised  against 
this  proposal,  that  it  was  necessarily  abandoned.  It  would  no  doubt 
have  been  an  exceedingly  vexatious  thing  for  private  families  to  be  sub- 
ject to  the  visitation  of  Excise-officers,  and  without  such  surveillance 
it  would  not  have  been  possible  to  prevent  a  very  general  evasion  of  the 
tax  ;  but  this  objection  leaves  untouched  all  considerations  arising  from 
the  glaring  injustice  of  the  tax,  whicli  was  necessarily  paid  by  every 
poor  man  in  the  country  who  consumed  beer,  while  all  other  classes  had 
the  means  of  relieving  themselves  from  the  burthen.  There  can  there- 
fore be  no  question  that  the  tax  as  levied  was  bad  in  principle,  and  that 
the  Government  acted  properly  in  repealing  it.  The  measure,  when 
brought  forward,  was  popular  with  all  parties  ;  with  the  labouring 
classes  because  of  its  cheapening  one  of  their  chief  luxuries,  and  with 
the  members  of  the  legislature  because  of  the  rise  which,  under  the 
then  existing  Corn  Law,  it  necessarily  occasioned  in  the  prices  of  some 
kinds  of  farming  produce. 

2  o  2 


.364  PROGRESS  OF  THE  NATION.  [sec.  y. 

The  duty  on  beer  in  Scotland  has,  since  the  Union  in  1707,  been  the 
same  as  was  charged  in  Enghmd  ;  but  the  consumption  in  that  part  of 
the  kingdom,  which  was  always  greatly  below  the  proportion  in  England, 
has  been  comparatively  insignificant  during  the  last  half  century.  The 
number  of  barrels  charged  with  duty  in  Scotland,  in  1829,  was  366,166, 
of  which  2-17,443  barrels,  or  two-thirds,  were  small  beer.  The  yearly 
consumption  of  both  qualities  amounted  therefore  to  5f  gallons  for  eacli 
inhabitant,  and  the  duty  paid  by  each  averaged  Sd.  It  has  been  shown 
that  the  ditference  in  this  respect  between  England  and  Scotland  is 
compensated  by  the  greater  use  of  spirits  in  the  latter  division  of  the 
kingdom.     No  duty  was  ever  charged  on  beer  in  Ireland. 

Since  1785  brewers  of  beer  for  sale  have  been  obliged  to  take  out  an 
Excise  license,  for  which  they  have  been  subjected  to  an  annual  pay- 
ment in  proportion  to  the  quantity  brewed.  This  system  of  obliging 
manufacturers  of,  and  dealers  in,  commodities  chargeable  with  Excise 
duties  to  take  out  licenses,  was  adopted  with  the  twofold  object  of 
bringing  the  parties  more  directly  under  the  survey  of  the  revenue 
oflScers  with  the  view  of  preventing  frauds,  and  of  adding  directly  to  the 
public  revenue  by  means  of  the  charge  made  for  the  license.  There 
have  been  so  many  changes  made  in  the  regulations,  whereby  additional 
classes  have  at  various  times  been  embraced,  and  the  charges  made  for 
licenses  have  been  so  altered,  that  it  would  not  afford  any  information 
concerning  the  progress  made  in  this  branch  of  manufacture  to  state  the 
number  of  licenses  that  were  taken  out  in  different  years.  Some  infor- 
mation on  this  subject  has  been  given  in  a  former  Section  of  this  work, 
when  treating  of  the  "  occupations  of  the  people.'"  * 

*  Pages  67  and  68. 


TCJBACCO.  55-0 


CHAPTER  V. 

Tobacco.  Consumption  at  different  Periods — Effects  of  increased  Duties — Encouragement 
to  Smuggling— Complaints  of  high  Duty  on  tlic  part  of  the  Producers  in  the  United 
States  of  America — Tiireatencd  Retaliation  —  Probable  conseciuence  of  such  a  course. 
Paper.  Quantity  made  for  use  at  different  periods— Injudicious  Nature  of  the  Tax  on 
this  Article— Growing  Use  of  Paper— Effect  of  Ueduction  of  Duty -Rapid  Extension  of 
Sale  by  Repealing  the  Duty  on  Almanacs.  Soap.  No  means  of  distinguisliing  its  Use 
for  Personal  Purposes  from  tliat  caused  by  Manufacturing  Processes — Frauds  caused  by 
the  Duty— Impolicy  of  Imposing  a  Duty  on  Soap— Mischief  of  Excise  Regulations  - 
Annual  Consumption  of  Soap  at  various  Periods.  Candles.  Cotton  Manlfactlres. 
Estimated  Consumption.  Silk.  Manufacture.  Estimated  Consumption — Linen  and 
Woollen  Manufactures.  Difficulty  of  estimating  the  Value  used.  Iron.  Increased 
Use  of  this  Material  for  Ship-building.  Copper.  Quantity  used.  Tin.  Timdek. 
Quantity  imported  for  use  in  different  Years  afford  insufficient  data  for  estimating  the 
use  of  Timber  generally— Consumption  of  the  Metropolis— Cattle— Sheep— Coals— Gas 
Lighting — Consumption  of  Food  in  Private  Families. 

Tobacco. — The  (juaiitity  of  this  plant  upon  which  consumption  duty  is 
paid  is  considerably  less  at  the  present  time,  taking  the  kingdom 
throughout,  and  making  allowance  for  the  increased  population,  than  it 
was  at  the  beginning  of  the  present  century.  This  fact  is  clearly 
attributable  to  the  increase  made  in  the  rate  of  duty.  In  great  towns, 
and  among  the  easy  classes,  and  especially  among  our  young  men, 
whose  expenditure  is  least  likely  to  be  carefully  regulated  as  regards 
minor  luxuries,  the  smoking  of  tobacco  is  probably  much  greater  now 
than  it  has  been  at  any  earlier  period.  The  falling  off  in  the  consump- 
tion is  principally  experienced  in  Ireland,  where  the  smoking  of  tobacco 
has  long  been  a  chief  luxury  among  the  working  classes,  and  where,  con- 
sidering the  few  comforts  that  usually  fall  to  their  lot,  its  diminution 
betokens  a  great  degree  of  privation.  Contrasting  1839  with  1801,  it 
will  be  seen  that  the  average  use  of  tobacco  in  Ireland  is  only  one-half 
what  it  was  at  the  begiiming  of  the  century ;  and,  although  the  rate  of 
duty  is  now  about  three  times  what  it  was  in  1801,  the  contribution  per 
head  to  the  revenue  has  advanced  only  75  per  cent.  In  Great  Britain, 
where  the  condition  of  the  people  generally  has  been  more  satisfactory 
than  in  Ireland,  the  consumption  per  head  is  now  about  equal  to  what 
it  was  at  the  beginning  of  the  century,  and  the  contribution  to  the 
revenue  has  consequently  been  more  in  agi-eement  with  the  increased 
rate  cf  the  duty. 


5(56 


PllOGKKSS  OF  THE  NATION. 


:  Pounds  Weight 
consumed. 


Duty  per 
Pound. 


Amount 

of 

Dutv. 


Average 
1  Yearly  Con- 
'   sumption. 


Great 
Britain. 


10,. 514, 998 
14,923,243 
12,983,198 
15,350,018 
16,830,593 


1  7.^ 


923,855 
1,710,848 
2.600,415 
2; 333, 107 
2,716,217 


15-37 
18-95 
14-43 
14-84 
14-52 


Average 
Contribution! 
to  the       I 
Revenue. 


It  is  made  evident  by  these  ligurcs  that  the  duty  of  4^.  per  lb.  was 
excessive.  The  advance  to  that  rate  from  2s.  2d.  caused  a  diminished 
consumption  to  the  extent  of  one-fourth,  and  the  revenue  per  head 
whicli,  had  the  consumption  not  been  lessened,  would  have  been  4s.  lO^d., 
amounted  to  onlv  Ss.  7 '//. 


Years. 


Pounds  Weighti  Duty  per 


consumed. 


Pound. 


Amount 

of 

Dutv. 


Average 
Yearly  Con- 
sumption. 


Ireland. 


United 
Kingdom. 


1801 
1811 
18-21 
1831 
1841 

1801 
ISll 
1821 
1831 
1841 


lbs. 

.<i. 

d. 

6,389,754 

1 

0,^ 

6.453,024 

1 

7 

2.614,954 

3 

0 

4,183,823 

3 

0 

5,478,767 

3 

0 

16,904,752 

21,376,267 

15,598,152 

19.533,841 

22,303,360 

285,482 
552,082 
528.168 
626.485 
863,946 

1,209,337 
2,262,930 
3,122,583 
2,964,930 
3,580,164 


18-95 

17-35 

6-15 

8-61 

10-71 

16-05 
18-44 
11-77 
12-85 
13-36 


Average 
Contribution! 
to  the       [ 
Revenue.    , 


1     0| 
1  lOj 

1  7t 

2  0 


1  5| 
•2    5| 

2  Ui 
2  5i 
2    8 


The  yearly  consumption  of  tobacco  in  the  United  Kingdom  has  .since 
1841  been  as  follows  : — 


Years. 

lbs. 

1842 

22,238,484 

1843 

23,012,627 

1S44 

24,.595,791 

1845 

20,162,159 

Years. 

Ills. 

1846 

26,859,788 

1847 

26,638,136 

1848 

27,194,368 

1849 

27,553,1.')8 

One  great  evil  that  attends  upon  exorbitant  taxation  on  this  article  of 
consumption,  is  the  encouragement  that  it  gives  to  smuggling.  The 
amount  of  the  duty  is  so  vastly  out  of  proportion  to  its  value,  that  the 
contraband  dealer  can  afford  to  lose  several  ventures  if  he  can  succeed 
in  safely  disposing  of  one.  The  number  of  those  successful  ventures  there 
are,  of  course,  no  means  for  ascertaining ;  but  it  appears  from-  a  return 
made  to  the  House  of  Commons,  that  the  number  of  persons  convicted  for 
smusrsflinK  tobacco  in  the  three  years,  1843  to  1845  inclusive,  was — 


In  England 
„  Ireland 
„  Scotland 


2,187 
435 

389 


3,011 


The  high  rates  of  duty  charged  on   tobacco  in   various   European 
countries  have  been  felt  as  a  grievance  by  some  of  the  States  of  the 


PAPEtl. 


567 


American  ruion,  and  threats  have  sometimes  been  used,  that  iudi>s.s  an 
alteration  be  made  iti  those  rates,  retaliatory  measures  would  be  taken, 
and  heavy  duties  placed  upon  some  of  the  staple  manut'aetures  of  Kuroj)e 
when  imported  into  the  United  States.  This  very  ineffectual,  but  by  no 
means  uncommon  method  of  meeting  the  case,  has  in  recent  years  been 
adopted  by  the  American  Congress.  The  result  of  the  existing  tariff 
of  the  United  States  in  all  probability  has  been  to  limit  the  sales  as 
well  as  the  ])urchases  of  America,  and  instead  of  caui^iug  an  increased 
vent  for  tobacco,  to  diminish  it  by  lessening  the  means  which  foreigners 
have  for  buvine;.* 


Paper. — It  would  give  a  very  wrong  view  of  the  progressive  use  of 
])aper  in  the  several  divisions  of  the  kingdom,  if  the  calculations  were 
made  from  the  produce  of  the  duty  in  those  divisions.  The  manufac- 
ture of  paper  is  carried  on  in  certain  localities,  whence  it  is  distributed 
over  every  part  of  the  kingdom,  so  that  English-made  paper  finds  its 
way  to  Scotland  and  Ireland.  The  Parliamentary  volumes  do  not  con- 
tain any  statement  of  the  quantity  of  paper  brought  to  charge  with  the 
Excise  earlier  than  1803  in  the  present  century,  which  year  is  therefore 
inserted  in  the  following  comparison,  instead  of  1801. 


I'oiinUs  of  I'aper 

Amount 

Uevenue  paid,  Duty  per  lb.  j 

"\ears. 

Cliarjjed  with 

or 

by  eacli             on  First 

Duty. 

Revenue. 

Individual,    i  Class  Paper. 

lbs. 

£. 

d.                       d. 

1803 

31,699,537 

394,824 

5|          '            3            i 
6t         !           3 
6*                   3 

1811 

.38,225,167 

477,414 

1821 

48,204,927 

579,867 

1831 

62,738,000 

728.860 

7i                   3 

1841 

97,103,548 

637,254 

^          IV 

The  duty  on  paper  was  first  imposed  in  1711  by  the  Act  10  Anne, 
c.  19,  which  recites,  as  a  reason  for  the  tax,  "the  necessity  of  raising 
large  suj)plies  of  money  to  carry  on  the  war,"  and  surely  it  required  a 
case  of  strong  necessity  to  justify  the  imposition  of  a  tax  which  tended 
so  directly  to  impede  the  progress  of  knowledge  among  the  jieople. 
That  it  must  have  had  this  effect  is  evident  from  the  statement  here 
given.  "W'hile  the  duty  on  first-class  paper,  which  includes  writing  and 
printing  paper,  was  continued  at  'dd.  per  lb.,  the  increased  quantity  used 
was,  considering  the  increase  of  the  population,  very  insignificant.  The 
quantity  used  at  the  difierent  periods,  if  equally  divided  among  the 
population,  would  have  been — 


Years. 

U>s. 

Years. 

lbs. 

1803 

1"92  for  each  individual. 

1831 

2-54  for  each  individual. 

1811 

2-06 

1S33 

3-47 

1821 

2-27 

183J 

3-58 

■•■  An  ilUutiation  of  this  position,  in  the  words  of  Dr.  Franklin,  will  be  seen,  i<,  "'Ol. 


568  rROGRESS  OF  THE  NATION.  [sue.  v. 

I'lie  reduction  of  the  duty  took  etiect  only  in  October,  1886,  and 
could  not  be  expected  to  have  produced  it^^  full  effects  for  some  years 
thereafter.  The  degree  in  which  it  has  already  stimulated  consump- 
tion may  be  seen  from  the  following  account  of  the  quantities  used  in 
each  of  the  sixteen  years,  1834  to  184'.),  viz. — 


Voais. 

lbs. 

1834 

7l).60r),S8',> 

1835 

74,042,650 

1836 

t^:>,  108,947 

1837 

88,950,845 

183S 

93,466,286 

1839 

97,643,823 

1840 

97,237,358 

1S41 

97,103,548 

Vfars. 

11)S. 

1812 

9(),693,322 

1843 

103,449,625 

1844 

109,495,148 

1845 

124,247,070 

1846 

127,442J480 

1847 

121,965,312 

1848 

121,820,227 

1849 

132,132,657 

» 


Previous  to  1836  the  paper  duty  w-as  charged  on  two  classes  or 
([ualities,  of  which  the  tirst  class  paid  3d.,  and  the  second  class  l^d. 
])er  lb.  Not  any  change  has  been  made  in  the  rate  charged  on  the 
second-class  paper,  but  the  duty  on  the  first  class  has  been  assimilated 
to  it,  and  thenceforward  the  Excise  officers  have  not  made  any  dis- 
tinction between  the  two  qualities.  1  he  duty  having  been  continued 
at  the  same  rate  upon  common  paper,  it  is  not  likely  that  much  increase 
in  the  quantity  used  will  have  taken  place  ;  but,  if  w^e  even  calculate 
that  an  increased  quantity,  to  the  amount  of  10  per  cent.,  has  been  used 
since  1835,  this  would  leave  31  per  cent,  increase  upon  first-class  paper 
in  little  more  than  two  years  from  the  reduction  of  the  duty.  'I'hat  the 
])rogressive  increase  experienced  up  to  1839  was  not  continued  for  the 
three  years  beyond  that  year,  is  no  doubt  attributable  to  the  condition 
of  commercial  stagnation,  which  lessened  the  power  of  expenditure 
among  a  large  class  of  persons  who  can  economise  in  the  purchase  of 
books  without  exciting  the  attention  of  the  circle  in  which  they  move. 
Yvom  1843,  it  will  be  seen  that  the  stagnation  having  passed  away,  the 
use  of  paper  has  again  been  increasing,  so  that  the  quantity  used  in 
1849  exceeded  that  used  in  1835  by  more  than  78  per  cent. 

There  is  reason  for  supposing  that  the  public  may  hereafter  obtain, 
more  even  than  hitherto  has  been  the  case,  advantages  from  the  reduc- 
tion of  this  duty.  The  sudden  demand  consequent  upon  the  alteration 
in  1836  caused  for  a  time  an  increase  in  the  price  of  the  principal 
materials  of  which  paper  is  made,  but  this  advance  has  not  since  been 
maintained  ;  and  there  can  be  no  doubt  that,  stimulated  by  the  higher 
price,  larger  quantities  of  those  materials  will  find  their  way  to  the 
English  market ;  or,  what  is  equally  probable,  that  other  materials 
may  be  found  ajiplicable  to  the  purpose,  and  at  a  lower  price,  so  that 
the  cost  of  paper  may  in  time  be  reduced  in  even  a  greater  proportion 
than  has  hitherto  followed  the  reduction  in  the  rate  of  duty. 

The  number  of  licenses  taken  out  by  paper  manufacturers  has  been 
13  fellows  :  — 


cuAi'.  V.J  SOAP.  500 

Years.             Kii^'laml.        Scotluiul.  Ireland.  Tolal. 

1801  41:i  •■53  I  No  account  kept 

1811  527  4S\  in  Ireland. 

1821  5G4  .55  47  666 

ISai  507  54  59           '     620 

1841  370  49  48  467 

1845  .381  45  47  473 

184:i  31',)  48  40  437 

The  price  piT  ream  of  printing  paper,  of  one  particular  description, 
lia.s  been,— • 

Year--.  j.  (/.  I           Years.          s.  d. 

1801  .36  0                    1831         24  0 

1808  40  0                    1841         17  0 

1811  35  U                     1843  (January)  15  6 

1821  27  6  I 

'I'lie  effect  of  high  duties  in  limiting  the  use  of  books  may  be  inferred 
from  the  rapid  extension  caused  to  the  sale  of  almanacs  through  the 
repeal  of  the  stamp-duty  of  Is.  dd.  It  was  stated  in  the  Report  of  the 
Commissioners  of  Excise  Inquiry,  that  200  new  almanacs  were  started 
immediately  upon  the  re})eal,  of  some  of  which  upwards  of  250,000 
copies  were  sold  within  a  short  period,  although  the  old  ones  maintained 
their  groiuid  ;  and  Moore's  Almanack  for  the  year  1835  is  stated  to 
have  actually  doubled  its  former  sales. 

Some  part  of  the  increased  manufacture  of  paper  must  be  ascribed  to 
the  great  reduction  made,  in  183G,  in  the  stamp-duty  on  newspapers, 
the  effect  of  which  will  be  more  fully  described  in  a  future  section  of 
this  volume. 

Soap. — The  use  of  this  article  is  in  some  degree  dependent  on  the 
growth  of  manufactures,  since  it  is  extensively  employed  in  many  pro- 
cesses, and  in  this  country  is  increasingly  so  employed ;  the  actual 
consumption  for  personal  and  household  purposes  cannot  therefore  be 
accurately  known  without  first  ascertaining  the  quantity  otherwise  dis- 
posed of,  no  particular  statement  of  which  has  been  given  in  any  Par- 
liamentary papers.  An  allowance  is  made  for  the  duty  on  soap  used  in 
the  silk,  woollen,  cotton  and  linen  manufactures ;  but  these  do  not  com- 
prise the  whole  of  the  manufacturing  processes  into  which  soap  enters. 
It  is,  besides,  impossible  to  make  any  true  estimate  of  the  quantity 
used  generally,  because  of  the  intervention  of  the  contraband  maker. 
It  is  known  that  frauds  upon  the  revenue  are  thus  committed  to  a  great 
extent,  not  so  much  perhaps  as  was  done  before  the  reduction  of  the 
duty  in  1833  ;  but  the  degree  in  which  that  reduction  was  calculated  to 
affect  the  fraudulent  maker  by  reducing  his  profits,  has  been  since  in 
part  countervailed  by  simplifications  in  the  process,  which  have  lessened 
at  once  the  expenses  of  the  manufacture  and  the  chances  of  detection. 
1  hat  frauds  to  a  great  extent  are  committed  by  the  surreptitious  pro- 
duction of  soap,  may  be  believed  from  the  fact,  that  there  are  50  per- 
sons in  England  who  each  take  out  an  annual  license,  the  charge  for 
.which   13   a.,  and    \'ho  do  net   pay  duty  to   the  E^ci;e  on  a    great-jr 


570 


TKOGRESS  OF  THE  NATION. 


[sec. 


quantity  than  one  ton  in  the  course  of  the  year,  leaving  room  for  suspi- 
cion that  the  license  is  used  as  a  cover  for  fraudulent  processes.  There 
are  besides  great  numbers  of  persons  \vho  make  soap  secretly,  and 
without  taking  out  any  license,  and  who  consequently  pay  no  duty 
whatever.  1  he  manufacture  can  be  successfully  carried  on  in  any 
cellar  or  small  room,  with  very  inartificial  apparatus  ;  and  so  long  as 
the  rate  of  the  duty  offers  any  temptation,  it  is  much  to  be  feared  that 
there  will  always  be  persons  in  whom  the  desire  of  gain  will  be  strong 
enough  to  lead  them  to  engage  in  such  secret  manufacture.  It  ;jppears 
doubtful  whether  it  can  ever  be  desirable  to  extract  a  revenue  from 
soap,  the  use  of  which  among  the  people  should  be  encouraged  on 
moral  considerations,  and  which  should  also  lead  the  legislature  at  all 
times  to  withdraw  from  those  contests  with  breakers  of  the  law,  in  which 
the  Government  is  siu-e  to  be  worsted.  The  Excise  duty  charged  upon 
soap  in  Great  Britain  is  not  levied  in  Ireland. 

The  Excise  regulations,  which  it  may  be  presumed  are  necessary  for 
the  protection  of  the  revenue,  so  entirely  prevent  improvement  in  the 
processes,  that  the  quality  of  soap  made  in  foreign  countries,  where  no 
such  regulations  are  imposed,  is  invariably  superior  to  that  of  English 
soap,  and,  unless  to  our  own  colonies  and  dependencies,  we  cannot  be  said 
to  have  any  export  demand  for  British-made  soap.  We  pay  an  import 
duty  on  the  chief  ingredient  used  in  the  manufacture,  which  is  not 
returned  on  that  part  which  is  exported,  and  our  duties  are  so  regulated 
that  our  manufacturers  are  in  a  great  degree  restricted  to  the  erapkn  - 
ment  of  a  material  which  is  not  calculated  to  produce  soap  of  the  finest 
quality.  The  manufacturers  of  Marseilles  use  almost  exclusively  vege- 
table oil,  while  ours  are  chiefly  restricted  to  the  use  of  tallow,  which  pro- 
duces an  article  so  inferior  in  quality  that  the  preference  is  given  in  foreign 
countries  to  almost  any  soap  over  that  made  in  this  kingdom  ;  and  this  is 
especially  tlie  case  where  the  article  is  used  in  manufacturing  processes. 

After  these  remarks  it  will  be  understood  that  the  following  statement 
regarding  the  use  of  soap  is  not  to  be  taken  as  correct,  although  it  is  as 
much  so  as  public  documents  will  admit : — 


1801 

1811 

1821 

1831 

1841 

1845 
1849 


Nnmlier  of 

Pounds  of  Soap 

Consumed. 


52,947,037 

73,527,760 

92,941,326 

103,121,577 

170,280,641 

190,187,163 
197,632,280 


Rate  ofDutv. 


Quantity      Amount  of 
Consumed         Duty 
,        per       'Contributed 
i     Head.        per  Head. 


Number 

of 
Licensed 
Makers. 


j  2|c/.  per  lb.  hard  i 
1  iff/.       .,       soft   i 

Ditto  .... 
j  '-id.  per  lb.  hard  1 
)  yifl.      „       soft  j 

Ditto  .... 
/  Ud.  per  lb.  hard  ) 
\lfJ.       ..        soft    f 

Ditto  ...     .1     9-65 

Ditto   ....   I     9-71 


lbs. 

4-84 
5-83 
6-43 
6-23 
9-20 


s.  d.  j 
0  U^  I 
If     I 


6| 
2| 


624 

522 

363 

532 

344 

356 
333 


CUA1-.  v.]  CANDLES.  .,?  I 

The  progressive  decrease  in  tiie  number  of  licensed  makers,  until 
they  are  now  little  more  than  one-half  as  many  as  in  1801,  is  a  very 
remarkable  circumstance,  and  one  for  which  it  is  difficult  to  assign 
a  sufficient  reason. 

Candles.—  The  quantities  of  different  kinds  of  candles  used  in  England 
and  Scotland,  at  different  periods  in  the  present  century,  were  as 
follows  : — 


England. 


Scotland. 


Great 
Britain. 


Years. 


Tallow. 


1801 
1811 
1821 
1823 

1801 
1811 
1821 
1829 

1801 
1811 
1821 
1829 

1830 


lbs. 

62,854,082 

73,166,119 

88,951,626 

103, 425,. 503 

3,5  48,602 
4,737.025 
4,864,720 
5,731,239 

66,402,684 

77,903,144 

93,816,346 

115,156,803 

1.55,. 586, 192 


Wax. 


I  Spermaceli. 


lbs. 
549,-385 
633,942 
697,196 
744,536 


1,516 

.543,385 
633,942 
6;)7,196 
746,052 


lbs. 

47,011 
103,463 
115,647 
303,683 


47,011 
103,469 
165,647 
.303,683 


Total. 


,  n-5 


lbs 

63,450,478 

73, 903,. 530 

83,814,469 

110,473,728 

3,548,602 
4,737,025 
4,864,720 
5,732,815 

66,999,080 

78,640,555 

94,673,189 

116,206,543 

116, 851, .305 


The  rates  of  duty  throughout  the  whole  period  were,  on  candles  made 
of  tallow.  Id.  per  lb. ;  made  of  wax  or  of  spermaceti,  3.^f/.  per  lb.  No 
Excise  duty  on  candles  has  ever  been  charged  in  Ireland.  The  amount 
of  revenue  in  the  above  years  from  this  source  was  as  follows  : — 


Years. 

£. 

1801 

275,660 

1811 

.328,892 

1821 

335,911 

Years. 

£. 

1829 

489,059 

1830 

482,413 

The  duty  on  candles  ceased  from  the  1st  January,  1832.  The  Act 
bv  which  it  was  repealed  was  passed  in  September,  1831,  and  mate- 
rially influenced  the  amount  of  the  manufacture  during  the  last  quarter 
of  that  year,  since  no  one,  with  the  knowledge  of  its  ceasing,  would 
make  a  greater  quantity  than  would  be  required  for  use  during  the 
continuance  of  the  duty.  For  this  reason  the  quantity  returned  to  the 
Excise  in  1831  was  only  103,374,860  lbs.,  and  the  revenue  470,059/. 

During  all  the  time  that  an  Excise  duty  was  levied  upon  candles,  it 
may  be  said  that  there  was  no  improvement  made  in  their  quality  ;  and 
it  is  probable  that  had  the  duty  not  been  repealed  the  regulations 
enforced  by  the  revenue  officers  would  have  continued  to  prevent  any 
such  improvements.  No  sooner,  however,  were  the  manufacturers  relieved 
from  the  restraints  thus  imposed,  than  their  ingenuity  was  set  to  work, 
and  each  year  that  has  since  elapsed  has  produced  one  or  more  inven- 
liuns  or  combinations,  whereby  the  essential  good  qualities  of  candles 


572  PKOGliESS  01''  THE  NATION.  [sec.  v. 

have  been  increased,   and  their  cost,  reUuively  to   their  value   in  iisc, 
diminished. 

IVoven  Fabrics. — The  statements  already  given  in  these  volumes,  in 
describing  the  progress  of  some  of  our  chief  manufactures,  make  it 
imnecessary  to  go  into  much  detail  in  regard  to  the  consumption  of 
woven  fabrics.  The  rapid  and  enormous  increase  which  has  been 
exhibited  in  these  branches  of  our  industry  must  serve  to  convince 
everybody  who  at  all  considers  the  subject  how  impossible  it  is  to  fix 
any  limit  to  the  powers  of  consumption  under  circumstances  favourable 
to  their  development,  and  how  unreasonable  it  must  be  to  suppose  that 
any  degi'ee  of  extension  to  which  we  may  hitherto  have  arrived  can  be 
taken  as  the  measure  of  what,  under  higher  degrees  of  prosperity,  may 
hereafter  be  attained. 

In  a  manufacture  like  that  of  cotton,  where  the  goods  produced  differ 
so  exceedingly  in  quality  that  the  value  of  a  pound  weight  varies  from  a 
few  pence  to  a  great  many  shillings,  it  is  extremely  difficult  to  make 
an  approach  even  to  the  capital  employed  and  the  value  ])roduced  in 
the  course  of  the  year.  In  the  statement  made  by  ]Mr.  M'CuUoch,  in 
his  'Commercial  Dictionary,'  already  quoted  in  this  work,*  the  entire 
annual  value  of  the  manufacture  is  given  as  36,000,000/.  Mr.  Baines 
made  the  value  31,338,693/.  in  the  year  1833,  when  the  weight  of 
material  used  was  282,000,000  lbs.  Of  this  value  the  part  exported 
amounted  to  18,459,000/.,  leaving  for  the  goods  consumed  at  home 
12,879,693/.  If  we  were  to  follow  the  same  mode  of  calculation  for 
the  year  1849,  making  the  increased  value  proportionate  to  the  increased 
quantity  of  the  raw  material  employed,  the  value  of  cotton  goods  used  at 
home  would  be  as  follows  : — 

77.%00O,00O  pounds  of  cotton  taken  by  the  manufacturers,  assumiug  £. 

the  cost  and  the  charges  of  ^manufacturers  to  be  the  same  per 
pound  as  in  1833,  would  amount  to 86,125,840 

From  which  deduct  the  value  of  yarn  and  goods  exported     .      .      .  26,775,135 

Leaving  for  home  use £59,350,705 


This  estimate  is  certainly  much  beyond  the  truth,  but  is  so  either 
because  of  the  adoption  of  further  improvements  in  the  manufacturing 
processes,  which,  by  reducing  their  cost,  have  placed  this  description  of 
fabrics  more  within  the  reach  of  the  labouring  classes  in  this  and  other 
countrie.*,  or  because  of  the  depressed  condition  of  a  large  part  of  the 
labouring  classes,  which  has  obliged  them  to  buy  coarser  and  lower- 
priced  articles. 

It  does  not  appear,  from  the  statement  of  our  exports,  that  any  very 
great  economy  was    introduced   into   the  manufacturing   processes    of 

*  Page  212. 


CHW.  v.]  \VOVi:X  FABRICS.  .-,73 

cotton  between  1833  and  1841.  It  may  certainly  be  tbat  tbo  qualitv  of 
tbe  goods  shipped  to  foreign  countries  has  been  better  in  the  latter  than 
it  was  in  the  former  year  ;  but  if  this  were  not  the  case,  the  difference 
in  the  cost  did  not  much,  if  at  all,  exceed  10  per  cent.,  calculated  on 
the  prices  of  1833.  In  that  year  the  number  of  yards  of  cotton  cloths 
exported  was  406,352,O<)G,  antl  the  declared  value  12,451,0r)()/.,  or  a 
very  small  fraction  over  (id.  per  yard.  In  1839  the  number  of  yards 
shipped  was  731,450,123,  and  the  declared  value  16,378,445/.,  beino- 
on  the  average  bid.  per  yard,  or  five-eighths  of  a  penny  less  than  in 
1833.  In  1849,  the  exports  amounted  to  1,337,536,116  yards,  the 
declared  value  of  which  was  18,794,964/.,  and  this  shows  onlv  an  averaf^e 
value  of  o'37r/.  per  yard.  Tiie  diminished  cost  which  appears  bv  the^e 
figures  is.  however,  greatly  the  result  of  reduction  in  price  of  the  raw 
material. 

If  the  value  of  cotton  goods  consumed  within  the  kiufj-duni  in  1840 
bore  the  same  proportion  to  the  whole  manufacture  as  the  calculation 
of  Mr.  Baincs  assigns  to  the  consumption  of  1833,  then  the  value  of  the 
531  millions  of  pounds  used  in  1840  could  nut  have  been  much  beyond 
41  millions  of  money  ;  so  that  while  the  quantity  of  the  material  was 
increased  88  per  cent.,  the  value  was  increased  at  the  rate  of  only  33 
])er  cent.  It  may  help  to  explain  this  difference,  without  assuminsf  that 
the  processes  of  manufacture  have  been  economised  to  the  extent  just 
mentioned,  if  we  call  to  mind  the  fact  that,  whenever  the  means  of  the 
people  are  limited,  their  purchases,  where  necessaries  are  concerned, 
are  made  of  coarser  and  therefore  heavier  goods ;  so  that  in  times  of 
comparative  distress  there  may  be  a  larger  consumption  of  the  raw 
material,  accompanied  by  an  abridgment  of  the  labour  employed,  and  a 
diminished  value  of  the  goods  produced. 

The  progress  of  the  silk  manufacture,  and  of  the  use  of  ftibrics  of 
that  material  in  this  country,  up  to  the  year  1849  inclusive,  have  alreadv 
been  stated.* 

The  value  of  silk  goods  produced  cannot  be  estimated  on  an  averao-e 
below  60.9.  per  lb.  ;  the  sum  annually  spent  on  these  fabrics  within  the 
kingdom  is  therefore  considerably  above  15,000,000/.,  if  we  include 
those  imported  of  foreign  manufacture.  In  the  early  years  of  the 
century  the  expenditure  under  this  head  was  not  more  than  one -fourth 
part  of  that  sum  ;  and  although  the  use  of  silk  garments  had  greatly 
increased  at  the  time  when  the  restrictions  were  removed  under  which 
the  manufacture  had  been  kept,  with  a  view  to  its  encouragement,  yet  the 
yearly  value  did  not  amount  to  one-half  that  of  the  present  consump- 
tion. 

The  quantities  of  our  linen  goods  that  are  used  within  the  kingdom 

*  Pa<rc  -2 15. 


.~)7  \  rKOGKESS  OF  'rilL  XATIOX.  [si:r.  r. 

CiUi  only  be  conjectured,  since  the  materials  employed  are  in  great  part 
of  domestic  ])roduction,  and  no  means  exist  for  determining  their 
quantity.  The  improvements  already  noticed  in  the  spinning  of  Hax 
have  most  importantly  reduced  the  price  of  our  linens  ;  but  as  a  reduction 
fully  as  great  has  been  effected  in  ti)e  cost  of  cotton  goods,  it  is  doubtful 
whether  the  use  of  linen  has  been  therefore  nuich  or  at  all  increased. 
There  is  from  year  to  year  an  increased  demand  on  the  part  of  our 
manufacturers  for  foreign-grown  flax ;  and  its  consequent  enhance- 
ment of  price  occasions  much  dissatisfaction  to  the  linen  weavers  of 
Belgium,  whence  our  chief  supply  of  fine  flax  is  drawn.  Concurrently 
with  this  state  of  things,  our  exports  of  linen  have  very  greatly  increased, 
and  may  have  absorbed  all  the  additional  quantity  of  material ;  but  this 
is  a  question  which  it  is  not  possible  in  any  way  to  determine. 

The  remarks  here  made  concerning  linen  apply  in  great  part  to  woollen 
goods  also.  There  is  a  continually  increasing  importation  of  the  rav/ 
material  from  abroad,  but  we  are  left  wholly  to  conjecture  concerning 
the  home  production.  As  in  the  linen  manufacture,  the  processes  used 
by  our  clothiers  have  also  been  economised,  and  the  prices  of  their 
goods  have  been  much  reduced ;  but  increased  consumption,  which, 
under  other  circumstances,  would  be  the  almost  necessary  consequence, 
may  not  have  been  experienced  'beyond  that  required  by  our  greater 
numbers,  because  of  the  still  greater  cheapening  of  other  articles  mIucIi 
may  be  in  great  part  substituted  for  woollen  garments. 

Iron. — The  increased  use  of  iron  in  this  country  during  the  present 
century  has  been  truly  extraordinary.  The  importations  of  this  metal 
at  the  beginning  of  this  century  amounted  to  about  40,000  tons  yearly, 
and  the  quantity  made  at  home  was  under  150,000  tons.  It  was  given 
in  evidence,  by  Sir  John  Guest,  before  the  Committee  of  1840  on 
Import  Duties,  that  in  the  year  1806  the  quantity  of  iron  made  in  the 
kingdom  was  increased  to  258,^00  tons;  that  in  1823  the  quantity 
produced  was  452,000  tons ;  in  1825  it  had  reached  581,000  tons ;  and 
in  1828  the  quantity  was  703,000  tons. 

A  fresh  impulse  has  since  been  given  to  this  branch  of  manufacture 
through  the  great  actual  and  projected  extension  of  railways.  There 
has  not  been  any  statement  put  forth  showing  the  quantity  of  iron  made 
in  England  in  1849  ;  but  a  careful  account  of  the  make  in  Scotland  has 
been  drawn  up,  from  which  it  appeared  that  there  were  then  113  furnaces 
in  blast,  producing  13,800  tons  of  iron  weekly,  or  at  the  rate  of  01)0,000 
tons  in  the  year  of  50  weeks. 

Assuming  the  data  of  Sir  John  Guest  *  for  the  quantity  of  this 
metal  made  within  the  kingdom,  and  using  Parliamentaiy  Returns  for 

*  See  pRge  268. 


v.] 


IlLON. 


the  (juautitit'cj  imported  and  ox])orted,  vve  arrive  at  tlie  following  result 
as  relates  to  lioine  coiisiuuptioii,  during  the  years  just  nieiilioned  : — 


1806 
1823 

1825 
1828 
1835 
183G 
18-10 
18il 
1842 
1843 
1844 
1845 
1846 
1847 
1848 
184:) 


Hritisli 
Iron  iiiudi' 


Foreign 
Iron  used. 


I  Hiilisli  Iron 
lixpoited. 


Hard  warn 
Exported. 


Tons. 

2.")S.nno 
4:.2,{)(j(i 

581, (HHJ 
703,  (Xtl) 
1,000,000 
l,i0(),0O() 
1,5()0,00U 
1,. 50(1, 000 
1,2()0,()(K1 
1,200,000 

i,4oa.ouu 


1,999,608 
2,093,736 


Tons. 
27,411 

9,(i()7 
14,977 
13.984 
17,571 
18,920 
13,263 
17,053 
14,741 
12,  Of)  9 
21,599 
30,840 
30,539 
28,264 
20,437 
26,537 


Tons. 

30.925 

40,413 

.'U,;572 

05,139 

199,007 

192,352 

268,328 

300,875 

369, 3 J8 

448,925 

458,745 

344,963 

424,858 

539,922 

619,230 

701,3,(6 


Tons. 

4,629 

10.. 375 

10,1180 
12,1(X) 
20,1U7 
21,072 
14,9;i5 
17,067 
15,212 
17,183 
22,552 
20,754 
19,016 
20,614 
18,105 
23,421 


Uomained  for 
Home  Use. 


Tons. 

243,857 

404,879 

5.50,025 

639,745 

798,367 

1,005,490 

1,229,940 

1,13J,111 

830,131 

745.901 

940,302 


1,467,336 
1,476,838 


Tliis  rapid  and  great  increase,  shown  in  the  last  few  years,  has  been 
in  some  part  caused  by  the  economy  introduced  tlirough  the  use  of  the 
hot-blast  ill  smelting,  a  process  which  has  matcrialb,  lowered  the  cost 
of  iron,  and  therefore  has  led  to  its  employment  for  many  purposes  in 
which  its  use  was  previously  unknown. 

Among  the  new  employments  found  for  this  the  most  useful  of  all 
metals,  must  be  mentioned  ship-building.  Iron  was  first  used  about 
the  year  1810  for  the  construction  of  vessels  employed  in  canal  and 
river  navigation.  After  this,  the  first  similar  employment  of  this 
material  occurred  in  1820,  when  a  steam-vessel  called  the  "  Aaron 
Manby "  was  constructed  at  the  Horsley  Iron-w'orks,  and  made  the 
voyage  between  the  capitals  of  England  and  France  without  unlading 
any  part  of  her  caigo.  'J'his  vessel  is  still  in  good  condition,  although 
30  years  old,  never  having  required  any  repairs  to  her  hull.  In  1825 
a  small  iron  steam-boat  was  placed  on  the  river  Shannon,  where  she  is 
now  employed,  in  good  condition.  In  1832,  "  The  Elburkah,"  an  iron 
steam-vessel,  built  by  Messrs.  Macgregor  Laird  and  Co.,  in  Liverpool, 
made  the  voyage  from  that  port  to  the  coast  of  Africa,  and  twice 
ascended  the  river  Niger.  This  successful  experiment  led  to  the  con- 
struction of  many  other  iron  steam- vessels.  One  bviilder,  Mr.  John 
Laird,  of  Birkenhead,  near  Liverpool,  has  built  45  iron  vessels  of  the 
aggregate  burden  of  12,G00  tons.  The  total  number  launched  since 
1830  is  said  to  be  near  200,  The  largest  iron  vessel,  with  one  excep- 
tion, yet  finished,  and  in  use,  is  believed  to  be  the  "  Guadaloupe,"  a 
steam-frigate  of  788  tons,  carrying  08  pounders,  and  belonging  to  the 
Mexican  government ;  but  her  dimensions  are  insignificant  when  com- 
pared with  those  of  the  "  Great  Britain,"  since  ])uilt  at  Bristol. 


rj7G  PROGRESS  or  THE  XATTOX.  fsr.c.  v. 

The  length  of  this  vessel,  from  lier  figure-head  to  (he  taflcrel,  was  520  feet. 

The  breadth  of  beam Til       „ 

The  depth  of  her  hold .".l       „ 

Her  draft  of  water,  when  loaded,  was  calculated  to  be  .      .     .     .     IG       „ 

and  her  burden  3500  tons.  The  engines  had  a  force  equal  to  that  of 
1000  horses,  and  were  used  to  keep  in  action,  as  the  means  of  propulsion, 
an  Archimedean  screw.  Her  draft  of  water  did  not  exceed  that  of  a 
first-class  West  Indiaman.  The  loss  of  this  splendid  ship  in  Dundrum 
Bay  was  a  casualty  which  might  equally  have  happened  to  any  other 
vessel,  and  should  not  in  any  degree  lessen  our  estimate  of  the  genius 
and  skill  of  those  by  whom  she  was  projected  and  put  together. 

A  great  part  of  the  steam  navy  of  the  East  India  Company  consists 
of  iron  vessels,  25  of  which  are  now  in  use  in  India,  among  which  are 
the  "  Nemesis,"  the  "  Phlegethon,"  the  "  Ariadne,"  and  the  "  Medusa," 
— names  well  known  to  the  British  public  from  the  conspicuous  part 
which  the  vessels  performed  in  the  war  with  (]^hina. 

The  advantages  of  iron  over  timber,  for  naval  architecture,  are, — the 
absence  of  "  wear  and  tear  "  in  the  hull — no  necessity  for  caulking  or 
coppering — no  possibility  of  injury  from  dry  rot — greater  lightness  and 
increased  capacity — and,  what  is  of  even  far  more  importance,  greater 
safety.  This  last  point  has  sometimes  been  questioned,  but  not  by  any 
one  having  knowledge  on  the  subject.  When  a  timber-built  ship  takes 
the  ground  with  any  violent  shock,  the  whole  framework  of  the  vessel 
is  strained,  and  in  a  measure  dislocated, — so  that  by  the  mere  buffeting 
of  the  waves  she  will,  in  all  probability,  soon  be  made  a  complete 
wreck  ;  but  when  an  iron-built  vessel  strikes,  however  violent  the  blow, 
it  is  only  the  part  that  is  brought  into  collision  with  the  rocks  that  will 
be  injured.  The  plan  of  building  these  ships  in  water-tight  compart- 
ments then  proves  its  efficacy ;  for  should  the  injury  amount  even  to  the 
tearing  away  of  plates,  the  resulting  mischief  will  only  be  to  fill  with 
water  that  particular  compartment  of  the',  vessel  to  which  the  injury  has 
occurred,  so  that  the  ship  will  be  scarcely  less  buoyant  than  before ; 
experience  has  shown  that  damage  of  this  kind  is  easily  repaired. 

The  fii-st  cost  of  iron  vessels  is  somewhat,  but  not  much,  less  than 
that  of  timber-built  vessels  :  their  comparative  cheapness  results  from 
their  greater  durability  :  after  years  of  constant  employment  they  are 
found  to  be  as  sound  and  as  clean  as  Mdien  first  built.  Their  weight, 
u})on  which  depends  the  displacement  of  water,  is — as  a  genei'al  rule — 
three-fifths  the  weight  of  wooden  vessels  of  the  same  caj)acity.  The 
weight  of  metal  used  in  proportion  to  the  burden  of  the  ship  varies,  of 
course,  with  the  size.  A  sea-going  iron  steam-vessel  will  take  from 
nine  to  twelve  cwts.  of  iron  per  ton  register.  Boats  intended  for  river 
traffic,  which  do  not  require  an  equal  degree  of  strength,  of  course  take 
a  less  weight  of  metal. 

The  Imilding  of  iron  ship?   is  fast  becoming  an  important  branch  of 


ciiAr.  v.] 


COPPER. 


577 


national  industry  ;  it  is  ono  in  wliicli  oni'  mineral  riches  and  our  great 
mechanical  skill  will  secure  to  us  a  virtual  monopoly. 

The  average  price  of  pig-iron  of"  the  same  (|uality  in  Glasgow,  in  each 
year  from  18o5  to  184'J,  was  as  follows  : — 


^'I'ars. 

I'er  Ton. 

£.  s.  d. 

1835 

4  2  6 

183G 

G  13  0 

1837 

4  12  0 

1838 

4  10  0 

183a 

4  5  0 

1840 

3  18  0 

1841 

3  7  6 

1842 

2  10  0 

Yoars. 

I'tT  T. 

n. 

i.".  .s. 

d. 

1843 (Jan 

)2  ir. 

(1 

1844 

2  14 

(1 

1845 

4  0 

0 

1846 

3  12 

0 

1847 

3  5 

0 

1848 

2  4 

6 

184'J 

2  6 

0 

The  selling  price  of  English  merchant  bar-iron  in  Liverpool,  at  the 
beginning  of  each  year  from  180G  to  1849,  was  as  under  : — 


Years. 

I'e 

To 

n. 

£. 

.<!. 

d. 

1806 

17 

10 

0 

1807 

16 

0 

0 

1808 

15 

0 

0 

1809 

15 

10 

0 

1810 

14 

10 

0 

1811 

15 

0 

0 

1812 

14 

0 

0 

1813 

13 

0 

0 

1814 

13 

0 

0 

1815 

13 

5 

0 

1816 

11 

10 

0 

1817 

8 

15 

0 

1818 

13 

0 

0 

1819 

12 

10 

0 

1820 

11 

0 

0 

1821 

9 

0 

0 

1822 

8 

0 

0 

1823 

8 

10 

0 

1824 

8 

15 

0 

1825 

14 

0 

0 

1826 

11 

0 

0 

1827 

10 

0 

0 

'ears. 

I'er  To 

n. 

£.  s. 

d. 

1828 

9  0 

0 

1829 

7  15 

0 

1830 

6  12 

6 

1831 

6  5 

0 

1832 

6  5 

0 

1833 

6  5 

0 

1834 

7  15 

0 

1835 

6  10 

0 

1836 

10  10 

0 

1837 

10  10 

0 

1838 

9  15 

0 

1839 

10  5 

0 

1840 

9  0 

0 

1841 

8  0 

0 

1842 

6  10 

0 

1843 

5  5 

0 

1844 

4  15 

0 

1845 

6  10 

0 

1846 

9  15 

0 

1847 

10  0 

0 

1848 

8  0 

0 

1849 

6  0 

0 

Copper. — The  quantity  of  copper  used  at  different  periods  during  the 
present  century  has  been  as  follows,  if  we  assume  that  which  is  not 
strictly  ti'ue  in  any  individual  year,  but  which  must  be  true  taking  one 
year  with  anotlier,  viz. : — That  the  quantity  remaining  of  the  whole 
produce,  after  the  shipments  to  foreign  countries  are  deducted,  is  used 
at  home.  The  produce  of  all  the  copper  mines  in  the  kingdom  is  not 
known  for  any  year  earlier  than  1820  nor  later  than  1840 ;  but  as  the 
quantity  raised  from  mines  other  than  those  of  Cornwall  has  been 
usually  equal  to  one-fifth  of  the  produce  of  the  Cornish  mines,  that 
pro])ortion  has  been  added  to  the  accounts  of  Cornish  copper,  in  order 
to  furin  a  total. 

2   p 


578 


PROGRESS  OF  THE  NATION. 


[sec.  V, 


^■'^^"-  i  rXo"  I-'^Ported 


1801 
1802 
1803 
1804 
1805 
1806 
1807 
1808 
1809 
1810 
1811 
1812 
1813 
1814 
1815 
1816 
1817 
1818 
1819 
1820 
1821 
1822 
1823 
1824 


Tons. 
6,318 
6,274 
6,739 
6,450 
7,481 
8,234 
8,0.59 
8,154 
8,185 
6,818 
7,137 
8,697 
9,789 
9,523 
8,028 
8,454 
7,299 
8,057 
8,6.57 
8,127 
10,288 
10,018 
9,679 
9,705 


Tons. 

4.825 

6,348 

4,554 

2,935 

3,007 

2,343 

3,374 

3,028 

3,458 

2,902 

2,413 

3,334 


Ketaineil 
for  Use. 


Tons. 
1,4U3 

2,"is5 
3,515 
4,474 
5,891 
4,685 
5,126 
4,727 
3,916 
4,724 
5,363 
Records  destro\ed. 

3,035  1     6,488 

5,099  I 

5,207  i 

6,647  I 

6,077  I 


4,824 
6,098 
6,271 
5,683 
5,326 
5.305 


2,929 
3,247 
652 
1,980 
3,833 
2,029 
4,017 
4,335 
4,3.53 
4,400 


Years  f'oPP*"''  ■  Rvnortp,!  '  ^^*' 

^^^"-        Raised.   il-^'Porteil.     ^^^ 


1825 
1826 
1827 
1828 
1829 
1830 
1831 
1832 
1833 
1834 
1835 
1836 
1837 
1838 
1839 
1840 
1841 
1842 
1843 
1844 
1845 
1846 
1847 
1848 


Tons. 
10,358 
11,093 
12,326 
12,188 
12,0.57 
13,232 
14,685 
14,4.50 
13.260 
14,042 
14,474 
15,369 
15,310 
13,958 
14,672 
13,022 
12,884 


14,841 
14,939 
14,955 
13,785 
14,720 


Tons. 

3,931 

4,799 

7,171 

6,206 

7,976 

9,157 

8,5.30 

9,730 

7,811 

8,886 

9,111 

8,076 

7,129 

7,459 

7.687 

7,524 

5,926 

9,703 

5,875 

5,586 

6,867 

5,057 

6,221 


Ret.nined 
use. 


Tons. 

6,427 

6,294 

5, 155 

5^982 

4,081 

4,075 

6,155 

4,720 

5,449 

5,156 

5,363 

7,293 

8,181 

6,499 

6,985 

5,498 

6,958 


9,255 
8,072 
9,898 
7,564 


In  1848  and  subsequently,  foreign  copper-ore  has  been  admitted  at  a 
nominal  duty,  without  regard  to  the  proportion  of  metallic  copper 
Avhich  it  contains.  This  metal,  when  smelted,  is  treated,  as  regards 
fiscal  regulations,  as  a  British  manufacture,  and  as  such  is  not  dis- 
tinguishable from  copper  raised  within  the  kingdom,  so  that  it  has 
become  impossible  to  continue  the  above  table  beyond  the  year  1847. 

If  the  quantities  are  distributed  into  decennary  periods,  it  will  be  seen 
that  the  average  quantity  yearly  retained  for  use  was : — 


Years. 

Tons. 

1801  to  1810 

3,694 

1811  „  1820 

.3,472 

1821  „  1830 

4,912 

1831  „  1840 

6,290 

Tin. — It  is  not  possible  to  furnish  any  correct  account  of  the  quantity 
of  tin  retained  for  home  use,  because  there  are  no  means  whereby  we 
can  ascertain  the  quantity  of  that  metal  which  is  used  in  the  manufacture 
of  various  articles  exported. 


Timber. — The  use,  at  different  epochs,  of  timber,  an  article  of  such 
general  application,  exhibits  forcibly  the  comparative  progress  and 
industry  of  a  people.  In  the  years  chosen  for  the  exemplification  of 
our  condition  in  those  respects,  as  shown  by  the  consumption  of  some 
principal  articles  of  use  and  consumption,  th§  quantity  of  "  timber 
eight  inches  square  and  upwards,"  of  colonial  and  foreign  growth,  used 
in  the  United  Kingdom,  was  as  follows : — 


TIMBER. 

Years. 

Colonial. 

Forei){n. 

■foul. 

1801 

3,039 

l.")8,770 

161,869  Loads 

1811 

154,282 

124,766 

279,048       „ 

1S21 

317,563 

99,202 

416,763       „ 

1831 

127,1'J'J 

418,879 

546,078       „ 

1810 

639,014 

168,804 

807,818       „ 

1841 

613,679 

131,479 

745,1.58       „ 

1842 

418,939 

108.. 388 

327,327       „ 

579 


These  quantities  are  exclusive  of  all  kinds  except  square  timber.  It 
would  have  greatly  complicated  the  account  to  bring  forward  the  like 
statements  with  regard  to  all  the  forms  under  which  wood  is  imported, 
such  as  deals,  battens,  and  staves,  the  quantities  of  which  will  most  pro- 
bably vary  nearly  in  the  same  proportions  as  timber. 

Towards  the  close  of  1842  a  different  system  was  adopted  for 
charging  the  duties  on  wood,  and  all  kinds,  whether  square,  or  sawn 
and  split,  have  been  reckoned  in  the  Custom-house  accounts  according 
to  their  cubic  contents.  The  importations  of  all  forms  of  timber  have 
since  been  as  follows  : — 


Years. 

Colonial. 

Foreign. 

Total . 

1843 

922,087 

395,5.58 

1,317,645 

Loads. 

1844 

941,221 

544,136 

1,485,357 

1845 

1,281,974 

675,840 

1,957,814 

1846 

1,214,442 

810,497 

2,024,939 

1847 

1,039,233 

805,918 

1,893,131 

1848 

1,085.752 

720,696 

1,806,448 

1849 

1,070,151 

597,364 

1,667,515 

It  was  predicted  by  persons  engaged  in  the  colonial  timber  trade, 
that  to  lessen  the  difference  between  the  rates  of  duty  charged  upon 
foreign  and  colonial  timber  must  prove  injurious  to  them,  and  therefore 
hurtful  to  our  North  American  colonies.  Their  predictions  have 
happily  proved  unfounded.  It  will  be  seen  that  although  the  protective 
duty  in  favour  of  colonial  wood  has  been  reduced  by  progressive  steps, 
from  456-.  to  145.  per  load,  the  colonial  trade  in  the  article  has  very 
much  increased.  No  good  reason  can  be  assigned  for  the  continuance 
of  even  this  modified  protection,  and  it  is  hoped  that  this  deformity  w  ill 
before  long  be  removed  from  the  tariff. 

It  results  from  these  figures  that  the  increase  has  been — 

Bet^veen  1801  and  1811,  72  per  cent.  \  ^^?  increase  of  popu-  1  ^^ 

'        ^  (      lation  having  been  /       ^  ^ 

1811    „     1821,  49        „  „  .,  14^ 

„         1821    „     1831,  31        „  „  „  14|        „ 

1831    „     1841,  36        „  „  „  13^ 

Comparing  1801  with  1841,  it  will  be  seen,  that  while  the  increase  of 
the  population  is  64^  per  cent.,  the  use  of  imported  timber  increased 
360  per  cent. 

The  great  increase,  beyond  that  of  all  former  years,  in  the  consump- 
tion since  1845,  is  evidently  the  result  of  diminished  duties  in  concur- 
rence with  a  period  of  great  and  general  prosperity. 

2  p  2 


580  PROGRESS  or  THE  NATION.  [sec.  v. 

Much  uncertainty  must  always  attend  u})on  computations  affecting 
the  consumption  of  articles  which,  like  timher,  are  partly  furnished  from 
our  own  soil,  and  respecting  the  home  production  of  which  we  are 
without  any  means  of  calculation. 

It  is  impossible  to  estimate,  with  anything  approaching  to  exactness, 
the  consunij)tion  of  the  metropolis.  Accounts  are  given  of  the  number 
of  cattle  and  slieep  sold  in  the  markets,  but  we  should  greatly  mislead 
ourselves  by  taking  these  accounts  alone  as  our  guide  in  the  matter. 
A  large  quantity  of  slaughtered  meat  is  brought  for  sale  to  the  London 
markets  from  various  and  distant  parts  of  the  kingdom,  and  especially 
in  the  winter  months,  when  meat  killed  at  Newcastle  and  Edinburgh  is 
so  brought  in  great  abundance. 

The  quantitv  thus  conveyed  for  the  consumption  of  the  metropolis  by 
steam-vessels  during  the  cooler  season  of  the  year  has  been  ascertained 
to  be  as  follows  : — 

From  Bei-wick,     12  tons  weekly  for  6  months,  chiefly  mutton. 
Aberdeen,  10  „  G        „ 

Dundee,      17  ,,  0       „ 

Leith,  30  „  7        „ 

Glasgow,     20  „  7        „ 

Inverness,  50  tons  during  the  year. 

The  steam-vessels  from  Berwick,  Aberdeen,  Dundee,  and  Inverness, 
hrin"-  also  large  numbers  of  live  stock — oxen,  sheep,  and  swine ;  and 
further  numbers  of  these  animals  are  h.rought  by  sailing-vessels.  On 
one  occasion  a  steam-vessel  from  Aberdeen  has  brought  18JI  fat  bullocks 
to  London. 

Even  the  live  animals  which  arc  included  in  the  returns  do  not  com- 
prise all  which  are  brought  to  be  slaughtered,  many  both  of  oxen  and 
sheep  being  sold  in  I^ondon  and  the  immediate  suburbs  before  they 
reach  the  markets ;  and,  on  the  other  hand,  butchers  who  carry  on 
their  business  in  some  of  the  neighbouring  towns  are  accustomed  to 
attend  at  Smithfield  market  to  make  their  purchases.  With  all  this 
uncertaintv,  it  would  be  idle  to  expect  that  any  accurate  statement  can 
be  offered  on  this  subject. 

This  difficulty  is  not  experienced  in  an  ec^ual  degree  with  regard  to 
many  towns  on  the  continent  of  Europe,  where  every  article  of  provi- 
sions that  enters  is  subjected  to  a  town-duty  or  octroi,  and  an  accurate 
account  of  the  quantities  must  be  kept  at  the  barriers.  But  even  in 
these  cases  the  record  cannot  be  relied  on  as  strictly  accurate  at  all 
times.  It  is  well  known  that  in  Paris,  in  time  of  scarcity,  when  it  is 
more  than  ordinarily  needful  for  the  labouring  portion  of  the  popu- 
lation to  economise  their  means  of  living,  many  fjimilies  go  beyond  the 
barriers  in  order  to  take  their  meals,  and  thu^  avoid  the  payment  of 
octroi  duties  altogether. 

The  accounts  ke])t  by  the  Excise  officers  of  the  quantities  of  different 


•J 


COALS. 


581 


articles  sent  by  permits  from  the  stocks  of  manufacturers  and  wholesale 
dealers,  might  be  supposed  to  give  some  idea  of  the  consumption  of  the 
district ;  but  the  fact  is,  that  London  dealers  supply  great  numbers 
besides  the  London  popvdation,  and  the  records  of  the  Excise  ofhcers 
therefore  give  a  very  exaggerated  view  of  the  consumption  of  the 
metropolis.  For  the  same  reason,  no  inference  should  be  drawn  from 
the  quantity  of  foreign  goods  cleared  for  consumption  at  the  London 
Custom-house,  a  gn^at  part  of  which  goods  are  afterwards  distributed  to 
dillcrent  places  in  the  kingdom. 

Of  the  Excise  duty  collected  during  the  years  1837  to  1831)  in 
England,  twelve  per  cent.,  or  very  nearly  one-eighth,  was  furnished  by 
the  metropolitan  district. 

The  numbers  of  cattle  and  of  sheep  brought  to  Smithfield  market  in 
each  of  the  twenty -nine  years  from  1821  to  1849  were  : — 


Years. 

Cattle. 

Sheep. 

Years. 

Cattle. 

Sheep. 

1S21 

12),  125 

1,107,230 

1836 

164,351 

1,21J,510 

1822 

142,043 

1,340,160 

1837 

172,435 

1,329,010 

1823 

14'.»,552 

1,264,920 

1838 

183,362 

1,403,400 

1824 

163,615 

1,23 J, 720 

183i) 

180,780 

1,360,250 

1825 

156, '.185 

1,130,310 

1840 

177, 4D7 

1,371,870 

1826 

143,460 

1,270,530 

1841 

166,922 

1,310,220 

1827 

138,363 

l,a35,10O 

1842 

175,347 

1,468,960 

1828 

147,968 

1,288,460 

1843 

175,133 

1,571,760 

1829 

158,313 

1,240,300 

1844 

186,191 

1,609,130 

1830 

159,907 

1,287,070 

1845 

192,180 

1,441,980 

1831 

148,168 

1,189,010 

ia46 

199,875 

1,458,820 

1832 

158,640 

1,257,180 

1847 

220,862 

1,438,2S0 

1833 

152,0'J3 

1,167,820 

1848 

220,193 

1,343,770 

1834 

162,485 

1,237,360 

1840 

223,560 

1,514,130 

1835 

170,325 

1,381,540 

Coals. — The  coals  brought  to  London  during  the  same  years  have 
increased  materially  in  quantity,  owing  partly  to  the  introduction  of  gas- 
lighting,  and  partly  also  to  the  great  extension  of  the  employment  of 
steam-vessels : — ■ 


Years. 

Tons. 

Years. 

Tons. 

Years. 

Tons. 

1821 

1,744,914 

1831 

2,053,673 

1841 

2,902,674 

1822 

1,667,307 

18.32 

2,149,820 

1842 

2,754,719 

1823 

1,936,891 

1833 

2,014,804 

1843 

2,663,114 

1824 

1,982,032 

1834 

2,080,547 

1844 

2,563,166 

1825 

1,921,091 

1835 

2,299,816 

1845 

3,461,199 

1826 

2,103,498 

1836 

2,399,551 

1846 

2,975,627 

1827 

1,874,610 

1837 

2,629,321 

1847 

3,302,425 

1828 

1,893,083 

1838 

2,582,770 

1848 

3,479^189 

1829 

2,095,420 

1839 

2,638,2.56 

1849 

3,3?0,786 

1830 

2,116,023 

1840 

2,-589,087 

It  is  proper,  under  this  head,  to  notice  briefly  the  invention,  or,  to 
speak  more  correctly,  the  introduction  of  gas-lighting,  as  one  of  the 
great  economical  improvements  of  the  present  century.  The  discovery 
of  an  inflammable  gas  in  coal,  which  might  be  applied  to  the  purpose  of 
illumination,  was  made  during  the  seventeenth  century,  but  it  was  not 


582  PROGRESS  OF  THE  NATION.  [sec.  v. 

until  the  year  1804  that  this  discovery  was  turned  to  any  practical 
account.  In  that  year,  a  patent  was  taken  out  for  an  apparatus  appli- 
cable to  the  purpose  by  Mr.  Winsor,  who,  by  his  lectures  and  experi- 
ments, overcame  by  degrees  the  ridicule  with  which  his  plans  were  at 
first  assailed,  and  prepared  the  way  for  the  success  of  other  persons 
having  greater  scientific  and  mechanical  knowledge  than  himself. 

Tliis  invention  wa?  first  applied  to  the  lighting  of  cotton-mills  and 
other  manufiictories,  but  was  soon  largely  adopted  in  London  and 
the  chief  provincial  towns  in  the  kingdom.  At  this  time,  altho\igh 
not  more  than  fortv  years  have  elapsed  from  its  first  successful  in- 
troduction, gas-lighting  is  employed  in  every  town  of  importance  in 
England  and  Scotland,  and  in  many  of  the  larger  towns  of  Ireland.  It 
has  not  been  possible  to  obtain  any  minute  data  for  estimating  the 
quantity  of  coals  now  applied  to  this  purpose  in  the  United  Kingdom, 
but  it  is  probably  within  the  truth  to  say  that  the  annual  consumption 
in  all  the  gas  establishments  amounts  to  between  500,000  and  G00,000 
(ons. 

It  appears  worthy  of  remark,  that,  notwithstanding  this  large  con- 
sumption, which  has  in  a  great  degree  superseded  the  use  of  oil  for 
street-lighting,  the  aggregate  consumption  of  whale  oil  has  very  mate- 
rially increased.  This  fact  is,  of  course,  referable  to  the  fashion  now 
become  very  general,  of  burning  table-lamps  in  the  place  of  candles  in 
our  dwellings ;  but  it  must  excite  surprise  in  the  mind  of  every  one 
when  first  made  acquainted  with  the  fact,  that  during  this  time  the  use 
of  candles  in  dwellings,  and  especially  of  wax  candles,  has  also  increased 
in  a  greater  proportion  than  the  population.  It  has  been  suggested, 
and  with  much  apparent  reason,  that  this  increase  may  be  consequent 
upon  the  greater  brilliancy  of  the  streets  since  they  have  been  lighted 
with  gas,  and  since  we  have  thus  been  made  dissatisfied  with  the 
quantum  of  light  previously  thought  sufficient  within  our  houses.  Cer- 
tain it  is,  that  our  apartments  are  much  more  brilliantly  lighted  now 
than  they  were  before  the  introduction  of  coal-gas,  whether  that  inven- 
tion be  chargeable  with  the  increase  or  not. 

During  the  first  few  years  after  its  adoption,  very  large  sums  were 
spent  in  making  experiments  with  the  hope  of  bringing  this  mode  of 
lighting  to  perfection,  and  to  a  certain  extent  those  experiments  were 
successful.  It  can  hardly  be  said  that  much  imj)rovement.has  been 
made  in  the  art  during  the  last  twenty  years,  although  the  spirit  of  in- 
vention is  by  no  means  quenched,  and  projectors  are  continually  offering 
plans  for  economising  the  cost  of  the  processes,  but  it  may  reasonably  be 
expected  that  the  invention  has  not  so  soon  after  its  adoption  reached 
the  utmost  limit  of  perfection. 

It  may  be  thought  an  easy  thing  to  ascertain  the  consumption  of  food 
by  families,  and  thence  to  determine  the  average  quantities  used  by  in- 


ciiAr.  V.J  CONSUMPTION  OF  FAMILIES,  ETC.  583 

(lividuals,  and  the  aggregate  for  the  whole  kingdom.  Any  one  who  may 
attempt  to  ])rocure  this  information  will,  however,  soon  find  greater 
ditKculties  in  his  way  than  he  lias  anticipated.  Very  few  persons  keep 
any  adequate  records  of  their  expenditure  ;  and  with  those  who  do  pre- 
serve them,  such  a  variety  of  circumstances  mus^t  be  taken  into  con- 
sideration before  the  experience  of  individual  families,  placed  in  some 
circumstances  or  other  of  peculiarity,  can  be  assumed  as  affording  a 
test  of  the  average  expenditure,  that  a  very  rough  approximation  to  the 
fact  is  all  that  we  can  reasonably  expect  to  attain. 

Not  having  been  allowed  in  every  case  to  mention  the  sources  whence 
the  following  statements  have  been  derived,  the  names  of  the  ])ai'ties 
and  establishments  are  wholly  suppressed,  but  every  reliance  may  be 
])laced  in  their  entire  accuracy. 

No.  1.  In  a  private  family  residing  in  a  fashionable  part  of  London, 
and  consisting  of  a  gentleman,  his  wife,  six  children,  and  ten  servants  ; 
in  all  eighteen  persons,  two-thirds  of  whom  were  adults,  the  consumption 
in  the  year  1840  amounted  to — 

Per  Diem.  Per  Annum. 

6,668  lbs.  meat,  or  for  each  person  1 -014916  lb.  370.^  lbs. 

5,100    „     bread      „  „  0-776255  „  283J   „ 

.541    „     butter     „  „  1-317505  oz.  ^-k^i 

1,8S7  qts.  milk         „  „  0-287214  qt.  104^  qts. 

In  the  following  year  the  family  was  reduced  to  seventeen  persons,  by 
the  discharge  of  one  of  the  servants,  and  the  consumption  of  the  year 
Avas  as  follows  : — 

Per  Diem.  Per  Annum. 

5,820  lbs.  moat,  or  for  each  person  0-937953  lb.  342;^  lbs. 

3,668    „     bread       „  „  0-591136   „  215f   „ 

586    ,,     butter     „  „  1-511039  oz.  34^   „ 

1,782  qts.  milk         „  „  0-287187  qt.  104|  qts. 

It  would  be  difficult  to  account  for  the  different  rates  of  consumption 
observable  In  the  statements  of  these  two  consecutive  years.  The  only 
apparent  differences  in  the  conditions  are,  that  there  was  one  male  servant 
discharged,  and  each  of  the  six  children  was  a  year  older,  and  therefore 
probably  a  larger  consumer  of  solid  food,  and  yet  we  see  that  the  con- 
sumj)tion  of  meat  and  of  bread  was  less  by  848  lbs.  and  1,432  lbs. 
respectively ;  whence  it  would  appear  (making  no  account  of  the  altered 
ages  of  the  children)  as  if  the  discharged  servant  had  consumed  on  an 
average  more  than  six  pounds  of  bread  and  meat  daily,  while  the  average 
consumption  of  the  remaining  seventeen  persons  did  not  much  exceed 
one-fourth  of  that  quantity.  It  is  evident  that  there  must  be  some  dis- 
turbing cause  that  does  not  appear ;  and  hence  we  may  learn  how  little 
reliance  is  to  be  placed  upon  averages  drawn,  even  with  the  greatest 
carefulness,  from  small  numbers. 

No.  2.  In  a  large  trading  establishment  in  the  city  of  London,  con- 


581  PROGRESS  OF  THE  NATION.  [sec.  v. 

sisting  of  114  persons,  males  and  females,  all  adults,  thcvc  was  consumed 
in  1841  — 

Daily.  In  the  Yenr. 

34,914  lbs.  of  meat,  being  per  head  0-S.3'J077  lb.,  or  306J  lbs. 
and  40,464      „       bread  „  0-972461    ,,     ,,355     „ 

In  this  establishment,  as  well  as  in  the  family  just  described,  the 
quantities  consumed  were  at  the  discretion  of  the  individual  members. 
This  may  not  have  been  the  case  with  the  following  institutions,  into  the 
management  of  which  a  control  of  the  expenditure  would  necessarily 
enter,  so  at  least  as  to  prevent  waste,  but  without  stinting. 

No.  3.  In  an  asylum  consisting  of  nine  superintendents  and  servants, 
and  158  female  children,  together  167  persons,  the  consumption  of  1841 
consisted  of — 

16,625  lbs.  meat,  or  for  each  person  0*272742  lb 


41,690 

)) 

bread 

1,456 

» 

rice 

3,360 

» 

flour 

1,780 

« 

butter 

1,335 

5J 

cheese 

21,848 

)! 

potatoes 

13,201 

qts 

milk 

16,272 

)i 

beer 

Per  Piem. 

Per  Annum. 

0-272742  lb. 

99i  lbs. 

0 -683.147   „ 

249a    „ 

0-023886   „ 

8f    „ 

0-0.55122   „ 

20^   „ 

0-029201    „ 

n  „ 

0-021901    „ 

8     „ 

0-3.58428   „ 

130|„ 

0-216.569  qt. 

79  qts. 

0-266951    „ 

97i„ 

The  average  consumption  of  solid  food  in  this  asylum  appears,  there- 
fore, to  be  527^  lbs.  in  the  year,  or  within  a  very  small  fraction  indeed 
of  1^  lb.  daily  for  each  person. 

No.  4.  In  another  asylum,  having  an  average  number  of  290  in- 
mates, chiefly  children  of  both  sexes,  the  consumption  during  the  year 
was  — 

Per  Diem.  Per  Annum. 
46,415  lbs.  meat,  or  for  each  person  0-438497  lb.  160  lbs. 

C0,780    „     bread       „  „  0-857628  „  313   „ 

62,7-20    „    potatoes,,  „  0-529536,,  216^,, 

The  greater  consumption  in  this  case,  26  per  cent,  beyond  that  of 
No.  3,  is  probably  occasioned  by  the  circumstance  of  one-half  of  the 
institution  being  composed  of  males. 

No.  5.  Another  asylum,  on  the  establishment  of  which  were  139 
persons,  chiefly  young  persons  of  both  sexes,  consumed  in  the  year — 

For  each  person  2.36  lbs.  of  meat. 

„  „  473      „       bread  and  flour. 

„  „  23      „      butter. 

„  „  21i    „       cheese. 

„  „  206       „       potatoes. 

„  „  63  quarts  of  milk. 

„  „  63  gallons  of  beer.  ^ 

„  „           12  quarts  of  oatmeal. 

„  „  9^  lbs.  of  sugar. 

•1  „  3        ,,       tea. 


ciiAF.  v.]  CONSUMPTION  OF  FAMILIES,  ETC.  585 

The  expenditure  In  this  case  appears  to  be  on  a  scale  of  great 
liberality,  if,  indeed,  it  do  not  go  beyond  that  (quality  and  exhibit 
profusion.  The  (piantity  of  bread  and  meat  consumed  by  eacb  inmate 
is  considerably  greater  than  that  of  the  family  No.  1,  in  which  there 
was  neither  the  same  motive,  nor  equal  means  for  the  exercise  of 
carefulness.  The  quantity  of  solid  food  consumed  is  80  per  cent, 
beyond  that  of  No.  3,  and  40  per  cent,  beyond  that  of  No.  4. 
The  cost  per  head,  for  food  alone,  in  this  institution,  is  stated  to 
have  amounted  in  the  year  to  15/.  135.  2d.,  being  65.  O^d.  per 
week. 

No.  6.  An  asylum  containing,  on  the  average  of  the  year  1841,  116 
persons,  10  of  whom  were  adults,  and  106  male  and  female  children, 
consumed — 


Per  Diem. 

Per  Annum. 

12,083  lbs.  meat,  or  for  each 

person 

0-285380  lb. 

1041  lbs. 

33,488    „     bread        „ 

„ 

0-790030  „ 

28Si  „ 

3,.3G0    „    flour          „ 

') 

0-07'.!357  „ 

2l>    „ 

5,824    „     potatoes  „ 

„ 

0-137553  „ 

^  „ 

1,402    „     clieesc      „ 

,j 

0-033113  „ 

12     „ 

520    „     butter       „ 

)> 

0-012281  „ 

4i„ 

2,207  gallons  milk    „ 

)> 

0-208502  qt. 

1<J  galls. 

The  consumption  here  detailed  is  nearly  the  same  in  average  quantity 
as  that  of  No.  3.  The  proportions  of  meat  and  bread  are  rather  greater, 
and  of  potatoes  less,  and  it  is  probable  that  the  nutritive  power  of  the 
food  is  in  both  cases  nearly  efiual. 

No.  7.  This  is  a  large  public  establishment,  containing  an  average 
number  throughout  the  year  of  646  male  persons,  chiefly  boys.  The 
consumption  during  1841  was — 


C«ts.  qr.  lbs. 

Per  Diem. 

Per  .\nnum, 

779     1     8  meat,  or  for  each  person 

0-365104  lb. 

1.3.3i  lbs. 

2,118    0    6  bread        „            „ 

1-053700  „ 

384i    „ 

69     2  18  flour  and  oatmeal 

0-0.32245  „ 

11!  » 

1,53    3    8  cheese      „            „ 

0-07.3034  „ 

261     „ 

765    0    0  potatoes    „            „ 

0-3.58716  „ 

131      „ 

62    2    6  butter       „            „ 

0-029718  „ 

101     » 

59     1  24  green  vegetables  „ 

0-028249  „ 

lOi    „ 

16     1     0  raisins      „            „ 

0-007720  „ 

n  V 

9,540  gallons  milk        „            „ 

0- 1603.38  qt. 

58^  qts. 

12,888      „       beer        „            „ 

0-218670  „ 

80      „ 

The  consumption,  in  this  case,  of  solid  food  amounts  to  711  lbs.  per 
annum,  or  within  a  small  fraction  of  2  lbs.  daily  (13  lbs.  11  ozs.  per 
week).  Judging  from  the  other  cases  brought  forward,  this  must  be 
considered  a  very  liberal  dietary. 

No.  8.  Another  large  establishment,  in  which  the  children  are  younger 
than  those  in  No.  7,  and  where  a  small  proportion  are  females.  It  con- 
sisted of  365  males  and  67  females.  In  the  course  of  the  year  1841 
they  consumed — 


586 


riiouKEss  or  the  nation. 


[sec.  v. 


Cwts. 

qrs.  lbs. 

Per  Diem. 

Per  Annum 

4S3 

3     1  meat,  or  for  each  person 

0-313048  lb. 

125}  11)9. 

1,193 

1     1  bread       „            ,, 

0-846175  „ 

309     „ 

49 

2    4  flour  and  oatmeal 

0-035127  „ 

1^.}  „ 

54 

1  16  cheese      „            „ 

0-038571  „ 

1*     ., 

354 

0    0  potatoes  „            „ 

0-251032  „ 

9U„ 

31 

2  23  green  vegetables 

0-022483  „ 

8|  „ 

25 

3  21  butter      „            „ 

0-018393  „ 

6J  „ 

11 

3    8  raisins      „            „ 

0-008383  „ 

3    „ 

10,665 

gallons  milk       „            „ 

0-270102  qt. 

98^  qta. 

6,631 

«      Ijeer 

0-167973    „ 

64  „ 

Considering  the  different  circumstances  already  noticed,  this  con- 
sumption may  he  considered  equal  to  that  of  No.  7.  Both  institutions 
are  under  the  same  management. 


PRICES.  587 


CHAPTER  VI. 


PIIICES. 


Effect  of  Prices  upon  Consumption— Cost  of  Ship-building  in  1805  compared  with  the  Cost 
in  1836— Prices  of  Beef  and  Mutton— Of  various  Articles  of  Clothing— Prices  of  Dress 
at  Chelsea  Hospital. 

The  effect  of  variations  in  price,  as  occasioned  by  additions  to  or  re- 
ductions of  duties  upon  the  consumption  of  particular  articles,  has  been 
sufficiently  shown  in  the  preceding  Chapter.  The  ultimate  limit  of 
consumption,  as  already  stated,  is  the  power  of  production ;  since  it 
must  1)6  quite  evident,  on  the  one  hand,  that  no  more  can  be  consumed 
than  is  produced ;  and  equally  evident,  on  the  other  hand,  that  men  will 
not  continue  to  produce  an  article  in  quantities  beyond  what  will  be 
demanded  at  a  price  sufficient  to  replace  the  cost  of  production,  together 
with  the  ordinary  rate  of  profit. 

Tiie  power  to  use  and  to  consume  has  always  been  practically  limited 
only  by  inability  to  command  the  means  of  purchasing — a  cause  which, 
in  some  degree  or  other,  has  been  always  in  operation  as  regards  the 
most  numerous  portion  of  every  community.  The  proportionate  con- 
sumption in  a  country  at  various  periods  forms,  therefore,  a  very  good 
help  by  which  to  estimate  its  comparative  prosperity. 

8ome  accidental  causes,  such  as  a  change  of  fashion,  may  occasion 
more  or  less  of  certain  commodities  to  be  used ;  but  this  will  not  affect 
the  general  consumption  of  all  commodities.  If  from  some  such  cause 
more  of  one  kind  are  purchased,  there  will  be  less  of  others ;  and  the 
variation  of  demand  thus  induced  will,  if  continued  for  a  sufficiently 
long  time,  determine  the  employment  of  a  greater  or  less  amount  of 
industry  for  the  production  of  the  articles  affected.  It  is  not  by  such 
means,  however,  that  permanent  variations  of  price  are  brovight  about. 
Except  in  a  modified  degree,  and  occasioned  by  other  causes,  into  which 
it  is  not  now  necessary  to  inquire,  such  variations  can  only  occur  through 
variations  in  the  cost  of  production  or  the  charges  of  distribution.  If 
(other  things  remaining  equal)  the  cost  of  producing  a  yard  of  cloth  be 
reduced  one-half  by  improvements  in  the  processes  of  manufacture, 
there  will  thenceforward  be  at  least  an  equivalent  increase  in  the  quan- 


5SS 


niOURESS  OF  THE  NATIOX. 


[sec 


tity  used,  not  so  nuich  because  every  wearer  of  cloth  will  he  less  careful 
of  his  garments,  as  because  a  larger  class  of  consumers  will  be  enabled 
to  purchase. 

intimate  of  the  E.vpense  of  Materials  and  Labour  for  Bttildmg  a  l-i-Gun  Ship,  of  X'OQ  Tons, 
given  to  the  A'iiry  Hoard,  oth  January,  1805,  hi/  Messrs.  Wells,  JBrent,  Jiamard,  and  Roberts, 
Dudmnn,  and  Pitcher,  compared  with  tlie  cost  in  1836. 


Timber— Oak      .     2,400  loads    . 
Elm      .  80    „ 

Fir  .      .  45    „ 

Knees        ...         230    „ 
Thick  stutt".  5-in.  1        „/. , 

and  upwards  .  f  »        • 

4-inch  plank   .      .  120     „ 

3-inch  ditto  &  under     150     „ 
Kast  Country  plank     150    „ 
Deals — 3-inch       .         330    „ 
2.V-inch     .         180     „ 
2-"inch       .  ISO     „ 

U-inch,  20  ft.  .500    „ 
1-inch        „       300     „ 
^-inch       .,      300    „ 
Elm  board,  1.000  feet    .... 
Sawyers'  labour,  per  hundred 
Shipwrights'  ditto      .    per  ton 
Labourers'  ditto  .     .         „ 
Caulkers'  ditto,  and  ) 

materials  .  .  j  " 
Joiners'  ditto,  ditto  .  „ 
Smiths'  work  ...  „ 
Carvers  2s.,  plumbers  -is.,  painters  1 

and  glaziers  4s I 

Tinman   9d.,    blockmaker    \s.   5d.    ) 

plaistering  lOrf j 

Scraper 

Landing   timber    and   plank,    and    ) 

landing  and  )iousing  deals   .      .      / 
Cross  spalls,  harpins,  and  ribands 
Kiln  fire  and  attendance,  per  ton 
Standards,     staging,     and    shores,    1 

480/. ;    cordage   and   blocks,   six    > 

tons,  420/ J 

Eingbolts,  clamps,  screws,  bolts,  and  1 

utensils / 

Mould-loft  expenses,  100?. ;  purvey-  \ 

ing  expenses,  200/. ;  officers'  sala-  l 

ries,  SOU/ ' 

Eent  and   taxes,  500/. ;    launching-  ) 

gear,  150/. ;  insurance,  150/.      .      J 


Cost  in  1805 


15  per  cent.    . 
36/.  lis.  3c/.  per  ton 


£.  s. 

d. 

7  10 

0 

6  0 

0 

5  10 

0 

10  10 

0 

14  0 

0 

13  0 

0 

11  0 

0 

13  0 

0 

1  16 

0 

1  10 

0 

0  18 

0 

0  7 

0 

0  5 

6 

0  3 

6 

0  1 

10 

0  1 

10 

4  12 

0 

0  12 

0 

0  12 

0 

0  15 

0 

2  5 

0 

0  10 

0 

0  2 

10 

0  0 

2 

0  2 

0 

£.  s.  d. 

18,000  0  0 

4S0  0  0 

247  10  0 

2,415  0  0 

5,0D6  0  0 

1,560  0  0 

1,650  0  0 

1,'.(.50  0  0 

648  0  0 

270  0  0 

162  0  0 

175  0  0 

82  10  0 

.52  10  0 

15  0  0 

2,, 5.53  0  0 

6,824  0  0 

1,023  12  0 

1,023  12  0 

1,279  10  0 

3,833  10  0 

853  0  0 

241  13  8 

14  4  0 

356  18  0 

200  0  0 

170  12  0 

900    0  0 


300    0    0 

1,100    0    0 

800    0    0 


I'ost  in  1830 


54,288     1     8 
8,142     0    0 


02,430     0     0 


£.  s.  d. 

5  10  0 

4  10  0 

5  10  0 
7   10  0 

13     0  0 

12    0  0 

10    0  0 

12     0  0 

1   10  0 

1     5  0 

0  18  0 

0     5  0 

0     4  0 

0     3  0 

4</.  foot. 

ICs.  per  ton 

3    3  0 

0    7  0 

0  10  0 


2     0    0 


5  per  cent. 

26    4    7 
per  ton. 


£.        s.  d. 

13,200    0  0 

360    0  0 

247   10  0 

1,725     0  0 

4,732     0  0 

1,440    0  0 

1,500    0  0 

1,800     0  0 

540    0  0 

225     0  0 

162    0  0 

125    0  0 

60    0  0 

45    0  0 

16  13  4 

1,364  16  0 

5,373  18  0 

597     2  0 

853    0  0 

1,279  10  0 

3,412    0  0 

853    0  0 

241   13  8 

14    4  0 

200    0  0 

1.50    0  0 

150    0  0 

500    0  0 


250  0  0 
700  0  0 
500     0     0 


42,617     7     0 
2,130  17     4 


44,748     4     4 


Permanent  alterations  of  price  arc  always  indicative  of  variations 
equally  permanent  in  the  c(jst  of  production  or  transmission  ,  and  as, 
in  the  progress  of  manufacturing  industry,  it  most  commonly,  nay, 
universally  hajjpcns  that  processes  are  simplified  ajid  labour  economised, 
the  uniform  tendency  has  thence  been  to  a  progressive  increase  of  con- 
sumption.    It  may  be  sufiicieut  on  this  head  to  refer  the  reader  to  the 


criAr.  VI.] 


PRICES. 


689 


second  Section  of  this  work,  in  which  the  progress  of  improvements  and 
consumption  liave  been  traced  with  respect  to  several  principal  branches 
of  our  manufacture.  The  object  now  in  view  is  not  to  write  a  scientilic 
treatise,  but  to  bring  forward  some  fiicts  that  may  be  useful  for  con- 
firming or  correcting  the  theories  of  others,  and  for  showing  in  a 
))ractical  manner  the  different  results  that  have  followed  in  various  cases 
from  legislative  interference.* 

The  preceding  statement  of  the  cost  of  materials  and  labour  employed 
in  the  construction  of  a  ship  of  74  guns,  in  each  of  the  years  1805  and 
1836,  will  be  found  intert>sting.  The  j)rices  in  1805  are  taken  from  a 
parliamentary  j)aper,  and  arc  those  which  were  paid  to  five  of  the  most 
considerable  ship-binlders  on  the  Thames ;  those  in  183G  were  kindly 
supplied  by  Mr.  G.  F.  Young,  of  the  firm  of  Curlings  and  Youn."-. 

The  following  statement  of  the  prices  of  beef  and  mutton  at  Lady- 
day  and  Michaelmas,  in  each  year  from  1801  to  1849,  is  taken  from 
the  weekly  book  of  St.  Thomas's  Hospital,  in  Southwark ;  and  as  the 
})ieces  and  parts  of  the  oxen  and  sheep  purchased  have  been  the  same 
throughout  the  time,  the  tal)le  is  strictly  comparative  : — 


Beef  per  Stone. 

Mu 

ton  per  Stone. 

Years. 

Beef  per  Stone. 

Mutton  per  Stone. 

Years. 

Lady-day. 

Michael- 
mas. 

Lady 

-day. 

Michael- 
mas. 

Ladv 

-day. 

Mich.iel- 
mas. 

Lady-day. 

M  iciiael- 
mas. 

s.    d. 

S.    d. 

s. 

d. 

s.jl. 

s. 

d. 

s.    d. 

s.    d. 

s.    d. 

1801 

0     8 

5      8 

6 

0 

5     4 

1826 

4 

0 

4    0 

4    8 

4     4 

1802 

5     0 

5     0 

5 

4 

5     4 

1827 

4 

0 

4    0 

4     4 

4     4 

1803 

4     8 

4    8 

5 

0 

.5     0 

1828 

3 

8 

3     8 

4     0 

4     0 

1804 

4     6 

4  10 

4 

8 

5     0 

182J 

3 

6 

3     4 

3  10 

4     0 

180.5 

4    4 

4    6 

4 

6 

4     4 

18,10 

2 

8 

3    0 

3     2 

3     6 

1806 

4     8 

4  10 

4 

10 

4   10 

1831 

3 

4 

3     4 

4    2 

4    2 

1807 

4     8 

4     8 

5 

0 

5     0 

18.32 

3 

4 

3     0 

4    2 

3  10 

1808 

4    6 

5     0 

4 

8 

5     0 

1833 

3 

4 

3     4 

3  10 

4     2 

1S03 

5     0 

5    8 

5 

0 

5     4 

1834 

3 

0 

3    0 

3  10 

3     6 

1810 

5     8 

5    8 

5 

4 

T)     8 

183.5 

2 

10 

3     2 

3     0 

3     4 

Irfll 

5     8 

5    8 

5 

8 

.5     8 

1836 

3 

6 

3     4 

3     8 

3  10 

lSl-2 

6     0 

6    0 

6 

0 

6    0 

1837 

3 

4 

3    4 

3  10 

4     2 

1813 

6     4 

6     4 

6 

4 

6    4 

1838 

3 

0 

3     4 

3     6 

3  10 

18U 

6     4 

.5     8 

7 

0 

6    0 

1839 

3 

4 

3     8 

3  10 

3  10 

1815 

5     4 

4     6 

5 

4 

4    8 

1840 

3 

4 

3     8 

3     8 

4    0 

1816 

4     0 

4     0 

4 

8 

4     8 

1841 

4 

0 

3     8 

4    4 

4    0 

1S17 

3     8 

3    8 

4 

8 

4    0 

1842 

3 

4 

3     0 

3     8 

3     4 

1S18 

4     4 

4     4 

4 

8 

5    0 

1843 

2 

8 

3     0 

3     0 

3     4 

isiy 

4  10 

4  10 

5 

8 

5     8 

1844 

2 

8 

2     8 

3    0 

3     4 

1820 

4  10 

4     6 

5 

4 

5    4 

1845 

2 

8 

3     4 

3     4 

4     0 

1S21 

4    0 

3     8 

4 

8 

4    0 

1846 

3 

8 

3     4 

4     4 

4    0 

1822 

2  10 

2     6 

3 

4 

3     6 

1847 

3 

8 

3  10 

4     4 

4     6 

1823 

2     6 

3    4 

3 

6 

3    8 

1848 

4 

0 

3     4 

4     8 

4    0 

1824 

3    4 

3     4 

3 

8 

3    8 

1849 

3 

0 

3    0 

3    8 

3     8 

1S25 

4    0 

4    4 

4 

« 

4    8 

The  average  quantity  of  meat  used  daily  in  the  hospital  is  32  stones 
4  pounds. 

*  If  it  be  required  to  know  the  fluctuations  that  have  occurred  in  the  prices  of  various 
descriptions  of  merchandise,  recourse  may  be  had  to  the  Appendix  to  Mr.  Tooke's  '  History 
of  Prices,'  in  which  tlie  most  complete  and  accurate  tables  of  that  nature  are  giver, 
embracing  the  period  of  56  years,  from  1782  to  1838. 


590 


PKOGRESS  OF  THE  NATION. 


[sec. 


The  average  prices,  per  stone  of  8  lbs.,  of  butcher's  meat,  sold  in  the 
London  markets,  in  each  vear  from  1841  to  1849,  have  been  as  follows  : — 


1841 

lS4i 

1843 

1844 

1845 

184ti 

184T 

1848 

1849 

«. 

fl. 

s.    d. 

s.    d. 

*.    d. 

s. 

rf. 

«. 

d. 

s. 

d. 

s. 

d. 

s.    d. 

Inferior  Beasts     .      3 

■H 

3    ^; 

2    8- 

2     71 

2 

1 

2 

8 

3 

bk 

3 

2 

2    7 

Second  Class   .     .      3 

9 

3    7 

3    2^ 

3     1 

3 

3 

1^ 

3 

1(4 

3 

7 

3     li 

Third  Class  (large )     ^ 
prime)    .     .     .  j 

21- 

3  11^ 

3    7 

3    5J 

3 

9 

3 

7i 

4 

3^ 

3 

11 

3      6;^ 

Fourth    Class        I 
(Scots)    ...  5 

4 

'h 

4    5i 

3  101 

3  10| 

4 

U 

4 

0 

4 

8 

4 

3 

3  10 

Inferior  Sheep 

3 

6i 

3    54 

3    Oi 

2  11 

3 

4i 

3 

H 

4 

0 

3 

^ 

1% 

Second  Class   . 

3 

lt>r 

3  10 

3    5 

3    .'>^ 

3 

ll>t 

4 

1 

4 

4i 

4 

2| 

Third  Class  (long^ 
coarse  woolled)  i 

4 

4* 

4    \i 

3  10 

3    ^ 

4 

3| 

4 

5^ 

4 

8^ 

4 

^h 

3  lOL 

Fourth    Class         V 
(South  Dow-ns)  3 

4 

11 

4    5i 

4    1 

4    Oi 

4 

9 

4 

10 

5 

3 

5 

li 

4   2:- 

Lambs  .... 

.5 

^ 

5     5 

4    9^ 

5    0^ 

3    si 

5 

3 

D 

11 

5 

9A 

5 

it 

4  lOf 

3  4i 

4  2:- 

3    4, 

Coarse  Calves. 

4 

W 

4    2 

3    9| 

4 

^ 

4 

0* 

4 

5:^ 

4 

Small  Prime  Calves 

.T 

s 

4    9| 
4    4| 
4  lOj 

4    4} 

4    .'4 
3    3.V 

4 

?^ 

4 

8 

5 

Of 

4 

7 

Large  Hogs 

4 

3    5 

3 

4 

^4 

4 

4 

2.^ 

Small  >'eat  Porkers 

4 

10} 

3  lli 

3  10§ 

4 

5 

4 

4  lOi 

4 

9.^ 

4    2J 

Enougii  has  already  been  said,  in  the  course  of  this  work,  concerning 
variations  in  the  prices  of  various  descriptions  of  agricultural  produce. 
It  will  suffice  therefore  if,  in  concluding  this  chapter,  some  particulars 
are  given  of  the  cost  of  certain  articles  of  clothing  purchased  for  the 
inmates  of  Bethlehem,  Green\nch,  and  Chelsea  Hospitals.  Tlie  descrip- 
tions and  qualities  purchased  by  the  same  establishment  do  not  vary 
from  year  to  year,  so  that  the  variations  in  prices  may  be  taken  as 
strictly  comparative  throughout. 

BETHLEHEM  HOSPITAL. 


1814 
1815 
1816 
1817 

1818 
1819 
1820 
1821 
1822 
1823 
1824 
1825 
1826 
1827 
1828 
1829 
1830 
1831 
1832 
1833 
ia34 
IS'i.-) 


Sixth-fourth 
Witney 
Blankets, 
per  Pair. 


s.  d. 

16  6 

16  6 

15  0 

11  0 

13  6 

12  9 
12  3 
12  0 
11  0 
10  6 

10  0 

11  0 


Men's 
Stockings, 

per 
Dozen  Pair. 


s.  d. 

26  0 

26  0 

26  0 

24  0 


9  0 

9  0 

9  0 

9  0 

9  0 

8  9 

8  8 

9  6 
11  10 
11  4 


24 
26 
24 
26 
25 
24 
19 
25 
21 
21 
21 
21 
21 
13 
21 
21 
22 
23 


Women's 
Stockings, 

per 
Dozen  Pair. 


s.  d. 

25  0 

25  0 

25  0 

23  0 

21  0 

23  0 

20  0 

21  0 
20  0 


20  0 

17  0 

17  0 

17  0 

17  0 

17  0 
12  0 
16  6 

18  0 
20  0 
20  0 


Sheets 
per  Pair. 


[s.     d. 

18     6 

18     6 

18    0 

13    6 

per  yard. 

2     7 

2    3 

2    2 

2    3 

2    3 

2    3 

8 

9 

5 
5 
3 

2^ 
2J 
3 
4 


Seven- 
eighth 
Dowlas, 
per  Yard 


s.  d. 
8 
8 
7 
6 


5 
4 
3 
3 
3 
2 
U 

f 

Oh 

% 

loj 
0  uf 

"     0 


Eleven- 
eighth 
Check, 
per  Yard. 


s.  d. 

2  2 

2  2 

2  0 

1  6 


I 

2 
2 
2 

0  10 
0  lOi 
0  11 
0  lO.i 
0  10.1 
0  lOi 
0  lOj 
0    7 
0    8 
0    8 
0    8 
0  lOJ 


Cotton 

Prints, 

per  Yard. 


1  0 

1  0 

1  0 

0  10 

0  11 

0  "10 

0  9 

0  9 

0  8| 

0  8f 

0  5I 

0  5 

0  5i 

0  5f 

0  6f 


CHAP.   VI.] 


PRICES. 
GKEKNWICII  HOSPITAL. 


391 


Years. 

Slioea 

s.    d. 

1800 

5     8 

1805 

5     9 

1806 

5     9 

1807 

5     0 

1808 

5     0 

1809 

5    6 

1810 

5    6 

1811 

4  11 

1812 

4  11 

1813 

4    8 

1814 

4    8 

1815 

4     7 

1816 

4     7 

1817 

3  10 

1818 

3  10 

1819 

4    2J 

4  4 

1820 

1821 

4    3 

1822 

4  2i 
4  l\ 
4    9| 

1823 

1824 

1825 

4    6 

1826 

4    5 

1827 

4    3.^ 

1828 

4     3 

1829 

3    9J 

1830 

3     6 

1831 

3    6 

1832 

3  4i 
3    41 

1833 

1834 

3  35 
3    3f 

1835 

1836 

3    3i 

1837 

3     3.1 

Stockings 
per  pair. 


2  11 
2  11 
2     9i 
2    8 
2    5 
2    2 
2     1| 
2    ll 
2    of 
1  1(^ 
1     9* 

1    9i 

1     6j 

1 

1 

1 

1 


Blankets. 


'I 

1     9| 
1  10 
1  10 


6  6 

8  9 

8  9 

8  9 

8  9 

8  9 

8  9 

8  9 

8  9 

8  9 
11  6 
11  3 

9  4i 
9  4| 
9  44 


Bedding, 
Suits. 


Clothes, 
Suits. 


s.    d. 


s.   d. 


59  lOi 
59  10.1 


59  10 


i 
59  io| 

59  lO.t 
59  lOl 
59  lOl 
59  lOj 
48  3"' 
45  9 
45  9 
37  lOf 
37  loi 
39  3i 
33  3.t 
44  111 

44  \% 

45  7" 
45     7 


Coats, 
each. 


s.  d. 

20  0 

21  10 
21  10 
21  6 


41  Oi 
41  71 
43  3| 
41  9 
40  2\ 
3:)  111 

39  \n 

40  8l 

41  6l 

39  10| 
38  1  I 
38  6-1  I 
38  6|  ' 

40  lit  I 
43  4 
43  8i 
47  2| 

46  1 

47  2i  1 
46  5t  I 


21 
21 
21 
22 
22 
22 
24 
24 
24 
20 
20 


21 

10.^ 

22 

7 

21 

11 

21 

3 

21 

H 

21 

2 

21 

8 

22 

2 

21 

4 

20 

7 

CHELSEA  HOSPITAL. 


Years. 

Office 

s'i 

Privates' 

Officers' 

Privates' 

Officers' 

Privates' 

Cfficers' 

Privates' 

Coat, 

.■ 

Coats. 

Waistcoats. 

Waistcoats 

Hats. 

Hats. 

Shoes. 

Shoes. 

£.  «. 

d. 

£.  s.    d. 

£.  s.    d. 

s.     d. 

s. 

d. 

s. 

d. 

s.     d. 

s.     rf. 

1815 

3     8 

7 

1     7     1 

1  11     6 

11     7 

17 

11 

4 

2 

7     0 

7     0 

1816 

3    8 

7 

1     7     1 

1  11     6 

11     7 

17 

11 

4 

2 

7     0 

7     0 

1817 

3     4 

2 

1     3     7 

1     7     6 

11     0 

19 

0 

4 

4 

5     6 

5    6 

1818 

3     4 

2 

1     3     7 

1     7     6 

11     0 

19 

0 

4 

4 

5     6 

5     6 

1819 

3     5 

6 

1     7     2 

1  17  11 

12    0 

19 

3 

4 

5 

6    0| 

6    01 

1820 

3     5 

6 

1     7     2 

1  17  11 

12    0 

19 

3 

4 

5 

6    Oi 

1821 

2  12 

5 

1     0  10 

1     5     8i 
1     5    &t 

9     4 

18 

S 

4 

0 

5    3"^ 

5    3 

1822 

2  12 

5 

1     0  10 

9    4 

18 

4 

0 

5    3 

5     3 

1823 

2    4 

6 

0  17     8 

1     0    3 

8    8 

17 

6^ 

4 

0 

6    0 

6     0 

1824 

2     4 

6 

0  17     8 

1     0    3 

8    8 

17 

6 

4 

0 

6     0 

6    0 

1825 

2     2 

Hi 
lU 

0  18    Oh 

1     2     9 

7  10 

18 

3 

4 

2 

4  10 

4  10 

1826 

2     2 

0  18   0.; 

a  16     91 
0  16     91 

1     2     9 

7  10 

18 

3 

4 

2 

4  10 

4  10 

1827 

2     4 

7i 

1    0    41^ 
1    0    4 

6     ^ 
6     3| 

18 

■^ 

4 

2 

5     1 

5     1 

1828 

2    4 

7 

18 

4 

4 

2 

5     1 

5     1 

1829 

2    2 

5 

0  16     3 

1     0    2 

6     8 

18 

0 

4 

2 

5    0 

5     0 

18.30 

2    2 

5 

0  16    3 

1     0    2 

6     8 

18 

0 

4 

2 

5    0 

5     0 

1831 

2    6 

2 

0  17     5 

13    0 

7     4 

18 

3 

4 

2 

4    9 

4     9 

1832 

2     6 

2 

0  17     5 

1     3    0 

7     4 

18 

3 

4 

2 

4    9 

4     9 

1833 

2    2 

7 

0  17  11 

1     1     9 

6  10 

18 

0 

4 

2 

4    6i 
4    6| 

4     6.i 

1834 

2     2 

7 

0  17  11 

1     1     9 

6  10 

18 

0 

4 

2 

4     6i 

1835 

2     7 

4 

1     0    9 

0  11     7 

7  11 

17 

5 

4 

1 

4    7 

4    6.1 

592  PROGRESS  OF  THE  NATION.  [sec.  yi. 


SECTION  VI.— ACCUMULATION. 


CHAPTER  I. 

'Dnditions  under  which' Accumulations  occur  —  Proofs  of  increasing  Wealth— Greater 
Power  of  Accumulation  in  Peace  than  in  War,  because  of  the  Difference  of  tlie  Public 
Expenditure  under  the  two  Conditions — Probable  present  State  of  England  in  this 
respect  if  we  had  avoided  the  Wars  with  our  North  American  Provinces,  and  with  the 
French  Republic  and  Empire. 

As  there  can  be  no  consumption  without  previous  production,  so  there 
can  be  no  accumulation  unless  the  ])roductive  industry  of  a  nation  is 
employed  to  such  a  degree  as  will  make  provision  beyond  the  immediate 
wants  of  the  people. 

If  the  producing  power  of  the  people  in  this  country  had  always  been 
strictly  limited  to  the  point  that  would  satisfy  their  ])ressing  and  tenipo- 
•ary  necessities,  it  would  have  been  quite  impossible  that  any  increase 
n  the  number  of  its  inhabitants  could  have  occurred  without  propor- 
tionally and  progressively  taking  away  from  the  comfort  of  the  existing 
population.  That  our  nund)ers  have  experienced  a  great  increase, 
while  our  power  of  commanding  the  necessaries  and  conveniences  of  life 
has  also  gone  on  increasing,  atibrds  abundant  ])roof  therefore  that  in  the 
meanwhile  accumulation  has  proceeded  in  at  least  an  equal  ratio,  and 
that  the  substantial  wealth,  tlie  capital  of  the  country,  has  kept  pace 
with  our  modern  progress  in  other  respects. 

This  fact  appears  so  amply  confirmed  by  proofs  that  meet  us  on  every 
side — proofs  admitting  of  no  doubts,  and  incapable  of  receiving  any 
different  interpretation — that  it  is  marvellous  how  they  can  escape  the 
notice  of  any  one,  or  fail  to  produce  the  universal  conviction  that,  if  we 
have  not  made  as  much  progress  as  our  means  should  have  enabled  us 
towards  the  well  being  of  all  classes  of  the  community,  we  have  yet 
during  the  present  century,  and  especially  within  the  last  twenty-five 
years,  made  great  advances  in  that  direction,  greater  perhaps  than  were 


r.uw.  i]  WAR   AXn  PEACE  EXrENDITI'UE.  •")f)3 

cvor  Ix'tore  realizeil  l»y  poaceahlf  means,  and  l)y  any  coinuiunily  in  any 
equal  period  of  time.  It  is,  notwitlistanding,  by  no  means  iineonimoii 
still  to  hear  coni])laints  of  increasing  distress  anxl  anticipations  of  ap- 
])n)aeljing  national  ruin  ;  although  it  must  be  confessed  that  such 
gloomy  views  and  forebodings  are  less  frequently  brought  forward  now 
than  they  were  only  a  very  few  years  back — an  etfeet  which  may  be  in 
some  measure  attributable  to  the  signs  of  wealth  and  prosperity  among 
us  having  become  more  obvious  through  the  particular  dii-ection  that 
has  been  giscMi  to  the  employment  of  a  portion  of  the  general  savings  of 
the  community.  The  present  has  been  called  the  age  of  locomotion — 
not  of  locomotion  such  as  was  employed  by  our  forefathers,  who  were  in 
a  far  greater  degree  than  we  are  confined  to  the  use  of  their  own  bodily 
energies  for  the  means  of  conveying  themselves  from  place  to  place,  but 
of  loL'omotion  accelerated  and  stimulated  by  numerous  combinations  of 
men  who  work  through  the  employment  of  vast  masses  of  capital.  The 
arrangements  which  have  rendered  possilne  this  change  are  known  to 
have  caused  an  enormous  outlay  ;  and  as  no  evidence  can  be  found  of 
any  stinting  of  capital  for  other  and  ])reviously-pursued  objects,  the 
inference  is  unavoidable  that  the  new  call  nuist  have  been  answered 
from  increased  accumulations. 

If  a  comparison  be  made  between  the  public  expenditure  of  the 
United  Kingdom  in  the  23  years  from  1793  to  1815,  and  that  of  the 
like  period  of  23  years  from  1816  to  1838,^  it  will  be  found  that  it  was 
less  in  the  latter  than  in  the  former  period  by  332,090,640/.,  showino- 
an  average  annual  difference  of  14,438,722/.  It  matters  not,  for  the 
purpose  now  under  consideration,  what  part  of  the  sums  here  mentioned 
was  raised  from  taxation,  and  what  part  was  borrowed  ;  under  whatever 
guise  it  was  derived,  the  whole  was  provided  by  the  nation  at  large  ; 
and  if  the  greater  expenditure  of  the  war  period  was  so  provided  with- 
out diminishing  or  even  without  materially  impairing  the  capital  of  the 
nation,  it  must  needs  be  that  the  smaller  expenditure  of  the  second  or 
peace  period  has  left  an  enormous  increase  of  wealth  in  the  nation.  It 
will  place  this  matter  in  even  a  stronger  light  if  the  comparison  is 
made  between  the  last  10  years  of  the  war,  from  1806  to  1815,  and 
the  10  years  ending  with  1838.  The  expenditure  in  the  first  of  these 
periods  was  860,677,615/.,  and  in  the  last  478,122,345/.  ;  exhibiting  a 
difference  of  382,555,270/.,  or  an  average  of  381  millions  more  ex- 
])ended  during  eaclrof  the  last  10  years  of  war  than  during  each  of  the 
10  years  of  })erfect  peace.  It  further  appears,  from  this  comparison,  that 
the  aggregate  difference  has  been  greater  between  the  two  decennary 
periods  than  it  was  between  the  two  longer  periods  of  23  years — 
a  fact  that  has  resulted  from  the  progressively-increasing  charge  of 
the  national  debt,  which  was  for  greater  in  the  latter  years  of  the  war 
than  it  had  previously  l)cen,  and  from  the  consequent  increased  charge 

2  a 


o94  PROGRESS  OF  THE  NATION.  [sec.  vr. 

upon  the  income  of  the  country,  wliich  has  been  in  great  part  continued 
to  tlie  pre.~ent  time.     This  portion  of  the  nntionnl  expenditure  was — 


^oars. 

£. 

In  1703 

9,437,802 

1S15 

31,576,074 

1^3S 

2-),260,23S 

Vcar^. 

i". 

In  1811 

29,4r)0,144 

184'J 

28,323,961 

It  is  probable  that,  owing  to  the  greater  deveh)pnient  of  the  resources 
of  the  country,  arising  from  the  extension  of  its  manufactures,  a  con- 
siderable addition  was  made  to  tlie  national  wealth  during  the  early 
part  of  the  war  begun  in  17l»o,  not\vit1i:~tnnding  the  large  expenditure 
tliit  it  occasioned  ;  but  this  could  no  longer  be  the  case  when  that 
expcMiditnre  vas  so  lavishly  increased  that,  as  already  shown,*  the 
war  charges,  added  to  the  interest  on  the  national  debt,  in  one  year, 
(181-1:)  exceeded  100  millions,  a  great  part  of  which  sura  being  ex- 
pended in  foreign  countries  was  wholly  abstracted  from  the  national 
capital.  Such  a  rate  of  exhaustion  could  not  possibly  have  been  con- 
tinued ;  its  disastrous  effects  were  made  sufficiently  apparent  during  the 
earlier  years  of  peace,  but  must  have  been  long  since  repaired. 

While  dwelling  on  these  circumstances,  it  seems  hardly  possible  to 
prevent  the  inquiry  arising  in  the  mind,  what  must  have  been  the  con- 
dition of  England  at  this  time  if  tlie  wars  which  caused  this  lavish,  this 
unexampled,  expenditure  could  have  been  avoided.  A  small  part  only 
of  that  expenditure  would  have  sufficed  to  pay  off  the  whole  of  the 
national  burthens  as  they  stood  in  1793;  we  should  then  assuredly 
have  heard  nothing  of  the  restrictions  upon  various  branches  of  trade  for 
Avhich  those  burthens  were  so  long  made  the  groundless  pretext,  and  an 
amount  of  prosperity  would  have  been  experienced  that  must  have  had 
the  happiest  effect  upon  tlie  physical  and  moral  condition  of  England 
first,  and  through  England  upon  that  of  the  whole  European  family. 

If  we  may  carry  back  our  inquiry  to  a  still  earlier  period — to  the 
years  that  followed  the  peace  of  Paris  in  1763,  and  before  the  breaking 
out  of  the  unfortunate  troubles  that  ended  in  the  loss  to  us  of  our 
North  American  plantations,  we  shall  find  cause  for  still  deej)er  regret. 
At  the  commencement  of  the  insurrectionary  war  in  America,  our  debt 
amounted  to  less  than  130  millions,  the  annual  charge  in  respect  of  the 
same  being  4?  millions,  or  less  than  one-sixth  of  its  present  amount. 
The  sources  of  our  national  wealth  which  have  since  been  discovered 
and  made  available,  were  none  of  them  l)rouoht  to  linht  or  fostered 
through  the  partial  dismemberment  of  the  British  Empire.  On  the 
contrary,  it  may  be  said  that  the  extent  to  which  they  have  been  carried 
was  importantly  limited  by  that  misfortune.  Had  the  case  been  other- 
wise— had  the  field  for  our  manufacturing  inventions  e([ually  embraced 
a  peaceful  and  flourishing  British  Empire  in  the  West,  how  much  more 

*   Page  TjOj. 


niAP    I  ]  WAR  AND  rEATE  EXPENDITURE.  595 

ra])i(l  and  gigantic  nmst  have  been  its  growth  !  how  nnich  more  rapid 
and  gigantic,  too,  might  ha\'e  been  the  growth  of  the  North  American 
States  themselves,  if,  instead  of  being  drained  of  men  and  treasure  in 
supporting  the  revolt  into  which  they  were  driven  in  resistance  of  what 
lias  since  been  acknowledged  to  have  been  a  course  of  legislative 
tyranny,  they  had  continued  to  be  recipients  of  the  surplus  population, 
and  sharers  in  the  accumulating  capital  of  the  mother-country  !  Is  it 
likely,  it  may  even  be  asked,  could  it  possibly  have  happened,  in  such 
circumstances,  that  the  British  Empire  could  have  been  involved  in 
such  a  war  as  that  which  followed  the  breaking  out  of  the  French  revo- 
lution? Nay,  is  it  ])robable  that,  without  the  jiarticipation  of  France 
in  that  struggle  as  the  abettor  of  rebellion  and  the  ally  of  republicanism, 
the  French  revolution  would  have  occurred  when  and  as  it  did  occur  ? 
These,  it  is  true,  are  questions  of  speculation  rather  than  of  fdct,  and  it 
would  be  of  little  advantage  to  pursue  them  further  on  this  occasion. 


2  Q  2 


o06  PROORESP  OF  THE  NATION.  [sec.  vi. 


CIIAPTEK  II. 

INCREASE  OF  PERSONAL  AM)  liEAL  PROPERTY. 

Forms  in  which  the  National  Accumulations  appear— Amount  of  Property  Insured  at 
ditFerent  Periods  -Moral  and  Economical  Effects  of  Insurances— Accumulations  in  Life 
Assurance  Offices— Property  devised  in  respect  of  which  Legacy  Duty  has  been  paid 
afi'ords  an  insufficient  Test  of  the  Amount  of  Accumulations— Estimate  of  Personal  Pro- 
perty in  tlie  Kingdom  at  different  Periods— Capital  on  which  Legacy  Duty  was  paid  in 
Fifty-two  Years  to  1840 — Yearly  Average  Amount,  compared  with  the  Year  1848,  in 
England,  Scotland,  and  Ireland— Savings  invested  in  the  Security  of  Ileal  Estates,  and 
in  their  Improvement.  Assessments  on  Real  Property,  showing  its  Value  at  various 
Periods— Savings'  Banks. 

It  must  be  sufficiently  evident,  from  the  circumstances  stated  in  the 
last  Chapter,  that  the  accumulation  of  capital  in  this  coimtry  since  the 
peace  has  been  exceedingly  great ;  but  it  will  place  the  fact  in  a  much 
stronger  light  to  bring  forward  in  evidence  some  of  the  forms  in  which 
that  accumulation  has  been  made  most  apparent. 

During  the  war,  the  surplus  profits  and  the  savings  of  individuals 
were,  to  a  great  degree;  swallowed  up  by  the  public  expenditure,  and 
went  to  supply  the  constant  drain  which,  without  those  savings,  would 
very  speedily  have  exhausted  the  whole  resources  of  the  nation.  The 
return  of  peace  soon  brought  the  expenditure  of  Government  nearer  to 
the  amount  of  revenue  realized  from  taxation,  and  in  time  loft  a  yearly 
surplus  of  income  to  be  applied  in  diminution  of  the  public  debt.  The 
loan  of  1836,  raised  for  the  payment  of  the  c()m})cnsation  for  slaves, 
can  be  considered  as  only  in  a  slight  degree  atl'ording  an  ojjportunity 
for  the  absorption  of  savings.  Unlike  the  produce  of  other  loans,  the 
amount  was  not  consumed  and  destroyed,  but  by  far  the  greatest  part 
of  it  went  to  the  payment  of  debts  due  to  merchants  in  England,  by 
whom  it  was  employed  as  capital,  and  thus,  as  far  as  the  nation  generally 
was  concerned,  ejected  only  a  change  from  one  hand  to  another, 
without  causing  any  material  alteration  in  the  aggregate  amount  of 
capital  in  the  country. 

The  amount  of  property  insured  does  not,  of  itself,  aiford  a  correct 
view  of  the  progressive  value  of  the  de?cri})tion  of  property  liable  to 
destruction  by  fire.  It  is  most  probable  that  a  large  but  a  continually 
lessening  proportion  of  such  j)roperty  is  always''left  uninsured  ;  and  it 
is  manifestly  impossible  to  calculate  the  proportionate  degree  of  prudence 
amonfT   its  owners,  so  as  to  arrive  at  any  probable    estimate   i/  the 


ciivr.  II. 


ASSURANCES. 


597 


aggregate  value  of  insurable  property  In  the  country.  The  following 
statement  of  the  sums  insured  in  the  fire-offices  of  England,  Scotland, 
and  Ireland,  at  different  periods  within  this  century,  has  been  calculated 
from  the  amount  of  duty  received  in  respect  of  the  same  at  the  Stamp 
Office.  If  it  be  desirable — and  who  can  doubt  that  it  is  so? — that  ail 
])ersons  should  secure  themselves  from  losses  arising  through  accidents 
beyond  their  own  control,  it  uiust  then  be  held  unwise  to  subject 
insurances  to  taxation  ;  and  when,  as  in  this  country,  the  tax  thus  levied 
amounts  to  200  per  cent,  upon  the  sum  required  by  the  insurance  offices 
to  cover  the  ordinary  risk  from  accidents  by  fire,  the  degree  of  discou 
ragement  occasioned  by  the  duty  must  needs  be  very  great.  It  is  not 
only  by  reason  of  the  security  arising  to  individuals,  amounting  often  to 
the  prevention  of  beggary,  that  insurances  against  fire  and  upon  lives 
are  beneficial  :  they  exercise  a  good  effi^ct  upon  the  country  generally 
through  the  accunudation  of  savings  which  they  cause.  The  sums  paid 
for  premium  on  life-policies  especially,  are,  in  every  case,  put  by  and 
added  to  the  accumulating  capital  of  the  community.  The  money,  as 
it  is  paid  to  the  insurance  offices,  is  beneficially  employed,  and  made  t » 
stimulate,  in  one  way  or  another,  the  industry  of  the  nation  ;  and  when 
called  for  by  the  arrival  of  the  contingency  against  which  the  payments 
were  meant  to  provide,  it  is  pretty  certain  that  in  a  large  proportion  of 
cases  the  money  is  so  much  clear  gain,  because  without  such  a  resource 
the  premiums  out  of  which  it  is  provided  would  have  been  unprofitably 
consumed. 

The  sums  insured  against  fire  in  England,  Scotland,  and  Ireland, 
respectively,  in  each  of  the  years  1801,  1811,  1821,  1831,  and  1841  to 
184'J,  were  as  follows: — 


Years. 

Eni^land. 

j        Scotland.        j         Ireland. 

United  Kingdom. 

£. 

!        £• 

£. 

£. 

1801 

219,623,954 

3,786,146 

8,8.32.125 

232,242,225 

1811 

340,296,000 

13,106,400 

13,. 302;  400 

366,704,800 

1821 

331,406,000 

13,824,666 

12,806,666 

408,037,332 

1831 

473, 073,. '«3 

34,109,-333 

19,472,666 

526,655,332 

1841 

605,878,9.33 

44,655,300 

31,005,606 

681,530,8.39 

1842 

613,684,300 

43,929,200 

31,179,100 

688,792,600 

1843 

614,. 539, 500 

43,665,900  '     32,480,100 

690,685,-500 

1844 

623,628,400 

45,484,700       33, 082, .500 

702,195,600 

1845 

640,680,-500 

47,122,900  ,     34,277,900 

722,081,300 

1846 

6.53,887,000 

1     49,760,000 

35,392,300 

739,0.39,300 

1847 

668,759,100 

1     48,720,KK) 

36,028,700  1     753,-507,900 

1843 

667,646,400 

42,928,900 

33,964,800  '     744,. 540, 100 

184'J 

679,814,100 

42,780,700  !     33,686,100  \     7.56.280,900 

'        '          1 

The  increase 

of  the  amount  insured  in  the  United  Kingdom  has  been, — 

Compa 

ring  ISOl  with  1811             £  134,462,57.5,  or    .57-89  per  cent- 

„ 

ISOl     „ 

1821                  175,79.5.107    „     75-69 

,, 

1801     „ 

1831                 294,413.107    „   126-77 

.i 

1801     „ 

1841                 449,297,614    „  193-45 

„ 

1801     „ 

1845                489,83  ),075    „  210-91 

)» 

1801     „ 

1849                5 

24,038,675    „  2 

25-64 

598  rilOGRESS  OF  TUE  NATION.  [seu.  vi. 

The  policy-duty  on  life  insurances  is  but  trifling  in  amount,  and 
being  charged  only  when  the  insurance  is  first  eflfected,  and  not  annu- 
ally, as  in  the  case  of  fire  insurances,  it  would  atlord  no  tost  of  the 
amount  of  policies  outstanding  at  various  periods.  The  records  of  the 
Stamp  Office  do  not  even  offer  the  means  of  ascertaining  the  amount  of 
new  insurances  effected  ft-om  year  to  year,  because  the  stamps  employed 
are  not  distinguished  from  those  used  for  giving  validity  to  many  other 
descriptions  of  instruments.  Tlie  great  increase,  of  late  years,  in  the 
number  of  Life  Assurance  Offices,  and  the  flourishing  condition  in  which 
they  appear  to  be,  leads  us  to  conclude  that  the  number  of  insurances 
must  have  been  very  greatly  augmented,  although  it  seems  probable 
that  the  system  has  not  yet  been  carried  to  anything  like  the  extent  that 
is  desirable. 

It  is  believed  that  the  sums  accumulated  in  the  hands  of  the  various 
Life  Insurance  Offices  in  the  kingdom,  and  which  form  a  part  of  the 
savings  of  the  assured,  amount  to  at  least  forty  millions  of  money,  an 
estimate  which  will  not  be  thought  extravagant  when  it  is  known  that 
the  assets  of  one  office,  the  Equitable  x\ssurance  Company,  form  one- 
fourth  of  that  sum.  It  is  to  be  wished  that  our  various  Life  Assurance 
Societies  were  obliged  by  the  legislature  to  register  the  amount  of  their 
engagements,  and  of  the  funds  which  they  respectively  hold  to  provide 
for  the  same.  Such  a  regulation  could  not  prove  injurious  to  any 
assurance  office  conducted  upon  safe  principles,  while  it  would  serve  to 
put  the  public  upon  their  guard  against  such — if  any  there  be — as  shoidd 
be  otherwise  conducted,  if  it  did  not  prevent  their  establishment.  It 
must  surely  be  useful  to  protect  the  public  against  the  risk  of  intrusting 
to  unsafe  hands  savings  which  are  made  oftentimes  with  much  privation 
and  at  great  sacrifice  for  the  benefit  of  the  widow  and  the  orphan.  At 
present  there  is  no  information  upon  this  subject  whereby  a  man  may 
be  guided  in  the  selection  of  an  office  ;  and,  should  he  make  a  bad  choice, 
his  error  may  not  discover  itself  until  to  remedy  it  will  have  become 
impossible.  There  are,  it  is  true.  Assurance  Offices  which  are  of  known 
stability,  and  by  the  choice  of  which  a  man  may  avoid  the  risk  here 
mentioned  ;  but  to  do  this,  it  will  mostly  be  the  case  that  he  will  be 
forced  to  pay  a  rate  of  })remium  higher  than  sufficient,  so  that  either  hiis 
privation  will  be  greater  than  it  need  be,  or  the  sum  insured  to  his  family 
smaller  than  might  have  been  provided. 

Occasion  has  already  been  taken,  in  describing  the  produce  of  taxes 
(Section  iv.  Chapter  iii.  pp.  492  and  493),  to  show  the  capitals  upon 
which  legacy  duty  was  paid  in  great  Britain  in  each  year,  from  1797 
to  1848. 

The  sums  thus  registered  do  not  comprise  the  whole  of  the  personal 
property  held  in  thia  country  which  changes  hands  on  the  death  of  its 


CHAP.  ii.J  TKUiiOXAL  rUfn'EllTV.  599 

possessors.  A  further  amount  passes  away  from  persons  who  die  intes- 
tate, and  whose  property  is  distributed  under  letters  of  administration. 
The  amount  thus  dealt  with  yearly  is  computed  at  nearly  five  millions. 
Beyond  this  a  very  large  sum  is  bequeathed  to  widows,  and  is  not 
chargeable  with  legacy  duty.  But  even  if  this  amount  could  be  ascer- 
tained, we  should  still  be  without  some  part  of  the  information  necessary 
for  making  an  accurate  estimate  of  the  personal  property  accumulated 
and  held  within  the  kingdom.  The  probate  and  administration  duties 
certainly  include  all  cases  where  the  property  of  deceased  persons  is  of 
considerable  value,  and  many  cases  also  where  the  sums  are  small. 
The  number  of  wills  proved  in  England  and  Scotland,  and  upon  which 
probate  duty  was  paid  in  1841,  aj)pears  to  have  been  16,684,  and  letters 
of  administration  were  taken  out  in  the  same  year  for  the  distribution  of 
the  property  of  0301  intestate  persons,  together  22,'J85  ;  out  of  which 
number  there  were  8276  cases  in  which  the  property  did  not  exceed 
2001.  in  value.  It  is  well  known  that  in  many  cases  where  no  will 
is  left,  and  the  property  is  of  that  nature  which  admits  of  easy  distri- 
bution among  the  natural  heirs  of  the  deceased,  a  division  takes  place 
Mithout  any  payment  of  duty ;  besides  which,  the  property  of  deceased 
persons,  when  not  exceeding  20/.  in  value,  is  exempted  by  law  from 
taxation.  If,  for  the  sake  of  illustration,  we  may  suppose  that  every  head 
of  a  family,  when  he  dies,  leaves  some  property  behind  him,  it  aj)pears 
that  from  some  cause  or  another  only  three-tenths  of  the  number  are 
thus  made  to  contribute  directly  to  the  revenue.  The  number  of  male 
persons  living  in  P^ngland  and  Wales  at  the  time  of  the  census  of  1831, 
was  6,771,11)0,  comprising  2,911,874  families.  At  the  last  census, 
in  1841,  the  male  ])opulati(m  of  England  and  Wales  was  7,770,941; 
and  if  the  proportion  then  remained  the  same  as  was  found  to  exist  in 
1831,  the  number  of  families  must  have  been  3,341,805,  corresponding 
very  nearly  to  the  number  of  male  persons  living  25  years  old  and 
u])wards  (3,371,144).  The  deaths,  male  and  female,  registered  in 
England  and  Wales  during  the  year  from  the  1st  July,  1839,  to  30th 
June,  1840,  were  350,101,  or  1  in  45*44  of  the  population.  Of  males 
alone  the  deaths  registered  were  17  7,926,  or  1  in  4367  of  the  male 
population  living  in  1841.  According  to  this  proportion  the  heads  of 
families  included  among  those  male  deaths  must  have  been  76,524.  It 
is  evident  that  this  number  will  not  be  correct,  because  of  the  want  of 
uniformity  in  the  rates  of  mortality  at  different  ages;  but  it  is  very  near 
to  the  truth,  according  to  the  fact  above  assumed,  that  twenty-five  years 
is  the  average  period  at  which  persons  become  heads  of  families, — the 
deaths  occurring  at  and  above  that  age  in  the  year  mentioned  having  been 
75,205,  a  difference  of  less  than  2  per  cent.  We  have  seen  that  the 
number  of  persons  who  died  in  1841,  and  whose  property  was  sub- 
jected   to    the    legacy    and    probate    duties,    was    only    22,985,    being 


Yfars. 

£. 

1814 

1 

200,000,000 

1819 

1 

300,000,000 

1824 

1 

500,000,000 

1829 

1 

700,030,000 

603  rROGRESS  OF  THE  NATION.  [sec.  vt. 

only  three  in  ton  of  the  deatlis  probably  occurring  among  heads  of 
fcimilies. 

For  a  reason  already  given  (page  494),  it.  is  not  possible  to  ground 
any  accurate  calculation  upon  the  produce  of  tlie  legacy  duty  during  the 
earlier  years  of  its  operation  ;  but  that  branch  of  revenue  must  now  for 
many  years  have  afforded  comparative  data  for  such  a  calculation,  and 
has  given  evidence  of  the  rapid  accumulation  of  wealth  in  the  kingdom. 
If  w^e  are  justified  in  the  data  here  assumed,  and  estimate  the  amount 
upon  the  scale  assumed  in  the  foregoing  calculation,  tlie  value  of  per- 
sonal property  at  different  periods  since  the  clo:jing  year  of  the  war, 
stated  in  round  numbers,  would  have  been  as  follows  : — 

Years.  £. 

1834  1,800,000,000 

1841  2,000,000,000 

1845  *2, 200, 000, 000 

The  addition  of  1000  millions  to  the  value  of  property  during  thirty- 
one  years  of  peace  will  not  appear  improbable  if  we  recall  to  mind  the 
facts  that  during  the  last  ten  years  of  the  war  the  public  expenditui-e 
exceeded,  on  the  average,  83  millions,  while  the  average  has,  in  the 
following  twenty-four  years,  not  exceeded  50  millions.  The  difference 
between  these  two  sums  would  alone  suffice  in  that  period  to  make  up  the 
sum  of  1000  millions. 

It  should  be  borne  in  mind  that  the  apparent  amount  of  personal 
property  within  the  kingdom  is  factitiously  raised  by  considering  as  a 
part  of  it  the  sum  due  to  the  national  creditors,  amounting  to  790,000,000/. 
Another  very  large  abatement  should  likewise  be  made  for  the  amount 
of  money  due  on  mortgages  of  real  property,  and  which,  although  it  is 
considered  as  personal  property,  and  thus  is  subjected  to  the  probate 
and  legacy  duties,  has,  in  fact,  become  a  part  of  the  real  property  of  the 
kingdom,  supplying  means  for  its  improvement,  or  repairing  the  waste 
of  its  possessors. 

The  following  analysis  of  the  sums  paltl  for  probate  duty,  and  on 

taking  out  letters  of  administration  in  England  and  Scotland  respectively, 

in  1838,  shows  the  number  of  wills  and  of  intestate  estates  subjected  to 

the  various  rates  of  duty,  ajid  the  cai)itals  in  respect  of  which  the  duty 

was  paid  ;  but  the  statement  must  not  be  relied  on  as  giving  an  accurate 

view  of  the  property  that  passes,  because  the  amounts  are  in  many  cases 

reduced  by  the  payment  of  debts  due  from  the  deceased,  and  by  other 

charges  upon  their  estates.     It  has  been  further  necessary,  in  consequence 

of  the  mode  employed  for  levying  the  duty,  to  assume  in  each  case  the 

amount  of  capital.     Each  rate  of  duty  is  made  to  apply  to  a  certain 
— ^ — — — — — — — — — ■ — ~ — — - — 1_ — ^ — — 

*  The  tendency  has  been  great,  since  1845,  to  convert  floating  into  fixed  capital,  by  con- 
structing railways  and  otlicr  works  of  a  permanent  character,  on  which  account  no  additiou 
is  made  to  the  Cbtiniate  adopted  in  that  year. 


PERSOXAL  ruOl'ERTV, 


601 


range  of  value.  For  cxani])lo,  tlu;  lowest  rate,  where  there  is  a  will, 
which  is  ten  shillings,  covers  all  sums  above  the  value  of"  20/.  and  under 
tlu!  value  of  100/.  ;  in  all  cases  where  this  rate  oi'  duty  has  been  ])aid, 
the  capital  is  assumed  in  the  following  table  as  being  the  mean  between 
20/.  and  100/.,  or  60/.  ;  and  in  like  manner  with  regard  to  all  higher 
rates,  the  mean  lietween  the  lowest  and  the  highest  amounts  that  they 
will  cover  is  taken  as  the  basis  of  the  calculation. 


Probates. 


ENGLAND. 

.SCOTLAND. 

Tiatc  of  Duly. 

1 

Amount  of 

Number 

Amount  of 

Amoun 

t  of 

Number 

Amount  of 

Duty 

of  \Vills. 

Capital. 

Duty 

!  of  Wills. 

Capital. 

£. 

s. 

£. 

£. 

.«. 

£. 

10s. 

1.254 

0 

2,508 

1,50,480 

~20 

10 

41 

2,460 

£2 

4^370 

0 

2, 185 

327,750 

no 

0 

55 

8,250 

.5 

6,980 

0 

1,396 

349,000 

260 

0 

52 

13,000 

8 

11,816 

0 

1,477 

5.53.875 

1,264 

0 

1.58 

59,2.50 

11 

12,980 

0 

1 ,  180 

619, 500 

1,771 

0 

161 

84,. 525 

15 

16,3'35 

0 

1,089 

762,300 

1,905 

0 

127 

88,900 

22 

18,370 

0 

835 

751,500 

2,200 

0 

100 

90,000 

30 

30, 7.50 

0 

1,025 

1,281,2.50 

3,750 

0 

125 

1.56,250 

40 

26,800 

0 

670 

1,172,. 500 

2,680 

0 

67 

117,250 

.50 

39,950 

0 

799 

1,997,500 

3,200 

0 

64 

80.000 

60 

33,480 

0 

558 

1,953,(100 

4,  .560 

0 

76 

266,000 

80 

28,880 

0 

361 

1,624,500 

2,160 

0 

27 

121,. 500 

100 

24,300 

0 

243 

1,336,. 500 

2,700 

0 

27 

148,500 

120 

20, 760 

0 

173 

1,124,500 

1,920 

0 

16 

104,000 

140 

18,760 

0 

134 

1,005,000 

980 

0 

7 

52,500 

160 

16,480 

0 

103 

875,. 500 

960 

0 

6 

51,000 

180 

17,820 

0 

99 

940, 500 

720 

0 

4 

38,000 

200 

.30,8t)0 

0 

154 

1,694,000 

2,000 

0 

10 

110.000 

220 

21,120 

0 

96 

1,248,000 

1,980 

0 

9 

117,000 

250 

22,000 

0 

88 

1,320,000 

1,2.50 

0 

5 

75,000 

280 

15,760 

0 

56 

952,000 

840 

0 

3 

51,000 

310 

17,050 

0 

55 

1,045,000 

1.240 

0 

4 

76.000 

3:)0 

30,450 

0 

87 

1,957,500 

2,100 

0 

6 

1.35,  W)0 

400 

28,800 

0 

72 

1,980,000 

2,000 

0 

5 

137,. 500 

450 

20,6.50 

0 

46 

1,495,000 

450 

0 

1 

32,. 500 

.525 

15,150 

0 

28 

9.50,000 

525 

0 

1 

37,. 500 

600 

14,400 

0 

24 

1,020.000 

., 

675 

6,075 

0 

9 

427, 5(X) 

67.5 

0 

"l 

47  ,'.500 

750 

23,250 

0 

31 

1,705,000 

7.50 

0 

1 

55,000 

900 

14,400 

0 

16 

1,040,000 

900 

0 

1 

65,(X)0 

1,050 

5,250 

0 

5 

375,000 

.. 

1,200 

15,600 

0 

13 

1,105,000 

,  , 

1,3.50 

12,150 

0 

9 

855,000 

1,3.50 

0 

1 

9.5,' 000 

1,500 

19,. 500 

0 

13 

1,430,000 

,  , 

1,800 

7,200 

0 

4 

520,000 

,1 

2,100 

12,600 

0 

6 

900,000 

.. 

2,400 

4,800 

0 

2 

340,000 

. ' 

3,000 

12,000 

0 

4 

900,000 

,  , 

5,250 

5,2.50 

0 

1 

375,000 

.. 

6,000 

6,000 

0 

1 

450,000 

,  , 

,, 

7,. 500 

7,500 

0 

1 

5.50,000 

,. 

9,000 

9,000 

0 

1 

6.50,000 

,  , 

., 

15,000 

15,000 

0 

1 

1,000,000 

Arrears 

21,652 

0 

•• 

•• 

EnRland      .      . 

743,492 

0 

15,658 

43,109,155 

47,220 

10 

1,161 

2,515,3S5 

Scotland     .      . 

47,220 

10 

1,161 

2,515,385 

•• 

Great  Britain  . 

790,712 

10 

16,819 

45,624,540 

t)it2 


riiOGllESS  OF  TJIE  NATION. 
Letteus  of  Administration,  1S3S. 


[bliC.    VI. 


Duty. 

ENGLAND. 

SCOTLAND. 

Kate  of 

i 

Amount 

of 

Number  of 

Amount  of 

Amount  of  Number  of 

Amount  01 

Duty. 

Estates. 

Capital. 

Duty.      1     Estates. 

CapitaL 

£. 

& 

£. 

£. 

£. 

lOs. 

460 

0 

920 

32,200 

,  , 

£1 

1,470 

0 

1,470 

110,2.")0 

5 

5 

375 

3 

3,54J 

0 

1 ,  183 

177.450 

45 

15 

2,250 

8 

4,20S 

0 

526 

131,.^00 

i 

11 

5,027 

0 

457 

171,375 

15 

4,335 

0 

289 

151,725 

22 

5,478 

0 

249 

100,300 

'  •        I 

. 

,  , 

30 

9,120 

0 

304 

273. GOO 

..       1 

45 

12,330 

0 

274 

341 ; 700 

1,665     j 

37 

46  ,'250 

60 

8,400 

0 

140 

245.000 

. 

75 

12,300 

0 

164 

4tX),000 

1,875     ! 

25 

62  ,'500 

iO 

6,660 

0 

74 

259,000 

1,440  ; 

16 

56,000 

120 

6,480 

0 

54 

243,000 

1 

150 

3,300 

0 

22 

121.000 

600 

"4 

22*000 

180 

3,600 

0 

20 

130,000 

, 

210 

2,730 

0 

13 

97,. 500 

210 

1 

7,500 

240 

2,SS0 

0 

12 

102,000 

480     1 

2 

17,000 

270 

2,700 

0 

10 

95,000 

.. 

300 

5,400 

0 

18 

198,000 

600  : 

2 

22,000 

330 

3,300 

0 

10 

130,000 

: 

375 

3,750 

0 

10 

150,000 

750 

"2 

30J6(X) 

420 

840 

0 

2 

34,000 

420 

1 

17,000 

465 

1,8G0 

0 

4 

76,000 

465 

1 

19,000 

525 

1,050 

0 

2 

45,000 

600 

4,200 

0 

7 

192,500 

, . 

,  , 

675 

3,375 

0 

5 

162,500 

785 

785 

0 

1 

37,500 

900 

900 

0 

1 

42.. 500 

1,575 

1,575 

0 

1 

75,000 

2,250 

2,250 

0 

1 

110,0(D0 

.. 

Arrears 

4,386 

10 

•• 

England 

128,698 

10 

6,242 

4,495,600 

8,555 

11 

301,875 

Scotland 

ain  . 

8,555 

0 

111 

301,875 

••       i 

Great  Brit 

137,253 

10 

6,353 

4,797,475 

Administratio 

ns. 

Ditto     . 

790,712 

10 

16,819 

45,624,540 

Probates. 
Total. 

927,  WG 

0 

23,172 

50,422,015 

No  general  mortality  table  for  Ireland  has  ever  been  published ;  it 
is  therefore  not  possible  to  offer  any  similar  calculation  for  that  part  of 
the  kingdom.  From  the  subjoined  table  of  the  produce  of  probate  and 
administration  duties  in  Ireland,  in  1838,  it  appears  that  2196  estates 
were  subjected  to  the  tax  in  that  year,  and  that  the  capital  which  they 
comprised  was  4,465,240/.  If  we  assume  the  same  rate  of  mortality 
as  that  ascertained  in  England  and  Wales,  it  would  therefore  appear 
that  the  personal  property  in  Ireland  N\hich  in  succession  contributes  to 
this  branch  of  the  revenue  is  167,669,762/.  This  sum  is  probably  far 
less  than  the  actual  value,  and  is  offered  only  as  an  approximation  to 
the  truth. 


rKKS(JNAL  rilOPEKTY. 


603 


rrobales  and  Letters  of  Admtni.ilratioti  in  Ireland  in  1833,  rto  distinction  beiarj  made,  as  In  Great 
Britain,  between  the  two  Classes. 


K..if  of 

Amount  of 

Number  of 

Amount  of 

Rate  of 

Amount  of 

Number  of 

Amount  of 

Duty. 

Duty 

Estates. 

Capital. 

Duty. 

Duty 

i:!>tates. 

Capital. 

£.  s. 

£. 

s. 

+" 

£.     S. 

£. 

s. 

£. 

0  10 

233 

0 

476 

30,940 

133     0 

1,890 

0 

14 

192,500 

1   10 

433 

10 

28'J 

4.3,350 

160    0 

i,760 

0 

11 

178,7.50 

2    0 

40 1 

0 

202 

50,. 500 

185     0 

925 

0 

5 

93,750 

3    0 

405 

0 

135 

47,250 

210    0 

2,310 

0 

11 

247,500 

4    0 

464 

0 

116 

52.200 

260    0 

1,820 

0 

7 

192,500 

r.    0 

335 

0 

77 

42,350 

310     0 

1,550 

0 

5 

162,. 500 

<;    1) 

420 

0 

70 

45,500 

360    0 

300 

0 

1 

37,5(X) 

7     (t 

43 1 

0 

02 

46,. 500 

460    0 

920 

0 

2 

95,000 

8     0 

440 

0 

55 

47,750 

550    0 

1,650 

0 

3 

105,000 

'J     0 

646 

0 

72 

68,400 

050    0 

650 

0 

1 

05,000 

i:.    0 

2,310 

0 

154 

192,500 

750    0 

750 

0 

1 

75,000 

20     0 

2,520 

0 

126 

220,540 

2,000     0 

2,000 

0 

1 

187,. 500 

35     0 

4,-J35 

0 

141 

387,750 

2,. 500     0 

2,. 500 

0 

1 

225,000 

fiO    0 

4,020 

0 

67 

284,7.50 

3,000    0 

3,000 

0 

1 

275,000 

75    0 

3,675 

0 

49 

306,250 

Arrears  . 

542 

10 

'10     0 

1,980 
2,0  JO 

0 

2^ 

192,500 
213,750 

UO    0 

0 

I'J 

Total,     . 

48,427 

0 

2,196 

4,405,240 

The  capital  in  respect  of  which  the  legacy  duty  alone  has  been  paid 
in  Great  Britain  between  1797  and  5th  January  1849,  was  as  follows  : — 

At  1    per  cent,  duty 


91 

3' 
4 
5 
6 
8 
10 


Total 


£  732,468,754 
20,716,610 
70,884,013 

339,549,997 
12,692,647 
56,045,410 
18,604,.535 
11,868,795 

157,179,802 

£  1,470,010,563 


The  amount  of  duty  received  by  the  Government  on  legacies,  and  on 
probates  of  wills  and  letters  of  administration,  during  the  same  period, 
viz.,  from  1797  to  1849,  was — 


Legacies. 
£. 
England  and  Wales     .      .     .     40,015,441 

Scotland 2,474,3J5 

Ireland 1,026,400 


Probates  and 

Administrations. 

£. 

31,893,438 

1,747,437 

1,417>292 


Total 


,  £43,516,236 


£35,0.58,167 


The  annual  averages  of  these  sums,  compared  with  the  amounts  for 
the  last  year  of  the  series,  were  as  follows  : — 

Yearly  Average, 

1797  to  1848  184S 

£.  £. 

Capital  subject  to  Legacy  Duty  in  Great  Britain   ,     28,82.3,736  44,.348,721 

Legacy  Duty— England  and  Wales 801,611  1,174,166 

Probate,  &c..  Duty— England  and  Wales      ,      ,      ,          633,322  978,820 

Legacy  Duty— Scotland 50,259  83,995 

Probate,  &c..  Duty—ditto 35,712  82,147 

Legacy  Duty- Ireland 21,940  61,061 

Probate,  .«ic.,  Duly- ditto 29,449  86,052 


601  rilOGliESS  or  'J"11E  nation.  [.si;c.  VI. 

The  unequal  distribution  of  personal  property  in  the  different  divi- 
sions of  the  kingdom  is  rendered  very  apparent  by  means  of  these 
figures.  ^Vn  amount  equal  to  the  legacy  and  probate  duty  paid  in 
1849,  if  ecpiallv  divided  among  the  inhabitants,  would  have  amounted 
to— 

s.  d. 

In  Eiiglanrl  ...     2     5.L 
Scotland  ...      1     2 
Ireland      ...     0     4 

The  different  habits  and  dispositions  of  the  people  are  also  exempli- 
fied by  the  proportions  which  the  duty  on  legacies  bears  to  that  on  ])ro- 
bates  and  letters  of  administration.  In  each  100/.  of  duty  tliose 
proportions  were,  in  1849, — 

Legacy  Duty.  Probate  Duty. 
In  England     .      .      .     .54-. 54  45'46 

Scotland     .      .      .     50 -.55  49-45 

Ireland       .      .      .     41-50  58- .50 

We  are  tiience  led  to  presume  that  in  Scotland  the  habit  of  making 
a  distribution  of  property  by  will  is  nearly  as  prevalent  as  in  England, 
while  in  Ireland  there  is  exhibited  much  less  of  forethought  for  others  in 
this  respect  than  in  England  or  Scotland. 

An  opinion  is  frequently  expressed,  that  in  the  continued  growth  of 
capital  in  this  kingdom  the  greatest  proportion  of  the  increase  falls  to  the 
share  of  those  who  are  already  wealthy,  while  the  numbers  of  the  middle 
class  and  the  poor  among  us  are  constantly  increasing.  That  this 
opinion  is  not  entitled. to  our  implicit  assent  is  shown  by  the  returns 
of  probate  duty,  which  are  so  made  up  as  to  exhibit  in  classes  the 
amount  of  property  possessed  by  persons  at  their  death.  On  examining 
these  returns  for  1848,  in  com})arison  with  the  amounts  given  in  the 
same  classes  in  the  tables  for  1833,  it  appears  that  the  increase  has  been 
as  follows : — 

Estates  not  exceeding  .      .     £1,500  15- 5G  per  cent. 

„        between  £  1 , .500  and    5,000  9-21        „ 

„  „  5,000     „    10,fX)0  16-38         „ 

„  „  10,000     „    15,000  6-:i6         „ 

„  „  15,000    „    30,000  18-42         „ 

„        above     ....     30,000  1-13        „ 

It  will  have  been  seen  that  the  average  receipts  from  probate  duty 
generally  have  been  steadily  and  progressively  advancing  with  the  in- 
creasing wealth  of  the  country,  and  it  affords  a  strong  corroboration  of 
the  above-cited  proportions,  that  in  each  of  four  equal  periods  be- 
tween 1833  and  1848  the  yearly  average  duty  paid  on  estates  of  30,000/. 
and  upwards  has,  on  the  contrary,  been  diminishing.  The  average  sum 
received  on  such  estates  in  the  four  years — 

1833  to  1836,  was  £238,306 
1837  „  1840  „  230,388 
1841  „  1844  „  220,162 
1845  „  1848      „       223,962 


miAi'.  n]  HEAL  niOrEUTY.  GOo 

It  has  l)(>en  already  stated,  that  a  consldcraljlc  amount  of  wcaltli, 
which  It  is  usual  to  consider  as  personal  ])roperty,  has  heen  invested  iu 
mortgages  on  real  estates,  and  partakes  therefore  of  the  nature  (jf  real 
j)roperty.  The  sums  thus  invested  consist  of  savings  or  accumulations 
made  by  the  lenders,  hut  ea))ital  thus  disposed  of  must  not  necessarily  be 
cousidi'red  as  additions  to  the  national  wealth,  since  the  loans  may  have 
l)een  required  through  the  extravagance  of  spendthrift  land-owners. 
'I'here  exists  no  genei-al  record  of  sums  thus  secured,  and  it  woidd  he 
difficult  to  make  any  satisfactory  estimate  of  the  amount.  Still  less 
would  it  be  possible  to  determine  the  sums  thus  advanced  to  the  pro- 
})rietors  of  real  estates  which  have  been  required  for  purposes  of  per- 
manent improvement,  and  w  hie  h  therefore  form  a  part  of  the  national 
aeeunudations.  The  savings  thus  disposed  of  have,  in  great  part, 
been  made  by  persons  engaged  in  commercial  and  professional  pursuits, 
but  there  must  be  another  and  a  far  larger  amount  thus  invested 
tin-ough  the  prudence  of  land-owners  themselves.  One  capital  instance 
of  this  nature  was  atlbrded  by  the  late  Earl  of  Jxnccster,  better  known 
as  Mr.  Coke  of  Norfolk,  who,  by  the  continued  application  of  capital 
to  improvements  in  the  coiu'se  of  his  long  and  useful  life,  converted  a 
sterile  domain  into  a  highly  productive  estate.  In  this  manner  Lord 
Leicester  is  said  to  have  invested  sums  amounting  in  the  aggregate  to 
at  least  half  a  million  of  money,  and  which  amount  has  thus  been  added 
to  the  productive  wealth  of  the  nation.  To  what  extent  the  example 
thus  given  may  have  been  followed  by  those  who  witnessed  the  success 
of  the  patriotic  owner  of  Hulkham  cannot,  of  course,  be  known ;  but 
as  men  are  seldom  slow  to  adopt  what  has  proved  itself  to  be  greatly 
and  notoriously  beneficial,  we  may  fairly  suppose  that  the  investments 
there  made  form  but  a  very  small  part  of  the  savings  and  accumulations 
eniployed  in  this  manner.  Nor  has  this  disposal  of  capital  been  con- 
fined to  the  owners  of  the  soil.  Among  the  more  intelligent  class  of 
tenants,  whose  interest  in  the  farms  they  have  occupied  has  been  secured 
to  them  by  means  of  leases  for  such  periods  as  would  justify  them  in  ex- 
pecting an  adequate  return,  there  must  have  been  many  whose  capital 
embarked  in  improvements  has  not  only  been  replaced  to  them  with 
proiit,  but  has  permanently  raised  the  value  of  the  estate,  and  in  this 
way  has  ailded  to  the  real  wealth  of  the  country. 

( )n  the  other  hand,  a  considerable  sura  has  of  late  years  been  trans- 
ferred from  the  form  of  real  to  that  of  personal  property  through  the 
appropriation  of  land  to  the  purposes  of  railway  construction.  AVhat 
the  amount  may  be  which  has  thus  passed  in  the  transfer,  it  is  not  pos- 
sible to  state,  nor  even  to  estimate  with  any  confidence  ;  and  indeed  it  is 
very  certain  that  if  we  could  ascertain  the  amount  of  money  which  has 
changed  hands  in  the  operation,  it  would  not  afford  us  any  certain 
information,  since   it  is  notorious  that  in  many,   or  most  cases,  other 


606  PROGRESS  OF  THE  NATION.  [sec.  vi. 

considerations  than  that  of  the  actual  vahie   of  the  hmd   ])urchasod  has 
been  made  to  govern  the  price. 

Another  cause  for  the  absorption  of  the  yearly  savings  of  the  peojde, 
is  found  in  tlie  necessity  which  arises  for  providing  additional  house  ac- 
commodation for  our  constantly-growing  numbers.  In  1815  the  yearly 
value  of  dwelling-houses  in  England  and  Wales  was  14,290,889/.  for  a 
population  of  10,880,000,  while  in  1841  the  yearly  rental  had  increased 
to  23,386,401/.,  for  a  population  of  15,911,000,  showing  an  increased 
yearly  value  of  9,096,512/.  for  5,031,000  more  persons,  which,  reckon- 
ing the  rental  at  only  20  years'  purchase,  shows  an  outlay  for  this  one 
object  of  more  than  180,000,000/.  in  26  years,  or,  on  an  average,  seven 
millions  pounds  per  annum,  without  reckoning  the  outlay  for  the  same 
purpose  in  the  other  division  of  the  kingdom.  It  must  be  evident  that 
as  the  increase  of  the  population  is,  in  the  nature  of  things,  a  growing 
quantity,  the  outlay  demanded  for  additional  dwellings  must  be  greater 
from  year  to  year,  and  that  the  amount  to  be  thus  invested  will  be 
greater  in  time  to  come  than  it  has  hitherto  been  ;  but  at  the  rate  already 
shown,  it  would  appear,  that  the  real  property  of  England  and  Wales,  in 
the  form  of  additional  dwellings,  must  have  absorbed  240,000,000/. 
since  the  peace  in  1815.  The  cost  of  furniture  of  various  kinds  re- 
quired for  these  additional  houses,  and  which  retains  the  form  of  personal 
property,  it  is  not  possible  to  estimate  correctly,  but  it  would  probably 
amount  to  at  least  one-third  of  the  above  sum. 

The  assessments  to  the  income-tax  upon  real  property  in  Great 
Britain,  in  1803,  were  made  on  an  annual  value  or  rental  of  38,691,394/., 
which,  at  twenty-five  years'  purchase,  represented  a  capital  of 
967,284,850/.  In  1812  the  assessments  to  the  property-tax  upon  the 
like  property  were  made  on  an  annual  value  of  55,784,533/.,  which  at 
the  same  rate  of  valuation,  represented  a  capital  of  1,394,613,325/.; 
showing  an  apparent  increase  in  value  of  427,328,475/.  in  nine  years; 
but  it  is  well  known  that  dm-ing  that  interval  the  prices  of  agricultural 
produce  had  risen  enormously,  and  that  rents  and  the  apparent  value  of 
land  and  of  buildings  partook  largely  of  that  increase,  which  arose  out 
of  circumstances  that  gave  an  artificial  value  to  everything  which  could 
be  freely  exchanged.  The  average  price  of  gold  in  1812,  was  4/.  155. 
per  ounce  ;  so  that  the  larger  valuation  assigned  to  that  year,  would  re- 
present a  capital  of  only  1,143,215,923/.,  if  estimated  at  the  Mint  price  ; 
the  increased  value  during  the  nine  years  that  followed  1803,  was 
therefore  no  more  than  175,931,073/.,  which  is  probably  still  somewhat 
exaggerated.  The  assessments  in  1812  were  made  to  include  tithes, 
and  it  does  not  clearly  appear  that  this  was  done  in  1803.  Their  annual 
value  was  assessed  at  2,583,687/.,  equal  to  a  capital  of  64,592,175/., 
or  at  the  ^lint  price  of  gold  52,948,586/.,  which  being  deducted  leaves 
the  increase  in  nine  years  72,982,487/.     The  assessments  for  the  ])oor- 


ciiAi>.  II.]  INCOME  AND  EXrENDITURE.  fiO? 

r;ites  are  not  made  Tij)on  the  uniform  principle  followed  in  regard  to  the 
income  and  })ro])erty  taxe.-,  and  do  not  aftord  any  very  satisfactory 
means  for  comparing  the  progress  made  in  tlie.  value  of  real  pro])ertv 
since  the  repeal  of  the  property-tax  in  1815,  nor  does  the  income  tax  of 
1  <S42  furnish  much  better  means  for  comparing  one  period  witii  another, 
because  of  the  numerous  classes  exem])ti!(l  under  its  various  provisions. 

The  following  table  (p.  GOS),  showing  the  annual  value  assessed  to 
the  poor-rates  in  England  and  ^Vales,  for  the  year  ending  24th  March, 
1841,  distinguishes  land  and  dwelling-houses  from  other  kinds  of  real 
])roj)erty.  It  appears  from  this  statement  that  the  annual  value  at  that 
time  of  real  property  thus  assessed  in  England  and  Wales  alone  was 
02,540,030/.,  which,  at  tw^entyfive  years'  purchase,  represents  a  value 
of  ],5G."),50O,750/. 

In  bringing  forward  his  proposal  for  an  income-tax  in  1842,  Sir 
Robert  Peel  assumed  the  value  of  real  property  to  be  ten  millions 
beyond  the  amount  there  shown,  but  Scotland  is  included  in  his  estimate. 
His  figures  were — 

Rent  of  land  ....  £39,400,000 
Kent  of  liouses  .  .  .  25,000,000 
Tithes,  mines,  &c.     .      .       8.400,000 

£  72,800,000 

which  sum,  at  twenty-five  years'  purchase,  is  equal  to  a  capital  of 
1,820,000,000/. 

Dr.  Beeke's  valuation,  made  in  1798,  was  as  follows: — 

A'alue  of  land  in  England      .      .      ,  £600,000,000 
,,  Scotland      .      .      .      liit.iiiiu.itoo 

Value  of  houses 2i  ii  i.(  h  i(  ij  n  lO 

Value  of  tithes 75,000,000 

£  995,000,000 

When  Mr.  Pitt  brought  forward  his  pro})osal  for  an  income-tax,  in 
the  same  year  (1798;,  his  calculations  were  based  on  the  following 
estimate  : — 

Kent  of  land £  25,000,000 

Tenants'  income 18,0(X),0(K) 

Tithes 5,0f)0,0(X) 

Mines,  canals,  &c .3,7.50,000 

Kent  of  houses 6,250.000 

Profits  of  professions 2,000.000 

Scotland — one-eighth  as  much  as  England        .      .  7,5(M),00O 

Income  of  residents  derived  from  colonies        .      ,  5,000,000 

Dividends  from  public  funds 1.5,(X)0.000 

Profits  of  home  and  foreign  trades 40,000,000 

£  127,.5O0.0OO 

The  real  property  included  in  this  estimate  is  only  45  millions' 
annual  value,  and  at  twenty-five  years'  purchase  would  represent  a 
capital  of  1,125^000,000/.  It  is  evident  that  the  sum  computed  as  the 
rent  of  houses  cannot  include  the  yearly  value  of  all  the  dwellings  in 
England,  which  now  amounts  to  more  than  five  times  the  sum  estimated 


(508 


PROGRESS  OF  THE  NATION. 


[sec.    VI. 


Net  Kcnta 

1,  or  Annual  Value  of  Kcal 
Asse.ssed  to  the  Poor  Kales, 

'ropcrty, 

Total 

Annual  Value 

of  Real 

Property  in 

1815. 

for  the  Y.  ar  ended  Lady-day,  1841.                    1 

Area, 

COUNTIES. 

Landed 

Uwellin;; 

All  other 
Kinds  of 
Property. 

Total  Annual 
Value  of 

in  Knfjlish 
Statute 
Acres. 

Property. 

Houses. 

Real  Property 

Assessed. 

Englanp. 

£. 

£. 

£. 

£. 

£. 

Bedford    .... 

343,683 

326,684 

159,816 

8,896 

495,396 

297,632 

Berks  .... 

652,082 

477,. 570 

199,999 

.54,. 547 

732,116 

472,270 

Buckinglmni 

644, 130 

.545,157 

95,7.57 

33,420 

674,. 334 

463,820 

Canibridge     . 

6.0.-),  221 

.581,761 

239,079 

47,844 

868,684 

.5.36,853 

Cliestcr     . 

1,083,084 

778,560 

447,034 

198,241 

1,423,8.35 

649,050 

('ornwall  . 

916.060 

603,119 

190,408 

115,952 

909,479 

854,770 

Cumberland  . 

70.-),  446 

497,573 

147,920 

50.859 

696,3.52 

i;69,4.0 

Derby 

887,659 

625,396 

160,777 

80,315 

866,488 

663,180 

Devon 

1,897,513 

1,241,52.3 

4:0,528 

120,093 

1,852,144 

1,6.36,4.50 

Dorset 

6:t8,3i6 

5.50,567 

143,125 

36.542 

735,234 

627,220 

Durham    . 

791,339 

516,971 

213,986 

200; 391 

931,348 

679,. 530 

Essex  .... 

!  1,5.56.836 

1,018,6.50 

443,9.53 

121,116 

1,1)85,719 

979,000 

Gloucester 

1,463,260 

898,957 

7.39,201 

144,039 

1,782,197 

790,470 

Hereford  . 

604,614 

5.52,383 

102,921 

25,<.31 

681,235 

.543.800 

Hertford  .      . 

.571,107 

386,341 

220,076 

61,2J3 

667,710 

400,370 

Huntingdon  . 

320,188 

2.36,633 

71,221 

9,864 

317,718 

241,690 

Kent    . 

1,644,179 

1,044,999 

878,472 

188,204 

2,111.675 

972,240 

Lancaster 

3,087,744 

1,402,208 

2,449,196 

1,415,202 

5,266,606 

1,117,260 

Leicester  . 

902,217 

6.,0,914 

221,771 

21,114 

933,799 

511,340 

Lincoln     . 

2,061,830 

1,766,740 

300,348 

60,219 

2,127,-307 

1,663,850 

Middlesex 

5,595.537 

304,653 

6,680,202 

308,514 

7,293,369 

179,590 

Jlonmouth     . 

295, Oj7 

251,019 

119,974 

.50,057 

421,050 

324,310 

Norfolk     . 

1,540,952 

1,209,181 

436,758 

197,885 

1,893,824 

1,2' '2,. 300 

Northampton 

!       942,162 

748,116 

158,621 

33,6.58 

940,. 395 

646,810 

Northumberland 

1,240,594 

740,609 

324,159 

261,646 

1,326,414 

1,165,4.30 

Nottingham   . 

7.37,230 

563,840 

2.52,2.30 

40,605 

856,675 

.525,800 

Oxford      .      . 

713.147 

528,242 

149.658 

17.8.52 

695,7.52 

467,. 3.30 

Kutland    .      . 

133,487 

106,119 

9,104 

3;  911 

119,134 

97,. 500 

Salop   . 

1,037,988 

874,316 

213,251 

82,441 

1,170,008 

864,. 360 

Somerset  . 

1,900,651 

1,361,. 547 

567,776 

121,193 

2,050,516 

i,023,o:;o 

Southampton 

1,130,9.52 

723,087 

541,229 

97,710 

1,362,026 

1,01 8,. 550 

Staiford     .      . 

1,150,285 

eOO, 102 

683,762 

422,896 

2,006,760 

7.36,290 

Suffolk      .      . 

1,127,404 

912,062 

302,059 

83,835 

1,297,9.56 

918,760 

Surrey       .     . 

1,. 579, 173 

376,644 

1,409,180 

141,669 

1,927,4<;3 

474,480 

Sussex 

915,348 

611,320 

472,443 

85,467 

1,169,230 

907,920 

Warwick  . 

1,236.727 

7 13,. 390 

300,427 

.595,930 

1,609,747 

567,9.30 

AVestmoreland 

298,199 

221,054 

37,374 

7,907 

266,3.33 

485,990 

Wilts   .      .      . 

1,155,459 

899,878 

219,931 

55,807 

1,175,616 

869,620 

Worcester 

799,605 

605,610 

323,007 

66,625 

995,242 

4.59,710 

York,  East  Riding  . 

l.i;,0..326 

760,942 

271,258 

79,607 

1,111,807 

763,800 

„      North  Kiding 

1^145,252 

845,547 

131,681 

.34,657 

1,011,885 

1,275,820 

„      West  Riding. 

2,392,406 

1,449,007 

1,414,800 

460,995 

3,324,802 

1,629,890 

Totals  of  England   . 

49,744,622 

30,448,991 

22,991,472 

6,244,949 

59,685,412 

31,770,615 

Wales. 

Anglesea  .... 

92,589 

164,637 

15,785 

11,191 

191,613 

173,440 

Brecon  . 

146,. 539 

170.397 

52,911 

19,355 

242,663 

482,560 

Cardigan  . 

141,889 

143^3.30 

16,929 

6,8.52 

167,111 

4.32.000 

Carmarthen  . 

277,455 

285, 188 

31,8.53 

21,362 

3.38,403 

623,360 

Carnarvon 

125,198 

125,587 

34,924 

22,6.55 

183,166 

.348,160 

Denbigh   .     . 

225,446 

262,6.35 

42,. 563 

30,. 341 

335,5.39 

405,120 

Flint    .      .      . 

153,930 

147,876 

40,561 

25,634 

214,071 

1.56,160 

Glamorgan     . 

.3.34,192 

226.652 

69.043 

80.787 

376,482 

506,880 

jMeri(;iieth 

111.4.36 

99,281 

12,9.36 

4,248 

116,4.35 

424,320 

Montgomery. 

207; 286 

247,3.50 

25,688 

9,31)2 

282,340 

.';.36,960 

Pembroke 

219,589 

221 , 167 

39,115 

15,8.30 

276,112 

390,400 

Radnor      .     . 

99,717 

112,046 

12,621 

5^986 

130,653 

272,640 

Totals  of  Wales  .     . 

2,153,801 

2,206,146 

394,929 

253,543 

2,854,618 

4,752,000 

Totals    of    Eng 
and  Wales 

and 

51,8'..8,423 

1     '       ' 

.32,6.55,1.37 

!  23,. 386, 401 

1 

6,498,492 

1 

62,540,0.30 

.36,522,613 

REAL  PROrERTY. 


609 


by  Mr.  Pitt  in  1798;  that  estimate,  in  all  probability,  excluded  farm- 
liouses,  and  all  others  below  a  certain  rental.  The  assessments  actu- 
ally made  on  real  property  under  the  income-^tax  of  1842,  although 
they  exclude  properties  of  less  yearly  value  than  150/.,  have  far  ex- 
ceeded in  amount  the  estimate  formed  by  Sir  Robert  Peel,  as  appears 
by  the  following  statement.  The  value  estimated  at  25  years'  purchase 
of  the  remaining  part  of  real  property  in  Great  Britain,  in  1842,  is  thus 
shown  to  amount  to  2,382,112,425/. 

Annual  Vuhie  of  Real  Property  assessed  to  the  Properfi/  and  Income  Tax,  for  the  Year  ended 

5th  April,  1843. 


Land 
Houses  . 
Tithes   . 
Manors 
Fines     . 
Quarries     . 
Mines    . 
Iron  ^^'orks 
Fisheries    . 
Canals  . 
Railways    . 
Other  Property 


Kngland. 


Scotland. 


40,167,088 

35,556,400 

l,96O,.%30 

1.52,217 

.319,140 

207,009 

1,903,794 

412,022 

11,105 

1,229,202 

2,417,610 

1,466,816 


85,802,735 


£. 
5,. 586,. 528 
2,919,3.38 


902 

33,474 

177,593 

147,413 

47,810 

77,891 

181,3.33 

309,480 


45,753,616 

38,475,738 

1,960,3.30 

1.52,217 

320,042 

240,483 

2,081,337 

559,435 

58,915 

1,307,093 

2,598,943 

1,776,296 


9,481,762  I  95,284,497 


In  a  return  made  to  an  order  of  the  House  of  Lords  in  May,  1841, 

for  an  account  of  the  amount  of  rental  assessed  to  the  sewers-rate  in  the 

metropolitan  counties  of  England,  and  which  order  was  only  partially 

obeyed,  it  is  stated  that  the  rental  so  assessed  in  the  undermentioned 

divisions  amounted  to  5,084,174/.,  viz. : — 

£. 

Westminster  and  adjacent  parts  of  Middlesex     .      .      .  2,788,190 

Ilolborn  and  Finsbury,  Shoreditch  and  Norton  Folgate  1,316,013 

Tower  Hamlets  division 888,596 

St.  Katharine's  precinct 12,964 

Poplar 78,411 

£  5,084,174 

The  Commissioners  for  Sewers  in  the  City  of  London  did  not  make 
any  return  to  this  order ;  but  in  the  Report  made  in  1837  by  the  Com- 
missioners for  inquiring  concerning  Municipal  Corporations,  we  find  a 
statement  of  the  rental  assessed  for  sewers-rates  in  the  different  wards  of 
the  city  at  different  periods,  viz.  : — • 

Years.  A". 

1771  457,701 

1801  507,372 

1831  792,904 

The  amount  assessed  in  1831,  added  to  the  above  sum  (5,084,175/.), 
makes  a  yearly  rental  of  5,877,078/.,  thus  leaving  only  1,41G,291/.  to 
make  u])  the  sum  assessed  to  the  poor-rate  in  the  whole  of  Middlesex 

2   R 


610 


PROGRESS  OF  THE  NATION. 


[sec.  VI. 


in  the  year  1840-41,  which  gave  good  reason  for  believing  that  the 
assessments  for  poor-rates  were  made  upon  less  than  the  actual  rental, 
and  that  consequently  the  value  of  real  property  in  the  kingdom  must 
be  greater  than  that  given  in  the  table  of  the  Poor  Law  Commissioners. 
We  learn,  from  the  above  returns  of  the  rental  of  the  City  of  London, 
that  in  the  thirty  years  from  1771  to  1801  the  annual  value  of  houses 
increased  only  40,G7U.,  or  10-85  per  cent. ;  while  in  the  first  thirty 
years  of  the  present  century  the  increased  yearly  value  was  285,532/.,  or 
56*27  per  cent.  This  last-mentioned  increase,  valued  as  before  at 
twenty-five  years'  purchase,  represents  a  value  of  7,138,300/.  of  real 
property  created  in  thirty  years  within  the  limits  of  the  City  of  London 
alone.  The  increased  rental  of  real  property  in  England  and  Wales 
during  the  thirty-five*  years  that  w^e  have  now  been  at  peace  in  Europe 
exceeds  forty  millions,  representing  a  capital  of  1000  millions. 

The  following  statement  of  the  valuation  made  for  the  county-rate  of 
the  townships  which  now  form  the  parliamentary  borough  of  Manchester, 
exhibits  a  most  extraordinary  rapidity  of  increase  in  the  rental  of  real 
property  since  the  peace.  It  is  not  probable  than  an  equal  rate  of 
increase  has  been  experienced  in  any  other  locality: — 


Township? 


Manchester   .... 
Chorlton-upon-Medlock 

Hulme 

Ardwick 

Cheatham       .... 
Berwick 


1S15 


1S29 


303,732 

19,484 
9,359 

11,0'j7 
8.524 
1^80 


371,749 
66,645 
19,678 
13,004 
24,0: 10 
831 


£. 

721,743 

137,651 

75,733 

46,471 

38,983 

1,474 


353,376  '  495,997   1,022,055 


The  population  of  the  above  townships  was — 


Years. 

Population 

1811 

89,104 

1831 

182,016 

1841 

234,925 

The  increased  value  between  1815  and  1829,  at  twenty-five  years' 
purchase,  amounted  to  3,565,525/.,  or  40*35  per  cent.  Between  1829 
and  1841  the  increase,  similarly  valued,  has  been  13,151,450/.,  or 
106*06  per  cent.  The  total  increase  since  the  peace  in  1815  has  been 
in  this  one  borough,  16,716,975/.,  or  189*22  per  cent.  :  the  population 
in  the  same  time  has  increased  about  120  per  cent. 

The  borough  of  Salford,  which,  for  all  practical  purposes,  must  be 
considered  as  a  part  of  Manchester,  exhibits  a  still  more  extraordinary 
advance.  The  value  of  property  assessed  to  tbe  county-rate  in  that 
borough  was.  In  1815,  918,397/. ;  and  in  1841,  2,703,292/.,  showing  an 


*  See  table,  page  608. 


cir.vp.  II.]  SAVINGS'  BANKS.  Gil 

increase  of  1,784,895/.,  or  llt435  por  cent.,  and  representing  an  accu- 
mulation of  capital  equal  to  44,622,375/. 

It  will  lianlly  admit  of  (jucstion  whether  the  sums  depositcMl  in 
Savings'  Banks  should  bo  considered  as  addititms  made  to  the  accnnni- 
lated  wealth  of  the  nation.  That  those  deposits  arc  savings  made  by 
the  individual  contributors  cannot,  of  course,  be  questioned  ;  when 
placed  in  the  hands  of  the  Government  Commissioners  for  investment 
in  public  securities,  it  is  true  that  the  capital  of  others  previously  so 
invested  is  thereby  set  free,  but  it  does  not  follow  that  when  this  change 
is  made  the  money  is  dissipated ;  it  may,  and  most  probably  does,  find 
productive  employment  elsewhere.  One  thing  is  clear,  viz.,  that  the 
sums  so  set  free  would  equally  have  been  required,  although  the 
savings'  banks  deposits  had  never  been  made,  and  therefore  that  these 
are,  to  their  full  extent,  additions  to  the  capital  of  the  country.  The 
advantages  of  these  institutions,  considered  only  in  their  economical 
effect,  are  very  great ;  but  these  advantages  sink  into  insignificance 
in  comparison  with  the  moral  benefits  they  have  conferred.  On  the 
one  hand,  the  feeling  of  honest  independence  which  must,  to  some 
extent,  be  felt  by  every  depositor,  cannot  fail  to  have  a  beneficial  influ- 
ence upon  his  character ;  he  is  no  longer  forced,  at  the  first  approach  of 
sickness  or  adversity,  to  become  a  candidate  for  the  pauper's  portion, 
but  can  draw  upon  a  store  of  his  own  accumulating  for  sustenance.  On 
the  other  hand,  every  person  who  intrusts  his  savings  to  these  institu- 
tions becomes,  by  that  means,  additionally  and  personally  interested  in 
the  stability  of  the  institutions  of  the  country. 

Banks  for  savings  cannot  date  their  origin  earlier  than  the  beginning 
of  the  present  century.  They  have  been  said  to  owe  their  rise  to  the 
Rev,  Joseph  Smith,  of  "Wendover,  who,  in  the  year  1799,  circulated 
proposals  in  his  parish  to  receive  any  sums  in  deposit  during  the 
summer,  and  to  return  the  amount  at  Christmas,  with  the  addition  of 
one-third  to  the  sum  as  a  bounty  or  reward  for  the  forethought  of  the 
depositor.  This  was  clearly  not  a  savings'  bank  according  to  what  is 
now  understood  by  the  term,  neither  would  such  a  plan,  if  ever  so 
extensively  followed  out — and  it  does  not  appear  probable  that  Mr, 
Smith  could  have  many  imitators — be  the  means  of  causing  any  but 
temporary  savings ;  the  very  bounty  given  would  insure  the  withdrawing 
of  the  deposits,  and  most  probably  the  disbursement  of  the  money.  The 
first  savings'  bank  was  established  in  1804,  at  Tottenham,  in  Middlesex, 
by  Mrs.  Priscilla  Wakefield,  and  was  called  the  Charitable  Bank.  In 
this  bank  deposits  were  received,  and  5  per  cent,  interest  was  allowed 
upon  their  amount — a  rate  which  left  a  considerable  loss  to  the  bene- 
volent individuals  by  whom  Mrs.  Wakefield  was  joined  in  the  under- 
taking.    The    society  next  formed  of  which  we  have  any  account  was 

2  R  2 


612 


PKOGRESS  OF  THE  NATION. 


[sec.  yi. 


opened  in  1808,  at  Bath,  chiefly  through  the  instrumentality  of  ladies, 
for  receiving  deposits  fi'om  female  servants.  The  good  resulting  from 
these  eflTorts  was  in  due  time  made  manifest ;  and  the  successful 
example  thus  set  was  so  far  followed  that  in  the  year  1817  there  were 
seventy  savings'  banks  in  operation  in  England,  four  in  Wales,  and  four 
in  Ireland.  In  that  year  Acts  of  Parliament  were  passed  to  encourage 
the  establishment  of  such  institutions,  and  to  place  the  funds  under  the 
safeguard  of  the  State.  By  subsequent  Acts  the  provisions  were  ex- 
tended to  Scotland  and  the  Channel  Islands. 

The  progress  of  these  banks,  as  shown  by  the  sums  received  on  their 
account  by  the  Commissioners  for  the  Reduction  of  the  National  Debt, 
to  the  end  of  1829,  was  as  follows : — 


Keceived  from  6tli  August,  1817  (the  date  of  the  first  Act! 
for  encouraging  Savings'  Banks),  to  5th  January,  1818     j 
Keceived  in  the  year  ending  5th  January,  1819 


328,282 


1819 

1,567,667 

1820 

1,019,612 

1821 

707.106 

1822 

1,205,960 

1823 

1,6.32,166 

1824 

1,932,448 

1825 

2,586,219 

1826 

1,261,290 

1827 

526,155 

1828 

979,641 

1829 

9.31,. 361 

1830 

450,137 

Detailed  accounts  have  since  been  made  up  to  the  20th  of  November 
in  each  year,  of  which  the  following  is  a  summary : — 


Year 

ENGLAND. 

W^\LES. 

IRELAND. 

TOTAL. 

20th 
Nov. 

Depositors. 

Amount. 

Depositors.     Amount. 

Depositors. 

Amount. 

Depositors. 

Amount. 

1830 
1831 
1832 
1833 
1834 
1835 

367,812 
380. 130 
373,704 
402,607 
434,845 
466,862 

£. 
12,287,606 
12,354,617 
11,956,289 
12,680,512 
13,582,102 
14,491,316 

i       £. 
10,204  i  314,903 
10.374     322,546 
10;014     301,509 
11,015  1  329,887 
11,183     336,976 
12,173  ,  356,135 

34,201 

38,999 
43,755 
49,170 
53, 179 
.58,482 

£. 
905,056 
1,042,3.32 
1,178.201 
1,327; 122 
1,450,766 
1,608,653 

412,217 
429,503 
427,473 
462,792 
499,207 
537,517 

£. 
13,507,565 
13,719,495 
13,4.35,999 
14,337,521 
15',  369, 844 
16,456,104 

Year 
ending 

ENGLAND. 

WALES. 

SCOTLAND. 

IRELAND. 

20th 
Nov. 

Depositors.       Amount. 

Depositors.    Amount. 

Depositors.     Amount. 

Depositors.!     Amount. 

1836 
1837 
1838 
1839 
1840 
1841 
1842 
1843 
1844 
1845 
1846 
1847 
1848 
1849 

515,444 

544,449 
595.425 
622,468 
662,-338 
695,791 
723,374 
773,551 
832,2r:0 
865, .389 
100,9.33 
901,826 
899,606 
928,425 

£. 
16,491,949 
17,178,041 
18,566,490 
19,246,221 
20,203.4.38 
21,0.36;  l'.;0 
21,780,373 
23,344,273 
25,112,865 
25,930.266 
26,7=^9,817 
25,S3S,10j 
24,985,730 
25,480,508 

13,110 
13,963 
15.232 
15,8j3 
15.825 
16;220 
16,434 
17.077 
18; 690 
18,916 
20,141 
20,978 
21,195 
21,421 

£. 
422,585 
455,846 
498.359 
525,320 
521,918 
527,688 
531,928 
.555,849 
599,796 
618,0:t2 
674,657 
697,840 
692,495 
678,313 

£. 
6.7.53          74,086 
13,553        160,902 
22.646        279,994 
34,739  1     436,0.32 
43,737  '     .5.38,961 
.50,619  1     608,50;) 
54,. 303  ;     6.52,129 
62,236       8.30,083 
69,824  11,043,183 
82,203    1,278.929 
90,301    1,383,866 
88.630    1,1*2,518 
86,056  11,081,110 
91,669    1,1.54,3.38 

64,019 
64,101 
69,933 
75,296 
76,155 
78,574 
80,604 
82,486 
91,243 
96,422 
96,6.50 
84,120 
.50.024 
45; 833 

£. 
1,817,264 
1,829,226 
2,048,469 
2,218,2,39 
2,206,7.33 
2,302,302 
2,. 354, 906 
2,447,110 
2,749,017 
2, 921,, 581 
2,924,910 
2,4-^8,713 
1,355,801 
1,223.851 

ClI.Vl'.    11. J 


SAVINGS'  BANKS. 


613 


Summary  of  tlie  foregoing  Table. 


Year 
ending  20tli 
November. 


1836 
1837 
1838 
183'J 
1840 
1841 
1842 
1843 
1844 
1845 
1846 
1847 
1848 
1849 


TOTAL. 


Depositors. 


599,326 

636,066 

703,236 

748,396 

798,053 

841,204 

874,715 

935,530 

1,012  047 

1,062,930 

1,108,025 

1,095,554 

1,056,881 

1,087,354 


Amount. 


£. 
18,805,884 
19,624,015 
21,393,312 
22,425,812 
23,471,050 
24,474,689 
25,319,336 
27,177,315 
29,504,861 
30,748,868 
31,743.250 
30,207,180 
28,114,136 
28,537,010 


The  amount  paid  by  the  public  for  interest  on  the  sums  due  to  the 
trustees  of  savings'  banks  and  friendly  societies,  from  6th  August,  1817, 
to  20th  November,  1841,  was  13,086,472/.  I65.  9rf.  ;  and  as  the  amount 
of  dividends  in  public  securities  invested  by  the  Commissioners  for  the 
Reduction  of  the  National  Debt  in  respect  of  the  same  amounted  only 
to  11,191,323/.  14,v.  Id.,  there  had  resulted  a  loss  at  that  time  to  the 
public  from  these  institutions  of  1,895,149/.  2^.  8c/.,  by  reason  of  the 
rate  of  interest  allowed  being  greater  than  that  yielded  by  the  securi- 
ties in  which  the  deposits  have  been  invested.  The  value  of  these 
securities,  according  to  a  return  made  to  Parliament  in  May,  1842, 
was — 


6,436,322  Consolidated  3  per  Cents.,  at  88J  per  cent. 


4,134,970  Reduced  3  per  Cents. 
5,389,900  3V  per  Cents.,  1818 
2,601,700  Reduced  3.V  per  Cents. 
5,442,721  New  3.1:  per  Cents. 
1,031,589  Old  3.^'per  Cents. 
96.3,950  Exchequer  Bills 


87^ 
97* 
971 
98a 
971 


£26,001,152 


£. 
.5,712,2-36 
3,628,435 
5,255,153 
2,533,405 
5,374,687 
1,003,219 
963,950 

£24,471,083 


The  following  statement,  made  up  to  the  20th  November,  1845,  shows 
the  number  of  depositors  in  ditlerent  classes  in  each  division  of  the 
kingdom,  and  the  average  amount  invested  by  each  depositor  in  the 
several  classes,  from  which  it  appears  that  the  number  of  persons  who 
have  thus  constituted  themselves  public  creditors  is  three  times  as  great 
as  that  of  persons  entitled  to  dividends  on  the  national  debt  at  the  same 
period,  viz. :  — 

Number  entitled  to  dividends  on  the  10th  Oct.,  1844,      85,115 
„  „  5th  Jan.,  1845,     109,978 


Total 


19=i.0:'3 


614 


PROGRESS  OF  THE  NATION. 


[sec.  VI. 


ENGLAND. 

SCOTLAND. 

DEPOSITORS, 

Number 

of 

Depositors. 

Amount 

of 
Investments. 

Average 
Amount 
Invested 
by  each 
Depositor. 

Number 

of 
Depositors 

Amount 

of 

Investments. 

Average 
Amount 
Invested 
by  each 
Depositor. 

+* 

£. 

£. 

£. 

£. 

Not   exceeding  20  .     .     . 

483,795 

3,124,311 

6 

61,034 

320,854 

5 

„            „            50  .      .      . 

211,546 

6,539,850 

31 

15,105 

456,231 

30 

100.     .      . 

95,742 

6,614,575 

69 

3,848 

260, 164 

68 

150.      .      . 

33,309 

4,010,132 

120 

844 

101,511 

120 

„          200.      .      . 

19,194 

3,279,687 

171 

278 

46,585 

167 

Exceeding    .     200  .     .     . 

2,859 

670, 193 

234 

1 

200 

200 

Number   and  amount  of  j 
individual  depositors  in  !• 
savings'  banks    .      .      .  ' 

846,445 

24,238,74^ 

2' 

81,170 

1,185,545 

15 

Number    and   amount   of) 
charitable  institutions  .  1 

10,171 

539,627 

53 

635 

35,891 

56 

Number   and    amoimt    of^ 

friendly      societies      in  1 
account    with    savings'  j 
banks J 

8,773 

1,151,891 

131 

398 

57,493 

144 

Total     .... 

865, 38 J 

25,930,266 

30 

82,203 

1,278,929 

16 

WALES. 

IRELAND. 

DEPOSITOBS. 

Number 

of 

Depositors. 

Amount 

of 

Investments. 

Average 
Amount 
Invested 
by  each 
Depositor. 

Number 

of 
Depositors 

Amount 

of 

Investments. 

Average 
.Amount 
Invested 
by  each 
Depositor. 

*■ 

£. 

£. 

f. 

£. 

Not   exceeding  20 .     .     . 

9,461 

74,215 

8 

43,281 

331,647 

8 

50.     .     . 

5,647 

172,710 

30 

35,311 

1,078,549 

31 

100.      .      . 

2,130 

146,850 

69 

12,007 

793,758 

66 

150.      .      . 

662 

79,338 

120 

3,109 

372,809 

120 

200.      .      . 

291 

49,118 

168 

1,539 

258,581 

168 

Exceeding  .      200 .      .      . 

40 

9,671 

242 

101 

22,916 

227 

Number   and    amount   of  j 
individual  depositors  in  I 
savings'  banks    ,      .      .  ! 

18,231 

531,902 

29 

95,348 

2,858,260 

39 

Number   and   amount  of  i 
charitable  institutions  . 

220 

13,582 

42 

669 

41,798 

62 

Number   and   amount    of  J 
friendly     societies     in  1 
account    with    savings'  j 
banks J 

465 

72,608 

156 

405 

21,523 

53 

Total     .... 

18,916 

618,092 

33 

^6,422 

2,921,581 

30 

SAVINGS'  BANKS. 


615 


dki'onI  niHs;. 


TOTAL. 

Number 

of 

Depositors. 

Amount 

of 

Investments. 

Average 
Amount 
Invested 
by  each 
Depositor. 

£. 

£. 

597,631 

3,831,027 

6 

267,609 

8,247,304 

31 

113,727 

7,815,347 

69 

37,924 

4,563,790 

120 

21,302 

3,633,971 

171 

3,001 

702,980 

234 

1,041,194 

28,814,455 

28 

11,695 

630,898 

34 

10,041 

1,303,515 

131 

1,062,930 

30,748,868 

28 

488 

1,913,956 

•• 

1,063,418 

32,661,924 

Not   exceeding    20 

»  »  50 

100 

l-^'O 

200 

E.\ceeding     .    200 

Number  and  amount  of  individual  depositors  in  1 
savings'  banks J 

Number  and  amount  of  charitable  institutions     . 

Is' umber  and  amount  of  friendly  societies  in  account  ] 
with  savings'  banks j 

Number  and  amount  of  friendly  societies  in  direct  i 
account  with  the  Commissioners  for  the  Reduction  > 
of  the  National  Debt J 

Gross  Total 


The  rate  of  interest  allowed  by  the  public  to  depositors  was  lowered 
from  20th  November,  1844,  to  2d.  per  centum  per  diem,  or  3/.  0*-.  lOd. 
per  centum  per  annum. 

A  savings'  bank  was  established  at  St.  Heller,  in  the  island  of  Jersey, 
in  January,  1835,  between  which  time  and  the  20th  November,  1841, 
deposits  were  made  therein  by  3206  persons,  out  of  a  total  population 
of  47,556,  to  the  amount  of  58,630/.  The  accounts  kept  at  this  insti- 
tution distinguish  the  occupations  of  depositors,  a  practice  which  is 
followed  by  the  managers  of  some  of  these  institutions  in  England.  It  is 
to  be  wished  that  all  would  adopt  this  course,  and  thus  throw  light  upon 
the  comparative  condition  and  habits  of  the  various  divisions  found 
among  our  labouring  population.  The  most  numerous  class  of  depositors 
in  the  Jersey  savings'  bank  are  domestic  servants,  if  we  except  sums 
invested  by  parents  in  the  names  of  their  children.  Next  to  servants 
stand  milliners,  shopwomen,  and  sempstresses ;  these  three  classes  fur- 
nishing more  than  half  in  number,  and  nearly  one-half  in  amount,  of  the 
entire  deposits. 

The  published  accounts  of  the  managers  of  the  Manchester  and 
Salford  bank  for  savings,  for  the  year  ending  20th  November,  1842,  also 
gave  these  particulars   in  detail.     Having  reference  to  so  large    and 


616 


PROGRESS  OF  THE  NATION. 


[sec.  VI. 


important  a  population   as   that   of  the   manufacturing   metropolis   of 
England,  it  is  thoudit  desirable  to  insert  the  followinGf  abstract : — 


Sums  ileposited. 


Not  exceeding  £20  each  .... 

Above  £20,  aud  not  exceeding  £50 
„        50  „  100 

„       100  „  150 

„       150  „  200 

Exceeding  £200 


Total  Amount  of 
each  Class. 


14, 937     i  Individual  depositors 
86     I  Charitable  societies 
172     !  Friendly  societies  . 


£.       s.    d. 

56,990  10    4 

118,200  10  10 

102,826    0    9 

60,597  13  10 

55,977     9     8 

4,148     7  10 


15,195 


Total  number  of  accounts  and  deposits 


398 

740 

13 

3 

4,614 

5 

0 

12 

928 

8 

0 

416,283    6    3 


Classification  of  Depositors. 


Domestic  servants  (neariy  7  in  8  females) 
Clerks,  shopmen,  warehousemen,  and  porters 
Minors 

Milliners,  dress-makers,  and  needle-women 

Shoemakers,  tailors,  and  hatters     . 
Cotton-spinners,  weavers,  and  their  assistants 
Silk-spinners,  weavers,  and  their  assistants 
Calico-printers,  bleachers,  dyers,  and  packers 
Engravers  and  pattern  designers    . 
jMechanics  and  handicraftsmen 
Bookbinders  aud  letter-press  printers  . 
Masons,  bricklaj-ers,  and  their  labourers  . 
Joiners,  coach-makers,  and  cabinet-makers 
Cab  and  omnibus  dri\ers,  mail-guards,  &c. 
Policemen,  soldiers,  and  pensioners 
Professional  teachers  and  artists    . 
Tradesmen  and  small  shopkeepers  . 
Farmers,  gardeners,  and  their  labourers   . 
Descriptions  not  specified 


Number.     Amount  of  Deposits 


3,063 

1,511 

3,033 

430 

30J 

911 

131 

412 

195 

816 

73 

390 

473 

41 

94 

323 

538 

350 

1,844 


£. 
80,009 
41,336 
45,153 
11,1.39 

8,685 
25,531 

3,. 530 
13,096 

5,346 
23,759 

1,507 
10,497 
15,391 

1,588 

2,654 
10,312 
20,072 
13,819 
65,306 


s.  d. 

5  10 

14  4 

12  2 

9  8 

9  1 

16  10 

0  0 

14  7 

3  6 

14  3 

12  0 

13  7 

18  8 

19  2 


14,937 


9  11 
16  9 


398,740  13  3 


CHAP.  III.]  PUBLIC  BUILDINGS.  G17 


CHAPTER  Til. 

INVESTMENTS  OF  ACCUMULATION  FOR  PUBLIC  OBJECTS. 

Buildings  for  Public  Worship  in  England  and  Scotland — By  Parliamentary  Grants— By 
Corporate  Bodies — By  Individuals— Bridges— Colleges — Hospitals,  &c. — Improvement  of 
Towns — Liverpool— Ne\vcastle-on-Tyne — Docks — Canals— Railways — Turnpike  Roads- 
Gas  Works. 

It  might  occupy  much  space,  and  would  afford  hut  little  profit,  to 
attempt  making  a  minute  enumeration  of  the  various  forms  in  which  the 
savings  of  individuals  in  this  country  have  been  invested.  Any  such 
enumeration  must  almost  necessarily  be  incomplete,  and  even  inaccurate, 
for  this,  among  other  reasons,  that  it  would  be  impossible  to  determine, 
with  reference  to  many  of  such  investments,  in  what  degree  they  can 
truly  be  considered  in  the  light  of  accumulated  capital,  and  in  what 
degree  they  should  be  accounted  as  a  part  of  current  expenditure,  serv- 
ing to  repair  the  ravages  of  time  and  accident.  It  would,  for  example, 
be  absurd  to  consider  as  accumulated  capital  the  cost  of  the  5,000,000 
tons  of  mercantile  shipping  built  and  registered  within  the  present  cen- 
tury, and  which  exceeds  by  more  than  forty  per  cent,  the  whole  existing 
mercantile  navy  of  the  kingdom.  The  same  remark  might  be  made, 
although  its  propriety  may  not  be  so  immediately  obvious,  with  regard 
to  other  and  less  perishable  works  of  utility  or  of  ornament.  It  is,  how- 
ever, a  quality  inherent  in  everything  of  human  production,  to  be,  in 
some  degree,  perishable  ;  and  this  fact  must  be  taken  into  account  in 
every  estimate  of  this  kind  that  may  be  formed.  The  magnificent  and 
substantial  structure  which  has  within  the  last  few  years  taken  the  place 
of  the  old  London  Bridge,  seems  built  to  last,  unimpaired,  for  ages,  and 
yet  nothing  can  be  more  certain  than  its  future  decay,  which  might  have 
been  prophesied  with  perfect  confidence,  even  in  the  absence  of  the  cor- 
roborative evidence  presented  by  the  very  necessity  for  its  construction 
in  the  stead  of  a  work  which  may  at  one  time  have  been  considered 
equally  indestructible. 

It  will  not  be  correct,  on  the  other  hand,  to  consider  in  the  light  of 
current  expenditure  the  cost  of  all  works  constructed  in  substitution  for 
others,  and  this  is  especially  the  case  in  regard  to  such  a  structure  as 


bis  niOGRESS  OF  THE  XATIOX.  [sec.  vi. 

London  Bridge,  the  probable  duration  of  which  will  be  such  that  a  very 
inconsiderable  sura,  if  suffered  to  accumulate  at  interest,  would  sutfiee  to 
produce  its  fellow  w'henever  the  ravages  of  time  shall  render  its  renewal 
necesscirv-  If  it  were  recjuired  to  apportion  correctly  the  value  of  pub- 
lic buildings  of  this  character,  distinguishing  the  part  that  is  of  the 
nature  of  expenditure  from  the  part  which  is  accumulation,  it  would  be 
necessary  to  make  periodical  valuations  of  the  national  works  and  monu- 
ments; and  as  no  advantage  could  follow  from  such  an  undertaking  that 
would  be  adequate  to  the  labour  it  would  occasion,  we  may  conclude 
that  the  task  will  never  be  accomplished. 

Tlie  object  proposed  on  this  occasion  is  not  to  determine  with  any 
pretension  to  minute  accuracy  the  amount  of  the  national  accumulations, 
but  merely  to  take  a  rapid  view  of  some  of  the  more  important  objects 
to  which  they  have  been  applied.  Some  inquiry  on  this  subject  does 
indeed  appear  necessary,  in  order  to  meet  the  very  common  but  yet  very 
unaccountable  fallacy,  that  as  no  new  loans  have  been  for  some  time 
contracted  by  the  Government  in  order  to  supply  deficiencies  in  the  pub- 
lic revenue,  there  are  no  channels  open  for  the  employment  of  surplus 
gains.  Persons  who  argue  thus,  do  not  suffer  themselves  to  reflect 
sufficiently,  or  they  could  hardly  fail  to  perceive  that  the  fact  of  loans 
being  required  to  make  good  deficient  revenues,  affords  in  itself  an 
indication  that  the  power  of  accumulating  exercised  by  individuals  is 
limited  and  counteracted  by  the  exigencies  of  the  State,  which  thus  dis- 
burses, and  in  part  destroys,  that  which,  being  otherwise  employed  as 
capital,  would  in  various  ways  give  additional  energy  to  the  springs  of 
national  industry. 

A  very  large  sura  has  of  late  years  been  devoted  to  the  permanent 
improvement  of  the  land  in  the  kingdom.  The  yearly  value  of  land 
assessed  to  the  jn-operty  tax  in  1841  exceeded  the  value  assessed  in 
1815  by  19,081,669/.,  which,  computed  at  only  20  years'  purchase, 
gives  an  amount  of  380,000,000/.  in  26  years  ;  and  this  does  not  include 
the  suras  so  applied  in  Ireland.  A  very  large  proportion  of  this 
increased  value  has  been  given  to  the  land  by  raeans  of  the  capital 
bestowed  upon  it. 

We  can  do  little  more,  in  pursuing  this  inquiry,  than  take  a  rapid 
glance  at  the  works  of  a  permanent  character  that  have  been  paid  for 
out  of  the  public  revenue,  ^.  e.,  by  the  indirect  contributions  of  the  great 
body  of  the  people. 

Among  the  most  important  of  these  works  must  be  placed  buildings 
erected  for  public  worship.  Large  sums  have  of  late  years  been  ex- 
pended in  the  erection  of  such  buildings,  partly  under  the  direction  of 
Parliamentary  Commissions,  by  means  of  sums  voted  for  the  purpose  by 
the  House  of  Comraons,  viz.,  1,000,000/.  voted  in  1813,  and  500,000/. 
iu  1^24:.     It  ap})ears  from  a  return  made  to  Parliament  by  the  Com- 


CHAP.  111.]  rUBLIC  BUILDINGS.  GlQ 

missioners,  in  July,  1841,  that  up  to  that  time  there  had  been  com- 
pleted, by  means  of  their  help,  281  new  churches  and  chapels  in  England, 
and  that  sixteen  other  churches  were  then  in  progress  of  erection.  In 
these  works  they  iiad  spent  the  sum  of  2,001,289/.,  wbich  included 
484,800/.  raised  in  the  different  localities  by  voluntary  contributions, 
local  rates,  and  loans.  The  estimated  cost  for  the  completion  of  the 
sixteen  churches  and  cliapels  then  in  the  course  of  erection,  was  stated 
to  be  44,084/.  These  sums,  large  as  they  are,  do  not  comprise  the 
whole  of  what  has  been  expended  in  building  sacred  edifices  during  the 
])eriod  embraced  in  this  inquiry.  In  addition  to  the  sums  granted  by 
the  Parliamentary  Commissioners,  1,500,000/.  in  Exchequer  Bills  have 
been  advanced  on  loans  to  other  parties  for  the  same  purpose.  It  must 
not  be  imagined  that  the  duty  of  providing  places  for  the  public  worship 
of  our  rapidly-increasing  population  was  neglected  up  to  the  year  in 
which  the  aid  of  Parliament  was  first  given.  There  is  not  any  record 
kept  of  the  number  of  such  new  buildings ;  but  judging  from  what  has 
passed  under  his  own  observation,  every  one  who  is  old  enough  to  have 
borne  a  part  in  the  business  of  life  during  the  earlier  years  of  this 
century,  must  be  of  opinion  that  the  number  was  very  considerable. 
There  have  been  besides  very  many  cases,  both  before  and  since  the 
above-described  interference  of  Parliament,  in  wliich  churches  and 
chapel  shave  been  built  and  endowed  by  means  of  funds  raised  either 
by  voluntary  subscriptions,  or  under  the  powers  of  private  local  acts,* 
and  not  a  few  churches  have,  in  the  same  period,  been  erected  through 
the  munificence  and  piety  of  individuals,  but  of  all  these  not  any  estimate 
can  be  formed.  It  is  equally  impossible  to  ascertain  the  number  or  the 
cost  of  places  of  worship  built  by  various  denominations  of  worshippers 
not  in  commimion  with  the  national  church,  the  cost  of  which  buildino;s 
is  wholly  provided  by  the  voluntary  contributions  of  the  congregations. 
If  all  these  matters  are  duly  considered,  there  appear  to  be  grounds  for 
believing  that  the  capital  invested  in  these  sacred  edifices  has  fully  kept 
j)ace  with  the  increase  of  the  national  wealth. 

In  addition  to  the  sums  above  mentioned,  and  which  have  been 
expended  in  England,  a  parliamentary  grant  of  50,000/,  was  made  in 
1825,  for  building  churches  in  the  Highlands  and  Islands  of  Scotland ; 
and  various  grants  were  made  for  the  like  purpose  in  Ireland,  where, 
between  1801  and  1820,  there  was  thus  expended  of  the  public  money 
749,551/. 

The  following  list  of  some  of  the  principal  public  works  and  buildings 
erected  of  late  years  (chiefly  in  the  metropolis),  will  at  least  serve  to 
show  that  we  of  the  present  day  are  not  unmindful  of  the  propriety 
of  giving  to  those  who  are  to  succeed  us  in  this  world  some  evidence  of 

*  The  expenditure  of  the  corporation  of  Liverpool  for  building  churches  amounted  in  tho 
ton  years  ending  with  1832  to  more  tlian  120,000/. 


620  PROGRESS  OF  THE  NATION.  [sue.  vi. 

our  desire  to  be  favourably  remembered  for  the  splendour,  the  diu-a- 
bility,  and  the  practical  utility  of  works  which  have  engaged  our  attention, 
and  which  have  afforded  a  field  for  displaying  the  skill  and  genius  of 
our  architects  and  engineers  : — 

Queen's  Palace  at  Pimlico.  I  Custom  House,  London. 

Breakwater,  Plymouth.  Custom  House,  Liverpool. 

London  Bridge  and  approaches.  |  General  Post  Office,  London. 

Southwark  Iron  Bridge.  |  liational  Gallery,  Trafalgar  Square. 


Yauxhall  Iron  Bridge. 
Waterloo  Bridge. 
Menai  Suspension  Bridge. 
Hammersmith  Suspension  Bridge. 


London  University  CoUeg 
King's  College,  London. 
Bethlehem  Hospital. 
North  London  Hospital. 


Thames  Tunnel  at  Uotherhithe.  |  Charing  Cross  Hospital. 

The  Houses  of  Parliament.  '  The  Iloyal  Exchange. 

A  very  large  part  of  the  public  buildings  of  England  are  erected  at 
the  cost  of  local  bodies,  but  the  funds  out  of  which  their  cost  is  defrayed 
are  not  less,  therefore,  to  be  considered  as  savings  or  accumulations. 
Even  in  cases  where  money  is  borrowed  for  the  purpose,  it  must  be 
supplied  through  the  economy  of  individuals,  who  thus  find  a  profitable 
channel  for  the  employment  of  their  surplus  funds. 

Hardly  any  one  of  the  large  manufacturing  and  trading  towns  of 
the  kingdom  can  be  mentioned  which  does  not  afford  this  proof  of  the 
existence  and  the  employment  of  increasing  wealth.  In  the  town  of 
Liverpool  alone  there  has  been  expended,  during  the  last  half  century, 
upwards  of  1,600,000/.  "in  widening  streets,  and  in  erecting  churches, 
charity  schools,  markets,  and  other  public  buildings."  Liverpool  is  a 
very  wealthy  corporation,  having  an  income  of  upwards  of  320,000/. 
per  annum,  and  it  would  not  be  correct  to  cite  its  example  as  a  fair 
measure  of  what  has  been  done  in  other  places.  There  is,  however, 
another  town  in  the  northern  part  of  England,  where,  within  the  last  few 
years,  capital  to  even  a  greater  amount  than  that  expended  during  h^lf 
a  century  in  Liverpool,  has  been  employed  for  its  embellishment.  In  the 
very  heart  of  the  town  of  Newcastle-on-Tyne,  surrounded  by  buildings, 
and  concealed  from  general  view,  there  was,  within  the  last  few  years,  a 
large  unoccupied  space,  called  the  Nun's  Field,  and  described  as  a  "  most 
desolate  and  neglected  wilderness."  This  space,  through  the  genius 
and  enterprise  of  one  man,  has  now  been  converted  into  streets,  wliich, 
for  architectural  beauty,  may  challenge  comparison  with  anything  to  be 
found  in  any  city  of  Europe.  The  cost  of  this  unexampled  improvement 
is  said  to  have  amounted  to  above  2,000,000/. 

In  the  metropolis,  as  might  reasonably  be  supposed,  the  investment  of 
capital  for  such  objects  by  Government,  by  various  municipal  and  chari- 
table bodies,  by  public  companies,  and  by  individuals,  has  been  to  a 
greater  extent.  For  the  construction  of  docks  alone  there  have  been 
expended  in  London,  since  the  beginning  of  this  century,  more  than 
8,000,000/.     The  four  bridges  built  during  the  same  time  have  cost 


CHAP.  HI.]  RAILWAYS.  021 

4,000,000/. ;   and    the    tunnel   under   the  Thames  at  Rotherbithe  luis 
absorbed  G14,000/.     The  new  Post  Office  has  cost  409,300/. 

The  greatest  number  of  the  canals  now  in  operation  in  England  were 
constructed  during  the  second  half  of  the  last  century,  when  the  spirit  of 
enterprise  was  so  much  exerted  in  this  direction  that  canals  were  opened 
in  almost  every  quarter  that  offered  sufficient  facilities  for  their  execution, 
and  that  promised  a  fair  remuneration  for  the  capital  expended.  The 
number  of  these  works  undertaken  since  the  beginning  of  the  present 
century  has  consequently  been  small  in  comparison  with  previous  under- 
takings, but  much  has,  nevertheless,  been  done  for  the  extension  and 
improvement  of  lines  previously  opened.  It  is  not  possible  to  ascertain 
with  exactness  the  amount  of  money  that  has  thus  been  invested  in  this 
description  of  property,  but  after  a  careful  examination  of  the  various 
Acts  of  Parliament  that  have  been  passed  since  the  beginning  of  1801, 
authorizing  the  raising  of  money  for  the  purpose,  it  may  be  stated  that 
the  amount  thus  invested  within  the  kingdom  has  not  been  less  than 
eleven  millions  of  pounds,  including  in  this  amount  sums  expended  for 
improving  navigable  rivers,  and  the  cost  also  of  that  truly  magnificent 
work  the  Caledonian  Canal,  which  alone  amounted  to  rather  more  than 
1,000,000/.  Of  the  whole  sum  invested  in  this  description  of  property, 
about  4,500  000/.  has  been  applied  to  the  construction  of  new,  and  about 
6,500,000/.  to  the  extension  and  improvement  of  old  works.  The 
amounts  here  stated  are  probably  much  within  the  truth,  as  they  include 
only  the  sums  which  the  different  adventurers  have  been  authorized 
to  raise  in  the  form  of  shares,  without  taking  any  account  of  the  further 
amounts  which  it  is  customary  to  allow  the  shareholders  to  borrow  on  the 
security  of  their  property,  and  of  which  permission  it  is  well  known  that 
a  great  proportion  of  the  companies  have  availed  themselves  to  the  full 
extent  of  their  authority. 

The  extension  that  has  been  given  to  the  railway  system  in  this 
country,  during  the  last  twenty  years,  has  called  for  the  investment  of 
far  larger  sums  than  have  been  absorbed  by  canals.  The  intention  of 
the  first  promoters  of  railways  was  to  provide  for  the  conveyance  of 
goods  by  a  cheaper  mode  than  was  offered  by  means  of  canals.  It 
is  singular  that  with  regard  to  both  these  expectations  the  results 
have  proved  them  to  be  without  foundation.  Hitherto  railroads  have 
not  been  found  to  act  in  injurious  competition  with  water  conveyance 
for  the  transmission  of  goods,  and  the  cost  of  their  construction  has 
been,  beyond  all  comparison,  greater  than  anything  known  in  the  history 
of  canal  cutting.  AVith  the  exception  of  the  great  coal-fields  of  England, 
in  which  railroad  conveyance  is  necessarily  used  in  preference  to  canals, 
it  is  not  often  found  profitable  to  substitute  land  for  water  conveyance. 


622  PROGRESS  OF  THE  NATIOX.  [skc.  vi. 

An  exception  must  also  be  made  in  tlie  pecnliar  case  of  the  Liverpool 
and  Manchester  Railway,  on  which,  irom  the  nature  of  the  trade 
between  the  two  towns,  time  often  forms  so  important  an  ingredient  that 
the  hi"her  rate  of  charoe  is  submitted  to  in  order  to  secure  the  more 
important  object  of  a  favourable  market.  But  even  in  this  case  not  any 
falling  ofi'has  been  experienced  in  the  tonnage  conveyed  upon  the  canal, 
which,  on  the  contrary,  has  even  increased, — the  growth  of  the  manu- 
factures of  Manchester  and  the  surrounding  district  having  been  so  great 
that,  but  for  the  facility  afforded  by  the  railroad,  it  would  have  been 
hardly  possible  to  convey  the  quantities  of  raw  materials  and  manufactured 
goods  which  now  pass  between  the  factories  and  the  port  of  shipment. 
The  advantage  of  this  line  of  railroad  for  the  conveyance  of  merchandise 
during  periods  of  frost  may  be  readily  imagined. 

It  may  be  seen,  by  referring  to  a  table  already  given  (page  327),  that 
the  number  of  railways  constructed  under  Acts  of  Parliament  before 
1826  was  only  2i),  and  that  the  capital  expended  upon  them  fell  some- 
what short  of  1,500,000Z.  The  works  undertaken  since  have  most  of 
them  been  of  far  greater  importance.  One  of  them,  that  between 
London  and  Birmingham,  has  cost  6,000,000/.  The  outlay  on  the 
Great  Western  Railway  has  greatly  exceeded  that  sum.  The  capital 
expended  in  railways  generally,  and  the  further  sums  of  which  the 
investment  has  been  authorized  by  Parliament  up  to  the  close  of  1849, 
have  already  been  stated  {see  page  327). 

The  system  of  management  employed  in  this  country  for  the  construc- 
tion and  maintenance  of  turnpike  roads,  renders  it  impossible  to  ascertain 
the  amount  of  capital  invested  in  that  branch  of  public  works.  The 
whole  service  is  performed  in  various  localities  or  sections,  under  the 
direction  of  trustees,  selected  generally  from  among  gentlemen  who 
reside  within  the  districts  through  which  the  roads  are  carried,  and  no 
general  superintendence  or  control  exists  which  would  afford  any  precise 
information  of  a  statistical  kind  on  the  subject.  The  result  of  inquiries 
made  by  direction  of  the  House  of  Commons  in  1818  and  1829,  has 
already  been  given  (Section  iii.  Chap,  ii.),  from  which  it  appears  that 
the  addition  made  to  our  turnpike  roads  between  these  two  years  was 
1000  miles.  If  the  same  rate  of  increase  had  been  realized  throughout 
the  years  that  have  elapsed  of  the  present  century,  there  would  now 
be  4,450  miles  more  of  turnpike  roads  in  England  and  Wales  than 
existed  at  the  beginning  of  1801 ;  and  assuming  that  the  cost  of  con- 
struction was  on  the  average  1760Z.  per  mile,  the  sum  mentioned  in 
evidence  before  a  Committee  of  the  House  of  Commons,  in  1836,  by 
Sir  James  M'Adara,  as  the  average  cost  of  road-making,  the  capital 
invested  in  their  construction  must  have  amounted  to  7,832,000/.  This, 
however,    is   not   one  of  the  subjects  upon  which  we  can  assume  the 


CHAP.    IIT.] 


TURNPIKE  ROADS. 


623 


operation  of  any  constant  law.  Every  new  line  of  road  that  is  opened 
diminishes  the  necessity  for  additional  undertakings.  In  the  infancy  of 
a  country  the  necessity  for  the  construction  of  roads  in  all  directions 
throughout  its  extent  is  great  and  urgent,  but  the  time  may  well  arrive 
in  which  the  same  country  may  be  fully  provided  with  these  lines  of 
communication,  and  when  nothing  more  is  needed  than  the  maintenance 
or  improvement  of  existing  roads.  The  propriety  of  this  remark  is 
apparently  coniirmed  by  the  fact  that  the  number  of  road-bills  that 
received  the  royal  assent  in  the  five  years  from  1829  to  1833  was 
340  ;  while  in  the  following  five  years,  from  1834  to  1838,  the  number 
was  only  121. 

Under  an  Act  of  Parliament  (3  and  4  Wm.  IV.,  c.  80),  returns  were 
made  of  the  income  and  expenditure  of  the  several  turnpike  trusts  in 
England  and  Wales,  and  from  these  returns  the  following  particulars 
are  derived  : — 


1834 

1835 

1830 

183T       !        1838 

Total  Income 

Total  Expenditure. 

Total  Debts 

Paid  for  Land 

Paid  for  Improvements    . 

£. 
1,753,544 

1,828,730 

8,453,331 

20,185 

217,152 

£. 
1,796,524 

1,777,368 

8,517,813 

27,839 

211,808 

£. 
1,776,586 

1,780,349 

8,577,132 

14,205 

204,740 

£. 
1,733,291 

1,780,857 

8,670,399 

18,580 

208,093 

£. 
1,670,475 

1,670,487 

8,735,416 

14,919 

154,630 

1839 

1840 

1841               184i 

1843 

Total  Income 

Total  Expenditure 

Total  Debts 

Paid  for  Land 

Paid  for  Improvements    . 

£. 
1,668,799 

1,666,106 

8,774,927 

15,194 

142,863 

£. 
1,654,887 

1,659,153 

8,806,085 

16,147 

159,712 

£.                 £. 
1,574,517      1,526,922 

1,551,335  ■  1,528,258 

8,818,846     8,836, .568 

12,162             7,942 

105,246         111,449 

£. 
1,473,021 

1,434,434 

8,772,056 

3,770 

87,032 

The  returns  do  not  embrace  a  later  period  than  1843,  and  they  do 
not  contain  any  statement  of  the  extent  of  new  roads  constructed,  nor 
of  the  length  of  those  in  existence. 

Diu-ing  the  last  year  of  the  series  (1843)  the  income  was  derived 
from —  £ 

Revenue  received  from  tolls 1  348  084 

Parish  composition  in  lieu  of  statute  duty    .     .  28  152 

Estimated  value  of  statute  duty  performed  .      .  6  012 

Revenue  from  fines 555 

Revenue  from  incidental  receipts 31  651 

Borrowed  on  security  of  tolls 58  567 

£1.473.021 


624  TROGRESS  OF  THE  NATION.  [sec.  vi. 

The  expenditure  was  for — 

£. 

Manual  labour .343,085 

Team  labour  and  carriage  of  materials     .     .      .  147,142 

Materials  for  surface  repairs 204,014 

Land  purchased 3,770 

Damage  done  in  obtaining  materials  ....  8,024 

Tradesmen's  bills 55,041 

Salaries  of  treasurers,  clerks,  and  surveyors  .     .  92,486 

Law  charges    26,040 

Int  rest  of  debt 291,032 

Improvements 87,033 

Debts  paid  off 114,723 

Incidental  expenses 56,032 

Estimated  value  of  statute  duty  performed  .     .  6.012 

£1,434,434 

During    the  year  1847  the   income  of  turnpike  trusts  was  derived 

from — 

£. 

Revenue  received  from  tolls 1,241,130 

Parish  composition  in  lieu  of  statute  duty     .      .  30,733 

Estimated  value  of  statute  duty  performed  .      .  6,211 

Revenue  from  fines 270 

Revenue  from  incidental  receipts 32,715 

Borrowed  on  security  of  tolls 6,027 

£1,317,088 


The  expenditure  was  for — 


Manual  labour 321,748 

Team  labour  and  carriage  of  materials    .      .      .  130,234 

Materials  for  surface  repairs 199,475 

Land  purchased 1,759 

Damage  done  in  obtaining  materials  ....  6,059 

Tradesmen's  bills 47,470 

Salaries  of  treasurers,  clerks,  and  surveyors       .  89,641 

Law  charges 21,285 

Interest  of  debt 272,343 

Improvements 32,017 

Debts  paid  off 149,491 

Incidental  expenses 53,979 

Estimated  value  of  statute  duty  performed  .     .  6,211 

£1,331,714 


The  capital  embarked  in  Gas  Companies  in  London  alone  exceeds 
two  millions  of  money ;  and  as  there  is  now  hardly  a  town  of  any  magni- 
tude in  England  and  Scotland  in  which  gas-lighting  has  not  been  intro- 
duced, it  is  probably  much  within  the  mark  to  estimate  tbe  w^orks 
provided  for  the  purpose  at  ten  millions.  One  Company  managed  in 
London,  but  carrying  on  its  operations  chiefly  in  Ireland  (The  United 
General  Gas  Light  Company),  has  a  capital  employed  of  450,000^.  ; 
and  another  incorporation  (The  Imperial  Continental  Gas  Company) 
has  employed  250,000/.  of  English  accumulations  for  providing  liglit  in 
various  cities  of  Europe. 


CH.vr.   iv.l  STEAM  ENOINES.  r5'25 


CHAPTER  IV. 

INVESTMENTS  FOR  COMMERCIAL  PURPOSES. 

Steam  Engines  in  Birmingham  —  Shipping  —  Steam  Vessels — Investments  in  Foreign 
Countries— Loans— Mines,  &c.,  in  British  Colonies— Investments  of  Foreigners  in  our 
Public  Funds  withdrawn,  and  replaced  by  Savings  of  British  Subjects — Live  Stock — 
Investments  for  Imiirovcment  of  Landed  Estates. 

The  additional  amount  of  fixed  capital  employed  from  time  to  time  for 
trading  and  mannfacturing  purposes  it  is  not  possible  to  estimate.  It 
is  probable  that,  through  the  greater  economy  and  simplicity  of  manu- 
facturing processes,  the  amount  of  the  national  accumulations  thus 
applied  has  not  been  altogether  proportioned  to  the  increase  of  the 
manufactures ;  but,  on  the  other  hand,  it  must  be  considered  that  the 
necessary  effect  of  that  simplificatiim  is,  for  a  time  at  least,  to  raise 
profits,  and  thereby  to  induce  the  employment  of  a  larger  amount  of 
capital,  tmtil  by  competition  the  equilibrium  shall  be  restored,  when  the 
rate  of  protit  will  be  reduced  to  the  average  current  rate  within  the 
kingdom. 

The  investment  of  capital  in  this  direction  may,  however,  have  been 
exceedingly  great,  although  it  may  have  fallen  short  proportionally  to 
the  increase  in  the  produce.  It  was  stated  in  a  paper  drawn  up  under 
the  inspection  of  a  committee  of  gentlemen  belonging  to  the  town  of  Bir- 
mingham, and  which  was  read  at  the  statistical  section  of  the  British 
Association,  during  its  meeting  there  in  1839,  that  the  number  of 
steam-engines  erected  and  employed  in  the  various  manufactories  of 
Birmingham  between  1780  (the  date  of  the  first  introduction)  and  1815 
was  only  42  ;  and  that  the  number  so  employed  in  1839  was  240, 
showing  an  increase  since  the  termination  of  the  war  of  198  engines,  the 
larger  proportion  (120  engines)  having  been  added  since  1830. 

The  gi'eat  extension  given  to  the  use  of  machinery  in  other  branches 
of  manufactures,  and  especially  in  the  cotton  manufacture,  during  the 
present  century,  has  already  been  described  (Section  ii.  Chapter  ii.). 
The  steam  power  newly  provided  in  1835  in  the  cotton  districts  of  Lanca- 
shire and  its  immediate  vicinity,  was  there  shown  to  be  more  than  seven- 

2  s 


QOQ  PKOOrvESS  OF  THE  NATION.  [sec.  vi. 

teen  times  as  great  as  the  whole  steam  j)ower  in  use  in  Manchester  at  the 
beo-imiing  of  the  century.  In  the  t^ame  year  (1835)  the  returns  made 
by  the  Inspectors  of  Factories  stated  that  the  number  of  power-looms 
employed  in  the  cotton  manufectories  was  109,626,  the  whole  of  which 
had  been  made  and  put  to  use  since  1801.  The  increase  since  1835  has 
been  exceedingly  rapid,  so  that  the  number  at  this  time  (1850)  falls  but 
little  short  of  250,000. 

The  o-reat  increase  shown  to  have  been  made  to  the  foreign  trade  of 
the  country,  has  called  for  the  employment  of  a  much  larger  amount  of 
capital  now  than  formerly  in  shipping.  The  number  and  tonnage  of 
merchant  vessels  belonging  to  the  British  Empire  were — 

Years.  Ships.  Tons. 

1S03  20,893  2,167,863 

1814  24,418  2,616,965 

1841  30,052  3,512,480 

1845  31,817  3,714,061 

1849  31,757  3,876,433 

The  increase  between  1803  and  1814  appears  to  have  been  20.^  per 
cent.,  and  between  1814  and  1849  the  increased  tonnage  was  48  per  cent. 
It  is  not  difficult  to  account  for  this  comparative  falling  off.     The  first 
period  was  one  of  war,  while  the  second  has  been  one  of  peace  ;  and  it 
is  well  known  that  a  much  larger  provision  of  shipping  is  necessary  for 
the  prosecution  of  an  equal  amount  of  trade  during  war  than  suffices 
during  peace,  when  the  ships  make  the  best  of  their  way  to  the  several 
ports  of  destination  without  having  to  wait  for  convoys.     The  greater 
economy  of  time  thus  attained  has,  of  late  years,  been  vastly  augmented 
through  the  employment  of  steam-vessels.     Besides  these  circumstances 
there  was  another  cause  which   requireil   the  employment  of  a  much 
larger  tonnage  during  war  than  has  since  been  needed.     That  part  of 
the  public  service  which  regarded  the  conveyance  of  troops  and  stores 
was,  in  a  great  measure,  carried  on  through  the  employment  of  private 
vessels  hired  by  the  Government  for  the  purpose.     Taking  all   tliese 
circumstances  into  calculation,  it  will   be  easily  understood   how  the 
wreatly  augmented  trade  of  the  country  is  now  prosecuted  with  so  com- 
paratively   small    an    increased  amount  of  shipping.     As  regards  the 
capital  embarked  in   the  property  of  mercantile  vessels,  it  is  probably 
not  much  greater  now^  than  it  was  at  any  period  between  1803  and  1814, 
owing  to  the  smaller  cost  of  the  various  materials  required  for  the  con- 
struction and  ecpiipment  of  vessels,  and  which  countervails,  to  a  great 
degree,  not  only  the  increased  tonnage  in  existence,  but  also  the  increased 
cost  of  that  part  of  our  mercantile  marine  which  is  propelled  by  steam 
machinery.     The  number  and  tonnage  of  steam-vessels  belonging  to  the 
United  Kingdom  and  its  dependencies  at  the  end  of  1849,  was  1274 
vessels  of  173,580  tons  burthen  ;  but  owing  to  the  custom  of  not  including 
in  the  register  the  tonnage  contents  of  that  part  of  these  vessels  which  is 


CHAP.  IV.]  INVEST^^ENTS  OF  FOREIGNERS.  t)27 

occupied  by  their  machinery,  thi'  actual  tonnage  was  much  greater. 
The  computed  power  of  the  engines  employed  was  equal  to  that  of 
nearly  100,000  horses.  The  accunuilatiou  of  capital  thus  employed 
may  be  judged  from  this  fact,  that  of  the  steam-vessels  belonging  to  the 
British  empire  at  the  end  of  184*J,  there  were  registered  in — 


Years. 

Steam  Ve 

1837 

82 

1833 

87 

1833 

65 

1840 

78 

1841 

54 

1842 

67 

1843 

53 

Years. 

Steam  Vessels 

1844 

73 

1845 

73 

1846 

88 

1847 

115 

1848 

128 

1849 

80 

The  whole  have  been  built  since  1814. 

A  very  large  amount  of  capital  belonging  to  individuals  in  this  country, 
the  result  of  their  savings,  has  of  late  years  sought  profitable  investment 
in  other  lauds.  It  has  been  computed  that  the  United  States  of  America 
have  absorbed  in  this  manner  more  than  twenty-five  millions  of  English 
capital,  which  sum  has  been  invested  in  various  pultlic  undertakings, 
such  as  canals,  railroads,  and  banks  in  that  country.  Large  suras  have 
also  been,  from  time  to  time,  invested  in  the  public  securities  of  that 
and  other  foreign  governments— not  always,  indeed,  with  a  profitable 
result. 

^^'hcn  the  security  thus  accepted  proves  good,  there  can  be  no  reason- 
able objection  made  to  this  course.  We  may  feel  quite  sure  that 
capital  would  not  thus  be  sent  abroad  but  with  the  reasonable  expecta- 
tion of  obtaining  for  its  use  a  greater  return  than  could  be  secured  at 
home,  and  by  such  means  the  accumulation  of  property  is  accelerated. 
Besides  the  ultimate  advantage,  there  results  this  present  good  from  the 
transmission  of  our  savings  to  other  lands,  that  it  sets  in  motion  the 
.springs  of  industry  to  provide  the  means  for  that  transmission.  It  is 
not  money,  in  the  usual  acceptation  of  the  word,  that  thus  finds  its  way 
abroad  for  investment,  but  products  and  manufactures,  the  results  of 
British  industry,  ^^'e  have  no  surplus  bullion  out  of  whicli  such 
advances  could  be  made,  and  even  if  we  had,  it  would  not  be  profitable  to 
us  thus  to  dispose  of  it.  It  may  be  in  insulated  cases,  and  under  tem- 
porary influences,  that  bullion  is  exported  for  such  a  purpose  at  times 
when  we  cannot  very  well  spare  it,  but  even  then  the  evil  is  soon  remedied 
through  the  ordinary  and  well-understood  operations,  either  direct  or- 
indirect,  of  commerce. 

Large  sums  have,  fi'om  time  to  time,  been  lent  to  various  foreign 
states  by  English  capitalists,  whose  money  has  been  put  to  great  hazard, 
and  in  some  cases  lost.  On  the  other  hand,  many  foreign  loans  have 
been  contracted  by  our  merchants  which  have  proved  highly  profitable 

2s  2 


628  PIIOGRESS  OF  THE  XATIOX.  [sec.  vi. 

through  the  progressive  sale  of  the  stuck  in  foreign  countries  at  higher 
than  the  contract  prices.  It  is  evidently  impossible  to  form  any  correct 
estimate  of  the  profit  or  loss  which  has  resulted  to  the  country  from 
these  various  operations  ;  the  general  impression  is,  that  hitherto  the 
losses  have  much  exceeded  the  oains. 

Amid  the  fever  of  speculation  that  arose  in  18:^4-5,  attention  was 
drawn  towards  the  mines  of  South  America  and  Mexico,  and  several 
companies  were  formed  with  large  capitals,  to  be  employed  in  once 
more  bringing  those  storehouses  of  the  precious  metals  into  productive 
operation.  The  capitals  embarked,  and  it  may  be  said  sunk,  in  a  few 
only  of  those  undertakings,  amounted  to  five  millions  sterling.  By  this 
means  the  supply  of  silver  and  gold  towards  the  general  circulation  has 
been  augmented,  but  at  an  expense  to  the  adventurers  so  much  greater 
than  the  returns,  that  the  capitals  originally  subscribed  may  in  most 
cases  be  considered  lost.  Investment  has  also  been  found  for  m.ore 
than  two  millions  and  a  half  of  money  by  joint-stock  associations  for  the 
purchase  and  sale  of  lands  in  our  North  American  and  Australian 
colonies. 

During  the  war  which  led  to  the  downfall  of  Napoleon,  a  general 
feeling  of  insecurity  pervaded  the  Continent,  and  large  sums  were 
invested  by  foreigners  in  the  public  funds  of  England  with  a  view  to 
safe  custody.  These  investments  were  very  convenient  to  us  while  such 
constant  and  great  additions  were  being  made  to  the  national  debt,  and 
no  doubt  tended  to  make  the  terms  of  borrowing  more  favourable  to 
our  Government  than  they  otherwise  might  have  been.  An  additional 
inducement  to  the  foreign  capitalist  to  place  his  money  thus  in  security 
was  offered  by  the  assurance  that  the  income  thence  arising  would  not  be 
subjected  to  deduction  by  taxation.  It  is  a  mistake  to  suppose  that  in 
the  exemption  from  property-tax  then  extended  to  foreign  holders  of  a 
portion  of  our  public  funds,  any  favour  was  shown  to  them.  To  subject 
the  dividends  to  taxation  would  have  been  not  only  impolitic,  it  would 
have  been  unjust.  The  property-tax  was  collected  from  British  sub- 
jects, holders  of  stock,  at  the  times  when  the  dividends  were  paid, 
because  it  aflforded  a  convenient  opportunity  for  collecting  a  tax  imposed 
by  law,  not  upon  the  public  debt  of  the  state,  but  upon  the  incomes  of 
its  subjects.  In  the  Act  which  established  the  Income  Tax  in  1842,  the 
same  regard  has  not  been  paid  to  strict  justice. 

We  learn  from  the  claims  made  on  the  part  of  foreigners  to  this 
exemption  from  property-tax,  that  the  amount  of  stock  held  by  them  in 
1813  amounted  to  more  than  twenty  millions. 

With  the  return  of  peace  came  comparative  security  for  capital,  and 
increased  means  for  its  profitable  investment  abroad.  The  increased 
marketable  value  then  given  to  the  public  funds  enabled  the  foreign 


cii.vi'.  IV.]  INVESTMENTS  OF  FOllEIGNERS.  629 

holders  to  realize  a  considerable  profit  from  the  sale  of  their  investments. 
For  all  those  reasons  a  very  large  part  of  the  money  thus  |)laced  was 
withdrawn  from  England,  and  our  capitalists  found  in  this  circumstance 
means  for  the  investment  of  some  of  their  accumulations.  In  1815,  the 
first  year  of  peace  and  the  last  year  of  the  then  imposed  property-tax, 
the  amount  of  stock  belonging  to  foreigners  had  already  been  reduced 
by  the  sum  of  three  millions. 

The  property  invested  in  live  stock  in  this  kingdom  has  evidently 
increased  in  a  greater  proportion  than  the  population.  It  will  be  seen, 
by  referring  to  the  table  of  prices  paid  for  beef  and  mutton  at  St.  Tho- 
mas's Hospital,  that  they  have  fallen  considerably  since  the  beginning 
of  the  century.  This  fact  alone  proves  that  the  proportionate  supply  is 
greater  now  than  it  was  thirty  or  forty  years  ago,  and  that  the  improve- 
ments adopted  in  the  means  used  for  rearing  and  fattening  animals  for 
human  food  have  been  attended  with  much  saving.  The  greater  num- 
ber of  live  stock  has  further  tended  to  increase  the  abundance,  and  so 
to  diminish  the  cost,  of  other  kinds  of  agricultural  produce  by  affording 
greater  means  of  enriching  the  soil. 


630  PROGRESS  OF  THE  NATION. 


SECTION  VIL— MORAL  PROGRESS. 


CHAPTER  I. 

INTRODUCTION. 

Has  our  Moral  kept  pace  with  our  Material  Progress  ? — Diminution  of  Gross  and  Sensual 
Vice  —  General  prevalence  of  Selfishness  —  AVretchedncss  of  our  Poor  Population  — 
Multiplication  of  Criminal  Offenders— Reasons  for  expecting  Amendment  in  this  respect. 

It  has  been  shown,  in  the  prececUng  Sections  of  this  volume,  that  since 
the  beginning  of  the  present  century  this  kingdom  has  made  the  most 
important  advances  in  population,  in  wealth,  and  in  the  various  arts  of 
life  which  are  capable  of  ministering  to  man's  material  enjoyments.  It 
is  now  proposed  to  consider  whether  equal  advances  have  been  made  in 
regard  to  his  moral  condition  and  to  the  general  tone  of  society.  If  our 
inquiries  on  this  head  do  not  admit  of  satisfactory  answers — if,  while 
wealth  has  been  accumulated  and  luxuries  have  been  multiplied,  vice 
has  been  thereby  engendered,  and  misery  increased — the  advantages  of 
our  progress  may  well  be  questioned.  It  were  better  (if  it  were  possi- 
ble) in  such  case,  that  we  should  return  to  the  condition  of  poverty, 
make  over  our  wealth-procuring  inventions  to  other  people,  or,  better 
still,  consign  them  to  annihilation,  and,  together  with  their  poverty, 
resume  the  simplicity  and  comparative  innocence  of  our  forefathers. 

An  inquiry  of  this  nature,  honestly  and  fearlessly  conducted,  would, 
in  all  likelihood,  lead  us  to  conclusions  of  a  mixed  and  partial  character. 
If  we  should  discover,  on  the  one  hand,  that  the  general  addiction  to 
gross  and  sensual  vices  has  been  checked  and  lessened,  we  might,  on 
the  other  hand,  be  forced  to  admit  that  we  have  lost  some  portion  of 
the  manly  virtues  by  which  our  ancestors  were  characterised — that  in 
our  daily  intercourse  we  have  swerved  from  the  road  of  honesty  and 
truthfulness  into  the  paths  of  expediency  and  conventionalism — that 
in  our  individual  strivings  after  riches  and  position,  the  feeling  of 
patriotism  has  been  deadened,  until  our  whole^  existence  has  become 
so  tainted  by  selfishness  that  we  suffer  oui'selves  to  view  the  interests  of 
our  country  only  as  they  may  affect  our  individual  ease  or  progress. 


ciiAi'.  i]  MOKAL  niOORES.S.  631 

It  would  be  foreign  to  the  object  of  these  pages  to  pursue  the  subject 
ill  this  direction  ;  but  it  wouhl  occasion  deep  regret  if,  in  exhibiting  the 
favourable  side  of  the  picture,  and  in  giving  utterance  to  liopes  for  tlic 
future,  grounded  upon  the  efforts  for  moral  and  intellectual  improve- 
ments which  now  are  haj)pily  in  action  around  us,  it  could  be  held  tliat 
there  were  implied  any  a])proval  of  national  crime,  or  any  feelings  save 
those  of  shame  and  humiliation  at  our  departure  from  that  course  of 
rectitude  which  was  wont  to  make  this  favoured  land  more  h(moured  for 
its  justice  than  it  was  respected  for  its  power. 

The  demoraHzing  tendency  of  riches  has  ever  been  a  favourite  theme 

for  declamation  with  poets  and  moralists  : — 

"  111  fares  the  land,  to  hastening  ills  a  prey, 
Wliere  wealth  accumulates" 

is  a  sentiment- which  has  been  repeated  until  it  has  gained  at  least  the 
nominal  assent  of  many  seriously-disposed  but  imperfectly-informed 
])ersons  among  us.  They  have  not  stopped  to  consider  how  far  the  evils 
which  they  deplore  have  their  origin  in  or  any  connexion  with  increasing 
wealth,  but  have  taken  it  for  granted  that,  as  the  evils  and  the  wealth 
have  increased  together,  they  must  necessarily  be  considered  as  cause 
and  etfect. 

It  must  be  owned  that  our  multiplied  abodes  of  want,  of  wretched- 
ness, and  of  crime — our  town  populations  huddled  together  in  ill-venti- 
lated and  undrained  courts  and  cellars — our  numerous  workhouses  filled 
to  overflowing  with  the  children  of  want — and  our  prisons  (scarcely  less 
numerous)  overloaded  with  the  votaries  of  crime,  do  indeed  but  too 
sadly  and  too  strongly  attest  that  all  is  not  as  it  should  be  with  us  as 
regards  this  most  important  branch  of  human  progress. 

If  we  refer  to  our  criminal  returns,  it  will  be  found  that  in  England 
and  Wales,  the  number  of  persons  committed  for  trial  is  now  more  than 
five  times  as  great  as  it  was  at  the  beginning  of  the  century ;  while  in 
Ireland  the  proportionate  increase  has  been  even  more  appalling,  there 
having  been  in  1849  twelvefold  the  number  of  committals  that  were 
made  in  1805,  the  earliest  year  for  which  our  records  are  available. 
There  are  not  any  accounts  of  so  early  a  date  by  which  we  are  able  to 
make  a  similar  comparison  for  Scotland  ;  but  comparing  the  number  of 
committals  in  1815  with  those  in  1849,  we  find  that  in  those  thirty-four 
years  they  have  augmented  nearly  sevenfold. 

AVe  have  here  prima  facie  evidence  that  the  increase  of  crime  litis  far 
out5tripj)ed  the  increase  of  our  population,  and  without  doubt  of  our 
wealth  also,  great  as  their  increase  has  been ;  and  it  behoves  us  to  inquire 
seriously,  lionestly,  and  fearlessly,  how  far  those  fi'ightful  appearances 
are  founded  in  truth, — and,  if  they  be  so  founded,  whether  the  two 
conditions  are  necessarily  connected,  or  whether  their  simultaneous 
occurrence  be  not  rather  attributable  to  ill-considered  interference,  or  to 


63-2  PKOGRESS  OF  THE  NATION.  [sfx\  vii. 

some  deficiency  or  neglect  on  the  part  of  those  whose  duty  should  have 
prompted  them  to  the  adoption  oi  measures  more  effectual  than  have 
been  used  for  the  correction  of  the  evil.  It  would  indeed  be  a  heart- 
sickening  prospect  if,  in  looking  forward  to  the  continued  progress  of 
our  country  in  its  economical  relations,  we  must  also  contemplate  the 
still  greater  multiplication  of  its  criminals.  The  nature  of  the  case  does 
not  indeed  admit  of  our  realizing  such  a  future  as  is  here  supposed, 
for,  ere  it  could  be  reached,  the  whole  physical  framework  of  society 
must  be  broken  up.  Neither  should  we  be  willing  to  admit — notwith- 
standing the  experience  of  the  last  forty  years — the  moral  possibility  of 
such  a  result.  The  growing  attention  that  is  bestowed  upon  this  subject 
in  England,  and  not  in  England  only  but  in  every  country  where  the 
like  result  had  been  experienced,  is  beginning  to  produce  its  legitimate 
fruit.  Governments  are  at  least  awakened  to  the  necessity  of  counter- 
acting the  evil  tendencies  that  have  made  such  fearful  progi'css.  It  is 
seen,  and  is  beginning  to  be  practically  acknowledged,  that  a  great 
part  of  the  moral  evil  under  which  societies  are  suffering  is  the  offspring 
of  ignorance,  and  that  without  insisting  upon  any  very  high  degree  of 
perfectibility  in  human  nature,  we  may  reasonably  hope  that  the  re- 
moval of  that  ignorance  will  do  much  towards  restoring  moral  health 
to  communities,  and  thus  fit  them  for  the  rational  enjoyment  of  bless- 
ings so  increasingly  offered  for  their  acceptance.  That  this  hope  is  not 
a  mere  vision  of  the  philanthropist,  but  is  founded  upon  the  knowledge 
of  what  is  daily  passing  around  us,  will  be  seen  when  we  come  to 
consider  the  intellectual  condition  of  those  who  have  been  made  to 
appear  at  the  bar  of  justice,  and  find  how  small  a  proporticm  among 
them  have  received  any  beyond  the  first  elements  of  instruction.  When 
we  are  thus  convinced  of  the  powerful  influence  of  instruction,  even  as 
hitherto  communicated,  in  restraining  from  the  open  violation  of  laws, 
what  may  we  not  reasonably  hope  will  be  the  power  of  that  moral 
training  which  it  is  now  felt  must  be  employed  to  stamp  its  proper  value 
upon  knowledge  ?  To  suppose  that  blessings  must  necessarily  be 
accompanied  by  countervailing  curses,  is  to  impute  a  capital  deficiency 
to  the  intentions  of  Providence,  and  amounts  to  a  practical  denial  of  the 
power,  wisdom,  and  goodness  of  the  Almighty. 


CRIME.  633 


CHAPTER  II. 

CRIME. 

Multiplication  of  Crimes  against  Propcrtj- — Diminution  of  Crimes  of  Violence — Xumlicr  of 
Offenders  in  England  and  Wales,  1S05  to  1849,  and  Number  of  Executions — Increased 
Proportion  of  Convictions  in  the  later  Years— Severity  of  our  Criminal  Code  and  con- 
sequent Impunity  of  Offenders — Reforms  in  the  Criminal  Law — Historical  Sketch  of 
their  Progress — Classification  of  Offences — Comparison  of  1805  with  1841  in  respect  of 
Criminals  and  Population  in  each  County— Comparison  of  Agricultural  with  Manufac- 
turing Counties — Classification  of  Offenders  with  regard  to  Ages— Increase  of  Juvenile 
Offenders — Reformatorj-  Prison  at  Parkhurst— Classification  according  to  Intellectual 
Condition — Proportion  of  Sexes — Proportion  of  educated  Offenders  to  Population — 
Analysis  of  Oflences  committed  by  educated  Persons — False  Conclusions  drawn  from 
French  Criminal  Returns  concerning  the  Effects  of  Instruction.  Scotland:  Superiority 
of  its  Criminal  Jurisprudence — Offenders,  1830  to  1849- — Classification  according  to 
Offences— Sex  and  Intellectual  Condition— Proportion  of  Convictions — Ages  of  Offenders 
— Juvenile  Offenders — Analysis  of  Crimes  committed  by  educated  Persons.  Ikelaxd  : 
Educated  Offenders  not  distinguished  as  in  England  and  Scotland — Comparative  Morality 
of  different  Classes — Offenders  in  Ireland,  1805  to  1812 — Proportion  of  Convictions — 
Offenders.  1822  to  1834,  and  Number  executed  in  those  Tears — Committals  and  Con- 
victions classified,  1835  to  1849,  and  Number  executed — Extraordinary  Fluctuations  of 
Numbers  in  different  Years — Proportionate  Ages  of  Offenders— Incompleteness  of  Irish 
Criminal  Returns- Numbers  and  Proportions  of  Offenders  wholly  ignorant,  and  who 
could  read  and  «Tite — Proportions  of  Juvenile  Offenders,  England,  Scotland,  and  Ireland 
—Improvements  in  Prison  Discipline. 

There  is  a  constant  tendency  in  the  human  mind  to  magnify  the  im- 
portance of  all  that  belongs  to  the  present  moment ;  and  this  tendency 
is  peculiarly  active  as  regards  the  enls  by  which  we  may  be  assailed 
or  surrounded.  "We  read  of  the  vices  and  crimes  of  our  forefathers, 
and  especially  such  of  them  as  have  been  notably  diminished  in  our 
day,  without  any  of  those  feelings  of  personal  annoyance  which  make 
us  so  peculiarly  sensitive  while  dealing  with  the  faults  of  which  we  are 
the  witnesses  or  the  victims.  Much  research  is  necessary  before  we 
can  place  ourseh^es  in  the  condition  to  form  any  correct  judgment  on 
such  a  subject,  and  much  self-examination  before  we  can  be  certain  that 
our  verdict  is  just. 

If  we  consult  the  reports  of  Parliamentary  Committees,  or  other 
publications  upon  these  questions,  which  appeared  in  former  years,  we 
shall  see  that  society  then  found  as  much  cause  for  complaint  and  grief, 
through  the  prevalence  of  crime,  as  we  find  at  the  present  day ;  and. 


634  PnOORESS  OF  THE  NATION.  [sec.  vii. 

further,  wc  cannot  but  be  struck  with  the  fact,  that  however  prevalent 
oifenccs  may  now  be  against  property,  we  enjoy  a  far  greater  degree 
of  protection  from  personal  violence  than  our  foreftithers.  In  the 
early  part  of  last  century  it  was  no  uncommon  thing  for  persons  to 
be  knocked  down  and  robbed  at  noon-day  in  the  public  thoroughfares 
of  London,  while  the  roads  in  all  directions  were  infested  by  robbers  on 
foot  and  on  horseback,  who  were  ready  for  the  commission  of  any 
number  of  murders,  if  met  by  resistance  on  the  part  of  those  whom  they 
attacked.  Even  since  the  beginning  of  the  present  century,  it  hap- 
pened to  a  physician,  who,  in  the  performance  of  his  professional  duty, 
was  frequently  obliged  to  cross  Blackheath  at  all  hours  of  the  night, 
that  for  the  preservation  of  his  own  life  he  at  different  times  found 
himself  under  the  necessity  of  shooting  highwaymen  by  whom  his  car- 
riage was  attacked.  The  highway  robberies  and  even  murders  com- 
mitted upon  what  was  then  Hounslow  Heath  were  of  such  frequcTit 
occurrence  that  they  seemed  almost  matters  of  course,  and  he  was 
considered  a  bold  man  who  would  venture  alone  to  cross  that  spot 
after  nightfall. 

The  author  has  been  told  by  gentlemen  now  living,  who  were  accus- 
tomed to  repair  after  business  hours  to  their  residences  in  the  environs 
of  London,  and  particularly  on  the  south  side  of  the  Thames,  at  Dul- 
wich  and  Norwood,  that  it  was  the  uniform  practice  with  them  to  appoint 
some  place  of  rendezvous  from  which  they  proceeded  in  a  body  for 
mutual  protection. 

These  things  have  passed  away  and  are  become  only  matters  of 
tradition.  One  cause  of  their  diminution  has  been  the  greater  use  of 
paper  money,  and  consequently  the  smaller  amount  of  coin  which  travel- 
lers carry  with  them,  by  which  means  the  risk  of  after  detection  is  greatly 
increased  ;  but  the  chief  means  of  suppression  are  found  in  our  im- 
proved system  of  police,  which,  while  it  has  succeeded  to  a  great  extent 
in  putting  down  these  graver  outrages,  has  brought  to  light  numerous 
minor  delinquencies,  and  placed  in  our  criminal  records  olfences  which 
previously  passed  unpunished,  or  were  summarily  dealt  with  by  the 
populace.  We  might  search  those  records  of  former  periods  in  vain  for 
the  evidence  of  many  offences  which  now  swell  the  calendar — not  that 
the  offences  were  unknown,  but  that  the  punishment  of  them  was  not 
reserved  for  the  magistrate.  The  pick})ocket,  for  example,  who  should 
be  detected  in  the  commission  of  his  offence,  was  dragged  by  the  mob 
to  the  nearest  pump,  half  drowned,  and  then  allowed  to  depart. 

The  following  table  shows  the  number  of  males  and  females  committed 
for  trial  in  England  and  Wales  in  each  year  from  1805  to  1849  ; 
the  number  in  each  of  those  years  that  were  convicted,  distinguishing 
those  sentenced  to  death,  those  actually  executed,  and  among  the  latter 
number,  those  executed  for  the  crime  of  murder : — 


CRIMINAL  LEGISLATION. 


635 


Years. 

Committed  for  Trial, 

Number 

jSentencei 
1         to 

1 
Executed 

Executed 
for 

1 

Convicted 

Males. 

Females. 

Total. 

Death. 

Murder. 

1805 

3,267 

1,3.38 

4,605 

2,783 

3,50 

68 

10 

1806 

3,120 

1,226 

4,346 

2,515 

325 

57 

5 

1807 

3,1.59 

1,237 

4,446 

2,. 567 

343 

63 

16 

1808 

3,332 

1,403 

4,735 

2,723 

333 

39 

8 

180  J 

3,776 

1,.554 

5,330 

3,238 

392 

60 

9 

1810 

3,733 

1,413 

5,146 

3,158 

476 

67 

9 

1811 

3,859 

1,478 

5,337 

3,163 

404 

45 

7 

1812 

4,891 

1,685 

6,. 576 

3,yl3 

532 

82 

16 

1813 

5,433 

1,731 

7,164 

4,422 

713 

120 

25 

1814 

4,826 

1,564 

6,3J0 

4,025 

558 

70 

23 

1815 

6,036 

1,782 

7,818 

4,883 

553 

57 

15 

1816 

7,347 

1,744 

9,091 

5,797 

890 

95 

21 

1817 

11,7.58 

2,174 

13,932 

9,0.56 

1,302 

115 

25 

1818 

11,3.35 

2,232 

13,. 567 

8,958 

1,254 

97 

13 

1819 

12,075 

2,179 

14,254 

9,510 

1,314 

108 

15 

1820 

11,595 

2,115 

13,710 

9,318 

1,236 

107 

10 

1821 

11,173 

1,942 

13,115 

8,788 

1,134 

114 

22 

1822 

10,369 

1,872 

12,241 

8,209 

1,016 

97 

18 

1823 

10,342 

1,921 

12,263 

8,204 

968 

54 

11 

1824 

11,475 

2,223 

13,698 

9,425 

1,066 

49 

15 

1825 

11,889 

2,548 

14,4-37 

9,964 

1^036 

50 

10 

1826 

13,472 

2,692 

16,164 

11,107 

1,203 

57 

10 

1827 

15,154 

2,770 

17,924 

12,567 

1,529 

73 

11 

1828 

13,8.32 

2,732 

16,564 

11,723 

1,165 

58 

17 

1829 

15,5.56 

3,119 

18,675 

13,261 

1,385 

74 

13 

1830 

15,1.35 

2,972 

18,107 

12,805 

1,397 

46 

14 

1831 

16,600 

3,047 

19,647 

13,830 

1,601 

52 

12 

1832 

17,486 

3,343 

20,829 

14,947 

1,449 

.54 

15 

1833 

16,804 

3,268 

20,072 

14,446 

931 

33 

6 

1834 

18,880 

3,571 

22,451 

15,995 

480 

34 

12 

1835 

17,275 

3,456 

20,731 

14,729 

523 

34 

21 

ia36 

17,248 

3,7.36 

20,984 

14,771 

494 

17 

8 

1837 

19,407 

4,205 

23,612 

17,090 

438 

8 

8 

1838 

18,905 

4, 189 

23,094 

16,785 

116 

6 

5 

1839 

19,831 

4,612 

24,443 

17,8.32 

56 

11 

10 

1840 

21,975 

5,212 

27,187 

19,927 

77 

9 

9 

1841 

22,560 

5,200 

27,760 

20,280 

80 

10 

10 

1842 

25,740 

5,569 

31,309 

22,7.33 

57 

9 

9 

1843 

24,251 

5,340 

29,. 591 

21,092 

97 

13 

13 

1844 

21,549 

4,9J3 

26,542 

18,919 

57 

16 

16 

1845 

19,341 

4,962 

24,. 303 

17,402 

49 

12 

12 

1846 

19,850 

5,257 

25,107 

18,144 

56 

6 

6 

1847 

22,903 

5,930 

28,833 

21,. 542 

51 

8 

8* 

1848 

24,586 

5,763 

30,349 

22,900 

60 

12 

12t 

1849 

22,415 

1 

5,401 

27,816 

21,001 

66 

15 

15 

*   1  suicide. 


t  1  respited. 


The  first  thing  that  must  strike  every  one  on  consulting  this  table, 
is — after  the  appalling  increase  in  the  number  of  convicts— the  different 
proportion  which  females  bear  now  to  males,  compared  with  the  propor- 
tion which  they  bore  in  the  earlier  years  of  the  statement.  In  1805, 
the  proportion  of  females  to  the  whole  committals  was  29  per  cent. ; 
whereas  in  1849  the  proportion  was  barely  20  per  cent.  The  number  of 
convictions  in  proportion  to  committals  is  now  much  greater  than 
formerly.  In  the  five  years  at  the  beginning  of  the  above  series,  the 
convictions  amounted  to  58'8  per  cent. ;  while  in  the  five  years  ending 
with  1819,  the  proportion  was  74-03  i)er  cent.  Tliis  change  is  probably 
attributable  to  a  combination  of  various  causes,  such  as  the  allowance  of 


636  niOGRESS  OF  THE  NATION.  [t-Lc.  mi. 

their  expenses  to  prosecutors  and  witnesses,  which  has  secured  their 
attendance  at  trials ;  the  simplification  of  the  laws ;  and  the  experience 
in  criminal  matters  of  a  large  body  of  trained  police  officers.  This 
effect  has  doubtless,  too,  been  in  great  part  a  consequence  of  successive 
mitigations  of  the  severity  by  which  our  criminal  code  was  formerly 
characterised,  and  which  indisposed  juries  to  convict  in  cases  where  the 
penalty  was  incommensurate  with  the  offence.  It  was  a  cruel  position 
in  wliich  every  citizen  was  liable  to  be  placed,  where  he  must  either  do 
violence  to  his  own  conscience  by  acquitting  the  guilty,  or  feel  himself 
to  be  the  abettor  of  harsh  and  unjust  legislation.  AYe  have  the  means 
in  these  figures  of  estimating  the  first-named  of  those  evils  ;  but  who 
can  number  to  us  the  cases  of  anguish  where  men  of  feeling  and  of  con- 
science gave  over  their  fellow-creatures  to  the  mercies  of  the  hangman, 
in  expiation  of  some  comparatively  petty  offences  committed  possibly 
through  distress  ?  It  might  have  proved  more  merciful  in  the  end  had 
jurymen  withstood  in  every  case  the  yearnings  of  humanity,  and  thrown 
upon  the  Government  the  reproach  of  our  unjust  and  sanguinary  laws, 
since  these  might  thus  have  been  sooner  rendered  impossible  of 
execution.* 

This  was  only  one  part  of  the  evil  consequences  of  our  former  severity- 
The  same  feeling  which  induced  jurymen  to  acquit,  indisposed  those 
against  whom  crimes  had  been  committed  to  accuse ;  and  we  may 
reasonably  imagine  that  the  number  of  persons  who  thus  escaped  pro- 
secution was  much  greater  than  that  of  the  class  who  were  wrongfully 
acquitted,  because  the  man  wlio  had  been  robbed  or  injured  did  no 
violence  to  his  conscience  in  withholding  the  charge  ;  he  had  all  the 
motives  here  explained  leading  him  to  a  merciful  course,  and  none  of 
the  opposing  restraint  caused  by  the  juryman's  oath.  In  this  manner 
malefactors  escaped,  and  an  additional  incentive  to  criminal  courses  was 
provided. 

The  amount  of  guilt  and  of  wretchedness  which  might  fairly  be  im- 
puted to  the  carelessness  or  ignorance  of  the  British  Parliament  on  all 
matters  relating  to  the  repression  of  crime,  would,  if  any  estimate  could 
be  formed  on  the  subject,  prove  an  emphatic  warning  to  legislators. 
The  course  pursued  for  the  purpose  by  Parliament  was  for  a  long  period 
only  a  series  of  wretched  expedients.  When,  by  the  greater  frequency 
of  its  occurrence,  or  by  some  notorious  instance,  any  particular  offence 
forced  itself  upon  public  attention,  it  was  not  the  rule,  as  reason  would 
have  dictated,  to  examine  and  remove  the  causes  of  the  increase,  but 
to  multiply  the  terrors  of  the  law  to  a  degi*ee  out  of  all  proportion 
with  the  guilt  of  the  offenders.     By  this   severity,  or  possibly  through 

♦  Juries  frequently  forgot  their  oath,  "  to  find  a  true  verdict  according  to  the  evidence  " 
— iu  fact  perjured  thcuiselves— by  reducing  the  amount  sworn  to  as  the  value  of  stolen  pro- 
perty, in  order  to  avoid  the  capital  conviction. 


CHAP.  II.]  CRIMINAL  LEGISLATION.  637 

circumstances  distinct.  IVoiu  legislation,  the  tendency  to  commit  that 
particular  crime  may  have  been  lessened,  until  the  feeling  of  vengtanee 
under  which  tiie  law  w<is  made  would  pass  away  ;  its  execution  would 
then  be  rendered  impossible,  and  the  law  would  become  as  great  a 
nuisance  as  the  offence  against  which  it  was  enacted  through  the  im- 
punity consequent  upon  its  disproportionate  severity. 

This  is  no  longer  matter  for  speculation  or  conjecture.  Our  criminal 
code  has  now  been  for  some  years  relieved  from  a  great  part  of  the 
reproach  so  justly  charged  against  it^  and  we  can  refer  to  parliamentary 
returns  for  confinnation  of  the  views  here  expressed. 

We  learn  from  the  interesting  explanations  prefixed  to  the  Criminal 
Returns  for  England  and  Wales,  by  Mr.  Redgrave  of  the  Home  Office, 
that  although  between  1818  and  1824,  adopting  the  recommendation  of 
a  Committee  of  the  House  of  Commons,  caj)ital  j)unishinents  were 
abolished  for  twenty-one  offences,  but  little  effect  was  shown  in  the 
numbers  of  persons  sentenced  to  death  and  executed,  "  the  remission 
not  having  reached  any  of  the  larger  classes  of  offences,  and  some  of 
the  offences  having  indeed  become  obsolete.  In  1832  capital  punish- 
ment was  abolished  for  cattle -stealing,  horse-stealing,  sheep- stealing, 
larceny  to  the  value  of  5/.  in  a  dwelling-house,  coining,  and  forgery 
(except  of  wills  and  powers  of  attorney  to  transfer  stock)."  Cajiital 
punishment  was  removed  in  1833  from  house-breaking — in  1834  from 
returning  from  transportation — in  1835  from  sacrilege,  and  letter- 
stealing  by  servants  of  the  Post-office — and  in  the  first  year  of  the 
present  reign  (1837)  capital  punishments  were  abolished  in  respect  of 
all  offences,  with  the  exception  of — 

Murder  and  attempts   to   murder  when  accompanied  with  injuries 
dangerous  to  life  ; 

Rape,  and  carnally  abusing  girls  under  ten  years  of  age  ; 

Unnatural  offences ; 

Burglary,  when  attended  with  violence  to  persons  ; 

Robbery,  when  attended  with  cutting  and  wounding  ; 

Arson,  of  dwelling-houses  or  ships  ;  when    the   lives    of   persons 
therein  are  endangered ; 

Piracy  when  murder  is  committed  ; 

Showing  false  signals  to  cause  shipwreck  ; 

Setting  fire  to  Her  Majesty's  ships  of  war  ; 

Riot,  and  feloniously  destroying  buildings  ; 

Embezzlement  by  servants  of  the  Bank  of  England  ; 

High  treason. 
The  last  six  named  offences  are  of  very  rare  occurrence. 

A  further  relaxation  of  the  law  took  efic'ct  in  1841,  when  capital 
punishment  was  abolished  for  the  crimes  of  rape,  felonious  riots,  and 
embezzlement  by  servants  of  the  Bank  of  Eno-land. 


638 


mOGRESS  OF  THE  NATION. 


[sec.    VII. 


Mr.  Redgrave  gives  in  the  following  :-tiitonieut  a  strong  proof  of  one 
of  the  evils  already  noticed,  as  attending  upon  the  undue  severity  of 
our  criminal  code  in  former  years  :  — 

"  The  Acts  of  the  1  Victoria  have  had  a  very  heneficial  effect  upon 
the  result  of  prosecutions,  juries  heing  in  all  cases  less  unwilling  to 
convict  when  they  know  that  capital  punishment  will  not  follow.  By 
these  x\cts  capital  punishments  were  aholished  in  the  crimes  enumerated 
below,  for  which,  at  that  time,  executions  were  not  unusual ;  and  the 
greater  proportion  of  convictions  in  those  crimes  which  has  resulted 
from  the  alteration  in  the  law  is  very  remarkable.  In  the  following 
calculation,  a  comparison  is  made  of  the  centesimal  proportion  of  con- 
victions to  accusations,  in  respect  to  those  offences,  in  the  three  years 
preceding  the  abolition  of  the  capital  punishment,  and  in  the  three  years 
ending  with  1841  :" — 

Average  of 
1S35-G-T 
Attempts  to  murder  40-75 
Sacrilege  .  .  .  .  73-68 
Burglary  .  .  .  .  69-69 
Robbery  ....  56-08 
Arson 16-56 

It  is  still  more  satisfactory  to  be  able  to  state,  on  the  same  excellent 
authority,  "  that  in  the  majority  of  the  offences  for  which  capital  punish- 
ments were  repealed  there  has  been  a  decrease,  and  that  in  the  aggre- 
gate this  decrease  amounted  in  1841  to  4j  per  cent.,  while  commitments 
generally  had  increased." 

The  effect  of  the  successive  changes  made  of  late  years  in  our  cri- 
minal code  is  forcibly  stated  by  Mr.  Redgrave  as  follows  :  — 

"  The  magnitude  of  the  recent  changes  in  the  criminal  law  will  be 
strongly  exemplified  when  it  is  stated  that,  had  the  offences  tried  in 
1841  been  tried  under  the  laws  of  1831,  the  eighty  capital  sentences 
passed  would  have  been  increased  to  2172." 

The  increasing  proportion  of  convictions  which  has  already  been 
noticed  as  a  consequence  of  this  relaxation  of  the  code  has  been  steadily 
progressive  throughout.  Examining  the  returns  in  this  particular  at 
short  intervals,  we  find  the  following  result :  — 


1S39 

1840 

1841 

50-71 

56-15 

63-22 

77-77 

68-75 

66-66 

73-56 

78-98 

79-85 

62-98 

64-71 

63-80 

29-73 

27-00 

45-45 

Years. 

Years. 

1805  Convictions 

per 

cent. 

60-43 

1830 

Convictions 

per 

cent. 

70-72 

1810                    „ 

61-35 

1835 

„ 

71-04 

1815                     „ 

62-46 

1841 

5> 

73-05 

1820                     „ 

67-23 

1845 

)) 

71-60 

1825 

69-01 

1849 

)» 

75-49 

The  following  historical  sketch  of  the  efforts  made  in  Parliament  for 
mitigating  the  severity  of  our  criminal  code  has-been  drawn  up  and 
kindly  communicated  by  the  valuable  public  officer  whose  name  has 
already  been  menti(jncd — Mr.  Redgrave,  keeper  of  the  Criminal  Re- 


cii.vr.  II  ]  CRIMINAL  LEGISLATION.  639 

gister  in  the  Home  Office.  We  may  learn  from  this  narrative  how  rapid 
is  the  march  of  puhlic  opinion  in  the  right  direction,  when  once  the 
shackles  of  prejudice  have  been  cast  aside,  and  the  evidence  of  facts 
has  been  allowed  to  produce  itself  in  confirmation  of  the  views  of  en- 
lightened reformers.  We  here  see,  among  the  opponents  of  all  change 
in  a  system  of  criminal  legislation,  now  looked  back  upon  with  hori-or 
or  disgust  by  every  one,  the  highest  authorities  of  the  day — the  then 
Lord  Chancellor  and  Lord  Chief  Justice  of  England.  If  anything  could 
justify  successive  Parliaments  in  resisting  the  appeals  for  mercy  and  for 
enlightened  justice  made  by  Romilly  and  Mackintosh — names  to  be 
ever  honoured  for  their  devotion  to  the  cause  of  humanity — it  would  be 
the  resistance  offered  to  those  appeals  by  Lords  Eldon  and  Ellcnborough, 
armed  as  they  were  with  all  the  weight  of  a  lengthened  experience.  Yet 
has  our  own  subsequent  experience  in  the  system  they  opposed  proved 
that  these — the  "  practical  men,"  par  excellence — were  decidedly  wrong  ; 
while  the  "  theorists,"  whose  schemes  they  so  unhesitatingly  denounced, 
were  still  more  decidedly  right,  since  every  one  of  their  predictions  of 
the  good  to  follow  from  the  adoption  of  the  measures  they  advocated  has 
been  fulfilled  or  rather  surpassed. 

"  Li  1750,  a  Committee  of  the  House  of  Commons  appointed  to 
inquire  into  the  laws  relating  to  felonies  '  reported  that  it  was  reason- 
able to  exchange  the  punishment  of  death  for  some  other  reasonable 
punishment ;'  and  a  Bill  founded  on  this  rc^solution  passed  the  House  of 
Commons,  but  was  rejected  in  the  House  of  Lords. 

"The  subject  then  slept  for  more  than  half  a  century,  until  in  1808 
Sir  JSamuel  Romilly  brought  forward  his  first  motion  for  the  Reform  of 
the  Criminal  Laws ;  and  a  Bill  which  he  introduced  for  abolishing  the 
capital  punishment  for  stcalinrj  jmvatehj  frovi  the  j)crson  to  the  value  of 
bs.  (picking  pockets)  passed  into  a  law  during  the  same  session. 

"  In  1810  Sir  S.  Romilly  obtained  leave  to  bring  in  three  Bills  for 
the  Abolition  of  Capital  Punishments  : — 

"  1st.  For  stealing  to  the  value  of  5^.  in  shops,  warehouses,  coach- 
houses, &c. 

"  2.  For  stealing  to  the  value  of  40a\  in  a  dwelling-house. 

"  3rd.  For  stealing  to  the  value  of  40^.  on  navigable  rivers,  &c. 

"  The  first  Bill  passed  the  House  of  Commons,  but  made  no  further 
progress ;  the  second  was  opposed  by  the  Government,  and  lost  by  a 
majority  of  two  in  a  thin  house  ;  the  third  Bill  was  dropped  for  the 
session. 

"  In  the  following  year  Sir  S.  Romilly  again  introduced  the  above 
Bills,  together  with  a  Bill  abolishing  capital  punishment  for  stealing 
from  bleaching-grounds,  and  was  enabled,  in  opposition  to  the  ministry 
of  the  day,  to  carry  his  four  Bills  through  the  House  of  Commons.    The 


610  niOGRESS  OF  THE  NATION.  [sec.  tii. 

Bills  were  introdnceil  into  the  ILmso  of  Lords  by  Lord  Holland,  sup- 
ported by  Lord  Lansdowne,  and,  with  the  exception  of  the  Bill  relating 
to  bleaching-grounds  (which  was  passed  into  a  law),  were  strongly  op- 
posed by  the  Lord  Chancellor,  and  by  Lords  Liverpool  and  Ellen- 
borough,  and  were  lost  on  a  division.  Lord  Ellenborough,  on  this 
occasion,  said,  'These  Bills  went  to  alter  laws  which  a  century  had 
proved  necessary,  and  which  were  now  to  be  overturned  by  speculation 
and  modern  philoso])hy  ;'  and  again,  '  He  trusted  that  laws,  which  a 
century  had  proved  to  be  beneficial,  would  not  be  changed  for  the  illusory 
opinions  of  speculatists.' — Hansard,  vol.  xx. 

"  In  1812  Sir  S.  Rorailly  introduced  a  Bill  which  passed  into  a  law, 
repealing  an  Act  of  Elizabeth  which  constituted  it  a  capital  offence  in 
soldiers  and  sailors  found  begging  in  the  streets. 

"In  1813,  on  the  assembling  of  the  new  Parliament,  Sir  S.  Romilly 
again  introduced  his  Bill  abolishing  capital  punishment  for  shop-lifting. 
He  had  selected  this  Bill  as  having,  in  former  discussions,  been  con- 
sidered less  objectionable  than  the  others.  Mr.  Secretary  Ryder  and 
the  Solicitor-General  expressed  their  disapproval  of  the  Bill  on  its  in- 
troduction, and  ministers  opposed  it  on  the  third  reading  as  introducing 
an  innovating  spirit  into  the  criminal  legislation.  It  was,  however, 
carried  in  the  face  of  this  opposition  by  a  majority  of  38  in  a  house  of 
106  members,  but  thrown  out  in  the  House  of  Lords. 

"  In  1816  Sir  S.  Romilly  carried  this  Bill  once  more  through 
the  House  of  Commons,  but  its  further  progress  was  again  stopped 
in  the  House  of  Lords.  In  introducing  his  Bill,  Sir  S.  Romilly 
brought  forward  the  fact,  that  in  the  year  1785,  no  less  than  ninety- 
seven  persons  were  executed  for  the  offence  of  shop-lifting  in  London 
alone. 

"  In  1818  Sir  S.  Romilly  again  carried  this  Bill— the  identical  Bill 
which  had  already  twice  passed  the  House  of  Commons  in  that  Parlia- 
ment, and  twice  in  its  predecessor,  the  only  opposition  offered  being  an 
amendment  proposed  by  the  Attorney-General,  on  the  third  readirg, 
to  the  declaration  in  the  preamble,  '  that  extreme  severity  was  calcu- 
lated to  produce  impunity  for  crimes.'  In  defeating  this  amendment, 
and  affirming  the  principle  for  which  he  contended.  Sir  S.  Romilly's 
exertions  for  the  amelioration  of  the  criminal  laws  of  his  country  ter- 
minated. He  died  at  the  close  of  the  year ;  and  though  he  liad  not 
been  enabled,  during  a  struggle  of  ten  years  with  the  ministry  of  that 
day,  which  opposed  all  his  propositions,  to  carry  many  of  the  measures 
he  so  zealously  advocated,  he  had  impressed  the  House  of  Commons 
with  their  justice,  and  at  least  put  a  stop  to  the  sanguinary  enactments 
which  were,  up  to  that  time,  constantly  being  a.dded  to  the  Statute 
Book,  at  the  same  time  that  he  aroused  the  attention  of  the  public  by 
his  eloquent  appeals  to  the  state  of  the  laws. 


cuw.  i\]  CRIMINAL  LEGISLATION.  641 

"In  1819  the  criminal  laws  and  their  administration  were  the  subject 
of  frequent  discussions. 

"  The  number  of  convictions  and  executions,  particularly  for  the 
iorging  and  uttering  of  bank  notes,  was  urged  as  a  ground  for  inquiry, 
and  petitions  from  most  of  the  large  towns  and  many  influential  bodies 
were  presented  to  Parliament  praying  that  serious  consideration  might 
be  given  to  the  subject.  Lord  Holhmd  presented  a  petition  to  this 
effect  from  the  Corporation  of  London  in  the  Upper  House,  and  earnestly 
supported  it ;  and  tl)e  sheriffs  presented  a  similar  petition  at  the  bar  of 
the  House  of  Commons.  Mr.  Wilberforce  presented  a  petition  from 
the  Society  of  Friends,  stating  that  at  their  annual  meeting  the  subject 
had  arrested  their  attention,  and  expressing  the  feelings  of  deep  com- 
miseration and  regret. 

"  Tiie  public  feeling  was  made  sufficiently  apparent  in  other  ways. 
Juries  seemed  determined  to  resist  by  their  verdicts  the  severe  enact- 
ments of  the  laws,  and  injured  parties  were  deterred  from  appearing  as 
prosecutors.  Sir  James  Mackintosh  now  appeared  as  the  active  advo- 
cate of  the  reforms  which  had  been  so  much  advanced  by  the  exertions 
of  his  friend,  and  moved  (in  March,  IblO)  the  appointment  of  a  select 
committee  '  to  consider  so  much  of  the  criminal  law  as  related  to  capital 
punishments,  and  to  report  their  observations  and  opinion  to  the  House.'* 
The  motion  was  opposed  by  Lord  Castlereagh,  supported  by  his  party 
— but,  after  a  lengthened  debate,  was  carried  by  a  majority  of  19  in  a 
house  of  275  members.  This  defeat  of  the  minister  was  welcomed 
with  'great  cheering.'  The  committee  was  appointed,  and  made  their 
report  at  the  end  of  the  session.  Li  the  next  year,  Sir  James  moved 
the  reappointment  of  the  committee,  and  brought  in  six  Bills  for  the 
Amendment  of  the  Criminal  Laws,  founded  on  their  report  presented  in 
the  previous  session.  These  Bills  proposed  to  abolish  capital  punish- 
ments— 

"  1st.  For  stealing  to  the  value  of  AOs.  in  dwelling-houses. 

"  2nd.   P^or  stealing  to  the  value  of  55.  privately  in  a  shop. 

"  3rd.  For  stealing  privately  on  a  river  to  the  value  of  40^. 

"  4th.  For  several  offences  of  the  nature  of  misdemeanors,  many  of 
them  obsolete. 

"  5th.  Repealed  parts  of  Acts  creating  capital  offences,  among  which 
were — abduction  of  women  of  property — maliciously  wounding  cattle — 
taking  a  reward  for  the  reco\ery  of  stolen  goods — destroying  trees — 
breaking  down  the  banks  of  rivers ;  and  several  offences  connected  with 
the  marriage  and  bankrupt  laws. 

"  6th.  Consolidated  and  amended  the  laws  relating  to  forgery,  and 


*  Sir  J.  ^Mackintosh   stated  that  a  similar  resolution  was  passed  in  1770,  when  authority 
was  delegated  to  a  commission  for  the  same  purpose. 

2  T 


642  niOGllESS  OF  THE  NATION.  [skc.  vii. 

repealed  the  capital  punisliment  for  all  Jirst  offences  of  forging  and 
uttering — except  of  Bank  of  England  notes. 

"  The  Bills  relating  to  stealing  in  a  dwelling-house,  stealing  on  navi- 
gable rivers,  and  forging,  were  opposed  by  the  Government  of  the  day, 
and  abandoned  by  Sir  James  in  the  face  of  their  opposition.  The  other 
three  Bills  were  suffered  to  pass  into  laws — the  Lords  having  altered  the 
Shop-lifting  Bill,  leaving  it  capital  to  steal  in  shops  to  the  value  of  15/. 

"In  1821  Sir  James  Mackintosh  succeeded  in  carrying  the  second 
and  third  reading  of  his  Forgery  Bill  in  opposition  to  the  strenuous 
exertions  of  the  ministry.  On  the  question  that  the  Bill  do  pass,  some 
of  its  supporters  having  left  the  house,  Lord  Londonderry  tried  another 
division — and  by  this  parliamentary  stratagem,  which  was  warmly 
exclaimed  against,  succeeded  in  defeating  the  Bill — the  numbers  being 
121  to  115. 

"  Li  1822,  in  consequence  of  ill  health.  Sir  James  Mackintosh  con- 
fined his  exertions  to  the  obtaining  a  pledge  from  the  House  to  consider 
means,  in  the  following  session,  for  abating  the  rigour  of  the  criminal 
law.  This  resolution,  though  strongly  opposed  by  the  Government,  he 
carried  by  117  to  101. 

'•In   1823,  in   pursuance  of  the  resolution  which,  in  spite   of  the 
Government,  he  had  extorted  from  the  House,  Sir  J.  Mackintosh  pro- 
posed, in  a  series  of  resolutions,  that  it  was  expedient  to  abolish  the 
punishment  of  death  in  cases  of  larceny  from   shops,  from  dwelling- 
houses,  and  on  navigable  rivers — for  horse,  sheep,  and  cattle  stealing — 
for   forgery — returning    from  transportation,  and  other  offences  made 
capital  by  partiulcar  statutes.     These  resolutions  w^ere  oppsoed  by  Sir 
Robert  Peel,  then  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home  Department,  who 
moved  the  previous  question,  and  promised  that  the  subject  should  be 
taken  up  by  the  Government.     Sir  Robert  Peel's  motion  was  carried, 
and  Sir  J.  Mackintosh  stated  that  '  he  should  not  take  upon  himself  to 
introduce  any  other  measures  for  amending  the  criminal  laws,  because 
he   must  foreknow  their  fate.'     In  conformity  with    his   promise.   Sir 
Robert  Peel  afterwards  brought  in  three  Bills  for  Abolishing  Capital 
Punishments,  which  were  passed,  an  ineffectual  attempt  being  made  by 
Sir  J.  Mackintosh  to  extend  their  provisions.     These  Bills  abolished 
capital  punishments  in  fifteen  distinct  offences ;  but  the  offences  were 
either  obsolete,  or  of  so  imfrequent  occurrence,  that  they  did  not  tend 
much  to  ameliorate  the  severity  of  the  criminal  code.     This  will  be  at 
once  obvious  from  the  fact,  that  in  the  two  years  preceding  the  passing 
of  these  Bills,  the  Criminal  Records  show  that  only  four  convictions  took 
place   under  their   enactments,  and  that  step    by  step  with  them  Sir 
Robert  Peel  carried  a  Bill  to  enable  Judges  to  record  instead  of  passing 
the  sentence  of  death,  in  order  to  avoid  the  farce  of  solemnly  passing  a 
sentence  which  no  one  who  heard  it  imagined  could  be  executed. 


CHAP.  II  ]  CRIMINAL  LEGISLATION.  G43 

"  In  the  three  years  preceding  the  passing  of  these  Bills,  the  capital 
convictions  were  3070  ;  the  executions,  153. 

"  In  the  three  following  years,  the  capital  convictions  were  407G  ;  the 
executions,  223. 

"  The  executions  from  1820  to  1829  inclusive  were  729. 

"The  executions  in  ten  years,  from  1832  to  1841  inclusive,  were 
216. 

"  In  the  last  five  years,  the  executions  have  been — 

Years.      Executioiu. 

1837  8 

1838  6 

1839  U 

1840  9 

1841  10 

44 

"In  1826,  1827,  and  1828,  Sir  Robert  Peel  carried  several  very  im- 
portant Bills  for  the  consolidation  and  amendment  of  the  criminal  laws, 
but  these  Bills  did  not  abolisli  capital  punishments.  Sir  R.  Peel,  indeed, 
made  it  a  matter  of  boast  that  he  did  not  constitute  any  new  capital 
felonies,  and  pointed  out  an  instance  in  which  he  had  abated  the  capital 
punishment  by  increasing  the  sum  constituting  it  a  capital  offence  to  steal 
in  a  dwelling-house,  from  405.  to  5/.,  and  by  widening  the  technical 
description  of  a  dwelling. 

"In  1830  Sir  Robert  Peel  brought  in  his  Forgery  Bill,  and  petitions 
were  poured  into  the  house  fi'om  all  quarters  against  the  re-enactment 
of  the  severe  penalties  for  this  offence.  Sir  James  Mackintosh  again 
took  up  the  subject,  and  moved  that  the  capital  punishment  be  struck 
out  from  the  Bill.  He  was  unsuccessful ;  but  in  the  last  stage  of  the 
measure  Mr.  Spring  Rice  was  enabled  to  defeat  the  ministry  by  a 
majority  of  151  to  138,  and  to  remove  the  sentence  of  death  from  the 
Bill.  It  was,  however,  restored  by  the  House  of  Lords,  and  the  Bill,  as 
altered,  was  suffered  to  pass  the  House  of  Commons  at  the  end  of  the 
session.* 

"  In  1832  two  most  important  Bills  for  abolishing  capital  punishments 
were  passed.  Mr.  Ewart,  assisted  by  the  Government,  was  able  to  carry 
a  Bill  abolishing  the  punishment  of  death  in  cases  of  horse,  sheep,  and 

*  Executions  for  forgery  were  not  of  uncommon  occurrence  up  to  this  time — 1830;  for 
the  three  preceding  years  no  less  than  fifteen  persons  were  executed  for  this  offence  out  of 
123  capitally  convicted.  The  manner  in  which  the  better  feelings  of  our  nature  are  liable 
to  be  blunted  or  perverted  by  habit  is  well  exemplified  by  the  following  authentic  anecdote. 
It  is  related  by  a  very  high  judicial  authority,  that  he  once  heard  a  judge  at  Stafford  sen- 
tence a  prisoner  convicted  of  uttering  a  forged  note  of  the  Bank  of  England  for  one  pound, 
when,  after  having  pointed  out  to  him  the  enormity  of  the  offence,  and  exhorted  him  to  pre- 
pare for  anotlier  world,  the  dignitary  thus  concluded  :  "And  I  trust  that  through  the  merits 
and  mediation  of  our  blessed  Redeemer,  you  may  there  experience  that  mercy  which  a 
due  regard  to  the  credit  of  the  paper  currency  of  the  country  forbids  you  to  hope  for  here  " 

2  T  2 


644  niOGRESS  OF  THE  NATION.  [sec.  vii. 

cattle  stealing,  and  larceny  in  a  dwelling-hoiise.*  He  was  opposed  by 
Sir  R.  Peel,  and  an  amendment  was  made  in  the  Lords  subjecting  these 
offences  to  the  fixed  penalty  of  transportation  for  life — at  the  same  time, 
ministers  brought  in  a  Bill  for  abolishing  capital  punishment  in  cases  of 
forgery.  This  Bill  was  introduced  into  the  Commons  by  the  Attorney- 
General,  and  into  the  House  of  Lords  by  the  Lord  Chancellor.  It 
passed  into  a  law,  but  an  amendment  was  made  in  the  House  of  Lords 
under  the  protest  of  the  Lord  Chancellor,  excepting  the  forgery  of 
wills  and  powers  of  attorney  to  transfer  stock,  which  offences  were  left 
capital. 

"  Li  1833  Mr.  Lennard  carried  his  Bill  for  abolishing  capital  punish- 
ment for  housebreaking,  executions  for  which  offence  were  continued 
down  to  1830. 

'•'  In  1834  Mr.  Ewart  carried  a  Bill  for  abolishing  capital  punishment 
for  returning  from  transportation  ;  and  in  the  following  year  for  sacri- 
lege and  letter-steahng. 

"This  was  the  state  of  the  criminal  law  when  Lord  John  Russell 
brought  in  his  Bills  for  its  mitigation,  founded  on  the  report  of  a  com- 
mittee wdiich  the  Government  had  appointed.  The  little  progress  which 
Sir  S.  Romilly  and  Sir  J.  Mackintosh  had  made  in  opposition  to  the 
Governments  of  their  day,  will  be  seen  by  the  foregoing  sketch — as  well 
as  the  extensive  and  salutary  changes  which  followed.  Lord  J.  Russell's 
Bills  effected  an  extensive  abolition  of  the  sentence  of  death  and  a 
mitigation  of  the  secondary  punishments.  He  was  enabled  to  abolish 
capital  punishments  in  all  cases  but — 

"  Murder  and  attempts  to  murder,  where  dangerous  bodily  injuries 

are  effected  ; 
"  Burglary  and  robbery,  when  attended  with  violence  or  wounds  ; 
"Arson    of  dwelling-houses,  where  life  is  endangered — and  six 
other  offences  of  very  rare  occurrence. 

"The  number  of  capital  convictions  in  1829  was  1385  ;  and  in  1834, 
three  years  after  the  extensive  abolition  of  capital  punishments,  the 
number  was  reduced  to  480. 

"  Only  four  years  have  elapsed  since  the  passing  of  these  Acts,  as  to 
which  we  as  yet  know  the  result,  and  the  Criminal  Tables  show  their 
very  important  operation  upon  the  criminal  procedure.  These  tables 
show  the  capital  convictions  under  the  existing  laws  to  have  been 
reduced,  if  w'e  deduct  the  number  of  offences  committed  in  1838,  before 

*  Executions  for  these  offences  were  common  up  to  1830.  In  the  three  preceding  years 
there  were  executed  for — 

Horse  stealing 22 

Sheep  stealing 9 

Larceny  in  dwelling-houses.      .  &-• 
In  the  following  two  years  which  intervened  before  the  abolition  of  the  capital  punishment, 
two  persons  only  were  executed  for  these  offences. 


tHAF.  n.J  CRIME.  645 

the  passing  of  the  Act  of  tliat  year,  to  a  mimber  not  exceeding  that  of 
the  executions  in  a  like  period  up  to  the  end  of  1829.  The  effect  on 
the  secondary  punishments  has  been  very  great-  The  proportion  sen- 
tenced to  transportation  for  hfe  was  reduced  from  1  in  20  to  1  in  86,  and 
the  effect  of  the  change  in  tlie  chief  punishments  lias  been  visible  down 
to  the  bottom  of  the  scale." 

Among  the  injurious  results  of  the  sanguinary  code  which  was  so 
long  allowed  to  disgrace  our  statute-book,  may  be  mentioned  the  im- 
pressions made  upon  the  minds  of  transgressors.  It  might  have  been 
supposed  that  at  least  one  salutary  effect  would  have  attended  upon 
severity, — that  the  terror  which  it  was  calculated  to  excite  would  have 
had  a  wholesome  influence  in  deterring  from  crime  :  but  it  is  well  known 
that  the  very  reverse  of  this  effect  was  produced,  Mrs.  Elizabeth  Fry, 
whose  name  will  go  down  to  posterity  with  thnt  of  Howard,  and  who 
had  well  qualified  herself  for  being  heard  upon  this  question,  \\as 
examined  before  the  Committee  on  the  Police  of  the  Metropolis  in  1818, 
and  upon  this  point  gave  the  following  testimony : — 

"  As  an  illustration  of  the  effects  produced  among  the  prisoners  them- 
selves by  capital  punishments,  I  wish  to  read  a  note  which  was  taken  in 
the  prison  of  Newgate  soon  after  the  execution  of  a  woman  named 
Elizabeth  Fricker,  who  was  executed  for  admitting  a  man  to  rob  her 
mistress.  '  I  visited  Newgate  two  days  after  the  execution  of  Elizabeth 
Fricker,  and  instead  of  finding,  as  I  expected,  the  whole  of  the  criminals 
awfully  affected  by  what  had  passed,  I  found  a  spirit  of  pity  and 
lamentation  over  the  sufferers,  with  such  an  impression  that  the  punish- 
ment exceeded  the  crime,  that  it  excited  a  feeling  of  great  dis])leasure 
and  even  bitterness,  not  only  towards  our  laws  but  to  those  who  put 
them  into  execution  ;  and  so  far  from  softening  the  heart,  or  leading  it 
from  evil,  it  appeared  to  harden  them,  and  make  them  endeavour  to 
justify  their  own  criminal  conduct  as  well  as  that  of  those  who  suffered, 
and  even  to  fortify  themselves  through  unbelief  of  the  truths  of  reli"-ion, 
or  to  justify  themselves  and  those  who  suffered,  by  feeling  that  thev  were 
not  what  they  considered  justly  done  by.'  " 

Up  to  1834  there  was  not  any  classification  of  offences  made  in  our 
criminal  returns,  the  whole  being  arranged  alphabetically.  But  on 
and  after  that  year  crimes  have  been  ranged  under  six  principal  heads, 
viz. : — 

1.  Offences  against  the  person  ; 

2.  Offences  against  property,  committed  with  violence ; 

3.  Offences  against  property,  committed  without  violence  ; 

4.  Malicious  offences  against  property ; 

5.  Forgery  and  offences  against  the  currency  ; 

6.  Other  offences,  not  included  in  the  above  classes. 


646 


PROGRESS  OF  THE  NATION. 


[sec.   VII. 


Following  this  classification,  we  find  that  the  offences  charged  in 
Ent^land  and  Wales  in  each  year  from  1834  to  1849  under  the  various 
heads  have  heen, — 


Years. 


1834 
1835 
1836 
1837 
1838 
1839 
1840 
1841 
1842 
1843 
1844 
1845 
1846 
1847 
1848 
1840 


Class 

1 


2,455 
2,016 
1,956 
1,719 
1,859 
2,009 
1,881 
2,140 
2,127 
2,431 
2,306 
1,966 
2,249 
2,023 
2,234 
1,846 


Class 
2 


1,4.59 
1,354 
1,310 
1,400 
1,538 
1,432 
1,934 
1,873 
2,178 
2,530 
1,759 
1,471 
1,507 
1,732 
2,172 
2,076 


Class 
3 


16,608 
15,478 
16,167 
18,884 
18,278 
19,243 
21,484 
22,017 
23,995 
22,298 
20,425 
19,506 
20,035 
23,571 
23,910 
22,053 


Class 
4 


162 
156 
168 
114 

89 
105 
145 

94 
201 
279 
347 
149 
209 
186 
191 
293 


Qass 

Class 

Total. 

5 

6 

431 

1,336 

22,451 

368 

1,359 

20,731 

359 

1,024 

20,984 

456 

1,039 

23,612 

503 

827 

23,094 

436 

1,218 

24,443 

541 

1,202 

27,187 

437 

1,199 

27,760 

634 

2,174 

31,309 

668 

1,335 

29,591 

548 

1,157 

26,542 

438 

773 

24,303 

406 

701 

25,107 

525 

796 

28,833 

684 

1,158 

30,349 

676 

872 

27,816 

The  increase  is  here  seen  to  apply  chiefly  to  offences  against  property 
committed  without  violence,  and  which  bore  to  the  whole  number  of 
committals  in  each  of  the  years  the  following  proportions : — 


Years. 

Per  Cent. 

Y^ears . 

Per  Cent. 

Y'ears. 

Per  Cent 

1834 

73-97 

1840 

79-02 

1845 

80-26 

1835 

74-66 

1841 

79-31 

1846 

79-79 

1836 

77-04 

1842 

76-64 

1847 

81-75 

1837 

79-97 

1843 

75-35 

1848 

78-78 

1838 

79-14 

1844 

76-95 

1849 

79-28 

1839 

78-72 

Although  the  population  of  England  and  Wales  has  probably  in- 
creased in  the  15  years  between  1834  and  1849  by  more  than  20  per 
cent.,  the  number  of  offenders  in  the  remaining  five  classes  has  not 
increased,  and,  indeed,  was  smaller  in  the  concluding  than  in  the  first 
year  of  the  series.  It  is  clear,  therefore,  that  the  relaxations  of  our 
criminal  laws  are  in  no  respect  chargeable  with  the  increasing  number 
of  delinquencies  which  have  occurred  in  a  class  of  crimes  in  regard  to 
which  little  or  nothing  has  been  done  in  that  direction.  The  number  of 
executions  that  have  taken  place  in  England  and  Wales  between  1805 
and  1849  is  seen  by  the  foregoing  table  to  have  been  2281,  or,  on  an 
averao-e,  50  yearly,  of  which  number  575,  or  12  per  annum,  had  been 
guilty  of  murder ;  so  that,  according  to  the  convictions  under  which  the 
leo'islature  has  of  late  years  been  brought  to  act,  the  fearful  number  of 
1706  lives  have  in  that  period  been  unnecessarily  and  therefore  wrong- 
fully taken  in  England  and  Wales  alone. 

In  the  following  table  the  number  of  committals  in  1841  is  contrasted 
W'ith  those  in  1805  for  each  county  in  England,  and  calculations  are 
added  whereby  it  may  be  seen  how  greatly  the  increase  of  committals 
has  outstripped  the  increase  of  population.     It  will  be  found,  that  in 


CHIME. 


r,i7 


the  period  of  thirty-six  years  the  rate  of  increase  in  criminality,  thus 
measured,  had  run  from  250  per  cent,  in  Rutlandshire  to  1720  per 
cent,  in  Monmouthshire.  In  the  former  county,  the  increase  of  popu- 
lation hetween  1801  and  1841  was  the  smallest  experienced  in  England, 
excepting  Sussex  and  Herefordshire  ;  while  in  Monmouthshire  the 
increase  of  population  has  been  the  largest,  with  the  exception  of  Lan- 
cashire. 


Numerical 

Order  of 

Counties  in 

respect  to 

Agricultural 

Employment. 


.3 
4 
5 
6 
7 
8 
9 
10 
11 
12 
13 
14 
15 
16 
17 
18 
19 
20 
21 
22 
23 
24 
25 
26 
27 
28 
2a 
30 
31 
32 
33 
34 
35 
36 
37 
38 
39 
40 


Bedford 
Huntingdon 
Rutland 
Hereford    . 
Lincoln 
Cambridge 
Bucks    . 
Essex    . 
Sufiblk  .     . 
Wilts     .     . 
Oxford  .      . 
Northampton 
Herts    .      . 
Berks    .      . 
Norfolk       . 
Dorset  . 
Sussex  . 
Westmoreland 
Salop 

Somerset    . 
Hants    . 
Devon  . 
Kent     .      . 
Worcester  . 
Cornwall    . 
Cumberland 
Leicester    . 
Nottingham 
Monmouth . 
Derby   .     . 
Gloucester. 
Chester 
York      .      . 
Warwick 
Statibrd 
Northumberland 
Durham 
Surrey  . 
Lancaster  . 
^Middlesex  . 


Committals  in 


1803 


1811 


20 

15 

4 

31 

58 

40 

33 

144 

109 

75 

38 

42 

43 

62 

163 

38 

105 

6 

79 

106 

147 

96 

210 

51 

45 

18 

47 

74 

20 

39 

141 

80 

245 

160 

91 

38 

27 

199 

371 

1,217 


191 

62 

14 

245 

349 

240 

287 

647 

482 

506 

323 

3-12 

319 

306 

666 

284 

539 

33 

416 

991 

677 

687 

962 

566 

235 

151 

466 

32) 

364 

277 

1,236 

943 

1,895 

1,046 

1,059 

226 

215 

923 

3,987 

3,586 


Increase  per  Cent,  of 


Committals'  Population 

between        between 

1805  and  j    1801  and 

1841.  1841. 


4,f.05     !  27.132 


855 
313 
250 
690 
502 
500 
769 
349 
342 
.575 
7.50 
714 
642 
393 
509 
647 
413 
450 
426 
835 
360 
615 
358 

1,009 
555 
739 
891 
344 

1,720 
610 
776 

1,078 
673 
553 

1,063 
494 
696 
363 
974 
194 


70 
50 
30 
28 
73 
84 
45 
56 
49 
40 
47 
51 
61 
46 
50 
51 
25 
35 
42 
59 
57 
55 
78 
67 
80 
53 
65 
75 
128 
67 
71 
106 
85 
93 
113 
59 
102 
106 
147 
94 


482  I 


The  counties  arc  arranged  in  the  order  of  their  rank  as  reoards 
agricultural  employment  in  1831 ;  and  it  will  be  found  that,  in  the 
twenty  counties  where  the  largest  proportion  of  the  inhabitants  be- 
longed to  the  agi-icultural  class,  the  increase  of  crime  has  been  as 
great  within  a  very  minute  fraction  as  it  has  been  in  the  remaining 


648 


PROGRESS  OF  tHE  NATION. 


fSEC.    VU. 


twenty  counties, — the  increase  of  committals  having  been,  in  the  more 
agricultural  counties,  498  per  cent.,  and  in  the  more  manufacturing 
counties  499  per  cent. :  while  the  increase  of  population  between  1801 
and  1841  in  the  more  agricultural  counties  has  been  55  per  cent.,  and 
in  the  remaining  counties  92  per  cent.  AVe  find  nothing  in  this  exami- 
nation to  support  the  assertion,  so  often  hazarded,  that  vice  and  crime 
are  fostered  by  bringing  men  together  in  large  masses,  while  innocence 
is  preserved  by  rural  pursuits.  For  each  million  of  inhabitants,  tliere 
were  charged  with  offences — 


1805 

446 
590 


1841 

1,723 
1,842 


Difference. 
1,277 
1,252 


In  the  20  more  agricultural  counties 
In  the  20  less  agricultural  counties  . 

The  refutation  of  the  popular  belief  thus  established  will  appear  more 
decided  if  we  consider  that,  as  already  shown,  the  groat  increase  of 
crime  generally  has  been  in  that  class  of  offences,  the  temptations  to 
commit  which  are  out  of  all  proportion  greatest  in  the  more  populous 
districts. 

If  the  comparison  had  been  made  between  1805  and  1840,  it  would 
have  been  found  that  the  proportionate  number  of  accusations  to  popu- 
lation in  the  two  classes  of  counties  were  still  nearer  than  in  1841. 

The  result  would  then  have  been  as  follows  : — For  each  million  of 
inhahitants  there  were  charged  with  offences  — 

1805 

.     446 

■     590 

The  great  number  of  committals  in  the  manufacturing  counties  in 
1841  was  probably  the  effect  of  commercial  distress,  which  most  pain- 
fully abridged  the  demand  for  labour,  and  of  the  high  prices  of  provi- 
sions to  which  that  distress  has  been  attributed. 

During  the  eleven  years  from  1835  to  1845,  for  which  alone  the 
returns  afford  means  of  comparison,  there  has  been  a  most  remarkable 
uniformity  in  the  proportionate  number  of  persons  at  different  ages 
committed  for  trial. 

The  centesimal  proportions  at  various  periods  of  life  in  each  of  those 
years  were : — 


In  the  20  more  agricultural  counties 
In  the  20  less  agricultural  counties    . 


1840 

Difference. 

1,753 

1,307 

1,836 

1,246 

AGES. 

1835 

1836 

183T 

1838 

1839 

1840 

1841 

Aged  12  years  and  under    . 
Above  12,  not  exceeding  16 

i-67 

1-84 

1-52 

1-58 

1-74 

1-79 

1-79 

9-70 

9-71 

9-72 

9-92 

10-08 

9-80 

9-78 

16              „              21 

29-65 

29-03 

29- -23 

29-13 

28-07 

28-10 

27-28 

.!      21              „              30 

31-92 

31-42 

31-74 

31-24 

31-12 

30-99 

32-10 

„      30              „              40 

14-01 

14-43 

14-56 

14-75 

14-94 

15-32 

15-35 

„      40              „              50 

6-60 

6-76 

6-65 

7-02 

6-97 

7-21 

7-18 

„      50              „               60 

3-24 

3-33 

3-24 

3-00 

3-23 

3-12 

2-99 

„      60  years     .... 
Ages  unknown      .... 

1-30 

1-40 

1-55 

1-58 

1-55 

1-57 

1-51 

1-91 

2-08 

1-79 

l-78> 

2-30 

2-10 

2-02 

100- 

100- 

100- 

100- 

100- 

100- 

100- 

CHAP.    II.] 


CRIME. 


64.9 


In  and  since  1842  the  ages  have  been  ascertained  at  different  periods 
of  life  to  assimilate  them  to  the  quinquennial  periods  adopted  in  the 
population  returns. 


AGICS. 

1842 

l!s43 

1841 

1845 

I84(i 

184T 

1848 

Centeaimal 

Proportions  of 

PopuLition, 

1841 

Aged  under  15  years  . 
„  15,  and  under  20 
„  20  „  25 
„  23  „  30 
„  30  „  40 
„  40  „  50 
„  50  „  60 
„      60,  and  above 

Ages  unknown    .     . 

5-3 

22-0 

24-7 

15-3 

16-8 

8-3 

3-8 

1-8 

2-0 

5-7 

22-7 

24-3 

14-9 

16-4 

8-1 

3-5 

1-9 

2-5 

6-0 

23-3 

24-1 

14-9 

15-3 

8-3 

3-9 

2-0 

2-2 

6-4 

24-1 

24-2 

14-3 

15-6 

8-2 

3-6 

1-7 

1-9 

6-5 

24-5 

23-3 

14-6 

15-8 

8-4 

3-4 

1-8 

1-7 

G-1 

24*2 

23-0 

14-7 

16-7 

8-5 

3-6 

1-8 

1-4 

3-6 

23-8 

25-2 

15-4 

16-8 

8-6 

3-4 

1-7 

1-5 

36-0 
9-9 
9-7 
8-0 

12-9 
9-6 
6-4 
7-2 
0-3 

100- 

100- 

100- 

100- 

100- 

100-        100- 

100- 

The  most  disquieting  feature  of  these  details  is  the  large  amount  of 
criminality  found  in  persons  of  tender  years,  and  who  may  be  considered 
victims  of  the  evil  influences  to  which  they  have  been  exposed.  The 
actual  numbers  of  children  under  sixteen  years  old  who  were  committed 
for  trial  in  the  years  1835  to  1841,  distinguishing  boys  from  girls, 
were, — 


Years. 

Males. 

Females. 

Total. 

1833 

2,002 

3,^4 

2,356 

1836 

2,057 

366 

2,423 

1837 

2,265 

389 

2,654 

1838 

2,250 

407 

2,6.57 

1839 

2,425 

463 

2,888 

1840 

2,586 

557 

3,143 

1841 

2,656 

556 

3,212 

The  constant  and  rapid  additions  thus  apparent  in  the  ranks  of  juve- 
nile offenders  was  calculated  to  awaken  the  deepest  and  most  anxious 
interest.  It  at  length  compelled  the  Government  to  the  adoption  of 
active  measures  for  the  repression  of  the  evil — an  evil  which  never 
should,  nay,  never  could,  have  arisen  but  for  the  neglect  of  the  legis- 
lature to  furnish  means  for  imparting  to  all  that  degree  of  moral  train- 
ing which  it  is  the  duty  of  the  State  to  provide  with  regard  to  the 
well-ordering  of  the  community.  Our  prisons  are  no  longer  allowed  to 
be  schools  wherein  the  child  who  may  have  been  led  into  some  petty 
delinquency  is  made  to  perfect  his  education  in  crime,  and  whence  he  is 
to  be  sent  back  into  the  world  an  accomplished  villain.  The  establish- 
ment of  the  Reformatory  Prison  at  Parkhurst,  in  the  Isle  of  Wight,  is 
one  very  important  step  towards  the  repression  of  crime  by  checking  its 
manifestation  at  the  source,  by  withdrawing  the  young  victims  of  society 
from  the  evil  influences  that  have  been  suffered  to  surround  them  from 
their  birtii,  replacing  those  influences  by  motives  to  virtuous  conduct, 
and  supplying  the  means  for  its  pursuit. 


650 


PROGKESS  OF  'J'HE  NATION. 


[sec.    VII. 


From  1842  inclusive  the  distinction  is  made  at  the  age  of  15,  and 
the  numbers  have  been — 


Years. 

Males. 

Females. 

Total. 

1842 

1.432 

240 

1,672 

1843 

1,425 

245 

1.670 

1844 

1,391 

205 

1,596 

1845 

1,332 

217 

1,549 

1846 

1,426 

214 

1,640 

1847 

1,514 

253 

1,767 

1848 

911 

176 

1,087 

If  we  conld  ever  have  doubted  the  great  influence  of  instruction  in 
restraining  men  from  the  commission  of  cnraes,  the  proof  of  its  efficacy 
would  have  been  afforded  by  our  criminal  statistics. 

In  1835  returns  were  first  obtained  of  the  degree  of  instruction  that 
had  been  imparted  to  persons  committed  for  trial ;  but  as  the  inquiries 
only  went  to  determine  whether  the  parties  could  read  and  write,  or 
read  only,  or  were  without  even  that  elementary  degree  of  learning,  and 
did  not  distinguish  such  as  had  been  superiorly  instructed,  but  little 
advantage  could  be  drawn  from  them.  In  the  following  year  this  defi- 
ciency was  supplied,  and  we  have  since  been  made  acquainted  with  the 
degrees  of  instruction  of  persons  charged  with  offences,  under  the  four 
following  heads  : — 

1.  Persons  who  can  neither  read  nor  write  ; 

2.  Persons  who  can  read  only,  or  read  and  write  imperfectly ; 

3.  Persons  who  can  read  and  write  well; 

4.  Persons  who  have  received  instruction  beyond  the  elementary 

branches  of  reading  and  writing. 
The  returns  under  those  heads  in  each  year  in  England  and  "Wales, 
from  1836  to  1848,  have  been  as  follows : — 


Years. 

Neither  Read  nor 
Write. 

Read  only, 

or  Read  and  Write 

imperfectly. 

Read  and  Write 

well. 

Superior 
Instruction. 

Instruction 
not  ascertained. 

Males. 

Females. 

Males.      Females. 

Males. 

Females. 

Males. 

Females. 

Males. 

Females. 

1836 
1837 
1838 
1839 
1840 
1841 
1842 
1843 
1844 
1845 
1846 
1847 
1848 

5,598 
6,684 
6,342 
6,487 
7,145 
7,312 
8,169 
7,344 
6,266 
5,698 
5,820 
6.848 
7;  530 

1,435 
1,780 
1,601 
1.709 
i;913 

i,ao8 

1,959 
1,829 
1,635 
1,740 
1,878 
2,202 
2,161 

8,968 
10,147 
10,008 
10.523 
12,151 
12,742 
14,983 
13,892 
12,745 
11,215 
11,833 
13,. 562 
13,950 

2,015 
2,151 
2,326 
2,548 
2,958 
2,990 
3,277 
3,153 
2,990 
2,964 
3,109 
3,418 
3,161 

2,016 

2,057 
2,051 
2,201 
2,038 
1,839 
1,890 
2,127 
1,892 
1,859 
1,744 
2,015 
2,634 

199 
177 
206 
261 
215 
214 
231 
244 
264 
178 
192 
230 
350 

176 

98 

74 

74 

100 

126 

65 

134 

109 

86 

83 

79 

76 

15 
3 
5 
4 
1 

'4 
6 
2 
3 
2 
3 
5 

490 
421 
430 
546 
541 
541 
633 
754 
537 
483 
370 
399 
396 

72 

94 

51 

90 

125 

88 

98 

108 

102 

.     77 

76 

77 

86 

The  most  cursory  glance  at  these  figures  must  carry  conviction  to 
every  mind  that  instruction  has  power  to  restrain  men  from  the  com- 
mission of  crimes — of  such  a  nature  at  least  as  will  bring  them  before 
the  bar  of  justice.     If  v;e  class  together  those  who  can  neither  read  nor 


CH.U-.  n.]  CRIME.  651 

write,  and  those  who  have  acquired  only  an  imperfect  acquaintance  with 
those  elementary  branches  of  knowledge — the  scaffolding  merely  for  the 
erection  of  the  moral  edifice — we  find  that  in  the  thirteen  years  com- 
prised in  the  returns  there  were,  out  of  335,429  persons  committed,  and 
whose  degrees  of  instruction  were  ascertained,  the  great  proportion  of 
304,772,  or  more  than  90  in  100,  uninstructed  persons,  while  only  1333 
persons  had  enjoyed  the  advantages  of  instrnction  beyond  the  elementary 
degree,  and  only  29,324  had  mastered,  without  advancing  beyond,  the 
arts  of  reading  and  writing. 

These  numbers  embrace  both  males  and  females.  If  we  examine  the 
returns  with  the  view  of  determining  the  moral  influence  of  instructicju 
upon  females,  we  find  that  among  the  335,429  persons  above  described 
there  were  63,824  females,  or  19'02  per  cent,  of  the  whole  ;  but  when 
we  inquire  in  what  proportions  females  are  divided  among  the  different 
classes  as  respects  instruction,  we  see  that  among  the  304,772  unin- 
structed persons  there  were  60,810  females,  or  19'95  per  cent. ;  while 
among  29,324  who  could  read  and  write  well  there  were  but  2961 
females,  or  10'09  per  cent.;  and  among  the  better  instructed,  1333 
j)ersons,  there  were  only  fifty-three  females,  or  3*97  per  cent,  llie 
proportions  in  each  10,000  persons  accused  that  were  furnished  by  the 
males  and  females  of  these  several  classes,  were  as  follows  : — 


Those  wholly  uninstructed,  and  those  who  could  ) 
read  only,  or  read  iuul  write  imperfectly    .      .  I 
Those  who  could  read  and  write  well  .... 
Those  superiorly  instructed 


Males. 

Females. 

Total. 

7,273 

1,813 

9,086 

786 
33 

88 
2 

874 
40 

8,097        1,903 


10,000 


Of  the  fifty-three  instructed  females  accused  of  crimes  throughout 
England  and  Wales  in  thirteen  years,  the  large  proportion  of  fifteen 
belong  to  the  first  year  of  the  series.  Of  these,  twelve  were  accused  of 
simple  larceny,  one  for  receiving  stolen  goods,  one  for  fraud,  and  one 
for  perjury.  There  were,  consequently,  in  twelve  years,  only  thirty- 
eight  educated  females  brought  to  the  bar  of  criminal  justice,  viz. : — 
three  in  1837  ;  five  in  1838 ;  four  in  1839  ;  only  one  in  1840  ;  in  1841 
not  one  educated  female  was  committed  for  trial  among  7,673,633 
females  then  living  in  that  part  of  the  United  Kingdom.  In  the  re- 
maining seven  years,  the  numbers  were  in  1842,  four;  1843,  six  ;  1844, 
two  ;  in  1845,  three  ;  in  1846,  two ;  in  1847,  three  ;  and  in  1848,  five. 

How  much  the  internal  peace  of  the  country  may  be  affected  by  the 
prevalence  of  ignorance,  or  the  spread  of  knowledge,  may  be  reasonably 
inferred  from  the  state  of  instruction  of  persons  tried  at  the  Special 
Commission  in  October,  1842,  arising  out  of  the  then  recent  rising 
in  the  manufacturing  districts.     This  is  shov.n  by  the  following  table  : — 


652 


PROGRESS  OF  THE  NATION. 


Neither  read  nor  write  . 

Koad  only 

Read  and  write  imperfectly 
Read  and  write  well  . 
Superior  instruction  .     . 


Cheshire 

Lanca- 

sliire. 

StiiiTord- 
shire. 

Total. 

Centesimal 
Proportion. 

26 

30 

28 

9 

47 
26 
97 
28 

81 
99 
59 
36 

1 

154 

155 

184 

73 

1 

27-16 
27-34 
32-45 
12-87 
0-18 

93 

198 

276 

567 

100-00 

The  influence  of  instruction  in  preserving  from  legal  offences  would 
not  be  fully  understood  by  a  simple  statement  of  the  number  of  in- 
structed persons  accused  of  crimes.  It  would  occupy  too  much  space  to 
go  into  a  minute  examination  of  the  cases  of  accused  persons  in  this 
class  for  each  of  the  years  in  which  the  intellectual  condition  of  the 
accused  has  been  distinguished,  but  the  subject  is  of  too  great  impor- 
tance to  the  moral  health  of  the  nation  to  allow  of  its  being  passed  over 
without  some  attempt  to  point  out  the  various  consequences  that  have 
been  seen  to  follow  from  even  the  imperfect  degree  of  training  which 
has  hitherto  been  deemed  sufficient  for  forming  the  minds  and  charac- 
ters of  Englishmen.  For  this  purpose  the  following  analysis  of  the 
criminal  returns  of  England  and  Wales  in  1840  and  1841,  so  far  as 
they  relate  to  well-instructed  criminals,  is  offered. 

In  1840  there  were,  as  already  stated,  100  males  and  one  female, 
who  had  received  instruction  beyond  reading  and  writing,  committed 
for  trial  in  the  various  counties  of  England  and  Wales.  Of  this  num- 
ber only  tifty-nine  (fifty-eight  males  and  one  female)  were  convicted, 
being  under  59  per  cent,  of  the  number  accused,  while  the  convictions 
generally  in  that  year  exceeded  73  per  cent,  of  the  accused. 

The  convictions  occurred  in  the  following  counties  : — 


Counties. 

Cambridge     . 
Chester     . 

1 
6 

Cornwall   . 

1 

Durham     . 

0 

Essex    . 

T 

Huntingdon    . 

1 

Kent    . 

3 

Lancaster  . 

15 

Monmouth 

1 

Northampton . 
Nottingham    . 
Salop    . 
Somerset   . 

1 

2 
1 
3 

Stafford     .      . 

4 

Surrey 
Warwick   . 

3 

5 

Wilts    .     .     . 

2 

Worcester 

1 

York    .      .     . 

5 

Anglesea   . 

1 

Inhabitants. 

Inhabitants. 

r  164,509,  01 

-  1  conviction 

for  164,  .509 

395.300     ., 

^j 

65,883 

341,269     „ 

,, 

341,269 

324,277     „ 

162,138 

344,995     „ 

344,955 

58,699     „ 

>) 

58.699 

548,161     „ 

182,720 

1,667,064     „ 

,, 

111,137 

134,349     , 

134,349 

199,061     , 

j> 

199,061 

249,773     , 

124,886 

230,014     , 

» 

230,014 

436,002     , 

14.5,334- 

510,206     , 

)j 

127,551 

582.613     , 

194,204 

402,121     , 

80,424 

260,007     , 

130,003 

233,484    , 

233,484 

1,591,584    , 

318,316 

50,890     , 

)) 

50.890 

In  twenty  counties  of  England  and  Wales,  with  a  population  of 
8,724,338  persons,  there  were  convicted  fifty-nine  instructed  persons,  or 
one  to  every  147,870  inhabitants  ;  vhile  the  remaining  thirty-two  coun- 


oHAr.  II.]  CRIME.  G53 

ties,  with  a  population  of  7,182,491,  did  not  furnish  one  convict  who  had 
received  more  than  the  rudest  elements  of  instruction.  It  is  even  more 
worthy  of  remark,  that  Middlesex,  the  metropolitan  county,  with  its 
1,576,616  inhabitants,  among  whom  the  proportion  of  instructed  ])er- 
sons  is  at  least  equal  to  that  in  any  other  county,  did  not  furnish  one 
educated  convict — a  fact  which,  considering  the  diversity  of  conditions 
and  occupations,  and  the  amount  of  temptations  that  assail  its  in- 
habitants, it  would  be  most  ditficult  to  believe  upon  any  testimony  less 
certain  than  that  of  official  returns. 

The  sraallness  of  the  number  of  criminals  included  in  the  class  of 
educated  persons  might  lead  to  the  belief  that  a  high  standard  of  in- 
tellectual acquirement  is  adopted  as  a  qualification  for  admission  into 
that  class ;  but  it  has  been  found  upon  inquiry  that  the  reverse  of  this 
belief  is  true,  and  that — owing  probably  to  the  deficient  education  of 
some  among  the  officers  of  prisons  who  make  the  returns — some  have 
been  represented  as  superiorly  instructed  who  should  have  been  included 
"within  the  third  class,  ^iz. — those  who  read  and  write  well. 

Among  the  fifty-nine  instructed  persons  convicted  in  1840  were  four- 
teen political  otfences,  and  one  other,  whose  offence,  that  of  offering  a 
bribe  at  an  election  for  a  member  of  Parliament,  might  come  under 
the  same  description ;  one  for  manslaughter — a  lad  of  nineteen,  whose 
punishment  was  the  payment  of  a  fine  of  1007.  There  were  eight  in- 
structed persons  convicted  of  forgery  and  offences  against  the  currency 
out  of  430  persons  of  all  degrees  of  instruction  who  were  convicted  of 
those  offences — a  truly  satisfactory  result,  affording  a  sufficient  answer 
to  the  objection  urged  (it  is  true)  less  frequently  now  than  formerly, 
that  to  extend  instruction  would  be  to  multiply  the  crime  of  forgery ; 
three  were  cases  of  larceny  hy  servants,  and  fifteen  were  cases  of  simple 
larceny.  The  remaining  seventeen  were  cases  of  embezzlement,  fraud, 
assaults,  and  other  not  very  heinous  off*ences. 

That  the  offences  were  altogether  of  not  a  very  dark  character  will 
appear  from  a  description  of  the  punishments  awarded,  viz. : — 

Transportation  for  life       ...  3  Fined   100/ 1 

„                20  years    .      .  1  1         „        10/ 1 

„                15      „        .     .  1  I         „          5/ 2 

14     „       .     .  3  ;         „          1/ 1 

10     „        .     .  3  I                                                             —    5 

„                  7      „        .      .  5  1  Discharged  on  sureties      ....     1 

—  16    I                                                                      — 
Imprisonment  for  3  years       .     .  1                                         Total 59 

„  2      „     .      .      .  3  _ 

„  18  months    .     .  3  | 

„  15       „          .      .  1  :  Of  the  above  there  were — 

„  12       „           .      .  5  !    Under  20  years  old 5 

„  9       »          .      .  4         i  Between  20  and  30  years       ...     2-1 

„  6      „          .     .  7  '  Between  30  and  45  years       ...     23 

„  4      „          .      .  1              Above  45  years 7 

„  3       „          .      .  9  - 

„  6  weeks      .     .  1  i                               Total 59 

„  1  month     .      .  1  I  — 

„  14  days  ...  1 

—  37    1 


654 


PROGRESS  OF  THE  NATION. 


[sec.  VII. 


Lest  it  should  be  thought  that  the  experience  of  one  year  is  insuffi- 
cient to  warrant  the  conclusions  which  would  follow  from  the  establish- 
ment of  the  facts  just  exhibited,  recourse  has  been  had  to  the  criminal 
department  of  the  Home  Office,  and  through  the  kindness  of  Mr.  Red- 
grave the  following  analysis  of  the  convictions  of  instructed  persons  in 
1841  has  also  been  obtained. 

It  has  been  stated  that  126  instructed  persons  were  in  that  year  ac- 
cused in  England  and  ^Vales.  Of  these,  seventeen  are  included  in  the 
county  of  Somerset.  An  inquiry,  made  subsequent  to  the  printing  of 
the  returns,  has  made  it  appear  that  these  seventeen  persons  should 
have  been  classed  among  those  who  read  and  write  well,  not  one  among 
them  having  received  any  higher  degree  of  instruction.  The  number  is 
thus  reduced  to  109,  of  whom  only  74,  or  67 "89  per  cent.,  were  con- 
victed.    These  convictions  occurred  in  the  following  counties : — 


Counties. 

Inhabitants. 

Inhabitants. 

Chester     . 

.     1  in 

a  population 

of  395,300, 

or 

1  conviction  for  395,300 

Essex  .... 

.     1 

344,995 

1              „              344,995 

Gloucester 

.     1 

431,307 

1              „               431,307 

Kent    .... 

.     8 

548,161 

1              „                 68,520 

Lancaster 

.    19 

,j 

1,667,064 

1              „                87,740 

Lincoln 

.      1 

,j 

362,717 

1              „              362,717 

iMiddlesex 

.   18 

1,576,616 

1              „                87,590 

Korfolk     . 

.     1 

412,621 

1              „              412,621 

Northumberland 

2 

250,263 

1              „              125,134 

StaflFord     .      .     . 

.     6 

510,206 

1              „                85,034 

Surrey 

2 

„ 

582,613 

1              „              291,306 

Wilts    .... 

o 

260,007 
402,121 

1              „               130,003 

Warwick  . 

.     8 

1              „                50,263 

Worcester 

.     1 

233,484 

1               „               233,484 

York   .... 

.     3 

1) 

1,591,584 

1              „               530,528 

In  fifteen  English  counties,  with  a  population  of  9,569,064,  there 
were  convicted  seventy-four  instructed  persons,  or  one  to  every  129,311 
inhabitants  ;  while  the  twenty-five  remaining  counties  of  England  and 
the  whole  of  Wales,  with  a  population  of  6,342,661,  did  not  among 
them  furnish  one  conviction  of  a  person  who  had  received  more  than  the 
mere  elements  of  instruction.  It  will  be  remembered  as  a  most  interest- 
ing fact,  one  which  speaks  irresistibly  in  favour  of  a  general  system  of 
education,  that  not  one  of  the  109  was  a  female  ! 

The  offences  of  which  the  seventy-four  were  convicted  were  as  fol- 
lows : — 


Manslaughter 3 

Wounding  with  intent  to  main  ;  shooting 

at,  &c 3 

Rape 1 

Assault  with  intent  to  ravisli   ....  1 

Common  assaults 4 

Housebreaking 2    1    Neglect  of  dutj' in  a  police  officer 

Horsestealing 2    i    Delaying  the  delivery  of  a  letter  . 

Larceny  by  servants 8    '<  > 

Larceny 21 

Embezzlement 5   1 


Stealing  letters  from  post-office     ...     4 

Frauds "   .      .     7 

Forgery      8 

L'ttering  counterfeit  coin 

Forcible  entry 

Perjury 


74 


cii.u'.  H.]  CKIMK.  fj6o 

The  sentences  pronounced  were  as  follows : — 

Sentenced  to  death  (for  rape;  sentence  [    Fined  (one— 40s. ;  one— 1«.)     ...     2 

commuted  to  one  year's  imprison-  i    Discharged  on  sureties 2 

Pardoned ....     I 

—    5 

Total 74 

Their  ages  were — 

_  _  23       Under  20  years 9 

Between  20  and  30  years 2G 

Between  30  and  45  years 31 

Above  45  years 8 


Transportation  fo 

r  life  .     .     . 

5 

15  years 

14      „ 

12      „ 

10      „ 

^ 

Imprisonment 

_2 

years  . 

18 
15 

montlis    . 

12 

» 

.      .   12 

6 

» 

.      .    10 

4 

»          •      • 

3 

)i 

2 

,.          •      • 

1 

)i 

1 

day     . 

Total 74 


45 


In  the  following  table  (p.  656)  the  committals  in  England  and  Wales, 
in  each  year  from  1836  to  1839,  are  divided  so  as  to  show  the  number  of 
males  and  females  charged  in  each  of  the  six  classes  of  crimes  already 
described  as  used  in  the  returns  made  by  the  Home  Office,  distributing 
them  according  to  the  absence  of  instruction,  or  the  degree  in  which  it 
had  been  imparted.  Those  persons  whose  intellectual  condition  was 
not  ascertained  are  not  included  in  the  table.  In  consequence  of  a 
change  made  in  the  arrangement  of  the  returns  presented  to  Parlia- 
ment, the  same  information  cannot  be  given  for  any  year  later  than 
1839. 

Tlie  feeling  in  favour  of  imparting  instruction  to  the  population 
generally  has  been  rapidly  spreading  during  the  last  few  years,  and  it 
is  not  likely  that  we  shall  again  see  resistance  offered  in  Parliament  to  a 
very  moderate  vote  of  money  for  that  purpose,  as  was  the  case  in  1839, 
when  the  grant  of  30,000/.,  brought  forward  and  supported  by  all  the 
power  of  the  Government,  was  carried  by  only  a  bare  majority.  The 
convictions  of  all  parties  appear  now  to  be  engaged  in  favour  of  the 
opinion,  then  first  practically  enforced,  that  it  is  the  duty  of  the  State 
to  provide,  or  at  least  to  aid  in  providing,  means  for  rescuing  the  multi- 
tude from  the  debasement  inseparable  from  ignorance. 

The  French  Government  preceded  us  in  making  a  classification  of 
offenders  according  to  their  degrees  of  instruction,  a  course  which  lias 
forcibly  drawn  attention  to  a  subject  for  the  elucidation  of  which  no 
means  previously  existed.  It  seems  deserving  of  remark,  that  an  argu- 
ment was  at  one  time  found  by  persons  unfriendly  to  the  spread  of 
instruction,  in  the  comparative  state  of  crime  in  the  most  instructed 
and  least  instructed  departments   of  France.     It  has  been  shown  by 


6oG 


PROGRESS  OF  THE  NATION. 


[^EO.    VtT. 


Neither  Read 

Read  or 

Write 

Read  and       | 

Superior 

ENGLAND  AND  WALES. 

nor  Write. 

Imperrectly. 

AN  rite 

welL    ! 

Instruction. 

Males. 

Fern. 

Males. 

Fern. 

Males. 

Fern. 

Males. 

Fem. 

1836 

Offences  against  persons 

419 

61 

844 

101 

302 

20 

48 

, , 

Offences   against   property,   with  1, 
violence 

380 

29 

636 

40 

150 

2 

8 

.. 

Offences   against  property,  with- 1 
out  violence 

4,460 

1,257 

6,789 

1,767 

1,386 

164 

92 

14 

Malicious  offences  against  property 

47 

6 

76 

6 

23 

2 

Forgery  and  offences  against  cur-  1 
^rency / 

65 

38 

162 

30 

47 

5 

11 

■  • 

Other  offences 

227 

44 

411 

71 

108 

8 

15 

1 

5,598 

1,435 

8,968 

2,015 

2,016 

199 

176 

15 

1S3T 

Offences  against  persons 

422 

59 

709 

95 

252 

6 

20 

1 

Offences   against   property,  with  1 
violence J 

472 

33 

732 

35 

117 

3 

2 

Offences   against  property,  with-  1 
out  violence 

5,420 

1,556 

8,076 

1,897 

1,506 

146 

59 

2 

Malicious  offences  against  property 

34 

4 

45 

8 

12 

2 

, , 

Forgery  and  offences  against  cur- 1 

reucy j 

Other  offences 

94 

67 

185 

48 

51 

4 

7 

, , 

242 

61 

400 

68 

119 

18 

8 

6,684 

1,780 

10,147 

2, 151 

2,057 

177 

98 

3 

1S3S 

Offences  against  persons 

454 

59 

776 

97 

276 

16 

23 

1 

violence 

510 

41 

809 

33 

129 

6 

1 

•  . 

Offences   against  property,  with- 1 
out  violence J 

5,102 

1,420 

7,882 

2,040 

1,469 

159 

34 

4 

JIalicious  offences  against  property 

23 

2 

47 

8 

7 

1 

,  , 

Forgery  and  offences  against  cur^  1 
rency j 

87 

44 

205 

66 

87 

5 

6 

Other  offences 

166 

35 

289 

82 

83 

20 

9 

•• 

6,342 

1,601 

10,008 

2,326 

2,051 

206 

74 

5 

1839 

Offences  against  persons      .     .      .   '     438 

50 

909 

108 

283 

24 

21 

Offences   against  property,   with  )  ;     ,-- 
violence j  i 

41 

767 

41 

112 

2 

1 

Offences  against  property,  with-  1 
out  violence J 

5,206 

1,526 

8,105 

2,298 

1,594 

211 

30 

4 

Malicious  offences  against  property 

40 

2 

35 

8 

18 

Forgery  and  offences  against  cur- 
rency        1 

80 

47 

170 

50 

71 

10 

6 

Other  offences      ...... 

268 

43 

537 

43 

123 

14 

16 

6,457 

1,709 

10,523 

2,548 

2,201 

2C1 

74 

4 

M.  Guerry,*  that  in  the  departments  where  the  greatest  amount'  of  in- 
struction had  been  imparted,  there  the  greatest  amount  of  crime  was 
found  to  exist,  and  thence  the  conclusii)n  was  hastily  formed  that  in- 
struction is  unfavourable  to  innocence.  An  examination  of  the  facts 
adduced  by  M.  Guerry,  aided  by  a  little  reflection,  would  have  shown 


'  Essai  sur  la  Statistique  Morale  de  la  France.' 


CHAP.  11.1  riiiME.  G.57 

how  l^ibe  was  eiicli  a  conclusion.  That  examination  would  have  es- 
tahllshed  the  fact,  that  although  there  was  a  greater  proportion  of 
offences  in  the  more  enlightened  departments,  the  criminals  were  found 
among  the  unin^^tructed,  and  reflection  would  soon  have  shown  why  this 
must  be  so.  In  an  instructed  community,  those  who  had  not  partaken 
of  the  advantage  of  education  would  be  placed  in  circumstances  unfa- 
vourable to  the  pursuit  of  honest  callings,  since  the  instructed  would 
conuuand  a  preference  from  all  wlio  had  employments  to  bestow  ;  and 
besides,  where  ignorance  abounds,  the  standard  of  morals  must  be  low, 
and  offences  which  could  not  be  tolerated  in  a  more  enlightened  com- 
munity might  pass  unnoticed. 

The  criminal  jurisprudence  of  Scotland  is,  in  some  rci-pects,  on  a 
better  footing  than  that  of  England.  The  existence  of  a  public  prose- 
cutor relieves  individuals  against  whom  trespasses  have  been  committed 
from  the  expense  of  time  and  the  inconvenience  otherwise  of  coming 
forward  to  accuse,  and  thus  renders  punishment  more  certain.  It  i.s, 
besides,  the  duty  of  the  officers  of  justice  to  inquire  into  the  circum- 
stances attending  every  crime  that  is  known  to  have  been  committed, 
without  waiting,  as  in  England,  until  some  person  shall  have  been 
accused  and  apprehended  on  account  of  the  same.  By  the  practice  in 
Scotland  it  will  sometimes  happen  that  the  inquiry  thus  made  serves  to 
point  out  the  culprit,  who,  for  want  of  such  a  preliminary  investigation, 
would  have  remained  undiscovered.  It  is,  of  course,  impossible  to 
determine  in  what  degree  this  greater  chance  of  detection  and  punish- 
ment deters  from  the  commission  of  offences,  but  that  it  must  have  some 
good  effect  few  will  be  disposed  to  doubt. 

It  is  surprising  that  a  system  so  superior  in  these  respects  to  that  of 
England  should  have  been  unaccompanied  by  any  plan  for  the  system- 
atic registration  of  offences.  The  performance  of  this  important  duty 
seems  to  have  been  left  very  much  to  the  discretion  of  local  officers, 
and,  as  might  be  expected,  it  was  very  imperfectly  done  by  some,  and 
not  even  attempted  by  others,  until  the  passing  of  the  Act  1  Wni.  IV., 
c.  37,  which  empowered  the  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home  Depart- 
ment to  require  from  the  Lord  Advocate  of  Scotland  the  preparation 
for  Parliament  of  criminal  returns  for  each  year,  according  to  a  form 
specified  in  the  statute,  and  which  the  Secretary  of  State  had  power  to 
vary  at  his  pleasure.  The  form  prescribed  by  the  Act  was  used  up  to 
1835  inclusive,  with  the  exception  of  1831,  the  returns  for  which  year 
have,  by  some  accident,  not  appeared  ;  but  in  1836,  and  each  subse- 
quent year,  the  criminal  returns  for  Scotland  have  been  assimilated  in 
form  to  those  which  relate  to  England  and  Wales. 

The  number  of  persons  committed,  convicted,  sentenced  to  death  and 
executed,  in  Scotland,  in  the  following  years,  between  1830  and  1835, 
were — 

2    IT 


653 


PilOGUESS  OF  THE  NATION. 


[sec.  vn. 


Years. 

Committed. 

Convicted. 

Sentenced  to  Death. 

Executed. 

1830 
1832 
1833 
1834 
1835 

Males  and  Females. 
2,063 
1,8;18          533 
2,033          531 
2,125          5St) 
2,225          G12 

Males  and  Females. 
1,274 
1,194     j     333 
1,418     '     378 
1 , 403     1     387 
1.473          427 

Males  and  Females. 
8 
5               1 
9               1 
5               1 
5                1 

Males  and  Females. 
8 
2 

3  .. 
4 

4  1 

I 


The  numbLT  of  committals  in  Scotland  since  1835  have  been — 


Years. 

Males. 

Females. 

Total. 

1836 

2,223 

699 

2,922 

1837 

2,391 

735 

3,126 

1838 

2,609 

809 

3,418 

1839 

2,490 

919 

3,409 

1840 

2,866 

1,006 

3,872 

1841 

2,533 

1.029 

3,562 

1842 

3,025 

1,164 

4,189 

1843 

2,737 

878 

3,615 

1844 

2,617 

958 

3,575 

1845 

2,515 

1,022 

3,537 

1846 

2,901 

1,168 

4,069 

1847 

3,320 

1,315 

4,635 

1848 

3,490 

1,419 

4,909 

1849 

3,228 

1,129 

4,357 

Distino-uishing  the  accused  according  to  the  classes  of  crimes,  and 
the  circnmstances  of  instruction,  so  far  as  these  were  ascertained,  the 
numbers  were  in  each  year  as  follows. — {See  pp.  G59-661.) 

The  commitments  for  crime  in  Scotland  are  much  fewer  in  propor- 
tion to  the  population  than  in  England.  In  1841  the  proportions  were, 
in  Entrland  and  Wales,  one  committal  for  573  persons,  and  in  Scotland 
one  for  738  persons.  The  comparison  in  favour  of  Scotland  in  this 
respect,  as  evincing  a  greater  degree  of  personal  respectability,  is,  how- 
ever, at  least  neutralized  by  the  much  larger  proportion  of  females 
committed  in  Scotland.  In  that  year  (1841)  there  was  committed  in 
Eno-land  and  Wales  one  in  every  1565  females  living,  and  in  Scotland 
one  in  every  1343.  The  proportion  of  convictions  to  committals  is 
usually  greater  in  Scotland  than  in  England.  Those  proportions  in  each 
of  the  fourteen  years  from  1836  to  1849  were — 


Years. 

England 

and  Wales. 

Scotland. 

1836 

70-39  per  cent. 

73-64  pel 

cent. 

1837 

72-37 

73-64 

1838 

72-68 

76-74 

1839 

72-95 

75-82 

1840 

73-29 

75-13 

1841 

73-05 

74-87 

1842 

72-60 

75-08 

1843 

71-28 

71-48 

1844 

71-28 

76-05 

1845 

71-60 

75-74 

1846 

72-26 

75-32 

1847 

74-71 

76-76 

1848 

75-45 

75-14 

1849 

75-49 

75-14 

CRIME. 


G50 


Neillier  Read 

Read  or  Write 

Read  and 

Superior 

SCOTLAND. 

nor  Write. 

Imperfectly. 

Write 
Males. 

Well. 
Fem. 

Instructior 

Males. 

Fern. 

Males. 

Fem. 

Males.      Fem. 

18.J0 

■ 

. 

OtT'ciices  against  persons 

82 

10 

377 

50 

181 

1 

20 

OlU'iu'fS    against    properly,   with  | 

04 

14 

132 

16 

48 

6 

- 

violence ( 

Oficnces  against  property,  with- 1 
out  violence ) 

10.5 

126 

448 

251 

142 

38 

19 

]\I;ilicious  offences  against  property 

9 

1 

13 

1 

6 

.. 

Forgery,  and  offences  against  cur- ) 
rency J 

9 

13 

20 

12 

16 

4 

3 

Other  oficnces 

7 

9 

75 

32 

44 

3 

5 

;i6G 

173 

1,065 

362 

437 

52 

54            1 

183r 

(Iffi'nces  against  persons 

()G 

12 

340 

41 

187 

2 

15           1 

Oll'cnces   iig;iinst   property,   witli  1 
violence ( 

75 

27 

242 

44 

52 

4 

4           1 

Offences  against   property,  witli- 1 
out  violence f 

260 

185 

603 

292 

159 

23 

23 

^lalicious  offences  against  properly 

4 

18 

2 

10 

1 

2 

Forgery,  and  offences  against  cur-  1 

12 

10 

27 

24 

3 

7           1 

rency J 

Other  offences 

28 

14 

115 

41 

47 

2 

14 

445 

248 

1,345 

427 

479 

41 

65           3 

1S:?S 

Offences  against  persons 

G7 

13 

396 

45 

194 

4 

44 

violence 1 

G8 

32 

266 

98 

86 

15 

3     ,      . 

Offences  against  propcrlj',   with-  ) 
out  violence 1 

171 

135 

637 

337 

216 

33 

26           1 

Malicious  offences  against  property 

8 

1 

22 

4 

16 

4           1 

Forgery,  and  offences  against  cur-  ) 
rency 1 

8 

11 

39 

16 

21 

3 

9 

Other  ofl'ences 

31 

6 

169 

41 

36 

6 

5 

353 

198 

1,529 

.541 

569 

61 

91           5 

18:59 

Offences  against  persons 

6G 

13 

364 

40 

169 

5 

26           5 

Offences   against  property,   witli  1 

83 

29 

262 

73 

62 

5 

0 

violence 1 

Offences  against  property,   with-  1 

264 

199 

668 

427 

1G4 

27 

14           1 

Malicious  offences  against  jjroperty 

2 

2 

24 

5 

11 

1 

Forgery,  and  oftences  against  cur- ) 

12 

9 

56 

34 

23 

4 

8 

rency j 

Other  offences 

26 

5 

120 

31 

36 

1 

4 

453 

257 

1,494 

610 

4G5 

43 

54           I 

1840 

Offences  against  persons 

93 

30 

416 

59 

161 

2 

18 

Offences   against    propertv,    with  ( 
violence ( 

8G 

39 

265 

81 

58 

6 

5            1 

Offences   against  property,  with-  i 
out  violence ( 

300 

210 

775 

413 

ISO 

37 

20       : 

Malicious  offences  against  property 

3 

24 

4 

22 

,  , 

6 

Forgery,  and  offences  against  cur-  ) 
rency j 

8 

13 

.56 

33 

28 

6 

9 

Other  offences      .,.,.. 

50 

19 

142 

29 

45 

4 

9     !     . 

540 

311 

1,678 

619 

504 

55 

67 

1- 

i;  U  2 


CGO 


niOOKESS  OF  THE  NATION. 


[srr.  vit 


Neither  Read 

Read  or  NArite 

Read  and 

Superior 

SCOTLAND. 

nor  Write. 

Imperfectly. 

Write  Well. 

Instruction. 

stales. 

Fem. 

Males. 

Fem. 

Males. 

Fem. 

Males. 

Fern. 

1S41 

Offences  against  persons 

92 

23 

445 

71 

174 

5 

8 

Dllences  against   isroperty,   with  \ 
violence j 

65 

26 

242 

52 

34 

6 

4 

■* 

(Wences   against  propertj',  with-  1 
out  violence 1 

204 

180 

650 

4S0 

193 

55 

21 

3 

Malicious  oifences  against  property 

7 

5 

30 

6 

18 

Forgery,  and  offences  against  cur- ) 
rency j 

12 

11 

48 

32 

19 

4 

2 

Other  offences 

55 

16 

147 

35 

38 

8 

4 

•• 

435 

261 

1,562 

676 

476 

78 

39 

3 

1842 

Offences  against  persons 

127 

26 

489 

81 

190 

4 

35 

t>ffences   against   property,    with  1 
violence j 

92 

36 

342 

97 

49 

5 

9 

Offences  against  property,  with-  1 

259 

211 

818 

563 

170 

29 

25 

Malicious  offences  against  property 

4 

2 

64 

/ 

15 

1 

3 

.> 

Forgery,  and  offences  against  cur-  1 
rency 1 

9 

22 

67 

32 

33 

3 

4 

Other  offences 

30 

17 

113 

31 

38 

1 

12 

•• 

521 

314 

1,893 

791 

495 

43 

83 

1SJ:3 

Offences  against  persons 

S6 

16 

432 

64 

117 

3 

14 

violence ) 

82 

27 

337 

78 

35 

3 

6 

Offences   against  property,  with- 
out violence 

254 

142 

835 

418 

130 

19 

31 

Malicious  offences  against  property 

5 

3 

28 

0 

12 

1 

3 

Forgery,  and  offences  against  cur-  '< 
rency      

10 

18 

48 

44 

19 

1 

3 

Other  offences 

40 

11 

82 

21 

37 

1 

6 

487 

217 

1,762 

G30 

406 

28 

63 

1844 

Offences  against  persons 

97 

20 

402 

59 

137 

8 

24 

Offences   against   property,   with) 
violence J 

76 

15 

314 

87 

47 

10 

1 

Offences   against  propertj',  with-  1 

275 

203 

744 

446 

121 

37 

19 

Malicious  offences  against  property 

3 

16 

1 

11 

1 

2 

Forgery,  and  offences  against  cur- ) 
rencv J 

12 

8 

58 

23 

21 

2 

9 

Other  offences 

44 

14 

122 

16 

38 

2 

8 

•• 

504 

261 

1,656 

632 

375 

60 

36 

1845 

Offences  against  persons      .      .      . 

115 

17 

403 

70 

177 

8 

31   - 

violence / 

78 

27 

274 

79 

-37 

7 

1 

Offences  against  property,  with- 1 
out  violence / 

241 

196 

710 

487 

153 

46 

10 

Malicious  offences  against  property 

8 

1 

39 

6 

8 

3 

1 

.. 

Forgery,  and  offences  against  cur-  1 
rency / 

7 

9 

34 

25 

23 

3 

3 

Other  offences 

30 

11 

87 

22 

,29 

2 

6 

1 
1 

479 

261 

1,.547 

689 

432 

69 

52 

3 

CHAT.    II.] 


CRIME. 


061 


Neitlie 

Kead 

Uiad  or  Write 

l(e;id 

.ind 

Siippiior 

SCUTLAMi. 

nor  Write.      1 

liiiperlectly. 

Write  Well.     1 

Instruction. 

Males. 

Pem. 

Males. 

Fem. 

Males. 

Fem. 

Males. 

Fem. 

IS  10 

Offences  against  persons 

177 

27 

511 

66 

212 

11 

25 

1 

Offences   sigainst   property,   with  ) 
violence ) 

91 

52 

266 

69 

36 

6 

3 

Offences  against  property,   with-  1 
out  violence J 

23.3 

214 

688 

546 

202 

87 

24 

3 

Malicious  offences  against  property 

14 

3 

57 

7 

19 

2 

1 

Forgery,  and  offences  against  cur- 1 
reucy J 

6 

9 

35 

26 

19 

2 

5 

Other  offences 

3J 

IS 

137 

16 

66 

7 

580 

323 

1,694 

730 

554 

108 

65 

4 

1S4T 

Offences  against  persons 

193 

35 

510 

75 

182 

12 

16 

Offences   against   property,   with] 
violence i 

135 

43 

418 

112 

65 

6 

4 

Offences  against  property,  with- ) 
out  violence 

312 

236 

822 

608 

242 

72 

15 

iNIalicious  ofienccs  against  property 

12 

4 

34 

8 

14 

1 

9 

Forgery,  and  offences  against  cur- ) 
rency J 

11 

13 

46 

31 

21 

3 

2 

Other  offences 

43 

11 

136 

43 

43 

2 

10 

706 

342 

1,966 

877 

567 

96 

56 

1S48 

Offences  against  persons 

157 

30 

605 

92 

236 

14 

28 

violence j 

104 

30 

466 

138 

66 

10 

2 

Offences  against  property,  with- 1 
out  violence J 

265 

l'J8 

827 

669 

232 

71 

30 

Malicious  offences  against  property 

8 

3 

28 

6 

10 

2 

3 

Forgery,  and  offences  against  cur-  1 
rcncv J 

18 

7 

65 

45 

27 

4 

5 

Other  offences 

59 

32 

131 

57 

77 

6 

9 

4 

611 

300 

2,142 

1,007 

648 

107 

77 

4 

1S19 

Offences  against  persons 

124 

30 

526 

62 

207 

12 

33 

Offences   against  property,   wth ' 
violence 

96 

46 

332 

95 

58 

12 

2 

Offences   against  property,  with-  1 
out  violence I 

289 

218 

838 

498 

206 

56 

17 

2 

Malicious  offences  against  property 

15 

3 

27 

6 

19 

2 

Forgery,  and  offences  against  cur- 
rency       

15 

10 

65 

31 

18 

4 

14 

1 

Other  offences 

37 

8 

133 

22 

60 

2 

6 

3 

576 

315 

1,981 

714 

568 

86 

74 

6 

This  result  is  probably  owing  to  the  investigation  by  competent  per- 
sons which  precedes  commitment  in  Scotland  ;  a  circumstance  which 
may,  in  some  measure,  account  also  for  the  fewer  commitments  propor- 
tioned to  population  than  are  made  in  England. 

The  proportionate  ages  at  which  committals  were  made  in  each  of 
the  years  1836  to  18411,  in  Scotland,  were — 


66. 


TKOGKESS  OF  THE  NATION, 


[&F.C.    VII. 


AGK 

>. 

18.36 

183T 

1838 

1839 

1840 

1841 

1842 

Aged  12  years  and 

under  . 

2-40 

2-69 

2-16 

3-11 

3-33 

3-68 

3-65 

Above  12,  and  not 

exceeding 

16  . 

12-60 

14-01 

12-69 

14-99 

14-41 

13-81 

12-40 

„     ir> 

21  . 

24-88 

23-80 

26-30 

25-84 

22-83 

25-10 

25-13 

„      21 

30  . 

31-79 

29-72 

29-43 

28-30 

31-07 

29-81 

30-60 

„       30 

40  . 

15-67 

15-64 

16-00 

15-89 

15-70 

15-75 

16-54 

„       40 

50. 

6-98 

7-74 

6-20 

7-27 

7-41 

7-16 

6-87 

„       50 

60  . 

3-01 

3-33 

2-57 

3-11 

2-8) 

3-00 

2-98 

Above  CO  years  . 

0-82 

1-34 

0-76 

0-91 

1-53 

1-24 

1-28 

Ages  unknown    . 

1-85 

1-73 

3-89 

0-58 

0-77 

0-45 

0-55 

100- 

100- 

100- 

100- 

100- 

100- 

100- 

AGE 

S. 

1843 

1844 

1845 

1846 

184T 

1848 

1849 

Aged  12  yeai-s  and  under  . 

3-26 

4-22 

3-31 

2-93 

3-13 

2-00 

2-16 

Above  12,  and  not 

exceeding  16  . 

11-62 

14-99 

11-76 

13-17 

13-57 

11-37 

11-31 

•     „       16 

21  . 

27  "22 

24-78 

25-05 

23-96 

24-83 

24-77 

25-09 

„       21 

30  . 

32-00 

28-03 

31-49 

31-90 

30-27 

32-45 

33-05 

„       30 

40  . 

14-73 

15-61 

15-50 

15-56 

16-40 

16-72 

16-21 

„       40 

50  . 

6-55 

7-94 

8-59 

7-89 

7-92 

8-54 

7-87 

„       50 

60  , 

3-23 

2-88 

2-82 

3-34 

2-63 

2-87 

3-19 

Above  60  years  . 

1-30 

1-31 

1-36 

1-10 

1-17 

1     1-26 

1-01 

Ages  unknown    . 

0-09 

0-18 

0-12 

0-15 

0-08 

0-02 

0-11 

100- 

jioo- 

iioo. 

100- 

i 

100- 

100- 

ilOO- 

The  proportionate  numbers  under  16  years  are  much  greater  than 
in  England.  The  actual  number  of  boys  and  girls  charged  with  ofFences 
were  — 


Years. 

Bovs. 

Girls, 

Total 

1836 

3S0 

58 

438 

1837 

452 

70 

552 

1838 

426 

82 

508 

1839 

491 

125 

616 

1840 

554 

135 

689 

1841 

497 

126 

623 

1842 

520 

153 

673 

1843 

463 

75 

538 

1844 

554 

133 

687 

1845 

444 

89 

533 

1846 

517 

138 

655 

1847 

729 

145 

874 

1848 

516 

140 

656 

1849 

476 

111 

587 

The  increase  in  these  numbers,  from  year  to  year,  is  even  greater 
proportionally  to  the  number  than  in  England. 

The  number  of  accused  persons  in  Scotland,  to  whom  instruction 
beyond  reading  and  writing  had  been  imparted,  are  given  in  a  preced- 
ing table.  It  has  not  been  practicable  to  obtain  any  analysis  of  these 
cases  for  any  year  except  1836,  when  the  number  of  instructed  persons 
accused  was  55,  of  whom  one  was  a  female,  the  whqie  numbers  accused 
having  been  2223  males  and  699  females.  Of  the  fifty-five  instructed 
persons  accused,  forty-one  were  convicted.     Their  ollences  were — 


C1IAI-.    11.] 


CRIME. 


gg: 


Bestiality 1 

Assaults It 

llousebroakiiii:^ - 

Theft — 14  males,  1  female      ....  1") 

Fraud 2 

Forgery 3 

The  jninishments  awarded  were  — 

Transportation  for  life 2 

„  14  years      ...      1 


Perjury      .     .      . 
Breach  of  the  peace 
Other  offences 


Total 


41 


Outlawry 

Imprisonment  for  12  montlis 
„  9         „ 

»  8        ,, 

6        „ 
4 

»  ^         » 

2 

„  40  (lays    . 

„  1  month 

„  20  days    . 

„  14      „      . 

10      „       . 


Fineil  .">/.  0.< 1 

„     ;?/.  3s.  each 2 

„     2/.  2s 1 

„     1/.  0« 1 

„     Sum  not  mentioned    ....  2 

Discharged  on  giving  surety    . 

Total     .... 


41 


27 


Tlie  ages  of  the  forty-one  convicts  were — 

Under  20  years 2 

Between  20  and  30  years 23 

,,        30  and  45  years 12 

Above  45  years 4 


Total 


41 


During  the  fourteen  years  embraced  by  the  returns  we  have  been  exa- 
mining, ihere  were  only  thirty-niuc  educated  females  accused  of  offences 
in  Scotland.  A\'e  have  not  any  means  for  ascertaininsf  the  result  of 
these  accusations,  but  comparing  that  number  with  the  result  in  Eng- 
land, we  find  that  it  is  far  less  favourable.  Taking  the  difference  of 
population  into  the  calculation,  there  should  have  been  in  the  fourteen 
years  not  more  than  eight  educated  females  accused  in  Scotland  to  be 
equal  to  the  fifty-three  accused  in  the  same  period  in  England  and 
"Wales.  This  difference  is  probably  owing  to  the  more  general  spread 
of  instruction  in  Scotland,  and  therefore  to  the  greater  proportion  of 
the  popidation  qualified  to  rank  among  well-instructed  persons. 

During  the  year  for  wliich  we  are  thus  enabled  to  analyze  the  cri- 
minal returns,  there  were  only  fifteen  counties  among  the  thirty-two  into 
which  Scotland  is  divided  that  furnished  causes  for  criminal  accusations 
against  educated  persons.  The  returns  do  not  distinguish  the  counties 
in  which  convictions  followed  ;  but  in  the  following  table  (p.  6G4)  will  be 
seen  the  numbers  of  persons  of  that  class  who  were  accused  in  each  of 
the  ten  years,  1836  to  1845,  in  the  several  counties  of  Scotland. 

The  criminal  returns  for  Ireland  have  not  hitherto  been  made  to 
distingui.-h  between  persons  who  read  and  write  well,  and  those  who 
have  been  instructed  in  any  higher  branch  of  knowledge  :  it  will  not  be 
possible,  therefore,  to  carry  this  line  of  examination  into  the  criminal 
statistics  t)f  that  part  of  the  United  Kingdom  ;  but  in  closing  the 
remarks  which  the  facts  here  recorded,  as  experienced  in  Great  Britain, 


661 


PKOUKESS  OF  THE  NATION. 


8EC.    VII, 


COUNTIES. 

1S36 

1S3T 

1838 

1839 

1840 

1941 

1812 

1813 

1844 

1845 

Aberdeen. 

13 

12 

4 

0 

3 

2 

5 

3 

1 

Argyle      .... 

6 

2 

3 

9 

7 

"4 

4 

Ayr 

'2 

.. 

.. 

5 

6 

2 

6 

Banff 

'2 

i 

1 

*2 

, , 

Berwick    .... 

Bute 

.. 

1 

.. 

1 

Caithness. 

.. 

1 

.. 

Clackmannan 

1 

.. 

'i 

.. 

3 

.. 

Dumbarton    . 

1 

2 

5 

]>unifries  .... 

"2 

*i 

.3 

2 

Ivlinburgh 

14 

22 

9 

9 

6 

Elgin  and  Moray 

1 

.. 

.. 

Fife 

1 

0 

3 

Forfar       .      .      .      • 

7 

7 

2 

3 

Haddington   . 

3 

1 

2 

Inverness .... 

1 

1 

Kincardine    . 

1 

'2 

3 

.. 

.. 

.. 

Kinross     .... 

5 

1 

.. 

.. 

Kirkcudbright    . 

'i 

Lanark      .... 

li 

14 

12 

5 

11 

14 

19 

Linlithgow     . 

2 

6 

6 

3 

" 

Nairn 

1 

1 
2 

'2 

"i 

•• 

•• 

, . 

Orkney  and  Zetland 

Peebles     .... 

,  , 

.. 

.. 

.. 

.. 

Perth 

1 

8 

4 

4 

5 

Kenfrew    .... 

4 

7 

7 

8 

14 

6 

12 

12 

Koss  and  Cromarty  . 

1 

.. 

.. 

Eoxburgh       .      .      . 

'3 

3 

3 

7 

1 

2 

Selkirk      .... 

1 

1 

1 

1 

Stirling      .... 

1 

6 

2 

2 

2 

Sutherland     . 

.. 

3 

"Wigton     .... 

•• 

•• 

•• 

"i 

•• 

•• 

Total  .     .     . 

.55 

68 

93 

57 

71 

42 

92 

64 

64 

55 

SO  naturally  called  for,  regarding  the  influence  of  education  in  restrain- 
ing from  the  commission  of  crime,  it  is  necessary  to  guard  against  the 
inference  that  to  instruct  a  man  heyond  the  merest  elements  of  human 
acquirement  will  suflace  to  destroy  all  tendency  to  evil  courses,  and  that 
we  require  nothing  more  than  the  initiation  of  the  people  generally  into 
some  certain  branches  of  school  learning  in  order  to  render  our  prisons 
useless,  and  to  shut  up  our  courts  of  justice.  That  amid  the  many 
thousands  who  are  yearly  called  to  answer  for  offences  committed 
aaainst  the  persons  and  the  property  of  their  fellow-citizens,  so  very 
small  a  proportion  as  44  in  10,000  in  England,  and  180  in  10,000  in 
Scotland,  should  have  belonged  to  classes  liaving  received  the  benefit  of 
something  beyond  the  merest  rudiments  of  knowledge,  ought  not  to  lead 
us  to  believe  that  the  same  amount  of  instruction,  if  imparted  to  all, 
would  diminish  offences  in  anything  like  that  proportion.  In  commu- 
nities where  the  great  mass  of  the  people  are  left  in  ignorance,  and  only 
a  few,  comparatively,  are  instructed,  those  few  will  find  themselves  in  a 
far  better  position  than  the  mass  for  obtaining  honest  employment,  and 
thus  will  have  fewer  temptations  to  withstand.  If  all  were  equally 
instructed,  this  condition,  of  course,  could  not  exist,  and  then  we  might 
be    better    able   to  estimate  at  its  true   value   the  moral  influence   of 


CHvr.  II.]  CUlMi:.  6G'J 

instruction  Knowing  wliat  we  know  of  tlic  quality  of  education  as  it 
has  usually  been  iuiparteJ  to  the  youth  of  this  country,  dare  we  hope 
that  its  restraining  influence  would  be  great?  It  is  true,  we  might 
even  then  expect  to  put  an  end  to  much  of  the  violence  and  fraud  by 
which  the  community  is  now  disgraced.  Merely  instructed  persons 
would  better  calculate  the  worldly  advantages  and  disadvantages  of 
right  and  wrong  conduct ;  and  who  can  estimate  how  much  of  crime 
and  consequent  misery  in  the  world  result  from  miscalculation  I  But 
further,  is  it  not  certain  that  an  instructed  community  would  be  able  to 
apply  its  energies  more  beneficially  for  the  whole  than  is  possible  where 
general  ignorance  prevails-  that  employments  would  be  more  certain  and 
more  profitable,  and  temptations  to  dishonesty  fewer  and  weaker?* 

It  is  a  common  remark,  that  in  every  community  we  must  look  to 
those  who  occupy  the  middle  rank  of  society  for  the  greatest  amount  of 
virtue  ;  and  we  may  believe  that  the  remark  would  not  have  received, 
as  it  has,  the  general  assent  of  society,  unless  it  had  been  supported  at 
least  by  appearances.  Is  it  true,  then,  that  a  condition  midway  between 
poverty  and  affluence  is  the  most  favourable  to  human  excellence,  mean- 
ing, by  that  term,  virtuous  conduct  proceeding  from  principle  ?  This 
may  well  be  doubted.  We  may  find  that  a  smaller  proportion  of  open 
profligacy  exists  among  persons  placed  in  that  condition  than  is  ap- 
])arent  among  the  richer  class,  and  in  the  ranks  of  the  poor,  without 
being  therefore  forced  to  admit  that  the  middle  class  is  governed  by  a 
nicer  sense  of  propriety  or  juster  views  of  duty  than  others.  May  it 
not  be,  that  the  greater  decency  of  their  conduct  is  the  result  of  circum- 
stances rather  than  of  principle  :  that,  being  removed  from  the  tempta- 
tions offered  by  idleness  and  oppt)rtunity  to  the  rich,  and  from  the  yet 
stronger  temptations  of  want,  from  which  there  is  no  escape  for  the 
uninstructed  poor,  they  are  constrained  to  pursue  a  routine  of  daily 
employment  which  leaves  but  little  time  for  the  indulgence  of  immoral 
pursuits  ?  The  judgment  of  men  upon  the  conduct  of  others  can  only  be 
formed  upon  a  view  of  their  outward  acts,  since  we  cannot  duly  appre- 
ciate their  motives  for  what  they  do,  nor  the  degree  of  fortitude  exercised 
in  what  they  resist ;  else  we  might  probably  find  that  good  dispositions 
are  pretty  equally  divided,  and  should  be  made  to  acknowledge  their 
existence  under  circumstances  apparently  the  most  unpromising. 

The  good  efl^ect  which  honest  employment  is  calculated  to  produce 
upon  even  the  worst  of  criminals,  and  under  apparently  the  most  un- 
favourable circumstances,  may  be  learned  from  the  following  testimony 
offered  by  the  Honourable  Grey  Bennet  to  the  Committee  on  the  State 

*  The  pi-oportion  of  offenders  in  England  and  Wales,  in  1841,  was  1  in  573  of  the  popu- 
lation ;  in  Scotland,  1  in  742 ;  a  difference  in  favour  of  the  latter  which  it  is  fair  to  attribute 
in  great  part,  if  not  entirely,  to  the  more  general  spread  of  instruction  as  compared  in  that 
respect  with  England. 


666  PROGRESS  OF  THE  NATION.  [sec.  vii, 

of  thePolico  of  the  Metropolis,  \Yhich  sat  in  1817,  and  of  which  he  was 
chairman  : — 

"  I  had  been  there  (Newgate  prison)  a  few  weeks  before,  and  found 
it,  as  usual,  in  the  most  degraded  and  afflicting  state.  The  women 
were  then  mixed  all  together,  old  and  young — the  young  beginners  with 
the  old  offenders— the  girl  for  the  first  offence  with  the  hardened  and 
drunken  prostitute — the  tried  with  the  untried — the  accused  with  the 
condemned — the  transports  with  those  under  sentence  of  death ;  all 
were  crowded  together  in  one  promiscuous  assembhige,  noisy,  idle,  and 
])rofligate  ;  clamorous  at  the  gratings  soliciting  money,  and  begging  at 
the  prison  window  with  spoons  attached  to  the  ends  of  sticks.  In  little 
more  than  a  fortnight  the  whole  scene  was  changed,  through  the  humane 
and  philanthropic  exertions  of  Mrs.  Fry,  the  wdfe  of  a  banker  in  the 
citv.  In  the  first  yard  I  visited  were  seventy-eight  women  ;  sixty-live 
of  these  were  employed  on  needlew^ork  which  had  been  procured  for 
them.  In  one  fortnight  the  work  done  was  344  shirts,  64  shifts,  59 
aprons,  and  250  pinafores.  There  are  yet  no  proper  means  for  classi- 
fication and  arrangement  of  the  prisoners,  but  the  change  in  their 
appearance  was  most  striking.  The  bold  hardened  look  of  guilt  was 
none — the  impudent  system  of  begging  had  ceased — all  were  busy  and 
cheerful,  and  at  least  looked  contented  and  happy.  I  asked  in  all  the 
rooms  of  the  prisons  if  they  preferred  occupation  to  idleness,  and  if 
thev  approved  of  the  change  ?  The  answer  was  unanimously,  yes ; 
and  several  with  tears  in  their  eyes  said,  '  If  we  had  had  any  means  of 
aainins  our  bread,  we  should  not  have  been  here.' ' ' 

"\Aliat  a  lesson  in  legislation  may  be  learned  from  this  declaration  ! 
It  is  not  pretended  that  the  active  interference  of  Government  can  pos- 
sibly be  given,  or  that  if  it  were  possible  it  w'ould  be  efficacious,  in 
providing  honest  employments  for  the  people.  But  much  may  be  done 
in  removing  legislative  impediments  that  lie  in  the  w\iy  of  industry,  in 
opening  new  markets,  and  extending  those  already  open  to  our  com- 
merce ;  and  until  all  that  is  possible  in  this  respect  shall  have  been 
accomplished,  and  all  that  is  needed  in  the  way  of  educaticm  and  moral 
training  of  the  people  shall  have  been  supplied,  is  it  unjust  to  say  that 
a  part,  at  least,  of  the  criminality,  induced  by  restrictions  and  by 
io-norance,  lies  at  the  door  of  the  legislature  ? 

If  forced  to  leave  the  question  here,  there  would,  however,  be  but 
little  cause  for  hoping  that  in  future  years  the  rapid  march  of  crime 
which  we  have  witnessed  could  be  arrested.  Our  hopes  in  this  respect 
must  be  based  upon  the  conviction,  fast  gaining  converts  among  all 
that  are  powerful  to  influence  the  course  of  legislation,  that  to  impart 
mechanically  the  rudiments  of  instruction,  or  even?  to  carry  a  pupil 
through  a  course  of  classical  learning,  should  not  be  consideerd  edu- 
cation— that  the  educator  must  form  the  character  as  well  as  store  the 


CHAT.    II.] 


CRIME. 


667 


memory — must  implant  as  living  principles  witliin  the  pupil's  heart  a 
reverence  for  truth  and  justice.  To  imagine  that  this  end  can  be 
attained  without  awakening  the  spirit  of  religion  in  his  heart,  were  worse 
than  usele:?s  ;  but  when  this  cliord,  which  can  be  found  when  sought  for 
in  every  human  breast,  shall  once  be  rightly  attuned,  all  difficulty  must 
be  over,  and  it  must  thenceforth  be  next  to  impossible  for  any  degree  of 
temptation  to  draw  a  man  into  the  ranks  of  habitual  criminality. 

The  Irish  returns  of  crime  have  not  until  of  late  years  been  rendered 
with  regularity.  The  number  of  committals  and  convictions  in  each  of 
the  eight  years  from  1805  to  1812  inclusive  were  as  follows  :  — 

Years.  Committed.  Convicted.  I  Years.  Committed.        Convicted. 

1805  3, GOO  603  1809  3,641  848 

1806  3,781  643  1 

1807  3,:)22  603 

1808  3,704  668  ' 

The  proportion  of  convictions  to  committals  in  the  above  years  is  on  the 
average  but  little  more  than  22  per  cent.,  affording  an  unfavourable 
view  of  the  administration  of  justice  in  Ireland  at  that  time.  In  each 
of  the  six  years  from  1805  to  1810  there  were  executed — 

Years.  |  Years. 

180.)  42.  of  wliom  9  were  for  murder.  I  1808 

1S06  42         „         10  „  1803 

1807  55        „         10  „  I  1810 

Between  1812  and  ]  822  there  must  have  occurred  either  a  fearful 
increase  of  crime,  or  a  much  more  vigilant  police,  for  the  committals  in 
that  interval  of  ten  years  were  trebled  in  number.  The  returns  from 
1822  down  to  the  present  time  have  been  given  with  regularity,  and  we 
find  that  the  committals  and  convictions,  tlie  numbers  sentenced  to  death, 
and  the  executions  in  each  year  from  1822  to  1834,  were  as  follows: — 


1810 

3,799 

819 

1811 

4,162 

1,113 

1812 

4,336 

1.458 

53,  of  whom  15  were  for  murder. 
68         „  13  „ 

29         „  13 


Committed 

Sentenced 

Executed 

Years.     | 

Males. 

Females. 

Total. 

Convicted 

to 
Death. 

Total 
Executed. 

for 
Murder. 

1822        12,766 

2,485 

15,251 

7,572 

341 

101 

42 

1823 

12,240 

2,332 

14,632 

7,285 

241 

61 

18 

1824 

12.414 

2,814 

15,258 

7,742 

295 

60 

41 

1825 

12,563 

2,952 

15,515 

8.571 

181 

18 

9 

1826 

13,268 

3,050 

16,318 

8,716 

281 

31 

17 

1827 

14,538 

3,433 

18,031 

10,207 

346 

37 

12 

1828 

11,919 

2,764 

14,683 

9,263 

211 

21 

16 

1829 

12,471 

2,800 

15,271 

9,449 

224 

33 

21 

1830 

12,709 

3,085 

15,794 

9,902 

262 

39 

14 

1831 

13,148 

3,044 

16,192 

9,605 

307 

37 

25 

1832 

13,160 

2,896 

16,056 

9,759 

319 

39 

17 

1833 

14,923 

2,836 

17,819 

11,444 

237 

33 

26 

1834 

17,757 

3,624 

21,381 

14,253 

197 

43 

31 

In  1835  the  returns  were  assimilated  in  most  respects  to  those  made 
in  England  and  Scotland,  exhibiting  the  number  of  offenders,  male  jr.id 
female,  in  each  of  the  six  divisions  or  classes  of  crimes  as  already  ex- 
plained ;*  distinguishing  also  the  ages  of  persons  committed,  and  (with 
the  important  omission  of  those  instructed  beyond  reading  and  writing) 
showins  their  degree  of  instruction  also. 


-ee  page  C 15. 


60S 


1'110UKE8S  OF  THE  NATION. 


[sec. 


The  number  of  committals  and  convictions  in  each  of  the  six  divisions, 
in  the  years  since  1834,  have  been  as  follows :  — 


First  Class. 

Second  Class. 

Tliird  Class. 

Yoirs 

Committed 

Convicted. 

Committed 

Convicted. 

Committed 

Convicted. 

1835 

7,622 

5,832 

516 

228 

6,175 

3,695 

1836 

7,769 

6,099 

671 

331 

6,, 593 

4,259 

1837 

4,132 

2,631 

662 

314 

6,963 

4,478 

183S 

4,325 

2,710 

610 

263 

7,4.36 

4,. 52  9 

1839 

7,457 

3,156 

1,2.55 

352 

11,143 

5,695 

1840 

5,703 

2,584 

1,146 

334 

10,514 

5,663 

1841 

5,297 

2,324 

1,127 

316 

8,313 

4,496 

1842 

5, 191 

2,128 

1,1.50 

414 

8,402 

4,. 584 

1843 

5,442 

2,172 

1,187 

387 

6,188 

3,426 

1844 

5,482 

2,093 

1,0.58 

278 

6,377 

3,397 

1845 

4,827 

1,869 

1,112 

288 

5,686 

3,126 

184G 

5,110 

2,186 

1,297 

503 

6,603 

3,732 

1817 

4,543 

1,617 

2,229 

993 

17,484 

10,102 

1848 

5,966 

2,057 

2,561              971 

19,. 547 

11,549 

1849 

5,275 

1,856 

2,682         1,163 

23,173 

14,596 

1835 

Fourth  Class. 

Fifth  Class. 

Sixth  Class.' 

369 

174 

184 

86 

6,309 

5,197 

1836 

500 

281 

214 

114 

8,144 

7,026 

1837 

198 

111 

161 

104 

2,688 

1,868 

183S 

122 

35 

194 

105 

3.036 

1,967 

1839 

306 

74 

179 

76 

6,052 

2,696 

1840 

218 

82 

201 

100 

6,045 

2,431 

1841 

315 

48 

153 

62 

5,591 

2,041 

1842 

253 

54 

137 

68 

6,053 

2,626 

1843 

193 

51 

150 

70 

6,966 

2,514 

1844 

211 

55 

123 

55 

6,197 

2,164 

1845 

216 

49 

86 

36 

4,769 

1,733 

1846 

191 

37 

99 

52 

5,192 

2,129 

1847 

321 

140 

183 

87 

6,443 

2,294 

1848 

926 

410 

202 

104 

9,320 

3,115 

1849 

707 

317 

271 

140 

9,881 

3,130 

The  total  numbers  of  males  and  females  committed,  of  convictions, 
of  sentences  to  death,  and  of  executions,  in  these  fifteen  years,  were : — 


Years. 


1835 
1836 
1837 
183S 
1839 
1840 
184i 
1842 
1843 
1844 
1845 
1846 
1847 
1848 
1849 


Committed 

Sentenced 

Total 
Executed. 

Executed 

Convicted 

to 
Death. 

for 
Murder. 

Males, 

Females. 

Total. 

17,338 

3,807 

21,205 

15,216 

179 

27 

19 

19,619 

4,272 

23,891 

18,110 

175 

14 

12 

11,320 

3,484 

14.804 

9,536 

154 

10 

10 

11,764 

3,959 

15,723 

9,609 

39 

3 

3 

20,094 

6,298 

26,392 

12,049 

66 

17 

15 

17,835 

5,998 

23,833 

11,194 

43 

15,507 

5,289 

20,796 

9,287 

40 

5 

5 

15,770 

5,416 

21,186 

9,874 

25 

4 

4 

15,250 

4,876 

20,126 

8,620 

16 

5 

4 

14,799 

4,649 

19,448 

8,042 

20 

9 

8 

12,807 

3,889 

16,696 

7,101 

13 

3 

3 

14,204 

4,288 

18,492 

8,639 

14 

/ 

4 

23,5.52 

7,657 

31,209 

15,233 

25 

'      8 

8 

28,765 

9,7.57 

38,522 

18,206 

60 

28 

24 

31,340 

10,619 

41,989 

21,202 

38 

15 

13 

niAi'.  u.\  CHIME.  660 

On  inspecting  tliese  fignros  one  cannot  fail  to  be  struck  with  the 
exceedingly  great  degree  of  irregularity  experienced  in  the  latter  years 
of  the  series.  There  is  the  same  and  (population  considered)  even  a 
greater  rapidity  of  increase  than  we  have  seen  in' England,  but  attended 
with  the  most  violent  alternations.  The  committals,  which  were  23,891 
in  183G,  fell  in  the  following  year  to  14,804,  or  38  per  cent. ;  in  1838 
the  number  was  nearly  as  moderate  ;  but  in  1839  it  jumped  to  26,392, 
an  advance  of  67  per  cent.,  and  which  exhibited  the  proportion  of  accu- 
sations to  the  population  as  1  in  307,  while  in  England  during  iIk; 
same  year  it  was  as  1  in  634.  Between  1836  and  1837  the  convictions 
were  lessened  in  a  greater  degree  than  the  committals,  viz.,  from  18,110 
to  9536,  or  47  per  cent. ;  while  the  increase  of  convictions  in  1839  from 
1838  was  only  25i  per  cent.  The  fearful  augmentation  of  both  com- 
mittals and  convictions  in  the  last  three  yeai-s  of  the  series  is  clearly  one 
of  the  consequences  of  the  dearth  caused  by  the  potato  rot. 

The  greatest  amount  of  fluctuations  have  occurred  with  respect  to 
four  heads  of  offences, — assaults,  illicit  distillation,  riot  and  rescue, 
and  misdemeanors  not  otherwase  described.  If  the  numbers  found 
under  those  titles  are  subtracted  from  the  whole,  the  agreement  between 
the  various  years  will  be  in  a  great  measure  established. 
'  The  number  of  accused  persons  whose  ages  were  not  ascertained  has 
been  so  great  in  Ireland  that  all  computation  on  that  head  would  be 
useless,  and  is  omitted.  In  England  and  Scotland  the  numbers  unknown 
have  been  insignificant. 

To  persons  who  have  had  occasion  to  pursue  statistical  inquiries  on 
questions  connected  with  Ireland,  it  will  not  be  matter  for  much  surprise 
that,  in  this  particular  matter  of  ascertaining  the  ages  of  persons 
charged  with  offences,  there  should  be  evinced  much  want  of  care.  In 
one  of  the  years  during  which  those  ages  have  been  required  (1837), 
they  were  obtahied  with  a  tolerable  degree  of  completeness,  the  ages  of 
only  396  out  of  14,804,  or  2-67' per  cent.,  being  deficient,  proving 
thereby  that  the  accomplislunent  of  the  task  is  within  the  ability  of  the 
officers  to  accomplish ;  two  years  later  we  find  that  out  of  26,392 
persons  acnused,  the  ages  are  wanting  of  10,612,  or  40*20  per  cent. ; 
and  although  in  the  two  following  years  the  deficiency  is  not  so  con- 
siderable, it  is  still  out  of  all  reason  great.  The  numbers  of  accused 
persons  whose  ages  were  not  ascertained  in  each  of  the  years  during 
which  this  branch  of  inquiry  has  been  ordered  in  England,  Scotland, 
and  Ireland  respectively,  have  been  as  follows : — 


EiiRland.     Scotland.  Ireland. 


1833 

336 

758 

183G 

438 

54 

709 

1837 

423 

54 

3U6 

1838 

410 

133 

1,109 

18.39 

.5G0 

20 

10,012 

1840 

.573 

.30 

5,559 

1811 

559 

IG 

4.873 

England.     Scotland.    Ireland. 


1842 

619 

23 

5,046 

1343 

748 

3 

5,880 

1844 

579 

6 

6,020 

1845 

408 

4 

4,401 

1840 

413 

0 

5,170 

1847 

417 

4 

7,111 

1848 

412 

1 

10.784 

G70 


TROGRESS  OF  THE  NATION, 


[sec.  vn. 


The  same  degree  of  neglect  has  been  shown  in  collecting  information 
concerning-  the  degrees  of  instruction,  although  the  inquiries  on  this 
head  in  Ireland  have  been  simplified  in  a  way  to  deprive  the  returns  of 
a  great  part  of  their  value  if  even  they  had  been  made  to  include  the 
whole  number,  by  omitting  to  distinguish,  as  is  done  in  England  and 
^Scotland,  persons  instructed  beyond  mere  reading  and  writing.  The 
numbers  as  to  whom  their  intellectual  condition  was  not  ascertained  in 
the  several  years,  were — 


Years, 
183.i 
1836 
1837 
1838 
1839 
1S40 
1841 
1842 


4,88'J  in  21,20.5 
1,817  „  23,891 
901  „  14,804 
1,415  „  15,723 
11,164  „  26,392 
5,345  „  23,833 
4,909  „  20,796 
5,357  ,,  21,186 


Years. 
1843 
1844 
1845 
1846 
1847 
1848 
1849 


6, 116  in  20, 126 
6,131  „  19,448 
4,806  „  16,696 
5,237  „  18,492 
7,184  „  31,209 
10,952  „  38,522 
12,013  „  41,989 


That  the  deficiencies  here  noticed  arise  from  neglect,  and  not  from 
any  peculiar  difficulty  attending  such  inquiries  in  Ireland,  is  evident  by 
the  fact,  that  in  the  two  years  1840  and  1841,  the  returns  for  which 
have  been  examined  for  that  purpose,  there  were  five  counties  from 
>Yhich  these  returns  in  both  years  were  complete,  and  fourteen  other 
counties  where  the  deficiencies  were  but  trifling,  while  in  several  of  the 
remaining  counties  whence  the  inquiries  have  been  most  unsatisfiictorily 
answered,  the  numbers  deficient  in  respect  both  of  age  and  of  instruc- 
tion are  identical,  or  nearly  so,  e.  (j. — 


COUNTIES. 


Cavan 
Cork  . 
Donegal 
Down  . 
DuLIiu 
Gahvay 
Mayo  . 
Sligo  . 
"Wic.klow 


Deficient  in  the  Returns 

for 

1840 

1841 

Ages. 

Instruction. 

Ages. 

Instruction. 

418 

418 

410 

448 

562 

552 

952 

952 

96 

98 

67 

67 

66 

66 

19 

19 

41 

41 

778 

777 

2.58 

258 

217 

217 

498 

498 

211 

211 

166 

166 

129 

129 

70 

70 

Comparing  the  three  divisions  of  the  kingdom  with  each  otlier  in 
respect  of  juvenile  delinquency,  we  find  that  the  centesimal  proportions 
of  persons  charged  with  offences  who  were  under  sixteen  years  of  age 
were  as  follows  : — 


183.5 

1S36 

ISU 

1S:?S 

IS.iO 

1840 

ISll 

Alean. 

England 

11-37 

11-55 

11-24 

1 1  •  50 

11-82 

1 1  -  -h 

U  -  57 

11-52 

Scotland 

15-00 

16-70 

14-85 

18-10 

17-SO 

17-49 

16-65 

Ireland 

5-42 

6-00 

7-09 

6-73 

9-61 

8-46 

9-16 

7-49 

niAi'.  II.]  CKLMM.  671 

Till'  comparatively  small  proportion  of  offending  children  in  Ireland 
is  prohabjy  owing  to  the  preponderance  in  number  in  that  island  of 
crimes  of  violence,  for  the  commission  of  which  children  are  physically 
disqualified,  while  the  larger  proportion  of  youtig  offenders  in  Scotland 
may  be  referred  to  the  circumstance  already  mentioned  of  the  superior 
general  instruction  of  the  Scotch  people,  and  which  opens  to  them  during 
manhood  more  opportvuiity  for  honest  employment  than  is  found  in 
England.  If  calculated  according  to  the  population  in  each  division 
of  the  kingdom,  and  not  in  relation  to  the  aggregate  nund)er  of  offenders, 
it  will  be  found  that  the  mean  number  of  committals  of  children  under 
sixteen  years  of  age  during  the  above  years,  was — 

In  England  1  in  5,564  of  the  population. 
Scotland   1  „  4,405  „ 

Ireland     1  „  (5,244  „ 

proportions  much  more  nearly  in  agreement  with  each  other  than  they 
are  with  the  whole  number  of  offenders,  which  seems  to  show  that  the 
various  circumstances  w^hich  determine  the  tendencies  to  crime  in  the 
different  divisions  of  the  kingdom  do  not  develop  themselves  so  as  greatly 
to  influence  conduct  in  early  years  of  life. 

The  subject  of  prison  discipline  is  one  which  has  of  late  years  claimed 
much  attention  on  the  part  of  the  Government  and  the  legislature,  and 
various  extensive  reforms  have  been  effected  in  the  management  of  pri- 
soners. Until  of  late  years,  the  only  quality  about  a  prison  that  seems 
to  have  been  thought  indispensable  was  its  strength  to  retain  its  in- 
mates ;  and  if  the  gaoler  was  possessed  of  activity  and  j)ersonal  courage, 
it  was  never  questioned  whether  he  were  ignorant  or  instructed,  humane 
or  brutal  in  disposition,  correct  or  dissolute  in  his  conduct.  Mr. 
Fielding,  one  of  the  magistrates  of  Queen-square  Police  Office,  when 
examined  before  the  Committee  of  the  House  of  Commons  on  the  Police 
of  the  Metropolis  in  1816,  respecting  the  sufficiency  of  prison  accommo- 
dation, is  reported  to  have  said — "  As  to  the  Coldbath-fields  prison,  I 
was  of  the  number  of  justices  who  voted  for  the  appointment  of  the 
man  (as  governor)  who  is  there  now — I  mean  Atkins,  who  I  thought 
the  best  suited  man  that  coidd  be  found  for  the  purpose,  being  a  man 
of  great  intrepidity,  which  is  the  greatest  quality  that  can  recommend 
such  a  man."  A  quarter  of  a  century  has  since  passed,  and  Me  have 
in  the  interval  come  to  the  belief  that  otlier  qualities  beyond  mere  per- 
gonal intrepidity  are  needed  to  fit  a  man  for  having  the  custody  an  J  con- 
trol of  criminals.  A  class  of  men  very  different  froui  those  among  whom 
Atkins,  the  Bow-street  runner,  was  selected,  are  now  placed  in  such 
situations,  and  somewhat  more  is  required  at  their  hands  than  that  they 
shall  keep  their  prisoners  in  subjection  by  brute  force. 

An  Act  was  passed  in  1835  for  effecting  greater  uniformity  of  prac- 


672  mOGRESS  OF  THE  NATION.  [sec.  vii. 

tice  in  the  government  of  prL^ons,  and  for  appointing  inspectors  of 
prisons  in  Great  Britain.  Under  this  Act  five  gentlemen  have  been 
appointed  to  visit  and  inspect  every  gaol,  bridewell,  house  of  correction, 
penitentiary,  or  other  prison  in  any  part  of  Great  Britain  ;  to  examine 
any  person  holding  office  in  the  same,  to  inspect  all  books  and  papers, 
and  to  inquire  into  all  matters  relating  to  such  prisons,  to  make  a  re- 
port in  writing  on  or  before  the  1st  of  February  in  each  year  as  to  the 
state  of  each  prison  visited,  and  to  transmit  the  same  to  the  Secretary  of 
State  for  the  Home  Department,  who  is  required  to  lay  it  before  Par- 
liament within  fourteen  days.  The  appointment  of  these  gentlemen,  and 
still  more  the  publication  of  their  Reports,  have  already  been  attended 
with  the  happiest  results  in  bringing  to  light  and  remedying  various 
abuses,  in  fixing  public  attention  to  the  subject,  and  in  causing  experi- 
ments to  be  undertaken  as  to  the  possibility  of  i-eforming  and  reclaiming 
criminals.  Under  their  inspection,  our  prisons  have  now,  for  the  most 
part,  ceased  to  be  schools  for  perfecting  in  villany  the  half-taught 
scoundrel,  and  are  converted  into  places  where  penitence  and  reforma- 
tion are,  at  least,  possible. 

The  establishment  of  the  present  metropolitan  police  force,  whicli 
occurred  in  1829,  a  measure  which  has  since  been  copied  in  most  of  our 
populous  towns,  has  substituted  an  efficient  and  respectable  body  of  men 
for  the  Townsends,  the  Vicarys,  and  the  Atkinses,  of  former  days, 
who  were  encouraged  by  the  system  then  in  use  to  become  the  associates 
of  thieves,  at  what  were  technically  called  "  Hash-houses,"  and  to  wink 
at  their  malpractices  until  they  should  have  been  led  on  to  the  commis- 
sion of  some  offence,  their  conviction  for  which  would  bring  a  substantial 
reward  to  the  thief-taker.  Under  such  a  system,  prevention  of  crime 
was  out  of  the  question  ;  its  punishment  only  was  thought  of,  and  this 
only  when  it  had  reached  to  a  point  of  enormity  which  induced  the  legis- 
lature to  give  large  premiums  for  detection.  Can  it  afford  cause  for 
wonder  that,  under  this  shocking  system,  our  criminals  have  been  multi- 
plied in  the  manner  W(^  have  witnessed  ? 


in.]  MANNERS.  GT. 


CHAPTER  III. 

MANNERS. 

Imperfect  Views  in  former  Times  concerning  the  Means  proper  for  repressing  Offenders^ — 
Drunkenness  —  Its  prevalence  in  1736  —  IMeans  taken  for  its  suppression  —  Failure  of 
those  Means — Quantity  of  Anient  Spirits  consumed  then  compared  witli  the  present 
Time — Drunkenness  not  confined  formerlj'  to  tlie  Working  Classes — General  Coarseness 
of  Conversation,  and  in  Pojiular  AVriters  — Anecdote  related  by  Sir  Walter  Scott — State  of 
Morals  and  Manners  fifty  Years  ago,  as  stated  in  evidence  before  the  House  of  Commons 
— Progressive  Improvement  occasioned  by  the  general  spread  of  Information — Increased 
Temperance  not  extended  to  Scotland — -Evidence  of  Sheriff  Alison — Infrequency  of 
Prize-fighting  compared  with  former  Times^Greater  refinement  of  the  Public  Press — 
General  Improvement  in  personal  ^Morality. 

The  result  of  the  examination  of  our  criminal  statistics,  contained  in 
the  preceding  chapter,  is  calcidated  to  excite  feelings  at  once  of  regret 
and  of  hope — of  regret,  that  the  science  of  government  in  this,  one  of 
its  most  important  branches,  has  hitherto  been  so  ill  understood,  or  so 
ineffectually  followed  out,  as  to  have  allowed  the  fearful  growth  of 
criminality  exhibited  by  parliamentary  returns — of  hope,  that  the  means 
of  arresting  and  in  a  great  degree  of  correcting  the  evil  having  dis- 
covered themselves  by  reason  of  the  classifications  of  offenders  which  of 
late  years  have  been  adopted,  eiforts  will  now  be  made  to  give  full 
efficacy  to  those  means.  Heretofore  the  growing  evil  has  been  dealt 
with  blindly,  and  in  a  spirit  of  empiricism — now,  and  hereafter,  we  may 
press  forward  in  the  work  of  reformation  with  a  full  comprehension  of 
the  disease,  with  confidence  in  the  means  of  cure,  and  with  some  assur- 
ance of  success.  AVe,  and  those  who  preceded  us,  have  formerly  been 
content  to  make  the  too  common  mistake  of  attacking  symptoms  instead 
of  seeking  out  and  combating  the  disease  at  its  source.  The  degree  of 
ignorance  upon  this  svtbject  which  has  prevailed  will  hardly  be  credited 
some  years  hence,  when,  as  may  now  be  reasonably  expected,  the 
desired  result  shall  be  accomplished.  Dr.  Colquhoun,  a  most  active 
and  intelligent  police  magistrate,  to  whom  society  is  much  indebted  for 
tlie  fearless  disclosures  made  by  him,  which  awakened  attention  to  the 
growing  evil,  had  yet  the  most  imperfect  conception  of  the  means  to  be 
used  for  arresting  it.     In  the  evidence  given  by  him  before  the  Select 

•2  X 


G74  PROGRESS  OF  THE  NATION.  [sec.  vii. 

Committee  of  the  House  of  Commons  on  the  Police  of  the  Metropolis  in 
1816,  we  find  this  passage  : — "  On  or  about  the  years  1744  or  1745, 
when  multitudes  of  men  and  women   were    rolling  about  the  streets 
drunk  in  consequence  of  the  number  of  gin-shop?,  the  physicians  were 
consulted  upon  it,  and  an  Act  was  passed  that  no  persons  should  be 
entitled  to  a  spirit  licence  that  could  not  previously  produce  an  ale 
licence."     We  must  suppose,  from  his  approval  of  this  expedient,  that 
Dr.  Colquhoun  attributed  to  the  existence  of  gin-shops  the  disposition 
to  drunkenness  then  prevalent,  instead  of  looking  at  them  as  the  con- 
sequence of  the  prevailing  low  condition  of  morals.     How  this  evil  was 
to  be  remedied  by  obliging  the  publican  to  pay  a  few  pounds  additional 
for  an  ale  licence,  and  to  keep  a  few  gallons  of  ale   upon  his  premises 
f  >r  such  as  might  choose  to  ask  for  it,  does  not  appear ;  neither  is  it 
shown  why  physicians  were  consulted,  since  there  could  be  no  doubt  of 
the  injury  to  the  bodily  frame  from  halutual  drunkenness,  and  there 
was  no  thought  of  curing  the  propensity  by  administering  physic.     The 
state  of  things  as  described  by  Dr.  Colquhoun  to  exist  in  1745,  had  not 
then  newly  appeared.     Ample  time  had  then  been  afforded  for  con- 
templating the  evil,  and  for  attempting  its  cure.     The  addiction  of  the 
people  to  intoxicating  drinks  had  reached  such  a  point  in  1736  as  to 
occasion  continual  debates  in  Parliament,  and  to  call  for  remedies  of  a 
very  stringent  character.     It  was  then   the  practice  of  some  publicans 
to  entice  their  customers  with  a  notice  painted  on  a  board  outside  the 
house  to  this  effect : — "  Yon  may  here  get  drunk  for  a  penny,  dead 
drunk  for  twopence,  and  have  clean  straw  for  nothing."    The  legislators 
of  that  day,  thinking  that  the  cheapness  of  the  liquor  caused  the  abuse, 
proposed  a  duty  of  20^.  per  gallon,  and  to  prohibit  the  sale  of  spirituous 
liquors  by  retail,  a  measure  far  more  likely  to  attain  the  end  proposed 
than  that  of  obliging  the  publican  to  provide  himself  with  a  supplemental 
licence  ;  and  yet  it  signally  failed  in  its  purpose.     Coxe,  in  his  '  Life  of 
Walpole,'  speaking  of  it,  says,  "  The  Act  led  to  the  usual  proceedings  of 
riot  and  violence  ;  the  clandestine  sale  of  jxin  was  continued  in  defiance 
of  every  restriction";  the  demand  for  penalties  the  offenders  were  unable 
to  pay  filled  the  prisons,  and,   by  removing  every  restraint,    plunged 
them  into  courses  more   audaciously  criminal."     In  March,   1738,  a 
proclamation  Avas  issued  to  enforce  tlie  Gin  Act,  to  protect  the  oflBcers 
of  justice  in  their  efforts  to  that  end,   and  threatening  offenders  with 
punishment.    Within  less  than  two  years  from  its  passing,  12,000  people 
had  been  convicted  under  the  Act  within  the  Bills  of  Mortality,  of  whom 
5000  had  been  sentenced  to  pay  each  a  penalty  of  100/.,  and  3000 
people  had  paid  lOZ.  each  to  excuse  their  being  sent  to  Bridewell  house 
of  correction. 

These  harsh  proceedings  failed  entirely.     It  wa^  given  in  evidence 
before  a  Committee  of  the  House  of  Commons,  in  1743,  that  the  quan- 


CHAP.  III.]  MANNERS.  G75 

tity  of  spirituous  liquors  made  for  consumption  in  England  and  Wales, 
was — 

In  173,1  10,500,000  gallons.   " 


1731 

13,500,000 

1740 

15,250,000 

1741 

17,000,000 

1742 

19,000,000 

These  quantities  were  consumed  by  a  population  not  exceeding  six 
millions,  giving  3^^  gallons  for  each  individual  m  1742.  One  century 
later,  and  we  find  a  po])ulation  increased  to  sixteen  millions  consuming 
8,166,985  gallons  in  the  year,  or  half  a  gallon  per  head,  showing  a 
diminished  consumption  of  more  than  five-sixths.  There  were,  in  1742, 
within  the  Bills  of  Mortality,  more  than  20,000  houses  and  shops  in 
which  gin  was  sold  by  retail. 

Nor  were  those  habits  of  drunkenness  confined  to  the  labouring 
classes.  What  would  now  be  called  drinking  to  excess  was  then  so  much 
the  custom  in  every  circle,  that  it  was  as  uncommon  for  any  party  to 
separate  while  any  member  of  it  remained  sober  as  it  is  now  for  any  one 
in  such  party  to  degrade  himself  through  intoxication.  This  habit, 
which  is  now  happily  banished  from  all  decent  society,  had  by  no  means 
dlsapi)eared  at  the  beginning  of  the  present  century.  The  reformation 
was  then  only  begun  which  we  have  lived  to  see  nearly  perfected  ;  and 
who  that  personally  witnessed  the  scenes  of  riot  that  fifty  years  ago 
were  still  of  too  common  occuri'enee  even  among  reputable  people,  and 
contrasts  them  with  the  quiet  and  rational  enjoyment  that  attends  our 
social  meetings  at  the  present  day,  but  must  acknowledge  that  this 
habit  of  temperance  in  the  use  of  intoxicating  liquors  is  one  of  the 
greatest,  if  indeed  it  be  not  the  greatest,  reformation  that  society  has 
Avitnessed.  In  those  days  it  rarely  happened  that  men  holding  the  rank 
and  otherwise  bearing  the  character  of  gentlemen,  rose  from  the  table 
of  a  dinner  party  in  a  condition  to  enter  the  society  of  females,  and 
thus  all  were  debarred  from  the  sweetest  hours  of  rational  enjoyment 
which  now  spring  from  social  intercourse. 

It  was  the  fitting  concomitant  of  the  habit  of  personal  debasement, 
through  drinking  to  excess,  that  the  style  of  conversation  at  the  convivial 
parties  of  gentlemen  was  then  such  as  would  not  be  tolerated  in  any 
decent  society  at  present ;  nor  is  it  to  be  wondered  at  that  men  who 
would  designedly  "  put  an  enemy  into  their  mouths  to  steal  away  their 
brains"  should  exhibit  the  coarseness  of  their  minds  in  their  habitual 
conversation.  If  we  carry  back  our  inquiries  twenty  years  further,  we 
may  learn  that  coarseness  of  the  same  kind,  although  perhaps  not  in  the 
same  degi-ee,  was  exhibited  by  educated  females,  and  that  respectable 
women,  the  mothers  of  families  and  the  wives  of  respectable  tradesmen, 
were  accustomed  to  amuse  their  guests  by  singing  songs  that  no  reput- 
able musicseller  or  bookseller  would  now  admit  among  his  wares. 

2x2 


676  PROGRESS  or  THE  NATION.  [sec.  vii. 

Remarking  upon  the  change  of  manners  in  this  respect  that  has  since 
heen  witnessed  in  this  country,  Sir  Walter  Scott  relates  the  following 
curious  anecdote  as  having  happened  to  himself: — 

"  A  granil-aunt  of  my  own,  Mrs.  Keith  of  Ravenstone,  who  was  a 
person  of  some  condition,  being  a  daughter  of  Sir  John  Swinton,  of 
Swinton,  lived  with  unabated  vigour  of  intellect  to  a  very  advanced  age. 
She  was  very  f(md  of  reading,  and  enjoyed  it  to  the  last  of  her  long  life. 
One  day  she  asked  me,  when  we  happened  to  be  alone  together,  whether 
I  had  ever  seen  Mrs.  Behn's  novels  ?  I  confessed  the  charge.  AVhether 
I  could  get  her  a  sight  of  them  ?  I  said,  with  some  hesitation,  I  believed 
I  could,  but  that  I  did  not  think  that  she  w^ould  like  either  the  manners 
or  the  language,  which  approached  too  near  that  of  Charles  the  Second's 
time  to  be  quite  ])roper  reading.  '  Nevertheless,'  said  the  good  old 
lady,  '  I  remember  their  being  so  much  admired,  and  being  so  much 
interested  in  them  myself,  that  I  wish  to  look  at  them  again.'  To  hear 
was  to  obey.  So  I  sent  Mrs.  Aphra  Behn,  curiously  sealed  up,  with 
'private  and  confidential'  on  the  packet,  to  my  gay  old  grand-aunt. 
The  next  time  I  saw  her  afterwards  she  gave  me  back  Aphra,  properly 
wrapped  up,  with  nearly  these  words — '  Take  back  your  bonny  Mrs. 
Behn,  and  if  you  will  take  my  advice  put  her  in  the  tire,  for  I  found  it 
impossible  to  get  through  the  very  first  novel.  But  is  it  not,'  she  said, 
'  a  very  odd  thing  that  I,  an  old  woman  of  eighty  and  upwards,  sitting 
alone,  feel  myself  ashamed  to  read  a  book  which  sixty  years  ago  I  have 
heard  read  aloud  for  the  amusement  of  large  circles,  consisting  of  the 
first  and  most  creditable  society  in  London?'  "* 

The  Report  of  the  Select  Committee  of  the  House  of  Commons,  ap- 
pointed in  1835  to  inquire  into  the  state  of  the  education  of  the  people 
in  England  and  Wales,  contains  an  amount  of  information  concerning  the 
increased  and  increasing  decency  of  deportment  within  the  present  age 
which  is  of  the  highest  value.  Among  the  many  witnesses  examined  was 
Mr.  Francis  Place,  who  for  more  than  half  a  century  has  been  an  attentive 
observer  of  the  condition  and  conduct  of  the  working  people  in  London, 
and  to  a  considerable  extent  throughout  the  kingdom  generally.  Scenes 
and  events  which  he  relates  as  being  of  common  every-day  occurrence 
when  he  was  an  apprentice,  are  such  as  would  be  unbearable  now,  and 
have  wholly  ceased.  Speaking  of  the  habits  of  tradesmen  and  masters, 
he  says,  "The  conduct  of  such  persons  was  exceedingly  gross  as -com- 
pared with  the  same  class  at  the  present  time.  Decency  was  a  very 
different  thing  from  what  it  is  now  ;  their  manners  were  such  as  scarcely 
to  be  credited.  I  remember,  when  a  boy  of  ten  years  of  age,  being  at 
a  party  of  twenty,  entertained  at  a  respectable  tradesman's,  who  kept  a 
good  house  in  the  Strand,  where  songs  were  sung  wl^ich  cannot  now  be 

*  '  Lockhart's  Life  of  Scott,'  vol.  v.,  pp.  136,  137. 


CHAP.  III.]  MANNERS.  Cul 

more  tlian  generally  described  from  their  nastiness,  such  as  no  meeting 
of  journeymen  in  London  would  allow  to  be  sung  in  the  presence  of 
their  fiimilies.  There  were  then  few  rational  employments  at  home  ; 
the  men  were  seldom  at  home  in  the  evening, 'excei)t  there  were  card- 
playing  and  drinking ;  they  spent  their  time  in  a  very  useless  and  but 
too  generally  a  mischievous  manner.  I  made  inquiries  a  few  years  ago, 
and  found  that  between  Temple-bar  and  Fleet-mai'kct  there  were  many 
houses  in  each  of  which  there  were  more  books  than  all  the  tradesmen's 
houses  in  the  street  contained  when  I  was  a  youth.  The  ballads  sung 
about  the  streets,  and  the  books  openly  sold,  cannot  be  adequately  de- 
scribed. I  have  given  you  in  writing  words  of  some  common  ballads 
which  you  would  not  think  fit  to  have  uttered  in  this  committee.  At 
that  time  the  songs  w^crc  of  the  most  indecent  kind ;  no  one  would 
mention  them  in  any  society  now ;  they  were  publicly  sung  and  sold  in 
the  streets  and  markets.  Books  were  openly  sold  in  shops  of  booksellers 
in  leading  streets  which  can  only  be  procured  clandestinely  now.  I  have 
seen  the  Prayer-book,  the  Racing  Calendar,  and  these  books,  l)ound 
alike,  side  by  side  in  very  respectable  shop-windows  in  the  leading 
streets.  Between  Blackfriars  and  Westminster-hall  there  w^cre  fourteen 
clubs  under  the  name  of  cock-and-hen  clubs.  I  attended  several  of 
them  when  I  was  an  apprentice.  There  was  one  in  the  Savoy,  where  a 
gii-1  used  to  sit  at  one  end  of  the  table  and  a  boy  at  the  other ;  I  have 
seen  the  chairs  placed  upon  the  table ;  the  amusements  were  smoking, 
drinking,  swearing,  and  singing  obscene  songs  ;  what  else  followed  you 
may  easily  conclude.  I  do  not  believe  there  has  been  a  club  of  the  sort 
for  many  years  past  within  the  same  space.  There  are  a  few  of  them 
still  in  London,  but  very  few ;  they  are  held  in  very  obscure  places, 
and  frequented  by  the  very  worst  of  the  community.  The  places  of 
public  resort,  the  tea-gardens,  were  formerly  as  notorious  as  they  were 
infamous.  The  Dog  and  Duck,  for  instance  ;  I  have  been  there  when 
almost  a  mere  boy,  and  seen  the  flashy  women  come  out  to  take  leave 
of  the  thieves  at  dusk,  and  wish  them  success.  The  Apollo  Gardens 
was  another  of  these  infamous  places  ;  it  was  opened  under  the  pretence 
of  musical  entertainments  ;  and  there  was  the  Temple  of  Flora  ;  it  w^is 
a  long  gallery  fitted  up  in  a  superb  manner,  and  when  lighted,  was  a 
very  fascinating  place  ;  there  were  boxes  where  boys  and  girls  and  men 
and  women  assembled  ;  there  wxn-e  also  close  or  })nvate  boxes.  Another 
of  these  places  was  the  Bull-in -the-Pound,  in  Spa-fields,  frequented  by 
thieves  and  dissolute  people.  In  Gray's-inn-lane  was  the  Blue  Lion, 
commonly  called  the  Blue  Cat ;  I  have  seen  the  landlord  of  this  place 
come  into  the  long  room  with  a  lump  of  silver  in  his  hand,  which  he  had 
melted  for  the  thieves,  and  pay  them  for  it.  There  was  no  disguise 
about  it ;  it  was  done  openly  :  there  is  no  such  place  now.  The  amuse- 
ments of  the  people  were  all  of  a  gross  nature.     We  hear  much  talk  of 


6/8  PROGRESS  OF  THE  NATION.  tsEc.  vii. 

the  desecration  of  the  Sabbath,  but  it  was  much  more  desecrated  for- 
merly. At  the  time  I  am  speaking  of,  there  were  scarcely  any  houses 
on  the  eastern  side  of  Tottenham  Court  Eoad  ;  there  and  in  the  Long- 
lields  were  several  large  ponds  :  the  amusements  here  were  duck-hunting 
and  badger-baiting ;  they  would  throw  a  cat  into  the  water  and  set 
dogs  at  her,  great  cruelty  was  constantly  practised,  and  the  most  abo- 
minable scenes  used  to  take  place.  It  is  almost  impossible  for  any 
person  to  believe  the  atrocities  of  low  life  at  that  time,  which  were  not, 
as  now,  confined  to  the  worst  paid  and  most  ignorant  of  the  populace. 
I  am  not  aware  of  any  new  vice  having  sprung  up  among  the  people  ; 
there  has  been  a  decrease  of  vice  in  every  respect,  and  a  great  increase 
of  decency  and  respectability." 

The  foregoing  })assages,  which  for  the  sake  of  brevity  have  been  put 
into  the  narrative  form,  are  faithfully  extracted  from  the  answers  made 
by  Mr.  Place  when  under  examination  by  the  committee.  The  only 
liberty  that  has  been  taken  is  the  suppression  of  some  of  the  more 
revolting  circumstances  brought  forward  by  Mr.  Place  in  illustration  of 
his  opinions. 

^Mien  asked,  "  To  what  do  you  principally  attribute  those  improve- 
ments?" Mr.  Place  answered — "To  information  I  you  will  find,  as 
the  working  people  get  more  information,  they  get  better  habits."  He 
added,  ""  Every  class  above  another  teaches  that  below  it ;  the  journey- 
man tradesman  is  above  the  common  labourer,  and  manners  descend 
from  class  to  class."  The  whole  of  the  evidence  given  by  Mr.  Place  on 
this  occasion  is  of  the  deepest  interest  to  all  who  wish  to  study  with  the 
aim  of  remedying  the  moral  evils  of  society  by  rational  and  therefore  by 
practicable  means. 

The  sobriety  which  among  educated  persons  has  taken  place  of  the 
contrary  habit  has  in  a  great  degree  been  adopted  by  the  labouring 
classes  also.  It  is  true  there  is  still  much  of  intoxication  among  us, 
and  much  of  other  vices  and  crimes  to  which  habitual  intoxication  surely 
leads  the  way ;  scenes  of  depravity,  however,  no  longer  court  the  public 
gaze,  but  in  a  great  degree  have  passed  away.  The  Apollo  Gardens, 
the  Dog  and  Duck,  and  other  places  of  popular  resort  in  those  days,  to 
which  those  who  remember  them  can  now  never  refer  but  with  disgust, 
exist  no  longer ;  they  would  no  longer  be  tolerated  among  us.  It 
might  be  expected  that  this  improvement  would  exhibit  itself  in  different 
degrees  in  various  localities.  Our  seaports  are  still  liable  to  the  old 
reproach  of  drunken  habits ;  and  the  reform  has  not  as  yet  made  any 
deep  impression  upon  the  working  people  of  Scotland.*  Mr.  Alison, 
the  sheriff  of  Lanarkshire,  in  his  evidence  given  before  the  Committee 
on  Combinations  of  Workmen  so  recently  as  1838,  speaking  of  the  habit 

*  It  has  been  already  shown  (page  556)  how  importantly  the  good  work  has  been  for- 
warded in  Ireland,  throurrh  the  exertions  of  one  earnest  benefactor  of  his  race. 


ciiAv.  HI.]  MANXJ-KS.  679 

of  intemperance  in  Scotland,  said, — ''  I  know  opium  is  used  to  a  certain 
extent,  bnt  I  think  whiskey  there  supersedes  everytliing.  In  short,  I 
nmy  mention  one  fact  to  the  connuittee  which  .will  illustrate  the  extent 
to  which  the  use  of  whiskey  is  carried :  in  London,  the  proportion  of 
public-houses  to  other  liouses  is  as  one  to  fifty-six  ;  in  Glasgow,  it  is  as 
one  to  ten  ;  every  tenth  house  in  Glasgow  is  a  spirit  shop.  I  should 
say,  as  far  as  my  statistical  researches  have  gone,  that  the  proportion  of 
v.'hiskey  drunk  in  Glasgow  is  twice  or  thrice  as  much  as  in  any  similar 
population  upon  the  face  of  the  globe."  Being  asked  whether  the  pro- 
portion of  spirit -shops  mentioned  was  greater  than  it  was  fifteen  or 
twenty  years  ago,  Mr.  Alison  stated  that  it  was  considerably  increasing ; 
that  in  1824  every  fourteenth  house  was  a  public-house,  and  that  the 
proportions  since  and  at  different  times  ascertained,  have  been  one  in 
twelve,  one  in  eleven,  and  (as  already  stated)  in  1838,  one  in  ten. 
Mr.  Alison  gives  a  deplorable  account  of  the  moral  condition  of  the 
people  of  Glasgow.  He  says,  "  I  think  that  in  Glasgow  there  are 
80,000  people  (the  whole  population  is  257,000)  who  have  hardly  any 
moral  or  religious  education  at  all ;  they  have  hardly  any  education  in 
worldly  matters ;  and  though  they  can  most  of  them  read  and  write, 
they  are,  practically  speaking,  uneducated."  It  would  be  indeed  sur- 
prising if,  under  those  circumstances,  the  population  of  Glasgow  were  to 
exhibit  any  but  the  lowest  state  of  morals ;  and  the  various  particulars 
given  by  Mr.  Alison  of  their  coarseness  and  brutality  seem  to  follow  as  a 
necessary  consequence  from  the  neglect  of  which  they  are  thus  the  victims. 

It  is  at  once  a  consequence  of  the  comparative  sobriety  of  the  age, 
and  a  help  to  its  continuance,  that  great  numbers  of  houses  have  been 
opened  for  the  sale  of  cups  of  coffee  and  tea  at  low  prices.  It  is  said 
that  there  are  from  IGOO  to  1800  of  these  coffee-houses  in  the  metro- 
polis alone,  and  that  they  are  established  and  rapidly  increasing  all 
over  the  country ;  about  thirty  years  ago  there  were  not  above  a  dozen 
of  those  houses  to  be  found  in  London,  and  in  these  the  prices  charged 
for  the  refreshment  t!iey  afforded  were  such  as  to  limit  to  a  very  few 
the  number  of  their  customers.  Some  interesting  information  concerning 
these  establishments  was  given  before  the  Committee  of  1840,  which  was 
appointed  to  inquire  concerning  the  operation  of  the  several  duties  levied 
on  imports,  and  popularly  known  as  "  the  Import  Duties  Committee." 

The  charge  made  at  these  houses  for  a  cup  of  excellent  coffee,  with 
sugar  and  milk,  varies  from  one  penny  up  to  threepence.  There  are 
many  houses  where  the  lowest  of  these  charges  is  made,  and  which  are 
each  frequented  by  700  to  800  persons  daily.  One  house  in  Shcrrard- 
street,  Haymarket,  is  mentioned  where  the  charge  is  three  halfpence, 
and  the  daily  customers  average  from  1500  to  1600  persons  of  "  all 
classes,  from  hackney  coachmen  and  porters  to  the  most  respectable 
classes,"  including  many  foreigners.     The  house  opens  at  half-past  five 


680  PROGRESS  OF  THE  NATION.  [sec.  vir. 

in  the  morning  and  closes  at  lialf-past  ten  at  night.     The  tem])tation  to 
frequent  these  houses  is  not  confined  to  the  coffee  or  tea  that  is  provided, 
hut  the  frequenters   are  furnished  with  a  variety   of  newspapers  and 
periodical  puhlications.     In  the  coffee-house  just  mentioned  there  are 
taken  forty-three  London  daily  papers  (including  several  copies  of  the 
leading  journals),  seven  country  papers,  six  foreign  papers,  twenty-four 
monthly  magazines,  four  quarterly  reviews,  and  eleven  weekly  periodi- 
cals.    The  proprietor  of  another  house  stated  to  the  committee  that  he 
had  paid  400/.  a  year  for  newspapers,  magazines,  and  binding.     He 
said,  "  I  have  upon  the  average  400  to  450   persons  that  frequent  my 
house  daily ;    they  are  mostly  lawyers'  clerks   and  commercial   men ; 
some    of  them    are  managing  clerks ;    and   there  are  many  solicitors, 
likewise  highly  respectable  gentlemen,  who  take  coffee  in  the  middle  of 
the  day  in  preference  to  a  more  stimulating  drink.     I  have  often  asked 
myself  the  question  where  all  that  number  of  persons  could    possibly 
have  got  their  refreshments  prior  to  opening  my  house.     There  were 
taverns  in  the  neighbourhood,  but  no  coffee-house,  nor  anything  that 
afforded  any  accommodation  of   the  nature  I  now  give  them ;    and  I 
found  that  a  place  of  business  like  mine  was  so  sought  for  by  the  public, 
that  shortly  after  I  opened  it  I  was  obliged  to  increase  my  premises  in 
every  way  I  could  ;  and  at  the  present  moment,  besides  a  great  number 
of  new^spapers  every  day,  I  am  compelled  to  take  in  the  highest  class  of 
periodicals.     For  instance,  we  have  eight  or  nine  quarterly  publications, 
costing  from  four  to  six  shillings  each,  and  we  are  constantly  asked  for 
every  new  work  that  has  come  out.     I  find  there  is  an  increasing  taste 
for  a  better  class  of  reading.     When  I  first  went  into  business,  many  of 
my  customers  were  content  with  the  lower-priced  periodicals  ;  but  I  find, 
as  time  progresses,  that  the  taste  is  improving,  and  they  look  out  now 
for  a" better  class  of  literature."     Another  of  these  parties  stated  : — "  I 
believe  we    may  trace    the    teetotal  societies  and    those  societies   that 
advocate  temperance  for  working  men  entirely  to  the  establishment  of 
coffee-houses,  because  a  few  years  ago  it  used  to  be  almost  a  matter  of 
ridicule  amongst  working  men  to  drink  coffee  ;  now  they  are  held  up  to 
emulate  each  other.     I  believe  that  not  one-third  of  my  customers  ever 
go  into  a  public-house   at  all.     I  have  never   heard  an  indecent  ex- 
pression, and,  with  two  exceptions,  have  never  seen  a  drunken  man  in 
my  house." 

In  some  of  these  coffee-houses  chops  are  cooked,  and  cold  meat  and 
ham  may  be  had  at  a  moderate  charge,  but  not  any  intoxicating  drink 
is  to  be  bought. 

The  improvement  visible  in  the  habits  of  the  working  people  of 
England,  as  respects  intoxication,  is  accompanied,  as  ^ight  be  expected, 
by  an  abatement  of  coarseness  in  their  general  deportment,  and  by  a 
weaning  from  some  of  the    pursuits  which,  having  been  part  of  the 


ci(Ai>,  hi]  manners.  681 

favourite  pastimes  of  their  and  our  ininiediatc  predecessors,  are  now- 
looked  upon  as  evidences  of  a  brutal  temper.  The  practice  of  prize- 
fighting, if  it  have  not  ceased,  is  certainly  most  importantly  diminished 
in  frequency.  A  great  many  years  have  not  elapsed  since  in  every 
newspaper  was  to  be  seen  a  circumstantial  account  of  those  gladiatorial 
displays,  with  all  their  disgusting  details,  and  now  there  is  not  a  re- 
spectable daily  or  weekly  journal  that  will  prostitute  its  columns  by  the 
insertion.  This  is  in  itself  a  proof  of  altered  manners  on  the  part  of 
readers,  i.  e.,  of  society  at  large  :  but  the  evidence  of  this  fact  is 
strikingly  illustrated  by  the  follow  ing  paragraph,  which  appeared  on  the 
28th  of  February,  1838,  in  the  '  Morning  Advertiser,'  a  very  Avell-con- 
ducted  and  respectable  London  jouraal,  which  circulates  principally 
mong  publicans,  and  is  in  fact  the  property  of  a  part  of  that  body  : — 

"  We  beg  to  deny  the  truth  of  a  paragraph  inserted  in  '  Bell's  Life 
in  London '  on  Sunday  last,  to  the  effect  that  a  deposit  of  21.  aside  is  to 
be  made  at  Harry  England's,  Old  Kent-road,  on  Thursday  next,  for  a 
match  between  Delhunt  and  Mortlock.  The  paragraph  is  an  utter 
fobrication.  Mr.  England  is  a  most  respectable  man,  and  the  false 
charge,  implicating  him  in  so  disreputable  a  transaction  without  his 
sanction,  is  an  injury  as  well  as  a  scandalous  piece  of  impertinence.  It 
is  monstrous  that  the  feelings  of  honourable  men  are  to  be  hurt  by  such 
unwarrantable  statements." 

We  here  see  the  landlord  of  a  public-house  indignantly  denying  not 
only  any  participation  in,  but  any  countenance  of,  an  act  as  disreputable, 
which  only  a  few^  years  before  would  have  been  openly  abetted,  not  by 
})ublicans  only,  but  by  men  of  the  highest  rank  and  station  in  the 
kingdom. 

It  is  in  itself  a  proof,  of  no  slight  significance,  as  to  the  general 
refinement  of  manners,  that  in  a  work  of  this  nature  there  would  be 
found  an  impro])riety  in  describing  scenes  that  were  of  e very-day  oc- 
currence formerly,  and  without  which  description  it  is  yet  impossible 
adequately  to  measure  the  advance  that  has  been  made.  Enough  ha,s 
been  said,  however,  to  bear  out  the  assertion,  that  as  regards  personal 
morals  there  is  at  least  a  greater  amount  of  decency  than  formerly — 
that  profligacy  does  not  stalk  abroad  in  the  face  of  day  as  shamelessly  as 
it  was  wont  to  do,  and  that  brutality  has,  in  a  very  great  degree,  ceased 
to  obtain  the  countenance  of  the  educated  classes.  There  is,  it  is  true, 
much  yet  to  be  done  in  this  direction,  while  in  the  higher  branches  of 
morals  we  have  almost  everything  to  learn.  With  the  self-denying  doc- 
trines of  Christianity  upon  our  lips,  we  present  a  practical  denial  of 
them  in  our  lives,  which  are  given  up  in  a  greater  degree  than  ever  to 
self-aggrandizement,  in  the  pursuit  of  which  we  have  seemingly  lost  all 
proper  appreciation  of  our  duties  as  citizens,  until  patriotism  has  become 
a  i)yword  and  a  scoff,  and  national  honour  a  thimr  of  small  account. 


CS-2  I'KOGKESS  OF  THE  NATION.  [sec.  vii. 


CHAPTER  IV. 

EDUCATION. 

Neglect  of  Public  Provision  for  Education  in  England — Consequent  Social  Evils— Duty  of 
Government  to  pi'ovide  for  Instructing  the  people  ;  enforced  by  Exertions  of  Individuals 
— Remedy  for  Inconveniences  of  increasing  Population — Absence  of  Crime  in  well- 
instructed  Communities  of  Nova  Scotia  and  Iceland  —  Joseph  Lancaster,  his  early 
Difficulties  and  subsequent  Success— His  Exertions  and  Sacrifices — Committee  of  Council 
for  Education — Opposition  to  the  Scheme  in  both  Houses  of  Pai-liament — Z!sumber  of 
Children  without  Instruction  —  Recent  Progress  of  Public  Opinion  on  the  Subject  of 
National  Education — Educational  Statistics — Imperfect  manner  in  v,-hich  the  Instruction 
of  the  Poor  has  been  conducted  —  Statistical  Societies  of  Manchester  and  London  — 
Normal  School  at  Battersea — Proportion  of  Marriage  Registers  signed  with  Crosses  in 
different  parts  of  England  and  Wales — Education  in  Scotland,  1825  and  1837 — National 
Schools  of  Ireland  established  in  1831 — Nature  of  opposition  offered  to  the  System — 
Former  Plans ;  their  Insufficiency — Charter  Schools — Kildare  Street  Society — Children 
taught  in  National  Schools  of  Ireland,  1834:  to  1849— Social  Benefits  of  the  System  to 
Ireland. 

This  United  Kingdom,  which  boasts  itself  to  be  at  the  head  of  civili- 
zation, has  been  among  the  last  of  European  nations  to  make  any 
public  provision  for  the  instruction  of  the  people.  This  neglect  is  all 
the  more  extraordinary  from  the  fact,  that  of  all  civilized  countries  this 
is  the  one  in  which  ignorance  on  the  part  of  the  people  brings  with  it 
the  greatest  amount  of  danger.  From  their  number,  and  the  manner  in 
which  they  are  brought  together  in  our  large  manufacturing  and  trading 
towns,  the  labouring  classes  have  become  a  most  important  power  for  good 
or  for  evil,  and  exercise,  without  its  being  acknowledged,  a  very  powerful 
influence  over  the  deliberations  of  the  Senate  and  the  acts  of  the  Govern- 
ment. Their  situation  is  besides  widely  different  from  that  of  the 
labouring  classes  in  every  other  country,  where  the  great  majority  de- 
pend upon  agricultural  labour  for  their  support,  and  are  but  little  liable 
under  any  circumstances  to  be  thrown  out  of  employment.  In  England, 
on  the  contrary,  as  already  shown,*  the  great  and  rapid  increase  in  the 
population  is  all  of  it  thrown  for  the  means  of  earning  subsistence  upon 
pursuits  other  than  agricultural.  A  change  of  fashion,  or — what  is  to 
the  full  as  likely  to  occur  where  the  legislature  takes  upon  itself  to  in- 
terfere on  all  occasions  by  "  protections"  and  restrictions  with  the  course 
(if  industry — a  change  of  policy,  may  in  a  moment,  and  without  warning, 

.♦  Page  54. 


cH.vr.  IV.]  EDUCATION.  (}f<3 

throw  tens  of  thousands  out  of  employment,  while,  as  we  have  sometimes 
witnessed,  a  succession  of  deficient  harvests  is  sure  to  brinf^  upon  the 
whole  class  the  severest  privations. 

How  necessary  then  it  is  that  these  masses,  so.  greatly,  so  increasingly 
influential,  should  not  be  suffered  to  remain  in  ignorance  of  their  true 
interests !  They  are  not  idiots  that  they  cannot  be  led  to  see  wherein 
those  true  interests  lie,  nor  to  admit  that  they  consist  in  upholding  the 
laws  and  respecting  the  institutions  of  their  country.  Neither  are  they 
knaves,  who,  to  secure  a  passing  advantage,  would  wantonly  invade  the 
rights  of  their  richer  fellow-citizens.  But  they  are  ignorant ;  and  in 
this  condition  all  manner  of  fallacies  may  be  made  to  pass  with  them  for 
truth.  To  what  but  to  ignorance  arc  we  to  ascribe  the  hostility  of  our 
operative  manufacturers  to  machinery,  and  their  lawless  crusades 
against  it?  How,  unless  means  for  teaching  them  are  adopted,  can 
they  be  expected  to  see  the  ultimate  consequences  to  them  of  a  machine 
the  introduction  of  w^hich  into  use  has  the  present  effect  of  throwing 
some  among  them  out  of  their  accustomed  employment  ? 

The  gi'cat  bulk  of  the  people,  they  whose  sole  dependence  for  their 
daily  bread  must  be  upon  their  daily  toil,  are  most  of  all  interested  in 
the  maintenance  of  order,  under  which  alone  they  can  have  any  assurance 
of  demand  for  their  labour.  This  truth,  which  they  should  be  taught 
to  recognise,  does  not  lie  upon  the  surface  ;  and  the  unlearned  may  well 
be  excused  for  not  embracing  it  when  they  see  men  Avho  have  had  the 
advantages  of  instruction  denied  to  themselves,  advocating  doctrines 
irreconcileable  Avith  it.  It  is  a  fact,  recognised  by  all  who  have  inves- 
tigated the  subject,  and  demonstrable  to  all,  that  the  introduction  of 
machinery  for  simplifying  manufacturing  processes  has  had  the  effect 
not  alone  of  increasing  the  comforts  of  the  great  body — the  consumers — 
but  also  of  multiplying  manifold  the  demand  for  labour  even  in  the  par- 
ticular branches  to  which  the  machinery  is  applied :  and  yet  how  com- 
mon is  it  to  hear  men  of  educated  minds,  but  who  have  not  allowed 
themselves  to  consider  this  class  of  facts,  inveighing  against  the  intro- 
duction of  a  new  machine  as  an  interference  with  the  rights  of  labour  I 
From  such  a  doctrine,  as  well  as  from  others  equally  false  and  equally 
pernicious,  there  are  no  means  of  preserving  the  people  but  by  edu- 
cating them. 

It  is  evident  that  the  kind  of  knowledge  which  will  preserve  from  such 
fallacies  will  not  be  the  result  of  instruction  in  the  mere  elements  of 
learning  ;  and  this  is  rendered  equally  clear  by  the  fact,  that  men  whose 
education  has  been  carried  far  beyond  the  elementary  dcgi'ee  have  failed 
to  acquire  right  views  concerning  points  wliich  the  general  safety  re- 
quires should  meet  the  practical  assent  of  all ;  but  this  presents  no 
difficulty.  The  educated  man  fails  to  recognise  the  truth  because  he  is 
but  partially  educated,  and  has  been  left  in  ignorance  with  regard  to 


684  rilOGRESS  OF  THE  NATION.  [sec.  vii. 

that  branch  of  knowledge  which  the  working  men,  if  educated  at  all, 
would,  be  sure  to  make  their  own,  since  it  intimately  concerns  their  daily 
comforts,  and  is  essential  to  the  welfare  of  their  families.  That  they 
would  do  so  we  have  the  evidence  of  experience  to  teach  us ;  for  have 
not  all  their  strikes  and  risings  had  for  their  object  the  attainment  of 
something  which  in  their  unenliglitened  reasoning  they  have  conceived 
to  be  their  right — mistakenly,  no  doubt— but  proving  thereby  how  deep 
is  the  interest  they  would  feel  in  securing  the  general  welfare,  from  the 
moment  they  should  come  to  know  how  completely  their  own  true  in- 
terests are  involved  in  it  "^ 

It  would  appear  to  be  the  duty  of  every  Government  to  see  that  its 
subjects  are  taught  their  duties  as  men  and  as  citizens,  and  thus  to  pro- 
vide for  the  security  of  all.  Lessons  to  this  end  have  indeed  been 
taught  by  the  Government  of  England,  but  to  whom  have  they  been  im- 
i^artcd,  and  by  what  agency  have  they  been  enforced  ?  To  be  adopted 
as  a  scholar,  a  man  must — at  least  up  to  a  comparatively  recent  period 
— have  qualified  himself  to  appear  as  a  criminal  at  the  bar  of  justice, 
and  his  chief  schoolmaster  would  have  been — the  hangman  !  If  one 
tithe  of  the  expense  that  has  been  incurred  to  so  little  purpose  during 
the  present  century  in  punishing  criminals  had  been  employed  for  pre- 
ventin<T  crime  by  means  of  education,  what  a  different  country  would 
Enoland  have  been  to  that  which  our  criminal  records  show  it  to  have 
been  I 

Thank  Heaven !  this  truth  at  length  is  making  its  way  to  the  con- 
victions of  our  rulers.  The  principle  is  recognised  that  the  people 
luust  be  instructed.  There  is  no  longer  any  party  found  to  question 
this  principle,  or  to  oppose  its  practical  application.  Differences  there 
are  and  will  be  as  to  the  best  mode  of  carrying  it  out,  but  those  differ- 
ences of  opinion  are  not  allow'ed  to  stay  the  progress  of  education,  w^hich 
will,  which  must,  go  forward,  and  perhaps  the  more  rapidly  by  reason  of 
the  discussions  that  arise  out  of  those  very  differences. 

We  are  as  yet,  however,  only  in  the  infancy  of  this  right  course. 
That  we  have  entered  upon  it,  is  due  to  the  zealous  and  enlightened 
exertions  of  men  who  toiled  amidst  difficulties  that  seemed  to  multiply 
as  they  proceeded,  but  who  rose  from  their  successive  defeats  with  a 
determination  to  succeed,  against  which  no  opposition  could  always 
prevail.  In  these  struggles  to  advance  the  best  interests  of  our  fellow- 
creatures,  circumstances  are  sometimes  witnessed  which  compensate  for 
past  defeats,  and  offer  encouragement  to  future  philanthropists.  One  of 
these  encouragements  is  known  to  have  well  repaid  the  long-continued 
and  louf-frustrated  efforts  for  the  recognition  by  Parliament  of  the  duty 
of  providing  for  the  instruction  of  the  people,  made  by  the  amiable  and 
accomplished  late  member  for  AVaterford.  No  man  had  laboured  more 
zealously,  more  intelligently,  more  benevolently,  but,  to  all  appearance, 


CHAP.  IV.]  EDLX'ATIOX.  fiK5 

more  hopelessly,  to  this  end  tlian  Mr.  \\'yse.  It  was  with  ditliculty  even 
that  once  during  each  succeeding  session  of  Parliament  he  could  procure 
the  attendance  of  a  sufficient  number  of  members  to  make  "  a  house  " 
for  the  discussion ;  hut  at  length  his  efforts  were  crowned  with  success, 
and  it  was  among  his  earliest  official  acts,  after  taking  his  seat  at  the 
Treasury  Board,  to  affix  his  signature  to  the  warrant  for  30,000/.  whicli 
had  been  wrung  from  the  House  of  Commons  as  the  commencement  of  a 
scheme — imperfect  and  inadequate,  it  is  true,  to  the  occasion — for  a 
national  system  of  education. 

The  circumstance  that  has  been  cited  of  the  rapid  multiplication  of 
our  numbers  in  the  working  class,  whose  only  theatres  for  employment 
must  be  the  seats  of  manufactures,  where  they  are  consequently  drawn 
together  in  masses,  has  excited  alarm  of  no  ordinary  kind,  not  among 
the  unthinking  only,  but  on  the  part  of  individuals  also  to  whom  we  have 
been  accustomed  to  look  for  instruction  in  matters  relating  to  the  well- 
ordering  and  progress  of  society.  AMience  does  this  alarm  proceed  ;  on 
what  is  it  founded,  but  on  the  ignorance  of  those  on  whose  account  it 
arises?  It  is  felt  and  acknowledged  as  an  impossibility  to  meet  the 
difficulty  by  means  of  any  dirc^ct  legislative  interference.  To  impose  any 
restraints  upon  industry  which  should  check  the  continued  progress  of 
the  population,  would  be  to  insure  the  immediate  occurrence  of  the  very 
mischief  that  is  dreaded.  The  true  path  of  safety  will  be  found  in 
educating  the  people — in  teaching  them  to  discriminate  between  evils 
referable  to  the  imperfection  of  human  institutions,  and  therefore  reme- 
diable, and  such  as  arise  in  the  order  of  Providence.  "  Demagogues, 
and  the  workshop  agitators  so  frequently  met  with  in  the  manufacturing 
districts,"  and  who  now  "  never  fail  to  take  advantage  of  the  excitement 
produced  by  the  occurrence  of  distress  to  instil  their  poisonous  no.-trums 
into  the  public  mind,  to  vilify  the  institutions  of  the  country,  and  to  re- 
present the  privations  of  the  workpeople,  which  in  the  vast  majority  of 
cases  spring  from  accidental  and  uncontrollable  causes,  as  the  necessary 
consequences  of  a  defective  system  of  domestic  economy,  having  regard 
alone  to  the  interests  of  the  higher  classes  "* — such  mischief-makers 
would  no  longer  exist,  for  they  would  find'no  dupes  upon  whom  to  prac- 
tise. Under  the  condition  of  general  enlightenment  here  supposed,  the 
fallacies  which  have  been  so  long  allowed  to  fetter  the  industry  of  the 
nation  would  disappear  like  snow  before  the  sun ;  and  if  evils  should 
then  arise  to  disturb  the  general  prosperity,  the  last  thing  that  would 
enter  into  the  niinds  of  the  sufferers  would  be  to  proceed  to  measures 
of  violence,  the  only  issue  of  which  they  would  then  know  must  be  to 
increase  in  degree  and  to  prolong  in  duration  the  amount  of  their  trials 
and  privations. 

*  '  Principles  of  Political  Economy,'  by  J.  K.  M'Culloch,  Esq.,  edition,  1843. 


G86  rr.OGRESS  OF  THE  NATION.  [sec.  vii. 

AMience  arises  this  fear — this  childish  fear — of  the  increase  of  our 
numbers  ? — childish,  because  it  exists  without  regard  to  the  lessons  of 
experience.  What  evidence  is  there  in  our  present  condition  to  justify 
the  complaint  of  "  surplus  population  "  that  did  not  exist  in  as  great  or 
even  m  a  greater  degree  of  force  when  our  numbers  had  not  reached 
one-half  their  present  amount  ?  Why,  then,  shall  we  not  go  forward  to 
double,  and  again  to  double,  our  population  in  safety  and  even  to  ad- 
vantage, if,  instead  of  rearing  millions  of  human  clods,  whose  lives  are 
passed  in  consuming  the  scanty  supplies  which  is  all  that  their  lack  of 
intelligence  enables  them  to  produce,  the  universal  people  shall  have 
their  minds  cultivated  to  a  degree  that  will  enable  each  to  add  his  pro- 
portion to  the  general  store  ? 

The  progress  of  our  population  in  Great  Britain  has  gone  forward 
M  ith  a  continually-accelerated  speed  : — 

Between  ISOl  and  1811  the  increase  was  1,492,2.'5.5 
„  1811  „  1821  .,  2,108,028 
„  1821  „  1831  „  2,189,970 
.,    1S31  ,,  1S41       ,,      2,278,381 

Of  these  8,068,634  additional  beings,  the  proportionate  numbers  in 
the  different  periods  were — 


1801  to  1811 

18"  50  per  cent 

1811  „  1821 

26-12 

1821  „  1831 

27-14 

1831  „  1841 

28-24 

100-00 


If  the  complaint  of  "  sui-plus  population"  had  any  foundation,  would 
it  not  have  been  in  the  later  years  of  this  series  that  the  evils  of  such  a 
condition  would  chiefly  have  made  themselves  apparent  ? — and  yet  we 
may  triumphantly  point  to  the  evidences  that  have  attended  our  re- 
searches, as  recorded  in  this  volume,  to  show  that  the  material  progress 
of  the  country  has  never  before  proceeded  with  a  speed  equal  to  that 
which  it  has  made  during  the  past  Sve-and-twenty  years.  The  plain 
common  sense  of  our  forefathers  led  them  to  considei-  every  increase  of 
their  numbers  as  an  addition  made  to  the  power  and  wealth  of  the 
country  ;  and  it  is  in  all  probability  our  artificial  system  of  so-called 
protections,  which  has  tended  in  some  degree  to  paralyze  our  ingenuity, 
and  to  fetter  our  industry,  that  in  modern  times  has  suggested  the  con- 
trary belief. 

Under  the  circumstances  that  have  attended  our  course  durinij  the 
present  century,  the  increase  of  po})ulation  among  the  instructed  chisses 
has  certainly  gone  forward  in  at  least  as  great  a  proportion  as  the  in- 
crease among  the  other  classes ;  yet,  except  in  rare  instances,  referable 
to  want  of  individual  prudence,  we  do  not  see  that  any  fall  back  into  the 
ranks  of  pauperism,  while,  on  the  other  hand,  thousands  have  advanced 


CHAP.  IV.]  EDUCATION.  Gb7 

in  worldly  rank,  themselves  or  tlielr  immediate  descendants  occupying 
in  many  cases  the  very  highest  stations  in  the  land.  What  is  it  but 
education  that  has  imparted  to  them  this  power  of  sustaining  themselves 
and  their  families  in  the  struggle  amid  so  many  competitors  ?  It  is  true 
we  hear  a  constant  cry  about  the  difficulty  of  obtaining  suitable  employ- 
ment on  the  part  of  educated  youths  ;  but  the  same  cry  has  been  raised 
during  each  one  of  the  past  forty  years,  if  even  the  complaint  be  not 
of  much  older  origin,  and  it  is  not  more  true  now  than  it  was  when  it 
first  arose.  If,  then,  the  educated  among  us  have  found  room  for  their 
exertions  without  sinking  in  the  social  scale,  it  must  have  been  through 
their  having  created  employments  for  themselves,  and  in  a  considerable 
degree  for  others  also,  by  means  of  their  superior  intelligence ;  and 
when  the  great  body  of  the  people  shall  be  placed  in  the  same  favour- 
able circumstances,  why  should  not  the  individual  members  of  the 
community  at  large  be  as  successful  each  in  providing  for  his  own  wants 
in  the  station  which  he  occupies  ?  —and  if  this  be  reasonable  with  refer- 
ence to  our  present  numbers,  why  should  it  be  otherwise,  although 
these  numbers  were  doubled  ?  The  only  obstacle  that  could  arise  would 
be  found  in  the  absolute  insufficiency  of  food  for  the  sustenance  of  the 
greater  number,  the  perfect  remedy  for  which  difficulty  has  at  length 
been  recognised  and  adopted. 

The  view  here  offered  of  the  social  benefits  to  be  derived  by  the  nation 
at  large  from  the  general  spread  of  intelligence  is  no  new  doctrine.  It 
was  well  said  by  the  present  Archbishop  of  Canterbury  (Dr.  Sumner),  in 
his  '  Eecords  of  the  Creation,' — "  Of  all  obstacles  to  improvement,  igno- 
rance is  the  most  formidable,  because  the  only  true  secret  of  assistin"" 
the  poor  is  to  make  them  agents  in  bettering  their  own  condition,  and 
to  supply  them,  not  with  a  temporary  stimulus,  but  with  a  permanent 
energy.  As  fast  as  the  standard  of  intelligence  is  raised,  the  poor 
become  more  and  more  able  to  co-operate  in  any  plan  proposed  for  their 
advantage,  and  more  likely  to  listen  to  any  reasonable  suggestion,  and 
more  able  to  understand,  and  therefore  more  willing  to  pursue  it. 
Hence  it  follows,  that  when  gross  ignorance  is  once  removed,  and  right 
principles  are  introduced,  a  great  advantage  has  been  already  gained 
against  squalid  poverty.  Many  avenues  to  an  improved  condition  are 
opened  to  one  whose  faculties  are  enlarged  and  exercised  ;  he  sees  his 
own  interest  more  clearly,  he  pursues  it  more  steadily,  and  he  does  not 
study  immediate  gratification  at  the  expense  of  bitter  and  late  repent- 
ance, or  mortgage  the  labour  of  his  future  life  without  an  adequate 
return.  Indigence,  therefore,  will  rarely  be  found  in  company  with 
good  education."* 

It  may  be  said  that  these  views,  however  reasonable  they  may  appear, 


*  Fourtli  edition,  vol.  ii.  page  333. 


G88  rnOGRESS  OF  THE  NATION.  [sr.c.  vji. 

arc  still  only  speculations,  formed  in  the  closet,  and  wanting  the  sanction 
of  experience  to  stamp  them  with  authority.  Happily  we  are  not 
without  this  sanction  also.  The  early  settlers  of  the  province  of  Nova 
Scotia  were  so  fully  impressed  with  the  necessity  of  imparting  instruc- 
tion to  the  people,  that  ample  provision  was  made  by  them,  and  has 
been  continued  by  their  descendants  to  the  present  day,  for  the  su})port 
of  schools,  so  that  not  a  child  is  brought  up  in  the  province  without 
receiving  a  considerable  amount  of  instruction  combined  with  moral 
training.  The  result  has  been  most  gratifying.  AVhen  conversing  Avith 
a  gentleman  from  Halifax,  a  barrister  and  member  of  the  provincial 
parliament,  and  a  most  intelligent  man,*  concerning  the  condition  in 
various  respects  of  the  Nova  Scotian  population,  a  question  was  put  to 
him  on  the  state  of  crime  within  the  province,  to  which  he  gave  this 
striking  answer, — "  Crime  !  we  have  no  crime."  When  urged  to 
explain  how  far  this  reply  was  to  be  received  in  a  literal  sense,  he  added, 
— "  I  do  not  mean  that  people  never  quarrel  in  Nova  Scotia  ;  brawls 
do  sometimes  occur,  although  not  very  frequently ;  but  as  to  crime, 
understanding  by  the  terra  oftences  for  which  men  are  brought  to  the 
bar  of  justice  in  England,  I  repeat  that  it  does  not  exist."  The  cause 
of  this  truly  enviable  state  of  society  was  made  apparent  when  he 
described  the  means  employed  for  imparting  universal  education,  and 
added,  as  a  consequence  of  the  high  degree  of  intelligence  thereby  de- 
veloped, that  every  person  could  find  employment,  and  could  support 
himself  and  his  family  upon  the  fruits  of  his  industry. 

Nor  do  these  facts  rest  upon  individual  or  private  testimony  only. 
The  return  made  to  the  Colonial  Office  in  London  of  the  condition  in 
various  respects  of  the  province  fully  bears  out  the  above  description. 
In  that  portion  of  the  volume  (known  officially  as  "  the  blue  book")  in 
which  forms  are  given  for  returns  under  the  head  of  gaols  and  prisoners, 
all  that  appears  is  the  following  note  : — "  No  account  is  kept  under 
the  heads  of  this  return,  which  are  wholly  inapplicable  to  the  gaols 
in  Nova  Scotia,  where  crimes  are  of  rare  occurrence,  and  imprisonment 
for  debt  is  infrequent.  There  is  at  least  one  gaol  in  each  county,  under 
the  jurisdiction  of  the  superior  court,  superintended  by  the  high  sheriff 
or  his  gaoler,  but  there  are  not  any  officers  of  prisons  appointed." 

The  population  of  Nova  Scotia,  according  to  a  census  taken  in  1838, 
amounted  to  178,237  souls.  There  were  in  1841,  in  public  schools, 
chiefly  in  Halifax,  1902  scholars ;  in  colleges,  138 ;  but  in  addition  to 
these  there  were  "  more  than  600  connuon  schools,  and  thirty  combined 
common  and  grammar  schools,  at  which  upwards  of  20,000  children 
were  instructed.  These  schools  are  supported  partly  by  grants  of  the 
legislature,  and  partly  by  the  subscriptions  of  the  inhabitants.     The 

2 

*  Mr.  G.  R.  Young,  senior  Attorney-General  of  tlie  province. 


CHAP.  IV. J  EDUCATION.  089 

total  amount  contributed  by  the  province  in  1841  for  promoting  educa- 
tion exceeded  6000/.  The  revenues  of  the  province  in  that  year 
amounted  to  93,882/.  18.s\  2<l. 

If  the  contribution  of  the  Imperial  Parliament  for  the  promotion  of 
education  in  Great  Britain  were  on  the  same  scale  of  liberality  as  that 
adopted  in  Nova  Scotia,  taken  with  reference  to  poj)ulation,  the  yearly 
vote  would  amount  to  624,000/. ;  but  if  made  proportionally  to  the 
revenues  of  the  two  communities,  it  would  amount  to  more  than  five 
times  that  sum,  and  even  then  would  not  absorb  one-half  of  the  revenue 
derived  in  Great  Britain  from  the  consumption  of  ardent  spirits. 

In  a  work  of  great  authority,  published  several  years  ago,  we  find  the 
following  passage,  corroborative  of  the  facts  and  their  consequences  here 
brought  forward  : — "  It  is  a  matter  of  doubt  whether  more  general  and 
useful  knowledge  among  all  grades  of  the  population  can  be  discovered 
in  any  coimtry  than  will  be  found  to  prevail  in  this  province  (Nova 
Scotia).  Many  of  those  born  and  educated  in  it  have  distinguished 
themselves  not  only  at  home  but  in  different  parts  of  the  world,  and  the 
natives  generally  possess  a  ready  power  of  apprehension,  a  remarkably 
distinct  knowledge  of  the  general  affairs  of  life,  and  the  talent  of  adapt- 
ing themselves  to  the  circumstances  of  such  situations  as  chance,  direc- 
tion, or  necessity  may  place  them  in."* 

In  the  island  of  Iceland  tlierc  is  no  such  thing  to  be  found  as  a  man 
or  woman — not  decidedly  deficient  in  mental  capacity — who  cannot  read 
and  write  well,  while  the  greater  part  of  all  classes  of  the  inhabitants 
have  mastered  several  of  the  higher  branches  of  education,  including  a 
knowledge  of  modern  languages,  and  an  accjuaintance  with  classical 
literature. 

Placed  on  the  verge  of  the  arctic  circle,  the  Icelanders  are  subjected 
to  the  hardships  of  a  long  and  rigorous  winter,  during  which  there  are 
but  few  hours  of  the  day  in  which  it  is  possible  for  them  to  pursue  out- 
door occupations.  These  apparently  unfavourable  circumstances  they 
have  with  the  highest  degree  of  wisdom  rendered  productive  of  the 
choicest  of  human  blessings — the  enlightenment  of  their  minds  and  the 
raising  of  their  moral  characters.  Some  part  of  the  long  evening  is 
employed  in  teaching  the  children  of  the  family ;  and  so  universal  is 
this  practice  that  in  the  whole  island  there  is  but  one  school,  which  is 
exclusively  used  for  the  highest  branches  of  professional  education. 
After  this  part  of  the  family  duty  has  been  performed,  the  whole  house- 
hold is  assembled — servants  and  all — and  some  book  is  read  aloud, 
each  person  present  taking  his  turn  in  reading.  After  this  there  usually 
follows  a  discussion  relating  to  what  has  been  read,  and  in  which  all 
unreservedly  join,  and  the  evening  is  not  suffered  to  close  without 
engaging  in  religious  exercises. 

*  '  British  America,'  by  Jobn  M'Grcgor,  Esq.,  vol.  i.  page  405.     Second  edition. 

2    Y 


090  PROGRESS  OF  THE  NATION.  [sec.  \ii. 

Every  account  of  these  people  that  has  been  published  agrees  in  de- 
scribing them  as  gentle  and  peaceable  in  their  dispositions,  sober,  moral, 
and  religious  in  their  habits.  Crimes  among  them  are  hardly  known. 
The  house  of  correction  at  Reickiavieh,  the  capital  of  the  island,  after 
having  stood  empty  for  years,  was  at  length  converted  into  a  residence 
for  the  o-overnor,  lay  whom  it  has  since  been  occupied.  The  island  is 
subject  to  the  penal  code  of  Denmark,  which  awards  the  penalty  of 
death  to  murder  and  some  other  heinous  offences.  It  is  said  that  only 
three  or  four  capital  convictions  have  occurred  during  the  last  two  cen- 
turies ;  the  last  of  these  happened  some  years  before  the  visit  of  Sir  G. 
Mackenzie  and  Dr.  Holland  in  1810  ;  it  was  of  a  peasant  for  the  mur- 
der of  his  wife,  and  on  that  occasion  it  was  not  possible  to  find  any  one 
on  the  island  who  could  be  induced  to  perform  the  office  of  executioner, 
so  that  it  became  necessary  to  send  the  man  to  Norway  that  the  sen- 
tence might  be  carried  into  effect.  It  is  worthy  of  remark,  that  from 
the  first  settlement  of  the  island  by  a  Norwegian  colony  in  the  ninth 
century,  to  the  acknowledgment  of  the  King  of  Norway,  and  during  the 
six  centuries  which  have  since  elapsed,  no  armed  force  has  ever  been 
raised  on  or  introduced  into  the  island. 

It  would  be  difficult  to  conceive,  if  we  had  not  the  facts  before  us, 
that  any  nation  calling  itself  civilized,  and  boasting  itself  to  walk  in  the 
lioht  of  Christianity,  could  have  so  totally  neglected  the  all-important 
subject  of  education,  as  did  the  rulers  of  England  up  to  the  beginning 
of  the  present  century.  There  was  then  no  provision  for  school-teach- 
ing besides  that  afforded  by  parochial  charity-schools,  in  which  the 
little  that  was  taught  had  nothing  in  it  that  was  useful,  and  the  then 
recent  institution  of  Sunday-schools,  which  chiefly  owe  their  existence  to 
Mr.  Raikes,  of  Gloucester,  and  in  which  the  instruction  given  was  neces- 
sarily confined  in  its  scope  and  limited  in  its  amount.  Besides,  even  the 
Sunday-school  system  was  then  far  from  being  generally  adopted. 

It  was  in  1798  that  Joseph  Lancaster  began  his  scheme  of  active 
benevolence  upon  a  very  humble  plan,  and  with  very  limited  means. 
To  use  his  own  words, ^"  The  undertaking  was  begun  under  the  hospi- 
table roof  of  an  affectionate  parent ;  my  father  gave  the  school-room 
rent  free,  and  after  fitting  up  the  forms  and  desks  myself,  I  had  the 
pleasure,  before  I  was  eighteen,  of  having  near  ninety  children  under 
instruction,  many  of  whom  I  educated  free  of  expense."  The  season 
of  scarcity  that  occurred  at  this  time  added  to  the  number  of  the 
scholars  whose  parents  were  unable  to  spare  the  price  of  their  children's 
schooling  ;  and  some  of  Lancaster's  private  friends  coming  to  his  assist- 
ance, the  school  came  more  and  more  to  take  the  character  of  a  free 
institution,  until  in  1804,  "  the  school  doors  were  thrown  open  for  all 
that  would  send  their  children  and  have  them  educated  freely."  The 
economical  plans  and  arrangements  adopted  in  the  school  brought  down 


CHAP.  IV.]  EDUCATION.  (i91 

the  expense  to  three  shillings  for  each  scholar.  The  subscriptions 
received  were  devoted  to  the  erection  of  the  necessary  buildinfrs,  and 
the  remaining  expenses,  including  the  simple  wants  of  Joseph  Lancaster 
himself,  were  defrayed  from  the  profits  of  his  publications,  many  thou- 
sands of  which  were  yearly  taken  by  the  j)ublic. 

Among  .Jose})h  Lancaster's  earhest  patrons  were  the  Duke  of  Bedford 
and  Lord  Somerville  ;  and  in   1805  the  King,  and  several  branches  of 
the  Royal  Family,  especially  the  noble-minded  father  of  our  gracious 
Queen,   gave  the  sanction  of  their  names  and  the  assistance   of  their 
subscriptions    for    carrying   his    plans  more  widely  into    effect.      This 
powerful  patronage  did  not  suffice,  however,  to  keep  the  author  of  these 
plans  out  of  pecuniary  difficulties  ;   so  little  at  that  time  did  the  public 
feeling  respond  to  the  benevolent  wishes  of  the  monarch  ;  so  indifferent 
was  the  public  mind  to  the  cause  to  which  this  zealous  apostle  of  edu- 
cation had  devoted  himself.     The  difficulties  against  which  he  had  then 
to  struggle  are  thus  simply  described  by  himself  in  a  report  drawn  up 
in  Ibll  : — "  I  was  not  insensible  of  the  heavy  responsibility,  yet  deter- 
mined to  succeed  or  sink  in  the  attempt,  committing  myself  to  the  pro- 
tection of  the  God  of  friendless  youth ;  and,  anticipating  final  success, 
I  persevered.     Had  I  not  done  so,  the  progress  of  the  work  would  have 
been  checked  for  several  years,  and  the  time  of  part  of  one  generation 
would  have  passed  aw^ay,  they  remaining  in  ignorance, — perhaps  the 
clouds  of  mental  night  enveloping  their  minds  to  the  end  of  their  lives. 
The  imposition  of  some  tradesmen  ;  the  deceit  of  a  personal  friend ;  the 
warm    professions   and    cold    support  of  one  professing  patron,  whose 
friendship  proved  to  consist  only  in  smiles,   but  who  left  me  to  bear 
the   expense   of  educating  all  the  children  of  his  poor  tenantry  ;    all 
heightened  the  expense  and  threatened  the  concern  with  ruin.     At  tliis 
juncture  (1808 )  I  providentially  received  the  zealous  support  of  my 
friend  Joseph  Fox,  who  became  attached  to  me   from  a  powerful  con- 
viction of  the  merit  of  my  system   of  education.     From  this  time  the 
debts  of  the  institution  were   put  into  a  state  of  liquidation,    to   the 
great  surprise  and  astonishment  of  some  who  were  expecting  a  contrary 
event." 

The  pecuniary  embarrassments  which  had  so  nearly  cut  short  his 
career  of  usefulness  arose  from  the  insufficiency  of  the  subscriptions  in 
aid  of  buildings,  and  which  amounted  only  to  G24Z.,  while  the  cost  of 
the  premises  erected  exceeded  3500/.  The  yearly  subscriptions  up  to 
the  time  here  mentioned  never  exceeded  600/.,  while  the  necessary  ex- 
penses of  the  school  were  double  that  sum.  To  relieve  Mr.  Lancaster 
from  pecuniary  difficulty,  and  to  enable  him  still  to  devote  his  energies 
to  the  furtherance  of  his  plans,  five  men,  embued  with  the  spirit  of  phi- 
lanthropy in  no  ordinary  degree,  took  upon  themselves  the  office  of 
trustees,  and  came  under  advances  to  the  following  amounts  : — 

2  Y  2 


692  PROGRESS  OF  THE  NATION.  [sec. 

Mr.  Joseph  Fox £1,895 

Mr.  William  Allen 1,232 

IMr.  Joseph  Foster 1,218 

Mr.  "William  Corston r)34 

John  Jackson,  Esq.,  M.P 522 

£5.401 


The  following  extract  from  the  minutes  of  the  trustees,  dated  28th 
March,  1811,  shows  the  extent  to  which  Mr.  Lancaster's  exertions  had 
then  been  successful,  and  the  amount  of  personal  effort  and  sacrifice  by 
which  that  success  had  been  attained.  No  word  of  commendation  is 
needed  to  do  honour  to  the  man  himself,  nor  to  the  friends  through 
whose  disinterested  philanthropy  his  success  was  rendered  possible  : — 

"  Tlie  trustees  examined  the  vouchers  produced  by  Joseph  Lancaster 
relative  to  the  expenditure  which  had  taken  place  prior  to  the  formation 
of  the  committee  in  1808,  and  have  the  satisfaction  to  find  that  they 
are  perfectly  correct,  and  most  satisfactorily  account  for  the  said  ex- 
penditure ;  and  they  find,  that  during  the  time  that  they  have  had  the 
care  of  his  affairs,  he  has  expended  above  1000/.,  the  produce  of  his 
lectures,  in  travelling  and  preparing  for  the  same  ;  that  he  has  main- 
tained himself  during  this  period  by  the  profits  of  his  publications  and 
printing  office  ;  and  in  having  educated  above  6000  children  free  of 
expense  ;  at  the  lowest  rate  of  payment  the  sum  of  7500/.  has  been  given 
to  the  education  of  the  poor." 

Many  years  had  elapsed  after  they  thus  had  taken  upon  themselves 
the  pecuniary  burthens  of  the  undertaking  before  the  contributions  of 
the  public  relieved  the  trustees  from  the  load,  themselves  being  among 
the  most  liberal  contributors ;  but  all  dread  of  failure  through  insuffi- 
ciency of  means  was  at  once  dissipated  by  their  management,  under 
which  the  British  and  Foreign  School  Society  has  been  the  chief  means 
to  wdiich  is  owing  all  that  has  since  been  done  towards  the  education  of 
the  poorer  classes  of  England. 

It  is  not  intended,  by  this  statement,  to  give  any  opinion  as  to  the 
value  of  the  particular  method  of  instruction  adopted  by  Mr.  Lancaster, 
nor  to  enter  upon  the  question  whether  he  or  the  late  Dr.  Bell  is  enti- 
tled to  the  merit  of  having  been  its  inventor,  but  simply  to  narrate  the 
steps  whereby  the  public  mind  in  this  country  has  been  directed  in  this 
all-important  matter ;  steps  which,  without  question  or  controversy, 
have  resulted  from  the  self-sacrifices  of  a  man  of  humble  birth,  without 
fortune  or  powerful  connexions,  and  whose  sole  reliance  for  success  was, 
for  years,  his  own  indomitable  spirit. 

It  is  only  by  comparing  the  actual  condition  of  England  upon  this 
subject  with  the  deplorable  state  of  darkness  in  which  it  was  when 
Joseph  Lancaster  began  his  labours,  that  we  can  eontemplate  the  pro- 
gress hitherto  made  with  any  degree  of  satisfaction.     Only  a  very  few 


cHAr.  IT.]  EDUCATION.  693 

years  have  passed  since  every  effort  that  could  l)e  made  by  those  who 
were  themselves  awakened  to  the  necessity  of  establishing  a  system  of 
national  education  appeared  to  be  ho])elcssly  employed.  It  svas  so 
recently  as  February,  1839,  that  the  Government  first  adopted  the 
subject  of  education  as  one  of  the  objects  that  called  for  its  interference, 
and  constituted  a  Board  of  Education,  consisting  of  five  privy  council- 
lors, over  whom  the  President  of  the  Council  was  to  preside.  To  this 
board  was  confided  the  distribution  of  such  a  sum  as  should  be  voted  by 
Parliament  for  the  promotion  of  education,  and  it  was  especially  charged 
with  the  formation  of  normal  schools.  The  sum  proposed  to  be  })ut  at 
the  disposal  of  this  board  in  that  year  was  30,000/.,  and  in  the  month 
of  June  a  motion  to  that  effect  was  brought  forward  and  carried,  after 
a  debate  of  three  days,  by  a  majority  of  275  to  273,  the  latter  number 
having  voted  in  fiivour  of  an  Address  to  the  Queen,  by  w'ay  of  "  amend- 
ment," praying  Her  Majesty  to  revoke  the  Order  in  Council  by  which 
the  Board  of  Education  had  been  appointed.  On  the  5th  of  the  follow- 
ing month  a  similar  hostile  Address  was  moved  by  a  learned  prelate  in 
the  House  of  Lords,  and  carried  by  a  majority  of  229  to  118  against  the 
Government,  which  had  the  firmness,  nevertheless,  to  persist  in  its  plan. 

That  the  objections  then  taken  to  this  moderate  scheme  of  the 
Government  have  since  been  found  chimerical  we  have  the  best  pos- 
sible proof  in  the  fact  that  it  has  been  cordially  adopted  by  the  former 
opponents  of  that  Government,  and  that  every  vestige  of  that  opposition 
has  disappeared. 

It  was  shown  by  returns  obtained  from  the  workhouses  of  478  unions, 
that  at  Midsummer,  1838,  they  contained  42,7G7  children  under  16 
years  of  age  ;  and  if  this  is  a  true  proportion  for  the  whole  country, 
there  must  have  been  at  that  time  in  the  GOO  unions  into  which  England 
and  AVales  were  to  be  divided  53,682  pauper  children.  Under  the  old 
system  of  neglect  those  children  would  have  grown  up  without  having 
been  impressed  with  any  idea  of  moral  responsibility,  and  without  being 
provided  with  means  much  beyond  those  possessed  by  the  brute  creation 
for  procuring  an  honest  livelihood.  Should  it  then  occasion  surprise 
that  the  ranks  of  crime  have,  in  years  past,  received  so  many  recruits, 
and  have  we  any  right  to  com])Iain  of  this  consequence  of  our  own 
neglect  ? 

The  Government  plans  are  still  perhaps  too  recent,  and,  it  must  be 
added,  too  imperfect,  to  exhibit  any  very  striking  result ;  but  with  a 
knowdedge  of  the  enlightened  zeal  which  is  allowed  to  carry  out  the 
intentions  of  the  legislature,  it  is  not  too  much  to  hope  that  enough  of 
good  will  soon  be  made  apparent  to  show  the  desirableness  of  extending 
those  plans,  so  that  we  shall  soon  cease  to  be  the  lowest  among  the  Pro- 
testant kingdoms  of  Europe  as  respects  the  performance  of  our  duty  in 
promoting  the  education  of  the  people. 


654  PROGRESS  OF  THE  NATION.  [sfc.  tii. 

It  is  but  too  probable  that,  in  even  the  httle  it  has  done,  the  Govern- 
ment has  placed  itself,  where  indeed  it  should  mostly  be  found,  in 
advance  of  the  general  opinion.  In  a  report  made  to  the  Poor  Law 
Commissioners  by  ^Ir.  Edward  Twisleton,  one  of  their  Assistant  Com- 
missioners, bearing  the  date  of  April,  1840,  the  following  passage 
occurs : — "  It  is  impossible  to  shut  one's  eyes  to  the  fact,  that  a  cer- 
tain portion  of  the  upper  and  middle  classes  harbour  a  rooted  distrust  of 
any  plan  for  the  education  of  the  poor.  In  discharge  of  my  ordinary 
duties  I  have  often  had  an  opportunity  of  seeing  this  feeling  manifested 
in  an  undisguised  form.  In  the  rural  unions  of  this  district  (Norfolk), 
it  fortunately  happens  that  religious  dissensions  are  almost  unknown, 
and  religious  scruples  have  only,  on  very  rare  occasions,  been  the  cause 
or  the  pretext  for  throwing  impediments  in  the  way  of  education.  Hence, 
the  chaplains,  in  the  majority  of  the  unions,  give  their  valuable  assist- 
ance in  the  improvement  of  the  schools, — a  fact  which  I  take  the  greater 
pleasure  in  acknowledging,  inasmuch,  as  in  some  unions  they  have 
almost  supplied  the  place  of  a  good  schoolmaster ;  and  it  has  only  been 
in  two  instances  that  the  slightest  opposition  has  been  experienced  from 
that  quarter.  But  amongst  many  small  farmers,  and  some  of  the 
gentry,  unwillingness  to  educate  the  poor  is  openly  defended  by  argu- 
ment ;  and  a  merchant  of  a  seaport  town  gravely  assured  me,  not  long 
ago,  that  an  agricultural  labourer  was  very  little  above  a  brute,  and  that 
to  educate  him  would  merely  have  the  effect  of  rendering  him  dissatisfied 
with  his  situation  of  life." 

The  feeling  thus  described  is  fast  giving  place  to  more  enlightened 
and  benevolent  views.  The  evils  anticipated  from  the  instruction  of 
the  poor  have  not  been  experienced.  It  is  seen  that  the  mind  can  be 
cultivated  without  developing  the  disposition  to  mischief,  or  engendering 
any  irrational  feelings  of  dissatisfaction  w-ith  their  lot ;  while,  on  the 
contrary,  instruction,  when  accompanied  with  moral  training,  is  felt  to 
exercise  a  powerful  influence  in  restraining  from  evil.  When  Lancaster 
began  his  labours,  it  was  a  common  remark,  that  if  he  succeeded  in  his 
object,  we  might  seek  in  vain  for  servants  who  would  clean  our  shoes, 
or  attend  upon  our  horses.  This  irrational  opinion,  which  w^as  founded 
on  the  })resumption  that  men  performed  their  duties  better  for  being 
kept  in  ignorance  regarding  them,  is  but  seldom  heard,  now  that  w^e 
have  proofs  of  the  greater  willingness  which  an  instructed  person  brings 
to  the  performance  of  his  labour,  and  of  the  greater  ability  with  which 
he  is  enabled  to  acquit  himself. 

We  have  not  any  accurate  statements  of  the  amount  and  progress  of 
education  in  this  country.  An  attempt  was  made  in  1833,  by  the  late 
lamented  Earl  of  Kerry,  to  supply  this  deficiency,  but  the  result  of  the 
inquiry  then  made  w^as  very  unsatisfactory,  so  that'  it  has  been  looked 
upon  as  a  failure.     In  one    respect,  however,  the  returns  then   made 


CHAP.  IV.]  EDUCATION.  695 

have  been  productive  of  good,  since  by  their  very  incompleteness  tliey 
have  stimulated  private  parties  to  prosecute  inquiries  in  that  direction, 
and  have  thus  drawn  public  attention  to  the  subject  in  a  greater  degree 
than  might  otherwise  have  been  experienced.  It  was  the  feeling  that 
justice  was  not  done  in  those  returns  to  efforts  made  by  the  friends  of 
education  among  the  manufacturers  of  Lancashire,  that  incited  the 
.Statistical  Society  of  Manchester  to  set  on  foot  tlie  extensive  series  of 
inquiries  which,  with  their  results,  they  subsequently  gave  to  the 
public  ;*  and  it  was  mainly  owing  to  the  publication  of  these  results 
that  the  Statistical  Society  of  London  undertook  similar  investigations 
in  various  parts  of  the  metropolis.  The  reports  of  those  societies  have 
had  an  acknowledged  and  a  powerful  influence  on  the  deliberations  of 
Parliament,  by  laying  bare  the  moral  deformity  ol"  the  land,  and  pointing 
out  a  remedy. 

Having  thus  expressed  a  warning  against  receiving  these  parliamen- 
tary returns  as  accurate  records,  we  are  forced  to  use  them  as  the  only 
data  extant  on  the  subject  having  reference  to  former  years. 

It  appeared  from  returns  thus  made  to  the  House  of  Commons, 
pursuant  to  the  Address  to  the  Crown,  moved  by  Lord  Kerry,  in  May, 
1833,  showing  the  number  and  description  of  schools,  and  the  number 
of  scholars  at  that  time  taught  therein,  in  each  town,  parish,  chapelry, 
or  extra-parochial  place  in  England  and  Wales,  and  indicating  the 
increase  that  had  occurred  since  1818,  that  in  the  last-named  year  there 
were  in  England  and  Wales  U),326  infant  and  daily  schools,  with 
605,704  scholars,  and  5543  Sunday-schools,  with  425,493  scholars.  If 
these  latter  were  in  every  case  distinct  from,  and  additional  to,  the 
scholars  in  infant  and  daily  schools,  the  whole  number  receiving  in- 
struction in  schools  of  all  kinds  in  England  and  Wales  in  1818  was 
1,031,197.  The  population  of  that  part  of  the  kingdom  was  then  (by 
computation)  11,846,057,  and  the  ascertained,  proportion  living  between 
five  and  fifteen  years  old  amounted  to  2,843,053.  If,  making  no  allow- 
ance for  the  duplicate  entries  of  scholars  in  Sunday  and  daily  schools, 
nor  for  the  children  in  infant  schools  under  five  years  of  age,  we  assume 
that  their  numbers  conjointly  would  be  equal  to  those  of  young  persons 
receiving  instruction  under  the  paternal  roof,  it  would  appear  that  nine- 
fourteenths  of  the  children  in  England  and  Wales  were,  in  1818,  without 
any  means  of  instruction.  The  returns  for  1833  were  less  unfavourable. 
The  number  of  children  then  given,  as  being  under  daily  instruction, 

*  The  omissions  in  the  parliamentary  returns,  as  stated  in  the  reports  of  the  Statistical 

Society  of  Manchester,  were : — 

Scholars. 

In  the  three  townships  of  Manchester,  Chorlton,  and  Ilulme  .  10,347 

In  the  borough  of  Bury -"^fil 

In  the  borough  of  Liverpool 1^,.500 

or  about  one-third  of  the  numbers  ascertained  by  the  society. 


696  PROGRESS  OF  THE  NATION.  [sec.  \it. 

was  1,276,947  ;  and  the  scholars  in  Sunday  schools  are  stated  to  have 
been  1,548,890— together  2,825,837.  In  that  year  (1833)  the  number 
of  persons  betwen  five  and  fifteen  years  old  was  3,432,023,  so  that  the 
proportion  then  left  wholly  uninstructed  was  not  qnite  one-third  of  what 
it  had  been  in  1818.  But  'it  is  known  that  in  1833  duplicate  entries 
were  made  of  Sunday  scholars,  who  also  attended  day-schools,  to  the 
amount  of  152,195  children,  and  there  is  reason  to  believe  that  the  num- 
ber actually  twice  reckoned  was  much  greater  than  was  ascertained ; 
besides  which  the  proportionate  number  of  infant  schools,  and  therefore 
of  scholars  under  five  years  of  age,  was  much  greater  in  1833  than  it 
had  been  fifteen  years  before,  which  facts  must  be  taken  in  diminution 
of  the  improvement  indicated  by  the  returns. 

It  must  be  evident  that  when  we  shall  have  procured  a  correct 
statement  of  the  number  of  schools,  and  of  children  attending  them,  we 
shall  possess  only  a  part  of  the  information  necessary  to  determine  the 
condition  or  progress  of  the  people  in  regard  to  their  education.  The 
reports  of  the  Statistical  Societies  of  Manchester  and  London  have 
shown  how  unworthy  of  the  name  of  education  is  the  result  of  what  is 
attempted  in  the  majority  of  schools  frequented  by  children  of  the 
working  classes,  and  which  are  frequently  kept  by  persons  "  whose  only 
qualification  for  this  employment  seems  to  be  their  unfitness  for  every 
other." 

A  lamentable  proof  of  the  correctness  of  this  remark  is  offered  in  the 
following  extract  from  the  report  for  1839,  of  the  chaplain  of  the 
Juvenile  Prison  at  Parkhurst  : — "  One  point  has  forcibly  struck  my 
attention,  and  that  is,  the  comparatively  large  amount  of  acquirement 
in  the  mechanical  elements  of  instruction  (the  art  of  reading  and  repe- 
tition from  memory)  contrasted  with  the  lamentably  small  degree  of 
actual  knowledge  possessed,  either  of  moral  duty  or  religious  principle. 
This  appears  mainly  to  have  arisen  from  the  meaning  of  the  words  read 
or  sounds  repeated  having  rarely  been  made  the  subjects  of  inquiry  or 
reflection.  The  following  digest  will  in  some  degree  illustrate  this 
position.  Your  Lordship  will  perceive  that,  although  fifty-eight  prisoners 
can  in  some  degree  read,  eighty-three  repeat  some  or  all  of  the  church 
catechism,  and  forty-three  possess  some  knowledge  of  Holy  Scripture, 
only  twenty-nine  (exactly  half  the  number  of  readers)  can  give  even  a 
little  account  of  the  meaning  of  words  read,  or  sounds  in  use  ;  and  of 
these  it  appears  very  often  to  be  the  strength  of  the  intellect  exercised 
at  the  moment,  and  not  the  result  of  prior  reflection,  that  leads  them  to 
the  raeanino;  of  a  word. 

"  Another  feature  of  the  moral  condition  of  the  Parkhurst  prisoners 
cannot  but  arrest  the  attention  strongly,  and  that  is,  the  very  large 
])roportion  that  have  received  instruction  for  a  considerable  period  of 
time  in  the  various  schools  wdth  which  our  country  abounds.     A  digest 


f 


CHAP,  n.]  EDUCATIOX.  697 

of  this  portion  of  the  general  table  will  show,  that  out  of  102  lads,  94 
have  attended  schools  ;  69  of  whom  have  been  (]<uj  scholars  for  terms 
longer  than  a  year,  eight  only  having  never  been  at  school. 

"  Read  tolerably •    .     20 

Head  indiflerently 38 


ly  at  all 
all    . 

14 

Read  not  at 

30 

Total  . 

.   102 

Of  those  there  attende 

d  school  from  8  to  12 

years  . 

2 

»                            » 

n                                  » 

5  „  8 
3  „  5 
1  „  3 
under  1  year 

'„       . 

5 

.     21 

.     44 

22 

'.    "s 

Total  . 

.   102 

This  result  will  not  in  any  degree  surprise  those  persons  who  have 
examined  the  reports  of  the  Statistical  Societies  of  Loudon  and  Man- 
chester, and  who  have  thus  become  acquainted  with  the  insufficient 
acquirements  of  a  large  proportion  of  persons  who  take  upon  themselves 
the  task  of  instruction. 

The  greatest  want,  now  that  the  public  mind  is  in  a  measure  aroused, 
to  exertion  in  this  direction,  is  felt  to  be  that  of  qualified  persons  as 
teachers.  This  is  a  want  which  it  must  be  the  work  of  years  effectually 
to  supply,  if  even  the  establishing  of  normal  schools  were  already 
accomplished  upon  an  adequate  foundation.  Imperfect  as  our  machinery 
for  education  now  is  in  this  essential  particular,  we  cannot  reasonably 
hope  to  derive  from  the  formation  of  schools  the  same  amount  of  advan- 
tage as  would  be  experienced  if  a  sufficient  number  of  qualified  teachers 
were  in  existence,  and  hence  some  over-sanguine  friends  of  education 
may  encounter  disappointment.  "  As  is  the  teacher,  so  is  the  school," 
is  an  axiom  fully  recognised  in  countries  where  the  want  of  which  we 
have  now  to  complain  has  been  made  to  disappear  through  a  more 
timely  attention  on  the  part  of  their  governments  to  this  essential  requi- 
site. The  effi3rts  of  the  Committee  of  Managers  of  the  British  and 
Foreign  School  Society  have  long  been  directed  to  this  object,  and 
institutions  for  training  teachers,  both  male  and  female,  are  now  also  in 
active  operation  under  the  managers  of  the  National  Society.  Grants 
of  money  for  this  purpose  have  been  made  by  Parliament  to  both  these 
institutions ;  but  the  utmost  that  they  can  eftect  will  bear  only  a  very 
insufficient  proportion  to  the  wants  of  the  country.  A  model  school, 
established  through  the  joint  exertions,  and  chiefly  at  the  expense,  of 
Sir  James  Kay  Shuttleworth  and  Mr.  E.  C.  TufFnell,  at  Battersea,  has 
formed  a  powerful  aid  by  means  of  the  plans  tested  under  the  inspection 
of  those  gentlemen,  and  which,  as  ftir  as  they  have  ])roved  successful, 
have  led  to  their  adoption  in  other  institutions. 


698  PROGRESS  OF  THE  NATION.  [sec.  tii. 

Upon  the  whole,  if  the  progress  made  towards  the  systematic  educa- 
tion of  the  entire  people  be  not  so  great  as  is  desirable,  we  must 
acknowledge  it  to  be  as  much  as  could  reasonably  be  looked  for  in  the 
short  time  that  has  elapsed  since  the  subject  has  been  taken  under  the 
charge  of  the  Grovernment,  while  it  is  such  as  justifies  the  most  sanguine 
hopes  for  the  future. 

A  plan  has  been  adopted  by  the  Registrar- General  of  Births,  Deaths, 
and  Marriages  in  England  and  Wales,  whereby  the  marriage  registers 
are  made  available  as  a  test  of  the  proportion  of  the  people  to  whom 
instruction  has  been  imparted,  so  far,  at  least,  as  the  ability  to  write 
affords  such  a  test.  In  the  year  ending  30th  June,  1839,  returns 
were  first  made  of  the  number  of  persons  wdio,  from  the  want  of  this 
degree  of  instruction,  have  affixed  marks  instead  of  signatures  to  the 
registers.  In  the  report  made  by  Mr.  Lister  in  1840,  he  draws  atten- 
tion to  this  plan  by  the  following  remarks : — 

"  Almost  every  raari'iage  is  duly  registered,  and  every  register  of 
marriage  is  signed  by  the  parties  married  ;  those  who  are  able  writing 
their  names,  and  those  who  are  unable,  or  who  write  very  imperfectly, 
making  their  marks.  Therefore,  an  enumeration  of  the  instances  in 
which  the  mark  has  been  made  will  show  the  proportion  among  those 
married  who  either  cannot  write  at  all,  or  write  very  imperfectly. 

"  It  may  be  said  in  favour  of  this  criterion,  that  it  is  free  from  the 
disadvantage  of  selection,  including  alike  every  class  and  condition,  and 
every  age,  except  children  and  very  old  persons.  It  must  at  the  same 
time  be  remembered,  that  although  a  fair  average  is  thus  afforded,  the 
portion  of  the  whole  population  exhibited  in  the  yearly  returns  of 
marriages  is  small.  It  appears  that  there  are  usually  about  seven  or 
eight  marriages  to  every  1000  of  the  population.  If,  therefore,  it  be 
assumed  that  persons  between  the  ages  of  eighteen  and  sixty-five 
constitute  half  the  population  (which  the  enumeration  of  ages  in  1821 
shows  to  be  very  nearly  the  case),  it  will  follow  that  of  those  who  may 
be  considered  the  marriageable  portion  of  the  community,  about  30 
in  every  1000  (or  three  per  cent.)  are  married  yearly.  The  portion, 
therefore,  whose  signatures  appear  on  the  marriage  registers  of  a  single 
year  is  sufficiently  small  to  be  easily  affected  by  accidental  circum- 
stances ;  and  it  cannot  safely  be  asserted  that  the  30  in  1000,  from 
whose  signatures  we  would  draw  an  inference  respecting  the  other  970, 
may  not  happen  to  consist  of  more  than  the  proportionate  number  of 
uneducated  persons.  It  must  not,  therefore,  be  hastily  assumed,  upon 
the  evidence  aflTorded  by  the  returns  of  a  single  year,  that  the  inhabit- 
ants of  any  particular  county  or  district  are  less  educated  than  their 
neighbours.  The  experiment  must  be  repeated  often,  and  be  attended 
with  similar  results,  before  this  inference  can  be  drawn  with  safety  ;  and 
it  is  only  when  returns  of  the  same  description,  given  for  several  sue- 


EDUCATION'. 


699 


ce?sive  years,  shall  have  exhibited  similar  facts,  that  it  will  be  perfectly 
justifiable  to  arrive  at  an  unfavourable  conclusion  with  respect  to  any 
particular  district." 

Since  these  remarks  were  written  to  accompany  the  first  returns  of 
the  kind,  the  experience  of  other  years  has  been  obtained,  and  the  result 
of  the  six  years,  which  is  given  in  the  annexed  table  (p.  701),  seems, 
by  the  uniformity  of  the  proportions,  to  justify  reliance  upon  this  test  to 
a  greater  degree  than  was  first  anticipated. 

In  the  whole  of  England  and  Wales,  among  367,894  couples  married, 
during  three  years,  it  appears  that  there  were  122,458  men  and  181,378 
women  who  either  could  not  write  at  all,  or  who  had  attained  so  little 
proficiency  in  penmanship  that  they  were  averse  to  the  exposure  of  their 
deficiency.  The  numbers  so  subscribing  the  marriage  register  in  each 
year  were — 


Years 

ending 

30th  June. 


1839 
1840 
1841 


Number 

of 
Marriages. 


121,083 
124,329 
122,432 


Persons  affixing  Marks. 


Men. 


40,587 
41,812 
40,059 


Women. 


58,959 
62,523 
59,896 


Number 

of 
Marriages. 


I  Persons  aflixing  Marks. 


118,825 
123,818 
132,249 


Men. 


Women. 


38,031  56,965 
40,520  60,715 
42,912  '     65,073 


Duri 
tained 
under  :- 


ng  the  three  years  ending  30th  June,  1841,  the  ages  were  ascer- 
of  40,874  persons,  or  20,437  couples  who  were    married,  as 


Ages. 
15  and  under  20  years 


Women. 


20 
25 
30 
35 
40 
45 
50 
55 
60 
65 
70 
75 
80 


25 
30 
35 
40 
45 
50 
55 
60 
65 
70 
75 
80 


.537 

2 

,711 

10,383 

10,424 

5,103 

3 

,951 

1,900 

1 

498 

944 

739 

603 

532 

371 

273 

271 

161 

147 

69 

112 

55 

41 

17 

15 

5 

6 

2 

4 

20,437 

20,437 

The  mean  ages  of  the  above  were, — 

Men     .     ,      .     27*30  years 
Women      .      .     25 -33      ,, 

so  that  the  test  of  education  applies  to  the  condition,  in  this  respect,  of 
the  population  generally  as  it  existed  about  ten  to  fifteen  years  before. 
By  continuing  to  record  the  facts  in  future  years,  we  shall  have  a 
tolerable  guide  of  the  progress  in  intellectual  acquirement — so  far  at 
least  as  elementary  instruction  is  concerned — in  the  years  that  have 
followed.  It  must  be  apparent  how  much  room  was  aflforded  for  im- 
provement in  this  eesential  object. 


700 


PROGRESS  OF  THE  NATION. 


Proportion  per  C«nt.  who  signed  with  Maiks. 

Years  ending  30th  June, 

Years  ending  31st  December, 

DIVISIONS. 

1839 

1840 

1841 

1842 

1843 

1844 

Men.  Worn. 

Men. 

Worn. 

Men.   Worn. 

Men.   Worn. 

VIen.  j  Worn. 

Men.  Worn. 

Metropolis     .     .     . 

11-6    23-9 

12- 1 

1           1 
24-8    11'4| 

23-7 

11-5 

23-0 

12-0    23-8 

12-1 

24-8 

South-Eastern  Counti* 
Surrey,  part  of     .  1 
Kent     (except 

;s:— 

Greenwich)  . 
Sussex  .      .      .      .  ^ 
Hants  .... 
Berks    .      .      .      ,j 

32-6 

40-0 

32-6 

41-2 

32-3 

40-2 

32-1 

38-6 

31-8 

38-6 

30-8 

38-0 

South  Midland  Counti 
;Middlesex,  part  of] 
Herts    .... 
Bucks   .... 

38 : — 

Oxford       ...  I 
Northampton 
Huntingdon    . 
Bedford     .     .      . 
Cambridge 

42-7 

52-7 

43-5 

53-9 

43-1 

52-6 

41-8 

50-5 

42-3 

52-4 

41-3 

.50-8 

Eastern  Counties: — 
Essex    .     .      .      .  \ 
Suffolk       ...  I 
Norfolk     .      .      .) 

45-1 

51-7 

48-1 

53-8 

45-0 

50-8 

45-6 

51-1 

46-1 

50-6 

45-6 

51-7 

South-Westem  Count 
"SVilts    .... 
Dorset  .... 
Devon  .      .      .      .  > 
Cornwall    . 
Somerset    . 

les:— 
32-4 

47-0 

34-3 

48-4 

33-9 

47-0 

34-6 

47-8 

34-9 

48-4 

34-1 

46-4 

Western  Counties : — 
Hereford   . 

/ 

Salop    ....  1 

|39-7 

53-6 

38-7 

53-5 

37-5 

51-3 

36-1 

49-5 

37-1 

50-9 

37-3 

51-6 

Stafford      .      .      . 
"Warwick  . 

North-Midland  Couni 
Leicester   .     .     .-i 
Rutland     ... 
Lincoln      .      .      .  \ 
Nottingham    . 
Derby  .... 

ies: — 
:32-8 

50-1 

33-3 

50-7 

32-2 

47-1 

30-7 

47-4 

31-9 

48-0 

31-1 

49-3 

North-Western  Counties : — 

Chester      .      .      .1 
Lancaster  .      .      .J 

41-7 

64-2 

38-7 

66-5 

38-1 

66-1 

36-3 

64-7 

38-5 

66-5 

38-8 

66-7 

York 

33-6 

56-9 

35-2 

59-1 

32-7 

55-8 

33-2 

57-4 

34-0 

57-2 

33-9 

58-5 

Ncrtheni Counties  :— 
Durham     . 
Northumberland. 
Cumberland   . 
Westmoreland 

>  20-6 

42-3 

22-1 

42-8 

21-5 

42-1 

21-2 

41-0 

21-4 

41-9 

19-4 

38-4 

Monmouth  and  Wale 

s  48-2 

69-6 

48-1 

69-2 

47-5 

69-4 

43-7 

66-6 

43-8 

68-1 

44-4 

67-8 

England  and  Wales  * 

33-7 

49-5 

33-6 

50-3 

32-7 

|48-8 

32-0 

47-9 

32-7 

49-0 

32-4 

49-2 

The  proportions  of  persons  who  affixed  their  marks  to  the  registers  in  1846  •were — 

Jlen.  I       Women. 

Metropolis     ....     11-6         i        22-6 
England  and  Wales      .     .32-6         I        48-1 


CHAP,  iv.j  EDUCATIOX,  701 

We  might  have  expected  to  find  that  the  inhabitants  of  the  metropolis 
had  some  advantage  over  the  rest  of  the  kingdom  in  their  intellectual 
acquirements,  but  certainly  not  in  the  degree  that  is  indicated  by  these 
returns,  from  which  it  aj)poars  that  the  proportion  of  persons  luiable  to 
write  is  only  one-half  of  that  found  in  the  otherwise  most  favoured 
division  (the  south-eastern  counties),  and  which,  indeed,  from  its  locality, 
partakes  in  some  considerable  degree  of  the  conditions  of  the  metropolis, 
while  the  proportion  is  less  than  one-third  of  that  found  in  Monmouth- 
shire and  Wales.  Some  part  of  the  apparent  superiority  of  the  metro- 
polis is  probably  attributable  to  the  fact,  that  among  the  easy  classes,  a 
proportion  greater  than  they  bear  to  their  numbers  in  the  country  gene- 
rally are  married  in  London  ;  but  it  is  to  be  feared  that  another  and  a 
less  reputable  explanation  is  to  be  found  in  the  low  condition  of  morals, 
which  leads  to  connexions  among  the  w^orking  classes  unsanctioned  by 
the  church,  for  which  a  crowded  metropolis  offers  greater  facilities,  and 
against  which  it  presents  fewer  restraints  than  are  to  be  found  else- 
where. 

The  proportion  of  ignorance  exhibited  in  1839  by  Monmouthshire  and 
AVales,  where  48  in  100  of  males,  and  61)  in  100  of  females,  were  unable 
to  write  their  names,  offers  a  striking  commentary  upon  the  scenes  of 
violence  that  were  committed  in  that  quarter  in  November,  1839,  and 
which,  with  their  cause — the  absence  of  due  means  for  instruction — 
formed  the  subject  of  a  report  made  to  the  Committee  of  Council  on 
Education  by  Mr.  Tremenheere,  which  was  published  by  that  body  in 
the  following  year.  It  there  appeared  that  more  than  two-thirds  of  the 
children  of  the  working  classes  in  the  district  did  not  attend  any  school, 
and  that,  as  regarded  the  remainder,  the  means  provided  for  instruction, 
and  its  quality,  were  for  the  most  part  little  calculated  to  produce  any 
good  result. 

Next  in  the  order  of  ignorance  to  the  district  just  mentioned  stand 
the  great  manufacturing  counties  of  Chester  and  Lancaster,  in  which 
forty  per  cent,  of  males,  and  sixty-five  per  cent,  of  females,  were  unable 
to  sign  their  names.  At  the  time  when  the  individuals  to  whom  this  test 
was  applied  in  the  years  comprised  in  the  returns  were  of  an  age  to 
pi'ofit  by  instruction,  there  had  been  no  interference  with  the  subject 
on  the  part  of  the  legislature.  The  measures  which  have  since  been 
adopted  may  reasonably  be  expected  to  remove  from  those  counties,  and 
fi-om  others  similarly  circumstanced,  the  stigma  now  affixed  to  them  by 
the  revelations  of  the  Registrar- General. 

The  statistics  of  education  in  Scotland  are  deserving  of  greater  con- 
fidence than  those  relating  to  England  and  Wales,  owing  probably  to 
the  much  superior  machinery  that  can  be  employed  for  their  collection. 
Every  parish  in  Scotland  contains  at  least  one  parish  school,  and  there 
are  but  few  parishes  in  which  further  provision  has  not  been  made  for 


702  PROGRESS  OF  THE  NATION.  [sec.  vn. 

the  instruction  of  the  people.  Returns  of  the  number  of  children  educated 
in  these  schools  have  at  different  times  been  called  for  by  Parliament, 
from  which  the  following  figures  have  been  taken  : — 


1825 

183« 

1837 

Scholars. 

Scholars. 

Scholars. 

In  parochial  schools 

.       56,232 

57,332 

61,921 

In  schools  not  parochial     . 

.     101,495 

119,350 

128,318 

Total     .     .     .     157,727  176,682  190,239 


The  increase  in  the  numbers  between  1825  and  1836  was  hardly 
equal  to  the  increased  number  of  persons  of  ages  requiring  instruction. 
The  number  between  five  and  fifteen  years  of  age,  in  1821,  was  found 
to  be  twenty-four  per  cent,  of  the  whole  population,  and  according  to 
this  proportion  the  numbers  between  those  ages  in  each  of  the  above 
years,  must  have  been — • 

In  1825      528,  .508 

1836  599,288 

1837  605,620 

The  proportion  receiving  instruction,  therefore,  was — 

In  1825      29-84  per  cent. 

1836  29-48    „ 

1837  31-41    „ 

The  increase  of  scholars  in  the  parochial  schools,  comparing  1837  with 
1825,  is  not  equal  to  the  increased  number  of  children  living  at  the  later 
period,  and  although,  in  schools  established  by  private  persons,  the 
proportion  was  more  favourable  than  in  1825,  it  was  still  far  below  the 
requirements  of  the  population,  leaving  415,381  children,  or  68"59  per 
cent,  of  the  whole,  unprovided  with  education,  from  which  number  must, 
however,  be  deducted  children  who  receive  instruction  under  their 
parents'  roof. 

The  following  particulars,  taken  from  the  parliamentary  returns, 
explain  the  nature  of  the  instruction  imparted  in  the  Scottish  schools. 
The  attention  long  bestowed  upon  'the  subject  of  education  in  that  part 
of  the  kingdom  will  sufficiently  account  for  the  advantageous  position 
which  the  natives  of  Scotland  so  generally  acquire  for  themselves  when 
they  quit  the  land  of  their  birth,  and  further  may  in  part  explain  why 
the  burthen  of  providing  for  the  maintenance  of  the  poor  has  been  there 
so  inconsiderable  when  compared  with  the  like  burthen  in  England': — 

Parochial      Non-Parochial 

Schools.  Schools. 

Number  of  schools  which  returned  answers 924  2,329 

„  „  did  not  return  answers    ....         129  1,025 

„        in  which  the  scholars  are  periodically  examined .      .         917  2,015 

„        of  teachers 4,054  2,940 

„  „  having  other  occupation 286  214 


ci:a1'.  IV.]  EDUCATION.  7U3 

-,        ,  „      ,       ,    .         ,  .   1  i         ,  ,  Parochial     Non-Parochial 

Number  of  schools  in  which  arc  taught —  Schools.  Schools. 

English 924  2,280 

Gaelic 12  23;> 

Greek 41.")  I'Jl 

Latin (;G4  501 

Modern  languages '.      .  307  214 

Mathematics G89  083 

Arithmetic 900  1,810 

Gcograpliy 701  1,141 

History G02  901 

Religious  instruction 92,3  2  254 

Singing oqi  512 

l>ia^ving 1()(,  211 

Number  in  whicli  the  scholars  are  taught  in  classes    ,      .      .  903  2  300 

„             „           monitors  are  employed 64g  1  092 

„  „  instruction  is  aliorded  in  gardening,  agri- ) 

culture,  or  any  mechanical  operation j  '  '  •'^ 

The  opposition  offered  to  the  Government  plan  of  education  in  En"-- 
land  has  been  of  a  moderate  character  when  compared  with  the  hostility 
shown  to  the  Board  of  National  Education  in  Ireland.  It  has  ever  been 
the  bane  of  that  portion  of  the  kingdom  that  the  rancour  of  party  spirit 
has  been  allowed  to  interfere  with  every  effort  made  for  the  improve- 
ment of  the  people. 

It  was  probably  owing  to  the  evils  arising  from  the  state  of  society  in 
which  this  irrational  habit  was  possible — a  habit  which  annihilated  every 
feeling  of  citizenship,  and  converted  every  man  into  a  party  bigot — 
that  drew  the  attention  of  the  Government  earlier  than  was  done  for 
England  to  the  necessity  of  providing  a  plan  of  education  which  should 
bring  together  in  fellowship  the  members  of  the  two  great  opposing 
factions.  From  its  first  institution,  in  1831,  by  Lord  Stanley,  the 
plan  of  education  for  Ireland  has  by  its  success  in  this  respect  proved 
itself  entitled  to  be  called  National.  The  plans  previously  sanctioned 
by  successive  Governments  having  ostensibly  this  object,  did  not  owe 
their  failure  to  the  want  of  money,  which  indeed  was  liberally  provided 
by  Parhament.  To  one  society,  "  The  Incorporated  Society  for  pro- 
moting English  Protestant  Schools  in  Ireland,"  which  was  founded  in 
1731,  upwards  of  1,100,000/.  were  at  different  times  voted,  and  about 
500,000/.  more  was  granted  in  about  50  years  for  the  support  of  the 
"  Charter  Schools,"  besides  other  sums  of  smaller  amount  devoted 
during  the  same  years  to  the  like  purpose.  The  effects  recently  pro- 
duced in  England  by  sums  which,  compared  with  these,  are  quite  insig- 
nificant, may  serve  to  show  what  might  have  been  accomplished  in 
Ireland  had  the  liberality  of  Parliament  not  been  counteracted  by  the 
spirit  of  bigotry  and  intolerance  on  the  part  of  those  to  whom  the 
administration  of  the  funds  was  intrusted.  In  their  hands  the  well- 
underst(jod  object  of  the  schools  established  was  not  education,  but  making 
proselytes  ;  and  the  result  of  their  management  was  precisely  what  might 
nave  been  foretold. 


701  PROGRESS  OF  THE  NATION.  [sec.  yii. 

Nothing  could  be  better  in  intention  than  the  legal  provision  made 
from  an  early  period  of  our  history  for  educating  the  youth  of  Ireland, 
and  nothing  could  well  be  worse  than  the  practical  result.  In  the  reign 
of  Henry  VIII.  a  statute  was  passed,  entitled  "  An  Act  for  the  English 
Order,  Habit,  and  Language,"  under  which  the  ecclesiastical  authori- 
ties were  directed  to  administer  an  oath  to  every  person  receiving  spi- 
ritual promotion,  "  That  he  would  teach  the  English  tongue  to  all  in 
his  cure  ;  that  he  would  bid  the  beads  in  the  English  tongue  ;  and 
further,  that  he  would  keep  or  cause  to  be  kept,  within  the  place, 
territory,  or  parish,  where  he  should  have  any  rule,  benefice,  or  promo- 
tion, a  school  to  learn  English,  if  any  of  the  children  of  the  parish 
should  come  to  him  to  learn  the  same,  taking  for  the  keeping  of  the 
same  school  such  convenient  stipend  or  salary  as  in  the  said  land  was 
accustomally  used  to  be  taken."  This  statute  was  confirmed  by  the 
7th  Act  of  Will.  III.,  and  is  still  unrepealed  ;  and  every  clergyman,  on 
his  induction  to  a  living  in  Ireland,  is  required  by  law  to  take  an  oatn 
in  the  following  terms : — "  I  do  sclemnly  swear  that  I  will  teach,  or 
cause  to  be  taught  an  English  school  within  the  vicarage  (or  rectory) 
of  *  *  *  as  the  law  in  that  case  requires."  The  performance  of  the 
duty  thus  solemnly  undertaken,  it  has  been  the  almost  universal  custom 
of  the  incumbents  of  parishes  to  confine  within  the  payment  of  forty  shil- 
lings per  annum  as  a  salary  to  a  schoolmaster,  which  act,  if  it  be  held 
to  discbarge  the  legal  obligation — which  is  very  doubtful — can  hardly 
be  thought  a  fulfilment  of  the  moral  duty  imposed  on  them  by  the  statute 
and  confirmed  by  their  own  oaths. 

By  the  Act  7.  Will.  III.,  it  was  made  penal  to  receive  any  other  than 
a  Protestant  education,  and  it  was  enacted  that  no  person  of  the  Romish 
religion  should  publicly  teach  a  school  under  a  penalty  of  20/.  and  three 
months'  imprisonment.  Where  schools  were  kept,  the  richer  papists 
would  not  send  their  children  to  them,  and  the  charge  made  was  so  high 
that  the  poorer  people  could  not  do  so. 

The  "  Incorporated  Society,"  already  mentioned,  was  founded  ex- 
pressly to  perform  the  work  of  proselytism,  for  which  purpose  the 
managers  found  it  necessai-y  to  cut  off  all  intercourse  between  the  pupils 
and  their  parents,  by  confining  them  within  the  walls  of  the  schools 
during  the  whole  period  of  their  education.  The  expense  attending 
these  schools  was  accordingly  great,  while  the  natural  repugnance  of 
the  parents  to  the  breaking  up  of  the  ties  between  themselves  and  their 
children  was  so  strong  that,  except  in  years  of  scarcity,  the  numbers 
which  the  schools  were  able  and  willing  to  receive  were  never  kept  up  ; 
and  although,  in  addition  to  the  munificent  grants  of  Parliament,  private 
benevolence  was  greatly  exercised  in  their  behalf,  the  society  was  at  no 
time  able  to  instruct  so  many  as  2000  scholars.  In  }784,  John  Howard, 
in    addition  to    his    inquiries    concerning   prisons,    applied   himself  to 


ciiAv.  IV.]  EDUC^VnON.  705 

examine  tlie  state  of  the  cliarter  schools  of  Ireland,  his  account  of  which 
induced  the  Irish  House  of  Commons  to  appoint  a  committee  for  the 
fiM-ther  investigation  of  the  subject.  From  the  report  of  this  committee 
it  appeared  that  the  schools  were  out  of  repair  and  going  to  ruin  ;  that 
the  children  were  "  sickly,  pale,  and  such  miserable  objects  that  they 
were  a  disgrace  to  all  society ;  that  their  reading  had  been  neglected 
for  the  purpose  of  making  them  work  for  their  masters ;  that  they  were 
in  general  filthy  and  ill-clothed,  without  shifts  or  shirts,  and  in  such  a 
situation  that  it  was  indecent  to  look  on  ;  the  diet  was  insufficient  for 
their  support ;  and  in  general  they  had  the  itch,  and  other  eruptive  dis- 
orders." The  public  money  was  thus  shown  to  be  expended  "  for  the 
purpose  of  imprisoning,  starving,  beating,  diseasing,  destroying  the 
natural  affections,  and  letting  the  understanding  run  to  waste,  of  about 
1400  poor  children  annually,  under  the  pretence  of  instructing  and  con- 
verting the  young  generation." 

The  Irish  Parliament  contented  itself  with  thus  ascertaining  the  evils, 
and  continued  to  vote  the  public  money  to  the  society  without  making 
any  provision  for  their  prevention  ;  so  that  at  the  period  of  the  legisla- 
tive union  the  schools  continued  in  the  same  condition  of  neglect  and 
disorder,  although  the  yearly  expenditure  had  increased  to  20,000/. 
From  that  time  to  1825  the  Im})erial  Parliament  voted  for  the  charter 
schools  of  Ireland,  sums  amounting  to  675,707/.  in  addition  to  other 
sources  of  income,  and  the  expenditure  during  those  twenty-five  years 
amounted  to  884,739/.,  for  which  sum  they  maintained  on  the  average 
thirty-five  schools  and  1870  children,  so  that  the  yearly  cost  of  each 
school  was  1000/.,  and  of  each  scholar  18/.  18^.  In  1824,  when  the 
attention  of  a  parliamentary  commission  was  directed  to  the  subject, 
there  were  found  only  twenty-four  boarding-schools,  with  about  1700 
scholars.  In  the  course  of  that  year  500  infants  from  the  P'oundling 
Hospital,  an  institution  supported  by  parliamentary  grants,  were  trans- 
ferred to  the  charter  schools.* 

Notwithstanding  the  extravagant  outlay  for  these  charter  schools, 
the  advantages  derived  from  them  were  exceedingly  small,  if  indeed 
they  w'ere  productive  of  any  advantage  whatever.  This  remark  is  fully 
warranted  by  the  following  extract  from  the  First  Report  of  the  Com- 
missioners for  Inquiring  concerning  Education  in  Ireland,  presented  to 
Parliament  in  1825  : — 

"  We  are  convinced  that  if  a  thousand  children,  educated  in  charter 
schools,  were  to  l)e  compared  with  an  equal  number  who  had  remained 
in  apparently  wretched  cabins  inhabited  by  their  parents,  but  who  had 

*  In  30  years,  from  1797  to  1826,  out  of  52,000  children  admitted  into  the  Foundling 
Hospital,  41,500  died.  The  money  granted  to  the  institution  by  Parliament  during  that 
period  amounted  to  753,685/. 

2  z 


706  PROGRESS  OF  THE  NATION.  [sec.  vn. 

attended  orderly  and  well-regulated  day-schools,  it  would  be  fi.und,  not 
only  that  the  latter  had  passed  their  years  of  instruction  far  more  hap- 
pily to  themselves,  but  that,  when  arrived  at  the  age  of  manhood,  they 
would,  upon  a  general  average,  be  in  every  respect  more  valuable  and 
better-instructed  members  of  society  ;  they  would  have  improved  in 
knowledge  under  circumstances  which  would  have  strengthened  and  con- 
firmed their  connexion  with  all  those  to  whom  they  must  naturally  look 
for  protection  and  assistance,  and  would  enter  upon  life  with  their  affec- 
tions awakened,  their  principles  confirmed,  and  their  character  raised  by 
the  reliance  they  would  have  learned  to  place  in  their  own  exertions, 
and  in  the  practice  they  would  have  acquired  of  controlling  and  con- 
ducting themselves. 

"  It  is  very  different  in  the  instance  of  a  boy  let  loose  from  a  charter 
school,  who  has  lived  in  a  state  of  existence  entirely  artificial.  All  his 
wants  having  been  supplied  by  the  care  of  others  ;  he  has  become  peevish, 
fretful,  and  impatient,  if  not  supplied  according  to  rule.  His  mind  is 
impressed  by  a  feeling  of  sullenness  resulting  from  a  system  of  severity 
and  terror.  His  expectations  have  been  unduly  raised  as  to  his  own 
future  prospects,  though  the  habits  of  indolence  and  apathy,  which  have 
appeared  to  us  peculiarly  to  charactei-ise  these  children,  render  them 
altogether  unsuited  to  the  active,  patient,  persevering  exertions  which 
are  necessary  to  their  success  in  life. 

"  The  expenditure  of  the  society  during  the  ninety  years  it  has  been 
in  operation,  has  been  no  less  than  1,612,138/.,  of  which  the  sum  of 
1,027,715/.  was  derived  from  parliamentary  grants." 

In  the  session  of  1814-15  a  grant  of  6980/.,  Irish  currency,  was  made 
by  Parliament  to  "  The  Society  for  promoting  the  Education  of  the  Poor 
in  Ireland."  This  society  was  formed  in  1811,  and  was  at  first  wholly 
supported  by  private  subscriptions.  When  parliamentary  assistance  was 
rendered,  model-schools  for  male  and  female  children  were  erected,  and 
the  society  has  since  been  known,  from  the  name  of  the  site  chosen  for 
these  buildings,  as  the  Kildare-street  Society.  Its  active  operations 
began  in  1817,  and  the  progress  made  during  nine  years  to  1825  was 
as  follows  : — 


Years. 
1817 
1818 

Schools  in 
connexion. 

8 
65 

Scholars. 

557 

4,527 

1819 

133 

9,263 

1820 

241 

16,786 

1821 
1822 
1823 

381 
513 
727 

26,474 
36,657 
51,637 

1824 

1.122 

79,287 

1825 

l,3i(5 

102.380 

.  ii.vr.  IV.]  EDUCATION.  707 

in  Ibol  the  number  of  schools  in  connexion  with  this  society  was  1G21, 
and  of  scholars  137,639.  From  this  time  the  numbers  began  to  decrease. 
Various  reasons  are  assigned  for  this  circumstance.  The  establi.-lnnent 
of  national  schools,  under  the  immediate  patronjige  and  direction  of  the 
Government,  and  the  discontinuance  of  the  parliamentary  grants,  are 
among  the  chief  of  these  reasons  ;  but  to  these  must  be  added  a  growing 
dislike  on  the  part  of  the  Roman  Catholic  clergy,  because  of  the  rule  of 
the  society  which  obliged  the  children  to  read  the  Scriptures  without 
note  or  comment,  and  indeed  forbade  the  use  of  any  comment,  whether 
written  or  oral. 

The  model-schools  in  Kildare-place  were  well  conducted,  and  the 
schools  in  connexion  w^ith  the  society  were  "  convenient,  cleanly,  and  in 
good  order,  and  the  instruction  given  extremely  efficient."  The  only 
bar  to  their  successful  extension  was  offered  by  the  rule  which  interfered 
with  the  discipline  considered  by  the  Church  of  Home  as  being  proper 
for  the  religious  education  of  its  members. 

This  difficulty  was  removed  by  the  establishment  of  a  Board  of 
Commissioners  for  National  Education  in  Ireland.  The  reasons  for  this 
establishment,  and  the  principles  by  which  it  should  be  governed,  are 
fully  explained  in  a  letter  addressed  in  October  1831  by  Lord  Stanley, 
then  Chief  Secretary  for  Ireland,  to  the  Duke  of  Leinster. 

A  Committee  of  the  House  of  Commons  had  recommended,  in  1828, 
the  adoption  of  a  system  "  which  should  affijrd,  if  possible,  a  combined 
literary  and  a  separate  religious  education,  and  should  be  capable  of 
being  so  far  adapted  to  the  views  of  the  religious  persuasions  which  pre- 
vail in  Ireland  as  to  render  it,  in  truth,  a  system  of  national  education 
for  the  poorer  classes  of  the  community." 

In  order  to  afford  security  to  the  country  that  "  while  the  interests  of 
religion  should  not  be  overlooked,  the  most  scrupulous  care  should 
be  taken  not  to  interfere  with  the  peculiar  tenets  of  any  description  of 
Christian  pupils,"  it  was  required  "  that  the  schools  be  kept  open  on 
four  or  five  days  of  the  week,  at  the  discretion  of  the  Commissioners,  for 
moral  and  literary  education  only  ;  and  that  the  remaining  one  or  two 
days  in  the  week  be  set  apart  for  giving,  separately,  such  religious  edu- 
cation to  the  children  as  may  be  approved  of  by  the  clergy  of  their 
respective  persuasions.  Tlie  clergy  are  also  permitted  and  encouraged 
to  give  religious  instruction  to  the  children  belonging  to  their  respective 
persuasions,  either  before  or  after  the  ordinary  school  hours,  on  the  other 
days  of  the  week." 

During  the  first  few  years  after  their  appointment,  the  Commissioners 
for  National  Education  in  Ireland  had  to  combat  against  a  most  deter- 
mined hostility,  chiefly  on  the  part  of  the  Protestant  clergy.  This  has 
happily  now  in  a  great  measure,  if  not  entirely,  ceased,  and  the  number 
of  schools  and  scholars  has  been  steadily  advancing  from  year  to  year. 

2  z  2 


708 


TROGRESS  OF  THE  NATION. 


[sec.    VII. 


During  each  of  the  sixteen  year: 
as  follows  : — 


1834  to  1849,  the  minihers  have  heen 


Schools  in 

Children  on 

Schools  in 

Cliihlren  on 

Years. 

operation. 

the  Rolls. 

Years. 

operation. 

the  Rolls. 

1834 

789 

107,042 

1842 

2,721 

319,792 

183.5 

1,106 

14.5,. ')21 

1843 

2,912 

3.55,320 

1836 

1,181 

153,707 

1844 

3,1.53 

395,. 550 

1837 

1,300 

166,929 

1845 

3,426 

4.32,844 

1838 

1,384 

169,533 

1846 

3,6.37 

456,410 

1839 

1,581 

192,971 

1847 

3,825 

402,632 

1840 

1,978 

2.32,. iCO 

1848 

4,109 

507,469 

1841 

2,337 

281,849 

1849 

4,-321 

480,623 

The  diminished  number  of  scholars  in  1847  must  be  considered  one 
of  the  sad  results  of  the  famine  in  that  year,  which  caused  such  devasta- 
tion by  death  among  the  people  of  Ireland  and  so  much  misery  among 
the  survivors. 

Is  it  unreasonable  to  assign  the  successful  estabhshment  of  a  system 
of  education  which  brings  together  in  peaceful  fellowship  the  children 
of  persons  of  different  creeds,  as  one  among  the  causes  which  have  pro- 
duced the  comparative  quietude  enjoyed  by  a  great  part  of  Ireland 
durin»  the  past  few  years ;  and  if  this  desirable  end  has  been  promoted 
in  even  a  greater  degree  by  the  habit  of  sobriety  that  has  so  rapidly 
spread  throughout  the  island,  may  we  not  also  in  part  account  for 
the  possibility  of  this  great  reformation  through  the  influence  of  well- 
conducted  schools  ?  No  one  who  has  witnessed  the  effects  produced  by 
such  establishments  in  districts  where  they  had  not  previously  existed, 
needs  to  be  told  that  their  moral  effects  are  not  confined  to  the  children 
by  whom  the  schools^  are  attended,  but  that  an  immediate  and  powerful 
influence  is  exercised  by  them  over  the  parents  also. 


CHAT-,  v.]  POSTAGE,  ETC.  709 


CHAPTER  V. 

POSTAGE,  &c. 

Legislative  Sanction  of  Mr.  Rowland  Hill's  Plans— Kapid  Progress  of  Public  Opinion 
regarding  them — Stationary  Condition  of  Post-office  Kevenue — Illicit  Conveyance  of 
Letters — Number  of  Letters  that  passed  through  the  London  General  and  District  Post- 
offices  in  18.3'.)-40  and  1841  to  1840— Estimated  Number  of  Letters  posted  in  the 
United  Kingdom  before  and  after  the  Reduction  of  the  Rates,  and  per  centage  In- 
crease— Increased  Revenue  from  Post-office  in  1842 — Progress  of  Post-office  Revenue, 
1758  to  1849 — Rates  of  Postage  charged  in  England,  Scotland,  and  Ireland  from  1710  to 
1840— Eifect  upon  the  Net  Revenue  of  successive  Alterations  of  the  Rates— Newspapers 
■ — Excessive  Stamp  Duty  thereon  encouraging  unstamped  Papers — Reduction  of  Duty 
and  suppression  of  Illegal  Publications — Circulation  of  Newspapers,  and  Revenue  there- 
from, 1801  to  1842 — Number  of  Papers  published  in  different  Divisions  of  the  Kingdom, 
and  their  Circulation,  183.)  to  1849. 

Since  the  publication  of  the  first  edition  of  this  work,  the  Legislature 
has  sanctioned  the  plans  then  in  agitation  for  the  adoption  of  a  low  and 
uniform  rate  of  postage  upon  letters  passing  from  one  part  to  another  of 
the  United  Kingdom. 

Those  plans,  suggested  and  enforced  by  Mr.  Rowland  Hill  with  a 
high  degree  of  energy  and  ability,  were  at  first  received  by  the  public  as 
amusing  speculations,  but  little  likely  to  be  carried  into  practice.  The 
proposal  that  the  Government  should,  for  the  small  charge  of  a  penny, 
convey  a  letter  from  Penzance  to  the  Orkneys,  seemed,  before  the  matter 
was  fully  investigated,  and  its  practicability  demonstrated,  to  be  most 
unreasonable.  The  public  had  grown  up  in  the  belief  that  the  charge  for 
the  transmisssion  of  a  letter  was  fairly  required  as  payment  for  a  service 
performed  at  an  infinitely  cheaper  rate  than  would  defray  the  expense 
of  transmission  and  distribution,  if  undertaken  by  the  individual  writer. 
In  proportion,  however,  as  the  subject  was  examined,  and  as  Mr.  Hill's 
calculations  were  tested,  this  view  of  the  case  was  abandoned.  It 
appeared  that  the  actual  expense  to  the  Government  for  conveying  each 
letter  between  the  most  distant  points  of  the  kingdom  was  only  a  irac- 
tional  part  of  a  farthing ;  and  that  to  charge,  as  in  many  cases  was 
done,  more  than  480  times  the  actual  cost,  was  equivalent  to  the 
imposition  of  a  heavy  tax  upon  communications  of  all  kinds,  whether 
carried  on  for  purposes  of  business,  or  for  gratifying  the  sympathies  of 
family  afiection  and  friendship.      It  was  well  said  by  one  of  the  advo- 


710  ,  I'llUUKESS  UF  THE  NATION.  [siic.  vii. 

cates  of  "  postage  reform,"  that  "  if  a  law  were  passed  forbidding  parents 
to  speak  to  their  children  till  they  had  paid  sixpence  to  Government  for 
permission,  the  wickedness  would  be  so  palpable  that  there  would  be  an 
end  to  the  tax,  in  that  form  of  exaction,  in  twenty- four  hours.  Yet  what 
difference  is  there  in  principle  when  parents  are  prohibited  from  writing 
to  their  children,  and  children  to  their  parents,  unless  they  pay  that  tax 
under  the  name  of  postage  ?" 

In  a  short  time  from  the  first  publication  of  Mr.  Hill's  proposals,  their 
advantages  and  justice  were  made  so  apparent  that  numerous  petitions 
in  their  favour  were  presented  to  Parliament,  and  a  committee,  consist- 
ing of  some  of  the  most  influential  bankers,  merchants,  and  traders  in 
London,  was  formed  in  order  to. assist  in  procuring  their  adoption.  The 
matter  was  shortly  after  taken  up  by  the  House  of  Commons,  and  a 
committee  appointed  for  its  consideration  recommended  a  partial  adop- 
tion of  the  scheme.  Such,  however,  was  the  force  of  public  opinion  that 
the  Government  was  carried  beyond  the  recommendation  of  this  com- 
mittee, and  in  the  month  of  August,  1839,  an  Act  was  passed  sanction- 
ing the  reduction  of  the  rates  of  inland  postage  to  one  uniform  rate  of 
a  penny  on  every  letter  of  a  given  weight,  with  a  proportionate  increase 
for  greater  weights,  and  giving  authority  to  the  Lords  of  the  Treasury 
to  carry  this  change  into  effect  by  such  steps  as  they  should  think 
advisable. 

Under  this  Act  a  Treasury  Order  was  issued  on  the  12th  of  Novem- 
ber, 1839,  directing  that  all  letters  should  be  charged  by  weight  instead 
of  according  to  the  number  of  sheets  or  of  inclosures,  as  was  practised 
under  the  former  law,  and  directing  that  on  and  after  the  5th  of  Decem- 
ber in  that  year  the  single  postage  rates  between  places  in  the  United 
Kingdom  which  exceeded  fourpence  should  be  reduced  to  that  uniform 
rate  ;  on  the  10th  of  January,  1840,  the  uniform  rate  of  one  penny  per 
half-ounce  came  into  general  operation,  and  on  the  6th  of  May  follow- 
ing pre-pay ment  by  the  use  of  stamps  was  begun. 

In  estimating  the  probable  results  of  his  plans,  Mr.  Hill  assumed 
that  the  reduction  of  the  existing  rates  to  one  uniform  charge  of  a  penny 
per  half-ounce  would  put  an  entire  stop  to  the  contraband  conveyance 
of  letters,  which  was  carried  on  to  an  enormous  amount,  and  that  it 
would  produce  a  great  extension  of  the  actual  correspondence  ;  so  great, 
indeed,  as  in  a  few  years  to  restore  the  gross  revenue  of  the  Post-office 
to  the  amount  which  it  had  reached  under  the  old  system. 

The  great  extent  to  which  the  illicit  conveyance  of  letters  had  ex- 
tended was  clearly  brought  out  in  evidence  before  the  committee  of  the 
House  of  Commons.  As  one  instance,  it  may  be  mentioned  that  a  bag, 
containing  eleven  hundred  letters,  was  seized  in  a  carrier's  warehouse ; 
but  if  direct  evidence  of  this  fraudulent  practice  had  been  wanting,  the 
fact  of  its  existence  might  have  been  inferred  from  the  condition  of  the 


CIIA1-.  v.]  I'DSTAGK,  ET(.'.  711 

Post-oillcc  revenue,  wliieli  had  continued  nearly  stationary  durino;  a  great 
number  of  years,  while  the  population  had  been  rapidly  increasing,  and 
the  manufacturing  and  conmiercial  transactions  of  the  country  had  been 
making  gigantic  strides.  Such  a  reduction  of  the  rates  of  postage  as 
that  advocated  and  afterwards  ado])ted,  would  at  once  put  an  end  to  the 
illicit  conveyance  of  letters  as  a  trade,  and  cause  the  whole  correspond- 
{>nce  of  the  country  to  pass  through  the  Post-office,  Thisin  itself  would 
cause  a  large  increase  of  business,  without  reckoning  that  one  letter 
additional  should  be  written  because  of  the  cheapness  of  conveyance. 
But  all  experience  in  analogous  cases  gave  assurance  that  a  progressive 
and  very  great  increase  would  follow  from  such  a  wholesale  abatement  in 
the  charge  as  that  advocated.  It  was  shown  by  Mr.  Hill  that  a  sixfold 
increase  in  the  number  of  letters  sent  by  the  post  would  yield  as  laro-e 
a  revenue  to  the  State  as  the  highest  rates  charged ;  and  some  persons 
have  charged  that  gentleman  with  having  been  grossly  deceived  in  his 
expectations,  because,  in  two  years  from  its  adoption,  the  low  rate  of 
charge  did  not  produce  a  multiplication  of  correspondence  to  that 
amount.  It  is  not  convenient  or  necessary  to  go  into  an  examination 
of  the  circumstances  attending  this  branch  of  the  public  revenue  in 
order  to  obtain  grounds  for  adopting,  or  otherwise,  the  opinion  that  a 
sixfold  increase  would  so  immediately  follow  upon  the  change  of  system. 
Nothing  published  by  Mr.  Hill  justifies  us  in  charging  such  an  error 
against  him,  and  it  is  injustice  to  him  that  the  reader's  attention  is  re- 
quested to  the  following  extract  from  his  pam])hlet  upon  this  branch  of 
the  subject : — 

"  But  in  considering  the  subject  of  increase,  it  must  be  remembered 
that,  however  desirable,  and  however  probable,  a  large  increase  may  be, 
it  is  not  counted  iipon  as  either  certain  or  essential  to  the  plan.  The 
proposed  regulations  are  not  founded  upon  the  presumption  that  in  their 
adoption  the  revenue  is  secured  from  alJ  risk  of  suffering.  What  I  have 
endeavoured  to  show  is,  first,  that  it  is  very  possible  the  revenue  may 
not  suffer  at  all ;  and  secondly,  that  it  is  highly  probable  it  will  not 
suffer  much.  Supposing,  however,  that  the  Post-ofKce  revenue  should 
suffer  even  a  serious  diminution,  it  can  scarcely  be  doubted  that  the 
cheap  transmission  of  letters  and  other  papers,  particularly  commercial 
documents,  woidd  so  powerfully  stimulate  the  productive  power  of  the 
country,  and  thereby  so  greatly  increase  the  revenue  in  other  depart- 
ments, that  the  loss  would  be  more  than  compensated." 

The  following  return  made  to  the  House  of  Commons  in  July,  1850, 
will  show  how  far  the  hopes  expressed  of  an  increased  number  of  letters 
have  been  justified  by  the  experience  of  the  Post-office  during  the 
period  that  has  elapsed  since  the  adoption  of  the  uniform  rate  of  one 
penny,  down  to  the  end  of  1849  : — 


712 


rilOGRESS  OF  THE  NATION. 


[sec.    VII. 


^f<; 


tS     sj 


!3    i-T 


.£> 


^ 


s 

c 

<M 

-* 

-f 

OD 

in 

CO 

CO 

-t 

in 

!■- 

'c?  '^ 

1^ 

<M 

-t 

C-. 

m 

CO 

CI 

CD 

-♦■ 

00 

CD 

o 

O 

CN 

■*.- 

CO 

t- 

1^ 

°1 

00 

o  i^ 

H-= 

r~ 

CO 

00 

o 

-(T 

O 

,_) 

o 

CD 

co" 

o 

in 

<^ 

O 

CD 

to 

^. 

in 

m 

00 

-f 

Cl 

to 

O  Ti 

cs 

in 

t^ 

'",. 

i> 

o_ 

"t- 

m 

00 

o_ 

o.^ 

o" 

to" 

oo" 

«r 

«r 

o" 

Cl" 

^ 

cr^ 

Cl" 

co" 

1^ 

t-- 

CO 

o 

o 

(M 

-^ 

l~ 

CD 

Cl 

Cl 

CO 

c 

■"* 

^^ 

c^ 

o\ 

c-\ 

(N 

CJ 

CO 

CO 

eo 

00 

Ol 

t^ 

<N 

CO 

<£> 

r- 

00 

o 

CO 

CD 

^ 

CO 

<£> 

r~. 

00 

r~ 

CO 

CO 

CD 

o 

■^ 

^  'H 

"• 

CT 

»-* 

t^ 

in 

(N 

o_ 

o_ 

00 

iS_5 

«" 

o 

•*" 

-*" 

ifT 

eo" 

cf 

o 

m 

^ 

co" 

CO 

^1 

tM 

CO 

in 

CO 

1^ 

o 

o 

CO 

CO 

CO 

-t< 

o 

CO 

in 

CO 

<M 

^.. 

m 

CO 

Cl 

•n 

X 

t^" 

co" 

^ 

o\ 

co" 

co' 

co" 

^"^ 

co" 

co" 

-(>" 

(M 

<N 

Q\ 

(N 

CJ 

CO 

CO 

CO 

CO 

-t 

CO 

(M 

t^ 

-f 

CO 

00 

CO 

1~ 

CO 

CO 

o 

o 

-f< 

CD 

CO 

CO 

0^ 

CO 

3l 

C5 

in 

«5 

(N 

^ 

-*_ 

CI 

05 

co_ 

Tf^ 

CD 

-^^ 

•*" 

o" 

■*" 

oo" 

(n" 

1^ 

1^ 

(M 

co" 

r^ 

co" 

r°'S 

o 

m 

cr. 

(M 

00 

CO 

00 

t^ 

l^ 

00 

o 

t- S 

0? 

O^ 

C>1 

t^ 

"c 

iV 

o 

in 

in 

^c- 

ra 

•* 

oo" 

rJ~ 

oo" 

o" 

of 

co" 

in 

oo" 

Cl" 

m" 

-^ 

m" 

■" 

<N 

C^ 

o\ 

(N 

w 

CO 

CO 

CO 

CO 

-3 

o 

'J" 

in 

Ol 

-* 

00 

CD 

CO 

CO 

CO 

o 

'M 

00 

<M 

(M 

CI 

(M 

-f 

\ 

o 

lO 

a>j 

in 

•—I 

t~ 

o 

■* 

O 

r^ 

o 

-t 

_g-5  Jj 

C'f 

(n" 

co" 

,_r 

■~£ 

'M'" 

o>r 

co" 

co" 

-*" 

(£ 

co" 

CO 

1^ 

f- 

o 

CTl 

m 

m 

CD 

CO 

t^  -r.j: 

o 

■— ' 

o_ 

■* 

oo 

^„ 

CO 

00 

CO^ 

CO 

g- 

"s" 

irT 

of 

^" 

co" 

co" 

crT 

»*<" 

in" 

co" 

o" 

00 

w 

lO 

CO 

m 

to 

t^ 

CO 

Cl 

CO 

o 

m 

Cl 

CD 
Cl 

CO 
Cl 

OJ 

(M 

(M 

o 

o 

CD 

o 

t^ 

1- 

oo 

'^ 

GO 

iM 

-t 

o 

00 

m 

-t 

CD 

§;2 

C0__ 

1^ 

C5 

CO 

^„ 

'I 

O^ 

00__ 

t- 

C0_ 

•a  4-. 

. 

c-f 

CO 

t-3 

^ 

o" 

oo" 

^ 

o" 

Cl" 

o" 

c  " 

cs 

CO 

00 

oo 

CI 

CD 

CO 

t^ 

CD 

Ji 

CO 

co_^ 

00 

o 

00^ 

Cl 

CO 

CO 

t^ 

co" 

co" 

't"" 

co" 

^ 

co" 

-h" 

co" 

co" 

Tii 

Q 

0\ 

(N 

(N 

(>J 

(?) 

CO 

CO 

CO 

CO 

CO 

Cd 
5 

c" 

^ 

tc 

m 

CI 

<N 

CO 

to 

p-4 

p.^ 

o 

CO 

CO 

fl-s 

CO 

O) 

00 

-f 

CO 

00 

^ 

in 

CO 

O 

00 

t~ 

(>) 

t^ 

o 

t- 

CO 

in 

-*_ 

CO 

Z 

"C  fft  ^ 

05 

to" 

m" 

oo" 

m" 

t^ 

co" 

»^ 

,_( 

in" 

< 

c : 

o  — r^ 

m 

to 

CO 

o 

t^ 

CD 

Cl 

in 

05 

-+ 

in 
co" 

CO^ 

o" 

o 
co" 

eo 

C5 

co" 

Cl 

in" 

00 
oo" 

2 

< 

"c 

(M 

C^ 

TI 

CO 

M 

CO 

CO 

-* 

Tf 

T)« 

2 

:?; 

i 

p— 1 

r^ 

C: 

^ 

CO 

,_H 

'^ 

r^ 

Cl 

CD 

H 

tTi 

t^ 

00 

t^ 

CM 

^. 

Cl 

c 

o 

Cl 

s 

t~- 

o 

Ti< 

r(< 

o_ 

c^ 

-* 

CO 

o 

. 

<?r 

1'^ 

in 

■^<" 

co" 

t^ 

-*" 

co" 

co" 

Cl" 

>. 

CO 

ci 

O 

CD 

CI 

o 

d 

CO 

i 

o_ 

CO^ 

'-' 

t- 

o_ 

Cl^ 

o 

o_ 

t~ 

CO 

3 

oT 

co" 

_r 

1^ 

r^ 

1--" 

cT 

in 

o" 

^J" 

O 

00 

o 

CI 

^ 

CO 

t^ 

00 

CO 

O 

"" 

■"* 

^^ 

■"^ 

*"* 

'"' 

cr> 

o 

^ 

<M 

CO 

-f 

m 

CD 

r— 

00 

o 

CO 

^• 

't 

-1" 

-f 

-f 

-t< 

'^ 

^ 

-f 

00 

CO 

CO 

00 

CO 

CO 

CO 

00 

00 

CO 

CO 

f— ' 

oT 

„ 

„ 

<D 

o 

J2 

J 

c 

e 

o 

c8 

u 

= 

= 

5^ 

?: 

=^ 

- 

- 

= 

- 

o 

i-J 

tS 

Q 

5*- 

o 

i2 

;-■ 

M 

o 

OJC 

X! 

c 

9 

-5 

3 

c 

0) 

^2!; 

" 

" 

"^ 

*" 

" 

" 

" 

" 

" 

" 

" 

K" 

s 

- 

- 

CJIAV.    v.] 


rOSTACIE,  ETC. 


713 


The  increase  from  1839  has,  therefore,  been- 


Years. 

Per  Cent. 

1840 

104 

1841 

138 

1842 

152 

1843 

167 

Years. 
1844 
1845 
1846 


I'cr  Cent. 
l'.)3 
229 
263 


Years. 

Per  Cent. 

1847 

290 

1848 

298 

1849 

308 

There  can  be  but  little  doubt  that  the  lessened  rate  of  increase  shown 
in  1842  was  in  a  great  degree,  if  not  altogether,  occasioned  by  the 
comparative  stagnation  of  trade  in  that  year,  and  that  the  return  of 
commercial  activity  in  1814  and  1845  caused  the  correspondence  of 
the  country  again  to  exhibit  a  satisfactory  progress.  If  the  increase 
should  go  forward  at  the  same  rate  as  in  the  ten  years  from  1839  to 
1849,  the  gross  receipt  of  the  Post-office  revenue  under  the  uniform 
rate  of  one  penny  would  in  1850  be  equal  to  what  it  was  in  1839,  under 
the  old  system  of  high  graduated  charges.  In  the  intermediate  years, 
although  there  has  been  and  will  be  loss  to  the  public  revenue  derived 
from  this  source,  there  must  have  been  and  will  be  experienced  coun- 
tervailing advantages  which  could  not  fail  to  improve  the  revenue  in 
other  branches  ;  and  it  even  admits  of  question  whether  the  Government 
would  not  find  an  ultimate  advantage  in  performing  all  this  class  of 
services  for  the  public  upon  terms  that  would  merely  bring  back  the 
necessary  expenses  of  their  establishments  for  the  purpose.  It  does 
not,  however,  seem  necessary  to  carry  reduction,  as  regards  the  postage 
of  letters,  further  than  has  already  been  adopted  for  their  transmission 
from  one  part  of  the  kingdom  to  another. 

The  progress  of  the  public  revenue  derived  from  the  conveyance  of 
letters  at  different  periods  in  Great  Britain  from  1758,  and  in  the  United 
Kingdom  in  each  year  of  the  present  century,  to  the  adoption  of  the  uni- 
form rate  of  one  penny,  has  been  as  follows  :  — 


GREAT  BRITAIN. 

Year  ending 
5th  April. 

Gross 
Receipt. 

Charges  of 
.Management. 

Net 
Revenue. 

£. 

£. 

£. 

1758 

222,075 

148,345 

73,730 

1763 

238,999 

141,165 

97,834 

1768 

299,133 

133,350 

165,783 

1773 

332,006 

164,830 

167,176 

1778 

373,. 564 

235,570 

137,994 

1783 

434,051 

274,426 

159,625 

1788 

547,084 

250,104 

296,980 

1793 

627,592 

236,084 

391,508 

1798 

9.50,476 

337,196 

613,280 

4799 

1,012,731 

355,343 

657,388 

1800 

1,083,9.50 

362,969 

720,981 

711 


I'llOGRESS  OF  THE  NATION. 


[.SKC 


GRRAT  lUilTArN. 

IRELAND. 

,  ,Year 
ending 
5th 
Jan. 

Gross 
Receipt. 

Chargi'S 
of  Manage- 
ment. 

Returns. 

Net 
Receipt. 

Gross 
Receipt. 

Charges 
of  Manage- 
ment. 

Returns. 

Net 
Receipt. 

£. 

£. 

£. 

£. 

£. 

£. 

£. 

£. 

*1801 

1,144,900 

35o7219 

39,582 

755,299 

66,030 

39,703 

8,9.53 

17,376 

*1802 

1,2S;),197 

365,657 

43.471 

880,069 

102,2*3 

.56,882 

13,607 

31,806 

tl803 

994,970 

240,550 

33;071 

721,319 

102,518 

51,935 

14,073 

36,510 

;i804 

1,320,585 

352,844 

42,902 

924,839 

108,844 

63,923 

13,548 

31,373 

1S05 

1,347,842 

356,699 

46,761 

944,382 

118,429 

63,696 

15,7.52 

38,981 

1806 

1,501,841 

381,814 

.53,629 

1,066,398 

146,682 

75,872 

17,779 

53,031 

1807 

1,568,330 

385,306 

56,282 

1,126,742 

149,857 

71,662 

19,278 

58,917 

1808 

1.553,231 

394,808 

58,. 547 

1,099,876 

158,749 

73,723 

17,477 

67,549 

1809 

1,559,345 

407,957 

59,465 

1.091,923 

180,510 

81,512 

17,859 

81,139 

1810 

1,675,076 

426,016 

58,844 

1,190,216 

180,670 

93,343 

16,721 

70,606 

1811 

1,791.873 

445,513 

.59,001 

1,287,359 

195,. 531 

100,974 

16,692 

77,892 

1812 

1,770,547 

438,327 

59,730 

1,272,490 

189,963 

102,070 

16,274 

71,619 

1813 

1,883,421 

481,430 

62,520 

1,339,481 

195,458 

95,455 

17,483 

82,520 

1814 

2,005,987* 

519,504 

67,532 

1,418,951 

203,226 

97,060 

19,053 

87,113 

1815 

2,159,867 

575,667 

77,096 

1,507,104 

212,562 

99,881 

21,490 

91,191 

1816 

2,193,741 

594,045 

73,169 

1,526,527 

225,000 

110,594 

21,737 

92,669 

1817 

2,067,940 

543,888 

72,340 

1,451,712 

212,269 

105,241 

21,235 

85,793 

1818 

1,983,165 

561,449 

68,065 

1,353,601 

203,4.56 

103,855 

19,331 

80,270 

1819 

2,043,043 

585,688 

69,948 

1,387,407 

197,510 

97,992 

19,392 

80,126 

1820 

1,993,885 

481,571 

64,291 

1,448,623 

197,677 

104,622 

18,438 

74,617 

1821 

1,980,334 

502,568 

77,208 

l,4fX),5S8 

192,511 

108,619 

18.875 

65,017 

1822 

1,935,845 

.544,159 

66,409 

1,325,277 

187,120 

101,082 

17,850 

68,188 

iS23 

1,942,902 

526,439 

61,357 

1,355,106 

186,024 

94,538 

18,240 

73,246 

1824 

1,965,468 

500,675 

64,713 

1,400,080 

188,826 

95,661 

18,078 

75,087 

1825 

2,055,636 

529,801 

66,717 

1,4.59,118 

199,602 

99,028 

19,670 

80,904 

1S2G 

2,160,3;)0 

542,951 

78,810 

1,-538,629 

207,177 

93,402 

20,137 

93,638 

1827 

2,184,514 

610,871 

74,074 

1,499,569 

207,757 

95,769 

21,795 

90,193 

182S 

2,062,179 

607,681 

69,730 

1,384,768 

216,232 

98,511 

18,325 

99,396 

182J 

2,048,402 

566,385 

64,612 

1,417,405 

239,559 

97,390 

15,. 350 

126,819 

1830 

2,024,418 

579,175 

65,004 

1,380,239 

241,063 

96,144 

15,811 

129,108 

1831 

2,053,720 

594,349 

71,509 

1,387,862 

247,711 

99,905 

17,717 

130,089 

1832 

2,064,334 

574,578 

75,040 

1,414,716 

256,976 

83,747 

18,907 

154,322 

1833 

2,034,603 

557,314 

81,005 

1,396,284 

242,671 

86,1.50 

20,977 

135,544 

1834 

2,062,839 

5.52,735 

83,605 

1,426,499 

232,071 

84,021 

21,124 

126,926 

1835 

2,079,508 

611,511 

85,443 

1,382,554 

240,471 

84,876 

25,097 

130,498 

1836 

2,107,676 

582,509 

84,328 

1,440,839 

245,664 

96,327 

25,718 

123,619 

1837 

2,206,736 

609,220 

86,490 

1,511,026 

255,070 

95,548 

24,713 

134,809 

183S 

2,200,973 

574.310 

96,979 

1,529,684 

261,2J6 

106,948 

25,. 551 

128,797 

183.» 

2,212,781 

568,446 

95,983 

1,548,352 

254,434 

101,310 

24,9.54 

128,170 

1840 

2,267,114 

631,934 

104, 199 

1,530,981 

255,380 

109,742 

27,531 

118,107 

Years  ending  5th  April. 


t  Three-quarters  of  year  to  5th  January. 
I  Year  ending  5th  January. 


The  Post-ofSce  revenue  in  the  United  Kingdom,  since  the  change  of 
system  in  1839,  has  been  as  follows  : — 


Year 
ending 

5th 
January. 


1841 
1842 
1843 
1844 
1845 
1846 
1847 
1848 
1849 
18.50 


Gross 
Revenue. 


£. 
1,359,466 
1,499,418 
1,578,145 
1,620,867 
1.705,067 
1^887,576 
1,963,8.57 
2,181,016 
2,143,679 
2,165,349 


Cost  of 
Management. 


858,677 

938,168 

977,504 

980,6.50 

985,110 

1,125,-594 

1,1.38,745 

1,196, .520 

1,403,2.50 

1,324,-562 


Net 
Revenue. 


I        Postage 
charged  on  the 
Government 
Departments. 


£. 
500, 789 
.561,249 
600,641 
640,217 
719,957 
761,982 
825,112 
984,496 
740,429 
840,787 


£. 
90,761 
113,255 
122,161 
11 6,. 503 
109,2-32 
101, 190- 
100,3.54 
121,290 
115,902 
106,923 


Net  Revenue 

exclusive  of 

Cliarges  on  the 

Government 

Departments. 


410,028 
447,993 
478,479 
.523,714 
610,724 
660,791 
724,7.57 
863,206 
624,526 
733,S(;3 


V.J 


rOSTAGE,  ETC, 


715 


This  branch  of  revenue  is  subject  to  many  reductions,  which  have  no 
pro])er  connexion  with  the  business  of  the  department,  and  the  payments 
made  into  the  Exchequer  under  this  head  do  not  therefore  correctly 
show  the  actual  working  of  the  establishment.  The  amount  of  pay- 
ments so  made  into  the  Exchequer  in  each  year  from  1840  to  1849  were 
as  follows : — 


Years. 

£. 

1R40 

447 

664 

1841 

455 

,000 

1842 

608 

,000 

184.3 

595 

,000 

1844 

691 

,000 

Years. 

£. 

1845 

753 

000 

1846 

845 

000 

1847 

923 

,000 

1848 

815 

000 

184'J 

832 

,000 

The  rates  of  postage  for  letters  in  England  fi-om  1710  to  1765  were, 
for  the  conveyance  of  a  single  letter  (double,  &c.,  letters  in  propor- 
tion)— 

d. 

For  any  distance  not  exceeding  80  miles       ....     3 

„  above  80  miles 4 

Between  London  and  Edinburgli 6 

,,  Dublin 6 

In  1765  the  rates  for  short  distances  were  modified,  and  the  charge  for 
a  distance  not  exceeding  "  one  post  stage  "  (the  length  of  which  is  not 
specified)  was  made  a  penny,  and  for  a  distance  above  one  and  not 
exceeding  two  post  stages,  twopence,  the  charges  for  greater  distances 
remaining  as  before. 

In  1784  an  addition  of  one  penny  was  made,  and  the  rates  for  greater 
distances  were  altered  thus  : — 

d. 

Not  exceeding  1  post  stage 2 

Above  1,  not  exceeding  2  post  stages 3 

„       2  post  stages,  not  exceeding  80  miles 4 

„       80,  not  exceeding  150  miles 5 

„       150  miles ...  6 

Between  Loudon  and  Edinburgh  and  London  and  Dublin  7 

In  1796  another  alteration  was  made,  and  the  rates  were — 

d. 

For  any  distance  not  exceeding  15  miles      ....  3 

15  and  not  exceeding  30  miles 4 

30                „                  60    „           5 

60                „                100    „           6 

100                „                150    „           7 

Above  150  miles 8 

In  1801  and  1805  the  rates  were  again  altered  as  follows  :  — 


Distance  not  exceeding  15  miles 

15  and  not  exceeding  30    „ 

30  .,  50    ., 

50  „  80    „ 

80  .,  120    „ 

120  „  170    „ 

170  „  230    „ 

230  „  3(X)     „ 

And  for  every  further  distance  of  100  miles 


1801 

1805 

d. 

d. 

3 

4 

4 

5 

5 

6 

6 

7 

7 

8 

8 

9 

9 

10 

10 

11 

1 

1 

716 


PROGRESS  OF  THE  NATION. 


[sec.    Yll. 


In  the  early  part  of  last  century  the  rates  of  })ostage  in  Scotland  were 
in  a  slight  degree  below  those  charged  in  England,  but  they  have  long 
since  been  equalized  ;  and  from  1812  an  addition  of  a  halfpenny  was 
charged  upon  each  letter,  whether  single  or  double,  or  heavier,  passing 
between  England  and  Scotland. 

In  1827  the  following  scale  of  rates  was  applied  to  the  whole  United 
Kingdom,  for  the  conveyance  of  a  single  letter.  Double,  &c.,  letters 
were  charged  proportionally  : — 

d. 

For  any  distance  not  exceeding  15  miles       ...       4 
15  and  not  exceeding  20  miles 5 


20 

30 

50 

80 

120 

170 

230 

300 

400 

500 

600 


30 
50 
80 
120 
170 
230 
300 
400 
500 
600 
700 


10 
II 
12 
13 
14 
15 
16 


Exceeding  700  miles 17 

The  postage  rates  charged  in  Ireland  from  1784  to  1797  were- 

d. 

For  any  distance  not  exceeding  15  miles  ....     2 

15  and  not  exceeding  30  miles 3 

Exceeding  30  miles 4 

In  1797,  1805,  and  1810,  the  rates  were  advanced  as  follows:- 


1T9T 

1805 

1810 

d. 

d. 

d. 

Distance  not  exceeding  15  miles 

o 

3 

4 

15  and  not  exceeding    30     „ 

.     3 

4 

5 

30                  „                    50    „ 

.     4 

5 

6 

50                  „                    80    „ 

.     5 

6 

7 

Exceeding  80  miles 

.     6 

7 

8 

In  1813  and  1814  the  following  char 

1S13 


ges  were  made 


Distance  not  exceeding  10  miles 
10  and  not  exceeding     20    „ 
20  „  30    „ 

30  „  40    „ 

40  „  50    „ 

50  „  60    ., 

60  „  80    „ 

80  „  100    „ 

Exceeding  100  miles   .... 

1814 

Distance  not  exceeding  7  miles 
7  and  not  exceeding  15    „ 


15 

25 

25 

35 

35                   , 

45 

45 

55 

55 

65 

65                  , 

95 

95 

120 

120 

150 

150                  , 

200 

200                 , 

250 

250 

300 

And  for  every  UK)  miles  additional 


3 
4 
5 
6 

7 

8 

9 

10 


9 
10 
11 
12- 
13 
14 

1 


cii.vr.  v.]  NEWSPAPERS.  717 

The  changes  made  in  the  rates  during  the  present  'century  were  cal- 
culated to  produce  the  following  results  : — 


Increase  of 

Diminution  of 

Years. 

Revenue. 

£. 

.    Kevenue. 

£. 

1801 

150,000 

1805 

230,000 

1813 

220, 0(X) 

1819 

17,600 

1821 

2,' 200 

1824 

4,000 

1825 

5,100 

1827 

80,'60(. 

1831 

, , 

25,00U 

1835 

5,500 

1836 

•• 

31,470 

Total  increase 

.     ('.16,800 

£  154,070 

Diminution 

.     134,070 

Estimated  increase 

£462,730 

which  sum,  added  to  the  net  revenue  from  postages  in  1801,  would  have 
amounted  to  1,374,605/.  The  sum  actually  received  in  1837,  the  year 
following  the  latest  alteration  included  above,  was  1,658,481/.,  showino- 
an  apparent  advance  of  283,876/.  ;  but  between  1801  and  1836  the 
population  had  increased  59?  per  cent.,  and  to  have  kept  pace  with  that 
increase  the  Post-office  should  have' yielded  2,192,495/.,  or  534,015/. 
more  than  the  actual  result.  It  is  curious  to  observe  the  altogether 
stationary  condition  of  this  branch  of  the  public  revenue,  while  such 
rapid  progress  was  experienced  in  the  trading  and  manufacturing  pur- 
suits of  the  country.  This  alone  gave  sufficient  evidence  that  the  rates 
imposed  were  excessive,  and  that  their  modification  was  needed. 

Owing  to  the  great  craving  of  the  people  for  information  upon  poli- 
tical subjects  during  the  agitation  that  accompanied  the  introduction 
and  passing  of  the  Bill  "  to  Amend  the  Representation  of  the  People," 
commonly  known  as  "  The  Reform  Bill,"  a  great  temptation  was  offered 
for  the  illegal  publication  of  newspapers  upon  unstamped  paper,  many 
of  which  were  sold  in  large  numbers  in  defiance  of  all  the  preventive 
efforts  made  by  the  officers  of  Government.  The  stamp  duty  of  four- 
pence  upon  each  sheet  placed  the  legally-published  jovirnals  beyond  the 
reach  of  the  working  classes,  who  eagerly  availed  themselves  of  the  low- 
priced  papers  offered,  and  which,  however  inferior  they  might  be  in 
every  quality  tliat  should  attend  them,  gave,  or  professed  to  give,  the 
information  that  was  so  eagerly  sought.  A  great  evil,  greater  even 
than  the  infraction  of  the  law  that  accompanied  this  state  of  things, 
resided  in  that  inferiority ;  the  writers  of  those  unstamped  papers 
making  up  in  violence  for  their  deficiencies  of  talent  and  information, 
produced  corresponding  feelings  in  the  minds  of  their  readers ;  and  as 
it  was  felt  to  be  impossible  to  put  down  the  illegal  publications  without 


18 


rilOGRESS  OF  THE  NATION. 


[sec.    VII. 


having  recourse  to  a  system  of  harshness  that  might  produce  even  more 
violent  and  more  widely-spread  feelings  of  dissatisfaction,  the  Govern- 
ment wisely  gave  way,  and  effectually  and  at  once  put  an  end  to  the 
illegal  publications  by  reducing  the  duty  from  Ad.  to  Id.  per  sheet. 
This  measure  was  announced  in  the  House  of  Commons  in  March,  1836, 
and  the  Act  by  which  it  was  sanctioned  was  passed  in  the  month  of 
August  followinsr. 

Tlie  circulation  of  stamped  newspapers  since  that  time  has  very 
greatly  increased,  as  it  was  reasonable  to  expect  would  be  the  case. 
The  number  of  stamps  issued  at  different  periods  before  and  since  the 
reduction  of  the  duty,  and  the  net  revenue  derived  from  the  same,  have 
been  as  follows : — 


IN  GREAT  BlUTAIN. 


Years. 


1801 
1811 
1821 
1822 
1823 
1824 


16,0SJ 
24:421 
24,862 
23,932 
24,670 
25.573 


085 
713 
186 
,403 
,265 
,909 


Gross  Revenue. 

Years. 

£. 
185,806 

1825 

298,574 

1826 

335,753 

1827 

398,873 

1828 

411,171 

1829 

431,668 

1830 

Gross  Revenue. 


26,950,693 
27,004.802 
27,368;490 
28,007,335 
28,691,611 
30,158,741 


449,574 
451,676 
4.58,559 
473,354 
480,968 
505,433 


IN  UNITED  KINGDOM. 


Years. 


1831 
1832 
1833 
1834 
1835 
1836 
1837 


35, 
34. 
32, 
32, 
33, 
35, 
53, 


198,160 
465,860 
468,940 
229,360 
191,820 
576,056 
496,207 


Net  Revenue. 

Years. 

£. 
483,1.53 

1838 

473,238 

183J 

445,835 

1840 

441,683 

1841 

4,33,130 

1842 

3.59,826 

1843 

218,042 

1844 

Number. 


Net  RevenuH 


53,347,231 
55,891,003 
60,922,151 
.59.936,897 
6 1,49  5,. 503 
65,767,035 
71,222.498 


£. 
22r,164 
238,394 
244,416 
252,003 
261,161 
271,180 
287.829 


The  number  of  papers  published  in  England,  Wales,  Scotland,  and 
Ireland  respectively,  distinguishing  London  from  the  rest  of  England, 
and  the  number  of  stamps  issued  to  each  of  those  divisions  in  the  four 
years  from  1839  to  1842  were  as  follows :  — 


1839 

1810 

1841 

1842 

No.  of 
Papers. 

Number  of 
Stamps. 

No.  of      Number  of 
Papers,  j       Stamps. 

No.  of 
Papers. 

Number  of 

Stamps. 

No.  of 

Papers. 

Number  of 
Stamps. 

London     .     . 

England  (ex-  i 
elusive  of  > 
London)    . ) 

Wales       .     . 

Scotland   . 

Ireland 

96 

242 

10 
64 
82 

28,719,271 

17,25.5,798 

378,700 
4,102,636 
5,434,598 

153 

250 

12 
72 

91 

30,705,340 

19,402,573 

478.400 
4,478,333 
5,857,505 

134 

232 

12 
71 
92 

31,075,332 

17,346,180 

478,350 
5,042.012 
5,995,023 

125 

221 

12 
76 
87 

32,166,474 

17,508,381 

445,930 
5,388,079 
5,986,639 

Total     . 

494  '  55,891,003 

578 

60,922,151 

541 

59,936,897 

521 

61,495,503 

CHAP,  v.] 


NEWSPAPERS. 


71U 


The  aggregate  number  of  newspaper  stamps  issued  in  1840  was  as 
follows:  — 


England  and  Wales 

Scotland 

Ireland    .... 


Number 

or 

Papers. 


NLMBER  OF  STAMPS. 


392 

94 

117 


603 


Penny. 


Halfpenny. 


66,159,502 
6,288,205 
6,345,227 


10,309,2a3 

205,000 

38,843 


78,792,934         10,553,076 


76,468,735 
6,493,205 
6,384,070 


89,-346,010 


There  is  another  subject  intimately  connected  with  the  moral  progress 
of  the  United  Kingdom  which  it  would  be  desirable  to  investigate,  if 
any  method  could  be  adopted  for  that  purpose,  and  whereby  it  could  be 
treated  in  a  manner  analogous  to  that  hitherto  pursued  with  other 
subjects  in  these  pages.  That  branch  comprises  the  progress  made  in 
science,  literature,  and  the  arts.  It  is  plain,  however,  that  there  are 
no  recognised  standards  or  positions  from  which  that  progress  can  be 
measured,  and  that  any  opinion  that  might  be  expressed  regarding  it 
must  convey  only  the  views  of  an  individual,  unsupported  by  facts  that 
would  command  general  assent. 

No  one  who  has  been  a  careful  observer  of  what  has  been  and  is 
passing  around  him  will  for  a  moment  question  that  very  great  progress 
has  been  made  by  our  country  during  the  present  century  in  all  the 
various  branches  of  human  discovery  and  acquirement ;  but  the  precise 
amount  or  the  comparative  value  of  that  progress  cannot  possibly  be 
measured  by  the  advances  made  in  former  periods,  and  which  them- 
selves are  equally  without  a  standard  or  measure  of  comparison.  If, 
however,  this  difficulty  could  be  surmounted,  is  it  not  probable  that  we 
should  find — regard  being  had  to  the  superior  facilities  afforded  to  each 
succeeding  age  through  the  labours  of  its  precursors — that  the  efforts 
of  the  human  mind,  and  the  success  attending  those  efforts,  have  been 
much  the  same  at  all  periods ;  and  that,  consequently,  if  we  have  pro- 
fited as  well  of  our  opportunities  as  our  fathers  did  of  those  bequeathed 
to  them,  we  must  have  made  greater  and  more  rapid  strides  than  any 
who  have  gone  before  us  in  the  walks  of  science  and  all  other  branches 
of  intellectual  progress,  whereby  we  shall  have  prepared  the  way  for  a 
still  more  rapid  advance  on  the  part  of  those  who  will  succeed  us  ? 

If  this  reason  for  avoiding  the  discussion  should  not  be  considered 
satisfactory,  it  may  be  further  urged  that  the  subject  does  not  admit  of 
being  properly  treated  within  the  limited  space  that  could  be  devoted  to 
it  in  this  work  ;  a  large  volume,  indeed,  would  not  suffice  to  do  justice  to 
the  question. 


720  PROGRESS  OF  THE  NATION.  [sec.  viii. 


SECTION  VJII. 
COLONIES  AND  FOREIGN  DEPENDENCIES. 


CHAPTER  I. 

ADVANTAGES  OF  COLONIES. 

Erroneous  Views  entertained  on  the  Subject — Whence  arising  —  Restrictive  Colonial 
Sj'stem  ;  Mischief  resulting  from  it — Advantages  of  granting  Commercial  Freedom  to 
Coionies — Field  for  profitable  Enterprise  ctfered  by  Colonies — Experience  necessary  for 
the  prudent  Government  of  Colonies — Frequent  Changes  of  Ministers  unfavourable  to 
this  end^Suggestions  for  establishing  a  permanent  Colonial  Council  under  the  Secretary 
of  State — Analogy  of  such  a  Plan  with  that  pursued  by  the  Government  of  India- 
Political  advantages  of  possessing  Colonies— Negative  Advantages  following  from  such 
possession. 

If  called  upon  to  declare  the  circumstance  in  the  condition  of  England 
which,  more  than  all  other  things,  makes  her  the  envy  of  surrounding 
nations,  it  would  be  to  her  colonial  possessions  that  we  must  attribute 
that  feeling.  In  the  eyes  of  foreigners  those  possessions  are  at  once  the 
evidence  of  our  power  and  the  surest  indicant  of  its  increase.  A  very 
different  estimate  of  their  importance  is,  however,  made  by  many  among 
ourselves.  How  often  do  we  hear  the  value  of  those  possessions  depre- 
ciated ;  nay,  how  common  is  it  to  be  told  that  England  would  be  more 
prosperous  and  happy  without  colonies  ! 

Nor  is  this  doctrine  confined  to  the  common  herd  of  society  ;  it  Is  put 
forth  from  time  to  time  by  men  who  would  teach  us  by  their  writings, 
and  is  occasionally  heard  even  within  the  walls  of  the  Houses  of  Parlia- 
ment, where,  so  often  as  some  real  or  alleged  act  of  mismanagement  or 
extravagance  in  our  colonial  administration  is  brought  forward,  the 
occasion  is  used  for  displaying  to  the  world  how  small  a  portion  of  the 
science  of  government  may  be  possessed  by  men  who  take  upon  them- 
selves one  of  the  highest  functions  of  society — that  of  making  laws  for 
its  regulation.     "  Colonies  are  mismanaged — therefore  they  are  evils. 


ciiAr.  i]  COLONIES.  721 

Tlioy  are  the  source  of  ceaseless  ex})ense — therefore  it  would  he  wise  to 
rid  ourselves  of  the  incumhrance  !"  Such  has  heeu  the  cry  from  time 
to  time,  and  more  or  less  at  all  times,  of  men  who,  while  they  put  them- 
selves forward  as  heing  competent  to  assist  in  the  government  of  a 
nation,  are  unable  to  discern  the  difference  between  use  and  abuse,  or 
to  see  that  in  politics  as  well  as  in  all  other  branches  of  human  concerns, 
everything,  however  useful  or  even  necessary  to  hap])iness,  may  be  con- 
verted into  an  injury  by  our  unwise  mode  of  dealing  with  it. 

It  would  form  a  very  inconclusive  argument  against  the  value  of 
colonies  and  foreign  possessions,  that  under  bad  or  defective  systems  of 
government  they  had  always  been  productive  of  evil.  The  like  objec- 
tion might  as  reasonably  be  made  against  every  personal  and  every 
national  blessing.  "Wealth  may  be  abused,  intellectual  gifts  may  be 
perverted,  station  and  power  may  be  prostituted  to  serve  the  most 
unrighteous  purposes,  and  we  all  have  seen  these  things  happen  ;  but  do 
we  thence  find  occasion  to  denounce  the  pernicious  nature  of  riches,  or 
mental  endowments,  or  personal  and  national  influence,  and  to  renounce 
them,  together  with  the  good  they  are  calculated  to  yield  ?  It  would 
seem  to  require  but  one  moment's  reflection  to  be  convinced  that 
colonial  possessions  must  be  capable  of  adding  to  the  wealth,  the  power, 
and  the  resources  of  the  parent  State,  if  the  right  means  for  making 
them  so  shall  be  adopted  ;  and  that  if,  on  the  contrary,  they  have  tended 
to  our  weakness  and  impoverishment,  these  consequences  are  attribut- 
able not  to  anything  inherent  in  the  nature  of  those  possessions,  but  to 
unwise  legislation  or  to  unjust  government. 

Under  the  influence  of  these  perverse  causes,  colonies  may  be,  and  too 
frecpiently  have  been  and  are,  sources  of  weakness  rather  than  of  strength 
to  the  parent  State ;  and  probably  to  no  country  have  they  been  so  in 
the  same  degree  as  they  have  been  to  England.  The  principal  cause 
of  this  fact  it  is  not  difficult  to  point  out.  Until  a  recent  period  the 
trade  with  our  dependencies  has  been  converted  into  a  close  monopoly 
in  favour  of  England  ;  and  although  various  "relaxations  were  from  time 
to  time  made  in  this  selfish  system,  it  was,  until  quite  recently,  sought  to 
retain  a  great  share  of  the  supposed  advantages  of  monopoly  by  means 
of  differential  duties  chargeable  in  the  colonies  against  the  productions 
and  manufactures  of  foreign  countries.  Many  years  have  not  passed 
since  the  ports  of  our  colonies  were  closed  against  all  ships  save  those 
under  the  British  flag,  while  the  ships  of  those  colonies  were  prohibited 
from  trading  with  any  foreign  country.  Bryan  Edwards,  in  his  '  His- 
tory of  the  West  Indies,'  thus  plainly  describes  the  system : — "  The 
leading  principle  of  colonization  in  all  the  maritime  States  of  Europe 
(Great  Britain  among  the  rest)  was  commercial  monopoly.  The  word 
monopohj  in  this  case  admitted  a  very  extensive  interpretation.  It  com- 
prehended the  monopoly  of  supply,  the  monopoly  of  colonial  produce,  and 

o    A 


722  PROGRESS  OF  THE  NATION,  [sec.  viii. 

the  monopoly  of  mauufaeturo.  By  tlie  first,  the  colonists  were  prohi- 
bited from  resorting  to  foreign  markets  for  the  supply  of  their  wants ; 
by  the  second  they  were  compelled  to  bring  their  chief  staple  commodities 
to  the  mother-country  alone  ;  and  by  the  third,  to  bring  them  to  her  in 
a  raw  or  unmanufactured  state,  that  her  own  manufacturers  might  secure 
to  themselves  all  the  advantages  arising  from  their  further  improvement. 
This  latter  principle  was  carried  so  far  in  the  colonial  system  of  Great 
Britain  as  to  induce  the  late  Earl  of  Chatham  to  declare,  in  Parliament, 
that  the  British  colonists  in  America  had  no  right  to  manufactiu'c  even 
a  nail  for  a  horse-shoe."* 

We  have  the  further  testimony  on  this  point  of  Adam  Smith,  who 
thus  describes  the  origin  of  this  spirit  of  monopoly  with  regard  to  the 
trade  with  our  colonies : — 

"  To  found  a  great  empire  for  the  sole  purpose  of  raising  up  a  people 
of  customers  may  at  first  sight  appear  a  project  fit  only  for  a  nation  of 
shopkeepers.  It  is,  however,  a  project  altogether  unfit  for  a  nation  of  shop- 
keepers ;  but  extremely  fit  for  a  nation  whose  Government  is  influenced 
by  shopkeepers.  Such  statesmen,  and  such  statesmen  only,  are  capable 
of  fancying  that  they  will  find  some  advantage  in  employing  the  blood 
and  treasure  of  their  fellow-citizens  to  found  and  maintain  such  an 
empire.  Say  to  a  shopkeeper,  buy  me  a  good  estate,  and  I  shall  always 
buy  my  clothes  at  your  shop,  even  though  I  should  pay  somewhat 
dearer  than  what  I  can  have  them  for  at  other  shops,  and  you  will  not 
find  him  very  forward  to  embrace  your  proposal.  But  should  any  other 
person  buy  you  such  an  estate,  the  shopkeeper  will  be  much  obliged  to 
your  benefactor  if  he  would  enjoin  you  to  buy  all  your  clothes  at  his 
shop.  England  purchased  from  some  of  her  subjects  who  found  them- 
selves uneasy  at  home  a  great  estate  in  a  distant  country.  The  price, 
indeed,  was  very  small,  and  amounted  to  little  more  than  the  expense  of 
the  different  equipments  wliich  made  the  first  discovery,  reconnoitered 
the  coast,  and  took  a  fictitijous  possession  of  the  country.  The  land  was 
good,  and  of  great  extent,  and  the  cultivators  having  plenty  of  good 
ground  to  work  upon,  and  being  for  some  time  at  liberty  to  sell  their 
produce  where  they  pleased,  became  in  the  course  of  little  more  than 
thirty  or  forty  years  (between  1620  and  1660)  so  numerous  and  thriving 
a  people  that  the  shopkeepers  and  othi3r  traders  of  England  wished  to 
secure  to  themselves  the  monopoly  of  their  custom.  Without  pretending, 
therefore,  that  they  had  paid  any  part  of  the  original  purchase-money, 
or  of  the  subsequent  expenses  of  improvement,  they  petitioned  the  Par- 
liament that  the  cultivators  of  America  might  for  the  future  be  confined 
to  their  shop ;  first,  for  buying  all  the  goods  which  they  wanted  from 
Europe  ;  and  secondly,  for  selling  all  such  parts  of  tbeir  own  produce  as 

*  '  History  ofWcst  Indies,'  vol.  ii.,  p.  565. 


citvi'.  i]  COLOXLES.  723 

tliosc!  traders  luiglit  (ind  it  convonicnt  to  buy, — for  they  did  not  find  it 
convenient  to  buy  every  part  of  it.  Some  ])art.s  of  it  imported  into 
England  might  have  interfered  with  some  of  the  trades  which  they 
themselves  carried  on  at  home.  Those  particulai-  parts  of  it,  therefore, 
they  were  willing  that  the  colonists  should  sell  where  they  could — the 
further  oft*  the  better ;  and  upon  that  account  proposed  that  their  market 
should  be  confined  to  the  countries  south  of  Cape  Finisterre.  A  clause 
in  the  famous  Act  of  Navigatioo  established  this  truly  shopkee])er  pro- 
posal into  a  law. 

"  The  maintenance  of  this  monopoly  has  hitherto  been  the  principal, 
or,  more  properly,  perhaps,  the  sole  end  and  purpose  of  the  dominion 
wliich  Great  Britain  assumes  over  her  colonies.  In  the  exclusive  trade, 
it  is  supposed,  consists  the  great  advantage  of  provinces  which  have 
never  yet  afforded  either  revenue  or  military  force  for  the  support  of 
the  civil  Government,  or  the  defence  of  the  mother-country.  The 
monopoly  is  the  principal  badge  of  their  dependency,  and  it  is  the  sole 
fruit  which  has  hitherto  been  gathered  from  that  dependency.  AVhat- 
ever  expense  Great  Britain  has  hitherto  laid  out  in  maintaining 
this  dependency,  has  really  been  laid  out  in  order  to  support  this 
monopoly."  * 

In  order  to  reconcile  our  colonists  to  the  "  badge  of  their  depen- 
dency "  thus  fastened  upon  them,  the  legislature  of  England  has  sought 
to  give  them  compensation  at  the  expense  of  the  producers  in  other 
countries  and  the  consumers  in  this,  by  means  of  differential  duties  that 
admitted  the  productions  of  our  colonics  at  lower  rates  than  the  same 
j)roductions  brought  from  other  quarters.  Every  real  benefit  thus  im- 
parted to  the  colonist  must  be  at  the  CNpense  of  the  people  at  home ; 
first,  because  of  the  higher  price  which  we  pay  for  the  colonial  articles, 
and  without  which  higher  price  there  could  manifestly  be  no  advantage 
to  the  colonist ;  and  further,  because  of  the  retaliatory  measures  to 
which  this  system  is  sure  to  give  rise  on  the  part  of  countries  whoso 
produce  is  thus  placed  at  disadvantage  in  our  markets,  and  which 
measures  of  retaliation  are  levelled,  not  at  the  trade  of  our  colonies, 
which  indeed  they  cannot  reach,  but  against  that  of  the  mother-country. 

The  amount  of  injury  sustained  from  this  last-named  cause  cannot 
well  be  made  the  subject  of  calculation  ;  but  some  idea  may  be  formed 
of  the  ruinous  effect  of  differential  duties  upon  the  expenditure  of  this 
nation ,  by  showing  the  result  produced  in  one  year  by  the  prohibitory 
duty  upon  a  single  article  of  colonial  production — sugar.  A  statement 
to  this  effect  will  be  found  in  this  volume  (page  547),  where  it  is 
shown  that  we  paid  for  the  quantity  of  sugar  used  in  1840  more  than 
5,000,000/.  sterling  beyond  what  would  have  been  paid  for  tlie  same 

♦  '  Wealth  of  Nations,'  book  iv.,  chap.  Tii. 

r,  A  2 


724  PllOGIlESS  OF  THE  NATION.  [sec.  vm. 

quantity,  irrespective  of  duties,  by  any  other  people  of  Europe.  The 
total  value  of  our  manufactures  exported  in  that  year  to  our  sugar 
colonies  was  under  4,000,000/.,  so  that  the  nation  would  have  gained  a 
million  of  money  in  that  one  year  by  following  the  true  principle  of  buy- 
ing in  the  cheapest  market,  even  though  we  had  made  the  sugar-growers 
a  present  of  all  the  goods  which  they  took  from  us. 

It  must  be  idle  to  suppose  that  colonists  depend  for  their  existence 
and  progress  upon  such  prefei-ences.  Unless  prevented  through  the  in- 
terference of  legislative  restrictions,  they  will  certainly  be  able  to  aj)ply 
their  industry  in  some  profitable  channel.  The  very  fact  of  their  exist- 
ence indicates  that  the  inhabitants  of  colonies  are  in  possession  of  advan- 
tages, whether  of  soil  or  climate,  greater  than  are  afforded  by  the  country 
whence  they  have  emigrated ;  and  it  nnist  be  reckoned  among  the  evils 
produced  by  differential  or  protective  duties,  that  they  divert  capital  and 
industry  from  more  profitable  into  less  profitable,  and  sometimes  even 
into  hurtful,  branches  of  employment. 

It  is  not  necessary  here  to  enlarge  upon  this  topic.  Enough  has  been 
said  to  show  that  it  is  not  by  means  of  commercial  restrictions  and 
monopolies  that  colonies  can  be  made  valuable.  Emancipate  your 
colonies  from  all  the  shackles  with  which  your  sliopheqnng  spirit  has 
loaded  them ;  let  them  be  free  to  adopt  such  commercial  regulations 
as  each  may  find  best  suited  to  its  circumstances,  and  you  may  then 
safely  proceed  to  emancipate  yourselves  from  the  countervailing  shackles 
you  lia ve  imposed  upon  your  own  commerce.  Thenceforward  your  trade 
with  your  foreign  possessions  will  be  truly  profitable  to  the  nation.  The 
settlers  with  whom  it  is  carried  on  will  have  taken  with  them,  or  will 
have  inherited  from  their  fathers,  a  taste  for  the  manufactures  of  the  old 
country ;  and  as  they  will  for  the  most  })art  be  unable  themselves  to 
produce  those  manufactures,  they  will  have  every  inducement  to  buy 
them  from  their  countrymen  rather  than  resort  to  foreign  markets  for  a 
supply.  That  England,  which  boasts  of  its  power  of  competing  success- 
fully with  the  whole  world  in  so  many  branches  of  manufacture,  should 
have  thought  it  necessary  to  force  her  goods  by  fiscal  regulations  upon 
people  who  had  already  the  strongest  inducements  to  trade  with  her, 
seems  siich  an  absurdity  that  one  is  at  a  loss  to  imagine  how  it  could  ever 
have  been  conceived.  Such  a  course  of  legislation  was  not  simply  use- 
less, it  was  positively  mischievous,  by  interfei'ing  with  the  natural  -rights 
of  the  colonists,  and  inducing  the  feeling  that  there  could  be  a  diversity 
of  interest  between  themselves  and  the  parent  country. 

One  principal  advantage  which  a  State  may  fairly  and  properly  derive 
from  colonial  possessions  is  the  field  which  they  offer  for  profitable  enter- 
prise to  its  subjects.  AVithout  admitting  that  uufjer  an  enlightened 
system  of  legislation  there  would  be  an  imperative  necessity  for  sending 
forth  our  additional  numbers,  the  advantage  of  their  thus  going  forth 


CHAP.  I.]  COLONIES.  725 

cannot  be  denied  ;  nor  will  it  be  questioned  that  the  inducements  to  that 
step  would  be  far  greater  than  they  ever  yet  have  been,  if,  in  leaving 
the  home  of  their  birth  for  that  of  their  adojjtion,  they  were  not  made 
practically  to  feel  that  they  forfeit  some  of  their  ])rivileges  as  citizens, 
and  come  in  some  sort  to  be  viewed  in  the  light  of  foreigners  or  strangers. 
One  of  the  wisest  sentiments  ever  uttered  in  Parliament  on  the  subject 
of  the  government  of  colonies,  was  that  delivered  in  the  session  of  1842 
by  Sir  Robert  Peel,  to  the  effect  that  colonies  should  as  far  as  possible 
1)0  treated  as  though  they  were  integral  parts  of  the  kingdom.  If  this 
sentiment  was  carried  into  practice,  no  State  need  ever  fear  that  its  colo- 
nies would  seek  to  shake  off  its  supremacy  ;  such  a  course  would  then 
be  quite  as  improbable  as  that  the  parent  State  itself  should  seek  the 
dismemberment. 

To  bring  about  this  state  of  things  something  more  is  wanted  than 
enlightened  opinions.  It  is  necessary,  also,  that  the  government  of  the 
colonies  should  be  administered  by  men  who  have  a  perfect  knowledge  of 
their  condition,  and  wants,  and  capabilities.  Unfortunately  the  system 
of  government  established  in  England  is  adverse  to  this  end.  Any  man, 
however  high  his  intellectual  capacity,  and  however  extensive  his  attain- 
ments, would  be  unable  to  fulfil  those  conditions  until  he  should  have 
acquired  the  experience  of  years  devoted  to  the  task  ;  and  it  has  so  hap- 
pened that,  with  the  exception  of  the  analogous  office  of  President  of 
the  Board  of  Control,  the  ministry  of  the  colonies  has,  during  the  pre- 
sent century,  been  changed  more  frequently  than  any  other  of  the  great 
offices  of  state.  There  were  during  forty  years  eighteen  Secretaries  of 
State  for  this  department,  one  of  whom.  Earl  Bathurst,  held  the  seals  for 
fifteen  years,  so  that  the  average  tenure  of  the  remaining  seventeen  was 
under  eighteen  months.  On  the  occurrence  of  each  of  these  changes 
the  whole  system  of  our  colonial  policy  has  been  liable  to  alteration  ; 
although,  if  there  be  one  department  of  Government  which  more  than 
any  other  requires  to  be  conducted  upon  fixed  principles,  assuredly  it 
must  be  that  to  which  are  confided  the  variety  of  interests  involved  m 
the  colonial  dependencies  of  the  kingdom,  the  inhabitants  of  which  have 
no  voice  in  the  national  councils. 

Under  such  a  system  it  would  be  unreasonable  to  expect  anvthino- 
like  consistency  of  action.  At  the  same  time  it  is  necessary,  in  order 
to  preserve  harmony  between  the  several  branches  of  the  general  govern- 
ment of  the  country,  that  the  colonial  minister  should  be  a  member  of 
the  cabinet,  and  therefore  subject  to  removal  from  office.  How  then  is 
it  possible  to  find  a  remedy  for  the  evil  ?  A  plan  to  this  end  has  been 
proposed,  which  seems  to  ofter  considerable  hope  of  success  ;  it  is  this: — 

Let  there  be  appointed  a  permanent  colonial  council,  the  members  of 
which  body  shall  be  chosen,  not  from  ]>arty  considerations,  but  for  their 
knowledge  of  colonial  interests  and  their  acquaintance  with  the  science 


726  niOGKESS  OF  THE  NATION.  [sec.  viii. 

of  Government.  The  general  accordanee  of  tliis  counell  with  the  policy 
of  the  administration  would  be  secured  by  the  nomination  of  a  chief 
councillor,  who  might,  as  now,  have  the  dignity  of  a  Secretary  of  State 
and  a  seat  in  the  cabinet,  while  the  colonists  would  be  secured  against 
any  capricious  or  ill-considered  changes  on  his  part  by  the  interposition 
of  a  majority  of  the  council.  It  would  add  greatly  to  the  efficiency  of 
this  body,  and  in  other  ways  would  be  advantageous,  if  a  large  propor- 
tion of  the  members  of  the  council  should  be  chosen  from  among  persons 
whose  fitness  for  performing  the  duties  of  the  office  has  been  evinced  by 
ability  previously  shown  in  the  more  important  of  our  colonies.  A  body 
thus  constituted  would  prove  a  bond  of  union  between  the  colonies  and 
the  parent  State,  through  personal  confidence  on  tlie  one  hand  and  local 
attachments  on  the  other.  A  future  seat  in  this  council  would  prove  an 
object  of  honourable  ambition  ;  and  for  each  one  who  could  succeed  in  its 
attainment  there  would  be  many  led  by  hope  to  undertake  studies  and 
to  make  exei'tions  whereby  to  prove  their  fitness  for  the  honour,  and  who 
could  expect  to  succeed  only  through  the  good  opinion  of  their  brother 
colonists  and  the  home  government,  obtained  as  the  consequence  of 
talent  and  jniblic  usefulness. 

It  can  hardly  be  said  that  this  plan  is  without  a  precedent  in  our  own 
time  and  country.  The  government  of  the  affairs  of  our  Indian  empire 
by  a  Court  of  Directors,  consisting  in  great  part  of  military  men  and 
civilians,  whose  fitness  for  the  office  has  been  gained  by  experience  in 
the  country  they  are  called  on  to  govern,  controlled  too  by  a  responsible 
minister  of  the  Crown,  is  a  case  as  nearly  analogous  as  possible  to  that 
under  consideration  ;  and  the  success  which  has  generally  attended  their 
government  should  give  hope  for  the  favourable  working  of  a  permanent 
colonial  council. 

The  advantages,  to  a  State  possessing  colonies,  which  have  hitherto 
been  enumerated,  are  all  of  an  economical  description.  There  remain 
to  be  noticed  the  political  advantages  which  they  offer.  These  are  of 
two  kinds — positive  and  negative.  The  positive  advantages  obviously 
reside  in  the  additions  which  such  possessions  make  to  the  power  and 
resources  of  the  parent  State  ;  and  the  capacity  for  aftbrding  those  addi- 
tions never  can  be  fully  developed  except  under  an  enlightened  system 
of  government.  So  long  as,  with  the  design  of  profiting  some  particular 
interests  at  home,  their  trade  shall  be  shackled,  and  the  direction  of 
their  industry  controlled ;  so  long  as  their  offices  of  emolument  and 
honour  shall  be  filled  with  a  view  to  party  patronage,  and  without  duly 
considering  the  fitness  of  persons  appointed  ;  and  so  long  as  the  ma- 
nagement of  their  highest  interests  shall  be  intrusted  to  hands  continually 
changing,  we  may  be  certain  that  colonies  will  not  iulfil  the  beneficial 
ends  which  they  are  calculated  to  secure.  But  when  the  sentiment 
already  alluded  to,  of  placing  dependencies  upon  a  footing  of  perfect 


ciiAi'.  I.]  COLONIKS.  727 

equality  with  the  ])arcnt  country,  shall  he  earned  into  ])ractical  oj)cration  ; 
when  Canada  and  Jamaica  shall,  in  every  way  that  is  possible,  he  con- 
sidered and  treated  as  Yorkshire  or  Lancashire  is  treated,  they  will  he 
placed  in  tiie  condition  equally  with  those  counties,  of  adding  to  our 
l)ower.  Nor  does  there  seem  to  be  any  insurmountable  difficulty  to  the 
adoption  of  such  a  course.  The  chief  step  towards  its  accom})li8hment 
will  he  attained  whenever  its  wisdom  shall  be  practically  recognised  by 
the  legislative  and  the  executive  Government — the  will  to  admit  our 
dependencies  to  a  full  participation  of  the  privileges,  commercial  and 
political,  which  are  enjoyed  by  the  inhabitants  of  these  islands,  must  at 
once  bind  our  colonists  to  us  by  the  strongest  of  all  ties,  and  lead  to 
their  increasing  prosperity.  The  facilities  for  such  a  system  are  daily 
becoming  greater  through  the  extension  of  steam  navigation,  whereby 
distance  is  practically  and  importantly  lessened  for  every  purpose  of 
moral,  political,  and  commercial  intercourse. 

The  negative  advantages  offered  to  a  State  by  the  possession  of  its 
colonies  consist  in  this — that  their  power  and  resources  cannot  be  ren- 
dered available  against  it.  This  will  be  fully  understood  if  we  reflect 
upon  the  consequences  that  might  result  to  England  from  the  acquisition 
by  the  United  States  of  America  of  the  provinces  of  Nova  Scotia  and 
New  Brunswick.  At  present  these  possessions  yield  no  direct  revenue  to 
the  parent  State  ;  they  provide,  it  is  true,  a  few  posts  of  profit,  the 
bestowal  of  which  may  in  a  trifling  degree  be  of  advantage  to  the  minister 
of  the  day  ;  but,  on  the  other  hand,  one  of  them  has  been  in  great  part 
the  cause  of  an  ill-judged  fiscal  preference  which  has  long  acted  to  our 
injury  by  limiting  our  exchanges  w'ith  the  timber-producing  countries  of 
Europe,  wdiile  the  premium  thus  offered  to  the  lumberers  of  New 
Brunswdck  has  retarded  the  development  of  its  resources  in  more  im- 
portant branches  of  industry.  It  can  hardly  be  said  that  England  has 
hitherto  drawn  any  positwe  advantages  from  the  possession  of  these  pro- 
vinces, if  we  place  out  of  view  the  convenience  afforded  during  periods 
of  war  by  the  harbour  of  Halifax  ;  but  the  negative  advantages  from 
them  are  evident  if  we  consider  that  the  United  States  of  America  are 
greatly  deficient  in  good  harbours  on  the  Atlantic  coast,  while  Nova 
Scotia  possesses,  in  addition  to  the  magnificent  harbour  of  Halifax, 
eleven  ports  between  it  and  Cape  Canso,  with  sufficient  depth  of  water 
for  the  largest  ships  of  war,  besides  fourteen  other  harbours  capable  of 
receiving  merchant  vessels ;  and  although  New  Brunswick  is  not  equally 
well  provided  in  this  respect,  its  coast  funiishes  several  safe  and  capa- 
cious harbours,  including  those  of  St.  John  and  Miramichi,  with  the 
further  advantage  of  their  greater  proximity  to  Europe.  In  the  unhajjpy 
event  of  a  war  breaking  out  between  the  two  countries,  the  possession 
of  these  harbours  by  America  v  ould  furnish  her  with  means  of  annoy- 
ance to  our  counncrce  from  national   vessels  and  privateers,  the  mag- 


728  PllOGKESS  OF  THE  NATION.  [sec.  vni. 

nltude  of  which  is  hcardly  calculable.  The  continued  possession  of  these 
provinces  is  therefore  a  matter  of  very  deep  importance  to  England, 
even  though  they  should  be  incapable  of  imparting  to  us — and  this  is 
very  far  fi-ora  being  the  case — any  positive  advantage  whatever.  Such 
continued  possession  is,  in  the  mean  time,  itself  an  additional  guarantee 
for  the  preservation  of  peace,  through  the  means  of  annoyance  in  war 
which  they  would  afford  in  our  hands,  and  which  would  be  far  greater 
than  their  possession  would  impart  to  xVmerica  by  reason  of  the  proxi- 
mity to  her  great  Atlantic  cities. 


CHAP.  ii.J        •  DEPENDENCIES  IN  EUKOl'E.  720 


CHAPTER  II. 

DEPENDENCIES  IN  EUROPE. 

Gibraltar:  its  Poinilatioii,  Trade,  and  Shipping.  Malta:  its  Importance  as  a  Military 
and  Naval  Station— Its  Area,  Population,  Trade,  Revenues,  and  Grain  Monopoly— Re- 
striction against  Printing  —  Abolition  of  those  ^Monopolies — Agricultural  Produce — 
Shipping.  Ionian  Islands:  their  Constitution,  Area,  Population,  Trade,  Shipping, 
Exports,  Manufactures,  and  Productions — Education.  IIklic.olam)  :  .\d vantages  of  its 
Position — Former  Importance  as  a  Trading  Depot  during  the  "War. 

TuE  dei)endcncies  of  England  in  Euro})e,  none  of  which  can  properly  be 
considered  colonies,  arc — 

<Jibi'altar; 

IMalta,  and  its  dependency,  Gozo  ; 

The  Ionian  Islands,  viz., 

Corfu, 

Cephalonia, 

Zante, 

Santa  Maura, 

Ithaca, 

Cerigo, 

Pa.\o;  and 
Heligoland, 

The  first  of  these  is  chiefly  valuable  as  a  military  station,  in  which 
respect  its  geographical  position  at  the  entrance  of  the  Mediterranean 
gives  it  very  great  importance.  In  point  of  territory  it  is  wholly  insig- 
nificant, comprising  an  area  of  only  If  square  miles,  or  1120  acres. 
Its  population,  in  1834,  was  as  follows  : — 

Males.  Females,  Total.  ; 

British  subjects  .     .....     4,812  5,310  10,122 

Aliens  and  resident  strangers       ...  ..  4,836 


Total     .     .     15,008 


There  were  among  these  persons  1031  employed  in  commerce,  chiefly 
a  smuggling  trade,  fostered  by  the  anti-commercial  system  pursued  in 
Spain,  and  which  would  doubtless  cease  with  the  relaxation  of  that 
system.  The  shipments  of  British  manufactures  from  the  United 
Kingdom  to  this  station,  in  each  of  the  years  from  1827  to  18-19,  were  of 
the  following  value  : — 


730 


niOGliESS  OF  THE  NATION. 


Years. 

£. 

1827 

1.045 

266 

1828 

1,038 

925 

1823 

504 

163 

1830 

292 

760 

1831 

367 

285 

1832 

461 

470 

1833 

385 

460 

1834 

460 

719 

Years. 

£. 

1833 

602,. 580 

1836 

756,411 

1837 

906,155 

1838 

894,096 

1839 

1,170,702 

1840 

1,111,176 

1841 

1,0.53,367 

1842 

937,719 

[sec.  viu 

Ye.irs. 

£. 

1843 

1 

,176,737 

1844 

1 

,(49,567 

1845 

768,973 

1846 

605,693 

1847 

466,845 

1848 

750,257 

1849 

533,481 

The  great  bulk  of  the  shipments  consist  of  cotton,  linen  and  \voolh>n 
"oods ;  the  value  of  these  goods  in  the   last  ten  years  of  the  series 


was — 


Cotton  Goods     . 
Linen  Goods. 
>Yoollen  Goods   . 

Total   .      . 

1840 

ISll 

1S42 

1843 

1814 

£. 
635,821 
224,061 
97,092 

£. 
622,875 
199,616 
97,341 

£. 
6.57,505 
71,615 
85,336 

£. 

822,070 

104, 122 

.  109,731 

£. 
72.3,927 
75,815 
118,923 

956,974 

919,832 

814,456 

1,035,923 

918,665 

Cotton  Goods 
Linen  (Joods. 
"Woollen  Goods  . 

Total   .      . 

1845 

1846 

1847 

1848 

1849 

£. 
596,857 
47,729 
75,044 

£. 
398,293 
35,021 
61,095 

£. 
277,340 
28,. 585 
47,141 

£. 
551,323 
36,875 
56,655 

£. 
344,719 
36,648 
43,362 

719,630 

494,409 

353,066 

644,853 

424,729 

A  larsje  quantity  of  tobacco  is  likewise  shipped  to  this  depot,  nearly 
all  of  which  is  fraudulently  introduced  into  Spain. 

Gibraltar  was  taken  by  us  in  1704,  and  has  since  remained  subject  to 
the  British  Crown. 

The  shipping  employed  in  the  trade  between  the  United  Kingdom 
and  Gibraltar,  in  each  year  from  1832  to  1849,  was  as  under:  — 


Years. 

INWARDS. 

OUTWARDS, 

Ships. 

Tons. 

Ships. 

Tons. 

1832 

16 

2,257 

162 

22,031 

1833 

22 

3,516 

181 

25,289 

18.34 

28 

3,720 

100 

12,885 

1835 

45 

5,601 

1.31 

54,971 

1836 

56 

8.063 

166 

21,878 

1837 

55 

10,299 

199 

30,911 

18.33 

79 

20,375 

248 

44,510 

1833 

117 

25,920 

260 

43,665 

1840 

101 

33,099 

280 

45,450 

1841 

100 

23,314 

261 

47  007 

1842 

81 

20,602 

2.58 

44,690 

1843 

130 

24,455 

249 

43,219 

1844 

85 

20,074 

260 

45,351 

1845 

82 

18,221 

209 

37,121 

1846 

72 

14,523 

216 

35,074 

1847 

50 

11,623 

196 

32,861 

1848 

52 

14,484 

188 

33,9.59 

18 19 

54 

12.457 

230 

37,631 

CHAP.    II.] 


DEPENDKN-UIES  IN  KUllOi'j;. 


731 


JNIalta  also  is  chiefly  valuable  as  a  military  possession,  and  is  the 
liead-qiiarters  of  the  British  naval  force  stationed  in  the  Mediterranean. 
The  island  was  taken  by  us  from  the  French  in  September,  1800,  and 
by  the  tenth  article  of  tiie  Treaty  of  Amiens  was  to  be  delivered  up  to 
the  Knights  of  the  order  of  St.  John  of  Jerusalem  ;  but  war  again  break- 
ing out  before  the  cession  had  been  completed,  this  article  of  the  treaty 
Avas  left  unfulfilled,  and  Malta  has  since  continued  in  the  possession  of 
the  British. 

The  area  of  Malta  is  ninety-five  square  miles,  and  of  Gozo  twenty- 
seven  square  miles.     The  population,  in  1839,  was — 


MALTA. 

GOZO. 

Natives 

Males. 

45,698 
1,315 
3,702 

2,458 

Females. 

49,893 

799 

959 

G32 

Total. 

95, 591 
2,114 
4,G61 

3,090 

Males. 
8,144 
10 

Females. 

8,305 

13 

Total. 
IG  449 

British  residents    .... 

23 

Queen's  troops,  \^itli 
followers  .... 

""'■) 

53,173 

52,283 

105, 45G 

8,154 

8,318 

16,472 

Total  Population, — Males 

„  Females  . 


01,327 
60,601 


Total 


121,928 


The  exports  of  British  manufactures  to  these  islands,  in  each  of  the 
yeare  from  1827  to  1849,  were  of  the  following  value  : — 


Years. 

£. 

Years. 

£. 

Years. 

£. 

1827 

200,949 

1835 

136,925 

1843 

224,546 

1823 

239,458 

1836 

143,015 

1844 

200,009 

1823 

224,010 

1837 

103,680 

1845 

183,065 

1830 

189,135 

1838 

226,040 

1846 

255,033 

1831 

134,519 

1833 

125,338 

1847 

195,836 

1832 

96,994 

1840 

166,545 

1848 

■  .379,467 

1833 

135,433 

1841 

223,734 

1849 

3S7.744 

1834 

242,696 

1842 

289,304 

The  revenue  of  the  government  of  Malta,  derived  from  various  sources, 
was  as  follows  in  1837,  stated  in  round  numbers:  — 


Rents  of  Crown  lands 23,000 

Small   internal  ta.xes — chiefly  licenses   for  exercising  trades — a  i 

tax  on  the  transfer  of  real  property,  and  auction  duty  .     .      J  "' 
Fees  of  court  and  government  offices,  postage  of  letters,  receipts  \ 

of  government  printing-office,  fines,  &c (  '"^j-^ 

Duties  on  imports,  tonnage  and  quarantine  dues 65,000 

£95,600 


Of  the  65,000/.  Customs'  duties,  35,0007.  arose  from  the  import  of 
grain.  Under  the  government  of  the  Knights  of  St.  John,  the  former 
rulers  of  Malta,  the  inhabitants   were  furnished   uith  gi-ain  and  other 


732  rilOGllESS  OF  THE  NATION.  [sec.  viii. 

articles  of  food  by  a  corporate  body,  or  universita,  wliich  had  the  mono- 
poly of  the  commodities  in  which  it  dealt,  and  fixed  the  })rices  on  tiiem 
in  the  island.  This  system  was  continued  by  the  British  Government, 
so  far  as  respects  the  price  of  grain,  until  1822,  the  management  of 
the  purchases  and  sales  having  been  transferred  in  1818  fi*om  the 
universita  to  a  body  called  Commissioners  of  the  Board  of  Su})ply.  This 
body  was  suppressed  in  1822,  when  the  commerce  in  gi-ain  was  thrown 
open  upon  the  payment  of  a  fixed  duty,  and  a  new  department  of  govern- 
ment was  created,  called  the  Grain  Dejiartment,  charged  with  buying 
and  keeping  a  stock  of  grain,  in  order  to  guard  against  scarcity  and  high 
prices.  In  1824  a  graduated  scale  of  duties,  varying  monthly  with  the 
prices,  was  substituted  for  the  fixed  duty  of  1822.  In  the  beginning 
of  1837  the  system  of  keeping  a  stock  of  grain  was  abandoned  by  the 
Government,  and  the  supply  of  the  island  was  opened  entirely  to  private 
enterprise.  The  quantity  required  every  year  for  the  supply  of  the 
island  is  about  73,000  salms,  or  quarters,  so  that  the  duty  is  ecjual  to 
nearly  lO^-.  per  quarter. 

The  "  sliding  scale"  of  duties  on  wheat,  established  in  December, 
1832,  and  continued  till  October,  1837,  was  as  under : — 

nuty. 

AVhcn  the  average  price  of  foreign  wheat  per  salm  (or  quarter)  was—  .«.   d. 

At  or  under  25s 12     0 

ALove  25s.  and  not  exceeding  30.5 110 

„      30                  „                   35 10    0 

„      35                  „                   40 9    0 

„      40                  „                   45 8    0 

„       45                   „                    50 7     0 

„       50                  „                   55 6    0 

„      55                  „                  60 5    0 

„       60                   „                   65 3     0 

„       65         10 

The  average  rate  of  duty  received  under  this  scale,  during  four  years, 
1833  to  1836,  was  10s.  Sjcl  ;  and  the  yearly  average  quantity  taken 
for  consumption  was  57,981  salms,  or  quarters.  The  duty  since  October, 
1837,  has  been  fixed  at  10s.  per  quarter. 

Among  the  sources  of  Government  revenue  may  be  noticed  "  receipts 
of  Government  printing-office."  This  calls  for  some  explanation.  Up 
to  the  beginning  of  1838,  no  person  was  allowed  to  exercise  the  trade 
of  a  printer,  or  to  use  a  printing-press,  without  the  license  of  the  Govern- 
ment, which  would  grant  no  such  license  except  to  the  Government 
Commissariat  Department,  to  be  used  for  the  public  service  of  that 
department,  and  to  the  Church  Missionary  Society,  the  society  binding 
itself  to  submit  everything  printed  by  it  for  the  approval  of  the  Govern- 
ment, before  publication.  Two  presses  set  up  without- the  license,  one 
in  1810,  the  other  in  1827,  were  taken  possession  of  by  the  Government. 
The  carefulness  of  the  Government  as  recrards  nrintincr  thus  went  far 


CHAP.  II.]  DErENDENCIES  IN  EUROrE.  733 

beyond  tlic  strictest  censoi-sliip,  and  amounted  to  an  absolute  monopoly. 
Tbis  system  of  Vandalism  was  abolisbed  tbrough  the  urgent  recommen- 
dation of  British  Commissioners,  who  were  sent  in  1836  to  inquire  into 
various  matters  connected  with  tlie  government  of  Malta. 

Such  a  system  was  clearly  indefensible  upon  every  ground.  As  a  matter 
of  profit  it  was  an  absolute  failure,  the  press  having  never  earned  its 
expenses,  although  the  rate  of  charges  made  to  the  public  was  exorbitant. 
As  an  act  of  tyranny  it  was  far  le^s  justifiable,  and  exposed  the  Govern- 
ment to  much  odium,  while  it  gave  a  colour  to  surmises  and  imputations 
for  which  no  real  grounds  existed.  It  hindered  effectually  the  diffusion 
of  knowledge,  and  tended  to  perpetuate  the  ignorance,  and  with  it  many 
misehievous  prejudices,  among  the  native  population.  The  relaxation 
of  this  odious  restriction  has  not  hitherto  been  accompanied  by  any  of 
the  evils  predicted  by  those  who  advocated  its  continuance. 

The  fixed  civil  and  judicial  establishments  in  Malta  consisted,  in 
1838,  of— 

£.     «. 

2-V  Englisli  persons,  with  salaries  amounting  to     .     .       7,71G  14 

577  Maltese 25,845  18 


£33,562  12 


The  agricultural  produce  of  the  islands  of  Malta  and  Gozo,  in  1839, 
and  the  area  from  which  each  description  was  raised,  were  as  follows : — 

Description.                     Area  in  Acres.  Quantity  produced. 

Wheat 9,951  17,453  quarters. 

Meslin 9,144  2G,042        „ 

Barley 4,051  11,641         „ 

Pulse 3,206  7,614        „ 

Sesamum      ....         493  488        „ 

(Jarden  produce      .      .     4,3.54  125,816  cwts. 

Cummin  seed    .     .      .         418  1,461     ,, 

Cotton 10,898  .32,602     ,, 

Forage 7,594  208,778  bushels. 

Pasture 4,607 

Tn  crop  .      ,      .     54,716 
Uncultivated  .     46,810 

Total     .  101,. 526  Acres. 


Tli(>  number  of  stock  in  the  same  year  was — 

Horses,  mule.s,  and  asses       .      .      .  4,447 

Horned  cattle 5,661 

Sheep 8,851 

Goats 2,935 

The  number  and  tonnage  of  shipping  employed  in  the  trade  between 
the  United  Kingdom  and  Malta,  in  each  of  the  eighteen  years  ending 
with  1849,  were  as  follows  : — 


731 


PROGRESS  OF  'HIE  NATION. 


Years, 

INWARDS. 

CUTWARDS. 

Ships. 

Tons. 

Ships. 

Tons, 

1832 

G 

726 

35 

6,023 

1833 

8 

8<:0 

62 

9,450 

1834 

<) 

1,219 

86 

13,006 

1835 

7 

1,003 

70 

11,128 

1836 

7 

1,113 

81 

11,816 

1837 

11 

1.889 

77 

14,996 

1838 

22 

3;393 

181 

33,626 

1839 

33 

5,667 

1.52 

30,835 

1840 

15 

3,531 

157 

35,379 

1841 

76 

10,628 

277 

53,885 

1842 

122 

21,583 

215 

41,266 

1843 

17 

2,216 

166 

32,721 

1844 

33 

5,365 

210 

40,4.50 

1845 

72 

11,817 

227 

45,176 

1846 

47 

8,443 

261  • 

53,894 

1847 

204 

37,343 

374 

75,977 

184S 

55 

8.100 

348 

77,301 

1849 

55 

10.224 

255 

53,802 

At  tlie  o|)ening  of  the  present  century,  the  seven  islands  known  as 
the  Ionian  Isles  were  nominally  under  the  joint  protection  of  Turkey  . 
and  Russia,  the  latter  power  exercising,  in  effect,  all  the  privileges  of 
sovereignty  over  them.  By  the  connivance  of  the  Ernperor  Alexander, 
they  soon  passed  under  the  dominion  of  France,  but  in  the  progress  of 
the  war  then  raging  in  Europe,  the  chief  of  them  were  taken  by  Eng- 
land. At  the  general  peace  in  1815  this  country  was  constituted  their 
protector,  and  the  possessor  of  the  British  Crown  has  since  been,  in 
efFect,  sovereign  of  these  islands  also. 

In  1817  a  constitution  was  granted  to  these  seven  islands  (collectively 
with  other  smaller  islands,  situated  along  the  coast  of  Albania  and  the 
Morea,  and  which  formerly  belonged  to  the  dominions  of  Venice),  under 
the  title  of  "  The  United  States  of  the  Ionian  Islands."  By  this  act 
the  seat  of  Government  was  fixed  in  the  capital  of  Corfu ;  the  Greek 
religion  was  declared  the  established  religion,  but  all  other  forms  of 
Christian  worship  were  protected.  The  civil  government  of  the  States 
was  declared  to  be  composed  of  "  a  legislative  assembly,  a  senate,  and 
a  judicial  authority."  The  members  of  the  legislative  assembly  to  be 
elected  "  from  the  body  of  noble  electors,"  who  must  not  follow  any 
trade  or  business, — the  senators  to  be  elected  out  of  the  body  of  the 
legislative  assembly, — and  the  judicial  authority  to  be  selected  by  the 
senate,  and  approved  by  the  Lord  High  Commissioner  of  the  protecting 
Sovereign.  This  last-named  functionary  is  appointed  by  the  British 
Government,  and  performs  in  all  respects  the  duties  of  a  viceroy  or 
governor  of  a  British  colony.  The  Lord  High  Commissioner  has  always 
been  a  British-born  subject.  The  legislative  assembly  consists  of  a 
president  and  thirty-nine  members,  and  the  senate  of  a  president  and 
five  senators,  the  president  being  selected  for  appointment  by  the  Lord 
Hierh  (Commissioner. 


DEPENDKNX'IES  IN  KUllOPK. 


The  area  and  population,  in  1840,  of  the  seven  islands  were  :- 


ISLANDS. 


Corfu  .     . 
Cephnlonia 
Zanto  . 
Santa  Maura 
Ithaca 
Cerigo 
Paxo    . 


Square 
Miles. 


POPULATION. 


Native. 


Males. 


227 
311 
IGOJ 
156 

44 
116 

26 


1.040^ 


35,447 
34,746 
21,773 
'J,  106 
5.239 
4^510 
2,520 


Females. 


Total. 


.Aliens  and 
Resident 
Strangers. 


30,287 
28.638 
18,180 
8,044 
5,022 
4,922 
2,2'J2 


65,734 
63,384 
39,953 
17,240 
10,261 
9,432 
4,812 


9,600 
1,252 
946 
210 
362 
15 
148 


Grand 
Total. 


75,334 
64,636 
40,899 
17,450 
10,623 
9,447 
4,960 


113,431  ;     97,335  '  210,816        12,533      223,349 


Tiie  declared  value  of  British  manufactures  sent  fi'om  the  United 
Kingdom  to  these  dependencies,  during  each  of  the  years  from  1827  to 
1 849,  was  as  follows  : — 


Years. 

£. 

1827 

37.196 

1828 

41,078 

1829 

30,465 

1830 

56,963 

1831 

50,883 

1832 

55,725 

1833 

38,915 

1834 

94,408 

Years. 

£. 

1835 

107,804 

1836 

104,123 

1837 

124.465 

183S 

96,100 

1839 

64,010 

1840 

89,204 

1841 

119,523 

1842 

83,600 

Years. 
1843 
1844 
1845 
1846 
1847 
1848 
1849 


£. 
127,598 
123,928 
20'J,612 
171,731 
143,426 
178,831 
165,805 


The  number  and  tonnage  of  shipping  employed  in  the  trade  between 
the  United  Kingdom  and  the  Ionian  Islands,  during  the  same  years, 


were 


Entered  Inwards. 

Cleared  Outwards. 

Entered  Inwards. 

Cleared 

Outwards 

Years. 

Years. 

Ships. 

Tons. 

Ships. 

Tons. 

Ships. 

Tons. 

Ships. 

Tons. 

1827 

54 

7,721 

21 

3,974 

1839 

60 

8,215 

28 

4,261 

1828 

52 

7,642 

33 

5,149 

1840 

56 

7,431 

45 

7,944  i 

1829 

38 

5,326 

25 

4,. 532 

1841 

42 

5,687 

41 

6,432  . 

1830 

32 

4,304 

38 

5,513 

1842 

80 

10,150 

44 

7,055 

1831 

60 

8,482 

36 

5,530 

1843 

54 

7,325 

39 

7,624 

1832 

48 

6,694 

23 

3,143 

1844 

51 

6,250 

69 

9,. 568 

1833 

61 

8,076 

30 

4, 125 

1845 

87 

11,036 

62 

9,804 

1834 

62 

8,469 

42 

5,753 

1846 

82 

11,570 

60 

8,991 

1835 

60 

8,896 

42 

6,655 

1847 

100 

13,101 

87 

14,276  ! 

1836 

46 

6,527 

31 

6,182 

1848 

83 

10,874 

76 

12,169 

1837 

71 

9,550 

42 

7,168 

1849 

80 

10,565 

68 

14,204 

IS.-iS 

47 

6,419 

30 

4,605 

\ 

The  chief  part  of  our  exports  to  these  islands  consists  of  cotton  goods 
and  refined  sugar.  The  imports  are  confined  almost  entirely  to  three 
articles,  viz.,  currants,  olive  oil,  and  valonia. 

A  considerable  trade  is  carried  on  between  these  islands  and  various 
ports  in  the  Mediterranean.  The  tonnage,  under  various  flags,  that 
entered  and  cleared  from  the  islands,  in  1840,  was  as  follows  : — 


736 


PROGRESS  OF  THE  NATION. 


[sr.c.  viii. 


Inwards. 


Ionian  (inter-insular  trallic) 

British 

Austrian 

Russian 

French      

JCeapolitan 

Papal 

Sardinian 

Greek 

Turkish 

All  others 


Tons. 
121.777 

2'.>,2;}2 

42,603 

16,832 

771 

5,971 

720 

4,136 

46,250 

3,632 

4,037 


276,021 


Outwards. 


Tons. 

125,412 

32,243 

40,031 

15,0.52 

771 

5,230 

504 

4,341 

39,972 

3,787 

4,130 


271,473 


The  })nncipal  exports  in  the  same  year  (1840)  consisted  of — 

068,711  gallons  olive  oil. 
22,719,990  lbs.  currants. 
131,976  gallons  wine. 
1,139,. 503  lbs.  of  soap. 

Some  manufactures  are  carried  on  of  common  earthenwares,  silks, 
shawls,  coarse  linen,  coarse  woollen  blankets,  goat-hair  carpets  and 
sacking.  The  chief  productions,  besides  the  foregoing  articles,  are — 
wheat,  maize,  barley,  oats,  pulse,  cotton,  and  flax. 

The  most  productive  branch  of  revenue  is  the  export  duty  on  oil  and 
currants.  The  collections  under  these  beads,  in  1840,  amounted  to 
71,765/.  The  duty  on  imports  yielded  35,591/. ;  stamp  duties,  13,481/. 
The  total  revenues  for  the  year  amounted  to  157,625/.,  and  the  expen- 
diture was  159,293/.,  of  which  sum  73,221/.  was  the  cost  of  civil  and 
judicial  establishments.  The  charge  defrayed  out  of  the  public  purse 
for  education  was  10,550/.;  the  hospitals  cost  8210/.,  and  17,117/. 
were  expended  in  maintaining  roads  and  bridges. 

For  the  sum  mentioned  of  10,550/.,  there  were  instructed,  in  159 
schools  (including  one  university,  one  ecclesiastical  seminary,  one  college, 
and  one  lyceum),  6527  scholars,  of  which  number  only  871  were  females. 
In  each  of  the  islands  there  is  a  "  secondary  school,"  supported  at 
the  public  expense,  in  which  instruction  is  given  in  classical  literature 
and  modern  languages,  together  with  the  more  ordinary  branches  of 
tuition.  In  the  chief  town  of  each  island  there  is  a  "  central  school," 
also  at  the  public  charge,  in  which  the  Lancasterian  system  of  teaching 
is  followed.  The  whole  of  the  establishments  for  education  to  .which 
contributions  are  made  from  the  public  purse  are  placed  under  the 
general  direction  of  a  "  Commission  for  Public  Instruction." 

Heligoland,  a  small  island  in  the  North  Sea,  situated  in  54'  11'  N. 
lat.,  and  7  51'  E.  long.,  came  first  into  the  possession  of  England  in 
1807,  and  was  formally  ceded  to  us  at  the  peace  of  J.814.  The  island 
is  about  a  mile  long  from  north  to  south,  and  about  a  third  of  a  mile 
wide.     It  is  of  some  commercial  utility  from  its  position.     The  church 


CHAP.  II.]  DErEXDEXCIES  IN  EUKOrE.  737 

and  lighthouse  are  useful  as  beacons  ;  but  its  principal  advantage 
consists  in  its  being  a  rendezvous  for  pilots  to  vessels  bound  to  the 
Elbe,  the  Eyder,  and  the  Weser. 

The  ])ossession  of  Heligoland  offered  much  greater  advantages  at  the 
time  of  its  acquisition  than  it  has  since  afforded.  During  the  continu- 
ance of  what  was  called  the  continental  system,  Heligoland  was  most 
usefully  employed  as  a  depot  for  our  manufactured  goods  and  colonial 
produce,  whence  they  could  be  introduced  in  small  quantities,  and  as 
opportunities  could  be  made,  into  the  neighbouring  continent.  The 
extent  to  which  this  smuggling  trade  was  carried  on  from  this  spot 
during  the  continuance  of  the  Berlin  and  Milan  decrees  serves  to  show 
how  hopeless  it  must  be  on  the  part  of  any  Government  to  impose 
shackles  upon  commerce,  when  the  profits  to  be  derived  from  their 
evasion  are  considerable. 

The  island  is  thickly  inhabited,  its  numbers  being  about  2200.  The 
natives  are  of  Frisian  descent,  and  are  a  fine  race  of  people.  The 
climate  is  as  mild  as  that  of  the  midland  counties  of  England,  and  the 
air  is  considered  healthy.  Within  the  last  few  years  many  invalids 
from  Germany,  Poland,  and  Russia,  have  resorted  to  it  for  the  sake  of 
its  baths,  which  have  acquired  some  degree  of  celebrity. 


3   B 


738  PROGRESS  OF  THE  NATION.  [sec.  viit. 


CHAPTER  Til. 

DEPENDENCIES  IN  ASIA. 

Origin  and  Progress  of  our  Indian  Empire — Circumstances  under  which  its  Growth  has 
occurred — War  of  Aggression  against  AtTghanistan  ;  its  sinister  consequences— Trading 
Monopoly  of  the  East  India  Companj';  its  Kelaxatiou  and  subsequent  Abandonment — 
Amount  of  Trade  between  England  and  India — Quantities  Imported  of  various  Articles 
of  Indian  Produce  —  Great  Commercial  Resources  of  India — Probability  of  obtaining 
Supplies  of  Products  liitherto  procured  from  the  Baltic  ;  "Wool,  Flax,  Tallow,  Oil-seeds — 
Shipping — Trade  of  Bengal ;  of  Madras ;  of  Bombay— Public  Revenues  and  Expenditure 
of  British  India— Public  Debt— Constitution  of  Anglo-Indian  Government— Board  of 
Control ;  its  unlimited  Power — Successive  Acquisitions  of  Territory  in  India— "Wealth 
drawn  Yearly  from  India  to  England.  Ceylon:  its  Position  and  Acquisition — Popula- 
tion— Increased  production  of  Cofi'ee.  Cocoa-nut  Tree  :  its  various  Products  and  their 
Advantages.  Cinnamon:  Monopoly  Abolished  —  Pearl  Fishery — Gems  and  Metals — 
Manufactures — Trade.  Mauritius:  Population — Sugar  Production — Trade  with  Eng- 
land and  other  Countries. 

The  origin  and  progress  of  the  British  Empire  in  India  is  altogether  a 
case  without  precedent  in  the  history  of  nations.  It  would  be  interesting 
in  a  high  degree,  could  we  here  trace  that  progress,  so  important  in  its 
consequences  to  our  country ;  but  a  sliglrt  sketch  of  its  more  remarkable 
features  is  all  that  can  be  offered  in  this  volume. 

This  eastern  empire — now  so  vast  in  its  extent  and  so  important  in 
all  its  circumstances,  both  social  and  political — originated  in  the  sub- 
scriptions, trifling  in  amount,  of  a  few  private  individuals,  which  were 
advanced  for  the  prosecution  of  a  mercantile  adventure.  This  event 
took  place  in  1599.  The  capital  then  subscribed  amounted  to  no  more 
than  30,000/.,  and  was  divided  into  101  shares.  At  the  end  of  the  fol- 
lowing year  the  adventurers  obtained  a  royal  charter,  constituting  them 
a  corporation  for  fifteen  years,  and  under  which  the  management  of  the 
joint-stock  was  confided  to  twenty-four  members  chosen  by  the  pro- 
prietors from  among  their  own  body,  this  committee  being  rene"vved  by  a 
fresh  election  every  year. 

The  objects  of  the  Company  were  at  first  strictly  confined  to  com- 
mercial adventure,  for  the  more  eflfectual  prosecution  of  which  the  capital 
was  enlarged  from  time  to  time,  imtil  in  1618  it  amounted  to  two 
millions.  The  Company  had  obtained  in  1611  from  the  Mogul  per- 
mission to  establish  factories  at  Surat,  Ahmedabad,  Cambaya,  and 
Goga  ;  in  return  for  which  indulgence  it  agreed  to  pay  to  him  an  export 


CHAP,  iii.l  DEPENDENCIES  IN  ASIA.  739 

duty  of  3^  per  cent,  on  the  value  of  all  its  shipments.  The  authority 
under  which  the  Company  first  exercised  any  of  the  functions  of 
government  was  conveyed  in  1624,  by  the  permission  of  the  King  of 
Englaiul,  to  punish  its  servants,  while  abroad,  either  by  civil  or  by 
martial  law. 

In  160 1  a  new  charter  was  granted  to  the  Company,  whereby  its 
})rivileges  were  confirmed,  and  authority  was  given  to  make  peace  with 
or  war  against  any  princes  and  people  "not  being  Christians.' 

Bombay,  which  came  into  the  hands  of  Charles  the  Second  as  part  of 
the  marriage  portion  of  Catherine  of  Portugal,  having  proved  a  costly 
appendage  to  the  Crown,  was  made  over  to  the  Company  in  1688,  with 
authority  to  exercise  all  the  powers  necessary  for  its  defence  and 
government ;  and  this  territory  it  holds  of  the  Crown  "  in  free  and 
common  soccage,  as  of  the  manor  of  East  Greenwich,  on  the  payment  of 
the  annual  rent  of  ten  pounds  in  gold  on  the  30tli  September  in  each 
year." 

In  1664  an  attack  made  by  the  chief  of  the  Mahrattas  on  Surat  was 
successfully  resisted  by  the  servants  of  the  Company  ;  and  this  was  the 
first  occasion  upon  which  the  Company  was  brought  into  hostile  collision 
with  any  of  the  native  powers  of  India. 

Nearly  a  century  elapsed  from  this  time  before  any  further  territorial 
acquisitions  were  made  by  the  Company.  In  1757  Masulipatam  was 
taken  by  its  forces ;  and  in  the  same  year  the  Nabob  of  Bengal,  Meer 
Jaffier,  ceded  to  it  a  district  in  the  vicinity  of  Calcutta  called  "  the 
Twenty-four  Pergunnahs  ;"  four  years  later  it  obtained,  by  cession  from 
Mahomed  Ali,  Nabob  of  the  Carnatic,  Madras,  Fort  St.  David,  some 
settlements  in  the  Northern  Circars,  and  a  district  near  Madras  called 
"  the  Seven  Magans." 

The  growth  of  our  political  power  in  India  up  to  this  period  is  chiefly 
attributable  to  a  grant  made  in  1652  by  the  Mogul  of  a  licence  to  carry 
on  an  unlimited  trade  throughout  the  province  of  Bengal  without  the 
payment  of  any  duties,  and  which  licence  was  obtained  at  the  insigni- 
ficant cost  of  3000  rupees,  through  the  influence  of  a  medical  gentleman 
whose  skill  had  been  successfully  employed  at  the  court  of  the  Mogul. 
A  far  more  important  step  was  gained  when,  on  the  12th  August,  1765, 
the  Mogul  Shah  Alluni  granted  to  the  Company  the  "  dewanny,"  or 
collection  of  the  revenue  of  Bengal,  Bahar,  and  Orissa.  This  grant 
gave  to  the  Company  the  virtual  sovereignty  of  those  extensive  provinces. 
A  further  grant  in  the  same  year,  by  that  sovereign,  of  the  Northern 
Circars,  was  at  first  resisted  on  the  part  of  the  Nizam  or  Soubahdar  of 
the  Deccan,  but  was  confirmed  by  that  ruler  on  the  12th  November, 
1766,  the  Company  agreeing  to  pay  him  seven  lacs  of  rupees,  or  70,000/. 
per  annum, — which  sum  was  redeemed  in  1823  by  the  payment  of 
1,070,000/. 

3  B  2 


740  PROGRESS  OF  THE  NATION.  [sec.  viii. 

In  1775  Benares  was  ceded  to  the  Company;  and  in  August,  1778, 
Chandernagore,  Masulipatam,  and  Carical,  were  taken  by  us  from  the 
French :  later  in  the  same  year  Pondicherry  also  surrendered  to  the 
English.  In  1780  possession  was  taken  of  Ahmedabad,  the  capital  of 
Guzerat,  and  a  great  part  of  the  country  of  the  jNIahrattas.  In  1782 
the  island  of  Salsette,  near  Bombay,  was  ceded  to  the  Company.  In 
1792  one-half  of  his  dominions  was  wrested  from  the  Rajah  of  Mysore, 
and  divided  by  Lord  Cornwallis  between  the  Company,  the  Nizam,  and 
the  Peishwa, — Malabar,  Dindigul,  Salem,  and  Baramahal  falling  to  the 
lot  of  the  former.  On  the  fall  of  Seringapatam  and  the  death  of  Tippoo 
Sultan,  in  1799,  the  remaining  Mysore  territories  were  divided  between 
the  Nizam  and  the  English  ;  the  southern  portion  was  taken  by  the 
Company,  whose  territory  was  thus  made  to  reach  from  shore  to  shore 
of  the  Deccan.  In  the  following  year  the  part  of  Mysore  ceded  to  the 
Nizam  came  by  treaty  into  our  possession.  Rohilcund  and  the  Lower 
Dooab  were  obtained  for  the  Company  from  the  Soubahdar  of  Oude  in 
1801,  and  in  1802  Furruckabad  was  ceded  to  us  by  its  ruler  on  receipt 
of  a  pension.  In  the  following  year  we  acquired  by  conquest  Alighur, 
Delhi,  Agra,  Ahmednuggur,  Boorhanpore,  Gawilghur,  Baroach,  Pow- 
anghur,  Manickpatam,  and  Kuttack ;  and  in  1805  we  acquired  by 
cession  some  districts  in  Guzerat.  Several  years  of  peace  then  occurred, 
and  there  are  no  further  conquests  to  record  until  1815,  when  we 
obtained  as  the  result  of  a  successful  war  with  the  Nepaulese,  the  pro- 
vinces of  Kumaon  and  Gurwahl,  with  a  territory,  called  the  Terrace,  at 
the  foot  of  the  Nepaul  hills.  In  1817  we  gained  from  the  Peishwa, 
Sau<Tur,  Huttah,  and  Darwar ;  and  from  the  Guickwar  we  obtained 
Ahmedabad,  the  capital  of  Guzerat.  In  1818  we  got  possession  of  the 
provinces  of  Kandeish,  Ajmere,  Poonah  and  North  Konkun,  and  the 
South  Mahratta  country;  and  in  1820  further  obtained  the  Southern 
Konkun.  Early  in  1824  war  commenced  between  the  English  and  the 
King  of  Ava  ;  and  at  its  termination  two  years  after,  we  were  confirmed 
in  the  possession  of  Arracan,  Assam,  Martaban,  Tarvy,  and  Mergui, 
with  the  islands  of  Cheduba  and  Ramree. 

By  tracing  on  the  map  these  various  acquisitions  of  territory,  it  will 
be  seen  that  nearly  the  whole  of  the  peninsula  of  Hindostan  has  fallen 
under  our  dominion.  Of  the  parts  which  are  not  in  our  immediate 
possession,  all  which  by  their  geographical  position  are  important  to  our 
security  are  virtually  ours,  their  rulers  being  under  British  protection, 
or,  in  other  words,  under  British  direction  and  control.  Our  power  is 
in  effect  "paramount  over  every  native  state  from  the  Indus  to  Cape 
Cormorin,  since  no  dispute  can  arise  among  any  of  those  states  which  we 
are  not  by  treaty  authorized  to  arbitrate." 

The  growth  of  this  empire  has  occurred  not  only  without  the  design 
of  those  under  whose  rule  it  has  been  effected,  but  even  in  opposition  to 


CH.vr.  in.]  DEPENDENCIES  IN  ASIA.  741 

their  positive  and  oft-ropcated  injunctions  to  their  servants  in  India. 
The  most  strenuous  and  repeated  inhibition  of  all  measures  that  niiglit 
increase  the  territorial  possessions  of  the  East  India  Company  has,  on 
almost  every  occasion,  been  conveyed  to  its  servants  by  the  Court  of 
Directors.  In  1768  that  Court  enforced  the  necessity  for  confining  the 
boundaries  of  their  possessions  within  the  limits  of  the  provinces  of 
Bengal,  the  Jaghire  of  Madras,  and  the  island  of  Bombay.  "  If,"  they 
observed,  "  we  once  pass  these  bounds,  we  shall  be  led  from  one  acqui- 
sition to  another  till  we  shall  find  no  security  but  in  the  subjection  of 
the  whole,  which,  by  dividing  the  British  force,  would  lose  us  the  whole, 
and  end  in  our  extirpation  from  Ilindostan."  The  first  part  of  this 
prediction  has  been  fully  verified,  but  its  forebodings  of  evils  do  not 
appear  likely  to  be  accomplished,  so  long  as  we  shall  limit  our  desires 
to  the  possession  of  India  itself,  applying  ourselves  to  call  forth  its 
resources  by  means  fully  within  our  power,  and  if  we  shall  let  our  rule 
over  its  hundred  millions  of  people  be  strictly  in  accordance  with  the 
spirit  of  justice  and  benevolence.  With  the  exception  of  our  short  and 
successful  but  severe  contests  with  the  Ameers  of  Scinde  and  in  the 
Punjab,  India  has  been  internally  at  peace  during  the  unusually  long 
period  of  more  than  twenty  years,  and  should  have  been  allowed  to  reap 
the  advantages  growing  out  of  that  condition ;  for  by  no" employment  or 
perversion  of  words  can  it  be  made  to  appear  that  our  irruption  into 
Affghanistan,  midertaken  for  no  Indian  object,  and  prosecuted  without 
the  sanction  of  the  recognised  rulers  of  India — nay,  for  a  long  time,  even 
without  their  knowledge — was  an  Indian  war.  Unhappily,  however, 
India  has  to  bear  many  of  the  evils  of  that  mysterious  invasion.  Not 
the  least  among  those  evils  is  the  waste  of  the  Company's  resources, 
whereby  a  check  has  been  given  to  various  plans  for  improving  the 
communications,  and  calling  forth  the  natural  wealth  of  the  country, — 
objects  of  the  deepest  importance,  not  to  India  only  but  to  the  whole 
British  empire. 

Up  to  the  year  1814  the  East  India  Company  had  a  monopoly  of  the 
trade  with  India.  In  that  year,  on  the  renewal  of  its  charter,  this 
privilege  was  taken  away,  and  the  trade  was  thrown  open  to  the  indi- 
vidual enterprise  of  British  merchants.  The  trade  with  China  remained 
wholly  in  the  hands  of  the  Company  until  1833,  when  its  charter 
was  last  renewed,  and  the  Company  was  restricted  from  carrying  on, 
upon  its  own  account,  any  commercial  operations  Avhatever.  The 
result  of  these  relaxations  has  been  highly  advantageous  to  the  trade 
of  England,  as  will  appear  from  an  examination  of  the  following 
statement. 

The  value  of  the  trade  between  the  United  Kingdom  and  India 
(not  including  China),  in  each  year,  from  1814  to  1832,  was  as 
follows :  — 


742 


TROGRESS  OF  THE  NATION. 


[sec.    VIII. 


Years. 

1814 
1815 
1816 
1817 
1818 
1819 
1820 
1821 
1822 
1823 
1824 
1825 
1826 
1827 
1828 
1829 
1830 
1831 
1832 


Imporis. 
Ji. 
8,643,275 
8,136,107 
6,429,785 
6, 865,. 586 
9,206,147 
6,615,768 
5,9,58,526 
4,775,146 
3,713,663 
5,932,051 
5,605,100 
6,178,775 
6,730,926 
5,681,017 
7,065,180 
6,218,284 
5,679,071 
5,729,810 
6,337,098 


Exports. 
±". 
1,874,690 
2,565,761 
2,-589,455 
3,388,715 
3,572,164 
2,347,083 
3,037,911 
3,. 544, 395 
3,444,443 
3,416,255 
3,496,578 
3,173,213 
3,471,-552 
4,636,190 
4,467,673 
4,100,264 
4,087,311 
3,635,051 
3,750,286 


No  account  has  been  furnished,  since  1832,  whereby  the  value  of  our 
importations  from  India  can  be  shown.  The  declared  value  of  British 
produce  and  manufactures  exported  to  that  quarter  in  each  year  from 
1833  to  1849  has  been:  — 


\     China.) 


Years. 

£. 

1833 

3,495,301 

1834 

2,578,569 

1835 

3,192,692 

1836 

4,285,829 

1837 

3,612,975 

1838 

3,876,196 

1839 

4,478,607 

1840 

6,023,192 

Years. 

£. 

1841 

5,595,000 

1842 

5,169,888 

1843 

6,404,519 

1844 

7,695,666 

1845 

6,703,778 

1846 

6,434,456 

1847 

5,470,105 

1848 

5,077,247 

1849 

6,803,274 

The  quantities  of  some  of  the  more  important  articles  imported  from 
India  in  those  years  have  been  : — 


Y'ears. 

Coffee  (includ- 
ing Ceylon). 

Cotton 
Piece  Goods 

Lac  Dve. 

Shellac. 

Hemp. 

Hides. 

Indigo. 

lbs. 

Pieces. 

lbs. 

lbs. 

Cwts. 

Cwts. 

lbs. 

1833 

5,734,820 

290,333 

299,405 

770,544 

34,008 

29,337 

6,315,529 

1834 

8,875,961 

268,877 

696,3.39 

941,179 

52,035 

31,213 

3,616,022 

1835 

5,182,856 

293,580 

528,490 

1,179,899 

40,8.54 

41,964 

3,878,404 

1836 

9,514,441 

368,160 

547,0.53 

1,372,519 

18,. 380 

40,883 

7,222,331 

1837 

9,806,123 

414,4.50 

990,560 

2,194,938 

168,336 

40,714 

5,721,554 

1838 

7,785,963 

204,271 

1,093,179 

2,6.59,827 

107,994 

37,474 

6,579,142 

1839 

9,820,550 

348,446 

1,166,. 562 

3,176,167 

133,301 

63,533 

4,654,226 

1840 

16,885,698 

349,961 

1,2.54,0.37 

2,828,6.32 

55,583 

52,559 

6,940,192 

1841 

15,896,624 

13.1,472 

1,221, -308 

3,244,3.52 

72,469 

86,044 

7,456,617 

1842 

18,206,448 

122,193 

729,008 

1,663,760 

128,642 

.57,108 

8,931,104 

1843 

13,816,045 

103,097 

1,172,336 

3,101,840 

227,812 

108,487 

5,9.30,064 

1844 

19,461,090 

63,805 

8.55,232 

1,661,408 

211,392 

99,334 

10,642,912 

1845 

21,637,481 

213,901 

1,4.38,7-52 

2,510,144 

273,963 

116,054 

9,845,920 

1846 

21,009,663 

265,630 

620,480 

1,058,288 

190,669 

95,325 

7,. 573, 064 

1847 

2;),  668, 9.56 

184,352 

8.30,032 

902,-528 

185,788 

94, 794 

7,802,928 

1848 

33,041,384 

114,306 

488,892 

1,604,624 

258,2.38 

69,999 

6,-393,072 

1849 

39,144,038 

60,166 

1,517,152 

1,630,272 

.300, 103 

71,017 

8,. 509, 984 

DErENDENUIES  IX  ASIA. 


713 


Years. 

Pepper. 

Rice. 

Paildy. 

Sago. 

Saltpetre. 

Linseed. 

Silk. 

U.S. 

Cwts. 

Bushels. 

Cwts. 

Cwts. 

Bushels. 

Ihs. 

1833 

7,298,025 

179,370 

8,012 

7,665 

143,434 

2,163 

989,619 

1834 

7,131,133 

276,968 

25,246 

25,683 

257,680 

2,826 

1,798,641 

1835 

2,807,014 

233,041 

29,426 

19,101 

194,119 

127,416 

1,105,  .367 

1836 

6,777,892 

145,180 

1,704 

24,809 

177,938 

275, 168 

1,4.50,282 

1837 

4,150,534 

352,834 

17,451 

15,288 

222,606 

126,. 532 

1,298,042 

1838 

3,326,990 

203,896 

13,050 

18,172 

234,048 

78,. 572 

1,151,407 

18;VJ 

9,090,898 

419,319 

8,938 

20,673 

272,429 

163,958 

1.388,070 

1840 

5,814,756 

320,7.52 

4,339 

51,882 

183,603 

207,869 

1,108,471 

1841 

14,784,497 

397,-535 

1,336 

75,847 

261,552 

199,322 

1.175,314 

184i 

5,788,505 

457,3.3  1 

7,984 

45,643 

224,129 

71,784 

1,367,207 

184.3 

3,636,226 

364,68) 

4,536 

23,216 

345,822 

64,024 

1,197,610 

1844 

7,477,514 

396,758 

136 

37,480 

206,085 

237,960 

1,669,. 585 

1845 

9,042.944 

514,485 

96 

42,003 

307,703 

194,624 

1,723,326 

1846 

5,441,030 

693,433 

1,376 

38,2;)8 

244,777 

94,744 

1,415,353 

1847 

4,455,247 

1,237,211 

16,224 

53,259 

192,205 

125,. 568 

1,083,204 

1848 

7,487,3.32 

877,860 

88 

63,426 

286,990 

206,248 

772,1.52 

1849 

3,913,611 

875,510 

•• 

83,540 

286,746 

209,136 

1,804,327 

Years. 

Silk  Goods. 

Rum. 

Sugar. 

Tobacco. 

Cotton. 

Sheep's  Wool. 

Pieces. 

Gallons. 

Cwts. 

lbs. 

lbs. 

lbs. 

1833 

298,580 

27 

1.53,994 

2,849 

32,755,164 

3,721 

18,34 

375,238 

537 

101,997 

6,570 

32,920,865 

67,763 

1835 

382,519 

14,068 

137,976 

11,747 

41,429,011 

295,848 

1836 

332,402 

38,139 

171,758 

44,498 

75,949,845 

1,086,393 

1837 

504,458 

67,064 

302,945 

45,393 

51,532,072 

1,880,741 

18.38 

493,893 

53,309 

474, 100 

206,103 

40,217,734 

1,897,266 

1839 

477,483 

170,385 

587,142 

139,616 

47,172,939 

2,103,546 

1840 

556,. 591 

311,968 

498,730 

256,476 

77,011,839 

2,441,370 

1841 

387,392 

1,006,712 

1,271,582 

137,021 

97,388,1.53 

3,008,664 

1842 

334,. 5.55 

670,779 

946,086 

76,490 

92,972,609 

4,246,083 

1843 

425,743 

835,4.33 

1,116,869 

170,299 

65,709,729 

1,916,129 

1844 

.543,473 

339,702 

1,108,671 

44,272 

88,639,776 

2,765,853 

1845 

727,. 567 

713,221 

1,340,6.59 

110,747 

58,437,426 

3,975,866 

1846 

607,736 

830,. 596 

1,470,663 

81,727 

34,540,143 

4,570,581 

1847 

.549,832 

843,605 

1,432,380 

70,307 

83,934,614 

3,063,142 

1848 

298,972 

922,123 

1,370,374 

63,126 

84,101,961 

5,997,435 

1849 

511,130 

713,679 

1,538,009 

18,272 

70,838,515 

4,182,853 

It  will  be  seen,  on  comparing  the  quantities  brought  during  the  later 
years  of  the  series  with  the  earlier  importations,  how  great  an  increase 
has  been  made  in  almost  every  article.  Some  important  branches  of 
the  trade  may  be  said  to  have  been  created  since  the  year  in  which  the 
charter  of  the  East  India  Company  was  last  renewed,  and  when  its 
existence  as  a  commercial  body  was  made  to  cease  altogether.  Thus 
we  find  that  linseed,  rum,  tobacco,  and  sheep's  wool,  which,  previous 
to  1833,  did  not  enter  into  the  trade  between  India  and  England,  have 
now  become  articles  of  considerable  importance.  The  quantity  of  coffee 
is  nearly  trebled ;  but  the  greater  part  of  this  increase  proceeds  from 
the  extension  of  the  culture  of  coffee-trees  in  Ceylon,  which  followed 
upon  the  assimilation,  in  1835,  of  the  duties  upon  East  India  and  West 
India  coffee.  The  quantities  of  lac-dye  and  shellac,  respectively,  have 
been  quadrupled.  Hemp  is  more  than  doubled,  and  hides  are  increased 
threefold.  Indigo  has  not  undergone  any  material  alteration  :  but  the 
quantities  of  pepper  and  of  rice  are  doubled.     The  sugar  trade,  from 


744  TROGRESS  OF  THE  NATION.  [sec.  vni. 

being  quite  insignificant,  has  lately  become  one  of  the  most  important 
branches  of  commerce  ;  and  the  supply  of  cotton  has  augmented  with 
rapidity,  being  now  nearly  three  times  as  gi-eat  as  it  was  in  1833. 

Important  as  are  these  results,  there  is  good  reason  for  asserting  that 
we  shall  hereafter  arrive  at  a  far  more  satisfactory  condition  as  respects 
our  Indian  commerce.  It  would  appear,  from  recent  investigations, 
that  we  are  now  only  beginning  to  appreciate  at  anything  approaching 
to  their  just  value  the  material  resources  of  Hindostan.  The  idea  of 
obtaining  sheep's  wool  from  British  India  would,  a  very  few  years  ago, 
have  been  treated  as  an  idle  dream  ;  and  yet  we  see  that  in  1849  we 
imported  thence,  of  that  important  material  of  manufacture,  more  than 
four  millions  of  pounds.  It  has  usually  been  held  that  cold  climates 
are  best  suited  to  the  production  of  fine  wool,  but  this  belief  is  seen  to 
be  erroneous.  Dr.  Forbes  Royle  justly  remarks,  that  "  fine-wool 
countries,  such  as  Spain  and  Tibet,  Australia,  Van  ])iemen's  Land, 
and  the  Cape  of  Good  Hope,  have  rather  dry  climates,  with  a  warm 
summer  and  a  cold  winter.*  The  coasts  and  plains  of  Bengal  are  not 
well  suited  to  the  production  of  wool,  but  "  the  table-land  of  the  penin- 
sula, beginning  with  the  Neelgherrie  hills,  and  proceeding  along  Mysore 
to  the  Deccan,  Candeish,  and  Guzerat,  presents  large  tracts  of  country 
affording  a  favourable  climate,  and  abundant  pastures  for  numerous 
flocks  of  sheep."  t  Marwar,  Malwa,  Rajpootana,  Hurriana,  and  the 
province  of  Delhi,  have  natural  pastures  which  support  numerous  herds 
of  cattle  and  flocks  of  sheep.  The  wool  of  the  latter  is  employed  by 
the  natives  in  making  blankets  of  different  degrees  of  fineness,  which 
form  a  considerable  article  of  commerce.  The  Himalaya  mountains 
likewise  support  on  their  southern  face  a  fine  breed  of  sheep.  The 
great  pastoral  countries  of  Gabool  and  Bokara  might  afford  an  almost 
unlimited  supply  of  fine  wool :  and,  although  not  the  produce  of  British 
industry,  its  collection  would  prove  an  important  branch  of  commerce 
to  our  merchants  in  the  western  districts  of  India,  while  payment  for  it 
would  doubtless  be  made  chiefly  in  British  manufactures. 

The  rice  of  Bengal  has  hitherto  been  considered  very  inferior  to  that 
of  America,  and  was  unable  to  bear  successful  competition  with  it,  even 
under  a  "  protecting"  duty  of  a  penny  halfpenny  per  pound  ;  so  that 
when  it  was  proposed  by  the  tariff  of  1842  to  reduce  this  "  protection" 
by  8^.  Qd.  per  cwt.,  or  very  nearly  a  penny  per  pound,  it  was  confidently 
predicted  that  the  trade  would  be  annihilated.  To  avert  this  evil  an 
intelligent  and  enterprising  merchant  forthwith  took  measures  for  im- 
proving the  quality  and  appearance  of  the  shipments  from  Bengal  ;  and 
from  the  success  that  has  attended  his  first  efforts  in  that  direction  there 
is  every  reason  to  believe  that,  ere  long,  the  rice  of  India  will  be  in 

*  '  Essay  on  the  Productive  Resources  of  India,'  page  163.  f  Ibid.,  rage  140. 


niAr.  m.] 


DEPENDENX'IES  IN  ASIA. 


74-5 


every  respect  equal  in  appearance  to  that  of  Carolina,  and  that  it  will 
command  as  high  a  price  in  our  markets. 

Some  experiments  on  a  respectable  scale  have  recently  been  begun 
in  Burdwan  for  the  production  of  flax,  the  finer  qualities  of  which  are 
every  year  becoming  more  scarce  and  dear  in  Europe,  and  we  may 
hope  that  this  important  material  of  manufacture  will  ere  long  be  added 
to  the  list  of  our  importations  from  India.  Tallow  has  already  been 
imported  thence  of  so  good  a  quality  that  it  has  realized  within  10  per 
cent,  of  the  price  obtained  for  the  finest  St.  Petersburg  tallow.  Besides 
these  articles,  India  could  furnish  an  almost  unlimited  supply  of  seeds, 
yielding  oils  of  excellent  quality  for  food,  or  light,  or  manufacturing 
processes  ;  and  considerable  supplies  of  the  finest  timber  may  be  pro- 
cured from  Oude  and  Goruckpore,  the  coast  of  Malabar,  and  the  east 
coast  of  the  Bay  of  Bengal. 

By  opening  new  channels  of  communication,  and  by  improving  such 
as  already  exist,  the  intermil  and  external  commerce  of  our  Indian 
empire  may  be  almost  indefinitely  increased,  to  the  advantage  of  the 
millions  who  have  been  subjected  to  our  sway  by  the  sword,  and  to 
whom  we  owe  this  reparation  for  the  miseries  that  have  been  inflicted 
by  our  conquest, — a  reparation  which  must  at  the  same  time  bring 
equal  advantages  to  the  United  Kingdom  in  the  increasing  employment 
that  must  thus  be  afforded  to  our  continually-multiplying  artisans. 

The  number  and  tonnage  of  shipping  employed  in  the  trade  between 
the  United  Kingdom  and  its  dependencies  in  India  in  each  year  from 
1833  to  1849  have  been  as  follows  : — 


Inwards. 

Outwards. 

Inwards. 

Outwards. 

Sliips. 

Tons. 

Ships. 

Tons. 

Ships. 

Tons. 

Ships. 

Tons. 

18.33 

182 

76,820 

204 

83,769 

1842 

430 

191, .378 

397 

202,101 

1834 

186 

75,461 

197 

90,833 

1843 

441 

209,600 

374 

168,672 

1835 

216 

89,449 

219 

96,157 

1844 

440 

197,979 

470 

220,350 

1836 

228 

97,371 

267 

117,784 

1845 

412 

189,573 

437 

222,004 

1837 

282 

119,069 

231 

106,927 

1846 

380 

190,318 

339 

187,856 

1838 

233 

106,004 

243 

117,824 

1847 

464 

236,-562 

415 

221,990 

1839 

310 

1.38,486 

264 

125,620 

1848 

408 

216,351 

332 

195,251 

1840 

288 

137, 8a3 

3S0 

179,204 

1843 

398 

225,636 

418 

231,937 

1841 

444 

207,075 

461 

215,421 

A  very  large  trade  is  carried  on  from  the  settlements  in  British  India 
in  addition  to  that  with  the  United  Kingdom.  In  each  of  the  eight 
years  1834-5  to  1841-2,  for  which  accounts  have  been  prepared  at  the 
India  House,  the  value  of  the  imports  and  exports  of  each  of  the  three 
presidencies  was  as  follows : — 


746 


PROGRESS  OF  THE  NATION. 


[sec.  Tin. 


\  rar< 

BENGAL. 

MADRAS. 

BOMBAY. 

Imports. 

Exports. 

Imports. 

Exports. 

Imports. 

Exports. 

£. 

+• 

+' 

£. 

i-' 

£. 

1834-35 

2,772,227 

4,5r9,812 

l,023,8.'i2 

1,669,1.33 

3,858,426 

3,485.783 

1835-36 

3,091,272 

5,887,794 

977,763 

1,914.644 

4,530,711 

4,944,970 

1836-37 

3,54'.),;).'')7 

7,123,410 

1,059,575 

2,210,785 

4,694,400 

5,784,990 

1837-38 

3,634,088 

7,154,054 

1,026,634 

1,631,723 

4,368,129 

4,064,152 

183S-39 

3,847,252 

7,158,431 

1,074,711 

1,897,185 

4,647,097 

4, 424,, 520 

1839-40 

4,6.52,125 

7,125,327 

1,047,699 

2,013,330 

3,205,660 

3,519,822 

1840-41 

5,757,074 

8,362,998 

1,137,686 

2,009,204 

4, 966,. 329 

5,165,558 

1841-i2 

5,855,826 

8,440.880 

1,052,469 

3,368,993 

4,564,818 

5,323,904 

Years. 


18.34-35 
1835-36 
18.36-37 
1837-38 
1838-39 
1839-40 
1840-41 
1841-42 


Total  of  three  Presidencies. 


Imports. 


7,654,485 
8,  .599, 747 
9,303,932 
9,028,851 
9,569,061 
8,905,484 
11,861,088 
11,473,113 


Exports. 


9,674,728 
12,747,408 
15,119,185 
12,849,930 
13,480,136 
12,643,396 
15,516,607 
16,020,857 


I 


In  the  year  ending  30th  April,  1840,  the  shipping  which  entered  and 
cleared  from  the  port  of  Calcutta  (exclusive  of  425  British  vessels  of 
157,475  tons  which  entered,  and  437  vessels  of  165,500  tons  which 
cleared)  was  as  follows  : — 


Entered. 

Cleared. 

Ships. 

Tons. 

Ships. 

Tons. 

French 

49 

15,254 

48 

14,995 

Dutch 

8 

1 ,  992 

6 

1,315 

Spanish     . 

1 

100 

1 

100 

Bremen     . 

1 

250 

American 

23 

9,759 

25 

10,072 

Arab    . 

13 

6,526 

12 

5,685 

Chinese     . 

1 

400 

Dhoonies  . 

55 

5,032 

55 

5,032 

Total 

150 

39,063 

148 

37,449 

The  shipping  that  arrived  at  and  departed  from  the  port  of  Madras, 
in  the  year  1839-40,  was  as  follows : — 


Entered. 

Cleared. 

Ships. 

Tons. 

yhips. 

Tons. 

British      .      .     . 

1,992 

115,520 

2,699 

159,315 

French 

25 

5,944 

42 

10,307 

Danish 

2 

1.52 

1 

24 

Dutch 

3 

612 

5 

1,169 

Portuguese 

219 

5,184 

183 

4,!)65 

American 

2 

1,016 

3 

1,.385 

Arab    .     . 

160 

21,486 

249 

31,512 

Jvative 

3,023 

185,551 

3,485 

211,935 

Total 

5,426 

.335,465 

6,667 

420,212 

CHAP.    III.] 


DEPENDENCIES  IN  ASIA. 


717 


The  shipping,  inwards  and  outwards,  at  Bombay,  in  the  year  ending 
30th  April,  183l»,  was:  — 


Kntered. 


Ships. 

Tons. 

Ships. 

Tons. 

British      .      ,      . 

228 

97,043 

228 

100,095 

French      .      .      . 

10 

2,554 

9 

2,. 539 

Portuguese    .     . 

3 

630 

5 

1,335 

Dutch       .     .     . 

1 

780 

2 

1,508 

American       .     . 

3 

649 

4 

909 

Swedish    .     .     . 

•• 

•• 

1 

134 

Total  .     . 

245 

101,656 

249 

106,520 

The  public  revenues  and  the  charges  of  government  in  India,  in  each 
of  the  eleven  years  from  1837-38  to  1847-48,  were  as  follows  :  — 


REVENUES. 


Extraordinary 

Ykars. 

Ben^jal  and 
Ayra. 

Madras. 

Bombay. 

Total. 

Receipt 
from  Commercial 

Assets. 

c 

■T 

■C 

f 

£. 

1837-38 

12,586,629 

4,51^,271 

2.426,779 

19,530,679 

718,705 

1838-39 

12,929,844 

4,643,458 

2,238,258 

19,811,560 

460,806 

1839-40 

11,937,412 

4,665,374 

2,255,934 

18,8,58,720 

31,0.33 

1840-41 

12,171,931 

4,609,067 

2,632,405 

19,413,403 

1,829  ' 

1841-42 

11,133,718 

3,833,504 

1,867,610 

16,834,832 

4,100 

1842-43 

11,551,588 

3,870,878 

2,091.3:)5 

17,513,862 

731 

1843-44 

12,292,195 

3,842,130 

2,183,176 

18,317,501 

1,206 

1844-45 

11,861,733 

3,512,417 

1,918,606 

17,292,756 

549 

1845-46 

12,174,338 

3,589,212 

2,047,380 

17,810,930 

1,489 

1846-47 

12,900,254 

3,631,922 

2,120,824 

18,653,000 

145 

1847-48 

11,947,924 

3,633,589 

1,990,394 

17,576,907 

195 

Yeass. 

Allowances 

under  Treaties 

with  Native 

Princes. 

Interest  of 
Debt. 

Charges 

exclusive  of 

Interest  of  Debt. 

Charsjes 
in  England  on 
Indian  Account. 

Total  Charges 

in  India 
and  England. 

1837-38 
1833-39 
1839-40 
1840-41 

£. 
1,-508,688 
1,620,101 
1,596,377 
1,609,400 

£. 
1,36'5',381 
1,-388,506 
1,340,771 

1,481,787 

£. 
13,571,847 
14,505,715 
15,188,675 
15,742,359 

£. 
2,304.445 
2,615;465 
2,578,966 
2,625,776 

£. 
18,750,361 
20,129,787 
20,704,789 
21,459,322 

Ye.4RS 

Bengal  and 

Agra. 

1 
Madras.         ■        Bombay. 

Charges 

in  England  on 

Indian  Account.* 

Total 

Charges  in  India 

and  England. 

1841-42 
1842-43 
1843-44 
1844-45 
1845-46 
1846-47 
1847-48 

£. 

9,991,901 
10,. 597, 067 
10,796,959 

9,575,854 
10,170,220 
10,445,994 
10,546,090 

£. 
3,580,792 
3,606.168 
3,565,411 
3,479,580 
3,  -523, 598 
3,449,619 
3,373,445 

£. 
2,128,077 
2,124,299 
2,351,062 
2,496,173 
2,569,910 
2,662,0:19 
2,. 553, 286 

£. 
2,834,786 
2,458,193 
2,944,073 
2,485,212 
3,044,067 
3,066,6-35 
3,016,072 

£. 
18,535,5.56 
18,785,728 
19,657,505 
18,0.36,819 
19,-307,795 
19,624,347 
19,488,893 

*  Including  dividends  to  proprietors  of  India  stock. 


748 


PROGRESS  OF  THE  NATION. 


[sF.c.  Via. 


The  first  of  these  years  exhibits  a  considerable  surplus  of  revenue 
over  expenditure  (l,49i),023/.),  which  in  the  following  year  was  reduced 
to  142,579/.,  doubtless  by  the  preparations  for  the  invasion  of  Cabool. 
In  the  following  years  there  appear  considerable  deficiencies,  the  con- 
consequences  of  that  ill-fated  proceeding,  and  of  other  w^ars. 

The  revenues  of  tlie  East  India  Company  are  mostly  derived  from 
the  land.  The  other  chief  branches  of  revenue  are  customs,  stamps, 
post-office,  and  the  monopolies  of  salt  and  opium.  The  sums  collected 
under  these  heads,  at  intervals  of  ten  years,  during  the  present  century, 
have  been  as  follows  : — 


Land  revenues. 
Customs. 
Stamps    . 
Post-ofRce    . 
Salt  monopoly  . 
Opium  monopoly 


10,030,  U2 

795,425 

61,194 

.58,585 

1,514,617 

646,485 


IS 19-20 


182U-30 


11.516,193 

i; 303, 927 

183,533 

72,376 

1,646,628 

632,755 


018 
540 
331 
111 
,752 
225 


354 

,662 
,7ii0 
,476 
,003 
,905 


1839-40 


£. 

12,480,854 

1,166,751 

400,959 

131,606 

2,321,556 

417,140 


The  remainder  of  the  Company's  revenue  is  drawn  from  marine  and 
pilotage  dues,  mint  duties,  tributes  and  subsidies  from  native  govern- 
ments, revenues  from  Prince  of  Wales'  Island  and  other  eastern  settle- 
ments, and  from  some  unimportant  miscellaneous  sources. 

The  wars  in  which  the  East  India  Company  has  at  various  times  been 
engaged  have  occasioned  it  to  contract  a  large  amount  of  debt.  The 
amount  of  this  at  various  periods,  from  1815  to  1840,  was  as  fol- 
lows : — 


Registered  debt  of  India    1 

on  the  1st  May,  1815  M-.-i-^-^-^S/ 


1820 
1825 
1830 
1835 


26,158,357 
20,180,492 
30,401J381 
31,326,150 


Registered  dett  of  India  i 

on   the  1st  May,  1836  |  26,947,434 

„              „          1837  27,280,286 

„               „          1838  26,525,448 

„              ;,          1839  26,406,376 

„               „          1840  26,559,854 


In  addition  to  the  "  registered  debt,"  the  Company  was,  on  1st  May, 
1840,  indebted  for  temporary  loans  and  deposits  for  sums  which  raised 
the  amount  of  its  public  debts  bearing  interest  in  India  to  30,703,778/., 
the  yearly  charge  in  respect  of  which  was  1,447,453/.  In  addition  to 
this  burthen,  it  has  bonds  outstanding  in  England,  and  bearing  interest, 
which  on  the  1st  May,  1842,  amounted  to  1,756,582/.,  the  yearly  inte- 
rest on  which  amounted  to  62,730/.  The  revenues  of  India  are  further 
chargeable  with  630,000/.  per  annum,  dividends  to  proprietors  of  East 
India  stock,  in  addition  to  all  the  charges,  ordinary  and  extraordinary, 
civil,  military,  and  judicial,  of  the  Indian  empire. 

The  government  of  India  is  ostensibly  confided  to  the  hands  of  twenty- 
four  gentlemen,  chosen  for  that  purpose  by  the  proprietors  from  among 
their  own  body,     Down  to  the  year  1773,  the  Court  of  Directors  thus 


C.IAP.  iii.l  DEPENDENCIES  IN  ASIA.  749 

chosen  were  the  uncontrolled  sovereigns  of  British  India  ;  hut  in  that 
year  Parliament  passed  an  Act,  under  which  a  Governor-General  was 
appointed  to  reside  in  Bengal,  and  a  supreme  court  of  judicature  was 
estahlished,  with  judges  ap])ointed  hy  the  Crown,  and  in  other  ways 
the  management  of  the  Directors  was  hrought  under  the  siu'veillance  of 
the  State.  In  1784  Mr.  Pitt's  India  Bill  was  passed,  which  brought  the 
government  of  India  more  completely  within  the  power  of  the  ministry 
by  the  establishment  of  a  Board  of  Control  for  the  Affairs  of  India, 
which  Board  is  composed  of  six  members  selected  by  the  Crown,  to 
superintend  the  territorial  concerns  (since  1833  the  only  concerns)  of 
the  Company.  The  Governor-General  of  India,  Presidents,  and  Mem- 
bers of  Council,  are  under  this  Act  appointed  by  the  Directors,  but  sub- 
ject to  the  approval  of  the  Government ;  and  the  Commander-in-Chief 
of  the  army  employed  in  India  is  chosen  by  the  Crown  without  any 
interference  on  the  part  of  the  Directors.  The  power  of  recalling  the 
Governor-General  was  subsequently  granted  to  the  Crown,  so  that  his 
appointment  is  virtually  and  substantially  the  act  of  the  ministry  of 
the  day. 

The  Board  of  Control,  although  by  Act  of  Parliament  it  is  composed 
of  six  members,  is  practically  an  office  administered  by  one  member,  its 
President,  who  has  a  seat  in  the  "  cabinet,"  and  is  essentially  a  Secre- 
tary of  State  for  the  Indian  Department.  This  important  functionary 
is,  in  ftict,  the  supreme  governor  of  India,  using  the  Court  of  Directors 
as  the  instruments  of  his  will,  and  exercising,  under  the  sanction  of  an 
Act  of  Parliament,  a  power  over  the  destinies  of  that  part  of  the  British 
empire,  greater  far  than  the  monarch  can  legally  exert  in  that  or  any 
other  quarter.  It  is  the  duty  of  the  President  of  the  Board  of  Control 
to  inspect  all  letters  passing  to  and  from  India,  between  the  Directors 
and  their  servants,  which  have  any  connexion  wath  territorial  manage- 
ment or  political  relations  ;  to  alter,  to  amend,  or  to  keep  back  de- 
spatches prepared  by  the  Directors,  and,  if  he  shall  see  fit,  to  transmit 
orders  to  the  functionaries  of  the  Company  in  India,  without  the  con- 
currence or  even  without  the  knowledge  of  the  ostensible  Governors  of 
India.  Any  orders  which  he  may  send  to  the  India  House  marked 
"  secret  and  political  "  are  seen  only  by  three  members  of  the  Court  of 
Directors,  who  form  a  "  Committee  of  Secrecy,"  and  who  are  sworn  to 
secrecy,  not  only  as  regards  the  public  at  large,  but  even  against  their 
own  colleagues.  This  secret  committee  is  further  bound,  immediately 
and  without  question,  to  transmit  those  orders' to  India,  and  the  ser- 
vants of  the  Company  are  bound  to  put  them  in  execution  also  without 
question  or  delay. 

It  must  be  superfluous  to  point  out  the  manner  and  degree  in  which 
a  power  so  unlimited  and  so  despotic  might  be  used  to  the  injury,  and 
even  to  the  destruction,  of  the  highest  political  interests  of  the  country. 


750 


PROGRESS  OF  THE  NATION. 


[SEC. 


That  the  legislature  should  have  clotlied  with  it  any  person  who  might 
be  selected  by  the  Crown,  exhibits  a  degree  of  confidence  in  the  integrity 
of  public  men  which  is  hardly  to  be  justified  upon  any  ground  short  of 
the  belief  that  they  are  placed  above  and  beyond  the  frailties  and  tempt- 
ations that  assail  humanity. 

The  territories  comprised  within  the  sovereignty  of  the  East  India  Com- 
pany, and  the  dates  of  their  acquisition,  are  seen  by  the  following  list : — 

180.").  Districts  in  Guzerat. 

1815.  Kumaon,  and  part  ofNepauI. 


1688.  Bombay. 

1757,  The  twenty-four  Pergunnahs. 

1759.  Masulipatam,  &c. 

1760.  Burdwan,  Blidnapore,  and  Cliitta- 

goiig- 
1765.  Bengal,  Behar,  and  Orissa. 

1765.  Jaghire  near  IMadras. 

1766.  Northern  Circars. 
Zaiuindary  of  Benares. 
Island  of  Salsette. 
Nagore. 
Pulo-Penang. 

1788.  Guntoor  Circar. 

1792.  Malabar,  Dindigul,  Salem,  &c. 

1799.  Coimbatore,    Canara,     Wynaad, 

and  Tanjore. 

1800.  Nizam's  acquisitions  fromTippoo 

Sultan. 

1801.  Carnatic,     Goruckpore,      Lower 

Dooab,  Bareilly,  &c. 

1802.  Districts  in  Bundelcund. 

1803.  Kuttack,  Balasore,  Upper  Dooab, 

Delhi,  &c. 


1775. 
1776. 
1778. 
1786. 


1817.  Suugur,  Iluttali,  Darvvar,  &c. 

1818.  Candeish,  Ajmerc,  districts  on  the 

Nerbudda,  Sumbhulpore,Patna, 
Poonah,  Koiikun,  Southern 
]Maharatta  Country. 

1820.  Lands  in  Southern  Konkun. 

1822.  Districts  in  Bejapore,  and  Ahmed- 
nuggur. 

1824.  Island  of  Singapore. 

1825.  Malacca. 

1826.  Assam,  Arracan,  Tavoy,  Ye,  Ten- 

nasserim,  &c. 
1832.  Cachar. 

1834.  Coorg,  Loodhiana,  and  adjoining 

district. 

1835.  Jynteeah. 

1839.  Aden. 

1840.  Kurnoul. 

1841.  Jalown. 
1843.  Scinde. 
1849.  Punjab. 


In  addition  to  the  political  importance  derived  from  these  magnificent 
possessions,  and  to  the  advantages  which  they  offer  as  a  field  for  com- 
mercial enterprise,  England  draws  a  direct  pecuniary  gain  from  her 
Indian  empire.  A  great  part  of  the  profits  and  savings  of  those  of  her 
European  subjects  who  make  choice  of  India  as  the  field  for  their  enter- 
prise is  transmitted  to  England,  making  constant  additions  to  the  capital 
which  gives  employment  to  her  artisans.  The  dividends  upon  the  stock 
of  the  East  India  Company  paid  in  England,  and  which  amount  to 
630,000/.  per  annum,  are  derived  from  the  land  revenues  of  India,  and 
altogether  it  has  been  calculated  that  the  tribute  which  India  pours 
yearly  into  the  lap  of  England  is  at  least  equal  to  three  millions  sterling 
— a  large  sum,  but  one  which,  in  comparison  with  the  resources  of  that 
immense  and  populous  region,  is  wholly  insignificant.  Ther£  now 
appears  but  little  ground  for  apprehending  that  the  attention  of  the 
British  authorities  need  be  called  away  from  the  peaceful  administration 
of  its  government,  and  under  these  circumstances  it  cannot  be  unreason- 
able to  expect  that  the  advantages  of  our  rule  may  be  rendered  more 
apparent  in  future  than  they  have  been  in  past  yearS;,  both  to  the  natives 
of  India,  because  of  the  security  against  violence  and  injustice  which 
they  may  enjoy  under  it ;   and    to  England,  because  of  the   apparently 


I 


CHAP.  III.]  DEPENDENCIES  IN  ASIA.  7.J1 

unlimited  field  for  cominercial  prosperity  which  it  offers,  and  of  which 
we  arc  now  beginning  only  to  suspect  the  extent. 

The  island  of  Ceylon,  although  placed  in  almost  immediate  contact 
with  the  continent  of  India,  does  not  form  any  ])art  of  the  dominions  of 
the  East  India  Company,  but  is  in  direct  dependence  on  the  Crown  of 
England.  It  lies  between  5'  54'  and  9^  50'  N.  lat.  and  79°  50'  and 
82°  10'  E.  long.  Its  length  from  north  to  south  is  270  miles,  and  its 
breadth  in  the  widest  part  145  miles.  Its  area  is  about  24,700  square 
miles. 

During  our  war  with  France,  in  1782,  we  took  possession  of  Trin- 
coraalee,  on  the  coast,  but  it  was  soon  after  retaken  by  the  French,  and 
the  sea-coast  remained  in  the  hands  of  the  Dutch  until  1 796,  when  we 
dispossessed  them.  In  1798  we  were  involved  in  a  quarrel  with  the 
native  king,  and  took  possession  of  his  capital,  which,  however,  we  did 
not  long  retain  at  that  time.  We  were  obliged  to  content  ourselves 
with  possessing  the  maritime  districts  until  1815,  when,  the  king  of 
Candy  being  deposed  by  his  subjects  on  account  of  his  cruelties,  we 
were  allowed  to  take  possession  of  the  whole  island.  Some  troubles 
followed  ;  but  since  1819  the  British  sway  has  remained  unquestioned 
throughout  the  country. 

Tlie  population  of  Ceylon  in  1835  comprised  the  following  num- 
bers : — 

Males.  Females.  Total. 

Whites 5,516  3,605  9,121 

Freo  Blacks    626,465  568,017  1,194,482 

Slaves  14,108  13,289  27,397 

Aliens  and  resident  strangers  .           ..  ..  10,825 

646,089  584,911  1,241,825 


The  Asiatic  or  native  population  consists  of  four  distinct  races,  viz., 
Beddahs  or  Veddahs,  the  aboriginal  inhabitants,  who  live  in  a  most 
primitive  state,  without  clothes  or  houses,  in  the  great  forests,  their 
food  consisting  of  wild  fruits  and  the  produce  of  the  chase.  Singalese, 
descended  from  the  Rajpoots  of  India ;  these  occupy  principally  Candy 
and  the  south-west  and  south  coasts  of  the  island.  Malabars,  who 
abound  on  the  north  and  east  coasts ;  and  Mussulman  descendants 
of  men  from  Upper  India ;  these  last  are  dispersed  over  the  island. 
There  are  besides  a  few  of  various  other  races ;  Chinese,  Javans, 
Malays,  Caffres,  some  Parsee  traders,  and  a  considerable  number  of 
half-caste  descendants  from  native  mothers  and  European  fathers; 
Portuguese,  Dutch,  and  English.  The  Singalese  are  Buddhists,  and 
the  Malabars  are  Hindoos. 

The  island  is  but  thinly  inhabited.  It  is  said  to  have  been  more 
populous  formerly,  and  that  the  number  has  been  continually  declining 
during  the  last  four  or  five  centuries ;  but  it  does  not  clearly  appear 


752  PROGRESS  OF  THE  NATION.  [sec.  viii. 

upon  what  this  helief  is  grounded.  By  far  the  largest  proportion  of 
the  surfoce  of  the  island  is  uncultivated  and  waste.  There  are  a  few 
natives  who  possess  considerable  estates  in  land,  some  as  much  as  1000 
acres ;  but  the  law  of  inheritance  has  for  the  most  part  caused  a  minute 
subdivision  of  the  soil  to  a  degree  but  little  favourable  to  its  improve- 
ment. The  English  Government,  which  claims  the  proprietorship  of  all 
the  waste  lands,  has  of  late  years  been  disposing  of  locations  by  public 
sale,  the  object  of  the  purchasers  being  chiefly  the  formation  of  coftee 
plantations.  The  quality  of  Ceylon  coftee  is  very  good,  and  the  soil 
and  climate  greatly  favour  the  productiveness  of  the  plant.  The 
advantage  given  to  this  product  in  1835,  by  admitting  Ceylon  coffee  to 
consumption  in  England  at  the  moderate  duty  charged  upon  British 
plantation  coffee,  has  greatly  stimulated  the  production.  Already  the 
importations  thence  are  very  greatly  augmented ;  but  as  the  plant 
requires  some  years  of  growth  before  it  comes  into  profitable  bearing, 
we  may  expect  that  future  supplies  from  this  island  will  be  greater 
than  have  yet  been  brought  forward. 

The   quantity    of  coffee  imported   into  the   United   Kingdom   from 
Ceylon  in  each  year,  from  1835  to  1849,  has  been  as  follows  : — 


Years. 

lbs. 

1835 

1,870,143 

1836 

5,026,504 

1837 

7,389,921 

1838 

4,946,356 

1839 

4,097,493 

1840 

8,244,816 

1841 

7,098,543 

1842 

11,154.024 

Years. 

lbs. 

1843 

9.515,619 

1844 

14,971,965 

1845 

16,657,239 

1846 

17,735,406 

1847 

27,190,024 

1848 

30,521,810 

1849 

35,640,958 

The  reduction  of  the  consumption  duty,  in  1842,  to  4c?.  per  lb.,  has 
tended  to  stimulate  production  in  Ceylon,  at  least  up  to  the  point  of 
satisfying  the  increasing  demands  of  our  population,  since  the  cost  of 
growing  and  preparing  this  article  of  produce  is  not  greater  in  Ceylon 
than  in  any  of  the  foreign  countries  and  settlements  whence  supplies 
could  be  drawn.  The  quantity  of  land  adapted  to  the  purpose  is 
unlimited. 

Another  plant  of  growing  importance  to  this  island  is  the  cocoa-nut 
tree.  The  numbers  of  those  trees  along  the  coast  are  reckoned  by 
millions,  each  one  of  which  produces  ft-om  fifty  to  a  hundred  nuts  in  the 
year.  Every  part  of  this  tree  and  of  its  product  is  capable  of  being 
turned  to  profitable  account,  and  it  yields  its  fruit  at  every  period  of  the 
year — "the  enclosed  bud,  the  flower,  the  immature  nut  in  all  the 
different  stages  of  its  progress,  and  the  ripe  fruit,  all  appearing  at  the 
same  moment  on  one  tree  in  a  continuous  course  of  vegetation." 

The  flower-bud  or  spat/ia  of  this  tree  yields  toddy,  which,  when 
fermented  and  distilled,  furnishes  arrack  of  the  best  quality.  Another 
mode  of  treating  this  juice  produces  jagyery,  a  description  of  sugar, 


CHAP.  Ill]  DEPENDENCIES  IN  ASIA.  753 

which,  altliough  unfit  for  exportation,  is  well  acla])ted  for  Us^c  by  the 
native  |)(i])iilation.  The  fibrous  husk  in  whieh  the  nut  is  enveloped  is 
eonvcrtible  into  cordage  and  carpeting,  and  is  applicable  to  a  great 
variety  of  other  purposes.  The  kernel  of  the  nut  is  used  as  a  nutritious 
and  palatable  food  ;  and  a  large  quantity  of  fixed  oil,  applicable  to  a 
great  number  of  uses,  is  expressed  from  it.  Large  shipments  of  this 
oil  are  made  from  Ceylon  to  England,  where  it  is  used  for  illuminating 
purposes,  and  for  conversion  into  candles  and  soap.  The  leaves  of  this 
tree  are  woven  into  mats,  and  are  employed  for  the  roofing  of  houses, 
being  lighter  than  straw,  and  equally  strong  and  lasting.  The  oil, 
when  newly  made,  is  used  in  the  island  for  culinary  purposes.  Alto- 
gether, the  cocoa-nut  tree  has  been  considered  the  most  important 
vegetable  production  of  the  island. 

A  product  of  Ceylon,  better  known  as  such  in  Europe,  to  which 
quarter  the  great  bulk  of  it  is  shipped,  is  cinnamon.  The  Dutch,  when 
they  had  possession  of  Ceylon,  reserved  the  trade  in  this  spice  as  a 
Government  monopoly,  strictly  prohibiting  any  person  from  trading  in 
it,  and  sentencing  to  confiscation  any  ship  on  board  of  which  there 
should  be  found  more  than  twenty  pounds  of  cinnamon,  unless  sent  on 
board  by  authority  of  Government ;  and  heavy  fines  were  imposed  for 
any  quantity  less  than  twenty  pounds.  The  English  adopted,  and  for 
some  years  after  their  conquest  of  the  island,  adhered  to  the  system  as 
thus  established  by  the  Dutch.  A  Government  agent  resided  at 
Cdlombo  for  managing  the  trade,  and  under  his  direction  all  the  cin- 
namon collected  beyond  the  quantity  that  it  was  thought  could  be  sold 
in  Europe  at  a  monopoly  price  was  ordered  by  him  to  be  burnt !  This 
system  was  altered  by  the  English  Government  in  October,  1832,  when 
tiie  trade  in  cinnamon  was  declared  free,  save  that  it  was  subjected  to 
a  duty  on  exportation.  The  pearl  fishery  is  a  Government  monopoly. 
The  places  and  times  where  and  when  it  is  to  be  pursued,  and  the 
number  of  boats  allowed  to  engage  in  it,  are  announced  by  advertise- 
ment. One-fourth  part  of  the  pearl  oysters  raised  are  the  property  of 
tlie  divers ;  the  remaining  three-fourths  are  sold  at  public  auction. 
The  amount  derived  from  this  source  of  revenue  averages  about  14,000/. 
j)er  annum  ;  it  has  sometimes  reached  to  nearly  three  times  that  sum  ; 
in  nine  years,  from  1826  to  1834,  it  realized  145,000/. 

Some  valuable  gems  are  found  in  Ceylon  ;  among  these  the  ruby  and 
cat-eye  are  the  best;  topaz,  sapphire,  and  crystal  are  also  obtained. 
Iron  is  diffused  over  the  greater  part  of  the  island  ;  black  oxide  of 
manganese  is  found  ;  and  plumbago  (carbonate  of  iron)  is  obtained  in 
I'onsiderable  quantity,  and  exported.  Weaving  gives  employment  to 
many  persons.  The  articles  made  are  handkerchiefs,  table-cloths, 
napkins,  towels,  sail-cloth,  and  a  coarse  kind  of  cloth  used  for  their 
(hess  by  the  natives.     There  are   also   many   oil-mills   in   operation, 


754  PROGRESS  OF  THE  NATION.  [sec.  viii. 

chiefly  for  pressing  the  coco-nut  kernels.  The  island  contains  exten- 
sive forests,  in  which,  besides  the  more  ordinary  descriptions  of  timber, 
the  growth  of  those  latitudes,  there  is  a  great  variety  and  profusion  of 
beautiful  woods,  well  adapted  for  the  use  of  the  cabinet-maker. 

Among  the  animals  of  Ceylon,  most  of  those  found  on  the  opposite 
continent  are  native  to  the  island.  Elephants  are  numerous,  and  some- 
times do  great  injury  to  the  growing  crops.  Under  the  kings  of  Candy 
these  animals  were  trained  to  perform  the  office  of  public  executioners. 

The  trade  of  the  United  Kingdom  with  Ceylon  is  not  distinguished 
in  the  Custom-house  accounts  from  that  to  the  continent  of  India.  A 
trade  is  carried  on  with  Bengal,  to  which  presidency  it  exports  betel- 
nuts,  chank  shells,  cordage,  cocoa-nuts,  and  various  minor  articles; 
while  it  imports  from  that  quarter  cotton  piece  goods,  sugar,  rice, 
wheat,  and  gunny  bags. 

Mauritius*  commonly  known  as  The  Mauritius,  is  an  island  in  the 
Indian  Ocean,  about  120  miles  north-east  from  the  island  of  Bourbon, 
and  four  times  that  distance  east  of  Madagascar.  Its  greatest  length 
from  north  to  south  is  forty  miles,  and  its  greatest  breadth  is  thirty-two 
miles  ;  its  area  is  about  700  square  miles.  This  island  was  discovered 
early  in  the  sixteenth  century  by  a  Portuguese  navigator ;  and  in  1598 
a  Dutch  admiral  made  a  landing  upon  it,  and  gave  it  the  name  of 
Mauritius,  in  compliment  to  the  then  Prince  of  Orange.  Its  earliest 
inhabitants  were  pirates ;  but  no  serious  attempt  for  its  colonization 
w^as  made  until  1720,  when  it  was  occupied  by  some  settlers  frotn  the 
French  island  of  Bourbon.  Its  name  was  then  changed  for  that  of  Isle 
of  France,  and  the  property  in  it  was  given  by  the  King  of  France  to 
the  French  East  India  Company.  The  island  was  fortunate  in  being 
early  intrusted  to  the  government  of  a  very  intelligent  man,  M.  de  la 
Bourdonnais,  under  whom  it  made  great  progress  in  cultivation. 

Mauritius  was  taken  by  an  English  force  in  1810  :  its  possession  was 
ratified  to  us  at  the  peace  of  1814,  and  it  has  since  remained  under  the 
dominion  of  the  crown  of  England. 

The  population  in  1849  consisted  of — 


Males. 

Females. 

Total. 

ropeans  and  Africans     . 

61.694 

50,452 

112,146 

ians  and  other  emigrants  . 

50,2S1 

8,454 

58,735 

Total      .      .      .     170,881 


In  1838  the  people  of  African  blood,  who  were  then  not  wholly 
emancipated,  were  distinguished ;  they  consisted  of  53^30  persons 
(34,994  males  and  18,236  females). 

*  Properly  this  island  should  be  classed  vrii\\  British  Possessions  in  Africa ;  it  is  more 
convenient,  however,  to  place  it  in  connexion  with  onr  Asiatic  possessions. 


i 


CHAP.    III.] 


MAURITIUS. 


Tlie  chief  exportable  produce  of  the  island  is  sugar,  the  cultivation 
of  which  has  been  so  profitable  that  the  inhabitants  are  content  to  import 
nearly  all  their  provisions  in  order  to  devote  themselves  more  exclu- 
sively to  sugar  planting.  This  state  of  things  is  owing  to  the  boon 
granted  to  the  island  in  1825,  by  admitting  its  produce  to  consumption 
in  England  at  the  same  favourable  rate  of  duty  as  was  charged  upon 
West  India  sugar.  The  following  statement,  showing  the  exports  of 
suf^ar  from  Mauritius,  in  each  year  from  1820  to  1849,  will  show  the 
effect  of  this  measure  in  stimulating  production  : — 


Years. 

lbs. 

Yeais. 

lbs. 

Years. 

lbs. 

1820 

15,524,753 

1830 

67,926,692 

1840 

89,-332,789 

1821 

20,410,053 

1831 

70,203,676 

1841 

86,505,825 

1822 

23,404,644 

1832 

73,594,894 

1842 

77,387,222 

1823 

27,400,887 

1833 

72,947,729 

1843 

59,802,636 

1824 

24,334,553 

1834 

76,817,365 

1844 

78,269,222 

1825 

21,793,766 

1835 

70,227,204 

1845 

94,384,197 

1826 

42,489,416 

1836 

69,547^778 

1846 

131,972,827 

1827 

40,619,254 

1837 

73,812,666 

1847 

124,466,044 

1828 

48,350,101 

1838 

78,351,782 

1848 

119,241,734 

1829 

58,431,538 

1839 

74,152,989 

1849 

138,754,665 

The  quantity  of  Mauritius  sugar  imported  into  the  United  Kingdom 
alone,  in  each  year  from  1838  to  1849,  "was  as  follows  : — 


Years. 

lbs. 

Years. 

lbs. 

Years. 

lbs. 

1838 

67,874,128 

1842 

75,7.33,144 

184G 

94,662,064 

1839 

69,294,960 

1843 

53.331,440 

1847 

133,721,168 

1840 

61,040,784 

1844 

60,585,728 

1848 

99,263,176 

1841 

78,954,176 

1845 

80,218,096 

1849 

100,676,688 

The  number  of  acres  planted  with  sugar  cane,  which  in  1825  was 
27,639,  was  increased  in  1836  to  57,127,  and  in  1844  amounted  to 
73,863  acres. 

The  value  of  British  produce  and  manufactures  exported  to  Mauri- 
tius, in  each  year  from  1827  to  1849,  was — 


Years. 

£. 

Years. 

£. 

Years. 

£. 

1827 

195,713 

1835 

196,559 

1843 

258,010 

1828 

185,972 

18.36 

260,855 

1844 

285,650 

1829 

205,558 

1837 

.349,488 

1845 

345,059 

1830 

161,029 

1838 

467,342 

1846 

310,231 

1831 

148,475 

1839 

211,731 

1847 

223,563 

1832 

163,191 

1840 

.325,812 

1848 

169,308 

1833 

83,424 

1841 

.340,140 

1849 

234,022 

1834 

149,319 

1842 

244,920 

A  considerable  trade  is  carried  on  between  this  island  and  the  British 
possessions  in  India,  whence  the  imports  are  chiefly  of  grain,  rice,  and 
live  stock.  France  still  retains  a  great  part  of  her  trading  connexion 
with  Mauritius,  one-eighth  part  in  value  of  the  total  imports  into  the 
colony  being  from  that  country.  The  principal  articles  thus  imported 
are  wine,  spirits,  silk  manufactures,  apparel,  and  books.  The  payments 
both  to  France  and  India  are  almost  wholly  made  in  bills  of  exchange 
on  England. 

3c2 


756 


PROGRESS  OF  THE  NATION. 


[sec.   Till. 


The  shipping  that  entered  and  cleared  from  Port  Louis,  the  only 
harbour  of  any  im})ortance  in  the  island,  and  which  embraces  all  its 
external  trade,  in  each  of  the  years  from  1837  to  1839,  and  in  1844 
and  1849,  was  as  follows: — 


'l83r 

183S 

Entered. 

Cleared. 

Entered. 

Cleared. 

Ships. 

Tons. 

Ships. 

Tons. 

Ships. 

Tons. 

.Ships. 

Tons. 

Great  Britain  .     .     . 
British  Colonies   .     . 
United  States.      .      . 
Foreign  Countries     . 

45 

165 

1 

243 

13,093 

47,085 

91 

47,958 

81 
137 

1 
201 

22,411 

38,510 

91 

34, 530 

69 
159 

264 

21,214 

44,954 

54^411 

82 

1.53 

2 

203 

23,809; 

45,370 

1,038 

39,748 

454 

108,227 

420 

95,542 

492 

120,579 

440 

109,965 

1839 

1844 

Great  Britain  .      .      . 
British  Colonies   .     . 
United  States  .  _   .      . 
Foreign  Countries     . 

48 

154 

4 

206 

13,378 

41,443 

1,306 

39,981 

85 
124 

1 
177 

24,803 

33,526 

522 

31,648 

58 

192 

8 

159 

15,606 
65,401 

2,977 
30,539 

102 
172 

i29 

30,179 
58,829 

23|i33 

412 

96,108 

387 

90,499 

417 

114,523 

1     403 

112,141 

Great  Britain 
British  Colonies 
United  States     .     . 
Foreign  Countries   . 

1849 

En 

tered. 

Cleared. 

Ships. 

Tons. 

Ships. 

Tons. 

63 

226 

4 

123 

21,015 

72,820 

1,.588 

21,834 

138 
193 

1 
95 

44,676 

59,078 

230 

14,239 

416 

117,287 

427 

118,223 

cHAr.  IV.]  SETTLEMENTS  IN  AUSTRALASIA.  757 


CHAPTER  IV. 

SETTLEMENTS  IN  AUSTRALASIA. 

General  Description — Times  of  Settlement.  New  South  Wales  :  Population— Disparity 
of  Sexes — Immigrants — Sales  of  Waste  Lands  —  "  Bounty  Emigrants  "  — Agricultural 
Emigrants  —  Convicts  —  Revenues  —  Productions  —  Wool  — Whale  Fishery  —  Trade — 
Shipping.  Van  Diemen's  Land:  Population  —  Disparity  of  Sexes  —  Productions — 
Whale  Fishery — F.xport  of  Wool  —  Manufactures,  &c. — Trade — Shipping.  Western 
Australia  :  Population — Shipping — Stock.  South  Australia:  Population  —  Sales  of 
Public  Lands.     New  Zealand  :  Population — Trade — Shipping. 

The  settlements  under  the  dominion  of  England  in  Australasia  are,  in 
the  strictest  acce})tation  of  the  terra,  colonies.  They  are  formed  on  the 
islands  of  New  Holland,  Van  Diemen's  Land,  and  Norfolk  Island. 
The  first-named  of  these  islands  extends  between  10  and  39  S.  lat. 
and  115  and  153^  E.  long.  It  extreme  length  from  east  to  west  is 
(in  round  numbers)  2400  miles,  and  its  extreme  breadth  from  north  to 
south  is  1700  miles.  The  mean  breadth  is  computed  at  1400  miles, 
which  would  give  for  the  area  of  the  island  3,360,000  square  miles ; 
being  more  than  twenty-eight  times  the  area  of  Great  Britain  and 
Ireland. 

The  British  flag  was  first  raised  on  this  island  in  January,  1788  ;  and 
the  rapidity  with  which  the  colony  of  New  South  Wales  has  advanced 
may  be  inferred  from  the  fact,  that  in  less  than  half  a  century  from  that 
date  land  was  sold  in  the  town  of  Sydney,  the  capital,  at  the  rate  of 
20,000/.  per  acre.  This  settlement  is  on  the  east  coast  of  the  island. 
It  extends  coastwise  about  500  miles,  between  28^  and  36'  S.  lat. ;  its 
boundary  inland  is  undefined. 

The  settlement  of  Western  Australia,  or  Swan  River,  was  begun  in 
August,  1829,  and  in  the  following  January  thirty-nine  locations  had 
been  effected.  The  number  of  resident  inhabitants  was  then  850,  and 
non-residents  440.  This  settlement  includes  all  of  the  island  of  New 
Holland  which  lies  west  of  129'  of  E.  long.  It  is  therefore  in  length 
from  north  to  south  about  1300  miles,  and  in  mean  breadth  from  east 
to  west  about  800  miles. 

Another  settlement  on  this  great  island,  called,  from  its  position, 
South  Australia,  was  formed  under  the  provisions  of  an  Act  of  Parlia- 
ment in  1836.     The  limits  of  this  province  extend  from  the  132nd  to 


753  PROGRESS  OF  THE  NATION.  [sec.  viii. 

the  l-llst  degree  of  east  longitude,  and  from  the  south  coast,  including 
the  adjacent  islands,  northwards  to  the  tropic  of  Capricorn.  Its  area  is 
therefore  nearly  200,000,000  acres. 

Van  Diemen's  Land,  or  Tasmania,  is  divided  from  the  south-east 
coast  of  New  Holland  by  Bass's  Strait.  It  lies  between  40^  40'  and 
43  40'  S.  lat,  and  between  144'  40'  and  148'  20'  E.  long.  Its  greatest 
length  from  north-west  to  south-east  is  210  miles,  and  its  greatest 
breadth  from  east  to  west  is  190  miles  ;  its  mean  breadth  is  about  120 
miles,  and  its  area  about  25,000  square  miles. 

Norfolk  Island,  lying  off  the  east  coast  of  New  Holland  at  the  dis- 
tance of  about  700  miles,  was  first  colonised  in  1791  by  the  then 
governor  of  New  South  Wales,  his  object  being  to  grow  supplies  for 
the  markets  of  Sydney,  the  soil  being  very  fertile.  It  is  now  used  solely 
as  a  receptacle  or  prison  for  the  worst  description  of  male  convicts,  who 
are  sent  thither  from  New  South  Wales  to  work  out  the  remainder  of 
their  lives  in  chains. 

An  account  of  the  population  of  the  colony  of  New  South  Wales  was 
taken  in  1828,  and  declared  to  consist  of — 

Males.  Females.  Total. 

Free  immigrants       ..     2,846  1,827  4,673 

Born  ia  colony    ...     4,473  4,254  8,727 

Free  by  ser\dtude    .      .     5,302  1,342  6,644 

Pardoned 835  51  886 

Convicts 14,155  1,513  15,668 


Total 


',611  8,987  36,598 


Between  1828  and  1833  there  arrived  in  the  colony- 


Free  settlers     .     .     .      6,021 
Convicts        .      .      .      .     16 '792 


and  the  excess  in  the  number  of  births  beyond  deaths,  according  to 
registers  then  not  very  carefully  kept,  was  in  the  same  five  years  1254. 
In  1833  another  census  was  taken,  and  the  numbers  found  were : — 


Males. 

Females. 

Total. 

Free  under  12  years  old 

5.256 

4,931 

10,187 

„     above  12        „ 

.     17,542 

8,521 

26,063 

Convicts 

.     21,846 

2,698 

24,544 

Total    .      .     44,644  16,150  60,794 


A  census  was  taken  in  March,  1841,  and  exhibited  the  following 

results  : — 


Arrived  free 

Born  in  the  colony     . 

Free  by  servitude  and  jmrdon 

Bond,  viz. : — 
Holding  tickets  of  leave 
In  Government  employment 
In  private  assignment     . 

Total    .     . 


Males. 

Females. 

Total. 

30,745 

22,158 

52,903 

14,819 

14,622 

29,441 

15,760 

3,637 

19,397 

5,843 

316 

6,159 

6,658 

97^ 

7,637 

11,343 

1,838 

13,181 

85,168  43,550  128,718 


CHAP.  IV  ]  SEITLEMENTS  IN  AUSTRAIASIA.  759 

The  great  disparity  between  the  sexes  observable  at  all  these  periods 
has  been  caused  by  the  peculiar  nature  of  the  colony  as  a  penal  settle- 
ment, the  great  bulk  of  those  sent  out  of  the  United  Kingdom  for  their 
misdeeds  being  males.  Every  year,  now  that  the  arrival  of  convicts 
has  ceased,  tliis  disparity  becomes  less  through  natural  causes.  It 
will  be  seen  from  the  foregoing  statements  that  the  proportion  of  females 
to  the  whole  population  has  been  continually  increasing  ;  it  was — 

In  1828     2-t-55  per  cent.      I      In  1841     33-83  per  cent. 
1833     2G-5G    „         |        1844     38-66    „ 

The  disparity  of  the  sexes  does  not  apply  to  the  population  under 
twenty-one  years  of  age.  The  numbers  of  males  and  females  under 
that  age  in  1841  were, — males  22,691,  females  21,294, — being  in  the 
proportion  of  5159  males  to  4841  females.  The  proportions  living  at 
those  ages  in  England  and  Wales  were,  in  1821,  5144  males  to  4856 
females,  and  in  1841,  5112  males  to  4888  females,  showing  a  deficiency 
of  young  females  in  New  South  AVales,  as  compared  with  this  country,  of 
only  15  in  10,000  of  both  sexes  in  1821,  and  47  in  that  nmnber  in  1841. 

On  the  31st  December,  1844,  it  was  computed  that  the  population 
was  increased  by  immigration  and  by  the  number  of  births  beyond  that 
of  deaths,  to  173,377,  viz.  :— 

Males— Adults 74,912 

Children  under  14  years      .     31,397 

100,309 

Females— Adults 36,170 

Children  under  14  years  .     30,898 

67,068 


Total     .     .     .      173,377 


A  complete  census  was  taken  in  March,  1846,  wdien  the  numbers 
were  found  to  be — 

Males       .     .      .     .     114,769 
Females  ....      74,840 

189,609 

Of  these  there  were — • 

Males— Adults 81,773 

Under  14  years     .      .      .      .32,990 

114,769 

Females— Adults 42,448 

Under  14  years      .     .     .     32,392 

74,840 


189,609 


According  to  a  return  presented  to  the  House  of  Commons  in  July, 
1850,  the  population  of  this  colony  at  the  end  of  1848  amounted  to — 

]\Iales       ....     131,708  59-75  per  cent. 

Females  ....       88,699  -10-25 


220,407         100- 


showing  a  constantly-lessening  disparity  between  the  sexes. 


760  PROGRESS  OF  THE  NATIOX.  [sec.  viii. 

The  number  of  immigrants  who  arrived  in   New  South  Wales  as 
settlers,  in  each  vear  fVom  1829  to  1840,  was — 


Vears. 

-Men. 

Women. 

Cliil.lren. 

Total. 

ISi'lt 

306 

113 

145 

564 

1S30 

166 

70 

73 

309 

1831 

1S5 

98 

174 

457 

1S32 

819 

706 

4^1 

2.006 

1S33 

83S 

1,146 

701 

2,685 

1834 

571 

596 

397 

1,564 

1S33 

551 

644 

233 

1,428 

1836 

5-24 

807 

290 

1,621 

1837 

1,769 

1.138 

1 

,368 

4,275 

1838 

3,631 

2,132 

3,077 

8,840 

1839 

4,095 

3,090 

3 

,324 

10J509 

1840 

Total 

7,536 

.     41,794 

The  waste  lands  of  the  colony  were  formerly  bestowed  by  the  Crown 
as  free  grants  to  individual  settlers,  the  conditions  of  their  receiving  such 
grants  being,  the  possession  of  property  within  the  colony,  and  the 
obligation  to  cultivate  or  improve  the  lands.  Since  1831  not  any  more 
free  grants  have  been  made,  and  the  land  has  been  sold.  The  proceeds 
have  been  applied  to  defray  the  expenses  of  surveying  and  bringing  the 
land  to  sale,  to  extend  the  blessings  of  civilization  and  protection  to  the 
aborigines,  and  to  the  payment  of  bounties  on  the  conveyance  of  emi- 
grants from  the  United  Kingdom  to  New  South  Wales.  In  the  ten  years 
from  1832  to  1841  there  were  thus  sold  within  the  colony  1,923,631 
acres  of  land,  at  prices  varying  from  bs.  A^d.  to  17.  125.  lid.  per  acre, 
not  reckoning  in  those  prices  the  sales  of  town  allotments  :  the  average 
price  obtained  for  country  lands  being  about  75.  per  acre.  Out  of  the 
purchase  money  there  was  paid  from  the  beginning  of  1832  to  Septem- 
ber, 1842,  the  sum  of  951,242Z.  as  bounty  to  the  owners  of  ships  for  the 
conveyance  of  emigrants  to  the  colony.  The  part  of  this  sum  paid  in 
1841  was  327,106/.,  including  gratuities  to  the  surgeons  and  officers  of 
emigrant  ships.  In  that  year  the  gi'eat  number  of  19,523  men,  women, 
and  children,  were  landed  as  bounty  emigrants,  and  a  further  number 
of  3677  independent  or  unassisted  settlers  arrived  in  the  colony,  making 
a  total  of  23,200.     The  bouuty  emigrants  consisted  of — 

7, 183  males  above  18  years  old. 

7,599  females  above  15  years.  ; 


14,782  adults. 

152  males  between  15  and  18  years 

CiOCi 

"     :,     1"'     ,, 

816  females    „ 

"     »     l-"'     » 

1,187  males        ,, 

1     „       7     „ 

1,065  females    „ 

1     „       7     „ 

.592  infants  under  1 

year  old. 

19,523 

crivr.  IV.]                       SETTLEMENTS  IN  AUSTRAT>ASIA.  761 

This  great  number  of  settlers  were  natives  of  various  divisions  of  the 
United  Kingdom,  as  under  : — 

England  AND  Wales:—  I         Ireland: — 

Northern  counties  of  England     Ij.'Uo                  Ulster 4,218 

Southern  and  western  counties    1,723              ;    Leinster 2,506 

Midland  counties     ....         759               I    Connaught J, 236 

Eastern  counties      ....         648              '    Munster 5,204 

Wales 83  13,344 


4,563 


Scotland:—  |  Total      .     .     .     19,532 

Northern  counties    ....        504  I  

Southern  counties    .     .     .     .     1,112 

1,616 

Of  the  adults  there  were  3425  married  men,  and  3396  married 
women  ;  the  remaining  7961  were  single.     Among  the.se  adults— 

8,643  could  read  and  write ; 
2,961  could  read  only  ;  and 
3;  178  were  without  any  degree  of  instruction. 

It  affords  a  strong  proof  of  the  extensive  field  for  the  employment  of 
labour  offered  by  this  colony,  that  of  all  the  number  of  persons  old 
enough  to  work  who  arrived  during  1841,  only  46  remained  without 
employment  on  the  1st  of  January,  1842 ;  and  that  of  4163  adult 
"  bounty  emigrants"  who  landed  in  the  first  four  months  of  1842,  only 
30  were  unemployed  on  the  14th  of  May  in  that  year.  This  fact  is  the 
more  deserving  of  notice,  because  the  colony  was  at  that  time  suffering 
a  great  degree  of  commercial  depression. 

Of  the  adidt  males  who  arrived  in  1841,  the  very  large  proportion  of 
5140,  or  7  out  of  10,  were  agricultural  labourers,  as  to  whom  the  agent 
for  emigration  at  Sydney  remarks  that  complaints  have  reached  him  of 
their  having  proved  for  the  most  part  "utterly  ignorant  of  almost  every 
branch  of  their  business  ;"  and  he  expresses  regret  that  "  so  very  few 
should  have  been  selected  from  districts  where  agriculture  is  most  suc- 
cessfully pursued,  and  where,  consequently,  the  best  husbandmen  are  to 
be  found."  It  does  not  seem  to  have  suggested  itself  to  the  mind  of 
this  gentleman  that  in  such  districts  the  farm  servants  would  be  placed 
in  circumstances  which  render  expatriation  less  needful  or  desirable 
than  it  is  for  the  labouring  population  of  less  advanced  parts  of  the 
kingdom. 

The  fund  applicable  to  the  employment  of  labour  in  New  South 
Wales  is  now  constantly  and  rapidly  increasing.  The  Home  Government 
has  every  year  to  pay  nearly  300,000/.  for  the  maintenance  of  the  military 
and  convict  establishments  of  the  colony  ;  large  sums  are  continually 
carried  over  for  permanent  investment  by  settlers,  and  the  high  rate  of 
profit  to  be  obtained  has  caused  the  transmission  of  other  large  sums 
by  English  capitalists  for  the  establishment  of  banks  and  loan  companies. 


762 


PROGRESS  OF  THE  NATION. 


[SEC.  vm. 


The  number  of  convicts,  chiefly  males,  that  ^Yere  landed  in  the  colony 
in  each  year  from  1828  to  1838  was — 


Years. 

Convicts 

1828 

2,712 

1829 

3,664 

1830 

3,225 

1831 

2,633 

1832 

3,119 

1833 

4,1.51 

1S34 

3,161 

Yeiu-s. 

Convicts 

1835 

3,602 

1836 

3,823 

1837 

3,425 

1838 

3,073 

Total 


36,588 


The  number  of  convicts  in  the  colony  on  the  31st  of  December,  1844, 
was  19,175;  the  expenses  attending  them  for  superintendence,  lodging, 
and  maintenance,  amounted  to  54,437/. 

The  public  revenues  of  the  colony  have  increased  with  an  extra- 
ordinary rapidity.  In  1826  they  amounted  to  72,230/. ;  in  1830,  to 
104,729/.  ;  in  1833,  to  164,063/. ;  in  1836,  to  330,579/. ;  and  in  1841, 
to  639,675/.  In  the  three  later  years  the  amount  was  swelled  by  the 
proceeds  of  Crown  lands  sold  to  the  respective  sums  of — 


Years. 
1833 
1836 
1841 


£. 
24,956 
126,4.58 
90,387 


In  1844,  mainly  through  the  failure  of  this  source  of  income,  the 
public  revenue  of  the  colony  was  only  455,844/.  In  the  following  years 
the  revenue  again  increased,  and  in  1848  amounted  to  551,246/. 

The  chief  revenue  is  derived  from  Customs'  duties,  and  the  principal 
article  thus  subjected  to  taxation  is  ardent  spirit,  the  consumption  of 
which  in  the  colony  is  great,  as  might  indeed  be  expected  if  we  take 
into  consideration  the  previous  habits  of  a  large  part  of  the  population. 

The  climate  and  soil  of  New  South  Wales,  so  far  as  our  researches 
have  hitherto  been  carried,  appear  to  be  admirably  calculated  for  the 
breeding  and  rearing  of  flocks  of  sheep,  which,  having  an  almost  un- 
limited extent  of  pasturage,  increase  with  the  greatest  rapidity,  and  yield 
fleeces  of  very  excellent  quality.  The  export  of  sheep's  wool  from 
the  colony  in  each  year  from  1822  to  1848,  as  stated  below,  will  show 
how  rapid  has  been  the  increase  in  this  branch  of  colonial  wealth : — 


Years. 
1822 
1823 
1824 
1825 
1826 
1827 
1828 
1829 
1830 


lbs. 
172,880 
198,240 
275,560 
411,600 
552,960 
407,116 
834,343 
1,005,333 
899.750 


Years. 
1831 
1832 
1833 
1834 
1835 
1836 
1837 
1833 
1839 


lbs. 
1,401,284 
1,515,156 
1,734,203 
2,246,933 
3,893,927 
3,693,241 
4,448,796 
5,749,376 
7,213,584 


Years. 
1840 
1841 
1842 
1843 
1844 
1845 
1846 
1847 
1848 


lbs. 

8,610,775 

8,-589,368 

9,428,036 

12,704,899 

13,541,173 

17,364,734 

16,479,520 

22,379,722 

22,969,711 


I 


The  only  exportable  articles  which,  until  very  recently,  and  with  the 
exception  of  wool.  New  South  AA'ales  has  hitherto  aftbrded  in  any  con- 
siderable quantities,  are  the  produce  of  the  whale  fishery  which  has  been 


cu.\r.  IV.] 


SETTLEMENTS  IN  AUSTRALASIA. 


763 


carried  on  from  its  shores,  during  the  past  few  years.  The  fishery  is 
prosecuted  to  great  advantage  because  of  the  abundance  of  w  hales  found 
near  to  the  coast,  so  that  the  vessels  employed  have  no  long  voyage  to 
make  in  quest  of  them,  as  is  the  case  with  our  northern  whale  fishery. 
Both  the  black  whale  and  the  spermaceti  whale  are  found.  The  pro- 
gress of  this  fishery  up  to  1838  was  as  follows  : — 


Yeiirs. 

Number  of 
Ships. 

Sperm 
Whale  Oil. 

Black 
Wule  Oil. 

WHialebone. 

Number  of 
Seal  Skins. 

Tuns. 

Tuns. 

Cwts. 

1828 

No  account. 

348 

50 

No  account. 

7,647 

1829 

27 

8S5 

.. 

I) 

12,3.JO 

1830 

32 

1,282 

518 

i> 

5,460 

1831 

31 

1,914 

1,004 

)> 

4,972 

1832 

22 

1,648 

247 

330 

891 

1833 

27 

3,4S3 

314 

485 

2,465 

lS3i 

24 

2,243 

1,124 

820 

737 

1835 

29 

2,716 

42 

40 

1836 

40 

1,700 

1,178 

1,926 

386 

1837 

47 

1,179 

2,006 

1,.5.50 

200 

1833 

53 

1,184 

2,178 

2,734 

180 

The  accounts  for  subsequent  years  are  not  given  with  the  same  dis- 
tinctness, but  the  progress,  until  1843,  will  be  indicated  by  the  quantity 
of  oil,  &c.,  exported.     This  was — 


Years. 

Sperm. 

Tuns. 

1839 

1,578 

1840 

1,854 

1841 

1,545 

1842 

957 

1843 

1,115 

Black  ^^■hale.  Whalebone 


Within  the  last  few  years,  the  colonists  have  applied  themselves  to 
the  production  of  tallow  as  an  article  of  export.  In  1843  the  quantity 
shipped  from  the  colony  was  5680  cwts. ;  in  1844  it  amounted  to 
56,609  cwts. ;  and  in  1848  to  98,213  cwts.  There  seems  good  reason 
to  believe  that  this  will  become  in  a  few  years  a  considerable  branch  of 
trade. 

A  time  will  arrive  at  which  the  flowing  of  capital  into  our  Australian 
colonies  from  England  will  be  checked,  if  indeed  it  do  not  cease.  The 
system  of  transporting  our  convicts  to  such  distant  settlements  was  for 
some  time  very  seriously  questioned,  and  has  for  some  years  been 
changed,  and  the  circumstances  of  distress  in  which  our  working  popu- 


764 


PROGRESS  OF  THE  NATION. 


[sec.    VIII. 


lation  was  in  some  recent  years  placed,  has  to  a  great  extent  passed 
away,  so  that  employment  for  them  may  be  found  at  home,  and  schemes 
for  promoting  emigration  by  means  of  bounties  may  now  be  abandoned. 
What,  then,  will  be  the  condition  of  our  Australian  colonists,  if,  in  the 
mean  time,  they  shall  not  have  employed  their  industry  in  providing 
a  greater  variety  or  a  larger  amount  of  exportable  produce?  The 
climate  is  well  adaj)ted  to  the  production  of  many  articles  for  which  a 
market  may  be  found  in  England.  There  is  reason  for  believing  that 
cotton  of  excellent  quality  may  be  raised  in  great  abundance,  that 
tobacco  may  be  grown  with  advantage,  and  that  wine  may  be  produced 
sufficient  for  the  consumption  of  the  colony,  even  if  it  were  allowed  to 
become  a  substitute  for  ardent  spirits,  and  that  at  no  distant  day  some 
considerable  quantity  might  be  furnished  for  exportation.  Dried  fruits, 
too,  which  are  at  present  supplied  to  us  from  Spain  and  countries 
bordering  the  jNIediterranean,  might  become  articles  of  exportation,  and 
a  source  of  wealth  to  the  colonists. 

The  trade  of  the  colony  has  increased  with  a  rapidity  equal  to  that  of 
its  population. 

A  part  of  the  excess  in  the  value  of  imports  over  exports  arises,  as 
already  explained,  from  the  transfer  of  capital  to  the  colony  on  the  part 
of  free  emigrants,  while  a  considerable  proportion  of  the  exports  from 
Enoland  are  paid  for  in  Government  bills  drawn  from  the  colony  for  the 
expenses  of  the  convict  establishments. 

The  value  of  imports  and  exports  in  each  year  from  1828  to  1848 
was  as  follows  :— 


Years. 


1828 
1829 
1830 
1831 
1832 
1833 
1834 
1835 
1836 
1837 
1838 
1839 
1840 
1841 
1842 
1843 
1844 
1845 
1846 
1847 
1848 


IMPORTS. 


Great  Britain: 


British 
Colonies. 


399, 
423, 
268, 
241, 

40:), 

434, 

669, 

707, 

794, 

807, 

1,102, 

1,251, 

2,200, 

1,837, 

854, 

1,034. 

643, 

777, 

1,119, 

1,347, 

1,084, 


892 
463 
935 
989 
344 
220 
663 
133 
422 
264 
127 
969 
305 
369 
774 
942 
419 
112 
301 
241 
054 


125,862 
135,486 
60,356 
68,804 
47,895 
61,662 
124,570 
144,824 
220,254 
257,427 
255,975 
504,828 
376,054 
332,296 
298,201 
227,029 
153,923 
237,759 
262,943 
388,724 
263,787 


Foreign  States 
and  Fisheries. 


Total. 


44,246 
42,055 
91,189 
179.359 
147^381 
218,01)0 
197,757 
262,848 
222,730 
232,800 
221,175 
479,574 
437,830 
358,323 
302,084 
288,573 
133,918 
218,983 
248,278 
246,058 
208,703 


570,000 

601,004 

420,480 

490, 152 

604,620 

713,972 

991,990 

1,114,805 

1,237,406 

1,297,491 

1,579,277 

2,236,371 

3,014,189 

2,527,988 

1,455,059 

1,550,544 

931,260 

1,233,854 

l-,  630, 522 

1,982,023 

1,556,550 


CHAP.    IV.] 


SETTL'LEilENTS  IN  AUSTRALASIA. 


765 


EXl'OKTS. 

Years. 

Great  Britain. 

British 
Cdlouies. 

Forei<»n  States 
and  Fisheries. 

Total. 

£. 

£. 

£. 

£. 

1828 

84,008 

4,845 

1,197 

90,0.50 

1829 

146,283 

12,692 

2,741 

161,716 

1830 

120,559 

15,597 

5,305 

141,461 

1831 

211,138 

60,354 

52,676 

324, 168 

1832 

252,106 

63,934 

68,304 

384,344 

1833 

269,508 

67,344 

57,949 

394,801 

1834 

400,738 

128,211 

.58,691 

587,640 

1833 

496,345 

83,108 

102,740 

682,193 

1836 

513,976 

172,780 

61,868 

748,624 

1837 

518,951 

157,975 

83,128 

760,0.54 

1838 

583,154 

160,640 

58,974 

802,768 

1839 

597,100 

289,857 

61,819 

948,776 

1840 

792,494 

520,210 

86,988 

1,399,692 

1841 

706,336 

238,948 

78,113 

1,023,397 

1842 

685,705 

298,023 

83,683 

1,067,411 

1843 

825,885 

285,756 

60,679 

1,172,320 

1844 

854,903 

236,352 

36,860 

1,128,115 

1845 

,  1,254,881 

276,788 

24,317 

1,555,986 

1846 

'  1,130,179 

328,922 

22,438 

1,481,. 539 

1847 

1,503,091 

335,137 

31,818 

1,870,046 

1848 

1  1,483,224 

335.887 

11,257 

1,830,368 

The  number  and  tonnage  of  the  shipping  employed  in  the  trade  of 
the  colony  in  each  year  from  1834  to  1848  were  as  follows : — 


1834 
1835 
1836 
1837 
1838 
1839 
1840 
1841 
1842 
1843 
1844 
1845 
1846 
1847 
1848 


INWARDS. 


Great  Britain.        British  Colonies.       United  States. 


Foreign  States. 


Total. 


Ships.  ! 

58 

47 

60 

56  ! 

102 

137  j 

190  1 

251  ' 

137 


80 

84 

88 

119 


Tons. 
20,906 
17,5.30 
23,610 
21,816 
41,848 
58,123 
80,806 
106,332 
.55,144 
35,914 
34,765 
29,954 
36,761 
37,941 
57,604 


Ships. 
112 
132 
124 
94 
106 
349 
415 
370 
.363 
368 
280 
426 
540 
640 
755 


Tons. 
23,730 
28,507 
25,861 
21,085 
22,928 
54,297 
66,748 
51,523 
56,450 
50,163 
38,384 
53,769 
68,. 350 
80,130 
112,355 


Ships. 

Tons. 

Ships. 

Tons. 

Ships. 

75 

13,896 

245 

6 

1,400 

75 

15,. 582 

260 

3 

975 

82 

14,969 

269 

5 

1,220 

105 

23,2.39 

260 

1 

274 

82 

15,010 

291 

4 

1,177 

73 

21,877 

563 

8 

2,520 

96 

28,884 

709 

13 

4,754 

80 

21.169 

714 

7 

2,762 

121 

29,565 

628 

5 

1,116 

98 

23,671 

558 

3 

1,005 

56 

13,385 

417 

1 

243 

90 

21,386 

597 

1 

370 

142 

35,986 

767 

1 

160 

149 

36,673 

878 

1 

406 

121 

28,939 

996 

Tons. 

58,532 

63,019 

65,415 

67,360 

80,060 

135,474 

178,958 

183,778 

143,921 

110,864 

87,539 

105,352 

141,467 

154,904 

199,304 


OUTWARDS. 

1834 

27 

8,639 

88 

16,005 

..     1       .. 

105 

28,729 

220 

53,373 

1835 

31 

11,261 

90 

15,821 

..     1 

148 

39,882 

269 

66,964 

1836 

32 

9,759 

106 

22,895 

126 

30,180 

264 

62,834 

1837 

43 

13,398 

91 

20,959 

.. 

128 

30,2.39 

262 

64,596 

1838 

35 

12,367 

83 

17,043 

1 

289 

154 

51,626 

273 

81,325 

1839 

39 

13,886 

384 

66,330 

2 

621 

123 

43,933 

548 

124,776 

1840 

54 

18,774 

433 

83,242 

4 

950 

174 

60,7.38 

665 

163,704 

1841 

54 

16,418 

420 

83,056 

1 

341 

215 

72,303 

690 

172,118 

1842 

.54 

16,. 323 

406 

69,971 

9 

705 

171 

47,971 

633 

134,970 

1843 

70 

22,154 

376 

53,892 

118 

.33,980 

564 

110,026 

1844 

67 

24.163 

415 

61,141 

87  1  23,938 

569 

109,242 

1845 

67 

25,221 

459 

57,173 

88 

21,. 567 

614 

103,961 

1846 

57 

22,545 

559 

75,555 

133 

36,898 

754 

134,998 

1847 

iii 

30,991 

693 

93,624 

165 

44,049 

933 

168,664 

1848 

75 

31,722 

744 

118,957 

126 

36,643 

945 

187,-322 

766  PROGEESS  OF  THE  NATION.  [sec.  viii. 

The  number  and  tonnage  of  shipping  registered  in  the  colony  on  the 
31st  of  December,  1841,  was — 

Vessels.         Tons. 
Sailing-vessels — under  50  tons  .     .         87  1,90.3 

„  above  50  tons  .     .       119  20,519 

206  22,422 

Steam  vessels — under  50  tons  .     .  3  126 

„  above  50  tons.     .         11  1,330 

14  1,456 

Total      .      .      .       220  23,878 

The  population  of  Van  Diemen's  Land  in  1824  was  as  follows : — 

Males.  Females.  Total. 

Free 3,781  2,248  6,029 

Convicts 5,467  471  5,938 

jVIilitary  and  their  families    .               266  70  336 

Total.     .     .     .  9,514  2,789  12,303 

In  1830  these  numbers  were  doubled.     The  inhabitants  then  were — 

Males.  Females.  Total. 

Free  8,351  4,623  12,974 

Convicts 8,877  1,318  10,195 

Military  and  their  families    .              880  230  1,110 

Total.     .      .      .         18,108  6,171  24,279 

In  1838,  the  latest  year  for  which  we  have  the  numbers  particularized 
in  classes,  they  were — 

Males.  Females.  Total. 

Free  14,692  11,363  26,055 

Convicts 16^069  2,064  18,133 

Military  and  their  families    .           1,171  405              1,576 

Total.     ...         31,932  13,832  45,764 

From  a  more  recent  return  it  appeared  that  the  population  on  the  31st 
of  December,  1844,  was  increased  by  immigration — forced  and  volun- 
tary— and  by  natural  causes,  to — 

Males  .     .     .     39,604 
Females    .     .     17,816 

Total   .     .     .57,420 

The  official  return  for  1848  states  the  population  as  being — 

Males  ,      .     .     47,828 
Females    .     ,     22,336 

Total    .     .     70,164 

The  disparity  in  the  sexes  is  greater  even  than  exists  in  New  South 
Wales.     The  proportion  of  females  to  the  whole  population  was — 


SETTLEMENTS  IN  AUSTRALASIA. 


767 


In  1824 
1830 
1833 


22' 07  per  cent. 
25-41         „ 
30-22         „ 


In  1844 
1848 


31-03  percent. 
31-83 


The  evil  appears  to  be  decreasing  here  as  in  New  Soutli  "Wales. 

lliis  island  is  not  so  subject  to  drought  as  New  South  Wales,  and  it 
is  therefore  better  adapted  for  arable  cultivation.  The  farming  produce 
raised  in  each  of  tlie  years  1836  to  1838,  in  1844,  and  in  1848,  was  as 
follows :  — 


Years. 

Wheat. 

Barley, 

Oats, 

Peas. 

Beans. 

Potatoes. 

Turnips. 

Hay. 

Bushels. 

Bushels. 

Bushels. 

Bushels. 

Bushels. 

Tons. 

Tons. 

Tons. 

1836 

485,969 

89,429 

121,526 

9,819 

1,480 

11,936 

69,009 

8,560 

1837 

309,569 

73,566 

128,209 

9,035 

237 

4,015 

22,547 

10,790 

1838 

551,285 

183,640 

251,491 

12,460 

1,031 

11,. 533 

12,396 

15,992 

1844 

752,924 

165,247 

209,205 

8,416 

1,072 

12,161 

25,631 

20,954 

1848 

1,241,700 

358,895 

770,624 

13,014 

1,850 

18,331 

41,262 

51,850 

The  number  of  stock  in 

the 

same  year. 

5  was — 

Years. 

Horses. 

Horned  Cattle. 

Sheep. 

Goats. 

1836 

8,243 

74,500 

906,813 

1,904 

1837 

8,010 

73,212 

911,357 

1,624 

1838 

9,884 

77,153 

1,222,511 

2,624 

1844 

15,355 

85,302 

1,145,089 

1S43 

17,100 

85,435 

1,752,973 

2,902 

The  whale  fishery  is  followed  as  a  regular  trade  from  this  colony. 
The  value  of  the  oil  and  whalebone  taken  in  each  year  from  1828  to 
1838,  in  1844,  and  in  1848,  will  show  the  increasing  importance  of  this 
pursuit : — 


Years. 

£. 

Years. 

£. 

Years. 

£. 

1S28 

11,268 

1833 

30,020 

1837 

135,210 

1829 

12,313 

1834 

.56,450 

1838 

98,660 

1830 

22,065 

1835 

64,8.58 

1844 

53,657 

1831 

33,. 549 

1836 

57,660 

1848 

51,264 

1832 

37,176 

The  quantity  of  colonial  w^ool  exported  from  Van  Diemen's  Land  in 
each  year  from  1832  to  1847,  was  as  follows  : — 


Years. 

lbs. 

Years. 

lbs. 

Years. 

lbs. 

1832 

1,333,061 

1838 

2,839,512 

1843 

3,376,080 

1833 

1,454,719 

1839 

3,080,920 

1844 

3,740,400 

1834 

1,372,608 

1840 

3,019,340 

1845 

3,820,320 

1835 

1,833,653 

1841 

3,408,360 

1846 

4,100,880 

1836 

1,727,258 

1842 

3,297,360 

1847 

4,856,400 

1837 

2,638,250 

A  return  has  been  made  of  the  number  of  manufactories,  mills,  and 
principal  trades,  in  each  year  from  1824  to  1838,  showing  a  progi^essive 
and  steady  increase  in  every  branch.  The  numbers  in  the  first  and  last 
years  of  the  series  respectively  were  as  follows  : — 


768 


PROGRESS  OF  THE  NATION. 


[sec.    VIII. 


1S38 

9 

1S24 

ISM 

I'J 

Mills — steam  . 

3 

-t 

9 
2 

„        water  and 
Printing-offices 

wind  . 

.      .        1 

.      .       G 

51 

8 

4 

Wool-staplers  . 

3 

1824 

Agricultural  implement  makers 

Breweries ."? 

Candle  manufactories 

Cooperages 

Coachmakers 

Distilleries 1 

The  trade  of  this  colony  has  increased  with  great  rapidity.  In  1824 
the  total  imports  were  valued  at  62,000/.,  of  which  50,000/.  came  from 
England,  and  10,000/.  from  other  British  colonies.  The  exports  in  that 
year  were  valued  at  14,500/.,  all  of  which  were  made  to  England  or  its 
colonies.  In  the  ten  years  from  1829  to  1838  the  values  of  imports  and 
exports  were  as  follows  : — 


IMPORTS. 


1829 
1830 
1831 
1832 
1833 
1834 
1835 
1836 
1837 
1838 


1829 
1830 
1831 
1832 
1833 
1834 
1835 
1836 
1837 
1838 


Great 
Britain. 


£. 
176,366 
153,478 
211,612 
293,885 
258,904 
316,559 
403,879 
386,142 
.391,804 
556,746 


British 
Colonies. 


United 
States. 


Foreign    I 
Countries.] 


77,529   ; 
93,251  I 
75,442  j 
91,119  I 
80,860 
145,445 
149,664  ' 
163,471 
158,074 
129,602 


1,424 
3,368 
2,002 

889 
2.661 


£. 
18,294 

8,569 
11,720 

7,662 
13,1.30 
13,189 
26,735 

6,625 
12,377 
13,947 


EXPORTS. 


55, 
52 

87; 

no, 

105, 
167, 
218, 
232, 
314, 
321, 


535 
031 
893 
883 
126 
815 
754 
720 
224 
871 


71,115 

534 

93,742 

207 

53,852 

46,787 

236 

47,567 

274 

35,399 

290 

18 

101,716 

61 

148 

186,193 

1,210 

,  , 

225,907 

CO 

251.604 

8,000 

272,189 
255,298 
298,774 
392,666 
352,894 
476,617 
583,646 
558,240 
563,144 
702,956 


126,984 

145,980 
141,745 
157,906 
152,967 
203,522 
320,679 
420.123 
.540,221 
581,475 


The  total  value  of  imports  and  exports  in  the  following  years  to  1847 
has  heen  as  follows  :  — 


Imports. 

Exp 

orts. 

Imports. 

Exports. 

Years, 

£. 

+ 

Years. 

£. 

£." 

1839 

524 

169 

500 

701 

1844 

322,879 

286,373 

1840 

679 

484 

457 

720 

1845 

389,357 

268,159 

1841 

488 

588 

407 

822 

1846 

403,959 

335,392 

1842 

353 

929 

303 

978 

1847 

538,323 

393,486 

1843 

462 

570 

280 

874 

The  greater  value  of  the  imports  over  exports^  is  due  to  the  same 
causes  as  produce  the  like  result  in  New  South  Wales,  and  which  have 
already  been  explained. 


cuxr.  IV  ] 


SETl'LEMENTS  IN  AI'STK-VLAFIA. 


769 


Tlie  tonnage  eniployetl  in  tlic  trade  during  tlie  above  years,  in  1844 
and  1<S48,  was  as  follows: — 


Entered. 

Cleared. 

E 

ntered. 

Cleared. 

Yeaw. 

Years. 

Ships. 

Tons. 

Ships. 

Tons. 

Ships. 

Tons. 

Ships. 

Tons. 

1829 

110 

24,717 

Ill 

25,742 

1835 

234 

.55,8a3 

225 

53,560 

1830 

101 

26,582 

<)2 

25,045 

1836 

292 

58,142 

274 

52,780 

1831 

1)4 

23,184 

102 

25,451 

1837 

344 

60,960 

363 

57,945 

1832 

142 

31,724 

128 

28,019 

1838 

370 

64,454 

369 

63,3:12 

1833 

167 

37,442 

159 

36,250 

1844 

425 

68,462 

445 

71,756 

i8;u 

150 

33,441 

134 

32,1 92 

1848 

648 

91,883 

677 

95,988 

The  shipping  belonging  to  the  colony  lias  increased  rapidly.  In  1824 
its  whole  mercantile  marine  consisted  of  one  vessel  of  42  tons ;  in  1830 
the  colony  possessed  sixteen  vessels  of  1386  tons;  in  1834  these  were 
increased  to  sixty-six  vessels  of  4437  tons;  in  1838  its  shipping 
amounted  to  101  vessels,  measuring  8382  tons ;  and  at  the  end  of  1841 
the  number  and  tonnage  were  as  under  : — 

Slr.ps.  Tons. 

Sailing-vessels — under  50  tons    .     .     75  1,804 

„  above  50  tons    .      .     68  10.119 


Steam-vessels— under  50  tons 
Total     . 


143 
3 


146 


12,014 


The  population  of  Western  Australia  (Swan   River)  from   1834  to 
1839,  and  in  1844,  was  as  follows  : — 


Years. 
1834 
1835 
1836 
1837 
1838 
1839 
1844 


Males. 
1,230 
1,231 
1,285 
1,249 
1,152 
1,302 
2,594 


Females. 

840 

734 

755 

776 

776 

852 
1.756 


Total. 
2,070 
1,965 
2,040 
2,025 
1,928 
2,154 
4,350 


In  1848  the  population  amounted  to  4460,  exclusive  of  about  2000 
aborigines. 

The  shipping  that  entered  the  ports  of  Fremantle  and  Albany  in  the 
above  years,  and  in  1848,  was  as  follows: — 


Great  Uritain. 

British  Colonies. 

United  States. 

Foreiun 

Countries. 

Total. 

Ships. 

Tons. 

Ships. 

Tons. 

Ships. 

Tons. 

Ships. 

Tons. 

Ships. 

Tons. 

18.34 

4 

1,351 

16 

1 ,  769 

20 

3,120 

1835 

3 

560 

19 

2,699 

i 

164 

6 

666 

29 

4,089 

18.36 

18 

2,178 

3 

830 

21 

3,t)08 

1837 

4 

842 

8 

1,415 

1 

.365 

1 

391 

14 

3,013 

183S 

2 

450 

13 

2,296 

9 
20 

2,770 
6,175 

6 

2,293 

24 
64 

5,516 

1839 

38 

'8,337 

16,805 

1844 

1 

2,160 

34 

3,377 

14 

4,105 

1 

360 

56 

10,002 

1848 

3 

927 

30 

4.314 

8 

2,379 

1 

332 

42 

7,9.52 

3    T) 


770  PROGRESS  OF  THE  NATION.  [sec.  viir. 

The  quantity  of  land  granted  by  the  Government  since  the  first  esta- 
blishment of  the  colony  amounted  at  the  end  of  1839  to  1,561,903  acres, 
and  the  quantity  sold  up  to  that  time  was  29,353  acres.  The  total 
amount  in  crop  in  18-48  was  6904  acres,  chiefly  in  wheat.  In  the  same 
year  the  number  of  stock  consisted  of — 

Horses      ....         2,359  j  Sheep       ....     144,054 

Horned  Cattle    .     .       11,938  |  Swine       ....         3,185 

The  number  of  settlers  who  arrived  in  the  colony  of  South  Australia 
up  to  the  close  of  1840  was — 


Years. 

Settlers. 

1836 

941 

1837 

1,279 

1838 

2,598 

1839 

5,197 

1840 

5,025 

Total 

.      15,040 

Tiie  returns  did  not  make  any  distinction  of  sexes,  except  for  the  year 
1839,  when  the  emigrants  were  divided  in  the  proportion  of  seven  males 
to  six  females. 

A  census  was  taken  in  1844,  when  it  was  found  that  the  population 
consisted  of — 

Males  ......     9,526 

Females 7,670 

Not  distinguished    .     .         170 

Total      .     .     17,366 


At  the  end  of  1848  the  number  of  inhabitants  was  estimated  to  have 
increased  to  38,666,  exclusive  of  coloured  people,  estimated  at  3730. 

The  sales  of  public  lands  effected  up  to  the  end  of  1841  included 
288,817  acres,  the  purchase-money  of  which  amounted  to  267,988/.  The 
money  thus  produced  is  applied,  under  a  Board  of  Commissioners,  to 
defray  the  expense  of  conveying  emigrants  to  the  colony,  with  the  view 
of  furnishing  the  settlers  with  labourers. 

The  entire  population  of  the  Australian  group  of  colonies,  reckoning 
only  persons  of  European  origin,  amounted  at  the  end  of  1848  to  333,764, 
or  double  the  number  in  1839  when  it  had  reached  170,676. 

The  colonization  of  New  Zealand,  or,  more  correctly  speaking,  the 
settlement  upon  the  islands  known  by  that  name,  by  British  subjects, 
had  been  for  some  time  in  progress,  when,  in  1839,  the  group  was 
declared  to  be  subject  to  the  Crown  of  England,  and  an  organized 
government  was  established.  Prior  to  this  step  on  the  part  of  our 
Government,  large  tracts  of  land  had  been  acquired  by  individuals  from 
the  native  chiefs  for  nominal  considerations,  such  as  a  blanket,  a  hatchet, 
or  a  o-un.  Such  purchases  have  since  been  officially  declared  invalid, 
nor,  indeed,  is  any  title  to  the  possession  of  land  within  the  colony  held 
to  be  valid  unless  derived  from  or  confirmed  by  Her  Majesty. 


(  IIAP.    IV.] 


NKW  ZEALAND. 


771 


The  colony  of  New  Zealand  consists  of  three  islands,  viz..  New  Ulster, 
or  Nortii  Island  ;  New  Munster,  or  Middle  Island  ;  and  New  Leinster, 
or  South  Island.  They  are  situated  between  48  and  34  south  latitude, 
and  between  166' and  179'  east  longitude. 

As  regards  the  population  of  this  group  of  islands,  we  have  no  certain 
information.  The  North  Island  is  roughly  estimated  to  contain  100,000 
native  inhabitants ;  but  no  estimate  has  been  formed  with  respect  to  the 
population  of  the  other  two  islands. 

The  progress  of  the  European  population  during  the  six  years  ending 
with  1848  has  been  as  folloMs  : — 


Males    .... 
Females 
Strangers  or  aliens 

Total     . 


1843 

1844 

1845 

1840 

184T 

184S* 

3,286 

3,133 

150 

4,029 

3,296 

500 

4,008 

3,367 

206 

3,944 
3,348 

89 

4,273 
3,, 526 

174 

6,200 
4,283 

7,109 

7,825 

7,581 

7,381 

7,073 

10,483 

*  Including  military,  amounting  to  1580. 

The  land  in  cultivation,  and  number  of  live  stock,  in  each  of  the  same 
six  years  was — • 


Yeais. 


1843 
1844 
1845 
1846 
1847 
1848 


Horses. 


1,382 
2,333 
3,468 
4,202 
5,785 
7,929 


183 
285 
372 
402 
716 
1,100 


Cattle. 


Sheep. 


Goats. 


Pigs. 


2,208 
3,216 
4,271 
5,971 
7,876 
12,677 


6,500 
13,859 
21,598 
33, 529 
48,755 
85,915 


344 
882 
1,371 
2,277 
3,494 
7,358 


1,152 
Noreturn. 
2,409 
2,806 
3,236 
12,424 


There  are  several  establishments  from  which  the  whale  fishery  is 
carried  on  by  means  of  boats.  The  produce,  and  its  value,  during  the 
above  six  years  were — 


Years. 

Sperm 
Oil. 

Black 
WTialeOil. 

Wliale- 
bone. 

Value. 

\ 

Tuns. 

Tuns. 

Tons. 

1       £. 

1843 

10 

1,279 

65 

i  32,680 

1844 

,  , 

1,215 

49 

!  26,240 

1845 

103 

937 

36f 
27| 
15| 

'  27,823 

1846 

13,V 

788 

19,074 

1847 

7 

460 

:     8,644 

1S4^ 

175 

302 

10 

14.89S 

The  value  of  imports  and  exports  into  and  from  the  province  of  New 
Munster  in  each  year,  from  1841  to  1848,  was — 


Imports. 


Exports. 


1841 

53,625 

14,447 

1842 

112,592 

12,156 

1843 

105,436 

29,311 

1844 

74.381 

38.644 

Vear^ 

Imports. 
£. 

Export 
£. 

1845 

44,066 

24,374 

1846 

69,333 

34,350 

1847 

105,216 

26,762 

1843 

109,412 

22,875 

772 


PROGRESS  OF  THE  NATION. 


[sec. 


Tlie  value  of  Britisli  manufactures  exported  to  New  Zealand  in  various 
years  since  1827  to  1845  has  been  as  follows : — 


Years. 

£. 

Years. 

£. 

Years. 

£. 

1827 

172 

1834 

nil. 

1840 

38,793 

1828 

2,487 

1835 

2,687 

1841 

67,275 

1829 

845 

1836 

nil. 

1842 

42,788 

1830 

1,39C 

1837 

nil. 

1843 

95,247 

1831 

4,752 

1833 

1,095 

1844 

47,512 

1832 

1,57G 

1839 

23,459 

1845 

43,045 

1833 

93G 

Our  importations  from  these  islands  have  hitherto  been  insignificant, 
being  confined  to  small  quantities  of  fish  oil  and  timber.  Of  this  latter 
article  the  islands  arc  said  to  contain  a  very  abundant  supply  of  very 
desirable  qualities,  and  in  particular  that  spars  of  considerable  size  may 
be  obtained  for  the  use  of  our  navy. 

The  shipping  engaged  in  the  trade  between  the  United  Kingdom  and 
this  colony  in  each  year  from  1841  to  1849,  was  as  follows : — 


Years. 


1841 
1842 
1843 
1844 
1845 
1846 
1847 
1848 
1849 


Entered. 


Ships. 


1,584 
1,341 

1,348 
1,184 
1,457 
1,638 
1.003 
i;703 


Ships. 


38 

24 

11 

6 

6 

9 

10 

12 


Tons 


15,556 
9,651 
4, 538 
2,212 
1,875 
2,604 
4,955 
5,528 

10,365 


CHA1-.  v.j  DEPENDENCIES  IN  AFiaCA. 


CHAPTER  V. 

DEPENDENCIES  IN  AFKICA. 

Cape  of  Good  IIopk:  Population— Imports  and  Exports— Shipping— Productions— ^Vine 
—Whale  Fishery— Stock— Farm  Produce— Timber— Harbours.  St.  Helena:  Popula- 
tion—Imports— Shipping— Ascension  :  Products.  SiEKKA  Leone:  Population— Eman- 
cipated Slaves— Unhealthiness  of  Climate— Imports  and  Exports— Shipping.  Settlement 
on  the  Gambia:  Population— Trade.  Settlements  on  the  Gold  Coast:  Cape  Coast 
Castle  :  Accra  :  Dix  Cove  :  Annamaboe  :  Trade— Population.  Fernando  Po  : 
Population. 

The  dependencies  and  colonies  of  the  United  Kingdom  in  Africa  are 
(with  the  exception  of  the  ^fauritius  and  its  dependencies,  described  in 
a  former  chapter) — 


The  Cape  of  Good  Hope ; 

St.  Helena; 

Ascension  Island ; 

Sierra  Leone : 

Settlements  on  the  Gambia; 


Cape  Coast  Castle ; 
Accra ; 
Dix  Cove ; 
Annamaboe ;  and 
Fernando  Po. 


The  cape  which  gives  its  name  to  the  important  colony  of  tlie  Cape 
of  Good  Hope  is  situated  at  the  most  southern  point  of  Africa,  in  34  23' 
south  latitude,  and  18  '23'  east  longitude.  From  this  point  the  colony 
extends  northward  to  29'  40'  south  latitude,  and  eastward  to  the  Great 
Kei  river  in  28'  25'  east  longitude.  The  area  of  the  colony  comprises 
110,256  square  miles. 

Cape  Town,  the  capital,  is  built  on  Table  Bay,  on  the  north  coast  of 
a  peninsula  about  thirty  miles  long,  and  which  for  some  time  formed 
the  extent  of  the  settlement  made  by  the  Dutch  in  1650.  In  1795  the 
town  and  colony  were  taken  by  the  English,  but  were  restored  to  Holland 
by  the  Treaty  of  Amiens  in  1801.  In  1806  it  was  again  taken  by  the 
British  forces,  and  its  possession  was  confirmed  to  us  by  the  peace  of 
1814. 

When  it  fell  into  our  hands,  in  1795,  the  population  of  all  races  was 
estimated  to  amount  to  about  60,000 ;  in  1806  the  numbers  were — 

Whites  and  free  coloured    . 

Free  blacks 

Negro  aud  coloured  slaves  . 
Hottentots 


Males. 

Females. 

Total. 

13,G24 

11,990 

25,614 

529 

G05 

1,134 

18,990 

10,313 

2.),  303 

8,496 

8,935 

17,431 

Total     .      .      •     41,639  31,843  73,482 


774 


TROGKESS  OF  THE  NATION. 


[sec.    VIII. 


In  1839,  when   the   condition   of  slavery  had  ceased,  the  numbers 
were — 

Males. 

AVhitcs 34,973 

Black  and  coloured  people  .     .     38,976 


Total 


73,949 


to  be — 

M.-iles. 

AVlutcs      .      .     .     .     • 33,307 

Coloured 39,904 

Cape  TowTi — race  not  distinguished       .     11,517 


Total 


89,848 


Females. 

Total. 

33,207 

68 

180 

36,115 

75, GDI 

09,322 

143 

271 

the  numbers 

were  f 

Females. 

Total. 

34,831 

73,218 

38,003 

78,573 

12,232 

23,749 

85,692 

175,540 

showing  an  increase  of  138  per  cent,  in  forty-three  years  from  natural 
causes,  from  immigration,  and  from  extension  of  territory. 

The  exports  of  British  manufactures  to  this  colony  during  each  of  the 
years  from  1827  to  1849  were  to  the  following  value  : — 


Years. 

£. 

Years. 

£. 

Years. 

£. 

1827 

216,558 

1835 

326.921 

1843 

502,577 

1828 

218,049 

1836 

482,315 

1844 

424,151 

1829 

257,501 

1837 

488,814 

1845 

648,749 

1830 

a30.036 

1838 

623,323 

1846 

480,979 

1831 

257,245 

1839 

464,130 

1847 

688,208 

1832 

292,405 

1840 

417.091 

1848 

645,718 

1833 

346,197 

1841 

3S4.574 

1849 

520,896 

1834 

304.382 

1842 

369,076 

The  principal  exports  from  the  Cape  consist  of  hides,  salted  meat, 
butter,  grain,  and  flour,  horns,  ivory,  goat,  seal,  and  sheep  skins,  tallow, 
wool,  and  wine. 

Of  the  last-named  article  of  produce  the  quantity  exported  in  each  of 
the  five  years  1835  to  1839,  and  in  1849,  was— 


Years. 
1835 
1836 
1837 
1838 
1839 
1849 


Gallons.  £. 

1,247,819,  valued  at  107,546 


926.039 
1,122,900 
1,090^079 
1,157,061 

515,861 


84,220 
99,851 
102,408 
99,798 
49,015 


The  shipping  that  entered  and  cleared  from  the  several  ports  of  Cape 
Colony,  "viz.,  Cape  Town,  Simon's  Town,  and  Port  Elizabeth,  in  the 
four  years  1836  to  1839,  in  1844  and  in  1848,  was  as  follows  :— 


KntereJ. 


Cleared. 


Ships. 

Tons. 

Ships. 

Tons. 

1836 

381 

124,9.52 

352 

118,042 

1837 

400 

139,103 

378 

134,207 

1833 

472 

170,329 

356 

16.'),  977 

1839 

524 

168,729 

510 

166,021 

1814 

533 

177,804 

503 

171,073 

1848 

806 

214,979 

805 

216,790 

CHAP,    v.] 


DEPENDENCIES  IN  AFRICA. 


775 


The  number  and  tonnage  of  vessels  that  belonged  to  Cape  Colony  in 
each  of  the  years  1838  to  1841  were  as  follows  : — 

Years.  Ships.  Tons.  I  Years.       '     Ships.  Tons. 

1838  14  1,59G  1840  23  2,743 

1839  15  1,670  I  ,1841  24  3,150 

It  was  at  one  time  believed  that  by  careful  attention  to  tlie  cultivation 
of  the  vine  in  this  colony,  and  to  the  preparation  of  its  produce,  England 
might  be  made  in  a  great  degree  independent  of  other  wine-growing 
countries.  In  this  belief,  and  following  up  the  notion  that  this  end  would 
the  more  surely  be  attained  by  giving  to  Cape  wine  a  fiscal  advantage 
in  our  markets  over  the  wine  of  foreign  countries,  the  duty  was  reduced 
in  1813  to  one-third  the  rate  charged  upon  other  wine  ;  and  in  1825, 
when  a  general  reduction  was  made  in  the  duty  on  wine,  a  further  small 
abatement  was  made  in  favour  of  Cape  wines,  which  have  since  paid 
half  the  rates  charged  upon  other  wine  ;  but  the  expected  result  has  not 
followed.  The  produce  has  not  of  late  years  been  sensibly  augmented, 
and  the  quality  continues  as  inferior  (if,  indeed,  it  has  not  deteriorated) 
as  it  was  before  this  boon  was  granted  to  the  colony.  "\Miether  this 
effect  is  attributable  to  causes  beyond  the  control  of  the  wine-growers 
of  the  Cape,  or  is  a  consequence  of  want  of  energy  resulting  from 
legislative  protection,  it  is  hard  to  say. 

The  whale  fishery  is  carried  on  to  a  small  extent  by  means  of  boats. 
In  each  of  the  four  years  fi-om  1836  to  1839  the  result  was — 


Number 

Number 

Number 

Value 

Years. 

of 

of  Whales 

of  Seals 

of 

Boats. 

taken. 

taken. 

Oil,  &c. 

1836 

47 

18 

681 

£. 
3,349 

1837 

98 

9 

105 

2,355 

1833 

77 

10 

345 

2,. 348 

1839 

118 

9 

1.5.j() 

This  colony  appears  to  be  peculiarly  fitted  for  pastoral  piu-jioses,  and 
there  is  a  probability  that  under  the  altered  tariff  of  1842  cured  provi- 
sions may  be  profitably  brought  thence  to  England.  The  number  of 
stock  existing  in  the  different  districts  in  the  three  years  1837  to  1839, 
in  1844  and  in  1848,  was  as  follows : — 

183T  1S38  1839  1844  1848 

Horses  .     .     .           79,881  71,793  56,703  93,881  116,740 

Horned  cattle.         279,813  266.255  306,809  471,635  419,066 

Sheep    .      ,      .     1,923,082  2,030,145  2,339,191  4,513;534  4,135.841 

Goats     .      .      .         579,480  370,510  393,601  831,223  82i;674 

The  breadth  of  land  under  cultivation  in  the  colony  during  1848,  and 
the  quantity  of  the  several  products,  were — 

Acres.  Produce. 

Wheat 76,282  516,219  bushels 

Barley 16,917  2^3,667  „ 

Oats  anil  rye 47,603  248,615 

Maize  and  millet      ....  4,948  34,140  ., 

Peas,  bcaw,  and  lentils      .      .  2,501  17,204  ., 

Potatoes 4,050  44,023  '., 


77G  PROGRESS  OF  THE  NATION.  [st;c.  via. 

The  produce  i)cr  acre  here  sho\^■n  is  exceedingly  small,  and  indicates 
a  very  unenlightened  system  of  farming,  which,  however,  must  he  inex- 
pensive, since  it  admits  of  the  exportation  yearly  of  a  considerahle  portion 
of  what  is  raised.  The  principal  markets  are  Mauritius  and  St.  Helena. 
The  wheat  grown  in  this  colony  is  of  fine  quality. 

The  value  of  the  exports  from  this  colony  falls  greatly  short  of  that 
of  its  imports,  the  balance  being  provided  by  bills  of  exchange  drawn  by 
the  Commissariat  Department  at  the  Cape  upon  the  Lords  of  the  Trea- 
sury to  meet  the  expenditure  incurred  on  account  of  the  Government. 
The  produce  of  the  Cape  does  not  offer  any  variety  of  articles  from 
which  large  cargoes  can  be  assorted  for  the  markets  either  of  Europe  or 
of  India.  Some  part  of  the  exports  at  present  made  consists  of  the 
produce  of  India  and  China.  There  are  considerable  forests  in  which 
timber  trees  are  found.  The  best  of  these  is  known  as  African  oak, 
and  is  highly  useful  to  the  ship-builder,  but  the  expense  attending  the 
cutting  and  conveyance  of  the  trees  to  any  port  of  shipment  makes  the 
cost  in  the  colony  equal  to  that  of  Baltic  timber. 

There  are  several  bays  and  harbours  on  the  coast,  which  in  the  future 
development  of  the  resources  of  the  colony  may  prove  themselves  to  be 
of  great  importance  ;  at  present  the  largest  proportion  of  the  foreign 
trade  of  the  colony  is  carried  on  from  Table  Bay.  This  is  an  open 
roadstead,  much  exposed  to  the  north-west  wind,  which  prevails  from 
May  to  September.  Simon's  Bay,  which  forms  a  small  indentation  in 
False  Bay,  is  protected  from  the  north-west,  but  is  exposed  to  the  south- 
east winds  which  blow  violently  in  the  summer.  The  distance  between 
Simon's  Bay  and  Cape  Town  is  twenty-two  miles  ;  the  roads  are  bad, 
and  not  easily  improvable.  Algoa  Bay,  or  Port  Elizabeth,  in  33^  54' 
south  latitude,  and  25°  35'  east  longitude,  is  a  safe  port  during  the  pre- 
valence of  the  north-west  wind,  but  is  hazardous  during  the  remaining 
six  months  of  the  year.  Saldanha  Bay,  in  33  5'  south  latitude,  and 
17°  50'  east  longitude,  offers  security  at  all  times,  but  its  situation  is 
unfavourable  for  commercial  objects. 

St.  Helena,  a  small  island  in  the  South  Atlantic  Ocean,  is  situated  in 
15^  15'  south  latitude,  and  5'  50'  west  longitude.  It  is  but  little  more 
than  ten  miles  long,  and  less  than  seven  miles  wide,  its  area  being  about 
30,000  acres. 

This  island  has  obtained  an  historical  celebrity  from  its  having  been 
made  the  prison  of  Napoleon,  when  he  threw  himself  upon  the  hos])itality 
of  England,  after  the  battle  of  Waterloo  in  1815,  and  from  its  having 
been  the  place  of  his  death  and  sepulture.  During  the  years  that  his 
mortal  remains  rested  in  the  island  a  degree  of  interest  was  attaclied  to 
the  spot,  and  many  a  pilgrimage  was  made  to  his  tomb ;  but  since  its 
contents  have  been  transferred  to  the  church  of  the  Iiivalides  in  Paris,  St. 
Helena  has  lost  this  factitious  importance,  and  has  fallen  back  to  the 


i 


DEPENDENCIEhJ  IN  AFKICA. 


777 


(luictudc  by  which  it  was  formerly  characterised.  The  advantage  at- 
tending the  porisossion  of  this  island  resides  in  its  ])osition,  and  in  the 
plentiful  supply  which  it  yields  of  good  water,  in  quest  of  which,  and 
of  fresh  vegetables,  it  is  visited  by  ships  homeward-bound  from  India. 

8t.  Helena  had  been  colonized  by  the  Dutch,  but  was  abandoned  by 
them  when  they  formed  their  settlement  at  the  Cape  of  Good  Hope  in 
1(551.  In  that  year  it  was  visited  by  a  fleet  of  vessels  homeward-bound 
belonging  to  the  East  India  Company,  who  took  possession  in  the  name 
of  England.  That  (\)mpany  subsequently  obtained  a  grant  of  the  island 
from  Charles  the  Second,  and  retained  possession  until  1815,  when,  to 
secure  the  custody  of  Napoleon,  it  was  judged  necessary  to  place  its 
government  more  directly  under  the  Crown.  On  occasion  of  the  last 
renewal  of  the  Conq)any's  charter,  when  their  character  as  a  trading 
body  ceased,  all  benefit  to  them  from  this  station  was  at  an  end,  and  its 
possession  was  resumed  by  the  Crown. 

We  have  not  any  statement  of  the  population  earlier  than  1836.  In 
that  year  it  consisted  of  2113  whites,  and  2864  coloured  persons — 
together  4997.  In  July,  1839,  a  census  was  taken,  and  the  numbers 
were  found  to  be  2527  males  and  2209  females — together,  4736  souls. 
The  climate  is  healthy,  and  the  increase  of  the  population  tin-ough 
excess  of  births  over  deaths  is  proportionally  great.  The  lessened 
number  of  inhabitants  in  1839  compared  with  1836  was  occasioned  by 
the  emigration  of  many  of  the  poorer  persons  to  the  Cape  of  Good 
Hope. 

The  exports  of  British  manufactures  to  St.  Helena  in  each  of  the 
years  from  1827  to  1849  were  to  the  following  amounts  : — 


Years. 
1827 
1828 
1829 
1830 
1831 
1832 
m33 
183i 


Years.  £.  Years.                 £. 

1835  31,187  1843  25,839 

1836  11,041  1844  21,006 

1837  9,645  1845  2'J,124 

1838  13,990  1846  28,309 

1839  12,668  1847  31,378 

1840  9,884  1848  31,728 

1841  7,921  1849  23,312 

1842  17,530 

The  number  and    tonnaije  of  vessels   that    sailed  from 


£. 
41,430 
31,362 
45,531 
38,915 
39,431 
21,236 
30,041 
31,615 


the  United 

Kingdom  to  St.  Helena  and  Ascension  Island  in  each  year  from  1831 
to  1849  were — 


Years. 
1831 
1832 
1833 
1834 
1835 
18.36 
1837 
1838 
1839 
1840 


Ships. 
6 
2 

3 
12 

9 
5 


Tons. 

1,164 

2S3 

622 

2,158 

1,399 

967 

1,631 

2,. 366 

1,717 

1,009 


Years. 
1841 
1842 
1843 
1844 
1845 
1846 
1847 
1848 
1849 


Ships. 

15 
22 
26 
18 
23 
15 
29 
23 


Tons. 
1,732 
3,977 
4,995 
6,318 
3,952 
5,877 
4,082 
7,404 
5,767 


78  PKOGRESS  OF  THE  NATION.  [sec.  viii. 

In  the  same  interval  there  entered  our  ports  from  these  islands — 


Years. 

.Sliips. 

Tons. 

Years. 

Ships. 

Tons 

1834 

2 

362 

18-44 

1 

196 

1838 

3 

336 

1845 

9 

2,101 

1839 

2 

452 

1846 

4 

709 

1841 

1 

350 

1847 

5 

1,031 

1842 

1 

350 

1848 

1843 

12 

2,658 

1840 

There  were  not  any  arrivals  thence  dm*ing  nine  years  of  the  scries. 

The  importations  are  composed  of  East  India  produce,  the  islands 
themselves  not  producing  any  articles  for  exportation  beyond  the 
refreshments  which  they  supply  to  vessels  visiting  them  for  that  purpose. 
The  island  of  Ascension,  likewise  in  the  South  Atlantic  Ocean,  685 
miles  north-west  of  St.  Helena,  lies  in  7^  56'  south  latitude,  and  14"  24' 
west  longitude.  This  small  island,  seven  miles  and  a  half  long,  and  six 
miles  wide,  is  of  volcanic  origin,  and  of  a  naked,  desolate  character. 
It  was  first  taken  into  the  possession  of  England  in  1815,  during  the 
confinement  of  Napoleon  in  St.  Helena,  and  employed  as  a  military 
station.  It  has  since  been  so  far  improved  as  to  atford  sustenance  to  a 
moderate  number  of  sheep  and  cattle,  and  to  yield  various  fruits  and 
green  vegetables.  Considerable  numbers  of  poultry  are  reared,  and 
turtle  and  various  kinds  of  fish  abound  on  the  coast.  The  water, 
gushing  from  a  small  spring,  is  collected  in  tanks,  and  the  principal 
advantage  which  the  possession  of  this  island  seems  likely  to  afford 
consists  in  the  supply  of  water  and  fresh  provisions  to  ships  calling  for 
such  refreshments. 

The  colony  of  Sierra  Leone  takes  its  name  from  a  cape  on  the  west 
coast  of  Africa,  in  8"  30'  north  latitude,  and  13"  15'  west  longitude. 
The  peninsula  which  forms  the  territory  of  the  colony  is  bounded  on 
the  north  by  the  river  Sierra  Leone,  on  the  south  by  Calmont  Creek, 
on  the  east  by  the  river  Bunco,  and  on  the  west  by  the  sea :  it  is  about 
thirty-five  miles  long  and  twenty-five  miles  broad.  The  river  Sierra 
Leone  is  in  fact  the  estuary  of  the  Rokelle ;  it  is  seven  miles  wide 
opposite  Freeto^vn,  the  capital  of  the  colony,  and  constitutes  its  harbour. 
This  has  been  in  the  virtual  possession  of  England  since  the  beginning 
of  the  sixteenth  century  :  it  is  the  only  place  worthy  to  be  called  a 
harbour  between  Cape  Verde  and  Fernando  Po.  An  English  fort  was 
built  there  in  the  reign  of  Charles  the  First,  but  the  first  attempt  to 
colonize  it  was  made  in  1787,  when  340  negroes,  American  refugees, 
were  sent  there  from  London  at  the  expense  of  some  private  philanthro- 
pists. Of  this  colony  only  sixty-three  remained  in  1791.  In  1792,  the 
Sierra  Leone  Company  sent  out  119  settlers,  part  of  whom  were  Euro- 
peans;  of  these  only  40  were  living  in  1793.  In -the  same  year  1131 
negroes  were  conveyed  there  from  Nova  Scotia,  all  of  whom,  and  their 
descendants,  remaining  in  1827,  were  578  persons.     In  1800  a  party  of 


,n\v.  Y.J  DEPENDENCIES  IN  AFRICA.  779 

550  Maroons  were  landed  from  Jamaica,  and  for  a  time  they  appeared 
to  thrive,  having  increased  their  numhers  in  1836  to  681  ;  l)ut  in  1841 
all  of  them,  excepting  seventy,  had  left  the  colony.  In  1818  upwards 
of  1200  persons  of  African  blood,  pensioners  from  the  West  India 
regiment,  and  their  families,  were  conveyed  to  the  colony. 

The  chief  part  of  the  population  of  Sierra  Leone  now  consists  of 
Africans  who  have  been  captured  on  board  slave-ships  and  liberated  in 
the  colony  by  the  authority  of  a  Court  of  Mixed  Commission  placed 
tiiere  under  the  provisions  of  treaties  for  the  suppression  of  the  slave 
trade.     The  population  in  1844  consisted  of — 


Whites 

Black  and  coloured  people  . 
Aliens  and  resident  strangers 


JIales. 

Females. 

ToUl. 

136 

39 

175 

22.127 

18,931 

41,058 

2,298 

1,404 

3,702 

Total     ....     44,935 


Of  these  about  14,000,  including  nearly  all  the  whites,  inhabited  Free- 
town. Among  the  blacks  in  the  colony  are  about  2000  Kroomen,  an 
industrious,  intelligent,  and  well-conducted  race,  who  are  never  enslaved, 
and  by  whom  all  the  heavy  work  of  the  place  is  performed.  They  are 
pagans,  and  every  attempt  made  to  convert  them  to  Christianity  has 
failed  ;  they  make  no  wars,  carry  off  no  slaves,  and  are  altogether 
averse  to  the  trade  in  men  ;  they  are  .very  docile  and  easily  managed. 

The  number  of  slaves  that  had  been  emancipated  at  Sierra  Leone  up 
to  the  year  1840  was  70,809,  of  whom  20,709  males  and  16,320 
females,  together  37,022,  were  living  in  the  colony  in  December,  1840. 

The  colony  is  administered  by  a  Governor  and  a  Legislative  Council, 
composed  of  the  Chief  Justice,  Colonial  Secretary,  and  three  other 
principal  functionaries. 

It  unfortunately  happens,  through  the  fatal  influence  of  the  climate 
upon  the  health  and  lives  of  Europeans,  that  persons  to  whom  the 
administration  of  the  colony  is  intrusted  seldom  remain  long  enough  in 
oflBce  to  conceive  and  to  carry  out  plans  for  its  improvement. 

The  trade  of  the  United  Kingdom  with  Sierra  Leone  is  not  kept  in 
our  Custom-house  distinctly,  but  is  included  with  that  to  the  Afi-ican 
coast  from  the  river  Gambia  inclusive  to  the  river  Mesurada.  The 
value  of  British  manufactures  exported  to  this  quarter  in  each  of  the 
fifteen  years  1827  to  1841  was  as  follows  : — 


Years. 

£.' 

Years. 

£. 

Years. 

£. 

1827 

75,456 

1832 

69,255 

1837 

103,597 

1828 

62,100 

1833 

58,336 

1833 

134,470 

1829 

85,7011 

1834 

86,431 

183) 

123,539 

1830 

87,144 

1835 

75,388 

1840 

93,640 

1831 

85 j 192 

1836 

108,978 

1841 

96,092 

These  exports  consist  chiefly  of  wearing  apparel,  arms,  and  ammu- 
nition, cotton  manufactures,  iron  and  steel  goods,  and  woollens.     The 


7«0  rilOGRESS  OF  THE  NATION.  [sec.  viii. 

returns  are  made  in  cam-wood,   gums,  hides,   palm  oil,    ivory,  teake 
wood,  and  bees'  wax. 

Tiie  shipping  emplojed  in  the  trade  between  the  United  Kingdom 
and  Sierra  Leone,  in  1848  and  1849,  consisted  of — 

1S48  1849 

Ships.         'I'oiis.  Sliips.         Tons. 
Outwards    ...         44         16,(X)4  45        14,991 

Inwards       ...         37         11,439  35         11,  %4 

There  belonged  to  the  colony  in  the  year  1841, — 

Ships.         Tons. 
Under  50  tons ....         7  245 

Above       „       .      .      .      .         8  566 

Total     .      .       15  811 

The  settlements  on  the  river  Gambia  form  a  dependency  on  the 
Government  of  Sierra  Leone.  The  town,  Bathurst,  is  on  the  left  bank 
of  the  river  Gambia,  at  its  entrance  from  the  ocean,  in  13^  30'  north 
latitude,  and  IG""  37'  west  longitude. 

Expeditions  were  sent  out  from  England  early  in  the  seventeenth 
century  to  this  point,  their  object  being  to  obtain  gold  and  ivory  in 
exchange  for  English  goods ;  but  the  attempts  at  forming  a  settlement 
were  then  frustrated  through  the  conjoint  operations  of  hostility  on  the 
part  of  the  Portuguese,  and  the  unliealthiness  of  the  climate.  About 
1723  a  British  factory  was  created  by  the  African  Company  on  the 
small  island  of  St.  James,  about  seventeen  miles  from  the  mouth  of  the 
Gambia.  The  principal  trade  carried  on  here  by  the  African  Company 
was  that  in  slaves,  which  for  a  long  time  received  great  encouragement 
from  the  British  Parliament,  and  was  generally  considered  as  a  blame- 
less pursuit !  In  168 S  the  fort  of  St.  James's  Island  was  destroyed  by 
the  French,  and  the  factory  at  that  spot  was  afterwards  abandoned.  A 
new  settlement  was  formed  in  1816  at  Bathurst,  on  the  island  of 
St.  Mary,  at  the  mouth  of  the  Gambia.  This  island  was  obtained  by 
purchase  from  the  King  of  Combo,  to  whose  successors  we  pay  a  yearly 
quit-rent  of  200  dollars.  We  bought  in  1820,  from  the  King  of  Barra, 
a  belt  of  land  on  the  opposite  bank  of  the  river,  extending  one  mile 
inland,  and  about  thirty-six  miles  along  its  bank,  and  this  gives  us  the 
command  of  the  mouth  of  the  river.  Another  purchase  was  made  in 
1840,  in  the  vicinity  of  Cape  St.  Mary,  of  the  Baccow  territory.  At 
the  distance  of  175  miles  up  the  river,  following  its  windings,  we  have 
obtained,  also  by  purchase,  Macarthy's  Island,  which  is  situated  at  the 
head  of  the  navigation  for  vessels  of  considerable  burthen,  the  trade 
beyond  bemg  carried  on  in  small  schooners.  Some  barracks,  a  mission- 
house,  school,  and  chapel,  have  been  built  on  Macarthy's  Island,  the 
population  on  which  amounts  to  about  800  males  and  400  females. 
The  Mandingo  town  of  Morocunda  stands  on  this  island. 


CHAP,  v.]  DEPENDENCIES  IN  AFRICA.  781 

The  population  consists  of  49  whites,  444G  coloured  people  (2398 
males  and  2097  females),  and  591  aliens  and  strangers. 

The  value  of  British  manufactures  exported  from  the  United  King- 
dom is  included  by  the  Custom-house  with  the  trade  of  Sierra  Leone,  as 
already  explained. 

The  remaining  British  settlements  on  the  continent  of  Africa  are 
situated  on  what  is  called  "  The  Gold  Coast."  Tliey  comprise  Cape 
Coast  Castle,  Accra,  Dix  Cove,  and  x\nnaraaboe. 

Cape  Coast  Castle,  in  5  iV  north  latitude,  and  V  10'  west  longitude, 
is  the  seat  of  government  for  these  settlements.  Accra  lies  in  5  33' 
north  latitude,  and  0^  5'  west  longitude.  Dix  Cove,  in  4^  46'  north 
latitude,  and  1'  55'  west  longitude ;  and  Annamaboe,  in  5'  12'  north 
latitude,  and  1"  7'  west  longitude. 

Cape  Coast  Castle  was  first  settled  by  the  Portuguese,  who  were  dis- 
possessed by  the  Dutch.  It  was  captured  by  the  English  in  1661,  and 
has  since  remained  in  oiu-  possession.  The  country,  even  in  the  imme- 
diate vicinity  of  our  stations,  is  represented  as  "  a  wilderness,  an  im- 
penetrable jungle,  wdiere  cultivation  has  never  been,"  The  posts  on 
the  coast  held  by  us  are  in  fact  stations  to  which  the  natives  from  the 
interior  may  resort  for  the  purpose  of  carrying  on  a  barter  trade.  Vie 
do  not  pretend  to  any  territorial  possession  beyond  the  actual  site  of  our 
several  forts. 

The  value  of  British  manufactures,  chiefly  arms  and  ammunition, 
brass  and  copper  manufactures,  cotton  and  woollen  goods,  exported  from 
the  United  Kingdom  to  the  diflijrent  stations  on  the  Gold  Coast  in  each 
year  from  1827  to  1841  was — 


Years. 

£. 

Years. 

£. 

Years. 

£. 

1827 

22,414 

1832 

65,291 

1837 

89,020 

1828 

41/JS.') 

1833 

86,263 

1833 

102,685 

1829 

4C,962 

1834 

107,627 

1839 

131.444 

18.30 

52,889 

183.5 

87,841 

1840 

136,877 

1831 

5'J,214 

1830 

142,063 

1841 

133^510 

The  returns  are  made  chiefly  in  palm  oil,  gums,  Guinea  grains,  "okl- 
dust,  dye-woods,  and  ivory.  "^There  has  of  late  years  been  a  consider- 
able increase  in  the  quantity  of  exportable  products,  and  consequently 
in  the  value  also  of  our  shipnaents  to  that  quarter.  The  quantity  of 
palm  oil  obtained  thence  in  1827  was  only  4962  cwt. ;  in  1831  it  had 
increased  to  16,750  cwt. :  in  1836  there  was  a  further  increase  to  22,042 
cwt.,  in  1841  we  imported  thence  42,754  cwt.,  and  in  1848  our  import- 
ation amounted  to  499,719  cwts.  This  result  is  attributed  chieflv  to  the 
success  that  has  attended  our  efforts  for  impeding  the  trade  in  slaves. 

The  population  of  the  district  within  the  direct  influence  of  the  British 
forts  along  this  dinsion  of  the  coast  is  roughly  estimated  at  from  700,000 
to  800,000.  They  are  Fantees.  Our  principal  trade  is  with  Ashantees 
from  the  interior.     Those  people  are  very  superior  in  intelligence  to  the 


732  PllOGRESS  OF  THE  NATIOX  [sicc.  viii. 

FaDtees  and  other  dwellers  on  tlie  coast,  who  have  most  probably  been 
demoralized  by  the  slave  trade  formerly  so  actively  pursued. 

Fernando  Po  is  an  island  in  the  Bight  of  Benin,  in  3'  25'  north  lati- 
tude, and  8°  50'  east  longitude  ;  it  is  of  volcanic  origin,  about  twenty- 
four  miles  long  and  sixteen  miles  broad,  and  about  twice  the  size  of  the 
Isle  of  Wight.  Its  surface  is  uneven,  and  in  one  part  rises  to  a  height 
of  3500  feet  above  the  sea,  to  which  circumstance  is  attributed  its 
comparative  healthiness.  The  island  was  discovered  in  1471  by  the 
Portuguese,  who  exchanged  it  with  Spain  for  an  island  off  the  coast  of 
Brazil.  In  1827  it  was  taken  into  the  possession  of  England  by  consent 
of  Spain.  The  position  of  this  island  opposite  the  Cameroons  river  and 
the  Amboises  makes  it  of  present  value  in  putting  down  the  slave  trade ; 
and  when  this  disgraceful  traffic  shall  be  suppressed,  and  the  inhabitants 
of  the  opposite  shores  shall  have  applied  themselves  to  commercial  pur- 
suits, Fernando  Po  will  acquire  a  greater  value  as  a  trading  station, 
where  Europeans  may  reside  with  less  danger  to  life  than  in  other  spots 
on  the  western  coast  of  Africa.  At  this  time  the  only  white  inhabitants 
are,  the  agent  of  the  AVest  African  Company,  a  surgeon  and  a  German 
settler.  The  black  population  is  variously  estimated  at  from  3000  to 
9000.  Part  of  these  are  from  Old  Calabar,  Bonny,  the  Cameroons,  and 
the  Gold  Coast,  together  with  some  Kroomen.  Tlie  English  settlement, 
Clarence  Town,  stands  on  a  headland  150  feet  above  the  sea,  which 
forms  the  entrance  to  Maidstone  Bay,  a  small  but  tolerably  secure  har- 
bour on  the  north  side  of  the  island. 

At  the  close  of  the  year  1849,  the  English  Government  obtained  from 
the  Crown  of  Denmark,  by  negotiation  and  purchase,  the  Danish  settle- 
ments on  the  Gold  Coast  of  Africa,  viz.,  Tacia,  Quittah,  Ningo,  and 
Addah,  which  settlements  are  now  made  to  form  part  of  the  stations 
under  the  Lieutenant  Governor  of  the  previous  possessions  of  this  country 
upon  that  coast.  The  object  sought  through  this  purchase  is  that  of 
gaining  greater  facilities  for  the  suppression  of  the  slave  trade. 


iiAP.  VI.]  inUTlSlI  AMKIiK'A.  7Sc 


CHAPTER  VI. 

BRITISH    AMERICA. 

Canada:  Population,  Lower  Canada— Increase  by  Immigration  —  Population  of  Upper 
Canada —  Imports  and  Exports  —  Sliipping — -Ship-building —  Fislicries — Agriculture — 
Manufactures — Mills  —  Internal  Navigation.  New  Brunswick:  Area  —  Population — • 
Imports  and  Exports— Shipping— Ship-building.  Nova  Scotia:  Population — Inequality 
in  the  Numbers  of  the  two  Sexes— Imports  and  Exports  —  Shipping — Ship-building — 
Fisheries— Harbours — Live  Stock.  Cape  Bketon  :  Population — Imports  and  Exports — 
Coals — Ship-building.  Prince  Edward's  Island:  Population — Imports  and  Exports- 
Tenure  of  Land — Stock — Ship-building.  Newfoundland:  Area — Fisheries  —  Popu- 
lation—Imports and  Exports— Shipping — Ship-building.  Hudson's  Bay  Territory: 
Boundaries— Extent.  Bermudas:  Population — Imports  and  Exports— Ship-buildings 
Shipping. 

The  dependencies  of  England  in  North  America,  exclusive  of  such  of 
the  West  India  islands  as  form  part  of  that  division  of  the  world,  are — 

The  Province  of  Canada— Upper  and  Lower. 

„  „         New  Brunswick. 

„  „        Nova  Scotia  and  the  Island  of  Cape  Breton. 

Prince  Edward's  Island. 
Newfoundland. 

The  North-west  or  Hudson's  Bay  Territory. 
The  Bermudas. 

The  capture  of  Quehec  by  General  Wolfe,  in  September,  1759, 
brought  the  province  of  Canada  under  the  dominion  of  England,  in  whose 
possession  it  has  since  continued  without  interruption.  This  important 
possession  is  bounded  on  the  east  by  the  Gulf  of  St,  Lawrence  and  the 
Atlantic  Ocean,  on  the  north  by  the  Hudson's  Bay  territory,  on  the  west 
by  the  Pacific  Ocean,  and  on  the  south  by  the  United  States  of  America. 
It  lies  between  42 '  and  53 '  north  latitude,  and  between  64°  and  143'' 
west  longitude.  It  is  usually  considered,  however,  that  the  western 
extremity  of  the  province  is  Goose  Lake,  near  Fort  William,  on  Lake 
Superior,  in  90  20'  west  longitude.  The  length  of  Canada,  thus  limited, 
from  east  to  west,  is  about  1000  miles,  and  its  average  breadth  from 
north  to  south  300  miles,  so  that  its  area  is  300,000  square  miles,  or 
two  and  a  half  times  that  of  Great  Britain  and  Ireland. 


784  PIIOGRESS  OF  THE  NATION.  [sec.  viii. 

Upp^r  and  Lower  Canada  contained — 

270,718  inhabitants  in  1806 
333,250        „         „  1816 

580,450         „         ,,  1824 

The  population  of  the  four  districts  of  Lower  Canada  in  1831  was — ■ 

Quebec 137,126 

Montreal      ....  284,6.50 

Three  Rivers    .     .      .  70,157 

Gaspe 9. .505 


Total 


501,438 


A  census  was  taken  in  1844,  when  the  numbers  were  ascertained  as 
under : — 


Lower  Canada. — "Whites 

Coloured  . 

Males. 

.     344,855 

140 

.     257,503 
2.409 

Females. 

346,077 

121 

224,383 
1,758 

Total. 
690,932 
261 

691,193 

Upper  Canada. — AVliites 

Coloured  . 

481,888 
4,167 

486,055 

Total      .      .      .     1,177.248 

The  increase  in  the  numbers  of  the  people  by  natural  means  is  rapid. 
The  ditFerence  between  the  births  and  deaths  in  the  six  years  from  1831 
to  1836  was  equal  to  an  average  annual  increase  of  2|  per  cent.  But 
this  increase  is  importantly  assisted  by  immigration.  Li  the  same  six 
years  the  number  of  emigrants  from  the  United  Kingdom  who  landed 
at  Quebec  and  Montreal  was  194,936.  The  greater  part  of  these  went 
forward  to  the  upper  province,  and  some  of  them  probably  crossed  over 
to  the  United  States ;  but  on  the  other  hand,  a  number,  probably  greater 
than  those,  of  British  emigrants  who  landed  at  ports  in  the  United 
States,  proceeded  onwards  to  Canada.  During  the  six  years  1831  to 
1830,  the  number  who  landed  at  the  port  of  New  York  alone  was 
169.354.  The  increase  altogether  in  the  districts  of  Quebec,  Montreal, 
and  Three  Rivers,  between  1831  and  1836,  was  70,789. 

The  population  of  Upper  Canada  in  1831  had  reached  296,544, 
making  the  numbers  in  the  entire  province  in  that  year  797,982.  At 
this  time  (1850)  our  Canadian  fellow-subjects  are  probably  increased 
to  1,250,000,  being  about  equal  to  the  population  of  Denmark,  exclusive 
of  the  duchies  of  Sleswick  Holstein. 

Our  trade  with  this  part  of  the  British  dominions  is  considerable. 
The  exports  exceed  in  value  the  return  shipments,  as  must  be  the  case 
while  any  considerable  number  of  our  countrymen  are  emigrating 
thither.  The  custom-house  accounts  do  not  indeed,  state  the  full 
measure  of  this  excess,  since  no  entry  is  made  of  the  greater  part  of  the 
property  taken  with  them  by  emigrants,  and  whiqh,  although  the  value 
may  not  be  great  in  the  individual  eases,  must  amount  to  a  considerable 
sum  in  the  aggregate. 


CHAV.    VI.] 


BRITISH  AMERICA. 


r85 


The  total  imports  and  exports  of  Canada  in  c.idi  year  from  1832  to 
1847  were  valued  in  offieial  documents  as  under : — 


Imports. 

Exports. 

\  ears. 

C 

£. 

18.32 

1,.')0:,719 

952,463 

1833 

1,00;-),  144 

965,026 

1834 

1,063,643 

1,018,922 

1835 

1,4'J6,378 

896,848 

1836 

l,941,0.-)3 

1,034,514 

1837 

1,602,3,')3 

908,702 

1833 

1,413,269 

968,599 

183'J 

2,137,374 

1,0J9,337 

Imports. 

Exports. 

\  t-AI^. 

•£. 

£. 

1840 

1,903,043 

1,625,085 

1841 

1,9.35,087 

1,884,. 328 

1842 

1,923,223 

1,-327,. 300 

1843 

1,126,536 

1,381,159 

1844 

2,384,196 

1,758,199 

1845 

2,599,960 

2,185,469 

1846 

2,362,844 

1,952,821 

1847 

2,161,923 

2,078,572 

It  thus  appears  that  during  those  sixteen  years  this  province  has  imported 
to  the  value  of  seven  millions  beyond  its  exports,  the  whole  of  which 
excess  has  been  drawn  from  England. 

Tile  value  of  our  cotton,  linen,  silk,  woollen,  and  iron  manufactures, 
that  found  a  market  in  Canada,  in  each  of  those  years,  was — 


MANUFACTURES  OF 


Years. 


Linen. 


Silk. 


Woollen. 


Iron. 


Total  of 

the 
foregoing. 


18.32 
1833 
1834 
1835 
1836 
1837 
1838 
1839 
1840 
1841 
1842 
1843 
1844 
1845 
1846 
1847 


309,170 
247,616 
173,347 
349,831 
473,160 
283,858 
249,872 
544,110 
423,024 
419,170 
388,622 
182,. 554 
520,895 
532,097 
402,751 
3J5,024 


£. 
54,320 
.50, 576 
26,733 
60,039 
61,235 
52,847 
43,9.36 
67,468 
90,697 
83,413 
70,633 
31,354 
72,804 
92,649 
77,451 
69,028 


£. 
62,339 
50,1'jl 
40,909 
58,988 
63,143 
50,222 
43,889 
95,772 
95,. 583 
64,857 
68,323 
29, 508 
65,. 307 
88,125 
103,611 
88,677 


229,631 
257,652 
1.33, 4'JO 
237,961 
303,166 
224,671 
193,859 
329,598 
261,583 
290,032 
305,846 
133,393 
354,084 
435,700 
4.32,421 
365,506 


£. 

68,246 

83,. 373 

56,663 

.56,884 

91,643 

64,839 

54,871  i 

111,604  i 

119,500 

1.37,859 

99,266 

34,168 

157,560 

183,4.54 

152,643 


179,389 


£. 

723,756 

689,408 

431,142 

763,703 

992,347 

676,4^37 

586,427 

1,148,552 

990,387 

995,931 

932,690 

410,977 

1,170,056 

1,332,025 

1,228,877 

1,097,624 


The  value  of  ashes,  grain,  and  timber,  the  most  important  articles  of 
Canadian  produce  that  were  exported,  was  as  follows  : — 


Years. 


1832 
1833 
1834 
1835 
1836 
1837 
1838, 
1839 
1840 
1841 
1842 
1843 
1844 
1845 
1846 
1847 


204,667 

174,281 

1  108,287 

I  176,231 

i  238,951 

'  180,571 

168,980 

142,457 

I  126,148 

:  121,733 

'  157.906 

I  189,009 

I  194,893 

134,430 

122,295 

80,481 


Grain,  &c. 


Timber. 


£. 

221,552 

241,720 

139,742 

39,590 

28,804 

15,331 

46,034 

32,052 

494,507 

660,908 

512,324 

277,737 

589,277 

675,454 

695,078 

1,064,907 


£. 
471,837 
489,367 
683,208 
620,182 
703,165 
651,786 
706,185 
880,403 
952,826 
1,019,745 
522,203 
836,383 
8it8,940 
1,325,886 
1,082,163 
873,850 


Together. 


898,0.56 

905,368 

931,237 

836,003 

970,920 

847,688 

921,199 

1,054,912 

1,573,481 

1,802,-386 

1,192,433 

1,303,129 

1,683,110 

2,135,770 

1,899,536 

2,019,238 


6   K 


786 


PROGRESS  or  TIIE  NATION. 


[sec.  VIII. 


The  shipping  that  entered  and  cleared  from  the  ports  of  the  province 
in  the  years  1832  to  1838,  and  1845,  were  as  follows: — 


INWARDS. 

Years. 

Great  Britain. 

Rritish  Colonies. 

United  States. 

Forei^ 

-n  States. 

Total. 

Ships. 

Tons. 

Ships. 

Tons. 

Stiips.  1      Tons. 

Ships. 

Tons. 

Ships. 

Tons. 

1S32 

860 

255,527 

1,162 

142,280 

780 

101,497 

25 

5,938 

2,827 

505,242 

1S33 

812  1  234,844 

1,155 

162,320 

994 

179,266 

19 

4,868 

2,980 

581,298 

1834 

931 

275,518 

1,157 

127,034 

771 

159,133 

20 

5,259 

2.879 

506,944 

1835 

947 

297,10.) 

*217 

*24,022 

1,349 

75,748 

28 

6,910 

2,. 541 

403,789 

1836 

953 

310,645 

1,093 

202,715 

910 

91,753 

44 

11,446 

3,000 

616,559 

1837 

854 

288,481 

827 

18'.i,862 

874 

90,847 

40 

10,496 

2,595 

579,686 

1838 

863 

306,241 

896 

152,443 

1,113  i     89,225 

46 

12,376 

2,918 

560,285 

1845 

1,350 

553,353 

*184 

21,855 

30  1     17,421 

135 

35,760 

1,699 

628,389 

OUTWARDS. 


1832 

962 

272,468 

157 

7,418 

883 

46,176 

2 

493 

2,004 

326,555 

ia33 

899 

260,967 

200 

16,977 

327 

68,623 

4 

1,G13 

1,430 

348,180 

1834 

1,024 

302,308 

180 

14,216 

399 

69,776 

9 

2,837 

1,612 

389,137 

1835 

1,015 

317,990 

218 

17,090 

832 

70,682 

9 

1,740 

2,074 

407,502 

1836 

1,092 

350,741 

230 

18,175 

419 

59,697 

1 

199 

1,742 

428,812 

1837 

980 

331,883 

164 

13,875 

432 

49,301 

1 

353 

1,577 

395,412 

183S 

955 

344, 153 

143 

11,939 

445 

67,816 

1 

34-3 

1,544 

424,251 

1845 

1,564 

625,716 

134 

9,254 

1 

76 

3 

1,361 

1,702 

636,407 

Ship-building  forms  an  important  and  increasing  branch  of  industry 
in  the  province.  There  were  built  and  registered  in  the  different  ports 
of  Canada  in  each  of  the  ten  years  from  1832  to  1841,  and  in  1845,  the 
following  numbers :  — 


Years. 

Ships. 

Tons. 

Years. 

Ships. 

Tons. 

1832 

25 

4,414 

1838 

33 

6,916 

1833 

29 

5,154 

1839 

42 

10,857 

1834 

32 

6,176 

1840 

54 

19,768 

1835 

26 

5,465 

1841 

64 

20,707 

1836 

32 

7,704 

1845 

44 

25,536 

1837 

32 

6,356 

The  greater  part  of  these  vessels  are  sent  for  sale  to  England,  and 
are  then  registered  in  the  various  ports  of  the  United  Kingdom.  There 
were  registered,  as  belonging  to  Canadian  ports,  at  the  end  of  1841 — 


Ships. 

Tons. 

Sailing-vessels— under  50  tons      . 

.     225 

6 

134 

„              above  50  tons 
Steam-vessels — under  50  tons 

.     236 

461 

1 

42 

767 
47 

48 

901 

„               above  50  tons 

8 
9 

_ 

983 

1 

030 

Total      . 

.      .     470 

49 

931 

The  fisheries  for  cod,  herrings,  mackerel,  and  salmon,  carried  on  from 
Lower  Canada,  furnish,  after  supplying  the  inhabitants  of  the  province, 


*  Sailing-vessels  only  included  in  these  years,  the  greater  part  of  the  trade  with  neigh- 
bouring colonies  is  carried  on  by  means  of  barges. 


cicAP.  VI.]  BRITISH  AMERICA.  787 

a  yearly  export,  chiefly  to  our  West  India  colonies,  to  the  value  of 
50,000/.  to  80,000/. 

Agriculture  must  necessarily,  for  many  years,  to  come,  engage  the 
chief  part  of  the  attention  of  the  Canadian  population,  and  if  even  the 
assumed  necessity  for  emigration  thither  from  the  parent  country  should 
cease,  we  shall  continue  to  find  customers  among  them  for  our  cheap 
manufactures,  although  the  commonest  articles  of  clothing  and  house- 
hold utensils  have  long  been  produced  in  their  cottages.  It  was  found 
that  in  1830  there  were  13,400  domestic  looms  in  Lower  Canada, 
estimated  to  produce  about  1,400,000  yards  of  coarse  woollen  cloth, 
1,000,000  yards  of  common  flannel,  and  1,350,000  yards  of  linen. 
There  were  at  the  same  time  in  that  division  of  the  province  90  carding 
and  97  fulling-mills,  3  paper-mills,  395  grist-mills,  and  737  saw-mills, 
many  whiskey  distilleries,  and  seven  iron  foundries.  Sugar  is  very 
generally  made  for  use  by  families  from  the  juice  of  the  maple-tree. 
In  Upper  Canada,  in  1834,  the  weaving  of  woollen  cloth  was  a  common 
occupation  in  the  cottages  ;  there  were  numerous  distilleries,  breweries, 
tanneries,  fulling-mills,  and  carding-mills  ;  the  number  of  grist-mills  was 
551,  and  of  saw-mills  843. 

The  growth  of  this  province  has  been,  and  will  continue  to  be,  greatly 
stimulated  by  the  advantage  of  easy  communication  which  is  offered 
through  the  navigation  of  the  St.  Lawrence  and  the  magnificent  chain 
of  lakes  connected  with  that  noble  river.  In  aid  of  this  natural  advan- 
tage some  costly  works  have  been  completed,  partly  by  private  enterprise, 
and  partly  at  the  expense  of  England.  The  most  important  of  th(!se 
works,  the  Rideau  Canal,  cost  this  country  a  million  of  money ;  it  is  135 
miles  long,  beginning  at  Kingston,  on  Lake  Ontario,  and  ending  at  the 
foot  of  the  Cliaudiere  falls  in  the  Ottawa  river. 

The  province  of  New  Brunswick,  which  formerly  comprised  part  of 
Nova  Scotia,  is  bounded  on  the  north  by  the  Gulf  of  St.  Lawrence  and 
the  river  Ristigouche  ;  on  the  south  by  the  Bay  of  Fundy  and  Chignecto 
Bay ;  on  the  east  by  Northumberland  Strait  and  the  Gulf  of  St.  Law- 
rence ;  and  on  the  west  by  the  state  of  Maine. 

The  area  of  the  province  in  square  miles  is  25,324. 

The  population  was — 

In  1806  about  35,000 
1816  „  56,000 
1824  „   78,000 

The  inhabitants,  in  1834,  were  found  to  consist  of — 

Males.  Females.  Total. 

"Whites    .     .     .     .     61,756  56,078  117,834 

FreeLlacks.     .     .  757  866  1,623 


Total     .     .     62,513  56,944  ll'J,457 


During  the  five  years  from  1835  to  1839,  besides  the  natural  increase 
of  the  inhabitants,  there  were  added  to  their  numbers  18,957  emigrants. 

3  E  2 


■88 


I'llOGllESS  OF  THE  NATION. 


[sec.  vin. 


A  census  was  taken  in  1840,  when  the  numbers  living  were  found 

to  be  — 

Males    ....    8o.s:n 

Females      .      .     .     75,271 


Total 


15G,lG-2 


The  trade  of  New  Brunswick,  in  each  year  from  1832  to  1847,  was  to 
the  followiuEf  amount : — 


Imports. 

Exports. 

Imports. 

Exports. 

Years. 

£. 

£. 

Years. 

£. 

£. 

1832 

531,875 

471,527 

1840 

845,680 

637,149 

1833 

54'J,215 

469,464 

1841 

842,577 

667,333 

1834 

567,719 

491,301 

1842 

328,794 

367,983 

1835 

621.511 

577,209 

1843 

427,794 

481,680 

1836 

863,783 

547,720 

1844 

672,489 

545,566 

1837 

730,563 

588,337 

1845 

893,413 

721,181 

1838 

720.042 

656,052 

1846 

861,468 

795,899 

1839 

1,011,546 

690,386 

1847 

925,958 

617,593 

The  value  of  imports  during  those  sixteen  years  exceeded  that  of  the 
exports  by  about  2,000,000/.,  tlie  greater  part  of  which  sum  was  probably 
conveyed  to  the  province  by  emigrants  from  the  parent  country,  together 
with  much  other  property  not  noticed  by  the  custom-houses. 

The  greatest  part  of  the  exports  of  the  province  consists  of  timber  and 
fish,  with  small  quantities  of  grain.  The  value  of  those  articles  exported 
in  the  foregoing  sixteen  years  was — 


Years. 


1832 
1833 
1834 
1835 
1836 
1837 
1833 
1839 


Lumber. 


£. 
384,900 
371.479 
417,773 
498,789 
475,431 
476,670 
568,857 
610,330 


Fish. 


31,130 
25,124 
26,395 
25,102 
25,295 
30, 550 
21,115 
24.610 


Corn,&c. 

Years. 

£. 

5,071 

1840 

5,786 

1841 

2,531 

1842 

1,709 

1843 

1,879 

1844 

2,630 

1845 

1,527 

1846 

3,975 

1847 

Lumber. 


544,862 
566,276 
321,275 
443,573 
513,604 
658,825 
742,926 
576,071 


Fisli. 


£. 
17,671 
17,146 
9,227 
10,193 
11,490 
11,377 
13,019 
14,521 


Corn,  S;c. 


£. 

5,738 
8,182 
6,204 
940 
4,081 
5,148 
10,784 
6,227 


The  shipping  inwards  and  outwards  during  the  years  1833  to  1839, 
and  in  1844,  were — 


INWARDS. 

Y'eais. 

Great  Britain. 

British  Colonies. 

U;;i' 

ed  States. 

Foreign 

Countries. 

Total. 

Ships.        Tons. 

Ships. 

Tons. 

>hips. 

Tons. 

Ships. 

Tons. 

Ships.         Tons. 

1833 

452      129,089 

1,615 

105,775 

829 

68,568 

6 

1,460 

1 
2,902  1  304,892 

1834 

472      137,796 

1,577 

92,280 

562 

46,637 

4 

868 

2,615  !  277,581 

1835 

637 

192,-5.55 

1,712 

86,892 

615 

45,852 

15 

3,589 

2,979  1  328,895 

1836 

512 

157,862 

1,919 

118,3.14 

543 

56,626 

19 

4,178 

3,002  1  337,060 

1837 

455 

156,579 

1,621 

108,514 

421 

52,614 

22 

4,868 

2,519  !  322,575 

1838 

567     207,907 

1,878 

127,648 

393 

38,601 

36- 

8,703 

2,874  1  382,859 

1839 

578     208,712 

1,123 

118,176 

944 

64,053 

37 

8,181 

3,482  I  399,122 

1844 

587 

220,135 

1,277 

80,809 

931 

112,513 

89 

19,333 

2,884     432,850 

VI.] 


BRITISH  AMERICA. 


7S9 


OUTWARDS. 

Years. 

Great  Britain. 

British  Colonies. 

United  States. 

Foreign 

Countries 

Total. 

Ships,  j      Tons. 

Ships. 

Tons. 

Ships. 

Tons. 

Ships. 

Tons. 

Ships. 

Tons. 

ia33 

613 

183,121 

1,565 

102,602 

625 

29,289 

3 

428 

2,806 

316,300 

1834 

654 

189,857 

1,453 

91,903 

218 

19,018 

1 

86 

2,326 

300,864 

1835 

816 

242,625 

1,388 

79,983 

287 

22,077 

2 

166 

2,493 

3U,851 

1836 

688 

219,259 

1,789 

108,435 

318 

18,670 

6 

671 

2,801 

347,035 

1837 

633 

224,238 

1,534 

94,262 

261 

18,244 

8 

1,231 

2,441 

337,975 

1838 

762 

266.566 

1,885 

109,234 

209 

18,645 

68 

4,760 

2,924 

399,205 

183J 

826  i  290,925 

1,899 

118,800 

798 

33,683 

4 

638 

3,. =527 

444,031 

1844 

828      2j3,358 

1,227 

65,649 

712 

39,339 

10 

831 

2,777 

439,177 

Ship-building  is  a  more  important  branch  of  industry  in  New  Bruns- 
wick than  it  is  hi  Canada.  During  each  of  the  ten  years  from  1832  to 
1841  there  were  built  and  registered  in  the  province  the  following  num- 
ber of  ships : — 


Years. 
1832 
1833 
1834 
1835 
1836 


Ships. 
68 
86 
87 
93 
94 


Tons. 
13,682 
15,450 
21,803 
25,309 
27,712 


Years. 

Ships. 

Tons. 

1837 

94 

24,957 

1838 

116 

26,931 

1839 

162 

43,091 

1840 

156 

55,618 

1841 

116 

45,555 

The  number  and  tonnage  of  sailing  and  steam  vessels  that  belonged 
to  the  various  ports  of  the  province,  at  the  end  1841,  were — 


Sailing-vessels— under  50  tons 
„               above  50  tons 

Sliips. 

335 

350 

685 

11 

.     696 

Tons. 

8,503 

106,370 

114,878 
1,362 

Steam-vessels  —  above  50  tons 

Total 

116,240 

A  considerable  part  of  the  shipping  built  in  this  and  the  other  pro- 
vinces of  British  America  arc  sold  in  England  after  conveying  thither 
their  first  cargo,  and  their  value,  which  does  not  enter  into  our  custom- 
house accounts,  must  be  considered  in  estimating  the  amount  of  their 
exports. 

By  far  the  largest  part  of  the  surface  of  this  province  is  still  in  a  state 
of  nature  ;  nearly  three -fourths  remain  still  ungranted  in  the  hands  of 
Government.  The  face  of  the  country  is  intersected  by  numerous 
rivers,  affording  cheap  and  ready  communicatiou  during  the  open  season 
between  every  part  of  the  province,  and  the  climate  is  in  a  high  degree 
healthy.  These  circumstances  point  it  out  as  a  favourable  field  for 
emigration. 

The  peninsula  of  Nova  Scotia  is  joined  to  the  continent  of  North 
America  by  an  isthmus  eleven  miles  wide,  which  unites  the  province 
with  New  Brunswick.  It  is  bounded  on  the  west  by  the  Bay  of  Fundy, 
on  the  north  by  the  Gut  of  Canso,  which  separates  it  from  the  island  of 


790 


PROGRESS  OF  THE  NATION. 


[rBC.    VIII. 


Cape  Breton,  on  the  south  and  on  the  east  by  the  Atlantic.  The  length 
of  Nova  Scotia  from  east  to  west  is  280  miles,  and  its  mean  breadth 
about  60  miles. 

From  an  early  period  England  claimed  the  sovereignty  of  Nova  Scotia, 
including  New  Brunswick,  by  right  of  its  discovery  by  Sebastian  Cabot. 
Early  in  the  seventeenth  century  an  attempt  was  made  to  form  a  settle- 
ment on  the  peninsula  by  the  French,  who  were  driven  away  by  the 
English  settlers  of  Virginia,  but  it  was  some  time  before  any  effectual 
steps  were  taken  to  colonize  it,  and  in  1667  it  was  ceded  to  France  by 
the  Treaty  of  Buda.  In  1710  it  was  captured  by  a  British  force,  and 
by  the  treaty  of  1713  was  fully  ceded  to  Great  Britain:  it  has  since 
remained  subject  to  the  British  crown. 

The  population  of  this  province  in  1806  was  65,000  ;  in  1816  it  had 
increased  to  73,000 ;  in  1824  it  contained  84,000  inhabitants ;  and  in 
1838,  when  the  last  census  was  taken,  the  numbers  were  declared  to  be 
as  follows : — 


Under  6  years  of  age 
From  6  to  14  years  of  age 
Above  14  years  of  age    . 

Total  .     . 


Males. 
17,294 
17,522 
51,305 

86,121 


Females. 
16,760 
16,079 
36,031 


Total 
34,054 
33,601 
87,336 


68,870  154,991* 


The  returns  did  not  include  the  population  of  two  counties,  which  in 
1827  contained  18,176  inhabitants.  There  is  further  reason  to  doubt 
their  accuracy  as  regards  the  numbers  which  are  given,  because  of  the 
great  inequality  in  the  numbers  of  the  two  sexes  above  14  years.  The 
proportions  found  in  1827  were  48*7  females  to  51*3  males,  while  the 
above  proportions  give  only  44*4  females  to  55'6  males,  and  there  are 
no  peculiar  circumstances  attending  the  province  which  should  occasion 
such  a  variation. 

The  trade  of  Nova  Scotia  in  each  of  the  years  from  1832  to  1847  was 
to  the  following  amounts  : — 


1832 
1833 
1S34 
1835 
1836 
1837 
1838 
1839 


Imports. 


£. 
765,167 
757,620 
700,127 
612,195 
733,540 
790,765 
923,563 
1,212,984 


Exports. 

Years. 

£. 

392,255 

1840 

431,385 

1841 

404,650 

1842 

455,547 

1843 

446,0.17 

1844 

478,461 

1845 

524,311 

1846 

642,849 

1847 

[m  ports. 

Exports. 

£. 

£. 

1 

,280,144 

742,592 

1 

,411,621 

877,639 

998,815 

642,079 

801,523 

416,537 

897,980 

3lt6,141 

862,626 

416,604 

828,066 

4.53,272 

1 

,031,835 

568,720 

The  shipping,   inwards  and  outwards,  in  each  of  the  years  1832  to 
1839,  and  in  1843  and  1844,  was— 


*  A  corrected  account,  including  the  population  of  Cape  Breton,  states  the  number  to 
have  been  178,237. 


CHAP.    Tl] 


BRITISn  AMERICA. 


791 


INW.VRPS. 

Years. 

Great  Britain. 

British  Colonies. 

United  States. 

Forei(,'n 
Coi^n  tries. 

ToUl. 

Ships.     Tons. 

Sliips. 

Tons. 

Ships. 

Tons. 

Ships. 

Tons. 

Ships. 

Tons. 

1832 

129 

32,310 

1,869 

124,026 

578 

52,867 

42 

7,637 

2,618 

216,840 

1833 

130 

32,053 

2,200 

145,424 

1,343 

112,893 

69 

10,597 

3,627 

271,995 

1834 

115     30,051 

1,2J7 

74,760 

967 

80,340 

38 

8,636 

2,417 

194.387 

1833 

100  ,  26,635 

2,285 

154,469 

833 

161,051 

25 

2,985 

3,243     345; 190 

1836 

108 

2i>,544 

2,295 

147,781 

965 

97,689 

36 

6,119 

3,404     381,133 

1837 

yi 

26,524 

1,986 

129,758 

882 

83,846 

57 

6,924 

3,016      247,052 

1838 

97 

30,208 

2,478 

162,170 

978 

101,325 

112 

12,360 

3,665     306,003 

1839 

97 

27,886 

2,517 

149,631 

1,211 

136,580 

181 

18,039 

4,006      .332,136 

1843 

144 

47,129 

1,869 

133,364 

1,281 

94,209 

215 

24,029 

2,509      298,711 

1844 

144 

46,133 

1,898 

133,719 

1,464 

114,804 

238 

26,584 

3,744     321,240 

OUTWABDS. 


1832 

111 

26,733 

1,957 

128,946 

648 

62,876 

32 

3,819 

2,748 

183:J 

124 

30,936 

2,149 

144,459 

1,466 

122,905 

30 

3,900 

3,809 

1834 

136 

31,906 

1,340 

93,278 

945 

78,040 

20 

3,165 

2,441 

1835 

117 

30,182 

2,430 

159,103 

876 

80,417 

29 

3,472 

3,452 

1836 

112 

30,931 

2,. 540 

170,407 

902 

90,399 

20 

2,783 

3,574 

1837 

89 

26,605 

2,171 

148,945 

841 

82,496 

31 

3,726 

3,132 

1838 

103 

30,459 

2,804 

189,962 

963 

100,572 

39 

4,150 

3,909 

1839 

102 

29,739 

2,815 

179,712 

1,266 

139,427 

49 

5,299 

4,232 

1843 

90 

30,249 

2,145 

165,745 

1,330 

102,977 

53 

5,609 

3,624 

1844 

124 

38,026 

2,118 

160,843 

1,549 

125,231 

67 

7,378 

3,858 

222,374 
302,201 
206,389 
273,174 
294,520 
261,772 
325,083 
354,177 
304,880 
331,481 


The  amount  of  shipping  built  within  the  province  in  each  of  the  ten 
years  1832  to  1841,  was  as  follows : — 


Years. 
1832 
1833 
1834 
1835 
1836 


Ships. 
95 
104 
103 
100 
114 


Tons. 
7,313 
9,475 
8,956 
4,. 531 
9.2S0 


Years. 
1837 
1838 
1839 
1840 
1841 


Ships. 
142 
182 
198 
199 
107 


Tons. 
12,6.59 
16,966 
19,4.35 
31,207 
23,904 


The  shipping  belonging  to  the  province  at  the  end  of  1841  was — 


Sailing  vessels — under  50  tons 
„  above  50  tons 

Steam  vessels — under  50  tons 
„  above  50  tons 


Vessels. 
1,181 
615 


Tons. 
24,437 
84,906 


109,343 


35 
117 


152 


ToUl 


1,799 


109,405 


The  fisheries  of  Nova  Scotia  are  of  the  greatest  importance  to  its 
prosperity,  and  their  produce  furnishes  the  most  valuable  article  of  its 
export  trade.  The  great  bulk  of  the  fish  taken  is  cod ;  but  herrings, 
mackerel,  and  salmon  are  also  found,  and  cured  for  exportation.  The 
value  of  fish,  grain,  and  lumber,  exported  from  the  province  in  each 
year  from  1832  to  1847  was — 


792 


PROGRESS  OF  THE  NATION. 


[snc.  VIII. 


Years. 


1832 
1833 
1834 
1835 
1336 
1837 
1838 
1839 
1840 
1841 
1842 
1843 
1844 
1845 
1846 
1847 


Fish. 


£. 
137,744 
149,046 
127,889 
155,801 
157,204 
181,961 
205,840 
233,075 
282,201 
281,037 
223,292 
218,359 
190,387 
204,227 
216,125 
335,472 


Corn,  &c. 


12,447 
25,652 
12,672 
51,660 
18,980 
11,768 
15,310 
30,180 
69,491 
86,629 
66,345 
10.6.56 
6;  030 
1,815 
24,386 
18.813 


Lumber. 


£. 

98,888 

82,142 

122,898 

115,148 

115,620 

143,736 

137,716 

143, 138 

117,244 

145,257 

73,390 

68,319 

91,009 

92,982 

82,9.56 

79,202 


The  province  of  Nova  Scotia  i.s  invaluable  to  this  country  from  the 
number  and  commodious  nature  of  its  harbours.  The  port  of  Halifax, 
the  capital  of  the  province,  is  entered  by  a  creek  sixteen  miles  long, 
which  ends  in  a  sheet  of  water  the  area  of  which  is  ten  square  miles, 
and  in  which  1000  ships  can  ride  in  safety.  Its  entrance  is  effectually 
protected  by  forts  erected  on  small  islands.  Margaret's  Bay,  also  on 
the  Atlantic  coast,  is  two  miles  wide  at  the  entrance,  but  widens  to  six 
miles,  and  is  fom'teen  miles  long.  At  the  south-western  end  of  the 
province  is  St.  Mary's  Bay,  four  to  ten  miles  broad  and  thirty-five  miles 
long.  The  Annapolis  Basin  is  entered  by  the  Gut  of  Digby  in  the  Bay 
of  Fundy,  and  is  one  of'  the  most  beautiful  harbours  in  America,  ex- 
tending ten  miles  parallel  to  the  Bay  of  Fundy,  with  a  width  varying 
from  one  to  four  miles.  The  Basin  of  Mines,  lying  at  the  extremity 
of  the  Bay  of  Fundy,  is  entered  through  a  strait  three  miles  wide,  and 
within  enlarges  to  from  eight  to  sixteen  miles,  extending  about  fifty 
miles  to  the  head  of  Cobequid  Bay.  Cumberland  Basin,  which  divides 
the  province  from  New  Brunswick,  forms  also  a  secure  and  capacious 
harbour.  Pictou  harbour  has  a  bar  at  its  mouth,  but  within  is  safe  and 
capacious  ;  and  there  are  other  smaller  harbours  along  the  north  shore  in 
Northumberland  Strait,  which  elsewhere  would  be  deemed  of  importance. 

A  considerable  number  of  live  stock  are  reared  in  the  province.  At 
the  census  of  1827  there  were  found — 

14,074  horses. 
127,642  horned  catUc. 
197,375  sheep. 

80,223  swine. 

The  number  of  acres  in  crop  in  the  same  year  was  327,676,  and  of 
uncultivated  land  there  were  9,668,801  acres.  Some  coal-mines  are 
worked  in  the  district  of  Pictou. 

The  island  of  Cape  Breton  is  a  dependency  of  Nova  Scotia,  from 
which  province  it  is  divided  by  the  Gut  of  Canso  and  St.  George's  Bay. 


ciiAr.  VI.] 


BKITISIi  AMEKICA. 


793 


It  is  bounded  on  the  nortli  and  north-west  by  the  Gulf  of  St.  Lawrence, 
on  the  south  and  east  by  the  Atlantic,  and  on  the  west  by  St.  George's 
Bay  and  Northumberland  Strait.  Its  length  from  north-east  to  south- 
west is  about  100  miles,  and  its  greatest  breadth  is  80  miles.  The 
population,  which  in  1806  was  2315,  in  1816  about  7000,  and  in  1824 
about  14,000,  consisted  in  1827  of  9435  males,  and  9265  females  — 
together  18,700  souls;  at  this  time  the  island  is  computed  to  contain 
about  27,000  inhabitants. 

The  custom-house  accounts  do  not  furnish  an  accurate  statement  of 
the  trade  of  this  island,  a  great  part  of  its  imports  being  included  in  the 
accounts  of  Nova  Scotia.  The  value  not  thus  included  durinc:  the  eicht 
years  1832  to  1839  was  as  follows  : — 


Years. 

Imports. 

Exports. 

Years. 

Imports. 

Exports. 

£. 

-C 

^ 

£.    - 

1832 

18,072 

31,891 

1836 

8,809 

34,460 

1833 

10,324 

28,608 

18.37 

7,591 

41,, 337 

18.34 

10,. 501 

22,188 

1838 

8,. 350 

33,546 

1835 

11,6G6 

31,03:) 

1839 

8,027 

42,859 

The  exports  consist  principally  of  fisli  and  coals.  Of  this  mineral 
there  are  mines  at  Sydney,  Bridgeport,  and  Little  Bras  d'Or.  The 
quantity  exported  in  each  of  the  above  years  was — 


Y'ears. 

Tons. 

1832 

21,855 

1833 

15,680 

1834 

8,374 

18.35 

9,955 

Years. 

Tons. 

18.36 

27,7.59 

1837 

32,701 

1838 

23,550 

1839 

33,199 

Ship-building  is  carried  on  in  the  island.  There  were  built  and 
registered  in  each  of  the  ten  years  1832  to  1841  the  following  number 
of  vessels  : — 


Y'ears. 
1832 
1833 
1834 
1835 
1836 


Ships. 
18 
22 
19 
17 
23 


Tons. 
1 ,  197 
1 ,  503 
1,111 
1.354 
1,613 


Vessels  under  50  tons 
„     above  50    „ 


Total 


Y'ears.            Ships. 

Tons. 

1837               17 

1,067 

1838               27 

1,145 

1839              25 

1,233 

1840               40 

2,3.52 

1841               23 

2,247 

he  end  of  1841- 

— 

Ships.             Tons. 

22               5,462 

18              3,969 

40 


9,431 


Prince  Edward's  Island,  in  the  Gulf  of  St.  Lawrence,  is  bounded  on 
the  south  and  the  west  by  Nova  Scotia  and  New  Brunswick,  on  the  east 
by  the  island  of  Cape  Breton,  and  on  the  north  by  the  Gulf  of  St.  Law- 
rence. It  lies  between  46°  and  47°  10'  north  latitude,  and  between 
ij^"  and  6-5°  west  longitude.  Its  extreme  length  is  140  miles,  and  its 
mean  breadth  is  about  15  miles.     Its  area  is  2134  square  miles. 


794 


PROGRESS  OF  THE  NATION. 


[sec 


This  Island  was  discovered  by  Sebastian  Cabot  in  1497,  but  no 
settlement  was  made  upon  it  by  the  English,  and  it  was  for  some  time 
occupied  by  the  French  as  a  fishing  station.  It  was  first  taken  into 
their  possession  by  the  English  in  1758,  and  has  since  remained  subject 
to  this  country. 

The  population  in  1806  was  9676 ;  in  1816  it  had  increased  to 
16,000;  in  1827  it  consisted  of  23,473  (12,211  males,  and  11,262 
females).  In  1841  a  census  was  taken,  according  to  which  the  inhabit- 
ants were — 


Males. 

Females. 

Total. 

Under  16  years  of  age 

.     11,580 

11,186 

22,766 

From  16  to  45  years    . 

.       9,456 

9,324 

18,780 

„    45  „  60     „ 

.       1,945 

1,726 

3,671 

Above  60  years  of  age 

.       1,082 

734 

1,816 

Total      .     . 

.     24,063 

22,970 

47,033 

Among  this  population  there  were — 


Deaf  and  dumb  persons    ....     30 

Blind 29 

Insane 78 


The  external  trade  of  the  island  is  very  small.     The  value  of  imports 
and  exports  in  each  of  the  years  1832  to  1839  was  as  under:— 


Years. 

Imports. 

Exports. 

Years. 

Imports. 

Exports. 

£. 

£. 

£. 

£. 

1832 

1,015 

8,267 

1836 

1,394 

11,610 

1833 

1,6V!3 

3,956 

1837 

1,946 

7,271 

1834 

2, 33  J 

10,693 

1838 

1,170 

11,918 

1835 

1,174 

9,029 

1839 

1,626 

13,628 

The  progress  of  this  island  in  improvement  has  been  checked  by  an 
extraordinary  proceeding  of  the  English  Government  which,  in  1767 
granted  very  nearly  the  whole  surface  by  a  gratuitous  kind  of  lottery,  the 
holders  of  the  tickets  to  wliich  benefits  were  attached  being  bound  to 
pay  a  few  sliillings  per  annum  for  each  100  acres,  and  to  settle  tlieir 
lands  in  the  proportion  of  one  settler  for  every  200  acres  within  ten 
years  from  the  date  of  the  grant.  These  conditions  have  been  mainly 
evaded ;  the  grantees  were  for  the  most  part  permanently  absent  from 
the  island,  and  settlers  have  been  unwilling  to  embark  their  capital  and 
industry  in  the  improvement  of  property  which  they  could  not  make 
their  own,  while  on  the  neighbouring  continent  there  was  an  abundance 
of  land  to  be  had  in  fee  simple  and  on  easy  terras. 

There  are  comparatively  but  few  immigrants  now  resident  on  the 
island.  Of  the  47,033  persons  hving  there  in  1841,  there  were  31,561, 
or  about  two-thirds,  who  were  born  in  the  colony,  and  who  for  the  most 
part  were  descended  from  Scotchmen. 


CHAP.  VI.]  BRITISH  AMERICA.  795 

The  soil  is  fertile,  and  the  climate  good  and  healthy  ;  the  island  is  in 
a  groat  luoasure  free  from  the  fogs  ^vhich  visit  the  shores  of  Newfound- 
land, Cape  Breton,  and  Nova  Scotia. 

The  great  bulk  of  the  people  are  agriculturists  and  stock  farmers. 
Tliere  were  on  the  island  in  1841 — 

9,861  horses; 
41,914  neat  cattle; 
73,643  sheep  ;  and 
35, 5:21  swine  ; 
10  breweries  and  distilleries  ;  87  grist-mills  ;  11  carding-mills  ;  and  83  saw-mills. 

The  number  of  ships  built  and  registered  in  the  island  during  each 
of  the  ten  years  from  1832  to  1841  was  as  follows  : — 


Vears. 

Sliips. 

Tons. 

1832 

42 

4,094 

1833 

44 

5,000 

1834 

34 

4,315 

1835 

40 

4,888 

1836 

33 

4,347 

Years,           Ships. 

Tons. 

1837               44 

6,715 

1838               46 

7,099 

1839              69 

9,986 

1840              77 

11,098 

1841              63 

10,797 

g  belonging  to  the 

islan 

Ships.              Tons. 

112              3,106 

80            12,967 

192            16,073 

end  of  1841  were — 

Under  50  tons     .     , 
Above  50  tons     . 

Total     . 

The  island  of  Newfoundland,  in  the  Gulf  of  St.  Lawrence,  lies 
between  46°  40'  and  50°  37'  north  latitude,  and  between  52°  40'  and 
59°  20°  west  longitude.  Its  extreme  length  from  north  to  south  is 
about  400  miles,  and  its  greatest  breadth  is  about  300  miles.  Its  area 
is  about  35,000  square  miles. 

The  value  of  this  possession  has  been  confined  to  the  fisheries  carried 
on  upon  the  "  banks"  in  its  neighbom-hood.  We  know  little  or  nothing 
of  the  interior  of  the  country,  the  settlements  being  limited  to  a  few 
stiitions  on  the  shores  having  reference  solely  to  the  business  connected 
with  the  taking  and  curing  of  fish.  Some  attempts  at  forming  such 
settlements  were  made  between  1585  and  1614 ;  but  the  first  permanent 
colony  was  established  in  1623  by  Lord  Baltimore,  who  proceeded  to 
the  island  in  person.  Another  colony  followed  in  1633,  under  the 
auspices  of  Lord  Falkland,  and  in  1654  Sir  David  Kirk  went  there 
with  a  few  settlers,  authorized  by  a  grant  from  the  Parliament.  Early 
in  the  eighteenth  century  the  island  was  taken  by  the  French,  but  by 
the  treaty  of  Utrecht  it  reverted  to  England,  and  has  since  remained  in 
our  possession. 

The  population  in  1806  was  26,505  ;  in  1816  it  was  52,672  ;  and  in 
1824  it  had  rather  diminished,  having  been  31,746  males  and  20,411 
females, — together,  52,157.     In  1832  it  contained  59,280  inhabitants. 


796 


PROGRESS  OF  THE  NATION. 


[sec. 


In  1836,  the  latest  account,  there  were  in  the  island  42,462  males,  and 
32,238  females,— together,  74,705. 

The  value  of  the  import  and  export  trade  of  the  colony  in  each  year 
from  1832  to  1847  was— 


Yeais.        Imports.       Exports.        Years.        Imports.       Exports. 


1832 
1833 
1834 
1835 
1836 
1837 
1838 
1S39 


£. 
573,872 
595,909 
556,087 
576,800 
579,799 
711,155 
580,384 
624,166 


£. 
594,486 
715,098 
663,264 
737,022 
787,099 
863,907 
727.5.59 
SlSjllO 


1840 
1841 
1842 
1843 
1844 
1845 
1846 
1847 


£. 
671,1.54 
665,815 
650,166 
667,739 
708,887 
6.54,  .503 
726,747 
760,324 


£. 
896,287 
908,103 
787.166 
912,773 
853,290 
875,151 
689,313 
806,819 


The  greater  part  of  the  imported  articles  consist  of  various  kinds  of 
provision,  clothing,  salt,  and  fishing-tackle ;  and  nearly  the  whole  of  the 
exports  consist  offish,  fish-oil,  and  seal-skins. 

The  ship})ing  that  arrived  at  and  left  tlie  colony  in  each  year  from 
1832  to  183D,  and  in  1844,  was  as  follows: — 


INWARDS. 

Years. 

Great  Britain. 

British  Colonies. 

United  States. 

Foreign 

Countries. 

Total. 

Ships. 

Tons. 

Ships. 

Tons. 

Ships. 

Tons. 

Ships. 

Tons. 

Ships. 

Tons. 

1832 

265 

36,067 

388 

29,454 

56 

6,104 

149 

20,719 

858 

92,344 

1833 

251 

35,171 

417 

33,012 

73 

8,787 

151 

18,872 

892 

95,842 

1834 

271 

39,365 

351 

30,845 

52 

6,733 

226 

30,339 

900 

107,282 

1835 

211 

30,821 

341 

31,983 

fO 

5,828 

249 

34,601 

851 

103,233 

1836 

186 

26,646 

313 

29,718 

39 

5,720 

262 

36,746 

800 

98,830 

1837 

191 

26,553 

419 

35,936 

22 

2,3.54 

293 

41,714 

925 

106,557 

1838 

138 

17,706 

262 

20,298 

24 

2,681 

393 

.53,997 

817 

94,682 

1839 

163 

19,390 

356 

28,064 

48 

5,207 

294 

39,000 

861 

91,661 

1844 

181 

25,652 

502 

44,816 

123 

14,813 

324 

41,858 

1,130 

127.139 

OUTWARDS. 


1832 

167 

12,128 

424 

28.749 

23 

2,727 

195 

24.700 

809 

68,304 

1833 

151 

18,. 515 

444 

41,544 

29 

3,515 

221 

27,386 

845 

90,960 

ia34 

2a3 

16,500 

443 

24,146 

25 

2,871 

270 

41,052 

971 

84,. 569 

1835 

1.56 

20,040 

402 

46,272 

26 

3,448 

249 

32,110 

833 

101,870 

1836 

145 

18,546 

376 

42,144 

18 

2,157 

246 

32,710 

785 

95,557 

1837 

1.58 

17,630 

474 

50,333 

9 

1,239 

249 

32,725 

830 

101,927 

1838 

150 

16,779 

437 

49,763 

9 

732 

236 

27,521 

832 

94,795 

1839 

136 

15,286 

419 

40,217 

20 

1,962 

259 

32,830 

834 

90,295 

1844 

119 

15,787 

601 

65,498 

29 

3,500 

296 

34,314 

1,045 

119,099 

A  considerable  number  of  small  vessels  are  built  in  the  island.  The 
number  and  tonnage  so  constructed  in  each  of  the  ten  years  1832  to 
1841  were  as  follows  : — 


years. 

Ships. 

Tons. 

1832 

34 

2,767 

1833 

35 

3,029 

1834 

26 

1,546 

1835 

€0 

2,428 

1836 

22 

1,232 

Years. 

Ships. 

Tons. 

1837 

25 

1,164 

1838 

'-     31 

1,.541 

1839 

17 

921 

1840 

30 

1,698 

1841 

35 

1,332 

CKAr.  VI.]  BlUTISIl  AMERICA.  797 

The  iiuniber  of  vessels  registered  in  urul  belonging  to  tlie  island  at 
the  end  of  1841  were — 

Ships.  Tons. 

Sailing-vessels— under  50  tons      ....     310  10,103 

„  above  50  tons      ....     415  34,273 

Total     .      .     .     725  44,376 

The  Hudson's  Bay  territory  is  a  tract  of  country  extending  between 
49  and  70  north  latitude,  and  from  Cape  Charles  in  Labrador  (near 
55  west  longitude)  to  the  Rocky  Mountains  and  the  mouth  of  the 
Mackenzie  river  (in  135  west  longitude).  This  territory  is  so  little 
known  that  its  area  cannot  be  given,  but  it  is  said  certainly  to  exceed 
2,000,000  square  miles,  and  probably  not  to  fall  much  short  of  3,000,000 
square  miles. 

The  description  of  this  immense  tract  belongs  to  the  province  of  the 
geographer,  and  would  be  out  of  place  in  this  volume.  The  only  pur- 
pose to  which  it  is  applied  is  that  of  hunting-grounds  for  the  Hudson's 
Bay  Company,  through  whose  instrumentality  the  markets  of  the  world 
are  yearly  supplied  with  the  most  valuable  furs. 

The  Bermudas,  or  Somers'  Islands,  form  a  numerous  group,  of  which 
only  five  are  of  any  importance,  viz.,  St.  George,  St.  David,  Long 
Island,  Somerset,  and  Ireland.  They  are  situated  in  the  North  Atlantic, 
580  miles  east  of  Cape  Hatteras  in  North  America.  The  western  point 
of  the  group  is  in  32  15'  north  latitude,  and  64^  50'  west  longitude. 
The  area  of  the  inhabited  islands  is  12,424  acres,  or  about  20  square 
miles.  Their  population  in  180G  consisted  of  10,000  persons,  of  whom 
nearly  one-half  were  slaves;  in  1824  the  numbers  were — 


Males. 

Females. 

Total. 

Whites     .     .     . 

.      1,8'J7 

2,751 

4,648 

Free  coloured    . 

312 

410 

722 

Slaves      .     .      . 

.     2,620 

2,622 

5,242 

Total      .      .     4,829  5,783  10,612 

In  1839  the  population  consisted  of — 


Males. 

Females. 

Total. 

Wliites     .      .     .     .     1,638 

2,428 

4,066 

Coloured  and  black    2,086 

2,781 

4,867 

Total      .     .     3,724  5,209  8,933 

The  climate  is  exceedingly  healthy,  and  an  increase  of  the  population 
by  natural  causes  would  certainly  be  experienced.  The  diminished 
number  of  inhabitants  must  therefore  be  owing  to  emigration,  which, 
considering  the  limited  nature  of  the  employments  offered  in  the  islands, 
must  be  resorted  to  by  the  natives. 

The  value  of  articles  imported  into  and  exported  from  the  Bermudas 
in  each  year  from  1832  to  1847  was  as  follows : — 


798 


PROGRESS  OF  THE  NATION. 


[sec. 


Years. 


1832 
1833 
1834 
1835 
1836 
1837 
1838 
1839 


Imports.      Exports. 


102,742 
86,145 
77,925 
100,783 
116,067 
105,794 
113,589 
124,884 


13,784 
13,522 
8,418 
21,3.53 
21,967 
25,945 
14,899 
21,258 


1840 
lg41 
1842 
1843 
1844 
1845 
1846 
1847 


Imports. 


£. 
130,800 
148,762 
147,783 
119,497 
131,844 
137,715 
130,217 
142,591 


Exports. 


32,231 

23,196 
21,797 
14,206 
25,143 
16,741 
18,831 
17,451 


The  imports  consist  of  a  great  variety  of  British  iiiauufactures,  with 
some  grain  and  flour,  and  miscellaneous  articles  left  by  vessels  putting 
in  for  repairs.  The  islands  afford  nothing  of  their  own  produce  for 
exportation  except  arrow-root,  the  value  of  which  is  small,  and  ships, 
the  building  of  which  was  formerly  more  successfully  followed  than  at 
present.  The  number  and  tonnage  of  vessels  built  in  each  of  the  years 
from  1832  to  1839  were  as  follows :— 


Years. 

Sliips.            Tons 

1832 

10                 804 

1833 

3               200 

1834 

No  return. 

1835 

6              393 

Years. 

Ships. 

Tons. 

1836 

8 

631 

1837 

8 

514 

1838 

8 

850 

1839 

8 

523 

The  difference  between  the  value  of  goods  imported  and  those  ex- 
ported is  provided  for  by  the  Government  expenditure  on  account  of 
convicts,  about  1000  of  whom  have  for  some  years  been  employed  in 
constructing  fortifications  on  the  islands. 

The  shipping  that  entered  and  cleared  from  these  islands,  in  each  of 
the  years  from  1832  to  1839,  and  in  1844,  was  as  follows : — 


INWARDS. 

Years. 

Great  Britain. 

British 
Colonies. 

United  States. 

Foreign 
(,'oiintijes. 

Total. 

Ships. 

Tons. 

Ships. 

Tons.     1 

Ships. 

Tons. 

Ships. 

Tons. 

Ships. 

Tons. 

1832 

8 

2,052 

76 

6,502 

65 

6,995 

6 

708 

155 

16,257 

1833 

8 

2,159 

76 

6,251 

57 

5,805 

4 

459 

145 

14,674 

1834 

7 

1,502 

74 

5,657 

53 

5,427 

1 

51 

135 

12,637 

1835 

9 

2,233 

71 

5,312 

50 

5,098 

16 

2,658 

146 

15,301 

1836 

10 

2,616 

62 

4,690 

48 

4,697 

4 

720 

124 

12,723 

1837 

8 

1,804 

53 

3,867 

45 

4,567 

16 

1,413 

122 

11,651 

1838 

11 

3,148 

51 

3,419 

47 

5,681 

16 

946 

125 

13,194 

1839 

8 

1,956 

45 

3,112 

42 

4,732 

25 

2,816 

120 

12,616 

1844 

27 

9,435 

54 

3,920 

80 

10,259 

33 

2,072 

194 

25,686 

■• 

OUTWARDS. 

1832 

102 

9,418 

48 

5,501 

13 

1,.522 

163 

16,441 

18.33 

2 

364 

84 

7,253 

50 

5,874 

6 

646 

142 

14, 1.37 

1834 

1 

58 

83 

7,256 

49 

4,837 

9 

1,101 

142 

13,252 

1835 

10 

1,900 

81 

7,227 

43 

4,509 

14 

1,4<)8 

148 

15,044 

18.36 

9 

1,661 

68 

6,063 

49 

5,129 

126 

12,853 

1837 

3 

552 

63 

4,879 

40 

4,063 

19 

1,507 

125 

11,001 

18.38 

4 

316 

61 

5,408 

47 

4,948 

22- 

2.427 

134 

13,099 

1839 

3 

520 

68 

5,13J 

36 

3,936 

9 

607 

116 

10,202 

1844 

2 

217 

81 

11,626 

95 

12,144 

18 

1,578 

196 

25,565 

CHAP.  VII.]  WEST  INDIA  COLONIES.  799 


CHAPTER  VII. 

WEST  INDIA  ISLANDS  AND  SETTLEMENTS. 

General  Description — Names  of  Colonies — Population — Imports  and  Exports — Trade  with 
the  United  Kingdom— Shipping -Productions— Slave  Trade;  its  Abolition— Abolition 
of  Slavery — Compensation  to  Slave-owners — Successful  Result  of  the  Measure — General 
liist  of  the  Colonies  and  Dependencies  of  England;  the  Date  and  Jlodc  of  Acquisition 
— Population — Forms  of  Government — Trade  with  the  United  Kingdom  —  Proportion 
which  the  Colonial  Trade  bears  to  the  whole  Trade  of  the  Kingdom — Colonial  Protec- 
tive System ;  its  injurious  conscqueucea. 

The  dependencies  of  England,  known  under  the  general  title  "  West 
Indies,"  comprise  the  islands  of  Antigua,  Barbados,  Barbuda,  Anguilla, 
Dominica,  Grenada  and  the  Grenadines,  Montserrat,  Nevis,  St.  Chris- 
topher, St.  Lucia,  St.  Vincent,  Tobago,  Trinidad,  Tortola,  and  the 
other  Virgin  Islands  and  Jamaica ;  besides  which  there  are  the  district 
of  British  Guiana  on  the  continent  of  South  America,  and  the  settlement 
of  Honduras  in  the  province  of  Yucutan. 

These  colonies  or  plantations  differ  materially  one  from  the  other  in 
their  origin  and  natural  features,  yet  in  their  relation  to  the  parent 
country  they  bear  so  intimate  a  resemblance  that  it  will  be  convenient 
to  class  them  together,  and  to  describe  their  trade  and  productions  under 
one  general  designation,  as  indeed  is  always  the  case  in  our  custom- 
house returns. 

The  different  West  India  colonies  now  subject  to  the  British  crown 
are — 


Name  of  Colony.  .  ^^te  <)f 

^  Acquisition. 

Antigua 1632 

Barbados 1625 

Barbuda 1632 

Anguilla 1650 

Dominica 1763 

Grenada 1763 

The  Grenadines 1763 

Montserrat    .......  1632 

Nevis 1628 

St.  Christopher 1623 


XT  i-  /-.  1  Date  of 

Name  of  Colony.  AcquUition. 

St.  Lucia 1803 

St.  Vincent 1763 

Tobago 1763 

Trinidad 1797 

Tortola  and  the  Virgin  Islands    .     1666 

Jamaica 1655 

The  Bahama  Islands     .     .     .     .     1623 

British  Guiana 1803 

Honduras 1670 


The  geographical  position  of  the  islands  in  the  above  list  is  between 
10°  and  23°  30'  north  latitude,  and  between   59"  30'  and  79'_  west 


800 


PJtOGRESS  OF  THE  NATION. 


[« 


longitude;  British  Guiana  lies  between  4  and  8' north  latitude,  and 
between  57  and  60  west  longitude;  Honduras  lies  between  16^30' 
and  18^  30'  north  latitude,  and  between  88°  and  89°  west  longitude. 

The  population  of  each  of  these  several  colonies  and  settl(!ments, 
according  to  the  latest  accounts,  is  as  follows : — 


White. 

Coloured. 

Total. 

COLONIES. 

Date. 

Total. 

Males.    1  Females. 

Males. 

Females. 

Males. 

Females. 

Antigua 

1832 

1,140 

840 

15,541 

17,891 

16.681 

18,731 

35,412 

Barbados    . 

1829 

8,049 

7,910 

40,371 

46,275 

48; 420 

54, 185 

102,605 

Barbuda     . 

,  , 

,  . 

,  , 

1,500 

Anguilla     . 

1824 

162 

*203 

1,'429 

1,872 

1*591 

2,075 

3,666 

Dominica  . 

1833 

382 

338 

8,475 

9,465 

8,857 

9,803 

18,660 

Grenada  and  the  1 
Grenadines  .      / 

1837 

1,840       1,964 

8,271 

8,919 

10,111 

10,883 

20,994 

Montserrat 

1836 

140           149 

3,233 

3,591 

3,379 

3,740 

7,119 

Nevis    .... 

1838 

•  •                             •  . 

,  , 

3,476 

3,958 

7,434 

St.  Christopher    . 

1838 

4,952  ;     5,483 

5,739 

6|308 

10,691 

11,791 

22,482 

St.  Lucia    .      .      . 

1839 

533  !         450 

6,153 

7,043 

6,686 

7,493 

14,179 

St.  Vincent 

1831 

1,301 

25, 

821 

27,122 

Tobago 

ia39 

.  •                             •  • 

5*  .502 

6, "246 

11,748 

Trinidad     . 

1837 

2,020       1,601 

17, "230 

18, "47  7 

19,250 

20,078 

33,328 

Tortola    and   the  1 
Virgin  Islands  / 

1835 

.. 

3,622 

4,109 

7,731 

Jamaica 

1824 

37,152 

166.595 

169,658 

373,405 

Tlie  Bahamas  . 

1839 

1 

.. 

.. 

11*539 

11,503 

23,048 

Demerara* 

1832 

3,006 

"1, 

877 

74,883 

Berbice*     .     . 

1833 

431            139 

10,914 

10.057 

11, '345 

10,'i96 

21,541 

Honduras  . 

1839 

200             35 

4,700 

3.000 

4,900 
Total 

3,035 

7,935 

820,792 

*  British  Guiana. 


The  declared  value  of  British  and  Irish  produce  and  manufactures 
exported  to  the  British  West  Indies  in  each  of  the  years,  from  1827  to 
1849,  was  — 


Years. 

£. 

Years. 

£. 

Years. 

£. 

1827 

3,583,222 

1835 

3.187,540 

1843 

2,882,441 

1828 

3.289,704 

1836 

3,786,453 

1844 

2,451,477 

1829 

3,612,085 

1837 

3,456,745 

1845 

2,789,211 

1830 

2,838,448 

1838 

3,393,441 

1846 

3,253,420 

1831 

2,581.949 

1S39 

3,986,598 

1847 

2,102,577 

1832 

2,433,808 

1840 

3,574,970 

1848 

1,434,477 

1833 

2,597.583 

1841 

2,504,004 

1849 

1,821,146 

1834 

2,680,024 

1842 

2,591,425 

The  value  of  the  produce  shipped  from  these  colonies  to  ihe  United 
Kingdom  in  each  of  the  years  1832  to  1847,  as  computed  by  the  colonial 
custom-houses,  was — 


Years. 

£. 

Years. 

£. 

1832 

5.020,145 

1838 

6,871,133 

1833 

5,169,878 

1833 

5,424,614 

1834 

6,064,786 

1840 

5,356.116 

1835 

5,728,916 

1841 

4,470,731 

1836 

6,675.424 

1842 

4,585,128 

1837 

5,947,596 

Years. 
1843 
1844 
1845 
1846 
1847 


4,961,566 
5,009,267 
5,027,563 
4,288,859 
5.768,926 


The  total  value  of  the  imports  and  exports  of  each  colony  in  the  years 
1832  to  1847,  according  to  the  custom-house  returns,  was  as  follows : — 


CHAP.    VII.] 


WEST  INDIA  COLONIES. 


801 


Is 

Vi 

IS 

$:! 

Is 

34 

(Jl)(^l)\||Os 

Imports. 

Exports. 

Imports. 

Exports. 

Imports. 

Exports. 

£. 

£ 

£. 

£. 

£. 

£. 

Anti?;na  . 

148,830 

169,244 

170,334 

183,285 

176,076 

371,. 370 

15arb;nlos 

461,308 

285,516 

438,679 

418, .351 

4.54,051 

624,085 

Dominica     . 

3.'),  570 

141,306 

38,421 

119,528 

36,8.58 

110,362 

Grenada 

111,605 

201,276 

114,17.1 

281,130 

126,776 

267,998 

Jamaica  . 

1,5'.I3,317 

2,814,-308 

1,519,452 

2,489,797 

1,58.»,720 

3,148,797 

Montserrat  . 

11,067 

21,517 

8,065 

18,885 

11,026 

36,. 523 

Nevis 

28,686 

28,871 

28,030 

44, 729 

27,304 

61,6.53 

St.  Christopher 

71,981 

101,148 

71,703 

102,378 

88,214 

1.37,963 

St.  Lucia 

35,958 

51,126 

34,723 

63,510 

42,834 

78,513 

St.  Vincent  . 

1.54,274 

255,343 

126,763 

283,170 

13S,.3.37 

307,251 

Tobago   . 

.56,399 

118,450 

54,731 

106,.o8:l 

.50,446 

106,773 

Tortoia   .     .     . 

5,932 

33,0.58 

10,006 

31,105 

4,756 

39,985 

Trinidad       .     . 

22 J, 697 

235,657 

287,453 

268,446 

252,518 

380,707 

Bahamas 

73,807 

68,156 

107,399 

76,614 

142,021 

92,802 

Demerara    . 

486,380 

1,386,104 

487,229 

1,577,615 

585,260 

1,261,767 

Bcrbice  . 

86,815 

3.32,933 

70,. 345 

258,954 

67,772 

267,338 

Total.     . 

3,591,626 

6,244,013 

3,567,512 

6,324,086 

3,793,969 

7,294,493 

1835 

18.36 

1S3T 

Antigua  . 

201,339 

236,861 

191,817 

175,808 

158,998 

73,049 

Barbados      .      . 

505,028 

578,739 

615,503 

636,853 

627,047 

787.344 

Dominica     . 

50,056 

45,624 

68,077 

78,282 

71,. 390 

74,871 

Grenada 

114,129 

204,795 

147,315 

201,080 

1.30,709 

204,822 

Jamaica 

2,018,965 

3,094,513 

2,108.60<; 

3,315,670 

1,956,. 540 

2,827,833 

Montserrat  . 

12,715 

19,249 

9,219 

19.069 

9,542 

7,775 

Nevis      .     .      . 

39,094 

33,575 

32,511 

34,885 

27,183 

12,203 

St.  Christopher 

110,337 

120,141 

98,344 

145,703 

118,271 

122,219 

St.  Lucia 

51,807 

79,872 

60,344 

69,040 

86,741 

74,185 

St.  Vincent  .     . 

130,  .559 

326,678 

1,55,522 

349,480 

178.415 

379,686 

Tobago   . 

58,705 

104,274 

73,947 

196,974 

09,763 

143,828 

Tortoia  .      .     . 

9,338 

23,215 

15,225 

23,129 

10,426 

24,729 

Trinidad       .      . 

315,850 

370,361 

469,208 

487,731 

443,572 

469,500 

Bahamas      .     . 

125,424 

108,928 

143,211 

88. 6  H 

190,113 

106,840 

Demerara    . 

615,106 

1,455,231 

770,833 

1,. 595, 137 

799,900 

1,326,308 

Berbice  . 

96,013 

315,936 

140,738 

499,042 

1.57,483 

.371,430 

Total.     . 

4,454,465 

7,117,992 

5,100,426 

7,916,577 

5,036,093 

7,006,628 

1838 

1S39 

1S40 

Antigua  . 

196,9.59 

378,. 337 

2.33,  a36 

353, 709 

191.185 

443,080 

Barbados      .     . 

7 17,. 554 

847,989 

783,775 

686,702 

599,139 

344,297 

Dominica     . 

50,472 

120,021 

44,275 

87,466 

61,004 

76,681 

Grenada . 

118,292 

266,277 

99,505 

201,132 

98,059 

170,786 

Jamaica  . 

1,876,. 566 

3,299,480 

2,244,4.50 

2,484.735 

2,183,917 

2,208,985 

Montserrat  . 

14,655 

21,248 

9,. 3.56 

21,312 

9.994 

24,227  ' 

Nevis 

32,918 

28.896 

31 , 757 

52,835 

27,005 

41,776 

St.  Christopher 

95,1.30 

180,161 

143,867 

185,626 

134,732 

217,403 

St.  Lucia      .     . 

60,143 

83,. 535 

7  7,. 507 

76,184 

66,078 

84.029 

St.  Vincent  . 

170,006 

339.025 

189,246 

299,325 

173,066 

202,109 

Tobago  . 

76,283 

139.171 

72,418 

150,5.57 

64,222 

1       118,819 

Tortoia   .      .     . 

10,540 

13,161 

6,200 

15,029 

10,964 

12,966 

Trinidad      .      . 

408,532 

494,199 

465,824 

3.58,945 

536,609 

361,645 

Bahamas 

154,484 

81.825 

132,;;06 

93,844 

123,773 

84,099 

Demerara     . 

851,399 

1,. 331, 390 

1,029,8.30 

1,091.582 

844,383 

1,5.55,664 

Berbice  .     .     . 

208,0.15 

348,546 

176,684 

2.56,122 

144,004 

a32,063 

Total.      . 

5,042,028 

7,973,261 

5,742,0.36 

6,415,105 

5,268,134 

6,278,629 

3    F 


802 


PROGRESS  OF  THE  NATION. 


ix 

11 

IN 

IJ 

IS 

V.i 

COLON!  i:<. 

imports. 

Exports. 

Imports. 

Exports. 

Imports. 

Exports. 

i           -• 

£. 

£. 

£. 

£. 

£. 

Antigua  . 

1       201,882 

295,343 

160.012 

267,032 

223,379 

369,217 

Barbados 

578, 474- 

410,371 

57 7, SCO 

424.513 

619.463 

5,56,943 

Dominica      . 

53,198 

50,917 

47,872 

64,357 

47,720 

56,455 

Grenada . 

114,505 

141,553 

84,251 

127,535 

84,679 

130.034 

Jamaica  . 

1,335,234 

1,909,744 

1,877,252 

2,231,112 

1,695,556 

1,847,147 

Montscn-at  . 

13,044 

28, 105 

10,297 

20,117 

12,008 

13,871 

Nevis 

23,728 

17,455 

14,379 

17,992 

17,954 

34,478 

St.  Christopher 

139,775 

136,842 

10:),701 

152,613 

115,578 

112,498 

St.  Lucia 

59.233 

99,312 

52,135 

10.»,960 

49,448 

77,754 

St.  Vincent  . 

138,124 

235,198 

124,642 

229,237 

102.208 

223,877 

Tobago  . 

59,249 

86,3r)0 

28,474 

83.083 

31,927 

69,010 

Tortola    . 

7,619 

18.968 

4,850 

13,139 

8,700 

8,999 

Trinidad       .      . 

532,734 

473,724 

386.158 

458,4'JO 

429,533 

407,141 

Bahamas 

108,823 

92,727 

128,060 

67.141 

105,618 

62,787 

Demerara     . 

76  9,. 56  5 

979,794 

601,593 

930,749 

646,012 

795,896 

Berbice  . 

116,656 

186,003 

69,927 

204,956 

69,219 

195,459 

Total.      . 

1  4,251,855 

5,162,446 

4,277,463 

5,402,026 

4,257,008 

4,961,566 

1844 

1845 

Imports.       [       Exports. 

Imports.       '        Exports. 

Antigua    . 

£.                         £. 
237  ,"905           407,946 

£.          j          £. 
251.350     ;       295,413 

Barbados . 

594,484     1       546,799 

654. 250     1       561 , 598 

Dominica. 

56,416             67,183 

62,694             70.089 

Grenada  . 

89,346           112,792 

97,522 

113,019 

Jamaica    . 

1,476,344     !  1,609,473 

1,553,421 

1,851,423 

iMontserrat     . 

7,097     ;         17,812 

8,557 

15,050 

Nevis  .... 

17,985 

51,565 

21,748 

49,364 

St.  Christopher  . 

135,816 

177,145 

159,221            194,087 

St.  Lucia  . 

65,637 

101,361 

63,052 

95,477 

St.  Vincent    . 

134,696 

210,239 

136,997 

189,241 

Tobago     . 

43.433 

85,946 

36,966 

83,412 

Tortola     .      .      . 

5,719 

12,214 

6,970 

15,753 

Trinidad  .      .      . 

437,411 

403,826 

449,991 

430,144 

Bahamas  . 

106,014 

86,3.30 

101,033             71,357 

Demerara 

602,028 

833,000 

742,363    ;      772,533 

Berbice    . 

Total,     . 

61,955 

225,579 

88,915 

219,597 

4,072,292 

5,003,267 

4,441,055 

5,027,563 

Antigua    . 

1S46 

184T 

200,311 

182,108 

195,846           374,887 

Barbados  . 

678,751 

51 2,. 524 

.546,272            737,988 

Dominica. 

5.3,416 

72,229 

49,914     i         78,665 

Grenada   . 

87,681     i       123,7.56 

95,270     !       160,805 

Jamaica    . 

1,419,845     !  1,478,709 

1,321,705     ,  1,937,645 

Montserrat    . 

7,512     1           7,001 

5,634             11,013 

Nevis  .... 

19,579              40,879 

13,481 

62,97Z 

St.  Christopher  . 

148,061            149,484 

143,779 

177,869 

St.  Lucia  .      .      . 

.56,3.33              79,551 

57,475 

111,889 

St.  Vincent    , 

144.617     ;       225.460 

126,434     i       275,469 

Tobago     . 

36,018 

66,783 

34,856     1       119,631 

Tortola     .      .     . 

6,437 

8,404 

8,352     1         13,711 

Trinidad  . 

494,365           497,317 

333,603     j       512,288 

Bahamas  . 

119,325              68,9.53 

101,844     ,         85,525 

Demerara 

801,956     1       649.025 

713.041     '       880,714 

Berbice     . 

Total.      . 

81,565     1       126,676 

58,n31            227,790 

4,355,840     1  4,238,8.59 

3,865,637     1  5,768,926 

CHAP.    VIT.] 


WEST  INDIA  COLONIES. 


803 


Tlie  number  and  tonnafre  of  shipping  employed  in  the  trade  between 
the  British  AVest  Indies  and  the  United  Kingdom  in  eacli  of  tlie  twenty- 
eiaht  years,  from  1822  to  1849,  were  as  follows: — . 


Years 

Iin 

.mU. 

Out 

«  arils. 

In 

.ar.:.. 

Out 

uaids. 

Ships. 

Tons. 

Ships. 

Tons. 

1    Ships. 

Tons. 

Ships. 

Tons. 

1822 

839 

232,426 

743 

208,099 

1836 

900 

237,922 

892 

238,915 

1823 

861 

2.33,790 

842 

2.32,717 

ia37 

855 

226,468 

913 

244, 546 

1824 

899 

244,971 

818 

2.38, 0J7 

1838 

878 

2.53,495 

894 

242,467 

1825 

872 

232,357 

801 

219, 4.U 

1839 

748 

196,715 

848 

219,6.52 

1826 

891 

243,448 

907 

251,8.52 

1840 

697 

181,731 

856 

222,817 

1827 

872 

243,721 

906 

248,. 598 

1841 

677 

174,975 

805 

2 11,. 536 

1828 

1,013 

272,800 

1,022 

270,495 

1S42 

714 

191,688 

896 

261,-344 

1820 

958 

263,338 

918 

252,992 

1843 

758 

206,2.0 

897 

2.53,698 

1830 

911 

2.53,872 

868 

240,664 

1844 

714 

195,440 

822 

231,667 

1831 

904 

249,079 

{;07 

249,051 

1845 

839 

220,. 538 

954 

263,273 

1832 

828 

229,117 

803 

226,105 

1S46 

658 

183,742 

812 

227,873 

18.33 

911 

248,378 

875 

241,. 384 

1847 

848 

243,338 

918 

268,790 

1834 

918 

246,605 

900 

246,603 

1848 

704 

199,589 

798 

237,2.58 

1S3.J 

878 

235,179 

862 

232,864 

1849 

750 

205,248 

828 

240,927 

The  pr(;ductions  of  these  colonies  are  almost  exclusively  sugar, 
molasses,  rum,  coffee,  and  cocoa,  and  pimento  from  Jamaica.  The  pro- 
ducts of  the  sugar-cane  are  obtained  from  all.  Coffee  is  chiefly  grown 
in  Jamaica,  Dominica,  and  Guiana  ;  and  cocoa,  the  growth  of  British 
colonies,  is  almost  exclusively  yielded  by  Trinidad  and  Grenada.  The 
quantities  of  those  important  articles  of  commerce  imported  from  oui- 
AVest  India  colonics  into  the  United  Kingdom  in  each  year,  from  1827 
to  1849,  were — 


Years. 

Sugar. 

Molasses. 

Rum. 

Coffee. 

Cocoa. 

Pimento. 

Cwts. 

Cwts. 

Gallons. 

lbs. 

lbs. 

lbs. 

1827 

3,551,218 

392,441 

5,620,174 

29,419,598 

549,688 

2,225,943 

1828 

4,313,6.36 

.508,095 

6,-307,224 

29,987,078 

4.54,999 

2,247,893 

1829 

4.152,614 

3G0,626 

6,9.34.759 

26,911,785 

684,917 

3,585,694 

1830 

3,912,628 

249,420 

6,752.799 

27,460,421 

711,923 

3,489,318 

1831 

4,103,800 

323,. 306 

7.844,1.57 

20,030,802 

1,491,947 

1,801,355 

1832 

3,773,4.56 

553,663 

4,713,809 

24,673,920 

618,215 

1,366,183 

18.33 

3.646.204 

686,793 

5,109,975 

19,008,375 

2,134.809 

4,770,255 

1834 

3,843,976 

650,-366 

5,112,399 

22,081,489 

1,-360,-325 

1,339,402 

1835 

3,524,209 

507,495 

5,453,317 

14,8-55,470 

43 J. 447 

2,-5.36,353 

1836 

3,601,791 

526.535 

4,868,163 

18,903,426 

1,612,304 

3,230,978 

1837 

3,306,775 

.575,657 

4,418,-349 

15,577,888 

1,847,145 

2,026,129 

1838 

3,. 520,676 

6-33,007 

4,641,210 

17,588,6.55 

2,149,637 

892,974 

1839 

2,824,372 

474.307 

4.021.820 

11,485,675 

959.641 

1,071,511 

1840 

2,214.764 

421,141 

3.780,979 

12,797,0-30 

2.374,-301 

999,068 

1841 

2,151,217 

4.30.221 

2,770,161 

9,927,689 

2,920,298 

797,7.58 

1842 

2,508,725 

471,759 

3,823,185 

9,491,646 

2,499,488 

1,643.376 

1843 

2,509,701 

605,632 

2,803,3)0 

8, .530, 110 

1,501,126 

2,028,6.56 

1844 

2.453,0.50 

-579,598 

2,. 506. 625 

9,280,278 

3,120,480 

294,672 

1845 

2,8.53,995 

491,083 

3,955,064 

6,189,077 

3,351,602 

2,996,560 

1846 

2,147,347 

477,623 

2,826,-373 

6,182.-527 

1,7-38,848 

;.23,888 

1847 

3,199,814 

531,171 

5,259,449 

6,763,103 

3,026,331 

1,-358.560 

1843 

2,794,987 

385,484 

5,653,840 

5,075,128 

2,602,309 

2,-326,576 

1849 

2,840.531 

605,623 

4.-329,640 

3,. 590, 839 

3.159.086 

2,273.9-36 

It  appears  from  the  Custom-house  statements  already  given  that  a 
gi-eat  part  of  the  value  of  the  yearly  harvests  in  these  colonies,  and 

3  F  2 


804  PROGRESS  OF  THE  NATION.  [sicc.  vin. 

which  arc  shipped  to  the  United  Kingdom,  remains  here,  and  constitutes 
an  addition  to  our  capital.  Tlie  balance  thns  remaining  after  the  ship- 
ments of  stores  and  manufactures  are  provided  for,  amounts  to  between 
two  and  three  millions  sterling  per  annum,  and  forms  the  revenues  of 
proprietors  and  mortgagees  resident  in  this  country. 

For  a  long  series  of  years  the  British  Parliament  gave  encouragement 
to  the  African  slave-trade,  and  it  required  a  struggle  of  twenty  years 
on  the  part  of  a  band  of  zealous  philanthropists,  at  the  head  of  whom 
were  the  venerable  Thomas  Clarkson  and  the  late  Mr.  "Wilberforce, 
sufficiently  to  arouse  the  land  to  the  enormity  of  this  national  sin,  and 
to  procure  the  passing  of  a  law  for  its  abolition.  In  May,  1787,  the 
first  committee  was  formed  for  the  purpose  of  procuring  and  publishing 
information  tending  to  the  abolition  of  the  African  slave-trade.  This 
self-constituted  body  consisted  of  Clarkson,  Granville  Sharp,  Pliilip 
Sansom,  and  nine  more  members  of  the  Society  of  Friends.  In  the 
following  year  numerous  petitions  against  the  continuance  of  the  traffic 
were  presented  to  Parliament :  motion  after  motion  was  made  upon  the 
subject  in  the  House  of  Commons,  where  year  after  year  the  minister, 
who  seemed  to  command  overwhelming  majorities  in  favour  of  every 
other  measure  advocated  by  him,  was  out-voted  in  his  advocacy  of  the 
cause  of  huiuanity  ;  and  it  was  reserved  for  the  administration  that  suc- 
ceeded to  office  on  the  death  of  Mr.  Pitt  to  carry  through  Parliament  a 
Bill  for  abolishing  the  African  slave-trade.  Tlie  perfecting  of  this  mea- 
sure by  giving  to  it  the  royal  assent  was  literally  the  last  Parliamentary 
act  of  Lord  Grenville's  administration,  their  seals  of  office  having  been 
given  up  to  the  king  on  the  very  same  day  in  which  this  Act  was  made 
the  law  of  the  land. 

It  was  at  that  time  confidently  predicted  by  those  who  had  resisted 
this  measure  that  it  must  insure  the  ruin  of  our  sugar  colonies.  May 
we  not  draw  from  the  signal  failure  of  this  prediction  a  well-gi'ounded 
hope  that  the  further  measure  of  justice  to  the  negro  perfected  by  the 
abolition  of  slavery  itself  throughout  the  British  dominions  on  the  1st  of 
August,  1838,  will  in  the  end  prove  as  little  productive  of  evil  to  those 
colonies  as  was  the  measure  of  1807  ? 

On  the  28th  of  August,  1833,  an  Act  was  passed  for  the  abolition  of 
slavery  throughout  the  British  colonies.  Under  this  Act  the  name  of 
slave  ceased  on  the  1st  of  August,  1834 ;  those  who  previously  stood  in 
that  relation  becoming  "  apprenticed  labourers"  to  the  persons  who  had 
been  entitled  to  their  services  as  slaves.  This  period  of  apprenticeship 
as  to  continue  in  the  case  of  household  slaves  until  the  1st  of  August 
1838,  but  in  the  case  of  prjedial  labourers,  comprising  all  usually  em- 
ployed in  agriculture,  the  apprenticeship  was  to^be  continued  until  the 
1st  of  August,  1840.  So  strongly,  however,  had  the  people  of  England 
become  convinced  of  the  sinfulness  of  holding  their  fellovr-creatures  in 


CHAl'.    VII.J 


WEST  INDIA  C.'OI.ONIKS. 


805 


bondage,  that  even  the  modified  condition  of  apprenticeship,  although  it 
had  taken  from  tlie  master  all  the  more  hateful  attributes  of  ownership, 
was  intolerable  to  them  ;  and  a  degree  of  moral  compulsion  was  used 
under  which  the  colonial  legislatures  were  induced  to  anticipate  the 
period  of  perfect  freedom,  and  the  labouring  ])opulation  throughout  our 
West  India  colonies  were  admitted  to  the  full  rights  of  citizi^nship  on 
the  1st  of  August,  1838. 

This  glorious  act  of  raising  770,000  human  beings  from  a  condition 
in  which  they  were  legally  considered  as  chattels,  and  could  be  bought 
and  sold  as  so  many  beasts  of  burden,  to  a  state  of  equality  before  the 
law  with  their  former  owners,  was  bought  for  them  at  the  pi'ice  of  twenty 
millions  sterling  by  the  British  nation,  who  thus  gave  unquestionable 
testimony  to  their  feelings  of  genuine  philanthropy,  while  they  proved 
their  sense  of  justice  by  compensating  those  who  would  otherw'ise  have 
suffered  individually  for  the  expiation  of  a  national  sin. 

The  number  of  slaves  in  respect  of  whom  their  owners  received  com- 
))ensation  by  means  of  this  Parliamentary  Grant  of  twenty  millions  was 
770,280,  of  whom  35,742  belonged  to  the  Cape  of  Good  Hope,  4026 
to  Bermuda,  and  60,613  to  Mauritius.  The  remaining  663,899  were 
located  in  the  several  West  India  colonies.  The  number  of  slaves  in 
each  colony,  with  the  average  rates  of  compensation  awarded  to  their 
former  owners^  and  the  amount  of  money  thus  distributed  to  the  several 
colonies,  were  as  follows  : — 


COLONIES. 


Antigua 
Bahamas     . 
Barbados    . 
Dominica    . 
Grenada 
Guiana  . 
Honduras   . 
.Tamaica 
Montserrat 
Nevis    . 
St.  Christopher 
St.  Lucia    . 
St.  Vincent 
Tobago . 
Trinidad     . 
Virgin  Islands 

Total 


Number 

of 
Slaves. 


Compensation  Apportioned. 


Average  Kates.  Total  Amount 


29,121 
10,086 
83,150 
14,175 
23,638 
82,824 

1,901 
311,070 

6,401 

8,815 
19,780 
13,2.11 
22,266 
11,589 
20,657 

5,135 


i.  s. 
14  12 
12  14 
20  13 
19  8 
26  1 
51  17 
53  6 
19  15 

16  3  7 

17  2  7 
16  13  0 


25  3 

26  10 
20  3 
50  1 


14  2  11 


663,899 


24  18  11 


425,547 
128,296 

1,719,980 
275,547 
616,255 

4,294,983 
101,399 

6,149,937 
103,556 
151,(X)6 
329,393 
334,495 
.590,779 
233,875 

1,033,992 
72,638 


16,. 56 1,684 


A  large  part  of  this  compensation  money  was  applied  to  the  extinction 
of  mortgage-debts  owing  to  merchants  in  England,  and  was  thus  doubly 
advantageous  to  the  planters,  who  were  thereby  fi*ee  from  obligations 
extremely  onerous,  and  which  in  various  ways  intercepted  the  benefits 
of  ownership. 


806  PKOGRESS  OF  THE  NATION.  [sec.  \nu 

The  different  rates  of  compensation  awarded  to  the  slave-owners  in 
the  several  colonies,  and  which  varied  from  12/.  14^.  4(Z.  per  head  in 
the  Bahamas  to  53/.  Qs.  9(/.  in  the  colony  of  Honduras,  were  propor- 
tioned to  the  average  sale-value  of  slaves  in  the  various  colonies  during 
the  years  between  1822  and  1830,  the  compensation  amounting  to  a 
small  fraction  below  45  per  cent,  of  such  sale-value.  It  must  not  be 
imagined  that  the  nation  having  thus  paid  only  that  proportion  of  the 
value,  the  former  owners  were  losers  of  the  remaining  proportion  of  55  per 
cent.  During  the  continuance  of  slavery,  if  an  owner  sold  the  labourers 
from  his  plantation,  he  had  no  labour  market  whence  to  hire  substitutes 
for  the  cultivation  of  his  estate,  and,  practically,  the  value  of  land  in 
the  sugar  colonies  resided  in  the  negroes  attached  to  it ;  but  when  the 
general  measure  of  emancipation  was  perfected  this  state  of  things  was 
altogether  changed  ;  the  former  owners  had  among  them  the  same  num- 
ber of  labourers  whose  services  they  might  engage,  the  difference  to 
them  being  simply  this  :  that  with  45  per  cent,  of  the  former  exchangeable 
value  of  the  labourers  in  their  pockets,  and  relieved  from  all  necessity  of 
providing  for  their  wants  in  sickness,  intirmiry,  and  old  age,  they  had  to 
support  them  by  means  of  daily  wages  paid  to  the  able-bodied  for  services 
performed,  the  rate  of  which  wages  must  be  regulated,  as  in  every  other 
country,  by  the  supply  and  the  demand.  It  was  a  favourite  plea  wnth 
those  who  were  opposed  to  the  abolition  of  slavery  that  the  expenses  of 
the  planters  in  supporting  the  old  and  the  infant,  and  the  sickly,  while 
they  had  the  services  only  of  those  among  the  ])opulation  who  were 
healthy,  and  of  ages  during  which  labom*  was  practicable,  amounted  to 
at  least  as  much  as  the  wages  they  would  have  to  pay  if  the  institution 
of  slavery  were  abolished  ;  and  if  there  were  any  true  foundation  for  such 
a  plea,  unquestionably  the  law  which,  in  placing  them  in  those  altered 
circumstances,  provided  the  employers  with  so  large  a  fund  out  of 
which  to  pay  their  labourers,  bestowed  upon  the  former  a  very  import- 
ant boon. 

It  could  not  reasonably  be  expected  that  a  great  social  revolution, 
such  as  the  act  of  emancipation  brought  about  in  these  colonies,  would 
pass  unaccompanied  by  some  inconvenience,  and  that  time  would  not 
be  required  in  order  to  the  right  adjustment  of  things  between  the 
different  classes  under  such  altered  circumstances.  The  inconveniences 
which  have  arisen  proved,  however,  much  less  formidable  than  the  most 
sanguine  fi'iends  to  the  measure  of  emancipation  ventured  to  expect ; 
and  whatever  those  inconveniences  were,  they  are  fast  disappearing. 
The  conduct  of  the  emancipated  negroes  has  been  most  exemplary. 
The  heaviest  charge  brought  against  them  is  that  of  demanding  exor- 
bitant rates  of  wages,  a  charge  which  calls  for  no  word  of  refutation, 
since  it  must  be  out  of  their  power  to  enforce  it,  or  to  insist  upon  any 
payment  beyond  that  which  circumstances  render  equitable.     It  is  no 


CHAI'.    VII.] 


BRITISH  COLONIES,  ETC. 


807 


more  In  their  power  than  it  is  in  tlie  power  of  the  farm-labourer  or  the 
hand-loom  weaver  in  EnG;land  to  fix  the  rate  of  waetes. 

The  very  great  dillvrence  in  the  sale-value  of  slaves  observable  in  the 
different  colonies  previous  to  emancipation  was  chiefly  the  result  of  a 
law  passed  for  the  registration  of  slaves,  and  which  forbade  their  transfer 
from  one  colony  to  another, — a  measure  framed  in  a  beneficent  spirit, 
but  the  wisdom  of  which  was  very  questionable.  In  the  Bahamas,  where 
the  slave  population  was  redundant,  labour  was  necessarily  cheap,  and 
the  value  of  those  by  whom  it  must  be  performed  was  low.  In  Guiana, 
on  the  other  hand,  and  in  Trinidad,  where  there  was  an  abundance  of 
fertile  land  to  be  reclaimed,  the  number  of  labourers  was  quite  inade- 
quate, and  their  value  proportionally  high.  There  would  have  been 
great  ad\antage  to  the  owners,  and,  under  proper  regulations,  no  hard- 
ship upon  the  negroes,  to  have  removed  them  from  places  where  their 
labour  was  not  needed  to  colonies  where  it  could  be  profitably  em- 
ployed. Since  the  measure  of  fi-eedom  has  been  consummated,  such 
changes  have  taken  place  to  a  great  extent,  and  with  mutual  advantage 
to  both  classes. 

The  inhabitants  of  Antigua,  in  which  island  there  was  an  abundance 
of  labourers,  so  that  their  average  sale-value  between  1822  and  1830 
was  only  32/.  12^.  lOd.  per  head,  quickly  perceived  the  advantages  they 
might  draw  from  the  measure  of  1833,  and  by  an  act  of  the  island 
legislature  granted  immediate  emancipation  to  their  slaves,  without  sub- 
jecting them  to  the  intermediate  step  of  apprenticeship.  This  island  is 
most  of  all  the  West  India  colonics  dependent  upon  the  seasons  for  the 
abundance  of  its  crops,  since  there  is  not  in  the  whole  of  its  area  a 
stream  or  spring  of  water  to  be  found.  With  this  fact  in  view  it  will  be 
seen  from  the  following  figures  that  its  harvests  have  not  fallen  short  by 
reason  of  tl)is  act  of  its  legislature. 

The  quantities  of  sugar,  molasses,  and  rum  imported  into  the  United 
Kingdom  from  Antigua  in  each  of  the  eighteen  years,  from  1832  to 
184it,  were  as  follows  : — 


Sugar. 


1832 
1833 
1834 
183,^) 
1836 
1837 
1833 
1839 
1840 


Crtfs. 
14;3,336 
129,519 
257,177 
174,818 
135,482 

62,170 
203,043 
222,689 
203,071 


Molasses. 


Cwts. 
!37,889 
67,181 
87,882 
75,985 
54.370 
26,993 
97,614 
104,034 
96,117 


Rur 


Gallons. 
29,173 
34,932 
71,445 
67,051 
7,731 
11,538 
29,171 
.55,958 
75,  .592 


1841 
1842 
1843 
1844 
1845 
1846 
1847 
1848 
1849 


Sugar. 


Cwts. 
144,103 
147,414 
173,401 
225.150 
210,013 
102,644 
240,259 
161,891 
188,986 


Molasses. 


Cwts. 

75,551 

75,124 

79,962 

104,243 

100,934 

46,205 

105,683 

63,287 

90,003 


Rum. 


Gallons. 
14,906 
48,078 

2,0)2 
22.513 
16; 120 

4,110 
60,334 
40,9.58 
42,764 


The  importance  to  the  United  Kingdom  of  the  trade  which  it  carries 
on  with  its  colonies  and  dependencies  in  the  four  quarters  of  the  globe, 
when  compared  with  that  which  it  carries  on  with  the   whole  world, 


8US 


PROGRESS  OF  THE  NATIOX. 


[SE(J.    VIII. 


including  those  colonies,  will  be  seen  from  the  following  statement, 
wherein  is  shown  the  real  value  of  the  products  of  British  industry 
exported  to  the  world  at  large,  and  of  the  part  exported  to  our  colonies, 
together  with  the  number  and  tonnage  of  the  shipping  employed  in  prose- 
cuting the  trade,  during  each  of  the  years  from  1832  to  1849. 

DECLARED  VAf-UE  OF  HRmSH  MANL'FACTLRES  EXPOUTED. 


Years. 

To  aU  the  World. 

To  British  Colonies. 

Ye.irs. 

To  all  the  World. 

To  British  Colonies, 

f 

£. 

£. 

£. 

1S32 

36,450.594 

10,140,979 

1841 

51,634,623 

15,153,632 

1833 

3J, 667, 347 

10,390,452 

1842 

47,381,023 

13,361,820 

1834 

42,649,191 

9,521,555 

1843 

.52,278,449 

15,051,420 

1835 

47,372,270 

11,175,746 

1844 

58,584,292 

16,506,366 

1836 

53,368,572 

14,079,642 

1845 

60,111,082 

16,857,394 

1837 

42,070,744 

12,633.660 

1846 

57,786,876 

16,959,503 

1838 

50,060,970 

13,581,850 

1847 

58,842,-377 

14,913,598 

183t 

53,233,580 

16,279,103 

1848 

52,849,445 

12,834,572 

1840 

51,406,430 

17,378,550 

1849 

63,. 596, 025 

15,712,595 

NUMBER  AND  TONNAGE  OF  SHIPPING. 


To  all  the  World. 

To  British  Colonies. 

Years. 

Inwards. 

Outwards. 

Inwards. 

Outwards. 

Ships. 

Tons. 

Ships. 

Tons. 

Ships. 

Tons. 

Ships- 

Tons. 

1832 

17,918 

2,825,959 

17,683 

2,880.492 

5,442 

1,009,317 

5,423 

1,021,892 

1833 

18,624 

2,945,839 

18,516 

3,002,875 

5,440 

1,045,514 

5,466 

1,018,926 

1834 

19,797 

3,132,168 

19,462 

3,149,1.52 

5,813 

1,081,277 

5,685 

1,081,328 

1835 

20,300 

3,303,724 

19,995 

3,325,211 

6,064 

1,200,933 

5,785 

1,152,349 

1836 

21,473 

3,494,372 

21,255 

3,. 566, 697 

5.829 

1,179.381 

5,714 

1,170,650 

1837 

22,498 

3,623,106 

22,028 

3.583,965 

6.051 

1,220,827 

5,707 

1,139,586 

1838 

24,798 

3,937,053 

24,427 

4,039,033 

6,334 

1,269,391 

5,9-54 

1,284,611 

1833 

27,961 

4,433,015 

27,764 

4.494,707 

6,-578 

1,334,412 

6,190 

1,287,-506 

1840 

28,081 

4,657,795 

23,073 

4,781,872 

6,825 

1,425,172 

6,663 

1,495,9-57 

1841 

28,052 

4,652,376 

28,250 

4,766.171 

6,868 

1,534.890 

6,696 

1,529,947 

1842 

27,041 

4,500,028 

27,160 

4.627,446 

6,186 

1,228,052 

5,672 

1,228,795 

1843 

28,041 

4,847.296 

23,043 

4,977,266 

6,791 

1,482,341 

6,546 

1.493,955 

1844 

23,295 

5,049,601 

29,604 

5,297,168 

6,465 

1,476,262 

6,531 

1,576,965 

1845 

32,652 

6,045,718 

32,527 

6, 031,. 587 

7.346 

2,035,075 

6,340 

1,818,270 

1846 

33,821 

6,101,015 

34,402 

6,314,571 

6,266 

1,782,291 

6,324 

1,832,552 

1847 

38,806 

7,196,033 

.S7.925 

7,083.163 

6,455 

1,827,606 

6,211 

1,786,895 

1848 

34,883 

6,515,945 

34,822 

6,780,681 

5,902 

1,680,508 

5,735 

1,659,845 

1849 

37,072 

6.919.900 

37,603 

7,084,488 

5,929 

1,691,447 

5,684 

1,629,331 

The  centesimal  proportions  into  which  our  foreign  and  colonial  trade 
are  divisible  during  the  above  years  are — 


Merchandise. 

Shipping. 

Merchandise. 

Sliipping. 

Foreign. 

Colonial. 

Foreign. 

Colonial. 

Foreign. 

Colonial. 

Foreign. 

Colonial. 

1832 

72-18 

27-82 

64-41 

35-59 

1841 

70-66 

29 -.34 

67-46 

32-54 

1833 

73-81 

26-19 

65-30 

34-70 

1842 

71-80 

28-20 

73-09 

26-91 

1834 

77-14 

22-86 

65-57 

34-43 

1843 

71-21 

28-79 

69-71 

30-29 

1835 

76-41 

23-59 

64-54 

35-46 

1844 

71-83 

28-17 

70-49 

29-51 

1836 

73-62 

26-38 

66-72 

33-28 

1845 

71-96 

28-04 

68-10 

31-90 

1837 

69-98 

30-02 

67-25 

32-75 

1846 

70-65 

29-35 

70-89 

29-11 

1838 

72-87 

27-13 

68-46 

31-54 

1847 

74-66" 

25 -.34 

74-69 

25-31 

1839 

69-42 

.30-58 

70-64 

29-36 

1848 

76-57 

23-43 

74-88 

25-12 

1840 

66-20 

33-80 

69-06 

30-94 

1849 

75-30 

24-70 

76-29 

23-71 

LUAi'.  vji.J  BRITISH  COLONIES,  ETC.  SU9 

The  following  statement  (p.  810)  exhibits  at  one  view  the  names  of 
our  folonial  ])ossessions  and  dependencies,  with  the  exception  of  our 
Indian  empire,  in  every  quarter  of  the  globe  ;  tlie  foriii  of  government 
established  in  each  ;  and  its  population  in  the  latest  year  for  which  the 
accounts  are  at  present  accessible. 

Occasion  is  sometimes  taken  by  the  advocates  of  a  protective  system 
to  point  out  the  actual  and  comparative  magnitude  of  our  colonial  trade, 
in  proof  of  the  practical  wisdom  of  their  doctrine.  The  chief  produc- 
tions of  our  colonies  have  hitherto  been  favoured  in  the  home  market  by 
means  of  differential  duties ;  and  it  is  affirmed  that  by  this  means  we 
carry  on  a  larger  export  trade  than  we  should  do  if  a  preference  were 
not  thus  given  to  a  part  of  our  customers ;  an  assertion  which  it  would 
be  difficult  to  prove. 

Let  us,  in  order  to  test  the  wisdom  of  this  system  of  preferences,  take 
what  will  be  considered  the  most  important  article  of  colonial  produc- 
tion, sugar,  and  inquire  shortly  what  has  been  the  effect  to  the  kingdom 
generally,  and  to  the  sugar  colonies  themselves,  of  the  virtual  monopoly 
of  the  home  market  that  was  given  to  them  by  om-  tariff. 

First,  we  were  made  to  pay  for  the  sugar  consumed  in  the  United 
Kingdom  more  than  we  needed  to  pay  by  an  amount  exceeding  the  value 
of  all  the  goods  which  we  manufactured  for  the  AVest  India  colonies ;  it 
will  hardly  be  said  that  this  was  a  profitable  trade  for  us,  ^^hatever  it 
might  be  for  the  colonies.  It  might  be  some  consolation  to  us  to  know 
that  the  excessive  price  which  we  thus  paid  benefited  in  a  proportionate 
degree  those  to  whom  it  was  paid.  But  was  this  so?  If  the  millions  of 
money  for  which  we  thus  taxed  ourselves  did  go  to  swell  the  profits  of  the 
planters,  how  was  it  that  this  undue  rate  did  not  stimulate  production, 
an  effect  which  excessive  profits  never  fail  to  have  ?  It  is  neither  wise, 
reasonable,  nor  just,  that  the  people  of  England  should,  under  any  cir- 
.cumstances,  be  thus  heavily  taxed  for  the  benefit  of  any  class  of  their 
fellow-subjects,  however  respectable ;  but  when  we  see  that,  notwith- 
standing the  heavy  burden  we  thus  took  upon  ourselves,  the  planters 
were  continually  lamenting  over  their  ruined  condition,  what  words  can 
we  find  adequately  to  describe  our  folly  ? 

Let  us  suppose  that  the  differential  duty  upon  sugar  were  wholly 
abolished,  and  that  we  no  longer  had  to  pay  a  monopoly  price  for  that 
which  we  use,  and  it  is  certain  that  our  consumption  must  ver}'  greatly 
increase.  To  supply  our  wants  we  must  then  have  recourse  to  other 
markets,  and  in  payment  for  our  importations  must  send  to  the  producers 
that  alone  which  we  have  to  offer,  the  products  of  our  industry,  our 
manufactvires.  The  people  of  England  w  ould  clearly  be  gainers  by  this 
change,  since  they  would  eitlier  have  more  sugar  in  return  for  an  equal 
amount  of  labour,  or  they  would  retain  more  of  the  products  of  their 
toil  to  exchange  elsewhere  for  other  conveniences  or  luxuries. 


810 


PKO  GUESS  OF  THE  NATION. 


[sec.  yih. 


A  Statemeyit  of  the  Date  and  Mode  oj  Acquisition,  the  Form  of  Government,  and  the  Population 
according  to  the  htest  Census,  of  each  Colony  or  Foreign  Possession  of  tlie  British  Crown. 


Date  and  Mode  c 

fits 

Form  of  Government, 

Acquisition, 

Population  according 

i  whether  having  Le^'islative 
Assemblies,  or  heinif 

Kame  of  Colony. 

whetlier  by  Capture. 

to  the  latest 

by  Cession, 

Census  or  Ketum. 

governed  directly  by  Urders 

or.by  Settlement. 

from  the 

Home  Government. 

Europe :— 

Gibraltar      .... 

Capttu-e     . 

1704 

1834 

15,008 

Under  Home  Govern- 
ment. 

Malta  and  Gozo 

Ditto   .      .      . 

1800 

1839 

121,928 

Ditto. 

Ionian  Islands   . 

Cession     . 

1814 

1840 

223,349 

Legislative  bodies. 

lleligolaud  .... 

Ditto   .     .     . 

1814 

About  2,000 

Under  Home  Govern- 

ment. 

Asia: — 

Ceylon 

Capitulation  . 

1796 

1835 

1,241,825 

Ditto. 

Australasia  : — 

New  South  Wales  .     . 

Settlement     . 

1787 

1848 

220,407 

Governor  and  Legis- 
lative Council. 

Van  Diemen's  Land    . 

Ditto   .... 

1803 

1848 

70,064 

Ditto. 

Western  Australia 

Ditto  .... 

18-29 

1848 

4,460 

Ditto. 

South  Australia 

Ditto  .... 

1836 

1840 

17,366 

Ditto. 

New  Zealand     . 

Ditto   .... 

1839 

•• 

Unknown. 

Africa  : — 

Mauritius     .... 

Capitulation  . 

1810 

1849 

170,881 

Under  Home  Govern- 
ment. 

Cape  of  Good  Hope    . 

Ditto  .... 

1806 

1849 

175.540 

Ditto. 

Sierra  Leone     . 

Settlement     .     . 

1787 

1844 

44; 935 

Ditto,  &  Executive  and 
Legislative  Council. 

Gambia 

Ditto   .... 

1631 

1839 

5,086 

Home  Government. 

Gold  Coast  .... 

Ditto  .... 

1661 

. . 

Ditto. 

Fernando  Po     .     .     . 

Ditto  .... 

1827 

•• 

Ditto. 

America  : — 

Lower  Canada  . 

Capitulation  and 

1  1759 

1844 

691,193 

Legislative  bodies. 

Upper  Canada  . 

Cession 

1763 

1844 

486,055 

Ditto. 

New  Brunswick 

Settlement'!  Soon 

\ 

1840 

156,162 

Ditto. 

Nova  Scotia 

Ditto     .             aiicT 

1838 

178,237^ 

Ditto. 

Cape  Breton 

I>itto    .          ']Jf7„. 

yi497 

Ditto. 

Prince  Edward's  Island 

Ditto     .              very 

1 

1841 

47,033 

Ditto. 

Newfoundland  . 

Ditto    .        J  '° 

} 

1836 

74,705 

Ditto.                            • 

Antigua 

Ditto   .... 

1632 

1832 

35,412 

Ditto. 

Barbados      .... 

Ditto   .... 

1605 

1829 

102,605 

Ditto. 

Dominica     .      .      .      .   . 

Cession 

1763 

1833 

18,660 

Ditto. 

Grenada       .... 

Ditto   .... 

1763 

1837 

20,994 

Ditto. 

Jamaica 

Capitulation  . 

1655 

1824 

373,405 

Ditto. 

]\Iontserrat  .      .     .      .   , 

Settlement     . 

1632 

1836 

7,119 

Ditto. 

Nevis ; 

Ditto   .... 

162S 

1838 

7,434 

Ditto. 

St.  Christopher      .      . 

Ditto  .... 

1623 

1838 

22,482 

Ditto. 

St.  Lucia      .... 

Capitulation  . 

1803 

183,) 

14,179 

Home  Government. 

St.  Vincent  .... 

Cession     . 

1763 

1831 

27,122 

Legislative  bodies. 

Tobago    , 

Ditto  .... 

1763 

1839 

11,748 

Ditto. 

Virgin  Islands  ... 

Settlement     . 

1665 

1835 

7,731 

Ditto. 

Anguilla       .... 

Ditto    .... 

1650 

1824 

3,666 

Ditto. 

Trinidad       .... 

Capitulation  . 

1797 

1837 

39,328 

Home  Government. 

British  Guiana  ... 

Ditto  .... 

1803 

1833 

96,424 

Ditto,  and  Legislative 
Council. 

Bahamas      .... 

Settlement     .     . 

1629 

1839 

23,P48 

Legislative  bodies. 

Bermudas    .... 

Ditto   .... 

1603 

1839 

8,933 

Ditto. 

Honduras     .... 

Cession     . 

1670 

1 

1839 

1 

7,935 

Home  Government  and 
Local  Magistrates. 

cirAi-.  VII.]  BRITISH  LOLOXIES,  ETC.  Ml 

Let  US,  secondly,  inquire  what  the  effect  would  he  to  the  Enerlish  suj^ar 
colonists  if  we  thus  placed  them  upon  a  footing  of  equality  with  the 
Brazils  and  Cuba.  They  would  possibly  grow  less  sugar,  altliough  that 
is  very  doubtful,  since  we  might  experience  in  this  case,  as  in  most 
other  cases  is  experienced,  the  beneficial  effect  of  competition  in  stimu- 
lating indu.stry  and  in  lessening  the  cost  of  production.  But  suppose 
this  result  were  to  happen,  it  could  only  be  that  they  found  some  other 
employment  for  their  land  and  labour,  that  would  be  more  beneficial, 
and  this  would  be  no  hardship  to  them.  Does  any  one  suppose  that  the 
land  in  those  prolific  settlements  would  be  left  waste,  or  that  the  labour- 
ers would  live  in  idleness  ? 

It  cannot  be  necessary  to  pursue  further  an  inquiry  which  has  been 
so  frequently  discussed  in  these  pages.  During  the  very  few  years  that 
have  elapsed  since  the  first  edition  of  this  work  was  offered  to  the  notice 
of  the  public,  the  cause  of  commercial  freedom,  which  is  the  cause  of 
human  progi-ess,  has  made  more  rapid  strides  than  its  most  sanguine 
disciple  then  diired  to  expect.  The  system  of  restrictions  and  preferences 
so  stoutly  advocated  and  maintained,  and  in  support  of  which  such  signal 
party  triumphs  have  been  achieved,  at  length  is  drawing  to  its  end. 
The  hands  even  to  which  it  looked  for  support  have  assisted  towards  its 
downfall,  and,  like  all  falling  bodies,  its  descent  will  become  more  and 
more  rapid  until  it  shall  cease  to  have  existence.* 

*  Written  in  1842. 


[     813     ] 


ANALYTICAL    INDEX. 


[For  the  Subjects  or  each  Section  and  Chapter,  see  the  Table  of  Content*.] 


AccujiULATiON  of  Wealth.— The  fact  of 
accumulation  of  national  wealth  shown 
in  the  outlay  of  enormous  masses  of 
capital  for  the  execution  of  plans  to 
facilitate  locomotion,  593.  National  ex- 
penditure of  periods  of  war  and  peace  , 
compared,  in  proof  of  great  increase  of 
accumulated  wealth  in  the  nation,  593. 
Advantages  that  would  have  resulted 
from  avoiding  the  French  and  American 
wars,  594,  595. 

Accumulated  capital  to  be  distinguished 

from  current  expenditure,  617-619. 

■  Objects  chosen  for  investments  of  ac- 
cumulated wealth,  617-624. 

Addington,  Mr.,  his  testimony  in  favour  of 
a  free  importation  of  foreign  grain,  503. 

Africa,  remarks  on  the  amount  of  exports 
to,  367. — Slave  trade  still  carried  on :  its 
baleful  effects,  368. 

Value  of  exports  to,  359,  3G0.— (See 

Dependencies  in  Africa.) 

ASghanistan,  invasion  of,  prosecuted  with- 
out the  sanction  of  the  Court  of  Directors ; 
not  an  Indian  war ;  injurious  in  its  con- 
sequences to  the  Company,  and  to  the 
British  Empire,  741. 

Agriculture. — A  numerous  people  can 
never  be  dependent  on  the  soil  of  other 
countries  for  supplies  of  food  :  to  supply 
the  United  Kingdom  with  wheat  alone 
would  employ  more  than  double  the 
shipping  which  at  present  enters  its 
ports;  rapid  progress  in  population  re- 
quires equal  progress  in  production  of 
food,  138,  139.  Quantities  of  wheat  im- 
ported from  foreign  countries  from  1801 
to  1849,  139,  140.  Agriculturists  have 
continued  to  embark  capital  in  culture  of 
the  soil ;  extraordinary  progressive  in- 
crease of  agricultural  products ;  increa-'^e 
of  agricultural  families,  compared  with 
increase  of  total  number  of  families  in 
the  kingdom  has  been  small ;  Sir  H. 
Davy's  chemical  researches  and  the  more 
recent  investigations  of  Liebig  have  ren- 
dered essential  services  to  agriculture ; 
bones  of  wild  cattle  of  South  America, 
and  guano  from  certain  islands  in  the 
Pacific,  &c.,  imported  for  manure  ;  great 
extent  of  agricultural  improvements  ne- 


gatives the  notion  of  continual  losses,  HI- 
MS.  Low  prices  have  stimulated  to  ex- 
ertion ;  deficiency  of  statistics  of  agri- 
culture in  this  kingdom,  145.  Statistical 
account  of  Scotland,  showing  the  pro- 
gress of  improvement ;  the  advantage  of 
procuring  similar  records  in  England, 
146-148.  Table  of  inclosure  bills;  im- 
port and  export  of  wheat  and  meal,  and 
prices,  from  1760  to  1849.  with  remarks, 
148-152.  Earl  Fitzwilliam  quoted  on 
increased  extent  and  produce  of  land, 
1 52.  Draining  of  fens  of  Cambridge- 
shire, and  produce  of  wheat  instead  of 
oats,  155.  Report  of  committee  on  agri- 
cultural distress  in  1821,  153.  Agricul- 
tural labourers  have  experienced  im- 
provement, and  rent  has  doubled  since 
1790,  153,  154.  Dispute  concerning  pro- 
fitable employment  of  more  capital  in 
agriculture,  155.  Influence  of  changes 
in  the  currency,  155,  156.  Number  of 
acres  brought  into  cultivation  since  1760, 
157.  Mr.  Couling's  tabular  statement  of 
acres  in  cultivation,  culturable,  and  waste 
in  the  United  Kingdom,  158-160.  Could 
all  the  culturable  land  be  brought  into 
profitable  use,  the  produce  of  food  might 
suffice  for  more  than  eight  millions  of  ad- 
ditional population,  161.  Produce  of  land 
in  Wales  not  half  of  its  capability,  with 
superior  culture,  162.  Produce  of  land 
in  England  might  be  doubled  by  better 
cultivation,  162.  Proportion  of  labourers 
to  occupiers  of  land,  162.  Proportion  of 
the  whole  soil  in  meadow  and  pasture 
about  three-fifths ;  question  whether  the 
number  of  horses  and  extent  of  pasture- 
land  are  reduced  by  establishment  of 
railroads,  163. 

Agriculture.  —  Exaggerated  statement  of 
Parliamentarj-  Committee  as  to  the  extent 
of  the  reduction  of  the  number  of  horses 
through  the  establishment  of  railways, 
163,  164.  Number  of  horses  kept,  and 
of  persons  assessed  for  tax  thereon,  in 
1821,  1844,  1848,  and  1849,  165. 

Comparative  table  of  numbers  em- 
ployed in  agriculture  and  trades,  53-55. 

Decrease  in  proportion  of  the  agri- 
cultural class,  54. 


814 


ANALYTICAL  INDEX. 


Agriculture. — Table  of  males  20  years  of 
age  compared  as  to  numbers  employed  in 
agriculture,  55.  Agricultural  class  in 
Ireland  more  than  double  the  proportion 
in  England,  01.  Comparative  propor- 
tion of  occupiers  and  labourers  in  Eng- 
land and  Ireland,  61,  C<-2.  No  precise  in- 
formation exists  as  to  the  produce  of  the 
soil  of  tins  kingdom,  0.3.  Number  of 
families  occupied  in  production  of  food 
in  Ireland,  63. 
Table  of  comparative  numbers  em- 
ployed in  agriculture,  manufactures,  and 
trades  in  each  county,  59.  Numerical 
order  of  each  county  in  this  respect.  6(i. 

Proportions  of  adult  male  population 

employed  in  agriculture  to  the  -whole 
inhabitants  of  the  several  counties  of 
England,  Wales,  and  Scotland,  82,  83. 

Comparative  classification  of  the  popu- 
lation of  France  as  (<>  division  of  the  soil, 
83. 

Agricultural  and    other    classes    in 

France,  83-85. 

Proprietors  of  the  soil  in  great  pros- 
perity during  French  war,  owing  to  high 
price  of  agricultural  produce,  167.  Num- 
ber of  sheep  and  quantity  of  wool  pro- 
duced m  1828  and  1844,  174,  175. 

Advantages  to,  by  opening  canals,  302. 

Population  of  England  fast  overtaking 

capability  of  soil  to  supply  food,  351-353. 

Incapability  of  soil  of  England  always 

to  supply  sufficient  food  for  continually 
increasing  population,  353.  Impossibility 
of  continuing  restrictions  on  foreign  trade 
in  corn  for  the  supposed  benefit  of  the  pro- 
prietors of  the  soil,  354,  355. 

Wages   of   farm-servants  in   various 

parts  of  Europe,  457. 

. IJural  population  has  not  increased  in 

the  same  proportion  as  other  classes,  527. 

Half  a  million  of  money  invested  by 

Earl  of  Leicester  in  improvements,  605. 

. Increased  amount  of  capital  invested 

in  live  stock,  629. 

. (See    Horses,  Sheep,  Wool,   Woollen 

Manufacture.) 

Alison,  Sheriff',  evidence  as  to  prevalence  of 
drunkenness  in  Glasgow,  678. 

Almanacs,  great  increase  in  the  number 
published  on  repeal  of  stamp  duty  in  1835, 
569. 

America,  United  States. — Number  of  emi- 
grants to,  from  1821)  to  1849,  128.  Emi- 
grants to  New  York,  129. 

Crews  of  American  vessels  more  ab- 
stinent from  ardent  spirits  than  English 
(See  St.  Lawrence),  132. 

. United  States  the  principal  customer 

for  British  linen  goods,  229. 

Railways  in  United  States,  338,  339. 

Hosiery  shipped  largely  from  Saxony 

to,  412, 

Benefit  of  trade   witli  L^nited    States 

during  war  with  Napoleon,  377,  378. 


America,  United  States. — Progress  of  trade 
of  United  States,  405,  406.  Capital  yields 
higher  interest  in  United  States  than  in 
Europe,  406. 

Table  of  imports  and  exports  in  1801- 

1848,  405. 

Value  of  exports  to,  359,  360,362-365. 

—  (See  Colonies.) 

Table  of  proportions  of  tonnage  em- 
ployed in  import  and  export  trade,  403. 

importance  of  possessing  the  colonies 

of  Nova  Scotia  and  New  Brunswick, 
727. 

More    than    25    millions    of   British 

capital  invested  in  public  undertakings, 
627. 

America,  British. — (See  Colonies.) 

Anderson,  Dr. — Experiments  proving  ne- 
cessity for  attention  to  form  in  construct- 
ing measures  of  capacity,  350. 

Annuities.— Conversion  of  perpetual  into 
term  inable:  incorrectness  of  tables  adopted 
for  the  purpose,  and  consequent  loss  to, the 
public,  479,  480. 

Antigua,  Island  of,  has  no  stream  or  spring 
of  Mater,  807.  Quantities  of  sugar,  mo- 
lasses, and  rum  exported,  807. 

Army  expenditure. — (See  War.) 

Artisans,  English,  have  more  energy  and 
skill  than  those  of  France  and  Germany, 
520. 

Prohibited,  previous    to   1825,    from 

leaving  the  country,  261,  262. 

Arts,  Fine,  increased  encouragement  to, 
caused  by  increase  of  wealth,  522. 

Asia,  value  of  exports  to,  359,  360,  362- 
307. — (See  Colonies,  Dependencies.) 

Ashton,  Mr.  Thomas,  his  beneficent  im- 
provement of  the  condition  and  dwellings 
of  his  workpeople,  524. 

AusTRAiiA.  — Cotton  of  excellent  quality 
may  be  raised  in  great  abundance,  and 
tobacco,  wine,  &c.,  furnished  for  expor- 
tation, 764.— (^ See  Colonies.) 

Babbage,  Mr.,  table  of  prices  of  goods 
manufactured  in  Birmingham  in  1812 
and  1832,  246. 

Construction  of  his  calculating  machine 

rerpiired  perfect  tools,  258,  259. 

Baines,  Mr.,  his  work  on  the  cotton  manu- 
facture quoted,  572,  573. 

Banca,  Island  of,  its  mines  of  tin  supply 
China  and  India,  270. 

Banks,  commercial,  facilitate  operations  of 
foreign  trade,  352. 

Bank  of  England,  amount  of  bullion  in,  from 
1838  to  1849,  433. 

Kemarks  on  act  for  renewing  charter 

in  1844,  434,  435. 

Baptisms,  registered  table  of  from  1801  to 
1849,  32.  Table  of  the  annual  propor- 
tion of  baptisifis,  burials,  and  marriages, 
in  each  county,  1790  to  1841,  33. 

Barley,  quantities  imported  into  England 
frorn  Ireland,  1815  to  1849,  345. 


ANALYTICAL  INDEX. 


815 


I'nrtholomew's,  St.,  Hospital,  numbers  ad- 

mittcil,    171»0-184'J.    aud    proportion    of 

deaths,  42,  4;3. 
15(.;his,  qiiaiitities   imported   into  England 

from  Ireland,  345. 
J^EER. — Quantity  consumed  in  England  and 

Wales,  with  rates  aud  produce  of  duty  in 

1801-1829,  .563. 
Duty  on  beer  in  Scotland  since  1707 

same  as   England  ;  no  duty  charged  on 

beer  in  Ireland,  5G4.     Since  1 78.')  brewers 

of  beer  obliged  to  take  out  licence,  504. 
Tax  repealed  in   1830;  consumption 

veiy  inconsiderable  in  Scotland,  504. 
Behn,  ]Mrs.  anecdote   by  Sir  Walter  Scott, 

illustrating  inijiroved.  change  of  public 

manners  since  her  novels  were  written, 

676. 
lUxGiUM,  railways  in,  and  revenue  derived 

therefrom,  1835  to  1847,  33fi,  337. 
Advantage  of  means  for  ascertaining 

amount  of  agricultural  produce,  S.'J'J. 
Bkngal,  imports  and  exports,  745,  746. 
Bkrlin. — Napoleon's  decree,  declaring  the 

ports   of  Britain   to   be    in    a  state   of 

blockade,  378. 
Bermudas,   or    Somers'   Islands,  situation, 

797  ;  area,  population,  climate,  imports, 

exports,  797.     Shipping,  tonnage,  798. 

Convicts  sent  thither  since  1824,  137. 

Bills  of  Mortalitj-.— (See  Deaths.) 
Birmingham,  progressive  increase  of  popu- 
lation, 1801-1841  ;  increased  nearly  150 

per  cent,  in  40  years,  240.     Increase  of 

buildings,   240.     Progress  of  hardware 

manufacture,  246,  &c. 
Number  of  steam-engines  employed, 

025. 
Births,  proportions  of,  in  various  European 

countries  and  America,  22. 
Illegitimate,  proportion  to  legitimate, 

in  various  countries,  22. 
Proportionate  decrease  of  births  with 

the  advance  of  civilization,  21. 
Proportionate  number  of  births  not  a 

test  of  condition  of  population,  21. 
Decreasing  in  proportion  to  the  amount 

of  population,  24.     A  large  proportion  of 

births  not  a  sure  indication  of  the  general 

prosperity  of  a  population,  25. 
Annual  average  number  in  London, 

1791-1820,  39,  40. 
Annual    proportion   of   births  in  the 

borough  of  Tavistock,  35. 
Blacklieath. — Common  occurrence  of  rob- 
beries and  murders  there  in  former  times, 

034. 
Board  of  Control,  East  India,  nature  and 

operation  of;  absolute  powers  committed 

to  the  President,  749.  750. 
Bogs  in  Ireland,  draining  of,  recommended 

to  employ  the  poor,  308. 
Bombay,  imports  and  exports,  shipping  and 

tonnage,  746,  747. 
Bones  of  cattle  of  South  America  imported 

for  manure,  144. 


Bowring,  Dr.,  reports   on  the  commercial 

relations  of  France  aud  England,  237, 

238,  241,  242. 
Quotation,  of  Report  on   commercial 

relations  of  France  and  England,  288, 

289. 
Bricks,  number  of,  made  in  England  and 

Scotland  in  18(12-1849,    528.      Number 

of  bricks  annually  used,   doubled  since 

1821,  .528. 
Bridgewater,  Duke  of.  Act  of  Parliament 

for  construction  of  his  stupendous  canal 

works,  302. 
Bristol. — Trade  with  Ireland,  343. 
British  and  Foreign  School  Society,  train- 
ing of  teachers,  097. 
Buchanan,    Mr.,   his   evidence   respecting 

emigrants  to  Canada,  132. 
Bullion,  amount  in  the  Bank  of  England, 

from  1833  to  1849,  431-433. 
Eurgoyne,  Col.,   Report  on  the  neglect  of 

the  Shannon  for  navigation,  304,  305. 
BnaALS.— (See  Deaths.)     Table  of  deaths 

registered  from  1801-1849,  32. 

Cairo,  projected  railway  from,  to  Suez,  323. 

Calcutta,  number  andtoimage  of  shipping 
in  1840,  746. 

Caledonian  Canal  described,  310. 

(.See  Canals.) 

Canada. — Boundary,  area,  population,  783, 
784.  Trade,  imports,  exports,  produce, 
784,  785.  Shipping,  tonnage,  ship-build- 
ing, 786.  Fisheries,  786,  787.  Manu- 
factures imported  from  the  United  King- 
dom, 1832  to  1847,  cotton,  linen,  silk, 
woollen,  iron,  785.  Value  of  ashes, 
grain,  and  timber  exported,  785.  Number 
of  looms,  produce  of  weaving,  mills, 
foundries,  stills,  &c.,  787.  Rideau 
Canal,  787. 

superiority  of  to  Australia  as  a  penal 

colony  for  F-nglish  convicts,  133. 

Caxals,  numerous  and  useful,  in  England, 
for  commercial  intercourse,  287,  288. 

History  of  commencement  of  canal- 
making  in  England,  302.  Length  of 
canal  lines  in  England,  302.  Advantages 
accruing  from,  to  Ireland,  302,  303. 
Small  extent  of,  in  Ireland,  303. 

Amount  of  traffic  on  canals  in  Ireland, 

308.     The  Ulster  Canal.  309. 

Caledonian  Canal  described,  cost  of 

construction,  amount  of  tolls,  traffic,  310, 
311. 

begun  and  completed  since   1800,  in 

the  United  Kingdom,  311. 

Tonnage,  and  dues  received,  on  the 

Weaver  and  Weston  Canal,  31 1,  312. 

in  France,  312.     Caoals  in  the  United 

States  of  .\merica,  312-314. 

■ Ship  canal,  proposed,   to  connect  the 

Mediterranean  and  Arabian  gulf,  323. 

Rideau  Canal,  in  Canada,  787. 

Great  amount  expended  in  construc- 
tion of  canals,  621. 


816 


ANALYTICAL  INDEX. 


Candles. —  Quantities  consumed,  lSOl-1830, 
in  England,  Scotland,  and  Great  Britain  ; 
rates  of  duty,  and  amount  of  revenue ; 
duty  on  candles  ceased  in  18.'?2,  571. 
Operation  of  the  duty  in  preventing  im- 
provement in  quality  ;  greatly  improved 
since  repeal  of  the  duty,  571. 

Cape  Coast  Castle. — (See  Dependencies  in 
Africa.) 

Cape  of  Good  Hope,  number  of  emigrants 
to,  from  1820  to  1849,  128.— (See  De- 
pendencies in  Africa.) 

Capital. — Agriculturists,  notwithstanding 
complaints  of  distress,  have  continued  to 
embark  capital  in  culture  of  the  soil,  144. 

Amount  of  conveyed  to  Canada  by 

emigrants  in  1834,  132. 

Yields  a    higher   rate  of  interest  in 

United  States  of  America  than  in  Europe, 
406. 

• Disadvantage    of   deficiency    of,    in 

Saxony, 412. 

When  its  increase  is  greater  than  that 

of  the  population,  produces  general  social 
improvement,  521. 

Great  accumulation  of,  since  the  peace, 

.596. 

Loan  in    1836  for  compensation  for 

slaves  did  not  much  diminish  national 
capital,  596. 

Large  sums  invested  in  English  funds 

by  foreigners  during  French  war,  628. 

Investments  for  commercial  purposes, 

625-629. 

Large  sums  lent  to  foreign  states,  627. 

Large  amounts  invested  and  lost  in  Ame- 
rican mining,  628. 

More    than    25    millions    invested  in 

public  undertakings  in  America,  627. 

Desirable  to  invest  capital  in  agri- 
cultural improvements,  629. 

Investment    of  large    sums  in  New 

South  Wales,  761.  Probable  discontinu- 
ance of  transfer  of  English  capital  to 
Australian  colonies,  763. 

(See  Wealth,  Accumulation,  Property, 

Investments.) 
Capital  Punishment — Historical  notices 

of  progresive  mitigation  quoted  from  Mr. 

lledgrave's  Criminal  Returns,  638,  &c. 

Evil  effect  of.onmindsof  prisoners. 645. 

• Number   of  executions   previous  and 

subsequent  to  the  mitigation  of  the  penal 

laws,  642,  643. 
Carriages,   public,   improvements  in   the 

construction  and  management  of,  owing 

to  improvement  in  roads,  297,  298. 

Calculations  of  the  number  of  pas- 
sengers, and  number  of  miles,  conveyed 
by  stage-coaches,  in  1834,  299,   300. 

Number  of  uiail-coaches  in  England, 

Ireland,  Scotland,  in  1837,  301. 

. Number  of,  assessed,  1812-1849,  530. 

Increase  of,  since  1812,  531.  Expense 
of  keeping  4-wheeled  carriages ;  annual 
expenditure  thereon,  531. 


Cattle,  number  imported  into  England  from 
Ireland,  343. 

Number    and    value   imported    into 

Liverpool    and    Bristol,    from   Ireland, 
1831,  1832,  1«37,  343,  344. 

Central  Society  of  Education,  its  inquiries 
into  condition  of  working  classes,  523. 

Ceylon. — (See  Dependencies,  Asia.) 

Children. — Average  number  to  each  mar- 
riage in  various  countries,  22. 

Proportion   that  die  before   1st,  10th, 

and  18th  year,  22. 

China,  advantageous  trade  with,  expected, 
369.  Declared  value  of  English  manu- 
factures exported  thereto  in  each  year 
from  1834  to  1849,  370.  Table  ofshipping 
engaged  in  trade  with  China,  from  1830 
to  1849,  370. 

trade  with,  might  be  benefited  by  bold 

reduction  of  duty  on  tea,  553. 

Christ's  Hospital. — Remarks  on,  and  table  of 
the  numbers  of  children,  and  decreasing 
number  of  deaths,  from  1814-1833,  44,  45. 

Churches  and  chapels,  amount  of  public 
expenditure  devoted  to  the  erection  of, 
618,  619. 

Cinnamon,  value  of  the  produce  of,  in 
Ceylon ;  surplus  produce  burnt  by  the 
Dutch,  753. 

Cities,  causes  of  greater  rate  of  mortality 
in,  27. 

Clothing. — Cost  of  articles  of  clothing  in 
Bethlehem  Hospital,  Greenwich  Hospital, 
and  Chelsea  Hospital,  during  a  series  of 
years,  590,  .591. 

Coaches. — (See  Carriages.) 

Coal,  great  value  of  mineral  products  of 
England,  owing  to  abundance  of  coal  for 
applying  steam  power,  273.  Quantities 
of  coal  shipped  from  Newcastle  and  Sun- 
derland, from  1801  to  1849,  275,  276. 
Amount  of  shipments  from  Stockton, 
from  1822  to  1849,  277.  Act  of  Parlia- 
ment requiring  registration  of  coals 
arriving  in  London ;  prices  of  coals 
shipped  from  Newcastle  and  Sunderland 
for  London,  from  1801  to  184.5,  277,  278. 
Prices  paid  in  London,  from  1813  to 
1850,  278.  Quantities  of  coals  shipped 
to  British  and  foreign  ports,  279.  Quan- 
tities distributed  to  the  great  seats  of 
manufacture    by    canals   and    railways, 

279,  280. 

Quantity  annually  consumed  in  Shef- 
field, 250,  280. 

Rapidly  and  cheaply  carried  to  Ireland 

for  manufactures,  308. 

English,  jealous  and  erroneous  exclu- 
sion of,  from  France,  288. 

Number  of  ships  arrived  in  the  port 

of  London,  and  quantities  conveyed 
therein,  in  1831-1849,  340. 

Quantities  consumed  annually  in  iron- 
making.  280. 

Great  importance  of  low  price  of  coal, 

280.  The  people  of  England  long  sub- 


ANALYTICAL  INDEX. 


817 


jectcd  to  a  biiick'iisoine  tax  imposed  upon 
iiiiil  as  a  trade  ref^ulation.  teriiu-d  "  limi- 
tation  of  the   vend,"    by    proprietors  of 
collieries;   description  of  the  nature,  cir- 
cumstances, and  evil  consequences  of  this 
oppressive  regulation,  '28(J-:283. 
Coal. — (Quantities  brought  to  London,  1821- 
IJ^-J'J,  ."iSl.     Estimate  of  quantity  used  for 
uas,  .082. 
C(uisting  Trade.— (See  Trade.) 
Cocoa-nut  tree,  abundant  produce,  and  va- 
rious uses  of.  in  Ceylon,  7.52,  753. 
Coco.^,  quantities  imported  from  West  In- 
dies, from  1827  to  1841t,  Si '3. 
Coffee,   East  Indian,   amount   consumed, 
prices,  reduction  of  duty  upon  it,  372- 
374. 
Fluctuations  in  the  consumption  espe- 
cially exemplify  effects  of  taxation,  .548. 
Quantities    consumed,    1801-1841,    com- 
pared with  population,  and  rates  of  duty, 
.549.     Exemplification  of  diminished  con- 
sumption   snd   revenue  caused   by   hijih 
duties,  549.     Impolicy  and  wasteful  con- 
sequences of  favouring  some  at  expense 
of  others,  by  protective  duties,  551*,  551. 

Successful  cultivation,  and  produce  of, 

in  Ceylon,  752. 

Quantities  imported  from  India,  742. 

Quantities  imported  from  West  Indies, 

803. 

Houses,  great  number  opened;  their 

promotion  of  temperance.  679.  Descrip- 
tion of  these  establishments,  079,  G80. 
CoiXAGK. — Deficiency  of  coin  durlnj;  the 
early  part  of  ;)resent  century,  43(i.  \'alne 
of  gold  and  silver  coinage  at  the  mint, 
from  1801  to  1849,  437.  Silver  coin- 
age insignificant  before  181(5,437.  Pro- 
jiosition  of  adopting  silver  as  well  as 
gold  standard  for  legal  tender,  437,  438. 
Copper  coin  issued  from  1815  to  1849, 
438. 
Colonies.— Colonial  possessions  of  England 
an  evidence  of  her  poM-er,  720.  Import- 
ance of  wise  management  of  colonies  as 
sources  of  national  wealth  and  power, 
720,  721.  Impolicy  of  commercial  mo- 
nopoly in  colonial  legislation.  721,  722. 
Advantages  of  colonial  possessions,  724- 
726.  Declaration  of  Sir  Eobert  Peel 
that  colonies  should  be  treated  as  integral 
parts  of  the  kingdom,  725.  Disadvantages 
of  the  frequent  changes  of  ministers  in 
the  Colonial  Department,  725.  Propo- 
siti<m  of  a  plan  for  a^ermanent  Colonial 
Council  :  advantages  of  this  plan,  725, 
726.  Importance  of  possessing  our  North 
American  colonies,  727,  728. 

General  tabular  statements  of  value  of 

manufactures,  shipping,  date  of  acquisi- 
tion, population,  imports,  exports,  of  each 
of  the  British  Colonies  and  Dependencies, 
799-803,  810.  Kemarks  on  the  impolicy 
of  protective  restrictions  on  colonial  com- 
merce ;  instance  of  sugar,  809,  811. 


Colonies. — Amount  and  value  of  exports  to 
colonies,  from  1805  to  1849,  359,  300. 

Number  of  emigrants  to,  from  182010 

1849,  128. 

Setllements    in    Australasia.       New 

Holland  :  situation,  extent.  iSetilement 
of  New  South  ir«/e.s-.—  Land  sold  in  the 
town  of  Sidney  at  20,0(;0/.  per  acre,  757. 
Population  in  1828;  in  18:;3;  in  1841  ; 
excess  of  males,  758,  759.  Population  in 
1846  and  1848,  759.  Number  of  immi- 
grants from  1829  to  1840,  700.  Grants 
and  sales  of  land ;  numbers  and  classes 
of  bounty  immigrants,  70().  Propor- 
tionate small  number  without  employ- 
ment ;  proportion  able  to  read  and  write, 
761. 

New  South  Wales. — Large  proportion 

of  immigrants  are  agricultural  labourers, 
701.  Expense  of  military  and  convict 
establishments  ;  investment  of  large  sums 
by  settlers  and  English  capitalists  ;  num- 
ber of  convicts  landed,  761,  702.  Public 
revenues  of  the  colony  ;  climate  and  soil 
very  favourable  for  rearing  flocks  of 
sheep,  and  produce  of  wool ;  quantities 
of  wool  exported,  702.  Whale  fishery 
sliips  employed  :  produce  of  oil  ;  whale- 
bone and  seal  skins,  703.  Quantity  of 
tallow  exported,  763.  Supply  of  Eng- 
lish capital  may  be  discontinued  ;  cotton, 
wine,  tobacco,  dried  fruits  may  be  pro- 
duced for  exportation,  703,  764. 

Value  of  imports  and  exports  from 

1828  to  1848,  704,  765.  Shipping  and 
tonnage,  705,  706. 

Cannot  become  an  agricultural  coun- 
try, 133.  Small  number  who  emigrate 
thither  compared  with  Canada ;  small 
amount  of  population  ;  nearly  half  con- 
victs, 134.  Number  of  convicts  who 
arrived  in  New  South  Wales,  1825-1841, 
134. 

Norfolk  Ishnd. — Situation  ;  soil  very 

fertile :  used  solely  as  settlement  for 
convicts,  758. 

Settlement  rf  South  Australia. —  Situa- 
tion, extent,  757,  758. 

. Number   of   settlers   who  arrived   in 

1840,  770.     Quantity  of  land  sold,  770. 

Western  Australia,  or  Suan  Eiver. — 

Situation,  extent,  757.  Population,  770. 
Shipping.  Quantity  of  land  granted  and 
sold :  quantity  in  crop  ;  number  of  live 
stock,  770. 

Van  JJiemeii's  Land. — Situation,  ex- 
tent, 758. 

Number  of  convicts  in  1840,  134. 

Population  in  1824  ;  in  1830  :  in  1838  ; 

in  1844;  in  1848,  766.  Greater  dispar- 
ity of  sexes  than  in  New  South  Wales ; 
climate  less  subject  to  drought  than  in 
New  South  AVales  ;  better  adapted  for 
arable  culture:  quantities  of  agricultural 
produce  ;  number  of  live  stock  ;  produce 
of  whale  fishery,  766,  767.  Quantity  of 
3    G 


818 


ANALYTICAL  INDEX. 


wool  exported ;  numbers  of  population 
eniplojed  in  diflerent  trades,  7G7,  7G8. 
Value  of  imports  and  exports,  7G8.  Ship- 
ping and  tonnage,  769. 

Colonies. — British  America. — Number  of 
emigrants  to,  from  1820  to  1849,  128. 
Emigrants  landed  at  Quebec,  129.  Capi- 
tal, estimated  to  amount  to  one  million, 
conveyed  b}'  emigrants  to  Canada  in 
1834,  132. 

Great  value  of  our  North  American 

colonies  compared  with  tliose  of  Aus- 
tralia, 134.  Advantage  of  transporting 
convicts  to  Canada  rather  than  to  Aus- 
tralia, 134. 

of   the  West    Indies.  —  (See   "West 

Indies.) 

•  (See  Dependencies.) 

Colonization,  England  little  to  boast  of  in 
regard  to  experiments  in.  128. 

Colqnhoun,  Dr.,  quoted  respecting  gin-sln>ps 
and  prevalence  of  drunkenness  in  1744, 
C74. 

CoMMERCK,  necessity  for  liberalizing  our 
system  of,  412. 

Impolicy  of  commercial  monopoly  in 

colonial  government,  721,  &c. 

Foreign  commerce,  necessity   of,   to 

most  countries,  and  especially  to  England; 
peculiar  advantages  of  England  for; 
amount  of  foreign  trade  of  England 
greater  than  that  of  any  other  country; 
■would  long  ago  have  been  greater  than  it 
is,  if  left  to  its  own  free  course  ;  its  small 
extent  a  subject  of  surprise  and  regret ; 
England  prevented  by  wars  and  ill-con- 
sidered commercial  laws,  from  having  the 
whole  habitable  world  for  its  market  351, 
352.  Increase  of  population  demands  the 
greatest  possible  facilities  to  foreign  com- 
merce for  supplj'  of  food  ;  expense  of 
trading  communication  between  London 
and  many  foreign  countries  less  than 
between  London  and  distant  English 
towns  and  counties,  352,  354.  Advan- 
tage of  foreign  commerce  in  seasons  of 
depression,  355.  Impossibility  of  con- 
tinuing restrictions  on  foreign  trade  in 
corn  for  supposed  benefit  of  proprietors 

•    of  the  soil,  355. 

Extension  of  commerce  greatly  owing 

to  revision  of  our  tariff,  and  reduction  and 
abolition  of  duties,  374.  Kemark  on  the 
official  and  actual  values  of  goods  im- 
ported and  exported,  377,  378. 

Custom-house  valuation   of  exported 

and  imported  merchandise  incorrect,  357, 
358, 

■ Advantageous   effects   of   abolishing 

commercial  monopoly  of  East  India  Com- 
pany, 741,  &c.  Quantities  and  value  of 
imports  and  exports  between  the  United 
Kingdom  and  India,  742,  743.  Important 
articlesofcommerce  procurable  from  India 
by  improvement  and  extension  of  means 
of  communication  with  the  interior,  745. 


Commerce. — Commercial  value  of  India  to 
England,  750. 

Retaliatory  restrictive  measures  adopt- 
ed by  Prussia;  Reciprocity  Acts  passed 
388.  Enumeration  of  reciprocity  treaties, 
389. 

In  1802,  the  year  subsequent  to  the 

peace  of  Amiens,  value  of  exports  ex- 
ceeded, by  13  per  cent.,  that  of  1801,  a 
year  of  war,  377.  No  means  of  analysing 
our  foreign  commerce  anterior  to  1805  ; 
benefit  of  trade  with  America  during  war 
with  Napoleon,  378.  Napoleon's  Berlin 
decree,  378.     His  decree  of  Milan,  378. 

Napoleon,    in   the   plenitude   of   his 

power,  unable  to  prevent  the  sale  of 
English  goods  in  Paris;  exorbitant  sums 
realized  by  his  commercial  indulgences 
to  individuals,  380.  The  English  export 
trade  maintained  in  defiance  of  the  Con- 
tinental system  of  prohibition  under 
Napoleon,  380.  Commercial  interests  of 
Enjiland  heedlessly  abandoned  by  the 
English  minister  at  the  congress  of 
Vienna,  381.  System  of  restriction  sup- 
ported bj"  interested  commercial  men  in 
England,  381.  In  1820  London  mer- 
chants petitioned  Pai'liament  against 
commercial  restrictions  and  protective 
laws  ;  copy  of  that  document,  382-384. 
Remarks  upon  one  exceptionable  clause 
in  it,  384.  Navigation  Act,  restricting 
imports  to  English  ships,  regarded  as  a 
monument  of  wisdom  during  160  year' 
386.  Mr.  Wallace's  Five  Acts  for  re- 
laxing restrictions  on  foreign  trade,  387, 

Amount  of  tonnage  employed  furnishes 

a  better  measure  of  progress  of  foreign 
trade  than  computations  of  money  value 
of  merchandise.  393. 

Table  of  official  value  of  foreign  and 

colonial  merchandise,  and  of  real  or  de- 
clared value  of  British  and  Irish  produce 
and  manufactures  exported  from  1801  to 
1849,  356.  Table  of  real  value  of  British 
and  Irish  merchandise  exported  to  foreign 
countries  and  colonies,  359.  360. 

Table  of  value  of  exports  to  foreign 

countries,  1827-1849,  36i-367.  Remarks 
on  amount  of  exportations  to  various 
countries,  367-372. 

Commercial  treaties,  would  be  unknown  if 
each  community  rightly  understood  its 
own  interests,  385. 

Communication,  internal. — (See  Internal 
Communication.)  Roads,  canals,  rail- 
ways. 

CoNSUMPTiox,  520-591. — Power  of  con- 
suming always  limited  and  controlled  by 
power  of  producing,  520. 

Ultimate  limit  of  consumption  is  the 

power  of  production,  587.  Proportionate 
consumption  at  various  periods  a  means 
by  which  to  estimate  the  comparative 
prosperity  of  a  country,  587. 


ANALYTICAL  INDEX. 


819 


Consumption. — Power  of  consumption  illi- 
mitable under  circumstances  favourable 
to  its  dtvi-lopment,  572,  573.  Consump- 
tion stimulated  in  seasons  of  prosperity, 
355. 

Contraband  trade  extensively  carried  on  at 
Gil)raltar  3f,7.— (See  Smugfiling.) 

CoPPKR.—  Produce  of  all  our  mines  not 
known  previous  to  18:iO,  nor  later  than 
184(1.  Quantities  raised,  exported,  and 
retained  lor  home  use,  in  181)1-1848,  577, 
578. 

Corn,  extreme  high  price  of,  at  commence- 
ment of  present  century,  439,  440. 

— —  Quantities  imported  into  England  from 
Ireland,  345. 

Remark  on  the  accounts  kept  of  quan- 
tities sold  in  certain  markets  throughout 
the  kingdom,  341. 

The  great  monopoly  of  corn  one  of  the 

chief  obstacles  to  extension  of  European 
commerce.  .374. 

Mr.  Addington's  testimony  in  favour 

of  freedom  from  restrictions  in  the  im- 
portation of  grain,  502,  503. 

Corn  Laws,  expediency  and  necessity  of 
repealing,  355,  350,  412. 

Cotton  Manufactcre,  annual  value  of; 
value  of  home  consumption  in  1849; 
quantities  and  value  of  produce  exported, 
572,  573. 

Number  of   power-looms   in   use   in 

cotton  factories  in  1835,  625,  626.— (See 
Manufacture.) 

of  Saxony  doubled  in  extent  since  the 

Prussian  Commercial  League  came  into 
operation,  411,  412. 

Cotton  and  Cotton  Goods,  quantities  im- 
ported from  India,  742,  743. 

Cotton  may  be  raised  in  Australia  in  great 
abundance,  764. 

CouliDg,  Mr.,  tabular  statement  of  acres  in 
cultivation,  waste,  and  culturable,  in  the 
United  Kingdom,  157-160. 

CotTNTiEs. — Numbers  eraplojed  in  agri- 
culture and  manufactures  in  each  county, 
59.  Numerical  order  of  each  county 
relative  to  proportion  of  its  population 
employed  in  agriculture  and  other  pur- 
suits, 60.  Annual  proportion  of  baptisms, 
marriages,  and  burials  in  each  county, 
33,  34. 

County  Rates,  amount  received  by  trea- 
surers of  counties  in  England  and  Wales 
from  1801  to  1849,  518.  Amount  for 
each  head  of  expemiiture;  remarks  on 
the  items  of  criminal  prosecutions  and 
maintenance  of  prif  oners,  518,  519. 

Ckime — Crimes  and  vices  of  our  forefathers 
viewed  as  less  annoying  than  those  of  our 
own  time:  greater  protection  from  per- 
sonal violence  now  than  formerly,  633, 
C34.  Common  occurrence  of  robberies 
and  murders  on  Blackheath  and  Houns- 
low  Heath  in  former  times  ;  danger  of  pro- 
ceeding to  the  environs  of  London  alone ; 


adoption  of  paper  money  and  establish- 
ment of  police  have  diminished  robberies; 
increase  in  commitments  owing  partly  to 
detection  and  judicial  piini>hment  of 
minor  oiFeuces  formerly  dealt  with  by 
the  populace,  G34.  Table  of  numbers  com- 
mitttd,  sentenced,  and  executed,  1805- 
1849;  great  increase  of  convicts,  C35. 
Diminished  proportion  of  female  offend- 
ers ;  increased  proportion  of  convictions 
to  committals,  635,  636. 

Crime. —  Proportions  of  offenders  who  can 
read  and  write ;  effect  of  instruction  in 
deterring  from  crime,  650,651.  Criminal 
jurisprudence  in  Scotland  ;  tables  of  num- 
bers of  offenders  and  offences  in  Scotland, 
658-664. 

Improvement  of  prison  economy  and 

discipline  under  the  Government  Inspec- 
tors, 672.  Classified  oflBcial  returns  of 
offenders  and  ofienccs  will  hcLceforth 
furnish  means  of  applying  legislative 
checks  to  progress  of  crime,  673. 

Number  of  convicts  who   arrived  in 

New  South  Wales  in  1825-1841,  134. 
Course  of  life  of  reputed  thieves ;  their 
expensive  maintenance  in  prison,  learning 
or  teaching  depravity,  135.  Great  in- 
crease of  commitments,  as  shown  in  gaol 
returns  of  1844,  136.  Number  of  con- 
victs in  Bermuda,  137. 

Proportions  of  offenders  in  Scotland 

able  to  read  and  write;  much  larger  pro- 
portion of  females  committed  in  Scotland 
than  in  England,  658.  Ages  of  offenders 
in  Scotland,  661,  662. 

Number  of  committals,  and  increase 

per  cent,  in  1841  compared  with  1805,  in 
each  countj-  iu  England,  646,  647.  Cen- 
tesimal proportions  at  each  age;  large 
number  of  juvenile  offenders,  648,  649. 
Parkhurst  Keformatorv  Prison  for  boys, 
649. 

Classification  of  crimes  adopted  in  the 

returns  of  the  Home  Office ;  number  of 
each  offence,  1S34-1S49,  640,  647. 

Number  of  offenders  committed  has 

greatly  outstripped  increase  of  population 
and  wealth,  631,  632. 

Historical  notices  of  progressive  miti- 
gation of  the  penal  laws  as  to  capital 
punishment,  quoted  from  Mr.  Pedgrave's 
Criminal  Keturns,  637,  &'C. 

Evil  effects   formerly  of  sanguinary 

penal  laws,  f,36. 

Expenses  incurred  in  each  county  for 

criminal  prosecutions  and  maintenance 
of  prisoneis,  518,  519. 

Does  not  exist  in  Nova  Scotia,  6S8, 

689. 

More  than  mere  knowledge  of  reading 

and  writing  required  to  deter  from  crime, 

664,  06.5. 
Number  of  pauper   children    left  in 

ignorance  a  cause  of  prevalence  of  crime, 

693. 

3    G    2 


S20 


ANALYTICAL  INDEX. 


Crime. — Better  to  expend  public  money  in 
preventing  crime  by  education  than  iu 
punishing,  ()S4. 

■ Good  effects  of  Mrs.  Fry's  philan- 
thropic agency  in  Newgate  prison,  066. 
Crime  diminishable  bj-  removal  of  legis- 
lative impediments  to  industry,  666,  667. 
Statistics  of  crime  in  Ireland,  667,  &c. 
Great  fluctuations  in  the  numbers  of 
olfenders  and  offences  in  Ireland,  668, 
669.  Relates  to  assaults,  riot,  and  illicit 
distillation,  669.  Deficiency  of  returns 
from  Ireland  as  to  ages  and  instruction, 
669,  670. 

Transportation  of  criminals  ;    object 

of  punishment  the  prevention  of  crime  ; 
expatriation  of  convicts  should  be  ren- 
dered more  advantageous  to  the  com- 
munity ;  preferable  to  convey  them  to 
the  interior  of  Canada  rather  than  to 
Australia,  132,  133. 

• Number  of  convicts   landed  in  New 

South  "Wales  in  1828-1838,  762. 

CiTRREsCT,  a  subject  frequently  examined 
and  discussed  since  the  Bullion  Committee 
in  1810,  but  no  principle  or  practice  yet 
determined  on  to  remedy  ruinous  alter- 
nations constantly  recurring,  413,  414. 
Bank  Restriction  Act,  414,  415.  Adverse 
commercial  circumstances  connected  with 
the  French  war,  which  affected  the  state 
of  the  currency,  high  price  of  gold,  415, 
416.  Prosperous  commercial  circum- 
stances subsequent  to  1814.  Fall  in  the 
price  of  gold,  416.  Erroneous  conduct 
of  the  Bank  of  England  in  resorting  to 
redundant  paper  currency,  416,  417.  Mr. 
Peel's  Act  of  1819;  resumption  of  specie 
payments,  417,  418.  Assertion  imputed 
to  Mr.  Kicardo  respecting  fall  in  prices 
in  relation  to  gold  currency,  418.  Panic 
of  1825,  419.  Establishment  of  branch 
banks,  421,  Establishment  of  joint-stock 
banks,  422.  Proposal  of  a  national  bank 
of  issue  by  the  Government,  responsible 
to  Parliament,  423.  Tendency  of  exces- 
sive issues  of  currency  to  raise  the  general 
pricesof  goods  considered,  425,  426.  Plan 
of  a  tabular  arrangement  of  prices  to 
indicate  rise  and  fall,  426.  Opinion  of 
Mr.  Tooke  that  prices  are  not  affected 
by  abundance  or  scarcitj-  of  circulating 
money.  427,  428.  Effect  of  deficient  har- 
vests in  raising  prices,  428,  429.  Table 
showing  amount  of  notes  in  circulation, 
rates  of  exchange,  prices  of  wheat,  and 
.")0  other  articles,  from  1833  to  1849, 
431,  433.  Amount  of  notes  in  circulation 
in  Scotland  and  Ireland,  from  1842  to 
1849,  434.     (See  Gold.) 

CcsTo.MS.  —  Duties  imposed  and  repealed 
from  1801  to  1849,  48,5,  486,  488-490. 

CusTOM-HousE.  — Destroyed  by  fire,  and 
statistical  documents  lost  thereby,  in 
1814,  39G. 

— —  Error  of  annual  statemVnts  respecting 


quantities  of  sugar  retained  for  home 
consumption,  540.  No  account  kept  of 
refined  sugar,  exported  to  Ireland,  which 
is  supplied  wholly  from  Great  Britain, 
541. 

Custom-house. — Valuations  of  exported  and 
imported  merchandise  imperfect,  358. 

Returns  of  numbers  of  emigrants  de- 
fective, 129. 

Custom-liouse  accounts  simplified  b)-  adop- 
tion of  warehousing  system,  465,  46G. 

No  custom-house  in  Switxerland,  244. 

Customs  regulations,  exceedingly  great  im- 
provement in,  at  commencement  of  pre- 
sent century,  461. 

Cutlery,  nearly  all  made  in  the  kingdom 
proceeds  from  Sheffield,  250. 

Dantzic,  amount  of  tonnage  employed  in 
import  and  export  trade,  404. 

Davy,  Sir  Humphry,  his  work  on  agri- 
cultural chemistry  very  serviceable  in 
improvement  of  soils.  145.  Great  benefits 
derived  from  his  safety-lamp,  274. 

Deaths. — Increase  of  populatiom  from  di- 
minishing proportion  of  deaths  an  uner- 
ring sign  of  prosperit3',  25.  Table  of 
proportionate  deaths  from  1780  to  1820, 
showing  progressive  diminution,  25.  Rate 
of  mortality  not  increased  by  bringing 
together  large  masses  of  population,  26, 
27.  Number  of  deaths  of  aged  persons  in 
London  not  easily  ascertained,  27.  Rate 
of  mortality  in  Middlesex  lower  than  in 
most  countries  of  Europe.  27. 

Table  of  ages  of  persons  buried  from 

1813  to  1830,  28;  known  to  be  incom- 
plete, 29.  Table  of  annual  proportion  of 
burials,  baptisms,  and  marriages,  1796- 
1841,  in  each  county,  33.  Annual  pro- 
portion according  to  Registrar-General's 
returns,  1839-42,  34, 

Increase  in  population  of  England  and 

France  the  result  of  diminished  propor- 
tion of  deaths,  18.  Proportions  of,  in 
various  countries  of  Europe  and  America, 
22. 

Results  deduced  from  bills  of  mor- 
tality, showing  progressive  decrease  of 
proportionate  deaths,  21,  23;  and  of 
deaths  under  the  age  of  20,  23,  24. 

Table   of    deaths    in    England    and 

Wales,  and  centesimal  proportions  of 
same  at  different  ages,  from  1838  to  1842, 
19. 

Rate  of  mortality  less  in  England  and 

Wales  than  in  other  European  countries, 
and  America,  21. 

Table  of  mortality  from   small-pox, 

.39.  To  1801,  burials  in  London  were  in 
excess  over  the  births ;  since  that  period 
an  excess  of  berths,  39,  40.  Annual  aver- 
age deaths  in  London,  1701  to  1800,  and 
1811-1836,  39. 

Proportion  of  children  that  die  before 

1st,  10th,  and  18th  year,  22. 


AN.VIATK'AL  INDEX. 


821 


Deaths. — Stigrgcstion  by  Sir  F.  D'lvernois, 
on  recordiuj;  mortality  of  children,  '^4. 

Annual  proportion  of  Deatlis   in  the 

Borough  of  Tavistock,  ."5. 

(See     under     Hospitals,    Tables    of 

Deaths.) 

Debt.  National. — (See  Finance.) 

Df.nmauk,  population  of,  -whicli  does  not 
equal  that  of  London,  consume  more 
FriMK'li  wine  than  the  whole  of  the  United 
Kingdom.  561. 

Differential  duties  on  sugar,  extremely  bur- 
densome and  impolitic,  547,  548. 

(See  Duties.) 

D'lvernois,  Sir  Francis,  statement  of  com- 
parative proportion  of  deaths  to  the  popu- 
lation in  several  countries  of  Europe,  21. 
Suggestion  of  the  use  of  recording  mor- 
tality of  children,  24. 

Dependencies. —  Europe.  — Gibraltar. — 
Area,  population,  trade,  shipping,  729, 
730.  Malta,  important  as  a  naval  station  ; 
its  area,  population,  trade,  revenues,  mo- 
nopoly of  grain,  731,  732.  Scale  of  duties 
on  wheat ;  Government  monopoly  of 
printing;  uumbersand  amount  of  salaries 
of  official  population.  732,  733.  Agricultu- 
ral produce,  live  stock,  shipping,  733,  734. 
Ionian  hhinds. —  Legislative  constitution, 
and  government  authorities,  734.  Area, 
population,  importations  from  Great  Bri- 
tain, shipping,  trade,  734,  730.  Heligo- 
land, valuable  as  a  station  for  pilots,  and 
depot  for  manufactured  goods  ;  resorted 
to  by  invalids.  73'!,  737. 

■ Asia. — Origin,  progressive   increase, 

government,  and  commercial  progress  of 
the  British  empire  in  India,  738,  &c. — 
(See  India.)  CeijJon. — Situation  ;  popu- 
lation, cultivation,  751,  752.  Produce  of 
coffee,  752.  Abundant  produce  and  va- 
rious uses  of  the  cocoa-nut  tree,  752,  753. 
Value  of  produce  of  cinnamon  ;  surplus 
produce  burnt  by  the  Dutch,  753. — 
Valuable  gems  and  minerals  found ;  other 
natural  productions  ;  manufactures,  trade, 
753.  754. — Mauritius. — Situation  ;  colo- 
nization ;  classified  population ;  export- 
able produce ;  quantities  of  sugar  ex- 
ported ;  value  of  British  produce  exported 
to  Mauritius,  trade,  shipping,  754-75fi. 
Number  of  slaves  emancipated  by  Act  of 
183.3,  805. 

Africa.  — Cape  of  Good  Hope;  situ- 
ation, area,  773.  Cape  Town  ;  population 
in  1795;  in  1839;  in  1849;  exports  of 
British  manufactures  from  1827  to  1849, 
773,  774. — Exports  from  the  Cape  ;  ship- 
ping, tonnage,  774,  775.  Produce  of,  and 
demand  for,  the  Cape  wine,  has  not  ful- 
filled expectation,  775.  Whale  fishery  ; 
number  of  live  stock ;  extent  of  land  in 
crop,  and  quantities  of  produce  ;  the 
African  oak  of  the  colony  valuable  for 
ship  building.  775,  776.  Bays  and  har- 
bours near  the  Cape,  776.     Number  of 


slaves  emancipated  by  the  Act  of  1833 
805. 
Dependencies.  —  St.  Helena.  —  Situation  ; 
celebrity  as  the  prison  of  Napoleon  after 
committing  himself  toEnglish  hospitality; 
yields  abundance  of  good  water  and  vege- 
tables for  supplying  vessels  from  India; 
colonized  by  the  Dutch  ;  population  ;  ex- 
ports of  British  mami  factures  to  St.  Helena, 
776,  777.  Shipping,  777.  Ascension 
Island.  —  Situation;  yields  supplies  of 
fresh  water  and  vegetables  to  vessels,  778. 

Sierra   Leone.  —  Situation  ;    extent  ; 

successive  transfers  of  negroes  to  the 
colony  ;  great  reduction  of  their  numbers 
by  mortality  and  desertion,  778,  779. 
Population  in  1844;  Kroom^n  ;  number 
of  emancipated  slaves  ;  government;  un- 
healthiness  of  climate  ;  trade  ;  exports  ; 
shipping,  779,  780.  Slave-trade  in  Island 
of  St.  James  :  settlement  at  Bathurst ; 
purchase  of  the  Baccow  Territory,  780. 

Settlements  on  the  Gold  Coast. — Cape 

Coast  Castle,  Accra,  Dix  Cove,  Anna- 
maboe ;  value  of  British  manufactures 
exported  thither;  increase  in  quantity  of 
palm  oil,  and  other  produce  exported  to 
England;  population  of  the  district,  781. 

Fernando   I'o. — Situation;  value  as  a 

trading  station  ;  black  population,  782. 

Domestic  Service. — (See  Servants.) 

Drunkenness,  prevalence  of,  in  1736  and 
1745,  attributed  to  the  number  of  gin- 
shops,  674,  675. 

Universal  habit  among  all  classes  in 

the  last  century,  675.  Personal  debase- 
ment and  depraved  conversation  conse- 
quent thereon,  675. 

Dundee,  great  increase  of  linen  manufacture 
since  1815;  quantities  produced,  227. 

DcTiES,  should  be  imposed  only  for  reve- 
nue ;  duties  for  regulation  always  pro- 
ductive of  more  harm  than  good,  500. 
Quotation  from  Dr.  Franklin  on  the  im- 
policy and  mischief  of  retaliatory  re- 
strictive duties,  501. 

High    duties    on   foreign    spirits   has 

kept  down  the  amount  of  consumption, 
557. 

Impolitic  and  immoral  effects  of  high 

duties  on  foreign  spirits  in  tempting  to 
the  commission  of  the  crime  of  smug- 
gling, 559. 

Duty  on  beer  repealed  in  1830,  562. 

Beer-duty  same  in  Scotland  as  England  ; 
no  duty  ou  beer  in  Ireland,  564. 

Duty  on  candles  prevented  improve- 
ments in  manufacture  ;  greatly  improved 
since  repeal  of  the  duty  in  1832,  571. 

Protective,  impolicy  of,  as  to  colonial 

commerce  ;  instance  of  sugar,  809,  811. 

Excessive  duty  on   French  wines    in 

favour  of  those  in  Portugal,  by  treaty  of 
Methuen  in  17U3  etfecteii  gnat  reduction 
in  quantity  consumed  in  England,  561, 
562. 


822 


ANALYTICAL  INDEX. 


Duties. — Cousumption  of  tea  diminished  by 
imposition  of  high  duties,  552. 

Protective,  evil  etft'Cts  of,  in  France, 

on  woollen  trade,  236,  237.  Opinion  of 
^Messrs.  Villiers  and  Bowring  quoted 
thereon,  237.  Impolicy  of  duty  on  im- 
portation of  coals  in  France,  and  on  iron, 
237. 

Glass  manufacture  retarded  by  impo- 
sition of  excessive  duties,  252,  253,  255, 
256. 

Excessive  duties  on  foreign  vrines  the 

cause  of  great  deci'ease  in  relative  cou- 
sumption since  1700,  560,  5(j1. 

■ Excessive  duties  on  tobacco  encourage 

smuggling,  566. 

Eemarkable  effects  of  high  duties  in 

diminishing  consumption  and  revenue, 
549,  550. 

Duty  on  paper  first  imposed  in  1711 ; 

its  tendency  to  retard  the  progress  of 
knowledge,  567.  Increase  of  consumption 
of  paper  on  reduction  of  duty  in  1S36, 
568,  569.  Increased  consumption  of  al- 
manacs on  repeal  of  stamp  duty,  569. 

Injurious  effects  of  prohibitory  duties 

on  silk  trade,  213,  214.  Great  increase 
of  consumption  produced  by  change  of 
system,  215-217. 

Decrease  of  consumption  in  tobacco 

attributable  to  increase  of  duty,  565,  566. 

■ Imposition  of   duties   destructive   to 

industry  during  the  war,  468. 

■ Consumption  duties  required  to  be  paid 

on  importation  of  goods  previous  to  1803 ; 
oppressive  consequences  of  that  system, 
461.  Reduction  of  impolitic  duties  since 
1831,  497,  493.  Expediency  of  repealing 
many  unproductive  duties,  498,  499. 

■ Impolicy  of  prohibitory  duties  in  Rus- 
sia, 243,  244. 

■ (See  Legacy  Duty.) 

Dwelling-houses  of  middle  classes  improved 
mcu'e  than  those  of  the  working  classes, 
522,  523. 

East  India  Company. — (See  India.) 

East  Indies. — (See  India.) 

Education.— Fi  rst  measures  of  Government 
for  national  education  :  Committee  of 
Privy  Council ;  vote  of  30,000/.,  693. 
Address  to  the  Queen  in  opposition  to  the 
Government  plan  ;  objections  found  to  be 
chimerical ;  the  opposed  sj'stem  adopted 
by  succeeding  ministry  ;  number  of  pauper 
children  left  in  ignorance,  693.  Prejudice 
against  the  education  of  the  poor,  694. 
Gradual  disappearance  of  this  prejudice, 
694.  Earl  of  Kerry's  inquiry  into  the 
state  of  education,  694.  Inquiries  insti- 
tuted by  Statistical  Societies  of  London 
and  Manchester  ;  number  of  children  re- 
c(-iving  instruction,  1818-33,  695,  696. 
Incompetence  of  teachers  ;  mental  con- 
dition of  inmates  of  Parkhurst  Juvenile 
Prison,  696,  697.     Training  of  teachers  ; 


model  school  established  by  Mr.  Kay 
Shuttleworth  and  Mr.  Tufthell,  at  Bat- 
tersea,  697.  Registration  of  marriages 
made  a  criterion  of  instruction,  ('93. 
Number  of  marriages,  and  proportion  of 
persons  who  signed  with  marks,  699,  700. 

Education. — Great  Britain  the  last  of  Euro- 
pean nations  iu  making  provision  for  in- 
struction of  the  people,  ()82.  Importance 
of  educating  working  classes,' 683,  684. 

Duty  of  Government  to  instruct  the 

people,  684. 

Ignorance  the  most  formidable  of  all 

obstacles  to  improvement  ;  Archbishop 
Sumner  cited  on  education  of  the  poor, 
687.  In  Nova  Scotia  education  prevails 
and  crime  does  not  exist,  688,  689. 
Amount  contributed  in  Nova  Scotia  in 
1841  for  education,  689.  Testimony  of 
Mr.  M'Gregor  as  to  the  beneficial  effects 
of  education  in  that  colony,  689. 

Commencement  and  progress  of  Mr. 

Lancaster's  school  system,  690-697. 

Labours  of  Mr.  Wyse,  M.P.,  in  the 

cause  of  national  education,  684,  685. 

Knowledge   merely  of  reading  and 

writing  does  not  deter  from  crime,  664. 
Instructed  persons  would  better  calculate 
the  consequences  of  right  and  wrong  con- 
duct, 665.  The  educator  must  form  the 
character,  666,  667. 

The  remedy  for   increase  of  crime, 

633-650. 

Proportion  of  emigrants  to  New  South 

Wales  who  could  read  and  write,  761. 

Scotland. — Returns  of  numbers  of  pa- 
rochial schools,  scholars,  and  subjects  of 
instruction,  701-703. 

Deplorable  deficiency  in  Glasgow,  679. 

Ireland.—  Institution   of  the  national 

system  by  Lord  Stanley  ;  previous  pro- 
vision for  education ;  abuse  of  ample 
means  allowed  for  the  purpose,  703.  Act 
of  Will.  III.  made  it  penal  to  receive  any 
but  Protestant  education,  704.  The  Pro- 
testant Incorporated  Society  for  Prose- 
lytism,  704,  705. 

Establishment  of  Board  of  Commis- 
sioners for  Education  in  Ireland,  707. 
Hostility  of  Protestant  Clergj',  707. 
Number  of  national  schools  and  of 
children  in  Ireland  ;  success  of  the 
national  system  there,  707,  708. 

Remarkable  prevalence  of  education  in 

Iceland,  and  beneficial  consequences,  689, 
690. 

Establishment  of  the  Kildare  Street 

Society  in  Dublin,  706,  707. 

Charter    Schools    in    Ireland  ;    their 

wretched  state,  and  large  amount  of  pub- 
lic money  squandered  upon  them,  705, 
706. 

(See  Crime,  Progress,  Manners.) 

Edwards,  Bryan,  quotation  from  his  '  His- 
tory of  the  West  Indies,'  on  colonization, 
721,722. 


ANALYTICAL  INDKX. 


8:23 


Eggs,  value  of,  imported  into  England  from 
Ireland,  344. 

E.MiGUATioN,  126-137.  Causes  which  make 
it  expedient,  12(5,  127.  Government  con- 
veyance of  settlers  to  South  Africa  in 
1820  ;  tables  of  numbers  of  emigrants  to 
different  colonies  from  1820  to  1849,  128, 
129. 

Number  of  emigrants  who  arrived  at 

Quebec  from  England,  Ii'eland,  Scotland, 
&c.,  from  1829  to  \S4:\  129.  Number 
who  arrived  at  New  York  from  1829  to 
1841.  129.  Capital,  amounting  to  one 
million,  conveyed  to  Canada  in  1834  by 
emigrants,  132. 

Recommended  as  auxiliary  relief  to 

Irish  poor,  307. 

Preference  of  Canada  to  Australia  for 

emigration,  132,  133. 

Emigrants  proceed  to  Canada  by  way 

of  New  York;  reasons  for  preferring  this 
route,  132. 

Employment. — Number  of  persons  em- 
ployed in  the  various  Government  de- 
partments, with  amount  of  salaries,  .514, 
515. 

Comparatively  small  proportion  of  the 

population  unengaged  in  gainful  employ- 
ment, 520. 

England  long  pre-eminent  for  manufac- 
turing skill,  1G7. 

Has  hitherto  been  the  lowest  among 

the  Protestant  kingdoms  of  Europe  in 
providing  means  of  national  education, 
693. 

Foreign  commerce  necessary  to  Eng- 
land ;  has  peculiar  advantages  for  prose- 
cution of  foreign  commerce,  351,  352. 
Soil  inadequate  to  supply  food  for  con- 
stiintly  increasing  population,  354. 

Especially  interested  in  perfect  free- 
dom of  commerce,  263. 

Necessaries,  conveniences,  and  luxuries 

of  life  very  great  in  England.  521,  522. 

Perfection   of  the   means   of  internal 

communication  in,  287-290. 

Great  increase  in  the  number  of  cri- 
minal committals,  631-032. 

England,  Mr.,  a  publican,  his  indignant  dis- 
claimer of  connexion  with  prize-fighters, 
6S1. 

Ewart.  Mr.,  his  bills  relating  to  capital 
punishment,  643,  644. 

Excise  licenses,  number  issued  in  1831.  67  ; 
in  1841,  68.  Table  of  licenses  granted  in 
18U1,  1816,  1833,  184-1,  71. 

Taxes  from   1801   to   1849,  485,   486, 

488,  490,  492,  49-3,  496. 

Expenditure. — (See  Finance.) 

Exports,  table  of,  from  1801  to  1849,  356. 
Table  of  real  or  declared  value  of  exports 
to  foreign  countries  and  colonies,  1805- 
1849,  359,  SCiO. 

Tables  of  value  of  exports  to  foreign 

countries  and  colonics,  from  1827  to  1849, 
362-367. 


Exports. — Remarks  upon  amount  of  export 
trade  to  various  countries,  361.  Prussia, 
361.  Gibraltar,  367.  Africa.  367.  North 
American  Colonies,  369.  West  Indies, 
369.  Turkey,  369.  India,  369,  370. 
China,  369,  370.  Remark  on  the  official 
and  actual  value  of  exported  and  imported 
goods,  377. 

Custom-house  valuation   of   exported 

merchandise  incorrect,  357. 

Factory  system  and  manufacturing  indus- 
try do  not  abridge  duration  of  life,  26,  27. 

Factories,  number  of  persons  and  amount  of 
mechanical  power  employed  therein,  in 
1835  and  1839,  7(i,  77,  232,  233. 

Felkin,  Mr.,  of  Nottingham,  address  to 
workmen  on  provident  habits,  455,  456. 

Finance,  new  system  of,  introduced  by  Mr, 
Pitt  in  1797,467.  New  impost  called  the 
"  Triple  Assessment,''  467,  468.  Income 
tax  imposed  and  repealed,  4f;8,  469. 
Explanation  of  partial  prosperity  under 
heavy  taxation,  469,  470.  Invention  of 
the  spinning'-jenny,  and  improvements  of 
the  steam-engine,  have  rescued  the  nation 
from  financial  ruin,  caused  by  the  expense 
of  the  French  war,  469-471, 

Income  and  Expenditure. — Amount  of 

expenditui'e  during  the  war ;  disbursement 
of  1814  nearly  1L»7  millions,  472.  Ave- 
rage annual  amount  of  expenditure  for 
the  10  years  ending  1815,  above  84  mil- 
lions; quotations  from  Sir  John  Sinclair's 
v.'ork  ou  the  Revenue,  showing  gloomy 
forebodings  of  financial  distress,  from 
1736,  472-474.  Amount  of  the  public 
debt  at  successive  periods,  from  173S  to 
1816,  473.  474.  Tabular  statement  of  the 
public  income  and  expenditure  of  the 
United  Kingdom  in  each  year,  from  1 792 
to  1844,  475.  Amount  raised  on  loan; 
amount  of  Exchequer  bills  ;  amount  and 
description  of  stock  created;  rate  of  in- 
terest; annual  charge,  476.  Delusive 
nature  of  the  sinking  fund  ;  its  fallacy 
now  fully  recognised,  474,  477,  481.  Er- 
roneous financial  proceedings  relative  to 
the  sinking  fund,  477,  478.  Inconsistent 
measures  adopted  ;  dead  weight  annuity  ; 
conversion  of  perpetual  into  terminable 
annuities,  479,  480.  Incorrectness  of 
tables  used  for  the  purpose,  and  great 
consequent  loss  to  the  public  ;  balance  of 
income  and  expenditure  for  the  10  years, 
1792  to  1802  ;  statement  of  excess  of  ex- 
penditure over  income  during  the  period 
of  war,  and  excess  of  income  during  sub- 
sequent peace  ;  3 1 6  years  of  peace  required 
to  cancel  the  debt  incurred  during  24 
years  of  war,  480-484.  Plans  of  finance 
adopted  during  the  present  century ;  an- 
nual financial  exposition  called  The 
Budget,  483,  484. 

War    and    peace   expenditure    in    the 

period  1793-1815  compared  with  that  of 


824 


ANALYllCAL  INDEX. 


1S1G-18.3S,  and  of  the  period  1S06-1813 
compared  with  that  of  1828-1838,  593, 
594. 
Finance. — Produce  of  Tares. — Estimated 
produce  of  taxes  imposed  iu  each  year 
from  ISOl  to  1849,  485,  436.  Estimated 
amount  or  taxes  expired,  or  reduced,  in 
each  j-ear  from  1814  to  1849;  remarks 
thereon,  486-488.  Statement  of  produce 
of  taxes,  compared  with  population  from 
1811  to  1849,  488-490.  Table  showing 
amount  of  capital  upon  which  legacy  duty 
has  been  paid  from  1797  to  1848,  492.  493. 
Amount  of  revenue  received  from  stamp- 
duty  on  legacies  from  1824  to  1849.  495, 
496.  Progress  of  Customs  and  Excise 
duties  with  relation  to  population,  from 
1801  to  1849,  496.  Amount  of  revenue 
from  taxes,  compared  with  population 
from  1801  to  1849,  496,  497.  Statement 
of  relative  amount  produced  by  different 
articles,  498,  499. 

Income-tax  in  1803;  amount  of  real 

property  assessed,  606.  Amount  as- 
sumed for  similar  assessment  by  Sir 
Robert  Peel  in  1842,  607.  By  Mr.  Pitt 
in  1798,  607. 

(See  War   Expenditure.)      Table   of 

expenditure  for  Civil  List  and  miscella- 
neous services,  from  1801  to  1849,  509. 
Historical  notices  and  successive  amounts 
of  Civil  List,  from  1701,  509-512. 
Amount  of  expenditure  for  miscellaneous 
services  iu  1849,  512.  Amount  of  ex- 
penditure for  salaries  in  Government 
departments,  513-515.  —  (See  France, 
America,  for  expenditure  of  those  coun- 
tries.) 

County  and  parochial  expenditure. — 

(See  Poor,  Coanty  Rates.) 
Fire  Insurance. — Amount  of  property  in- 
sured does  not  afford  a  correct  view  of 
the  progressive  value  of  property  liable 
to  destruction  by  fire,  596.     High  rate  of 
dut}"    acts   as  a   great  discouragement  to 
effect   insurances,    597.      Tabular    state- 
ment  of  amounts    insured    in    England, 
Scotland,  and  Ireland,  showing  increase 
thereon,  in  1801-1849,  597. 
Finlaysoii,  Mr.,  table  of  population  (by  Mr. 
Rickman)    on   his   authority,    for    1700- 
1800,  13. 
FisHE'.aEs  of  Xew  South  Wales,  762,  763. 
Van  Diemen's  Land,  767.     New  Zealand, 
772.     Cape  of  Good  Hope,  775.     Lower 
Canada,  78G,  787.    Nova  Scotia,  791,  792. 
Newfoundland,  795. 
Fitzwilliam,  Earl,  quotation  from  his  .Id- 
dress  on  th-'  Corn  Laws,  in  proof  of  ex- 
tension and  increased  produce  of  agricul- 
ture, 152. 
Flax. — Increased  demand  for  foreign  flax ; 
obtained  chiefly  from  Belgium,  574. 

Quantities  imported  and  consumed  in 

the  United  Kingdom  in  eacli  year  from 
1820  to  1829,  229. 


Flax  Factories,  number  and  power  of  in 
operation,  and  the  number  and  ages  of 
persons  employed  therein  in  1835  and 
1839,  230,  231. 

Flol-r. — Wheat-flour,  quantity  imported 
from  Ireland,  345. 

Food. — Number  of  families  employed  in 
the  production  of  food  in  England  and 
Ireland,  (52,  63. 

Great  scarcity  of  experienced  at  com- 
mencement of  present  century,  owing  to 
bad  harvests  ;  price  of  quartern  loaf, 
Is.  10(/^.,  439. 

Prices  of  beef  and  mutton  iu  1801- 

1849,  589. 

Necessity  for  abolishing  all  restrictions 

upon  importation  of,  412. 

—  No  means  of  asct- rtaining  quantities  of 

chief  articles  of  food  produced  and  con- 
sumed iu  this  country  :  want  of  this  in- 
formation has  c;iused  fallacious  compu- 
tations in  treatises  on  social  economy ; 
importance  of  knowing  accurately  the 
amount  of  provision  for  sustenance  of  the 
people,  537,  538.  Disastrous  consequences 
of  deficient  information  ;  popular  prejudice 
against  adoption  of  any  organized  plan 
for  oiitaining  this  knowledge,  538,  539. 
Superior  advantage  of  arrangements  for 
this  purpose  in  Belgium,  539.  Facility 
and  reasonableness  of  procuring  returns 
for  this  purpose  in  England.  539.  540. 

■ •  Difficulty  of  ascertaining  amount   of 

consumption  of  food  by  families,  582,  583. 
Account  of  consumption  of  various  articles 
of  food  in  a  wealthy  private  family,  and 
in  several  public  institutions  in  Loudon, 
583-.586. 
Foreign  Commerce. — (See  Commerce). 
Forgery,  mitigation  of  penal  law  relating 
to,  642.     Bill  by  Sir  Robert  Peel  relating 
to,  643. 
Foundling  Hospital  in  Ireland,  expense  of, 

and  mortality  in  (note),  705. 
France. — Exports  of  British  silk  goods  to 
France,    219.     Causes   of  superiority   of 
French  weavers.  219,  221.     Woollen  ma- 
nufacture. 235.    Cotton  manufacture,  237- 
240.     Silk  manufacture,  240-243.     Great 
amount  (>f  smuggling.  241. 
•  —  .-Vtlantic  ports  completely  ruined  dur- 
ing the   war;   Havre,   the   Liverpool  of 
France,  lost  all  its  trade,  400. 
• — —  Trade  of,  greatly  increased  since  the 
peace,  400-402.     Table   of  imports   and 
exports  from  1801  to  1848,  400. 
Table  of  shipping,  inwards  and  out- 
wards in  1820-1848,  401,  402. 

Has    become    possessed    of  our    best 

machines,  520. 
Classification  of  employments  of  popu- 
lation of  France,  83  -85.     Division  of  the 
soil,  85. 

Consumption   of  iron  in ;   amount    of 

loss  by  exclusion  of  English  iron,  288,  289. 
Calculation  of  extent  of  lands  culti- 


ANALYTIC -AI,  INUi:X. 


82.5 


vated  in,  and  of  the  number  of  ploughs 
employed.  '288. 
France. — Adiierence  of  the  French   .'^hop- 
keepers  to  the  use  of  the  ancient  weights 
and  measures,  .347,  348. 

Relative  consumption  of  wine  exceeds 

seventy  times  that  of  the  United  King- 
dom, 5f;i. 

Quantity  of  wine  made  in  France,  ."501. 

Loss  to  inhabitants  of,  by  badness  of 

roads,  2S'.>,  290.  Number  and  extent  of 
canals,  312. 

Railroads  constructed  and  undertaken, 

29n. 

■  Value  of  plated  goods  annually  con- 
sumed, 252. 

Kates  of  increase  of  population,  18. 

Amount  of  population  in  1791,  1817, 

1825,  1831,  1841,  18. 

Correspondence  of  number  of  mar- 
riages with  price  of  food,  440,  441. 

Franklin,  Dr.,  his  authority  quoted  as  to 
the  impolicy  and  miscliief  of  retaliatory 
restrictive  duties,  .501. 

Free  Trade. — (See  Commerce,  Monopoly, 
Duties.) 

Fry,  Mrs.,  good  effects  of  her  philanthropic 
agency  in  Newgate  prison,  l\W>. 

Her  evidence  on   the   evil    effects  of 

capital  punishment,  (J4a. 

Furnaces,  number  of,  in  Scotland,  for  smelt- 
ing iron,  574. 

Gas,  origin  of  using  it  for  lighting  build- 
ings and  streets,  581,  582. 

Companies,  amount  of  capital  invested 

in,  (324. 

GKRMAXY,has  become  possessed  of  our  best 
machines,  520. 

Amount  of  exports  to.  in  each  year 

from  1827  to  1849,  410,  411. 

Progress  of  the  cotton  manufacture  in, 

243. — (See  Prussia,  Saxony.) 

Gibraltar,  contraband  trade  extensively 
carried  on  at,  367. — (,  See  Dependencies  in 
Europe.) 

Gin,  enormous  quantities  consumed  in  1733 
to  1742,  674,  675. 

Gin-shops,  20,000  in  London  in  1742,  675. 

Prevalence  of  drunkenness   in    1742 

and  1745,  attributed  to  the  great  number 
of  gin-shops,  674. 

Glasgow,  deplorable  deficiency  of  educa- 
tion, and  consequent  prevalence  of  im- 
morality, 679. 

Sheriff  Alison's  evidence  as  to  preva- 
lence of  drunkenness  in  Glasgow,  678, 
679. 

Glass  manufacture,  252,  Jtc. — (See  Manu- 
factures.) 

Gloves,  cotton,  low  price  of,  in  Saxony,  412. 

Gold,  great  increase  in  price  of,  during  the 
war  with  Napoleon,  379. 

Gold  and  silver  plate. — (See  Plate  ) 

Government  instituted  for  good  of  the 
people,  and  to  remove  domestic  calamity, 


no  less  than  to  protect  from  foreign  out- 
rage, 127,  128. 

Govenmient.— Not  the  source  of  all  the 
circumstances  that  affect  the  happiness  of 
a  country,  24.' 

The  duty  of  every  Government  to  pro- 
vide instruction  for  the  people,  683. 

Grain,  its  high  price  causing  import:ition 
from  foreign  countries,  occasioned  dimi- 
nution of  the  coasting  trade  in  1827,  1828, 
340,  341. 

Quantity  brought  into  Great  Britain, 

from  Ireland,  1815-1849,  345. 

Griffith,  Mr.,  his  evidence  quoted  as  to  the 
great  advantages  arising  from  improve- 
ment of  roads  in  Ireland,  294. 

Guano  imported  from  certain  islands  in  the 
Pacific,  for  manure,  1841-1849,  145. 

Guerry,  iM.,  notice  of  his  work.  "  Sur  la 
Statistique  Morale  de  la  France,"  656, 
657. 

Guest,  Sir  John,  evidence  of,  quoted  on 
amount  of  iron  made  in  the  kingdom, 
268,  574. 

Hardwark  and  Cutlery,  quantities  and 
value  thereof,  exported  at  different  periods 
during  the  present  century,  247. 

Harvests,  extremely  bad  at  commencement 
of  present  century,  439. 

Havre,  the  Liverpool  of  France,  during  the 
war  lost  all  it  trade,  400. 

IlawkiiiS,  Dr.  Bisset, his  work  on  'Medical 
Statistics,'  noticed  and  quoted,  37,  3S. 

Health  and  duration  of  life  not  diminished 
by  bringing  together  population  in  masses, 
26,  27. 

Heligoland. — (See  Dependencies — Europe.) 

Hemp,  quantities  imported  from  India,  742. 

Hides,  quantities  imported  from  India,  742. 

Highlands  of  Scotland,  advantages,  social 
and  moral,  produced  by  opening  and  im- 
proving roads,  293,  294. 

Hill,  Mr.  Rowland,  his  plans  for  a  low  and 
uniform  rate  of  postage,  709,  &c. 

Extract  from  his  pamphlet  on  Post- 
office  reform,  711. 

Himalaya  raoimtains  and  other  parts  of 
India  give  pasturage  to  fine  breed  of 
sheep,  744. 

Holland  consumes  much  greater  relative 
quantity  of  French  wines  than  England, 
562. 

Hops,  extent  of  land  occupied  in  the  culture 
of,  precisely  known,  145,  146. 

Horses,  demand  for.  diminished  by  esta- 
blishment of  railroads,  163.  E-xag- 
gerated  statement  of  Parliamentary  com- 
mittee as  to  extent  of  this  reduction,  164. 
Number  of  horses  kept,  and  of  persons 
assessed  for  tax  thereon,  in  1821  and 
1844,  165,  166. 

Nnmber  imported  into  England  from 

Ireland,  343. 

Difficult  to  ascertain  and  compare  thq 

numbers  kept  at  different  periods,-  num- 


8:26 


ANALYTICAL  INDEX. 


ber  charged  with  duty  in  1838, 1840.  and 
1849,  532.  Number  exempted  from  duty, 
533. 

Horsham,  great  improvements  in  its  means 
of  communication,  :i96. 

Hosiery,  manufacture  of,  increased  in 
Saxouy,  411.  Extreme  low  prices  of, 
412. 

Shipped  largely  from  Saxouy  to  the 

United  States  of  America,  412. 

Hospitals,  medical,  notice  of  and  recom- 
mendation to  institute  regular  and  uni- 
form registration  of  operations.  37,  38. 
Disadvantages  of  our  present  ignorance 
upon  this  subject  stated  by  Dr.  Hawkins, 
38. 

Eemarks  on  the  different  proportions 

of  mortality  in  several  general  hospitals, 
42-44.  Table  of  admissions  and  propor- 
tion of  deaths  and  cures  in  the  Lock 
Hospital,  44. 

Remarks  on  St.  Luke's  Hospital,  and 

table  of  admissions,  cures,  and  deaths, 
from  1751  to  1844,  46,  47.  Remarks, 
and  tables  of  admissions,  cures,  and  deaths 
in  Bethlehem  Hospital,  1820-1849,  47, 
48. 

Foundling,  in  Ireland,  expense  and 

mortality  of  {note),  705. 

Hounslow  Heath,  common  occurrence  of 
robberies  and  murders  there  in  former 
times,  634. 

Houses,  number  of,  in  proportion  to  in- 
habitants, usually  the  same  at  all  periods 
in  the  same  district ;  average  number  of 
persons  in  each  house  widely  different  in 
different  places,  but  permanently  similar 
in  the  same  locality  ;  average  number  in 
England  and  in  iMiddlesex  in  1801-1841, 

525.  No  returns  of  inhabited  houses  in 
Scotland  and  Ireland  previous  to  1821  ; 
average  number  in  each  house  in  Scot- 
land—Edinburgh, Ireland — Dublin,  525, 

526.  Number,  rates,  and  classes  of  in- 
habited houses  ;  annual  rental  according 
to  rated  value,  526.  Total  number  of 
inhaljited  houses  in  England,  Ireland, 
Scotland  ;  increase  in  rated  houses  from 
1812  to  1833;  house  duty  repealed  in 
1834,  527.  Increase  of  rated  dwellings 
indicates  progress  of  improvement  among 
■working  classes,  527,  528. 

Howard,   his  inquiry  into  state  of  charter 

/    schools  in  Ireland,  704,  705. 

Hudson's  Bay  territory  ;  situation  ;  probable 
area  ;  is  the  hunting  ground  of  the  Hud- 
son's Bay  Company  ;  supplies  furs  to  the 
markets  of  the  world,  796. 

Iceland. — Universality  of  education  there- 
in, and  beneficial  consequences,  689,  690. 

Ignorance  the  most  formidable  of  all  ob- 
stacles to  improvement,  687.  (See  Edu- 
cation.) 

Imforts  and  Exports. — Quantities  of  iron 
exported,  574,  575.     Copper,  577,  578. 


Imports  and  Exports  of  the  trade  with 
India,  746,  747. 

of  the  United  States  of  America,  405, 

406. 

Table  of  import  and  export  trade  in 

1802,1814,  1835.  and  1844,  399.  Amount 
and  value  of  cotton  exported,  572,  573. 

Imports.  —  Possible  to  ascertain  average 
value  of  all  foreign  and  colonial  mer- 
chandise imported,  357,  358. — (See  Com- 
merce, Trade,  Duties,  and  Countries  and 
Ports  under  their  respective  names.) 

Improvement,  social,  increase  of  in  England, 
521-524. 

India.  East. — Origin  and  progressive  in- 
crease of  the  British  empire  in  India, 
738,  &c.  Increase  of  territory  undesigned 
and  forbidden  on  the  part  of  the  Court 
of  Directors,  740,  741.  Irruption  into 
Affghanistan  prosecuted  M'ithout  the  sanc- 
tion of  the  Court  of  Directors ;  not  an 
Indian  war,  741.  Advantageous  effects 
of  abolishing  commercial  monopoly  of 
the  Company,  741,  &c.  Value  and  quan- 
tities of  imports  and  exports,  the  trade 
of  the  United  Kingdom  with  India,  742, 
743.  Extensive  and  good  pasturage  for 
sheep  and  climate  favourable  for  pro- 
duction of  fine  wool,  743,  744.  Improve- 
ment of  East  India  rice:  flax,  tallow, 
oils,  timber,  might  be  imported  from 
India,  744. 

Revenues  of  the  Company   derived 

chiefly  from  land  ;  amounts  collected  ; 
amount  of  the  Company's  registered  debt, 
and  other  pecuniary  burdens,  747,  748. 
Constitution  and  powers  of  the  Court  of 
Directors  ;  subjection  to  the  ministerial 
power  of  the  state;  nature  and  operation 
of  the  Board  of  Control ;  absolute  powers 
committed  to  the  president,  748,  749. 
Territories  over  which  the  sovereignty 
of  the  Company  extends,  750.  Com- 
mercial value  of  India  to  England,  750, 
751. 

Capabilities  of  that  vast  region  imper- 
fectly known  ;  since  the  Act  of  1833  public 
attention  strongly  directed  to  commercial 
intercourse  with.  370,  371.  Remarks  on 
means  of  improving  commerce  in  India, 
371,  372. 

Imports,    exports,    and    shipping   of 

Bengal,  Madras,  and  Bombay,  745-747. 

Great  part  of  the  Indian  steam  navy 

consists  of  iron-built  vessels,  bTH. 

Steam  navigation  to,  319-322.  Num- 
ber of  letters  received  from,  322,  323. 

— —  Public  revenues  and  charges  of  Go- 
vernment, 747,  748. 

Improved  despatch  in  communicating 

intelligence  by  means  of  steam-vessels 
and  over-land  posts,  320,  321. 

Amo'ut  or  East  India  coffee  con- 
sumed ;  assimilation  of  duty  thereon  with 
West  India  coffee,  and  couscqucnt  great 
increase  of  consumption,  372,  373. 


ANALYTICAL  INDKX. 


827 


Indian  corn,  qnantitv  imported  from  Ire- 
land, 34"). 

Indigo,  in  Ikngal,  state  of  crop  accurately 
and  expeditiously  communicated  to  mer- 
chants in  London,  538.  Quantities  im- 
ported from  India  from  1833  to  1849, 
742. 

Industry,  produce  of,  may  be  more  equally 
distributed  hereafter,  if  capital  shall  ac- 
cumulate more  rapidly  than  population, 
521,  522. 

Amount  of,  greater  at  present,  or  ap- 
plication of,  more  skillful  than  formerly, 
524. 

Great   inequality  in   distribution   of 

produce  of,  521. — (See  Labour.) 

Inoculation  for  small-pox  almost  entirely 
discontinued,  40. 

Instruction. —  Popular  education  now  felt 
to  be  necessary  by  all  parties ;  refutation 
of  M.  Guerrj's  position,  that  crime  in- 
creases with  instruction,  ()55-657. 

Influence  of,  in  restraining  from  viola- 
tion of  the  laws,  032. 

Proportions  of  criminal  offenders  able 

to  read  and  write;  effect  of  instruction  in 
deterring  from  crime,  050,  &c.  It  is  the 
duty  of  Government  to  provide  means  of 
instruction  for  the  people,  655. — {See 
Education.) 

Intemperance,  increase  of,  not  proved  by 
increase  in  consumption  of  ardent  spirits  ; 
the  fact  of  double  amount  of  consump- 
tion consistent  with  that  of  general  im- 
provement in  sobriety,  559. 

Crews  of  American  vessels  more  ab- 
stinent than  English,  132. —  (See  Drunk- 
enness.) 

Internal  communication,  perfection  of  the 
means  of,  in  England  compared  with 
France,  287-290.  Source  of  jealousy  to 
the  French  commercial  economists,  288. 
—  (See  Roads,  Canals,  liailroads.) 

Investments  of  accumulated  wealth,  617- 
624. 

Ireland. — Proportion  of  agricultural  class 
more  than  double  the  proportion  in  Great 
Britain,  61.  Proportion  of  occupiers  em- 
ploying labourers,  compared  with  Eng- 
land, 61.  Quantities  of  grain  and  meal 
furnished  to  England,  345.  Occupations 
of  males  20  years  of  age  and  upwards, 
08,69. 

steady   market   for  labour  principal 

want  for  improving  the  condition  of  the 
working  classes,  306-  Employment  of 
poor  in  improving  the  soil,  internal  navi- 
gation, roads,  and  bridges,  recommended 
as  expedient  and  necessary,  300,  307. 

Extension  of  commercial  intercourse, 

and  establishment  of  manufactxires  recom- 
mended, 308. 

Advantages  from  road  improvements, 

294,  295.  From  canals,  303-306,  308, 
309. 

Emigration  suggested  as  an  auxiliary 


relief,  307.      Draining    and    reclaiming 
bogs  recommended,  308. 
Ireland.  —  Appointment  of  parliamentary 
commission  on  system  of  railways,  335, 
336. 

Trade  with  Great  Britain,  342-346. 

Amount  of  parliamentary  grants  for 

public  works  in  Ireland,  3u9.  Coals 
rapidly  and  cheaply  procurable  from 
England  for  manufactures,  308. 

Trade  with,  subsequent  to  1825,  assi- 
milated to  the  coasting  traffic  of  England, 
342. 

Decrease   of  consumption    of  ardent 

spirits  in  Ireland,  1840  and  1841 — re- 
markable evi-nt  of  the  age,  caused  by 
'  Father  Mathew,'  556.  Foreign  spirits 
almost  wholly  unused,  556,  557. 

Decrease  of  consumption  of  tobacco, 

owing  to  increased  duties,  5C5. 

Quantity  of  sugar  consumed  com- 
pared with  the  population,  541.  Imports 
refined  sugar  wholly  from  Great  Britain, 
541. 

Consumption  of  malt,  554. 

Discouragement  of  woollen  manufac- 
ture by  William  III.,  224.  Quantities  of 
linen  goods  exported  from  Ireland,  ISOO- 
1825,  22.5. 

Value  of  linen  goods  sold  in  the  dif- 
ferent linen  markets  in  Ireland,  1821- 
1824,  226. 

Revenue  from  legacy  duties,  495,  496. 

Table  of  probates  of  wills  and  letters 

of  administration  in  Ireland  in  1838,  602, 
603.  Less  provision  for  others  bj-  be- 
queathment  of  property  than  in  England, 
603. 

Population  returns  for  1813  imperfect, 

9.  Summary  of  population  returns  for 
1821,  1831,  1841,  9. 

No  general  mortality  table  ever  pub- 
lished for  Ireland,  602. 

Foundling     Hospital,    expense     and 

mortality  of  {note),  705. 

Statistics  of  crime,  667-671. 

Great  increase  in  number  of  criminal 

committals.  031. 

Establishment  of  the    Kildare-street 

Society  for  Education ;  number  of  schools 
in  connexion  therewith,  and  scholars, 
1817-1825,  70G. 

Number  of  emigrants  from,  to  Quebec, 

1829-1843,  129;  "to  New  York,  1829- 
1841,  129. 

Party  spirit  interferes  with  all  efforts 

for  the  improvement  of  the  people ;  in- 
stitution of  national  system  of  education, 
703,  &c. 

Act  of  V/illiam  III.  made  it  penal  to 

receive  any  other  than  Protestant  educa- 
tion ;  the  Protestant  Incorporated  Society 
for  Proselytism,  704. 

State  of  charter  schools,  and  abuse  of 

public  funds  for  their  support,  705,  70f^. 

Establishment  of  Board  of  Commis- 


828 


AXALYTICAI.  INIHiX. 


raissioners  for  National  Education  in 
Ireland,  707.  Number  of  schools  in 
operation,  and  children  ou  the  rolls,  1834- 
1819,  708. 
Iron,  universal  importance  of,  as  a  material 
ofmanufacture,  288. 

Quantity   imported    annually  at  the 

commencement ofthe  present  century, 574. 

Quantities  made  annually,  268,    269. 

Quantities  of  foreign  iron  used,  of  British 

.   iron  exported,  and  amount  of  home  con- 
sumption, 1806-1849,  .'J74,  575. 

Quantity  made  in  Scotland,  and  num- 
ber of  furnaces  in  blast,  1845,  574. 

Quantity  exported  from  Great  Britain, 

1801-1849,  247,  248.  Conversion  of  iron 
into  steel  an  extensive  business  in  Slief- 
field,  250. 

Extraordinary  increase  of  iron  made 

in  the  kingdom  during  the  present  cen- 
tury, 574.  Quantities  of  coal  consumed 
in  its  manufacture,  280. 

. Five-sixths  of  the   quantity  used  in 

Sheffield  is  of  foreign  production,  250. 

English,  exclusion  of,  from    France, 

288,  289. 

Amount  of  loss  to  France  by  exclusion 

of  English  iron.  288,  289. 

Comparative  quantity  of,  consumed  by 

abrasion  of  horse-shoes  and  wheels  upon 
roads  in  England  and  France,  289. 

Amount  of  consumption  of,  for  agri- 
cultural purposes  in  France,  288,  289. 

English,  superiority  of,  for  railroads, 

290. 

. Origin  of  iron-built  vessels;    nearly 

200  launched  since  1S30;  the  '  Guada- 
loupe,"  a  steam  frigate  of  788  tons;  the 
'  Great  Britian,'  of  3,500  tons,  and  1,000 
horse  power;  great  part  of  India  steam 
navy  consists  of  iron  vessels ;  advantages 
of  iron  for  naval  architecture.  575,  576. 

Prices  of  pig  iron,  1835-1849  ;  of  bar 

iron,  1806-1849,  577. 

Joist-stock     companies      established     in 

Saxony  as  an  expedient  for  deficiency  of 

individual  capital,  412. 
Juries,  before  the   mitigation  of  the  penal 

laws,  induced  to  resort  to  perjury  {note), 

636. 

Kay,  Dr.  (Kay  Shuttleworth'),  investiga- 
tion of  state  of  Spitalfield  Aveavers,  453, 
454. 

Kerry,  Earl  of,  inquiry  into  state  of  educa- 
tion ofthe  people,  695,  696. 

Labour. —  Greater  amount  of  skilled  labour 
performed  in  given  time  by  given  num- 
ber of  workmen  in  England  than  in  any 
other  country  of  Europe,  52(i.  Propor- 
tion of  population  engaged  in  labour  not 
agricultural,  520,521.  Social  advantage 
of  large  number  of  population  engaged 
in  productive  labour,  521. 


Labour. — The  agent  which  provides  all  the 
necessaries  and  convenlencies  of  life  that 
are  consumed,  524. 

Demand  for,  can  only  increase  with 

the  increase  of  the  capital  destined  for  the 
payment  of  wages,  470. 

Proportions  of  ages  in  differerent  flax 

factories,  231,  232. — (See  Manufactures.) 

Convict  labour  in  Australia,  134,  135. 

Lac-dye,  quantities   imported   from  India, 

742. 

Laird,  Mr.,  quoted  as  to  the  fertility  of  the 
Delta  of  the  Niger,  and  its  capability  of 
sustaining  a  large  population,  3(i8. 

Lancaster,  >Ir.,  commencement  and  progress 
of  his  school  system,  690,  693. 

Leeds,  prices  and  wages  of  linen  manufac- 
ture, 227,  228. 

Legacy  duty,  amount  of  duty  received  on 
probates  of  wills,  601. 

Average    annual    amount    compared 

with  the  year  1848,  in  England,  Scotland, 
and  Ireland,  603. 

Remarks  on  the  legacy  and  probate 

duties,  491.  Table  of  amounts  subjected 
to  each  rate  of  duty  from  1797  to  1848, 
492,  493. 

Amount  of  property  subject  to  it,  59S, 

601.  Probates  and  letters  of  administi'a- 
tion  in  England,  Scotland,  and  Ireland, 
601-604. 

Leicester,  Earl  of  (Mr.  Coke,  of  Norfolk), 
his  investment  of  half  a  million  of  money 
in  agricultural  improvements,  605. 

Letters,  number  of,  received  from  and  sent 
to  East  Indies,  1834-1836,  and  from  1843- 
1845,  322,  323. 

Licenses  to  manufacturers  of  soap,  decrease 
in  number  since  1801,  570,  571. 

Number  taken  out  by  paper  manufac- 
turers, 1801-1849,  569. — (See  Excise  Li- 
censes). 

Liebig,  Dr.,  by  his  chemical  investigations 
has  rendered  essential  services  to  agri- 
culture, 145. 

Life  insurance,  remarks  on,  598.  Great 
increase  of  life  insurance  offices  ;  expe- 
diency of  being  required  by  the  legislature 
to  register  the  amount  of  their  engage- 
ments and  funds,  598.  Assets  of  the 
various  offices  in  the  kingdom  amount  to 
forty  millions,  598. 

Linen. — Exports  of  Linen  very  greatly  in- 
creased, 573,  574.  No  means  for  ascer- 
taining amount  of  domestic  produce,  574. 

Lister,  Mr.,  citation  of  his  Keport  on  Hegis- 
tratiou  as  to  numbers  able  to  write,  698, 
699. 

Literature,  increased  encouragement  to, 
caused  by  increase  of  wealth,  522,  523. 

Liverpool,  amount  expended  in  public  edi- 
fices and  improvements,  620. 

Infirmary^  patients  admitted,  and  pro- 
portion of  deaths,  43. 

Trade  with  Ireland,  343. 

Loch,  Mr.,  quoted  as  to  great  moral  im- 


ANALYTICAL  INDEX. 


S29 


provenieiit  in  tlie  Ilij^lihnuls  by  the  form- 
ation of  roads,  ■i!)4. 

i.ockliait's  Life  of  Scott  quoted  respecting 
Mrs.  Bohu's  novels,  (17(3. 

Locomotion,  present  and  future  improve- 
ments in,  298.— (See  Koads,  Canals,  Kail- 
roads,  Steam  Navigation.) 

LoNuo.v. — Ln])ossible  toestimate  exactly  the 
amount  of  articles  consumed  in  the  metro- 
polis ;  quantities  of  slanj;htered  sheep  and 
cattle  hrouiiht  by  sea  from  Scotland,  580, 
581. 

■ Difficulty     of    ascertaining    amount 

of  consumption  of  food  by  families,  582, 
583.  Account  of  consumption  of  various 
articles  of  food  in  a  wealthy  private 
family,  and  in  several  public  institutions, 
583,  58G. 

• Prices  of  beef  and  mutton  in  London, 

1801-1849,  589.  Average  prices,  per 
stone  of  8lbs.,  of  butclicr's  meat  sold  in 
SmithfieUl,  1S41  to  1S49,  590.  Cost  of 
articles  of  clothing  in  Bethlehem  Hospital, 
Greenwich  Hospital,  and  Chelsea  Hos- 
pital for  a  series  of  years,  590,  591. 

■ Number  of  cattle  and  sheep  sold  in 

Smithfield  market,  1821-1849,  581. 

■ Progressive  increase  of  quantities    of 

coals  brought  to  London,  1821-1849,  581. 
Origin  of  gas-light,  581,  582. 

Number  of  coal-vessels,  and  quantities 

of  coals,  arrived  in  the  port  of,  1831-1849, 
340. 

Eemarks  on  tlie  returns  of  the  rental, 

and  sewer-rate  assessment,  showing  in- 
crease of  real  property,  609,  610. 

■ Extent  of  travelling  by  stage-coaches 

out  of  London.  301. 
' Public  edifices  recently  erected,  620, 

Costs  of  new   docks  and  bridges,   620, 

621. 
• lioom,  power, introduction  of,  instanced 

as   cause   of  partial    injury    to  working 

classes,  12(;. —  (See  Manufactures.") 
LiTNATics. — Number  of  lunatics  and  idiots 

chargeable   to  parishes  in    England   and 

Wales,  1844  and  1847,  50,  51. 
Number  of  patients  in  private  asylums, 

51. 
• Proportions    of  cures  and   deaths    in 

county   and   other   asylums,    1840-1844, 

50. — (See,  under  '  Hospitals,'  St.  Luke"s, 

Bethlehem.) 
Luxury,  increase  of,  ainong  higher  classes, 

caused   by    increased    accumulation    of 

capital,  522. 

M'Adam,  Mr.,  improvement  of  roads  on  his 


plan, 


291. 


M'CuUoch,  Mr.,  his  '  Commercial  Diction- 
ary '  quoted  on  the  cotton  manufacture, 
572. 

M'Gregor,  Mr.,  his  work  on'  British  Ame- 
rica '  quoted  respecting  education  in  Nova 
Scotia,  689. 


Machinerv,  introduction  of,  has  increased 
the  comforts  of  the  great  body  of  the 
people,  and  multiplied  the  demand  for 

labour,  683      . 

introduction  of  new,  causes  transitory 

but  severe  privations  to  particular  classes, 
126. 

Used  in  manufactures  of  Saxony,  is  of 

the  commonest  kind,  412. 

(See  Manufactures.) 

Machines,  our  best  possessed  also  by  France 
and  Germany,  520. 

Mackintosh,  Sir  James,  his  bills  for  abolition 
of  capital  punishment,  641,  &c. 

Madras.  —Imports  and  exports  ;  number  and 
tonnage  of  shipping,  746. 

Mails  first  sent  by  railway,  Nov.,  1830,  331. 

Malt,  comparative  decrease  in  use  of,  during 
the  last  100  years,  553.  Amount  of  con- 
sumption in  each  year  from  1801  to  1841, 
compared  with  population  and  rates  of 
duty,  554.  Consumption  compared  with 
population  frimi  18i!9  to  1849;  tax  on 
malt  always  been  unfavourably  and  erro- 
neously viewed  by  agriculturists,  554, 
555.  Importation  of  malt  prohibited  ; 
foreign  barley  cannot  be  profitably  malted, 
555. 

Malta. — (See  Dependencies  in  Europe.) 

MANcnESTER.  —  Increase  of  population 
shown  not  to  have  increased  the  rate  of 
mortality,  26,  27. 

Infirmary;  number  of  patients  ad- 
mitted, and  proportion  of  deaths,  43,  44. 

Increase  of  silk-mills,  219. 

Great  increase  of  real  property  since 

the  peace,  610,  611.  Savings'  bank  ;  num- 
ber of  depositors  and  amount  of  deposits, 
615,  616. 

Statistical   Society   of,  inquiries  into 

state  of  education,  695. 

Inquiries  into   condition  of  working 

classes,  523. 

Manchester  and  Salford,  population  of,  in 
1801,  1811,  1821,  1831,  1841,  26,  27. 

Manners. —  Habits  of  drunkenness  preva- 
lent among  all  classes  in  the  last  centurj  ; 
consequent  coarseness  and  licentiousness 
of  manners  and  conversation,  674-678. 

Drunkenness  and  scenes  of  depravity 

less  prevalent  than  formerly  ;  SheriiF  Ali- 
son's evidence  as  to  excessive  whiskey 
drinking  in  Glasgow,  678,  679. 

General  improvement  in,  accompany- 
ing increased  production  of  wealth,  522, 
523. 

Progress  of  moral  and  social  improve- 
ment among  the  working  classes  attested 
by  Mr.  Place,  676. 

Improvement  in  public  manners,  illus- 
trated by  an  anecdote  respecting  Mrs. 
Behn's  novels,  676. 

Instances  of  a  publican   indignantly 

disclaiming  connexion  with  prize-fighters, 
681.     A  greater  observance  of  decency 


830 


ANAIATICAL  INDEX. 


than  formerly :  profligacy  and  brutality 
much  less  exhibited  in  public ;  but  high 
morality  deficient,  and  selfish  propensities 
predominant,  681. 

Manners.  —  Deplorable  ignorance,  immo- 
rality, and  drunkenness  of  the  populace 
of  Glasgow.  678,  679.  Opening  of  coffee- 
houses tor  promotion  of  temperance  ;  de- 
scriptiou  of  these  establishments,  G79.  G80. 
Prize-fighting,  present  comparative  in- 
frequency  of,  indicative  of  improvement 
manners,  681. 

Maxufacttres.  —  Comparative  table  of 
numbers  employed  in  manufactures, 
trade,  agriculture,  Sec,  53,  .55. 

— . —  Increase  in  proportion  of  manufac- 
turing class,  54. 

Have  rapidlj-  and  enormously  in- 
creased, 572.— (See  Cotton,  Silk,  Wool- 
len.-) 

. Cotton  manufacture  doubled  in  Saxony 

since  1834  ;  cause  of  stationaiy  state  of 
linen  and  woollen  manufacture  in  Saxony, 
411,  412. 

Artisans  of  France  and  Germany,  from 

having  less  energy,  cannot  compete  with 
those  of  England,  520. 

• Would  be  benefited  by  reduction  of 

duty  on  tea,  553. 

' England  pre-eminent  for  manufac- 
turing skill ;  v.ithout  which  the  great  ex- 
pense of  the  French  revolutionary  -war 
could  not  have  been  sustained  ,  the  spin- 
ning-jenny and  steam-engine  the  true 
moving  power  of  our  fleets  and  armies, 
167,  168. 

Woollen  Manufacture,  early  introduc- 

duction  of  into' England  ;  impolitic  prohi- 
bition of  exporting  British  wool,  168. 
Great  increase  of  the  produce  of  the 
manufacture  after  removal  of  the  restric- 
tion ;  value  of  produce  exported  in  1700, 
and  in  1815,  the  largest  export  ever  made, 
169.  Value,  quantities,  and  kinds  exported 
in  each  year  from  1815  to  1849,  170. 
Quantities  exported  far  less  than  home 
consumption,  173.  Quantities  of 'alpaca 
and  llama  wool,  and  mohair  imported  and 
re-exported  in  1849,  171.  Number  of 
-woollen  and  worsted  factories  in  the  king- 
dom, with  the  engines,  number,  and  ages-of 
persons  employed  therein,  172.  Mechani- 
cal power  employed  in  factories,  232,  233. 
Proportion  of  ages  of  persons  iu  mills, 
232.  Importation  of  foreign  wool  greatly 
increased  ;  quantities  imported  from  1801 
to  1849,  173,  174.  Parliamentary  com- 
mittee in  1828  on  the  woollen  trade ;  num- 
ber of  sheep  in  the  kingdom  at  that  time, 
and  quantity  of  wood  produced,  174,  175. 
Extension  of  stuff  and  worsted  trade  at 
Bradford  in  Yorkshire  shown  by  increase 
of  population  ;  prosperity  of  the  woollen 
manufacture  similarly  indicated  at  the 
other    principal   clothing  towns  in   the 


country,  175,  176.  Improved  breeds  of 
sheep  yield  coarser  wool ;  foreign  woollen 
rags  imported  for  manufacturing  cheap 
fabrics  for  exportation :  great  increase  iu 
blanket  trade,  176.  Worsted  and  stuff  ma- 
nufacture likely  to  increase,  1 7().  Woollen 
manufacture  discouraged  iu  Ireland  by 
William  III.,  224, 
Manufactures.  —  Cotton  Mannfactnre,  rise 
and  progress  of,  in  GreatBritain ;  reference 
to  Mr.  Kemiedy's  Memoir,  ]Mr.  Baines's 
History,  and  Dr.  Ure's  Essay  on  the  sub- 
ject, 176,  177.  Quantities  of  cotton  wool 
worked  up,  and  value  of  goods  exported, 
from  1801  to  1849,  177,  178.  Quantity, 
description,  and  value  of  cotton  goods 
exported  in  each  year  from  1820  to  1849, 

180.  Average  value  of  cotton  manufac- 
tures per  yard,  and  of  twist  or  yarn  per  lb., 
1830  to  1849, 181.  Prices  of  cotton  yarn, 
from  1786  to  1832,  from  Mr.  Bannatyne's 
article  in  the  '  Encyclopa>dia  Britannica,' 

181.  Average  price  of  cotton  compared 
with  twist  at  different  periods,  182,  183. 

\        Cost  of  cotton  yarns  in  1812  and   1830; 
j        advantages  gained  by  xhepouer  loom,  185. 
I        Prices  paid  for  weaving ;  prices  of  cottons, 
and  earnings  of  weavers,  from    1814  to 
i         1 844  ;  prices  paid  at  Stockport,  from  1 802 
I        to    1812,  184.      Progress  of  the  power- 
!        loom,   from   Mr.  Baines's  History,    185, 
i        186.     Number  of  persons,  males  and  fe- 
males, adults  and  children,  distinguishing 
j        ages,  employed  in  cotton  mills,  from  the 
'  Eeport  of  tlie  Factory  Commissioners,' 
187-189.      Quantities  of  cotton  used  in 
spinning,  in  1832,  188.     Kinds  of  work; 
earnings,   190,   191.     Number  of  cotton 
factories,  situation,  and  numbers  and  ages 
of  persons  employed  in  1835  and  1839, 
192,  193.     Work  performed  by  one  spin- 
ner ;  wages  ;  hours  employed,  and  quan- 
tity of  fiour  equivalent  to  his  earnings, 
194,    195.      Number  of  hand-looms  and 
power-looms  at  Stockport  in    1822   and 
1832,  195,  196.     Number  of  each   kind 
in    England  and  Scotland  in   1830,   196. 
In    1835,  200.     Quantities   produced  by 
one  spinnei',  and  rates  of  earnings,  by 
increasing  size  of  mules,  197,  198.     Pro- 
portion of  ages  of  persons  in  mills,  235. 
Mechanical  power  employed  in  factories, 
232,  233.      Remarks  on    fluctuations   of 
demand;  restrictions;  markets,  198,  199. 

Friiiting  of  Cotton  practised  in  1676  ; 

quantity  printed.  1796  to  1830,  201.  Im- 
provements and  increase,  202.  Evil  of 
excise  laws,  202. 

■ Hosier;/   Manufacture,  chief  seats  of; 

number  of  stocking  frames ;  produce  ; 
consumption  of  yarn ;  value ;  wages,  203, 
206.     Increase,  203. 

Bobbin-net  Manvfacture.  number  em- 
ployed ;  wages  ;  statistics  of  the  trade  by 
Mr  Felkin,  205,  207-211.     Extent  and 


AXAIATICAI,  INDEX. 


831 


value  of  the  whole  cottou  manufacture  of 
the  kingdom,  hy  Mr,  M'CuUoch  aud  Mr. 
Baines,  212,  213. 

Manufactures.  —  Warp-lace  Manufacture, 
number  employed  ;  wages  ;  value  of  ma- 
uufactured  goods,  210,  21 1. 

Hardware. — Increase  in  jjopulation  and 

buildings  of  Birmingham  ;  prices  of  arti- 
cles manufactured  iu  1812  and  1832, 
showing  reduction  of  40perceut. ;  amount 
aud  value  of  hardware  and  cutlery  ex- 
ported from  1805  to  1849,  24.0-247. 
Quantity  aud  value  of  brass  and  copper 
manufactures  exported  from  1803  to  1849, 
24S,  249.  Description  of  factory  build- 
ings for  accommodation  of  operatives,  249 
Sheffield  produces  nearly  all  the  cutlery 
made  in  the  kingdom;  increase  of  popu- 
lation of  Sheffield,  250.— (See  Sheffield.) 
Process  of  converting  iron  into  steel,  an 
extensive  branch  of  business  iu  Sheffield  ; 
cost  of  fuel  consumed  in  this  process ; 
quantity  exported  from  1814  to  1849  ; 
quantity  of  unwrought  steel  exported  to 
America,  250,  251.  Value  of  plated  goods 
exported  iu  1827-1849;  advantage  of 
English  manufacturer  in  machinery  for 
rolling,  252.  Valueof  British-made  plate; 
value  exported,  252. 

Glass,  manufacture  impeded  by  impo- 
sition of  excessive  duties ;  advantages 
possessed  by  England  for  this  manufac- 
ture, yet  cannot  compete  with  any  foreign 
country,  252,  253.  English  plate-glass 
preferred  to  French  ;  quantities  and  kinds 
produced,  from  1789  to  1844,  with  excise 
revenue  thence  derived,  253,  254.  Limi- 
tation in  quantity  produced  occasioned  by 
arbitrary  regulations  by  Act  of  Parliament 
and  excessive  duties,  255-257.  Illicit 
manufacture  of  flint-glass  in  attics  and 
cellars,  257.  Duty  repealed  in  1845  ; 
advantageous  results  arising  therefrom, 
257. 

Mac/liner  1/  used  in  manufactures;  great 

importance  of  superior  implements  and 
ingenious  mechanism  for  execution  of  in- 
ventions ;  construction  of  the  calculating 
machine  of  Mr.  Babbage  ;  parts  of  English 
cotton-spinning  machinery  invented  by 
foreigner,  but  made  in  the  superior  work- 
shops of  England.  258,  259.  Quotation 
from  Dr.  Ure  on  the  importance  of  perfect 
manufacturing  mechanism,  259.  Policy 
of  restricting  the  exportation  of  superior 
machinery  discussed  ;  iuipracticable  to 
prevent  communication  of  iniprovements; 
fair  and  prudent  to  legalize  trade  in  ma- 
chinery ;  not  true  that  what  is  gained  by 
one  nation  is  lost  by  the  other ;  both  may 
and  do  gain,  260,  201.  Repeal  of  the 
laws  prohibiting  the  exportation  of  ma- 
chinery, and  of  skilled  artizans  from 
leaving  the  country  ;  resolutions  of  the 
parliamentary  committees  of  1821  and 
1825  for  allowing  exportation  of  certain 


articles  of  machinery,  2G1-2G3.  England 
especially  interested  in  perfect  freedom  of 
commercial  couimunication,  203.  Acts 
passed  against  exportation  of  machinery, 
2(J4.  llepeaied  by  C  &  7  Vict,  c.  84,  2t;5. 
Value  of  exports  ot  machinery  from  1822 
to  1849,  265.  Great  and  numerous  im- 
provements effected  by  applications  of 
machinery,  266. 

Manufactures. — Silk  Manufacliire  establish- 
ed in  England  since  Edward  III. ;  im- 
politic prohibitory  duties  on  foreign  trade, 
213,  214.  Average  quantities  of  silk 
imported  from  1814  to  1849,  214,  215. 
Reduction  of  duties  in  1824,  and  conse- 
quent increase  of  consumption,  214,  215. 
Quality  of  English  fancy  goods  equal  to 
French,  but  cost  of  jproduction  higher  ; 
ad  valorem  duty  of  30  per  cent,  imposed, 
221.  Extent  and  effects  of  smuggling, 
217,  218,  223.  Liability  of  silk  weavers 
to  occasional  distress,  217,  218.  Value 
of  silk  goods  exported  from  1820  to  1849  ; 
large  amount  exported  to  France,  219. 
Number  of  silk  factories  in  the  kingdom, 
and  number  and  ages  of  persons  em- 
ployed, 1835  and  1839,  220,  221.  Causes 
of  comparative  superiority  of  French  silk 
weavers ;  greater  cheapness  of  necessaries 
of  life  in  France,  and  artistical  education 
of  weavers  in  designing  patterns,  219.221. 
Present  ability  of  English  silk  manufac- 
turers to  compete,  in  the  heavier  goods, 
with  the  French,  owing  to  discontinuance 
of  the  old  prohibitory  system,  221,  222. 
Tabular  statement  of  quantities  of  silk 
goods  exported  from  France  to  Englanfl, 
1827-1843,  showing  that  more  than  50 
per  cent,  have  been  introduced  by  smug- 
gling ;  enormous  sum  lost  to  purchasers 
by  operation  of  the  high  duty,  223,  224. 
Proportion  of  youig  children  iu  silk  fac- 
tories greater  than  in  those  for  cotton, 
woollen,  or  flax  ;  proportion  of  sexes, 
230,  232.  Mechanical  power  employed, 
232.  233. 

Linen  Manufacture  of  long  standing 

in  England  :  encouraged  in  Ireland  by 
William  III.,  224.  Quantities  of  linen 
goods  exported  from  Ireland  from  1800 
to  1825  ;  quantities  exported  from  the 
United  Kingdom,  from  1820  to  1849,  225, 
226.  Value  of  linen  goods  sold  iu  the 
Irish  markets,  1821-1824;  first  erection 
of  flax-spinning  mills,  226.  Improve- 
ments in  flax-spinning  machinery,  227- 
229.  Prices  of  yarn  ;  of  canvas ;  wages 
at  Leeds,  1813-1833,  227,  228.  Wages 
in  a  flax-mill  near  Leeds,  distinguishing 
ages,  228.  Decrease  in  quantities  of 
foreign  linen  yarn  imported  ;  quantity  and 
value  of  linen  goods  exported  to  United 
States  of  America  in  1848;  quantities 
of  foreign  flax  imported,  229, 230.  Num- 
ber of  flax  factories  in  the  kingdom,  with 
number  and  ages  of  persons  employed , 


832 


ANALYTICAL  IXDEX. 


1S35  and  1839,  -230,  231.  Quantity  of 
cambric  lineu  imported  from  Frauce,  229. 
Comparative  statement  of  proportions  of 
ages  of  persons  in  factories,  232.  State- 
ment of  mechanical  power  employed  in 
factories,  232. 
Manufactures. — State  and  progress  of,  in 
Foreicjn  Countries  ;  statements  on  the 
subject  not  generally  satisfactory,  234. 

. Woollen  Maiuifaclure  in  France,  -wool 

imported  and  exported  from  1787  to  1848, 
235.  Bount}"  granted  and  duty  imposed  : 
bad  efiects  produced  by  system  of  restric- 
tion and  monopoly.  236,  237.  Exports 
of  woollens  in  1S33,  239,  240. 
Cotton  Minuifacture  in  France,  disad- 
vantageous condition  of,  from  high  price 
of  coal  ,  and  of  iron,  caused  by  unwise 
fiscal  duties  ;  great  increase  of  the  manu- 
facture notwithstanding,  237,238.  Extent 
of  contraband  importation  ot  cotton  twist, 
238.  French  imports  and  exports  of 
cotton,  239.  Progress  of  the  cotton  manu- 
facture in  Germany,  243.  Progress  of 
cotton  manufacture  in  Russia  and  Switzer- 
land :  impolicy  of  protective  duties  im- 
posed in  Russia.  Advantage  of  free  trade 
in  Switzerland,  243,  244. 

Silk  Manufacture  in  France,  a  most 

important  branch  of  National  industry  ; 
progressive  increase ;  produce,  import, 
consumption ;  total  value  of  the  manu- 
facture, 240,  241.  Great  extent  and 
amount  of  smuggling,  241.  Quotation 
from  Dr.  Bowring's  Report  on  the  produce 
of  raw  silk  in  France,  241,  242. 
Maruiages. — Number  registered  in  each 
year,  from  1801  to  1849,  .32.  Annual 
proportion  of  marriages,  baptisms,  and 
burials,  1796-1841,  in  each  county,  33. 
Annual  proportion  according  to  Registrar- 
General's  returns,  1839-1842,34.  Fallacy 
in  estimating  decrease  of  nnarriages,  and 
of  inferring  tlierefrom  increasing  pru- 
dence, 34,  35.  Increased  duration  of  life 
a  cause  of  decrease  in  proportion  of  mar- 
riages, 35.  Annual  proportion  of  mar- 
riages in  the  borough  of  Tavistock,  35. 

Correspondence   in   England    and  in 

France  of  number  of  marriages  with  price 
of  food,  440,  441. 

Signatures   required   for  registration 

furnish  criterion  of  proportion  able  to 
write,  t98.  Number  of  marriages  and 
proportion  of  persons  who  signed  with 
marks,  C99,  700. 

Proportions   of,   in  various  states   of 

pAirope  and  America.  22.    Table  of  regis- 
tered, from  1801-1849,  32. 
Marseilles. — Soap   manufactured  there    of 
olive  oil  superior  to  English  made  with 
tallow,  570. 
Mathew,  Rev.  Theobald,  (Father  Mathew) 
his  agency  in  causing  a  great  decrease  in 
consumption  of  spirits  in  Ireland,  556. 
Mauritius. — (See  Dependencies,  Asia.) 


Meal,  barley,  qxiantity  imported  from  Ire- 
land, from  1815  to  "l  849,  345. 

Measures. —  (See  Weights  and  Measures.) 

Medical  statistics,  neglect  of,  37,  &c. 

Methuen,  treaty  of,  effected  great  reduction 
in  consumption  of  French  wines  in  Eng- 
land by  imposition  ofexcessive  diflerential 
duties,  561,  562. 

Middle  classes,  improvement  in  dwellings 
of,  522. 

exhibit  less  of  open  profligacy  than  the 

lower  and  higher  classes,  665. 

Middlesex,  rate  of  mortality  in,  lower  than 
in  most  countries  of  Europe,  27- 

Milan,  Napoleon's  decree  of,  denationalizing 
ships  which  paid  tax  to  the  British  Go- 
vernment, 378,  379. 

Mines,  numbers  of  the  population  employed 
in,  79. 

of  America,  large   capitals   invested 

and  lost  in,  627.  628. 

Mining. —  Iron.  —  Earlj-  celebrity  of  the 
mines  of  England  ;  product  of,  in  several 
years,  commencing  1740,  267,  268.  Ac- 
curate statement  of  quantities  and  places 
of  production,  from  1823-30,  and  in  1840, 
268,  269. 

Tin  and  Copper. — Quantities  of  tin 

produced  from  1750  to  1S34;  India  and 
China  supplied  with  tin  from  the  mines 
of  the  Island  of  Banca;  importations  of 
tin  from  Banca,  and  re-exportations,  270, 
271.  Quantities  of  British  tin  exported, 
and  value  of  tin  plate,  271.  Quantities 
of  copper  produced  from  the  mines  of 
Cornwall  from  1771  to  1848  ;  quantity 
produced  in  the  whole  kingdom,  271-273. 
Value  of  tin  and  copper  produce  of  Corn- 
wall, 272.  Value  of  the  mineral  products 
of  England  owing  to  abundance  of  coal, 
and  application  of  steam  power,  273. 
Advantages  procured  by  safety-lamp  of 
Davy  ;  great  in)provements  in  the  science 
of  mining,  274,  275. 

Coal. — (See  entry  under  this  head.) 

Salt. — (See  entry  under  this  head.) 

Mitchell,  Dr. — Retm-n  of  number  of  children 

and  deaths  in  Christ's  Hospital,  44,  45. 
Molasses,  quantity .  cleared  at  the  Custom 

House  for  consumption  in  1821,  541. 
Quantities  imported  from  West  Indies, 

803.     From  Antigua,  807. 
Monopoly   of    trade  in   cinnamon   by   the 

Dutch ;  surplus  produce  ordered   to   be 

burnt,  753. 

Impolicy  of  cxclusiveness  in  commer- 
cial legislation,  502. 

( See  Duties,  Commerce,  Trade,  Pro- 
tective System.) 

Moral  Progress. — (See  Progress.) 

Mortality  of  children  in  Foundling  Hospital, 
Ireland,  705. 

(See  Deaths. )^Diminishing  Mortality 

attributable  to  improved  modes,  arts,  and 
habits  of  life,  and  to  the  introduction  of 
vaccination,  20,  21. 


ANALYTICAL  INDEX. 


833 


Mortgages  on  real  estates,  remarks  on,  G05. 

Murdi-r,  pioporliou  of  executions  for,  C4'J. 

Nai'dlkon,  liis  measures  for  suppressing 
tlie  forc-iim  trade  of  Englaud,  377-379. 

In  the  plenitude  of  liis  power  unable 

to  prevent  tlie  sale  of  English  goods  in 
Paris  ;  exorhilant  sums  realized  liy  his 
commercial  indulgences  to  individuals, 
380,  381. 

National  debt,  interest  of,  in  the  years 
17'J3-1849,  594. 

Navigation  Act,  386. 

Navy  expenditure. — (See  War.) 

Necessaries  of  life,  increased  amount  of,  iu 
England,  524. 

New  Hrunswick,  importance  of  possessing  it 
as  a  British  colony,  727,  728. 

Boundary,  area^  population,  787,  788. 

Trade,  imports,  exports,  788.  Shipping, 
tonnage,  ship-building,  788,  789.  Three- 
fourths  of  the  surface  uncleared ;  nume- 
rous rivers  ;  climate  healthy  ;  favourable 
country  for  emigration,  789. 

Ne\vcastle-on-Tyue  :  great  outlay  of  capital 
in  public  editices  and  improvements,  62U. 

Newfoundland  :  situation,  extent,  coloniza- 
tion, 795.  Population,  imports,  exports, 
shipping,  795,  790.  Shipbuilding,  796,797. 

New  Holland. — (See  Colonies,  Asia.) 

Newspapers,  reduction  of  stamps  from  4d.  to 
1(/.  per  sheet,  718.  Number  of  stamped 
papers  and  amount  of  revenue  produced, 
18U1  to  1844,  and  in  1849,  718,  719. 
Number  of  papers  published  in  the  four 
years  1839-1842,  718.  Number  sent  to 
and  received  from  East  Indies,  1834-1836, 
and  from  1843-1845,  322,  323. 

New  York. —  Number  of  emigrants  who 
arrived  thereat  from  the  United  Kingdom, 
iu  each  year  from  1829  to  1841,  129. 

New  Zealand  :  situation  ;  estimated  popu- 
lation of  aborigines  and  Europeans,  770, 
771.  Land  in  cultivation:  live  stock; 
produce  of  fisheries.  1843  xo  1848,  771. 
Value  of  British  manufactures  exported 
to  the  colony  from  1841  to  1848  ;  shipping, 
1841  to  1849,  771,  772. 

Niger,  Delta  of  the,  described  by  Mr.  Laird 
as  capable  of  sustaining  a  large  population, 
368. 

Ninimo,  Mr.,  Report  on  Improvements  iu 
Ireland,  quoted,  294,  295.  On  canals  in 
Ireland,  3u3. 

Norfolk  Island. — (See  Colonies,  Asia.) 

Norwaj-,  amount  of  tonnage  employed  in 
import  and  export  trade,  404. 

Nova  Scotia,  importance  of  possessing  it  as 
a  British  colony,  727,  728. 

Boundary,  population,  trade,  789,  790. 

Shipping,  ship-building,  790,  791.  Fish- 
eries, value  and  excellence  of  harbours  ; 
Halifax,  791,  792.  Live  stock  ;  number 
of  acres  in  crop,  792. 

— —  Exhibits  a  remarkable  instance  of  the 
non-existence  of  crime  consequent  on 
prevalence  of  education,  688,  689. 


Oatmeal,  quantity  imported  from  Ireland, 
345. 

Oats,  quantity  imported  from  Ireland,  345. 

Occupation,  gainful,  small  proportion  of 
population  not  engaged  in,  520,  521. 

Occi;i»ATioNS. — Numi)er  of  excise  licenses 
issued  to  various  manufacturers  and 
dealers  in  1831  and  1841,  67,  68. 

Great  advantage  of  classifying  popu- 
lation as  to  employments,  (i3,  (;4.  He- 
marks  on  this  classification,  63-67.  Num- 
ber employed  in  manual  labour  and  other- 
wise, 65,  66. 

Comparative    table   of   the    numbers 

employed  in  agriculture  and  trades,  53- 
55. 

Table  of  occupations  of  the  population 

in  1841,  57,  58. 

Statement  of  the  proportions  in  regard 

to  occupations  into  Mhich  the  population 
of  each  county  of  England  is  divided, 
showing  the  variations  which  each  has 
undergone  from  1811  to  1841,  59,  60. 

Specification  of  occupations  in  Ireland 

iu  1841,  68,  69. 

Classification  of  occupations  iu  1841 

compared  with  1831,  70,  71. 

Kemarks  on  the  occupations  of   the 

people  of  Ireland,  73. 

Statement  of  the  numbers  occupied  in 

textile  manufactures ;  in  factories ;  in 
mines;  in  manufactures  of  metals,  75-80. 

Classification  of  population  of  France 

as  to  employments,  83-85. 

Omnibuses,  great  and  constantly  increasing 
number  of,  in  the  thoroughfares  of  Lon- 
don, 318. 

Ordnance  expenditure. — (See  War.) 

Paper. — Number  of  licenses  taken  out  by 
manufacturers,  1801-1849,  569. 

Increase  of  consumption  on  reduction 

of  duty  in  1 830,  508. 

English  paper  supplied  to  Scotland  and 

Ireland ;  quantity  charged  with  duty, 
with  amount  of  revenue  produced,  from 
1803  to  1841.  Duty  on  paper  first  im- 
posed in  171 1  ;  its  tendency  to  retard  the 
progress  of  knowledge,  567. 

Quantities   used  iu  each    year   from 

1834  to  1849,  568. 

Prices  from  1801-43.  Increased  con- 
sumption for  almanacs  on  repeal  of  stamp 
duty  thereon,  509. 

Paris — The  octroi,  or  town  duty,  on  all 
articles  of  provision,  imposed  at  the  bar- 
riers, furnishes  more  exact  means  of  esti- 
mating amount  of  consumption  in  Paris 
than  in  London,  580. 

Parkhurst  Juvenile  Prison,  mental  con- 
dition of  the  boys  confined  there,  696. 

Pauperism,  86  —  125. — (See  Poor  Laws.) 

Peace. — Great  accumulation  of  capital  since 
the  peace,  5'.)0. 

Peas,  quantities  imported  into  England  from 
Ireland,  345. 

3n 


834 


ANALYTICAL  INDEX. 


Peel,   Sir  Robert,  his  bills  for  abolishing 

capital  punishment,  G42,  643.     Bills  ou 

criminal  laws,  643. 
' Wisdom  ofhis  declaration  that  colonies 

should  be  treated  as  integral  parts  of  the 

kingdom,  725. 

Value  of  real  property  assumed  for 

assessment  to  his  income  tax,  607. 

Pepper,  quantities  imported  from  India, 
743. 

Petition  to  Parliament  of  London  merchants, 
in  1820,  against  commercial  restrictions, 
381-384. 

Pigs,  number  imported  into  England  from 
Ireland,  343. 

Pimento,  quantities  imported  from  West 
Indies,  803. 

Pitt,  Mr.,  his  financial  system  introduced  in 
K97,  467, 

Place,  jMr.,  his  evidence  before  a  Parlia- 
mentary Committee  on  improvement  in 
manners  of  the  populace,  676,  678. 

Plate,  silver  and  gold,  articles  of,  used  by  a 
much  more  numerous  class  during  the 
last  25  years;  since  1815  silver  forks 
commonly  used  at  tavern  tables  instead 
of  those  of  steel,  533.  Remarks  on  the 
decreased  quantity  of  plate  used,  1830- 
1837,  compared  with  the  period  of  1807- 
1814,  533,  534.  Improvements  in  manu- 
facture of  plated  articles  has  diminished 
the  demand  for  those  subject  to  the  plate 
duty,  535.  Table  of  quantities  on  which 
duty  M-as  paid,  on  -which  drawback  Avas 
allowed,  and  which  was  retained  for  home 
use,  from  1801  to  1850,  535,  536. 

Poor. — Amount  of  assessments  for  poor 
from  1812  to  1849,  517. 

Origin  and  progress  of  poor  laws,  86. 

Act  27  Henry  VIII.  quoted,  86.  Act  43 
Elizabeth  originated  compulsory  system, 
of  provision,  87.  Amounts  expended  in 
successive  years  for  relief  of  poor,  88. — 

Evilsof  the  system,  89.  Board  of  Com- 
missioners appointed  to  inquire  into  the 
practical  operation  of  the  laws,  89. 
Amendment  Act  passed,  89.  Table  of 
sums  expended  for  poor  each  year  from 
1801  to  1849,  compared  with  popula- 
tion and  price  of  wheat,  90.  Proportion 
of  payments  at  each  decennial  census, 
1801-1841,  according  to  the  population, 
91.  Amount  expended  in  each  county 
for  relief  of  the  poor  in  each  of  the  years 

.  1801,  1811,  1821,  1831,  and  1841,  and 
also  the  average  expenditure  perhead, 
96,  97.  Poor  Laws  in  Ireland,  98- 
100.  Amount  expended  for  relief  of  poor, 
1840-1849,  100.  Poor  laws,  Scotland, 
100-101.  Poor  laws  in  various  foreign 
countries  : — Norway,  102  ;  Sweden,  102  ; 
Russia,  103;  Denmark,  103;  Mecklen- 
burgh,  105;  Prussia,  105;  VVurtemhurg, 
106;  Bavaria,  108;  Berne,  109;  France, 
109;  Holland,  115;  Pauper  colonies  of 
Holland,  116-119:  Belgium,  119. 


Poor. — Annual  value  of  real  property  as- 
sessed to  the  poor-rates  in  1841,  607-608. 
— (See  Wages,  Working  Classes.) 

Population,  deficiency  of  means  for  esti- 
mating, previous  to  official  returns  of 
1801,  5,  6.  Mr.  Rickman's  explanations, 
6,7. 

Proportion  which  the  two  sexes  bore 

to  each  other,  and  number  of  adult  males 
living  in  1831  and  1841,  in  different  parts 
of  the  kingdom,  12. 

Ages  of  per.'^ons  living  in  1821  and 

1841,  and  proportions  at  difiFerent  ages  to 
tiie  population,  15,  16. 

of  Manchester  and  Salford,  1801, 1821, 

1831,  and  1841,  26,  27. 

• Table  showing  the  occupations  of  the 

population  in  Great  Britain  in  1841,  57. 

• Progressional  increase  of  population 

from  1801  to  1841,  686. 

Rates,  and  causes  of  increase,  18, 19. 

Increases,  not  only  because  many  are 

born,  but  because  few  die,  '■20,  21. 

Increase    resulting  from   diminishing 

proportion  of  deaths  an  unerring  sign  of 
prosperity  of  population.  25. 

Childish  fear  of  surplus  population, 686. 

Remark  upon,  including  the  numbers 

in  the  army  and  navy,  7,  8.  Comparative 
rates  of  increase  in  England,  Ireland, 
Wales,  8,  9.  Numbers  and  places  of  birth 
of  the  population  inhabiting  the  different 
divisions  of  the  kingdom,  10,  11. 

Mr.  Rickman's  table  of  the  population 

of  England  and  Wales  in  the  period  1 700- 
1800,  and  1570-1750  {note),  13.  Table 
of  numbers  living  in  1841,  distinguishing 
the  places  of  their  birth,  and  males  from 
females,  14,  15. 

in  England  appears  not  to  have  pressed 

upon  the  means  of  subsistence  so  as  to 
prevent  social  improvement,  522. 

Utility    of   parish    school    system    of 

Scotland  for  collecting  returns,  7.  Gene- 
ral accuracy  of  population  returns  may 
be  relied  on,  7.  Summarv  of  population 
of  Great  Britain  in  180"l,  1811,  1821, 
1831,  1841,  7,  8.  Returns  for  Ireland  in 
1821,  1831,  1841,  9. 

Advantage  of  classifying  population,  as 

to  employments  exceedingly  great,  63,  64. 
Remarks  upon  this  classification,  64,  65. 
Number  occupied  in  manual  labour  and 
otherwise,  66. 

Table  of  males  20  years  of  "age  com- 
pared as  to  number  employed  in  agricul- 
ture, trade,  &c.,  55. 

Comparative  rates  of  increase  of  the 

agricultural  and  manufacturing  classes, 
54. 

Comparatively  small  portion  unem- 
ployed, 520,  521. 

No  general  mortality  table  ever  pub- 
lished for  Ireland,  602. 

Number  of  deaths,  with  reference  to 

property  bequeathed,  599. 


ANALYTICAL  INDEX. 


835 


Population. — Classification  of  population  of 
France  as  to  eiiiplo} ments,  83,  85. 

of  France  in  1817,  1825.1831,  1841,18. 

The    Delta  of  the   Niger  capable   of 

sustaining  a  large  population,  .^(iS. 

(See  Births,  D.'aths,  Mortality.) 

Post  Office. — Taxes  from  1801  to  1849, 
48.5,  486,  488-49  >. 

Amount  of  postage  and  cost  of  con- 

vi'j-ance  of  letters  between  Liverpool  and 
Maiifh-'Ster.  in  1828 -•J.3,  33i>. 

Mail  first  sent  by  Railway,  Nov.  1830, 

331.  Accelerated  speed  of  transmitting 
letters  by  railway,  331,  332. 

Mr.  Rowland  Hill's  plans  for  a  low 

and  uniform  rate  of  postage,  709,  &c. 
Extract  from  his  pampfdet  on  Post  Office 
Keform,  711.  Exorbitancy  of  rates  pre- 
viously imposed  ;  progress  of  public  opin- 
ion in  favour  of  reduction,  7(i9,  710.  Act 
of  Parliament  sanctioning  Mr.  Hill's 
plans  ;  illicit  conveyance  of  letters,  710, 

711.  Question  of  loss  to  the  revenue,  711. 
Comparison  of  number  of  letters  before 
and  since  the  adoption  of  the  new  system, 

712,  713.  Progress  of  revenue  of  posr- 
office  of  Great  Britain  and  Ireland  from 
1758  to  1850,  713,  714.  Rates  of  postage 
from  1710,  715,  716.  Effects  of  changes 
of  rates  on  revenue  from  1801  to  1836, 
717.  Annual  number  of  newspapers  cir- 
culated from  1801  to  1344,  and  in  1849, 
718,719. 

Power-loom,  progressive  use  of,  in  the  cotton 
manufacture,  185,  &c. 

Public  edifices  of  recent  erection  enumera- 
ted, 619,  620. 

Probates. — (See  Legacy.) 

Production. — (See  Labour.) 

Progress,  moral,  remarks  on  the  importance 
of,  compared  with  material  progress,  630, 
631.  Fallacious  to  consider  as  the  conse- 
quence of  increased  M-ealth  the  increase  of 
immorality  which  may  be  concomitant 
with  it ;  prevalence  of  crime  and  wretch- 
edness indicat  s  something  wrong  in  our 
social  procedure  ;  great  increase  of  num- 
ber of  criminal  committals,  631,  632. 

Progress  of  society  in  the  arts  of  life 

involves  changes  in  sources  of  employ- 
ment which  occasion  transitory,  but 
severe  privations,  to  particular  classes, 
126,  127. 

In   science,  literature,  and   the  arts; 

each  succeeding  age  advances  more 
rapidly,  as  possessing  the  advantage  of 
the  discoveries,  experience,  and  facilities 
furnished  by  the  age  preceding  it,  719. 

(See  Education.     ^Ianners.) 

Prices. — High  prices  cause  decrease  of  con- 
sumption ;  instanced  in  the  c;ise  of  sugar, 
542-546. 

587-591.      Permanent   alterations   of 

price  indicative  of  pernianeut  variations  in 
cost  of  production  or  transmission,  ."iSS, 
589.     Cost  of  building  a  74-gun  ship  in 


1805  and  1836,  5SS.  Prices  of  beef  and 
mutton  in  1801-1849,589;  of  butchers 
meat  in  the.  London  markets  from  1841 
to  1849,  590.  Cost  of  various  articles  of 
clothing  in  London  hospitals,  590,  591. 

Prices. — Price  of  wheat  enormously  high  at 
commencement  of  present  century,  439, 
440. 

Effect  of  high  prices  in  diminishing 

consumption,  exemplified  in  variations  of 
duty  on  cotJ'ee.  549. 

Prince  Edward's  Island. — Boundary,  popu- 
lation, trade,  793,  794.  Improvement  of 
the  soil  retarded  by  impolitic  mode  of 
granting  land;  few  immigrants,  soil  fer- 
tile, climate  healthy,  population  chii-tly 
farmers,  live  stock,  794,  735.  Shipping, 
tonnage,  795. 

Prison  discipline,  improvement  of,  under 
the  superintendence  of  Government  in- 
spectors, 672. 

Prize-fighting,  present  comparative  infre- 
quency  of,  indicative  of  improvement  in 
manners,  681. 

Profits,  surplus,  swallowed  up  by  public 
expenditure  during  the  war,  59G. 

Property,  real. — Amounts  assessed  for  in- 
come-tax and  poor-rates,  607-609.  Value 
has  been  more  than  doubled  since  1798, 
609,  610. 

Great  increase  of  amount  of,  in  Jlan- 

chester  since  the  peace,  610,  611. 

Personal  and  real,   increase  of,   since 

the  peace,  596.  Amount  of  personal  pro- 
perty in  1814-45;  increase  of  1000  mil- 
lions since  the  peace,  600. 

Property  tax  in  1803  and  1812;  amount  ov 
real  property  assessed,  606,  607. 

Protection  to  any  branch  of  trade,  for  sup- 
posed benefit  to  particular  classes,  an 
unsound  and  impolitic  principle  in  legis- 
lation, 550.  Favouring  some  at  expense 
of  the  rest,  occasions  great  waste  of 
capital ;  interference  with  the  natural 
course  of  trade  highly  impolitic,  550. 

Protective  system  in  trade,  impolicy  and 
evils  of.— (See  Trade,  Duties,  Agricul- 
ture, Spirits,  Wine.) 

Commercial  restrictions  and  prefer- 
ences, so  long  and  stoutly  maintained,  at 
length  drawing  to  an  end,  811. 

Prussia,  Commercial  League  of  407-412. 
Origin  and  preliniinarj'  arrangements  of, 
407-410.  Came  into  operation  in  1834. 
Its  ostensible  and  political  objects,  4ii7, 

409.  Names,  area,  &c.,  of  the  states  com- 
posing the  league,  408.  Principle  and 
policy  of  the  measure  discussed,  408,  409. 
English  exports  to  German}-,  from  1827 
to  1849.  Cotton  manufacture  of  Saxony 
doubled  since    operation  of  the  league, 

410,  411. 

Erection    of    cotton-spinning    mills, 

243. 

Remark  on  amount  of  cxportations  to, 

361. 


836 


ANALYTICAL  INDEX. 


Quebec. — Number  of  emigrants  to,  from 
1829  to  1843,  129.  Disadvantage  of  Aus- 
tralia as  a  penal  colony  for  English  con- 
victs, compared  witli  Canada,  132,  133. 

Railroads,  amount  expended  in  their  con- 
struction from  1826  to  1849,  327,  328, 
622. 

Table  showing  number  of  passengers, 

cattle,  sheep,  swine,  and  merchandise, 
conveyed  on  lines  of  projected  railways, 
299. 

Historical  notice  of,  in  England,  326. 

Acts  of  Parliament  relating  to,  from 
1801  to  1849,  326.  Length  of  lines  com- 
pleted in  the  United  Kingdom,  at  the  end 
of  the  year  1849,  and  amount  of  capital 
expended  thereon,  330.  Number  of  pas- 
sengers conveyed  in  carriages  of  various 
classes,  with  the  receipts  arising  there- 
from, 1845  to  1849,  330.  Liverpool  and 
Manchester  line  the  first  for  passengers, 
328.  Tabular  comparison  of  amount  of 
merchandise  conveyed  on  this  line,  329. 
Amount  of  postage  increased  by  opening 
this  line,  330.  Mail  first  sent  by  railway, 
Nov.  1830.  Rapid  transmission  of  letters 
by  railway,  331,  332.  Amount  of  fares, 
and  advantages  to  the  public,  332.  Exag- 
gerated notions  regarding  accidents ;  com- 
parative statement  of  the  number  of 
passengers  killed  or  injured  to  those  con- 
veyed, 332,  333.  Advantage  of  Govern- 
ment superintendence,  333,  334.  Parlia- 
mentary expenses  incurred  in  obtaiuing 
Acts  for  various  lines,  334.  Appointment 
of  Parliamentary  Commission  on  a  system 
of  railways  for  Ireland,  335,  336.  Num- 
ber of  persons,  in  various  capacities, 
employed  by  railway  companies  in  1849, 
336.  Government  system  of  railways  in 
Belgium,  336-338.  Railways  in  United 
States  of  America,  338,  339.  In  Ger- 
many, 339.     In  France,  290. 

Projected  railway  between  Cairo  and 

Suez,  323.    Commercial  advantage  of,  323. 

Redgrave,  Mr.,  quotation  of  his  remarks 
upon  our  criminal  legislation,  638,  &c. 

Retaliative  spirit,  rendering  "eye  for  ej-e, 
tooth  for  tooth,"  fatal  in  commercial 
legislation,  501,  502. 

Revenue,  public,  and  expenditure,  467-471 . 

Great  amount  of  loss  occasioned  by 

differential  duty  on  sugar,  547,  548. 

Sugar,  a  very  suitable  article  for  indi- 
rect taxation,  541.  A  great  reduction  in 
duty  on  sugar  would  increase  consump- 
tion and  revenue,  541,  542.  Revenue 
was  not  increased  by  increased  rates  on 
sugar  in  1805,  542. 

» Evil  effects  of  high  importation  duties 

on  foreign  produce  in  reducing  amount 
of  revenue,  541. 

Loss  occasioned  by  operation  of  pro- 
tective duties  on  coffee,  550,  551. 

. Not  expedient  to  obtain  revenue  by 


duty  on  soap ;  frauds,  to  great  extent, 
practised  in  manufacture  of  soap,  to  evade 
duty,  569,  570. — (See  Duties,  Trade, 
Commerce,  Agriculture,  Corn,  Spirits, 
Wine,  Sugai',  Finance.) 

Rice,  improvement  of  that  produced  in 
India,  744,  745. 

Rickman,  Mr.,  his  table  of  population  in 
the  period  1700-1800,,  and  1570-1750 
{note),  13.  Table  of  ages  of  persons 
buried,  28. 

■ Quoted  upon  classifying  population  as 

to  employmeuts,  63,  64. 

Explanations  by,  relating  to  enumera- 
tions of,   1811,  1821,  and  1831,  64,  65. 

Roads,  turnpike,  improved  construction  of; 
increase  in  extent  of,  since  1818,  291. 
Length  of,  in  England  and  Wales ;  extent 
of  surface  occupied ;  length  of  I'oads  in 
each  county,  291,  292.  Extension  of 
roads  in  Scotland,  293.     In  Ireland,  294. 

Social  and  moral  improvements  pro- 
duced by  opening  and  improving  roads  in 
Scotland,  293.  In  Ireland,  294.  In  Eng- 
land, 295,  296.  Scientific  improvemeuT 
of  roads  owing  to  exertions  of  Mr. 
M'Adam,  291.  Arthur  Young's  descrip- 
tion of  road  between  Preston  and  Wigau, 
296. 

Advantage  and  perfection  of,  in  Eng- 
land, 288.  Loss  to  inhabitants  of  France 
by  badness  of,  289. 

Past  and  present  means  of  communi- 
cation of  Horsham  with  London,  in- 
stanced as  remarkable  proof  of  improve- 
ment in  means  of  locomotion,  296. 

Mode  of  management,    extent,    and 

amounts  expended  in  their  construction 
and  maintenance,  622-624. 

Good,  advantage  of,  for  increase   of 

commerce  in  India,  371,  372. 

(See  Carriages.) 

Romilly,  Sir  Samuel,  his  bills  for  abolition 
of  capital  punishment,  639,  640. 

Rum,  quantities  imported  from  West  Indies, 
803  ;  from  Antigua,  807. 

Russia,  amount  of  tonnage  employed  in 
import  and  export  trade,  404. 

Rye,  quantity  imported  from  Ireland,  345. 

Salaries,  amount  of,  in  the  Government 
departments,  513-515. 

Salt,  fossil,  obtained  from  mines  near  North- 
wich,  in  Cheshire,  is  nearly  all  exported  ; 
white  salt  made  from  brine  springs  in 
Cheshire  and  Staffordshire,  284.  Quan- 
tities sent  from  Cheshire  to  Liverpool  by 
the  river  Weaver  from  1803  to  1844; 
duty  on,  repealed  in  1825,  284,  285. 
Quantities  made  and  consumed  from  1801 
to  1817;  quantities  exported ;  much  more 
extensively  used  since  repeal  of  the  dutv, 
285,  286. 

Savings'  banks,  remarks  on  their  economical 
and  moral  benefits,  (ill.  Particulars  of 
their  origin,  611,  612.    Tables  exhibiting 


i 


ANALYTICAL  INDEX. 


837 


their  progress  in  England  and  Wales, 
612-C16. 

Savings'  banks. — Commendation  of,  114, 
115. 

Savings  of  individuals  swallowed  up  by 
public  expenditure  during  war,  590. 

Saxony  ;  cotton  manufacture  doubled  since 
Couinu-rcial  League  of  Prussia,  411. 

Progress  of  cotton  and  hosiery  manu- 
factures, 243. 

Immense  increase  of  hosiery  manufac- 
ture, 412. 

Wages  miserably  low ;  wretched  man- 
ner of  subsistence  of  working  classes, 
411. 

Science,  increased  encouragement  to,  caused 
by  increase  of  wealth,  522. 

Scotland,  utility  of  parish  school  system 
for  collecting  population  returns,  7. 
Population  in  1801,  1811,  1821,  1831, 
1841,  8. 

Advantages  from  road  improvements, 

293. 

Returns  of  schools  and  scholars,  701- 

703. 

Number  of  emigrants  from,  to  Quebec, 

1829-1843, 129. 

Linen  manufacture  greatly  increased 

since  1815,  227. 

Comparative  amoimt  of  duty  on  pro- 
bates of  wills ;  provision  for  others  by 
bequeathment  of  property  more  prevalent 
than  in  England,  603,  004. 

Quantities  of  slaughtered  sheep   and 

cattle  brought  from  Scottish  ports  to 
London,  580. 

Foreign  spirits  almost  wholly  unused 

in  Scotland,  550,  557.  Quantities  of  home- 
distilled  spirits  consumed  in  each  j'ear 
from  1842  to  1849.  557. 

Consumption  of  malt,  554. 

Revenue  from  legacy  duties,  495,  496. 

Consumption  of  beer  very  inconsider- 
able ;  quantity  charged  with  duty  in 
1829,  504. 

Criminal  statistics  of  Scotland  ;  tables 

of  ofiFenders  and  offences,  057-063. 

Great  increase  in  number  of  criminal 

committals,  631. 

Extracts    from  the    new  '  Statistical 

Account  of  Scotland,'  showing  the  pro- 
gress of  improvement  in  that  country, 
146,  147. 

(See  Caledonian  Canal.) 

Scott,  Sir  Walter,  anecdote  by,  I'egarding 
Mrs.  Behn's  novels,  indicative  of  the 
general  improvement  in  public  manners, 
676. 

Senior,  Mr,  facts  on  pauperism  derived 
from  his  preface  to  '  Report  on  Poor,' 
124,  125. 

Statement    of    proportions  of  births, 

deaths,  and  marriages,  in  various  coun- 
tries of  Europe  and  America,  22. 

Servants,  domestic,  mule,  number  of,  20 
years  "f  age,  GO.     Female,  all  ages,  70. 


Servants,  domestic. — Comparative  statement 
of  numbers  in  1831  and  1841,  74. 

Number  of  persons  assessed  for  keep- 
ing male  servants,  1812-1849.  529.  De- 
crease in  1821  owing  to  expense  of  war, 
529.  Annual  expense  of  male  and  female 
servants,  530.  Number  and  cost  of  ser- 
vants in  Ireland,  530.  Not  taxed  in  ire- 
land,  530. 

Proportion  of  population  engaged  in 

domestic  service,  521. 

Sewers-rate  assessments  in  London  and 
metropolitan  counties  in  1841,  609,610. 

Shannon,  Act  of  Parliament  in  1835  for  im- 
provement of,  305. 

The  river,  neglect  of  its  great  capa- 
bilities for  internal  communication,  304- 
306. 

Sheep,  number  of,  and  quantity  of  wool 
produced  in  1828,  174,  175.  Coarser 
wool  produced  by  enlarged  size  of  im- 
proved breed,  176. 

Number  imported  into  England  from 

Ireland,  343. 

Extensive  and  good  pasturage  for,  in 

India,  744. 

Sheffield,  superior  state  of  dwellings  o, 
working  classes,  523. 

Increase  of  population  and  buildings ; 

progress  of  hardware  manufacture,  250, 
251. 

Consumes  about  515,000  tons  of  coals 

annually,  2.50,  280. 

Produces  nearly  all  the  cutlery  made 

in  the  kingdom,  250. 

Shellac,  quantities  imported  from  India, 
742. 

Shipping,  accounts  destroyed  in  the  burn- 
ing of  the  Custom-house  in  1814,  396, 
Table  of  number  and  tonnage  of  vessels, 
British  and  foreign,  in  the  ports  of  the 
United  Kingdom,  from  1801-1849,  307, 
398.  Comparison  of  progressive  amounts 
of  British  and  foreign  tonnage  in  the 
ports  of  the  United  Kingdom,  396.  Table 
of  amoimt  of  tonnage  employed  in  1 802, 
1814,  1835,  and  1849,  in  the  import  and 
export  trade,  distinguishing  countries, 
399. 

Table    of   centesimal   proportions  of 

British  and  foreign  tonnage  employed  in 
the  import  and  export  trades  in  1820- 
1849,  403. 

Table  of  numbers  of  ships,  and  ton- 
nage, built  and  registered  in  the  United 
Kingdom,  1801-1849,395.  Number  and 
tonnage  of  prize  ships  registered,  396. 
No  public  registry  of  ships  or  tonnage 
employed  in  commerce  between  1801- 
1814,  396. 

Proportion  of  Enslish  and  American 

tonnage  in  ports  of  the  United  States, 

391,  392.  Comparison  of  British  and 
foreign  tonnage  in    English   ports,   392, 

392.  Progiessive  increase  of  tonnajjc 
from  1801  to  1849,  393.     Table  of  nuin. 


838 


ANALYTICAL  INDEX. 


bers  of  ships  and  tonnage  belonginp:  to 
the  United  Kingdom  and  colonies,  1803- 
1849,  394. 

Shipping.— Great  depreciation  of  value  of 
shipping;  causes  thereof,  389,  390.  Mr. 
Huskisson's  proposal  of  a  drawback  on 
materials,  390. 

• Number    of   merchant    vessels     and 

amount  of  tonnage,  1803-1849,  G2C. 

• IMeasurement  and  classing   of;  mode 

of  nieasurin;,'  sliips  by  taking  merely 
length  and  breadth  to  ascertain  cubic 
capacitj- :  evils  resulting  from  this  system 
as  connected  with  duties  on  registered 
tonnage,  4.'JS,  459.  Committees  formed  in 
1821  and  1834  to  inquire  concerning 
these  evils  ;  vessels  since  the  adoption  of 
scientific  measurement  built  with  better 
and  safer  proportions,  459.  Classifica- 
tion of  vessels  by  registry  at  Lloyd's ; 
bad  consequences  through  neglect  of  du- 
rability in  construction;  superior  system 
now  adopted  securing  desirable  attention 
to  building  and  repairs,  459,  4G0. 

Estimate    of  expense    of  building  a 

74-gun  ship,  of  17(10  tons,  588. 

■ Origin  of  iron-built  vessels;  nearly  200 

launched  since  1830;  the  '  Guadaloupe' 
steam  frigate,  of  788  tons  ;  the  '  Great 
Britain,'  of  3500  tons,  and  1000  horse 
power;  great  part  of  East  India  steam 
navy  consists  of  iron  vessels  ;  advantages 
of  iron  over  timber  for  naval  architecture, 
575,  576. 

• (See  India,  Calcutta,  Madras,  Bombay, 

Mauritius.) 

Table  of  ships  engaged  in  China  trade, 

370.  Number  and  tonnage  employed  in 
the  West  India  trade  from  1822  to  1849, 
802. 

of  France,  401-403. 

(See  Trade,  Commerce.) 

Ships. — Great  part  of  our  merchant  vessels 
the  most  unsightly  in  Europe  ;  sail  badly, 
unmanasreable  in  bad  weather,  consequent 
great  loss  of  life,  458,  459. 

Shipowners,  a  numerous  and  wealthy  body, 
continually  complaining  of  distress,  390, 
391. 

— —  Their  complaint  of  competition  from 
foreign  tonnage  in  the  English  ports  re- 
plied 10,  391,  .'592,  396,  402-404. 

Shuttlev,or!h,  Sir  James,  establishment  of 
model  school  at  Battersea,  697. 

Sidney,  New  South  Wales,  land  in  the  town 
sold  at  20,000Z.  per  acre,  757. 

Sierra  Leone.  —  (See  Dependencies  in 
Africa.) 

Silk.— (See  Manufactures.) 

Silk  and  silk  goods,  quantities  imported 
from  India,  7T3. 

• Amount   annually  expended   on   silk 

fabrics  in  the  United  Kingdom,  573. — 
(See  Manufactures,  Silk.) 

Sinclair.  Sir  John,  his  statistical  account  of 
Scotland,  146,  147. 


Sinclair,  Sir  John. — Quotations  from  his 
work  on  the  public  revenue,  473. 

Slave  Trade  of  the  West  Indies, — (See  West 
Indies.) 

Carried  on  by  the  African  Company 

in  the  island  of  St.  James,  780. 

Slaves,  loan  in  1836  for  compensation  for 
manumission  of,  did  not  much  diminish 
national  capital,  596. 

Small  pox. — Tables  of  mortality  from  small- 
pox, compared  with  total  mortality,  from 
1701-18-30,  and  from  1838  to  1847,"39,  40. 
Admissions  into  the  Small-pox  Hospital 
still  numerous.  40,  41. 

Table  of  numbers   admitted  into  the 

Small-pox   Hospital,  1794-1844,  and  pro- 
portion of  deaths,  41. 

Mortality  from  smallpox  in  Ireland, 

compared    with     total    mortality,    from 

1831-2  to  1841,  41,  42. 
Smith,  Adam,  citation  from  his  '  Wealth  of 

Nations,'    on    impolicy    of    commercial 

monopoly  in  colonies,  722,  723. 
Smithfield,   number   of   cattle    and    sheep 

brought  to,  1821-1849,  581. 
Smuggling  encouraged   by  excessive  duty 

on  tobacco,  566. 

P^xtensive  smuggling  of  cotton  twist 

into  France,  238. 

Extent  and  effects  of  contraband  trade 

in  foreign  silk  goods,  217,  218,  223. 

Extensively  carried  on  at  (iibraltar, 

367,  729,  730. 

Immoral    effects   of   high    duties   in 

tempting  to  the  commission  of  the  crime 
of  smuggling,  557,  559. 

Social  improvement  accompanies  accumu- 
lation of  capital,  521,  522.  Increase  of, 
in  England,  521-524. 

Soap,  extent  of  consumption  dependent  on 
increase  of  manufactures ;  deficiency  of 
official  records  of  quantities  produced  and 
consumed ;  prevalence  of  fraudulent  pro- 
cesses for  evasion  of  the  duty,  569. 

Not  expedient  to  derive  revenue  from 

duty  on  soap ;  enforcement  of  excise  duty 
prevents  improvement  in  manufacture, 
569,  570.  Consequent  superiority  of 
foreign  soap,  5"0. 

Only    imperfect    account    obtainable 

of  amount  of  consumption,  18ltl-1849, 
570. 

Spain,  amount  of  exports  to,  considerable, 
367. 

Spinning-jenny,  invention  of,  combined  with 
the  steam  engine,  has  enabled  us  to 
triumph  over  difiiculties  nnjiaralleled 
in  the  history  of  the  world,  470, 
471. 

Spirits,  quantities  consumed,  18'^2tolS41, 
compared  with  population  and  rates  of 
duty,  555,^556.  Quantities  of  home- 
distilled  spirits  consumed  in  England, 
Scotland,  and  Ireland,  in  each  year  from 
1842  to  1849,  557.  Decrease  of  consump- 
tion of  spirits  in   Ireland  in    1810,  1841, 


ANALYTICAL  INDEX. 


83f) 


through  the  agency  of  Father  Muthew, 
SSG.  Foreign  spirits  almost  wholly  un- 
used in  Scotland  and  Ireland,  Soc;,  557. 
Quantity  of  rum  consumed  in  England, 
Ireland,  Scotland,  and  the  United  King- 
dom, compared  with  population  and  rates 
of  duty,  557,  55S.  Quantity  of  foreign 
spirits  consumed  in  ditto,  55S.  Evil 
effects  of  high  duties  ou  foreign  spirits, 
557. 
Spirits, — Increase  in  the  consumjjtion  of, 
niiizht  not  prove  any  increase  of  intem- 
perance, 559. 

Only  a  small  proportion  distilled  from 

malted  grain,  553. 

•  Foreiiin,  duty  reduced  in  184G  ;  quan- 
tities consumed  in  each  year  from  1842 
to  1849,  559. 

Spitalfields  weavers  improvident ;  many 
provided  with  only  working  dress;  keep 
pigeons  and  cultivate  flowers,  452.  453. 
Dr.  Kay's  investigations  in  the  Spital- 
fields district,  45.3,  454. 

Stage-coaches. — (See  Carriages.) 

Stamps,  taxes  from  1801  to  1849,  485,  486, 
488-490,  492,  493,  495-497. 

St.mley,  Lord,  institution  of  national  system 
of  education  in  Ireland,  703. 

Statistical  Society  of  London,  inquiries  into 
state  of  education,  695. 

Citation  from  Transactions  of,  respect- 
ing expense  of  servants  and  carriages, 
529-532. 

Steam-engines,  number  in  Birmingham,  625. 
Steam-power  in  cotton  factories,  177,  193, 
625,  626. 

Employment  of,  in  drainine;  land,  154, 

155. 

Number     employed     in     factories, 

233. 

Improvements  in,  have  produced  al- 
most magical  effects  upon  the  productive 
energies  of  the  kingdom,  470,  471. 

Steam-navigation,  historical  notice  of,  315, 
Number  and  tonnage  of  steam-vessels 
employed  at  different  ports  in  the  United 
Kingdom  and  Colonies  in  1849,  315. 
Number  and  tonnage  of  steam-vessels 
built  in  the  L'nited  Kingdom  and  colo- 
nies, 1814-1849,  316.  Progressive  an- 
nual increase  of  numbers,  317.  Supe- 
riority of  steam-vessels  for  passengers  and 
for  cargoes  more  valuable  than  bulky, 
316.  Contrast  of  passage  to  Gravesend 
by  sailing  boats  formerly  and  steam- 
vessels  at  present,  317,  318.  Prodigious 
increase  of  passengers  conveyed  to  various 
places,  318,  319.  Steam  navigation  to 
America,  West  Indies,  and  East  Indies, 
319,  .323. 

■  Number  and  tonnage  of  steam-vessels, 

to  and  from  ports  in  the  United  Kingdom, 
1820-1819,  324.  Steam-vessels  used  by 
every  European  power,  and  other  foreign 
nations,  325.  Trade  with  Ireland  in- 
creased by  steam- vessels,  343,  344. 


Sleam-vessels  diminish  the  number  of  .sea- 
men (note),  390. 

Number  and  amount  of  horse-power 

in  the  British  empire,  315,  627. 

Steel,  quantity  exported,  1814-1849,  251. 

St.  Helena. —  (See  Dependencies  in  Africa.) 

St.  Lawrence,  river,  navigation  of,  tedious 
and  dangeious  in  winter,  132. 

Stock,  amount  and  description  of  stock 
created  from  1801  to  1821,  476. 

Suez,  projected  railway  from,  to  Cairo,  323. 

Sf  fJAK,  quantities  consumed  in  the  United 
Kingdom  in  each  year,  1830  to  1849,  with 
the  price,  and  average  quantity  to  each 
persr)n  of  the  whole  population  ;  curious 
correspondence  of  this  average  wiih  fluc- 
tuations in  price,  542,  543,  High  price 
of,  decreases  amount  of  consumjition  even 
under  circumstances  favouiable  to  increase 
of  demand,  544-546. 

Great   and    palpable    error    involved 

in  the  custom-house  statements  of  quanti- 
ties retained  for  home  consumption,  540. 
Table  exhibiting  for  1801,  ISIl,  1821, 
the  quantity  consumed  in  Great  Britain 
and  Ireland,  compared  with  the  popula- 
tion, 541,  Sugar,  an  article  of  very 
general  consumption,  very  suitable  for 
indirect  taxation,  to  supply  revenue,  541. 

Quantities  exported    from    Mauritius, 

1820-1842  ;  quantities  imported  into  the 
United  Kingdom  from  Mauritius,  755. 

• Duty  on  sugar  too  high;  great  reduc- 
tion of  it  would  increase  consumption  aud 
reveime,  541,  542. 

Differential  duty  on  sugar  extremely 

burdensome  and  impolitic ;  extravagantly 
great ;  acts  as  prohibition  to  consumption ; 
occasions  extensive  loss  to  the  revenue ; 
desirable  to  abolish  it  altogether,  547, 
548. 

Tabular  exhibition  of  enormous  loss 

to  the  revenue  through  operation  of  pro- 
hibitory differential  duty,  548. 

Amount   of  importations    from    West 

Indies  in  1831,  compared  with  1840,  546. 
Fallacy  of  the  argument  that  high  price 
of  sugar  is  necessary  to  the  emancipated 
negro  population  of  the  West  Indies,  546, 
547. 

Quantities  imported  from  West  Indies, 

1822-1849,  S03  ;  from  Antigua,  807. 
Sumner,   Dr.,   Archbishop   of  Canterbury, 

cited  on  the  education  of  the  poor,  687. 
Sunday-schools,  their  first  existence  owing 

chiefly  to  Mr.  Raikes,  690. 
Swan  Kiver.— (See  Colonies,  Settlement  of 

Western  Australia.) 
Sweden. — Amount  of  tonnage  employed  in 

import  and  export  trade,  404. 
Switzerland  has  no  cus'om-house ;  has  free 
trade  in  its  fullest  extent,  244.  H.is  de- 
clined joining  the  Prussian  Commercial 
League,  244, 
Sykes,  Colonel,  his  estimates  of  annual  ex- 
penses of  servants,  530 ;  of  carriages,  531. 


840 


ANALYTICAL  INDEX. 


Tavistock,  parish  registers  of  the  borough 
of,  35,  36. 

Population  of,  1801,  1811,  1821,  1831, 

aud  1841,  35. 
Taxes. — (See  Finance,  Produce  of  Taxes.) 
Indirect  preferred   to  direct,  by  Go- 
vernments, 408. 
Taxation,  ell'ects  of,  especially  exhibited  in 
the  fluctuations  of  the  cotfee  trade,  548.  549. 
Tea,  amount  of  consumption  of,  indicating 
condition  of  working  classes,  552. 

Consumption   and  revenue  would  be 

increased  by  bold  reduction  of  duty  on 
tea,  553. 
Consumption  of,   diminished   by    im- 
position of  high  duties,  553. 
Textile  fabrics,  numbers  of  the  population 

employed  in  the  manufacture  of,  75. 
Timber,  quantity  used  exhibits  comparative 
social  progress  and  industr}- ;  quantities 
used  in  1801-1842,  and  from  1343  to  1849, 
colonial  and  foreign,  578,  579. 
— —  The  monopoly  of,  one  of  the  chief 
obstacles  to  extension  of  European  com- 
merce, 375.  Quantities  imported  from  our 
North  American  possessions,  in  each  year 
from  1843  to  1849,  375.  Remarks  on  the 
timber  trade,  showing  the  disadvantage 
ot  present  resti'ictions,  375-377.  An 
arficle  of  the  first  necessity  ;  its  importa- 
tion should  be  as  free  as  possible,  375. 
A  full  discussion  of  the  subject  in  No.  4 
of  the  '  British  and  Foreign  Quarterly 
lieview'  (note),  377. 
Tin,  no  means  for  ascertaining  quantity  ex- 
ported or  retained  for  honi3  use,  578. 
Tobacco,  565-567. — Kelative  amount  of 
consumption  decreased,  owing  to  increase 
of  duty,  565.  Smoking  increased  in 
England;  decreased  in  Ireland,  565.  Duty 
three  times  greater  now  than  in  IftOl; 
quantity  consumed  in  Great  Britain, 
1801-1841  ;  amount  of  duty,  565,  566. 
In  Ireland,  566.  Excessive  duty  on  to- 
bacco encourages  smuggling,  566. 

May    be    grown   with   advantage    in 

Australia,  764. 

Retaliatory    tariff    adopted    by   the 

American  Congress  with  respect  to  the 
European  high  duties  on  tobacco,  566, 
567. 
Tooke,  Mr.,  his  opinion  that  prices  are  not 
aifected  by  abundance  or  scarcity  of  cir- 
culating money,  427. 

His  work  on  '  The  History  of  Prices' 

referred  to  {note),  589. 
Trade    and    manufactures,     proportion    of 

population  engaged  in,  520,  521. 
. Comparative    table   of  numbers   em- 
ployed in  trade,  agriculture,  &c.,  53-55. 
——  Necessity  for  adopting  more   liberal 
system  of,  412. 

With  colonies  and  dependencies,  809- 

811. — (See  Colonies,  Dependencies.) 

Progress  of,  in  foreign  countries,  400- 

406. 


Trade  and  manufactures. — Progress  of,  in 
United  States  of  America,  405,  406. 

Coasting,  no  records  of,  earlier  than 

1824,  340.  Tonnage  of  coasting  vessels, 
1824-1849,  340,  Aifected  by  importa- 
tions of  foreign  grain,  340,  341. 

Trade  between  Great  IJritain  and  Ire- 
land, imports  into  Ireland,  ex]M)rts  there- 
from, 1801-182.5,  342.  Has  greatly  in- 
creased, 342,  343.  Tables  of  imports  into 
England,  343,  344  Table  of  sbippiiig 
and  tonnage,  345,  346. 

Includes  trade  with  Ireland  subsequent 

to  1825,  342. 

Trade,  Free. —  (See  Commerce.) — Foreign 
Trade  of  England  would  long  ago  have 
been  greater  than  it  is,  if  left  to  its  own 
free  course,  352.  Increase  of  population 
demands  the  greatest  possible  facilities  to 
commerce  for  supply  of  food,  352-354. 
Impossibility  of  continuing  restrictions 
on  foreign  trade,  355. 

A    sound    principle    that    no    duties 

should  be  levied  but  for  purposes  of 
revenue;  unwise  to  tax  the  whole  com- 
munity for  supposed  benefit  of  a  part,  373, 
374. 

England  especially  interested  in  perfect 

freedom  of  commerce,  263. 

Retaliatory   expedient  threatened  by 

the  American  Congress  with  respect  to  the 
European  high  duties  on  tobacco  thence 
imported,  566.  567. 

Impolicy  of  prohibiting  exportation  of 

British  wool,  168,  169. 
The  two  great  monopolies  of  corn  and 

timber  long  the  chief  remaining  obsta- 

cb^s  to  extension  of  European  commerce, 

374. 
In  its  fullest  extent  in   Switzerland ; 

no  custom-house  exists,  244. 

(See  Duties.) 

Trade,  Contraband. — (See  Smuggling.) 
Trade,  Foreign. — (See  Commerce.) 
Transportation  of  criminals. — (See  Crime.) 
Travelling,  improved  means  and  speed  of, 

297,  298.— (See  Roads,  Canals,  Railroads, 

Carriages,  Steam  Navigation.) 
Treaties,  commercial,  would  be  unknown  if 

each   community    rightly  understood  Us 

own  interests,  385,  386. 
Turnpike  roads. — (See  Roads.) 
Twisleton,  Mr.,  his  evidence  cited  on  the 

prejudice  of  the  upper  and  middle  classes 

against  educating  the  poor,  C94> 

United  States. — (See  America.) 

Vaccination,  remarks  on  the  introduction 
of,  38,  39.     Discovered  in  1798,  38. 

Diminisliing   mortality  attributed    to 

the  introduc^tion  of,  21. 

Van  Diemen's  Land. — (See  Colonies — Asia.) 

Venice,  province  of,  mode  of  paying  farm 
labourers  ;  poverty  of  the  soil,  457. 

Vienna,  congress  of,  commercial    interests 


I 


ANALYTICAL  INDEX. 


841 


of  Eiiglaiul  liccdlessly  abainloiicd  by  tlie 
English  minister,  ."581. 

Villiers,  Mr.,  reports  on  the  commercial 
relations  of  France  and  England,  237, 
238. 

quotation  of  report  of,  on  commercial 

relations  between  France  and  Great  Bri- 
tain, 288,  289. 

Wages,  high  rate  of,  for  fewer  hours  than 
in  other  countries,  an  accompaniment 
of  England's  manufacturing  superiority, 
r)2(). 

' Demand  for  labour  can  only  increase 

■with  the  increase  of  the  capital  destined 
for  the  payment  of  wages,  470.  Wages 
necessarily  higher  in  London  than  in  the 
country.owing  to  greater  expense  of  living, 
470.  Comparison  of  weekly  wages  in 
1790  and  1800,  470. 

439-4r)7.   Bad  harvests;  great  distress 

of  working  classes ;  comparatively  few 
marriages  at  commencement  of  present 
century,  439-441.  Special  exertion  and 
competition  among  labourers  for  piece- 
■work  at  low  wages,  441,  442.  Must  often 
happen  under  our  present  system  that  the 
bulk  of  the  people  will  be  exposed  to 
violent  alternations  of  plenty  and  misery, 
442.  Kegister  of  wages  of  artisans  in 
Greenwich  Hospital ;  difficult  to  procure 
authentic  continuous  accounts  of  wages  in 
this  country,  442.  Good  effect  of  certain 
and  constant  work  in  correcting  habit  of 
improvidence  acquired  by  dependence  on 
precarious  and  deficient  earnings,  442, 451. 
Weekly  wages  of  artisans  in  various  parts 
of  the  kingdom  from  1800  to  183fi,  and 
from  1844  to  1849,  443,  451.  Circum- 
stances and  wages  of  Spitalfields  weavers 
investigated  by  Dr.  Kay,  453,  454.  Mr. 
Felkin's  excellent  address  to  workmen  on 
provident  habits,  455.  Weekly  earnings, 
Nottingham  weavers'  families.  455,  456. 
Wages  of  farm-servants  and  labourers  in 
various  parts  of  Europe,  450,  457. — (See 
Working  Classes,  Poor,  Servants.) 

In   cotton   mills,    190-197.      In    flax 

mills,  227,  228. 

in  Belgium,   123,    124.     In   Norway, 

102.  In  Sweden,  103.  In  Denmark, 
105.  In  Mecklenburg,  105.  In  Wur- 
toniburg,  108.  In  Bavaria,  109.  In 
France,  113.     In  Holland,  119. 

Miserably  low  rate  of,  in  Saxony,  411. 

Exorbitant  rate  of,  demanded  by  eman- 
cipated slaves  in  West  Indies ;  not  prac- 
ticable by  them,  or  the  lalwurers  and 
artisans  of  England,  to  fix  the  rate  of 
wages,  8t)G,  807. 

A\'ales,  produce  of  the  land  is  not  half  it 
is  capable  of  producing,  with  superior 
culture,  lf>2. 

Wallace,  Mr ,  his  Five  Acts  for  relaxing 
restrictions  on  foreign  trade,  3S7,  38S. 

War,  injurious  to  foreign  trade,  352,37  7, 378. 


War. — .'\dvantages  that  would  havetollowcd 
from  avoidance  of  the  French  and  Ameri- 
can wars,  594,  595. 

Expenditui;e. — Sums  expended  for  the 

army,  navy,  and  ordnance  service  in  1814; 
amount  nearly  102  millions,  504.  Conse- 
quent exhaustion  and  distress,  504,  505, 
National  defence  from  1801  to  1830  cost 
the  country  al)ove  1000  millions  ;  table  of 
expenditure  for  army,  navy,  and  ordnance, 
from  1801  to  1849,  505,  50(5.  Amount  of 
loans  and  subsidies  to  foreign  states  on 
account  of  war,  from  1793  to  1814,  507, 
508. 

Financial  statement  showing  31 G  years 

of  peace  required  to  cancel  the  debt 
caused  by  24  years  of  war,  481-483. 
Great  productiveness  of  legacy  duty  im- 
portantly assisted  in  defraying  expense  of 
war,  495,  496. 
War  and  peace  expenditure,  593,  594. 

Surplus  profits  and  savings  swallowed 

up  by  public  expenditure   during  war, 
596. 
Ruinous  state  of  finances  of  the  king- 
dom at  the  termination  of  the   French 
war,  472. 

Decrease  in  number  of  male  domestic 

servants  in  1821,  as  compared  with  1812, 
owing  to  expense  of  war,  529. 

Great  diminution  of  consumption  of 

foreign  spirits  in  1812  attributable  to 
war,  557. 
War  of  the  French  Kevolutiou,  expense  of, 
was  sustained  by  manufacturing  skill  of 
the  people,  167. 
Warehousing  system.  —  Disadvantageous 
customs  regulations,  requiring  immediate 
payment  of  consumption  duties  on  im- 
portation, previous  to  1803  ;  warehousing 
sjstem  first  proposed  by  Sir  liobert 
Walpole,  in  1733;  first  warehousing  act 
passed,  461,  462.  Progress  of  improved 
system;  facilities  and  concessions  allowed 
to  merchants  by  subsequent  regulations, 
463-465.  Present  system  less  favour- 
able to  commerce  that  it  is  capable  of 
being  made,  464.  Privilege  of  ware- 
housing goods  without  payment  of  duty 
first  extended  to  Ireland  in  1824,  465. 
List  of  ports  in  the  United  Kingdom  to 
which  it  is  now  granted,  with  date  of 
first  concession  to  each,  465,  466.  Ad- 
vantages of  warehousing  system  in  sim- 
plifying custom-house  accounts  and  pre- 
venting fraudulent  proceedings,  466. 
Wealth.-— (See  Accumulation,  Property,  In- 
vestments.) 
Weaver,  river,  account  of  traffic  and  tonnage 

dues  received,  1801-1837,  312. 
Weights  and  Measures. —  Parlianicjitary 
committee  in  1 790,  to  investigate  the  sub- 
ject; another  in  1814;  in  1818  a  commis- 
sion appointed  to  remedy  evils  of  different 
modes,  348.  Act  passed  iu  1824  to  estab- 
lish uniformity,  348.     Description  of  tlie 

O    1 


842 


ANALYTICAL  INDEX. 


new  measures,  348,  349.  More  perfect 
measures  adopted  in  1835,  349.  Remarks 
on  heaped  measure,  349,  350.  All  local 
or  customary  measures  and  weights  abo- 
lished. Troy  weight  retained  for  precious 
metals  and  precious  stones,  350.  Neces- 
sity of  attention  to  form  of  measure  for 
grain,  350. 

Weights  and  Measures.  —  Want  of  uni- 
formity a  great  inconvenience,  347, 
348.  Adherence  of  the  French  shop- 
keepers to  the  use  of  the  old  modes, 
347,  348. 

West  Indies.— Quantities  of  sugar,  mo- 
lasses, rum,  coffee,  cocoa,  pimento,  ex- 
ported to  the  United  Kingdom,  1827- 
1849,  803.  From  Antigua  alone,  807. 
Slave  Trade. — Petitions  and  motions  in 
Parliament  against ;  bill  for  abolishing, 
804.  Act  for  general  emancipation, 
804.  Number  of  slaves  whose  owners 
received  compensation  from  the  grant  of 
20  millions;  average  rates  and  total 
amounts,  805.  Number  of  slaves  eman- 
cipated by  the  Act  of  1833  ;  proportion 
belonging  to  West  Indies  and  other 
colonies,  805.  Remarks  on  circumstances 
connected  with  the  compensation,  806, 
807. 

Enumeration  of  the  islands  and  set- 
tlements ;  date  of  acquisition  of  each  ; 
situation ;  population  of  each,  white  and 
coloured,  799,  800.  Imports  and  exports, 
800.  Value  of  imports  and  exports ; 
shipping,  tonnage,  80 1-803. 

Value  of  exports  to,  in  each  year  from 

1S05  to  1849,  359,  360,  362-367. 

Remarks  on  the  sugar  trade,  546-548. 

Whale  fishery  of  New  South  Wales,  762, 
763. 

■\\'heat,  extreme  high  price  of,  at  com- 
mencement of  present  century,  439,  440. 

Quantities    imported    from    foreign 

countries,  from  1801  to  1849,  139,  140. 
Insignificance  of  its  amount,  1 40. 

■ Quantity  imported  from  Ireland,  345. 

Proportion  of  numbers  fed  with  wheat 

of  foreign  and  home  growth,  from  1801  to 

1849,  141-143. 
Average  price   from   1760   to    1849, 

148. 
Wills,  number  of,  proved  in  England  and 

Scotland,    in    1841,  599.— (See   Legacy 

Duties.) 
-\Vine. — Quantity  of  French  wine  consumed 

in  the   United  Kingdom,  with  rates   of 

duty  chargeable  thereon,  from  1815  to 

1849,  562. 
Quantities  consumed  in  Great  Britain 

and  Ireland,  with  rates  of  duty  thereon, 

560. 
More  French  wine  consumed  in  Den- 
mark, whose  population  does  not  equal 

that  of  London,  than  in  the  whole  of  the 

United  Kingdom,  561. 
Holland  consumes  much  greater  rela- 


tive quantity  of  French  wines  than  Eng- 
land, 56?. 

Wine. — Great  decrease  in  amount  of  con- 
sumption attributable  to  excessive  duties, 
561. 

— —  Relative  consumption  in  France  ex- 
ceeds 70  times  that  of  the  United  King- 
dom ;  is  altogether  denied  to  the  working 
man  by  excessive  duties ;  excellent  French 
wine  might  be  profitably  sold  at  sixpence 
per  bottle,  560,  561.  Quantity  made  in 
France,  561.  Excessive  duty  on  Frencii 
wines,  by  treaty  of  INIethueu,  in  1 703, 
greatly  reduced  ;  amount  of  consumption 
in  England,  561,  562. 

Of  the  Cape  of  Good  Hope,  produce 

of,  and  demand  for,  has  not  fulfilled 
expectation,  775. 

might  be  produced  in  Australia  suf- 
ficient for  consumption  of  the  colony  and 
for  exportation,  764. 

Wool,  British,  impolitic  prohibition  of  ex- 
porting it,  168,  169,  Quantity  produced, 
174,  175.  British  long  combing  wool  su- 
perior in  quality  to  foreign,  175.  Coarser 
wool  produced  by  enlarged  size  of  im- 
proved breeds,  176. 

Quantities  imported  from  India,  743. 

Extensive  and  good  pasturage  for  sheep 
in  India,  744. 

Continually  increasing  importation  of 

foreign  wool ;  no  means  for  ascertaining 
amount  of  domestic  produce,  574. 

Woollen  Manufacture. — (See  Manufacture.) 

Working  classes,  comparative  condition  of, 
at  dift'ereut  periods,  indicated  by  amount 
of  consumption  of  tea,  coffee,  sugar,  552. 
Resort,  when  depressed  by  reduced  means, 
to  stimulating  di'ink,  which  accounts  for 
excise  revenue  undergoing  no  diminution, 
even  in  periods  of  long  continued  distress, 
5.52,  553. 

Dwellings  of,  not  improved  equally 

with  those  of  middle  classes,  522,  523. 
Superior  state  of,  in  Sheffield,  523.  In- 
creased amount  of  comfort  among,  522  - 
524. 

Injuriously  affected  by  introduction  of 

new  machinery,  126.  Suggestion  of  ex- 
pedient for  providing  imemployed  with 
work,  127. 

Advantages  of  improved  condition  of, 

to  themselves  and  emploj^ers,  523,  524. 

Increase  of  working-classes  inhabiting 

rated  dwellings,  527,  528. 

Improvement  in  manners  and  habits.  — 

(See  Manners.)  Great  importance  and 
influence  of  education  upon  working 
classes,  as  affecting  their  condition,  682, 
683. 

Privation   and   misery  of,    at  com- 

menctnieut  of  present  century,  439,  4-10. 

Want  of  providence  often  imputed  to 

the  poor  by  the  rich  who  cannot  appre- 
ciate the  trials  which  poverty  has  to 
undergo,  454,  455. 


ANALYTICAL  INDEX. 


843 


Working  classes.-Depnved  of  newspapers 

before  reduction  of  stamps,  717,  <18. 
Wine  altogetlier  denied  to  the  working 

man  by  excessive  duties,  5til. 
Only  when  left  in  ignorance,  are  sub- 

iect  to  the  designs  of  demagogues,  OS::.. 
_  Kemarks  on  the  complaint  of  surplus 

Dopnlation,  085,  C8G. 
_  In  Ireland,   principally  want  steady 

market  for  labour,  300, 


Working  classes,  in  Saxony,  wretched  con- 
dition of,  411. 

(^See  Wages,  Spitalfields  weavers.) 

Woven  fabrics,  ."i-'i-S'-t.        _ 

\Yyse,  Mr.,  M.l''.,  his  labours  in  the  cause  ot 
national  education,  084,  085. 

YouKsiiiRK,  woollen  manufacture,  17."),  170. 
Youn.',  Arthur,  remarkable  description  of 

the""  infernal  "  road,  in  his  time,  between 

Preston  and  Wigan,  2'JO. 


LONDON : 

I'liiited  l)v  William  Ci-owes  and  Son's.  Stamford  .Street. 


January,  1851. 


jWr.  iWmraj'si  3Cfet  of  ^OorUs. 


HISTORY    AND    ANTIQUITIES. 
BIOURAPUY    AND    MEMOIRS. 
VOYAGES    AND    TRAVELS. 
DOMESTIC    AND    RURAL    ECONOMY. 


CONTAINING 
HAND-BOOKS    FOR    TRAVELLERS. 
RELIGIOUS  WORKS   AND   TIIEuLoGY. 
POETRY    AND    THE    DRAMA. 
JUVENILE    WORKS. 


CLASSICAL   AND   SCHOOL   BOOKS. 
ART,  SCIENCE,  AND    MEDICINE. 
GENERAL    LITERATURE. 
NATURAL    HISTORY. 


THE    HOME    AND    COLONIAL    LIRKAUV. 


HISTORY  AND  ANTIQUITIES. 


GIBBON'S  DECLINE  AND  FALL  OF  THE 
ROMAN  EMi'IRE.  Edited  by  Rev.  U.  H.  Milman, 
Dean  of  St.  raul's.  Second  Edilion.  Maps.  0  vols. 
»vo,  3/.  Xi. 

This  is  the  only  edition  extant  to  which  Parents  and 
Suardians  and  Academical  Authorities  ought  to  give  any 
leasure  of  countenance." — CJunrterlt/  Reuifw. 
»•  MIL.MANS  LIFE   OF  KDWAKl)  CilHliON.  fivo.  !)^. 

"A  valuable  compaaioD  to  the  Decline  and  Fall." — 
Monthly  lieiitw. 

HISTORY  OF  GREECE.   From  the  earliest 

>BRIOD    TO   THE    END    OF    THE    PeLOPONNESIAN   WaR.       By 

Skorgb  GnoTE.    Second  Edition.     Maps.     Vols.  1  to  8. 
ItO,  16^.  each. 

'The  author  has  now  incontestahly  won  for  himself  the 
itle,  not   merely  of  a  historian,   but  of  the  historian   of 
ijGreece." — Quarterly  lieview. 

"  Mr.  Grote  is  beyond  all  question  the  historian  of 
Greece." — Times. 

lit. 
THE   HISTORY  OF  ENGL.\ND.  from  tlio 

Aciosion  of  Henry  VII.  to  the  Death  of  George  U.    By 
1 1 K N  KY  Ha llam.    Sijctli  Edition.    2  vols.  8vo,  24s. 

•  Air.  Hallam  has  great  industry  and  <treat  acuteness. 
II  s  knowledge  is  extensive,  various,  and  profound;  and 
lii^  mind  is  equally  distinguished  by  the  amplituiie  of  its 
frriisp  and  delicacy  of  its  touch." — Edinburijh  Reniciv. 

THE  STATE  OF  EUROPE  DURING  THE 

JIIDDLE  AGES.     By  Henry  Hallam.     Ninth  Edition. 

2   \nls.    8V0,  2!,?.      SUPPLEMK.VTAI,    NoTEs.      8vo,  1  Os.  (id. 

'■  The  most  complete  and  highly-finished  among  many 
.  valuable  works.  It  is  a  series  of  finely-drawn  historical 
sketches." — North  American  Review. 

HISTORY  OF  ENGLAND,  from  the  Peace 
of  Utrecht  (I713)  to  the  Peace  of  Paris  (I'^S)-  By  Lord 
Mahon.     Second  Edition.    4  vols.  8vo,  J2s. 

"  Lord  Mahon  has  a  very  just  judgment  of  things.  He 
writes  sensibly,  clearly,  and  pleasantly.  His  book  has  the 
vivacity  of  a  French  memoir,  without  its  insincerity."— 
£j:a7niner. 

HISTORY  OF  THE  WAR  OF  THE  SUC- 
CESSION IN  SPAIN.  By  hoKD  Maho>!.  Second  Edition. 
Map.     8vo,  15y. 

"  Lord  Mahon's  narrative  reflects  a  singularly  well- 
ordered  mind— it  is  comprehensive,  clear,  and  lively." — 
iiuarterly  Review. 

vir. 

SPAIN  UNDER  CHARLES  THE  SECOND  ; 
Being  Extracts  from  the  Stanhope  Correspondence. 
By  Lord  Mahon.    Second  Edilion.    Post  8vo, fi.?. (ii/. 

"  A  very  curious  volume :  of  sterling  value." — Spectator. 

THE  CAUSES  OF  THE  SUCCESS  OF  THE 

ENGLISH  REVOLUTION  OF  1G40— 1688.    By  M.  GuizoT. 
Second  Edition.    Post  8vo,  Is. 

STATE   PAPERS  DURING   THE  REIGN 

OF  KING  HENRY   VIII.    5  vols.  4to,  20*.  each.     {Ftib- 
Ushed  by  authority.) 


RANKE'S  HISTORY  OF  THE  POPES  OF 
ROME.  Translated  from  the  German.  By  Mrs.  Austin 
Third  Edilion.    2  vols.  8vo,  24j. 

"  An  excellent  book,  excellontly  tran^<latcd.  It  now  takes 
its  place  among  the  Excusii  ('LASsics."—frfm4urg/i /<«/•. 

RANKE'S  HISTORY  OF  SERVIA  AND 
THE  SEltVIAN  REVOLUTION.  From  tlie  German. 
By  .Mrs.  Kerr.     Second  Edition.    Map.    Hvo,  Lis. 

"  A  work  much  required,  and  worthily  takes  its  place  by 
the  side  of  Ranke's  Popes  op  Komk,  by  Mas.  Austin." 
— Morning  Post. 

RANKE'S    HISTORY    OF   PRUSSIA,  and 

JlRJIOinS    OF    the    house    OF     BRANDENRUROH.      From    tho 

German.    By  Sik  Alexander  Gordon.   3  vols.  8vo,  36s. 

"  The  translators  of  this  work  have  done  it  every  justice, 
and  its  continental  repute  is  a  guarantee  of  its  value  and 
imjiortance.  It  reflects  many  new  lights  upon  points  of 
biographical  and  national  interest." — Literary  Caxelte. 

XIII. 

THE  MANNERS  AND  CUSTOMS  OF  THE 
ANCIENT  EGYPTIANS.    RySiR  Gardner  Wilkinson. 

Third  Edition.    Plates,    ."i  vols.  8vo,  4/.  4s. 

"  Sir  Gardner  Wilkinson  has  done  more  to  make  the 
people  of  the  Pharaohs  known  to  us  moderns  than  any 
contemporary  writer." — Athen<eum, 

HISTORY    OFINDI  A,— THE    Hindoo 

AND   MAHOiMMEDAN  PERIODS.       By   the   HoN.  iloUNTSTlAKT 

Elphinstone.     Third  Edilion.    Map.     8vo,  IHs. 

"A  work  of  the  greatest  authority  and  learning— one  of 
the  latest  and  most  valuable  works  on  the  Eastern  Empire." 
—Sir  Hubert  Peel. 

HISTORY  OF  THE  SIKHS,  from  the 
Origin  of  the  Nation  to  the  B.*ttle  of  the  Sutlkj. 
By  Capt.  J.  D.  Cunningham.    Maps.    8vo,  15s. 

"  The  first  connected  narrative  of  the  Sikhs,  with  any  pre- 
tension  to  historical  dignity,  and  is  leally  an  excellent 
supplement  to  the  history  by  Elphinstone." — Examiner. 

HISTORY  OF  CHRISTIANITY,  from  the 
Birth  of  Christ  to  the  Extinction  of  Paganism  in  the 
Roman  Empire.  By  Rev.  H.  H.  ^Iil.ma.v,  Dean  of  St.  Paul's. 

3  vols.    8vo,  36s. 

"  A  safe  book  for  all  to  read.  The  divine  origin  of  Chris, 
tianity,  and  the  authority  of  the  Holy  Scriptures,  are  every- 
where maintained." — Vr.  liliirdoch. 

HISTORY  OF  CHRISTIANITY  IN 
CEYLON.  Its  Introduction  and  Progress  under  tho 
Portuguese,  Dutch,  British,  and  American  Missions. 
By  Sir  J.  Emerso.n  Tennbnt.    Woodcuts.    8vo. 

THE  COURTS  OFLONDON  AND  VIENNA 

in  the  17th  Century.  Extracted  from  the  Correspon- 
dence of  Lord  Lexington,  Minister  of  Vienna,  161(4 — 98. 
8vo. 

HISTORY  OF  THE  FALL  OF  THE 
JESUITS  IN  THE  NINETEENTH  CENTURY.    From 

the  French.    Post  8vo,  2s.  (id. 


I 


HISTORICAL  ESSAYS.  Contributed  to  the 
Quarterly  Keview.    IJy  1x)kd  SIahon.    Post  Syo,Gs. 

XXI. 

SCENES  FROM  THE  WAR  OF 
I.IHKKATION  iM  GEK.MANY.  Trnnslated  from  the 
German.    Hy  Sir  Ai.kxandkr  Gordon.    Post  !)vo,  O.s-. 

"  This  is  a  selection  deserving  more  than  ordinary  atten- 
tion. The  writer  lived  among  distinguished  people  and  in 
stirring  times."— Atheiiirum. 

HISTORY  OF  THE  sTeGE  OF  GIBRALTAR, 

]77o_17!j(),  with  a  description  of  that  Garrison  from  the 
earliest  jioriods.  Ry  John  Drinkwater.  I'ost  (ivo,  '2s.  lid. 
"  A  hook  so  replete  with  interest  and  information  as  to 
be  truly  a  legend  of  the  United  Services  of  the  day."— 
United  Serrice  Magiizine. 

MILITARY  EVENTS  IN  ITAL\^  1848-9. 
From  the  German.  By  Lord  Ei-i.es.\ikrk.  Map.  Post  8vo 


THE  TWO  SIEGES  OF  VIENNA  BY  Till 
Tl'UKS.  From  the  Germ.in.  lly  Lord  Eli,ksmi;i;i;, 
Post  iivo.  2f .  (i(/. 

"  A  valualile  contribution  to  the  history  of  an  import  oil 
period."—  Atfteticcum. 

THE  CAIVIBAIGNIN  RUSSIA,  1812.  I.v 
(^ENKRAL  Caui,  Von  Clausewitz.  Prom  the  Germ:  ■; 
M.ip.    Uvo,  iOs.  6d. 

XXVI. 

THE    CAMPAIGN     OF     RADETZKY    IX 

PIEDMONT— The  IJcfoncc  of  Temoswar  and  t'ainii  nt 
the  l$an.  From  the  German.  By  Lord  I^llesmkiu:. 
Map.    Post  8vo,  Gs.  ChI. 

XXVII. 

COMMENTARIES    ON     THE     WAR    IN 

RUSSIA  AND  GEKMANV,  lai'J  l.i.  15y  the  1 1  -- 
Coi,.  George  Cathcakt.    Diagrams  and  Plans.    8vo,  1  is. 


BIOGRAPHIC  AND  MEMOIRS. 


MEMOIR  OF  THE  LATE  BISHOP  OF 
NORWICH.    By  the  Rev.  A.  P.  Stanley.    8vo. 

LORD  HERVEY's"'mEMOIRS  OF  THE 
REIGN  OF  GEORGE  IL  AND  QUEEN  CAROLINE. 
Edited  by  Jlr.  Crokkr.    Portrait.     2  vols.  8vo,  36s. 

"  The  createst  accession  to  our  English  historical  literature 
since  the  publication  of  Pepys's  Diary  and  Walpolr's 
Ji\  e.moibs.  The  matteris  curiously  confirmatory  of  Walpole's 
Reminiscences,  Letters,  and  JMemoirs."— .l/Acntrum. 

III. 

LORD  SIDMOUTH'S  LIFE.  By  the  Dean 
OF  Norwich.     Portraits.     3  vols.  Hvo,  4-2j. 

"A  book  which,  for  its  individual  subject,  and  the  asto- 
nishing importance  of  the  events  it  commemorates,  is 
exceeded  by  no  work  that  has  appeared."— J1/o)vi/h^  Post. 

MEMOIRS  OF  THE  HOUSES  OF 
CRAWFUKD  AND  BELCARRES  ;  ok,  LIVES  OF  THE 
LINDSAYS.    By  Lord  Lindsay.    3  vols.  8vo,  36s. 

"  One  of  the  very  best  specimens  of  Family  History  that 
our  language  aifords."— yu«)'/tW^  Review. 

LIVES  OF  THE  LORD  CHANCELLORS 
OF  ENGLAND,  from  the  earliest  times  to  1838.  By 
Lord  Cami-rkll.     Third  Edition.    7  vols.  8vo,  51.  2s. 

"  A  work  of  sterling  merits — one  of  very  great  labour,  of 
richly  diversified  interest,  and,  we  are  satisfied,  of  lasting 
value'  and  atimatioa,"— Quarterly  lieview. 

LIVES  OF  THE  CHIEF  JUSTICES  OF 
ENGLAND,  from  the  Norman  Conquest  till  the  Death 
of  Lord  JIansfield.  By  Lord  Campbell.  2  vols.  8vo,  30*-. 

VII. 

LIFE  OF  LORD  CHANCELLOR  ELDON, 
and    bis    CORRESPONDENCE.       By    Horace    Twiss. 

Third  Edition.     Portrait.     2  vols.  Post  8vo,  2U. 

"  A  work  which  onehtto  be  in  the  library  of  every  lav»'yer, 
stafetman,  and  EugUsh  gentleman."— U/uc/tu-ood. 

VIII. 

LIFE  OF  SIR  SAMUEL  ROMILLY. 
With    bis    DIARY    AND    CORRESPONDENCE.     By 

his  So.NS.    Third  Edition.    Portrait.     2  vols.  fcp.  8vo,  12i. 
"  A    narrative    singularly    touching     and     striking." — 
Athentriim. 

LIFE  OF  THE  GREAT  LORD  CLIVE. 
By  Rev.  G.  R.  Gleio.     Post  8vo,  6s. 

"The  narr.itive  is  clear,  sustained,  and  solid;  and  the 
hook  is  a  worthy  addition  to  the  best  of  our  popular 
biographies." — Spectator. 


MEMOIR  OF  ROBERT  PLUMER  WARD, 
^Vith  HIS  CORRESPONDENCE  AND  DIARIES.  B> 
Hon.  Edmund  Phipps.    Portrait.    2  vols.  8vo,  28*. 

BOSWELL'S  LIFE  OF  DR.  JOHNSON. 
Including  the  Tour  to  the  Hebrides.  Edited  by  MrJ 
Croker.  2\'<'tc  and  Cliciipcr  Edition.  Portraits.  Complete 
in  one  Volume.  Royal  8vo. 

"  A  new  and  thoroughly  revised  edition  of  Boswell,  in  one 
octavo  volume— and  with  really  a  good  index ."— At bencenm. 

ME]\IOIRS  OF  SIR  VoWELL  BUXTON. 
With  his  CORRESPONDENCE.  By  Charles  Buxton. 
Fourth  Edition.    Portrait.  8vo,  16*.;   or  Post  8vo,  8*.  6<f. 

"  One  of  the  most  thoroughly  well-written  pieces  oi 
biography  that  has  issued  from  the  modern  press." — Evan- 
gelical Magazine. 

LIFE  OF  JOHN  CALVIN.  Compiled  from 
his  Correspondence  and  authentic  Sources.  By  Thomas 
n.  Dyer,    Portrait.    8vo,  I5.«. 

XIV. 

LIFE   OF    LOUIS    PRINCE    OF    CONDfi 

(surninied  the  Great*.     By  Lord  Mahon.    Post  Svo,  Gs. 

"Avery  skilful  and  interesting  narrative." — Quarterly 
Review. 

XV. 

LIFE  OF  BELISARIUS.    By  Loud   Mauon 

Second  Edition.    Map.     Post  8vo,  10*.*0<i. 

"  An  able  and  valuable  performance." — Monthly  Reviews 

SIR  JOHN  BARROW'S  AUTOBIOGRAPHY 

From  Early  Life  to  Advanced  Age.    I'ortrait.     8vo,  16«. 

"  Here  is  another  pleasant  English  hook  to  be  added  tc 

the  Englishman's  library." — Athenceum. 

LIVES  OF  JOHN  BUNY'AN  AND  OLIVEB 
CROjnVELL.    By  Robert  SoiTHEY,     Post  8vo,  2*.  6d. 
"  Admirably  written  lives." — Yorkshireman. 

XVIII. 

LIFE   OF    SIR   FRANCIS   DRAKE. 
John  Barrow.  Post  8vo,  2.'t.  6d. 

"  Mr.  Barrow  has  enriched  our  biographical  litcrature."- 
Edinburgh  Review. 

THE    NAVAL    WORTHIES    OF    QUEE^ 

ELIZABETH'S  UKIGN.    By  John  Barrow.    8vo,  14*. 

"  This  nationallyinteresting  volume." — Literary  Guzettl 

LIFE   OF   GENERAL   LORD   HILL.      B: 

Rev.  Edwin  Sidney.   Second  Edition.   Portrait.  8vo,  12*. 

"  1  here  is  no  military  memoir  which  we  should  so  pladi; 
place  in  the  hands  of  a  youthful  soldier." — Dublin  U.Mag. 


B, 


THE    LIFE   OF   SIR    THOMAS  MUNIIO. 

By  Kcv.  G.  U.  GLKiOi     I'ost  !lvo,  C*. 

LIFE  OF  SIR  DAVID  WILKIE  ;  With  liis 

Letters  and  Journals.     Hy  Allan  Cunninuiiam.  i'ortrait. 
3  volt).  Hvo,  42*. 
"  A  work  of  great  \ntcieat."—Gentleman'sMagazine. 

LIFE  OF  THOMAS '  STOTIIARD,  With 
Personal  Heiniuisccnccs.  BySIns.  Uhav.   Woodcuts.  4to. 

XXIV. 

LIFE  AND  VOYAGES  OF  COLUMBUS 
and  Ills  Conip.'inionB.  Uy  Washinoto.v  1rvi.no.  Thiril 
Editivn.    Maps.  3  vols.  8vo,  31*.  Cd. 

XXV. 

LIFE    OF    OLIVER     GOLDSMITH.      By 

WASHIN.'iTON    lllVINO.      ToSt  (iVO,  «». 

"This  excellent  and  very  entertaining  life." — Morning 
Herald. 

XXVf. 

LIFE  AND  LETTERS  OF  LORD  BYRON. 
By  Thomas  Moore.  Hcus  and  Cheaper  Edition. 
Portraits.    Complete  in  One  Volume,  Royal  8vo. 

"  A  work  -which  must  always  form  an  intereating  portion 
•f  the  history  of  English  literature." — Times. 

LIFE   OF    ROBERT    BURNS.      By  J.  G. 
LocKHABT.     FiAh  Edition,  Fcap.  8vo,  ."!*. 
xxvtii. 
LIFE  OF  REV.  GEORGE  CRABBE.      By 
his  Son.    Portraits.    Fcap.  8vo,  4*. 

"  We  never  read  a  more  interestiug  piece  of  biography." 
—Alhciiaum. 


SHORT  LIVES  OF  THE  BRITISH  POETS. 

Uy  Thomas  Campokll.    Post  Uvo,  (U. 

LIVES    OF     MAhIjMET     AND     HIS 

.SUL'CliH.SOllS.  Uy  Wawhi.soto.v  Iiivi.no.  2  vols,  Hvo,  21/. 

LIFE  OF  GENERAL  WASHINGTON.    By 

Waeiiinoto.v  Irvi^o.     Uvo.  Kearly  Heady. 

LIFE   OF    ADMIRAL  SIR   P.  DURHAM. 

By  Capt.  A.  Mi'Rrav.     Bvo,  h$.  dd. 
xxxni. 
LIVES    OF   GALILEO,  TYCHO    BRAHE, 
ANU  KEPLER.    By  .Sir  I).  Ukewstkr.    Second  Edition. 
Fcap.  Uvo,  4*.  (id. 

MEMOIR  OF  WILLIAM  SMITH,  LL.D. 
(The  Geologist.)    By  John  J'hillitb,  F.R..S.    Bvo,  7*.  Oi. 

LIFE   OF  JAMES    WATT.     By  M.  Arago. 
From  the  Frcncli,  by  J.  P.  iAIi.'irhkad,  M. A.    IJvo,  II*.  liil. 
xxxv;. 
A  NAVAL  BIOGRAPHICAL  DICTIONARY 

OF   ALL   LIVING    OFFICERS.      By   W.   R.  OUvrve. 
Royal  8vo,  42*. 

xxxvn. 
MEMOIR    OF    LORD    SYDENHAM.      By 
G.P.  .ScROPE,  M.P.  Second  Edition.  Portrait.  8vo,  9*.  fi</. 

XXXVIII. 

EARL  DUDLEY'S  LETTERS  TO  THE 
LATE  BISHOP  OF  LLANUAFF.  Second  Edition. 
Portrait.    8vo,  10*.  6J. 


VOYAGES  AND  TRAVELS. 


India  and  China, 

A  .JOURNEY  THROUGH  INDIA.     By  the 

late  liisHOP  IIebkr.    2  vols.,  post  Ilvo,  12*. 

•'  We  envy  those  who  read  these  charming  Jounials  for 
the  first  l\mc."— Examiner. 


SKETCHES   OF   PERSIA.      By    Major 
I  General  Sir  John  Malcol.«.    Post  8vo,  6/. 
]      "  The  Persians  are  here  presented  with  all  the  intercut 
,  but  without  the   caricature   of  our  amusing  friend   Uajji 
I  Ba.hs.."—Quarlert!/  Review. 


LETTERS  FROM  MADRAS;  or,  Life 
Di  I.vDiA.    By  a  Lady.     Post  Hvo,  2*.  (id. 

"  A  welcome  addition  to  our  store  of  literary  entertain- 
ment,''—iJnVunnia. 

THE  MANNERS  AND  CUSTOMS  OF 
INDIA.   By  Rev.  Charles  AcLAND.   Post  8vo,  2*.  6<Z. 

"  Written  in  an  easy  unaffected  style :  and  the  sketches 
which  it  gives  of  European  life  and  manners  under  an 
eastern  sun  must  interest  all  who  have  friends  in  India, 
and  who  would  like  to  know  how  they  pass  their  days."— 
The  T/ieul%'iun. 

LADY  SALE'S  JOURNAL  IN  AFFGHAN- 

ISTAN.     Eitjhlh  Edition.     Post  Cvo,  12*. 

"  The  journal  of  one  whose  very  name  lightens  up  the 
eye,  and  gladdens  the  spirit— of  one,  whose  '  story  shall 
the  pood  man  tell  his  son  ' — the  journal  of  our  high- 
njiiided,  noble  countrywoman.  Lady  Sale." — Atltenceum. 

A  JOURNAL  OF  A  RESIDENCE  IN 
CAIiOOL.  By  Sir  Alkx.v.nder  Burnes.  Second  Edition. 
Plates.    8vo,  l.'l*. 

"  'I  he  charm  of  the  book  is  its  buoyant  style.  Personal 
\  character,  domestic  scenes,  and  oriental  manners  are 
f  painted  with  vivacity,  ease,  and  lightness  of  touch." — 
I  Spectator. 

!  VOYAGE  UP  THE  INDUS  TO  THE 
I  BOLRCE  OF  THE  P.IVER  OXLS,  by  Kabul  and 
I  Badakhslian.  By  Lieut.  John  Wood.  Map.  Hvo,  14?. 
I  "  Ihe  valuable  geographical  details  which  Lieut.  Wood 
i  has  collected,  and  bis  clear  sketches  of  society,  render  his 
I  volume  one  of  the  most  agreeable  and  instructive  of  its 
I  clasf." — Athtneeum, 


THE  STRAITS  OF  MALACCA,  Pe.vang, 
MAI.ACCA,  AND  SiNGAioRB.  By  Lieut.  Newbold.  2  vols. 
8vo,  2(J*. 

IX. 

HINDOSTAN,  Geographically,  Btatistically, 
and  historically  described.  By  Walter  1Ia.milto.v. 
Maps.    2  vols.  4to,  4/.  14*.  6d. 

THIRTEEN  YEAR.S'  RESIDENCE  AT 
TDK  COVIIT  OF  CIII.NA,  in  the  service  of  the  Emperor. 
By  Father  Ripa.    Post  fivo,  2*.  fit/. 

"As  interesting  a  work  as  any  that  has  appeared,  not 
excepting  Sorrow's  Bible  in  Spain." — Spectalnr. 

THE  NORTHERN  PROVINCES  OF  CHINA. 
With  a  Visit  to  the  Tea  and  Cotton  Countries.  By 
Ror.ERT  Fortune.    Second  Edition.    Plates.    8vo,  15*. 

"  This  is  a  genuine  book — as  full  of  interest  and  amuie- 
ment  as  it  is  empty  of  pretences  at  fine  writing.  A  traveler 
with  an  object,  who  naturally  details  the  adventures  which 
befell  him  in  pursuit  thereof,  and  modestly  but  earnestly 
writes,  is  as  welcome  as  an  old  friend  or  a  true  witness." — 
Athenemm. 

xri. 

NOTICES  ON  CHINA,  and  our  Recent 
Commercial  Intercourse.  By  Sir  George  Stalnto.v. 
Third  Edition.     Bvo.    9*. 

SIX  MONTHS  WITH  THE  CHINESE 
EXPEDITION.  By  Lord  Jocelv.v.  Sixth  Edition. 
Fcap.  8vo,  5*.  6d. 

"  Lord  jocelyn  supplies  us  with  some  striking  facta  and 
unknown  particulars." — Literary  Gazette. 


THE  EVENTS  OF  THE  CLOSING  CAM- 
PAIGN IN  CHINA.  With  Oi'ERATioN-s  in  Yang-tze- 
KiANG,  and  Treaty  of  Nankin'o.  By  Capt.  Loch.  Map. 
Post  «vn,  R«.  ()<;. 

"  The  sketches  of  Chinese  character  are  the  most  strikinp 
and  the  most  (graphic  we  have  met  with." — i\'uru/  und 
Military  Gazette. 

JAPAN  AND  THE  JAPANESE.    Described 

from  the  Accounts  of  Kccent  Dutch  Travellers.  Post  8vo, 
\)s.  0,1. 

"  Containing  all  the  Information  about  Japan  which  has 
hocn  obtained  ;  well  arranged  and  well  put  together." — 
Literary  Gazette. 

XVT. 

LATEST  EVENTS  IN  BORNEO  ;  from  tlie 
Journals  iif  Sin  James  Hrookb.  Edited  by  Capt.  Mundy, 
K.X.     Plates.     2  vols.  8v.),  32*. 

"  Those  who  hape  watched  through  Captain  Keppell's 
pages,  the  establishment  of  the  strange  dominion  of  the 
solitary  English  adventurer,  will  recognise  with  satisfaction 
in  Captain  Mundy's  continuation  of  the  narrative,  the  evi- 
dence of  its  healthful  progress  and  the  confirmation  of  those 
impressions  of  the  character  of  Sir  James  Hrooke,  and  the 
value  of  his  achievements,  which  we  and  all  derived  from  the 
work  of  Captain  Mundy's  predecessor."— QMo>-<e)-/y  Review. 

Africa^ 

FIVE    YEARS'    ADVENTURES    IN    THE 

FAR  INTERIOR  OF  SOUTH  AFRICA;  AVith  Modes 
of  Hunting  the  Wild  Beasts  of  the  Deserts  and  Forests. 
By  R.  GoHDON  CuMMiNG.  Second  Edition.  Woodcuts. 
2  vols,  post  iivo,  24s. 

A  TRANSPORT  VOYAGE  TO  THE  MAU- 
RITIUS,  The  Cai'e  of  Good  Hope,  and  St.  Helena. 
By  Author  of  "  Paddiana."    Post  8vo. 

RESIDENCE  AT  THE  CAPE  OF  GOOD 

HOPE.  With  Notes  on  the  Natural  History  and  Native 
Tribes.   By  C.  J.  F.  Bunbury.   Woodcuts.   Post  iivo,  9s. 

"  The  statesman  who  may  be  called  upon  to  discuss  or 
decide  upon  the  public  affairs  of  the  Cape,  the  emigr.ant 
who  may  contemplate  removing  his  cares  thither,  the 
curious  inquirer  who  would  '  know  the  rights  '  of  what  has 
given  rise  to  so  much  controversy,  will  find  Mr.  Bunbury 
an  intelligent  and  candid  guide." — Eauminer, 

WESTERN  BARBARY,  ITS  WILD 
TRIBES  AND  SAVAGE  ANIMALS.  By  Dbuaimond 
Hay.    Post  8vo,  2s.  Gd. 

"A  new  and  highly  interesting  work."  —  Greenock 
Advertiser. 

SXT. 

A     RESIDENCE     IN     SIERRA    LEONE, 

described  from  a  Journal  kept  on  the  Spot.  By 
a  Lady.    Edited  by  Mks.  Norton.     Post  Svo,  G.t. 

"A  most  animated  and  sprightly  picture  of  the  state  of 
society  at  Sierra  I^eone,  the  point  and  cleverness  of  which  is, 
we  apprehend,  to  be  placed  to  the  credit  of  the  talented 
editor,  fully  as  much  as  to  that  of  the  original  writer  of  the 
letters." — Jo/tti  Bull. 

IMIediterranean,  and  Asia  Minor. 

ATHENS  AND  ATTICA  ;  A  Journal  of  a 
Residence  there;  '\\'ith  Fac-Siniiles  of  the  Ancient 
Writings  on  the  AValls  of  Pompeii.  By  the  Rev. 
Dr.  \Vords.wop.th.    2nd  Edition.     Plates,    iivo,  14s.  Cd. 


A  FIRST  AND  SECOND  EXCURSION  IN 
ASIA  IMINOR  AND  LYCIA.  By  Sir  Charles  Fellows. 
Second  Ediliiin.    Plates.   2   vols.     Impl.  fivo,  7'^s. 

"  Our  author  has  discovered  eleven  ancient  Lycian  cities, 
and  has  allowed  the  learued  world  to  perceive  that  Lycia 
has  a  mine  of  antiquarian  treasures,  of  which  he  has  only 
scraped  the  surface."— ^<Ae»««j«. 


A  VISIT  TO  THE  IONIAN  ISLANDS, 
ATHENS,  AND  THE  MOREA.  By  Edward  Gifkard. 
Plates.    Post  Itvo,  12.?. 

"  Mr.  Giffard's  work  is  very  creditable  to  its  author."^ 
Quarterly  Iteview. 

ADVENTURES  IN  THE  LIBYAN  DE- 
SERT.   By  Baylk  St.  John.    Post  8vo,  2j.  (J,/. 

"The  writer  has  described  his  journey  with  the  most 
charming  ease  and  simplicity,  iiresenting  the  reader  with  a 
few  pictures,  rapidly  dashed  off  and  full  of  iutercst." — 
Bentley's  Miscellany. 

VISITS  TO  THE  MONASTERIES  OF  THE 
LEVANT.  By  Hon.  Rouert  Curzon.  Third  Edition, 
Woodcuts.     Post  8vo,  1.5s. 

"  We  hazard  little  in  prophesying  that  Mr.  Curzon's 
work  will  be  more  popular  than  any  other  recent  set  of 
Oriental  descriptions,  except  Mr.  Kingslakc's  ;  and  however 
that  remarkable  writer  may  claim  the  superiority  in  wit, 
point,  and  artislical  finish,  we  should  not  be  surprised  if  the 
respectable  oddity  of  Mr.  Curzon's  objects  and  fancies 
should  be  suflicient  to  win  fully  equal  acceptance  for  his 
Visits." — Quarterly  Review. 

XXVII. 

RESEARCHES  in  ASIA  MINOR,  PONTUS, 
AND  ARIMENIA.  By  William  I.  Hamilton.  Plates, 
•2  vols.  8vo,  38s. 

"  Mr.  Hamilton's  archseological  researches,  and  his  nar- 
rative in  general,  have  our  warmest  commendations."^ 
Athenceum. 

Turkey,  Eg:ypt,  and  Syria. 

XXVIII. 

TRAVELS  IN  TURKEY,  During  the  Years 
1847-8.    By  Charles  Macfarlane.   2  vols.  8vo,  28s. 

NINEVEH      and"  ITS     REMAINS. 

AVith  an  Account  of  a  Visit  to  the  Chalde.an  Christians 
of  Kurdistan,  and  the  Yezedis  or  Devil  Worshippers,  &o. 
By  Austen  H.  La  yard.  Fourth  Edition.  Plates.  2  vols. 
8vo,  36s. 

"  The  most  extraordinary  work  of  the  present  age,  whe- 
ther with  reference  to  the  wonderful  discoveries  it  describes, 
its  remarkable  verification  of  our  early  biblical  history,  or  oi 
the  talent,  courage,  and  perseverance  of  its  author."—  Times. 

LAYARD'S  MONUMENTS  OF  NINEVEH 

Illustrated  by  upwards  of  One  Hundred  Engravings,  from 
Drawings  made  on  the  spot.  In  a  Portfolio.  Imperial 
10/.  10s.;  or  Colombier,  14?.  14s. 

"  Following  up  Mr.  Layard's  very  interesting  wcrk,  de- 
scriptive of  the  excxvaiio's  at  Nimroud  and  Konyunjik 
this  (olio  of  above  a  hundred  engravings  reveals  more  dis 
tinctly  to  us  the  long-buried  forms  and  secrets  of  the  primeva 
world.     It  is  a  splecdid  performance." — Literary  Gazette 

THE  PALACES  OF  NINEVEH  AND  PER 

SEPOLIS  restored,  being  an  attempt  to  explain  th. 
Architecture  of  Assyria  and  Persia.  By  James  Fkrgusso.v 
Woodcuts,  8vo. 

xxxii. 

TRAVELS  IN  EGYPT,  NUBIA,  SYRIA 
AND  THE  HOLY  LAND.  By  Captains  Irby  an 
Mangles.    Post  8vo,  2s.  Gd. 

"  One  of  the  most  interesting  and  popular  works  of  th' 
present  century." — Aberdeen  Juur7ial, 

XXXIII. 

CAIRO,     PETRA,      AND      DAMASCUS 

from  Notes  made  during  a  Tour  in  those  Countries.  B 
John  G.  Kinnear.    Post  8vo,  9s.  Gd. 

"  Mr.  Kinnear  writes  extremely  well,  and  his  descriptioi 
proclaim  him  a  good  observer." — Examiner. 

JOURNEY  THROUGH  ARABIA PETRiE. 

AND  MOUNT  STOAI,  to  the  Excavated  City  ok  Petr 

By  JM.  Leon  de  Labokd£.    Second  Edition.    Plates.  8v 

18s. 

"  A  publication  of  extreme  value  and  interest."— Brt/iV 

Critic. 


Ma.  MURRAY'S  LIST  OF  BOOKS.— Voyases  and  Travels. 


Polynesia  and  tbe  South  Seas. 

VOYAGE     OF     DISCOVERY    AND     RE- 

SEAKCII  TO    TlIK   S()1;T)1    rOLK;    in.TI  4:t.      By  Sin 
JamksClakk  Hoss,  K.N.     I'latos.     ;>  vols,  flvo,  .'Hi*-. 

"  The  e.\tracts  «e  have  given  will  speak  better  than  we 
could  for  the  plain,  modest,  and  manly  taste  of  the  author 
— which  seems  entirely  worthy  of  his  liiifh  prutebsiuaal  cha- 
racter and  signal  services." — (Juarterli/  Ri-.iiiciv. 

XXXVI. 

TYPEE  andOMOO;  or,  The  MARQUESAS 
[SLANDERS.  l!y  llKiiM.vN.v  Mei.vii.le.  2  vols,  post 
Jvo,  12s-. 

"  The  book  is  e.tcellent,  quite  first-rate." — Jilackwnod. 

"  Since  the  joyous  niomint  when  we  first  read  Robinson 
Crusoe,  and  believed  it  all,  and  wondered  all  the  more 
liecausc  we  believed,  we  have  not  met  with  so  bewitching  a 
iirork  as  this  narrative  of  Herman  ftlclviUe's.'' — JuUii  lititl. 

XXXVII. 

RECOLLECTIONS    OF    BUSH    LIFE    IN 

AUSTRALIA,  duriiio;  a  Resideucc  of  Eight  Years  in  the 
[nterior.     I!y  11.  W.  IIavgauth.     Vost  !;vo,  2,v.  fid. 

"  Lively,  graphic,  desrriptive  of  man,  animals,  nature, 
land  society  ;  and  with  sufficient  incident  to  animate  the  nar- 
Irativc,  it  possesses  the  interest  of  romantic  fiction." — Sped. 

NOTES  AND  SKETCHES  OF  NEW  SOUTH 

WALES.     By  Miis.  Mkhkdith.      Post  fivo.    2s.<)i1. 

"  Mrs.  Meredith  is  a  pleasant  unaffected  writer;  and  the 
book   derives  interest  from  being    a  lady's   vitw    of  New 

fouth  Wales." — Spictator. 
XX.XIX. 
WORKING     MAN'S     HAND-BOOK     TO 
SOUTH  AUSTRALIA.  By  G.  B.  Wilki.nso.v.  Map.  ICmo, 
\S.  6>t. 

"  Mr.  Wilkinson's  book  is  by  many  degrees  the  best  in 
I  practical  sense  we  have  seen." — Muniii,g  Adveitiser. 

XL. 

NEW  ZEALAND.  With  some  Account  of 
;he  Beginning  of  the  British  Colonisation  of  the  Island. 
»y  E.  J.  Wakkkield.     AVith  JIap.    2  vols.  8vo,  2iis. 

"The  most  complete  and  continuous  history  of  British 
Jolonisation  in  New  Zealand  which  has  appeared." — Sped. 

Central  and  South  America. 

VISITS    TO   CENTRAL   AMERICA    AND 

irUCA TAN.     By  John  L.  Stephens.     A  Aew  Edition. 
I  vols.  Post  8vo.    Nearl'i  Reachi. 

.  "  These  deliglitful  volumes!  It  is  grievous  to  quit  a  store 
10  brimful  to  overflowing  of  what  welike  best." — Athenaum. 

XLII. 

MEXICO     AND    THE     ROCKY    MOUN- 
TAINS.   By  George  F.  Buxton.    Post  X\o,  Gs. 
"A  capital  book,  alike  attractive  for  its  narrative  of  travel, 
ith  its  hardships  and  incidents,  for  its  pictures  of  scenery 
society,  for   the   direct  information   it   imparts  as  to 
sico  and  the  incidental  glimpses  it  gives  us  of  the  Ame- 
ns  and  their  armies  in  Slexico." — Spcdutor, 

XLIII. 

rOURNEY'S  ACROSS  THE  PAMPAS.    By 

JpRANCis  Head.     Post  8vo,  2,?.  (iti. 

I  This  book  has  all  the  interest  of  a  novel." — Eclectic  Rev. 

xi.rv. 

^VOY'AGE   OF   A   NATURALIST   ROUND 

E  WORLD.  By  Charles  Daiuvin.  Post  !!vo,  Hs.  6(1. 
*"  The  author  is  a  first-rate  landscape  painter,  and  the 
■dreariest  solitudes  are  made  to  teem  with  interest."  — 
Quiirterly  Review. 

VOY'AGE  UP   THE   RIVER   AMAZON, 

'  A  VISIT  TO  PARA.    By  Willia.m  11.  Edwaris. 

I'l    :  svo,  '2s.  (>(/.      ^ 

■  i-  nil  of  novelty;  we  can  hardly  open  a  pa.-e  which  h\s 
It  !i-  picture  lor  the  general  observer,  and  its  product  for 
who,  like  Sir  .losi'ph  Banks,  look  oa  the  earth  as  one 
useum." — AthentButn. 


North  America  and  VU^ost  Indioa. 

.\(  VI. 

A  CHUONOLUGICAL  ACCOUNT  OF 
VOYAGES  OK  I)1SC(JVKRY  tothk  ARCTIC  REfJiONS, 
From  thu  curliest  period.  By  Siii  John  Dahiiow.  AlapB. 
2  voIh.  IIvo.  27*. 

"  Kecords  of  enterprise  and  endurance,  of  rciiolutB 
perseverance,  and  of  moral  Hnd  physical  cou-age,  which  wo 
take  to  be  peculiar  to  Kngliah  seamen,  and  Co  make  one 
proud  of  the  name  of  Englishman." — Exumintr. 

XLVII. 

A     FIRST     AND     SECOND     VISIT     TO 

NORTH  A.MERICA,  with  Observations  on  tho 
United  States,  Canada,  and  Nova  Scotia.  By 
Sir  Charles  Lvkll.  2ii<t  h'llition.  4  vols,  post  Uvo,  .'U)/. 
"Sir  C.  Lyell  visited  America  not  merely  as  a  man  of 
science  or  a  philosopher,  but  as  a  man  of  sense  ami  of  the 
world,  eminently  imbued  with  ipialilications  to  cunstilule 
him  an  astute  observer." — Lilrruiy  Oazette. 

XLvm. 

TOUR  THROUGH  THE  SLAVE  STATES, 

from  the  River  Potomac,  to  Texas  and  the  FrontiiTbof 
Mexico.  By  G.  W.  Featherstonhauou.  Plates.  2  vols. 
8vo,  26*. 

"  The  notices  of  the  natural  history,  and  the  mines,  are 
novel  and  interesting ;  and  his  pictures  of  the  heroes  of  the 
bowie  knife  are  remarkably  characteristic  and  entertaining." 
— New  Mult  t Illy  Magazine. 

xux. 
VOYAGE  TO  TEXAS  AND  THE  GULF 

OF  JIEXICO.  By  Mrs.  IIoi  stoln.  2  vols,  post  Uvo,  21*. 

"  The  information  contained  in  this  admiralilc  work  will 
be  very  important  to  those  who  have  an  idea  of  settling 
abroad." — Tiines. 

FOREST  SCENES  AND  INCIDENTS  IN 
CANADA.  By  SiK  George  Head.  Second  Edition. 
Post  8vo,  10*. 

LETTERS  FROM  CANADA  AND  THE 

UNITED  STATES.  By  J.R.Godlev.  2  vols.  postOvo,  Ki*. 
"  Here  is  at  least  one  English  book  of  which  the  Ameri- 
cans  cannot  reasonably  complain." — Athemeum, 

MEMOIRS  OF  A  CHURCH  MISSIONARY 

IN  CANADA.  By  Rev.  J.  Aijpott.     Post  8vo,  2*.  (ii/. 

"  The  little  wcrk  before  us  is  a  genuine  account  ol  what 
a  missionary's  life  is  now  in  ('anada.  Under  an  invented 
name,  it  is  the  story  of  the  writer's  own  experience,  told  in 
a  straightforward  and  unaffected  manner,  with  considerable 
power  of  description."—  Guardian. 

LIII. 

EXCURSIONS     IN      NEWFOUNDLAND. 

The  Cod  Fishery— Fog  Banks— Sealing  Expedition,  &c. 
ByJ.B.  Jukes.    Map.    2  vols,  post  8vo,  21*. 

THE   JOURNAL   Of'  A    RESIDENCE   IN 

THE  WEST  INDIES.    By  .^I.  G.  Lewis.    Post  8vo,  2*.  Cf. 
"  These    amusing    slories    of    actual    Jamaica    life." — 
Quarterly  Review, 

Europe. 

I.V. 

DATES  AND  DISTANCES ;  or,  a  Tour  of 
Sixteen  Months  upon  the  Continent  of  Europe.  I'ost  8vo, 
8*.  6({. 

LVI. 

DALMATIA  AND  MONTENEGRO;  with 
A  Journey  to  MobTAR  in  Hkrtzegovina,  and  Rfmabks 
on  the  Slavonic  Nations.  By  Sir  Garpneu  Wilkinson. 
Plates.    2  vols.  8vo,  42*. 

"The  work  is  illustrated  by  numerous  woodcuts,  which 
arc  striking,  and  well  exeruted.  '1  he  inlornuition  which  it 
contains  is  varied  and  u«elul,  whilst  its  interest  i»  greatly 
enhanced  by  its  appositeiicas  to  contemporary  evtui*."— 
Morniny  Chronicle. 


Mr.  MURRAY'S  LIST  OF  BOOKS,— Domestic  Economy. 


THE  CITIES  AND  CEMETERIES  OF 
ETRURIA  ;  or.  The  extant  Local  Monumentsof  Etruscan 
Art.    By  George  Denxis.    Plates.     2  vols.  8vo.    A-2s. 

"  A  valuable  storehouse  of  classical  and  antiquarian  lore 
to  every  scholar;  and  the  most  general  reader  must  be  at- 
tracted by  their  pleasant,  though  somewhat  discursive  style- 
In  this  respect  Mr.  Dennis's  book  reminds  us  not  a  little  of 
Mr.  Ford's  very  entertaining  Hand-book  for  Spain. " — 
Edinburgh  Rit'iew. 

Lvm. 

RUSSIA  IN  EUROPE  AND  THE  URAL 
MOUNTAINS;  Geologically  Illustrated.  By  Sir  R. 
MuRCHiso.v,  G.C.S.     Plates.    2  vols,  royal  4to. 

"  Many  admirable  memoirs  have  resulted  from  these 
excursions ;  but  the  crowning  triumph  is  the  great  work 
before  us.  It  is  impossible,  by  extract,  to  convey  an  idea 
of  the  value  of  its  contents." — Athenceum. 

IAS.. 

DOMESTIC  MANNERS  OF  THE  RUSSIANS. 

Described  from  a  Year's  Residence  in  that  Country.  Ey 
Rev.  R.  L.  Venables,  3I.A.    Post  8vo,  9*.  6d. 

LETTERS  FROM  THE  SHORES  OF  THE 
BALTIC.    By  A  Lady.    Post  8vo,  -Is.  C>J. 

"A  series  of  charming  descriptions.  The  style  is  full  of 
ease  and  freshness."— £j;aminer. 

LXI. 

NORWAY     AND     HER    LAPLANDERS  ; 

■\Vith  Hints  to  the  Salmon  Fisher.  By  Joh.v  Milpord. 
8vo,  Kis.  6d. 

"  A  pleasant  book,  on  a  very  pleasant  subject :  the  obser- 
vation of  an  accomplished  and  good-natured  man." — 
Examiner. 

HUNGARY  AND  TR.\NSYLVANIA.    With 

Remarks  on  their  Condition,  Social,  Political,  and  Eco- 
nomical. By  John  Paget,  ind  Edition.  Plates.  2  vols. 
8vo,  24*. 

"  Mr.  Paget  never  suffers  our  interest  to  flag,  ani  appears 
to  have  made  himself  accurately  acquamted,  not  only  with 
the  localities  and  traditions  of  the  courtry,  but  with  its 
whole  history  and  institutions." — Quarterly  Review. 

Lxin. 

TOUR     IN     AUSTRIAN     LOMBARDY, 
TYROL,    AXD    BAVARIA.  By    John  Barrow.  Wood- 
cuts.   Post  8vo,  10^.  Gd. 
"Agreeably  written,  faithful,  and  minute." — Athenteum. 


I  LXiV. 

!     A  RIDE  ON  HORSEBACK  FROM  FRANCE 
i  TO  SWITZERLAND.  By  A  Lady.  2  vols,  post  8vo.  2U. 

LXV, 

THE  BIBLE  IN  SPAIN;  or,  The Juui-ueys, 
Adventures,  and  Imprisonments  of  an  Englishman  in  tho 
Peninsula.  By  Gkorgb  Borrow.  At'ic  Edition.  Post 
8vo,  6*. 

"  Mr.  Borrow  has  come  out  as  an  English  Author  of  high 
mark.    We  are  reminded  of  Gil  Bias,  in  the  narratives  of 
this  pious,  single-hearted  man."— Quar^er/y  Review. 
Lxvr. 

THE  GYPSIES  OF  SPAIN  ;  Their  Manners, 
Customs,  Religion  and  Language.  By  George  Borrow, 
New  Edition.    Post  8vo,  6s. 

"  A  curious,  a  very  curious  work,  and  contains  some  of 
the  most  singular,  yet  authentic  dcscription4  of  the  gipsy 
race  which  have  ever  been  given  to  the  public." — Literary 
Gazette. 

LXVIt. 

GATHERINGS  FROM  SPAIN.  By  Riciiaud 
Ford.    Post  8vo,  6*. 

"  The  best  English  book,  beyond  comparison,  that  ever 
has  appeared  for  the  illustration,  not  merely  of  the  general 
topography  and  local  curiosities,  but  of  the  national  cha- 
racter and  manners  of  Spam."— Quarterly  Review. 

LXVIil. 

PORTUGAL,  GALLICIA,  and  thb  BASQUE 
PROVINCES.  By  Lord  Carnarvon,  Third  Edition. 
Post  8vo,  6s. 

"  This  is  a  very  remarkable  work.  It  is  not  only  a  graphic 
description  of  the  face  of  the  country,  and  an  impartial  and 
sagacious  account  of  the  mora!  and  political  condition  of 
Spain  and  Portugal ;  but  it  relates  also  a  series  of  personal 
adventures  and  perils,  very  unusual  in  modern  Europe."— 
Quarterly  Reniew. 

LXIX. 

PEDESTRIAN     WANDERINGS     in     the 

I  French  and  Spanish  Pyreneks.  By  T.  Clifton  Paris. 
AVoodcuts.     Post  8vo,  10s.  6d. 

"  Contain    better    descriptive    passages,   strikingly  pic- 
turesque, and  without  the  least  strain  and  effort,  than  we 
recollect  in   any   book   of   the    same  light  pretension," —  | 
Examiner,  I 

A  PHYSICIAN'S  HOLIDAY,  or  A  Month 
in  Switzerland  during  the  Summer  of  1848.  By  Jotuf 
Forbes,  M.D.    2nd  Edition.    Plates.  Post  8vo.  8*.  6d. 


DOMESTIC  Ais^D   RURAL  ECONOMY. 


THE  MODERN  DOMESTIC  COOKERY 
BOOK,  Founded  on  Principles  of  Economy  and  Practice, 
and  adapted  for  private  fa.mjlies.  Based  on  the  work  by 
Mrs.  Rundell.  A  Xcw  Edition,  most  carefully  revised  and 
corrected  to  the  present  time.    By  a  Lady.    Fcap.  8vo.  5^. 

"The  most  peacticallt  useful  book  we  ever  met 
with." — British  Critic. 

***  0/  this  work  upwards  o/ 200,000  copies  have  been  sold. 


FAMILY  RECEIPT-BOOK  ;  A  Collection  of 

1000  valuable  Receipts.    Kew  Edition.    Fcap.  8vo,  .'is.  6d. 

"A  large  quantity  of  truly  valuable  matter." — British 


INSTRUCTIONS    IN    GARDENING  ;    with 

a  Calend.ir  of  Operations  and  Directions  for  every  Month. 
By  Mrs.  Loudon.  8th  Edition.  Woodcuts.     Fcap.  8vo,  5s. 

"  A   most   useful    and    agreeable    Manual." — Salopian 
Journal. 


THE  DOVECOTE  AND  THE  AVIARY; 

a  History  of  Domestic  Pigeons  and  other  Birds  in  a  Cap- 
live  State.    By  Rev.  E.  S.  Di.kon.    Woodcuts.    Fcap.  8vo. 

PRACTICAL    HINTS    ON    DECORATIVE 

NEEDLEWOliK,  containing  minute  directions  as  to  the 
choice  of  materials,  and  the  best  methods  of  employing 
them  for  Canvas  or  Tapestry  Work.  '  By  Miss  Lambert. 
Woodcuts.      16mo,  Is.  6d. 

MY  KNITTING-BOOK,     By  Miss  Lambekt 
Woodcuts.    2  Parts,    ICnio,  .3s. 


MY     CROCHET    SAMPLER, 

Lambert.     Woodeuts.    2  Parts.    16mo,  4s. 


By     JIisi 


CHURCH  NEEDLEWORK, 

With  Practical  Remarks  on  its  Preparation  and  Arrange 
nient.  By  Miss  La.meert.  With  numerous  Engravings 
Post  8vo,  'Js.Gd, 


MURRAY'S    HAND-BOOKS 
FOE  TEAVELLEES  ABEOAD  AND  EEADEES  AT  HOME. 

.7  detailed  and  precise  Information  rcspcctiwj  Steamers,  Passports,  Moneys,  Guides,  and  Servants, 

with  Directions  for  Travellers,  and  Hints  for  Tours. 

1.  I  13. 

I  WD-BOOK  OF  TRAVEL-TALK;  or,  Con- I     HAND-BOOK    FOR    FRANCE,  THE 

IIS   in   English,    Gerniiin,  Fiencli,   and    Italian.  ;  PYKKNKKS,     liKlTTANV,     tho     JtlVKUS     LOIRK, 

,,    .-,,.  SKINK,   KUONE,  and   (iAKONNK,    KKKNCII    ALl'8, 

DAUl'UINE,  and  I'ROVKNCE.  Maps.   PostHvo,  12/. 
14. 
HAND-BOOK      OF      FAINTING  — THE 
ITALIAN   SCHOOLS.    From  the   ficrman  of  Kuolkr. 
Edited,  with  Notes,  by  Sin  Charlrs  Eastlake.  Illustrated 


HAND-BOOK  FOR  NORTH  GERMANY, 
..  iMllNE,  HOLLAND,  BELGIUM,  and  PRUSSIA. 
lap.   I'ust  Ovo,  i-2s. 

3. 


]  I  A  ND  -BOOK   FOR    SOUTH     GER.MAN Y,    witli  100  Woodcuta  from  the  Old  Masters.    Post  Uvo.  21*. 


^!iOL— BAVARIA— AUSTRIA— SALZliURG  and 
NUBE,  from  ULM  to  the  BLACK  SEA.    Map. 

•,  12f. 

4. 

I1.\ND-BOOK    OF    PAINTING— THE 
'  '     IAN,  FLEMISH,  AND  DUTCH  SCHOOLS.  From 
I  man  of   Ki'glkr.    Edited,  with    Notes,   by  Sir 
I >  Head.    PostSvo,  I2»-. 
5. 

HAND-BOOK     FOR      SWITZERLAND, 

1.1  .-  if  SAVOY  and  PIEDMONT.    Map.    Post  8vo,  10*. 

6. 

I!  LUSTRATIONS  to   the   HAND-BOOKS 

i;i{MANY   AND   SWITZERLAND.    A   Series  of 


l.'i 

I  H  A  N  D-B  0  0  K  O  F  PA  I  N  T  I  N  G— THE 
SPANISH  AND  FRENCH  SCHOOLS.    By  Si K  Edmund 

'  1Ieas>.     Post  8vo,  12»-. 

]  IG. 

I  HAND-BOOK  FOR  NORTH  EUROPE, 
DENMARK,  NORWAY,  SWEDEN.  RUSSIA,  and 
FINLAND.   Maps  and  Plans.    2  vols.    Post  8vo,  24*. 

I  ''• 

HAND-BOOK  FOR  ENGLAND  AND 

■WALES.    Map.    Post  Svo.  A'early  Read;/. 

"  The  old  Lord  Treasurer  Burleigh,  if  any  one  came  to 
the  Lords  of  the  Cf)uncil  for  a  Licence  to  Travel,  he  would 
first  examine  him  of  England ;  if  he  found  him  ipnorant 
would  bid  him  stay  at  home,  and  know  hi»  own  Country 


d  Plans  of  the  most  frequented  Roads,  Cities.    &iiit."-TheCompltat  Gentlemnn.by  Henry  l'eac/iam,l662. 


:    :   !    wns,  &C.     Post  8vo. 

7. 

MAND-BOOK   FOR    MALTA    AND    THE 

;\:-I.     the     IONIAN     ISLANDS,     TURKEY.    ASIA 
ll.Mili.and  CONSTANTINOPLE.  Maps.  Post  8vo,  15*. 

8. 

HAND-BOOK  FOR  EGYPT.— THE  NILE, 
I.I  XANDRIA,   CAIRO,    the    PYRAMIDS,    MOUNT 
l.\  \1,  and  THEBES.    Map.     V>s. 
9. 

HAND-BOOK   FOR  NORTHERN    ITALY, 

LdlJKNCE.   SARDINIA,    GENOA,    THE  RIVIERA, 
i:\l(  1:,  LOMBARD Y,  and  TUSCANY'.     Map 


1«. 

;     HAND-BOOK   FOR  DEVON  AND  CORN- 
WALL.    .^laps.    Post  8vo,  6*. 
19. 
I     HAND-BOOK  FOR  LONDON— PAST  AND 

PRESENT.    By  Peter  Cu.vni.vgha.m.    Post  8vo,  16*. 
I      "  The  best  and  moot  complete  guide  to  the  sights  and 

localities  of  London,  that  we  have  seen ;  hut  it  is  a  great 
'deal  more  besifles;  it  is  a  delightful  literary  companion, 
I  teeming,  not  only  with  rare  and  valuable  information,  often 
i  quite  new,  but  with  stores  of  apposite  quotation  from  our 
I  older  and  modern  writers."- J/orning'  Chronicle. 


10. 


HAND-BOOK  FOR  CENTRAL  ITALY, 
liiMi;,  the  PAPAL  STATES,  and  CITIES  of  ETRURIA. 
111-,.    Post  8vo,  16*. 

11. 

HAND-BOOK  FOR  SOUTHERN  ITALY, 
R1LV,AND  NAPLES.  Map.  Post  8vo.  (Preparing) 

12. 

HAND-BOOK  FOR  SPAIN,  ANDALUSIA, 

lONDA,  GRENADA,  MURCIA,  VALENCIA,  CATA- 
lONIA,  ESFREMADLRA,  LEON,  GALLICIA,  THE 
LSTURIAS,  THE  CASTLLES,  THE  BAStiUES,  ARRA- 
ibN,  PYRENEES, and  NAVARRE.  Maps.  Post8vo,16*. 


A  MINOR  HAND-BOOK  OF  LONDON  ; 

Post    or,  A  complete  Guide  to  the  Sights  of  the  Metropolis. 
)8mo.     In  Preparation 

21. 
HAND-BOOK  FOR  THE   ENVIRONS  OF 
LONDON.  With  hints  for  Excursions  by  Railw.iy,  Steam- 
boat, and  Road.    By  Petjsr  Cu.nkikoham.    Post  8vo     In 
Preparaticn. 


HAND-BOOK  TO  THE  PICTURE  GAL- 
LERIES in  and  near  Loudon.  With  Historical,  Biogra- 
phical, and  Critical  Notices.    By  Mrs.  Ja.meso."*.    Post 

iSvo,  10*. 

i  23. 

j     HAND-BOOK     FOR    WINDSOR    AND 

I  WESTMINSTER  ABBEY.    Woodcuts.  Fcap  8vo,  2*.G(t 

; each. 


Critical  Opinions  an  tijc  ?l)anii--J3ooiiS. 

'  Mr.  Murray's  series  of  Hand-books  seem  destined  to  embrace  all  the  sights  of  the  world." — Spectator. 

'  The  useful  series  of  Hand-books  i.ssued  by  Mr.  Jlurray." — Exumiuer. 

'  Mr.  Murray's  excellent  series.     Compiled  with  great  care.    The  information  full  and  satisfactory."— .■KAf"*""'. 

"  Weil  consideretl,  well  arranged,  and  well  compressed.  They  combi'e  every  practical  information,  with  satisfactory 
lescriptions  and  extracts  from  the  most  accomplished  travellers,  unencumbered  with  long  historical  details,  which  not 
infrequently  are  uselessly  intruded  into  these  manuals." — Genllemnn's  Magazine.  j  •  1  • 

i  "  An  immense  quantity  of  minute  and  useful  information  respecting  all  places  of  interest,  presented  m  a  plain, 
nncteiiiatious,  and  intelligible  manner."— t'/iiVerf  Scrmce  Giip^/e.  .      ,_ 

I  "  All  the  information  a  traveller  requires  j  and  supplies  an  answer  to  every  difiSculty  which  can  possibly  "rise.  Atlas. 
I  "  An  er.ccllcnt  plan,  and  contains  much  in  little  compass,  and  is  an  amusing  resource  when  the  road  is  dull  and  our 
tompanion  has  fallen  asleep." — Asiatic  Journal.  _  •       >•      r  •» 

I  •'  Capital  guides  1  A  man  may  traverse  half  the  continent  of  Europe  with  them  without  asking  a  question.  —LiUrary 
iBazetle. 


mil.  juLivivAi  J5  IjIsi    ur    uv;ui\o. —  I'lieoiogry. 


RELIGIOUS   WORKS,  THEOLOGY,  &c. 


THE  BOOK  OF  COMMON  PRAYER; 

with  1(100  Illustrations,  IJordcrs,  Initial  Letters,  Vignettes, 
&c.     A'lic  Eililion.    Medium  llvo,  2U?. 

"  Tiie  most  elaborate  copy  of  the  Liturgy  ever  executed. 
A  noble  devotional  volume  and  fitting  Christian  manual." 
—  Times. 

THE  BOOK  OF  THE  CHURCH ; 

AVith  Notes  containing  References  to  the  Authorities, and 
an  Index.  By  Robert  Solthky,  LL.D.  SixUi  Edition. 
«vo,  V2s. 

"  A  most  interestinp;  sketch  of  a  subject  which,  to  the  gene- 
rality of  readers,  is  almost  unknown  ;  and  as  it  cannot  tail 
to  be  popular,  from  the  Ijeauty  of  its  execution,  will,  I  trust, 
have  the  eii'ett  of  turning  the  attention  of  many  persons, 
who  have  hitlierto  been  inditlVrent  to  such  matters,  through 
ignorance,  to  the  nature  of  the  dangers  which  this  country 
has  escaped,  and  the  blessings  of  various  kinds  which  have 
been  secured  to  it,  through  the  National  Church  Establish- 
ment."— Archbisliop  Hoicley  to  the  Author. 
III. 

CATHOLIC  SAFEGUARDS  AGAINST  THE 
CHURCH  OF  ROME,  selected  from  the  works  of  eminent 
Divines  of  the  17th  Century.  By  Rev.  James  Brogden. 
Second  Edition.    With  Preface  and  Index.     3  vols.  8vo. 

"  A  Selection  of  the  ablest  discourses  on  the  errors  of  the 
Church  of  Rome." — Bishop  cf  London's  Charge. 

IV. 

ILLUSTRATIONS  OF  THE  LITURGY 
A>;d  ritual  of  the  church.  By  Rev.  Ja.mes 
Brogden-.    3  vols,  post  8vo,  2/^. 

"  A  most  valuable  addition  to  every  churchman's  library." 
^Bishop  of  Exeter's  Charge. 

FRIENDLY  AND  SEASONABLE  ADVICE 

TO  THE  ROMAN  CATHOLICS  OF  ENGLAND.  By 
Dean  Comber.  A  New  Edition.  Edited  by  the  Rev. 
Dr.  Hook.    Fcap.  8vo,  3*. 

THE  THREE  REFORMATIONS;  Luthe- 
ran, Roman,  and  Anglican.  By  Rev.  Ur.  Hook.  Third 
Edition.   8vo,  3s. 

VII. 

ON  THE  UNITY  OF  THE  CHURCH. 
By  the  Rev.  Henry  Edward  Manning.  Second  Edition. 
8vo,  10*.6(i. 

VIII. 

SERMONS  ON  THE  LEADING  DOCTRINES 
AND  DUTIES  TAUGHT  BY  THE  CHURCH  OF 
ENGLAND.    By  the  Dean  of  Norwich.    2  vols.  8vo,  21s. 

ON  THE  DOCTRINE  OF  TIIE  INCAR- 
NATION. By  Archdeacon  AVilberforce.  3rd  Edition. 
8vo,  12*. 

ON  THE  DOCTRINE  OF  HOLY  BAPTISM. 

By  Archdeaco.n  Wilberforce.    3rd  Edition.    8vo,  7s.  6d. 

XI. 

SERMONS  ON  THE  NEW  BIRTH  OF 
MAN'S  Nature.  By  archdeacon  Wilberforce. 
8vo,  Us. 

UNDESIGNED  SCRIPTURAL  COINCI- 
DENCES. ATest  OF  THEIR  Veracity.  By  Rev.  J.  J.  Bx-uNr. 
Third  Edition.    8vo,  9*. 

"  Whoever  has  read  Dr.  Paley's  Horce  Paulines,  will  find 
this  volume  conducted  with  scarcely  inferior  ability  and 
fucceas." — John  Bull. 

XIII. 

THE  EVIDENCES  OF  CHRISTIANITY; 
or.  Dialogues  between  a  Brahmin  and  a  Christian. 
By  Rev.  William  Sbwell,  B.D.,  Exeter  College,  Oxford. 
Fcap.  8vo,  7*.  6d. 


SUGGESTIONS  TO  THE  THEOLOGICAL 

STUDENT  UNDER  PRESCNT  DIFFICULTIES.  By 
the  Dkan  of  Carlisle.    Post  8vo,  6*.  iid. 

XV. 

TIIE  CONTROVERSY  OF  FAITH  :  Being 
Advice  to  Candidates  for  Holy  Orders.  By  Rev.  C. 
Dodgso.v.    12mo,  '3s. 

xvi. 

SERMONS  PREACHED  in  the  CHAPEL 
of  HARROW  SCHOOL.  By  Rev.  C.  J.  Vaughan,  D.D. 
Head  Master.    8vo,  10s.  dd. 

"  The  sermons  now  before  us  are  addressed  specifically  to 
the  boys  of  the  public  school ;  and  parents  will  find  tliem 
a  valuable  family  possession." — Christian  Observer. 

XVII. 

NINE  NEW  SERMONS  preached  at  HAR- 
ROW SCHOOL.  By  Rev.  C.  J.  Vaughan,  D.D.  Fcap. 
8vo,  5s. 

xvin. 
BISHOP  HEBER'S  PARISH  SERMONS;' 

On  the  Lessons,  the  Ciospel,  or  the  Epistle,  for  every  Sun- 
day in  the  Year.    Sixth  Edition.    2  vols,  post  8vo,  IB*,  j 

REMARKS    ON    ENGLISH    CHURCHES, 

and  on  rendering  Sepulchral  Memorials  subservient  to 
pious  and  Christian  Uses.  By  J.  H.  Markland.  Fourth 
Edition.    Woodcuts.     Fcap.  8vo,  (is.  6d. 

"  One  of  the  most  important  steps  made  lately  in  the 
restoration  of  a  sound  and  efficient  church-system  amoug 
us." — Quarter  It/  Review, 

ON  THE  REVERENCE  DUE  TO  HOLY 
PLACES.  By  J.  H.  Markland.  Third  Edition.  Wood- 
cuts.   Fcap.  8vo,  2*. 

xxr. 

FAMILY  PRAYERS,  ARRANGED  FROM 
THE  LITURGY.  By  Right  Hon.  W.  E.  Gladstone. 
12mo,  2«.  6d. 

xxn. 

A  MANUAL  OF  FAMILY  PRAYER; 
arranged  on  a  board  so  as  to  save  the  trouble  of  turning 
the  pages  backwards  and  forwards.    8vo,  2s. 

XXIII. 

THE  ROMAUNT  VERSION  of  the  GOSPEL 
OF  ST.  JOHN  ;  originally  in  Use  among  the  Old  Wal- 
denses.    Edited  by  Rev.  W.  S.  Gilly,  D.D.  8vo,  5s.  6d. 

XXIV. 

PSALMS  AND  HYMNS.  Adapted  to  the; 
various  Solemnities  of  the  Church.  By  Rev.  W.  B.Holland, 
24mo,  Is.  6d. 

XXV. 

THE  LAWS  RELATING  TO  SUNDAYS.' 
HOLIDAYS,  and  DAYS  OF  FASTING.  By  E.  V.  Nkale! 
Fcap.  8vo,  9s.  Ijd. 

"  An  excellent  handmaid  to  '  Nelson  on  Fasts  and 
Festivals.'  " — British  Magazine. 

THE   NESTORIANS,  or  LOST   TRIBES, 

With  Illustrations  of  Scripture  Prophecy.  By  Asahbi 
Grant,  M.D.     Third  Edition.    Fcap.  8vo,  6*. 

"  An  importaiit^ccession  to  our  stores  of  geographica 
knowledge." — Church  of  England  Review. 

XXVIf. 

SERMONS  FOR  CHILDREN.  By  Mrs 
Markha.m.    Second  Edition.    12nio,3s, 


mil.  iiiviviv^ii   k3    Lttoi    \jr 


iy\j\ji\<3. — roeiry,  ine  srama,  «Le« 


POETRY,  THE  DRAMA,  &c. 


(Copyright  Editions  of  Lord  Byron's  If'orks.) 


LORD    BYRON'S   LIFE,  LETTERS,  AND 

JOURNALS.  l$y  Thomas  MooiiK.   licw  Library  Editiun. 
Plates.  6  vols.  fc;n).  8vo.  Wis. 


LORD   BYRON'S   LIFE,  LETTERS,  AND 

JOURNALS.     Hy  Thomas   Moore.      C'oinpleto    in   t)no 
Volume.  Js'cw  and  cheaper  cdilion.  Portraits.    Koy.il  8vo. 


LORD     BYRON'S     POETICAL     WORKS. 
Pocket  Edition.     Vignettes,  10  vols.  lUtno,  is.  Gd.  each. 


LORD     BYRON'S     POETICAL     WORKS. 

With    all   the   Notes  and  Illustrations.       New   Library 
Edition.     Plates.     10  vols.  fcap.  Bvo.  30*. 


LORD     BYRON'S     POETICAL     WORKS. 

Complete    in  One  Volume.     New  and  Cheaper  Edition. 
Portrait  and  Vignette.    Royal  8vo. 


LORD      BYRON'S     CHILDE      HAROLD. 

New  Edition.    Illustrated  with  Portrait  and  GO  Vignette 
Engravings.    8vo.     2ls. 


LORD     BYRON'S     CHILDE      HAROLD. 

Vignette.    24mo,  2s.  6d. 


LORD    BYRON'S    TALES    AND    POEMS. 


1.  GlAOVR. 

2.  Rbide  of  Abvdos. 

3.  Corsair. 

4.  Lara. 

5.  Siege  of 


Corinth. 

Vignettes. 


6.  Beppo. 

7.  M.iZEPPA. 

8.  Island. 

9.  i'abisina. 
10.  Prisoner  of  Chillon. 

2  vols.  24mo,  Rs. 


LORD 

POEMS.     V 


BYRON'S      MISCELLANEOUS 
ignettes.    3  vols.  24mo,  7*.  Gd. 


LORD    BYRON'S    DRAMAS. 


1.  Manfred. 

2.  Marino  Faliero. 

3.  Heaven  and  Earth. 

4.  Sakdanapalus. 


5.   Two  FOSCARI. 

(>.  D;:poBMED  Transformed. 

7.  Cain. 

8.  Werner. 


Vignettes.    2  vols.  24mo,  5* 


LORD  BYRON'S  DON  JUAN.     Vignettes. 

2  vols.  24mo,  OS. 

1^"  No  edition  of  Lord  Byron's  Works  is 
cojiPLETE,  except  it  be  published  by  Mr.  Murray, 
he  alone  being  sole  proprietor  of  all  Copyright. 


REV.    GEORGE    CRABBE'S    LIFE    AND 
POETICAL  WORKS,  with  ull  tho  Notes  and  Illuiitra- 
\  tions.    Copyriyht  and  Chf.aper  Edilioti.    Platctf.    a  voU. 
fcap.  Ovo.  24». 

CRABBE'S  LIFE  AND  POEMS.  Com- 
plete in  One  Volume.  New  and  Cheaper  Edition.  Por- 
trait and  Vignette.  Royal  Uvo. 

III. 
POPE'S  LIFE  AND  POETICAL  WORKS. 

A  New  Edition,  with  Notes,  an  Original  Life,  and  more 
than  One  Hundred  Unpubliahed  Letters  of  Pojie  and  hin 
eon  temporaries.    Edited  by  JIr.  Ciiokeb.    Portraits.    8vo. 

IV. 

SPECIMENS  OF  THE  BRITISH  POETS. 
By  Thomas  Campbell.    One  Volume.    Royal  8vo,  \Bt. 

"Rich  in  exquisite  examples  of  En|;li!sh  poetry,  and 
suggestive  of  deligbttul  thoughts  beyond  any  volume  in  the 
language." — Alias. 

BISHOP   HEBER'S   POETICAL   WORKS. 

Fourth  Edition.     Portrait.    Feap.  8vo,  7*-  Gd. 

"  Bishop  Heber  has  taken  a  graceful  station  among  the 
favoured  bards  ot  the  day."— Li7erar^  Qazetle. 

DEAN   MILMAN'S    POETICAL    WORKS. 

Including  the  Fall  of  Jerusalem— Samor,  Jlartyr  of 
Antioeh,  &c.  Second  Editiun.  Plates.  3  vols.  feap. 
8vo,  18*. 

VII. 

ALLAN  CUNNINGHAM'S  POEMS  AND 

SONGS.     AVoodcuts.     24rao,  2i.  Gd. 

"The  works  of  the  most  tender  and  pathetic  of  the  Scot- 
tish minstrels,  in  a  cheap  and  elegant  form." — Blackwood. 

VIII. 

HORACE.  A  New  Edition  of  the  Text. 
Edited,  with  Notes  and  a  Life,  by  Dea.n  Milman.  Illus- 
trated with  Statues,  Gems,  Vignettes,  ic.,  chiefly  from 
the  antique.     300  Woodcuts.    Medium  8vo,  Us. 

ANCIENT  SPANISH  BALLADS.  Trans- 
lated by  J.  G.  LocKHART.  With  Titles,  Borders,  and  Wood- 
cuts.   4to,  i2s. 

"  A  more  appropriately  as  well  as  beautifully  embellished 
volume  never  was  offered  to  the  world." — Edinburgh  Bevieu: 


REJECTED  ADDRESSES.  By  James  and 
Horace  Smith.  Twenty-second  Edition.  Portraits.  Fcap. 
8vo. 

XI. 

SPECIMENS  OF  ITALIAN  SONNETS, 
From  the  most  celebrated  Poets,  with  Translations.  By 
Rev.  Charles  Strong,  M.A.    8vo,  6*. 

TRANSLATIONS  FROM  THE  SWEDISH 

Poems  of  EsAi-.s  Tegner,    and    from    the    German   of 
Schiller.  By  U.  Dri.nkivateb  Bethu.ne.  Post  8 vo,  12*. 

FRAGMENTS    FRUAI    GERMAN    PROSE 

WRITERS.    By  Sarah  Austin.    Post  8vo,  lOx. 
"  A  deUghtfuI  \o\uine."—Athcn<tum. 


i 


WORKS  ADAPTED  FOR  YOUNG  PERSONS. 


P.^rs.  IVXarkbaxu's  Histories. 

HISTORY   OF   ENGLAND. 
From  the  First  Invasion  by  the  Romans,  to  the  Present 
Year's  IJeign  of  Queen  Victoria.    iN'i-io  Edition.    ^Vood- 
cuts.    12mo,  ~s.  ()(/. 

HISTORY  OF  FRANCE. 
From  the  Conquest  by  the  Oauls,  to  the  Death  of  Louis- 
Fhiiippe.    iV'fic  Edition.    Woodcuts.     liimo,  7.'.  6(^ 

HISTORY  OF   GERMANY. 
From  the  Invasion  by  Marius,  to  the  Battle  of  Leipsic. 
Woodcuts,    limo,  7«-  6(/. 

HISTORY  OF  ROME  AND  GREECE. 
Woodcuts.    12mo.    In  Preparation. 

"  Mrs.  Markham's  Histories  are  constructed  on  a 
plan  which  we  think  well  chosen,  and  we  are  glad  to  find 
that  they  are  so  popular,  for  they  cannot  be  too  strongly 
recommended,  as  adapted  for  youth." — Journal  of  Edu- 
cation. 

LITTLE  ARTHUR'S  HISTORY  OF  ENG- 
LAND. By  Lady  Callcott.  Fifteenth  Edition.  Woodcuts. 
ISmo.  is.  (id. 

"  Lady  CaUcott's  style  is  of  the  right  kind  ;  earnest  and 
simple. '  ■ — Exam  in  er, 

CROKER'S  STORIES  FOR  CHILDREN, 
FROM  THE  HISTORY  OF  ENGLAND.  Fourteenth 
Edition.  Woodcuts.     Ifiino,  5^. 

"  This  skilful  performance  of  Bfr.  Croker's  sufr.cested  the 
plan  of  Sir  Walter  Scott's  'Tales  of  a  Grandfather.'" — 
Quarterly  Review. 

CROKER'S  PROGRESSIVE  GEOGRAPHY 
FOR  CHILDREN.    Fourth  Edition.    ISmo,  \s.Od. 

"  The  best  elementary  book  on  the  subject." — Quarterly 
Review, 

iESOP'S  FABLES. 
A  New  Version,  chiefly  from   Original  Sources,  by  Rev. 
Thomas  James.  With  Woodcuts  by  John  Tenniel.   Post 
iivo,  \C>s. 

"  Mr.  James  has  made  a  judicious  selection  of  the  Fables 
themselves,  and  of  the  version  to  be  taken  as  his  test:  his 
translation  is  at  once  close  and  free:  the  wood  engravings 
are  among  the  triumphs  of  art." — Spectator. 

BERTHA'S  JOURNAL  DURING  A  VISIT 
IN  ENGLAND.  With  a  variety  of  Information,  arranged 
for  every  Day.    Seventh  Edition.    12mo,  7.S.  6(i. 

"  I  am  reading  '  Bertha '  with  the  utmost  avidity.  I  can 
scarcely  take  my  attention  from  this,  the  best  of  all  juvenile 
compilations."— flee.  George  Crabbe. 

"  An  excellent  little  work."— C■up^  Basil  Hall. 

THE  HEIRESS  IN  HER  MINORITY  ; 

Or,  Progress  of  Character.    By  the  Author  of  "Bertha's 
Journal."    2  vols,  li'nio,  18*. 

"The  Author  has  endeavoured,  in  the  following  pares,  to 
trace  the  steps  by  which  the  power  of  self-control  may  be 
practically  developed  in  a  young  and  ardent  mind  when 
brought  under  the  influence  of  high  and  noble  motives  ;  and 
further,  to  show  how  materially  the  happiness  of  the  indi- 
vidual is  enlarged  by  turning  it  from  the  selfish  indolence 
of  pride  to  the  active  and  habitual  exercise  of  the  faculties 
in  endeavouring  to  acquire  useful  and  varied  knowledge." — 
I'rtface. 

VIII. 

JESSE'S  NATURAL  HISTORY, 

For  Schools.  With  Anecdotes  of  the  Sagacity  and  Instinct 
of  Animals.    Seventh  Edition.    Fcap.  8vo,    Gs.  6d. 


PHILOSOPHY  IN  SPORT  MADE  SCIENCE 

IN  E.VRNEST  ;  or.  Natural  Philosophy  inculcated  by  tho 
Toys  and  Sports  of  Youth.  Sixth  Edition.  Woodcuts. 
Fcap.  Uvo,  8s. 

"  We  know  of  no  other  book  which  so  charmingly  blends 
amusement  with  instruction.  No  juvenile  book  has  been 
published  in  our  time  more  entitled  to  praise."— iij«»a>ier. 

WALKS  AND  TALKS  ;  A  STORY-BOOK 
FOR  CHILDREN.    By  Aunt  Ida.    Woodcuts.   ICmo,  5*. 

XI. 

LOCKHART'S  HISTORY  OF  THE  LATE 

WAR  :  with  Sketches  of  Nelson,  Wellington,  and 
Napoleon.    18mo,  2*.  M. 

ELEMENTS  OF 
George  Fishkb,  Head 
Schools.     Third  Edition. 


GEOMETRY.      By  Rev. 

Master    of    Greenwich    Naval 
18mo,  3s. 


FIRST  PRINCIPLES  OF  ALGEBRA.     By 
Rev.  George  Fisher.     Third  Edition.     18mo,  3s. 

XIV. 

GOSPEL  STORIES  FOR  CHILDREN. 

An  attempt  to  render  intelligible  tho  Chief  Events  of  the 
Life  of  Our  Saviour.    Second  Edition.  ]Umo,  3s.  (kl. 

XV. 

SERMONS  FOR  CHILDREN. 

By  Mrs.  Makkham.    Second  Edition.    Fcap.  8vo,  3s. 


SENTENCES   FROM  THE  PROVERBS. 

In  English,  French,  Italian,  and  German.  For  Daily  Use. 
By  A  Lady.     16mo,  3s.  6<f. 

"  The  design  of  this  volume  is  excellent;" — Atlas. 
xvii. 

THE  ARABIAN  NIGHTS.  Translated  for 
Family  Reading,  and  illustrated  with  600  Woodcuts,  by 
Hakvey.    Third  Edition,    3  vols.  Post  Svo,  18s. 

XVIII. 

THE  FAIRY  RING  ; 

A  Collection  of  Tales  and  Stories  for  Young  Persons. 
With  Illustrations  by  Richard  Doyle.  Second  Edition, 
Fcap.  8vo,  7s.  6(/. 

"  Rare  news  for  young  people — whole  sacksful  of  new 
fairy  lore.  Nicely  illustrated  by  Mr.  Richard  Doyle,  who 
has  lived  a  long  time  in  Fairy  Land,  and  knows  all  about 
it." — Examiner. 

"  Three  dozen  legends,  many  among  them  pointed  with 
that  humorous  wisdom  which  none  appreciate  better  than 
children,  make  up  a  mouth's  entertainment  of  charming 
quality." — Athenwum. 

xrx. 

PUSS  IN  BOOTS  ;  Suited  to  the  tastes  o\ 
Little  and  CinowN  Children.  By  Otto  Speckter.  Witt 
Illustrations.     lUmo,  5s. 

"  Twelve  designs  full  of  excellent  humour." — Examiner 

"Complete  p'ctures,  and  loll  the  story  with  dramatii 

force." — Spectator. 

XX. 

THE  CHARMED  ROE  ;  or,  The  Stouv  of  rnr 
Little  Brother  and  Sister.    By  Otto  Si-eckter.    WitJ 
Illustrations.     16mo,  5*. 
"  A  book  for  kindly  remembrances."— Z,i7er«i-^  Gazette, 


ftiR.  iviuKivAi  a  L,i»r  uv  UUUKS.— Scbool  Books,  4^o. 


11 


CLASSICAL  AND  SCHOOL  BOOKS. 


Dr.  Smitli's  Dictionaries. 


A  NEW  CLASSICAL  DICTIONARY  FOR 

HE  ITSli  OF  SCHOOLS.  Kditcd  by  Wm.  .«mith,  LL.D. 
>ne  volume  Uvo,  21*. 

A  DICTIONARY  OF  ANTIQUITIES  FOR 

THE    USE   OF    SCHOOLS.     AbridK«-<l  fri>m   tlio    larger 

•ork.    With  2(l0  Woodcuts.     IGmo,  llii.  Ci/. 

Drawn  up  in  a  clear  and  concise  style,  and  weeded  of 
hose  references  and  speculative  matters  which  tend  so 
nuch  to  confuse  the  student  who  is  not  far  advanced.     It  is 

most  valuable  addition  to  our  school  literature."— Cam- 
ritlge  Clirunicle. 

DICTIONARY  OF  GREEK  AND  ROMAN 

NTIQL'ITIES.  Second  Edition,  revised  and  enlarged. 
Vith  500  Woodcuts.     Koyal  Svo.     -21.  is. 

"  A  work  much  wanted,  will  be  invaluable  to  the  younpr 
itudent,  and  as  a  book  of  reference  will  be  most  acceptable 
»nthe  library  table  of  every  scholar."— QIkuWcW^  Review. 

DICTIONARY  OF  GREEK  AND  ROMAN 

810GKAPHY  AND  MYTHOLOGY.  3  vols.  8vo,5/.  las.  Gd. 
"  The  only  CIa.ssical  Dictionary  with  any  pretensions  to 
;he  name,  in  our  language  ;  ami,  as  such,  it  must  torm  part 
>fthe  library  of  every  student  who  desires  to  become  ac- 
]uaii:tcd  with  the  mind  of  antiquity." — Athenaeum. 


niddle's  Xiatln  Dictionaries. 

LATIN-ENGLISH  LEXICON.  A  copious 
md  criiic.ll  Latin-English  Lexicon,  founded  on  the  Ger- 
man-Latin Dictionaries  of  William  Frtund.  Hy  the  Kev. 
I.  E.  KiDDLK,  M.A.,  of  St.  Edmund  Hall,  Oxford.  One 
thick  volume,  post  4to,  u^s. 


A  COMPLETE  LATIN-ENGLISH  AND 
ENGLISH-LATIN  DICTIONARY,  For  the  use  of  Col- 
tcges  and  Schools.  Chiefly  from  the  German.  By  the 
Rev.  J.  E.  UiDDLE,  M.A.  Kew  Edition,  corrected  and 
tnlari/cd.  8vo,  3U.  6</.  The  two  Dictionaries  j^yiara^d^y; 
^Tlie  English-Latin  Dictionary,  lOs.  dd. ;  the  Latin-Eng- 
Ush  Dictionary,  2U. 

irr. 

THE  YOUNG   SCHOLAR'S   LATIN-ENG- 

^'     '  AND  ENGLISH-LATIN  DICTIONARY;  being  an 

lent  of  •'  The  Complete  Latin  Dictionary.''    By  the 

E.  Riddle,  M.A.    A'ew  Edition,   corrected  and 

I.    Square  12mo,  12s.     The  two  Dictionaries  wpa- 

— The  Latin-English  Dictionary,  7t. ;  the  English- 

L..;...  Dictionary,  os.  6d. 


A  COPIOUS   AND  CRITICAL  ENGLISH. 

LATIN  LEXICON.  Founded  on  the  German-Latin  Dic- 
(if>n:!iy  of  Dr.  Charles  Ernest  Georges.  By  the  Rev.  J.  E. 
1  .  M.A.,  and  theRev.  T.  Kehchever  AftNOU),  M.A. 


DIAMOND    LATIN-ENGLISH     DICTION- 

A.RY.  A  Guide  to  the  Meaning,  Quality,  and  Accentuation 
>f  Latin  Classical  Words.  By  the  Rov.  J  E.  Riddle.  Sew 
Edition.    Royal  32mo,  4*. 


HORACE.  A  Ni:w  Edition  of  the  TtXT. 
Edited,  with  a  tife.  By  Vhas  Milmaw.  With  Jo« 
Vignettea  from  the  Antique,   svo,  42/. 

ANTHOLOGIA     POLYGLOTTA  ;     Ob,    A 

Selectio.n  op  Vkhsicvs,  chiiHy  from  the  tireck  Antho- 
logy.    ByREV.  Hk.nrv  Wkllewlkv,  D.U.     Svo,  15/. 

MULLER'S  DORIANS  ;  Tramslatcl  hy  Tif- 
NKLL  and  Lewis.   Secoud  Edition.  Maps.    2  voU.  uvo,  26*. 

BUTTMAN'S  LEXILOGUS;  A  Ciitical  Ex- 
amination of  the  Meaning  and  Etymology  of  TaBhagert 
in  Greek  Writers.  Translated,  with  Notes,  by  FisiiLAKt:. 
Third  Edition.     Svo.  14*. 

BUTTMAN'S  GREEK  VERBS;  With  all 
the  Tenses— their  Formation,  .Meaning,  and  Usage,  accom- 
panied by  an  Index.  Translated,  with  Notes,  by  FibULAKB. 
Second  Edition.    Svo,  7*.  Gd. 

CARMICHAEL'S  GREEK  VERBS.     TiiEia 

FOK.MATIO.VS,  iBREGULAIHTIES,  AND  DEKECTS.      ScCOnii  Edi- 
tion.    FoBtSvo,  8*.  UJ. 

MITCHELL'S  PLAYS  OF  ARISTOPHANES. 

\\  uh  English  Notes.   Svo.  CLOUDS.  10*.— 2.  FROGS.  15*. 

VIII. 

THE  AGAMEMNON  AND  CHOEPHORCE 

OP  yESCUVLUS.  With  Notes,  by  Rev.  Dr.  Vkilb. 
Second  Edition.    Svo,  9*.  each. 

HASE'S  ANCIENT  GREEKS  ; 
Their  Public  and  Private  Like,  Manners,  a.vd  Cus- 
toms.   Translated  from  the  German.    Fcap.  svo,  5*.  lid. 

INTRODUCTIONS  TO  THE  GREEK  CLAS- 
SIC  POETS.  By  U.  N.  Coleridge.  Third  Edition. 
1 2mo,  5*.  6J. 

OUTLINES  OF  ENGLISH  LITERATURE 
For  the  use  of  Schoom.  By  Thos.  B.  Suaw.  Post  8vo,  12*. 

KING  EDWARD  Vlth's  LATIN/E  GRAM- 

MATIC.E  RUDIMENTA;  or,  An  Introduction  to  tho 
Latin  Tongue,  for  Use  of  Schools.  Seventh  Edition. 
12mo,  3*.  6d. 

XIII. 

KING  EDWARD  Vlths  LATIN  ACCI- 
DENCE; OR.  ELE.MENTS  OF  THE  LATI.N  TONGUE, 
for  the  Use  of  Junior  Classes.     12mo,  2*. 

XIV. 

ENGLISH  NOTES  for  LATIN  ELEGIACS; 

designed  for  early  proficients  in  the  Art  of  Latin  Versiticii- 
tion.    By  Rev.  VV.  OxKNHAM.    Si:coiid  Edition.     12mo,  4*. 

A  GREEK  GRAMMAR  FOR  SCHOOLS. 
Abridged    from     M.atthi.c      by    Blompield.      Sevent/t 

Edition,  revised  by  Edwards.    12mu,  3*. 

GREEK  xVCCIDENCE  FOR  JUNIOR 
CLASSES.  Abridged  from  Matthlk  by  BLo>iriELi>. 
Fourth  Edition,  reviicd  by  Eowaros.    12mo,  2*. 


1-2 


Mr.  MURRAY'S  LIST  OF  BOOKS.— Art,  Science,  &.c. 


ART,   SCIENCE,  AND    MEDICINE. 


THE  ANATOMY  OF  EXPRESSION  AS 
CONNECTED  WITH  TUE  FINE  ARTS.  By  the 
late  Sib  Charles  Bbll.  Fourth  Edition.  Plates.  Im- 
perial 8vo,  2ls. 

"The  artist,  the  writer  of  fiction,  the  dramatist,  the  man 
of  taste,  will  receive  the  present  work  with  gratitude,  and 
peruse  it  with  a  lively  and  increasing  interest  and  delight." 
—  Christian  Remembrancer. 

SKETCHES    OF   THE   HISTORY   OF 

CHRISTIAN  A){T.  By  Lord  Lindsay.  3  vols.  8vo.  3\s.M. 

"  As  a  contribution  to  the  Kistor.y  of  Art,  Lord  Lindsay's 
work  is  unquestiouiibly  the  most  valuable  -nhich  has  yet 
appeared  in  England,  and  w  ith  whatever  richness  of  detail 
succeedmg  writers  may  illustrate  them,  the  leading  lines 
of  Lord  Lindsay's  Chart  will  always  hencelorth  be  fol- 
lowed."—(jMar/er/^  Review. 

III. 

KUGLER'S  HISTORY  OF  PAINTING— 
(ITALIAN  SCHOOLS).  Edited,  with  Notes.  By  Sir 
Charles  Eastlakk.  Second  Edition.  Illusfrated  with 
100  Woodcuts.    Post  8vo,  2U. 

IV. 

KUGLER'S   HISTORY    OF    PAINTING— 

(GERMAN,  FLEMISH,  AND  DUTCH  SCHOOLS). 
Edited,  with  Notes,  by  Sir  Edmund  Head.    Post  8vo,  1 2s. 

HISTORY  OF  PAINTING  —  (SPANISH 
AND  FRENCH  SCHOOLS).  By  Sir  Edmund  Head.  Post 
8vo,  12*. 

"  These  volumes  present  us  with  a  view  of  the  schools  of 
painting,  and  we  recommend  them  as  very  candid  and 
excellent  productions." — Literary  Gazette. 

CONTRIBUTIONS  TO  THE  LITERATURE 
OF  THE  FINE  ARTS.  By  Sir  Charles  Eastlake. 
8vo.  y2s. 

AN  ENCYCLOPEDIA  OF  THE  ARTS  OF 

THE  MIDDLE  AGES.  By  the  Monk  Theophilus. 
Translated,  with  Notes,  by  Robert  Hendrie.    8vo,  2\s. 

"  Mr.  Hendrie  has  done  good  service  to  this  class  of  lite- 
rature, by  the  publication  of  this  woik."—  Sjiectator. 

VIII. 

THE  ARTS  OF  PAINTING  IN  OIL  AND 
ON  GLASS,  and  other  styles  described  in  several  un- 
published Manuscripts.  AVith  Notes  by  Mrs.  Merrifield. 
2  vols.  8vo,  2is. 

HISTORY    OF    MODERN    POTTERY 

AND  PORCELAIN.  By  Joseph  Marrvat.  AVith  Plates 
and  Woodcuts.  8vo,  3U.  6d.,  or  India  Proof,  mounted  on 
large  paper,  4  to. 

GOTHIC  ARCHITECTURE  IN  FRANCE  ; 

or.  An  Enquiry  into  the  Romanesque  and  Pointed  Styles, 
with  Notices  of  some  of  the  principal  Buildings  on  which 
it  is  founded.    By  Thomas  Inkersley.    Svo,  12s. 

CORRESPONDENCE   OF  JAMES  WATT, 

ON  HIS  Discovery  of  the  Theory  of  the  Co.mposition  of 
Water.    By  J.  P.  Muirhead.    Portrait.    Svo,  li)s.  Gd. 

.THE  ECONOMY  OF  MACHINERY  AND 
MANUFACTURES.  By  Charles  BAunAGE.  Fourth 
Edition.    Fcap.  8vo,  6s. 

NINTH  BRIDGEWATER  TPvEATISE. 

By  Charles  Babbage.    Second  F.ililiun.    8vo,  !)*.  lid. 

TABLE  OF  THE  LOGARITHMS  OF  THE 
NATURAL  NUMBERS  from  I  to  I08(HHi.  By  Charles 
Babbage.    Second  Edition.    Royal  Svo,  Gs. 


PHYSICAL    GEOGRAPHY.    By  Mart 

SoMERviLLE.  ^rd  Edition.  Portrait.  2  vols.  Fcap.  8vo,  12.?. 
"  We  have  followed  Mrs.  Soraerville  through  her  intellec. 
tual  journey  over  the  globe,  dcliahted  and  improved  by  her 
instruction." — North  British  Recieiv. 

XVI. 

THE  CONNEXION  OF  THE  PHYSICAL 
SCIENCES.  By  Mary  Somerville.  EiQhth  Edition. 
Plates.    Fcap.  8vo,  Uij-.  6r/. 

'•  Should  be  placed  in  the  h.inds  of  every  youth  the 
moment  he  has  mastered  the  general  rudiments  of  educa- 
tion." — Quarterly  Revieiv. 

A  MANUAL  OF  SCIENTIFIC  J]:NQUIRY, 

Prepared  for  the  Use  of  Officers  and  Travellers.  Edited 
by  Sir  J.  Herschell,  Bart.  2nd  Edition.  Maps.  Post8vo. 
"  Althoui;h  the  Manual  is  only  a  series  of  Instructions  a« 
to  what  points  an  enquirer  should  direct  his  attention  to, 
and  how  he  should  record  what  he  observes,  it  will  not  only 
be  found  an  admirable  book  tor  its  express  object,  but  may 
be  used  advantageously  by  all  travellers,  and  perused  with 
interest  at  home."— Spectator. 

XVIII. 

HUMBOLDT'S  COSMOS.  A  Plijsical  De- 
scription  of  the  Universe.  Translated  by  Col.  and  Mrs. 
Sabine.     Seventh  Edition.    3  vols.   Post8vo. 

"  Here  we  have  the  'authorised  edition'  translated  at 
the  wish  of  the  author,  who  has,  moreover,  read  a  great 
portion  of  the  proof-sheets." — Spectator, 

XIX. 

HUMBOLDT'S    ASPECTS    OF     NATURE 

IN     DIFFERENT     LANDS     AND      IN       DIFFERENT       CLIM-^TES. 

Translated  by  Col.  and  Mrs.  Sabine.  2  vols.  Post  8vo,  5s. 
"  The  only  English  translation    which  is  recognised  as 
authentic  by  the  distinguished  author." — Medical  Gazette, 

XX. 

FACTS  TO  ASSIST  THE  MEMORY,  IN 
VARIOUS  SCIENCES.  Second  Edition.  Fcap.  Svo,  Gs.  Gd. 
XXI. 

NAVAL  GUNNERY  ;  for  Officers  and 
Seamen  Gunners.  By  Sir  Howard  Douglas,  Bart, 
Srd  Edition.  With  Descriptions  of  the  New  Guns  intro- 
duced since  the  War.   Plates.    8vo. 

XXII. 

ON  PRACTICAL  SURVEYING  WITHOUT 
INSTRUMENTS.  By  G.D.  Burr,  of  Sandhurst.  Second 
Edition.    Woodcuts.    Post  Svo,  "is.  Gd. 

XXIII. 

BRITISH    ASSOCIATION   REPORTS. 

York  and  Oxford,  1831-32,  13s.  Gd.  Cambridge,  1833,  12s. 
Edinburgh,  1834,  15s.  Dublin,  18.3.".,  13s.  6(/.  Bristol, 
183d,  12s.  Liverpool,  18.37,  16s.  Gd.  Newcastle,  1838, 
15s.  Birmingham,  1839,  13s.  Gd.  Glasgow,  1840,  15s, 
Plymouth,  1841,  13s.  Gd.  Manchester,  1842,  10s.  Gd.  Cork, 
1843,  12s.  York,  1844,  20s.  Cambridge,  1845,  12.?, 
Southampton,  1846,  15s.  Oxford,  1847,  18s.  Swansea, 
1848,  9s.    Svo. 

XXIV 

SIR  JAMES  CLARK  ON  THE  SANATIVE 
INFLUENCE  OF  CLIMATE.  J^'ourttii'd.  Post  8vo,10s.6d 

XXV. 

SIR  HENRY   HALFORD'S    ESSAYS. 

Third  Edition,   Fcap.  Svo,  6s.  Gd. 

DR.  MAYO    ON    THE   PATHOLOGY   Of 

THE  HUMAN  MIND.    Fcap  Svo,  5s.6d. 

XXVII. 

DR.  ABERCROMBIE  ON  DISEASES    OE 

THE  STOMACH.^  Third  Edition.    Fcap.  8vo,  6s. 

XXVlll. 

DR.  GOOCH  ON  THE  MOST  IMPORTANT 
DISEASES  OF  WOMEN.     Second  Edition.     Svo,  )2s. 

XXIX. 

DR.  FERGUSON'S  ESSAYS  01 
PUERPEHAL  FEVER.    Post  Svo,  9s.  Gd. 


Mr.  MURRAY'S  LIST  OP  BOOKS.-Oeneral  I.lteratnre. 


13 


GENERAL    LITERATURE. 


LITERARY     HISTORY     OF      EUROPE. 

By  IIknky  llALLAM.     Third  lid itioii.    3  vols.  Xvo,  :)(J«. 

"  The  most  impurtant  contribution  to  literary  history 
irhich  English  libraries  have  received  for  many  years." — 
Edinburgh  Review, 

A  HISTORY  OF  SPANISH  LITERATURE, 
W^ith  Ciiticisms  .ind  Biographical  Notices.  By  Georgb 
riCK.N-OR.    3  vols.  8vo,  42*. 

III. 

ENGLAND  rPolitical,  Social,  and  IiuUistrial, 
In  the  middle  of  the  19th  Century.  By  W'm.  Joh.vsto.v. 
i  vols.  Post  Hvo. 

IV. 

THE  DEFENCELESS  STATE  OF  GREAT 
BRITAIN.    By  Sir  FnA.vcis  Uead,  Bart.    Post  8vo,  12s. 

THE  EMIGRANT. 
By  Sir  Francis  B.  Head.    Fi/lh  Edition.  Post  8vo,  Us. 

STOKERS    and     POKERS,— HIGH-WAYS 

AND  DliV-WAYS  ;  or,  tub  railroad,  electric  tele- 
ORAPM,  and  CONWAY  tubular  bridges.  By  Author  of 
'  Bubbles."    Post  8vo,  2s.  6d. 

VII. 

LAVENGRO,  The  Scholar,  The  Gipsy, 
AND  THE  PRIEST.  By  George  Borrow.  Portrait. 
3  vols,  post  8vo. 

REMARKABLE   CRIMES  AND   TRIALS. 

Prom  the  German.    By  Lady  Duff  Gordo.v.     8vo,  l-2s. 

"  Forms  the  most  interesting  specimen  existing  ia  our 
language." — Law  Muguzine. 

IX. 

HORTENSIUS.  An  Historical  Essay  on  the 
Office  and  Duties  of  an  Advocate.  By  VVillia.m  Forsyth. 
Post  8vo,  I2i. 

X. 

CONSOLATION  IN  TRAVEL  ;  or,  The  Last 
)jiys  of  a  Philosopher.  By  Sir  Humi-hry  Davy.  Fi/lh 
Edition.    AVoodcuts.    Fcap.  bvo. 

SPECIMENS  OF  THE  TABLE-TALK  OF 
AMOEL  TAVLOH  COLEIUDGE.  'llurd  Edition. 
Portrait.    Fcap.  8vo. 

XII. 

HAWKSTONE  ;  A  Tale  of  England  in  18—. 
Third  Edition.    2  vols.  fcap.  8vo,  12*. 

OUTLINES  OF  ENGLISH  LITERATURE. 

;y  Tho.mas  B.  Shaw.     Post  8vo,  Ms. 
"  Concise  and  comprehensive,  well  written,  and  charac- 
irisied  in  most  instances  by  a  fair  and  impartial  spirit." — 
burning  Poit, 

VISITS   TO   SPOTS   OF   INTEREST.     By 
IDWAKD  Jesse.    Woodcuts.    Post  8vo,  12s. 
"A  pleasing  and  popular  omnium  g'ltherum." — Lit.Gaz. 

NOTES  FROM  LIFe'  AND  FROM  BOOKS, 
^y  Henry  Taylor.  Third  Edition.  2  vols,  post  8vo,  ISt- 
PIIILOSOPHYOFTHE  MORALFEELINGS. 

By  JuH.N  Abercko.mbie,  M.D.  Eighth  Edition.  Fcap.  8vo,  4s. 

!>N  THE  INTELLECTUAL  POWERS. 
By  .ToHN  Abbrcrombie,  M.D.  Thirteenth  Edition. 
l\.iV.  8vo,  6s.  6d. 

(•N  ENGLISH  ETYMOLOGIES.  By  H. 
Fox  Talbot,  F.R.S.    8vo,  12s. 


ESSAYS  ON  THE  CONDUCT  OF  LIFE: 

AND  MORAL  NATURE  UP  MA.V.     By  Georok  LoMO. 

2  vole,  post  8vo,  12s. 

THE  STORY  OF  THE  BATTLE  OF 
WATERLOO.     By  Rev.  G.  R.  Gleio.    Post  Uvo,  (U. 

XXI. 

AN  ESSAY  ON  ENGLISH  POETRY.    With 

Notices  of  the  Poets.   By  Thomas  Campbell.    Post  8vo,  6/. 

CAMPAIGNS  AT  WASHINGTON  AND 
NEW  ORLEANS.    By  Rev.  G  R.  Glbig.  Po«t  avo,  it.  M 

XXIII. 

SIR    ROBERT     SALE'S    BRIGADE     IN 

AFFGIIANISTAN.  By  Rev.  G.  R.Glkkj.  Post  Uvo,  2s.C</. 

THE  WAYSIDE  CROSS.  A  Tale  of  the 
Carlist  War.    By  Capt.  E.  A.  Milmav.    Post  8vo,  2s.  6d. 

LIVONIAN  TALES.  'By  the  Author  op 
"Letters  from  the  Baltic."     Post  8vo,  2s.  G'/. 

BRACEBRIDGE   HALL.      By  Washingto.n 

Irving.     Post  iJvo,  (is. 

THE  AMBER-WITCII:  a  Trial  for  Witch- 
craft. Tr.anslated  by  Lady  Duff  Gordon-.  Post  (ivo,2s.(;c/. 
"  Has  completely  absorbed  our  interest."— Quur.  Heoiew. 

X.\V|i|. 

THE  FRENCH  IN  ALGIERS.  Translated 
By  Lady  Duff  Gordon.    Post  8vo,  2s.  6d. 

TALES  OF  A  TRAVELLER.  By  Wash- 
INGTON  Irvi.vg.    Post8vo,  6s. 

XX.X. 

ADVENTURES  o\  the  ROAD  to  PARIS  in 

1813-14.     From  the  Autobiography  of  Henry  Stekfe.vs. 
Post  8vo,  2s.  6d. 

XXXf. 

THE  LAW  AND  PRACTICE  OF  NAVAL 
COURTS  MARTIAL,  for  the  guidance  of  Naval  Officers. 
By  William  Hickjian,  R.N.    8vo. 

XXXIL 

A  PLEA  FOR  PEASANT  PROPRIETORS 

IN  IRELAND.    By  AV.  T.  Thor.nton.    Post  Uvo,  7s.  6d. 

XXXIII. 

ENGLISH  MISRULE  AND  IRISH  MIS- 
DEEDS. By  Aubrey  de  Verb.  2nd  Edit.  Post  8vo,7s.  6(f. 

PROGRESSION  BY  ANTAGONISM.  A 
THEORY.     By  Lord  Lindsay.     Uvo,  6s. 

RICARDO'S  POLITICAL  WORK.S.  With 
a  Biographical  Sketch.    By  J.  R.  McCulloch.   Uvo,  16s. 

XXXVL 

THE  QUARTERLY    REVIEW.    8vo,  6a. 

XXXVII. 

HART'S  ARMY  L 1  ST.  {PulU^hcd  Quarterly.) 
8vo,  5s. 

XSXVIII. 

ROYAL  NAVY  LIST.  {Published  Quar- 
terly.)   16mo,  2s.  6(i. 

IX  XIX. 

THE  NAUTICAL  ALMANACK,    8vo,  5*. 

•  XL. 

ROYAL  AGRICULTURAL  JOURNAL. 
8vo.  10s. 

XLI. 

ROYAL  GEOGRAPHICAL  JOURNAL,  8vo. 


NATURAL   HISTORY,  SPORTING,  &c. 


PRINCIPLES  OF  GEOLOGY  ;  or.  The 

^todern  Chanjres  of  the  Earth  and  its  Inhabitants.  By 
Sir  Charles  Lyell.  Eiiihtk  Editio/i.  "Woodcuts.  8vo,  IS.i. 
"  Should  be  read  by  every  one  who  takes  an  interest 
in  this  rising  branch  of  Natural  History." — Jameson's 
Juurnal. 

II. 

A  MANUAL  OF  ELEMENT  .\RY  GEO- 
LOGY ;  or,  The  Ancient  Changes  of  the  Earth  and  its 
Inhabitants.  By  Sir  Charles  Lybll.  Thii-d  Edition, 
revised.    Woodcuts.    1  vol.  8vo. 


GEOLOGY  OF  RUSSIA  IN  EUROPE  AND 
TITR  URAL  JIOUNTAINS.  By  Sir  R.  Murchisox, 
G.C.S.  AVith  Coloured  Map,  Tables,  Woodcuts,  &c. 
2  vols,  royal  4to,  8/.  8s. 

"  The  publication  of  this  system  forms  an  epoch  in  jreolo- 
gical  research.  .  .  The  author  has  developed  the  first  broad 
outlines  of  a  new  system  of  classification,  capable  of  effect- 
ing  for  geology  what  the  natural  system  of  Jussieu  had 
effected  for  botany.  It  is  a  work  which  must  necessarily 
become  a  standard  for  geologists." — Spectator. 

"  The  impulse  given  to  geology  by  the  publication  of  the 
•  Silurian  System,'  cannot  be  too  highly  appreciated.  The 
author  at  orice  took  his  place  in  the  foremost  rank  of  geo- 
loarists.  But  his  energy  did  not  permit  him  to  rest  satisfied 
with  the  accomplishment  of  so  noble  a  labour.  Determined 
to  compare  and  confirm,  he  followed  out  in  foreign  lands 
the  research  which  he  had  so  successfully  commenced  at 
home.  JIany  admirable  memoirs  have  resulted  from  his 
excursions  ;  but  the  crowning  triumph  is  the  great  work 
before  us." — Athenceum. 


THE  GEOLOGY  OF  THE  YORKSHIRE 

COAST    AND    THE     MOUNTAIN-LIMESTONE    DIS- 
TRICT.   By  Jou.s  Phillips.     Plates.    -2  vols.  4to,  84*. 

V. 

THE  INVISIBLE  WORLD,  AS  REVEALED 
BY  THE  MICROSCOPE  ;  or.  Thoughts  on  Animalcules. 
By  G.  A.  Mantell.    Second  Edition.    Plates.     16mo.  6*. 

"  The  object  of  this  volume  is  in  the  highest  degree  com- 
mendable. There  is  no  branch  of  science  more  interesting, 
none  whose  revelations  are  more  wonderful,  than  that 
which  unfolds  the  forms  and  nature  of  minute  creatures. 
Dr.  Mantell's  idea  is  a  happy  one."  —  Chambers's  Journal. 


JOURNAL  OF  A  NATURALIST. 

Fourth  Edition,  with  Woodcuts.    Post  8vo,  9*.  6il. 
"  A  book  that  ought  to  find  its  way  into  every  rural 
drawing-room  in  the  k\agAom."— Quarterly  Review. 


NATURAL  SYSTEM  OF  PLANTS;  or, 
A  Popular  Introduction  to  Botanv.  By  Mrs.  Loudon. 
Second  Edition.    Woodcuts.    Fcap.  Svo,  Gs. 

"  To  any  one  who  wishes  to  comprehend  the  names  and 
nature  of  plants,  this  charming  volume  can  be  safely  recom- 
mended."— Spectator, 


MUCK   MANUAL   FOR  FARMERS. 
A  Treatise  on  the  Nature  and  Value  of  Manures.    By  F. 
l-'ALKNER.    Second  Edition,  with  a  Glossary.     Fcap.  Svo. 

"  Addressed  to  the  practical  farmer,  and  written  as  such 
books  ought  to  he."— Bell's  Messenger. 

"  A  valuable  work  for  farmers." — British  Farmer's 
Magagine. 


THE  CHASE— THE  TURF— and  the  ROA 

By  Ni.MROD.     Plates.    Sew  Edition.    Post  Svo,  6*. 

X. 

FIELD  SPORTS  OF  FRANCE  ;  or,  Hunti 
Shooting,  and  Fishing  on  the  Continent.  By  Rodef 
O'CoN.voR.    Woodcuts.     12mo,  7*-  Gd. 

FIELD  NOTES  OF  A  SPORTSilAN  AI 
NATURALIST  IN  SUTHERLAND.  By  Charles 
John.    Woodcuts.    2  vols,  post  Svo,  18*. 


WILD  SPORTS  AND  NATURAL  HISTOl 
OF  THE  HIGHLANDS.    By  Charles  St.  John. 
Svo,  6s. 

"  The  work  is  full  of  interest  from  beginning  to  e 
Nest  to  Mr.  Scrope's  Days  of  Deer-Stalking,  and  Salir 
Fishing,  we  have  met  with  no  author  who  writes 
agreeably  on  those  subjects  than  Mr.  St.  John." — Times 

"  The  descriptions  are  worthy  of  Scott,  from  their  ch 
ness  and  power." — Britannia, 

THE  ROCKS  AND  RIVERS  of  SCOTLAI^ 

Containing  Angling,  Eagle  Shooting,  AVild  Goat  Stalk: 
&c.    By  John  Colquhoun.    Post  Svo,  6s.  6d. 

"  This  book  belongs  to  a  class  of  which  recent  years  ' 
given  us  what  is  now  almost  a  little  library.  Mr.  Colquhf 
we  believe,  was  the  first  (with  one  exception)  who  occui 
this  field  of  letters  :  assuredly  he  has  been  not  its  least ; 
cessful  cultivator.  He  enjoys  one  great  advantage  < 
nearly  all  his  compeers,  in  thnt  he  is  '  native,  and  to 
manner  born."' — Edinburgh  Evening  Courant. 

XIV. 

DAYS     OF     DEER-STALKING   IN    Ti 

FOREST    OF    ATHOLL.    By    William  Scrope,  F. 
Third  Edition.    Woodcuts.    Crown  Svo,  20*. 

"  Brief  and  imperfect  as  the  preceding  abstract  is 
think  that  it  will  fully  justify  the  high  praise  we  1 
bestowed  on  this  work,  and  induce  our  readers  to  sit  d. 
to  the  luxurious  repast  from  which  we  have  risen. 
Edinburgh  Review. 

XV. 

DAYS  AND  NIGHTS  OF  SALM< 
FISHING  IN  THE  TWEED.  By  William  Scr( 
F.L.S.     Plates.    Royal  Svo,  42*. 

"The  fisherman  will  find  in  this  volume  abundant 
instruction  in  his  art ;  the  naturalist  a  large  addition  tc 
knowledge  ;  and  the  general  reader  a  fund  of  adventure 
agreeable  and  exciting  narrative." — The  Critic. 


SALMONIA,  OR  DAYS  OF  FLY  FISHIl 
By  Sir  Humphry  Davy.  Fourth  Edition.  Woodc 
Fcap.  Svo. 

XVI  I. 

DOG-BREAKING  ;  the  most  Expeditk 
Certain,  and;  Easy  Method.  By  Lieut-Col.  Hutchin 
2nd  Edition.    Woodcuts.    Fcap.  Svo,  7*.  Crf. 

"  A  more  opportune,  a  pleasanter,  a  more  useful  boo 

I  the  sportsman  than  this  has  not  been  published  for  n 

a  day.     The  author  is  a   practical  man,  and  almost  e\ 

thing  he  writes  about  dog-breaking  may  be  relied  on 

Bell's  Life. 

XVIII. 

MAXIMS  AND  HINTS  FOR  AN  ANGL  i 
A^^TH  THE  MISERIES  OF  FISHING.  By  Rici  i 
Penn,  F.R.S.    Second  Edition.    Plates.    Fcap.  Svo, 

"  They  have  the  air  of  novelty,  and  charm  by  their  f  j 
nant  brevity,  sly  sarcasm,  and  oily  racinesg." — Quarj 
Review, 


Post  Svo,  price  2s.  6cZ.  each  Part  (or  Two  Parts  as  a  Volume), price  6s.  in  cloth. 

MURRAY'S   HOME  AND  COLONIAL  LIBRARY, 

CU.Ml'LKTE    IN   37   VOLUMES. 

This  Series  of  attractive  and  useful  works,  by  approved  authors,  was  clesipncd  to  furnish  tlic  IIiohkst  LrrKiiATi'BR 
lie  day,  at  the  lourst  possible  ]>rici\  and  was  conimencod  in  consequence  of  the  Acts  which  had  passed  tlie  HritiMli 
•lianient  for  the  protection  of  Copyriglit,  and  the  rijjlits  of  IJritisti  autliors  and  luihlishcrs,  by  the  entire  cxcluKiun 
li  in  Great  UaiiArN  and  hkr  Colonik.s,  of  forc'if,'n  pirated  editions;  and  tlie  volumes  liave  been  issued  at  a  price 
icli  places  them  within  the  means  not  only  6f  the  Colonists,  but  also  of  the  less  wealtliy  classes  at  liouie,  who  thua 
icfited  by  the  widening  of  the  market  for  our  literature. 

M 

p  The  aim  of  the  Publisher  has  been  to  produce  a  Series  of  Works  as  entertaining  as  romances,  but  conveying  at 
same  time  sound  information. 


ill: 


A     PERMANENT     LIBRARY     OF     ENTERTAINMENT. 


LIST  OF  WORKS  INCLUDED  IN  THE  SERIES. 


Vol.  I. 

BORROWS   BIBLE  IN  SPAIN. 

'  There  is  no  taking  leave  of  a  book  like  t)iia."—Athen<eum. 

Vols.  2  and  .3. 

ISIIOP  HEBER'S  JOURNAL  IN  INDIA. 

[if  One  of  the  most  delightful  books  in  the  lansuage." 

Quarterly  Review. 
Vol.4. 

IPxBY    AND    MANGLES'    TRAVELS. 

Irl)y  and  Mangles'  interesting  Travels." — Lit.  Gazette. 

rijlINKWATER'S  SIEGE  OF  GIBRALTAR. 

ruly  a  legend  of  the  United  Services." — Cf.  S.  Mngazine. 
Vol.  5. 

h  HAY'S  MOROCCO  AND  THE  MOORS. 

A  highly  interesting  work." — Greenock  Aduerliaer. 

LETTERS  FROM  THE  BALTIC. 

"A  series  of  charming  descriptions." — Examiner. 

Vol.  6. 

THE  AMBER  WITCH. 

icifothing  has  so  absorbed  our  interest." — Quarterltj  Rev. 

;°pUTHEY'S  CROMWELL  AND  BUNYAN. 

Southey's  admirably  written  lives." — yurksliireman. 

Vol.  7. 

I*IS.  MEREDITH'S  NEW  SOUTH  WALES. 

upressions  recorded  with  fidelity." — Newcastle  Courant. 

LIFE  OF  SIR  FRANCIS  DRAKE. 

jo  Jlr.  Barrow  has  enriched  our  biographical  literature." 
'  Edinburgh  Review. 

"^  Vol.  8. 

AE  COURT  OF  CHINA,     ^y  Father  Ripa. 

n  s  curious  a  book  as  any  that  has  appeared." — Spectator, 
,;1lEWIS'S  RESIDENCE  IN  THE  WEST 

INDIES. 

•These  highly  amusing  s'ories." — Quarterly  Review. 
Vol.  9. 

STRETCHES    IN    PERSIA.      By   Sir  John 

LCOLM. 

if(^  Has  all  the  interest  of  our  amusing  friend  Hajji  Baba." 

Quarterly  Reriew. 


Vol.  10. 

FRENCH  IN  ALGIERS. 
"  Of  romantic  and  absorbing  interest."  — JVoWAern  W/ii^. 

HISTORY  OF  THE  FALL  OF  THE  JESUITS. 

"  A  candid  and  moderate  work." — C/ieltenfiam  Juunvil. 

Vol.  11. 

BRACEBRIDGE  HALL. 

"  The  most  charming  work  ever  written  by  Washington 
Irving. ' ' — Cambridge  Chronicle. 

Vol.12.    Price  a.f.M. 

DARWIN'S  VOYAGE  OF  A  NATURALIST. 

"  Blr.  Darwin  is  a  first-rate  laudacape  painter." 

Quarterly  Review. 

Vol.  13. 

LORD  MAHON'S  LIFE  OF  CONDE. 

"A  very  skilful  and  interesting  narrative." 

Quarterly  Review. 

Vol.  14. 

BORROWS  GYPSIES  IN  SPAIN. 
"Tliese  singularly  attractive  pages."— ii/erarj/  Gazette. 

Vol.  15. 
THE   MARQUESAS   ISLANDS.      By  Her- 
mann Melville. 
"  This  book  is  excellent— quite  first-rate."— iJ'acA-ii'oorf. 

Vol.  16. 

LIVONIAN  TALES.     By  a  Ladv. 

"  We  like  these  Livonian  Tales  much." — Athcnarum. 

THE  MISSIONARY  IN  CANAD.V. 

"  Reminds  one   of  the   '  Vicar  of  Wakhkikld.'  " 

Morning  Put, 

Vol.  1/. 

SALE'S  BRIGADE  IN  AFFGHANISTAN. 

"  One  of  the  noblest  records  of  military  adventures." 

Morning  Chronicle. 

LETTERS  FROM  MADRAS.     By  a  Lady. 
"  A  welcome  addition  to  our  literary  store." — Uritannia. 


Vol.  18. 

HIGHLAND  SPORTS.    By  Charles  St.  John. 

"  We  would  uot  desire  a  more  pleasant  companion." 

Murning  Past. 

Vol.  1.0. 

TAWPAS  JOURNEYS.     By  Sir  F.  B.  He.4d. 

"  Has  all  the  interest  of  a  novel." — Eclectic  Reeiew, 

THE  TWO  SIEGES  OF  VIENNA. 
"  A  valuable  collection  to  history." — Athenceum. 

Vol.  20. 
FORD'S  GATHERINGS  FROM  SPAIN. 

"  The  best  book  on  Spain  that  has  ever  appeared."  • 

Quarteity  Review. 
Vol.2]. 

SKETCHES  OF  GERMAN  LIFE. 

"  A  work  deserving  much  attention." — Athenceum, 

Vol.  22. 
THE   SOUTH    SEAS.     By    Hermann    Mel- 

VILLK. 

"  A  companion  after  our  own  hearts." — Times. 
Vol.  23. 

GLEIG'S  BATTLE    OF  WATERLOO. 

"This  account  is  instinct  with  spirit." — Literary  Gazette. 

Vol.  24. 

EDWARDS'S  VOYAGE  UP  THE  AMAZON. 

"  This  book  is  full  of  novelty." — Athenceum. 
WAYSIDE  CROSS.     By  Captain  Miljian. 
"A  spirited  and  interesting  little  story." — Athenceum. 

Vol.  25. 

ACLAND'S  POPULAR  ACCOUNT  OF 
INDIA. 

"Must  interest  all  who  have  friends  in  India." 

Theologian. 

GLEIG'S  CAMPAIGNS  AT  WASHINGTON. 

"  The  Personal  Narrative  of  an  eye-witness.'' — Times. 

Vol.  26. 
RUXTON'S  ADVENTURES  IN  MEXICO. 

"  Full  of  interest  and  adventure." — Athenceum. 

Vol.  27. 
PORTUGAL    AND    GALLICIA.     By  Lord 
Carnarvon. 

"  A  very  remarkable  work." — Quarterly  Review. 


Vol.  28. 

GLEIG'S  LIFE  OF  ROBERT  LORD  CLl  \  E, 

"  One  of  the  best  popular  biographies."  —  iipe<:tu(  "■, 
Vol  29. 

HAYGARTH'SBUSII  LIFE  IN  AUSTRALIA. 

"Descriptive  of  wan,  animals,  nature,  and  society.  " 

Spect'ihir, 

STEFFENS'S     ADVENTURES    ON    THE 

ROAD  TO  PARIS. 

"  Original,  and  amusing  in  its  style  and  conduct." 

Literary  Uuzi  ttt. 
Vol.  30. 

TALES  OF  A  TRAVELLER.  By  Washing  roii 
Irving. 

"Furnishes  food  for  delectable  entertainment." 

Literary  Gazrttt, 
Vol.  31. 

CAMPBELL'S  LIVES  OF  THE   BRITISH 

POETS. 

"The  rise,   advance,  and    the   fluctuations  of   Enirlish 
poetry." — Sun. 

Vol.  32. 

LORD   MAHON'S  HISTORICAL  ESSAYS. 
Selected  from  Contributions  to  the  Quarterly  Revicic- 
Vol.  33. 

STOKERS    AND   POKERS,  HIGH-WAYS 
AND  DRY-WAYS. 

"A   very    graphic   and    effective  series  of  sketches."— 
Examiner. 

THE  LIBYAN  DESERT.    By  Bayle  St.  John. 

"  A  most  picturesque  and  agreeable  description." 

Morning  Herald, 
Vol.  34. 

LETTERS  FROM  SIERRA  LEONE.     By  a 

Lady. 

"A  most  animated  and  sprightly  picture." — John  Bull. 
Vol.  35. 

GLEIG'S  LIFE  OF  SIR  THOMAS  MUNRO. 

"  The  highly  interesting  contents  of  Mr.  Gleig's  work." 

Quarterly  Rcvievs, 
Vol.  36,    Price  8*.  Gd. 
MEMOIRS   OF   SIR   FOWELL  BUXTON.  I 

By  HIS  Son.  | 

"  A  thoroughly  well-written  biography." 

Evangelical  Magazine. 
Vol.  37. 

OLIVER     GOLDSMITH.     By   Washington 
Irving. 

"  This  excellent  and  entertaining  life." 

Morning  Hmihl 


The  "IIoME  AND  Colonial  Library"  having  been  sustained  during  a  period  of  Six  years  with  unab  .i.l 
success,  Mr.  Murray,  anxious  to  guard  against  the  objection  of  overloading  the  subscribers  with  too  large  aad 
cumbrous  a  series  of  books  of  one  size,  decided  on  concluding  the  work  with  its  thirty-seventh  volume.  He  is  tboi 
enabled  to  offer  to  the  public  a  compact  and  portable  u'ork,  the  bulk  of  which  does  not  exceed  the  compass  of  a  .um  ' 
shelf,  or  of  one  trunk,  suited  for  all  classes  and  all  climates— of  which  the  interest,  value,  and  po_pularity  is  not  )i: 
to  be  impaired  by  lapse  of  time. 

At  the  same  time,  the  barge  circulation  of  the  "  Home  and  Colonial  Library,"  and  the  continued  demand  for 
numbers,  convince  him  that  there  is  an  unabated  desire  <m  the  part  of  tlie  public  for  reading,  at  once  cheap,  pop 
and  instructive  ;  lie  is  therefore  preparing  speedily  to  put  forth  a  New  Library,  ythicii,  though  equally  portable,  si 
be  even  more  elegant  in  typography  than  the  last,  and  shall  surpass,  or  at  least  maintain,  its  literary  value 
general  attraction. 

Uniform  with  the  above  Series. 

HUMBOLDT'S   COSMOS.     {Sabine's  authorised  Edition.')    3  vols,  post  8vo. 

HUMBOLDT'S  ASPECTS  OF  NATURE.     {Saline's  authorised  Edition.)    2  vols,  post  8vo 


BBADBURY    and    KVANS,  printers,  WHjTEFRIASS, 


i 


m 
•  ft 

'^ 
CO 

ft, 


CO: 


O   ^ 
CO  -H 


bo 


Pk^ 


(D 


-9 


rH 

00 


•Vh 


tu3 


ft 


..•siK'l  "»?"!   J'H,.  'M  ••3p«n 


siqi    tuojj 


pjBD 


9AOUJ 


:iou 


AHVHan 
oiMOHOi  jo  AiisaaAisn 


illllllllllillHIIIIIIIPCllllHIKlHi: 

iiilltllitt'HII!!||!t;:p|li!llll|||||!i 


