ORIENTAL  COMMERCE; 

< ONTVININO 

A GEOGBAPHIVAL  DESCRIPTION 

OF  THE  riUNl  IPAE  PLACES  IN 

The  East  Indies,  China,  and  Japan, 

WITH 

Their  Produce,  Manufactures,  and,  Trade, 

INCLUDING  THE  CGAS'l’INCi  OR  COl  NTRY  TRADE  FROM  l‘OR1'  TO  FORT, 

ALSO 

THE  RISE  AM)  PROdRESS  OF  THE  TRADE 

or  I ME  VMOOUS 

EUEOPEAN  NATIONS  Wl'JMl  THE  EA-TJEJ^N  W(JRLD. 

PAUTICULXRLY  TIMT  OF  THE 

EJVGEISH  EViA'T  IJVBJA  C OMPAJVY , 

FROM  the 

BISCOVEHY  OF  TIIK  FASSAC^E  HOUND  THE  GAPE  OF  GOOD  HOPE 

TO  HIE 

PRESENT  PERIOD; 

wirii 

An  Account  of  the  Company’s  Estahlislimcnts,  Revenues,  Debi'^,  Assets,  &c.  at  Home  and  Abroad. 

DiJiued  from  iiuthenOc  J)o<umni/s,  und  fouiultd  njnin  pun  Inal  hhiirrnnre  vhtainctl  in  (he 
Coni  it'  of  Seven  I'ot/agts  to  Jniltn  and  (’liinti^ 

By  AVILIJAM  MILBURN,  Esq. 

Of  the  IIonourxble  F.ast  India  Company's  Service. 

VOLUME  THE  FIRST. 

’■  1 1 

UhMXtN: 

I’niNTKO  FOR  THE  AUTIIOR, 

AND  rUlU.ISnED  BY  BLACK,  PARUV,  &■  Co.  No.  7,  LI'ADliNIIALL  STliEET. 


1813, 


18  3^1 


S.  M'Dowall,  Phinter, 
XiEADENHAi^L  Street. 


CONTENTS 


INTRODUCTION. 

Risk  \xu  Rroort.^s  of  tub  Commehce  uetwkkm  Knoi.and  and  the  R\st  Indifs. 


( HAPTF.u  r.— Tin:  madkiras. 

Porto  Sancto — The  Deserta^ — Madeira,  Deserijitioii— -(’oins,  \Vei<^lils,  ami  Measiiren — y\rtie!e.'*  of  Import—* 
Amount  of  Imjxirts  and  I’Aports — I'-xports — DenominatiojH  of  Wines — 'I’lieir  Prices — imported 
into  British  India  in  ISOo — Prices  of  Madeira  at  Boinhay — I’iast  India  Com])any’s  Uej^ul.  lions  relative  to 
Madeira — Import  and  ICxport  Duties — Port  ChaiTros — Port  Re'rulalu)ns — I*rovision.s  and  Refresh luents^^ I toR 


( HAPTKR  II.— THE  CANARY  ISEANDS. 

Their  Number — Lancerota;  Description,  Trade,  Ac. — Euertaventnra,  Descript  ion ; Trade,  iKt. — Grand  Canaria; 
Dcseription,  'fradc,  «Ste. — IVnerilh- — Santa  Oiiz,  Description — Coins — Wei^lils  — >IeasiM es  — Imjxn ts  liom 
London,  and  tlicir  Amount — Articles  f>f  which  they  eonsi>(od — Exports — Duties — Pint  Rei^adalions  and 
Charges— Provisions  .and  Refreshments — Orolava;  Dcscn))tHMi — Palma,  l)escrij)tion,  Trade,  tvc. — (lomero; 
Description— Hierro;  Description — Orchil). i M'ced — Rose  Wood  to  i6 


CHAPTER  HI.— CAPE  DE  VERD  IM.ANDS. 

Their  Number — .S.al — Bon.avista — Mayo — St.  .lago;  Descrijition — Pmlo  Pr.iya:  Naval  Aetion  tbere — Iiaport*;  and 
Exports — Cloths  m.annfacti.red — Provi‘«ions  and  Refreshments — l'og») — Brava — St.  Nieh(das — St.  laina— 
St.  Yjnrcnt^^St.  1/  to  If? 


CHAPTER  IV.— SOUTH  AMERICA. 

Ports  visited  by  East  India  Sliips  in  Brazil — St.  S.ilv.idor;  Inscription — Coins,  \Vcights,  and  Measures — Imports 
and  Exports — Port  Regulations — Provisions  and  Refreshments — Rio  de  Janeiro;  Description — Coins,  tVcjglits, 
and  Measures — Imports  from  England,  .and  their  Amount — Exports  to  England,  and  tljoir  Amount— State 
of  the  Portuguese  Trade  with  the  British  .Settlements  in  the  East  Indies — Import  and  Export  Dutich— 
Provisions  and  Refreshments — Rio  de  la  Platii — .Maldonaldo;  Description — Provisions  and  Refrc.simients— 
Monte  Videp;  Description — (’oins,  Weights,  and  Measures— Impt»rts  from  England — l-ixports  to  England— 
ToUl  of  Importa  and  Exports— Trade  of  Spain  witli  South  America — Buenos  Ayres;  Dcscription^^^^  ‘^0to.>2 


CONTENTS. 


CHAITER  V.— CAPE  OF  GOOD  HOPE. 

Limits  ofilie  Colony-^Wlicn  first  visited  l)y  Eiirt>pe;ms — When  taken  liy  the  English — Saldinha  Bay ; Description- 
Capture  of  two  Dutch  IHccts  ill  the  Ihiy — Provisions  and  Refreshments — Table  Bay — Cape  'fown; 
Description — Coins,  Wci^dits,  and  Measures — fable  of  Specie  current  in  the  Colony — European  Articles 
saiitable  to  the  (ape  Market — Imports  from  India — Surat  Piece  Goods— Madras  Piece  Goods — Ben^i^al  Piece 
Ooods — Other  Articles  of  B<‘n/ral  Produce — Batavia  Produce — Articles  of  Export — Ollicial  Value  of  Imjiorts 
and  l''\j)(»rts — Cape  Wines — Import  and  Export  Duties — Port  Regulations — Hire  of  Waggons  and  Horses— 
Provisjoiih  and  RclVeshmcnts — False  Bay — Loss  of  the  Colebrooke  East  Indianian — Simon's  'fown; 
Description — Imports  and  Exports — Provisions  and  Refreshments — Mossel  Bay;  Description — Provisions 
and  Rcireshincnts — Plcltemberg's  Bay;  Description — Coins,  tS:c. — Imports  and  Exports — Pro\isions  and 
Bcfreshmeiits — Algoa  or  Z wartkop’s  Bay ; Description — Imports  and  Kx})orts— Provisions  and  Refreshments — 
Loss  ot  tJie  Doddingtoi^  I'aist  liidianiaii  o.l  tti  o 1? 


CHAPTER  VI.— EAST  COAST  OF  AFRICA. 


Natal;  Deseriptitm — Provisions  and  Refreshments — Delagoa B;iy ; Description — Imports  and  pA'ports — Provisions 
and  Refreshments — Inhnmban — Sofala;  Description — Imports  and  ICxports — Provisions  and  Refreslnnents— 
Great  Cuama  Ri\er — (Juiliiiiane — Mosambiipie;  Description — Clause  in  the  rreaty  with  Portugal  relative 
to  the  ISlavc  Trade — Coins,  Weights,  anti  Measures — Imports  and  I'Aj)orts — 'Priide  with  British  India— 
Provisions  and  Refreshments— Articles  procurable — Amber — Ambergris — (’olumbo  Root — (’owrie.s — Ele- 
phants’ Teeth — Elephants'  Hair — I lippopotamiis  Teeth — 'rortoise-shell — (Jiierimba  Islands — Macaloe— 
Mongallou  River — Lindy  River — (Juiloa;  Description — Iinjiorts  and  Ivxports — Pnn  isionsand  Refreshments— 
Zanzibiir—Mombas— Melinda—  Patte—J uba — Brava— Magadoxa — Capi*  ( i uardafui — Barbora— /eila*v55  to  (>9 


CHAPTER  VIE— ISLANDS  OFF  THE  EAST  COAST  OF  AFRICA. 

Madagascar;  its  Extent — St.  Augustine’s  Bay — Articles  of  Trade — Mode  of  .salting  Provisions — Moroundava 
— Bembatook  Bay — New  Massalege — Passaridava — Fort  Daupliin — Manouro — ’Painatav e — I'oul  Point- 
Si.  Mary’s  Island — iViitoiigil  Ba\ — Ra\,insera,  a Spice;  directions  bow  locluise — Comoro  Islands;  their  Number 
—Comoro — Moliilla — Mayotta — .fobauna — Imports  ;iik1  Ex)M>rts — Anchorage  Fees,  Presents,  ^c. — Provisions 
and  Refrc.shineiits — Socotra — Pro^isions  and  Rcfrc.shmciits — Aloes;  Directions  how  to  cliuse  tlu*nu,7.'l  to  80 


C HAPTER  VIIL— 'J1IE  RED  8Ey\,  OR  GULF  OF  ARABIA. 

Straits  of  Balx'hnandel — Places  on  the  Abys,sinian  side  of  the  Gulf — Dalialac — Massuah;  Description— Coins, 
Weights,  and  Mi’asures — Imports — Exporl.s — Import  and  Ex))ort  Duties — Provisions  and  Refreshments— 
Port  Mornington — Badmir — Siiakin;  Dc-scriptioii — Provisions  and  Refre.shnient.s — Cos.sier;  Description— 
Jni])orts  and  Exports — Suez;  Ihseription — Coins,  Weights,  and  Measures — Imports — Exports — Provisions 
ami  Refreslnnents — Tor;  Di*seription — Provisions  and  Refreshments — Yarnbo;  Deseri[)tion — Judda;  Descrip- 
tion— C oins — Weights — Ini})orts — Piece  (ioods — Other  Articles  of  Import — I mports — Duties  and  Pre.sents — 
Port  Charges,  ikv. — Instriu  lions  relative  to  tlie  'IVade  of  Judda — Relative  Value  of  Coins — Provisions  and 
Rcfresluiients — Loheia ; Description— Coins,  V\  eights,  and  Measures— Duties— Provisions  and  Refreshments— 


(ONTENTS. 


Modfula;  Description— Bceil(‘facki(';  D('scripti<»n — Coins,  Wn^lits,  and  Measures— ^CofTc’c  Trade Moehn; 

Description — Coiiis,  Weijuhts,  and  Mcasuii's — ’I’rade  hel\^ecn  tin*  lUsl  Sea  and  Ik'ilixh  IndM— d’lMde  with 
otlu'i*  I’laces — Duties,  Port  (.'har^-s,  and  Prestaits — Proxisinn^  aiul  PefVcsIinu  nts — Arln  les  proeiiralde  at 
Mocha — Acacia — Acorns — Asphaltnni — Ikdni  of  (Idead — Ci\  et — Collet — Dates — I lennodaetx  K — dnncins 
Odoratus — Mx  rrh — Natron — Khinoceros*  I h»rns — Ithmoceros'  I Iides — Sai;apeiiun» — S»ilep — S<  nna — Sliark’s 
Fins— (ruin — *S | to  i lo 


( flAPTl'P  IX,— (OAST  OF  \HAHI\  TO  TIIF  PFdCsIAN  (K  LF. 

Aden;  Description — Trade — Articles  smtaldc  to  the  Market — Pnix  isimis  anti  Periedmieiits — .\raeiila  P.iy— 
Sliahar — Kisseeii— I )olar — MtU'ehat— Ma/a‘ir,i  f''land — |{osal;4.ite — /oar — K iii  lat  — M O'.eat  ; I )eseriplion— 
(\)ins  and  Weij^hts — 'I'rade  helwecii  liritish  India,  and  the  (inllsof  Peisiaand  Arahi.i — Ikil.ime  in  I’axonr 
of  British  India — I'rado  witli  other  Places — Duties — Provisum-,  and  Bt  rrcslniiciits — lUiika^v*,.^  Ill  to  II7 


CHAPria(  X.— (iCLF  OF  PJ-HSIA. 

lias-el-Khiina — Destruction  of  Pirate  Wssids  Xc. — Ikihretui  Islands — INmiI  l•ishery — (\ilif— Ornne — Biissorah; 
Desrri[)tion — (’oiiis — Weights  and  Measures — 'Pradc  to  anil  fri»m  Pntisli  India — Imports  and  I’Ap«»it>  ♦Voin 
Bombay  and  Matlras — Surat  Piece  (roods  suitable  to  the  Biissorah  M.irket — Bcii^mI  Piece  (iootls — Iiisiruelii 
oils  relative  to  the  'Frade  of  Biissorah — Duties  and  Port  ( harncs — Prox  isions  and  Bcfrcshnicnts — Bandarcek 
— Kor^o — Karak— Bushire  ; Description — C\»iiis,  Weights,  and  Mcasurt's — Imports  and  I'Aports— Prox  isU 
fins  and  Rcfreshineiits — Busheab — Kisnns — ( )nnns , Description — (iombroon  , 1 )cscriplion — Coins — \\  ci^ht.s 
and  Measures— Imports  and  Exports — Articles  proenrabh^  in  the  (Jiilf  of  Persia — Almonds — Aminoniacmii 
Gum — Arabic  (inm — Arsenic — Assalictiil.i — AnripcjAmeiilnin — Bdcllnmi  ( inm — Rc/oar  Stones — Rninstone 
(’araniina  Wool — Carpets — (.'oloipiiiilid.i — ( ’mnniiii  Seed — l.arlli  Bed — I Jemi  ( Iinii — ( bilbaiimn  ( inni — (ialls 
— (lo^nl — 1 1 \ poeisles — Jujubes — Ivisiniss<*s — FabdaiiiiinC  Inm — Lapis  lai/nli — Lapis  Fiitiie — Mastic — ( Iliba- 
iimii  Gum — Opoponax  (luin — Pearl  Shells — Bose  Malocs — Bose  Water — Buinas — Sal  Amiiioniac — Sarco- 
colla  Gum — Sehiraz  Wine — Scammony — Worni>cc<l  I LS  to  1 


CHAPTER  XL— COASTS  OF  PLBMA,  S(  IM)V,  A\D  GLZ/EB  \'J\ 

(\)ast  of  Persia — Jasipies — Posin<*e — Chcxx.ibad  — Clutter  Bay — (Iiiadcl — Soinnicaiiy — Coast  of  Sciiidv*— 
Crotchey;  Description — Imports  and  l Apiirts — Duties — Proxisjons  and  Bciii’shmeiits— Biv  cr  Si  indy  or 
Indus — lairibiindcr — Tati  i — Aiinini'abnndcr ; (’oiiis — W'd^hts  and  Measures — Imports  and  JAports— 
Duties,  Presents,  Xe. — Frade  bet x\ ecu  the  Biiti'^h  Sctllements  and  the  Coasts  (»f  Siindy  and  Cnteh — (Itilf 
ofCiiteh — Mnddi;  Description — Coins,  Weiirhts,  and  Measures — Imports  anil  lApoits — Provisions  and 
Refreshments — Bate — ^h^at — ( loointee — Coast  of  ( Inz/erat — Dm  ; 1 )e‘'ei  iplion — Now  ahnnder — B.idjapore — 
JallVebat— Searbet — Goapnant  Point— Go»o  ; Description — Prox  isioiis  and  Befreshinents.v»v»^,%  J l.j  to  Ij'f 


CHAPTI'B  XIL— COAST  OF  INDIA  FROM  CAMBAY  TO  BOMBAY. 

Cambay;  Description — ('oiiis,  Wei^dits,  and  Measures — 'Fradi*  between  Bntisli  India  and  tiie  Northern  Parts  ot’ 
Guzzerat— Duties,  Port  (Jiar/^es,  Xe. — Jnmhaseer — Baroaeh — Sural;  Description — Coins — W'ei^lits,  and 
Measures — Traile  of  Surat  and  adjaieiit  \ ill.i^es  xvitli  British  Indi.i — 1‘Aports  to  the  Gulfs  of  Persia  and 

Arabia Trade  with  tlie  Portuguese,  Dnleh,  and  French — Custom  House  Beiiiilations — Prox  isions  and  Be- 

freshments— Dumaunj  Dcbcriptivn — Biiissem;  Descnplion  lot  to  Kks 


CONTENTS. 


CHATTER  XIII.— BOMBAY. 

Description— Coins — Remarks  on  Coins;  llicir  WVi^ht,  Alloy,  iS:c. — Weiglit'.—McM^invs— Commerce  of  Bonv 
bay  and  Surat — Conniifrce  with  liOfidon — Extracts  from  the  Act  of  Tarli.imcnt  authoi  i/ini;’  IndividiiaE  tra- 
ding to  tin*  Ib-itisli  Settlements  in  India — Company's  Regulations  rtlati\(‘  to  Tninm/^e  fiiniislied  under  the 
Act — louropean  Articles  suitable  to  the  Bombay  Market — Trice  Current  of  EuropiMii  Articles — Commerce 
witli  Hamburgh — nenmark — Lisbon — Madeira — Statement  of  Commerce  with  Foreign  i'urope — (‘ominerce 
>vith  the  Cnited  States  of  America — Commerce  with  the  Nortluin  Tarts  (if  (hi7/erat — Surat  and  the  adja- 
cent ^ illa^^es — Ihnnbay — Coast  of  Coromandel — Coasts  of  Malabar  and  C.hmim — Bengal — Ce\  Ion — Statement 
of  (\nnmerce  with  British  Asia — Commeree  wdtli  the  (lulf  of  Arabia — (iulfof  1\  r^la — Casbinere,  i'^c.— 
(biteli  and  Seindy — Bassein  and  Villaires — Coa,  and  the  Coast  of  Cone.in — 1V:mi — Tulo  Tman/jf,  and  the 
Eastward — Batavia — China — \birious  Tlaees — Statement  of  the  (‘onmurte  with  l''orii«»n  Asia,  Ac. — (ieneral 
Recapitulation — Balance  in  fax  our  of  Bombay  and  Surat — Trie(‘  (’urrent  ot‘  East  India  (mods — Import  and 
Export  Duties — ('ustoui  House  Renful.itions — Ih-oulations  respeetiin^*  Serx.iiils — Itates  of  Tilota^'C — Liirht- 
Jiouse  dues — \\  barfa^^e — Dock  Reo'ulations  and  Ch;iri;es — Regulations  relative  to  Salutes  and  (luiipowdcr 
—Sliip  Owner’s  Allowanci's — SeameiTs  Wai;es,  Sci\ — (‘ompany's  R(‘i;ul  itions  n^l  itix c to  Cotton  carried  in 
tlicii*  Sliips  to  ( liina — Rates  of  Trci^ht  from  Bombav  to  (’hina — List  ol'  Merehanls  resichuit  at  Bombay— 
U;ites  of  Commission — Mereliaiit  \ essels  beloii'^in*^  to  Bombay — Insurance  Companies — Stiitcment  (»f  Los, sen 
from  LSOo  to  18()S,  by  Ca])tureand  Sea  Risks — (’ompaiiCs  Imports  from  I'n/,;land — Com})an>’s  Exports  to  I’.n/(- 
land — J{(‘\  eimes — Disburscaiients — Asset- — ( *ov(’rnment  Securities — Bombay  Army — Bay  and  Allowances— 
ib'^ulatioiis  relative  to  Eurlou^li  and  Retirement — Rates  of  Passage  Money  to  and  from  Europe— Regulati- 
ons relative  to  Bajrn-a/^e,  outward  and  bonieward-!)ouud — Reji^ulations  relative  to  cleanup^  l*rt‘sents,  Wine, 
Ba^Tra^e,  i\:c. — List  of  establislied  l"ees  thereon — b',xtraet  from  the  Act  of  Parliament  relative  to  ()l)j(‘cts  of 

Natural  History — Duties  on  \ari(jus  Last  India  Commodities  imported  as  J^resents,  &.e. List  of 

inanufaetured  and  iinmanufaetured  (Joods — List  of  prohibited  Goods,  and  Jaius  relative  thereto — Bombay 
Marine — Pay  and  Allowances — Re^rulations  relalixe  to  Eurlou«:h  and  Retirement — Coni))arative  Rank  of  the 
Olliccrs  of  the  Company’s  Ships  and  (\»mpan\’s  Army — Rank  of  Officers  in  the  Army  and  Navy — Provisions 
and  Refreshments — Articles  procurable  at  Bombay — Alkali — Anaeardium — Animo  Gum — Arrack — Arraufjocj 
— Awl — Ihetle  Nut — Cha)a  Root — ( oeoa  Nuts — Coir — C’oeulus  ludieus — Conessi  Bark — Cornelians — ( otton 
Wool — Eu])horbiinn — I''ish  Maxvs — Eoliuin  Indieum — Lignum  Colubrimnn — Man;rocs — Nux  Yomica— 

I'eacocks’  I 'e.Mthers — Piece  Goods — Putehoek — Radix  Lupeziana — Sandal  Wood — Sesannim— Shawds ScpiilD 

^ urbith— X(*doai y to 


CHAPTER  XIV.— COAST  OF  CONTAN. 

Coast  of  Com  an ; tiie  Extent — B.ineoot,  or  Fort  Vietoiia — Sexerndroop^ — Cdieriah,  Description — Meliindy,  or 
Malwan — Pirates — Cioa;  Description — Coins,  Weii^ht-,  and  Measures — (’onnnerec — Commerce  betxvccn  the 
Coast  of  Concan  and  the  British  Settlements — lfist<»rieal  Facts  relative  to  the  Rise  and  Progress  of  the 
Discoveries  and  Compie-ts  of  the  Portviguesc  in  the  East  Indies  294  to  .Sll 


CHAPl'ER  XV.— COAST  OF  CANARA. 

Its  pAtent — Carwar ; Description — Coins,  M’eights,  and  Measures — Imports  and  Exports — Provisions  and  Refresh- 
ments— Anjedivah — Merjee — b'ortified  Id.uid — Onore;  Description — (’oins,  Weights,  and  Measures Im- 

ports anil  I*:.xports—Barcelorc— Mangalore;  Description— Coins,  Weights,  and  Measures — Imports— Exports 
**'“^t)mmeree  with  Madias  and  Bombay 31^  to  ^iLS 


CONTENTS. 


CHAPTER  XVI.— COAST  OF  MALABAR. 

lls  FAttJit — Billi.npat.irn — ('an;m(>ro;  Description — Coin-^,  VVcI^rJits,  and  Measure*^— Imports  niul  l''xport«— 

Laccadiv**  Islands — 'IVIliclicrry ; Drsiriplion — Coins,  M'cii;:lits,  and  Measures — Imports  and  lApfnts Com- 

iiieree  of  tile  Coast  uf  Mal.ibar  wit  li  Bengal — Commerce  u itli  Madras — Import  and  Export  Duties — lVo\isi- 
ons  and  Refreshments — Mahe;  Description — Caliiiit;  Deseription — Coins,  Wri^rhts,  and  Measures — Im- 
ports and  I'.xports — Prices  of  |)nIt,^s  and  Spices  at  Calicut  in  I.VJO — Bey  pour;  Descriptitui — 'fi'ak  Tindier 
— Paniani , Deserijition — Imports  and  I’Aports — Chitwa — (‘ran^aiiore;  Di'scription — Cochin ; Description — 
Coins,  V'ei;;])ts,  and  Measures — Imports  and  pAports — Provision.s  ami  Refresinuents— Alijiee — Pona— 
(pinion — Anj(*n;^o;  Dcscrijition — Corns,  Weights,  and  Measures — Connuerce — I’lovisnuis  and  Refreshment:) 
— Cape  Comorin — Maidive  Islands;  Description — Coins— Imports  and  Exports — Commerce  uith  Ben^.d 
ami  Madras  J1‘)  to  o'tli 


( IIAPTI'  R XVII.— C EYI.OX. 

Us  Extent — Aripo — Condalch} — Caljicnteen — Nej;ond)o — Colimiho;  Description — Coins,  \Vei;;ht<J,  and  Measure-^ 
— Impfirls  and  Exports — Comuierci*  uith  the  British  Settlements  in  India — Import  and  lixport  Duties,  and 
Re^nilalions — Regulations  in  llie  Master  Attendant’s  Department — Port  Chaises — Provisions  and  Rcfrcsli- 
mimts — Point  de  (hdlc;  Description — Matiira — Doiulra  I lead — Tc‘iit«al!e — B.iticaloe — 'rrmcomalee;  Deserip- 
tion— Jallhap.itam — Articles  pia.'curable  at  Ceylon — Calaiiiiiidar  Wood — Ce\  Ion  Stones — ( li.iiik  Sliells — ( in- 
natuoii*— ~C.^i I ol  ( iniianioii*~” Pearls  to 


CHAPTER  XVIII.— (OAST  EROM  CAPE  COMORIN  TO  MADRAS. 

Const  of  Tmnevelly — Tutieorin — Comm<‘re<*  uith  Madra' — Point  Calyniere — Ne^oipatam — Coins— Commerce 
with  Madras — Na^ore — Caricrd — 'rrampicb.'ir — Coins,  Wci^bls,  ami  Mcasures-r-Connnercc — Historual  I'actc 
relative  to  tlie  Commeire  of  Demmirk  with  the  East  Indies — Deucotta — Porto  Novo — Coiiis^  Weif;lit^, 
and  Measures — ( ’udd. done— CoumuTCv;  ol' the  Soutliern  Division  of  the  Carnatie  with  Madras — Poiulielu'rry ; 
Description — Coins,  Weights,  and  Measures — llistorieal  Eaets  relative  to  the  Couiinerti*  and  Coiupiests  of 
France  in  the  East  Indies — .Allemparva — Sadras — Seven  Pa/»odas — Covelong — llistorieal  facts  rel.ilive  to 
the  Coimume  of  Ubtend  with  the  East  Indies — ^leliapour^  or  St.  Thome  % % ♦ vv*  % % ■* \ % %-V\  % •%  to  413 


TO  THE 


RIGHT  HONOURABLE  ROBERT,  EARL  OF  BUCKINGHAMSHIRE, 

PRESIDENT  OF  THE  BOARD  OF  CONTHOUL,  Ac. 


My  Lord, 

Presuming  that  tlie  following  Work  will  interest 
every  one  connected  with  the  affairs  and  coininerce  of  the  East  Indies,  to  whom  can  it 
be  inscribed  with  so  much  propriety  as  to  yourself?  Placed  so  conspicuously  as  your 
Lordship  is  in  the  Councils  of  His  Majesty,  no  one  at  this  important  crisis  participates 
more  largely  in  all  that  relates  to  our  Eastern  possessions,  and  no  one  is,  thcrcl'ore,  better 
qualified  to  decide  upon  its  merits. 

Were  I to  revert  to  the  high  and  illustrious  office  your  liordship,  so  honourably 
to  yourself,  and  so  advantageously  to  the  Empire,  filled  in  the  Eastern  world,  I should 
not  fear  the  imputation  of  fiattcry,  while  the  records  of  the  East  India  Company 
remain  in  existence,  and  their  executive  body  bear  so  just  and  ample  a testimony  to 
your  ability  and  worth : — ‘‘Your  administration  in  India  was  distinguished  by  wisdom 
and  energy,  mildness  and  integrity ; your  intelligence  extended  to  all  its  concerns,  cenn- 
mercical,  civil,  and  military;  and  your  judgment,  zeal,  and  activity  in  the  ]jublic  service 
were  unrivalled.” 

My  Lord,  with  the  world  at  large  would  I,  humbly  and  diffidently,  thus  pub- 
licly offer  my  tribute  of  respect  for  your  I^ordship’s  character  and  confluct ; but 

grateful  to  my  feelings  will  it  ever  be  to  acknowledge  the  many  instances  of  fiivoiir 

a 


DEDICATION. 


and  protection  I have  privately  had  the  honour  of  receiving  from  you.  In  presenting, 
therefore,  to  your  Lordship’s  candour  the  performance  to  which  many  years  of  my  life 
have  been  dedicated,  I entreat  that  it  may  be  accepted  by  your  Lordship  as  an  evidence 
of  my  gratitude  and  regard. 

I have  the  honour  to  be,  with  the  utmost  respect, 

My  Lord, 

Your  Lordship’s  most  faithful  and  devoted  Servant, 
WILLIAM  MILDURN. 


]34<,  Leadenhall  Street, 
March  25,  1813. 


PREFACE. 


THE  commercial  concerns  of  the  extensive  countries  within  the  liinit.s  of  the  East 
India  Company’s  charter  are  so  little  known  in  Great  Jiritain,  that  any  at  tempi  to  eluci- 
date them,  must  be  always  acceptable,  but  more  particularly  so  at  the  present  time,  when 
the  public  attention  is  directed  to  the  consideration  of  East  India  alfairs. 

The  materials  of  which  this  work  is  composed,  have  been  collected  during  a period 
of  twenty-five  years  actively  employed  in  the  sea  service  of  the  Gompany,  and  in  com- 
mercial pursuits  in  Enj^land  immediately  connected  with  it.  Duriiii;'  tlu'  above  period, 
the  Author  performed  seven  voyages  to  and  from  the  East  Indies  and  China,  and  had 
the  benefit  of  repeatedly  visiting  the  principal  places  referred  to  in  the  work.  These 
opportunities  were  wtH  calculated  to  (jualify  him  for  the  task  lu‘  has  umhMlaken;  and  with 
what  success  he  has  performed  it,  is  now  submitted  to  the  judgim*nt  of  the  piddie.  It 
has  been  his  aim  through  the  whole  to  render  every  thing  in  the  numerous  subjects 
it  comprehends,  as  plain  and  intelligible  as  possible. 

The  geographical  and  historical  matter  has  been  drawn  from  the  best  and  latest 
writers,  and  the  Author  has  endeavoured  to  be  accurate  without  lu  iug  too  ditfuse. 

The  statements  of  the  relative  value  of  the  coins,  weights,  and  measures  wer(‘  made 
from  personal  observations  at  the  dilferent  places  the  Author  has  \isited,  from  the 
authorities  of  such  as  have  trealcdoii  these  subjects  before  him,  and  from  the  kind  assist- 
ance of  vaiiuiib  friends  eoiiveisaiit  therein,  lie  has  to  regret,  however,  that  tlnw  are  less 
perfect  than  he  could  wish,  from  the  want  of  a fixed  standard  even  at  the  priueipal  setih'- 
ments.  Here  it  may  be  necessary  to  remark  that  Indian  accounts  are  ke|U  in  lacs  of  one 
hundred  thousand  each  ; thus,  ^’1, ‘234, 567  would  be  stated  in  rupees  12,3 1,567 twelve 
lacs,  thirty-four  thousand,  five  hundred  and  sixty-seven  njjiecs. 

The  statements  of  duties,  and  the  various  regulations  in  the  shipping  and  coniim  rcial 
departments  of  the  principal  .setth'ments,  have  been  brought  down  to  the  latest  period; 
and  as  observations  upon  the  provisions  and  refreshments  procuralile  at  the  various  plact  s, 
must  he  admitted  to  be  essentially  necessary  to  those  connected  with  the  eomint  rce  of  llie 
East  Indies,  particular  care  has  also  been  taken  to  give  a correct  detail  of  them. 

The  lists  of  European  and  other  commodities  suitable  to  the  markets  at  the  llritish 
Presidencies  are  made  up  from  actual  transactions.  Those  ol  liomhay  w .1)  appear  more  ex- 
tensive than  at  the  other  settlements.  The  Author’s  connexions  were  cliielly  ihi  re;  and  the 


r R E F A C E. 


calamitous  fire,  which  a tew  years  since  destroyed  the  warehouses  of  the  merchants, 
made  the  orders  from  that  settlement  more  numerous.  By  a reference  to  t^lu'se  lists  it  will 
be  seen  that  there  is  scarcely  an  article  manutactured  in  Great  Britain,  or  any  other  part 
of  Europe,  but  what  is  carried  in  considerable  quantities  to  India  in  the  investments  of  the 
Commanders  and  Officers  in  the  Company’s  service. 

The  directions  for  chusing  the  various  productions  of  India  and  China  arc  given  from 
the  best  authorities;  and  the  quantities  imported  and  sold,  will  enable  the  merchant  to  ascer- 
tain, with  a groat  degree  of  accuracy,  the  demand  for  each  article,  and  the  price  it  has  gene- 
rally borne  at  the  Company’s  sales. 

The  trade  from  port  to  port  in  India,  carried  on  by  Native  or  European  merchants 
resident  there,  commonly  called  the  Country  Trade,  is  fully  shewn  by  numerous  tabh-s:  and 
from  the  lists  of  the  articles  which  compose  the  imports  and  exports,  it  will  be  seen  that 
the  productions  of  the  western  hemisphere  bear  but  a very  small  proportion  in  this  trade. 

The  commerce  carried  on  by  Foreigners  with  the  British  Settlements  is  extremely 
beneficial  to  the  latter,  the  greater  part  ot  the  imports  consisting  of  treasure,  and  the  exports 
of  the  manufactures  of  England.  The  articles  imported,  are  principally  wines,  sj)irits, 
naval  stores,  and  metals,  interfering  in  a very  small  degree  with  the  trade  carried  on  by  the 
East  India  Company,  or  the  Commanders  and  Officers  in  their  service. 

In  stating  the  rise  and  progress  of  the  commerce  carried  on  with  hidia  and  China  by 
the  various  nations  of  Europe,  the  best  authorities  have  been  consulted,  and  the  Author 
has  entered  into  a detail  of  their  commercial  transactions,  particularly  those  of  the  English, 
to  a much  greater  extent  than  has  hitherto  been  done.  It  was  intended  to  close  the 
account  of  the  English  East  India  Company  with  a detail  of  the  particular  branches  of 
their  service  at  home,  the  benefits  resulting  to  individuals  belonging  to  their  numerous 
establishments,  and  the  internal  arrangement  of  the  various  depart menfs;  hut  as  delays 
have  already  occurred  in  the  publication  of  this  work,  and  it  seems  particularly  called 
for  at  the  present  juncture,  it  has  been  Judged  best  to  give  the  public  that  part  of  it  which 
is  now  ready,  and  to  reserve  what  reraaips  for  a future  opportunity. 

It  will  t asily  he  seen  that  a work  of  this  nature  required  great  labour  and  attention, 
diligent  research,  and  persevering  enquiry,  to  render  it  worthy  of  public  attention  ; and 
the  Author,  as  he  has  already  stated,  has  had  the  advantage  of  many  years’  expe- 
rience. Having  thus  briefly  acquainted  the  reader  with  the  nature  of  it,  it  is  only 
necessary  to  add,  that  it  was  begun,  and  has  been  carried  on,  under  circumstances  very 
adverse  to  such  ait  undertaking;  and  should  it  experience  the  public  patronage,  the 
Author  will  think  himself  happy  in  having  contributed  to  the  commercial  interests  of  the 
empire.  A work  so  arduous  and  complicated  can  hardly  be  thought  to  be  without  errors; 
the  Author,  therefore,  upon  this  point  claims  the  indulgent  candour  of  his  reader. 


INTRODUCTION 


RISE  AND  PROGRESS  OF  THE  COMMERCE 


BETWEEN 


JilNGLAN®  AN®  THE  EAST  JNDIES. 


THE  advantages  which  Great  Britain  has  derived  Irom  iG  commerce  with  the  East  Iiniies  for  ^lp^^  ards 
of  two  centuries,  hy  the  immense  wealth  it  has  introduced  into  the  country,  the  large  pecuniary  suppllc.^  it 
has  afforded  the  Government,  and  the  assistance  it  has  given  to  her  naval  power,  to  which  her  exaltation 
among  the  nations  may  be  attributed,  are  so  tftily  benelicial,  that  it  will  not  he  thought  an  unimportant 
object  in  the  commencement  of  this  work  to  endeavour  to  trace  its  rise  and  progi  es.s,  and  to  place  in  a dear 
light  the  present  situation  of  so  essential  a branch  of  the  national  trade. 

Some  historians  allege  that  the  East  Indies  were  not  unknown  to  Britons  in  very  ancic'nt  times. 

William  of  Malmesbury  relates  that  in  the  year  883,  Siglielmus,  Bishop  of  Sherborne*  in  Dorsetshire, 
being  sent  by  King  Alfred  to  Rome  with  presents  to  the  Pope,  proceeded  from  thence  to  the  East  Indies, 
to  visit  the  tomb  of  St.  Thomas  at  Meliapour,  by  whose  means  the  English  nation  had  an  early  view  of 
the  riches  of  those  countries,  in  the  spices  and  jewels  which  the  Bishop  brought  back  with  him. 

With  respect  to  the  importation  of  the  manufactures  and  productions  of  the  East  into  Europe  ante  - 
cedent to  the  discovery  of  the  passage  round  the  Cape  of  Good  Hope,  wc  find  that  in  the  thirteenth 
century  the  Mahometan  Moors  made  a conquest  of  tlic  greater  part  of  the  Peninsula  of  India,  as  well  as 
of  the  most  valuable  of  the  Spice  Islands ; and  having  engrossed  the  commerce  of  tliose  countries,  they 
transmitted,  during  that  and  the  two  following  centuries,  the  rich  merchandise  of  Asia  for  the  European 
markets,  chiefly  from  Aden  in  Arabia,  by  the  Red  Sea  to  Suez,  from  whence  it  was  conveyed  upon  camels 
to  the  Nile,  and  there  shipped  for  Grand  Cairo  anci  Alexandria;  and  sometimes  it  was  carried  from  the 
Persian  Gulf  to  the  Euphrates,  and  afterwards  conveyed  by  caravans  to  Aleppo.  From  those  places  it 
was  dispersed  by  the  Venetian  and  other  European  merchants  over  the  western  world.  England  was  sup- 
plied with  Indian  commodities  by  an  annual  ship  from  Venice,  of  great  burthen  and  immense  value,  which 
they  sold  at  their  own  prices.  In  this  condition  the  commerce  remained  for  a considei’able  time,  without 
any  attempt  of  the  English  to  participate  in  so  beneficial  a trade. 

♦A 


ii 


HISE  AND  PROGRESS  OF  THE  COMMERCE 


The  Portuguese  had  the  credit  and  good  fortune  of  making  the  important  discovery  of  a passage  by 
sea  to  the  East  Indies.  It  was  soon  followed  by  their  acquisition,  partly  by  treaty,  but  chiefly  by  conquest, 
of  numerous  settlements  on  the  coasts  of  the  peninsula  of  India  and  the  Eastern  Islands,  which  enabled 
them  to  supply  the  European  markets  with  all  kinds  of  East  India  goods,  which  they  enjoyed  for  nearly 
a century,  without  any  other  Euro[)can  nation  endeavouring  to  partici[mte  with  them  in  this  lucrative 
branch  of  commcj  ce,  on  the  ground  of  their  original  discovery,  by  which  it  was  held  that  all  other  nations 
were  excluded  from  a communication  with  India  by  the  same  route. 

1497.  King  Henry  VI  I.  fitted  outjbvo  vessels  under  the  command  of  John  Cabot,  a skilful  and  en- 
terprising navigator,  with  a view  of  discovering  a north-western  passage  to  India.  He  proceeded  as  far  as 
67^  30  North  latitude;  but  in  consequence  of  the  mutinous  disposition  of  his  crew,  he  was  obliged  to  stand 
to  the  southward,  and  in  the  course  of  his  passage  home,  he  fell  in  with  Newfoundland,  and  the  Continent 
of  North  America. 

1549.  Sebastian,  the  son  of  John  Cabot,  inheriting  the  idea  of  his  father,  that  there  was  a shorter 
passage  to  India  than  round  the  Cape  of  Good  Hope,  persuaded  a number  of  merchants  in  London  to 
raise  a capital  of  .P60(X),  in  shares  of  i?25  each,  for  the  purpose  of  prosecuting  the  discovery  of  a passage 
to  the  North-west.  They  obtained  the  King’s  Charter,  and  in  155fl  fitted  out  a licet  of  three  ships  under 
Sir  Hugh  Willoughby,  who  sailed  on  the  10th  of  May.  Sir  Hugh  Willoughby  with  his  crew  were  all  lost. 
Captain  Cliancellor,  the  second  in  command,  arrived  at  a port  in  Russia,  travelled  to  the  Court  of  the 
Czar,  or  Emperor,  and  laid  the  foundation  of  the  present  Russia  Company. 

157G.  Previous  to  this  period,  very  considerable  privileges  were  granted  by  the  Grand  Signior  for  the 
establishment  of  a Turkey  trade,  in  consequence  of  a treaty  between  England  and  the  Porte.  The  Turkey 
or  Levant  merchants  were  at  this  time  looked  upon  as  the  true  East  India  traders,  by  means  of  their  fac- 
tories at  Alexandria,  Alep|)o,  Damascus,  and  the  different  ports  of  Egypt  and  the  Turkish  dominions. 
A new  channel  of  trade  Iiad  also  been  set  on  foot  through  Russia  to  Persia  for  raw  silk,  and  Queen  Eliza- 
beth had  sent  letters  to  the  Sophy  of  Persia,  requesting  permission  for  her  subjects  to  trade  in  his  dominions. 
The  Sophy  granted  them  an  imniunity  from  tolls  or  customs  on  their  merchandise,  and  full  protection  to 
their  persons  and  goods. 

Mr.  Thorne,  a London  merchant,  who  had  long  resided  at  Seville,  and  there  acijuired  some  know- 
ledge of  the  East  India  trade,  represented  to  King  Henry  VIII.  the  advantages  this  kingdom  might 
derive  from  the  eastern  commerce.  His  proposal  was  to  open  a passage  by  the  north-west  to  Tartary  and 
China;  and  some  merchants  of  London,  in  expectation  of  reaping  the  benefit  of  this  discovery,  fitted  out 
fwo  ships  under  Captain  Frobisher,  which  were  unsuccessful  in  several  attempts;  and  the  idea  of  finding  a 
passage  in  that  direction  was  rejected,  as  being  hazardous  and  impracticable. 

1577.  Sir  Francis  Drake  fitti?d  out  an  armament  at  his  own  cxpence,  consisting  of  the  Pelican  under 
his  own  command,  and  four  other  ships,  with  which  he  sailed  through  the  Strait  of  Magellan  into  the  South 
Seas,  wliere  he  did  the  Spaniards  incredible  miscliief,  and  acquired  an  immense  booty.  On  the  news  of 
this  reaching  Spain,  a strong  force  was  sent  to  intercept  him  in  his  return ; to  avoid  which,  being  by  losses 
reduced  to  a single  ship,  he  determined  to  proceed  home  by  the  Cape  of  Good  Hope.  In  the  course  of  his 
passage  he  touched  at  Ternate,  one  of  tlie  Molucca  Islands,  whose  King  was  then  at  war  with  the  King  of 
Tidore,  at  the  latter  of  which  places  the  Portuguese  liad  formed  a settlement.  Sir  Francis  having  afforded 
the  King  of  Ternate  some  assistance  against  his  enemies,  a treaty  of  amity  and  commerce  was  entered  into 
between  them,  in  which  the  King  agreed  to  9U{)ply  tlie  English  nation  with  all  the  cloves  produced  in  his 
country;  he  also,  according  to  the  Eastern  custom,  formally  ratified  the  contract  by  the  delivery  of  a present. 
At  Ternate  Sir  Francis  took  on  board  a large  quantity  of  cloves,  and  in  February,  1580,  departed  for 


BETWEEN  ENGLAND  AND  THE  EAST  INDIES 


111 


England,  where  he  arrived  on  the  3d  of  November  following.  In  lliis  voyage  Sir  Francis  not  only  esta- 
blished his  reputation  as  the  first  person  who  had  |)erformed  a complete  voyage  round  llu*  world,  but  he 
had  the  honour  of  being  the  first  who  opened  a direct  commercial  intercourse  between  England  and  Iiulia. 

1583.  Three  English  merchants,  Fitcli,  Newberry,  and  Leedes,  travidled  overland  to  India,  pro- 
vided with  letters  to  the  King  of  Cambay,  the  Emperor  of  China,  &c.  They  proceeded  to  Tripoli,  from 
thence  to  Bagdad,  and  down  the  Tigris  and  Persian  Gulf  to  Orinus,  where  tluy  cmbai  ked  for  (ioa;  they 
then  proceeded  to  Agra,  where  Leedes  entered  into  the  service  of  the  Great  Mogul;  Newberry  died  in 
India;  and  Fitch  proceeded  to  Ceylon,  Bengal,  Pegu,  Siam,  Malacca,  and  many  otlier  parts  of  the  East 
Indies,  in  all  of  which  places  they  found  the  Portuguese  settled,  who  threw  ewery  ol)stacle  in  llie  way  of 
their  progress.  They  >vere  in  general  received  kindly  by  the  natives  of  the  various  coiintrii*s  they  visited. 

1586.  Captain  Cavendish  commenced  his  voyage  round  the  globe,  sailed  from  Plymoiitb,  the  2 1 si  of 
July,  arrived  at  the  Cape  de  Verd  Islands  in  September,  1586,  and  entered  the  Straits  of  Magellan  the 
7th  of  January,  1587.  He  coasted  along  to  the  northward,  then  proceeiled  to  the  T^adrones,  where  hi- 
arrived  on  the  3d  of  January,  1588,  and  by  the  6th  of  March  passed  the  Straits  of  Sunda,  and  arrived  at 
Plymouth  on  the  9th  of  September,  1588,  by  the  way  of  the  Cape  of  Good  Hope.  This  was  the  second 
voyage  round  the  world  pciformed  by  the  Englisli. 

1587.  England  at  this  period  was  at  war  with  Spain  and  Portugal.  Sir  Eraru  is  Drake  eaplured, 
near  the  Azores,  a Portuguese  carrack  from  the  East  Indies,  and  brought  her  to  bbigland.  The  papia  s 
of  this  ship  afforded  so  much  information  as  to  the  value  of  the  trade,  and  the  mode  of  conduit  ing  it,  thul 
Camden  considers  them  to  have  furnished  the  first  idea  of  establishing  a trade  thither  fiom  England. 

1588«  The  Spaniards  complained  of  the  English  having  infringed  their  right  by  fn-quenting  tin* 
Indian  seas,  alluding  to  Sir  Francis  Drake  sailing  round  the  globe.  Queen  Klizahelh  replii-d,  “It  is 
as  lawiul  for  my  subjects  to  do  this  as  the  Spaniards,  since  the  sea  and  air  arc  common  to  all  men.*' 

1591.  The  voyages  undertaken  by  Sir  Francis  Drake  and  ("aptuin  Cavendish,  thoiigli  more  foi 
the  purpose  of  annoying  and  distressing  the  enemy,  and  profiting  by  the  booty,  than  witli  a view  to  com- 
mercial objects,  afforded  such  an  insight  into  the  trade  of  India,  as,  combined  with  tlic  information  pro- 
cured  from  others,  who  had  visited  that  country  by  circuitous  routes,  induced  some  merchants  of  London  to 
set  on  foot  a voyage  thither,  direct  by  the  way  of  the  Cape  of  Good  Hope,  In  defiance  of  the  claims  of  the 
Portuguese  to  the  exclusive  right  to  the  navigation  by  that  route.  This  voyage  w^as  undertaken  with  three 
ships,  the  Penelope,  the  Merchant  Royal,  and  the  Edward  Bonaventuri*,  under  the  command  of  Mr. 
George  Raymond  and  Mr.  James  Lancaster;  and  although  its  principal  object  was  to  establish  a commer- 
cial intercourse  between  the  two  countries,  the  advantages  of  privateering  were  still  kept  in  view.  In 
their  passage  to  the  Cape  they  were  successful  in  capturing  several  Portuguese  ships;  hut  this  occasioned 
KO  much  delay,  that  they  had  to  encounter  the  diHiciilties  of  weathering  the  Cape  in  the  most  inclement 
season;  in  addition  to  which,  their  crews  were  so  sickly,  that  they  were  obliged  to  send  hack  the  Merchant 
Royal.  The  other  two  ships  pursued  their  voyage,  hut  soon  after  parted  company  in  a gale  of  wind;  and 
the  Penelope  with  Captain  Raymond  was  never  more  heard  of.  Captain  Lancaster  reached  the  Indies, 
and  took  in  pepper  at  Sumatra;  hut,  owing  to  the  sickly  state  of  his  crew,  could  not  reacli  the  Moluccas. 
On  his  return  home,  being  in  want  of  provisions,  he  made  for  the  West  Indies,  wliere,  whilst  himself 
and  the  chief  of  the  crew  were  on  shore  upon  an  uninhabited  island,  in  search  of  means  for  supplying 
their  wants,  the  remainder  ran  away  with  the  ship.  Here  he  continued  some  time,  fill  at  length  he  was 
relieved,  and  brought  home;  but  in  tlie  interim  most  of  his  crew  had  perlslied. 

*A2 


iv 


RISE  AND  PROGRESS  OF  THE  COMMERCE 


159^.  Some  private  ships  of  war  captured  a large  Portuguese  carrack,  called  the  Madre  de  Dios,  of 
1600  tons  burthen,  and  brought  her  into  Dartmouth ; she  was  the  largest  ship  ever  seen  in  England.  The 
cargo  eonsi.^ted  of  spices,  calicoes,  silks,  gold,  pearls,  drugs.  China-ware,  &c.  valued,  at  a moderate  com- 
putation, at  .XM  50,000.  The  possession  of  such  imtiiense  foreign  riches  greatly  encouraged  the  English  to 
go  directly  to  the  East  Indies  on  a mercantile  account. 

1596.  Sir  Robert  Dudley  and  others  fitted  out  three  ships,  with  the  intention  of  trading  to  China. 
Wood,  the  commander,  hud  letters  from  Queen  Elizabeth  to  the  Emperor  of  China.  This  expedition  was 
very  unfortunate;  not  one  of  the  company  ever  returned  to  give  an  account  of  the  rest. 

1599.  In  this  year  Queen  Elizabeth  sent  Sir  John  Mildenhall  overland,  by  the  way  of  Constanti- 
nojde,  to  the  Court  of  the  Great  Mogul,  to  apply  for  certain  privileges  for  the  English  Company,  for 
whom  she  was  then  preparing  a charter,  in  which  he  was  long  opposed  by  the  arts  of  the  Portuguese  at 
that  Coui  t,  who  prepossessed  the  Mogul  against  the  English,  so  that  it  was  a considerable  time  before  he 
could  get  the  better  of  them. 

The  unsuccessful  termination  of  Captain  Raymond's  expedition  gave  a*  damp  to  all  future  exer- 
tions upon  individual  account.  The  Dutch  had  by  this  time  commenced  u trade  to  India  upon  an 
extensive  scale,  with  a [)rospect  of  success.  At  this  juncture  England,  not  being  able  to  get  supplied  with 
Eastern  commodities  from  Lisbon,  on  account  of  the  war,  could  only  obtain  them  through  the  medium  of 
the  Dutch,  or  her  own  Turkey  Company,  by  way  of  the  Levant.  The  Dutcli,  taking  advantage  of 
this  eircumstaiice,  raised  the  pepper  upon  us,  from  about  three  shillings  to  tin'  extravagant  rate  of  six 
and  eight  sliillings  p(»r  pound.  Aggrieved  by  this  imposition,  the  merchants  of  London  conceived  an  idea 
of  putting  in  for  a share  of  this  trade.  A meeting  was  accordingly  called  on  the  22d  of  September,  1599, 
at  Founders'  Hall,  at  which  the  Lord  Mayor  and  most  of  the  Aldermen  and  principal  merchants  of  the 
City,  to  the  number  of  101,  attended,  and  agreed  to  form  an  association,  for  the  piu’posc  of  establisiilng  a 
commercial  intercourse  w'ith  India  direct.  The  sum  raised  for  that  purpose  was  .^.S0,133  6s.  8d. 

At  a subsecjiient  meeting  persons  were  appointed  to  conduct  the  concern;  and  it  was  agreed  that  a 
petition  should  he  [iresented  to  the  Lords  of  the  Privy  Council,  setting  forth,  “ that,  stimulated  by  the 
success  which  has  attended  tlie  voyage  to  the  East  Indies  by  the  Dutch,  and  finding  the  Dutch  are  projecting 
another  voyage,  for  which  (hey  have  bought  ships  in  England;  the  merchants,  having  the  same  regard 
to  the  welfare  of  this  kingdom  that  the  Dutch  liavc  to  their  commonwealth,  have  resolved  upon  making 
a voyage  of  adventure,  and  for  this  purpose  entreat  Her  Majesty  will  grant  them  letters  patent  of  incor- 
poration, succession,  &c  ; for  that  the  trade,  being  so  far  remote  from  hence,  cannot  he  managed  but  by  a 
joint  and  united  stock."  On  the  ith  of  October,  at  a meeting  of  the  subscribers,  they  were  informed  by 
the  committee,  that  the  f.ords  of  the  Privy  Council  were  pleased  to  favour  the  enterprise,  and  had  pro- 
mised to  further  the  business  witli  her  Majesty.  On  tlie  16th  they  reported  that  her  Majesty  had  ex- 
pressed her  gracious  approbation  of  the  voyage,  as  also  that  the  Lords  of  the  Council  desired  some  of  the 
principal  adventurers  would  attend  them  to  receive  orders  for  their  further  proceedings. 

At  this  juncture  an  attempt  was  made  on  the  part  of  Spain  to  negotiate  a peace  with  England. 
Commissioners  liad  arrived  for  that  purpose,  and  it  was  foreseen  that  one  of  the  main  points  that  Spain 
would  insist  upon,  would  he  to  exclude  England  from  the  trade  to  India,  and  it  was  apprehended  that  this 
would  be  conceded  to  them  ; it  was  therefore  judged  advisable  to  bring  matters  to  a test  before  the  voyage 
was  so  far  entered  upon,  as  to  recede  without  loss  and  disappointment.  A petition  was  accordingly 
presented  to  the  Lords  of  the  Council,  “ soliciting  their  Lordships’  warrant,  that  the  voyage  might  be  pro- 
cceded  upon  without  any  hindrance,  nothwithstanding  the  treaty,  and  that  by  reason  thereof,  they  should 
not  be  staid  when  the  shipping  was  prepared."  In  reply  to  this  petition,  they  were  informed  that 
their  Lordships  declined  granting  such  warranty  as  deeming  it  more  beneficial  for  the  general  state  of 


BETWEEN  ENGLAND  AND  THE  EAST  INDIES. 


T 


merclmtulise  to  entertain  a peace,  than  tliat  the  same  should  he  hindered  hy  tlu'  standinir  with  the  Spanish 
Commissioners  for  the  maintenance  of*  this  trade,  and  tlierehy  forego  tin;  opportunity  of  concluding  the 
peace.’’  Upon  this  inteliigeiice,  the  adventurcTs,  “ fearing  lest,  after  they  were  drawn  into  a chaige,  they 
should  be  required  to  desist  from  the  voyage,  w^ere  didermined  to  give  up  tlie  concern.”  Foitinmtely, 
howTver,  for  the  best  interests  of  the  country,  the  Commissioners  did  not  agri'e,  and  the  negotiation  for 
peace  was  entirely  broken  off. 

1600.  Availing  themselves  of  the  breaking  off  the  Spanish  treaty,  the  merchants  made  applU 
cation  to  the  Queen  for  a charter,  empo^vering  them  to  undertake  a trade  to  the  Mast  Indies.  On  the  ‘31st 
of  December,  1600,  their  request  was  granted,  and  an  East  India  Company  (‘reeled  under  the  title  of 
“ The  Governor  and  Company  of  ]\lerchants  of  London  trading  to  the  Mast  Indies.*’  A chart(T  was  granted, 
and  they  were  formed  into  a body  corporate,  with  a common  seal,  which  they  were  |H‘nnitlcd  to  alter 
at  pleasure. 

The  management  of  their  concerns  was  placed  under  a Governor  and  twenty-four  conimillee-men,  to 
he  annually  chosen  in  July  in  each  year,  who  wore  to  have  the  direction  of  voyages,  provision  of  sliipping, 
and  sale  of  merchandise. 

The  members  of  the  Company,  their  sons  of  the  age  of  twenty-one  years,  and  their  a|)[)rentiees, 
factors,  and  servants,  w’ore  authorized  to  carry  on  trade  to  the  Mast  Indies  (that  is,  to  all  countries  beyond 
tlie  Cape  of  Good  Hope  to  the  Straits  of  ]Mag(dlan)  for  fifteen  yc'ars  from  Christmas,  1600,  on  the  following 
terms,  viz,  Freely  to  trafiic  and  use  the  trade  of  merchandise  hy  s(\a,  in  and  hy  such  ways  and  passages 
already  discovered,  or  hereafter  to  be  found  out  or  discovered,  as  they  should  esteem  and  take  to  he  littc'st, 
into  and  from  the  Mast  Indies,  into  tlie  countries  and  ports  of  Asia  and  Africa;  and  into  and  from  all  the 
islands,  ports,  havens,  cities,  creeks,  rivers,  and  places  of  Asia,  Africa,  and  Anu'rica,  or  any  of  them 
beyond  the  (.'ape  of  Good  Hope  to  the  Straits  of  Magellan,  w luae  any  trade  or  tralbc  rnuy  be  used  to  and 
from  every  of  them,  in  such  order,  manner,  form,  liberty,  aJid  condition  as  they  themselves  should  from 
time  to  time  ague  upon.” 

They  were  also  empowered  to  make  hye-laws,  to  inflic  t punishments,  either  corpoial  or  pecuniary, 
provided  sucli  punishments  accorded  with  the  laws  of  Mnglitnd. 

To  export  goods  free  of  duty  for  f'onr  years;  and  uftei  wards  the  duly  of  all  exports  which  should  mis- 
carry, to  be  deducted  from  future  goods  when  shipped. 

For  the  customs  ol  imported  goods  they  were  allowed  six  months’  credit  for  half,  and  twelve  months 
for  the  payment  of  the  remainder,  with  a free  exportation  for  thiiteeii  months. 

They  were  also  permitted  to  export  to  the  amount  of  in  foreign  coin  or  bullion,  provided 

that  et’btXlO  were  recoined  in  her  Majesty's  mint. 

All  other  her  Majesty’s  subjects  were  by  this  charter  excluded,  under  severe  penalties,  from  this 
traffic,  w ithoui  the  assent  and  lea\  e of  the  Company. 

The  charter  w^as  not  to  extend  to  any  place  in  the  actual  possession  of  any  of  her  Majesty’s  allies. 

The  Company  were  obliged  to  return,  six  months  after  the  completion  of  a voyage,  the  same  (juan- 
tity  of  silver,  gold,  or  foreign  coin  as  they  had  exported,  the  first  voyage  excepted. 

This  proviso  was  likewise  added,  that  “ if  within  the  space  limited  by  the  charter,  this  monopoly 
should  appear  in  any  respect  detrimental  to  the  public,  it  should  then,  upon  two  years’  warning  under  the 
privy  .seal,  become  null  and  void.  13ut  if  experience  proved  this  n(‘W  corporation  w'as  for  the  wTal  and 
benefit  of  the  nation,  in  this  case  her  Majesty  passed  her  royal  word,  not  only  to  r(*ncvv  their  charter, 
but  to  add  such  other  clauses  and  graces  as  should  a[)pear  most  conducive  to  the  interest  of  the  commerce, 
the  undertakers,  and  the  kingdom  in  general,  the  true  end  of  all  public  enterprises.” 

In  consequence  of  this  charter,  the  merchants  began  to  raise  a joint  stock  l*or  the  execution  of  the 
design,  which  became  so  popular,  that  in  a short  time  were  paid  into  the  treasurer’s  hands. 


VI 


RISE  AND  PROGRESS  OF  THE  COMMERCE 


Tlie  Company  purchased  the  Susan  for  I’KiOO,  and  tlic  owners  agi*eed  to  give  £800  for  her  after 
her  return  from  the  first  voyage.  The  Malice  Scourge,  afterwards  named  the  Dragon,  of  600  tons, 
with  all  her  stores,  was  bought  of  the  Earl  of  Ciiinberland  for  £3700;  and  they  came  to  a resolution 
not  to  employ  any  gentlemen  in  any  place  of  charge.'’  The  allowances  granted  to  the  commanders 
were  to  be,  .PI 00  wages,  and  £200  on  credit  for  an  adventure;  and  as  an  incit(‘meiit  to  activity  and 
zeal  in  the  service,  if,  on  their  return,  the  profit  yielded  2 for  1,  they  were  to  be  allowed  P500;  if  3 for  I, 
PlOOO;  if  4 for  1,  PI 500;  and  if  5 for  I,  P2000.  Thirty-six  factors,  or  supracargoes,  were  nomi- 
nated. Three  principal,  or  factors  of  the  first  class,  were  each  to  be  allowed  cf’lOO  for  equipment,  and 
£200  as  an  adventure;  four  factors  of  tlic  second  class,  £50  for  equipment,  and  PlOO  for  an  adventure; 
four  of  the  third  class  were  to  have  P30  for  equipment,  and  £50  for  an  adventure;  and  four  of  the  fourth 
class  were  to  be  allowed  £20  each  for  equipment,  and  .PtOfor  an  adventure.  They  were  to  give  security 
for  their  fidelity,  and  that  they  would  abstain  from  all  private  trade;  the  principal  factors  to  the  extent  of 
P500  each,  and  the  others  in  proportion. 

A fleet  of  five  ships,  the  Dragon  of  ()00  tons,  the  Hector  of  300,  the  Ascension  of  2(i0,  the  Susan 
of  240,  and  a tender,  under  the  command  of  Captain  James  l4ancaster,  was  equipped  and 
manned,  the  cargoes  of  which  were  composed  of  bullion,  P28,742;  and  goods,  consisting  of  iron,  tin 
wrought  and  iinwrought,  lead,  80  pieces  of  broad-cloths  of  all  colours,  80  pieces  of  Devonshire  kersies, 
100  pieces  of  Norwich  stuffs,  with  smaller  articles  intended  as  }>resents,  amounting  to  P6860.  They 
were  furnished  with  letters  and  presents  from  the  Queen  to  the  Kings  of  Achecn  and  Bantam.  The  fleet 
sailed  from  England  the  13th  of  February,  1601,  and  arrived  at  Acheen  the  5th  of  June,  1602,  where  they 
w’ere  received  with  every  mark  of  distinction ; they  formed  a treaty,  and  left  factors,  but  did  not  obtain 
a sufficiency  of  pepper  to  load  their  ships.  From  thence  they  sailed  to  Bantam,  and  w-ere  graciously 
received.  So  successful  in  every  respect  w^as  this  fleet,  that  it  excited  the  jealousy  of  the  Portuguese,  who 
soon  began  to  do  the  English  all  the  mischief  in  their  power.  Having  settled  factors  at  Bantam,  Lancaster 
set  sail  for  England,  and  arrived,  after  a prosperous  voyage,  in  the  Downs  on  the  lltli  of  September, 
1603.  On  their  passage  home,  tlicy  took  possession  of  the  Island  of  St.  Helena. 

During  the  absence  of  these  ships,  it  had  been  proposed  to  follow  up  the  efforts  of  the  first  adventurers 
by  setting  forth,  in  the  subsequent  season,  a second  voyage  upon  a new  subscription ; hut  though  the  mea- 
sure w'as  strongly  recommended  by  the  T.ord  High  Admiral,  the  I^ord  Treasurer,  the  Lords  of  the  Council, 
and  even  by  her  Majesty,  who  went  so  far  as  to  Intimate,  that  by  not  following  up  the  business  with 
spirit,  in  the  manner  of  the  Dutch,  it  seemed  as  if  but  little  regard  was  entertained  for  her  Majesty's 
honour,  or  the  honour  of  the  country;”  yet  so  averse  were  people  at  that  time  to  hazard  their  property  in 
untried  speculations,, that  no  sufficient  number  of  persons  could  be  found  who  were  disposed  to  engage  fur- 
ther in  this  trade,  till  it  should  be  known  how  far  the  original  adventure  was  likely  to  succeed. 

Captain  Lancaster’s  return  took  place  at  a most  unfortunate  period.  The  plague  was  then  raging  in 
London,  from  whence  most  of  the  principal  inhabitants  had  withdrawn  themselves,  in  order  to  escape  from 
its  direful  effects.  A large  sum  of  money,  not  less  than  •f'35,000,  was  unavoidably  required  to  defray  the 
current  expcnces,  such  as  seamen's  wages,  the  King's  duties,  and  other  incidental  charges.  There  was  no 
prospect  of  obtaining  the  money  by  a present  sale  of  the  Company's  commodities,  nor  were  they  enabled 
to  borrow  it,  even  upon  the  credit  of  men  of  the  first  responsibility.  It  was  also  no  less  necessary  that 
measures  should  be  taken  for  raising  a fund  for  fitting  out  a second  voyage  in  the  subsequent  season,  to 
which  no  new  adventurers  shewed  an  inclination.  Under  these  discouraging  circumstances,  the  original 
adventurers,  as  a measure  of  necessity  rather  than  choice,  resolved  that  each  subscriber  of  £250  to  the 
first  capital,  should  be  required  to  advance  a further  sum  of  .£'200  in  addition  thereto,  in  consideration  of 
which,  he  should  be  allowed  to  receive  pepper  and  spices^  at  given  rates  of  valuation,  to  the  amount  of 
£500,  to  be  disposed  of  at  liis  own  discretion.  In  this  way  a further  sum  of  J?60,450  was  raised,  which 


BETWEEN  ENGT.AND  AND  THE  EAST  INDIES. 


vli 

at  once  furnished  a supply  for  the  existing  demands,  and  enabled  the  original  advonUu  ers  to  send  out  again 
the  same  ships  upon  a second  voyage. 

1604.  The  East  India  Company  sent  out  their  second  voyage  under  tlie  command  of  Sir  Henry 
Middleton  with  four  ships,  the  same  as  pertbrined  the  former  voyage,  'fliey  were  lo  proceed,  in  the 
first  instance,  to  the  factories  wdiich  had  already  been  established,  but  with  permission  to  opim  a trade 
with  the  Spice  Islands.  The  sum  suhscrihed  tor  the  second  \oyagc,  I’fiO,  1.^0,  was  expended  as  follows: 
— For  repairs  of  the  ships,  for  stores,  and  provisions  /MS,110;  bullion  F11,I6();  goods  FJ,1  \^2.  This  Heel 
sailed  the  25th  of  March,  1604,  and  arrived  at  Bantam  on  the  22d  of  D(‘C(‘mhcr,  where  two  sliijis  were  laden 
with  pepper;  the  other  two  WTre  sent  to  Banda  and  Andjoyna  for  nutmegs,  mare,  and  eloxes.  Captain 
Middleton  arrived  in  England  in  May,  1606,  with  the  Joss  of  one  of  his  ships.  The  profits  upon  this  and 
the  former  voyage  amounted  to  95  per  cent,  upon  the  capital  originally  siihserihnl,  cli  ar  of  all  charges. 

The  success  ot'tliese  two  voyages  induced  pr  ivate  nierehants  wlio  were  not  partners  in  the  Compan)'s 
stock,  to  endeavour  to  obtain  a participation  in  the  trade.  King  »James  1.  in  this  year  granteil  a licence 
to  Sir  Edward  Michelborne  and  others,  to  trade  to  ‘‘ Catliay,  China,  Japan,  Coiea,  and  Cainhay.i,  &e. 
and  the  isles  thereto  belonging,  and  to  trade  vvitii  tlie  said  countries  and  people,  not  as  yet  frerpienled  and 
traded  unto  by  any  of  our  subjects  or  people,  xvithout  inteiniplion,  any  restraint,  grant,  or  charter  to 
the  contrary  notwithstanding.’’  This  licence  was  a direct  violation  of  the  exclu.sive  privileges  granted 
by  Queen  P^ilizabeth  to  the  Company;  and  Is  memorable  for  its  being  the  first  appeal ance  of  pi ix ate 
traders,  who  were  termed  interlopers,  endeavouring  to  participate  in  the  Company  s commerce.  Michelborne, 
on  his  arrival  in  India,  instead  of  exploring  new  places  of  trade,  as  was  the  proicssed  object  of*  his  voyage, 
committed  various  depredations  upon  the  Chinese  junks  trading  among  the  eastern  islands;  and  having 
obtained  a considerable  booty,  he  returneil  to  England  with  the  plunder.  This  not  only  brought  disgrace 
upon  the  English  name,  but  in  some  degree  involved  the  Comjiany’s  alfaii  s at  Bantam  in  eonl*usioii. 

1606.  Notwithstanding  these  unpromising  appearances,  there  were  still  found  among  the  adventurers 
some  public  spirited  persons  who  were  unwilling  lo  abuiuion  the  trade,  provided  they  could  be  assured 
of  meeting  with  due  support  and  protection  from  the  State.  Being  satisfied  on  this  lu  ad,  a new 
subscription  was  entered  into,  which  produced  a capital  of  i?5.1,.^y)0.  Willi  part  of  ibis  sum  lh(‘  new 
subscribers  purchased  of  the  original  adventurers  tlieir  outstanding  reinuius,  and  the  lemainder  was 
employed  in  fitting  out  the  third  voyage,  consisting  of  three  ships,  the  Dragon,  Captain  Keeling;  Hector, 
Captain  Hawkins;  and  (’onsent,  Cajitain  JMiddlctoii.  The  ex|»ence  of  repairs  and  c([uipping  this  fleet 
amounted  to  i?28,620;  the  cargo  was  estimated  at,  bullion,  i'i  7,1)00,  and  gooils  J.72S0,  forming  a total 
of  ^24,880. 

The  Dragon  and  Consent  went  to  Bantam,  and  from  thence  to  tlie  Moluccas,  some  of  which  being 
in  possession  of  the  Dutch,  and  others  of  the  Spaniards  and  Torlugucse,  tliey  were  ref  used  lila-rty  of  trade, 
and  ordered  away,  on  which  they  returned  to  Bantam,  and  procured  a lading  of  pepper,  and  a small 
quantity  of  cloves.  The  Hector  proceeded  to  Surat,  wfith  pow’crs  from  King  James  (o  treat  with  the  Mognf 
Captain  Hawkins,  who  commanded  her,  cxpcrienceil  every  opposition  from  the  Fortugnese  and  the  (tovernoi 
of  vSurat;  he,  however,  succeeded  in  reaching  Agra,  and  delivered  the  King's  letters  to  tlie  Mogul,  who 
received  him  favourably,  and  gave  him  a gi  ant  for  establishing  a factory  at  Sural.  This  excited  llie  enmity 
of  the  Portuguese  and  the  (lovernor  of  Surat,  at  whose  solicitation  the  Mogul  was  induced  to  revoke  the 
grant,  and  forbid  the  English  his  ports  for  ever.  Captain  Hawkins  having  in  some  degree  been  enabled 
to  repel  the  misrepresentations  made  by  the  enemies  of  flie  English,  the  Mogul  was  led  to  leinstate  them 
in  their  privileges;  but  being  of  a fickle  disposition,  the  Portuguese  again  obtained  an  ascendeiiey  over  him, 
and,  by  dint  of  presents,  accomplished  their  views  of  excluding  tlie  English:  whereupon  Hawkins  left  Agra 
in  disgust,  and  arrived  in  England  in  161T  'JJie  original  cost  of  the  above  cloves  brought  f*rom  Amboy  nn 


viii 


RISE  AND  PROGRESS  OF  THE  COMMERCE 


in  this  fleet  was  ^"2,948  15s.  and  they  sold  in  England,  in  December,  1609,  for  i?36,287:  the  profits  upon 
this  voyage  amounted  to  234  per  cent,  on  the  original  subscription.  The  subscription  lor  this  voyage  was 
raised  on  a new  plan.  In  the  former  voyages  each  subscriber  had  a voice  in  tlie  regulation  of  the  concems, 
which  in  all  matters  of  importance  were  transacted  in  a General  Court.  This  had  been  productive  of  incon- 
venience, as  the  minor  interest  in  numbers  frequently  prevailed  over  the  major  in  value. 

In  the  first  and  second  voyages,  out  of  237  subscTiber.s,  212  were  in  sums  under  i^300;  and  in  the 
third,  out  of  205,  108  were  under  £200,  and  36  under  £300,  To  remedy  this,  it  was  resolved  that  no 
person  should  subscribe  less  than  i?500;  but  as  it  would  have  been  difficult  to  procure  a sufficient  number 
of  persons  who  would  be  inclined  to  venture  so  large  a sum  at  their  own  risk,  a modification  was  adopted, 
by  which  whoever  subscribed  £5(X)  or  upwards,  might  take  under-subscribers,  who  should  be  entitled  to 
a share  of  the  profits  that  attached  to  the  principal  subscriber,  in  proportion  as  such  under-subscription 
should  bear  to  the  main  subscription  of  the  person  under  whom  they  subscribed;  but  that  they  should  have 
no  voice  in  the  management  of  affairs,  which  should  be  confined  only  to  the  principal  subscribers  of  i?500 
and  upwards. 

1607.  The  fourth  voyage  commenced  with  two  ships,  the  Ascension  and  (Jnion,  under  the  command 
of  Captain  Sharj)ry.  A subscription  of  i?33,000  was  entered  into.  The  cxpence  of  repairs  and  equipment 
amounted  to  d(?  14,600;  the  cargo  consisted  of  15,000  in  bullion,  and  i?3, 400  in  goods.  This  voyage 
was  unfortunate.  The  Ascension  arrived  at  Aden  the  8th  of  April,  1609,  and  obtained  the  grant  of  a free 
trade,  but  was  afterwards  lost  off  Diu.  The  Union  proceeded  to  Priaman  on  Sumatra,  and  obtained  a 
cargo  of  pepper,  and  nn  her  voyage  home  was  lost  on  the  coast  of  France. 

1608.  Upon  the  arrival  of  the  Consent  from  the  Moluccas,  belonging  to  the  third  voyage,  with  a 
cargo  of  spices,  which  the  Commander,  by  dint  of  bravery  and  exertion,  had  obtained,  in  spite  of  every 
effort  of  the  Dutch  to  prevent  it,  the  adventurers  agreed  to  raise  an  additional  subscription  of  25  per  cent, 
on  their  capital,  to  send  out  another  ship,  the  Expedition,  Captain  David  Middleton,  for  the  firth  voyage, 
the  equipment  of  which  cost  £6000,  The  cargo  consisted  of  £6000  in  bullion,  and  700  in  goods. 
This  ship  was  destined  to  Bantam  and  Banda ; but  the  Dutch  being  in  possession  of  the  latter  place,  they 
were  refused  permission  to  trade;  on  which  they  proceeded  to  Pulo  Way,  where  he  procured  a valuable 
cargo,  consisting  of  nutmegs,  mace,  pepper,  and  other  commodities.  Captain  Middleton's  conduct  was 
equally  conspicuous  in  this  as  in  the  former  voyage ; and  upon  the  final  adjustment  of  the  whole  concern, 
there  was  divided  a profit  of  211  per  cent. 

1609.  Although  the  fifteen  years'  exclusive  trade  granted  to  the  East  India  Company  by  Queen 
Elizabeth,  was  not  to  expire  till  1615,  the  inconvenience  which  the  Company  experienced  from  the  inter- 
ference of  private  traders,  induced  them  to  make  application  to  King  James  for  a renewal  of  their  privi- 
leges. After  reciting  the  charter  of  Queen  Elizabeth,  the  King,  by  letters  patent,  dated  the  31st  of 
May,  1609,  confirmed  the  right  to  the  Company,  to  be  a body  politic  and  corporate  for  ever,  with  per- 
petual succession,  and  to  make  bye-laws;  and  this  right  was  defined  to  be,  to  possess  lands,  and  to 
alienate  the  same;  but  instead  of  limiting  their  exclusive  privileges  to  fifteen  years,  the  whole  entire  and 
only  trade  and  traffic  to  the  East  Indies  for  ever,"  was  granted  to  the  Company;  and,  by  a prohibitory 
clause,  all  persons  were  enjoined  not  to  trade  within  the  Company's  limits,  except  by  licences  obtained 
from  them  under  their  common  seal;  and  to  prevent  any  apprehensions  which  the  Company  might  enter- 
tain of  licences  granted  to  private  traders  being  obtained  from  the  Crown,  it  was  expressly  stated,  that  the 
same  should  not  be  given  without  the  consent  of  the  Company,  explaining  that,  notwithstanding  these 
privileges,  if  the  trade  should  not  be  found  profitable  to  the  realm,  such  exclusive  privileges  were  to  cease 
and  determine  after  three  years'  warning. 


BETWEEN  ENGLAND  AND  THE  EAST  INDIES. 


ix 


At  this  period  the  East  India  Company  wanted  one  advanta^a'  wlilch  other  nation's  enjoyed.  'The 
Spaniards  and  Portuguese  had  harbours,  of  \^hieh  tliey  were  absolute  masters,  ami  Avhii  h they  liad 
secured  by  garrisons  and  fortifications.  'Fhe  Dutch,  after  their  example,  had  lx  gun  to  foitiiV  themselves 
in  different  places.  The  voyages  of  the  I'iUglish  were  hitlualo  lUTessaiily  pieeaiious,  depending  not  (»nly 
on  the  uncertainty  of  seasons  and  markets,  whieli  wvie  frerpiently  engrossed  hyotlieis,  hut  also  eni  the 
will  of  the  Dutch  and  oilier  powers,  who,  in  eonsecpience  of  fheir  fnifs,  could  e\( Imh' (hem  fiinn  tin  ir 
ports;  hut  experience,  and  the  praetiec*  of  other  nations,  soon  convinced  thi  in  of  the  lus  i sslt)  of  suppoiling 
the  simple  title  of  merchants  by  pow  er. 

The  shipping  at  this  time  was  to  a very  liiniled  extent.  It  nppi'ars,  froni  a lemoiistr.inee  from  the 
Corporation  of  the  Trinity  House,  that  in  l.^SS  the  whole  nnmher  ol  ships  in  the  run)  wc're  of 
which  only  fO  belonged  to  the  Crown;  that  then*  was  a like  nnmher  of  \ess(‘Is  employed  in  trading 
voyages  to  all  parts,  the  average  burthen  (»f  which  was  alxnil  !.>()  tons  each.  In  IfiOi  it  was  lepresenled 
that,  within  the  last  Pi  years,  the  slilpping  and  seamen  of  the  eoimtry  were  dei  a)  c‘d  about  one-lliird, 
owing  to  the  W'ars  wIUi  Spain,  losst  s by  < a[)lures,  and  in  the  many  pii\ate  adveiitni(‘s  and  expedition^  to 
America,  Africa,  ike.  Sir  AVilliani  IMortson,  in  bis  Na\al  'fraeC,  sfafes  that  at  tin*  death  of  (*)ueeii 
Elizalx'tli,  there  were  not  more  than  four  ships  In  the  kingdom,  of  dOOtons  each;  and  tlu‘  ships  that  sailed 
to  India  in  IdOl,  were  described  by  him  as  “ tom*  of  tin'  be‘'t  meiTlianrs  ships  in  the  Kingdom." 

The  Coin[)any,  not  being  abit'  to  proem e Ne-'Si'Is  of  a suflieli'iit  burthen  for  tlieir  voyages,  eitiu'r  in 
England  or  at  any  foreign  ports,  eainc  to  the  resolution  of  building  tlieir  own  shijis;  llie\  in  eoiisiMpieiice 
[Hircbased  a piece  of  ground  at  Deptford,  where  a dockyard  was  foruKsl,  and  slorehuiises  ami  othei 
conveniences  erected  at  a very  great  ex |)('nee,  and  in  this  >eui  was  l.iunclied  from  the  yani,  (o  iisc*  (he 
wwds  of  Sir  William  IVTonson,  “ the  goodliest  and  gi(‘atest  ship  that  was  iwar  fianusl  in  this  kingdom,"'* 
and  from  this  beginning,  bo  adds,  may  be  dutoil  the  “ hicrea:'»o  of  gn  at  ships  in  laigland." 

This  eflbrt  on  the  part  of  the  Company  was^iewaslby  all  lanks  with  gual  exultation.  King  J.iii'.C',  T 
honoured  the  launch  with  his  presence,  aeeoin]uinied  by  his  son  (afterwards  Charles  I ) the  jnineipal  olIiK  js 
of  state,  and  great  numbers  of  the  nohility.  llis  Majesty  perfoiined  thceeixMiiony  usual  <»n  ^ueh  ocea'ions, 
and  named  her  the  “ Trade's  Increase."  After  the  launch,  tlie  King  and  nobility  paittH)k  of  .i  sumptuou'* 
banquet,  provided  at  the  Company's  expeiiee;  and  it  was  then  spoken  of,  a^  a spii  imen  of  eastei  n mag- 
nificence, that  tile  whole  of  the  tables  were  covered  with  sei vices  of  China-ware. 

1(510.  The  Company,  having  raised  a capital  of  .i\S0,l(i3  for  a sixth  voyage,  dlspatehed  tlu*  'frade^ 
Increase,  the  Pepper  (.’orn,  and  Darling,  under  the  eommand  of  Sii  Henry  Middh  ton.  The  olijcci  of 
this  voyage  w'as  to  open  a new  source  of  trade.  It  was  eoneeivi'd  that  laigi‘  <juanti!ies  nf  Jhilish  (oinmo- 
ditles,  particularly  w'oollcns  and  metals,  might  be  disposed  <if  in  llic  Bed  Sea;  and  that  eali(w»es  and  oIIk  i’ 
Indian  articles  might  be  procurable  from  the  Mogul's  subjects  who  traded  (hitla  i*;  which  hi  ing  laiiiid  to 
Bantam,  the  Moliiceas,  &c.  might  be  disposed  of  in  barter  for  spices  and  drugs.  Upon  binding  at  Afoelia, 
their  goods  were  seized,  and  Sir  Henry  and  several  of  his  associates  committed  to  juisoii,  where  they  wx*i(‘ 
detained  several  months.  They  at  length  made  their  escape;  and  having  an  ived  on  board  their  ships,  ?sir 
Henry  obtained  restitution  of  liis  los.se.s  by  threatening  to  use  foreiv  Having  remained  in  the  Bed  Sea 
(luring  the  monsoon,  lie  pursued  his  voyage  to  Surat,  where  his  landing  w^ns  oj)pos('d  l)y  the  I'oi tiigiiesc, 
and  effected  only  by  force.  Owing,  however,  to  the  intrigues  of  the  Pgrluguc'se,  they  were  not  pe  rmitted 
to  trade.  Sir  Henry  thereupon  returned  to  the  lied  Sea,  where  he  seized  several  of  the  Mogul's  ships,  and 
obliged  them  to  compound  for  their  release,  by  a sum  equivalent  to  the  loss  he  Iiad  siistaiiMMi  by  the 
iVu.stration  of  bis  voyage.  He  then  proceeded  to  Ticoo  on  Sumatra,  wliere,  and  at  Bantam,  lie  loaded 
home  tw'o  of  Ins  ships  w ith  pepper;  but  w'as  obliged  himself  to  remain  beiiind,  to  irpair  the  damage  whieli 
his  ship,  the  Trader’s  Increase,  had  sustained  by  running  on  a rock.  In  careening  the  ship  in  Bantam 

H 


X 


RISE  AND  PROGRESS  OF  THE  COMMERCE 


roads,  she  overset,  at  which  Sir  Henry  was  so  much  affected,  that  he  soon  after  died  of  g/Aef,  The  concern 
on  its  termination,  nevertheless,  divided  their  capital  with  £121  13s.  4d.  per  cent,  profit 

The  seventh  voyage  was  undertaken  with  a single  ship,  the  Globe,  under  the  command  of  Captain 
Ilippon,  having  on  board  two  merchants,  who  had  quitted  the  service  of  the  Dutch,  and  entered  into  that 
of  the  English  East  India  Company.  The  object  of  this  voyage  was  to  open  a trade  on  the  Coast  of 
Coromandel  for  calicoes,  partly  for  sale  in  the  Eastern  islands,  where  they  were  in  great  demand,  and  also 
for  trial  at  home.  They  sailed  from  the  Downs  on  the  5th  of  February,  1610,  and  proceeded  to  the 
Coromandel  Coast ; but  were  prevented  trading  at  Pulicat  by  the  Dutch,  who  were  settled  there,  and  had 
the  grant  of  an  exclusive  trade.  At  Pettapole  they  traded,  and  left  factors.  At  Mausulipatam  they 
also  traded,  paying  4 per  cent,  customs;  the  Governor  wanted  to  exact  12.  From  thence  they  proceeded 
to  Bantam,  and  settled  a trade  with  the  King,  paying  3 per  cent,  customs.  From  thence  they  went 
to  Patany,  where  they  were  favourably  received,  and  allowed  a free  trade.  They  likewise  settled  a 
factory  at  Siam,  and  returned  to  Mausulipatam  the  16th  of  December,  1613.  In  1614  the  King  of 
Narsinga  invited  them  to  settle  a factory;  but  he  dying  before  they  left  the  place,  the  Governor,  who 
had  obtained  goods  of  them,  refused  payment  of  his  debt:  on  this  they  seized  his  son,  and  carried  him 
on  board  their  ship;  he  then  paid  their  demand,  and  obtained  his  song's  release.  They  then  went  back  to 
Bantam,  where  they  took  in  a cargo,  and  returned  to  England. 

The  profits  from  this  voyage  were  218  per  cent,  on  the  sum  of  j£^15,364  originally  subscribed. 

The  value  of  the  exports  made  by  the  Company  in  the  years  1601  to  1610  was,  in  goods  and  stores, 
•P5],673,  in  bullion  ^'’119,022,  forming  a total  of  j^l 70,695,  by  which  it  appears  that  the  buUion  bore  a 
proportion  to  the  goods  of  2 to  1.  The  value  of  the  imports  cannot  be  ascertained,  as  the  Company 
occasionally  made  their  dividends  in  goods,  after  the  manner  of  the  Dutch;  but  it  may  be  estimated  to 
amount  to  near  i?l, 000,000  per  annum.  The  amount  of  the  duties  paid  during  the  same  period  was 
JP97,950,  on  an  average  i?9,795  per  annum. 

1611.  The  eighth  voyage  was  a distinct  concern,  in  the  Clove,  the  Hector,  and  Thomas,  under 
the  command  of  Captain  Saris.  They  sailed  from  England  in  April,  1611.  On  their  arrival  at  Mocha, 
they  were  about  to  enter  upon  a trade,  when  the  arrival  of  Sir  Henry  Middleton,  on  his  return  from 
Surat,  put  an  end  to  all  further  proceedings.  Sir  Henry,  on  behalf  of  the  sixth  voyage,  and  Captain 
Saris  for  the  eighth  voyage,  finding  that  if  they  acted  separately,  there  would  be  a clashing  of  interest  that 
might  affect  the  good  of  the  whole,  agreed  to  take  their  measures  in  concert,  allowing  to  the  sixth 
voyage  two-thirds,  and  to  the  eighth  one-third  of  all  their  trading  concerns.  On  this  plan  they  stopped 
the  Moorish  ships  from  entering  Mocha,  and  bartered  with  them  for  their  commodities  in  exchange  for 
European  goods.  Having  finished  their  business  in  this  way,  they  sailed  for  Bantam;  hei-e  two  of  the 
ships  took  in  pepper  and  spices,  and  Captain  Saris,  in  the  Clove,  proceeded  to  open  a trade  with  Japan. 
In  his  way  he  touched  at  the  Moluccas,  and  could  have  obtained  cloves  of  the  natives,  but  the  Dutch 
would  not  suffer  him  to  trade;  they  insisted  that  the  islands  were  theirs  by  right  of  conquest,  and  that 
the  natives  were  under  perpetual  contract  to  supply  them  exclusively  with  the  whole  of  their  productions. 
At  Japan  Captain  Saris  met  with  a friendly  reception,  and  obtained  permission  to  trade.  He  afterwards 
returned  to  Bantam,  and  took  in  a lading  for  Europe.  The  capital  raised  for  the  eighth  voyage  was 
.1^55,947,  and  it  yielded  a profit  of  211  per  cent 

1612.  The  ninth  voyage  was  a single  ship  that  sailed  for  Bantam,  and  from  thence  to  the  Coast  of 
Coromandel.  The  capital  riused  for  the  voyage  was  dP19,164,  and  the  profit  160  per  cent. 

The  tenth  voyage  was  made  with  two  ships,  the  Dragon  and  Hoseander,  under  the  charge  of 


BETWEEN  ENGLAND  AND  THE  EAST  INDIES. 


xi 

Captain  Thomas  Best,  a brave  and  discreet  commander.  The  object  of  this  voyage  was  to  quiet  the 
mind  of  the  Mogul,  in  respect  to  the  proceedings  of  Sir  Henry  Middleton,  in  laying  tlie  ibips  of  his 
subjects  under  contribution  in  the  Red  Sea.  Captain  Best  by  great  address  arcomplished  his  purpose. 
He  entered  into  a treaty  of  amity  and  commerce  with  the  Mogul,  and  procured  a phirmaund,  allowing 
the  English  nation  permission  to  trade,  on  paying  3^  per  cent,  customs,  the  privilege  of  keeping  an 
ambassador  at  Agra,  &c.  The  Portuguese  were  nevertheless  determined,  if  possible,  to  prevent  the 
English  from  trading  in  the  Mogul's  dominions.  For  this  purpose  they  collected  the  whole  of  their  naval 
force,  4 galleons  and  26  frigates,  and  attacked  the  English  ships.  The  Portuguese,  having  the  advantage 
of  numbers,  maintained  an  obstinate  light;  but  by  the  gallantry  of  Captain  Best  and  his  associates,  aflcr 
four  several  encounters,  the  Portuguese  were  entirely  defeated  with  great  loss,  to  the  satisfaction  of 
the  Moors,  who  had  considered  them  to  be  invincible.  From  Surat  Captain  Best  proceeded  to  Aclieen, 
where  he  procured  a confirmation  of  the  privileges  granted  to  Captain  Lancaster  in  the  first  voyage.  He 
afterwards  went  to  various  places  on  Sumatra,  and  finally  to  Bantam,  from  whence  he  returned  home 
with  pepper,  &c.  The  capital  engaged  on  this  voyage  was  i?46,092,  which  yielded  a profit  of  148  per  cent. 

The  eleventh  voyage  was  a single  ship,  sent  out  to  bring  home  the  remains  of  the  adventurers 
who  had  subscribed  to  the  third  and  fifth  voyage.  The  sum  subscribed  was  10,G69,  and  the  voyage 
being  made  direct  out  and  home  in  20  months,  the  profit  was  320  per  cent. 

The  twelfth  and  last  voyage  consisted  of  a single  ship  only,  the  Expedition,  Captain  Newport, 
whicfai  took  out  Sir  Robert  Shirley,  as  the  .King's  ambassador  to  Persia.  Sir  Robert  was  to  Jinve  been 
landed  at  Guadeli  to  proceed  to  Ispahan  by  land;  but  a discovery  being  made  that  the  natives  had 
an  intention  of  plundering  and  destroying  him  and  his  suite,  they  proceeded  to  Diu.  Here  the  Portuguese 
opposed  them;  they  accused  Sir  Robert  of  being  a pii’ate,  and  treated  his  pass  from  the  King  of  Spain 
as  a forgery.  The  Governor  of  Diu  was  inclined  to  admit  of  their  ti*ading,  but  was  prevented  by  the 
influence  of  the  Portuguese;  a conditional  agreement  was,  however,  made  to  admit  the  English  in 
another  year,  on  which  they  proceeded  to  Ticoo  and  Bantam,  and  loaded  home  with  pepj>er.  The 
capital  for  this  voyage  was  J?71 42.  The  outward  cargo  consisted  of  1,250  in  money,  and  i?650  in 
goods.  The  profit  amounted  to  J^133  18s.  4d.  per  cent. 

It  is  observable  that  h7thf>rto  but  little  progress  had  been  made  in  extending  this  trade,  which  scarcely 
merited  the  name  of  a national  concein.  Thu  whole  of  the  capitals  raised  for  the  twelve  voyages,  in  the 
aggregate,  amounted  to  no  more  than  X‘464,284,  or  upon  an  average  i?38,690  for  each  voyage,  which 
sum  of  d&464,284  appears  to  have  been  invested  in  the  following  manner: 

In  merchandise,  &c  d(?62,411^or,  on  an  average  i?5,201  per  voyage. 

Bullion  138,127  11,510  ditto. 

Shipping,  stores,  provisions,  &Ct  1 ,9 1 9 ditto. 

which  gave  a profit,  one  voyage  with  another,  of  138  per  cent. 

That  no  erroneous  idea  may  prevail  with  regard  to  the  supposed  magnitude  of  these  profits,  compared 
with  the  state  of  things  at  the  present  day,  it  will  be  necessary  to  bear  in  mind  that  the  voyages  above 
referred  to,  were  seldom  made  in  less  than  thirty  months,  and  often  were  extended  to  three  and  four  years, 
from  the  time  of  the  ships  leaving  England  till  their  return;  that,  upon  their  arrival,  their  cargoes  were 
disposed  of  at  long  credits,  from  eighteen  to  twenty-four  months,  and  that,  iVom  irregularity  in  the  factors, 
as  well  in  keeping,  as  in  the  transmission  of  their  accounts,  it  was  frequently  six,  seven,  and  eight  years 
before  the  concerns  of  a voyage  were  finally  adjusted;  (the  first  and  second  voyage  accounts,  which  com- 
menced in  1600,  were  not  brought  to  a close  till  1609,  and  then  it  was  by  making  over  their  remains  to 

♦B  2 


xii 


RISK  AND  PROGRESS  OF  THE  COMMERCf: 


the  thiril  voyage,  who  advanced  the  amount  upon  a valuation);  taking  it,  therefore,  upon  a medium  of 
seven  years,  it  reduces  it  to  something  less  than  20  per  cent,  per  annuin.  It  must  also  be  noticed  that 
this  was  not  merely  the  simple  [irofit  of  the  voyage  out  and  home,  but  included  the  accumulated  profits  of 
all  the  various  barters  and  sales  in  their  transit  from  port  to  port  in  India,  which  were  by  no  means  incon* 
sideruble.  It  is  further  to  be  recollected  that  the  Company,  by  building  their  own  ships,  and  fitting 
them  out  within  themselv(\s,  derived  tlie  advantag(‘s  which  now  attach  to  the  various  professions  employed 
111  and  about  shipping;  taking,  therefore,  all  these  circumstances  into  coiislderatioii,  it  may  be  fairly 
doubted  whether  the  profits  upon  an  insignificant  sum  under  X’dDjOOO,  were  more  than  what  they  will  be 
found  to  be  upon  a capital  of  rb,000,0()(). 

The  importance  of  this  trade  was  daily  becoming  more  apparent,  and  it  was  of  course  necessary  to 
adopt  measures  for  conducting  it  upon  a more  extended  scale.  Experience  had  laid  open  the  error  of 
carrying  on  the  trade  upon  a separate  account.  The  Dutch  were  early  sensible  of  this  evil,  and  by 
joining  in  one  common  stock,  became  united  in  one  common  interest;  while  the  natives  of  India, 
unus(‘d  to  any  other  than  national  distinctions  among  the  dilfereni  descriptions  of  Murojiean  traders,  saw 
with  astonislmu'nt  the  represiaitatives  of  various  societies  of  the  same  nation  pursuing  their  several 
commercial  speculations  with  all  the  zeal  and  avidity  of  professed  rivals,  and  suhjcTt  to  all  the  jarrings 
and  contentions  which  ever  result  from  opposing  interests.  They  belield  them  with  secre  t satisfaction 
underselling  and  overbuying  each  other  in  the  same  niarkel;  and  being  alive  to  their  own  interest,  they 
did  not  fail  to  avail  theiuselvx's  of  the  opportiuiity  that  was  thus  afforded  them,  of  depreciating  the  value 
of  British,  and  enhancing  tlie  rates  of  their  own  Indian  commodities. 

Inconveniences  also  vviTO  no  less  felt  at  homo  in  the  disposal  of  tlie  homeward  cargoes.  They  were 
either  sold  at  public  sale,  or  divided  among  the  adventurers  in  kind,  as  was  l)(*st  suited  to  tin*  interests  of 
the  leading  persons  in  the  sepaiate  concerns;  and  it  often  happened  that  private  accommodation  was 
studied  at  the  expe  nee  of  the  gimeral  good. 

It  nas  impossii)le  under  such  circumstances  that  the  Mnglish  iinfion,  divided  amongst  themselves, 
could  maintain  llic‘ir  ground  against  the  Portuguese  and  Dutih,  both  of  wh«>m  were  endeavouring  by 
every  means  in  tlieir  power  to  compel  them  to  abuiulon  this  brancli  of  trade.  It  was  therefore  resolved  to 
rcliiujuish  all  lnrth(‘r  concerns  on  separate  voyages,  and  to  open  a subscription  for  continuing  the  trade 
upon  a joint  stock  account.  The  duration  of  the  stock  was  piirp()s(‘ly  limited  to  i'our  years,  in  order 
that  the  adventurers  might  have  an  opportunity  of  n'gulating  their  liiture  conduct  by  eireumstances  as 
they  should  arise.  The  amount  of  the  subscription  was  X^I1S,()91,  wliich  it  was  agreed  should  be 
advaiued  in  ccjual  proportions  in  each  of  the  four  years. 

In  the  outset  of  this  concern  the  Company  were  highly  successful,  although  they  hud  to  contend 
with  the  violence  of  the  Portuguese,  and  the  treachery  of  the  Dutch;  the  latter  of  whom,  although 
they  had  acted  very  cordially  uitli  the  English  in  resisting  the  attempts  that  were  made  by  the  rortugucse, 
to  excliule  both  nations  from  any  trading  intercourse  with  that  country,  yet  having  obtained  a secure 
footing  themselves,  they  were  now  ecjnally  earnest  in  excluding  tlie  English. 

16 bl.  The  first  voyage  on  the  joint  stock  consisted  of  four  ships,  under  the  command  of 
Captain  Nicholas  Downton.  On  their  arrival  at  Surat,  they  contended  for  a reduction  of  customs  and 
other  privileges.  The  Mogul,  being  at  war  with  the  Portuguese,  sought  the  assistance  of  the  English; 
but  as  peace  subsisUd  at  that  time  between  England  and  Spain,  to  the  latter  of  whom  the  Portu- 
giK'se  were  then  subject,  it  was  declined.  U'lie  Governor  of  Surat,  displeased  at  this  refusal  of  the 
iMigli^h  to  assist  the  Mogul,  used  his  utmost  endeavours  to  prevent  their  being  allowed  to  trade;  and  the 
Portuguese,  with  the  most  unprincipled  ingratitude,  availed  themselves  of  the  circumstance,  insinuating 
that  the  English  meant  to  lend  thek  assistance  to  them  against  the  Mogul.  The  Mogul,  being  at  length 


liETWEEN  Ex\(;LAND  AND  THE  EAST  INDIES  xiil 

tnidcceivcd,  sent  his  jdiirniauiul,  allowing  the  English  to  trade;  and  tin-  prese  nts  for  the  Mogul  were  there- 
upon Ibrwardeil  to  Agi\i.  Upon  the  a|)j)earaiu‘(‘  of  a voiy  considi  rahle  Poiliigufso  Hod,  llio  (lovernnient 
were  terrilied,  and  sued  for  j)eaLe,  whieli  was  haughtily  retiised  them.  The  Eoituguese  Ihi'n  attacked 
the  haiglish  ships,  hut  met  with  a severe  re])uhs(‘,  in  which  many  of  tludr  ships  were  burnt,  'bhis  alhorded 
great  encouragement  to  the  Mogul's  people.  Some  attempts  weie  mad(*  by  llu*  desiiits  to  reconcile  mailers, 
whicli  proved  ineileetual,  Iruni  the  impel  i«)Us  demands  made  by  the  Eoiliiguese,  who  procured  a supply  of 
fire-sliips,  and  endea\onred  to  destroy  the  English  ships,  but  without  cHcct.  'I'he  \ iceroy  then  made 
proposals  tor  peace  wit !i  the  Mogul,  who  in  his  turn  jiroNed  haughty,  u[)on  w hith  they  idired  to  Cloa. 
1 he  English  having  transact' <1  their  bu'^liu'ss',  d(‘[iaited  lor  Ihintam,  where  oiu'  of  the  ships  procured  a 
cargo  ol  mace  and  silk,  and  jiroceechal  to  Mausulipatam,  ami  the  othe  rs  rcliuiud  to  I’lngland.  CJreat 
complaints  were  made  ag  nnst  the  conduct  «)f  the  Dutch  botjiat  Ihmiam  and  AbuMssar  t«>  the  English  lactois* 

An  attempt  was  made  to  open  a trade  with  IVTsia,  where  tlu'  iMiglish  liutors  wcie  well  leceivetl. 

Ibl  1.  'Die  dissensions  that  pre\ ailed  between  tlie  laiglish  and  Dutch  Company's  siixants  in  India  were 
now  become  so  seiious  and  alarming,  as  to  forma  sidiject  of  di^enssion  b(‘tw'een  tln^  ri'spcatis e (ioMiimuiits 
in  Europe.  (^Jnlmi^si{)nel•s  were  appointed  on  both  siilcs  to  adjust  tiu'se  ditfen-nees,  and  to  li\  upon  soni(‘ 
satisfactory  plan  for  tin*  regulation  of  the  trade' to  India  in  liitme.  In  the  conferencis  wliicli  lo(»k  jilace 
on  this  occasion,  a pi oposil ion  was  made' on  tin*  part  of  the  Dutch,  that  an  union  shouhl  hi*  estahlished 
between  tin'  two  Companies,  and  tin*  tiade  caJiic'd  on  .is  a joint  eoiieiin.  In  sup[Mul  of  Ihi^  luoposilicnij 
they  urged  that  such  a iiK'asure  would  he  piodiietivc'  of* the  following  signal  advantages: 

That  with  a stock  of  Cl )()(),  tlu'  concern  would  he  .d)Ie  to  maki'  a ye.uly  lefurn  in  spice,  alone, 
to  the  amount  of  5 or  i’tiOt ),()()(). 

It  wa)nld  keep  up  the  prices,  as  care  waiidd  he  taken  to  Ining  no  more*  than  sbendd  la*  barely  siiilicii  nt 
lor  the  European  demand. 

It  would  he  the  means  of  elfeeling  a reduction  In  the  customs  pav.dili'  in  India. 

It  w'onld  lead  to  the  abolition  of  the  juuetice  of  giving  ju’esents  to  the  native  Ihincis. 

It  waudd  lend  to  iiure.ise  the  number  of  shijijung,  by  the  opening  ol‘.i  tiaih'  to  China. 

It  would  keep  tiu'  factors  and  maiiiu'rs  in  better  subordination,  and 

It  would  operate  to  the  ('xcliision  of  all  other  nations  from  tlu’  tiade  of  India,  as  abo  cnabh*  llieni 
the  betlir  to  make  war  against  iht'  eomnion  eimmy. 

Upon  the  English  (Vmipany  taking  this  |)roposition  Into  eoiisuhi atlon.  It  was  u inaiked  that  the 
Moluccas,  the  especial  place  which  the  Diitrb  were  so  earnestly  stiiving  for,  would  not  yield  sullieieiit 
advantage  to  countervail  tlie  excessive  charge  of  their  maintinanci'. 

That  the  pro.spcct  which  tin*  Company^  had  of  trade  on  the  Malaliar  Coast  bid  fiir  to  bi*  productix* 
of  more  solid  advantages  than  could  be  expected  to  arise  from  the  trailc'  in  spices  siiiijily;  and  that  if  an 
union  were  to  be  formed,  tlie  Dutch  must  be  allowed  a participation  therein. 

Tliat  the  object  of  the  Dutch  was  meri  ly  to  obtain  the  assistance  of  tlu'  l aigli  di  in  di  iving  the  Spa- 
niards from  the  Moluccas. 

That  they  deemed  war  to  be  a matter  of  .state,  and  contrary  to  the  mercantile  course  pursued,  and 
intended  to  he  pursued  by  tin'  1 aiglish ; and, 

That  for  two  nations  to  join  in  monopolizing  a trade  to  tlie  exclusion  of  others,  was,  in  their  view  of 
things,  neither  just  nor  praetieahle. 

Upon  the  whole,  therefore,  they  were  of  opinion  the  proposition  could  not  be  acceded  to,  on  w hich 
the  conferences  were  hrok(*n  off. 

1615.  The  Company  made  an  application  to  the  King,  to  grant  his  royal  authoi ity  that  an  ainhas- 
sador  should  proceed  in  his  name  to  the  Great  Mogul.  The  King,  in  compliance  then with,  granted  his  coin- 


RISE  AND  PROGRESS  OF  THE  COMMERCE 


xvr 

mission  to  Sir  Thomas  Roe  ‘‘  to  be  Ambassador  to  the  Great  Mogul,  or  King  of  India  ^ the  Company 
agreeing  to  defray  the  expences,  in  consideration  that,  under  their  exclusive  privileges,  they  were  to 
acquire  such  benefits  as  might  result  from  this  mission. 

Sir  Thomas  Roe  sailed  from  England  in  March,  1615,  on  board  the  Lion,  Captain  Newport,  one  of 
four  ships  fitted  out  on  the  joint  stock  account,  and  arrived  at  Surat,  from  whence  he  proceeded  to  the 
Mogul’s  Court  at  Agimere,  which  he  reached  in  December,  1615,  and  on  the  10th  of  January,  1616,  was 
presented  to  the  Great  Mogul,  when  he  delivered  the  King’s  letter,  and  the  presents,  of  wdiich  the  Mogul 
expressed  his  satisfaction,  and  gave  the  ambassador  a gracious  reception.  On  the  24th  of  January  Sir 
Thomas  had  a second  audience  of  the  Mogul,  when  he  stated  the  injuries  the  English  had  sustained 
from  the  arbitrary  conduct  of  the  Governors  of  Surat,  and  proposed  the  renewing  the  articles  of  the  phir- 
maund  or  treaty  between  the  Mogul  and  the  English  nation,  which  was  complied  with.  The  following  is 
the  substance  of  this  treaty: 

After  the  usual  preamble,  it  was  stipulated  tliat  the  English  subjects  should  have  liberty  of  trade, 
and  be  allowed  to  settle  factories  in  any  ports  of  the  Mogul  empire. 

That  they  should  be  furnished  with  all  kinds  of  provisions  and  carriages  by  the  inhabitants  of  the  sea- 
ports, according  to  the  ordinary  rates  of  charge. 

That  the  merchants  should  be  protected  against  any  exactions  in  all  sales,  not  exceeding  16  rials  of  8. 

That  all  presents  sent  to  the  Mogul,  should  be  protected  from  being  opened  at  the  sea-ports,  and  be 
forwarded  to  the  English  ambassador  at  Court,  to  be  delivered  agreeably  to  his  instructions. 

Tliat  the  goods  of  the  English  merchants  should  be  rated  within  six  days  after  being  landed  at  any 
port;  and  after  payment  of  the  stipulated  duty,  might  be  forwarded  free  to  any  other  English  factory. 

That  the  goods  purchased  by  the  English,  in  any  part  of  the  Mogul’s  dominions,  should  have  a free 
transit  to  the  ports  at  which  they  were  to  be  shipped. 

That  the  property  of  the  Company’s  servants  who  might  die  in  the  Mogul’s  dominions,  should  be 
delivered  to  the  Company’s  officers,  or  their  successors. 

That  the  provisions  necessary  for  the  shipping  should  be  exempted  from  duty. 

By  a separate  article  it  was  agreed,  that  the  rate  of  customs  on  English  imports  should  be  fixed  at 
Sj  per  cent,  and  2 per  cent,  on  rials  of  eight;  and  that  mutual  assistance  should  be  given  against  the  ene- 
mies of  either  of  the  contracting  parties. 

Sir  Thomas  Roe  resided  some  years  In  India,  and  conducted  himself  so  much  to  the  Company’s  satis- 
faction, that  upon  his  return  in  1619,  he  was  complimented  with  an  honorary  seat  in  their  Court  of  Com- 
mittees, and  allowed  an  annual  stipend  of  J?200  per  annum,  as  a mark  of  their  esteem. 

Captain  Kcelinge,  who  commanded  one  of  the  ships  which  sailed  with  Sir  Thomas  Roe,  proceeded 
to  Cranganore,  where  he  arrived  in  March,  1616,  and  obtained  liberty  to  trade,  and  permission  to  settle  a 
factory;  and  it  was  agreed  by  treaty,  that  the  English  and  the  Samorin  should  join  their  forces,  and  expel 
the  Portuguese  from  Cochin,  which,  when  conquered,  should  be  ceded  to  the  English. 

In  tliis  year  a treaty  was  concluded  with  the  King  of  Acheen,  by  which  liberty  to  trade,  and  settle  a 
factory  at  Ticoo  was  granted,  on  payment  of  7 per  cent,  customs  on  imports  and  exports. 

A pamphlet  was  this  year  published,  entitled  Trade’s  Increase,”  complaining  of  the  East  India 
trade,  and  alleging,  among  other  objections  to  it,  its  draining  the  country  pf  specie.  It  was  replied 
to  by  Sir  Dudley  Digges,  who  stated  that  the  Company  had  employed,  from  their  origin,  24  ships, 
of  which  four  had  been  lost;  that  19  of  them  were  from  150  to  600  tons  burthen;  that  one  was  of  800 
tons,  one  of  900,  one  of  1060,  one  of  1100,  and  one  of  1293  tons;  and  that  the  reason  for  having  such 
large  ships  was  owing  to  the  navy  not  being  sufficiently  strong  to  protect  them  from  the  Barbary  rovers. 
He  states  that  the  largest  value  of  goods  exported  in  one  year  was  .£36,000;  that  i^70,000  had  beei^ 


BETWEEN  ENGLAND  AND  THE  EAST  INDIES. 


XV 


saved  annually  to  the  nation  in  the  prices  of  pepper,  cloves,  and  nutmegs  for  home  consumption ; that 
spices  had  been  exported  in  the  last  year  to  the  value  of  ^218, (KK),  besides  indigo,  calicoes,  China  silks, 
and  drugs,  to  which  should  be  added  the  King'^s  customs,  and  also  the  employment  given  to  ships  and 
mariners  in  the  re-exportation. 

That  besides  cinnamon,  the  Company  computed  that  we  annually  consumed  at  home  the  following 
spices,  viz,  pepper  formerly  at  8s.  but  now  at  2s.  |)er  lb.  450, (XK)  lbs.  cloves  50,000  lbs.  mace  1.5,000  Ihs. 
nutmegs  100,000  lbs.  and  that  the  cloves,  mace,  and  nutmegs  were  proportionahly  reduced  in  price  since 
our  direct  trade  to  India.  That  the  cargoes  in  1614  amounted  to  i?100,000,  and  consisted  of 

Bays,  kersies,  and  broad  cloths,  died  and  dressed  J?14.,000 

Lead,  iron,  and  foreign  merchandise  10,000 

Treasure  (which  is  less  than  allowed  to  export  by  charter)  12,000 

The  shipping  and  furniture  cost  in  the  same  year 

^For  provisions  and  other  extraordinary  charges  30,0(K) 

1616.  The  stock  for  the  next  voyage  was  estimated  at  i?52,087  in  money,  and  X^16,506  In  goods; 
and  tlie  fleet  consisted  of  seven  vessels,  under  the  command  of  Captain  Pring.  They  sailed  from  the 
Downs  in  March,  and  arrived  at  Surat  in  October,  1616,  after  taking  a valuable  Portuguese  frigate;  tliey 
then  sailed  to  Bantam.  At  Jacatra  they  agreed  to  give  700  rials  per  annum  for  the  liberty  of  trade,  and 
1 500  rials  for  a piece  of  ground  for  a factory.  The  Dutch,  who  liad  so  loudly  complained  of  the  oppo- 
sition they  met  with  from  tlic  Portuguese,  seeing  the  rapid  advances  the  English  were  making  in  the 
East  India  trade,  sought  every  opportunity  in  their  turn  to  harass  and  distress  them.  The  most 
serious  differences  had  for  some  time  subsisted  between  the  two  Companies,  which  at  length  broke  out 
into  open  hostilities.  King  James  I.,  with  a view  of  affording  protection  to  the  English  Company,  as 
well  from  the  insults  of  the  Dutch,  as  from  the  injurious  effects  from  some  interlopers  who  had  crept  into 
the  trade,  granted  a commission  to  Sir  Thomas  Dale  to  proceed  with  a fleet  propeily  armed  to  India;  he 
also  was  empowered  to  seize  the  ships  of  illicit  traders.  ^Phis  force,  on  its  arrival  at  Bantam,  was  joined 
by  the  Company’s  shipping  then  in  India,  making  13  sail,  witli  wliUh  they  engaged,  and  beat  oft'  the 
Dutch  fleet.  The  Dutch  had  previously  seized  the  English  factors  at  Jacatra,  and  burnt  the  factory,  and 
even  went  so  far  as  to  attack  the  King’s  palace.  The  King  on  this  sent  to  Bantam  for  the  a.ssistance  ol' 
the  English,  which  being  rendered  him,  the  Dutch  proposed  to  surrender  their  fort  at  Jacatra.  The 
English  attacked  four  Dutch  ships  off  Sumatra,  which  again  retreated  ; but  in  a subsequent  engagement 
five  of  the  English  ships  were  taken. 

The  profits  of  the  four  voyages  on  joint  stock  did  not  amount  to  more  than  87|  per  cent,  on  the 
original  subscription,  notwithstanding  the  cargo  of  one  of  the  ships  cost  only  40,000  rials  of  eight,  and 
produced  at  the  sales  in  England  i?80,000  sterling. 


1617.  The  period  of  four  years,  to  which  the  concerns  of  the  first  joint  stock  was  limited,  being 
expired,  a fresh  subscription  was  opened;  and  so  eager  were  persons  of  all  ranks  to  enrol  themselves 
therein,  that  at  the  period  of  its  close,  the  sums  that  were  underwritten,  amounted  to  no  less  than  0^1,620,040. 
The  following  list  has  been  preserved  of  tlie  various  descriptions  of  the  subscribers: 


15  Dukes  and  Earls. 

82  Knights,  including  2 Judges,  all  the  King’s 
Council,  and  5 privy  counsellors. 

13  Countesses  and  Ladies. 

26  Doctors  of  Divinity  and  Physic. 

18  widows  and  virgins. 


.313  merchants. 

214  tradesmen. 

212  without  title. 

25  merchants,  strangers. 

36  whose  occupations  were  unknown, 
making  in  all  954. 


xvi 


RISE  AND  PROGRESS  OV  THE  COMMERCE 


Tills  joint  stock,  like  the  former  one,  was  limited  to  four  years  duration,  or,  more  correctly  speaking, 
to  send  out  sliippin^  for  four  succeeding  years,  and  then  lo  wait  their  arrival,  in  order  to  bring  the  con- 
cern to  a close.  The  Directors  fixed  on  Surat  and  Bantam  as  the  principal  scuts  of  their  trade,  and 
placed  under  their  controul  such  out-stations  as  had  been  established. 

At  its  commencement  the  jiroposition  was  again  renewed  for  the  English  and  Dutch  to  Join  in  con- 
cert, seeing  that  an  East  India  ('ompany  was  forming  in  France,  and  iinotlnT  in  Denmark;  but  it  was 
again  rejected.  This  so  exas|)erated  the  Dutch  Company,  that  they  gave  instructions  to  their  servants 
abroad  to  take  measures  for  engrossing  the  whole  of  the  pepper  trade  at  Bantam  and  Batavia,  at  both  of 
whicli  places  the  English  carried  on  a trade  with  the  natives.  They  aKo  declared  that,  as  a means  of 
forcing  the  F.nglisli  into  the  desired  union,  they  were  ddermiiied  to  undersell  them  at  home,  though 
to  tlieir  own  loss.  These  threats,  however,  had  no  ollua*  effeet  upon  the  Company,  tlian  to  render  them 
more  cautious  and  wary  in  count(‘racting  their  proceedings. 

The  following  survey  of  the  Company’s  estahlishinents  in  India,  and  the  nature  of  the  trade  carried  on, 
was  transmitted  in  this  year: 

Surat  was  the  most  commodious  station  in  nil  India;  at  which,  though  Englisli  goods  were  not  in 
great  request,  all  the  eastern  parts  of  India  could  be  supplied  with  cloths;  but  those  articles  could  only 
be  procured  by  exchange  of  China  goods,  spices,  and  money. 

At  the  factories  of  Acheen  and  Ticoo  large  quantities  of  rand)ay  and  MaiMdipatam  goods  iniglit  be 
disposed  of;  and  in  return,  gold,  cainpbirc,  pepper,  and  benjamin  could  be  obtained. 

Bantam  was  the  greatest  place  of  tnuh*  in  the  Indian  seas,  where  Cambay  and  Mausidipatam  goods, 
to  the  amount  of  00, ()()()  rials,  were  annually  imported,  and  in  return,  from  00  to  1.50,000  sacks  of  pepper 
could  be  exported;  the  price  of  pejiper,  however,  bad  been  raised  treble  within  the  last  few  year.Sy  from 
the  competition  between  the  English,  Dutch,  and  Chinese. 

Jacatra  yiehh'd  arrack,  rice,  and  fish;  but  a seltlcment  there  would  be  difficult,  from  the  cxorbilant 
sum  demanded  by  the  King  for  ground  lo  build  a factory  iq)OTi. 

Jamliee  lia<l  been  recently  settled  as  a factory,  at  which  there  was  an  increasing  demand  for  Cambay 
and  Coromandel  cloths,  and  in  return,  would  afford  J0,(K)0  sacks  of  pepper. 

At  Patany  about  10,000  rials  of  Surat  and  Coromandel  cloths  might  be  sold;  but  it  furnished  few 
articles  of  export,  and  trade  was  on  the  decline. 

At  Siam,  if  the  country  were  in  a state  of  peace,  Coromandel  cloths  might  be  sold  to  tlnr  amount  of 
40,000  rials  per  annum;  and  in  return,  it  would  yield  gold,  silver,  and  dccr-skins  for  the  Japan  market. 

At  Japan  English  cloth,  lead,  deer-skins,  silks,  and  other  goods  would  find  a considerable  market 
and  in  return,  it  would  furnish  silver,  copper,  and  iron;  but  the  English  cargoes  liitherto  sent  had  been 
ill  assorted,  and  the  trade  was  on  the  decline. 

At  Succadana  diamonds,  bezoar  stones,  and  gold  might  be  obtained,  had  not  this  trade  been  ruined 
by  the  ignorance  of  the  first  factors. 

At  Banjarmaf>sln  diamonds,  gold,  and  bezoar  .stones  could  be  procured ; but  the  character  of  the 
natives  w’as  so  treucherous,  that  it  would  he  expedient  to  withdraw  the  factory. 

At  Macassar  the  h(‘st  rice  in  Imlia  could  be*  bought,  and  about  40,000  rials  per  annum  of  India  cloths 
sold;  hut  this  place  was  resorted  to  by  the  Portuguese,  though  abandoned  by  the  Dutch, 

At  Banda  about  50,000  rials  annually  of  Coromandel  cloths  could  be  sold,  and  in  return,  about  100 
Ions  of  nutmegs  and  mace  could  be  purchased,  and  a still  greater  quantity,  could  peace  be  established  between 
the  P’uropeans  trading  to  it. 

In  this  year  the  English  obtained  possession  of  the  islands  of  Pulo  Roon  and  Rosengyn,  and  fortified 
them;  the  Dutch  attacked  the  former,  but  were  repulsed  with  loss.  They,  however,  captured  two  of  the 
(’ompany’s  ships,  the  Defence  and  Swan, 


BETWEEN  ENGLAND  AND  THE  EAST  INDIES. 


xvii 


I61S.  King  James  granted  letters  patent  for  the  estiihllshment  of  a trade  to  India  from  Scotland,  to 
Sir  James  Cunningham,  a|)poIntlng  him,  Ids  heirs,  and  assigns,  to  he  governors,  lulers,  and  directors  of 
the  Scottish  East  India  Company,  and  nnthorizing  him  “ to  trade  to  and  from  the  East  Indies,  and  the 
countries  or  parts  of  Asia,  Africa,  and  America,  heyond  the  Cape  of  Bona  Spia'antia  to  tin*  Straits  of 
Magellan,  and  to  the  Levant  Sea,  and  territories  under  the  (i()\ eminent  of  tlie  Great  Turk,  and  to  and 
from  tlic  countries  of  Greenland,  and  all  other  eouiitries  and  islands  in  the  noilh,  noilh-west,  and  north- 
east seas,  and  other  parts  of  America  and  Muscovy.’’ — TTpon  which  the  Biissia  Company  and  the  English 
East  India  (’ompany  represented  to  Ills  M.aji'sty,  that  it  would  he  highly  prejudicial  to  their  traile.  Tlie 
King  thereupon  informed  the  Company,  that,  ns  he  considered  them  to  he  a strength  to  the  kingdom,  and 
an  honour  to  liimself,  he  would  withdraw  the  patent,  on  their  n eompensiiig  Sir  James  Cunningham  foi 
the  charges  and  cxpcnccs  he  had  uicnrred  in  his  proceedings;  ami  lu'  at  the  sjunp  time  eonditiom'd  that  the 
East  India  Company  should  join  with  the  Unssia  Company  in  the  ^nppoit  of  their  trade,  tlie  concerns  of 
which  had  long  been  in  an  enfeehh'd  slate.  'The  ('ompany  theieupon,  at  Ills  Majesty^  entreaty,  and  under 
a promise  that  he  would  grant  no  oth(‘r  patents  lliat  should  he  injurious  to  their  interests,  as  also  induced 
thereto  by  his  having  been  graciously  pleased  to  withdraw  the  Scottish  pnttnt,  agreed  to  a<lvanee 
per  annum  for  tlie  remaining  time  of  their  duration,  which,  with  a similar  sum  to  lie  advanced  by  the 
Russia  Company,  it  was  hoped  would  gi\ e life  and  vigour  to  that  trad(‘,  which  lor  the  ln>t  sixty  year^ 
liad  yielded  no  iienefit  to  the  adveiilureis.  'flie  trade  was  carricul  on  by  both  (’oinjianies  jointly  for  tno 
seasons,  but  without  success;  upounliich,  on  the  ^^IKh  of  l)('f i inhei*,  l<)l!h  t lie  c )nnexIon  was  dissolved. 
The  East  India  Company’s  IcfSs  on  this  occasion  was  estimated  at 

The  voyage  of  this  .season  coiisisteil  of  two  ships,  the  Dragon  and  E\peilition,  for  the  Malabar  Coast 
Tliey  were  defeated  in  theii  views  of  ti:nle  at  Dahul,  Haticaloe,  ami  Calient,  iVom  want  of  sincerity  in  the 
Sumorin.  They  then  jirmaadt d to  Sinnatia.  I’he  Diagon  was  allei wauls  attacked  hy  six  Dutch  ships  otl 
Ticoo,  and  after  an  obstinate  d(‘fi*nce,  taken,  and  her  ciew  treated  with  the  grealist  barbarity. 

1019.  A furtlM  i*  voyage  wjis  made  in  the  London,  llait,  Hoelnuk,  ami  hiOgli',  under  the  command 
of  Captain  Shillinge:  they  sailed  in  Eehruai\,  ltil9.  In  iheii  passage  out,  they  tiiok  possession  of  Sal- 
danha  Bay.  On  their  arrival  in  Malabar,  the  llait  and  Jvigle  weio  iruj)atrheil  for  Jasques;  but  on  their 
attempting  to  enter  that  port,  they  found  it  blockaihd  !»  a hugi*  Eortugiiese  lleet  ■ they  were  therefore 
obliged  to  return  to  Surat,  where  they  were  joined  by  the  other  ship^,  ami  again  salh»l  for  Jasques,  wliere 
they  fell  in  wdth  the  Portuguese  Heel,  when  an  cMigageinent  look  jdaci',  which  lasted  nine  hours,  but  with 
little  loss.  Tlic  Portuguese  gave  w ay,  and  allowed  tlieJinglish  ships  U)  enter  tin'  port;  hut  ha^illg  re- 
ceived assistance  from  Oriuu.s,  a second  engagement  took  place:  tlie  eonlliD  was  obstinate,  but  terminated 
ill  favour  of  the  English,  who  lost  their  commander,  (’aplain  Shillingc'.  The  ships  soon  alter  returned 
to  Surat,  where  the  Mogul  Governor  occasioning  some  ubstruetlon  to  tlu  ir  trade,  they  prevented  a ship 
of  his  from  obtaining  a loading,  which  brought  about  a remoNul  of  their  dilliculties. 

A treaty  of  friendship  and  trade  was  this  year  concluded  with  Persia  upon  terms  very  advaiiiageous  to 
the  English,  who  were  permitted  to  build  a fort  at  Jasques. 

In  this  year  the  Dutch  took  four  of  the  Company's  ships  on  tlie  Coast  of  Sumatra. 

The  perpetual  contentions,  and  tlic  fruitless  issue  of  several  conferences,  which  took  place  in  Europe 
in  1613  and  1615,  respecting  the  ailairs  of  the  Englisli  and  Dutch  East  India  Companies,  rendered  fur- 
thcr  negotiation  absolutely  necessary.  A treaty  was  concluded  by  commissioners,  appointed  by  the  India 
Companies  of  both  nations.  On  the  7th  of  July,  1619,  an  agreement  was  signed,  which,  after  specifying 
an  amnesty  and  oblivion  of  all  excesses  committed  by  either  part  in  the  East  Indies,  and  a mutual  restor- 
ation of  ships  and  property,  declared  the  trade  of  the  two  nations  in  the  East  to  be  free,  to  the  extent  of 
the  respective  funds  which  might  be  employed  and  specified;  that  the  exertions  of  both  Companies  should 

♦C 


RISE  AND  PROGRESS  OF  THE  COMMERCE 


xvJii 

lie  directed  to  reduce  the  duties  and  exactions  of  the  native  officers  at  the  different  ports;  that  the  pepper 
trade  at  Java  should  be  equally  divided;  that  the  English  should  have  a free  trade  at  Pulicat,  on  paying 
half  the  cxpeiices  of  the  garrison;  that  the  English  at  the  Moluccas  and  Bandas  should  enjoy  one-third  of 
the  import  and  export  trade,  and  the  Dutch  two-thirds,  and  tliat  commissioners  should  be  appointed  to 
regulate  the  trade,  the  charges  of  the  garrisons  to  be  paid  in  the  same  proportion;  that  each  Company 
should  furnisli  ten  ships  of  war  for  common  defence,  but  tliat  those  ships  were  not  to  be  employed  to  bnng 
cargoes  to  ICurope,  but  oidy  in  the  carrying  trade  from  one  part  of  the  East  Indies  to  another;  and  that 
the  whole  proceedings  should  be  under  tlie  r<‘gulation  of  a Council  of  Defence  in  the  Indies,  composed  of 
four  riienibers  from  each  Comjiany.  I'his  treaty  was  to  be  binding  for  twenty  years.  On  its  ratification 
by  King  James,  His  Majesty  promised  not  to  grant  another  charter  to  any  other  person  whatsoever,  during 
the  term  of  llie  above  agreement. 

On  the  arrival  of  this  iiitelllgence  in  India,  lio.stilities  ceased,  the  fleets  saluted  encli  other,  and  Ijarmony 
was  for  a sliort  time  restored.  The  English  then  sailed  for  Japan,  Avhere,  having  united  with  the  Dutch, 
they  settli'd  with  the  Emperor  the  terms  for  carrying  on  their  trade. 

In  conse(|ucnce  of  this  treaty,  the  Company  sent  out  the  greatest  fleet  they  had  ever  consigned  to  tlie 
East ; it  consisted  of  ten  ships,  the  largest  of  wdiieh  was  1000  tons  burthen,  and  several  of  the  others  700  tons. 
The  investment  for  tliis  voyage  consisted  of  i^G2,490  in  bullion,  and  J.’:^8,50S  in  goods.  Of  this  fleet, 
nine  of  the  ships  were  detained  in  India,  and  only  one  retunied  w ith  a cargo,  wdiich  realized  .fl08,S87. 

IGa^O.  Tlie  Dutch  (lovermnent  at  Batavia,  notwithstanding  the  treaty  wdiich  Imd  been  concluded, 
fitted  out  an  expedition,  w hich  proceeded  to  the  islands  of  Lantorc  and  Pulo  Boon,  and  took  j)Osscssion  of 
them,  treating  the  few  Englishmen  they  found  there  wdtli  great  inhumanity.  The  Company,  on  receipt  of 
tliis  intcdligence,  presented  a memorial,  praying  for  protection  and  redi'ess;  hut  the  state  of  the  nation  pre- 
vented any  clforts  being  made  to  obtain  satisfaction. 

1G21.  In  this  year,  Mr.  IMimn,  an  eminent  merchant  of  London,  and  one  of  the  Directors  of  the 
East  India  Company,  published  a treatise  in  favour  of  the  East  India  trade;  wherein  he  gives  the  quanti- 
ties of  Indian  merchandise  consumed  annually  in  Europe,  with  their  prime  cost,  and  all  charges  till  oti 
board,  by  the  old  w^oy  from  Aleppo,  and  also  the  new  way  by  the  Cape  of  Good  Hope,  whence,  he  states, 
•will  be  seen  the  great  benefit  of  the  East  India  commerce,  viz. 


ANNUAL  CONSUMPTION. 

COST 

AT  ALEPPO. 

COST  FN  1NDI\. 

ff. 

t. 

£ 

s 

//. 

6,000,00(1  lbs.  pepper 

2 

0 per  lb. 

600,000 

0 

0 

0 

2|  per  lb 

62,500 

0 

0 

J.fjOjOOO  do.  cliivcs 

4 

9 ditto. 

10(i,87.> 

0 

0 

0 

9 ditto. 

16,875 

0 

0 

l/)(lj(^00  do. 

4 

9 ditto. 

:i%6‘25 

a 

0 

0 

8 ditto. 

5,000 

0 

0 

400,000  do.  iiutnicgSv>%%*^%%%.. 

2 

4 ditto. 

4«,C()6  13 

4 

0 

4 ditto. 

6,666  13 

4 

,TiO,O0O  do.  indigo 

4 

4 ditto. 

75,K'l,] 

6 

8 

1 

2 ditto. 

20,416  13 

4 

1,000,000  do.  raw  silk»w%%*%^% 

12 

0 ditto. 

600, ()0() 

0 

0 

8 

0 ditto. 

400,000 

0 

0 

Total  £ 

1,105,000 

0 

0 

^*511, 458 

6 

8 

Thus,  for  rather  more  than  a third  part  of  the  prices  of  the  goods  shipped  from  Turkey,  we  had 
them  shipped  fiom  India;  and  addifig  one-sixth  part  more  for  the  expence  of  the  voyage  homeward,  beyond 
that  of  the  Turkey  one,  the  said  goods  cost  about  half  the  price  they  did  from  Turkey,  besides,  that  the 
greater  part  of  the  East  India  cost  was  paid  to  OUT  own  people,  and  centered  at  home,  as  freight, 
insurance,  supracargoes,  w^ages,  provisions,  &c. 


BETWEEN  ENGI.AND  AND  THE  EAST  INDIES.  xix 

Mr.  IMunn  also  estimates  the  annual  importation  of  the  following  India  goods,  with  the  prices  they 
cost  on  board  the  ships  in  India,  and  those  they  sold  for  in  England,  thus; 


ANNUAL  IMPORT  VTION. 

COST  ON  HOARD  IN  INDI  \. 

SCM.lNt;  PRU'ICS  I\  l.N(.| 

\M>. 

B 

//. 

£ 

V. 

r/. 

?. 

d 

— 

<1 

250, (X)0  lbs.  pop|)cr^^w^^v%^^%v 

0 

21  per  lb. 

2(>,0U 

13 

4 

1 

8 per  lb. 

20S,333 

<i 

s 

1.50,000  do.  cloves 

0 

0 ditto. 

A, 020 

0 

0 

(i 

0 ditto. 

45,000 

0 

0 

]50,(X)0  do.  nutmegs 

0 

4 ditto. 

2, .500 

0 

0 

2 

G ilitto. 

1S,7.‘)0 

0 

{) 

otljOOO  do.  muee 

0 

vS  ditto. 

1 

13 

4 

(> 

0 ditto. 

0 

0 

200,000  do.  indigo 

1 

2 ditto. 

1 1 dhiO 

13 

4 

.5 

0 ditto. 

50,()()() 

0 

0 

107,140  do.  China  raw  silk 

7 

0 ditto. 

37,499 

0 

0 , 

20 

0 ditto. 

107,110 

0 

0 

50,000  pieces  of  calico 

7 

0 each. 

17,.500 

0 

0 ' 

20  0 each. 

.50,000 

0 

0 

0 

0 i 

G 

8 

And  the  din'erence,  Avhich  consl'ited  of  freight,  dutu‘s,  chai’gos,  and  profits,  was  gain  to  the  nation. 
He  afterwards  estimates  the  annual  consuin[)tion  of  the  follow  ing  goods  in  England,  and  gives  a coin- 
parntive  view  of  the  lowest  prices  of  them,  when  imported  from  Turkey  or  Lisbon,  before  England  im- 
ported any  from  India,  and  the  common  prices  in  his  ow^n  linus  r/’:. 


ANNUAL  CONstMI*TlO.\. 

LOWEST  ANCIENT  PRU 

i 

(OMMON  MODERN  PRICES. 

<1. 

£ 

~ 

<i  ' 

» 

f/ 

!• 

.V 

400, (XM)  lbs.  pcppoi\..*^»^*^.,^vv^ 

3 

()  per  lb. 

70,000 

0 

0 i 

1 

S per  lb. 

33,3:13 

G 

8 

40, 000  do.  cloves 

8 

0 ditto. 

l(i,0(X) 

0 

0 1 

G 

0 ditto. 

12, (K«) 

0 

0 

20,(X)0  do. 

9 

0 ditto. 

9,000 

0 

O 

G 

0 ditto. 

G,000 

0 

(y 

1 GO, 000  do.  nutmegs 

4 

G ditto. 

.'Ki.OOO 

0 

0 

2 

G ditto. 

20,000 

0 

0 

150,000  do.  indigo 

7 

0 ditto. 

52,501) 

0 

0 

.5 

0 ilitto. 

.■17,000 

0 

0 

. . . _ 

138.1,500 

0 

0 

G 

8 

The  diflerence  of  these  sums  was  a saving  of  expenditure,  in  consecjuence  of  the  direct  importation. 

In  this  year  the  Company  presented  to  Parliament,  the  estate  of  their  trade  from  the  beginning  thereof 
in  IGOO,  to  the  29th  of  November,  1(321,’'  which  states 

There  hath  been  sent  forth  in  the  said  term  of  21  years,  8(j  ships  to  ll>e  Indies,  whereof 
3(>  returned  safely  home,  laden. 

9 were  lost. 

5 worn  out  by  long  .service  from  port  to  port  in  Iinlia. 

1 1 have  been  taken,  and  surprised  by  the  Dutch,  and 
25  do  remain  in  India,  or  on  their  homew’ard  passage. 

The  East  India  Company  by  licence  from  Ills  Majesty  might  have  shipped  out  of  these  realms  in 
the  said  term  of  twTnty-one  years,  i'PlOjOtX)  in  foreign  coin;  but  they  have  not  sent  out  so  much  by  near 
•£^300,000;  for  they  have  laden  away  in  all  the  said  time,  upon  all  the  said  ships,  as  well  out  of  these 
realms,  as  out  of  the  Downs,  Holland,  and  other  place.s,  but  ^^013, (>81.  And,  together  with  the  said 
money,  they  also  have  sliipped  out  of  the  realm,  in  woollens,  lead,  iron,  tin,  and  other  wares,  to  the  value 
of  i?319,21],  making  together  dP932,892. 


*C  2 


XX' 


RISE  AND  PROGRESS  OF  THE  COMMERCE 


And  of  all  the  before-mentioned  monies  and  goods  sent  into  the  Indies,  tliere  hath  been  employed 
the  value  of  i^375,288  for  the  lading  of  36  ships,  which  are  retunied  licnce  with  sundry  sorts  of  wares, 
all  of  which  wares  have  produced  here  in  England  by  the  sales, 

“ Whereby  it  doth  plainly  appear,  that  if  i?557,6()4'  of  our  money  and  goods  sent  out,  were  returned 
with  no  more  success  than  the  i?375,2H8  which  is  already  received,  it  would  produce  in  all  d6’5,000,000 
sterling,  which  is  a fur  greater  proportion  of  the  kingdom's  stock,  than  can  be  procured  by  any  other 
foreign  trade  whatsoever  known  unto  us.  For,  although  it  is  very  true  that  the  said  cF5,000,000  be  pro- 
cured by  the  money  and  goods  afore- written  alone,  without  a further  great  charge  also  disbursed  for  ship- 
ping, victuals,  ammunition,  wages  for  captains,  olSccrs,  factors  and  mariners,'  besides  His  Majesty’s 
customs  and  imports,  with  many  other  charges,  yet  all  these  disbursements  made  within  this  realm  from 
one  to  tlie  other,  do  not  diminish  the  kingdom’s  stock,  although  tliey  directly  abate  the  merchant’s  gain.” 

The  equipment  of  this  season  consisted  of  four  ships,  the  cargoes  of  which  were  estimated  at  of*12,900 
in  bullion,  and  i?6,2o3  in  goods.  Of  tliese  ships  only  one  returned  to  England,  and  her  cargo,  which 
consisted  of  pepper,  cloves,  &c.  produced  at  the  sales  0^91,461*. 

1622.  Tlie  Portuguese,  from  the  first  appearance  of  the  Dutch  and  the  English  in  India,  had 
determined  to  keep  them  out  of  the  trade  by  force,  under  the  pretence  tlmt  the  exclusive  right  was 
vested  in  them,  as  the  original  discoverers  of  the  passage  by  tlic  Cape  of  Good  Hope.  The  English  and 
Dutch  determined  to  resist  force  by  forc«',  and  a warfare  existed  in  India,  though  the  English  were  at 
peace  with  Spain.  In  the  commission  from  the  King,  granted  to  Sir  Henry  Middleton  in  1604,  there 
was  a clause  inserted,  in  wliicli  it  was  stated,  that  as  the  King  was  at  peace  with  all  the  Christian  powxTs 
in  Europe,  the  Englisli  shipping  were  forbid  to  attack  tlie  subjects  or  ships  of  the  King  of  Spain,  unless 
in  their  own  defence,  being  previously  provoked  thereto.  The  English  commamh'rs  had  on  all  occasions 
studiously  adhered  to  their  instructions,  and  acted  only  upon  the  defensive  in  the  various  engagements 
that  had  taken  place  with  the  Portuguese.  Among  their  other  acquisitions  in  India,  the  Portuguese 
possessed  the  island  and  castle  of  Ormus,  which  commanded  the  trade  of  the  Persian  Gulf,  in  which  they 
committed  various  depredations  upon  the  hhiglish  and  others  trading  there.  The  King  of  Persia  was 
desirous  of  dispossessing  them ; and  calling  to  his  assistance  the  English,  with  whom  he  was  then  in  alli- 
ance, it  was  proposed  to  make  a joint  attack  upon  tlie  island;  and  the  King  agreed  that,  if  it  proved 
successful,  he  would  place  it  in  the  Company’s  hands,  and  give  tlicm  one-half  of  the  customs.  In 
conseciucncc  of  this  agreement,  an  expedition  was  prepared,  and  sent  against  it.  The  attack  was  chiefly 
conducted  by  the  English,  and  the  city  and  castle  taken  on  the  22d  of  April,  1622.  The  English 
received  a proportion  of  the  plunder,  and  a grant  of  the  moiety  of  the  customs  at  the  Port  of  Gombroon, 
wliicb  was  regularly  paid  till  about  1680,  when  the  Company,  not  having  it  in  Uieir  power  to  keep  the 
Gulf  clear  of  pirates,  the  King  of  Persia  withheld  their  proportion  of  the  duties. 

The  equipment  of  this  season  consisted  of  five  ships;  the  stock  was  estimated  at  £GlfiOO  in  money, 
and  •£’6,430  in  goods.  The  homeward  ships  were  also  five,  and  the  amount  of  tlieir  sales  was  d£’389,500. 

1623.  The  e(iui[)ment  of  this  season  consisted  of  seven  ships;  the  stock  was  estimated  at  o£’68,720 
in  Spanisli  silver,  and  i?  17,345  in  goods.  The  homeward  ships  were  five;  their  cargoes  consisted  of 
pepper,  cloves,  mace,  and  nutmegs,  which  produced  at  the  sales  .P  18.5, 593,  exclusive  of  Persian  raw 
silk,  which  amounted  to  P97,000,  making  in  the  whole  P582,593.  The  outward-bound  ships  were 
detained  in  consequence  of  a claim  of  the  Duke  of  Buckingham,  as  Lord  High  Admiral,  for  a share  of 
prize-money  at  Ormus;  and  the  Company  paid  him  P10,000  before  they  were  permitted  to  depart,  and 
a similar  sum  to  the  Secretary  of  State  for  the  King’s  use. 

In  February,  1622-3,  the  Englisli  factory  at  Ainboyna  was  massacred  by  the  Dutch.  By  this  act  of 
cruelty,  and  those  previously  practised  at  Lantore  and  the  other  islands,  the  Dutch  engrossed  to  them- 


BETWEEN  ENGLAND  AND  THE  EAST  INDIES. 


xxi 


selves  tlic*  whole  of  tlie  spice  trade,  of  which  they  rcmaineil  the  solo  possessors  till  tlic  islands  were 
captured  by  the  English  during  the  war,  which  coinineiiced  in  171)3. 

1G23.  On  the  Sth  of  Marcli  a warm  debate  took  place  in  railiainent,  in  wliich  tlic  East  India 
trade  was  pronounced  to  be  injurious  to  the  national  interests,  on  the  pica  of  its  ilraining  the  nation  of 
treasure,  of  which  it  was  said  they  exported  to  the  amount  of  ^80,000  per  annum.  Upon  this  occasion 
they  were  ably  defended  by  two  of  the  City  members  and  many  others.  The  following  paper  was  also 
printed  and  sent  in  cireulatioii  among  the  members,  wliieh,  ibr  its  brevity  and  j)ersplcuity,  merits  attention: 

‘‘The  principal  objections  that  will  be  made  in  Pailiament  against  the  East  India  Company  are 
supposed  to  be  these : 

I.  Tlie  exj)ortIng  the  treasure  of  the  kingdom,  to  tlie  impoverishment  of  tlie  State. 

II.  The  destruction  of  timber  by  building  of  great  ships. 

III.  The  decay  of  mariners  by  tlieir  eniployimait. 

“ To  the  first  they  answer,  that  they  curry  out  no  silver  hut  such  as  tiny  contract  for  abroad  to  be 
delivered  here,  being  restrained  by  an  express  danse  in  tin*  patent  lioin  exporting  lMigli‘'h  coin,  'fhey 
buy  rials  of  eight  at  dear  rates,  which,  if  they  did  not  do,  the  merchants  would  seek  out  as  good  a market, 
and  know  where  to  find  it. 

“ If  the  State  should  think  fit  to  dissolve  tlie  Comjiany,  the  I lollanilers  are  ready,  with  much  carefulness, 
to  take  up  the  whole  trade  as  a business  that  would  increase  their  strength  and  wealth,  and  with  no  less 
proportion  of  money  than  the  English  now  do;  but  our  nation  will  lo^e  thi‘ honour  and  trade,  and  the 
silver  will  be  bought  up  as  now,  and  sent  o\er  by  tlie  Duldi. 

“ They  have  not  carried  out  so  much  sihoras  by  licence  they  might  have  done,  to  a great  value. 
The  proportion  of  silver  now  carried  by  the  Company  will  he  much  lessened,  and  that  for  two  reasons : 
one  by  tlie  convention  of  tlie  Dutch  with  us,  wdiich  will  heat  down  half  the  price  of  tlic  commodities; 
the  other  by  consent  of  the  rcrslmis  (for  so  (heir  factors  wriU'),  to  accept  lor  their  wares  onc-third  in 
money  and  two-thiids  in  commodities.  Hereunto  may  be  adiled  the  ben(*fit  of  vending  our  native  com- 
modities, as  woollens,  tin,  &c.  and  the  expectation  of  buying  Persian  commodities  with  the  calicoes  ol 
Surat  and  the  spices  of  the  Moluccas,  w’hereby  the  one-half  of  the  proportion  of  the  moiuy  expected, 
may  he  well  spared. 

“ The  Company  send  not  all  the  money  tliey  export,  without  return  of  th^*  same  specie;  for  tlie  surjilus 
of  their  commodities  brought  home  (England  Iieing  fii^t  sctvihI),  will  vent  into  foreign  parts,  and  return 
much  more  in  silver  and  gold  than  it  exported;  but  when  tlie  Persian  trade  of  silks,  indigo,  calii  oes,  See. 
shall  be  drawn  hither,  or  but  the  one-lialf,  whereof  there  is  some  good  beginning  already,  the  vast  sums 
sent  out  of  France,  and  the  parts  of  Italy  for  silk  only,  may  have  a great  pail  of  their  course  in  this  trade, 
and  then  will  silks  be  herein  greater  plenty  than  ever  heretofore;  neither  is  this  imaginary,  for  the 
Company  have  had  advice  of  late  from  some  of  their  factors,  that  a great  (punitity  of  Persian  silk  is  already 
bought,  and  stays  but  for  ship|)ing  to  bring  it  home. 

“ That  the  kingdom  of  England  was  wont  to  send  forth  much  corn  into  Spain,  for  wlileli  it  was 
lawful  for  the  merchants  to  return  ready  money;  and  now  of  late  years  little  or  none  hath  been  iinporitd 
into  England. 

“ That  to  the  East  countries  much  coin  hath  been  carried  over,  wherein  they  can  charge  no  man  in 
particular;  yet  they  are  able  to  prove  that  in  one  towm  ia  the  East  country,  and  within  the  circuit  ot 
one  summer,  «C1«0,000  of  English  shillings  and  testoons  were  coined  into  that  country  money,  and  how 
otherwise  it  hath  been  convoyed  away  by  strangers,  the  Stale  hath  had  of  late  parllcul.ir  k!un\ ledge. 

^ Thirdly,  silver  is  so  much  dearer  in  other  countries  above  the  EnghMi  standard,  that  they  will  bring 
none  hither  but  that  which  the  merchant  is  forced  to  contract  for  at  high  rates:  tlicicforc  it  were  to  he 


xxii 


RISE  AND  PROGRESS  OF  THE  COMMERCE 


wished  that  the  neiglibouring  Princes  might  be  dealt  withal,  to  put  up  their  standard  to  equal  that  of 
England,  which  hath  been  an  honoui*  to  our  nation. 

To  tlie  second  o1)jection,  which  is  the  waste  of  timber,  they  answer — 

That  timber  cannot  serve  for  a nobler  use  than  to  build  ships. 

“ That  as  soon  as  timber  is  felled,  other  timber  grows;  but  the  price  grows  not,  as  may  appear  by  the 
experience  of  15  years  last  past,  within  which  time  the  price  of  timber  has  not  risen. 

“ Timber  when  it  is  at  full  growth,  will  decline  in  goodness,  and  must  be  taken  in  its  season. 

‘‘  That  the  greater  ships  the  ('ompuny  build,  the  more  useful  and  serviceable  they  arc  to  the  State; 
and  that  if  the  Company  had  not  been  the  artsmen  for  building  of  ships,  they  had  not  been  maintained 
and  increased  as  now  they  are. 

‘‘  If  it  be  objected  that  the  Company's  ships  arc  of  good  force  indeed,  and  where  they  may  happen 
occasionally  to  use  them,  they  will  not  be  found  within  the  limit  of  a press;  to  this  they  answer,  that 
there  can  be  no  design  of  imj)ortance  against  the  State  so  secretly  carried,  hut  there  will  be  intelligence 
time  enough  to  make  stay  of  the  (Jonipany's  ships,  which  commonly  are  some  months  in  making  ready  to 
depart.  Morcovc'r,  by  the  occasion  of  the  use  of  greater  ships,  they  maintain  a magazine  of  stores,  to 
the  value  of  near  whereof  the  State  may  make  use  upon  any  sudden  occasion. 

“ The  tliird  ohjection  is  the  decay  of  mariners.  To  this  they  answer,  that  the  East  India  Company  do 
breed  an  increase  of  mariners  of  (he  first  eminence,  in  point  of  knowledge;  for  the  India  trade,  consisting 
of  long  voyages,  liath  brought  navigation  to  more  perfection  of  art  than  before  time  it  hath  been  in 
England;  and  next  in  uuinber,  for  the  Company  do  ship  more  than  one-third  pai-t  of  landsmen,  all  of 
whom  are  made  marim’rs,  and  but  for  this  (*niployment,  would  never  have  been  so;  yea,  many  a time 
they  ship  the  half  landsmen,  and  those  ships  that  lost  men,  do  make  as  many  sailors  as  they  lose  men 
that  were  no  sailors,  as  may  he  instanced  in  divers  of  the  Company’s  ships;  and  the  Hollander  that  hath 
not  one  man  for  our  tliree,  sends  out  three  men  for  our  one;  and,  which  is  principally  to  be  observed,  the 
whole  numher  of  mariners  employed  in  the  East  Indies,  is  a clear  addition  to  the  navigation  of  the 
kingdom,  for  that  it  hath  not  decreased,  hut  rather  increased  the  trade  of  this  kingdom. 

‘‘  These  and  all  other  objections  the  Company  is  ready  to  prove,  when  by  authority  they  shall  lie 
thereunto  called;  and,  in  the  meantime,  they  do  hope  that  an  opinion  taken  up  witliout  ground,  may 
not  prevail  to  their  prejudice,  who  had  rather  have  no  being,  tlian  to  be  such  as  the  State  shall  not  have 
Just  reason  to  cherish.” 

At  this  period  llie  Company  w ere  engaged  in  the  manufacture  of  gunpowder,  and  had  mills  esta- 
blished in  the  county  of  Surrey ; which,  upon  an  application  made  by  the  inhabitants  in  the  vicinity  to 
the  King,  w^ere  ordered  to  be  demolished ; and  the  Company  petitioned  for  permission  to  erect  new 
powder-mills  in  the  counties  of  Kent  and  Sussex,  in  situations  in  which  the  like  objections  could  not  be 
made,  and  stated  that  this  manufacture  was  necessary  to  camble  them  to  bring  to  market  tlic  stock  of 
saltpetre  they  had  in  store. 

J6!^5.  Ill  ])ursuance  of  an  order  of  the  House  of  Commons,  the  following  Abstract  of  the  Trade 
to  (he  East  Indies,  both  for  exportation  and  importation,  fiom  the  25th  of  March,  1020,  to  the  25th  of 
March,  102-1*,”  was  laid  before  them: 

1020.  There  were  laden  on  10  ships  i?02,490  in  bullion,  and  i.^28,608  goods^^^^Total  i^90,998 

1621.  On  4 ships  12,91K)  6,523  ditto  10,423 

1622.  On  5 ships, 000  6,430  ditto%,kv%„.,i„%,,,^v%08,030 

1623*  On  7 ships, 08,720  7,345  ditto  86,065 


Exported  .^205, 710  ditto  .^.........X’58,806  ditto — Total  .^264,616 


BETWEEN  ENGLAND  AND  THE  EAST  INDIES. 
**  The  Imports  were  as  follow : 


kxili 


» 1C20.  This  year,  by  reasoi.  of  our  (lifreiciicps  with  the  Dutch,  our  shi|is  were  kept 
in  India  for  our  defence,  to  our  very  -n-at  daum-e,  and  only  one  ship  returned  with  iudi-ro, 

calicoes,  drugs,  &c.  »alue " ’ i’lOS  fiS7 

“ This  year  our  diHeretiees  with  the  Dutch  hciiig  newly  acconunodated,  and  our 

stock  of  money  by  those  broils  much  w.istial,  there  was  rclunied  only  one  .shii>,  laden  with 

pepper,  clovCsS,  and  Cldna  raw  siik,  \aliie  91 

‘‘  1622.  There  returned  this  year  live  ^hitn,  laden  with  eloves,  niiieo,  niitnieirs, 

gum-lac,  indigo,  and  calicoes,  value  and  l\Tsian  raw  silk  i’!M, ()(){) 3S9  .'iOO 

‘ 162.3.  lleturncd  this  year  five  ships,  ladt  n with  p'  jjpcr,  cloves,  mace,  milnu-gs,  indigo, 

tnd  calicoes,  value  alM85,,5f):i,  and  rersian  raw  silk.  TH  7,000 ‘ 

Recovered  from  the  Dutch  for  the  value  they  took  fimn  us  in  Indin bO  000 

‘‘  Forming  a total  in  four  years  of  X‘l,2.-A1  ll,  on  an  averagu  ^’313,861  par  inniuin. 

‘‘  Monies  arc  of  tlie  same  value  when  they  arrive  in  India;  hut  the  wares  make  good  profit,  and  arc 
doubled  at  least,  whereby  our  exportations  in  wares  are  more  ll.an  half  as  nuicli  as  we  have  sent  out  in  momy. 

“ We  are  confident  that  in  the  said  four  years,  we  should  have  returned  < umnioditics  into  this  kingdom 
for  ot^600,(KX)  more  at  the  least,  il‘ we  had  not  been  deprived  of  the  employment  from  the  Indies  of  the 
said  i?80,000,  and  also  damaged  by  an  excessive  chaige  and  waste  of  onr  stock  ol‘  money,  and  ships 
kept  there  purposely  for  our  defence,  which  otherwise  would  have  returned  richly  laden. 

“ Concerning  the  part  ol  the  Indian  wares  which  by  trade  Irnth  been  exported  again  into  foreign 
countries,  we,  by  estimate,  are  of  opinion,  that  one  half  of  the  raw  silk  is  used  here,  which  by  the  manu- 
facture thereof,  doth  employ  a great  multitude  of  poor  people;  the  other  half  we  consider  is  carried  beyond 
the  seas,  as  also  three-quarters  of  all  the  Indian  wares  which  have  been  brouglit  into  this  kingdom,  to 
the  great  increase  of  trade,  importation  of  treasure,  and  employment  of  shipping.’’’ 


1631.  King  Charles  I.  issued  a proclamation  “ for  restraining  the  excess  of  tlie  private,  or  clandes- 
tine trade,  carried  on  to  and  from  the  East  Indies  by  the  olfieers  and  sailors  in  the  Company'’H  own  ships.” 
This  proclamation  stated  the  goods  which  the  Company  were  permitted  to  ex|)ort  to,  and  import  from, 
India  into  England,  which  were  as  follow,  viz. 

Exports. — “ rcrpetiianoes,  and  drapery,  broad  clotlis,  &c.  pewter,  saffron,  woollen  stockings,  silk 
stockings  and  garters,  ribbons,  roses  edged  witli  gold  lace,  heaver  hats  with  gold  and  silver  bands,  felt 
hats,  strong  waters,  knives,  Spanish  leather  shoes,  iron,  and  looking-glasses. 

Imports. — “ Long  pepper,  white  pep[)er,  white  powdered  sugar,  priNcrved  nutmegs,  and  ginger,  pre- 
served myrabolans,  bezoar  stones,  drugs  of  all  sorts,  agate  heads,  blood-stones,  rnusk,  aloes,  ambergris 
rich  carpets  of  Persia  and  Cambay,  quilts  of  satin  taffuty,  painted  calicoes,  beiijamin,  damasks,  satins  and 
taffaties  of  China,  (luilts  of  Chinn  embroidered  with  gold,  (juilts  of  Patany  embroidered  with  silk,  galls, 
worm-seeds,  sugar-candy,  China  dishes,  and  porcelain  of  all  sorts.” 

In  this  year  the  Rump  Parliament  granted  the  East  India  Company  a charter  for  five  yeors  to  frade 
on  the  Continent  of  Africa. 


1634'.  A phirmaund  was  obtained  from  the  IMogul  on  tlie  2d  of  February,  1631*,  for  liberty  of  trade 
in  the  province  of  Pengul,  witliout  any  other  restriction  than  that  the  English  ships  were  to  resort  only^ 
to  th^port  of  Pipley. 

1635.  In  this  yeoi*  King  Charles  granted  a charter  to  Sir  William  Courtcen  and  otliers,  authorizing 


RISE  AND  PROGRESS  OF  THE  COMMERCE 


isir 

them  to  send  six  sliips  under  the  command  of  Captain  Wedden,  to  India,  to  trade  during  five  years,  the 
proainhle  to  which  states,  ‘‘  that  the  East  India  Company  had  neglected  to  establish  fortified  factories,  or 
seats  of  trade,  to  wliich  the  King’s  subjects  could  resort  with  safety ; that  th(*y  had  cunsiilU  d their  own 
interests  only,  without  any  regard  to  the  King’s  revenue;  and,  in  general,  tliat  they  had  broken  the  con- 
ditions on  which  their  charter  and  exclusive  privileges  had  been  granted  them.” — I’lie  Company  remon- 
strated against  this  manliest  infringement  of  their  charter,  and  received  in  answer,  from  the  King,  “ that 
the  ships  were  about  to  lie  employed  upon  a secret  design,  which  for  the  present  he  did  not  think  fit  to 
reveal;  but  that  the  Company  might  rest  under  an  assurance  that  nothing  was  intended  to  their  disad- 
vantage.” The  Company,  however,  finding  the  ships  were  taking  in  goods  fitted  for  the  Indian 
market,  and  that  many  persons  who  had  been  formerly  in  their  service,  were  engaged  to  proceed  in  the  said 
ships,  they  resolved  to  petition  Ills  Maje.sty.  The  petition  stated,  “ that  they  had  then  in  India  fourteen 
returnable  ships  (besides  three  then  going  out),  many  of  which  wen^  forced  to  be  rotting,  by  reason  of  the 
great  scarcity  of  merchandise,  which  formerly  the  liulies  did  afibrd,  occasioned  by  a famine  and  pestilence. 
Albeit  the  Company  have  at  present  a large  stock  in  India  and  Persia  to  buy  commodities.  They  also  prayed, 
that  if  leave  was  given  to  Sir  William  Courteen’s  ships  to  go  to  the  Indies  by  way  of  trade,  they  might  lie 
debarred  from  bringing  to  Europe  any  spires,  indigo,  calicoes,  silk  or  other  commodities,  in  which  the 
(’ompany  traded  lor  relading  their  ships,  for  it  was  Inipossibh*  they  could  subsist  together;  but  if  tliey 
should  be  sufiered  to  buy  tlic  same  commodities  with  the  Company  there,  and  vend  them  in  Europe,  the  one 
would  undoubtedly  undo  the  other,  or  both  together;  and  \\hen'as  Ills  Majesty  laid  his  express  commands 
on  the  petitioners  to  use  their  best  assistance  Ibr  the  continuance  ol‘  tlie  trade,  which  accordingly  they 
bad  endeavoured,  as  well  by  their  councils  as  labour,  and  advertising  their  estates,  they  also  further  prayed, 
that  if  the  trade  should  hap|)en  to  be  deserted,  HE  Majesty  would  not  impute  the  same  to  neglect  on  their  part, 
and  that,  according  to  their  charter,  they  might  have  three  years  to  recall  home  their  ships  and  eflects.” 

The  ships,  however,  proceeded  to  India  in  April,  IfilO.  Two  of  them,  the  Roebuck  and  Samaritan, 
with  only  stores  and  provisions  on  board,  n‘<*eived  from  the  King  a commission  that  was  not  to  be 
opened  till  they  were  in  the  latitude  of  Ihc  Cunuiy  Islands.  They  proceeded  to  the  lied  Sea,  and  committed 
several  acts  of  piracy  on  the  ships  lu'longing  to  the  IMogul  merchants ; in  conse(pience  of  which,  the 
Company’s  servants  at  Surat  were  seized  and  imprisoned,  and  their  property  confiscated,  to  make  good 
the  losses  sustained  by  the  owners  of  the  Mogul  vcs.sels.  On  the  receijd  of  this  intelligence  in  England, 
the  Company  presented  a memorial  to  the  King,  stating  the  sulferings  of  their  servants,  and  their  great 
losses,  which  would  terminate  in  the  ruin  of  the  East  India  trade,  unless  Ilis  IMaJesty  should  interfere  in 
their  behalf,  and  be  pleased  to  take  the  illegality  of  the  licences,  and  their  consequences  to  the  trade,  into 
his  consideration.  The  subject  was  referred  to  the  Privy  Council  on  the  Cth  of  January,  1G37.  The  Com- 
pany also  gave  directions  that  the  parties  concerned  in  this  piratical  aet  should  be  prosecuted.  This  w^as 
interrupted  on  the  !i^2d  of  February  by  a message  from  the  King,  desiring  ‘‘  that  Sir  William  Courteeh 
might  not  be  troubled  on  the  subject  of  his  ships.”  The  other  ships  belonging  to  this  association  proceeded 
to  Chinn,  where  their  conduct  was  somewhat  similar  to  that  in  tlie  Red  Sea. 

1637.  The  Company's  application  for  redre.ss  was  of  little  avail;  for  on  the  1st  of  June,  1637,  the 
King  by  a fresh  grant  confirmed  the  privileges  granted  to  the  new  ('ompany,  and  allowed  them  to  trade 
for  five  years  to  all  places  in  India,  where  the  old  Company  had  not  settled  any  factories  or  trade  before 
the  12th  of  December,  1635;  and  with  permission  to  export  during  the  said  term  jP40,0(K)  in  gold  and  silver 
bullion  to  India,  and  to  re-export  India  goods,  free  of  customs. 

1630.  The  Company  again  presented  a petition  to  the  King,  in  whicli  they  enumerated  their  griev- 
ances nearly  in  the  same  terms  as  before;  and  concluded  by  stating  the  absolute  necessity  they  should  be 


BETWEEN  ENGLAND  AND  THE  EAST  INDIES. 


xx\ 


under  of  abandoning  the  trade,  unless  the  protection  they  prayed  for,  was  afforded  them.  Tfiis  petition 
was  referred  to  a committee  of  the  Privy  Council,  who  made  a report  thereon  to  tlie  King  on  the  of 
November,  1639.  On  the  10th  of  December  the  King  declared  that  he  would  i*L*voke  all  patents  formerly 
granted,  for  plantations  beyond  the  Cape  of  Good  Hope,  and  grant  no  more  of  the  same  kind ; allowing 
only  to  Courteen’s  association  reasonable  time  to  withdraw  their  settlements,  and  to  bring  home  their 
goods  and  shipping;  and  that  a new  subscription  should  be  entcaed  into,  for  carrying  on  the  trade  on  an 
extensive  joint  stock ; and  when  such  subscription  should  be  completed,  His  Majesty  would  renew  the  Com- 
pany’s charter,  and  grant  such  additional  privileges  as  might  bt‘  found  necessary  and  expedient  “ for 
carrying  on  so  great  and  important  a trade.’' 

1640.  In  consequence  of  the  protection  and  cncouragcanent  thus  held  out,  a Court  of  the  gcnerali(\ 
of  proprietors  was  summoned,  wlien  it  was  proposed  to  raiee  a subscription  for  a new,  or  fourth  joint 
stock,  on  the  following  conditions: 

I.  That  the  subscription  should  be  paid  in  lour  years. 

IL  That  the  subscription  should  be  open  to  all  persons,  foreigners  as  well  as  IbiglUli,  till  the  Ist  of 
May,  1640,  and  the  instalments  paid  (quarterly. 

III.  That  in  case  of  default  in  payment  of  the  instalments,  1 { per  cent,  per  month  should  be  levied 
as  a fine,  till  such  payment  should  be  made. 

IV.  That  no  Englishman  should  subscribe  less  than  and  no  foreigner  less  than  X^IOOO. 

V.  That  if  any  Englishman  should  buy  any  share  alter  the  books  were  closed,  he  shouhl  pay  £20^ 
and  a foreigner  jt*40,  as  a fine  for  his  freedom  to  the  new  Coin[)any. 

VI.  That  to  prevent  inconvenience  and  confusion,  the  old  Company,  or  adventyrei>*  in  the  third 
joint  stock,  should  have  sufficient  time  allowed  for  bringing  home  their  properly,  and  shoidd  send  no  more 
stock  to  India  on  that  account  after  tlie  month  of  May,  1610. 

Among  the  ex[iedients  to  which  King  Charles  in  his  necessity  was  obliged  to  have  recourse,  was 
his  compelling  tlie  East  India  Company  to  .sell  to  tlie  Crown  the  whole  of  the  pepper  in  their  warchouse.i, 
amounting  to  607,522  lbs.  at  2s.  Id.  peril),  payable  by  instalments.  This  pej)per  was  sold  for  ready  money, 
at  Is.  8d.  per  lb.  and  it  was  several  years  before  the  Company  could  get  the  accounts  settled. 

The  Company,  on  the  15th  of  November,  16U1,  obtained  a giant  uf  the  town  and  port  of  Madra.s- 
patnam,  where  they  built  a fort,  which  they  naiiUHl  St.  George.  As  an  encouragement  to  the  English  to 
settle  there,  they  were  allowed  to  trade,  duty  free;  of  the  customs  paid  by  other  (radiTs,  one  half  was  to 
be  allowed  to  the  Company,  and  the  other  half  to  the  King.  On  olitaining  this  grant,  tlie  factory  removed 
from  Armagon  to  Fort  St.  George,  which  has  .since  been  the  pi  incipal  settlement  on  tlie  coast. 

The  Company’s  trade  having  much  extended,  tliey  found  tln  ir  yard  at  Deptford  inadequate  to  their 
occasions.  Some  coj))’hold  ground  was  therefore  purchased  at  Bluckwall,  viliieli  at  this  time  was  a mar.di, 
without  inhabitants,  and  another  yard  was  established  upon  a more  ext(‘nsive  scale,  where  they  built 
a still  larger  ship  of  1200  tons,  (the  Royal  James),  and  several  others  of  the  burthen  of  900,  800,  and  700 
tons  each.  In  these  two  yards  the  Company  performed  every  function  connected  with  the  outfit  of  ship- 
ping within  themselves;  they  built  their  own  sliijis  and  boats,  made  their  own  masts,  yards,  sails,  anchors, 
cables,  and  cordage  for  rigging;  they  imported  their  own  flour,  baked  their  own  bread,  killed  and  .salted 
their  own  provisions;  imported  staves  from  the  Baltic,  made  their  own  cask.s,  and  even  were  under  the 
necessity  of  importing  from  tlia  Continent  saltpetre  to  make  their  own  gunpowder,  King  Charles  1.  having 
taken  the  monopoly  of  this  commodity  into  his  own  hands,  but  was  unable  to  supply  the  Company  with 
Uie  quantity  they  required  of  . it.  All  these  occu|)ations,  from  the  improved  state  of  the  country,  have 
shice  become  separate  trades,  which  have  been  successfully  carried  on  by  individuals,  whereby  many 
families  by  industry  have  risen  to  a state  of  affluence  and  honourable  independence. 

♦1) 


MW  EISE  AND  PBOGRESS  OF  THE  COMMERCE 

In  this  year  the  Company  were  first  oflered  a ship  upon  freight,  at  £25  per  ton;  and  as  k aj^eared 
by  a calcidatioD,  that  their  own  shipping  stood  them  at  the  rate  of  ^31  per  ton,  she  was  chartered, 
and  performed  a voyage  to  and  from  India  in  the  space  of  eleven  months,  being  the  shortest  that 
at  that  period  had  ever  been  known.  As  tins  proved  an  advantageous  concern  to  the  owners,  others 
were  ledhy  degrees  to  follow  tl\eir  example;  so  that  the  Company's  trade  for  a time  was  carried  on  partly 
by  their  own,  and  partly  by  hired  shipping.  The  country  at  length  being  furnished  with  such  a stock  of 
shipping,  that  the  Company  could  rely  upon  being  supplied  with  tonnage  sufficient  for  their  annual  wantst 
by  the  hire  of  ships  upon  freight,  they  relinquished  the  practice  of  building  their  own  ships,  and  sold 
their  dockyards;  since  which  time,  with  but  few  exceptions,  the  Company's  capital  has  ceased  to  be  invested 
in  shipping. 

The  second  joint  stock,  originally  established  in  1617,  having  been  from  time  to  time  protracted 
tin  1631,  before  it  had  been  able  to  afford  a reimbursement  of  the  original  sum  subscribed,  it  was  agreed 
to  make  over  its  remains  to  the  tliird  Joint  stock,  at  a valuation  of  12[  per  cent 

The  subscription  for  the  third  Joint  stock  amounted  only  to  n(?430,700,  of  which  nearly  one  half 
was  to  be  paid  to  the  former  Joint  stock,  as  the  valuation  of  their  remains  in  India  and  in  England.  With 
this  sum  but  little  could  be  accomplished;  indeed  the  state  of  public  affairs  was  not  sufficiently  encouraging 
for  the  activity  of  enterprise.  The  Company  were  persecuted  by  their  enemies  abroad,  and  were  without 
support  or  protection  at  home.  No  retlrcss  was  likewise  to  be  obtained  from  the  Dutch,  whose  power  and 
insolence  in  India  had  arrived  to  an  unexampled  degiw  of  magnitude.  The  Company,  however,  upon  the 
whole  suffered  less  from  enemies  abroad,  than  their  opponents  at  home.  The  King  had  been  prevailed 
upon  to  issue  a new  grant  to  Sir  William  Courieen  and  others,  authorizing  them  to  trade  in  such 
parts  of  India  as  had  not  hitherto  been  resorted  to  by  the  East  India  Company.  Instead  of 
confining  themselves  within  the  limits  of  this  grant,  they  openly,  and  in  defiance  of  tlie  Company's 
authority,  visited  and  traded  in  every  part  of  India.  The  Company  remonstrated,  but  obtained  no 
redress.  They  were  nevertheless  unwilling  to  abandon  the  trade,  in  hopes  that  affairs  might  take  a more 
favourable  turn.  In  this  way  they  persevered  for  several  years,  struggling  against  difficulties  of  various 
kinds.  Having  at  length  realized  sufficient  to  discharge  their  debts,  they  in  this  year  (1640)  brought 
their  affairs  to  a close,  and  divided  their  capital,  with  a profit,  in  eleven  years,  of  only  36  per  cent. 

1642.  At  a meeting  of  the  adventurers  in  the  third  joint  stock,  on  the  6th  of  October^  1641, 
it  was  resolved,  that  a necessity  exists  of  something  being  done  to  support  and  uphold  the  East  India 
trade,  as,  if  this  year  Is  passed  over,  the  trade  may  pass  off  so  as  never  to  be  again  revived."  A subscrijv* 
tion  was  therefore  opened  for  a single  voyage,  and  £67^500  was  subscribed.  This  adventure  was  to  pay 
the  tliird  Joint  stock  one  per  cent,  for  management  at  home,  and  6 per  cent,  ou  the  invoice  cost  of  their 
goods,  for  service  of  factories,  warehouses,  and  small  shipping  in  India. 

The  adventurers  in  the  fourth  Joint  stock  consisted  of  such  of  the  members  of  the  fisrmer  stock 
as  chose  to  subscribe  their  remains  in  that  concern,  on  a valuation  of  25  per  cent,  wiffi  a few  new  sub^ 
scribers;  but  to  so  deplorable  an  ebb  was  this  trade  reduced,  that  the  total  amount  of  the  subscriptions^ 
lacludmg  an  addition  that  was  made  thereto  in  1643,  was  only  about  j£^lQ/S,000;  with  this  sum  little  could 
be  eftcied,  and  indeed  little  was  attempted,  owing  to  the  confusion  of  the  times.  The  nation  was  now 
involved  in  a civil  war,  and  the  baneful  spirit  of  party  had  extended  itself  to  all  ranks  and  descriptions  of 
men:  it  pervaded  even  the  ordinaiy  operations  of  commerce.  The  stock  of  the  Company,  trifling  as  it 
was,  experienced  a great  diminution  by  the  conduct  of  Captain  Macknel,  one  of  their  commanders,  who 
carried  hie  ship,  the  John,  with  a cargo  valued  at  ^20,000,  into  Bristol,  where  he  surrendered  her  up  to 
the  King's  use.  The  capital  was  also  further  lessened  by  the  wreck  of  another  ship,  valued  at  £36,000. 
This  reduced  them  to  the  necessity  of  borrowing  money  upon  their  bonds  at  home,  and  availing  themselves 


BETWEEN  ENGLAND  AND  THE  EAST  INDIES, 


UfU 


of  their  credit  abroad,  in  the  manner  tliat  had  been  practised  hy  the  former  Company^  by  which  upon  tlic 
whole  they  obtained  but  little  profit. 

164(i.  The  urgency  of  State  atiliirs  pi^veiited  the  Government  from  attending  to  the  East  India  con- 
oerns.  The  application  for  a charter  had  been  put  oft'  from  time  to  time  for  many  years,  ainfthe  only 
encouragement  the  Company  could  obtain,  was  the  forbidding  all  persons  trading  to  India,  ii|)on  the  for* 
feiture  of  ships  and  goods,  and  empowering  them  to  fine  and  imprison  those  who  sliould  lie  guilty  of  dis^ 
obedience  to  their  orders. 

The  following  is  a state  of  the  affairs  of  the  fourth  joint  stock  on  the  4th  of  September,  Id  Id. 

The  debts  owing  by  the  Company  in  England,  amounted  to  l'122,0tX). 

Their  cftects  consisted  of,  quick  stock  at  Surat,  i.'83,d00;  quick  stock  at  Bantam,  i?G0,731;  in  shipping 
and  stores  jL^31,1S0;  and  customs  at  Gombroon,  estimated  at  X'5,000;  forming  a total  of  XM80,.511. 

It  was  estimated  that  the  profits  of  the  quick  stock  would  be  suflicieiit  to  discharge  the  debt,  and  leave 
a clear  capital  of  if 180,000  in  money,  mei'chandise,  and  outstanding  debts  in  England  and  India. 

1649,  The  Company  presented  a memorial  to  the  Council  of  State,  specifying  that  under  theii 
aharter  they  had  carried  on  a trade  to  the  East  Indies,  with  great  advantages  to  the  public  revenues, 
which  during  the  last  twenty-five  years  liad  drawn  from  it  above  i?500,000; — that,  in  prosecuting  this 
trade,  they  had  experienced  heavy  losses  from  the  Portuguese,  though  by  a truce,  within  the  last  fourteen 
years,  that  nation  had  accommodated  matters  with  them; — that  licences  had  been  granted  in  the  late  reign, 
to  Courteen^'s  Association,  to  carry  on  trade,  and  establish  factories  in  the  countries  within  their  limits,  and 
that  their  depredations  on  the  native  traders  had  exposed  the  Company's  servants  in  imprisonment,  and  their 
property  to  heavy  losses;— that  this  same  association  was  now  applying  for  |>ermissioii  to  form  a setUemenl 
on  the  island  of  Assada,  near  Madagascar,  and  was  preparing  shipping,  and  engaging  settlers  for  that 
purpose;— that  the  consequence  of  such  an  establishment  would  be,  that  their  ships  would  nmew  their  de- 
predations on  the  shipping  and  trade  of  the  native  SUtes  in  India,  and  again  cxjMise  the  Company's  pro- 
perty and  servants  to  seizure  and  imprisonment;— and  that  the  ultimate  effect  must  he,  to  exclude  the 
En^ish  nation  from  trade  in  the  East  Indies:— they  therefore  prayed  lliat  the  Council  of  State  would  pass 
an  Act  for  the  support  and  encouragement  of  the  East  India  trade,  as  managed  by  the  Company. 

Without  entering  into  the  question  of  the  Company’s  rights,  or  the  infringement  of  them  by 
Courtcen's  Association,  which  now  took  the  name  of  Assada  Merchants,  the  Council  recommended  the 
parties  to  confer,  and  come  to  an  agreement  between  themselves.  After  several  meetings  it  was  agreed, 
that  the  planters  of  Assada  should  not  be  allowed  to  trade  from  port  to  port  in  India,  but  might  proceed 
direct  from  Assada  to  any  ports  on  the  Coasts  of  Asia,  Africa,  and  America,  and  return  direct  to 
Assada;  that  they  should  be  allowed  a free  trade  without  restriction  to  the  Coast  of  Melinda,  the  River 
of  Sofala,  Mosambique,  and  parts  adjacent;  that  the  trade  to  Guinea,  for  gold  and  ivory,  should  io 
future  be  united  witli  the  East  India  trade ; and  therefore  petitioned  tlie  Council  of  State  (all  parties 
having  adjusted  their  differences),  that  a recommendation  should  be  made  to  Parliament  for  an  Act  to 
settle  the  trade,  that  in  future  it  should  not  be  prejudiced  by  interlopers,  and  that  protection  should  be 
afforded  against  the  Dutch. 

This  agreement  was  foQowed  by  a petition  to  Parliament,  praying  for  an  Act  to  relate  the  trade, 
which  was  ^en  into  consideration  on  the  Slst  of  January,  1649-^,  when  it  was  resolved  “ that  the 
trtrde  to  the  East  Indies  should  be  carried  on  by  one  Company  and  with  one  joint  stock,  and  the  manage- 
ment thereof  to  be  under  such  regulations  as  the  Parliament  should  think  fit"' 

♦D2 


xxTiii 


RISE  AND  PROGRESS  OF  THE  COMMERCE 


This  led  to  the  formation  of  what  was  termed  the  United  Joint  Stock,  towards  which  i?157,000 
was  subscribed,  and  the  remains  of  the  fourth  joint  stock  purciiascd  for  «£^20,000;  and  it  was  proposed 
that  no  vessel  should  be  sent  out  atler  the  1st  of  Mm*ch,  1053. 

m The  injuries  the  Englisli  had  experienced  from  the  Dutch  in  India  for  a series  of  years,  were 
enumerated  in  a petition,  presented  by  the  Company  on  the  1 4th  of  November,  J 050,  to  the  High  Court 
of  Parliament,  stating  “ That  in  violation  of  the  treaty  of  1019,  they  !iad  been  expelled  by  them  from  the 
Island  of  Pulo  Roon,  their  ancient  inheritance,  and  from  the  Islands  of  Lantore,  Molucca,  Banda,  ami 
Amboyna,  where  their  factors  and  servants  had  been  barbarously  murd(*red;  that  the  spice-trees  in  Pulo 
Roon  had  been  cut  down  by  the  Duteli,  and  the  Company’s  houses  and  stores  at  Jaccatra  burnt,  and  their 
treasure  taken  away;  that  Bantam  had  been  blockaded  by  the  Dutch  for  six  years  together,  wherel)y  the 
English  were  deprived  of  the  benefit  of  that  trade;  tbht  the  shipjiing  and  subjects  of  the  Mogul  had 
been  protected  liy  the  Dutch  against  the  English;  that  tlio  Dutch  hafl  committed  piracies  in  the  Retl  Sea 
under  the  English  flag,  for  which  the  Company  had  to  pay  103, (XX)  rials  of  eight;  that  a quantity  of 
pepper  had,  in  the  year  1649,  been  taken  by  tin*  Dutch  out  of  one  of  the  Company’s  ships  at  Indrapour; 
and  that  on  the  whole  they  had,  during  the  last  20  years,  sustained  losses  from  the  Dutch  to  the  amount 
of  i?2,()00,000  sterling;  that  they  had  repeaU'dly  represented  their  grievances,  but  never  could  obtain 
any  reparation;  and  therefore  prayed  that  their  case  might  be  taken  into  consideration,  that  satisfaction 
should  be  demanded  from  the  States  General  for  the  loss  which  they  had  sustained,  and  particularly  that 
Pulo  Roon  should  be  restored  to  them. 

1654.  The  above  petition  was  referred  by  the  Parliament  to  tlie  consideration  of  the  Council  of  State. 
A war  with  Holland  soon  after  commenced,  and  it  was  not  till  the  conclusion  of  a peace  between  the  two 
nations,  by  the  treaty  of  Westminster  in  1054,  that  any  redress  was  obtained.  By  this  treaty  it  was  agreed, 
that  the  States  General  shall  take  care  that  justice  be  done  upon  those  who  were  partakers  or  accom- 
plices in  the  massacre  of  the  English  at  Amboyna,  as  tlie  Republic  of  England  is  pleased  to  term  that 
fact,  provided  any  of  them  be  living;  and  that  four  commissioners  shall  be  named  on  both  sides,  to 
examine  and  distinguish  nil  the  losses  and  injuries  either  party  complains  of  having  suffered  from  the 
other.”  The  commissioners  were  accordingly  named,  and  met  in  London  on  the  30th  of  August,  1654, 
to  decide  on  the  claims  of  the  respective  Companies,  for  coi»ipensation  for  the  damages  which  each  asserted 
they  had  sustained.  The  English  Company  stated  their  damages,  as  established  by  regular  accounts  from 
161 1 to  1652,  at  695,999  15s.  To  counterbalance  this  statement,  the  Dutch  brought  forward  accounts, 
in  w’hich  they  estimated  their  damages  at  ^2,919,361  3s.  fid.  After  much  deliberation,  the  commis- 
sioners pronounced  their  award,  in  substance,  that  there  should  be  an  oblivion  by  both  parties  of  past 
injuries  and  losses;  that  the  Island  of  Pulo  Roon  should  be  restored  to  the  English;  that  the  Dutch 
Company  should  pay  to  the  English  Company  i?85,0()0  by  two  instalments;  and  farther,  that  the  sum 
of  i?3,615  should  be  paid  to  the  heirs  or  executors  of  the  sufferers  at  Amboyna.  These  sums  were  accord- 
ingly  paid  by  the  Dutch  Company,  conformably  to  this  award.  ’ 

The  above  treaty  set  the  aftairs  of  the  Company  again  on  foot,  and  gave  life  and  spirit  to 
c'ommercc,  but  encouraged  an  opposition  to  the  Company,  from  a general  impression  of  extending  the 
trade  of  the  realm.  This  opposition  arose  from  some  who  had  been  parties  to  the  Assada  trade  in  1649. 
These  adventurers  petitioned  the  Council  of  State  on  the  21  st  of  September,  1654,  that  the  trade  might 
be  carried  on  by  a Company;  but  with  liberty  for  the  members  of  such  Company,  individually,  to  employ 
their  own  stock,  servants,  and  shipping,  in  such  way  as  they  might  conceive  most  to  their  own  advantage. 
The  East  India  Company  answered  this  petition,  and  among  other  reasons,  stated  that  the  only  method 


BETWEEN  ENGLAND  AND  THE  EAST  INDIES. 


xxjx 

of  carrying  on  tlic  trade,  for  the  benefit  and  honour  of  the  country,  would  be  by  a joint  stock  v*’  and  tlicy 
pnayed  a renewal  of  their  cliarter,  and  that  private  persons  should  be  prohibited  sending  shipping  to 
India.  These  petitions,  from  the  unsettled  state  of  public  alfairs,  were  not  attended  to. 

The  objections  which,  from  the  commencement  of  the  Company's  establishment,  had  been  occasionally 
urged  against  their  being  vested  with  the  exclusive  trade  to  India,  were,  however,  pressed  upon  the 
Protector  with  so  much  force  and  effect,  that,  by  way  of  experiment,  he  declan  d the  navigation  and 
commerce  to  India  open  and  free  for  three  years.  All  ranks  eagerly  embarked  in  the  trade.  Tin* 
consequence  of  this  permission  is  thus  truly  stated  by  an  intelligent  author: — ‘‘When  the  East  India 
trade  was  laid  open,  they  aflTorded  India  commodities  so  clienp,  that  they  supplied  mon*  parts  of 
Europe,  and  even  Amsterdam  itseli  therewith,  than  ever  they  did  after,  whereby  tliey  very  mucli  Mink 
the  East  India  Company’s  actions;”  and  “ there  was  also  a great  lowering  of  Englisli  commodities  in 
India.”  In  this  year  the  (’ompany  made  u|i  the  actual  state  of  their  allhirs,  by  which  it  appeared  that 
their  assets  amounted  to  .P185,5S9  7s.  and  their  debts  to  1 19s.  4d.  leaving  a balance  in  their 

favour  of  7s.  8d. 

1656.  Tlie  (’ompany  presented  another  petition  to  the  Government,  staling  that  they  had  been  at 
great  expenees  in  purchasing  privileges,  and  erecting  factories  in  \arioiis  parts  of  India;  that  the  time  of 
the  United  Stock  being  expired,  and  many  ships  having  been  sent  by  individuals  under  licences,  the 
interference  of  wdiich  had  the  effect  of  raising  the  price  of  India  produce  1‘roni  M)  to  50  per  cent,  and  to 
lower  the  price  of  English  manufactures  in  an  equal  proportion,  they  prayed  that  the  Protector  would 
renew  tlieir  charter,  and  that  it  might  he  confirmed  by  Act  of  Parliament,  with  such  additional  privileges 
as  had  been  found  necessary  to  carry  on  the  trade. 

This  petition  was  submitted  to  the  consideration  of  the  (’ouneil  of  State,  who,  by  an  order  dated  the 
3d  of  November,  1056,  referred  it  to  a select  committee,  wlio  were  directed  to  take  the  subject  into  their 
consideration,  and  to  report  their  opinion  to  the  Council,  “ in  what  manner  the  East  India  trade  might  be 
best  managed  for  the  public  good  and  its  own  encouragement.” 

The  committee  reported,  on  the  18th  of  December,  that  they  had  candully  considered  the  petition 
of  the  East  India  Company;  and,  that  they  might  have  the  fullest  information  on  tills  important  subject, 
had  directed  notices  to  he  fixed  on  the  Exchange,  appointing  a day  for  all  persons  concerned  in  the  East 
India  trade  to  attend  tlierri.  In  consequence  of  wdiioh,  several  mereliants  attended,  and  a full  hearing  was 
given  to  the  arguments  of  both  parties;  and  the  Committee  reported  to  the  Council  of  State,  that  thougli 
it  was  their  private  opinion  the  trade  ought  to  be  conducted  on  an  united  joint  stock,  yet  they  considered 
the  business  of  so  much  importance,  that  they  w^ould  not  come  to  any  positive  delermination  on  the 
subject,  but  referred  the  whole  case  to  the  Council  of  State  for  their  decision. 

The  Council  of  State,  on  receiving  this  report,  appointed  the  28th  of  January,  1057,  for  the 
Governor  and  Committee  of  the  East  India  Company,  and  the  principal  ineichant  adventurers,  to  attend 
them;  when,  after  a full  hearing  of  the  claims  of  both  parties,  the  Council  gave  it  as  their  advice  to  the 
Protet^r,  “ that  the  trade  of  East  Indya  be  mannaged  by  a united  joynt  stock,  exclusive  of  all  others.” 
On  the  10th  of  February  the  Protector  signified  his  approbation  of  their  advice,  and  a committee  was 
appointed  to  consider  of  the  charter  to  be  granted  to  the  East  India  Company. 

In  consequence  of  this  determhiatiun  of  the  Protector,  an  union  took  place  between  the  Coinj)any 
and  the  merchant  adventurers;  and  the  sum  of  -P786,(XK)  was  subscribed,  to  form  a new  joint  stock,  and 
the  forts,  privileges,  and  immunities  in  India  and  Persia  were  made  over  to  the  new  joint  stock  on  pay* 
ment  of  i?20,000.  The  rights  thus  transferred  were  Fort  St.  George,  and  tlie  several  factories  on  the 
Coromandel  Coast  and  in  Bengal;  the  factories  at  Surat  and  Gombroon  in  Persia,  with  their  dependencies; 
and  the  factory  at  Bantam,  with  its  dependencies  of  Jambee  and  Macassar. 


niSE  AND  PROGRESS  OP  THE  COMMERCE 


16(K).  Notwithstanding  the  recent  restoration  of  the  Company's  privileges,  they  still  continued  to 
'•uffer  hy  interlopersS.  A case  at  this  time  occurred,  which  produced  the  most  serious  differences  between 
both  Houses  of  Parliament  Thomas  Skinner  had  fitted  out  a ship  in  1657,  which  arrived  in  India  in 
1658.  ITie  Company,  by  virtue  of  the  powers  they  possessed  under  their  new  chat  ter,  seized  Skinner 
and  his  effects.  Skinner  complained  to  the  K^ing,  who  referred  his  case  to  the  Privy  Council,  from  ivhence 
it  was  carried  to  the  House  of  Peers.  The  Peers,  on  hearing  the  complaint,  directed  the  Company  to 
put  in  their  answer.  The  Company  urged  their  exclusive  privileges,  and  at  tl^c  same  time  demurred 
against  the  jurisdieiion  of  the  Lords,  as  the  case  had  not  come  before  them  regularly  hy  an  appeal  from 
an  inferior  Court.  The  Lords  overruled  the  plea,  and  iti  1666  appointed  the  case  to  be  heard  at  their 
bar.  The  Company  obtained  a postponement  till  1667,  when  they  again  demurred,  and  complained  to 
the  Commons  of  the  illegality  of  the  Lonls'  proceedings.  The  Lords  on  tliis  were  inflamed,  and  passed 
a decree  in  favour  of  Skinner,  with  i?5(K)0  damages.  This  exasperated  the  Commons,  who  passed  some 
severe  resolutions  against  the  Lords,  and  sent  Skinner  to  the  Tower.  The  Lords  upon  this  voted  the 
Company's  petition  to  the  Commons  to  be  false  and  scandalous.  The  Commons,  in  return,  resolved  that 
whoever  should  execute  the  sentence  of  the  Lords,  in  favour  of  Skinner,  should  be  deemed  a betrayer  of 
the  rights  and  liberties  of  the  Commons  of  England,  and  an  infringer  of  the  privileges  of  their  House. 
These  violent  contentions  obliged  the  King  to  jirorogue  tlie  Parliament  seven  times.  In  1670  the  quarrel 
was  again  revived,  when  the  King  called  both  Houses  to  Whitehall,  and  prevailed  upon  tliem  to  erase  all 
the  offensive  votes  from  their  journals.  This  put  an  end  to  the  business,  but  occasioned  many  discussions 
in  respect  to  the  Jurisdictions  of  the  Houses  of  Parliament. 

In  the  early  |)eriod  of  the  Company's  concerns,  the  trade  with  India,  as  has  been  already  stated, 
was  carried  on  by  a circuitous  route.  The  ships,  on  their  departure  from  England,  visited  the  northern 
parts  of  India,  where  they  disposed  of  part  of  their  cargoes,  and  ivith  the  proceeds  purchased  piece- 
goods  for  the  supply  of  the  ports  to  the  southward:  here  they  disposed  of  the  remainder  of  their 
British  goods,  and  such  of  the  piece-goods  as  were  suitable  for  those  markets,  and  invested  the  produce 
in  pepper,  spices,  and  other  articles  for  their  returning  cargoes,  wdncli  thereby  consisted  of  an  assortment 
of  goods  from  all  pails.  The  fluctuating  state  of  Asiatic  politics,  (the  Indian  Princes  being  mostly 
engaged  in  a state  of  warfare),  combined  with  the  opposition  which  the  Company  experienced  from 
their  inveterate  enemies,  the  Portuguese  and  Dutch,  obliged  them  to  he  continually  sliitling  their  factories 
from  place  to  place,  according  to  the  state  of  existing  circumstances.  This  moile  of  traffic,  which 
was  both  tedious  and  expensive,  was  now  given  up,  and  the  Company  resolved  to  confine  themselves  to 
the  ti'ade  with  India  direct  out  and  home.  The  trade  from  port  to  port  in  India,  or,  as  it  is  more 
familiarly  termed,  the  country  trade,  was  accordingly  leflt  to  the  Company's  servants  in  India,  and  to  per* 
sons  licensed  to  reside  there  as  free  merchants. 

Tlic  national  ships  at  this  period,  thougli  numerous,  were  still,  compared  with  the  present  day, 
but  of  small  dimensions^  and  in  general  incapable  of  defence  against  tlie  pirates  of  Algiers,  or,  as  they  were 
tefmed,  the  Turkish  rovers.**  To  entourage  the  building  of  ships  of  above  550  tons,  and  with  three 
decks,  the  Company  gave  the  public  assurances  that  they  would  give  them  employment  in  their  airvice  in 
preference  to  all  others,  at  20s.  per  ton  more  tiiau  the  ordinary  rates  of  freight.  The  first  ship  of  this 
description  tendered  to  the  Com|)aiiy,  was  the  Loyal  Merchant,  built  by  Captain  Millett  in  1660.  This 
ship  underwent  a royal  Inspection,  and  his  Majesty,  Charles  II.  was  so  pleased  with  her  construction,  that, 
as  an  enoouragement  for  building  ships  of  a similar  description,  he  caused  an  Act  to  be  passed  (14  Charles  11. 
chap.  %)  by  which  it  was  conditioned,  that  for  seven  years  to  come,  whoever  slmuld  build  Alps  with  three 
decks,  or  with  two  decks  and  a half,  and  a forecastle,  with  a space  of  five  feet  between  each  deck,  and 
mounted  at  least  with  90  cannon,  should  for  tite  first  two  voyages  receive  one  tenth  part  of  all  the  Customs 
that  were  payable  on  their  export  and  import  lading. 


BETWEEN  ENGLAND  AND  THE  EAST  INDIES.  axi 

In  the*  three  yeftis^  1659)  Hiid  the  totAl  smouiit  o^Chc  Ooinp(iny*s  6xpoi*tsw&s  1,583 
aiul  consisted  of  bullion,  £227fi20j  and  goods,  i?S3,763. 

lG(il.  The  Company  petitioned  the  Kingfioc  a renewal  of  their  exclusive  privileges,  when  a new 
charter  was  groriited,  dated  the  3d  ol  April,  1661;  the  preamble  of  wiiich  recites,  that  divers  disorders 
and  inconvenionces  had  been  committed  by  the  King's  subjects  and  by  foreigners,  to  the  great  prejudice 
of  tlw  Company,  and  inten  uption  of  their  trade;  wliereuj)on  the  Company  had  besought  the  King  to  con. 
finn  their  charters,  granted  them  by  Queen  Elizabeth  and  King  James.  The  King  accordingly  grants^ 
ratifies,  and  confirms  unto  the  Governor  and  Company,  that  tliey  shaU  be  a body  corporate  and  politic 
by  their  former  name,  witli  perpetual  succession  for  ever.  And  tlie  charter  tlien  pioceeils,  like  that  from 
King  James,  to  the  nomination  of  the  first  Governor,  Deputy  Governor,  and  24  Committee-men,  with 
instructions  for  tlieir  annual  election;  and  grants  to  the  Company  tlic  following  powers  in  addition  to 
those  given  them  by  tlieir  last  charter,  viz. 

That  the  Commissioners  of  Customs  shall  permit  no  entry  of  India  goods,  but  such  as  shall  be 
allowed  by  the  Governor  and  Company,  under  their  seal,  or  unde  r the  hand  of  the  Company's  officers, 
to  be  by  them  appointed  to  sit  at  the  Custom-house  for  that  purpose. 

That  every  member  shall  have  a vote  in  the  general  Court,  at  all  elections  and  byeJaws,  for  each 
1*500  stock  wliich  he  shall  possess;  and  that  persons  may  unite  smaller  sums  to  make  up  that  amount, 
and  vote  jointly  for  the  same. 

That  all  plantations,  forts,  &c.  where  the  Company's  factories  are,  or  shall  be  established,  shall  be 
under  their  own  command  and  controul,  with  the  appointment  of  Governors,  and  officers  to  govern  the 
same;  and  that  such  Governor  and  his  Council  may  exercise  civil  and  criminal  jurisdiction  in  the  said 
factories,  &c.  according  to  the  laws  of  England;,  and  if  the  offence  shall  be  committed  in  a place  where 
it  cannot  be  tried,  the  offender  may  be  sent  to  such  oilier  plantation  or  fort  where  there  is  a Governor  in 
Council  to  try  him,,  that  justice  may  be  done. 

That  the  Company  may  export  warlike  stores,  make  peace  and  war  with  Princes  and  people  In  tlie 
limits  of  tlieir  trade  (not  b<^ing  Christians),  and  recom|jense  themselves  for  wrongs  and  damages  sus- 
tained at  their  settlements. 

That  they  may  fortify  St.  Helena  and  any  other  places  within  the  limits  of  their  trade,  and  supply 
their  forts  and  setticineiils  with  clothing,  victuals,  umniunition,  and  implements  free  from  custom  oi 
<hity,  and  transport  thitlier  such  men  os  shall  be  willing  to  go;  may  govern  them  in  a legal  and  reasonable 
manner,  and  inflict  punishments  for  misdemeanors,  or  ini^^osc  fines  for  breae^  of  orders. 

That  they  may  seize  all  Englishmen  and  other  persons  in  the  East  Indies  sailing  in  any  Indian  or 
English  vessel,  or  inhabiting  those  parts  without  the  Company’s  licence,  or  that  shall  disobey  their  order?, 
and  send  them  home  to  England. 

That  the  King's  subjects,  employed  by  tlie  Com|mny  in  tlie  limits  aforesaid,  shall  sufl'er  such  punish- 
ment for  offences  there  committed  as  the  Company’s  President  and  Council  shall  think  fit,  and  the  quality 
of  the  offences  requires;  and  in  case  of  appeal,  the  offender  shall  be  sent  home  fur  punishment.  And  for 
the  better  discovery  of  offenders,  ail  persons  may  be  examined  upon  oath  before  the  Company’s  President 
and  Council,  touching  the  same. 

The  Company  ore  restricted  from  trading  in  the  dominions  of  any  Christian  Prince  or  State,  in  aniify 
with  the  Crown  of  England,  who  shall  oveiily  declare  it  to  be  against  his  will  or  good  liking. 

With  proviso,  that  if  the  continuance  of  tliis  charter  shall  not  be  profitable  to  the  Crown  and  the 
realm,  the  King  may  resume  it  on  three  years’  notice. 

The  marriage  of  King  Charles  II.  with  the  Infanta  of  Portugal  took  place  soon  affer  the  renewal  of 
the  Company’s  charter.  By  the  11th  article  of  the  treaty  of  marriage,  the  Crown  of  Portugal  ceded  and 


xxxii 


niSE  AND  PROGRESS  OP  THE  COMMERCE 


granted  tp  the  Crown  of  England  fhl'^i^island  and  barbour  of  Bombay,  in  full  sovereignty,  which  was 
taken  possession  of  in  the  name  of  the  King,  and  retained  by  the  Crown  till  1668;  when  it  being  found  that 
the  expences  in  maintaining  it  greatly  exceeded  the  revenues,  it  was  granted  to  the  Company  in  pcii)etuity 
by  letters  patent,  dated  the  27th  of  March,  1668. 

The  island  of  Roon,  otherwise  Pulo  Roon,  was  an  early  possession  of  the  Company.  The  Dutch 
East  India  Company  having  captured  it,  the  arbitraton  appointed,  in  1654,  for  settling  the  disputes 
between  the  two  Companies,  decreed  that  it  should  be  restored  to  the  English;  but  the  Dutch  having 
failed  to  do  so,  the  King,  by  a grant  dated  the  lltli  of  January,  1660,  gave  licence  to  the  Company  to 
take  possession  of  the  said  island,  and  to  regain  it  from  the  Dutch  Company,  and  to  plant,  husband, 
manage,  retain,  and  keep  the  same.  The  island  was  accordingly  repossessed  by  the  Company,  who 
held  it  only  a short  time  before  the  Dutch,  in  1664,  again  seized  it;  and  by  the  treaty  of  Breda  in 
1667,  it  was  ceded  to  the  Dutch  in  full  sovereignty  and  riglit. 

1664.  The  seven  years  for  which  the  Company  were  associated,  being  now  expired,  public  notice 
was  given  that  within  a prescribed  space  of  time,  such  of  tlie  subscribers  as  were  inclined,  might  withdraw 
their  shares;  but  they  all  preferred  letting  them  remain  upon  a new  establishment.  The  price  of  India  stock 
having  been  reduced  so  low  as  70  per  cent,  a statement  of  the  ('orflpany’s  aflairs  was  made  up,  by 
which  it  appears  that  they  had 

In  India,  quick  and  dead  stock  — ... .<£'435,713 

In  England,  Cash  and  bullion  in  their  Treasury  663 

Saltpetre  and  piece-goods  ......,..^.^...............^..23,768 

Cash  advanced  on  account  of  exjiorls  9,227 

Drugs  of  various  kinds,  and  pepper  4,707 

Lease  of  house  in  Leadenhall  Street  and  furniture  1,112 

76,477 

Debts  owing  them  for  goods  sold  127,93.5 

Sundry  other  debts  owing  to  them  ......................  21,316 

Forming  a total  of  jP6G0,841,  from  which  being  deducted  sundry  debts  owing  by  them,  i?l  65,807, 
left  a balance  of  i'495,734  in  their  favour;  by  which  it  appeared  that  the  stock  was  worth  130  per  cent, 
and  it  was  agreed  to  open  books  for  a new  subscription  at  that  rate. 

1066.  The  East  India^onipany  suffered  a heavy  loss  this  year,  from  the  fire  of  London  destroying 
their  saltpetre  warehouses,  and  the  pepper  in  the  vaults  under  the  Royal  Exchange;  though  their 
other  warehouses  escaped  the  conflugratioii. 

1670.  In  this  year  Sir  Josiah  Child  published  his  esteemed  work,  called  “ Discourses  on  Trade.'’ 
With  respect  to  the  benefits  and  advantages  accruing  to  England  from  its  East  India  trade,  of  which  he 
was  a Director  and  an  active  member,  he  supposes  it  to  be  far  from  difficult  to  evince  it  to  be  the  most 
beneficial  trade  which  England  at  that  time  earned  on,  which  he  lays  down  in  the  following  positions,  viz, 

I.  It  employs  from  25  to  30  of  the  most  wmlike  merchant  ships  of  the  kingdom,  with  60  to.  100 
mariners  in  each. 

II.  It  supplies  the  kingdom  constantly  and  fully  with  tliat  necessary  article,  salt|)etre. 

III.  It  supplies  the  kingdom  for  its  consumption,  with  pepper,  indigo,  calicoes,  and  several  useful 
d^ugs,  to  the  value  of  from  X^150,000  to  X180,U00  per  annum. 

IV.  It  also  supplies  us  with  materials  for  carrying  on  our  trade  to  Turkey,  viz  pepper,  cowries, 
c^icocs,  and  painted  stuffs;  as  also  for  our  trades  to  France,  Spain,  Italy,  and  Guinea,  to  the  amount 
of  near  X'300,000  per  annum,  most  of  which  trades  we  could  not  carry  on  with  any  considerable  advantage 


BETWEEN  ENGLAND  AND  THE  EAST  INDIES. 


xxxiii 


but  for  those  supplies.  And  those  goods  exported  do  produce  in  foreign  pait*;,  to  be  returned  to  England, 
six  times  the  treasure  in  specie  which  the  Company  export  to  India."  lie  ihenMore  concludes— 

That  although  the  East  India  Company's  imports  greatly  exceed  its  exports  of  our  manufactures, 
yet  for  the  above  reasons  it  is  clearly  a gainful  trade  to  the  nation."  He  subjoins  also, 

“ 1st.  That  if  we  had  not  this  trade  ourselves,  tiie  single  article  of  saltpetre,  so  absolutely  necessary 
for  making  gunpowder,  would  cost  a vast  annual  sum  to  purchase  it  from  the  Dutch. 

2d.  The  loss  of  so  many  stout  ships  and  mariners  would  he  a great  detriment  to  the  nation. 

‘‘  3d.  AVere  wc  forced  to  buy  all  our  pepper,  calicoes,  &e.  from  the  Dutch,  they  would  make  us  pay 
as  dear  for  them  as  we  do  for  tlndr  nutmegs,  mace,  cloves,  and  cinnamon;  and  if  wc  did  not  use  calicoes, 
wc  should  fall  into  the  use  of  foreign  linens." 

About  this  time  the  wear  of  muslins  was  first  introduced  into  England  instead  of  cambrics,  lawns, 
and  other  linens  from  b'landers  and  Gerniany,  f4)r  which  immense  sums  were  anmiully  paid. 

Tlie  Levant  Company  began  to  comjdain  of  the  l^ast  India  Coinpimy,  on  account  ot  the  great 
quantities  of  raw  silk  they  inijiortcd,  whicli  had  ibrmerly  been  brouglU  sole!)  iVom  I'urkey. 

1G72.  The  English  Company  obtained  a confirmation  of  the  pri\ilcges  granted  them  in  1G43  at 
Madraspatnam,  as  also  a grant  of  the  remaining  moiety  of  the  customs,  on  paving  the  Nabob  the  annual 
sum  of  1,200  pagodas.  The  phirmaimd  was  dated  the  .'list  of  .Taniiaiy,  1071-2. 

The  Dutcli  took  St.  Helena;  but  it  was  soon  after  retaken  by  Captain  Ahiialeii. 


1674.  The  Company  having,  under  the  authority  of  tlieir charter  ol'  ItiOl,  erected  foils,  and  made 
plantations  at  St.  Helena,  previous  to  its  cap! lire  by  the  Dutch,  and  it  Ix  ing  rdakeri  liy  tin*  King's  shijis  and 
forces,  the  King,  by  grant  dated  December  16,  1674,  regranted  and  confirmed  the  same  to  the  .said 
Governor  and  Company  in  perpetuity,  to  he  held  in  socage  tenuie,  as  of  the  Manor  of  East  Creenwieh, 
with  the  same  powers  and  privileges  for  the  safety  ond  protection  thereoi*,  and  for  the  government  ol*  the 
inhabitants,  and  with  the  like  declarations  in  favour  of  the  Company  and  the  inlmhitants,  as  were  coin 
tuined  ill  the  grant  of  Bombay;  and,  with  this  fiirtlnu'  privilege',  that  the  (’ompany  >v('re  permitted  to 
export  to  the  .said  island  all  kinds  of  clothing,  provisions  or  victuals,  ammunition,  ordnance,  and  im- 
plements,  without  payment  of  custom,  subsidy,  or  olher  duly,  and  also  to  tran.sport  thither  such 
numbers  of  men,  willing  to  go,  as  the  Company  should  think  fit. 

At  this  time  the  manufactured  commodities  of  India  annually  im|M)i  tpd  into  lOurope,  and  more 
particularly  into  England,  were  become  so  considerable,  as  to  occasion  loud  complaints  against  the 
East  India  Company,  as  les.seners  of  the  consumption  of  English  maiiufuclures;  whereby  it  wa.s  observed 
that  the  annual  exportation  of  bullion  to  India,  which  Ibrmerly  did  not  oll(*n  exceed  jCMOjOGO,  was 
greatly  increased.  These  complaints  continued  without  intermission,  or  rather  inen^ased,  until  the 
legislature  found  it  necessary  to  enact  a total  and  absolute  prohibition  of  the  wear  of  all  such  in  Eng- 
land,  muslins  only  excepted. 

An  attempt  was  made  to  open  a trade  with  Formosa,  which  proved  unsuccessful ; and  a ves.sel  was 
also  sent  to  Japan ; but  in  consequence  of  the  King  of  England  having  marrieil  a Princess  of  Portugal, 
they  were  refused  permission  to  trade:  they  then  procec'ded  to  Macao,  hut  from  tlie  intrigues  of  the  Vov* 
tuguese,  it  was  with  difficulty  their  cargo  could  he  disposed  of. 

The  ('ompany  made  out,  and  presented  to  l\arliatneiit,  an  account  of  all  bullion,  gold,  silver,  and 
pieces  of  eight  shipped  by  them  since  the  year  1667-H,  to  this  present  year,  167 1*. 


X 4.  J 

In  1667-8,.^ 128,60.5  17  5 

1668- 9 162,394  9 10 

1669- 70  187,458  3 8 

1670- 1 v.v.v.186,149  10  11 

VOL.  I. 


£ <•  d. 

In  8 3 

1672-3 131,300  5 11 

lC73-k 1S2,983  0 6 

Total  1,165,311  16  6 


XUIV 


IIISE  AND  PROGRESS  OF  THE  COMMERCE 


“ In  lieu  whereof,  and  of  several  sorts  of  manufactures  sent  out  by  the  Company,  there  had  been 
paid  unto  His  Majesty  for  customs  tlie  sum  of  about  i:’35,()00  per  annum. 

“ And  for  encreasing  the  navigation  and  strength  of  this  kingdoin,  there  hath  been  built  within  that 
time,  and  are  now  in  building,  24*  sail  of  ships,  from  350  to  GOO  tons  burden ; and  they  have  paid  for 
freight  and  wages  yearly  to  the  amount  of  100,000  per  annum. 

‘‘  And  have  furnished  His  Majesty’s  kingdoms  of  England,  Scotland,  and  Ireland  with  all  sorts  of 
East  India  commodities,  (excepting  cinnamon,  cloves,  nuts,  and  mace),  which,  had  they  not  done,  would 
have  cost  the  kingdom  farr  greater  rates  to  have  been  siipjdii  d from  other  nations. 

“ And  besides  which,  there  are  exported  East  India  goods  to  other  countries,  by  moderate  estimate, 
double  the  value  of  what  they  have  exported  in  bullion,  which  is  a very  great  eiicrease  to  the  stock  of 
this  kingdom,  and  the  proceed  of  a greater  part  thereof  is  from  time  to  time  returned  in  gold  and  silver. 

And  as  for  the  permissions  granted  to  others  to  send  on  their  ships,  the  (’ompany,  not  finding  it 
convenient  for  themselves  to  trade  in  diamonds,  bezoar  stones,  ambergreese,  musk,  pearles,  and  otlier 
fine  goods,  they  have  given  leave  to  others  to  trade  therein,  paying  only  a small  acknowledgment  to  the 
Company  for  freight,  to  tlie  end  that  trade  might  not  onely  he  preserved,  hut  encreased,  to  the  kingdom’s 
advantage:  by  which  also  this  kingdom  is  not  only  furnished  with  those  commodities,  but  there  is  also 
sent  out  from  hence  of  those  fine  goods,  to  a very  great  value  unto  other  countries,  for  encreasing  the 
stock  of  this  kingdom.” 

1076.  The  English  Company’s  affairs  being  at  this  time  in  a prosperous  state,  instead  of  making  a 
dividend,  it  was  agreed  to  add  the  profit  to  their  capital,  by  which  it  became  doubled;  and  every  share  of 

was  now  made  IMOO,  so  that  their  capital  became  J^?39,7B2  10s,  Although  it  had  been  so  recently 
demonstrated  by  experience,  that  a trade  with  the  East  Indies  could  only  be  carried  on  wdth  advantage 
through  the  medium  of  an  exclusive  Company,  the  Company  continued  to  be  harassed  by  an  inflexible 
opposition,  wdio,  emboldened  by  the  spirit  of  the  times,  now  meditated  a blow  at  tlieir  legal  existence. 
A work  of  .some  celebrity  made  its  appearance  at  tliis  time,  purporting  to  be  th.e  opinion  of  a Barrister 
to  a Country  Gentleman,  advising  him  against  trusting  his  children’s  fortunes  in  East  India  bonds ; 
because,  as  the  Company  were  not  established  by  an  Act  of  Parliament,  they  had  no  legal  existence,  and 
were  of  course  liable  to  be  oveiiuriied  or  annihilated.  This  produced,  on  the  part  of  the  Company,  a 
most  able  reply,  supposed  to  be  from  the  pen  of  Sir  Josiah  Child,  in  which  is  exhibited  the  following 
view  of  their  affairs  at  this  juncture  : 

That  they  employed  to  and  from  India  30  to  .35  ships,  from  300  to  GOO  tons  burthen,  28  of  which 
had  been  built  within  the  last  seven  years;  that  their  exports  in  1674—5  consisted  of  bullion  0^320,000,  and 
in  woollens  and  other  goods  about  <£*100,000.  The  returns  from  that  adventure  were  calicoes,  pepper, 
saltpetre,  indigo,  raw  and  wrought  silks,  drugs,  &c.  whicli,  on  sale  in  England,  produced  -£^860,000,  from 
which  deducting  j6*G0,000  for  the  maintenance  of  factors,  forts,  garrisons,  &c.  they  added  annually  to  the 
stock  of  the  kingdom  ^6^370,000.  There  were  also  exported  in  the  private  trade  of  their  officers  and 
servants, 

British  manufactures  and  other  goods,  from  IMOjOOO  to  £30,000 

Bullion  ...80,000  to  100,000 

the  returns  for  which  were  made  in  diamonds,  pearls,  niiisk,  ambergris,  &c.  to  the  amount  of  from 
i^250,000  to  jP300,000.  The  amount  of  India  commodities  consumed  in  England  w^as  estimated  at,  raw 
and  wrought  silks,  .£*30,000;  pepper,  180,000  lbs.  at  8d.  £G,00;  indigo  and  drugs,  i?15,000;  saltpetre, 
jP30,000;  and  calicoes,  wPl  60,000.  Their  stock,  which  in  1665  w as  at  70  per  cent,  was  now  at  24-5. 

The  ships  sent  out  this  season  were  thirteen  in  number;  seven  of  which  were  destined  to  Bantam, 
three  to  Surat,  and  three  to  Coast  and  Bay,  and  tlieir  chartered  tonnage  amounted  to  G015  tons. 


BETWEEN  ENGLAND  AND  THE  EAST  INDIES. 


XXXV 


1677.  About  tins  period  great  clamours  had  been  raised  on  arcount  of  the  Company's  exclusive 
privileges  of  trade,  and  many  opinions  were  promulgated  through  the  realm,  that  their  chaili  r was  become 
forfeited  and  void  by  misuses  and  abuse.  Doubts  had  also  been  suggested  whether  the  Company  were 
not  liable  to  account  to  the  (hown  for  monies  arising  by  penalties  levied  in  tlie  Ka>t  Indies,  bv 
seizures  of  forfeited  goods,  and  by  damages  and  compositions  received  from  their  servants  for  bieaeh  of 
contracts.  The  King  granted  a new  charter  (being  the  fourth),  dated  Otloher  1677,  hy  whieli  he  eon- 
firmed  to  the  Company  for  ever,  all  their  rights,  liherties,  and  franchises  granted  hy  thc'ir  former  eharliM  s, 
notwithstanding  any  misuser,  nonuscr,  or  abuser;  and  gave  them  the  benefit  of  all  damages  they 
should  recover  from  their  servants  or  ship-owners,  for  breach  of  covenant,  and  a geiu'ral  paidon 
to  the  Company  and  their  servants  of  all  debts  anil  demands  (except  customs  and  subsidies  whieli  accrued 
since  September,  1676),  directing  that  all  prosecutions  depending  in  respect  thereof  should  he  Mircc  ased 
and  withdrawn.  By  this  grant  the  Governor  and  Company  were  aUo  authorized  to  coin  money  at 
Bombay,  and  in  all  other  places  mentioned  in  any  of  the  King's  chaiters,  so  that  any  of  such  coin* 
were  not  called  by  the  name  of  any  coin  current  in  the  King's  dominion^,  except  in  tlio  East  Indies. 

1678.  Permission  was  tliis  year  obtained  for  settling  a factory  at  Toiifpiin;  l)iit  in  consequence  of 
the  exactions  of  the  Mandarins,  and  the  little  traiie  carried  on  there,  it  was  sof)n  ab:uHl()m*d.  Nine  ships 
were  sent  out  this  season,  three  of  whieli  were  destined  to  Bantam,  tliiee  to  Coast  and  Bay,  and  thr(e 
to  Surat;  their  chartered  tonnage  amounted  to  tons. 

1679.  Ten  ships  w^ere  sent  out  this  season,  three  of  which  w'cre  destined  to  Bantam,  four  to  Coast 
and  Bay,  and  three  to  Surat ; their  chartered  tonnage  amounted  to  .5400  tuns. 

A factory  was  established  at  Amoy  in  ('hina  about  this  period. 

1680.  Ten  ships  were  sent  out  this  season,  five  of  which  were  destined  to  Madras,  three  to  8urat, 
and  two  to  Bantam ; their  chartered  tonnage  was  407,5  tons,  and  the  bullion  nml  meichamlise  expoi ted 
on  them  were  1^316,213,  From  this  period  the  exports  by  the  b'ast  India  Company  ar(‘  regularly  staled. 

1681.  The  silk-weavers  of  London  this  year  unsuceessfidly  petitioned  the  House  of  Commons 
against  the  wear  of  East  India  silks,  Bengals,  &o.  It  was  stated  hy  oiu'  of  the  nnanhers  of  the  House, 
“ that  we  consumed  i?.30(),000  yearly  in  lliose  blast  India  manufactured  goods,  including  printed  and 
painted  calicoes  for  cloths,  bed-han^ngs,  &c. 

The  Turkey  Company  made  a formal  complaint  to  tlie  Council  of  tla  ('nmprsny's  interference  in  the 
article  of  raw  silk,  and  tlierchy  lessening  the  demand  for  woollens.  'TIh'  'rm  key  Compjmy  were  heard 
in  support  of  their  complaint  before  the  I.ords  of  the  Privy  Council,  to  which  llu*  East  India  (!ompaiiy 
made  an  able  and  satisfactory  defence.  The  substance  of  the  3'urkey  Coinjiany's  allegations  and  tlie  East 
India  Company's  answers  was  printed,  and  exhibited  an  interesting  view  of  the  trade  of  both  Companies. 

While  the  above  proceedings  were  pending  before  the  Privy  Council,  the  Company  represented  to 
their  Lordships  the  necessity  of  their  being  aflorded  jiroh  etioii  against  illicit  traders.  They  stated  they 
were  at  an  expence  of  £\00ft00  per  annniu  for  forts,  ganison.s,  &:c.  and  that  it  would  he  impossible  to 
carry  on  a profitable  trade  if  interlopers  were  permitted.  A slilp,  commanded  by  ('n])taiii  Sands,  being 
now  about  to  proceed  with  a cargo  of  .C,50,00()  value,  the  King,  at  the  request  of  the  Company,  lai<l  an 
embargo  upon  her;  and  after  a long  and  interesting  trial,  a decision  was  made  in  favour  of  the  Company; 
so  that  the  ship  and  cargo  w^rcsold  off,  to  the  proprietors'  great  loss.  Notwithstaiuling  which,  the  inter- 
lopers continued  their  voyages  to  India,  being  encouraged  by  the  opinion  of  several  (>minent  lawyers,  who 
freely  declared  that  the  King  could  not  legally  o!>struct  them  by  any  charter  whatever  grunted  to  the 
Company,  unless  their  exclusive  powers  had  the  sanction  of  on  Act  of  Pailiamcnt 

2 


xxxn 


RISE  AND  PROGRESS  OF  THE  COMMERCE 


1682.  In  August  the  English  were  expelled  from  Bantam,  in  consequence  of  a quarrel  between  the 
old  King  of  Bantam  and  his  son.  The  English  took  part  with  the  father,  and  the  Dutch  with  the  son, 
and  sent  their  forces  to  his  assistance  from  Batavia,  whereby  the  old  King  was  vanquished,  and  shut  up  in 
prison.  The  young  King  gave  the  Dutch  possession  of  the  castle  which  commanded  both  the  town  and 
fort,  whereuiwn  they  drove  out  the  English  Company's  fa<‘tors,  and  have  ever  since  possessed  the  place. 

1683.  For  the  more  eflTectually  preventing  and  punishing  interlopers  residing  at,  or  trading  to  the  East 
Indies  without  licence,  the  King  granted  the  Company  their  fifth  charter,  dated  August  O’,  1683,  empow- 
ering the  (>ompany,  their  factors,  &c.  to  seize  all  ships  and  goods  brought  from,  or  carried  to  any  place 
within  the  limits  of  the  Company’s  exclusive  trade,  granting  to  the  Company  one  moiety  of  the  forfeiture, 
and  reserving  the  other  moiety  to  the  Crown. 

Also,  that  the  Governor  and  Company  should  have  the  rule  and  government  of  all  forts,  factories,  and 
plantations,  already  or  thert‘after  to  he  settled  by  ihc  Company  within  tlie  limits  aforesaid,  with  the  power 
of  making  and  declaring  peace  and  war  with  the  heathen  nations,  and  the  appointment  of  Governors,  &c. 
which  Governors,  &c.  might  muster  forces,  and  execute  martial  law  in  India;  the  King,  nevertheless, 
reserving  the  sovereign  riglit  over  tlu;  said  forts,  &c.  and  power  of  making  peace  and  war,  uhen  he  should 
think  fit  to  interpose  his  royal  authority. 

Also  a power  to  erect  Courts  of  Judicature  in  any  of  their  settlements,  and  to  appoint  Judges  thereof, 
who  should  determine  according  to  er[!ilty  and  good  conscience,  and  the  laws  and  customs  ol  merchants. 

And,  lastly,  the  King  granted  that  the  Company  should  enjoy  all  privileges  in  the  City  of  London, 
in  us  large  a manner  as  could  be  enjoyed  by  any  Company  of  merchants  erected  by  charter. 

An  alarming  and  dangerous  mutiny  broke  out  among  the  military  at  Bombay.  Captain  Keigwin,  who 
commanded  the  garrison,  seized  tlie  members  of  Government  on  the  27th  of  December,  1683,  annulled  the 
Company’s  authority  by  proclamation,  and  declared  the  island  under  the  King's  protection,  The  President 
at  Surat  used  every  means  to  persuade  thorn  to  return  to  their  duty,  but  in  vain ; and  it  was  not  till 
November,  1681-,  the  island  was  again  subjected  to  the  Company’s  authority. 

The  inhabitants  of  St.  Helena  were  also  in  a state  of  insurrection ; many  of  them  having  refused  to 
pay  taxes,  or  acknowledge  the  Company’s  authority,  it  was  found  necessary  to  put  in  execution  the  jxiwers' 
with  which  they  were  invested  by  their  new  charter.  Some  of  the  most  refractory  were  tli(Teupoii  tried  and 
executed.  This  occasioned  a great  ferment.  The  relatives  of  the  parties  complained  to  Parliament,  who 
voted  the  Company’s  proceedings  to  be  arbitrary  and  illegal,  which  was  the  means  of  rendering  them  very 
unpopular;  but  in  other  re.spects  their  concerns  were  in  a tlourishing  state,  their  stock  having  in  this  year 
increased  from  31>0  to  500  per  cent. 

The  Engb’sh  having  been  expelled  from  their  fort  and  factory  at  Bantam,  the  King  granted  a commission, 
dated  August  1,  1683,  authorizing  the  Adniii'alty  to  grant  commissions  to  such  as  the  Company  should 
recommend,  for  enabling  them  to  recover  the  said  fort  and  factory  from  the  Dutch,  to  whom  the  King  of 
Bantam  had  made  it  over. 

1686.  The  interlopers  in  India  having  become  very  numerous,  and  created  great  disturbances  there, 
and,  by  setting  themselves  up  as  the  true  East  India  Company,  incited  the  Mogul's  people  to  make  war  on 
the  Company  in  Bengal,  to  their  great  detriment,  and  the  hazard  of  being  deprived  of  their  privileges  of 
trade  granted  them  by  the  country  powers ; a ship  of  war  was  dispatched  to  India,  with  the  King's  pro- 
clamation, enjoining  all  his  subjects  in  India  to  repair  to  the  Company’s  forts  and  factories,  and  to  submit 
to  their  jurisdiction,  with  orders  to  seize  all  interlopers;  and  for  enlarging  and  corroborating  the  Company’s 
authorities,  the  King  granted  them  & new  charter,  being  the  sixth,  dated  April  12,  1686,  whereby  he 
ratified  all  the  preceding  charters  for  ever  in  their  fullest  extent,  notwithstanding  any  nonuser,  misuser,  or 


BETWEEN  ENGLAND  AND  THE  EAST  INDIES. 


:KXXvii 


Abuser.  And,  further,  grante<l  to  the  Company,  and  their  respective  Presidents,  Agents,  Chiefs,  and  Coiuu  ils 
in  India,  or  to  any  three  of  them  (whereof  such  President,  Agent,  or  Chief  to  l)e  one),  power  to  administer 
to  all  persons  employed  by  the  Company,  the  oath  taken  by  the  freemen  of  the  Company,  and  such  other 
lawful  oaths  as  the  Court  of  Directors  should  preserilie.  And  also  a power  to  exercise  martial  law  at 
St.  Helena,  and  the  Company's  fort  at  Priaman  on  tiu!  West  Coast  of  Sumatra,  as  well  as  in  all  their  other 
limits.  And  the  King  having  been  given  to  understand,  tliut  many  of  the  native  Princes  and  Govi  rnors  of 
India,  &c.  taking  advantage  of  the  divisions,  distractions,  or  rehellions  amongst  the  EiigUdj,  occasioned 
by  the  late  licentious  trading  of  interlopers,  had  violated  many  of  the  Company's. privileges,  sur- 
prised their  servants,  ships,  and  goods,  besieged  their  factories,  invad(‘d  their  liberties,  and  by  many  other 
ways,  without  just  can'se,  abused  their  Chiefs  and  Factors,  to  the  dishonour  of  the  English  nation,  for  all 
which  the  C^)mpany  intended  to  demand  satisfaction  in  a peaceable  way;  ami  if  not  obtained  that  way,  to 
use  force  of  arms,  wherein  they  would  hav<‘  oceasi»>n  to  use  tlu  ir  sliips  in  a \\arlike  manner;  wherefore  the 
King  granted  full  power,  to  tlie  Company  to  appoint  ^Vdmirals,  Captains,  &:<*.  fn)m  time  to  time,  who  might 
raise  and  muster  seamen  and  soldiers  on  boaril  their  ships,  asshoidd  hedirt'cled  hy  tlie  Company,  or  by  their 
Captain-Cieneral  in  India,  to  whom  authority  w as  granl('d  fors(‘izing  all  I'liglisli  interloptTs,  and  compelling 
them  to  submit,  and  fur  taking  tlieir  ships  and  goods.  Also  to  make  war  on  sneli  Indian  Princes  as  might 
hurt  the  C'ompaiiy;  witli  power,  in  time  of  open  hostility  with  any  Indian  nation,  to  exercise  on  the  other 
side  the  Cape  of  Good  Hope,  inarllal  law%  as  wvll  on  hoard  their  ships  as  on  land  ; reserving,  however, 
liberty  to  the  King  at  pleasure  to  revoke  this  grant  of  martial  hnv  in  their  ships. 

The  Company  might  also  coin  in  their  forts  aiiy  species  of’nioiuy  usually  coined  hy  (he  Princes  of  tlH)se 
countries,  so  that  it  .sliould  he  agreeahh*  to  the  standards  of  those'  Princes  in  we'ight  and  fineness,  and  so 
that  they  did  not  coin  any  European  money;  and  it  w’fis  eleelared  that  all  such  money  sotoho  coined,  should 
be  current  in  any  city,  town,  port,  or  pLico  within  the  limits  of  the  Company's  charter,  hnt  not  elsewhere. 

The  Company's  affairs  at  this  time  were  in  so  prospeions  a state,  that  their  [)rorits  in  tlie  nine  years, 
1676  to  1685,  were  stated  to  have  amounted  to  .P963,631>. 

1600.  The  Company  published  a view  of  tlu  ir  aflairs,  in  which  they  stated  that  wdthin  seven  years 
they  had  built  sixteen  large  sliij)s,  from  900  to  1,3(K)  tons  burthen;  that  in  lien  of  Bantam,  of  which  they 
had  been  unjustly  deprived  by  the  Dutch,  they  bud  erected  and  garrisoned  three  I’oi  ts  for  (he  protection  of 
the  pepper  trade;  that  they  had  at  scu,  in  India,  and  coming  home,  eleven  sliips  and  four  permission  ships, 
whose  cargoes  amounted  to  aC360,000;  that  they  had  then  outward-bound  I’or  Coast  and  Bay,  thirteen 
ships,  valued  at  JE*570,000;  seven  for  China  and  the  South  Seas,  XUOO,000;  and  that  they  possessed 
goods  unsold  to  the  amount  of  Jp70i)y000;  that  they  had  also  restored  to  order  the  revolted 
settlements  of  Bombay  and  St.  Helena,  had  brought  the  war  with  the  Mogul  to  a successful  ter- 
mination, and  obtained  a phirmaund  in  oonbrniation  of  their  former  privileges.  Nevertheless,  the  cla- 
mours of  the  interlopers,  and  of  the  friends  of  those  put  to  death  at  St.  Helena,  Jointly  cons|)ired  to  bring 
the  Company  into  discredi^;  insomuch,  that  printed  papers  were  handed  about,  exposing  tlieir  crimes  and 
miscarriages,  and  proposals  were  also  published  for  dissolving  this,  and  erecting  a new  Company:  and  so 
far  was  the  House  of  Commons  intluenced  thereby,  that  they  appointed  a committee  to  consider  of  tlie 
East  Ttidiu  trade,  before  whom  the  evidence  of  the  different  pai  tics  was  heard.  Tlie  committee,  after  ninth 
deliberation,  came  to  the  resolution,  the  I6th  of  January,  1690,  “ that  it  is  the  opinion  ol’this  comiuittee, 
that  the  best  way  to  manage  the  East  India  trade  is  to  have  it  in  a new  Company,  and  a new  joint  stock, 
and  this  to  be  established  hy  Act  of  Parliament;  but  the  present  Company  to  continue  the  trade,  exelii- 
sive  of  all  others,  either  interlopers,  or  permission  ships,  till  it  be  established."  The  King's  answ  er  w as, 

“ that  it  being  a matter  of  very  great  importance,  it  required  some  time  to  consider  their  address." 


xxxviii 


RISE  AND  PROGRESS  OF  THE  COMMERCE 


III  the  meantime  he  referred  it  to  a Committee  of  the  Privy  Council,  and  the  Company  consented 
to  abide  by  such  regulations  as  the  Council  sliould  prescribe.  The  Council  resolved  that  their  capital 
stock  should  be  made  up  .£^1,500,000  at  least,  and  not  to  exceed  two  millions,  of  which  the  present  Com- 
pany's stock  of  .£?74*0,000  was  to  constitute  a |)art,  and  that  they  and  the  new  subscribers  should  be  incor- 
porated for  twenty-one  years.  To  this  the  Company  olijected,  on  the  ground  that  their  quick  stock  and 
revenue  were  really  worth  more  than  1,500,000,  and  that  the  current  price  of  their  stock  at  market  was 
150  per  cent. ; that  all  their  forts,  towns,  and  territories  were  their  own  for  ever  by  their  charters,  and  had 
cost  them,  first  and  last,  upwards  of  «i?l,(XK),000.  The  King  thereupon  informed  tlie  Commons  that,  upon 
consultation,  lie  found  he  could  not  dissolve  the  Company  without  giving  them  three  years'  notice,  during 
which  time  they  could  not  be  hindered  from  trading,  nor  could  a new  Company  trade  till  the  three  years 
were  expired:  he  tlierefore  recommended  to  them  to  prepare  a bill  for  settling  the  business.  The  House 
accordingly  took  the  subject  under  consideration;  hut  owing  to  a diversity  of  opinion,  nothing  was 
determined  upon,  except  an  address  to  the  King,  to  dissolve  the  Company  at  the  end  of  three  years. 

1G91*.  The  Company,  having  made  default  in  the  payment  of  a duty  of  5 per  cent,  imposed  on  their 
capital  stock,  by  an  Act  of  the  4tli  and  5tli  of  William  and  Mary,  chap.  15,  a doubt  arose  whether,  in 
strictness  of  law,  their  charters  were  not  become  void,  under  a proviso  contained  in  the  Act  To  prevent 
the  disorders  and  inconveniences  which  would  have  befallen  the  Company,  and  other  persons  concerned 
and  employed  in  their  coininerce,  as  well  at  home  as  abroad,  if  the  Crown  were  to  have  taken  advantage 
of  the  forfeiture,  the  King  granted  to  the  Company  a new  charter  of  this  date,  for  restoring  them  to  their 
former  cajiacities  and  privileges;  subject  to  a special  proviso,  that  if  they  should  not  accept  of,  and  in  all 
things  conform  to,  such  orders  and  constitutions  as  the  King,  with  the  advice  of  his  Privy  Council,  sliould 
express  and  direct  by  any  instrument  under  the  great  seal,  the  King  should  be  at  liberty  to  resume  the 
charter.  And  by  two  separate  Instruments  under  the  great  seal,  dated  November  II,  1693,  and  28th  of 
September,  1691,  the  King  prescribed  various  rules  and  orders  fur  the  Company's  observance,  viz. 

By  the  instrument  of  1693,  it  is  ordered  that, 

I.  All  subscribers  shall  bo  members  of  tlie  Company. 

II.  a(?'rk4,(H)()  sliull  be  added  to  the  present  ca[)itul  stock  of  tlie  Company  by  a fresh  subscription. 

HI,  None  shall  subscribe  above  -X^10,0(X). 

IV.  In  general  ('ourts  .£^1,0()0  stock  to  give  one  vote,  and  none  to  have  above  ten  votes. 

V.  Such  as  shall  become  proprietors  liy  purchase,  shall  pay  £5  for  their  freedom;  who  (as  also  the 
new  subscribers)  shall  take  the  oaths  appointed  by  law,  ami  also  tlie  freeman's  oath. 

VI.  The  Governor,  or  in  his  absence,  the  Deputy  (Governor,  to  Iiav^  a casting  vote  in  all  Courts;  each 
of  them  to  liave  iPkjOOO  stock  in  tlieir  own  right;  and  each  Director  and  Committee-man  to  have  i?1000. 

VII.  No  permission  shall  be  granted  for  ships  to  India  on  a private  account,  under  the  penalty  of 
forfeiting  the  charters. 

VIII.  No  pri\  ate  contract  .shall  be  made  for  the  sale  of  goods,  saltpetre  for  thp  King's  use  onlyexcepted ; 
hut  all  to  be  openly  and  publicly  sold ; and  no  one  lot  ( jewels  excepted)  to  exceed  £500  value. 

IX.  The  Company  shall  aimiially  export  goods  to  India,  of  the  growth  and  product  of  England,  to 
the  value  of  at  lea.st  -t*  100,000. 

X.  Company  shall  annually  supply  the  Crown  with  500  tons  of  saltpetre,  at  £38  10s.  per  Ion 
in  time  of  peace,  and  £<^5  in  time  of  war. 

XI.  All  dividends  of  the  Company’s  profits  shall  for  the  future  be  made  in  money  only. 

XII.  A book  shall  be  kept  by  the  Company,  wherein  the  value  of  their  stock  simll  be  entered,  and 
utt(\sted  upon  oath,  and  lay  open  to  the  view  of  all  persons  concerned;  and  the  like  as  to  mortgages,  alien- 
ations, transfers,  and  assignments. 


BETWEEN  ENGLAND  AND  THE  EAST  INDIES. 


ixxix 


XIIL  The  joint  stock  of  the  Company  shall  continue  for  a term  of  twenty-one  years;  and  for  thr 

•pace  of  one  year  before  its  expiration,  books  shalHie  open  for  new  subscriptions  to  a new  joint  stock. 

And  by  the  second  instrument  of  regulations,  the  following  alterations  were  made  : 

I.  The  Company  may  liccMise  their  own  commanders  and  mariners  (hut  none  other)  to  trade  on 
their  own  private  account,  In  such  commodities  and  to  such  value  as  a Gimeral  Court  shall  diicct. 

II.  'J\)  the  intent  that  tlie  (\)mpany\s  annual  exports  of  English  goods  to  India,  to  the  value  of 
100,000,  may  he  proved,  a true  account  tliereof  in  writing,  signed  hy  the  Governor  or  Deputy,  shall  he 

annually  laid  before  the  King  and  Council,  attested  on  the  oaths  of  the  proper  oliicers;  and  no  part  of 
such  goods  shall  be  relandcd,  or  carried  any  where  out  of  the  Company's  limits. 

III.  Neither  the  Governor,  Deputy,  nor  Committee  sliall  lend  out  the  Company's  money  without 
the  authority  of  a General  Court. 

IV.  If  this  and  the  two  last  charters  sliall  not  a[ipear  to  he  j)rofit:il)h’  to  the  Crown  and  realm,  then, 
after  tliree  years'  warning,  all  tlie  said  three  charters  shall  be  d(*terminc(l  and  void,  and  the  said  (ioNcriiors 
and  Company  shall  no  longer  continue  a corporation. 

V.  Lastly,  the  Company  shall,  by  a writing  under  their  common  seal,  de  clare  their  acceptance  of, 
and  submission  to,  the  said  two  charteis;  or,  in  tlicir  delUnlt,  no  longj  i*  act  as  a corpuiation. 

1G95.  The  Parliaincnt  of  Scotland,  on  the  2(itli  of  June,  WOj,  pas.scil  an  Act,  enaliling  the  King  (us 
King  of  Scotland)  to  constitute  a Scottish  Company,  with  powers  to  trade*  to  Africa  and  the  East  Indies, 
and  authorized  it  besides,  not  only  to  trade  to  the  countiies  within  the  East  India  (’ompany's  limits, 
but  extended  its  range  to  America  and  the  West  Indies.  It  was,  however,  in  the  course  ol*  a few  years 
repealed,  in  consequence  of  the  rejirescntations  and  remonstrances  from  the  East  India  Company,  and  the 
other  European  nations  interested  in  that  commerce. 

The  Company’s  settlements  and  trade  having  been  exjmsed  to  great  dangers  by  the  continual  depreda- 
tions of  the  English  pirates  in  the  Indian  seas,  a reward  of  -L\50()  was  offered  by  the  King,  and  u like  sum  liy 
the  Company,  for  the  apprehension  of  Captain  Avery,  the  princijial  of  tliern,  who,  after  enriching  himself  by 
plunder,  had  gone  to  the  Bahamas,  wlicre  his  ship  was  sold,  and  the  crew  dispersed;  several  of  them  were, 
however,  seized  and  executed. 

1697.  This  year  the  silk-weavers  of  London  were  extremely  outrageous  and  tumultuous,  on  pretence 
of  the  great  quantities  of  silks,  calicoes,  and  other  Indian  manufactures  imported  hy  the  East  India 
Company,  and  worn  by  all  sorts  of  persons.  They  even  carried  their  violence  so  far,  as  to  attempt  seizing 
the  treasure  at  the  East  India  House,  and  had  almost  succeeded  in  it;  hut  were  in  the  end  reduced  to  ord(*r. 

During  the  war  with  France,  which  was  brought  to  a close  by  the  treaty  of  Kyswdck,  the  Company 
lost  several  valuable  ships  taken  by  the  privateers  of  that  nation. 

1698.  From  the  encouragement  given  to  private  traders  by  licences  to  trade  with  India,  an  opinion 
began  to  prevail  that  a second  East  India  Company  might  be  formed.  The  private  merchants  tlierefore 
made  application  to  obtain  from  Parliament  an  Act  for  creating  another  Company,  whereupon  tin*  Court 
of  Directors  made  an  offer  to  advance  i7(}0,000  at  4 per  cent,  interest,  for  the  public  service,  provided 
their  charter  should  be  confirmed  by  Act  of  Parliament.  The  private  merchants  offered  lo  raise  .£%()( H),()<H) 
at  8 per  cent,  interest,  provided  they  might  liave  the  exclusive  tr&de  to  India  vested  in  them.  J'his  Inst 
offer  was  considered  the  most  advantageous  to  the  public,  and  a bill  was  intiodiiced  into  the  House  of 
Commons  for  accepting  the  offer;  and  they  were  incorporated  by  the  name  of  the  English  Company  tru  Mng 
to  the  East  Indies,  the  old,  or  London  Company  to  be  permitted  to  ti  ade  till  the  S^9th  of  September,  1701. 


xl 


RISE  AND  PROGRESS  OF  THE  COMMERCE 


Thus  tlio  nation  had  two  East  India  Companies  constituted  upon  parliamentary  authority.  No  sooner 
was  the  new  Company  erected,  than  numerous  and  obvious  difliculties  and  objections  were  started  against 
their  trading  during  tlic  three  years  remaining  to  the  old  Company,  who  were  in  possession  of  the  forts, 
and  of  the  privileges  granted  in  India  l)y  the  Moguls,  &:c.  The  English  Company,  therefore,  in  the  course 
of  a short  period  made  advances  to  the  London  Company  for  a coalition,  or  union  of  stock  and  trade, 
which  were  rejected.  On  the  19th  of  January,  1699-1700,  the  London  Company  obtained  an  Act  of  Par- 
liament, continuing  thein  a corporation.  On  the  8th  of  March  the  King  recommended  an  union  of  the  two 
Companies,  as  it  was  his  opinion  that  it  would  be  most  for  the  interest  of  the  Indian  trade.” 

During  these  unsettled  times  the  Company’s  stock  tluctuatcd  from  300  to  37  per  cent. 

The  wear  of  India  wrought  silks,  stuffs,  and  calicoes  was  become  so  universal  in  England  at  this 
tirne,  and  the  complaints  thereof  so  loud,  that  k was  now  thought  proper  to  remedy  so  great  an  evil. 
The  grievance  was  greatly  heightened  by  the  double  importations  by  two  I'ast  India  Companies,  which 
raised  a great  clamour  in  various  parts  of  the  country.  A statute  was  therefore  passed,  enacting  that 
from  Michaelmas,  1701,  all  wrought  silks,  llengals,  and  stuffs  mixed  with  silk  or  herbn,  of  the  manufacture 
of  Persia,  China,  or  the  East  Indies;  and  also  all  calicoes,  printed,  painted,  dyed,  or  stained  there,  should 
be  locked  up  in  wareliouses  a[)pointed  by  the  Commissioners  of  the  Customs,  till  re-exported ; so  as  none 
of  the  said  goods  should  be  worn  or  used,  in  either  apparel  or  furniture,  in  England,  on  forfeiture  thereof, 
and  also  of  .£’200  penalty  on  the  pc'rson  having,  or  selling  any  of  tliem. 

The  English  Company  established  a factory  at  Jlorneo,  and  a ship  was  dispatched  to  China. 

1700.  In  consequence  of  the  recommendation  ofthe  King  to  form  an  union  of  the  two  Companies, 
a Court  of  proprietors  of  the  London  Company  was  called  on  the  23d  of  December,  1700,  at  which  it  was 
resolved,  “ that  this  Company,  as  ili(»y  have  always  been,  so  are  they  still  ready  to.  embrace  eveiy  oppor- 
tunity by  which  they  may  manifest  their  duty  to  His  IMajesty,  and  zeal  for  the  public  good,  and  that  they 
are  desirous  to  contribute  their  utmost  endeavours  for  the  preservation  of  the  East  India  trade  to  this  king- 
dom, and  are  willing  to  agree  with  the  new  Company  upon  reasonable  terms.” 

The  Court  were  informed,  that  “ His  IVfaJesty  was  glad  to  find  that  the  l^ondon  Company  were  dis- 
posed to  unite  with  tlie  lOnglisb  Company  on  reasonable  terms,  and  that  he  would  willingly  know  from 
themselves  what  those  terms  were.” 

A General  Court  was  accordingly  summoned,  at  which  it  was  resolved,  ‘‘  that  what  terms  may  be 
judged  reasonable,  they  do  humbly  conceive  must  arise  from  a treaty,  and  that  tliey  have  appointed  seven 
persons  of  this  Company  to  treat  with  the  like  number  of  the  English  Company,  in  order  to  an  union.” 
Various  conferences  were  held  with  the  Governor  and  Committee  of  the  English  Company;  and  in  January, 
1702,  the  general  terms  of  union  were  agreed  on  by  both  Companies,  and  approved  by  their  respective 
General  Courts  on  the  27tb  of  April,  1702. 

1702.  An  indenture,  tripartite  between  the  Queen  and  the  two  East  India  Companies,  dated  the 
^2d  of  July,  1702,  })asscd  under  the  great  seal  of  England,  which  is  described  as  the  “ Charter  of  Union.” 
jly  this  deed  it  was  settled  that  tlie  London  Company  should  purchase  as  much  of  the  stock  of  the  English 
Company,  at  par,  as  would  vest  in  each  an  equal  proportion  of  tlie  £^2,000,000,  for  the  advance  of  which 
to  Government  the  charter  had  been  originally  granted  to  the  Englisli  Company.  The  interests  of  the 
London  and  English  Companies  and  private  tradi^rs  were  as  follow: 

The  I.ondon  Company’s  subscription  1^315,000 

The  English  Company':)  subscription  663,000 

Separate  traders'  subscription  23,000 

.. — ^-^<^300,000 


BETWEEN  ENGLAND  AND  THE  EAST  INDIES.  nil 


IBy  this  agreement  the  interests  of  the  two  Companies  were  fixed,  as  foUnw: 


Purchase  of  stock  by  ihc  London  Company,  .C<i73,(K)0,  in  addition  to  their 

former  stock,  making  their  share  together  i?9R8,.500' 

Englisli  C'ompony’s  988, 500 

Separate  traders’  proportion  2J,(.)0() 

1%000,000 


It  was  decided  that  in  future  the  trade  to  Imlla  should  he  curried  on  for  seven  years  liy  the  chailer  of 
the  English  Company.  Estimatt's  were  made  of  the  dead  stock  of  both  Coinj)anics,  that  is,  forts,  facto- 
ries, buildings,  &c.  as  distinguished  from  money,  ships,  or  merchandise.  'I'lu*  dt  ail  itoek  of  the  London 
Company  was  valued  at  P^k30,000,  and  that  of  the  English  Company  at  the  hhiglish  Companv, 

therefore,  were  to  pay  XM30,0()()  to  the  London  Company,  so  as  to  make  up  their  moiety  of  the  whol<^ 
dead  stock,  estimated  at  ClOOjOOO,  ami  intended  to  liecome  an  additional  stoek  on  lh(‘  joint  account. 

The  London  Company  W’ere  to  fetain  the  use  of  their  dead  stock  at  home,  that  is,  tluir  ofiees  and 
Warehouses,  during  seven  years,  and  after  lliat  period  they  were  to  go  to  the  Uiillul  CV)ju|)any.  During 
this  period,  also,  each  Company  were  to  hold  their  distinct  ('ouits,  and  miglit  r.uM*  innney,  either  for  their 
respective  shares  of  the  united  trade,  for  th(‘ir  separate  afliiirs,  or  for  paying  their  ^(‘para!(  de  bts,  hut  all 
debts  contracted  for  the  joint  trade,  wore  to  be  jiaid  out  of  the  Ignited  Company's  •‘lock.  Eacli  (/ompany 
were  fortliwitli  to  iiring  home  their  s(‘parate  estates,  and  make  dividends  to  their  re>p(‘etlvc  propi  ietor.s, 
aller  which,  neither  Company  were  to  send  out  ships,  bullion,  or  goods  on  tlieir  se  p irate  accfiunt. 

A Court  of  twenty -four  Managers  was  ajipointed,  twcdvi*  to  bcu  hostai  from  each  ('ompany,  to  cany 
on  the  trade,  and  to  act  according  to  such  rules  as  might  be  settled  by  the  Geni  ral  Com  Is  of  both 
Conipunies,  empowered  to  make  hyc-hiws  for  tlie  united  trade.  Each  Coin[):ui\  were  to  furnish  an  cquol 
part  of  the  stock  of  Uie  united  trade,  and  to  (*xport  one  tenth  of  thetr  cargoes  in  gooils  of  the  growth  or 
manufacture  of  England,  an  account  of  whieli  was  to  be  annually  delivend  to  tlie  I'llvy  Council;  hereby 
releasing  both  ('onipanies  from  all  former  co\enants,  saltpetre  excepted,  of  which  nieichaiulise  they  were 
obliged  to  deliver  to  the  OHice  of  Ordnance  IlMJ  tons,  at  El.>  piu*  ton  in  time  of  jieaee,  and  at  iA'I  in  time 
of  war,  the  refraction  thereof  settled  at  L5  jier  cent.;  hut  no  transaelii)n  on  the  joint  trade  was  to  he  adojited 
without  the  concurrence  of  both  Companies,  the  General  Courts  of  w hich,  and  tlie  Court  of  Managers 
W'prc  to  have  the  sole  government  of  all  their  forts,  factories,  &c.  in  India,  and  to  appoint  (iovernors  and 
oflTicers,  wdtli  powers  to  build  forts,  &c.  and  to  raise,  train,  and  muster  a military  force  for  the  defence  of 
the  same,  and  with  authority  to  coin  foreign  money  in  Iiulia. 

The  London  Company  w'ere  to  conveys,  with  the  Queen's  lieemv,  the  islamL  of  Bombay  and  St.  He- 
lena to  the  English  Company,  and  resign  their  charters  to  the  Queen  in  two  months  atler  llie  i‘xpiration 
of  the  seven  years  ; and  thenceforward  tlie  cliarter  of  the  English  (.'ompany  (KiJlS)  was  to  be  considered 
that  of  both,  and  the  two  East  India  (.'onipanies  w ere  to  take  the  name  in  future  of 


The  United  Company  of  MERciiANrs  of  Enolvnu  tkadino  to  the  East  Indies," 


who.se  affairs  w’erc  to  be  conducted  by  their  own  Directors,  agreeable  to  the  10th  of  King  AVilliarn. 

Tills  deed  having  settled  the  respective  interests  of  the  two  Companies  at  borne,  and  having  also  asc^r- 
tained  the  estimated  value  of  their  dead  stock  at  lionic  and  abroad,  w^as  followed  on  the  same  day  b/' 
what  was  termed  a Quinque-Partite  Indenture  of  conveyance  of  tlie  dead  stock  of  the  two  East  India  Com- 
panies. This  indenture  w\as  made  between  the  London  Company  of  tbe  first  part;  the  English  Company 
of  tlie  second  part;  Sir  Jeremy  Sambrooke,  trustee  of  the  I^ondon  Company's  freehold  w'archouses  in 
Great  St.  Helens,  London,  of  the  third  part;  Sir  'J'hoinas  Davall,  and  others,  trustees  of  the  London 
Company^'s  leasehold  warehouses  in  Great  St.  Helens,  of  the  fourth  part;  and  Sir  James  Batemaa  aa^ 

♦ p 


tlii 


RISE  AND  PROGRESS  OP  THE  COBIMEHCE 


otliers,  trustees  for  the  English  Company,  of  the  fifth  part.  By  this  deed  the  London  Company  agreed 
to  tninsfi'r  the  charters  by  which  they  held  the  inlands  of  Bombay  and  St.  Helena,  to  the  English  Com- 
|)aiiy,  ill  consideration  of  credit  in  the  united  trade,  and  tiie  sum  of  i?l.‘]0,00()  paid  to  them 

ill  money,  and  also  their  rights  to  all  their  several  forts  and  factories,  within  the  limits  ot  then'  charter,  in 
the  Piast  Indies,  of  whicli  the  following  is  an  enumeration,  vu. 

Tlie  factories  dc'pending  on  the  Piesidciiey  of  Bomhay,  Surat,  Baroach,  Amcdabad,  and  Agra. 

On  tlie  Atalabar  Coast,  the  forts  anil  factories  of  Carwar,  Tellichcrry,  Anjengo,  and  Calicut. 

Ill  Persia,  the  factories  of  Gombroon,  Sihiraz,  and  Tspuhan,  with  the  yearly  rent  of  10t)0  tomunds, 
or  (is.  Sd.  paid  by  the  Sojilii  of  Persia  at  Gombroon. 

On  the  Coast  of  Coromandel,  Gingee  and  Orixa,  the  faetoiles  depending  on  the  Presidency  of  P'ort 
St.  George,  or  St.  George,  and  the  (.'ity  of  ^Madras,  P'ort  St.  l^avid,  Cuddalore,  Poi  to  Novo,  Pettipole, 
Maiisullpalam,  Madapollain,  and  Vizagapatani,  and  connected  with  them,  the  settlements  on  the  island  of 
Sumatra;  or,  York  Fort,  Bcneoolcn,  Iiulrapore,  Priaman,  Sillehar,  and  the  stations  dependent  on 
Bencoolen;  and  al^o  the  factory  of  Tonqnin. 

The  factories  dependent  on  the  Presidency  of  Fort  William;  or  Fort  William,  Chutamiltce,  Balasorc, 
Cossimbuzar,  Dacca,  lliigliley,  l\ialda,  Biijainahl,  and  Patna,  with  all  their  claims  or  title  to  Bantam,  or 
any  other  settlements  they  might  have  had  in  the  Southern  Seas;  and  all  the  stores  and  ammlinition  be- 
longing to  the  said  forts  and  factories  respectively,  and  comprehending  all  the  rents  and  customs  arising 
from  those  settlements,  and  all  the  grants  or  pliirmaunds  by  w liicli  the  same  w'cre  sold  to  them.  This 
transfer  also  included  their  warcliouscs  in  London,  and  their  house  in  Leadcnliall  Street. 

The  English  Company,  on  the  other  hand,  declared  to  the  London  Company  that  the  following  scl- 
tliMTicnts  constituted  their  dead  .stock,  for  which  tlicy  were  to  be  allowed  i7(),000  in  the  united  stock ; 
vis.  the  factories  at  Surat,  iii  the  Bay  of  Bengal,  at  Mausulipatum,  Mudapollam,  on  the  island  of  Borneo, 
and  on  the  island  of  I'ulo  ('oiulore,  with  the  stores  and  ammunition  belonging  to  each,  and  all  of  them;  and 
it  was  in  explanation  mutually  covenanted  that  both  Companies  should  enjoy  the  respective  profits,  unci 
pay  the  respective  charges  of  all  their  settlements,  to  the  date  of  this  deed,  July  22,  1702. 

1703.  The  bullion  exported  from  England  to  the  East  Indies  in  six  years,  from  1698  to  1703,  both 
years  inclusive,  was  in  silver  J^3,171,40,5,  and  in  gold  ori28,229,  total  J.'3,299,()3t;  being  on  an  average 
J^549,939  per  annum.  It  appears,  by  an  account  made  up  by  the  In.spcetor  General  of  the  Customs,  that 
the  East  India  goods  re-exported  from  England  in  the  four  years,  1698  to  170^^,  amounted  to  rif’2,538,934, 
being  on  an  average  .X’.’iOijiS?  per  annum. 

The  first  auction  in  laiglaiul  was  by  Governor  Yale,  of  Madru.s,  of  the  goods  he  brought  home. 

1704.  The  Council  of  Pulo  Condore  obtained  a grant  of  the  island  from  the  King  of  Cochin-China. 
In  the  following  year,  on  the  2d  of  March,  an  insurrection  took  place  among  the  Malay  soldiers,  who  set 
fire  to  the  Company's  w^arcliouses,  and  massacred  the  (^hief  and  the  greatest  part  of  the  English  on  the 
island.  The  Malays  were  supposed  to  liave  been  instigated  by  the  Cocliin-Cliinese,  that  they  might  get 
possession  of  the  Company’s  treasure,  estimated  at  22, (KK)  tales. 

1707.  By  an  Act,  6 Anne,  chap,  2,  for  bettor  securing  the  duty  on  East  India  goods,  the  security 
thereafter  to  be  given,  pursuant  to  the  Act  of  the  9th  of  King  William,  that  the  East  India  Company 
should  cause  all  the  inerchandi.se  in  any  ship  from  India  to  he  brought  to  some  port  in  England,  without 
previously  breaking  bulk,  was  directed  to  be  after  the  rate  of  .^2, 500  for  every  100  tons  of  each  ship  sent 
to  the  ladies  (necessary  provisions,  stores,  and  merchandise,  for  the  people  and  garrison  of  St.  Helena,  for 
their  own  proper  consumption,  only  excepted);  and  except  also  where  the  breaking  of  bulk,  or  landing  of 
goods  should  hap|)en  by  the  danger  of  the  seas,  enemies,  restraint  of  Princes,  &c.  under  penalty  of  forfeit* 
ing  such  goods  or  their  value,  &c. 


BETWEEN  ENGLAND  AND  THE  EAST  INDIES. 


xliii 

Tlio  English  srttlement  at  Ilanjar  Massin  was  suddenly  attacked  by  the  natives  on  the  37lh  of 
Juno,  1707;  and  tliougli  they  were  at  first  beaten  olF,  the  lo.ss  of  the  English  in  killed  «ns  so  great,  that 
it  was  with  diliiculty  the  survreors  escaj>ed  on  board  the  sinps.  The  loss  of  tieasiire  belonging  to  the 
Company  on  shore  was  estimated  at  .5(),()<K)  dollars.  The  natives  were  supposed  to  have  been  instigated  to 
this  measure  by  the  (Jhinese,  who  were  jealous  of  their  interference  in  trade. 

not).  The  Earl  of  Godolphin  having  been  constituted  arbiter  of  the  rights  and  privileges  of  the 
two  Companies,  and  empowered  to  examine  and  ascertain  the  reciprocal  credits  and  debts  of  each,  mmle 
his  award,  the  substance  of  which  is  as  follows: 

That  all  debts  or  iiiouey  due  to  the  Old  or  London  C\)mpany,  in  India,  China,  rcisia.  Si.  Helena, 
&c.;  and  also  all  debts  due  to  the  3‘higlisli  (’oinpany  in  India,  China,  &c.  and  the  separati'  goods,  wares, 
and  merchandise  ol  both  Companies  laden  on  ships  in  India,  and  which  might  not  an’i\(‘  in  the  Ui>cr 
lhanies  before  the  1st  of  September,  1708,  should  become  the  stock  or  property  of  the  United  Company 

ihat  the  London  Company  should  transfer  to  the  Queen,  by  indenture  under  their  common  ^eal,  all 
their  foreign  debts,  or  debts  due  to  them  in  India  before  the  Hist  of  October,  1708,  To  the  intent  ihut 
the  Queen  might  regrant  the  same,  within  ten  days  alter  that  date,  to  the  United  C ompany.  Tliat  after 
such  regrant  or  transfer  by  (he  Queen,  the  United  Company  should  be  liable  to  jiay  the  separate  debts 
both  of  the  London  and  Knglish  Companies  in  India.  That  tlit‘  estate  and  elfeets  of  the  London  ('om- 
pany would  not  be  sidfieient  to  pay  their  foreign  debts,  or  debts  in  India,  to  whieli  debts  the  United 
Company  would  b(‘come  liulde  from  the  date  of  this  award;  and  therefore  tlicieed  that  the  London 
Company  should  pay  to  the  United  Cuinpany  the  sum  of  Is.  lid. 

That  the  estate  and  effects  of  the  Lnglish  (-ompany  in  India  would  exeeeil  their  separate  debts,  and 
therefore  decreed  that  the  United  (’ompany  should  pay  I’bO, ()():>  Is.  2d.  to  the  Diiceturs  of  the  Knglish 
Company,  for  the  use  of  their  respective  iu(‘ml)ers. 

That  the  London  Company  were  indebted  to  a large  amount  in  Ihigland,  and  tluM  efore  empowered 
them  to  call  on  their  proprietors  to  raise  T20(),0(M),  in  two  instalnu  iits,  before  the  Isi  of  I'ebriiary,  171)1), 
and  such  further  sum  betore  the  1st  of  INIureli,  1701),  as  uould  be  suHicient  to  dear  olf  all  their  home 
ilebts;  and  then,  taking  into  view  the  sum  which  had  l)een  luhaueed  hy  the  London  (’ompany  at  the 
union,  to  equalize  the  stock  of  the  two  Comjmnics  (or  what  was  termed  the  70  [n'r  e(>nl.  additional  stock), 
decided,  that  when  the  London  Company  should  have  raised  the  lirst  Cl 00,000,  the  UiiitiTl  Company 
should  repay  to  them  one-third  of  the  said  money,  or  additional  stock,  advanced  by  them  at  the  union, 
for  carrying  on  the  united  trade;  and  when  they  should  have  raised  the  second  id00,0t)(),  another  third 
part  of  the  said  additional  stock  should  in  like  manner  he  repaid;  and  uhtm  the\  should  have  raised  a sum 
sufficient  to  defray  all  their  debts  in  Great  Britain,  the  remainder  of  the  said  additional  stock  should  bo 
repaid,  with  the  exception  of  1^70, 000,  wliich  was  to  be  reserved  as  a secuiity  tu*  juaiHlty,  that  the 
London  Company  should  surrender  all  their  charters  to  the  Queen  on  or  before  the  2oth  of  March,  170!), 
which  sum,  on  their  failing  to  make  such  surrender,  was  to  be  forfeited  to  tin*  United  C’ompany;  but  in 
the  event  of  such  surrender  being  made,  the  said  sum  of  .X^70,0()0  Avas  to  be  vested  iu  trustees,  to  pay 
any  remaining  debts  of  the  London  Company;  and  should  any  surplus  remain,  to  lx*  distributed  anioii'; 
the  members  of  the  London  Company. 

And,  lastly,  it  was  decided,  that  the  Ixuidoii  Company  should  transfer,  before  the  l!)tli  of  Maidi, 
1700,  to  their  respective  members  all  such  stock,  in  the  pro|)ortion  of  their  respective  shares,  as  the  said 
London  Company  might  have  in  the  stock  of  the  United  Company;  and  that  the  members  liaving  light 
to  it,  should  be  adinitled  to  all  the  privilcge.s  of  members  of  the  United  CVnn|Kiny. 

This  award,  proceeding  on  the  authority  of  the  Act  of  rurliumeiit,  avus  to  be  confirmed  in  all  its 
parts  by  a decree  of  the  High  ('ourt  of  Chancery. 

♦ V 2 


RISE  AND  PROGRESS  OF  THE  COMMERCE 


i:li¥ 


By  an  account  subjoined  to  the  award,  it  appears  that  the  debts  of  the  London  Company  amounted  to 
i^l,249,807  7s.  6d.  and  their  assets  to  only  «f’850,011  18s.  5d.  being  a deficiency  of  1*399,795  9.s,  Id. 

By  an  Act  of  the  Gth  of  Anne,  chaj).  17,  the  Company,  on  advancing  u further  sum  of  i?  1,200, (M.K) 
for  the  public  use,  without  any  additional  interest,  or,  which  was  the  same  thing,  on  consenting  to  receive 
5 per  cent,  interest  for  the  former  and  present  loan,  amounting  t«igetlier  to  1*3,200,000,  had  tJie  term 
of  their  exclusive  trade  prolonged  for  14[  years;  tliat  is  to  say,  whereas,  by  the  l.iw  of  l(i98,  tliey 
were  to  be  redeemable  upon  three  years’  notice  after  1711,  and  repayment  of  principal  and  interest,  their 
redemption  was  now  prolonged  to  three  years’  notice  after  Lady  Day,  172<i.  And  for  enabling  the 
Company  to  make  good  this  loan  to  the  public,  they  wctc  by  this  act  cmj)Owered  to  borrow  as  far  as 
rPl,500,(X)0  on  l)onds,  over  and  above  what  they  were  legally  authorized  to  do  before,  and  also  to  make 
calls  of  money  from  their  proprietors.  The  proprietors  of  the  1*7,200  in  separate  trade,  might  still 
continue  so  to  trade  till  Michaelmas,  1711,  when  tlic  United  Company  might,  on  three  years’  notice,  pay 
tlie  same  off,  whereby  their  privileges  of  trading  would  be  solely  vested  in  the  Company.  By  this  Act  that 
part  of  the  Act  gf  the  12th  of  King  William,  which  laid  a duty  of  5 j)er  cent,  on  goods  exported  to 
India,  was  to  cease  from  Michaelmas,  1714. 

1710.  The  following  is  a list  of  the  various  places  in  which  factories  were  established  at  different  pe- 
riods, from  the  commencement  of  the  tra(le  to  the  East  Indies,  till  the  union  of  the  two  Companies  in  1708. 

In  the  Rod  Sea  or  Arabian  Gulf,  Aden  and  Mocha. 

In  the  Persian  Gulf,  Bussorah,  Bushire,  Gombroon,  Ispahan,  and  Schiraz. 

On  the  w'estern  side  of  India  at  the  under-mentioned  places: 


Cutch. 

Bombay. 

Barcelore. 

Cranganore. 

Cambay. 

Iluybag. 

Mangalore. 

Cochin. 

Amedabad. 

Kajalipore. 

Durmapatam. 

Porca, 

Brodcra. 

Carwar. 

Cananore. 

Carnoply. 

Baroach. 

Baticaloe. 

Tellicherry. 

Quilon. 

Surat. 

Onore.  * 

Calicut. 

Anjengo. 

On  the  eastern  side  of  the  Peninsula,  or  Coast  of  Coromandel,  the  following: 


Tuticorin.’ 

Fort  St.  George. 

Mausulipatarn. 

1 Vizagapatam. 

Porto  Novo. 

Pulicat. 

Verasheroon. 

Bindiapatam. 

Cuddalore. 

Pettipole. 

Ingeram. 

Ganjam. 

In  Bengal  the  under-mentioned: 

Balasore. 

Cossimbuzar. 

Lucknow. 

Lahore. 

Calcutta. 

Rajahmal. 

Brampore. 

Malda. 

Hughley. 

Patna. 

Agra. 

Dacca. 

On  the  Malay  Peninsula  to  the  southward: 

Siam.  1 

Quedab. 

Cochin-China. 

1 Johore. 

Pegu. 

Cambodia.  | 

Patany. 

I Ligore. 

On  the  Island  of  Sumatra  and  Java: 

Acheen. 

1 Sillebar. 

j Jambee. 

j Japara. 

Passaman. 

1 Ticoo. 

1 Bantam, 

1 Jacatra. 

On  the  Island  of  Borneo,  at  Banjar  Massin,  and  Succadana;  and  on  Celebes,  Macassar. 
In  the  Moluccas,  on  Banda,  Amboyna,  and  I’ulo  Rood, 


BETWEEN  ENGT.AND  AND  THE  EAST  INDIES.  xU 

In  the  China  Seas;  Pulo  Condoro,  ^Vwan,  Cliusan,  Amoy,  and  Afacao;  Mn^Indanao  on  the 
island  of  tlie  same  name,  and  Eirando  in  >Ta[?an. 

Ill  India  a factory  i j simply  what  would  he  considered  a house  of  agency  for  the  sale  and  purchase 
ot  goods  on  commission.  Factories  of  this  descTi))tion  were  frt'ipicntly  established  in  dillerent  jdaccs, 
with  a view  ol  eX|)loring  the  state  of  the  markets,  and  ascertaining  the  situations  that  were  best  adajdeil 
lor  trade.  Tliese  minor  factories  were  suiiject  to  the  authority  anil  controul  ol*  a superior  government, 
consisting  of  a Chief  and  Council,  with  whom  all  orders  and  instructions  originated,  and  to  whom  the 
factors  were  accountable  for  their  transactions.  A subordinate  factory  formeily,  as  at  present,  seldom 
consisted  ol  moic  than  a Factor,  and  a Writer  as  his  assistant,  with  a lew’  natives  to  perlonn  the  operations 
of  maiuitd  labour. 

Ol  the  preceding  factoilcs  were  at  diilerent  periods  cstahlislicd  for  the  purpose  of  procuring  the 
article  ol  piece-goods  only,  lu.  10  on  llic  norlli  and  western  side  of  India,  11  on  the  Coast  of  Coromandel, 
and  11  in  Bengal.  And  in  the  provlsioii  of  pepper  no  less  than  'iO  faetori(“s  were  settled  at  various  times 
and  in  dillerent  |)lae(*s,  ti:.  l(j  on  the  Coast  of  ^lalaliar,  (]  on  Sumatra,  .1  on  .JaNa,  and  Ion  the 
Eastei’ii  Elands,  most  ol  which  w'cre  witlidr.iwn,  not  answeriag  th(‘  expiMiee  ol’  their  maintt'iianee. 

'Ihe  following  is  an  account  of  the  mnnlx'r  of  ships  sent  from  England  hy  the  London  Coni[)any  in 
the  veins  ltjSI-2  to  170l)-I()  inclusive,  with  their  chartered  tonnage,  and  th(‘ amoniit  of  their  raigoes, 
which  consisted  ol  Inillion  and  merchandise,  the  particulars  ofc'ach  of  which  cannot  he  asccitaiiied;  exclu- 
sive ol  ships  belonging  to  individuals,  of  w hich  no  uccount  has  been  preserved. 


S|.|j,s 

Atoouiii  «»i 
l‘  Is 

^ CiUS. 

.Shi|»s. 

AlIKMIlkl  lit 

V \j>orls 

No 

Toiina^f. 

L 

No 

1 lolUl.lLM*  1 

1 ^* 

10 

1,075 

316,213 

160.‘>-(i 

7 1 

3,120  1 

22S,()'i2 

23 

0,l(M» 

831,190 

l(i9(>-7 

i ' 

1,810 

1 1.5,.570 

l()S2-3 

21 

8,625 

515,216 

l(i07-8 

9 1 

3,01 15 

.388, ()5H 

^2 

10,880 

482,117 

1608-0 

U 

5, .5.50 

500,91 1 

14 

5,545 

520,311 

l6!lfM) 

12 

5,(»S6 

.582,  <.53 

l(»8.5-« 

13 

7,775 

610,200 

1700-1 

7 

2,075 

452,710 

l(j8(j-7 

6 

3,320 

208,058 

1701-2 

9 

2,085 

317,2113 

1GS7-8 

0 

2,90H 

157,101 

1702-3 

12 

1,730 

220,223 

1688-0 

2 

875 

30,230 

170.E4 

13 

4,195 

411,715 

1680-06 

4 

955 

131,602 

1701-5 

17 

5,025 

349,71 1 

1600-1 

0 

2,589 

125,101 

170.5-0 

9 

2, 120 

198,138 

1601 -a 

7 

2,7H(i 

143,728 

1700-7 

9 

3,120 

3.3,3,215 

1692-3 

5 

2,510 

171,812 

170r-H 

1.5 

5,130 

.502,983 

1693-4 

15 

5,858 

677,616 

1 708-9 

10 

.3,410 

5.50,.35H 

1604-5 

9 

3,855 

305,301 

1709-10 

13 

1,5.50 

51.3,733 

- - -ir 

1711.  By  an  Act  of  the  9th  of  Amu',  chap.  7,  it  is  declarcil  that  no  person  shall  serve  as  a Director 
of  the  East  India  ("ompany  and  the  Bank  of  England  at  one*  and  the  same  time.  The  like  regulation  w aii 
also  pre.scribcd  with  regard  to  the  South  Sea  Company,  established  in  this  year. 

The  price  of  East  India  Stock  in  the  month  of  November  in  this  year  was  121J. 

1712.  By  the  10th  of  Anne,  chap.  2H,  to  encourage  the  Company  to  jn'occed  in  their  trade,  and 
make  lasting  settlements,  their  exclusive  privileges  were  further  prolonged  until  three  years  al'ter  Lady 
Day  in  1733;  and  they  were  allowed  to  continue  trading  in  their  corporate  capacity,  although  their 
funds  should  be  redeemed. 

The  Company  presented  a petition  to  Parliament  against  a Bill  for  laying  additional  duties  on 
calicoes,  tea,  coflhe,  drugs,  &c.  in  which  they  stated  that  they  exported  woollens  and  other  lirilish 
products  to  llie  extent  of  150,000  per  annum. 


xWi  lllbi:  AND  PROGRESS  OF  THE  COMMERCE 

1714.  The  Em|)eror,  Charles  VI.  granted  commksions  to  ships  fitted  out  at  Os>tcnd,  for  trading 
to  the  East  Indies.  These  ships  it  was  discovered  were  chiefly  English  or  Dutch  projieity,  covered  under 
the  Emperor’s  flag.  Roth  the  English  and  Dutch  Governments  complained  ot  this  transaction  to  the 
Court  of  Vienna,  as  being  a breach  of  th(‘  treaty  of  Munster;  but  the  ICmperor  did  not  manifest  any 
inclination  to  redress  the  evil. 

1715.  The  English  (’ompany  sent  a deputation  to  Delhi,  to  solicit  redress  for  the  past,  and  security 
against  future  oppressions  on  the  part  of  the  oflicers  of  the  Mogul  Government.  1 he  Mogul  granted 
thoiii  a phinnaund,  under  date  Jumiary  171b,  exempting  their  trade  from  duties,  on  the  payment  of 
a peshcush  of  1 (),()()()  rupees  per  annum. 

In  the  phirmaund  it  is  recited,  as  part  of  the  Company’s  representation,  “ that  custoins  on  English 
goods  are  only  payable  at  Surat;  that  in  Shah  Jehan’s  time  these  were  only  2 per  cent;  in  the 
tiiiKj  of  Aurungzebe  3]  at  Surat,  and  none  at  other  places;  in  Rahauder  Shah’s  time  they  were 
that  by  reason  of  the  Government  olIiciTs’  opjircssions,  it  is  three?  y(‘ars  since  they  have  withdrawn  their 
factory.  In  Ruhar  and  Orixa  they  have  no  customs.  In  Ilughhy  they  give  3000  rupees  a year  in  lieu. 
Ry  tliis  phirmaund  iliey  are  allowed  to  possess  forty  biggahu  of  land  (about  15  acres)  wherever  they 
established  a factory.” 

1710.  No  redress  having  been  obtained  for  the  Invasion  of  the  privileges  of  the  English  East  India 
(’onipany,  a proclamation  w as  issued  by  the  King,  .strictly  prohibiting  Ilis  Majesty’s  subjects  from  trading 
to  the  East  Indies  under  foreign  commissions,  contrary  to  the  privileges  of  the  English  East  India  C orii- 
pany,  and  also  from  .serving  on  board  foreign  ships. 

Ry  an  Act,  5 Geo.  I.  chap.  11,  no  goods  from  the  Fiast  Indies  can  be  landed  in  Ireland,  on  penalt\ 
of  forfeiture  of  goods  and  vessel. 

About  this  period  there  was  a eonsi(hTal)Ie  scarcity  of  silver  coin  in  England,  occasioned,  as  it  w'as 
stated,  by  the  vast  exportation  of  silver  bullion  to  the  East  Indies,  wliereby  silver  had  become  scarcer,  and 
gold  more  plentiful,  by  tlie  profit  of  bringing  gold  from  India  and  China.  It  was  asserted  that  the  East 
India  Company  had  exported  in  one  year  near  .3,00(M)()0  ounces  of  silver  to  India,  which  was  more 
than  was  imported  from  all  parts. 

1718.  The  trade  from  Ost<’nd  to  India,  under  the  Emperor’s  flag,  being  still  carried  on,  notwith- 
standing the  remonsl^ances  of  the  English  and  Dutch,  an  Act  was  passed  for  the  better  securing  the 
lawdul  trade  of  llis  Majesty’s  subjects  to  the  East  Indies,  and  for  the  more  effectually  preventing  all 
flis  Majesty’s  subjects  from  trading  thither  under  foreign  commissions,  whereby  it  was  enacted  that 
“ whereas  it  is  of  great  importance  to  the  w^elfare  of  the  kingdom,  that  the  trade  to  and  from  the  East 
Indies  he  regulated  according  to  Acts  of  Parliament,  and  the  roy.al  charters;  and  that,  particularly  by  an 
Act  of  the  flth  of  King  William  III.  the  Ihist  Indies  should  not  be  visited  nor  frequented  by  any  Rritish 
subjects,  other  than  such  as  might  lawfully  trade  thither,  under  the  penalties  therein  set  forth;  and  that 
the  goods  laden  from  India  should,  without  breaking  bulk,  be  brought  to  some  port  in  Great  Rritain  to 
be  laden.  Notw  ithstumling  wiiich  restrictions,  and  the  proclamation  of  the  year  1715,  several  British 
subjects,  not  entitled  under  the  said  law  s,  have  presumed  lo  trade  to  India,  in  foreign  and  other  ships,  to 
the  diminution  of  Ilis  Majesty’s  customs,  an<l  the  trade  of  this  kingdom;  wherefore  the  contraveners  are 
hereby  declared  liable  to  all  the  penalties  of  the  laws  in  being.  And,  moreover,  the  East  India  Company 
are  liereby  authorized  to  seize  on  the  persons  of  all  such  British  subjects  as  bliall  be  found  within  their  limits, 
and  to  s(*nd  them  prisoners  to  England;  and  that  all  or  any  British  subjects,  acting  under  a commission 
from  any  foreign  potentate,  shall  forfeit  £500  fop  every  sucli  offcmce.”~Thi8  Act  was  further  continued, 
by  the  5lh  of  Geo.  III.  chap.  29,  for  seven  years,  from  the  1st  of  May,  1732. 


BETWEEN  ENGLAND  AND  THE  EAST  INDIES. 


x\\\[ 

1719.  The  Company’s  servants,  h iving  ;ihaiulone<l  York  Fort,  on  lla*  West  (^)a^l  Sumatra,  liegaii 
erceting  Fort  Martborougli,  two  or  three  miles  distance;  but  wen*  prevented  proceeding  bv  the  native^, 
n' ho  drove  them  out.  In  the  ensuing  year  they  returned,  and  without  opp«)siiion  eompleted  the  foit. 

1721.  The  use  of  printed  Indian  calicoes,  both  in  apparel  and  household  furniture,  was  at  this  time 

become  so  universal,  as  to  be  a great  detriment  and  obstruclion  to  the  woollen  and  silk  manuraelures  of  the 
kingdom.  This  had  occasioned  several  riots  and  tumults  <»f  the  weavers  iu  London,  It  was  theuforo 

found  necessary  to  redress  the  grievance, wherein  so  many  were  inferc'^ted.  An  Act  of  I’arliament  was  in  eon- 
sequence  passed,  to  preserve  and  encourage  the  woollen  aiiil  silk  luamifaetures,  See.  which  ahsolutely  prohi- 
bited the  ww.‘ar  thereof,  under  the  penally  of  F,j  for  each  cdVcucc  on  l!ie  w'eaier,  and  of  on  the  sellei. 

The  Ostenders  still  persisting  in  trading  to  the  Ea'^l  Indies,  Fin  llanient  passed  an  Act  lor  fuillier  pre- 
venting Ilis  Majesty’s  subjects  from  trading  under  forc'igii  4*ommissions,  and  prohihiling  the  imp«)itation  of 
tea  from  any  part  of  Europe,  ovct  and  above  all  toimer  rc'^lraints  laid  on  Ibltish  suhjeets  I'lom  reMuling 
or  trading  to  the  East  Indies  under  foreign  commissions;  with  smulry  other  new  adililional  restraints 
and  penalties.  (7  (ieo.  I.  chap.  20.)  And  by  the  Dute!»  placaids  it  was  lu.ule  death  lor  any  of  tlieir 
subjects  to  be  copeerned  lh(*reiii. 

1722.  The  interference  of  the  Oslcnd  Coinpanv,  and  various  otlu  r iliilit  ultles,  nt  ihks  time  obliged 
the  Company  to  reduce  their  half  yearly  dividend  fiom  5 to  t per  cent. 

1726.  King  George  1.  granted  the  Company  a luwv  charter  of  confirmation,  witli  ample  powers  to 
erect  corporations  at  Bengal,  Madras,  and  Bombay,  and  to  establish  Courts  of  Judicature  there.  The 
powers  conferred  hy  this  charter  were  enlarged  aiul  more  accurately  defined  hy  suhsei|uent  iharters. 

In  this  year  the  East  India  House  in  Leadenhull  Street  was  built. 

1727.  By  an  Act  of  the  IJth  of  (ieorgo  1.  chap.  H,  the  South  Sea  Company,  vvith  the  licence  ami 
consent  of  the  East  India  Company,  w'ere  allowed  to  take  in  negro(*s  at  Mailaga**rar,  giving  sec  nrily  not 
to  break  bulk,  or  to  proceed  to  any  other  places  within  the  Company’s  limits,  under  hu h ilnre  4)f  Ihcii 
ships  and  cargoes,  and  of  double  the  value.  This  Act  w'as  to  eoutiiuu*  tor  six  ycai’>i  only;  and  the  South  Sim 
Company  were  thereby  limitc’d  to  four  ships  anmially^,  and  to  carry  to  Aladagascar  n<»1hing  hut  llu' 
necessary  provisions,  ixc.  solely  for  the  purchase  of  negroes. 

'I’lio  English  and  Dutch  at  length  succeeded  in  convincing  the  Emperor  of  the  injustice  ol  saniti»)i!ing 
the  Ostend  East  India  traders;  whereupon  he  suspended  their  chaiter. 

1730.  The  Company’s  term  for  the  redemption  of  their  tapital,  ami  of  tlu‘ir  exclusive  trade,  luing 
near  its  expiration,  that  is,  on  three  years’ notice  from  Lady  Day,  1733,  a powerful  and  strenuous  oppo- 
sition to  its  renewal  was  now  raised  by  certain  merchants  and  gentlemen,  wlu),  fbresc'eing  that  the  (’oin- 
pany  would  apply  to  the  legislature  for  a prolongation  of  tlieir  exclusive  pi ivih  ges,  dtleimimd  to  he 
beforehand  with  them;  and,  therefore,  in  I’ehniary,  1731),  they  |aeM*nled  to  the  House  of  Commons 
their  petition  and  proposals,  wherein  they  offered  to  advance  .X*3,2()(),()00,  to  redeem  the  fund  ot  the 
Company,  by  five  several  payments,  the  last  to  be  at  I.ady  Day,  1733,  to  be  allowed  mi  inten  t of 
4 per  cent,  till  that  term,  and  only  2 per  cent,  after  it;  provided, 

I.  That  they  might  be  incorporated,  and  in  all  respects  vested  with  all  the  exclusive  privileges  ami 
trade  of  that  Company;  yet  so  as  not  to  trade  in  one  joint  stock,  or  in  their  eorjiorate  capacity,  hut  fl.  it 
the  trade  should  be  free  and  open  to  all  His  Majesty’s  subjects,  who  should  jiay  oiu*  per  cent,  of  tae 
value  of  their  exports  to  India,  in  consideration  of  their  taking  out  a licence  trom  the  p^()po^clI  corporatisn. 

II.  That  this  trade  be  sohdy  carried  on  from  the  Fort  of  London. 

III.  That  the  proposed  (’ompany’s  term  be  31  ye.ars,  and  be  redeemed  on  tliree  years  notice. 

IV.  That,  moreover,  for  enabling  the  proposed  corporation  to  defray  tlie  cxpciiccs  ot  forts  and 


xlvill 


RISE  AND  PnOGRESS  OF  THE  COMMERCE 


icttlements  in  India,  as  well  as  the  preservation  and  enlargement  of  the  trade,  they  were  to  be  empowered 
lo  levy  a duty  of  5 per  eeiit.  on  the  gross  value  of  all  the  merehandise  which  should  be  imported  from  India. 

The  House  of  Commons  rejected  the  pe  tition,  and  passed  a l)ill,  entitled  An  Act  for  reducing  the 
Annuity  or  fund  of  the  United  J'lust  India  ('oinpuny,  and  for  ascertaining  their  right  of  trade  to  the  East 
Indies,  and  the  continuance  of  tlieir  corporation  for  that  purjmse,’’  upon  the  terms  therein  mentioned; 
whereby,  after  a full  recital  of  former  statutes  and  charters,  the  Company  agreed,  and  it  was  enacted,  tliat 
their  yearly  fiiiul  should  be  reduced  from  Ij  to  4 per  cent,  from  IMichaelmas,  1730;  in  consideration 
whereof,  and  of  riC^2(K),0(K)  to  be  paid  by  them  for  the  public  service  of  the  year  1730,  all  their  exclusive 
privileges  of  trade  to  the  East  Indies  wti’c  continued  and  prolonged  from  Lady  Day,  1736,  to  Lady  Day, 
176(),  .an<l  three  years'  notice  then  lo  be  given,  being  in  all,  including  the  said  three  years’  notice  to  Lady 
Day,  1769,  ,3.3  years;  wdion,  on  payment  of  their  entire  capital  of  ^^3,200,000,  their  exclusive  privileges 
of  trade  w ere  to  cease  .and  determine.  Yet,  nevertheless,  the  Company  w ere  to  continue  as  a corjMn  ation  for 
ever,  to  enjoy  the  East  India  trade  in  common  with  all  other  subjects.  The  Company,  Jiioreovei  , at  any 
time,  on  one  year's  notice  after  Lady  Day,  17,36,  might  be  paid  off  their  whole  caj)ital  by  any  payments, 
not  less  than  L^5()0,000  at  a time,  ami  so  on  from  time  to  time,  on  such  yearly  notices  hy  rarliament. 
"1  he  Company  were  likewise  hereby  debarred  from  possessing  in  Great  Ilritain  lands,  Umcments,  &c. 
exceeding  1*10,000  yearly  rent. 

17-31.  The  following  is  a statement  of  tlic  numher  of  ships  sent  out  from  Englaml  hy  the  Companv, 
witli  tlicir  chartered  tonnage,  tlie  amount  ol‘ merchandise  and  bullion  expoilcd,  the  numher  of  ships  lost  or 
taken,  likewise  the  sale  amount  of  the  goodie  imported  by  the  Company  in  each  year,  1708-9  to  173;3-i. 


SliijN 

siTit  tioin  1 

KM'OUrs  FlU)M  1C\’( 

JLAND. 

S C) 

IMPORTS. 

Ycais. 

Kii 

1 

1 Moioluiul  SL* 

Bullion 

1 Total. 

•y 

S.ile  Aniniiiu 

No. 

1 Tons 

I 

X 

1 £ 

£ 

^ 2 

£ 

1708-9 

10 

3,  no 

102, 1S7 

388,171 

550,358 

2 

986,516 

170!>-10 

13 

4,5,50 

161,071 

.352,662 

513,733 

3 

654,766 

1710-1 

1.5 

5,0,55 

200,51.5 

.375,105 

575,920 

1 

490,5.32 

1711-2 

12 

4,110  j 

162,292 

327,705 

4N<>,997 

1 

955,372 

I7I2-.S 

S 

2,790 

109,012 

2^^3,162 

332,204 

913,866 

171,3-1 

11 

3,395 

8.j,20G 

20.3,000 

348,206 

1,429,519 

171 

9 

3,410 

79,304 

.304,871 

414,235 

1,394,622 

17l5-(> 

12 

4,420 

00,800 

422,720 

483,592 

1 1 

1,1.59,888 

l71(i-7 

13 

4,61.5 

08,547 

489,630 

558,183 

1 1 

805,108 

1717-8 

13 

5,170 

8s,o:hi 

608,118 

696,1.54 

989,722 

1718-9 

16 

(),()I0 

107,470 

^ 0;59,000 

700,470 

1 

1,332,902 

171‘)-‘i<) 

18 

7,(Mi5 

13L3.53 

522,(i37 

0.50,990 

4 ! 

1,094,022 

1720-1 

20 

8,210 

121,9.58 

4.54,5 16 

570,5(H 

2 

1,397,103 

1721-2 

18 

7,010 

147,015 

629,929 

777,.514 

1 

1,531,146 

1722-:! 

17 

(i,975 

13.7,104 

609,768 

744,872 

1,528,106 

I72:i-t 

12 

5,220 

118,157 

466,4(>8 

584,925 

...... 

1,457,856 

1721-5 

13 

5,8(i0 

9(i,992 

597,6.52 

094,014 

1,747,804 

172.'>-(i 

12 

5,OH5 

79,987 

466,421 

540,408 

1,519,.558 

1720-7 

11 

t,925 

70,573 

488,351 

504,924 

1,371,184 

1727-8 

13 

5,020 

101,403 

368,389 

469,792 

1,688,7.52 

1728-y 

15 

0,7.33 

102,102 

519,606 

621,708 

— - 

1,. 3.54, 212 

1729-30 

17 

7,233 

134, .78,3 

6,35,771 

770, .354 

1 

1,4,58,0.51 

1730-1 

13 

5,830 

1.30,57.3 

.5.39,755 

076, .328 

1,. 589,6-10 

17.31-2 

15 

7,110 

149,020 

619,226 

768,852 

1 

1,2:38,059 

1732-3 

13 

0,310 

105,230 

I 393,377 

498,607 

1,910,996 

17;J3-4. 

14 

0,440 

1.39,622 

402,789 

542,411 

1 

l,.5il.5,747 

Tot^  1 

353 

142,98f 

■3,()04,774 

12,189,147 

15,253,921 

20 

33,.571,'7'09“ 

BETWEEN  ENGLAND  AND  THE  EAST  INDIES. 


tlWx 

From  the  operation  of  variou.^  causes,  but  particularly  the  reduction  which  had  taken  place  in  the 
rate  of  interest  on  the  debt  due  to  the  Company  from  Government,  and  the  i?200,000  paid  for  tlie 
renewal  of  their  cliarter,  the  Court  of  Directors  recoinmended  to  the  General  Court,  that  the  half-yearly 
dividend  due  at  Christmas,  1734,  should  be  reduced  from  8 to  G per  cent.  The  Court  of  Troprietors  re- 
sisted the  proposition,  and  upon  a ballot  resolved  to  reduce  It  only  to  7 per  cent. 

173G.  About  this  period  Thomas  Kouli  Khan,  the  Persian  usurper,  who  had  assumed  the  title  of 
Nadir  Shah,  ravaged  the  empire  of  Hindostan.  Maliomed  Shall,  tlic  Mogul,  accommodated  matters  by 
ceding  to  him  all  the  provinces  to  the  westward  of  the  Indus,  On  his  return  to  Persia  in  173!),  he  is  said 
to  have  carried  off,  in  treasure  and  effects,  nCl25,()00,()()0  sterling.  During  these  troubles  the  Nizam  ul 
Mulck  established  himself  in  the  Souhahship  of  the  Decan.  Bengal  also  became  indi^peiuh'iit  under  Ana- 
verdy  Cawn  in  1738,  and  about  the  same  time  the  llohillas  formed  themselves  into  a state  on  the  east  side 
of  the  Ganges.  The  Mogul  empire,  thus  weakened,  was  soon  ullcr  entirely  suhveitcd. 

1740.  About  this  period  an  attempt  was  made  to  rc\ive  the  trade  with  Persia  by  the  way  of  llnssia; 
and  it  being  doubted  whether  the  Act  of  Navigation  permitted  the  importation  of  silk  from  Persia  through 
liussia,  a new  Act  was  ohl Mined,  by  which  the  merchants  were  enabled  to  carry  on  this  trade  as  they  had 
done  before  the  Act  of  Navigation.  In  consequence  of  which,  considerable  quantities  of  woollen  goods 
Were  exported  to  Persia,  by  the  way  of  Russia,  in  return  for  Persian  raw  silk.  This  continued  till  1717, 
when  the  carrying  of  good.s  through  Russia  to  Persia  was  prohibited  by  a decree  of  tlie  Russian  Legislature. 
The  navigation  of  the  Caspian  Sea  wms  also  refused  to  the  British  flag;  and  the  ships  wliich  Iiad  been  built 
by  the  Russian  Company  for  this  service,  were  sold  at  a great  loss;  and  dining  tb(‘  eh  il  wars  in  Persia,  the 
effects  of  the  British  merchants  were  plundered,  to  the  amount  of  above  XU00,O0O. 

1744.  The  East  India  Company,  in  consideration  of  an  enlargement  for  fourteen  years  longer  of 
their  present  exclusive  trade  and  privileges,  agreed  to  advance  X' 1,000,000  for  the  public  service  of  1741, 
at  3 per  cent,  interest,  which  W'as  accordingly  confirmed  by  an  Act  of  Parliament;  the  Company  being 
for  this  end  enabled  to  borrow  money  on  their  common  seal,  by  creating  a inilllon  of  new  bonds  at  three 
per  cent,  interest;  so  that  the  debt  due  by  the  public  to  the  Company  was  X' I ,‘200,000,  viz. 

Lent  in  1G98,  in  consideration  of  the  charter  of  incorporation  000,000 

III  1707  there  w'as  advanced  on  an  interest  of  5 per  1,^00,000 

In  1744,  in  consideration  of  an  extension  of  cxcludvc  privileges  «%'«  1 , 000,000 

This  debt  was  declared  to  be  redeemable  upon  one  year’s  notice,  nl’trr  T.ady-day,  171.7,  by  payment* 
of  not  less  than  i?500,000  at  any  one  time;  but,  notwithstanding  such  re«lcmptlon,  the  Company  w'as  to 
continue  to  enjoy  its  exclusive  commerce  for  the  term  granted  by  former  law  s;  and  in  conshleration  of  tin* 
loan  to  the  public,  it  was  to  have  an  addition  of  fourteen  years  to  its  present  exclusive  term,  which  would 
therefore  extend  to  1780,  three  years’  notice  to  be  given  by  Parliament  after  Lady-day,  17S0;  and  at  the 
expiration  of  the  said  three  years,  and  repayment  of  the  above  i?!, "200, 000,  and  all  arrears  of  interest, 
then  its  title  to  an  exclusive  trade  should  cease  and  determine:  yet,  alter  tlie  said  determination,  the 
Company  should  continue  to  have  a common  right  wdth  other  subjects  in  and  to  the  trade  to  fndia. 

1746.  The  English  having  refused  the  neutrality  offered  by  the  French,  the  latter  came  to  the  reso- 
lution of  giving  a vigorous  exertion  to  tlieir  force  In  India;  and  to  distress  the  English  as  much  as  possible, 
they  besieged  Madras,  the  principal  settlement  on  the  Coast  of  Coromandel,  which  surrendered  to  them  on 
the  10th  of  September,  1746;  from  which  period  the  Government  was  transferred  to  Fort  St.  David,  and 
continued  there  till  Madras  was  restored. 


•G 


1 


RISE  AND  PROGRESS  OF  THE  COMMERCE 


1718.  The  English  made  an  unsuccessful  attempt  upon  the  French  settlement  of  Pondicherry. 

A general  peace  was  concluded  in  Europe,  and  definitively  signed  at  Aix-la-Chapelle  on  the  7th  of 
October,  whereby  it  was  agreed  that  all  the  conquests  that  had  been  made  since  the  commencement  of  the 
war  in  the  East  Indies,  should  be  restored.  Madras  was  in  consequence  delivered  up  by  the  French. 

1750.  The  interest  on  the  debt  of  .P4, 200,000  due  from  Government,  was  reduced  to  3 per  cent,  and 
the  Company  were  empowered  to  grant  annuities  towards  the  discharge  of  their  bond  debt,  for  which  the 
funds  appointed  for  the  payment  of  the  interest  to  the  Company,  were  made  a collateral  security. 

The  late  war  in  India  brought  together  a greater  number  of  troops  than  either  the  English  or  French 
had  assembled  before;  and  the  two  powers,  when  no  longer  authorized  to  fight  against  each  other,  took 
the  resolution  of  employing  their  arms  in  the  contests  bctw'een  the  native  Princes.  From  1749  to  1754 
they  opposed  each  other  only  as  auxiliaries.  A truce  was  then  agreed  upon  between  both  nations;  after 
which  they  recommenced  hostilities,  when  war  w'as  declared  between  Great  Britain  and  France  in  1756, 
and  continued  till  the  general  peace  was  concluded  in  1763.  I'liis  w.ir  was  gloriously  conducted  by  the 
English  forces  in  India.  The  particulars  are  detailed  under  the  head  of  the  French  East  India  Company. 

17.55,  The  C-ompany,  In  consequence  of  the  expenrps  Incurred  in  Indin  on  account  of  the  war,  wxre 
under  the  necessity  of  reducing  their  dividends  from  8 to  6 per  cenfc 

The  Doddington  outward-bound  Ea^^t  Indiaiiian  was  lost  on  the  17th  of  July,  1755,  off  the  East  Coast 
of  Africa,  and  the  greater  part  of  her  crew  and  passengers  perished. 

1756.  An  expedition  was  fitted  out  from  Bombay,  under  Commodore  James,  against  the  pirate 
Angria\s  possessions  on  the  Malabar  Coast.  He  sailed  from  Bombay  on  the  22d  of  March,  17.55,  cap- 
tured Severndroog  on  the  2d  of  April,  Bancoote  on  the  8th,  and  after  reconnoitring  Gheriah,  Angria\s 
capital,  returned  to  Bombay  the  31st  of  December.  They  agaiti  sailed  on  the  27th  of  January,  1756,  and 
on  the  J3th  of  Feluuary  Gheriah  surrendered  to  the  English  and  l^lahratta  forces,  and  was  delivered 
up  to  the  hitter.  Angria's  fleet  ivus  destroyed,  and  considerable  booty  was  found  in  the  place. 

In  this  year  Surajah  Dow  lab,  Nabob  of  Bengal,  captured  Calcutta  from  the  English;  but  on  the  arrival 
of  reiiiforcements  from  Madras,  they  .succeeded  in  regaining  possession  of  it;  and  large  tracts  of  land  were 
granted  them  by  Jaffier  Ally  Cawii,  whom  they  made  Nabob  of  Bengal, 

1757.  The  French  captured  the  British  factories  at  Ingeram  and  Bandermanlanka,  and  invested 
Vizngapatani  with  a very  large  army,  which  soon  surrendered  by  capitulation.  This  capture  gave  the 
French  the  entire  possession  of  the  coast  from  G an  jam  to  Mausulipatam. 

Three  homeward-bound  East  luuiamen,  the  Houghton,  Suffolk,  and  Godolphin,  were  attacked  by  two 
French  ships,  one  of  sixty-four  guns,  the  other  a frigate  of  thirty-six  guns,  off  the  Cape  of  Good  Hope. 
The  French  ships  attacked  them  with  an  assurance  of  victory  over  trading  vessels  heavily  laden ; but  the 
Indiamen  formed  into  a line,  and  sustained  a furious  engagement  for  upw  ards  of  three  hours,  in  which  the 
French  made  repeated  attempts  to  board,  but  were  always  repulsed,  and  at  last  sheered  off  with  the  lo.ss 
of  146  men  killed  and  wounded.  The  East  India  Company  on  the  27tli  of  September  ordered  a gra- 
tuity of  to  each  ship’s  company,  as  a reward  for  their  courage  and  fidelity. 

1758.  The  French,  under  the  command  of  General  Lally,  captured  Cuddalore  on  the  3d  of  May, 
and  on  the  26th,  Fort  St.  David  surrendered  by  capitulation;  the  fortifications  of  which  were  destroyed 
by  the  French,  and  have  not  since  been  rebuilt. 

The  French  commenced  the  siege  of  Madras  on  the  12th  of  December,  1758,  which  they  were  com- 
pelled to  raise  on  the  17th  of  February,  1759. 

The  Parliament  in  the  supplies  for  the  service  of  the  year,  granted  the  Company  i^,000  towards 
enabling  them  to  defray  the  expence  of  a military  force  in  their  settlements,  in  lieu  of  His  Majesty’s  troops. 


BETWEEN  ENGLAND  AND  THE  EAST  INDIES. 


li 


1759.  The  English  factory  at  Surat,  having  been  grievously  insulted  and  oppressed  by  the  native 
Governors,  a force  was  detached  to  take  possession  of  the  castle,  \>  liich  was  obtained  on  the  4tli  of  March, 
and  the  English  established  in  a most  valuable  and  useful  settlement. 

The  English  factory  at  Gombroon  was  taken,  plumlered,  and  burnt  by  the  rrench  on  the  15(h  of 
October,  under  ITEstaing,  who  was  at  the  time  on  his  parole,  having  been  taken  prisoner  at  the  siege 
of  Madras,  and  liad  not  been  exchanged. 

Maiisulipatam  was  taken  from  the  rn  nch  by  storm  on  the  7lh  of  April,  with  but  little  loss. 

The  Dutch,  availing  themselves  of  the  situation  of  llie  English,  made  preparations  for  invading 
the  British  possessions  in  Bengal,  and  embarked  upwards  of  1500  men  on  board  seven  vessels,  vi:.  the 
Vlessingen,  Bleiswyk,  Welgeleegen,  and  Princess  of  Orange,  of  .‘10  guns  ( m b ; hilizabclb  Dorothea,  ami 
Waereld,  of  26  guns  each  ; and  ^Nlossell,  of  16  guns,  'fhe  EngliNhhad  only  ilurr  Eii>t  IiulIanK  ii  to  o])po.se 
to  this  formidable  force  : the  Calcutta,  Captain  Wilson  ; tlie  Duke  of  Dorset,  Captain  Forrester;  and  the 
Hardwickc,  Captain  Sampson.  On  their  approaching  each  otlu'r  in  the  river,  the  Dutch  drew  up  in  line 
of  battle  to  receive  the  English,  who  followed  tlieir  example,  and  the  Duke  nl‘ Dorset  began  the  engage- 
ment; but  tlie  wind  dying  away,  she  could  not  be  properly  seconded  for  some  time,  lIoue\er,  when  the 
other  two  ships  came  up,  they  malTilained  so  smart  a fire  upon  the  Duteli,  that  lv\«)  of  their  smaller  ships 
were  obliged  to  cut  their  cables,  and  run,  and  the  other  was  driven  ashore.  Alter  a severe  action  of  two 
hours,  the  Dutch  Commodore  struck,  and  the  others  followed  his  example,  exc(’j)(  his  seeoiul,  who  got  off 
by  fighting  bis  way,  and  fi  ll  down  the  river  to  Culpee,  where  he  was  intercepted  hy  theOxl'ordund  Boyal 
George,  who  had  arrived  two  days  before,  'flu*  Dutch  Commodore  had  '16  men  killed,  and  many 
wounded:  he  sull’ered  most,  as  did  the  Duke  of  Dorset  on  the  Fnglisli  side,  who  w'as  mon*  immediately 
engaged  with  him.  This  ship  was  almost  torn  to  pieces,  and  had  above  ninety  sliols  in  her  hull ; yet  she 
liad  not  a man  killed:  nor  did  the  other  ships  lose  u single  man,  though  the  Dutch  had  above  a hundred 
killed  and  wounded.  'I1ic  rest  were  made  prisoners,  and  carried  up  to  Calenlta.  'fins  brave  action,  liy 
which  the  province  of  Bengal  may  lie  said  to  have  been  saved,  receivcil  the  warme  st  thanks  from  the  Court 
of  Directora  on  the  return  of  the  ships  to  England. 

1760.  A fleet  of  seventeen  East  Indiamen  arrived  under  the  protection  of  Admii  al  Pocockc  on  the 
20th  of  September.  This  was  the  richest  convoy  that  ever  arrived  together  from  Indi.i. 

Karical  was  taken  from  the  French  by  Major  Monsoii  on  the  5th  of  A pi  11. 

Count  D’Estaing  attacked  and  captured  the  British  .settlements  of  Natal,  'rapjianooly,  and  Bencoolen, 
on  the  West  Coast  of  Sumatra,  committing  all  the  ravages  in  his  pow  er.  The  English,  however,  restored 
them  in  the  following  year  to  their  former  state. 

1761.  Pondicherry,  the  capital  of  the  French  possessions  in  India,  was  taken  by  the  English  under 
Colonel  Coote,  on  the  16th  of  January,  after  a tedious  siege  of  eight  months.  Malic,  wdth  its  subor- 
dinates, surrendered  to  the  British  troops  under  Major  Hector  Munro,  on  the  10th  of  February,  1761. 

Jafficr  Ally  Cawn,  who  had  been  placed  on  tlie  throne  of  Bengal  in  17.57,  was  deposed,  and  his  son- 
in-law,  Cossim  Ally  Cawn,  promoted  to  that  dignity,  who  granted  the  English  a considerable  extent  of 
country,  and  confirmed  all  the  privileges  given  by  his  predecessors. 

1762.  Government  granted  the  East  India  Company  i?20,000,  in  lieu  of  affording  them  a regiment 
for  the  protection  of  their  settlements  in  India. 

War  having  been  declared  against  Spain,  an  expedition  was  fitted  out  from  India  against  Manilla, 
the  principal  settlement  belonging  to  the  Spaniards  in  the  Philippine  Islands.  The  fleet  sailed  from 
Madras  on  the  1st  of  August,  and  arrived  in  Manilla  Bay  on  the  23d  of  September.  The  place  was  taken 
by  storm  on  the  6th  of  October,  and  a capitulation  agreed  upon,  by  whieli  the  tow  n and  port  of  Cavite, 
with  the  islands  and  forts  dependent  on  Manilla,  were  to  be  given  up  to  his  Britannic  Majesty,  and  they 
were  to  pay  4,000,000  dolloi's  for  the  preservation  of  the  town  and  their  effects,  for  whit:h  tdlU  were  aftei- 

♦G2 


lii 


RISE  AND  PROGRESS  OP  THE  COMMERCE 


wards  given.  The  Spaniards,  however,  evaded  the  ransom,  and  acted  on  the  most  dishonourable  terms, 
and  to  this  period  the  ransom  has  never  been  paid. 

1763.  The  conduct  of  Cossim  Ally  Cawn,  tlic  new  Soubah,  Iiaving  been  ungrateful  to  the  English, 
a war  took  place  between  them,  which  was  carried  on  with  uninterrupted  success  on  the  part  of  the  latter, 
who  defeated  the  Nabob  in  several  actions,  and  became  entirely  masters  of  the  province  of  Bengal. 

A treaty  of  peace  was  concluded  between  England  and  France.  Tliis  treaty  put  a conclusion  to  the 
war  carriecl  on  by  the  two  powers  in  the  East  Indies,  first  as  auxiliaries  to  the  native  Pnnees,  and 
afterwards  as  declared  enemies,  for  the  space  of  eight  years,  during  which  period  the  British  troops 
acquired  immortal  honour,  and  great  advantages  for  the  East  India  Company. 

The  Comjiany,  by  treaty  concluded  with  Mahomed  Ally  Cawn,  Nalioh  of  the  C’arnatic,  dated  the  29th 
of  October,  1763,  obtained  possession  of  certain  districts,  called  the  Jaghire  lands,  which  were  confirmed 
to  the  Company  by  the  Mogul's  pliirmaimd,  dated  the  12th  of  August,  1765.  The  revenues  of  these  lands 
Were  entered  in  the  Mogul's  hooks  at  4, 00, 494*  pagodas. 

The  Company  made  a demand  upon  Government  for  tlie  following  sums  advanced,  viz» 

Subsistence  of  l^'ieiich  prisoners  In  India  i'260,6S7 

Expcnces  incurred  on  the  expedition  to  jManilla  139,877 

llosjiital  expenccs,  on  account  of  Ills  IVlajesty's  forces  21,147 

making  a total  of  X422,011,  of  w hich  sum  they  afterwards  received  from  the  Lords  of  the  Treasury 
^’28,366;  so  that  their  deficiency  on  this  head  amounted  to  L’393,645. 


1765.  Lord  Clive  was  appointed  Governor-General  of  India,  with  more  powers  tlian  any  preceding 
Governor  had  ever  been  vested  with.  Soon  after  his  arrival,  he  obtained  from  the  Great  Mogul  a formal 
grant  to  the  Company  of  the  administration  of  the  provinces  of  Bengal  and  Orixa,  on  condition  of  paying 
an  annual  quit  rent  of  26,00,000  rupees,  and  for  the  expcnces  of  the  civil  government,  and  the  suj)poj‘t  of 
his  dignity,  53,00,000  rupees  yearly.  The  remainder  of  the  revenues  were  allotted  to  the  Company  for  their 
expenccs  in  supporting  their  armies  and  other  charges.  Thus  a territory,  nuicli  larger  than  Great  Britain 
and  Ireland,  producing  a revenue  estimated  at  X^l,700,000  per  annum,  and  containing  upwards  of  ten 
millions  of  inhabitants,  was  acquired  to  the  Company.  The  Mogul  also  confirmed  to  the  Company  the 
provinces  of  Burdw'an,  Midiiapore,  and  Chittagong. 

The  Company  obtained  a grant  of  the  five  Circars,  commonly  called  the  Northern  Circars,  by  the 
Mogul's  pliumaund,  dated  the  12lh  of  August,  1765,  which  was  afterw’'ards  confirmed  to  them  by  treaty 
with  the  Nizam,  or  Soubah  of  the  Dccan,  to  whose  government  they  liad  been  subject.  By  this  treaty, 
dated  the  12tli  of  November,  1766,  the  Company  engaged  to  pay  the  Nizam  for  the  three  Circars  of  Ellorc, 
Rajahmundry,  and  Mustaphanaghur,  5,00,000  rupees  yearly,  and  2,00,000  for  each  of  the  Guntoor  and 
Chicacole  Circars,  the  latter  of  w’hich  was  not  then  reduced  to  obedience,  as  soon  as  the  Company  should 
be  put  in  possession  of  them.  The  possession  was  so  far  settled  and  adjusted  by  May,  1766,  as  to  yield 
the  net  sura  of  .iCl40,000,  and  in  1769  the  annual  net  receipt  was  ^^290, 000. 

From  the  accoimls  laid  before  Parliament,  it  appears  that  the  first  cessions  of  territory  were  very  ina- 
dequate to  the  support  of  the  Company’s  establishment,  the  revenues  and  charges  being  as  follow: 

The  Bengal  revenues  of  all  descriptions,  both  old  and  new,  brought  into  the  treasury,  from 


1761  to  1766 


Besides  the  revenues  from  the  ceded  lands,  a further  sum  was  realized  for  the  Dew  ann'ee,  in 
the  five  years 

The  revenues  of  Bombay  brought  clear  into  the  treasury  in  the  five  year8v%v%%^%%v%-%v%v.^ 
The  revenues  of  Bencoolen  and  other  gains  were 


£3,2V),m 

1,080,000 

349,000 

75,000 


Fonoing  a total  of  revenue  in  five  years  of 


/’5, 760,000 


BETWEEN  ENGLAND  AND  THE  EAST  INDIES. 


Tlie  disbursements  were  as  follow 
Bengal,  civil  and  military,  fortifications,  and  other  cxpenccs^. 
Fort  St.  George  ditto  ^ 

BoiTibay i tto 
Bencoolen  ditto 


Vk  V«' 


> ■% V %♦  % v%  » % ' 


..  jLM-,10S,000 
1,9S1,()00 
1,124<,(K)0 
17^4?,(X30 


7,3S8,000 


The  expenccs  during  the  five  ye.ars  exceeded  the  revenue  i?  1,028,000 

The  folloiving  is  a statement  of  the  number  of  ships  sent  nut  l»y  the  ( onipany  to  India  and  C hina, 
W'ith  their  chartered  tonnage;  the  amount  of  exports  from  I'.ngland,  speeilying  the  meichaiulise  and 
bullion;  the  number  of  ships  lost,  taken,  &:c.  outward  and  homeward  Ixiund;  together  »ith  the  amount, 
sales  of  the  homeward-bound  cargoes  in  the  years  17.11-/)  to  17()5-()  inclusive. 


Shll)^ 

siMil  I'roin 

1-  \enii 

rs  FiioM 

I, AM). 

IM  POUTS. 

Years. 

Kn 

gland. 

M 1^1  r hand  u»v’ 

Hiill..  II 

'Ii»'  I 

'L  ^ 

i\iii'»UlU  .S.\I(‘s. 

N(3. 

1 Toil*! 

JL 

/ 

1 

-C 

JL 

1734-.'i 

U 

6,730^ 

108,.507 

400,002 

.5*19, 199 

1 

1,372.215 

n.i-i-fi 

16 

7,700 

1.52,491 

482,08(5 

6.35,180 

2 

1,007,452 

1736-7 

17 

8,275 

172,117 

.55?,0?5 

7.10,122 

4 

1,81.5,008 

1737>H 

18 

8,7(;0 

1S8,0<)5 

492.72f) 

(581.625 

2 

1,72 1, (03 

173S*  9 

16 

7,0(M) 

116,727 

47  l,.52.5 

f;2 1,2.52 

1 

1,540,352 

1730-10 

18 

7,8-18 

n.l,.52l 

'127,902 

511,12.3 

— 

1 ,699,682 

1710-1 

21 

9,787 

18S,1S2 

481,028 

673,110 

— 

1,795,.584 

171^1 -.2 

17 

7,898 

210,7.57 

437,5.50 

6 is, 307 

1 

1,.5S|.,710 

1712-3 

17 

S,0S8 

2('.5,13l 

.5S(t,K70 

78(5,010 

1 

1,813,475 

174.1-4 

21 

! 8,271 

231,861 

517,880 

782,741 

2 

1,770,1.30 

1741-.5 

1.5 

7,329 

231,319 

458,544 

680,863 

2 

1,007, .50(5 

171.5-6 

21 

1 9,172 

01, .3(5 1. 

47(5,8.53 

568,217 

1 

2,480,066 

174(5-7 

20 

8,9.59 

2(i.5,818 

5(50,020 

825,838 

2 

1 ,602,.3KS 

1747-8 

23 

9, ,561 

107,979 

779,257 

887,236 

2 1 

1,730,150 

1748-0 

16 

7,665 

127,221. 

706,891 

831,115 

1,78(5,041 

1740-50 

17 

7,618 

272,877 

900,069 

1,172,946 

— 

2,607,600 

1750-1 

17 

8,235 

23.3,051. 

809  2.52 

1,01.3,206 

— 

2,221,800 

1751-2 

19 

9,261- 

313,031 

936,185 

1,279,216 

— 

2,.1..5H,;i58 

1752-3 

20 

9,732 

351,6(X) 

8.33,394 

1,184,991- 

— 

1,078,002 

1753-4 

21 

10,3.50 

3(50,284 

91 1 ,25() 

1,313, .540 

— 

2,235,760 

1754-5 

16 

7,835 

202,117 

668,893 

961,010 

1 

2,1.38,075 

1755-0 

1.5 

7,112 

240,460 

620,379 

H60,S  18 

— 

2, 10(5, .351 

175(5-7 

19 

9,481 

24,3,340 

795,008 

1,038,318 

3 

2,060,500 

1757-8 

20 

9,908 

20.3,413 

456,2.53 

749,666 

— 

1,7(50,010 

1758-9 

22 

10,978 

3l.3,.577 

172,604 

486,181 

— 

1 ,357,367 

1750-(»0 

20 

9,980 

2.36,525 

1423122 

379,147 

1 

2,210,2(51. 

1760-1 

16 

7,986 

.361, .551 

91,1.36 

452,f)H7 

1 

2,570.6!  1 

17C1-2 

23 

10,766 

510,37.5 

27,090 

5 If), 4 65 

1 

1,86.5,100 

17(52-3 

20 

9,980 

488,50(5 

5fi,H.57 

51.5,4.53 

1 

1,008,117 

176.3-4 

26 

12,577 

420,210 

40,017 

4f>9,236 

1 

2,6.50,80.5 

1764-5 

22 

10,879 

445,.32H 

345,404 

790,7,32 

4 

2,575,810 

176.5-6 

22 

10,978 

455,577 

281,875 

7.37,4.52 

1 

2,780,0.52 

TotaK.. 

1)05  ■ 

287,695 

8.4,34,760" 

IfiOh  1,496 

124.51 6,265 

.37 

(5 1•,4.52,.377 

1767.  The  public  conceiving  they  had  a claim  to  participate  in  the  newly  acquired  revenues  of  the 
East  India  Company,  a Committee  of  the  House  of  Commons  was  appointed  to  en(|uire  into  the  Com- 
pany’s  concerns.  During  the  enquiry,  the  Company  were  aliout  to  declare  a dividend  of  121  PP**  cent. 
Government  were  desirous  they  should  forego  making  tliis  dividend,  until  their  affuiis  had  undergone  a 


RISE  AND  PROGRESS  OF  THE  COMMERCE 


Hv 

further  investigation ; but  the  Company  persevering  in  their  intentions,  two  bills  were  passed,  the  one, 
7 George  III.  chap.  48,  for  preventing  proprietors  in  all  trading  joint  stock  companies  from  voting  in. 
(leneral  Courts,  unless  tiny  had  been  in  possession  of  their  stock  six  months;  and,  to  prevent  the  dangerous 
consequence  of  sudden  and  unwarrantable  alterations  in  the  rates  of  the  dividends,  it  was  enacted  that 
dividends  should  only  l)e  declared  at  a half-yearly  or  quarterly  Gcnerid  Court,  at  least  five  months  after 
the  declaration  of  the  preceding  dividend;  that  the  declaration  should  he  oidy  for  one  dividend;  and  that 
every  proposition  for  increasing  the  rate  of  a dividend  should  be  decided  by  ballot  three  entire  days,  at  the 
least,  after  the  breaking  up  of  the  General  Court  wherein  the  proposal  was  made. 

lly  the  other  Act,  7 Geo.  III.  chap.  49,  it  was  enacted  that  after  the  ^tth  of  June,  1707,  no  dividend 
vshould  be  made  but  by  ballot  in  a general  meeting  of  the  Company,  summoned  expressly  for  that  jiurpose 
by  at  least  seven  days’  previous  notice  fixed  on  the  Exchange  of  London,  and  that  no  dividend  above  10 
per  cent,  per  annum  sliould  bo  made  before  the  next  session  of  Parliament. 

By  another  Act,  7 Geo.  III.  chap.  .57,  the  (bnipany,  in  consideration  of  their  territorial  acfjui- 
sitions,  became  bound  to  pay  to  the  public  .f‘I0(),0()0  per  annum  for  two  years,  eornmencing  from 
the  1st  of  February,  1707.  It  was,  however,  provided,  that  if  they  .should  he  deprived  of  their 
territories,  or  any  part  of  them,  during  that  period,  a proportional  abatement  should  take  jilace. 

The  Company  were  involved  in  war  with  llyder  Ally,  who  usurped  the  government  of  the  kingdom 
of  Mysore  in  17().‘3,  and  in  a short  time  extended  Ids  dominions  so  as  to  I)ec()me  formidable  to  his  neigh- 
bours. The  war  continued  with  various  success  during  the  years  17(i7,  17()H,  and  part  of  1709,  when 
llyder  with  a strong  detachment  having  advanced  within  a few  miles  of  Madras,  the  Presidency  made 
overtures  of  peace,  which  were  readily  acceded  to.  Negotiations  were  opened,  and  a treaty  comluded,  hv 
which  each  party  agreed  to  cede  the  conquests  made  by  him.  The  prisoners  on  both  sides  were  to  be 
released,  u league  ollensive  and  defensive  to  take  place  between  the  contracting  parties,  and  a free 
trade  carried  on  between  tlicii’  subjects. 

1708.  By  a treaty,  dated  the  23d  of  February,  1708,  between  the  Company,  the  Nizam,  and  the 
Nabob  of  the  Carnatic,  in  which  tlie  Northern  Circars  were  confirmed  to  tlie  Company,  the  annual  payment 
to  the  Nizam  for  the  four  Circars,  of  which  the  Company  were  then  in  possession,  was  reduced  to  2,()(),0(’0 
rupees  for  six  years,  and  1,00,000  more,  if  during  that  period  they  should  obtain  possession  of  the  Guntoor 
Circar;  and  after  the  .six  years,  .5,00,000  rupees  for  tlie  four  Circars,  with  two  more  when  Guntoor 
should  come  into  their  possession. 

1769.  The  time  being  near  at  harnl  when  the  anmtal  payment  of  i?400,000  to  the  Government  by 
"the  Company,  and  also  the  parlianuMitary  restriction  of  the  dividends  would  expire,  the  Company  con- 
ceiving that  the  large  sum  thus  exacted  from  tliem,  would  thenceforth  be  considered  by  the  Administration 
as  part  of  the  regular  revenue,  were  desirous  of  rcceiviiig  some  compensation  for  what  they  deemed  so 
great  a sacrifice.  They  therefore  requested  a prolongation  of  their  charter  for  five  years,  which  was 
refused.  Afler  holding  several  Genei'al  Courts,  and  much  correspondence  between  Administration  and  the 
Company,  the  following  agreement  was  confirmed  by  Parliament. 

The  East  India  Company  became  bound  to  pay  to  the  public  J^400,000  annually,  for  five  years  to 
come.'  They  were  ])crinitted  lo  increase  their  dividends,  at  a rate  not  exceeding  one  per  cent,  each  year, 
till  they  .should  be  raised  to  12}  per  cent,  which  they  must  never  exceed.  Should  the  Company,  instead 
of  increasing,  be  obliged  to  reduce  their  dividends,  a prufiortional  deduction  was  to  be  made  from  the 
sum  payable  to  Government,  which  was  to  be  entirely  given  up,  should  the  Company  be  obliged  to 
reduce  their  dividends  to  6 per  cent.  During  the  five,  years  the  Company  were  obliged  to  exp6rt  British 
goods  equal  in  value  to  the  average  amount  of  those  they  exported  in  the  last  five  years;  and  if  any 
cash  should  remain  in  their  treasury,  after  the  jiayment  of  certain  specified  debts,  they  were  bound  to 
lend  it  to  the  public  at  an  interest  of  2 per  cent.  (9  Geo.  III.  chap.  24.) 


BETWEEN  ENGLAND  AND  THE  EAST  INDIES.  W 

The  Company  sent  out  Commissioners  to  superintend  their  Governments  in  India,  and  to  rectify  the 
abuses  which  had  arisen  from  mismanagement.  They  sailed  in  the  Aurora  frigate,  and  were  unfortunately 
never  more  heard  of. 

1770.  The  penalty  of  30  per  cent,  payable  to  the  Company  on  goods  imported  from  the  East 
Indies  under  foreign  commissions,  not  being  found  sufficient  to  clieck  such  illicit  trade,  it  was  now  raised 
to  100  per  cent,  on  the  value  of  all  goods  so  imported.  By  the  same  Act  tlie  civil  and  military  servants 
of  the  Company  were  made  amenable  to  the  Court  of  King's  Bench  in  England,  for  acts  of  oppression 
committed  in  India.  (10  Geo.  III.  chap.  47.) 

The  situation  of  the  Company's  allUirs  being  such  as  to  admit  a further  augmcMitation  of  their 
dividend,  it  was  declared,  for  the  ensuing  payment,  at  the  rate  of  12  per  cent.  j)er  annum. 

1779.  In  order  to  prevent  the  great  consumption  of  timber,  fit  for  the  constnution  of  large  ships 
of  war,  the  Company  were  prohibited  from  building,  or  allow  Ing  to  be  built  for  their  service,  any  new 
ships,  till  the  shipping  in  their  employ  should  be  re«luced  undca*  4.j,000  tons,  or  employing  any  ships 
built  after  the  18th  of  May,  1779;  but  they  were  at  liberty  to  build  any  vessel  wliatevei*  in  India  or  the 
colonies,  or  to  charier  any  vessel  built  in  India  or  the  colonies. 

The  Company's  affairs  in  India  standing  more  in  ne(‘d  of  rc‘gulation  than  when  the  supervisors,  who 
unfortunately  perished  on  their  passage,  were  sent  out,  the  CouiL  of  Dii  eel ors  resolved  to  send  others, 
and  appointed  five  gentlemen  for  the  important  trust;  hut  before  tliey  could  proceed  on  (heir  mission, 
they  were  prohibited  by  an  Act  of  Parliament  of  13  Geo.  HI.  chap,  t),  which  nslrained  the  Company,  for 
a limited  time,  from  appointing  Commissioners  for  su]>cnutending  and  regulaliiig  their  affairs  at  their 
Presidencies  in  India. 

JVfr.  Warren  Hastings,  belonging  to  the  Madras  Civil  Service,  was  this  year  appointed  Governor 
General  of  India.  The  confused  and  embarrassed  state  of  the  Comj)anCs  alfairs,  in  the  midst  of  the  most 
flattering  external  appearance  of  prosperity,  notwithstanding  the  great  accessions  of  territory,  will  be  best 
sliewn  by  an  extract  from  that  (Gentleman’s  lleview  of  tlie  state  of  Bengal: — ‘‘  The  treasury  was  empty; 
the  Company  wiis  involved  in  debt;  its  revenue  was  declining;  every  n gion  of  Ilindostaii  groaned  under 
different  degrees  of  oppression,  desolation,  and  insecurity." — The  plans  di  vised  by  biin,tbongb  unfortunately 
not  executed,  are  deserving  attention,  as  they  shew  the  be.d  pv>liey  of  that  system  of  aggrandizement 
which  had  been  hitherto  pursued. — “ Had  I been  alh»wed  the  nu-ans  which  I re(|ulretl,  I should  have  sought 
no  accession  of  territory  ; 1 should  have  rejected  the  ofler  of  any  which  would  have  enlarged  our  line  of 
defence,  without  a more  than  approj)riatc  augmcntalion  of  defensive  strength  and  revenue;  I should  have 
encouraged,  but  not  solicited,  new  ulliaiiees,  and  sliould  liave  lendeied  that  of  our  (iovernment  an  olject 
of  solicitation,  by  the  example  of  those  which  already  existed.  Towards  thc'-e  I ^Iiould  have  observed,  as 
my  religion,  every  principle  of  good  faith." — Numerous  obstacles,  lu)we\er,  interfered  with  the  execution 
of  this  sclietne.  Mr.  Hastings's  conduct  aflerwards  became  the  subjict  of  pailiamentary  investigation; 
and  a reference  to  the  result  of  it  is  necessary,  for  the  means  of  forming  an  opinion  respecting  him. 

The  Company  found  it  necessary,  in  con.sccpieuee  of  the  embarrassed  state  of  their  affairs,  to  reduce 
their  dividend  from  12^  per  coat,  ut  which  rate  it  had  been  paid  from  Midsummer,  J771,  to  Mid.sumnu‘r, 
1779  inclusive,  to  G per  cent,  jier  annum. 

The  Mahraltas  made  some  attempts  to  get  possession  of  the  pio\  inces  of  Corah  and  Allahabad, 
bordering  on  the  terrltoi  ics  of  the  Nabob  of  Oude,  but  were  opposed  by  the  Eiiglisli,  who  in  the  ensuing 
year  defeated  and  cUove  them  across  the  Ganges,  when  they  invaded  the  country  of  tlie  lloliillas. 
On  this  occasion  the  English  acted  as  allies  of  the  Nabob  of  Oude,  to  wlioiu  the  llohilla  Chiefs  had  promised 
to  pay  40  lacs  of  rupees  for  the  protection  aflbrdcMl  them;  but  payment  was  afterwards  refu.sed;  the 
consequence  of  which  was,  that  the  llohilla  country  was  Invaded  in  1774,  and  conquered,  as  well  as  several 
otlier  large  tracts  of  territory,  by  wliich  the  boundaries  of  Oude  were  advanced  in  all  directions. 


Iri 


RISE  AND  PROGRESS  OF  THE  COMMERCE 


1773.  In  this  year  a material  alteration  took  place  in  the  system  under  which  the  Company’s  shipping 
concerns  were  conducted.  Previous  to  this,  by  long  established  practice,  the  ships  were  chartered  at  499 
tons,  with  a complement  of  ninety-nine  men  and  a boy;  as  by  the  charter  of  1G98,  the  Company  were 
required  to  employ  a Chaplain  on  board  every  ship  of  500  tons  burthen,  'rhis  occasioned  them  to  charter 
the  ships  at  499  tons.  Different  rates  of  freight  were  allowed  to  the  various  parts  of  India  and  China, 
and  also  distinct  freights  for  fine ‘and  gruff  goods,  in  proportion  as  the  commodities  were  more  or  less 
favourable  for  stowage.  Of  these  499  tons,  a deduction  was  made,  in  the  first  instance,  of  3 per  cent, 
or  15  tons,  for  which  no  freight  was  paid,  it  being  an  allowance  to  the  commanders  and  officers,  for  private 
trade.  A further  16  per  cent,  or  60  tons,  was  also  stipulated  to  be  carried  in  iron  kiutledge  or  ballast, 
for  which  the  Company  agreed  to  pay  the  owners  at  the  rate  of  one-third  of  the  freight  payable  on  gruff 
goods;  so  that,  in  fact,  the  cliartered  tonnage  of  a ship  was  actually  completed  with  404  tons  of  goods, 
nor  were  the  Company  obliged  to  lade  any  greater  quantity,  unless  it  suited  their  convenience;  if  any 
further  quantity  was  laden  under  80  tons,  freight  was  reckoned  ot  two-thirds^  of  the  rate  payable  on  gruff 
goods  (one-third  having  been  previously  allowed  the  owners  for  the  kintledge),  and  on  all  exceedings 
beyond  80  tons,  they  paid  only  half  freight.  This  perhaps  may  be  more  clearly  illustrated  by  an  example. 


In  general  the  tonnage  of  a cargo  from  Bengal  or  the  Coast,  under  the  old  system,  consisted 
of  80  tons  of  iron  kintledge,  at  one-third  of  the  freiglit  payable  on  gruff  goods, 
(say  ^6^34  5s.  per  ton)  or  i?ll  8s.  4d.  per  ton 
Fine  Goons. — 300  tons  of  piece-goods,  raw  silk,  &c.  at  i^37  5s.  per  ton 
Gruff  Goods. — 30  tons  of  redwood,  which,  being  considered  a sort  of  dunnage,  paid  only 
the  half  gruff  freight,  or  i?17  2s.  6d.  per  ton 
11  tons  of  various  other  articles,  as  sticklac,  shellac,  &c.  at  «C34  5s.  per  ton 


% v%  %%%%  w % 


v% 


Saltpetre,  2,000  bags,  or  133  tons,  as  follows: 

53  tons  to  make  up  the  chartered  tonnage,  at  i?34  5s. 

60  tons,  the  remainder,  being  the  kintledge  proportion,  at  two-thirds  freight,  or 
£22  16s.  8d 


£ 

«. 

d. 

913 

6 

8 

11,175 

0 

0 

513 

15 

0 

376 

15 

0 

171 

5 

0 

1,815 

5 

0 

1,826 

13 

4 

Total 6,792  0 0 


If,  as  it  frequently  happened,  an  additional  1000  bags  of  saltpetre  were  laden,  they  were  brought  at 
half  freight,  which  operated  as  a reduction  of  freight  upon  tlie  whole  of  the  cargo. 

The  ships  chartered  in  tins  mode  seldom  exceeded,  in  builder  s measurement,  from  600  to  650  tons ; 
but  it  being  found  that  some  few  which  had  been  built  upon  a larger  construction,  werC  more  advantageous 
both  to  the  Company  and  the  owners,  by  bringing  home  greater  quantities  of  surplus  tonnage,  particularly 
from  China,  at  half  freight;  the  old  ships,  as  they  completed  their  four  voyages,  were  replaced  by  others, 
of  from  700  to  800  tons  burthen,  and  in  more  recent  periods  they  have  been  further  increased  to  1200 
tons  for  the  China  trade. 

A new  description  of  ships  led  to  a different  mode  of  freighting,  and  in  1773  it  was  agreed  that  in 
future  the  ships  should  be  engaged  for  China  to  the  extent  of  their  builder’s  measurement,  and  to  India 
(the  Indian  investments  being  thought  less  favourable  for  stowage)  at  seven-eighths  of  such  tonnage,  at  a 
specific  rate  of  freight  for  the  whole  of  the  cargo,  whether  fine  goods  or  gruff,  including  the  kintledge. 

The  engaging  the  ships  to  India  at  seven-eighths  of  their  builder’s  tonnage  was  grounded  upon  an 
idea  which  then  strongly  prevailed,  that  a ship  could  not  bring  her  full  tonnage  from  India;  but  the 
experience  of  one  or  two  seasons  having  proved  this  to  be  erroneous,  the  ships  ore  now  uniformly 
chartered  at  their  builder's  measurement. 


BliTWEExN  ENGLAND  AND  THE  EAST  INDIES. 


Ivii 


Tlic  following  arc  the  rates  of  freight  and  deiiiurrage  at  which  the  ships  employed  in  tlic  Company's 
service  were  taken  up,  from  the  year  175J  to  the  year  1772  inclusive.  From  tlie  report  of  the  Secret 
Committee  of  the  House  of  Commons. 


CHIW.  1 

COAST  AND  HAY. 

ItOMHW. 

Moch.1, 

i 

IUmu  oolco. 

Kail*  ot 
DiMllunaj;t* 

il.iv  In  .»  SI 
ol  4»jy  To 

lur 

up 

iw 

<iri 

(iotx 

oil. 

1 0 

( Uh 

Giull 

Gooils 

t lllc 
wU 

1 

1 Glh 

iiM 

kIn 

V ojo 

( IciOll-, 

jM'l  T 

[HM 

\>o  1 

per  ■ 

"on. 

po,  'I 

on 

! 

,'oM 

PCT  ' 

foil 

prr 

Con 

p.T' 

I'on . 

per  Ton 

i 

1 

% 

i 

J 

1 / 

/ 

V 

/ 

V. 

/ 

f 

r 

A 

/ 

17i3 

24 

0 

27 

0 : 

21 

0 

27 

0 

27 

0 

30 

21 

0 

21 

12 

0 

IT.'il 

24 

{) 

27 

“ 1 

21 

0 

27 

0 

27 

0 

30 

0 

21 

0 

21 

10 

12 

•j 

0 

1 7 55 

25 

0 

28 

0 I 

25 

0 

28 

0 

1 28 

0 

31 

0 

25 

0 

2.1 

10 

12 

2 

0 

1759 

31 

10 

31 

10  1 

31 

10 

31 

10 

31 

10 

37 

10 

31 

10 

32 

0 

IS 

3 

0 

1757 

33 

0 

39 

0 

33 

0 

39 

0 

39 

0 

39 

0 

33 

0 

3.3 

10 

18 

,3 

0 

i75S 

31 

0 

37 

0 

31 

0 

37 

0 

37 

0 

40 

0 

31 

0 

.31 

10 

IS 

3 

0 

1759 

35 

0 

38 

0 

35 

0 

.38 

0 

38 

0 

41 

0 

.35 

0 

.35 

10 

IS 

3 

0 

1790 

37 

0 

to 

0 

37 

0 

10 

0 

40 

0 

13 

0 

37 

0 

.37 

10 

20 

3 

1 

1791 

37 

0 

40 

0 

37 

0 

10 

0 

10 

0 

43 

0 

37 

0 

37 

10 

20 

.3 

4 

1792 

37 

0 

40 

0 

37 

0 

10 

0 

10 

0 

43 

0 

i 37 

0 

.37 

10 

20 

.3 

4 

1793 

31 

0 

31 

0 

31 

0 

34 

0 

:u 

0 

37 

0 

31 

31 

19 

2 

8 

1794 

31 

0 

34 

0 

31 

0 

34 

0 

31 

0 

37 

0 

.31 

0 

31 

10 

19 

o 

S 

1795 

30 

0 

33 

n 

30 

0 

.33 

0 

.3.3 

0 

3(> 

0 

30 

0 

.30 

10 

15 

12 

7 

1799 

29 

0 

32 

0 

31 

() 

31 

0 

31 

0 

37 

0 

.31 

0 

31 

10 

15 

12 

7 

1797 

29 

0 

32 

0 

31 

0 

1 31 

0 

.31 

0 

37 

0 

31 

0 

.31 

10 

15 

12 

7 

1798 

29 

0 

32 

1 

31 

0 

1 31 

0 

34 

<) 

37 

0 

31 

0 

31 

10 

15 

12 

7 

1799 

29 

0 

32 

31 

0 

' .34 

0 

31 

0 

37 

0 

31 

0 

31 

10 

15 

12 

7 

1770 

29 

0 

32 

0 

31 

0 

! 31 

0 

31 

0 

37 

0 

.31 

0 

31 

10 

1.5 

12 

7 

1771 

30 

0 

33 

0 

32 

0 

1 35 

0 

1 .35 

0 

38 

0 

32 

0 

32 

10 

IS 

3 

0 

1772 

29 

0 

32 

0 

34 

5 

1 37 

5 

1 .37 

7 

10 

L R 

0 

,33 

10 

IS 

3 

0 

The  Company’s  afluirs  being  in  a derangeil  state,  they  petitioned  I’ailiament  h)r  assistance,  who 
advanced  them  a loan  of  jC’ljdOOjOOO,  on  condition  that  tiie  surplus  revenue  of  India,  after  payment  ol  a 
dividend  of  6 per  cent.,  should  he  set  apart  to  di.scharge  the  saitl  loan;  and  that  until  the  same  weie  dis- 
charged, the  public  sliould  forego  any  claim  to  a participation  of  the  said  revenues.  AVhen  the  whole  ol 
ilie  said  loan  should  be  discharged,  they  were  allowed  to  divide  7 per  cent,  \intil  the  bond  »h  ht  was  reduced 
to  X’1,500,000,  after  which  the  whole  of  the  surplus  was  to  be  applied  in  redeemuig  tlu'  bond  (hl)t.  '^I'he 
Company  were  obliged  to  submit  a statement  of  their  profit  and  loss  every  hull  year  to  the  Loids  of  the 
Treasury.  They  were  restricted  from  accepting  l)ills  dniwn  hy  their  servants  in  India,  lor  above 
JP300,000  ill  one  yciu',  exclusive  of  certificates  to  the  amount  of  to  the  comnuimler  find  olTicers  ol 

each  of  their  ships;  and  they  were  bound  to  export  goods  of  the  growth,  produce,  and  manufacture  ol 
Great  Britain,  to  the  amount  of  oL7(>l,(i71‘,  between  the  29th  of  Sejitember,  1773,  and  the  29th  ot 
September,  1775,  exclusive  of  military  and  naval  stores,  and  of  all  ex])ortution  by  tlie  Company  s servants, 
or  by  private  traders  licensed  by  the  ('oinpany.  (13  (ieo.  III.  eliap.  91.) 

By  this  Act  there  were  1219  proprietors  of  India  stock  disfranchised,  and  the  whole  govei’iunent  ol 
the  Company's  affairs  thrown  into  the  liands  of  dH7  jiroprietors. 

The  civil  and  military  government  in  India,  an<l  the  management  of  the  territorial  acquisitions  in 
Bengal,  Baliar,  and  Orixa,  were  vested  in  a Governor  General  and  lour  ('ouncillors,  to  reside  at  hurt 
William  in  Bengal,  to  whom  the  JVesidencies  of  Madras,  Bombay,  and  Bencoolen  were  made  subordinate. 
A Supreme  Court  of  Judicature  was  also  established  at  Fort  William,  consisting  ol  a Chief  Justice  and 
three  other  Judges,  all  appointed  by  the  Crown.  This  Court  superseded  the  IMayor's  Court  at  Calcutta. 

♦II 


Iviil 


KISE  AND  PROGRESS  OF  THE  COMMERCE 


TIic  sajarics  of  the  Governor  General,  Councillors,  and  Jud;;(vs  were  directed  to  be  paid  out  of  the 
territorial  revenues;  and  neither  they  nor  any  other  civil  or  military  servant  of  the  Crown,  or  of  the 
C’onipany  in  India,  were  allowed  upon  any  account  to  accept  any  j)r(*.sents,  or  to  engage  in  any  kind  of 
trade;  but  counsellors  at  law,  physicians,  surgeons,  and  chaplains  were  allowed  to  receive  their  professional 
fees.  (13  Geo.  HI.  chap.  (33.) 

The  annual  election  of  twenty-four  new  Directors  having  made  the  administration  of  the  Company's 
aftuirs  too  fluctuating  and  unstalde,  it  was  enacted  that  (hey  should  in  future  remain  four  years  in  office, 
and  six  of  tlicm  go  out  every  year.  The  election  to  !>e  made  hy  proprietors  of  not  less  than  .TIOOO 
stock,  who  only  were  to  have  the  privilege  of  voting  in  future,  which  they  must  have  held,  without 
collusion  or  fraud,  twelve  months,  or  acquired  hy  succession,  the  custom  of  London,  or  settlement.  No 
person  who  should  have  been  employed  in  any  civil  or  military  capacity  in  India,  could  be  elected  a 
Director  till  lie  hud  resided  two  years  in  England. 

At  the  period  of  pas.sing  the  above  regulation,  the  number  of  proprietors  of  East  India  stock,  holding 
.f  500  or  more,  appears  by  the  Company’s  books  to  have  been  as  follows; 

rroprietors  of  iPlOOO  stock  or  more, 

English \S7 holding -t'l, 018, 398  19  11 

I’oreigners  890,940  17  0 

l,tK)9,339  16  11 

Proprietors  of  £500  stock,  and  more,  not  exceeding  oTlOfJO, 

English 12  tO. Jioldiu^^  X’63  t,46k  1 8 

I^  95  50,22(>  0 0 

684,690  I 8 


1774.  From  the  auditors’  accounts  made  up  at  the  East  India  House,  it  appears  that  in  the  eight 
years,  from  May,  176(5,  to  April,  1774,  the  revenues  and  disbursements  were  as  follow; 

The  revenues  of  Bengal  under  every  denomination,  after  deducting  the  charges  of  collection, 

the  tribute  of  .stipends,  &c.  brought  into  the  Treasury  /•I  9,790,000 

T.  he  revenues  of  Madras  during  the  same  3,950,000 

The  revenues  of  Bombay  670,000 

The  revenues  of  Beiicoolen  90,000 

llcceived  from  the  Nabob  of  Arcot  for  his  share  of  the  army  expences,  &c.  1,900,000 

Forming  a total  of^^.s.^.^jt^26,400,000 

The  disbursements  at  Bengal  for  fortifications,  and  the  civil,  military,  and  marine 

departments,  amounted  to  i’13, 166,000 

Commission  drawn  on  the  revenues  of  Bengal  424,000 

Madras  disbursements  under  tiie  above  heads  5,530,000 

Commission  drawn  on  the  revenues  of  Madras  168,000 

Bombay  disbursements  under  the  above  heads  2,850,000 

Bencooleu  disbursements  under  the  above  heads  385,000 

^ 22,523,000 

Leaving  a set  luiplui  in  eight  years  ofM..M.v...£*3,877,000 


1775.  By  an  Act  of  the  I5th  of  Geo.  III.  chap.  4r4>  the  obligation  laid  upon  the  Company  to  export 


IHiTWKEN  ENGLAND  AND  THE  EAS^T  TNDTE:^. 


lix 


the  aiuuial  quanlity  of  British  goods,  appointed  by  a former  Art,  to  llu*ir  setllemeiits  in  India,  was  pro- 
longed from  the  of  September,  1775,  to  the  l29th  of  September,  i7?S. 

On  the  death  of  the  Nabob  of  Onde,  a new  treaty  was  made  with  Ins  son,  \\berel)y  the  C’oriipany 
added  to  their  territorial  possessions  the  province  of  Benares,  with  a clear  reviame  of  10,000  per  annum, 

1770.  At  this  period  the  Maliratta  empire  was  rent  by  civil  dissensions.  Ragonaut  Row,  who  htu\ 
usurpeil  the  governmcMit,  was  compelled  to  seek  refuge  at  Bombay,  That  Presidency  cml)arkcd  into  a war 
on  his  account,  and  soon  reduced  the  Island  of  Salsette  and  the  ('ity  of  Baroacli.  1'be  (Government  oi* 
Bengal  condemned  tlie  condnet  of  that  of  Bombay,  disavowed  the  treaty  with  Ragonaut,  and  <lispatclK‘d 
(Jolonel  Upton  to  Poonab,  to  negotiate  a reconciliation  with  the  Mahratta  State.  A tnatv  was  concluded 
on  the  1st  of  March,  177(i,  called  “ The  Poorunder  'IVeaty,’'  by  which  the  Island  of  Salsette,  with  the 
territory  of  Baroacli,  and  some  other  districts  in  the  Guzzerat  province,  were  ceded  to  tin*  ( ’om[)an\.  The 
Malirattas  also  agreed  to  indemnify  the  authors  of  the  war  for  the  expenees  of  it,  bv  tin*  paMiu  nt  of 
about  i^l5(),(K)()  at  stipulated  periods.  They  fnilber  agreed  to  assign  an  ample  revi  iine  to  Uagonant,  on 
condition  of  Ills  fixing  bimsidf  in  a part  of  the  iMabratla  dominions,  lemotc  from  the  scat  of  (io\ern- 
mont.  On  the  other  Inind,  the  ('omjiaiiy  agrc(‘d  not  to  give*  proteition  nr  assistance,  either  to  that  (’!iicf‘, 
or  to  any  other  subject  who  should  attempt  to  excite  distiirhanc(‘  in  tin*  Stale. 

At  a Court  of  East  India  proprietors  it  appealed  that  the  loan  of*  i’ I , I( )(),()()()  advanced  hv  (Gom'iin 
ment  to  the  C'ompany,  was  reduced  lo  the  sum  of  X’l'if ),()()();  and  that  the  alfairs  of'  the  (’om[)an\  were 
in  general  in  a prosperous  condition. 

Lord  Pigot  w'as  deprived  of  the  (lov(‘rninent  of  Fort  St.  George  by  a inajoiify  of  the  Connell,  and 
imprisoned  at  the  Mount  at  St.  'riionie,  where,  after  a confinement  of  some  months,  he  died. 

17?7.  The  (Company,  having  now' paid  up  the  whole  of  the  money  advanced  to  them  by  Govern- 
ment ill  1773,  together  with  the  interest  on  it,  were  ooiiseqiiently  at  lihirty,  agreeably  to  the  Act  of 
Parliament,  to  raise  their  dividends  from  G to  7 [ler  cent.;  and  they  accordingly  declared  their  half 
yearly  dividend  to  be  3\  per  cent,  TJie  restriction  laid  ujion  the  (Company  not  to  accept  hills  drjjwn  from 
India  beyond  .X\M0,0()0  in  one  year,  was  liow^ever  continued. 

It  appears  by  the  aecounts  made  n|)  at  the  East  India  House,  tliat  in  the  ten  yenrs,  I ThS  to  177? 
inclusive,  the  Company''s  losses  by  ea[)lure  or  otherwise  were  .^’57 being  V2  IL.  .id.  per  cent,  on 
their  imports  and  exjiorts,  which  amounted  together  in  that  period  to  I’2^,‘lf)!h^s()7 

1778.  War  broke  out  again  with  the  Malirattas.  The  (\niit  of  Poonab  lefuslng  to  comply  with 
some  of  the  stipulations  of  the  Poorunder  Treaty,  the  Bombay  army  landed  on  the  coiitiiu  nt  to  proieed  to 
Poonah;  they  were  soon  after  surrounded  by  the  Malirattas,  and  all  means  of  letreat  cut  off.  A l iipilii- 
lation  look  place  at  Worgaum,  when  the  English  agreed  to  give  up  the  Island  of  SalM  lte,  and  the  othei 
countries  conquered  by  them,  upon  which  they  were  conducted  to  the  s(‘a-coast,  and  emharked  for  Bomljav. 

War  was  declared  between  England  and  France.  (Jn  the  receipt  of  this  Intelligence  in  India,  an 
expedition  was  fitted  out  against  Pondicherry,  which  surrendered  to  the  Britisli  foices  on  tlw  l/itli  t»l' 
October,  1778. 

The  Company  obtained  from  the  Rajah  of  Tanjore  the  territory  of  Nagore,  )ielding  a roe  inc  of 
2,50,(X)0  rupees  yearly,  in  lieu  of  a grant  of  land  round  Devicotta,  which  the  Rajah  volnntaiily  olliicd  to 
the  Company,  on  being  restored  to  his  dominions  by  the  Madras  Goveriinioiit 

1779.  The  Company  having  now  discharged  their  debt  of  i?l,400,000  due  to  the  public,  and  ic- 
duced  their  bond  debt  under  X^l,500,000,  the  public  became  entitled  to  a partii  ijiation  of  the  teriitniial 

♦ II 


H 


IIISE  AND  PHOGRESS  OF  THE  COMMERCE 


acquisitions  and  revenues  obtaini^d  in  India.  They  were,  however,  continued  entli’e  to  tlie  Company  by 
Parliament  till  the  5th  of  April,  17S0;  they  being  restneted  from  making  aaiy  dividends  above  8 per 
rent,  during  that  time.  The  Company  were,  moreover,  directed  to  present  a state  of  their  aflaii’s  every 
half  year  to  the  Lords  of  the  Treiisury;  and  they  were  prohibited  from  accepting  Mils  from  India  for 
above  i^’SOOjOOO,  exclusive  of  certificates  to  the  comniauders  and  ofiiccTs  of  their  ships,  without  the 
consent  of  the  Lords  of  the  Treasury. 

The  Com[)any  gave  a large  bounty  for  raising  6000  seamen  for  the  public  service,  and  made  an 
addition  to  the  navy  of  three  ships  of  71  guns,  which  were  called  the  Bombay  Castle,  Carnatic,  and  Ganges. 

"J'lie  House  of  Commons  jietitioned  His  Majesty  to  direct  the  Attorney  (ieneral  to  prosecute 
George  Stratton,  Henry  Brooke,  Charh's  Floycr,  and  George  IVIackay,  J^'squires,  for  confining  Lord 
l*igot,  the  Governor  of  Madras,  ^'hey  were  tried,  found  guilty,  and  fined  iMOOO  each. 

A\'ar  was  declared  against  Great  Britain  by  Spain  in  June,  1779. 

A leagiK*  of  confederacy  was  foj-med  against  the  English  in  India;  the  principal  parties  were  tlie 
Nizam,  the  Mahrattas,  Hydcr  Ally,  the  Rajah  of  Bcrar,  and  several  (’hiefs  on  the  western  sidef)f  India. 
^I'hc  [)rej)arations  were  in  a great  state  of  forwardness;  and  the  Company's  (iovernments  considering  the 
war  as  fraught  with  great  danger,  used  every  exertion  to  put  the  settlements  and  troops  in  the  best  state 
to  meet  the  approaching  storm. 

1780.  Lord  North  proposed  in  the  House  of  Commons,  that  notice  should  be  given  to  the  East 
India  Company  of  tlie  intention  of  Parliament  to  pay  off  the  d(*ht  of  i?l, 200,000,  together  with  the 
interest  upon  it,  due  by  the  public  to  the  Company  on  the  5th  of  Aj)ril,  1783,  agreeably  to  the  power  of 
redemption  in  the  Act  of  Parliament,  and  the  stipulation  <)f  three  years'*  notici',  after  which  the  Company's 
exclusive  privileges  would  expire.  He  stated  he  had  expected  the  (’ompany  would  have  made  some  offer 
of  terms  for  the  renewal  of  their  charter;  but  though  the  time  was  so  near  whiui  it  would  be  necessary 
for  Government  to  give  notice  of  repayment,  no  proposal  bad  hitherto  been  uliered  on  the  part  of  the 
Company,  wjiich  came  near  to  the  expectation  or  right  of  the  public,  who  were  cuititled  either  to  the 
whole  of  the  territorial  acciuisitions  and  revenues,  or,  if  the  (’ompany  were  permitted  to  retain  the 
monopoly  of  the  trade,  to  a participation  of  the  profits.  The  final  settlement  of  the  business  of  the 
charter  was  postponed  for  the  present  by  the  Act  of  20th  Geo.  III.  chap,  56,  by  which  the  Company 
were  to  retain  the  entire  revenue  of  India,  though  their  debt  to  the  public  of  i:*!, 400, 000  was  paid  oflT, 
and  tlieir  bond  debt  reduced  to  500, OCX),  till  the  8th  of  April,  1781,  and  till  then  to  make  dividends 
not  exceeding  8 per  cent,  per  annum. 

The  (Company  experienced  a very  severe  loss  in  their  .shipping  this  year:  the  Royal  George,  Mount 
Stuart,  Godfrey,  Hillsborough,  and  Gatton  were  taken  on  the  Dth  of  August,  1780,  by  the  combined 
fleets  of  France  and  Spain. 

In  November  war  was  declared  against  the  Dutch.  On  the  receipt  of  the  intelligence  in  India, 
Negapatam,  their  prim  ipal  settlement  on  the  Coast  of  Coromandel,  with  all  jJaces  subordinate  thereto, 
were  taken  possession  of  by  the  British  forces. 

Ilyder  Ally,  who,  since  the  conclusion  of  the  peace  in  1769,  had  paid  every  possible  attention  to  his 
army  and  finances,  invaded  tlie  Carnatic;  and  while  Tippoo,  his  son,  was  laying  waste  the  Northern  Circars, 
Hydcr  lay  siege  to  Arcot,  which  he  obtained  possession  of,  after  defeating  the  English  army  under 
Colonel  Baillie.  For  some  time  he  carried  every  thing  before  him.  By  the  happy  exertions  of  Sir 
Eyre  Coote,  however,  to  whom  the  management  of  affairs  was  committed,  the  progress  of  this  formidable 
adversary  was  stopped,  and  he  soon  became  weary  of  a war  which  was  attended  with  incredible  cxpence 
to  himself,  without  any  reasonable  prospect  of  success.  By  the  year  1782,  tlierefore,  Hyder  Ally  was 


BETWEEN  ENGLAND  AND  THE  EAST  INDIES.  Ixi 

finccrely  desirous  of  poace,  but  died  before  it  could  be  brought  to  a concUbion ; and  Ills  rival,  Sir 
Coote,  did  not  survive  him  above  five  months. 

1781.  The  Company  made  up  their  account  of  the  profits  of  their  trade  and  t'  li  lloiial  levenues  to 
tlie  1st  of  March,  1781;  whereby  there  appeared  a balance,  after  paying  i'lO(),nO()  to  the  public, 
according  to  agieement,  of  17s.  lOd.  This  sum  they  weit*  aib  ruards  anlhoilzetl  to  pay  in 

dividends  to  the  proprietors  of  the  stock;  but  they  preferred  employing  it  in  trade;  and  they  laoe  kept  a 
distinct  account  of  it,  under  the  title  of  the  Separate  FilTid,  which  they  havi!  annually  credite<l  with  inteii‘st. 

After  many  debates  in  Parliament  and  the  India  House,  the  affairs  of  the  Company  at  home  and 
abroad  were  settled  by  two  Acts  of  Pailiamcnt,  in  the  following  manina*: 

That  the  Company  should  pay  the  sum  of  i?4()0,0tltb  by  four  crjual  instnlim  nt^,  as  a fidl  compen- 
sation for  all  claims  the  public  might  have  upon  them,  fiom  the  time  that  their  Ixmd  clcht  was  redneed 
to  X^l,500,000,  to  the  1st  of  March,  1781.  The  Company's  exclusive  traile,  and  the  possession  of  their 
territorial  ac(juisitions,  were  thereupon  contiiuieil  till  the  1st  of  Mareh,  171)1,  and  llu  realb'*  till  Ibnlia- 
nieiit  should  give  tliree  years'  notiee  of  an  intention  to  discontinue  them,  and  |)ay  oil*  Ihe  caj)ital  or 
debt  of  oP4,2()0,()()0  due  to  the  Company,  with  all  arrears  of  interest,  &:c.;  and  after  a t(’rmination 
of  their  exclusive  privileges,  they  were  to  have  a right  to  remain  a corporation,  and  to  trade  with  their 
joint  stock  in  common  with  other  British  subjects. 

The  public  were  henceforth  to  receive  three-fourths  of  the  annual  Mirplus  of  the  net  profits  and 
revenues  of  the  Company,  which  should  remain  above  8 per  cent.,  computed  upon  their  caj)ital  stock  ol 
Jt?3,200,000 ; the  remaining  fourth,  together  with  money  to  he  allowed  tlu  in  in  consideiation  of  \ ietualling 
Ills  Majesty's  ships  in  the  East  Indies,  they  were  allowed  to  apply  in  enlarging  their  dividends,  so  as  the 
augmentation  should  never  exceed  1 jier  cent,  in  a year,  nor  altogether  cvni’  rise  al)o\e  [2[  per  cent,;  the 
bond  debt  being  also  limited  not  to  exceed  X^l,5()0,0tKJ. 

The  Company  were  to  pre.sent  annually  to  the  Lords  of  the  Treasuiy  a balanced  statement  ot  their 
accounts,  with  an  inventory  of  their  stock  in  hand,  debts,  tsc.  distinguidiiug  the  state  of  their  stock 
at  each  of  their  settlements  in  India,  made  up  to  the  4tli  of  March  in  each  Near,  and  signed  by  two  ot 
the  Directors;  and  also  to  submit  to  the  Secretaries  of  Stale  all  letters  and  ordca  s to  be  sent  out  to  India. 

It  was  also  settled  by  this  Act,  that  the  Company  should  pay  in  India  two  lacs  of  ruj)ees  annually 
to  the  King  for  every  regiment  of  lOCX)  men  employed  in  India  at  their  recpiost,  over  and  above  the 
extraordinaries  now  paid  by  them,  reckoning  from  the  embarkation  of  the  regiments,  to  their  return 
to  England;  and  that  they  should  supply  all  the  victualling  for  His  Majesty  s ships  cmpl(»yed  in  India 
at  their  request,  from  the  5th  of  July,  1782,  to  the  termination  of  (ho  war,  one-fouilli  of  which  exjumcc 
should  be  repaid  by  Government;  but  after  the  peace,  the  whole  expence;  to  fall  on  the  Company. 

The  Company  were  also  to  buy  and  carry  out  all  such  naval  and  mililary  stores  as  should  be  required 
by  the  Commissioners  of  the  Navy,  for  which  they  were  to  be  repaid  by  the  Trt  .ism  y tin*  |)rincq)al  |)art  of 
the  cost  in  40  days  after  delivering  the  account,  and  the  remainder  after  certificates  sliouhl  be  obtained 
of  the  stores  being  furnished  to  the  King's  ships  in  India.  I'he  Company  were  also  to  supply  all  necessary 
stores  for  the  repair  of  the  King's  ships  in  India,  for  wliicli  they  were  to  be  \m\d  during  the  war;  hut 
after  the  peace,  such  stores  were  to  be  supplied  at  the  (^impaiiy’s  expence. 

Doirbts  having  dWsen  whether,  in  conse(iueiice  of  great  numluTs  of  foreigners  being  proprietors  of 
India  stock,  the  ships  in  the  Company's  service  should  be  absolutely  considered  as  British  vessels,  it  was 
declared  by  this  Act,  that  all  their  ships  were  conshlered  as  British  ships,  within  the  tine  intent  and 

meaning  of  the  Act.  ^ ^ 

As  some  compensation  for  the  restraints  now  laid  upon  the  Company,  the  prohibitions  against. 


Ixii 


RISE  AND  PROGRESS  OF  THE  COMMERCE 


British  subjects  belli"  in  any  way  whatever  concerned  with  fon'igners  in  Indian  were  innJc  so  strict,  tliat 
even  fending  money,  directly  or  indirectly,  was  declared  iinlawrul, 

1782.  The  Company  lost  the  under-mentioned  ships  in  the  course  of  this  year: 

Fortitude,  Captain  Gregorle,  taken  by  the  French  tlie  23d  of  June,  1/82. 

Earl  of  Dartmouth,  Captain  Thompson,  lo**!  oil  Car  Nicobar  the  21th  of  Jane,  1782. 

Major,  Ca|dain  Arthur,  burnt  at  Culpee,  in  Bengal  River,  the  2 lib  ol  June,  1782. 

Grosvenor,  Captain  Coxon,  lost  off  the  Kas^t  Coast  ot  Afiica  the  lib  ot  August,  1782, 

Rrilliant,  Captain  Mears,  lost  at  Johanna  tlie  28tb  of  August,  1782. 

Earl  of  Hertford,  Captain  Clarke,  lost  in  ^ladras  Roads  the  13ib  ot  October,  1 /S2. 

The  Company  being  in  arrears  to  Government  for  customs,  an  Act  was  passed,  22d  Geo.  III.  cliaj).  .51, 
postponing  the  period  of  their  payment,  and  allowing  the  Company  in  the  hiterim  to  diviile  8 per  cent. 

The  Americans  established  their  independence  the  30th  of  Novemlicr,  1784/. 

By  an  account  made  up  at  the  India  House,  it  appears  that  the  dami|^*^ftstalnc‘il  by  the  (.'ompnny 
and  chargeable  to  the  owners  of  their  ships,  amounted,  in  the  years  1771  to  1782  inclusive,  to 
being  on  an  average  i^l33  5s.  lid.  on  each  ship, 

A treaty  of  peace  WMs  concluded  with  the  Mahrattas,  dated  May  17,  1782,  which  stipulated  lhal 
the  Company  .should  restore  the  countries,  forts,  &c.  lately  taken  from  the  Mahrattas,  with  the  exceptioi 
of  the  Islands  of  Salsetto,  Elcplmnta,  Caranjah,  and  Hog  Island. 

The  possession  of  Buroach,  witli  a twritory  of  3,00, (K)0  rupees,  had  hocn  ceded  to  the  Compixiiy  1)^ 
a former  treaty;  but  llicy  now  relinquished  tlieir  claim  to  the  territory,  yet  retainetl  the  city. 

The  Feshw%a  engaged  to  suffer  no  o*fr  European  nation  to  be  established  in  his  territories,  or  thos( 
depending  upon  him;  the  settlements  of  tlie  Portuguese  were,  however,  understood  to  remain  on  tlieii 
foriiUT  footing. 

1 783.  The  Acl  of  last  year,  postponing  the  payment  of  the  arrears  due  from  the  Company  t( 
Government,  xva.s  repealed, and  an  Act  passed,  the  23d  Geo.  III.  chap.  30,  allow ing  the  Company  to  borrov 
/’5()0,0(K)  upon  lionds;  and  in  this  year,  cliap.  78,  the  payment  of  duties  was  fui  ther  postponed,  and  Govern 
nient  advanced  the  Company  i’SOfhOOO  in  Exchequer  Bills. 

'fhe  higli  duties  upon  the  importation  of  muslins,  calicoes,  and  nankeens  operated  a.s  a premium  fo 
smuggling.  It  was  found  expedient  to  lower  the  duties,  by  .substituting,  instead  of  the  former  rates,  , 
duty  of  18  per  cent,  on  tlie  sales  by  the  Company,  of  w hich  10  per  cent,  should  be  allowed  as  a draw 
back  upon  exportation.  23  Geo.  III.  rliap.  74*. 

Peace  was  concluded  betw'een  Great  Britain  and  France,  by  the  13th  article  of  which  it  wa.s  agree 
that  the  settlements  which  had  been  taken  from  the  French  during  the  war,  should  be  restored  to  them 
with  some  privileges  of  trade,  and  liberty  to  Jig  a ditch  round  Chandernagorc.  Tliev  w^re  alsalo  b 
allowed  some  districts  round  Pondicherry  and  Karical. 

The  Company  lost  the  under-mentioned .slnjis  in  this  year: 

Blandford,  Captain  Pigou,  taken  off  Gati^am,  January  lly  1783. 

llinchinbrooke.  Captain  Maxwell,  lost  in  Bengal  River,  Apeft  10,  178S.  . 

Duke  of  Athol,  Captain  Rattray,  burnt  in  Madras  Roads,  A^jl8,  1783/  ; 

Fairforcl,  Captain  Haldane,  burnt  at  Bombay,  June  15,  1783f  ' 

Duke  of  Kingston,  Captain  Nutt,  burnt  off  Ceylon,  August  20,  1783. 


BETWEEN  ENGLAND  AND  THE  EAST  INDIES. 


Ixili 


It  appears  by  accounts  made  up  at  the  India  House,  that  in  six  years,  177S  to  17S.),  being  a period 
of  war,  the  Comj)any\s  losses,  by  capture  or  otherwise,  were  170,  being  /’t  <Js.  I Id.  per  cent,  on 

their  imports  and  exports,  which  amounted  together  in  tliat  period  to  i?l  1,01  J,,>0(i. 

1784*.  A treaty  of  peace  was  concluded  with  the  Dutch,  May  20,  wlieiiin  wcie  the  fulh)wing 
stipulations: 

Article  4*.  The  States  General  ceded  Negapatatn  with  its  dependencies  to  (iieat  Jhit.iin,  but  llu* 
King  promised  to  listen  afterwards  to  any  reasonable  proposal  fur  a restoration  of  it,  by  aji  exelumge  Ibi 
Bome  other  territory. 

5.  Great  Britain  restored  to  the  Dutch  Trincomalee  and  all  otlica-  towns,  fnll^,  he.  taken  from 
tliem  during  the  war,  either  by  the  King’s  forces  or  the  I’.ast  India  Compmiv^. 

0.  The  Dutch  promised  not  to  obstruct  the  navigation  of  British  siihjeels  in  the  I'astein  Seas 

A treaty  of  perpetual  peace  and  friendship  was  signed  at  Mangalore,  on  the  lltli  of  March,  bet n ecu 
tlic  Company  and  Tippoo  Sultan,  the  principal  stipulations  ol*  which  were  : 

Article  2,  Tippoo  engaged  to  evacuate  the  Carnatic,  and  to  liberate  all  pii^o!tei>. 

3,  4,  !}.  The  Company  restored  Onore,  Carwar,  Sudasbaglnir,  &c.  and  some  other  f(»rts  and  distiiits. 

8,  9.  Tippoo  renewed  and  confirmed  all  the  commercial  privileges  granted  by  his  fatlier  to  llic 
Company,  and  agreed  to  restore  to  them  the  factory  and  privileges  they  fori neil\  po^^sessed  at  Calicut, 
and  also  Mount  Dilly  with  its  district,  as  it  formerly  helongcd  to  the  si'tlhanent  of  'J\'Ilicherrv. 

Mr.  Pitt  brought  in  a hill  for  the  better  regulation  ol‘  the  Company's  alliiijs,  which  was  rejf’cted  on 
the  second  reading;  upon  which  Ills  Majesty  judged  it  expetlient  to  dissolve  the  Pailiainent. 

On  the  new  Parliament  meeting,  a bill  was  passed,  21  Geo.  III.  eba|>.  25,  by  wbicli  the  superin- 
tendence and  controul  overall  the  territorial  possessions  in  India  were  vested  in  a Board  of  Commissioners, 
with  powers  nearly  similar  to  those  contained  in  the  Act  of  33  Geo.  111.  chap.  .52.  This  Act  also  made 
provision  for  the  establishment  of  a special  tribunal,  consisting  of  a number  of  Members  of  both  Houses 
of  Parliament.  Persons  returning  from  the  ICasl  Indies,  were  reipiiicd  to  give  an  inventory  of  ibeir 
property;  but  tbi.s  was  rejiealed  by  an  Ac.t  of  29  Geo.  III.  eliap.  ,57. 

A bill  was  brought  into  Parliament  by  Mr.  Fox,  for  the  heller  regulaling  (he  alfairs  of  (lie  Fast 
India  Company,  which,  after  much  opposition,  passed  the  Hou^e  of  Commons,  but  was  njocted  by  (lie 
Lords,  which  produced  a cliange  in  the  Administration. 

From  the  accounts  laid  before  Parliament  by  the  Company,  it  ap|>eai  > tliat  the  losses  sustained  by 
them  during  the  war,  w'cre  estimated  to  amount  to  of’3,H.5S,G6(i,  as  follow  : 

Amount  of  payments  in  England,  and  losses  by  sea,  occasioned  by  the  w ar 

Extraordinary  charges  in  freight,  demurrage,  and  bills  of  exchange  from  the  1st  ol’  IMarcli, 

1783,  to  tlie  1st  of  March,  178 1,  computed  at  H28,000 

Extraordinary  charge  to  be  incurred  for  freight  and  demurrage  after  the  1st  of  March,  1781, 

estimated  at  40,000 

In  this  year  the  Act  commonly  called  the  Coniiuiilalion  Act  was  passed,  by  which  the  lieary  duties 
on  teas  were  commuted  lor  a tax  upon  windows,  and  tlie  (.'ompauy  were  to  make  good  the  deficieiiry. 

178C.  An  Act  was  passed,  26  Geo.  III.  chop.  57,  by  which  new  rules  were  laid  down  for  conducting 
trials  of  offences  committed  in  India;  and  the  Governors  were  empowered  to  seize  the  persons  and 
property  of  interlopers,  and  proceed  to  judgment  upon  them. 


xir  IIISE  AND  PROGRESS  OF  THE  COMMERCE 

By  an  Act  of  the  2Gth  of  Goo.  III.  cliap.  62,  the  Company  were  ornpoweretl,  for  the  further^xton- 
sion  of  their  commerce,  to  borrow  money  at  an  interest  of  3 per  ci  nt.,  the  whole  annual  interest  not  ex- 
ceeding <£\36,2G6  IGs.  which,  together  with  the  interest  payable  on  the  X'2,992,41«0  .5s.  borrowed  by  them, 
by  virtue  of  the  Act  of  the  2Jd  of  Geo.  II.  chap.  22,  makes  the  annual  sum  of  .i?12G,()00,  payal)le  by  the 
public  to  the  Company,  as  interest  at  3 per  cent,  on  the  iM, 290,000  advanced  by  the  ("ompany  at  various 
times  to  the  public.  Tin?  (’ompany  were  also  cmjmwered  to  add  to  their  capital  stock  .PH00,000,  at  the 
rate  of  XM  GO  to  be  paid  fur  every  XMOO  of  stock  subscribed  for.  This  addition  made  the  whole  capital 
stock  of  the  Company  i^4',000,(.)00.  This  nccommodation  enabled  the  Company  to  discharge  a part  of  their 
debts,  and  to  reduce  the  interest  on  the  bonds  held  by  such  as  declined  receiving  j)aynient,  from  5 to  4 
per  cent. 

The  lialscwell,  Captain  Pierce,  outward-bound,  was  lost  in  the  Channel,  January  G,  178G. 

Warren  Hastings,  Esep  late  Governor-General  of  Bengal,  was  charged  with  high  crimes  and  misde- 
meanors, in  the  House  of  Commons,  by  Mr.  Burke,  on  the  4th  of  April. 

1787.  Some  difliculties  having  arisen  respecting  the  meaning  and  extent  of  the  13lh  article  of  the 
treaty  of  peace  with  France,  an  explanatory  convention  was  signed  the  31st  of  August,  17S7. 

By  the  first  article,  “ a safe,  free,  and  inde])endent  trade,  such  as  was  carried  on  by  the  French 
Company,'''  was  secured  to  the  subjects  of  France*,  whether  they  should  exercise  it  individually,  or 
as  a (.'ompany.'" 

A treaty  was  concluded  with  the  Nabob  of  Oude,  by  which  the  British  subsidiary  force  was  Increased, 
but  for  which  the  Nabob  was  to  pay  annually  50,00,000  sicca  rupees. 

1788.  Doubts  Inning  arisen  whether  the  Company  were  liable  to  bear  the  expence  of  troops  sent  tev 
India,  without  being  rcrpiested  by  them,  the  Board  of  Controul  were  declared,  by  an  Act  passed  the  28tli 
of  Geo.  III.  chap.  S,  to  bo  fully  empowered  to  order  the  expcnce,  raising,  transporting,  and  maintaining 
any  munher  of  His  1\1  a jesty's  forces,  not  exceed ing  8,04.5  men,  including  oflier  iN;  or  of  tlio  European 
forces  of  the  East  India  Company,  not  exceeding  12,000  men,  inelinling  olHcers,  to  be  defrayed  out  of  the 
territorial  revenues  of  India.  The  Commissioners  were  prohibited  from  augmenting  the  salary  of  any 
person  in  Indm,  or  giving  any  gratuity,  unless  such  augmentation  or  gratuity  were  proposed  by  the 
Directors,  and  also  submitted,  together  with  the  reasons  for  it,  to  both  Houses  of  Parliament.  The 
Directors  were  re(piircd  to  lay  before  Pailiamcnt  an  annual  account  of  the  revenues  and  disbursements  at 
each  of  their  Presidencies  in  India,  together  with  a statement  of  the  debts  due  by  them  at  each  of  them. 

The  Company  jircsented  a petition  to  Parliament,  when  in  they  set  foi  th  that,  in  consequence  of  the 
arrears  of  the  war,  of  the  claim  of  Government  on  them  for  0^,500, 000,  of  the  debt  incurred  in  China,  and 
of  the  advances  necc.ssary  for  the  China  trade,  they  stood  in  need  of  a large  sum  of  money,  which  they 
prayed  that  they  might  lie  authorized  to  borrow,  when  they  were,  by  an  Act  of  the  28th  Geo.  III.  chap.  29, 
empowered  to  liorrow  .X*l,20(),000  upon  bonds  under  their  common  seal. 

The  Company  purchased  on  the  continent  of  Europe,  and  imported  into  Great  Britain,  since  the 
passing  of  the  Commutation  Act,  17,tW)9,877  lbs.  of  tea,  which  cost  them  X^2,048,797  18s.  2d. 

1789.  The  Company  entered  into  a contract  with  the  Spanish  Philippine  Company  to  supply  them 
with  the  manufactures  and  produce  of  India  to  a considerable  amount,  to  be  delivered  at  Manilla,  and  to 
be  paid  for  in  dollars. 

Lord  Cornwallis  issued  orders  for  abolishing  the  slave  trade  in  the  Company’s  dominions.  The 
Directors  gave  public  notice  that,  in  order  to  give  every  encouragement  to  the  British  manufactures,  they 


BETWEEN  ENGLAND  AND  THE  EAST  INDIES 


IXT 

had  resolved  to  make  an  nngmentation  of  above  2,500  tons  in  tlu*ir  exports  this  seuson.  They  also  granted 
permission  to  the  commanders  and  ofheers  to  fill  all  unoccupied  toiiiiage,  freight  liee;  and  thev  allowed 
their  servants,  and  inerchants  residing  in  India,  to  fill  up  such  tonnage  homewanl-boimd,  ns  might  be  unoc- 
cupied by  the  (\>mpany,  at  a reasonable  freight. 

The  i'oinpany  were  again  involved  in  war  with  Tippoo  Sultan,  in  coiiserpuMice  ot‘  his  invading  the 
territory  of  their  ally,  the  llajah  of  Travancore.  This  period  was  very  favourable  to  the  hinnhling  ot' 
Tippoo  Sultan,  the  Company  being  at  peace  with  nil  the  ])owers  in  India;  and  treaties  of  alliance'  existed 
with  the  two  most  powerful  States,  the  Nizam  and  the  Mahrattas,  who  bf>t1i  joineil  the  English  in  assist- 
ing  to  crush  the  rising  power  of  Mysore. 

1701.  The  House  of  Commons  gave  the  Company  notice  that  on  the  31st  of  March,  170L  the 
capital  or  debt  of  «^4,20(),000  owing  to  them  by  the  piddle,  together  with  all  interest  due  upon  it,  shouhl 
be  paid  ofl*,  that  Parliament  might  beat  liberty,  agreeably  to  the  terms  of  the  charter,  uhich  reipiire •three 
year.-i’  notice,  to  lay  the  trade  to  India  open. 

The  Company,  by  an  Act  of  the  31st  of  Geo.  HI.  chap.  42,  were  reipiircd  to  put  up  at  their  sales, 
every  half  year,  5,000  bags  of  saltpetre  m<»re  than  the  quantity  of  that  article  sold  hy  them  on  the  ave- 
rage of  their  four  last  sales,  at  the  price  of  31s.  per  cw3.  in  lime  of  peaee,  and  40s.  in  tinu*  of  war,  ami 
also  to  di'liver  annually  500  tons  of  saltpetre  into  the  King's  stores,  at  tlie  average  of  their  upset  price  for 
the  year;  and  on  failure  of  either  of  the  se  requisitions,  the  King  in  Council  might  authorize  the  importatioji 
of  the  necessary  quantity  from  any  country. 

1702.  The  Englisli  and  the  allies  were  very  successful  in  their  exertions  against  'I'ippoo  Sultan;  most 
of  bis  principal  forts  were  taken,  and  his  fortified  camp  at  Seringapatam  stormed  by  the  EiUglisb  army, 
under  Lord  Cornwallis,  on  the  Gth  of  February,  and  on  the  Sth  of  Manli  a treaty  was  eoneliuled, 
whereby  Tippoo  confirmed  to  llie  Company  all  the  privileges  and  immunities  of  trade  grantisl  to  tliem  by 
llyder  in  1770;  he  also  ceded  to  the  Company  and  their  allies  a considerable  portion  of  his  dominitms,  and 
consented  to  pay  a large  sum  of  money.  For  tlie  due  performance  of  this  tr(*aty.  In*  gave*  his  two  sons  as 
hostages.  By  this  treaty,  also,  the  (’’ompany  received  an  increase  of  territory,  yii  lding  an  annual  reve- 
nue of  13,10,765  pagodas;  and  the  acquisitions  of  the  Nizam  and  tlu'  Mahrattas  W(  re  each  in  a similai 
pro[)ortion  to  those  of  the  English. 

The  IVincess  Royal,  Captain  Horncastle,  was  taken  in  the  Straits  of  Siiiida  b\  the  French,  on  the 
20th  of  September,  1703;  and  the  Winterton,  C.aptain  Dundas,  was  h)st  off  Ma(l.lga^(^l^,  humeward- 
bound,  the  20tli  of  August,  1702,  having  a cargo  on  board,  the  prime  cost  of  uhieh  amounted  to  .t  'Oti, 500- 

Lord  IMacartney,  as  ambassador  to  China,  sailed  from  Fhigland  on  the  20lh  ot‘ Se|»leml>er,  1702,  and 
arrived  in  the  River  of  Tckin  on  the  5tli  of  August,  J703.  The  obje  ct  of*  his  mission  was  to  remove  (he 
obstacles  in  the  way  of  the  English  cormiiercc.  He  was  received  with  eve  ry  m.uk  of  attention,  hut  eliel 
not  succeeil  in  fulfilling  the  purposes  for  which  he  was  sent. 

The  Nabob  of  Arcot  entered  into  a treaty  with  the  Company,  dateel  July  12,  1702,  by  which  the 
Company  agreed  to  maintain  a military  force  in  his  dominions,  ujion  his  paying  them  star  pagoda^ 

annually  towards  the  expence.  I'he  Nabob  furtlier  agreed  to  pay  ti,21,ltt5  star  pagotJas,  towarefs  licjiiiilating 
sundry  debts  due  by  him,  which  was  afterwards  guaranteed  by  tlic  British  ]\‘ii  liameiit. 

1703.  The  French  Government  on  the  1st  of  February  declared  war  against  (ireat  Ilrilfiin.  On  the 
receipt  of  this  intelligence  in  India,  expeditions  were  fitted  out  against  tlie  French  settlements  in  Jlengal 
and  in  the  Peninsula,  which  were  all  taken  possession  of  by  the  EngHsIi. 

The  Company,  by  virtue  of  an  Act  of  the  23d  of  Geo.  HI.  chap.  22,  and  upon  (he  ‘^eemity  of  the 
debt  due  to  them  by  the  public,  had  sold  annuities  at  3 per  cent,  to  the  amount  of  J’2,!f02,  HO  5s.  ot 

* I 


RISE  AND  PROGRESS  OF  THE  COMMERCE 


Izvi 

capital,  which  were  known  by  the  name  of  India  Annuities.  With  the  consent  of  the  Company  and  of 
the  holders,  these  annuities,  and  also  tlie  annuities  on  the  capital  sum  of  d£*l,207,559  15s.  retained  by  the 
Company  in  their  own  hands,  amounting  in  all  to  i<^126,t)00  a year,  were  transferred  from  the  Company’s 
management  to  that  of  the  Bunk  of  England,  and  ingrafted  upon  the  fund  called  the  3 per  cent.  Annuities. 
By  this  ingraftment  the  Jebt  of  i?4,2(.)0,000  due  by  the  public  to  the  Company,  was  considered  as  paid 
off,  excepting  that  the  part  of  it  remaining  in  the  Company’s  hands,  w^as  to  be  repaid  to  them  at  par, 
before  the  legislature  could  divest  them  of  their  exclusive  trade. 

The  Company  were  also  authorized  to  increase  their  present  stock  of  five  millions,  by  opening  a sub- 
scription for  another  million,  the  projirietors  having  a preference  of  subscribing  to  the  extent  of  50  per  cent, 
on  their  present  stock,  unless  the  capital  so  subscribed  should  have  exceeded  the  proposed  million,  in  which 
case  there  was  to  be  a proportional  reduction  on  every  subscription.  And  they  were  to  employ  the  money 
so  received,  in  reducing  their  bond  debts  in  Great  Britain,  to  tlie  sum  of  i?l,500,000,  which  they  were 
not  afterwards  to  exceed,  unless  with  the  consent  of  the  Board  of  Controul. 

The  following  is  a statement  of  the  number  of  ships  sent  out  by  the  Company  to  India  and  China, 
with  their  chartered  tonnage;  the  amount  of  exports  from  J^higland,  specifying  the  merchandise  and  bul- 
lion; the  number  of  ships  lost,  taken,  &c.  outward  and  honicward-bound ; togctlier  with  the  amount  sales 
of  the  homeward-bound  cargoes  belonging  to  the  Company,  and  the  private  trade  of  the  commanders  and 
officers  in  their  service,  in  the  years  17(i(i-7  to  1792-3  inclusive.  (The  first  four  years  of  the  latter  are 
by  estimate.) 


Slup' 

Yenrs. 

No. 

1767- 8  27 

1768- 9  32 

1769- 70  30 
1770^1  S3 

1771- 2  26 

1772- 3  26 

1773- 4  It 

1771-5  16 

1775- 6  20 

1776- 7  24. 

1777- 8  22 

1778- 9  22 

177‘4-80  26 

1780- 1  22 

1781- 2  30 

1782- 3  24 

17a3-4  14 

1781-5  28 

1785- 6  44 

1786- 7  34 

17S7-8  32 

1788-9  .32 

17.89-90  32 

1790- 1  25 

1791- 2  28 

n92-;i  44 

“ 'Potiil  '731“ 


sfMt  Irtiin 


KM’OUTS  FROM  KNGLAND. 


r<  handr,e.  j Hiillioii.  j Total. 


Company Vr.kkIs  Private  Trade. 


11,S7  7 

13.473 

14,970 

10,109 

12,974 

12,085 

10,199 

11,034 

14,129 

17,391 

16.473 
16,844 
19,746 
15,278 
21,858 
1H,3(W 
10,218 
20,800 
31,385 
26,775 
25,212 
26,905 
26,577 
22,556 
2.3,622 
37.926 

Tri,3l3 


•1 19,076 
.588,256 
.555,.130 
59 1, 621 
.520,262 
.506,810 
491,072 
471,499 
471,596 
510,958 
559,466 

515,0.3.3 

526.262 
.591,967 
386,1,52 
666,321 
547,092 
405,412 
418,7.t7 
.529,165 
.551,317 
767,627 

772.262 
924,204 
928,783 

1,068,252 

1,1 13,314 

i6,151.,()16 


51-,9C8 

162,.583 

212,998 

305,630 

202,110 

10,824 

11,867 

10,200 

10,080 

109,422 

10,896 

10,722 

10,002 

15,014 


724,317 

749,833 

646,798 

489,192 

787,078 

632,705 

5.3.5,276 

10,998 

.5,073,513 


504,044 
588,2.56 
71.8,01.3 
837,619 
825.S92 
708,9.50 
.5.31,896 
48,3,366 
484,796 
521,038 
668,888 
525,929 
536,984 
601,969 
401,166 
666,321 
.547,092 
40.5,442 
418,747 
1,2.5.3,482 
1,301,1.50 
1,414,425 
1,261,154 
1,711,282 
1,461,488 
1,60.3,528 
1,144,312 
22, 127, 529' 


2,423,254 

2,70.5,349 

.3,526,.353 

3,5;3,.385 

3,485,902 

3,2.58,624. 

3,.5.34,.3S9 

3,225,86.5 

3,675,984 

3,194,505 

3,305,687 

3,556,874 

3,6.50,158 

3,028,445 

3,192,110 

2.‘t2S,690 

.3,242,617 

.3,209,592 

4,204,981 

4,617,974 

4,667,049 

4,874,745 

4,256,518 

4,417,823 

5,104,-508 

6,141,532 

5,050,819 

101,-38.3,792 


150,000 

150,000 

150.000 

160.000 
202,281 
147,726 
146,018 
158,118 
1.38,427 
143,750 
184,555 
26.5,804 
189,257 

171.455 
210,172 
1.39,148 
34.3,614 
154,198 
408,784 
611,205 
547,3.37 
918,389 
810,516 
838,484 
9.30,930 

709.455 
703,758 

r9;673,191 


BETWEEN  ENGLAND  AND  THE  EAST  INDIES. 


Kv!i 

An  Act  passed  for  continuing  in  tlie  (Company  lor  twenty  yiars  tlie  temtorial  possessions,  and  loi 
prolonging  their  exclusive  privileges  under  certuin  Jiniilations  in  favour  of  inili\iduals  lor  tlu*  like  period. 
In  this  Act  are  introduced  all  the  provisions  of  former  Act-«,  of  which  the  following  is  an  ahstraet,  under 
the  respective  heads  of 

1.  Hoard  of  Coinniissioners.  I.  Exclusive  trade. 

2.  Governments  in  India.  Individuals  allowed  to  participate  in  the  liade. 

3.  Revenues.  (>.  Appllealion  of  the  Eonipany''.  prulils  in  J airope. 

ERKAMni.K.— Comi)any\  prMleges  extended  for  twenty  years  fiom  the  M of  M<iieli,  r;OI.  May  hr 
then  discontinued,  on  giving  three  years'  notice. 

Hoaru  ok  CoMMrsmoNERs. — 2.  Ills  IMnjesty  may  appoint  (Nmimlssioners  for  the  atlhirs  of  India. 

3.  Three  Commissioners  may  form  a Hoard  for  executing  the  powers  vcstcil  In  Ihein. 

4.  In  case  of  an  oijuality,  Ere.sident  to  have  the  casting  vote. 

!j.  Board  may  aj)point  ofllcers.  (Commissioners  and  oIHcjts  to  have  sneli  salarus  as  His  IVl.ijeslv  shall 
direct.  Salaries  and  contingent  exjiences  to  he  paid  liy  the  Company,  not  exceeding  .X’ Hi, OHO  per  annum. 

f)  and  7.  Commissioners  and  oflieers  to  take  an  o.ath  for  the  due  exernlion  of  their  ti  ust. 

5.  Commissioners  and  (’hief  Secretary  not  therehy  discpialitied  to  sit  in  J\iiHaMien(. 

0.  Hoard  to  superintend  all  roneerns  relative  to  the  civil  or  military  goveiaimenl.  or  revenues  of  liiiljii. 

10.  Commissioners  and  their  oOict'rs  to  have  access  to  the  Ct)m])any\  hooks,  and  to  he  liuiiislied  »itli 
copies  or  extracts  of  such  as  may  he  re<iMired. 

11.  ('opies  of  all  minutes  and  proceedings  of  the  General  Coin  ts  of  IVoprielors  or  Dinx  lors,  and  of 
all  dispatches  receivi'd  from  India,  relating  to  the  civil,  military,  or  revenue  concerns  of  the  Company,  to 
he  sent  to  the  Hoard. 

12.  No  order  relating  to  the  civil  or  military  government,  or  revenues  of  the  (Company,  shall  ho  sent 
to  Indio,  till  first  approved  by  the  Hoard.  The  Hoard  may  disapprove,  alter,  or  vary  the  sid)slance  of  the 
Court's  instructions,  giving  their  reasons  for  tlie  .same,  wliieh  aineiuh  d iiislrnetions  the  Directors  shall 
transmit  to  India  without  delay. 

13.  Directors  may  remonstrate  upon  the  Hoard's  varying  the  sul)>lanec  of  their  orders,  n Inch  the 
Board  shall  consider,  and  give  such  further  oiders  thereon  as  Out  think  fit. 

14.  Hoard  not  to  nominate  any  of  the  (Company's  servants. 

15.  It  the  Court  of  Directors  neglect  to  frame  orders  on  any  subject  rehitiiig  to  the  ei\il  or  military 
government,  or  the  revenues  ol  the  C'onipaiiy,  wdtliin  fourteen  days  afler  they  are  rerjulred,  (lommissioners 
may  frame  such  instructions  as  they  thiuk  fit,  wliich  the  Court  of  Directors  are  reipiireil  to  transmit  to  liiilia. 

IG.  If  the  Directors  think  the  Hoard  interfere  with  points  not  eonneeted  with  the  civil  or  inilitaiy 
government,  or  revenues  of  India,  they  may  petition  His  Majesty,  who  shall  decide  hetwei  ii  them. 

17.  Hoard  may  not  direct  the  increase  of  salaries,  allowances,  or  emoluments  to  any  of  the  Ciunpany's 
servants  in  India,  unless  such  increase  be  proposed  by  the  (rourt  of  Diieelors  In  a dispatch,  and  notice  of 
such  intention,  with  their  reasons  for  the  same,  shall  liavc  been  laid  befon*  both  1 louses  of  i’arliainerit, 
thirty  days  before  such  dispatch  shall  be  sent. 

18.  Nor  grant  any  gratuity  for  services  performed,  unless  projmsed,  in  like  m.nnncr,  I)y  tlie  (Vunt  of 
Directors.  Such  gratuities,  when  made,  to  be  added  to  the  next  lists  of  cslablidimcnls  to  bi*  laid  b(*forc 
Parliament. 

19.  Board  may  transmit  .secret  orders  to  the  Secret  Committee  of  the  Dlj  irtors  n ho  shall  transmit 
the  same  to  India,  where  they  shall  be  obeyed,  in  like  manner  ns  if  they  had  bei  n sent  by  the  Court. 

♦ I 2 


1*"*'  RISE  AND  PROGRESS  OF  THE  COMMERCE 

20.  Court  of  Directors  to  appoint  three  of  their  members  a Secret  Committee,  who  shall  take  an  oath 
of  scci’ocy. 

ai.  Secret  Committee  dispatclies  to  Iw  prepared  by  the  Secretary,  the  examiner  of  Indian  correspon- 
dence, and  none  else,  without  tlie  a|)prubatiun  and  consent  of  the  Commissioners.  Such  jiersons  must  be 
sworn  to  secrecy. 

22.  rresidciu  ies  in  India  may  address  their  dispatches  to  the  Secret  Committee  of  the  Directors,  who 
.shall  deliver  the  same,  or  copies,  to  the  Board. 

23.  Resolutions  of  the  Court  of  Directors,  touching  the  civil  or  military  Governments,  or  the  reve- 
nues, after  being  approved  by  the  Commissioners,  shall  not  be  revokable  by  the  Proprietors. 

Governments  in  India. — 24.  The  civil  and  military  government  of  Fort  William,  and  the  ordering, 
management,  and  government  of  the  territorial  acquisitions  and  revenues  of  the  kingdoms  or  provinces  of 
Bengal,  Bahar,  and  Orixa,  vested  in  a Governor-General  and  three  Coiinsellor.s. 

The  civil  and  military  government  of  Fort  St.  George,  and  the  acquisitions  on  the  Coast  of  Coro- 
mandel, in  a Governor  and  three  Counsellors. 

The  civil  and  military  government  of  Bombay,  and  the  acquisitions  on  the  Coast  of  Malabar,  in  a 
Governor  and  three  Counsellors.  The  Governments  of  Fort  St.  George  and  Bombay  shall  be  subject  to 
the  superintendence  and  controul  of  the  (iovernor-General  in  Council. 

25.  Vacancies  of  Governor,  Counsellors,  or  Commanders  in  Chief  of  all  the  forces  in  India,  or  of  any 
provincial  Commander  in  Chief,  to  be  filled  by  the  Directors.  The  members  of  Council  to  be  taken  from 
the  senior  merchants,  who  have  resided  twelve  years  in  India. 

26.  If  tlie  Directors  neglect  for  two  months  to  till  up  such  vacancie.s,  His  Majesty  may  supply  them. 

27.  Directors  may  appoint  persons  provisionally  to  supply  vacancies,  when  they  shall  happen,  and 
may  revoke  the  same;  but  no  person  .so  appointed  shall  receive  the  salary  or  emolument  of  the  office,  until 
in  actual  possession. 

28.  This  Act  not  to  vacate  any  appointments  already  made. 

29.  Vacancies  in  the  GovernnuMit,  when  no  provisional  successor  is  on  the  spot,  shall  be  filled  by  the 
senior  member  of  Council,  until  some  other  person  is  ap))ointcd  thereto.  If  the  Council  Ix'come  reduced 
to  one  member,  beside  such  acting  Governor,  be  may  call  to  the  Council  such  one  of  the  senior  merchants 
as  he  shall  tliink  fit.  Acting  Governor  to  receive  the  emoluments  of  Governor,  on  foregoing  his  allow- 
ances as  Counsellor,  for  the  period  he  .so  acts. 

30.  No  Coimnander  in  (’liief  to  succeed  to  the  temporary  Government,  unless  provisionally  appointed 
to  supply  the  same ; but  the  vacancy  must  be  filled  by  the  member  of  Council  next  in  rank  to  the  Com- 
mander in  Chief. 

31.  Vacancies  in  (Council,  when  no  provisional  successor  i.s  on  the  spot,  shall  be  filled  from  among  the 
senior  merchants. 

32.  When  the  office  of  Commander  in  Chief  of  all  the  forces  in  India  is  not  held  by  the  Governor 
General,  such  (\)mmanderin  Chief,  if  specially  authorized  by  the  Court  of  Directors,  may  be  a member 
of  the  Council  of  Fort  William.  And  when  the  offices  of  Governor  and  Commander  in  Chief  of  Fort 
St.  George  and  Bombay,  respectively,  are  vested  in  difierent  persons,  such  Commander  in  Chief  may  be 
a member  of  Council  at  such  Presidencies,  if  authorized  by  the  Court,  and  shall  rank  as  second  in  Council, 
but  sliall  not  be  entitled  to  any  emolument  as  a member  of  Council,  unless  the  same  be  specially  granted 
by  the  Court  of  Directors. 

33.  Commander  in  Chief  of  the  forces  in  India,  if  not  in  the  person  of  the  Governor-General,  when 
resident  at  Fort  St.  George  or  Bombay,  shall  be  a member  of  Council  at  such  Presidency,  during  which 


BETWEEN  ENGLAND  AND  THE  EAST  INDIES. 


Ixix 

tinKj  the  provincial  Comnmiuler  in  Cliief,  if  a nieniber  of  the  Council,  may  continue  to  sit  and  deliberate, 
but  shall  have  no  voice  at  the  Council  Board. 

If  any  member  of  Council,  by  inlirinity  or  otherwise,  be  remlered  incaj)able  of  acting,  or  be  ab- 
sent from  the  Presidency,  the  Governor-General,  or  Governor,  may  call  to  Council  any  provisional  suc- 
cessor, or  if  there  be  none  such,  a senior  merchant;  but  he  shall  be  entitled  to  no  salary  or  emolument 
nor  shall  it  occasion  him  to  be  deprived  of  any  ollice  or  emphnnunt  he  la  fore  enjoyed. 

J.j.  ilis  Majesty,  by  his  sign  manual,  countersigned  by  the  Pie.sident  of  the  Boanl,  ina)  remove  any 
oflicer  or  servant  of  the  Company  in  India. 

‘Mh  I'his  Act  sliall  not  preclude  the  Directors  from  recalling  their  ollicers  oi  servants;  any  (io\ernor- 
General,  Governor,  or  Commander  in  Chief  appointed  by  His  Majt'.siy,  in  delanit  of  an  appoiiitinent  by 
the  Court  of  Directors,  excepted. 

37.  Departure  from  India  of  any  Governor-General,  Governor,  ]\Icml)er  of  C’ouneil,  or  Commander  in 
Chief,  with  an  intent  of  leturniiig  to  Europe,  shall  be  deemed  a resignathm  of  bis  ollice.  A resignution  while 
at  the  I’resideiiey  not  to  be  valid,  except  made  in  writing,  lor  the  piii|)ose  of  being  recorded.  Salaiies  to  cease 
from  the  day  of  their  departure.  Any  person  (putting  the  Presideney  to  wliieh  he  shall  belong,  other  than 
in  the  known  service  of  the  Company,  salary  to  cease  lioni  the  time  of  leaving  the  settlement. 

3S.  C’oimcil  to  consider  business  proj)Osed  by  Governor.  A jjroposition  from  Ji  ( 'ouiisellor  the  Go- 
vernor may  udjouin  to  a futnie  lime,  not  exceeding  forty-eight  hours;  but  it  shall  not  he  twice  adjouined, 
without  the  coiistail  of  the  Counsellor  who  pr()pos(*d  it. 

39.  7VII  resolutions  sliall  be  reconh  d and  issiu*d  by  the  Seeietaiies,  as  the  act  of  the  (Jovei  lUH-tieiK  ial 
in  Council,  or  Gov(Tiior  In  ( oimcil,  as  the  c.iso  may  he. 

4-0.  Governor-GeiKTal  in  (’ouneil  at  Fort  William  to  superintend,  coutroul,  and  direct  all  the  Com- 
pany‘’s  Governments  in  India. 

41.  Governmenls  must  oiicy  all  orders  from  G()vcrnor-(i(‘neral  in  Coiineil,  exi’cpt  wlnm  they  may 
have  received  positive  (jrders  from  the  (’ourt  of  Directors,  or  the  Secret  ('ommiltee,  by  the  authority  of 
the  Commissioners,  re|Migiiant  to  the  01  dels  ol’ tin*  Governor-General,  and  not  known  to  th(‘  (TO\eiiior- 
General  at  the  lime  of  issuing  his  iintruelions:  in  such  eas(*,  eo|)i(‘S  of  such  01  del  s must  he  transmitted  by 
them  to  the  Governor-General  in  (’ouneil,  who  sh.ill  lh('ieiipoii  give  such  fiiilher  iiisli nelioiis  as  he  shall 
see  necessary. 

42.  Governor-Crcneral  of  Fort  William,  without  ordeis  fiom  the  Court  of  Diieetois  or  Seeiet  ('omniit- 
tce,  except  wlien  hostilities  have  been  eomnieneed,  or  pieparations  aetiiall)  made  for  tlie  eominencriin  nl  of 
hostilities,  against  the  British  nation,  or  any  of  their  allies,  may  not  chrLiiv  war  against  any  of  the  nativi? 
powers;  and  in  all  cases  vvlu'n^  hostilities  are  lesolved  upon,  eoiiimuiiiealion  iiiiist  he  iiiad(‘  with  all  expe- 
dition to  the  Secret  Committei’. 

43.  Governor  ol'Fort  St.  George  or  Bombay  may  not  d(‘clare  w ar,  or  eonelnde  jie.'iee,  except  in  v(‘ry 
extraordinary  eases,  without  orders  fiom  the  Governor-Cieiieral  in  Council,  the  f'ouit  of  Directors,  or  the 
Secret  Committee,  on  penalty  of  dismission. 

44.  Fort  St.  Cn'orge  and  Bombay,  and  all  other  settlements  in  India,  to  send  copies  of  their  proeerd- 
ings  in  Council  to  Governor-tfeiieial  in  Cuiiiieil  at  h'oit  William. 

4.J.  Governor-General  in  Council  may  issue  his  warrant  to  apprehend  any  jiersoii  siispeel(d  of  (viriy- 
ing  on  any  correspondenee  dangerous  to  the  peace  and  saf(‘ty  of  the  British  jiossessioiis  in  India,  wiih  any 
of  the  native  or  European  powers,  and  commit  him  or  lh(*m  to  sale  custody.  A copy  ot'  tin*  diaigr  (<)  he 
delivered  the  party  within  five  days,  who  shall  be  allowed  to  make  a (l(*l’enee  in  wnliiig.  l!,  a/tci  the 
hearing  of  witnesses  on  both  •sides,  there  shall  appear  reasonable  grounds  lor  the  ehaiLo,  ^:Kh  pri  son  may 
be  ke|)t  in  safe  custody,  and  brought  to  trial  in  India,  or  else  be  sent  for  trial  to  England  by  the  lirst 
convenient  opportunity. 


Ixx 


msK  AND  rnoGiiEss  or  the  coMiwEncE 


4(>,  1’he  like  powrs  ;'ivon  to  the  Governors  of  Fort  St.  Georp^o  and  Hombay. 

4 7.  Governor-(ji(‘nonil  in  (Council  at  llenp^ai,  and  Governor  of  Fort  St.  George*  and  Bombay,  Jn  case 
of  a elini'i  ence  of  opinion  between  tbeinseiv  cs  and  tlicir  Council,  may  act  independent  of  the  Council.  All 
acts  so  done  by  him  itiusi  be  recorded,  signed  by  the  Council,  and  be  obeyed,  in  like  manner  as  if  con- 
curred in  by  the  Council. 

48.  In  such  cases,  the  Governor-General  or  Governor  shall  be  alone  held  responsible  for  the  same. 

1 9.  This  not  to  (*mpo\ver  the  (iovernor  to  perform  any  act  whieli  could  not  have  been  made  and  exe- 
cuted with  the  conciirreiicc  of  the  Councils. 

'riiis  power  not  to  he  exercised  by  any  Governor  who  shall  succeed  to  the  Government  by  deatli 
or  rcNigiiation,  unless  such  person  sliall  have  been  provisionally  appointed  to  succeed,  or  uidess  and  until 
such  pel  son  shall  have  been  continued  by  the  Couit  in  such  otlice. 

.51.  Tills  power  not  to  be  exerted  in  rases  which  come  under  the  consideration  of  the  Governor- 
(ieneral  or  Go\ernor  In  Council,  in  tiudr  judicial  capacity. 

52.  The  powers  of  the  Governments  of  J^'ort  St.  George  and  Bombay,  and  all  other  settlements,  vested 
in  the  Governor-General,  during  bis  stay  at  such  IVrsidency. 

5d.  Wiien  Governor-General  shall  see  it  necessary  to  be  absent  from  bis  Government  at  Btnigal,  be 
may  nominate  a member  of  the  C'ouncil  to  act  as  Vice  IVcsideiit,  or  Deputy  Governor,  in  bis  absence. 

5 k Governor-General,  wliiJe  absent,  may  issue  orders  to  the  respective  Governments,  or  to  any  of 
the  oflicers  and  servants  of  these  Gov<*i*nments,  without  communicating  such  orders  to  such  Governmcnl, 
which  they  are  hound  to  obey,  as  if  coming  li  oiu  the  (iovernor  in  Council  at  Fort  William. 

55.  The  Court  of  Directors  may,  with  the  approbation  of  Board  of  (Commissioners,  suspend  the 
powers  of  the  Governor-General  to  act  of  his  own  autliority,  fur  so  long  as  t4icy  shall  see  fit,  and  to  le- 
vive  them  when  they  see  fit. 

5(>.  (’ivil  servants  under  Council  to  he  promoted  according  to  llii‘ir  rank. 

57.  Vacancies  in  tlie  civil  service  to  he  filled  up  fibm  the  servants  of  the  Presidency  w here  the  vacancy 
hapi)cns.  No  person  shall  be  appointed  to  any  situation,  the  salary  and  emoluments  of  which  exceed  i’5(^0 
per  annum,  unless  such  person  shall  liave  been  a resident  in  India  for  three  years,  as  a covenanted  servant. 


prior  to  the  vacancy. 

To  the  like  of  oP  1,500  Six  years. 

J,000  Nine  years. 

4,000  welve  years. 


58.  No  person  may  bold  tw^o  offices,  the  salaries  of  w hicli  shall  exceed  the  prescribed  sums  above  named. 

59.  Directors  may  not  send  out  a larger  number  of  writers  or  cadets  tlian  are  competent  to  supply 
the  vacancies  in  their  establishments. 

00.  No  [lerson  slmll  be  appointed  a writer  or  cadet,  whose  age  shall  be  under  fifteen,  or  more  than 
twenty-tw^o  years.  A certificate  must  be  produced  of  the  age,  under  tlie  hands  of  the  parisli  registrar.  Where 
such  cannot  he  obtained,  the  affidavit  of  the  party  may  be  received  as  a substitute.  An  exception  as  to 
cadets,  in  favour  of  persons  wdio  have  borne  a cominksion  in  the  King’s  service,  the  Militia,  or  Feuciblc5| 
or  from  the  Company  of  Cadets  at  Woolw  ich. 

IIevenuks.— 61.  Officers  employed  In  collecting  revenues,  to  be  sw’orn  not  to  receive  any  money, 
gift,  or  present. 

62.  Beceiving  presents  declared  to  be  a misdemeanour,  and  the  party  to  forfeit  the  value. 

63.  Court  may  restore  present  to  the  party  from  whom  it  was  obtained,  and  order  the  whole  or  any 
part  of  the  fines  to  be  paid  to  the  prosecutor. 


BETWEEN  ENGLAND  AND  THE  EAST  INDIES.  \xxl 

G4^.  Counsellors,  pliysicians,  surgeons,  and  chaplains  may  take  fees,  but  in  the  war  of  their  pro- 
fesslon  only. 

G5.  Govcrnor-Gcneral,  Governors,  Commanders  In  Cliief,  or  servants  of  tlic  Company,  dhoheying  or 
neglecting  to  execute  the  orders  of  the  Court  of  Directors,  or  wilfully  breaking  their  trust;  are  guilty  of  a 
nusdemeanour, 

GO.  The  like  as  to  any  corrupt  bargain  for  giving  up  or  obtaining  any  office  or  employment  in  the 
King  or  Company’s  service. 

G7.  His  xMiijesty’.s  subjects  amenable  to  Courts  of  Just  ire  in  India  and  in  Great  Britain,  for  ollenecs 
in  the  ten  itorics  of  native  Trinces,  or  ngniiisl  any  of  their  people. 

G8.  No  action  or  suit  at  law  may  be  stayed  by  the  Court  of  Directors,  or  any  of  their  servants,  witli- 
out  the  approliation  of  the  Board  of  (’ommissioiiers. 

GO.  Sentences  of  Courts  in  India  or  in  England  may  not  he  remitted,  or  oificia  s disnli^sed  by  such 
sentences  n'stored. 

70.  Persons  in  civil  or  military  service,  under  the  rank  of  Council,  or  (^ommander  in  Chu‘l',  who 
.shall  be  absent  from  their  station  five  years,  are  not  capable  of  serving  again  in  India;  unless,  in  case  of  a 
civil  servant,  it  is  proved,  to  the  satisfaction  of  the  Court  of  Directors,  their  absence  has  arisen  Iroin  sick- 
ness or  infirmity,  or  unless  such  person  shall  hu\e  the  sanction  of  the  Court  of  l^roprietors  for  sucli  purjiose, 
for  returning  w ith  his  rank,  taken  by  a ballot,  in  wJiich  three  jiarts  in  four  shall  concur ; or  in  the  case  of 
a military  officer,  it  lie  proved,  to  the  satisfiiction  of  the  Court  ol‘  Directors  and  the  Board  of  Cominissioncrs, 
that  the  absence  has  been  occasioned  by  sickness,  iiifirinily,  or  some  inevitable  accident. 

Exclusive  Thade.— 71.  Exclusive  trade  to  the  Company  continued,  subject  to  limitations,  conditions, 
and  i cgulations;  as  also 

72.  All  profits,  &c.  granted  by  former  acts  or  charters,  and  not  by  this  act  repealed,  ratified,  and  con- 
firmed in  as  full  and  am[)lc  a manner  as  if  re-enacted  in  tliis  act,  subject  to  all  sucb  restrictions  and  regula- 
tions contained  in  such  acts  or  charters. 

73.  At  any  time  after  the  Ht  of  3Iarcli,  1811,  upon  three  years’  notice,  and  payment  of  what  may  lie 
due  from  the  public  to  the  Company,  at  the  expiration  of  such  three  years,  the  exclusive  tiadc  .shall  cease. 

74.  But  the  Company  may  afterwards  carry  on  a free  trade  to  India,  in  tlicir  corpoiate  capacity,  in 
common  with  others  His  Majesty’s  subjects. 

7.5.  Notice  from  the  Speaker  of  the  1 louse  of  Commons  to  ])C  deemed  a due  notice. 

7G.  In  case  of  any  cession  of  territory  from  the  Chinese  Government,  and  the  establishment  of  a new 
.settlement  thereon.  His  Majesty's  subjects  may,  under  certain  restrictions,  export  British  or  Irish  inanu* 
factures  in  the  Company’s  ships,  at  a moderate  rate  of  freight. 

77.  Salvo  in  favour  of  the  ships  employed  in  the  Southern  Whale  Fishery,  subject  to  the  restrictions 
and  regulations  contained  in  the  2Gth  Geo.  III.  chap.  50,  and  the  28th  Geo.  III.  chap.  20. 

78  to  80.  And  for  ships  ti’ading  from  the  N.  W.  coast  of  America,  on  what  conditions  licences  may 
be  given  them. 

Individuals  allowed  to  participate  in  the  trade  to  and  from  the  Last  Inoies.— 81.  Any  of  JJis 
Majesty’s  subjects  resident  in  Great  Britain,  or  any  part  ot  Ills  Majesty  s Luropeun  dominions,  may 
export  to  India;  and  any  of  the  Company’s  civil  .servants,  or  persons  resident  in  India  under  lliem  licence 
and  protection,  may  import  from  India,  goods  ujjon  the  Company’s  ships,  subject  to  the  following  irstiitU 
ions  and  regulations. 

82.  None  but  the  Company,  or  such  ns  shall  obtain  their  special  licence,  may  ship  any  militaiy  oi 
naval  stores,  nor  import  any  India  calicoes,  or  other  description  of  piece-goods. 


Ixxii 


RISE  AND  TROGRESS  OF  THE  COI^fMERCE 


83.  The  Court  of  Directors  sliall  annually,  in  the  month  of  February,  lay  before  the  Commissioners 
for  India  an  account  of  the  naval  stores  exported  by  them  in  the  preceding  year;  and  the  like,  as  far  as 
can  be  done,  of  what  is  intended  to  be  exported  in  the  ensuing  season.  If  any  representations  are  made 
by  the  manufacturers  that  such  exports  are  insutficient  for  the  Indian  demand,  the  Boaid  may  examine 
such  representations,  and  at  their  discretion  allow  individuals  to  (‘xport  the  same  on  the  Company's  ships, 
at  the  rate  of  freight  payable  for  other  private  goods,  a!id  direct  tonnage  to  be  provided  for  the  same. 

84.  If  the  Company  do  not,  by  the  31st  of  August  in  each  )ear,  purchase  1,5()0  tons  of  copper  for 
exportation,  the  proprietors  or  holdcTs  of  British  copper  may  export  to  that  extent,  or  so  much  as  the 
Company's  exports  may  fall  short  thereof  (freight  to  be  paitl  the  same  as  on  other  [)rivate  goods),  and 
may  make  their  returns  in  the  commodities  ni'  India,  in  like  manner  as  is  allowed  to  other  exporters  of 
British  produce.  Notice  of  such  intention  to  export,  must  be  given  by  the  20th  of  October  in  (‘ach  year. 
The  tonnage  for  such  copper  not  to  be  deemed  any  part  of  the  allowance  made  for  |)rivate  trade. 

8.5.  If  the  Company  do  not  import  a suflicient  quantity  of  piece-goods,  the  Board  of  Coniniissioiicrs 
may  admit  individuals  to  import  them  in  the  Company's  ships. 

86.  Not  to  vary  any  nf  the  legal  provisions  as  to  prohihited  goods. 

87.  Company  required  to  provide  3,000  tons,  at  least,  of  shipping,  in  their  export  and  import  trade. 
This  to  he  regulated,  more  or  less,  as  the  Board  of  (Commissioners  may  direct. 

88.  Directors  may  petition  His  Ma  jesty  if  they  think  the  quantity  of  tonnage  directed  to  be  provided 
for  individiuds  is  too  large,  who  .shall  finally  determine  thereon. 

89.  Rates  of  freight,  in  time  of  peace,  to  be  £t)  per  ton  outward,  and  i^J.5  per  ton  homeward.  In 
war,  or  preparation  fur  war,  additional  rates  to  be  paid  in  proportion  to  the  additional  rates  of  freight 
paid  by  tbc  Company. 

90.  Intention  of  raising  the  rates  of  freight  to  be  first  communicated  to  the  Board  of  Commissioners 
for  their  approbation. 

91.  Every  three  years  the  Directors  to  determine  whether  any  abab’ment  can  be  made  in  the  rates  of 

freight  of  private  trade,  and  to  communicate  the  result  to  the  Commissioners.  ' 

92.  Persons  intending  to  ship  goods,  must  give  notice  to  the  Secretary  before  the  31st  of  August  in 
each  year,  of  the  nature  and  quantity  of  the  goods,  and  when  tliey  will  be  ready;  and  before  the  15th  of 
Se])tenihcr  deposit  the  freight.  In  case  of  failure  in  shipping  the  goods,  tlic  fri'iglit  to  he  forfeited. 

93.  The  like  notice  and  conditions  to  be  observed  in  India,  in  regard  to  goods  intended  to  be  shipped 
for  this  country. 

94.  Vacant  tonnage,  not  engaged  by  individuals,  may  be  occupied  by  the  Company.  If  the  goods 
to  be  shipped  exceed  the  ipiantity  of  tonnage  provided,  a distribution  must  be. made  to  each  in  proportion. 

95.  Civil  servants,  and  free  merchants  in  India,  may  act  as  consignees,  in  the  disposal  of  exports 
from  this  country,  and  providing  articles  in  return. 

90.  If  there  are  not  a sullicient  number  of  persons  in  India  to  act  as  above.  Court  may,  with  the 
approbation  of  the  Commissioners,  license  an  additional  number  of  free  merchants  to  reside  in  India. 

97.  Agents  for  private  traders  to  he  amenable  to  the  Company's  authority. 

98.  No  person  sliall  reside  more  than  ten  miles  from  one  of  the  principal  settlements,  without  leave 
of  the  Governor. 

99.  The  duty  of  7 per  cent,  payable  on  goods  of  individuals  repealed,  and  3 per  cent,  laid  in  lieu 
thereof,  as  an  eipii valent  for  all  charges  of  management. 

1(X).  This  not  to  cxt(‘nd  to  goods  from  Cliina,  or  to  the  private  trade  of  the  commanders  and  officers. 
— By  a resolution  of  the  Court  of  Directors,  this  has  been  since  extended  to  the  goods  of  the  commanders 
and  officers  in  private  trade. 


BETWEEN  ENGLAND  ANT)  THE  EAST  INDIES. 


Ixxiii 


101.  Arrangements  to  be  made  for  speedy  side  of  the  goods  of  individuul><. 

102.  Such  goods  to  be  warehoused,  and  sold  at  the  Company’s  sales,  on  account  of  the  pi opiic  tois 
Goods  bought  in,  to  be  speedily  delivered,  on  payment  of  the  charges  only. 

103.  Goods  to  be  registered  previous  to  shipping,  both  here  and  in  India,  on  penalty  of  foilVituic. 

104*.  Goods  of  individuals,  in  all  respects,  to  be  on  the  same  footing  as  Company's  goods,  as  to 

j)ayment  of  duties. 

105.  Company  exonerated  from  embezzlement  of  goods  of  individuals  while  in  their  warehouses  m 
India  or  England, 

lOb.  The  security  given  by  Company’s  servants  against  embezzlements,  to  be  extended  to  the  goods 
of  individuals.  Persons  through  whose  negligence  any  loss  arises,  shall  be  answeiuble  for  the  same  at  law 

Application  of  the  surplus  Revenues. — 107.  The  revenues  of  India,  after  defraying  the  charges  of 
collection,  shall  be  disposed  of  in  the  following  order.  Eirst,  in  defraying  the  charges  of  the  inilitar\  and 
marine  establishments,  maintenance  of  forts  and  garrisons,  and  provision  of  naval  and  warlike  stores. 
Secondly,  in  paying  the  interest  of  the  Indian  debts.  Thirdly,  in  defraying  the  expences  of  the  ci\il  aiul 
commercial  establishments.  Eourthly,  a sum  of  not  less  thanacion-  of  lupces,  to  be  tievoted  to  the 
provision  of  investments  and  lemlttauies  to  Cliiiia.  Eit'thly,  as  often  as  any  part  of  the  ilehts  in  India 
shall  be  redeemed  or  transferred  to  Great  Rritain,  the  advances  to  the  Commercial  Hoards  to  hi*  iiiereaseil 
in  the  extent  to  which  the  interest  is  reduced.  And,  lastly,  (he  surplus  shall  he  ap|died  to  (lie  liipiidafion 
of  the  debts  In  India,  or  to  such  other  uses  as  the  Court  of  Directors,  with  (he  approbation  of  the  Board 
of  Commissioners,  shall  direct. 

108.  The  Governments  in  India  may  grant  bills  upon  the  Directois,  for  transferring  the  debts  in 
India  to  England,  till  they  arc  reduced  to  two  millions  sterling. 

109.  If  the  Indian  creditors  shall  decline  to  receive  bills  of  exchange  to  the  amount  oi'  X’5(H),00(}, 
the  deficiency  may  be  made  up  by  loans,  which  shall  be  applied  to  the  Hciuidation  and  discharge  of  (he 
Indian  debts,  and  to  no  other  purpose. 

110.  Bills  not  to  be  granted  for  a larger  sum  than  i?500,000,  unless  by  the  authority  of  the 
Court  of  Directors, 

Application  op  the  Profits  op  the  Company  in  Europe. — 111.  After  payment  of  (he  bills  of 
exchange,  current  debts,  interest,  and  other  outgoings  and  charges,  (the  bond  debt  excepted),  the 
remainder  to  be  disposed  of:  first,  in  payment  of  a dividend  of  10  per  cent,  per  annum;  the  first  half 
year’s  payment  to  be  made  at  Mid.summer,  179.3.  Secondly,  .P500,000  per  annum  to  be  set  apart  for  pay- 
ment of  bills  drawn  in  liquidation  of  the  Indian  debts,  until  the  same  shall  he  redncc’d  to  two  millions 
sterling.  Thirdly,  in  payment  of  aP500,(X)0  annually  into  Ills  Majesty's  Excherjiier,  the  ilefieiency  of 
one  year  to  be  made  good  in  the  next.  The  first  half  year’s  payment  to  b(*  due  the  1st  of  duly,  1783. 

Until  die  debts  are  reduced  to  two  millions,  the  ultimate  surplus  may  be  appropriated  for  the  lurtliei 
reduction  of  debts  in  India,  or  in  jiayment  of  debts  in  England  (bond  debt  of  P1,.50(MMM)  excepted),  or  to 
the  purchase  of  exports,  the  produce  of  which  to  be  appropriated  to  the  discharge  of  Indian  dehls. 

When  debts  in  India  are  reduced  to  two  millions,  and  bond  debts  to  d’l, .'>()(), 000,  (he  surplus,  aflei 
payment  of  outgoings,  a dividend  of  10  per  cent,  and  dt^5()0,(X)0  a year  to  the  Kxclieijuer,  to  he  apjilic  d 
as  follows:  one-sixth  to  be  retained  by  the  (’ompany  for  their  own  use,  to  augmi  nt  d'vidi  mis,  ami  the 
residue  to  be  vested  in  the  Bank,  in  the  names  of  the  Commissioners  appointed  to  apjily  sums  tewaids  (Ik* 
discharge  of  the  national  debt,  until  the  sums  so  paid,  with  the  growing  interest,  shall  amoimt  to  twebe 
millions  sterling,  after  which,  such  supply  shall,  from  tune  to  time,  be  paid  into  the  Exelierpier  fm  Ills 
Majesty’s  use. 

♦ K 


Ixxiv 


RISE  AND  niOGRESS  OF  THE  COMMERCE 


11:^.  If  the  debts  are  again  increased  beyond  two  millions  in  India,  and  <£1, 500,000  bond  debt  in 
England,  the  like  appropriations,  as  mentioned  before,  shall  again  take  place,  until  the  debts  are  reduced 
to  those  sums. 

113.  Hank  to  keep  an  account  with  the  Commissioners,  under  the  head  of  Guarantee  Fund. 

114?.  When  the  stock  in  the  name  of  the  Commissioners  shall  amount  to  twelve  millions,  the  divi- 
dends shall  be  liable  to  make  good  what  tlie  Company’s  dividends  may  fall  short  of  10  per  cent,  w hile 
they  continue  to  trade  under  a joint  stock. 

1 15.  This  stock  to  be  a guarantee  fund,  for  securing  to  tlie  Company  their  capital,  at  the  value  oi 
200  per  cent.,  in  case  their  own  funds  shall  prove  insuilicient,  at  the  expiration  of  the  Utiu  Ibr  determining 
of  their  exclusive  trade,  after  payment  of  their  debts,  and  as  a guarantee  fur  the  like,  wdiile  they  trade  on 
a joint  stock.  After  making  good  such  deficiency,  the  surplus,  if  any,  shall  belong  to  the  jiublie. 

110.  Hank  to  lay  lielbre  Parliament  annually  an  account  of  the  money  so  paid  in  by  the  Company. 

1 17.  'riie  securities  givi*ii  by  cashiers  of  the  Hank  to  be  extended  to  this  Act. 

118.  Hank  to  be  allowed  out  of  the  dividends  such  sums  for  their  services  ns  tlie  Lords  of  the 
Treasury  shall  think  fit. 

119.  If  the  Company  fail  of  making  siuli  pfiynu'nts  to  the  Hank,  it  may  be  sued  lor  in  the  Courts, 
and  recovered  with  damages. 

120.  Hank  to  give  the  Comjiany  a e(‘rtilicato  of  the  monies  so  paid  in. 

J2I.  If  it  is  inconvvui^'^ft  0)  the  Company  to  make  the  payments  at  the  time  required,  the  Lords  of 
the  Treasury  are  allowed  to  postpone  the  periods  of  such  paynumts. 

122.  If  by  extraordinary  cxpences  for  w\ar,  or  preparations  for  war,  the  Company’s  funds  shall  fall 
short  of  allow'ing  the  payment  of  .C5()0,000  annually  into  the  Exeheipior,  the  deficiency  shall  not  be  made 
good,  so  as  to  impede  the  accumulation  of  the  Guarantee  Fund. 

123.  31iis  Act  not  to  affect  the  rights  of  the  public  or  the  Company  in  the  territorial  acquisitions 
and  revenues,  beyond  tlie  further  term  granted. 

121.  Conijiany’s  separate  fund,  amounting  to  J^’lt57,89fi  7s.  Id,  over  and  above  1?9,75()  capital  stock; 
also  part  of  the  said  fund,  may  he  appropriated  in  an  increased  dividend  of  10s.  per  cent. 

125.  No  grant  of  new  sjilaries,  increase  ol*  salaries,  or  pensions  above  1^200  piT  aiimini,  to  be  made 
but  with  the  approbation  of  the  Hoard  of  Commissioners. 

12ti.  .Annual  produce  of  the  revenues,  amount  sales  of  goods  and  stores,  annual  disbursements, 
amount  of  debts,  amount  of  Interest,  state  of  their  ellects,  and  a list  of  their  establisiiments  in  India;  as 
also  an  annual  account  of  their  commercial  receipts  and  charges  at  home,  a statement  of  the  bond  and 
other  <lebts,  witli  the  amount  of  interest,  with  an  account  of  new  or  increased  salaries  and  pensions,  to  be 
annually  laid  before  Parliament. 

127.  Debt  of  the  Company  to  Ills  Majesty  for  the  hire  of  troops,  and  of  the  public  to  the  Company 
for  th(*  mainti  nance  of  jirisoners  at  the  taking  of  Manilla  in  17(i2,  and  for  customs  on  tea  returned  by 
llie  buvers  in  17S  I-,  miUuuIJy  agreed  to  be  discharged  and  done  away  until  the  S-Uh  of  December,  1792. 

12S.  After  this  period,  all  charges  respecting  the  King’s  troops  serving  in  India,  to  he  paid  by  the 
( ompany. 

129.  3'he  several  Acts  passed  for  securing  to  the  Company  the  exclusive  trade  to  India,  reduced  to 
4)nc  Act.  Ships,  &c.  of  unlicensed  persons  trading  to  the  East  Indies,  to  be  forfeited,  and  double  the 
value;  one-fourth  to  the  person  v>ho  shall  .seize  or  inform,  the  other  to  tlie  Company,  W’ho  shall  bear  the 
charges  of  the  prosecution. 

130.  Persons  found  wdthiii  tlie  Company’s  limits,  to  be  deemed  unlawfid  traders. 

131.  Such  persons  shall  be  subject  also  to  fine  and  imprisonment. 


BETWEEN  ENGLAND  AND  THE  EAST  INDIES. 


Ixxr 

132.  May  be  arrested,  and  sent  to  England  for  trial. 

13:^.  t’oinpany's  (iovernors  and  Ag(‘nts  empowered  to  arrest  oftt‘n(iers,  and  seize  tlieir  vessels. 

13  k IV^rsons  resigning,  or  dismissed  the  service,  remaining  in  India  aller  the  time  allowed  them  to 
depai  t,  .shall  he  deemed  unlawful  traders. 

13.>.  All  goods  shipped  for  the  East  Indies,  except  licensed  by  the  Tompany,  or  under  the  provision»» 
of  this  Act;  and  all  goods  taken  out  of  any  ship  on  her  \(>y;ige  home,  to  he  forfeiletl  with  dmdde  value 
The  Master  to  forfeit  i?1000  and  all  his  wages,  and  Ix'  rendered  incapable  of  serving  the  (\)m|):inY  ai;ain 

l.'Ki.  No  British  subject  shall  trade  to  India,  under  a ecuninission  from  any  foreign  State,  <m  penalty 
of  •f^OO;  one  half  to  the  informer,  who  shall  ^iie  h)r  the  same,  the  i)ther  to  the  ('(»m|)any. 

137.  No  Governor,  Member  of  (.V)uncil,  Judge  of  the  Supreme  Coin  t,  or  person  emj)loved  in  cob 
lecting  the  revenues,  or  in  the  admiiii‘'tralion  ot‘ justiee,  shall  be  allowed  to  tiade,  on  penally  of  treble 
the  value;  half  to  the  (.hnupany,  and  ludi'  to  the  informer  suing  for  the  same. 

1.38.  No  British  subject  to  Ix'  roncerneil  In  sending  goods  to  Europe  by  w\'\y  of  Suez,  or  In  any  othei 
channel  than  allowed  by  this  Act.  IVnalty  double  the  value. 

139.  'riie  abov'c  not  to  be  considered  as  extending  to  sidling  goods  to  the  subjects  of  fuieigii  States, 
or  acting  as  agents  for  foreigners. 

140.  Directions  how  ollieers  are  to  be  prosecuted. 

141.  Directions  how  actions  are  to  he  laid.  Limitation  of  actions,  process. 

112.  Attorney  General  may  exhihit  eorn|)!aints  .against  illicit  traders.  ClaiMh'sline  traders  to  pay  (he 
King's  duties,  and  a reparation  to  the  C’omjianv  of  [xt  cent,  of  the  value.  If  hill  dismisseil  in  favoiii 
of  defendant,  the  ('ompany  to  jiay  costs,  if  a decree  is  obtained,  <h*fendant  must  pay  costs, 

113.  Upon  information  of  illicit  trading,  if  the  Gompany  shall  elect  to  piel’er  the  complaint,  there 
shall  be  paid  to  the  informer  one-third  of  the  shigle  value  of  the  concern;  if  it  is  agreed  to  prosecute  for 
the  penalties,  informer  may  sue  ; nor  shall  the  action  be  discontinued  wilbout  Gompanv's  consent. 

144.  If  the  Company  are  the  i»ifonner.s,  the  penalties  to  accrue  on  them,  though  not  sued  for  within 
the  limited  time. 

145.  If  suit  is  brought  against  tlje  Comjjaiiy  for  unlawful  .arresting,  is:e  tliey  may  plead  the  general 
issue.  On  failure,  plaintiff'  shall  pay  treble  costs. 

14G.  All  penalties  and  provisions  regarding  illicit  trading,  recited  in  former  Acts,  n'|)oaled.  So  nuich 
of  the  Acts  of  9 and  10  William  III.  chap.  IL  .5  Geo.  1.  cha|».  21.  5 Geo.  I.  chap.  it.  7 Geo.  L 
chap.  21.  9 Geo.  I.  chap.  20.  3 Geo.  II.  chap.  IL  27  (ieo.  IT.  chap.  17.  10  (ieo.  III.  chap.  17. 
13  Geo.  III.  chap.  G3.  21  Geo.  III.  chap.  05.  21  Geo.  111.  chap.  25.  20  Geo.  III.  chap.  57.  as 
relate  to  persons  illicitly  trading  to  the  East  lndi(*s,  repealed. 

147.  Repeal  not  to  extend  to  offences  committed  before  passing  this  Act. 

148.  Not  to  affect  the  powders  of  the  present  Board  of  (Commissioners  till  a new  Board  is  appointed. 

149.  Nor  to  abridge  or  vary  tlie  powers  given  by  28  Geo.  III.  ch/ip.  8,  and  31  (lOO.  III.  chap.  10, 
concerning  the  expenccs  of  King's  troo[)s  serving  in  the  East  Indies. 

150.  Acts  repealed  not  to  bar  actions. 

151.  Governor  General  in  Council  may  appoint  Justices  of  the  Peace.  Not  to  set  in  Courts  of  Oyer 
and  Terminer  until  called  upon. 

152.  Not  to  act  till  they  have  taken  oaths. 

153.  Proceedings  of  Justices  may  be  removed  to  Courts  of  Oyer  and  Terminer, 

154.  Before  granting  writs  of  certiorari,  same  recognisances  must  be  entered  into,  as  are  practised 
in  removal  of  conviction  from  a Justice  of  tlie  Peace  in  England  into  the  Court  of  King’s  Ucncli. 

155.  Justices  of  the  Peace  may,  when  required,  set  in  the  Council  of  the  Presidency  upon  appeals. 

*K  2 


Ixxvi 


RISE  AND  PROGRESS  OF  THE  COMMERCE 


1 56.  Powers  of  the  Supreme  Court  of  Judicature,  as  a Court  of  Admiralty,  are  extended  to  the  high  seas. 

157.  Governor  General,  and  Governor  of  the  respective  Presidencies,  may  appoint  and  remove 
Coroners,  to  act  in  the  like  manner  as  in  England. 

158.  Justices  of  the  Peace  may  appoint  scavengers,  order  the  streets  of  Calcutta  to  be  washed  and 
repaired,  and  make  rales  and  assessments  for  defraying  the  expences  thereof. 

159.  May  grant  licences  for  sale  of  spirituous  liquors,  in  like  manner  as  is  practised  in  England. 

160.  Prescribes  the  oath  to  be  taken  by  the  Duectors  on  entering  into  office. 

161.  Respects  the  deposits  on  teas,  and  the  time  at  which  they  shall  be  made.  Teas  purchased  on 
Monilay  and  Tuesday  in  the  week,  to  be  paid  before  3 o’clock  on  the  Saturday  following;  purchased  on 
Wednesday,  Thursday,  Friday,  and  Saturday,  to  be  paid  before  3 o’clock  on  the  Tuesday  following. 

162.  Prosecutions  in  consequence  of  this  Act,  to  be  commenced  within  three  years  ot  the  otiencei  In 
the  absence  of  the  party  aggrieved,  within  three  years  of  their  return  to  Great  Britain. 

Act  to  commence  from  the  1st  of  February,  1794*. 

1794.  By  an  Act  of  34  Geo.  III.  chap.  41,  the  Company  were  released  from  the  obligation  of 
keeping  their  bond  debt  within  the  amount  of  1,500, 000,  and  permitted  to  issue  bonds  to  the  amount 
of  i?2,000,000;  and  they  w^re  also  empowered  to  increase  their  bonds  to  the  amount  of  jPi,000,000 
more  for  the  general  purposes  of  their  trade,  with  the  consent  of  the  Board  of  Controul. 

The  Company’s  saltpetre  warehouses  in  liatclifTe  Highway  were  burnt  the  26th  of  June,  1794. 

By  the  treaty  of  amity,  commerce,  and  navigation  concluded  between  America  and  Great 
Britain,  on  the  19th  of  November,  1794,  it  was  stipulated  that  American  vessels  should  have  liberty 
to  trade  in  all  articles  not  prohibited  in  the  British  settlements  in  India,  and  to  pay  the  same  duties 
as  British  subjects,  but  should  only  carry  the  articles  exported  by  them  from  India,  to  their  own  ports 
In  America. 

The  Company,  in  a loyal  address  to  the  King,  offered  to  raise  and  clothe  three  regiments,  of  1000 
men  each,  for  His  Majesty’s  service  during  the  war;  but  (Jovernment  preferred  their  giving  a bounty  to 
seamen,  which  was  arrordiiigly  done. 

1795.  Hostilities  having  commenced  with  Holland,  it  was  necessary  to  guard  the  eastern  coast  of 
Great  Britain.  Ills  Majesty’s  Ministers,  thinking  it  needful  to  augment  the  strength  of  the  navy  as 
much  as  possible,  apjdied  to  the  East  India  Company  for  such  ships  of  force  as  they  had  at  home.  In 
consequence  of  which,  14  of  their  largest  ships  were  transferred  to  the  use  of  the  Slate,  and  made  into 
54  gun  ships;  some  of  which  were  afterwards  in  the  memorable  engagement  under  Lord  Duncan,  and 
one  (the  Glatton,  commanded  by  Captain  Trollope),  beat  off  and  defeated  five  ships  of  the  enemy. 

On  the  receipt  of  the  intelligence  in  India,  that  war  was  declared  against  Holland  by  Great  Britain, 
expeditions  were  fitted  out  against  their  settlements  in  India,  and  from  England  against  the  Cape  of 
Good  Hope,  which  was  taken  by  (lie  British  forces  September  16,  1795.  Trincomalee  on  Ceylon 
surrendered  to  the  British  troops  August  26,  1795.  Malacca  and  its  dependencies  were  taken  August 
17,  1795.  Cochin  was  taken  October  20,  1795;  ami  a force  detached  against  the  Dutch  fort  at  Quinton 
and  the  factory  at  Porca,  which  were  delivered  up  without  resistance.  These  captures  left  the  Dutch 
without  a single  settlement  or  fi^tory  upon  the  continent  of  India. 

In  the  years  1792-3-4  there  were  conveyed  to  India  in  the  Company’s  ships  10,400  troops  of  their 
own  and  the  King’s;  the  mortality  amongst  them  was  only  194  men,  and  some  of  them,  it  appears,  were 
lust  by  accident.  This  forms  a contrast  to  the  losses  which  have  been  incurred  in  Government  trans- 
ports in  voyages  of  much  shorter  duration,  and  places  in  a striking  point  of  view  the  safety  and  strength 
of  the  Company’s  shipping. 


BETWEEN  ENGLAND  AND  THE  EAST  INDIES. 


Ixxvii 


Tlie  trial  of  Warren  Hastings,  Esq.  formerly  Governor  General  of  India,  whieh  had  lasted  nearly  eight 
years,  was  now  brought  to  a conclusion.  He  was  honourably  ac(|uitti‘d;  and  tlu^  East  India  ronipuny, 
unanimous  in  their  approbation  of  his  conduct,  paid  his  law  cxj)enccs,  which  amounted  to  and 

settled  an  annuity  of  i,^5()()0  per  annum  upon  him.  4'his  (rial,  which  engaged  the  attiMUion  ot  the  nation, 
was,  to  use  the  words  of  Mr.  Hastings,  “less  my  trifd  than  that  of  the  I'ast  Inilia  (‘ompany  and  the 
British  nation,  whose  justice  and  honour  were  e(|ually  involved  in  it.  It  became  unavt)iilahle,  fiuni  the 
reiterated  allegations,  which  for  years  preceding  had  been  made  and  credited,  of  abuses  ami  oppressions 
exercised  by  the  Governments  of  India.  It  was  institutial  for  the  ixpre**s  purpose  of  rectifying  those 
abuses  in  one  event  of  it,  or  of  proving  that  they  ne\er  had  existence.  INIy  uccpiittal  has  proved  they  did 
not  exist.  It  has  retrieved  the  honour  of  Great  Britain.  It  has  confirmed  the  right  of  the  Company  and 
of  the  nation,  to  those  advantages  which  were  at  all  times  admitted  to  Iiavc  been  obtained  by  my  im'usuri  s; 
and  it  has  demonstrated,  beyond  all  argument,  the  purity  of  that  great  assembly,  which  w ould  resolve  to 
hazard  such  a sacrifice  of  the  national  wealth  and  strengtii,  in  which  they  themselves  had  so  near  a concern, 
to  the  superior  calls  of  national  justice."’ 

In  the  month  of  August,  in  consequence  of  the  senreity  of  grain  that  at  that  time  [u  evailed  in  hhigland, 
and  the  probability  of  its  continuance,  the  Court  of  Directors  took  up  .^>000  tons  of  sliipping  to  [iniceed 
to  India  for  rice;  and  at  the  end  of  the  year  the  Court,  from  a motive  of  further  relieving  the  couiilry 
from  the  dreadful  effects  of  fomine,  the  apprehensions  of  it  not  lia\ing  then  subsided,  engaged  .^jOOO  tons 
more  shipping  to  proceed  to  the  Cape  of  Good  Hope  for  wheat,  which  it  was  uiulciNlood  was  in  great 
abundance  there.  The  Court  also  sent  orders  to  India,  authorizing  the  (iovernments  there  to  pci  mil 
country  ships  to  load  home  rice,  allowing  tliem  to  take  cargoes  from  England  in  return.  From  an  account 
made  up  on  the  return  of  the  ships  sent  to  India  and  the  Cape  of  (iood  Hope,  it  appears  that  tlic  (\>ni- 
pany  lost  by  this  praiseworthy  measure,  on  rice  importetl  from  India,  J.^ir>(),S{)();  and  on  wln  at  Impoiied 
from  the  Cape  of  Good  Hope,  forming  a total  loss  of  c£’17H,l;^Gl). 

1790.  The  (’ompany  gave  public  notice  that  tliey  w'ould  thenceforth  allow  interest,  at  the  rale  ol 
1}  per  cent,  upon  all  tlieir  outstanding  bombs,  though  bearing  an  obligation  to  pay  only^  \ jier  cent.,  (‘N<ept 
those  wliich  were  ordered  to  be  paid  olf. 

In  tlie  month  of  November  the  British  forces  captured  Foul  Point  on  Madagascar,  heloiiging  to  (he 
French;  likewise  several  other  small  places  they  held  on  the  east  side  of  that  island. 

It  appears,  liy  accounts  made  up  at  the  East  Indi.x  House,  that  in  nine  }t*ars,  1 7S.>  to  1 7tM  inchi^ivj*, 
the  Company's  losses,  by  capture  or  otherwise,  were  being  17s.  7il.  per  cent,  on  the  aim^unt  ol 

their  imports  and  exports,  which  during  that  period  w^as  ol\‘i3,<?l(),.5.jG;  and  that  the  sea  damage*  ol  those 
cargoes  w'as  .X’ 1(30,.' 191,  or  14s.  I3d.  per  cent,  on  tlie  invoice  amount. 

The  shipping  concerns  of  the  Company,  which  w^ere  lell  to  the  entire  management  of  the  Coni  I ol 
Directors  at  the  time  when  the  legislature  as.siinied  a enntroul  over  the  other  points  connec  ted  w it  h tlie 
welfare  and  support  of  the  British  possessions,  having  occasioned  continual  dissensions  ami  eoiiti-t^ 
amongst  themselves,  it  was  in  this  year  resolved,  after  much  discussion  and  delibcralioii,  to  new  iiuuh  l dial 
important  and  essential  branch  of  their  affairs. 

Previous  to  this  period  the  Company  employed  ships  built  specially  for  their  sc  i vice,  and  used  in 
none  other  so  long  as  they  were  considered  fit  for  their  use,  wdiicli  was  lour  voyages;  and  u In  n u oi  ii 
out,  other  ships  were  built  iii  their  room,  and  the  new  shi|is  replaced  the  old  in  <*veiy  uqurt. 
They  were  officered  hymen  devoted  wholly  to  that  service,  and  regulated  liy  oM  customs  and  standing 
rules.  There  was  no  written  engagement  on  the  jiart  of  the  owners,  that  they  wuuM  conliniu*  their  ships 
in  the  Company’s  service,  nor  on  tSe  part  of  the  Company  that  they  should  be  employe il , however,  the 


Ixxvili 


RISE  AND  PROGRESS  OF  THE  COiniERCE 


custom  was  so  well  established,  that  the  parties  mutually  relied  upon  it,  each  considering  the  other  bound, 
by  ties  of  honour,  and  by  their  mutual  interest,  to  observe  their  implied  customary  engagements.  In  point 
of  form,  when  it  came  to  a ship’s  turn  to  be  employed,  a regular  tender  on  the  part  of  the  owners  was 
sent  in,  in  writing,  olforing  the  ship  in  (jiiestiou  for  the  Company’s  service  for  one  voyage,  and  proposing 
a particular  person  as  Captain;  and  upon  this  tender  a charter-party  was  entered  into  for  one  voyage',  uitli- 
out  reference  to  any  previous  or  subsequent  service  of  the  same  ship;  hut  although  the  ships  were  tendered 
from  voyage  to  voyage,  and  a f’aptain  proposed  for  each  voyage,  yet.  the  owners  were  not  at  liberty,  with- 
out the  consent  of  the  Company,  to  displace  any  person  having  been  regularly  put  into  the  command  of  a 
ship  according  to  the  usage  of  the  service. 

In  Dccemher,  17JK>,  the  (’onipany  adopted  a new  system  for  tliclr  shipping  concerns,  and  determined 
in  future  to  (*mploy  no  ship  but  such  ns  the  owners  should  build  for  their  service,  and  should  expressly 
engage  to  continue  then'iii  for  six  voyages.  At  the  same  time  all  the  old  ships  then  in  the  service  were 
considered  holli  by  the  ConipaJiy  and  the  owners  as  permanently  engaged  therein  for  the  performance 
of  six  voyages,  at  a fixed  rale  of  fr(*iglit  in  each  season,  with  an  additional  allowance  for  the  actual 
expellees  incurred  by  war,  or  preparation  for  war,  to  be  then  srfth'd  nnrl  agreed  upon  between  the  Couit  of 
Directors  and  the  old  owners  acting  in  a body;  and  from  this  time  the  ships,  as  tliey  came  in  turn  for  voy- 
ages, were  employed  without  any  lender  being  made  iluring  their  existence;  and  to  provide  for  the  future 
want  of  shipiiing  hy  public  advertisement  and  open  eompdition,  an  Act  afterwards  passed,  by  whicli  it  was 
ordained,  that  IVom  and  after  passing  the  said  Act,  (.‘i9  Geo.  III.  chap.  89),  the  C’ompany  should  employ 
ill  their  regular  service  no  ships  but  such  as  should  be  contracted  for  to  serve  the  said  Company,  as  they 
.should  have  occasion  to  employ  them,  and  that  from  time  to  time,  whenever  the  said  Company  should 
have  occasion  to  cause  any  ship  or  ships  to  b(?  built  for  their  service,  the  Court  of  Directors  should  give 
notice  thereof  hv  public  advertisement,  and  therein  state  the  burthen  of  tlie  ship  or  ships  wanted,  &c.  and 
recc‘ive  proposals  fur  building  and  fri'ighting  ships;  and  the  proposals  ollering  the  lowest  freight,  to  be 
accepted,  without  favour  or  partiality.” 

This  alteration  in  the  sliljiping  system  led  the  Company  to  a consideration  as  to  the  situations  in 
which  the  (’omniandcrs  and  ofiicers  would  be  placed  wdieii  their  resjiective  ships  should  be  w'orn  out.  'flic 
perpetuity  of  bottoms,  though  very  properly  never  acknowledged  by  the  C’oiiipany,  yet  got  into  practice 
by  the  favour  and  indiilgenee  of  the  (’ourt  of  Directors,  though  contrary  to  their  original  principle.  With 
the  continuance  of  liottoms  came  on  the  continuance  of  commands;  and  the  sale  of  those  commands  was 
universally  known,  and  continued  to  be  the  invariable  practice  of  the  service,  though  in  direct  contradiction 
to  the  regulations  of  the  Company. 

The  high  freight  paid  by  the  Company,  w^as  in  a great  degree  occasioned  by  this  sale  of  commands,  or, 
as  it  is  usually  termed,  the  good-w  ill,  which  in  some  instances  has  risen  to  i^l0,000,  hut  on  an  average  may 
he  computed  at  nCS,()()0  for  a new  ship,  'fhis  practice  origiimled  with  the  acting  owner,  who  is  styled  the 
ship’s  husband,  and  who  sold  it  to  the  Captain  to  whom  he  gave  the  command,  wdicn  the  .ship  was  first 
taken  into  the  service.  After  this  sale,  the  command  became  the  transferrable  property  of  the  Captain; 
and  when  he  left  the  ship,  he  was  considered  to  have  an  undoubted  right  to  sell  the  command  to  the  highest 
bidder;  or,  if  lie  died,  the  same  right  was  to  go  to  his  heirs. 

The  practice  of  the  sale  and  purchase  of  commands  was  in  use  under  the  old  Company,  as  the  Court 
of  Directors,  in  the  year  1702,  pa.ssed  the  following  order:  “ That  if  any  owners  or  Commanders  shall  sell 
any  place  in  the  ship,  such  ship  or  Commander  respectively  shall  not  be  employed  hy  tliis  Court;  and  that 
if  any  Commander  or  officer  shall  give  any  money  for  his  place,  he  shall  be  disidaced.”  Tlie  scope  of 
this  resolution  accordingly,  with  penalties  annexed,  made  from  that  time  an  article  in  the  charter-parties, 
and  nearly  in  the  same  terms  in  which  they  are  at  present. 


Ixxix 


BETWEEN  ENGLAND  AND  THE  EAST  INDIES. 

Ill  1708,  upon  the  incorporation  of  tlie  two  Companies,  when  various  suhjicts  wore  n^-itaUd,  thii 
cpiestion  was  broii^^ht  into  a General  Court,  and  a resolution  passed,  “ Tliat  it  he  reieried  to  the  Conunitteo 
of  Bye  Laws,  to  consider  of,  and  prepare  a bye-law,  to  prevent  llie  Captain  and  all  ollur  ollieers  of 
ships  employed  in  the  Company’s  service,  to  buy  or  sell  their  places.'’  A byc-law  was  aetoidinj^ly  passed, 
with  some  amendments,  which  ordained  “that  no  (’ommander,  owner,  or  pait  owner  of  imv  ship 
freighted  by  the  Court  of  Directors,  shall  sell  any  ollicc  of  mate,  purser,  gunnei-,  boatswain,  or  other  infe- 
rior oflieei*,  or  take  any  fee  or  reward  ^^hatsocver,  either  directly  or  indirectly,  for  any  of  the  said  ollieei 
or  employments  on  board  any  ship  so  freighted.”  This  is  the  KUh  bye-law  as  it  stamls  at  present;  and  it 
is  obvious,  but  material  to  remark,  that  the  amendment  |)urposely  and  avowedly  made  in  a (General  ( ouit, 
was  the  abrogating  of  that  part  of  the  proposed  law  nliieb  prohibited  tin*  sale  of  commands. 

In  1 7;U  this  bye-law  was  confirmed,  and  in  175()  the  Court  of  Directors  cMubiislied  lules  respecting 
the  (jualifications  necessary  in  those  persons  who  should  he  eligible  to  eomninnds  in  tlu  ir  ships,  but  Ibniear 
fifty  years,  from  170*1,  no  public  notice  ajipears  to  have  been  taken  of  this  (piestion.  By  the  )ear  1757 
the  elTeets  of  perpetuity  in  bottoms,  which  had  then  existed  more  than  twenty  years,  began  to  shew 
themselves  in  the  higher  value,  and  more  frecpienl  salts  of  commands.  In  that  year  the  Court  of  Direttois 
say,  there  is  the  greatest  reason  to  believe  that  several  persons  ha\e  of  late  bought  and  sold  the 
command,  or  other  oflices  on  board  of  ships  freighted  by  the  Company.'’  And  a reM>lntion  then  jiassed, 
denouncing  dismission  from  the  ser\iee  t*or  any  such  olfence,  and  retpilring  the  Ctiinmaiulers,  and  cliicf  and 
second  mates,  to  enter  into  penalty  bonds,  the  lirst  of  the  two  latter  of  i'50()  t acli,  in  case  they 

should  bo  found  to  have  purchased  their  places;  and  in  another  set  of  bunds  of  thi‘  same  tenor,  in  ea^*  they 
should  be  found  to  have  sold  those  places. 

In  December,  17(35,  it  >vas  stated  by  the  Court  of  Directors  that  these  bonds  “ had  not  answon'd 
the  end  anil  purpose  intended;”  and  in  January,  17<>(),  an  oath  was  prescribed  by  them;  but  in  July  following 
the  Court  declared  it  to  be  their  opinion,  that  this  oath  also  h.ad  proved  inelfeetunl,  and  should  be  dis- 
continued.” It  was  discontinued,  and  from  that  timi*  to  the  present  no  ne>v  eiroit  has  been  made  to  cor- 
rect the  evil  complained  of. 

Ill  Fi'briiary,  179(3,  (lie  Court  of  Directors,  desirous  of  abolishing  this  practice*,  w hich  the  inteii  st  of 
the  Company  and  the  public  l ecpiired,  and  ofalfording  that  relief  to  the  Commanders  w hlrli  they  had  leason 
to  expect  from  the  liberal  senlinienfs  >YliicIi  bad  been  expressed  by  a (ieniaal  Court  of  I’loprielors  on  the 
subject,  aller  much  deliberation,  came  to  tlie  following  resolutions: 

“ That  the  bottom  of  each  ship  be  valued  at  cl4500,  and  that  ench  ('ommaiuh  r lu*  rejiaiil  two-thirds 
of  the  sum  he  sliall  be  found  to  have  paid  for  the  purchase  of  the  butlom.  f)ii  this  piinciple,  the  com* 
mander  who  paid 


£.j/j00  or  upw'ards  received  i?5,0()() 

5,000  4,s3ii 

4,. >00 4,o00 

4, (KM)  i«(; 

3,m 


01'  upwarils 

2. . 5(H) 

2,(H)() 

1.. 5()() 

1,000 


(‘celM'd  aC;3,500 
,3, 1 (JO 

>,.5(10 

-,00(1 


and  the  Commanders  wdio  bad  obtained  tlie  command  graluitonsly,  received  X’J,500. 

“ That  cveuy  Commander  of  a n’gular  ship  in  the  service  of  the  Comjiany,  lx*  suhject  to  (lie  payment 
of  i:-\500  on  the  conclusion  of  each  voyage,  which  sum  shall  not  be  remitted  in  any  case  whatever,  witliout 
the  approbation  of  a General  Court  summoned  for  that  [nirposc.” 

The  amount  of  the  bonds  issued  to  the  Commanders  of  the  regular  ships  In  the  Company's  service, 
in  consecjucnce  of  the  first  resolution,  was  X’37(3,505,  the  interest  of  vvliieb,  at  5 per  cent,  per  uiinum,  is 


Ixxx  RISE  AND  PROGRESS  OF  THE  COMMERCE 

ri8,825;  so  that  it  will  require  thirty-seven  regular  ships  annually  to  defray  the  interest,  without  reducing 
the  principal. 

As  the  Company’s  regulations  now  stand,  it  is  out  of  the  power  of  money  to  obtain  a command  for  a 
person  deficient  in  the  qualifications  requisite  for  such  a situation.  Great  care  is  taken  that  no  person, 
without  competent  merit,  shall  be  promoted.  A man  must  enter  very  young  into  the  service,  begin  with 
the  lowest  station,  and  act  in  that  station  with  diligence  and  propriety;  he  must  go  on  progressively 
through  superior  offices,  acquit  himself  in  them  to  the  satisfaction  of  Ids  Commander,  and,  upon  each 
voyage,  undergo  a professional  examination  before  he  is  admitted  to  be  sworn  in.  All  these  arc  necessary 
trials  of  his  merit  and  nautical  skill;  and  aft<‘r  so  much  experience,  and  such  repeat(*d  proofs  of  liis  capa- 
city, qualifications,  and  merits,  he  is  considered  as  entitled  to  command  a ship ; having,  by  the  labour  of 
from  ten  to  fifteen  yi'ars,  shewn  his  ability  to  discharge  the  duties  of  tlie  station. 

• The  Company  have  freipiently  expressed  tlieir  obligations  to  the  Commanders  and  officers  in  their  sea 
service.  In  one  instance  tliey  observe,  ‘‘  except  for  their  exertions,  their  ability,  and  their  valour,  many  of 
the  great  operations  in  India  would  most  probably  have  been  endangered;  and  they  believe  that,  next  to 
the  bravery  and  perseverance  of  their  land  forces,  the  Company  are  indebted  to  the  distinguished  exertions 
of  those  gentlemen  for  their  present  prosperity.” 

The  junior  officers  derive  very  little  advantage  from  the  privilege  granted  them  to  trade;  and  a 
young  man  entered  into  the  service,  will,  notwithstanding  the  greatest  economy,  expend  upwards 
of  X* 1,000  before  he  can,  witli  the  best  interest,  and  most  fortunate  circumstances,  arrive  to  be  a second 
officcT,  which  is  the  first  station  wherein  his  pay  and  allow^ances  afford  him  a maintenance.  From  that 
station  he  occasionally  becomes  a Commander;  but  most  friMjuently  has  to  perform  one  or  more  voyages 
as  chief  officer.  Having  altaiued  the  command,  the  principal  advantages  resulting  from  that  situation  are, 

1st.  Investment  to  India  or  China,  and  from  India  or  China  home. 

2d.  The  trade  from  port  to  port  in  India,  if  a circuitous  voyage. 

3d.  The  passengers  out>vard  and  homeward, 

IwESTMENT  OUTWARD.— The  Commaiuler  of  each  regular  ship  is  allowed  to  carry  out  to  the  extent  of 
56 { tons  in  any  articles,  excepting  tin,  woollens,  warlike  stores,  clocks,  and  toys.  Of  this  tonnage  he 
may  invest  .£^2,(K)()  in  coral,  precious  stones,  &c.  on  paying  duties  to  the  Company.  ^ 

Ccunmandcrs  of  China  ships  may  cany  out  bullion  to  make  up  any  deficiency  between  the  amount  of 
tlieir  investment  and  .T3,()0(),  and  may  further  carry  out  to  the  amount  of  £3,000  in  bullion  for  the  pur- 
chase of  gold.  They  have  also  leave  occasionally  granted  to  cany  out,  as  ballast,  flints  for  sale  in  China, 
exclusive  of  the  regular  privilege;  and  the  Commanders  of  ships  of  every  destination  are  sometimes  per- 
mitted to  exceed  the  amount  of  their  privilege  outward,  upon  application  to  the  Court. 

If  tlu‘re  be  a ejuuntity  of  provisions  and  stores  in  the  victualling  bill,  exceeding  what  the  owners  may 
think  re(|uisitc  for  the  ship’s  use,  it  is  understood  that  the  Commander  has  the  option  of  filling  up,  on  his 
own  account,  the  wliole  amount  of  each  article  left  deficient  by  the  owners. 

IwvESTMKNT  HOMEWARD.— The  CoiTUiianders  of  China  ships  may  import  38  tons  each,  and  the  Com- 
manders of  other  ships  may  each  import  .30  tons  32  feet  on  theii*  own  account.  The  articles  oi?which  the 
tonnage  is  to  consist,  and  the  duties  ])ayuble  thereon,  are  enumerated  In  the  Company’s  Regulations.  There 
is  also  an  indulgence  of  tonnage,  not  exceeding  30  tons,  exclusive  of  the  above,  granted  to  each  ship, 
provided  the  Commander  shall  not  have  refused  to  receive  on  board  any  goods  tendered  by  the  Com- 
pany’s agents  in  India  or  China. 

It  is  necessary  to  observe  that  the  above  allowance  of  tonnage  is  not  paid  for  by  the  Company  to  the 
owners  of  the  ship,  nor  can  the  Captain  claim  the  exemption  from  freight  upon  that  tonnage  as  his  riglit; 
but  it  is  considered  as  a boon  to  him  from  his  owners. 


BETWEEN  ENGLAND  AND  THE  EAST  INDIES. 


Ixxxi 


Trade  from  Port  to  Port. — Ships  destined  for  Bombay  and  China  aro  allowed  to  be  freighted 
l)y  the  Commanders  and  officers  from  Bombay  to  China  on  their  own  account,  upon  paying  a sum  equal  to 
that  whicli  the  Company  are  charged  l)y  the  owners  for  demurrage,  and  sucli  i\niher  sum  ns  muv  be 
stipulated.  Ships  for  Madras  and  China  are  allowed  to  be  freighted  in  like  manner. 

PAbSENOERs. — The  allowance  for  passage  money  outward  and  homeward  is  fixed  by  the  Company, 
and  tiic  C-oniinanders  enter  into  a bond  not  to  take  more  tluin  that  allowances  but,  in  consideration  of 
giving  uj)  their  own  apartments  and  accommodations,  those  sums  in  many^  instances  are  exceeded. 

It  is  impossible  to  form  an  average  estimate  of  the  profits  arising  from  tlie  command  of  an  East 
Indiaman,  so  nmcli  depends  upon  tlie  skill  and  good  management  of  the  Commaiuler  and  the  persons 
employed  by  him,  the  risk  of  the  markets,  his  connexions  and  interest,  wliieh  enable  liini  to  select  Ids 
passengers  from  among  opnlent  persons  returning  to  Europe,  and  many"  other  cireinnstances  depending  on 
chance.  Although  u|)c)ii  a voyage  out  and  home,  tlie  (.Vmmian(ler\s  investment  has  sometimes  produced  a 
small,  and  at  other  times  a large  profit,  inslanceb  Jiave  occurred,  and  those  not  unliequently,  wherein  a 
considerable  loss  has  been  sustained.  Tlie  least  productive  of  the  voy-ages  may  he  generally  estimated  nt 
^2000  per  voy^age;  while  upon  some  others,  such  as  the  eireiiltous  voyages  to  Bomliay  and  China,  of 
which  there  are  not  above  four  in  a season,  the  gain  may  be  from  E8000  to  .PP2, ()()();  tho  major  part  of  tlie 
voyages  may  be  averaged  from  X'dOOO  to  oP5()0().  The  time  occupied  in  ju  rlinming  a voyage,  liom  the 
period  of  the  ship  commencing  the  receipt  of  her  outward  cargo,  to  her  Ix  ing  linally  cleared  of  her  homeward 
one,  varies  according  to  the  ship’s  destinathm,  from  II  to  18  months. 

The  followinf  are  the  rates  of  freiglit  paiil  by  the  Company  from  the  period  the  alteration  took  place 
in  their  shipping  system,  to  the  period  wlien  the  system  of  free  and  open  competition  commcnceil: 


Y.-ars. 

Co.ul  and 

U.iy. 

Bombay 

Chuia 

direct. 

India 

China 

UiMHial  X 
Belli  i*i»!i  r 

\ O.ilS. 

C»'Usl  and 
B.i\. 

1 Bonihny 

t \i 
dir 

per 

uia 

Cl  l. 

Indu  \ 
C\una 

per  Tun. 

Ben^pd  5,. 
|Bcn«  itnlcii 

jier 

Ton. 

per 

Ton. 

per  Ton. 

per  Ton 

j.«‘r'l'on- 

per 

Ton 

|H  1 'I’on 

Ton 

p.  1 

Ton 

J. 

» 

r 

/ 

V 

/ ' 

/ 

y 

? 

/ 

s 

/ 

/ 

.s. 

1773 

26 

10 

26 

10 

22 

10 

22  10 

1 787 

26 

10 

25 

JO 

23 

10 

1 21 

10 

2.5 

JO 

1774. 

26 

10 

26 

10 

22 

10 

— 

1 

17SS 

2t> 

10 

25 

10 

23 

10 

21 

10 

25 

10 

177.'i 

26 

10 

26 

10 

22 

10 

1789 

21 

0 

23 

0 

21 

0 

22 

0 

2.3 

0 

1776 

27 

0 

27 

0 

24 

0 

24  0 1 

..... 

2.5 

0 

21 

0 

22 

0 

23 

0 

21 

0 

1777 

29 

10 

29 

10 

26 

10 

26  10  j 

26 

10 

25 

10 

23 

10 

21 

10 

25 

10 

1778 

33 

0 

33 

0 

30 

0 

... 

30  0 1 

1790 

26 

10 

25 

10 

2.3 

10 

21 

10 

26 

10 

1779 

37 

0 

37 

0 

34 

0 

31  0 i 

— 

24 

0 

23 

0 

21 

0 

22 

0 

21 

0 

1780 

38 

0 

1 38 

0 

3.5 

0 

... 

35  0 1 

_ 

23 

0 

22 

0 

20 

0 

21 

0 

2.3 

0 

1781 

47 

4 

47 

4 

i.7 

4 

_ 

47  4 1 

... 

24 

10 

2.3 

10 

21 

10 

21 

10 

24 

10 

1782 

47 

4 

47 

4 

47 

4 

— 

47  4 ! 

1791 

26 

10 

25 

10 

2.3 

10 

21 

10 

- 

— 

1783 

33 

0 

33 

0 

33 

0 

33  0 j 

1792 

2.5 

10 

21 

10 

2.3 

0 

23 

0 

— 

1784 

30 

0 

29 

0 

28 

0 

28  0 

28  0 1 

1793 

32 

0 

31 

0 

29 

10 

29 

10 

- 

— 

1785 

20 

0 

28 

0 

26 

0 

27  0 

27  0 

1791 

10 

7 

39 

7 

.37 

17 

37 

17 

— 

178G 

24 

0 

24 

0 

22 

0 

23  0 

— : 

179,5 

42 

.3 

41 

13 

40 

.3 

40 

.3 



1797.  The  greater  part  of  the  Dutch  possessions  in  India,  Batavia  excepted,  having  been  taken,  an 
expedition  was  prepared  against  Manilla,  the  capital  of  the  Ehili|)pine  Islands.  Tlie  first  division  ot  the 
armament  sailed  to  Pinang,  the  place  of  rendezvous;  but  the  accounts  received  Ironi  Europe,  combined 
with  the  conduct  of  Tippoo  Sultan,  and  the  general  state  of  the  native  powers  in  India,  obliged  the 
British  Government  to  abandon  the  expedition.  Several  of  tlie  Company’s  ships  were  fitted  out  to  act  as 
men  of  war;  and  the  zeal  and  alacrity  manifested  by  the  Commanders  and  officers  on  this  occasion,  received 
the  thanks  of  the  Court  of  Dii'ectors,  and  gratuities  were  made  to  each  in  pi  opoi  lion  to  then  stations. 

♦ L 


hrxxli 


RISE  AND  PROGRESS  OF  THE  CO:\rMERCE 


179S.  Lord  IVIornington,  Governor  General,  arrived  at  Calcutta  on  the  Sth  of  May,  and  took  hw 
«aths  and  scat. 

The  voluntary  subscriptions  collected  at  the  Rritish  settlements  for  the  prosecution  of  the  war,  and 
remitted  in  this  year,  amounted  to  L^271,833,  of  which  i'’l.W,053  was  from  Bengal,  £7i,9\!)  from  Madras^ 
and  ^37,835  from  Bombay  and  places  on  the  western  side  of  India. 

A large  fleet,  having  on  board  an  army  of  40,000  men,  sailed  from  Toulon,  under  the  command  of 
General  Biionaj)arte.  Ailer  taking  jMalta,  they  proceeded  to  Alexandria,  of  which  tliey  ol)taIiipd  posses- 
sion without  much  loss.  I'lie  fleet  was  afterwards  attacked  in  Aboukir  Bay  by  I^ord  Nelson,  and  the 
wliole  taken  or  destroyed. 

On  the  21st  of  February,  17f)8,  a treaty  was  concluded  with  the  Nabob  of  Oiide,  by  which  the 
subsidiary  force  was  increased  to  10,000  men.  The  sum  stipulated  to  be  paid  by  the  Na!)o])  was  70,00,000 
Oude  rupees,  including  some  stipends  and  pensions  to  be  paid  to  the  Begums,  Princes,  &c.  Tliis  treaty 
continued  in  f6rce  till  1801,  when  it  was  sujKTseded  by  another,  dated  November  10,  I SOI,  under  which 
districts  w'ere  ceded  in  perpetual  sovereignly  to  the  (^ompany,  estimated  at  an  annual  gross  rent  of 
laicknow  rupees  1,3.), 23, 174,  or  1 ,.502,0.52.  I'hls  territorial  cession  was  declared  to  he  in  lieu  of  the 
subsidy,  and  all  expenees  on  account  of  defensive  engagements;  and  no  demand  was  to  he  made  in  future 
upon  the  Nabob  on  any  account  whatsoever. 

The  Company,  in  consideration  of  the  services  rendered  them  l>y  Lord  Hobart  during  the  period  he 
was  Governor  of  JMadras,  granted  him  a pension  of  i.’1.500  per  annum,  payable  out  of  the  territorial 
revenues  in  India  for  the  period  of  the  Company’s  charter,  if  he  should  so  long  live^and  to  commence 
from  the  time  of  his  (jiiltting  the  Government  of  Madras. 

8ince  the  peace  of  Seringapatam,  and  more  especially  ^inec  the  year  1790,  the  destruction  of  the 
Briti.sh  |)ower  in  India  formed  the  favourite  and  unremitting  object  of  Tippoo  Sultan’s  hopes  and  exertions. 
His  haughty  mind  never  could  he  reconciled  to  the  sacrifice  which  he  was  compelled  to  make  for  tlie 
purchase  of  peace  in  1792;  and  Ids  increasing  eagerness  to  recover  the  extensive  portion  of  his  dondiiions 
then  ceded  to  the  allies,  urged  Idm  to  pursue  a systematic  course  of  intrigue  against  the  British  power 
among  all  the  native  States,  and  to  revert  to  his  ancient  and  hereditary  connexion  with  France,  as  the  only 
eflectual  means  of  gratifying  either  his  aml)itioii  or  He  therefore  dispatched  an  embassy  to 

Zemaun  Shah,  the  object  of  wliieh  was  to  encoura^r  that  Prince  in  liis  long-projected  invasion  of 
Hiiulostan.  He  aKo  .sent  ambassadors  to  the  IMduritius,  where,  on  their  arrival,  a proclamation  was 
issued  by  the  Governor,  wideli  stated  that  an  emliassy  had  arrivcal  with  letters  from  Tippoo  Sultan,  pro- 
posing to  conclude  an  ollensive  and  defensive  alliance  with  the  French;  to  subsidize  and  supply  whatever 
troops  the  French  ndglit  furnish  to  the  Sultan;  and  to  commence  against  the  British  power  in  India  a war 
of  aggression,  for  which  tlie  Sultan  declared  himself  fully  prepared,  and  waiting  with  anxiety  the  moment 
when  the  succour  of  France  should  enable  him  to  satisfy  his  ardent  desire  of  ex[)elling  the  British  nation 
from  India. — A French  force  was  .sent  from  the  Mauritius,  which  landed  at  Mangalore,  the  principal 
oflicers  of  which  were  received  with  extraordinary  marks  of  honour  and  distinction.  These  circumstances 
were  considi'rcd  by  the  Supreme  Government  as  violations  of  the  treaties  of  peace  subsisting  between  him 
and  the  ( -ompany,  and  acts  of  direct  hostility  and  aggression  against  the  British  Government  in  India. 
A treaty  was  concluded  with  the  Nizam,  who  at  this  period  had  an  army  of  14,000  men,  commanded  by 
I'rciich  oflicers,  that  had  obtained  a degree  of  discipline  superior  in  every  respect  to  tluit  ot*  any  /lative 
iniantry,  excepting  those  in  the  Company’s  service.  By  this  treaty  an  increase  of  tlie  British  subsidiary 
force  serving  with  His  Highness,  was  increased  by  4,400  men.  This  detachment  reached  Ilydrabad  on  the 
10th  of  October,  and  on  the  22d,  under  the  orders  of  the  Nizam,  and  with  the  co-operation  of  a body 
of  bis  cavalry,  surrounded  the  French  camp,  disarmed  the  sepoys,  and  secured  the  persons  of  all  the 
nlFiccrs.  Tliis  operation  was  happily  effected  without  bloodshed  and  without  contest. 


BETWEEN  ENGLAND  AND  THE  EAST  INDIES. 


Ixxxlii 


Some  attempts  were  made  to  obtain  from  T'ippoo  a satisfactory  adjustment  of  iljc  dlllerenccs,  and  to 
remove  every  cause  of  dissatisfaction,  if  any  really  existed,  wlilcli  proved  uumkcc  ; upon  wliic  h the 
British  army  from  Madras,  under  the  command  of  (General  Hairis,  entered  the  territorus  of  Mysore  on 
the  5th  of  Mareli,  1799,  and  commenced  operations  by  the  capture  of  several  foils.  Tlu*  nomhay  army, 
under  Tdeutenant  (ieneral  Stuart,  inarched  from  raiianore  on  the  "il st  of  February.  His  aiiuv,  on  the 
6th  of  Alareli,  was  attacked  by  Tippoo  at  Seedaseer,  ^^hen  the  Sultaifs  army  was  defeated,  and  (oinpUtely 
dispers('d.  The  English  army  invested  Seriiigapatam,  and  their  butteries  opeiietl  on  the  IlOth  of  iVi^iiil; 
and  on  the  Itli  of  May  the  place  was  taken  by  assault,  in  which  '^ripj)oo  Sultan  fell;  the  lossofthe  English  in 
the  attack  wa^.  but  trifling.  Thus  ended  a war  which  retlected  gieat  honour  on  those  who  were  ein|)loyed 
in  it,  and  under  whose  direction  it  was  most  ably  conducteil;  which  frustrated  the  hopes  of  the  French, 
and  gave  the  English  peaceable  jiossession  of  immense  ten  it«u  ies  and  revenues.  The  specie  captured 
amounted  to  about  Hi, 00, <)()()  pagodas,  and  the  amount  of  jewels  was  about  9,00,000  more. 

The  Governor  General  placed  the  descendant  of  the  Rajah,  who  had  been  dis[)ossessed  of  his  rights 
l)y  ITyder  Ally,  on  the  Musiuid,  and  di\ided  the  territories  in  the  following  manner: 

To  the  East  India  Company  the  province  of  (hmara,  and  the  districts  of  (\>imhatoie  and  Dc  ram- 
porum,  with  all  the  territory  between  the  Goinjiany's  possessions  in  the  Carnatic  and  those  in  tin*  IMalahar 
province;  the  forts  and  posts  forming  the  heads  of  the  passes  aliove  the  Ghauts  and  the  'fahh*  T.und;  togetlu  r 
with  the  fortress,  city,  and  island  of  Seringapatam,  the  possession  of  whit Ii  secures  llit*  eommunicatioii 
between  the  territories  on  both  coasts.  By  this  partition  the  I'ast  India  Ctunpany  accpiired  an  augment- 
ation of  direct  territorial  revenues  to  the  annual  amount  of  7,77,170  (’anteria  pagodas,  from  whit h a 
tleduetion  of  2,1-0,000  W'as  made  for  tlit‘  maintenance  of  the  families  of’  llyder  Ally  and  of  Tippoo  Sultan. 

The  Nizam  acquired  territories  yielding  revenues  of  ,5,07,0:12  star  pagodas. 

MVi  the  Mahrattas,  notwithstanding  tluy  had  btuin*  no  part  in  the  expence  or  hazard  t>f  the  W’ar, 
were  givtai  territories  wdiich  yielded  a re\enue  of  2,60,957  (’anteria  pagotlas. 

The  country  reserved  for  the  Rajali  of  ISIysore  is  on  the  'ruble  Land,  above  the  Ghauts,  remarkably 
compact,  with  a strong  frontier  on  every  side,  yielding  a revenue  of  10,7^,076  Canteria  pagodiis. 

1799.  The  empire  of  llintlostan  being  threatened  w ith  Invasion  by  Zemann  Shah,  an  embassy  w'as 
sent  from  Bengal  to  Persia,  wdiicli  was  received  with  honour,  and  .siiecec  ded  In  the  principal  objects  of  its 
inission.  The  King  of  Persia  was  not  only  induced  to  attack  Khoiosaii,  w hich  Iiad  the  effect  of  nith- 
drawing  Zeinaun  Shah  from  his  designs  upon  India,  but  entered  into  treaties  of  political  and  commercial 
alliance  with  tlie  British  (iovernment,  which,  while  they  completely  excluded  the  French  nation  from 
JVrsla,  gave  the  Englisli  every  benefit  wdiieh  they  could  derive  iiom  the  connexion. 

1800.  A perpetual  and  general  defensive  alliance  was  coiieliuled  on  tin*  r2t!i  of  October,  at  TTydrabad, 
between  the  East  India  Company  and  Ills  Iliglmess  the  Ni/ain,  w hereby  Ills  Highness,  in  eommululion 
for  the  subsidy  payable  to  the  Conq»any,  ceded  to  him.  In  ]Kr|)etiiuI  so\ereignt),  all  the  (eiritoiles 
acquired  by  His  Iliglmess  under  tlie  treaty  of  Seringapatam  on  the  IStljof*  March,  1792;  and  also  aJl 
the  territories  acquired  by  His  Iligluics.s  under  the  trc'aly  oi  M\sore  f)n  the  22(1  of  dune,  1 v.  .th  tlut 
exception  of  certain  districts  situated  to  the  northward  ol  the  River  1 oonibuddrali,  whit.li  Ills  IlighiK^^s 
retained  in  exchange  for  the  provineas  of  Adoiil  and  Nundyal;  and  for  all  His  Hlghness'.s  n-niuniiiig 
possessions  and  dependencies  situated  to  the  southward  of  that  river,  and  of  t!i(‘  River  Kiistna  ht  low  its 
junction  with  the  Toombiiddrah,  the  provinces  of  Adoiii  and  Nnndyal,  and  all  the  said  distiicts,  ptjsx  .smns, 
and  dependencies  of  His  Highness,  .situated  to  the  .southward  of  the  Toombiiddrah,  and  of  the  ICiMna 
below  its  junction  with  the  Toombuddrah,  being  ceded  to  the  Company.  The  annual  revenues  of  the 
countries  ceded,  amounted,  accordmg  to  the  valuation  contained  in  the  schedules,  to  62,71,262  rupees, 

♦L2 


Ixxxiv 


RISE  AND  PROGRESS  OP  THE  COMMERCE 


The  Company,  in  consequence  of  the  eminent  services  rendered  by  the  Marquis  Wellesley,  granted 
him  an  annuity  of  dPSOOO,  to  issue  out  of  the  territorial  revenues  in  India,  for  the  term  of  20  years, 
provided  the  Company’s  exclusive  trade  should  so  long  continue,  and  the  territorial  revenue  should  so 
long  remain  in  possession  of  tlie  Company,  to  commence  from  the  1st  of  September,  1798. 

The  Company,  taking  into  consideration  the  iinremitted  exertions  of  Mr.  Henry  Dundas,  who  had 
intimated  his  intention  of  relinquishing  the  situation  of  President  of  the  Board  of  Commissioners  for 
the  Affairs  of  India,  gave  him  an  annuity  of  i^2000  during  the  existence  of  the  Company’s  present  limit- 
ation of  their  exclusive  trade,  to  be  paid  to  him,  his  executors,  or  assigns. 

In  consequence  of  the  high  price  of  grain  throughout  the  kingdom,  the  East  India  Company,  with 
the  concurrence  and  approbation  of  Ilis  Majesty’s  Ministers,  sent  out  in  August,  1799,  directions  to  their 
Governments  in  India  to  afford  every  encouragement  to  individuals  to  send  rice  and  other  grain  to  England, 
engaging  that  the  ships  so  employed,  should  be  allowc‘d  to  carry  out,  in  return,  cargoes,  as  formerly  allowed 
to  Country  ships;  and  on  the  .SOth  of  September,  in  order  to  encourage  as  large  an  importation  as  possible 
before  the  next  harvest  could  be  got  in,  they  sent  further  directions  to  India,  authorizing  such  ships  as 
brought  iliree-fourths  of  them  tonnage  in  rice,  to  bring  also  such  other  goods  as  are  usually  imported  into 
this  country,  with  an  indemnification  in  case  rice  should  be  under  certain  prices  on  their  arrival  in  England, 
They  also  offered  to  grant  licences  to  any  ships  to  be  sent  from  England  to  India,  for  the  purpose  of 
bringing  home  rice,  on  very  liberal  conditions;  but  under  the  express  stipulation  that  the  ships  should  be 
cleared  out  from  the  Custom  House  before  the  1st  of  December,  18(X),  or  from  any  port  in  the  East 
Indies  before  the  1st  of  September,  1801.  Large  quantities  of  rice  were  in  consequence  imported  from 
India,  chiefly  from  Bengal,  and  between  the  months  of  June,  1799,  and  August,  1800,  twenty  India 
built  ships  returned  to  India  from  the  Port  of  London  with  cargoes,  of  which  the  invoices  amounted  to 
i^()l3,247  12s.  (id.  and  from  the  Island  of  Madeira  to  J?  11 6,505  Os.  fid.  and  their  repairs,  outfit,  and 
supplies  in  England  to  i?202,877  12s.  3d, 

1801.  The  settlement  of  Bencoolcn,  on  the  West  Coast  of  Sumatra,  being  a heavy  expence  to  the 
Company,  the  Court  of  Directors  came  to  the  resolution  of  reducing  the  establisliment  there,  and  other 
subordinate  places,  and  transferring  the  civil  servants  to  Madras;  the  recent  great  addition  of  territory 
to  that  Government  requiring  an  additional  number  of  servants. 

From  the  1st  of  August,  1801,  the  civil  government  of  Malabar  was  transferred  from  Bombay  to 
Madras;  and  the  interior  administration  of  the  City  of  Surat  and  its  dependencies  having  become  vested 
by  treaty  in  the  Company,  the  establishment  of  Chief  and  Council  was  abolished,  and  a Lieutenant 
Governor,  a Judge,  and  Magistrate,  with  some  subordinate  officers,  were  appointed. 

The  preliminaries  of  a treaty  of  peace  with  France  were  signed  the  1st  of  October,  1801,  by  the 
second  article  of  which,  Great  Britain  agreed  to  restore  to  the  French  Republic  and  her  allies  all  the 
possessions  and  colonies  occupied  or  conquered  by  the  English  force  in  the  course  of  the  war,  with  the 
exception  of  Ceylon,  whicli  His  Britannic  Majesty  reserved  to  himself  in  full  and  entire  sovereignty.  By 
the  third  article,  the  Cape  of  Good  Hope  was  to  be  open  to  the  commerce  and  navigation  of  the  two  con- 
tracting powers,  who  were  to  enjoy  therein  the  same  advantages. 

On  the  31st  of  July  a new  treaty  was  concluded  with  the  fjfabob  of  Arcot,  vesting  the  civil  and  mili- 
tary government  of  the  Carnatic  in  the  Company,  together  with  the  full  and  exclusive  right  to  the  reve- 
nues thereof  for  ever;  reserving  to  the  Nabob  the  annual  payment  of  one-fil‘tli  part  of  the  net  collections, 
upon  principles  defined  in  the  treaty ; the  Company  engaging  to  apply  the  annual  sum  of  «C248,442  to  the 
liquidation  of  the  Nabob’s  registered  private  debts,  according  to  the  stipulations  of  a former  treaty,  till  it 
should  be  completed.  The  entii  c defence  of  the  Carnatic,  and  the  maintenance  of  internal  tranquillity  aqd 


BETWEEN  ENGLAND  AND  THE  EAST  INDIES 


lxxx\ 


police,  were  undertaken  by  the  Company.  The  liquidation  of  the  Nabolfs  debts  was  accomplished  in  1801, 
at  which  period  measures  were  taken  for  the  payment  of  other  debts  which  were  not  included  in  those 
classes,  as  well  as  what  were  atlcrvvards  incurred;  and  Commissioners  appointed  for  examining  and  making 
up  the  account,  when  the  annual  sum  of  3,4*0,000  pagodas  was  set  apart  for  the  payment  of  it. 

1802.  A treaty  offensive  and  defensive  was  concluded  with  the  Peishwa  on  tlic  31st  of  DccembiT, 
1802,  which  stipulated  that,  in  consideration  of  the  Company  furnisliing  a permanent  snhsidiary  force  of 
not  less  than  0,000  regular  native  infantry,  with  the  proper  equipment  of  warlike  stores  ami  ammunition, 
the  Peishwa  should  assign  and  cede,  in  perpetuity  to  the  Company,  certain  distiicts  in  the  province  of  (luz- 
zerat,  and  territories  south  tlicreof,  yielding  an  annual  revenue  of  2(),(K),000  rupee's. 

In  this  year  a political  connexion  commenced  between  the  Guicovvar  Rajah  in  Guzzerat,  and  on 
the  15th  of  March,  articles  of  convention  were  entered  into  with  him,  in  consequence  of  his  having  soli- 
cited the  assistance  of  English  troops  in  securing  his  right  as  legitimate  heir.  This  comention  provided, 
in  the  first  place,  for  the  reimbursement  of  the  exjience  which  might  attend  his  rc-estahlisliment,  by  the 
assignment  of  certain  districts;  and,  in  tlie  second  place,  for  permanently  subsidizing  a body  of  troops,  the 
whole  expence  of  which  was  computed  at  fi5,000  rupees  per  month,  for  the  payment  of  uhieh  lands  were 
ceded  to  the  Company.  A cession  from  the  former  Rajah  was  recognized  by  tliis  convention.  (Jn  the  fith 
of  June  following,  the  war  having  ended  successfully,  an  engagement  was  entered  into  with  the  Rajah, 
confirming  the  former  convention,  and  making  other  cessions  of  territory;  l)uL  it  was  not  till  the  21st  of 
April,  1805,  that  the  definitiye  treaty  was  concluded,  fixing  the  amount  of  tlie  subsidiary  force;  for  tlie 
cxpence  of  which,  districts,  producing  a revenue  of  «P131,625,  wen*  ci‘dcd  to  the  Company.  Tlie  former 
cessions  were  also  confirmee],  and  districts  were  mortgaged  till  the  advances  made  by  the  Company  on 
account  of  the  Rajah,  should  be  liquidated. 

The  Presidencies  of  Bombay  and  Madras  experienced  heavy  losses  from  fire  in  this  year.  On  the  17tli 
of  February  a dreadful  fire  broke  out  in  the  former  place,  which  destroyed  the  wliole  of  the  bazar,  or 
market-place,  the  barracks,  custom-house,  &c.  and  threatened  the  total  ruin  of  the  settlement.  Tlie  jiri- 
vate  loss  was  stated  at  near  .50,00,000  rupees.  On  the  .30th  of  April  a destructive  lire  broke  out  near  the 
custom-house  at  Madras,  which  destroyed  immense  quantities  of  grain,  and  olhi  r articles. 

In  this  year,  after  much  deliberation,  a final  arrangement  was  made  for  the  rcguliitif)n  <»f  tlic  jirivatc 
trade  between  India  and  Great  Biitain.  It  was  determined  by  the  Company  that,  in  addition  to  the  3,000 
tons  of  shipping  of  the  33d  of  Geo.  TII.  a further  quantity  of  5,000  tons  m’  much  as  might  be 
wanted,  .should  be  assigned,  and  which  should  not  be  diverted  to  political  or  w mi  like  purposes,  but  should 
sail,  laden  with  private  trade  goods  only,  within  the  line  WTatber  season.  ICxcejd  sal![)('tre  and  piece-goods, 
all  articles  might  be  laden  upon  them;  light  and  heavy  goods  were  to  beussoiled  by  the  Company's  olliceis; 
and  as  the  (.'ompany  were  answerable  to  the  owners  for  the  freiglil,  they  were  to  lade  lIk*  ^hips,  If  private 
merchants  declined.  These  ships  wen;  to  be  built  either  in  England  or  in  Iiulia 

1803.  The  Company  were  involved  in  war  with  the  Maliratta  Piinces,  Dowlut  Rao  Sciiidcah,  and 
Ragojee  Rounsla,  Rajah  of  Bcrar;  but  from  the  well-planned  and  vigorous  prosecution  of  it,  the  coimtiics 
of  both  those  Princes  were  overrun,  and  each  of  them  was  compelled  to  conclude  a j)cace;  that  with  the 
Rajah  of  Berar  was  signed  on  the  17th  of  December,  by  which  he  ceded  to  the  English,  in  jicipctual  sove- 
reignty, the  province  of  Cuttack,  including  the  district  and  fort  of  Balasore,  and  also  all  the  tcii  itorics, 
the  revenues  of  which  he  had  previously  collected,  in  conjunction  with  the  Souhahdar  ofllu*  Diraii,  toge- 
ther with  those  shunted  to  the  westward  of  the  River  Wurdah;  and,  lastly,  to  engage  tu*v(T  to  take,  or 
retain  in  his  service,  any  Frenchman,  or  the  subject  of  any  other  European  or  American  power,  without 
the  consent  of  the  British  Government. 


Ixxxvi 


RISE  AND  PROGRESS  OF  THE  COMMERCE 


The  peace  with  Scindcah  was  signed  on  the  30th  of  December.  Ry  this  treaty  It  was  agreed,  on  the 
part  of  Scindcah,  first,  to  cede  to  the  English,  in  perpetual  sovereignty,  all  his  forts,  territories,  and  rights 
in  the  Dooab,  or  couritiy  situated  in  northern  llindostan,  between  the  Rivers  Ganges  and  Jumna;  secondly, 
to  cede  to  the  English,  in  perpetual  sovereignty,  the  fort  and  territory  of  Baroach  in  the  Guzzerat,  and 
the  fort  and  territory  of  Ahmednughiir  in  the  Decan;  and  likewise  all  the  territories  which  belonged  to 
him  before  the  commencement  of  the  war,  which  are  situated  to  tlie  southward  of  the  Adjuntce  Hills, 
including  all  the  districts  between  that  range  of  mountains  and  the  River  Godavery;  thirdly,  to  renounce 
for  ever  all  claims  upon  the  Emperor  Shah  Alum,  and  to  engage  never  again  to  interfere  in  the  affairs 
of  that  monarch.  This  treaty  also  contained  a clause  similar  to  that  with  the  Rajah  of  Berar,  respecting 
the  employment  of  Europeans. 

The  Island  of  Ceylon,  which,  on  intelligence  of  tike  war  between  England  and  Holland  in  171)5,  was 
surrendered  in  trust  for  the  Prince  of  Orange,  to  whose  cause  the  majority  of*  the  Dutch  Avere  attached, 
remained  an  appendage  to  the  Presidency  of  IMadras  until  1799,  when  it  was  transferred  to  the  Ch'owii  of 
England,  and  formed  into  an  establishment  wholly  unconnect(‘d  with  the  East  India  Company,  and  subject 
only  to  the  controul  of  Ilis  Majesty's  Ministers.  In  1803,  in  consequence  of  the  troops  ol’  the  King  of 
Candy  having  committed  hostilities  against  the  inhahitants  of  the  English  territories,  an  army  was  marched 
into  the  interior,  which  succeeded  in  obtaining  possession  of  the  capital  of  Candy;  but  from  the  un- 
healtliiness  of  the  climate,  they  were  soon  corii|)elled  to  surrender  it  to  the  Candians,  who  pnt  the  garrison 
to  death.  AH  the  other  fortn  sses  in  ('andy  were  likewise  abandoned,  and  it  was  some  time  before  peace 
was  restored  between  the  two  countries. 


1801.  A fleet  of  homeward-bound  ships  from  China,  consisting  of  sixt(‘cn  sail,  under  the  command 
of  Captain  Nathaniel  Dance,  fell  in  with  a Erencli  sejuadnm  under  Admiral  Linols,  consisting  of  one  sldj) 
of  80  guns,  2 heavy  frigates,  a corvette,  and  a brig,  otV  Pulo  Auore,  in  the  China  seas,  on  tlie  1 1th  of 
February.  Captain  Dance  ma<le  such  preparations  for  receiving  them,  that,  on  th(*ir  altaeking  the  ships  on 
(he  following  morning,  they  were  so  severely  handled,  that  Admiral  Linois  hauled  his  wind,  and  made 
sail  to  the  eastward  under  all  sail,  and  the  Company’s  ships  prorei  ded  on  their  \o\  ago. 

The  circumstance  of  so  formidable  a fleet  being  defeated  by  a fleet  of  merchantmen  heavily  laden,  was 
considered  highly  honourable  to  the  British  naval  character.  The  King  conferred  the  honour  of  Knight- 
hood  ujion  Captain  Dance;  and  the  East  India  Company,  with  the  most  liberal  gratitude  for  the  gallantry 
and  good  conduct  evinced  by  the  Commanders,  officers,  and  seamen,  voted  the  follow  ing  sums: 

3’o  C’aptuin  Dance  2,0(K)  guineas,  and  a jiiecc  of  plate  valu(‘d  at  200  guineas. 

To  Captain  3’imins,  whose  ship,  the  Royal  George,  bore  the  brunt  of  the  action,  being  the  leading 
ship,  1 ,0(KI  guineas,  and  a piece  of  plate  value  100  guineas. 

To  each  of  the  other  Commanders  500  guineas,  and  a piece  of  plate  value  50  guinea.s. 

To  the  officers,  petty  ollieers,  and  .seamen  of  the  fleet,  in  Uic  fullowdng  proportions;  ' ' 


Chief  Olficers  guineas  each. 

Second  ditto. 

Tliird  and  fourth  ditto  SO  ditto. 

Eiflh  and  sixth  ditto  « % ^ I'iO  ditto. 

Pursers  and  Surgeons  80  ditto. 


Suigeons  mates  guineas  c^cli, 

jVI idshipmcn  ditto* 

Other  petty  olTicers  ^^.^^15  ditto. 

Boatswains,  gunners,  & carpenters  50  ditto. 
Seamen,  ordinary  seamen,  &c.  6 ditto. 


The  Insurance  Companies  in  India  likewise  behaved  with  great  liberality  to  them. 

. 1805.  The  Company’s  alfairs  being  in  an  embarrassed  state,  arising  from  various  causes,  they  made 
'application  to  Parliament  for  paynumt  of  a large  balance,  amounting  to  oC5,570,336,  stated  to  be  due  to 
them  from  Government,  on  account  of  advances  for  the  public  service  iu  India.  The  account  was  referred 


BETWEEN  ENGLAND  AND  THE  EAST  INDIES. 


Ixxxvii 


to  a Select  Committee  of  the  House  of  Commons,  who  reported  that,  after  dividiuij;  the  charges,  &e.  of  tlie 
capture  of  Ceylon  and  tlie  Eastern  l.slands  C(|ually  between  the  public  and  tlu*  Cn’npany,  deducting  the 
ordinary  expences  of  tlio  troops  employed  in  Egypt  from  the  gross  charges  of  tin*  expedition,  and  taking 
credit  for  the  whole  amount  of  cimrge  against  the  Company  by  Pay  (Jtliee,  many  articles  {){'  whirh  the 
Committee  stated  were  objeetional>le,  there  was  a clear  balance  owing  to  the  Company  of  X’,^,;H)0,lKK).  Of 
lliis  sum  i?l,()(X),000  was  paid  to  tlie  Company  on  account,  and  in  180G  anolber  sum  of  C 1, ()()(), ()(H). 


180G.  Ily  an  Act  of  ParHamcnt  of  the  l.ld  of  ilvo.  III.  ebap.  a Company  was  formed,  bearing 
the  title  of  the  b'ast  India  Dock  Company,  with  powers  to  make  docks  and  other  woiks  tit  Black  wall;  tlie 
preamble  of  whleli  runs  thus:— ‘‘  Whereas  the  ships  in  the  employ  of  the  East  Iinlia  ^^^nlpany  are  ol  a 
larger  size  than  other  vessels  employed  by  merchants  in  trade,  and  many  of  them  nearly  equal  in  linlk  to 
the  .ships  of  the  line  in  the  Royal  Naw ; and  whereas  the  cargoes  and  merchandise  on  hoaid  of  sucli  sliips 
are  of  great  value  and  national  importance;  and  whereas,  by  the  present  sy.stem  of  loading  and  discharging 
the  cargoes  of  such  sliips,  the  navigation  of  the  River  Thames  Is  frequently  imped(‘il,  and  delays,  l(>s.^^•s, 
and  inconveniences  experienced,  and  the  cargoes  of  such  .ships  are  subject  to  |)hmder,  and  thi'  East  India 
Company  and  owners  thereof  injured,  and  the  public  revenue  defrauded  to  a coasidcrable  amount;  and 
whereas,  if  good  alul  sufficient  wet-<loeks  and  basons,  with  neci'ssarv  ac(‘ommi)d.ilioiis  and  requisites  for  the 
recejition  of  East  India  ships  were  made  at  or  near  RIackwall,  the  (*vlls  anil  ml  ililcls  aloresaid  miglit  he 
greatly  remedied  and  prevented,  The  principal  stipulations  of  tlie  Act  are — 


part 


All  ships  with  cargoes  from  the  East  Indies  or  China  must  unloail  witliln  tl»c  dotk^,  except  such 
as  the  Commissioners  of  the  (histoms  may  direct  to  be  imloadcii  at  Lung  lliMch,  loi  lessoning  tlie 


them  to  he  unloaded, 


draught  of  water  of  the  ships. 

Owners,  masters,  &c.  of  ships  with  Last  India  produce  on  boanl,  sulleiin^ 
except  as  above,  to  forfeit  for  every  oflViice 

If  sutli  sliips  raiinot  be  luiloudcd  in  the  docks,  (■(•mnlis^iom•rs  ofCnstoius  may  direct  wlicre  tlieysliall 
be  unloaded  in  the  port  of  London. 

Outward-bound  ships  to  India  or  China,  to  load  either  in  the  dock.s,  or  below  I.Irnchoiisc  (>ii‘ck. 
Owners,  masters,  &e.  suflVriiig  goods  to  be  loaded,  except  os  aboxe,  to  forleit  i'dOO  for  every  olfence. 
No  other  than  ships  in  the  India  trade,  or  cratl  attending  them,  are  sulleud  to  go  into  the  docks. 


The  following  are  the  rates  of  charges  for  the  use  of  the  docks: 


Entering  inwards  and  unloading,  and  loading  outwards  (to  be  paid  within  ten  days  atler 

clearing  inwards)  for  ships  not  Country  ships,  per  ton,  according  to  the  register ... 

For  Country  ships,  not  less  than  two-thirds  of  the  crew  being  Lascars,  per  ton,  to  be  paid  as  above 
New  ships,  loading  out  for  the  first  time,  or  ships  not  having,  on  their  last  arrival,  unloaded  in 
the  docks,  to  pay,  before  leaving  the  docks,  per  ton 
Ships,  or  Country  ships,  removing  from  dock.s  after  unloading  inwards,  and  not  loading  there 
outwards,  to  have  returned,  per  ton 

And  to  such  ships  completing  their  number  of  voyages,  or  not  continuing  in  the  trade,  to 
have  returned,  per  ton,  within  one  month  after  such  ship  sJiall  he  removed  from  the  docks 
And  in  addition  to  the  above,  a further  rate  of  2s.  pr  ton  on  all  goods,  &c.  imported  by  the 
East  India  Company,  to  be  paid  the  Dock  Company,  within  tliree  months  after  the  ship 

shall  lie  cleared  (the  tonnage  to  be  computed  according  to  the  mode  of  calculating  tonnage 

of  goods,  &c.  by  the  East  India  Company);  the  amount  paid  for  private  goods  to  be 
deducted  by  the  East  India  Company  from  the  produce  of  such  goods. 


d-’O  It  0 
0 12  0 

0 t 0 

0 2 0 

0 t.  0 


Ixxxviii 


RISE  AND  PROGRESS  OF  THE  COMMERCE 


The  Dock  Company  may  charge  after  the  rate  of  2s.  per  ton,  for  wharfage,  carting,  Sec.  of  goods. 
The  East  India  Company  may  increase  the  rate  to  3s.  per  ton. 

Prize  ships  loaded  wdth  East  India  produce,  are  subject  to  the  same  regulations  as  sliips  from  India, 
&c.  and  to  pay  the  same  charge  as  privilege  goods.  Ships  in  the  East  India  trade  are  not  required  to  load 
or  unload  in  the  docks,  &c.  for  more  than  twenty-one  years. 

1807.  Hy  an  Act  of  the  37th  of  (4eo.  III.  chap.  3,  the  Company  were  permitted  to  add  i?2,000,000 
to  their  capital  stock;  a power  of  which  they  did  not  avail  themselves,  preferring  to  borrow  money  upon 
bond,  as  being  more  advantageous  to  their  concerns;  they  therefore  applied  to  Parliament  to  enable  them 
to  issue  bonds  to  that  amount,  wdilch  was  granted  by  an  Act  of  the  47th  of  Geo.  III.  chap.  41. 

1808.  The  Company  presented  a petition  to  the  House  of  Commons  on  the  26th  of  April,  which 
shewed  that  the  embarrassments  in  which  their  afiaiis  were  involved,  had  not  originated  in  any  impro- 
vidence or  mismanagement  on  their  parts.  It  states, 

“ That  in  the  course  of  the  last  and  present  war  they  have  incurred  various  expences  for  expeditions 
from  the  continent  of  India  to  the  French,  Dutch,  and  Spanish  possessions  in  the  Indian  seas,  and  to 
Egypt,  under  the  instructions  of  His  Majesty's  Government,  which  expences  were  adwnced  upon  the  re- 
liance that  they  were  to  be  t‘ully  reimbursed  by  the  public,  and  diilbrent  sums  have  at  diflerent  times  been 
issued  in  respect  thereof;  nevertheless  they  claim  that  a large  balance  is  still  due  on  that  account. 

That  they  were  on  the  1st  of  March  last  indebted  for  customs  and  excise  .^^770, 000;  and  upon  an 
estimate  of  their  pecuniary  transactions,  from  the  1st  of  March  last  to  the  1st  of  March,  1799,  their  pay- 
ments, including  the  said  duties,  will  exceed  the  probable  amount  of  their  receipts  within  the  same  period 
by  the  sum  of  jF2,433,185,  not  including  in  the  said  receipts  any  part  of  the  balance  which  may  appear 
due  by  the  public  to  them;  and  that  it  will  be  highly  inconvenient  and  disadvantageous  that  they  should 
raise  the  whole  of  that  sum  by  the  means  now  in  their  power.” 

“ That  they  are  not  conscious  of  having  created  or  aggravated  the  financial  pressure  which  they  now 
feel,  but  that  the  same  has  been  produced  liy  a combination  of  the  following  causes : 

I.  “ The  vast  amount  of  the  debt  accumulated  in  India,  and  the  high  rate  of  interest  it  bears,  the 
effects  of  which  have  been  to  intercept  the  suiqdus  revenue,  and  to  occasion  large  drafts  on  the  home  trea- 
sury for  payment  of  interest  on  the  said  debts,  as  well  as  payments  for  political  charges  appertaining  to 
the  Indian  territory,  out  of  the  home  funds. 

II.  The  very  large  sums  advanced  for  the  expeditions  from  India  before  mentioned,  part  of  which 
was  borrowed  in  India  at  a high  rate  of  interest. 

III.  The  deterioration  occasioned  in  their  affairs  by  a state  of  European  war,  under  these  heads: 

First,  in  freight  and  demurrage,  which  in  fourteen  years  have  created  an  increased  cxj)ence  of 

.£^7,000,600.  Secondly,  in  the  increased  cost  of  the  manufactures  of  this  country  exported  by  them,  to  the 
annual  amount,  on  the  average  of  thirteen  years,  of  «F1, 690,000  sterling;  which  increase  has  not  been 
counterbalanced  by  an  increase  in  the  selling  prices  abroad  of  the  same  goods,  nor  by  diminution  in  the 
cost  of  goods  purchased  abroad  for  importation  into  Europe;  and  thirdly,  in  diminution  of  profits  on  the 
Indian  investments  homeward-bound. 

IV.  The  large  supplies  in  goods  and  bullion  sent  out  to  India  and  China,  between  the  years  1802 
and  1806,  exceeding  very  considerably  the  returns  which  have  been  made  them  in  the  corresponding  number 
of  years.  Those  supplies  were  originally  furnished  for  the  purpose  of  increasing  the  investments;  but  great 
])art  thereof,  particularly  the  bullion,  was  absorbed  by  the  expences  of  the  war  then  carried  on  against  the 
Mahrattas;  and  in  1805,  to  aid  the  Indian  finances,  they  sent  large  supplies  of  bullion,  besides  the  usual 
exports  of  goods,  which  latter  were  also  to  assist  the  manufactures  of  Great  Britain,  continued  to  be 


Ixxxix 


BETWEEN  ENGLAND  AND  THE  EAST  INDIES. 

exported  upon  an  extended  scale  to  India  and  China  in  180G,  all  which  exports  m the  said  several  years  arc 
among  the  more  immediate  causes  of  the  pressure  now  felt  upon  the  home  finances  of  the  Company,  the 
returns  hitherto  received  for  the  said  exports  idling,  us  already  observed,  far  short  of  their  amount. 

V.  “ The  comparatively  small  investments  which  were  sent  home  from  India  during  llie  years 
1803-4-.5;  whereas,  if  investments  in  proportion,  even  to  the  amounl  usual  in  preceding  years,  had  been 
sent  home,  they  could  then  have  been  sold,  and  would  have  produced  a considerable  inllux  of  money  into 
the  home  treasury,  which  would  have  been  ready  to  have  counteracted  the  ellects  of  the  very  small  sales 
which,  in  the  present  state  of  Europe,  can  only  be  made,  and  wliich  tend  to  the  further  emhurrassmeut 
of  the  allairs  of  the  Company. 

VI.  “ That  anterior  to  the  period  1H0>,  mentioned  under  the  fourth  head,  and  during  a period  often 
years,  1797  to  1807,  the  advances  made  out  of  the  funds  at  home,  for  supplies  sent  to  India  and  China, 
for  payment  of  hills  of  exchange  drawn  from  thence,  and  for  sums  ])aid  in  England  on  account  of  political 
and  military  charges,  appertaining  to  the  Indian  territory,  have  very  largely  exceeded  all  the  returns 
received  in  the  corresponding  period  from  the  said  countries,  which,  by  an  account  earcfully  made  out, 
appear  to  be  indebted  to  the  home  concern  in  the  said  period,  upwards  of  ^.5,000,000  sterling. 

“ That  they  do  not  presume  to  reijuest  tlie  intiTposition  of  the  House  to  aid  them  in  their  present 
emergency,  without,  at  the  same  time,  shewing  their  unquestionable  ability  to  discharge  all  their  jiresenl 
debts  in  England,  and  to  repay  whatever  the  House  may  in  their  wisdom  think  fit  to  assist  them  with; 
for,  independent  of  the  Indian  debt,  which  they  submit  is  justly  chargeable  on  the  Indian  territory,  they 
beg  leave  to  state,  that  on  the  1st  of  March  Just,  the  sum  total  ol'  all  debts,  carrying  interest,  and  not 
carrying  interest,  owing  in  England,  then  amounted  to  .Pt),  I (not  inehiding  the  amount  of  their 
capital  stock,  hut  including  the  debts  luuein  before  mentioned  to  be  due  to  His  Majesty  for  (\istoms  and 
Excise),  and  the  sum  owing  by  the  public  to  the  Company,  taking  the  sam(‘  as  it  stands  in  the  annual 
account  at  X^2,460,000,  and  other  good  debts  owing  to  them  in  England,  togethi*!'  with  the  value  of  goods 
now  unsold  in  the  wareliouses,  and  of  the  Iiouses,  warehouses,  and  other  property  in  England,  nnioiinling 
to  the  sum  of  iM4,149,b2J;  and  moreover,  tliey  certainly  expect  further  goods  from  India  and  Cliina  in 
the  course  of  the  present  year,  to  the  amount  of  r5,271,0(X),  which  added  to  the  last-mentioned  sum,  will 
make  their  actual  property  in  England  itmount  to  X’ 19,420,1323,  from  which  the  debts  aforesaid  being 
deducted,  there  will  remain  a balance  of  i?l 0,298,002;  hut  taking  only  the  amount  of  the  goods  now 
unsold  in  their  warehouses,  and  the  amount  to  be  expected  in  the  course  of  the  yi'ar,  being  .E5,27 1 ,000, 
both  will  make  an  aggregate  of  properly  amounting  to  X’ 13, 086, .30.);  and  if  from  this  be  deducted  the  esti- 
mated amount  of  sales  in  the  course  of  the  year,  there  will  still  remain  at  the  end  of  the  year,  goods  to  the 
amount  of  X^8, 307,092,  as  a security  for  any  loan  tliat  may  be  made. 

They  therefore  pray  that  the  House  will  be  pleased  to  take  the  matters  aforesaid  into  their  consider- 
ation, and  to  grant  such  relief  in  the  premises  as  tlieir  ease  may  require,  and  to  the  House  shall  seem  meet.'’ 

This  petition  was  referred  to  the  Select  Committee,  who  reported  that  there  was  X'^1,500,019  owing 
to  the  Company,  a considerable  doubtful  balance  being  still  left  open  for  discussion.  In  consequence  ot 
this  repoit,  X?l,500,000  was  paid  under  the  authority  of  Parliament. 

The  long  and  intimate  connexion  with  the  Rajah  (>f  Travancorc  was  this  year  broken  off.  The  war 
with  Tippoo  Sultan,  which  concluded  in  the  year  1792,  had  for  its  first  ostensible  cause  the  attack  by  lliat 
Prince  on  the  lines  of  the  Rajah  of  Travancorc,  wlio  was  in  close  alliance  with  the  Com[)any.  It  w.is 
therefore  considered  as  a matter  of  justice,  that  the  Rajah,  should,  in  like  manner  willi  tlie  jNahol)  of 
Arcot  and  the  Rajah  of  Tanjore,  be  culled  upon  to  coiitribule,  acconling  to  his  ability,  Ins  proportion 
towards  the  expenees  of  the  war.  This  proportion  was  calculated  at  half  the  amount  ol  his  net  revenues. 
The  last  payment  *o  any  amount  was  made  in  1792-3.  A small  sum  was  received  in  the  following  year. 

♦M 


xc 


niSE  AND  rROGllESS  OF  THE  COMMERCE 


After  tills  period  the  settlement  of  accounts  with  the  Rajah  was  transferred  from  Madras  to  Bombay; 
but  during  the  three  years,  1794-5  to  1796-7,  nothing  was  received.  In  1795  a permanent  treaty  was 
concluded  with  the  Rajah,  in  wdiich  it  was  stipulated  that  a subsidiary  force  should  be  furnished  by  the 
Company  for  his  service,  for  which  a sum  was  to  be  paid  annually  equivalent  to  the  expence  of  the  same. 
No  payment  was  made  under  this  treaty  till  1797-8.  From  1798-9  to  1606  the  amount  of  this  subsidy, 
fixed  at  «£^42,914,  has  been  annually  realized  in  the  way  of  set-off  in  the  accounts  with  the  Rajah  for 
pepper,  furnished  by  him  under  contract.  In  1805  another  treaty  was  entered  into  with  the  Rajah  for 
increasing  the  subsidiary  force,  and  adding  to  the  subsidy  to  the  amount  of  i!45,186  for  the  expence  of  it; 
but  no  payment  was  made  on  account  of  the  additional  subsidy  for  nearly  two  years  subsequent  to  the 
conclusion  of  the  treaty,  notwithstanding  the  remission  of  half  of  it  for  that  period.  In  1808,  through 
the  intrigues  of  the  Dewan  of  that  Rajah,  serious  disturbances  occurred,  and  ended  in  direct  hostility  to 
the  (Company,  which  was  happily  subdued ; and  the  Rajah  has  since  made  a considerable  payment  in 
discharge  of  the  aiTcars  of  subsidy. 

The  Danes  having  been  compelled  to  yield  to  the  French  system  of  excluding  England  from  the 
continental  markets,  an  expedition  was  sent  against  Copenhagen,  w hich  ohtaineil  possession  of  it  and  the 
Danish  fleet.  On  the  receipt  of  this  intelligence  in  India,  a detachment  of  the  Madras  army  took  Tran- 
quebar,  the  principal  settlement  of  Denmark  in  the  East  Indies.  About  the  same  time  Serhampore  in 
Bengal  surrendered  to  the  British  forces. 

1809.  The  Company  sustained  some  heavy  losses  in  their  shipping,  more  particularly  in  the  homeward- 
bound  ships  from  Bengal;  of  these  three  were  lost  in  1808,  and  four  in  1809,  of  which  no  account  Jias 
ever  been  received.  The  following  is  a statement  of  the  losses  sustained  in  the  years  1807-8  and  1808-9, 
taken  from  the  accounts  rendered  to  rarliament: 

Walpole,  lost  off  Margate,  homeward-bound,  value  of  her  11,706 

Admiral  Gardner,  lost  on  the  Goodwin  Sands,  outward-bound  37, mr 

Britannia,  Company’s  own  ship,  including  her  cargo  1 1 / ,820 

Travers,  lo.st  outward-bound,  in  the  Bay  of  Bengal  14,558 

Lord  Nelson  'I  Parted  from  the  fleet  homeward-bound,  in  November  6fl,468 

ExperimenL^^.,..^  [-  1808,  in  a violent  gale  of  wind,  not  since  heard  of,  12,470 

Glory  3 supposed  to  have  foundered,  and  all  hands  perished.^*.  1 1,875 

Calcutta  > Parted  company  from  the  fleet  homeward-bonnd,  in  138,915 

Bengal  March,  1809,  In  a tremendous  gale  of  wind,  not  since  135,601 

Duchess  of  Gordon  ” heard  of,  supposed  to  have  foundered,  and  all  hands  100,540 
I^ady  JanoDuiidas  51,316 

Europe,  taken  outward-bound,  and  carried  into  Mauritius  154,398 

Streatham,  ditto,  ditto  154,502 

Asia,  lost  in  proceeding  up  Bengal  River,  outward-bound  43,011 

Forming  a total  in  two  years  of  fourteen  ships,  valued  at  -PI, 048, 077 

So  unprecedented  a loss  of  ships  occasioned  a particular  enquiry  on  the  part  of  the  Company  into  the 
4auscs  of  these  disasters;  from  which  it  appeared  that  they  were  owing  chiefly  to  extraordinary  tempests, 
or  to  the  caj)tures  of  the  enemy,  and  not  to  any  defect  or  errors  in  the  structure,  equipment,  or  loading  of 
rlio  sliips,  or  to  any  want  of  skill  or  conduct  in  the  commanders  and  officers  of  them. 


BETWEEN  ENGLAND  AND  THE  EAST  INDIES.  xtj 

1810.  The  following  is  an  arcount  of  the  number  of  ships,  with  their  cliarlerea  tonnage,  which  sailed 
from  England  for  India  and  China,  in  the  years  1793-1  to  1809-10  iiulusive;  the  amounrof  merchandise 
and  bullion  exported  on  them  by  the  Company;  the  number  of  shij>s  lost,  taken,  &c.;  likewise  the  amount 
sales  of  the  Company's  goods;  the  gooils  imported  by  the  Commanders  and  ofliccrs  of  the  Company's  shiin 
during  the  same  period,  including  prize  and  neutral  property. 


Shijjs 

sent  from 

EXPORTS  FROM  ENGLAND. 

! 

iMPoiirs. 

1*11  vale  1 

Years. 

JLllgLUtld 

MiMfhaiwl  SI*. 

Hiiilitin 

1 ” ^ 

I'oinp  CIiMiils 

1 n.  c and 
Neiilrjl  l*ru|K  1 1] 

No. 

Tons. 

£ 

i ^ 

£ 

Sbi 

takt 

1 

1793-4 

40 

4B,0.55 

1,3.35,800 

10,298 

1,310,101. 

! 1 

1,859,7 15 

882,020 

1791-.4 

34 

18,890 

1,2.58, .584 

— . ■ , 

1,2.5H,.581. 

i 1 

5,172,911 

I,(t5.h402 

179.5-0 

40 

41,728 

1,382,913 

38,191 

1,121,137 

1 ““ 

0,5 1.5,900 

1,.509'.52G 

179()-7 

34 

31,2.52 

1,194,907 

222,314 

1,117,281 

i •'i 

0,00.3,910 

2,098,999 

1797-8 

20 

21,fi01 

1,220,107 

0.3.3,08.5 

1,8.53,852 

I 

4,(i75,35S 

1,331,579 

1798-9 

3() 

34,102 

1,540, ,5.30 

l,229,0ti0 

2,709,.590 

1 4 

8,315,073 

1,978,190 

1799-0 

30 

.30,283 

1,713,918 

2()2,870 

1,970.824 

! 2 

7..1.59,070 

2,792,8,83 

1800-1 

50 

42,750 

1,869,802 

583,471 

2,3.5.3,.'3.3.3 

1 

7,.59.5,1.SI 

2,721,111 

1801-2 

40 

34, 7.58 

2,292,798 

139,517 

2,7.32,31.5 

0,020,.347 

2,.52.5..500 

1802-3 

54 

47,031 

2,288,.578 

1,722,085 

i,oio,oo;i 

1 

0,009,0.10 

,1,.5.S0,103 

180:3-4 

54 

40,720 

2,0.53,08.5 

990,122 

.3,01:1,807 

1 0 

5,800,07.3 

2,517,099 

1804-5 

51 

43,913 

2,(H».5,171 

1,952,0.H 

3,9.57,822 

I 2 

5,200..521 

2,770,814 

180,5-0 

50 

41,1.37 

2,080,721  1 

702,071 

2, 789, .192 

! 4 

5,!»9.5..598 

2,7.82,1.52 

1800-7 

40 

41,090 

2/j.50,27l 

— 

2,.5.50,27l 

i - 

.5,181,120 

1,71.5,28.5 

1S07-8 

40 

36,071 

2,218,0.30  i 

200,921 

2,119,5.51 

.5,1.50,9  71 

2,S79,,5;55 

1808-9 

44 

40,208  ' 

2,124.010 

2,191,010 

' .5 

.5.710,021 

2,27S,.339 

1809-10 

17 

38,394 

1,89  MM. 5 1 

— 

1,89M>1-5 

13 

5,91 7,280 

2,217,700 

Total.  ! 

7‘M 

031.22,5“ 

711,000,7.52' 

8,988,10.5 

40,018,917 

1 ,50 

1102,737,951 

1 ;{7,79 1.857 

The  Company  presented  to  the  House  ot’Coniinons  a suppIenuMit  to  tlieir  financial  exposition  of  ISOS, 
ill  which  they  stated  the  cMuharrassinents  they  were  snlyected  to  hy  the  reniiltances  of  thc’  Indian  Dchl,  the 
great  losses  sustained  in  their  sliippiiig,  S^c.  and  petitioned  for  a temporary  assistance  hy  loan.  In  conse- 
c|ucnce  of  which,  (Tovernment  were  authorized,  hy  the  Act  of  the  5f)(h  Geo.  111.  eli.ip  114,  lo  issue  ICx- 
ehequer  Bills  to  the  amount  of  X’1,5(K),000  for  the  use  of  the  Company.  By  this  assistance  their  home 
finances  were  in  some  degree  relieved. 

The  Islands  of  Bourbon  and  France,  the  remaining  possessions  ot'llie  h’reneh  In  the  haistcTii  Seas,  were 
taken  by  expeditions  from  the  British  settlements:  (he  fornicT  surrendej’ed  on  (he  9t!i  of  July,  and  the 
latter  on  the  10th  of  Dc’cenibcr.  By  this  capture  an  end  was  put  to  that  predatoiy  warfai’e  which  liad 
been  successfully  carried  on  against  the  British  trade  in  India  for  a scries  of  yi  ars.  The  principal  scdle- 
menU  in  the  Fastern  Islands  were  also  taken  from  the  Dutcli. 

181 1.  The  transfer  of  the  debt  owing  in  India,  and  bearing  interest  from  H to  10  per  eiait.  per  amnim, 
to  England,  having  still  gone  on  in  rapid  progression,  and  Government  laa'ng  ronvineed  that  the  operation, 
with  whatever  temporary  inconvenience  it  might  he  attended,  would  he  permanently  iKaK  fiiial  to  the  Com- 
pany’s concerns,  passed  an  Act,  51st  Geo.  111.  chap,  fit,  authorizing  the  Company  to  make  a linther  issiu* 
of  bonds,  to  an  amount  not  exceeding  I *‘2,000,000. 

Holland  being  annexed  to  France,  and  troops  having  been  sent  from  the  latter  couiiti  v lo  take  pos- 
session of  Batavia,  an  expedition  was  fitted  out  from  India  against  the  Island  of  Java.  Balavia  surren- 
dered on  the  8th  of  August,  1811,  u ithout  opposition;  and  the  remaining  part  of  the  island,  under  the 
Dutch  Government,  was,  after  some  resistance,  taken  possession  of. 

♦ M 2 


xcii 


RISE  AND  PROGRESS  OF  THE  COMMERCE 


1813.  We  shall  now  close  this  account  of  the  rise  and  progress  of  the  commerce  between  England 
and  the  East  Indies  with  tli(*  following  statements,  and  a few  brief  remarks  on  each: 

I.  An  abstract  statement  of  goods  exported  to  India  and  China,  and  imported  from  thence,  from  the 
period  of  the  union  of  the  two  Companies  in  1708-9  to  1809-10,  being  a period  of  102  years. 

II.  An  account  of  the  prime  cost  and  charges,  sale  amount,  and  profit  arising  from  the  goods  im- 
ported into  Great  Britain  from  India  and  China  in  the  .^)0  years,  1761-2  to  1810-11  inclusive. 

III.  The  revenues  which  have  arisen  to  the  State  from  the  trade  from  1793  to  1811  inclusive, 

IV.  The  amount  of  contributions  from  the  Company  to  the  public  from  1768  to  1812. 

V.  The  amount  of  the  dividends  which  have  been  paid  to  the  proprietors  from  1708  to  1609-10. 

VI.  An  account  of  the  shipping  in  the  service  of  the  East  India  Company  in  the  year  1811,  with 
the  number  of  ships  which  have  been  built  for  the  service  from  1771  to  1811  inclusive. 

VII.  An  account  of  the  debts  and  assets  of  the  East  India  Company  in  Great  Britain. 

VIII.  An  account  of  the  revenues  and  charges  at  the  different  Presidencies  in  India  in  the  years  181 1-12. 

IX.  A list  of  factories  at  present  established  in  various  parts  of  India  for  commercial  purposes. 

X.  The  Constitution  of  the  East  India  Company. 

I.  The  following  is  the  abstract  statement  of  merchandise  and  bullion  exported  by  the  Company  to 
India  and  China,  the  sale  amount  of  goods  imported,  and  the  number  of  ships  lost,  taken,  kc.  from  1708-9 
to  1809-10  inclusive: 


Ships  snii  from 

JKn  gland. 

EXPORTS  FROM  ENOLAND. 

J W 

IMPORTS. 

PERIODS. 

Me*ri  hainlise 

Bulltotl  ' 

T..1  d. 

Sale  Amount. 

No  j roils 

1 

£ i 

i ( 

1 

'28  Years,  17(»8-()  to  1733l4 

3.53  I4.2,!WI 

3,064,77-4 

12,189,147 

i 15,2.53,921 

20 

.3.3,571,709 

32  ditto  .^1734-5  to  170.5-6 

60.5;  287,695 

8,4.34,769 

16,081,496 

24,516,26.5 

.37 

61,452,377 

27  ditto  ..170(i-7  to  1792-3 

7311  .511,313 

16,4.54,016 

.5,673,513 

22,127,.529 

.39 

101  ,,38.3,792 

17  ditto  .a  793-4  to  1809-10 

740  631,22.5 

31,060,752 

8,988,165 

40,048,917 

50 

102,7.37.9.54 

i02  Years 

24291,573,21-4' 

.59,014, .311 

12,932,321 

101,946,632 

146 

.102,145,832 

From  the  foregoing  statement  it  appears  that  in  the  102  years,  1708-9  to  1809-10  inclusive, 

the  prime  cost  of  the  merchandise  and  goods  exported  by  the  Company  was  i’59, 01 1,311 

That  the  sale  amount  of  the  East  India  and  China  commodities  imported  by  the  Company 

during  the  same  [leriod  was  302,14'), 832 

The  sale  amount  of  imports  exceeded  the  prime  cost  of  exports  in  the  sum  of  XX % XXXXXXX X £243,131,521 
During  the  sume  period  the  Company  exported  in  bullion  the  sum  ofxxxxxxwxxxxxxxxxxxxxxx^xxxvx  42,932,321 

Forming  a balance  against  England  in  102  years  ofxxxxxxxxxxxxxxi^286,()63,842 

It  also  appears  that  during  the  above  period  the  East  India  Company  sent  from  England  to  India 
and  China  2429  ships  whose  chartered  tomi.age  amounted  to  1,573,214  tons.  Of  these  there  have  been 
lost  and  taken  146.  Admitting  one  half  to  have  been  lost  or  taken  on  the  outward,  and  the  other  half 
on  the  homeward-bound  passage,  the  loss  is  about  3 per  cent. 

By  the  aid  of  the  foregoing  statement  of  goods  and  bullion  exported,  it  will  be  seen, 

Hiat  the  exports,  which  In  the  ten  years  of  the  periods  embraced,  vtz.  1708-9  to  1717-18,  were 
only  i?l,177,126,  had  in  the  last  ten  years,  1800-1  to  1809-10,  amounted  to  JP21,413,807,  of  which 
more  than  one-lmlf  consisted  of  the  staple  manufacture  of  the  country  woollens. 


BETWEEN  ENGLAND  AND  THE  EAST  INDIES. 


xciii 


That  ill  proportion  as  the*  export  in  goods  increased,  that  of  the  bullion  dnninished. 

Tn  the  first  period,  from^^*%l  70S-9  to  the  bullion  bore  to  the  goods  i to  1. 

In  the  second  period,  from  17.11^5  to  17(>5~ti,  the  proportion  was  reduced  as  2 to  I. 

In  the  third  period,  from  ^^17fi(i— 7 to  l7(h^-^5,  the  goods  excelled  the  bullion  as  3 to  1. 

In  the  last  period,  from  tx)  1H09— It),  the  difi‘i‘rence  was  inereasetl  nearly  \ to  1. 

II.  The  following  is  a statement  of  the  prime  cost,  including  the  commercial  charges  of  idl  goods  shipped 
from  India  and  China  on  account  of  the  Company,  in  the  yeais  r7til-‘2  to  1S|()-11  inclusive;  the  amount 
of  customs  paid  thereon  from  the  Company's  treasury ; the  freight  and  dt'miirrage;  the  charges  of  mer- 
chandise, calculated  at  the  rate  of  5 jier  cent,  on  the  sale  amount;  tlie  total  of  prime  cost,  and  the  various 
expellees;  the  sale  amount  of  the  goods  at  the  Company's  sales;  and  the  profit  arising  Irom  the  trade  In 
each  year  during  the  same  period: 


Yt-ajs. 


17G1  to 
17G,5-G 
!7(>G  to 


1*1  llUf  Cosl,  111- 

liutin)'  Cli.iigi-S 


3,8(»7,815 


1776- 7 

1777- 8 

1778- 0 
I77!>-8() 
178()to1. 
1781-5 

178.5- 6 

1786- 7 

1787- 8 

1788- 9 

1789- 90 

1790- 1 

1791- 2 

1792- 3 

1793- 1' 
1791-5 

1795- 6 

1796- 7 

1797- 8 

1798- 9 

1799- 0 

1800- 1 
1801-2 

1802- 3 

1803- 1. 
1801-5 

180.5- 6 

1806- 7 

1807- 8 

1808- 9 

1809- 10 

1810- 1 1 


1 1,7.30,126 
1,150,883 
1,876,189 
2,010,787 

1.677.30.5 

6.0. 57.91 1 
1,851,317 
2,280,601 

2.133.. 5.32 
2,7.51,772 

2.116.03.5 
2,172,7.38 
2,517,863 

2.. 5.3.5.578 
2,568,741 
2,5.56,815 
2,883,5.52 
3,229,599 
2,991,111 
2,318,007 
.3,620,871 
3,196,258 
3,797,229 
3,091,271 

2.871. . 533 
2,9.59,6.51 
2,617,686 
3,012,085 
2,663,962 

2.575. . 589 
2,7.3.5,740 

2.727.37.5 
2,511,113 


Total -1106,.32l,066 


'\i8toni-.  paid  bv 

FrtM;»ht  and 

(Muiri^cs  oi  Mot-  1 

'I'nlal  (-ost  and 

Sab*  \iniMini 

PK.bt 

iho  CtMiipati) 

Deni 

Cliai  gi-s 

i 

JL' 

/ 

JL 

1 

2,90H,5S5 

1,997,207 

622,098 

9,395,70.5 

11,879,892 

2,1SV,187 

8,89.3,671 

4,120,122 

1,771,102 

29,8I.5,.32I' 

32,90.3,6(0 

3,OS8,.n6 

320,316 

151,083 

2,.526,K26 

3,305,687 

7 i H,S()  I 

87J,1()'I 

397,326 

189,088 

3,333,706 

3,.5.56,S7  1 

223,168 

872,313 

461,335 

196,162 

3,.5ro,H9r 

.3,6.50,1.58 

79,261 

(179,503 

438,519 

167,251 

2,962,()0S 

3,028,1  V.5 

6.5,837 

L(i3:3,M1. 

2,120,91.5 

(i  12,8 19 

1 0,72.5, 0S9 

12,573,009 

1,817,9'20 

57i,(i4^1 

1,017,160 

278,8  VI 

3,721,989 

4,201,981 

479,992 

537,l.yi 

8.83,001 

359,673 

1,(I6(),7'27 

1,617,971 

.587,217 

16.5,381 

819,818 

11 1,. 522 

t,133,2S() 

1,667,019 

A33,7(i3 

.550,190 

785,4-98 

291, .598 

1,3H2,0.58 

1,871,7  1.5 

492,687 

513,689 

677,781 

2.5.5,390 

3,S62,S9S 

1,2.56,518 

3*3.3,620 

.501,770 

745,5 13 

2()5,o;h 

.3,9.S.),0.SS 

1,117,823 

132,7.35 

621,880 

71(),303 

.30.5,175 

1,191,521 

,5,101..508 

909,987 

fil  1,722 

719,362 

308,191 

1,175,1.5.1 

.5,1  11,5.32 

966,379 

()(K),091 

716,69.5 

301,589 

•1.190,116 

.5,0.50,819 

860,70.1 

G26,07(> 

7()7,.591 

212,986 

4,133,198 

1,8.59,715 

720,217 

598,396 

663,019 

273,(iV3 

1,118,610 

.5,172,911 

1,051,3.31 

770,371 

1,0.53,701 

325,800 

.5,. 379,4  71 

6,51.5,900 

1,1.16,1'29 

S7(>,545 

1,077,713 

303,191* 

.5,2.51,626 

6,06.1,910 

812,281 

403,031 

1,021,057 

233,768 

3,978,863 

1, 67.5, 358 

696,49.5 

1,198,603 

1,. 51 1,307 

415,783 

6,776, .561 

8,.3 1.5,67. 3 

1,. 539,1 09 

43(i,75l 

1,137,680 

367,983 

.5,738,672 

7,3.59,676 

1,621,001 

209,151 

1,. 53 1,897 

379,75t) 

.5,921,036 

7, .59.5,1 81 

1, 674',  11. 5 

150,365 

1,175,130 

331,314 

1,7.51, .380 

6,626,.'!  17 

1,871,967 

78,159 

1,219,.560 

302,126 

1,171,378 

6,06!>,6.36 

],. 59.5, 2.58 

77,415 

1,281,188 

293,303 

4,611,890 

.5,866,073 

1 ,2.5 1, 1 83 

76,230 

990,07.5 

263,026 

3,977,017 

5,260, .521 

1,28.3, .501 

78,595 

1,176,.581 

29(1,657 

4,.596,918 

5,995,5*38 

1 ,.‘198,680 

54,955 

1,102,7.55 

259,056 

1,080,728 

.5,181,120 

1,100,392 

37,437 

1,26.3,5.51 

257,8 V8 

1,1.31,428 

.5,1.56,971 

1 ,022,.)  1.3 

65,140 

1,161,692 

287,301 

1,252,873 

.5,746,021 

1,19.'1,M8 

82,228 

1,196,115 

298,862 

1,301,610 

.5,977, '280 

l,(w2,670 

60,198 

1,263,121 

298,143 

1,162,60.8 

.5,962,860 

1 ,800,2.  >2 

27,322,631 

"38,110,.393 

il,927;()7i 

ilKl,98l,l6r 

22K961',198 

j37,9HO,.337 

JlCIV 


RISE  AND  PROGRESS  OF  THE  COMMERCE 


From  the  tbre^olng  statement  it  aj)|)ears  lliat  the  prinuj  cost  of  the  cargoes  imported 
into  Great  Britain  from  India  and  China,  including  tlie  commercial  charges  at  the  difTercnt 
Presidencies,  and  at  Canton,  amounted  in  the  years  17G1-2  to  lSlO-1 1,  both  years  inclusive, 
being  a period  of  fifty  years 

That  the  above  goods,  exclusive  of  what  were  lost  and  captured  by  the  enemy,  produced 
at  the  East  India  Company’s  sales  in  London  221,964,198 

The  sale  amount  exceeded  the  prime  cost  and  charges  during  that  period  oPl  15,040,432 


Whicii  may  be  considered  as  clear  gain  arising  from  the  trade,  and  to  have  been  thus  appropriated: 

Customs  paid  from  the  Company’s  treasury  during  the  above  period 322,031 
Freight  and  demurrage  paid  the  owners  of  the  shipping  employed  38,410,393 

Charges  of  merchandise  in  England,  estimated  at  5 per  cent.  11,927,071 


Balance  remaining  to  the  East  India  Company,  after  paying  the  above  charges  37,980,337 

exclusive  of  the  losses  which  occurred  on  the  homeward  voyages  from  India  and  China,  which,  it  may  be 
estimated,  have  amounted  to  near  hP2,000,000,  wliicli  should  be  added  to  the  above  balance,  or  rather 
should  have  been  deducted  from  the  prime  cost.  The  sale  amount  of  East  India  and  China  goods,  from 
l79^M'to  1809-10  inclusive,  was  oC 103,028,000,  and  consisted  of  the  under-mentioned  articles,  viz. 

Teas........ ^^55, 100, 2,30  Bengal  and  China  raw  silk  ^7, 01 4,980 

Bengal  picce-goods.........^...^..^.  14,490,378  Organzine  silk  228,  / 27 


Coast  and  Surat  piece-goods^.^...  11,503,923  IVpper  ^**^*^*%%...^............%....%..3,322,835 

Damaged  piece-goods ..............  116,824  Saltpetre  <^v.%...vv.....%w%%^..v..%...vvv3,000,956 

China  wrought  silk................%.  10,498  Spices  of  various  sorts  1,974,099 

China-ware  82,001  Sugar,  indigo,  alkali,  &c.«.«...%,....<,.5,035,101 


Nankeens  848,42,5  | Coffee  113,017 

and  the  profit  arising  therefrom  during  the  same  period,  amounted  to  ^21, 955,392. 

For  the  purpose  of  pointing  out  the  causes  of  the  variations  in  the  amount  of  sales,  both  on  account 
of  the  Company  and  individuals,  and  in  the  Customs  paid,  it  will  be  necessary  to  advert  to  the  alterations 
that  have  of  late  years  taken  place  in  the  sale  prices  of  the  Company’s  imports ; first,  from  the  modifica- 
tions that  have  been  adopted  in  the  manner  of  paying  the  duties;  and,  secondly,  from  the  derange^!  state 
of  commercial  affairs,  occasioned  by  the  distraction  of  the  times. 

Previous  to  the  year  1784,  the  sale  value  of  the  Company's  imports  was  enhanced  by  the  amount  of 
the  custom  duties  to  which  they  were  subject.  These  duties  being  a charge  upon  the  Company,  the  goods 
were  of  course?  sold  at  an  increased  rate  of  cost,  proportioned  to  their  amount. 

By  the  Act  of  the  2Uh  George  III.  commonly  called  the  Commutation  Act,  a revision  of  this 
system  took  place  upon  the  article  of  tea;  and  from  the  passing  of  that  Act,  the  duties  upon  this  commo- 
dity have  been  paid  by  the  purchaser,  at  a certain  rate  per  cent,  upon  the  gross  price  at  the  sales. 

In  1799  a further  modification  took  place.  By  an  Act,  usually  distinguished  by  the  name  of  the 
Warehousing  Act,  entitled,  “ An  Act  for  permitting  certain  goods  imported  from  the  East  Indies  to  be 
warehoused,  and  for  repealing  the  duties  now  payable  thereon,  and  granting  other  duties  in  lieu  tlieieof,” 
the  imports  made  through  the  (’ompuny,  with  a few  exceptions,  are  allowed  to  be  landed  and  housed  on 
payment  of  a small  duty,  atter  which  they  may  be  exported  free  of  further  charge;  but  if  cleared  for  home 
consumption,  the  duties  formerly  paid  thereon,  become  a charge  upon  the  purchaser. 


xcv 


BETWEEN  ENGLAND  AND  THE  EAST  INDIES. 

Under  these  regulations  the  sale  amount  of  the  Company’s  imports  has  been  reduced  in  proportion 
to  the  amount  of  the  duties  formerly  paid  by  tlie  ( ompaiiy,  but  non'  transferred  to  the  purchaser. 

The  amount  of  the  Coni[)any’s  sales  cannot  altogether  he  relied  upon  as  an  accurate  test  lor  ascertain- 
ing how  far  the  trade  may  be  considered  in  an  improving  or  a ilediiiing  state;  many  ot'the  coiumoditics 
are  subject  to  great  tluctuations  in  price:  pc[3per,  for  instance,  has  varied  from  2\?4d.  to  7[d.  per  lb. 
In  1757,  the  period  at  winch  the  first  of  the  Indian  territciries  was  obtained,  pepper  sold  at  I5d.  per  lb.;  it 
is  now  about  half  that  price:  hence,  by  looking  at  the  sale  amount  of  the  commodity,  no  considerable  alter- 
ation may  be  visible;  but  it  is  evident,  in  point  of  fact,  that  in  the  latter  period  double  the  cpiantlty  uill 
be  required  to  give  an  ecpial  sale  amount  with  that  of  the  former. 

Tea  may  also  be  instanced-  In  1757  the  quantity  sold  was  2,t>0 7,805  lbs.  and  the  sale  amount 
.£^7 10,1 16.  In  1810  the  (juaiitity  sold  was  23,51*8,168  Ihs.  and  the  sale  amount  C3,S{)6,02I.  Here 
the  quantity  is  found  to  be  an  increase  nearly  as  9 to  J,  whereas  the  sale  amount  is  only  in  the  itroportiori 
of  5 to  1.  Piece-goods  also:  in  1771  the  quantity  sold  at  the  (.’ojnjiany’s  sales  was  850,665  pieces,  and 
the  sale  amount  £’1,427,031.  In  1810  the  quantity  sold  was  819,193  pieces,  and  tlie  sale  amount 
«(?61 1,974.  Here  the  quantity  of  the  article  is  found  nearly  equal,  whereas  the  sale  ainniiut  is  only  in  the 
proportion  of  1 to  4. 

In  contrasting  the  state  of  the  Company’s  trade  in  the  last  ten  years,  with  its  situation  at  any  jx’riod 
prior  to  1784,  to  the  sale  amount  of  P.57,8 12,427,  should  he  added  a further  sum  as  an  erpiivah'nt  for  the 
duties,  i? 19,280, 809,  which  will  extend  it  to  £'77, 1 23,236 ; an<l  if  an  allowance^  is  made  for  the  reduced 
price  of  all  articles  of  Indian  produce,  the  amount  t)f  the  Company’s  sales  may  be  taken  at  i,’S.5,000,000, 
or  on  an  .average  of  the  ten  years,  1801—2  to  1810—11  inclusive,  £’8,500,000  per  annum. 

III.  The  amount  of  duties  stated  in  the  foregoing  .account,  as  paid  by  the  Company,  is  not  the  whole 
revenue  arising  from  the  trade*  with  India  and  China,  the  greater  part  of  the  duties  being  |)aid  by  the 
purchasers  on  clearing  the  goods  for  home  consumption.  The  tbllowing  is  an  .aeeoiuit  of*  the  total  of  cus- 
toms and  excise  duties  which  have  arisen  from  the  trade  in  the  eighteen  years,  1791  to  1811  inclusive, 
taken  from  papers  submitted  to  the  House  of  Cuinmons: 


F E\C  r^^K. 

Tt)'l  \L. 

I Oih<  I (.  .m-!s 


l,(f03,fM9 

819,702 

, 1,220,606 

; 1,566,131 

; 1,373,917 

' 1,175,970 

1,831,167 

1,761,273 

2,0 15,  If  )9 

1,935,171 

<1,420  2,619,fM)3 

17,591  3,032,550 

17,461  * A7  I 

26,147 
29,763 
18,783 
7,619 
8,886 
135,670 


F'xport  aiicl 
Tonnage  Uiity 


NET  nCTIES  OF  reSTOMS. 


iflia  (toocU,  I Clnn.i 


1794 

1795 

1796 

1797 

1798 

1799 

1800 
1801 
1802 

1803 

1804 

1805 

1806 

1807 

1808 

1809 

1810 
1811 

TotaL^ 


5,580 

9,259 

7,928 

5,952 

8,037 

8,193 

7,132 

16,216 

17,693 

26,485 

21,620 

28,003 

112,116 

96,069 

60,750 

74,420 

65,188 

54,7.54 

"6^5,395 


323, ()9() 
182,517 
:310,2(>2 
573,396 
198,840 
1.50,129 
428,190 
416,519 
401,284 
.‘132,606 
3.33,664 
492,199 
505,212 

526.385 
460,428 

564.386 
466,510 
448,594 

7,114,241 


159,115 

146,015 

173,399 

173,88.3 

143,793 

1.56,385 

216,572 

17.5,721 

202,870 

184,311 

218,078 

1.35,124 

207,619 

219,496 

228,775 

267,631 

237,665 

269,629 

3,516,111’ 


516,161 
511,851 
729,017 
813,200 
1,023,277 
1,161,263 
1,179,273 
1,1.52,817 
1,12.3, .3.52 
1,392,072 
2,067,121 
2,359,6.33 
2,910,165 
2,994,6.35 
3,018,5.50 
3,2f)0,687 
2,7 66,365 
3,433,437 
32,742,879 


RISE  AND  PROGRESS  OF  THE  COMMERCE 


mi 

IV.  The  following  is  a statement  of  tlio  contributions  from  the  East  India  Company  to  the  public, 
from  the  years  1768  to  1812  inclusive: 

Paid  from  1768  to  1775,  in  consequence*  of  an  agreement  concerning  the  territorial 

possessions  (7th  Geo.  III.  chap.  57,  and  the  0th  Geo.  III.  chap.  2t)  169,399 

Paid  from  1769  to  1773,  for  indemnity  on  lea  483,050 

Paid  ill  177fl,  bounty  for  seamen  raised  for  the  sendee  of  Government  13,653 

Paid  in  1780  and  1781,  for  tliree  ships  of  the  line  presented  to  (Government  95,349 

Paid  in  1781  and  1787  for  agreement  for  a new  charter  in  1781  ^ % % % % W V%  400,000 

Paid  in  1780  and  1790  for  victualling  the  navy,  and  charges  for  troops  in  India  500, (KX) 

Claim  for  subsistence  of  prisoners  of  war,  and  other  expences,  w ritten  otfiii  1793^..^^  443,632 

Paid  in  1793  and  1794,  for  participation,  pursuant  to  Charter  Act  of  1793  5(K),000 

Paid  in  1795  and  1796,  expence  of  raising  3,000  seanicti  for  Government  57,000 

Paid  in  1803  and  1804,  armed  ships  hired  for  the  service  of  Government  67,330 

Loss  from  1793  to  1811  by  saltpetre  supplied  as  per  obligation  of  the  cliarter  405,906 

forming  a total  of  cP5, 135,31 9,  exclusive  of  the  various  expences  incurred  by  the  Company  in  freight, 
demurrage,  &c.  and  in  the  high  interest  of  money  advanced  for  the  public  service  in  India. 

V.  The  two  ICast  India  Companies  were  united  upon  a capital  of  .£3,200,000,  upon  which  calls 
were  made  to  the  amount  of  87 j per  cent.;  I)nt  owing  to  some  deficiency,  the  capital  upon  which  the 
dividends  were  made,  stood  at  X3,163,2(X).  The  dividends  were  paid  half  yearly,  at  the  following  rates: 

Christmas 708,  to  Lady  Day  v% 1709^^%%%^^%  i year,  at  5 per  cent,  per  aunum^  £39,540 

Lady  Day  1709,  to  Michaelmas  1709  I ditto  8 ditto  l!iJ0,5!i8 

Micbaclmas.,1709,  to  ditto 1711 2 ditto  — 9 ditto 509,376 

71 1 , to  C/hristnia.s  ^■%1716^v%%^%%  5^  ditto  ^•%»’^10  ditto  1,600,()80 

The  capital  from  this  period  w as  increased  to  £3,194,080: 

Christmas  ...,^17 16,  to  Midsummer  1722,^.^.^.^  5^  years,  at  10  per  cent,  per  annunu^  1,756,744 

Midsummer  1772,  to  ditto  ,^^^*^%^1732v%^*^v%10  ditto  8 ditto  2,555,264 

Ditto^^^*^v^^%l 732,  to  ditto  ditto  7 ditto  2,459,442 

Ditto  1743,  to  Christmas  ,>1755«.^»..^12^  ditto  8 ditto  3,194,080 

Christmas  755,  to  ditto  .^.^.»»»1766«,.»»»».n  ditto  ditto 2,108,093 

Ditto 1766,  to  ditto 1768 2 ditto — 10  ditto 638,816 

Ditto  1768,  to  ditto  1 ditto  ditto  351,349 

Ditto^v^s.^..s..^l769,  to  ditto  .^^^.^^^1770,..^^^.^,..  1 ditto  ^.^12  ditto  383,290 

Ditto...v^*^^^^vl770,  to  Midsummer  1 772v^^w.....  1{  ditto  ditto  598,800 

Midsummer  1772,  to  ditto  4 ditto  6 ditto  766,579 

Ditto%-^v%%xv%^^177(>,  to  Christmas  ..^1777^-*^%^%^  II  ditto  7 ditto  335,378 

Christmas  .»,vl  777,  to  Midsummer  1787,.,^..»v.  9^  ditto  8 ditto  2,427,501 

The  capital  from  this  period  was  increased  to  £?4,000,000: 

Midsummer  1787,  to  Christmas  .^1789^^1^^^  2^  years,  at  8 per  cent,  per  annumv%  800,000 

The  capital  from  this  period  was  increased  to  £’5,000,000: 

Christmas  ,^*^1 789,  to  C hristmas  ...1792..^^.^%^  3 years,  at  8 per  cent,  per  annum«%  1,200, (XX) 

Ditto«^«^%«<^l  792,  to  Midsummer  1793*^%>^-^  I ditto  ditto  525, OCX) 

The  capital  from  this  period  was  increased  to  £6,000,000: 

Paid  in  the  years  1793-4  to  1809-10  inclusive,  17^  years,  as  dividends  and  interest^^  12,512,284 

Forming  a total  paid  as  dividends  in  102  year8%%v*,^%^-^%%v^w%^*^%^v%^^w^%^^£35,008,834 


BETWEEN  ENGLAND  AND  THE  EAST  INDIES.  xcvii 

VT.  The  ships  in  the  service  of  the  Company  in  1810-11,  on  the  ontwaid  ami  homeward-bouml 
^"oyages,  were  104,  and  their  chartered  tonnage  amounted  to  IK), "^7^2  tons,  viz. 


33  ships 

eaclu^.^.. 1,200  tons 

.,19  39,600 

tons. 

1 

ship 

— 889  tons  — is  889 

tons. 

1 ditto 

1,242 

do. 

13 

10, GW) 

<lo. 

1 ditto 

1 , 1 1 91 98 

do. 

7 

-,818 

.^>,326 

do. 

1 ditto 

1,140 

do. 

1 

flit  f n,, 

756 

1 ditto 

1,000 

do. 

39 

small,  or  extra 

ships,  whose  char- 

uo. 

6 ditto . 

do. 

tered  tonnage 

amounted  to 

22,368 

do. 

Of  this  branch  of  the  Company's  concerns  I.ord  Castlcreagh,  in  the  year  180.^,  spoke  as  ibllows: 

‘‘  The  shipping  in  the  service  of  the  East  India  ('oinpany  is  such  as  to  conslitutc  a magnificent  pro- 
perty, and  a great  naval  force;  it  is  of  a nature  to  be  at  any  lime  converted  into  a great  addititm  to  tfie 
naval  force  of  the  empire;  it  is  composed  of  upwards  of  UK)  ships,  bearing  90,000  tons  burthen,  and 
manned  with  7000  seamen.  These  may  be  arranged  in  three  classes;  the  first,  containing  ships  of  1200 
tons,  may,  upon  a public  exigency,  be  armed  as  ships  of  the  line;  tlie  ships  of  800  tons  may  be  employed 
as  frigates,  and  those  of  500  tons  as  sloops  of  war.'’ 


The  following  is  a list  of  the  number  of  ships  which  have  been  launehed  in  the  Iliver  Thames  for  tlie 
Company's  seiwice,  with  their  tonnage,  in  each  year,  from  1770  to  1811  inclusive:  , 


1770,,,, 

5 ships 

1 — 3,694 

tons. 

1784 — 

3 ships....2,324 

tons. 

1798 

6 

sliips 

— 4., 788 

Ions. 

1771 

11  ditto 

....8,682 

do. 

1785 — 

8 ditto 

....6,404 

do. 

1799 — 

10 

ditto 

— 8,201 

<lo. 

1772,,- 

7 ditto 

— 5,581 

do. 

1786....] 

13  ditto 

..10,^188 

do. 

1800 

5 

ditto 

....5,385 

do. 

1773 — 

2 ditto 

— 2,301 

do. 

1787 — 

8 ditto 

..  7,550 

do. 

1801 

H 

ditto 

— 8,06(3 

do. 

1774. — 

1 ditto 

— 741 

do. 

1788 — 

3 ditto 

3,555 

do. 

1802 

16 

ditto. 

..  14,682 

do. 

1775^^ 

none. 

1789 — 

3 ditto 

— 3,305 

do. 

1803 — 

1 

ditto 

— 2,085 

do. 

1776 

none. 

1790 

5 ditto 

— 6,054 

do. 

1804 

6 

ditto 

4,698 

do. 

1777 — 

7 ships 

— 5,480 

do. 

1791  — 

none. 

1805 

2 

ditto 

— 1,638 

do. 

1778 

6 ditto 

— 4,605 

do. 

1792 — 

4 ships 

4,992 

do. 

1806.... 

1 

ditto 

— 1,273 

do. 

1780 

5 ditto 

— 4,010 

do. 

1 793 — 

none. 

1807 — 

none. 

1780.... 

11  ditto 

— 8,70i 

do. 

1794 

2 ship-s 

— 2,292 

do. 

1808 

3 

ships 

do. 

1781....; 

16  ditto 

..12,489 

do. 

179.5.... 

1 ditto 

— 1,439 

do. 

1809 

1 

ditto 

....  820 

do. 

1782 — 

8 ditto 

— 6,375 

do. 

1796 17  ditto 

-19,898 

do. 

1810 — 

1 

ditto 

....  955 

do. 

1783 

.5  ditto 

— 3,982 

do. 

1797.... 

4 ditto 

5,239 

do. 

1811.... 

6 

ditto 

....6,829 

do. 

forming  a total  in  forty-two  years,  of  224  ships,  of  the  burthen  of  202,011  tons. 

Upon  the  mode  of  their  ccpiipment  it  is  necessary  to  obseiwc,  that  a ship  bound  to  the  East  Indies,  or 
China  and  back,  should  always  be  prepared  for  a passage  of  six  or  seven  months  outward,  and  the  same 
for  her  return;  and  if  any  accident  should  arise  to  make  it  necessary  to  go  into  port  to  repair  or  icfit, 
before  she  reach  the  place  of  her  destination,  either  outward  or  homeward-bound,  the  C’ornmander 
would  frequently  be  compelled  to  shelter  in  a harbour,  where  little  or  no  assistance  could  be  jirocured, 
either  with  respect  to  artificers  or  stores,  but  what  he  carried  with  him ; therefore  the  general  safety 
requires  that  an  East  Indiaman  should  be  supjdied  with  more  stores  of  every  kind  than  arc  necessary  on 
any  other  foreign  voyage ; and  in  order  to  navigate  securely  through  those  long  passages,  an  additional 
number  of  officers,  petty  officers,  and  seamen  are  engaged,  besides  many  tradesmen  and  artificer**’,  not  requi- 
site for  the  short  passages  to  the  Straits,  the  Coast  of  Africa,  the  West  Indies,  or  North  America.  '^Ihese 
circumstances  make  it  impossible  to  reduce  the  rate  of  freight  paid  by  the  Company  to  a jirojiortionate 
standard  with  those  paid  for  other  foreign  voyages. 

♦N 


xcviii 


RISE  AND  PROGRESS  OF  THE  COMMERCE 


VII.  The  following  is  an  account  of  the  debts  and  assets  of  the  East  India  Company  in  Great  Britain, 
on  the  1st  of  March,  1812,  taken  from  papers  laid  before  the  House  of  Commons,  and  from  the  reports 
of  the  Secret  Committee  appointed  to  examine  and  report  on  the  Company’s  affaii’s: 

Debts  owing  by  the  Company: 


Bonds  bearing  interest 
Sundry  bonds  not  bearing  interest 
Bills  of  exchange  unpaid,  drawn  from  Cliina^^^^ 

Ditto,  ditferent  parts  of  India 

Customs  and  Excise  on  gooils  sold,  and  Customs  on  goods  unsold 
Bank,  for  lo  in  on  mortgage  of  annuities,  and  on  bond,  with  interest 
Freight  and  demurrage 


0^6,565,900 

15,417 

43,596 

4,238,382 

935,313 

800,000 

39,336 


Supracargoes’  commission  on  all  goods  sold  and  unsold 
Proi)rietors  of  private  trade  on  all  goods  sold 
Amount  owing  for  exports  of  former  seasons 
Alms-houses  at  Poplar^ 


r%  V%%  % %*%%%%% 


i vw%  %%%%% 


Amount  owing  to  the  warehouse  and  other  contingent  funds 
Sundry  warrants  which  have  passed  the  Court  unpaid 
Owing  for  teas  returned  by  the  purchasers,  and  resold  * 

Interest  on  bonds,  and  dividends  on  stock 

Owing  to  proprietors  at  the  prices  paid,  viz. 

What  paid  by  the  adventurers,  being  87 [ per  cent,  on  i?3,200,000 

Additional  capital  sold  to  ditto  v^«^^155  ditto  800, tm 

Ditto  «%%'kv'%«««%v«in  1789  -»^%%w^'v%v%«^v‘%174  ditto  1,000,000, 

Ditto  1793  ♦.v,v.v..,.„^200  ditto  1,000,000., 


162,800 
663,000 
124,987 
61,742 

12,998 

34,500 
971 
176,823 


.13,875,765 


2,800,000 
1,240,000 

1,710,000 

2,000,000 


Forming  a total  owing  by  the  Company  at  home 
The  Company’s  assets  in  Great  Britain  were  as  follow: 

Cash,  balance  in  the  Treasury  on  the  1st  of  March,  1810  995,394 

Amount  of  goods  sold,  not  paid  1,096,390 

The  Honourable  Bo«ard  of  Ordnance,  for  saltpetre  supplied  10,998 

Prime  cost  of  goods  in  England  unsold  4,800,141 

Outward  cargoes  not  arrived  in  India  or  China,  at  the  date  of  accounts  1,876,872 

Exports  paid  for,  exclusive  of  bullion,  1809*10  v% v. v»  1,288,926 

Impress  and  war  contingencies  paid  owners  of  ships  not  arrived  in  England  665,043 

Sundry  sums,  part  of  which  may  bo  considered  doubtful: 


7,780,000 
i’2 1,655, 765 


-10,733,764 


Wliat  due  from  (iovernmeiit  to  the  Company  1,207,560 

Due  from  Government  for  supplies  to  Ilis  Majesty’s  troops  W V«  V%  V%%«  V.  960,000 

Value  of  ships,  sloops,  and  vessels  70,020 

Value  of  the  East  India  House  and  warehouses  1,138,000 

What  the  Company  j)ai(l  for  their  dead  stock  in  India  400,000 

Owing  by  sundry  persons  returned  from  India  19,712 

J )ue  from  Government  on  account  of  hemp  from  India  180,801 


Forming  a total  of  assets  in  England  of-^ 


3,916,093 
a^l  4,649,857 


'i'hc  balance  against  the  Company  in  England  being  .£’7, 005, 908,  including  their  capital  stock. 


BETWEEN  ENGLAND  AND  THE  EAST  INDIES. 


xcix 


In  the  foregoing  account  the  article  of  deadstock  is  valued  at  .£^U)0, 000,  which  includes  liuildings  and 
fortifications,  plate,  household  furniture,  plantations,  farms,  sloops,  vessels,  stores,  and  otlier  articles  of 
dead  stock,  according  to  Lord  Godol  phi  if  s award  in  the  year  1702;  whereas  the  whole  of  the  siuns  of 
money  expended  in  buildings  and  fortifications,  by  the  latest  advices  from  the  Company's  several  settle- 
ments, for  tlie  acquisition  and  maintijnancc  of  their  possessions,  and  the  nearest  estimated  value  of  other 
articles  of  dead  stock,  was  i? 1 1,287,015. 

Tlie  following  is  a statement  of  the  account  between  Government  and  the  hhist  India  Company,  as 
submitted  to  the  Select  Committee  of  tlie  House  of  Commons  in  1813: 


Claims  of  the  Company  on  the  (lovernment,  rtz. 

To  advances  for  the  navy  to  May,  1812 — 

Advances  from  Ceylon,  the  (.-ape  of  Good  Hope,  &c.  — 

Expence  of  building  ships  in  India 

Eayments  at  home  for  passage  of  military  to  the  Cape,  C'l'ylon,  &e. 
Extra  expellees  of  expeditions  to  the  Ercneh  islands 
Extra  expences  of  expedition  to 
Sums  paid  by  the  Government  on  account,  viz. 

A loan  in  Excheipier  Bills 
Demands  from  the  Pay  Olfice 
Expences  of  recruits  transferred 


.£>215, 3>« 

„,?1(!,()(H) 

, IKVKMl 

J,77(»,25.i 
.5,700,G(i3 

.1,G4<;,2.}7 
. ;}5(),(>00 

;j, 4.90, 2.17 


Balance  due  from  Government  to  tlic  East  Inili.a  (.'omp.-my  £'2,29 

This  account  is  subject  to  some  adjustment-,  lor  claims  of  the  Victualling  OlHcc  lor  supplies  to  tlic 
Company’s  service,  to  be  brought  to  the  credit  of  Ihe  public;  and  the  calculation  of  interest  on  hotli  sides 
is  to  be  completed.  How  far  the  balance  ahoNC  st.atcd  may  he  augmented  or  diminislicd  by  these  circum- 
stances, cannot  at  present  be  determined. 

VIII.  The  debts  of  the  Company  exceeded  their  assets  at  their  Piesideni  ies  in  India,  as 

made  up  to  1809,  under  the  head  of  Calcutta,  in  tlie  sum  of £’!(>, tii.M  12 

From  which  the  following  are  to  he  deducted,  not  being  there  included  as  assets. 

Balance  of  quick  stock  in  favour  at  Canton,  made  up  to  the  2d  of  March,  1H09  i’l,.127,H(»() 

Ditto  at  the  Cape  of  Good  Hope,  made  up  to  tlic  .31st  of  August,  lH(t9«— .... 

Ditto  at  Prince  of  Wales’s  Island,  made  up  to  the  IlOth  of  April,  1809..........  21.),7SI» 

Ditto  at  St.  Helena,  dated  September,  1809  j 

Leaving  a balance  against  the  Company  at  the  elifferent  PresidcncieJ  ahroatl i?l  4,909, 4, 12 

The  following  is  an  account  of  the  revenues,  cliarges,  and  interest  on  debt  at  the  diflcrent  I’reM- 
dcncies  in  the  year  1811-12,  taken  from  papers  laid  before  the  House  of  Commons. 

Revenues.  Charge*.  Inleiest  on  Delit.  Cliaig.-- ..n'l  Intr  I 

Bengal i?10,706,173 i>7,059,771 i.‘l,.317,4-47 

Fort  St.  George  5,130,717  10 — .......  80,795.. 

Bombay  686,101  ^w^v.v^^L052,292  90,000  ^ 

Tctal™i.^l0.54«,991  aei3,33l,073  X'l, 488,212  .£’M,83!^ 


c 


RISE  AND  PROGRESS  OF  THE  COMMERCE 


Foni  the  foregoing  statement  it  appears  that  since  the  year  1808-9  the  revenues  have  increased  in 
the  sum  of  ^1,032,936,  while  the  amount  of  charges  and  interest  on  debt  has  decreased  ^^731^1829 
forming  a more  favourable  result  in  1811-12  than  in  1808-9,  of  1,755, 11 8. 

The  amount  of  bills  of  exchange  drawn  from  India  on  account  of  the  debt  in  the  years  1809-10  to 
1811-12  inclusive,  was  as  principal  i?6, 691, 31 4,  and  as  interest  i?2,845,193;  of  these  sums  ^"91 9,301 
was  retransferred  to  India,  leaving  a total  of  demand  on  the  home  treasury,  on  account  of  the  Indian 
debt,  of  <P8, 61 7,206;  of  these  bills  *P2, 168,400  are  not  yet  due. 

The  total  of  the  Indian  debt  in  181 1-12  was  X^28, 646,989,  from  which  deducting  the  amount  of  assets 
abroad,  a sum  falling  short  of  the  present  revenue  of  the  Company's  Indian  territories  for  one  year,  remains, 
and  which  may  be  liquidated  in  ten  years  under  the  present  system,  from  the  surplus  revenues. 

IX.  The  following  is  a list  of  factories  at  present  established  in  various  parts  of  India,  for  the 
provision  of  the  Company's  luiropean  investments,  at  all  of  which  the  Company  have  an  establishment 
of  European  servants.  Under  the  Presidency  of  Bengal  are  the  subordinate  factories  of 


Benares. 

Midiiapore. 

Patna. 

Soonamookey. 

Baulesib. 

Luckipore. 

Radnagorc, 

Mow. 

Hurrial. 

Chittagong. 

Rungpore. 

Cossiporc. 

Hurripaul. 

Cossimbuzar. 

Santipore. 

Etawah, 

Jungypore.  I 

Comercolly. 

Burron. 

Calpy. 

Keerpore.  j 

Malda.  j 

Dacca. 

Gorruckporc* 

Under  the  Presidency  of  Fort  St.  George,  or  Madras,  are  the  subordinate  factories  of 

Tinncvelly. 

Nagore. 

Maddepollam. 

Vizagapatam, 

Ramnad. 

Cuddalore. 

Mausulipatam. 

Ganjam. 

Salem. 

Pulicat, 

Ingeram. 

Devicotta. 

Under  the  Presidency  of  Bombay  are  the  subordinate  factories  of 


Scindy,  or  Tattah. 

C’ambay. 

Tellicherry. 

Calicut. 

Cutch. 

Brodera. 

Onore. 

Cranganore. 

Amedabad. 

Baroach. 

Barcelore. 

Cochin. 

Surat. 

Carwar. 

Mangalore. 

Anjengo. 

Including  also  all  the  other  places  where  pepper  was  produced  in  the  earlier  periods. 


Under  Bencoolen,  on  Sumatra,  are  the  subordinate  residencies  of 

Moco  Moco.  I Cattown.  Manna. 

Ippoe.  I Saloomah.  Crooe. 


Tappanooly. 

Padang. 


Some  of  these  have  recently  been  withdrawn,  their  maintenance  being  too  expensive.  The  Company 
have  also  an  establishment  at  Piilo  Pinang,  or  Prince  of  Wales’s  Island,  in  the  Straits  of  Malacca;  at 
several  of  the  Eastern  or  Spice  Islands;  at  Bushire,  in  the  Gulf  of  Persia;  and  Canton,  in  China. 

Of  the  factories  under  the  respective  Governments  of  Madras  and  Bengal,  many  include  an  extent  of 
from  50  to  100  miles  of  country ; so  that  under  each  factory  there  is  of  necessity  a number  of  minor 
factories,  situated  in  the  principal  manufacturing  towns,  for  the  purpose  of  collecting  the  produce  of 
those  places,  and  of  forwarding  them  to  the  head  factory  to  which  they  are  attached,  from  whence  they 
are  ultimately  consigned  to  the  respective  Presidencies^  to  which  the  principal  factories  are  subordinatOt 


BETWEEN  ENGLAND  AND  THE  EAST  INDIES 


X.  The  following  is  the  present  Constitution  of  the  East  India  Company : 

The  Company's  stock  forms  a capital  of  six  millions  sterling,  into  which  all  persons,  natives  or 
foreigners,  males  or  females,  bodies  politic  or  corporate  (the  Governor  and  Company  of  the  Hank  of 
England  only  excepted),  are  at  liberty  to  purchase,  without  limitation  of  amount.  Act  1)  and  U)  Wil- 
liam III.  chap.  44.  Charter,  5th  of  September,  1698. 


General  Courts. — The  proprietors,  in  General  Court  assembled,  are  empowered  to  enact  byc-hiw.s, 
declare  dividends,  and  in  other  respects  are  competent  to  the  complete  investigation,  regulation,  and  eon- 
troul  of  every  branch  of  the  Company’s  concerns;  but  for  the  more  prompt  dispatch  of  business,  the  cxe- 
cutive  detail  is  vested  in  a Court  of  Directors.  Charter,  5th  September,  161)8. 

A General  Court  is  required  to  be  held  once  in  the  months  of  March,  June,  September,  and 
December  in  each  year.  Charter,  5th  September,  1698. 

No  person  can  be  present  at  a General  Court,  unless  possessed  of  X'50(3  stock;  nor  can  any  person 
vote  upon  the  determination  of  any  question,  who  has  not  been  in  possession  of  nL‘l,(KK)  stock  lor  the  pre- 
ceding twelve  months,  unless  such  stock  shall  have  been  obtained  by  bequest  or  marriage. 

Persons  possessed  of  one  thousand  pounds  stock  are  empowered  to  give  a single  vote;  three  thousand 
pounds  are  a qualification  for  two  votes;  six  for  throe  votes;  and  ten  thousand  and  upwards  for  four  votes. 

The  number  of  proprietors  on  the  Company’s  books,  on  the  8th  of  April,  1800,  were  2163:  of  these 


1,683  were  qualified  to  give  single  votes. 
342  two  votes. 


87....... ditto.» three  votes. 

.^l.. ditto lour  votes. 


Upon  any  special  occasion,  nine  proprietors,  duly  qualified  by  the  [wssession  of  .n ,( KM)  stock,  may,  by 
a requisition  in  writing  to  the  Court  of  Directors,  call  a General  Covirt,  which  the  Directors  are  required 
to  summon  within  ten  days,  or,  in  default,  the  proprietors  may  call  such  Court,  by  notice  affixed  upon  the 
Royal  Exchange.  Charter,  5th  September,  1698. 

In  all  such  Courts  the  (juestions  are  decided  by  a majority  of  voices.  In  case  of  an  equality,  the  deter- 
mination must  be  by  the  Treasurer  drawing  a lot.  Charter,  5th  Septembe  r,  l()9H. 

Nine  proprietors  may,  by  a rc(|uisition  in  writing,  demand  a ballot  upon  any  question,  which  shall 
not  be  taken  within  twenty-four  hours  after  the  breaking  up  of  the  General  C’ouit. 

Court  of  Directors.— The  Court  of  Directors  is  composed  of  twenty-lbur  members,  eliosen  from 
among  the  proprietors,  each  of  whom  must  be  possessed  of  1^2, 000  stock;  nor  can  any  Director,  aftei 
being  chosen,  act  longer  than  while  he  continues  to  hold  stock.  Charter,  5tli  of  September,  1698. 

Of  these,  six  are  chosen  on  the  second  Wednesday  in  April  in  each  year,  to  serve  tor  four  years,  in 
the  room  of  six  who  have  completed  such  service.  After  an  interval  of  twelve  inontlis,  those  who  had  gone 
out  by  rotation,  are  eligible  to  be  re-elected  for  the  ensuing  four  years. 

No  person  who  has  been  in  the  Company’s  civil  or  military  service  in  India,  is  eligible  to  be  elected  a 
Director,  until  he  shall  have  been  a resident  in  England  two  years  after  (putting  the  service. 

The  Directors  chuse  annually  from  among  themselves  a Chairman  and  Deputy  (’hairmun,  who  are  cacli 
allowed  £500  per  annum.  The  Directors  are  allowed  1 300  per  annum  each.  Bye-Laws,  chap.  6,  sect.  1 1. 

The  Directors  are  required  by  Bye-Laws,  chap.  6,  sect.  1,  to  meet  once  in  cveiy  wtek 
they  frequently  meet  oftener,  as  occasion  requires.  Not  less  tliaii  thirteen  can  lorin  a ( ourt.  i icii  1 1 ti 
minations  are  guided  by  a majority.  In  case  of  an  equality,  the  question  must  be  decided  Iiy  the  drawing 
of  a lot  by  the  Treasurer.  Charter,  5th  September,  1698.  Upon  all  questions  of  iin|)ortance,  the  sense 

of  the  Court  is  taken  by  ballot. 


iii  RISE  AND  PROGRESS  OF  THE  COMMERCE 

For  the  more  ready  and  orderly  dispatch  of  the  Company‘‘s  business,  the  members  of  the  Court  arc 
subdivided  into  twelve  classes  of  Committees,  to  each  of  which  is  allotted  some  distinct  branch  of  the 
Company's  affairs ; and  the  name  of  these  Committees  In  a great  degree  indicates  the  nature  of  the  business 
to  which  their  attention  is  more  immediately  devoted. 

In  the  first  class,  which  consists  of  a number  of  the  senior  Directors,  are  comprised  the  several 
Committees  of  Correspondence,  Treasury,  Lawsuits,  and  Military  Fund. 

].  To  the  Committee  of  Correspondence  arc  referred,  generally,  all  matters  connected  with  the  civil 
and  military  Governments  of  India,  and  the  Company's  servants  abroad;  they  also  prepare  and  submit  to 
the  Court  the  dispatches  to  the  various  settlements. 

2.  The  Committee  of  Treasury  regulate  the  financial  affairs. 

3.  The  ('ommittec  of  Lawsuits  conduct  the  legal  concerns. 

4.  The  Committee  of  INIilifary  Fund  manage  and  direct  the  application  of  the  fund  established  by 
Lord  Clive,  for  the  support  of  the  invalids  in  the  Company's  military  s(»rvice. 

The  second  class  is  com[>osed  of  a number  of  the  Dii  ectors  next  in  the  course  of  seniority,  and  forms 
the  respective  Committees  of  AVarehouses,  Accounts,  Buying,  and  House. 

5.  The  (Committee  of  Warehouses  arc  charged  with  the  more  immediate  superintendence  of  the 
Company’s  investments  iti  India;  they  also  regulate- the  disposal  of  them  in  this  country. 

fi.  The  Committee  of  Accounts  prepare  the  statements  of  the  general  state  of  the  home  concerns. 

7.  The  Committee  of  Buying  purchase  the  woollens  and  lead  for  exportation  to  India  and  China. 

8.  Th(j  Committee  of  House  give  directions  in  all  matters  appertaining  to  the  concerns  of  the  Housc- 

Tho  third  class  contains  the  remaining  Directors,  who  constitute  the  Committees  of  Shipping,  Private 

Trade,  preventing  the  growth  of  Private  Trade,  and  Government  Troops  and  Stores. 

9.  The  Committee  of  Shipping  arrange  the  shipping  concerns,  aftd  provide  tlie  remaining  exports. 

10.  The  Committee  of  Private  Trade  adjust  the  settlement  of  freight  with  the  owners  of  shipping. 

11.  The  Committee  for  preventing  the  growth  of  Private  Trade,  see  that  the  indulgences  granted  to 
the  Commanders  and  oflicers  of  the  Company’s  ships  are  conducted  within  the  prescribed  regulations. 

12.  The  Committee  for  Government  Troop.s  and  Stores  adjust  all  concerns  respecting  the  forces  and 
.ships  of  His  Majesty  serving  in  the  Fast  Indies. 

The  Chairman  and  D(*j)uty  are,  !)y  virtue  of  their  office,  members  of  every  (’ommlttee. 

All  letters  and  papers  on  the  subject  of  the  Company’s  aftairs  are  read  in  Court,  and  referred  to  the 
consideration  of  a Committee,  according  to  the  nature  of  tlielr  contents.  The  reference  upon  ordinary 
concerns  is  for  tlic  C!ommIttee  to  give  such  directions  thereon  as  they  may  think  fit;  but  in  more  important 
matters,  the  Committee  is  required  to  examine  the  facts,  and  report  an  opinion  thereon,  for  the  ultimate 
determination  of  the  Court  of  Directors. 

The  Company’s  oflicers,  both  at  home  and  abroad,  receive  their  appointments  immediately  from  the 
Court,  to  whom  they  are  responsible  for  the  due  and  faithful  discharge  of  the  ti  ust  reposed  in  them.  The 
patronage  is,  nevertheless,  so  arranged,  as  tliat  each  member  of  the  Court  particijiates  therein. 

Tlie  civil  and  military  establishments  abroad  are  kept  up  by  an  annual  appointment  of  Writers  and 
Cadets.  These  vary  in  number  according  to  existing  circumstances.  The  number  (o  be  sent  to  India  is 
tletermined  upon,  and  a distribution  is  made,  with  a due  attention  to  the  pretensions  of  seniority. 

At  home  each  Committee  is  considered  as  possessed  of  the  patronage  of  the  department  that  falls 
more  immediately  under  its  controul,  according  to  the  established  system  of  official  arrangement. 

The  Secretary,  in  point  of  fact,  is  the  immediate  officer  of  the  Court ; yet  as  the  duties  of  Jiis  station 
are  so  intimately  connected  with  points  that  fall  under  the  cognisance  of  the  Coimaittee  of  Corresjioiidcnce, 
his  establishment  has  always  been  considered  as  subject  thereto. 


BETWEEN  ENGLAND  AND  THE  EAST  INDIES. 


(iii 

From  the  foregoing  remarks  on  the  rise  and  progress  of  tlie  commerce  between  England  and  the 
East  Indies,  it  is  evident  that  the?  East  India  Company  fiavc  essentially  contiibuted  to  the  present  great- 
ness of  the  country.  They  gave  a very  early  impulse  to  its  manufactures  and  trade.  'rh(‘y  opened  a new 
commerce  not  with  the  East  only,  but,  by  means  of  their  returns  from  thence,  wdth  foreign  Euroj)e.  They 
soon  increased  the  ship-building,  and  improved  the  navigation  of  the  kingdom;  both  ^^hIch  they  have,  in  latter 
times,  carried  to  a degree  of  advancement,  that  has  made  their  fleets  serviceable  in  the  wars  of  the  nation,  ami 
their  Commanders  and  officers  eminently  successful  in  adding  to  the  naval  glory  of  their  country.  Against 
the  jealous  rivalship  of  the  Portuguese  and  Dutch,  they,  through  a long  course  of  hostilities  from  a superior 
force,  maintained  for  the  nation  a share  in  the  India  trade;  they  preserved  it  from  being  totally  lost,  amidst  all 
the  convulsions  of  the  civil  wars;  they  outlived  even  the  more  dangerous  innovations  of  suhsequent  jicriods; 
they  upheld  in  India  the  national  interests  against  the  ambitious  designs  of  h’uropcuii  enemies,  and  the 
despotic  violence  of  native  powers,  and  in  a long  and  arduous  struggle,  maintained,  with  little  exception, 
at  their  own  expence;  they  aeipiired  a territorial  empire  for  the  motlu^r  country,  which  exalted  its  rank  in 
the  scale  of  nations;  they  have  since  expelled  every  European  nation,  except  our  ally  of  Portugal, 
from  the  Indian  Continent  and  Ocean;  and  they  have  given  a better  government  to  an  immensely  extended 
empire  than  the  East  ever  saw  before. 

In  all  this  progress,  not  the  wisdom  of  their  civil  servants  only  has  been  conspicuous,  hut  the  talents 
and  valour  of  their  military  officers  have  signally  added  to  the  glory  and  renown  of  the  llritish  nation. 
By  those  officers,  a grand  army  has  been  formed  of  native  troops,  in  discipline,  attachment,  and  effieieiiey, 
a just  object  of  admiration:  and  from  the  time  of  the  first  Clive  downwards,  the  iJX[)loits  j)erlormc(l  by  the 
Company’s  military  servants  in  India,  equal  In  hrilliaiiey  those  reconkMl  in  any  period  of  modern  history. 

To  all  these  public  benefits,  is  to  he  added  the  direct  wealth  with  wliieli  the  (’ompany  have  been  the 
means  of  enriching  the  nation.  The  uniount  of  these  eonlrilmtions,  consisting  of  the  profits  of  manufac- 
turers, .ship-huilders  and  tradesmen,  ship-owners  and  officers,  servants  and  hdxjurers,  miners,  rc-exporlers 
of  Eastern  productions  to  foreign  parts,  and  other  descriptions  of  persons  gaining  by  the  C’ompany's  trade, 
in  dividends  to  proprietors,  [layments  to  Government,  .and  the  inllux  of  private  fortunes  acquired  in  India, 
e.specially  in  the  last  fifly-fivc  years,  may  he  moderately  estimated  at  one  hundred  millions  sterling. 

Were  any  further  observations  necessary,  as  to  the  benefits  resulting  to  the  nation  from  the  present 
mode  of  conducting  the  affairs  of  our  Oriental  possessions,  the  following  sentiments  delivered  by  Lord 
Castlereagh,  in  the  House  of  Commons,  on  the  22d  of  March,  1813,  will  doubtless  he  considered  sufficient: 

“ The  mode  op  Government  adopted  nv  the  East  India  (’ompanv  has  raised  and  preserved  an 
EMPIRE  unprecedented  IN  THE  HISTORY  OF  THE  WORLD;  AND  THEY  HAVE  GOVERNED  THE  PEOPLE  UNDER 
THEIR  CONTROUL,  ON  A PRINCIPLE  EMINENTLY  C’M.CUL^TED  TO  PRODUCE  THE  II \PPINES8  OF  THE  GOVERNED. 
I DO  NOT  RELIEVE  THE  HISTORY  OF  THE  WORLD  II  \S  EVER  PRODUCED  ITS  PARALLEL;  A SYSTEM  BY  WHICH  A 
POPUL\TION  OF  FIFTY  MIIJ.IONS  OF  NATIVE  SUnjEi’TS  ARE  GOVERNED,  WHILE  TIIF.  CIVIL  OFFICERS  OK  THE 

Company,  bv  whom  the  Government  is  coNotcTED,  does  not  exceed  sixteen  hundred;  and  this  too 
UNDER  \ Government,  than  which  there  never  was  a milder,  nor  one  by  which  THE  happiness  of  the 
PEOPLE  IS  MORE  CONSULTED.” 


ORIENTAL  COMMERCE. 


CHAPTER  I. 

Hie  Madeinis. 


Porlo  Sancto—Thr  Desertas — Madeira — Qiniral  Dtaerijaion — Cuina,  Il'n^oA^v  and  Measures— Ardclta  n/ 
Import — Amount  of  Imports  and  Exports— Exports— Denominations  of  U'iius-'J'lair  Viias— Quant, iy 
imported  into  British  India  in  imH— Prices  of  Madiira  at  Bond, a, /—East  l,i,l,a  ('on,pa„,/\  Rr/ridalions 
relative  to  Madei,-a— Import  and  Export  Duties— Port  Charges,  x\e.—Po,-t  Bennlutions—P,„visions  and 
Befrcshmcnts. 


TIIK  M.\I)EIHA,S 

Ar«  a group  of  islands  consisting  of  Porto  Sancto,  tho  Dcscrlas,  and  Madeira 

l»()UTO  SVNCTO 

Is  the  northornmost  of  tlio  group.  centre  of  tliei.sland  is  in  lalllude  MV  .>  North,  and  longitude 
IG  25  West;  it  is  very  remarkable,  and  in.ay  !>o  seen  in  clear  wt'al her  near  20  haigiu's;  it  has  two  or 
three  very  high  hummocks,  by  which  it  is  distinguished  from  Mndeiia  or  tlu‘  Desertas.  On  the  S.  W.  side 
IS  an  excellent  road,  where  good  water,  provusions,  and  refi(‘shmenfs  ;»t(*  to  In*  ha<l,  and  where  vessels  of 
near  .^00  tons  burthen  have  been  hove  douii  and  repaired.  The  pioperty  of  the  island  is  vested  in  a pjivut(‘ 
family,  and  trom  it  Madeira  is  supplied  with  laige  ipiantities  of  coin,  >>hen  the  crops  aiv  good. 

^rilE  DKSl'HtTAS 

Are  about  12  leagues  S.  S.  W.  from  Porto  Sancto.  The  se  islands  extend  nearly  N.  N.  W.  and  S.  S.  K. 
rather  of  an  even  appearance,  about  5 leagues  in  extent,  and  are  uninliahited. 

MADETKA. 

Thi.s  island  is  about  12  leagues  long  from  East  to  West,  and  ab(»ut  3 leagues  broad  from  North  to 
South;  it  is  very  high  and  mountainous,  except  the  East  emi,  wliith  terminates  in  a low  rugged  point. 

Funchal,  the  capital,  and  the  seat  of  the  Government,  is  on  the  .south  side  about  lw<i  thii  ds  down  tiorn  its 
west  end,  in  latitude  32'’  37  N.  and  longitude  17’  fi  West;  the  town  is  about  a mile  long,  and  half  a mile 
broad,  and  is  said  to  contain  about  2000  houses.  It  has  several  handsome  cliurelies  and  monastei  ies.  'flie 
houses  are  built  of  .stone,  some  (Hf*  them  three  stories  high,  willi  latticed  windows,  and  ljaleoni(‘s  in  the 
front:  most  of  them  have  a mean  appearance.  The  streds  are  narrow,  badly  pave<l,  anri  verydi/ty. 

Funchal  is  strongly  fortified.  On  the  eastern  extremity  of  the  beach  i.s  a fort  called  ^{.  Jago;  that  of 
Lorenzo,  within  200  yards  of  the  western  extremity  of  the  town,  is  ocenpled  as  the  residence  of  the  Gover- 
nor; the  third,  called  the  Peak  Castle,  is  at  the  N.  W.  angle  of  the  town  on  a hill,  about  half  a mile  from 

H 


MADEIRA. 


the  shon'.  The  fourth  fort  stands  upon  the  Loo  Rock,  which  is  about  400  yards  from  the  shore,  with 
which  it  has  no  communication  but  by  boats;  it  commands  the  bay,  and  the  only  cntifuicc  to  it  is  Ly  a 
naii'ow  night  of  steps,  hewn  out  of  the  rock,  and  properly  guarded.  The  town  has  likewise  a strong  wall 
to  the  sea,  connecting  the  forts,  the  whole  of  which  are  in  a good  state  of  repair. 

The  landing  place?  of‘the  island  is  to  the  N.  W.  of  the  Loo  Rock;  and  irom  the  deep  water,  and  I lie 
violence  of  the  surf*,  is  sometimes  dangerous.  Steps  are  cut  out  of  the  rock  to  ascend  to  the  top  of  it,  which 
communicates  with  the  road  to  Funchal.  This  road  is  very  rough  and  narrow',  being  no  more  than  four 
feet  and  a half  wdde,  with  a low  wall  on  either  side.  The  entrance  to  the  town  is  about  three  (|iniiUis  of 
a mile  from  the  landing  place,  and  is  through  a gate,  from  which  a narrow  stn  et  leads  to  a puhlie  w alk 
disposed  in  the  form  of  a garden,  w e ll  shaded  w ith  trees,  w ith  a principal  avenue  in  the  centre,  terminated 
by  the  cathedral,  a large  Gothic  building.  On  one  side  of  the  entrance  stands  the  theatre,  and  on  the  other 
the  hospital.  The  custom-house  is  on  the  sea  side,  surrounded  by  a rampart  mounted  with  cannon,  w hich 
contains  barracks  for  soldiers. 

The  best  ancliorage  for  large  ships  is  in  30  to  35  fathoms  w'ater,  having  the  citadel  a little  open  to  the 
eastward  of  the  Loo  Rock ; the  distance  from  the  I.oo  Rock  will  tlien  be  about  half  a mile.  Prudence 
requires  that  it  should  be  w ith  a w hole  cable  w hen  there  is  the  least  app(*arance  of  unsettled  w'eatluT,  with  a 
slip  buoy  on  the  eable,  having  the  spliee  so  situated,  that,  should  you  be  oblig(‘d  to  put  to  sea,  which  fre- 
quently happens,  and  not  be  able  to  weigh,  you  may  cut  the  cable  near  the  s|)li(  (\ 

Ships'  boats  may  land  on  the  beach  in  suiunuT  months;  but  when  th(‘re  is  no  landing  of  goods  to  render 
it  necessary,  it  is  hedter  to  he  avoided  at  all  seasojis,  both  for  the  safety  of  the  boats,  which  are  driven  Ijy  a 
violent  surge*  on  a shingly  shore,  and  for  preventing  the  seamen  from  having  the  opportunity  of  fi  cquenting 
the  disorderly  houses  in  tho  neighbourhood  of  the  beach,  and  drinking  the  pernicious  liquors  vended  there- 
abouts. ('aution  is  likewise  nece'ssary  against  the  shore  boats  coming  on  board,  under  pnte'ncc  of  selling 
fruit,  vegetables,  &c.  for  their  chief  object  is  the  sale  of  spirituous  liquors,  ami  often  concealed  goods. 

The  merchants  here,  w ho  arc  principally  English,  arc  extremely  hospitable  and  kind  to  strangers  If 
they  bring  the  smallest  introduction  from  any  friend  in  England.  Madeira  contains  about  110,000  inha- 
bitants, of  which  near  20,000  arc  computed  to  be  inhabitants  of  Funchal;  the  remainder  are  dispersed  in 
the  towns  and  villages,  of  wliich  there  are  six  or  eiglit  on  the  island. 

Madeira  w'as  firsi  visited  l)y  the  Portuguese  in  1119;  hid  it  had  been  previously  visited  by  nn  English- 
man of  the  name  of  Macham,  w ho  w'as  driven  here  in  a storm,  having  w ith  him  a lady,  who  died 
on  the  island,  and  over  whose  grave  he,  w ith  the  assistance  of  his  shipmates,  erected  a wooden  tomb  and 
cross:  this  circumstance  is  admitted  by  most  of  the  Portuguese  historians.  The  Portuguese  nniaiiicd  in 
undisturbed  possession  of  the  island  till  1801,  when  the  English  took  possession  of  it,  to  prevent  a similar 
transaction  on  tlie  part  of  the  French:  it  was,  liow'cvcr,  restored  at  the  peace;  but  on  tin*  emigration 
of  the  I'ortuguese  Government,  when  Portugal  was  invaded  by  the  French,  the  island  again  came  under  the 
English,  being  surrendered  in  trust  to  them  for  tlie  Queen  of  Portugid,  December  2G,  1807. 

COINS,  WEIGHTS,  AND  MEASURES. 

Coins.— Accounts  are  kept  in  n*as  and  inilreas,  which  are  imaginary  coins ; the  latter  is  1000  reas, 
and  equivalent  to  5s.  (id.  sterling.  The  coins  current  on  the  island  arc, 

Spanish  dollars  pass  for  1(K)0  reas,  equal  to  10  bits. 

Pistare(*ns 200 do. 

Half  pi.stareens,  or  bits  . 1(K) 1 do. 

Quarter  pistareens  ....  50 1 do. 

The  gold  coins  of  Portugal  do  not  pass  current  on  the  island. 

The  copper  coins  are  pieces  of  5,  10,  and  20  rea.s,  being  the  .V,  to,  and  ’ parts  of  tlie  pistaicen 


MADEIRA. 


•( 


Weiohts  and  Me\siihes.-- Those  of  I’ortiifral  are  in  general  iiso  on  ilie  ishni.l.  ’['lie  Portimuese  com- 
meroiul  i)oun(l  is  ecjual  to  111).  3-1  drams  avoirdupois;  thus  100 lb.  of  Poitngal  is  101  Ih.  ,3oz.  3;  dtains 
avoirdupois. 


CoMMKiin  \L  Weioiits. 


lUQl  ID  Air  V'il  RK. 


72  Grains  of  Wheat 

1 Oita  VO 

2 Meyos 

4 Oitavos 

1 Ounce 

4 Quart illos 

4 Ounces 

1 Quarta 

G Canadas 

4 Quartas 

- make  - 

1 Aratel,  or  lb. 

2 Poles 

- make  ' 

3‘J  Aratels 

1 Arolia 

2ti  Almudes 

4 Arobas 

1 Quintal 

2 Pipes 

13  1 Quintals 

1 'J^on. 

IS  A In  Hides 

I yuartillo 
1 C’aiuida 
I \\)W 
I Aliiiudo 
I Pipe 
1 Tun 
I nurrcl 


Long  IVIeasuue. — There  are  two  principal  measures,  (he  vara  and  (lie  covado;  the  (onner  is  five 
palms  or  pans,  and  the  latter  three.  The  palm  is  eight  Portuguese,  nearly  nine  Knglish  inches ; the 
covado  being  2Gl  English  inches. 


IMPORTS. 


The  following  are  the  articles  imported  from  England,  either  direct,  or  by  I’ortugucse  vessels  from  Lisbon. 


Ale  in  casks&bottles. 
Blacking. 

Books  & pamphlets. 
Boots  and  shoes. 
Buttons. 

Butter. 

Brandy. 

Brasiery. 

Cabinet  ware. 
Cordials. 

Cheese. 

Cotton  goods. 

Coals. 

Candles. 

Cards. 

Cloths  & Casimeres. 
Copper. 

Cutlery. 

Confectionary. 

Cordage. 

Earthen  ware. 
Engines. 


Furniture. 

Fish,  dried  .salted. 
Flour. 

Geneva. 

Garden  seeds. 
Groceries. 

Gigs. 

Glass  ware. 

Hams. 

JInts. 

Hay. 

Haberdashery. 

Hardware. 

Herrings. 

Hosiery. 

Irish  Linen. 
Jewellery. 

Isinglass. 

Iron. 

Ironmongery. 

Iron  hoops. 
Looking-glasses. 


Lead. 

Leather. 

Laces. 

Musical  instruments 
^Mathematical  ditto. 
Medicines. 
Millinery. 

Nails. 

Olive  oil. 

OilmanN  stores. 
Pipes,  Tobacco. 
Piece  Goods. 
PainteiV  colours. 
Pc'wtcM'cPs  ware. 
Pictures. 
Perfumery. 

Plate. 

Plated  ware. 

Porter. 

Provisions. 

Potatoes. 

Ruin  Shrub. 


Saddlery 

Salt. 

Slii[)-chandlcry 

Shot. 

Silk  goods. 
Soap. 

Spices. 

.Slops, 

Staves 

Steid, 

Sugar. 

Stationery 

Stulls. 

Tin  ware. 
Tobacco. 

Tin  plates. 

T urncry. 

Toys. 

Window  ghi-ss. 
Watches. 
Wines. 
Woollens. 


Of  the  above  articles,  Soap  and  Tobacco  are  prohibited,  being  a monopoly  belonging  to  Government. 
Considerable  quantities  of  corn  are  imported  from  the  Azores  and  America,  as  the  island  does  not  pro. 
duce  sufficient  for  the  consumption  of  the  inhabitants. 

B2 


4 


MADEIRA. 


Official  Value  of  Goods  imported  from^  and  exported  to^  England^  from  the  Accounts  submitted  to  the  British 
Parliament  from  1793  to  1809  inclusive;  likewise  the  Amount  of  Customs  levied  on  Madeira  Wines 
retained  for  Home  Consumption  in  Great  Britain. 


Years. 

liriports  from  Fn^Jand 

Kx  ports  to  Englaixl. 

('nstoins  Oil  W iiK*  iiM 
Home  con^.iiinpiioii. 

£ 

s. 

d. 

£ 

S. 

d. 

£ 

S. 

d. 

1798 

35,697 

12 

9 

10,541 

6 

1 

.... 

179i 

34s51(i 

17 

2 

4,527 

12 

] 

....... 

.... 

1795 

1.53,353 

19 

10 

5,755 

15 

10 

i . - 

179(j 

325, 1 tiS 

17 

4 

.3,.3SS 

11 

9 

10,019 

3 

3 

1797 

108,112 

5 

9 

1,308 

4 

1 

7,097 

18 

0 

179S 

170,825 

6 

0 

4,8.8G 

9 

10 

23,5G9 

5 

8 

17!»9 

111,182 

14 

10 

14,91.3 

8 

6 

23,485 

17 

11 

18(H) 

187,131 

0 

7 

10,410 

13 

6 

35,2.8G 

0 

8 

1801 

191,3(;:3 

7 

6 

8,283 

19 

7 

42,980 

0 

7 

1802 

114221 

8 

2 

10,843 

19 

7 

(>0,101 

4 

10 

1808 

109,888 

3 

6 

14,1.59 

15 

5 

57,830 

9 

4 

1801. 

10.8,117 

18 

8 

6,5.50 

15 

7 

39,293 

10 

5 

1805 

227,882 

18 

5 

8,278 

0 

0 

.Tl,fi2G 

17 

8 

180G 

211, .528 

5 

8 

10,780 

3 

11 

59,858 

11 

11 

1807 

2(i8,.557 

10 

0 

13,30(1 

6 

7 

01,217 

0 

0 

1808 

588,498 

13 

1 

31,304 

7 

7 

77,667 

2 

11 

1809 

518,118 

19 

8 

57,417 

14 

3 

94,015 

0 

0 

Total. 

8,278,018 

5 

If 

21G,IG7 

4 

ji 

G.82,04O 

11 

2 

•riuMrnportsexcmlthc<>x|)oiHnl7y«-ar.sX>3,161,87(i  Is.  4f/.on an av(Ta-f.ri8.5,992  14v.  2rf.poraun. 
The  princiiml  purl  of  which  is  llie  inanu('nclures  of  Great  Bj  itain.  In  1800,  the  imports  consisted  of 

British  merchandise 171,082  G 11 

l-'orei;,Mi  mercliandise 1G,048  I.')  8 

4’187,li;i  0 7 

llic  Aniencaiis  carry  on  a C(*nsiderable  trade  with  the  island,  iniportiiifr  i)rovisions,  lumber,  &c.  It 
appears,  troin  the  |iai)ers  hial  before  Conj^ress,  that  from  tlie  80th  of  September,  1805,  to  the  3()th  of 
Septemlrer,  180G,  there  was  exported  from  the  IJniU'd  States  to  Madeira 

Domestic  Produce Dollars  528,875 

F<»reii;n  Mei'chandise 


Dollars  590,5(>9 


r.rnrf  b;  Ib.m  t..  ,1...  W,.t  In, I,,,.  ,„„l  „,nnd,™llv  t,.  ,W  E..,  Clcnlatins  ,l,n,  160  MW. 

. pi,.-,  on  ,l.n  ,,,,,,, 

r.x  PORTS. 

Wine  » the  „ril,e  id.,„|,  ,,  d„„min„io»,: 

J here  are  also  the  following: 

Sercial. 

Swc’ot  iVfalmscy, 

Dry  Malmsey. 

'I'iiito,  or  Red  Wine. 


London  particular,  or  first  (jiiality. 
London  Market  . . second  quality. 

India  Market  . . . third  quality. 
New  York  Market  . fourth  (pialitv. 
Cafgo fifth  qua%/ 


MADEIllA. 


5 


The  export  of  wine  may  be  reckoned  from  15,000  to  17,000  pipes  per  annum;  of  which  a very  small 
part  is  Loudon  particular  Madeira.  The  inferior  kinds  annually  made,  wliicli  ace  estimate  d at  5,000  pipes, 
are  consumed  on  the  island. 

The  demand  for  Madeira  wine  in  Great  Bribiin  has  of  late  years  much  increased.  In  ISOO  the  (juan- 
tity  imported,  and  retained  for  home  consumption  was  2,002  tuns  of  252  ^^allons,  la  ing  iipw-nds  of  (),f)00 
pipes.  The  customs  collected  on  the  article  from  1700  to  ISOO  inclusive,  are  inseited  uilli  llie  impoits  inul 
exports.  The  excise  duties  are  so  blended  with  those  on  other  white  wines,  that  it  cannot  be  asceitaiiud 
what  has  been  levied  on  Madeira  wines;  but  the  amount  has  at  all  times  exceedc'd  that  of  the  eiistoms. 

The  prices  of  wines  are  settled  at  the  commencement  of  every  year  at  the  British  Factory.  They  have, 
from  various  causes,  increased  amazingly  of  late  years.  The  following  are  the  prices  from  170.1  to  the  pr(‘- 
sent  time. 


1703,  the  price  for  new  wine  was  d?35  per  pipe. 

1707,  it  was  raised  to 37  ditto. 

1708,  it  was  again  raised  to  ....  42  ditto. 


1 800,  the  price  w'as iMl  per  pipe. 

1810,  it  was  raised  to 50  ilitlo. 

1811,  the  price  is  51  ditto. 


Those  prices  are  for  new  particular  wines.  Old  wines  are  charged  iVnm  X’l  lo  X'O  per  pipe*  hlglicr, 
according  to  their  age;  the  other  qualities,  second,  third,  fourth,  and  fjltli,  aie  gciUMally  in  gradation  l'\  or 
X’5  per  pi])e  under  the  other  prices.  Serciul  and  Malmsey  vary  according  lo  th(‘  di  inand. 

The  (juantity  of  Madeira  wine  sent  lo  India,  it  i.s  dillieult  to  ascertain  with  any  dcgn  e of  aeciiracy. 
The  following  is  an  account  of  the  oilicial  value  of  imports  into  Madras  and  Bombay  from  Madeira  for  ri\e 
years,  1802  to  ISOO  inclusive.  At  Bengal  the  imports  from  Madeira  are  classed  with  those  iVom  Lisbon, 
hut  may  be  presumed  to  be  e((ual  to  both  Madras  and  Bombay  together. 


M^URAS. 

BO.MH.W. 

Years. 

Merchan.lise. 

Trra'.  ure 

Men  haiiMi.c 

TliMMirf* 

'roial. 

Sitca  Kucees 

Sicid  Kupecs. 

Sicca  Uupfcs 

Siif.l  ln’lipn-^ 

1 Nui.i  Ku|n*i*“. 

18()2 

2,96,620 

- r-  r 

2,9(i,(;20 

1803 

2,38,771 

— 

1,03,655 

3, 12, 12(> 

1804 

4,39,367 

— 

1,23,6.W 

— 

5,(i3,022 

1805 

2,90,427 

65, (KK) 

1,24,HK) 

l,7!t,S27 

1806 

2,4«,879 

i 

1,17,895 

3.66,774 

Total. 

15,14,064 

65,000 

4,6(),605 

1 — — 

20,tH,(i(i9 

The  above  merchandise  may  be  considered  to  consist  of  Madeira  \\in(‘;  and  admitting  it  to  be 
valued  at  the  custom  house  on  an  average  of  260  Sicca  Rupees  per  pi[)e,  or  F35  steiling,  the 

quantity  in  1805  would  be,  exclusive  of  treasure,  Sicca  Rupees  4,14,827,  or Pipes  1,1SI 

Admitting  the  imports  at  Bengal  equal  to  both  of  the  oilier  Presuh  neies 1,1S1 

The  Americans  imported  into  India,  Madeira  wine  in  1S05,  of  w hich  the  oificial  value  was 

Sicca  Rupees  2,91,162,  and  at  the  rate  of  280  Rupees  per  pipe,  is 1,010 

The  East  India  Company  imported  into  India  in  1805  not  included  in  the  above 905 

There  was  shipped  from  Madeira  to  India,  in  the  tonnage  granted  to  individuals 90.3 

The  extra  ships  belonging  to  the  Company,  which  carried  their  wine  iVoni  Madeira  to  India, 
may  be  calculated  to  have  taken  at  least  half  as  much  on  their  own  account 


Pipes  6,260 


Total  of  wine  shipped  from  Madeii'a  to  India  in  1805 


MADEIRA. 


The  East  India  Company,  with  a view  of  supplying  the  wants  of  their  military  and  civil  servants  at 
the  different  Presidencies,  have  shipped  Liadeira  wine  to  the  following  extent : 


1803- 4  510  Pipes 

1804- 5  630  ditto 

180.5-6  905  ditto 

1806-7  405  ditto 


1807- 8  910  Pipes 

1808- 9  340  ditto 

1809- 10  415  ditto 

1810- 1 1 530  ditto 


The  following  are  tlu>  jiriees  at  Homhay  for  throe  months  previous  to  the  1st  of  January,  1811,  for 
ready  money;  the  [)ipes  are  filled  ii|)  on  being  delivered  fronrthe  warehouses. 


Kinds  of  Wine,  and  when  ini|i«rtfd. 

PRICKS  at  BOMBAY  in  1810. 

Orttdier  1 

Nuvnnbrr  1. 

1 Di'ceiiibor  1. 

London  Markd  iin|)orti*d  October,  1809  . . 

India  Market  ....  ditto 

T.ondon  Market  imported  December,  1809  . . 

India  Market  , . . . ilitto 

k.  Q k 

.384  3 73 

3f)9  2 33 

384  2 30 
369  2 29 

a Q K 

390  0 04 
371  2 64 
389  2 61 
374  2 69 

K Q R. 

395  0 25 
379  2 95 
394  2 92 
379  29  1 

The  Company  allow  each  of  their  cominander.s  to  import  two  pipc.s  of  Madeira  wine,  beyond  their 
stipulated  tonnage,  and  they  ai-e  usually  allowed  to  |)ass  freight  free. 

Imlividiiuls  are  permitted  to  ship  wine  from  Madeira  to  India,  and  from  thence  to  Europe,  upon  the 
following  ternns. 


Extracts  from  the  East  India  ComjHinfs  licgulations  respecting  Madeira  Wine, 

Vxn.  7.  We  have  established  the  following  regulations  for  shipping  of  such  wine  from  Madeira  on  the 
extra  shij)s,  as  may  he  recpiired  to  he  rall  ied  to  India,  and  from  thence  brought  to  England,  riz. 

1.  That  the  fi-eight  of  Madeir.i  nine  from  iMadeira  to  India  he  J’4  per  pipe,  and  that  the  same  be 
paiil  within  fiilteen  days  aftcT  permission  shall  be  granted  for  shippinjr  wine. 

2.  That  the  same  rate  of  freight  he  jiai.l  for  wine  sent  to  any  part  of  India,  both  in  peace  ami  war 

and  that  no  pipe  do  contain  more  than  1 10  gallons,  ’ 

.3.  That  the  rate  of  freight  for  wine  brought  from  Imlia  to  England  he  per  pip,  in  time  ofwar- 
and  that  this  freight  he  paid  previous  to  the  delivery  of  the  wine  in  England,  and  charged  at  the  above 

rates  respectively,  whether  the  pipes  contain  the  full  ijuantity,  or  not. 

4.  That  persons,  requiring  tonnage  for  wine  from  Jhuleira,  to  be  carried  to  India,  and  from  thence 
to  England,  be  permitted  to  lade  in  articles  for  Madeira,  freight  free,  to  the  amount  of  the  tonnage  thev 

may  he  allowed  in  wine;  and  that  two  pipes  be  calculated  equal  to  a ton.  ® ^ 

5 'rimt  such  ships  as  may  he  appointed  to  take  on  boanl  wine  at  Madeira,  be  allowed  to  remain  at 
that  islaiul  two  working  days  for  every  20  Ton.s  of  goods  they  may  have  br-en  permitted  either  to  cariT  to 
or  receive  on  board  at,  Madena  (the  day  of  arrival  and  sailing  not  included);  and  that  if  the  agents  of  the’ 

shippers  .should  not  complete  t^  the  ships  do  proceed  on  their  voyai  and  Z 

freight,  paid  in  Irngland,  do  then  become  forfeited  ^ ® 

N.  B.  The  rates  of  freight  arc  settled  at  the  commencement  of  each  season. 


MADEIRA. 


The  quantities  shipped  in  consequence  of  the  above  indulgence,  have  been  as  follow: 


1803-4  . . 

. . . 512  Pipes 

1804^5  . . 

. . . G28  ditto 

18(»3-0  . . 

. . . 903  ditto 

180(>-7  . . 

. . . 403  ditto 

1807- 8 

1808- 9 

1809- 10 

1810- 11 


A part  of  which  has  been  brought  to  England,  after  having  been  the  voyage. 
The  following  are  the  Duties  on  Madeira  wines  in  England. 


1511  Pipes 
377  ditto 
392  ditto 
79  ditto 


£ s,  d.  £ s.  d. 

Customs,  per  Tun,  on  British  ships  . 44  2 GA  on  foreign  ships  . 47  7 lA 

Excise 52  10  0 52  10  0 


Total  per  Tun  . 9G  12  GA 99  17  lA 

The  drawback,  when  exported  to  the  East  Indies  or  China,  is  TSG  25.  per  3'un. 

IMPORT  AND  EXPORT  DUTIES. 

The  Duties  on  goods  imported,  are  settled  by  the  late  treaty  w ith  the  Porlugii<‘se  Government  in 
Brazil,  at  15  percent,  ad  valorem:  and  on  those  exported,  at  10  percent.  Goods  may  be  landed  for 
-ex[)ortation,  on  paying  a duty  of  4 per  cent,  when  shipped.  The  time  limited  for  l)eliig  in  the  w'arc- 
houses,  is  six  montlis. 

PORT  CHARGES,  &c. 

The  Consulage  for  each  ship  is  £3  6s.  the  entry  at  the  custom-house  about  the  same  amount.  Two 
visits,  one  on  arrival,  and  the  other  on  departure,  one  Spani.sh  Dollar  each.  Two  c\istom-hoiis(M)Hicers 
remain  on  board  during  a ship’s  stay  in  port,  and  are  paid  by  the  ship  300  rcas  each  per  day. 

The  charge  of  commi.ssion  on  transacting  business,  varies  from  31  to  5 per  cent. 

The  rate  of  freight  to  and  from  Madeira,  depends  on  circumstances:  -from  England  it  is  generally  £2 
per  ton  for  dead  weight,  and  20d.  per  foot  foi  ineasuiable  goods.  From  Madeira  l onnd  by  the  West 
Indies  to  London,  for  wines  8 guineas,  per  pipe.  The  commanders  of  the  l ^nst  India  ships  sometimes  exact 
very  heavy  freight  for  carrying  a casual  pipe  or  two  of  wine  round,  though  the  Company  will  allow'  it  to 
be  taken  the  voyage  on  application,  at  i?12  per  pipe;  25  guineas  per  pijic  having  been  charged. 

The  following  instructions  are  drawn  up  by  one  of  the  princi[)al  houses  at  Funchal,  and  are  recom- 
mended to  the  attention  of  those  frequenting  the  island. 

PORT  RULES 

■ To  be  observed  by  the  Commanders  of  British  Merchant  re5.9e/5  at  the  Island  of  Madeira, 

1.  No  vessel  can  have  communication  with  the  shore,  or  with  vessels  lying  in  the  port,  until 
visited  by  a boat  from  the  Government,  or  from  the  health-office. 

2.  The  Master,  Purser,  or  other  persons,  coming  in  the  first  boat  from  any  vessel,  must  land  at 
the  health-office,  there  to  undergo  examination. 

3.  The  Captains  or  Pursers  must  bring  with  them  the  vessel’s  register  and  Mediterranean  Pass, 
and  also  the  manifest  of  her  cargo;  as  without  the.se  documents,  business  cannot  be  transacted  at  the 
Consular  and  other  offices. 

4.  No  vessel  lying  in  the  port,  can  have  any  communication  with  one  that  is  coming  in,  or  that  has 
already  anchored,  until  the  new  comer  shall  have  been  regularly  visited. 

5.  No  vessel  at  anchor  can  change  her  birth  without  licence  from  the  Government, 


ft 


MADEIRA. 


f).  No  boats  aro  pormitted  to  pass  between  vessels  and  the  shore  after  sunset,  except  by  licence 
obtaiiK'd  iVorn  the  Government. 

7.  No  seaman  or  soldier  to  leave  their  ships  without  leave  obtained  in  writing  from  the  Captain  or 
the  commanding  oilicer. 

H.  Any  seamen  or  soldier  found  on  shore  after  sunset  without  a written  leave  of  absence,  is  liable 
to  be  taken  up  by  the  Government,  and  kept  in  custody  until  claimed  and  sent  on  board  ship;  which 
will,  exclusive  of  his  mainUMianee,  occasion  an  expence  of  two  dollars  for  each  individual,  to  be 
deducted  out  ot'his  wa":es. 

o 

0.  All  (.\'i|)lains  or  commaiuling  oflicers  are  requested  to  read  the  above  two  articles  (7  and  8)  to 
the  sailors  and  soltli(*rs  on  board  their  respective  vessels. 

10.  All  Captains  or  Pursers  must  give  notice  at  the  Consufs  or  the  Vice-Consufs  office  twenty-four 
hours  at  least  before  the  time  of  th(‘ir  intended  departure. 

11.  No  vessel  is  t(»  carry  Irom  hence  any  person  or  persons  other  than  those  that  came  in  her,  without 
a regular  jiassport. 

P^.  ^riie  Master  of  any  vessel  d(*terted  in  attempting  to  carry  away,  without  a passport,  any  Portu- 
guese subject,  is  liable  to  a fine  of  a hundred  dollars,  and  imprisonment  for  three  months. 

M.  In  cases  where  the  ('aptain  of  a vessel  .shall  be  judicially  warned  not  to  cany  from  this  island 
any  particular  person,  if  he  shall,  notwithstanding  such  judicial  warning,  still  carry  him,  he  w’ill  thereby 
become  Iia[)le  for  the  delits  which  such  person  .shall  owe  here. 

1 1*.  When  v(‘ssel.s  are  ready  to  (h'part,  the  Captains  must,  through  their  C’onsul,  or  through  their 
C’onsignees,  apjily  to  the  (rovernmeiit  to  have  its  visiter  sent  on  l)oard  at  the  hour  when  they  will  be  ready 
to  proceed  to  sea. 

lA.  After  a vessel  has  been  visited  for  the  purpose  of  proceeding  on  her  voyage,  she  cannot  have  any 
communication  either  w ith  tin*  shore,  or  with  the  ves.sels  in  port.  If  she  has  any  communication  with 
either,  she  cannot  sail  until  visited  a .second  time. 

Hi.  No  vess(‘I  can  enter  or  leave  this  port  after  sunset,  without  special  licence. 

17.  No  vessel  that  shall  have  remained  in  port  anight,  after  being  visited  the  preceding  day,  can  sail 
until  slie  shall  be  again  vi.sitcd. 

18.  All  vessels,  wheie  seeond,  third,  or  more  visits  are  ncces.sary,  must  pay  for  each,  after  the  first, 
half  a moidore,  or  thirteen  shillings  and  twopenee  halfpenny  sterling,  besides  other  contingent  expences.  ' 

19.  Any  vessel  attempting  to  get  under  weigh  before  she  has  been  visited,  a.s  in  all  cases  above  menti- 
oned,  w dl  lie  fiied  at  iiom  the  forts,  and  obliged  to  pay  for  th(*  powder  and  shot 

20.  No  eommander  of  a vessel  ean  leave  any  of  his  cirw  behind  him  in  this  island,  without  giving 
security  in  the  C’onsurs  ofliee  for  tlu'ir  subsistence. 

Any  person  who  shall  transgress  llio  above  Rules,  will  do  so  at  Ids  peril,  and  must  not  expect  from 
his  Consnl  any  protection  against  eonsecpienees  occasioin-d  by  a wilful  breach  of  the  Laws  and  llegulationi 
of  this  island. 


PROVISIONS  AND  REFRESHMENTS 

Are  most  cxorhitanlly  dear.  Reef  and  mutton  very  indifferent,  from  15f/.  to  I8rf.  per  lb.  Fowls,  very 
had,  a Spanish  dollar  each.  Ducks  laOO  reus  each.  Turkeys  3000  to  4000  reas  each.  Fruit  and  vege- 
tables very  scarce,  inferior,  and  dear.  The  provisions  and  water  are  sent  off  in  the  boats  belonginc 
to  the  island.  ® ® 


CHAFFER  11. 


The  Canary  Islands, 


Tlieir  Numher'-^Lanccrota;  Description^  Trade^  ^c.—Fucrtaventura;  Description^  Trade,  ^c,^G rand  Canaria; 
Description,  Trade,  ^c, — Teneriffe— Santa  Cruz;  Description — Coins-^Weights — Measures — Imports 
from  London,  and  their  Anuiunt— Articles  of  which  they  consisted — Exports — Duties — Port  liegulaUons 
and  Charges— Provisions  and  Refreshments— Orotava;  Description— Palma ; Description,  Trade,  ^c.— 
Gomcro;  Description— Hierro ; Description— Orchilla  Weed— Rose  Wood, 


THE  Canary  Islands  are  seven  in  number;  viz. 

Lancerota,  Fuertaventura,  Grand  Canaria,  Teneriffe,  Palma,  Gomcro,  Hierro,  or  Ferro;  the 
easternmost  of  which  is  about  50  leagues  from  Cape  Non,  on  the  Coast  of  Africa. 

To  which  may  be  added  several  small  isles  to  the  eastward,  which  are  uninhabited. 

LANCEROTA, 

The  easternmost  island  of  tlie  cluster,  is  about  15  miles  long,  and  10  broad.  The  principal  port  is  on 
the  S.E.  side,  and  is  called  Porto  de  Naos;  its  latitude  28°  58'  N.  and  longitude  13^  33'  W.  Here  vessels 
not  drawing  more  than  18  feet  water,  lay  secure  from  all  winds.  As  this  is  the  only  convenient  place  in  tlie 
Islands  for  cleaning  or  repairing  large  vessels,  it  is  much  frequented  for  that  purpose.  At  the  west  end  of 
the  harbour  stands  a square  castle  built  of  stone,  and  mounted  with  some  cannon,  but  of  no  great  strength, 
as  ships  of  war  may  approach  within  musket  shot  of  it.  Thcrre  is  no  town ; but  there  arc  some  magazines 
in  which  corn  Is  deposited  for  exportation.  On  the  west  side  of  the  castle  is  another  port  called  Porto 
Cavallos;  this  Is  also  an  excellent  harbour,  but  the  entrance  to  it  has  only  12  feet  water  at  spring  tides. 
Upon  a small  island,  between  the  two  harbours,  stands  the  aforesaid  castle,  which  defends  them  both. 
This  rock  is  joined  to  the  land  by  a bridge,  under  which  boats  go  from  Porto  de  Naos  to  Porto  Cavallos. 

About  two  leagues  from  Porto  de  Naos,  towards  the  N.  W.  is  the  town  of  Cayas,  or  Rubicon,  the 
chief  habitation  in  the  Island,  and  which  was  formerly  a Bishop's  see.  It  contains  about  200  houses,  a 
church,  and  a convent:  it  has  an  old  castle,  mounted  with  some  guns  for  its  defence.  Most  of  the  dwelling 
houses  here  have  but  a mean  appearance.  There  are  one  or  two  other  small  towns  on  the  island. 

This  island  exports  to  Teneriffe  a great  quantity  of  corn,  orchilla  wTcd,  cattle,  cheese,  coal,  skins, 
salt  fish,  and  fowls.  The  returns  are  generally  European  goods  and  cash.  The  horses  are  much  esteemed, 
being  of  the  Barbary  breed;  the  cattle  are  fat  and  good,  and  fish  are  in  great  plenty,  and  of  various  sorts. 

FUERTAVENTURA 

Is  about  7 miles  distance  from  the  S.  W.  point  of  Lancerota.  This  island  is  about  80  miles  long,  and 
16  broad;  in  the  middle  it  is  narrow  and  low.  There  are  no  ports  for  large  ships  in  the  island,  but 
several  from  whence  the  produce  is  shipped,  which  consists  principally  of  corn. 

C 


10 


GRAND  CANARIA. 


Tilt.*  latitude  of  the  north  point  of  the  island  is  28*^  40'  N.  and  longitude  13^  52  W.  fj'om  Grccnwit  li. 
In  the  channel  between  it  and  Lancerota,  lies  the  island  of  Lobos  (or  seals),  which  is  about  a 
league  in  circumference,  uninhabited,  and  destitute  of  water.  Near  to  this  is  a good  port  for  shipping; 
the  mark  to  find  it  is  the  east  point  of  Lobos  N.  JK.  and  anchor  about  half  way  between  it  and  Fuerta- 
ventura.  Although  this  road  seems  to  be  open  and  exposed,  yet  it  is  very  sale  with  the  trade  wind ; for 
the  water  is  smooth,  and  th(?  ground  every  w'hcre  clean,  being  a fine  sandy  bottom.  Right  ashore  from  tiie 
road,  on  Fuerta\  entura,  is  a well  of  good  water,  easy  to  come  at. 

On  the  east(  rn  side  is  the  poit  of  Cala  de  Fustes,  where  corn  is  shipped  off,  but  is  only  fit  for  small 
barks  : here  they  II(*  secure  from  all  but  S.  K.  winds.  Four  leagues  to  the  southward  of  the  above  is  Point 
de  Negro;  on  the  otlu'r  side  of  which  is  a spacious  bay  called  Las  Play  as.  The  best  anchoiing  place  is  on 
the  north  side,  where  it  is  ch'an  sandy  bottom,  at  a convenient  distance  from  the  shore,  in  14  fathoms. 

The  principal  town  on  the  island  is  situate<l  about  2 leagues  inland  from  the  road  of  Lobos,  before 
mentioned;  here  are  a large  heantiful  ehurch  and  convent,  built  of  hewn  stone;  most  of  the  houses  of  the 
town  are  neat,  and  are  about  100  in  iinmber.  There  are  several  other  small  towms  scattered  up  and  down 
ill  different  parts  of  the  island  ; hut  the  inhabitants  are  not  numerous. 

Tlie  artiele  of  corn  is  (lie  principal  one  exported  from  the  island,  in  return  for  which  the  inhabitants 
receive  Spanish  dollars,  and  a few  articles  ol*  European  and  West  Indian  produce;  besides  which,  they 
have  some  orchilla  weed,  caltle,  and  a small  (juantity  of  wine,  geii(*rally  w eak  and  poor. 

GRAND  (CANARIA. 

The  N.E.  [)oint  of  this  island  is  about  18  leagues  distant  fjoin  Eucrtaventura ; the  latitude  of  this 
point  is  2H^  13'  N.  and  15’  38  W.  from  Greenwich.  On  the  N.E.  (’Jill  of  tills  isluiul  is  11  {K'ninsuhi,  about 
two  Iragucs  in  circiimfcrcncc’.  'I'Ik.'  isthmus  hy  whicli  it  is  connected  with  the  main  island,  is  about  two 
miles  long,  and  u (inarter  of  a mile  broad  at  its  narrowest  |iart.  On  each  side  of  this  istliimis  is  a hoy, 
which  is  cxiMised  on  the  N.  side  to  the  swell  of  the  sea,  and  therefore  an  unlit  road  for  shipiiing;  but 
small  barks  lie  beie  secure  from  all  winds  and  weather,  and  licre  the  natives  I’ejiair  their  small  ves-els. 

On  the  other  side  of  the  isthmus,  is  a spacious  sandy  buy,  called  Porto  dc  laiz,  having  some  steep 
rocks  at  its  entrance  towards  the  N.  li.  This  is  a good  road  for  shipping  of  any  hurtlien,  with  all  winds 
except  S.E.  to  which  it  is  exposed;  hut  that  wind  seldom  blows  so  hard  as  to  endanger  shipping. 

The  landing  place  is  at  tlie  veiy  bottom  of  the  bay,  where  the  water  is  generally  so  smooth,  that  a 
boat  may  lie  broadside  to  the  sliore  without  danger.  At  this  landing  place  stands  a chapel,  dedicated  to  St. 
Catherine,  and  a castle  mounted  with  a few  guns,  but  of  no  strength.  From  thence  along  shore  to  the 
eastward  is  the  city  of  Palmas,  the  capital  of  the  island,  between  which  and  the  above-mentioned  ca.stlc, 
are  two  forts,  mounted  with  guns,  and  garrisoned  by  invalids.  At  the  other  end  of  the  city  is  another  castle, 
called  St.  Pedro;  none  of  these  are  of  any  strength.  The  city  of  Palmas  is  not  capable  of  opposing  an 
attack;  but  it  is  large,  and  contains  several  fine  buildings,  jiarticularly  the  Cathedral  of  St.  Anne,  with  many 
churches,  convents,  and  nunneries.  The  private  houses  are  in  general  good,  being  all  built  of  stone. 
The  city  is  divided  into  two  parts,  wliicli  have  a communication  with  each  other  by  a bridge  thrown  over 
a small  stream  of  water.  Tiie  iiuiiiber  of  the  iidmbitants  in  Palmas  is  estimated  at  about  (i,0l)0. 

Shipping  that  discharge  their  cargoes  at  Palmas,  generally  in  good  weather  anchor  within  half  a mile 
of  the  town,  for  the  (|uiekcr  dispatch ; hut  that  jdneo  is  not  a good  road. 

This  island  is  the  most  healthy  and  pleasant  of  tlie  whole  group. 

niPORTS  AND  EXPORTS. 

Grand  Canaria  exports  to  TenerilTe,  provisions  of  all  sorts : coarse  woollen  blankets,  some  raw  and 
wrought  silk,  orchilla  weed,  square  stones  for  pavements,  filtering  stone  vessels,  some  salt,  &c.  The 
returns  received  for  these  commodities  areciiicily  silver,  and  other  produce  of  the  Spanish  West  Indies. 


'rENERlFFK. 


The  wine  of  Canaria  is  good,  but  has  not  siidi  a Iwcly  as  lliat  of  TcncriflV,  and  ilicrcrurc'  not  so  fit  for 
exportation;  yet  a cuiisideralde  quantity  of  it  is  annually  sent  to  tlie  West  Indies. 

PROVISIONS  \Nn  RKFRESIIAIENTS. 

ProvLsion.s  and  refreshments  are  plentiful,  and  consist  of  hulloeks,  sheep,  floats,  ralduts,  fowls,  lurkejs, 
geese,  &e.  and  of  fruits,  the  ju'ach,  apricot,  apple,  pear,  eheriy,  jrluins,  pine-apples,  ;>,e.  aie  in  the  pro|>er 
.season  in  abundance.  Onions  and  other  vegetables  arc  extremely  good  and  reasonable. 

TENKRIFFE. 

This  i.sland  is  ahno.st  triangular,  the  three  sides  being  nearly  equal,  and  each  about  12  leagues  in 
length.  It  is  1.5  leagues  from  (Irand  Canaria.  Nearly  In  the  centre  of  the  island  is  th(>  thmous  peak, 
which  is  19()I  French  toises,  or  two  Engli.sh  miles  and  a quarter  above  the  level  of  the  sea,  and  may  be 
seen  in  clear  w'cather  upwards  of  .'10  leagues.  About  six  leagues  from  the  N.  E.  point  of  the  island,  called  Punto 
de  Nago,  on  the  S.  K.  side,  is 

SANTA  CRUZ, 

The  most  frequented  port  of  any  in  the  Canary  Islands.  'I'he  best  road  Ibr  shipping  is  between  the  middle 
of  the  town,  and  a fort  or  castle  about  a mile  to  the  northward  of  it.  In  all  tliat  space,  shi|)s  aiichoi'  from  a 
cable's  length  distance  from  the  shore,  in  6,  7,  and  8 fathoms  water,  to  half  a mile  in  2.5  to  30  fathoms. 
The  ground  is  in  .some  places  foul ; and  if  a ship  is  likely  to  remain  long  in  the  roads,  it  is  nceessaiy  to  buoy 
the  cables.  In  the  middle  of  the  town  is  a mole,  built  at  a vast  expence,  for  the  convenience  oflanding; 
it  runs  to  the  northward,  and  the  outermost  part  of  it  turns  tow'ards  the  shore.  Tlie  surt  sometimes  beats 
with  great  violence  on  the  shore  for  .several  days  together;  for  a .shelter  against  which,  tin*  mole  is 
but  ill  contrived.  In  mild  weather  goods  arc  landed  at  a creek  among  the  rocks,  near  the  custom-house, 
at  a short  distance  to  the  southwanl  of  the  mole.  In  going  from  the  mole  into  the  Jown,  there  is  a .square 
fort  on  the  leR  hand,  named  St.  Philip’s,  which  is  the  principal  one  in  the  bay  ; to  the  northward  of  it  along 
shore  are  .some  forts,  or  batteries,  mounted  with  guns ; the  most  considerable  of  which  is  called  Pusso  Alto : 
near  it  is  a steep  rocky  den  or  valley  ninning  a long  way  inland. 

At  the  south  end  of  the  town  are  some  batteries,  and  beyond  them  close  to  the  .slime,  there  is  a fort 
called  St.  Juan.  All  the  sea  shore  from  thence  to  the  southward  is  generally  inaccessible,  being  naturally 
fenced  with  rocks,  on  which  the  surf  breaks  almost  continually.  These  forts  are  mounted  with  cannon, 
and  joined  to  each  other  by  a thick  stone  svall,  which  begins  near  Passo  Alto,  and  continues  with  little  inter- 
ruption to  Fort  St.  Juan.  This  wall  is  only  breast  high  within,  but  higher  without,  facing  the  sea.  The 
entry  to  the  town  from  the  sea,  is  at  the  mole,  where  there  is  an  open  |)ussage  between  the  wall  and  St. 
Philip’s  Castle,  which  commands  and  guards  this  entry.  The  town  is  not  fortified  on  the  land  side,  as  no 
danger  is  apprehended  from  that  quarter,  the  country  near  Santa  Cruz  being  diy,  stony,  and  barren. 

Santa  Cruz  is  a large  town,  containing  several  churches  and  com  cuts,  an  hosi>ital,  and  the  best  con- 
structed private  building.s  of  any  in  the  Canary  Islands;  it  is,  in  tact,  the  capital  ol  them  all,  though  the  ejiis- 
copal  see,  and  courts  of  Judicature,  are  in  the  city  of  Palmas  on  Canaria;  but  the  (lovernor  (ienerul  of  the 
islands  resides  always  in  Santa  Cruz,  where  there  is  continually  a great  eoneoiirse  of  foreigiu  rs,  it  being 
the  centre  of  the  Canary  trade  with  Europe  and  America.  'I'he  number  of  inhabitants  are  about  7,(HH); 
the  water  they  drink,  is  conveyed  in  open  wooden  troughs  or  spouts  into  the  town  from  a neighb(au  lng  spi  iug. 

The  latitude  of  the  road  of  Santa  Cntz  is  28°  28  N.  and  longitude  10°  26  West  of  Grc<  nwich. 

COINS. 

The  current  coins  in  the  Canary  Islands,  are  the  Mexico  dollar  and  its  divisions,  the  halt,  quarter, 
eighth,  and  sixteenth.  Besides  these,  there  is  a provincial  real  of  plate,  which  is  a small  sdver  piece  of  the 

C3 


TENERIFFE. 


value  of  five  pence  sterling,  and  the  quart,  a copper  coin,  equal  in  value  to  our  hallpcnny,  for  ten  of  tliem, 
make  a real  of  plate.  The  provincial  silver  coin  is  not  current  in  Lancerota  and  Fuertaventura,  and  is 
never  exported,  because  it  passes  in  the  islands  for  more  than  its  intrinsic  value. 

Accounts  are  kept  here  in  imaginary  money,  viz.  in  current  dollars  of  ten  reals  of  vellon  each.  The 
real  of  vellon  is  equal  in  value  to  eight  of  the  above-mentioned  quarts,  so  that  the  current  dollar  is  exactly 
three  shillings  and  four|3ence;  and  six  of  them  are  equal  to  a pound  sterling;  three  sixteenths  of  the  Mexico 
dollar  pass  for  two  reals  of  plate.  Little  or  no  gold  is  to  be  met  with  in  these  islands,  passing  as  coin* 


WEIGHTS 

Are  much  the  same  as  in  England,  1231bs.  of  the  Canary  Islands  being  nearly  1251bs.  avoirdupois. 
They  are  thus  divided; 

l(i  Adarmos 
8 Oncas 
2 Marcos 
25  Libras 
4 Arobas 


I make  < 


1 unca,  or  uunce. 
1 Marco. 

1 Libra. 

1 Arolia. 

1 Quintal. 


MEASURES. 

The  measures  are  the  fanega,  the  almude,  the  liquid  aroba,  aiul  the  var.  The  first  of  these  is  tlie 
measure  used  for  corn,  cocoa,  salt,  &c.  Twelve  almudes  make  a fanega.  The  liquid  aroba  contains  some- 
thing more  than  three  English  gallons,  and  the  quartillo  is  nearly  ecjual  to  our  quart.  The  var  is  a mea- 
sure for  cloth,  &c.  and  is  about  7 per  cent,  less  tlian  the  English  yard. 


IMPORTS. 

Since  the  invasion  of  Old  Spain  by  the  Fn»nch,  and  the  reconciliation  between  the  Englisii  and  Spa- 
niards, the  l.racle  with  these  islands  has  cuiisideiubl^r  luei eased,  at  all  times  n small  traffic  was  carried  on,  as 
will  appear  from  the  following 

Account  of  Imports  into  Teneriffe  from  England^  and  Exports  from  Tenerijfe  to  England;  extracted  from 
Accounts  submitted  to  the  Di'itish  Parliament  frwn  1793  to  1810,-  likewise  the  Amount  of  the  Customs 
levied  on  Canary  Wines  retained  for  Home  Consumption  in  Great  Britain. 


y 

1 linpori't  iiiio  the 

1 kxporth  from  the  i 

iCustoms  on  Wint 

r for 

Mrs. 

1 I^Kinch 

1 lsland<$. 

Home  consumption. 

1 jP 

s. 

d.j 

P 

s. 

d. 

£ 

S. 

(i. 

1793 

1 26,120 

10 

7 

4,369 

4 

10 

1,.536 

9 

1 

1794 

17,806 

7 

2! 

11,41)4 

2 

4 

. 

mm 

1795 

32,773 

5 

4' 

15,082 

12 

2 

mm 

1796 

16,724 

5 

5 

1.5,7.51 

14 

10 

874 

19 

8 

1797 

■ ■■■I...  ■■ 

— 

1,671 

H 

3 

143 

16 

1 

179B 

23 

11 

0 

28,8,54 

0 

9 

62 

9 

11 

1799 

5 

0 

0 

1.3,078 

9 

9 

— 

1800 

■ —-I 

48,5,36 

18 

9 

2,2{t9 

9 

2 

1801 

4,4,55 

4 

6 

2.5,791 

3 

8 

1,-549 

8 

3 

1802 

rA03l 

1 

10 

38,402 

16 

6 

4,126 

7 

4 

1803 

52,046 

11 

7 

24,840 

17 

11 

4,617 

16 

11 

1804 

34,996 

10 

11 

4.5,706 

7 

9| 

7,046 

14 

4 

1805 

6,024 

16 

1 

62,767 

16 

0 

8,137 

7 

9 

1800 

3,3,793 

3 

2 

,54,691 

16 

2 

14,783 

6 

1 

1807 

14,860 

18 

5 

47,565 

6 

10 

13,1.57 

12 

9 

1808 

1 10,.557 

11 

G 

83,846 

12 

11 

17,078 

14 

11 

1809 

137,141 

17 

2 

112,999 

13 

11 

27, .516 

13 

4 

Total. 

'547,723 

14 

8 

i 6.35,361 

3 

' 4 

10.3,231 

' ,5“ 

H 

The  exports  have  exceeded  tlie  imports  in  17  years  dl^87,937  6s.  6d.  on  an  average  i?5,172  ISj.  9d.  per  ann 


TENERIFFE. 


Ji 


The  following  are  the  articles  of  which  the  Imports  from  England  consisted - 


Ale. 

Copper. 

Ironmongery. 

Plated  ware. 

Blacking  & brushes. 

Cutlery. 

Lead. 

Saddlery. 

Books. 

Earthen  ware. 

Leather,  wrought. 

Ship  chandlery. 

Butter. 

Floor  cloth. 

Looking  glasses. 

Spices. 

Bricks  & Tiles. 

Glass  ware. 

Linens. 

Steel. 

Brandy. 

Hats. 

Medicines. 

Stationery. 

Brasiery. 

Haberdashery. 

Mathematical  Inst. 

Stuffs. 

Cabinet  ware. 

Hosiery. 

Millinery. 

Tin  w are. 

Cheese. 

Jewellery. 

Oilman’s  stores. 

Turnery. 

Cotton  goods. 

Isinglass. 

Painter’s  colours. 

Toys. 

Cards. 

Iron,  in  bars 

Pewterer’s  w are.  | 

Watches. 

Candles. 

Iron  hoops. 

Perfumery. 

Woollens. 

EXPORTS. 

Wine  is  the  principal  produce  of  the  island;  the  quantity  varies  from  10  to  1,^,000  j>ipcs  per  annum, 
the  better  sorts  of  which  are  equal  to  the  middling  kinds  of  Madeira  wine.  Large  c|uantities  of  it  arc  sent 
to  England,  where  it  generally  passes  for  Madeira.  In  the  year  1800,  there  were  imported  and  retained 
for  home  consumption  1,659  tuns  of  Canary  wine,  or  gallons  418,068;  the  customs  upon  which  amounted 
to  £27 /AG  135.  4J.  The  excise  duties  are  blended  with  those  of  olli(*r  white  wines,  and  are  therefore  not 
to  be  correctly  ascertained;  but  the  amount  has  at  all  times  exceeded  that  of  the  customs.  The  other 
exports  are  orcliilla  weed,  rose  wood,  Spanish  dollars,  and  a few  other  trifling  articles. 

A considerable  trade  is  carried  on  between  the  Islands  Teneriffe,  Canaria,  and  Palma,  and  the  Spanish 
West  Indies,  in  which  no  foreigner  is  permitted  to  share;  it  is  principally  confined  to  articles  of  their  own 
produce.  The  ships  are  all  obliged  to  unload  their  homeward  cargoes  at  TcncTiffe,  which  consist  of  the 
commodities  of  ports  from  whence  they  came,  being  chiefly  cocoa,  logwood,  hich  s,  sugar,  and  Mexico 
dollars;  but  cochineal  and  indigo  are  prohibited  from  being  landed  here;  the  silver  is  also  limited  to  50 
dollars  per  ton,  according  to  the  registered  tonnage,  yet  some  of  the  ships  import  far  more  than  that 
allowance. 


DUTIES. 

All  goods  imported  into  the  Canary  Islands,  or  exported  from  them,  used  to  pay  a duty  of  7 per  cent,  on 
the  rated  value;  and  all  American  and  European  goods,  which  are  transported  from  island  to  Island,  pay  alike 
duty,  if  they  have  been  imported  into  the  islands  within  a certain  limited  time,  which  is  about  tw^o  months. 
Some  alterations  have  recently  been  made  by  the  Government  respecting  the  impoil  and  export  duties. 

PORT  REGULATIONS. 

No  person  is  permitted  to  land  on  these  islands  from  any  ship,  until  the  master  of  her  produce.^ 
a bill  of  health  from  the  port  he  was  last  in,  or  until  the  crew  have  heen  properly  examined  whetlier 
they  are  free  from  any  infectious  distemper;  before  this  is  done,  no  boat,  (*xce})t  the  pratl<|ue,  or  health, 
boat  dares  to  come  near  her.  No  boats  are  allowed  to  land  or  to  go  from  the  shore  oiler  sunset. 


OROTAVA. 


11 


Tlie  following  port  cliargcs  were  paid  by  one  of  the  East  India  Company’s  ships  wliich  recently 


anchored  in  the  roads. 

Captain  of  the  port’s  visit Spaijish  Dollars  3! 

In(|uisition 3Jr 

Tlealth  ollice 3] 

Waterage  and  anchorage  dues 1^3 

flc’iicral  licence 4- 


The  firing  a morning  and  evening  giin  in  the  roads  is  prohibited. 

niOVISlONS  AND  REFRESHMENTS. 

Reef,  which  is  good,  is  charged  at  about  sixpence  per  11).  Mutton,  pork  and  goats  arc  procurable. 
Vegetables  and  fruits  are  rather  scarce.  Fowls  of  a middling  kind  cost  from  half  to  a whole  dollar  each.  Bread 
is  very  indillen'iit.  Fisli  are  plentiful,  particularly  niackarcl,  and  the  water  is  preferable  to  what  is 
procured  from  the  other  islands;  it  is  charged  a Spanish  dollar  per  hiitt,  the  boat  hire  included. 

The  anchoring  ground  being  in  general  had  in  Santa  Cruz  Roads,  it  is  advisable,  for  ships  that  call 
at  this  place  in  (he  winter  months  merely  for  the  piiqiose  of  obtaining  refreshments,  not  to  come  to 
anclior,  but  to  stand  off,  and  on,  si'iuling  a boat  on  shore,  to  go  through  the  necessary  forms  with  the 
Governor,  and  to  order  the  reijnisite  supplies  to  be  put  on  board.  The  little  additional  trouble,  and 
seeming  inconvenience  of  this  mode,  are  sufficiently  compensated  l)y  the  preservation  of  tlie  cables,  tlie  safety 
of  tlie  ship,  and  the  exeni|)tion  from  anxiety.  Even  in  the  summer  months  it  is  necessaiy  to  buoy  the 
cables,  and  to  moor  with  as  little  cable  as  possible. 


OROTAVA. 

This  port  lies  about  8 leagues  to  the  soutlM\estward  of  Point  Nago,  in  latitude  28^25'  North,  and 
longitude  1(P  3;j  West.  1’his  is  a good  port  in  the  summer  season,  or  from  the  beginning  of  May  to  the  end 
of  October;  but  in  tli(‘ winter,  ships  are  often  obliged  to  sliji  their  cables,  uiul  put  to  sea,  for  fear  of  being 
sniprised  with  a north-west  wind,  wliicli  throws  in  a heavy  sea  upon  this  coast;  but  those  winds  rarely  Imp- 
pen,  and  commonly  give  warning  beforehand,  so  tJiat  Shi,  js  have  time  to  get  away. 

No  bout  w ill  go  Irom  hence  to  a ship  in  tlie  offing  until  she  approaches  within  a mile  of  the  shore,  when 
the  |.ratii|ue  l)()at  |)ufs  n |>ilot  on  tiomcl,  nlu.  hrin^rs  her  into  (Ik-  roud,  whieli  is  about  a mile  to  the  west- 
ward  of  the  (own,  wlu-re  .shi|)|)in,r  lay  moored  in  dO  or  .5(1  fallioms  water.  The  j.ilot  who  boards  a shij)  on 
her  arrival,  remains  mdil  she  de,)arts:  they  are  very  careful  to  slip,  and  ,,ut  to  sea,  when  they  appre- 
hend any  daiif'er.  It  is  eonimonly  calm  in  lids  road  ; hut  there  is  almost  always  a long  northerly  swell, 
which  causes  ships  to  roll  very  much,  and  make.s  it  difficult  to  load  a cargo  there.  ’ 

'I'he  landiiig-|.luee  is  near  to  the  mi.ldle  of  the  town,  where  is  a small  creek  or  haven  among  the  rotks 
There  large  laiats  load  wines,  and  carry  them  olf  to  the  .shi|)s  in  the  roud.s  with  great  dispatch. 

Tort  Orotavii  is  u jiluee  of  coiisideiahle  trade,  and  has  inurh  increased  since  the  destruction  of 
(Jarrachiea,  one  of  the  jirineijial  |H)rts,  hy  an  earthquake  in  170t.  It  contains  some  good  private  buildings 
two  elnirches,  two  convents  of  I'riars,  and  two  of  Nuius.  At  each  end  of  the  town  is  a black  sandy  bay! 
along  the  northernmost  is  a low  stone  wall,  built  to  |.reveiit  an  enemy  from  lauding;  at  the  other  bay  is  a 
small  fort  or  castle,  for  the  same  |nn  j.ose;  and  between  them,  at  the  landing-, ilace,  a battery  of  a few 
enimon:  hut  the  surf  that  breaks  continually  on  (he  shore,  is  a belter  .lefence  than  a large  army  Port 
Orotnva  is  jilentifidly  sup, died  with  gooil  water,  which  is  conveyed  to  it  from  a rivulet  at  a great  distance  in 
ojicn  wooden  sj.outs,  or  troughs,  and  is  brought  oil’  to  shipiiing  in  the  country  boats. 


PALMA—GOMERA. 


15 


PALlfA. 

This  island  is  about  17  leaguos  from  the  west  oml  of  Tencriffi'.  It  is  un,  ommonlv  I,!,,],  land  • its 
north  iK.int  is  in  latitude  28^  51  North,  and  longitude  17-  IS  West.  The  ehief  port  is'  tlnil  of  Santa 
Cruz,  on  the  S.  E.  side  of  the  island.  The  mark  by  which  it  is  to  he  found,  is,  when  appro  u hing  to  the 
east  side  of  the  island,  it  will  appear  shajied  like  a saddle.  Steer  so  as  to  full  in  a little  to  « indwaid  of  the 
middle  of  the  saddle,  till  within  a mile  of  the  land;  then  run  along  shore  to  the  sontliwurd,  till  von  peieeive 
the  town  close  by  the  shore,  and  the  shiiipiiigin  the  roads.  The  town  is  in  latitude  2S-  .'IS  'North,  and 
longitude  17-  .58  West.  Theroad  is  within  a masket-shol  of  theshore,  in  1.5  to  2(»  fathoms,  hut  is  expos- 
ed to  easterly  winds;  it  is  considered  more  .secure  than  any  at  Canaria  or  'rcnerilfe,  though  in  the  n inter 
season  there  is  a heavy  surf,  which  prevents  boats  from  going  oil  or  landing  for  smer.d  das"s  together. 

Santa  Cruz  is  a large  town,  containing  two  parish  churches,  several  convents  of  Fii, ns  and  Nuns, 
svith  many  neat  private  buildings,  though  not  .so  good  and  large  iis  those  of  the  city  of  Palmas  in  Camniai 
or  of  the  towns  of  Teneriffe.  A mole  is  built  here  at  a considerable  expence,  near  nhich  is  a (..sHc  or 
battery  mounted  with  a few  cannon  to  defend  the  .shipping  in  the  bay,  and  to  prevent  an  enemy 
from  landing.  In  the  middle  of  the  town,  near  the  great  church,  is  a fountain  tilled  by  a rivulet,  nhieh 
plentifully  supplies  the  inhabitants  with  good  water.  Palma  exports  to  'reneiilfe,  sugar,  ahm.nds,' sweet- 
meats, plank,  pitch,  law  silk,  and  orchilla  weed,  and  rcceiv(‘s  in  return  W^cst  liulian  and  I'inropean  goods. 
Santa  Cruz  U tlio  only  town  of  note  on  the  island. 

Tlie  produce  here  is  much  the  same  as  that  of  Canaria.  The  east  side  of  the  Isl.nid  produces  good 
wines  of  a dilferent  taste  and  flavour  from  tho.se  of  Teneritfe.  The  dry  nine  is  snndl-bodied,  and  of  a 
yellow  colour.  The  Malvasia  is  not  so  luscious  or  strong  as  that  of  Tenerifle;  but  when  it  is  about  .1  vears 
old,  has  the  flavour  of  a rleh  and  ripe  pine-apple:  but  these  wines  are  veiy  dillicnlt  of  preservation  when 
exported,  as  they  often  turn  sour.  In  this  and  the  neighbouring  island  pitch  is  e.xti  acted  in  great 
quantities  from  the  pitch-pine. 


TROVrslONS  AND  UHFRESIIMKNTS 

Arc  much  the  same  as  at  Grand  Canaria  and  ToneriHe.  The  nati\es  have  plenty  of  siii^ar,  and  make 
excellent  conserv  es,  which  form  an  article  of  trade  to  the  other  islands,  and  lo  some  parts  of  Hie  Indies. 

GOMERA. 

This  island  is  about  6 leagues  S.  W.  from  Teneriffe,  in  latitude  28^  :j  North,  and  longitude  1 20  Wt‘st. 

The  principal  town,  called  St.  Sebastian’s,  or  La  Villa  de  la  rainni,  is  situate  d close  by  the  sea  shore,  in  the 
bottom  of  a bay,  on  the  S.  E.  side  of  the  island,  where  shipping  lay  landlocked  fi  om  all  winds,  except  S.  E. 
Here  you  may  moor  at  a convenient  distance  from  theshore,  from  7 to  15  fathoms;  but  as  the  land  wind 
fretjuently  blows  hard,  it  is  necessary  for  a ship  to  moor  with  a large  .sco|)c  of  cable,  otherwise*  she  will  he  in 
danger  of  being  blown  out  of  the  bay.  The  sea  here  is  generally  so  smooth,  that  boats  may  land  on  the  bench 
without  danger.  When  boats  cannot  land  on  account  of  the  suif,  they  put  ashore  at  a small  covi*,  on  the  north 
side  of  the  bay,  from  whence  tliere  is  a footpath  along  the  face  of  the  cliff'  to  the  town  ; but  it  is  so  narrow, 
that  two  persons  cannot  walk  abreast.  Near  the  end  of  this  road  is  a gati*,  wdiich  is  always  s!mt  after  sunset, 
or  when  it  turns  dark,  and  then  no  man  can  pass  that  w^ay.  At  the  cove,  ships  of  anv  burthen  may  heave 
down,  clean,  and  repair,  hauling  close  to  the  shore,  whicli  is  a high  and  perpendicular  eJi/f;  on  the  top 
is  a battery,  with  several  pieces  of  cannon  for  the  defence  of  the  port.  The  town  comnu'nces  a short 
distance  from  the  beach,  the  principal  street  of  whicli  runs  straiglit  inland.  It  has  a eluiieh  and  convent, 
with  about  150  private  houses ; most  of  them  are  but  mean  and  small.  It  is  well  supplied  with  good  water 
drawn  from  wells  in  several  parts  of  it.  The  be.st  place  for  a shij)  to  lay,  is  whei  e a fidl  view  may 
be  had  through  the  main  street  of  the  town,  and  at  about  a cable's  length  from  the  beach. 


HIERRO. 


IG 


HIERRO,  OR  FERRO, 

Is  the  westernmost  of  llio  Canaries;  its  north  point  is  in  latitude  27^50'  North,  and  longitude  17"^  50' 
West.  It  is  15  leagues  in  circumference,  and  5 in  breadth.  There  is  no  considerable  towm  on  the  island ; 
the  port  or  anchoring  j)lace  is  an  o|)en  road,  and  but  little  frequented,  ( xcept  by  small  vessels. 

Water  is  extremely  scarce  on  this  island.  It  produces  wine,  which  being  poor,  weak,  and  bad,  is  distilled 
into  brandy  : lliis  with  (jrchilla  weed,  and  a few  small  cattle,  are  the  principal  exports  to  Tenerifte ; for  which 
they  receive  in  return  various  European  and  other  commodities. 


OUCHILLA  WEED 


Grows  upon  the  rocks  on  the  sea  coast  of  the  Canary  Islands,  the  Cape  de  Verds,  and  Madeira;  but 
the  best  sort,  and  the  greatest  quantity,  are  found  on  the  Canary  Islands.  It  is  an  ingredient  used  in  dying, 
and  very  valuable  It  grows  out  of  the  pores  of  stones  or  rocks  to  about  the  length  of  three  inches,  is  of 
a round  form,  and  of  tlio  thickness  of  cominun  sewing  twine.  Its  colour  is  grey,  inclining  to  white ; here 
and  there  on  the  stalk  are  found  white  spots,  or  scabs ; many  stalks  proceed  from  one  root,  at  some  distance 
from  svhich  they  divide  into  branches.  There  is  no  earth  or  mould  to  be  perceived  on  the  rock  or  stone 
svhere  it  grows.  Those  who  do  not  know  this  weed,  or  arc  not  accustomed  to  gather  it,  would  hardly  be 
able  to  find  it ; for  it  is  of  such  a colour,  and  grows  in  such  a direction,  that  it  appears  at  first  sight  to  be 
merely  flic  shade  of  the  rock.  It  produces  a beautiful  purple  dye,  and  is  much  used  for  brightening  and  enli- 
vening  other  colours.  The  best  sort  is  that  of  the  darkest  colour,  and  of  an  exactly  round  form ; and  the 
more  it  abounds  in  scabs,  the  more  valuable.  It  is  found  on  sonic  of  the  islands  of  the  Mediterranean,  and 
it  is  probable  that  it  grows  on  .some  of  those  in  the  Eastern  Seas.  The  prices  of  the  different  sorts  greatly 
vary  in  the  London  market,  riV. 

i 

First  sort  from  the  Cnnaiy  Islands,  from  . i’230  to  £250  per  ton. 

Second  ditto 110  to  130  ditto. 

Cape  de  Verd  Islands 130  to  160  ditto. 

Madeira 80  to  100  ditto. 

The  permanent  duty  on  orchilla  weed  is  10s.  6d.  and  the  temporary  or  war  duty,  3s.  (kl.  per  cwt 

ROSE  WOOD. 


This  wood  grows  on  the  Canary  Islands,  and  in  some  parts  of  the  East  Indies.  It  is  extemallv  of  a 
whitish  colour,  but  internally  of  a deep  yellow  with  a cast  of  red.  These  colours  are  sometimes  varied  In 
the  most  perfect  .specimens,  the  external  jiart  Is  pale,  and  nearest  the  heart  is  darker.  In  these  it  also  apnears 
that  this  wood  is  cut  from  a knotty  tree  with  an  irregidar  grain,  having  several  convolutions  in  the  midst 
of  which  arc  clusters  of  circular  fibres,  incluiling  a fine  fragrant  resin.  Rose  Wood  has  a slightly  bitterish 
somewhat  pungent  balsamic  taste,  and  a fragrant  smell,  especially  when  scraped  or  rubbed  resembling 
roses.  It  should  be  chosen  sound,  heavy,  of  the  deepest  colour,  and  in  the  largest  pieces  that  can  be  pro 
cured,  of  the  most  irregular  knotty  grain,  and  well  filled  with  resinous  fibres.  The  smaU  lieht  coloured 
and  large  shivered  pieces  should  be  rejected.  ’ ° * 


CHAPTER  III. 


Cape  de  Verd  Islands. 


Their  NumberSal—Bonavista— Maya^St*  Jago;  Description — Porto  Praya;  Naval  Action  ihere--^ Imports 
and  Kxports— Cloths  manufactured-^ Provisions  and  Refreshments^ Fogo— Brava — St,  Nicholas^ 
St,  Lucia—SL  Vincent^St.  Antonio. 


Tlicse  islands,  wiiicli  take  their  name  from  Cape  de  Verd,  the  nearest  point  of  the  coast  of  Africa,  consist 
of  Sal,  or  Salt  Island;  Bonavista,  Mayo,  St.  Jago,  Fogo,  Brava,  St.  Nicholas,  St.  Lucia,  St.  Vincent,  and 
St  Antonio,  besides  several  small  islets. 

SAL. 

This  island  is  about  16  miles  long,  and  6 or  7 broad.  It  is  high,  and  has  a peak  on  it,  which  may  he 
seen  in  clear  weather  at  a considerable  distance.  The  N.  W.  part  of  the  island  is  in  latitude  16^  50'  N.  and 
longitiuh*  22^^  55'  W.  On  the  west  side  are  three  bays,  the  principal  of  which  is  Mordera  Bay,  and  is 
one  of  the  best  in  the  C^ape  de  Verd  Islands.  This  island  is  uninhabited. 

BONAVISTA. 

The  north  end  of  this  island  is  in  latitude  16*^  15  N.  and  longitude  22®  .52'  West,  and  is  very  uneven. 
No  freshwater  is  to  be  had  here.  The  principal  road,  named  English  Road,  is  on  tlie  .N. W.  side  of  the 
island,  where  merchantmen  load  salt.  On  a reef  of  rocks  near  the  S.  E.  point,  the  Hartwell  East  India- 
man  was  lost.  May  24-,  1787;  on  the  19th  April,  1806,  the  Lady  Burgess,  another  of  the  Company’s 
ships,  was  lost  on  a reef  near  the  same  place,  and  several  ships  in  the  fleet  narrowly  escaped  the  same  fate. 

MAYO. 

This  island  is  about  15  leagues  to  the  .southward  of  Bonavista.  Under  its  S.W.  point  is  the 
road  named  English  Road,  where  merchant  vessels  anchor.  This  island  is  remarkable  for  its  salt,  which  is 
collected  by  the  natives  for  sale,  and  is  much  frequented  for  this  article,  more  particularly  by  the  Americans. 
The  anchorage  is  rocky  and  dangerous.  The  town  is  a wretched  place,  and  the  surrounding  country  has 
scarcely  a vestige  of  vegetation  u|Km  its  surface.  It  is  governed  by  a black  man,  subject  to  St.  Jago.  I’he 
inhabitants  apparently  live  in  great  misery.  Live  stock  and  a few  limes  are  to  be  had.  The  water  is  scarce, 
and  very  indifferent.  The  cotton  plant  grows  in  the  interior;  likewise  the  silk  cotton  tree. 

ST.  JAGO. 

This  island  w very  high,  and  the  largest  and  most  considerable’ of  the  group.  Its  priiicijial  road  is  on 
the  S.E.  aide,  called  Porto  Praya,  or  Pray  a Bay,  in  latitude  11°  55'  N.  and  longitude  23°  JO  W.  1 he 

D 


I8  3q 


18 


ST.  JAGO. 


town  of  Ribiera  Grande,  situated  on  the  south  side  of  the  island,  was  formerly  the  residence  of  the  Go- 
vernor, and  of  course  the  chief  place  in  it.  It  contains  a large  church,  and  a convent  of  Franciscans,  in 
which  are  twenty-four  Monks.  A castle  commands  the  town,  which  some  time  back  contained  some  good 
houses,  built  of  a kind  of  Portland  stone;  but  both  castle  and  town  arc  now  in  a state  of  ruin,  and  present 
nothing  but  the  greatest  decay.  Scarcely  is  an  European  to  be  seen  in  either:  a few  miserable  creatures 
alone  inhabit  those  buildings,  in  which  formerly  resided  some  respectable  Portuguese  families. 

Poilo  Praya,  situated  about  seven  miles  to  the  N.E.  of  llibiera  Grande,  at  the  S.  E.  extremity  of 
the  island,  is  now  the  residimee  of  the  I'ortuguese  Governor,  to  whom  the  whole  of  the  Cape  de  Verd 
Islands  are  subject.  It  contains  a church;  except  which  building  and  the  gaol,  it  does  not  possess  another 
above  the  description  of  a hut;  even  tlu:  habitation  of  the  Governor  is  but  one  of  a better  a])pearance. 
These  huts  are  built  in  wid(‘ly  detached  rows,  and  the  market  is  held  in  the  most  spacious  of  these  divisions. 
The  liarbour  is  defended  by  a battery  of  Hi  guns,  placed  on  a clifi‘  at  the  bottom  of  the  bay;  but  the  car- 
riages are  in  .so  bad  a state,  as  hardly  to  bear  the  shock  of  bring  a salute.  The  best  anchorage  is  with  the 
fort  bearing  N.  W.  about  one  mile  distant. 

Poito  Praya  is  celebrated  for  tlie  engagement  which  took  place  between  Monsieur  Suffiein  and  Com- 
modore Johnson,  on  the  Kith  of  April,  1781,  in  which  the  East  Iii(linmcn  hdiuvcd  with  uncommon  bra- 
very. This  bay  is  occasionally  visited  by  outward  bound  ships,  for  the  purpose  of  procuring  refreshments. 


IMPORTS  AND  EXPORTS 

Are  very  trifling:  the  former  coirsist  of  a few  necessaries;  the  latter  of  some  coarse  cotton  goods,  ma- 
nufactured for  the  slave  market,  and  mules,  ot  which  they  have  an  excellent  breed ; numbers  of  them  are 
annually  sent  to  the  West  Indies. 

Cotton  is  grown  here  sufficient  for  the  cloths  they  manufacture  for  their  trade  to  the  Coiifinent  of 
Africa.  The  following  are  the  kinds  made;  the  Hrst  of 'uhich  is  in  the  greatest  demand,  and  flic  resf  iti 
the  order  of  the  numbers.  'Fheir  prices  on  the  Island  are. 


1 Pano  de  agulha,  all  cotton 2,500  rea.s 

2 Pano  qundroda,  all  cotton 2,000 

Pano  da  ley,  all  cotton 1,000 

4 Pano  de  sio  de  Ian,  cotton  and  worsted  . . 1 to  5,000 

5 Pano  de  retro.s,  cotton  and  .silk 0 to  12,000 

6 Pano  de  V€*stir 3,(K)() 


A duty  is  levied  on  imports  amounting  to  about  10  per  cent. 


PROV  ISIONS  AND  REFRESHMENTS. 


The  privilege  of  selling  eaftle  to  shipping,  and  European  goods  to  the  inhabitants,  is  vestc<i  in  a foin 
pany  ; but  ni  all  otl.er  articles  the  native,  are  allowed  to  traffic,  t’altle  must  he  paid  for  in  Spanish  dollars' 

but  the  other  refreshments  arc  procured  better  for  old  clothes,  black  in  particular,  th.an  for  dollars  The 
prices  arc: 


Uullock.s,  weighing  from  3 to  -I  cwt.  each  16  to  20  Spanl.sh  dollars 

Goats,  but  iiidiffi  rent 3 to  t ditto 

Hogs,  small  and  poor 2 to  4 dilto 

Turkeys,  which  are  very  large  and  good  . I dollar  earli. 

Fowls,  very  indiHerent 2 ditt„  ,,tr  dozen 


19 


FOGO—BnAVA— NICHOLAS— ST.  LUCIA— ST.  V1N(M<  NT— ST.  AN'rONK). 

Of  fruits  they  have  oran-cs,  guavas,  cocoa-nuts,  liim.s,  plantains,  piiie-applc^s,  anil  tannii  inils.  Vege- 
tables  are  rather  scarce,  particularly  in  dry  seasons;  iiotwitlistaruiing,  a few  cal)l)a;;cs,  pumpkins,  yams,  and 
sweet  potatoes  arc  always  to  be  procured.  Indian  corn  is  plentiful,  and  the  principal  food  of  the  natives. 

The  water  is  in  general  very  good.  The  cistern  which  supplies  the  sliips,  is  at  the  bottom  of  the  hill 
on  which  the  fort  is  built,  about  a ciuarter  of  a mile  from  the  beach.  As  tlien^  is  gcncrallv  some  surf  upon 
the  beach,  boats  should  lie  at  their  grapnels,  and  the  casks  of  water  be  hoisted  into  them,  aftci’  being  Idled  at 
the  cistern,  rolled  down,  and  floated  through  tlic  surf.  It  is  recommended  to  send  on  shore  a pump, 
to  place  in  tlie  well,  by  which  ships  will  be  sooner  watered,  than  if  drawn  up  in  tlie  common  way  by 
buckets.  Some  planks  carried  on  shore,  will  be  useful  to  place  under  the  casks  in  rolling  tliem  down, 
where  the  ground  is  stony,  or  uneven,  or  where  it  is  soft  sand,  which  is  oflen  the  case. 

FOGG, 

This  is  the  highest  ot  the  Cape  de  Verd  Islands,  and  has  an  immense  volcano,  uliich  hin  ns  conllnuallv, 
and  may  sometimes  be  seen  upwards  of  30  leagues’  distance.  On  tlie  western  side  is  a small  town,  olf 
which  vessels  may  anchor  in  10  fathoms,  and  where  a few  provisions  may  be  procured,  if  reipiired.  'flic 
latitude  of  the  peak  is  14*^  .50  N.  and  longitude  14^  22'  West. 

BJIAVA. 

This  island  is  about  6 leagues  to  the  westward  of  Fogo.  Its  southern  side  is  in  latitmlc  1 .51  N.  ami 
longitude  25^  42  West.  It  has  but  few  inhabitants,  and  these  are  blacks;  but  the  most  hospitable  and  harm- 
less ])eople  in  the  islands.  Brava  produces  plenty  of  salt,  some  corn,  live  stock,  and  fish. 

ST.  NICHOLAS 

Is  about  10  miles  long,  three  broad,  and  high  and  mountainous.  Its  east  eiul  is  in  lutilude  10^  2.) 
N.  and  longitude  about  24*^  10  West,  There  are  two  good  hays,  one  on  tin*  S.  \V.  and  tiu*  other  on  the 
N.  W.  side  of  the  island.  The  first  is  called  rreguica  Bay,  and  is  about  7 miles  from  the  Last  end.  At 
this  place  there  is  good  landing,  and  plenty  of  water  may  Ik*  had  in  line  weatlier  f rom  a pond  siippliisl  by 
the  mountains;  but  no  other  refreshments.  The  other  hay  is  1 leagues  from  the  S. AV.  end,  and  called 
St. George’s  Bay.  Here  every  article  of  refreshiniait,  ('xcept  good  water,  may  he  pjoeured,  and  at  no  other 
place  on  the  island.  About  four  miles  from  the  bay  i.s  a town,  wliiae  the  B^^hop  nsides.  Ve-ssels  of  dif- 
ferent nations  frequently  touch  here,  to  procure  cattle,  hog>,  poultry,  fruit,  ami  some  medicinal  plants. 

ST.  LIT(  lA 

Is  about  5 leagues  long,  and  one  and  a half  broad.  It  is  uninhabited,  hut  iins  a mimher  of  wild  bullocks 
and  goats,  which  the  inhabitants  of  St.  Nicholas  and  St.  Antonio  occasionally  join  in  hunting. 

ST,  VINCENT 

Is  about  4 leagues  to  the  N.  W.  of  the  latter,  and  has  a good  hay  on  its  N.AA^  siile.  This  island  is 
likewise  uninhabited,  but  well  stored  with  wood  and  water,  and  there  are  many  wild  asses  upon  it. 

ST.  ANTONIO, 

The  northernmost  and  westernmost  of  the  group,  is  about  0 leagues  long,  and  4 broad.  Thia  i'  are  two 
remarkable  mountains  upon  it;  one  of  which  is  higher  than  the  other,  and  called  the  sugar-loaf.  On  the 
S.E.  side  is  the  town  of  Santa  Cruz,  situated  on  a bay,  of  which  the  ground  is  viay  indiflerenr.  The 
island  produces  wine,  cotton,  indigo,  orchilla  weed,  &c.  and  has  plenty  of  wood,  provisions,  and  other 
I'efreslments.  The  N.W.  point  of  the  island  is  in  latitude  17°  10  N.  and  longitude  25^3  W. 

1)2 


CHAPTER  IV 


South  America. 


Forts  visited  h\^  East  India  Ships  in  Brazil — S(,  tSalrador;  piscriplion^Coin,s\  Weip^hfsy  and  Measures^ 
Imports  and  Exports— Port  Regulations — Provisions  and  Refreshments — Rio  dt  Janeiro;  Description— 
Coinsy  Weights,  and  Measures — Imports  from  England^  and  (heir  Amount — E\por(s  to  England,  and 
thiir  Amount-State  of  the  Portuguese  Trade  with  the  British  Stttlements  in  the  East  Indies— Import  and 
Export  Duties — Prot  isinns  and  Refreshments — Rio  dt  la  Plata — Maldoiudda ; Description — Provisions  and 
Rifreshmuits — Monte  Video;  Description — Coins^  Weights,  and  Measures — Imports  from  England— 
Exports  to  England— Amount  of  Imports  and  Exports — Trade  of  Spain  with  South  America— Buenos  Ayres; 
Description » 


mW/AL. 

Tlu*  coast  (if  Brazil  contains  st'vcj-al  good  harbours;  but  St.  Salvador  and  Rio  do  .lanciro  arc  the  most 
rapacious  and  convcMucnt  for  large  ships,  and  arc  the  (udy  ports  frc<|U(‘ntcd  hv  outward  bound  Rast  India 
ships,  which  stop  on  this  coast  for  refreshments. 

SAINT  SALVADOR. 

The  entrance  into  the  Bay  of  All  Saints,  or  St.  Salvador,  is  b(‘t ween  a large  island  called  Tnporica  to 
the  westward,  and  a peninsula,  on  which  the  city  of  St.  Salvador  is  built,  to  the  eastward.  The  anchorage  is 
abreast  of  the  city  in  8 to  12  fathoms,  a mile  or  a mile  and  a half  distant.  On  the  extremity  of  the  pe- 
ninsula there  is  a lighthouse  to  guide  ships  in  the  night.  The  bay  is  large  and  eominodioiis,  and  capa- 
ble of  containing  a girat  number  of  .ships,  where  they  ride  secure  from  all  winds. 

The  city  in  on  the  riglit  hand  side  of  the  hay,  in  latitude  12"^  db  South,  and  longitude  38*^  40' West; 
it  was  the  capital  of  the  whole  of  Brazil,  until  the  seat  of  Oovenmunt  w'as  removed  to  Rio  de  Janeiro. 
It  is  divided  into  the  upper  and  lower  town,  the  former  being  built  on  the  Mininiit  of  a steep  hill; 
and  tile  latter,  which  consists  chictly  of  a single  street,  running  parallel  to  the  beach,  is  situated  at  the 
bottom  of  the  hill.  They  are  connected  by  throe  streets,  w Inch  run  shmtw  isc  iij)  tlie  einincnci',  as  it  w^ould 
be  inijiossible  to  go  right  up.  In  the  lower  town  all  the  merchants  and  people  of  business  reside.  The  houses 
are  in  general  large,  but  by  no  means  liaiidsome  or  commodious.  In  tlui  middle  of  the  town  is  situated  the 
great  s(|uure:  its  four  sides  are  oeeupied  by  the  Governors  Talaee,  the  Mint,  and  other  jiublic  buildiin^s. 
The  churches  are  numerous,  and  many  of  tlieiii  large  and  handsome  structures*.  The  streets  are  in 
general  confined  and  narrow  , badly  paved,  and  very  diily. 

Saint  Salvador  is  defended  by  a nnmher  of  forts  and  batteries,  the  principal  of  which  is  Fort  de  Mar. 
It  stands  on  a small  rocky  hank  of  the  inner  bay,  about  thretMjii al  ters  of  a mile  from  the  shore,  and  is 
mounted  wdth  very  heavy  cannon,  it  is  employed  its  a magazine  for  shipping;  and  all  vessels,  excc'jit  men 
of  war,  are  obliged  to  land  tlunr  pow  d(»r  on  an  iving  in  the  bay.  The  Dock-yard  is  defended  by  the  battery 
ofSt.  rhilip;  and  on  the  inhabited  part  of  the  beach  are  several  batteries,  mounted  with  eamion  of  difler- 
cut  sizes.  On  the  land  side,  St  Salvador  is  defended  by  several  extensive  lortifications  in  good  repair. 
The  city  Is  computed  to  contain  100, (K)0  inhabitants;  of  which  :10,000  are  whites,  about  the  same 
number  imdattoes,  and  tlic  remumder  negroes. 


mo  0RANt>K 


1*  A K A 1 H . 


P A H T 
or  THE 

(OAST  OF  BRAZIL 


r A M A U I C A Cj 


V K H N A M II  V ('  () 


/'.  Frtwt'  io  d<* 

Paitth' 

S K K (i  I P 1*  K 

S.in  I'Vuiicihi'^i 

a V * i 

Srrtfi/'/'r  i 

./4Avi  u 

Ku)  Rra 

\ 

\S 

\Pimim 


......... 


R.FafffHi  ^ 

» fiyuro 


n’ 


K ' • J-  I 
/7  Kitpiphu  SrtMto 


4- 


(S' 


■L 


SAINT  SALVADOR. 


tl 


In  the  lower  town,  near  the  beach,  stand  the  custoni-hoii^o  and  whari;;  lik(n>is('  the  roval  dock- 
yard, tlie  arsenal,  the  marine  store-house,  magazines,  &c.  which  arc  lar^c,  well  filled  with  naval  stores,  and 
kept  in  excellent  order.  Adjoining  to  tlie  public  l)iiildings,  a resuhnicc  has  bccMi  erected  lor  the  Inteiidant, 
or  Port  Commander. 

The  dock-yard  admits  but  one  ship  of  the  line  to  be  built  at  a time.  At  a place  called  I'aoapippc*,  a 
short  distance  from  the  city,  are  several  private  yards,  in  vvliich  ships  of  all  dimensions  are  Iniilt,  and  with 
much  greater  dispatch  than  in  the  royal  yard.  The  ships  are  handsome,  and  well  modelled;  and  the 
timber  extremely  well  calculated  for  .ship-building.  The  labour  of  workimm,  and  other  artielesfor  the 
equipment  and  repair  of  ships,  are  cheaper  here  than  at  Uio  de  Janeiro.  Large  i|uaiitities  of  limber, 
prepared  for  building,  used  to  he  sent  to  Portugal  in  the  men  of  war  that  came  out  as  convoy  to  the  lh  azil 
Heeds.  Ry  the  treaty  recently  concluded  with  the  Portuguese  Government,  the  Lnglish  have  the  jirivih'ge 
of  causing  timber,  for  the  purpose  of  building  .ships  of  war,  to  be  purchased  and  cut  down,  together 
with  permission  for  ships  of  war  to  be  built,  equipped,  or  repaired  within  the  ports  and  harhours  in  the 
Portuguese  dominions;  whicli  privileges  are  not  to  be  granted  to  any  other  nation. 

Saint  Salvador  is  miserably  provided  with  accommodations  for  strangeis.  An  inn  is  unknown,  and 
those  who  wish  f(»r  a temporary  residence  on  shore,  are  obliged  to  tak(‘  tin*  whole  or  pait  of  a lious(‘, 
and  furnish  it;  whieh  is  attended  with  much  ineoiixenienee,  and  consicli  rabk*  ex|)enc(*. 

The  regulations  rospeeting  .salutes  Iiere  are,  to  fonagn  men  ot‘  w ar,  the  same  number  is  ret  in  iied  ; to  an 
Admiral  of  their  own  nation,  an  ecjual  numher;  two  less  to  a Commodon',  and  foin*  less  a C.ijitain  of  llicii* 
own  ships  of  w’ar;  to  foreign  merchant  ships  tour  gun.s  less,  and  to  their  owai  trading  shijis  no  aiisn  i r is  gi\  (*n. 

The  coast  of  Rrazil  W’as  discovered  by  Peter  do  (’abral  in  1.500,  when  on  a v(>yai>e  to  the  Last 
Indies;  he  took  possession  of  it  in  the  name  of  the  King  of  Portugal,  and  sent  one  ol  his  licet  to  Lislion  to 
announce  th(‘  diseoveiy.  Lor  many  years  the  Portuguese  only  us(‘d  it  as  a pi. ice  for  condemned  criminals; 
however,  in  1519,  the  King  appointed  a Gov(‘rnor,  who  .shortly  after  built  M.  Salvador,  and  fortified  it. 
In  15S1,  the  Crown  of  Portugal  devoUing  to  tin*  King  of  Spain,  he  became  posse^s(*d  of  HrazLl.  In  1()21, 
the  Dutch  being  at  w’ar  with  Spain,  attackctl  and  took  S(.  Salvador,  and  ju(jul](‘(l  imme  nse  plimdei ; tiny 
WTre  driven  out  from  thence  in  1(1*20.  In  KiJO,  th.ey  attacked  anil  took  Pei  namhiieo,  and  m.iny  othi  i jil.ues 
on  the  coast,  doing  iniminse  mischief  to  their  enemies:  it  is  stated  that  in  thiiteen  years,  liom  to 

IC.'IT,  they  took  5J5  vesseks,  wlilcli,  with  their  cargoes,  sold  for  seven  millions  and  a hall  Sti  rling.  In  10.51, 
the  Portuguese  succeeded  in  expelling  the  Dutch;  .since  which  period  they  have  rem.iined  in  iindistui  bed 
possession. 

COINS,  WEIGHTS,  and  MLASURES 

Are  similar  to  those  enumerated  at  Rio  dc  Janeiro,  to  whicli  St.  Salvador  is  subordinate. 

IMPORTS  Axn  Exroirrs. 

Previous  to  the  removal  of  the  scat  of  Government,  the  li.ich*  with  the  mother  eouuiiy  enijiloyeil  a 
great  number  of  ships,  many  of  them  upw^ards  of  1,(XK)  tons  Inii  then.  Lrom  Europe  tin*  imjiorts  are  similar 
to  those  enumerated  at  Rio  de  Janeiro.  The  merchants  here  impoi  t tlieirow  n slaves  fiom  the  coast  ot  Aliii.i, 
w'ho  arc  said  to  cost  on  an  average  upwards  of  .^30  piT  head,  and  are  obtained  in  exchange  tm*  tobacco, 
spirits,  piece-goods,  beads,  &c.  which  are  carried  from  hence. 

The  coasting  trade  is  very  considerable,  and  the  vessels  emjdoyed  are  numerous.  A contraband 
trade  with  the  Spanish  settlements  to  the  southward,  used  to  be  can  led  on  to  .a  gi c.it  i xtcnl , tin  o’  lelm  ns  w cie 
Spanish  dollars,  dried  beef,  hides,  &c.  Cotton  is  one  of  the  most  considerable  ai  tides  ol  c'.jxn  U it  is  i eceiv  ed 
from  the  neighbouring  places,  deposited  in  warehouses  appropjiated  to  the  purpo>e,  whtu  it  is  soiled, 
weighed,  and  made  up  into  bales  for  exportation;  the  other  articles  are  Mig.ir,  lohan  o,  drugs,  &c. 


22 


ST.  SALVADOR. 


Amoxint  of  Goods  imported  intOf  and  exported  from  the  Baj/  of  All  iSaiiils,  in  the  Years  1798  to  1810  inclnhitr^ 

extracted  from  the  Correia  Brazilknsc. 


IMPORTS.  1 

I'XPOR'iS. 

1 

Ytrais. 

Ships. 

Val  lie. 

^ ears. 

Ships 

\ Riiif 

1798  1 

291 

3,170,711,059 

1798 

280 

3, 11 4,457, .300 

1799  1 

315 

3,61(3,429,715 

1799 

.328 

5,315,48 1,130 

1800 

298 

2,8 1.5,2 19,7.'>0 

1800 

2(i8 

3,514,394,770 

1801 

309 

3,391,390,485 

1801 

283 

4,423,086,200 

1802 

272 

.3,940,192,350 

1802 

2.32 

3,000,098,225 

1803 

325 

3,582,590,200 

1803 

202 

3,.384, 250,62/5 

1801 

300 

3,.3.5.3,020,425 

1804 

276 

3,481,093,-595 

1805 

381 

3,157,457,780 

1805 

351 

! 3,942,873,(X)5 

1800 

420 

.3, ()01, 198,305 

1800 

388 

3,647,850,189 

1807 

.300 

2,991,250,280 

1807 

3.53 

3,499,384,240 

1808 

.304 

2,317,947,900 

1808 

285 

1,418,338,025 

1809 

4,39 

4,285,540,550 

1809 

380  * 

2,817,079,270 

1810 

453 

1 3,978,955,900 

1810 

390 

3,329,232,410 

Total  4,533  R. 

‘as  43, .371,570, 885 

jl  Total  4,132  Reas  4.3,9.54,732,344 

The  exports  exceeded  the  imports  during  tin*  above  period  583,155,4^9  rcas. 


The  Imports  in  IHIO,  consHifcl  of 


European  commodities  . . 

(roods  the  produce  of  rortugal 
Privileged  manufactures  . . 

Produce  of  India  .... 
Product*  of  Coast  da  Mina  . . 

Ditto  of  Rio  (Irande 


Reas. 

1,775,().'M),4S() 

87,890,280 

I27,59i,840 

14^,478,700 

7ta,181,«(M) 

1,09«>,780,0(M) 


Total  ....  Reas  3,978,9o5,lK)0 


The  Exports  in  1810,  wore  to 

Rea.. 


To  Portugal  and  otlier  parts  in 
Portuguese  Ships  . . . . 

In  Kiigllsh  Ships 

To  ports  in  Ali-ica 

To  Rio  Grande 

To  Gob 


Total  ....  Ri'iis 


1,. 5 1.3,92/5,700 
1,001,081,980 
305,849,400 
493,(300,000 
11,775,330 


3,.329,232,410 


The  produce  of  India  imported  in  1810  consisted  of 


Ihafctas 

1 102  pieces 

Ruzio 

5125  libras 

Cas.s.as 

. . 500  varas 

C'adia  Ralagate 

4.5,12  piece's 

Cadia  Surat  . . . 

. . 4,318  ditto 

Chihis 

408  ditto 

Chitas  da  Bamao 

320  ditto 

Dimitins  .... 

. . 82  ditto 

Ermetins  .... 

. . 112  ditto 

Ganga.s 

. . .35,107  ditto 

Garraz 

. . 7,735  ditto 

tlolas 

.380  ditto 

Lcncos 

1,6368 

Lirilas  Surat  . . . . 

12,440  pieces 

Louca  .... 

Mamodiz 

. 1 85  pieces 

Morins  

. 1 00  ditto 

Procolos 

30.3  ditto  . 

Sanas  

992  ditto  , 

2,(344,800 

512,.500 

280,000 

45.112.000 

12.954.000 
I,5.55,;KM) 

3181,300 
287, 0(K) 
280,(KK) 

35.107.000 
24,752,tH)0 
. 950,0(H) 

4.092.000 
l(),172,()(Kj 

1,302,400 

3.700.000 

360,000 
363,(X)0 
7(K»,(XK) 


Total  , 


. . Reas  148,178, 7(K) 


ST.  SALVADOR— RIO  DE  JANEIRO.  03 

PORT  REGULATIONS. 

On  the  arrival  of  any  merchant  vessel  in  the  hay,  custoni-housi?  officers  are  sent  on  boanl  to  prevent 
contraband  trade ; men  of  war,  and  King's  packets  are  exempteil.  The  charges  arc  veiy  Invivy ; but  it  is 


expected  that  some  alteration  will  take  place.  They  are  as  follow,  ih. 

Pilotage,  at  entrance,  and  departure 7,000  reas 

l\)r  entrance  into,  and  departure  from  the  port 1,000 

Anchorage  per  day  ';^,00() 

Harbour-master  per  day  1,000 

IVesent  to  linguist  on  departure  2,i)0()  reas 

Six  custom-house  guards,  at  3 patacaoscach  per  day,  eating  at 

their  own  cost,  while  on  board A, 7 00 

Guard  de  mor  of  tobacco 3,200 

Ditto  of  Alsandego,  or  custom-house  1,2S0 

making  a first  expence  of  17,480  reas,  and  an  additional  daily  one  of  S,7(>0  reas. 

The  charges  made  for  caulking,  if  people  are  procured  from  the  shore  for  that  purpose,  an? 

Alaster  workman,  per  day Reas  1,200 

First  Assistant  working  high  up  8CK) ; when  low  down  ....  1,100 
Second  ditto  . . . ditto  . . . .000  . . . ditto 1,000 


PROVISIONS  AND  REFHESHMKN  rs. 

All  biishicss  relative  to  a ship  must  be  done  by  application  to  the  Tntendant  of  I lie  port;  and  IIkmi 
there  is  considerable  difficulty  in  obtaining  even  a necessary  supply  of  refreshments.  A list  of  whatever  is 
required,  must  be  given  in  writing  the  day  before,  at  one  o'clock.  On  last  days  they  will  notgraMlany 
supplies.  The  price  paid  for  bullocks,  which  are  intolerably  bad,  are  12,000  reas  ( ndi.  Poultry  more 
reasonable.  There  is  a market  held  in  the  lower  town,  where  liuits  ol  vaiious  Kinds  arc  procun  »1,  i/:. 
plantains,  oranges,  lemons,  guavas,  tamarinds,  &c.  V^egetables,  such  as  yams,  peas,  cabbage.,  and 
cucumbers,  are  in  abundance;  and  the  bay  produces  fish  in  great  variety. 

A charge  of  4-00  reas  is  made  for  Coolies  driving  bullocks,  &c.  and  on  the  departure  ol*  a ship,  the 
under  linguist,  who  attends  the  wharf,  expects  a present. 

RIO  DE  JANEIRO, 

Called  also  St.  Sebastian,  is  at  present  the  capital  of  Brazil,  and  became  the  residence  of  the  royal 
family  of  Portugal,  upon  their  emigration  from  Lisbon,  on  the  French  invasion.  The  entrance  of  the 
harbour,  one  of  the  finest  in  the  world,  is  .situated  about  22  leagues  from  Cape  Frio,  which  is  in  latitude 
23^  1'  S.  and  longitude  41°  AO'  W.  and  may  be  known  by  a remarkable  hill  in  the  form  of  a sugar-loaf,  at 
the  West  pwnt  of  the  bay.  The  entrance  of  the  harbour  is  not  very  wide,  but  the  sea  breeze,  which  blows 
every  day  from  10  to  12  o'clock  till  sunset,  enables  ships  to  go  in  bclbre  the  w ind,  and  it  grows  wider  as 
the  town  is  approached;  so  that  abreast  of  it,  there  is 'room  for  the  largtst  fleet.  'Ihe  entrance  is  defended 
by  the  Castle  or  Fort  of  Santa  Cruz,  which  is  very  strong,  mounting  near  GO  pieces  of  heav  y cannon,  and 
by  a small  fortified  island,  nearly  abreast  of  it,  called  St.  Lucia;  between  these  is  the  channel.  B(*foj’e 
a ship  attempts  to  enter  the  harbour,  it  will  be  necessary  to  send  a boat,  with  an  officer,  to  the  Fort  of 
Santa  Cruz,  from  whence  he  is  conducted  to  the  city,  to  give  information  of  the  slop's  airivaJ,  the 
occasion  of  her  stopping,  &c.  The  ship's  colours  should  also  be  hoisted  early,  unless  the  prat icpie  boat 
be  already  on  board.  A vessel,  even  of  the  Portuguese  nation,  attempting  to  pass  the  fort,  will  be 
hailed,  and  compelled  to  anchor,  until  permission  be  granted  for  passing  into  tlie  harbour.  Lvery  parti- 
cular of  the  ship,  her  condition,  force,  destination,  and  wants,  are  rc(juired  to  be  declared  under  the  sig- 
nature of  the  Captain;  after  which,  every  indulgence  and  assistance  are  readily  promised  to  be  given;  but  the 
ship’s  crew  arc  not  suffered  to  land  at  any  place,  except  at  the  stairs  opposite  the  palace;  and  a military 


24 


BIO  DE  JANEIRO. 


officer,  or  soldier,  generally  attends  every  person  from  on  board,  and  while  he  remains  on  shore.  Guard 
boats  also  surround  the  ship,  to  prevent  landitig,  except  when,  and  where  permitted.  These  regulations  are 
still  more  rigidly  enforced  with  regard  to  merchant  ships,  than  men  of  wax;  and  all  persons  are  obliged  to 
repair  on  board  their  ships  at  sunset. 

The  City  of  St.  Sebastian  is  situated  on  the  West  side  of  the  river,  about  4 miles  from  the  entrance, 
on  a projecting  point  of  land.  It  is  about  one  mile  and  a half  long,  and  about  three  quarters  broad. 
On  the  promontory  is  a strong  and  regular  fortification,  which  completely  commands  the  town  and 
anchorage;  opposite  tliis  point  is  the  Isla  de  Cobras,  or  Snake  Island;  on  the  highest  part  of  which, 
stands  the  citadel,  about  80  feet  above  the  level  of  the  sea.  The  island  is  upwards  of  300  yards  long;  it 
slants  at  the  inner  end  to  about  8 feet;  round  every  side  of  it,  and  close  to,  ships  of  the  greatest  draught  of 
water  may  lie  in  perfect  security.  On  this  island,  a commodious  dock -yard  has  been  erected,  with  magazines 
and  naval  storehouses,  and  a wharf  for  heaving  down  and  repairing  ships. 

On  landing,  the  first  object  is  a handsome  square,  surrounded  on  three  of  its  sides  with  buildings,  and 
the  fourth  open  to  the  water;  along  this  side  is  erected  a noble  stone  quay,  with  flights  of  steps  at 
each  extremity,  and  in  the  centre,  which  is  the  common  landing  place;  and  near  it  is  a quadrangular 
obelisk,  which  siqiplies  a stream  of  good  water,  for  the  iwe  of  the  lower  part  of  the  town,  and  of  the 
shi[)ping  in  the  harbour.  One  side  of  the  square  is  entirely  occupied  by  the  palace,  a long  plain  building; 
contiguous  to  which,  and  nearly  adjoining  each  other,  arc  the  opera-house*,  prison,  and  mint:  the  palace, 
the  obelisk,  and  pier  are  all  built  with  hewn  blocks  of  granite;  some  of  the  houses  are  of  hewn  stone, 
and  others  of  brick,  mostly  covenjd  with  slat**,  and  furnished  with  balconies;  the  slrc'cts  are  generally 
straight,  well  paved,  and  have  excellent  foot|)uth.s,  and  most  of  them  are  tenninuted  l)y  a church.  The 
shops  are  numerous,  and  well  stocked  with  European  and  Asiatic  commodities. 

COINS. 

Accounts  are  kept  in  milrea«  and  reas,  1000  reas  making  a milrea.  They  separate  the  milreas  from  the 
rcas  thus — 106,208,  which  is,  166  milreas,  208  reas. 

The  gold  monies  current,  and  the  weight,  are  os  follow.  The  sterling  value  is  estimated  at  the  British 
standard  of  oP.'l  17  10]  per  ounce. 


C'OINS. 

wek; 

IIT 

Stcrline  value. 

(’unont  va 

U.- 

No  ol  Kr.is. 

U/. 

tis 

jf 

9. 

fi. 

£ 

#/. 

Gold  piece 

1 

16 

12 

7 

2 

1 

7 

4 

0 

5 Moidore 

piece,  or  Dohrao 

24,(K)0 

1 

14 

12 

6 

14 

5 

6 

15 

0 

Doubloon, 

or  2 Joanese  . . 

12,8(K) 

0 

18 

6 

3 

11 

OJ 

3 

12 

0 

4 Dohrao 

12,(KK) 

0 

17 

6 

3 

7 

11 

3 

7 

6 

] Doubloon  or  Joanesc  , . 

6,400 

0 

9 

5 

1 

!.:> 

10 

1 

16 

0 

Aloidore  . 

*••••• 

4,8()() 

0 

fi 

22 

1 

6 

11 

1 

7 

0 

i Doubloon  or  { .loaiiese  . 

3, 2(H) 

0 

4 

15 

0 

17 

Hi 

0 

18 

0 

Gold  piece 

\ Joanese  . 

1,(i()() 

0 

2 

6 

0 

8 

Si 

0 

9 

0 

Moidore 

1,2(K) 

0 

1 

16V 

0 

6 

0 

6 

9 

Testoon  . 

■ • ■ • • . 

S(H) 

0 

1 

8 

0 

4 

<> 

0 

4 

6 

fh’usado  . 

•kS() 

0 

0 

15 

0 

2 

5 

0 

2 

ii 

SILVER  COINS. 

The  following  arc  the  current  silver  coins,  with  theii-  weights,  and  sterling  value  estimated  at  the  British 
standard  price  of  5s.  2d.  per  ounce. 


COINS.  WEIGHT 

NoofRoas.  Oz.  ilrt.  grs.  St  rrling  value 

Patacao  or  Sello 640  0 11  12  I 0 2 91 

Crusado 480  0 9 9 • 0 2 31- 

•5  Patacao  320  0 5 18  ] 015 


ttio  DE  JANEIRO. 


COINS 

WEioiir 

No.  of  Reas. 

O/. 

, dw 

Sti-rlnig 

valur 

* Crusado,  or  1 2 Vintem 

piece  240 

0 

4 

16 

0 

1 

2 

^ Patacao,  8 ditto  . . 

. . 160 

0 

2 

21 

0 

0 

6 Vintem  piece  . . . 

. . 120 

0 

2 

4! 

0 

0 

4 ditto 

. . 80 

0 

1 

13 

0 

0 

l; 

3 ditto 

. . 60 

0 

1 

2i 

0 

0 

•n 

The  Spanish  dollar  passes  current  here;  when  received  hy  the  Portuguese  from  a foreigner,  il 
is  seldom  taken  for  more  than  720  to  750  reas,  but  wlien  paid  by  tliem,  is  estimated  at  800  reas. 

The  Portuguese  silver  coins  are  in  general  7 to  9 dwts.  worse  than  British  standard. 

COPPER  COINS 

Are  the  piece  of  20  reas,  or  1 vintem,  and  the  half  and  quarter  vintem  in  proportion;  most  of  the  Pt>r- 
tiiguese  coins  have  on  one  side  the  arms  of  Portugal,  and  on  the  other  an  armillary  sphere. 


WEIGHTS 


Arc  about  1 per  cent,  heavier  than  avoirdupois;  98 lbs.  80  dec.  being  equal  to  lOOlbs.  avoirdupois,  and 
are  tlms  divided ; 


2 Drams 
8 Octaves 
16  Ounces 
32  Pounds 
4 Arobas 
13  j Quintals 


> make  < 


1 Octave. 
1 Ounce. 

1 Pound. 
1 Aroba. 

1 Quintal. 
1 Ton. 


The  ounce  is  divided  into  octaves,  scruples,  and  grains.  Diamonds  are  weighed  by  carats  of  4 grains; 
the  Portuguese  ounce  is  139 J such  carats,  each  carat  equal  to  grains,  English  troy. 


MEASURES. 


The  long  measures  are  the  Covada  and  Vara;  the  latter  is  5 spans,  and  the  Covada,  three;  the  spaa 
is  near  9 inches,  so  that  the  Covada  is  about  27  inches  English. 

The  measure  for  corn,  salt,  and  other  dry  commodities,  is  thus  divided: 


2 Outavas 
2 Quartos 
2 Meyos 
4 Alquieres 

The  Alquiere  measures  817  cubic  inches, 
The  liquid  measure  is  thus  divided: 


► make  ^ 


1 Quarto. 

1 Meyo. 

1 Alquiere. 

1 Fanega. 

and  50  Alquieres  make  19  English  bushels. 


4 Quartillos 

1 Canada. 

12  Canadas 

1 Almude. 

18  Almudes 

. make  < 

1 Baril. 

26  Almudes 

1 Pipa. 

2 Fipas 

1 Tonelada. 

The  Almude  is  reckoned  equal  to  4^^  English  gallons. 

E 

26 


RIO  DE  JANEIRO. 


IMPORTS. 

Since  the  departure  of  the  Prince  Regent  and  Court  from  Portugal  to  Brazil,  tlic  consumption  <)f 
British  commodities  has  much  increased.  The  greater  |Mirt  of  tlie  trade  may  now  l)e  considered  as  vested  in 
England.  The  articles  of  imjiorts  arc  os  follow  : 


Ale. 

Cordage. 

Looking  glasses. 

1 Pt'pper. 

Anchors  & grapnels. 

Carpeting. 

Lead. 

j Piee(»  goods,  India, 

Reads. 

Cinnamon. 

Lace,  gold  Sr  silver. 

j Rum  shrub. 

Blacking  & brush(*s. 

Cloves. 

Musical  instruments 

1 Saddlery. 

Rooks  & pamphlets. 

Drugs. 

Mathematieal  in.st. 

i Ship  chandlery. 

Boots  and  shoes. 

Eartli('rn  ware 

Millinery . 

1 Shot  of  all  sizes. 

Buttons. 

Gin,  Hollands. 

Mace. 

Shooting  tackle. 

Brandy. 

Garden  seeds. 

Nutmegs. 

Soa[). 

Cabinet  ware. 

Guns  and  pistols. 

Nails  of  all  sorts. 

Steel. 

Cotton  goods. 

(lunpowder. 

Oilmaifs  stores. 

Stationary. 

Canvas.  J 

Glass  ware. 

Pipes,  Tobacco. 

Silk  goods. 

C’ards. 

Hats. 

Paintc‘r\s  colours. 

Tin  ware. 

Cloths  & casimeres. 

Haberdashery. 

Pictures. 

Toys. 

Copper. 

Hosiery. 

Perfumery. 

Ten. 

(]orks. 

Jewellery. 

Plate. 

Watches. 

Cutlery. 

Iron. 

Plated  ware. 

Window  glass. 

Confectionary. 

Ironmongery. 

Porter. 

Wines,  of  sorts. 

Tht  following  is  a Slalmait  of  the  officinl  Value  of  Goods  exported  from  London  to  Brazil,  from  Papers  laid 


before  the  House  of  Commons. 

18<)6 J’4,527  3 11 

1807  22,412  18  10 

1808  2,5.51,658  16  8 

1809  .3,251,623  11  6 


'J'otal  . . . J"5,S30,222  10  10 

The  accounts  for  the  year  1810  arc  not  yet  made  up  at  the  cu.stoni  house;  but  the  demand  for  British 
goods  is  said  to  be  increasing. 


EXPORTS. 

The  following  arc  the  principal  articles  produced  in  Brazil,  and  sent  from  Rio  de  Janeiro  to 
Europe;  the  prices  vary  according  to  the  demand. 


Bark  Peruvian  . 
Coffee,  fine  . . 
Ditto,  inferior  , 
Cotton,  Capitunia 
Ditto,  Mino  new 
Ditto,  inferior  . 
Diamonds  . • 

(Jold  .... 
Horse  hidc.s  • . 


1,700  to  1,800  Reas  per  Ib, 

3.000  to  Sji^OO  per  Aroba. 
acetirding  to  quality. 

4.000  to  4,200  per  Aroba. 
0,200  to  0400  ditto, 
according  to  quality, 
according  to  size  and  purity, 
about  1 0 to  1 . 

000  to  080. 


Indigo,  1st  quality 
Ditto,  inftu'ior  . 

Ipecacuanha  . . 

Nutree  skins  . . 

Rice  .... 
Sugar,  fine  . . 
Ditto,  inferior  . 

I Tobacco  . . . 

i Tallow  . . . 


s500  to  .WO  Reas  per  lb, 
according  to  quality. 

450  to  m Reas  per  lb. 
1,400  to  1,500  per  dozen. 

6, (MX)  Reas  per  0 Aroba. 
1,400  to  1,420  Reas  per  do. 
according  to  quality, 
ditto 

2,800  Reas  per  Aroba 


BIO  DE  JANEIRO. 


The  following  is  a Statment  of  the  official  Value  of  Imports  into  England  from  Bra:ily  from  Papers  fahi 

before  the  House  of  Commons, 


1800  J?l,702  IG  7 

1807  \U)  19  2 

1808  4:31,047  9 8 

1809  1,4^36,701  1(>  3 


Total  . - l’l,87:i,:34:i  1 8 


The  imports  into  Brazil  in  four  years  have  exceeded  the  exports  ^3,050,8? 9 9^‘.  2d.  being  on 

an  average  i"989, 21 9 17!?.  3d!,  per  annum. 

TRADE  BETWEEN  PORTUGAL  AND  THE  EAST  INDIES. 

The  greater  part  of  the  trade  which  used  to  be  carried  on  between  Portugal  and  the  BritiNh  settle- 
ments in  the  East  Indies,  being  now  removed  to  Rio  de  Janeiro,  the  following  statement  will  shew  the 
extent  of  it,  and  the  benefit  derived  from  the  quantity  of  silver  thrown  into  British  India. 


IMPORTS  INTO  BRITISH  INDIA.  EXPORTS  FROM  BRITISH  INDIA. 


Years. 

Mcrcbandi'ic 

Treasure. 

Total. 

Y ears 

Merchandise, 

IVcasurt*. 

Tolnl 

Sicca  Rupees. 

.Sire, a Rupees. 

Sicca  Rupees. 

Siccu  Rupees. 

.Sicc.i  Rupees. 

SiaM  Ru[>ees 

1803 

1803 

1804 

1805 
1800 

5,93,339 

4', 57,895 
5,39,353 
0,40,970 
9,14,173 

14,50,097 

33,89,330 

33,18,908 

30,48,730 

34,18,144 

30,49,030 

J18, 47,335 
38,48,331 
33,95,715 
33,33,857 

1802 

180,8 

1801 

1805 

1806 

38,93,744 

39,97,851 

39,90,955 

19,58,309 

19,4^1,035 

— 

38,93,741. 

39,97,851 

39,90,955 

19,58,309 

9,43,035 

Total7 

31,41,179 

133,31,875 

1.5:1,7.1,054 

8\)tul. 

137,fKU54 

— 

fl  37,90,4.51.  ■ 

Value  of  merchandise  imiiorted  into  the  British  settlements  in  India  in 

five  years,  1802  to  1806  inclusive,  from  Idsbon  . . . Sicca  Rii|)(  es  ,31, 11, 179 

Ditto,  exported  from  India  to  Lisbon  in  the  same  period 127,90,1.54 

The  exports  exceeded  the  imports ....  96,19,27.5 

Treasure  imported  into  India  during  the  same  period  (none  be  ing  (*xj)oited)  122, .‘31,87.5 

Balance  in  favour  of  the  British  .settlements  in  five  years  . Sicca  Rupees  218,81,750 


Being  in  the  following  proportions  to  the  different  Presidencies: 

Bengal Sicca  Rupees  1 5.5,.56,8.59 

Madras  and  its  dependencies  . . . 29,31,273 

Bombay  and  Surat 3.3,93,018 

Total 218,81,1.50 


Which  on  an  average  of  five  years,  reckoning  the  Sicca  Rupee  at  2s.  Cd.  sterling,  is  4 .5.^8, 786  per  annum 

in  favour  of  British  India.  , . 

Of  the  amount  of  exports  from  India  in  1805,  it  appears  that  Sicca  Rupees  16,21,66.3  was  in  piece 
goods;  and  it  also  appears  that  the  demand  for  India  piece  goods  in  Brazil  and  Spanish  America  has  since  the 
above  period  much  increased. 


28  RIO  DE  LA  PLATA— MALftONALDO. 

IMPORT  AND  EXPORT  DUTIES. 

A treaty  has  recently  been  conclwled  with  the  Portuguese  Government,  by  which  the  duty  is 
settled  at  15  per  cent,  ad  valorem^  suliject  to  certain  conditions. 

rnovisioNS  and  refreshments. 

The  following  articles  are  proc’ured  here : 

Bullocks  12  Spanish  dollars  each.  These  are  small,  and  in  general  very  poor. 

Sheep  and  hogs  are  bud  and  dear,  and  are  seldom  purchased  for  sea  stores. 

Goats — some  excellent  ones  are  to  be  procured,  but  at  very  high  prices. 

Turkeys — ^large  and  good,  at  about  | moidore  each. 

Fowls  and  capons  very  fine  and  large,  may  be  got  in  plenty,  from  2s.  6d.  to  3s.  eacli. 

Muscovy  Ducks,  large  ones,  which  prove  in  a short  time  excellent  stock,  at  about  3s.  each. 

Yams  and  cabbages,  very  fine  and  of  a large  size,  and  fruits,  oranges,  &c.  in  abundance. 

Tlie  spirits  manufactured  here,  are  very  indifferent,  and  should  not  be  purchased  for  ships’  stores  if 
it  can  possibly  be  avoided  Common  wines  are  to  be  got  very  cheap ; and  unless  great  care  is  taken,  the 
seamen  who  go  on  shore  on  duty,  generally  return  intoxicated. 

Water  is  filled  from  the  fujueduct  pipes,  whicli  are  l(‘d  down  to  the  quay.  It  is  advisable  to  hire 
a country  boat,  which  will  hold  about  30  butts.  If  you  water  with  your  own  long  boat,  no  charge  is  made; 
and  on  application  at  the  palace,  one  of  the  cocks  which  supply  the  town,  is  sometimes  granted,  for 
the  sake  of  dispatch. 

Washing  is  very  dear,  and  there  is  much  difficulty  in  getting  your  clothes  back  again. 

RIO  DE  LA  PLATA, 

Or  River  Plate,  has  been  recently  brought  into  notice  by  the  success  of  a small  expedition,  under  the 
command  of  Sir  Home  Popham  and  General  Beresford,  from  the  Cape  of  Good  Hope,  which  took  Buenos 
Ayres  from  the  Spaniards  in  180(5.  The  capture  of  this  city,  with  so  small  a force  as  these  commanders  had 
lirought  against  it,  oxeited  much  triumjih  in  the  British  dominions;  and  although  an  act  unauthorized  on  the 
part  of  Government,  yet  it  appeared  inclined  to  take  advantage  of  this  unexpected  conejuest,  to  open  a new 
channel  for  the  manufactures  of  the  country.  Great  expectations  were  held  out  by  Sir  Home  Popham’s 
dispatches;  and  as  his  knowledge  of  commercial  concerns  was  held  in  high  estimation,  the  circular 
lelter  he  addressed  to  the  merchants,  encouraged  speculation  to  an  extent  that,  in  the  end,  caused  the  ruin  of 
hundreds,  and  great  embarrassment  to  the  mercantile  world  in  general.  An  expedition  was  fitted  out 
from  England,  to  retain  the  possession  so  easily  acquired ; but  before  their  arrival,  the  Spaniards  had 
succeeded  in  reconquering  the  settlement,  and  sent  the  garrison  prisoners  into  the  interior.  On  the  arrival 
of  the  expedition,  they  attacked  and  took  Monte  Video  by  storm;  but  failed  in  an  attack  upon  Buenos  Ayres, 
the  result  of  which  was,  a treaty  between  the  English  and  the  ^Spaniards,  dated  July  7,  1807,  by  which 
the  former  agreed  to  evacuate  Monte  Video  in  the  course  of  two  months,  which  was  accordingly  done.  Thus 
terminated  this  disastrous  expedition,  from  which  too  much  had  been  expected  by  the  British  nation. 

The  principal  places  of  which  the  English  obtained  a temporary  possession  in  the  River,  were  Buenos 
Ayres,  the  capital  of  the  province,  Monte  Video,  and  Maldonaldo.  Some  of  the  East  India  ships  have 
visited  those  places ; and  as  it  is  not  improbable  that  at  some  future  period  the  ports  maybe  again  open,  a 
(iMcription  of  them  and  the  trade  may  not  be  unaceeptable. 

MALDONALDO. 

This  town  b situated  on  the  north  side  of  the  River,  in  latitude  34'"  58  South,  and  longitude  about  54 
4.'i  W est.  The  harbour  is  safe,  witli  good  depth  of  water  for  ships  of  any  size,  and  is  partly  sheltered  from 


MONTE  VIDEO. 


Sin 


the  sea  by  the  island  Gorelli  at  its  entrance.  The  town  is  pleasantly  situated  at  a short  distance  from  the  sea, 
contains  about  200  houses,  and  1000  inhabitants;  the  houses  are  low  and  mean,  and  have  each  a small 
garden  attached  to  them.  A new  church  has  recently  been  erected  in  the  Spanish  style  of  architecture. 
The  leading  mark  for  entering  the  harbour  is  the  island  Lohos,  so  called  from  the  multitude  of  sea-wolves 
that  infest  it.  The  harbour  is  defended  by  batteries  on  the  beach,  and  by  a strong  fortification  on  the 
island  Gorelli,  which  mounts  twenty  24  pounders. 

PROVISIONS  AND  REFRESHMENTS. 

Bullocks  are  in  plenty,  and  good : they  may  be  procured  at  a Spanish  dollar  each.  Of  fruits,  oranges, 
lemons,  nectarines,  peaches,  figs,  &c.  may  be  had  in  abundance. 

MONTE  VIDEO 

Is  in  latitude  34°  53' South,  and  longitude  56°  1 West;  it  is  about  22  leagues  to  the  westward  of 
Maldonaldo,  is  elevated  about  450  feet  above  tlie  sea,  having  a building  on  its  summit  Tlie  harbour, 
where  ships  moor  in  2'J  and  3 fathoms  water,  is  on  tlie  east  side  of  tlie  mount;  and  the  town  of  Monte 
Video,  so  called  from  the  mount,  is  on  the  east  side  of  the  harbour.  The  town  is  built  on  a rocky  peninsula, 
fortified  all  round,  more  particularly  on  the  land  side,  where  a strong  fort  has  been  recently  added,  which  is 
a regular  work,  with  bastions,  and  a ditch : the  only  entrance  is  within  the  town  over  a drawbridge.  There 
are  two  entrances  into  the  town  from  the  country,  one  on  each  side  of  the  citadel  or  fort.  The  only  landing 
place  is  within  the  harbour,  at  a stone  pi(?r.  The  cathedral  is  a large  brick  building,  willi  two  lolly  square 
towers,  and  a cupola,  and  is  placed  in  the  western  face  of  an  open  square,  near  the  citadel.  There  is  a 
second  church  belonging  to  the  Dominicans,  the  only  order  of  Monk.s  in  the  town.  The  streets  are  laid  out  at 
right  angles,  of  about  100  feet  in  each  face,  and  occupied  with  brick  houses,  having  flat  roofs,  and 
parapets  of  4 feet  in  height  surrounding  them ; the  windows  arc  grated  with  iron,  a precaution  necessary 
in  a climate  where  too  much  air  cannot  be  admitted,  and  where  also  a great  number  ot  the  inhabitants  subsist 
by  depredations  on  their  neighbours. 

COINS,  WEIGHTS,  and  MEASURES. 

Accounts  are  kept  in  pesos  of  8 reals,  subdivided  into  16  parts,  and  also  into  34  Maravedis.  1 lie  gold 
coins  are  doubloons  of  8 escudos,  with  halves  and  quarters  in  the  .same  proportion.  Ihe  silver  coins  are 
dollars,  or  pesos,  Mcxicanos  of  8 reals,  with  halves  and  quarters,  eighths  (or  reals),  and  sixteenths  in 
the  same  proportion. 

The  quintal  is  divided  into  4 arobas  of  25  lb.s.  each;  the  pound  into  2 marks,  or  16  ounces ; the  ounce 
into  8 drams,  16  adarmes,  or  676  grains  Merchants  commonly  reckon  100  lbs.  equal  to  102  lbs, 

avoirdupois,  but  the  exact  proportion  is  123  to  125. 

The  Spanish  foot  is  111  English  inches;  it  is  divided  into  12  pulgadas,  each  12  lines.  The  fanega 
is  a measure  for  com,  &c.  containing  12  celerains:  and  5 fanegas,  one  English  quarter. 

IMPORTS. 

The  desire  of  embarking  in  the  trade  to  South  America,  on  the  receipt  of  Sir  Home  Po|^Iianis 
circular  letter,  was  so  general,  that  the  amount  of  goods  shipped  from  England,  was  considerable.  Liverpool, 
Bristol,  Hull,  and  Glasgow  were  anxious  to  participate  in  the  trade,  the  result  of  which,  as  has  been  before 
sUted,  was  extremely  disastrous.  At  the  period  the  expedition  sailed  from  Monte  Video  to  attack  Buenos 
Ayres  a second  time,  there  were  near  40  merchantmen  in  the  roads,  many  of  considerable  burthen,  laden 
with  European  and  other  goods  for  sale.  The  articles  of  which  their  cargoes  consisted,  were— 


MONTE  VIDEO. 


30 


Ale. 

Beads. 

Books. 

Boots  and  Shoes. 
Buckles. 
Blankets. 
Buttons. 

Cabinet  ware. 
Cheese. 

Cotton  goods. 
Canvas. 

Cards. 

Cloths. 

Copper  sheet. 
Ditto  bolt. 

Ditto  nails. 
Cutlery. 

Cloves, 

Cinnamon. 

Carpeting. 


Cider. 

Earthen  ware. 
Enamelled  ware. 
Feathers. 

Fishing  tackle. 
Carden  seeds 
Guns  and  pistols. 
Gloves. 
Gunpowder, 

Glass  ware. 

Gold  thread. 

lluiiis. 

Hats. 

Haberdashery. 

Hosiery. 

Jewellery. 

Irish  linens. 

Iron  in  bars. 
Ironmongery. 
Kitchen  furniture. 


Lead. 

Looking  glasses. 
Laces. 

Mace. 

Musical  instruments 
Mathematical  ditto. 
Medicines. 
Millinery. 

Nankeen  cloth. 
Nails. 

Nutmegs. 

Oil 

Parasols . 

Painter's  colours. 
Perry. 

Pickles. 

Pictures. 

Perfumery. 

Pepper. 

Plated  ware. 


Plate. 

Porter. 

Pewtercr's  ware* 
Piece  goods,  India. 
Saddlery. 

Ship  chandlery. 
Sauces. 

Shot. 

Shooting  tackle. 
Soap. 

Spectacles. 

SnutI’  boxes. 
Swords. 

Stationary. 

Silk  goods. 

Tin  ware. 

Toys. 

Tin  plates. 
Watches. 

Woollens  of  all  sorts. 


On  the  agreenumt  for  evacuating  Monte  Video,  endeavours  wctc  made  to  open  tlie  port 
of  Buenos  Ayres  for  the  merchants  then  in  the  River;  but  it  was  strongly  resisted,  on  the  ground  of  its 
being  contrary  to  the  laws  of  Spain  for  the  government  of  her  American  Colonies;  in  consequence  of 
which,  some  of  the  ships  proceeded  to  the  Cape  of  Good  Hope,  others  to  Brazil,  and  some  to  the 
West  Indies,  to  endeavour  to  dispose  of  their  cargoes,  which  in  many  cases  were  ill  calculated 
for  either  of  these  markets. 


EXPORTS. 

The  returns  imule  to  Europe  for  the  goods  sold  here,  were  hides,  tallow,  skins,  and  a few  small  articles  ; 
tlic  remainder  was  in  specie. 

The  following  is  an  official  SUilment  of  the  Value  of  ihr  Exports  from,  and  Imports  into,  Great  Britain 
from  the  Rio  de  la  Plata,  from  pajKrs  submitted  to  Parliament. 


Yfuis 

isob 

1507 

1508 
1S()9 


fioin  England. [ 

p ■ .v“  d r 
0 2' 

10  11 

12  2' 
4 h! 


lm|>.  10  Kiigland. 

P sT'd. 
121,685  18  8 
li;3,626  3 11 
253,24.5  15  10 
122,189  11  9 


To£.-iI.  11,276,701 7 111  610,747  10  2 

“VTt,  I"*:’  '*  i«  f"u.-  esee«l,J 

Ihc  exports  I 6(k>,9;j3  1<s.  9(/.  beinjj on  tin  average -C166, 488  Os.  M per  annum. 


ruovisioxs  AND  REFRESHMENTS 


The  market  is  very  excellent;  it  abounds  with  every  speeies  of 
the  river  with  a great  variety  of  fish.  Ik-ef  is  < ery  fine;  bullocks  ar 
a dollar  each.  Vegetables  and  fruits  arc  cheaj),  and  very  abundant. 


# 

meat  and  poultry,  and  is  supplied  from 
e a S|)anish  dollar  each,  and  sheep  lialf 


BUENOS  AYRES. 


51 


BUENOS  AYRES,  ^ 

riie  capital  of  the  Viceroyalty  of  Paraguay,  is  situated  on  the  south  side  of  the  Rio  do  la  Plata;  it  is 
bounded  on  the  cast  side  by  a smaU  river,  over  which  is  a wooden  bridge:  the  northern  and  western  sides 
are  bounded  with  gardens  and  orange  groves,  enclosed  with  strong  hedges  of  the  aloe  and  prickly  pear. 

In  the  centre  of  the  town,  on  the  face  next  the  river,  stands  the  castle,  a srpiare  work,  Hanked  with 
small  bastions;  the  walls  are  about  15  feet  high;  it  has  a ditch  on  the  face  next  the  town  only,  n>er 
which  is  a drawbridge.  In  this  fortress  is  the  residence  of  the  Go\  ernor,  and  it  is  likewise  occupied  w itli  othcT 
spacious  buildings.  The  great  square,  called  by  the  Spaniards,  Ua  Plaza,  separates  the  castle  Iroin  tin* 
town,  the  south  face  of  which  contains  a large  church  with  a lofty  dome  and  parapet.  Thv  stieets  are  at 
right  angles,  and  the  houses  in  this  neighbourhood  are  lofty,  and  sun*ounded  with  parapets  above  4 feet 
high.  At  the  N.  W.  angle  of  the  town,  and  close  to  the  river,  is  another  extensive  opening,  cuIKhI  La 
Plaza  del  Tauros,  in  which  is  erected  El  lletiro,  the  amphitheatre  tor  the  exhibition  of  bull-figlits.  In  the 
neighbourhood,  and  towards  the  river,  are  other  large  buildings  of  ])riek,  s('r\ing  as  the  ehief  depot  for 
the  military  stores  and  ordnance  of  Buenos  Ayres.  Various  roads  and  .stress  lead  into  the  Plaza  del 
Tauros,  but  all  at  right  angles  with  each  other.  To  the  eastward  of  the  great  square,  and  one  street 
above  it,  is  another  open  space,  where  arc  barracks,  and  nearly  opj)()sit(‘  those,  tlie  chureli  and  monastery 
of  St  Domingo,  the  principal  one  in  Buenos  Ayres  except  the  cathedral  A very  extensive  building,  w liicli 
had  been  originally  intended  as  a royal  hospital,  and  called  Uesidciitia,  is  situated  at  the  east  (‘iid  of  llie 
town,  over  wdiich  are  scattered  other  churches  and  squares  ol*  interior  note.  Many  of  the  |>iil)lie  buildings 
are  of  white  stone,  vvhieli  is  found  in  a small  plain  in  the  vicinity  of  the  tow  n Th(‘  length  of  the  city  is 
nearly  two  miles,  and  its  breadth  about  one,  and  it  has  a handsome.'  appearance  from  llu'  river. 

The  river  is  very  shallow.  No  vessel  of  any  burthen  can  opproucli  nearer  than  H or  iOniile^;  goods 
are  therefore  conveyed  to  land  in  small  cndl,  wliicli  are  built  long,  narrow,  and  high,  yet  so  constructed 
as  to  draw  but  little  water. 

Buenos  Ayres  derives  its  great  wealth  from  being  the  intermediate  depot  for  the  valuable  metals 
which  are  forwarded  through  it  to  Spain,  as  well  as  for  the  merchandise  of  the  latter,  for  the  use  of  most 
of  her  colonies  on  the  south  side  of  the  equator. 

The  trade  between  Spain  and  the  various  parts  of  South  Anierica  was,  previous  to  the  rupture  between 
that  power  and  England,  considerable.  The  following  account  of  the  imports  and  exports  from  Spain  to 
South  America  in  1788,  is  extracted  from  Bourgoigne'’s  Account  of  Spain. 

Exjwrts — Value  of  Spanish  produce,  reduced  to  sterling  X’3, 930,576  1 0 
Value  of  foreign  produce 3,5(i2,357  1 0 

Total  of  exports  from  Spain  £ 7, 193,933  5 0 
Imports — Value  of  colonial  imports 23,667,320  9 0 

Imports  exceeded  the  exports  ....  XM  5, 173,38  7 I 0 

The  duties  collected  on  the  imports  and  exports  in  1788,  amounted  to  XM  ,386, 123  1 I v ; since  that 
period,  it  appears  that  the  trade  has  considerably  increased;  but  tJic  ext(*iit  of  it  caniiut  easily  be  asc(*rtaiii(‘d. 

It  is  difficult  to  state  the  exact  quantity  of  gold  and  silver  drawui  by  Sjiain  from  the  mints  in  her 
American  colonies,  as  part  of  the  metals  is  converted  into  current  coin,  and  a part  is  also  u iit  under  the 
form  of  ingots,  either  clandestinely  or  legally,  to  the  mother  country.  Fioni  autln'iitic  r(‘gi.sters  trans- 
mitted by  the  Governors  of  the  different  provinces,  it  appears  that,  fr(>m  Jmiuarv  1 to  Dectmber  31, 
1790,  there  were  coined  in  the  royal  mints  of— 


558 


BUENOS  AYRES. 


Mexico  . . mfiU  Dollars  in  gold,  and  17,435,644  in  silver.  Total  18,063,088  dollars 

Lima  . . . 821,108  . . ditto  . . . 4,341,071  . ditto  . . . 5,162,239  ditto 

Potosi  . . . 2#ft,846  . . ditto  . . . 3,988,170  . ditto  . . . 4,288,022  ditto 

Saint  Jago  . 721,754  . . ditto  . . . 146,132  . ditto  . . . 867,880  ditto 

2,470,812ingold,  and  in  silver  25,911,023  forming  a Total  28,381,835  ditto 

If  to  the  above  sums  are  added  the  gold  and  silver  fabricated  into  various  utensils  for  churches, 
convents,  and  private  persons,  and  the  sums  clandestinely  exported  by  the  merchants,  without  being 
coined,  to  avoid  the  King^'s  duties,  which  are  heavy,  we  may  venture  to  estimate  the  annual  produce  of  the 
mines  at  j(?9,000,000. 

The  most  moderate  of  the  Spanish  writers  fix  at  9,000  millions  of  piastres,  or  dollars,  the  sums  which 
Spain  received  from  America  during  the  248  years  that  followed  its  conquest,  up  to  1740.  The  mine 
of  Potosi  alone,  during  the  first  90  years  of  its  being  worked,  produced  395,619,000  piastres;  and 
since  the  above  period,  from  the  improvements  made  in  metallurgy  and  mining,  its  produce  is  supposed 
to  have  considerably  increased. 

The  recent  visit  of  the  English  may  probably  tend  to  bring  British  manufactures  more  into  use,  from  the 
cheapness  with  which  they  were  procured,  as  the  Spaniards  always  set  a high  value  upon  every  article 
from  England.  It  is,  however,  to  be  apprehended  that  the  conduct  of  tradesmen  in  packing  up  many  goods 
which  had  been  laying  for  years  in  their  shops,  and  these  not  answering  to  the  samples  by  which  they 
were  sold  to  the  country  dealers,  may  make  the  Spaniards  more  cautious  in  purchasing  goods  in  future 
without  a careful  inspection  of  them. 

From  the  unsettled  state  of  the  province,  trade  is  very  dull,  subject  to  many  risks,  and  the 
wants  of  the  Government  induce  them  frequently  to  raise  the  duties.  At  present  their  demands  are 
principally  supplied  from  Biode  Janeiro. 


MHimla 


Moinbaa 


CAPE  or  GOOD  HOPf: 


^A*7)  THE 


P'AST  COAST  OF  Africa 


TO  THK 


K(R'ino(’tiai.  Link. 


\ Y ^ouaibai* 


Qutloa 


-Cjjf  Q ^Comoro 


Mosatubiqiipr^ 


0 _U,  fnAtuato 


I .IW, 


ffiAam^anr  Jt  ^ 


'\&ru./,U  ^ 

\ ^ . <e 

\ L ^ 

I r 0 

^rvundjmmJL^  ^ 

V ^ 

L 

l t4fiiiMmf(S 


aoTTivTot  covKtm 


CHAPTER  V. 


Cape  of  Good  Hope. 


Limits  of  the  Colony-^When  frst  rhited  by  Europeatis — When  taken  by  the  EnglUi-^Saldanha  Bay; 

^^C0tion--^Capture  of  tico  Dutch  Fleets  in  the  Bay — Procismts  and  Refreshments — Table  Bay Cape 

Tom;  Description — Coin.f,  Weights^  and  Meastms — Table  of  Specie  current  in  the  Colony^European 
Articles  suitable  to  the  (Sape  Market — Imports  from  IiPdia — Surat  Piece-‘gotuls — Madras  Piece-goods 

^Bengal  Piccc-goods-^Other  Articles  of  Bengal  Prtxluce — Batavia  Produce — Articles  of  Export Official 

Value  of  Imports  and  Exports — Cape  Wines — Import  and  Export  Duties — Part  Regulations^Hire  of 
Waggons  and  Horses^Provisions  and  Refreshments — False  Bay — Loss  of  the  Colcbrooke  East  Indiaman-^ 
• Simonas  Town;  Descripttem-^Imports  and  Exports^Provisions  and  Refreshments-— Mossell  B/ty ; 
Description-^Provisions  and  Rcfreshments—Plettemberg\s  Bay;  DcscrijiHon— Coins,  Imports  and 

Exports^Provisions  and  Refreshment s^Algoa,  or  Zwartkop\H  Bay;  Description^ Imjmr Is  and  Exports 
•-'Provisions  and  Refreshments — Loss  of  the  Doddington  East  Indiaman. 


( APE  OF  GOOD  HOPE. 

THIS  Colony  is  al  the  soutiieni  extremity  of  Africa,  extending  above  50()  miles  in  length  from  West* 
to  East,  and  about  315  from  North  to  South.  It  extends  on  the  western  side  of  the  Peninsula  to  the  lati 
tude  of  29°  50'  South,  and  on  the  eastern  side  to  Great  Fish  River,  or  Rio  dTnfuiita,  in  latitude  33°  25' 
South,  and  longitude  about  27°  37'  East. 

The  southern  extremity  of  Africa,  which  is  in  latitude  34-0  27  Soutli,  and  longitude  18°  13  East, 
was  discovered  by  the  Portuguese  navigator,  Bartholomew  Diaz,  in  1493,  who  gave  it  the  name  of  Cabo 
Tormentoso,  or  the  Cape  of  Storms,  from  the  boisterous  weather  wliich  he  met  with  near  it;  but  Emanuel, 
King  of  Portugal,  on  the  return  of  Diaz,  changed  its  name  to  that  of  the  Cape  of  Good  Hope,  from,  the 
liope  he  entertained  of  finding  beyond  it  a passage  to  India.  This  hope  was  fulfilled  by  Vasco  de  Gama, 
who  having  doubled  this  Cape  on  the  14th  of  November,  1497,  proceeded  to  India,  and  landed  at  Calicut, 
on  the  22d  of  May,  1498.  The  Portuguese,  however,  made  no  settlement  on  this  part  of  Africa,  nearer  to 
the  Cape,  tkan  the  banks  of  the  Rie  dTnfanta,  or  Great  Fish  Riveff  In  1900,  the  Dutch  first  visited  it; 
but  for  many  years  only  touched  at  it  in  their  voyages  to  and  from  the  East  Indies,  to  supply  themseives 
with  water  and  fresh  provisions.  In  1629,  Captain  Shillinge,  who  commanded  the  outward-bound  East 
India  fleet,  stopped  at  Saldanha  Bay,  and  by  a proclamation,  dated  July  23,  1620,  took  pos.sessioji  of  the 
bay,  and  the  adjacent  country,  in  the  name  of  the  Kmg  of  England,  on  the  condition  expressed  in.  tlie 
Company's  charter,  that  no  other  European  p<^wer  had  at  this  time  claimed  a right  to  tliat  pait  of  the  coast 
of  Africa:  reserving  to  His  Majesty  by  proclamation',  the^glit  of  assuming  the  sovereignty  of  those  dis- 
tricts, under  any  title  which  he  might  be  |>leased  to  adopt.  By  this  act,  the  right  of  the  crown  of  England 
to  tRS  Cape  of  Good  Hope  was  established  by  actual  possession,  many  years  prior  to  the  period  when  the 

F 


3,,  SALDANHA  BAY. 

Dutch  took  po^c^sionolll;  IrntthecivU  wars  in  England  prevented  measures  being  adopted  to  form  a colony 
at  tlic  Cape,  and  the  prior  rights  of  tlic  crown  were  neglected.  In  Iti-IO,  Van  Ricbcck,  a surgeon  of  one  of 
their  ships,  pointe.l  out  to  the  Directors  of  the  Dutch  Ka.st  India  Company,  the  great  advantages  winch  would 
he  derived  from  establishing  a settlement  at  this  place.  The  Company  adopted  Ins  plan,  and  sent  out  four 
ships  under  his  command,  to  commence  the  settlement  he  hod  advised . With  some  presents  of  brass,  toys, 
beads,  tobacco,  and  hraiuly , he  purchased  of  the  natives  permission  to  build  a fort,  and  form  a settlement  m 
their  country;  and  from  that  time  the  Cape  remained  in  the  undisturbed  possession  of  the  Dutch,  during  the 
space  of  nearly  J. 50  years,  till  it  siuTtMiiU  rcd  hy  capitulation  to  the  llriiish  arms,  under  Cieneral  Mured 
Clarke,  and  Admiral  Sir  (icorge  Keith  Eliihinstono,  on  the  16tli  September,  1795.  It  was,  however,  re- 
stored by  tlie  treaty  of  Amiens,  and  evacuated  by  the  llritisb  on  tlie  i21.st  of  February,  IHOJ.  Again,  on 
the  2d  of  January,  ISOb,  an  expedition  under  Idciit.  General  Sir  David  llaird,  and  Commodore  Sir 
Home  Popham,  arrived  in  Talile  Hay,  where  a landing  was  with  but  veiy  little  difficulty  effected, 
notwithstanding  the  opposition  made  by  the  (‘iiemy,  who,  under  the  command  of  General  Janssens, 
were  afterw^ards  bold  enough  to  risk  a battle  in  the  open  field,  which  took  plac(‘  on  the  8th  following.  Tlic 
actioiMvas  of  very  short  duration;  nothing  could  withstand  the  impetuosity  with  which  the  British  army 
charged  the  enemy,  wlio  soon  tU'd  in  every  direction  into  the  interior,  leaving  the  town  to  its  fate.  On  the  10th, 
the  town  liaving  suiTendercd,  the  troops  took  possession  of  the  castle  and  batteries;  and,  hy  the  prompt  and 
decisive  measures  pursued  hy  TdeutenanL  Giaieral  Sir  David  Baird,  the  Dutch  (ieneral  was  forced  to  agree 
to  a capitulation,  hy  which  tlu*  wliole  colony  was  once  more  put  in  possession  of  the  British  forces. 

The  places  most  freipiented  by  East  India  slii[>piiig,  are  Saldanha  Bay  and  Table  Bay,  on  the  western 
side,  and  False  Bay,  on  the  eastern  side  ol*  the  peninsula. 


SALDANHA  BAY 

Is  an  excellent  harbour,  where  any  number  of  ships  may  lie  sheltered  from  all  wdnds.  The  entrance 
is  in  latitude  3,‘P7'  South,  about  l(i  leagues  N.N.W,  of  Table  Bay,  between  two  small  islands.  A little 
farther  in  is  another,  which  may  be  passed  on  either  side.  On  the  left  side  going  in,  is  Hootje’s  Bay,  where 
the  ships  from  the  Cape,  and  American  w halers  when  in  want  of  repairs,  heave  dow'ii  at  a natural  pier  of  gra- 
nite, and  have  every  facility  in  remedying  their  defects. 

In  1 781,  Commodore  Jolinson  surprised  five  Dutch  East  Tridiamen  in  the  hay,  and  took  four  of  them ; the 
other,  called  tlic  Middlehurg,  the  most  valuable  of  the  fleet,  was  burnt  hy  the  Dutch.  In  August,  1797,  a 
Dutch  stpiadron,  consisting  of  nine  men  of  war,  having  troops  on  board,  under  Commodore  Lucas,  sent  from 
Europe  to  retake  the  colony,  surrendered  to  the  British  fleet,  under  the  command  of  Admiral  Sir  George 
Keith  Elphinstone,  and  an  army  commanded  by  General  Craig,  marched  from  Cape  Town. 

PKOVTSIONS  AND  REFRESHMENTS. 

Before  you  have  any  communication  with  the  inhabitants  in  the  neighbourhood,  it  will  be  necessary  to 
send  a boat  on  shore,  to  obtain  permission  from  the  Resident  to  land  goods,  or  procure  supplies ; and  at  whose 
fiouse  accommodations  may  be  had  during  a ship’s  stay  in  the  harbour. 

Bullocks  are  to  be  procured,  but  they  are  poor  and  dear.  Sheep  are  in  plenty,  and  good.  Poultry  of 
various  kinds  are  to  be  got;  likewise  fruit  and  vegetables.  Wood  is  scarce;  but  the  greatest  disadvantage 
here,  is  the  scarcity  of  good  water;  no  spring  in  tlic  neighbourhood  yielding  sufficient  for  a small  squadron 
in  the  dry  season  : during  the  winter  months,  when  much  rain  falls,  the  brackish  water  about  the  bay  is 
rendered  sweet,  and  fit  for  most  purposes. 


TX\M.V:  BAY— CAPK  TOWN. 


TAULK  BAY 

Is  large,  and  capable  of  containing  any  number  of  ships;  but  it  is  open  to  11h’  wcshi  l\  wiiuU,  \>  liii  h iIhxmv 
in  a heavy  swell.  The  land  contiguous  to  the  bay,  is  remarkable.  The  highest  j)art,  fiom  naIk  iuv  tin 
bay  takes  its  name,  is  situated  directly  over  Cape  Town,  at  the  soutli  side  of  the  hay,  am!  is  called  the  'liable 
Mountain.  It  is  a stupendous  mass  of  naked  rock,  the  iiorlh  front  of  which,  diieclly  facing  (he  town,  is  a 
horizontal  line,  or  very  nearly  so,  of  about  two  miles  in  length.  The  bold  face  that  rises  almost  at  right  angles 
to  meet  this  line,  has  the  appearance  of  the  mined  walls  of  some  gigantic  fortress ; and  tlu  se  walls  rise  above 
the  level  of  Table  Bay  3,582  feet.  The  Devifs  monnlain  on  one  sideg  and  the  Lioifs  lb  ad  on  the  oilier,  niak(‘ 
in  fact,  with  the  Table,  but  one  mountain;  the  height  of  the  former  is  3,135,  and  that  oitlu*  latter  2,1  GO  feet. 
The  Devil’s  Mountain  is  broken  into  irn'giilar  points;  but  the  upper  pai  t ot‘  the  Lion’s  Head  is  a solid  mass  of 
stone,  resembling,  from  some  points  of  view,  the  donieof  St.  Paul’s  placed  upon  a high  conic  shaped  liill.  From 
these  mountains  descend  several  small  rivulets,  which  fall  into  Table  Bay,  and  ^^d^e  Bay.  The  jiroper 
anchorage  is  abreast  of  (’ape  Towm,  with  tlie  'Fable  Mountain  healing  S.  \V.  in  .3  to  7 fathoms,  about  a mih* 
distant  from  the  town. 


(;apf  town, 

The  capital  of  the  Colony,  and  the  scut  of  Government,  is  pleasantly  situated  at  the  In'ad  of  'i’.ihh*  Bay, 
in  latitude  33^  58  South,  and  longitude  18^35'  J-’.asl,  on  a sloping  jdain  that  rises  with  an  eas)  a^eenl  to  the 
foot  of  the  Devil’s  Hill,  tin*  Table  IVIonnlain,  and  the  Lion’s  Head,  before  mentioned.  'Fhe  low  n consists  ot 
about  1,100  houses,  built  witliregularity,  and  kept  in  neat  order;  it  isdisposed  into  straight  and  parallel  streets, 
intersecting  each  other  at  right  angles.  Many  ot  the  streets  are  open  and  airy,  wdth  caiuds  ol  watei*  running 
through  them,  walled  in,  and  planted  on  each  side  with  trees;  others  are  narrow  andilipa\ed.  Three  or 
four  s(|uares  give  an  openness  to  tlie  town.  In  one  is  held  the  public  market;  another  is  the  common  K'soit 
of  the  peasantry  wdth  their  waggons;  and  u third,  near  the  shore  ot  the  bay,  and  between  the  town  and  the 
castle,  serves  as  a parade  for  exercising  the  troops.  The  barracks,  originally  intended  h>r  an  liospital,  foi 
corn  magazines,  and  wine  cellars,  is  a large,  w’ell-ilesigned,  regular  building,  wliieh,  with  its  two  wings,  occu- 
pies part  of  one  of  the  sides  of  the  great  square.  'Fhe  Castle,  whudi  is  a regular  pentagon,  is  said  to  have  been 
constructed  by  the  famous  Coeliorn,  on  his  way  to  India;  and  is  mounted  tuw’ards  the  sea  with  \eiy  lieavy 
guns  and  mortars.  There  is  but  one  entrance  into  the  body  of  the  fort,  w hieb  is  on  the  tow  n side.  It  affords 
barracks  for  1,000  men,  lodgings  for  the  officers,  magazines  lor  artillery,  ston‘s,  and  ammunition;  and  most 
of  the  public  offices  of  Government  are  within  its  walls.  Tlu^other  public  buildings  are  the  Stadtlioiiso, 
situated  nearly  in  the  centre  of  the  town;  a Lutheran  Churcli,  in  tin*  (‘asternmost  scjuarc;  and  another  fre- 
quented by  Calvinists,  at  the  west  end  of  the  town.  Betw’cen  the  tow  n and  I able  Mountain  me  scntUaed 
over  the  plain,  a number  of  neat  houses,  surrounded  by  plantations  and  gardens:  of  these,  the  large  st  and 
nearest  the  town,  is  that  called  the  Government  Gardens,  wdiieh  is  near  1,000  yanls  long,  and  contains  about 
40  acres  of  rich  land,  divided  into  squares,  well  planted,  and  sheltered  from  the  noon  heat  of  the  climate;  and 
they  are  at  all  times  accessible  to  decent  persons.  In  these  grounds  is  the  Governor’s  n sidenee.  'Flic  [lofiida- 
tion  of  Cape  Town  is  estimated  at  about  6,000  whites,  inclusive  of  the  military,  and  12,000  slaves;  that  of’ 
the  whole  Colony,  exclusive  of  the  town,  is  estimated  at  only  15,000  whites.  3 here  are  few  inns  in  tin 
town;  but  no  stranger  need  be  at  a loss  for  accommodation,  as  most  of  the  lamilies  receive  strangeis  into  tlieii 
houses,  to  board  and  lodge  during  their  stay.  Upon  the  whole,  Cape  Town  may  he  considered  an  excellent 
place  for  an  outward  or  homeward  East  India  ship  to  refresh  at,  in  the  fair  weather  season. 


F2 


3a 


CAPE  TOWN. 


COINS,  WEIGHTS,  and  MEASURES. 

The  accounts  of  the  colony  nre  kept  in  Rix  Dollars,  Schillings,  and  Stivers. 

2 Stivers  -v  r 1 Dubbletjec 

3 Dubbletjees  v make  -j  1 Schilling 

8 Schillings  3 v 1 Rix  Dollar. 

The  Rix  dollar  is  a paper  currency,  which  rises  in  value,  according  to  the  real  or  supposed  scarcity  of 
cash;  the  discount  varying  from  15  to  3.5  per  cent.  In  all  bargains  it  is  necessary  to  state  whether  the  pay- 
ments are  to  be  in  specie,  or  in  pajier  money.  Bills  on  England,  at  a date  not  exceeding  30  days,  are  generally 
considered  equal  to  cash,  particularly  Government  Bills.  The  following  are  the  rates  at  which  foreign  coins 
pass  current. 


Ta6k  of  Specif,  as  regulated  to  he  current  at  the  Colonp  of  the  Cape  of  Good  Hope, 


Schil. 

Stiv. 

1 ^ 

/. 

fh 

Guinea 

44 

264. 

1 1 

2 

0 

Doubloon,  If)  Spanish  dollars  . . 

160 

960 

4 

0 

0 

Johannes,  8 ditto 

80 

480 

2 

0 

0 

Ducat 

19 

114 

0 

9 

6 

Venetian  Sequin 

19 

114 

0 

9 

6 

Gold  Mohur  ........ 

75 

450 

1 

17 

6 

Pagoda  

16 

96 

0 

8 

0 

Spanish  dollar 

10 

60 

0 

6 

0 

Rupee 

6 

80 

0 

2 

6 

English  shilling 

2 

12 

0 

1 

0 

Copper  coin 

2 

0 

0 

2 

PAPER  MONEY. 

Rix  dollar 

8 

48 

0 

3 

4 

Dutch  schilling 

1 

6 

0 

0 

4^ 

The  English  weights  and  measures  are  in  general  use,  except  for  wines ; these  arc  sold  by  the  aum  and 
leager,  four  of  the  former  making  one  of  the  latter,  which  contains  from  150  to  152  gallons. 

IMPOllTS. 

The  following  list  of  European  articles  suitable  to  the  market  at  the  Cape  of  Good  Hope,  is 
extracted  from  orders  received  from  the  Colony,  since  it  last  came  into  our  possession. 

ALE. 


20  hogsheads  pale  ale  12  half  chests  bottled  ale 

10  butts,  ditto  6 ditto  Biuton  ale 


6 gross  of  blacking  cakes 
6 ditto  balls 
3 ditto  heel  balls 


BLACKING  AND  BRUSHES. 

3 gross  brushes,  assorted 
3 ditto  painters"  brushes 
6 ditto  white-washers'  ditto 


CAPE  TOWN. 


37 


BOOKS  AND  PAMPHLETS. 


2 Sets  of  Novellist’s  Magazine 
2 Sets  British  Essays 
2 Bell’s  Theatre 
2 Hume  and  Smollett’s  England 
12  Dutch  and  English  Dictionaries 
12  dozen  Spelling  Books 


3 Johnson’s  Dictionaries,  4to. 
New  Military  Publications,  ii^lO 
Magazines,  Reviews,  &c. 
Children’s  Books,  PIO 
New  French  Publications 
New  and  approved  Novels  -P20 

BOOTS  AND  SHOES. 


3 dozen  pairs  of  Hessian  boots 

2 ditto  jockey  backstrap  ditto 

6 ditto  gentlemen’s  walking  shoes 

3 ditto  dress  ditto 

2 ditto  Morocco  slippers 


3 dozen  pair  of  strong  sliooting  shoes 
100  pair  of  fashionable  kid  slippers  for  ladies 
1(X)  ditto  black  dog’s  skin  ditto 
100  ditto  coloured  jean  ditto 
50  ditto  children’s  slices,  assorted 


BRASIERY. 

6 dozen  mortars  with  pestles  I 100  gross  of  curtain  rings 

24*  ditto  brass  cocks,  of  vai*ious  sizes  C dozen  brass  door  locks,  assorted 


CHINTZ,  MUSLINS,  &c. 


30  pieces  wliite  jean 
20  ditto  coloured  ditto 
60  ditto  narrow  corded  dimities 
20  ditto  quiltings  for  waiscoats 
5 ditto  buff  thickset,  fine  quality 
10  ditto  drab  and  olive,  ditto 
10  ditto  corduroys  of  different  sorts 
20  ditto  clouded  Nankeens 
100  ditto  fine  black  broad  linens 
20  ditto  bed  ticken,  fine 


50  pieces  Scotch  cambrics 

20  ditto  neat  printed  muslins 

10  ditto  black  Chambray  ditto 

10  ditto  white  ditto 

20  ditto  line  fashionable  fancy  prints 

40  ditto  black  yard  wide  cambric  liandkerchicis 

20  ditto  black  bombasin 

40  dozen  white  muslin  handkerchiefs 

2 ditto  large  counterpanes 

3 ditto  middle  sized  ditto 

CANVAS 


Assorted  numbers,  1 to  6,  JPlOO 


Russia  ducks,  value  £100 


CUTLERY  AND  HARDWARE. 


3 gross  black  wood  knives  and  forks 
1 ditto  penknives,  assorted 
I ditto  ladies’  scissars,  ditto 
1 ditto  steel  snuffers 
24*  ditto  strong  seamen’s  knives 
1 ditto  sportsmen’s  knives 
6 ditto  best  table  knives 
3 ditto  ditto  desserts^  to  match 


2 dozen  best  polished  concave  razors 
6 ditto  Packwood’s  razor  strops 
5,000  assorted  fish  hooks 

3 dozen  boot  jacks 
1 ditto  coffee  mills 
3 ditto  rat-traps 

6 ditto  barber’s  hones 
3 ditto  corkscrews,  of  sorts 


38 


CAPE  TOWN. 


CLOTHS.  CASIMEliES,  &c. 


20  pieces  dark  kerseys,  at  60s.  per  piece 
20  ditto  J broad  cloth,  5s.  per  yard 
20  ditto  ditto,  6s.  to  7s.  ditto 
5 ditto  superfine  dark  blue  ladies'  cloth 
2 ditto  black  ditto 

20  ditto  Bath  coatinq;,  ; broad,  dark  colours 
20  ditto  red  baize,  thick  and  good,  J broad 
to  ditto  white  ditto  . . . ditto 

5 ditto  green  ditto  . . . ditto 

10  ditto  striped  ditto  . . . ditto 


5 pieces  dark  blue  casimcrcs,  fine 
3 ditto  black  ditto 
1000  regular  army  blankets 
30  piec('s  Scotch  caniblets 
50  ditto  Welch  flannel,  diOerent  qualitie.'t 
50  ditto  fine  black  camblets 
50  ditto  ditto  dark  blue  ditto 
5 ditto  snpei-fiiie  scarlet  cloth 
.3  dozen  uol^tcd  breeches  pieces 
50  pieces  brown  caniblets,  different  shades 


CONFECTIONARY. 


6 half  chests,  bottled  fruits 
6 ditto  cherry  and  raspberry  brandy 
3 dozen  lib.  pots  currant  jelly 
2 ditto  ditto  raspberry  jam 


2 dozen  botth*s,  peppermint  drop.' 

3 ditto  Scotch  earraways 

1 ditto  3 lb.  |K)ts,  mince  meat 
3 ditto  brandy  fruits 


EARTHEN  AVAUE. 


8000  small  bowls,  5 inches  in  diameter,  yellow 
2000  ditto  . . 6 ditto 

2000  ditto  . . 5 ditto,  coloured 

600  ditto  . 6 ditto 

2(X)  larger,  of  different  .sizes,  cream  coloured 
100  wash-hand  basons,  10  inches  in  diameter 
30  round  basons  & covers,  (j  to  8 inches  in  diam. 
2i‘  oval  soup  tureiMis  and  covers 
50  ditto  sauce  boats,  ditto 
100  doz('n  soup  plates,  inches  in  diameter 
100  ditto  Hat  ditto  . . . ditto 

12  ditto  dessert  ditto 
50  salad  di.shes,  13  inches  long 
60  butter  pots,  w ith  dishes  and  covers 
3 dozen  egg  cups 

200  round  sugar  basons,  w ilh  covers 


100  oval  dishes,  11!  inches  long 
200  ditto  . . 12!  (litto 

50  ditto  . . 13!  ditto 

,50  ditto  . . 11!  ditto 

80  ditto,  larger,  of  dillerent  sizes 
50  oval  deep  dii»iies  and  covers,  1 1 inches  long 

JJtto [2  ditto 

100  round  ditto,  no  rovers,  10  to  12  ditto  across 
60  dozem  w’Jiite  and  blue  cups  and  .saucers, 

10  dozen  3 , indies  in  diameter 
30  ditto  4^1  ditto 
20  ditto,  5 ditto 
80  dozen  cream  coloured  ditto 

20  dozen  3]  inches  in  diameter 
30  ditto  ditto 
30  ditto  5 ditto 


GLASS 

50  dozen  plain  w ine  glasses 
30  ditto  cut  ditto 
24  ditto  plain  claret  ditto 
12  ditto  cut  ditto 
24  cut  butter  pots 
2 dozen  vase  lamp.s,  of  sizes 
2 ditto  hand  lanterns 


WARE. 

24  plain  r|uart  decanters 
12  cut  fluted  ditto 
12  plain  pint  ditto 
12  cut  fluted  ditto 
6 dozen  ditto  tumblers 
30  ditto  plain  ditto 

6 dozen  each,  cut  and  plain  ale  glasses 


CAPE  TOWN. 


39 


10  boxes  maccaroni  and  vermicelli 
4001bs.  of  pearl  barley,  in  small  kegs 
l^lbs.  chocolate 


GROCERIES. 

3 cwt.  starch,  in  and  41b.  papers 
5 cwt.  9110611^  blue 
3 ditto  Scotch  barley,  in  small  kegs 


HOUSEHOLD  FURNITURE. 


3 dozen  mahogany  chairs,  4 with  elbows,  black 
hair  seats 

2 sofas,  to  correspond  with  ditto 
2 sets  of  dining  tables 
2 mahogany  bookcases 


6 mahogany  tea  tables 
12  ditto  card  ditto 
12  ditto  tea  caddies 
12  ditto  liijnor  cases 
4 ditto  wine  keepers 


HABERDASHERY. 


lOOlbs.  white  thread,  No.  50 

1(K)  ditto 60 

/iO  ditto 70 

2/i  ditto 100 

lOOlbs.  dark  blue  thread  10 
100  ditto  whited  brown  10 
20  ditto  nankeen  colour  10 
.50  ditto  red  colour  . 10 

.30()lbs.  pins,  assorted,  from  No.  1 to  9 
Velvet  binding,  assorted  for  ladies,  X’lOO 
100  gr().ss  shirt  buttons 
241bs.  assorted  sewing  silk 

100  coarse  hats,  each  at  3.?.  3^.  6d,  and  4«. 
3 dozen  men’s  fashionable  round  hats 
1 ditto  cocked  ditto 
6 ditto  second  iiats,  black 


3 dozen  pieces  tape,  from  J to  1 inch  broad 
Fine  white  tape,  assorted,  i‘5() 

Round  bobbin,  ditto,  F.30 
Flat  ditto,  .V20 

50, ()()()  b('st  knitting  needles,  No.  17  to  30 
50,000  iron  netting  needles 
Best  Wliitecbapel  needles,  No.  1 to  7,  i’50 
12  dozen  white  patent  ladies’  gloves 
12  tiitto  black  ditto 

4 ditto  black  silk  ditto 
4 ditto  coloured  ditto 

50  pieces  silk  and  cotton  feiret 

HATS. 

12  I.adies’  black  beaver  Jiats,  trimmed 
12  ditto  coloured  ditto 
24  girls’  ditto 

24  children’s  black  hats,  ditto 


Ladies’  fashionable  silk  hose  X?100 
Gentlemen’s  ditto  ....  100 

Ditto  cotton  stockings  . . 50 

Ladies’  ditto 60 


HOSIERY. 

60  dozen  fine  white  worsted  hose 
60  ditto  mixed  blue  and  white  men’s  cotton  ditto 
50  ditto  pepper  and  salt  ditto 
Children’s  stockings  and  socks,  X30 


50  tons  iron,  in  square  and  flat  bars 
5 ditto  steel,  in  faggots 
Locks,  padlocks,  and  hinges,  -PSO 
Iron  hoops  for  leagers,  2 tons 


IRONMONGERY,  &c. 

Files  and  rasps  assorteil  X30 
Carpenters’  and  Coopers’  tools  i’50 
6 iron  chests,  middling  size 
3 tons  of  nails,  of  sizes,  assorted 


40 


CAPE  TOWN. 


3 dozen  black  lace  long  veils 
2 ditto  white  ditto 
2 ditto  black  tamboured  ditto 


LACE,  EDGINGS,  &c. 

Black  and  white  lace  and  edgings,  £50^ 

2 or  3 real  black  lace  cloaks 
4 real  lace  handkerchiefs,  42  inches  square 


LEAD,  LEAD  SHOT,  &c. 


10  cwt.  diy  white  leail,  in  1 cwt.  kegs 
3 tons  pig  lead,  in  small  pigs 
3 ditto  sheet  lead 
10  cwt.  lead  pipes,  small  sizes 


20  cwt.  red  lead,  in  small  kegs 
40  cwt.  patent  shot,  viz. 

No.  JLl?f  ‘'>6'78910 
Cwt.  12  12  3 3 3 3 3 3 3 5 


LOOKING  GLASSES. 


3 pair  of  fashionable  glasses,  4 feet  high 
2 ditto  ...  . . 3 ditto 

1  ditto  ...  . 5 ditto 


1 dozen  table  rlrcssing  glasses 
6 ditto  pieces  of  plate  glass,  12  by  8 inches 
3 ditto 8 by  6 


12  dozen  Stoughton’s  Elixir 
lOOlbs.  sal  ammoniac,  in  small  parcels 
lOOlbs.  sarsaparilla,  ditto 


MEDICINES. 

50lbs.  saffron,  in  papers  of  lib.  each 
lOOlbs.  jalap,  in  small  parcels 
lOOlbs.  Spanish  liquorice,  in  51bs.  papers 


MATHEMATICAL  INSTRUMENTS 


6 barometers  with  thermometers 
12  thermometer's,  half  in  black  cases 
6 shagreen  cases  of  instruments 


6 pocket  conq)asses,  3 of  them  silver 
2 sextants,  best  maker,  not  too  large 
6 quadrants,  ditto 


OILMAN’S  STORES. 


50  Yorkshire  hams,  small  size 
3 dozen  pine  apple  cheese 

2 ditto  Berkeley  ditto 

36  pounds  best  Durham  mustard,  in  half  pounds 

3 dozen  pints  salad  oil 

12  ditto  fish  sauces,  assorted 


20  quarter  cases  of  pickles 
12  kegs  tongues,  6 in  each 
12  ditto  pickled  .salmon 
12  ditto  herrings 

6 dozen  French  olives,  in  pint  bottles 
6 ditto  capers,  ditto 


PAINTERS’  COLOURS. 


40  kegs,  each  281bs.  ground  wliite  lead 
100  gallons  h'nseed  oil,  in  jars  of  4 g.'^llons  each 
10  cw't.  yellow  ochre,  in  half  cwt.  kegs 
1 ditto  verdigrease 
lOOlbs,  lamp  black,  in  1 lb,  papers 
.50  ditto  ivory  black,  ditto 


50  gallons  of  turpentine,  in  small  carboys 
10  keg.s  of  green  paint,  each  lOlbs. 

30  ditto  yellow  ditto  . . 281bs. 

lOOlhs.  patent  yellowy  in  small  parcels 
121hs.  of  Florentine  lake 
2 tons  of  chalk 


CAPE  TOWN. 


41 


PERFUMERY. 


IMOlbs.  best  violet  hair  powder 
34  dozen  best  dressing  combs 
3 ditto  ivory  small  tooth  combs 
6 ditto  tortoiseshell  combs  for  ladies 
6 ditto  pints  lavender  water 
3 ditto  essence  bergamot  and  lemon 


13  dozen  Oriental  tooth  powder 
12  ditto  Jamaica  pomatum 
12  ditto  shaving  boxes 
lOOlbs.  best  Windsor  soap,  in  squares 
2 dozen  hair  brushes 
6 ditto  tooth  brushes 


PLATE,  JEWELLERY,  &c. 


6 fashionable  silver  tea  pots  and  stands 
6 ditto  cream  ewers,  to  correspond 
6 ditto  sugar  basons,  ditto 
12  dozen  silver  tea  spoons 
6 ditto  dessert  ditto 
12  ditto  table  ditto 
3 silver  mustard  pots 
Fashionable  jewellery,  assorted  •PlOO 


12  plated  tea  pots  and  stands 
12  ditto  milk  jugs 
12  ditto  sugar  basons 
6 ditto  waiters,  small  size 
12  ditto  bracket  candlesticks 
6 ditto  table  ditto 

3 pairs  plated  curry  dishes  and  covers 
d fashionable  plated  cruet  frames 


PEWTERER'S  WARE. 


36  dozen  pewter  plates,  usual  size 
36  ditto  soup  ditto 
6 dozen  dishes,  assorted  in  sizes 
6 tea  pots,  of  sizes 
6 coffee  pots 
2 soup  ladles 

6 pewter  bowls,  smallest  size  3 pints 
2 dozen  hot  water  plates 


12  pewter  soup  tureens 
12  wash-hand  basons  and  gugleta 
36  dozen  table  spoons 
24  ditto  tea  spoons 
6 small  tea  kettles 

12  Britannia  metal  castors,  with  glasses 
12  ditto  teapots,  with  stands 
12  pair  ditto  fancy  candlesticks 


STATIONARY. 


50  reams  superfine  foolscap  paper 
30  ditto  demy 
18  ditto  medium 
5 ditto  royal 

20  ditto  thick  4to.  post,  part  gilt  and  black 
20  ditto  thin  ditto 
20  ditto  8vo.  post,  gilt  and  plain 
5 ditto  blotting 
20  ditto  printing  demy 

1 ditto  wove  elepha^nt 

2 sets  account  books,  demy  size 


4 gross  best  Mogul  cards,  in  2 boxes 
2 gross  Harry  ditto 
12  mahogany  writing  desks 
lOOlbs.  black  sealing  wax 
lOOlbs.  red  ditto 
12  dozen  black  ink  powders 
6 ditto  red  ditto 

12  ditto  red  tapes,  different  breadths 
5,000  large  clarified  quills,  not  yellow 
100  tin  boxes  of  mixed  wafers 
60  pieces  fashionablepaperhangings,  with  borders 


6 


48 


CAPE  town: 


SADDLERY. 


12  plun  neat  hunting  saddles,  complete 
12  plated  curb  bridles 
12  snaffle  bridles,  plated  bits 
24  pair  plated  spurs,  with  leathers 
12  surcingles 

3 ladies'  saddles,  complete 
6 sets  headstalls  and  reins 
12  ditto  girths  and  surcingles 
2 sets  of  gig  harness,  complete 


12  dozen  curry  combs  and  brushes 
12  ditto  mane  combs  and  spunges 
3 ditto  water  brushes 
1 ditto  pairs  white  girths 
6 pair  stirrup  leathers,  with  plated  stirrups,  8tr. 
Whips  assorted  £10 
3 dozen  horse  pickers 
6 jockey  caps 

Spare  articles  of  saddlery  i?10 


SHIP  CHANDLERY. 


lOOlbs.  sewing  twine,  assorted 
200  lbs.  S-tliread  twine  for  nets 
20  coils  4 inch  rope 
30  ditto  3 ditto 
30  ditto  2^  ditto 
20  ditto  2 ditto 
20  ditto  1 j ditto 

20  coils,  each  6, 9,  and  12  thread  ratline 
20  barreb  pitch 
30  ditto  tar 


6 dozen  each  marline  and  houseline 
6 ditto  loglines 
2 ditto  deep  sea  lines 

12  pieces  hunting,  each  red,  blue,  and  white 
12  copper  pumps  for  ship's  use 
6 large  speaking  trumpets 
12  smaller  ditto 

1 dozen  middle  size  grindstones 
1 dozen  lialf  hour  glasses 
2001bs.  glue  in  square  pieces 


TIN  WARE,  &c. 


40  boxes  tin  plates,  each  box  225  plates 
100  single  tea  kettles,  1 to  4 quarts  each 
40  double  ditto,  ditto 
20  dozen  iron  tinned  table  spoons 
6 ditto  green  painted  dust  pans 
2 ditto  night  candlesticks 


12  japanned  dressing  cases,  different  sizes 
36  ditto  sugar  boxes  and  covers 
24  fashionable  bread  baskets 
24  ditto  tea  trays 
36  ditto  small  wdters 
6 four  quart  bronzed  tea  urns 


WINDOW  GLASS. 


1000  panes  8-inchcs  by  6>inche8,  free  from  specks 
2000  ditto  7 . . . 9 ditto  ditto 

2000  ditto  8 . . .10  ditto  ditto 


600  panes  10  inches  by  12,  free  from  specka 
500  ditto  12  ...  15  ditto 

500  ditto  14  ...  16  ditto 


WINES,  LIQUORS,  &c. 


24  dozen  best  Port  wine,  in  half  chests 
12  ditto  claret  in  ditto 
12  ditto  old  hock  in  ditto 


6 dozen  Irish  whiskey 
12  ditto  cider,  in  half  chests 
12  ditto  perry  in  ditto 


CAPB  TOWN. 


43 


GLOVES. 


12  dosen  white  patent  ladies*  glores 
12  ditto  black  ditto 
12  ditto  black  and  white  silk  ditto 
4 ditto  coloured  silk  ditto 


13  dozen  gentlemen's  wash  leather  gloves 
13  ditto  ladies'  leather  habits 
13  ditto  ditto  Limerick  kid,  &c.  mostly  long 
3 ditto  best  Cavalry  gloves 

SUNDRIES. 


100  gross  best  long  wine  corks 
40  pairs  of  bellows,  small  sizes 
341bs.  wax  candles,  5 to  a pound 
34  ditto  sperm,  ditto 
300  lbs.  boiled  horse  hair 
5 dozen  coffee  mills 

Jn  Account  of  the  official  Value  of  Imports  fronts 
derived  therefrom^  taken  from 


100  gross  Dutch  pipes,  4 dozen  in  a box 
Toys  assorted,  mostly  tin,  i’.iO 
34  gross  best  gilt  coat  buttons 
12  ditto  jacket  ditto 
6 ditto  breast  ditto 

2 large  organs,  with  spare  barrels,  &e. 

and  Exports  to  England^  together  with  the  Revenue 
Papers  submitted  to  ParliamenL 


Year*. 

IMPORTS  FROM  ENGLAND.  | 

EXPORTS 

TO 

ENGLAND. 

DUTIES  COI.LECTRD  IN  ENGLAND  on 

Brilush 

Merchandise. 

Foreign 

Merchandise. 

Total.  1 

Imports 
from  the  Cape. 

Exports 
to  the  Cape. 

Total. 

£ s. 

£ s. 

d. 

£ ». 

m 

£ 

s. 

d. 

£ 

Y. 

£ 8, 

d. 

£ 

5. 

1797 

82,871  7 

6 

4,759  1 

87,630  8 

€ 

7,778 

3 

11 

2,376 

0 10 

399  13 

3 

2,775  14 

1 

1798 

163,913  16 

3 

6,708  8 

0 

170,621  16 

11 

1,473 

10 

6 

62 

1 

2 

406  9 

2 

548 

10 

4 

1799 

377.035  11 

6 

9,196  15 

0 

286,232  6 

(j 

35,680 

3 

0 

3,331 

2 

0 

103  3 

0 

3,434 

5 

0 

1800 

8,735  16 

11 

14,274 

10 

0 

1,028 

5 

3 

67  2 

10 

1,085 

8 

1 

1801 

69,379  17 

2 

2 

77,313  8 

4 

7,237 

14 

2 

2,403 

3 

8 

188  12 

6 

2,591 

16 

2 

1802 

16,689  17 

6 

254  18  10 

16,944  16 

4J 

12,334 

13  10 

1,872 

8 

5 

103  6 10 

1,975 

15 

3 

1803 

--  -- 

■ ■ — 

Ml.  

6,379 

17 

9 

2,793 

9 

10 

» — 

2,793 

9 

10 

1804 

- 

, ■ , 

227 

14 

4 

291 

9 

2 

— ■ . 

291 

9 

2 

1805 

- 

,,  , 

5 

12 

6 

7 

13 

9 

— 

7 

13 

9 

im 

6 

9,^51  8 

4 

189,788  14  10 

— 

— 

-> 

— 

7,210  8 

6 

7,210 

8 

6 

1807 

88,384  18 

7 

7,668  18 

3 

96,971  16 

10 

5,703 

13  10 

2,205 

7 

7 

3,372  1 

10 

5,577 

8 

5 

J808 

245,602  13 

7 

7 

17,444 

17 

2 

7,186 

19 

2 

6,682  12 

4 

13,869 

11 

0 

1809 

311,816  0 

8 

31332,168  6 

11 

5,796 

11 

10 

2,371 

10 

0 

8,650  1 

7 

11,021 

11 

7 

£ s.  d. 

Amount  of  imports  in  13  years 1,581,717  13  8 

Ditto  of  ex|)orts  ditto 114,337  2 10 


The  imports  exce^'^ded  the  exports  , . . i? 1,467,387  10  10 


Being  on  an  average  ^£*113, 876  per  annum. 

The  accounts  for  1810  are  not  yet  made  up  at  the  custom-house;  but  the  export  of  Drith>h  commodi- 
ties has  considerably  exceeded  that  of  any  former  jieriod. 


G3 


CAPE-  TOWN. 


IMPORTS  FROM  INDI.V. 

Large  quantities  of  Piece  Goods  manufactured  at  Surat,  on  the  Coromandel  Coast,  and  at  Bengal, 
were  annually  imported  by  individuals  in  the  ships  of  the  East  India  Company,  or  in  country  vessiCs 
under  their  sanction;  but  at  present  tlie  Company  reserves  tliis  trade  to  itself. 


List  of  Surat  Goods  niilable  to  the  Cape  Market, 


SURAT  NAMKS. 

Dimensions  in 

Cubits. 

Prime  cost  in 
Rupees. 

500  Neganepauts 

18  by  1 

100  to  106 

1,000  Major  Niccannces;  these  answer  to  Cud- 
dalore Hospital  ginghams ; .should  he  thick 
and  strong 

18  by  1 

120  to  130 

3,000  Blue  Byrampauls,  of  Surat  nianufacture 
only,  very  full  colour  and  thick ; if  this  can- 
not he  procured,  the  blue  cloth  of  Madras 
or  Bengal  will  not  do 

18  by  I 

80  to  85 

1,000  blue  Saloopauts,  very  thick  and  close  wove; 
if  not  to  be  so  got,  none  to  be  sent  . . 

17  by  1 

60  to  6.6 

500  Niccannees  Major 

14  by  1 

120  to  130 

600  ditto,  a little  better 

14  by  1 

126  to  136 

300  large  tapseils 

14  by  1 

80  to  85 

300  ditto  different  stripe  and  fine 

14  by  1 

95  to  100 

500  blue  Bejautapauts ; these  answer  exactly  to 
the  Cuddalore  cambays 

18  by  1 

85  to  90 

600  red  Bejautapauts 

18  by  1 

90  to  95 

500  blue  Clielloes 

18  by  1 

80to  85 

N.B.  600  Shirts  to  be  mode  of  this  kind. 

600  blue  chelloes 

18  by  1 

85  to  90 

600  red  chelloes 

18  by  1 

no  to  115 

500  Phofalia  check 

18  by  1 

100  to  105 

1,000  Lungee  mugnib 

18  by  1 

115  to  125 

500  Chalias.  A stuff  used  by  the  Malays  and 

Telingas  for  trowsers ; to  have  no  border, 

if  possible  

t,000  blue  shirts  of  the  lowest  price  dyed  cloth, 

stitched  with  white  thread,  not  to  exceed 

each 

1 

♦r  by  1 

Ito  4 

In  the  above  goods,  the  quality  need  not  be  fine;  the  chief  recommendation  is,  as  they  are  for  the 
clothing  of  slaves,  a strong,  rather  coarse  thread,  and  veiy  close  thick  texture. 

These  articles  are  extremely  difficult  to  be  procured  at  Surat,  but  nearly  all  of  them  may  be  imitoted 
and  made  at  Bemagore,  near  Calcutta,  or  at  Cuddalore,  on  the  Coast  of  Coromandel;  and  at  rates  nearly 
the  same  as  at  Surat,  by  advancing  money  to  the  weavers,  and  allowing  them  three  months  which  is 
by  far  the  preferable  mode  of  procurbg  tlie  above  deKription  of  goods. 


CAPE  TOWN. 


List  of  Madras  and  Coast  Piece  Goods  suitable  to  the  Cape  Market, 

^ PuxjuM  Cloth. 

Punjumis  a kind  of  cloth,  of  a peculiar  strong  textiue^  manufactured  in  the  Northern  Circars,  on  the 
Coast  of  Coromandel.  A punjum  is  the  mark  of  f|uality,  and  consists  of  120  threads,  .and  Increases  hy  2 
punjums;  the  lowest  is  10  in  the  breadth,  the  coarsest  made,  and  called  No.  10  Punjum,  from  which  it 
increases  by  2,  and  the  finer  the  threads,  the  greater  number  of  punjums  are  contained  in  the  breadth,  up 
to  40,  the  finest  of  this^sort  ofc^oth  made.  The  numbers  are  10,  12,  It,  16,  18,  20,  and  so  up  to  40. 

This  kind  of  cloth  in  the  lower  numbers,  has  been  lately  imitated  with  success  in  the  llarainhaul 
country ; but  is  made  up  in  jueces,  only  about  half  the  length  of  the  Circar  cloth,  and  called  Salempores. 

The  under-mentioned  goods  tabe  the  Company's  size,  if  possible;  hut  if  not  to  be  procured,  the  |)ri- 
▼atc  cloth,  and  to  have  as  little  congee  as  possible,  and  be  j)ut  up  peifc'ctly  dry  ; for  if  damp,  they  will  rot. 
400  pieces,  bleached  punjums  . . No.  14  ...  50  Pagodas  per  corge. 

400  ditto  . ditto 22  . • . 70  ditto 

400  ditto  . ditto  24  ...  80  ditto 

400  ditto  . ditto 30  ...  120  ditto 

1000  ditto  brown  Punjums  ....  14  ...  50  ditto 

2000  ditto  cut  in  half  pieces  ....  14  ...  25  ditto 

300  pieces  Dungaree  of  a good  quality,  rather  fine,  and  bleaelual  for  towels. 

In  the  purchasing  punjum  cloth,  of  the  bleached  kind,  none  to  be  lower  tlian  No.  14,  and  of  the  brown, 
none  finer  than  that  number,  and  cut  into  half  pieces.  The  private  clotlis  answer  the  market,  but  the 
Company's  being  w-idcr  and  longer,  are  preferred ; yet  they  do  not  yield  a ditference  of  price,  proportioned 
to  the  increased  cost  in  India. 

Tinnevelly,  or  Madura  Goods. 


100  Aunniketchies,  a kind  of  long  cloth 4 Pagodas  a piece 

100  ditto  . . . ditto 5 ditto 

100  ditto  . . , ditto 6 ditto 

200  Puttonketchies,  white I J ditto 

100  Cattaketchies 1 ditto 


These  cloths  being  made  of  a hard  long  grained  cotton,  are  of  an  even  regular  texture,  and  resemble 
Europe  linen  more  than  any  of  the  Indian  cloths;  and  in  point  of  comfort  in  a warm  climate,  and  durability, 
are  preferable  to  the  Circar  long  cloths,  which  arc  made  from  a very  short  grained  soft  cotton,  and  arc 
very  apt  to  rend  in  washing,  and  when  in  use;  yet  they  arc  cheaper  hy  at  least  30  per  cent,  than  the  nor- 
thern long  clotlis,  and  for  the  Europe  market  they  would  certainly  answer  well. 

Mausulipatum  Goods. 

100  Pieces  of  fine  Handkerchiefs,  white  ground,  piiqde  check,  2 Pagodas  each 


100  ditto,  blue  and  red  ch^jck 2 ditto 

100  ditto,  white  ground,  light  blue  and  narrow  red  check  . 2 ditto 

] 00  ditto,  ditto,  red  and  dark  blue  check  ....  2 ditto 

100  ditto,  ditto,  red  check 2 , ditto 

100  ditto,  dark  red  grounds  with  half  white  narrow  stripes, 

and  no  white  spaces  in  the  comers 2 ditto 

100  ditto,  red  ground,  with  a yellowish  unbleached  red  check  2 ditto 

1300  ditto  coarse  handkerchiefs,  very  dark  red  grounds,  with 


narrow  white  stripes,  and  no  white  spaces  in  the  corner  1 } 


ditto 


CAP*  TOWN. 


4« 


List  of  Bengal  Piece  Goods  suitable  to  the  Cape  Market • 


4dbO  Beerboom  Gurrahs,  the  best  and  thickest,  36  by  S|, 
300  Mamoodies,  Mow  kind,  if  possible  • 36  by  2 a 2^, 


1000  Emerties 23  & 84  by  2, 

500  Allahabad  Sannoes 40  by  2|, 

500  ditto  Cossaes 40  by  24, 

500  Tandali  Cossaes 40  by  24, 

500  Chittabully  Baflaes 25  by  2, 

500  Callapatty  Baflaes 25  by  2, 

1000  White  Baflaes 36  by  2, 

2000  Blue  Bernagore  Honials  • . . ^ 10  in  a piece, 
400  Muslin  Handkerchiefs,  1 yard  square,  not  to  exceed 
100  ditto,  finer  ditto,  not  to  exceed 


200  Nainsooks  in  half  pieces  for  neckcloths,  full  yard  wide 


at  5 Bupees  each 

at  5 

ditto 

at  4 

ditto 

at  5 

ditto 

at  6 

ditto 

at  5 

ditto 

at  4 

ditto 

at  4 

iHtto 

at  4 

ditto 

at  3}^ 

ditto 

. 8 

ditto 

. 15 

ditto 

80 

ditto 

General  Remarks  on  Bengal  Cloths. 

Gurrahs  ought  always  to  form  one  fourth  of  an  inrestment  of  white  goods;  Mamoodies  another 
fourth,  and  of  the  other  articles  of  white  goods  the  name  is  of  no  material  consequence,  if  long  and  wide, 
such  as  36  and  40  cubits,  by  2 and  2^. 

Beerboom  Gurralis  should  be  of  a very  good  kind,  or  the  Company's  rejected  ones,  36  by  2 ^;  this  is  an 
article  for  which  there  is  always  a great  demand  at  the  Cape;  in  ordinary  times  they  cost  about  80,  but 
sometimes  are  as  high  as  105  rupees  per  corge. 

Mamoodies  may  be  reckoned  the  next  best  article  of  white  cloth,  of  middling  quality,  and  ought  to 
be  the  longest  and  widest  possible.  The  usual  size  is  36,  and  40  cubits  by  2;  the  gold  ends  must  not  be 
overlooked,  as  they  are  of  consequence  to  the  sale  amongst  the  Dutch.  Mamoodies  cost  from  90  to  100 
rupees  per  corge. 

Bernagore  Blue  Iloraals,  10  handkerchiefs  in  a piece,  should  be  full  yard  square  each,  and  cost 
from  65  to  75  rupees  per  corge;  they  must  be  very  dark  blue,  and  the  cross  stripes  of  white  very  faint,  or 
tinged  with  blue,  and  no  white  at  the  corners. 


Other  Articles  of  Betigal  Produce  suitable  to  the  Cape  Market. 

Chintz,  onlinaiy,  in  pieces  of  12  cubits  by  2,  on  a tolerably  good  cloth;  to  cost  about  35  to  40  rupees 
per  corge,  and  only  tliree  grounds,  red,  black,  and  white,  aU  small  sprigs  and  flower  patterns.  The  white 
ground  may  display  as  great  a variety  of  colour  as  possible,  except  yellow  or  orange,  which  do  not  suit 
at  the  Cape.  The  red  grounds  to  liave  only  white  sprigs,  and  the  black  only  white  sprigs.  No  striped 
pattern,  however  handsome,  suits  the  Dutch  taste,  ^ 

Chintz,  fin*.  The  same  as  the  preceding,  in  regard  to  colours,  length,  and  breadth,  to  cost  70  or  80 
rupees  a corge?  answers  very  well  on  Jondah  Cossaes,  in  whole  pieces;  these  come  to  about  10  or  18 
rupees  a piece. 

Chintz  Hanukerchikps,  upon  twDled  dimity,  pretty  fine,  and  the  small  real  shawl  spot,  imitated  as 
near  as  possible,  with  broad  borders,  and  a long  twisted  knotted  fringe,  of  three  sizes,  8,  8}-,  and  3 
square.  The  same  patterns  on  common  cloth  also  answer  for  the  slaves. 


CAPE  TOWN. 


47 

Muslins,  flowered,  a few  pieces  of  the  Santipore  kind,  that  cost  15  to  IG  rupees ; but  no  fine  muslins, 
muslin  handkerchiefs,  doreas,  or  charconnas,  answer  at  the  Cape;  the  little  of  articles  of  this  description 
used,  they  get  from  England,  of  British  manufacture,  considerably  cheaper  than  they  can  be  brought  from 
#India. 

Shirts,  of  middling  cloth,  for  the  better  sort  of  people,  but  not  to  cost  above  two  rupees  each,  without 
ruffles;  and  coarse  ones  for  the  soldiers,  not  to  cost  above  one  rupee  each;  and  shirts  made  of  coarse  blue 
cloth  for  the  slaves,  as  much  under  a rupee  as  possible,  but  not  to  exceed  it. 

Shawls,  real  India,  are  in  great  request  at  the  Cape,  and  usually  sell  well. 

Rice  is,  in  years  of  ordinary  plenty,  only  an  article  of  luxury  among  the  Dutch,  and  seen  only  at  their 
tables  with  curry;  in  these  times,  the  finer  and  whiter  the  rice  is,  the  better;  the  white  Patna  rice  is  then 
the  article  to  be  taken,  for  which  they  will  give  from  7 to  10  rix  dollars  per  lOOlbs.  Dutch  weight ; but  in 
times  of  scarcity,  when  their  wheat  crops  fail,  rice  becomes  an  article  of  food  from  necessity : lh(*n  the  com- 
mon cargo  rice  is  acceptable,  and  bears  a price  from  6 to  9 rix  dollars  per  lOOlbs.  The  most  convenient 
packages  are  bags  of  llSlbs.  English,  which  will  turn  out  a Dutch  hundred  of  lOTlbs. 

Sugar,  from  none  being  produced  in  the  Colony,  generally  yields  a good  price;  and  in  proportion  to 
its  whiteness,  is  valued  at  2 to  3 schillings  a pound. 

Sugar  Candy,  from  Bengal,  also  answers  in  boxes  of  112  and  5G]hs.  each. 

Soap,  Bengal,  is  now  made  little  inferior  to  Europe,  and  has  the  advantage  of  washing  equally  well 
with  salt  as  with  fresh  water.  The  best  packages  to  put  it  up  in,  are  boxes  of  1 cwt.  and  \ cwt.  which, 
allowing  for  loss  of  weight,  turns  out  at  the  Cape  a full  Dutch  hundred,  and  the  small,  half  a Dutch  hundred. 


List  and  Description  of  Teak  Timber  suitable  for  the  Cape  Market, 


DESCRIPTION. 

1 DIMENSIONS. 

broad. 

tliick. 

long. 

2 Duggies,  best  kind,  free  from  cracks,  &c. 

22 

22 

40 

200  ditto 

12 

14 

20 

200  ditto 

12 

12 

22 

SOO  Artiec 

9 

11 

25 

500  ditto 

G 

8 

22 

200  ditto 

8 

10 

12 

100  Planks  for  mortar  beds 

24 

10 

15 

200  Shinbins  

15 

4 

25 

200  ditto 

18 

5 

30 

100  ditto  

12 

4 

22 

200  ditto 

12 

3 

22 

500  Planks . 

12 

2 

22 

800  ditto 

12 

H 

22 

800  ditto 

12 

n 

22 

1,000  ditto 

12 

1 

22 

50,000  Staves,  split,  not  sawed 

6to7 

HtoH 

6 

25,000  Sheathing  boards 

7to8 

1 tol^ 

9 

The  measurement  is  what  the  Dutch  call  Rynlandsch,  and  is  a trifle  larger  than  the  English; 
consequently  the  above  dimensions,  when  the  English  rule  is  applied,  should  be  full  measure. 

The  pipe  staves  of  Teak  timber,  although  not  used  for  making  casks,  as  the  Teak  tastes  the  wine, 
are  sometimes  used  for  spirits.  They  are  principally  used  for  the  roofs  ot  houses ; and  on  account  of  the 
estaUished  rule  amongst  the  Dutch,  of  placing  the  beams  on  the  roofs  of  their  hodses  at  certain  distances, 
the  bo^s  must  be  of  the  exact  length  to  cover  three  beams,  and  exactly  6 feet  long,  at  which  length  they 
are  worth  a rix  dollar  each,  but  if  one  inch  shorter,  only  half  the  value. 

The  sheathing  boards  must  be  all  whole  and  unbroken  pieces;  the  double  boards  arc  preferable  to  the 
tingle,  and  will  yield  2 rix  dollars  each. 


48 


CAPE  TOWN. 


The  teak  tiniber  of  Java  is  preferred  to  that  from  the  Coast  of  Malabar  at  the  Cope  of  Good  Hope. 

The  following  articles  of  Batavia  produce  used  to  be  impoiicd  by  tlie  Dutch;  but  instead  thereof,  they, 
arc  supplied  from  India  and  China  |jy  the  Company’s  ships. 

20,0001bs.  coffee.  200  jars  pickles. 

100  leagers  arrack.  200  bottles  soy. 

2,000  bundles  rattans.  2,0001bs.  dried  ginger. 

200  jars  sweetnieats.  2,0001bs.  tumieric. 

Of  Teas,  Nankeens,  China  ware,  &c.  large  quantities  arc  consumed;  and  the  Company  have  an  inresU 
inent  landed  annually  from  their  homeward-bound  China  ships,  of  mo.st  kinds  of  China  goods.  The 
Colony  is  therefore  in  general  well  supplied. — Of  spices  but  a small  quantity  is  consumed.  One  hundred 
parcels,  each  containing  a pound  of  cinnamon,  cloves,  mace,  and  nutmegs,  is  enough  for  a year. 

•EXPORTS. 

The  chief  articles,  the  growth  and  produce  of  ihe  Colony,  exported  to  Europe,  America,  and  the 
East  Indies,  arc 

Almonds.  Hides.  Soap.  Wheat 

Aloes.  Lion  skins.  Salt  provisions.  Wines. 

Brandy.  Leopard  skins.  Seahorse  teeth.  Wool. 

Dried  traits.  Ostrich  feathers.  Tobacco.  Whale  oil 

Elephants’  teeth.  Raisins.  Tiger  skins.  Whalebone. 

The  amount  of  the  above  is  but  trifling.  Prize  goods  are  occasionally  to  be  procured ; but  together 
they  form  but  a small  proportion  of  the  value  of  the  imports.  The  merchants  therefore  purchase  Govern- 
ment bills  to  make  their  remitUnces,  at  a heavy  discount,  generally  from  15  to  25  per  cent. 

American  ships  frequently  .stop  at  the  Cape  on  their  outward  voyage  to  China,  to  di.spose  of  a part  of 
their  cargoes  consisting  generally  of  lumber,  for  which  they  receive  biUs  on  India,  or  Spanish  dollars. 

CAPE  WINES. 

There  are  several  kinds  of  wine  made  in  the  Colony.  The  principal  are  Constantin,  red  and  white; 
Maag,  Madeira,  Muscodell,  and  Malmsey. 

Constantin  is  the  produce  of  two  farms,  called  Great  and  Little  Constantin,  situate  about  midway  between 
Table  and  False  Bay.  Great  care  is  taken  in  the  manufacture  of  it : no  fruit  but  such  as  is  fuU  ripe,  or 
stalks,  are  suffered  to  go  into  the  press.  The  genuine  Constantia  is  a very  racy  and  delicate  dessert  wine 
and  has  something  peculiarly  agreeable  in  the  flavour  of  it.  The  produce  of  tiie  two  farms  used  to  be  about 
60  pipes  of  the  red,  and  100  of  the  white.  The  Dutch  Company  reserved  to  themselves  the  exclusive 
sale  of  the  Constantia;  but  there  are  now  other  farms,  that  produce  wine,  which,  in  point  of  goodness 
nearly  equals  it:  this  is  called  Maag,  or  stomach  wine,  and  is  sold  rather  cheaper  than  Constantia.  * 

Cape  Madeira  is  a heavy,  strong,  sweetish  wine,  seldom  sent  to  Europe,  as  it  is  not  much  (isteemed. 
The  inferior  kinds  of  wine  are  very  cheap,  and  produced  in  great  abundance. 

Cape  brandy  bears  a strong  resemblance  to  whiskey,  but  is  much  more  fi^,  and  considered  penddoHa 
to  the  health,  unless  kept  for  some  time.  It  should  not  therefore  be  shipped  as  stores,  without  its  MebelM 
ascertained;  unless  in  cases  of  urgent  necessity.  ^ ^ 


SjOOOlbs.  tamarinds. 
200  bags  sago. 

200  bags  pepper. 
5001bs.  cardamoms. 


CAPE  TOWN. 


41) 


TARIFF  OF  IMPORT  AND  EXPORT  DUTIES  AT  rilE  CAFE. 

Import  Duties  on  European  Manufactures. 

1 . British  goods  in  British  sliips  Duty  IVec 

2.  Foreign  goods  in  British  sliips 6 per  cent. 

3.  British  goods  in  foreign  ships  7 ditto 

4.  Foreign  goods  in  foreign  sliips 15  ditto 

5.  Prize  goods  on  the  vendue  roll 5 ditto 

6.  N.  B.  Goods  transhipped  in  the  harbour,  are  to  pay 

import  duties,  but  they  may  be  afterwards  landed  Duty  free 

Indian  Produce. 

1 . By  British  ships  from  any  part  of  India,  or  the  east- 

ward, on  prime  cost 5 per  cent. 

2.  By  neutrals  from  a foreign  settlement  (supposing 

a permission  to  be  granted) 15  ditto 

3.  Prize  goods,  supposing  them  to  be  sold  under  peculiar 

circumstances  for  consumption,  upon  sale  price  10  ditto 

4.  Indian  articles  from  England  in  British  ships  . . 7 ditto 

Exportation  Duties  on  Colonial  Produce. 

1.  To  a foreign  Port ' 3 i)er  cent. 

2.  If  shipped  for  a British  port dlft® 

3.  Provisions ^ 

But  sea  stock  (liquors  excepted)  for  passengers,  is  allowed  to  be  shipped,  Duty  free. 

European  Articles. 

1.  Re-exported,  if  for  a foreign  port 5 percent 

If  for  a British  settlement ^ 

Indian  Produce. 

1.  If  exported  by  the  East  India  Company,  or  by 

their  licence  ^ per  cent. 

Prize  goods  sold  for  exportation 5 ditto 

TARIFF  OF  FEES  AND  EXPENCES  TO  BE  CHARGED  AT  THE  CUSTOM-HOUSE. 

Entrance  of  ships  4 rix  dollars 

For  landing  a cargo,  or  shipping  a cargo,  each  ...  10  ditto 

Entrance  of  a.  coasting  vessel  Gratis 

For  landing  her  cargo,  or  shipping  a cargo,  each  . . 2 ditto 

Permit  to  import  or  export  merchandise 1 ditto 

Permit  for  sea  stores,  baggage,  and  other  trifles  ...  4 ditto 

Manifest ^ ditto 

Clearance  of  ships ^ 

Clearance  of  coasting  vessel ^ ‘^‘R® 

Puss  for  a vessel  trading  on  the  coast 2 ditto 

H 


£0 


CAPE  TOWN. 


PORT  REGULATIONS. 

1.  When  your  vessel  is  properly  moored  with  bower  anchors,  or  at  least  with  one,  and  a very  heavy 
stream  anchor  and  good  cable,  and  good  buoys  and  buoy  ropes,  you  arc  to  take  the  exact  place  of  the  ship 
by  bearings  of  two  landmarks,  and  depth  of  water,  and  should  any  accident  occur,  by  which  your  ship  may 
drift  from  her  situation,  or  lose  her  anchors,  you  must  be  cai'eful  in  taking  good  bearings  at  the  time,  and 
depth  of  water,  and  notify  the  same  in  writing  to  the  Port  Office:  and  it  is  particularly  recommended  to 
you  to  keep  your  sliip  as  snug  as  possible,  to  counteract  the  periodical  winds  which  sometimes  blow  with 
great  violence. 

2.  You  are,  within  twenty-four  hours  after  giving  seeurily  at  the  Colonial  Secretary’s  Office,  to  lodge 
the  certificate  of  your  having  done  so  at  tin*  Port  Office,  and  to  leave  there  your  address  or  place  of  abode 
when  on  shore. 

3.  No  boat  can  ship,  tranship,  or  bring  on  shore  any  goods,  wares,  or  mercliandise,  without  a permit 
from  the  Custom  House,  vvliidi  is  to  particularize  the  nature  and  number  of  packages,  &c.  Nor  can  any 
boats  be  permitted  to  land  goods  (except  King’s  stores)  any  where  but  at  the  public  wharf,  without  per- 
mission from  the  Custom  House;  and  when  landed,  they  must  be  taken  away  within  twenty-four  hours,  or 
they  will  be  lialile  to  seizure. 

4.  You  are  not  to  allow  any  desertei’  from  the  Navy  or  Army,  or  any  runaway  slave  to  be  harboured 
on  board  your  ship,  under  the  penalty  of  6(H)  rix  dollars. 

5.  Y ou  are  not  to  harbour  or  receive  seamen,  or  seafaring  men,  or  landsmen,  of  any  nation  or  colour, 
without  a certificate  from  the  Coimnwidhig  Officer  of  His  Majesty’s  s^ps  or  vessels  of  war  on  this  station, 
with  regard  to  seamen  and  scjafaring  men,  and  of  the  Captain  of  tbe  Port  witli  regard  to  landsmen  and 
others,  countersigned  by  the  Fiscal:  nor  receive  any  person  on  board  without  a due  certificate,  under  the 
penalty  in  the  bond  signed  by  you  at  the  Secretary’s  Office. 

6.  You  arc  not  to  lefrve  any  passenger  or  otlier  person  behind  you  in  the  Colony,  without  permission 
from  the  Colonial  Secretary’s  Office ; and  all  persons  deserting  or  absenting  themselves  from  your  ship,  are 
to  be  notifiecl  at  the  Port  and  Fiscal’s  Offices,  that  they  may  be  apprehended  as  soon  as  possible. 

7.  You  arc  not  to  attempt  U)  take  away  any  specie  out  of  this  Colony,  without  special  permission;  the 
penalty  for  so  doing  is,  confiscation  of  the  boat  or  craft  that  takes  it  away,  the  propei'ty  confiscated,  with  n 
penalty  of  tliree  times  the  amount,  together  with  twelve  months  imprisonment. 

8.  Your  boats  cannot  be  jiermittcd  to  remain  on  shore  after  gun  fire  at  night,  except  in  cases  when 
the  public  service  requires  your  shtji  to  be  quickly  watered, 

9.  You  must  give  notice  at  the  Custom  House  at  least  tw^  days  previous  to  your  sailing  from  Table 
Bay,  and  three  days’  notice  from  Simon’s  Bay;  and  in  order  to  admit  of  all  possible  means,  and  to 
give  sufficient  time  for  researches  to  be  made  for  deserters  and  runaway  slaves,  you  are  to  cause  your  ship’s 
ensign  to  be  hoisted  at  the  main-top-gallant-mast-head,  forty-eight  hours  previous  to  your  intended  depar- 
ture, in  order  thereby  to  notify  it  to  the  public. 

10.  In  failure  of  complying  with  any  one  of  these  several  instructions  ao  enumerated,  you  will  for 
such  offence  incur  a [)enalty  of  500  rix  dollars,  over  and  above  the  other  pains  and  penalties  as  by  law 
established. 

List  of  Pt'^ces  on  the  Hire  of  Waggon  aitd  Saddle  Harm  at  Copt  Temm, 

1.  For  the  Iiire  from  Cape  Town  to  Simon’s  Town,  and  the  next  day  back. 


Of  a covered  waggon,  or  chariot  46  rix  doBaiv 

Of  a curricle,  or  cart  with  two  wheels 30  ditto 

Of  a saddle  horse  10  ditto 


CAPE  TOWN. 


2.  Any  renter  detaining  a waggon  or  horse  in  Simon’s  Town,  is  to  pay,  in  addition  to  the  above-men- 
tioned prices,  daily 

For  a covered  waggon  or  chariot 10  rix  dollars 

For  a curricle  or  cart 12  ditto 

For  a saddle  horse 3 ditto 

3.  For  hire  from  Cape  Town  to  Simon’s  Town,  or  from  Simon’s  Town  to  the  Cape,  and  not  in  return. 

Of  a covered  waggon  or  chariot 38  rix  dollars 

Of  a curricle  or  cart  20  ditto 

Of  a saddle  horse 7 ditto 

♦.  For  transporting  goods  from  Cape  Town  to  Simon’s  Town,  or  from  Simon's  Town  to  the  Cape. 

On  a horse  waggon 38  rix  dollars 

On  a bullock  waggon 24  ditto 

But  a waggon  being  hired  to  carry  a load  from  Cape  Town  to  Simon’s  Town,  and  the  next  day  a 
load  from  Simon’s  Town  to  the  Cape  in  return. 

On  a horse  waggon 46  rix  dollars 

On  a bullock  waggon 34  ditto 

5.  For  hire  of  waggons,  intending  to  pass  Muysenburg,  without  freight  or  passengers,  and  there  hired 
or  stopped  for  the  purpose  of  carrying  goods  or  passengers  to  Cape  Town  or  Simon’s  Town,  whither  they 
were  bound  for, 

Of  a covered  waggon  or  chariot 15  rix  dollars 

Of  a gig  or  cart 11^  ditto 

Of  a bullock  waggon 15  ditto 


6.  For  transporting  a load  of  hay  to  the  Hout  Bay  « 

Ditto  to  Muysenburg 

Ditto,  from  citlier  place,  one  half  more. 


24  ditto 
20  ditto 


7 For  hire  from  Cape  Town  to  other  districts  not  enumerated  above. 

Of  a covered  waggon  or  chariot 18  rix  dollars 

Of  an  open  waggon 

Of  a gig ditto 

Of  a bullock  waggon 12  ditto 

These  prices  may  be  asked  per  day,  during  tlie  first  three  days;  but  beyond  that  period,  two  rix  dollars 
less  for  each  day.  Of  a saddle  horse,  for  three  days  or  less,  four  rix  dollars  per  day;  but  for  more  days, 
three  rix  dollars  per  day. 

8.  For  a freight,  to  or  from  the  country  districts,  not  at  a further  distance  than  Witteboomen,  twelve 
rix  doHars. 

9.  It  will,  however,  be  allowed  to  the  parties  to  contract  for  loss  prices,  but  the  lessors  may  not  de- 
mand more  than  the  prices  above  stipulated. 


112 


58 


FALSE  BAY~SIMON’S  BAY. 


PROVISIONS  AND  REFRESHMENTS. 

The  Cape  is  an  excellent  place  for  refreshments;  all  sorts  of  provisions  being  in  abundance,  and  at 
moderate  prices. 

Beef  is  to  be  got;  the  prime  parts  sixpence  a pound,  the  other  in  proportion. 

Mutton,  threepence  per  pound;  but  taking  beef  and  mutton  together,  one  third  of  the  former,  and 
two  thirds  of  the  latter,  two  pounds  and  a quarter  for  sixpence. 

Ducks  and  fowls  vary  according  to  their  size,  and  the  demand. 

Of  fruits,  the  Colony  produces  many  kinds  in  abundance,  and  reasonable. 

The  vegetables,  such  as  cal)bages,  brocoli,  cauliflowers,  &c.  are  very  excellent;  the  seeds  of  them  arc 
an  acceptable  present  in  all  parts  of  India,  and  are  frequently  carried  from  the  Cape  to  the  British  settle- 
ments, as  an  article  of  trade. 

^J'he  water,  which  is  good,  is  brought  to  the  pier  by  pipes,  where  boats  may  lie  and  fill  their  casks 
with  a hose;  or  il’  it  is  not  convenient  to  use  your  own  boats,  country  boats  may  be  had  to  w'ater  the  ship, 
at  a Spanish  dollar  a butt.  Firewood  is  very  scarce  and  dear.  In  fine  weather,  the  town  is  well  supplied 
with  fish  of  several  kinds. 


FALSE  BAY 

Is  formed  by  the  Cape  of  Good  Hope  on  the  west  side,  and  Ca|>c  Falso  to  the  eastward;  the  distance 
from  Cape  to  Cape  is  about  5 leagues,  and  its  extent  to  the  northward  about  the  same  distance.  Four 
leagues  to  the  northward  of  the  ('ape  Point,  near  the  N.  W.  corner  of  False  Bay,  and  at  the  foot  of  the 
highest  mountain  on  the  coast,  is  situated 

SIMON’S,  oa  SEAMAN’S  BAY. 

This  is  only  a small  bay,  or  cove;  and  in  the  winter  months,  from  April  to  September,  when  Table  Bay 
is  unsafe,  ships  put  in  here,  and  are  sheltered  from  all  wind.s,  except  the  S.  E. 

The  town  is  small ; the  houses  arc  neat.  Close  to  the  landing-place  is  a range  of  warehouses,  w^ell 
stocked  with  marine  and  other  stores.  At  a short  distance  from  this,  is  a commodious  and  handsome 
house,  where  the  commanding  officer  resides.  A little  higher  up,  on  the  brow  of  a hill  overlooking  the  bay, 
is  a large  building,  which  the  Dutch  used  for  a hospital;  but  it  is  now  converted  into  excellent  barracks 
lor  the  troops  stationed  here.  There  is  a saluting  battery,  near  the  landing  place,  which  is  a wooden  pier, 
where  boats  may  he  at  all  times;  the  water  is  brought  down  to  the  pier  by  pipes,  and  conveyed  into  th6 
casks  by  hoses  with  ease  and  expedition. 

About  half  a mile  from  the  town,  to  the  eastward,  is  a space  called  the  Company’s  garden,  well  stocked 
with  vegetables,  &c.  for  the  use  of  shipping.  About  half  way  between  the  town  and  garden  is  a strong 
batteiy,  which  commands  great  part  of  the  bay;  besides  which,  there  are  a few  small  batteries,  on  a level 
with  the  sea,  and  guns  planted  at  different  places,  to  prevent  an  enemy  landing  on  the  beach. 

PROVISIONS  AND  REFRESHMENTS. 

The  generality  of  supplies  are  procured  here  upon  the  same  terms  as  at  Cape  Town.  Ships  occasion- 
ally send  their  long  boats  over  to  a bay  in  Hottentot  Holland,  on  the  eastern  side  of  False  Bay,  where 
poultry  and  many  other  refreshments  are  to  be  got  rather  more  reasonably  than  at  Simon’s  Town.  The 
bay  abounds  with  fish,  many  of  them  excellent,  particularly  the  stone  brassems,  or  Hottentot  fish. 


MOSSEL  BAY—PLETTEMBERG  BAY. 


63 


MOSSEL  BAY. 

The  southern  extremity  of  this  Bay  is  Cape  St.  Blaze,  in  latitude  34°  10'  South,  and  longitude  22°  18" 
East.  The  bay  is  open  to  the  S.  E.  winds,  which  throw  in  a heavy  swell.  The  marks  for  unchorafre  are. 
Seal  Island  N.W.  by  W.  the  com  magazine,  S.  W.  by  S.  and  the  outer  point  South;  you  are  then  in 
fathoms  water,  and  about  three  quarters  of  a mile  from  the  shore.  There  is  a Port-holder  here,  who  lias 
charge  of  the  corn  magazine,  which  is  a strong  building,  150  feet  in  length,  and  will  hold  10,(KK)  bushels 
of  corn.  The  Colony  at  the  Cape  draws  considerable  quantities  of  grain  from  this  place. 

PROVISIONS  AND  REFRESHMENTS. 

The  best  mode  of  procuring  supplies  is  by  application  to  the  Port-holder,  unless  you  are  acquainted 
with  the  language;  they  would  then  be  obtained  more  reasonably.  lli!ef  and  mutton  may  be  purchased 
from  2d.  to  3d.  per  lb.  A sheep  at  about  six  schillings.  Vegetables  and  fniit  are  scarce.  Fish  are  caught 
in  abundance;  and  good  oysters  and  muscles  are  to  be  procured.  Only  brush-wood  is  to  be  got  near  the 
bay;  but  at  a small  distance  up  one  of  the  rivers,  there  is  plenty  of  large  limber.  Water  is  easily  to  be  had 
from  a spring  near  the  landing  place,  and  can  be  conveyed  into  the  bo.its  by  a hose.  AVheat  is  about  22 
rix  dollars  the  load,  under  three  shillings  sterling  the  bushel. 

PLETTEMBERG  BAY. 

Seal  Cape,  or  Cape  Delgado,  the  S.  W.  point  of  this  bay,  is  in  latitude  31°  0 South,  and  longitude 
23°  48'  East.  It  is  an  Ojicn  roadstead,  but  the  anchoring  ground  is  good  in  17  or  18  fathoms.  The  land- 
ing-place is  on  a sandy  beach,  near  the  Governor’s  house,  which  is  neat  and  spacious.  Here  is  a magazine 
for  timber,  200  feet  long,  and  a strong  and  commodious  building  as  a barrack  for  troops,  where  a small 
detachment  of  the  Cape  Regiment  is  always  stationed. 

COINS. 

The  Cape  paper  money  passes  current  here;  and  Spanish  dollars  vary  from  11  to  12$  schillings  pajier 
currency,  each. 

IMPORTS  AND  EXPORTS. 

For  the  use  of  the  military,  tea,  sugar,  and  a few  Eurojiean  commodities  are  brought ; for  trade  here, 
coarse  woollens,  camblets,  cutlery,  tar,  iron,  lead,  coarse  Imlia  chintz,  blue  Balias,  Gurruhs,  Doosooties, 
and  unbleached  linens,  in  return  for  elephants’  teeth,  aloes,  and  timber:  of  the  latter,  large  quantities  are 
sent  to  the  Cape,  and  spars  may  be  procured  of  sufficient  dimensions  for  masts  to  line  of  battle  ships,  from 
a forest,  about  twelve  miles  to  the  N.W.  of  the  landing  place,  which  abounds  with  timber  of  large  dimen- 
sions, fit  for  ship>and  house  building.  Timber  in  planks  might  be  pmchased  here,  12  to  14  inches  wide, 
and  I4nch  thick,  at  about  3d.  per  foot  in  paper  currency. 

PROVISIONS  AND  REFRESHMICNTS. 

At  a short  distance  up  a small  river,  whose  entrance  is  generally  closed  by  a sandy  bai,  is  a consitlei 
able  farm-house,  where  it  would  be  advisable  to  apply  for  what  is  rwiuired.  Beet  and  muftoii  is  a • 
per  lb.  FowU  15d.  to  18d.  each.  Fruit  and  vegetables  are  rather  scarce;  fish  is  in  abundance,  llie 
watering  is  rather  difficult  here,  as  you  have  to  roll  the  casks  nearly  .3(M)  yards  over  a heavy  sail  , an  o 
raft  them  through  a surf,  which  frequently  breaks  high  upon  the  beach. 


ZWABTKOrS  BAY. 


!i4 


ALCOA,  oa  ZWARTKOFS  BAY. 

This  bay  U about  10  leagues  in  extent  from  Cape  Recife,  or  Rocky  Cape,  its  S.  W.  point,  to  Cape 
Padron,  its  N.  E,  extreme.  Cape  Recife  is  in  latitude  34°  2 South,  and  longitude  26°  40"  East.  You 
may  anchor  in  any  part  of  tlie  bey,  and  diuse  your  depth  of  water;  the  common  anchorage  is  off  the  land- 
ing  place,  in  7 fathoms,  about  three  quarters  of  a mile  from  the  shore,  a small  river,  called  Baker's  river, 
beaiing  W.  half  S.  the  outermost  point  of  the  land  S.  by  E.  On  the  North  side  of  the  river,  a blockhouse 
has  been  erected,  surrounded  witli  a palisade,  for  tlie  defence  of  the  landing  place,  and  to  keep  the  Caffres 
in  awe.  The  common  landing  place  is  at  the  blockhouse.  About  200  of  the  Cape  regiment  are  generally 
stationed  here. 


IMPORTS  AND  EXPORTS. 

Very  little  trade  is  carried  on  here,  it  being  kept  principally  as  a depot  for  provisions;  a few  articles 
may  be  disposed  of  to  the  miliUry,  particuhuly  eatables  and  drinkables,  for  which  you  are  paid  in  paper  cur- 
rency:  and  to  the  farmers  in  tlie  ncighliourhood,  a small  quantity  of  the  commodities  enumerated  at  Plet- 
teraberg  Bay,  may  be  exchanged  for  tlie  articles  you  may  stand  in  need  of. 

PROVISIONS  AND  REFRESHMENTS. 

The  readiest  way  of  procuring  supplies  is  by  application  to  the  commanding  officer  of  the  troops  sta- 
tioned here,  who  will  send  round  to  the  farmers.  The  cattle  here  are  large  and  very  fat,  and  may  be  pur- 
chased for  8 or  10  rix  dollars  each,  weighing  5 cwt.  Veal,  at  about  2 stivers  a pound.  Sheep,  6 to  8 schillings 
each.  Poultry  equally  reasonable;  and  from  the  stores,  a .ship  in  distress  might  procure  salt  provisions,  spirits, 
and  grain.  Potatoes,  cabbages,  and  turnips  are  to  be  met  with  in  small  quantities ; and  dried  fruits  in  abun- 
dance. Of  fish,  Roman  snappers,  and  many  others  equally  good,  may  be  caught  near  tlie  isltmds  and  rocks  in 
the  bay.  Firewood  is  to  begot  a few  miles  up  the  country.  There  is  a good  spring  of  fresh  water  about  100 
yiuds  within  Bakers  river;  and  about  three  quarters  of  a mile  to  the  southward  is  a small  run  of  water, 
called  Baker's  Fountain,  from  whence  with  a westerly  wind  any  number  of  casks  may  be  easily  rafted  off.  ' 

About  10  leagues  to  the  eastward  of  Cape  Padron,  and  3 from  the  Main  of  Africa,  lies  the  rock  on 
which  the  Doddington  East  Indiaman  was  lost  in  1755.  She  was  outward-bound,  and  had  made  1 1 degrees 
meridian  distance  from  Cape  Lagullas.  Judging  they  were  near  the  Coast  of  Madagascar,  and  the  passage 
open,  they  bore  away  to  the  northward;  but  on  the  17th  of  July,  about  a quarter  before  one  in  the  morn- 
ing, they  struck,  saw  Uie  breakers,  and  in  less  than  a quarter  of  an  hour  the  ship  went  to  pieces.  Out  of 
270  people,  only  23  were  saved.  Tlicy  remained  six  months  on  tliis  rock,  to  which  they  gave  the  name  of 
Bird  Island,  and  built  a sloop  out  of  the  wreck.  The  chief  officer  and  16  people,  being  all  that  remained 

alive,  went  to  Madagascar  in  her;  where  the  Carnarvon  outward-bound  East  Indiaman  took  them  onboard, 
nnd  curried  them  to  Madras 


CHAPTER  VI. 


East  Coast  of  Africa. 


Natal;  Description^Proviaions  and  Refreshments — Delagoa  Bay;  Description^Imports  and  Export s-^Prn- 
visiona  and  RefreshTntnta^Inhamhan^Sofala;  Description^Imports  and  Exports^Provisions  and  Re- 
fre8hmtntS""^reat  Cuama  R{v€r^QuilimuHC“^Jifosanthi(fue;  Description — Clause  in  Ike  Treaty  with 
Portugal  relative  to  the  Slave  Trade^Coins,  Weights^  and  Measures— ‘Imports  and  Exports— Trade  with 

BritiJi  India Provisions  and  Refreshments— Articles  procurable — Amber — Ambergris — Cnlvmbo  Root- 

Cowries Elephants'  Teeth— Elephants  Hair— Hippopotamus  Teeth— Tortoise  Shell — Querimba  Islands— 

Macaloe—Mongallou  River— Lindy  River— Quiloa ; Description— Imports  and  Exports— Provisions  and 
Refreshments — Zanzibar;  Description — Momhas— Melinda— Patte— Juba— Brava— Magadoxa— Cape 
Guardafui— Barbara— Zeila. 


NATAL. 

The  River  Infanta,  or  Great  Fish  Rivier,  tlie  extent  of  the  Cape  Colony  to  the  eastward,  is  the 
southernmost  boundary  of  the  coast  of  Natal,  so  called  because  the  Portuguese  discovered  it  on  Christmas 
Day,  1497.  The  only  place  frequented  by  the  Europeans  is 

PORT  NATAL, 

Which  is  situated  in  latitude  29°  56  South,  and  longitude  about  31°  30  East.  The  river  Is  wide  at 
its  entrance,  but  is  only  fit  for  small  vessels.  The  bar  is  very  dangerous,  not  having  more  than  5 feet  at 
low  water,  and  the  sea  rises  but  5 feet  more,  except  in  the  months  of  September  and  October,  when  you 
will  find  about  12  feet  at  high  water.  The  course  on  the  bar  is  to  the  S.  W.  the  swell  being  very  great; 
but  as  it  is  very  narrow,  two  or  three  seas  will  carry  you  over,  and  then  you  deepen  your  water  to  3,  4, 
and  5 fathoms.  When  you  are  about  a mile  within  the  river,  you  perceive  a piece  of  barren  ground  at  the 
dedivity  of  a hill,  over  against  which  you  may  anchor  in  4 fathoms,  ut  a cable's  length  from  the  shore;  the 
safest  way  is  to  moor  with  hawsers  to  the  rocks  on  shore. 

This  place  was  much  frequented  by  the  earlier  voyagers  to  India;  but  at  present  very  little  trade  is 
carried  on,  except  with  the  Portuguese  from  Mosambique,  who  import  coarse  piece-goods,  chiefly  blue 
cloth,  iron,  beads,  tobacco,  and  spirits;  and  receive  in  return,  elephants'  teeth,  cattle,  and  sometime.s  amber- 
gris. The  natives  are  apparently  inoffensive,  but  generally  go  armed  with  lances,  bows  and  arrows; 
their  houses  are  built  of  straw  and  mats,  but  in  a neat  manner. 

PROVISIONS  AND  REFRESHMENTS. 

The  b»»llnf^Tfa  here  are  large  and  good,  and  poultry  in  plenty,  in  exchange  for  small  articles,  such  as 
buttons,  iron  hoops,  &c.  The  river  abounds  with  fish,  and  turtle  is  occasionally  to  be  met  with. 


56 


DELAGOA  BAY. 


DELAGOA  BAY, 

So  called  ljy  (lie  Eii][>]ish,  is  named  by  the  Portuguese  and  other  nations,  Bay  ot  I.orenzo  Marques, 
from  the  name  of  its  discoverer,  and  also  the  Bay  of  the  Holy  Ghost:  it  is  of  considerable  extent,  being 
about  7 leagues  broad  from  East  to  W(‘st,  and  near  20  leagues  deep  from  North  to  South;  but  the  channel, 
on  account  of  the  shoals  on  both  sides,  is  not  more  than  five  miles  in  breadth.  The  North  Point,  or  Cape 
St.  Mary's,  tlie  N.  E.  point  of  the  island  of  the  same  name,  is  in  latitude  25°  58  South,  and  longitude  33° 
15  East.  This  island  is  separated  from  the  main  land  by  a narrow  rocky  channel. 

There  are  tliree  principal  rivers  in  this  bay,  vk.  Maniea,  Delagoa,  or  English  River,  and  Macha- 
vanna.  Tlie  first  is  the  northernmost,  and  when  this  bay  was  discovered  by  the  Portuguese  in  1545,  was 
the  only  one  navigable  for  large  vessels;  here  they  formed  a settlement,  and  built  a fort,  some  vestiges  of 
which  still  remain,  but  abandoned  it  in  consequence  of  its  entrance  being  choked  with  sand.  The  second 
is  Delagoa,  or  English  River,  which  has  a bar  with  about  15  feet  on  it  at  low  water:  this  is  the  only 
one  at  present  frequented  by  English  vessels.  The  Dutch  settled  a factory  here,  which  they  held  till  1727, 
when  a strong  squadron  of  Ibiglisli  pirates,  who  had  their  rendezvous  on  Madagascar,  after  plundering  the 
Dutch  warehouses,  rased  them  and  the  fort  to  the  ground.  In  1777,  an  establishment  was  made  here,  on 
account  of  tlie  Austrian,  or  Ostend  East  India  Company,  under  the  command  of  Colonel  Bolts,  who  built 
warehouses,  and  erected  a battery  of  12  guns  on  the  south  side  of  the  river:  the  Imperialists  remained  but 
Ihree  years  in  possession,  when,  in  consequence  of  a protest  from  the  Portuguese  Government,  the  Cabinet  of 
Vienna  disavowed  the  settlement,  and  a force  was  sent  from  Goa,  who  treated  the  Imperialists  in  a similar 
manner  to  that  in  which  the  Dutch  were  treated  by  the  pirates  in  1727;  then*  ships,  (‘ffects,  and  men,  having 
been  seized  and  carried  off.  The  third,  or  Machavanna  River,  is  the  southernmost;  it  is  about  8 leagues 
from  Delagoa  River,  and  is  not  navigable  for  ships;  but  a boat  that  draws  only  6 feet  water,  can  go  30  leagues 
above  the  entrance,  where  the  trade  is  carried  on,  and  where  the  chi(*f  usually  resides. 

Delagoa  River  is  much  frequented  by  South  Sea  whalers,  as  the  bay  abounds  in  whales,  and  is  very 
commodious  and  safe.  It  is  navigable  by  vessels  drawing  about  12  feet  water,  for  upwards  of  40  miles, 
and  for  large  bouts  near  200.  Ships  commonly  lie  about  2 miles  up  the  river,  where  they  have  good  depth 
of  waU'r,  and  are  perfi’ctly  secure  from  all  winds.  A considerable  trade  was  formerly  caiTiod  on  at  the  rivers 
in  the  bay,  for  elephants’  teeth  and  gold  dust.  Few  English  ships  now  visit  the  bay  for  that  purpose ; but 
the  Portuguese  carry  on  a small  trade  with  the  natives.  There  are  several  chiefs  on  the  south  side  of  the 
river ; but  they  are  all  subject  to  one  who  resides  near  the  village  where  the  slijps  anclior.  The  houses  of 
the  natives  are  neat,  and  circular,  about  15  feet  in  diameter,  having  only  one  entrance,  and  surrounded 
with  palisadoes  about  four  feet  high.  ^L'lie  natives  are  CaflTres,  of  a bright  black  colour,  but  not  numerous, 
probably  in  the  whole  hay.  They  seem  a good-natured  and  harmless  people,  but  sharp  and  cun- 

ning, anil  ask  three  times  more  than  tlwy  will  take  for  their  goods.  They  are  great  beggars,  particularly 
on  the  north  side  of  the  river : the  natives  at  a distance  up  the  rivefs  arc  reckoned  more  traiterous  and 
ferocious  than  those  in  the  bay,  and  you  must  be  continually  on  your  guard  when  trading  with  them, 

IMPORTS  AND  EXPORTS. 

The  Portuguese  send  a shij)  here  1 Vom  Mo.sambique  occasionally,  and  the  Persecs  on  the  Malabar  coast 
'have  sent  small  vessels  at  different  times,  their  imports  consisting  of 


Arrangoe  beads 

Cutlery 

Piece  goods 

Spirits 

Buttons 

Copper 

Pipes 

Tobacco 

Brass  wire 

Iron 

Sugar 

Wearing  apparel 

INHAMBAN—SOFALA 


b1 


Their  returns  are  principally  made  in  elephants’  teeth;  the  rortuguesc  sometimes  take  slaves  to 
Mosambique.  Ambergis  is  occasionally  to  be  met  with,  likewise  gold  <lust  in  small  quantities,  and  hippopo- 
tamus teeth : the  latter  article  may  be  purchased  very  cheap,  but  the  natives  set  a high  price  upon  the  ele- 
phants’ teeth;  these  arc  only  to  be  procured  for  piece-goods,  and  the  kind  most  in  request  amongst  them 
is  coarse  blue  cloth. 


PROVISIONS  AND  REFRESHMENTS 

Are  to  be  procured  in  plenty,  and  very  reasonably,  after  permission  of  the  chief  is  obtained.  Tliere 
is  a kind  of  master  attendant  here,  called  the  king  of  the  water ; he  informs  the  chief  of  the  arrival  of  any 
ship  l<l^the  bay,  and  you  cannot  purchase  any  bullocks  till  the  chief  comes  down  to  his  house  at  the  landing 
place,  where  you  must  make  him  a present  of  some  old  clothes  and  liquor:  he  gives  you  in  return  a bul- 
lock, after  which  you  may  get  what  you  want  every  day.  The  master  attendant  has  a great  number  of 
cattle ; he  comes  on  board  your  ship,  remains  as  long  as  you  please,  and  will  accompany  any  officer  on  shore 
to  trade:  by  keeping  on  good  terms  with  him,  you  can  get  every  thing  that  is  to  be  procured  here.  The 
bullocks  are  very  good;  for  a piece  of  coarse  Surat  piece-goods,  one  weighing  between  three  and  four  hun- 
dred weight  may  be  got;  fowls  for  an  iron  hoop  each,  or  two  metal  buttons,  vegetables,  and  fruit,  for 
old  clothes,  empty  bottles,  &c.  Turtle  is  sometimes  to  be  met  with.  Fire-wood  and  water  are  in  plenty, 
and  easily  procured.  The  bay  and  rivers  abound  with  a variety  of  excellent  fish,  whicli  are  brouglit  off  by 
the  natives  in  their  boats,  and  cost  a mere  trifle. 

From  Delagoa  Bay  to  Cape  Corientes,  in  latitude  T South,  and  longitude  35^51  East,  tlic 
coast  is  seldom  visited  by  Europeans,  and  but  little  known. 

INHAMBAN  BAY  and  RIVER. 

The  eastern  extremity  of  Inhamban  Bay  is  5 leagues  to  the  northward  of  Cape  Corientes;  about 
three  miles  to  the  westward  of  which,  is  the  entrance  of  the  river,  in  latitude  23P  47  South,  and  longitude 
35^  52  East;  but  on  account  of  the  numerous  shoals  in  the  bay,  it  is  only  frequented  by  small  vessels. 
Inhamban  Town  is  situated  about  eight  miles  from  the  entrance  of  the  river.  The  Portuguese  have  hero 
a Resident,  and  a few  troops  for  his  protection.  Vessels  from  Mosambique  come  here  to  trade  for  slaves, 
elephants'  teeth,  and  gold  dust;  but  the  trade  is  not  very  considerable. 

SOFALA. 

'Phis  town  is  situated  up  a river,  navigable  only  by  small  vessels,  liaving  a bar  at  its  entrance, 
which  has  only  12  or  14  feet  on  it  at  low  water.  The  Fort  of  Sofula  is  on  a point  of  land,  insulated  at 
high  water,  in  latitude  20®  15  South,  and  longitude  34®  45  East;  the  town,  which  principally  consists  of 
huts,  lies  on  the  north  side  of  the  river.  The  anchorage  is  about  four  miles  from  the  fort,  in  5 futhoins, 
having  the  flag-staff  bearing  N.  33®  W.  Ships  ought  not  to  enter  this  place  without  a pilot.  A Portu- 
guese Resident  with  a party  of  men  are  stationed  here ; there  are  also  some  merchants,  who  procure  ele- 
phants' teeth,  slaves,  gold  dust,  &c.  for  a ship  which  annually  comes  from  Mosambique. 

Sofala  was  visited  by  the  Portuguese  soon  after  their  discovery  of  the  passage  round  the  Cape  of  Cood 
Hope.  They  were  kindly  received;  and  in  1507,  notwithstanding  the  opposition  they  ex|)erienced  from 
the  Arab  merchants  frequenting  the  port,  obtained  permission  to  build  a fort,  which  they  have  lield  ever 
since,  although  the  climate  is  represented  as  extremely  unliealthy. 


I 


B8 


GREAT  CUAMA  RIVER— QUILIMANE. 


IMPORTS  AND  EXPORTS. 

The  vessel  which  comes  annually  from  Mosambique,  imports  coarse  piece-goods,  and  other  articles 
suitable  to  the  taste  of  the  natives;  and  takes  in  return,  gold,  slaves,  and  elephants'  teeth.  It  is 
stated,  that  from  the  mines  in  the  neighbourhood  of  Sofala,  more  than  2,000,000  metigals  of  gold  are 
yearly  extracted,  the  value  of  which  is  estimated  at  1,666,666  sterling.  The  trade  in  slaves  is  abo 
considerable.  The  Arabs  frequent  Sofala,  and  cariy  on  an  extensive  trade  with  this  part  of  the  coast. 

At  Sofala,  and  other  places  where  the  Portuguese  have  Residents,  a guard  is  placed  on  board  any 
vessel  that  may  touch  there,  to  prevent  illicit  trade;  but  by  gaining  the  favour  of  the  Commandant, 
trade  may  be  transacted  at  most  of  these  places.  They  are  all  subordinate  to  Mosambique,  and  all  the 
coasting  vessels  belong  to  that  port. 

Ships  touching  on  different  parts  of  the  East  Coast  of  Africa,  little  frequented,  ought  to  be  careful 
in  landing  with  their  boats,  for  the  natives  of  many  places  are  much  prejudiced  against  Europeans; 
and  not  without  cause.  It  has  bccai  said,  that  both  French  and  English  vessels  have  visited  the  coast, 
and  at  different  places,  after  enticing  the  natives  on  board,  carried  them  away,  and  sold  them  as  slaves. 
It  is  pretty  well  umlerstood  that  a vessel  from  the  Cape  of  Good  Hope  used  to  procure  slaves  in 
this  manner;  and  it  is  said  that  when  she  was  at  an  island  called  Chulawan,  to  the  southward  of  Sofala, 
the  son  of  the  Prince,  or  Chief,  governing  the  country  on  the  banks  of  the  river  opposite  the  island, 
with  several  of  his  subjects,  were  allured  on  board  under  pretence  of  friendship,  and  carried  away. 
This  vessel  returned  to  the  Cape  with  a full  cargo  of  slaves,  and  there  b much  reason  to  believe  that 
the  greater  part  of  them  was  procured  in  this  perfidious  manner. 

PROVISIONS  AND  REFRESHMENTS. 

Bullocks  and  poultry  may  be  procured  reasonably,  if  purchased  from  the  natives;  but  the  Portu- 
guese make  visiters  pay  much  dearer  for  supplies.  Fruit  and  vegetables  are  plentiful;  and  fish  of 
various  sorts  are  caught  in  the  river. 

GREAT  CUAMA  RIVER 

Is  called  by  the  natives  Zanibezc,  and  is  in  many  places  more  than  a league  broad.  About  20 
leagues  from  its  joining  the  sea,  it  divides  itself  into  two  branches,  the  southernmost  of  which  is  called 
I.uabo;  this  also  divides  itself  into  two  branches;  the  other  principal  arm  is  called  Quilimane.  In  the 
midst  of  the  river  are  several  islands,  some  very  large.  The  entrance  of  Luabo  River  is  in  about 
19^  South  latitude;  that  of  Quilimane  in  18°  10'  South,  and  longitude  37°  30  East. 

QUILIMANE. 

This  town  is  situated  on  the  north  side  of  the  river,  about  5 leagues  from  its  entrance.  The  river 
has  a bar,  having  only  2}  fathoms  on  it  at  low  water;  here  the  Mosambique  vessels  discharge  their 
cargoes  into  small  bouts,  to  proceed  to  Sena,  their  principal  settlement  on  the  river,  which  is  more  than 
60  leagues  distant,  in  latitude  17°  37  South.  Large  quantities  of  gold  are  annually  procured  at  Sena, 
but  it  is  not  above  19  carats  fineness;  likewise  elephants'  teeth,  wax,  rhinoceros  horns,  hides,  &c.  The 
Africans  from  the  interior,  come  sometimes  from  the  distance  of  two  or  three  months'  travel  to  Sena, 
to  purchase  European  and  Indian  goods  for  gold.  This  barter  yields  the  Portuguese  veiy  great  profit; 
indeed  this  part  of  the  Coast  of  Africa  may  be  considered  their  Peru;  gold  being  so  common  in  the 
interior,  tliat  many  of  their  household  utensils  are  made  of  it. 


MOSAMBIQUE. 


Mosambique  island,  which  is  situated  in  latitude  15°  1 South,  and  longitiulo  tO^  i()  East,  is  the  principal 
i,ettlement  of  the  Portuguese  on  tlie  East  CoEvSt  of  Africa,  and  to  which  all  the  others  arc  subordinate.  The 
harbour  is  one  of  the  best  on  the  coast,  and  is  formed  by  the  islands  of  St.  Jago  and  St.  George,  which  arc  to 
the  southward  of  its  entrance,  and  that  of  Mosambique,  about  three  miles  to  the  N.  W.  of  the  otht  rs.  Mosam- 
bique  is  small,  not  above  three  miles  in  circumference,  to  the  westward  of  which  is  the  harbour.  Ships 
generally  anchor  w^ithin  St.  George’s  Island,  and  wait  for  a pilot  to  carry  them  to  the  proper  anchorage. 

Mosambique  was  first  visited  by  the  Portuguese,  under  De  Gama,  in  M98,  and  was  llien  described 
as  a large  ti)wn,  lull  of  merchants,  who  traded  with  the  Moors  of  India,  for  spices,  precious  stones,  and 
other  commodities.”  The  natives  received  De  Gama  in  a friendly  manner,  taking  them  to  he  Turks; 
but  on  discovering  them  to  be  Christians,  laid  a plan  for  their  destruction,  which  was  fortunately  discovered, 
and  De  Gama  removed  from  the  harbour;  but  being  in  want  of  water,  he  took  it  by  force,  and 
previous  to  his  departure  for  India,  lie  cannonaded  and  destroyed  great  part  of  the  town.  In  1510 
the  Portuguese  obtained  permission  to  settle  a factory,  the  object  of  which  was  the  establishment  of  a place 
for  their  outward  and  homeward  tmund  ships  to  stop  at,  to  procure  refreshments.  They  soon  after  expelled 
the  inhabitants;  and,  excepting  an  attempt  made  by  the  Dutch  in  1603  to  take  the  place,  which 
was  unsuccessful,  they  have  remained  in  undisturbed  possession  ever  since.  It  was  at  first  unhealthy,  but 
has  of  late  years  improved  in  that  respect. 

Mosambique  is  strongly  fortified,  and  has  several  large  churches,  convents,  and  other  public  buildings. 
Many  of  the  houses  are  well  built,  but  the  principal  part  of  the  town  is  composed  of  huts:  within  the 
fort  is  a large  cistern  for  water,  which  is  scarce  here. 

The  Portuguese  ships  generally  stop  here,  on  their  voyages  to  and  from  India ; and  a considerable 
trade  is  carried  on  with  tlie  neighbouring  places  on  the  coast,  principally  for  slaves,  of  which  it 
is  computed  that  10,000  are  annually  exported  to  the  islands  of  Mauritius  and  Bourbon,  tlie  Portuguese 
settlements  on  the  coast  of  Brazil,  and  to  India.  The  English  Government,  anxious  to  abolish  this 
inhuman  traffic,  made  it  an  article  in  the  treaty  of  commerce,  concluded  und  signed  by  the  Portuguese 
Government  at  Rio  de  Janeiro,  February  19,  1810,  but  it  is  not  to  the  extent  which  could  be 
wished.  It  stipulates  thus : 

“ His  Royal  Highness  the  Prince  Regent  of  Portugal,  being  fully  convinced  of  the  injustice  and 
« impolicy  of  the  slave  trade,  and  of  the  great  disadvantages  which  arise  from  the  necessity  of  introducing 
and  continually  renewing  a foreign  and  factitious  population,  for  the  purposes  of  labour  and  industry, 
“ within  his  South  American  dominions,  has  resolved  to  cooperate  with  his  Britannic  Majesty  in  the  cause 
of  humanity  and  justice,  by  adopting  the  most  efficacious  means  for  bringing  about  a gradual  abolition  of  the 
slave  trade  throughout  the  whole  of  his  dominions.  And  actuated  by  this  principle,  his  Royal  Highness 
the  Prince  Regent  of  Portugal  engages,  that  his  subjects  shall  not  be  permitted  to  carry  on  the  slave  trade 
‘‘  on  any  part  of  the  coast  of  Africa,  not  actually  belonging  to  his  Royal  Highness’s  dominions,  in  which 
that  trade  has  been  discontinued  and  abandoned  by  the  Powers  and  States  of  Europe  which  formerly 
traded  there;  reserving,  however,  to  his  own  subjects,  the  riglit  of  purchasing  and  trading  in  slaves 
within  the  African  dominions  of  the  Crown  of  Portugal.  It  is,  how^ever,  to  be  distinctly  understood,  that 
« the  stipulations  of  the  present  article  are  not  to  be  conside^pd  as  invalidating  or  otherwise  an'oeting  the 
rights  of  the  Crown  of  Portugal  to  the  territories  of  Cabinda  and  Molembo,  (whicli  rights  have 
formerly  been  questioned  by  the  Government  of  France),  nor  as  limiting  or  restraining  the  com- 
“ merce  of  Ajuda,  and  other  parts  in  Africa,  situated  upon  the  coast  commonly  called,  ^ in  the 
« Portuguese  language,  the  Costo  da  Mina,  belonging  to,  or  claimed  by,  the  Crown  of  Portugal, 
« his  Royal  Highness  the  Prince  Regent  of  Portugal  being  resolved  not  to  resign  nor  forego  his 
**  just  and  legitimate  pretensions  thereto,  nor  the  riglits  of  his  subjects  to  trade  with  those  places  exactly 


MOSAMBIQUE. 


€ 

m 

in  the  same  manner  as  they  have  hitherto  done.'”— It  is  to  be  hoped,  that  at  some  future  period  our 
exertions  in  this  cause  will  be  more  successful. 

With  India  a considerable  trade  is  carried  on  in  vessels  under  Portuguese  colours,  or  English  counti7 
ships.  The  Portuguese  are  equally  strict  here  as  in  their  South  American  possessions.  Immediately  on 
the  arrival  of  a vessel,  a guard  is  placed  on  board,  to  prevent  illicit  trade;  notwithstanding  which,  with 
proper  management,  whatever  goods  are  required,  may  be  readily  obtained. 

COINS,  WEIGHTS,  and  MEASURES. 

The  coins  current  are  Spanish  dollars,  crusados,  and  testoons,  4 testoons  making  1 crusado,  the 
exchange  of  which  with  Spanish  dollars  varies  from  250  to  270  crusados  per  100  dollars. 

The  weights  are  the  frazil,  and  the  bahar,  20  of  the  former  making  one  of  the  latter,  which  is  con- 
sidered equal  to  240  avoirdupois  pounds. 

IMPORTS  AND  EXPORTS. 

The  principal  article  of  trade  is  slaves,  of  which,  as  before  stated,  about  10,000  are  annually 
exported,  at  an  average  of  from  40  to  50  dollars  each.  Large  quantities  of  gold  arc  annually  brought 
from  Sena  and  Sofala;  and  ambergris,  elephants'  teeth,  columbo  root,  tortoiseshell,  and  cowries  are 
procurable  here  to  a considerable  extent. 

The  trade  carried  on  between  Mosambique  and  the  British  settlements  in  India  is  considerable:  in  the 
Bengal  accounts  it  is  blended  with  that  of  other  places;  but  at  Fort  St.  George  and  Bombay,  kept  separate. 
The  following  are  the  amounts  of  the  imports  and  exports  from  these  two  settlements,  in  the  year  1805. 

IMPORTS. 


SIM' ( irs  OF  GOODS. 

Total. 

Sicca  Kupces. 

Sicca  Rupees. 

Sicca  Rupees. 

Piece  goods  of  various  kinds  . . . 

(tIass  Deads 

(^hinaWare 

Toys 

Metals 

Glass  ware  

29,467 

2,275 

3,575 

1,286 

6,531 

~2,67,293 

10,736 

4,032 

2,^71 

^6,760 

10,736 

6,307 

2,271 

3,675 

1,286 

Sundries,*  including  British  goods 

10,592 

17,123 

Total  . . . Sicca  Rupees 

43,134  1 

2,94,924 

3,38,058 

EXPORTS. 


The  imports  into  India  during  the  same  year  from  Mosambique,  are  only  enumerated  at  Bombay, 
and  consisted  of 

Elephants'  teeth Sicca  Rupees  1,22,697 

Tortoise-shell 2,684 

Sundric's  including  drugs,  cowries  &c. 7,291 

Treasure 7,613 

Total  Sicca  Rupees  1,40,285 

PROVISIONS  AND  REFRESHMENTS. 

Mosambique  is  dependent  on  Madagascar  and  other  places  for  provisions,  which  are  consequently  dear. 
Bullocks  are  not  procurable  under  15  dollars  a head,  and  rice  from  2 to  3 dollars  a bag.  Watqr  is  very 
scarce,  there  being  only  two  good  wells ; one  on  the  island,  and  the  other  on  the  main : the  rest  are 
brackish.  Wood  is  procured  from  tlie  main,  where  the  Portuguese  have  gardens,  which  produce  vegeta- 
bles and  fruits  of  various  kinds. 


AMBER — AMBERGRIS— COLUM BO  ROOT. 

Articles  procurable  at  MosamhiquCy  with  directions  how  to  chitse  than. 

AMBER 

Is  sometimes  to  be  met  with  on  the  East  Coast  of  Africa ; it  is  generally  in  irregular  masses  of  a 
yellowish  brown  colour:  it  should  be  chosen  in  fine  hard  pieces,  clean  and  transparent:  the  smell  when 
rubbed,  fragrant  and  pleasant;  it  should  also  attract  straws,  hairs,  and  other  light  substances.  That  which 
is  opaque  and  foul,  should  be  rejected. 

The  permanent  duty  on  amber  is  Is.  per  lb.  and  the  war  duty  4d.  per  lb. 

AMBERGRIS 

Is  a concrete  substance,  of  an  ash  colour,  soft  and  tenacious  like  wax,  marked  with  blackish  and  yellow 
spots:  it  is  generally  in  solid  masses,  irregular,  and  sometimes  round,  being,  when  broken,  rougli  and  uneven, 
and  frequently  containing  pieces  of  shells,  and  other  substances.  It  is  found  on  various  parts  of  the  Hast 
Coast  of  Africa,  and  the  islands  in  the  eastern  seas,  sometimes  in  very  large  masses,  though  generally 
small.  In  1693,  the  Dutch  gave  the  King  of  Tidore  1 1,000  rix  dollars  for  a piece,  which  weighed  \S2\hs. 
measuring  5 feet  8 inches  long,  and  2 feet  2 inches  thick. 

This  article,  being  vciy  valuable,  is  often  adulterated;  great  care  is  thenTore  requisite  in  purchasing  it. 
The  best  is  ash-coloured,  intermingled  with  yellowdsh  or  blackish  veins  and  spots;  it  has  scarcely  any  par- 
ticular taste,  and  very  little  smell,  unless  heated  or  much  handled,  when  it  is  very  fragi  ant  and  agreeable 
to  most  people:  it  melts  without  affording  either  bubble  or  scum,  when  exposed  to  the  (lame  of  a candle 
in  a silver  spoon : it  swims  in  water;  and  if  the  point  of  a knite  heated,  has  asmull  piece  laid  upon  it,  and  it 
melts  entirely  away,  without  leaving  any  dross  or  impuritie.s,  it  is  good.  The  Chinese  try  whether  it  is  genuine, 
by  scraping  some  of  it  very  fine  upon  boiling  hot  tea ; if*  genuine,  it  will  dissolve  and  difiuse  generally, 
which  the  adulterated  will  not.  That  which  is  all  black,  or  entirely  while,  is  good  for  little,  as  is  the 
smooth,  uniform,  and  apparently  pure,  these  being  commonly  factitious. 

This  commodity  is  principally  used  by  the  perfumers,  and  when  good,  will  sometimes  sell  for  30s. 
per  ounce;  but  is  frequently  not  more  than  half  that  price. 

COLUMBO  ROOT 

Is  a steple  export  of  the  Portuguese  from  Mosambique ; and  from  the  ejuantity  produced,  it  is  remark- 
able that  the  place  of  its  growth  should  have  been  so  long  doubtful  in  Europe.  It  is  never  cultivated, 
but  grows  naturally,  and  in  great  abundance  in  the  thick  forests  on  the  coast  about  Mosambique, 
and  inland  about  fifteen  or  twenty  miles.  It  is  in  great  estimation  among  all  the  Africans,  even  far 
removed  from  the  Portuguese  settlements,  for  the  cure  of  dysentery,  and  as  a remedy  for  almost  all 
disorderi. 

Columbo  root  is  imported  in  circular  pieces^  from  half  an  inch  to  3 inches  in  diameter,  ami  of  various 
thicknesses,  generally  thin,  from  i to  i of  an  inch  thick;  the  bark  is  wrinkled  and  tliick,  of  a brownish 
colour  without,  and  a brightish  yeUow  within;  the  pith  is  spongy,  yellowish,  and  slightly  stri[)ed;  when 
fresh,  it  has  a smell  rather  aromatic;  it  is  disagreeably  bitter,,  and  slightly  pungent  to  the  taste,  somewhat 
resembling  mustard  that  has  been  too  long  kept.  Chuse  the  largest  pieces,  fresh,  and  of  a good  colour, 
as  free  from  worms  as  possible,  from  which  it  is  seldom  quite  free;  rejecting  that  which  is  small  and  broken. 
The  best  mode  of  packing  is  in  cases,  filling  the  interstices  with  fine  dry  sand. 

•Tho  freight  of  Columbo  root  is  calculated  at  16  cwt.  to  the  ton.  The  present  duties,  which  are  payable 
.||iy  the  purchaser,  are  £6  12s.  per  cwt.  permanent  duty,  and  £l  17s.  id.  war  duty,  making  in  the  whole 
£7  9s.  id.  per  cwt. 


COWllIES—ELEPHANTS’  TEETH. 


(i2 


The  following  are  tlie  quantities  sold  at  the  East  India  sales  for  five ) ears,  1804?  to  1808  inclusive,  with 
tlic  amount  of  the  sales,  and  the  average  price  per  cwt. 


Year*. 

^ March  Sale, 

September  Sale 

Aver,  per  ('wl. 

Cwt. 

£ 

Cwt 

Cwt 

£ 

I 

.f 

f/. 

1804 

43 

137 

43 

137 

4 

3 

9 

1805 

94 

194 

51 

131 

145 

325 

2 

2 

10 

ISOfi 

18 

29 

125 

208 

141 

237 

1 

13 

1 

1807 

7 

7 

51 

64 

58 

71 

1 

4 

6 

1808 

— 

— 1 

— 

— 

— 

— 

— 

COWRIES. 

These  small  shells,  which  pass  current  at  Bengal,  and  other  parts  of  India,  and  of  which  considerable 
quantities  used  to  be  imported  into  Europe  for  tlie  slave  trade,  are  met  with  among  the  islands  on  the  East 
Coast  of  Africa,  and  at  the  Maldives.  They  are  an  article  of  trade  at  Bombay,  where  they  are  bought  by 
the  Surat  candy  of  7 cwt.  and  sold  by  tale  40  to  50  puns  for  a rupee,  each  pun  80  cowries.  They  should 
be  chosen  for  the  Europe  market,  small,  clean,  and  white,  with  a beautiful  gloss  on  them,  rejecting  those  which 
are  yedlow,  large,  and  without  lustre.  The  freight  of  cowries  is  calculated  at  20  cwt.  to  the  ton.  The 
permanent  duty  is  £53  I6s.  3d.  per  cent,  and  the  war  duty  £17  I8s.  9d  making  in  the  whole 
£71  15«.  per  cent,  on  the  sale  amount*  There  have  been  but  few  sold  at  the  East  India  sales  since  September 
sale,  180J,  when  1,418  cwt.  were  disposed  of,  the  sale  value  of  which  was  ^3,626. 


EEEPITANTS’  TEETH, 


Or  rather  tusks,  of  which  each  animal  has  two  pointing  forwards,  and  bending  a little  upwards,  are 
of  a yellowish,  brownish,  and  sometimes  a dark  brown  colour  on  the  outside,  internally  white,  hollow 
towards  the  root,  and  so  far  as  was  inserted  in  the  jaw,  of  a blackish  brown  colour;  they  are  procured  from 
both  coasts  of  the  continent  of  Africa,  from  various  parts  of  Indio,  Siam,  &c.  and  should  be  chosen  larger 
straight,  and  white,  without  Haws,  not  very  hollow  in  the  stump,  but  solid  and  thick.  At  Surat  and  Cutely, 
the  Mosanibiqiie  teeth  are  preferred  to  any  others,  and  are  sold  in  the  following  manner: 


Teeth  weighing  above  16  seers,  or  151bs.  avoirdupois,  by  the  maundof  40  seers,  or  1 maund 
Ditto  . . . from  16  to  10  seers  each  . . . ditto  ....  60  . . 1|  ditto 

Ditto  . . . from  10  to  5 ditto ditto  ....  80  . . 2 ditto 

And  all  under  5 seers  each ditto  ....  160  . . 4 ditto. 


In  India  the  hoUow  part  ot  the  teeth  is  frequently  sawed  off  to  make  bangles  or  ornaments  for  the 
women  s arms;  therefore  the  stumps  are  sometimes  to  be  purchased  very  reasonably ; generally  the  largest 
sizes  are  very  dear  in  all  parts  of  India. 


The  trade  in  London  divide  them  as  follows : the  prices  vary  according  to  the  demand. 

1st  sort  ....  weighing'701bs.  and  upwards <£*25  to  30  per^wt 

56to701bs 22  to  25  ditto, 

37to56 ,8to82  ditto. 

28  to  37 IS  to  18  ditto. 

; 18to2S 13  to  15  ditto. 

All  under  ISIbs.  are  denominated  scrireUoes,  and  sell  for  . . . . 10  to  12  ditto. 


The  largest  teeth  are  said  to  come  from  Africa,  and  are  most  esteemed,  being  of  a closer  texture, 
and  less  liable  to  turn  yellow  than  those  from  the  East  Indies.  In  purchasing  elephants’  teeth,  those  that  aie 


ELEPHANTS’  HAIR— HIPPOPOTAMUS  TEETH— TORTOISE-SHELL.  63 

very  crooked,  hollow,  and  broke#  at  the  ends,  or  cracked  and  decayed  in  the  inside,  slioulil  be  rejected,  and 
care  taken  that  lead,  or  any  other  substance  has  not  been  i^oured  into  the  hollow.  The  fVei^lit  of  elephants’ 
teeth  in  the  Company’s  ships  is  rated  at  16  cwt.  to  the  ton.  The  permanctit  duty  thereon  is  £2  Kh.  per 
cwt.  and  the  war  duty  16s.  per  cwt.  The  importation  of  elephants’  teeth  into  Great  Rritain  for 
twelve  years,  1788  to  1799  inclusive,  was  18,914' cwt.  equal  to  1576  cwt.  annually. 

The  following  are  the  quantities  sold  at  the  East  India  sales  for  five  years,  1804*  to  1808  inclusive, 
with  the  amount  of  the  sales,  and  the  average  price  per  cwt. 


Years,  j 

March 

Sale. 

[ .September  Sale.  | 

Total.  Aver  pcrCwi 

Cwt. 

£ 

Cwt. 

1 i 

('wt. 

1 1 

£ 

» li. 

1804 

206 

5,430 

_ 

— 

206 

1 5,130'2(r 

1805 

24 

780 

161 

3,979 

185 

4,759' 

24 

14  7 

1806 

71 

2,351 

291 

8,67a 

362 

10,92:1 

30 

3 6 

1807 

56 

1,334 

149 

3,127 

205 

4,461 

21 

14  3 

1808 

— 

— 

169 

3,722 

169 

3,722 

22 

0 6 

ELEPHANTS’  HAIR. 

The  hairs  which  grow  on  the  tail  of  the  elephant,  arc  stilF  and  remarkably  smooth,  of  a glossy  black 
colour,  14  or  15  inches  long,  and  of  the  size  of  small  iron  wire;  they  are  not  hollow,  but  of  a horny  nature 
throughout  their  whole  substance;  they  are  very  tough,  and  will  in  general  bear  to  he  tied  or  doubled 
without  breaking,  for  which  reason  they  would  be  useful  for  making  beaids  to  fish  liooks,  though  some 
of  them  are,  on  the  contrary,  very  brittle;  the  greater  part  are  rather  Hat  tliaii  round,  and  make  neat 
ornaments  for  ladies’  rings,  broaches,  &c. 

HIPPOPOTAMUS  TEETH. 

Africa  is  the  only  part  of  the  world  which  produces  the  hippopotamus.  The  teeth  are  long,  crooked, 
and  sharp,  like  the  tusks  of  a boar,  and  are  sometimes  met  with  12  or  14  inches  long,  weighing  8 or  lOlbs:  they 
are  of  a harder  and  whiter  substance  than  those  of  the  elephant,  and  do  not  turn  yellow  so  soon  Dentists 
prefer  them  on  account  of  these  qualities,  for  artificial  teeth.  Tliey  should  be  chosen  large,  straight,  free  from 
cracks  or  flaws;  those  under  two  pounds  each  are  of  little  value.  The  hide  of  this  animal  is  thicker  than  that 
of  the  rhinoceros,  and  makes  excellent  whips,  which  after  a little  use  become  very  pliable. 

TORTOISE-SHELL 

Is  the  shell  of  the  testaceous  animal,  called  a tortoise,  of  which  there  arc  two  kinds,  the  land  and  sea 
tortoise;  the  sea  tortoise  is  again  of  several  kinds,  but  it  is  only  the  hawk’s  hill  which  produces  this 
beautiful  shell,  so  much  admired  in  all  parts  of  the  world.  Its  flesh  is  in  no  estimation ; the  plates  of  the 
shell,  which  are  far  stronger,  thicker,  and  cleaner  than  in  any  other  kind,  constituting  the  sole  value  of  the 
animal. 

The  shell  of  the  tortoise  is  somewhat  of  a Iieart-shaped  form,  or  pointed  at  the  extremity,  and  con- 
sists of  thirteen  divisions  or  plates,  surrounded  by  twenty-five  marginal  pieces ; of  the  former,  there  are 
four  plates  on  each  side,  and  five  on  the  back;  these  last  are  bent  in  the  centre;  of  the  side  jdates,  (he  (no 
middle  ones  are  the  most  valuable,  being  larger  and  thicker  than  the  others;  those  on  the  back,  with  the 
marginal  ones,  are  denominated  Ao^  in  the  trade,  and  are  of  comparatively  little  value. 

Tortoise-shell  should  be  chosen  in  large  thick  plates,  free  from  cracks,  carbuncles,  or  barnacles,  which 
are  frequently  attached  to  them;  the  more  clear,  transparent,  and  variegated,  the  more  esteemed;  the 
crooked,  broken,  and  small  plates  should  be  rejected.  There  is  a peculiar  kind,  said  to  lie  met  with  at  the 
Maidive  Islands,  which  is  superior  to  all  others,  being  very  dark  coloured,  smooth,  and  beautifully  varie- 
gated, and  having  frequently  many  natural  figures  in  it. 


QUERIMBA-MACALOE-MONGALLOU  RIVER. 


0i 


The  freight  on  torto!se.9heU  is  calculated  at  the  rate  of  20  cwt.  to  # ton,  and  tlie  duty  payable  by 
the  purcliaser  iii  as  follows: 


^Vdr  Duty,  Permanent  Duty. 

Unmanufactured 0 10  0 per  lb,  . . . £ 0 2 6 per  lb. 

Manufactured 17  1 8 per  cent.  . . 51  5 0 per  cent. 


The  following  are  tlie  quantities  sold  at  the  East  India  sales  for  five  years,  1804  to  1808  inclusive, 
with  the  amount  of  the  sales,  and  the  average  price  per  lb. 


1 September  Sale.  j 

[ Total.  1 

Aver,  per 

11). 

JUSSSsUI 

f 

Pouilfl'i.  1 

1 £ 

Pounds. 

£ 

i ti. 

(i 

mmm 

.391 

... 

— 

600 

391 

0 15 

8 

1805 

400 

337 

10,673 

11,524 

11,073 

11,861 

1 1 

5 

1806 

— i 

9,264 

9,477 

9,264 

9,477 

1 0 

6 

1807 

377 

32G 

1,171 

1,173 

1,548 

1,499 

0 19 

4 

1808 

57 

40 

13,671 

11,386 

13,728 

11,426 

0 18 

0 

At  the  Cape  of  Good  Hope,  a small  land  tortoise  is  met  with,  which  is  very  common,  the  shells  of 
oome  of  them  are  veiy  beautiful,  not  exceeding  3 inches  in  diameter:  and  when  made  into  snulf  boxes,  are 
much  esteemed. 


QUERIMBA 

Is  the  name  given  to  a chain  of  islands  extending  as  far  as  Cape  Delgado  along  the  coast.  That  called 
Querimba,  which  gives  its  name  to  the  whole,  is  in  latitude  about  12®  20  South,  and  longitude  40®  68' 
East,  being  about  4 or  6 miles  long,  and  the  most  considerable  of  the  group.  It  may  be  known  by  palm* 
trees  on  its  north  point,  and  a white  sandy  beach,  with  a lai^e  house  wliich  serves  as  a fort.  These  islands 
were  formerly  inhabited  by  Arabs;  but  the  Portuguese,  in  their  eai'ly  voyages  into  these  seas,  not  only 
plundered  them,  under  the  pretence  of  their  being  MahomeUns,  but  murdered  them  all,  without  sparing 
either  age  or  sex.  They  remained  uninhabiteil  a long  time,  tiU  at  length  some  Portuguese  from  Mosambique 
and  Goa  setUed  upon  them,  and  brought  slaves  to  till  the  ground,  and  defend  them.  On  Querimba  there  are 
about  30  well-built  houses,  not  contiguous  to  each  otlier,  but  scattered  like  so  many  farmhouses.  The 
church  stands  in  the  centre  of  them,  and  mass  is  said  by  a Priest  appointed  from  Goa. 

The  Arabs  occasionally  caU  here  to  dispose  of  piece-goods  and  a few  other  articles,  for  which  they  receive 
in  return  cowries,  tortoiseshell,  corn,  and  provisions. 

MACALOE. 

This  bay  or  harbour  is  situated  about  18  leagues  to  the  northward  of  Querimba,  and  is  formed  between 
the  main  land  and  the  Island  Macaloe.  Should  a ship  wish  to  stop  here,  it  will  be  necessary  to  make  the 
signal  for  a pilot.  On  the  north  side  of  the  jwint  on  the  main,  is  the  town,  directly  opposite  the 
Macaloe,  where  the  Sultan  resides,  and  where  vessels  that  trade  to  this  place,  anchor  in  7 or  8 fathoms 
good  holding  ground,  mud  and  sand.  '* 

MONGALLOU  RIVER. 

This  place  is  to  the  N.  W.  of  Cape  Delgado,  in  latitude  10®  7'  South,  and  is  not  easily  distinguished. 
The  entrance  of  the  river  is  about  a cable's  length  wide  between  the  sands  at  its  entrance.  It  Is  difficult  of 
access,  but  has  from  9 to  11  fathoms  in  the  fair  channel  up  to  the  anchorage  above  the  town,  which  is  a 
little  within  the  oorth  point  of  the  river.  A considerable  trade  is  carried  on  here  by  the  Arabs  in  slaves, 
el^hants’  teeth,  &c.  Provisions  are  to  be  procured  in  abundance,  likewise  fire-wood,  but  good  water 
with  difficulty.  * 


LINDY  niVER-QUILOA— ZANZIBAR. 


f)5 


LINDY  RIVER 

Is  about  6 leagues  from  the  former,  is  largo,  and  easy  of  access,  having  many  villages  around,  the 
principal  of  which  is  Lindy,  on  the  northern  side.  It  is  said  to  be  an  excellent  liarbour,  where  provisions, 
wood,  and  water,  may  be  easily  procured. 


QUILOA. 

This  town  is  situated  on  an  island,  in  latitude  8°  41'  South,  and  longitude  39®  47  East.  The  island 
is  about  6 miles  long  from  North  to  South.  The  harbour  is  between  the  island  and  the  main,  and  is  ca- 
pable of  receiving  ships  of  any  size,  where  they  lie  secure  in  all  weathers.  The  town  is  reprcst'nlcd  as 
large  and  well  built ; the  houses  of  stone,  two  or  three  stories  high,  having  terraced  roofs.  The  streets 
are  very  narrow:  on  one  side  of  the  town  is  the  fort,  where  the  Governor  resides;  it  is  strong,  and  sur- 
rounded by  a ditch.  Quiloa  was  first  visited  by  the  Portuguese  in  1500,  who  were  kindly  received  by  the 
reigning  Prince;  but  in  consequence  of  the  character  given  of  them  by  the  Arab  merchants  frequenting 
the  port,  the  intercourse  with  them  was  broken  off;  and  they  were  refused  to  trade  in  his  dominions;  they 
therefore  proceeded  to  India,  attacking  all  the  Arab  ships  they  met  with  in  their  way,  in  revenge  for 
the  affront  they  had  received  from  those  of  Quiloa.  In  1505  the  l*ortuguese,  under  D’Almeyda,  attacked 
and  took  the  town,  built  a strong  fort,  and  left  a garrison  of  5(W)  men,  who  were  afterwards  driven 
out  by  the  Arabs;  since  which  period  it  has  remained  in  their  hands. 

IMPORTS  AND  EXPORTS. 

The  trade  of  this  port,  which  is  extensive,  is  carried  on  by  the  Muscat  Arabs;  they  import  piece- 
goods  of  various  kinds,  sugar,  arrack,  spices,  &c.  and  receive  in  return,  slaves  and  elephants'  teeth.  The 
place  is  seldom  visited  by  Europeans,  as  the  inhabitants  are  in  general  considered  hostile  to  thoin. 

ZANZIBAR 

Is  the  largest  island  on  this  part  of  the  coast,  and  on  sailing  along,  it  has  a most  beautiful  appearance; 
its  north  end  is  in  latitude  6°  20'  South,  and  longitude  39®  40'  East.  It  was  first  visited  by  the  Portu- 
guese in  1503,  when  they  took  a number  of  vessels  belonging  to  the  place,  whereupon  in  retaliation  the 
Kiitg  made  an  attempt  upon  the  Portuguese  ships ; but  being  defeated,  peace  was  concluded,  the  King 
agreeing  to  pay  tribute.  In  1500,  the  inhabitants  having  negleclcd  to  pay  tlie  tribute,  the  town  was 
attacked,  plundered,  and  destroyed  by  the  Portuguese,  The  English  first  visited  it  in  1591. 

There  are  two  harbours,  the  outer  and  inner,  both  fit  for  receiving  large  ships.  His  Majesty’s  ships 
Leopard  and  Orestes  were  here  in  1799  for  refreshments;  the  following  are  the  observations  then  made. 

‘‘  Got  a pilot  on  board,  and  ran  close  into  the  inner  harbour  at  low  water,  through  a very  narrow 
channel,  scarce  three  quarters  of  a mile  wide,  and  anchored  about  a mile  from  the  town,  Tlie  fort 
saluted  with  three  guns,  as  did  a ship  under  Moorish  colours,  hound  to  Muscat.  The  town  is  composed 
“ of  some  few  good  houses;  the  rest  are  huts  of  straw  mat,  which  are  very  neat.,  The  latitude  of  the 
town  is  6®  6 South,  and  longitude  39®  33  East,  The  inhabitants  made  every  profession  of  serving  us ; 
“ but  they  were  so  slow  and  indolent,  that  we  had  but  little  assistance  from  them  by  boats.  We  completed 
“ the  water  within  a few  tons  with  the  ship's  boats;  by  watching  the  tides,  you  get  plenty  of  water  at 

K 


MOMHAS— MEIJNDA. 


(U> 

Fresli  Water  River,  wjrKli  is  about  lour  miles  to  the  eastward  of*  tlie  ancliornn;e ; yon  roll  your  casks 
“ some  (listanee  from  the  beucli,  and  bah'  out  of  the  stream;  but  at  hi;;h  water  it  is  ratluT  brackish;  it  is 
“ therefore  advisable  to  fill  with  the  fallini^  tide,  and  take  them  off  with  the  flood.  There  are  several 
“ wells  in  and  about  the  town,  but  they  will  not  allow  the  water  to  he  taken  from  some  of  them  from 
“ religious  motives.  They  will  supply  you  with  plenty  of  wood. 

‘‘  Here  you  can  obtain  many  kinds  of  refreshments ; hut  as  the  Governor  made  a monopoly  of  the  sale 
“ of  all  kinds  of  articles,  w'epaid  exorbitantly  dear  for  them:  the  inhuhitants  sell  their  things  much  cheaper* 
“ We  got  very  fine  bullocks,  goats,  poultry,  rice,  cocoa  nut  oil,  &:c.  The  fruits  are  very  delicious,  and 
they  have  all  kinds.  There  is  good  fishing  here,  and  turtle  is  oeeasionally  taken,  'fhe  small  trading 
“ vessels  from  IVIuseat,  and  the  Red  Sea,  aft('r  discharging  their  cargoes,  which  are  chiefly  dates,  always 
“ dismantle,  and  move  into  an  inner  harbour  at  the  back  of*  the  town,  and  wait  the  return  of  the  monsoon. 
“ IMiis  island  is  tributary  to  the  Imauni  of  Muscat,  and  the  (Tovernor  is  appointed  by  him.  They  have  a 
“ grout  trade  with  the  Fieiieh  from  the  Mauritius,  in  slaves  and  coffee,  and  many  of  them  talk  that  lan- 
‘‘  guage  in  conseipieiiee.  I'lie  inhabitants  profess  the  Mahometan  religion.  In  their  modi's  of  traffic  they 
“ are  very  singular;  a guinea  is  of  no  \alue,  but  an  anchor  button,  or  a button  of  any  kind,  is  a gem  in  the 
“ eyes  of  tlu'  lower  class  of  people;  an  instanei'  occurred  on  board  the  Leopard,  where  they  refused  a gui- 
nea  which  v\as  offered  in  change  for  some  fowls,  and  amarine’s  button  put  an  end  to  the  bargain.  They 
always  go  armed,  and  apjiear  very  timid,  exc(‘pt  wlieii  a cousiderahle  number  are  together.’’ 

MOMRAS. 

This  port  is  formed  hy  an  arm  of  the  sea.  Into  which  fall  several  small  rivers,  and  this  narrow  arm, 
or  iidet,  extends  round  Moinhas  island,  which  is  situated  inside  of  the  two  points  that  form  the  entrance. 
M’he  town  and  fort  arc  on  the  island,  a little  within  the  harbour,  in  latitude  about  4'^  4 South,  and  longitude 
4<)°  2 East.  The  town  is  large,  and  many  of  the  liouses  handsome  and  well  built;  the  streets  are  straight 
and  narrow;  the  fort  is  strong,  and  well  furnished  with  cannon.  The  Portuguese,  under  Vasco  de  Gama, 
arrived  here  April  7,  1197.  In  1507,  Almeida,  on  MS  way  to  India,  sent  his  vessels  to  sound  the  harbour;  they 
were  fired  upon  from  the  shore,  in  revenge  for  which,  he  burnt  the  shipping,  landed  his  troops,  plundered  the 
town,  and  reduced  the  greater  pait  of  it  to  ashes.  It  was  afterwards  rebuilt,  hut  plundered  a second  time 
by  D’Acunlia  in  1529,  and  the  fort  which  was  strong,  they  took  possession  of,  and  retained  till  about 
1(531,  when  the  King  of  the  country  having  a quarrel  with  them,  retook  it  hy  storm,  and  put  all  the 
Christians  in  tlie  country  to  death.  Since  that  period,  few  European  vessels  visit  this  part  of  the  coast, 
more  particularly  Mombas,  where  the  Government  has  in  general  endeavoured  to  allure  and  seize  the  Eu- 
ropean ships  that  touched  here  for  provisions.  In  the  event  of  a ship  being  in  want  of  water  or  other  arti- 
cles, she  ought  to  proceed  to  Zanzibar,  which  is  preferable  to  any  other  port  on  the  coast,  and  there  is  less 
chance  of  treacheiy,  it  being  under  the  government  of  Muscat,  and  more  civilized.  There  is  a great  trade 
carried  on  here,  and  the  place  is  much  f’requented  by  Arab  vessels  from  the  neighbouring  places. 

MELINDA. 

This  town  is  in  latitude  about  South,  and  longitude  4P2  East;  it  is  large,  and  had  formerly  a 
number  of  Portuguese  churches,  and  other  large  buildings,  which  are  now  in  ruins.  The  town  is  repre- 
sented as  being  large,  the  houses  built  of  stone,  many  of  them  handsome,  which,  with  the  numerous 
mosques,  look  well  from  the  sea.  The  place  of  anchorage  is  at  a considerable  distance  from  the  town;  the 
coast  liere  is  very  shallow,  notwithstanding  which,  it  is  a place  of  considerable  traffic.  Vessels  from  the 


PATTE— JUBA— BRAVA. 


67 


Red  Sea,  Persia,  and  the  northern  parts  of  India  frequent  the  place,  the  trade  with  the  Interior  being  very 
brisk.  Vasco  de  Gama  visited  this  place,  Apnl  13,  1498,  where  he  was  kindly  received,  and  furnished 
with  pilots  to  proceed  to  India,  lii  a few  years  afterwards,  in  consequence  of  some  olfenee  taken  by  th(! 
Portuguese,  they  plundered  and  destroyed  the  town;  it  was,  however,  rebuilt,  and  made  tributary  to  them, 
and  they  remained  here  till  expelled  by  the  Arabs,  about  the  year  1698. 

PROVISIONS  AND  REFRESHMENTS. 

Cattle,  and  many  other  articles  of  provision  are  here  plentiful,  and  reasonable ; but  as  the  trade  ii 
carried  on  in  native  vessels,  Europeans  seldom  visit. 

PATTE. 

This  town  is  situated  at  tlie  west  end  of  an  island  of  the  same  name,  in  latitude  2^  2 South,  and  Ion- 
gitude  41®  24f'  East;  it  is  surrounded  with  shoals,  and  in  the  event  of  a ship  stopping  here,  it  will  be  neces- 
sary to  wait  for  a pilot  to  take  her  to  the  anchorage,  which  is  six  miles  to  the  southward  of  the  town.  The 
place  was  visited  by  the  Portuguese  about  1.503;  here  they  settled  a factory,  which  enabled  them  to  carry 
on  a considerable  trade  in  India  goods,  taking  in  return,  cowries,  elephants'  teeth,  &c.  About  1092,  the 
Arabs  expelled  them  from  hence,  and  prohibited  commerce  with  all  other  nations;  it  is  therefore  seldom 
visited  by  Europeans. 


JUBA. 

This  town  is  situated  on  an  eminence  near  the  side  of  Rogues  River,  in  latitude  0®  12  South, 
and  longitude  43®  2 East.  It  is  composed  of  a few  huts.  The  river  has  a bur,  and  the  surf  beats 
high  upon  it;  boats  may  pass  over  it  at  high  water  in  the  fair  season,  but  the  perfidy  of  the  natives  should 
exclude  European  ships  touching  at  this  place.  Ilis  Majesty's  .ships  Leopard  and  Orestes  before  men- 
tioned,  anchored  here  in  1798,  expecting  to  procure  a supply  of  water:  two  of  their  boats  upset  in  the 
surf,  and  although  the  natives  at  first  appeared  in  a supplicating  manner,  they  soon  collected  in  num- 
bers, and  assaulting  the  boats'  crews,  killed  several  men,  and  it  was  with  great  difficulty  the  remainder 
were  saved. 


BRAVA. 

This  town  is  situated  close  to  the  sea  in  latitude  1®  12'  North,  and  longitude  4i®  10  East.  Near 
it  are  several  small  islands  which  break  off  tlie  sea,  and  there  is  on  one  of  them  a pagoda  or  tower,  resem- 
bling a light-house.  Inside  these  islands  the  small  vessels  lie  sheltered,  and  ships  anchor  outside  in  7 or  8 
fathoms.  In  1.503  tliis  jilace  became  tributary  to  the  Portuguese,  in  consec|uence  of  their  having  captured 
a number  of  tlie  principal  inhabitants  in  sonic  vessels  at  sea,  and  who  agreed  to  pay  annually  .500  nietigals 
of  gold.  In  1508  the  inhabitants  having  failed  in  the  payment  of  the  tribute,  the  Portuguese  attacked, 
and  took  the  place  by  storm,  committed  the  greatest  cruelties  upon  the  inlnahitants,  and  plunilered  and 
burnt  the  city,  which  was  then  described  as  large,  and  a place  of  great  trade;  at  prt*s(*iit,  it  apjiears  well 
built,  but  being  in  posses.sion  of  the  Arabs,  it  is  seldom  visited  by  jMiropeans.  Cattle,  and  goats  arc  plentiful 
here,  and  in  the  neighbourhood. 


K 2 


68 


MAGADOXA— BARBORA— ZEILA. 


MAGADOXA 

• 

Is  the  principal  town  on  this  part  of  the  coast  of  Africa;  it  is  in  latitude  2®  8'  North,  and  longitude 
46°  30'  East;  it  is  easily  known  by  three  remarkable  mosques  in  the  middle  of  it,  resembling  towers. 
There  is  a reef  of  coral  rocks  fronting  the  town,  having  a sandy  beach  inside  of  it.  Vasco  de  Gama,  on 
his  return  from  India,  saw  this  town,  Feb.  2,  1499,  but  did  not  land.  It  is  described  ‘‘  appearing  very 
‘‘  large  and  handsome,  surrounded  with  walls,  and  in  the  middle  a great  palace,  that  stood  very  high.” 
Magadoxa  is  the  only  place  on  this  coast  that  resisted  the  arms  of  the  Portuguese  with  effect,  as  it  does  not 
appear  they  were  ever  able  to  make  an  impression  upon  it.  Of  all  the  conquests  which  do  so  much  credit  to 
their  valour,  and  so  little  to  their  policy,  Mosambique  is  the  principal  and  almost  only  possession  which 
has  survived  the  wreck  of  their  empire  on  the  East  Coast  of  Africa,  and  from  which  they  have  been  expelled 
by  the  natives,  without  the  aid  of  any  European  power. 

The  inhabitants  are  hostile  to  Europeans.  In  1700,  the  Albemarle  East  Indiaman  anchored  off  the 
town,  and  sent  her  boat  on  shore,  which  was  seized  by  the  inhabitants,  and  they  fired  on  the  long  boat 
whilst  endeavouring  to  open  a communication  for  the  recovery  of  it. 

Between  Magadoxa  and  tlie  north-easternmost  extremity  of  Africa,  Cape  Guardafui,  which  is  in  lati- 
tude 11®  ,50'  North,  and  longitude  ,51°  32'  East,  there  are  no  ports  visited  by  Europeans.  On  the  coast 
between  Cape  Guardafui  and  the  Straits  of  Babclmandel,  are  Barbora  and  Zeila. 

BARBORA. 

This  town  is  situated  on  an  island  at  the  bottom  of  a bay,  in  latitude  about  10®  45'  North,  and  lon- 
gitude 4*6°  15  East.  It  is  a place  of  considerable  trade,  and  has  been  alw^ays  a kind  of  rival  in  commerce  to 
Zeila,  and  a great  fair  is  annually  held  hen*  from  October  till  April,  the  caravans  from  the  interior  coming 
in  during  that  period,  'fhe  first  is  uhvaj^s  the  largest;  it  is  said  to  bring  down  15,000bahars  of  gum  arabic,  each 
320 lbs.  also  all  the  myrrh  that  is  consumed,  about  2,000  bahars;  the  first  produces  about  15  dollars,  and 
the  latter  22  dollars  per  huhar.  Olibunum  is  chiefly  produced  on  the  coast  between  Barbora  and  Cape 
Guardafui;  it  is  exported  from  a small  port  near  Cape  Felix,  in  Arab  vessels,  and  is  usually  sold  at  about  12 
dollars  the  baliar.  A small  proportion  of  these  articles  finds  its  way  to  Bombay,  and  from  thence  to  Eu- 
rope; the  larger  proportion  goes  up  the  Red  Sea  to  Egypt,  and  some  is  consumed  in  Arabia  and  Persia. 
From  the  fair  at  Barbora,  Arabia  draws  considerable  quantities  of  ghee,  a great  number  of  slaves,  horses, 
mules,  and  asses,  the  returns  for  which  arc  made  in  India  piece-goods,  generally  sold  at  a great  profit. 
Thera  are  many  Banians  from  Mocha,  Aden,  and  various  parts  of  India,  who  carry  on  a trade  with  their 
respi‘ctlve  ports.  Many  chiefs  in  the  interior  send  down  caravans  of  their  own  to  purchase,  with  gold, 
elephants'^  teeth,  &e.  the  produce  and  manufactures  of  India. 

Barbora  was  taken  by  the  Portuguese  fleet  in  1517,  and  plundered  and  burnt:  they  expected  to  find 
a considerable  spoil  in  it,  hut  were  disappointed,  the  inhabitants  having  had  sufficient  time  to  convey  them- 
selves and  their  most  valuable  effects  to  the  continent. 

. ZEILA,  OR  ZEYLA. 

This  town  is  situated  at  the  bottom  of  a large  bay,  in  latitude  10°  15'  North,  and  longitude  about 
44®  0 East.  It  was  formerly  of  considerable  importance;  and  previous  to  the  arrival  of  the  Portuguese 
in  these  seas,  it  was  the  place  through  which  the  greatest  part  of  the  merchandise  that  was  carried  into 
the  interior  of  Abyssinia,  commonly  passed. 


ZEILA. 


69 


In  IMG  the  Portuguese  fleet,  having  failed  in  uii  attempt  made  upon  Judda,  in  the  Rod  Sea,  came  to 
this  port,  which  they  found  unprovided  with  tlic  proper  means  of  defence;  it  was  tiu'retbre  easily  taken, 
plundered,  and  burnt,  but  was  soon  rebuilt,  though  not  so  well  as  before,  when  in  the  Portuguese 
again  took  and  utterly  destroyed  it.  Zeila,  notwithstanding,  carries  on  a considerable  trade  with  various 
parts  tf  the  East  Coast  of  Africa,  Mocha,  and  other  ports;  their  imports  consisting  of 


Coarse  piece  goods. 

Cardamums. 

Iron,  in  bars. 

Cutlery. 

Dates. 

Ironmongery. 

Cornelian  beads. 

Glass  ware. 

Lead. 

Spices. 

Sugar  & sugar  candy 


Tin. 


and  various  other  Asiatic  and  European  commodities.  The  returns  are  principally  made  in 

Elephants’  teeth.  I Cum  Arabic.  Olibanum.  i Rhinoceros’  horns. 

Gold  dust.  I Myrrh.  Ostrich  feathers  | Slaves. 


and  a few  other  articles,  the  produce  of  Abyssinia,  and  the  neighbouring  countries. 

Zeila  is  seldom  visited  by  Europeans.  In  1800  one  of  His  Majesty’s  ships  anchored  near  llie  town. 
Having  an  Arab  linguist  from  Mocha  on  board,  a treaty  was  entered  into  with  the  chier  to  supply  the  troops 
going  on  the  Red  Sea  Expedition  (then  in  transports  at  Mocha),  with  sheep,  which  are  lu  re  very  cheap. 
Should  a merchant  ship  touch  here  for  refreshments,  it  will  be  retpiisite  to  guard  against  treachery,  as  the 
disposition  of  the  natives  of  this  place,  and  along  the  coast  from  hence  to  Cape  Guardafui,  is  but  little 
known. 


CHAPTER  VII. 


Islands  off  the  East  Coast  of  Africa. 


Mahgascar;  its  Exknl~~Sl.  Augmlm's  Bay—Artichs  of  Tradt—Mode  of  salting  Pmmons^Mwmndava 
Bcmbatook  Buy— New  Mnssalego—Passandam—Port  Dauphin— Manouro—Tamatave— Foul  Point- 
Si.  Mary's  Island— Ant  ongil  Bay— Ravansera,  a Spice;  Directions  how  to  chuse— Comoro  Islands;  their 
Numiwr— Comoro— Mohilla—Mayotta— Johanna— Imports  and  Exports— Anchorage  Fees,  Presents,  ^c. 
Provisions  and  Refrcshmenls—Socotra — Provisions  and  Refreshment*— Aloes,  their  Kinds,  and  Directions 
how  to  chuse  them. 


MADAGASCAR. 

This  island,  which  is  one  of  the  largest  in  the  world,  extends  from  Cape  St.  Mary,  its  southern  ex- 
tremity,  in  latitude  25°  40  South,  and  longitude  45°  16' East,  in  a N.  N.  E.  direction  to  Cape  Amber, 
its  northern  extremity,  which  is  in  latitude  12°  2'  South ; it  is  about  100  leagues  from  the  coast  of 
Africa,  and  the  .sea  between,  which  is  denominated  the  Mosambique  Channel,  is  much  frequented  by 
ships  proceeding  to  India,  more  particularly  those  bound  to  Bombay. 

Tlie  western  side  of  the  island  contains  many  bays  and  harbours  but  little  known ; the  only  one 
resorted  to  by  the  outward-bound  h'ast  India  Ships,  is 

ST.  AUGUSTINE’S  B.\Y. 

At  the  entrance  of  this  bay,  about  two  miles  from  the  .southern  shore,  is  Sandy  island,  which  is 
in  latitude  2.3°  .39  South,  and  longitude  44°  0 East.  After  passing  it,  and  standing  to  the  eastward, 
you  sec  a high  land  close  to  the  .sea,  on  the  South  side  of  the  bay,  and  another  high  land  in  the  in- 
terior; the  entrance  of  Dartmouth  River  is  then  open  to  you. 

This  part  of  the  island  is  subject  to  the  King  of  Baba,  who  resides  in  a town  built  with  mud,  about 
12  miles  from  St.  Augustine's  Bay.  On  a ship  anchoring,  some  of  the  King's  people  come  off,  whom  they 
call  pursers,  and  who  in  general  adopt  English  names  and  titles,  such  as  Prince  of  Wales,  Duke  of  Kent,  &e. 
Some  small  presents  are  necessary  for  permission  to  procure  provisions,  See.  and  should  the  King  come 
off,  it  will  be  requisite  to  salute  him  on  his  arrival  and  departure. 

This  i.s  an  excellent  place  fur  refreshments,  more  particularly  provisions.  The  bullocks  beuig  large 
and  fat,  weigh  from  6 to  700 lbs.  each;  they  hare  all  a hump  on  the  shoulders  similar  to  the  Indian  cattle# 
They  are  procured  by  barter  for  English  commodities.  The  foUowing  is  an  account  of  the  expence  incurred 
by  a ship's  stay  here,  by  a gentleman  who  visited  the  bay  some  years  since. 


ST.  AUGUSTINE'S  BAY. 


71 


AKTICEES  OF  TRADE. 


Gunpowder. 

Small  looking-glasses. 
Brass  nails. 

Brass  pots. 


Muskets. 
OomiMon  sfissars. 
Razors. 

Tin  tea-kettles. 


Pewter  tankards. 

Iron  pots  ot*'2ui  p;allons, 
Pow(U‘r  horns. 

Flints. 


Glass  beads  of  five  colours,  vtz,  green,  yellow,  white,  transparent,  and  orange.  Airangoes  about  3 
inches  long,  bored,  and  artificial  coral  beads.  Siber  is  in  great  request  among  them  ; they  make  it  into 
bracelets  for  the  women,  and  it  is  in  general  preferred  to  gold. 

On  our  first  arrival  they  asked  8 Spanish  dollars  for  a bullock,  or  8 measures  of  gunpowder,  each  9 
pounds,  or  one  musket ; but  latterly  they  were  purchased  for  2 measures  each,  anil  one  measure  for  a cow, 
and  sometimes  a powder-horn  for  one ; these  horns  should  be  black  and  w hite,  and  the  musket-stocks 
very  brown  ; a fat  sheep  may  be  had  for  a measure  of  powder,  and  two  goats  for  the  saine. 


Summary  of  Goods  exchanged^  ivith  an  Eslimait  of  tfuir  Value, 


Gunpowder  6 barrels  .... 

^34 

2 

6 

4 Cartridges 

0 

18 

0 

26  Muskets 

27 

0 

0 

2 Pistols 

1 

0 

0 

350  Flints 

0 

8 

G 

15  Gallons  brandy 

4 

2 

6 

12  Powder  horns 

0 

18 

0 

100  Musket  balls 

0 

5 

0 

2 Cutlasses 

0 

10 

0 

Small  looking  Glasses  .... 

1 

0 

0 

3 Pair  scissars 

0 

3 

0 

£70 

13 

6 

rp:ceived  in  return. 

47  Bullocks. 

27  dozen  fowls. 

7 Goats. 

B Guinea  hens. 

1 Cask  Lime  Juice. 

25  Pumpkins. 

Plantain  Trees. 

Grass  for  stock. 

Grain  for  poultry. 

Yams  and  sweet  potatoes. 
Limes  and  oranges. 


Of  the  47  head  of  cattle,  the  Shipp’s  crew  and  passengers,  near  ,3(K)  men,  had 

Fresh  provisions  for  9 days,  which  is  about 5000lbs. 

15  Tierces  beef  salted,  which  served  about  1 1 days  . . 4500 

26  Live  cattle  carried  to  sea  ditto  13  ...  . 0000 

Total  33  days’  provisions  15,5001bs. 

which  is  about  a penny  per  pound  for  the  meat,  besides  hides,  suet,  &c. 

A part  of  the  above  enumerated  articles  was  given  as  presents  to  the  King  of  Baba,  tlie  Princes  of  his 

family,  and  his  principal  attendants. 

MODE  OF  SALTING  PROVISIONS. 

The  bullocks  were  killed  in  the  afternoon,  and  cut  up  at  two  in  the  morning,  salted,  and  put  in  casks, 
and  about  noon  taken  out,  placed  on  four  thick  deals  supported  on  casks,  then  four  deals  lai  ^ ® 

meat,  and  large  stones  and  other  heavy  articles  placed  thereon,  to  press  out  the  pickle,  &c.  oi  iree  or 


72  MOROUNDAVA— BEMBATOOK  BAY— NEW  MASSALEGE. 

four  hours;  then  salted,  packed  iii  clean  casks,  and  headed  up.  Boiled  pickle,  with  a little  saltpetre  in  it, 

was,  when  cold,  poured  into  the  casks  at  the  bung-hole,  till  i|uite  full.  ^ , i e 

No  good  water  is  to  be  had  here,  unless  you  send  your  boats  4-  or  5 miles  up  the  river : and  mstea  o 
filling  your  casks  at  low  water  (as  is  (he  case  in  most  other  rivers),  you  must  begin  to  fill  here  at  about  a 
quarter  flood.  The  reason  assigned  for  it  is,  that  the  river  has  a communication  with  the  sea  at  other 
places,  as  well  as  with  the  channel  of  St.  Augustine’s  Bay ; and  by  experience  it  may  he  found  that  he  s^ 
water  brought  into  the  river  by  the  flood-tide,  is  not  discharged  till  a quarter  flood  of  the  next  tide  in 
St.  Augustine's  Bay,  and  for  U miles  at  least  up  the  river,  the  water  is  always  brackish  _ 

The  river  and  buy  abound  with  various  sorts  of  fish,  and  alligators  are  occasionally  seen  in  the  nver ; 
therefore  the  boats’  crews  should  be  prevented  from  going  into  the  water  to  bathe. 


MOROUNDAVA. 

In  latitude  20®  16  South,  is  a place  where  some  trwle  is  carried  on,  and  where  a ship  may  get  refresh- 
ments. Water  is  procuml  from  the  rivers  adjacent  to  the  roails.  This  place  is  seldom  visited  by  Euro- 
pean ships,  being  exposed  to  all  winds  from  N.  W.  to  S.  W.  The  town  is  situated  on  the  southern  side  of 
the  bay,  and  consists  of  a number  of  huts  near  the  sea  side,  'fhe  wooding  and  watering  here  are  attended 
with  difficulty,  as  the  rivers  are  very  shallow  at  their  entrance. 

BEMBATOOK  BAY 

Is  liira;e  und  safe;  the  entrance  is  in  latitude  15®  43'  South,  and  longitude  4G®  28  East,  and  is  about 
3 miles  wide.  On  the  east  side  of  the  entrance  is  the  village  Majuinga.  Bembatook  town  is  on  the  south  side 
of  a point  of  the  same  name,  about  3 leagues  within  the  entrance  of  the  bay  on  the  east  side:  here  ships 
may  lay  land-locked  and  sheltered  from  all  winds,  close  under  the  point  near  the  town.  Captain  Inverarity, 
who  visited  this  bay  during  a trading  voyage,  in  1802,  says— ‘‘ Should  the  Englisli  Government  over  intend 
« to  have  a settlement  on  this  island  of  consequence,  I should  certainly  recommend  Bembatook  as  one  of 
“ the  most  commodious,  healthy,  and  easy  of  access,  it  being  near  the  capital  ol  the  country,  the  King  of 
“ which  is  cordial  to  strangers,  and  supplied  with  as  fine  beef  as  any  in  the  world,  at  the  moderate  price 
of  from  one  to  two  dollars  each  bullock.  The  merchant  would  also  find  this  a most  excellent  situation 
**  for  trade,  the  country  su|)plyiiig  many  commodities,  as  well  as  a sale  for  East  India  goods.  The  French 
purchase  in  this  part  of  the  island,  with  dollars  brought  for  that  purpose,  their  slaves  and  cattle,  which  are 
‘‘  drove  across  to  Fort  Dauphin  by  the  natives  of  the  Ft)rt  Dauphin  district,  the  French  putting  implicit 
“ faith  in  those  men,  who  seldom  betray  tlieir  trust.  At  Bembatook,  beef  may  be  salted,  as  well  as  at 
Fort  Dauphin,  where  tlie  French  salt  provisions  for  their  European  ships,  as  well  as  their  colonial  con-. 
“ sumption.  There  is  no  pork  to  be  had  here,  except  the  wild  hog,  which  is  in  great  plenty.  Rice  may 
‘‘  be  bad  in  any  quantity,  at  two  gamels  a dollar,  the  gamel  weighing  38 lbs.  avoirdupois.  It  is  necessary 
« to  speak  in  time  to  the  natives,  as  the  grain  is  generally  purchased  here  in  paddy,  and  beat  out  as  they 
‘‘  consume  it.'*' 

This  place  is  frequented  by  the  Arabs  from  Muscat  and  the  neighbouring  places^  who  cairy  on  a small 
trade  here,  and  Arabic  is  spoken  by  many  of  the  natives. 

NEW  MASSALEGE 

Is  situated  on  the  right  side  of  a river,  in  latitude  15®  30'  South;  there  is  a bar  at  the  entrance  which 
precludes  large  vessels  from  going  up.  The  town  is  large,  and  there  is  a mud  fort,  with  many  cannon 
mounted.  The  King,  who  resides  here,  appears  the  most  powerful  on  the  island ; his  palace  is  built  in  the 
European  style,  and  has  two  stories,  with  a reserve  of  arms,  and  many  articles  of  furniture  from  Europe, 


PASSANDAVA— FORT  DAUPHIN— MANOURO. 


7S 


such  as  tables,  chairs,  looking  glasses,  &c.  In  the  bay,  facing  the  river,  there  is  good  anchorage;  there  is 
also  a small  island,  which  is  very  commodious  for  refitting  and  repairing  ships,  and  on  which  they  once 
permitted  the  French  to  form  an  establishment.  There  are  several  Arab  families  settled  here,  who  con- 
struct  small  vessels,  and  trade  to  Persia  and  Arabia,  touching  at  the  Comoro  Islands  for  refreshments. 
These  Arabs  are  the  only  inhabitants  who  know  how  to  navigate  the  open  sea,  and  they  serve  as  pilots  to 
the  ships  approaching  to,  or  departing  from  the  coast.  When  the  King  pays  a visit  to  a ship,  he  generally 
brings  a present  of  two  bullocks,  some  poultry,  and  vegetables,  and  expects  in  return  the  usual  acknow- 
ledgments of  muskets,  coarse  linen,  flints,  &c. 

PASSANDAVA 

Is  a large  bay,  of  a square  form,  extending  6 leagues  to  the  southward.  The  town  is  at  the  bottom 
of  the  bay,  in  latitude  13^  45'  South,  and  longitude  48^  23  East. 

Bullocks  and  other  refreshments,  wood  and  water,  may  be  procured  in  great  plenty,  and  on  reasonable 
terms.  The  inhabitants  are  shy  of  strangers,  until  acquainted  with  their  business;  but  they  seem  to  be  an 
inoffensive,  and  fail*  dealing  people.  The  inhabitants  of  Johanna  affirm,  that  their  villages  are  plundered 
and  destroyed,  and  many  of  their  people  cruelly  maimed  or  massacred  by  the  natives  of  Madagascar,  who 
come  over  in  boats  to  plunder  and  prey  upon  them. 

From  Passandava  Bay  to  Cape  Amber,  the  northern  extremity  of  the  island,  there  docs  not  appear 
any  place  of  resort  for  shipping.  The  ports  on  the  eastern  side  of  the  island  are  seldom  visited  by  English 
ships,  except  occasionally  tn  war  time,  when  our  cruisers  arc  in  search  of  French  vessels  from  the  Mauri- 
tius, or  stand  in  need  of  refreshments. 

The  principal  places  on  the  east  side,  are  Fort  Dauphin,  Manouro,  Tamatave,  Foul  Point,  St.  Mary’s 
Island,  and  Antongil  Bay. 

FORT  DAUPHIN 

Is  in  latitude  85®  5'  South,  and  longitude  46®  35'  East.  Tlie  fort  commands  the  road,  being  150  feet 
above  the  level  of  the  sea;  it  is  a long  square,  encompassed  with  walls  of  lime  and  gravel  well  cemented,  and 
might  easily  be  made  secure  against  the  islanders,  but  the  situation  is  unhealthy.  This  part  of  Madagascar 
b very  populous;  almost  all  the  villages  are  situated  on  eminences,  and  surrounded  with  two  rows  of  strong 
palisadoes,  somewhat  in  the  manner  of  fences,  composed  of  hurdles  and  turf;  within  is  a parapet  of  solid 
earth,  about  4-feet  in  height  Large  pointed  bamboos  placed  at  some  distance  from  each  other,  form  a kind 
of  loop  holes,  which  contribute  towards  the  defence  of  these  villages,  some  of  which  are  besides  surrounded 
with  a deep  ditch,  Thb  country  being  under  the  command  of  several  chiefs,  great  caution  in  your  con- 
duct must  be  observed. 


PROVISIONS  AND  REFRESHMENTS. 

Bullocks,  poultry,  and  other  provisions  are  abundant,  and  at  reasonable  prices ; water  is  got  at  the 

landing-place,  by  digging  in  the  sand ; it  is  very  indifferent,  and  will  only  serve  lor  cooking  and  the  stock, 

but  at  a short  distance  inland,  there  are  several  springs  of  veiy  excellent  water. 

$ 


MANOUEO. 

This  village  is  situated  at  the  mouth  of  a river,  in  latitude  about  20®  South;  it  consists  of  a small 
number  of  huts,  in  the  neighbourhood  of  which  the  French  occupy  a small  piece  of  ground,  enclosed  by 

L 


74 


TAMATAVE— FOUL  POINT— ST.  MARV’S  TSLAXI). 


palisadocs,  wherein  are  two  huts,  one  of  which  serves  as  a lodging,  and  the  other  is  employed  as  a magazine 
fur  rice,  and  other  commodities. 

Vessels  lie  sheltered  here  within  a reef,  extending  from  the  village  to  the  northward. 

In  this  part  of  the  island  numerous  herds  of  cattle,  and  much  poultry  are  reared.  More  rice  is  grown 
than  they  consume,  and  frequently  large  quantities  of  this  important  article  are  sent  to  tlie  Mauritius  and 
Bourbon. 

The  natives  manufacture  beautiful  mats,  and  from  the  fibres  of  a plant,  make  a fine  stuff  of  various 
coloured  stripes,  about  8 yards  long:  some  of  them  are  not  much  inferior  in  beauty  of  colour  to  silk,  but  are 
not  so  soft  and  pliant,  for  tliey  readily  cut  in  wearing;  they  likewise  manufacture  several  articles  from  the 
cotton  produced  on  the  island. 

TAMATAVE 

Is  in  latitude  about  18^  12  South.  The  French  had  a small  settlement  here,  to  procure  cattle,  &c. 
for  the  Islands  of  Mauritius  and  Bourbon,  which  was  taken  in  1811. 

FOUL  POINT. 

The  anchorage  here  is  formed  by  a large  reef,  which  begins  on  the  shore,  about  a mile  to  the  south- 
ward of  the  village,  and  extends  about  three  miles  N.N.E. 

Opposite  the  anchorage,  in  latitude  17^  4r  South,  and  longitude  49^  36'  East,  is  situated  a village 
of  considerable  magnitude,  named  Mahaveti  by  the  inhabitants;  here  the  French  possess  a piece  of 
ground,  surrounded  by  palisadoes,  where  they  have  a principal  house,  intended  as  a habitation  for  the  resi- 
dent of  the  company  established  in  the  Isle  of  France,  for  the  purpose  of  purchasing  the  necessary  supply  of 
cattle  and  rice  for  the  use  of  that  colony.  The  King^'s  house  is  situated  at  the  western  extremity  of  the 
tillage,  and  is  composed  of  one  principal  story,  which  is  ascended  by  means  of  a ladder;  the  roof  is  covered 
with  leaves,  and  has  altogether  a very  mean  appearance.  It  is  surrounded  by  several  huts  appropriated 
to  tlie  accommodation  of  his  attendants  and  women. 

According  to  the  relation  of  a French  officer,  the  ships  of  that  nation  trade  witli  the  inhabitants  in  the 
following  manner. 

A male  or  female,  from  30  to  4ft  ...  2 muskets,  2 cartouch  boxes,  10  flints  and 


10 balls;  or  1,500 bolls;  or  1,700 flints. 

A bullock 1 musket,  or  12  to  15  lbs.  of  powder. 

A heifer 2 cartouch  boxes,  or  lOlbs.  ditto 

2 heifers 1 musket. 

1 fat  capon  1 knife,  or  7 balls,  or  a pair  of  scissors. 

1 fowl  8 needles,  or  4 balls,  or  6 flints. 


and  fruits,  vegetables,  and  other  small  articles,  for  buttons,  flints,  needles,  &c. 

Plenty  of  bullocks,  large  and  fat,  are  to  be  procured  here,  with  other  refreslunents.  To  the  southward 
if,  the  village  is  a small  river,  where  vessels  obtain  fresh  water;  but  a boat  cannot  proceed  into  it  at4ow 
water  in  consequence  of  a bar. 


ST.  MARY^S  ISLAND, 

Called  by  (he  natives  Nossi  Ibrahim,  is  about  forty  miles  N.N.E.  from  Foul  Point,  and  extends  from 
17°  5'  South,  to  16°  33  in  a direction  about  N.E.  by  N.  On  the  West  side,  about  2 leagues  from  the 
South  point,  there  b a bay,  with  an  island,  called  Quail''s  island,  at  the  entrance;  on  it  the  French  settled 


ANTONGIL  BAY^OMOllO. 


75 


a factory  in  1740,  and  left  120  men  there,  who  were  three  months  aflerwa^d^  cut  oft  by  tlie  natives;  they» 
however,  repossessed  it  in  1743,  but  abandoned  it  in  17G1,  on  account  of  the  unhcaltJiiness  of  the  place. 

About  the  year  1696,  the  Englisli  pirates  who  infested  the  Indian  Seas,  established  a fortified  station 
here,  and  brought  in  their  prizes;  the  principal  of  whom  were  Kidd  and  Avery.  Kidd  was  taken  and 
hung  in  chains  at  Tilbury,  in  1701.  In  1702,  two  men  of  w'ar  were  sent  out  to  supjuess  them;  but  it 
was  many  years  before  their  depredations  were  eftectually  put  a stop  to. 

ANTONGIL  BAY, 

Called  Manghabees  by  the  natives,  takes  its  name  from  Antonio  Gil,  a Portuguese  captain,  by  whom 
it  was  discovered.  The  entrance  into  it  is  about  10  leagues  to  the  northward  of  St.  Mary’s  island;  it  is 
about  14  leagues  long  from  North  to  South,  and  8 broad  at  its  entrance  between  Cape  Bollones  and  Point 
Baldrick.  At  the  bottom  of  the  bay  are^everal  small  islands,  the  principal  of  which,  called  Marotte,  is 
about  a mile  in  extent,  and  the  same  space  from  the  shore;  it  is  situated  in  latitude  15®  25  South.  The 
common  anchorage  is  tg  the  northward  of  this  island,  at  the  distance  of  a musket  shot,  opposite  to  two 
small  sandy  coves,  in  11  or  12  fathoms.  Wood  and  water  are  procured  here  with  great  convenience,  and 
the  tents  may  be  erected  safer  than  on  the  main,  where  you  must  trade  for  provisions.  The  river 
bears  N.  N.  W.  from  Marotte,  and  is  navigable  by  boats.  The  anchorage  of  the  river  is  called  Port  Choi- 
seul,  and  from  hence  they  derived  part  of  their  supplies  for  the  Mauritius. 

Exclusive  of  the  places  described,  there  are  many  other  bays  and  harbours  on  the  East  Coast  of  Ma- 
dagascar, where  small  vessels  may  anchor  and  procure  refreshments,  although  not  so  convenient  for  large 
ships  as  those  already  specified.  ^ 

Madagascar  produces  few  articles  of  commerce.  The  French  have  occasionally  brought  from  thence 
a kind  of  spice,  called  by  the  natives,  Ravansera,  some  of  which  has  l)eeu  taken  by  our  cruizers,  and  put 
up  to  sale  at  the  East  India  sales.  It  is  thus  described: 

RAVANSERA 

Is  the  produce  of  a large  bushy  tree,  growing  on  various  parts  of  Madagascar,  having  a pyramidical 
head,  like  the  clove  tree,  and  a reddish  odorous  bark;  the  wood  is  hard,  heavy,  and  white,  with  some  red- 
dish fibres,  and  has  no  smell.  The  fruit  is  the  size  of  a large  cherry,  shaped  like  a pear,  with  a rouiidish 
body;  it  consists  of  a nut,  divided  into  six  parts,  in  the  same  manner  as  a walnut  into  four,  covered  with 
a hard  coriaceous  shell,  and  that  with  a green  shell  or  bark  very  closely  adhering  to  it;  both  these  are  aro- 
matic, but  the  nut  has  an  acrid  biting  taste,  which  is  almost  caustic.  The  natives  gather  it  before  it  is 
ripe,  and  use  it  as  a spice,  for  seasoning  their  meat;  it  ha.s  a fine  aromatic  smell  when  fresh,  and  the 
caustic  taste  may  be  abated  by  keeping  it  some  months,  after  which  it  may  be  thrown  into  boiling  w^ater 
for  four  or  five  minutes,  and  then  dried  in  the  .sun.  It  is  in  this  state  in  which  we  see  it. 

COMORO  ISLANDS 

Are  four  in  number— Comoro  (which  gives  its  name  to  the  group),  Mohilla,  Mayotta,  and  Johanna. 

COMORO 

Is  the  largest  of  these  islands,  being  about  12  leagues  long,  and  5 or  6 broad.  The  anchorage  is  to 
the  N.  W.  of  the  island,  where  the  principal  town  is  situatAl,  in  latitude  about  11®  20  South.  The  town 
is  large,  and  full  of  cocoa-nut  trees,  with  a fine  smooth  sandy  beach  before  it;  it  is  the  only  place  where  a 
boat  can  land;  shoal  water  runs  off  about  a quarter  of  a mile,  and  at  low  water  you  cannot  go  ofl  with  a 
’ L2 


7(}  .MOHILLA—MAYOTTA— JOHANNA. 

boat.  Whenever  you  see  this  town,  send  boate  a-head;  for,  as  the  shore  is  boid  in  all  other  places,  you  would 
have  no  expecUtion  of  foul  ground  off  such  a fine  sandy  beach.  This  island  is  seldom  visited  by  Euro, 
peans,  Johanna  having  the  preference  of  all  the  others. 

PROVISIONS  AND  REFRESHMENTS. 

Very  excellent  bullocks  arc  to  be  procured  here  at  about  six  dollars  each,  likewbe  sheep  and  goats  at 
moderate  prices.  Oranges,  lemons,  and  plantains  are  to  be  had  for  knives.  No  water  can  be  procured. 

A present  is  necessary  to  the  King  or  Chief,  who  resides  at  the  town. 

MOHILLA, 

The  smallest  of  the  islands,  is  about  12  leagues  S.  E.  by  S.  from  Comoro,  and  at  one  time  was  consi- 
dered the  best  for  supplying  refreshments.  There  are  several  small  towns;  one  to  the  southward,  which  is 
reckoned  the  best  anchorage,  is  behind  some  small  islands;  another  to  the  northward : this  last  we  have  the 
most  general  account  of,  having  been  visited  by  one  of  the  Company’s  ships  in  1756.  The  town  is  situated 
on  a bluff  hillock  close  to  the  sea,  where  provisions  and  refreshments  were  procured;  the  bearings  at  anchor 
were,  the  town  S.S.  W.,  the  N.  W.  point  of  the  island  W.S.  W.  and  the  eastern  land  E.  by  S.  The  wa- 
tering-place is  about  200  yards  from  the  beach,  up  an  easy  ascent;  but  the  water  is  in  a kind  of  ravine, 
about  12  feet  deep,  and  being  too  steep  to  roll  casks  up,  they  are  filled  with  the  engine,  where  tliey  are  rolled 
with  great  ease  from  the  beach,  which  is  a soft  sand.  Tlie  run  of  water,  which  is  clear  and  constant  from 
the  mountains,  is  lost  about  ten  yards  below  wliere  the  casks  are  to  be  filled,  among  the  rocks  and  sand, 
and  may  be  observed  to  ooze  out  of  tl)e  beach  at  low  water;  there  is  a reef  of  rocks,  which  runs  from  the 
town  across  the  little  bay,  wliere  the  watering-place  is,  which  prevents  boats  working  the  last  quarter  ebb, 
and  the  first  quarter  flood. 

The  town,  where  the  King  resides,  is  about  4 leagues  S.  E.  by  S,  from  the  above  place ; but  the  coast 
is  very  dangerous,  and  ships  cannot  approach  within  two  miles  of  the  town,  where  there  is  a large  surf, 
which  would  make  it  difficult  and  dangerous  watering  there. 

Bullocks  are  to  be  procured  here;  they  are  small,  and  not  in  abundance.  Rice,  paddy,  plantain  trees, 
and  fruit  of  various  kinds  are  to  be  got,  and  the  sea  abounds  with  fish. 

The  body  of  Mohilla  is  in  latitude  about  12®  20'  South,  and  longitude  43®  50 . 

MAYOTTA 

Is  the  southernmost  of  these  islands,  and  being  surrounded  with  reefs,  is  less  frequented,  and  tess 
known  than  the  others;  at  its  N.  W.  end  there  is  a saddle  island,  like  that  of  the  N.  W.  point  of  Johanna, 
from  which  circumstance  this  island  lias  occasionally  been  mistaken  for  Johanna.  The  town  and  anchorage 
is  about  five  miles  S.  E.  by  E.  from  that  island,  and  is  remarkable  by  a bluff  head,  with  rocks  overhanging 
the  sea,  which  may  be  mistaken  for  a ship  at  anchor  close  in  shore.  Here  water  and  refreshments  can 
be  procured,  but  it  is  attended  with  danger.  On  the  South  part  of  Mayotta,  is  a sharp  conical  mountain, 
called  Valentine’s  Peak,  which  is  in  latitude  12®  54  South,  and  longitude  45®  14'  East. 

JOHANNA. 

This  island,  which  is  now  much  frequented  by  European  ships  for  refreshments,  on  their  outward- 
bound  voyage,  is  of  a triangular  form,  and  the  bay  and  anchorage  is  between  its  two  North  points,  in  lati- 
tude 12®  7 South,  and  longitude  44®  30  East,  The  best  anchorage  is  about  three  miles  to  the  westward 


JOHANNA. 


77 


of  the  town,  abreast  of  a range  of  cocoa-nut  trees,  called  Brown’s  garden,  near  the  sea,  having  a large  black 
rock  to  the  eastward,  between  them  and  the  town,  with  the  rivulet  where  water  is  procured,  at  their  western 
extremity;  the  bearing,  when  at  anchor,  is  the  rivulet  S.  by  W.  and  the  mosque  East,  rall\er  more  than  a 
quarter  of  a mile  from  the  shore. 

The  town  of  Johanna  is  near  three  quarters  of  a mile  long,  close  to  the  sea  side,  and  contains 
about  two  hundred  houses,  each  of  which  is  enclosed  with  a wall,  or  paling  made  with  a sort  of 
reed;  the  alleys  or  streets  are  intricate;  the  better  kind  of  houses  are  built  of  stone,  with  a court 
yard,  having  a portico  to  shield  them  from  the  sun,  and  one  lofty  room,  where  they  receive  their  guests, 
which  is  ornamented  with  small  pieces  of  looking  glass,  China  ware,  &c.  and  such  furniture  as  they  pro- 
cure occasionally  from  ships  stopping  here.  The  King  resides  about  nine  miles  in  the  interior,  seldom  vi- 
siting  the  sea-side,  unless  on  the  arrival  of  a ship  in  the  roads,  which  he  generally  visits,  and  it  is  customary, 
on  his  arrival  and  departure,  to  salute  him  with  five  guns,  and  some  presents  are  necessary  for  himself  and 
his  attendants,  when  permission  is  obtained  for  procuring  provisions  and  refresliments.  Tlie  island  is  said 
to  contain  about  10,000  inhabitants;  those  on  the  coast  are  Mahometans.  They  carry  on  a considerable 
trade  in  their  trankeys  with  Arabia:  these  are  vessels  from  70  to  100  tons  each,  and  carry  cocoa-nuts, 
cowries,  and  occasionally  a few  slaves.  From  this  trade,  the  natives  of  Johanna  have  learned  the  use  of  money 
in  purchasing  piece-goods,  and  other  Indian  commodities  from  the  Arabs,  which  Ibrmerly  they  were  igno- 
rant of. 


IMPORTS  AND  EXPORTS. 


The  under-mentioned  European  articles  are  always  in  demand,  and  fetch  a handsome  price. 


Small  oval  looking  glasses. 
Ditto,  paper  mounted. 

Beads,  white,  blue,  and  yellow. 
Iron  in  rods  and  square  bars« 
Nails  of  various  sixes. 


Large  coarse  razors. 

Clasp  knives. 

Lascar  knives,  with  sheaths. 
Cloth,  red  and  blue. 

Skirts,  and  other  apparel 


Muskets. 

Pistols. 

Cutlasses. 

Gunpowder. 

Flints. 


But  the  people  of  Johanna  have  no  other  mode  of  payment  than  the  refreshments  received  in  barter, 
a mode  of  liquidation  which  will  be  found  favourable  to  any  of  the  Company’s  ships  who  may  call  here, 
since  the  attachment  of  the  inhabitants  to  the  British,  is  a great  incitement  to  their  dealing  lioncstly.  They 
have  but  few  dollars  among  them,  and  these  they  carefully  reserve  for  the  purchase  of  Surat  goods,  which 
are  occasionally  imported  in  vessels  from  Surat,  the  returns  for  which  are  usually  made  in  cowries,  red 
beetle  nut,  dammer,  wax,  cocoa-nuts,  and  corn. 


ANCHORAGE  FEES,  PRESENTS,  &c. 


The  presents  and  demands  under  the  head  of  Port  Charges  are,  to  the  King  a barrel  of  gunpowder,  a 
few  yards  of  scarlet  cloth,  and  two  or  three  muskets;  and  to  his  attendants,  who  mostly  assume  Englisli 
titles,  areasfollow: 


The  Prince  of  Wales  ...  15  dollars. 
The  Governor,  Duke  Burkit  2 ditto 
The  King’s  Purser  ....  20  ditto 


Governor  Abdallah  ....  5 dollars. 
Keeping  watering-place  in  order  5 ditto 
Watching  casks,  at  night  . . 1 ditto 


Independent  of  the  above,  the  Prince  of  Wales  asks  for,  and  expects  a barrel  of  gunpowder.  They 
have  likewise  faUen  upon  a method  of  soliciting  those  who  visit  the  island,  particularly  all  passefigers,  to 


JOHANNA— SOCOTRA. 


18 

contribute  a dolkir  or  two  towards  improving  the  navigation  which  they  carry  on  with  the  Continent  of 
Africa;  and  by  way  of  persuasive  example,  produce  lists  of  persons  who  Imve  subscribed  for  that  purpose, 
so  that  they  sometimes  collect  30  or  40  dollars  from  a ship;  and  when  the  commanders  leave  the  place, 
they  generally  procure  from  them  a certificate  of  good  usage. 

PROVISIONS  AND  REFRESHMENTS. 

The  bullocks  here  are  very  excellent,  but  not  large,  seldom  weighing  more  than  4 cwt.  Goats  and 
poultry  may  also  be  procured;  and  excellent  yams,  and  sweet  potatoes  in  abundance;  the  prices  arc, 


Bullocks 10  dollars  each  Fowls 1 1- dollar  per  dozen. 

Rice,  per  bag  of  140  lbs.  ...  aj  ditto  Ducks 1 ditto 


Calavances 2 ditto  | Goat,  or  2 kids  ....  1 dollar  each. 

Of  fruits,  they  have  pine-apples  of  a most  delicious  flavour,  measuring  10  to  12  inches  in  circumfe- 
rence; oranges,  limes,  plantains,  guavas,  Stc.;  these  are  brought  off  by  the  natives  in  their  canoes,  and 
sold  to  the  ship’s  erew  for  knives,  old  clothes,  bottles,  &c. 

The  water  is  very  gootl,  and  is  generally  procured  from  the  rivulet,  at  the  extremity  of  Brown's  gar- 
den ; it  is  got  very  exjtcditiously  by  laying  down  a small  anchor  midway  between  the  shore  and  the  ship, 
for  the  boats  to  haul  off  when  loaded:  by  this  means  100  butts  might  be  procured  in  forty-eight  hours. 
Firewood  is  scarce. 

This  place  is  admirably  well  suited  for  jn  ocuring  refreshments,  and  recovering  the  health  of  scorbutic 
people,  provided  they  arc  debarred  an  immoderate  use  of  fruit,  and  arc  not  permitted  to  sleep  on  shore. 


SOCOTRA. 

This  island  is  about  40  leagues  to  the  eastward  of  Cape  Guardafui;  it  extends  nearly  E.  S.  E.  and 
W.N.W.  is  27  leagues  long,  and  7 broad,  and  in  general  compo.sed  of  high  and  mountainous  land 
There  are  two  anchoring  places,  generally  used  according  to  the  prevailing  monsoon;  that  on  the  S W 
side  of  the  island,  is  called  Delisa;  it  is  seldom  visited.  Provisions  may  be  procured,  but  the  water  is  un 
palatable.  The  Bay  of  Tamarida,  on  the  N.  E.  side  of  the  island,  where  the  King  resides,  is  the  most 
eligible  place  for  refreshments;  it  is  in  latitude  12°  39  North,  and  longitude  53°  33  East.  The  anchorage  is 
in  10  to  12  fathoms,  the  body  of  the  town  bearing  South,  about  a mile  off  shore.  The  houses  are  built  of 
Stone  and  lime,  and  the  town,  having  .several  mosques,  makes  aJiandsome  appearance  from  the  ships 

This  island  was  discovered  by  the  Portuguese  in  1503:  in  1508  they  first  landed  here,  when  being 
offended  with  the  reply  to  their  demand,  of  the  island  In-coming  tributary  to  the  King  of  Portugal  they 

attacked  the  fort,  which  wa,  but  an  indlflerent  one,  and  after  much  resistance  from  the  natives,  they  took 
it^  putting  the  garrison  to  the  sword. 

This  island  was  oceasion.-illy  visited  by  our  earlier  voyagers  for  aloes.  The  price  in  1610  was  35  to 
38  dollars  per  quintal  ol  104lbs.  Dragon’s  blood  is  sometimes  to  be  met  with  in  small  quantities. 

PROVISIONS  AND  REFRESHMENTS. 

B"llock>,  li>k,  .ihI  are  to  b,  procund  here  at  reasooable  price.,  nd  the  iababitut,  m 
« generd  e.yJ  to  .t^-^  The  »ot,  r » rer,  good,  u,d  » got  f™,  a .mall  madjr  mdW,  dKl«t . mar. 
ter  of  a mile  from  the  town.  Firewood  is  scarce,  and  procured  with  difficulty.  ' ^ 


ALOES. 


79 


Aloes  are  a bitter,  gummy,  resinous  juice,  prepared  from  a plant  of  tke  same  name,  which  grows  in 
several  parts  of  the  world,  of  which  there  are  four  sorts,  viz.  Socotrine,  Hepatic,  Horse,  and  Cape. 

ALOES  SOCOTRINE 

This  drug  is  brought  from  Socotra,  wrapped  in  skins;  it  is  of  a bright  suiface,  in  some  degree 
transparent,  of  a yellowisli  red  colour,  with  a purple  cast,  when  in  the  lump,  and  of  a golden  colour  when 
reduced  to  powder:  it  is  hard  and  friable  in  winter,  somewhat  plialile  in  summer,  and  soRens  between  the 
fingers.  Its  bitter  taste  is  accompanied  with  an  aromatic  flavour,  but  nut  sufficient  to  prevent  its  being 
disagreeable:  the  smell  is  not  very  unpleasant,  and  is  something  like  myrrh.  To  try  its  purity,  boil  four 
ounces  in  a quart  of  water,  and  it  will  dissolve  into  a dark  coloured  Hcpior:  if  adulterated,  the  impurities  will 
remain  undissolved.  If  in  the  package  of  this  drug  there  should  be  any  mixture  of  rubbish,  it  will  be 
more  advantageous  to  cleanse  it  in  India,  the  duty  being  paid  by  weight,  and  purity  much  advancing  the 
price.  The  packages  should  not  weigh  more  than  150  to  SOOlbs.  The  purchaser  should  expect  a 
considerable  loss  on  the  skins;  and  the  packages  should  be  greased,  to  prevent  the  aloes  from  sticking. 

ALOES  HEPATIC. 

This  sort  is  produced  in  otlier  parts  as  well  as  the  East.  The  best  is  usually  imported  from  Barba- 
does,  in  gourd  shells,  an  inferior  kind  in  pots,  and  a still  woi*se  in  casks.  Tliis  kind  is  generally  darker 
coloured,  and  less  clear  than  the  former,  yet  it  is  more  compact  and  dry,  though  sometimes  quite 
soft  and  clammy,  particularly  the  cask  sort : its  taste  is  intensely  bitter  and  nauseous,  without  the  aromatic 
flavour  of  the  Socotrine,  and  its  smell  is  much  stronger,  and  more  disagreeable.  If  any  of  this  sort  be 
brought  from  India,  care  should  be  taken  that  it  be  not  liquid,  a circumstance  that  lessens  its  value 
very  considerably. 

All  aloes  brought  from  India,  should  be  manifested  as  Hepatic,  in  consequence  of  the  difference  of  duty, 
which  is  as  follows : 


Permanent,  War  Duty, 

Socotrine  Aloes,  perewt.  .•..^880.^2  16  0 
AH  other  sorts,  ditto  ....  9 16  0 . 180 


The  following  is  an  account  of  the  quantities  of  aloes  imported  and  sold  at  the  East  India  sales  for 
five  years. 


' V 1 

1 March  Sale. 

1 September  Sale.  | 

Total.  { 

lAver.  perCwt. 

Yean.  1 

Cwt. 

£ 

Cwt. 

£ 

Cwt. 

1 £ 

£ s. 

d. 

180€“ 

1 „ 

10 

104 

10 

104 

10^ 

0 

1805 

87 

726 

19 

138 

106 

864 

8 3 

0 

1806 

38 

132 

38 

132 

3 9 

6 

1807 

476 

1655 

83 

407 

559 

2062 

3 12 

0 

1808 

50 

75 

12 

25 

62 

100 

1 12 

5 

The  freight  of  aloes  is  calculated  at  16  ewt  to  the  ton. 


60 


ALOES. 


ALOES,  HORSE, 

Or  Caballine,  is  easily  distinguished  from  both  the  preceding,  by  its  strong  rank  smell ; in  other  re- 
spects it  nearly  agrees  with  the  Hepatic,  and  is  not  unfrequently  sold  in  its  place;  it  is  sometimes  prepared 
80  pure  and  bright,  as  to  render  it  difficult  for  the  eye  to  distinguish  it  from  the  Socotrine;  but  it  is  quickly 
discovered  by  the  rankness  of  the  smell:  should  this  also  be  dissipated  by  art,  the  aromatic  flavour  of  the 
finer  aloes  is  a sufficient  criterion. 


CAPE  ALOES. 

Tills  kind  is,  when  powdered,  yellow,  like  the  other  aloes;  but  the  thin  pieces,  when  broken  off  from 
the  mass,  and  even  the  edges  of  the  larger  pieces,  are  transparent,  appearing  as  if  made  of  yellowish  brown 
glass;  consequently  it  has  nothing  of  the  dark,  cloudy,  opaque  appearance  of  the  other  aloes.  This  kind 
should  be  chosen  pure,  bright,  and  free  from  any  impurities;  when  broken,  of  a yellowish  brown  colour, 
and  the  less  rank  the  smeU,  the  better. 

This  article  affords  a considerable  revenue,  large  quantities  being  brought  into  England,  principally 
for  home  consumption.  In  1796  the  duties  collected  thereon  amounted  to  ^^2,966  3s.  7dL 


" '*\ 

!'^Y«f,.lM» 

VLr  * • >> 


f)  -Az/lf//  7* 

C.  \ *' 


'‘>.v  ,i{- 


■,"  W«^)ay><^  jl  I 

^ S»)luir^W 


V ••  \/  “ Y 

^CVi  ft  \r'.j«Hi«i« 

\ \ ^ -vu. 

v)  . ^ 

, I'i  I’-.L 

^ (.>.*, /wW/rtlW/ 

^ SMki.^  .J-.71 

""o  \ ,.^5 

vt\  'J' 

«/'  Mammnhyil^V  I ^ -'O 

\^J  (L 

<L  .r  A 


Ronnlj^'ftto 


ji  ’ /'. 


K\un^n  fiuru.fh 


z^iUc®^ 


$$r 


JlMborn  ^ 

Adel 


REi^'SKA  OR  GUI.F  or  ARABIA 


COAS tor  ARABIA  FEMX 

^JYJi  THE 

PERSIAN  GtriF. 


A.r 


CHAPTER  Yin. 


The  Red  Sea,  or  Gulf  of  Arabia. 


Sti'aits  of  Babelmandel'^Placcs  on  the  Ahijssinian  Side  of  the  Gulf — Dahalac-^Massuah ; Dcscription^Coins^ 
IVcightHf  and  Measurcs-^Imports-^Kxports-^Import  and  Export  Duties— Provisiona  and  Hcf reshments— 
Port  MorningtonSadourSuakin;  Description— Provisions  and  Refreshments— Cossier ; Description 
—Imports  and  Exports—Suez  ; Description — Coins,  Weights,  and  Measures — Imports — Exports — Pro- 
visions and  Refreshments — Tor;  Description — Provisions  and  Refreshnunts — Yamho;  Description — Judda; 
Description— Coins— Weights — Imports— Piece-Goods— Other  Articles  of  Import — Exports— Duties  and 
Presents— Port  Charges,  ^c.— Instructions  relative  to  the  Trade  of  Judda— Relative  Value  of  Coins— Pro- 
visions and  Refreshments— Loheia;  Description — Coins,  Weights,  and  Measures— Duties — Provisions  and 
Refreshments— Hodcida;  Description— Bcetlcfaekie;  Description— Coins,  Weights,  and  Measures — Coffee 
Trade— Mocha;  Description— Coins,  Weights,  and  Measures — Trade  between  the  Red  Sen  and  British 
India— Trade  with  other  Places— Duties,  Port  Charges,  and  Presents— Provisions  and  Refreshments— 
Articles  procurable  at  Mocha— Acacia— Acorus—Asphaltuni— Balm  of  Gilead— Cwet— Coffee— Dates— 
Hermodactyls—Junetus  Odoratus— Myrrh — Natron— Rhinoceros  Horns— Rhinoceros  Hides— Sagapenum 
Salep— Senna— Sfuirlcs  Fins—Tragacanth. 


THE  Straits  of  Babelmandel,  the  entrance  into  this  Sea,  is  formed  to  the  northward  hjr  the  Cape  of 
the  same  name  in  Arabia,  in  latitude  40  North,  and  the  Coast  of  Abyssinia  to  the  soutliward,  having 
at  the  entrance  the  Island  of  Perlm,  which  is  about  five  miles  long.  There  is  a passage  on  both  sides  of 
the  Island;  the  one  to  the  northward  between  it  and  Cape  Ikbelniandel,  is  called  the  Little  Strait;  the 
other  to  the  southward  of  the  Island,  is  called  the  Large  Strait;  tlie  former  is  most  frequented  by  ships 
entering,  or  departing  from  the  Red  Sea. 

The  Coast  of  Abyssinia,  or  southern  side  of  this  Sea,  is  but  little  known  to  Europeans.  The  principal 
places  between  the  entrance  and  Suez,  are  Dahalac,  jMassuali,  Suakin,  and  Cossier. 

DVHALAC. 

This  island  is  about  7 leagues  in  extent;  the  South  end  is  in  latitude  North,  and  longitude 

40’’  15  East.  It  was  formerly  a place  of  considerable  trade.  In  1.520  the  Portuguese  took,  plundered, 
and  destroyed  the  town.  Dahalac  el  Kibecr  was  formerly  the  principal  port,  whirhit  is  nearly  enclosed 
by  a chain  of  islands  that  lie  off  at  the  dbtance  of  about  two  miles;  at  presemt  there  is  scarce  water 
enough  for  a dow  to  approach  the  shore;  till  near  the  islands,  it  is  seldom  more  than  tlirce  or  four  feet. 
The  port  still  exhibits  many  vestiges  of  its  former  consequence.  The  town  is  about  half  a mile  from  the 
sea,  with  a sloping  beach  of  sand  between;  on  the  northern  side  are  the  ruins  of  two  mosques  built  of 

M 


62 


MASSUAH. 


stone,  with  cupolas  at  top,  but  of  rude  workmanship;  to  the  southward  of  the  town  are  a number  of  large 
tanks  for  water.  Vessels  from  Massuah  and  other  places  occasionally  come  here  to  trade. 

MASSUAH. 

This  Bay  is  in  latitude  15®  31'  North,  and  longitude  39®  37  East,  on  the  North  side  of  the  high  land 
of  Gedam,  having  a town,  called  Arkeeko,  in  the  southern  part  of  it,  where  A’essels  may  anchor  in  10  or  13 
fathoms,  and  be  sheltered  from  most  winds.  Massuah  is  situated  on  a small  island  close  to  the  Abyssinian 
ahore.  The  fortifications  are  trifling;  the  houses  are  surrounded  by  fences  of  reeds;  the  rooms  are 
detached,  and  built  of  the  same;  within  they  are  lined  with  mats.  'Fhe  inhabitants  arc  very  civil,  but  are 
importunate  beggars,  and  occasionally  thieves.  The  chief  resides  clueily  at  Arkeeko,  where  he  has  a good 
house,  although  the  place  is  not  so  pleasant.  Massuali  is  the  principal  seaport  of  Abyssinia;  and  were  the 
trade  to  be  turned  into  any  other  channel,  it  would  sink  into  insignificance.  The  Portuguese,  in  1526, 
reduced  this  place.  There  are  about  30  tanks  for  water,  which  are  filled  in  the  rainy  season,  but  they  are 
not  sufficient  for  the  supply  of  the  place,  and  much  water  is  daily  brought  by  boats  from  Arkeeko. ' The 
landing-place  is  at  a pier  close  to  the  town,  to  w^hich  boats  can  come  with  ease.  Though  this  place  may 
be  considered  as  situated  in  a very  plentiful  country,  yet  all  the  necessaries  of  life  are  dear. 


COINS,  WEIGHTS,  ani>  MEASURES. 


Venetians  do  not  pass  current.  Dollars,  and  glass  beads,  called  cantarro,  of  all  kinds  and  colovirar, 
perfect  and  broken,  pass  for  small  money,  and  are  called  in  their  language,  boorjookes. 


3 of  which,  or  grains 
10  Kibcers 

4 Duvanis 
23  Duliabs 


> make  •< 


1 Kibcer. 

1 Duvani. 

1 Ilarf',  or  Dahab. 

1 Dollar,  or  Patack. 


The  value  of  the  dollar  is  therefore  2,760  bourjookes,  or  beads;  the  fraction  of  the  patack  is  the  half 
and  quarter. 

The  Massuah  vakia  is  to  the  Mocha,  as  5 to  6. 

The  Cuba  is  a wooden  measure,  containing  62  cubic  inches  of  rain  water.  The  dram  is  called  caffla, 
.10  of  which  make  a vakia. 


IMPORTS. 

The  trade  carried  on  with  Mocha  and  Judda  is  considerable;  the  value  of  goods  imported  into  Mas- 
suah, is  estimated  at  400,000  dollars  per  annum,  exclusive  of  cotton  wool,  which  is  purchased  by  the 
Abyssinians,  and  of  which  three  ships’  cargoes  may  be  disposed  of  in  a year.  No  merchant  here  has  capital 
sufficient  to  enable  him  to  purchase  a cargo,  nor  even  a large  proportion  of  it;  but  experience  has  given 
rise  to  a confidence  in  the  honour  of  the  dealers,  which  justifies  the  captain  of  a ship  in  trusting  his  pro- 
perty into  their  hands.  The  Banians  here  are  comfortable,  some  of  them  men  of  good  property;  Hadje 
Hassan,  or  Currum  Chund,  would  receive  a cargo,  and  consider  themselves  responsible  for  the  whole; 
they  would  dispose  of  it  in  smaller  quantities,  to  people  whom  they  know  worthy  of  credit,  who  would  de- 
part with  it  into  the  interior,  and  in  about  three  mofiths  return  with  the  value  in  gold  and  other  goo;^* 
’The  principal  articles  of  import  are  as  follow: 


MASSUAII. 


811 


Benjamin. 

Cardamums. 

Musk. 

Sandal  wood. 

Cotton  wool. 

Cinnamon. 

Pepper, 

TohiUTu. 

Copper, 

Gunpowder. 

Piece-goods. 

Tin. 

Camphire. 

Ginger. 

Rice.  ; 

Tutenague. 

Cloves. 

Iron,  in  bars. 

Redwood. 

Turmeric. 

China  ware. 

Lead. 

Steel. 

Vermilion. 

And  many  other  articles  of  European  manufacture,  us  glass  ware,  cutlery,  arnis^  kc. 


EXPORTS. 

The  only  articles  which  Abyssinia  produces,  areas  follow:  but  of  these  the  quantity  Is  sufficient  to 
pay  for  the  imports,  and  the  former  would  increase  as  the  trade  should  extend  into  those  countries  where 
Aey  are  produced  in  the  greatest  abundance.  The  prices  in  IBOl  were  as  follow : 


Rhinoceros  horns  . . . 7{  dollars  a frazil.  A good  female  slave  ....  GO  <lollars. 

Gold 11|  ditto  wakia.  A male,  according  to  age  . . 40  to  80  dollars . 

Civet  .......  3f  ditto  ditto.  Rice,  per  bag  of  105  lbs.  ...  5 dollars. 

Elephants'  teetli  ....  22  ditto  frazil.  Ghee,  per  rottolo 2 ditto. 

Hqney | ditto  cuba.  Wax,  per  frazil 4 ditto. 


A considerable  caravan  arrives  at  Massuah  in  February,  which  brings  down  slaves,  mules,  cattle,  &c. 
The  balance  of  trade  is  in  favour  of  Abyssinia,  to  the  extent  of  several  thousand  dollars.  Two  hundred 
vakias  of  gold  are  brought  by  each  caravan,  but  at  tw’O  months’  notice,  2,000  could  be  procured,  to  pay  for 
such  goods  as  are  suitable  to  the  market. 

IMPORT  AXD  EXPORT  DUTIES. 

The  Nayib  receives  10  per  cent,  ad  vahrem  on  all  imports  and  exports,  and  one  dollar  for  each  indi- 
vidual who  enters  the  country  to  trade;  but  this  is  not  settled  at  all  times.  The  following  is  a list  of  arti- 
cles,  upon  which  he  demands  a duty;  and  the  sum  demanded  is  generally  moderate,  tliough  graduated  by  no 
regular  principle  of  trade. 

Tobacco,  per  bale  of  15  mds.  ...  4 dollars. 

Rice,  per  bag  of  IGGlbs } ditto 

Pepper,  per  9 frazils 1|  ditto 

Cotton,  per  12mds.  of  28 lbs.  ...  3 ditto 

Tin,  per  frazil  i ditto 

Copper,  per  20  frazils 3 ditto 

PROVISIONS  AND  REFRESHMENTS. 

The  under-mentioned  arc  the  prices  paid  to  the  Nayib,  wfio  monopolizes  the  supplies. 


12  fowls 1 dollar.  Cow.s,  each 5 dollars. 

2 goats 1 ditto.  Water,  23  skins  ....  1 ditto. 

2 sheep  , 1 ditto.  1 man’s  load  of  wood  . . . 360  beadsi 


M2 


Fine  Piece  Goods,  per  corge  ...  8 dollars, 
Hlue  cossaes  . . ditto  ....  .5  ditto. 

Bailaes  , . . ditto  , . . . 2|  ditto. 

Chintz,  of  all  sorts  ditto  ....  IJ  ditto. 

Tutenague  . . per  frazil  ...  * ditto 

No  duty  on  iron  and  gunpowder. 


PORT  ^lORNINGTON— BADOUR-SUAKIN. 


8* 


PORT  MORNINGTON 

Is  in  latitude  18®  10'  North,  and  longitude  38°  32  East:  the  N.  E.  side  of  the  harbour  con-* 
sists  of  islands;  the  N.  W.  side  is  protected  by  a peninsula.  The  only  entrance  for  large  vessels  is 
at  the  northern  extremity  of  tlie  harbour,  though  dows  enter  at  the  southern.  I'he  passage  is  rather  nar- 
row, but  the  whole  navy  of  England  might  lie  within,  as  in  a bason,  protected  from  every  wind,  in  5 to  7 
fathoms,  with  a bottom  free  from  every  danger.  On  the  west  end  of  the  large  island,  in  the  middle  of  the 
bay,  is  the  villag(? 


BADOUR. 

Here  the  Dola  resides.  It  is  a miserable  little  place,  one  small  mosque  being  the  only  stone  building; 
the  rest  are  grass  huts.  There  is  no  trade,  exc(‘pt  an  export  of  ghee,  and  some  tortoise-shell.  The  dows 
come  this  way  from  Suakin  and  Massiiah,  for  fear  of  the  Wahabees.  Cattle  are  in  great  plenty;  sheep 
and  poultry  are  also  in  abundance;  the  prices  demanded  are,  however,  high.  Bullocks  5 to  7 dollars  each. 
Fowls,  8 for  a dollar.  Sheep  more  reasonable,  a good  fat  one  being  procured  for  a dollar.  Money  is  but 
little  known  here,  white  Surat  cloths  being  more  valuable,  as  two  pieces,  each  of  a dollar,  woidd  purchiise 
a bullock,  Water  is  to  he  had,  which,  though  not  very  good,  is  equal  to  that  of  Mocha. 


SUAKIN. 

This  town  is  situated  on  a small  island,  in  latitude  19°  .5  North,  and  longitude  37°  33  East;  the 
port  is  deemed  one  of  the  best  in  the  Red  Sea.  It  was  formerly  very  important,  and  extremely  opulent. 
A Portuguese  writer,  who  visited  it  about  154/),  thus  describes  it: 

‘"Suakin  is  at  present  one  of  tlie  richest  dtic.s  in  the  East,  standing  near  the  coast  of  Abyssinia;  it 
equals,  if  not  exceeds  tlic  most  eminent  places,  in  the  goodness  and  security  of  its  harbour,  facility  in 
“ lading  and  unlading  ships,  traffic  with  remote  countries,  strength  and  advantageous  situation  of  the 
“ town,  &c.  The  harbour  is  slieltered  by  nature  from  all  winds,  and  the  waters  are  so  sniootli  and  still, 
“ that  the  tides  are  scarcely  perceptible.  It  is  capable  of  containing  200  large  shij)s,  besides  a prodigious 
“ number  of  gallics;  the  road  is  from  5 to  10  fathoms  deep,  the  ships  come  up  close  to  the  shore,  quite 
“ round  the  city,  and  may  be  laden,  by  laying  a plank  from  them  to  the  warehouses  of  the  merchants.” 

With  respect  to  commerce,  it  traded  at  that  time  to  the  Peninsula  of  India,  the  Arabian  and  Persian 
Gulls,  and  other  countries.  Since  the  above  period,  this  place  has  fallen  under  the  dominion  of  the 
Turks,  and  has  lost  its  commerce  and  consequence,  and  is  now  only  kept  from  total  ruin,  by  the  caravans 
which  still  come  annmdly  from  the  interior  of  Africa,  in  their  way  to  Mecca.  The  town  is  nearly  in  ruins; 
two  mosque.s  give  it  a handsome  a])pcarance  at  a distance,  and  the  buildings  being  whitewashed,  and  on  an 
elevation,  look  much  better  than  they  really  are.  It  covers  the  whole  of  a small  island,  as  it  did  in  former 
times ; but  instead  of  a number  of  ships,  tliere  are  only  a few  miserable  dows  anchored  alongside  the  houses. 
A trade  is,  however,  carried  on  with  Hodeida,  Mocha,  and  Judda,  for  slaves,  horses,  and  elephants’ teeth. 

PROVISIONS  AND  REFRESHMENTS 

Are  to  be  procured  here  in  abundance.  Water  is  good  and  tolerably  clear;  it  is  to  be  got  from  welh 
and  tanks  in  skins,  25  for  a dollar.  Fish  are  in  plenty,  and  cheap.  Sheep  from  1|  to  2 dollars  each. 
Fowls  are  scarce,  about  four  for  a dollar.  Bullocks  6 to  7 dollars  each,  and  vegetables  plenty  and  cheap. 


COSSIER— SUEZ. 


S5 


COSSIEH. 

This  town  is  in  latitude  26®  8'  North,  and  longitude  3P 15  East.  It  is  an  open  roadstead,  with  very 
bad  holding  ground;  there  is  always  a heavy  swell  setting  in  here;  and  from  the  smallness  of  the  aiuhorage, 
the  shipping  are  obliged  to  lie  very  close  to  the  shore.  It  has  been  a place  of  great  note,  and  is  still  con- 
siderable for  the  exportation  of  grain  to  Arabia,  which  is  brought  by  caravans  Irom  the  Nile.  I'he 
Fort  of  Cossier  stands  upon  a rising  ground,  and  is  a square  building,  of  about  400  yards  in  circumference. 
It  was  formerly  strong  enough  to  have  withstood  a regular  attack,  the  walls  being  of  stone,  and  raised  to 
a considerable  height;  but  at  present  it  is  in  a defenceless  state;  the  breaches  which  time  has  made  in  it, 
being  repaired  with  mud,  and  not  more  than  three  dismantled  cannon  letl  to  protect  it.  Tin*  town  now  is 
in  a most  miserable  condition  ; of  all  the  numerous  houses  which  once  reared  their  heads  here,  nothing  but 
the  walls  are  standing;  of  mosques,  only  the  remains  of  two  can  be  discerned;  but  if  the  town  displ.nys  so 
unfavourable  an  appearance,  it  falls  infinitely  short  of  the  dreary  aspect  of  the  country  around  it.  4'hough 
the  garrison  is  under  the  command  of  a Turkish  officer,  appointed  by  the  Hc*y  of  Cairo,  the  gov(‘rmnent  of 
the  town  is  entirely  in  the  hands  of  the  Arabs. 

IMPORTS  AND  EXPORTS. 

Various  kinds  of  Asiatic  commodities  are  imported  and  sciit  into  the  interior,  by  tin*  eara\ans  which 
bring  dowm  the  grain  to  the  coast.  Exce[Jt  giulii,  the  exports  arc  but  trilling,  and  the  whole  commerce  ol* 
the  port  is  carried  on  by  the  Arabs. 

SUEZ. 

This  town,  which  Is  situated  at  the  head  of  the  Red  Sea,  is  in  latitude  1 Nortli,  and  longitude 
32®  28  East,  and  is  about  one  mile  and  a half  in  circuit.  Here  are  three  channels,  running  near  the  East  end 
of  the  town,  that  form  a curve  uniting  into  one  branch,  which  rims  WTstward  to  the  back  (»f  the  town,  re- 
ceiving at  spring  tides,  dows  and  other  small  vessels.  It  is  nearly  two  miles  and  a half  from  the  town  to 
the  bar.  Suez  is  not  fortified;  the  houses  are  built  closely  together,  and  then*  are  only  tw'o  pas- 
sages into  the  city,  of  which  that  nearest  the  sea  isopen,  the  other  shut  by  a gate.  It  w as  formerly  a plaec 
of  considerable  splendour:  each  Bey  of  Egypt  had  a house,  wherein  his  factor  resided.  'Fhe  hiiildiiigs  are 
many  of  them  large,  hut  at  present  little  more  than  a heap  of  ruins,  chielly  ow  ing  to  the  wanton  injnrie.s 
of  the  French,  who  thus  revenged  themselves  on  the  Beys  for  retiring  into  Upper  Egypt,  and  not  permit- 
ting themselves  to  be  subdued. 

In  December  and  January,  the  pilgrims  assemble  here  to  proceed  to  Judda.  Immediately  on  a ship 
making  her  appearance,  a boat  is  sent  on  hoard  to  enquire  the  purpose  of  her  coming,  and  the  offic(*r 
usually  brings  a small  present  from  the  Governor,  consisting  of  a sheep,  ivc.  As  the  messenger  is  g(‘nerally 
a man  of  some  rank,  it  is  usual  to  salute  him  with  three  guns.  The  most  acceptable  presents  are,  double- 
barrelled  silver  mounted  guns  and  pistols,  China  howls,  repeating  watches,  shawls,  kincohs,  muslins,  &c. 
Any  of  these  things  given  the  Governor,  and  some  trilie  of  the  same  kind  to  the  offic(‘r  of  the  customs, 
will  ensure  you  great  respect,  and  prevent  your  goods  and  baggage  being  tumbled  and  searched. 

COINS. 

The  principal  current  coins  are  burhers,  medines,  sequins,  and  Spanish  dollars.  Hie  huibei  is  a 
copper  coin,  18  of  which  make  a medine.  The  sequin  is  of  two  sorts,  one  called  Fiiiulunelee,  and  passes 
current  for  146  medines;  the  other  zermabob,  which  passes  for  110  incdincs.  The  asper,  though  not 
coined  in  Egypt,  passes  current  here,  3 aspers  making  1 medine. 


TOK~YAMBO. 


WEIGHTS  AND  MEASURES. 

Four  grains  mako  1 kellat,  10  of  winch  make  a dram,  of  which  all  the  weights  are  compounded. 

1 1 dram  is  1 metigal,  by  which  gold  and  silver  arc  weighed. 

144  ditto  1 rottolo,  equal  to  lib.  4 ounces  avoirdupois. 

400  ditto  1 oke,  by  which  sugar  and  other  heavy  goods  are  weighed. 

The  quintal  varies  from  110  to  150  rottolos,  aceprding  to  the  species  of  goods  to  be  weighedr 

IMPORTS. 

There  arc  six  or  eight  large  ships  belonging  to  tliis  port,  which  trade  to  Judda,  and  make  sometimes 
two  voyages  in  a year,  some  of  them  upwards  of  1,000  tonsbiulhen.  The  principal  article  of  import  is 
colfee,  of  which  0,0(X)  tons  are  said  to  be  brought  annually  into  Egypt;  the  other  articles  of  India  produce 
are  similar  to  those  enumerated  at  Jiiddu. 


EXPORTS, 

Immense'  ipiantities  of  grain  are  sent  from  Suez  and  Cossler  to  Arabia;  upon  a moderate  calculation, 
not  less  than  i?0,000  tons  per  annum:  the  balance  is  paid  in  bullion. 

PROVISIONS  AND  REFRESHMENTS. 

The  necessaries  of  life  arc  very  scarce,  and  consequently  dear.  All  kinds  of  animal  food  and  fish  are 
difiicult  to  be  procured.  Bread,  butter,  and  milk,  in  small  quantities.  To  the  westward  of  the  town, 
there  is  a well  of  brackish  water;  but  the  water  to  supply  the  shipping,  and  town  of  Suez,  is  brought  on- 
camels  from  springs  at  a considerable  distance  to  the  eastward  of  the  road,  and  is  very  indilfcrent. 

TOR. 

This  harbour  is  situated  in  latitude  28°  1 9 North,  and  longitude  .33^28  East;  it  is  formed  to  the 
soutlnvard  by  a reef  of  coral  rocks,  and  to  the  northward  by  a low  point  of  land,  on  which  is  placed  a- 
beacon;  it  is  a plain  stone  building,  secured  by  piles,  about  30  feet  high,  with  a mast  placed  in  the  middle, 
and  may  he  seen  very  plainly  at  three  leagues  distance.  The  town  is  situated  at  the  N.  FI  part  of  the  har^ 
bour,  and  is  inhabited  by  Greeks  and  Hedonin  Arabs;  near  the  town  there  are  the  remains  of  a well-con- 
structed foitification.  When  tlw  strong  northerly  winds  are  blowing,  the  cargoes  which  are  brought  from 
Judda,  and  intended  for  Suez,  are  landed  at  this  j)lace,  and  carried  on  camels  to  their  place  of  destination. 

PROVISIONS  AND  REFRESHMENTS. 

Here  is  the  best  water  of  any  place  in  the  Red  Sea,  and  you  bale  it  out  of  three  wells,  that  are  not‘ 
more  than  200  yards  from  the  beach.  You  can  get  no  refreshments  of  any  kind  here ; but  there  is  a mo* 
nftsteiy  on  Mount  Sinai,  about  20  miles  from  Tor,  from  whence  you  may  now  and  then  get  some  fruit' 
and  vegetables,  brought  down  by  a Greek  priest. 

YAMBO 

Is  a considerable  town  in  latitude  24^  10' Noilh,  and  longitude  38^  21' East.  It  is  the  seaport  of 
Medina,  from  wliich  it  is  distant  about  100  miles;  here  the  pilgrims  from  Egypt  land,  it  being  the  port^ 


JUDDA. 


h7 

from  which  the  communication  is  more  immediately  carried  on  with  Ej^ypt.  It  Is  the  general  resort  of  all 
the  Arab  vessels  that  ply  on  this  sea,  and  has  a safe  and  convenient  hurhoiir  for  their  protection  in  bud  wea- 
tlier.  Its  situation  behind  a chain  of  shoals  and  breakers,  secluded  it  from  the  knowledgo  of  hhiropean 
navigators  till  1777,  when  a country  vessel  bound  to  Sueis  was  inv(‘igled  into  the  harbour,  seized,  and  sub- 
jected to  heavy  exactions  previous  to  her  liberation;  the  perfidious  coiuluct  of  the  natives,  therefore,  upon 
this  occasion  ought  to  be  a warning  to  all  ships  to  avoid  so  dangerous  a set  of  men.  'fhe  town  is  at  tin* 
bottom  of  the  bay  or  harbour,  and  is  in  a ruinous  condition;  there  are  the  remains  of  a fort  hen',  and  a 
few  old  guns,  but  the  firing  of  them  would  endanger  the  safety  of  the  fortifications. 

JUDDA. 

This,  town  is  situated  in  latitude  21^  29  North,  and  longitude  30-  lA  East;  it  is  a port  of  consider;d)le 
trade,  arising  from  the  numerous  pilgrims  who  come  from  the  various  Alahoinetnn  counliies  to  ^isit 
Mecca,  wdiich  is  about  21  miles  inland.  Tin*  entrance  to  the  road  is  full  of  shoals;  it  would  llierelore  he 
im{)i'iident  to  attempt  going  in  without  a pilot;  it  signals  are  made  with  two  guns,  the  native  pilots  will 
meet  a ship  well  outside,  and  carry  her  to  the  anchorage,  w hich  is  in  J2  iatlioins,  three  miles  distant  Iroiii 
tlie  shore,  the  town  bearing  about  E.  liy  S. 

The  town  of  Judda  is  .superior  to  that  of  Mocha.  The  houses  are  built  of  large  blocks  of  Afjuln'poi  e; 
and  tlie  streets  are  very  narrow,  wdiieli  is  an  advantage,  as  they  are  c onsequenlly  shaded  the  gi(*ul(‘r  pait  of 
the  day.  The  landing-place  is  in  front  of  the  Vizier’s  palace;  wdiieh  is  j)ieasiintly  situated  close  to 
the  sea;  the  custom-house  likewise  faces  the  sea,  and  is  a handsome  lofty  building.  The  ground  rising  from 
the  sea,  gives  the  town  a good  appearance. 

The  English  formerly  carried  on  a considerable  trade  liere ; l)ut  of  late  yeai’s  it  has  mnch  declineil,  in 
consequence  of  the  numerous  extortions  under  the  head  of  presents,  N:c.  and  the  insolence  and  ill-treatment 
to  which  all  Christians  are  subject  in  Mahometan  countries. 

Though  the  trade  of  Judda  is  still  considerable,  yet  it  is  only  a mart  between  Egypt  anil  India.  The 
ships  from  Suez  do  not  proceed  farther  than  this  port,  and  those  from  India  are  seldom  permitted  to  pro- 
ceed to  Suez;  they  have  also  a trade  across  the  Gulf  to  Cossier  and  Massiuih. 

COINS. 

. Accounts  are  kept  in  cruse  and  duaiiees,  40  of  the  latter  making  one  of  the  formi  i*. 

No  money  is  coined  here.  Foreign  coins  of  all  denominations  pass  current.  From  tliegi  cat  inllux  of 
pilgrims,  large  quantities  of  small  coins  are  in  circulation,  but  they  arc  never  eaiTied  ont  ol  the  country  by 
Europeans. 

List  of  tSilver  and  Gold  Coins  at  Judda^  and  tvhat  thci/  commnnUj  pass  curnnt  for. 

Dollars.  o/.  dwt. 

Judda  weight  . . 100  . 87  4 250  cruse. 

German  crowns  . 1(K)  91  6 255  ditto. 

Razeens  (Barbary)  100  . 87  4 240  ditto. 

Lump  silver,  if  good  100  , 87  4 250  ditto. 

PistareensofPhilip  V.  100  . 87  4 225  ditto. 

LyondoUars  . . 100  . 87  0 195  to  200. 

Pope’s  coins,  per  100  . . , . 125  ditto. 

Muscovy  coins 150  ditto. 

Bar  silver  . . . 100  . 87  4 250  ditto. 

The  exchange  at  Judda  fluctuates,  but  the  general  average  may  be  taken  at  250  Judda  cruse  per  liun- 
dml  Spanish  head  doUai-s.  The  pillar  and  head  dollar  are  esteemed  here  of  the  same  value,  althougli  the 


Zelotlas,  per  tali*  . HH)  Dollars  100  to  105  cruse. 
Venetians  100--22J  Sicca  Rupees  . . 1\J  ditto 

Staniboles 4 1 <hlb) 

Zermabobs ditto 

Gingelecs **1  ditto 

Tiirahs <*dto 

Gubbers,  100  of  which  are  2}  percent  less 

tlian  that  of  Veneliiins,  or  St^imbolcs  . 4 1 ditto 

Ring  gold,  sold  per  vakia 4'0  ditto 


B8 


•n)DDA. 


pillar  is  alxnit  2 per  cent,  better  than  the  head.  French  crowns  are  13  per  cent,  less,  though  of  equal 
standard,  by  which  you  may  gain  an  advantage  in  purchasing  French  crowns,  or  pillar  dollars;  but  ii‘ 
possible,  avoid  taking  any  gold  coins  to  India  upon  your  own  account. 


WEIGHTS. 

Arc  vakeas,  rattles,  maunds,  frazils,  bahars,  and  are  thus  divided. 

15  Vakeas  Hattie. 

2 Rattles  f , \ 1 Maiind. 

Vmake^ 

10  Maunds  C j 1 Frazil. 

10  Frazils  3 C ^ Bahar. 

But  as  all  goods  are  weighed  by  the  steelyards,  after  the  Turkisli  manner,  the  European  as  well  as 
the  Turkey  merchants,  are  obliged  to  rest  contented  witli  such  w’eights  as  the  weigher  thinks  proper  to 
give  them.  No  merchants  are  allowed  to  weigh  goods,  when  bought  or  sold,  at  their  houses;  besides  this, 
there  is  an  unreasonable  custom  of  certain  allowances  on  all  w'eighable  goods;  the  particulars  of  such  allow- 
ances, besides  the  tares,  being  as  follow  : 


Agala  wood  .... 

. ...  10 

per  cent. 

Lump  Lac 

. . . 20  per  cent. 

Beetle  nut  .... 

. ...  10 

ditto 

Metals  of  all  kinds  . . . 

...  6 

ditto 

Cloves 

. ...  10 

ditto 

Nutmegs 

. . . 10 

ditto 

Cam  ph  ire 

....  5 

ditto 

Pepper  

...  10 

ditto 

Cardamums  .... 

. ...  10 

ditto 

Sugar  

. . . 20 

ditto 

Calambac 

. ...  10 

ditto 

Sandal  wood 

. . . 10 

ditto 

Cinnamon  .... 

. ...  10 

ditto 

Stick  Lac 

. . . 20 

ditto 

Ginger 

. ...  10 

ditto 

Thread 

. . . 10 

ditto 

Long  pepper  .... 

....  20 

ditto 

Turmeric 

. . . 10 

ditto 

IMPORTS. 


The  principal  article  of  import  from  India  is  piece  goods,  of  whicli  the  following  are  the  proper 
lengths  and  breadths,  and  should  be  as  near  these  dimensions  us  possible. 


Baftaes.  < 


' Dacca 
Jugdea  . 
Chaundporc 
^ Jama  wars 
Comconnas  Patna  . . 

Cowpeaches  .... 
Patna 
Cogmary 
Maulda  . 
Asmariy  . 
Bengaliynatties 
Bahur 

f Charconnas 
Silk  flowered 
White  ditto 
Plain 
Coincallas 


Cossaes. 


Doreas. 


Dimities 
Emerties  Patna 
Elatchees  Maulda 
Gurmasmoots  . 
Hummnms  . . 
Keish  .... 
Mungadootics  . 


2 i covids  by  2 
2 
2 
2 
2 
n 

21 

2 

H 

n 
2 
2 
* 
2 
2 
2 
U 
li 

J* 

3 

2 


2i 

24 

8 

3(1 

26 

26 

40 

4ft 

38 

34 

34 

4ft 

4ft 

4ft 

4ft 

4ft 

24 

27 

18 

44 

24 

8 


Mulmuls. 


Sonnocs. 


Patna  . 
Mahmoodatties 
Annundees 
Santipore 
Savagepore 
Mutcnacols 
Savodohatts 
Gold  . 

San'ies 
Limboa 
Bulgarry 
Mumpore 


Soot  Romals 
Seerbands  Sonargams 
Seersuckers  white  . 
Terrindams  . . . 
r Dacca 


Tanjebs. 


! 


I 


Annundee 
Santoose 
Bowally 
VizagapaUm  long  cloth 
’ Jamawars 

Soosees. 


White 
iPbeta  . 


36  covids  by  2 
2 
2 

2* 

H 

H 
U 
2 
2 
2 


40 

38 

40 

40 

32 

40 

32 

32 

24 

24 

24 


1£  in  a piece 
40  covids  by  1| 
24  . . 2 

40  91 

38  ..  If 

36  . . li 

40  ..  2i 

36  .. 

72  covids  long 

22  . : li 

42  . . li 

42  . . li 


auDm. 


The  fonowing  commodities  are  liktfwise' imported  from  India: 


Benjamin. 

Camphire. 

Flanks. 

Silk,  raw. 

Beetle  nut. 

Ginger. 

Quicksilver. 

Shawls. 

Cassia. 

Iron. 

Rice. 

Saltpetre. 

Cotton  wool. 

Lump  Lac. 

Sandal  wood. 

Tin. 

Cotton  thread. 

Lead. 

Stick  lac. 

Tutenague. 

Cardamums. 

Musk. 

Sapan  wood. 

1 Turmeric. 

China  ware. 

Nutmegs. 

Sugar. 

Tobacco. 

Cinnamon. 

Opium. 

Sugar  candy. 

Thread. 

Cloves. 

Pepper. 

Steel. 

1 Wrmilion. 

The  demand  for  British  manufactures,  and  other  European  articles,  is  very  trifling. 


EXPORTS. 


Very  few  articles  are  procured  at  Judda;  coflTee  is  the  principal.  The  balance  of  trade  with  India 
is  carried  back  in  Spanish,  Venetian,  and  German  coin.s,  and  occasionally  a few  pearls. 


DUTIES  AND  PRESENTS. 


Piece-goods  pay  8 per  cent,  customs  in  specie,  and  all  other  goods  are  valued  by  the  custom-house 
officers,  and  whatever  value  they  put  on  them,  they  will  never  abate.  As  all  piece-goods  pay  in  specie,  it 
is  proper  to  pack  even  hundreds  in  every  bale;  or  thus,  100  pi^s,  125,  150,  175,  200,  &c.  for  whatever 
odd  pieces  the  officers  find  in  a bale,  they  value  at  an  unreasonable  rate;  neither  is  this  to  be  remedied  but 
by -the  Bashaw,  to  whom  you  can  seldom  obtain  admission  for  that  purpose. 

Considerable  presents  arc  necessary  here,  both  in  piece-goods  and  money ; the  following  is  a list  of 
presents  given  to  the  Bashaw  and  his  officers,  with  the  different  assortment  of  goods,  and  the  species  they 


are  to  consist  of. 

Cruse, 

Bashaw  .... 

. . 42 

pieces,  value 

500 

Xeriff  .... 

. . 42 

ditto 

500 

Visier  .... 

. . 21 

ditto 

250 

Kial  Bashaw  . . 

. . 21 

ditto 

250 

Eusaphager  Visier 

. . 12 

ditto 

130 

Devan  EfiTendy  . 

. . 13 

ditto 

140 

Aboosuid  Caffas  . 

. . 13 

ditto 

140 

Kasnagar  Aga 

. , 12 

ditto 

130 

Visier  of  Mecca  . 

. . 15 

ditto 

160 

Bash  Cattel  . . 

. . 43 

ditto 

140 

Zeiny  Effendy 

. . 13 

ditto 

140 

Shebander  Mecca 

. . 8 

ditto 

80 

Cruse 


Selecta  Aga  .... 

. 5 

pieces,  value 

50 

Jockadar 

. 5 

ditto 

40 

Eusoph  kia  J udda  . . 

. 5 

ditto 

60 

Surbashey,  or  Cutuul  . 

. 3 

ditto 

25 

Obadashey  Azaban  . . 

. 3 

ditto 

25 

Obadashey  Janizary 

. 3 

ditto 

25 

Bashaw’s  custom  porters 

. 3 

ditto 

25 

XerifTs  ditto  • , . 

. 3 

ditto 

25 

Four  Peons  at  the  gate 

. 12 

ditto 

70 

Pilot 

. 6 

ditto 

30 

Shroft' 

. 8 

ditto 

85 

Total  . . Pieces 

281 

Value  3, 

000 

The  above  presents  are  to  be  made  out  of  such  goods  as  are  in  your  cargo,  of  fine,  middling,  and 
coarse.  The  Bashaw’s  and  XerifTs  presents  are  24  pieces  each,  as  by  the  foregoing  list;  and  these  to  consist 
of  two  pieces  of  every  assortment  of  the  finest  and  middling  goods;  and  should  a few  pieces  be  wanting,  you 

N 


90 


JUDDA. 


are  to  make  up  the  deficiency  out  of  the  ordinary  assortments.  The  Bashaw  Kia,  and  the  XeriiT  Visler, 
are  to  have  21  pieces  each,  as  by  the  list,  and  that,  one  piece  of  each  assortment,  as  the  Bashaw  and  Xeriff 
have;  the  rest  of  the  officers'*  presents  are  to  be  made  out  of  the  middling  and  ordinary  assortments; 
and  care  must  be  taken  that  the  quantity  of  pieces  given  to  each  [lerson,  may  be  sorted,  so  that  the  valua* 
tion  by  the  list  may  not  be  exceeded.  The  presents  in  money,  are  to  the  petty  officers  after  visiting  the 
Bashaw,  and  amount  in  the  whole  to  280  Judda  cruse. 


Pori  Charges^  and  Boat  and  Cooky  Hite, 


Pilotage  in  and  out  • . 

. . . 100  cruse. 

Boat  hire  for  shipping  off  baggage 

. 30  cruse. 

Anchorage,  to  the  Xeriff  . 

. . . 500  ditto 

Cooley  hire,  and  buxies  . . . 

12  ditto 

Ditto,  to  the  Bashaw  . . 

. . . 5()0  ditto 

Mirbhar's  present 

25  ditto 

Ditto,  to  the  Kia  . . • 

. . . 50  ditto 

Ditto  deputy'‘s  present  .... 

16  ditto 

Order  for  the  ship's  sailing 

. . . 35  ditto 

Arab  writers  wages 

. 250  ditto 

Boat  hire,  on  baggage  . . 

. . . 30  ditto 

House  rent 

1,000  ditto 

Cooley  hire 

« . . 10  ditto 

Present  to  linguist 

. 600  ditto 

Custom-house  searchers  for  cutting  the  bales  to  clear  the  customs,  8 bales  for  a cruse. 

To  the  Bashaw'‘s  guard 

on  board,  1 cruse  per  day  till  cleared,  and  20  cruse  as  buxies. 

The  Rates  of  Boat  Hire  are  as  follow. 

Robins  of  Pepper,  each 

. . . 14  duanees. 

Chests  of  Benjamin,  each  . . . 

14  duanees. 

Bales  of  Cardamums  • . 

. . . 14  ditto 

Bags  of  rice,  sugar,  &c 

7 ditto 

Chests  of  China  ware  . , 

. . . 14  ^itto 

Lead  and  Tutenague,  in  slabs  . . 

7 ditto 

Chests  of  lac,  &c.  , . . 

. . . 14  ditto 

Boat  hire,  and  writer'‘8  fees  . . 

25  ditto 

The  Rates  of  Cooley  Hire  are  as  follow. 

Bales  of  Pepper  . . , 

, . . d per  cruse. 

Bags  of  rice,  sugar,  &c.  . . . 

20  per  cruse- 

Ditto  Cardamoms  . . . 

. . . 9 ditto 

Stowing  bales  in  godown  . . . 

10  ditto 

Chests  of  China  ware  . . 

. . . 2 ditto 

Chests  of  Benjamin 

9 ditto 

Instructions  respecting  the  Trade  from  India  to  Judda^  by  II,  Elmore, 

As  soon  as  you  anchor  in  the  harbour  of  Judda,  the  Eniibar  and  officers  of  the  Bashaw  will  come  off, 
and  demand  a manifest  of  your  cargo,  that  is,  the  number  of  packages  ; they  do  not  enquire  about  the  con- 
tents— only  say,  so  many  chests  of  China  ware;  so  many  bales  of  Bengal  goods,  &c.  The  only  man  I can 
recommend  to  you  at  Judda  is  Shaik  Ally,  as  an  Arab  writer,  (which  it  is  neccessary  you  should  have)  ; he 
will  also  serve  as  your  broker. 

When  the  Enubar  s boat  leaves  you,  he  will  leave  two  custom-house  officers  on  board,  who  will  re- 
main till  the  cargo  is  all  delivered,  and  the  ship  searched,  to  whom,  during  their  stay,  there  is  a customary 
daily  allowance  for  provisions.  In  addition  to  these  officers,  there  will  be  a boat  moored  a-stem  of  you 
every  night  while  any  cargo  remains  on  board : and  do  not  suffer  your  own  boat  to  leave  the  ship,  except 
when  it  cannot  be  avoided,  as  the  officers  of  Government  are  both  troublesome  and  insolent,  stopping,  and 
searching  your  people,  &c.  but  as  soon  as  the  ship  is  cleared  and  searched,  this  ceremony  is  dispensed  with^ 
and  no  longer  pursued,  and  you  have  a free  communication  with  the  shore. 

Should  it  so  happen  that  you  arrive  at  Judda  before  the  Hodjee,  get  permission  to  go  on  shore  as  soon 
as  possible,  and  in  this  case  the  Government  will  wish  to  hasten  you;  so  that  there  will  be  no  difficulty  hi 


JUDDA. 


91 


procuring  the  indulgence.  But  do  not  leave  the  ship,  until  you  have  agreed  to  he  allowed  to  chuse  yoiu 
own  broker  and  shroff:  and  have  it  in  writing  under  their  signature,  or  else  tluy  will  iniimse  some  crea. 
ture  of  their  own  upon  you,  who  pay  them  for  it.  I have  already  said,  that  Shaik  Ally  will  probably  be 
your  broker,  and  assist  you  in  chusing  a shroff,  if  you  cannot  get  Ifodjee  Hogg  Sayell,  who  is  the  most 
honest  man  in  the  English  service,  at  Judda:  stipulate  with  them  also,  that  all  your  cargo  pay  the  duties, 
charges,  &c.  in  kind,  which  will  amount  to  8 or  9 per  cent,  and  that  it  be  opened  and  examined  at  your 
own  house  only,  and  by  no  means  in  the  public  custom-house. 

A good  house,  with  convenient  warehouses  and  godowns,  will  cost  you  from  3(X)  to  400  cruse  for  the 
season. 

When  you  go  on  shore,  your  first  visit  is  to  the  Bashaw,  and  then  to  the  Xeriff,  after  which,  and 
you  have  returned  to  your  own  house,  begin  to  land  your  cargo  as  fast  as  possible,  and  arrange  it  in  your 
godowns  for  inspection  (taking  care  it  comes  immediately  from  your  boats  to  your  house,  and  not  to  go 
near  the  custom-house,)  sorting  each  description  of  goods  by  themselves,  freight  and  private  trade  promis- 
cuously; and  when  all  is  assorted,  send  information  to  the  Government,  that  your  cargo  is  ready  for  exa- 
mination. 

When  the  Bashaw  and  Visier  come,  point  out  to  them  the  different  parcels  of  buftas,  &c.  and  tell 
them  they  contain  such  a number  of  pieces,  of  such  and  sucli  goods,  but  be  very  exact  as  to  the  quantity, 
and  number  in  each  bale:  for  if  they  find  the  number  agree  wdtii  your  account,  they  will  not  open  more 
than  a bale  or  two  of  each  kind ; but  if  the  number  differs  from  your  report,  they  will  open  every  bale  of 
your  cargo:  this  will  be  exceeding  troublesome,  and  cause  you  to  be  suspected  in  all  your  future 
dealings. 

When  this  job  of  examination  and  settling  the  customs  is  over  (which  you  will  find  the  most  trouble- 
some of  any  you  will  meet  with  at  Judda,)  you  are  to  make  up  the  (Tovernment  presents  of  piece-goods, 
two  or  three  pieces  of  each  kind  in  your  cargo,  probably  to  the  amount  of  4, (KX)  cruse;  of  this,  Shaik  Ally 
will  inform  you  particularly.  These  presents  must  not  be  charged  to  the  owners  alone,  but  in  proportion 
to  all  the  freighters;  and  your  brokerage,  which  will  be  about  1,.500  or  ^^,(XX)  cruse  (including  your  Arab 
writer),  must  be  charged  in  like  proportions. 

Your  presents  being  delivered,  find  out  (among  the  shroffs)  what  is  the  price  of  old  and  new  German 
crowns,  Venetians,  stamboles,  zirmabobs,  and  other  coins;  but  do  not  buy  any  zirmabob.s,  inissirec, 
or  gingeriys,  as  they  do  not  turn  to  advantage;  the  best  guide  for  your  direction,  is  to  have  the  product 
of  these  coins  from  the  Bombay  and  Madras  mints,  and  make  your  purchase  of  them  according  to  your 
calculation. 

When  you  are  thus  prepared,  the  merchants  will  come  to  you,  and  even  press  upon  you,  if  the  Hodjee 
is  near.  You  need  not  talk  of  ready  money,  as  none  pay  until  after  the  llodjee;  so  that  you  must  make 
your  bargains  to  be  paid  after  the  Hodjee,  and  their  returns  from  Mecca,  together  with  the  specie  in  which 
you  will  be  paid,  and  the  rate  of  exchange  of  each  kind  of  coin ; all  these  articles  must  be  booked  by  your 
writer,  as  his  book  is  your  voucher  in  case  any  dispute  arises,  (and  indeed  this  is  the  only  real  use  of  having 
an  Arab  writer). 

The  first  offer  is  invariably  the  best;  and  if  you  can  agree  with  one  person  for  your  whole  cargo,  you 
will  reap  a double  advantage,  for  you  will  get  a larger  price,  and  less  trouble.  The  time  from  your  arrival, 
until  the  time  of  the  Hodjee,  will  be  very  short;  and  after  its  arrival,  your  goods  will  not  sell,  at  least  not 
to  such  a good  account. 

You  are  to  be  guided  by  the  character  of  the  merchants  to  whom  you  give  credit.  In  this  I will  not 
pretend  to  guide  you,  as  the  honest  man  of  one  year  may  turn  out  otherwise  the  year  following;  and  by 
presents  and  lyibeiy  to  Government,  may  purchase  his  protection ; or  may  probably  be  able  so  far  to  in- 
fluence Government  to  prohibit  any  others,  but  himself  and  his  creatures,  from  ])urchasing  your  goods.  As  a 

N« 


JUDDA, 


«nide,  I can  t(*ll  you  what  they  say  of  each  other:  ‘‘  If  he  has  been  at  Mecca  once,  take  care  of  him;  if 
“ he  has  been  there  twice,  do  not  trust  him;  but  if  he  has  been  there  three  times,  have  no  kind  of  dealing 
‘‘  uith  him,  for  he  will  cheat  you.” 

There  is  one  thing  I cannot  omit  in  this  place.  In  the  event  of  your  selling  the  whole  of  your  cargo 
to  one  person,  or  only  one  particular  species  of  goods,  you  ought  to  observe  (as  they  buy  them  at  an  ave- 
rage price)  that  the  proprietors  of  fine  goods  of  that  specie,  should  liave  a proportionate  advance  upon  their 
goods;  and  consequently  the  proprietors  of  coarse  goods  should  have  such  an  advance  taken  from  the 
amount  sale  of  their  goods,  being  of  a worse  quality;  and  only  sold  (probably)  by  the  demand  of  the  other 
(fine)  goods. 

As  soon  as  the  merchants  return  from  Mecca,  which  will  be  about  a month,  l>egin  to  collect  your 
money,  and  send  it  off  to  your  ship  immediately  as  you  receive  it;  and  never,  if  you  can  possibly  help  it, 
keep  any  in  your  bouse;  and  at  the  same  time  call  upon  all  the  niercliants  and  pilgrims,  and  fix  upon  a day 
for  sailing.  The  merchants  will  by  this  means  prepaie  their  treasure,  freight,  and  themselves,  as  passengers; 
from  whom,  and  the  pilgrim  passengers,  the  (’aptain's  principal  emolument  arises,  as  he  has  so  much  a 
head  for  each,  as  well  as  so  much  more  for  his  water  and  provisions;  both  of  which,  by  custom,  are 
allowed  to  him  by  the  owners  of  the  ship. 

A furiher  emolument  of  the  (’aptain  arises  from  insuring  the  freight  treasure  which  he  takes  on  board, 
and  which  the  native  irierchaiits  never  object  to,  although  he  may  be  a passenger  on  board,  and  will  take 
the  Captaiifs  guarantee,  though  not  worth  a sous,  for  lacs  of  dollars,  if  he  has  so  much  on  board. 

The  freight  of  treasure  from  Judda  to  Surat,  Bombay,  or  Madras,  is  generally  3 per  cent.;  the  pre- 
mium of  insurance,  as  the  Captain  can  agree,  from  one  to  two  and  a half  per  cent.  The  freight  of  grulT 
goods  is  arbitrary,  as  it  must  be  agreed  upon  by  both  parties. 

Should  the  season  be  so  far  advanced,  as  to  make  it  doubtful  whether  your  ship  will  be  able  to  go  to 
Surat,  deliver  her  freight,  and  leave  it  before  the  full  moon  in  March  (or  not.)  It  would  be  better  to  de- 
cline taking  any  Surat  freight,  unless  the  mercliants  will  allow  you  to  send  the  treasure  by  some  other  con- 
veyance from  Bombay,  immediately  upon  your  arrival  tliere;  if  they  agree  to  this,  the  additional  expence 
must  be  paid  by  their  constituent  at  Sural,  and  not  by  you.  If  you  can  prevail  upon  them  to  do  this,  it 
will  considerably  increase  your  freight,  as  they  have  large  consignments  from  thence  in  Guzzerat,  Cossim- 
buzar,  and  Bengal  piece-goods,  &c.  and  consecjuently  have  large  remittances  to  make. 

rrobably,  if  the  pi  ices  of  goods  are  low  at  Judda,  and  you  do  not  sell  at  the  first  offer,  your  Aiab 
writer  w ill  endeavour  to  [lersuade  you  to  send  them  to  Mecca,  in  Jiopes  of  tlieir  being  entrusted  to  his  care^ 
and  himself  with  the  sale  at  the  Ilodjee,  and  have  the  commissions ; they  will  furnish  you  with  very  spe- 
cious and  favourable  accounts  of  the  markets,  as  well  as  bringing  numbers  of  people  to  recommend  them^ 
as  being  well  ac(]uainted  with  the  markets,  and  of  the  highest  integrity.  But  do  not  on  any  account  fall 
into  this  snare  ; for  as  certain  us  you  send  goods  to  Mecca  on  youi*  own  account,  to  be  sold  at  the  Hodjee^ 
you  will  be  n considerable  loser  (if  not  lose  the  whole)  by  the  speculation. 

The  customs  upon  your  China  ware  and  goods  will  be  settled  by  the  Government,  and  (though  it 
may  lie  extravagantly  exorbitant,  complaint  is  useless,  ns  you  can  have  no  redress)  from  the  account  you 
give  them,  and  which  should  be  done  by  the  supercargo  or  purser,  in  the  public  custom-house;  as  it  is  a 
necessary  form,  it  ought  to  be  complied  with. 

Your  musk  and  agala  wood  they  will  weigh  in  tlie  custom-house,  and  pjobably  want  to  open  it  there 
to  satisfy  themselves;  but  you  must  not  allow  it  to  be  done.  If  they  want  to  see  the  contents  of  your 
{lackages,  let  them  come  to  your  house ; for  if  you  oj>en  any  thing  in  the  custom-house,  you  may  rest  as- 
sun  d of  losing  25  per  cent,  and  you  cannot  possibly  help  it,  they  are  such  expert  thieves. 

Wlien  they  deliver  you  the  amount  of  customs  upon  your  graft'  goods^  it  will  be  10  per  cent  abova 
what  the  customs  should  be. 


jitdda: 


93 


Upon  both  piece-goods  and  gruff  cargo  tliey  charge  you,  und(‘r  the  head  of  Calum  and  Xeral|»hie, 
10  per  cent,  upon  the  amount  of  your  customs,  which  they  call  fees,  for  the  drlierent  wi  il(Ms  and  people 
attached  to  the  custom-house.  By  a small  fee  you  may  prevail  upon  them  to  take  your  ( hiini  ware  at  five 
per  cent,  without  unpacking  or  counting,  which  will  reduce  the  whole  of  your  cu4{)ins  to  ahmi  1 1 or  12 
per  cent.;  and  if  the  time  before  the  Hodjee  is  short,  the  Government  will  readily  agree  to  this ; but  will 
take  ten  cups  from  every  chest  of  China  ware,  exclusive  of  the  customs.  What  this  is  done  for,  I could  not 
find  out,  only  that  it  was  an  old  established  custom.  As  you  generally  sell  your  China  ware  by  the  corge, 
which  is  20  in  all  parts  of  India,  you  are  to  recollect  that  the  corge  is  22  at  Jiidda. 

When  you  sell  your  sugar-candy,  or  any  thing  else  by  weight,  send  for  the  custom-house  steelyards 
(as  it  will  prevent  disputes),  and  have  the  goods  weighed  and  delivered  at  your  own  house.  They  make  arbi- 
trary deductions  from  5 to  20  per  cent,  for  tare  of  the  packages,  therefore  agree  ])reviously  about  the  tare. 
Sugar-candy  is  about  10  per  cent.;  upon  this  account  a small  present  to  the  custom-house  weighinun  (con- 
veyed.privately)  may  be  advantageously  disposed  of,  as  he  generally  fixes  the  tare;  and  as  well  as  his  pre- 
sent, give  him  a few  cruse  and  a bottle  of  arrack  occasionally.  If  the  Bashaw  purchases  your  cargo,  or  any 
part  pf  it,  the  w'cighman  dare  not  shew  you  the  smallest  tavour  in  the  delivery;  on  the  contrary,  you  may 
expect  the  reverse:  but  even  in  this  your  present  \vill  not  be  misapplied,  ns  he*  will  for  arrack  and  a few 
cruse,  do  all  he  dure  to  si^n’c  you. 

In.si.st  upon  your  shroff  having  the  weighing  of  yoiu'  musk:  it  will  save  you  a great  deal.  Musk  sells 
hy  the  rattle  (of  4()0  drams). 

You  pay  1,00(1  to  1,2(X)  cinisc  anchorage,  with  about  3A0  cruse  w lien  you  get  on  the  coast,  which  will 
be  all  the  charges,  beside  the  pilotage,  you  have  to  pay  at  Judda. 

It  may  be  now  necessaiy  to  caution  you  against  disputes,  which  will  unavoidably  arise  (eitlier  about 
your  prices,  payments,  money,  or  goods),  that  they  sliould  be  settled  amicably,  if  possible,  by  your  sliroll, 
or  by  merchants  of  respectability ; but  if  you  are  under  the  necessity  of  referring  the  dispute  to  the  Go- 
vernment, apply  to  wdioever  has  the  most  weight  at  Judda,  either  the  Hashaw  or  the  Xeriffs,  but  not 
without  a present.  If  your  application  is  to  the  Bashaw%  go  yourself  personally;  ninl  if  to  the  Xerifl,  go 
(o  his  house  in  Judda:  if  he  is  absent,  w'rite  to  him  to  Mecca,  through  your  Arab  writer.  But  all  this  is 
only  upon  the  most  urgent  necessity,  for  all  communication  with  the  Ciovermncnt  ought  to  cease  imiuc- 
diiitely  after  paying  your  present,  and  paying  your  cu.stoms. 

Having  finished  your  business  at  Judda,  which  will  probably  l)(‘  in  the  end  of  July,  and  able  to  sail 
by  the  1st  of  August,  you  will  perhaps  "get  to  Mocha  by  the  10th,  of  wdiich  you  should  inform  the 
broker  before  you  leave  Mocha  to  go  up  the  Red  Sea,  and  desire  him  to  procure  you  all  the  freight  he  can^ 
and  have  it  ready  by  this  time.  The  freight  from  Mocha  to  Bombay  is  2\  per  cent,  for  treasure,  and  to 
Surat,  to  be  delivered  free  of  all  charges  to  the  consignees,  3 pt?r  cent,  for  gold,  and  for  silver;  by  this 
mode  you  will  be  able  to  do  all  your  business,  and  leave  Mocha,  perhaps  with  a full  freight,  hy  the  20th  of 
August,  (particularly  if  it  should  be  a year  when  there  is  no  Company’s  ship  there;  then  there  will  be  little 
doubt  of  your  getting  full  of'  freight),  by  which  means  you  will  get  to  Bombay  in  the  early  part  of  Sep- 
tember, and  have  fine  weather,  and  a whole  season  before  you  to  go  to  Sui’at,  if  necessary. 

The  customs  upon  piece-goods  being  taken  in  kind  at  Judda,  the  Government  allow  the  purser 
and  linguist  the  customs  arising  to  it,  of  two  bales,  r/r.  one  bale  each,  and  give  them  leave  to  pick 
the  two  richest  bales  in  the  cargo  for  themselves.  The  CapUin  being  generally  his  own  purser,  this 
is  also  one  of  his  perquisites,  as  well  as  his  freight  treasure:  lie  draws  the  following  primage,  vu.  on 
every  1,250  cruse,  he  has  one  German  crown;  the  signing  every  bill  of  lading,  one  German  crown;  every 
passenger  on  going  on  board,  one  German  crown ; and  on  every  bale,  chest,  bundle,  or  package  whatso- 
ever of  freight,  25  duanees  each: 


JUDDA. 


A comparative  View  of  the  relative  Value  of  Coins 


100  Mexico  dollars  will  mint  . 239  2 74 
100  French  crowns 239  0 fi9 


JOG  English  crowns 239  2 74 

100  Pillar  dollars 241  3 38 

100  German  crowns 226  3 92 

100  Duccatoons 244  1 39 


taken  at  Judda^  with  Bombay. 


100  old  abassees  will  mint  . . 226  3 80 

100  new  abasses 266  3 0 

100  estimates 239  2 74 

100  old  Seville  estimates  . . . 242  3 70 

100  Peru,  or  cobb  dollars  . . • 224  2 28 

100  lion  dollars  ......  193  1 4 


Should  you  wish  to  coin  your  silver,  the  above  statement  will  be  found  pretty  correct,  exclusive  of 
mintage,  which  amounts  to  about  4 per  cent.;  but  if  your  ship  is  going  to  Madras  and  Bengal,  it  is  better 
to  sell  your  silver  to  the  shroff,  than  to  coin  it.  One  hundred  ounces  of  standard  silver  will  bring  258 j or 
259  Arcot  rupees ; and  there  being  only  1 per  cent,  difference  between  Arcot  and  Madras  rupees,  makes 
4t  7 per  cent,  better  thus  to  sell  to  the  shroffs,  than  coining  it  into  Madras  rupees. 

From  the  above  statement,  it  would  be  best,  in  making  your  sales,  to  fix  both  the  price  and  value  of 
your  silver  and  gold  coin  (in  cruse)  with  the  merchant.  In  this  be  very  exact,  and  observe  that  gold  fluc- 
tuates more  than  silver  all  over  India : it  would  be  necessary,  therefore,  before  you  leave  Calcutta,  Madras, 
Bombay,  or  Surat,  to  have  the  price  current  of  all  kinds  of  coins,  from  the  Shroffs,  in  the  current  rupee  of 
the  place ; by  this  means  you  will  know  to  a certainty  w^hat  your  coins  will  produce,  and  the  best  market 
for  the  sale  of  them  : add  to  this,  large  sums  are  paid  at  Judda  in  gold,  and  a small  error  in  calculation 
may  amount  to  a considerable  sum.  And  be  guarded,  upon  the  receipt  of  gold,  not  to  suffer  them  to 
charge  you  2 per  cent,  for  what  they  call  overweight ; or  if  obliged  to  allow  it,  make  your  estimate  of 
their  relative  value  accordingly. 

The  Grand  Signor’s  customs  on  goods  imported  by  the  English  through  his  dominions,  are  5 per 
cent ; however  the  Bashaw  of  Judda,  under  pretence  that  Judda  is  not  named  in  the  phirmaund  for  our 
trade,  has  always  imposed  a great  deal  more : he  takes  4 per  cent,  for  himself;  4 percent,  for  the  Xeriffs, 
and  the  other  inijiositions  may  be  reckoned  at  4 per  cent  more ; making  the  whole  aggregate  amount  equal 
to  at  least  12  per  cent. 

The  trade  w'ith  Judda  is  on  the  decline:  at  one  period  the  English  paid  upwards  of  i'50,000  sterling 
duties  per  annum;  yet  the  abuses  and  extortions  multiplied  daily:  this,  with  the  progress  recently  made 
by  the  Wahabites,  a new  religious  sect  in  Arabia,  has  occasioned  the  almost  entire  abandonment  of  the 
trade  by  Europeans.  The  progress  of  these  reformers  has  been  audacious  and  successful.  Mecca  and 
Medina,  so  long  considered  by  Mahometans  the  tw’o  principal  cities  in  Arabia,  have  been  taken  by  them; 
Mecca,  on  the  27th  of  April,  1803,  when  the  splendid  tombs  and  public  buildings  were  levelled  with  the 
ground;  Medina,  and  the  tomb  of  the  Prophet,  shared  the  same  fate  in  1804.  They  afterwards  attacked 
Judda  with  a considerable  force,  but  w ere  repulsed;  they  however  reduced  the  town  to  such  distress,  that 
the  Xerlff  and  principal  inhabitants  had  recourse  to  negotiation,  and  purchased  a peace  for  130,000  dollars, 
when  the  Wahabites  retired  into  the  interior. 

Yanibo,  X^oheia,  and  Hodeida  have  been  taken  and  plundered  at  different  times  by  them. 


PROVISIONS  AND  REFRESHMENTS. 


Slieep  and  a few  bullocks  arc  to  be  procured,  but  at  high  prices.  The  bazar  is  well  supplied  with 
fruit  and  vegetables. 

Europeans  are  only  permitted  to  go  into  the  bazar  to  purchase  the  few  articles  they  require,  and  are 
subject  lo  much  insolence  from  ilie  natives. 


LOHEIA. 


95 


LOHEIA 

Is  a considerable  town,  situated  in  latitude  15^  44'  North,  and  longitude  42^  44  East.  It  is  at  the 
bottom  of  a deep  bay,  protected  from  the  sea  by  the  large  island  Camaran,  and  a group  of  smaller  to  the 
N.  W.  Loheia  is  without  walls,  though  not  entirely  defenceless:  several  towers,  guarded  by  soldiers,  stand 
at  equal  distances  round  it,  some  of  which  will  admit  cannon.  Many  of  the  houses  are  built  of  stone,  but 
the  greater  number  are  mud  huts  thatched  with  grass.  The  harbour  is  at  present  so  shallow,  that  even  the 
smallest  vessels  are  obliged  to  anchor  at  a great  distance  from  the  town ; and  at  low  water  laden  boats  can- 
not even  approach  it.  Notwithstanding  this  disadvantage,  a considerable  trade  in  coffee  is  carried  on  here : 
this  coffee  is  not  reckoned  so  good  as  that  wliich  comes  from  Beetlefackie,  and  is  shipped  at  Mocha  and 
Hodeida ; but  it  is  to  be  purchased  more  reasonably,  and  the  carriage  to  Judda  costs  less.  On  this  account 
several  merchants  from  Cairo  reside  here,  and  there  are  about  forty  Banians  employed  in  different  trades. 
The  French  recently  mode  application  at  Loheia  for  permission  to  settle  a factory  on  the  island  of 
Camaran.  Its  situation  is  good  for  watching  all  vessels  going  up  or  down  the  Red  Sea,  but  would  be 
of  little  use  in  a commercial  point  of  view.  This  island  was  visited  by  the  Portuguese  in  1513,  when  they 
captured  many  vessels,  and  wintered  here. 


COINS. 

The  only  money  is  a small  piece  of  base  and  adulterated  silver,  about  the  size  of  a sixpence,  called 
commassee,  and  by  this  all  the  different  denominations  of  foreign  coins  are  ascertained.  There  arc  likewise 

half  commassees,  which  are  the  smallest  coin  current. 

« 

1 Venetian  sequin  passes  for  . 90  Commassees  t 1 Barbary  sequin  passes  for  80  Commassees 

1 Fundunclee 80  ditto  j 1 Dollar,  or  patack  ....  40  ditto 

When  the  Indian  merchants  or  vessels  are  here,  the  fundunclee  is  raised  3 commassees  more;  but 
all  specie  is  scarce,  notwithstanding  the  quantity  brought  hither  in  dollars,  whicli  is  the  coin  in  which  all 
purchases  are  made.  When  it  is  necessary  to  change  dollars,  the  shroff,  or  broker,  only  allows  39  instead 
of  40  commassees,  so  that  there  is  a loss  on  the  exchange  of  per  cent. 

WEIGHTS  AND  MEASURES. 

The  weights  are  the  di'am,  ounce,  rottolo,  and  quintal.  Their  proportions  are  as  follow: 

10  drams  r ^ ounce 

16  ounces  Vmakei  ^ rottolo 

100  rottolos  j (^1  quintal 

The  rottolos  are  of  two  sorts,  one  of  140  drams,  which  is  used  in  selling  fine  goods ; the  other  of  160, 
which  is  used  in  weighing  sugar,  lead,  and  other  heavy  articles.  There  is  also  another  weight,  called  the 
faranzula,  equal  to  20  rottolos. 

The  long  measure  is  the  peek  of  27  inches. 

IMPORT  AND  EXPORT  DUTIES. 

All  Indian  goods  imported  directly  from  India,  pay  5 per  cent. ; but  all  goods  whatever  brought  from 
Judda  by  merchants,  whether  Turks  or  natives,  pay  7 per  cent.  Presents  are  necessary  here,  as  well  aa^ 
in  all  other  places  in  the  Red  Sea. 


HODEIDA-^BEETtEFACKIE. 


IIODEIDA 

Is  in  latitude  15®  10'  Nortli,  and  is  the  seaport  of  Beetlefackie.  The  harbour  is  somewhat  better 
than  that  of  Loheia,  yet  large  vessels  cannot  enter  it.  The  town  is  large,  and  the  mansion  of  the  Dola^ 
or  Governor^  the  mosques,  the  custom-1  lOuse,  and  the  houses  of  the  principal  merchants  are  built  of 
stone;  the  rest  consist  of  huts  built  in  an  ordinary  manner.  Near  the  sea  stands  a small  castle,  which  is 
not  capablti  of  much  defence. 


f OINS,  WEIGHTS,  and  MEASURES 

Are  the  same  as  at  Beetlefackie.  The  Spanish  dollar  is  the  principal  currency,  which  is  equal  to 
40  cavears,  an  imaginary  coin. 


BEETLEFACKIE 

Is  about  30  miles  distance  from  llodeida,  in  latitude  15®  10'  North.  The  town  stands  on  a plain,  and 
the  houses,  many  of  which  are  of  stone,  are  built  separate.  There  is  a kind  of  castle,  sufficiently  strong  to 
resist  tlie  roving  Arabs.  It  is  in  a favourable  situation  for  trada,  being  only  Haifa  day’s  jourAey  from  the 
hills  on  whieJi  tlie  coffee  grows,  and  but  a few  days’  journey  from  Mocha,  l.oheia,  and  Hodeida : it  is 
therefore  the  pnnelpal  mart  for  it,  and  this  trade  brings  merchants  from  Egypt,  Persia,  Abyssinia,  and 
India.  Here  are  also  a number  of  Banians  from  Guzzerat,  who  are  allowed  the  fi'ce  exercise  of  their  reli- 
gion. This  place  is  seldom  visited  by  Europeans,  as  they  transact  their  business  with  the  Banians  at  Mocha. 


COINS,  WEIGHTS,  and  MEASURES. 


Accounts  arc  kept  in  J^panish  dollars  and  cavears;  40  cavears  are  equal  to  one  Spanish  dollar:  cavears 
are  an  imaginary  coin,  both  here,  and  at  IVIocha.  All  foreign  coins  puss  current,  and  as  coffee  is  always 
paid  for  in  ready  money,  large  quantities  of  various  kinds  of  foreign  coins  are  to  be  met  with.  The  custom- 
house weights  are  vakius,  ^rattles,  maunds,  and  frazils,  thus  divided  ; 


15  Vukias 
2 Rattles 
10  Maunds 
40  Frazils 


I make  i 


1 Rattle  lbs.  oz.  dwts.  gr. 

1 Maiiiid  weighs ...  2 0 10  23 

I Frazil 20  6 4 0 

1 Bahar 814  to  816  lbs. 


They  reckon  14{  vakias  to  a rattle,  and  2 rattles  to  a maund  in  coffee,  and  to  all  other  goods,  15 
vaklas  to  a rattle;  hut  of  all  sorts  of  merchandise  whatever  (excepting  Jaggery,  date.s,  candles,  and  iron, 
ol  which  16  vakias  make  a rattle),  10  maunds  arc  a fruzi),  and  40  frazils  a bahar.  The  rattle  is  only 
used  in  the  bazar.  1 he  weights  arc  seldom  exact,  though  annually  rectified  by  the  Imaum's  shroff'. 


COFFEE  TRADE. 

Coffee  is  the  only  article  produced  here:  that  which  is  intended  for  India,  Muscat,  or  Europe,  1$ 
first  brought  by  land  to  Mocha;  but  w'hat  is  designed  for  Judda,  is  shipped  at  Hodeida.  There  are  two 
kinds  of  duty  payable  on  coffee,  one  at  Beetlefackie,  called  the  inland  duty,  which  is  paid  on  all  that  is 
consumed  in  the  kingdom  as  ivell  as  wdiat  is  exported ; and  another  duty  on  exportation,  of  which  the 
quantity  is  immense:  it  is  said  that,  one  year  with  another,  there  are  not  less  than  60,000  bahars 
ex|K)rted.  3 he  price  here  varies  from  8.5  to  110  Spanish  dollars  pc?r  bahar.  Tlie  inland  and  foreign  duty, 
catncl-hire  to  Mocha^  and  charges  on  shipping,  amount  to  about  20  Spanish  dollars,  making  the  price  at 
Mocha  from  105  to  130  Spanish  dollais  per  bahar.  . • . . 


MOCHA. 


97 


MOCHA, 

The  principal  port  in  the  Red  Sea  frequented  by  Europeans,  is  in  latitude  13^  20  Nouli,  and  longi- 
tude 43"^  20  East,  about  40  miles  to  the  northward  of  Cape  Babel  man  del. 

Mocha  makes  a striking  appearance  from  the  road,  or  in  sailing  by  it,  and  is  situated  bL‘t\Yr('n  two 
low  ponits  of  land,  which  project  from  the  shore,  so  as  to  form  a bay,  which  shelters  such  ships  as  their 
draught  of  water  will  permit  anchoring  within  a mile  of  the  shore.  Large  ships  lie  much  further  out,  where 
they  are  exposed  as  in  an  open  road.  This  city  is  so  situated,  that  each  of  those  projt  cting  points  of  land 
seem  at  an  equal  distance  from  each  end  of  it:  the  distance  between  these  two  points  is  about  5 miles. 

Mocha  is  built  so  near  the  sea,  that  when  the  wind  blows  strong  from  the  west,  it  washes  against  the 
walls.  It  lies  due  North  and  South,  and  is  near  a mile  and  a half  long,  but  of  uneijiiul  breadth;  at  the 
North  end  it  is  more  than  half  a mile  broad,  and  becomes  gradually  narrower  to  the  South  end,  where  it 
is  not  quite  half  a mile.  It  is  strongly  walled  round  with  hewn  stone,  and  the  walls  are  kept  in  good 
repair:  there  are  loopholes  for  arrows  and  musketry  at  about  5 feet  distance  from  each  other. 

At  the  extremity  of  the  two  points  of  land  which  form  the  bay,  is  a circular  castle,  strongly  built  of 
stone:  on  the  semicircle,  towards  the  sea,  arc  six  24  pounders,  and  on  that  fronting  the  land,  are  six 
12  pounders.  There  is  another  such  castle  nearly  in  the  middle  of  the  sea  walls,  near  wliich  is  the  only 
gate  by  which  goods  or  passengers- can  enter  from  the  sea.  Here  is  a station  for  the  custom-house  officers, 
where  all  goods  that  are  imported  or  exported,  are  examined  and  registered.  From  this  gate  there  runs 
out  a pier  150  yards  due  West,  which  is  built  of  stone,  and  strongly  supported  at  the  end  and  sides  by 
plank  and  piles,  and  is  very  serviceable  for  loading  and  unloading  goods. 

At  about  a quarter  of  a mile  from  the  North  end  of  the  town,  on  the  sea  w alls,  is  a battery  of  12  guns 
pointing  due  West;  and  at  the  South  end  a round  castle  with  tw^elve  embrasures,  and  six  guns  mounted: 
the  embrasures  are  placed  at  equal  distances,  to  any  of  which  the  guns  can  be  shifted  occasionally.  At 
equal  distance  round  the  city  are  built  round  towers  on  the  walls,  which  add  much  to  the  beauty  of  the 
whole.  There  are  two  land  gates,  one  at  the  North,  and  the  other  at  the  South  end  of  the  town. 

The  houses  fronting  the  aea,  are  all  very  lofty,  built  with  stone,  and  whitewashed  without  as  well  as 
within.  There  are  four  large  mosques,  and  six  smaller,  the  minarets  of  w hicli  greatly  improve  the  view 
of  the  town  from  the  sea,  especially  the  great  mosque,  which  being  elegantly  built,  and  very  lofty,  serves 
as  a landmark  for  ships  coming  into  the  road.  The  best  anchorage  is  in  6 or  7 fathoms  water,  the  grand 
mosque  bearing  E.  S.E.  and  the  South  fort  S.  by  E.  distant  about  two  miles  from  the  shore. 

Mocha  was  first  visited  by  an  English  fleet,  under  Sir  Henry  Middleton,  in  1610,  having  letters  and 
presents  from  the  King  to  the  Bashaw  and  Aga,  and  was  received  with  all  possible  marks  of  distinction 
and  friendship.  The  civilities  of  the  Turks  were  intended  to  ensnare  the  Admiral,  and  to  allure  him  and 
his  officers  on  shore,  as  well  as  to  entice  their  ships  into  the  harbour;  but,  disappointed  in  the  latter  part  of 
their  scheme,  they  fell  upon  the  Admiral,  killed  eight  of  his  attendants,  w'oimded  himself  and  fourteen 
men,  and  after  stripping  them,  threw  them  chained  into  a dungeon.  They  next  made  an  attempt  upon 
one  of  the  ships,  but  were  repulsed  with  great  loss.  Finding  that  open  force  could  not  reduce  the  sliips  Into 
their  power,  they  threatened  the  Admiral  with  death  and  the  torture,  if  he  did  not  order  them  to  suri-cinlpi': 
but Henry.,  preferring  the  most  excruciating  tortures  and  death,  to  an  ignominious  life,  and  tiic  Joss  ol’ 
honour,  bravely  defied  them,  and  triumphed  over  their  malice  and  cruelty.  After  six  months’  iinpiisoii- 
ment,  he  found  means  with  most  of  his  attendants  to  make  his  escape,  and  arrive  at  the  sliips,  which  had 
kin  in  an  haribour  on  .the  Abyssinian  shore.  He  now  had  an  opportunity  of  shewing  In's  resentment,  which 
he  did  accordingly  in  a message  to  tlie  Aga— that  if  he  did  not  instantly  release  the  remaining  prisoners, 

V and  render  ample  satisfaction  for  the  damages  be  had  received,  he  would  sink  all  the  ships  in  the  road,  and 

O 


MOCHA. 


batter  the  town  about  his  ears.^  This  menace  had  its  effect;  his  men  and  pinnace  were  set  at  liberty,  and 
18,000  rials  of  eight  paid  him  for  damages,  after  which  he  proceeded  with  the  fleet  to  India. 

In  1618,  the  English  obtained  a phirmaund  from  the  Governor,  by  which  they  were  allowed  freedom 
of  trade,  and  protection  to  their  persons  and  property.  A factory  was  afterwards  established,  since  which 
period  a commercial  intercourse  lias  been  carried  on  between  Mocha  and  the  British  Settlements  in  India. 

COINS. 

Accounts  are  kept  in  Spanish  dollars  and  cavears,  80  cavears  being  a Spanish  dollar;  80  cavears  are 
also  reckoned  a Mocha  dollar,  which  is  an  imaginary  coin. 

The  current  coins  of  the  country  are  only  carats,  and  commassecs,  which  rise  and  fall  considerably, 
according  to  the  quantity  of  silver  there  is  in  them:  the  usual  divisions  are, 

7 Carats  ) t J ^ Commassee 

60  Commossees  j-  c | j Spanish  dollar 

One  hundred  Spanish  dollars  arc  equal  to  121  \ Mocha  dollars. 

Most  goods  arc  sold  for  Mocha  dollars,  except  China  ware,  China  silks,  olibanum,  and  some  few 
other  goods,  and  even  these  are  sometimes  sold  for  them. 

Of  the  foreign  silver  coins,  which  are  in  circulation  here,  the  pillar  dollar  is  most  esteemed : next  to  that, 
the  Mexico,  for  which  all  bargains  are  made  payable.  German  crowns  pass  in  tale  for  common  things,  and 
up  the  country  for  a weighty  Spanish  dollar.  French  crowns  are  2 per  cent,  more  than  Mexico  dollars. 

Gold  coins  of  all  sorts  are  worth  more  or  less,  according  to  the  demand  there  is  for  them.  There 
is  but  2 j)er  cent,  diflerence  in  the  following  kinds,  when  taken  in  weight,  more  than  when  taken  in  tale;- 
but  they  are  generally  sold  by  the  weight. 


Venetians  %v.^^^^-v.^from  Mexico  dollars  2 15  cavears  to  2 20  each. 
Gubbers  10  16 


Xeraphims  48 

Stambol  cs 


WEIGHTS  AND  MEASURES. 

AVOINDUPOIS  WEIGHT.  TROY  WEIGHT. 

, lb,  oz*  oz.dwtg,  gr.  dec. 

Jd  Vakias  1 Rattle 12  1 Carat 

40  Vakias  1 Maundv^.^...^^^  3 0 16  Carats 

10  Maunds  ^ Frazil  30  0 1|  Caffala 

16  Frazils  1 Bahar  0 10  Caffalas 

There  is  a small  maund  of  only  30  vakias;  by  this  H Vakia 
vermilion  is  always  sold.  ^^7  Vakias 

1 Mocha  bahar  Bombay  maunds  16 1 which  are  Troy  71b.  4oz.  ISdwts. 

1 dittOvw^^^vSurat  maunds  13  16  seers  123  dec.  German  crowns  are  93  ounces,  791  Troy. 

GRAIN  MEASURE.  LIQUID  MEASURE. 

4 small  measures  Kellah.  16  Vakias  'j  r 1 Nusseah 

40  Kellas  Tomand,  about  1701bs.  8 Nusseahs  j i Cuda,  about  2 gall. 

Tlie  long  measures  are  the  guz  of  26  English  inches,  the  hand  covid  of  18  inches,  and  the  longitl^n 
covid  of  27  inches. 

The  custom-house  weights  are  only  stones  sewed  up  in  gunnies.  The  weights  are  seldom  exact,  and 
the  smaller  they  are,  the  greater  the  difference,  though  they  annually  rectify  them  by  the  weights  of  the 

Imaum's  shroff,  whose  business  it  is  to  examine  them;  under  which  cover  he  has  an  opportunity  to  add 

Bometliing  to  the  money  weights,  for  which  he  is  weU  paid  by  the  Banians,  who  are  the  principal  exporters 
of  silver. 


' IS  troy  wt.  ^0  0 3 6 

1 Caffala  ^^^0  2 0 91 
1 Miscall  .^0  3 1 36 

1 Vakia 0 9 12 

1 Beak  10  IS  68 

100  Spanish  dollars. 


»iOCHA. 


The  trade  carried  on  between  the  British  settlements  in  India,  and  the  dinirent  ports  in  the  Rctl 
Sea,  is  very  considerable,  and  throws  a large  quantity  of  specie  into  India.  The  following  is  an  account 
of  the  trade  carried  on  with  Madras  and  Bombay  for  five  years,  1802  to  1800  inclusive.  The  statement 
of  the  exports  and  imports  at  Bengal  from  the  Red  Sea  is  blended  with  that  to  and  from  the  Persian  Gulf. 


IMPORTS  FROM  BOMBAY  AND  FORT  ST.  GEORGE. 


Yetrg. 

Merchandise. 

Treasure. 

Total. 

Sicca  Uupecs. 

Sicca  Rupees . 

Sicca  Ku|)ces. 

1802 

1803 

1804 

1805 

1806 

20,82,531 
If), 17,650 
20,75,126 
17,68,005 
15,73,237 

31,884 

334 

1,215 

20,82,531 

16,17,650 

21,07,010 

17,68,-339 

15,74,452 

Total. 

91,16,549 

33,433 

91,49,982 

EXPORTS  TO  BOMBAY  AND  FORT  ST.  OrORGI'. 


Years 

Merchandise. 

Treasure. 

Toial. 

Sicca  Rupees. 

Sicca  Rupees. 

Sicca  Rupees 

1802 

2,70,391 

22, .55,575 

25,25,966 

1803 

2,42,6.37 

15,14,287 

17,56,924 

1804 

3,.58,.51.5 

37,13,359 

41,01,874 

1805 

2,50,854 

24,31,6  it 

26,82,498 

1806 

3,01,453 

21,90,552 

24,92,005 

Total. 

14,23,850 

'121,35,417* 

1 i3.5,.59,267 

Articles  of  Import  in  1805. 

Sicca  Rupees 

Piece-goodi 
Sugar 
Iron 
Shawls 
Coloured  silk 
Sandal  woodv 
Cotton 
Drugs 
Tobacco 
Ginger 
Vermilion 
Pepper 
Lead 

China  ware 
Cassia  and 
Sundries 

Imports  re-exported 
Treasure 


^%%%%%%%  %%%%% 


6,34,480 

7,89,837 

26,380 

40,370 

20,525 

44,458 

3,461 

6,6.53 

43,843 

11,628 

7,756 

5,524 

36,391 

17,286 

3,256 

4,069 

67,522 

4^.566 

334 


Articles  of  Export  in  1805. 

Myrrh  Sicca  Rupees  23,287 

4 1 ,425 

Almonds 
Alkali . 

Aloes 

A rsen  ic  %%  «.%>% 

Acalcara 
Beads 
Cloves 


Imports  from  Madras  and  Bombay  17,68,339 


Coffee. 

Grain , 

Gum  Arabic . 

Hiern  Cassy , 

Kismisses 
Metals  ... 

Moura 
Nuckla 
Needles 
Oils 

Shark's  fins. 

Senna  leaf  ^..r..-.........^...^...........^^..... 

Provisions 
Tortoise-shell . 

Fniits , 

Horses 
Drugs 
Sundries 
Treasurer 


1,095 

3,940 

3,464 

2,140 

4,028 

2,477 

7,208 


10,787 
4,500 
8,970 
3,6.58 

6. . 303 
4,170 
4,901 
2,559 
1,200 
1,903 
4,625 
7,323 
1,163 
6,169 

3. . 350 
8,427 
.5,315 

76,487 

24,31,644 


Exports  to  Madras  and  Bombay  26,82,498 


02 


100 


MOCHA. 


Yulue  of  tniadiandlsf;  iniporti  cl  into  the  Arabian  Gulf  from  Madras  and  Bomba}r««Sicca  Rupees  91,16,549 

Ditto  cx()orted  troin  ditto  to  ditto  14,23,850 

Imports  exceed  the  exjwils  76,92,699 

IVeasure  exported  from  the  Arabian  Gulf  to  Madras  and  Bombay 121,35,417 
I'rcasure  imported  into  ditto  from  ditto  33,433 

121,01,984 

Balance  ogainsf  the  Arabian  Gulf  in  five  years  Sicca  Rupees  197,94,683 

Being  in  favour  of  Bombay  and  Surat^w*  Sicca  Rupees  182,19,212 

I\ladrus  and  its  de|Kindencies  »%%%%'»»% vw%%^%»-  15,75,471 

During  tlie  same  period,  ilie  trade  curried  on  between  Bengal  and  the  Gulfs  of  Arabia  and  Persia, 
was  in  favour  of  Bengal,  Sicca  Rupees  108,53,394;  of  that  amount  one  half  may  be  considered  to  arise 
from  the  trade  with  the  Gulf  of  Arabia,  which  will  make  this  trade  in  favour  of  British  India  in  five  years^ 
Sicca  Hupei'S  252,21,360,  which  at  2s.  6d.  sterling  per  Rupee,  is  <£^630,539,10  per  annum. 

Notwithstanding  the  balance  of  the  trade  betw  een  British  India  and  the  Red  Sea  is  against  the  latter, 
us  the  greater  j)art  of  the  imports  are  paid  in  gold  and  silver,  yet  this  drain  is  amply  compensated  by  the 
iinmimse  sums  of  ready  money  paid  for  cofTee,  which,  admitting  that  60,000  bahars  is  the  annual  average 
exportation,  at  100  Spanish  dollars  per  bahar,  amounts  to  six  millions  of  Spanish  dollars,  beside  the  sums 
paid  for  customs,  and  the  other  expcnces  attendant  on  the  shipping  and  transfer  of  it. 

The  trade  carried  on  with  Judda,  Matsua,  Suez,  and  other  ports  in  the  Red  Sea,  is  very  extensive^ 
’riie  principal  article  of  export  is  coffee,  of  which  the  greater  part  is  sent  to  Judda,  in  vessels  either  belong- 
ing to  Mocha  or  Judda,  where,  after  reserving  a sufficient  quantity  for  the  consumption  of  the  country,  the 
remaijulcr  is  sent  to  Suez,  in  ships  which  come  annually  from  thence  laden  with  corn,  a few  other  articles, 
the  produce  of  Egypt,  and  some  European  commodities;  and  return  again  from  Judda  with  cofiee,  dnigs, 
and  other  commodities,  the  produce  of  Abyssinia,  Muscat,  Persia,  and  India.  The  ships  of  Suez  have  an 
(•xclusive  right  to  the  trade,  as  no  ships  from  Mocha,  Muscat,  or  India  are  allowed  to  enter  any  port  in  the 
Red  Sea  beyond  Judda.  Coffee  is  prohibited  to  be  carried  from  Mocha  to  Judda,  excej)t  in  ships  belong- 
ing to  one  or  other  of  the  above  ports. 

U'lie  Anu'ricans  have  of  late  years  sent  a number  of  ships  to  Mocha  for  coffee,  which  has  advanced 
the  price  upwards  of  40  dollars  per  bale. 

Till!  greater  part  of  the  foreign  trade  is  transacted  by  the  Banians.  It  is  much  safer  to  sell  to 
them,  than  either  the  Turks  or  Arabs,  since,  if  a Banian  becomes  a bankrupt,  the  other  Banians  will 
< ontrihule  according  to  their  ability,  and  pay  his  debts,  to  prevent  his  being  imprisoned,  or  tortured] 
which  neither  Turks  nor  Arabs  will  do  for  their  countrymen. 

When  goods  are  discharging  from  the  ship,  the  merchant  to  whom  they  belong,  must  give  the  custom- 
house officer  a copy  of  the  marks,  numbers,  and  contents  of  each  package.  If  the  duty  is  to  be  paid  by 
weight,  they  are  carried  to  the  custom-house;  if  piece-goods,  they  are  carried  to  the  merchants  house, 
where  they  must  lay  in  a yard  unopened,  until  they  arc  inspected  by  the  Governor,  collector,  and 
other  officers  of  the  customs.  Two  or  three  bales  are  then  opened,  and  the  pieces  counted;  if  they  cor- 
respond w'ith  the  account  delivered,  they  only  open  a few,  and  the  merchant  is  permitted  to  put  the  goods 
into  his  wan*house,  and  to  sell  them  when  he  pleases;  but  if  any  bales  exceed,  either  in  number  or 
quality,  the  merchant  (besides  receiving  a severe  reprimand)  pays  double  duty  for  the  excess,  and  all 
the  remaining  bales  are  opened,  which  is  attended  with  much  trouble  and  inconvenience. 

All  kinds  of  foreign  goods  are  sold  at  !Mocha  on  credit,  and  the  payment  is  made  either  in  three  in- 
stalments, or  the  whole  is  paid  for  on  a certain  day,  according  to  the  time  for  which  the  goods  were  sold. 

Coffee  is  alw  ays  paid  for  in  ready  money,  either  in  Spanish  dollars,  German  crowns,  or  Venetian 


MOCHA. 


101 


sequins.  All  goods,  the  produce  of  the  country,  are  likewise  sold  either  by  tale  or  weight,  at  so  much  the 
Spanish  dollar,  with  this  difference  only,  that  there  is  a credit  given,  or  if  ready  money  is  paid,  a discount 
allow^ed  at  tlie  rate  of  9 per  cent. 

All  foreign  goods  imported,  China,  silk,  &c.  are  sold  at  so  much  by  weight  or  talc,  for  a Spanish 
dollar,  and  a credit  given,  as  on  other  goods  sold. 

The  East  India  Company  used  formerly  to  send  a ship  annually  to  Mocha  for  coffee;  but  now  their 
coffee  is  brought  to  Bombay  in  country  ships,  from  whence  the  Indiamen  convey  it  to  Europe.  It  is  said, 
that  the  exportation  of  Coffee  from  Mocha,  one  year  with  another,  is  60,000  bahars  a year. 

DUTIES  AND  PORT  CHARGES. 

The  English  pay  a duty  of  3 per  cent,  on  all  goods,  on  the  amount  sales;  the  natives  pay  the  same; 
but  those  of  India,  and  the  Arabs  from  Judda  and  Muscat,  and  all  other  foreigners  pay  .5  per  cent. 

The  purchaser  pays  brokerage,  cooley,  and  boat  hire,  &c.  and  charges  for  all  goods  bought  here  the 
same  as  on  landing. 

The  following  are  the  particulars  of  port  charges  to  be  paid  to  the  Government  of  Mocha,  in  three- 
mabt  vessels  on  their  arrival. 


Anchorage  ....  Mocha  Dollars 

131 

40 

Sheik  of  the  boat  people  Mocha  Dollars 

1 

17 

Bashkaleb 

60 

60 

Ditto  weighers 

s 

Emir  of  the  Mizan 

36 

30 

Ditto  seapoys 

1 

17 

Mirbhar 

30 

Muccadum  of  the  boat  people  .... 

4. 

Writers  of  Government 

60 

Master  of  the  Vakella 

2 

8 

Catly 

12 

12 

Muccadum  of  the  hamauls 

0 

6 

Mufti 

10 

Governor  s porter 

8 

40 

Mirbhar’s  writers,  &c. 

10 

Ditto  writer 

8 

40 

Porters  at  Custom-house 

5 

Ditto  shroff 

1 

44 

The  above  amount  to  384  Mocha  Dollars,  one  half  of  which  is  paid  by  two-mast  vessels. 


Disbursmentsj  Pori  Charges^  ^c.  paid  on  Account  of  a Brig  before  she  went  up  to  Judda^  and  on  her  Return 

from  thence. 


The  Governor’s  music,  as  customary Mocha  Dollars 
The  country  boats  from  the 
The  Governor’s 

The  customary  presents  on  the  Brig's  arrivd,  half  what  is 
paid  on  3-mast  vessels,  as  per  foregoing  account 
Ditto  on  the  vessel’s  departure,  as  customary,  as  per  follow- 


ing  account 

Bringing  up  the  long-boat  which  had  fallen  to  leeward 

A Government  boat  for  bringing  goods  on  shore 

Hamallagc  on  ditto,  as  customary 

Charges  at  waiting  on  the  Governor 

An  Arab  writer  for  writing  two  letters  to  Judda 

Two  shawls  claimed  by  the  Banians,  as  customary 

Forming  a total  of  Mocha  Dollars  366  35 


11  46 
3 0 

3 52 

192  0 

78  78 
2 34 
2 0 
14  0 

9 0 

1 17 
48  48 


102 


MOCHA. 


Particulars  of  Port  Charges,  ^ on  2 and  3 Mast  Vessels  at  their  Departure  from  Mocha. 


To  the  writers  at  the  custom-house, 
The  Mirbhar 


Spanish  Dollars  32 
17 


The  Mirbhar's  writers 
The  Caftan  or  vest 


7 

9 


Captain  Elmore  says,  if  you  do  not  make  any  sale  at  Mocha,  you  do  not  pay  any  port  charges;  but 
if  you  sell  any  thing,  even  one  bag  of  rice,  you  become  liable  to  pay  the  whole,  as  if  you  had  sold  the  en- 
tire cargo;  but  if  your  sales  are  likely  to  be  but  trifling,  settle  with  your  broker,  and  be  very  clear  and  po- 
sitive with  him  not  to  pay  any  port  charges,  nor  presents  to  the  Xeriff ; or  else  you  must  put  what  cargo 
you  sell  on  board  some  ship  in  the  roads,  who  is  landing  goods,  and  have  them  sent  on  shore  as  his  cargo. 

If  bound  to  Judda,  you  should  procure  a pilot  here,  agreeing  with  him  for  the  run;  which  wii?  i>e 
from  50  to  100  Mocha  dollars  for  the  trip  there  and  back,  besides  a suit  of  clothes  at  Judda. 

List  of  sundry  Presents  made  to  the  Governor  of  Mocha  and  his  OJJicers  for  Permission  to  go  on  Shore, 
with  the  additional  Duties  for  Anchorage  paid  to  him  and  his  Attendants. 


For  permission  to  come  on  shorc^ 
Expence  of  wateringv 
Permission  to  sailv 


. Mocha  Dollars  11  46 
29  0 

82  49 


ANCHORAGE. 


To  the  Governoi\,*v^v%,.^,,^  Mocha  Dollars  121 
The  second»%v»v%v»%%v»%^v»%%w»%vw»»%^,w»»^%,»%>  60 
The  writer  200 

Armee  Mazon  36 

Mirbhar  SO 

IVIuffatees  10 

Custom-house  porter  5 

Weigherman , 


40 

60 

38 

36 

0 

12 

0 

0 

0 


Coolies  muccadum 
Writer  at  Pier  head 
Pier-head  Muffatees 
MufTatees  seiTant 
Fishing  boat  muccadum 
Governor’s  servant 
Ditto  muccadum  boats 
Custom-house  porter 
Governor’s  porter 


tMocha  Dollars 


Forming  a total  of  Mocha  Dollars  768  25 


6 

10 

5 

S 

2 

2 

4 

2 


6 

0 

0 

0 

34 

34 

69 

34 

34 


In  delivery  of  rice,  out  of  every  tomand  of  rice,  you  give,  as  is  customary,  Haifa  measure  to  the  Go- 
vernor; and  for  every  12  tomands,  to  the  different  coolies,  1 measure;  besides  this  exorbitant  demand,  the 
Governor  takes  from  the  merchant  who  buys  the  rice,  6 measures  out  of  every  tomand  for  and  2 

measures  for  the  coolies.  ' . 


mOVISIONS  AND  BEFRESHMENTS. 

Provisions  are  plentiful  and  good  in  this  town;  a fat  sheep  can  be  purchased  for  a Spaiush  dollar,  a 
rnilch  goat  and  kid  for  the  same;  twelve  good  fowls  for  a dollar,  and  beef  at  three  halfpence  per  pound. 

Fish  of  many  kinds  are  cheap  and  excellent  in  their  quality;  here  are  sea-crabs,  very  large,  from  3 to 
41bs.  each,  which  may  be  bought  for  a halfpenny  each.  New  cheese  and  fresh  butter  are  daily  tiTOUght  to 
market  from  a town  called  Musa,  about  20  miles  inland. 


ACACIA— ACORUS—ASPHALTUM— BALM  OP  GILEAD. 


103 


In  the  summer  they  have  plenty  of  grapes,  peaches,  apricots,  quinces,  mangoes,  plne-apples,  plan- 
tains, and  melons,  all  of  which,  though  brought  from  20  to  50  miles  inland,  are  very  reasonable. 

Good  water  is  scarce;  what  is  drunk  in  the  town,  isbrouglit  from  the  villagt*  of  Musa,  a short  dis- 
tance ott‘,  in  leather  bags  or  bottles,  on  the  backs  of  asses,  and  is  at  all  times  very  indiff  erent ; llie  water 
from  the  wells  in  the  town  is  brackish,  and  disagrees  with  most  visiters  to  this  place. 

List  of  Articles  procurable  at  Mocha^  with  Directions  how  to  chuse  them, 

ACACIA 

Is  the  inspissated  juice  of  a plant  of  the  thorn  kind,  growing  in  Arabia,  and  other  parts:  two  sorts  are 
known,  Acacia  Vera,  and  Acacia  Germanica.  The  former  is  a gummy  substance,  usually  of  a firm  con- 
sistence, but  not  very  dry.  We  meet  with  it  in  round  masses,  enclosed  in  thin  bladders,  from  4 to  8 ounces 
in  .veight:  outwardly  it  is  of  a deep  brown  colour,  inclining  to  black,  and  of  a lighter  brown  within,  in- 
clining to  red,  or  yellow.  Acacia  Germanica  is  a juice  expressed  from  the  unripe  fruit  of  the  sloe  bush, 
and  differs  from  the  pr^eding,  in  being  harder,  heavier,  darker  in  colour,  shaqier  in  taste,  and  particu- 
larly in  this,  that  its  astringency  may  be  procured  by  rectified  spirit,  as  well  as  by  water;  whereas  the  other 
is  not  at  all  dissoluble  by  spirit.  The  following  particulars  should  be  attended  to  in  chiising  Acacia  Vera: 
it  has  little  or  no  manifest  smell;  applied  to  the  tongue,  it  quickly  sollens,  discovering  a rough,  and  not 
very  ungrateful  taste,  followed  by  a sensation  of  sweetness.  If  quite  pure,  it  dissolves  totally  in  water;  if 
otherwise,  the  impurities  remain  undissolved.  This  is  an  article  seldom  imported  by  East  India  ships. 

ACORUS,  OR  CALAMUS  AROMATICUS, 

Is  a reed,  or  knotty  root,  about  the  size  of  a little  finger,  and  several  inches  long,  reddish  externally, 
internally  of  a white  colour,  full  of  joints,  somewhat  flatted  on  the  side,  and  of  a loose  s[>ongy  texture; 
its  smell  is  strong,  the  taste  warm,  bitterish,  and  aromatic.  They  should  be  chosen  tough,  and  cleared 
from  the  fibres,  and  free  from  worms,  to  wliich  it  is  very  subject. 

ASPHALTUM 

Is  a solid  shining  bitumen,  of  a dusky  colour  outside,  and  within  of  a deep  black,  found  in  many 
parts  of  Egypt,  A thin  piece  appears  of  a reddish  colour,  when  placed  between  the  eye  and  the  light. 
It  has  no  smell  when  it  is  cold,  but  acquires  a slight  one  by  friction;  when  exposed  to  heat,  it  liquifies, 
swells  up,  and  burns  with  a tliick  smoke,  the  smell  of  which  is  strong,  acrid,  and  disagreeable.  It  is 
occasion^ly  adulterated  with  pitch ; but  the  fraud  may  be  discovered  by  means  of  spirits  of  wine,  which, 
entirely  dissolve  the  pitch,  and  only  take  a pale  colour  with  Asphaltum. 

BALM  OF  GILEAD, 

Or  Balsam  of  Mecca,  is  a resinous  juice  Uiat  distils  from  an  eveegreen  tree,  or  shrub,  growing  between 
Mecca  and  Medina;  it  is  much  used  by  the  Asiatic  ladies  as  a cosmetic.  The  tree  is  scarce;  the  best  sort 
is  said  to  exude  naturally  from  it,  but  the^  inferior  kinds  are  extracted  from  tlie  branches  by  boiling. 
It  is  at  first  turbid  and  white,  of  a strong  pungent  smell,  and  of  a bitter  and  acrid  taste;  upon  being  kept 
some  time,  it  becomes  thin,  limpid,  of  a greenish  hue,  then  of  a golden  yellow,  and  at  length  of  tlie  co- 
lour of  honey. 

This  article,  being  scarce  and  valuable,  is  very  liable  to  adulteration.  The  following  methods  are  ro 
commended  to  discover  imposition. 


104 


BALM  OF  GILEAD— COFFEE. 


Cause  a drop  or  tvro  of  the  liquid  balsam  to  fall  into  a glass  of  clear  water;  if  the  drop  go  to  the  bottom 
without  rising  again  to  the  surface,  or  if  it  continue  in  a drop  like  oil,  it  is  a proof  that  the  balsam  is  adul- 
terated. If,  on  the  contrary,  it  spreads  upon  the  surface  of  the  water,  like  a very  thin  cobweb,  scarcely 
visible  to  the  eye,  and  being  congealed,  may  be  taken  up  with  a pin  or  small  straw,  the  balsam  is  pure  and 
natural.  Or  if  the  pure  balsam  be  dropped  on  woollen,  it  will  wash  out ; but  if  adulterated,  it  will  not. 
The  genuine,  dropped  into  milk,  coagulates  it,  which  the  spurious  will  not.  When  a drop  of  the  pure  bal- 
sam is  let  fall  on  red  hot  iron,  it  gathers  itself  into  a globule;  but  oil  or  spurious  balsam  runs,  and 
sheds  itself  all  round.  The  genuine  balsam  also  feels  viscid  aiid  adhesive  to  the  fingers,  which  the  adul- 
terated does  not.  If  sophisticated  with  wax,  it  is  discovered  by  the  turbid  colour,  never  to  be  clarified;  if 
with  honey,  the  sweet  taste  betrays  it;  if  with  resins,  by  dropping  it  on  live  coals,  it  yields  a blacker 
flame,  and  of  a grosser  substance  than  the  genuine.  Wheu  the  balsam  is  too  thick  to  be  taken  out  of  the 
bottle,  it  need  only  be  placed  near  the  fire,  the  smallest  degree  of  heat  liquifying  it.  Tlie  bottles  must 
not  be  quite  full,  lest  they  should  break,  as  the  Imlsam  is  apt  to  rarify. 

Balsamum  is  the  Latin  name  of  the  tree,  whence  the  balsam  issues;  Opa  Balsamum  is  the  juice  or  bal- 
sam; Carpo  Balsamum  is  the  fruit,  and  Xylo  Balsamum  is  the  wood;  these  are  all  useful 

CAIlPO  BALSAMUM 

Should  be  chosen  fresh,  plump,  ponderous,  of  a hot  biting  taste,  and  smelling  in  some  moderate  de- 
gree like  the  balsam.  Hypericum  is  sometimes  mixed  with  it,  which  may  be  discovered  by  its  excess  in 
size,  its  vacuity,  want  of  virtue,  and  peppery  taste.  The  berries  are  about  the  size  of  a small  pea,  sharp 
at  the  end,  brown,  with  a small  stalk.  Reject  such  as  are  broken,  decayed,  and  wonn-eaten. 

XYLO  BALSAMUM, 

The  wood  of  the  tree  producing  the  Balm  of  Gilead,  should  be  chosen  in  small  knotty  rods,  the  rind  red, 
the  wood  white,  resinous,  and  having  a scent  somewhat  like  the  balsam. 

Freight  is  charged  on  Balm  of  Gilead  at  the  rate  of  Ificwt.  to  the  ton.  The  permanent  duty  on 
natural  balsams  Is  Is.  6d.  per  lb.  and  on  artificial  balsams  3s.  per  lb.  the  temporary,  or  war  duty  on  the 
former  6d.  and  on  the  latter  Is.  per  lb. 


CIVET. 

This  substance  is  soil,  unctuous  and  odoriferous,  nearly  the  consistence  of  butter,  and  is  produced  by 
an  animal  called  the  Civet  Cat.  They  are  confined  in  cages,  and  when  irritated,  throw  out  the  civet,  which 
is  carefully  scraped  off.  It  is  brought  from  the  Brazils,  Guinea,  and  the  interior  of  Africa.  Lord  Valentia 
brought  home  from  Abyssinia  a horn  full  of  it,  which  is  of  a dark  brown  colour,  unctuous,  somewhat  resem- 
bling Labdanum,  of  a very  powerful  smell,  far  from  fragrant  or  agreeable.  Its  principal  use  is  as  a per- 
fume,  and  when  genuine,  is  worth  from  30s.  to  40s.  per  ounce.  The  best  is  said  to  come  from  the  Brazils, 
of  a lively  whitish  colour,  which  becomes  dark  by  keeping,  if  paper  is  rubbed  with  civet,  and  it  will  bear 
writing  on  afterwards,  it  is  considered  genuine. 


-COFFEE. 

There  is  but  one  species  of  the  coffee  tree,  supposed  to  be  a native  of  Arabia;  it  seldom  rism  men 
than  16  or  18  feet  in  height:  the  main  stem  grows  ujpright,  and  is  covered  with  a light  brown  bark;  the 
branches  are  horizontal,  the  leaves  when  fully  grown,  are  4 or  5 inches  long,  and  2 broad  in  the  middle. 


COFFEE 


10,1 


The  flowers  are  produced  in  bunches  at  the  roots  of  the  leaves;  the  fruit,  which  is  the  only  useful  part,  re 
sembles  a cherry;  it  grows  in  clusters,  and  when  it  comes  to  be  of  a deep  red,  it  is  gathered.  The  fnlit  is 
of  an  orri  form,  smaller  than  a horse  bean,  and  of  a tough,  close,  and  very  hard  texture.  It  is  prominent 
on  one  side,  and  flatted  on  the  other,  having  a large  deep  furrow  running  along  the  Hatted  ^ide.  It  is  mo- 
derately  heavy,  hard  to  break,  of  a greyish  yellow  colour,  and  a somewhat  bitterisli  taste. 

The  liquor,  which  we  call  coffee,  is  said  to  have  been  drunk  in  ^Ethiopia  time  immemorial.  It  was 
introduced  into  Arabia  about  the  middle  of  the  sixteenth  century.  Not  long  alter  it  reached  Mecca  and 
Afedina,  then  Grand  Cairo,  from  thence  it  continued  its  progress  to  Damascus  and  Aleppo,  and  in  1,554 
became  known  at  Constantinople.  The  first  mention  of  coffee  in  the  west  of  Ihirope  is  by  Rauwolf,  a 
German  traveller,  who  returned  from  Syria  in  1573.  In  1591  it  was  particularly  described  hy  Prosper 
Alpinus.  Its  use  as  a beverage  is  noticed  by  Biddulph  in  100,3,  who  says— “ The  Turks  have  for  theii' 
“ common  drink  coffee,  which  is  a black  drink  made  from  a kind  of  pulse  called  Cmva.  William  Finch, 
w^ho  visited  the  East  Indies  in  1607,  .says— « The  people  in  the  Island  of  Socotra  have  for  their  best  en- 
tertainment  a China  dish  of  Co6o,  a black  bitterish  drink,  made  from  a berry,  like  a bay  berry,  brought 
from  Mecca,  sipped  off  hot,”  It  is  not  certain  at  what  time  coffee  passed  to  the  western  parts  of  Europe; 
but  Pietro  de  la  Valle,  a Venetian  traveller,  in  a letter  from  Constantinople  in  1615,  .slates  his  intention  of 
bringing  with  him  some  coffee,  which  he  believed  was  a thing  imkiiowm  in  his  count ry. 

A French  author,  who  wrote  on  coffee,  says  the  Freneh  kne^w  nothing  of  it  till  1645.  It  was  not 
known  at  Paris  before  1669.  Its  use  was  intrcnluced  into  England  some  years  sooner,  in  165!^,  when 
Air.  Daniel  Edwards,  a Turkey  merchant,  brought  home  with  liim  a Greek  servant,  wlio  understood 
tlie  roasting  and  making  of  coffee.  He  opened  a coffee-house  in  George  Yard,  Loinhard  Street,  for  pub- 
licly vending  it  as  a drink,  after  the  manner  practised  in  Turkey.  The  first  mention  of  coffee  in  our 
Statute  Books  is  in  1660,  wrhen  a duty  of  fourpence  was  laid  upon  ever)^  gallon  of  eoffee  made  and  sold, 
to  be  paid  by  the  maker.  In  1663  all  coffee-houses  were  licensed  at  the  general  quarter  sessions  of  each 
county.  Ill  1675,  King  Charles  H.  issued  a proclamation  to  shut  them  up  ns  seminaries  of  sedition,  but 
in  a few  days  it  w’as  set  aside.  In  1688,  it  was  supposed  that  there  ivere  more  coffee-houses  in  London 
than  in  Grand  Caii*o,  and  they  were  likewise  to  be  found  in  every  town  of  note  in  the  kingdom. 

About  1690,  Van  Hoorn,  Governor  of  Batavia,  procured  some  coffee  plants  from  Mocha,  ivhich  he 
caused  to  be  planted  at  Java.  In  1714,  the  Dutch  presented  the  French  King  ivith  a fine  tree,  which  is 
•aid  to  have  been  the  parent  of  all  that  have  been  since  cultivated  in  tlie  French  AVest  India  Islands.  In 
1718,  the  Dutch  began  to  plant  coffee  in  Surinam,  and  in  the  same  year  it  is  stated  to  have  been  intro- 
duced into  the  Island  of  Bourbon  from  Mocha.  In  172!^,  it  was  introduced  into  Cayenne  liy  the  French, 
and  in  1727  to  Martinique;  from  thence  it  most  probably  spread  to  the  neighbouring  islands,  for  in  1732 
an  act  passed  in  Jamaica,  to  encourage  it  in  that  island;  since  which  period  it  has  w'ondeiTully  increased 
in  both  the  East  and  West  Indies,  more  particularly  in  tlie  latter;  and  what  was  about  two  hundred 
years  since  not  known  as  an  article  of  food,  except  to  a few  tribes  in  the  interior  of  Africa,  has  no\v  made 
its  way  thnmgh  half  the  civilized  world. 

Of  the  coffee  produced  in  the  Eastern  parts  of  the  w'orld,  that  of  Alocha  is  esteemed  the  best ; 
secondly,  that  of  the  Island  of  Bourbon ; and  thirdly,  that  of  Java. 

It  is  impossible  to  ascertain,  with  accuracy,  the  quantity  of  coffee  that  is  raised  in  the  East  Indies. 
From  the  information  of  the  Custom  Master  at  Mocha,  it  appears  that,  one  year  wnth  onolher,  pro- 
Tious  to  the  troubles  occasioned  by  the  Wahabites,  there  were  annually  exported  from  Arabia  60,000 
bahars,  each  about  820 lbs.  making  in  the  whole  49,200,0001bs.  In  the  year  1777  there  w en?  exported 
from  the  port  of  Hodeida  alone,  upwards  of  35,000  bahars,  which  are  stated  to  be  more  than  was  ex- 
ported from  all  other  parts  of  Arabia  in  that  year. 


P 


100 


DATES. 


The  cultivation  of  coffee  on  the  Island  of  Bourbon  has  considerably  increased  within  these  few  years  : 
it  was  started  in  1810  that  there  would  be  gathered  upwards  of  95,(KK)  bales,  each  of  lOOlbs. 

The  Dutch  used  to  import  large  quantities  from  Java  By  an  account  of  the  sales  of  the  Dutch 
East  India  Company  itap])ears  that,  on  an  average  of  seven  years,  1785  to  1791,  there  were  annually  sold 
(i,llS,1801bs.  of  Java  coflee,  and  during  the  same  period,  of  codec  imported  from  Ceylon,  76,143lbs. 

Coffee  was  never  an  object  of  cultivation  worth  attention  in  any  part  of  our  extensive  territories 
in  the  East  Indies  till  within  a very  few  years : now  some  considerable  plantations  have  been  formed  at 
Chittagong,  but  the  produce  is  considered  inferior  to  either  the  Java  or  Bourbon.  It  is  likewise  cultiva- 
ted on  the  west  coast  of  Sumatra,  but  to  a trifling  extent,  and  of  a very  inferior  .sort. 

IVIocha  coffee  is  the  most  valuable  kind,  and  is  what  is  commonly  called  in  Europe,  Turkey  Coffee;  it  is 
packed  in  large  bales,  each  containing  a nundier  of  smaller  bales,  or  frazils,  and  should  be  chosen  of  a greenish 
olive  hue,  fresh  and  new,  free  from  any  musty  smell,  the  berries  of  a middling  size,  clean,  plump,  and  as 
tree  from  sticks  and  other  impurities  as  possible,  and  particular  care  should  be  taken,  that  it  is  not  false 
packed;  it  is  very  apt  to  imbibe  moisture,  or  the  flavour  of  any  thing  placed  near  it;  it  should  therefore 
not  be  st()wi*d  in  a ship’s  hold,  if  it  can  possil)ly  be  avoided.  Coffee  imported  in  packages  of  less  than 
1 12  lbs.  net  is  liable  to  seizure,  and  no  smaller  package's  can  be  entered  for  exportation. 

The  following  are  the  quantities  of  coffee  imported  from  the  East  Indies,  and  sold  at  the  Company's 
sales  in  the  year  1802  to  1810  inclusive,  with  the  sale  amount  thereof.  That  sold  on  account  of  the 
('ompany  was  all  Mocha  coffee ; but  a portion  of  that  imported  in  the  j)rivatc  trade,  may  have  been  the 
]H'oduce  of  Java,  Bourbon,  or  Ceylon. 


COMPANY’S 

PKOPEKTY. 

T 

PRIVATE  TilADE. 

Ycari. 

!V1aic)\ 

Sale. 

September  Sale  | 

Total.  1 

March  Sale. 

Total 

Cwt. 

t* 

Cwt 

(?wt. 

£ 

Cwt. 

£ 

Cwt 

£ 

Cwt. 

£ 

1803 

1319 

7049 

4(i72 

.5981 

37344 

230 

1517 

1770 

114,33 

”2006 

12lhW 

IHOi 

— 

— 

— 

— 

— 

— 

822 

5748 

783 

3323 

1005 

9091 

1805 

880 

7712 

3000 

28010 

4540 

30.322 

18 

100 

808 

0020 

820 

6120 

1800 

2828 

21371 

2090 

17987 

5518 

39358 

794 

4332 

64 

,398 

858 

4730 

IH07 

2721 

18731 

2721 

18731 

«... 

--  - 

- , 

1808 

— 

— 

— 

— 

— 

— 

— 

.... 

_ 

wmmm$ 

rnmmmm 

1809 

— 

— 

— 

— 

— 

— 

— 

_ 

213 

1220 

213 

1220 

1810 

— 

— 

— 

_ 

— 

— 

— 

— 

— 

— 

18  cwt.  of  coffee  is  allowed  to  a ton;  the  permanent  duty  is  ,X^1  8«.  and  the  temporary,  or  war  duty, 
9^.  id.  pc‘r  cwt.  and  the  duty  of  excise  i?2  12^.  making  in  the  whole  13«.  Id.  per  c\vt. 

DATES 

Are  sent  in  large  quantities  from  Arabia  to  the  Bi'itisli  settlements  in  India.  This  fruit  is  soniewliat 
In  the  slinpc  of  an  acorn;  they  are  composed  of  a thin,  light,  and  glossy  membrane,  somewhat  pellucid  and 
yellowish,  which  contains  a fine,  soft,  and  pulpy  fruit,  that  is  fii*m,  sweet,  and  rather  vinous  to  the  taste: 
within  this  is  enclosed  a solid,  tough,  hard  kernel,  of  a pale  grey  colour  on  the  outside,  marbled  within 
like  a nutmeg.  They  are  generally  left  on  the  tree  until  quite  ripe  (at  which  time  they  are  soft,  and  of  a 
high  red  colour,)  and  then  are  pressed  into  pails,  or  baskets,  until  they  unite  together  like  a paste;  they 
are  then  more  esteemeil,  and  become  a rich  sweetmeat.  Those  which  are  dry  and  hard,  are  of  little  value. 
In  Persia  a very  excellent  kind  of  brandy  is  made  from  dates ; in  many  places  the  stones  are  ground  to 
make  oil,  and  with  the  paste  which  is  left,  they  feed  the  cattle  and  sheep.  This  is  practised  chiefly  on  the 
Coast  of  Arabia,  in  the  Persian  Gulf,  and  at  Muscat,  where  tliey  find  it  a very  nourishing  diet.  Dates  are 
seldom  imported  f rom  India.  The  permanent  duty  i9£'i  17s.  and  the  temporary  or  war  duty  17s.  per  cwt. 


HEBMODACTYL— JUNCTUS  ODORATUS^MYRRlt. 


Wl 


HERMODACTYL 

Is  the  root  of  a species  of  Colchicum,  grown  in  Turkey  and  Arabia,  of  tlie  shape  of  a heart,  flat  on 
one  side,  with  a furrow  on  the  other;  of  a whitish  brown  colour  externally,  internally  white;  ronipnct  and 
solid,  yet  easy  to  cut  or  powder;  it  is  about  the  size  of  a chesniit,  and  has  a viscous,  sweetish,  farinaceous 
taste,  but  no  remarkable  smell.  They  should  be  chosen  as  fresh  as  possible,  well  dried,  and  free  from  tlio 
worm,  to  which  they  are  very  subject.  This  article  is  seldom  imported  from  the  East  Indies.  The  per- 
manent duty  on  Hermodactyl  is  6d.  per  lb.  and  the  war  duty  2d.  per  lb. 

JUNCTUS  ODOIIATUS, 

Sweet  rush,  or  camel's  hay,  is  the  produce  of  Arabia  and  Turkey,  whence  it  is  exported  in  bundles 
diout  a foot  long,  composed  of  smooth  stalks,  that  bear  some  resemblance  to  barley  straws  in  shape  andt 
colour.  The  leaves  are  like  those  of  wheat,  and  it  is  full  of  a fungous  pith:  towards  the  tops  of  the  stalks 
are  sometimes  found  short  woolly  spikes  of  imperfect  flowers,  set  in  double  rows.  Tlie  sweet  rush,  when 
lU  perfection,  has  an  agreeable  smell,  with  a warm,  somewhat  bitter,  but  not  unjileasunt  tusto, 

MYBRH 

Is  a vegetable  product  of  the  gum  resin  kind,  distilling  by  incision,  and  sonielimos  spontaneously  from 
the  tree  that  produces  it.  Myrrh  is  generally  in  grains,  from  the  size  of  a pea  to  that  of  a horse  bean,  or 
larger;  their  flgure  is  as  irregular  as  their  size,  round,  oblong,  or  contorted.  These  grains  are  of  a resin- 
ous greasy  substance,  not  hard  to  break;  their  colour  is  a reddish  brown,  with  a mixture  of  yellow;  their 
smell  is  strongly  aromatic,  and  their  taste  is  acrid,  warm,  bitter,  though  somewhat  spicy.  When 
broken,  myrrh  is  often  marked  with  small  white  semi-lunar  specks.  It  is  to  be  chosen  in  ch^r  pieces, 
light,  triable,  unctuous,  and  of  the  bitterest  taste,  of  a reddish  brown  colour:  that  which  Is  foul  and  black 
must  be  rejected.  When  pure,  myrrh  will  dissolve  in  boiling  water ; but  as  the  liquor  cools,  a |)ortioii  of 
resinous  matter  subsides.  There  are  sometimes  found  among  myrrh,  hard  shining  pieces,  of  a pale  yellow 
colour,  resembling  Gum  Arabic,  but  without  taste  or  smell;  sometimes  masses  of  lldelliiim  arc  mixed  with 
it,  which  are  darker  coloured,  more  opaque,  softer  tlian  myrrli  internally,  and  which  di/lers  from  it  in 
taste  and  smell.  Sometimes  an  unctuous  gummy  resin,  of  a moderately  strong,  but  somewhat  ungrateful 
smell,  with  a durable  bitterish  taste,  obviously  diflerent  from  Hdtllium  and  myrrh,  is  fouinl  with  this  drug; 
and  sometimes  we  meet  with  hard,  compact  dark  coloured  tears,  less  unctuous  than  inyrrh,  of  an  ofleii- 
sive  smell,  and  a most  ungrateful  bitterness,  so  as,  when  kept  some  time  in  the  mouth,  to  provoke  retching. 
That  which  is  dark  coloured,  and  full  of  impurities,  should  be  rejected. 

The  following  are  the  quantities  of  myrrh  imported  and  sold  at  the  East  India  sales,  in  the  years 
1804  to  1808  inclusive,  with  the  sale  amount,  and  average  price  per  cwt. 


Years. 

1 March  Sale.  | 

.September  S.ife. 

1 Totut.  j 

\ver.  per^^^f. 

Cwt. 

£ 

Cwt. 

£ 

Cwi. 

Jt* 

1 i’ 

if. 

r/. 

1804 

•mm 

_ 

— 

— 

- 

18a5 

mmm 

_ 

...» 

,r-  T 

1806 

— 

18 

380 

18 

380 

21 

2 

3 

1807 

56 

1,058 

_ 

— 

56 

1,058 

18 

17 

o 

1808 

38 

747 

15 

267 

53 

1,014 

19 

2 

.16  cwt.  of  myrrh  is  allowed  to  a ton.  The  permanent  duty  is  £5  12«.  per  cwt.  and  the  temporary 
Or  war  duty  £l  17j.  4d.  making  in  the  whole  £7  4d.  per  cwt. 


108 


NAXnON^—RHINOCEROS"  HORNS  and  HIDES-SAGAPENUM-SALEP. 


NATRON, 

Or  native  mineral  Alkali,  is  sometimes  found  in  Egypt,  from  whence  it  has  been  brought  to  India, 
and  from  thence  to  England.  Volney  describes  the  lakes  where  it  is  produced:  their  bed  is  a natural  ca- 
vity, 3 or  4 leagues  long,  and  about  a quarter  of  a league  broad ; the  bottom  is  solid  and  stony ; it  is  dry 
during  nine  months  of  the  year,  but  in  winter,  a water  of  a violet  red  colour  oozes  out  of  the  earth,  which 
fills  the  lake  to  5 or  0 feet  in  depth ; the  return  of  the  heat  of  summer  evaporates  this,  and  leaves  a bed  of 
salt  behind  it,  of  two  feet  in  thickness,  which  is  dug  out  witli  bars  of  iron.  The  mineral  Alkali  differs 
from  the  vegetable;  it  is  less  caustic,  and  so  far  from  attracting  humidity,  that  it  effloresces  in  the  air.  The 
French  are  stated  to  have  imported  into  Marseilles  from  Egypt  5,000  tons  of  this  article  in  a year. 

RHINOCEROS'  HORNS 

Are  much  esteemed  among  the  Mahometans,  not  for  any  real  utility,  but  on  account  of  their  being 
considered  a powerful  antidote  against  poison.  They  are  in  general  about  12  to  15  inches  long,  and 
from  3 to  6 inches  in  diameter,  though  sometimes  10  inches  in  diameter,  and  near  24  inches  long;  this  size 
is  seldom  seen.  A good  sized  horn,  sound,  and  not  broken  at  the  point,  is  worth  from  three  to  four  pounds 
sterling.  At  the  base  they  are  commonly  of  a brown  or  olive  colour,  though  they  are  occasionally  met 
with  grey,  and  sometimes  nearly  white:  they  are  placed  in  the  middle  of  the  forehead,  and  are  nearly 
straight,  having  a very  small  curve,  inclining,  upwards  with  a sharp  point.  The  horns  of  the  Rhinoceros 
liavc  not  that  interior  spungy  substance  which  is  contained  in  the  horns  of  other  animals,  but  are  entirely 
solid : they  are  made  into  drinking  cups  and  snuff  boxes,  which  are  very  beautiful,  and  preferred  to 
tortoise-shell. 


RHINOCEROS  HIDES 

Are  in  great  demand  for  making  targets  or  shields;  when  prepared,  tliey  are  proof  against  the  stroke 
of  a scimitar;  they  are  of  a variegated  colour,  and  when  polished,  are  very  similar  to  tortoise-shell.  At 
Surat  they  make  the  most  elegant  targets  of  these  hides,  and  stud  them  with  silver-headed  nails.  These 
will  fetcli  from  30  to  40  rupees  each,  and  are  much  sought  after,  particularly  in  Arabia. 

SAGAPENUM 

• 

Is  the  concrete  gummy  resinous  juice  of  a plant  not  well  known.  It  is  met  with  in  drops,  and  in 
masses  composed  of  those  drops ; but  the  loose  drops  are  much  finer  than  the  masses.  In  both  forms  it  is 
a compact  substance,  considerably  heavy,  of  a reddish  colour  outwardly,  but  paler  within,  and  dear  like 
horn.  It  grows  soft  on  handling,  so  as  frequently  to  stick  to  the  fingers.  The  larger,  daricer  coloured, 
broken  masses  of  Bdellium  are  sometimes  substituted,  but  they  may  be  easily  distinguished  by  the  weakness 
of  their  smell.  Sagapenum  has  a strong  smell,  somewhat  of  the  leek  kind,  and  a moderately  hot,  biting 
taste.  Of  Sagapenum  18  cwt.  is  allowed  to  a ton.  The  permanent  duty  is  16s.  and  the  war  duty 
18tf.  8rf.  per  cwt.  making  in  Uie  whole  £3  10s,  9d.  per  cwt. 

SALEP 

Is  pi'epared  from  the  dried  roots  of  a plant  of  the  Orchis  kind;  it  was  formerly  imported  from  the 
East  Indies,  and  held  in  great  estimation,  being  considered  highly  nourishing.  It  is  generally  in  yellowish 
white  oval  pieces,  bard,  clear,  and  pellucid,  without  smell,  in  taste  somewhat  resembling  TragaoantlK 


SKNNA— SHARKS'  FINS. 


109 


When  properly  prepared,  it  is  a wholesome  nourishment,  Miperior  to  rice,  and  it  has  the  sin^nilar  propiMly 
of  concealing  the  taste  of  salt  water;  hence,  to  prevent  the  calamity  of  famine  at  sea,  it  has  been  proposed 
that  the  powder  of  it  should  constitute  a part  of  every  ship’s  provisions.  If  kept  dry,  it  never  spoils. 

The  freight  of  this  article  is  calculated  at  Iti  cwt.  to  the  ton.  ITie  permanent  duty  is  X’4  4s.  per  cwt* 
and  temporary  or  war  duty,  £l  making  in  the  whole  £5  1&.  per  cwt. 


SKNNA 

Is  the  leaf  of  an  annual  wood  pod  hearing  plant,  and  is  imported  dry  from  Alexandria  and  the  Red  Sea. 
It  is  of  an  oblong  flgure,  pointed  at  the  ends,  particularly  the  one  opposite  to  whore  it  grows  to  the  stalk; 
in  the  middle  it  is  about  a quarter  of  an  inch  broad,  and  seldom  more  than  an  inch  long;  it  is  of  a lively 
yellowish  green  colour,  of  a firm  texture,  somewhat  thick  and  flat;  its  smell  is  faint,  but  not  disagreeable, 
and  its  taste  somewhat  bitter,  nauseous,  and  acrid.  There  aie  two  or  three  inferior  sorts,  distinguishable 
by  their  being  either  narrower,  longer,  and  shai'p  pointeil,  or  larg(*r,  biiuaJcr,  and  round  pointeil,  with 
small  prominent  veins,  of  a fresh  green  colour,  without  any  yellow  cast. 

In  chusing  Senna,  the  shape  of  the  leaf  should  assure  us  that  it  is  of  the  Alexandriun  kind;  it  should 
be  bright,  fresh,  of  a good  smell,  soft  to  the  touch,  and  clear  from  stalks  and  spots.  That  which  is 
imported  from  India  is  in  general  foul,  full  of  sticks  and  dirt,  in  the  proportion  of  31bs.  of  sticks  and  dii  t 
to  1 lb.  of  leaf;  if  well  garbled,  it  might  answer,  but  the  heat  of  the  hold  is  very  apt  to  injure  it. 

The  following  is  an  account  of  the  quantities  sold  at  the  East  India  sales  in  the  years  1804  to  1808 
inclusive,  with  the  sale  amount,  and  the  average  price  per  cwt. 


March 

Sale. 

September  Sale. 

Toul.  1 

V\er. 

Cwl. 

Cwt,  1 

£' 

Cwt 

£ 

Cwi, 

i* 

Jt‘ 

fL 

180S 

1 

12,889 

793 

12,889 

793 

i) 

1 

n 

1804 

21,473 

1,044 

1,492 

63 

22,965 

1,10.5 

0 

0 

11 'r 

1805 

5,059 

321 

38,941 

1,749 

44,0(K) 

2,070 

0 

0 

111 

1806 

15,610 

389 

7,16.5 

392 

22, m 

781 

0 

0 

1807 

31,944 

924 

33,403 

1,501 

6.5,347 

2,42.5 

0 

0 

HI 

1808 

10,4871 

328 

187 

4 

10,674 

0 

0 

7i 

The  freight  of  Senna  is  calculated  at  8 cwt.  to  the  ton ; one  ninth  part  is  allowed  for  tare.  The 
permanent  duty  Is  9d.  per  lb.  and  the  temporary  or  war  duty,  3d.  making  in  the  whole  Is.  per  pound. 

SHARKS’  FINS 

Are  an  article  of  trade  from  the  Arabian  and  Persian  Gulfs  to  India,  and  from  thence  to  China;  they 
are  esteemed  very  strengthening  by  the  Chinese.  In  chusing  them,  care  should  be  taken  that  they  have 
been  properly  cured;  the  larger  they  are,  when  free  from  decay,  the  more  they  are  esteemed.  In  India 
they  are  generally  sold  by  tale:  each  fin  should  be  upwards  of  nine  inches  long;  all  under  that  size,  reckon 
two  for  one;  the  price  varies  from  three  to  five  rupees  per  hundred  In  China  they  are  sold  by  the  pccul, 
which  contains  about  500  pieces.  The  East  Indiamcn  prefer  carrying  them  on  freight  from  India  to  China; 
they  are  packed  in  bales  weighing  about  7 cwt  and  from  Bombay  to  China  the  freight  is  about  20  to  24 
rupees  per  bale.  They  are  likewise  prepared  on  the  Malabar  and  Coromandel  Coasts,  and  many  of  the 
islands  in  the  Indian  Ocean. 


110 


TRAGACANTII  GUM. 


TRAGACANTH  GUM,  or,  as  it  is  usually  caUed,  gum  dragon,  is  a gum  exuding  from  a prickly 
plant  of  the  same  name.  This  commodity,  chiefly  produced  in  Turkey  and  Arabia,  is  of  different 
colours  and  qualities,  from  a pale  white  to  a dark  and  opaque.  It  is  usually  in  long,  slender,  worm- 
like pieces,  and  sometimes  it  is  in  roundish  drops,  which  are  rare.  It  is  moderately  heavy,  of  a firm  con- 
sistence, rather  tough  than  hard.  It  is  with  difficulty  pulverized,  unless  it  be  dried,  and  the  pestle  and 
mortar  kc]it  warm.  Its  natural  colour  is  a pale  white,  and  the  cleanest  specimens  are  something  transpa- 
rent. It  has  little  or  no  smell,  and  a taste  rather  disagreeable.  It  melts  in  the  mouth  to  a very  soft  mu- 
cilage, without  sticking  to  the  teeth,  as  Gum  Arabic  does.  The  most  striking  difference  between  this  and 
the  other  gums  is,  that  it  gives  a thicker  consistence  tO  a much  larger  quantity  of  water,  and  is  with  diffi- 
culty dissoluble,  or  rather  dissolves  but  imperfectly.  When  put  into  water,  it  slowly  imbibes  a great  quan- 
tity, swells  in  a large  volume,  and  forms  a soft,  but  not  fluid  mucilage;  by  agitation,  and  an  addition  of 
ivutcr,  a solution  may  be  obtained,  but  the  gummy  mucilage  settles  to  the  bottom  on  standing.  Gum 
Tragacanth  should  be  chosen  in  long  twisted  pieces,  semi-transparent,  white,  very  clear,  and  free  from  all 
other  colours;  the  brown,  and  particularly  the  black,  are  to  be  wholly  rejected.  An  inferior  kind  has  been 
lately  brought  home  from  the  British  settlements,  for  an  account  of  which,  see  Gum  Kuteera. 

t)f  Gum  Tragacanth  16  cwt.  is  allowed  to  a ton.  The  pennanent  duty  is  £S  IOj,  per  cwt.  and  thtj 
temporary  or  war  duty  £l  3s,  id.  making  in  the  wliole  £i  l3^.  id.  per  cwt» 


CHAPTER  IX 


Coast  of  Arabia  to  the  Persian  Gulf. 


Ailtn;  Descriptton'-^Trade-^Articles  suitable  to  the  Market — Provisions  and  liefi'cshmcnts-^Macvhi 

Shahar — Kisseen^^Dofar-^Morebat-^Mazeira  Island — Rosalgnte — Zmr — Kuriat — Muscat ; Description 
— Coi'ws,  and  tVeights^Trade  between  British  India  and  the  Guffs  of  Persia  and  Arabia — Balance  in 
Favour  of  British  India^Trade  with  other  Placcs-^Duties-^Provisions  and  Bfrcshments-^Burlca, 


ADEK. 


About  100  miles  to  the  eastward  of  the  straits  of  Babelmandel,  is  (\'ipe  Aden,  in  liitlindc  about 
19^  45  North.  This  Cape  is  high  and  craggy,  and  forms  a peninsula,  witli  a deep  bay  to  the  westward, 
called  Back  Bay,  and  another  to  the  eastward,  in  which  the  town  of  Aden  is  situated,  in  latitude  12^  .51 V 
North,  and  longitude  4.5°  10'  East,  where  ships  lie  sheltered  from  westerly  winds.  The  anchorage  is  in 
7 fathoms,  with  Cape  Aden  bearing  South;  the  mosque  touching  the  N.  W.  point  of  Eortilied  Island 
(a  black  islet  with  a tower  on  its  extremity)  about  | of  a mile  distant  from  the  island. 

The  town  of  Aden  has  at  present  a miserable  appearance  from  the  sea,  b(‘ing  neai  ly  a heap  of  ruins* 
out  of  which  two  minarets  and  a mosque  rear  their  heads.  The  rocky  peninsula  on  wln’ch  tin*  town  is 
situated,  was  formerly  strongly  fortified,  the  .summits  of  the  rocks  being  cove  red  with  the  ruins  of  lines 
and  forts.  Fortified  Island  was  also  covered  with  works  resembling  the  hill  forts  of  India;  and  when  in 
good  condition,  must  have  been  impregnable,  and  a small  expeiice  would  make  it  so  again,  'fhe  residtmee 
of  the  Sultan  is  but  an  indifferent  building,  and  the  greater  part  of  the  houses  are  comjiosed  ot  basket 
w^ork  and  matting.  There  is  a pier  running  out  from  the  middle  of  the  tow'ii,  where  boats  cun 
conveniently  land,  but  it  does  not  extend  to  low  water  mark. 

Aden  was  formerly  the  most  opulent  town  in  Aralria.  The  Portuguese,  under  Allnuiuercine,  made 
an  attempt  upon  it  in  1513,  but  were  repulsed.  In  15Ifi  a Portuguese  force  stopju’d  h(‘n‘  on  its  way  into 
the  Red  Sea,  when  the  Governor  of  the  town  oflered  to  surrender  it  to  them;  hut  they  defiTred  taking 


possession  till  their  return  from  tlic  Red  Sea.  In  the  mean  time  the  Governor,  having  received  remforce- 
ments,  refused  to  deliver  it  to  the  Portuguese,  who  thereupon  returned  to  India.  In  153:2  it  became  tri- 
butary to  them;  it  was  then  described  “very  strong,  standing  by  the  sea  side,  surromnled  by  iiiomnaiiis, 
“ on  the  top  of  which  are  little  castles  or  forts,  encompas.sed  with  ravelins  on  every  side,  excepting  a 
« little  opening  for  a road  into  the  country,  and  to  the  shore,  with  gates,  towxTs,  and  good  walls.  3 o the 
“ northw^ard  there  is  a large  port,  with  good  anchorage  secure  from  all  winds.  In  1.'>3H  it  wa.s  taken  by 
the  Turks,  who  reteined  possession  for  some  time,  hut  were  driven  out  of  the  country  hy  the  Imaum  of 
Sana’s  forces  V who,  desirous  of  atti^acting  vessels  to  his  dominions,  fixed  upon  Modiii,  to  which  he  annexed 


11* 


MACULA  BAY. 


so  many  privileges  and  encouragements,  that  Aden,  notwithstanding  the  superiority  of  its  harbour,  and 
the  difliculty  of  getting  through  the  straits  from  Mocha,  except  during  the  particular  monsoon,  was  in  a 
great  measure  abandoned,  and  the  commerce  transferred  to  the  new  establishment.  One  of  the  causes 
that  contributed  most  to  tlie  removal  of  the  commerce  to  Mocha  was,  that  the  market  for  coffee  being  in 
the  territory  of  the  Imaum  of  Sana,  he  wished  to  have  it  shipped  from  a port  within  the  boundary  of  his 
own  states,  and  for  that  purpose  laid  upon  the  article  so  heavy  a duty  when  it  was  taken  to  Aden,  that  the 
merchants,  to  avoid  this  charge,  adopted  the  practice  of  shi[>ping  it  from  Mocha. 

In  ISO*,  Sir  Home  Popham  was  sent  on  a mission  from  Bengal  to  Arabia.  He  visited  Aden,  and 
prefers  it  to  Mocha,  both  in  a commercial  and  political  point  of  view : as  a commercial  port,  it  has  manifest 
advantages  over  Mocha,  it  being  accessible  at  aU  tunes  of  the  year  Its  intercourse  with  the  Coast  of 
Africa  can  be  kept  up  at  all  seasons,  and  consequently  there  would  be  a continued  trade,  if  any  protec- 
tion \vas  given  to  it  by  tlie  English,  to  whom  the  Sultan  is  much  attached,  and  has  offered  to  hold 
his  country  under  them.  There  are  some  merchants  already  settled  at  Aden,  who,  though  they  have 
but  little  trade,  enjoy  a mild  Government,  and  on  that  account  they  do  not  remove  to  Mocha. 
The  exports  and  imports  are  nearly  the  same  as  at  Mocha;  and  Gum  Arabic,  and  other  drugs,  which 
are  brought  from  the  opposite  coast,  owing  to  its  contiguity,  may  be  procured  at  a cheaper  rate.  The 
natives  who  inhabit  the  coast  from  Cape  Guardafui  to  the  straits,  exclude  the  Arabs  from  their  ports,  and 
bring  tlicir  produce  either  to  Aden  or  Mocha  in  their  own  dows;  a great  part  of  the  myrrh  and 
Gum  Arabic  is  brought  to  the  former  place,  where  the  Banians  of  Mocha  liave  each  a partner  established 
to  conduct  tlieir  business.  AVere  a regular  trade  carried  on  at  Aden,  the  consumption  of  goods  would 
probably  Increase  considerably,  as  the  Africans  have  no  limit  to  their  purchases,  excepting  the  amount  of 
their  gold,  elephant's  teeth,  gums,  and  the  produce  of  their  own  country. 

The  articles  suitable  to  the  market  are  as  follow ; and  the  quantity  that  may  be  disposed  of,  about 
the  value  of  three  lacs  of  rupees,  principally  the  produce  of  the  East  Indies  and  China. 


Benjamin. 

Cotton, 

Iron. 

Steel. 

Camphirc. 

Cotton  thread. 

Lead. 

Sugar. 

('ardumums. 

Cutlery.  ^ 

Piece  goods. 

Tobacco. 

Cassia. 

Ginger. 

Popper. 

Turmeric. 

China  ware. 

Glass  ware. 

Rice. 

Tin. 

Cloves. 

Hardware. 

Sandal  w^ood. 

Tutenaguc, 

Cinnamon. 

Ironmongery 

Silks. 

Vermilion. 

The  exports  would  consist  ot  coffee,  elephants'  teeth,  gold,  and  gums  of  various  kinds. 


PROVISIONS  AND  REFRESHMENTS. 

The  beef  procured  here  is  but  indifferent;  the  Sultan  reserves  to  himself  the  disposal  of  bullocks 
The  be.st  w^ater  is  to  be  procured  from  Back  Bay,  the  only  cxpence  of  which  is  3 dollars  demanded  by  the 
Dola:  that  from  Aden  is  brackish,  and  brought  in  skins  to  the  landing  place.  Grapes  and  pomegranates 
are  to  be  had  in  plenty,  but  no  vegetables.  Firewood  is  to  be  got,  if  required. 

MACULA  BAY 

fs  about  55  leagues  E.  N.  E.  from  Cape  Aden,  in  latitude  about  W'  6 North,  and  longitude  47®  S3 
East.  The  bay  is  about  * leagues  deep,  and  60  broad.  At  the  bottom  of  it  is  a small  town ; but  refresh- 
ments are  not  to  be  expected,  water,  and  every  article  of  provision,  except  (ish,  being  scarce,  and  the 
inhabitants  are  not  to  be  trusted.  Between  this  place  and  Sbahar  Point  are  several  small  villages  close 
to  Uie  sea  side. 


SHAHAR—KISSEEN—OOFAEo-MOREBAT-^MAZEIRA  ISLAND— ROSAI.GATr,.  j 1.1. 


SHAHAR 

• 

Is  about  40  miles  to  the  Eastward  of  Macula,  in  latitude  14"^  20  North,  and  lun^itiule  48'*  Jii  East. 
This  town  appears  of  considerable  size,  and  is  situated  close  to  the  sea  side.  The  inliuliUants  arc  inure 
civilized,  and  give  a kind  reception  to  strangers;  and  here  provisions  and  refreshments  mn)*  he  proem  ed. 
The  place  is  known  by  two  hills,  one  to  the  northward,  and  the  other  to  the  southward.  Ships  anchor  in 
9 fathoms,  the  first  hill  bearing  N.  £.  by  N,  the  other  about  West. 

KISSEEN. 

This  bay  is  formed  by  Cape  Kisseen,  in  latitude  15^  19  North,  and  longitude  50'  East,  and  Cape 
Fartash  : the  former  is  known  by  two  peaks  that  make  like  an  ass’s  ears.  In  this  bay  are  three  towns  or 
villages,  the  principal  of  which  is  Kisseen,  in  latitude  15®  25'  North.  To  the  westward,  about  a mile,  on 
the  shore  is  a well,  the  only  place  where  water  can  be  procured. 

DOFAR. 

Tlus  town  is  called  Hamme  Badgeree  by  the  natives ; it  is  about  .50  leagues  from  Ca])c  Fartash,  and 
in  latitude  17^  North,  and  longitude  54®  33  East;  the  anchorage  is  about  two  miles  from  the  shore.  This 
place  was  formerly  of  some  importance.  It  was  destroyed  in  1526  by  the  Portuguese,  upon  what  occasion 
it  does  not  appear.  The  town  is  small;  no  provisions  or  refreshments  can  be  procured;  the  natives  who 
arc  armed  with  matchlocks  and  spears,  are  shy,  but  do  not  appear  unfriendly  to  strangers. 

MOBEBAT. 

Cape  Morebat,  which  forma  the  southern  extreme  of  the  bay,  is  in  latitude  17®  North,  and  longitude 
55®  4'  East.  The  town  b about  two  miles  from  the  point,  and  consists  of  a number  of  huts,  with  several 
mosques;  the  best  anchorage  b abreast  of  the  town,  about  a mile  distance.  If  the  inhabitants  should  be 
shy  in  coming  on  board,  wave  a white  flag,  when  they  will  come  off;  they  are  well  behaved,  but  it  would  be 
^proper  to  rbk  going  far  from  the  beach,  or  sleeping  on  shore  in  the  night.  This  bay  is  preferable  to 
any  on  the  coast,  and  ships  that  lose  their  passage,  generally  wait  here  the  change  of  the  monsoon* 
Water  b to  be  procured  by  sinking  casks  near  the  mosques;  the  water  is  brackish,  but  does  not  injure 
the  health  of  the  men.  Fbh  are  plentiful;  some  sheep,  goats,  and  bullocks  are  to  be  had:  the  latter  is  a 
scarce  article,  but  fodder  more  so.  Thb  place  is  not  recommended,  except  in  cases  of  necessity.  A few 
lean  bullocks,  goats,  or  a few  fowls,  are  all  that  may  reasonably  be  expected.  The  inhabitants  here  arc 
generally  at  war  with  those  of  the  interior,  with  whom  they  have  no  communication. 

MAZEIRA  ISLAND. 

The  N.  B.  part  of  thb  bland  is  in  latitude  20®  35'  North,  and  longitude  about  59®  40  East.  On  its 
Mstern  side  is  a small  village,  but  it  is  seldom  virited  by  Europeans,  the  currents  running  strong,  and  the 
coast  being  but  imperfectly  known.  There  is  a passage  between  the  island  and  the  main  for  large  vesse 

R0SAL6ATE. 

This  cape  fa  the  N.  E.  point  of  Arabia;  the  land  is  high  and  uneven  over  it,  but  facing  the  sea  fa  fa 
low  and  levd.  Its  sfanation  wat  not  correeUy  determined  till  1799,  when  by  observations  taken  in  the 
licopard,  it  iqi^iean  Ac  latitade  Is  88®  SO"  North,  and  longitude  ®0“  10'  East. 

Q 


114 


ZOAR—KURIAT— MUSCAT. 


The  town  is  situated  on  the  banks  of  a small  river  or  crook,  about  5 leagues  from  the  Cape,  in  lati- 
tude about  22^  34  East;  it  is  inhabited  by  fisliormeti,  who  bring  off  fish  and  dates  to  ships  passing;  the 
town  is  small,  has  several  trees  near  it,  and  4 or  5 tomb%<{r  white  buildings  on  the  left  of  it. 

ZOAR 

Is  in  latitude  22°  45'  North,  about  five  leagues  from  Rosalgate;  it  is  a considerable  town,  and  a place 
of  some  trade,  but  being  so  near  Muscat,  to  which  it  is  tributary,  it  is  not  visited  by  European  vessels. 
It  was  taken  and  plundered  by  the  Portuguese  under  Albuquerque  in  1508. 

KURIAT. 

To  the  southward  of  Cape  Kuriat,  is  a towm  of  the  same  name;  it  was  formerly  of  Some  note.  It 
was  visited  by  the  Portuguese  in  1508,  under  Albuquerque,  who  being  ill  received  by  the  inhabitants  at 
that  period,  under  the  dominion  of  Ormus,  he  stormed  the  town,  then  plundered,  and  afterwards  burnt  it. 

The  Government  of  Muscat  is  said  to  extend  to  Cape  Rosalgate,  including  the  above  places;  but  it  is 
not  safe  for  Europeans  to  land  at  the  villages  near  the  Cape,  because  the  inhabitants  are  inhospitable  to 
strangers,  and  there  is  reason  to  believe  that  the  wandering  Arabs  keep  some  of  these  villages  or  towns  in 
subjection.  The  only  supplies  that  are  likely  to  be  met  with  hereabouts,  are  fish,  dates,  and  sometimes 
water,  which  are  brought  off  by  the  country  boats  to  ships  passing  near  the  coast. 

MUSCAT 

Is  situated  in  latitude  23°  38'  North,  and  longitude  about  59°  16'  East.  The  harbour,  or  cove,  is 
formed  by  high  land  to  the  southward  and  westward,  and  on  the  East  side  by  an  island,  called  Muscat 
Island,  which  is  joined  by  a reef  of  rocks  to  the  peninsula,  on  which  the  town  of  Muscat  is  situated,  the 
entrance  into  the  cove  being  from  the  northward,  and  is  protected  by  a fort  on  each  side;  and  there  is  ano- 
ther fort  close  to  the  town,  that  commands  the  inside  of  the  cove,  where  the  depths  of  water  are  4 and  5 
fatl^pms,  between  the  two  western  forts,  and  where  a large  fleet  may  moor  in  safety. 

Ti'he  town^  of  Muscat  is  walled  round,  and  none  but  Arabs  and  Banians  are  permitted  to  live  within 
ihe  gates ; the  others  reside  without  in  mat  houses.  It  is  strongly  fortified,  and  no  vessels  are  allowed  to 
go  in,  after  dusk,  or  come  out  after  sunset.  It  is  the  duty  of  the  Serang  of  the  Imaum  or  Prince  of  Muscat, 
to  iissist  any, vessel  that  comes  to  the  port;  and  they  are  allowed  a certain  sum  for  this,  which  they  are 
never  backward  in  demanding,  whether  they  attend  or  not.  When  a vessel  comes  near,  by  making  the 
usual  signal  for  a pilot,  they  will  come  off,  otherwise  they  will  take  no  notice  of  any  one:  it  is  best  ta 
make  them  attend  till  the  vessel  is  secured,  as  they  have  excellent  boats  for  carrying  out  warp  anchors. 

Muscat  is  the  key  of  Arabia  and  Persia;  all  the  j)orts  from  Rosalgate  to  the  Gulf  are  tributary  to  it; 
it  is  a place  of  very  great  trade,  being  possessed  of  a considerable  number  of  large  ships,  which  trade  to 
the  British  settlements  in  India,  to  Sumatra,  the  Malay  Peninsula,  the  Red  Sea,  and  East  Coast  of  Africa. 
Great  indulgences  are  allowed  by  the  English  to  the  flag  of  Muscat ; being  recognised  as  neutral,  their  ves- 
8IU8  visit  the' enemy's  settlements,  where  they  purchase  prize-goods,  at  hsITtheir  value:  and  thejr*  have  of 
laic  been  ihe  carriers  of  British  India.  Muscat  may  be  considered  the  magazine  for  goods,  and  is  resorted 
to  by  vessels  from  every  port  in  Persia,  the  ports  of  Arabia  within  the  Gulf,  and  from  the  coast  as  far  as 
the  Indus.  It  has  been  the  usual  custom  for  all  English  merchant  ships  in  their  voyage  from  India  to  Bus- 
sorah,  to  stop  at  Muscat,  and  in  like  manner  on  their  return,  and  they  generally  sell  and  purchase  goods  here. 

There  is  aiidther  town,  about  three  miles  to  the  westward,  called  Muttra,  defended'^by  u sAiidl  fort, 
which  is  nearly  as  large  as  Mu'seat,  with  several  villages  in  the*  valley  between.  Ai-Huttra  therb  ba  gook 


MUSCAT, 


US 

place  to  haul  rcsselfl  on  shore;  and  though  they  have  one  at  Muscat,  yet  they  always  send  their  largest 
there  to  be  cleaned.  There  is  a good  road  along  the  shore  from  Muscat  to  MutJ,ra.  ^ 

Independent  of  tlie  commerce  by  sea  to  the  British  settlements  in  India  and  other  places,  the  inhabi- 
tants  of  Muscat  carry  on  a very  large  trade  with  the  numerous  tribes  of  Arabs  in  the  interior,  from  whom 
they  receive  caravans  frequently,  which  bring  various  articles  hereafter  enunu  rated. 

The  Government  of  the  Imaum  is  the  strictest  and  civilest  of  any  either  in  Persia  or  Arabia,  and  a 
stranger  may  walk,  the  streets  any  hour  in  the  night  without  molestation:  goods  are  ])ilcd  up  in  the 
streets,  and  lie  night  and  day  exposed,  without  any  watch  or  guard,  ajul  there  never  happens  an  in- 
stance that  such  goods  are  robbed  or  pilfered  of  the  least  part,  tin*  police  being  so  (*xeellent. 

Muscat  was  a place  of  considerable  trade  previous  to  the  arrival  of  the  IMrtuguese  in  IheNC  seas,  and 
was  then  tributary  to  Ormus.  Albuquerque  summoned,  and  obliged  it  to  submit  in  the  year  lo()7;  but  a 
body  of  2,000  Arabs  getting  into  the  town,  immediately  raised  an  insurrection,  in  spite  of  all  the  care  the 
Governor  could  take  to  keep  them  quiet,  upon  which  a bloody  and  obstinate  action  ensued,  ending  in  a 
complete  victory  gained  by  the  Portuguese.  After  the  destruction  of  Urmus,  this  place  hecanie  the  prin- 
cipal mart  of  this  part  of  the  world,  and  thereby  produced  very  great  advantages  to  the  Crown  of  Portugal, 
exclusive  of  the  prodigious  private  fortunes  made  by  individuals,  while  they  remained  in  possession.  During 
that  time,  the  city  was  very  much  improved ; for,  besides  regular  fortifications,  they  erected  a stately 
church,  a noble  college,  and  many  other  public  structures,  as  well  as  very  fine  stone  houses,  in  which  the 
principal  merchants  resided,  and  those  who,  by  the  management  of  public  aflliirs,  had  acquired  fortunes  to 
live  at  their  ease.  In  process  of  time,  however,  they  began  to  treat  the  natives  so  ill,  and  to  lay  tlieir 
commerce  under  so  many  difficulties,  that  at  length,  despairing  of  redress  any  other  way,  they  had  recourse 
to  arms;  and  though  the  Portuguese  behaved  very  gallantly,  yet  in  the  end  they  were  reduced  to  such 
extremities,  as  to  be  glad  to  embark  with  their  best  eflects  on  board  their  ships  in  the  port,  and  retire  to 
their  other  settlements.  This  was  about  the  year  1648;  but  the  war  did  not  end  here : they  made  frequent 
attempts  to  recover  a place  of  such  importance,  sometimes  by  force,  sometimes  by  negotiation,  but  with- 
out effect.  They  for  many  years  disturbed  the  trade  of  the  place;  but  these  hostilities  were  disadvanta- 
geous in  the  end;  for,  by  degrees,  the  Arabs  became  expert  seamen,  excellent  in  the  use  of  fire  arms,  and 
raised  a considerable  maritime  force,  which  afterwards  was  the  di'cad  of  all  the  European  powers  in  India. 

In  1659,  the  English  Resident  at  Surat  projected  a plan  for  obtaining  possession  of  Muscat,  and  it 
so  far  succeeded,  that  a negotiation  was  commenced  with  the  Governor ; but  it  was  not  brought  to  a satis- 
factory conclusion.  In  1694,  the  strength  of  the  Arabs  of  Muscat  in  shipping  and  forces  was  so  increased 
as  to  occasion  an  alarm  that  they  would  obtain  the  command  of  the  Persian  Gulf,  they  having  taken 
several  places;  and  apprehensions  were  entertained  that  they  would  attack  Gombroon,  the  Resident  of  which 
gave  it  as  his  opinion,  “ that  they  will  prove  as  great  a plague  in  India,  as  the  Algerines  were  in  Europe.” 
The  Government  at  home  proposed,  when  peace  was  concluded  in  Europe,  to  equip  armed  ships  to  clear 
the  Indian  Seas,  and  to  root  out  that  nest  of  pirates,  the  Muscat  Arabs.”  In  1707  the  Arabs  adopted 
a more  regular  system  of  naval  warfare,  having  obtained  permission  from  the  King  of  Pegu  to  build  ships 
at  the  ports  in  hb  country;  and  they  spread  their  fleets  over  the  Indian  Seas,  some  of  their  ship.s  cairying 
froin^  to  50  guns;  and  made,  descents  on  scveral'towns  on  the  Malabar  Coast.  They  continued  tor  a 
len^  of  time  to  annoy  the  tirade;  but  of  late  years  they  have  confined  themselves  principally  to  comnieree.^ 
With  the  Persians  they  are  almost  continually  at  war;  but  such  is  the  policy  of  the  Buaum;  or  Prince  ot 
Muscat,  that  he  suffers  the  Persians  to  resort  to  Muscat  with  their  vessels  to  purchase  goods,  for  ready 
money,  without  any  molestation,  either  at  Muscat  its  dependent . territories,*  or  in  tladr  voyages  to  or 
from  Muscat  to  any 
nmels  which  they, 


lart  of  Persia;  but  this  permission  holds  good  only  with  regard  to  such  vessels,  ah 
2e§t.  tending  to  othcr.pqrts,  and  all  ships  of  yvar,  tli^y  endeavour  to  make  prizes  of. 

0 2 \ 


n< 


MUSCAT. 


COINS  AND  WEIGHTS. 

Account!  ar#  kept  kcre  in  gass  and  mamoodies;  20  gaas  make  1 mamoody.  The  coins  current  are 

30  Budgerooks  1 f ^ Mamoody. 

3}  Mamoodies  [■  make']  ^ Bombay  Rupee. 

7{  Ditto  ^ V 1 Spanish  Dollar. 

All  Persian^  Turkish,  and  Indian  coins  are  met  with  here,  but  are  generally  sold  by  weight. 

The  weights  are  the  cucha  and  maund;  24  cuchas  making  a maund,  which  is  equal  to  81b»  12  oa« 
avoirdupois. 


COMMERCE. 

The  trade  carried  on  between  the  British  settlements  in  India,  and  the  Persian  and  Arabian  Gulfs, 
is  very  considerable.  The  following  is  a statement  of  its  extent,  as  carried  on  by  individuals,  exclusive  of  the 
East  India  Company's  trade  in  woollens  with  the  Gulf  of  Persia,  for  five  years,  cur. 


IMPORTS  FROM  THE  BRITISH  SETTLEMENTS.  EXPORTS  TO  THE  BRITISH  SETTLEMENTS. 


Years. 

Merclmn.iise. 

Treasure. 

Total. 

Years. 

1802' 

1803 

1804 

1805 

1806 

Merchandise. 

Treasure. 

Total. 

iSicca  Rupees. 

Sicca  Rupees. 

Sicca  Rupees. 

Sicca  Rupees. 

Sicca  Rupees. 

Sicca  Ruptcf. 

1803 

1804 

1805 
180(1 
ToUl. 

55,32,988 

41,98,537 

53,61,813 

61,43,978 

77,09,937 

55,32,988 

41,98,637 

53,95,888 

61,44,312 

77,11,152 

16,29,730 

15,43,999 

20,16,272 

17,02,357 

18,77,906 

42,16,993 

35,81,035 

53,02,818 

50,84,272 

58,39,054 

57,46,723 

51,25,034 

73,18,090 

67,86,629 

77,16,960 

289,45,253 

1 37,624' 

289,82,877 

TStaT 

~88;69,264 

326,93,486 

This  trade  is  of  great  importance,  and  very  advantageous  to  British  India,  pouring  in  a very  large 
supply  of  treasure,  as  will  appear  from  the  following  statement: 


Value  of  merchandise  imported  into  the  Gulfs  of  Persia  and  Arabia,  from 

the  British  Settlements,  in  five  years  Sicca  Rupees  289,45,253 

IXtto,  exported  from  ditto  to  86,69,264 

Imports  of  merchandise  exceed  the  exports  by  Sicca  Rupees  202,75,989 

Treasure  exported  to  India  during  the  same  periods  Sicca  Rupees  240,21,178 
IMtto,  imported  from  37,624 

■ ■ 239,86,543 

B Jance  in  favour  of  the  Britbh  settlements  in  five  years  Sicca  Rupees  442,62,637 
Being  in  the  following  proportions  to  the  different  settlements: 


In  favour  of 


Fort  St.  George  and  Dej)endencies 
Bombay  and  Surat 
^ Total . . . Sicca  Rup^s  I 


Merchamlwe, 

TreaNure. 

Totil. 

Sicca  Rupees. 

Sicca  Rupees. 

Sicca  Rupees. 

71,01,049 

29,05,073 

102,69,867 

t'202,75,989 

37,52,345 

6,71,637 

196,62,666 

239,86,548 

l(^,53,^ 

34,76,610 

299,32,533 

The  articles  of  which  the  imports  and  exports  consisted,  are  enumerated  under  tha  heads  of  the  re^ 
spcctive  settlements.  The  greater  part  of  thb  commerce,  as  well  as  that  to  other  places  to  the  eastward 


BURKA. 


HT 

i*  carried  on  by  the  Arabs,  under  the  flag  of  the  Imaum  of  Afuscat  The  trade  with  the  subjecti  of  Muscat 
on  the  coast,  and  the  independent  Arabs  in  the  interior,  consist  of 


Almonds, 

Gums^  various. 

Rhinoceros’  horns. 

Wax. 

Cattle. 

Hides. 

Ditto  hides. 

Pearl  shelU 

Drugs,  of  sorts. 

Honey. 

Skins. 

Horses^ 

Elephants’  teeth. 

Ostrich  feathers. 

Sheepw 

Raisins, 

taking  in  return  various  East  Indian  commodities,  principally  the  under-mentioned; 

Ginger.  i 

Opium. 

Pepper.  | 

Spices. 

Grain.  | 

Piece  goods. 

Sugar.  1 

Turmeric. 

and  a small  quantity  of  European  cutlery,  glass  ware,  looking  glasses,  broad  cloth,  &c. 


DUTIES. 

Mahometans  pay  per  cent  on  imports  and  exports;  all  other  nations  pay  5 per  cent. 

PROVISIONS  AND  REFRESHMENTS. 

Notwithstanding  the  unpromising  appearance  of  the  country  near  Muscat,  provisions,  fruits,  and  ve- 
getables are  to  be  had  in  plenty,  and  reasonably  cheap.  Bullocks  are  extremely  good,  at  10  to  IS  dollars 
a head;  a good  sheep  2 or  3 dollars;  fowls,  large  and  reasonable.  From  April  to  September  the  market 
is  extremely  well  supplied  with  grapes,  melons,  mangoes,  oranges,  limes,  pomegranates,  and  other  fruits ; 
likewise  greens,  pumpkins,  onions,  and  abundance  of  other  vegetables.  They  are  always  well  supplied 
with  delicious  fresh  fish,  which  is  the  principal  support  of  the  natives;  they  kill  meat  daily  on  shore  for 
sale,  but  that  which  comes  on  board  the  vessels,  must  come  from  Muttra,  in  a clandestine  manner,  as  the 
compradore  (or  steward)  is  dependent  on  the  Company's  broker,  who  is  a Hindoo,  and  very  desirous  of 
saving  the  lives  of  the  bullocks,  but  they  have  not  that  authority  on  shore;  they  manage  so  as  to  bring  the 
cattle  on  bqard  in  the  night  time.  The  beat  mode  of  watering,  is  with  the  ships’  casks,  otherwise  they  will 
bring  off  the  water  in  oily  boats  in  bulk,  which  will  smell  disagreeably  in  a few  days,  although  very  good 
if  it  is  taken  clear  from  the  reservoir,  which  is  near  the  sea,  the  water  being  conducted  to  it  from  a consi- 
derable distance  inland.  The  Muscat  mangoes  ore  preferable  to  any  in  India. 

BURKA. 

Thb  place  is  in  latitude  23®  50'  North,  and  is  strongly  fortified.  Here  the  Imaum  of  Muscat  resides; 
between  it  and  the  entrance  of  the  Persian  Gulf,  are  several  small  villages  seldom  visited  by  any  European 
vessels; 


CHAPTER  X. 


Gulf  of  Persia. 


Ras  el  Khima^Destruclion  of  Pirate  Ves-^elH,  — Bahreen  Tslandn^Pearl  Fishery^Catif^Grane^Bustorahy 

Description — Coins — Weights  and  Measnres^Trade  to  and  from  British  India-^Imports  and  Experts  from 
Bomlniy  and  Madras — Surat  Piece  Goods  suitable  to  the  Bussorak  Market — Bengal  Piece  Goods-^Instruc- 
tions  relative  tothe  Trade  at  Bussorah-^Dutiesand  Port  Charges-^Provisions  and  Refreshment  s^Bandareck-^ 
Korgo^Karak — Bushire ; Description — Coinsy  Weightsy  and  Measures^-^Imports  and  Exports-^Provisions 

and  Refreshments^Bushcab^Kimis^Ormus ; Description^Gombroon;  Description Coins^Wtighls 

and  Measures^Imports  and  Exports-^Articles  procurable  in  the  Gulf  of  Persia — Jlmonds-^Jmnumiacum 
Gum-Arabic  Gum—Arsenio-^Assafoiida—Awripegmentum-^Bdellium  Gum — Bezoar  Stones--‘Brmstone 

•^Caramania  Wod^Carpets^-^oliHiuintida— Cummin  Seed^Earth  Red^^Elcmi  Gum Galbanum  GiniM- 

Galls-^Gogul^Hypocistis— Jujubes — Kismisses—Labdanum  Gum^J^pis  Lazuli^^Lapis  Tuh\t^M<Mid 
^Olibanum  Gum—Opoponax  Gum— Pearl  Shells^Rose.  Maloes^Rose  Water— Ruinas^Sal  Amnwkiat 
—Sarcocolla  Gum—Schtraz  Wine-^Scammony^Worm  Seed. 


THE  entrance  into  the  Gulf  of  Persia  is  between  Cape  Mussendom  In  Arabia,  on  the  southern  side, 
in  latitude  26^  12  North,  and  longitude  56®  40'  East,  and  Cape  Jasques  in  Persia,  in  latitude  25°  40'  Northi 
and  longitude  57®  55  East,  on  the  northern  side. 

On  the  Arabian  side  of  the  Gulf  the  coast  extending  upwards  of  400  miles  from  Cape  Mussendom  to 
the  Bahreen  Islands,  is  denominated  the  Pirate  Coast,  and  was  but  little  known  to  Europeans  till  the  year 
1809,  when  the  muchief  done  by  the  pirates  was  so  considerable,  and  the  rnielties  they  committed  so  great, 
that  an  expedition  was  fitted  out  at  Bombay  to  act  against  them.  The  fleet  stopped  at*  Muscat,  in  expec- 
tation of  the  Imaum  rendering  some  a.ssistance ; but  he  was  much  averse  to  the  armament,  on  the  pre- 
sumption that  the  force  would  not  be  sufficient  for  the  purpose.  He  stated  that  none  but  small  vessels 
could  approach  the  town  of  Ras  el  Khima,  and  that  not  less  tban  ten  thousand  men  could  assail  it  by  land; 
because  the  pirates  would  be  assisted  by  llie  Bedouin  Arabs  to  the  number  of  twenty  thousand. 

RAS  EL  KHIMA, 

The  capital  of  the  Pirate  Coast,  is  in  latitude  about  25®  49'  North,  and  longitude  55®  S(y  East  The 
town  sUnds  on  a sandy  peninsula,  defended  in  the  isthmus  by  a well-flanked  battery  with  square  towers, 
the  sea-line  defended  by  batteries  of  one  gun  each  at  regular  intervals  between  the  point  and  the  wall, 
comprising  a space  of  about  1}  mile.  Many  date-trees  are  within  the  walls,  and  huts,  built  of  their 
leaves  and  bamboo  supports,  form  a suburb  to  the  town  of  flat-roofed  houses.  ^ There  are  several  castles, 
one  of  which  is  the  residence  of  their  chief,  and  another  a protection  for  naval  idores,  &c. 


BAHREEN  ISLANDS, 


no 


The  town  was  taken  by  assault  on  the  13th  of  November,  1809 ; the  enemy  driven  into  the  interior; 
all  their  guns  spiked;  about  seventy  vessels,  principally  dows,  burnt ; their  ma^razines  blown  up,  and 
every  injury  done  to  the  works.  This  was  effected  with  the  loss  of  only  one  officer  killed,  and  four  men 
wounded.  Considerable  plunder  was  taken  in  the  tow  n : one  soldier  is  said  to  have  had  1400  gold  mohurs. 

BAHREEN  ISLANDS. 

The  principal  of  these  islands  is  situated  about  30  leagues  W.  N.  W.  from  Bushire,  and  w ithin  5 
leagues  of  the  coast  of  Arabia:  they  are  in  possession  of  the  Persians.  On  the  island  is  a strong  fort 
garrisoned  with  about  300  men;  but  their  supplies,  even  water,  are  brought  from  the  ludghbouring  places. 
At  these  islands  is  the  greatest  and  most  valuable  pearl  fisliery  in  the  w orld,  the  annual  produce  being 
seldom  less  than  60,000  Bussorah  tomands,  and  often  more;  some  years  it  amounts  to  100,000  toiiiands. 

The  pearl  banks  commence  in  about  26^  North  latitude,  and  extend  to  26^  4^)  North,  having  in  that 
space  several  towns  very  little  known. 

The  fishery  generally  commences  in  June,  and  lasts  about  two  months.  It  is  carried  on  by  the  Per- 
sians, and  the  divers  are  Persians. 

The  duty  on  what  is  taken,  is  one  third  to  the  Sovereign,  which  the  collector  receives  every  day,  either 
pearls,  or  their  equivalent  in  money,  as  the  divers,  or  those  who  contract  wdth  them,  can  agree.  It  some- 
times happens  that  a diver,  or  contractor,  makes  his  fortune  in  a season.  The  boats  are  all  numbered,  and 
no  oysters  are  allowed  to  be  opened  in  a boat,  but  must  be  t>rought  on  shore  by  a certain  hour,  w hen  they 
are  opened  in  the  presence  of  an  officer.  The  pearls  which  are  found,  are  then  carried  to  the  collector, 
^ho  receives  the  duty,  and  the  day's  business  is  concluded. 

The  oyster  banks  have  from  15  to  30  feet  water  on  them,  and  some  more.  It  frequently  happens 
that  a man  will  bring  up  300  to  400  oysters  in  a day,  and  not  find  as  many  pearls  as  are  worth  five  shil- 
lings; as  there  ore  more  which  have  not  any,  than  those  that  have,  and  of  these  many  have  only  small 
pearls,  which  are  denominated  seed  pearl. 

The  oyster  shells  are  always  the  property  of  the  divers,  whether  they  fish  for  themselves,  or  contract 
ivith  others.  Some  of  these  shells  ore  from  8 to  10  inches  in  diameter,  nearly  of  a round  form,  and  thick 
in  proportion.  The  oysters  are  seldom  eaten,  as  they  are  generally  rank.  The  sorts  and  sizes  vary  so 
much,  that  the  smallest  are  not  two  inches  in  diameter:  these  are  eaten  by  the  people  on  the  spot.  The 
largest  shells  have  not  always  the  greatest  quantity,  nor  do  they  contain  the  largest  pearls,  ns  neither 
the.  sisw  nor  colour  indicates  their  contents,  it  being  mere  cliance.  The  round  pearls  are  always  found  in 
the  fleshy  part  of  the  oyster,  and  many  of  those  which  have  an  irregular  shape:  some  adhere  to  the  inner 
part  of  the  shell,  which  are  deformed,  and  flat  on  that  side  which  is  attached  to  it. 

The  shells  are  bought  on  the  spot,  and  sent  to  different  parts  of  Persia,  from  whence  they  are  sent 
up  the  Red  Sea,  and  from  thence  to  Grand  Cairo  and  Constantinople.  Many  are  carried  to  India,  and 
from  thence  to  China,  where  they  arc  manufactured  into  a great  variety  of  neat  and  use  ful  articles. 

The  pearls  produced  here  ore  not  so  much  esteemed  in  Europe  as  those  of  Ceylon,  having  a 
yellowish  hue ; but  the  natives  of  India  prefer  them.  They  say  they  always  retain  their  original  colour: 
whereas  the  white  will  in  a few  years  become  darker,  from  the  heat  of  the  weather,  and  that  ol  the  person 
wearing  them. 

CATIF,  OR  EL  KATIF. 

The  town  is  Stinted  in  latitude  about  26®  60'  North,  at  the  weetem  extremity  of  a bay  of  tlie  same 
Qeae.  It  ia  said  to  be  a good  harbour,  and  i place  of  lome  trade,  but  is  seldom  visited  by  Europeans*  ■ 


6nANE-BlTS80RAlT. 


m 


GRANE. 

Thi*  town  and  harixMir  is  situated  on  the  Coast  of  Arabia  in  latitude  gS®  13'  North,  about  18  leagues 
from  the  entrance  of  Bussorah  River.  The  town  is  on  the  south  side  of  a small  river,  and  here  the  Com* 
pany's  cruisers  generally  wait  the  arrival  of  the  overland  dispatches  from  Europe. 

BUSSORAH. 

This  town  is  situated  in  a plain,  about  three  miles  from  the  great  river  of  Arabia,  from  which  a creek 
rans  into  the  city,  navigable  at  high  water  for  vessels  of  50  or  60  tons,  and  is  in  latitude  30®  SO'  North 
and  lonptude  47®  33  East.  It  is  about  100  miles  from  the  Persian  Gulf,  into  which  tliat  river  empties 
Itself,  and  about  90  miles  from  Koma,  the  extreme  point  of  Mesopotamia,  where  the  rivers  Tigris  and 
Euphrates  unite  The  river  is  about  half  a mile  broad  from  Bussorah  creek  to  the  Persian  skore. 

The  city  b walled,  and  surrounded  with  a deep  and  broad  ditch;  it  has  four  gates  and  a sally  port. 
The  walls  are  of  mud,  from  «0  to  26  feet  thick,  with  parapet  walk,  breast  high,  which  have  small  eml 
brasures  for  musketry  or  arrows.  The  walls  not  only  encircle  the  city  on  the  side  of  the  land,  but  like- 
wise on  those  of  the  creek,  the  entrance  of  which  is  at  a considerable  dbtance,  where  the  walls  terminate 
on  both  sides,  each  extremity  being  defended  by  a fortification  and  a gate,  which  are  three  miles  dbtance 
from  the  town.  In  the  intermediate  space  are  many  thousands  of  date  trees,  mixed  with  rice  grounds. 
The  walls  are  about  12  miles  in  circuit;  and  although  not  half  the  enclosed  space  b built  upon,  yet  it  b a 
large  city,  and  was  formerly  very  populous.  The  two  principal  gates  are  large,  and  are  situated  on  thd 
land  side;  one  b called  the  Bagdad,  and  the  other  the  Zobeir  Gate;  neither  of  them  is  defended  by  a 
ditch,  which  b wanting  for  a considerable  dbtance  each  side.  The  foundation  of  the  waUs,  which  ig 
buUt  of  burnt  brick,  reaches  so  high,  as  to  bo  above  the  water  when  tbo  dJtrb  b fuU.  The  water  b let 
into  the  ditch  at  the  flood  tide  from  the  creek,  and  b retained  by  flood  gates. 

There  are  eight  bastions,  on  each  of  which  are  mounted  8 brass  guns,  12  pounders,  besides  which 
upwards  of  50  brass  cannon,  6 and  9 pounders,  on  ship  carriages,  are  mounted  round  the  walla.  Th^ 
fortifications  on  each  side  the  creek’s  mouth,  are  exclusive  of  the  eight  bastions;  baddes  which,  there  is  a 
battery  of  12  brass  guns  at  the  Bashaw’s  quarters,  which  is  about  100  yards  below  the  ci4k’g  mouth 

The  mosques  and  houses  are  all  buUt  of  burnt  brick;  many  houses  belonging  to  the  merchants 
are  large  and  convenient,  being  only  one  story  high  above  the  ground  floor,  which  consbts  of  a hall 

facing  the  gate;  on  each  side  of  which,  are  magazines  and  warehouses  for  the  reception  of  merchandbe 

The  meydan,  or  great  square,  b very  large,  and  b not  only,  used  for  exerebing  horses,  but  as  thi 
great  com  market,  where  wheat,  and  all  kinds  of  grain  and  pulse  arc  sold,  wholesale.  On  one  side  of 
the  meydan,  b the  Seraglio,  or  Governor’s  palace,  which  is  very  large,  but  not  a handsome  building. 

Bussorah,  previous  to  the  plague,  which  commenced  in  April,  1773,  was  computed  to  contain  300000 
Inhabitants,  and  in  September  following  when  it  ceased,  they  only  amounted  to  about  50,000;  the  remainder 
except  about  20,000,  who  fled  from  the  city,  having  fldlen  victims  to  its  fury.  * 

Bussorah  was  first  visited  by  the  Englbh  in  1640,  who  soon  after  established  a factory,  which  has  been 
kept  up  ever  since,  notwithstanding  the  numerous  convubions  to  which  the  country  has  been  suMect; 
The  factoiy  is  a good  and  convenient  building,  situated  on  the  banks  of  the  creek,  full  three  from 
its  mouth,  where  vessek  ot  80  tons  may  unload  their  cargoes  at  the  gate  of  tiie  factoiy.  At  the  side  of  the 
creek  b a good  garden;  and  about  5 miles  dbtance  from  the  Bagdad  gate,  the  CompanyVt  r^ent  has  a country 
house,  c^  hfargil,  which  has  a good  prospect' up  and  down  the  river,  from  the  banks  of  which  iti 
distant  about  a quarter  of  a mile. 


BUSSORAII. 


From  its  convenient  situation,  Dussorah  is  a place  of  great  trade,  as  mercliaiils  can  here  purchase 
the  produce  of  most  parts  of  India,  Persia,  and  Arabia  at  the  first  hand,  they  being  iiupoiled  directly 
from  the  place  of  their  growth  and  manufacture.  There  are  a number  of  Armenian  and  other  merclianls 
resident  here,  who  carry  on  a considerable  commerce  with  all  the  ports  of  India,  by  cara>ans  to  Aleppo 
and  Bagdad,  and  from  thence  to  Constantinople. 

COINS. 

Accounts  are  kept  in  floose,  danims,  mamoodics,  and  tomands,  thus  divided  : 

10  Floose  ^ r 1 Danim, 

10  Danims  /makc<  1 Mamoody. 

100  Mamoodies  3 (.1  Tomand,  value  about  lo  rupees. 

Few  of  the  coins  current  in  Persia,  are  coined  in  the  country.  The  consequence  of  this  want  of 
standard  coins,  and  the  introduction  in  their  stead  of  foreign  gold  and  silver,  is  a constant  fluctuation 
in  their  value,  so  much  so,  that  it  is  impossible  to  ascertain  the  value  of  gold  coins  for  any  length  of  time* 
and  the  Governors  of  the  different  districts  frequently  alter  their  standard  value  without  assigning  any 
reason.  Excepting  the  Turkish  piastre,  and  the  tomand,  all  other  coins  are  taken  at  a disadvantage. 

TPlie  following  is  the  value  in  mamoodies  of  some  of  the  foreign  coins  in  circulation  here:— 

Gold  mohur^>^%^,^<^^^.^71  to  72  mamoodics  Spanish  7[  to  8 mamoodies 

Sequin  to  21  {ditto.  Lion  dollars 7]  to  8 ditto. 

Fundunclee  .^21  to  22  ditto.  Turkish  piastrtu.....vw.....  6 ditto. 

Zirmabob  to  21  ditto.  Bombay  rupee  3[  to  3}  ditto. 

Stambole%««^v%^«^«^%%«.v»%^20  to  21  ditto.  Persian  i*upee  3 to  3|  ditto, 

Gingerlee  to  15  ditto.  Abassee  2 to  2 1 ditto. 

WEIGHTS  AND  MEASURES. 

The  weights  are  vakias  and  raaunds ; the  latter  are  of  two  sorts,  olcree,  and  sopliy. 

24/  Vakias  ^ r 1 Maund  ateree,  equal  to  avoir,  28Ibs.  8oz. 

76  Ditto  rmake*!  ^ Ditto  soj)Iiy  ^ ditto  90  4 

117  Ditto  J (.1  Cutra  ditto  138  14 

The  maund  sophy  is  equal  to  1 Bengal  factory  maund,  8 scers,  5 J chittacks;  and  the  maund  ateree 
to  15  seers  4{  chittacks. 

^ There  arc  sundry  allowances  made  on  goods  on  delivery,  beyond  tlie  above  weights,  viz. 

86  vakias  per  maund  for  ginger,  pepper,  and  coffee. 

25  «%%%%^^ditto^«^v%vdbr  cardamuins,  sugar-candy,  and  benjamin, 

24  ««<,^«^ditto^«^^^^or  sugar,  and  all  kinds  of  metals. 

The  maund  for  cotton  is  equal  to  2 Surat  maunds,  and  for  indigo  3 Surat  maunds  35  seers. 

Gold  and  silver  are  weighed  by  the  cheki  of  100  miscals,  each  miscal  1 J dram,  or  72  grains  troy. 
A miscal  of  the  finest  gold  is  worth  about  22  mamoodies ; a cheki  of  silver,  or  150  drams,  is  worth 
about  180  mamoodies. 

The  oka  of  Bagdad  is  2f  vakias  ateree,  and  weighs  266  miscals,  or  about  400  drams. 

The  preceding  is  the  mode  of  reduction  of  weights  used  by  the  Arabians ; but  the  Europeans  at 
Bummrah  reckon  the  maund  sophy  to  consist  of  3 maunds  ateree,  and  25  vakias  ateree  equal  to  1 maund 
Meree.  The  rattle  is  14{  vakias  ateree. 

The  guz,  or  cubit,  is  about  37  English  inches,  93  being  equal  to  100  English  yards. 

R 


122 


BUSSOEAH, 


TRADE  TO  AND  FROM  BRITISH  INDIA. 

Persia  is  happily  situated  for  trade,  almost  surrounded  by  Arabia,  Turkey,  the  Tartars,  and  countries 
whose  commerce  is  imperfectly  known  to  the  North  and  North  East,  and  also  by  India.  It  has  however, 
a large  tract  of  the  sea  coast,  and  communicates  at  the  same  time  with  Aleppo  and  Constantinople 
through  Bussorah  and  Bagdad,  and  with  Russia  by  means  of  the  Caspian  Sea.  If  to  these  circumstances 
bo  added,  its  former  state  of  prosperity,  aflluentT,  and  splendour,  with  the  fertility  of  soil,  and  its  nume* 
rous  natural  productions,  it  is  reasonable  to  form  great  ex|K*ctation8  from  such  a combination  of  advantages. 
Persia,  however,  adds  another  melancholy  instance  to  those  found  in  the  annals  ol  history,  that  every 
blessing  which  nature  can  bestow,  is  of  no  avail  unless  accompanied  by  that  peace  and  tranquillity  which  alone 
result  from  a steady,  well-regulated  Government.  If,  in  addition  to  political  convulsions,  we  consider  the 
havoc  made  by  maladies,  which  in  some  places,  and  on  some  occasions,  on  the  confines  of  Turkey,  are 
stated  to  have  destroyed  one  third  of  the  inhabitants,  the  emigrations  which  have  ensued,  tlie  few  in  num- 
ber now  left  who  enjoy  ease  and  affluence,  whence  trade  derives  its  best  support,  the  comparison  between 
the  past  and  present  state  of  Persia  in  every  respect  will  be  found  truly  deplorable. 

The  trade  carried  on  between  British  India  and  Persia  is  however  very  considerable,  and  is  open  to 
every  one,  the  article  of  woollens  excepted,  which  the  Company  reserve  to  themselves,  notwithstanding  it 
is  attended  with  an  annual  heavy  loss.  It  appears  from  papers  laid  before  the  House  of  Commons,  that 

The  average  amount  of  sales  at  Bussorah  for  10  years  was  .>^..^^^£5047 

The  annual  loss  130 

Besides  which,  the  expence  of  the  fartory,  inrlitding  presents,  was*«.,.^«^4<276 

Annual  loss  arising  from  the  sale  of  woollens,  and  the  establishment  ^^£^5406 

The  demand  for  British  manufactures  is  comparatively  small  ; the  most  valuable  part  is  supplied 
from  Europe  by  caravans  across  the  desert.  The  expence  of  carriage,  including  the  insurance  from  risk, 
and  the  duties  paid  the  wandering  tribes,  &c.  is  very  moderate.  It  is  impossible  that  a cargo  of  European 
goods  to  any  extent  could  be  found  capable  of  being  disposed  of  in  all  or  any  ports  in  the  Gulf.  It  will 
appear  by  the  list  of  imports  in  1805,  that  the  only  European  articles  mentioned  are  lead,  cutlery,  quicksilver, 
iron,  beads,  cochineal,  and  steel;  and  the  amount  was  under  a lac  of  rupees.  A considerable  part  of  the  goods 
imported  into  Bussorah  from  India  is,  no  doubt,  for  Turkey  and  other  parts,  as  well  as  Persia;  but  as  most 
of  those  articles  are  also  imported  into  Bushire  (the  Indian  manufactures,  however,  in  small  quantities,  but 
the  others  in  a much  larger  proportion),  some  of  these  necessary  for  the  supply  of  Persia,  are  of  con- 
siderable value,  and  naturally  entitled  to  a preference  over  woollens  or  other  European  articles ; wliilst, 
on  the  other  liand,  the  greater  part  of  the  products  and  manufactures  of  Persia  is  not  suitable  to  the  Indian 
mai'kets.  They  consist  of  horses,  pearls,  silks,  brocades,  carpets,  manufactures  of  steel,  sword  blades, 
spear  heads,  gun  barrels,  glass,  rose-w’aier,  otto  of  roses,  cotton  cloths,  shawls,  skins,  raw  silks,  some 
indigo,  tobacco,  rhubarb,  drugs  of  different  sorts,  diied  fruits,  iron,  copper,  Caramania  wool,  wines, 
and  some  trifling  articles;  to  which  must  be  added  Persian  and  Turkish  coins,  Venetian  sequins,  German 
crowns,  and  gold  and  silver  in  bars.  India  is  therefore  a constant  drain  upon  Persia  for  its  gold  and  silver, 
as  scai’ce  one  third  of  the  imports  can  be  returned  to  India  in  tlie  produce  of  Persia. 

The  following  is  a statement  of  the  trade  carried  on  between  Madras  and  Bombay  and  the  Gulf 
Persia  in  five  years,  1802  to  1806  inclusive;  likewise  the  articles  of  which  the  imports  and  exports 
consisted  in  1805.  The  trade  between  Bengal  and  the  Gulf  of  Persia  is  blended  with  that  of  the 
Arabian  Gulf. 


BUSSORAII. 


1*3 


IMPORTS  FROM  MADRAS  AND  BOMBAY. 


Yean. 

Merchandise. 

Treasure. 

Total, 

Sicca  Kupces. 

Sicca  Rupees. 

Sicca  Rupees . 

1802 

22,37,153 

-- 

22,37,153 

1803 

15,10,253 

2,000 

15,12,253 

1804 

18,92,412 

2,192 

18,94,063 

1805 

21,90,686 

21,90,686 

1806 

26,98,380 

— 

26,98,380 

Total. 

105,28,884 

4,191 

105,33,075 

VXPORT3  TO  MADRAS  AND  BOMBAY. 


Years 

Merchaiultkc 

r reus  lire. 

Total. 

Sicca  Itupues. 

SiLt-u  Rupees. 

hiccu  Rupees. 

1802 

7,37,448 

12,22,919 

19,60,317^ 

1803 

9,40,129 

16,.3»,647 

25,79,776 

1804 

11,52,678 

11,27,107 

22,79,785 

1805 

10,81,003 

18,.54,216 

29, .35,21 9 

KS06 

11,35,385 

22,92,521 

34,27,906 

Total. 

50,46,643 

81,36,410 

131,8.3,053 

Arikhs  of  Import  in  1805. 
Piece-goods  Sicca  Rupees 

Sugar 
Grain««, 

China  ware<^« 

Cotton  yam  and  thread 
Indigo 
Lead 

Sapan  wood 
Agala  wood 
Drugs 
Spices  < 

Pepper 
Cotton 
Coffee^ 

Cutlery , 

Lac 
Paper , 


Raw  silk 

Shawls 

Seeds 


Tutenague 
Turmeric 
Tobacco 
Tin 
Iron. 
Beads 


Ging^y  oil  *~*^*"  *****  — •■**- 

Steel » » 

Sun4ries 

Importo  re-exported 


11,68,1.55 

3,82,827 

1,25,472 

31,443 

49,224 

15,100 

13,212 

24,699 

20,415 

72,301 

40,774 

51,085 

9,570 

2,625 

9,200 

6,402 

2,419 

3,950 

6,228 

3,868 

3,460 

6,400 

1,056 

6,223 

31,363 

49,807 

7,230 

5,663 

4,363 

5,456 

30,497 

200 


Imports  from  Madras  and  Bombay  21,90,686 


Articles  of  Export  in  1805. 

,v.  Sicca  Rupees 


Dates 
Lametta 

Copper 

Coral 

Galls 

Myrrh 
Benjamin 
Olibanum 
Almonds 


Pepper 
Rose-water. 
Shark's  fins^ 
Elephants'  teethe 
Horses 
Fruits  • 

Drugs-. 

Gum 
Sundries 
Treasure^ 


.%^W%V%VkV.V.Vk%%V%V%VfcV%%%%%V%%% 


1,84,540 
1,24,869 
71,798 
27,707 
18,027 
17,162 
12,791 
10,692 
11, .582 
14,927 
11,290 
8,844 
47,136 
14,421 
4,18,400 
1,810 
9,684 
1,590 
73,733 
18,54,216 


Exports  to  Madras  and  Bombay  29,36,219 


R2 


m 


BUSSOllAH. 


Amount  of  merchandise  imported  from  the  British  settlements  of  Bombay  and  Madras  in  the 

years  ISOS  to  1 Sicca  Bupees  105^28^04*4 
Ditto  exported  to  ditto,  during  the  same  period  50,46,043 

Imports  exceed  the  ex|>orts  54,82,281 

Treasure  exported  to  Madras  and  Bombay  81,30,410 

Ditto  imported  from  ditto^»vw.v.vw**w«»»»vvw..,v*vv«^»»»»v^»,«^v»«.w^vv,^*»»»».  4,191 

81,32,219 

Balance  in  favour  of  the  British  settlements  of  Bombay  and  Math’as  Sicca  Rupees  136,14,460 

Being  in  favour  of  Bombay  and  Surat  Sicca  Rupees  11 7, 13,321 

Madras  and  its  dependencies  19,01,139 

During  the  same  period,  the  trade  of  Bengal  with  the  Gulfs  of  Arabia  and  Persia  was  in  favour  of 
Bengal,  Sicca  Rupees  108,53,394;  of  that  amount,  one  half  may  be  considered  to  arise  from  the  trade  with 

Persia,  which  will  make  this  trade  in  favour  of  British  India  in  5 years,  Sicca  Rupees  190,41,157,  which> 

at  2s.  Gd.  sterling  per  Rupee,  is  equal  to  XH76,028  IOa*.  per  annum. 


Surat  Piece  Goods  suitable  to  the  Bussorah  Market , by  J.  Stevens. 


Prom  Surat  the  following  piece-goods  are  imported,  in  the  proportions  hereinafter  stated,  vfz*> 


Red  Sheilas  or  Sallocs 
Red  Sahn 

Humsey  Siah  Snrmaic 
Duty  Siah  Surmaie  Pono  der 
Baflla  Siah  Guzzee  S ur m ai e 
Duly  Mauwee,  or  light  blue  Der  Guzzee 
Baftae  Siah  Surmaie 


1 \jr  U«<  ^4.C 


Sheilas  or  Sallocs,  Siah  Surmaie,  the  cloth  to  be  thick  and  close  woven,  half 
of  the  first,  and  half  of  the  second 
Sahn  Siah  Surmaie,  the  cloth  to  be  close 
l^uty  Brodera 


Byram  Nousaree  Surmaie,  the  cloth  to  be  thick  and  close  woven 
By  ram  Broachee  Surmaie  ditto  ditto 

Byram  Randaree  Surmaie  ditto  ditto  . 

Cotton  yarn,  Siah  Surmaie,  each  bale  to  weigh  6 Surat  maunds 
Mulmuls  Siah,  called  Setra  Guzzee,  dyed  at  Surat,  a very  deep  blue 


20  corge 
20  ditto. 

15  ditto, 

16  ditto. 
30  ditto 
25  ditto. 
20  ditto. 
15  ditto. 
10  ditto. 

60  ditto. 
30  ditto. 
50  ditto* 
40  ditto, 
190  ditto. 
96  ditto. 
96  ditto. 
3 bales. 
10  corge 


The  above  red  and  blue  goods  are  the  consumption  of  Bussorah,  and  places  adjacent,  so  that  a consider- 
able quantity  is  likely  to  go  off  well.  It  is  necessary  to  observe,  that  the  sooner  these  goods  arc  provided 
at  Surat,  the  cheaper  they  will  turn  out ; and  by  being  etlrly  at  market,  you  will  have  the  advantage  of 
chusing  or  procuring  the  goods  of  a finer  quality  than  when  the  monsoon  is  far  advanced,  or  at  the  latter 
end  of  it. 


BUSSOflAH. 


125 


Of  fine  Surat  piece  goods,  the  following  will  answer : 

Soosey  Ilundee  Seefed  anil  Cheendar  20  corge. 

Germasoot  Guzzee  Klvan  Mutai'iif^^^^  10  ditto. 

Ditto  Kerinesi  Solbisi  3 ditto. 

Germasoot  Mulherhauiie  ditto. 

Germasoot  Mahomet  Shai  Seefed  2 ditto* 

Cbitaura  Mahomet  Shai  Seefed  1 ditto. 

Of  the  above  goods,  if  well  provided,  a considerable  quantity  may  be  disposed  of;  likewise  of  the  finer 
sorts  of  Guzzerat  goods,  such  as  arc  usually  brought  to  this  port. 

Bengal  Goads  suitable  to  the  Bnssorah  Markit. 

Mulmuls  Annendee,  of  the  first  and  second  sorts,  | of  the  first  sort,  { oftlio  second  sort. 
Mulmuls  Setha  Guzzee,  of  the  first  sort,  which  at  Bussorah  go  under  the  name  of  Mulmuls  Slier- 
Betty  and  Mahomet  Ilyatce;  observe,  that  two-thirds  should  be  of  tlie  ^luhniils  Annendee,  in  the  manner 
above  specified,  and  the  other  third  part  of  Setra  Guzzee,  as  above  mentioned.  And  observe  also,  that  the 
assortment  of  goods  made  up  for  Bussorah,  are  generally,  or  ought  to  be  in  the  tollowing  manner,  i h, 
two-third  parts,  or  thereabouts,  of  your  whole  parcel  of  goods  ouglit  to  be  of  Mulmuls,  anil  Mnlinuls  Setra 
Guzzee,  in  the  manner  and  proportion  as  are  above  specified ; and  the  remaining  third  part  of  the  adven- 
ture ought  to  be  made  up  of  the  goods  hereunder  mentioned.  All  which  goods,  log(‘ther,  or  one  with  ano- 
ther, generally  go  at  a certain  rate,  more  or  less,  according  to  the  demand  and  ijiiantity  at  market.  But 
take  notice,  that  all  goods  be  of  the  usual  lengths  and  breadths ; for  if  they  are  deticlent,  it  will  prejudice 
the  sale. 

Mulmuls  Santipore,  of  divers  sorts;  but  the  finest  sort  is  most  in  demand. 

Mulmuls  Savagepore,  as  they  call  them  here,  the  old  or  true  .sort.  Of  each  sort  an  equal  quantity. 
Mulmuls  Savagepore  Solosoy.  Cassa  Boorum,  1 or  2 bales  to  every  2.^  or  30  bales. 

Mulmuls  China  Sonergam.  Cassa  Izmere,  sorted  in  like  manner  as  the  foregoing, 

Mulmuls  Sarookpeach.  Dooria  Rizaput,  ditto. 

Mulmuls  Powookpcach.  Dooria  Alley  Cauney,  ditto. 

Cassa  Solosoy.  Munga  Dooria  of  the  Tanzib  sort,  1 or  2 bales. 

Cassa  Ketmery;  1 bale  of  this  is  enough  to  every  Munga  Dooria  of  the  Mulmul  kind,  not  in  diMiiand. 

20  or  30  boles  of  Mulmuls.  Munga  Dooria  of  the  Bafta  kind,  5 or  (i  bales. 

Tenrandems,  sorted  in  like  manner,  as  above.  Bafta  Dacca,  2 or  3 bales. 

The  above  specified  goods  are  the  proper  sorts  to  sell  to  the  merchants,  who  come  to  purchase  them 
from  the  different  parts  of  Turkey,  viz.  Constantinople,  Smyrna,  Aleppo,  Diabekir,  Bagdad,  &c. 

Instructions  relative  to  the  Trade  at  Bussorah^  by  J.  IL  Elmore. 

Immediately  upon  your  arrival  at  Bussorah,  use  dispatch  in  going  up  to  town,  and  procure  boats  for 
your  cargo;  for  which  you  will  apply  to  the  Chief,  who  generally  sends  down  boats,  called  dunnocks;  but 
X would  advise  you  to  have  trankeys,  as  they  are  less  liable  to  be  stopped  in  the  river,  whicli  Irequently 
happens  when  dunnocks  arc  sent. 

You  are  next  to  look  out  for,  and  hire  a good  house,  with  large  godowns,  which  ought  to  be  as  nigh 
the  creek  as  possible,  for  the  convenience  of  landing  and  receiving  your  goods. 

In  chusing  your  broker,  much  caution  and  circumspection  are  necessary,  as  your  wlioli*  transactions 
depend  upon  bis  Being  steady  to  your  interest.  If  possible,  employ  a jierson  wlio  trades  a little  tor  him- 
seBT,  and  is  independent  of  any  one  else;  the  same  caution  is  to  be  used  in  chusing  your  sluofl  (or  banker.) 


Cbitaura  Elvan  Cankneedar  1 corge 

Ditto  yellow  and  white  striped — 1 ditto. 

Ditto  red  ai^l  white  striped  1 ditto. 

Ditto  jiengc  reng  Kalum  Areed  1 ditto. 

Ditto  Am.sluiat  1 ditto. 

Bafta  Bootidar  crood.  with  flowers 


126 


BUSSOHAIL 


These  persons  you  will  find  very  slow  in  transacting  your  affairs,  though  they  will  appear  to  bc  very 
assiduous.  Your  seiwants  should  be  solely  de|>endcat  upon  yourself,  and  you  ought  not  to  employ  any  recom- 
mended by  persons  whom  you  suspect  to  be  desirous  of  prying  into,  or  being  acquainted  with  your  business 
and  concerns.  This  caution  is  to  be  observed,  otherwise  your  transactions  will  be  communicated  to  Uie 
whole  town,  wdiich  doubtless  will  be  much  to  your  prejudice. 

After  you  are  settled  in  your  house,  the  merchants  will  come  and  pay  you  a visit;  tlie  Turks  and 
Armenians  will  bc  very  inrjuisitivc  about  your  affairs.  They  are  particularly  tenacious  of  any  slight;  be 
therefore  very  complaisant  in  your  behaviour,  and  treat  them  (particularly  the  Turks)  with  much  courtesy. 

When  landing  your  cargo,  the  freight  goods  (if  you  have  any)  should  be  put  in  different  boats 
than  your  own,  otherwise  it  will  occasion  much  confusion  and  trouble,  as  all  the  freight  is  carried  to  the 
ciistom-liouse;  but  your  own  private  trade,  immediately  upon  landing,  is  carried  to  your  own  house;  for 
which  reas6n,  the  officers  on  board  should  have  a list  of  the  freight  goods,  and  orders  not  to  mix  them  in 
the  boats  with  the  trade,  but  load  them  separately. 

The  purser  (if  you  have  one)  ought  to  attend  at  the  landing-place  with  a list  of  the  freight,  and  the 
marks  and  numbers  of  each  package;  as  it  frequently  happens  that  the  merchants  do  not  know  their  bales. 

After  all  your  goods  arc  landed,  you  inform  the  Shabundar  you  are  ready  for  his  visit:  he  will  come 
with  his  officers,  attendants,  writers,  and  some  of  the  principal  merchants  of  the  place  They  will  take  an 
account  of  your  goods,  open  a bale  or  two  of  each  quality,  and  are  satisfied  with  your  account  of  the  num- 
ber of  bales,  and  quantity  of  pieces  in  each.  This  good  opinion  should  not  be  abused,  as  it  renders  the 
inspection  extremely  easy  to  you.  And  for  the  gruff' goods,  he  takes  the  account  entii*ely  from  yourself. 

After  this  visit,  he  pays  you  another,  to  bc  informed  of  the  prices  for  which  you  have  sold  your  goods; 
and  if  any  remain  unsold,  they  are  valued,  and  the  customs  and  duties  calculated  ujwn  the  whole. 

The  Shabundar  receives  no  duty  upon  grain;  this  is  paid  to  the  IMurbarall:  other  goods  either  pay  to 
the  Shabundar,  or  custom-house. 

Upon  exporting  any  goods,  you  must  have  a permit  from  the  Shabundar,  mentioning  the  quantity 
and  quality  of  them. 

The  hamauls,  or  custom-house  porters,  will  not  allow  your  own  hamauls  to  bring  your  goods 
from  the  water-side  to  your  house  (as  these  people  farm  their  place  from  Government,  and  pay  a large 
sum  annually  for  it),  for  which  you  pay  them  1 mamoody  for  every  bale,  and  5 mamoodies  for  every  100 
maunds  (sophy.)  House  hamauls  have  only  one  half  that  sum  for  their  labour,  and  5 mamoodies  per  100 
maunds  (sophy)  for  the  returning  cargo. 

Boat  hire  is  2 mamoodies  per  bale,  and  10  mamoodies  per  100  maunds  (sophy).  The  best  method  is 
to  hire  trankeys  for  so  much  per  trip ; the  expence  is  something  more,  but  the  safety  of  your  goods,  and 
the  dispatch  they  make,  fully  compensate  for  it. 

Presents  here  are  very  necessary,  particularly  to  the  Islam  (or  Bashaw);  they  are  generally  made  up 
in  goods  to  the  value  of  1,200  or  1,500  cruse;  but  he  afterwards  receives  the  amount  in  money,  and  the 
goods  are  returned : this  makes  it  easy  to  the  merchant,  as  he  might  otherwise  dispute  the  value  of  the  goods. 

You  should  make  a proportionate  present  to  the  Shabundar  and  his  people,  the  Mirbhar's  people,  your 
broker,  shroff,  linguist,  and  the  Bashaw's  servants. 

After  your  presents  are  all  made,  you  visit  the  Islam,  who  makes  you  some  trifling  present,  as  a coat, 
(or  gown)  such  as  is  worn  in  the  country. 

A house  will  cost  about  30  tomands  for  the  seasont 

A licence  to  trade  5 tomands  per  annum. 

Durwan,  or  door  porter  36  mamoodies  per  month. 

Waterman,  or  Beasty  30  mamoodies  per  month. 

Pi  otchman  20  mamoodies  per  month. 


BANDAREEK-KORGO^-ltAIlAK. 


127 


Owners  of  sWps  from  all  ports  in  India,  allow  the  commanders  house  rent,  palanquin  (or  carriage) 
hire,  oil,  candles,  grain,  fuel,  sircars  (or  compradorcs)  pay,  except  at  the  port  to  which  tlie  sliip  belongs, 
when  no  house  rent  or  palanquin  hire  is  allowed,  but  every  thing  else.  And  this  custom  is  general  in 
India,  except  there  is  a special  agreement  to  the  contrary.  If  they  bring  back  freight,  the  owners  allow 
the  Commander  5 per  cent,  as  a commission  for  collecting  it. 

DUTIES  AND  PORT  CHARGES. 

All  goods  imported  in  English  ships  pay  a duty  and  consulage  to  the  East  India  Company,  which 
amount  to  6 per  cent.  This  duty  is  over  and  above  what  is  paid  to  the  Rashaw  of  Ragdud;  and  as  most  of 
the  goods  from  India  are  brought  in  English  ships,  it  amounts  in  the  year  to  a considerable  sum. 

The  Bashaw  of  Bagdad  receives  two  customs  on  all  goods  which  are  sent  from  Russorah,  vie.  3 per 
cent,  from  Europeans,  and  8 per  cent,  from  all  Turks,  Persians,  and  other  Asiatics;  one  duty  is  paid  at 
Bussorah,  the  other  at  Bagdad.  These  goods  are  rated  at  the  current  prices  whicli  they  may  be  worth 
on  their  arrival  at  each  place,  with  the  exception  of  such  goods  as  are  conveyed  directly  by  the  cara- 
van  from  Bussorah  to  Aleppo,  which  must  pay  two  duties  at  Bussorah,  one  on  their  arrival,  and  ano« 
ther,  called  the  Bagdad  duty,  before  their  departure.  No  caravan  can  depart  for  Aleppo  without  leave 
first  obtained  from  the  Bashaw  of  Bagdad;  so  that  he  receives  6 percent,  from  Europeans,  and  16  per 
cent  from  all  otliers,  and  half  this  duty  only  on  goods  consumed  at  Bussorah. 

PROVISIONS  AND  REFRESHMENTS, 

Provisions  are  very  good  here,  and  at  reasonable  prices,  particularly  boef^  mutton,  and  butter,  os 
well  as  camefs  flesh,  which  the  Arabs  prefer  to  beef,  especially  when  young. 

The  fruits  procurable  here,  are  apples,  grapes,  peaches,  nectarines,  pomegranates,  dates,  &c. 

BANDAREEK. 

This  port  is  in  latitude  29°  42'  North,  and  previous  to  tlic  troubles  in  Persia,  the  Company  had  a 
factory  here;  it  has  been  long  since  withdrawn.  It  was  formerly  a place  of  some  note;  the  houses  are 
built  of  mats;  the  inhabitants  are  chiefly  Arabs;  and  though  they  may  appear  civil  to  Europeans,  are 
not  to  be  trusted. 


KORGO 

Is  a small  low  island,  about  4 leagues  long,  and  a quarter  of  a mile  brood,  situated  near  the  N.E. 
end  of  Karak;  there  is  a channel  between  them  about  a mile  wide,  and  quite  safe.  On  both  ends  of 
Korgo  there  is  water,  but  not  so  good  as  that  on  Karak ; the  best  anchorage  is  at  the  N.  E.  part  of 
the  island,  where  there  are  a few  date  trees,  and  thereabouts  a watering  place,  where  near  40  of  our 
people  were  cut  to  pieces  in  1768,  when  we  assisted  the  Persians  in  the  siege  of  Karak. 

KARAK. 

This  island  is  in  latitude  29^  14'  North,  about  12  leagues  from  Bushire  town.  It  is  about  7 miles 
long,  and  4 broad.  At  the  N.  E.  end  is  a bay,  where  there  is  good  anchorage,  and  near  it  a strong  castle 
built  on  the  extreme  point,  which  commands  the  whole  anchorage  of  the  bay.  This  island  was  uninha- 
bited till  about  1760,  when  a Dutch  gentleman  from  Bussorah  having  surveyed  it,  and  finding  the  bay  per* 
fectly  secure,  and  that  there  was  a good  situation  to  build  a town,  with  a castle  for  its  defence,  and 
that  of  the  ships  at  anchor  in  the  bay,  reported  his  observations  to  the  Government  of  Batavia, 
who  approving  of  the  design,  sent  him  back  with  several  ships  laden  with  every  necessary  for 


BUSHIRE. 


m 

building  the  castle  and  town,  and  a large  quantity-  of  European  and  Indian  goods.  They  completed  their 
work,  and  had  a brisk  sale  for  their  goods,  of  which  tliey  liad  a regular  supply  for  5ix  or  seven  years ; but 
were  dispossessed  by  a Persian  Prince  who  lived  at  Bandareek,  a few  leagues  to  the  northward  of  Karak% 
He  then  made  the  island  his  chi|?f  place  of  residence,  built  a number  of  vessels,  and  commenced  piraic, 
taking  and  plundering  ships  and  vessels  of  (wery  nation,  till  he  became  us  great  a terror  to  those  who  navi- 
gated the  Persian  G idf  ns  the  famous  A ngria  had  heretofore  been  in  India.  In  1708  the  Persians,  with 
the  assistance  of  the  Eiiglisli,  made  an  attempt  to  capture  the  island,  but  it  was  ineffectual.  The 
Persians,  however,  contrived  to  get  ])osscssion  of  it  in  the  following  year  without  any  loss  (Uie  Prince 
having  abandoned  the  island),  becoming  masters  of  an  immense  quantity  of  merchandise,  ammunition, 
many  galliots,  and  some  treasure.  It  still  continues  in  their  possession,  but  has  very  little  trade. 

The  best  pilots  for  Dussorah  are  procured  here.  To  carry  u ship  there  and  back,  they  generally  re- 
ceive 150  to  100  rupees,  ^ith  an  addition  of  50  more  for  the  trankey  that  attends,  and  provisions  for  five 
or  six  people.  It  is  customary  to  give  a bag  or  two  of  rice  to  the  Sheik,  and  one  to  the  pilot's  family. 
During  the  time  the  ship  is  stationary  at  Bussorah,  the  pilot  receives  10  rupees  per  month. 

PROVISIONS  AND  REFRESHMENTS. 

The  water  of  Karak  is  much  hotter  than  at  Bushire.  Firewood  is  very  scarce ; what  they  have,  is 
brought  from  the  nortliern  coast.  Fish  arc  plentiful,  which  with  dates  is  the  principal  food  of  tlie  inhabit- 
ants ; for  they  have  no  grain  but  what  comes  from  Bushire,  and  very  few  vegetables.  Bullocks,  sheep, 
and  poulljy  aiv  to  be  procured,  but  at  an  exorbitant  price  when  a supply  is  wanted.  Vegetables  are  scarce. 

BUSHIRE 

Is  the  principal  scajiort  iho  Persians  have  in  the  Gulf,  and  is  situated  about  S.  S.  E.  from  the  bar  at 
Bussorah,  70  leagues  distance,  and  about  8 leagues  S.  E.  from  the  island  of  Karak.  The  town  is  in  latitude 
29^’  North,  and  longitude  50°  4-7  East,  and  stands  on  the  North  point  of  alow  peninsula,  of  which  Bushire 
Point,  about  4 leagues  to  the  southward,  forms  the  other  extreme.  It  stands  so  very  low,  that  the 
houses  are  discovered  on  coming  from  (lie  sea,  much  sooner  than  the  land  on  which  the  town  is  built.  The 
situation  on  one  side  is  near  the  entrance,  and  on  the  south  bank  of  the  river  of  that  name,  having  a sandy 
beach  between  the  houses  and  the  river,  in  some  places  about  20,  in  others  from  30  to  40  yards  in  breadth 
at  high  water.  The  tide  rises  in  the  river  5 or  0 feet  perpendicular,  but  not  more  than  two  or  three  in  the 
roads.  Another  side  of  the  town  is  on  the  banks  of  the  sea,  with  a sandy  beach.  The  town  is  surrounded 
with  stone  walls,  except  the  part  wliich  is  within  the  river’s  mouth ; but  they  are  not  kept  in  good  repair, 
There  are  two  gates  on  the  land  side,  one  on  eacli  side,  facing  each  of  which  is  a very  large  brass  cannon, 
the  diameter  of  the  bore  of  which  is  11 1 inches : they  were  brought  from  Ormus  in  1622,  and  though  they 
bear  the  date  of  1502,  appear  as  if  new.  The  town  is  about  3 miles  in  circuit,  and  of  a rectangular  form ; 
the  longest  sides  arc  those  on  each  sea  bank.  There  is  neither  castle  nor  battery  in  or  near  the  totvn  be- 
longing  to  it ; but  there  are  many  war  galliots,  and  a number  of  small  merchantmen  belonging  to  those 
who  trade  to  and  from  IVIiiscat,  Gombroon,  and  other  places  in  the  Gulf,  as  well  in  Arabia  as  Persia  and 
Bussorah.  The  number  of  inhabitants  is  stated  to  be  20,000. 

The  entrance  of  the  yver  is  about  3 miles  broad ; yet  near  the  town  it  is  not  navigable  (even  for  boats 
at  low  water)  a hundred  yards  across.  Vessels  that  draw  more  than  9 feet,  cannot  come  into  the 
river  at  high  water ; those  of  less  draught  may  go  above  the  town.  The  road  where  ships  Ke,  is  directly 
fronting  the  river,  there  being  2 or  3 fathoms  three  miles  from  the  shore.  There  are  many  chantieb 
in  the  entrance  of  the  road,  between  which  there  arc  not  above  8 or  10  feet,^80  that  ships  ^ of  Wf 
great  burthen  anchor  at  least  2 leagues  from  the  shore  in  about  4 fathoms,  with  a soft  muddy*  bottoih. 


BUSHIRE. 


IW’ 

The  road  is  qttite  open;  and  when  strange  ships  arrive,  they  should  make  sigmds  for  a pilot  to  comeYrom 
the  town,  as  all  ships  bound  to  Bussonah  call  here,  and  take  a pilot,  while  those  tlmt  come  from  Bussoruh 
put^  their  pilots  On  shore  at  Bushire. 

The  castle  of  Bushire  is  about  12  miles  S.  E.  of  the  town;  thej^rtu;,mcse  had  fomeily  a fadory 
here,  having  first  built  a castle,  and  then  a town,  which  they  walled  round  very  strongly,  with  only  one 
small  gate  on  the  land  side,  barely  sufficient  for  a loaded  •mule  to  pass.  The  castle  is  of  great  extent, 
situated  on  an  eminence,  and  although  at  present  much  decayed,  makes  a noble  appearance  from  the  sea; 
it  was  taken  by  the  Persians  from  the  Portuguese  in  1622,  who,  being  hard  pressed,  left  behind  their 
cannon  and  mortars,  which  were  all  brass;  but  being  masters  of  the  sea,  carried  off  their  moveables. 

At  one  period  the  Company  had  abandoned  Ormus,  Gombroon,  and  Bushire ; hut  at  the  rcrpiost  of 
the  Persian  Government,  an  establLshment  was  again  formed  at  the  latter  place,  which  has  continued  ever 
fiince.  No  trade  can  be  carried  on  with  Persia  from  the  sea,  without  a regular  (‘stablishment  of  persons  con- 
stantly residing  at  this  port  and  Bussorah,  to  cultivate  the  protection  of  this  fluctuating  (jovernmemt,  by 
making  presents,  and  at  times  to  a considerable  amount,  whenever  a revolution  may  take  place  in  the 
country. 

The  Company  being  deprived  of  the  means  of  an  establishment  on  the  borders  of  the  Bed  Sea,  from 
the  want  of  protection,  they  retain  the  settlements  of  Bussorah  and  Bushire,  notwithstanding  the  great  loss 
they  have  sustained  for  many  years,  and  which  may  probably  continue  for  many  more,  as  tliey  are  well 
aituated  for  obtaining  information,  as  well  as  for  improving  every  favourable  circumstance  wliich  may  arise. 

COINS,  WEIGHTS,  and  MEASURES. 

Many  of  the  European,  and  most  of  the  Asiatic  coins  pass  at  the  same  rates  as  at  Bussorah;  but  the 
price  fluctuates  according  to  the  quantity  of  the  specie  in  the  market. 

Accounts  are  kept  in  floose,  mamoodies,  and  tomands,  100  mamoodies  making  1 tomand. 

Pearls  are  sold  by  the  abas,  a weight  equal  to  about  3|  diamond  grains,  or  2,875  dec.  gold  grains. 

IMPORTS  AND  EXPORTS. 

The  East  India  Company  have  a resident  here,  with  a view  of  extending  the  sale  of  woollens  and 
metab,  of  which  they  are  obliged  by  their  charter  to  take  so  large  a quantity;  all  other  articles  arc  free 
for  individuals  to  trade  in.  The  annual  average  amount  of  woollens  sold  at  this  residency  for  10  years  from 
1780  to  1790,  was  £2608,  on  which  the  loss  was  about  5 'per  cent.  This  with  the  expeners  of  the  factory, 
which  was  during  the  same  period  near  14<X)  a year,  and  advances  made  to  the  Bombay  cruisers  when 
here,  made  an  annual  loss  of  upwards  of  <i&1800  per  annum.  The  articles  sold  were  broad  cloths, 
long  ells  and  shalloons ; in  no  year  did  the  sale  exceed  .£’7,000,  and  in  one  year,  1788,  only  i’OS. 

From  Bombay,  Bengal,  Muscat,  and  other  places  arc  imjKirtcd  pu'ce  goods  similar  to  those  enume* 
rated  at  Bussorah,  likewise  the  following  articles: 


Bamboos. 

Cassia  buds. 

Musk.  i 

Shawls, 

Cotton. 

Coffee. 

Nutmegs. 

Silk  goods. 

Cotton  yam. 

China  camphire. 

Pepper. 

Turmeric. 

Cardamums. 

Ginger. 

Red  lead. 

Tuteiiaguc. 

Cloves. 

Indigo. 

Sugar. 

Tobacco. 

pinnamon. 

Iron. 

Sugar  candy. 

Tin. 

China  ware. 

Lead. 

Steel, 

Woollens. 

A part  of  these  importations  b supposed  to  be  for  Turkey  and  Arabia,  as  well  as  this 

part  of  Per^;  of  Indian  manufactures  the  quantities  imported  into  Bushire  are  small  compaied  with  those 
of  Bussorah,  but  of  the  European  commodities  a much  larger  proportion. 

S 


130 


BUSHEAB^KISMI&--OBMUS. 


Very  few  of  the  products  of  Persia  being  suitable  to  the  Indian  market,  the  returns  are  prindpaflly 
made  in  Persian  and  Turkish  coins,  Venetian  sequins,  German  crowns,  and  gold  and  silver  in  bars* 
About  one  fifth  of  the  imports  are  estimated  to  be  returned  in  Persian  commodities,  consisting  of  dniga 
of  various  kinds,  carpets,  rose-wa^r,  otto  of  roses,  Schiraz  wine,  &c. 

PROVISIONS  AND  REFRESHMENTS 

Are  all  brought  from  the  interior  by  caravans,  and  the  town  is  well  supplied  with  fruits,  vegetables, 
and  meat,  which  are  both  good  and  cheap.  A full  grown  sheep  from  1 J to  2 rupees  each.  Oxen,  which 
weigh  from  4 to  5 cwt.  each  from  6 to  8 rupees.  The  fruits  are  good,  such  as  apples,  pears,  peaches, 
nectarines,  apricots,  plums,  and  grapes.  Bread,  butter,  milk,  and  vegetables  are  excellent,  and  rea-^ 
sonable.  The  water  in  the  town  is  very  bad,  being  brackish,  and  brings  on  disorders:  but  they  have 
some  good  water  which  is  brought  from  the  interior.  There  are  fish  of  various  kinds  in  great  plenty. 

BUSHEAB. 

Next  to  Kismis,  this  is  the  largest  island  in  the  Gulf,  and  is  in  latitude  2GP  50  North ; it  is  about  12 
miles  long,  and  4 or  5 broad.  At  its  east  end  is  good  anchorage : here  the  chief  of  the  island  resides,  who 
is  a kind  of  pirate,  and  not  to  be  trusted.  A few  years  since  a vessel  belonging  to  Bombay  was  wrecked 
on  a reef  which  runs  out  about  3 miles  from  the  west  end  of  the  island,  the  cargo  of  which  was  seized  by 
him,  and  not  long  after,  one  of  the  Company's  packets  ran  upon  the  island  in  the  night,  and  was  lost. 

KISMIS. 

This  island,  which  is  the  largest  in  the  Gulf,  is  situated  near  the  continent.  On  its  east  end,  oppo- 
bite  a small  island,  called  Larek,  is  a considerable  town  well  inhabited.  This  island  produces  large  quan* 
titles  of  wheat  and  other  grain,  and  was  formerly  the  granary  of  Ormus.  In  1642  the  Dutch  made  an 
attempt  to  take  the  island ; but,  losing  a great  many  men,  were  obliged  to  desist,  and  make  their  peace 
with  the  Persians  by  considerable  presents.  The  town  is  in  latitude  about  27®  North. 

On  the  north  side  of  the  island  was  a nest  of  pirates,  who  were  destroyed  by  the  English  in  1809. 

ORMUS. 

This  little  island,  which  is  not  more  than  6 miles  long,  and  about  4 broad,  stands  within  7 miles  of 
the  continent,  in  latitude  27®  12  North,  nearly  opposite  to  Gombroon.  It  was  first  visited  by  the  Portu- 
guese  under  Albuquerque  in  1508,  and  was  then  a place  of  great  importance.  The  King  of  the  island, 
having  heard  of  the  conduct  of  the  Portuguese  in  the  neighbouring  towns,  which  they  had  attacked,  plun- 
dered, and  burnt  without  provocation,  made  eveiy  exertion  to  defend  the  island,  so  that,  when  the  Por- 
tuguese entered  the  harbour,  there  were  30,000  men  on  the  island,  and  in  the  harbour  400  vessels,  sixty  of 
them  of  considerable  bulk,  and  having  2500  men  on  board.  Albuquerque  made  an  attack  upon  the  town, 
in  which  he  foiled,  but  succeeded  in  destroying  all  the  shipping : he  then  returned  to  India,  doing  all  the 
mischief  in  his  power.  In  1514  he  returned  with  a large  force,  and  succeeded  in  obtaining  possession  of 
the  island,  on  which  he  erected  a strong  fort ; and  leaving  a sufficiefnt  garrison,  proceeded  to  Goa,  The 
Portuguese  encouraged  the  commerce  of  the  island,  which  wonderfuHy  flourished;  they  built  elegant 
houses,  and  increased  the  fortifications ; and  during  the  period  it  remained  in  their  possession,  about  120 
years,  it  so  advanced  in  wealth  and  splendour,  that  it  was  considered  the  richest  spot  in  the  world.  The 
Portuguese  having  committed  many  outrages  on  the  En^^sh  shipping  and  property,  the  latter  agreed  to 
join  the  Persians  in  an  atUck  upon  Ormus.  The  attack  was  chiefly  conducted  by  the  EngKsb,  and  the  city 


GOMBROON. 


131 


and  castle  erere  taken  on  th6  22d  of  Aprilf  1622:  the  surrender  was  made  to  the  Englisli,  and  the  Portu- 
guese commander  and  principal  officers  were  sent  prisoners  to  Surat.  On  this  occasion  the  English  received 
a proportion  of  the  plunder  of  Ormus,  which  was  very  considerable,  and  a grant  of  tiie  moiety  of  customs 
at  Gombroon.  The  Portuguese  made  an  attempt  for  its  recovery,  wliich  was  unsuccessful.  After  it  once 
fell  into  the  hands  of  the  Persians,  the  place  was  quickly  ruined,  and  the  trade  truiisferreil  to  Gombroon. 
A gamson  was  kept  in  the  citadel  for  some  time;  but  by  degrees  that  has  fallen  to  ruin,  and  the  islaml 
is  nearly  deserted : scarce  the  smallest  remains  are  now  left  to  prove  that  this  was  once  a place  of  such  great 
consequence,  and  the  principal  magazine  of  the  Indian  commerce. 

The  only  natural  productions  of  the  island  are  sulpliur,  salt,  and  red  earth,  for  which  articles  vessels 
come  occasionally.  The  black  shining  sand  of  Ormus  is  much  esteemed  in  India. 

GOMBROON. 

This  town,  which  was  formerly  of  such  great  importance,  Is  at  present  reduced  to  a fishing  town,  and 
is  situated  on  the  main,  nearly  opposite  the  island  of  Ormus,  in  latitude  about  27°  10  North,  and  longi- 
tude 55°  45'  East.  The  English  obtained  permission* to  settle  a factory  here  in  1613.  About  1620  the 
Dutch  followed  their  example,  and  upon  the  capture  of  Ormus  in  1 022  by  the  English  and  Persians,  num- 
bers of  merchants  resorted  here,  and  the  commerce  greatly  increased.  It  was  at  that  time  strongly  forti- 
fied ; the  houses  were  large  and  handsome,  but  the  place  was  considered  very  unhealthy.  The  English  re- 
tnained  here  till  1759,  when  the  factory,  then  defenceless  and  totally  neglected,  was  attacked  by  the  French, 
tinder  Count  D'Estaing,  who  had  been  made  prisoner  at  Madras,  and  who  was  at  the  time  on  his  parole, 
The  force  consisted  of  about  400  men,  with  four  ships,  having  all  the  requisites  for  a siege.  They  began 
to  batter  the  factory,  in  which  were  sixteen  Europeans  and  a few  seapoys  as  a guard  to  the  house,  on  the 
morning  of  the  15th  of  October,  and  in  the  afternoon  they  summoned  it  to  surrender,  which  it  did,  and 
the  terms  were  calculated  to  clear  the  Count  D'Estaing  from  the  guilt  of  breaking  his  parole,  which  was 
given  in  the  usual  way,  not  to  serve,  directly  or  indirectly,  against  the  English  during  the  war,  or  until  he 
should  be  regularly  exchanged.  The  factory  was  afterwards  re-established,  but  has  long  since  been  with- 
drawn,  in  consequence  of  the  heavy  expence,  and  the  unbealthiness  of  the  climate.  • 

COINS. 

Accounts  are  kept  in  shahees,  an  imaginary  coin,  and  for  which  all  bargains  are  made;  the  re- 
turns for  goods,  allowing  7 or  8 per  cent  for  the  exchange,  arc  generally  made  in  abassees.  All  coins  pass 
current  here,  Spanish  dollars,  rupees,  Venetians,  French  crowns,  &c. 


make 


Abassees  and  sequins  are  the  common  coins;  of  the  latter  there  are  several  kinds,  of  which  the  Ve- 
netians are  the  best  in  India  by  2 per  cent.  When  a parcel  of  Venetian  ducats  are  mixed  with  others,  the 
whole  go  jby  the  name  of  sequins;  but  when  separate,  one  sort  is  caUed  Venetian,  and  all  the  rest  indii- 
imhtly  by  the  name  of  ^bbers. 

SS 


1 Shahee. 

1 Mamoody. 

1 Abassee. 

1 Surat  Rupee. 

1 Venetian. 

1 Spanish  Dollar. 
1 Tomand. 


10  Coz  or  Pice 
2 Shahees 
2 Mamoodies 
2 Abassees 
28  Shahees 
16  Shaliees 
200  Shahees 


ALM0NDS»AMM0N1ACUM  GUM. 


WEIGHTS  AND  MEASURES, 

Tlic  larger  weights  are  of  tlifferent  sorts,  and  vary  according  to  the  nature  of  the  commodities  sold. 

The  maund  tabrees  is  6|1bs.  in  the  factory,  but  only  6|lbs.  in  the  bazar;  by  this  weight,  sugar,  copper, 
tutenague,  and  all  kinds  of  drugs  are  sold. 

The  maund  copra  is  71  lbs.  at  the  custom-house;  but  in  the  bazar  from  7|  to  TJlbs.  by  this  weight,  riee, 
almonds,  raisins,  and  other  eatables  are  sold. 

The  maund  shaw  is  likewise  in  use,  being  2 maunds  tabrees,  and  equal  to  13}lbs.  avoiidupois. 

The  weight  for  gold  and  silver,  is  the  miscal;  2i  miscals  are  equal  to  a Surat  tola,  and  200  it 
1 maund  tabrees.  By  this  weight,  all  valuable  commodities  are  weighed. 

The  long  measure  is  the  guz,  93  of  which  are  considered  equal  to  100  English  yards. 

IMPORTS  AND  EXPORTS. 

The  trade  formerly  carried  on  was  very  considerable ; at  present  it  is  trifling,  scarce  one  vessel  in  a 
season  calling  here.  The  articles  imported  and  exported,  are  similar  to  those  enumerated  at  Bushire,  but 
in  very  small  quantities.  , 

Aniclet  procurable  in  the  Gulf  qfij>erina,  teith  Directions  hme  to  chuse  them. 

ALMONDS 

Are  carried  in  large  quantities  from  Persia  to  India;  great  care  is  necessary  in  the  choice  of  these 
kernels,  as  they  are  apt  to  become  rancid  in  keeping,  and  to  be  preyed  on  by  an  insect  which  eats  out  the 
internal  part,  leaving  the  almond  to  all  appearance  perfect.  They  should  be  chosen  large,  of  a bright 
cinnamon  colour  without,  breaking  of  a clean  pure  white  within.  A species  of  bitter  almonds  passes 
current  at  Surat,  and  are  called  baddams,  about  60  of  which  are  equal  to  a pice. 

AMMONIACUM  GUM 

Is  a concrete  gummy  resinous  juice,  brought  from  Persia,  and  various  parts  of  the  East,  either  in  fine 
tears,  or  drops,  or  in  mosses  composed  of  them  of  a miUcy  whiteness;  the  external  part  of  the  mny,, 
monly  inclines  to  yellow  or  brown,  and  the  white  tears  change  to  the  same  colour,  on  being  exposed  for 
some  time  to  the  air.  Thu  gum  has  a strong  smell,  somewhat  resembling  galbanum,  but  not  so  ungrateful ; 
a disagreeable  sweetness  of  taste,  followed  by  a sensation  of  bitterness;  it  softens  in  the  mouth,  and  on  being 
chewed,  becomes  of  a white  colour.  Gum  Ammoniacum  in  masses  should  be  chosen  full  of  drops  or  tears 
without  filth  or  seeds,  dry,  brittle,  growing  soft  by  the  fire,  and  easily  reduced  to  a white  powder,  of  ft 
sharp  taste  and  smell.  The  drops  should  be  round,  white  internally  and  externally,  of  a bitter  taste,  and 
free  from  seeds  or  other  foreign  substances,  and  when  thrown  on  live  coab,  burning  away  in  flame.  Reject 
that  which  u soft,  dark  coloured,  and  foul. 

The  following  is  a statement  of  the  quantities  imported  and  sold  at  the  East  India  Company’s 
in  the  year  1804  to  1808  inclusive;  w'ith  the  sale  amount  and  average  price  per  cwt. 


Years. 

1 March  Sale. 

1 September  Sa^. 

1 Toul. 

AVer.  |)cr  Cwt, 

Cwf. 

£ 

Owt. 

£ 

Cwi. 

A-  ».  d. 

3 If  1 
1 12  2 
1 8 2 
1 15  0 

1804 

1805 

1806 

1807 

1808 

156 

295 

81 

177 

81 

59 

288 
241 
114  j 
105 

81 

333 

81 

59 

288 

536 

114 

105 

16  cwt.  of  gum  ammoniacum  is  allowed  to  a ton.  The  permanent  duty  is  per  ort.  Mad  the  ’ 

temporary  or  war  duty  £l  8*.  making  in  the  whole  £i  8s.  per  cwt 


ABiVBlC  GUM— ARSENIC—ASSAFCETIDA. 


133 


ARABIC  GUM 

Is  the  inspissated  juice  of  the  Acaclsi  and  grows  in  various  parts  of  the  world.  It  is  In  small  clear 
masses,  of  an  insipid  viscous  taste,  semi-transparent,  of  a clear  whitish,  or  very  pale  yellow  colour;  the 
clearer  and  more  pellucid,  the  better  tlie  gum.  When  pure,  it  will  dissolve  totally  in  water ; otherwise  it 
will  leave  a foul  sediment.  It  is  strongly  recommended  to  have  this  gum  well  garbled,  or  cleaned,  in  India, 
ns  its  value  is  much  enhanced  thereby,  and  particular  care  must  be  taken,  tliat  it  is  not  mixed  with  a kind 
of  gum  reseniblmg  the  best  specimens  of  Gum  Arabic,  geneiAlly  in  larger  pieces,  tliat  will  not  melt,  but  swell 
in  water:  considerable  quantities  have  been  imported  of  that  kinti,  w hich  is  of  no  use  whatever. 

The  following  is  a statement  of  the  quantity  imported  and  sold  at  the  East  India  sales  in  the  years 
1804  to  1808  inclusive,  with  the  sale  amount,  and  average  price  per  cwt. 


Yean. 

March  Sale. 

September  S.ile 

Total 

Aver  per  Cwt. 

Cwt. 

e 

i Wl 

t* 

I'wt. 

T 

• 

ii. 

180i 

1011 

4323 

756 

.‘1813 

17G7 

8136 

4 

12 

i 

1805 

1867 

9769 

2064 

680(> 

3931 

1637  5 

4 

1 

1 

1806 

1463 

4282 

71 

146 

1534 

4428 

2 17 

8 

1807 

4984 

12357 

1581 

3017 

6565 

1.^1.374 

2 

6 

10 

1808 

1326 

2844 

56 

146  1 

1382 

2090 

2 

3 

3 

20  cwt.  of  Gum  Arabic  is  allowed  to  a ton.  The  permanent  duty  is  7s.  (ki  per  cwt.  and  the  lempo- 
raiy  or  war  duty,  2s.  6d.  making  in  the  whole  10*.  per  cwt. 


ARSENIC 

Is  of  two  sorts,  the  common  white,  which  is  in  India  commonly  called  liartall,  and  the  yellow,  called 
•ttripegmentum,  or  orpiment,  and  by  the  Arabs,  Zamich.  Arsenic,  properly  so  called,  is  a moderately 
Iwavy,  compact,  hard,  brittle  concrete,  of  a chrystalline  or  vitreous  appearance,  gradually  changing  from 
exposure  to  the  air,  to  a milky  hue,  like  that  of  porcelain,  and  at  length  to  the  opaque  whiteness  of  white 
enamel;  Uie  large  masses  preserve  their  transparency  longer  than  the  small,  and  in  dry,  longer  than  in  a 
moist  air.  In  the  fire  it  neither  hums,  nor  perfectly  melts,  but  totally  exhales  in  tliick  fumes  of  a strong 
fetid  smell  resembling  garlic.  Great  caution  is  necessary  in  all  operations  upon  arsenic,  to  avoid  its  fumes. 

It  is  seldom  imported  into  England  from  India.  In  1805,  206  cwt.  was  sold  at  the  East  India  sales, 
and  the  sale  amount  was  ^102.  The  permanent  duty  is  9s.  per  cwt.  and  tlie  war  duty  3s.  making  m the 
nhole  12s.  per  cwt. 


ASSAFOETIDA 

Is  the  concrete  juice  of  the  root  of  a plant  growing  in  Persia,  which,  according  to  Kiempfer,  is 
Wnnial,  tapering,  ponderous,  increasing  to  the  size  of  a man’s  arm  or  leg,  coverwl  with  a blackish  buik; 
the  int^al  substance  is  white,  fleshy,  and  abounds  with  a thick  milky  juice,  yielding  an  exce.ssive  y .strong 
fttid  imeU.  Though  assafoetida  has  been  in  use  near  1,000  years,  having  been  introduced  by  tlie  Arabians, 
yet  there  was  no  satisfactoiy  account  of  the  plant  which  yielded  it,  till  Kiempfer,  who  visited  Persia,  and 
was  on  the  spot  where  this  drug  is  collected,  published  his  account  in  1712.  Assafoptn  a las  a nau.  cous, 
somewhat  biS^,  biting  taste;  the  stronger  these  are,  the  better,  as  age  diminishes  both.  It  is  originally  in 
amdl  dwps  ; but  when  packed,  ft  fonns  irregular  masses,  composed  of  little  shinuig  lumps  or  grams,  which 


A0RIP£6M£NTtJM~BD^:LLIl/M  GUM.' 


m 

have  the  diflerent  shades  of  white,  brown,  red,  or  violet.  It  should  be  chosen  clean,  fresh,  strong  scented, 
of  a pale  reddish  colour,  variegated  with  a nuipber  of  fine  white  tears;  when  broken,  it  should  somewhat 
resemble  marble  in  appearance,  and  after  being  exposed  to  the  air,  should  turn  of  a violet  red  colour.  Its 
peculiar  scent  and  taste  will  distinguish  the  genuine  from  the  adulterated;  that  which  b soft,  black,'  and 
foul  should  be  rejected.  The  packages  should  be  carefully  examined,  or  there  will  be  considerable  wastet 
they  should  also  be  tight,  or  the  smell  arising  from  this  drug,  will  injure  any  other  that  u stowed  near  it. 

The  following  is  an  account  of  the  quantities  imported  and  sold  at  the  Company's  sales  for  five  years, 
1604  to  1808  inclusive,  with  the  sale  amount,  and  average  price  per  cwt. 


Marcl 

iitile. 

Scptenil 

>er  Sale. 

Total. 

Aver,  per  Cwr. 

Cwt 

f 

<Jwt 

£ 

Cwu 

e 

£ j. 

1804 

141 

530 

— 

— 

141 

530 

3 15  2' 

1805 

114 

810 

43 

67 

157 

873 

5 11  2 

1800 

82 

308 

— 

— 

82 

308 

3 12  B 

1807 

11 

42 

29 

103 

40 

145 

3 12  6 

1808 

48 

100 

24 

180 

72 

280 

3 17  9 

20  cwt.  of  assnfeetuia  i.s  allowed  to  the  ton.  The  permanent  duty  b £i  16*.  per  cwt.  and  the  war 
duty  18*.  Sd.  making  in  the  whole  £3  14*.  Sd.  per  cwt. 

AURIPEGMENTUM, 

Or  orpiment,  so  called  from  its  being  used  as  a gold  pigment,  is  called  Zamich  by  the  Arabians;  it  b 
commonly  supposed  to  be  the  same  as  the  factitious  ycQow  arsenic,  and  to  be  possessed  of  a pobonous  quality, 
but  it  is  neither  tlie  one  nor  the  other.  It  is  a native  fossil,  found  in  Turkey,  and  the  Eastern  countries; 
some  is  also  met  with  in  Bohemia,  but  inferior  in  goodness  to  the  other.  The  best  sort  is  of  a lively 
gold  colour,  here  and  there  intermixed  with  pieces  of  a Vermilion  red,  of  a shultery,  foliaccous  texture 
somewhat  flexible,  soft  to  the  touch  like  talc,  and  sparkling  when  broke.  The  inferior  kinds  are  of  a dead 
yellow,  inclining  more  to  greenish,  and  want  the  bright  appearance  of  the  foregoing.’  It  buriis  in  the 
fire,  but  not  very  easily,  of  a dark,  blueish,  white  flame,  a sulphureous  smell,  and  at  the  same  time’ 
melts  and  becomes  red.  Its  principal  use  is  as  a colouring  drug  amongst  painters,  bookbinders,  &c.  Greirf 
care  b necessary  in  securing  it,  or  it  will  from  its  weight  break  the  packages,  and  much  of  it  be  lost. 
It  has  been  imported  in  powder,  which  has  been  of  a beautiful  yellow  colour.  % 

20  cwt.  of  auripegmentum  is  allowed  to  a ton.  The  permanent  duty  is  18d,  per  cwt.  and  the  temi 
porary  or  war  duty  6d.  making  in  the  whole  2s.  per  cwt.  ■ ’ . 

BDELLIUM  GUM  • . 

Is  produced  in  Persia  and  the  East  Indies,  and  is  externally  of  a reddish  brown,  somewhat  like 
myrrh;  internally  it  is  clear,  and  not  unlike  glue;  it  b in, loose  drops,  not  concreted  into  Some 

of  these  drops  are  as  large  as  hazel  nuts,  many  less  than  a pea,  and  some  few  of  considerable  size;  they 
are  seldom  regularly  round,  often  crooked,  and  of  an  irregular  diape.  This  gum  b moderately  heavy  and 
hard;  taken  into  the  mouth,  it  grows  soft  and  tough,  in  the  manner  of  mastic;  its  «fnyll  b not  dbogiae^ 
able;  its  taste  inclines  to  bitter,  but  not  so  much  as  that  of  myrrh;  it  readily  takes  fiia,  and  bums  very 
briskly  with  a white  bright  flame,  though  it  crackles  all  the  time,  and  frequently  throws  «»n*ii  fragments 
of  matter  to  the  surface  of  the  flame.  It  should  be  chosen  somewhat  transparent,  the  more  so  the 
better,  of  a bitter  taste,  and  of  a dusky  reddbh  brown  colour,  moderately  heavy  and  bard, 
soft  and  tough 'in  .the  mouth.  It  entirely  dissolves  in  verjuice  or  vinegar. 

16  cwL  of  Gum  Bdellium  b allowed.to  the  toiu  The  penqai^ent  duty  b JSH  16s.  per  cwt,  and  the 
temporary  or  war  duty  18*.  Sd.  making  in  the  whole  £3  14*.  Bd.  per  cwt. 


BEZOAR— BRIMSTONE-CARAMANIA  WOOL-COLOQUINTIDA. 


139 


BEZOAR. 

■» 

This  medicinal  stone,  to  which  extraordinary  qualities  were  formerly  attributed,  has  latterly  been 
a^uch  more  lightly  esteemed.  It  grows  in  the  stomach  of  an  animal  of  tlie  goat  kind,  inhabiting  the 
mountains  in  various  parts  of  Persia  and  India.  Besides  this,  there  are  German  and  other  bezoars,  which 
are  less  valuable.  The  genuine  Oriental  bezoar  is  commonly  of  an  oval  form,  and  between  the  size  of  a 
hazel  nut  and  a walnut;  if  larger,  it  is  more  valuable;  if  smaller,  of  little  value.  This  stone  is  cxtemnlly 
smooth  and  glossy,  and  composed  of  several  shining  coatx,  like  an  onion,  enclosing  either  a powdery  sub* 
stance,  or  a nucleus,  round  which  they  are  formed.  The  colour  most  valued,  is  a shining  olive,  or  dark 
green;  but  there  are  some  whitish,  some  grey,  and  some  of  a dull  yellow.  Purchasers  should  be  careful 
in  cliusing  this  drug.  The  real  bezoar  lias  little  smell,  and  no  taste.  It  should  be  as  large  as  possible;  the 
very  stiKtll  pieces  should  be  entirely  rejected,  as  they  are  most  commonly  increased  with  factitious  substances 
resembling  them.  Wlien  a red  hot  needle,  on  entering  the  bezoar,  occasions  it  to  fry  and  shrivel,  it  is 
not  genuine;  if  it  only  throws  off  a small  scale  or  crust  without  entering,  it  is  good.  If  on  rubbing  it  over 
paper,  previously  smeared  with  chalk  or  quick  lime,  it  leaves  a yellow  taint  on  the  former,  or  a green  one 
on  the  latter,  it  is  a good  vtonc.  If  the  be  zoar,  after  soaking  five  or  six  hours  in  lukewarm  water,  remains 
unchanged  in  weight,  colour,  or  consistence,  it  is  genuine.  Nor  should  it  appear  affected  by  rectified 
spirit  anymore  than,  by  water.  The  powder,  alter  agitation  with  water  or  spirit,  subsides  uniformly 
and  totally,  leaving  no  greenish  matter  dissolved  in  the  li<juors,  as  those  powders  do  in  which  the  bezoar* 
tincture  has  been  imitated  by  certain  vegetable  matters. 

The  permanent  duty  on  Bezoar  stones  is  Is.  6d.  per  oz.  and  the  temporary  or  war  duty,  6d.  per  oz. 

BRIMSTONE,  or  SULPHUR, 

Is  a well-known  substance,  hard,  brittle,  and  inflammable,  of  an  opaque  yellow  colour;  it  is  found, 
more  or  less  pure,  generally  in  the  neighbourhood  of  volcanoes;  it  is  an  article  of  trade  from  Persia  to  the 
British  settlements,  but  not  to  any  extent.  It  has  been  corned  to  China;  but  being  contraband,  would 
not  fetch  any  price,  and  was  thrown  into  the  river. 

CARAMANIA  WOOL. 

This  article  waa  formerly  one  of  the  principal  imports  into  England  from  Persia,  and  the  East  India 
Company  were  particularly  anxious  to  obtain  it,  it  being  in  great  demand  in  some  of  the  British  manufac- 
tures. It  b described  ‘‘  as  soft  as  silk,  curiously  curled,  of  a mixed  colour,  black  and  white,  inclining 
to  grey. 

COLOQUINTIDA^ 

Or  bitter  apple,  b a fruit  about  the  size  of  an  orange,  that  grows  on  a climbing  plant  of  the  gourd 
kind,  in  Persia,  Arabia,  and  Egypt;  it  is  light,  and  of  a fungous  texture,  with  a number  of  roundish 
seeds  in  the  cavities,  which  are  unctuous,  and  sweetish  to  tlie  taste;  the  other  part  is  acrid,  nauseous, 
and  extremely  bitter.  Chusc  the  largest  white  apples,  that  are  light,  round,  and  not  cracked  or  broken,  os 
the  seeds  are  the  most  material  part  of  the  fruit. 

It  has  occasionally  been  imported  from  India;  but  the  prices  it  has  fetched,  have  been  veiy  low. 

In  September  sale,  1803, ..123  cwt.  sold  for  £13. 

In  March  sale,  1807, 395  cwt  sold  for  £30. 

8 cwt  of  Coloquintida  b allowed  to  the  ton.  The  permanent  duty  is  £&  12#.  per  cwt.  and  tlie 
temporary  or  wer  duty,  £1  17#.  4d.  making  in  the  whole  £7  9#.  4d.  per  cwt. 


130  C.UirET&-.CUMMIN  SEEDS—EARTH,  RED— ELEMI  GU^— GALBAJJUM  GUM. 

CARPETS 

Were  formerly  an  article  of  trade;  but  from  the  improved  state  of  our  own  manufactures,  and  the 
heavy  duty  on  Persian  curjiets,  they  arc  now  seldom  imported.  The  permanent  duty  is  £l  10s.  6<f.  p^r 
square  yard,  and  the  temporary  or  war  duty  10*  34-  making  in  the  whole  £2  1*.  per  square  yard^ 

CUMMIN  SEEDS. 

The  plant  which  produces  these  sced.s,  somewhat  rescmldes  fennel,  and  grows  in  various  parts  of  India, 
Persia,  and  Egypt;  it  is  an  article  of  trade  with  Surat.  The  seed  is  a kind  of  carraway,  of  a bitterish,  warm 
taste,  of  an  aromatic,  but  disagreeable  flavour.  They  are  to  be  chosen  fresh,  and  of  a greenish  colour. 
There  are  several  sorts  of  cummin  seeds  to  be  met  with,  but  they  are  seldom  imported  from  India. 

EARTH,  RED, 

Or  Indian  red,  is  the  name  of  a species  of  earth,  which  is  procured  from  some  of  the  Islands  in  the 
Persian  Gulf,  and  carried  from  thence  to  Surat,  Bengal,  and  other  parts  of  India,  where  it  is  used 
in  painting  houses,  kc.  It  is  much  esteemed  among  painters,  being  an  useful  colour,  but  it  is  difficult  to  be 
procured  genuine  in  England.  The  best  kind  is  of  a fine  purple  colour,  extremely  heavy,  and  of  a very- 
great  hardness,  of  a firm,  compact,  solid  texture,  and  always  full  of  bright  glittering  particles,  of  a rough 
and  dusty  surface,  colouring  the  hands  very  much;  it  adheres  firmly  to  the  tongue,  melts  with  difficulty 
in  the  mouth,  and  is  of  a rough,  austere,  and  very  astringent  taste;  thrown  into  water,  it  makes  a very 
considerable  ebullition,  but  moulders  or  breaks  with  difficulty  in  it.  In  the  fire  it  burns  to  a greater  hard* 
ness,  with  very  little  change  of  colour. 


ELEMI  GUM 

Is  a concrete  resinous  juice  exuding  from  a tree  of  the  olive  kind,  growing  in  the  East  and  West 
Indies.  The  East  India  elemi  is  generally  brought  in  cakes  of  2 or  3 lbs.  each,  of  an  oblong,  roundish 
form,  wrapped  up  in  flag  leagues ; it  is  semi-transparent,  and  of  a pole  yellow  colour,  a little  inclining  to 
green.  Chuse  that  which  is  softish,  of  a pale  whitish  yellow  colour,  and  of  a strong,  not  unpleasant  smell, 
somewhat  like  that  of  fennel,  and  of  a bitterish  taste.  Reject  that  which  is  hard,  dark  coloured,.or  dirty, 

IGcwt.  of  gum  elemi  is  allowed  to  a ton.  The  permanent  duty  is  £2  2s.  per  cwt.  and  the  tempo* 
rary  or  war  duty  14s.  making  in  the  whole  £2  16s.  per  cwt. 

GALBANUM  GUM 

Is  the  produce  of  an  evergreen  plant,  found  in  Persia,  and  in  some  parts  of  Africa.  When  this  pl»tnl 
is  in  the  third  or  fourth  year  of  its  growth,  it  naturally  exudes  drops  of  galbanum  at  the  joints ; the  na, 
tives  to  increase  the  produce,  wound  the  main  stem  at  this  time,  at  a small  distance  above  the  root ; the 
juice  then  flows  plentifully,  and  is  collected  for  use.  Galbanum  is  a gummy,  resinous,  rather  unctuous  sub* 
stance;  sometimes  in  the  natural  drops  or  tears,  but  more  frequently  in  masses  composed  of  a number  of 
these  blended  together.  The  drops  when  perfect,  approach  near  to  a roundish,  or  oblong  figure;  but  they 
commonly  lose  their  form  in  the  masses;  these  are  pale  coloured,  semi-transparent,  soft,  and  tenacious. 
In  the  best  specimens,  they  appear  composed  of  clear  whitish  tears,  often  intermixed  with  stalks,  and  seeds 
of  the  plant.  When  fresh,  the  masses  and  tears  are  white,  and  with  age,  change  to  yellow  or  brown. 


6ALLS-G0GUL. 

13T 

When  the  teen  can  be  procured,  they  ore  to  be  oreferrMl  tn  >i.»  ... 

■hould  be  fattbh,  moderately  viscous,  and  glossy  on  Uie  sLace;  such  as  are  Z fet'oMT  kT*® 
lour,  end  mixed  with  sticks,  and  other  foreign  substances,  are  to  be  rejected  The  besi  r k T“ 
a Ught  yellow  colour,  of  a strong,  piercing,  and  to  ^st  pT.-. Tr.gJ«W 

tinL^d^rir’d  "‘’l  “ "“ture  between  a gum  nn<l  a resin,  flaming  in 

^ ‘’r  "ther  impuritios,  .he  better 

solvicr  Jn  rtf  “d  ®«e  of  water,  will  best  shew  its  quali.y,  by  AW 

solving  »U  ^e  pare  galbanum.  and  leaving  the  impurities.  When  its  foulness  renders  it  of  littlJvalL  it 

enough  to  be  str^^  by  pressure  through  a hempen  cloth.  If  this  process  be  skilfuUy  managed,  the  gal- 
mmum  to^s  but  Uttle  of  the  essenthd  oD.  some  of  whichi.  ge„erally‘carried  off  in  eva^raZ  ® 

1804  to  “ Tr  veaiv 

to  1808  inclusive,  with  the  sale  amount,  and  average  price  per  cwt. 


Yean, 

Anarch 

1 ^aie. 

1 September  Sale. 

1 Total. 

Aver  prrCwt. 

Cwt. 

£ 

Cwt. 

£ 

Cwt. 

£ 

£ a tl 

1804 

— 

— 

15 

241 

15 

24r~ 

~ns  i 4 

1805 

199 

42 

399 

66 

598 

9 12 

1806 

— 

57 

238 

67 

238 

4 3 6 

1807 

1.. 

1 MM 

1808 

— 

— 

ssbIbw 

— 

— 

16  cwt.  of  Gum  Galbanum  is  allowed  to  the  ton.  The  permanent  duty  is  £4i  4«.  per  cwt,  and  the 
temporaiy  or  war  duty  £l  per  cwt.  making  in  the  whole  £5  12$.  per  cwt. 


GALLS 

Are  hard  roundish  excrescences,  found  on  a species  of  oak  trees,  in  various  parts  of  the  East,  pro- 
duced  from  the  puncture  of  an  insect,  and  affording  a lodgment  for  its  young,  till  they  are  capable  of  eating 
a passage  through;  those  galls  which  have  no  hole,  are  generally  found  to  have  the  dead  insect  in  them* 
The  best  galls  arc  firom  Aleppo,  are  generally  of  a blueish  colour,  or  of  a greyish  or  blackish,  verging  to 
blueness,  unequal  and  warty  on  the  surface,  hard  tp  break,  and  of  a close  compact  texture.  Those  whicti 
are  small,  white,  and  broken,  should  be  rejected.  The  quantity  of  galls  annually  used  in  Great  Britaiii, 
aMnmt  to  about  S,000  cwt. 

The  following  are  the  quantities  imported  and  sold  at  the  East  India  Company'^s  sales  in  the  years 
18(Mf  to  1806  inclusive,  ^with  the  sale  amount,  and  average  price  per  ‘Cwt. 


Yetrt. 

March  Sale 

1 September  Sale 

1 Total. 

Avcr.per  Cwt. 

Cvl 

£ 

CwL 

t e 

Cwt. 

£ 

£ s. 

r/. 

1804 

2006 

54 

384 

!^68 

6 3 

4 

1805 

71 

559 

594 

665 

4225 

6 7 

0 

1806 

137 

186 

1167 

323 

1972 

1 

1807 

134 

665 

7276 

4 

321 

1721 

5394 

5 10 

6 

,ji|p  fwt  ofx^  are  allowed  to  the  ton.  The  permanent  duty  is  7s.  per  cwt.  and  the  temporaiy  or 

^ per 


‘ • G06UL 

' ' Ib  0 ^(MfdeB  of  Utumen,  and  much  used  at  Bombay,  Bengal,  and  other  parts  of  India,  for  painting  the 
hiittoiiM  driS^  it  bong  superior  to  hny  thing  else  fiir  that  purpose,  and  wood  covered  with  it,  resists  the 
worm  a todg  time. 


IS8  HYrOCISTIS--JUJUBES---KISMISSES—LABDANUM  GUM— LAPIS  LAZULI, 


HYPOCISTIS 

Is  an  inspissated  juice,  of  a firm  consistence,  of  a bright  black  colour,  prepared  from  a certain  fleshy 
juicy  vegetable^  which  grows  up  from  the  root  of  a species  of  cistus,  common  in  Fema^and  Arabia.  It  la 
seldom  imported  into  England ; it  is  in  considerable  hard  and  heavy  masses^-  of  a fina  'shining  bladi)  Uka 
that  of  liquorice,  when  fresh  broken,  and  of  a duskier  black  on  the  surface*  It  should  ba  chosen  heaTjv 
hard,  and  black,  and  of  an  acrid,  astringent  taste,  and  a burning  smell 

JUJUBES, 

A half  dried  fruit  of  the  plum  kind,  produced  in  the  southern  parts  of  Europe,  na  well  as  in  Persia^ 
and  other  Eastern  countries.  The  latter  is  of  a blackish  hue,  much  darker  than  the  former,  which  is  of  a 
reddish  yellow  colour.  It  is  furnished  with  an  ash-coloured  cup  at  the  bottom,  from  which  it  is  easily 
parted.  They  should  be  chosen  fresh,  plump,  and  well-dried,  or  they  will  be  subject  to  decay.  The 
European  sort  having  superseded  the  use  of  the  Oriental,  t Aey  are  not  imported  from  the  East  Indies. 

KISMISSES, 

A species  of  raisin,  in  which  a considerable  trade  is  carried  on  between  Persia  and  various  parts  of  India. 

LABDANUM  GUM 

Is  a resinous  juice  which  exudes  from  a small  shrub  in  I’ersia  and  Arabia.  Two  sorts  of  it  arc  distin- 
guished ; the  one  in  cakes,  or  masses  of  an  irregular  siae ; the  other  in  rolls,  twisted  like  the  rolls  of  wax 
tapers.  This  drug  is  said  to  be  collected  in  the  heat  of  summer,  lightly  brushing  the  shmb  that  pro- 
duces it  with  a kind  of  rake,  having  thongs  of  leather  fixed  to  it,  instead  of  teeth;  the  unctuous  juice  ad- 
heres to  the  thongs,  and  is  aflerwards  scraped  off  with  a knife.  The  masses  of  Labdanum  are  dark  co- 
loured, of  the  consistence  of  a soft  plaister,  of  a strong,  but  not  disagreeable  smell,  accompanied  with  a 
warm,  aromatic,  rather  unpleasant  taste.  The  coiled  Labdanum  is  harder  than  the  preceding,  and  con- 
tains a considerable  quantity  of  sandy  matter.  The  masses  have  not  near  such  a quantity  of  impurities ; 
some  small  dust,  &c.  blown  on  this  resin  while  it  remains  on  the  shrub,  cannot  be  avoided. 

LAPIS  LAZULI, 

Or  azure  stone,  is  a compact,  ponderous  fossil,  less  hard  than  flint,  that  takes  a high  polish,  and  ia 
used  occasionally  for  toys,  &c.  Its  most  valuable  purpose  is  in  making  that  beautiful  coloqr  call^  ultrk  ma- 
rine blue.  It  is  found  in  many  ports  of  the  world,  but  the  best  is  that  of  Asia;  it  is  in  lumps,  usually 
about  the  size  of  a man's  fist,  frequently  smaller,  and  sometimes  in  pieces  of  4 or  5 lbs.  weight.  It  is  very 
seldom  covered  with  any  coat  or  crust,  but  resembles  those  stones  which  have  been  washed  off  from  whole 
strata,  and  smoothed  or  rounded  by  accident  afterwards.  Its  surface  is  naiurapy  smooth  and  glossy;  its 
colour  a very  elegant  blue,  beautifully  variegated  with  white  ot  clouded  spots,  and  witl^  gold  coloured  shin- 
ing veins.  For  any  purpose  but  toy-makmg,  it  is  the  most  valuable  thel  l^s  it  h^  of  these  variegations^ 
Itis  to  be  chosen  of  a fine  dose  texture,  heavy,  of  a deep  indigb  blue  colour,  having  as  few  gold  coloured 
veins  as  possible,  and  such  as  calcines  in  a strong  fire  without  emitting  any  smell.  It  is  sometimes  rubbed 
over  with  olive  oil  to  increase  its  colour:  this  may  be  discovered  by’  breaking  the  stone;  if  it  be  paler  within 
than  without,  it  is  a proof  that  the  stone  was  falsified;  if  it  be  of  a good  quality,  its  cobnrvi^  rmalkr 
unchanged  when  it  is  red  hot  m the  fire.  The  ]l*api8  Afynenus,  which  externally  resembles  this  stone^ 
may  be  readily  distinguished  by  its  being  less  hard,  and  foon*  losing  its  blue  colOttrrin#modurata"l^ 

20  cwt.  of  Lapis^  Lazuli  is  allowed  to  the  ton.  The  permanent  duty  on  it  is  Ss.  Ih-  .|in4 
)fmary  or  war  duty  8d.  per  Ib.  making  in  the  whole  Ss.  8d.  per  lb. 


1>APIS  TUTLB—MA8TIC-0LIBANUM. 


m 

' • .*  I 

, LAPIS  TVTIM, 

^ OrTvItyf  i»A-da]rqr  or  argillaeeotts  ore^f  asemUmeial,  called  Zinc,  found  in  Persia,  formed  on 
ejiiodrieal  moakb  ifi|to  tubuloua  pieces  of  different  lengths,  like  the  bark  of  a tree,  and  baked,  to  a mode- 
rate liardaess*  On. the  outside  it  is  of  a brown  colour,  and  full  of  small  protuberances,  smooth  and  yel- 
lowish within,  sometimes  with  a whitish,  and  sometimes  with  a blueish  cast.  The  finest  is  that  which  is  6f 
a godd  brown  on  the  outside,  and  of  a yellow  tinge  within,  the  thickest,  brightest,  most  granulated,  'the 
hardest  to  break,  and  that  which  has  the  least  foulness  among  it.  It  is  seldom  imported  from  India.' 

80  ewt  of  Lapis  Tutlse  is  allowed  to  a ton.  The  permanent  duty  is  £2  28,  and  tlio  temporary 
or  war  duty  lie,  making  in  the  whole  £2  16s.  per  cwt. 

MASTIC 

Is  a concrete  resin,  obtained  from  the  Lentisk  tree  by  transverse  incisions  made  in  the  bark,  about 
the  beginning  of  August.  It  is  in  small  yellowish  white  transparent  drops,  of  a resinous,  and  rather 
astringent  taste,  with  a light,  agreeable  smell,  esiiecially  when  rubbed,  or  heated.  In  chewing,  it  first 
crumbles,  soon  after  sticks  together,  and  becomes  soft  and  white  like  wax.  It  is  to  he  chosen  clear,  of  a 
pale  yellow  colour,  well  scented  and  b/ittle.  Such  as  inclines  to  black,  green,  or  is  dirty,  must  be  rejected. 
When  free  from  impurities,  it  totally  dissolves  in  rectified  spirits.  Mastic  is  seldom  Imported  from  the 
East  Indies.  In  the  September  sale  1606,  785  cwt.  was  put  up,  the  sale  amount  of  which  was  only  £\  14. 
The  wood  of  the  tree  is  sometimes  imported;  it  should  be  chosen  heavy,  compact,  and  firm,  grey  without, 
and  white  within,  of  an  astringent  taste. 

The  permanent,  duty  on  red  mastic  is  6d.  per  lb.  and  the  war  duty  2d.  per  lb. ; onany  other  sort  the 
perteiuusntdaty>is  9d.perlb.  and  the  war  duty  3d.  per  lb. 

OLIBANUM 

Is  a gnmmy  resin,  produced  in  Persia  and  Arabia,  in  drops  or  tears,  and  is  said  to  be  the  frankincense 
of  the  ancients;  it  smells  moderately  strong  and  resinous,  but  not  very  pleasant;  the  taste  is  pungent,  and 
somewhat  bitter;  it  sticks  to  the  teeth  in  chewing,  becomes  white,  and  turns  the  spittle  milky.  The  drops 
are  of  a pale  yellow  colour,  which  by  age  becomes  reddish.  Laid  on  red  hot  iron,  Olibanum  readily 
catches  flame^  and  bums  with  a strong,  Effusive,  not  unpleuant  smell.  If  it  be  run  into  a mass,  mixed 
with  dirt  and  rubbbh,  having  but  few  tears,  it  is  of  little  value. 

The  following  is  ad  account  of  the  quantities  imported  and  sold  at  the  Company's  sales  for  five  years, 
180410  1806  indosive,  together  with  the  sale  amount,  and  the  average  price  per  cwt 


Yean. 

1 March  .*lale. 

September  Sale  | 

1 \ver  perCwt. 

i'*'’ 

£ 

Cwt. 

B8 

■£Bi 

£ 

«.  d. 

76 

'706 

3 

Bl 

78  . 

9 

3 6 

1805 

•«. 

— 

■s 



139 

158 

588 

387 

1,136 

3 

19  3 

1171 

161 

471 

456 

1431 

617 

1,903 

3 

1 6 

146 

173 

— 

146 

•173 

1 

3 7 

18  ewt  of  Olibanum  is  allowed  to  a ton.  The  permanent  duty  is  ^1  10a  per  cwt  and  the  temporary 
or  war.  duty  lOe.  making  in  the  whole  £2  per  cwt 


140 


dPOPONAX  GUM— PEARL  SHELLS-ROSE  MALOE8. 


OPOPONAX  GUM 

Is  a toncrete  gummy  resinous  juice,  obtained  from  the  root  of  a flower  bearing  plant,  which  grows  in 
Turkey,  Arabia,  and  Persia.  It  is  of  a tolerably  firm  texture,  usually  in  small  grains,  but  sometimes  in 
large  masses,  formed  by  a number  of  these  connected  with  a matter  of  the  same  kind...  The  masses  are 
generally  loaded  with  foreign  substances,  and  are  much  inferior  to  the  pure  loose  drops.  The  finest  Opo- 
ponax  is  in  grains,  from  the  size  of  a pin's  head,  to  that  of  a large  pea.  The  internal  colour  of  these 
grains  is  a pale  yellow,  frequently  mixed  with  white,  and  externally  they  incline  to  a red  or  orange  colour* 
They  are  moderately  heavy,  of  a somewhat  fat  or  unctuous  appearance,  smooth  on  the  surface,  pf  an 
acrid,  bitter  taste,  and  a strong  disagreeable  smell.  Opoponax  should  be  chosen  in  clear  pieces,  with  the 
before-mentioned  qualities.  Such  tears  as  are  black,  and  too  hard,  should  be  rejected.  The  masses  or 
cakes  are  usually  of  the  black  colour,  and  full  of  sticks  and  straws. 

This  is  one  of  the  most  valuable  gums ; it  is  principally  brought  from  Turkey,  and  when  perfectly 
good,  the  price  is  from  <£*30  to  JP40  per  cwt. 

16  cwt.  of  Gum  Opoponax  is  allowed  to  a ton.  The  permanent  duty  is  3s.  3d.  per  lb.  and  the  tern* 
porary  or  war  duty  9d.  making  in  the  whole  3s.  per  lb. 

PEARL  SHELLS, 

Commonly  called  mother  of  pearl  shells,  are  the  shells  of  the  pearl  oyster  from  the  Fishery  in  the 
Persian  Gulf;  some  of  them  are  from  8 to  10  inches  in  diameter,  nearly  of  a round  form,  and  thick  in  pro* 
portion.  These  shells  are  sent  to  Bombay,  and  from  thence  to  China,  where  they  are  manufactured  into 
beads,  fish,  counters,  spoons,  &c.  The  larger  the  size,  the  more  they  are  esteemed.  They  are  occasionally 
brought  to  Europe,  both  from  India  and  China,  and  when  stowed  loose  as  dunnage,  are  generally  admitted 
to  pass  free  of  freight.  For  the  Europe  market,  these  shells  should  be  chosen  of  the  largest  size,  of  a 
beautiful  pearlisli  lustre,  thick  and  even,  free  from  yellow  and  other  spots.  Reject  such  as  are  small,  have 
barnacles,  or  lumps,  on  them,  and  that  ai'e  cracked  or  broken. 

The  following  are  the  quantities  of  rough  mother  of  pearl  imported  and  sold  at  the  East  India  sales 
in  the  years  1804  to  1808  inclusive,  witli  the  sale  amount,  and  average  price  per  cwt. 


Yean 

March  Sale.  | 

September  Sale 

1 1 

^▼er.  per  Cwt^ 

Cwt. 

! £ J 

C>i 

L-£ 

Cwi. 

£ 

\ £ s,  4. 

67 

464 

531 

.5359 

BTiWBTil 

47 

334 

1360 

11H23 

1416 

12157 

8 11  8 

m 

*.» 

— - 

483 

4054 

482 

4054 

8 8 2 

1807  1 

1535 

6313  j 

278 

1384 

1813 

7697 

4 4 11 

1808  I 

— 

4691 

677 

4691 

I 6 18  6 

20  cwt.  of  mother  of  pearl  shells  is  allowed  to  a ton.  The  permanent  duty  is  £2  16s*  per  cwt.  and 
the  temporary  or  war  duty  18s.  8d.  making  in  the  whole  ^3  14s.  8A  per  cwL 

ROSE  MALOES 

Is  pearly,  the  consistence  of  tar,  and  is  an  article  of  trade  from  India  to  China.  It  is  in  jars,  and 
particular  care  should  be  taken  in  examining  every  jar,  for  there  are  generally  considerable  qvantitief  cjPdirt 
ia  it.  It  should  be  quite  clear,  not  of  a yellow,  or  rosy  colour* 


ROSE  WATER— RUINAS— SAL  AMMONIAC— SARCOCOLLA  GUM,  &c. 


141 


ROSE  WATER 


K * trade  from  Persia  to  Surat  and  Bombay,  and  is  packed  in  chests,  each 

c^t  84  totUes,  but  there  is  a great  difference  in  the  size  of  the  bottles,  which  the  purchaser  must  pay  atten- 
tion  to.  Thebtet  is  of  a fine  amber  colour,  strongly  partaking  of  the  flavour  of  the  roses,  and  wfll  keen 
several  years  without  losing  its  fragrance.  “ 


RUINAS. 

Thb  root  grows  in  Persia,  is  somewhat  like  liquorice  both  in  size  and  colour,  yields  a beautiful 
red  colour,  and  is  said  to  pve  that  fine  colour  that  the  Indidh  calicoes  have.  The  roots,  when  pulled  out 
of  the  eaith,  are  veiy  long;  they  are  then  cut  in  pieces  about  a foot  long,  packed  in  bags,  and  sent  to 
vanous  parts  of  India.  When  fresh,  it  is  full  of  juice. 

SAL  AMMONIAC 

Is  brought  from  Egypt  and  the  East  Indies,  sometimes  in  conical  loaves,  commonly  in  round  ceVes, 
camex  on  one  side,  and  concave  on  the  other.  It  should  be  chosen  of  a very  sharp  penetrating  taste, 
white,  clear,  transparent,  dry,  with  the  internal  part  perfectly  pure,  and  of  an  almost  transparent  white- 
ness; the  outside  is  for  the  most  part  foul,  and  of  a hue  inclining  to  yellow,  grey,  or  black:  it  should  be 
in  eveiy  respect  as  clear  as  it  can  be  procured.  When  broken,  it  should  appear  as  if  full  of  needle  points. 

The  following  is  a statement  of  the  quantities  imported  and  sold  at  the  Ea.st  India  sales,  in  the  years 
1804  to  .1808  inclusive,  with  the  sale  amount,  and  average  price  per  cwt. 


Yean. 

March  Sale. 

Sfptember  Sale 

Total. 

Avi*r  per  Cwt. 

Cwt, 

i* 

Cw 

£ 

Cwi 

£ 

£ #.  fU 

1804 

281 

1665 

423 

305 

2088^ 

6 16  11 

1805 

153 

1494 

441 

2527 

5 14  7 

1806 

58 

325 

mm 

58 

325 

5 12  1 

1807 

616 

3288 

■9 

616 

3288 

5 6 9 

1808 

91 

609 

^8  1 

209^ 

389 

2701 

6 18  10 

16  cwt  of  Sal  Ammoniac  is  allowed  to  a ton.  The  permanent  duty  on  it  is  £l  8s.  per  cwt  and  the 
temporary  or  war  duty  9s.  4d.  making  in  tlie  whole  ^1  17s.  4d.  per  cwt. 

SARCOCOLLA  GUM 

Is  a gummy  resinous  Juice,  produced  in  Persia  and  Arabia;  it  is  in  small  crumbly,  spongy,  light  yel- 
low grains,  with  a few  inclining  to  red  mixed  with  them.  Their  taste  is  somewhat  bitter  and  acrid,  fol- 
lowed by  a nauseous  kind  of  sweetness;  the  tears  are  about  the  size  of  a pea;  and  the  whitest,  as  being  the 
freshest,  are  preferred.  This  gum  softens  in  the  mouth,  bubbles  and  catches  flame  from  a candle,  and  dis- 
solves almost  wholly  in  water,  when  pure  and  genuine.  This  article  is  seldom  imported  from  India.  The 
permanent  duty  is  £2  Ids.  per  cwt.  and  the  temponuy  or  war  duty  18s.  8d.  per  cwt 

SCHIRAZ  WINE 

Is  much  esteemed  by  the  Persians,  and  when  old,  is  rich,  full,  and  generous,  and  may  be  compared 
with  the  beat  producUon  of  any  country  or  climate;  when  new,  it  has  a disagreeable  roughness,  which  age 
wears  off.  Tliere  are  two  sorts,  white  and  red,  but  the  former  is  most  esteemed.  It  is  said  that  4,000 
tons  of  this  wine  are  annually  made  in  Persia.  It  is  occasionally  sentfirom  India  to  Europe  as  presents. 


m 


SCAMMONY— WORM  SEED- 


SCAMMONY 

Is  the  concrete,  gummy,  resinous  juice  of  a species  of  convolvolus,  growing  in  Turkey,  Syria,  end 
Persia.  The  scammony  is  extracted  by  laying  bare  the  upper  part  of  the  root,  wounding  it  pretty  deeply, 
and  placing  a shell,  or  some  other  receptacle,  to  receive  the  milky  juice,  which  hardens  into  masses.  Scam* 
mony  is  of  two  kinds,  Aleppo  and  Smyrna. 

Aleppo  Scammony,  which  is  preferable  to  the  other,  is  in  irregular,  light,  friable  masses,  of  a cavern- 
ous,  or  spongy  texture,  and  of  dilTerent  shades  of  colour,  from  a grey,  or  yellowish  white,  almost  to  a 
black.  Its  suriace  is  naturally  smooth  and  even  between  the  holes ; when  fresh  broken,  it  is  somewhat 
bright  and  glossy,  but  when  powdered,  it  is  of  a browner  colour;  its  taste  is  acrid,  nauseous,  and  somewhat 
bitter,  accompanied  with  a faint  disagreeable  smell.  Smyrna  Scammony  is  in  compact  ponderous  pieces, 
of  a black  colour,  harder,  of  a stronger  smell  and  taste  than  the  other  kind,  and  full  of  impurities. 

The  former  sort  is  sometimes  to  be  procured  in  Persia  and  in  India.  It  should  be  chosen  so  as  easily 
to  crumble  betwt‘en  the  fingers,  being  glossy  when  fresh  broken,  of  a grey  colour,  which  becomes  of  a 
whitish  yellow,  when  touched  with  a wet  finger;  and  when  dissolved  in  proof  spirit,  it  should  leave  no 
dregs.  With  water  it  should  form,  a greenish  milky  fluid.  Reject  that  which  is  black,  solid,  or  impure. 

16  cwt.  of  Scammony  is  aUowed  to  a ton.  The  permanent  duty  is  4«.  per  lb.  and  the  temporaiy  or 
war  duty  Is.  making  in  the  whole  5s.  per  lb. 

WORM  SEED 

Is  a small,  light,  oval  seed,  composed  of  a number  of  thin  membraneous  coats.  It  ia  of  a greenish 
yellow  colour,  with  a cast  of  brown.  These  seeds  easily  crumble,  by  rubbing  between  the  fingers,  into  a 
fine  chaffy  kind  of  substance.  Their  smell  is  of  the  wormwood  kind,  moderately  strong,  and  not  very 
agreeable;  their  taste  is  bitter,  and  somewhat  acrid.  Worm  seed  should  be  chosen  fresh,  inclining  to 
a greenish  colour,  with  a sharp,  bitter,  disagreeable  taste,  and  having  as  small  a mixture  of  stalks  and 
leaves  as  possible.  The  Turkey  or  Aleppo  sort  is  most  esteemed  in  England.  They  are  seldom  brought 
fbotn  India  to  Europe,  but  are  an  article  of  trade  from  Persia  and  Arabia  to  Bombay  and  Surat. 


CHAPTER  XI 


Coasts  of  Persia,  Scindy,  and  Guzzerat. 


Co(ut  of  Peraia^^asqueo^Posmeo^Chewabad-^GutterBay-^Guadcl-^Sommcany^Coast  of  Scindy^Croichy ; 
IMacription^Importi  and  Exporta^Dutiea^Provmom  and  Rtfreshntnts — River  Sandy ^ or  Indus^ 
JLsurUMndieT^J^Oif^t^Aurungab^  Weights^  and  Measurcs-^^Imports  and  JExports-^Dutics, 

, 4^.^7Vw2e  betw^  the  British  Settlements  and  the  Coasts  of  Sandy  and  Culch — Gulf  of  Cutch 

Descriptiojs^CoijtSy  Weights^  and  Measures^-^Imports  and  Exports — Pronsions  and  Refresh^ 
pMo*^BaiO‘^igat^Go(mJUe--^oastofGuzz€rat~^Diu;  Description^Nowahunder^RadJapore-^^aJfre-^ 
iat^Searbetl  Istandr'^oaptiaiU  Point^Gogo;  Descriptwnr^Provisions  and  Refreshments. 


THE  Coast  of  Persia  extends  from  the  Gulf  to  Cape  Monze,  having  the  following  towns— Jasques, 
Posmee,  Chewabad,  Gutter  Bay,  Guade),  Sommeany,  and  many  smaller. 

JASQUES, 

• TWf  town  is  situated  at  tlie  bottom  of  a bay,  formed  by  Cape  Jasques  to  the  westward,  and  a low 
|iQi^  to  the  eastward,  where  vessels  may  lie  secure  from  all  but  southerly  winds ; near  the  town  is  a 
liveri  on  which  there  is  a bar,  over  wliich  vessels  dxawing  less  than  10  feet  water  may  go,  and  lie 
]|[i]|d4ocked  along  side  the  shore.  Jasques,  at  the  early  period  of  the  Company’s  trade  to  India,  was  the 
j^Mort  pf  their  ships  trading  to  Persia.  In  1618  they  obtained  permission  to  build  a fort,  and  had  libeity 
of  ffitpOft  ftftd  import  trade  of  all  kinds  of  goods,  without  payment  of  duties  or  customs. 

POSMEE. 

This  town  is  situated  at  the  bottom  of  a small  bay,  formed  by  Cape  Posmee,  in  latitude  about  25'’  l(r 
and  longitude  59®  5 East.  It  is  small,  and  chiefly  inhabited  by  fishermen,  who  arc  very  civil  to 
tbrangers.  Caravans  from  the  interior  come  down  here  to  barter  their  commodities,  consisting  chiefly  of 
^iUtes,  dried  hides,  and  cotton,  for  salt  fish,  &c.  which  they  carry  up  the  country.  Small  coasting  vessels 
^Bkewise  call  in  here,  and  dispose  of  their  goods,  consisting  of  ghee,  rice,  &c.  Their  mannci  of  trai  c is, 
triieii  they  arrive  at  a town,  where  there  is  a probabUity  of  selling  any  thing,  to  go  on  shore,  ^ 
and  retail  their  goods,  taking  in  return,  hides,  cotton,  &c.  and  then  proceed  to  the  next  town.  a cr  is 

^attd  d^ar;  Fish  are  in  abundaopa^^';  ~ 


144  CHEWABAD— GUTTER  BAY— 6UADEL. 


CHEWABAD, 

• * » ‘ 

Or  Churbar  Bay,  is  one  of  the  best  on  theicdist,  and  is  in  latitude  about  15'  North;  the  en* 
trance  is  between  the  head-land,  called  Colab,  on  the  west  side,  and  Churbar  low  point  to 'the  eastward, 
liaving  ov^r  it  a wliite  tomb  and  some  trees. , The  to.wn  is*  inside  the  low  point,  where  ships  may  anchor 
in  4 or  5 fathoms.  Here  is  a small  mud  fort,  but  no  cannon;  and  the  town  is  composed  of  straggling 
mat  houses.  There  are  about  100  Banians  settled  in  the  place,  who  have  a small  bazar;  and  many  weavers, 
who  manufacture  coarse  check  piece-goods,  and  some  carpets.  A trade  is  carried  on  here  in  horses,  the 
breed  of  which  is  very  good,  and  camels,  for  which  they  receive  inlretuj’n,  rice,  ghee,  and  other  articles  of 
food.  The  Portuguese  once  had  a small  settlement  in  this  bay,  the  , remains  of  the  town  being  still  visiUe, 
Goats  and  sheep  are  to  be  had  at  a moderate  price;  but  neither  bullocks  nor  fowls  can  be  got;  there 
are  some  small  gardens,  which  prdduce  vegetables  of  various  kinds.  The  water  b better  here  t]|^n  at  any 
other  place  on  the  coast,  and  easily  procured,  being  very  near  the  shore. 


- GUTTER  BAY. 

Noa  Point,  the  eastern  extreme  of  this  bay,  is  in  latitude  26^  3'  North,  and  longitude  about  5 
East.'  At  the  bottom  of  the  bay  is  situated  the  town,  which  is  small,  and  chiefly  inhabited  by  fishermen; 
In  crossing  the  bay  from  Noa  Point,  a small  hill  is  seen  on  tlie  opposite  shore,  near  which  is  in  island,  at 
the  mouth  of  a small  bay,  called  by  the  natives,  Bucker  Bunder,  where  they  go  to  fish.  This  is  sidd  to  be 
one  of  the  places  where  the  pirate  vessels  from  Gnzzerat  lie  in  the  fair  Weather  season,  on  purpose  to  plun- 
der the  dingies,  and  other  small  vessels  which  trade  on  this  coast.  These  pirate  gallivats  come  firom 
Bate,  Nowabunder,  JafTrebat,  and  other  ports  on  the  Guzzerat  Coast.  They  rove  along  the  coasts 
of  Scihdy  and  Persia,  and  about  the  entrance  of  the  Persian  Gulf,  boarding  and  plundering  every  small 
vessel  they  can  master.  Recently  Uiey  have  been  successful  in  getting  possession  of  several  brigs  trading 
from  Bombay  to  the  Persian  Gulf,  and  have  treated  their  commanders  and  crews  with  great  cruelty. 


GTTAnKT., 


Cape  Guadel,  in  latitude  about  4'  North,  and  longitude  63<’  12'  East,  is  a peninsula  of  moderate 
height,  joined  to  the  main  by  a neck  of  land,  about  half  a mile  over.  A wall  fortified  with  towers  ibr- 
merly  extended  across  the  isthmus,  from  one  bay  to  the  other,  to  protect  the  town  from  assaults  by 
the  ruins  of  which,  also  some  wells,  and  a town  built  with  stone,  are  to  be  seen;  but  the  few  inh^itants 
now  live  in  a town  composed  of  mat  houses,  situated  close  under  the  north  side  of  the  Ciqpe.  The  principal 
part  of  them  are  weavers;  they  manufacture  such  cloths  as  serve  their  own  markets,  which  are  dark  chedii, 
and  very  narrow,  and  some  plain  carpets  of  different  colours,  but  not  rough.  They  say  there  are  several  large 
towns  in  the  country,  and  one  situated  between  Posmee  and  Guadel;  but  the  principal  town  of  which  they 
speak  most,  is  Lahore,  from  whence  they  are  supplied  with  curious  matchlocks,  of  inlaid  work,  and  fd- 
mitars,  which  are  for  the  most  part  watered  alter  the  manner  of  the  Damascus  blades.  From  Cape 
Jasques  to  this  place,  the  people  call  themselves  Brodies,  and  from  hence  to  Crotchey,  Ubiej  take  the  iMyne 
of  Blochees.  There  is  some  difference  in  their  language,  and  perhaps  ia  their  refigion,  though  none  is.  to 
be  observed  in  their  dress.or  manners. 


PROVISIONS  AND  REFRESHMENTS. 

A few  goats,  aheep,  andfowls  may  be  purchased,  but  are  dear.  The  best 
tn  the  sand;  that  whidi  is  procured  from  the  wdditlidlliillDwib  bebg  rather  Mckiitu 


SOMMEANY— CROTCHEY. 


145 


SOMMEANY 

Is  a smdl  town,  situated  Inside  the  entrance  9!’  a river,  in  latitude  about  25®  30  North,  and  longitude 
67®  25'  East.  It  has  a mud  fort  which  is  in  ruins.  The  liiits^coinjwsing  the  town  are  con-ti  u(  ted  of  poles 
and  mats;  the  townjs  scarcely  discernible  from  the  road;  Uie  best  mark  for  finding  it,  is  a remarkable  gap 
In  the  high  land  at  the  back  of  it,  which  in  clear  weather  cannot  escape  notice.  When  it  bears  N.  N.  E. E, 
the  river’s  mouth  is  N.  E.  by  E.  distant  about  2 miles,  in  4 fatlioms  water. 

Every  article  of  refreshment  is  very  scarce;  even  the  water,  which  is  indlfrerent,  cannot  be  pro- 
cured in  sufficient  quantity,  nor  without  considerable  trouble:  it  is  got  by  iligging  holes  .'i  or  (5  feet  deep, 
and  as  much  in  diameter,  near  the  town,  which  formerly  appears  to  have  been  a swamp : il'  the  water  oozes 
through  the  sand,  which  docs  not  always  hup])en,  it  serves  them  that  day,  and  perhaps  the  next,  but  soon 
becomes  quite  brackish,  owing  to  the  nitrous  quality  of  the  earth. 

The  Coast  of  Scindy  extends  from  Cape  Monze  to  the  Gulf  of  Cutcb,  a distance  of  about  80  leagues; 
it  receives  its  nanie  from  the  River  Scindy  or  Indus,  which  disembogues  itself  into  the  sea,  by  many 
branches  extending  along  tlie  coast.  The  principal  place  of  trade  between  Cape  Monze  and  the  Indus,  is 

CROTCHEY, 

Which  is  known  by  several  small  islands  to  the  northward,  and  by  a w bite  tomb,  or  pagoda,  built  on  a 
promontory,  which  bounds  tlie  west  side  of  the  harbour,  and  atadistanceappe.arslike  an  island;  Iheenliance  into 
the  bay  is  between  the  promontory  and  the  largest  island.  To  anchor  in  the  road  outside,  the  tomb  should 
^ brought  to  bear  N.  W.  by  N.  to  avoid  some  foul  ground.  The  town  of  Crotchey  is  about  (>  miles  from 
the  anchorage,  near  a mile  from  the  side  of  a small  creek,  which  con  admit  only  small  boats,  and  is  in 
latitude  about  24°  46  North.  The  fort  is  about  a mile  round,  constructed  of  mud;  the  streets  ore  very 
narrow  and  dirty,  abounding  with  filth  of  all  kinds,  which  makes  the  place  very  unhealthy;  the  houses  are 
of  the  simplest  structure,  and  merely  calculated  to  shelter  their  tenants  iVom  the  sun;  the  walls  are  of  mud 
and  straw,  mixed  into  a paste,  and  the  roofs  which  are  flat,  are  covered  with  the  same  materials.  Of  tim- 
ber, the  country  is  entirely  destitute ; what  is  required  for  building  houses  and  boats,  is  brought  from  Ma- 
labar and  Bombay.  This  town  formerly  belonged  to  the  Bloachcs ; but  the  Prince  of  Scindy,  finding  it 
more  convenient  than  any  part  of  his  sea  coast,  for  the  caravans  from  the  inland  countries,  made  an  ex- 
change with  some  other  place  for  it.  It  seems  the  caravans  cannot  come  from  tiie  interior  to  Tatta  as  for- 
merly,  on  account  of  the  branches  of  the  Indus  being  so  wide  and  deep,  as  to  render  it  impossible  for  ca- 
mds  to  pass;  but  hairing  no  such  difficulty  in  the  road  to  Crotchey,  the  trade  is  much  increased,  and  con- 
tinues to  flourish.  The  population  of  Crotchey  is  estimated  at  10,000  souls ; the  men  are  chiefly  merchants 
and  mechanics,  who  carry  on  a considerable  trade  to  Muscat,  Surat,  Bombay,  and  the  Malabar  Coast; 
there  is  also  a very  large  inland  traffic  by  camels  to  Candahar  and  CabuL 

IMPORTS  AND  EXPORTS. 

From  Surat,  Bombay,  Muscat,  and  the  Coast  of  Malabar,  are  imported  the  following  articles : 


Beetle  nut 

Cassia  l^gnea. 

Nutmegs. 

Sandal  wood. 

Cardamums. 

Copper. 

Pepper. 

Safiron. 

Cochineal 

Iron,  in  bars. 

Piece  goods. 

Tin. 

Cloves. 

Ironmongery.  ’ 

Rice. 

Tutenague. 

Cloths. 

Lead. 

Sapan  wood. 

Timber. 

China  ware. 

Looking  glasses. 

Sugar. 

Vermilion. 

And  by  the  caravans  from  Cabul  and  Candahar  are  brought,  almonds,  cummin  seeds,  dates,  ghee, 
grain,  hides,  oil,  piece-goods. 

The  exports  consist  of  the  above-enumerated  arBdes,  and  cotton,  which  are  generally  sent  to  Bombay. 

U 


146 


BIVKU  INDUS.  OR  SCINDY— LARIBUNDER-TATl'A. 


DUTIES. 

The  revenue  arising  from  the  ciifjtoms  is  stated  to  amount  to  1,25,000  inipees  per  annum.  This  is  to 
be  understood  to  relate  only  to  the  period  since  the  trade  of  Ijaribunder  has  been  obstructed:  how  the  duties 
are  levied,  is  not  generally  known. 

PROVISIONS  AND  REFRESHMENTS. 

Black  cattle,  sheep,  and  goats  are  to  be  had,  but  not  reasonable.  The  necessaries  of  life  are,  how* 
ever,  plentiful  and  cheap,  and  the  country  abounds  with  wild  geese,  ducks,  teal,  partridges,  snipes,  hares, 
and  deer.  Poultry  is  plentiful.  Little  or  no  regard  is  paid  to  vegetables  here;  excepting  a few  spots  in 
the  neighbourhood  of  the  town,  which  produce  a small  quantity  of  carrots,  radishes,  and  a few  other 
roots,  there  is  nothing  of  the  kind  for  40  miles  mund.  The  water  is  very  indifferent,  and  in  consequence 
of  the  distance  from  the  harbour,  the  expence  of  shipping  it  is  considerable. 

RIVER  INDUS,  OR  SCINDY. 

The  different  branches  of  this  celebrated  river  occupy  a space  of  near  SO  leagues  of  sea  coast,  but, 
being  seldom  visited  by  Europeans,  is  but  indifferently  known.  About  170  miles  from  tliesea,  by  the  course 
of  the  river,  the  Indus  divides  itself  into  two  branches,  of  which  the  northernmost  is  the  largest.  This  is 
commonly  called  liaribunder.  After  a course  of  about  60  miles,  it  branches  off  into  two  more,  the  smallest 
of  which  is  called  Darraway,  and  the  largest,  taking  the  name  of  Ritchel  River,  runs  in  a more  southerly 
course  to  a small  village  of  that  name  on  the  sea  coast.  The  other  principal  branch,  which,  as  before  stated, 
separates  about  170  miles  from  the  sea,  is  smaller  than  the  other,  and  at  some  distance  from  the  sea,  di- 
vides mto  several  branches,  the  pruicipal  of  which  are  Aurungabunder  and  Warrell. 

LARIBUNDER. 

This  is  commonly  called  Scindy  River,  being  the  principal  branch  of  the  Indus,  having  15  feet  water 
on  the  bar,  and  6 or  7 fathoms  inside;  it  is  situated  in  latitude  about  24*^  30  North,  having  a pagoda  on 
the  western  side  of  its  entrance.  The  town  of  Laribunder  is  about  5 leagues  from  the  sea,  and  vessels  of 
SOO  tons  used  to  proceed  up  to  it;  but  of  late  years  the  navigation  is  much  obstructed  by  shoab.  The 
town  contains  about  100  houses,  chiefly  built  of  bamboos  and  mats,  with  a small  mud  fort,  having  4 or  $ 
guns  mounted  to  protect  it  from  robbers.  About  50  miles  farther  up  the  river  stands 

TATTA, 

The  capital  of  the  province.  The  town  was  formerly  very  large,  about  3 miles  long  and  1|  broad, 
fcttving  at  its  western  extremity  a large  castle,  containing  the  residence  of  the  Nabob,  and  barracks  for  a 
lai-ge  army;  it  stands  about  2 miles  from  the  river  side,  from  whence  it  has  canals  cut,  to  convey  vessels 
and  merchandise  to  it.  The  river  hereabouts  is  a mile  broad,  having  S and  6 fathoms  water  in  the  channel, 
nnd  is  navigable  by  small  Vessels  an  immense  distance  up  the  country.  The  Portuguese,  under  Baretto  in 
1555,  having  received  some  provocation  from  the  King  of  Scindy,  attacked  the  place,  put  upwards  of  8,000 
persons  to  the  sword,  then  burnt  the  town,  and  with  it  great  riches:  notwithstanding  this,  the  plunder 
was  immense,  all  of  which  was  afterwards  lost  in  a storm.  In  1635  the  English  formed  a factory  here, 
with  a view  to  the  disposal  of  woollens  and  other  goods ; but  it  was  withdrawn  in  about  20  yeaw,  not 
answering  the  purpose  intended.  A considerable  trade  is  earned  on  with  the  6ul6  of  Persia  and  Arabia, 
Qombay  and  Surat,  by  both  of  the  princq)al  branches  of  the  river. 


AtJRUNGABUNDEn. 


UT 


ATTRUNG  ABUNDER,  called  also  Darah,  is  in  latitude  about  23®  50  North,  and  has  a wide  entrance^ 
abreast  of  which  ships  anchor,  but  shoal  water  is  found  on  the  banks  near  its  mouth.  It  is  navigable  for 
boats  of  burthen,  and  a considerable  trade  is  carried  on  with  Tatta,  from  whence  it  is  distant  about  50  miles^ 
by  the  course  of  the  Indus.  Vessels  from  Surat,  Bombay,  and  other  parts  of  India  frccpient  this  place. 

COINS,  WEIGHTS,  and  MEASURES. 


Accounts  are  kept  in  rupees,  carivals,  and  pice,  12  pice  making  1 carival,  50  carivals  1 rupee.  Cow- 
ries are  current  in  Scindy— 48  cowries  1 picc. 


The  exchange  between  Tatta  and  Aurungabunder  is  2}  percent. 

The  weights  and  measures  are  as  follow: 

8M.\LL  WEIUUTS. 

LONG  MEASURE. 

24  Moons 

1 Ruttee. 

1 1 Garce 

'I  f 2 Inches. 

y make  A , 

) 11  (jllZ. 

6 Ruttees 

[.  make  ) 

1 Massa. 

1 1 6 Garccs 

12  Massas 

) ( 

1 Tolalu 

but  1 Guz  is  34  inches  in  cloth  at  Tuttu. 

CROSS  WEIGHTS. 

(illAIN  MiiASUHi;. 

4 Picc 

) f 

I Amin. 

4 Puttoes 

^ f 1 Twier. 

16  Annas 

f make  i 

1 Pucca  seer. 

4 Twiers 

V make  -J  1 Cossa. 

40  Seers 

J i 

1 Maund. 

60  Cossas 

J V I Carval  of  wlieat. 

which  is  equal  to  74  lbs.  5oz.  7dwts. 

avoirdupois. 

which  is  22  pucca  mauiids,  or  21  Bombay  paruhs. 

Diamonds  and  pearls  are  sold  by  hubbas  and  ruttecs— 8 bubbas  equal  to  1 ruttee,  about  2grs.  troy  ^ 

IMPORTS  ANJ)  EXPORTS. 

Prom  Bombay  and  other  parts  of  tlie  British  dominions  are  imported  the  following  commodities. 


Copper. 

Coarse  cutlery. 

Nutmegs. 

Sugar. 

Cochineal. 

Glass  ware. 

Piece  goods. 

Steel. 

Cardamums* 

Ironmongery. 

Pepper. 

Tutenague. 

Cassia. 

Iron. 

Raw  silk. 

Treasure. 

and  a few  other  articles,  principally  the  produce  and  manufacture  of  India  and  China. 

The  principal  article  of  export  is  cotton,  which  with  drugs,  grain,  sliawls,  gbcc,  oil,  sharks’  fins, 
and  cattle  for  the  Company’s  marine,  form  the  returning  cargoes  to  British  India. 

DUTIES,  PRESENTS,  &c. 

The  import  duties  are  2 per  cent.  The  following  is  a list  of  charges  on  a vessel  sent  from  Bombay 
with  a cargo  consisting  of  the  articles  above  enumerated,  the  value  of  which  amounted  to  about  60,000  rupees. 

Boat-hire  from  the  Bunder  to  Tatta  wiili  cargo,  each  boat  ^ Rupees  L!> 

Anchorage  on  coming  over  the  bar  25 

Presents  to  the  Shabundar" s deputy  in  money  and  goods  42 

Ditto  ««««^«>%%Mweighennan  ^w^^Jn  ditto  28 

Ditto  •%%«%«%%%vv.^custom-house  writers  and  servants 
Sundry  petty  officers  under  government,  in  money  and  goods  17 

The  above,  with  various  presents  of  glass  ware,  muslins,  cloth,  telescopes,  &c.  to  the  various  people 
in  office>  amounted  to  upwards  of  2,400  Bombay  rupees. 

TT  O 


148 


COMMERCE  WITH  THE  BRITISH  SETTLEMENTS. 


The  following  is  a statement  of  the  commerce  carried  on  between  the  British  settlements  in  India,  and 
the  Coast  of  Scindy  and  Cutch,  for  5 years,  1802  to  1806  inclusive,  together  with  the  articles  of  which 
the  imports  and  exports  consisted  in  1805,  and  their  amount. 


IMPORTS  FROM  THF.  BRITISH  8F.TTI,EMENT.S. 


y cars. 

Mcrchan.lise. 

Treasure. 

Total. 

Sicca  Rupees. 

Sicca  Rupees. 

Sicca  Rupees. 

1802 

12,60,957 

2,!^8,0(J3 

14,88,960 

1803 

7,84,418 

68,084 

8,42,502 

1804 

12,a3,661 

3,75,038 

16,58,699 

1805 

14,37,568 

2,.5(),371 

16,87,939 

1806 

16,74,495 

1,9.3,405 

18,67,900 

Total. 

64,41,099 

11,04,901 

75,46;00() 

EXPORTS  TO  THE  BRITISH  SETTLEMENTS. 


Years. 

Merchandise. 

Treasure. 

Total. 

Sicca  Rupees. 

Sicca  Rupee.*!. 

Sicca  Kii|iee$. 

1802 

1803 

1804 
1803 
1806 

13,76,568 

13,99,4J16 

29,68,1.55 

26,46,191 

27,6.3,645 

24,733 

16,686 

27,975 

6*834 

14,01,301"' 

14,16,122 

29,96,130 

26,46,191 

27,70,479 

IIWTWW 

76,228 

Piece-goods. 
Pepper 
Haw  silk 
Sugar  and  Jaggery 
Beetle  nut 
Copper^. 

Cochineal 
Cocoa  nuts 


Articles  of  Import  in  1805. 

Sicca  Rupees 


Coir 

Cardaniumsv 
Drug.s 
Grain 
Iron 
Steel 

Sapun  wood 
Tutenague  ... 
Tin.., 

Spices 
Sundries 
Treasure 


1,17,917 

1,19,723 

1,29,395 

5,45,999 

38,218 

80,037 

18,231 

48,355 

30,092 

15,098 

47.431 

54,143 

24,302 

23,518 

11,554 

16,636 

19,365 

15,914 

81,640 

2,50,371 


Imports  from  India,  Sicca  Rupees  16,87,9.39 


Cottnn« 

6hee 


Articles  of  Export  in  1805. 

. Sicca  Rupees 


Grain  v% 

Oil 

Piece-goods 
Seeds 
Kismisses 
Indigo  ...... 

Sharks"  fins 
Shawls 
Drugs. 
Sundries 


15,85,620 

4,40,709 

2,67,644 

45,477 

64,798 

59,853 

29,791 

12,476 

8,609 

11,356 

32,655 

97,303 


Exports  to  India,  Sicca  Rupees  26,46,191 


Merchandise  imported  into  Scindy  and  Cutch,  from  the  British  Settlements, 

in  India,  in  five  years Sicca  Rupeel  64,41,099 

Ditto,  exported  from  ditto  to  ditto., nn-nnir mnuL-  111  53  995 

Exprts  of  merchandise  exceed  the  imports  by  Sicca  Rupees  47,12,896 

Treasure  imported  into  Scindy  and  Cutch  Sicca  Rupees  11,04,901 

Ditto,  exported  from  ditto 76,228 

— * ■ 10,28,673 

Balance  tnjitvouf  of  Scwdy  and  Cutch»,»%»»,..%>^<<»»,»%»<»»v%»v>%»»Sicc8  Rupees  57,41,569 


MUDDI. 


U9 

The  Gulf  of  Cutch  extends  a considerable  distance  to  the  eastward,  at  the  head  of  which  is  a low 
barren  trwk,  annually  overflowed  by  the  sea  during  tlie  monsoon,  and  Is  said  at  certain  seasons  to  commu- 
nicate  with  the  river  Ran  in  the  Gulf  of  Cambay,  thereby  making  what  is  commonly  called  the  iieiiin- 
sula  of  Guzzerat  an  bland.  The  Gulf  is  formed  by  the  coast  of  Cutch  to  the  northward,  and  that  of 
Guzzerat  to  the  southward ; it  contains  numerous  shoals,  and  being  but  little  frequented  by  Europeans,  is 
but  imperfectly  known.  The  principal  place  of  trade  is 

MUDDI, 

Or  Musker  Maundvee:  tliis  is  Uie  great  port  of  Cutch,  and  is  situated  in  latitude  22»  .'iO  North,  and 
longitude  69°  25'  East.  The  cajiital,  called  Bhooj,  is  about  25  miles  to  tlie  N.  W.  Muddi  is  large,  and 
strongly  fortified;  the  houses  are  indiflerent,  being  principally  of  mats  and  bamboos.  Eight  miles  to  the 
northward  is  a pagoda,  called  Assara,  from  a town  of  that  name  in  its  vicinity.  Off  this  pagoda,  and  a small 
way  to  the  westward  of  it,  there  are  rocks  near  the  shore  above  water,  which  seem  to  be  the  tennination  of 
the  broken  and  bad  ground  in  that  direction.  All  to  the  eastward,  and  as  far  to  the  southward  as  22^  40' 
North,  is  foul  ground,  and  irregular  soundings;  and  the  natives  in  their  accounts  agree  with  all  the  charts  ex- 
tant, in  describing  the  Gulf  quite  across  to  the  other  coast,  to  be  replete  with  shoals  both  of  sand  and  rocks. 
A vessel  bound  to  Muddi  from  any  quarter  not  in  the  Gulf,  should  be  careful  to  make  tlie  Cutch  coast, 
to  the  westward  of  Assara  pagoda,  and  if  a leading  wind,  keep  along-shore  about  East,  in  8 fathoms; 
and  if  obliged  to  work,  her  tacks  must  be  short,  always  toking  care  to  go  about  as  soon  as  she  shoals  on 
the  oltahore  tack.  Between  Muddi  . and  tlie  opposite  coast  a passage  boat  goes  daily. 

COINS,  WEIGHTS,  and  MEASURES. 

The  only  coin  belonging  to  the  place,  is  of  silver,  called  a cowrie.  The  exchange  varies  from  285  to 
295  cowries  per  100  Bombay,  or  Surat  rupees.  All  Indbn  coins  pass  current  here.  Their  value  fluctu- 
ates according  to  the  quantity  in  the  market. 

The  weights  are  seers  and  maunds,  the  latter  of  two  sorts,  Cutch  and  Pucca. 

2 Pice  ..  Anna 

16  Annas  tmake*!  ^ Cutch  Seer 

40  Seers  J (.1  Cutch  Maund,  avoidupois  37 1 lbs. 

The  Pucca  maund  is  2 Cutch  maunds,  and  20  Cutch  maunds  are  equal  to  1 Surat  candy. 

The  measures  are  the  grab  and  the  guz,  16  grabs  making  1 guz,  about  .34'  English  inches.  Broad 
cloth,  velvets,  silks,  &c.  are  sold  by  this  measure,  though  the  shopkeepers  in  the  bazar  otien  sell  by  hand, 
firoin  the  finger's  end  to  the  elbow,  &c.  This  is  rejected  by  the  merchants. 

IMPORTS  AND  EXPORTS. 

A considerable  commerce  is  carried  on  between  this  place  and  the  British  settlements  of  Bombay.  The 
principal  article  of  produce  is  cotton,  which  is  inferior  to  most  of  what  is  grown  in  the  neighbourhood  of 
Surat  and  the  Gulf  of  Cambay.  Many  of  the  principal  Bombay  merchants  have  agents  residing  here  to 
transact  their  business.  Some  trade  is  likewise  carried  on  with  the  Persian  Gulf. 

PROVISIONS  AND  REFRESHMENTS. 

No  animal  food  is  to  be  procured,  but  by  stealth;  and  rice,  &c.  only  in  small  quantities,  which  must 
be  paid  for  as  soon  as  received.  There  is  tolerable  water  to  be  got,  brought  down  by  women  to  the  land- 
ing.place,  at.  the  rate  of  2|  silver  cowries  per  leager. 

The  coast  of  Guszerat,  from  the  h^  of  the  Gulf  of  Cutch  to  the  islands  near  Jigat  Point,  is  but 
little  known. 


150 


BATE— JIGAT— GOOMTEE, 


BATE. 

This  island,  and  that  of  Artura,  are  situated  about  10  miles  N.  E.  from  Jigat  Point,  and  with  tho 
main  form  the  harbour  of  Bate,  which  is  well  sheltered  from  all  winds.  The  entrance  to  it  is  in  latitude 
22°  31'  North,  where  there  is,  directly  to  the  northward  of  Artura,  about  a mile  distant,  the  bar,  having 
on  it  near  high  water,  3|  and  fathoms,  rocky  bottom,  and  outside  of  it,  at  half  a mile  distant,  14  and  l(i^ 
lathoms.  The  island  is  about  five  miles  long  from  N.  E.  to  S.  W.  something  in  the  shape  of  an  S,  with 
the  lower  part  of  it  cut  oiT ; the  fort  is  situated  on  the  west  side  of  the  island,  and  is  a place  of  considerable 
strength.  There  is  no  ditch;  the  gate  is  in  the  north  face;  the  tide  flows  to  within  30  yards  of  the  waUs, 
which  are  about  40  feet  high,  and  appear  well  built  of  stone  and  chunam.  A ship  drawing  17  feet  water^ 
can  get  within  half  a mile  of  it;  but  the  passage  is  narrow  and  dangerous.  The  latitude  of  the  castle  is. 
22®  28  North,  and  longitude  69°  20  East.  The  Rajah  of  Bate,  being  the  most  powerful  in  the  petty 
states  who  fitted  out  vessels  for  piratical  purposes,  and  this  island  being  the  general  rendezvous,  an  expe* 
dition  was  sent  from  Bombay  in  1803  against  it;  they  burnt  about  30  of  the  pirate  vessels,  and  made  an 
attick  on  the  fort,  by  landing  a party  of  men  and  some  guns,  and  by  firing  on  it  from  the  ships;  but 
were  repulsed  with  some  loss.  They  have  several  forts  on  the  main,  particularly  Aramra  and  Pissotra ; 
the  former  about  three  miles  to  the  westward,  and  the  latter  about  five  miles  to  the  S.  E.  of  Bate. 

Bate  produces  cocoa  nuts,  beetle  nut,  and  grain,  but  in  small  quantities,  and  some  trade  is  carried 
on  in  dates,  sugar,  and  rice,  in  dows,  having  tlie  Rajah  of  Bate's  pass. 

JIGAT. 

Jigat  Point  is  in  latitude  22°  15'  North,  and  longitude  69°  East.  On  it  is  a pagoda;  the  place  where 
it  stands,  was  formerly  called  Jigat  More,  but  now  by  the  Hindoos,  Dorecur.  At  a distance  the  pagoda  has 
very  much  the  appearance  of  a ship  under  sail;  it  is  a circular  building,  with  curious  wrought  pillars  on 
the  outside,  which  support  a dome  covering  an  upper  gallery,  immediately  under  which  there  is  a lower 
one,  of  nearly  tlie  same  dimensions;  and  on  the  inland  side  joining  to  it,  a pyramid  rises  on  a base  above  the 
dome,  on  the  top  of  which  they  hoist  a white  flag.  The  whole  is  enclosed  by  a wall  and  bastions,  with  loop- 
holes, to  appearance  without  cannon.  In  the  vicinity  of  it  are  a number  of  small  buildings,  probably 
tombs.  The  wall  of  the  pagoda  extends  to  the  sea-beach,  and  can  be  approached  very  near  by  a vessel,  but 
there  is  no  anchoring  with  safety,  it  being  all  rocky  ground.  Great  numbers  of  pilgrims  from  the  interior 
visit  Jigat  pagoda,  and  are  supplied  witli  necessaries  from  Goomtee  and  Bate.  About  a gun-shot  withiii 
the  pagoda  is 

GOOMTEE. 

The  town  is  strongly  fortified,  and  is  the  place  where  the  principal  persons  reside,  who  used  to  fit  out 
vessels  for  piratical  purposes.  The  Governor  is  a Hindoo,  independent  of  the  Rajah  of  Nagore.  A ship 
can  approach  within  gun-shot  of  this  fort  without  danger.  Near  Goomtee  is  a small  fort,  called  Cutcb 
Ghur,  belonging  to  the  Rajah  of  Bhooj,  and  garrisoned  by  hb  troops,  for  the  purpose  of  claiming  any  pro* 
perty  that  may  be  captured  by  the  pirates  belonging  to  the  Cutch  merchants. 

The  Coast  of  Guzzerat  from  Jigat  Point  to  Din  Head  is  but  little  known  to  Europeans,  being  sel- 
dom frequented,  on  account  of  the  pirates,  who  are  very  numerous  here,  Tke’princijpel  t^ns  are  Poor- 
bunder,  in  latitude  about  21°  40'  North,  and  longHnde  69^45'  East  Novibunder,  in  latitude  about  21°  25" 
North,  and  longitude  70°  T East.  Mangarole,  in  latitude  21°  5'  North,  and  longitude  70^  23  East,  and 
Pattan,  in  latitude  20°  50'  North,  and  longitude  70°  40  East 


DIU. 


l.»l 

DIU  belon^js  to  the  Portuguese.  'This  island  is  about  2 miles  from  Din  IIo.'nl,  the  soutlicni  point  of 
the  coast  of  Guzzerat,  which  is  in  latitude  20^^  42  North,  and  longitude  71- 7 East.  The  channel  bi - 
Iwecn  is  only  navigable  by  fishing  bouts  at  half  tide,  the  westcTii  entrance  having  hut  i or  5 fo(‘t  »at  low 
water  on  the  bar.  This  entrance  is  defended  by  a square  fort.  Diu  Island  is  about  G[  miles  long  from 
East  to  West,  and  IJ  broad  from  North  to  South:  on  the  east  end  of  it  the  castle  and  town  arc  situated. 
It  is  one  of  the  best  built  and  most  strongly  fortified  cities  in  India,  the  castle  having  upwards  of  100 
pieces  of  cannon  mounted,  many  of  which  are  brass : from  the  castle  runs  a wall  w liich  surrounds  the 
whole  town,  having  half-moon  towers  at  equal  distances.  Tlicrc  arc  only  two  gates,  one  of  the  sea,  the 
other  of  the  land,  and  both  are  shut  at  sunset.  The  houses  within  the  walls  are  built  ol’  free-stone,  some 
of  ivhich  are  four  or  live  stories  high,  inhabited  by  Iranians.  U'hereare  also  several  churclies  and  convents. 
The  streets  are  extremely  narrow,  but  kept  very  clean.  The  landing  place  is  at  a flight  of  stone  steps  o|k 
posite  the  custom-house,  at  the  entrance  of  which  are  many  shops  and  warehouses  fur  goods.  On  the  cast 
side  of  the  castle  there  is  water  sufficient  for  a 74  gun  ship  within  500  yards  of  the  walls,  if  she  avoids  a 
rock  above  water,  which  is  joined  to  a line  of  rocks  from  the  shore. 

This  place  was  first  visited  by  the  Portuguese  under  Albucjiierque  in  1509.  It  was  then  described  as 
begirt  with  walls  and  towers,  being  a strong,  beautiful,  well-governed  city,  its  appearance  renewing  in  the 
memory  of  the  Portuguese,  that  of  their  o>vn  country.''  On  their  arrival  they  attacked  the  shipping  in  the 
harbour,  consisting  of  200  sail,  of  which  some  were  sunk,  others  taken,  and  the  rest  fled.  Of  all  the  ships 
that  were  taken  full  of  immense  riche.s,  only  four,  and  two  gallies  w^erc  preserved  ; the  rest  were  plundered 
and  burnt.  Albuquerque  having  settled  an  advantageous  peace,  returned  to  tlie  southward.  In  15Ji  they 
obtained  permission  to  build  a fort,  which  in  forty-nine  days  was  made  so  strong  as  to  resist  the  attempts 
of  the  Prince,  >\1io  repented  of  his  conces.sion.  In  1537  the  King  of  ('ambay,  wanting  to  destroy  the  Por- 
tuguese, made  an  attack  upon  them,  but  lost  his  life  in  the  attempt^  and  Diu  was  surrendered  to  them.  The 
gold  and  silver  found,  did  not  exceed  200,000  pardos,  but  the  quantity  of  ammunition  was  incredible ; 
cind  amongst  the  brass  and  iron  guns  were  several  of  prodigious  size,  one  ot  which  was  s(*nt  to  Por- 
tugal as  a rarity,  and  kept  at  the  Castle  of  St.  Julien,  and  called  the  great  gun  of  Diu.  In  1538  an  at- 
tempt w^as  made  to  regain  possession,  but  without  success;  and  in  151-5  another,  which  met  a like  fafe. 
The  Portuguese  remained  in  quiet  po.ssession  till  about  1670,  when  the  town  was  suq^rised  by  the  Muscat 
Arabs,  who  for  three  days  plundered  the  rich  city  and  churches,  and  loaded  their  \Tssels  with  the  pro])crty, 
which  was  immense.  They  mounted  some  cannon  on  a church,  and  fired  on  the  fort,  but  to  little  pur- 
pose; for  the  Portuguese  in  the  castle  were  forbid  by  the  priests  from  firing  at  the  cliurch,  lest  an  unlucky 
shot  should  sacrilegiously  deface  some  holy  image.  The  Arabs  having  ceased  their  plunder,  became  secure 
«nd  negligent,  upon  which  the  Portuguese  sallied  forth  from  the  castle,  killed  about  a thousand,  and  com- 
pelled the  rest  to  abandon  the  place,  and  retire  to  their  sliips.  Diu  has  never  recovered  this  loss,  having 
been  dwindling  ever  since.  There  are  not  above  200  Portuguese  here ; the  remainder  of  the  inhabitants 
4re  Banians,  Persees,  Moors,  &c.  and  may  be  about  4D,000,  few  of  them  men  ot  large  propeit}  , the 
trade  which  was  formerly  carried  on  here,  having  been,  from  the  conduct  of  the  Portuguese,  removed  to 
Surat  and  the  neighbouring  places:  but  if  the  island  w’ere  in  the  possession  of  any  other  European  poi^er, 
it  w'ould  soon  regain  its  former  importance,  as  from  its  situation  and  security,  it  may  be  considered  the  he.st 
station  for  trade  on  the  western  side  of  the  peninsula  of  India. 

The  market  is  well  supplied  with  vegetables,  which  come  from  the  main.  Fish  and  fowls  aie  very 
plentiful ; the  latter  are  dearer  here  than  at  Dumaun,  but  cheaiier  than  at  any  of  the  English  ports.  Beef 
they  are  obliged  to  procure  in  a clandestine  manner,  and  kill  it  witliin  the  castle,  on  account  of  the  pirn- 
cipal  merchants  being  Hindoos,  whose  friendship  is  of  the  utmost  impoilance  to  tlie  place,  as  the  revenues 
of  the  custom-house  are  the  only  support  of  the  garrbon.  Most  of  the  water  on  the  island  is  biac  is  i » 
that  which  is  for  use,  is  kept  in  large  reservoirs,  and  will  last  the  garrison  and  shipping  fiom  ^a.son  to 
season.  It  is  all  rain  water,  conveyed  to  the  wharf  in  a channel,  and  delivered  by  a eoc  to  l le  oat-*. 


162  NOWABUNDER~RADJAPORE.-^AFFREBAT— SEARBETT  ISLAND,  kc. 


NOWABUNDER. 

About  6 miles  East  of  Diu  Is  a nest  of  Pirates.  These  thieves  are  nearly  on  the  same  tenns  with  the 
Portuguese  as  the  Malwan  pirates  are  with  the  English,  passing  all  boats  under  their  colours ; but 
those  of  other  nations  are  seldom  spared  if  the  pirates  get  the  upper  hand.  They  have  a small  creek  pro^ 
tected  by  a little  fort,  into  which  their  vessels  are  hauled,  many  of  which  are  always  kept  ready  for  sea. 

RADJAPORE. 

This  place  is  in  latitude  about  20o  45'  North,  and  longitude  71®  SO  East.  There  is  a small  fort  upon 
a point  greatly  elevated ; and  they  generally  fire  upon  any  vessel  that  comes  within  the  reach  of  their  shot. 
Round  this  point  is  a small  creek,  where  their  gallivats  lie.  They  are  arrant  thieves  from  this  place,  and 
pay  no  respect  to  any  colours,  taking  all  by  whom  they  can  gain  any  advantage ; but  their  cowardly  dis- 
position is  against  their  profession ; for  the  flash  of  a musket,  or  a red  jacket  or  two  will  intimidate  them. 

JAFFREBAT. 

Next  to  Diu,  this  is  the  principal  place  for  trade  in  Guzzerat.  It  is  in  latitude  20®  52'  North,  and 
longitude  71®  38  East,  and  about  6 miles  to  the  westward  of  Searbett  Island.  It  has  the  best  river  on  this 
coast,  owing  to  its  easy  entrance,  having  no  bar.  It  is  shallow,  but  vessels  will  receive  no  damage  by  lying 
in  the  soft  mud  at  low  water,  as  they  are  well  sheltered  from  all  winds*  This  town  belongs  to  the  Siddee 
of  Radjapore,  who  is  at  war  with  the  Sanganians  and  Arabs,  and  has  several  vessels  at  sea  in  the  fair  weather 
season.  It  is  defended  by  a wall  all  round,  but  it  has  not  any  guns  mounted.  The  Governor  is  said  to  be- 
have civilly  to  the  English,  who  occasionally  visit  this  place. 

SEARBETT  ISLAND. 

The  centre  of  this  island  is  in  latitude  20®  55'  North,  and  longitude  71®  40'  East.  Its  form  is  that 
of  an  irregular  triangle.  It  affords  shelter  to  vessels  against  both  monsoons.  The  village  is  on  the  north 
side  of  the  island,  consisting  of  thirty  or  forty  houses,  built  of  stone,  and  thatched  with  straw.  The  inha- 
bitants arc  about  200  in  number,  including  women  and  children.  The  greater  part  of  the  island  is  laid  out 
in  fields  of  Badjeree  grain,  the  rearing  of  which  is  the  chief  employment  of  the  people.  They  have  several 
wells  of  excellent  water,  which  seem  to  have  been  the  work  of  the  Portuguese,  as  they  are  regularly  built 
of  cut  stone.  The  ruins  of  some  old  walls  of  good  masonry  arc  still  to  be  seen. 

This  island  is  the  receptacle  of  all  the  pirates  on  the  coast,  and  here  they  are  supplied  with  grain  and 
water,  being  always  ready  to  put  to  sea  whenever  they  find  it  seasonable.  These  pirates  always  give  a part 
of  every  thing  they  take  as  a tribute ; and  the  colours  of  all  the  vessels  taken  are  placed  over,  the  tomb  of  a 
Mahometan  saint,  called  Sallee  Pier,  who  was  interred  on  the  east  neck  of  tlie  island.  He  has  also  some  rela- 
tion on  the  island,  who  is  allowed  a few  of  the  fiags;  and  there  arc  two  men  appointed  to  watch  them. 

The  island  is  subject  to  the  Siddee  of  Radjapore,  and  pays  him  a small  acknowledgment  annually.  The  * 
inhabitants  are  chiefly  of  the  Gentoo  persuasion ; but  they  pay  that  respect  to  the  Mahometan  Pier  * 
merely  out  of  compliment  to  the  Siddee.  The  island  has  very  few  animals  upon  it. 

GOAPNAUT  POINT 

Is  in  latitude  21®  12  North,  and  is  so  called  by  the  Gentoos,  in  consequence  of  a famous  place  of 
worship  that  is  built  here,  dedicated  to  their  god,  Goapnaut.  This  building  is  said  to  be  of  mud,  but  it 
has  the  appearance  of  a fortification,  with  a very  high  flagstaff  to  it,  and  the  priests  who  attend  here, 
keep  a flag  constantly  flying.  It  lias  a few  thick  bushy  trees  about  it,  forming  a neat  regular  grove. 
This  point  may  be  seen  5 or  6 leagues  in  clear  weather,  and  has  a dangerous  shoal  projecting  near  fbur 
miles  from  it  to  the  eastward. 


GOGO. 


a,u 

GOGO  is  7 miles  to  the  N.  W.  of  the  small  island  of  Peram,  and  is  la  latitude  21*^  4<r  Nortli^  and  longi- 
tude 72*^  23'  Bast.  It  is  a place  of  some  trade,  and  has  fortifications  sulhelcntly  ^rong  to  resist  any 
attack  from  the  neighbouring  pirates.  The  houses  ore  mostly  built  of  stone,  unil  there  being  many  old 
erections,  a jierson  wanting  to  build,  purchases  three  or  four  of  tliem,  on  purpose  to  have  the  stones  for  his 
house.  Most  of  them  are  two  stories  high,  but  very  dose  and  badly  planned  for  a hot  climate;  they  are 
generally  tiled,  and  form  a Tery  pleasant  prospect  from  the  road  whei-e  the  small  vessels  anchor,  which' 
if  in  about  3 fathoms,  directly  abreast  of  the  town,  tlie  pagoda  on  Peram  In'oring  S.  S.  Iv 

Gogo  is  chiefly  inhabited  by  Lascars,  whose  numlicr  is  computed  to  l>e  about  2,000,  fit  for  sea/ 
when  all  present,  which  seldom  or  never  is  the  case.  These  people,  when  on  board  BnghMi  vessels,  arc  tho* 
most  active  and  best  seamen  in  India;  they  are  likewise  |>ossessed  of  a spirit  ot'  liravery,  scarce  to  bo 
equalled  in  any  of  the  other  native  tribes ; and  will,  when  practised,  exercise  a great  gun  as  skilfully’ 
an  European.  When  they  arc  at  home,  they  parade  about  in  their  best  apjwrel  and  swords,  and 
will  scorn  to  do  any  work,  until  they  have  s|)cnt  all  the  money  of  th(i  last  voyage;  when  that  is  gone,  they 
cliecrfully  return  to  sea,  leaving  part  of  their  impress,  or  advance,  1>eliind  them,  for  the  use  of  their  rela^ 
lions,  as  it  is  customary  to  pay  them  four  or  six  months  wages  in  advance : they  nre  then  hound  for  the' 
voyage  or  season.  The  serang,  or  boatswain,  is  generally  the  bondsman  to  the  commander  for  all  his 
people.  It  is  remarked  that  they  seldom  quarrel  iimong  themselves;  they  arc  exceedingly  quiet  on  board, 
and  obedient  to  their  commancling  officers;  they  never  drink  liquors,  but  will  at  time's  intoxicate  them- 
selves with  opium,  wliich  they  smoke  with  tobacco.  They  are  strict  Mahometans,  Small  vessels  from 
SO  to  250  tons  burthen  are  built  here,  and  ships  may  have  any  damage  repaux'd  with  case  aiul  expedition,- 
and  receive  a suj)ply  of  necessary  stores. 

The  Portuguese  plundered  and  burnt  this  town  in  1531,  and  again  in  151fi,  when  it  was  just 
emerging  from  the  former  ruins. 

The  greater  part  of  the  cotton  grown  in  this  neighbourhood,  and  Bownaghur,  is  shqiped  from  hence 
to  Bombay;  and  the  vessels  bring  in  return,  various  articles  of  European,  East  Indian,  and  China  produce, 

PROVISIONS  AND  REFRESHMENTS. 

The  market  is  but  poorly  supplied;  vegetables  are  scarce,  though  there  are  a number  of  Baniajis  who 
fjibsist  on  nothing  else.  Fish  is  not  to  be  had  at  any  rate,  except  a few  mud  w ornis,  called  by  the  natives, 
newtee.  Mutton  is  seldom  killed,  because  uo  one  can  afford  to  purchase  it,  but  on  tlieir  great  feast  days. 
Beef  is  never  killed  for  tlie  same  reasons,  and  to  ol)lige  the  Bramin  and  Hindoo  merchants  who  reside  here. 
They  are  badly  off  for  fresh  water;  all  about  the  town  being  brackish,  as  that,  and  a great  way  inland,  is 
overflowed  every  Iiigh  spring;  they  are  therefore  obliged  to  bring  the  water  for  drinking,  the  distance  of 
four  or  five  miles,  in  skins,  upon  bullocks.  Firewood  is  likewise  very  scaice,  being  all  brought  from  other 
parts  inland,  and  from  the  different  creeks  in  the  Gulf.  Fowls  arc  good,  ond  tolerably  cheap;  these,  with 
lOggs,  butter^  and  milk,  are  all  an  European  can  get  to  subsist  upon> 


X: 


CHAPTER  XII. 


Coast  of  India  from  Cambay  to  Bombay. 


Camhay;  Description-^Coins^Wdghls  and  Mioaurcs^Trade  between  British  India  and  the  Northern  Parts  of 
Guzzerat^Dutiesy  Port  Chargesy  ^c.^^unibaseer^Baroach — Surat;  Dcseriptioyp^CoiHs^Wetghts  and 
Mcasures^Trade  of  Surat  and  adjacent  Villages  with  British  India-^Kxports  to  the  Gulfs  of  Persia 
and  Arahia-^Trade  with  the  Portugucscy  Dutchy  and  Freneh-^Custom-house  Begulations-^Provisions  and 
Refreslnnents^Dumaun ; Description-^^Bassein ; Description. 


CAMBAY, 

The  place  which  gives  its  name  to  the  Gulf,  is  the  seaport  to  Amcdabad,  the  capital  of  the  province, 
and  is  in  latitude  22^  24'  North ; it  is  of  considerable  .size,  and  was  formerly  a place  of  great  trade:  most 
of  the  European  nations  had  factories  here ; that  belonging  to  the  Dutch  was  established  in  1620.  The 
tides  are  very  strong  and  rapid  here;  at  high  water  spring  tides  there  are  5 or  6 fathoms  water,  and  ship^ 
could  anchor  near  the  city;  but  at  low  water  it  is  quite  dry,  except  some  channels,  in  which  there  remain 
3 or  4 feet,  so  that  vessels  in  the  river  must  lie  quite  aground,  tliough  they  do  not  suffer  much  in 
that  situation,  from  the  bottom  being  soft.  The  town  is  stated  to  have  been  twice  as  large  as  Surat,  but 
not  so  populous ; the  streets  are  large,  and  have  all  gates  at  the  end,  which  are  shut  in  the  night  time ; in 
that  pai’t  next  the  sea,  are  to  be  seen  tlie  remains  of  some  fine  houses,  built  by  the  Portuguese  when  they 
resided  here.  The  inhabitants  are  numerous,  composed  of  all  nations,  who  carry  on  a trade  with  many 
parts  of  India,  but  nothing  in  comparison  with  what  it  did  previous  to  the  water  decreasing  in  the  upper 
pail  of  the  Gulf.  Large  quantities  of  piece-goods  manufactured  at  Amedabad,  and  cotton  are  annu^y 
shipped  from  hence  to  Bombay.  Cambay  is  the  only  place  where  cornelian  stones  are  produced. 

COINS. 

Gold  mohurs,  rupees,  and  pice  are  the  current  coins;  for  small  change  a species  of  almond,  celled 
baddam,  is  used,  in  the  same  manner  as  cowries  at  Bengal.  These  almonds  are  imported  from  Persia,  and 
the  general  rate  is  about  60  for  a pice. 

All  foreign  coins  arc  taken  according  to  weight,  and  their  prices  vary  according  to  the  demand. 


WEIGHTS  AND  MEASURES. 


The  maund  is  40  seers,  and  the  seer  30  pice;  tlic  maund  is  equal  to  dT^lbs.  avoirdupois,  and  varies 
according  to  the  different  kinds  of  goods  bought  or  sold,  viz. 


Metals  of  all  kinds  seers  to  a maund. 

Elephants'  teeth ditto 
Spices  of  all  kinds  ditto 

Coftee«%%^.«v^v.vwv.^*«%%«^%«*«42  ditto 


Myrrh 
Sugar  ^ 
Cardamums 
Indigo 


I to  a maund. 


.*41  ditto 
ditto 
,44*  ditto 


The  long  measures  are  the  cubit,  about  18  English  inches^  the  guz  of  28,  and  in  the  bazar  281  inches 


CAMBAY 


Iji 


COMMERCE  WITH  THE  BRITISH  SETTLEMENTS. 

The  following  is  a statement  of  the  commerce  carried  on  between  Mnilras  nnd  Bombay,  and  the 
northern  parts  of  Guzzerat,  in  the  years  1803  to  1800  inclusive,  together  with  a list  of  the  articles  vrhich 
composed  the  imports  and  exports  in  1805. 


IMPOim  VROM  MADRAS  AND  BOMBAY.  E^XPORTS  TO  MADRAS  AND  BOMBAY. 


Years. 

Merc  handisu 

T reasure. 

Total. 

Years. 

Metcliandise 

Treasure. 

Tulal. 

Sic-ra  Rupee, 

Sicca  Rupees. 

Sicca  Rupees. 

Sicca  Rupees. 

Sicca  Rupees. 

.SlLC.t  UvUlfCs 

1802 

43,86,623 

16,91,7.54 

60,78,.377 

1802 

70,49,517 

.3,03,618 

73,.53,135 

1803 

34,18,367 

2,45,527 

36,63,894 

1803 

56,23,634 

1,550 

56,25,184 

1804 

66,80,144 

11,38,341 

68,18,485 

1804 

67,7S,.323 

67,7s, .32.3 

1805  i 

58,43,308 

17,29,511 

75,72,819 

1805 

79,22,128 

79,22,128 

1806 

60,40,733 

34,53,105 

84,9.3,828 

1806 

84,02,809 

23, .501 

81,26,310 

Total.  ^ 

243,69,165 

82,58,238 

326,27,403 

Total.” 

.357,76,41 1 

3,28,6(59  1 

"3(51  ;().5, 080^ 

Articles  of  Import  in  180.5. 
Beetle  nuts  Sicca  Rupees 


Woollens 

C/Ocliineal 
Cocoa  nuts 
Datesw 
Pruit 
Grain. 

Iron 


Piece  goods , 
Embroidery , 
Pepper 
Raw  silk. 

Sugar  and  Jaggery 
C./Opra^^^.^^^s 
Elephants’  teeth 
Gunnies 
Steel 
Wines 


Spices 
Liquors 
Drugs 
Metals 
Seeds 
G'hee 

Bangle  ivory 
Sundries  s 
Imports  re-exportedw 
Treasure. 


1,09,161 

1,73,675 

1,83,310 

1,78,241 

2,91,059 

1,25,4,38 

28,846 

1,14,719 

1,85,488 

8,58,817 

72,707 

2,80,662 

7,17,709 

11,40,041 

60,305 

1,68,238 

84,593 

54,256 

57,164 

97,833 

45,295 

2,54,285 

47,245 

60,6.33 

54,015 

60,285 

3,39,074 

214 

17,29,511 


Imports  in  1805%%%«%%Sicca  Rupees  75,72,819 


Articles  t)f  Export  in  1805. 

Rupees 


Cotton  .1^^, 

Cornelians 
Ghee 
Grain 
Moura 
Oils 

Piece  goods 
Pntchock 
Seeds 

Sandal  oil  ... 

Tobacco 
Jingely  seeds 

' Raroacli 


% % W%^%  V%  %■%  % ■%  %%  % % % 

%%  % %■%%  -w%% 


Piece  Goods 


Cambay 
Juinbaseer  .... 
Bownaghur 
Amedabad 


Hemp 

Shaw  ls%.%%,%»  %%%%.%%%  * %•».%.*  ^ ♦ V 

Opium  seeds 

Lac 

Dhabbies 

Hides 

8undric3%'%w%%w%^%w»w%w%.%%%w»ww^'»w.»^%.»^.^*^*  ♦ 


46,82,404 
62,231 
1,24,845 
9,60,541 
45,56  K 
1,35,628 
2,72,026 
61,457 
81,909 
62,812 
31,850 

60.62.3 
.3,70, 41.3 

1.14.17.3 
93,67(5 
38,372 

4. 6 1.003 

17.38.3 
3(),964 
(i2,8l2 
16,761 
12,682 
20,719 
11,950 
12,618 
14,843 
4.3,650 


Exports  in  1805..vvv.Sicca  Rupees  79,22,128 


156 


JUMBASEER—BAROACH. 


Merchaiulise  import^  into  the  northern  parts  of  Guzzcrat  from  the  British  settlements  of 

Madras  and  Bombay  in  the  years  1802  to  1806«,.  Sicca  Hupees  243^69,165’ 

Ditto  exported  to  ditto,  during  the  same  period  357,76,411 

Exports  exceed  the  imports  114,07,246 

Treasure  imported  from  Madras  and  Bombay  into  Guzzerut  82,58,238 

Ditto  exported  to  3,2S,  669 

79,29,565 

Balance  against  tlie  British  settlements  of  Bombay  and  Madras  Sicea  Rupees  193,36,815- 

Being  against  Bombay  and  Surat  ^^•^^^^Sicca  Rupees  194,17,877 

111  favour  of  Tort  St.  George  and  its  dependencies  81,062 

DUTIES,  PORT  CHARGES,  &c. 

The  following  customs  are  paid  by  the  Englisli  on  goods  sold  liere. 

Company  $ d u ty 2 per  cent*  Rrokerage  2 per  cent* 

Consulage  2 ditto.  Dustoor,  cooly  hire,  &c.  1 ditto. 

Commission  to  tiic  chief  2|  ditto.  making  in  the  whole,  about  10  per  cent. 

JUMBASEEK. 

This  road  lies  in  latitude  2P  49'  North,  and  may  be  known  by  a pagoda  on  the  North  side  of  the 
fiver  caUed  Uieu.  The  marks  for  anchoring  are  the  pagoda  N.  E.  by  E.  Jumbaseer  point  E.  by  N.  ‘in  7 
fathoms  water.  The  tide  rises  from  33  to  36  feet  peqiendicular.  The  town  is  situated  up  the  river,  from 
whence  a great  trade  is  carried  on  in  cotton,  piece-goods,  grain,  and  oil,  with  Bombay  and  other  places. 

DAROACII 

Is  about  8 leagues  up  the  River  Nerbudda  on  its  north  side:  half-way  between  the  town  and  the  sea,  the 
fiver  divides  itself  into  two  branches,  and  forms  a long  and  narrow  island,  on  each  side  of  which  they  run 
into  the  Gulf  of  Cambay,  in  the  direction  of  E.  S.  E.  and  W.  S.  W.  The  fortress  of  Baroach  is  large  and 
square,  standing  upon  a hill,  the  only  eminence  for  many  miles  round,  and  might  be  made  very  strong. 
Soon  after  the  Company  established  a factory  at  Surat,  their  servants  discovered  that  piece-goods  and 
cotton  yarn  could  be  procured  cheaper  at  Baroach  than  at  Surat,  in  consequence  of  which  an  application 
was  made  to  the  Mogul,  and  permission  granted  for  establishing  a factory.  In  the  year  1617  the  Dutch 
followed  our  example;  it  was  at  that  period  a place  of  considerable  importance,  but  in  1660,  in  the  wars 
between  Aurungzebe  and  his  brothers,  it  sided  with  the  latter.  After  a stout  resistance  he  took  the  place, 
put  part  of  the  citizens  to  the  sword,  and  rased  most  of  the  walls,  which  he  afterwards  rebuilt.  Baroach 
at  this  period  produced  more  tnanufacturps,  and  of  the  finest  fabrics,  than  the  same  extent  of  country  in 
any  other  part  of  the  world,  not  excepting  Bengal. 

Gold  and  silver  rupees,  with  their  subdivbions,  ore  the  common  coins,  and  the  weights  are  similar 
to  those  of  Surat. 

The  trade  is  chiefly  centered  in  Surat;  the  produce  of  the  neighbouring  country,  consisting  of  cotton, 
cotton  yarn,  piece-goods,  &c.  being  generally  sent  thither. 


SURAT. 


1.1  r 

SURAT  is  situated  on  the  South  side  of  the  River  Taptee,  or  Tappco,  about  20  miles  IVoni  the  sco. 
Vaux's  Tomb,  on  Swalley  Point,  the  North  side  of  the  entrance  of  the  river,  is  In  lonwitiule  2P  I North, 
and  latitude  72^  ,51'  East.  Tlie  anchoring  ground  for  large  ships’ in  Surat  roails,  is  in  7 or  H fathoms, 
Vaux’s  tomb  bearing  N.  j E.  and  the  entrance  of  False  River  K.  S.  E.  The  tides  run  here  at  the  rate  ot*  fiNcy 
miles  an  hour,  but  near  the  bar  they  do  not  run  with  such  rapidity. 

The  navigation  up  the  river  to  Surat  is  very  ditticult,  in  consequence  of  tlie  sands  frecpiently  sliit'ling, 
by  which  new  channels  are  formed,  and  the  old  ones  shut  up.  Near  two-thirds  of  the  distance  from  the 
bar  to  Surat,  is  a continued  chain  of  banks,  having  but  narrow  channels  belvvc'cn  IIkmu. 

On  the  right  hand  side  of  the  river,  about  four  miles  within  the  bar,  is  a creek,  uhich  leads  to  a small 
village  called  Domus,  where  there  is  a guard-house,  situated  on  a rising  ground,  with  a serje.nit's  guaid, 
who  send  to  the  chief  at  Surat  an  account  of  the  arrival  and  departure  IVoin  the  roads  of  all  sliips  of  e\ery 
nation,  of  which  a register  is  made.  From  Domus  to  Surat  is  about  fifteen  miles  by  water,  by  land  about 
ten.  The  city  stands  close  on  the  banks  of  the  river,  and  extends  a considerable  distanei'  along  s\unv;  the 
castle  is  a large  quadrangular  building,  with  a circular  and  capacious  bastion  at  cacli  angle,  mounted  wiih 
three  tiers  of  guns,  pointing  ditTerent  ways;  the  lowest  are  30  pounders,  tlie  second  and  tlie  upper 
18  and  12  pounders;  there  are  near  200  cannon  mounted  in  the  castle,  liesides  21  at  the  saluting  battery: 
the  lower  guns  are  not  above  G feet  above  the  level  of  the  river  at  high  water,  nheii  it  u ashes  the  castle 
walls.  The  houses  for  the  Commandant  and  officers  are  not  only  conviaiient,  but  many  oi’lhem  ileganl; 
the  non-commissioned  officers  and  privates  arc  also  well  lodged.  On  one  ol  the  bastions  is  hoisted  tlie 
British  flag,  and  on  its  opposite,  the  Mogul’s.  There  is  a wall  and  ditch  iuelosing  iIm'  city,  and  another 
surrounding  the  suburbs;  the  distance  round  the  outer  wall,  is  n(‘ar  twelve  miles;  the  intermediate  space 
between  the  two  walls  is  a mile  wide,  and  as  populous  in  proportion  to  its  (‘xtiait,  as  the  cil\.  In  the 
outer  wall  are  thirteen  gates,  including  three  on  the  banks  of  the  river;  in  the  inner  are  four  gat(*s,  two 
of  winch  lead  to  the  castle,  the  keys  of  which  are  carried  to  the  chief  every  night  at  sunset,  when  thi‘y 
ore  locked:  they  are  opened  at  daybreak  in  the  morning. 

To  the  southward  of  the  castle  is  a large  o[)en  plain,  called  the  Castle  Gr(‘en,  where  arc  largo  tents 
fixed,  surrounded  by  jialings  of  bamboos ; where  goods  are  kept  ready  for  shipping  off. 

Surat  has  few  fine  buildings;  some  of  the  houses  of  the  principal  merchants  are  large  aiul  w(‘ll  built, 
but  the  generality  are  of  bamboos  and  mud.  There  arc  some  handsome  mosques,  likewise  the  rnstoni- 
house,  and  mint,  and  some  fine  tanks  or  reservoirs  for  water.  The  streets  are  narrow,  iiTegnlar,  and  iin- 
paved,  extremely  dirty  and  offensive,  particularly  in  the  wet  season.  Surat  is  very  populous;  the  inhabit- 
ants are  estimated  at  400,000,  amongst  whom  are  a great  number  of  rich  merchants,  Fersees,  Moors,  and 
Armenians,  who  carry  on  a large  trade  with  Persia,  Arabia,  and  various  parts  ol  India. 

The  burial  places  of  the  Europeans  in  the  suburbs,  are  generally  visited  by  strangers,  some  of  the 
tombs  being  large  and  handsome  buildings,  formed  of  the  best  materials,  and  highly  ornamented,  more 
particularly  those  belonging  to  the  Dutch. 

The  Portuguese  took  and  destroyed  Surat  in  1.512.  Celebrated  as  it  was  then  for  its  trade,  it  became 
more  considerable  by  its  min,  and  >vas  soon  the  general  staple  for  European  and  Eastern  mcrcliandisc. 
In  1612  the  English  established  a factor}^  here;  in  1615  a treaty  was  com luded  with  tlie  Mogul  by 
Sir  Thomas  Roe,  on  very  favourable  terms.  In  1617  the  Dutch  commenced  trading  at  Surat.  About 

1660  the  river  Taptee  being  incommoded  with  sand  banks  at  Ranier,  the  then  mart  town  on  this  river, 
the  English  removed  two  miles  further  down  on  the  opposite  side,  near  a castle  which  had  luen  built  many 
years  before,  to  secure  the  trade  from  the  Malabar  pirates;  others  following  the  cxamjile,  witiiin  a few 
years  the  place  became  a large  town,  but  without  walls,  and  so  continued  till  the  Muhrattas  in  UiGl  came 
and  plundered  all  but  the  European  factories,  which  were  on  their  guard.  After  this  disaster,  at  thi‘  re(|uest 
of  the  inhabitants,  the  Mogul  enclosed  v^ith  walls  a space  of  ground  about  four  nfilcs  in  cucumimnee,  to 


m 


SURAT. 


buiW  tlie  cltj  in ; but  tlie  number  of  people  increasing  with  the  trade,  several  large  suburbs  were  added, 
Surat  flourished  till  1686,  when  it  suffered  materially  by  a war  with  the  English,  which  was  continued  for 
three  years,  and  during  which  period  many  of  their  valuable  ships  were  captured.  In  1695  the  trade  was 
molested  by  the  ]*inglish  pirates,  which  subjected  the  Company’s  factory  to  much  trouble  and  inconvenience. 
In  1705  the  villages  around  were  plundered  by  the  neighbouring  Mahrattas,  and  Surat  besieged;  but  the 
enemy  being  unprovided  with  artillery,  made  no  impression  on  the  c ity.^ 

On  the  removal  of  the  seat  of  Government  to  Bombay,  the  factory  was  continued;  but  for  many  years, 
in  cons(!qiience  of  the  relaxed  authority  of  the  Mogul,  the  government  of  the  castle,  which  was  in  the 
hands  of  the  Siddcc,  or  Mogul’s  Admiral,  was  converted  into  a licentious  exercise  of  power,  to  the  oppres- 
sion of  the  Nabob,  and  the  inhabitants  of  the  city.  From  the  general  dissatisfaction  caused  by  this  mis- 
conduct, added  to  the  humiliating  and  disgraceful  instances  of  it,  to  which  the  Company’s  factory  had  been 
subjected,  originated  the  design  of  the  Bombay  Government  to  subvert  a power  that  threatened  the  anni- 
hilation of  its  commercial  Interests,  in  the  general  ruin  of  the  city.  This  design  was  happily  effected  in 
1759  by  the  capture  of  the  castle,  which,  liaving  been  accomplished  with  the  assent  of  the  Nabob  and  the 
inhabitants  of  the  city,  sumnuds  were  granted  from  llelhi,  investing  the  C.'ompany  with  the  authority  and 
revenue  of  the  conquered  Siddee,  agreeably  to  which  the  IMogul  (lag  is  lioisted  in  the  castle,  and  at  the  mast 
head  of  the  Company’s  chief  cruiser  on  the  Surat  station.  Since  that  period,  the  Company  have  remained 
in  undisturbed  possession. 

The  revenues  of  Surat  have  been  very  inadequate  to  the  expcnces;  from  the  yeai*  1759,  the  period 
when  it  came  into  our  possession,  to  1795-6,  it  appears  that 

Rs.  A.  p. 

The  revenues  amounted  to  44,04., 907  2 14 

The  charges,  ditto  106,67,868  1 97 

Leaving  a deficiency  in  thirty-six  years,  of««v%%^^%^%«^v%v.^>Rupees  69,98,251  0 46 


III  the  year  1795-6  the  revenues  amounted  only  to  Rupees  93,571  0 69,  and  the  disbursements  to 
Rupees  2?5,171  3 89,  leaving  a deficiency  of  Rupees  181,600  3 20,  which  at  2s.  6d.  sterling  per 
nqiec,  is  n^’22700  2s.  How  far  this  loss  is  reimbursed  by  the  Company’s  commerce  with  this  city,  it  is 
diflicult  to  ascertain,  without  an  actual  statement  of  the  sales  and  purchases  made  on  their  account. 
\Vithjn  these  few  years,  a considerable  reduction  has  taken  place  in  the  establishment  at  Surat,  and  the 
chai'ges  considerably  diminished. 

Sliip-biiilding  used  to  be  carried  on  to  a considerable  extent  at  Surat,  but  at  present  it  is  much  de- 
creased, most  vessels  requmed  for  the  foreign  trade,  being  built  at  Bombay  or  Dumaun. 

COINS. 

Accounts  are  kept  in  rupees,  quarters,  and  reas,  400  reas  making  one  rupee. 

The  coins  current  are  the  gold  mohur,  rupees,  their  halves  and  quarters,  and  tin  pice,  7Spiee  to  1 nipee* 
For  small  change  they  have  baddams,  ^ species  of  almond;  these  rise  and  fall  according  to  the  quantity 
in  the  market,  and  vary  from  48  to  60  for  a pice. 

The  gold  mohur  weighs  179  grains,  and  passes  current  for  16  silver  rupees. 

The  silver  rupee  coined  under  the  Mogul  Government,  weighed  178,314  grains,  and  contained  1,24  of 
alloy;  but  in  consequence  of  the  Surat  coinage  being  so  much  depreciated,  as  to  contain  from  10  to  15  per 
cent,  of  alloy,  in  1800,  the  Bombay  Government  ordered  the  Surat  rupee  to  be  struck  in  that  mint,  to 
weigh  179  gi*ains,  and  to  contain  7,87  per  cent,  of  aUoy. 


SUHAT. 


159 

Bullion  of  all  kinds  is  sold  in  proportion  to  its  fineness,  reckoning  Mexico  dollars  the  standard: 
this  varies  according  to  tlie  rates  of  exchange. 

100  ounces  Mexico  dollars  lloz.  2d\vts.  fineness  will  produce  from  2 to  21  rupees. 

100  ditto  Duccatoons  ^vw.1 1 6 ^«/w^ditto  245  to  250  ditto, 

100  ditto  ,,  Old  Seville  ^,,11  5 v,»,v.v,ditto 211  to  2 19  ditto. 

100  ditto  .^Pillar  dollars  „„11  4 242  to  2 l-H  ditto. 

100  ditto  V,  French  crowns^,!  1 1 J — 235  to  21. j ditto. 


100  dittos  Lion  dollars  ,,,,  8 19  ditto».^v„ 190  to  200  ditto. 

Gold  Venetians  full  weight  of  vals  31(i  to  .3.50  <litto 


^ltihbers„«^w„%,v.w...ditto  342  to  350  ditto 

Coins  of  gold  are  seldom  circulated  as  coin  at  Surat,  but  generally  considered  ns  bullion. 

WEIGHTS  AND  MEASURES. 

The  great  weights  are  pice,  seers,  mounds,  and  candies,  but  English  weights  arc  In  common  use. 

Cw(.  qr'..  lb,  07  iKtt,  dec. 

20  great  or  30  small  Pice  ^ r 1 Seer,  equal  to  avoir.  0 0 0 14  15  7(i 

40  Seers  f make"!  ^ Maund  0 19  7 0 50 

20  Maiinds  ill  Candy  0 2 21  4 2 0 

The  maund  is  considered  equal  to  one  half  of  the  Calcutta  factory  maund.  Tlicre  i.s  also  a Pucka 
maund,  which  is  equal  to  the  factory  maund.  Although  the  above  is  the  common  received  standard  of 
gross  weight  at  Surat,  yet  most  of  the  commodities  in  the  market  are  sold  by  a difTercnt  number  of  seers  to 
the  maund,  varying  from  40  to  46  seers ; nor  is  the  candy  uniformly  confined  to  20  maunds.  For  example: 
Pepper  and  sandal  wood  are  sold  by  the  Bombay  candy  of  21  maunds ; and  cotton,  the  great  staple  com- 
modity of  this  country,  by  the  Surat  candy  of  21  maunds.  In  the  list  of  imports  at  Bombay  is  specified 
by  what  number  of  seers,  &c,  to  a maund  each  article  is  sold. 


PEARL  WEIGHTS. 


dwt. 

K'"'. 

tier. 

20  Vassas 

\ i 

r 1 Ruttce  is  troy  -.^v% 

0 

8 

951 

3 Ruttees  j 

' 1 

1 1 Val 

0 

5 

853 

24  Ruttees  \ 

' make  ^ 

1 

15 

024 

30^  Vals  i 

i 

1 1 Surat  Rupee 

7 

11 

0 

32  Vals  J 

1 

[ 1 Tola 

7 

19 

317 

02,  dwt.  dec.  OZ.  drs.  dec. 

1 small  Surat  Pice  is  Troy  9 2 56  or  avoirdupois  0 7 992 
1 great  ditto«^%«^%>*.«>«««%^  13  16  805  ditto  0 11  988 

1 Surat  Tola  7 19  317  ditto  0 6 850 

1 miscal  is  1 tank,  2 ruttce  1 vassa,  and  38  tolas  25  vals  is  100  miscals. 

47  tolas,  29  vals,  1 ruttee,  or  60  Surat  rupees,  is  Troy  18  oz.  13  dwts.  23grs.  61  dec. 

1 seer  of  coral,  or  amber,  is  18  great  pice,  31  j tolas,  or  27  small  picc,  and  weighs  troy  12  oz,  203 dec* 
or  avoirdupois  13  oz.  487  dec. 

The  Venetian  sequin  is  9J  vals,  and  the  Spanish  dollar  73  vals. 

The  measures  are  the  large  covid  of  36  inches,  and  the  small  covid  of  24  inches.  Broad  clotli, 
satins,  velvets,  &c.  are  generally  sold  by  the  English  yard  of  36  inches.  The  parah  coin  measure  contains 
80  pallies,  and  weighs  about  751bs.  avoirdupois. 


1«0 


SURAT. 


Tlio  following  is  a statement  of  the  trade  carried  on  between  Surat  and  the  adjacent  villages,  and 
Uonibay  and  Madras,  in  the  years  1802  to  1806  inclusive,  together  with  a list  of  the  articles  which  com'. 
|)ose«l  the  im|iorts  and  exjjorts  in  1805,  and  Uieii’  value. 

IMPORTS  FROM  FORT  ST.  GEOROF.  .\Nn  BOMB.W.  E.VPORT.S  TO  FORT  ST.  GEORGE  AND  BOMBAY. 


SUllAT. 


IGl 


Merchandise  Imported  from  Madras  and  Bombay  in  the  years  1802  to  l80G*v,v..Sicra  llupces  103,78,118 
Ditto  exported  to  ditto sL’^loioir 


Imports  exceed  the  exports  . 

Treasure  imported  into  Surat  from  Madras  and  Bombay  during  the  above  period,^.:}?,  10, (1^5 
Ditto  exported  from  ditto,  to  dittos — 4,41,5()S 


32,60,0,57 


Balance  against  Madras  and  Bombay  . 


Mcca  Kupees  1 1 ,00,9vS(> 


The  commerce  carried  on  at  Surat  is  stated  to  have  declined  since  the  establishment  of  the  Company's 
power  in  it.  A considerable  part  lias  no  doubt  been  transferred  to  Boniliay;  but  whiitever  decay 
Surat  may  have  suffered  in  commerce,  may  be  attributed  to  the  suliversion  of  the  Mogul  empire,  the 
anniliilation  of  that  spirit  of  commerce  which  sprang  from  the  innumerable  wants  of  so  rich  and  expensive 
a people,  and  the  decrease  of  the  lucrative  trade  to  the  Gulfs  of  Persia  and  Arabia,  owing  to  the  anareby 
in  which  Persia  is  involved,  and  into  which  the  Turkish  dominions  have  long  been  sinking.  The  trade 
to  the  Gulfs  is  however  considerable.  The  following  is  a statement  of  the  exports  from  Surat  in  the  years 
i794f  to  1798  inclusive. 

Value  of  Goods  exported  to  the  Gulfs  of  Persia  and  Arabia  for  fourycars^  1704  to  1798  inclusivr. 


Yeari. 

Arubian  (Julf. 

IVrsian  (in If. 

Total. 

Riipets.  qr.  rrai 

Rupeas,  qr.  rcas. 

Kupoes.  qi.roas. 

1794-5 

179.^6 

179G-7 

1797-8 

3,34,734  0 80 
2,82,970  2 70 
6,22,527  0 45 
3,45,657  0 86 

2,09,601  1 40 

3,14,386  3 80 
3,62,119  1 0 
2,4.5,381  2 80 

The  trade  carried  on  by  the  Portuguese,  Dutch,  and  French,  dmingthe  period  they  had  factories  at 
Surat,  was  considerable.  The  imports  principally  consisted  of  staple  commodities,  by  each  of  tlicse  nations 
from  Europe ; sugar,  spices,  and  Japan  copper  from  China,  and  the  Dutch  settlements;  sugai',  raw  silk, 
and  some  piece-goods  from  Bengal;  and  elephants'*  teeth  by  the  Portuguese  from  the  East  ('oast  of  Africav 
Their  exports  were  cotton,  indigo,  piece-goods,  the  latter  for  the  European,  African,  and  Malay  markets^ 

CUSTOM-HOUSE  REGULATIONS. 

A Regulation  for  the  Collection  of  the  Customs  at  the  Port  ^of  Surat,  passed  by  the  Honourable  the  Governor  of 

Bombay,  under  date  June  18,  1890. 

Previous  to  the  acquisition  of  the  castle,  and  the  charge  of  the  Mogufs  fleet  by  the  East  India  Com* 
pany  in  1759,  they  collected  duties  at  a place  called  the  Latty,  from  those  trading  at  the  port  of  Surat 
under  their  protection,  in  consideration  for  which  privilege,  thgy  appear  to  have  paid  a fixed  pcslicusli  to 
the  Nabob^s  or  native  Government.  The  duties  thus  levied  consisted  in  one  general  rate  of  4 per  cent, 
together  with  one  per  cent,  additional  duty,  originally  imposed  in  part  indemnification  lor  certain  war 
charges  incurred  before  the  ^quisition  of  the  castle  and  fleet  during  the  chiefsliij)  of  Mr.  Somber,  and 
one  per  cent,  convoy  duty,  making  in  all  6 per  cent,  on  imports  and  exports,  but  never  diarged  on  both. 
The  valuations  in  this  department  were  to  be  made  at  10  per  cent,  under  the  market  price,  except  on  cot- 
ton, which  was  fixed  annually  by  special  order  from  Bombay.  • 

Y 


16S 


SURAT. 


Anterior  to  the  English  East  India  Company  having  any  share  in  the  local  admihiitration  of  the  Surat 
Government,  the  rates.of  customs  collected  by  the  native  Government  were  as  under: 


Mahomedans 
Annenians  and  Jews^ 
Hindoos 


W«  V V%  % %V%  V%  %%%  V 


.2}  per  cent, 
«3[  ditto. 

^ ditto. 


On  the  7th  of  February,  1747,  Teigh  Bey  Khan'^s  Kkotra  was  first  levied,  when  Mahomedans  (with 
a few  exceptions  of  persons  who  did  not  pay  this  last  mentioned  import) 


Paid 

Armenians  and  Jews 
Hindoos « 


Customs  2}  per  cent,  and  1 per  cent.  T.  B.  K.  is  3y  per  cent. 

3i  3{  ditto. 

A and  1 per  cent.  T.  B.  K.  is  6 ditto. 


Agreeably  to  the  above  rates,  the  customs  continued  to  be  collected  till  the  22d  of  November,  1750, 
when  a second  Ekotra  was  lai<i  on  towards  raising  the  two  lacs  of  rupees  agreed  to  be  paid  the  Company  on 
account  of  the  charges  of  the  war  in  Mr.  Somber^’s  time. 

Mahomedans  then  pohl,  (a  few  persons  excepted),  who  never  paid  either  of  tlie  Ekotras, 

Customs.  T B.  K.  Ekotra.  War.  Total. 

Customs  y pcF  ccnt.%^%^%%%^%'%1  per  cent* 

Armenians  ditto  ditto. 

14indoos  ditto  1 7 ditto. 


The  two  lacs  of  rupees  to  the  Company  being  discharged,  the  Ekotra  on  this  account  ivas  taken  off 
in  July,  1 758,  and  the  rates  of  the  customs  were  again  reduced. 

Customs.  T.  B.  K.  Ekotra.  Total. 

Mahomedans  (with  exceptions  as  before)v«2i  per  per  cent. 

Armenians  and  J ews  ditto  ditto. 


On  the  14th  of  March,  1750,  in  consequence  of  the  capture  of  the  castle  by  the  English,  the  war 
Ekotra  was  again  levied  to  defray  the  Company'^s  charges  of  the  expedition,  when  Mahomedans  paid, 
with  exceptions  as  before,  as  to  the  payment  of  Teigh  Bey  Khan's  Ekotra,  but  every  body  was  obliged  to 
pay  the  war  Ekotra  of  this  period. 


Mahomedans 
Armenians  and  Jews%%v 
Hindoos 


Customs, 

per  cent., 
ditto 
ditto 


T.  B.  K.  Ekotra.  War. 


a. 


ToIbI. 

..4f  per  cent. 
»4|  ditto. 
m7  ditto. 


The  customs  collected  at  this  time,  were  dirided  as  under  mentioned. 

The  Mogul  Government,  and  the  Mahrattas,  or  Pesbwa,  and  Guickwas  Chonteas  received  two  thirds 
of  per  cent,  from  Mahomedans,  of  3}  per  cent  from  Armenians,  and  of  6 per  cent  fiiMB  Hindoos 
The  Company  received  in  right  of  the  command  of  the  Mogul’s  fleet,  to  wMch  they  hud  succeeded  at  the 
same  time  as  that  of  the  castle,  one  third  of3{  per  cent  from  the  Mahomedans,  one  third  from  the  Armenians 
and  Jews,  and  one  third  of  6 per  cent  from  the  Hindoos,  besUos  the  whole  of  the  Ekotra,  oit  aceoiwt 
of  the  war  charges,  from  each  sect  resi>ectively. 


SUllAT. 


l&l 

On  the  4th  of  January,  1763,  the  rates  of  the  customs  were  again  altereil,  tii. 

Customs.  T B.  K.  Ekotra.  War  Total. 

Mahomodiins  (exceptions  as  before) per  per  ctMit. 

Ariiienians  and  ditto  \ ditto. 

Hindoos  ditto  ditto. 

The  division  of  the  customs  continued  as  above,  with  this  difference,  that  more  was  reoei\cd  from  the 
Moliomedans,  and  less  from  the  Hindoos. 

Till  the  year  1766,  it  appears  that  the  passing  of  goods  in  tliis  department  had  lieen  entrusted  to  the 
native  Daroga ; but  in  the  month  of  May,  in  the  last-mentioned  yeai*,  it  was  onlered  that  no  goods  should 
be  exported  without  the  pass  of  the  English  Phoorza  master,  nor  imported  without  a translate  of  the 
Bhurtas,  or  manifest  signed  by  him  : and  as  goods  were  discharged  hy  tlie  Phoorza,  the  Naboli,  or  native 
government,  and  sometimes  the  Mahrattas,  in  view  to  their  claim  of  chowte,  had  people  to  see  that  no 
more  was  exported  than  the  quantity  expressed  in  the  Bhurtas ; and  as  when  country  vessels  imported, 
sepoys  were  sent  from  the  Phoorza,  who  accompanied  the  goods  from  town,  to  prevent  their  being 
landed  or  shipped  elsewhere,  it  was  on  the  some  occasion  ordained  that  proper  |)eople  should  he  employed 
for  these  purposes  on  Uhalf  of  the  Company.  On  this  system  the  French,  Dutch,  and  Portuguese  tra- 
ding under  jihii'maund  privileges,  were  not  subject  to  the  Khooshka  customs  on  their  trade  with  Surat  by  sea 
or  land,  but  all  natives  were : so  that,  according  to  the  original  system,  a Latty  merchant,  or  dependent 
on  the  English  Company's  government,  after  paying  to  them  the  duty  on  his  gooils  imported  hy  sea,  or  a 
Mogul  sutyect  to  the  native  government  Phoorza,  had  each  of  them  again  similarly  to  account  for  the 
Khooshka  duty,  on  carrying  their  goods  into  the  interior  country;  but  from  the  example  of  the  Latty  de- 
partment ill  exacting  its  duty  only  once,  the  double  duties,  thus  payable  at  the  Phoorza  and  Khooshka, 
appear  to  have,  within  these  last  eight  or  ten  years,  fallen  much  into  disuse,  or  been,  in  fact,  for  the  greater 
part,  evaded  : for  instance,  the  importers  through  the  Phoorza  re-exporting  tlieir  goods  by  sea,  and  land- 
ing  them  at  a convenient  port,  either  up  or  down  the  coast,  according  to  their  ultimate  destination : 
and  in  like  manner,  although  upon  importation  by  land,  they  had  cijually  to  pay,  in  the  first  instance, 
not  only  the  Khooshka  duty,  but  again  that  of  the  Phoorza,  or  Latty,  according  as  the  im|>orters  were 
esteemed  Mogul  subjects,  or  English  dependents,  on  the  same  goods  when  exported  hy  sea,  yet,  agree- 
aliile  to  established  usage,  piece  goods  for  exportation  have  been  exempted  from  Khooshka  import  duty, 
which  constitutes  by  far  the  principal  article  in  that  branch  of  customs.  In  the  imports  Irom  tlie  interior 
districts  there  was  also  another  class  of  exemptions  under  what  were  called  Mogul  dukdlas,  (»r  coun- 
try  certificates,  which  arc  subject  only  to  tlie  two  Ekotras  to  the  Company  and  the  Nabob,  that  Iiave  been 
above  specified,  besides  Bengal  certificate  goods,  as  hereatler  notici*d. 

Under  this  system,  a competition  taking  place  between  the  Latty  and  I’hoorza  departments,  as  to  what 
goods  should  pass  tlirough  either,  it  was  ordered,  in  the  year  1789,  that  those  only  of  merchants  under 
Englllfi  protection,  should  resort  to  the  former,  and  no  imports  by  foreign  vessels  were  to  make  their  en- 
trief  lit  the  English  custom-house;  whilst,  further  to  gratify  the  Nabol),  the  article  of  Bengal  raw  silk  had 
been,  admitted  to  be  imported  through  the  Khooshka,  and  thereby  kept  siibji'ct  to  certain  fees,  usually 
exited  on  Bengal  certificate  goods,  in  consequence  of  the  Supreme  (iovernment  having  directed,  in  1791, 
th»t  all  customs  should,  fi*om  the  1st  of  October  following,  be  abolished  u|>on  imports  from  the  f Vmipany's 
lerntorks  on  that  side  of  India. 

These  arrangements  continued  generally  in  force  till  the  year  1795,  when  orders  were  received  from 
the  Court  of  Directors  to  fix  the  export  and  import  duties,  at  the  port  of  Bombay,  at  2*  per  cent,  the  in- 
tent of  which  instruction  being  construed  to  extend  to  Surat,  gave  rise  to  various  discussions  on  the  expe- 
diency of  a consequent  reduction  in  the  Latty,  or  Phoorza  rates, 

V 2 


164 


SURAT. 


Upon  the  whole,  the  Supreme  Government  inclined  to  a modifieation  of  the  customs  at  Surat,  andsug* 
gested  that  they  might,  as  well  as  the  Latty,  or  the  Phoorza,  be  fixed  at  percent,  but  it  was  nevertheless 
ultimately  determined  to  reduce  them  at  both  places  to  per  cent,  which  took  place  generally,  at  all  the 
custom-houses  in  Surat,  in  1795. 

On  that  occasion,  in  lieu  of  the  two  established  Ekotras  of  the  Comjiany,  and  of  Teigh  Bey  Khan, 
which  had  hitherto  been  levied  on  the  Mogul  dukilla,  or  certificate  goods,  exempted  from  other  duties, 
those  concerned  in  that  branch  of  trade  voluntarily  tendered  to  the  Nabob  a duty  of  i per  cent.,  which 
has  since  been  admitted  to  operate;  the  merchandise  under  this  denomination,  consisting  of  dooties,  and 
Other  articles  from  C’amhay,  Amedabad,  and  Gogo;  and  of  silk  pattolies,  &cc.  from  Puttom,  and  of  other 
piece-goods  from  Hnrhamporc*  and  Sliangur,  and  on  cotton  yarn  from  Klmmdein,  and  of  cotton  and  va- 
rious other  fabrics  from  Baroacli. 

Nor  have  the  oilier  general  duties  been  in  fact  reduced  to  the  net  amount  of  per  cent,  to  the  mer- 
chants, as  in  each  of  the  dcjiartments  the  collecting  European  and  native  officers  have  continued  to  enjoy 
fees  and  allowances,  under  various  denominations,  levied  either  in  a rateable  proportion  to  the  principal 
duty,  or  by  some  other  rule  or  estimate,  thereby  constituting  a further  item  of  charge  in  the  merchants''  pay- 
ments, whicli  have,  for  instance  in  the  Khooshka,  by  these  means  joined  to  the  hoonda  and  dustoor,  hitherto 
Collected  on  account  of  the  Nabob,  risen  to  between  3 and  4 per  cent.;  besides  wliicli,  the  latter  continued 
in  the  same  department  to  collect  a separate  fee  on  all  certificate  goods  imported  from  the  interior  whilst 
in  the  Phoorza,  to  be  levied  at  8Q  Rs.  per  bale  on  Bengal  silk  goods,  similarly  exempted  from  the  ordi- 
nary custom-house  duty. 

The  Supreme  Government  did  not  at  the  time  approve,  nor  have  since  extended  their  sanction  to  these 
reductions,  and  have  recently  been  pleased  to  signify,  that  although  certificate  goods  from  the  other  Presi- 
dencies,  or  Bombay,  the  exportation  of  which  it  may  be  an  object  to  encourage,  may  be  admitted  to  pass 
free  under  the  subsisting  regulations,  yet  all  other  imports  to,  and  all  exports  from  Surat,  may  be  sub* 
jected  to  the  former,  or  other  modified  rates  of  duties,  at  the  same  time  that  an  additional  duty  of  1 per 
cent,  has  been  ordered  to  be  levied  for  marine  charges,  and  has  accordingly  taken  place  in  the  Latty  since 
April,  1800. 

Those  instructions,  and  the  changes  that  have  taken  place  in  the  interior  administration  of  Surat, 
whereby  all  the  riglits,  prerogatives,  and  functions  of  the  Nabob’s  Government  have  devolved  by  treaty  to 
the  English  East  India  Company,  rendering  a new  mode  of  Custom-house  regulations  necessary,  the  foL 
lowing  rules  are  enacted  for  this  purpose. 

I.  The  Latty,  Phoorza,  and  Khooshka  departments  shall  be  under  the  charge  of  one  custom-master, 
with  one  or  more  assistants. 

II.  Relates  to  the  oath  to  be  taken  by  the  custom-master. 

III.  Relates  to  the  seal,  and  inscription,  for  the  custom-house. 

IV.  Relates  to  the  accountants,  and  other  officers  in  the  different  departments. 

V.  To  ascertain  and  distinguish  between  goods  that  should  pass  through  the  Latty,  or  Phoorza,  and 
Khooshka  departments,  all  merchants  and  others  applying  to  pass  their  goods  at  either  of  the  Latty, 
Phoorza,  or  Khooslika  custom-housas,  shall  at  the  same  time  enter  into  an  obligation  to  pay  a fine  of  10 
per  cent,  on  the  value  of  the  goods  thus  passed,  in  case  they  shall  afterwards,  either  from  the  pniperty  in 
the  merchandise,  or  the  description  of  the  owner,  be  detected  in  having  applied  in  the  wrong  channel;  and 
as  an  additional  precaution,  it  is  ordered  that  no  goods  be  exported  or  imported  under  borrowed  names, 
but  that  the  real  owner,  as  well  as  agent,  be  always  specified. 

VI.  The  custom-houses  to  be  opened  for  the  transaction  of  business,  every  day  (Sunday  excepted) 
from  nine  o’clock  in  tlie  morning,  until  three  in  the  afternoon. 

VII.  1st.  The  following  are  the  rules  prescribed  for  the  collection  of  the  duties  on  imports  by  sea. 


SURAT. 


16^ 


sa.  With  respect  to  the  ships,  vessels,  and  commerce  of  those  European  nations  possesslnjjr  phinnaumls 
from  the  Great  Mogul,  the  same  rules,  precautions,  and  observances  are  to  be  Ibllowed  in  the  de|)aitinent 
of  the  Phoorza,  as  have  hitherto  obtained,  as  well  in  respect  to  their  European  as  Indian  comiuerce,  ad- 
hering to  the  established  practice  in  regard  to  each  branch,  the  collector  being  attentive  to  report  to  Gu- 
vernnaent,  and  to  propose  the  correction  of  any  abuse  that  experience  may  shew  to  exist  therein. 

3d.  A tide-waiter,  native  or  Ehjrogean,  from  the  custom-house,  is  to  go  on  hoard  of  every  trndino^ 
ship  or  vessel  that  may  come  to  anchor  at  the  bar  of  Surat,  anil  iMiter  in  a book  her  name,  tlie  nation  to 
which  she  may  belong,  the  name  of  her  commander,  from  what  port  shi’  may  have  last  sailed,  and  every 
other  particular  concerning  her,  of  which  copies  are  monthly  to  he  forwarded  to  the  (Jovenior  in  Council; 
nor  any  goods  or  articles  be  thence  disembaiked,  without  the  pass  note  of  such  tide-waiter,  and  liis  report- 
ing the  same  to  the  custom-master. 

4th.  Goods  trans-shipped  at  the  bar,  or  in  the  river  of  Surat,  or  sent  Ihcncc  to  any  other  port  or  place, 
without  being  brought  within  the  city  of  Surat,  to  be  subject  to  the  same  duties  as  if  they  had  entered 
within  the  walls,  and  invariably  to  confiscation,  if  clandestinely  attempted  in  the  manner  hereal’ter  speeilied. 

VIII.  1st.  The  manner  of  levying  the  duties  upon  imports  by  sea,  shall  he  by  the  owners,  commandir, 
master,  or  supercargo,  or  other  person  or  persons  having  goods  on  boanl  the  ship  or  vessel,  delivering 
in  a manifest  to  the  custom-house  of  his  cargo  (uccompanieil  by  the  exhibition,  as  liir  ns  the  casi*  may  ad- 
mit, of  the  original  invoices  in  corroboration  thereof),  and  landing  his  goods,  and  paying  the  duties  thereof, 
according  to  the  same,  after  the  custom-master  shall  have  taken  and  lodged  a co|>y  of  the  niani/est  in  his 
office,  and  caused  his  official  seal  to  be  impressed  upon  the  back  of  tlie  oi  iginal,  which  is  then  to  he  restored 
to  the  party  producing  it;  and  if  any  articles  in  the  said  manifest  shall  he  deemed  to  be  under-rated,  it  shall 
be  the  duty  of  the  custom-master  to  enter  into  a full  enquiry  thereon:  when  if  he  finds  such  under-valuation 
to  have  arisen  from  any  fraudulent  intention  in  the  party  or  parties  exhibiting  the  same,  he  is  to  order  the 
duty  to  be  levied  on  double  the  amount  of  what  he  shall  award  to  he  the  proper  valuation,  at  the  place 
whence  the  import  is  made,  leaving  to  the  party  to  appeal  to  the  Governor  in  Council,  if  he  shall  think  lit, 
which  must  be  done  by  letter,  to  be  forwarded  open,  within  three  days  after  the  award,  and  through 
the  custom-master,  who  will  accompany  it  with  such  remarks  as  may  occur  to  him  thereon. 

2d.  In  case  of  any  goods  being  attempted  to  be  landed,  or  trans-sliipped,  or  conveyed  away,  the  account 
of  which  shall  not  have  been  previously  exhibited  in  the  manifest,  such  goods  shall,  bi  ing  first  stopped,  ho 
in  like  manner  reported  to  the  custom-master,  who,  after  having  taken  the  partii's’  answer,  and  made  other 
satisfactory  and  adequate  enquiry,  is,  if  the  attempt,  secretly  or  clandestinely,  to  land  such  goods,  sliall 
appear  to  him  to  be  fraudulent,  to  adjudge  the  same  to  be  confiscated,  and  sold  at  public  auction;  but  In 
this  last  case,  an  appeal  shall  lie  in  the  Governor  and  Council  of  Bombay,  if  such  appeal  he  given  notice 
of  to,  and  preferred  through  the  custom-master,  within  three  days  after  the  decisions  being  passed,  in  the 
manner  as  above  provided  for  in  the  instance  of  undcr-valiiations. 

IX.  1st.  And  for  the  greater  encouragement  of  the  native  officers  in  the  custom-house  department  to 
be  vigilant  in  their  duty,  it  is  hereby  provided,  that  in  all  cases  where,  by  reason  of  an  under-valuation  in 
the  manifest,  double  duties  shall  be  decreed  to  be  levied,  or  where  goods  shall  be  confiscated,  in  conse- 
quence of  their  owners  being  detected  in  the  attempt  to  smuggle  them,  as  above  noticed,  half  of  the  amount 
of  the  said  double  valuation  duty,  or  half  the  produce  of  such  confiscated  goods,  sliall  go  to,  and  be  equally 
divided  between  the  aforesaid  officers  of  the  custom-house  station  where  such  an  atti  injit  at  iinilcr-vahia- 
tion,  or  such  act  of  smuggling  was  detected;  and  the  native  officer,  or  officers,  being  the  searcher,  or  other 
person  or  persons,  belonging  to,  and  dependent  on  such  custom-house  station,  who  were  the  immcdiiUe 
agents  in  the  detection  of  the  said  fraud  or  frauds. 

2d.  Relates  to  the  divisions  of  such  penalties  and  confiscations. 


106 


SURAT. 


X.  1st.  In  all  cases,  where  the  value  of  the  goods  cannot  be  ascertained  by  tlie  exhibition  of  the  mani- 
fest (as  may  happen  in  the  coasting  trade,  or  otherwise),  the  duty  to  be  levied  in  the  following  manner. 

2d.  The  owner,  or  agent,  to  deliver  in  a written  applicatioji  under  his  signature^  specifying  the  quan« 
tity  and  description  of  the  goods,  with  the  place  whence  im|)orted,  and  the  invoice  prices  thereof,  pro- 
ducing at  the  same  time  the  original  invoice,  in  proof  of  the  accuracy  thereof;  after  comparing  which 
with  the  application,  and  finding  them  to  correspond,  the  custom-master  is  to  countersign  the  apjdication 
in  question,  and  having  caused  his  seal  to  be  impressed  upon  the  back  of  the  original  invoice,  and  deposited 
a copy  thereof,  together  with  the  signed  application,  in  his  office,  he  is,  after  receiving  the  amount  of  the 
duty,  to  bo  calculated  on  the  price  mentioned  in  the  invoice,  to  pass  the  contents  in  the  usual  form,  subject 
always  to  the  same  penalties  and  forieiturcs,  for  under-valuation,  or  fraudulent  disembarkation,  as  are  spe^ 
rified  in  Section  VIII.  and  with  the  like  encouragement  to  the  custom-house  officers  to  be  vigilant  in  the 
detection  thereof,  as  provided  for  in  Section  IX. 

3d.  In  all  cases  where  the  custom-master  may  be  satisfied  that  it  is  not  in  the  power  of  the  party- 
presenting  the  application,  to  specify  the  invoice  price,  he  is  to  dispense  therewith,  and  require  only  a de- 
scriptive enumeration  of  the  articles,  the  duty  on  which  must  be  levied  by  appraisement,  at  the  current 
prices  in  the  city  of  Siu^at. 

XI.  Tarccls  for  gentlemen,  native  or  European,  and  necessaries,  are  to  be  passed  at  the  discretion 
of  the  custom-master,  and  the  duties  on  ships’  manifests  finally  settled  by  him,  without  any  reference. 

XII.  1st.  'fhe  rate  of  duty  to  be  collected  at  the  Latty,  Phoorza,  and  Khooshka  custom-houses  (if 
passing  througJi  the  latter)  to  be  4 per  cent,  on  the  Surat  price  of  all  foreign  goods  imported  by  sea,  in  ships 
sailing  with,  or  being  tlie  property  of  persons  residing  or  navigating  under  the  protection  of  the  English 
East  India  Company,  without  any  deduction,  or  super-addition  for  fees,  or  otherwise,  together  with  1 per 
cent,  on  the  Latty,  on  account  of  the  marine  charges,  noticed  in  the  preamble  to  this  regulation,  and  in  the 
Phoorza  and  Khooska,  with  the  Company’s  Ekotra  (instead  of  the  aforesaid  1 per  cent,  for  marine  charges) 
that  has  b(M'n  already  adverted  to  in  its  first  clause. 

2d.  The  extra  1 [ler  cent,  in  the  Latty,  and  the  Ekotra  in  the  Phoorza  and  Khooshka,  are  to  be  sepa* 
ratcly  collected  by  ihe  custom-master  from  the  general  duty  of  4 per  cent,  above  described. 

,‘W.  All  merchandise  im|K)rted  in  ships  not  sailing  with,  or  not  being  the  property  of  persons  residing, 
or  navigating  under  the'  protection  of  the  English  East  India  Company,  and  of  which  the  manifest  shall  be 
exhibited,  is  to  be  subject  to  the  same  duties  as  are  specified  in  Clause  1st  of  this  section,  together  with  an 
established  advance  thereon,  regulated  as  follows:  from  which  advance,  goods  from  Bussorah,  Mocha, 
•Tudda,  and  ports  in  the  Gulfs  of  Persia  and  Arabia,  are  to  be  exempted,  and  also  goods  which,  from  the 
manifests  not  being  exhibited,  must  be  regulated  by  the  provision  in  Clause  3d,  Section  X. 

60  per  cenh 
15  ditto. 

15  ditto. 

12  ditto. 

20  ditto. 

10  ditto. 

XIII.  Ist.  Certificate  goods  from  Bengal,  and  all  other  ports  of  the  British  dominjons  in  India,  not 
subordinate  to  the  Presidency  of  Bombay,  and  goods  certified  to  have  already  paid  duty  at  any  place  ei* 
port  subordinate  to  the  Presidency  of  Bombay,  to  enjoy  the  established  exemption  at  Surat,  under  foL 
lowing  qualifications  as  to  the  former. 


Cargoes  by  Eoreign  European,  or  American  sliips  (not  included  under 
Section  VII.  clause  2d.)  on  on  advance  of 

Ditto  from  Bengal 

DitU)  from  the  (’ousts  of  Africa  and  (’oroniandel,  and  from  Malacca, 
Aclieen,  and  Siam  . 

Ditto  from  Ceylon 
Ditto  from  China^ 

Ditto  from  this  Coast,  between  the  Indus  and  Cape  Comorin « 


SURAT. 


167 


2d.  Goods  imported  under  certificates  from  Bengal,  or  Coromandel,  or  Sumatra,  or  Prince  of  Wales's 
Island,  to  be  liable  to  an  import  duty  of  2^  per  cent,  the  amount  of  which  is  to  he  restored  by  an  e.iuivnlent 
drawback,  whenever  re-exported  by  land  or  by  sea. 

3d.  Neither  Cochin,  nor  Ceylon,  nor  Canara,  arc  comprehended  for  the  present  u ithin  the  sense  of 
the  two  preceding  clauses,  but  are  till  furtlicr  orders  to  he  considered,  as  far  as  regards  the  customs,  i,,  the 
light  of  foreign  dependencies.  ’ 

XIV.  No  exemptions  whatever  to  be  allowed  for  goods  imported  by  land  or  sea,  iiiulcr  ]Mo<nil  da- 

killas,  or  from  the  custom-house  at  Bownaghur.  ^ 

XV.  In  conformity  to  the  usage  adverted  to  in  Clause  2d  of  the  preamble  to  this  regulation,  piece- 
goods,  consisting  of  battas  and  white  dooties,  imported  hy  land  or  sea,  for  re-exportation,  are  to  be’subjeet 
to  the  payment  of  the  import  duty  only,  unless  dyed,  chintzed,  or  otherwise  altered  \\iihm  the  to^^n  i in 
which  case,  they  arc  to  pay  an  additional  duty  of  per  cent,  on  exportation. 

XVI.  The  boat-master  is  not  to  grant  a pilot  to  any  vessel,  until  a certificate  .shall  bo  produced  to 
him  from  the  custom-master,  of  the  import  and  expdrt  duty  on  her  trade  having  been  duly  ])aid. 

XVII.  The  pilot  of  every  vessel  which  may  have  received  her  clearance,  shall  be  onU  red  by  the  boat- 
master  to  report  to  the  custom-master,  if  any,  and  what  goods  are  receivorl  on  hoard  in  the  river,  atlcr  the 
receipt  of  such  clearance,  and  to  indorse  the  same  on  the  liack  of  the  clearance. 

XVIII.  The  custom-master  is  to  grant  receipts,  on  application  being  made  for  them,  for  all  goods  landed 
from  ships,  and  lodged  in  the  custom-house.  The  custom-master  shall  he  held  re.sjionsible  for  delivering  from 
the  custom-house  all  good.s  for  which  receipts  shall  have  been  so  granted.  Should  the  captains,  officers,  or 
passengeis,  omit  to  take  such  receipts  upon  tlieir  goods  being  landed,  and  lodgc'd  as  above  lucntiomui,  they 
are  not  to  be  entitled  to  indemnification  for  any  part  of  them  which  may  be  lost  in  passing  tlirougli 
the  custom-house. 

XIX.  Relates  to  the  modes  of  keeping  the  accounts  of  goods  imported  into  Siirnt  by  sea, 

XX.  Ready  money  only  is  to  be  received  from  merchants  in  payment  of  the  duties,  except  that  a credit 
of  from  three  to  six  months  may  he  allowed  for  the  duty  on  goods  imported  from  beyond  sea,  to  such 
persons  as  shall  deposit  sufficient  security  for  the  payment  of  the  amount  when  it  may  become  due;  the 
amount  of  which  outstanding  and  secured  duty,  the  collector  is  carefully  to  note  at  the  bottom  uT  cacli  of 
his  cash  accounts,  which  he  is  to  send  monthly  to  the  Presidency. 

XXI.  The  duty  on  cotton  is  an  exemption  from  the  general  rale  of  customs,  as  settled  in  Section  XII. 
and  is  fixed  annually,  according  to  the  established  practice,  both  as  to  rate  and  valuation,  in  tJie  ninnncr 
recited  in  the  first  article  of  this  preamble. 

XXII.  On  all  other  imports  by  land,  the  duty  is  to  be  collected  at  the  rates  specified  in  Section  XII. 
and  in  the  manner  recited  in  Clauses  2d  and  3d,  Section  X. 

XXIII.  All  goods  shall  be  passed  at  the  custom-house  with  the  least  possible  delay,  and  official  bills, 
signed  by  the  custom-master,  shall  be  given  on  all  imports  and  exports,  of  whatever  description. 

XXIV.  to  XXVII.  Relate  to  the  keeping  copies  of  registers  of  goods  irnporltMl  both  by  sea  and  land. 

XXVIII.  The  custom-master  and  his  officers  arc  required  to  bring  to  tlie  custom-house*  nil  boats  at- 
fempiing  to  pass  the  town  \trithout  landing;  and  should  any  goods  be  found  on  board,  they  .sliuiJ  be  iiubie 
to  confiscation,  in  the  manner  directed  in  Clause  2,  Section  X. 

XXIX.  No  tolauts,  or  weighmen,  or  appraisers,  nor  any  other  servants  whatever,  to  be  emplo)  ed  in 
the  ditties  of  the  custom-house,  excepting  such  as  are  furnished  with  a certificate  from  the  cii.stom-mastcr. 

XXX.  In  cases  in  which  Government  may  deem  it  proper  to  grant  exemptions  from  duties  to  indi- 
tidUflii,  the  Cu^om-master  wilt  furnished  with  special  orders  regarding  such  exemptions. 


103 


SURAT. 


TROVISIONS  AND  REFRESHMENTS. 

Trovisions  of  all  kinds  are  in  abundance,  and  reasonable.  Peas,  asparagus,  and  cucumbers  are 
amongst  the  numerous  vegetable  s.  The  river  allbrds  ample  supplies  uf  fish,  and  bread  is  better  than  in  anj 
]»art  of  India,  the  wheat  licrc  being  very  excellent. . Firewood  is  scarce,  and  the  timber  that  is  required  for 
building,  is  imported  from  Dumaun  and  the  Malabar  Coast.  Water  is  j)rocured  from  wells,  that  of  the 
river  before  the  town  being  almost  always  brackisli. 

DUMAUN, 

Or  Demaiin,  the  principal  place  belonging  to  the  Portuguese,  next  to  Goa,  on  this  side  of  India,  is 
situated  up  a river,  in  latitude  20^  2^  North,  and  longitude  73^  4'  East.  The  mouth  of  the  river  i.s  de- 
fended by  two  forts,  one  on  each  side  of  it,  and  157  yards  asunder.  St.  Jerenomi  is  the  smallest,  and  to 
the  northward.  The  main  fort  is  an  irregular  pentagon,  with  ten  bastions  to  it,  mounted  hut  indiflercntly 
with  cannon,  though  some  of  them  are  of  brass,  and  of  a very  large  calibre.  The  inside  of  the  fort  is 
neatly  laid  out  in  streets,  crossing  each  other  at  right  angles.  Very  few  but  those  of  the  military  live 
witliin  the  fort,  and  not  many  of  them;  for  the  utmost  frugality  is  required  to  make  both  officers  and  sol- 
diers appear  decent  in  their  dress;  so  that  a great  number  of  the  large  houses,  built  in  former  times,  are 
now  vacant,  and  going  to  decay.  The  two  gates  of  the  main  fort  bear  North  and  South,  distance  about 
500  yards.  Within  the  walls  are  seven  churches,  besides  two  in  ruins.  The  troops  stationed  here  are 
about  100  in  number,  and  their  military  operations  seem  to  be  carried  on  with  ease  and  regularity.  From 
abreast  of  the  forts  to  the  outside  of  the  bar  is  1,}  mile.  The  bar  is  very  flat,  and  mostly  a hard  sand. 
There  are  not  more  than  2 feet  water  on  the  bar,  low  water  spring  tides,  and  there  is  a rise  on  ordinaiy 
tides  of  17  feet,  so  that  on  springs  there  are  never  loss  than  3 fathoms  at  high  water.  Dumaun  is  known 
from  sea  by  two  very  high  steeples,  and  a fort  on  a hill,  about  two  miles  to  the  soutiiwai’d  of  the 
river.  The  Governor,  Custom-master,  and  Commandant  of  the  troops  form  the  council  upon  all  public 
affairs.  The  salaiy  of  the  (iovernor  is  4000  rupees  a year;  and  that  he  may  not  get  too  rich,  he 
relieved  from  Goa  every  third  year. 

Dumaun  was  formerly  a place  of  some  commerce ; but  at  present  it  is  much  reduced.  Ship-building 
is  carried  on  here  to  a considerable  extent,  and  some  beautiful  ships  of  800  tons  burthen,  built  of  teak, 
Imve  recently  been  launched.  Next  to  Bombay,  this  is  the  best  place  to  lay  up  small  vessels  in  for  the 
tnonsooii,  the  river  being  clear  of  danger  for  three  miles  above  the  forts.  Dumaun  was  taken  by  the 
Portuguese  in  1530.  About  four  years  afterwards  it  was  ceded  to  them  by  treaty  with  the  King  of  Cambay, 
mid  they  have  retained  possession  ever  since,  though  several  attempts  have  been  made  to  wrest  it  from  them. 

Provisions  of  all  kinds  are  remarkably  cheap  here.  The  water  is  brought  to  the  sea  side  in  jars, 
by  Gentoo  >vomen,  The  fire-wood  is  also  brought  down  in  carts,  at  one  rupee  per  load. 

BASSEIN. 

This  town  is  situated  several  miles  up  a river,  the  entrance  of  which  is  in  19°  18'  North.  It  is  of 
considerable  size,  and  strongly  Ibrtified  ; the  streets  are  wide  and  regular.  In  the  middle  of  the  town  is 
a large  sipiare,  in  wliicli  are  many  good  houses.  In  1532  it  was  taken  by  the  Portuguese,  and  plun- 
dered, and  4^)0  pieces  of  cannon  taken  away.  In  1534,  by  a treaty  with  the  King  of  Cambay,  Bas- 
sein  was  given  up  to  the  Portuguese  for  ever,  with  its  dependencies  by  sea  and  land ; it  was  likewise 
agreed  that  all  ships  bound  for  the  Red  Sea  from  Cambay,  should  set  out  from  this  port,  and  return 
to  pay  the  duties ; that  none  should  go  to  other  places  without  leave  from  the  Portuguese ; and  that 
no  ships  of  war  should  be  built  in  any  of  its  ports.  In  consequence  of  this  arrangement,  Bassem  became 
a place  of  great  trade ; but  it  declined  as  the  Portuguese  power  fell  off*.  It  was  taken  from  them  by  the 
Mahruttas,  and  again  in  1780  by  the  English.  It  was  restored  to  its  late  masters  by  the  treaty  of  1782, 
jsince  which  period  it  has  been  ceded  to  the  English,  in  whose  possession  it  still  remains. 


CHAPTER  XIII. 


Bombay. 


Description^ Coins’^ Remarks  on  Coins;  their  Weighty  i^'c.  — lVcights—Mcasures^Commene  oj 

Bmibay  and  Surat —Commerce  with  London— Extracts  from  the  Act  of  Parliament  authorizing 
Individuals  trading  to  the  British  Settlements  in  India — Company's  Regulations  relative  to  Tonnage^ 
furnished  under  the  Act’— European  Articles  suitable  to  the  Bombay  Market-Price  Current  of  European 
Articles— Commerce  with  Hamburgh— Denmark— Lisbon— Madeira— Statement  of  Commerce  with  Foreign 
Europe— Commerce  with  the  United  States  of  America — Commerce  with  the  Korihern  Parts  of  Guzzerai 
—Suraty  and  the  adjacent  Villages— Bombay— Coast  if  Coromandel— Coasts  of  Malabar  and  Canara— 
Bengal— Ceylon— StatemerU  of  Commerce  with  British  Asia — Commerce  with  the  GulJ'  of  Arabia — Gulf  of 
Persia— Cashmere^  ^c.—Cutch  and  Scindy — Bassein^  and  Villages— Goa^  and  the  Coast  of  Cancan— Pegu 
—Pulo  Pinangy  and  the  Eastward— Batavia— China — lartoM^  Places — Statement  of  the  Commerce  with 
Foreign  Asia^  — General  Recapitulation — Balance  in  Favour  of  Bombay  and  Surat-^Price  Current  of 

East  India  Goods— Import  and  Export  Duties — Custom-house  Regulations — Regulations  respecting  Ser 
vants— Rates  if  Pilotage— Light-house  Dues — Wharfage — Dock  Regulations  and  Charges — Regulations 
relative  to  Salutes  and  Gunpowder— Ship  Owners'  Allowances— Seametis  Wages,  i^'c.—Compajiy  s Regular 
lions  relative  to  Cotton  carried  in  their  Ships  to  China— Rates  of  Freight  from  Bombay  to  China— List  of 
Merchants  resident  at  Bcmbay— Rates  of  Commission— Merchant  Vessels  belonging  to  Bondf ay— Insurance 
Companies— Statement  of  Losses,  1805  to  1808,  by  Capture  and  Sea  Risks— Company" s Imports  from 

England Company"s  Exports  to  England — Revenues — Disbursements— Assets — Government  Securities— 

Bombay  Army— Pay  and  Allowances— Regulations  relative  to  Furlough  and  Retirement— Rates  of  Passage 
Moniy  to,  and  from  Europe — Regulations  relative  to  Baggage,  outward  and  homeward-bound— Regulations 
relative  to  clearing  Presents,  Wine,  Baggage,  ^c,— List  of  established  Fees  thereon— Extract  from  the  Act 
of  Parliament  relative  to  Objects  of  Natural  History — Duties  on  various  East  India  Commodities  imported  as 
Baggage,  Presents,  ^'C,—List  of  manufactured  and  unmanufactured  Goods— List  of  prohibited  Goods, 
and  Laws  relative  thereto— Bombay  Marine— Pay  and  Alloivanccs— Regulations  relaticc  to  Furlough  and 
Retirement— Comparative  Rank  of  the  Oficers  if  the  Company" s Ships  and  Company  s Army-Rank  of 
Officers  in  the  Army  and  Navy — Provisions  and  Refreshments — Articles  procurable  at  Bombay— Alkali— 
Anacardium^Anime  Gum— Arrack— Arrangoes— Awl — Beetle  Nut — Chaya  Root — Cocoa  Nuts — Coir— 
Coculua  Indicus—Concasi  Bark— Cornelians — Cotton  Wool — Euphorbi urn— Fish  Maws — Folium  Indicum 
—Lignum  Colubrinum—'MangoeS'—Nux  Vomicev— Peacock" s Feathers  Piece-goods— I uichock’—Radi  v 
Lopezerina^Sandal  Wood—Sesamum— Shawls— Squills—  I *urbith—Zcdoary» 


BOMBxVY, 

THIS  island,  on  which  is  the  seat  of  Government  for  the  western  part  of  India,  is  siluated  in  lati. 
tude  19“  66  North,  and  longitude  78°  50  East;  its  length  from  North  to  South  is  about  0]  miles,  and 
its  extreme  breadth,  near  the  fort,  about  a mile.  It  is  separated  from  the  main  land  by  an  arm  of  t ie 
eea,  and  with  the  islands  Colabah,  Salsette,  Butcher’s  Island,  Elephanta,  and  Caianjah,  forms  one  oi  the 
most  commodious  harbours  in  India. 

Z 


170 


BOMBAY, 


The  town  of  Bombay  is  near  a mile  long,  from  the  Apollo  gate  to  that  of  the  bazar,  and  about  9 
quarter  of  a mile  broad  in  the  widest  part,  from  the  bunder,  or  custom-house,  across  the  green  to  Church 
gate,  which  is  nearly  in  the  centre  of  the  walls,  between  the  Apollo  and  bazar  gates.  There  are  likewise 
two  marine  gates,  having  commodious  wharfs,  and  cranes  built  out  from  each,  with  a landing-place  at  ttte 
dock-head,  for  passengers  only,  under  certain  regulations.  Between  the  two  marine  gates  is  the  castle, 
called  Bombay  castle,  a regular  quadrangle,  well  built  of  strong  hard  stone.  In  one  of  the  bastions  is  % 
large  tank,  or  reservoir  for  water.  The  fortifications  are  numerous,  particularly  towards  the  sea,  and  are 
80  well  constructed,  the  whole  being  encompassed  by  a broad  and  deep  ditch,  which  can  be  flooded  at 
pleasure,  that  it  is  now  one  of  the  strongest  places  the  Company  have  in  India;  besides  which,  there  arc 
several  forts  and  redoubts,  the  principal  of  which  is  Mahim,  situated  at  the  opposite  extremity  of  the 
island,  so  that,  properly  garrisoned,  Bombay  may  bid  defiance  to  any  force  that  can  be  brought  against  it. 

In  the  centre  of  the  town  is  a large  open  space,  called  the  green,  which  in  the  fine  weather 
season,  is  covered  with  bales  of  cotton,  and  other  merchandise,  entirely  unprotected:  around  the 
green  are  many  large  well  built  and  handsome  houses;  the  Government  house,  and  the  church,  which  ia 
an  extremely  neat,  commodious,  and  airy  building,  are  close  to  each  other,  on  the  left  of  the  church  gate. 
On  the  right  of  the  churcli  gate  is  the  bazar,  which  is  very  crowded  and  populous,  and  where  the  native 
merchants  principally  reside;  at  its  commencement  stands  the  theatre,  a neat  handsome  structure.  This 
part  of  the  town  suffered  much  by  a destinictive  fire,  which  broke  out  in  February,  1803,  and  destroyed 
nearly  three-fourths  of  the  bazar,  together  w'ith  the  barracks,  custom-house,  and  many  other  public  build-^ 
ings,  and  property  of  immense  value  belonging  to  the  native  merchants.  Many  houses  in  the  neighbour- 
hood of  the  castle  were  battered  down  by  the  artillery,  to  stop  the  progress  of  the  flames,  and  preserve  the 
magazine,  or  in  all  probability  the  whole  town  would  have  been  destroyed.  Since  which  period  tliis  part 
of  the  town  has  been  rebuilt,  and  the  whole  much  improved,  at  a considerable  expence  to  the  Company^ 

The  dockyard  is  large,  and  well  contrived,  having  naval  stores  of  all  kinds  deposited  in  warehouses, 
together  with  large  quantities  of  timber  for  repairing  and  building  ships,  and  forges  for  all  kinds  of  smithes 
work.  The  dry  dock  has  scarce  its  equal  for  size  or  convenience;  it  has  three  divisions  and  three  pair  of  strong' 
gates,  so  as  to  be  capable  of  receiving  three  ships  of  the  line  at  the  same  time.  Near  the  dock,  is  a conve- 
nient place  to  heave  down  several  ships  at  once,  which  is  done  well,  and  with  great  expedition.  Here  is 
also  a rope  walk,  which  for  length,  situation,  and  convenience,  equals  any  in  England,  that  in  the  King's 
yard  at  Portsmouth  only  excepted;  and  like  that,  it  has  a covering  to  protect  the  workmen;  cables,  and 
all  sorts  of  lesser  cordage,  both  of  hemp  and  coir,  are  manufactured  here. 

Close  to  Bombay,  separated  only  by  a small  creek,  fordable  at  low  water,  is  Colabah,  or  Old  Woman’Is 
Island,  which  partly  foniis  the  North  side  of  the  harbour;  it  is  about  2{  miles  long.  Near  its  southern 
extremity  stands  the  light-house;  this  building  is  of  a circular  form,  and  has  within  it  a flight  of  steps  to 
ascend  to  the  top;  the  height  is  upwards  of  150  feet  above  the  level  of  the  sea,  and  the  light  may  be  seen 
in  clear  weather  the  distance  of  seven  leagues.  There  is  also  a signal  station,  where  a regular  watch  is 
kept,  day  and  night,  the  expcncc  of  which  is  defrayed  by  a rate  levied  on  all  vessels  frequenting  the  port. 
On  this  island  are  barracks  for  the  military,  and  occasionally  a camp  is  formed  here,  being  esteemed  a 
healthy  situation.  It  has  many  delightful  villas  scattered  about.  The  Point  of  Colabah,  on  which  the 
light-house  stands,  is  guarded  on  all  sides  by  an  extensive  reef  of  rocks,  divided  into  prongs;  the  most 
dangerous  is  the  S.  W.  prong,  which  forms  the  northern  boundary  of  the  entrance  into  the  harbour,  and 
Tull  reef  the  other;  the  breadth  of  the  channel  between  them  is  about  three  miles. 

The  Island  of  Salsette  is  separated  from  Bombay  by  a narrow  arm  of  the  sea,  capable  of  receiving 
small  craft  only;  it  is  about  20  miles  long,  and  15  broad.  The  soil  is  rich,  and  by  proper  cultivation,  ca- 
pable of  producing  any  thing  that  will  grow  in  tropical  climates.  This  island  belonged  to  the  Portuguese,, 
and  ought  to  have  been  ceded  to  England,  along  with  Bombay,  in  1662;  the  fulfilment  of  this  artide  how- 
evec,  being  evaded,  the  island  remained  in  their  possession,  till  it  was  taken  from  them  by  the  Mahraitas.. 


BOMBAY.  ,7, 

^ was  ^rwards  taken  by  the  English  In  1780,  and  has  continued  in  their  possession  ever  since.  It  .nay 
he  considered  granary  of  Bombay  Here  arc  excavations  of  rocks,  much  more  numerous  than  tl.oi 
if  Elephanta,  but  not  equal  to  them  either  in  size,  or  w^orknianship. 

Nearly  opposite  to  Bombay  Castle,  at  three  miles  distance,  is  Butclier’s  Island,  on  which  is  a small 
fart  with  a guard  of  soldiers.  About  two  miles  from  this,  and  still  fronting  Uie  fort,  is  the  small,  but  cele- 
Brated  island  of  Elephants.  The  immense  excavations  and  figures  cut  out  of  the  solid  rock,  causes  this 
island  to  be  visited  by  Europeans  frequenting  Bombay.  Caranjah  produces  rice,  poultry,  and  vegetables. 

At  the  entrance  of  the  harbour  are  two  small  islands,  Ilenery  and  Kenery ; the  former  is  about  a mile 
distance  from  the  main ; it  is  very  small,  and  surrounded  with  fortifications. 

Kenery  is  likewise  small,  and  lies  due  South  of  the  light-house,  in  latitude  180  42  North,  and  is  just 
iliscernible  from  the  decks  of  the  ships  in  Bombay  harbom'.  It  is  nearly  of  a circular  form,  and  has  a small 
creek  on  the  N.  E.  side,  where  boats  He,  and  is  the  only  landing-place  about  it.  The  island  is  near.  (JOO 
yards  in  circumference,  surrounded  by  a wall  irregularly  divided  by  towers,  but  no  cmbrasure.s,  or  the 
appearance  of  cannon  mounted ; it  is  covered  with  houses,  and  veiy  populous. 

The  inhabitants  of  Bombay  arc  composed  of  persons  from  almost  every  Asiatic  nation.  Notliing  has 
contributed  more  to  the  prosperity  of  the  island  than  the  mildness  of  its  government,  and  the  toleration  of 
all  religions : Persees,  Mahometans,  Gentoos,  Arabs,  and  Roman  Catholics  are  alike  protected. 

The  European  houses  of  agency  at  tliis  presidency  are  few  in  number.  No  one  of  them  could  subsist 
Upon  the  advantages  of  the  agency  business  alone,  it  being  very  confined,  and  tlie  profits  in  a great  mea- 
sure absorbed  by  interest  of  money  on  the  cash  balances  they  are  obliged  to  keep,  and  the  expences  of  the 
establishment.  Their  advantages  arise  principally  from  mercantile  transactions;  and  though  they  hold  out 
the  agency  business  to  be  the  line  they  confine  themselves  to,  yet  without  trade  they  would  scarcely  gain 
a subsistence.  Agency,  however,  gives  them  the  command  of  a capital,  which  enables  them  to  embrace 
every  favourable  opportunity  that  occurs,  to  forward  their  commercial  [lursuits.  They  usually  allow 
9 per  cent,  interest  for  money  deposited  in  their  hands ; their  charges  for  commission  and  agency  arc  here- 
after enumerated.  Many  great  and  uncommoa  events  have  occurred  during  the  war,  which  contributed 
in  a great  measure  to  advance  the  opulence  of  the  merchants  of  the  presidency.  The  fortunes  ac(]uired 
have  been  considerable  and  rapid,  more  particularly  amongst  those  who  were  proprietors  of  .ships.  These 
advantages  will  subside  on  the  return  of  peace,  and  the  merchants  and  ship  proprietors  must  resort  to 
Iheir  former  pursuits,  the  Indian  and  China  commerce. 

The  Persees  rank  next  to  the  Europeans.  They  arc  an  active,  industrious,  and  clever  people,  and 
possess  considerable  local  knowledge.  Many  of  them  are  very  opulent,  and  each  of  the  European  houses 
of  agency  have  one  of  the  principal  Persee  merchants  concerned  with  them  in  most  of  their  foreign  specu- 
lations. They  are  become  the  brokers  and  Banians  of  the  Europeans.  The  factors  belonging  to  these  dif- 
ferent houses  resident  in  China,  Bengal,  &c.  are  generally  Persees,  and  the  correspondence  is  carried  on 
in  the  country  language,  so  that  the  British  merchant  knows  no  more  than  they  communicate  to  him. 
The  servants  attached  to  Europeans  at  this  presidency  are  Persees,  and  are  the  best  of  any  in  India. 

There  arc  many  considerable  Portuguese,  Armenian,  and  Hindoo  merchants  resident  here,  who  pos- 
sess great  property,  and  are  men  of  much  integrity.  There  are  likewise  some  Borah  merclianls,  or  Maho- 
mdan  Jews,  who  carry  on  a great  trade  with  Guzzerat,  and  other  places  to  the  northward.  Upon  the 
whote,  Bombay  may  be  considered  the  emporium  of  Persia,  Arabia,  and  the  western  parts  of  India,  and 
where  the  manufactures  and  produce  of  all  parts  of  the  world  may  be  readily  procured. 

Bombay  claims  a distinguished  rank  among  our  foreign  naval  arsenals ; it  has  always  been  famous  for 
ship-building,  and  formerly  supplied  Bengal  and  other  parts  of  India  with  shipping,  and  when  any  consi- 
derable repairs  were  wanting,  they  were  obliged  to  proceed  to  Bombay  to  have  them  effected.  Many  fine 
^ihips  have  lately  been  built  at  Bengal,  so  that  this  branch  of  commerce  at  Bombay  is  rather  diminis^d. 
WithirLthese  few  years,  many  merchant  ships  of  considerable  burthen,  from  COO  to  1300  tons,  for  the 

Z2 


m 


BOMBAY. 


country  trade,  and  the  service  of  the  East  India  Company,  have  been  built  here,  which,  in  point  of  beauty 
ui  construction,  excellent  workmanship,  and  durability,  are  superior  to  any  class  of  merchant  ships  in  the 
world.  Bombay  has  the  peculiar  honour  of  being  the  first  place  in  the  British  dominions  out  of  Europe, 
at  which  a ship  of  the  line  was  ever  built ; it  has  also  added  several  fine  frigates  to  the  royal  navy : they 
are  all  built  of  Malabar  teak,  which  is  esteemed  su|)erior  to  that  of  any  other  part  of  India.  The  builds 
ers  are  Persees,  who  are  very  skilful  and  assiduous,  so  that  for  the  skill  of  its  naval  architects,  the  superi- 
ority of  its  timber,  and  the  excellence  of  its  docks,  Bombay  may  be  considered  of  the  first  importance  to 
the  British  Empire  in  India. 

Bombay  was  settled  by  the  Portuguese  soon  after  the  discovery  of  the  passage  by  the  Cape  in  1627. 
The  Englisli  and  Dutch  formed  a plan  to  obtain  possession  of  it,  and  make  it  a station  independent  of  the 
native  powers  ; but  the  Dutch  commander  dying,  it  was  abandoned.  In  1661  King  Charles  II.  set  on  foot 
n treaty  with  Portugal  for  his  marriage  with  the  Infanta,  when  it  was  detennined  to  embrace  this  opportu- 
nity of  procuring  the  cession  of  some  convenient  port  for  the  East  India  Company,  as  part  of  the  Infanta’s 
portion.  Accordingly,  by  the  treaty  of  marriage  dated  the  23d  of  June,  1661,  the  Crown  of  Portugal 
ceded  and  granted  to  the  Crown  of  England  the  island  and  harbour  of  Bombay  in  full  sovereignty.  On  the 
basis  of  this  treaty,  and  to  render  the  island  an  immediate  dependency  on  the  Crown,  the  King,  in  March, 
1662,  dispatched  a fleet  of  men  of  war,  under  the  command  of  the  Earl  of  Marlborough,  to  receive  the 
possession  of  the  island  and  its  dc'pendencies  from  the  Portuguese.  On  his  arrival  doubts  arose  wliether  the 
treaty  included  Bombay  and  its  dependencies  (Salsette,  &c.)  or  tlie  island  of  Bombay  only.  The  Viceroy 
therefore  refused  to  surrender  the  island,  upon  which  the  Earl  of  IMarlboroiigh  with  the  men  of  W'ar  pro- 
ceeded to  Surat  for  refreshments,  and  from  thence  to  Europe,  and  the  ships  with  the  troops  to  the  island  of 
Anjedivah  on  the  Malabar  Coast,  where  the  General,  Sir  Abraham  Shipman,  and  the  greater  part  of  the 
troops  died.  His  successor,  in  November,  1664*,  concluded  a treaty  with  the  Viceroy  of  Goa,  renouncing, 
on  the  part  of  England,  all  pretensions  to  the  dependencies  of  Bombay,  and  accepting  the  cession  of  the 
island  only  It  was  accordingly  delivered  over  to  the  English  on  the  25th  of  February,  1665. 

The  revenues  of  the  island  not  being  eciual  to  the  expence  incuiTed  in  retaining  it,  and  political  and 
commercial  reasons  superadded,  the  King,  by  letters  patent  dated  the  27th  of  March,  1668,  tranferred  tlie 
island  of  Bombay  to  the  London  East  India  Company  in  perpetuity,  ‘‘  with  all  ilie  rights,  profits,  and  ter- 
“ ritoi-ios  thereof,  in  as  full  a manner  as  the  King  himself  possessed  them,  by  virtue  of  the  treaty  with  the 
“ King  of  Portugal,  by  wliicli  the  island  w'as  ceded  to  his  Majesty,  to  be  held  by  the  Company  of  the  King^ 
in  free  and  common  succage,  as  of  the  manor  of  East  Greenwich,  on  payment  of  the  annual  rent  of  £10 
“ in  gold  on  the  30th  of  September  in  each  year.” 

On  the  28th  of  September,  1668,  the  island  was  delivered  over  to  the  Company's  servants,  and  every 
exertion  made  to  put  it  in  a re.spectable  state  of  defence,  and  to  eneourage  settlers.  In  1673  the  island, 
from  almost  a desert,  had  been  made  the  centre  of  the  C'ompany’s  trade,  protected  by  strong  fortifications, 
having  upwards  of  100  pieces  of  cannon  mounted,  and  a suflicient  garrison.  In  1678  the  Company, 
finding  the  eliarges  of  the  establishment  very  heavy,  adopted  an  economical  system,  reducing  the  salaries, 
and  lowering  the  rank  of  their  military  officers,  witich  occasioned  so  much  discontent,  that  on  the  27th  of 
December,  1683,  a revolt  took  place  on  the  island,  which  threatened  serious  consequences  to  the  Company’s 
affairs.  Captain  Richard  Keigwhi,  who  commanded  the  garrison,  seized  the  Governor,  and  such  members 
of  the  council  as  adhered  to  him,  assembled  the  troops  and  militia,  annulled  the  authority  of  the  Com- 
pany by  proclamation,  declared  the  island  to  be  under  the  King’s  protection,  and  required  tbe  inhabitanU 
to  take  the  oaths  of  allegiance  to  the  King,  and  to  renounce  their  obedience  to  the  Company.  With  this 
proclamation  the  whole  of  the  garrison,  militia,  and  inhabitants  complied.  Every  exertion  was  used  by 
the  President  at  Surat  to  persuade  the  revolters  to  return  to  their  duty  to  the  Company.  Repeated  pro- 
mises of  pardon,  and  redress  of  grievances,  were  unavailing;  and  it  was  not  till  the  lOth  of  November,  1684^ 
when  Sir  Thomas  Grantham,  who  had  a King’s  commission,  arrived  from  Surat,  and  landing  with  prompt* 


BOMBAY. 


173 


ilude  and  spirit  without  any  attendants,  demanded  a conference  with  Captain  Keip^win,  the  result  of 
which  was  that  Kcigwin  agreed  to  deliver  up  the  fort  to  him  as  a King’s  officer,  on  condition  of  a free 
pardon  to  himself  and  his  adherents:  Jind  the  island  was  formally  surrendered  on  the  19th  of  Novenibei*, 
to  Sir  Thomas  Grantham,  and  by  him  transferred  to  the  Company’s  senior  civil  servants. 

The  Company,  in  a statement  of  their  trade,  ports,  shipping,  &c.  publi  bed  in  lOfiH,  speaking  of 
Bombay,  say,  that,  by  means  of  their  Isle  of  Bombay,  they  have  brought  thither  the  principal  part  of 
“ the  trade  of  Surat,  where  from  400(1  families,  computed  wlu*n  the  Company  took  possession  of  it,  they 
are  since  increased  to  50,000  families,  all  subject  to  the  Company’s  laws ; that  the  Company  had  made 
“ a most  successful  war  with  the  Mogul,  and  brought  him  to  reasonable  terms,  confirmed  by  that  Prince’s 
own  phirmaund,  and  secured  by  a strong  garrison  at  Bombay,  which  being  one  of  the  best  ports  in 
India,  and  lying  so  near  Surat,  the  great  emporium  of  the  Tiulian  trade  to  Arabia,  Persia,  Bussornli, 
“ and  the  Red  Sea,  if  the  English  trade  had  not  been  brought  thither  to  load  home,  and  not  at  the  river 
‘‘  of  Surat  as  formerly,  it  would  not  have  been  near  so  beneficial.” 

Since  that  period,  the  island  has  continued  increasing  in  wealth  and  consequence,  and  bids  fair  to  be 
the  most  durable  of  the  British  possessions  in  India. 

The  government  of  Bombay  and  its  dependencies  is  by  law  vested  in  a Governor  and  three  counsel, 
lors,  who  are,  in  respect  to  the  native  powers  of  India,  levying  war,  making  peace,  collecting  and  applying 
revenues,  levying  and  employing  forces,  or  other  matters  ot  civil  or  military  government,  under  the  con- 
troul  of  the  Government  General  of  Bengal;  and  are,  in  all  cases  wliatever,  to  obey  their  orders,  unless  the 
Court  of  Directors  shall  have  sent  any  orders  repugnant  thereto,  not  known  to  the  Government  General, 
of  which,  in  that  case,  they  are  to  give  the  Government  General  immediate  advice.  1 he  Court  of  Di- 
rectors appoint  the  Governor  and  members  of  the  Council,  and  likewise  the  Commander  in  Chief  of  tiie 
forces : the  latter  is  not,  ex  officio,  to  be  of  the  Council,  but  is  not  disqualified  from  being  so,  if  the  Court 
of  Directors  shall  tldnk  fit  to  appoint  him;  and  when  he  is  a member  of  the  Council,  he  takes  precedence  of 
the  other  counsellors.  The  civil  members  of  the  Council  are  to  be  appointed  from  the  list  of  civil  servants, 
who  have  resided  twelve  years  in  the  service  in  India.  The  method  of  conducting  business  at  the  Council- 
board,  is  as  follows:— IVlatters  propounded  by  the  President,  are  first  proceeded  upon:  he  may  adjourn  the 
discussion  of  questions  put  by  the  other  members  of  Council,  but  not  more  than  twice.  All  orders  arc  ex- 
pressed to  be  made  by  the  Governor  in  Council.  The  Governor  has  power  to  act  contrary  to  the  opinions 
of  the  other  members  of  the  Council,  taking  upon  himself  the  whole  responsibility.  On  such  extraordinary 
occasions,  the  Governor  and  counseUors  are  to  communicate  to  each  other  their  opinions  and  reasons  by 
minutes  in  writing,  and  to  meet  a second  time;  and  if  both  retain  their  first  opinion,  the  minutes  arc  cn- 
tered  on  the  consultations,  and  the  orders  of  the  Governor  are  to  be  valid,  and  put  in  execution. 


COINS. 

Accounts  are  kept  at  Bombay  in  rupees,  quarters,  and  rcas.  The  following  is  a list  of  the  currciit 

coins,  with  their  sterling  value,  estimating  the  Bombay  rupee  at  2s.  6d.  sterling.  ^ ^ ^ ^ 


2 Reas 

4 Reas 

6 Reas,  or  3 urdees 
8 Reas,  or  4 urdees 
3J  Fuddeas,  or  pice 
I2i  Pice,  or  4 annas 
25  Pice,  or  8 annas 
50  Pice,  or  16  annas 

5 Rupees 

S Pauncheas,  or  15  rupees 


> make  < 


1 Urdee 


0 0 0 0 


Doogany,  or  single  pice^%v..O  0 0 1 

Doreea  0 0 0 1 

Fuddea,  or  double  pice^^O  0 0 2 

Anna-*K%^'v^%— ^0  0 13 

Quarter  Rupee-^^  0 0 7 2 

Half  Rupee  ^0  1 3 

Rupee  2 0 

Paunchea  12  6 

Gold  mobur  17  6 


60 

20 

80 

40 

50 


m 


BOMBAY. 


limarks  on  the  Coins  of  Bombay, 

Silver.— Tho  old  Bombay  rupee  is  the  same  as  was  coined  at  Surat  uifder  the  Mogul  Government 
It  weighed  178,314  grains,  and  contained  1,24  percent,  of  alloy.  By  an  ancient  agreement  with  the 
Nabob  of  Surat,  the  rupee  of  both  Oovernments  was  to  circulate  through  both  at  an  equal  value  ; while 
they  mutually  pledged  themselves  to  keep  up  the  coin  to  its  exact  standard  of  weight  and  fineness.  The 
Nabob,  however,  did  not  keep  to  this  agreement ; for  hb  rupees  were  found  soon  afterwards  to  contain, 
instead  of  1,24  per  cent,  of  alloy,  no  less  than  10,12,  and  even  15  per  cent  The  consequence  of  this 
was,  that  all  the  Bombay  rupees  were  carried  to  Surat  to  be  recoined.  This  mint  was  entirely  stopped  in 
its  silver  coinage  for  more  than  twenty  years,  and  the  circulation  of  silver  was  occupied  by  the  Surat  rupee. 

In  this  situation  of  tilings  tlie  merchants  could  not  afford  to  coin  their  bullion  here,  and  therefore 
Bombay  was  long  without  a silver  coinage  of  its  own ; when  Government  in  1800  ordered  the  Surat 
rupee  to  be  struck  in  this  mint,  and  since  that  time  the  rupee  has  been  kept  at  an  equal  value  in  both 
mints.  In  both  the  silver  rupee  weighs  179  grains,  and  contains  7,97  per  cent  of  alloy. 

Gold. — In  the  year  1774  the  gold  mohur  was  made  of  the  same  weight  as  the  silver  rupee.  It  was 
ordered  to  be  of  the  fineness  of  a Venetian,  and  to  pass  for  15  silver  rupees.  In  this  coinage,  therefore, 
14,9  grains  of  silver  represented  one  grain  of  gold,  for  such  is  the  proportion  between  tlie  quantity  of 
gold  in  thb  gold  mohur,  and  the  silver  in  15  old  Bombay  rupees.  When  the  Surat  silver  currency  had 
occupied  the  circulation,  this  proportion  between  gold  and  silver  was  quite  destroyed ; so  that  gold  coined 
according  to  the  regulation  of  1774,  was  now  exchanged  for  no  more  than  thirteen  times  its  weight  in 
silver,  and  often  fdr  much  less. 

In  order  to  reitiedy  thb,  and  to  bring  back  the  coins  of  gold  and  silver  to  nearly  their  ancient  pro- 
portions, and  their  relative  value  in  the  market,  it  was  ordered  in  1800,  that  the  gold  mohur  should  be  of 
the  same  weight  as  the  silver  rupee,  that  it  should  contain  the  same  quantity  of  alloy,  and  that  it  should 
pass  for  15  rupees.  At  present,  therefore,  in  the  Bombay  coins,  15  grains  of  silver  represent  one  of  gold* 

Coins  of  gold  have  never  circulated  as  a coin,  either  at  Surat,  or  in  the  Mahratta  states  on  this  side 
of  India.  They  are  occasionally  carried  to  those  parts,  but  it  is  only  as  bullion. 

The  following  table  was  drawn  from  actual  assays;  the  first  column  contains  the  alloy  in  100  parts 
of  each  of  the  dilferent  coins;  the  second  column  contains  their  weight  in  grains.  From  these  two  columns 
Uie  value  of  the  whole  of  the  coins  may  easily  and  with  perfect  accuracy  be  ascertained. 


Silver  Coins. 

British  standard  of  silver 
Spanish  dollar  A.  D.  1790. 

Old  Spanish  4 real  piece. 

New  German  crown^..^........^^..^^^, 

Bombay  rupee 
Goa  pardoe^..^^.^. 

Pondicherry  rupee 
Bussorah  Crux 
Sultaiiny  half  rupee 
Canannore  fanam 
Old  fanam  coined  at  the  presidency 
Madras  rajapour. 

Lucknow 

Madepoor  or  Nowse  rupee 

Jeypoor . 


Weight  In. 
Grains. 


416 


178, 3S 


85.68 

35.68 
...  5,82..«^74^!)5 

78,29 

6,62...-«.173,95 
2,56 175 


BOMBAY, 


rrs 


Mahratta  and  Guzzerates  Silver  Coins. 


Chandeny  rupee, 
Oufcery 


7,84 


S]u*ee  sicca  of 
Halee  siccawM 


Ougcin  sicca. 

Maisor  ornew  Holkar , 

Indore  Holkar . 

N.  B.  The  old  Ougien  Maisor,  and  Indore  rupees, 
Chinsouree 

Surat  rupee  as  now  established^ 

New  Broach  rupee  (weight  and  alloy  irregular). 
Old  Broach  rupce^ 

New  Brodera  rupee% 

Old  Brodera  nipee« 

Ana  Sai  coined  at  Caira^^v^,^,.,.. 

Amedabad  sicca^v 
Ana  Sai  coined  at  Fitlad, 

Mungal  SaK 
Mumo  Sai 

Seea  Sai  (coined  in  Futty8ing\s  time) 

Cambay  Saw.vvv»%vv»%^w,^^^^ 


8,17^. 
2,27 — 

5,47 

4,57 — 
5,75^^ 


.172,97 

175 

172,57 

,^175,2G 

...174,27 

...173,10 

...173,70 


arc  all  better  than  the  new. 

6,7 172,7 

7,97 179 

...  7,75 — ....177,95 

1,66 177,95 

..11,82 178,51 

9,43 178,51 

12 176,25 

10,6 178 

.14,77 177,25 

...11,82. 178,54 

11,12 177,75 

11,53 175,75 

.15,2  178 


Gold  Coins. 


British  standard  of 
Bengal  19  sun  sicca  gold  mohur.. 

Old  Bombay  gold  mohur  now  in  circulation. 
Standard  of 
Star  pagoda.. 


8,33 

66.. 


.190,894 


...  4,66........1 78,333 

178,333 
52,75 


Hyderee  boon 
Sultanny  boon 
Calicut 

Saik  Sai  (a  Mahratta  gold  coin) 

Gold  mohur  of  the  Surat  impression  now 

Comparative  Vino  of  the  relative  Denominatione  of  Rupees  current  in  India, 


curren 


100  CurreBt  Hs 


100  Arcot  Bs. 


R. 

A. 

p. 

dec. 

R. 

A. 

P. 

dec. 

Sicca  rupees  ...^.86 

3 

3 

72 

Sicca  rupees......95 

11 

0 

41 

Sonaut  ditto....w.90 

1 

5 

29 

100  Sonaut  Hs.  •< 

Bombay  ditto  ..100 

14 

6 

54 

Bombay  ^itto....90 

14 

6 

54 

Arcot  ditto  ......1 02 

12 

5 

33 

^ Arcot  ditto.%»..»..^92 

9 

5 

77 

Current  ditto....!  1 1 

0 

0 

0 

" Sicca  rupees  .^....93 

1 

7 

86 

'Sonaut  rupees..  104 

8 

0 

86 

Sonant  ditto...w.97 

4 

9 

08 

100  Sicca  Rs.  ^ 

Bombay  ditto..  105 

7 

3 

27 

Bombay  ditt0w^98 

2 

1 

91 

Arcot  ditto......!  07 

6 

6 

22 

Current  dittOv%..108 

0 

0 

0 

Current  ditto..-**!  16 

0 

0 

0 

17fl 


BOMBAY- 


The  following  is  a Table  for  reducing  Bombay  Rupees  Into  the  preceding  denominations  of  Rupees, 
calculated  upon  the  principle  of  100  Bombay  Rupees  being  equal  to  110  current  Rupees. 


Bombay  Hiipees. 

Kupees  ■■■ 

R.  A.  P. 


Sonaut  Rupees. 

Arcot  Rupees. 

R.  A,  P.  Dec 

R.  A.  P.  Dec 

Current  Rupees. 

R.  A.  P.  Dec 


1 0 15  2 6 0 15  10  27  1 0 3 55 

2 1 U 4.  13  1 15  8 64  2 0 7 11 

3 2 13  G 20  2 15  6 81  3 0 10  66 

4 3 12  8 27  3 15  5 8 4 I 2 22 

5 4 11  10  34  4 15  3 35  5 1 5 77 

6 5 11  0 41  5 15  1 62  6 1 9 33 

7 6 10  2 48  6 14  11  89  7 2 0 88 

8 7 9 4 55  7 14  10  16  8 2 4 41. 

9 8 8 6 62  8 14  8 43  9 2 7 99 

10  9 7 8 68  9 14  6 70  10  2 11  65 

11  10  6 10  74  10  14  4 97  11  3 3 10 

12  11  6 0 81  11  13  3 24  12  3 6 66 

13  12  5 2 88  12  13  1 51  13  3 10  11 

14  13  4 4 95  13  13  11  78  14  4 1 67 

15  14  3 7 2 14  13  10  05  15  4 6 22 

16  15  2 9 9 15  13  8 32  16  4 8 78 

17  16  1 11  16  16  13  6 59  17  5 0 33 

18  17  1 1 23  17  13  4 86  18  5 3 89 

19  18  , 0 3 30  18  13  3 13  19  5 7 45 

20  18  * 5 5 37  19  13  1 40  20  5 11  11 

30  28  , 7 2 6 29  11  8 10  30  8 10  66 

40  37  ' 4 10  75  39  10  2 80  40  11  10  22 

50  47  , 6 7 44  49  8 9 51  50  14  9 77 

60  56  H 4 13  59  7 4 21  61  1 9 33 

70  66  6 0 82  69  5 10  91  71  4 8 88 

80  75  13  9 51  79  4 5 61  81  7 8 44 

90  85  5 6 20  89  3 0 31  91  10  7 95 

100  94  13  2 89  99  1 7 2 101  13  7 55 

200  189  10  5 79  198  3 2 4 203  11  3 10 

300  284  7 8 68  297  4 9 6 305  8 10  65 

400  379  4 11  58  396  6 4 8 407  6 6 20 

500  474  2 2 48  495  7 11  10  509  4 1 75 

600  568  15  5 37  594  9 6 12  611  1 9 SO 

700  663  12  8 27  693  11  I 14  712  IS  4 85 

800  758  9 11  16  792  12  8 16  814  13  0 40 

900  8.53  7 2 6 891  14  3 18  916  10  7 95 

1000  948  4 4 96  990  15  10  20  1018  8 3 50 

2(KX)  1896  8 9 92  1981  15  8 40  2037  0 7 0 

3001)  2844  13  2 88  2972  15  6 60  305.5  8 10  50 

40<X)  3793  1 7 84  3963  15  4 80  4074  1 2 0 

5000  4741  6 0 SO  4954  15  3 0 5092  9 5 50 

6(XX)  5689  10  5 76  .5945  15  1 20  6111  1 9 0 

7000  6637  14  10  72  69.36  14  11  40  7129  10  0 50 

80(X)  7586  3 3 68  7927  14  9 60  8148  2 4 0 

9000  85.34  7 8 64  8918  14  7 80  2166  10  7 50 

10000  9482  12  1 60  9909  14  6 0 10185  2 11  0 


1 1 7 20 

2 3 2 40 

3 4 9 60 

4 6 4 80 

5 8 0 0 

6 9 7 20 

7 11  2 40 

8 12  9 60 

9 14  4 80 
11  0 0 0 

12  1 7 20 

13  3 2 40 

14  4 9 60 

15  6 4 80 

16  8 0 0 

17  9 7 20 

18  11  2 40 

19  12  9 60 

20  14  4 80 
22  0 0 0 
33  0 0 0 
44  0 0 0 
55  0 0 0 
66  0 0 0 
77  0 0 0 
88  0 0 0 
99  0 0 0 

110  0 0 0 
220  0 0 0 
330  0 0 0 
440  0 0 0 
550  0 0 0 
660  0 0 0 
770  0 0 0 
880  0 0 0 
990  0 0 0 
1100  0 0 0 
2200  0 0 0 
.3.300  0 0 0 
4400  0 0 0 
5500  0 0 0 
6600  0 0 0 
7700  0 0 0 
8800  0 0 0 
9900  0 0 0 
11000  0 0 0 


BOMBAY, 


•i^n 


WEIGHTS. 

The  English  vreights  being  in  common  use  here,  and  at  all  the  other  Presidencies,  the  following  account 
of  their  relative  proportions  may  be  found  useful. 

The  two  principal  weights  established  in  Great  Britain  are  the  avoirdupois  and  troy  weight;  the 
last  is  again  divided  into  diamond  and  money  weights;  the  grain  is  understood  to  be  a grain  of  wheat, 
gathered  in  the  middle  of  the  ear: 


AVOIRDUPOIS  WEIGHT. 


3 Scruples 

1 Dram. 

16  Drams 

1 Ounce. 

16  Ounces 

^make  • 

1 Pound. 

28  Founds 

1 Quarter. 

4 Quarters 

1 Cwt. 

20  Cwt. 

. 1 Ton. 

Comparison  between  troy  and  avoirdujiois. 


176  Troy  lbs. 
175  Troy  ounces 
1 Troy  lb. 

1 Avoir,  lb 
1 Avoir.  oE. 

1 Troy  on. 


>make 


'144.  Avoir.  lbs. 

192  Avoir,  ounces. 
5760  Grains. 

7000  Grains. 

437{  Grains. 

.480  Grains. 


the  avoir,  oz.  is  near  ^ less  than  the  troy  ounce. 


TROY  WEIGHTS. 


24  Grains  ^ I Penny  wt 

20  Penny  wts.  ^make  -j  1 Ounces 

12  Ounces.  ^ ^1  Pound. 


Tlie  moneyers  have  a peculiar  subdivision  of  tlif 
grain  troy  thus : 


24  Blanks 
20  Prnots 
24  Droits. 
20  Mites. 


>make  < 


1 ' Periot. 
1 Droit. 
1 Mite. 

1 Grain. 


DIAMOND  WEIGHTS 

Are  carats,  each  carat  being  divided  into  4 grains 
or  64  parts.  The  ounce  troy  contains  150  such 
carats;  therefore  this  carat  is  3|  grains  troy;  hence 
5 diamond  grains  are  equal  to  4 gold  grains. 


ji  Table  shewing  the  Avoirdupois  Pounds  conjoined  in  any  given  Number  of  Troy  Pounds^  and  vice  versa 


Avoirdupois  lbs. 
ind  deciniuU  of  a lb. 

.0,822867142 

1,645714286’ 

..2,468571428 

1,291428571 

.4,114285714 


>,760000000 

.6,582857141 

.7,405714280 


Avoirdupois 
lbs. 


Troy  lbs.  and 
decimals  of  a lb. 

.1,216277777 
.2,430556555 
.,,^,645833333 
.4,861111111 

5. ^6,076388888 

6,, ,^7,291666666 

R, .506944444 

8  ,,,9,722222222 

9  10,937500000 


EXPLANATION. 

For  tens  of  pounds  remove  the  decimal  point  one  place  fonvard,  for  hundreds  of  lbs.  two  places,  for 
thousands  three  places,  an^  so  on,  as  in  the  following  examples; 


In  175  troy  lbs.  how  many  avoirdupois  lbs? 

KM  lbs.  troy  is  <«.^^v^%^voirdupois  lbs.  82,2857 

67,6000 

176  tpoy  lbs.  be-u-%j^%^avoirdupois  lbs.  144,0000 


In  1441bs.  avoirdupois  how  many  troy  Ibs..^ 

100  avoirdupois  Ibs.-^ww^e^troy  lbs.  121,528 

. ditto  48,611 
. ditto  4,861 


144  avoirdupois  lbs.  ise^>%vk*^tr<)y  lbs.  175,000 


Aa 


178 


BOMBAY. 


The  Bombay  great  wights  are  pice,  seers,  maunds,  and  candies,  thus  divided : 

lb.  02.  dri.  dec. 

SO  Pke  ) f ^ Seer«%«.%%%%%Avoirdupoid  0 14  14  93 

40  Seers  tmalrei  1 Maund  28  0 0 

20  Maunds  ) ( 1 Candy ^60  0 0 

Although  the  above  represent  the  common  received  standard  of  gross  weights  at  Bombay,  yet  there 
are  a great  number  of  commodities  which  are  not  governed  by  them,  but  sold  by  the  Surat  maund,  whicli^ 
notwithstanding  it  is  said  to  contain  only  40  seers,  is  sometimes  41,  42,  43,  through  all  the  intermediate 
gradations  up  to  40 ; nor  is  the  candy  uniformly  confined  to  20  maunds,  as  will  be  observed  in  the  under* 
mentioned  list  of  imports. 


List  of  Imports^  how  bought  and  sold^  with  the  Number  of  Seers  to  the  Maund* 

Bengal. 


Candle8«w«.^««^Bombay  maund  of  40  seers. 
Ginger  maund  of  40  seers. 

Ghee  of  2 Pucca  maunds. 

Gunnie8«>^^^wvv.Corge  of  20  pieces. 

Long  Pepper^-v.^Surat  maund  of  44  seers. 
Lump  Lac  ditto. 

Opium«^^«%%^*««.««%v«Che8t  of  4 Surat  maunds. 
Piece  Goods  ^.v^Corge  of  20  pieces. 

Rice  a^^%^wv^^^Bag  of  1681bs. 


Red  Woodv«..«««.^^Surat  Candy  of  21  maunds. 
Silk,  raw..^v^.>%^%^^^per  Pucca  seer. 

Saltpetre  of  1681bs. 

Sugar  .>%.^%^v%%^»».^Ditto  ditto. 

Ditto,  Java  .^^^^^wSurat  nuiund  of  41  seers. 

Turmeric«^^^^^ww%Surat  candy  of  22  maunds. 
W maund  of  42  seers. 
Wood  OiIv%«^v%«.«v^wv«Jar  of  2 Pucca  maunds. 


Malabar  Coast. 

Arrack,  Goa  ..^v^^per  leager  or  gallon. 

Beetle  nut..w.^«v%«^Bombay  candy  of  21  mds. 

Coir  Laccadive^i^Ditto  ..v.^v%«.v«^valitto. 

Cardamoms  .^^.^^^Surat  maund  of  42  seers. 

Cassia  Lignea^^^^Ditto  ditto. 

Persia,  Muscat,  Mocha,  and  Juoda. 

Almonds>%^^,^^^>^^Surat  maund  of  42  seers,  Hartall  ^....^^^^^^Surat  maund  of  44  seers. 

Aloes  ..^..^..^..^.^^Ditto  Kismisses  .^.^^v%vw,««Ditto  42  seers. 

Amber,  false  «%vw%Ditto  ■>%^w>%%%%v%Ditto.  Lapis  Tutiiew.^wi^Ditto  44  seers. 

A88afoetida.^^^^%%^»J)itto  -.^^..^^^Ditto.  Myrrh  Ditto. 

Brimstone  ...ww^^Surat  Candy  of  22  rads.  Olibanum  w^%a^^M.%wSurat  candy  of  21  maunds. 

Coffee  ^%%.^w%v^Surat  maund  of  42  seers.  Rose*-water...^^^^.v%%per  Chest. 

Copper,  Lump  %..^Ditto  40  seers.  Red  Earth  ..^v^^w^Surat  candy  of  22  maunda. 

Ditto,  old..<,^»v«.^DittQ  42  seers.  Rose  Maloc8...^%..ww^Surat  maund  of  44  seers. 

Cummin  Seed^^.^Ditto  Ditto.  Ruinas  -.^,««v«.^.^^^per  Chest. 

Dates,  dry^^y^^Surat  candy  of  21  mds.  Senna  .^^^....^.^.^^Surat  maund  of  44  seers. 

Ditto,  weU,^<^«%^Candy  of  30  Bombay  mds.  Salop  .. — Ditto  Ditto. 

Bombay  candy  of  21  mds.  Sal  Ammoniac  .^.^...^Ditto  Ditto. 

Gum  Arabic  .^%««^v«*«Surat  maund  of  44  seers.  Seed  and  other  Pe8rL«»«.^«per  Tola. 

China  produce,  and  other  commodities,  not  above  enumerated,  are  stated  hereafter. 


Coculus  Indicu8«w.%«Surat  maund  of  42  seers. 
Cocoa  nutsv^<v.^^^per  1000  of  1250. 

Pepper  .^...^^v^v^^Bombay  candy  of  21  maunds. 
Sharks^  Fins  •.^v^v.v.Surat  maund  of  42  seers. 
Sandal  Wood  .^v%«v«^Bombay  candy  of  21  maunds.. 


BOMBAY 


170 


A TMt  of  Bombay  Mamit  brought  into  Surat  Maund»,  of  differtnl  Sctrt  to  the  Maund,  agreeable  lo  Avoir- 
dufoie  Weight,  1 Bombay  Maund  of  40  Seers  being  considered  equal  to  30  Sural  Seers. 


Bombajr  40  Seen, 

in  Surat 

Bombay 

40  Seers, 

Bombay 

40  Seers, 

iBombay 

40  Seers, 

Bombay  40  Seers, 

Bombay  40  Seers. 

40  Seen. 

in  Surat 

41  Seers. 

In  Surat 

42  Seers. 

jin  Surat  43|  Seers. 

in  Surat  44  Seers. 

inBomba) 

42Seerk 

Pounds. 

Surat 

Mds. 

C 

1 

3 

£ 

Deci- 

mals 

Surat  K 
Mds.  J 

1 

Deci- 

mals. 

Surat 

iMds. 

e 

I 

^ Deci- 
de muls. 

Surat 

.Mds. 

12 

$ 

d Dcci- 
mals. 

.Surat 

Mds. 

1 

jj  Deci- 
de mats. 

Bom 

Mds. 

§ 

CO 

gDeci 
£ mals. 

i 

0 

0 

8 

03:) 

0 

U 

7 

830 

0 

0 

7 

0.5.1 

0 

0 

7 

430 

0 

0 

7 

28  J 

“tT 

0 

10 

1 

0 

0 

16 

070 

0 

0 

15 

679 

0 

0 

15 

301 

0 

0 

11 

803 

0 

0 

U 

616 

0 

0 

20  407 

i 

0 

0 

2i 

lOi't 

0 

0 

2.3 

517 

0 

0 

22 

9.50 

0 

0 

22 

294 

0 

0 

21 

9n 

0 

1 

0 010 

1 

0 

1 

2 

U2 

0 

1 

1 

358 

0 

1 

0 

600 

0 

0 

29 

726 

0 

0 

29 

220 

0 

1 

10  81.5 

2 

0 

2 

4 

28.5 

0 

2 

2 

716 

0 

o 

1 

221 

0 

1 

29 

4.51 

0 

1 

28 

410 

0 

2 

21  6.31 

;i 

0 

3 

6 

42 

b 

3 

4 

06H 

0 

3 

1 

824 

0 

2 

29 

172 

U 

2 

27 

060 

U 

4 

2 430 

4 

0 

4 

8 

556 

0 

4 

5 

42-1 

0 

4 

2 

4.36 

0 

3 

28 

890 

0 

3 

26 

880 

0 

5 

13  248 

ri 

0 

5 

10 

70  J 

0 

5 

6 

792 

0 

5 

03U 

0 

4 

28 

632 

0 

4 

26 

100 

0 

6 

24  072 

<> 

0 

6 

12 

852 

0 

6 

8 

112 

0 

6 

.t 

66(1 

0 

5 

28 

350 

0 

.5 

25 

320 

0 

8 

4 881 

7 

0 

7 

15 

0 

0 

7 

9 

501 

0 

7 

4 

281 

0 

6 

28 

09: 

6 

6 

21 

.510 

0 

9 

15  708 

0 

0 

8 

17 

189 

0 

8 

10 

800 

0 

8 

4 

881 

0 

7 

27 

816 

0 

1 

23 

700 

0 

10 

26  520 

9 

0 

9 

19 

278 

0 

9 

12 

216 

0 

9 

5i 

496 

0 

8 

27 

540 

0 

8 

S9 

980 

0 

12 

7 832 

10 

0 

10 

21 

426 

0 

10 

13 

584 

0 

10 

6 

120 

0 

9 

27 

264 

0 

0 

22 

200 

0 

13 

18  1.56 

11 

0 

U 

23 

5G5 

0 

11 

14 

910 

0 

11 

6 

720 

0 

10 

26 

988 

0 

10 

21 

420 

0 

14 

28  9,50 

0 

12 

25 

71.S 

0 

12 

16 

296 

0 

12 

7 

314 

0 

11 

26 

724 

0 

11 

20 

610 

0 

16 

9 792 

13 

b 

13" 

27 

852 

0 

13 

17 

652 

0 

13 

7 

920 

0 

12 

26 

418 

0 

12 

I9 

860 

0 

17 

20  60 4 

11 

0 

15 

0 

0 

0 

11 

19 

020 

0 

14 

8 

.560 

0 

13 

26 

184 

0 

13 

19 

080 

0 

19 

1 428 

lA 

0 

16 

2 

139 

0 

15 

20 

376 

0 

15 

9 

180 

0 

11 

2.5 

908 

0 

11 

18 

.SOO 

0 

20 

12  240 

10 

0 

17 

4 

278 

0 

16 

21 

732 

0 

16 

9 

780 

0 

15 

25 

632 

0 

15 

17 

520 

0 

21 

23  040 

17 

0 

18 

6 

426 

0 

17 

23 

088 

0 

17 

10 

401 

0 

16 

25 

350 

0 

16 

16 

7 to 

0 

23 

3 876 

18 

0 

19 

8 

565 

0 

18 

24 

44-1 

0 

18 

n 

001 

0 

17 

25 

080' 

0 

17 

15 

"OGO 

0 

24 

14  676 

19 

0 

20 

10 

713 

0 

19 

25 

812 

0 

19 

It 

628 

0 

18 

24 

720 

0 

18 

1.5 

180 

0 

25 

25  500 

30 

0 

21 

12 

852 

0 

20 

27 

168 

0 

20 

12 

210 

6 

19 

21 

540 

0 

19 

14 

400 

0 

27 

5 292 

21 

0 

22 

15 

0 

0 

21 

28 

536 

0 

21 

12 

852 

0 

20 

24 

276 

0 

20 

13 

620 

0 

28 

ir  136 

23 

0 

23 

17 

139 

0 

22 

29 

892 

0 

22 

13 

464 

0 

21 

23 

0 

6 

21 

12 

810 

0 

29 

27  948 

33 

0 

24 

19 

278 

0 

24 

1 

236 

0 

23 

14 

064 

0 

22 

23 

724 

0 

22 

12 

060 

0 

31 

8 760 

21 

0 

25 

21 

436 

0 

25 

2 

604 

0 

24 

14 

688 

0 

23 

23 

418 

0 

23 

11 

280 

0 

32 

19  584 

35 

0 

26 

33 

565 

0 

26 

3 

960 

0 

25 

15 

.300 

0 

24 

23 

172 

0 

24 

10 

50f; 

0 

34 

0 396 

30 

0 

27 

25 

713 

0 

27 

5 

328 

0 

26 

15 

912 

0 

25 

22 

908 

0 

25 

9 

T20 

0 

35 

11  220 

27 

0 

28 

27 

852 

0 

28 

6 

682 

0 

27 

10 

524 

0 

26 

22 

632 

0 

26 

8 

940 

0 

36 

22’  320 

Bomb. 

Surat  6 

g 

Deci- 

Surat C 

Deci- 

Surat 

- C 

g Deci- 

Surat 

tA 

6 

Oeci- 

Isurat  C 

6 

Deci- 

Bom 

• i 

d Dect- 

Mdi. 

Mds. 

$ 

£ 

mals. 

Mds. 

$ 

mals,  ^ 

'Mds. 

^ mals. 

Mds. 

1 

£ 

mals 

Mds. 

V 

CA 

A 

mals. 

Mds. 

■ 1 

jg  mals. 

1 

0 

30 

0 

0 

0 

29 

8 

O4o' 

0 

28 

17 

130 

0 

27 

22 

368 

0 

27 

8 

172 

0 

38' 

2 856. 

3 

1 

20 

0 

0 

1 

18 

16 

092 

1 

17 

4 

284 

1 

15 

14 

736, 

1 

11 

16 

.M56 

1 

36 

5 712 

3 

2 

10 

0 

0 

2 

7 

24 

141 

2 

5 

21 

420 

2 

3 

7 

104 

2 

1 

24 

510 

2 

31 

8 568 

4 

3 

0 

0 

0 

2 

.37 

2 

184 

2 

34 

8 

568 

2 

,30 

29 

472 

2 

29 

2 

721 

3 

32 

11  424 

A 

3 

.30 

0 

0 

3 

26 

10 

2.36! 

3 

22 

25 

704 

3 

18 

21 

840 

3 

16 

10 

908 

4 

30 

14  280 

6 

4 

20 

0 

0 

4 

15 

18 

2881 

4 

11 

12 

840 

4 

6 

11 

208 

1 

3 

liO 

080 

5 

28 

17  136 

3 

5 

10 

0 

0 

5 

4 

28 

328 

4 

39 

29 

988 

4 

.31 

6 

.576 

4 

30 

27 

261 

6 

26 

19  99'J^' 

« 

0 

0 

0 

0 

5 

34 

4 

368 

5 

28 

17 

136 

5 

21 

28 

944 

.5 

18 

.5 

418 

7 

21 

22  848 

9 

0 

30 

0 

0 

6 

23 

12 

420 

6 

17 

4 

272 

6 

9 

21 

312 

6 

.5 

13 

032 

8 

22 

25  701 

10 

7 

20 

0 

0 

7 

12 

20 

484 

7 

5 

21 

420 

6 

37 

13 

680 

6 

32 

21 

816 

9 

20 

28  560 

11 

a 

10 

0 

6 

8 

1 

28 

524 

7 

34 

8 

544 

7 

25 

“ 

048 

7 

19 

"29 

~988 

10 

19 

1 416 

12 

9 

0 

0 

0 

8 

31 

6 

576 

8 

22 

25 

680 

8 

12 

28 

416 

8 

7 

8 

160 

11 

17 

4 272 

13 

9 

30 

0 

0 

9 

20 

14 

616 

9 

11 

12 

828 

9 

0 

20 

784 

8 

34 

16 

344 

12 

15 

7 128 

14 

10 

20 

0 

0 

10 

9 

22 

656 

9 

39 

29 

076 

9 

28 

13 

152 

9 

21 

24 

52H 

1 13 

13 

9 984 

15 

11 

10 

0 

0 

10 

39 

0 

696 

10 

28 

17 

124 

10 

16 

5 

.520 

10 

9 

2 

712 

1 

11 

12  840 

' 10 

19 

0 

0 

0 

11 

28 

8 

738 

11 

17' 

4 

272 

11 

.3 

27 

888 

10 

“36 

10 

896 

15 

9 

1.5  096 

17 

13 

30 

0 

0 

12 

16 

16 

788 

12 

5 

21 

408 

11 

31 

20 

256 

11 

23 

19 

800 

16 

7 

18  552 

18 

13 

20 

0 

0 

13 

6 

24 

846 

12 

34 

8 

541 

12 

19 

12 

624 

12 

10 

27 

261 

17 

5 

21  108 

19 

14 

10 

0 

0 

13 

36 

2 

914 

13 

22 

25 

099 

1.3 

7 

4 

992 

12 

38 

5 

418 

18 

3 

21  264 

30 

15 

0 

0 

0 

14 

25 

10 

968 

14 

11 

12 

852 

13 

34 

27 

360 

13 

25 

13 

632 

19 

1 

27  120 

3p 

32 

20 

0 

0 

21 

38 

t 

452 

21 

17 

4 

284 

20 

32' 

11 

040 

20 

18 

5 

418 

28 

22  1 

25  680 

40 

30 

0 

0 

0 

29 

10 

21 

948 

28 

22 

25 

701 

27 

29 

21 

720 

27 

10 

27 

261 

38 

3 24  240 

00 

37 

20 

0 

0 

.36 

23 

12 

432 

35 

28 

17 

136 

34 

27 

8 

400 

34 

3 

19 

080 

47 

21  22  800 

30 

45 

0 

0 

0 

43 

36 

2 

904 

42 

34 

8 

568 

41 

21 

22 

BOO 

40 

36 

10 

890 

57 

5 21  360 

70 

53 

20 

0 

0 

51 

8 

23 

400 

49 

.39 

29 

988 

48 

22 

n 

760 

47 

29 

2 

712 

66 

26  19  920 

'^00 

60 

0 

0 

0 

58 

21 

13 

896 

57 

5 

21 

408 

55 

19 

w 

440 

51 

21 

21 

.528 

70 

7 

18  480 

90 

67 

20 

0 

0 

65. 

34 

4. 

380 

64 

11 

12 

840 

62 

10 

33 

120 

61 

11 

16 

311 

85 

28 

17  040 

100 

75 

0 

0 

0 

73 

0 

24 

864 

71 

17 

4 

2724 

69 

U 

16 

BOO 

08 

7 

8 

160 

95 

9 

15  600 

wmm 


I8d^ 


TfaeSiirftt  mimnd'iseommoftljconsld  S7|1bi;.av<drdiipotijOiilj^  oc  ftSfutdikiaii^ 

equal  to  1 Bengal  factory  maund;  irhereaa  the  true  Suirat  maund'is  3Zlbft  .7ofc.  9 dM*^.  and  ift  dae.  whidi 

makes  the  Suralt  candy"749lbs,  4o*.  ^drsrinstead  of  746Hb8.  - - ^ 

The  following  tables  are  calculated,  one  admittiRg  the  Surat  maund  to  be  37^  lbs.  onfyi  the  other  tho 
Surat  merchants"  true  maund  of  37  lbs.  7 oz.  6 drs.  5 dec. 


Table  calculated  at  3 Surat  maunds  of  37  i lb.  to 
the  hundred  weight,  vis» 

Avoirdupois. 


•Table  cakulated  ai-tlie  Surat  maund  being  371ba^ 
7os.  6 dn..  and  5dec. 


Soon. 

40 


41 


*2 


.43 


i 

i 

i 

1,' 

i 

i 

I 

i 

i 

1 

i 

4 


.44 


lb. 

37 

37 

37 

38 
38 
38 
38 

38 

39 
39  , 
39 

39 

40 
40 
40 

40 

41 


Decimals. 

33333 

5G668 

79999 

03333 

2G666 

49999 

73333 

96GG6 

19999 

43333 

66660 

89999 

13333 

36666 

59999 

83333 

06666 


AvoiMupoii.  ' 


Seen. 

40 


41 


43 


43 


i 

i 

i 

i 

i 

i 

i 

i 

i 

i 

i 

i 


44 

46 


lb. 

37 

37 

37 

38 
38 
38 

38 

39 
39 

39 
89 

40 
40 
40 
40 

40 

41 
43 


Decinwla. 

46341 

69756 

93170 

16^ 

4 

63414 

86839 

10243 

33658 

57073 

80487 

03902 

27317 

50731 

74146 

97650 

20975 

08292 


This  is  tbe  Surat  merchants'  true  maund. 
The  other  weights  and  measures  in  use  at  this  Presidency  are  the  undcr>mentioned: 


1 Goonze. 

2 Tiprees 

- make  ^ 

1 Vail. 

4 Seers 

- make  ^ 

1 Tola,  or  Rupee. 

16  Adowlies 

' 1 Seer. 

8 Parahs 

SILVER  WEIOHTS. 

6 Chowes 
Goonces 
40  VbUs 
24  Tolas 

Silver  is  commonly  sold  from  96  to  100  single  pice 

KTola,  but  computations  in  money  are  made  by 
eas,  or  double  Pice. 

LONO  MRASURB. 

18  inches  ) i f ^ Haul  or  Cubit. 

24  inches  J | 1 

The  English  yard  of  36  inches  is  in  common  use. 
N.  Be  Piece-goods,  and  a few  other  articles  are 
sold  by  the  corge. 

SALT  MEASURE. 

100  Baskets  'k  u / ^ Anna,  or  2}  tons. 

iS  Annas  J 1 1 Rash  40  tons. 


DRY  MEASURE. 

1 S^. 

1 Adowley. 

1 Fkrah. 

1 Candy» 

These  measum  serve  for  Wheat,  and  all  l^ds  of 
grain,  except  lUce  or  Batty,  which  is  i 

BATTA  MEASURE. 


2 Tiprees 
7{Secr8 
20  Adowlies 
OiParahs 
25  Parahs 
4 Candies 


make  -i 


A Bag  of  Rice  weight  6 maunds, 
is  Madras  Maunds  .^v..vvvvwvvv^  6 
A Bombay  Candy  is  ditto  ^ 22 


1 Seer. 

1 Adowley. 

I Parah. 

1 Candy. 

1 Moorab. 

1 Moorah. 
or  168  lbs.  and 
5 30  4 
3 8 


BOitBAYi 


191 


i 


COMMERCE:  OF  BOMRAY  ato  SURAT. 


ftom  iti  rituation  oomnyuids  tbs  commerce  of  the  Gulfs  of  Persia  and  Arabia,  and  the  nor> 
them  parts  of  this  side  of  India;  the  trade,  however,  is  only  a transit,  the  island  not  fumislung  from  its 
own  products  any  connderable  articles  for  exportation,  or  even  sufficient  food  for  its  numerous  inhabitants. 
It  is  merely  an  emporium  for  the  reception  of  articles  produced  in  other  countries,  and  a port  of  resort  to 
merchants.  All  sorts  of  Asiatic  and  European  commodities  are  therefore  to  be  procured  here. 

•In  1801,  a reporter  of  external  commerce  was  appointed  at  this  Presidency,  and  particular  instructions 
sent  from  home  as  to  the  manner  Of  keeping  the  accounts  of  imports  and  exports;  since  wliich  period  a 
clear  and  comprehensive  statement  has  been  annually  transmitted  to  Europe,  of  the  merchandise  and  trea- 
sure import^  into,  and  exported  from  Bombay  and  Surat,  together  with  a list  of  the  articles  of  which  the 
imports  and  exports  consisted.  The  commerce  is  arranged  under  the  following  heads: 

I.  To  and  from  London  (exclusive  of  the  East  India  Company’s  trade),  comprehending  the  invest- 
ments of  the  commanders  and  officers  of  the  Company’s  ships;  the  goods  shipped  by  individuals  on  the  ton- 
nage allowed  by  the  Act  of  33d  Geo.  III.  chap.  52;  and  the  cargoes  of  such  country  ships  as  have  been  per- 
mitted to  proceed  from  Bombay  to  London,  and  return  with  European  goods. 

II.  To  and  from  other  parts  of  Europe,  under  the  denomination  of  Foreign  Euroja?,  comprising 
Hamburg,  Denmark,  Lisbon,  Madeira,  &c. 

III.  To  and  from  the  United  States  of  America. 

IV.  To  and  from  British  Asia,  which  comprehended  in  1801  the  under-mentioned  places,  and  not- 
withstanding the  acquisitions  which  have  since  taken  place,  is  continuetl  under  the  same  arrangement,  viz. 


1 Northern  Parts  of  Guzzerat. 

2 Surat  and  adjacent  Villages. 

3 Bombay. 

4 Coast  of  Coromandel. 


5 Coasts  of  Malabar  and  Canara  united. 

6 Bengal. 

7 Ceylon. 

8 Coast  of  Sumatra. 


V.  That  to  and  from  Foreign  Asia,  which  comprehended  in  1601  the  under-mentioned  places,  and 
though  some  of  them  have  since  been  added  to  the  British  possessions,  the  same  asTangement  is  continued,  viz. 


1 Gulf  of  Arabia,  or  Red  Sea. 

8 Gulf  of  Persia. 

3 Cashmere,  &c.  including  Punjab,  &c. 

4 Coasts  of  Cutch  and  Scindy. 

5 Bassein  and  adjacent  Villages. 

6 Gk)a,  and  the  Coast  of  Concan. 


7 Pegu. 

8 Pulo  Pinang,  or  Prince  of  Wales’s  Island, 
and  places  to  the  Eastward. 

9 Batavia. 

IQ  China. 

11  Various  places. 


Under  the  head  of  various  places,  are  comprehended  the  Maidive  and  Laccadive  Islands,  Mosam- 
bique,  and  East  Coast  of  Africa,  New  South  Wales,  Cape  of  Good  Hope,  Saint  Helena,  Stc. 

The  whole  of  the  commerce  of  India,  commonly  called  the  country  trade,  is  in  the  hands  of  indivi- 
duals, the  East  India  Company  never  interfering,  except  sending  cotton  occasionally  to  Cliina  in  their 
Bombay  and  China  ships,  with  a view  of  securing  funds  for  tlie  purchase  of  their  teas  at  Canton. 

The  accounts  are  made  up  at  all  the  Presidencies  in  Bengal  sicca  rupees,  at  the  usual  rates  of  ex- 
change, in  order  to  consolidate  the  commerce  of  all  parts  of  India  under  one  head  hereafter.  As  the  entries 
of  both  imports  and  exports  arc  verified  by  oath,  and  the  duties  moderate,  the  following  statements  may 
be  coBiidand  accurate. 


BOMBAY: 


COMMERCE  WITH  LONDON, 

The  following  It  a staterafont  of  the  merchandise  and  treasure,  exclnsirfr^of  the  East  India  Company's, 
imported  into  Bombay.and  Surat  from  London,  in  the  years  1802  to  1806  inclusive,  likewise  of  the 
merchandise  and  treasure  exported  from  Bombay  and  Surat  to  London  during  the  mmA  period;  togetlier 
svith  a list  of  the  articles  of  which  the  imports  and  exports  consisted  in  1805.  > 


IMPORTS  FROM  LONDON. 


Merchandise. 


Sicta  Rupees. 


3,00,^46 

1,93,748 

5,66,839 

6,35,535 

6,64,128 


23,60,195 


18,01,914 

12,53,085 

19,42,403 

19,39,226 

27,28,442 


Articles  sf  Import  fa  1805. 
Wearing  Apparel^.««v^  Sicca  Rupees 

Cutlery  and  liardwarc.^».>,^,.^vv„^ 

Cochineal 

^ Glass  ware,  and  looking-glasse$.«>v«v»%« 

‘Hal)erdashery  

Jewellery 

Ironmongery 

Malt  liquors 


Plate,  and  plated  ware 

Saffron 

Wines  and  spirits 
Metals  w««w«w< 

Na^al  stores  %%%%%»»»»»» 

$tationary%wv»wvwnw»www%wvv»%^^%^,vt^,v^^^^ 

'Small  articles)  too  numerous  to  mention 
Merchandise 


EXPORTS  TO  LONDON. 
I Treasure.  | 


Sicca  Rupees, 


I 1,17,618 
10,760 
56,310 
1,18,728 
6,216 
82,075 
29,705 
49,325 
5,267 
16,202 
21,716 
26,444 
2,846 
69,089 
12,862 
9,445 
92,435 
8,635 
48,385 
32,226 
38,585 
1,75,418 
95,374 
26,815 
11,807 
1,49,404 

13,03,691 

6,35,535 


Mercliandbe. 

Years. — 

Sicca  Rupees. 

'1862  'erfojs^ 

1803  6,76,406 

1804  5,88,885 

1805  7,86,068 

1806  6,91,214 
total  i“33;62,l  II 


Artides  of  Export  in  1805. 
Piece  goods.^.^%,..,. , ..^.^v^Sicca  Rupees 

Elephants'  teeth 

Coffee ■|---1-.111V.l..lULLinillLll.lULLL 

Wine  and  spirits,^^ 

Drugs 

^tmdnes, I.... ^ ^ 


4,04Q 

2,478 

5,88,725 

44,700 

16,074 

15,890 

85,683 

28,478 


Imports  from  London  Sicca  Rupees  19,39,226  | Exports  to  London  Si^a  Rupees  7,86,068 


BOMBAY. 


183 


Value  of  imports  into  Bombay  and  Surat  from  London,  in  S years,  Sicca  Rupees  73,04,873 
Ditto  exports  from  ditto  to  ditto  33,62,111 

Imports  exceed  the  exports  39,42,764 

Treasure  imported  during  the  above  period  23,60,195 

Balance  against  Bombay  and  Surat,  in  five  ycars.^v...»..v.v.».^'>v.*%».Sicca  Rupees  15,82,569 


Extract  from  the  Act  of  33d  George  III.  chap.  52,  relative  to  the  East  India  Trade. 

By  the  Act  of  33d  George  III.  chap.  .52,  the  trade  to  India  from  London  is  opened  to  individuals, 
being  British  subjects.  The  following  are  the  principal  heads  relative  thereto. 

British  subjects  may  export  to  India  articles  of  the  growth,  produce,  or  manufacture  of  the  Euro- 
pean dominions  of  his  Majesty  (except  military  stores,  ammunition,  masts,  spars,  cordage,  anchors,  pitch, 
tar,  or  copper),  and  may  import  from  India  any  goods,  &c.  (except  calicoes,  dimities,  muslins,  or  other 
piece-goods,  manufactured  with  silk  or  cotton,  or  with  silk  and  cotton  mixed,  or  with  other  mixed  mate- 
rials). Licences  may  be  granted  by  the  Company  to  allow  individuals  to  export  and  import  the  above  ex- 
cepted articles;  and  if  the  Company  do  not  supply  the  markets  with  a sufficiency  of  the  excepted  articles 
of  export  and  import,  the  Board  of  Commissioners  may  permit  individuals  to  export  and  import  such 
quantities  as  they  may  direct,  under  certain  regulations;  the  excepted  articles  exported,  to  be  at  the  same 
rate  of  freight  as  the  private  trade  of  the  same  season. 

All  goods  imported  in  private  trade  to  be  secured  in  the  Company’s  warehouses,  and  sold  at  their  sales; 
when  brought  in  for  the  owners,  to  be  delivered  os  soon  as  possible  after  the  payment  of  the  freight,  and 
other  charges,  without  the  payment  of  the  gross  amoimt  of  the  goods  sold. 

Goods  to  be  registered  previous  to  shipping,  in  books  kept  by  the  Company,  describing  the  marks, 
numbers,  and  tonnage  of  eveiy  package.  Goods  shipped  either  in  London  or  in  India,  without  being  so 
teetered,  to  be  subject  to  seizure,  and  to  the  penalties  of  trading  without  the  Company’s  licence. 

Goods  imported  and  exported  to  be  sulyect  to  the  same  duties,  &c.  as  the  like  articles  of  the  Company) 
and  to  no  other,  except  the  Company’s  charge  of  3 per  cent.  The  Company  not  answerable  for  embez- 
zlement, waste,  losses,  or  damages  of  goods,  on  board  ship,  in  their  warehouses,  or  in  the  transit  of 
the  goods  to  or  from  the  ships;  but  the  Company’s  officers  and  servants,  in  charge  of  goods,  or  by 
whose  means  loss,  &c.  thereon  is  sustained,  to  be  liable  to  answer  for  the  same;  and  the  Court  of  Direc- 
tors, on  indemnity  that  the  Company  shall  not  suffer  thereby,  may  deliver  up  their  officer's  covenants, 
be.  on  which  the  owners  of  the  goods  so  lost,  may  recover. 

The  Company  to  provide  3000  tons  of  shipping  for  the  export  and  import  of  private  trade,  which  may 
be  inme**^  or  diminished  by  the  direction  of  the  Board  of  Controul,  upon  representation  being  made  to 
them;  but  if  the  Court  of  Directors  think  the  Board  order  too  large  an  increase,  they  may  appeal  to  the 
Ring  in  council. 

In  time  of  peace,  to  charge  for  freight  on  private  goods  d?6per  ton  out,  and  £15  per  ton  home;  and 
In  time  of  war,  or  preparation  for  war,  when  the  Company  pay  an  increased  rate  of  freight,  they  may 
charge  the  private  traders  in  the  same  proportion,  so  long  as  the  circumstances  shall  continue.  No  increase 
in  the  rate  of  freight  to  be  made  tiU  the  Court  of  Directors  shall  communicate  their  reasons  for  the  .same 
to  the  Board  of  Controul,  and  obtoin  their  consent  thereto,  which  rate  may  be  also  reduced  or  discontinued. 

In  August,  in  every  third  year,  the  Court  of  Directors  to  consider  whether  any,  and  what  abatement 
can  be  made  in  the  rate  of  freight,  and  to  certify  the  same  to  the  Board  of  Controul,  whose  orders  are  to 

regulate  the  rate  to  be  charged.  , a . • 

Persons  intending  to  ghip  goods  in  private  trade,  to  give  notice  thereof  to  the  Company  s Secretary  in 

Rngiond  before  the  last  day  of  August,  specifying  the  destination  of  the  tonnage,  the  goods  required,  and 


BOMBAY. 


when  the  goods  will  be  ready ; to  pay  the  freight  before  the  15th  of  September,  exe^tthe  Dlrei^rs  take 
security  for  the  same,  and  before  the  30th  of  October  to  deliver  a list  of  the  sorts  and  quantities  of  goods 
to  be  exported ; in  default  whereof,  or  if  the  goods  are  not  ready  in  the  limited  time,  the  deposit,  or  se- 
curity, to  be  forfeited.  And  for  goods  to  be  shipped  in  India,  notice  is  to  be  given  within  a time  to  be 
limited  by  the  Governments  in  India,  to  persons  authorized  by  them  to  receive  the  same,  stating  the  sorts 
and  quantities  of  goods,  time  when  to  be  ready,  and  paying  freight,  or  giving  security  for  the  payment 
of  the  same  in  Great  Britain : if  the  goods  are  not  provided  in  time,  the  deposits,  or  security,  to  be  for- 
feited. If  any  tonnage  required  by  private  traders,  shall  remain  unoccupied,  the  Company  may  apply  the 
same  without  any  allowance  to  the  parties  for  whom  it  was  allotted ; and  if  more  tonnage  should  be  re- 
quired than  is  allotted,  the  quantity  allotted  to  be  divided  equally  among  the  parties  applying  for  the  same. 

Civil  servants,  or  persons  licensed  by  the  Company,  if  not  under  restrictions  to  the  contrary,  may  act 
as  consignees  to  private  traders.  If  the  Court  of  Directors  do  not  license  a sufficient  number  of  persona 
for  that  [lurpose,  tlie  Board  of  Controul,  on  representation . being  made  to  them,  may  order  a sufficient 
number  of  free  merchants  to  be  licensed  accordingly ; such  persons  to  be  subject  to  the  authority  of  the 
Company,  and  not  to  reside  more  than  ten  miles  from  a principal  settlement  without  permisrion. 

The 'duty  of  5 per  cent,  and  chai'ge  of  2 per  cent,  on  goods  from  India  repealed,  and  a charge  of  3 per  , 
cent,  only ' substituted  in  lieu  thereof.  Mot  more  than  5s.  per  ton  to  be  charged  by  the  East  India  Dock 
Company  foi'  dock  rates,  wharfage,  cartage,  &c.  of  private  trade  goods,  wliich  the  East  India  Company 
is  to  pay,  and  deduct  the  same  from  the  produce  of  such  goods. 

East  India  House^  ISM  of  Novembtr^  180$. 

Terms  and  Conditions  under  which  ike  East-India  Compmiy  are  willing  to  fumiah  tonnage^  exclusm  of  that  to  b& 

. 2)tovidcd  by  the  Act  of  the  33d  of  His  present  Majesty^  Cap.  5S. 

I.  That  the  application  for  tonnage  be  received  on  the  first  Wednesday  in  the  months  of  September,, 
December,  and  Mat  ch  in  each  year,  and  that  such  applications  be  endorsed,  « Private  application  for  ton- 
nage;"' and  that  any  application  made  in  the  intermediate  months,  unless  required  by  advertisement,  will 
be  considered  only  in  the  ensuing  quarter. 

II.  That  all  applications  be  made  by  the  persons  who  actually  ship  goods,  and  not  by  any  agent  or 
clerk,  and  specify  that  the  sard  goods  are  bona  fide  intended  to  be  sent  to  India  on  account  of  the  persona 
making  the  a]iplication,  or  on  commission  received  from  persons  in  India,  whose  names  must  be  inserted  kc 
the  applications;  and  the  person  making  application,  must  engage  to  verify  the  aame  by  affidavit,  if  sq 
i^equircd  by  the  Court  of  Directors. 

III.  That  every  application  do  specify  the  tonnage  of  measurable  and  heavy  goods  respectively,  the 
particular  articles  of  which  each  species  of  tonnage  consists,  the  presidencies  to  which  they  ai'e  to  be 
consigned,  and  the  periods  when  the  same  will  be  ready  to  be  shipped. 

IV.  That  no  material  deviation  be  permitted  in  the  articles  or  tonnage  specified  in  any  request,  after 
^ch  request  shall  have  been  granted. 

V.  That  no  ap|)liration  for  a less  quantity  than  one  ton  be  granted. 

VI.  That  the  Court  of  Directors,  in  order  to  encourage  the  export  of  a sufficient  suppty  of  neces* 
•ary  articles  for  consumption  in  India,  do  not  intend  to  restrain  the  exportation  wholly  to  the  Act,  which 
limits  the  articles  to  such  as  are  of  the  growth,  produce,  or  manufacture  of  Great  Britain ; but  the  Court 
reserve  to  themselves  the  power  oflimiting  the  exportation  of  articles  which  are  not  of  the  growth,  produce^ 
or  manufacture  of  Great  Britain,  or  the  exportation  of  which  by  individuals  is  not  p^rmitted^by  lhe^ 
Ac^  to  such  quantities  as  the  Court  may  judge  proper.  ' And  they  furthet  seserve^  to  themselves  a 


BOMBAY. 


I8.i 

power  to  reduce  the  quantities  of  any  particular  description  of  goods  applied  for  by  any  individual,  which 
may  appear  to  them  to  operate  to  the  exclusion  of  others. 

VII.  That  not  more  than  fifty  chests  of  wine,  or  fifty  hogsheads  of  beer  belonging  to  one  person  be 
laden  on  any  ship. 

VIII.  That  the  tonnage  of  wine,  or  chests  of  liquor  on  freight,  lie  calculated  at  two  chests,  containing 
twelve  dozen  (}uart  bottles  each  to  the  ton,  and  not  at  three  chests  to  the  tun,  us  has  occasionally  been  the 
practice  heretofore. 

IX.  That  the  tonnage  of  carriages  on  freight  be  calculated  as  follows,  ru. 


A coach,  or  barouche 
Chariot 
Phaeton 
Curricle  .. 

Two-wheel  chaise 


%%.%%%%%%%%%%  % 


10  tons. 
S ditto, 
fi  ditto. 

1 1 ditto. 
2 ditto. 


X.  That  not  more  than  two  four-wheel  carriages,  or  four  two-wlieel  carriages,  be  laden  on  any  ship, 
nor  any  one  house  be  permitted  to  ship  more  than  one  carriage  on  each  sliip. 

XI.  That  if  quicksilver  be  allowed  to  be  shipped  on  freight,  no  expence  or  risk  thereby  be  incurred 
liy  the  Company  or  owners  of  the  ship. 

XII.  That  the  peace  rate  of  freight  for  good.s  shipped  in  b!ngland  on  extra  ships,  for  India,  he  at  a 
rate  not  exceeding  £5  per  ton;  and  that  such  additional  freight  be  paid  for  goods  shipped  in  England  in  war, 
as  the  circumstances  of  the  time  may  render  necessary. 

XIII.  That  the  peace  rate  of  freight  homeward  shall  not  exceed  per  Ion;  nnd  that  such  additional 
freight  be  paid  on  goods  laden  in  India  on  extra  ships,  in  war,  the  circumstances  of  the  time  may  render 
neces.sary. 

Paragraphs  XIV.  to  XVTTT  are  regulation.s  lespecting  Madeira  wine,  already  detailed  page  0. 

XIX.  That  all  persons  do  make  a deposit  in  the  Cuiiipuny's  treasury,  within  fifteen  days  after  their 
requests  to  ship  goods  or  wine  shall  have  been  granted  by  the  Court  of  Directors,  of  the  amount  of  freight 
chargeable  on  such  goods  or  wine,  at  the  rates  above  mentioned,  under  iJie  regulations  of  the  act. 

XX.  That  the  Court  of  Directors  do  reserve  to  themselves  the  right  of  allotting  to  any  of  the  .ships  in 
their  service,  bound  to  the  respective  [daces  of  consignment,  the  goods  or  wine  in  such  proportions  as  tluy 
may  think  proper ; at  the  same  time,  the  Court  will  endeavour  to  comi)ly,  as  far  us  c ircumstances  w ill 
admit,  with  the  particular  wishes  of  the  proprietors,  respecting  the  sliipping  of  their  goods  or  wine. 

XXI.  TJiat  if  the  goods  allotted,  as  before  mentioned,  be  not  sent  on  board  the  .shi[>s  [)i vvious  to  the 
day  appointed  by  the  Court  for  the  ships  clearing  out  at  the  Custom-house,  tlie  iVeiglit  paid  on  such  goods 
shall  be  forfeited. 

XXII.  That  should  the  produce  of  such  goods  or  wine  be  paid  into  the  Company's  treasury,  at  citln  r 
of  the' three  Presidencies,  or  Bencoolen,  bills  will  be  granted  on  the  Court  of  Directors,  on  the  terms  of 
the  season  allowed  to  other  individuals. 

XXIII.  That  the  proprietors  of  goods  shall  be  exactly  on  a similar  footing  with  the  Company,  in 
respect  to  short  delivery,  as  is  contained  in  tlie  terms  and  conditions  under  whicli  the  ships  sliall  hu\c  Uem 
engaged. 

XXTV.  That  each  ship[)er  of  goods,  jointly  with  the  ('ornpany,  shall  be  entitled  to  all  a\\o\yaiwc^  lor 
ship  damages  and  siiort  delivery,  not  exceeding  per  ton  on  their  rt'spective  tonnage,  that  iS  to  say, 
i?4.  per  ton  to  such  persons  who  occupy  the  like  proportion  of  tonnage  out  and  home,  whether  the  damage 
he  on  the  outward  or  homeward  goods,  and  £2  irer  ton  on  tlie  outward  good.s,  and  Uie  like  sum  on 

lib 


180 


BOMBAY, 


the  homcwartl  goods,  when  they  belong  to  different  proprietors,  averaging  on  the  whole  at  tlie  rate  of  JP5 
per  ton  on  the  builder's  measurement,  agreeably  to  the  terms  under  which  tlie  ships  shall  have  been  engaged. 

XXV.  That  in  all  other  cases,  the  owners  of  goods  will  be  subject  to  the  same  decisions  and  determU 
nations  only,  as  the  Company  themselves  are  liable  to. 

XXVI.  That  the  tonnage  of  all  goods  (except  the  ai  ticles  before  mentioned)  be  calculated  according 
to  the  computation  of  tonnage  used  by  the  Company. 

XXVII.  That  three  days  at  least  shall  be  appointed  by  the  Court  for  shipping  goods  on  board  of  each 
ship,  appointed  to  carry  out  the  same,  and  that  public  notice  shall  be  given,  at  least  tliree  days  before  such 
day  of  shipping,  by  the  officer  for  private  trade,  outwards. 

XXVIll.  That  not  any  order  will  be  given  by  the  officer  in  the  private  trade,  outwards,  for  goods 
allowed  to  be  shipped  on  freight,  until  tlie  several  persons  who  are  permitted  to  export  the  same,  shall 
have  delivered  into  the  office  an  exact  account  of  the  tonnage  of  each  article,  which  they  have  been  allowed 
to  ship. 

XXIX.  That  before  any  goods  shall  be  shipped,  the  same  shall  be  registered  with  the  officer  for  pri- 
vate trade,  outwards,  in  books  to  be  kept  by  him  for  that  puqiose,  whicii  registry  shall  descrilie  the  marks 
and  numbers  of  eacli  bale  or  package  of  goods  to  be  shipped,  and  the  amount  of  the  whole  tonnage  allowed 
to  the  person  so  shipping,  and  all  goods  which  shall  be  shipped,  without  being  so  registered,  will  be  consi- 
dered as  goods  illicitly  .shipped,  and  the  goods  will  be  subject  to  such  seizure  and  forfeitures,  and  the 
owners,  shippers,  and  agents  concerned  therein,  to  such  forfeitures  and  penalties,  as  any  person  shall  be 
subject  to  by  law,  for  carrying  on  trade  to  and  from  the  East  Indies  without  the  Company’s  licence. 

XXX.  That  the  said  officer  for  private  trade,  outwards,  upon  such  registry  as  aforesmd,  shall  give 
an  order  or  licence,  under  his  hand,  for  the  shipping  of  such  goods,  which  licence,  together  witli  the  goods, 
shall  be  carried  to  the  East  India  wharf,  to  the  proper  officers  there,  who  shall  examine  the  same,  to  see 
that  the  packages  contain  only  the  soils  of  goods  of  which  notice  shall  have  been  g^ven,  and  that  they  do 
not  exceed  in  tonnage  the  quantity  of  goods  allowed  lo  micU  shipper;  and  all  goods  exceeding  the  allowed 
tonnage  shall  be  returned  and  taken  back,  unless  the  Committee  of  Shipping  of  the  said  Company,  upon  spe- 
cial application,  shall  see  fit  to  allow  the  8hip})ing  thereof,  which  it  shall  be  competent  for  them  to  do» 
upon  previous  payment  of  double  freight  for  the  additional  quantity-of  goods  shipped,  exceeding  the  quan- 
tity appertaining  to  such  shipper  os  aforesaid,  if  the  same  shall  amount  to  one  ton  or  upwards,  or  single 
freight  if  under  one  ton. 

XXXI.  That  after  the  goods  shall  have  been  examined  as  aforesaid,  the  same  shall  be  sent  from  the 
East  India  wharf,  on  board  of  hoys  to  be  employed  by  the  Company,  the  water-side  cliarges  and  hoyage 
being  previously  ]iaid  by  the  owner  of  the  said  goods,  in  default  of  which  payment  the  goods  may  be 
.stopped. 

XXXII.  That  on  the  goods  being  shipped,  bills  of  lading  shall  be  signed  for  the  same,  in  triplicate, 
by  the  commander  or  purser,  which  shall  be  delivered  to  the  shipper  of  the  goods,  or  his  agent,  the  persons 
who  sign  such  bills  of  lading,  being  allowed,  if  they  think  proper,  to  add  the  following  memorandum,  in 
regar4  to  the  delivery  of  the  goods  at  their  consigned  port,  viz,  “ To  be  delivered  at  the  consigned  port, 
“ provided  the  destination  of  the  ship  shall  not  be  changed  by  the  East  India  Company)  or  their  agents 
abroad,  or  by  the  act  of  any  of  His  Majesty’s  officers.”. 


BOMBAY. 


187 


EUROPEAN  COMMODITIES  SUITABLE  TO  THE  BOMBAY  MARKET, 

Taken  Jr<m  Indents  received  at  various  Periods  from,  Bombay^  which  Commodities  form  the  Investments  of  the 
Commanders  and  Officers  of  the  Company's  Skips^  and  the  Cargoes  of  such  Country  Ships  as  have  been 

permitted  to  load  from  London  to  Bombay* 


60  hogsheads  pale  ale 
20  butts  ditto 
8 hogsheads  porter 


ALE  AND  PORTER. 

100  dozen  bottled  ale 
100  ditto  porter 
ditto  Burton  ale 


ANCHORS  AND  GRAPNELS. 


6 of  each,  weighing  2cwt,  each 
6 dittO'»<%%%'»^»%vw»»'»%^  ditto 
6 ditto%%v%%%v*%*v»%^v%  3 ditto 


6 of  each,  weighing  31  cwt.  cocli 
G ditto  4 ditto 

6 ditto  5 ditto 


• BEADS. 


20  cwt.  milk  white  beads,  small  size 
20  crystal  ditto  ^-v^%*%^-.^%^ditto 
10  orange  ditto  ^»%v»w»^fc%%w»^ditto 
1000  lbs.  transparent  red  plain  beads 


2000  bunches  transparent  green  beads 
4000  bunches  milk  white  ditto 
2000  ditto  orange  colour  ditto 
1000  ditto  ruby  beads,  12  strings  each 


BLACKING  AND  BRUSHES. 


12  gross  blacking  cakes,  in  paper 
10  ditto  blacking  balls,  small 
30  ditto  ditto,  large 


10  gross  heel  biflts,  small 
10  ditto  large 

30  dozen  sets  shoe  brushes,  3 in  a set 


BRASIERY. 


S gross  brass  drawer  handles  to  pattern  No.  615 

3 ditto  coirtmode  ditto%^^^%%vkw.^vv*^%vi^%w097 
2 dozen  plated  handles  ditto 

10  sets  writing  desk  furniture  617 

1 gross  lackered  lion  masks  and  ring8..B591 
1 ditto  bronzed  dltto^^^^^v^^^^^-^^'-^^^ditto 
1 ditto  knobs  for  drawers  491 

1 ditto  lackered  ditto^^....^^v.^------ditto 

4 ditto  bed  caps  049 

2 ditto  brass  lifting  602 

10  ditto  brass  screw  rings  and  knobs  128 

12  ditto  escutcheons  to  pattern^^%^.-.%^T  414 
20  dozen  brass  butt  hinges,  ditto%..>%^vwwv^C  668 
20  ditto  brass  hinges,  ditto  C711 


24  dozen  brass  drawer  locks.  No.  762  to  770 
36  ditto  brass  thumb  locks  780  to  792 
2 gross  lamp  hooks,  each%x«%%v%>  793  to  798 
12  sets  brass  castors  xmi 

6 dozen  brass  beer  cocks  8 711. 

12  ditto  8 719 

36  ditto  brass  bureau  hinges^,.^^^^  V 700  to  700 

18  ditto  card  table  ditto  V 717  to  721 

6 ditto  sets  table  fastenings  V 729  to  T^i 

20  gross  brass  curtain  rings  S 162 

4 ditto  hooks  and  eyes  8 171 

1 ditto  tea  table  bells  J 1 19 

2 ditto  brass  till  locks....%%%%v^^%^%  "^^19 

1 ditto  bookcase  locks 


188 


BOMBAY 


BOOKS  AND  PAMPHLETS. 


6 Portuguese  and  English  Dictionaries 
2 Persian  and  English  ditto 
20  sets  Ephemoris,  if  lately  published 
20  sets  Requisite  'I'ablcs 
2 sets  British  Classics  neatly  bound 
2 ditto  British  I’oets  ditto 
2 ditto  Ilunie  and  Smollett's  England 
1 Encyclopaedia  Britannica 


3 Bell’s  British  Theatre 
New  Publications  on  Ship-building  £20 
Ditto,  ndative  to  India  Affairs  20 

Ditto,  Medical  and  Law  Books^^^^^lO 
New  and  approved  Novels-.<kv^>-w^^^%.^^^  20 
Ditto  Persian  or  Arabic  Books  10 
Army  and  Navy  Lists,  last  published  5 
Magazines  and  Reviews,  diUow-%w^l0 


BOOTS  AND  SHOES. 


100  pairs  military  boots,  large  sizes 
6 dozen  pairs  Hessian  boots,  ditto 
2 ditto  fashionable  jockey  <litto 
1 ditto  strong  shooting  shoes 


3 dozen  pairs  dress  shoes,  full  siee 
6 ditto  undress  ditto 
3 ditto  Morocco  slippers,  ditto 
Ladies’  and  children’s  shoes  £30 


BUTTONS. 


100  gross  buttons^^^«>«^  No.  60  C 

50  ditto 70  C 

24  gross  plain  gilt  coats  L 707 

12  ditto  Jackets  ditto 

12  ditto  breast  ditto 


24  ditto  plated  sugar-loaf  buttons  L 803 


6 gross  captain’s  buttons^^^vw^^^  L 710 

3 ditto  ditto  each,  jacket  and  breast  ditto 

4 ditto  masters'  coats  L720 

2 ditto  ditto,  jacket  and  breast  ditto 
2 ditto  pursers’  coots  L 722 

1 ditto  ditto,  each  Jacket  and  breast  ditto 


CABINET  WARE. 


24  mahogany  writing  desks,  No,  792 
24  ditto^v  193 

6 ladies’  toilette  glasses 


6 wainscot  tool  chests^^^^No.  190 
2 mahogany  ditto  192 

1 joiner's  chest  of  tools  195 


COCHINEAL. 


1000  lbs.  large  black  grain  cochineal,  free  from  all  kind  of  smell,  in  small  casks. 


COTTON  GOODS. 


50  pieces  jacconot  muslin.«v»v,vM^  G 750 
50  ditto  G751 

50  ditto  G752 

N 17 
N 20 
N 21 
N 32 

20  ditto  Sannoes  each»vw»N  36,  N 37,  N 38 
10  ditto  wliite  corduroy,  narrow  cord 


25  ditto  Japan  muslin 
25  ditto 
25  ditto 
50  ditto  veined  Japan  muslin 


50  pieces  white  handkerchiefs  with  border,  0 3 
IS  dozen  pulicat  handkerchiefs  0 22 

12  pieces  checked  muslin^,,*,^,,,,^.^,,^  N 40 
50  ditto  fashionable  chintz  for  ladies 
15  ditto  furniture  chintz 
1 dozen  cotton  counterpanes 
20  pieces  bed  ticken,  fine 
30  ditto 

30  ditto  plain  217 


BOMBAY. 


ISO 


CLOTHS  AND  CASIMERES. 

V. 

100  yards  best  scarlet  superfine  cloth  20  coat  lengths,  fashionable  colours 

SO  ditto  royal  blue  ditto  3 pieces  black  .suj)eifiiic  casiinere 

SO  ilitto  French  grey  ditto  C ditto  white  ditto 

12  pair  fine  large  blankets  12  ditto  IVelch  tlanncl,  3s.  to  Ss.  per  yard 

Cloth  being  supplied  to  the  militaiy  and  Company’s  servants  from  tlieir  warehouses  here,  at  a small 
advance  upon  the  prime  cost,  this  article  is  seldom  in  much  demand. 

CONFECTIONARY. 

48  dozen  cherry  brandy  in  half  chests 
21'  ditto  raspberry  ditto....»,»~.»ditto 
20  cases  bottled  fruits,  each  3 dozen 
12  jars  each  6 lbs.  raspberry  jam  g 
6 ditto  ditto  red  currant  jelly 

3 ditto  ditto  black  ditto 

4 ditto  ditto  strawberries 


6 dozi'ii  pints  capillairo 
3 ditto  orgeat 
3 ditto  r(*d  currant  shrub 

|)int  decanters  peppermint  drops 
21*  ditto  Scotch  carraways 
21*  l)ottIes  brandy  truits 
3(>  ditto  assorted  comfits 


CLARET. 


12  whole  chests  and  24  half  chests  from  those  houses  whose  wine  w in  most  repute  at  Bombay 


CUTLERY. 


30  gross  penknives,  pattern  No.  862 
30  ditto  865 

30  ditto  — - 869 

30  ditto 871 

25  ditto 

20  ditto  874 

15  ditto  875 

10'  ditto  H80 

10  ditto  881 

10  ditto. 

10  ditto 886 

10  ditto  887 

10  ditto  892 

10  ditto  — 893 

10  ditto  — 894 

10  ditto 

36  dozen  best  ivory  table  knives  and  forks  630 
36  ditto  desserts 

36  pair  carvers  to  correspond  «v...™^v.^w~~.630 

36  dozen  Uack  handled  knives  and  forks.«»639 
36  ditto  desserts 


20  gross  fine  scissars,  pattern  02S 

20  ditto ....929 

20  9ii2 

20  93^1* 

20  ditto....... 935 

20  ditto 

3 ditto  large  scissars..^................953 

3 ditto  ditto  .v.v.v.^...v*....*........^...^9ob 

20  ditto  razors 

50  ditto  table-knives  0291 

20  ditto  pocket-knives.......^..-^043  844 

2 ditto  corkscrews..^..^.^....-'*-^  7112 

1 ditto  boot-hooks....^.... 

20  ditto  brass  stamped  knives  Z 7102-8 

2 ditto  oyster  knives  .......^.........841 

24  pair  best  patent  razors  ^.............'32 

24  one  blade  penknives.....*^ — 

24  three  blade 

10  gross  buffalo  cuttcaux  ........Z  7120 

20  ditto  ditto.... ^ 


190 


BOMBAY. 


CARDS. 

6 gross  best  Mogul  cards,  in  2 gross  boxes  | 2 gross  best  Harry  cards,  in  1 gross  boxes 

CORKS. 

400  gross  wine  corks,  large  and  round  i 12  cakes  cork  for  bungs,  &c. 

400  ditto  beer  corks  ditto  | 10  gross  small  corks  for  phials,  &c. 

EARTHEN  WARE. 


6 large  table  services,  brown  lined 
8 ditto  or  cream  colour 

100  dozen  plain  plates 
80  ditto  soup  ditto 
100  ditto  dessert  ditto 
60  ditto  small  cheese  ditto 
24*  nests  dishes,  5 in  a nest 
36  soup  tureens  with  dishes 


72  sauce  tureens  with  dishes 
72  blitter  boats  and  plates 
100  wash-hand  basons  and  guglets 
20  dozen  hot  water  plates 
6 dozen  oval  dishes,  3 sizes 
40  pairs  curry  dishes  and  covers 
6 dozen  baking  dishes,  3 sizes 
6 dozen  salad  bowls  of  sizes 


ENAMELLED  BOXES. 


25  dozen,  no  figures,  same  as  No.  4860 
25 


25  ditto. 
25  dltto^ 
25  dittOv 


.4866 

.4868 

.4869 


25  dozen,  no  figures,  same  as  No.  4870 
25 


25  ditto. 
25  ditto. 
25  ditto. 


.4872 

.4876 

.4877 


ENGINES. 

6 common  size  ship's  fire  engines,  complete,  with  hoses,  leather  buckets,  &c. 

FEATHEllS. 

Hackle  feathers  for  the  Company's  troops  on  tliis  establishment,  according  to  the  Regulation,  <^50. 

GUNS  AND  PISTOLS. 


6 fowling-pieces,  single  barrelled,  each  in  a 
case,  with  apparatus 
6 ditto  double  ditto 


13  pair  plain  pistols  in  mahogany  cases 
12  ditto  brass  barrelled  ditto  in  ditto 
12  boxes  spare  instruments,  &c. 


GUNPOWDER. 

5 half-barrels  patent  gunpow'dcr  in  one  pound  papers,  and  5 half-barrels  in  half-pound  canisters. 
This  must  be  landed  with  the  ship's  gunpowder,  and  sent  to  the  Company's  magazine  at  Bombay. 

GARDEN  SEEDS. 

If  fre.sh  and  good,  will  always  sell.  In  the  event  of  a ship  calling  at  the  Cape  outward  bound, 
garden  seeds  from  thence  are  an  acceptable  article  in  all  parts  of  India. 


BOMBAY, 


101 


GLASS  WARE, 


48  nests  vase  lamps,  3 in  a nest,  plated  mountings 
12  dozen  spare  tumblers  for  the  above 
3 ditto  spare  chains  to  hang  tumblers 
18  nests  brass  mounted  globe  lamps,  with  chains 
and  tumblers 

6 nests  green  lamps  with  glass  bottoms  and  chains 
42  pairs  cut  oval  butter  pots  of  sizes,  with  tops 
36  ditto  plain  round  ditto 
24  dozen  cut  fluted  wine  glasses 
24  dozen  plain  ditto 
24  dozen  finger  cups,  polished  bottoms 
24  dozen  ditto  purple  and  green 
12  dozen  blue  Montciths,  or  wine  coolers 
12  dozen  ditto  purple  and  green 
6 richly  cut  hookah  bottoms 
6 dozen  cut  muffineers  with  silver  tops 
24  plated  cruet  frames  of  6,  7,  and  8 bottles 
60  pair  glass  feet  pillar  shades,  with  drops,  8ic. 

50  ditto  smaller  ditto  for  card  tables 
50  ditto  cut  glass  candlesticks 
100  ditto  cut  white  glass  cups  and  saucers 
100  ditto  plain  ditto 
24  dozen  rose  water  bottles,  3 colours 

HATS. 

6 dozen  gentlemen's  fashionable  round  hats 
2 ditto  cocked  ditto 

6 ditto  children's  hats,  different  sizes  and  colours 
1 ditto  ladies'  ditto 


24  dozen  small  ^ pint  mugs,  with  handles 
24  ditto  larger  ditto 
SO  India  table  shades,  each  61bs, 
f chest  brass  bottom  cabin  lainjw 
12  pair  plated  chamber  canillcsticks,  with  shades 
12  ditto  sliding  shade  ditto 
12  dozen  egg  cups,  blue,  piiqde,  and  green 
12  ditto  cut  tluted  claret  glasses 
12  ditto  plain  ditto 
b ditto  cut  tluted  jelly  glasses 
6 ditto  rather  larger 
10  ditto  cut  oval  saltcellars 
4 chests  plated  wall  shades,  single  branches 
6 ditto  double  ditto. 

12  pair  plated  double  branch  cut  pillar  shades, 
engraved  borders,  and  spare  shades 
24  dozen  ink  and  sand  glasses 
6 ditto  green  hoek  glasses 
50  ditto  plain  saltcellars  with  legs 
50  ditto  common  tumblers 
100  ditto  small  wine  glasses 
2 ditto  plain  decanters 
2 ditto  cut  ditto 


4 dozen  common  hats,  is.  to  5s.  each 
4 ditto  6s.  to  8s. 

4 ditto  10  to  12 
2 ditto  boys'  hats,  2 in  a nest 


HABERDASHERY. 


25  lbs.  blue  thread 

15  ditto  each  red  and  black 

20  ditto  of  threads  from  No.  10  to  40  assorted 

50  dozen  white  bobbin 

50  lbs.  mixed  pins 


20  gross  shirt  buttons 
30  thousand  Whitechapel  needles  assorted 
50  dozen  white  tapes,  different  breadths 
12  pieces  black  hair  ribbon 
Fashionable  ribbons,  narrow  .^10 


HARDWARE. 


10  thousand  fish  hooks  No.  27  to  41 
20  thousand  ditto  to  50 

50  dozen  japanned  ink  stands,  No.  444 
3 ditto  pairs  of  chambers  bellows 
1000  feet  plated  mouldings,  No.  3622 


12  dozen  brass  compasses 
6 ditto  barber's  bones  assorted 
12  sets  leather  backgammon  tables 
2 sets  chess  boards  and  men  complete 
4 cwt.  of  brass  wire  for  Venetians 


m 


BOMBAY. 


HOSIERY. 


50  dozen  white  cotton  pantaloon  stocking* 
50  ditto  superfine  ditto 
J;?0  ditto  worsted  stockings 
10  ditto  half  ditto 

}2  ditto  ladies’ fine  cotton  stockings 
G ditto  ladies'  silk  ditto,  laced  clocks 

2 ditto  black  ditto 

3 ditto  jiicii’s  half  silk  hose 


12  dozen  men's  cotton  night  caps 
24?  ditto  gentlemen’s  gloves 

2 ditto  fleecy-hosiery  shirts 

1 ditto^^^^^^ditto^-k^^^drawers 
6 ditto  gentlemen’s  silk  hose 

3 ditto  black  ditto 

1 ditto  cotton  pantaloon  pieces 
6 ditto  children’s  cotton  stockings 


IRON,  STEEL,  &c. 


10  tons  English  iron,  2 to  3 in.  flat  bars 
2 ditto  bar  iron,  1 inch  square  bars 
5 ditto  Swedish  ditto 
5 ditto  butt  hoops 
10  cwt.  rivets  for  hoops 
5 tons  of  steel  in  faggots,  9 to  12  bai^s  each. 


5 tons  Swedish  steel  in  tubs 
2 ditto  iron  plate,  34  by  24  in.  at  41b.  each 
2 ditto  ditto,  4,  5,  and  6 plates  to  the  cwt. 

1 ditto  ditto,  thin,  20  to  24  inches  square 

2 tons  each,  12d.  20d.  24d,  and  30d.  nails 
1 ton  each,  4d.  6d.  8d.  and  lOd.  ditto 


IRONMONGERY. 


21  dozen  11  L hinges,  each  G to  12  inches 
12  ditto  II  hinges  G to  12  ditto 
50  gross  each  1 inch  and  1 inch  screws 
100  ditto  f inch  and  j ditto 
50  dozen  portmanteau  padlocks 
12  ditto  double  bolt  ditto 
12  ditto  spring  rat  traps 
12  ditto  wood  mouse  traps 
48  ditto  iron. chest  liandles 

LEAD,  LE 

10  tons  red  lead  in  kegs  of  2 cwt.  each 
2 ditto  while  lead  ditto 

10  ditto  pig  lead  in  large  slabs 
2 ditto  slieet  lead,  thin  sheets 


48  dozen  3 square  files,  3 to  6 inches 
24  ditto  flat  ditto 
12  ditto  round  ditto 
12  ditto  half  round  ditto 
G ditto  flat  rasps  ditto 
12  polished  hand  vices 
6 dozen  bench  vices 
6 ditto  iron  screw  plates 
3 ditto  flat  irons 

SHOT,  &c. 

3  tons  patent  shot,  as  under : 

No.  1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 io  11  12 

Cwt.  044444G  20  2 222 


LUSTRES. 


10  pair  diamond  cut  lustres  with  6 branches,  en- 
graved shades,  12  inches  long  G broad 
10  pair  ditto,  with  5 branches  ditto 
2 pair  ditto  w ith  4 lights  ditto 

J.ACE,  GOLD 

75  dozen  rich  silver  bullion,  .3  inches  | 

75  ditto  gold  ditto%.«%«%%«%^^^3  niches 
100  yards  rich  gold  Russia  braid 
200  ditto  silver  ditto 


2 pair  6-light  lustres,  neat  ornamented  plain 

shades,  spare  furniture,  &c. 

4  four  light  ditto,  ditto 

1 eight  ditto,  ditto 

AND  SILVER. 

3 dozen  rich  gold  epaulets,  twisted  bullion 
G ditto  silver  ditto  ditto 

2 ditto  sword  knots 

1 ditto  regimental  sashes 


BOMBAY. 


LOOKING  GLASSES. 


5 pairs  looking  glasses,  plum  gold  frames,  84 
inches  by  48  inches 

10  pairs  72  by  42 

1.5  pairs  ditto  30  by  24 

10  ditto  ditto  30  by  18 

/*  ditto  ditto  30  by  16 


20  dozen  oval  gilt  brass  framed  looking  glasses., 

each 5613,  10.53,  4313 

10  ditto  43.53,  30.53 

15  ditto  427,  527,  627 

1000  plate.s  looking  glass,  without  frames,  10  fnehes 
by  8,  carefully  packed 


MATHEMATIC  AL  INSTUIIMENTS. 


2  middling  size  sextants,  established  maker 
6 good  plain  quadrants,  ditto 
1 dozen  handsome  opera  glussea 
1 ditto  ship’s  compasses 
I azimuth  compass 


3 sets  ship-builders’  instruments 

2 dozen  telescopes,  eacli  No.  3762  to  3768 

4 ditto  pi*ospeot  glasses,  No.  3709  to  3770 
1 ditto  day  and  night  glasses 

3 sinull  pocket  compasses 


MUSICAL  INSTRUMENTS. 


2 organs,  each  three  spare  barrels,  the  tunes 
new  and  approved 
9 piano-fortes,  strong  and  plain 
2 liai*ps,  with  spare  strings 


New  published  music  .X3() 

3 Potter’s  patent  Cierman  flutes 
6 sets  Instructions  for  the  (xcrman  Flute 
1 set  of  instruments  for  a regimental  band 


OILMAN’S  STORES. 


KK)  hain5,  small  size,  under  12  lbs.  each 
20  l){Wi'els  Jew  beef,  each  about  14  pieces 
10  tierce.s  prime  India  beef 
.5  ditto  ditto  pork 
20  quarter  cases  pickles 
4 half  chests  fish  sauces 
100  pine-appltf  cheeses 
50  Berkely  ditto 

4  quarter  casks  white  wine  vinegar 
12  kegs  pickled  herrings 


20  kegs  tongues,  1 dozen  In  each 
20  ditto  pickled  salmon 
10  ditto  salted  ditto 
24  dozen  French  olives,  in  Iialf  chests 
6 ditto  Spanish,  ditto 
24  tlitto  pints  capers,  ditto 
6 ditto  mushrooms,  ditto 
24  dozen  best  mustard,  in  pounds  and  I lbs. 
6 ditto  salad  oil  in  pints 
3 quarter  cases  anchovies 


ORSIDUE,  &c. 


i>00  lbs.  orsidue,  *5  to  28  leaves  to  a pound,  each 
box  25  lbs.  no  other  sort  will  answer 


2000  packets  common  gol<l  leaf 
.5(K)  sheets  thin  yellow  foil 


P.AINTERS’  COLOURS. 


100  gallons  linseed  oil,  in  small  jars 
50  gallons  spirits  of  turpentine 
5 cwt  black  paint,  ground 
56  lbs.  verdigrease 


10  cwt.  prepared  white  lead 
10  cwt.  rosin 

.56  lbs.  patent  yellow  paint 
20  cwt.  yellow  dclire 


Ce 


lU 


BOMBAY. 


PERFUMERY. 


6 dozen  pints  lavender  water 
1 2 ditto  half  pints  ditto 
24f  ditto  ditto  Hungary  water 
4 ditto  ditto  honey  water 

2 ditto  arejuebusado 

3 ditto  milk  of  roses 

3  ditto  spirits  of  hartshorn 

3 ditto  ditto  of  lavender 

4 ditto  smelling  salts 

12  ditto  essence  [leppermint,  glass  stoppers 

PLATE  AND 

12  pair  neat  silver  bracket  candlesticks 
1 neat  silver  teapot  and  basons^  complete 
6 dozen  silver  tabic  spoons 

3 ditto  dessert 
6 ditto  tea  ditto 

4 pair  plated  curry  dishes 


24  sets  tooth  brushes 
12  boxes  Naples  soap 
100  lbs.  Windsor  soap 

5 cwt.  common  ditto 

6 dozen  dressing  combs 
3 ditto  small  tootli  ditto 

3 ditto  soap  boxes,  with  brushes 
100  lbs.  violet  hair  powder 

6 dozen  pots  Jamaica  pomatum 
3 ditto  Velrio’s  vegetable  syrup 

JEWELLERY. 

1 dozen  fasldonable  shoe  buckles 

2 ditto  ladies’  thimbles 

1 ditto  fashionable  gold  watch  chains 

2 ditto  marriage  rings 

3 ditto  broaches 
Fashionable  and  neat  jewellery, 


SADDLERY. 


12  light  dragoon  saddles,  bridle.s,  &tc.  complete 
6 hunting  saddles  and  bridles 
2 dozen  watering  bridles 

2 ditto  plated  snaffle  ditto 

3 ditto  best  white  surcingles 

2 ditto  best  brown  martingales 
6 ditto  sets  curry  combs,  brushes,  &c. 


6 pair  of  harness  complete,  No.  2008 

12  single  2010 

3 single  2013 

8 pairs  plated  lamps,.^w.^^.^^^^2292 

3 dozen  whips  of  No.  8731,  2,  and  3 
1 ditto  each  No.  8735,  G,  and  7 


STATIONERY. 


5  reams  imperial  paper 
10  ditto  royal 
1.5  ditto  medium 
30  ditto  demy 
J 00  ditto  foolscap 

50  ditto  thick  4to,  post,  part  gilt,  part  wo%’e 
SO  thin  ditto,  ditto 
50  ditto  thick  and  thin  Bvo.  ditto 
2 ditto  demy  extra  marble 
2 ditto  foolscap  ditto 
2 ditto  large  bank  post  folio 


30  reams  yellow  wove  printing  demy 

2 ditto  blossom  blotting 
10,000  large  clarified  quills 

100  boxes  mixed  wafers 

3 sets  merchants  account  books 
12  lbs.  sealing  wax,  red  and  black 
20  dozen  black  ink  powders 

6  ditto  red  ditto 
12  ditto  London  spelling  books 
12  ditto  slates  of  3 sizes 
Slate  pencils  in  proportioa 


BOMBAY. 


m 


12  copper  screw  pumps  for  ships 
^4  grindstones,  of  sizes 
6 dozen  3 thread  log-lines 
12  ditto  marline  and  kouseline 
2 ditto  hand  lines 
2 ditto  dee})  sea  lines 
12  ditto  sewing  twine 


SHIP-CHANDLERY. 

50  binnacle  glasses 

2 |)ieces  mixed  fearnought 
12  ditto  red  buntin 

3 ditto  each,  white  and  blue  ditto 
6 dozen  half  hour  glasses 

3 ditto  minute  and  half  minute  glasses 
6 ditto  tar  and  paint  brushes 


TIN  WARE  AND  IRON  WARE. 


1  dozen  tea  kettles,  each  3,  4,  and  6 quarts 

1 ditto  copper  ditto  3,  4,  and  6 quarts 

2 ditto  tin  coffee  pots 

1 ditto  chocolate  pots 

3 ditto  block  tin  saucepans,  of  sizes 
3 ditto  dish  covers  in  nests 

2 ditto  japanned  ditto 

2 ditto  iron  tea  kettles,  1st.  2d  and  3d  size 

3 ditto  small  tin  shaving  pots 


3 dozen  tin  saucepans  of  slzctf 
2 ditto  co|q)er  ditto 

1 ditto  stewpans  ditto 
6 fish  ki^ttles,  of  sizes 
6 dozen  tin  pattypans 

2 ditto  pudding  moulds 
2 ditto  Ja}ianned  tca})ols 
2 ditto  coffee  biggins 

48  tin  speaking  trumjicts,  of  sizes 


30  boxes  tin  plates,  225  sheets  each 
30  ditto  common  thin  plates 

1000  lbs.  shag  tobacco,  in  pound  papers 
500  Alloa  ditto  in  lib.  ditto 


TIN  PLATES. 

110  boxes  double  225  sheets,  each  plate  15  by  10 
inches,  and  to  weigh  II  oz.  each 

TOBACCO. 

1 250  lbs.  common  pigtail,  in  lib.  rolIs» 

100  fine  ladies  ditto 


5000  feet  best  crown  glass,  6 by  4 inches 
4000  ditto^>%-^%%^«>%^%>v%^^  8 by  6 ditto 
3000  10  by  8 ditto 


WINDOW  GLASS. 

18  plates  plate  glass,  16  by  12  inches 
36  ditto^........^^I4  by  10 

36  ditto^v%^...w.^vvv%^^  10  by  8 


WATCHES. 


5 pair  double  gilt  watches  with  seconds 
5 ditto  silver  watches,  double  cases 
2 chronometers,  good  maker,  not  too  dear 


3 fashionable  ladies'  watches,  chains.  Sec. 

4 ditto  gentlemen's  gold  watches 
Watch  glasses,  large  size  £3 


100  gross  Dutch  tobacco  pipes 
3 spars  for  topihasts  and  topsail  yards 
Toys  for  children,  mostly  tin,  £30 
100  lbs.  saffron,  free  from  oil 
2000  lbs.  quicksilver,  in  iron  bottles 
6 half  chests  Port  wine  in  quarts 
6 ditto  in  pints 
6 ditto  hock 

5 ditto  cider 

6 ditto  perry 


SUNDRIES. 

200  deals  from  2 to  3 inches  thick 
* 2 fashionable  gigs,  cheap  maker 
10  pieces  French  cambrics 
Fashionable  millinery  £50 
24  camblet  boat  cloaks 
24  ditto  coats 

12  pair  fine  blankets  of  sizes 
20  pieces  fine  Irish  linens 
10  kegs  pearl  barley,  { cwt. 

10  ditto  currants  ditto 


BOMBAY 


PRICE  CURRENT  OP  EUROPEAN  GOODS  AT  BOMBAY. 


P,  C.  signifies  prime  cost,  N.  D.  no  demand. 


SPECIES  or  GOODS. 


HOW  SOLD. 


f Ilof'slieads  Rupees  per 

( llotlle  Ditto  |)er  tlozcn  J 

Anchors  iind  gra|)iu‘ls  Ditto  per  cwt. 


r (jla.ss,  small  Ditto 

Beads  s Sc(*(l  Ditto 


Ttlacking  and  brushes^ 


Beads  -J  Sc(*(l  l)itto  per  bunch 

Ttlacking  and  Per  cent,  advance*. 

IMocks  Ditto 

Books  and  Paniphlets  Ditto 

Bools  and  shoos  Ditto 

Buckles,  shoe  and  knee  Ditto  .-w. ........  .....I 

X)iitt(ms  ......................................  Jhtto 

Buntin,  ot*  colours ............. .............  Ditto  ................ 

Brandv  f Uupces  pur  oullon.. 

^ ( (’herry  and  Baspberry  ........  Ditto  per  dozen  .... 

Cables,  1C  to  20  incJies...v..........<,^....  Ditto  per  cwt.  ...... 

Cabinet  ware,  desks,  &:c.  ................  Per  cent,  advance  .. 

Cochineal  ^»^%^V........ ............... .......  Rupees  per  lb. 

Cheese...................................^...  Ditto  ................ 

Chintz  and  Muslincts  ............. ..... ..  Pci  cent,  advance.. 


Brandy 


.Ditto 

.Ditto  ............... 

. Rupees  per  gallon. 
. Ditto  per  dozen 
.Ditto  per  cwt.  ..... 

. Per  cent,  advance  . 
. Rupees  per  lb. 

. Ditto  ............... 


Chronometers 

Canvas,  all  numbers  ............ 

Cards,  playing 
Claret 

Cloths  and  casinierc  ...................... 

' Sheet 
Plate 

Coppers  Sheatliiiig 

Japan  ............................ 

Nails  and  bolts.................. 

Corks  ........................ ....... ........... 

Cutlery  ...................................... 

Conleclionary  .............................. 

Cordage,  small  to  3 indues 

C otton  sciows  .'v.. 

Carpeting 

Cider  ............... 

Deal 

-n. f ^'ire 

engines  Garden  ..................... 

Enamelled  boxes 
Feathers,  military 
Gin,  in  lajge  cases 

Garden  seeds................................ 

( I Lins  and  pistols  .......................... 

Gunpowder,  patent  ............. ........... 

fWare,  plain  ^ v-%  % ^ v%  %-v-%  ^ % 
AVindow  ....................... . 


eWare,  plain 
Glass  -<  AVindow  ...^ 

^ 1 jiOoking.....^ 

Gold  and  silver  thread 


Pci  cent,  advance .. 
Ditto  ................I 

Rupees  per  bolt 
I'or  cent,  advance  .. 
Rupees  per  doz(*n  .. 

. Per  cent,  advance  .. 
.p(’rniaundof37llbs. 

, Ditto 
.Ditto 
. Ditto 

.Ditto  .... 

. Rupees  per  gross  .. 

. Per  cent,  advance  .. 

, Ditto  ................ 

.Rupees  per  cwt..... 

. Per  cent,  advance.. 

I F3itto  ................ 

, Rupees  per  dozen.. 

. Per  cent,  advance .. 

. Ditto 

. Ditto  ^ .........v.  . j 

» Fhtto 

* Ditto 

» Rupees  per  case  ....I 

* Per  cent,  advance  .. 

* Ditto 

* Ditto 
. Ditto 

. Ditto  . ......  ..1 

JDitto 

.Ditto 


1809. 1810. 

.lull.  3.  I July  m Jan  i£7.  | Juip?. 


BOMBAY, 


197 


SPECIES  OF  GOODS. 


Gold  End  silver  bullion^ 
Hams 
JF 1 ats 

HabiM'dasheiy 
T"f  aw 
Herrings 
Hock 
Hosiery , 

Jewelleiy , 

" Swedish  narrow^ 
English  broad 
Square  bars 
Hoops 

Ironmongery,  liinges,  &o., 
radJocks,  locks,  &c. , 


Iron 


V»  ^ 'V  %%  ^ ' 


1^  %«%■%.•  -w-' 


'X  V «1  j 


> • V-Vk  %'W«. ' 


Lead  in 


r Pigs 

. I Slieetv- 
in  « , 


%%%%%% 


% % v%^  %%  O 


I Red 
[AVhite 


% % V%^%-%  %^%%%^ 


%%%%%%%%•%%  %^^%  I 


f London  purticulai' 
Madeira  A iMarket  ^ 

liace,  gold  and  silvcr<,.%>^ 
Mathematical  inslrunicnts 
Musical  instruments. 
Millinery 
Nails,  of  sizes 

I Salad,  ill  pints 
\ Linseed 


%%%%%%%%%%% 


•I  %%.<%  %<%  ^ ^ %>%%%^  I 


%%%  %%^*%%  % , 


Oil 

Olives 
Organs 

Orsidue,  25  to  30  pieces  per  pound 
Pipes,  tobacco 
Paints,  of  colours 
Perry 
Pickles..- 
Pitch 
Pictures 
I’erfumery 
Plate,  silver 
I'lated  ware 


............................ 


PortfiT  S Hogsheads 
porter  | Bottles 


...................... 


I...........  ........  ...'...■...J 


........................ 


Port  win  e'...'^......'' 

Provisions,  salt....... 

Quicksilver 
Raisins,  bloom 
31'ataiia 
Rum,  Jamaica 
Rum  Shrub 
Sc^ldlery  ....yv....'....’ 

Salmon  {|5Jiied 
Saffron 

ShipH;handlery, 


•'V........I......  ......... 


......... 


..............  ........I 


............................ 


........................ 


now  SOLD. 

ISOS. 

iSOf).  1 

1810. 

' Jail,  ^ ]Julv  l’> 

.1.111  O. 

.1  lily  J . 

.1.111  1 

.Icl\  , 

^ IVr  cent,  advance.. 

20 

r.c. 

P.C. 

20 

p.ir 

VA\ 

, Rupees  per  lb. ...... 

i 

r 

L 

1 

1 

1 

1 

^ Per  cent,  advance  .. 

20 

10 

20 

30 

25 

30 

. Oilto  ...w......'..... 

N.  1). 

P.C. 

X.  1). 

10 

P.C. 

10 

^ Rupees  per  cwl. .... 

2N 

25 

30 

30 

30 

10 

. Ditto  per  keg........ 

S 

N.  D. 

N.  1). 

12 

12 

10 

. Ditto  per  dozen  .... 

30 

20 

30 

10 

3t> 

10 

. Per  cent,  advance  .. 

20 

20 

15 

30 

20 

20 

. Ditto  ................ 

N.  D. 

X.  D. 

P.C. 

10 

X i). 

15 

. Rupees  pcT  candy  .. 

no 

120 

130 

120 

100 

no 

Ditto  ...-^  ........ 

95 

no 

no 

10.^1 

93 

90 

. Ditto  ................ 

90 

100 

90 

100 

93 

90 

. Ditto  per  cwl. ...... 

17 

20 

2k 

25 

25 

‘21 

Per  cent,  advance .. 

10 

10 

P.C. 

10 

N.  D. 

P.C. 

I'^itto  ................ 

10 

10 

P.C. 

10 

N 1). 

P.C. 

R up('es  per  vw  t. .... 

2() 

‘21. 

20 

17 

1 k 

15 

,,  Ditto  ............ 

30 

27 

28 

20 

17 

17 

^ Ditto  ................ 

1 30 

35 

30 

12 

20 

IS 

,.  Ditto  'V.%.....r.. ...... 

1 23 

22 

20 

22 

19 

20 

. Rupees  per  pipe  .... 

150 

KM) 

3.30 

tlM) 

350 

350 

. Ditto  ................ 

too 

350 

.300 

3.V) 

2?.5 

300 

. Ditto  .-V.. ...... ...... 

300 

300 

220 

2 J5 

2.>0 

. Per  cent,  advance  .. 

N.  D. 

p.(\ 

N.  1). 

10 

N.  1). 

P.<\ 

\ I'^itto  ................ 

P.(\ 

p.(\ 

X.  1). 

P.C. 

N.  1). 

P.C. 

. Ditto  .V. ............. 

N.D. 

p.(\ 

N.  D. 

I’.C. 

\.  1). 

20 

. Ditto  ................ 

N.  1). 

I p.(\ 

\.  1). 

P.C. 

N.  D. 

^ Rupees  per  cwt.  .... 

•28 

30 

20 

21. 

20 

22 

^ Ditto  per  dozen  .... 

12 

7 

0 

0 

IS 

IS 

,,  Per  cent,  advance .. 

25 

P.C. 

20 

20 

N.  D. 

10 

,,  Rupees  per  dozen  .. 

N.D. 

5 

N.  D. 

0 

0 

0 

Per  cent,  advance .. 

20 

10 

20 

20 

20 

2.1 

,,  Rupees  per  corge  .. 

o 

2 

4 

•11 

31 

Per  cent,  advance  .. 

N.D. 

10 

nCI). 

N.  1). 

20 

VA\ 

..  Ditto  ................ 

T.(\ 

P.C. 

N.  1). 

P.C. 

N.  D. 

P.  C. 

..Rupees  per  dozen.. 

12 

JO 

12 

12 

12 

12 

..  Ditto  per  case  ...... 

15 

n 

10 

11 

1 k 

10 

Ditto  per  barrel  .... 

30 

25 

35 

30 

20 

.3(1 

Per  cent,  advance  .. 

N.  1). 

P.(\ 

N.  1). 

10 

N.  D. 

P.C. 

Ditto  ................ 

N.  D. 

20 

N.  D. 

P.C. 

N.  D. 

10 

' D itto  ................ 

P.C. 

P.(\ 

\.  1). 

P.C. 

P.C. 

10 

Ditto 

N.  D. 

VA\ 

N.  1). 

P.C. 

P.(\ 

15 

Rupees  per  lilul....^ 

80 

80 

80 

85 

80 

80 

Ditto  per  dozen.... 

7 

7 

i) 

S 

7 

8 

^ 13itto 

13 

12 

Ik 

1.3 

13 

17 

Ditto  per  tierce  .-... 

N.D. 

50 

N 1). 

00 

00 

70 

Ditto  per  Surat  md. 

51^ 

50 

15 

IS 

10 

10 

Per  cent,  advance  .. 

N.D. 

J\C. 

N.  D. 

P.C. 

10 

P.  c. 

Rupees,  per  dozen 

N.  1). 

10 

IS 

Ik 

13 

JO 

Ditto  per  gallon.... 

2 

2 

3 

4 

4 

t 

^ Ditto  per  dozen  .... 

8 

P.C. 

4 

]\  c. 

4 

4 

..  Per  cent,  advance  .. 

N.  D. 

10 

P.  C. 

15 

N.  D. 

15 

..  Riqiccs  per  keg  ...^ 

20 

20 

N.  ]). 

20 

15 

IS 

»»  Ditto  per  kit  ........ 

8 

8 

N.  D. 

M 

8 

8 

^ Ditto  per  lb.  ........ 

27 

22 

18 

IS 

17 

17 

Per  cent,  advance 

15 

\\C. 

P.  ( \ 

15 

N.  D. 

N.  D. 

198 


BOMBAY. 


SPECIES  OF  GOODS. 

HOW  SOLD. 

1 1808.  J 

1 1809.  1 

1 1610. 

Jan.  5 

July  15 

Jan.  3. 

July  25. 

Jan  87. 

July  7. 

oi  soi*ts 

llupees  per  dozen  ^ 

N.  D. 

8 

4 

„ ^ 

N.D. 

N.D. 

Shot  patent,  of  sizes 

Ditto  per  cwt. 

30 

30 

28 

.30 

32 

30 

Sliootiiijs^  tackle 

Per  cent,  advance 

P.C. 

N.D. 

10 

10 

P.C. 

P.C. 

SoapI  

Ditto 

20  1 

50 

20 

P.C. 

P.C. 

P.C. 

D 1 1 to 

20 

.50 

20 

P.C. 

P.C. 

P.C. 

Spectacles 

Ditto 

N.  D.  1 

P.C. 

10 

p.(\ 

p.(;. 

P.C. 

SIciiis,  ^lorocco 

13lttO 

N.  D. 

N.D. 

P.C. 

P.C. 

P.C. 

P.C. 

^pars%v»'%v%  ^ 

l~))ttO 

100 

7b 

50 

50 

25 

50 

3 n U ffv  % VV  ^ 'V 

Ditto 

N.  D. 

N.  D. 

10 

N.  1). 

N.D. 

N.D. 

Rupees  per  cwt.%^ 

18 

20 

23 

22 

20 

21 

oLCd  ^ rii  1 

Ditto 

25 

28 

28 

27 

26 

iDLulflOIlCi  y 

IVr  cent,  advance 

20 

10 

15 

20 

20 

so 

10 

Tap 

Rupees  per  barrels 

25 

25 

30 

30 

20 

20 

^ in  ware 

Per  cent,  advance  ^ 

P.C. 

PC. 

15 

P.C. 

10 

P.O. 

Tobacco  1 

Rupees  per 

1 

1 

1 

U 

H 

11 

xooatto  1 

T^ltto  %% 

H 

1} 

u 

li 

u 

u 

T^ia  plates 

Per  cent  advance 

30 

25 

40 

40 

30 

so 

Rupees  per  dozen 

N.  W. 

20 

N.  D. 

20 

20 

20 

Per  cent  advance  ^ 

P.C. 

20 

20 

20 

P.C. 

20 

T-'iii  pentiiic 

l)lttO 

20 

10. 

10 

25 

P.C. 

10 

V inc^ar 

Rupees  [ler  gallon^^ 

1{ 

2 

i 

1 

i 

1 

*V  erd  i^rcase 

l*cr  cent,  advance 

P.C. 

20 

N.  D. 

P.C. 

P.C. 

P.C. 

^Vatches,  coninion 

|DlttO  -^^vvavv^^-vwvvvk 

P.C. 

P.C. 

N.D. 

P.C. 

20 

10 

HATES  OF  EXCHANGE. 

Spanish 

Rupees  per  100 

218 

221 

220 

219 

220 

221 

iiiiid  /\r»  1*  lYiontlis  sip|lit 

Per  Rupee 

2s,  6d, 

2s.  6d. 

2*.  5d. 

2s.  fid. 

2s.  fid. 

2s.  Gd. 

Ditto 

2s.  U 

2s.  U 

2s.  U 

2s.  4d. 

2s.  4d. 

2s.  4d. 

l-rnglaud  ^ g 

Ditto 

2s.  3d. 

2s.  3d. 

2s.  3d. 

2s.  3d. 

2s.  3d. 

2s.  3d. 

j^avy  Dills  at  00  days 

Ditto 

2s.  3d. 

2s.  3d. 

2s  3d. 

2s.  3d. 

2s.  3d. 

2s.  2d, 

The  commaiulcrs  and  oflicers  of  the  Company’s  ships  employ  one  of  the  principal  Persee  merchants 
as  tlieir  dubnsh  or  agent,  wlio  has  the  management  of  their  investments,  and  is  considered  responsible  for 
the  goods  sold  either  to  the  European  or  native  shopkeepers,  and  for  which  a compensation  is  made,  but 
they  have  no  fixed  rule  of  charging  commission  on  sales  and  purchases,  leaving  it  to  the  discretion  of  their 
eiu|)lnyers  what  allowance  to  make  them. 

Investments  from  Europe  are  usually  divided  into  three  classes.  The  first  comprehends  such  articles  as 
.avc  intended  for  the  consumption  of  Europeans;  these  arc  .sold  at  a certain  per  centage  on  the  prime  cost  of 
the  goods:  the  packages,  convoy  duty,  shipping  expences,  &c.  arc  only  paid  for  at  prime  cost.  The  second 
class  comprehends  what  arc  denominated  bazar  articles,  such  as  cochineal,  saffron,  iron,  steel,  lead,  8ic. 
these  are  generally  purchased  by  native  merchants  at  a fixed  price  per  pound,  candy,  cwt.  &c.  The  third 
class  is  what  are  considered  marine  stores,  such  as  cordage,  pitch,  tar,  &c.;  these  are  generally  tendered  to 
the  (iovernment,  and  if  refused,  are  sold  to  the  merchants  in  the  bazar. 

The  usual  mode  of  settlement  for  goods  sold  is,  payment  at  two  months  from  the  period  of  delivay, 
reckoning  the  Bombay  rupee  at  2s.  Cd.  sterling. 

Of  late  years  the  merchants  have  been  in  the  habit  of  commissioning  goods  from  Europe,  at  an  agreed 
odvapceupon  the  prime  cost,  varying  from  38  to  45  per  cent,  the  packages,  &c.  at  prime  cost;  from  which 
advance  are  to  be  deducted  the  following  charges,  to  which  tlie  individuals  who  ship  them  in  England  ait 
liable. 


BOMBAY. 


m 


Freight,  as  there  are  usually  many  bulky  articles,  may  be  reckoned  equal  0 0 per  cent 

Premium  of  insurance  7 per  cent,  and  stamp,  being  always  sliipped  on  extra  sliips  7 5 0 ditto. 

Wastage  on  some  articles,  and  damage,  &c.  on  others,  about^v...^^^^..^^^2  10  0 ditto. 

Bombay  import  duties  and  fees  at  15  0 ditto. 

Commission  to  agent  at  Bombay,  5 per  cent,  on  delivery,  including  advance.^v>^7  0 0 ditto. 

Expences  of  landing,  cooley  hire,  5 0 ditto. 

Making  in  the  15  0 

Of  the  above  deductions  the  commanders  and  officers  of  the  Company’s  ships  are  exempt  from  the 
charge  for  freight,  1 per  cent,  difference  in  insurance  on  regular  ships,  and  a part  of  the  commission.  Be- 
sides which,  there  is  a loss  on  the  exchange  to  Europe  of  10  j>cr  cent.,  bills  at  three  months  after  sight  be- 
ing at  the  rate  of  2s.  3d.  per  rupee,  and  may,  from  various  circumstances,  be  expected  to  full  still  lower. 

The  commerce  carried  on  from  Foreign  Europe  with  Bombay  and  Surat  is  very  trilling.  In  the  years 
1802  to  1806  inclusive  it  was  as  under : 

COMMERCE  WITH  HAMBURGH. 

During  the  period  of  five  years,  1802  to  1806  inclusive,  the  Commerce  with  Hamburgh  consisted 
of  only  the  cargo  of  one  ship,  wliich  imported  in  1804, 

Treasure  amounting  to  — Sicca  Rupees  1,57,500 

Exported  merchandise,  principally  piece-goods  1,88,505 

Making  a balance  in  favour  of  Bombay  and  Surat  Sicca  Rupees  3,16,005 

COMMERCE  WITH  DENMARK. 

During  the  above  period  of  five  years,  the  commerce  with  Denmark  consisted  of 
Merchandise  imported  into  Bombay  and  Surat,  in  1802,  the  only  year  in 

which  any  importation  took  place  Kupees  46,736 

Ditto  exported  from  ditto  to  ditto  R4,4.« 

Exports  exceed  the  imports  37,705 

Treasure  imported  into  Bombay  and  Surat  from  Denmark  %%%%%%%% 78,075 

Balance  in  favour  of  Bombay  and  Surat  Sicca  Rupees  1,15,780 

COMMERCE  WITH  LISBON. 

The  following  is  a statement  of  the  merchandise  and  treasure,  imported  into  Bombay  and  Surat 
from  Lisbon  in  the  years  1802  to  1806  inclusive;  likewise  of  the  merchandise  and  treasure  exported  from 
Bombay  and  Surat  to  Lisbon  during  the  same  period;  together  with  a list  of  the  articles  of  which  the 
imports  and  exports  consisted  in  1805. 


IMPORTS  INTO  BOMBAY  AND  SURAT.  EXPORTS  FROM  BOMBAY  AND  SURAT. 


Yean. 

Merchandise. 

Treasure. 

Total. 

Years. 

Merchandise. 

Trcasiue. 

Tutal. 

Sicca  Rupees. 

Sicca  Rupees. 

Sicca  Rupees. 

Sicca  Rupees. 

Sicca  Rupees 

Sicca  Rupees. 

H 

Spos 

88,039 

1,07,712 

2,17,716 

2,31,763 

1,03,673 

3,30,931 

1,88,059 

7,04,880 

4,62,345 

1,69,278 

4,18,970 

2,95,771 

9,22,696 

6,94,108 

1802 

1803 

1804 

1805 

1806 

2,.34,146 

6,31,508 

4,37,617 

6,61,926 

6,48,768 

— 

2,;D,146 

5,31,508 

4,37,617 

5,61,926 

5,48,768 

Total. 

7,10,835 

17,89,888 

Total. 

23,13,965  1 

— 

1 23,13,965 

^00 


IJOMBAY. 


Articles  of  Import  in  180.1 

Cjon  llupco^ 

Shuk'iia  wiiK*  % 1 jOO^NOfl 

Siiiulries*^  21,115 

1 rcusiirc  7,04,880 


Imports  from  Lisboii..„%^%xSicca  RupC(‘s  0,^J2,.^90 


Articles  of  Export  in  1805. 


Piece  goods^,.,,  Sicca  Rupees 

Cassia  and  cassia  Imds 
Drugs 
Cottoiu 
Sundries  • 


%%%%%% 


O.OoO 

18,218 

1,16,000 

7,348 


Exports  to  Lisl)on.  Rupees  5,61,926 


IMerdiamlise  imported  into  Roinhay  and  Surat  from  Lisbon,  in  .5  years,  Sicca  Rupees  7,10,8.3.5 
Ditto  cxj)orled  from  ditto  to  ditto  3,13,9fi5 


I'^xports  (‘xewd  the  imports.*.  1(5,03,H8() 

TreuMire  import I'd  ti'om  Idsbun  (luriii^  the  above  jieriod  l7,8y,88S 

Balance  in  facour  of  Bombay  and  Surat  **.*.***.  Sicca  Rupees  33,93,768 

COMMERCE  WITH  MADEIRA. 

33ic  following  is  a statc'incnt  of  tlie  merchandise  and  treasure  Imported  into  Bombay  and  Surat  from , 
the  Llimd  of  Madeira  in  the  years  1802  to  1806  inclusive.  There  do  not  appear  to  have  been  any  goods 
cxporUul  Irojn  Bombay  and  Surat  to  Madeira  during  the  above  period. 


IMPORTS  INTO  BOMUAY  A^rD  .SUR\T.  KXP()UTS  FROM  BOMBAY  AND  SURAT. 


Mrrt  li!uuji'«('.  1 

'IVaMiM*. 

Toi.ll 

Mmli.indisc’.  j 

Treasure 

Tot.'il. 

Years 

SlCf  |{u|ii‘r->. 

Sict.i  Ru|)(>e>.. 

Sicca  Uupee«. 

Years. 

Sicca  Rupees, 

Sicca  Kup^'cs. 

Sicca  Rupees. 

1802 

, 

1802 



1 

_ 

1803 

i,03,()r)5 

1,03,0,5.5 

1803 

- 

1801 

1.23,05.5  ' 

1,23,0.5.5 

1804 

1 - -1- 

...M 

180.) 

1,21.,1(M) 

— — 

1,24,.100 

180.5 

, ■ ■ ■ 

- - 

— 

1S06 

i,i7,oa» 

. 

1,17,805 

1800 

— 

— 

— 

T<.(al. 

4,03,005 

— 

1 4,00,00.5 

llTotal. 

— 

— 

— 

In  1S05  tlic  only  article  imported  Mas  Aladeira  wine,  valued  at  Rupees  1,24,400. 


COAIMEIK  E WITH  FOREIGN  EUROPE. 

The  following  is  a statement  of  the  merchandise  and  treasure  imported  into  Bomb^  and  Surat  from 
Poreign  lairope,  coinprebending  ITamburgh,  Denmark,  Lisbon,  and  Madeira,  in  the  years  1802  to  1806. 
ineliHive;  likewise  of  the  merchandise  and  treasure  exported  from  Bombay  and  Surat  during  tlic  samo  . 
period.  'Die  aitieh’s  of  which  the  imports  and  exports  consisted,  arc  already  enumerated. 


IMPOUrs  INK)  BOMBAY  AND  SURAT.  EXPORTS  FROM  BOMBAY  AND  SURAT. 


Ywrs. 

Men  lutifliNC. 

TrraMirc. 

Total. 

Years 

Mercliandiiie. 

Treasure. 

Total. 

1 * ' 

Sicr.i  Ru|H•t•^ 

Sicca  Rupees. 

Sicca  Rupees. 

Sicca  K 11  pros. 

Sicca  Rupees. 

Sicca  Rupees. 

1802 

1,1 2, .341 

1,81,748 

2,04,089 

1802 

3,1.5,662 

3,15,662 

1803 

1,01,00-4 

3,.1(),03I 

.5,22,025 

180.3 

5,3-1,508 

- --- 

5,31,508 

1804 

2,,31,.‘107 

.3,45,5.59 

.5,70,026 

1804 

6,20,122 

■ ■ 

6,26,122 

1805 

.3,42,110 

7,04,880 

10,40,096 

180.5 

5,04,851 

— 

5,64,851 

1800 

.3,40,058 

4,02,345 

8,12,003 

1806 

5,48,708 

— 

5,48,768 

'fotal. 

12,27,176 

20,25,403 

32,,52,C.39  1 

Total. 

25,86,911 

25,86,911 

BOMBAY, 


‘>01 


IVIercliandise  imported  into  Bombay  and  Surat  from  Foreign  Europe  in  llio  years 

1802  to  1806  inclusive  Sicca  llupecs  12,27,176 

Ditto  exported  from  ditto  to  ditto  %■%%%%'%%  %«>%  V%%  « V%  % % «.  %%%%%'%  «v«  25,86,011 


^ Exports  exceed  the  imports^ 

I'reasure  imported  into  Bombay  and  Surat  during  tlie  above  periods 


13,59,735 
.20,25,4(53 


Balance  in  favour  of  Bombay  and  Surat 


.Sicca  llupecs 


33,85,198 


COMMERCE  WITH  THE  UNITED  STATES  OF  AAIERICA. 


The  following  is  a statement  of  the  merchandise  and  treasure  imported  into  Bombay  and  Surat  from 
the  United  States  of  America  in  the  years  1802  to  1806  inclusive;  likewise  of  the  merchandise  and  trea- 
sure exj^orted  from  Bombay  and  Surat  to  the  United  States  during  the  same  period,  together  with  a list  of 
the  articles  of  which  the  imports  and  exports  consisted  in  1805. 


IMPORTS  INTO  BOMBAY  AND  SURAT.  F.XPORTS  FROM  BOMBAY  AND  SURAT. 


Y cars. 

Merchandise. 

Treasure. 

Total. 

Years. 

Merelianthsc. 

Trentiiire. 

Total. 

Sicca  Rupees. 

Sicca  Rupees. 

Sicr.i  Rupees. 

Suca  Ru])i‘e:i. 

Sicca  Riipccn. 

Sicca  Rupees. 

1802 

- 

..  »— 

■■— — 

1802 

1,78,332 

■— 

1,78,332 

180.3 

— 

. 

1- 

1803 

— 

r ■■■■- 

' 

1804 

9,071 

2,07,564 

2,16,6.35 

1801 

65,903 

— 

65,903 

1805 

95,660 

94,500 

1,90,160 

1805 

1,12,866 

— — 

1,11,866 

1806 

1,21,0.‘18 

1,32,583 

2,53,621 

1806 

1,62,440 

— 

1,62,410 

Totall 

2,25,769 

4,.34,647 

6,60,416 

toUl 

.5,19,541 

■ 

■■■5,19,541 

Articles  of  Import  in  1805. 

Brandy  and  cherry  brandy  Sicca  Rs,  69,223 
Claret  and  port  wine  11,775 

Geneva  3,493 

Cordage  I**  * 

Metals  ^ ,678 

Oil,  and  oilmans'  stores  1,711 

Total  of  merchandise  95,660 

Ditto  of  Treasurev%%^^%%%^v^^>%-*%%^^’‘'*  94,500 

Imports  in  1805  «««/%<»%^i^Sicca  Rupees  1,90,160 


Articles  of  Export  in  1805. 


Piece-goods 
Cotton%%%^%-%^' 
Camphire 
Seeds. 


%Sicca  Rupees 


35,450 

70,000 

6,416 

1,(KK) 


Exports  in  1 805-v^v.w.^^v^Sicca  Rupees  1 , 1 2,860 


Value  of  imports  into  Bombay  and  Surat  from  America  in  5 years 
' Ditto  exports  from  ditto  to  ditto 


. Sicca  Rs.  2,25,769 
5,19,541 


Exports  exceed  the  Imports  2,93,772 

Treasure  imported  into  Bombay  and  Surat  from  America  4,34,647 

Balance  in  favour  of  Bombay  and  Surat  during  the  above  period  %%%%  Sicca  Rs.  7,28,419 


202 


BOMBAY. 


COMMERCE  WITH  THE  NORTHERN  PARTS  OF  GUZZEEAT. 

The  following  is  a statement  of  the  merchandise  and  treasure  imported  into  Bombay  and  Surat  from 
the  ports  in  the  northern  parts  of  Guzzerat,  in  the  years  1802  to  1800  inclusive,  likewise  of  the  merchant 
disc  and  treasure  exported  from  Bombay  and  Surat  to  the  northern  parts  of  Guzzerat  during  the  same  pe- 
riod,  together  with  a list  of  the  articles  of  which  the  imports  and  exports  consisted  in  1605. 


IMPORTS  INTO  BOMBAY  AND  SURAT 


KXPORTS  FROM  BOMBAY  AND  SURAT. 


Mcrchaiiilii^e. 
Sicca  lliipcr-j. 


70,4<l,.517 
56,‘23,<>34. 
67,25,258 
78,64^765 
82,96,049 


'I'otal.  1 :W5,59,22;J 


Trea<iure. 
Sicca  Ru|)U(‘s. 


3,03,618 

1,550 


23,501 


3,28,669 


Sicca  Rupees. 


73,53,135 

56,25,184 

67,25,258 

78,64,765 

^ljn55^ 

M8,S7,802 


MerLhamli>c. 

Treasure. 

Sicca  Ku]*cl*s. 

Sicca  Rupees. 

i . . _ . 

1802  43,85,624 

1803  34,18,367 

1804  55,02,461 

1805  57,50,601 

1800  50,13,862 

[Total.  240,70,915 


00,77,378 

36,63,804 

66,40,802 

74,80,112^ 

84,66,967 


323,29,1.53 


C o 1 1 0 n « 'V'v. -« % % .V m'vi 

('oriielians 

Ghee 

Grain 

Moura 

Oil 

Pieccrgoods 

Putchock 

Seeds  ^ 

Sandal  oil 
Tobacco 
Gingely  seeds 

f Baroach 


A Hides  of  Import  in  1805. 

Sicca  Rupees 


Piece-goods 


Cambay 
Jumbaseer  « 
Bownaghur  « 
Amedabad^^ 


Hemp 

Soap 

Shawls 

Opium  and  seeds^.. 

Orugs 

Horses 

IMiabbies 

Ridei 

Sundries 

Imports  in  1805  « 


46,38,477 
62,231 
1,24,84,5 
9,64,188 
45, .567 
1,35,628 
2,66,249 
61,457 
81,999 
62,812 
31,856 
60,623 
3,70,443 
1,14,173 
93,676 
38,372 
4,61,003 
17,383 
36,964 
62,812 
16,761 
12,682 
20,719 
14,950 
12,618 
14,843 
41,434 


Articles  of  Expert  in  1805. 

Sicca  ]Rupees 


Bcctle-nut 
W oollens 


Copper  v»v 
Cocnineal .. 


Cocoa  nuts 
Dates 
Grain 
Iron 

Piece>goods 
£mbroidery.^».v.*^ 
Pepper..»..^«».»»^..- 
Raw  silk 

Sugar  and  Jaggery 
Copra 

Elephants'  teeth 

Qunnies 

Steel 

Wines  

Spices 

I^Quors 

Drugs 

Metws 

Ghee 

Bangle'ivory 

Sundries 

Tressurev.«t%w»w. 


• Sicca  Rupees  78,64,765  Exports  in  1605. 


1,07,616 

1,73,676 

1,83,310 

1,78,241 

2,91,059 

I, 25,438 
1,10,802 
1,84,629 
8,58,817. 

72,707 

2,36,927 

7,17,709 

II, 40,041 
60,305 

1,68,238 

84,593, 

54,256 

57,164 

95,608 

45,295, 

2,51,428 

47,245 

60,633 

54,015 

60,^ 

3,31,671 

17,29,511 


. Sicca  Rupees  74,80,1 12 


Valu^.of  imports  into  Bombay  and  Surat  from  Guxzerat  in  5 yean.  Sicca  aimecs  355,50,223 
Ditto  of  exports  from  ditto  to  -;i--i.vn„  240,70,915 


Imports  exceed  the  exports 

Treasure  imported  into  Bombay  and  Surat  finm  Gnxxerat. 
Ditto  exported  from  ditto  to  ditto 


Balance  against  Bombay  and  Surat,  in  five  years. 


114,.8830S 

— 3,28,669 
82,58,238 

79,29,569 

.Sicca  Rupees  194^17,877 


BOMBAY. 


201 


COMMERCE  WITH  SURAT  AND  THE  ADJACENT  VILLAGES. 

The  following  is  a statement  of  the  merchandise  and  treasure  imnorted  into  Bombay  and  .Surat,  fiom 
Surat  and  the  adjacent  villages,  in  the  years  1802  to  180(i  inclusive;  likewise  ol  the  mercluindise  and  trea- 
sure exported  from  Bombay  and  Surat,  to  Surat  and  the  adjacent  villages,  during  the  same  period;  together 
u’ith  a list  of  the  articles  of  which  the  imports  and  exports  consisted  in  1803. 

IMPORTS  INTO  BOMBAY  AND  SURAT.  EXPORTS  FROM  BOMBAY  AND  SURAT. 


Y oars. 

Merchant  Uc. 

Treasure 

Total. 

Siccii  Rupees. 

Sicca  Rupees. 

Sicca  Ru)>ees.  I 

180:5 

13,01,788 

1,10,216 

14,12,004  1 

1803 

9,J13,016 

15,996 

9,51,012 

1804 

12,96,871 

22, .520 

13, 19, .391 

1803 

23,00,403 

95,988 

23,96,-391 

1806 

22,50,740 

1,83,021 

24,-33,761 

T'otal. 

80,84,818 

4,27,741 

85,12,-559  1 

Y ears 


1S02 

1803 

1804 

1805 

1806 
Total. 


Mcrdmii(li»e. 
Sicca  Rupees. 

“17,“39;;730“ 

i:i,S2,282 

21,8.1,287 

20,18,107 

29,72, 

T0.1,l6,2.'i'7 


'rrcasiire. 


Sicca  Rupees. 

"5,717971-“ 

3,69,239 

11,71,059 

13,99,():>5 

1,91,935 

37,09,859 


Tolal. 


Sicca  Rupc»*s. 

17,.'jl,.?21 

3;i,.57,34« 

34,18,062 

31,64,486 

140,20,116 


Articles  of  Import  in  1805. 
t / otton............ ............  Sicca  Rupees 

Piece-goods,  Surat ...................... 

Ditto  villages 

Hemp 

Red  and  white  lead 

Shawls 

Silk  works 

Vermilion 
Country  paper 

Castor  seeds  *>%  » %-w^  %%  %%%^  % 

Indigo  %%%■»•• 

Horses 
Sundries 
Treasure, 


10,83,893 

7,59,140 

1.96.. 51J2 
22,971 
19,421 
10,062 
11,969 
10,996 

4,053 

11,502 

12,427 

4,482 

13,000 

1..  39. 3.55 
95,988 


Articles  of  Kxport  in  1805. 
Raw  Siccii  Rupees 

Piece-goods 
Sugar 
Bcetle-nut 
Cochineal 
Elephants'  teeth 
Iron 

Pc^)perv^,%,.% 

Quicksilver 
Wine^. 

Copper- 
Horses 
Tin, 

Beads 
Woollens 
Liouors 
Ola  brass 
Spices 

Cnina-ware  , 

Cocod-nuts 
Coir 

Cardaniums 
Dates 
^^ain 

-<jlass  ware 
Qunnies 
Tortoise-shell 
Sundries,%,^w 
Treasure 


6,16,664 
2,74,732 
3,19,655 
65,914 
69,908 
33,654 
.36,965 
23,867 
85,722 
20,398 
35,5.35 
26,575 
10,918 
16,497 
12,835 
26, .398 
40,370 
12,005 
15,527 
21,161 
12,7.32 
1.3,313 
10,985 
12,941 
13,9.52 
13,1.37 
18,066 
1,49,931 
1.3,99.6.5.5 


Imports  in  1805  Sicca  Rupees  23,96,-391 

Merchandise  imported  into  Bombay  and  Surat«. 
Ditto  exported  from  ditto . 


Exports  in  1805 


.Sicca  Rupees  34,18,06)5 


Sicca  Rupees  80,84,918 
103,16,2.57 


Exports  exceed  the  imports . 

Tenure  imported  into  Bombay  and  SuraU... 
Ditto  exported  from  ditto  ............. 

Balance  against  Bombay  and  Suiat 


...Sicca  Rupees  4,27,741 
37,09,8.59 


‘22,31,439 


.32,82,118 


..Sicca  Rupees  10,.50,079 


204 


BOMBAY. 


COMMERCE  WITH  THE  ISLAND  OF  BOMBAY. 

The  following  is  a statement  of  the  merchandise  and  treasure  impoi*ted  Into  Bombay  and  Surat  from 
tiic  Island  of  Bombay  and  tlie  adjacent  villages,  in  the  years  1802  to  ISOfi  inclusive,  likewise  of  the  mer- 
chandise and  treasure  exported  from  Bombay  and  Surat  to  the  Island  of  Bombay  during  the  same  period, 
together  with  a list  of  the  articles  of  which  the  imports  and  exports  consisted  in  180.5, 


IMPORTS  INTO  B()M»AY  AND  SURAT.  EXPORTS  FROM  BOMBAY  AND  SURAT. 


Y ears. 

Mi*rt*h.indisr. 

Treii^-iirt* 

Total.  1 

j Ycurt. 

Mercharitlist*. 

Troasiiie. 

Total. 

Si(.i4k  Rupees. 

Sicea  RupcL'S. 

Sicca  lUipces.  | 

Sicca  Riipors. 

Sifra  Riipee.s. 

Sicca  Rupees, 

1802 

10,68,570 

7,633 

10,76,20,3 

1 1802 

18,81,960  j 

■ 

18,81,969 

1803 

9,72, 18(» 

8,573 

9,80,759 

j 1803 

10,27,197 

-- 

10,27,197 

1804 

9,99,866 

5,70,473 

15,70,339 

' 1804 

12,89,4.30 

— - - 

12,89,430 

1805 

8,57,827 

5, .58, 921 

14,16,748 

1805 

17,41.,92.3 

17,44,92.3 

1806 

13,58,918 

87,376 

14,46,.324 

1806 

17,28,130 

! 1,700 

17,29,830 

Total. 

52,57,397 

12,?>2,976 

64,90, 373  1 

I'otal.  1 

76,71,649 

. J,700 

1 76,73,.349  * 

Jrlu'ka  of  Import  in  1805 


Arlicki  of  Export  in  1805. 


Piece  Goods 
Quicksilver 
Sugar  and  sugar  candy. 
Metals 

Elephants'  teeth 
Cochineal 
Beetle-nut 
Beads 

Cardamums 
China  ware 
Cocoa  nuts 
{/Glass  %% 

Oil  ^ 

Pepper. 

Raw  silk 
Spices 
SalL.^.^ 

Tortoise-shell.^ 

Fruits 
Woollens 
Tea«%.^v 
Hardware . 

Naval  stores. 

Liquon 
Sundries .. 


...uSicca  Rupees 


61,843 
83,447 
99,948 
43,855 
55,762 
81,347 
69,421 
15.852 
18,780 
10,460 
25,489 
7,430 
4,459 
18,747 
17,918 
20,276 
4,765 
16,752 
6,564 
1,660 
5,066 
3,648 
14,254 
23,524 
1,46,561 
1,921 


Imports  ih>m  Bombay  «%v%vvv\  Sicca  Rs.  14,16,748 


.Sicca  Rupees 


Cotton* 

Elephants'  teeth  -**..v^*^*****..**^,^ 
lieu  lead 
Piece-goods 
Vermilion 
Hemp 


'booking  glasses  

Samphire 
Coloured  silk . 

Tin. 

Topees,  or  caps 
Sugar 
Oils., 

Sundries. 


9,95,932 

21,762 

15,743 

4,88,146 

30,769 

11,028 

10,792 

18,100 

10,490 

10,916 

12,693 

525 

1,906 

1,16,129 


Exports  to  Bombay 


^%««%%%«« 


Sicca  R».  17,44,923 


BOMBAY. 


m 


TMercharidise  imported  into  Bombay  and  Surat  from  Bomba)\«»SIccn  Rupees  5*2, 57,307 
Ditto  exported  from  ditto  to  ditto  ..... 7(i,?l,(;49 


Exports  exceed  the  imports. 

Treasure  imported  into  Bombay  and  Surat  from  Bombay 
Ditto  exported  from  ditto  to  ditto 


524,14,2.)^ 


12,32,070 

1,700 


12,31,270 


Balance  in  favour  of  Bombay  and  Swat 


Sicca  Rupees  30,1.5,528 


COMMERCE  WITH  THE  COAST  OF  COROAIANDEI-. 

The  following  is  a statement  of  the  merchandise  and  treasure  imported  into  Bombay  and  Surat  Irom 
the  Coast  of  Coromandel,  in  tlie  years  1802  to  1800  inclusive,  likewise  of  the  merchandise  and  treasure 
exported  from  Bombay  and  Surat  to  the  Coast  of  Coromandel  during  the  same  period,  together  with  a list 
of  the  articles  of  which  the  imports  and  exports  consisted  in  1805. 


IMP»)RTS  INTO  BOMBAY  AND  SURAT. 


EXPORTS  FROM  BOMBAY  AND  SURAT. 


MerchaiidLsc, 

Ticasure. 

Total. 

Year, 

MLTchandisc. 

Ticaslirc. 

'J'oiuli 

iftrs. 

3tcca  llu|)ee!i. 

Sicca  Iiupee4. 

Sicca  Rujiees. 

Sicca  kiipccs. 

Sirra  Ku|)v*cs. 

Sicca  Hupeci. 

1802 

1,61,629 

6,750 

1,68,379 

1802 

62,160 

_ 

62,160 

1803 

94,a38 

3,(X)0 

97,838 

1803 

70,0^27 

— 

70,027 

1804 

4,18,348 

.■■■■■— 

4,18,348 

1804 

1,98,.52.5 

— 

1,98, .525 

1805 

1,95,990 

1,95,990 

1805 

55,921 

— 

.55,921 

1806 

3,06,018 

3,06,018 

1806 

.3,70,156 

3,74,556__ 

Total. 

11,76,82.3 

9,750 

11,86,573 

Total. 

7,56,789 

4,400 

7,61,189 

Arlidti  of  Import  in  1805. 

Piece-goods  ........--...-.-.-Sicca  Rupees  1 ,00,995 

Beniamin  32,869 

Spicea  44,827 

Wine  and  liquors  ^197 

Sundries 1 02 


Imports  in  1805 ^Sicca  Rupees  1,95,990 


Piece-goods 
Gi-uin 
Cotton 
Horses 
Date&a 
Sundries 


Articles  of  Export  in  1805. 

Sicca  Rupce.s 


.5,421 

(},0(H) 

1,72.5 

10,100 

8,070 

24,605 


Exports  in  1805 


Sicca  Rupees  .55,921 


Goods  imported  into  Bombay  and  Surat  from  the  Coast  of  Coromandel-Sicca  Rupees  1 1,76,823 
^tto  exported  from  ditto  to  ditto 7, .56, 789 

Imports  exceed  the  exports.......— 

Treasure  imported  into  Bombay  and  Surat  from  the  Coast  of  Coromandel. 

IKtto  exported  from  ditto  to  ditto. 


...  4,20,034 
9,750 
4,400 

5,350 


agaiHft  Bombay  and  Surat  in  five  years— Sicca  Rupees  4,14,684 


206 


BOMBAY. 


COMMKKCE  WITH  THE  COASTS  OF  MALABAR  AND  CANARA. 

The  following  in  a stotcmciit  of  the  merchandise  and  treasure  imported  into  Bombay  and  Surat,  from 
the  Coasts  of  Malabar  and  Canura,  in  the  years  1802  to  1806  inclusive,  likewise  of  tlie  merchandise  and 
treasure  exported  from  Bombay  and  Surat  to  the  Coasts  of  Malabar  and  Canara  during  the  same  period; 
together  with  a list  of  the  articles  of  which  the  imports  and  exports  consisted  in  1805. 


IMPORTS  INTO  BOMBW  AND  SURAT.  EXPORTS  FROM  BOMBAY  AND  SURAT. 


Vour^. 

Mcrchaivlis" 

'riiMslIlf. 

'Fotul. 

Year3. 

Mcrthandiae. 

Treasure. 

Total 

Sut  1 lillpt'tN. 

.Sicca  ltii|ift.*'. 

Sitr.i  Riipeei. 

Sicra  Rupees. 

Sicra  Rupees. 

Sicca  Rupees 

IH02 

Jl,^il,(i.50 

50,483 

11,72,133 

1802 

7,15,8.32 

6,995 

7,52,827 

1803 

21,01,717 

5,(500 

24,07,317 

1803 

7,20,494 

47,0.50 

7,76,644 

1801 

25,88,644 

9,157 

25,97,801 

1804 

6,47,699 

89,043 

7,36,742 

180.5 

17,65,<)31 

67, ‘154 

18, .33, 585 

1805 

6,46,514 

68,749 

7,16,263 

1800 

2.5,19,2<>H 

41,987 

25,61,255 

1806 

5,79,412 

4,9.3,245 

10,72,657 

Total. 

i();i,9(»,910 

_ 1,7.5.181 

105,72,091 

Total. 

33,48,951 

7,05,082 

40,54,033 

Arlh'ks  of  Import  in  1805. 

,^Sicca  Rupees 


Articles  of  Export  in  1805. 


f^opra 
( *ocoa-iiuts 
Pepper 
Sandal  w'ood. 
Beetle  nut 
Piece  good; 

Coir 
Cardamums 
Ghee  ^ 

Timber  and 
Arrack 
Candles  *. 

Cliili  pepper 
('ua 

Sugar  and  Jaggery 
Seeds 

Sapan  wood 
Sandal  oiL 
Turmeric 
Sundries 


Treasure  ^ 


2,44,271 
2, 18, 150 
2,28,562 
2,81,278 
1,35,666 
1,04,647 
57,789 
75,177 
.53,513 
72,566 
99,137 
10,009 
15,462 
23,371 
12,164 
. 19,677 
9,648 
6,438 
9,946 
21,513 
60,644 
67,954 


Imports  in  1805  Sicen  Hiipcesi  18,33,585 


Sicca  Rupees 


Apparel 
('otton 
Iron 

Piece  goods 

Wine  %%%>  «%%%%%%%%%«%% 

Horses^ 

Limiors 
Ola  brass 
Copper^v 
Provisions 


Quicksilver 
Sugar 
Shawls 
Tea 


Tutenaguc 
Tui 
Spices 
Woollens 
Drugs 
Sundries  i 
Treasure 


14, .531 
94,08.3 
26,788 
63,763 
67,671 
88,575 
42,468 
17,992 
11,950 
14,753 
14,516 
8,829 
4,732 
12,836 
2,223 
23,420 
12,766 
8,541 
7,260 
4,128 
5,344 
4,562 
20,583 
74,200 
66,749 


Exports  in  1805. 


Sicca  Rupees  7,16,263 


McrchaiulUc  imported  into  Bombay  and  Surat  from  Malabar  and  Cnnara..Sicca  Rs.  103,96,910 
Ditto  exjmrtcd  from  ditto  to  ditto  33,48,951 

.,  ■■  Jk 

Imports  exceed  the  exports 70,47,969 

Treasure  imported  into  Bombay  and  Surat  from  Malabar  and  (’anara..vJ, 75,181 
Ditto  exported  from  ditto  to  ditto  ... 

6,29,901 

i Rs.  75,77,860 


Balance  againd  Bombay  and  Surat 


BOMBAY. 


tt07 


COMMERCE  WITH  BENGAL. 

The  following  is  a statement  of  the  merchandise  and  treasure  imported  into  Bombay  and  Surat  from 
Bengal,  in  the  years  1802  to  1806  inclusive,  likewise  of  the  merchandise  and  treasure  exported  from 
Bombay  and  Surat  to  Bengal  during  tlie  same  period;  together  witlia  list  of  the  articles  of  which  the 
imports  and  exports  consisted  in  1805. 


IMPORTS  INTO  BOMBAY  AND  SUR\T.  EXPORTS  FROM  BOMB\Y  AND  SITRXT. 


Years. 

Merchandiso. 

Treasure. 

Total. 

Years. 

Mcrrhaiulisr. 

Trea-surc. 

Total. 

Sicca  Kupcc«. 

Sicca  Rupees. 

Sicca  Rupees. 

Sicca  Rupees 

Sicca  Uiippes 

Sicca  Rupees. 

1802 

38,43,206 

18,000 

38,61,206 

1802 

4, .56, 791 

— 

4,56,791 

1803 

47,99,073 

12,376 

48,11,149 

180.3 

3,06,910 

18,450 

3,25,360 

1804 

90,25,786 

1)0,25,786 

1804 

3,32,806 

— 

3,32,806 

1805 

68,46,989 

68,46,989 

1805 

2,.82,445  , 

— 

2,82,44.5 

1806 

79,11,627 

79,1 1,6*27 

1806 

3,.54,<241 

5,  HM)15 

9,04,156 

^11 

.324, .57, 0.57 

Total. 

I7,33,l<)3 

5, 6s, .365 

2.4,01,5.58 

Jrltcksof  Import  in  1805. 


Articles  of  Export  in  1805. 


Haw  silk  Rupees 

Grafn 
Books 

Wearing  appardL»»%..%^%^^ 

Carriages 
Piece  good! 

Spice 
Sugar 
Drugs 
Liquor 
Ginger 

Hemp 

Gunaies 

Indigo 


18,92,759 

15,27,806 

3,922 

13,779 

18,032 

14,76,983 

33,514 

14,08,386 

43,246 

1,20,106 

53,407 

25,951 

2,553 

1,08,273 

3,860 

5,871 

1,08,541 


Imports  from  Bengalo.««»..Sicca  Rupees  68,46,989 


»%%%  % 

w%%  >%  %%  % 


Copper 
Cornelians 
Coral 
Dates 
Dnigsu. 

Lametta 
Tea 

Vermilion 
Beads 
Elephants'*  teeth 
Kismissesv 
Plated  ware 
Red  and  white  lead 
Horses 
Piece  j^oods 
Sundries 


.Sicca  Rupees 


40,094 

2,036 

9,7fX) 

7,600 

10,065 

18,075 

45,836 

16,886 

8,08.3 

.•1,371 

5,095 

3,1.55 

4,506 

46,000 

19,434 

40,089 


Exports  to  Bengal,^«««v,%«Sicca  Rupees  0,H0,445 


Merchandise  imported  into  Bombay  and  finrat  from  Bengal 
Ditto  exported  ihmi.ditto  to  dii 

Imports  exceed  the  exports . 

Treasure  imported  into  Bombay  and  Surat  from  BengaU* 
Ditto  exported  from  ditto  to  ^tto 


»Sicca  Rupees  324,26,681 
17,.3.3,193 


306,93,488 


30, .376 
5,68,365 


5,.37,989 


Balance  agabut  Bombay  and  Surat  in  five  years , 


,Sicca  Rupees  312,31,477 


BOMBAY. 


REMARKS  ON  THE  COMMERCE  WITH  BENGAL. 

Bengal  importing  but  few  trifling  articles  from  Bombay,  the  exchange  is  from  8 to  10  per  cent,  in 
favour  of  this  presidency.  This  government  draws  from  (JO  to  80  lacs  of  rupees  yearly  on  Calcutta,  Benares, 
and  Lucknow;  and  from  tlie  scarcity  of  the  precious  metals,  it  is  more  advantageous  to  the  Arabs  and 
Banians  to  take  Company’s  or  other  good  bills,  than  to  send  bullion,  which  was  the  case  formerly;  and  the 
shrolls  would  not  pay  so  liigh  a premium  for  bills,  if  bullion  would  answer. 

Formerly  large  cpiantities  of  cotton  used  to  be  sent  from  Bombay  to  Bengal;  but  at  present,  and  for 
some  years  past,  Bengal  has  raised  sufficient  for  its  consumption. 

COMMERCE  WITH  CEYLON. 

The  following  is  a statement  of  the  merchandise  and  treasure  imported  into  Bombay  and  Surat  from 
the  Island  of  Ceylon  in  the  years  IBO'2  to  1 80fi  inclusive;  likewise  of  the  merchandise  and  treasure  exported 
from  Bombay  and  Surat  during  the  same  period;  together  with  a list  of  the  articles  of  which  the  imports 
and  exports  consisted  in  180j. 


IMPORTS  INTO  BOMBAY  AND  SURAT.  EXPORTS  FROM  BOMBAY  AND  SURAT. 


Years. 

Merchandise. 

Treasure. 

Total. 

Years, 

Merchandise. 

TreasHre. 

Total. 

Sicca  Ru))ee4, 

.Sicca  Rupees. 

Sicca  Rupees. 

Sicca  Rupees. 

Sicca  Rupei*8. 

Sicca  Ru|iec8. 

i8oa 

irto.i 

1W>4 

1805 

IH(X) 

58,155 
90,904 
89,09' 
78,504  ! 
1,. 1.3, 686 

— 

58,155 

<A<J04 

89,095 

78,504 

1,33,686 

1802 

1803 

1804 

1805 

1806 

40,743 

15,673 

71,646 

49,664 

7'i,7en 

io,ooa* 

55,000 

40,743 

25,<)73 

71,646 

49,664- 

4,27,781 

Total. 

4,50,344 

4,50,344 

Total, 

$,.50,507 

||BI|||^23i 

lilE9QSE33lil|| 

Jrticks  of  Import  in  180.5. 

Pepper  Sicca  Rupees  1,128 

Arrack  73,691 

Svmdncs  3,685 


Articles  of  Export  in  1865. 


Imports  from  Ccjlcnv.«v.«Sicca  Rupees  78,504 


G^rain 
Metals. 

'^lass  ware 
Horses, 

Tea^ 

Sundries  1 5,30Q 

Exports  to  Ceylon 


Sicca  Rupees  12,815 
2,500 
2,137 
12,568 
4,3*35 


Sicca  Rupees  49,664 


Merchandise  imported  into  Bombay  and  Surat  from  Ceylon 
Ditto  exported  from  ditto  to  ditto 

Imports  exceed  the  exports^ 

'Preasure  imported  into  Bombay  and  Surat  from  Ceylon , 


~^..Sicca  Rupees  4,50,344 

$,50,507* 

1,99,837 
’ 65,000 


Ralance  op^titst  Dombay  and  Surat  Rupees  $,64,837 


BOMBAY. 


009 


COMMERCE  WITH  BRITISH  ASIA. 

The  following  is  a statement  of  the  merchandise  and  treasure  imported  into  Bomliay  and  Sui  at 
from  various  parts  of  British  Asia,  in  the  years  1802  to  1806  inclusive;  likewise  of  the  merchandise  and 
treasure  exported  from  Bombay  and  Surat  to  vuiious  parts  of  British  Asia  during  the  same  period.  The 
particulars  of  imports  and  exports  are  enumerated  under  the  heads  of  the  respective  places. 


IMPORTS  INTO  BOMBAY  AND  SURAT.  " 


EXPORTS  FROM  BOMBAY  AND  SURAT. 


Years. 

Merchandise. 

T reasure. 

Total. 

Years. 

MorchandUe. 

Treirtuie. 

'I'otal, 

Sicca  Rupees, 

Sicca  Rupees. 

Sicca  Ru)icc8. 

Sicca  Rupees. 

Sicca  Rupees. 

Sicca  Rupeev. 

1^2 

Ti6,04,5l5 

4,96,700 

151,01,215 

1802 

93,32,849 

22,73,720 

116,06,569 

1803 

149,17,368 

47,095 

149,64,463 

1803 

69,49,950 

6,90,266 

76,40,216 

1804 

211,43,868 

6,02,150 

217,46,018 

1804 

102,25,851 

24,01,413 

126,27,297 

1805 

199,10,109 

7,22,863 

206,32,972 

1805 

105,48,475 

31,97,915 

137,46,390 

1806 

227,76,336 

3,35,885 

231,12,221 

1806 

1 10,91  ,ia3 

47, 49, 3(K) 

158,40,433 

Total. 

933,52,196 

955,56,889 

Total. 

481,48,261 

1.33,12,644  1 

Merchandise  imported  into  Bombay  and  Surat  from  the  various  parts  of  Britisli 

Asia,  in  tjie  years  1802  to  1806  Sicca  Rupees  933,52,106 

Ditto  exported  from  ditto  181,48,261 

Impoils  exceed  the  exports  452,03,035 

Treasure  imported  into  Bombay  and  Surat  from  British  Asia««SiccaRs.  22,04,693 

Ditto  exported  from  ditto  12,644 

111,07,951 


Balance  against  Bombay  and  Surat 


.Sicca  Rupees  563,1 1,886 


210 


BOMBAY. 


COMMERCE  WITH  THE  GULF  OF  ARABIA. 

The  following  is  a statement  of  the  merchandise  and  treasure  imported  into  Bombay  and  Surat,  from 
the  Gulf  of  Arabia,  in  the  years  1803  to  1806  inclusive,  likewise  of  the  merchandise  and  treasure  exported 
from  Bombay  and  Surat  to  the  Gulf*  of  Arabia  during  the  same  period;  together  with  a list  of  the  articles 
of  which  the  imports  and  exports  consisted  in  1805. 

IMPORTS  INTO  BOMBAY  AND  SURAT.  EXPORTS  FROM  BOMBAY  AND  SURAT. 


Years. 

Merchandise. 

Treamve. 

Total. 

Years. 

Merchandise. 

Treasure. 

Total. 

Sicca  Rupees. 

Sicca  Rupees. 

Sicca  Rupeci. 

Sicca  Rupees. 

Sicca  Rupees. 

Sicca  Rupees. 

1802 

1803 

1804 

1805 
. 1806 

1,95,212 

2,20,016 

3,14,882 

2,25,077 

2,49,968 

22,30,225 

14,27,514 

36,69,616 

23,78,636 

20,04,065 

24,25,437 

16,47,530 

39,84,498 

26,03,713 

22,54,033 

1802 

1803 

1804 

1805 

1806 

17,71,702 

13,30,928 

19,16,966 

15,04,362 

11,94,853 

4,500 

17,71,702 

13,30,928 

19,21,466 

15,04,362 

11,94,853 

Total. 

12,05,155 

117,10,056 

129,15,211 

Mi 

“77,18,811 

4,500 

Articka  of  Import  in  1805. 


Myrrh 
Olibanum 
Almonds 
Alkali 
Aloes 
Ars€nic»%%i%%»w%< 

Acalcara 
Beads^.«v»< 
Cloves 
Coffee 
Grain 
Gum  Arabic*.. 
Hiera  Cassy*. 
Kismisses 
Moura . 
Nuckla.^«. 
Needles 
Sharks"  fins . 
Senna  leaf 
Tortoise  shelL 
Horaes^ 
Sundries  *. 
Treasure*.* 


Imports  in  1805 


WV»»'^V»V» 


Sicca  Rupees  23,287 
41,425 
1,096 
3,940 
3,464 
2,140 
4,028 
2,477 
7,208 
10,787 
4,500 
8,970 
3,658 
6,303 
4,901 
2,559 
1,200 
4,625 
7,323 
6,169 
2,000 
73,018 
23,78,636 

Sicca  Rupees  26,03,713 


Articles  Export  in  160& 


Gram 

Piece  gOQdsv%e.*>^»>*M^%^ 

Iron 

..w,^icca  Rupees  4,24y972 
7,884>11 

QA  QA/I 

n-niuin.-iuLii.,.  40,370 

i5ha  w is 

20,525 

44  458 

Coloured 

Drugs 

43,843 

Tobacco  -.nn-.-ix't-.a-tamuxa 

m^^er 

% % %%%%%%  %r%  A A 

7,756 

5,5S4 

.S.A60 

Pepper 

17,^86 

3,266 

China  warevvM«««%*%%«*« 

Cassia  and  buds 

4,069 

Sundries 

61,824 

Exports  in  1805vmmvmm  Sicca  Rupees  15,04,362 


Merchandise  imported  into  Bombay  and  Surat  from  the  Arabian  GuIfU«v«,Sicca  Rs.  12,05,155 
Ditto  exported  from  ditto  to  ditto  -t,--, ^ 77,18,811 


Exports  exceed  the  imports  — , 

Treasure  iin|X)rted  into  Bombay  and  Surat  from  the  Gdf  117,10,056. 

Ditto  exported  from  ditto  to  ditto  4^500 


65,13,656 

117,05,556 


Balance  in  favour  of  Bombay  and  Surat. 


.vJSiccaRs.  181^19,212 


BOMBAY. 


211 


COMMERCE  WITH  THE  GULF  OF  PEliSIA. 

The  following  is  a statement  of  the  merchandise  and  treasure  imported  into  Bombay  and  Surat,  from 
the  Gulf  of  Persia,  in  the  years  1S02  to  1806  inclusive;  likewise  of  the  iiKTchandise  and  treasure  exported 
from  Bomba3r  and  Surat,  to  the  Gulf  of  Persia,  during  the  same  period;  together  with  a list  of  the  articles 
of  which  the  imports  and  exports  consisted  in  1805. 


IMPORTS  INTO  BOMBAY  AND  SURAT. 


KXPORTS  from  BOMBAY  AND  SURAT 


Years, 

MerchaiiJise. 

Treasure. 

1 otal. 

Years. 

Murchanilisc. 

TreuMiro 

Sicc.1  Rupees. 

Sicca  Rupees. 

Sicca  Ru|>ees. 

Sicca  Rupees. 

Sicca  Rujices. 

Sicca  Ku|»ce%. 

1302 

6,46,325 

12,22,919 

18,69,244 

1802 

16,.50,177~ 

-- 

10,50,177 

1803 

9,21,743 

14,66,679 

23,88,422 

1803 

11,64,(JS4 

2,(X)0 

1 1,00,084 

1804 

11,03,076 

. 11,27,107 

22,30,183 

1804 

13,72,121 

— 

13,72,121 

1805 

10,49,396 

18,54,216 

29,03,612 

1805 

21,54,319 

- ■ .. . 

21,54,319 

1806 

11,25,047  “ 

22,88,189 

34,13,236 

1806 

22,00,497 

— 

22,00,497 

Totaj^ 

48,46,.587 

79,59,110 

1^,04, ({97 

rTotaP  1 

1 80,01,798 

2,0()() 

1 80,03,798 

Articles  of  Import  in  180.5. 

Hates  %■%■%.%%% R>upees  1,84*,.54B 
I^amctta  1,2*1*,860 

Hiiig 
Copper 
Coral 
G'aBs«^%^ 

Myrrh.,. 

Benjamin  ^ 

OUbaiium  w%  %%%%>%■% 

Almonds 
Pepper 
Rose 

Sharks'  6ns.. 

Elephants'  teeth 
Horses 
Safidrfes%. 

Treastti'e . 


71,798 
27,704 
18,027 
17,162 
12,791 
10,692 
11,582 
14,927 
11,290 
8,844 
47,136 
14,421 
4,00,200 
73,410 
18,54,216 


Imports  in  1805»«%%«%%%%'v  Sicca  Rupees  29,03,612 


Sicca  Rupees 


Piece-goods 
Sugar 
Gram 
China-ware 
Cotton  yarn  and  thread 
Indisro 

T _-Y 


Lead 


v%%^%  %%  % 


Sapan  wood  ... 

Agala  M'ood 
Drugs 
Spices 
Pepper..^ 

C'otton 
Coff'ee 
Cutleiy 
I^ac 
Paper 
Quicksilver 
Haw  silk» 

Shawls 
Seeds  .. 

Tutenague  ...... 

Tobacco 

T ...... ....... 

Iron  .r..  ......  V..  ......  ... 

Beads  . ......................... 

Cochineal 
Jiligelly  Oil 

Steel  ........................................... 

Sundries, 


11,68,155 

3,82,827 

1,16,021. 

31,413 

49,224 

15,100 

13,212 

24,699 

20,415 

70,861 

36,825 

32,871 

9,570 

2,625 

9,200 

6,402 

2,419 

3,950 

(5,228 

3,868 

3,460 

6,400 

6,223 

31,363 

49,807 

7,230 

5,663 

4,363 

5,455 

28,4.37 


Exports  in  1805 


Sicca  Rupees  21,54,319 


Merchandise  imported  into  Bombay  and  Surat  from  the  Gulf....Sicoa  Rupees  48,45,587 
Ditto  exported  from  ditto  to  ditto 


Exports  exceed  the  imports 

Treasure  imported  into  Bombay  and  Surat  from  the  Persian  Gulf  79,59,1 10 
Ditto  exported  from  ditto  to  ditto 

‘ — 79/>7,110 


Balance  in  Javour  of  Bombay  and  Sural»»»»»»v»»»»»»»v»»*»»»»w»»»»Sicca  Bupccs  1 17, 1 3,321 


£12 


BOMBAY. 


COMMERCE  WITH  CUTCH  AND  SCINDY. 

The  following  Is  a statement  of  the  merchandise  and  treasure  imported  into  Bombay  and  Surat  from 
Cutch  and  Scindy  in  the  years  1802  to  1806  inclusive,  likewise  of  the  merchandise  and  treasure  exported 
from  Bombay  and  Surat  to  Cutch  and  Scindy  during  the  same  period,  together  with  a list  of  the  articles 
of  which  the  imports  and  exports  consisted  in  1805. 


IMPORTS  INTO  BOMBAY  AND  SURAT.  EXPORTS  FROM  BOMBAY  AND  SURAT. 


Year®. 

Mfrchandine. 

Treasure. 

Total. 

Years. 

Merchandise. 

Treasure. 

Total. 

Such  nnjjecN. 

Su'ca  Rupees. 

Sicca  Rupees. 

Sicca  Rupees. 

Sicca  f^upees. 

Sicca  Rupee.®. 

1802 

12,60,717 

24,733 

12,85,460 

1802 

9,73,894 

2,28,003 

12,01,897 

1803 

13,99,436 

16,686 

14,16,122 

1803 

7,84,418 

68,084 

8,42,.502 

1804 

29,68,165 

27,975 

29,96,130 

1804 

12,83,661 

3,75,038 

16,68,699 

1806 

26,46,191 

26,46,191 

mmm 

14,37,668 

2,60,371 

16,87,939 

1806 

27,63,645 

6,8.34 

27,70,479 

1809 

16,74,495 

1,93,405 

18,67,900 

ToUl. 

1 10, .38,144 

76,228_ 

111,14,37:^ 

Total. 

61,54,036 

“Tl  ,04,901 

72,58,937 

,r.  \- 


Arikhs  of  Import  in  1805. 


Cotton^ 

Grain 
Oil 

Piece-goods 
Seeds 
Kismisses 
Indiso 

Shares"  fins^, 


..^^Sicca  Rupees  15,85,520 
4,40,709 
2,67,644 
45,477 
54,798 
59,853 
29,791 
12,476 
8,609 


Shawls 
Drugs 
Sun  dries 


n,a5f 

3i^,65l 

97,30^ 


Imports  in  1805  Sicca  Rupees  26,40,191 


Arikhs  of  Export  in  1805. 


Piece-goods^, 
Pepper 
Raw  silk 
Sugar  and  Jaggery 
Beetle-nut 
Copper 
Coenbeal. 

Cocoa  nuts 
Coir 

Cardatnums 
Drup 
Grain , 

Iron , 


Sapan  wood 
Tutenague 

Spices 
Sundries,^, 
Treasure 


Sicca  Rupees  1,17,917 
1,19,723 
1,29,395 
5,45,999 
38,218 
80,037 
18,231 
48,355 
30,092 
15,098 
47,431 
54^143 
24,302 
23,518 
11,554 
16,636 
19,365 
15,914 
81,640 
2,50,371 


Exports  in  1805  Sicca  Rupees  16,87,939 


Value  of  imports  into  Bombay  and  Surat  from  Cutch  and  Scindy  «.^Sicca  Rupees  1 10,38,144 
Ditto  of  exports  from  ditto  to  <Hn» 61,54,036 

Imports  exceed  the  exports  48,84,108 

Treasure  imported  into  Bombay  and  Surat  from  Cutch  and  Scindy  »»  76,228 

Ditto  exported  from  ditto  to  ditto  11,04,901 

10,28,673 


Balance  agaiiut  Bombay  and  Surat,  in  fire  years 


Sicca  Rupees  59,12,761 


■ BOMBAY. 


213 


COMMERCE  WITH  BASSEIN  AND  ADJACENT  VILLAGES. 


Tlie  following  u a statement  of  the  merchandise  and  treasure  imported  into  Bombay  and  Surat  from 
Bassein  and  the  adjacent  villages  in  the  years  1802  to  180t>  inclusive,  likewise  of  the  mercliandisc  and 
treasure  exported  from  Bombay  and  Surat  to  Bassein  during  the  same  period;  together  with  a list  of 
the  articles  of  which  the  imports  and  exports  consisted  in  1805. 


IMPORTS  INTO  BOMBAY  AND  SURAT.  EXPORTS  FROM  BOMBAY  AND  SUR.AT. 


Years. 

McrchuiidiHe 

Treasure. 

Total. 

Years. 

Merciiaiidise 

Treasure. 

Total. 

Sicca  Rupees. 

Sirca  Rupees. 

Sicca  Rupees. 

Sicca  Kupee.s. 

Sicca  Rupees. 

Sicca  Rupees. 

1802 

2,47,791 

900 

2,48,691 

1802 

2,63,214 

2,800 

2,66,014 

1803 

5,2.3,291 

15,7d4 

5,39,025 

1803 

4,49,686 

15,525 

4,()5,2n 

1804 

5,89,462 

5,89,462 

1804 

4,88,235 

9,100 

4,97,855 

1805 

4,44,61 1 

4,45,942 

180.) 

4,24,898 

— 

4,24,898 

1806 

4,7.1,004 

4,74,7ti0 

180(i 

4,97,H()(i 

5,910 

5,08,7 1() 

Total. 

22,78,1.59 

19,721 

‘2'2,97,8HO  1 

Total. 

21,23,859 

8:],;]:35 

2 i,. 57, 194 

Article)  of  Import  in  1805. 


Piece  goods 
Grtun 
Iron . 

Sugar . 

Cocoa  nuts ..... 
Copra 
Beetle-nut 
Dates 
Peppi 
Turmeric , 
Treasure 
Sundries 


I0r 


1,23,56.1 
43,316 
38,2(jy 
31,5.53 
30,399 
29,359 
11,161 
16,5<» 
9,424 
. 6,730 
1,331 
1,04,247 


Imports  in  1805 


Sicca  Rupees  4,45,942 


1 


Grain 
Ivory  ware 
OU 

Timber  and  plank 
Hemp 
Piece-goods 
Beetle-nut 
Sundries 


Articles  of  Export  in  180.). 

Sicca  Rupees 


1%%%%%%%^%*%%%%  %%  % 


l,C8,0'28 
78,958 
43,342 
.30,430 
23,549 
11, .1.37 
25,052 
44,202 


Exports  in  1805 


Sicca  Rupees  4,‘24,8<J8 


Merchandise  imported  into  Bombay  and  Surat  from  Bassein 
Ditto  exported  from  ditto  to  ditto 

Imports  exceed  the  exports*^ 

Treasure  imported  into  Bombay  and  Surat  from  Bassein 
Ditto  exported  from  ditto  to  ditto 


^Sicca  Rupees  C 1 ,'2:3,859 
12'2,78,159 


1,54,:300 


33,335 

19,721 


13,614 


Balance  in  Jawwt  of  Bombay  and  Surat  in  five  years  Sicca  Rupees  I,fi7,9l4 


m 


BOMBAY. 


COMMERCE  AVITII  GOA  and  THE  COAST  OF  CONCAN. 

The  following  is  a statement  of  the  merchandise  and  treasure  imported  into  Bombay  and  Surat  from 
Goa  and  the  Coast  of  Concan  in  the  years  1802  to  1806  inclusive,  likewise  of  the  merchandise  and  trea- 
sure exported  from  Bombay  and  Surat  to  Goa  and  the  Coast  of  Concan  during  the  same  period^  together 
wdth  a list  of  the  articles  of  which  the  im|)orts  and  exports  consisted  in  1805. 

IMPOinS  INTO  BOMBAY  AND  SUUAT.  EXPORTS  FROM  BOMBAY  AND  SURAT. 


BOMBAY. 


Value  of  goods  imported  into  Bombay  and  Surat  in  five  years.. 
Ditto  exported  from  ditto  to  ditto 


M^SiccaBs.  St, 61, 1 14 
191,80,380 


Exports  exceed  the  imports 

Amount  of  treasure  imported  into  Bombay  and  Surat 
Ditto  exported  from 


:a5, 08,003 

36,25,0^0 


137,2.5,260 


11,16,363 

Balance  in  favour  of  Bombay  and  Surat  during  the  above  period  «^Sicca  Rs.  120,08,903 
COMMERCE  WITH  PULO  PINANG,  &c. 

The  following  is  a statement  of  the  merchandise  and  treasure  im[wrted  into  Bombay  and  Surat  from 
Pulo  Pinang  and  places  to  the  eastward,  in  the  years  1802  to  1 800  inclusive;  likewise  of  the  merchandise  and 
treasure  exported  from  Bombay  and  Surat  to  the  above  places  during  the  same  period;  together  with  a 
list  of  the  articles  of  which  the  im^Kirts  and  exports  consisted  in  1805. 

IMPORTS  INTO  BOMBAY  AND  SURAT.  EXPORTS  FROM  BOMBAY  AND  SURAT. 


Total. 


Stcca  Rupees, 


1802 

1803 

1804 

1805 

1806 


Total. 


Merchandise. 

Treasure. 

Sicca  Ru|iees. 

Sicca  Rupees. 

6,19,601 

34,711 

4,34,893 

1,11,538 

7,09,430 

64,405 

2,93,890 

1,24,040 

3,69,656 

1,93,831 

24,27,470 

5,28,525 

Merchandise. 


Sicca  Rupees. 


4,17,140 
),6<i,448 
l,y  1,809 
1,19,931 
3,7!2,881 


Trca-iure. 


Sicc.  Rupwt. 


1,48,1-27 

‘2,734 


Flece-goods^^^ 
Benjamin 
Beetle  nut 
Pepper 

Spices 
Metals 
Agala  wood 
Sapan  wood 
Cuuebs 
China  ware 

Li(|uors%%iv%%<»%%%%v»v%' 

Elephants^  teeth  ^ 

Sundries 

Treasure 


Arlicks  of  Import  in  1805. 

Sicca  RiUpces 


511 

28,047 

1,400 

42,447 

325 

38,108 

71,069 

30,252 

3,942 

6,240 

137 

3,147 

.31,571 

26,216 

10,478 

1,24,040 


Piece-goods 
CoHon  — V 
Sandal  wood— . 
Drugs 
W me 

Iron«^^<w^w%^s 

Sundries 


2,08,201 


Articles  of  Export  in  1805. 

Sicca  Rupees 


Tntul. 


Sicca  Kupeeii. 


5,65,267 

1,65,183 

1,91,809 

1,19,931 

3,72,881 


14,7'2,47<> 


9,566 

92,230 

7,200 

2,115 

740 

7,980 

100 


Inerts  in  1805  — JSicca  Rupees  4^17,930  | Exports  in  1805  — ,Sicca  Rs.  1,19 

Mercl«n<B8ciinporte<Hiite  Bombay  and  Surat  from  Pulo  Pinang,  &c.-.Sicca  Rupees 

Ditto  ezpoortad  nom  ditto  to  ditto  ig,oo,x»j 

Imports  exceed  the  exports.*.— 11,63,261 

Treasure  imported  into  Bombay  and  Surat  dunng  the  above  period  — ...  o,iOT,^aa 

IMtto  ea^rted  from  ditto ......^.•.-x^**^^******-*-*'**-^^^  » » 3^20,264 

Balance  Bmnbay  and  Surat  »t,^»w.>ww«..»v»w«v.vwi*vtw.%wvv.Sicca  Rupees  8,42,997 


.Sicca  Rs.  1,19,931 


from  Puh)  Pinang,  &c— .Sicca  Rupees  24,27,470 
- 12,64,209 


819 


UOMBAY. 


COMMERCE  WITH  PEGU. 

The  commerce  carried  on  between  this  settlement  and  Pegu  is  but  small.  In  the  years  1802  to  1^6 
inclusive,  only  one  sliip  arrived  from  Pegu.  The  following  is  an  account  of  the  merchandise  and  treasure 
impoited  and  exported. 

Merchandise  imported  into  Bombay  and  Surat  from  Pegu»»v«*.»Sicca  Rupees  9>700 
Ditto  exported  from  ditto  to  ditto  7,970 

Imj)orts  exceeded  the  exports  1,724 

Treasure  exported  from  Bombay  and  Surat  to  Pegu  2,2.50 

Dttldiicc  o^QiHsl  Bouibfly  find  l^up6€s  3)074 


COMMERCE  WITH  BATAVIA. 

The  following  is  a statement  of  the  merchandise  and  treasure  imported  into  Bombay  and  Surat  from 
Batavia  in  the  years  1802  to  1806  inclusive,  likewise  of  tlie  merchandise  and  treasure  exported  from 
Bombay  and  Surat  to  Batavia  during  the  same  period. 

IMPORTS  INTO  BOMBAY  AND  SURAT.  EXPORTS  FROM  BOMBAY  AND  SURAT. 


Years. 

Merchandi>r. 

Treojiure. 

Total. 

Years. 

Merchandise.  | 

Treasure. 

Total. 

iSicca  Ru()Ccs. 

S'u'ca  Rupoen. 

Sicca  Rupees. 

Sicca  Rupees. 

Sicca  Rupees. 

Sicca  Rupees. 

1802 

4,00,511 

3,075 

4, 03, .586 

1802 

70,482 

- - - - 

70,482 

1803 

4,95,337 

25,756 

5,21,093 

1803 

— 

■ ■■■■ 

1804 

_ ' 

■■■ 

1804 

■ 

1805 

■ 

1805 

■ ■■■■— 

I80(> 

— 

— 

— 

1806 

— 

— 

— 

Total. 

8,95,848 

'‘28,'83li 

9,24,679 

Total. 

70,482 

— 

Merchandise  imported  into  Bombay  and  Surat  from  Batavia  ..*.v..wv«^Sicca  Rupees  8,95,848 
Ditto  exported  from  ditto  to  ditto  70,482 

Imports  exceed  the  8,25,366 

Treasure  imported  into  Bombay  and  Surat  from  Batavia%^vv.v^^vvv%w^%%%%%%%^w^v^  28,831 

Balance  against  Bombay  and  Surat  in  five  ycarsvv>w>ww^»v.v>^^^  Sicca  Rupees  7,96,535 


The  Bombay  market  used  to  receive  great  part  of  its  supplies  of  sugar  from  Batavia,  which  were  paid 
for  in  specie;  and  the  procuring  a cargo  of  sugar  was  considered  a favour  conferred  by  the  officers  of 
(fovernment  at  Batavia  on  the  Bombay  merchant;  but  of  late  years  Bengal  sugars  have  taken  the  lead,  and 
tlie  Mahrattas,  who  are  the  great  consumers  of  the  sugar  imported  into  Bombay,  are  said  to  give  a pre- 
ference to  the  Bengal  sugar,  if  it  can  be  obtained  at  or  near  the  same  price. 

The  other  articles  of  import  from  Batavia  are  arrack,  cloves,' mace,  nutmegs,  &c. 


BOMBAY, 


COMMERCE  WITH  CHINA. 

The  following  is  a statement  of  the  merchandise  and  treasure  imported  into  Bombay  and  Surat  from 
China  in  the  years  1802  to  1806  inclusive;  likewise  of  the  merchandise  and  treasun*  exported  from  Bombay 
and  Sdrat  to  China  during  the  same  period;  together  with  a list  of  the  articles  of  wtiich  the  imports  and 
exports  consisted  in  1805. 


IMPORTS  INTO  BOMBAY  AND  SURAT. 


EXPORTS  FROM  BOMBAY  AND  SURAT 


MerchaiiJiHC. 


Sicca  Rupees. 


40,18,265 

11,29,407 

48,41,274 

25,05,966 

37,68,859 


162,63,771 


Sicca  Rupees. 


13 

91 


135,75,884 


Sicca  Rupees. 


46,22,219 

12,39,033 

91,01,274 

85,12,079 

63,65,050 


Sicca  Rupees. 

"65;^81,492' 

45,00,290 

86,77,301 

72,01,316 

77,61,228 


298,39,6.55  Total  I 347,21,657 


Sicca  Ruju'cs. 

poi)  ' 


47,349 

.56,349 


Sicca  Rupees. 

~65,90,49^ 

45,00,290 

86,77,301 

72,01,346 

78,08,577 

347,78,006 


Articles  of  Import  in  1805. 

Rupees 


Camphire 

Piece-goods 

Brandy  and  other  liquors 
Tutenague 


Vermilion 

Lackered  ware 

Sugar  and  sugar  candy 
Spices 

Cassia  and  cassia  buds 
Stationery 

Red  and  white 

Drug 
Cochineal 
Cordage 
Fire-works 
Plate  and  plated  ware 
Sapan  wood 


24,857 

8,594 

1,86,193 

4,63,605 

33,023 

1,03,271 

46,554 

59,226 

1,01,223 

I, 480 
2,07,743 
8,85,518 

5.5,21 1 
.51,190 
4,133 
45,256 
30,698 

II, 579 
25,272 
25,261 
12,250 
12,770 
14,866 
19,269 

6,233 

70,691 

60,06,113 


Artkks  of  Export  in  1805. 

Cotton  Rupees  64,73,6.39 

Sandal  wood  2,67,810 


Sandal  wooii 
Myrrh 
Olihanum 
Cornelians 
Elephants’  teeth 
Putchock 
Sharks’  6ns 
Sundries 


23,370 

22,707 

7.3,321 

26,.534 

54,313 

2,44,7.56 

23,370 


Iinporte  in  1806 Sicca  Rupees  85,12,079  | Exports  in  1805 Sicca  Rupees  72,01.3*6 

Merchandise  imported  into  Bombay  and  Siurat  from  Clunav..^Sicca  Rupees  162,6.3,7, 1 
" Ditto  exported  from  ditto  to  I ,oj7 

Exports  exceed  the  imports r*"T5r — 

Treasure  imported  into  Bombay  and  Surat  from  China 

• ^ 5o,J49 


Ditto  exported  from  ditto  to  ditto 
Balance  in  favour  of  Bombay  and 

F f 


—1.3.5,19,535 

^Sicca  Rupees  319,77,421 


818 


BOMBAY. 


REMARKS  ON  THE  COMMERCE  WITH  CHINA. 

Tills  is  the  most  valuable  branch  of  the  commerce  of  Bombay.  The  staple  article  is  cotton  wool;  the 
remainder  consists  of  sandal « wood,  sharks'  fins,  and  a few  otlier  articles,  the  produce  of  Malabar,  and  the 
western  side  of  India.  Within  tlicse  few  years  the  merchants  at  Bengal  and  Madras  have  become  com- 
petitors in  the  China  market  in  the  article  of  cotton,  and  which,  from  its  being  of  a superior  quality, 
or  rather  from  its  being  cleaner,  has  fetched  higher  prices  at  Canton  than  that  from  Bombay.  This 
competition  therefore  threatens  to  affect  the  trade  of  Bombay  in  a very  material  degree,  unless  the  same 
precautions  are  taken  in  cleaning  the  cotton  produced  on  this  side  of  India,  as  have  been  practised  at  Bengal 
and  Madras. 

The  East  India  Company  have  within  these  few  years  become  participators  in  the  trade  from  Bombay 
to  China,  since  which  period  the  article  of  cotton  wool  has  nearly  doubled  in  price.  They  reserve  to 
themselves  two  thirds  of  the  chartered  tonnage  of  their  ships  destined  from  Bombay  to  China;  and  in  the 
event  of  their  not  occupying  it,  it  is  disposed  of  by  open  competition : and  if  the  commanders  and  officers  of 
the  ships  offer  a rate  of  freight  equal  to  the  highest  bidder,  the  preference  is  given  to  them,  on  condition 
that  tlie  freight,  together  w ith  the  proceeds  of  the  goods,  shall  be  paid  into  the  Canton  treasury,  for  the 
latter  of  which  bills  are  granted  on  England  at  the  current  rate  of  exchange. 

The  commanders  of  the  Bombay  and  China  ships  frequently  dispose  of  their  tonnage  to  the  merchants 
at  a stipulated  rate  of  freight  for  each  particular  commodity,  and  advance  their  money  on  respondentia  on 
the  goods,  at  a premium  of  10  p(*r  cent,  the  rate  of  exchange  being  316  Bombay  rupees  per  100  Spanish 
dollai*s,  payable  30  days  after  the  ship's  arrival  at  Whampoa. 

The  Company’s  regulations  relative  to  their  proportion  of  tlie  tonnage  from  Bombay  to  China  are 
inserted  hereafter. 

The  export  of  cotton  from  Bombay  to  China  has  in  some  seasons  amouiiled  to  80,000  bales,  each 
half  a candy,  or  about  3751bs.  making  in  the  whole  30  millions  of  pounds. 

Tlie  Company's  sliijis,  of  w hich  tliere  arc  generally  four  or  five  destined  to  Bombay  and  China,  carry 
H part;  the  remainder  is  taken  in  country  ships  belonging  to  the  European  and  native  merchants.  From 
the  excellent  manner  in  which  it  is  packed,  the  largest  class  of  the  Company's  ships  will  take  upwards  of 
four  thousand  bales,  and  still  retain  room  for  a few  articles  which  they  collect  in  the  Straits  of  Malacca. 

The  cotton  trade  from  this  side  of  India  to  China  is  but  of  recent  date.  It  commenced  about  35  years 
ago.  A considerable  famine  which  happened  about  that  period,  induced  the  Chinese  Government  to  direct, 
by  an  imperial  edict,  that  a greater  proportion  of  the  lands  should  be  thrown  into  the  cultivation  of 
grain,  to  prevent  the  like  calamity  in  future.  The  circumstance  gave  rise  to  this  branch  of  commerce, 
which  Increased  progressively  till  the  commencement  of  the  late  war.  The  scanty  supply  during  that  pe- 
riod, the  inattention  to  tlie  quality,  and  the  many  frauds  that  had  been  practised,  prompted  the  Chi- 
nese to  again  incrca.se  the  grow  th  of  tliis  commodity  within  themselves,  which  has  made  it  rather  H 
precarious  trade. 

The  demand  for  China  articles  at  Bombay  amounts  to  about  30  lacs  of  inipees  per  annum ; and  the 
specie  thrown  in  by  this  commerce,  aids  the  circulation  at  Bombay  very  considerably,  amounting  on  an 
average  of  five  years,  1808  to  1806,  to  Sicca  Rupees  27,03,907  per  annum. 

Sugar  and  sugar  candy  form  one  of  the  most  material  articles^  of  import  from  China.  To  throw  thU 
branch  of  trade  more  witiiin  tlie  Britivli  dominions,  the  Government  a few  years  since  took  off  the  duties 
on  Bengal  sugar,  which  is  now  more  Li  demand. 


BOMBAY. 


219 


COMMERCE  WITH  CASHMERE,  &c. 

The  following  is  a statement  of  the  merciiantlise  and  treasure  imported  into  Bombay  and  Surat  from 
Cashmere,  Punjab,  Deccan,  Khandeish,  &c.  in  the  years  1802  to  1806  inclusive,  likewise  of  tlie  merclian- 
dise  and  treasure  exported  from  Bombay  and  Surat  during  the  same  period;  together  witli  a list  of  Uie 
articles  of  wiiich  the  imports  and  exports  consisted  in  1805. 

IMPORTS  INTO  BOMBAY  AND  SURAT.  EXPORTS  FROM  BOMBAY  AND  SURAT. 


Mert'handise 

Treasure. 

Total. 

Merchandise. 

Treasure. 

Total 

Years. 

Sicca  Rupees. 

Sicca  Rupect. 

Sicca  Rujiee^. 

Years. 

Sicea  Rupui.‘<. 

Sicca  Rupees 

Sicca  Rupees 

1802 

1,54,203 

- 

1,54,203 

1802 

56,126 



56,126 

1803 

1,41,424 

■ I.  ■■i... 

1,41,424 

1803 

62,506 

■ 

62,.50(» 

1804 

1,13,852 

. 

1,13,852 

1804 

63,167 

■ ■ ' — 

6.3,167 

1805 

l,41,7s57 

■ 

1,41,757 

1805 

1,10,148 

1,10,148 

1806 

1,. 5.5, 045 

— 

1,55,015 

1806 

99,323 

— 

99,323 

Total. 

7,06,281 

— 

7,06,281 

Total. 

.3,91,270 

3,91,270 

".-r-.  T.-.ii'iSBrtaa. 

Articles  of  Import  in  1805. 

Cowries^^.^<*^^>-.,.^v^v%%^^»Sicca  Rupees 
Piece  goodsv^ 

Shawls  ^ 

Sundries 


86,976 

20,4ii7 

21,816 

12,528 


Imports  in  1805 


.Sicca  Rupees  1,41,757 


Articles  of  Export  in  1805. 

Piece-goods  Sicca  Rupees  69,020 

o 


Sundries 


41,128 


Exports  in  1805  — ....Sicca  Rupees.  1,10,14-H 


............ 


Sicca  Rupees  7,06,281 
3,91,270 


Merchandise  imported  into  Bombay  from  Cashmere,  &c. 

Ditto  exported  from  ditto  to  ditto  .... 

Imports  exceed  the  exports,  being  a balance  against  Bombay  ........Sicca  Rupees  3,15,911 

COMMERCE  WITH  VARIOUS  PLACES. 

The  following  is  a statement  of  the  merchandise  and  treasure  imported  into  Bombay  and  Surat  from 
various  places,  comprising  the  Mahlivc  and  I^accadive  Islands,  MosainWciue  and  hast  C oast  of  Africa, 
New  South  Wales,  Cape  of  Good  Hope,  St.  Helena,  &c.  in  the  years  1802  to  1806  iiiclii.yvc;  likewise  of 
the  mercliaiidise  and  treasure  exported  from  Bombay  and  Surat  to  the  above  places  during  tlie  same  period. 


EXPORTS  FROM  BOMBAY  AND  SITH\T. 

Total. 


Years. 

Merchandise 

Treasure 

Sicca  Rupeen. 

Sicca  Rupees. 

1802 

2,40,701 

— 

1803 

1,. 38, 426 

— - 

1804 

1,68,941 

10,542 

1805 

.3,00,.534 

■■ 

1806 

2,66,809 

— 

Total. 

11,1.5,411 

10,542 

Yean. 

Merchandise. 

Treasure. 

Total, 

Sicca  Rupees. 

Sicca  Rupees. 

Sicca  Rupees. 

1802 

2,72,586 

71,300 

.3,43,886 

1803 

3,05,823 

32,.353 

.3,38,176 

1804 

2,64,293 

a5,76l 

3,00,054 

1805 

3,21,569 

15,203 

3,.36,772 

1806 

3,60,677 

81,403 

4,42,080 

TotaT 

nr5,24,948 

2,36,020 

17,60,968 

Sicca  Rupee's. 

~2,40,701 

1,38,426 

1,79,183 

3,00,534 

2,66,809 


ll,2s5,9.53 


..............Vfc..... 


Merchandise  imported  into  Bombay  and  Surat  from  the  above  places  hi  the  y ears 

1802  to  1806  inclusive ............ bicca  Rupees 

Ditto  exported  from  ditto  to  ditto. 


...  2,36,020 

10,542 


Imports  exceed  the  exports  . . 

Treasure  im|K)rted  into  Bombay  and  Surat  from  the  above  places.. 
Ditto  exported  from  ditto 


..... 


........... 


I. O.ShOiS 

II, 15,411 

4, 09, .537 
2,25,478 


Balance  agaiiut  Bombay  and 


.Sicca  Rupees  1,84,0.59 


BOMBAY 


22a 


COMMERCE  WITH  FOREIGN  ASIA,  &e. 

The  following  is  a statement  of  the  merchandise  and  treasure  imported  into  Bombay  and  Surat,  exclu- 
sive of  the  Company’s,  fi’oiii  the  various  [larts  of  Foreign  Asia,  &c.  in  the  years  1802  to  1806  inclusive,  like-% 
wise  of  the  merchandise  and  treasure  exported  from  Bombay  and  Surat  to  the  various  parts  of  Foreign 
Asia,  &IC.  dui  ing  the  same  period.  The  articles  of  which  the  imports  and  exports  consisted,  are  enumerated 
under  the  heads  of  the  respective  places. 

IMPORTS  INTO  BOMBAY  AND  SURAT.  EXPORTS  FROM  BOMBAY  AND  SURAT. 


Years. 

MrrchandiHO. 

Treasure. 

Toul. 

Years. 

Merchandise. 

H^^gjU 

Total. 

i*icca  Rupees. 

Sicca  Rupees. 

Sicra  Rupees. 

Sicca  Rupees, 

Sit  ca  Rupeesi 

1803 

1803 

1804 

1805 

1806 
^^otal 

89,39,214 
64,18,833 
115,38,177 
87,03,028 
109,12,636  j 
465,01,877  1 

-Mi, 50, 066 
35,44,653 
101,50,644 

1 (Mi, 98,80:3 
76,ia,4«7 
"366,56,652 

135,89,280 
99,63,475 
216,78,821 
194,01, 8;io 
185,25,123 
a31 .58,529 

1802 

1803 

1804 

1805 

1806 
Total,  j 

134,86,630 

131,93,829 

204,80,448 

167,89,576 

175,59,706 

815,10,189 

4,20,718 

14,.'>0,274 

18,61,199 

7,76,930 

.5,24,429 

.50,33,5.50 

139,07,348 

146,44,103 

223,41,647 

175,66,506 

180,84,1.35 

865,43,739 

Merchandise  imported  into  Bombay  and  Siu*at  from  Foreign  Asia,  Africa,  &c.  Sicca  Rs.  465,01,877 


Ditto  exported  from  ditto  to  ditto  81.5,10,189 

Exports  exceed  the  imports  350,08,313 

Treasure  imported  from  the  above  places  366,56,653 

Ditto  ex[iortcd  from  ditto  to  ditto  50,33,550 

316,23,103 

Balance  in  favour  of  Bombay  and  Rs,  666,31,414 


RECAPITULATION  OF  COMMERCE  TO  ALL  PARTS  OF  THE  WORLD. 

The  following  is  a statement  of  the  merchandise  and  treasure  imported  into  Bombay  and  Surat,  exclu- 
sive of  the  Company’s,  from  all  parts,  in  the  years  1803  to  1806  inclusive;  likewise  of  the  merchandise  end 
treasure  exported  from  Bombay  and  Surat  to  all  parts  during  the  same  period;  together  with  a list  of  the 
articles  of  which  the  imports  and  exports  consisted  in  1805. 


IMPORTS  INTO  BOMBAY  AND  SURAT  EXPORTS  FROM  BOMBAY  AND  SURAT. 


Years. 

Merchandise. 



Trea.sure. 

Total. 

Years. 

Merchandise. 

Treasure. 

Total. 

Sicca  Riipen. 

.Sicca  Rupees. 

Sicca  Rupees, 

Sicca  Rupees* 

Sicca  Rupees. 

Sicca  Rupees. 

1802 

1803 

1804 

1805 

1806 
Total. 

251,67,339 

226,87,221 

342,89,047 

.303.54,604 

302,23,982 

56,29,469 

41.16.427 
118,71,756 
128,56, .580 

92.07.428  ' 

307,86,498 

367,03,646 

461,60,803 

433,11,184 

454,31,410 

1802 

1803 

1804 

1805 

1806 
Total. 

239,33,011 

213,51,693 

319,87,212 

288,01,836 

300,53,261 

1361,27,013' 

26,94,438 

21,40,540 

42,62,642 

39,74,845 

62,73,729 

266,27,449 

234,92,2^ 

362,49,854 

327,76,681 

353,26,990 

1486,11,893 

436,81,650 

wmmmm 

BOMBAY. 


221 


Articles  of  Import  in  1805. 

Apparel,  boots,  shoes’ &c...^Sicca  Rupees 
Books  and  stationery 
Beetle  and  leaf 

Cv  utlery 
Cochineal 
Coir  and  coir 


Copra 

Cornelians^vwM.^.^..^^ 
Coral 

China  ware 
Cowries 

Coboa  nuts  and  shells 
Cotton 

C-'Otton  yarn'%^'%'w%ww%'»'«‘%v%'%'. 
Drugs  and  dyes 

Dates«/w%'v^'W'v%‘w«^^^^^'«‘«v^«^v»‘ 

Katttbles,  provisions,  &c.  ^ 
Furniture 


lilcphants  teetli 
Glass  and  looking  glassesv 
Gums 
Or  rai  n 
Crunnies 

Haberdashery 

Hemp 


Tlorses 

Ironmongery  v%  -v^ 

Liquors 
Lametta 
•Aletals 

Naval  stores.^*^..^..^.^^..^ 
Oilman's  stores 
Piece-goods 

Pertumery 

Plate  and  plated  ware 
Quicksilver 
Raw  sillu« 

Suddlery.^..^^v^,^^v,^^ 
Shawls 

Seeds 

Sugar  candy  and  jaggery^. 
Sandal  wood 
Timber  and  planks 
Tutenaguo  ^ v»%^ wv 
n ea  »%*«»»■» 


Vermilion 

Woollens 

Various  small  articles.^ 

Treasure««.v%«.%vk^^.«^wv^ 

Imports  in  1805 


es  1,32,398 
^ 1,07,743 
^ 3,02,323 
V.  51,083 
..  24,248 

« 60,067 

« 1,88,683 
71,184 
^ 2,48,537 
^ 62,231 

22,223 
..  1,21,676 
6,159 
^ 2,63,942 
^ 73.08,803 
..  91,807 

..  11,89,6.58 
^ 2,00,857 
..  1,67,513 
13,069 
^ 3,75,483 
..  74,472 

..  16,978 

. 34,23,960 
^ 1,09,.54,5 
..  6,51,689 
..  16,202 
5,267 
.*  1,64,(K)0 
4,64,550 
.»  30,061 
..  8,65,092 
1,25,089 
. 4,47,619 
2,30,242 
2,90,827 
48,99,445 
3,03,210 
10,645 
8,149 
83,447 
21,30,737 
.33,665 
1,08,014 
3,08,578 
2,60,345 
25,34,619 
3,05,859 
1,29,567 
1,07,956 
51,861 
73,410 
7,046 
10,72,772 
128,56,580 


«Sicca  Rupees  432,11,184  Exports  in  1805< 


Articles  of  Export  in  1805. 
Piece-goods^  Sicca  Rupees 

Sugar  and  jaggery 
Raw  silk  «« 

Grain 

Cotton 

Gunnies  and  cativas 
Wearing 
Bangle  ivoiy 
Carnages 
Cocoa-nuts 

(\ittnn  yarn  and  tbread 

Cardaniunis 

Copra 

Drugs  and  dyes 
Dates 

Elephants''  tedh  V«.  %%  k % ^%%  % 

Hoi  ses  V 



1 epper 

Sandal  and  Sapan  wood  

Spices  

Sharks'  fins 
Cochineal 
Cornelians 
C'hina  ware 

(ilass  ware  V W W% 'V'«  %«-«-vv«.  V % %«.  % v%  v^%-% 

Liquors  %%  % v%»>  v»  % 

Quicksil ver 

Shawls 

I'ea 

Tutenagu  e »%  »•■%  %-•%♦  %.%  %•»  xxx-xx  X » X 

Vermilion  xxxx.xxxx  xxx^xx  x^xx  x'xxxxxx^xxx  xxxx  XXX 

W oollens  XX.X^XX-VXXXX'XXXXVXXXXXX^XXXXXrXXXXXVXX-X 
Sundry  small  articles  xxxxx^xxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxx 
Treasure  XX  xxx<x  vxxxxxx  vxxx  XX  x%%%x  x'vxx'vw%v%  v% 


52.00. 3:n 
21SiKi22 
2i,r}r}jm 
i:i,i.5,  b)i 
85,fi7,3:H 

i,i;i,ooG 

i,()2,sfi(; 

59,:J10 

Tl/ifi^ 

3,100 

3,9.5,lti8 

5S,^^():^ 

75. . 311 
l,fiV^)H 

10,05,71 1 

3,00,993 
^^^3H,(i^5 
79,ii7() 
4,:is,s:H 
3,79,‘^18 
3,20,30 1 
:2, 14,755 
‘2,97,939 

81.01.5 

52.. 33t 
87,7.59 

4,18,311. 

11,3.1,703 

1,1.5,89.5 

73,177 

85.08.5 

85. . 381 
1,12,518 
.3,4.5,2119 

1.3.14.00. 3 
39,74,815 


xSicca  Rupees  327,76,081 


BOMBAY, 


Value  of  goods  imported  into  Bombay  and  Surat  from  all  parts  of  tlie 

world,  in  five  years,  1802  to  1806  inclusive«^v%«^«^  Sicca  Rupees  1486,11,893 
Ditto  exported  from  ditto  to  ditto  1361,27,013 

Imports  exceed  the  exports  124,84,880 

Amount  of  treasure  imported  into  Bombay  and  SuraU>««v«««»>»^436,81,650 

Ditto  exiwrted  from  ditto»**»v«»v>^w»^%»^»>>»»»^^»v»»w.>.»«»«.>.<»»183,46,193 

2.53,35,466 

Balance  in  favour  of  Bombay  and  Surat  during  the  above  period  ««Sicca  Bs.  128,60,576 


PllICE  CUUKENT  OF  INDIA  AND  CHINA  GOODS. 


Spoci()S  of  Goods. 


Almonds 
Arrack 
Bees  wax 
Beetle  nut 


Benjamin,  3d  sort^j 
Brimstone 
('otton 
Cocoa  nut  oil*^>^».^w.| 


From  whence  imported. 


( 
I 


Persia 

{Batavia 
Col  umbo 
Sumatra 
/ White 
I Red 
Sumatra 
Persia 
Surat,  &c. 
Malabar 


How  Hold. 


I 


Cardamums 
Coir 

Copra,  new 
Cocoa  nuts,  wet 
Ditto, 

Caniphire 
Cinnamon 
Clove.s 
Cassia  ..1 
Coffee 
Dammer 
Dates,  dry 
Ditto, 
Elcphant.s'*  teeth 
Gunnies 


(1st  son 
^2(1 
i3d  ... 


Per  maund  of  44  8cerS'wv^»%w>/»%^»^%>»*.%%»| 
Per  gallon 
j^llitto 

,’Per  cwt.^,.^,.^. 

I Per  Surat  candy  of  21  maunds  % 

Ditto  % % V%  %*V% 

,*Per  Surat  maund  of  40  seers 
'Per  Surat  candy  of  22  maunds 
Per  Surat  candy 
Per  Bonibay  maund 


1st  sort  Per  Surat  maund  of  42  seers 

Ditto. 

'Ditto- 

Laccadive  'Per  candy  of  21  Bombay  maunds 

Malabar  candy  of  4 robins  .»>- 


Ditto  DlttO%'».%%'< 

(Ellina  'Per  Surat  maund  of  42  seers 

Ceylon  iPer  lb. 

Batavia  «,»»»v,»»...»»'Per  Surat  maund  of  42  seers  . 


««««%«  %■ 


li 


%^%%%%^  %%  %%%% 


W%^%%  I 


Ghee 

Grain 


> v%%% %% %% % %^ 


f % % %%  v%%%  % % ^ 


China  cwt. 

Mocha%%....*»-^.*.*,,.,..,...^.^.,.^IPer  Surat  maund  of  44  seers 

Malacca Surat  candy  of  22  maunds  ^ 
Persia  Ditto.*..,.. 

Ditto  Ditto 

Musainhique  ^^*^v.,.v^'Per  Surat  maund 

Bengal  % %%-%%  % %<».%  ^ w,|  er  100 * 

Per  Surat  maund  of  40  seers  *.**>*, 
Ditto 

1 1 )l  1 1 

Per  candy  of  8 parahs 
iDitto* 

Per  Surat  maund  of  40  seers 
Per  Bombay  maund 
Per  Surat  maund  of  44  seers 
jPer  lb.,^1 
Per  cwt. 

Per  oz.  troy 
Per  rorge  of  20  pieces 
Per  lb. 

Per  cwt. 


( Caranehy 
< Bengal  *.****** 
(,  Bownaghur  * 
f Surat 
\ Bengal 
Persia 
Surat*^ 


vv*% 


Persia 

Batavia 

;Moeha*. 


Hingi 

Jingelly-^vv 
Kisinisses 
Mace 
Myrrh 

Musk  %^%%  % % China 

Nankeens  %%%%«%%%  v«%^, Ditto*  %%^*^*%%*******^*| 
Nutmegs  ****.|Batavia  ***,**■, 

Qlibanum  'Persia  ^^VM.*******  V*  *** ' 


>*,**,**  * **  ***,***■**%,*%’%  *.*W*,**^**.* 


Rupees. 


5 to 
1 to 
1 to 
50  to' 
5t)  to 
55  to 

14  to 
40  to 

140  to 
3}  to 
86  to 
67  to 
60  to 
80  to 
30  to 
25  to 
23  to 
65  to 
3 to 
86  to 
30  to 

15  to 
70  to 
35  to 
20  to 
70  to 
25  to 

5 to 
5 to 

5 to 
23  to 
20  to 
65  to 

3 to 

6 to 
6 to 


7 

2 

2 

60 

65 

70 

18 

50 

180 

5 

too 

80 

65 

lOO 

40 

35 

28 

80 

li 

100 

40 

20 

80 

40 

25 
100 

30 

6i 

6 
6i 

26 
25 
70 

4 

7 

8 


80  to  100 


5 to 
40  to 
4|  to 
8 to 


7 

45 

6J 

12 


BOMBAY. 


233 


PRICE  CURRENT  OF  INDIA  AND  CHINA  GOODS  CONTINUED. 


Species  of  Goods. 

From  whence  imported 

How  sold. 

Kll|>i‘L‘8. 

Paddy  i 

Per  morah  v^% 

30  to 

40 

Pearl  shells  ] 

Per  eWt.xvxn.xxvxvxaxxxxxaxx^^'ia^^an'i^-i-.-t-i'i-i^-.-i 

40  to 

GO 

Tellicherry, heavy 

Per  candy  ot  4*  robinsx^%%v«^xx-«x%«'%^'%«^-%-x%.x 

170  to 

180 

Pepper  ‘ 

Ditto,  light 

Per  ditto  of  20  parahs  ..,^^vx^x.x%xx^vx^xxx 

ICO  to 

170 

Kastern,  heavy 

Ditto  of  21  iiiaunds 

150  to 

160 

Ditto  light^^^^^^^ 

DlttO«X-%^^V^X«XX'X«VXX^xX'vXVXVXXX^X.X^%X«%X%XXX^X«X. 

140  to 

1.50 

Piitrliook  i 

Surat 

Per  ranr^y ...... 

60  to 

80 

Quicksilver  J 

Europe 

Per  Surat  maund  

60  to 

80 

Unboiled,  1st  sort 

6 to 

8 

Moongeyvw..^^ 

5 to 

7 

ivice 

IVoddy 

DlttO«^%X^X%X^^XXX^VX'X%^«%X%VX%X«>X«X«.^X%X%X%V<«%% 

4 to 

5 

Bengal 

DlttO^'»«/XXXXX'^'X«.XXXXX«X«XX.%«XX^X'X'%.X'%^%%%X%'X%.X%'X 

3 to 

5 

" Bengal  Ist  sort^^ 

I cr  bag  ^-%%X'VX%^«X«^«XXX'WXXX%XVXX%X«^«XXX«X'XX 

15  to 

2.5 

Ditto  2d 

I.llttO-%'XXXX-VXX.-k-%.XX%X%^X'VXX%XX.^XX%^Xi<XX  VVXX'XXX^^X.X 

14  to 

18 

•dUifar 

^ Batavia-»<v%'%-%-%«-««'%'«^ 

Per  maund  of  41  j seers  .x.x*^,.xxxx.x.^xxx<w^^ 

4 to 

5 

China  in  chests  ...« 

3 to 

4i 

Ditto  in  dupotas«^ 

3 to 

4 

1 st  sort 

Per  Surat  maund  of  43  \ seers  xxxxxvxv^x 

7 to 

H 

Suofar  candy 

2d  ditto 

6 to 

7 

^ 3d  ditto 

DlttO^X^*X.%X.X^^>X^'X^%^VX%-%XXX^..^'XXX*.%X^*%»-XX.%X^XX 

6|  to 

6 

( 1 st  sort 

Per  Pucca  seer-xx%^x%x^v^x/vxx'vxx'xv%v%^%wxxk%x 

10  to 

12 

Silk  raw,  China 

"s  2d  ditto 

Dl  ttO^^X'X'WX'X^X/VX^  WX  WX^XX'WX^^X  XX.WX'VXX^  vxx-x^x 

9 to 

10 

^ 3d  ditto 

Dl  tt  Ox.^X'VXXX.XW'VWXX^XXXXVXX^X-^X.XX^VXX  xvxx  vx  x.%x 

8 to 

9 

Saltpetre 

Bengal 

Per  bag  XXXXXXX-XXX.X.^XXXXX'XX.XXXX'XX.XX.XVXX.XX.XX^X-X 

15  to 

20 

C 1st  sort 

Per  candy  of  2 1 Bombay  maund Sx.xx^xxxx 

180  to 

225 

Sandal  wood 

•%  2d  dittO'«%^^%'%%%.w«^ 

Di  ttox-xxx.x^xx^x^x.x.x^x'xx.xx-xxxx.xvxxxxx.  VXX.XX  • * » - 

160  to 

180 

^ 3d 

DlttOx«x%»xx.xx^x/x-x»xx.^vxx^%x.»x^xx%x»  xxxx  X XXX^XX 

150  to 

160 

Sa^o 

Pulo  Pinang 

Per  maund  

3 to 

5 

Sliurkb 

M 

Per  CWt.X^X-X.X^'XX^X/XX^X^X^XX.XXXXXXX'VX'XXXXXX^XX 

20  to 

25 

llyson 

p er  lb.x/x^x-^x/X^^xx^x^xxxxxxxxxxxx-xxx.xxxrXx.xx^xxx 

3 to 

4 

Souchong 

lllttOxJXX'^^^XrXXXVXX'XX^X^X.^X/X^^X/XXXXX.X^X^XXXXXXXX 

2 to 

3 

' 1st 

Per  COVlt  .^.wx^^x^x^x'^x^xx^x^xxxx.xx.x-xxxxXxXxXx-xxx 

21^  to 

30 

rliffn _ 

Ditto  xxutxXXXXXxXXXxxxXXXXxxxxxxxxxxxx-xxxxxxx 

20  to 

24 

Timber,  Calicut^^ 

«3d  ditto 

18  to 

20 

planks 

Per  100  gn^  X^XXX/XVXXXX^XX.X^XXXXXXXXX.XX/XX'XX-X 

45  to 

55 

" In  large  slabs 

Per  maund  of  40  seers  .x^xx.x^x^xx,x,xx.xx^x.xx.x 

10  to 

13 

Tin 

In  small  ditto 

Ditto  X^XX^'XX^X^X^VXX^VXX^X^X.-XXX^XX^XrXX.XX-X^X.X 

10  to 

14 

Tiitenague 

China 

Per  Surat  maund  x.^xxx^xxx^x^x-xxxxxvx^x.vxxx 

8 to 

10 

V ermilion 

China  -v* 

2 to 

Wh6atv%%^w*^v%^v%v% 

Jumbaseer 

Per  candy  of  8 parahs  xx.^xxx^xx^xxxx.xxxxx 

17  to 

20 

VSTood 

P egu«^ 

Per  Bombay  maund  %»xvv»%xrxv^x»%x.vx'x%%^xxx; 

2 to 

3 

RATES  OF  EXCHANGE. 


On  days’  sight«*,».^l08  to  110  Bombay  per  100  Sicca  Rupees. 

On  Madras  »w..»v*30  ditto»»v,».**^~340  to  3G0  Bombay  Rupees  jh-t  100  Star  I’agodas. 

On  SuraU,..~«.»^»*  8 ditto^«»vv*»»^103  to  110  Bombay  per  100  Surat  Rupees. 

On  China  30  ditto  Bombay  Rupees  per  100  Spanish  Dollars. 


BOMBAY. 


IMPORT  DUTIES. 

Goods  imported  from  Ben/^al  will  he  exempted  from  duty,  on  producing  the  usual  certificates,  agreeably 
to  the  Government  advertisement  of  May  1st,  1795.  But  if  they  are  not  accompanied  by  the  required 
certificates,  they  are  to  be*  assessed  at  an  advance  of  15  per  cent,  and  charged  witli  duties  as  on  other  goods. 

Certificates  of  duties  having  been  paid  from  Madras,  Malabar,  or  Surat,  admitted  in  exemption  of 
duties  here,  provided  they  are  jiroduced  in  the  time  prescribed. 

Certificates  from  Ceylon  not  admitted  here,  nor  from  Prince  of  Wales’s  Island. 

Arrack,  tin;  manufacture  of  Bencoolen,  exempted  from  duties. 

No  slaves  permitted  to  be  imported. 

Grain  of  all  kinds  may  be  imported  free  of  duties.  .. 

All  other  merchandise  imported,  to  pay  a duty  of  two  and  half  per  cent,  on  the  manifest  prices,  and 
an  established  advance  thereon,  regulated  as  follows;  from  which  advance  the  cargoes  of  ships  imported 
from  England  are  to  be  exempted,  viz. 

Cargoes  by  foreign  ships,  Americans  excepted,  from  whatever  place  imported,  an  advance  of  60  per  cent. 
On  British  ships,  or  ships  navigated  under  the  colours  of  the  native  Princes  of  India,  viz. 

Erom  the  Coromandel  15  per  cent. 

roin  ^0  ditto. 

Fiom  Mocha,  agreeably  to  the  amount  sales  on  oath. 

From  Malabar  (without  the  province)  Guzzerat,  Scindy,  Cambay,  Gaunt, 

and  Pegu  »»»%■%  10  ditto. 

From  Goa,  if  tlie  produce  of  60  ditto. 

From  the  two  Gulfs,  it  the  produce  of  60  ditto. 

If  not  the  produce  of  15  ditto. 

Timber  and  plank,  subject  to  the  same  duty  as  other  goods  from  Bussorah, 

Alocha,  Judda,  &c.  ports  in  the  Gulf  of  Persia  and  Arabia,  the 
Coast  of  Africa,  and  Malacca..^  15  ditto. 

From  the  Cape  ot  Cfood  Hope  30  ditto* 

From  Batavia  (arrack  excepted)  25  ditto. 

Batavia  arrack  to  he  assessed  at  55  Rupees  the  leager,  but  no  leakage  or  ullage  allowed. 

Goods  landed  expressly  for  exportation,  or  transshipped  in  the  harbour,  to  pay  the  same  import  duty 
AS  other  goods,  and  no  drawback  to  be  allowed. 

All  goods,  though  imported  for  private  use,  are  to  pay  duties.  Nothing  but  wearing  apparel  to  ^ass 
duty  free.  And  all  baggage  to  he  inspected  at  the  Custom-house* 

All  goods  or  packages  of  every  description,  timber  excepted,  to  be  landed  and  inspected  either  at 
the  Bunder  Custom-house  within  the  Fort,  or  at  MuzjiH  Bunder  without,  but  at  no  other  landing  place. 

N.  B.  The  Custom-house  is  open  for  the  transaction  of  business  every  day,  Sundays  excepted,  from 
nine  o’clock  in  the  morning  until  five  in  the  evening. 

Additional  Duty.— An  additional  duty  of  one  per  cent,  on  account  of  the  Honourable  Company's 
marine,  is  also  levied  on  all  goods  imported  on  the  same  principle,  and  under  the  same  regulations  as  the 
old  established  duties. 

Town  Duties.— Cotton  impoi*ted  in  bales  or  docras,  to  pay  one  rupee  per  Surat  candy,  without  any 
drawback  on  re-exportation.  The  other  town  duties  hare  been  aboliisbed  by  Government  from  May  1|  1806. 


BOMBAY. 


225 


EXPORT  DUTIES. 

I.  No  goods  to  be  exported  to  the  Cape  of  Good  Hope,  without  permission  of  Government. 
TI.  The  exportation  of  liquors  of  ail  kinds  to  New  South  Wales  strictly  prohibited, 

III.  All  export  duties  withdrawn. 

IV.  No  salt  permitted  to  be  exported  to  Calcutta. 

V.  No  other  opium  than  Bengal,  permitted  to  be  imported  or  exported. 

VI.  All  opium  prohibited  to  be  exported  to  China. 

N.  B.  Manifests  of  export  cargoes  required. 


CUSTOM  HOUSE  REGULATIONS. 

To  Captain  of  the  Honourable  Company's  Ship 

Sir,  I have  it  in  command  from  the  Honourable  the  Governor  in  Council  to  direct  that 
after  twenty-four  hours  of  your  arrival  in  t1ie  harbour,  and  previous  to  any  private  trade  being  permitted  to 
be  landed  from  your  ship,  you  will  please  deliver  in  a general  manifest,  and  that  yourself  anti  oflieers  attend 
one  of  His  Majesty’s  Justices  of  the  Peace,  with  a particular  account  of  the  whole  of  your  respective  invest- 
ments, before  whom  yourself  and  they  will  make  affidavit  in  the  fi)llowing  form,  and  then  deliver  into  my 
office.  And  if  any  goods  not  manifested  are  landed,  they  will  be  liable  to  confiscation.  I am,  Sir,  &c. 

Bombay  Custom  House^  Custom  Master, 

0 

Manifest  of  the  whole  of  my  Investment  on  Board  the  Ship 


FORM  OF  AFFIDAVIT. 

I commander,  or  chief  officer,  &c.  make  oath  and  say,-  that  the  annexed  copy 

of  my  investment  exhibits  a true  and  faithful  statement  of  the  whole  thereof,  and  that  the  sums  written 
opposite  to  the  several  articles,  arc  the  true  and  just  prime  cost  thereof. 

Sworn  to  this  day,  before  me, 

N.  B.  It  is  particularly  desired  that  the  commander  will  l)e  pleased  to  communicate  the  above  inform- 
ation to  the  officers,  and  others  having  private  trade  on  board  the  ship  under  his  command,  in  onlc*r  that 
they  may  not  plead  ignorance  of  the  regulations  of  the  port ; and  it  is  also  particularly  roquired  that  not 
any  private  trade  be  disposed  of  on  board  ship,  but  that  the  same  be  duly  and  regulai  ly  (Altered  at  the 
cu8tom-hou..e,  and  the  Company’s  duties  paid,  otherwise  such  articles  as  have  been  disposed  of  in  this 
manner,  will  be  seized  being  landed. 


BOMBAY. 


List  of  such  Articles  of  Commerce  as  are  permitted  to  he  landed  at  the  Government  Custom  House  at  the  Bunder 
in  Bombay^  or  at  Muzjid  Bunder^  at  the  Option  of  the  Proprietors^  from  and  after  the  Sth  ef  October^  1803. 


Agates,  cornelians,  &c.  Cambay 
stones. 

Agala  wood. 

Alum  from  Cliina. 

Almonds. 

Ambergris. 

Anchors  and  grapnels. 

Aloes. 

Arrack,  Columbo,  Batavia,  and 
Rencoolen. 

Arsenic. 

Assafa'tida. 

Bdellium. 

Beads  and  pearls,  false. 

Be«*  of  sorts. 

Beetle  nut. 

Bird  shot. 

Books. 

Blue  stone. 

Borax. 

Brandy. 

Brass  and  copper  ware. 

Brass  leaf 
Candles. 

Canvas. 

Cardamums. 

Carriages. 

Cassia  and  Cassia  buds. 
Carpets  of  sorts. 

Catgut. 

(’nutch  (Terra  Japonica.) 
China  root. 

China  ware. 

Chocolate. 

Cinnamon. 

Cloves. 

Clocks  and  watches. 
Cochineal. 

Coculus  Indicus. 

Coffee. 

Columbo  root. 

Copper  and  copper  nails. 
Coral. 


Cordage,  Europe,  and  coir. 
Cordials. 

Corks. 

(-'otton  (in  packed  bales). 
Cotton  screws. 

Cot  lace. 

Cow,  bezoar. 

Cubebs. 

Cutlery 

Drugs  of  every  description. 
Earthen-ware. 

Eatables  of  all  sorts. 

Elephants’  teeth. 

Empty  bottles. 

Essence  of  Spruce. 

Fh)or  cloths. 

Furniture. 

Galls  of  every  description. 
Gtlangnl. 

Garden  seeds. 

Gill. 

Ginger,  dry. 

Glass  beads. 

Glass  ware. 

Gold  and  silver  lace. 

Grain  of  all  sorts. 

Grocery. 

Gum  Ammoniacum. 

Gum  Arabic. 

Gunpowdef(tothear8eBalonly). 

Gunnies. 

Hardware  of  all  sorts. 

King. 

Honey. 

Japanned  ware. 

Jewellery. 

Indigo. 

Iron. 

Iron  hoops. 

Ironmongery. 

Iron  nails. 

Ivory  works. 

Kismisses. 


Lead. 

Leather,  Europe  pump. 
Leather,  Persia. 

IJquors. 

Liquorice  root. 

Loernits. 

Looking  glasses. 

Long  pepper. 

Mace. 

Maneyary. 

Manna. 

Mathematical  instruments. 
Medicines. 

Millinery. 

Musk. 

Muskets  and  bayonets,  and  fire 
arms,at  Bombay  bunderonly. 
Myrrh. 

Needles. 

Nuckla. 

Nutmegs, 

Nux  vomica. 

Old  copper. 

Old  iron. 

Opium,  Bengal  only. 

Ordnance,  brass  or  iron,  at  Bom- 
bay bunder  only. 

Orsidue. 

Paint  of  all  sorts. 

Paper. 

Patch  leaf. 

Pearls  and  jewels,  at  Bombay 
bunder,  only. 

Perfiimeiy. 

Pq^per. 

Piece-goods  of  all  aorts. 
Plmplemool. 

Pistachio  nuts. 

Plate  and  plated  warUr 
Preserves  of  sorts. 

Prints. 

Putohock 

Quicksilver. 


BOMBAY. 


227 


Raw  silk. 

Red  and  \7bite  lead. 
Rhinoceros'  horns. 
Rhubarb. 

Rose  water. 

Rum. 

Saddlery 

Saffron. 

Sal  Ammoniac. 

Salt  provisions. 
Saltpetre. 

Sandal  wood. 

Sapan  wood* 


Seeds  of  all  sorts. 

Senna  leaf. 

Shawls. 

Ship  chandlery. 

Shot. 

Silk  works. 

Spars. 

Stationery. 

Steel. 

Stones,  paving  and  grinding. 
Sugar  of  sorts. 

Sweetmeats. 

Summer  heads. 


Toys. 

Treasure  of  every  description, 
at  Huinbuy  bunder  only. 
Turineric, 

Tu  ten  ague. 

Twine. 

Venice  ware. 

Verdigrease. 

Vinegar. 

Vermilion. 

White  copper. 

Wine. 

Walnuts. 


Lui  of  aueh  Articles  of  Commerce  as  are  prohibited  from  being  landed  at  the  Government  Custom  House  at  the 
Bunder  in  Bombay^  but  which  nevertheless  may  be  landed  at  the  Custom  House  at  Muzjid  Bunder* 


Alum  from  Scindy  & Guzzerat. 

Dammer. 

Miinjeet. 

Arrack;  Goa,  Pariar,  Mow- 

Dates  and  other  fruits. 

Olibanum. 

rah,  &c. 

Earth,  red,  from  Persian  Gulf. 

Oil  of  evciy  description. 

Bang. 

Fire  works. 

Penack  (oil  cake) 

Benjamin. 

Feathers. 

Pitch. 

Brimstone. 

Fins,  shark. 

Rampatree  leaf. 

Bazar  buttoo. 

Fish  maws. 

Kogan. 

Cadjans. 

Ganzica. 

Hose  Haloes. 

Camphire. 

Garlick. 

Rose  Flowers. 

Castor  oil. 

Ghee. 

Ruscapore. 

Charcoal. 

Ginger. 

Salt  rock,  from  Persia,  Red 

Chili  pepper. 

llartall. 

Sea,  and  Cambay. 

Chunam  stone. 

lleiratsey. 

Sheep  guts. 

Chundroos  (Copal). 

Hemagc. 

Soap. 

Chunk. 

Hemp. 

Salt  fish. 

Cocoa  nuts. 

Hides  of  sorts,  raw  and  dressed. 

Targets. 

Cocum. 

Jaggery. 

1 Tamarinds. 

Coir. 

Laces  of  every  description. 

Tar. 

Copra. 

Mats. 

Turpentine. 

Cossumba. 

Molasses. 

Wax,  bees. 

Cotton,  in  docras  or  bags. 

Moretooth  (Vitriol). 

Wooden  ware, 

Cotton  yarn  and  thread. 

Mother  of  jicarl  shells. 

Wool. 

Cowries. 

Mowrah. 

Wormwood. 

Police  Rboulations.— .1st.  That  all  persons  arriving  at  the  Presidency,  except  military,  naval,  or 
marine  officers,  shall  report  themselves  to  the  superintendent  of  the  police  within  twenty-four  hours  after 
their  arrival. 

2d.  That  a list  of  the  officers,  crew,  and  passengers,  on  board  every  ship,  brig,  snow,  cutter,  or  vessel 
of  any  description,  arriving  in  or  departing  from  the  harbour,  shall  be  delivered  into  the  police  office,  there 
to  remain ; such  list  specifying  the  country  and  profession  of  each  individual ; and  in  case  ot  arrival,  the 
same  to  be  done  within  twenty-four  hours  after  the  vessel  anchors. 

Gg2 


S28 


BOMBAY. 


REGULATIONS  RESPECTING  IIAMAULS,  OR  PALANQUIN  BEARERS. 

I.  A general  register  to  be  kept  in  the  office  of  police,  of  all  the  palanquin  bearers  on  tlie  island,  whe- 
ther in  or  out  of  service,  by  casts,  where  every  nian‘’s  name,  age,  and  place  of  residence  must  be  forthwith 
entered,  in  default  of  which  he  shall  not  be  permitted  to  enter  into,  or  continue  in  any  service. 

II.  Every  man,  on  having  his  name  registered,  as  above  set  forth,  shall  receive  a ticket  marked  with 
the  letters  P.  B.  and  the  number  in  which  he  stands  in  the  general  register,  which  lie  is  to  wear  on  his 
right  arm,  immediately  above  the  elbow,  and  on  the  oulshle  of  his  clothes,  if  he  wears  a coat  with  sleeves, 
subject  to  punishment  if  he  ever  appears  without  the  said  ticket,  or  if  the  same  shall  be  concealed,  or  other- 
wise placed  than  above  directed. 

III.  A separate  register  sliall  also  be  kept  of  hamauls  in  service,  specif}' ing  their  master  or  mistress’s 
name,  and  the  name  of  each  hamaul,  with  the  time  of  his  entry  into  such  service. 

IV.  Tliat  on  liaving  his  name  entered  in  the  said  separate  register,  each  man  shall  receive  another 
ticket,  or  ticket  of  service  with  a niimlier  upon  it,  wddeh  he  is  to  wear  on  his  left  arm,  immediately  above 
the  elbow,  and  on  the  outside  of  his  clothes,  if  he  wTars  a coat  with  sleeves,  subject  to  punishment  if 
seen  without  it;  and  which  ticket  he  is  to  return  into  the  office  of  police  when  he  is  discharged. 

V.  No  person  shall  (‘mploy  hamauls,  but  by  an  application  to  the  superintendent  of  police. 

VI.  No  hamaul  shall  presume  to  serve  any  master  or  mistress,  without  an  application  has  first  been 
regularly  made  for  that  puqiose  at  the  office  of  police,  and  a ticket  of  service  granted  to  liim  in  conse- 
quence thereof. 

VII.  Every  person,  on  discharging  any  hamaul,  or  set  of  hamauls,  is  requested  to  notify  the  same  to 
the  su[M*rlntendent  of  police,  with  the  reasons,  if  any,  of  such  discharge. 

VIII.  No  hamaul  shall  be  discharged  from  his  service,  without  first  receiving  his  pay  up  to  the  day- 
on  which  he  is  discharged;  though  it  may  be  optional  wdth  any  master  or  mistress  to  keep  their  hamauls 
ill  arrears  for  u period  not  exceeding  fillf'CMi  days,  in  order  to  guard  against  their  absconding  without  cause, 
or  any  other  misconduct,  which  may,  upon  investigation  before  the  proper  authority,  render  it  necessary  for 
such  arrears  of  pay  to  be  forfeited. 

IX.  No  hamaul  engaged  by  the  month,  shall  be  permitted  to  leave  his  service  without  giving  one 
montli’s  previous  warning. 

X.  On  hamauls  being  discharged  by  any  master  or  mistress  without  receiving  their  wages  up  to  the 
day,  it  shall  be  the  duty  of  the  superintendent  of  jjolice  to  see  that  they  receive  them,  by  applying  to  their 
master,  &c.  or  to  the  proper  Court  for  that  purpose. 

XL  Every  hamaul  leaving  his  service  without  being  regularly  discharged,  and  without  coming  to  the 
office  of  police  to  make  the  same  known,  and  to  deliver  up  his  ticket  of  service,  shall  suffer  such  punish- 
ment as  the  offence  may  seem  to  merit. 

XII.  The  wages  of  hamauls  shall  be  one  quarter  of  a rupee  per  day  to  each  man,  and  no  more,  unless 
they  go  off  the  Island,  or  to  Sion,  Mahiin,  or  any  similar  distance,  when  they  shall  be  allowed  two  annas 
per  day  each,  for  provisions. 

XIII.  Every  person  applying  for  a monthly  set  of  hamauls,  and  getting  their  names  inserted  in  the 
separate  register,  shall  pay  one  rupee. 

XIV.  The  general  register  shall  be  renewed  every  year. 

XV.  Great  impositions  being  made  by  hamauls  upon  strangers,  and  others,  occasional  residents  on 
tiie  island,  in  refusing  their  services  unless  the  set  consist  of  six  hamauls,  the  following  rules  ere  prescribed 
for  Uieir  duty  in  this  respect. 


BOMBAY. 


S29 


A set  of  four  hamauls  is  to  corry  any  where  to  or  from  town,  the  distance  not  cxcccdini» 
two  miles  and  a half. 

If  exceeding  2\  miles,  the  set  to  consist  of  (j  Imniauls. 

If  to  Parell,  and  e<iUBl  distances g humnuls. 

If  to  Sion,  Mahim,  or  any  simUar  distance 10  hamnnls. 

In  these  last  instances,  each  hamaul  to  receive  two  annas  per  tiny,  provision  money. 

XVI.  The  superintendent  of  police,  or  sitting  magistrate,  shall  be  authorized  to  seize,  tletaln  in  custody, 
and  punish  all  hamauls  not  conforming  to  the  above  regulations,  until  they  shall  comply  therewith. 

IIEGULATIONS  RESPECTING  HOUSE  SERVANTS. 

AVhen  the  above  regulations  for  palanquin  bearers  were  framed,  others  were  .settled  respecting  house 
servants,  and  their  wages  fixed  as  follows: 

A head  servant  of  the  first  clas.s,  according  to  his  abilities,  from  12  to  20  rupees  per  month. 

A second  servant  according  to  his  abilities.. ..... ....  0 to  10  ilitto. 

A masalchee.......w«^.................... .5  to  (i  ditto. 


A boy 
A havildar  of  peons  .. 


%%%%%%  %■  % % % 


A cook,  according  to  his  merit 
A cook’s  mat&a^ 

A female  servant,  according  to  her  abilitiess,.^^ 
A coachman,  dittos^ 

A horse  keeper 
A cow  keeper . 

A goat-herd% 


«<WVW»  Wk  ww  %%»•* 


3 to  5 ditto. 
7^  ditto, 

ti  ditto. 

5 to  6 ditto. 
10  to  l.()  ditto. 

5 to  H ditto. 

6 to  12  ditto. 

8 to  15  ditto. 
5 to  8 ditto. 
5 to  0 ditto. 
J ditto. 


RATES  OF  PILOTAGE. 

The  following  are  the  rates  of  pilotage  at  which  all  merchant  ships  and  vessels  visiting  the  harbour 
of  Bombay  are  charged. 

Ru|)ces.  Rupees. 

300  tons  burthen  in  fair  weather  50  in  the  monsoon  75 

4*00  ditto  55w%'WW%VW%W%^W%W«^^^SO 

5(X)  ditto  %'W  bO'W»W%%W«.%«<«^%W*.%^^%'%‘%.85 

600  ditto  65  90 

700  ditto  70 — 

800  ditto  75  100 


Square  rigged  vessels  up  to 
300  to 
400  to 
500  to 
600  to 
700  to 


800  to  900  ditto 
900  to  1000  ditto 
1000  to  1 100  ditto 
1100  to  1200  ditto 
1200  .Mv....v...ulitto 


80 

85 

90... 

95 

100 


.105 

..110 

115 

120 

125 


LIGIlt-IIOlTSE  DUES. 

A duty  of  10  rupees  per  100  tons  is  collected  by  the  master-attendant  from  every  merchant  vessel 
anchoring  in  the  harbour,  towards  defraying  the  expence  of  the  light-house. 


230 


BOMBAY. 


WHARFAGE. 


The  following  are  the  rates  of  charge  for  flic  use  of  the  cranes  at  the  Bunder  wharf,  viz. 


Hoisting  large  spars  each 
An  anchor  under  20  cwt. 
Ditto  above  ditto 
A gun  under  ditto 
Ditto  above  ditto 
A large  bale 
A small  bale  or  cask 
A horse 


Hs.  Q.  n. 
2 0 0 

0 8 0 
10  0 
0 2 0 
1 0 0 
.010 
0 0 48 
0 1 0 


^ %%%%  V‘%>  V% 


A bullock  or  cow  0 1 0 

A carriage  or  large  box  0 10 

Articles  conveyed  in  the  Company's  crall,  to  pay  half  the  amount,  whctlier  belonging  to  His  Majesty 
or  to  merchants. 


DOCK-YARD  REGULATIOxNS. 

I.  No  boats  but  those  belonging  to  His  Majesty's  ships,  the  Honourable  Company's  cruisers,  and  the 
establishment  of  the  yard,  are  to  use  the  stairs  of  the  dock;  with  the  exception  of  the  boats  of  the 
Honourable  Company's  chartered  ships,  when  their  commanders  are  in  them. 

II.  Natives  of  every  description  not  engaged  in  the  service  of  the  yard,  or  the  ships  and  vessels  before 
mentioned,  or  concerned  in  the  ships  under  repair,  are  to  be  excluded  from  the  dock-yard. 

III.  No  baggage  or  stores  to  be  carried  through  the  yard  by  any  other  than  the  crews  of  the  ships 
and  vessels,  except  with  an  order  from  the  Honourable  the  Governor,  II is  Excellency  the  Admiral,  the 
commanding  officer  of  the  forces,  the  superintendent  of  the  marine,  the  master-attendant,  or  town 
major;  and  all  baggage  and  stores  so  passed,  are  to  be  accompanied  by  a certificate  from  the  officer  to 
whom  they  belong. 

IV.  The  dock-gates  are  to  be  shut  after  sunset,  the  wicket  being  left  open  till  the  evening  gun  is 
fired;  after  which,  nobody  belonging  to  the  ship.s  in  the  harbom*,  below  the  rank  of  a commissioned 
officer,  is  to  be  allowed  to  land,  or  enter  the  dock-yard,  without  the  express  permission  of  one  of  the  au- 
thorities above  mentioned. 

V.  Boat's  crews  are  not  to  be  permitted  to  quit  their  boats  at  the  stairs,  after  the  hour  of  shutting 
the  gates. 

VI.  Small  craft  are  not  to  deliver  fire-wood,  or  any  other  lading,  within  the  limits  of  the  yard,  with- 
out the  siiperintendenfs  sanction. 

VII.  The  shij)s  and  vessels  in  dock  arc  not  to  land  any  lumber  whatever  on  tlie  pier. 

VIII.  No  cargo  of  any  description  is  to  be  landed  in,  or  passed  through  the  yard,  from  or  to  any 
ship  in  dock,  without  the  superintendent's  permission  in  writing. 

IX.  No  palanquins  arc  to  remain  in  the  yard  without  the  permission  of  one  of  the  authorities 
above  mentioned. 

X.  If  any  fire  should  happen,  or  any  signal  of  distress  be  made,  on  board  a vessel  in  the  harbour, 
the  dock-gates  are  to  be  thrown  open,  that  every  assistance  fi'om  the  shore  may  be  conveyed  to  her. 

XI.  When  a ship  is  either  coming  into,  or  going  out  of  dock  in  the  night,  the  gates  are  to  be  open 
for  the  master  attendant's  and  builder's  people  to  pass. 


BOMBAY. 


S31 


XII.  The  tindals  of  the  Bunder  boats  having  any  reports  to  make  on  service,  arc  to  be  permitted 
to  pass. 

XIII.  When  the  builder  is  repairing  any  ships  afloat,  he  may,  on  his  own  authority,  desire  the  sentries 
to  allow  country  boats  to  quit  the  dock  stairs  with  artifiwrs,  planks,  tools,  &c. 

The  following  are  the  charges  on  ships  entering  the  ducks. 

Every  English  ship,  the  first  4.50  nipees. 

Ditto  every  subsequent  spring  eacli  350  (littd. 

Every  foreign  sliip,  the  first  springs  ()00  ditto. 

Ditto  every  subsequent  spring,  each  — 500  ditto. 

REGULATIONS  RELATIVE  TO  SALUTES  BY  THE  COMPANY  S SHIPS. 

Re.solved,  that  it  be  a standing  order  in  future,  tliat  no  other  salutes  with  guns  be  allowed  of  tliaii 
those  mentioned,  and  that  upon  all  otlier  occasions  the  commanders  do  salute  with  dicers  according  to  their 
own  discretion,  and  the  present  rules  of  the  navy,  and  Hint  fbe  following  regulations  be  printed,  and 
inclosed  in  the  Company’s  packets  to  tlieni,  for  their  .strict  eompliance  tlKM’ewitli. 

On  the  King’s  birth-day,  a royal  salute  from  the  commodore  of*  21  guns. 

A Governor,  at  his  coming  on  board,  or  going  on  shore  at  any  of  the  principal  settlements  in  India,  at 
St.  Helena,  or  in  England,  to  be  .saluted  with  19  guns. 

One  of  tlie  Council  taking  passage  for  Ji^urope,  on  his  coming  on  board,  9 guns. 

N.  B Any  person  dismissed  the  Conijiany’s  service  is  not  to  be  saluted. 

A Chief  going  on  shore  to  take  the  charge  of  a factory,  or  quitting  the  same,  11  guns. 

One  of  the  Council  of  any  settlement  in  India  quitting  the  ship  when  dispatched,  7 guns. 

N.  B.  No  salute  to  the  [)crson  who  musters  Uic  ship  at  St.  Helena. 

Supra-cargoes  going  on  shore  on  tlie  ship’s  arrival  at  China  or  Mocha,  and  coming  on  board  at  her 
departure  for  Europe,  9 guns. 

The  Hoppo  coming  on  board  to  measure  tlie  ship,  and  going  on  shore,  9 guns. 

Mandarins  of  high  rank  on  a visit,  coming  on  board,  1 J guns;  going  on  shore*,  1 1 guns  and  3 cheers. 

English  ships  to  salute  each  other  in  ports  belonging  to  foreign  powers,  only  7 guns. 

And  if  more  than  one  ship  there,  the  salute  of  the  arriving  ship  to  be  returned  by  the  Commodore  only. 

All  foreign  salutes  to  be  continued  in  the  usual  manner. 

Upon  the  ship’s  arrival  in  port  in  India  or  at  St.  Helena,  to  salute  the  fort  with  9 guns. 

And  the  ship  to  return  the  same  salutes  as  given  by  the  forts  in  India,  at  the  commander’s  going 
on  shore,  or  coming  off'. 

An  Europe  ship  being  saluted  by  a country  vessel,  to  return  2 guns  less. 

N.  B.  These  regulations,  as  far  as  relate  to  the  firing  salutes  at  China,  are  rescinded,  and  no  guns  are 
to  be  fired  there,  unless  by  express  leave  or  order  of  the  supra-cargoes  in  writing. 

OWNER’S  INSTRUCTIONS  RELATIVE  TO  GUNPOWDER. 

" You  are  to  pay  at  every  port  you  anchor  at  belonging  to  the  Company,  one  bairel  of  gunpowder, 
and  take  a receipt  for  the  same;  by  the  neglect  thereof,  several  ships  have  paid  five  guineas  alter  their  ar- 
rival in  England.’^ 

Immediately  on  a ship’s  arrival  in  Bombay  harbour,  the  gunpowder  is  landed,  and  .sent  to  the  Company’s 
magazine,  where  it  is  dried,  and  repacked,  if  nccessaiy.  The  charges  attending  the  landing,  drying,  reship- 
ping,  &c.  «re  considerable,  seldom  amounting  to  less  than  150  rupees  each  ship. 


2J2  * BOMBAY, 

ItEGUI^TIONS  RELATIVE  TO  GUNPOWDER. 

I.  That  all  powder  on  private  account  will  in  future  be  received  at  the  magazine  at  Mazagon^  and 
at  no  otliCT  place. 

II.  That  application  for  receipt  or  delivery  must  be  made  at  the  office  of  the  commissary  of  stores, 
at  least  twelve  hours  beforehand. 

III.  Magazine  hours  from  8 in  the  morning  till  4 in  the  afternoon,  every  day,  Sundays 

IV.  None  can  I)e  admitted  except  in  complete  and  unexceptionable  packages,  perfectly  free  from  iron, 
and  not  covered.  Where  any  are  tendered  whieh  the  commissary  or  his  people  may  think  objectionable, 
lie  has  orders  to  substitute  proper  barrels,  which  will  be  charged  to  the  owmers. 

V.  As  the  magazine  is  infested  with  white  ants,  it  is  recommended  to  such  as  may  have  powder  to  lodge, 
to  provide  themselves  with  teak-wood  barrels,  or  boxes.  The  Company  cannot  be  at  any  charge  on  account 
of  the  damage  thus’ occasioned;  and  whenever  it  occurs,  the  commissary  will  substitute  teak-wood  barrels, 
which  will  be  charged  to  the  owners;  and  similarly  in  all  cases  where,  from  decay,  or  other  causes,  the 
packages  may  become  objertionnblp 

OWNERS'  ALLOWANCES. 

The  owners  of  the  regular  ships  In  the  Company's  service  usually  make  the  following  allowances : 

Commander  and  Purser  during  the  ship’s  stay  in  rupees  per  day. 

Tabic  homeward  for  commander  and  officers,  <£^50,  ditto. 

60  bags  paddy,  which  are  considered  equal  to  10  quarters  of  grain  for  homeward  use. 

Godown  rent  for  ship’s  stores,  water  casks,  provisions,  &c.  about  50  rupees  per  month. 

Presents  to  Dubash  for  his  attendance,  procuring  provisions,* &c.^..vfrom  .500  to  1000  rupees. 

Daily  allowance  to  officers'  table  on  board,  a quarter  of  mutton,  vegetables,  and  bread,  amounting 
to  about  2 rupees  per  day. 

By  a clause  in  the  charter  party,  the  Company  is  to  supply  for  the  use  of  the  ship  during  her  stay  in 
India,  to  be  coinputed  from  the  delivery  of  her  dispatches  from  Europe,  at  the  rate  of  £200  per  month, 
the  exchange  at  Bombay  is  fixed  at  28.  3d.  per  rupee,  whieh  is  1777  3 10  Rupees. 

SEAMEN’S  WAGES,  &c. 

In  the  event  of  being  ol)liged  to  sliii)  lascars  in  lieu  of  seamen  pressed  into  His  Majesty's  service, 
their  pay  is  as  follow^s,  which  is  paid  at  the  presidency  six  months  in  advance,  viz^ 

1 serang,  6 months  at  30  rupees  per  month  180 

1 tiudal,  ditto  20  ditto  120 

1.5  lascars,  ditto  cach'»«12  ditto  1080 

Batta  money  to  be  repaid  in  England  w ithout  interest  350 

Forming  a total  expence  Rupees  1730 

The  practice  of  paying  so  much  wages  in  advance,  may  be  considered  the  cause  of  so  many  firey 
occurring  amongst  the  Bombay  shipping,  as  there  is  reason  to  beligve  they  are  often  intentional. 

Lascars  are  likewise  employed  in  the  monsoon  to  assist  in  working  the  ship  out;  their  pay  is  as  follows: 
serang  250  reas  per  day;  tindal  175  reus  per  day;  and  each  lascar  125  reas.  A country  boat  is  also  occa* 
gionally  employed  in  lieu  of  the  ships’  boat.s,  for  carrying  off  provisions,  &c.  at  2 rupees  per  day. 


ISOMBAY^ 


BOAT  AND  COOLEY  HIRK 


The  sliip's  long  boat  Is  generally  employed  in  landing  tho  investmenfe  of  the  coniinander  and  ofliccr>, 
and  in  carrying  off  stores,  water,  &c.  The  charges  for  cooloy  hin*  are 

1 sling  and  men  for  carrying  a butt  of  beer,  or  pipe  of  wine^.Rupecs  1 0 0 
1 hogshead  or  a chest  of  wine  0 2 0 


Hoisting  from  the  boat  upon  the  wharf  at  the  bumler,  per  butt  ....  0 1 0 


For  carrying  dead  weiglit,  4 annas  per  candy;  1 anna  per  candy  for  hoisting;  and  2 annas  per  candy 
for  weighing.  For  cases  and  other  packages,  according  to  w eight  and  dimensions. 


FREIGHT  FROM  BOMBAY  TO  CHINA. 

Regulations  of  the  Court  of  Directors  for  loading  the  Company  s Ships  from  Bombay  to  China^  Madras  to  China  ^ 

Bengal  to  China^  and  from  Port  to  Pori  in  India, 

I.  It  IS  determined  that  in  most  cases  cotton  shall  be  sent  on  the  Company's  account  from  Bombay, 
Madras,  and  Bengal,  to  China,  to  the  extent  of  three-titlths  of  the  whole  tonnage,  builder's  measurement, 
without  reckoning  as  part  of  the  tonnage  the  kentledge,  and  1. 50  tons  of  dead  weight,  which  may  be 
laden  in  England  ; and  that  the  remainder  of  the  tonnage  tlie  ship  may  be  capable  of  conveying,  shall  be 
allowed  to  the  commander  and  officers,  on  their  entering  into  the  usual  bonds  to  guurante(‘  the  Companr 
against  any  claims  their  owners  may  make  for  the  port  to  port  Ihiight  of  such  tonnage,  and  on  their  un- 
dertaking that  the  Company  shall  not  be  subjected  to  any  expcncc  whatever,  whether  for  screwing  tlie 
Company's  cotton,  or  otherwise. 

II.  If  at  any  period  the  Company  shall  have  a larger  quantity  of  eotton  than  the  tonnage  reserved 
for  their  own  use  will  stow,  and  may  not  otherwise  have  occasion  for,  the  Government  may  dispose  of 
the  same  to  the  commanders  and  officers  at  prime  cost. 

III.  In  the  event  of  the  trade  being  relinquished  by  the  Company  for  a season,  the  tonnage  reser\Td, 
as  before  mentioned  for  the  Company,  is  to  be  disposed  of  to  the  best  bidder,  at  a specific  rate  per  ton  of 
-50  cubical  feet,  after  the  ship’s  arrival  at  Bombay,  Madras,  or  Bengal,  giving  due  notice  of  such  deti  r- 
mination,  and  of  the  period  fixed  for  receiving  proposals  in  writing  lor  the  letting  of  the  same ; and  if  the 
commander  and  officers  offer  at  a rate  per  ton  equal  to  the  highest  bidder,  tJic  preference  is  always  to  be 
given  to  them,  but  they  are  to  deliver  their  proposals  at  the  same  time  w itii  the  other  tenderers,  and  are 
not  to  be  allowed  to  amend  their  tender  after  their  proposals  have  been  signed. 

IV.  If  the  Company's  proportion  of  the  tonnage  should  be  disposed  of  to  the  commanders  and  officers, 
it  must  be  under  a condition  that  the  freight,  together  with  the  proceeds  of  the  cotton,  shall  be  paid  into 
the  Canton  treasury,  for  the  latter  of  w hich  hills  on  England  w ill  be  granted,  at  the  ciiriTiit  rate  of  ex- 
change;  and  this  condition  is  also  to  extend  to  the  proceeds  of  the  regular  privilege  of  the  commanders. 

V.  That  in  voyages  from  one  Presidency  to  another  in  India,  if  the  Governor  and  Council  hav« 
nothing,  or  only  a proportion  of  her  free  tonnage  to  let,  t!ie  commander  shall  have  a fair  and  reasonable 
preference  given  him  to  occupy  it,  and  that  no  person  whatever  shall  Iiave  it  on  the  same,  or  lower  terms; 
or  in  the  event  of  the  commander  paying  the  ship’s  demurrage,  from  the  beginning  of  lier  lading,  to  the 
delivery  of  the  cargo,  at  each  consigned  port,  he  shall  have  the  option  to  occupy  the  ship  on  such  terms, 
if  the  Company  do  not  provide  a cargo,  or  on  ills  paying  such  proportion  of  the  demurrage  as  lie  may  occupy 
of  the  outward  tonnage  she  is  engaged  for. 

VI.  In  all  cases  the  commander  is  to  exonerate  the  Company  from  all  claims  of  the  owners,  in  re- 
spect of  the  outward  tonnage,  or  any  part  thereof  so  occupied. 

VII.  Proper  covenants  are  to  be  entered  into  at  the  Presidency  where  the  ship  lades,  for  the  payment 
of  the  demurrage  that  may  be  due  at  the  consigned  port, 

Hh 


!934 


BOMBAY. 


^ European  Houses  of  Agbncv. 

Bruce,  Fawcett,  and  Co.  John  Leckie. 

Forbes  and  Co.  S.  Beaufort. 

Shotton  and  Co. 

Wine  Merchants  and  Shopkeepers. 

Baxter,  Son,  and  Co.  I Wooller  and  Co. 

John  Mitchell,  and  Co.  ) R,  McLean  and  Co 

Portuguese  Merchants  and  Agents. 

Joseph  Pereira,  and  Co.  I R.  D.  Faria. 

De  Souza  and  Co.  { 


Armenian  Merchants  and  Agents. 


Joseph  Arratoon. 

Martyrus  Sarkies. 

Martjrus  ter  Stephens. 

Gregory  Johannes. 

Persee  Merchants. 

Pestonjee  Bomanjee. 

Bhickajee  Meijee. 

Hormuzjee  Bomanjee. 

Dadabhoy  Cowasjee. 

Dhunjeebhoy  Sorabjee. 

Framjee  Cowasjee. 

Nasserwanjee  Monackjec. 

Pestonjee  Rustomjee. 

Framjee  Nanabhoy. 

Bomanjee  Nasserwanjee. 

Cursetjee  Monackjce, 

Cursetjee  Ardaseer. 

Burjorjee  Dorabjee 

Jaliangeer  Ardaseer. 

Muncheijee  Nowrojee. 

Sunker  Sinoy. 

Hindoo  Merchants. 

Kcssoordass  Runsordass. 

Narondass  FulsJdass. 

Vituldass  Kessowram. 

Duckmichund  Poonjaraz* 

Madowdass  Hamdass. 

Kessowjee  Shamjee. 

Sunkersett  Baboolsett. 

Purshoram  Bhowan. 

Dhackjee  Dadajee. 

Yirzlall  Tulsidass. 

Ragoonath  Dadajee. 

Purmanaun  Ragoonathdass. 

Tricumdass  Lalldass. 

Soorasir  Dunasir 

Ramckunder  Sunker  Seny.  1 

MuSSCIJfAN  MERCliA»T8t 

Noorbhoy  Nathabhoy.  i 

Shaik  Tyab  Rossu^ee. 

MuUuckjce  Cassimjee.  | 

Hyder  Alley  Cossimjee. 

China  Agents. 

Hormusjec  Dorabjee.  1 

Eduljee  Cowasjee. 

Ship  Builders. 

Jamsettjee  Bomanjee, 

Nowrojee  Jamsettjee. 

Rustomjee  Manockjee. 

I^owjee  Framjee. 

Ruttonjee  Bomanjee. 

Cursetjee  Rustomjee. 

BOMBAY; 


m 


RATES  OF  COMMISSION. 


I.  On  the  sale  or  purchase  of  goods  of  all  denominations,  except  the  following  5 per  cent. 

II.  On  the  sale  or  purchase  of  ships,  houses,  and  lands  2[  ditto. 

III.  On  the  sale  or  purchase  of  diamonds,  pearls,  and  every  description  of  jewellery  21  ditto. 

IV.  On  the  sale  or  [)urchase  of  treasure,  or  bullion  1 ditto. 

V.  On  goods  consigned  for  sale,  and  afterwards  withdrawn  Half  commission. 

VI.  On  procuring  freight,  whether  to  Europe  or  elsewhere  5 ditto. 

VII.  On  shipping  for  Europe  or  elsewliere,  bale  or  gruff  goods  of  every  desci  ijitioii  21  ditto. 

VIII.  On  shipping  for  Europe  or  elsewhere,  diamonds,  pearls,  jewellery,  or  bullion  1 ditto. 

IX.  On  ship’s  disbursements,  when  no  commission  has  been  previously  charged  on 


freight  or  cargo 

X.  On  effecting  in 


J In  the  insurance  office 
‘ I By  private  underwriters 


VT  r»  ..!•  • 1 f With  the  office  

XI.  On  settling  insurance  losses 

I With  private  underwriters, 

XIT.  On  del  credere^  or  guaranteeing  the  responsibility  of  persons  to  whom  goods  are 
sold,  on  the  amount  sale 

XIII.  On  the  sale  or  purchase  of  cattle  of  every  description,., 

XIV.  On  collecting  house  rent 

XV.  On  effecting  remittances  by  bills  of  exchange 


XYI.  On  the  sale  or  purchase  of  public  or  private  bills  and  Company’s  papiT 
XVII.  On  exchanging  one  description  of  Company’s  paper  for  another,  on  invest- 
ing  money  in  the  public  loans,  and  on  transferring  (lovernment  securities  from 


2\  ditto. 

[ ditto. 
1 ditto. 


[ ditto. 
1 ditto. 

i ditto. 
5 ditto. 
2[  ditto. 
1 ditto, 
\ ditto. 


one  constituent  to  another , 


V,  \ ditto. 


XVIII.  On  public  or  private  securities,  jewels,  or  other  valuables  lodged,  and  after- 


wards withdrawn  before  the  amount  is  realized 


Half  commission. 


XIX.  On  procuring  money  on  Respondentia,  payable  in  Eurojie,  India,  or  elsewhere  2 ditto. 
XX  On  recovery  of  bonds  or  bills  for  persons  returned  to  Europe,  over  due  at  the 


time  of  their  departure 


XXL  On  procuring  loans  of  money,  exclusive  of  the  commission  on  llie  receipt  of  casli 
XXII.  On  debts,  where  a process  at  law  or  arbitration  is  necessary, 
and  if  recovered  through  such  means 
XXIII.  On  managing  the  affairs  of  an  estate  for  an  executor  or  administrator,  on 


the  amount  recovered^ 


XXIV.  On  guaranteeing  bills  or  bonds  by  indorsement  or  otherwise 

XXV.  On  attending  the  delivery  of  contract  goods  to  the  Company  . 

XXVI.  On  the  receipt  and  payment  of  all  monies  not  arisingfrom  the  proceeds  of  goods 
on  which  commission  has  already  been  chai’ged,  (or  \ per  cent  on  receiving,  and 
i per  cent,  on  paying,  at  the  option  of  the  agent),  independently  of  any  charge 
that  may  become  requisite  through  the  necessity  of  employing  agents  elsewhere 

XXVII.  Where  the  debtor  side  of  the  account  exceeds  the  creditor  side  by  advances 
made,  the  agent  to  have  the  option  of  charging  his  commission  upon  the  total  of 
either;  and  the  balance  of  interest  carried  forward  to  the  account  of  the  euiTent 
year,  to  be  considered  as  money  paid  or  received,  and  chargeable  accordingly  «% 

Hh2 


2 ditto. 
1 ditto. 
2\  ditto. 
.5  ditto. 

5 ditto. 
2[  ditto. 
1 ditto. 


1 ditto. 


1 ditto. 


^^30 


BOMBAY. 


XXVIII.  When  the  balance  of  an  account  due  by  the  constituent  is  brought  forward 
from  an  account  of  the  preceding  year,  and  not  paid  in  the  course  of  the  succeed- 
ing one,  commission  may  be  charged  thereon,  or  upon  the  residue  that  may  be 
unpaid:  the  agent  in  the  latter  case  to  have  the  option  of  charging  his  commis- 
sion upon  the  residue,  or  upon  the  sums  received  towards  the  discharge  of  the 
original  balance  due  at  the  commencement  of  the  year  1 per  cent 

RATES  OF  COMMISSION  ON  SALES. 

In  the  event  of  the  whole  of  an  investment  not  being  dis|>osed  of  by  private  sale,  the  remainder  is  sent 
to  auction,  or  to  a conunission  warehouse  for  sale,  of  which  there  are  several  in  tlie  settlement,  where 
every  attention  is  paid  to  the  lotting  and  arranging  the  property,  and  the  value  guaranteed  on  the  follow- 
ing terms,  rw. 

On  Private  Sales.— A commission  of  5 per  cent,  on  what  is  sold ; 1 per  cent,  for  goods  sold  by  the 
proprietor  after  having  been  deposited  for  sale  in  the  warehouse,  but  no  charge  will  be  made  for  goods 
returned  unsold. 

On  Public  S\lks.— A commission  of  5 per  cent,  on  all  goods  and  furniture,  advertisements,  andcooley 
hire  not  included ; the  amount  sales  payable  at  one  month  from  the  *lny  of  the  sale,  or  before,  if  required,, 
on  deducting  the  usual  iiitcrcst  of  tliree  quarters  per  cent-  per  month. 

On  Private  or  Public  Salks. — On  liorses,  carriages,  or  any  other  article,  when  sold  from  500  to 
1000  rupees,  2 per  cent,  from  1000  to  5000  one  per  cent. 

Houses,  land,  or  ships,  one  half  per  cent,  payable  on  receipt  agreeable  to  the  terms  of  sale. 

Articles  exposed  for  public  sale,  and  bought  in  on  account  of  the  proprietor,  one  per  cent,  unless  left 
to  be  sold  to  the  highest  bidder  at  the  next  public  sale,  in  which  case  no  charge  will  be  made  for  their 
having  been  bought  in  at  the  first  sale. 

INSURANCE  COMPANIES. 


There  is  only  one  Insurance  Office  at  B<jmbay,  the  Bombay  Insurance  Society.  The  Proprietary  iy 
divided  into  100  shares  of  20,000  rupees  each,  fonning  a capital  of  20  lacs  of  rupees;  one  half  in  Com- 
pany’s paper,  and  the  otlier  half  in  personal  bonds ; but  there  are  many  private  undei*writers  in  Bombay, 
who  insure  separately  dn  ships. 

It  appears  from  a document  framed  in  the  Insurance  Office,  that  the  rate  of  premium  from  Bombay  io 
China,  and  from  China  to  Bombay,  from  1798  to  1805,  fluctuated  between  12,  10,  9,  and  8 per  cent, 
but  during  the  period  from  1805  to  1808  inclusive,  whilst  under  the  command  of  Vice-Admiral  Sir  Edward 
Pellew,  it  stood  at  8 per  cent,  with  a return  of  3 per  cent,  if  sailing  with  convoy,  and  at  5 per  cent,  war- 
tanted  with  convoy,  and  that 

The  amount  of  property  insured  at  Bombay,  from  the  1st  May,  1800, 

to  31st  October,  1808,  amounted  to  5,37,00,000 

The  premiums  paid  by  the  trade  on  that  sum  amounted  35,61,000 

The  losses  by  captures  during  the  same  period  amounted  to  4,93,000 

The  losses  by  sea  risk.s  ditto  5,52,000 

The  profits  to  the  underwriters  ditto  25,15,000 


The  losses  by  captures  were  under  one  per  cent,  on  the  principal  insured,  and  were  exceeded  by  those 
arising  from  sea  risk;  whilst  the  former  occurred  in  consequence  of  a departure  from  the  regular  system  of 
convoy  laid  down  by  Sir  Edwoid  Pellew,  and  by  which  the  coounercc  of  the  western  division  of  India 
has  been  so  extensively  benefited. 


BOMBAY. 


837 


BATES  OF  FREIGHT  FROM  BOMBAY  TO  CHINA. 

Mother  o’penrl  shells,  per  Surat  candy  20  rupees. 
Elephants’  teeth  20  ditto. 

Sharks’  fins<..<..«^«^per  halo  ol’G^  cwt.^^  ‘23  ditto. 

Cornelians  per  hlul  30  ditto. 

False  Amber  ^vv^^vper  chest  35  ditto. 

Rose  Maloes  ^^^v^^pei  Cask.  3.5  ditto. 

The  above  rates  of  freight  are  considered  extremely  low;  they  fluctuate  every  season,  and  soineti  nes 
are  very  high.  Cotton,  which  is  considered  the  staple  commodity,  lias  been  as  high  ns  80  rupees  per  randy; 
consequently  every  other  article  advanced  in  jiroportion.  3'lie  usual  rate  oi*  exchange  is  300  Jloinbay 
rupees  for  100  Spanish  dollars,  payable  30  days  after  the  ship’s  arrival  in  China. 

In  the  delivery  of  cotton  upon  freight  at  China,  2j  per  cent,  is  allowed  for  waste,  and  the  deduction 
for  tare  varies  from  17  to  20  lbs.  per  bale. 

List  of  Merchant  Ships  belonging  to,  or  sailing  out  of  the  Pori  of  Boinhay^  with  the  N^a^ncs  of  the  Places 
where  built  and  tvhai,  a7id  Tonnage,  January  1st  1811. 


Colton,  per  Surat  candy  rupeeSi 

Sandal  wood  ditto. 

Olibanum  23  ditto. 

1 utcbock  ditto. 

Alyi  rh  ditto. 

Assafoetida  ditto. 


Namcii. 

Tons. 

Where  built. 

When. 

To  whom  belonging 

Lowjee  Family 

. 926 

Bomhay 

. 1791 

Forbes  and  Co. 

1 1 pt 0 n C as tl  e 

675 

Bombay 

179.3 

Fol  lies  and  Co. 

ot 

672 

Bnmhny n -k  1 

1 803 

Forbes  and  (’o. 

Thomas  Henchman 

600 

C a Ic  u 1 1 a%-%%.  %%., 

1S08 

Forbes  and  Co, 

Anna 

899 

Bombay 

1790 

Bruce,  Fawcett.,  and  Co» 

Alysorc 

777 

1 egu«/%%«'%^/«/v*-v'%%«‘%^^«^ 

1795 

Bruce,  F’awcctt,  and  ('o. 

Castlereagli 

750 

C/orhin 

1803 

Bruce,  Fawcett,  and  Co. 

\^ariina 

700 

Calcutta%^v%v%v%%%%^vi 

Bruce,  Fawcett,  and  C-o. 

C ambrian 

670 

Bomhay 

1803 

Bruce,  Fawcett,  and  Co. 

F ame 

700 

rlolin  Favin. 

Sibbald 

6i3 

Bom  hay  .. 

1803 

George  Harrower  and  Co. 

F^ugcnia 

350 

('Oeliin 

1807 

(ieorge  Harrower  and  Co, 

Shah  Byramgorc 

560 

jC.  alcutta«.%««/.%%%%^^%^ 

1800 

Briscoe  and  Beaufort. 

Adventure 

200 

j Alula  har%^v%%%^^%^«.%^'v 

Briscoe  and  Beaufort. 

IVL  At  y 

450 

Rangoon 

1800 

Thomas  Basden. 

Sultana 

300 

Java 

1806 

John  Pringle. 

1 n d h ana 

800 

Dumaun 

1808 

De  Souza  and  Co. 

Alinerva 

9.58 

Duniaun  xxxx.vxxxxxxx 

1790 

Ardaseer  Dady. 

Friendship 

872 

Dumaun  xx^^w..vxx 

1791 

Ardaseer  Dady. 

Alilfbrd 

679 

Bombay 

1786 

Pestonjec  Bomanjee. 

G unj  a vEv^*.^  v» 

680 

PcgUw.x^.i..^^..^xx 

1788 

Frainjee  Nanahhoy. 

Sulimany 

679 

Dumaun 

1799 

Framjee  Cowasjee. 

Cornwallis 

653 

Surat  xxxxxxxxxxxxxxxx 

1790 

Nasserwaniee  Monackiee. 

Bombay  Merchant 

4s39 

Dumaun  xxxxxxxx^.^ 

1801 

W 

Nasserwanjee  Moiiackjee. 

Alexander 

600 

Bombay  xxxxxxxxxxvxxx 

1802 

Dhunjeehhoy  Sorahjee. 

utteh  Khir 

300 

U ncertainxxxxvxxxxxxx 

Sciad  Tuckey. 

Duncan 

400 

Bcypourxxxxxxxxxxxxxx 

1803 

Hormuzjee  Bomanjee. 

Dadahaloy 

400 

Cochin  XXXXXXXXXXX/XXX 

Muncherjee  Jamsetjee. 

Colonel  Macaukywi^.vw.w...^ 

261 

AJipee^w«».— 

1807  i 

Arathoun  and  Stephens. 

Total  29  ships 

17593 

Tons. 

f38 


BOMBAY. 


COMPANY’S  IMPORTS  FROM  EUROPE. 

An  account  shewing  the  invoice  amount  of  all  goods,  stores,  and  bullion  imported  into  Bombay  by 
tlio  East  India  Company,  from  1792-3  to  1808-9  inclusive;  likewise  an  account  of  the  sums  received  at 
Bombay  for  sales  of  import  goods  and  stores  during  the  same  period ; also  the  quantity  remaining  in  the 
ivarehouses  at  the  end  of  each  year. 


AMOUNT  KXPOKTKD. 

Sums  received 

Invoice  Amount  of 

Y oars. 

Good',  and  Stores. 

Bullion. 

Tola! 

for  Sales. 

Guodb  on  Hand. 

£ 

£ 

£ 

£ 

£ 

1792-^3 

144,702 

- — - 

144,762 

1(‘9,365 

1793-4 

138,860 



138,866 

125,092 

1794-.'> 

60,182 

■ 

60,162 

1 12,009 

1795-« 

226,374 



226,374 

91,103 

179ti-7 

216,834 

256,377 

— 

216,8.34 

94,445 

126,115 

1797-8 

42,047 

298,424 

242,930 

17,960 

1798-9 

291,294 

504,564 

795,858 

186,493 

160,262 

183,104 

1799-0 

203,881 

100,697 

304,578 

256,444 

18(X)-1 

293,262 

131,366 

424,628 

187,392 

202,586 

1801-2 

364,824 

864,824 

100,303 

230,323 

1802-.3 

327,115 

101,478 

428,593 

222,380 

6,878 

1803-4 

222,150 

222,150 

326,152 

226,792 

469,110 

1804-5 

125,359 

200,793 

261,099 

396,916 

335,112 

1805-G 

318,775 

318,775 

276,251 

180G-7 

454,061 

464,061 

273,103 

250,280 

1807-8 

271,480 

271,480 

270,447  ’ 

128,168 

1808-9 

307,699 

307,599 

407,159 

153,920 

4,223,175 

l,080',94.'i 

5,304,120 

3,442,897 

Of  the  Company’s  imports  into  Bombay,  a considerable  part  consists  of  woollens.  In  1799-1800 
their  amount  was  i?90,865.  Of  broad  cloths,  the  under-mentioned  are  the  sorts  imported. 


Red,  stop  list. 

Red,  white  list. 

Yellow,  striped  list. 
Mazarine  blue,  white  list. 
Grass  green,  striped  list. 
Emerald  green,  striped  list. 
Aurora,  striped  list. 
Popinjay,  striped  list. 


French  yellow,  striped  list. 
French  green,  ditto. 

Aurora,  white  list. 

Scarlet,  striped  list. 

Telcmot  yellow,  striped  list. 
Scarlet,  fine. 

Yellow,  fine. 

Emerald  green,  fine. 


Mazarine  blue,  fine. 
Black,  fine. 

Scarlet,  superfine. 
Mazarine  blue,  ditto. 
Yellow,  ditto. 
Emerald  green,  ditto 
Grass  green,  ditto. 
Whitened,  ditto. 


Of  other  British  manufactures,  the  following  are  imported,  but  in  smaller  quantities : 


Red  long  ells. 

Scarlet  ditto. 
Emerald  green  ditto. 
Mazarine  blue  ditto. 
Black  ditto. 

Yellow  ditto. 


Cassimere  cloth. 
Salisbury  flannels. 
Embossed  ditto. 
Ditto  cloth. 

Ditto,  long  ells« 
Shalloons. 


Horse  cloth. 

Plush. 

Mock  cassimere. 
Saddle  cloth. 

Double  coloured  cloth. 
Europe  shawls. 


BOMDAY, 


m 

Of  fine  cloths,  which  are  for  the  use  of  Europeans,  the  quantity  is  small.  The  coarse  cloths  are  appro- 
priated to  clothing  for  the  army;  and  such  as  are  sold  to  foreigners  arc  almost  entirely  of  llie  interior  soils, 
and  used  for  the  same  purpose.  The  (’ompany  at  certain  periods  dispose  of  such  woollens  and  other  iin- 
ports  as  remain  in  their  warehouses  by  public  auction:  and  lh(*y  endeavour  to  make  their  indents  without 
much  variation,  under  the  impression  that  an  iinifuriii  demand  is  more  benetii  ial  to  the  inanufaclurers  than 
uncertain  and  unequal  exertions. 

Of  the  commodities  usually  denominated  staples,  the  Company  imported  in  1799-1800, 


Iron,  to  the  amount  of  2,501  Naval  and  garrison  l.j 

Steel  3,197  Pitch,  tar,  deals,  &c. 


Copper  6,526  I Lend  j,09r 

By  the  foregoing  statement  it  appears  that  the  invoice  amount  of  the  goods  imported  into  Homhay, 
including  a charge  of  10  per  cent,  added  to  the  prime  cost,  to  cover  contingent  expcnccs,  such  as  IVc  igld, 
insurance,  interest  of  money,  &c.  in  17  years  amounted  to 

That  the  sum  received  for  goods  sold  during  the  same  period  was  .P3, 112,897 

That  there  remained  in  the  warehouses,  1808-9,  as  stated  at  the  invoice  amount,..  153,920 
The  value  of  goods  on  the  Henry  Addington  lost  1798-9,  is  stated  ut  29,222 

D 1 1 Hmdostan  lost  1802—3,  ditto  37,i;io 

.Vdd.ns 

Leaving  a deficiency  in  17  years  oL  i^5.59,997 

Tliere  is  great  difficulty  in  making  up  a correct  statement,  from  the  impracticahility  of  ascertaining  w itii 
precision  the  final  disposal  of  military  and  marine  stores,  wdnch  form  a very  material  pari  of  the  Company's 
imports  into  Bombay.  On  the  arrival  of  the  consignments,  the  cargoes  of  ships  are  distributed  to  the  de- 
partments to  wdiich  they  respectively  belong:  the  goods  for  use  and  sale,  to  the  commercial;  and  the  stores, 
to  the  military  or  marine  departments.  In  the  above  account  of  sales  is  comprised  the  ex|)enditure  of 
the  stores,  in  so  far  as  the  amount  of  such  expenditure  lias  been  included  in  the  charges  at  the  Presidency. 
A portion  of  the  stores,  consisting  of  guns  for  garrisons,  arms,  and  accoutrements,  falls  into  the  dead 
stock,  and  a portion  into  the  quick  stock;  but  from  being  blended  with  the  stores  purchased  in  the 
country,  and  not  distinguished  in  the  accounts,  it  is  impossible  to  make  the  sejiarutioii  so  accurately  as 
is  desirable. 

It  appears  that  the  value  of  stores  at  this  Presidency,  commonly  called  (juick  stock,  was  in  1792 
^176,127,  and  that  in  1809  it  hod  increased  to  •P440, 21 2,  making  a difference  of  i?2Gl*,085.  What  pro- 
portion of  these  is  European,  cannot  be  stated,  but  may  be  assumed  as  two  thirds,  whicli  is  .Pi 98,093. 

The  short  deliveries,  and  damages,  which  are  chargeable  to  the  owners  of  the  ship's  on  which  the  con- 
signments were  made,  are  deducted  from  the  freight  on  settling  the  ship’s  accounts  in  England,  subject  to 
an  additional  charge  of  30  per  cent,  on  the  invoice  amount,  agreeably  to  the  terms  of  the  charter  pai  ty. 
This  may  be  considered  equal  to  5 per  cent,  on  the  amount  of  i?4,223,175,  which  is  ^211,158. 

The  trade  in  woollens,  of  which,  during  the  above  period  of  17  years,  tliere  have  been  inqiorlcd  by  the 
Company  to  the  amount  of  ^1,357,290,  has  generally  been  curried  on  at  a loss,  notwithsluiKling  every 
effort  has  been  used  to  extend  the  sale  throughout  their  dominions,  and  other  parts  of  India  and  Persia. 
In  some  years  upwards  of  20  per  cent.  loss  has  been  incuiTcd,  and  in  very  few  instances  has  any  pi-otit 
been  derived : we  may  therefore  suppose  a loss  of  5 per  cent,  on  the  above  PI, 3.57, 290,  which  is  P195,729, 
all  of  wliich  being  deducted  from  the  above  deficiency  of  P559,997,  leaves  a balance  unaccounted  Ibr  in 
17  years  of  P15,047. 


2W 


BOMBAY. 


COMPANY’S  EXPORTS  TO  EUROPE. 


The  following  Is  an  account  • of  the  prime  cost  of  goods  exported  from  Bombay  to  Europe  by  the 
Company,  together  with  the  commercial  charges  thereon,  from  the  years  179C-3  to  1808-9  inclusive. 


Years. 

Prime  Cost 

Charges. 

To*al. 

Rupees. 

Rupees. 

Rupees. 

179‘.:-3 

8,6.1,869 

99,000 

9,62,869 

1793-4 

17,51,617  ■ 

89,029 

18,40,666 

\194-5 

13,09,355 

1,42,504 

14,51,859 

179.5-6 

15,29,437 

1,62,188 

16,91,82.5 

179(>-7 

10,27,304 

75,687 

11,02,991 

30,93,125 

1,28,178 

32,21,303 

■ ’159 

10,88,111 

1,23,531 

12,11,642 

2'2,51,9.W 

94,748 

23,46,688 

18(X>-I 

— i 

1,0.>,419 

1,05,419 

1801-2 

36,78,0.19 

1,25,783 

38,03,822 

isoc-a 

1,72,721 

95,308 

2,68,029 

1803-4 

56,297 

1 lo  007 

1,68,524 

1804-5 

19,78,452 

1,28,570 

21,07,022 

1805-6 

14,29,572 

1,23,487 

15,53,039 

1806-7 

7,76,4.50 

1,62,657 

9,39,107 

1807-8 

1.1,41,006 

1,. 16,445 

14,77,451 

1808-9 

9,87,291 

1,02,709 

10,9(3,002 

Total. 

mmmm 

20,67,676 

253,42,278 

The  Company’s  exports  consist  of  sugar  and  saltpetre  sent  round  from  Bengal  as  dead  weight  for  their 
ships.  Pepper,  piece-goods,  and  occasionally  Mocha  coffee,  individuals  are  permitted  to  trade  in;  but 
are  prohibited  from  saltpetre.  The  charges  comprise  the  salaries  and  allowances  of  a description 
strictly  commercial,  with  those  of  the  factories  where  the  investments  are  provided;  also  the  charges  of 
the  departments  where  the  goods  imported  from  England  are  deposited  and  sold.  From  the  foregoing 
statements  it  ajipears  that  the 

Value  of  goods  and  stores  imported  into  Bombay  from  England  hy  the  East  India 

Company  in  the  years  179‘2-3  to  1808-9  inclusive  was  — ^4,233,175 
Value  of  goods  exported  during  the  same  period.  Rupees  233,42,278  at  28.  3d.  each^^  2,851,000 


Imports  exceed  the  exports 

Treasure  imported  into  Bombay  from  England  during  the  above  period  1,080,945 


Balance  against  Bombay 


^301,224 


From  the  foregoing  statements  it  appears  that  in  the  years  1802  to  1806  inclusive,  the  commerce  carried 
on  by  the  East  India  Company  and  individuals,  from  London  to  Bombay  and  Surat,  was  as  foUows, 
estimating  the  Company's  imports  at  the  exchange  of  2s.  6d.  per  Sicca  Rupee,  and  the  exports  at  the  usual 
exchange  of  the  Company,  2s.  3d.  per  Bombay  Rupee. 


IMPORTS.  EXPORTS. 


Company 

Individuals..^^ 

Merchandi.se 

Treaiiure. 

Toul. 

Merchatidisv. 

Treasure. 

Total. 

Stcc*  Rupees. 

Sicca  Rupees. 

Sicca  Rupees. 

Sicca  Rupees, 

Sicca  Rupees. 

Sicca  Rupees. 

11.5,79,680 

73,04,875 

24,18,168 
23,60,1  <15 

139, 97,848 
96,65,070 

47,75,270 

.33,62,611 

— 

47,75,270 

33,62,611 

i ulal 

47, 78, .36.8 

r236,62,918  1 

81,37,881 

— 

81,37,881 

BOMBAY, 


HECAPITULATION  OF  IMPORTS  AND  EXPORTS 


The  following  is  an  abstract  of  the  merchandise  and  treasure  Iinjxntcd  into,  and  export eJ  iVoni 
Bombay  and  Surat,  including  the  East  India  Company’s,  in  the  ycju  s 1S()2  to  IHOti  inclusive. 


IMrORTS. 

j!,\ruKi.s. 

FROM  WHKNCK. 

Mcrrh.indlM*. 

Treasure. 

Toi.il. 

M.'irli.indee 

'J  M'J.Uie 

I T..I.11. 

Sicca  UiipetN 

Sicca  Rupees. 

.SiCL.i  Rupees 

1 Sic«'a  Rupees, 

.Sici  ii  Rupee, 

.Sic(  a Rupee-1. 

(Company  from  Londoiu^ 

i 15,79, «S() 

ai,iH,i()S 

1;19,97,B1H 

, ir,75.'27() 

•17,7.5, 2/0 

Individuals  from  London 

7,3,01,87.5 

2.3,00,105 

9<!,(»5,()7() 

: 1 1 

— 

.‘«.(i2,lll 

Foreign  Europe 

12,27,170 

20,2.5,10.3 

3!i,5‘^,i;.'{9 

! 2.'>,K(i,911 

— 

2.),H(i,91 1 

America 

2,2.5,700 

1,31,017 

> .5,19,511 

— 

.5,19.511 

Bj  itish 

03,3, .52, 100 

22,04,003 

955,5(>,SS9 

4Sl,48,2(il 

133,12,011 

(;il.({(),905 

Foreign  Asia 

40.5,01,877 

.30(i,. 50,0.52 

Rjl,.'iS,5'i9 

HI.5,10,1H9 

50,33, .5.50 

80.5,13,719 
1 1.592, 18, 17? 

Total^^^v.,  Sic<‘a  Rupees 

HiOl, 9 1.57.1 

“4  (fO, 00,8  IS 

■ iJ(»(i2,91,.«n' ; 

1 ‘114(9,02,283 

183,10,101 

From  the  prec(‘ding  accounts  of  the  commerce  carried  on  at  this  Presidency  liy  the  East  India  (om- 
pany  and  individuals  in  the  years  1802  to  180G  inclu.sive,  it  a[)pears, 

I.  That  the  value  of  merchandise  imported  by  the  East  India  Company  from  London  during  the 
above  period  is  upward.s  of  nine  times  that  of  foreign  Europe,  and  nearly  fifty  times  tliat  ol  the  l-nited 
States  of  America,  and  that  the  amount  of  treasure  imported  by  them  is  about  one  filth  of  that  of 
merchandise. 

II.  That  the  value  of  merchandise  imported  by  individuals  from  London  during  the  above  period  is 

six  times  that  of  all  other  parts  of  Europe,  and  upwards  of  thirty  times  that  ot  the  United  States  o£ 
America,  and  tliat  the  omount  of  treasure  t^y  them  is  nenrly  one  third  ilia t of  merchandise. 

III.  That  the  value  of  merchandise  imported  by  the  East  India  Company  is  about  one  half  more 
than  that  of  individuals,  and  that  the  amount  of  treasure  imported  is  nearly  equal. 

IV.  That  the  value  of  merchandise  imported  from  London  by  the  East  India  (Company  and  Individ 
duals  is  upwards  of  twelve  times  that  of  all  other  parts  of  Europe  and  tlie  United  States  of  America  toge- 
ther,  and  that  the  amount  of  treasure  imported  from  London  is  about  double  that  of  foreign  Europe  and 
America. 

V.  That  the  value  of  merchandise  imported  from  the  Briti.sh  territories  in  India,  and  from  foreign 
Asia,  wliich  is  called  the  Country  Trade,  from  being  carried  on  in  Indian  ships  and  with  Indian  capital,  is 
about  twelve  times  that  of  the  East  India  Company,  nearly  twenty  times  tlwit  of  individuals,  and  a hundred 
limes  that  of  foreign  Europe  and  the  United  States  of  America  together,  and  that  the  treasure  imported  is 
above  five  times  that  of  all  other  parts. 

VI.  That  the  value  of  merchandise  exported  by  the  East  India  Company  to  London  is  nearly  one  half 
more  than  that  of  individuals,  nearly  double  that  of  foreign  Europe,  and  nine  times  that  of  the  United 
States  of  America. 

VII.  That  the  value  of  merchandise  exported  to  London  by  the  East  India  Company  and  individuals 
is  nearly  three  times  that  of  all  other  parts  of  Europe  and  America  togetlier. 

VIII.  That  the  value  oi^ merchandise  exported  to  British  and  foreign  Asia  is  nearly  twenfy-lour 
times  that  of  London,  all  other  parts  of  Europe,  and  the  United  States  of  America  togetlier,  tincl  that  it 
withdraws  from  the  Presidency  two-fifths  of  the  treasure  imported,  tlic  greater  part  of  which  is  taken 
to  other  parts  of  the  Britbh  dominions. 


li 


242 


BOMBAY. 


IIEVENUES  AND  DISBURSEMENTS. 

The  following  is  an  account  of  the  revenues  of  the  East  India  Company  at  the  Presidency  of  Bombay, 
the  charges  and  disbursements  (exclusive  of  commercial  charges),  the  interest  payable  on  the  debt,  the 
deficiency  in  tlic  revenue,  and  the  amount  of  the  debt,  in  each  year,  1792-3  to  180S-9  inclusive. 


Yearn. 

Hoveiiin's. 

Charges. 

Interest  on  Debt. 

Toul  ol  CMv.ugci 
Und  lllt(MC-.t. 

Deftcienty  in 

Uf  venue. 

I Debt. 

£ 

£ 

£ 

£ 

£ 

£ 

J 792-3 

230,555 

739,002 

10.5,094 

814,096 

(>07,541 

1,165,103 

179,3-4 

291,736 

786,691 

120,054 

906,71.5 

(n2,tH)9 

887,682 

1701-5 

.312,480 

747,838 

76,072 

82.3,910 

511,430 

644,065 

179,5-6 

277,590 

734,152 

48,905 

78.3,0.57 

505,461 

769,142 

1700-7 

315,1>37 

894,192 

37,482 

932,391 

616,457 

83.5,619 

1797-8 

338,  J 89 

950,51 1 

47,6.58 

99H,l(i9 

659,980 

890,675 

1798-9 

374,587 

1,223,208 

57,107 

1,280,315 

905,728 

1,136,276 

1799-0 

415.003 

1,494,811 

82,371 

1,577,182 

1,161,519 

1,497,134 

1800-1 

28!),4.57 

1,297,543 

1,3.5,289 

1,4:12,8.32 

1,1 46, .375 

1,913,196 

1801-2 

305,992 

1,201,759 

210,066 

1,414,825 

1,108,8.‘43 

2,405,729 

1802-3 

359,516 

1,220,161 

190,089 

1,410,253 

1,050,707 

2,847,720 

180:i-4 

558,018 

1,652,631 

212,852 

1,89.5,48.3 

1,. 336,835 

3,382,276 

1804-5 

715,5-18 

2,048,487 

289,792 

2, .3.38,279 

1,622,731 

3,814,900 

1805-6 

840.480 

2,455,744 

305,.552 

2,761,296 

1,914,810 

3,704,210 

1806-7 

772,809 

2,166,604 

307,605 

2,474,209 

1,701, .3-k) 

4,038,231 

1807-8 

770,091 

2,059,106 

313,036 

2,372,142 

1,601,451 

4,432,262 

1808-9 

740,276 

1,738,495 

324,319 

2,062,814 

1,322,5.38 

4,127,858 

The  fllllowillg  lire  the  Miuiees  tVnni  whiMice  Ihe 
which  const!  tut  oil  the  charges  in  that  year. 

REVENUES. 

Land «C«127,033 

Customs  1(31,959 

Farms  and  145,(556 

Travancore  Subsidy 5,628 


Total  of  the  revenues  in  1808-9  i:740,276 


cvi-Mitji's  proceeded  for  1808—9,  and  tlie  particulars 


CHARGES. 

Civil  charges  -Pi 47,428 

Rcvenue->-^^.>^^^.>-.^-^^  1 15,319 

^Military  1^246,279 

Marine^ — 1 67,980 
Buildings  and  FortificationSwi.--.v^^v%  61,489 

Total  of  the  charges  in  1808-9  1,738, 495 


The  revenues  of  Bombay,  from  the  limited  extent  of  the  districts  under  its  administration,  are  small 
compared  with  those  of  the  other  Presidencies.  From  the  foregoing  statement  it  appears  that  the  reve- 
nues are  very  inadequate  to  the  expences,  and  that  in  the  period  of  17  years,  1792-3  to  1808-9,  the  dis- 
bursements bave  exceeded  the  revenues  in  the  sum  of  £ 1 8, 1 85, 7 45 

In  the  ten  years  previous,  1782-3  to  1791-2  inclusive,  the  expences  exceeded  the 

revenues  552,85,316  rupees,  which  at  2s.  3d.  sterling,  6,214,605 

• ' 

Forming  a total  deficiency  in  27  years  of  %v>%^^»v%-.%%-,v-^%%%^-»%«*<».v->^.%v%iP24,400,35Q 

The  civil  charges  comprehend  the  salari(»s  of  the  Governor  and  Council,  the  allowances  at  the  Presi- 
dency and  subordinates,  the  jiost-office  and  mint  charges,  pensions  and  charitable  allowances,  likewise  the 
expences  of  the  Recorder’s  Court  and  police  establishment. 

The  revenue  charges  include  the  expences  of  collecting  the  land  revenues,  customs,  &c. 


bo:mbay. 


COMPANY’S  ASSETS. 

The  following  is  an  account  of  the  assets  belonging  to  the  East  Iiulla  Company  at  the  Presidency 
of  Bombay,  on  the  30th  April  in  each  year,  from  179!<J-3  to  1808-9,  specifying  the  particulars  of  which 
they  consisted. 


Debts,  mclu- 

— “ 

Gram  and 
Caiilf. 

Yeats. 

Cubh  and  Bills 

Stores. 

ding  advanci^ 

Kxport  Goods. 

Import  Goods. 

Total. 

for  investment! 

£ 

£ 

£ 

£ 

£ 

£ 

£ 

1793 

209,449 

176,137 

280,060 

151,7.33 

85,111 

— — 

903,480 

1703 

187,298 

116,671 

300,987 

62,238 

52,467 

719,661 

170t 

180,095 

129,372 

396,509 

48,786 

84,332 



8.39,084 

1705 

265,387 

123,517 

87,754 

87,602 

■ ■ ■ 

98.3,895 

1796 

227,045 

110,177 

348,226 

140,982 

59,705 

— 

886,135 

1797 

184,885 

368,556 

349,066 

249,918 

130,039 

38,9  K) 

1,311,104 

1708 

119,911 

349,510 

401,791 

199, .557 

18,518 

2.3,169 

1,202,1.56 

1799 

229,426 

353,342 

411,697 

13.5,959 

16.5,248 

5,233 

1,300,!>04 

1800 

278,780 

302,673 

381,174 

179,958 

1KH,801 

1,015 

1,.392,.300 

1801 

79,797 

281,951 

302,035 

378,305 

208,889 

1,183 

1,152,060 

1802 

138,507 

305,532 

250,254 

103,005 

237,489 

3,898 

1,037,685 

180;i 

116,837 

331,011 

406,997 

1.5,667 

7,092 

1,318 

878,952 

1804 

190,151 

344,492 

546,488 

142,925 

483,705 

79,113 

1,786,903 

1805 

242,621 

368,568 

535,634 

131,927 

409,263 

109,011 

1,797,024 

1806 

456,087 

356,726 

589,730 

140,366 

3 45, .538 

9.918 

1,898,285 

1807 

550,510 

359,343 

601,465 

245,631 

2.58,066 

753 

2,015,788 

1808 

668,367 

403,360 

880,524 

355, d23 

132,1.56 

, 2,388 

2,402,124 

1809 

606,287 

_453,908 

654,669 

260,1 14 

158,708 

1 3,103 

2,135,788 

From  the  foregoing  statements  it  appears  that  the  East  India  Company's  debt  at  this  Presidency 
in  1809  amounted  to 

That  the  amount  of  assets  as  above,  was  at  the  same  period  2,135,788 

^ he  debt  exceeds  the  1 ,99)w,07Q 


The  Company  are  possessed  of  property  to  a consideraldc  amount  at  this  Presidency,  wliieli,  from 
not  being  considered  as  immediately  available,  is  not  inserted  in  the  above  account.  This  property  consists 
of  plate,  household  furniture,  guns  on  the  ramparts,  arms,  and  some  descriptions  of  military  stores. 
Buildings  might  also  be  mentioned,  but  the  cost  of  them  is  supposed  to  liave  been  included  in  the 
charges.  These  several  articles,  with  the  doubtful  debts  of  the  Company,  arc  carried  into  an  account 
termed  Dead  Stock. 

By  the  Company’s  annual  accounts  drawn  up  to  Marcli,  IRIO,  it  appears  that  the  sum  expended  on 
buildings  and  fortifications,  for  the  acquisition  and  maintenance  of  their  possessions,  and  the  estimated 
value  of  other  articles  of  dead  stock  at  this  Presidency,  is  as  follows: 

Buildings  and  fortifications  i?l, 125,003 

Plate,  furniture,  plantations,  farms,  vessels,  stores,  &c  352, b9I 


Forming  a total  of.^ 


i?J,477,78.i 


A very  considerable  increase  in  the  amount  expended  on  buildings  and  fortifications  at  this  Presidency, 
lias  arisen  from  the  extensive  damage  occasioned  by  the  fire  in  1803.  New  barracks  lor  the  military,  and 
other  buildings  have  been  erected,  the  esplanade  extended,  and  the  fortifications  considerably  strengtlu  nwl. 

113 


244 


BOMBAY. 


GOVERNMENT  SECURITIES. 

Under  the  Presidency  of  Bombay,  Government  securities  are  issued  on  paper  negotiable  to  order, 
transferrable  by  simple  indorsement,  and  those  now  in  circulation  are  of  the  following  descriptions,  vix* 

Securities  on  the  General  Register. 

Of  these  securilies  the  notes  of  the  first  sit  Ioaho  have  become  payablp,  ma.  tlie  notes  dated  the  20th 
April,  1800,  became  due  on  the  11th  October,  1808;  thosp  Hnfcd  20th  August,  and  20th  December,  1800, 
on  the  17th  June,  1809;  the  notes  dated  May  and  November,  1801,  and  February,  March,  and  April, 
1802,  on  the  21st  July,  1810;  and  those  dated  the  1st  January,  and  20th  April,  1803,  on  31st  December, 
1810. 


Seventh  Eight  per  Cent.  Loan 

advertised  and  opened  12tli  November,  1803.  Notes  dated  1st  February,  1804.  Notice  has  been 
given  that  the  notes  of  tliis  loan  would  be  discharged  on  5th  January,  1811. 

EiGiiTii  8 PER  Cent.  Loan 

advertised  and  opened  10th  January,  1807.  Notes  dated  17th  March,  1807.  , 

Of  the  seventli  and  eighth  loans  the  interest  is  payable  half-yearly,  either  in  cash  at  Bombay,  or 
(where  the  interest  amounts  to  £50  sterling,  or  upwards)  by  bills  on  the  Court  of  Directors,  at  twelve 
months’  sight,  and  at  2s.  6d.  the  Bombay  rupee. 

Tlie  principal  is  payable  in  cash  at  Bombay,  according  to  priority  of  order,  or  by  bills  (on  demand  by 
the  proprietor  at  any  time,  either  when  due  or  before)  on  the  Court  of  Directors  at  twelve  months’  sight, 
and  at  2s.  Od.  the  rupee. 


Ninth  8 per  Cent.  Loan 

advertised  and  opened  ISth  August,  1807.  The  notes  are  dated  16th  February,  1608. 

Tenth  8 per  Cent.  Loan 

advertised  and  opened  March  12,  1808.  The  notes  are  dated  15th  November,  1808. 

The  interest  of  the  9th  and  lOth  loan  is  payable  hoU-yeai  ly,  either  in  cash  at  Bombay,  or  (where  the 
Interest  amounts  to  i?50  sterling  or  upwards)  by  bills  on  the  Court  of  Dkectors  in  London  at  six  months’ 
sight,  and  2s.  Gd.  the  Bombay  rupee. 

The  principal  is  payable  according  to  pi  iority  of  order,  in  cash  at  Bombay,  or  by  bills  on  the  Court 
of  Directors  in  London,  at  twelve  months’  sight,  and  at  2s.  6d.  the  rupee;  or  by  similar  bills  on  demand  at 
any  time  by  the  proprietors,  with  reservation  of  |)ostponing  payment  of  the  bills  so  grunted  for  six  months, 
on  condition  of  paying  for  such  protracted  period,  interest  at  the  rate  of  5 per-cent,  per  annum. 

Eleventh  8 per  Cent.  Loan 

advertised  and  opened  January  21,  1809.  The  notes  are  dated  1st  September,  1809. 

Twelfth  8 per  Cent.  Loan 

advertised  and  opened  the  16th  December,  1809.  Notes  dated  30th  AprU,  1810.  Eighteen  months’  notice 
to  be  given  of  putting  in  course  of  payment  the  notes  of  this  loan. 


BOMBAY. 


S4A 

The  interest  of  the  11th  and  12th  loans  repayable  half-yearly,  either  in  cash  at  the  Presidency,  (or 
(where  the  interest  amounts  to  £50  or  upwards)  by  bills  on  the  Court  of  Directors,  at  six  monfl.s’  sight, 
and  as.  6d.  the  rupee.  The  principal  is  payable  acconliiig  to  priority  of  order  in  cash,  at  Boinlwy  only. 

The  official  yeai’  ending  on  the  30th  April,  and  commencing  on  the  1st  of  iVIuy  in  evciy  year,  the 
respective  notes  of  the  above  loans  may  be  considered  as  forming  the  llegister  l>ebt  of  eucliycar  respectively 
as  follows,  VIZ, 


Of  the  7th  Loan,  dated  1st  Febn||i^,  1804. ..^..of  1803-4. 

8tl» ditto — 17tli  March  — 1807 1800-7 

9t!i»„..vv.ditto»»>»15th  February,  1808 1807-8 

10th»..v..,ditto»».»15th  Novemlier,  1808 1808-0 

llth»»»»»»ditto-.^  1st  September,  1800-10 

12thv»v^ditto  ,»v.30th  April,^ — . 1810 ................  1800-10 

The  following  are  some  additional  advantages  and  conditions  annexed  to  the  respc.ftive  loans. 
Proprietors  of  notes  in  the  5th,  6th,  7th,  8th,  9th,  lOlh,  11U>,  .and  I'illi  loans,  proviilftl  their  ainoinit  he 
not  less  than  10,000  rupees,  are  entitled  to  have  them  deposited  iu  the  treasury;  and  the  interest  ot*  the 
5th,  (ith,  7th,  and  8th,  remitted  l)y  bills  at  twelve  months’  si^ht,  and  that  of  the  Oth,  lOth,  11th,  and  12th, 
remitted  by  bills  at  six  months’  si^ht,  and  at  2s.  6d.  the  i upe(\ 

*lhe  8th  and  9th  eight  per  cent,  loans  afford  the  additional  advantage'  to  the  subscribers  of  ('xchniiglng 
their  notes  for  certificates,  entitling  them  to  Bengal  promissory  notes,  of  the  same  tenor  as  the  Bornhay 
notes,  at  the  rate  of  one  per  cent,  above  the  exchange  at  which  bills  on  the  Bengal  government  can  he 
obtained  at  the  time  that  the  transfer  is  made;  and  the  lOth,  lltli,  and  12th  eight  per  cent,  loans,  that  of 
exchanging  their  notes  for  such  certificates,  at  the  rate  of  108  Bombay  nipees  for  100  Calcutta  sicca  rupees. 

Proprietors  in  the  8th  and  12tli  loans  are  also  at  liberty  to  consolidate  two  or  more  notes,  which  are 
then  to  be  registered  separately,  and  to  be  payable  af\er  those  in  the  original  register.  A privilege  of  sub- 
dividing notes  into  even  liundreds  belongs  to  all  the  loans  on  the  registers. 

State  of  the  Bombay  Register  IVht  on  the  1st  July,  1 81(1,  from  the  Bombay  Courier. 


1801-2. 

1802- 3 

1803- 4 

1806- 7 

1807- 8 

1808- 9. 

1809- 10 


...  lluppes  24., 00,691 
33,!K),069 
8,66,100 
35,35,600 
81,23,700 
21,92,300 
1,05, 9.3, 900 


3,11,02,660 


..r,. 

Fromissoiy  notes  bearing  interest  at  8 per  cent,  per  annuilPbf  second  loan  1809-10v^,^^^18,73,(X)0 


Rupees  3,20,7.),fi6O 

Previous  to  the  year  1799,  the  loans  raised  in  India  were  entirely  local,  and  no  power  of  demand  hi 
England,  either  for  principal  or  interest,  w^as  allowed  to  the  lender.  The  loans  termed  o|jti(>nal  (from 
vesting  in  the  lender  aright  to  demand  bills  upon  England  for  tlie  interest  half  yearly,  and  for  the  piincipal 
when  due)  commenced  in  1798,  since  which  period  the  loans  were  rai.sed  with  this  option,  till  the  Com- 
pany in  1807  directed  that  this  system  of  borrowing  should  be  discontinued.  From  llie  reduced  rate  of 
interest  in  India,  a greater  portion  of  the  optional  loans  have  been  paid  off  by  bills  on  England,  than  was 
originally  calculated  upon,  which  has  occasioned  much  inconvenience  to  the  Company,  and  created  the 
necessity  of  extraordinary  measures  to  meet  the  demand. 


m 


BOMBAY. 


COMPANY’S  ARMY. 

The  Company’s  army  on  this  establishment  consisted  in  1807,  of  nine  regiments  of  native  infantry, 
one  regiment  of  European  infantry,  one  battalion  of  artillery,  one  troop  of  native  cavalry,  one  marine 
battalion,  one  coq^s  of  engineers,  and  one  of  pioneers. 

The  following  is  an  aecount  of  the  number  of  persons  in  the  military  employ  of  the  East  India  Com- 
pany on  the  30tli  of  April,  1807;  which  will  be  useiul  in  ulTording  an  idea  of  the  nature  and  numbers 
of  the  diirercnt  corps  of  which  the  army  is  composed,  md  particularly  as  no  material  alteration  in  the 
numbers  of  regiments  is  known  to  have  taken  place  since  that  period,  except  in  those  of  His  Majesty. 


EUROPEANS. 


4 Major  Generals. 

1 Chaplain. 

7 Colonels. 

2 Surgeons,  members  of  medical  board. 

28  Lieutenant  Colonels. 

29  Surgeons. 

30  Majors. 

32  Assistant  surgeons. 

129  Captains. 

10  Civil  servants  in  military  employ. 

22  Captain  Lieutenants. 

19  Conductors. 

342  Lieutenants. 

420  Serjeants. 

125  Ensigns. 

1.53  Drummers  and  fifers. 

5 Cadets. 

4284  Rank  and  file 

3 Quarter  Masters. 

NATIVES. 

3 Commandants.  . 

31  Scrangs. 

29.5  Subadars. 

136  Tindals. 

242  Jcmauldars. 

1.569  Lascars. 

1224  Havildars. 

.398  ArhTirers. 

404  Drummers  and  fifers. 

5 Native  doctors. 

19112  Rank  and  file. 

25  Writers. 

And  washermen,  puckallies,  bullock  drivers,  and  every  other  description  of  native  followers,  1517. 
The  total  number  of  persons  in  the  Company’s  military  employment  on  the  Bombay  establishment 
on  the  30th  of  April,  1807,  according  to  the  above  abstract,  was  as  follows: 


^Commissioned  officers,  medical  department,  chaplains,  and  civil 
Europcans«%«%v%%%-|  servants  in  military  cmployments^^^^^^»^.>^^^%%vv>%^v»>^-.^>^  775 

C Non-commissioned,  rank  and  file,  including  invalids  and  pensioners  5234 

# 6009 


Natives 


' Commissioned,  non-commissioned,  rank  and  file,  including  invalids, 
pensioners,  and  the  Governor’s  peons 
Artilleiy,  and  store  lascars,  firemen,  and  all  of  these  descriptions 

on  the  invalid  and  pension  lisU  1736 

Camp  followers,  including  artificers,  doctors,  writers,  puckallies, 

bullock  drivers,  washermen,  sweepers,  ^18 

8503* 

Total  of  Europeans  and  natives  ^ 


31043 


BOMBAY. 


Ui7 

In  the  year  1796  a considerable  alteration  took  place  in  the  constitution  and  system  of  the*  Company’s 
army.  Previous  to  that  period  tlic  officers  were  exposed  to  peculiar  hardships.  The  increase  of  territory 
had  led  to  the  increase  of  numbers,  with  which  neither  the  gradations  of  rank,  nor  the  jiroportions  ofoflicers,. 
particularly  of  field  officers,  were  in  conformity.  The  hi^diest  rank  was  that  of  Colonel;  and  as  proin(»tioii 
only  took  place  in  the  line,  the  progress  was  so  slow  as  to  aflonl  hut  a distant  and  discouraging  prospect  of 
attaining  it.  No  provision  existed  for  the  relief  of  any  who,  from  ill  health  or  other  cireumstanees, 
found  it  necessary  to  visit  their  native  country;  nor  for  the  retreat  of  those  \\Iio,  afller  a rc'rlaiii  ninnher 
of  years  of  service,  might  wish  to  retire.  These  several  eircumslanees  were  hroiiglit  to  the  consideration 
of  tlie  Court  of  Directors  and  Board  of  Controul,  who  entered  into  a very  laborious  exainination  of  the 
.subject,  and  finally  determined  upon  an  entire  new  arrangement  of  the  army.  The  detail  of  this  arrange- 
ment was  coniiniinicated  to  India  by  letters  dated  January,  1706.  By  this  ineasiiie  llie  prospect  of 
promotion  was  greatly  enlarged;  the  rank  of  Major  Ceneral  was  inslitnffd  in  the  romjjany’s  sei’\iee;  the 
tuiinher  of  field-offieeis  was  increased;  and  the  expeelatiini  attaining  the  higher  ranks  was  rendered 
more  encouraging,  by  the  establishment  of  the  principle  of  promotion  in  regiments  accoiding  to  seni.aity, 
as  follows:  In  the  European  and  native  infantry  to  the  rank  of  Licadenant  Colonel;  in  the  native  cavalry 
to  the  rank  of  Captain,  and  afterwards  in  the  line.  The  promotion  in  the  aitillery  was  eontiiiucsl  hy  seniority 
in  the  whole  corps,  according  to  the  practice  in  Ilis  ]\Iaj(‘sty  s service.  laheral  provision  was  made  for 
allowances  to  a limited  number  of  officers  on  furlough  in  Europe,  and  for  the  event  oi*  a total  ladircment 
after  the  service  of  a certain  number  of  years.  A modification  of  the  rule  of  promotion  was  din'ctcd  hy 
letters  to  India,  dated  in  June  and  July,  1798,  establishing  it  generally  to  he  to  the  rank  of  Major  in 
the  respective  regiments,  and  afterwards  by  seniority  in  the  whole  corps,  excepting  the  artillery,  in  which 
the  promotion  continued  by  seniority. 

The  leading  object  of  these  several  arrangements  was  the  satisfaction  of  the  European  commissioned 
officers,  and  to  afford  them  the  relief  which,  on  principles  of  justice  and  etpiity,  they  were*  entitled  to 
A like  attention  was  equally  necessary  and  just  to  the  case  of  the  lower  ranks,  both  iOuropean  and  native. 
As  to  the  Europeans,  it  is  to  be  observed  that  it  is  an  established  g(*neral  principle  that,  in  respect  nf  pay 
and  allowances,  His  Majesty’s  and  the  Company’s  forces  are  jdaced  upon  an  erpial  footing.  In  flu*  year 
1797,  an  increase  of  pay  was  granted  to  the  royal  army  by  Ills  Majesty’s  order  dated  May  ;?^(h.  This 
grant  extending  to  the  service  in  India,  the  same  increase  was  given  to  the  C’ompany’s  European  soldiers. 
An  addition  was  likewise  made  in  the  year  1801  to  the  pay  of  the  native  officers  and  sei)oys  at  tliis  esta- 
blishment and  that  (»f  Madras. 

From  these  circumstances,  and  the  Increase  in  numbers  which  has  taken  place  since  1 791,  the  military 
expences  of  tJiis  establishment  have  multiplied  nearly  five-fold,  and  now  considerably  excird  the  whole  of 
the  revenues.  The  following  is  a statement  of  their  iiniouiif  from  the  year  179J-3  to  1809-10  inclusive. 


Years. 

Charges. 

Ye.irs. 

Chdrg'*s, 

Yea  IS 

I'h.iturs 

■1792-^1 

XM.79,2()5 

1798-9 

,P9()  1,988 

1 HO  P-5 

1.5 1 1,105 

1793-4 

472,070 

1799-0 

1,039,152 

180.5-6 

1,904,519 

170t-5 

468,541 

lSOO-1 

lHOO-7 

IJilTjiS.j 

1705-0 

503,385 

1801-2 

8.>0,()0l 

1807-S 

1,521,125 

1796-7 

610,014 

1802-3 

811,253 

1 SOS-9 

1,216,279 

1797-8 

641,469 

1803-4. 

1,201,139 

1809-10 

1,282,81.5 

The  number  of  persons  in  the  military  service  at  this  Presidency  in  1791  was  .S,27.1  Europeans,  and 
12,628  natives,  of  all  descriptions,  forming  a total  of  15,901 ; since  which  period  it  has  increased  2,736 
Europeans,  and  12,106  natives,  as  will  appear  from  the  foregoing  statement  of  tin)  army  in  1807. 


PAY  AND  ALLOWANCES  TO  THE  HONOURABLE  COMPANY’S  ARTILLERY. 

IN  GARRISON. 


254  0 0 < 260  0 


Ql 


I 


£ 


, 1 

X X)  jT*  -P  J3  X 

~ C5  0 0 :3  c 0 r .-' 

- 

1 ■,  p 0 ‘r>  -H  r r — 1- 

' ^ r y < "w  T N 

-'■ 

r>-;?:::ooc-:r’L-  *'c: 

J r JO  -'  r 

-s  - ^ 0 .:,  .-_  0 r^  0 0 0 

X ! 

-i  .^1  :.  '3>  0 'c  -f  0 at 

r-i  . C.  ' t _ -'J  --t  .-J  1 V 1 

R 

0 

^ _ 1 . 'f  '••  -/  i -J 

4 

^1 

' -^  .->  0 Cl'  r 0 0 n 0 

X ' X A 0 OCi  X 

< 

J''  ^ 3 :i>  r c 'j>  r.  0 :? 

0 

H 

h r-^  r.  1 w *J  r t t - 

X r 1 c.  ^ ^ 1 - 1 , ^ 

i 

- 

0 C-.  0 C li  0 r C C - 0 '' 

K ‘JO  JO  ) '^-•'11 

1 

'Zicor  1 

1 

1 

X 

^'i  > < - <0  f 'j  ^ 'T  C;*  1 ' ■ 

1 

1 

Ti  l-  'T  ^ t'  04  ' ' *■' 

j 

0) 

C . 

- 

0 »ri  X 0 »-  03  ‘-'1 

1 

0 ^ 

0 -3 

2S 

-4  O)  -4  - > ^ t a r-^  04  m 

~ '-~  'C>  •*•>  ‘X  <0  JO  0*  04 

A|ipU(>UI 

0.)UI!MO]|y  OvJ()]| 

cr 

:3r>ooo3ooo3c 
no  00  X cr;  X 

■ ii.oc5C/Ooc:o-r'C) 

Oi  a>  (?!  0 0 0 c 0 c 3i  c< 

'V1HI!IOIUOSPUJ11^>]11 

\L 

0 ir  - E 3 ^ ^ 0 iV)  ^ ■“ 

“O 

1 

9 

a: 

•rv  0 'C  'O  3)  0 

(-.  *;;;>  X 03  fN  c ''i 

!< 

■0 

'■^ 

r 

3 

iJ 

•'OTtr'^ooc^soo 
•'*.  c ^ y 0 0 4 \*-i  (X  04 

t^*5*rr-r-r- 

' ^ 

►- 

I H 

k. 

ll«’ 

-3 

1 ^ 
r*. 
3 

.*  0 ‘r*  *»•  *•■  'O  r,  ■HP  0 0 C 

y qr  ^ 1 - (^«.xi-.»- 

n 

zi 

> 

Y 

1 Z’  0 Cp  TT  “ > 't*  » '*  — Z) 

-o 

X 

'C^'n  ^ ^:z.  z * ^ 

!■■{■ 

|.'  0 m ij  'c  ♦ r;  'o  t -^0 

c -0 

U 

r’'''" 

|{  Xiipiioui  Xpni 

•j; 

Y- 

1 ^ ^ \ - ' 

^ ” 4 ■■  ® ~ 

- 

-i 

1 f 
\^ 

j ^ ^ - 0 - ,,  ^ - - - 

'2 

\ 

w® 

rj 

cr 

c c - - - - o “ :3  c 

>< 

0 f ^ ^ 0 ^ ~ c 

B. 

'»  c<  ' ‘ •- 

:5C5  0 000  0‘:?03»  - 

cr 

OCOGOCiriOOi^:: 

X 

.3  00  O)  •'I*  ‘O  '4*  C/  0 '3  0 

14  04  ^ <->  ^ 

a> 

e - 

cr 

0 13C3  0=  C>^3.00C1 

'OOOOOCC'JO'^^^O 

SQ 

u. 

-5  0C3  'O  ^ ' '»  *' 

. 

— - - 

: a 


• • c 

• • T rt 

c c C 

3?  c_)  jj 


I • e! 

3 - §" 

2 3 5^ 


^ ..  .,  S'  c 5 5;  -C  3 

??UyJWc«<<Cf 


Kk 


PAY  AND  ALLOWANCES  TO  THE  HONOURABLE  COMPANY'S  NATIV’E  INFANTRY. 


•5* 


PAY  AND  ALLOWANCES  TO  THE  HONOURABLE  COMPANY’S  ENGINEERS. 


252 


BOMBAY. 


Table  of  Established  Personal  Allowances  and  Office  Establishments  to  the  Staff  of  the  Bombay  Army. 


ALLOWANCES  PAID  IN  ARRRAR. 


Established  peisontl 
Aliowanre 


THE  GENERAT.  STAH*  j 

Thv  Commanding  (Wit  ei  of  tlml'ortes 

when  not  aiiU'mlnT  of  Council 

Gcneial  Olbrrr  on  ilie  Stall 

Afljutant  Gencial  ...B^ 

Quarti  r Master  (Teneial  Bj 

Di'jiiiiy  Adjutant  (ieneral Bj 

J)(j|)mv  Quailer  Master  General  . .B 

Suivejor  F 

Assistant  Surveyoi  E| 

Judge  \dvoiate  P 

Military  Seiretary  to  the  Governor  .... 
Secretary  to  the  Coninunder  in  Chief. . 

Aides  de-iamp  

lieLiuiling  Uliuer  (toll  balla)  ,.,..,11 

CiAKUlSON  STAFl-. 

The  Comini.sjin  of  Stores  il 

DepiityCommissaiy  i)f  Stores  at  Bombay !J 

Onto  at  Sinai |K 

Onto  at  Fa'inah 

Town  Ma|or  at  Bombay  

B.iriaek  Masler  at  ditto 

For»  Adj.  find  Harraik  Master  at  Cocliin] 

Fort  Adjufaiu  at  Bombay 

Onto  and  Gariison  Qr  Master  at  Suial 
Ditto  ditto  at  other  aijh(|dinates  , , , , . 

Suigeon 

Ditto  Male 

Chaplain 

Muster  Mast«M  lor  tlu'  Honourable  Com- 

paiij’s  troops  at  Bombay  

Ditto  ditto  for  hh  M.ijeslCs  troops 
Arljutain  III  Bomb.iy  bandaree  guards.. 
G.irrisoii  Storekeeper  and  Conimi.ssaiy  ofj 
Receipt  and  Fsiioof  ProviMoms 

PROVINCIAI.  .STAFF  FOR  THE 
PROVINCI  S OF  MALABAR 
AND  KANARA. 


.!30days  I ‘11  day*, 


Major  of  P.n^i.uie  

Judgi*  Adu)(  ,ite  (^full  baita  while  military 
law  m.iyioniiiuie  in  Inrce  in  Kanara) 
MunU  r M.istt  I (Captain’s  hatta  and  tent 

< '.iinagi  ' 

Anl  de  C.nnpiothe  Commanding Otfirer] 

Deputy  (’oinmissary  ol  .Stores 

Comini^^iiy  (►f  Provisions  m Malahar] 
(CajUam's  hatta  and  Unit  rani.ige) 

Dilln  in  Kanaia 

Post  Mailer  in  ditto 

Piovoit  Maiii.il  in  ditto  


BRIGADE  STAVE. 

Major  of  Brigade  to  his  M.ijedy\  troops 
Ditto  to  a General  Officer  on  ilie  Siaft. . 

Ditto  to  a Brigade  on  field  seivn  e , . . , 
Quarter  Masler  to  a ditto 


R 


fifitj 

VjO 

7-.0 

170 

170 

70‘J 

GO 

li!0 

1‘70 

Tjn 

li^o 

1-JO 


600| 

J00| 

IM) 

IbO 

400 

120 

00 

00 

120 

60 

120 

60 

120 

400 

120 

48 

bbO 


120 

120 

120 

120 

IbO 


240 

60 

100 


120 

120 

120 

60! 


66 


666 

22.’30 

7b0 

7bn 

i;o 

170 

702 

6 

12  1| 
12 
124| 
121 
IJl 


600 

200 

IbO 

IbO 

400 

124 

9.1 

62 

124 

62 

124 

62 

1‘24| 

410 

1241 

bboi 


12  Ij 

IJl, 

124 

124 

IbO 

1'J4 

248 

60 

100 


124 

124 

124 

62 


66 


Half  Bat ta  for 


lOdavilOl  d.iv 


JOO 


22  b 

22.b 


90 

90 

90 

90 

180 


9u 

90 

90 


90 


90 

GO 

90 


90 

180 

280 

90 

90 

280 

SOO 


90 

90| 

full 

180| 


010 


2021 

202i 


90 

9.8 

9.3 

9.‘i 

186 


9.1 

9.1 

93 


93 


93 

62 

93 


9.3 

lfl6 

286 

93 

93 

i 

286 

3101 


9.3| 

9; 

hatta 

1861 


.36 


90 


|(:  500 
D 190 


F 160 
|(;  1.30 
G 130 


bO 


90 


bO 

bo| 

lent, 

100] 


Office  Esta- 
blishment 


87b 


100 


200 


120| 

I 

370i 


400 

40 


120 

80 

149 

119 


Total  for 


30  days.  | 31  days 


A 666 
A 2230 
1640 
940 
485 
48a 
1.578 
60 
456 
426 
426 
«9'i 
48b| 


600 
376 
326 
326 
L coo 
!M  296 
N 111 
92 
171 
91 
296 
168 
296 


4001 
|S  180 
55 

.550 


|T  416 

U 756 

400 

296 

3J6 

400 
1030 
V 100 
100 


W 416 
376] 

iX  5491  OlSOi 
1791  Olsot 


66 


666 

22.30| 

I6b( 

9401 

4921 

49‘J 

1578] 

62 

4C3| 

43.31 

43., 

30.3| 

496 


600 

379 

329 

329 

600 

303 

114 

94 

175 

93 

303 

172 

303 

410 

184 

5b 

55o| 


42.J 

766 

410 

303 

329 

410 

1048 

100 

100 


423 
|X  383 

559 

181 


66 


0 80 
0 80 


BOMBAY. 


253 


Rtferentts  to  the  foregoing  Table. 


A. — Agreeable  to  the  Honourable  CompanyN  coinmanils  of  the  8th  of  January,  1796 

B. — The  established  personal  allowanees  for  ihise  appoin'nuMils  are  as  fixed  by  the  Honourable  tlie  Court  of  Directors  in  thrir  commands 
of  the  3()th  of  January,  1799.  By  Guvernmenl  orders  of  the  17lli  of  DeceinbeT,  1799,  the  Adjutant  General,  his  Deputy,  and  the 
Deputy  Quarter  Master  (icneral,  are  allowed  to  diaw  the  balta,  and  bouse  lent  of  llieir  otficial  ranks,  the  foimei  as  Lieutenant  Ctdonel, 
the  two  latter  as  Major 


C.  — As  fixed  by  the  Governinent  orders  of  the  ?4th  of  DoLeinber,  1799. 

D.  — Established  by  the  (iovernnient  orders  of  the  iid  of  Februarv,  1789 

E — These  allowances  to  the  Surveyor  and  his  Assistant  are  taken  (loiii  the  Fay  Table  piiblishi’il  in  1789. 

E.  — From  the  Fay  Table  published  in  1789. 

O. — Aetording  to  the  Government  orders  ol  the  1 4th  of  July,  1793. 

n — By  the  Goveinnieni  orders  of  the  J Id  of  Otiober,  179^,  the  allowaiK  es  lieie  stated  w<*re  h'tedfor  the  ai>poiiumenl  of  Drill  Master 
to  the  naiive  ret  nuts — By  tJie  nnnules  of  Counril  undei  the  9Ulh  <d' January,  1799,  the  desigiulion  of  this  othcer  wa^  changed 
fioni  DriF  Master  to  that  of  Uet  ruiiiiig  Oilieei  on  iIk  luiiio  SiutV  |.t<v  .nut  initu' nx  (*.. 

I — Aetording  to  the  eomniaiids  of  the  1 loiioutahle  the  Couit  of  Duet toi , uivh  r the  9 <d  uf  Mav,  1798. 

J.— .As  fixed  by  the  Honourable  ilic  f’ourt  of  Direttors  m tin  ir  t oniinaiKL  ol  the  lath  of  Apiil,  179i 
K — As  established  by  Government  in  July,  1793,  and  21stofJu!v,  1794. 

L. — By  the  Government  orders  of  the  20tli  of  July,  1793,  and  9th  of  August,  1799. 


M — From  the  old  Fay  Table. 

N.  — The  salary  agreeable  to  the  iniiuitos  of  Council  under  the  2d  of  Deiemixr,  1706,  and  the  (dfu  e est.ibhdiment  agreeable  to 
the  old  Pay  Table. 

O.  — By  the  old  Fay  1'uble, 

p.^-Officers  not  holding  the  established  appointment,  but  orcasiomilly  offii  lalmg  .is  J udge  Adsocates  nt  geneial  Cniirls  Mailial,  to  lie  allowed 
eight  rupees  per  day  for  every  day  the  Court  actually  meets,  in  lieu  of  salary,  stalion.Tv,  peon.,  intt  rpret(  rs,  and  all  other  ch.iige> 
whatever  The  bilU  for  this  allowance  to  specify  live  dales  of  the  Court's  sitting,  to  be  counti  rsigned,  if  at  .i  suboidmate  station,  by  the 
Commanding  Ofiicer ; if  in  the  held,  by  the  AdjiiiaiiL  General,  or  other  ofhci’r  olhc  laimg  in  lli.U  f ainu  ily 

Q. — The  salary  for  this  appoinlnient  is  agreeable  to  the  nnnutcn  ofCouiinl,  under  the  J4tli  of  Sepleinbei,  1799.  The  esiablisliment  is  .i. 

follows,  VI/.  Palanquin  allowance  as  Fort  Adjulant  agrcfable  to  the  niiimlesof  Cmiin  il  uinler  the  24ili  ol  Apiil,  1710 20 

Lights,  btntionary,  and  clerk  as  ditto  

Lights  and  stationary,  as  Garrison  Quarter  Master 

R — Captuin'b  net  Pay,  full  batta  and  tent  carnage,  os  per  Government  orders  of  the  24lli  ol  Maiib,  1800. 

S.— Fixed  by  the  minutes  of  Council,  under  the  tOih  of  July,  179^>. 

T —As  ebtablished  by  the  minutes  of  Council,  under  the  2d  of  Febiuaiy,  1798,  and  the  2i>iU  of  NoMunber,  1 , 99 


U.—By  the  minutes  of  Council,  under  the  17tli  <»f  December,  1799. 


V — By  the  general  orders  of  the  l.bih,  and  minutes  of  Council,  under  the  26th  of  Novembci,  1799. 

W.— According  to  the  minutes  of  CouritiJ,  undci  the  24ih  of  tebruary,  1794,  and  2il  of  February,  1/98. 


X. — As  fixed  by  the  minutes  of  Council,  under  the  2d  of  Febriuiry,  1798. 


Y. — For  clerks,  lights,  and  stationary 80  0 0 

Office  lent  carnage .60  0 0 

Horse  money  19  0 80 


Rupees  149  0 80 


Z.— For  clerks,  light.,  and  slat  ions iv 

Office  lent  carnage 

Horse  money 


kO  0 0 

50  0 0 

19  0 HO 

Kiip«  es  119  0 80 


The  allowances  to  Staff  Officers  will  vary  occiLsionally  from  circumstances  of  change  m the  icgimLiilal  r.mk  One  ijenci.d  mb-  is, 
that  they  shall  receive  allowances  agreeable  to  the  highest  rank,  whcibcr  of  the  legirnental  commission  oi  f..i  th.*  ..ppo.nfmi  nt,  but 
not  for  both.  The  net  pay  only  of  the  inferior  rank.  Officers  holding  two  or  more  appointments,  wlu  r^-  <i\<  d .uni  > jrt-  tM.mmd  tor  < on- 
ducting  the  business,  shall  receive  with  the  established  personal  allowances,  the  office  establishinent9K>f  all 


254 


BOMBAY. 


A Table  of  the  Difference  of  Pay,  payable  to  the  Commitnoned  and  Warrant  Officers  in  his  Majesty's  Regiments 
of  Foot  serving  under  the  Presidency  of  Bombay,  to  make  their  British  Pay  equal  to  the  Pay  of  the 
corresponding  Ranks  in  the  Honourable  Company's  Service. 


RANK. 


Colonel 


Subsistence  fur  365  days,  at  18s.  per  diem- 
Arrears 


Lieut.  Colonel. 


Major 


STATEMENT  l)E  PARTICULARS. 


Difference  jiayable  by  the  Company , , 
iTotal  or  Company’s  pay  for  3G5  days 


[Subsistence  for  365  days,  at  13s.  per  diem. 
Ai  rears 


Diffciciue  (idyabltf  by  the  Cumpuiiy. 
'Petal  or  Company’s  pay  for  365  days. 


Captain 


Arrears 


Difference  payable  by  the  Company . < 
Total  or  Company’s  pay  for  365  days 


Subsistence  for  365  days,  at  7s.  6d  per  diem. 
Arrears 


Difference  payable  by  the  Company.* 
iTotal  or  Company’s  pay  for  36.5  days 


Captain  Lieut- 
or  Lieutenant. 


Ensign . 


Chaplain  . 


Arrears  , 


Difference  payable  by  the  Company .. 
iTolal  or  Company’s  pay  for  365  days 


Subsistence  for  .365  days,  at  3s.  per  diem. , 
Arrears * 


Difference  payable  by  the  Company  . , 
Total  or  Company’s  pay  for  365  days 


Subsistence  for  .365  days,  at  5s  per  diem. 
Arrears 


Adjutant 


piffercnce  payable  by  the  Company 
[Total  or  Company’s  pay  for  365  days. 


Subsistence  for  3G5  days,  at  ds.  per  diem. , 
Arrears 


iDilTerence  payable  by  the  Company . , 
»otal  or  Company’s  pay  for  365  days 


"" 

1 

Annual 

Annual 

mount  inBom* 

amount  in 

bay  rupees  at  ^ 

s 

terling  money 

he  exchange  of 

2s.  6d. 

£ 

.» 

</. 

Rs. 

9 

eas. 

.328 

10 

( 

• 

82 

15 

( 

411 

5 

0 

3290 

0 

0 

.360 

0 

0 

3650 

0 

0 

237 

5 

0 

54 

1 

t) 

291 

6 

b 

23.30 

1 

60 

5B9 

o 

40 

29*0 

0 

0 

209 

17 

6 

47 

3 

1 

257 

0 

7 

2056 

0 

93i 

! > . 

3 

6j 

• • 

21 'A) 

0 

0 

1.36 

17 

6 

•• 

34 

9 

7 

171 

7 

1 

1370 

s 

•• 

H9 

0 

r»6| 

• • 

1460 

0 

0 

63 

17 

6 

•• 

16 

* 

9 

m 

19 

3 

6.39 

2 

80 

•• 

90 

1 

20 

•• 

730 

0 

0 

. . 

54 

15 

0 

*• 

8 

1 

7 

62 

16 

7 

502 

61 

2 

1 

53li 

.. 

584 

0 

0 

91 

22 

5 

( 

19 

c 

114 

4 

c 

) 913 

3 

60 

546 

1 0 

an 

146C 

i c 

1 t\ 

5^ 

i’  I.*; 
) li 

t ( 

V 

i 1( 

) 

6i 

i 1C 

) 1( 

J 541 

181 

) 1 
1 s 

1 3*3| 

< 66 

73C 

) c 

) 0 

Difference  of 
pay  in  any 
lonth  in  Boii\> 
bay  currency. 


Rs.  I (j.  reas. 


SO 


49 


n 


45 


15 


53i 


59 


72 


10 


31 


55 


BOMBAY. 


Table  of  the  Difference  of  Pay  continued. 


RANK. 

.STATEMENT  OF  PARTICULARS. 

Annual 
ainnunt  in 
sterling  money 

Annual 

ainouiuin  Bom- 
bay rupees  at 
ihe  exchange  of 
1 Us  6<1 

Difference  of 
pay  in  any 
inoiuli  in  Bom- 
bay cunency. 

1 

d 

! Its 

q- 

1 eas 

Rs 

q. 

reas. 

Quarter  Master. 

Subsistence  for  36.5  days,  at  3s.  Od.  pei  diem 

63 

17 

6 

Ai  rears 

161 

9 

79 

19 

3 

6 39 

2 

80 

Difference  payable  by  the  Company 

90 

1 

20 

7 

I 2 

10 

Total  or  Company's  pay  for  065  day.s  

7 ‘30 

0 

0 

Surgeon  

1 36 

r 

9 

At  rears 

.‘14 

9 

7 

I 

171 

7 

1 

1370 

3 

Difference  payable  by  the  Company 

89 

0 

GGi 

7 

72 

Total  or  Company's  pay  for  365  days  

1460 

0 

0 

Assist  Surgeon 

Subsistence  for  36.5  days,  at  6s.  fxl.  per  diem  .. . . 

118 

12 

6 

Arrears 

9 

17 

9i 

128 

10 

1028 

0 

50 

i 

Company’s  pay  foi  .3().5  days 

7.30 

0 

0 

As  ihe  subsistence  exceeds  the  Company's  pay  the 

280 

0 

50 

sum  of  Rs.  24  3 37^,  «o  much  is  to  be  deducted 

from  the  balta  monthly,  to  make  the  puy  and 

allo^sancis  in  both  seiviics  equal. 

, 

The  (.alary  to  the  Deputy  Paymaster  Gcner.il  to  his  Majesty’s  troops  to  bo  montlily,  whether  of  2H,  29,  ,10,  or  31  days. 
Rupees  398  0 73. 

The  Staff  pay  la  ihe  Non-commiwjoned  StofF  to  be  ihe  same  tfjat  of  the  corresponding  lUnks  in  the  Honourable  Com- 
pany's service. 


Table  of  Pay  and  Allowances  to  the  European  Non-commissioned  Officers,  Drummers,  Fifers,  Rank  and  File 
of  the  Army  serving  under  the  Presidency  of  Bombay,  framed  in  Conformity  to  the  Minutes 
of  Council  under  the  VMh  of  November,  1798. 


ARTILLERY. 


Serjeant 

Corporal 

Gunner  

Drummer  or  Fifer, 
Matross  


INFANTRY. 


Serjeant 

Corporal 

Drummer  or  Fifer 
Private 


NET  PAY. 


aft  day*;. 


Per  Month  of 

.‘30  days. 


‘JO  days. 


'31  days. 


per  Day. 


H.  q.  r 

~0  3 6’ 
0 2 bO 
0 2 

0 1 83 
0 1 80 


R.  q r 

lii  0 0 
17  3 68 
\b  2 44 
12  3 24 
12  2 40 


U q r. 
2 1 3 0 
18  2 24 
16  0 67 
IJ  1 7 

13  0 20 


R.  q r 
1^2’“0 
10  0 80 
16  2 90 
1.‘3  2 90 
13  2 60 


K.  q r 

2^1  (T 

19  .'3  36 
17  1 13 
14  0 7.‘3 
13  3 80 


0 2 50 
0 1 90 
0 1 83 
0 1 60 


17  2 0 
13  I 20 
12  3 24 
It  0 80 


18  0 .50 
1.3  3 10 
13  1 7 
11  2 40 


18  3 0 

14  1 0 

13  2 90 
12  0 0 


19  1 50 
14  2 90 
14  0 73 
12  1 60 


BOMBAY. 


Tnble  of  Establtshed  Personal  AUmeanees  and  Ofiee  Establishments  -to  the  Audit  and  Pay  Department. 


A.UD1T  AND  PAY  DEPAR  TMENT. 


Military  Auditor  General 

Military  PayinaNtcr  General 

Assisiam  i j ilie  Military  Auditor  Ganeral] 
Deputy  Military  Paymaster  General  .. 
Deputy  Paymaster  (!encial  to  the  King'; 

troops 

Garrison  Paymaster  at  the  P reside ney  . . 

Military  paymaster  at  Surat 

Ditto  to  the  British  troops  at  Goa  . 
Ditto  to  the  troops  in  Kaiiara 


MONTHLY  ALLOWANCES  PAID  IN  ARREARS. 


Ditto  for  the  S.  district  \ Province. 
l*ay master  of  Company's  allowanees  t 
the  King's  troops  and  exiraordinaries 


Staff  Pay  or  established 
personal  Allowances  for 

Half  batta  for 

c 

o 

3 

o 

Office  Esta- 
blitihment. 

Total 

for 

.'30  days  1 

31  day 

u 

30  days 

31  days 

X 

30  day<5 

day 

66 

lOtiO 

1)0 

568 

2 

B 1868 
C 300 

i.iUO 

300] 

300 

1 

C 100 

1 OOi 

399  1 
K 500 

E 3.j0 

oao 

1 

D f.24 
92.) 
49') 
F 789 

0 1,:80 
M 800 

1 U50 

E 550 

1 

n 

C24 

92.) 

496 

779 

1 W 
800 
1E)0 

550 

42.5 

140 

569 

750 

400 

750 

250 

O 

.350 

1 

0 

flO 

0 

60 

240 

400 

240 

400 

400 

.300 

300 

310 

90 

300] 

6G 


i80 


A*— 7'he  salaty  of  this  appointment  is  as  fixed  by  the  Honourable  the  Court  of  Directors^  in  their  commands  of  the  Rth  of  January,  179G, 
and  the  Office  Establishment  agrer»able  to  the  Government  Orders  of  the  3d  of  July » 1793  By  the  Coveinment  Orders  ol  the  2l?d  of 
Dorember,  179  »i  and  the  Honourable  Court’s  above  menttoned,  coiiiiiiands,  the  salary  and  Ofhee  Ei»lubliHhnienl  here  stated  uie  ex- 
clusively as  Military  Auditor  General,  and  in  no  way  to  tho  payments  to  him  in  virtue  of  his  army  rank,  when  the  appoint- 
ment  is  held  by  a military  officer. 

B —Salary  as  establisluxl  by  the  Honourable  Company’s  commands  of  the  15th  of  April,  1795,  and  the  Esiablishmcnt  agreeable  to  the 
Orders  of  Government  in  February,  1795. 

C. — As  per  Government  Orders  m .fuly,  1793. 

D. — Salary  and  Establishment  a.s  fixed  by  the  Honourable  the  Governor  and  Commander  in  Cliief  in  July,  1793. 

E.  — As  fixed  by  the  Honouiablo  the  Court  of  Directors  in  their  commands  of  the  15lh  of  April,  1795. 

F. — As  per  Government  Orders  of  the  7lh  and  'Jfiili  of  October,  1799. 

<;  — In  conformity  to  the  (iovernment  Orders  of  the  5lli  and  14ih  of  March,  1800. 

H — I3y  the  Government  Orders  of  the  2Jd  of  February,  1798. 

J. — ^By  the  (iovcinnient  Orders  of  the  23d  of  February,  1798,  and  IRtli  of  October,  1799. 


Table  of  Pay  arid  Allowances  to  the  Medical  Department  and  Military  Board, 


MEDICAL  DEPARTMENT. 

Fixed 

monthly 

Allowance. 

House  Rent 

u 

X 

X 

u ^ 

1C  ^ 

Total. 

..  . 

First  Member  of  the  Medical  Board. . , . 

133.3 

1000 

I 

33 

60 

1423 

lOGO 

750 

540 

480 

33 

Superintending  Suigeon  in  the  Provinces 

750 

Hospital  .Siiigi'On  at  the  Pre.sidency,,.. 
Meilic.il  Stnrpki*i»ppr 

400 

480 

50 

96 

— 

ii\  fllllA  nt  ftis*  1^rr»eie1  Anr*u 

60 

60 

200 

76 

xYD^ISliilli  llllLU  slv  IIH  1 rv^UiCIiL-y  • • • • 

Ditto  to  flittn  nr  niit.vt.iliiitta 

60 

Si*creiarv  lii  the  1VI('frir.il  Hoard  . . . 

108 

308 

Assistant  Surgeon  withoiii  rank  ,,, 

24 

45 

145 

MILITARY  BOARD. 

Secretary  and  Aicompfant  - * - » t t 

575 

1675 

150 

First  Assistant  to  the  Seeretary 

. . 

Second  ditto  ditto 

as; 

rr“ 



100 

An  allowance  for  purchasing  Camp  Equipage  is  made  to  Officers  ordered  for  Field  Service,  computed  for  two  years,  vh,  to  Field 
Officers  1600  rupees,  to  Capuins  800  rupees,  and  to  Subalterns  400  rupees. 


BOMBAY. 


257 


REGULATIONS  RESPECTING  MILITARY  OFFICERS  RETIRING. 

^ Evpiy  officer,  ailter  twenty-five  years’  service  in  India,  tiirce  years  for  one  fnrlouj'h  iR’Inif  ineliuK'il,  is 
allowed  to  retire  with  the  pay  of  the  rank  to  which  he  h.as  attained ; but  such  pay  is  to  be  the  .same  only  us 
that  allowed  to  officers  of  infantiy. 

A Member  ol  the  Medical  Board,  who  has  been  on  that  station  not  less  than  five  years,  and  not  less 
than  twenty  years  in  India,  including  three  years  for  one  furlough,  is  permitted  to  retire  from  the  service, 
and  allowed  jt?500  per  annum. 

A Surgeon  of  a General  Hospital,  who  has  been  in  that  station  not  less  than  five  years,  and  who.se 
period  of  service  has  been  not  less  than  twenty  years,  including  three  years  for  one  furlough,  ns  above,  is 
permitted  to  retire  from  the  service,  and  allowed  X'300  per  annum  for  life. 

All  other  Surgeons  and  Assistant  Surgeons  attached  to  the  Military,  are  jii'rniitted  to  retire  from  the 
service  on  the  pay  ol  their  rank,  after  having  served  in  India  not  less  than  twenty  years,  including  three 
for  one  furlough. 

A Chaplain,  after  eighteen  years'*  service,  ten  years  at  a mililary  station,  and  Including  three  years  for 
one  furlough,  is  allowed  to  retire  with  the  pay  of  Ids  rank. 

Every  Lieutenant  Colonel,  Major,  Captain,  or  Captain  lieutenant  is  allowed  to  retire  with  the  half 
pay  of  the  rank  to  which  he  has  attained,  in  case  his  health  shall  not  permit  him  to  serve  in  India. 

A Lieutenant  having  served  thirteen,  or  an  Ensign  nine  years  in  India,  including  three  years  for  fiu- 
lough,  may  retire  on  the  half  pay  of  his  rank,  in  case  his  health  shall  not  permit  him  to  serve  in  India. 

A Lieutenant  is  permitted  to  retire  on  the  half  pay  of  Enaip^tt^  if  his  constitution  should  be  so  impaired 
as  to  prevent  the  possibility  of  his  rontinning  in  Tmlin 

Every  officer  returning  on  furlough,  and  wishing  to  retire  from  fhe  service,  musi  make  ii  declarntion 
to  that  effect,  within  twelv(»  months  after  hi.s  arrival  in  England;  and  in  case  of  Ids  neglecting  so  to  do,  he 
must  at  the  expiration  of  his  furlough,  either  return  to  India,  or  be  held  to  have  rclimjuished  the  service, 
and  not  be  entitled  to  retire  on  pay,  unless  he  has  continued  to  serve  in  India,  from  his  first  arrival,  for  the 
space  of  twenty-two yearsy  without  having  a furlough;  in  that  case  he  is  allowed  two  years  Ix'lbre  he  shall 
be  called  upon  to  signify  his  intention  of  retiring;  but  he  can  only  be  allowed  the  pay  of  the  rank  lie  held 
at  the  expiration  of  twelve  months  from  his  arrival  in  Europe. 

Promotion,  in  consequence  of  officers  retiring  in  England,  takes  place  from  the  time  when  such  officers 
are  permitted  by  the  Court  to  retire. 


FUntOUGII. 

Subalterns  must  be  ten  years  in  India,  before  they  can  be  entitled  (except  in  case  of  certified  sickness), 
to  their  rotation  to  be  absent  on  furlough,  and  the  same  rule  is  applicable  to  Assistant  Military  Surgeons. 
The  furlough  to  be  granted  by  the  Commander  in  Chief  at  each  Presidency,  with  the  approbation  of  llie 
respective  Governments. 

Chaplains  must  have  been  seven  years  in  India  before  they  can  be  allowed  furlough  (except  In  cases  of 
sickness)  with  the  pay  of  their  corresponding  rank,  viz.  CapUdn. 

The  period  of  furlough  is  three  years,  reckoning  from  its  date  to  the  day  of  the  return  of  the  officer 
to  his  Presidency.  No  officer  on  furlough  can  receive  pay  for  more  than  tw^o  years  and  a half  from  the 
period  of  his  quitting  India. 

At  a Court  of  Directors,  held  on  the  23d  January,  1810, 

Resolved,  That  in  future,  whenever  tlie  absence  of  a military  officer  from  India  shall  exceed  the  period 

LI 


256 


BOMBAY. 


of  his  regular  furlough,  no  further  leave  of  absence  shall  be  given  to  him  upon  the  mere  production  of  a 
medical  certificate  or  other  unauthenticated  statement  of  circumstances;  but  that  previous  to  such  leave 
being  granted,  proof  of  the  statement  made  by  the  party,  in  supjjort  of  his  application,  shall  be  adduced  to 
the  Committee  of  Correspondence  by  personal  examination,  or  by  such  other  evidence  as  shall  be  deemed 
satisfactory  to  the  Committee. 

At  a Court  of  Directors,  held  on  the  1st  March,  1811, 

A report  from  the  Committee  of  Correpondence,  dated  this  day,  being  read,  calling  the  Courfs  attention 
to  the  evident  misapprehension  of  the  meaning  of  the  70th  section  of  the  Act  of  the  33d  of  his  present 
Majesty,  cap.  52,  as  to  the  time  of  absence  after  wliicli  civil  and  military  officers  may  return  to  the  Com- 
pany's service  in  India ; 

Resolved,  that  General  Officers  wishing  to  avail  themselves  of  the  provision  above  referred  to,  must 
arrive  in  India  within  five  years  from  their  departure  from  thence,  otherwise  they  will  not  be  entitled  to 
any  pay,  rank,  or  militaiy  authority,  unless  they  shall  have  a permission  by  the  Court  of  Directors  to  return 
to  India,  having  previously  proved,  to  the  satisfaction  of  the  Court,  and  to  the  Board  of  (Commissioners  for 
the  Affairs  of  India,  that  their  absence  was  occasioned  by  sickness  or  infirmity,  or  some  inevitable  accident. 

REGULATIONS  FOR  THE  ADMISSION  OF  PENSIONERS  ON  THE  MILITARY  FUND. 

Every  petitioning  officer  and  soldier  must  produce  a certificate  from  his  commanding  officer  of  his 
being  an  invalid,  and  rendered  incapable  of  further  service  in  India,  together  with  an  approbation  of  such 
certificate  by  the  Governor  and  Council  of  tlie  Presidency  where  he  shall  have  served. 

Every  commissioned  officer  must  previously  make  oath  before  the  Governor  and  Council,  that  he  is 
not  possessed  of,  or  entitled  to  real  or  personal  property  to  the  following  amount,  viz. 

i?4,(K)0  Captain  £2^000 

Lieutenant-Colonel  3,00U  I Lieutenant  1,0(X) 

Mttjoi\  2,500  I Ensign  750 

Officers'  w'idows  must  produce  proof  on  affidavit,  that  their  husbands  did  not  die  possessed  of  property 
as  above. 

All  commissioned,  staff,  or  warrant  officers  to  have  half  the  ordinary  pay  they  enjoyed  whilst  in  ser- 
vice, viz, 

wC  #.  f/.  £ ».  d. 

Colonel  per  annum  228  2 6 or  per  day  0 12  6 

I.ieutenant-Colonel  182  10  0 0 10  6 

Major  136  17  6 0 10  6 

Captain  01  5 0 0 5 0 

Lieutenant  4^  12  6 0 2 6 

l^'nsign  36  10  0 0 2 0 

Surgeon  91  6 ^0  5 0 

Assistant  Surgeon  46  12  6 0 2 6 

Conductor  of  Ordnance  36  10  0 0 2 0 

Their  widows  one  half  of  the  above,  to  continue  during  their  widowhood. 

Serjeants  of  Artillery  to  have  nine-pence  per  day,  and  those  tliat  have  lost  a limb,  one  shilling  per  day. 
Privates  of  the  Artillery  six-pence  per  day,  and  those  that  have  lost  a limb,  nine-pence  per  day. 

All  other  non-commissioned  officers  and  privates  to  have  four-pence  three  farthings  per  day. 

Officers  and  privates  to  be  entitled  from  the  period  of  their  landing  in  England. 


BOMBAY. 


259* 


REGULATIONS  RESPECTING  PASSAGE  MONKY. 

At  a Court  of  Directors,  held  on  July  11,  1810, 

Resolved— That  the  following  Regulations  be  established  respecting  the  passage  and  accommodation 
of  persons  of  the  under-mentioned  descriptions,  to  and  from  India,  in  the  ships  in  the  Company’s  service,  l u. 


RATES  OP  PASSAGE  MONEY  FROM  ENGLAND  TO  INDIA. 


I That  the  commanders  be  not  permitted  to  demand  more  than  the  under-mentioned  sums  for  the  pas- 
sage and  accommodation  at  their  tables  of  gentlemen  proceeding  to  India  in  the  Company's  service,  at 
their  own  expence,  in  the  following  stations,  m. 


General  Oilicers^s 


aC2.5() 


Gentlemen  of  Council,  or  Colonels 
Lieutenant-Colonels,  Majors,  senior  and  junior  merchants  and  factors^w 
Captains 


2()0 

1.50 

125 


That  the  commanders  be  absolutely  restrained  from  demanding  more  than  the  following  sums  for  the 
passage  and  accommodation  at  their  tables  of  persons  proceeding  to  India,  in  the  ('ompany’s  service,  in  the 
following  stations,  vtz. 

Writers  and  Subalternsvvv^^^>%w.^.^^v«'v%.%«^  i?110 

Assistant  Surgeons  and  95 

Including  the  charter  party  allowance  to  the  owners  of  the  ship. 

That  the  Third  Mates  be  likewise  restrained  from  demanding  more  than  the  sum  of  JP&Jj  for  the  ac- 
commodation of  an  Assistant  Surgeon,  or  Cadet,  who  may  proceed  in  theii*  mess  to  India,  exclijisive  of  the 
charter  party  allowance  to  the  owners. 

That  in  order  more  effectually  to  prevent  more  than  the  allowances  aforesaid  being  taken  from  Writers, 
Subaltern  Officers,  Assistant  Surgeons,  and  Cadets,  the  several  sums  stipulated  for  the  outward-bound  passage 
of  those  persons,  whether  the  two  latter  shall  he  at  the  Captain's  table,  or  Third  Mate's  mess,  shall  be  paid 
by  them,  respectively,  to  the  Paymaster  of  Seamen's  Wages,  and  the  order  for  the  reception  of  any  person, 
in  either  of  those  stations,  on  board  any  of  the  ships  in  the  Company's  serviee,  shall  not  be  delivered,  until 
tliey  shall  have  produced  the  Paymaster’s  receipt  for  the  amount  so  ordered  to  be  paid  him;  and  that  the 
several  allowances,  hereby  directed  to  be  deposited  in  his  hands,  be  paid  to  the  Commander,  or  to  the  Third 
Mate,  or  their  respective  agents  properly  authorized  to  receive  the  same. 

That  the  Commanders  be  not  permitted  to  demand  more  than  the  following  sums  for  the  passage 
and  accommodation  at  their  tables,  of  officers  in  his  Majesty’s  service  proceeding  to  India  in  the  following 
stations,  vtz» 


General  Officers 

r^nlnn<»l« --  - 

T JputenAnt-r^olonidfl  and  Maiors 

j.T5 

jLjaw u v^aicaii caiiu 

Captains  and  Surgeons 

Subalterns,  and  Assistant  Surgeons*.^^ 

no 

Exclusive  of  the  charter  party  allowance  to  the  owners,  paid  by  the  Company. 


L12 


260 


BOMBAY. 


RATES  OF  PASSAGE  MONEY  FROM  INDIA  TO  ENGLAND. 

That  the  commanders  of  the  Company's  ships  be  not  permitted  to  demand  more  than  the  following 
sums  for  the  passage  and  accommodation  at  their  tables,  from  India,  of  officers  either  in  his  Majesty's  or 
the  Company's  service,  who  shall  be  returning  to  Europe,  either  on  sick  certificate  or  military  duty,  viz. 


From  Hen|ral. 

From  Madras. 

From  Hombay. 

Sicca  Rupees. 

Aicot  kiipecs. 

Bombay  Rupees. 

I-^ieu  tenant— 

2,500 

2,500 

2,500 

2,500 

2,500 

2,500 

C^aptam 

2,000 

2,000  1 

2,000 

^ubaltci  IIS 

1,500 

1,500 

1,500 

And  that  the  commanders  do,  upon  no  account,  refuse  to  receive  the  sums  herein  stated  for  the  passage 
and  accommodation  of  gentlemen  of  the  above  description  from  India,  respectively. 

That  the  commanders  of  the  Company's  regular  ships  lie  ench  ronstrained  to  receive  on  board  their 
respective  ships  at  least  two  officers,  of  the  description  above  mentioned,  returning  to  Europe,  and  that 
the  larboard  third  part  of  the  great  cabin,  with  the  passage  to  the  quarter  gallery  taken  off,  be  appro- 
priated to  their  accommodation. 

That  tlic  commanders  of  the  Company's  extra  ships  shall  be  likewise  constrained  to  receive  on  board 
one  officer  returning  to  Europe,  of  the  above-mentioned  description,  and  that  such  officer  be  accommo- 
dated with  a cabin  on  the  starboard  side,  abaft  the  Chief  Mate's  cabin,  and  abreast  of  the  spirit-room,  of 
not  less  dimensions  than  7 feet  long  and  6 w’ide. 

That  in  the  event  of  the  return  of  the  whole  of  one  of  His  Majesty's  regiments  to  Europe,  the  Go- 
vernments in  India  shall,  in  such  case,  allot  the  wliolc,  or  such  part  of  the  great  cabin  of  each  ship  for  the 
accommodation  of  the  officers,  as  the  Governments  may  deem  proper,  due  notice  thereof  being  given  to  the 
commanders;  and  that  the  sums  to  be  paid  for  the  passage  of  each  officer,  be  the  same  as  those  above  stated 
for  officers  returning  on  military  duty. 

That  the  commanders  be  not  permitted  to  demand  more  than  the  following  sums  for  the  passage 
and  accommodation  at  their  tables,  from  India,  of  the  following  gentlemen,  who  shall  be  certified  by  tht 
Governor  and  Council  to  be  under  the  necessity  of  rclurning  to  England. 


From  hengal. 

From  Madrafi. 

From  Bombay. 

Sicca  Kupecb. 

Arcot  Rupees. 

Bombay  Rupees. 

Factors  % %%^% 

2,000 

27000 

2,000 

1,500 

1,500 

1,500 

'I'hat  in  case  any  commander  shall,  by  any  ways  or  means,  directly  or  indirectly,  either  in  England  of 
India,  take  or  receive  any  further  sum  or  sums  of  money,  or  other  gratuity  or  satisfaction,  for  the  passage 
of  any  Writer,  Subaltern  Officer,  Assistant  Surgeon,  or  Cadet,  to  or  from  India,  such  commander  shall  for- 
feit and  pay  to  the  Company,  for  the  use  of  Poplar  Hospital,  treble  the  sum  so  taken  beyond  the  sums 
before  mentioned;  and  for  the  purpose  of  making  himJself  liable  to,  and  securing  such  payment,  the  com- 
mander of  every  ship  in  the  Company’s  service  shall,  before  he  is  sworn  in,  give  bond  to  the  Company, 
ill  the  penalty  of  -PIOOO. 

That  if  any  I'hird  Mate  should,  directly  or  indirectly,  either  demand  or  receive  from  any  Assistant 
Surgeon  or  Cadet,  accommodated  at  his  mess,  a larger  sum  than  the  rate  fixed  by  these  regulations,  he  be 
fined  treble  the  amount  of  the  excess,  for  the  use  of  Poplar  Hospital,  and  that  such  fine  be  deducted  from 
bis  wages,  or  bis  account  of  private  trade,  as  the  Court  may  direct 

That  the  several  sums  ^bovc  mentioned  be  established  for  the  passage,  outward  and  homeward,  of  the 
several  persons  of  the  descriptions  before  stated;  and  that  the  same  do  apply  only  to  such  accommodations 


BOMBAY. 


861 


«8  those  persons  are  respectively  entitled  to,  under  the  existing  regulations  of  the  Company;  and  that  any 
additional  accommodation  or  cabin  may  be  agreed  for  with  the  cmnihandcr,  and  paid  fin-  sepurutely,  with- 
out being  considered  as  a deduction  from  the  sum  fixed  by  the  Court  for  the  passage  money  of  each  person. 

Previous  to  any  blaclc  servant,  or  a wife  ol  any  non-commissioned  oflicer,  or  priv'ate,  either  in  llis 
Majesty's  or  the  Company’s  service,  being  aUowed  to  come  to  England  in  attendance  uiwn  passengers  on 
board  any  ship  whatever,  a deposit  of  i?l(X)  must  be  made  into  the  Company’s  treasury  at  the  Presidency 
where  she  is  to  embark. 


RATES  OF  PASSAGE  MONEY  FROM  BOMDAY  TO  OTHER  PARTS  OP  INDIA. 

The  following  is  a table  of  rates  of  passage  money,  to  bo  demanded  by  tlic  commanders  of  country 
•hips,  from  individuals  proceeding  on  leave  of  absence,  viz. 


From  1st  May  From  1st  Sept, 

to  1st  Sept.  to  1st  May 

.Rupees  80  Rupees  80 

100  100 


To  the  Malabar  Coast 

adras  1 1.50 

rrince  of  Wales’s  Island^^v.^s.^^^^.^^.^150 200 

Malacca  1 50 2(H) 

Fort  Marlborough  ^...^.^.^....200 

China  too im 


REGULATIONS  RELATIVE  TO  PASSENGERS’  BAGGAGE  FROM  ENGLAND  TO  INDIA. 
At  a Committee  of  Shipping,  the  22d  June,  1795, 

Resolved — That  gentlemen  proceeding  to  India  in  the  under-mentioned  stations,  be  not  allowed  to 
take  with  them  a larger  tonnage  of  baggage  and  stores  than  the  following,  exclusive  of  their  bedding,  a 
table,  a sofa,  or  two  chairs,  for  their  respective  cabins,  viz. 


Gentlemen  of  Council 
General  Officers 

Colonels  in  His  Majesty’s  or  the  Com- 
pany’s service 
Senior  Merchants 


3 1 tons. 
3x  ditto. 

3 ditto. 
3 ditto. 


I^ieutenant-Coh^nels 
Junior  Merchants 
Majors , 

Faclors^^ 

Captains 


2|  ton.s. 
2j  ditto, 
2 tlitto. 
2 ditto. 
1{  ditto 


That  such  gentlemen,  proceeding  in  either  of  the  above-mentioned  stations,  who  may  be  j)ernutted  to 
carry  out  their  wives  with  them,  be  allowed  to  take,  as  the  ladies’  baggage,  an  additional  tonnage,  ccpial  to 
one  half  of  the  preceding  allowance. 

That  married  ladies  proceeding  to  their  husbands  in  India,  be  allowed  to  carry  two-tlilrds  of  the  ton- 
nage prescribed  for  a gentleman  of  the  same  rank  as  her  husband. 

That  Writers,  Lieutenants,  Ensigns,  and  otlier  cabin  passengers,  he  not  allowed  to  carry  a larger  (piari- 
tity  of  baggage  and  stores  than  one  ton  each,  exclusive  of  their  bedding,  a table,  a sofa,  or  two  chairs’,  and 
a washhand  stand. 

That  married  ladies  proceeding  to  their  husbands  in  India,  of  either  of  these  last-mentioned  dcscriji- 
tions,  be  allowed  to  carry  a similar  quantity  of  baggage  and  cabin  furniture. 

That  such  gentlemen,  of  either  of  these  last-mentioned  descriptions,  who  may  be  permitted  to  carry  out 
their  wives  with  them,  be  allowed  to  take  one  ton  additional  as  the  ladie.s’  baggage. 

That  single  ladies  be  allowed  the  same  quantity  of  baggage  and  cabin  furniture  as  Writei's.' 


262 


BOMBAY. 


At  a Committee  of  Shipping,  5th  October,  1808, 

The  Committee  referring  to  their  resolution  of  22d  June,  1795,  respecting  the  allowance  of  tonnage 
for  passengers'  baggage  outward-bound,  and  being  of  opinion  that  the  same  is  sufficient  for  every  needful 
accommodation  in  the  voyage ; but  it  having  been  the  practice  for  passengers  to  ship,  as  part  of  their  baggage, 
glass  and  earthen  ware,  %lso  cabinet  ware,  and  other  ailicles  of  housekeeping  in  India-— 

Resolved,  That  none  other  articles  than  wearing  apparel,  or  such  others  as  shall  be  really  intended 
for  the  use  of  the  respective  passengers  in  the  voyage,  be  allowed  to  be  shipped  as  baggage,  musical  instru- 
ments for  ladies,  and  books  excepted. 

That  books  and  musical  instruments,  when  requested  to  be  shipped,  be  included  in  the  tonnage  of 
baggage  prescribed  for  each  passenger  by  the  Committee's  resolution  of  the  22d  June,  1795,  before 
mentioned. 

That  gentlemen  returning  to  India  in  the  under-mentioned  situations,  be  allowed  to  take,  as  part  of 
their  prescribed  tonnage  of  baggage,  the  following  quantities  of  wine  for  their  own  use  in  the  voyage,  pro- 
vided that  they  severally  make  application  to  this  Committee  for  permission  to  ship  the  same,  and  state, 
under  their  own  hand,  that  the  wine  is  hona  Jide  intended  for  tliat  purpose,  viz. 

Gentlemen  of  Council  and  General  Officers  2 chests. 

Colonels,  Lieutenant-Colonels,  and  1 ditto. 

Senior  and  J unior  1 ditto. 

That  all  requests  to  ship  possengers'  baggage  be  laid  before  this  Committee,  and  in  the  event  of  any 
excess  beyond  the  prescribed  tonnage,  application  to  be  made  in  writing  to  this  Committee,  by  the  indivi- 
duals for  whose  use  the  articles  are  requested,  stating  the  particular  causes  of  the  excess.  And  that  no 
order  be  given  for  shipping  passengers’  baggage  in  future,  until  this  Committee’s  decision  on  the  request 
for  the  same  shall  have  been  certified  by  the  clerk  to  this  Committee. 

REGULATIONS  RELATIVE  TO  PASSENGERS’  BAGGAGE  FROM  INDIA  TO  ENGLAND. 

Extract  from  the  Honourahk  Company's  Instmctionsy  dated  the  26th  August,  1801.  (Public  Department,) 

Para.  8.  Having  adverted  to  the  immense  quantity  of  baggage  brought  home  by  the  passengers 
arrived  in  the  Company’s  ships,  and  being  desirous  of  promoting  every  regulation  that  appears  to  us  likely 
to  increase  the  im))ortation  of  surplus  tonnage,  we  have  investigated  this  as  one  cause  which  has  occasioned 
the  reduction  of  that  important  benefit  both  to  the  Company  and  owners;  the  space  occupied  by  the  paa- 
sengers"  baggage  in  one  of  the  ships  lately  arrived,  having  amounted  to  the  immense  quantity  of  63  tons, 
(’onceiving  therefore  some  regulation  necessary  to  be  adopted,  to  correct  as  much  as  possible  this  growing 
evil,  and  to  prevent  such  immense  quantities  of  baggage  being  imported,  to  the  ultimate  exclusion  of  the 
('oinpany’s  cargo,  we  liave  come  to  the  following  resolutions;  and  we  direct  that  you  adopt  every  other 
means  which  may  appear  necessary  towards  carrying  the  same  into  effect,  viz. 

That  gentlemen  proceeding  to  England  in  the  under-mentioned  stations,  be  restricted  from  taking 
with  them  a larger  tonnage  of  baggage  and  stores  than  the  following,  exclusive  of  their  bedding,  a table^ 
and  a sofa,  or  two  chairs,  for  their  respective  cabins,  viz. 


Gentlemen  of  Council  and  General  Officers 

Colonels  of  His  Majesty’s  or  Company’s  Service,  and  Senior  Merchants^ 
Lieutenant  Colonels  and  Junior  Merchants 


5 tons. 
4 ditto. 
3 ditto. 
2{  ditto. 
> 2 ditto. 


BOMBAY. 


2(5J 

That  gentlemen  proceeding  to  England  in  either  of  the  above-mentioned  stations,  who  may  he  per- 
mitted to  bring  home  their  families  with  them,  he  restricted  from  taking  more  toiina»e  than  onc’  half  of 
the  preceding  allowance,  in  addition,  as  the  ladies' 

That  married  ladies  proceeding  to  their  husbands  in  England,  bo  restricted  from  taking  more  than 
two-thirds  of  the  tonnage  prescribed  for  a gentleman  of  the  same  rank  ns  thur  husl)an(ls. 

That  Writers,  Lieutenants,  Ensigns, and  other  cabin  passengers,  he  restricted  from  taking  a larger  (]uan- 
tity  of  baggage  and  stores  than  one  ton  each,  exclusive  of  their  bedding,  a table,  and  sofa,  or  two  chairs. 

That  married  ladies  proceeding  to  their  husbands  in  England,  of  eitlior  of  these  last-mentioned  de- 
scriptions, l)e  restricted  from  taking  more  than  a similar  quantity  of  baggage. 

That  such  gentlemen,  of  either  of  these  last-mentioned  descriptions,  who  may  he  permitted  to  bring 
home  their  wives  with  them,  be  restricted  from  taking  more  than  onc  ton  iti  addition,  as  the  ladies' baggage 

That  single  ladies  be  restricted  from  taking  more  than  the  same  quantity  of  baggage  and  cabin  furniture. 

That  all  excess  of  baggage,  beyond  the  above-mentioned  quantities,  on  wdiatever  ship  it  may  be 
brought  home,  be  invariably  charged  freiglit,  at  the  charter-party  rate  per  ton,  and  that  the  said  l)aggage 
be  not  delivered  from  the  Company's  warehouse  till  such  freight  shall  have  been  paid  into  the  Company's 
treasury. 

Extract  from  a General  Letter  in  the  Commercial  Department^  dated  September  7,  1S08. 

In  our  letter  of  31st  October,  1799,  we  informed  you  that  we  had  appointed  Messrs.  Hyde  and 
Marier,  clerks  in  our  Accountants'  office,  to  act  as  agents  in  the  clearance  ot  baggage,  wines,  and  presents 
from  the  Company's  warehouses,  and  that  we  had  been  induced  to  ajppoint  our  own  servants  to  conduct 
this  business,  in  order  that  they  might  be  accountable  to  us  for  the  propriety  of  their  contluct.  The  in- 
crease which  has  taken  place  in  the  civil  and  military  establishments  of  our  several  Presidencies,  and  the 
conse(juently  augmented  number  of  persons  returning  to  Europe,  have  determined  us  to  make  a separate 
department  for  the  purpose  of  clearing  baggage,  wines,  and  presents,  and  we  have  appointed  Mr.  William 
Marter  and  Mr.  William  Evans  to  be  warehouse-keepers  of  baggage,  subject  to  our  own  immediate  inspec- 
tion and  controul,  and  we  have  made  such  arrangements  with  His  Majesty's  Board  of  Customs,  for  ascer- 
taining and  paying  the  duties  on  baggage,  &c,  as  will  ensure  the  greatest  possible  dispatch  in  the  delivciy  of 
the  articles  to  the  respective  proprietors. 

We  have  also  sanctioned  a table  of  fees  and  allowances  to  be  received  for  the  discharge  of  this  duty, 
and  for  reimbursing  the  expences  attending  it,  and  we  have  prohibited  the  baggage  warehouse-keepers 
from  receiving  any  other  than  the  authorized  allowances,  upon  pain  of  our  severest  displeasure. 

As  we  have  erected  this  establishment  for  the  sole  puipose  of  the  convenience  of  our  servants  and 
others  who  may  return  to  Europe,  we  direct  that  our  intentions  in  this  respect  be  made  public,  and  be 

constantly  affixed  up  in  the  export  offices  of  our  several  Presidencies,  and  that  it  be  signified  to  all  our 

servants  returning  to  Europe,  that  it  is  our  desire  that  they  apply  to  our  said  warehousc-kec*pers,  Messrs. 
Marter  and  Evans,  to  clear  and  deliver  them  their  baggage,  wines,  and  presents,  as  we  liave  directed 
Messrs.  Marter  and  Evans  to  transact  every  branch  of  business  connected  with  this  department,  which  will 

render  the  agency  of  all  other  persons  unnecessary. 

Passengers  arriving  from  India,  are  liable  to  inconvenience  from  being  ignorant  of  the  law,  winch 
prohibits  calicoes  being  printed,  painted^  stained,  or  dyed,  and  also  silk  goods  from  being  worn  or  used 
in  this  country ; and  such  goods,  although  made  into  apparel,  are  of  necessity  taken  out  of  their  haggugc, 
and  detained  by  the  officers  of  the  revenue.  We  direct  therefore  tliat  napkins,  &c.  which  contain  a co- 
loured stripe,  however  smaU,  be  considered  to  be  prohibited,  and  cannot  be  passed  in  England  os  part  of 
their  baggage. 


BOMBAY. 


m 


TABLE  OF  FEES  AND  CHARGES  ON  BAGGAGE,  &c. 

Fixti  Ij/  the  Court  of  Dinclors,  ond  payable  to  the  Warehouse  Keepers  of  Baggage,  on  the  Clearance  of 
Baggage,  Wine,  tjc.  belonging  to  Passengers  and  others  from  India. 


ON  BAGGAGE. 


£ s.  d. 


Cliargcs,  including  fees  and  dock  dues,  on  a chest  or  trunk  of  apparel,  containing 
above  8 ditto  and  not  exceeding  15  solid  feet 

above  4 ditto  and  not  exceeding  8 ditto  0 15  0 

on  a chest  of  drawers  or  a couch,  containing  apparel  or  15  0 

on  an  empty  couch  or  a Sea-cot  and  bedding  0 8 0 

on  a child's  couch  0 15  0 

on  a small  package  of  little  value  from  2s.  Cd.  to  7s.  6d.  in  proportion. 

Cording  and  sealing  (if  required)  per  package 


GOODS  CLEARED  BY  VALUATION. 


Charges,  including  fees  and  dock  dues,  on  goods  not  exceeding  gross  value^i.^ 
above  £5  and  not  exceeding  i?10  ditto 
above  i^lO  and  not  exceeding  £20  ditto 
above  .£^20  and  not  exceeding  d£^30  ditto 
above  X^30  and  not  exceeding  ^^50  ditto 
above  <£^50  at  the  rate  per  cent  oL 

TEA. 

Charges,  including  fees  and  dock  dues,  on  a package  not  exceeding  ^10  gross  value*^ 
above  i?10  and  not  exceeding  £20  ditto 
above  .£*20  and  not  exceeding  £?30  ditto 
above  .£^30  and  not  exceeding  £50  ditto 
above  £50  at  the  rate  per  cent,  of . 


0 8 0 
0 12  0 

0 15 

1 1 

1 5 

2 10 


0 8 
0 12 

0 15 

1 1 
2 10 


WINE. 

.2  2 0 
. 1 10  0 
. 0 18  0 
. 0 12  0 

No  goods  are  to  be  delivered  from  the  warehouses  before  the  above  charges  have  been  paid,  and  all 
other  duties  and  charges  to  which  such  goods  are  liable.  , 

N.  B.  The  above  charges  do  not  include  the  custom-house  dues,  nor  the  charge  for  carriage  from  the 
East  India  warehouse  to  the  residence  of  the  proprietor  of  the  goods* 

East  India  ffme^  October  3,  1810, 


Charges,  including  fees  and  dock  dues,  on  a butU.^ 
on  a pipe  ^ 
on  a half  pipe  . 
on  a quarter  cask. 


BOMBAY. 


Extract  from  the  Act  of  Parliament  relative  to  Presents,  Baggage,  tj-c.  imported  from  India. 


Whereas  certain  duties  of  customs  are  payable  on  certain  articles  according  to  tlie  true  and  real  value 
thereof,  to  be  ascertained  by  the  gross  price,  at  which  sucli  goods  shall  liave  been  publicly  sold  at  the 
sales  of  the  East  India  Company ; and  whereas  much  inconvenience  and  delay  have  arisen  in  the  payment 
of  the  duties,  and  delivery  of  articles  brought  from  the  East  Indies,  either  as  presents,  or  for  private 
use,  particularly  specimens  of  natural  history,  models,  drawings,  and  other  articles,  tending  to  illustrate 
or  improve  the  arts  and  sciences,  arising  from  the  necessity  of  such  articles  being  exposed  to  public  sale  by 
the  East  India  Company,  in  order  to  ascertain  the  value  according  to  which  tlie  dutic's  payable  by  law  are 
to  be  levied  and  collected,  and  such  articles  are  also  thereby  frerpiently  exposed  to  great  injury  ami  da- 
mage; and  whereas  it  is  expedient,  in  order  to  remedy  such  inconvenience  and  dtday,  that  the  duties  of 
customs  payable  on  such  goods,  should  be  ascertained  without  the  same  being  in  future  ex[iosed  to  public 
sale;  be  it  therefore  enacted,  that  from  and  after  the  fifth  day  of  July,  1809,  it  shall  and  may  be  lawful 
for  any  person  or  persons  who  shall  import  or  bring  into  Great  Britain,  from  any  port  or  place  within 
the  limits  of  the  charters  granted  to  the  East  India  Company,  of  the  article's  before  mentioned,  or 
any  articles  whatever  (not  being  prohibited  to  be  used  or  consumed  in  Great  Britain),  on  which  the  duties 
of  customs  are  now  chargeable  according  to  the  value  thereof,  either  as  presents  or  for  private  use,  and 
not  by  way  of  merchandise,  to  enter  the  same  with  the  proper  ofiicors  of  His  Majesty’s  customs,  such 
goods  having  been  first  lodged  and  housed  in  warehouses  according  to  law ; and  that  the  value  of  such  goods, 
according  to  which  the  duties  of  customs  are  due  and  payable,  shall  be  ascertained  according  to  the  decla^ 
ration  of  the  value  thereof,  to  be  made  by  the  owners  or  proprietor,  or  his  known  agent,  In  the  like  manner 
and  form,  and  under  all  the  rules,  regulations,  and  restrictions,  and  subject  and  liable  to  such  and  tho 
like  forfeitures  and  penalties  as  are  presenbed,  directed,  and  imposed,  with  respect  to  goods  not  imported 
by  the  Company,  and  on  which  the  duties  of  customs  are  payable  according  to  the  value  thereof. 

The  following  are  the  duties  payable  on  goods,  wares,  and  merchandise  imported  into  Great  Britain 
by  the  United  East  India  Company,  and  secured  in  warehouses;  also,  of  the  duties  on  such  goods,  wares, 
and  merchandise  when  taken  out  of  such  warehouses,  to  be  used  or  consumed  in  Great  Britain;  together 
with  the  drawback  to  be  allowed  on  the  exportation  of  certain  of  those  goods,  wares,  and  merchandise 
firom  Great  Britain. 


Olf  WAREHOUSING. 

Goods,  wares,  and  merchandise  inioorted  by  the  East  India] 
Company,  and  secured  in  warehouses,  under  the  condi- 
tions, regulations,  and  restrictions,  directed  and  required 
by  39  Geo.  III.  cap.  59,  viz. 

Muslins,  plain  Nankeen  cloths,  muslins,  or  white  calicoes, 
flowereo  or  stitched  cent.l 

Plain  white  calicoes,  plain  white  dimity,  and  all  goods,  wares, | 
and  merchandise  prohibited  to  be  worn  or  used  in 
Clreat  Britain  per  cent. 

C)oflee  and  cocoa  jjer  cent.j 

,A11^ other  goods,  wares,  and  merchandise  (except  hullioii,! 
cotton  wool,  saltpetre  and  tea)w^^w»%^^w>%v%  per  cent. 


rermanent 

n.irv 

Tomi)arary,  or 
War  Dinv. 

T^tal. 

P s.  d. 

37~ 

.£*  s.  d. 

7 10  0 

2 10  0 

• 

10  0 0 

2 10  0 

0 10  8 

3 0 8 

2 10  0 

0 10  8 

3 0 8 

1 0 0 

0 0 0 

1 0 0 

2 0 0 

0 13  4 

2 13  4 

Which  several  values  sihall  be  ascertained  according  to  the  gross  price  at  which  such  goods  respectively 
ahall  have  been  sold  at  the  public  sales  of  the  said  Company,  without  any  deduction  or  abatement  whatsoever. 

For  the  conditions,  regulations,  and  restrictions  under  which  the  said  duties  may  be  seeux  ed  by  bond, 
4tl  39  Geo.  111.  cap.  59. 


M m 


200 


BOMBAY. 


Clood'^,  wni  (s,  and  niercliandlsc  so  imported  and  warehoused  (not  being  prohibited  to  be  worn  or  used 
III  Gi  c.it  Britain),  may  be  delivered  from  such  wai chouse  for  the  purposes  of  being  used  or  consumed  in  Great 
Jh  ituin,  on  payment  of  the  following  duties,  exclusive  of  the  duties  belbre  mentioned,  paid  or  secured  by  the 
said  Company  on  warehousing  any  of  the  said  goods;  and  also  on  jiayment  of  such  excise,  or  other  duties, 
as  shall  he  due  or  pa)  able  thereon  at  the  time  of  such  delivery^ 

N.  B.  The  duties  are  to  he  paid  hy  the  purchasers. 

DUTIES  TAVABLE  ON  EAST  INDIA  GOODS  IMBOKTED  IN^JD  GREAT  BRITAIN. 


0\  WARElIOUSINO. 


atioii  of  cneli  and  every  public  sale. 

For  every  iT(M)  of  tlie  real  value, 

India  sales,  of  muslins,  plain  nankeen  cloths,  muslins 

or  white  calicoes  flowered  or  stitched,  imported  hyj 
1 lit ‘III  cent 

For  every  <XMOO  of  tlie  real  vidiie  of  all  plain  wdiite  calicoes, 
plain  wliite  dimities,  and  of  all  goods,  wares,  and  iner- 
chjiiulis(‘s  prohihited  to  be  worn  or  used  in  Great  Jbi 
lain,  imported  hy  titem  per  cent, 

C’ojfce  and  cocua^  ditto. 

Sugar  ditto. 

For  every  .i?l()()  of  the  n'al  value  of  all  other  goods, 
wares,  and  nu'rchandisc,  &c.  imported  hy  the  said  (bm- 
pany  (except  bullion,  tea,  cotton-wool,  and  salt- 

pilrc) 


Perniuncnt 

TtMiipomry  or  War 
Duty 

Total. 

L’  A'.  d. 

A.  (1 

\ 

1 7 10  0 

! 

2 10  0 

10  0 0 

1 j 

2 10  0 

0 If)  8 i 

.S  6 8 

2 10  0 

0 1()  8 

a 6 8 

1 0 0 

0 0 0 

1 0 0 

2 0 0 ; 

0 13  4. 

2 13  4 

All  goods  may  he  exported  directly  from  the  East  India  Company's  warehouses  without  payment  of 
duty,  cxeejit  indigo,  wliich  pays  ii  duty  wlu'n  taken  out  eitlicr  for  home  consumption  or  exportation. 

rrohibited  goods  are  allowed  to  he  sent  liy  land  carriage  to  Lancaster,  Liverpool,  and  Bristol,  raw 
silk  to  Liverpool  and  Cliester,  and  cowries  and  airangocs  to  any  port,  for  exportation.  Goods,  wares, 
and  iiiercliaiulise,  vGiich  may  liavc  been  seemed  in  warehouses  within  the  port  of  London,  may  be  re- 
moved to  other  ports  in  Great  Britain  for  the  purpose  of  exjioiiation,  on  the  like  restrictions  and  conditions 
as  East  India  proliihlted  goods. 

(ioods  impoiled  from  India  for  private  use,  may  he  entered  immediately  on  tlie  declared  value. 

All  goods,  w.ares,  and  merehaiulise  ol*  the  growth,  production,  or  manufacture  of  China,  the  East 
Indies,  or  any  parts  within  the  limits  of  the  exclusive  trade  of  the  East  India  Company,  taken  and  condemned 
as  j)ri:(\  shall  he  publicly  sold  at  the  port  of  London  only  under  the  like  conditions,  subject  to  the  same 
duties,  and  entitled  to  such  drawbacks  as  tliose  regularly  imported  by  the  said  Company. 

ON  HOME  CONSUMPTION. 

The  following  duties  are  to  be  paid  by  the  purchaser  of  all  goods,  wares,  an  merchandise  imported 
by  the  East  India  Company,  \>hen  taken  out  of  the  warehouses  for  home  consumption  (tea  and 
saltpetre  excepted,  the  duties  ou  which  are  paid  by  the  Company),  and  the  drawbacks  as  stated,  allowed, 
if  exj)orted  within  one  year  from  the  time  of  such  full  duties  being  paid  thereon  (except  tea,  which 
is  allowed  three  years)  to  all  places  except  the  Islands  of  Guernsey,  Jersey,  Alderney,  ^k,  orMa^jl 
or  the  Island  of  Ferro. 


BOMBAY 


207 


1 PrriTianpnt 

iTemporary  or  \Va 

r 

ON  HOME  CONSUMPTION* 

On  tv. 

Dufy 

1 Oiai. 

5?^ 

d. 

~T 

s. 

d. 

£ 

n. 

d.' 

Arrangoes,  or  cent 

. o3 

If) 

3 

17 

■~is‘ 

9 ^ 

71 

0 

UoiinQ  w% cwt.i  i* 

2 

0 

1 

7 

I. 

5 

9 

i 

Unbound 3 

1 

G 

1 

0 

G 

1 

2 

0 

Bullion,  and  gold  .‘ind  silver  coin 

Calicoes, 

i)ls.iii  will cent*  1 

5 

0 

17 

1 

8 

G8 

6 

8 

Drawback  on  the  exportutioji  of* such  as  have  been  printed 

1 

stained,  painted,  or  dyed  in  (ireat  Jlrilain^^^^per  centJ  ^0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

50 

0 

0 

For  the  goods  coiiiprehended  under  this  head  see  list  A. 

Candles,  wax  Ib^ 

0 

1 

G 

0 

0 

G 

0 

2 

0 

Of  Persia  s(|uarc  yard 

1 

10 

9 

0 

10 

3 

2 

1 

0 

Of  Turkey  under  4 yards  s(|uare 

0 

15 

0 

0 

.5 

0 

1 

0 

0 

Ditto  from  4 to  G ditto  — x,x^x^^xxx.^x^x^xditt47. 

.1 

0 

0 

1 

0 

0 

1 

0 

0 

Ditto  exceeding  5 yards  siiuarc  xvxxxxxvx^xxditto. 

.5 

0 

0 

1 

13 

4 

6 

13 

4 

('hina  warc^^^^— c(*nt. 

0 

0 

27 

G 

s 

loy 

G 

8 

Coin,  foreign,  of  gold  and 

(Cornelians  %»»%^'%-'%%'%'%'%-»''%»'%'v*»-»^'%^-%'%'-%'%-'v%-'v%--»pci  ci*n t • 

.'>3 

16 

3 

17 

18 

9 

71 

15 

0 

Diamonds 

X-XX'X-XX.-XXX^XXXXXXXX^XX-XX-XX^XXXXX.XXX-WXX  xx-x-xx.-xxx^xxx-x-vx»x  1 I'CC. 

Dimity,  pi 

lam  will tcx-^x^xxxxx'xx^xxx-xxxxxx^x'xxxx-xx^x^^-^x'xvxpei  cent 

ol 

5 

0 

17 

1 

8 

GS 

G 

8 

Drawback  on  exportation  of  such  as  have  been  printed, 

1 

stained,  painted,  or  dyed  in  Great  Britain ^^^^per  cent. 

50 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

50 

0 

0 

( r’oloured  x-wxxx^xxxx,.x,,xxx.xx,xxx^xxxx.^x*.,.*.x-xxx^*.^xeach. 

0 

2 

0 

0 

0 

8 

0 

2 

8 

Drawings 

( Plain 

0 

1 

0 

0 

0 

4 

0 

1 

1 

Emeralds, 

rubies,  and  other  precious  stones  except  dia- 

monds  cent. 

10 

0 

0 

3 

G 

8 

13 

G 

8 

1 

r Ostrich  fcatlicrs  drcssetl  xxxxxx*^xxx^,^xxx.^^^pcr  lb. 

1 

15 

0 

0 

11 

8 

2 

G 

8 

Feathers  - 

< Ditto  mulri'sscd  x%xx*.^x,-*x^x^*.x.xxx^v*.^xx^xx*.x.x-xx^ditto. 

0 

10 

0 

1 0 

3 

1. 

0 

13 

4 

1 

( Any  other  sort  cent. 

37 

10 

0 

12 

10 

0 

50 

0 

0 

i Cut  lb. 

0 

17 

G 

0 

5 

10 

1 

3 

4 

Garnets  ■ 

\ Rough  *^*xxxx%x>xx*,xw^*.'»-»,^*-».*.'**-*%^-*'*'*'».%'*™’*»^ditto. 

0 

G 

0 

0 

2 

0 

0 

8 

0 

Horses,  mares  or  geldings 

4 

4 

0 

1 

8 

0 1 

5 

12 

0 

Eackered  ware  cent. 

51 

5 

0 

17 

1 

s 

G8 

6 

8 

Mans^^«^, 

0 

0 

9 

0 

0 

3 

0 

1 

0 

Muslins,  plain,  nankeen  cloth,  muslins  or  white  calicoes 

1 

flowered  or  stitch  cent. 

20 

10 

0 

G 

IG 

8 

27 

G 

8 

Drawback  on  exportation  of  such  as  have  been  printed. 

stained,  painted,  or  dyed  in  Great  Britain  ^^per  cent 

20 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

20 

0 

0 

For  the 

goods  comprehended  under  this  head  see  list  B. 

Nankeen  cloth,  see  Muslins 

[Printed,  painted  or  stained,  or  paper  hang- 

Paper 

ings  I'tT  square  yard. 

0 

0 

9 

0 

0 

3 

0 

1 

o 

Of  any  other  sort,  not  particularly  enumerated 

or  otherwise  charged  with  duty  .xx*^-x^x^per  lb. 

0 

1 

0 

0 

0 

4 

0 

1 

4 

Pearls 

rent. 

10 

0 

0 

3 

G 

8 

13 

G 

8 

Pickles  of  all  sorts  not  otherwise  enumerated^^^^per  gallon. 

0 

3 

0 

0 

1 

0 

0 

1 

0 

" Under  2 feet  square 

2 

3 

0 

0 

14 

i 

2 

17 

4 

Pictures  - 

t roiTi  2 to  4 ditto  x^v>^%^xx % i tto. 

4 

G 

0 

1 

8 

8 

5 

1 t 

8 

4 feet  square  and  upwards  ^^..^xxxxx^xxx^^^-ulitto. 

6 

9 

0 

2 

3 

0 

S 

12 

0 

' Battered,  fit  only  to  be  reinanufacturedxx*^free. 

Of  gold  oz»  troy. 

2 

8 

G 

0 

IG 

2 

3 

4 

8 

Plate 

Of  silver 

0 

4 

0 

0 

1 

4 

0 

5 

4 

X^itto  part  gdt 

0 

3 

0 

0 

1 

3 

0 

.5 

0 

Ditto  ungilt  tto » 

0 

2 

9 

0 

011  1 

0 

3 

H 

Mm  2 


268 


BOMBAY. 


ON  HOME  CONSUMPTION. 


Pcrmnnciil 

])iny. 


Precious  stones,  see  Emeralds 
p . . ( Paper  0 10 

nn  ( Ditto  coloured  cent.  51  5 0 

Rubies  see  Emeralds. 

Goods,  wares,  and  rniTchandise,  beirifj;  either  in  part  or 
wholly  manufactiind,  not  bein^  otherwise  enumerated, 
or  charged  with  duty,  and  not  prohibited  to  be  imported 
into,  or  used  in  Great  Britain  |H?r  cent. 

For  till*  articles  comprehended  under  this  head  sec  list  C. 

Goods,  wares,  and  merchandise,  not  being  either  in  ptart  or 
wholly  manufactured,  not  being  otherwise  enumerated, 
or  charged  with  duty,  and  not  prohibited  to  be  imported 
into,  or  used  in  Great  Britain  cent.  20  0 0 

For  the  articles  comprehended  under  this  head  see  list  D.  | 


51 


Temporary  or  War 
Dury 

Total. 

£ *.  rf. 

a,  s (/. 

0 0 4 

0 1 4 

17  1 8 

68  6 8 

17  1 8 

68  6 8 

€ 13  4 

26  13  4 

A. — Calicoes. 


Under  this  denomination  the  under-mentioned  goods  are  comprehended : 


Byrampauts,  wliite. 
Bailacs. 

Callipatties. 

Chow  tars. 

Doosooties. 

Dotties,  white. 
Dungarees. 

and  all  other  calicoes,  white. 


Emmerties. 

GuiTahs. 

Ginghams,  white. 
Ilumhums. 

Izzarccs. 

Laccowries. 

Long  cloths,  white. 


Mammoodies. 

Moorees. 

Sannoes. 

Salampores. 

Succatoons. 

Percaulahs. 

Putcalis. 


B.— Muslins. 


Under  this  denomination  the  under-mentioned  goods  are  comprehended: 


Allaballies. 

Addaties.  . 

Balasorc  handkerchiefs 
Betellees. 

Cossas. 

Chundraconnas. 


Doreas,  white  or  gold, 
Jamdamnccs. 

Mulmuls. 

Nainsooks. 

Seerhaud  connos. 
Seerbettees. 


and  all  white,  flowered,  or  muslins  stitched. 


Seerbands. 

Surshauds. 

Sublooms. 

Terrindams. 

Tanjeebs. 

Tartorees. 


C — Manufactured  Goods. 

Under  this  denomination  the  following  goods  are  comprehended  : 


Amber  beads. 

Artificial  flowers. 

Bamboo  atchar. 

Butterflies  preserved. 

China  ink. 

Cane  blinds. 

Cane  mats. 

Curry  stuff. 

Chinese  musical  instrumenti 


Furniture  of  black  wood. 
Ditto  of  sandal  wood. 
Fans. 

Fireworks. 

Handles  for  knives 
Ivory  toys. 

Indian  glue. 

Kittisols. 

Landscapes  in  stone. 


Mother  of  pearl  articles. 
Painted  bamboo  sticks. 

Rice  flowers,  images,  &c. 
Rosewood  furniture. 

Soy. 

Shawls. 

Vermicelli. 

Wood  frames  carved  !t  gilt. 
Walking  sticks  inlaid. 


BOMBAY, 


D.— Unmanufactured  Goods. 

iJndcr  this  denomination  the  under-mentioned  goods  are  comprehended  : 


India  weed. 

Paddy. 
lU'cd  canes, 
llougli  pebbles. 

Hose  wood. 

Sandal  wood. 

The  East  India  Company  arc  authorized  by  Act  of  Parliament  to  cliargc  on  the  amount  of  all  goods 
imported  and  sold  on  account  of  individuals  at  their  sales, 

For  expences  of  unshipping,  hoyage,  cartage,  warehouse-room,  sorting,  lolling, 
and  selling  the  said  goods,  or  in  any  manner  concerning  the  same,  over  and 


Agates,  rough 
Birds'*  nests. 

Bamboo  reeds. 

Camefs  hair. 

Cashew  nuts. 

Cayenne  pepper  in  pods. 


Sea-horse  leelh. 
Sea-shells,  rough. 
Tigers’  teelh. 
Tigt'rs’  claws, 
'riiteiiague. 
Tobacco. 


above  tlie  freightv.,^....... 


..‘1  per  cent. 


Extracts  J'rmn  Acts  of  Parliament  relative  to  Prohibited  (7oods. 

Wrought  silks,  Bengals,  and  stuffs  mixed  with  silk  or  herha,  olTIie  manufaclure  of  Persia,  Chinn,  or 
the  East  Indies,  and  all  calicoes,  painted,  dyed,  printed,  or  stained  lliere,  not  to  be  worn  or  used  in  (irt'at 
Britain,  to  be  imported  only  for  exportation,  and  then  only  in  the  port  of  London,  and  to  be  warehousetl; 
if  taken  elsewhere,  or  improper  entries  made,  the  goods  to  be  forfeited,  and  a penalty  of  to  attach 

to  the  parties.  If  any  doubt  of  the  place  of  manufacture,  the  proof  to  lie  cm  tlie  owm  rs  of  the  goods.  If 
such  goods  be  found  in  any  house,  &c.  to  be  forfeited,  and  a [)enalty  of  £200  to  attach  to  the  parties  in 
whose  custody  the  goods  may  be.— 11  and  12  Geo.  HI.  chap.  10,  se(‘t.  1 to  .'1. 

When  entered  for  exportation,  to  pay  only  the  duty  which  will  remain  on  exportation. — S(‘ct.  10. 

Prohibited  goods,  if  relanded,  to  be  forfeited,  and  certain  penalties  to  attach  to  the  master  of  the 
ship,  Sec. — 5 (ico.  I.  chap.  11,  sect.  6. 

Persons  concealing  prohibite<l  goods,  or  goods  subject  to  duty,  to  forfeit  the  artieU's,  and  trible  the 
value.  Offering  for  sale  prohibited  or  run  goods,  or  goods  pretended  to  be  so,  tlie  parties  to  forleit  the 
same,  and  treble  the  value.  Such  goods  may  be  seized  from  the  buyer,  who  is  to  forfeit  three  times  the 
value  also.— 11  Geo.  I.  chap.  30,  sect.  10  to  21. 


Prohibited  Goods,  Wares,  and  Merchandise. 


Arras. 

Callawaporcs. 

llerba  Lungees. 

Painted  silk  gauze. 

Allejars. 

Cotton  Romol  hand- 

Jilmils. 

Homals. 

Alchabannies. 

kerchiefs. 

Jamawars,  flowered 

Sastraeiindies. 

Abbawars. 

Chanderbannics. 

Jamdannies,  ditto. 

Samioes. 

Atlas  cuttanecs. 

Charconnaes. 

Kissusoys. 

Seersuckers. 

Bejutapauts. 

Chucklaes. 

Kincobs. 

Silk  handkerchiefs. 

Byrampauts, 

Cuttanees. 

Long  clotli,  blue. 

Silk  stock iiiijs. 

Brawls. 

Duckmonsoys. 

Lemmunies. 

Sictersoys. 

Bandannoes. 

Dysooksoys. 

Lungees. 

Sooseys. 

Bombay  stuffs. 

Dimities,  painted. 

Lustrings. 

ShalbafTls. 

Carridai'ries. 

Elatclies. 

Nillaes. 

Silk  skeins. 

Chillacs. 

Ginghams,  striped. 

Niccapnees. 

Silk,  wrought. 

Chintz. 

Ditto,  clouded. 

Neganepauts. 

T aff’aties. 

Cotton  Romals. 

Guinea  stuffs. 

Photaes. 

Te|>oys. 

Chilloes. 

Gurrasoots. 

Poises. 

Tapseils. 

Coopees. 

Gold  atlas. 

Peniascoes. 

Tutahumsey. 

Cushtaes. 

Habassies. 

Polampores. 

S70 


BOMBAY. 


J)y  13  Geo.  III.  chap.  G8,  sc(  t.  3G.  From  the  ratification  of  the  definitive  treaty  of  peace  with  France, 
the  East  India  C’ornpany  may  sell  for  home  consumption  or  exportation,  warehoused  silk  handkerchiefs, 
provided  that  they  shall  not  in  any  one  year  sell  or  expose  to  sale  more  than  50,000  pieces,  of  the  usual 
len^dh,  and  the  sorts  usually  exposed  to  sale. 

COMPANY’S  MARINE. 


The  marine  on  this  establishment  was  originally  instituted,  and  has  been  maintained  for  services  of 
€ftnsidcrable  iinjiortance  to  the  interests  of  the  East  India  Company,  and  to  the  commerce  in  general  on 
the  western  side  of  India.  It  is  in  fiict  a species  of  navy.  The  merits  and  services  of  the  officers,  and  the 
extensive  benefits  derived  by  the  docks  and  arsenals  are  well  known.  The  immediate  leading  objects  of 
this  establishment  arc 

I.  The  protection  of  the  ti  ade,  wliich  is  eonsiderable,  from  port  to  port  from  pirates. 

II.  The  defence  of  the  ('ompany’s  trade  and  possessions,  in  time  of  war,  against  European  enemies. 

HI.  The  transport  of  troops,  kv. 

IV.  For  making  nautical  discoveries. 

V.  For  conveying  packets  to  and  from  the  Red  Sea,  Persian  Gulf,  &c. 

In  the  year  the  Court  of  Directors  entered  upon  a full  examination  of  the  subject  of  the  mai*ine 

department  of  tliis  Pr<‘sideiicv,  in  which  they  took  Into  consideration  tlie  deficiency  of  the  establishment 
upon  its  constitution  at  that  time,  and  forwarded  such  instructions  for  its  improvement  in  every  respect  as 
appeared  nnpiisite.  The  situation  of  the  olticiu  s drew  likewise  their  particular  attention,  and  regulations 
were  passed  respecting  their  rank,  placing  it  in  a relative  proportion  with  that  of  the  officers  of  the  army, 
which  had  recently  been  consiiiorably  improved.  The  principle  of  granting  furlough,  and  allowing  total 
retirement  after  prescribed  periods,  with  the  pay  of  theii*  respective  ranks,  was  also  instituted,  in  like 
manner  as  in  tlic  military  service. 

From  the  nature  of  tlie  service  in  lime  of  war  particularly,  the  annual  expcnce  of  this  department  is 
fluctuating  and  uncertain  in  its  amount.  INIeasurcs  are,  however,  adopted  to  cheek  and  controul  the  expen- 
diture, and  keep  it  within  sucli  limits  as  arc  consistent  with  the  efficiency  of  the  service. 

PAY  AND  ALLOWANCES  TO  3 HE  OFFICERS  IN  THE  COMPANY’S  MARINE. 


STATIONS. 


P.iy  per  Momli 

1(  uprOH 

Commodore 
Captains  of  large 

Captains  of  small  ship  180. 

J.ieutenants  in  command.^........,........*..  110. 

Iftt.  Lieutenants  not  in  cmninaud. .......  110.....^..... 

2d.  Lieutenants  70........... 

Volunteers........... 30. 


Allowanres. 

Kupei's 

300 

1 80.......^...^...... 

‘ 90, 


r%% 


Total. 
Ill)  pres. 
.2000 

G40 

300 
200 


0 — 
0»> — 
0 


110 
70 
30 


The  pay  of  the  Superintendent  of  Marine  is  2,500  rupees  per  montli,  and  that  of  the  Master  Attendant 
20,000  rupees  per  annum. 

The  following  is  a statement  of  the  cxpenccs  of  the  Alarine  in  the  years  1792-3  to  1809-10  inclusive. 


Yr,ir»  j 

j < li  ii  I'l.'  [ 

^ (Mr-. 

Charu<*s  j 

Y.MIS. 

Clia'pos 

T792-3 

79, 7 50 

1798-9 

i'67,292 

, 1804-5 

■2T3 1,64.7 

1793-4 

93.330 

1799-0 

140,172 

1805-6 

134,493 

J7!)4-5 

77,H-i5 

18(X>-1 

152,601 

1800-7 

158,393 

17f)5-ti 

00,7  M 

1801-2 

116,867 

1807-8 

154,674 

1796-7 

05,747 

1802-3 

118,694. 

1808-9 

167,980 

1707-8 

05,004 

1803-4 

108,875 

1809-10 

155,205 

BOMBAY, 


^71 


REGULATIONS  RELATIVE  TO  FURLOUGH  AND  RKTIRE.Ml'AT. 

Furlough. — 1.  A certain  proportion  of  the  marine  oflicers  (to  he  determined  hy  the  (iovi  rnineiil,  with 
a due  regard  to  the  exigencies  of  the  service)  are  allowed  to  go  home  on  furlough  fur  three  yeai  s,  \>ith 
tlie  pay  only  of  their  rank. 

2.  No  officer  under  the  rank  of  Captain,  who  has  not  actually  served  ten  years  in  tlu'  marines  can  he 
p(‘rmitted  to  come  home  on  furlough,  unless  in  cases  of  ill  health,  under  the  like  certificates  recjuiictl 
from  military  officers. 

3.  If  the  Commodore  is  permitted  to  come  home  on  furlough,  he  is  to  he  allowed  the  pay  of  a ra|)tain 
only,  half  the  remainder  of  his  allowance  to  be  drawn  hy  the  senior  Captain  in  the  service,  who  is  to  act  a-* 
Commodore  during  his  absence,  in  addition  to  the  pay  of  his  rank  as  si‘nior  Captain. 

Retirement. — 1.  Every  officer  of  the  marine  who  has  served  twenty-five  years  in  India,  including 
three  years  for  a furlough,  is  permitted  to  retire  from  the  service  wWh  the  lidlouing  pay: 

Commodoi  c,  annum 

Captain  of  tlie  first  class  of  ISO 

Captain  of  the  smaller  13.5 

First  Lieutenant  so 

2.  The  regulations  for  drawing  pay  on  furlough  and  retirement  hy  the  marine  offieers  are,  as  far  :w 
circumstances  will  admit,  the  same  as  those  for  the  military  officers,  as  established  by  the  Honourable 
Court’s  orders,  dated  the  22d  April,  1790. 

3.  In  order  to  afford  every  suitable  encouragement  to  the  European  petty  officers  ami  seamen  of  the 
marine,  the  Court  of  Directors  have  resolved  that,  in  cases  where  they  may  have  received  wounds,  or  have 
been  disabled  or  worn  out  in  the  service,  they  sliall  be  allow^ed  a pension  ])roportiont‘d  to  the  h iigth  and 
nature  of  their  services,  to  be  received  in  Europe.  W I lenever,  therefore,  any  persons  of  this  description  may 
be  recommended  to  the  benefit  of  this  indulgence,  the  recommendation  must  be  accompanied  with  the 
proper  certificates,  together  with  the  opinion  of  Govemmeiii  as  to  the  amount  of  the  pensions  to  Ix'  granted* 

The  native  officers  and  seamen  who  are  disabled  by  w’ounds,  length  of  si'i  vicc*,  or  other  accidental 
causes,  arc  to  be  allowed  pensions,  at  such  rates  as,  in  the  opinion  of  Government,  the  nature  of  tlu  ir  cases 
may  require. 

Precedence  of  Hank,  as  established  between  the  Officers  of  the  Bombay  Marine^  and  those  of  the  Past 

^ India  Company s chartered  Ships, 

Commodore  of  the  Bombay  marine. 

Commanders  of  the  Company’s  regular  ships. 

Captains  in  the  Bombay  Marine. 

Masters  of  the  Company’s  extra  ships. 

Lieutenants  of  the  Bombay  Murine,  witli  the  temporary  rank  of  Captains  commanding  vessels. 

' Comparative  Rank  of  OjffUcers  in  the  Company s Marine  and  Armi/, 

MARINE.  ARAIV. 

Commodore  with  Colonels. 

Captains  of  vessels  of  28  guns  and  upwards,  with  Lieutenant-Colonels. 

Ditto,  under  28  with  Majors. 

First  Lieutenants  Captains. 

Second  Lieutenants  with  Lieutenants. 


272 


BOMBAY. 


In  all  cases  the  dates  of  the  respective  coraniissions  arc  to  regulate  the  precedence.  The  civil  rank  of 
the  Superintendent  of  Marine  is  next  to  the  Members  of  Council ; ‘ the  Master  Attendant  is  to  have  civil  rank 
next  below  the  Superintendent,  and  to  sit  above  the  (Commodore  when  they  arc  acting  together. 

Comparative  Rank  of  Officers  in  the  Navi/  and  Army, 

NAVY.  ARMY, 

^ din  II*  qI  W1 1 ll  Generals. 

Vice  Admiral  with  ieutenant-Generals. 

Itear^Adnin  %%.%%%•%%  with  %%«%'«.-««>%wwk‘%«^^«iv«-v%AIfyoi~Genei  als. 

Commodore  and  first  Captain  to("onimanders  inChief|With  Brigadier-Generals. 

Captains  of  three  years  post  Colonels. 

Cither  post  C aptains  %^%%v%v%'*%%^%'%v%%'%%v%%^%%%^^v-^%^%^%%»-%with'vv*x%%%»»^v%»%w-%»A*w^l4ieutenant*'0olonels. 
Commanders  with  Majors, 

liieutenants 

I'ROVISIONS  AND  llEFRESHMENTS. 

The  Island  of  Bombay  scarcely  produces  any  articles  of  consumption.  It  is  supplied  with  food  for 
its  numerous  inhabitants  from  various  parts  of  India,  and  every  article  is  much  dearer  than  at  either  of  the 
otiicr  Presidencies.  ConsideraHle  quantities  of  rice  and  other  grain  are  annually  imported.  The  prices 
are  continually  fluctuating,  from  the  uncertain  stat?  of  the  market,  which  is  under  the  superintendence 
of  the  Police. 

Hansia  wheatv^^^%%%^  Rupees  20  to  24-  per  candy.  Errandia  oil  v»v%wv»vvww»%%»  2 to  3 per  maund. 

Junihaseer  ditto  17  to  20  ditto.  Mutton,  hind  quarter^^w^v*  IJto  2 each. 

Bownaghur  ditto  17  to  20  ditto.  Ditto,  fore  ditto  1 to  1|  ditto. 

Jumbaseer  grain  20  to  22  ditto.  I Inferior  kinds  sold  71bs.  for^^l  rupee. 

Bownaghur  ditto  18  to  23  ditto.  Beef,  Gibs.  ditto. 

Badjeree  12  to  15  ditto.  Kid,  fore  quarter*%vM^%^v^%%  3 to  4 rupees  each, 

Jowarec  12  to  14  ditto.  Ditto,  hind  ditto^^»'vv^^%v%%^%w*  1 to  l-j[^  ditto. 

Baroacfl  doll  2 to  3 per  parah  Bullocks’  hearts-v.^%^^.^%^v^  IS  pice  each. 

Surat  ditto  2 to  3 ditto.  Buffalo  ditto  { rupee  each, 

Jerausant  ricevw^.......^..  3 to  4 ditto.  Veal,  according  to  the  quality  and  quantity. 

Vcrgole  ditto 2 to  3 ditto.  Kid,  or  sheep’s  liead^.^..^^  | rupee  each. 

Bengal  rice  unboiled%%%%%««^  6 to  8 per  bag  Calf’s  head*^  1 ditto. 

Ditto  builed.,.w,,,.^.^„«„,  3 to  S ditto.  Surat  fowls  JL.  Ij  to  3 rupees  each/ 

Mangalore  rice  unboiled  2 to  3 per  robin  Country  fowls  \ ditto. 

Ditto  boiled  li  to  2J  ditto.  Ditto  half  ditto  3 per  rupee. 

Putney  rice  unbeaten  1{  to  2 per  parah  Large  chickens  4 ditto. 

Ditto  batty  25  to  30  per  morah  I Ducks’  eggs  IS  reas  each. 

Red  ditto  20  to  25  ditto.  I Hens’  ditto«^%%%%v%%«v%«.%«%«%^«%  10  ditto. 

Caranchey  Ghee  5 to  6 per  maund.  Coorwen  fish  10  reas  per  lb. 

Bownaghur  5 to  5}  ditto.  Pomphlets  according  to  size  and  quantity. 

Amedabad,  ditto^^^,^.^^^^^  G to  7 ditto.  Seer  fish  24  reas  per  lb. 

Cocoa  nut  oil  ) ^ to  S[  ditto.  I Bread,  Is't  sort,  per  loaf  of  13  oz.«..<40  reas  eacl^ 

GingcUy  ditto  3 to  3 ditto.  reas  per  seer. 

Bombay  produces  most  excellent  onions.  All  other  vegetables  are  scarce  and  dear.  Firewood  variea 
from  3 to  6 rupees  per  1000  billets,  according  to  the  we. 


ALKALI— AXACARDIUM—ANIME,  GlTAf. 

Arrack  from  Goa,  Colunibo,  and  Batavia,  atone  to  two  rupees  per  gallon,  «accor(lin/T  to  the  quality ; 
but  Bengal  rum,  equal  to  some  of  the  West  India  rum,  is  occasionally  to  be  procured  from  the  Company's 
stores,  at  an  advance  of  15  per  cent,  on  the  prime  cost  at  Calcutta. 

Water  is  supplied  by  pipes  from  the  bunder,  and  the  casks  filled  with  a hose,  for  wliich  a charge  is 
made  by  the  Marine  Paymaster  of  one  rupee  per  ton.  It  is  generaUy  earned  of!* in  the  ship's  long-boat;  but 
large  countzy  boats  are  to  be  preferred  for  that  puipose. 

Jatjst  nf  Articles  procurable  at  lionibay^  with  Directions  how  to  chusc  them* 

AI.KALI 

Is  occasionally  brought  from  Bombay  to  Europe,  as  ballast  instead  of  stones,  generally  loose,  but  some- 
times in  mat  bags.  Care  should  be  taken  that  it  is  properly  duiinaged,  as  it  will  diminish  considerably  if  the 
water  gets  to  it.  It  should  be  chosen  dry  and  clean,  of  a greyish  blue  or  slate  colour,  both  within  and  without, 
and  full  of  small  hnlp<»,  like  sponge ; if  good,  it  will  bubble  much  on  being  put  into  vinegar.  Reject  that 
which  is  of  a blackish  green  colour,  and  of  a disagreeable  fetid  smell. 

The  following  are  the  quantities  imported  and  sold  at  the  Company's  sales,  in  the  years  1804  to 
inclusive,  with  the  sale  amount  and  average  price  per  owt. 


Years. 

March  Sale. 

Sppiembcr  Sale 

Total. 

A\cr 

per  i 

wr 

Cwt. 

i' 

Cu  t 

i 

Cwt. 

£ 

JL 

s. 

ti. 

53 

29 

50i 

478 

557 

507 

0 

iiT 

“9 

mmim 

1950 

761 

_ 

1950 

761 

0 

7 

9 

■ESS 

1196 

1331 

1196 

0 

17 

11 

1807 

■9 

^9 

1975 

1266 

1975 

1 

11 

2 

1808 

11^9 

BO 

98 

151 

98 

0 

12 

11 

20  cwt.  of  alkali  are  allowed  to  a ton.  The  permanent  duty  on  barilla  is  8s.  6d.  the  cwt.  and  the  tem- 
porary or  war  duty  2s.  lOd.  making  in  the  whole  11s.  4d.  per  cwt.  The  gencTality  of  the  ship-owners 
allow  it  to  come  freight  free,  but  in  one  or  two  instances  half  freight  has  been  charged. 

ANACARDIUM 

Is  the  fruit  of  the  Malacca  bean-tree,  and  grows  in  various  parts  of  the  East  Indies;  it  is  a kind  of 
nut  with  a double  shell,  containing  in  the  space  between  the  outer  and  inner  shell  a fungous  substance, 
filled  with  a dark-coloured  viscous  fluid,  which  is  easily  forced  out  upon  cutting  the  nut,  and  squeezing  it 
between  the  fingers.  This  juice  ru'bbed  on  linen  or  cotton  gives  a reddish  brown  stain,  and  when  rubbed 
with  wet  chunam,  deepens  to  a full  black,  that  is  quite  permanent:  it  is  used  in  India  for  marking  linen, 
hence  it  is  called  the  mai’king-nut.  They  should  be  chosen  large,  plump,  and  fresh. 

ANIME,  GUM 

Is  a resinous  substance,  which  flows  by  incision  from  the  trunk  of  a large  tree,  growing  in  several  parts 
of  the  East  Indies,  and  in  South  America.  It  has  a light  pleasant  smell,  and  little  or  no  taste  ; its  colour 
is  a fine  pale  yellow;  in  the  best  specimens  it  is  quite  clear  and  transpaient ; it  readily  breaks  between  the 
teeth,  but  on  long  chewing,  softens  and  sticks  together.  Gum  Anime  should  be  chosen  in  large  pieces, 
clear  and  transparent ; it  is  much  enhanced  in  value  by  having  the  dirty  outside  scraped  off,  w Iiich  can  be 
done  at  a small  expence  in  India,  compared  with  what  it  can  be  in  London:  when  laid  on  a red  hot  iron,  it 
immediately  melts,  catches  flame,  and  burns  quickly  away  with  a fragrant  smell,  lea\ing  only  a small  quan- 
tity of  light-coloured  ashes.  That  which  is  sraaD,  dark-colourcd,  and  opaque,  should  be  i ejected. 

N n 


274 


ARRACK. 


The  large  and  dear  pieces  of  Gum  Anime  arc  frequently  substituted  for  Gum  Copal,  and  form  a 
most  beautiful  and  durable  varnLsIi,  which  is  highly  prized  for  its  horny  toughness. 

I'he  following  are  the  quantities  of  Gum  Anime  imported  and  sold  at  the  Company’s  sales  in  the  years 
1804  to  1808  inclusive,  with  the  sale  amount  and  average  price  per  cwt. 


M.irch 

Sft!c 

Septcinbrr  Sale 

Total. 

Avi-r  per  Cwt. 

£ 

Cwt. 

e 

Cwt 

i 1 

£ fi.  if. 

IHO-l. 

76 

36(i 

90 

704 

166 

1070 

6 8 11 

180./i 

309 

2056 

143 

1237 

452 

7 5 8 

1806 

137 

688 

131 

641 

268 

1320 

4 19  2 

1S()7 

885 

3751 

lot 

517 

98(i 

4268 

4 6 7 

1808 

1086 

1769 

13 

169 

1(M)9 

1938 

1 15  3 

10  cwt.  of  (nun  Anime  are  allowed  to  a ton.  The  permanent  duty  is  £2  l(i.v.  per  cwt.  and  the  tem- 
porary or  war  duly  18s.  Sd.  per  cwt.  If  manifested  as  Gum  Copal,  which  it  occasionally  lias  been,  it  is 
liable  to  double  the  above  duties. 


ARRACK. 

This  spirituous  li(|uor  is  maniifactiircd  nt  several  places  in  the  East  Indies— -Goo,  C-olumbo,  .and  Bata- 
via. This  is  a branch  of  trade,  of  which  the  Dutdi  Imve  alino.st  deprived  the  Portuguese,  the  art  of  making 
it  being  transferred  for  the  most  part  from  Goa  to  Ratavia.  Goa  arrack  is  both  double  .and  treble  dis- 
tilled; it  is  weaker  tbaii  that  of  Batavia,  but  lias  a peculiar  and  agreeable  flavour,  which  makes  it  preferred 
to  the  other  sorts.  The  (’olumbo  arrack  is  the  most  inferior. 

There  are  various  accounts  of  the  materials  used,  and  the  mode  of  making  arrack,  and  the  disagree- 
ment of  these  accounts  seems  to  arise  from  the  general  appellation  of  arrack  being  given  in  most  parts  of 
India  to  every  kind  of  spirituous  li([uor.  It  is  certain  that  the  flavour  of  the  several  kinds  of  arrack  difier 
as  much  from  each  other,  as  those  of  brandy,  rum,  or  any  other  spirituous  liquors  of  Europe.  The  Goa 
arrack  is  invariably  made  from  a vegetable  juice  called  toddy,  which  flows  by  incision  from  the  cocoa-nut 
tree:  >vhcii  a sufficient  quantity  of  toddy  is  procured,  it  is  left  to  ferment,  which  it  soon  docs;  when  the 
fermentation  is  over,  and  tlie  liquor  or  wash  is  become  a little  tart,  it  is  put  into  the  still,  and  a fire  being 
made,  the  still  is  suffered  to  work  as  long  as  that  which  conics  over,  has  any  considerable  taste  of  spirit. 
The  spirit  thus  procured  is  the  low  wine  of  arrack,  and  this  is  so  poor  a liquor,  that  it  will  soon  corrupt 
and  spoil,  if  not  distilled  again,  to  separate  some  of  its  phlegm:  it  is  therefore  immediately  poured 
back  into  the  still,  and  rectified  to  that  very  weak  kind  of  proof-spirit  in  which  state  we  generally  find  it. 
The  arrack  we  meet  with,  notwithstanding  its  being  of  a proof-test,  according  to  the  way  of  judging 
by  the  crown  of  bubbles,  holds  but  a sixth,  and  sometimes  but  an  eighth  part  of  pure  spirit;  whereas 
our  other  spirits,  when  tliey  shew  that  proof,  arc  generally  esteemed  to  hold  one  half  pure  spirit. 

Batavia  arrack  is  obtained  by  distillation  from  rice  and  sugar:  it  is  said  that  the  Chinese  junks  import 
large  <piantitics  of  sumslievv,  a hut,  fiery  spirit  from  China,  which  is  mixed  with  the  arrack ; but  it  is 
•more  probabh’  that  it  is  consumed  by  the  numerous  Chinese  who  reside  in  that  settlement. 

Arrack  is  seldom  imported  as  an  article  of  trade,  though  the  East  India  Company  allow  20  leagers  to 
be  brought  in  each  ship,  except  in  those  from  China,  on  paying  the  custom  and  excise  duties,  and  to  the 
Company  2 per  cent,  on  the  sale  value,  and  Gd.  per  gallon;  upon  what  exceeds  that  quantity,  2 sliillinga 
is  charged.  The  proportional  shares  .are  as  follow  : 

(’ommamler  Gallons  1971 

(Ihief  25G 

Second  ditto  205 

Third  ditto.  Purser,  and  Surgeon,  each  154  gafions  4G2 

Fourth  Officer  102 

Fifth  Mate,  Boatswain,  Gunner,  and  Carpenter,  each  51  gallons  204 

forming  a total  of  3,200  gallons,  being  20  leagers,  each  of  160  gallons. 


ARRANGOES— AWr 


The  follotoiriff  arc  the  Eaut  India  Company's  Regulations  for  shipping  Jrrfulx,  ij  r. 

No  arrack  or  oilier  spirits  are  permlited  to  be  shipped  in  India,  or  China,  on  any  ol'  the  Company \ 
ships  returning  to  Euro[)e,  except  such  as  shall  be  for  the  use  of  the  ship's  company  on  tiio  voyages  or  in 
the  immediate  privilege  of  the  commander  and  oflicers. 

Each  cask  or  chest,  shipped  for  the  use  of  the  ship’s  company,  shall  be  marked  ‘‘  Stores,"  and  each 
cask  or  chest,  shipped  on  the  private  account  of  any  of  the  officers,  shall  be  mark(3d  with  the  name  at 
length  of  the  person  to  whom  it  belongs;  and  Mich  casks  or  chests  ns  shall  not  be  so  marked,  shall  be  taken 
and  deemed  to  be  the  projicrty  of  the  commander.  In  order  to  ascertain  the  sums  to  be  charged,  as  here- 
after mentioned,  before  the  respective  accounts  shall  be  adjusted  and  passcil  the  Court,  the  arrack  and  other 
s])irits  received  into  the  warehouse,  shall  be  the  first  private  trade  articles  put  up  to  sale  by  each  ship. 

Should  those  marked  “ Stores”  be  refus(*d  to  be  bought,  or  not  sell  for  a sum  equal  to  the  King’i} 
and  Company’s  duties,  the  difference  shall  be  charged  to  the  owners  in  thiir  account  of  freight  and  demurrage. 

Should  those  marked  with  the  name  of  the  respective  oflicers  of  the  ship,  or  those  deemed  to  be  the 
property  of  the  commander,  in  the  same  manner,  sell  for  less  than  tlie  duties  before  speciHi'd,  the  difference 
shall  be  charged  in  their  respective  accounts  of  private  trade;  but  shoidd  it  so  happen  that  an  officer  im- 
porting  arraek  or  other  spirits,  has  not  a sufficient  quantity  of  other  goods  to  answer  the  deficiency  ari^ing 
as  aforesaid,  then  in  that  case  such  officer  shall  not  be  employed  again  in  the  Company’s  service,  until  he 
has  paid  the  amount  of  such  deficiency  into  the  Company’s  treasury. 

Q’he  duties  and  drawbacks  on  arraek  are  the  same  as  those  on  brandy. 

Tlio  tonnage  of  arrack  is  calculated  at  252  gallons  per  ton, 

ARRANGOES 

Are  a kind  of  beads  formed  from  the  rough  cornelian,  chiefly  in  demand  for  the  African  trade,  of 
various  forms,  barrel,  bell,  round,  and  are  all  drilled.  The  barrel  shaped  kind,  cut  from  the  best  stones,  arc 
from  two  to  three  inches  long,  and  should  be  chosen  as  clear  as  possible,  whether  red  or  whiti’,  having  a 
good  polish,  and  free  from  flaws ; the  bell  shape  are  from  one  to  two  inches  long,  and  inferior  in  every 
respect;  the  latter  beads  are  made  from  veiy  inferior  stones,  and  are  ol  little  value.  Considerable  quan- 
tities were  formerly  imported,  but  in  consequence  ol  the  abolition  ol  the  slave  trade,  the  demand  is  now 
very  trifling.  The  quantities  sold  are  blended  with  cornelians. 

20  cwt.  of  arrangocs,  or  arrango  beads,  arc  allowed  to  a ton.  The  permanent  duty  is  £53  IGs.  3d, 
per  cent,  and  the  temporary  or  war  duty  oC17  18s.  9d.  in  all  i^71  15s.  per  cent. 

AWL, 

Or  morinda,  is  a tree  of  a middling  size,  growing  on  the  Coast  of  jNIalabar,  and  other  parts  of  India, 
the  root  of  which  spreads,  and  strikes  into  the  ground  three  or  four  feet;  the  trunk  is  used  only  foj-  fuel. 
The  roots,  which  are  long  and  slender,  are  usetl  as  a dye  in  many  parts  of  India;  the  colouring  matter  re 
sides  chiefly  in  the  bark  of  the  root.  The  small  twigs  which  contain  little  wood,  bear  a higlier  price  than 
the  larger  pieces,  therefore  the  roots  when  dug  up,  are  divided  into  three  sorts,  coarse,  inediuni,  and  flue: 
the  coarse  sells  for  about  a rupee  per  maund,  the  medium  tw  o or  three,  and  the  fine  four  rupees  jicr  maund. 
Independent  of  the  consumption  of  this  dye  in  the  province  of  Malabar,  large  quantities  ol  it  arc  <‘X])ortcd 
to  Guzzerat,  and  the  northern  parts  of  Hindostan,  to  the  amount  of  several  lacs  of  rupees  p(  r annum. 
It  is  seldom  imported  into  Europe.  In  the  Maich  sale,  1807,  a quantity  of  20  cwt.  i\us  .sold  lor  120. 


BEETLE  NUT— CARDAMUMS. 


S76 


BEETLE  NUT, 

Or  Betel  Nut,  is  the  fruit  of  the  Areca  Palm,  a fine  slender  upright  tree,  not  above  6 inches  in  diameter 
fit  bottom,  and  upwards  of  .30  feet  liigh.  The  leaves  grow  similar  to  those  of  the  cocoa  nut  tree,  and  the  nuts 
are  in  clusters.  The  husk,  which  is  yellow  on  the  outside,  and  brown  and  fibrous  within,  covers  a nut  about 
the  size  of  a nutmeg : at  one  end  it  is  rather  flat;  it  is  white  and  marbled  within  with  purplish  veins,  of  a 
light  brown  externally,  moderately  astringent,  and  insipid  to  the  taste.  Beetle  nut  is  grown  in  various 
parts  of  India,  the  Malay  Peninsula,  and  the  Eastern  Islands.  That  produced  on  the  Coast  of  Malabar  is 
of  two  sorts,  boiled  and  raw  : tlie  former  is  tlie  nut  cut  in  slices,  and  boiled  with  a small  quantity  of 
Terra  Japonica;  then  dried,  when  it  is  fit  for  sale;  the  other  is  the  nut  in  the  state  we  see  it.  When  new 
and  good,  the  nut  will  fiave  a whitish  skin  on  the  broad  end ; but  when  old,  the  skin  is  easily  rubbed  ofL 
Those  wliicli  are  worm-eaten  and  decayed,  sliould  he  rejected. 

They  an,*  seldom  imported  into  England,  though  they  might  be  of  use  in  some  manufactures. 

Beetle  Nut  is  an  article  of  considerable  trade  from  port  to  port  in  India.  In  the  year  1805,  there  wag 
imported  into  tlic  British  Presidencies,  from  various  parts,  to  tlie  following  amount,  viz. 

Bengal  Sicca  Rupees  2,41,165 

Fort  St.  George  and  its  dependencies 

Bombay  and  3,02,323 

Sicca  Rupees  11,10,694 

Large  quantities  arc  annually  imported  into  China  from  Pulo  Pinang  and  the  Malay  Peninsula. 


CARDAMUMS 


Are  produced  in  several  parts  of  India,  but  the  best  are  from  the  Malabar  Coast,  and  are  the  sort 
usually  broiiglit  to  England.  They  are  the  produce  of  a small  plant,  growing  in  some  places  without  cul- 
tivation ; in  others  they  arc  propagated  by  cuttings  from  the  roots ; in  the  third  year  the  plants  come  to 
perfection,  bearing  abundantly  for  a year  or  two,  and  then  die.  The  capsules  are  gathered  as  they  ripen, 
and  when  dried  in  the  sun,  are  fit  for  sale. 

The  usual  crops  raised  in  Malabar  arc  estimated  at  about  100  candies,  wliich  are  distinguished  by  the 
places  of  their  growth,  and  are  esteemed  as  follow  : 


I.  Wynaad  w'hich  is  said  to  (>roduce . 

II.  Tamaratchery 

III.  Uartinaad  or  Cadutinadai^.^.^...^ 

IV.  C Qor 


Candies  65 


About  5 candies  of  an  inferior  quality  are  procured  from  Velater,  which  are  sold  at  about  half  the 
price  of  the  others.  Many  merchants  by  looking  at  cardamums,  can  tell  the  country  whence  they  came. 
Those  from  Wynaad,  including  those  also  of  Cartinaad  and  Tamaratchery,  contain  many  round,  full 
white  grains,  or  capsules.  Those  of  Coorg  have  fewer  black,  or  light  ones,  T he  Velater  sort  are  long, 
dark  coloured,  and  thin  skinned.  The  East  India  Company  have  not  traded  in  cardamums  since  1797 ; 
they  always  purchased  them  by  contract  from  the  merchants  oq  the  Coast,  and  had  them  garbled.  At 
their  last  purchase,  8 candies  of  6401bs.  or  51201bs.  as  received  from  the  contractor,  produced  only 
candies  of  5G01bs.,  or  4060 lbs.;  the  bad  and  rejected  are  sold  to  the  Arabs.  Cardamums  are  never 
garbled,  except  for  the  Europe  market;  they  are  exported  chiefly  to  Bengal,  Bombay,  Surat,  Cutch,  and 
the  dlllerent  ports  in  Arabia.  Cardamums  should  be  cliosen  full,  plump,  and  difficult  to  be  broken,  of  a 


GREATER  CARDAMUMS— CHAYA  ROOT— COCOA  NUTS. 


277 


briglit  yellow  colour,  of  a piercing  smell,  with  an  acrid,  l)itterisli,  though  not  very  unploasanl  taste,  and 
particular  care  should  be  taken  that  they  are  properly  dried.  Tliey  are  reekoiKul  to  ke(*p  b(\st  in  a 
body,  and  are  therefore  packed  in  large  chests  well  jointed,  pitched  at  the  scams,  and  olheiu  ise  properly 
secured,  as  the  least  damp  greatly  reduces  their  value.  Previous  to  the  sales  in  England,  tluw  shoiiltl  he 
allotted  into  parcels  of  about  one  cwt.  each,  that  quantity  being  more  suitable  to  piirchasi  rs  than  a lot  of 
six  or  eight  cwt.,  which  the  chests  they  ai*c  imported  in,  usuully  contain. 

The  following  are  the  quantities  of  cardamums  of  all  sorts  imported  and  sold  at  the  I3ast  India  salt's 
in  the  years  1804  to  1808  inclusive,  with  the  sale  amount  and  the  average  price  per  lb. 


Y ears.. 

‘ Miuh 

1 Sale. 

Sf|»tf»iiilKT  Sale.  1 

[ 'I'nlal 

|.\ver.  per  lb 

lbs 

t* 

lbs  1 

1 t‘ 

1 lb..  1 

1 

r 1 'f. 

1H03 

■ 

■■  ... 

15,:i3.5 

3,055 

15,335 

3,055  1 

0 5 2 

18()4 

4,854 

453 

7,513 

314 

12,307 

767 

0 1 1 

1805 

- - 

■■■ 

— 

— 

— 

1800 

3,001 

960 

10,241 

2,262 

13,302 

3,228 

0 1 10 

1807 

7,338 

1,176 

15,168 

7,540 

3,95<> 

22,506 

.5,135  1 

0 |.  7 

1808 

8,705 

1,040 

2,502 

1 (),335 

3,602  I 

0 4 5 

12  cwt.  of  cardamums  are  allowed  to  a ton.  The  permanent  duty  is  Is.  3d.  per  lb.  and  the  temporary 
or  war  duty  5d.  making  in  the  whole  Is.  8d.  per  lb. 

The  above  account  of  East  India  sales  includes  cardamums  of  all  kinds,  botli  large  and  small.  The 
aK(ioiint  sold  in  the  year  1805  has  not  been  ascertained. 

GREATER  CARDAMUMS. 

This  kind  is  produced  on  Ceylon,  Java,  and  in  some  other  parts  of  the  East,  The  pods  arc  large  and 
long,  triangular,  thick  skinned,  and  dark  coloured,  some  approach  nearly  to  black  ; the  snu'll  is  less  aeriil, 
and  the  taste  nauseous  and  disagreeable,  not  the  least  resembling  that  of  the  Mahibar  cardamums.  T'hese 
have  occasionally  been  imported,  but  arc  not  esteemed.  The  duty  is  the  same  us  on  the  former  kind. 

CHAYA  ROOT 

Is  a small  root,  from  15  to  25  inches  long,  very  slender,  with  few  fibres,  cultivated  on  the  Coasts  of 
Malabar  and  Coromandel,  and  other  parts  of  India.  It  is  used  in  dying  red,  purple,  u deep  clear  brown, 
and  to  paint  the  red  figures  on  Chintz.  The  woody  part  of  the  chaya  root  is  white  and  tasteless;  it  is  the 
bark  only  which  is  possessed  of  the  colouring  principle.  When  fresh,  it  is  orange  colour,  tiiigc's  the 
spittle  yellow,  and  leaves  a slight  degree  of  acrimony  on  the  point  of  the  tongue  for  some  hours  atler 
chewing.  To  appearance  it  loses  its  yellow  colour  in  drying,  but  still  retains  the  above  property  on  Ix  ing 
chewed.  It  impregnates  cold  water  or  spirits  with  a straw  dolour,  and  to  boiling  water  it  gives  a brown- 
ish porter  colour.  The  coloui’ing  powers  of  the  root  are  said  to  be  improved  by  keeping  three  or  four  years. 
When  the  wild  sort  can  be  obtained,  it  is  preferred ; and  if  to  be  bad  of  two  years’  growth,  it  is  reckoned 
still  better.  It  is  seldom  imported  into  Europe. 

COCOA  NUTS 

Are  an  article  of  considerable  trade  in  all  parts  of  India,  in  its  various  branches— the  kernel,  the  husk 
of  the  nut,  of  which  coir  is  made;  and  the  oil  which  is  expressed  from  the  kernel.  It  is  the  produce  of  a 
palm  common  throughout  India.  It  begins  bearing  when  seven  or  eight  years  old,  and  live  s so  long, 
that  its  period  of  duration  cannot  readily  be  ascertained.  A good  tree  will  yield  iVom  50  to  100  nuts 
annually.  The  kernel  is  much  used  by  the  natives  in  diilerent  modes  of  dressing ; when  cut  into  pieces  and 
dried,  it  is  called  copra. 


278 


COIIU.COCULUS  INDICUS— CONESSI  BARK— CORNELIANS. 


COIR 

Is  manufactured  from  the  Jiusks  of  tlie  cocoa  nut,  composed  of  small  strings  and  threads,  wliicli 
being  soaked  sometime  in  water,  become  soft.  When  they  are  beaten,  the  other  substance  w^hich  is  mixed 
amongst  them,  falls  away  like  saw-dust,  leaving  only  the  strings : these  are  afterwards  spun  into  long 
yarns,  and  rolled  into  balls.  The  cordage  thus  manufactured,  is  much  esteemed  in  India,  and  preferred  to 
that  of  Europe  on  some  occasions,  from  its  advantage  of  floating  on  the  surface  of  the  water. 

COCULUS  INDICUS, 

Or  Indian  berry,  grows  in  considerable  clusters  on  large  trees  on  the  Malabar  Coast.  It  is  a small 
kidney  shaped  berry,  having  a wrinkled  outside,  with  a seam  running  along  the  back,  of  a dark  brown 
colour.  It  has  a white  kernel  inside,  of  a most  unpleasant  taste.  It  is  said  that  the  principal  use  of  the 
licrry  in  England  is  to  mix  with  malt  licpiors,  in  order  to  make  them  intoxicating ; Imt  this  practice  is  now 
expressly  forbidden  by  Act  of  Parliament.  These  berries  should  be  chosen  sound,  dry,  and  clean,  heavy, 
large,  and  free  from  stalks  and  dirt.  The  small  and  broken  should  be  rejected. 

The  following  are  the  (|iuintitics  of  Coculus  Indicus  imported  and  sold  at  the  East  India  sales  in  tlie 
years  1801'  to  1808  inclusive,  with  the  sale  amount  and  average  price  per  cwt. 


Yoarji. 

Murcli 

Scptcmbei  SaU'. 

Total. 

^ V ''  i>nr  Cwt, 

('wl 

£ 

Cwt. 

£ 

Cwt. 

£ 

X ^ /y. 

l8(H 

~ 48  0 

1771 

— 

480 

1771 

3 19  0 

1805 

104 

029 

230 

734 

424 

13(53 

3 4 3 

1806 

(510 

89(5 

6 

7 

624 

003 

1 8 11 

47 

70 

02 

IGG 

139 

236 

1 13  11 

1808 

74 

125 

48 

88 

122 

213 

1 14  11 

IGcwt.  of  Coculus  Indicus  are  ullowe<l  to  a ton.  The  permanent  duty  is  JOS  8s.  per  cwt.  and  the  war 
duty  Ids.  per  cwt.  making  in  the  whole  ^^11  4s  jior  cwtl 

CONESSI  BARK 

Is  the  bark  of  a small  tree,  growing  on  the  Coast  of  Malabar,  and  Ceylon.  It  i.s  of  a blackish  colour  * 
on  the  outside,  covered  more  or  less  with  a white  moss  or  scurf,  and  of  an  au.stere  and  bitter  taste.  The 
bark  of  the  small  young  branches  which  has  the  least  moss  or  scuif,  is  preferred.  It  has  but  lately  been 
brought  into  Europe,  and  is  little  known  in  the  shops,  though  much  esteemed  in  some  parts  of  India. 

CORNELIANS. 

These  stones  are  brought  from  Cambay,  and  are  found  in  roundi.sh  oval  masses,  somewhat  like  our 
common  pebbles,  from  1 to  3 inches  in  diameter ; they  are  of  a close  compact  texture,  and  when  cut,  of  a 
bright  glossy  surface  ; their  colours  are  red,  white,  yellow,  and  variegated. 

The  colour  of  the  red  corne  lian  varies  from  the  palest  flesh  colour,  to  the  deepest  blood  red : this  sort 
is  most  in  demand,  great  quantities  being  consumed  in  the  manufacture  of  seals,  and  other  trinkets.  They 
khould  be  chosen  of  a deep  cleai-  and  even  red  colour,  free  from  cra(*ks,  flaws,  and  veins,  and  the  larger 
and  thicker  they  are,  the  mojcthey  are  esteemed;  those  which  are, muddy,  should  be  rejected.  The  white 
arc  scarce,  and  when  large,  thick,  of  an  even  colour,  and  free  from  flaws,  are  valuable.  The  yellow  and 
variegated  are  but  in  little  estimation,  and  should  be  rejected. 

Necklace  s,  ear-rings,  and  other  trinkets  are  manufactured  at  Cambay  from  cornelians,  and  are  an  arti- 
cle of  trade  to  Europe;  they  sliould  be  chosen  of  pure  clear  colours,  w^ell  cut,  and  free  from  cracks  and  flawa^ 


COTTON  WOOL.  279 

Cornelian  stones  are  sometimes  imported  in  their  rongli  state  from  Bombay.  In  chusinfr  them,  such  as 
are  chipped  should  be  rejected,  as  those  have  been  tried  and  refused  by  the  stonecutters  at  Cambay. 

The  following  is  the  amount  of  the  sah>  value  of  the  various  kinds' of  cornelian  iroods,  vh.  stones,  neck- 
laces,  ear-rings,  arrangoes,  &c.  sold  at  the  (’onipuny’s  sales  in  the  years  IStM  to  IHOS  inelusisc. 

1S07 

1808  

1800  no  {U’coiiiit, 

20  cwt.  of  cornoHans  are  allowed  to  a ton.  The  permanent  duty  on  the  man ii fact ii red  articles  is 
£o3  16.V  3f/.  percent,  and  the  temporary  or  war  duty  XTr  IS.v.  Od.  making  in  the  whole  i71  1.ja-. 
per  cent.  The  rough  stones  pay  the  same  duty  as  unmanufactured  goods. 


1804  ........ — 4 

1 80 j 50*10 

1806  1747 


, COTTON  WOOL. 

Among  tlie  various  raw  materials  that  are  produced  in  the  Hrltish  possessions  in  India,  and  wliieli  arc 
exceedingly  valuable  and  of  great  iiiiportaiiee  to  our  home  ninnufuc  tures,  the  article  of  fine  cotton  wool 
claims  the  pre-eminenee  over  every  thing  else.  The  very  cheap  rate  at  which  tliis  arllde  can  he  produced, 
renders  it  peculiarly  desirable  that  eneoiiragement  should  bo  given  to  its  cultivation  and  iin|)orta- 
(ion.  Though  the  cotton  from  the  western  side  of  India,  coiniuonly  denominated  Suiat  cotton,  is  the 
principal  part  of  those  imported,  yet  ns  cotton  of  very  superior  (pialitles  may  ho  proiluced  in  India,  in 
(luantlty  amply  adeciuate  to  the  coii.sumption  of  Great  Britain,  it  would  obviously  be  the  interest  of  this 
country  to  encourage  the  importation  of  the  raw  material,  rather  than  the  manufaeUires  of  India;  and  to 
that  advantage  would  he  added,  what  in  the  present  situation  of  public  alfairs  is  an  important  coiisuh'ration, 
the  becoming  independent  of  America,  for  an  article  actually  of  the  first  necessity  in  our  nuuuifai  tures. 

Cotton  is  the  soft  and  vegetable  down  wdiicli  forms  the  covering  or  envelope  of  the  seeds  of  the  cotton 
plant.  It  is  the  spontaneous  production  of  three  parts  of  the  globe,  Asia,  Africa,  and  Anna  ica.  It  is  im- 
ported from  the  West  Indies,  the  Spanish  and  Portuguese  settlements  in  South  America,  likewise  (icorgia, 
and  the  southern  states  of  North  America.  The  islands  and  sliores  of  the  Mcdit(‘rranean  long  snpplicNl 
Europe,  and  within  these  few  years  considerable  quantities  have  been  imported  IVom  Surat,  iMadi  as,  and 
Bengal,  and  occasionally  from  the  islands  of  Bourbon  and  Mauritius. 

The  cotton  from  these  different  quarters  of  the  globe  varies  considerably  in  the  colour,  length,  strength, 
and  fineness  of  the  fibre.  White  is  in  general  considered  of  secondary  quality.  The  cotton  ot*  the  Levant 
is  distinguished  by  its  want  of  colour,  and  the  chief  part  of  that  from  North  America  is  also  white.  Yellow, 
when  not  the  effect  of  accidental  wetting,  or  inclement  season,  is  indlaitivc  of  greater  fmen(*ss.  The 
cotton  of  the  West  Indies  and  of  South  America  is  called  yellow,  but  inclines  more  to  cr(‘am  colour. 

The  East  India  cottons  rank  in  the  following  order:  Bourbon,  Surat,  Bengal,  Madras. 

I.  Bourbon;  this  is  the  most  even  and  uniform  in  quality  of  any  other;  it  is  of  a long  silky  stapl(», 
very  clet^n,  and  is  the  most  valuable  kind  imported  into  England,  except  the  Sea  Island,  (Georgia. 

II.  Of  the  Surat  cottons,  the  Ahniood  is  the  best ; the  fibre  is  very  fine,  hut  not  of  long  stajile.  The 
specimens  upon  which  experiments  have  been  made,  fully  prove,  that  if  such  cotton  could  always  he  im- 
ported, it  would  command  a high  price,  and  meet  a ready  market  to  the  extent  of  6,()()(),(K)t)ll)s.  without 
interfering  with  the  growth  of  our  West  India  Islands.  The  other  places  are  Baroaeh,  Bownagluir,  Surat, 
Jambooser,  Oclasur,  Hansoote,  &c.  The  finest  Ahmood  cotton  could  have  been  purchased  at  Surat  for  IIA 
to  123  rupees  per  candy  of  7 cwt.  some  years  since,  but  lately,  from  the  competition  to  I Ik*  nor  thward  for 
cotton  for  the  China  market,  it  has  risen  to  above  180  rupees  per  candy : even  at  that  price  it  would  answer 
as  a remittance;  but  great  advantages  would  be  ucc|uired  by  freeing  the  cotton  of  every  particle  of  foulness. 


COTTON  WOOL. 


m 

as  well  as  rvciy  mixture  of  tinged  or  inferior  staple  before  it  is  packed  up,  leaving  nothing  to  be  made  up 
into  bales  but  t!ie  purest  cotton,  by  which  the  value  would  be  much  increased  in  England,  and  the  freight 
would  be  considerably  reduced  by  tlie  impurities  left  behind,  which  pay  a iVeight,  and  are  not  only  a great 
injury  to  the  sale  and  value  of  the  cotton,  but  the  picking  alone,  which  costs  3d.  per  lb.  in  England,  could 
be  performed  for  one  penny  in  India. 

It  is  impossible  to  be  too  attentive  to  the  great  object  of  shipping  no  cotton  but  what  is  perfectly  clean; 
it  should,  in  fact,  he  put  into  that  precise  state  in  which  it  is  placed  hy  the  women  of  India  previous  to  its 
being  spun  into  yarn.  Ti'he  coarse  and  middling  qualities  should  be  rejected,  as  they  do  not  suit  the  Euro- 
j)ean  market,  not  only  on  account  of  the  high  freight,  hut  because  it  would  be  inex|)edient  to  interfere  with 
the  system  of  the  West  India  planters,  who  are  increasing  the  culture  of  these  qualities  of  cotton,  and  be- 
cause it  might  in  some  degree  interfere  with  the  commerce  in  this  article  carried  on  with  China. 

III.  The  Bengal  cotton  imported  is  much  like  that  of  Surat,  but  of  rather  shorter  staple,  the  superior 
kinds  being  reserved  for  the  manufacture  of  muslins  and  other  piece*  goods. 

IV.  Of  Madras  cotton  but  little  is  imported;  it  is  in  general  dirty,  containing  much  seed,  which  reduces 
its  value  in  England  very  considerably.  Small  quantities  are  occasionully  met  with  raised  from  Bourbon 
seed,  which  it  resembles  in  staple,  but  falls  far  short  in  cleanness  and  roloor. 

The  first  memtiori  we  Iwve  of  cotton  as  an  article  of  trade,  is  in  Hackluyt’s  collection  of  voyages,  from 
a little  work  entitled  “The  Process  of  English  Policy."  After  enumerating  the  articles  which  constitute 
the  trade  of  England  with  various  other  countries,  it  states  that  “ Genoa  resorts  to  England  in  her  huge 
ships,  named  carracks,  bringing  many  commodities,  as  silk,  paper,  wool,  oil,  cotton,  &c."  This  work 
was  printed  ns  early  as  1430 ; and  it  is  probable  that  much  earlier  than  that  period,  England  was  supplied 
with  cotton  from  the  Levant.  The  Genoese  possessed  this  trade  till  about  1511;  from  that  period  till 
1534,  according  to  llackluyt,  “ ships  of  London  and  Bristol  imported  from  Sicily,  Candia,  Cyprus,  and 
other  parts,  silks,  rhubarb,  wines,  oils,  cotton  wool,  Turkey  carpets,  galls,  and  Indian  spices.’’  The 
Levant  trade  was  soon  after  engrossed  by  the  merchants  at  Antwerp,  and  till  1575  entirely  abandoned  by 
the  English.  After  the  sacking  of  Antwerp  the  English  trade  to  the  Levant  revived,  and  in  1()21  was  in 
a flourishing  state,  as  appears  from  the  testimony  of  Mr,  Munn,  in  his  Treatise  on  the  Trade  of  India,  in 
which  cotton  is  enumerated  as  one  of  the  many  articles  imported  from  the  Mediterranean. 

From  the  above  it  appears  evident  that,  previous  to  the  discovery  of  America  and  the  West  Indies, 
and  for  some  time  afterwards,  England,  and  probably  all  Europe,  were  supplied  with  cotton  from  the 
Levant  In  1641  U is  stated  that  “ the  town  of  Manchester  buys  cotton-wool  in  London,  that  comes  first 
from  Cyprus  and  Smyrna whence  it  may  be  inferred  that  no  considerable  quantities  were  as  yet  im- 
ported from  our  West  India  islands.  In  1660,  a law  |)assed  prohibiting  the  landing  any  cotton  the  growth 
of  our  Asian,  African,  or  American  colonies,  except  in  the  English  dominions. 

Since  that  period  the  importation  of  cotton  into  Great  Britain  has  progressively  and  rapidly  increased, 
ns  will  ap[)ear  from  the  following  statement,  from  which  some  idea  may  be  formed  of  the  astonishing  and 
unexampled  increase  and  prosperity  of  our  coiton  manufactures. 

Total  lbs.  Average  per  annum. 

Imported  in  5 years  1701  to  1705  inclusirev^.....  5,854,407  Mv»M..MWMwJbsl,170,881  . 

5 1716  to  1720  10,866,435  2,173,287 

5 1771  to  1775  ...  23,822,945  4,764,589 

5 1776  to  1780  .................  a3, 530.(165  .......  6,706,013 

5 1781  to  1785  54,709,671  ........ 10,941,934 

5 •....  1786  to  1790  127,216,352  26,443,270 


COTTON. 


581 


In  1790  the  quantity  consumed  In  the  manufactures  was  estimated  at  about  23  millions  of  pounds, 
of  which  about  13  millions  were  applied  to  calicoes  and  muslins,  lialf  that  quantity  to  fustians,  and  the 
remainder  to  hosiery,  candle-wicks,  &c.  The  following  are  the  quantities  imported  into  Great  Britain’ 
in  the  years  1791  to  1802  inclusive,  specifying  that  from  the  East  Indies,  and  that  from  other  paiis. 


Y-prff 

East  Indies. 

Other  parts. 

Total 

lbs. 

lbs. 

lbs. 

1791 

3,472 

28,70.3,203 

^,706,675 

1702 

7 

34,907,490 

34,907,497 

760,372 

18,059,848 

18,820,220 

240,166 

23,970,117 

24,216,27.3 

1795 

208,606 

2.5,804,780 

26,073,452 

1790 

736,919 

31,233,010 

31,969,935 

1797 

1,35.3,971 

21,820,785 

23,174,756 

1798 

1,969,68,5 

29,022,041 

31, .592,326 

1799 

6,934,631 

30,279,203 

43,21.3,8.34 

1800 

6,7.50,036 

48,830,305 

55, .586, .341 

1801 

4, 252, .509 

61,508,314 

5.5,760,823 

1802 

2,929,786 

57,309,525 

60, .329, 311 

Tlic  following  is  an  account  of  the  quantities  of  cotton  wool  imported  into  Great  Britain  in  the  years 
1794  to  1799  inclusive;  from  which  may  be  derived  a tolerably  accurate  idea  of  the  relative  quantities  of 
the  different  kinds  of  cotton  imported,  and  of  the  increased  cultivation  of  each  particular  sort. 


Dcnmarlc 
Russia 
Sweden 
Poland.. 

Prussia 
Germany  ......... 

Holland 
Flanders 
France 
Portugal 
^ain 
Gibraltar 
Italy 
Turkey 
Irelandv^^..^* 

Isle  of  Alan. 
Guernsey  and  Jersey 
^sia* 

Africa 

American  States 
Jlritish  Colonies 
British  West  Indies 
Conquered  Islands. 
Foreign  West  Indies 
‘ ^oteC 


1 

w% 


1794 

1795 

1790 

1797 

1798 

11)9. 

lb9. 

lbs 

lbs. 

lbs 

BBB9 

193,835 

167,484 

45,008 

31,226 

48.5,401 

— 

5,744 

7,652 

1,724 

4,451 

8,801 

611 

19,187 

23,90.5 

21,909 

- - 

- --  , 

21,24^4 

9,f)08 

1,048 

57,562 

1,47.5,163 

1,125,072 

1,533,2.32 

3,501  ,(X)5 

2,118,165 

571,317 

12,000 

101,171 

23,50.5 

— 

694,124 

92,429 

— 

— 

— 

»»■■■ 

■ ■■  ■■ 



I—  i 

< 

3,954,112 

6,831,337 

8,026,674 

4,997,277 

6,233,043 

8,1.30,613 

561,930 

1,472,128 

1,736,701 

134,972 

211,1.33 

— — . 

4,843 

51,699 

212,089 

.301,422 

402,431 

22,295 

396,493 

1 100,964 

31,703 

82,496 

4,596,481 

1,221,036 

1,404,959 

19.5,071 

236,961 

336,118 

111,477 

347,330 

245,594 

495,17.5 

142,986 

332,039 

■ 

■ . 

— — 

383 

199,700 

19,378 

256,984 

■■■  ■■■— 

90,421 

16,.5H 

240,156 

268,666 

736,919 

1,353,971 

1,969,(»5 

6,931-, 631 

1,301 

1,262 

287 

14,863 

52,710 

. 260,873 

3,416,.332 

3,232,049 

5,992,577 

7,170,219 

1,341,391 

1,1()8,<>«»0 

656,068 

7,485,634 

6,857,620 

r.944l743 

6,044,015 

798,927 

1,23.5,280 

2,280,1 15 

kyiTtfLif&i 

23,174,756 

31,592,326 

13:213,8.34' 

262 


COTTON. 


The  following  is  a statement  of  the  quantities  of  cotton  wool  imported  from  the  East  Indies  on  nccount^ 
of  the  Company  and  individuals,  in  the  years  1803  to  1809  inclusive,  together  with  the  sale  value. 


host  lad  1.1 

Cunipaay. 

Individuals.  { 

Tutsi  1. 

icars. 

lbs. 

£ 

lbs 

£ 

lbs. 

£ 

■ i!al 

— 

1, 789,984 

67,073 

1,789,9H4 

67,073 

MiSM 

— — 

— — . 

2,484,920 

117,572 

2,484,920 

117,572 

■ 

284, ()74 

19,318 

284,674 

19,318 

18(X) 

....... 

2,696,582 

141,446 

2,696,582 

141,446 

1807 

— 

_ 

3,597,699 

165,257 

3,597,699 

165,257 

1808 

245,48.3 

25,996  1 

5,175,362 

193,120 

5,420,845 

219,116 

1809 

2,76f),4l.3 

157,686 

3,665 ,0;)8 

228,995 

6,434,481 

386,68 1 

The  following  is  an  account  of  the  prime  cost  and  expcnces  of  400  liales  of  cotton  imported  from 
Bombay  to  London,  in  a country  ship,  having  the  East  India  Company’s  penuissioii  to  proceed  to  Europe. 
400  bales  cotton  ross  weight,  Cwt.  l.Uj4  3 C(J 

Tare  at  Hiilbs.  per  bale  .'irt  3 (20 

Net  weight,  Cwt.  130f)  0 (i 

Making  Surat  candies  180,579  dec.  at  180  nipees  per  candy^^^x^v^^»^%%%>%^  Rupees  3.3,584  1 8 

Charges— Repacking  400  bales  at  I rupee^>^^^.^v^>%^v%v%  Rupees  400  0 O 
Screwing  ditto  at  ditto  400  0 0 

Lacing  ditto  at  (2  ditto  800  0 0 

400  new  wrappers  at  i dittOw^w^%%%%>^«^v^vv%%v^%^%%  300  0 0 
Sewing  and  packing  after  being  screwed  w%%<%  31  1 0 

4 mds.  twine  for  sewing  at  7 \ rupees  30  0 0 

Cooley  women  employed  in  6 1 GO 

Cooley  hire  400  bales  from  Green  to  screws  (25  0 O 

Ditto  4(X)  bales  from  screws  to  Bunder  50  0 0 

Weighing  400  bales  1(2  O O 

Loading  into  boats  1(2  0 0 

14  double  boats  for  ditto,  at  4 rupees^%...*%%»  56  O 0 

Commission  on  Rupees  33584  1 8,  at  5 per  cent  .^.1()79  0 80 

■ 3,801  3 40 

Rupees  37,38(i  0 48 

Exchange  at  2s.  fid.  per  Bombay  rupee  is  5 3 

Premium  of  insurance  on  jP.5,000  to  cover  prime  cost 

and  insurance  at  7 per  0 0 

Policy  duty  at  5s.  per  12  10  0 

— . 362  10  O 

Tonnage  occupied  by  400  bales,  102  tons,  25  feet,  freight  .£^22  15s. 

per  ton,  payable  90  days  after  the  ship’s  arrival  2, .332  2 9 


TotaL 


.^£7j567  18  0 


The  net  weight  of  the  above  400  bales  at  the  sales,  was  146,013 lbs.  The  sale  amount,  i?6842  3s,  4d 
subject  to  the  usual  deductions.  The  freight  thereon  amounted  to  about  4d.  per  lb. 


EUrHORBIUM— FISH  MAWS— FOLITJM  IXDICU.M— HEMP,  .Vr. 


2SS 


eupiiouhhjm 

Is  the  concrete  resinous  juice  of  a pricklyshrub,  grooving  in  Malabar  anti  various  ports  of  India.  It  i< 
in  tears  of  an  irregular  form,  some  of  which  are  found,  on  being  bivken,  to  contain  little  thorns,  twigs,  &c. 
others  are  hollow  without  any  thing  in  the  cavity ; the  tears  are  of  a bright  light  yellow,  between  a straw 
and  a gold  colour  on  the  outside,  and  whitt*  within;  easy  to  break,  having  but  little  smell,  but  the  taste  is 
violently  sharp  and  acrimonious.  It  is  to  be  chosen  dry,  clean,  and  of  a bright  colour ; its  acrid  taste  is 
the  great  mark  of  its  goodness,  and  this  ought  to  be  such  os  to  inilaine  the  whole  mouth,  on  holding  a very 
small  piece  thci'cln  tor  u short  space  of  time. 


FISH  MAWS 

Are  an  article  of  trade  from  various  parts  of  India  to  t'liin.n,  where  they  are  much  esteemed.  In 
chusing  them  care  should  be  taken  that  they  are  properly  cured,  or  they  will  be  subject  to  decay,  and  not 
be  worth  the  freight;  the  largest  are  to  be  preferred. 

rOMUM  INDICUM, 

Or  Malabathrum,  is  sahl  to  be  the  leaf  of  the  cassia  lignea  tree.  The  leaf  is  large,  of  an  oblong 
figure,  smooth  and  glossy  on  tlie  upper  side,  and  less  so  on  the  lower.  Its  colour  is  a dusky  green  on  one 
side,  and  a pule  brown  on  the  other.  It  is  furnished  with  three  ribs,  running  its  whole  length,  very  pro. 
tuberant  on  the  lower  side;  and  it  has  two  smaller  ones  near  the  edges.  Its  smell,  while  fresh,  is  aromatic 
and  aorecable,  somewhat  resembling  that  of  a mixture  of  cloves  and  cinnamon;  its  taste  is  rather  acrid  and 
bitterish,  but  very  aromatic;  when  chewed,  it  renders  the  saliva  slimy  and  glutinous.  The  more  aromatic 
the  flavour,  the  warmer  the  taste,  an<l  the  fresher  and  better,  the  more  it  ia  esteemed. 

8 cwt.  of  Folium  Indicum  is  allowed  to  a ton. 

HEMP. 

The  Island  of  Salsette  produces  two  sorts  of  this  commodity ; one  resembles  the  Bengal  Paut,  the 
leaves  and  young  fruit  of  which  are  used  as  food,  and  the  fibrous  part  employed  in  several  kinds  of  cordage. 
The  other  resembles  the  Sunn  of  Bengal,  and  is  much  esteemed  for  its  strength  and  durability,  being  pre- 
ferable to  that  of  Bengal  for  cotton  ropes,  where  very  great  strength  is  necessary;  it  is  the  best  substitute 
for  hemp  yet  known,  and  could  the  cultivator  be  ensured  a certain  price,  and  a ready  market  for  the  com- 
modity, very  large  quantities  would  be  produced.  It  has  occasionally  been  imported  both  by  the  East 
India  Company  and  individuals ; but  the  heavy  freight  it  is  subject  to,  has  prevented  it  being  a profitable 
remittance.  The  purer  and  cleaner  it  is  when  packed,  the  more  it  is  esteemed. 

• Hemp  in  its  rough  state  pays  a duty  of  fis.  per  ton  of  20  cwt.  The  tonnage  is  calculated  at  50  cu- 
bical feet  to  a ton. 

LIGNUM  COLUBRINUM, 

Snake  wood,  or  snake  root,  is  the  wootly  part  of  the  tree  which  produces  Nux  Vomica.  It  is  of  a heavy 
ilose  substance,  covered  with  an  iron  coloured  bark,  of  a yellow  colour  internally  with  whitish  streaks. 
In  rasping  or  scraping,  this  wood  emits  a faint,  but  not  disagreeable  smell;  when  chewed  for  some  time, 
it  discovers  a very  bitter  taste.  It  should  be  chosen  in  ponderous  sound  pieces,  about  a foot  and  a half 
lone  free  from  worms  and  dust.  It  is  seldom  imported  from  the  East  Indies. 

® Oo2 


<84 


MANGOES—NUX  VOMICA— PEACOCKS'  FEATHERS. 


Mi\NGOES. 

This  fruit,  when  fully  ripe,  is  yellowish  or  reddish,  replete  with  a fine  agreeable  juice,  having  a large 
stone;  it  cuts  like  an  apple,  but  more  juicy.  Mangoes  are  sent  to  Eurofie  as  a pickle,  and  are  prepared  in 
the  following  manner;  when  nearly  ripe,  they  are  cut  in  two,  the  kernel  taken  out,  and  the  vacant  space  filled 
with  chillies,  garlic,  ginger.  Sec.  after  which  they  are  put  in  vinegar,  and  sent  as  presents  to  Europe  and 
elsewhere.  They  should  be  chosen  of  a bright  yellow  colour,  firm  and  fleshy,  free  from  fibres,  and  of 
an  agreeable  smell;  and  care  should  be  taken  to  fill  the  cask  full  of  pickle,  or  they  will  be  apt  to  spoil  on 
the  voyage.  The  permanent  duty  is  3s.  per  gallon,  and  the  war  duty  Is.  making  in  the  whole  4s.  per  gallon. 

Mode  of  foncarding  Maogot  Plants  to  Europe. 

The  vegetative  quality  of  the  stone  or  kernel  not  seeming  to  be  long  preserved,  the  readiest  method 
of  obtaining  the  plants  in  Europe  is  to  set  a quantity  of  the  nuts  in  a tub  of  earth,  and  when  the  plants  are 
grown  a foot  high,  to  ship  them,  placing  a covering  to  protect  them  from  the  spray  of  the  sea,  being  very 
careful  not  to  water  them  too  much  on  the  passage.  When  the  ship  arrives  in  a cold  climate,  they  should  be 
screened  from  the  cold. 


NUX  VUMICA 

Is  the  produce  of  a middling  sized  tree,  growing  plentifully  on  the  Malabar  Coast;  the  berry,  or  fruit 
of  which  is  about  the  size  of  an  apple,  covered  with  a hard  shell,  somewhat  resembling  the  pomegranate, 
of  a rich  beautiful  orange  colour  when  ripe;  filled  with  a pulp  eontaining  the  seeds,  or  Nux  Vomiea;  these 
are  flat  and  round,  about  an  inch  broad,  and  of  the  thickness  of  a dollar,  on  both  sides  prominent  in  the 
middle,  of  a grey  colour,  covered  with  a woolly  kind  of  matter,  internally  hard  and  tough  like  horn, 
having  a taste  considerably  bitter,  with  very  little  snwll.  Chuse  such  as  are  large,  clean,  and  new,  free 
from  dust  and  dirt,  rejecting  the  decayed  and  worm-eaten.  An  extract  of  Nux  Vomica  has  been  recently 
imported  from  India;  but  to  what  use  it  has  been  applied,  is  uncertmn. 

The  following  are  the  quantities  of  Nux  Vomica  imported  from  India,  and  sold  at  the  Company’s 
yfiV«  in  the  years  1803  to  1808  inclusive,  together  with  tlie  sale  value  and  the  average  price  per  cwt. 


March  ^ale«  | 

September  Sale. 

Toul.  1 

Aver,  per  Cwt, 

Yean. 

Cwt. 

£ 

Cwt 

£ 

Cwt. 

£ 

£ » d 

1803 

722 

767 

722 

1 1 3 

1804 

168 

190 

168 

1 2 7 

1805 

9 

10 

9 

10 

1 2 3 

1806 

6 

8 

6 

8 

1 6 8 

1807 

145 

189 

145 

189 

1 6 1 

1808 

101 

97 

— 

— 

101 

97 

0 19  2 

15  cwt.  of  Nux  Vomica  is  allowed  to  a ton.  The  permanent  duty  on  it  is  £4i  4s.  per  cwt.  and  the 
temporal^  or  war  duty  £l  8s.  making  in  all  £5  l<s.  per  cwt 

PEACOCKS’  FEATHERS. 

This  bird  is  found  in  its  wild  state  in  several  ports  of  Indio.  Its  beautiful  feathers  are  much  used  among 
the  Chinese  to  moke  the  raised  work  of  birds.  They  should  be  chosen  peiihct  and  not  rumpled.  The 
centre  feather  of  the  tml,  which  is  sometimes  four  feet  long,  is  much  esteemed,  being  decorated  with 
what  is  the  eye,  a brilliant  spot  beautifully  enamelled  with  a variety  of  coburs. 


PEPPER. 


ms 


PEPPER  is  the  produce  of  d vine,  which  in  its  own  climate  is  a hardy  plant,  growing  readily  from  cut- 
tings or  layers,  rising  in  several  knotted  stems,  twining  round  any  neighbouring  support,  and  adhering  by  iU 
fibres,  that  shoot  from  every  joint  at  intervals  of  6 to  10  inches;  if  suffered  to  run  along  the  ground,  these 
fibres  would  become  roots,  but  in  this  case  it  would  not  bear,  tlie  prop  being  necessary  for  encouraging  it 
to  thn)w  out  its  prolific  shoots;  it  climbs  to  the  height  of  20  feet,  but  thrives  best  when  restrained  to  12  or 
15,  as  in  the  former  case  the  lower  part  of  the  vine  bears  neither  leaves  nor  fruit,  whilst  in  the  latter  it 
produces  both  from  within  a foot  of  the  ground;  the  stalk  soon  becomes  ligneous,  and  in  time  acquires  con- 
siderable thickness.  The  leaves  are  of  a deep  green  and  glossy  surface,  heart  shaped,  pointed,  not  pungent 
to  the  taste,  and  have  but  little  smell.  The  branches  are  short  and  brittle,  not  projecting  above  two  feet 
from  the  stem,  and  separating  readily  at  the  joints;  the  blossom  is  small  and  white,  the  fruit  round,  green 
when  young  and  full  grown,  and  turning  to  a bright  red  when  ripe,  and  in  perfection.  It  grows  nhun- 
dantly  from  all  the  branches,  in  long  small  clusters  of  20  to  50  grains,  somewhat  resembling  bunehes  of 
currants,  but  with  this  diflerence,  that  every  grain  adheres  to  the  common  stalk,  which  occasions  tlie  clus- 
ters of  pepper  to  be  more  compact,  and  it  is  also  less  pliant.  It  is  generally  propagated  by  cuttings  from 
the  horizontal  shoots  that  run  along  the  ground.  The  plant  begins  to  bear  about  the  third  year,  is  esteem- 
ed in  its  prime  in  tlie  seventh,  which  state  it  maintains  three  or  four  years;  it  then  gradually  declines  for 
about  the  same  period,  until  it  is  no  longer  worth  keeping:  generally  speaking,  the  pepper  plant  proiluces 
two  crops  ill  a year,  but  the  seasons  arc  subject  to  great  irregulai’itics.  As  soon  ns  any  of  the  berries  n>dden, 
the  bunch  is  reckoned  fit  for  gathering,  the  remainder  being  tlien  generally  full  grown,  although  green  ; it  is 
then  gatliered,  and  spread  on  mats  in  the  sun;  in  this  situation  it  becomes  black  and  shrivelled  as  w(»  see  it; 
and  as  it  dries,  is  hand-rubbed  occasionally,  to  separate  the  grabis  from  the  stalks.  That  which  has  been 
gathered  at  tlie  properest  state  of  maturity,  will  shrivel  the  least;  but  if  plucked  too  soon,  it  will  in  u short 
time,  by  removal  from  place  to  place,  become  broken  and  dusty. 

Pepper  is  produced  on  the  Malabar  Coast,  on  Sumatra,  and  many  other  of  tlie  Eastern  Islands;  it  is 
an  article  in  which  a considerable  trade  is  carried  on  with  the  British  settlements  in  India,  with  China, 
and  with  the  different  maritime  powers  of  Europe. 

The  Malabar  pepper  is  esteemed  the  best;  next  that  of  the  west  coast  of  Sumatra;  and  lastly,  that 
produced  on  the  Malay  Peninsula,  Java,  and  the  neighbouring  islands;  of  the  whole,  that  from  Palembang 
and  from  Borneo,  is  considered  the  worst. 

There  are  two  denominations  of  Pepper  in  commerce,  black  and  white. 

Black  Pepper  is  of  two  sorts,  light  and  heavy;  the  former  in  its  original  state  having  a niimlicr  of  bad 
grains,  sticks,  and  dirt  in  it:  this  is  carried  to  China,  but  should  be  rejected  for  the  European  markets.  I'hat 
which  is  well  garbled  and  clean,  having  the  stalks,  bad  giains,  and  other  impurities  taken  out,  is  denomi- 
nated heavy  pepper,  and  is  the  sort  usually  brought  to  Europe.  Pepper  should  be  chosen  of  a pungent 
smell,  extremely  hot  and  acrid  to  the  taste,  in  large  grains,  firm,  sound,  and  with  few  wrinkles,  of  which 
it  will  always  Iwve  some.  Reject  that  which  is  much  slirivelled  and  small  grained,  or  which,  on  being 
rubbed,  will  break  to  pieces. 

White  Pepper  is  also  of*  two  sorts,  common  and  genuine  : the  former  is  made  by  blanching  the  groins 
of  the  common  black  pepper.  For  this  process  the  best  and  soundest  grains  arc  selected,  and  steeped  in 
water.  In  about  a week  the  skin  bursts,  which  is  aftei’wai'ds  carefully  separated  by  drying  in  the  sun,  rub- 
bing between  the  bands,  and  winnowing.  But  little  of  this  sort  is  jirepared,  the  price  in  England  fluc- 
tuating much,  being  frequently  as  low  as  the  black  pepper ; but  the  w hite  has  this  obvious  recommendation,, 
that  it  can  be  made  of  no  other  than  the  best  and  soundest  grains,  taken  at  the  most  iierfect  slate  of  matu- 
Pity.  The  genuine  white  pepper,  as  it  is  called,  is  composed  of  the  blighted  or  imperfect  grains  picked  in 
small  quantities  from  the  heaps  of  black  pepper,  and  retains  more  of  the  qualities  of  tlie  black  than  the- 
manufactured  sort  does.^ 


PEPPER: 


IVpprr  wan  in  demand  in  England  long  before  the  East  India  Company  was  established;  it  was  ob- 
tained partly  from  Lisbon,  and  partly  through  the  medium  of  the  I.evant  or  Turkey  Company.  The 
suj)ply  from  Lisbon  was  checked  by  the  war  which  took  place  with  Spain  at  the  latter  end  of  the  six- 
teenth century;  and  the  Dutch,  by  supplanting  the  Portuguese,  having  obtained  a considerable  share  in  this 
hrancli  of  eastern  traffic,  the  article  rose  in  the  British  market  from  4s.  to  8s.  per  lb.  In  159'^,  by  the  capture 
ot  tlie  Spanish  carrack,  IVIadre  de  Dios,  a large  quantity  which  formed  part  of  her  cargo,  lowered  the  price 
considerably.  This  capliire  in  a great  degree  led  to  the  detemnnntion  of  entering  upon  a trade  to  the  East 
Indies,  direct  from  this  country.  For  many  years  after  the  Company's  establishment,  pepper  formed  the 
most  iinjiortant  article  of  their  imports.  As  the  early  voyages  were  made  upon  separate  accounts,  it  would 
1)(*  (lillieiilt,  it  not  inipossil)le,  to  ascertain  with  any  degree  of  accuracy  the  quantities  procured,  or  whether 
they  were  nioie  or  less  than  competent  to  the  home  demand;  the  probability  is,  that  England  very  early 
pnrtieipated  in  the  supply  of  the  continent. 

Til  IGl.^,  Sir  Diidli^y  Digges,  in  reply  to  an  attack  which  had  been  made  upon  the  Company's  trade, 
stated  the  annual  consumption  of  this  country  at  4o(),0001bs.  ])cr  annum.  If  Sir  Dudley  was  correct  in 
this  asM'iiion,  jicppcr  must  have  been  at  that  time  in  more  general  use  tlian  at  subsequent  periods. 

^ In  IGil,  Air.  ]\lnnn  stated  the  annual  consumption  of  Europe  to  be  (),0()0,(X)01bs. 

In  Afalyues,  in  his  “ Centre  of  tlie  Circle  of  Commerce,*'  (piotes  the  cost  price  of  pepper  in  In- 
dia at  "J!d.  j)er  lb.  anil  the  sale  price  at  Is.  8d.  About  this  time  the  price  of  pepper  at  Lisbon  was  2s. 
pi‘r  11).  Tli(‘  Dutch  at  this  period  state  that  jicpper  cost  at  Java  from  5 to  7 dollars  a pccul. 

Among  tlie  expedients  to  whic'h  King  Charles  II.  in  his  necessity  was  compelled  to  have  recourse,  was 
his  obliging  the  Jlast  India  ('oinpany  to  sell  to  the  Crown  the  whole  pepper  which  was  in  theii*  warclioiises, 
amounting  to  (j07,.52‘2  llis  wliich  was  bought  by  the  King  on  credit  ot  2s.  Id.  per  lb.  or  £63^283  11  1. 
This  pepper  w\as  sold  to  dillercnt  merchants  for  ready  money,  at  Is.  8d.  per  lb.  or  d6^50,C26  17  1;  and 
many  years  elapsed  before  the  Company  could  get  their  account  finally  adjusted. 

In  the  seven  years,  from  1(>6I  to  1670,  the  quantity  of  popper  imported  was  9,426,387  lbs.  or  on  an 
average  1,316,669  lbs.  per  annum,  by  which  it  is  e\ident  that,  making  a large  allowance  for  the  home  con- 
suinjition,  there  must  liavc  been  considerable  quantities  exported. 

Ill  167.5-6,  it  appears  that  ginger  had  become  a sub.stitute  for  pepper,  and  the  sale  of  pepper,  in 
Italy,  Tiukcy,  or  the  North  of  Europe  had  failed,  on  account  of  the  wars  in  Poland,  and  the  price  had 
fallen  to  7d.  jier  lb.  in  England.  Tlic  Company  sent  instructions  abroad  fixing  the  purchase  price  at  2|d. 
or  at  the  most  3d.  per  II). 

In  1680,  IMr.  Papillon,  who  wrote  a treatise  on  the  East  India  Trade,  states  the  quantity  of  the  pepper 
annually  consumed  in  this  country  at  1 80,000  lbs.  at  8d.  per  Ih.  i^6,000. 

In  the  infancy  of  the  C'ompuny’s  concerns,  their  investments  of  pepper  were  chiefly  provided  at  Acheen> 
Bantam,  Borneo,  Jambee,  Jacutra,  the  present  Batavia,  Macassar,  Priaman,  Patany,  Siam,  Succadana, 
and  other  jilaces  in  the  eastern  seas.  Their  principal  factory  was  at  Bantam,  to  'which  all  the  othera 
were  Mibonlinate.  Tlie  voyages  were  circuitous,  and  articles  were  bought  and  sold  as  markets  offered. 
After  disposing  of  iMiropean  goods  on  the  Coasts  of  Coromandel  and  Malabar,  they  took  in  some  articles  of 
piece-goods  for  a part  of  their  returning  cargo,  and  others  for  ti'affic  among  the  eastern  islands,  with  which 
they  obtained  pepper  to  complete  their  lading  for  Europe. 

In  1683,  the  English,  through  the  intrigues  of  the  Dutch*,  were  compelled  to  withdraw  from  Bantam,  ’ 
upon  which  they  settled  at  Bcncoolcn,  upon  the  island  of  Sumatra,  and  built  a strong  fort;  here  they  re- 
mained about  tliirty-six  years,  when  being  disposed  to  quit  it  in  favour  of  a more  salubrious  spot,  at  a few 
miles’  distance,  the  natives  in  1719  entered  into  a conspiracy,  and  drove  them  off  the  island.  In  the  n^xt 
year  they  returned,  and  without  molestation  completed  the  present  Fort  Marlborough,  which  the  Company 
have  retained,  except  during  the  short  mterval  that  the  French  deprived  them  of  it  in  the  year  1760.  • • 


PEl’PER. 


287 


III  1722,  the  duty  on  pepper  for  lionie  consumption  was  reduced  from  2s.  to  W.  per  Ih. 

In  1730,  the  Dutch  imported  into  Holland,  3, 1*15, 302  lbs.  black,  and  .3,0011bs.  white  pepper,  and  in 
1732,  their  imports  amounted  to  1 ,41 0,427  lbs. 

In  1742,  the  imjwrtation  of  jx'pper  into  France  was  stated  to  amount  to  ;j0j,3I7  lbs. 

On  Sumatra,  the  natives  who  live  uiidi'r  the  Company's  government,  are  by  compact,  which  is  deemed 
the  price  of  their  protection,  re(|uircd  to  cultivate  a fixed  number  of  pei)j»er  > incs,  in  |)roporlinn  to  their 
families.  The  produce  of  tliese  vines  is  supplied  to  the  Company  at  a stipulated  rate  of  ))rice:  this  was 
formerly  10  dollars,  but  has  been  increased  to  15  dollars  the  bahar.  The  averagi'  f|uantily  procured  at  the 
Company’s  settlements  in  the  years  1795  to  1800,  was  1004  tons  per  annum.  'I’he  jniuie  cost  of  the 
cargoes,  chietly  pepper,  during  the  same  period,  amounted  to  473,270  dollars,  or  4 Spanish  dollars 
jier  annum.  In  1801,  from  tlie  small  quantities  of  pepjier  collected  on  tlie  coast  of  Sumatra,  and  the  heavy 
expence  attending  that  establishment,  the  East  India  Company  issued  orders  to  uitlulraw  tlie  out- 
settlements,  and  to  give  every  encouragement  to  the  natives  to  transport  the  pepper  produced  in  their 
several  districts  in  their  own  boats  to  Fort  Marlborough,  where  it  should  be  paid  for  at  a lair  market  price. 


Pepper  is  also  produced  on  the  Coast  of  Malabar,  of  which  it  is  the  principal  article  ot  commerce. 
Previous  to  the  invasion  of  Hyder  in  1764,  the  province  produced  annually  Irom  15  to  2(1,009  candles  of 
(i-401bs.  Of  this,  it  is  conjectured,  full  one-third  was  taken  otf  by  various  Indian  markets,  and  tlie  re»nainder 
exported  to  Europe.  Formerly  the  English  and  French  were  tlie  principal  purcliiiscrs.  J he  I'.iiglish  made 
theirs  at  Tellicherry,  and  the  French  at  Mahe,  and  their  concerns  were  so  discreetly  managed,  as  to  avoid 
overbidding  each  other,  by  which  they  obtained  the  commodity  at  a fair  and  icnsoimble  jn  iee. 

In  1732,  the  English  Company  procured  to  the  extent  of  6,000  candies,  at  68  rupees  per  randy, 
though  the  iJiice  was  afterwards  rai.scd  to  individuals  to  77i  rupees ; from  1710  to  17.)0  it  got  up  to  80.  In 
1765,  the  produce  began  to  diminish,  by  which  the  price  rose  from  100  to  120  rupees. 

Upon  the  abolition  of  the  I'rencli  East  India  Company,  Main*  beeame  a free  port,  and  was  resorted 
to  by  VJirious  descriptions  of  purchasers,  whose  eagerness  of  competition  nalnrally  produced  a further 
increase  of  price.  From  1776  to  1780,  pepper  sold  at  from  1 15  to  130  nipecs,  and  upon  the  conclusion  o^ 

the  jieace  in  1783,  it  got  up  to  155  rupees  per  candy. 

In  1790,  upwards  of  1100  candies  were  procured  at  Tellicherry,  at  from  125  to  1.70  rupees  per  candy, 
and  in  1791  the  quantity  was  doubled.  In  Aiigu.st,  1790,  a eontraet  was  made  at  165.  From  17S9  to 
1793,  about  4000  candies  were  annually  exported  from  that  place.  In  179.3,  the  pnei'  ot  jiepper  was  as  higli 
as  220  rupees  a candy,  and  the  Company’s  resident  made  a contract  lor  4,0(K)  candies  at  200  rupees.  1 he 
extravagant  price  to  which  the  article  had  tlius  arrived,  called  for  serious  investigation,  and  upon  enquiry 
was  found  to  result  froiti  the  improvident  conduct  of  one  of  the  Company’s  servants.  Upon  his  leinoval,  his 
successor  almost  immediately  etfected  a reduction  of  the  price  to  1(K)  rupees;  since  that  period  it  once  tell 
to  130,  and  expectations  were  held  out  that  it  would  be  reduced  still  lower:  even  that  price  is  too  low 

to  enable  the  cultivator  to  thrive.  roo- 

The  quantity  of  pepper  exporU'd  from  the  Company’s  warelioitses  at  Tellicherry  iii  li97  was,  t.'—i 

candies;  in  1798,  4778  candies ; and  in  1799  and  1800  about  1140  candies  each  year. 

Upon  the  Company  obtaining  possession  of  Malabar,  plans  were  suggested  for  seeiirliig  totliMii  the 
whole  of  the  pepiier  produced  therein ; hut  on  trial  they  entirely  failed  of  effect,  and  a free  Inldc  is  now 
allowed  in  pe|iper,  as  well  as  in  all  oth^r  articles  of  produce  on  the  Coast  of  Malabar. 

In  1795,  a treaty  was  concluded  with  the  Rajah  of  Travuncore,  in  which  it  was  sll.nilateil  that  a 
aubsidiary  force  should  be  furnished  by  the  Company  for  the  use  of  Uie  Rajah,  for  whieli  a '«■* 

paid  annually,  equivalent  to  the  expence  of  the  same.  No  payment  was  made  under  the  treaty  41  U.k -J. 
From  that  period  to  i806  the  amount  of  the  subsidy,  fixed  at  £i2,m,  has  been  annually  realised  m tlm 


PEPPER. 


way  of  set  off,  in  tlie  account  with  tlie  Rajah  for  pepper,  furnished  by  him  under  contract  at  the  price  of 
about  125  rupees  per  candy.  In  1608,  in  consequence  of  the  price  of  pepper  having  fallen  from  the  con« 
tinuance  of  the  war,  a requisition  was  made  to  the  Rajah,  that  the  future  payment  of  the  subsidy  should 
be  in  money  instead  of  pepper.  This  occasioned  a misunderstanding  between  the  two  Governments,  whicli 
brought  on  a war,  and  terminated  in  the  British  forces  oveminning  the  greater  part  of  Travancore,  which 
was  restored  to  the  Rajah  on  tlie  conclusion  of  a peace. 

The  following  is  the  official  value  of  pepper  imparted  into  the  British  settlements  in  1805. 

Sicca  Rupees  11,35,111 

Fort  St.  George,  and  its  dependencies  4,19,829 

Bombay  and  Surat  3,03,210 

Of  the  amount  of  the  Bengal  imports,  10,36,703  Sicca  Rupees  was  from  Prince  of  Wales’s  Island, 
Sumatra,  and  other  places  to  the  eastward. 

Of  the  Fort  St.  George  imports  300,000  Sicca  nipees  was  from  the  above  places ; the  rest  from  the 
fioutliorn  parts  of  Coromandel,  Ceylon,  &c.  Those  of  Bombay  are  not  particularized. 

The  following  are  the  quantities  of  pepper  imported,  and  sold  at  the  East  India  sale;  likewise  the 
^ale  value,  tlie  quantities  exported,  and  those  retained  for  home  consumption,  from  1770  to  1800. 


Year-i. 

Import*.. 

Sale  Amount 

Exported. 

Home  Congumpt. 

from  2'»lh  March 

Ibi 

£ 

lbs. 

Ibi. 

1770  to  1779 
1780  to  1789 
' 1790  to  1799 

i>:i,538,798 

23,688,222 

89,463,337 

1,263,712 

1,316,835 

1 2,648,723 

i8,6()r35g- 

17,579,468 

32,721,024. 

4,937,150 

5,108,754 

6,682,353 

The  following  is  a statement  of  the  quantities  of  pepper  imported  and  sold  on  account  of  the  East 
India  Conipuiiy  and  individuals,  at  the  Company’s  sales  in  the  years  1803  to  1809  inclusive,  together 
with  the  sale  value,  and  the  quantities  retained  for  home  consumption. 


Years, 

East  India 

Company. 

liidividuais. 

Total. 

Homo  Consuiu. 

fbs. 

Sale  value. 

lbs. 

Sale  valne. 

lbs. 

Value. 

lbs. 

1803 

5,407,314 

224, 52ti 

1,253,609 

45,876 

6,660,923 

27b, m 

736,391 

1804 

3,506,764 

141,588 

1,094,133 

41,189 

4,600,897 

182,777 

776,216 

1805 

3,169,244 

120,748 

‘2.50,722 

8,771 

.3,419,966 

129,519 

673,497 

1806 

1,210,760 

38,266  1 

.56,.‘157 

1,5.52 

1,267,117 

39,818 

1807 

2,149,287 

75,389 

345,511 

19,918  ■ 

2,494,798 

95,757 

805,942 

1808 

1, .‘180,243 

70,249, 

2,410 

271 

1,382,653 

878,650 

1809 

1,1.5.3,986 

50,476 

114,483 

4,762 

1,268,469 

55,238 

884,166 

In  the  foregoing  statement  of  sales,  the  white  pepper  is  blended  with  the  black ; the  average  quantity 
imported  of  the  former  is  about  80,0001bs.  per  annum. 

16  cwt  of  pepjier  is  allowed  to  a ton.  The  permanent  duty  on  pepper  is  Is.  3d.  per  lb.  and  the  tem- 
porary or  war  duty  5d.  making  in  the  whole  Is.  8d,  per  lb. 

llie  customs  received  on  pepper  drawn  for  home  consumption  during  the  above  period,  1803  to  1809 
inclusive,  have  amounted  to  jP359,057,  or  on  an  average,  i?5 1,294  per  annum. 

Pepper  abounds  in  so  many  parts  of  India,  it  has  never  been  monopolized  like  the  other  spices;  the 
imports  into  Europe  have  always  been  considerable,  and  will  no  doubt  continue  so,  as  it  will  probably  ror 
main  in  general  demand  by  all  ranks  end  conditions  of  people. 


PIECE  GOODS. 


iiso 

The  following  are  the  quantiUe*  of  black  and  wliitc  pepper  Imported  into  Molland,  and  sold  by  the 
Dutch  East  India  Company,  for  seven  yeai-s,  1785  to  1791,  l)otI>  years  inclusive. 


Years 

Bluck"  IVppt^r. 

Whiii* 

re|jj»er 

1 oL 

U)S 

£ 

lbs 

£ 

lbs  1 

178.) 

1,S76,4<);i 

31  (>,.51.5  ■ 

4^37115 

,3,9;i(i  '*■' 

”l,T)i8,518 

irwi 

;{, 5.57,144 

222, ,325 

38,773 

3,5G.^ 

3,.5!).).!II7 

1787 

ia'1,495 

48,127 

4,385 

3,038,  no 

1788 

l,(i,52,419 

103,275 

57,.3(i0 

5,100 

1,710,770 

1780 

2,()(J9,.5I8 

122,820 

2.'1,.5(M) 

2,135 

2,003,018 

1700 

2,95<i,.5H9 

178,0G0 

8.1,77.5 

7,G15  1 

3,0|.0,3G4 

1701 

2,800,417 

105,225  1 

24,450 

2,220  1 

2,S8I,8G7 

I 

lu  iVi  i.) 

1S7>S() 

los,  uw. 


being  on  an  average  2,U94,()S.j  lbs.  black,  and  45,404  lbs.  white  pepper  per  nnnuni^  of  which  0:<?J*4.yj  Ihs. 
were  annually  imported  irom  Ceylon. 


PIKCK  GOODS 

Are  manufnrtiircd  of  various  dimensions  and  qualities  at  llaroach,  Juinhasecr,  Ainedabad,  aiul  other 
places  in  (iuzzerat,  and  to  the  northward  of  llonibuy.  They  are  usually  denominated  Surat  piece  gooik^. 
and  exported  from  thence  and  Ilombay  to  luirope,  the  Arabian  and  IVrsiaii  Gulls,  tin*  Malay  Coast,  and 
various  other  parts  of  India:  they  are  in  general  coarse  coloured  goods,  and  prohibited  for  home  coii- 
vuniption  in  (ireat  Ilritain. 

The  demand  for  Surat  piece-goods  has  much  decreased  in  Europe,  in  conse(|uenco  of  the  im[)roved 
state  of  the  British  manufactures,  which  have  materially  interfered  with  them  ; mid  from  the  abolition  oC 
the  slave  trade,  the  demand  for  the  African  market  is  much  reduced. 

Tlie  following  arc  the  species  imported  into  England  from  Bombay,  with  Uie  number  of  pieces 
allowed  to  a ton. 


Annabatchies 
Bombay  stulfs 
Byrampauts 


Bcjutapauts. 
Brawls 
Betellecs  ^ 
Chelloes 
('hintz,  of  soils 
Doolies 


R 


R 
]4> 


Guinea  stuffs,  4 [ yards  eaeh 
Long  cloths,  whole  pieces 


4(10 

400 

400 

400 

1200 

400 

400 

400 

400 

12CK) 

IGO 


Long  cloths,  half  pieces  320 

Musters  400 

Nunsarces  II  4tl0 

Neganepauts  400 

Niccannees,  lai  •go (KX) 

Ditto,  sinull  600 

Salcmpoi'cs  400 

Stufls,  brown  11  4(X» 

Tapscil.s,  large,  400 

Ditto,  sinulL^.,.^^^  GOO 


N.  B.  When  the  letter  R is  set  against  pieces  of  l-OOto  aton,  it  shews  those  gooils  are  to  he  reduced, 
or  brought  to  a standard  of  IG  yards  long,  and  I broad;  wh(*re  it  is  against  pieces  of  800  to  the  ton,  to 
10  yards  long,  and  1 broad. 

Example, — 1000  pieces  of  12  yards  long,  and  1 J broad,  at  400  pieces  to  the  ton,  make  844  pieces,  or 
2 tons,  44  pieces,  and  1000  pieces  of  lOJ-yai-dsby  1 J,  at  800  to  a ton,  are  1181  pieces,  or  1 ton,  381  pities. 

The  particular  kinds  of  piece  goods  suitable  to  the  markets  in  various  parts  of  India,  arc  enumerated 
under  the  respective  places. 

Considerable  quantities  of  Surat  piece  goods  were  imported  into  Europe  by  the  IVciich  and  Dutch 
previous  to  the  war.  In  1791  there  ijert*  sold  at  I/Orient  GS,025  pieces,  the  sale  amount  of  which 
was  X^4,5,G78  1«.  6d^ 


290 


PUTCHOCK— RADIX  LOPEZIANA— SANDAL  WOOD. 


TIip  following  is  a statement  of  the  quantities  of  Surat  piece-goods,  imported  and  sold  at  the  East 
India  ( oinpnny's  sales  for  twenty  years,  1771  to  1790  inclusive,  with  the  sale  amount 


Ypars. 

Cu  rps. 

Salp  Amount. 

Years 

Piecch. 

Salo  Amount. 

1771 

131,198 

91,300 

1781 

.33,144 

2.3,129 

1772 

147,029 

87,176 

1782 

.36,597 

29,403 

J77:i 

.58,138 

65,231 

1783 

82,960 

79,944 

1771 

3S,3(if3 

54,798 

1784 

31,1.30 

22,607 

1775 

47.105 

62, .3.55 

1785 

26,767 

18,963 

177(i 

1H,S22 

1.3, .308 

178(3 

1 

1777' 

83,021. 

48,468 

1787 

41.882 

28,560 

1778 

61,SH5 

.32,207 

1788 

41,806 

44,715 

29,937 

1779 

31, .525 

1.3,2.30 

1789 

33,357 

1780 

lH,(iO.) 

11, .349 

1790 

9,6.39 

Within  these  few  years,  considerable  quantities  of  coarse  white  piece-goods  have  been  manufactured  ift 
the  Travancore  country,  and  shipp(‘d  I’or  England  from  Anjengo;  thej  are  blended  in  the  accounts  made 
up  at  the  East  India  House  with  those  of  Surat 

The  following  is  tui  account  of  tJie  sale  uniount  of  Surat  and  Anjengo  piece-goods  at  the  East  India 
Company's  sales,  for  tcii  years,  1798-9  to  1807-8  inclusive. 


Yonr^.  Salo  Amount. 

1798-9  i?l<)3,2()2 

1790-()  177,901 

1S(M)-1 20:), 283 

1501- 2 11,7.71 

1502- 3  184,130 


Year'?. 


Sale  Amount. 


1 S0«3— i>91,218 

1804- 5  14,679 

1805- 6  84,617 

1806- 7  92,755 

1807- 8  3(3,38 1 


PUTCHOCK. 

Of  this  article  considerable  quantities  are  annually  sent  from  the  western  side  of  India  to  China,, 
where  it  is  used  in  their  teiiiph’s,  having,  when  burnt,  a pleasant  and  grateful  smell.  It  is  in  general 
full  of  .sticks  and  dirt  Tbe  Dutch  always  garble  theirs,  but  the  English  do  not,  and  are  in  consequence 
obliged  to  make  an  allowance  of  from  15  to  25  per  cent  fur  waste  and  dirt.  The  Company's  ships  pro- 
ceeding from  Bombay  to  China,  seldom  purchase  this  article  On  tJieir  own  account,  but  carry  it  on  freiglit. 

RADIX  LOPEZIANA  ^ 

^s  a root  produced  on  the  Malabar  ('oast,  and  brought  from  Goa,  in  pieces  about  two  inches  thick,  of 
which  the  woody  part  is  lightisli  and  white,  the  medullary  part  more  dense  and  reddish.  3'Iie  bark  is 
rough,  wrinkled,  brown,  soft,  and  apparently  woolly,  covered  with  a paler  cuticle,  neither  has  it  any  striking 
smell  or  taste.  When  boiled  in  water,  it  has  no  smell;  the  liquor  is  of  a yellow  hue,  almost  insipid,  impress- 
ing tiie  tongue  witli  a very  light  bitterness.  In  diarrhoeas  this  root  is  regarded  as  a medicine  of  gi’eat  efficacy^ 

SANDAL  WOOD. 

Tlie  tree  which  produces  sandal  wood,  grows  only  on  the  Malabar  Coast,  the  Island  of  Timor,  and  one 
or  two  islands  in  the  eastein  seas ; but  the  Malabar  is  the  best.  The  tree  bos  something  of  the  appearance 
of  a large  myrtle,  with  stilf  branches ; its  leaves,  which  ore  about  two  inches  long,  and  three  quarters  of 


SANDAL  WOOD. 


an  moil  broad,  are  like  those  of  the  privet,  smooth  and  shining;  It  bears  a small  i cd  flower,  and  the  berry  is 
about  the  size  of  a pea,  smooth,  juicy,  and  black,  when  ripe.  The  common  size  of  the  tree  at  the  root, 
when  it  is  cut,  is  about  nine  inches  in  diameter,  but  sometimes  considerably  larger.  Wlien  the  trees  are 
felled,  the  bark  is  taken  ofl’;  they  are  then  cut  into  billets,  and  buried  in  a dry  jdm'e  for  two  months,  during 
which  period  the  white  ants  will  eat  the  outer  wood  without  touching  tlie  heart,  which  i>  the  sand.il;  it  i> 
then  taken  up  and  smootlied,  and  according  to  their  size,  sorted  into  three  kinds.  The  deeper  llie  colour, 
the  higher  is  the  perfume;  and  hence  the  merchants  sometimes  divide  sandal  into  r(*d,  yellow,  and  white; 
but  these  are  all  diflTerent  sliadcs  of  the  same  colour,  and  do  not  arise  from  any  diflerence  in  the  .species  of 
the  tree.  Tlie  nearer  the  root,  in  general  the  higher  is  tlie  perfume.  Tlie  billet  ucuresl  tlie  root  is  com- 
monly called  root-sandal,  and  is  of  a superior  <juality. 

Sandal  wood  is  sorted  into  three  sizes.  Before  the  year  1707,  that  was  reckoned  of  the  first  siz  •,  of 
which  35  billets  made  a candy  of  5G01b.'4.;  the  second  size  45  pieces,  and  the  third  size,  55  pieces.  Since 
the  year  1797,  the  sizes  have  been  reduced;  tlie  first  sort  now  contains  (>5,  the  second  .sort  7^2,  and  the 
third  sort  90  pieces  to  a candy:  all  pieces  smaller  than  these,  all  irnt  and  knotty  piece's,  whalevir  may  be 
their  size,  together  with  t*uttings,  roots,  and  the  like,  arc  called  Carippn,  and  form  n fouilli  soil.  The 
chips  which  are  removed  in  polishing  the  logs,  form  a fifth  ussortnunt  The  three  first  only  are  sent 
to  China.  The  Carippu  is  chiefly  sent  to  Bengal  and  Muscat,  and  the  chips  to  ( ’ntch  and  ^Muscat. 

The  produce  of  the  coast  is  said  to  be  about  2000  candies  per  annum,  sonulimes  mori'.  'J'he  (’ompany 
used  to  send  about  BOO  candies  to  China;  all  the  remainder  was  sent  by  pi  ivate  trade  rs  to  Bengal,  Bom!)ay, 
Cutch  and  Muscat.  The  Company’s  resident  makes  the  purchase  from  the  nu'rchants  on  the  sea-coast  for 
ready  money.  These  have  always  on  hand  a considerable  stock,  as  sandal  rather  improi  es  by  keeping. 

The  prices  paid  on  account  of  the  Company  from  1794  to  1800  wtjc  as  folloiv: 

1794..^....  1st  4*5  pieces  to  a candy — 200  Rupees  per  candy. 

2d  ditto  ditto  BO  ditto. 

1797^»^^^-^  1st  sort^*^~- — -^^05  ditto  150  ditto. 

2d  ditto  ^^.%--^72  ditto — !7|  ditto. 

3d  ditto  90 ditto  1 45  ditto. 

1708,%^.-  The  prices  paid  this  year  were  the  same  as  in  tlie  year  1797. 

1799.^^^%  The  prices  paid  were  the  same  as  in  the  two  preceding  yenr>. 

1 1st  sort  »v.^7  pieces  to  a candy^..-%v^-^^^>^--— -149  ditto 

2d  sort  ditto  .........127  ditto. 

In  cliusing  sandal  wood,  the  larger  pieces  should  be  selected,  free  from  hiiots,  rents,  or  crnclt.s,  of  a 
close  texture,  and  fine  grain;  of  a dark  yellow  colour,  an  extremely  sweet  smell,  and  the  outer  l)ark  elean 
off.  The  smaller  pieces,  and  such  as  are  decayed,  and  have  white  wood  about  lliem,  should  be  rejected. 
Particular  care  should  be  taken  that  a wood  much  resembling  sandal  is  not  mixed  with  it,  wliieli  when  cut, 
has  neither  scent  nor  colour;  it  is  a species  of  citron  wood,  and  being  in  large  pieces,  it  more  fre()ueully 
happens  that  the  larger  logs  are  changed  than  the  smaller  ones;  and  you  are  lial)lc  to  the  same  im])osition 
in  sending  it  from  the  ship  to  Canton,  unless  a very  sharp  look-out  is  kept  in  the  bo.ats. 

Sandal  wood  Is  never  brought  to  Europe  as  an  article  of  trade;  a few  logs  are  sometimes  brought  by 
individuals  as  presents  or  for  their  private  use.  20  cwt.  of  it  ore  allowed  to  a ton.  'I  lie  permanetit  duty  < n 
sandal  wood  is  6d.  per  Ib.  and  the  war  duty  2d.  making  in  the  whole  8d.  per  lb. 

The  tonnage  of  sandal  wood  is  generally  computed  by  weight,  allosving  20  cwt.  to  a ton  ; but  the 
measurement,  even  when  piled  up  carefully,  far  exceeds  the  weight.  For  instance,  20  cwt.  of  the  3il  soit  of 

rp2 


29* 


SESAMUM— SHAWLS— SQUILLS. 


sandal  wood  consiste^l  of  SSi  pieces,  and  measured  G feet  2 inches  long,  3 feet  high,  and  6 feet  dee|>, 
making  02{  cubical  feet;  so  that  1(X)  tons  of  sandal  wood  at  20  cwt.  to  the  ton,  actually  occupies  185  tons< 
at  50  cubical  feet  to  the  ton. 

Of  the  first  sort,  19  pieces  weighed  3 cwt.  19  lbs.  and  measured  2 feet  0 long,  2 feet  4 inches  broad,  and 
1 foot  9 inches  high,  making  cubical  ineasuroinent  lOj  feet,  whicli  makes  the  20  cwt.  equivalent  to  G4tVo 
cubical  leet;  so  that  100  tons  of  the  first  sort  of  sandal  wood  occupies  129  J tons,  at  50  cubical  feet  to  the  ton. 

OIL  OF  SANDAL  WOOD 

Is  pre  pared  from  tlie  cliips  and  waste  of  the  wood,  and  is  sometimes  to  be  jirociired  of  a very  superior 
kind,  ncailv  e((ual  to  the  Tnrkiw  oil  of  roses,  and  very  different  from  the  common  sort  usually  met  with  in 
India.  The  best  is  about  the  consistence  of  castor  oil,  of  a lightish  yellow'  colour,  and  of  a high  and  fragrant 
smell ; it  sinks  in  water,  n'ailily  dissolves  In  spirits  of  wine,  and  does  not  congeal  except  in  cold  weather. 
That  whic  h is  thick,  glutinous,  and  dark  coloured,  should  be  rejected. 

The  jiermanent  duty  on  oil  of  sandal  is  £51  5s.  per  cent,  and  the  temporary  or  W'ar  duty  i?17  Is.  8(1* 
in  all  of  GS  Gs.  8d.  [ler  cent. 


SKSAMUAI. 

Tliis  |)lant  is  small  and  annual,  and  yields  seeds,  from  which  an  oil  is  extracted  in  many  parts  of 
India,  that  will  kcej)  many  years,  and  not  accjuire  any  rancid  smell  or  tasti*,  but  in  two  years  become 
(|uit(^  mild;  so  that  when  theivarm  taste  of  the  seed,  which  is  in  the  oil  when  first  drawn,  is  worn  oftiit  is 
used  for  all  the  purposes  of  salad  oil.  It  is  in  common  use  in  China  and  Japan. 

SHAWLS 

Arc  mjifnufuctured  in  Cashmere,  aii<l  from  tlience  forwarded  to  Surat,  Bengal,  and  other  parts  of  India. 
The  wool  of  which  they  arc  manufactured,  is  not  produced  in  the  couiitiy,  but  brought  from  Thibet;  it 
is  originally  of  a dark  grey  coloui,  and  is  bleuclied  in  C.'ishmerp,  The  yarn  nf  this  wool  is  stain<*d  with  such 
colours  as  may  be  judged  best  Milled  fur  .sale,  and  after  being  woven,  the  piece  is  once  washed.  The  bor- 
ders, which  usually  display  a variety  of  figures  and  colours,  are  attached  to  the  shawls  after  fabrication,  but 
111  so  nice  a manner,  that  the  junction  is  not  discernible.  The  texture  of  the  shawl  resembles  tliat  of  the 
slialloon  of  Ihirope,  to  which  it  has  probably  communicated  its  name.  The  shawls  usually  consist  of  three 
sizes,  two  of  which,  the  long  and  the  small  square,  are  in  common  use  in  India,  and  are  the  sorts  usually  im- 
ported into  England;  the  other,  long  and  very  narrow,  with  a large  mixture  of  black  colour  in  them,  are  w'om 
as  ji  girdh*  by  many  of  the  Asiatics.  They  an'  generally  sold  in  pairs,  and  the  price  varies  according  to  the 
quality,  it  being  considerably  enhanced  by  the  introduction  of  flower-work.  For  the  English  market, 
those  with  coloured  grounds  and  handsome  rich  borders  and  flowers,  are  most  esteemed ; the  plain  white 
shawls  being  closely  imitated  in  England,  are  seldom  in  demand. 

SQUILLS, 

Commonly  called  the  sea-onion,  are  knotty,  crumpled,  bulbous  roots,  like  the  onion ; they  are  large, 
conical,  consisting  of  tlcsliy  scales,  thin  at  each  edge,  surrounded  by  others  diy  and  shining.  They 
shoiihi  be  chosen  plump,  sound,  fj  t sli,  and  full  of  juice,  and  cure’shoiild  be  taken  that  they  are  free  from 
worms;  having  the  outward  skin  teken  off,  of  a jcd  colour,  with  but  little  smell,  full  of  a bitter  clammy 
juice,  nauseous,  acrid,  and  bitter,  and  if  much  handled,  ulcerates  the  skin. 


TURBITH— ZEDOARY. 


m 


TURBITII 

Is  the  cortical  part  of  the  root  of  a species  of  convolvulus,  hroup^ht  from  the  East  Indies  in  ohlnn/; 
pieces  of  a brown  or  ash  colour  on  the  outside,  and  whitish  within.  At  first  it  makes  an  impression  of 
sweetness  on  the  taste,  but  wlien  cliewed  for  some  time,  betrays  a nauseous  aei  imony.  'Die  best  is  pon- 
derous, not  wrinkled,  easy  to  break,  and  discovers  to  the  eye  a large  quantity  of  resinous  matt(‘r. 

10  cwt.  of  I'urhlth  are  allowed  to  the  ton.  The  ]K'rinaiient  duty  is  i’S  Ss.per  cwt.  ami  tlie  temporary 
or  war  duty  £2  10s.  making  in  the  wliole  I’ll  is.  per  cwt. 

ZKDOAUV 

Is  produced  in  Ceylon  and  Malabar,  and  brought  from  thence  in  fddong  pieces  of  a modei  ate  tliiek- 
ncss,  and  two  or  three  inches  long,  or  in  roundish  pieces  about  an  inch  i)i  diameter,  extenuiMy  wiinkled, 
and  of  an  ash  colour,  but  internally  of  a hrownisli  red ; its  .smell  is  ngreeahio,  and  its  taste  aromatie  and 
somewhat  bitter;  it  impregnates  water  with  its  smell,  a slight  l)itterm“'S,  a considerable  warmth  and  pun- 
gency, and  a yellowi.sh  brown  colour.  Cliii.se  such  roots  as  are  heavy  and  lV(‘e  from  worms,  njecting  llutso 
wliich  are  decayed  and  broken. 

10  cwt.  of  Zedoary  is  allowed  to  a ton.  The  permanent  duty  is  £[>  Is.  per  cent,  and  tlic  tcinporaiy 
or  war  duty  £1  8s.  making  in  tlio  whole  £5  12s.  per  cent. 


CHAPTER  XIV. 


Coast  of  Concan. 


Coailuf  Cuiican;  ih  Kxhnt—hatitool,  or  Fort  Victoria— Scverndroog—Ghtrinh— Description ; JlfelunJy,or 
Mala-un  Pirates  Ooa  ; Description — and  Measures — Commerce— Commerce  betiecen 
the  Coast  of  Concan  and  the  British  Settlements — Historical  Facts  relative  to  the  Rise  and  Progress  of  the 
Discocerics  and  Compicsts  of  the  Portuguese  in  the  East  Indies. 


THE  western  side  of  the  Peniiisiila  of  Indio  is  generally  rolled  the  Malabar  Coast.  This  appellation 
belongs  proj)erly  to  the  southern  part,  for  the  whole  extent  eompreliends  three  province.s,  viz.  Conean, 
Catiara,  and  Malabar.  Tlic  Coast  of  Concan  is  the  northernmost,  extending  to  Cape  Ramus. 

BANCOOT. 

Bancoot  River,  in  latitude  17°  .57  North,  and  longitude  73°  9 Ea-st,  is  about  lamflcs  East  of  Bombay: 
it  has  10  feet  on  tlie  bar  at  low  water,  and  on  spring  tides  21  feet.  The  channel  is  on  the  eastern  side  of 
the  entrance  of  the  l iver ; but  being  narrow,  ought  not  to  be  approached  without  a pilot.  The  anchorage 
for  large  ships  is  in  .5  fathoms  abreast  of  the  fort.  Upon  the  south  side  of  the  entrance  of  the  river, 
and  on  a very  high  hill,  stands  l-’ort  Victoria,  commanded  by  a resident,  and  a company  of  sepoys, 
besides  a number  of  hx  als,  who  live  in  or  near  the  Fort.  This  place  was  taken  from  Angela  by 
the  j;ngli.sh  in  175.5,  and  remains  in  their  possession.  The  object  of  the  Bombay  Government  in  retain, 
ing  po.ssession  ot  Hanroot  and  its  dependencies  was,  to  protnire  live  provisions,  and  in  particular  homed 
cattle.  The  ihief  supply  got  for  the  marine,  was  from  theSiddec's  country,  to  which  Bancoot  is  contiguous. 
It  was  a port  of  great  trmie  before  it  fell  into  the  hands  of  Angria,  but  at  present  it  is  very  insignificant! 
Ships  occasionally  stop  here,  and  send  their  boats  on  shore  to  procure  bullocks,  which  are  far  superior  to 
those  purchased  at  Bombay;  and  when  homeward  bound  from  Bombay,  a supply  of  cattle  and  poultry  may 
be  secured  by  application  to  the  resident,  and  appointing  some  conspicuous  signal,  that  the  ship  may  be 
known  on  her  appearance  off  the  river,  svhen  the  stores  are  immediately  sent  off, 

Tlie  prices  at  Fort  Victoria  are  as  follow: 

Bullocks  large,  and  very  good 12  to  14  Rupees  each. 

Iluy  for  ditto,  suffeient  for  a week 1 j to  2 ditto. 

Rice  per  bag  of  .5  maunds 5 to  0 ditto. 

I addy  ditto  2 to  3 ditto. 

Fowls,  of  a middling  size 2 to  3 ditto  per  dozen. 

Iliieks,  2 to  3 ditto  ditto. 

Sheep,  which  are  indifferent  C to  8 Rupees  each. 

Firewood,  including  boat-liire.,.....^^...., 4 Rupees  per  1000  billets 

The  general  mode  of  payment  for  supplies  is  by  draft  on  Bombay,  payable  at  sight 


SEVERNDROOG— GHERIAH. 


59.1 


SEVERNDROOC;* 


Is  a low  island  situated  about  a musket  shot  iVom  the  continent,  hearing  from  llie  entrance  of  Hancoot 
River  S.  E.  distant  4 leagues.  It  was  one  of  the  Pirate  Angrias  principal  fortresses;  it  >n:is  strongly,  hut 
not  regularly  fortified,  the  greatest  part  of  the  works  being  cut  out  of  the  solid  rock,  and  tin*  rest  u Ith 
stones  10  or  12  feet  square,  having  upwards  of  50  guns  mounted  on  the  ramparts.  On  tlie  main  land  tluTe 
were  three  forts,  the  largest  of  which  was  called  Port  Goa,  built  in  the  same  iiuinner,  ^>ith  Uio,.  square 
stones,  and  mounting  40  guns ; the  other  two  were  built  with  stones  of  an  irregular  sliape,  and  v^wh  of  them 
mounting  20  guns.  In  1755  an  Englisli  fleet  under  Commodore  James,  attacked  Sevei  ndroog,  running 
within  100  yards  of  it.  He  in  a few  hours  ruined  the  walls,  and  set  it  on  fire:  a powder  magazine  also  hlow"^ 
ingup,  the  people,  to  the  number  ot  about  1000,  abandoned  the  place,  and  embarking  in  boats,  attianpted 
to  make  their  escajic  to  Fort  Goa,  but  were  all  intercepted,  and  made  prisoners  I»y  the  Fn.dish.  The 
whole  force’s  being  then  turned  upon  (loa,  a white  flag  was  soon  hung  out  as  a signal  to  suin  nder.  The 
Governor  however  passed  over  to  Severndroog,  where  he  hoped  to  he  able  to  maintain  his  ground,  not- 
withstanding the  ruinoas  state  of  the  fortifications.  The  fire  was  now  renewed  against  this  fiitrcss*  and 
the  seamen  of  the  fleet  having  cut  a passage  through  one  of  the  gates  with  their  axrvs,  the  garrison’  soon 
siiiiendcred.  About  the  same  time  tlie  two  other  forts  on  the  main  surrendered  to  the  Afahrallas;  so  that 
four  of  Angela’s  forts,  which  had  for  a series  of  years  been  diH’med  impre  gnable,  were  reduced  in  one  day. 
The  island  was  given  up  to  the  Mahrattas,  who  still  retain  possession. 


GHERIAII. 

Gherlah  Point  and  flagstaff  arc  In  latitude  16o  31"  North;  and  the  fort  at  the  entrance  of  the  harbour 
about  a mile  furtlicr  to  the  northward.  The  point  which  forms  the  south  side  of  the  enlranci*,  is  higli  and 
bluff,  and  is  in  longitude  25  East.  The  flagstaff  stands  on  a hill  to  the  southward  of  the  fort,  and 
may  be  seen  a considerable  distance.  The  harbour  is  excellent,  the  vessels  in  it  being  landlocked,  and 
sheltered  from  all  winds.  There  is  no  bar  at  the  entrance,  the  depths  tiiere  being  from  5 to  7 fathoms, 
and  from  3 to  4 fathoms  inside  at  low  water. 

The  fort  of  Gheriuh  stands  on  a promontory  of  rocky  land,  about  a mile  long,  and  a quarter  I)rond. 
Nearly  a mile  from  the  entrance  of  the  harbour,  which  forms  the  mouth  of  a largo  river,  tiie  promontory 
projects  to  the  S.W.  on  the  right  of  the  harbour,  and  on  the  sides  contiguous  to  the  water  is  endosc’d  by 
a continued  rock,  about  50  feet  high,  on  which  the  fortifications  are  built ; these  arc  a double  wall 
with  round  towers,  the  inward  wall  rising  several  feet  above  the  outward.  The  neck  of  land  by  which 
the  promontory  joins  to  the  continent,  is  a narrow  sand,  beyond  which,  where  the  ground  expands,  is 
a large  open  town,  or  pettah.  The  river  directing  its  course  to  the  S.AV.  w aslies  the  north  .side  of  the 
town,  the  neck  of  land,  and  the  promontory.  On  the  neck  of  land  arc  docks,  where  grabs  are  built  and 
repaired. 

Gheriab  was  the  capital  of  Angria  the  Pirate,  whose  dominions  at  one  period  extended  to  witfiiii 
a few  miles  of  Bombay,  about  150  miles  to  the  southw^ard,  and  from  30  to  GO  in  breadth.  'J’his  pii  atic/il 
state  had  for  upwards  of  50  years  rendered  itself  formidable  to  the  trading  ships  of  ail  tlig  European  nutiuns 
in  India,  and  the  English  Company  had  kept  up  a marine  force  at  a considerable  annual  cxpciiee,  to  pro- 
tect their  own  ships,  and  those  of  the  merchants  established  in  their  settlements. 

In  1717  an  unsuccessfbl  attempt  was  made  upon  Gheriah  from  Bombay  by  aVinsiderabJe  naval  force, 
with  a numerous  body  of  land  forces  on  board.  In  1735  the  Dutch  sent  a strong  force  from  Batavia,  to 
attack  it,  in  which  they  were  defeated.  In  1736  Angria's  vessels  took  tlie  Derby  East  Indiaman,  ricldj 


MELUNDY,  OR  MALWAN. 


SPG 

Jaden,  ulsi)  the  Restoration  armed  ship  of  20  guns  and  200  men,  fitted  out  purj)0seljr  to  cruise  against  them, 
and  several  of  less  note  from  the  (’ompanv.  From  the  French  they  took  the  Jupiter,  of  JO  guns,  with  400 
slaves  on  hoard,  and  also  made  seviral  captures  from  the  Dutch.  They  had  the  presumption  to  attack 
Commodore  Idsle  in  the  Vigilant  of  (it  guns,  the  Ruby  of  50,  and  several  other  ships  in  company.  In 
1751  tlic  Bombay  Government  proposed  to  the  Mahrattas  the  reduction  of  Gheriah,  and  a tieaty  was 
fonfludcd  Ix’twcen  them  for  the  purpose,  whenever  there  should  he  a proper  opportunity,  TJ»e  necessity 
of  this  treaty  was  soon  j)ci  ceivcd;  lor  in  FebruJiry,  1754,  Angria's  fleet  attacked  three  Dutcli  ships  of  5(>, 
.‘l(i,  and  IS  gnus,  hiirnt  th(»  two  large  ones,  and  took  the  other.  Angria  grew  insolent  on  this  success,  built 
several  ves^scls,  se  t two  large  ships  on  the  stocks,  and  boasted  he  should  soon  be  master  of  the  Indian  seas. 

In  175(i  an  Faiglish  licet  of  four  sail  of  t!ic  line,  several  frigates,  and  the  Company's  marine  vessels, 
under  Adiniial  Watson,  with  alwut  2000  troops  on  board,  aided  by  the  Mahratta  fleet  and  army,  attacked 
(iheriah,  which  soon  surrendered,  and  was  taken  possession  of  by  the  British  forces.  There  were  found  in 
the  place  200  pieces  of  cannon  and  six  brass  mortars,  a great  quantity  of  ammunition,  military  and  naval 
stores  of  all  kinds,  besides  money  and  efiTt^cts  to  the  amount  of  i?l 25,000,  which  were  divided  among  the 
captors,  without  any  reserve  either  for  the  nation  or  the  Company.  Angria’s  fleet,  which  consisted  of  eigiit 
grabs  and  a great  number  of  gallivats,  were  destroyed,  as  also  two  large  ships  upon  the  stocks,  one  of 
wliieli  was  intended  to  carry  forty  guns. 

It  was  given  up  to  the  Alahrattas,  who  have  held  it  ever  since. 

MELUNDY,  OH  MALWAN. 

This  island  is  in  latitude  IG'^  3 North,  and  is  the  principal  place  of  the  pirates  on  this  coast;  it  is 
strongly  foitifieil,  and  tliei  e is  a considerable  fort  on  the  main  land  near  it,  to  protect  their  vessels.  These 
pirates  are  called  Malwaas,  an<l  are  a very  cruel  race.  None  hut  the  Rajah  fits  out  vessels,  which  are  of 
three  kinds,  gallivats,  sliehars  and  grabs:  the  first  have  in  general  two  masts,  and  are  decked  fore  and  aft, 
have  square  topsails  and  top-gnllunt  sails,  and  are  rigged  mostly  after  the  European  fashion.  The  shebar 
is  also  of  two-mast’<,  the  atler-mast  and  bowsprit  very  short;  they  have  no  topmasts,  and  very  little  ngging, 
and  aie  not  decked  ; their  largest  sail  is  extended  on  a yard  of  very  great  length,  running  up  to  a point, 
many  feet  higher  than  theina>t;  they  sail  well,  and  arc  fine  vessels  in  fair  weather  and  smooth  water; 
many  of  them  are  of  more  than  150  tons  burthen.  The  grab  is  distinguished  from  other  vessels  by  having, 
jiiNteail  of  bows,  a projecting  prow;  they  arc  decked,  and  have  either  two  or  three  masts,  and  are  rigged 
in  the  luiropean  maiiiK'r.  I'lucli  of  the  Rnjalfs  vessels,  of  all  of  these  descriptions,  carries  eight  or  ten  small 
larriage  guns,  and  about  1(K)  men.  Their  general  rendezvous  is  Pigeon  Island.  On  leaving  port,  each 
pirate  lasear  receives  two  rupees,  the  serang  eight,  and  on  their  return  they  get  corn,  according  to  their 
success,  and  3 or  I rupees,  ami  more  corresponding  with  their  rank  and  good  fortune.  Their  cruise  seldom 
exceeds  fil’leen  days.  All  prizes  are  the  property  of  tlie  Rajah,  wdio  is  at  the  sole  expence  of  tlie  outfit.  The 
vessels  taken  are  seldom  retained,  unless  peculiarly  adapted  to  the  ser^dee;  the  cargo  becomes  tlie  Rajah's 
property,  and  ihi*  vessel  is  reh’nsed. 

Tliey  sail  without  any  written  commission,  and  with  instructions,  it  is  understood,  to  take  all 
vessels  that  they  can  master,  except  those  having  English  colours  and  passes.  Sometimes,  liowever, 
they  are  regardless  of  the  English  protection,  which  they  thus  contrive  to  evade.  One  pirate  boat  boards 
the  intended  prey,  and  demands  her  pass ; and  while  some  person  pretends  to  read  it,  others  pick  a 
quarrel  with  some  of  the  crew,  and  comiiience  a scuffle,  in  which  the  pass  is  removed  or  destroyed; 
however,  they  take  kkt  little,  perhaps  nothing,  and  depart.  Soon  after  another  pirate  boards  her, 
and  finding  no  pass,  pretends  that  the  reasons  offered  for  its  absence,  are  lies,  and  takes  all.  In  these 
cases  complaint  is  of  course  made  by  the  plundered  owner  to  the  Bombay  Government,  and  restitution 
u demanded,  and  generally  made  without  much  demur. 


GOA. 


297 


BetTreen  Melundy  and  the  entrance  to  Goa  River,  are  the  forts  of  Newtce,  Roree,  Chiracole,  and 
Chapra;  the  two  latter  belong  to  the  Portuguese,  but  seldom  shew  their  colours  to  ships  |)assing. 

GOA 

Is  the  capital  of  the  Portuguese  possessions  in  the  Past  Indies,  the  seat  of  the  \ iceroy,  Ihe  sec  of  an 
Archbishop,  who  is  primate  of  the  East,  and  tlie  supreme  court  of  judicature  for  all  the  I’orlugiKse  in  Asia, 
and  to  which  all  others  are  subordinate.  Algoadu  Point,  in  latitude  lo^  29  North,  and  longitude  7 J 
Eas^  forms  the  northern  extremity  of  Goa  Buy;  it  has  a lighthouse  and  small  fort  on  it,  but  tlie  principal 
forti$  situated  close  to  the  sea,  on  the  S.  E.  side  ol  the  headland,  where  there  is  a well  of  excellent  water, 
from  which  the  shipping  is  supplied.  Nostra  Senhora  de  la  Cabo,  a large  monastery,  of  a white  appeuruiiee, 
is  situjited  on  the  summit  of  tire  bluff'  point  of  land,  about  2}  miles  S.  J-:.  of  Aigoada,  which  forms  the 
south  side  of  the  bay.  The  common  anchorage  is  abreast  Aigoada  Port,  the  llagstaff  beming  about  Nortli, 
at  half  a mile  distance  from  the  shore. 

The  btu-  at  the  entrance  of  the  river  is  about  two  miles  to  tlie  eastward  of  Aigoada  Point,  ha^lng  l(i 
or  18  feet  on  it  at  high  water  springtides;  but  the  bottom  about  it  being  haid  and  rocky,  aiul  the  clmniu  l 
winding  and  intricate,  a ssliip  ought  not  to  enter  the  river  witliout  u jillot.  ARcr  the  early  pait  of  Muy 
it  is  con.sidered  unsafe  to  remain  at  the  anchorage  in  the  road  ; tiie  Poiingiiese  then  bcnd  llicir  large  ship.s 
that  cannot  go  into  tlie  river,  to  Murinagon  roads,  4*  or  5 mile.s  to  the  southward  of  Aigoada  fort,  wlicje 
they  are  sheltered  from  the  S.  VV.  monsoon,  by  mooring  close  under  the  N.  K.  side  of  that  |)eiiinsuia. 

*1  he  city  ol  Goa  is  situated  on  the  north  side  of  an  island  about  twelve  miles  long  and  six  broad,  sevcai 
miles  from  the  entrance  of  the  river.  Halfway  between  Aigoada  and  Goa  is  a large  town,  at  which  the 
V^iceroy  or  Governor  General  has  a residence.  The  many  buildings  on  each  side  ihe  river,  which  is  very 
broad,  makes  a splendid  appearance,  particularly  the  convents,  being  generally  placed  in  elev.ated  situations. 
In  the  centre  of  the  city  is  a noble  square,  in  which  are  the  cathedral,  the  Viceroy’s  palace,  the  Jesuits’ 
convent,  and  the  Inquisition,  all  of  which  are  fine  buildings.  The  two  last  have  been  shut  uj)  since  the 
suppression  of  the  Jesuits.  The  city  is  hwge,  the  streets  straight,  the  houses  regularly  and  hand.soiuely 
built  of  stone,  in  the  European  style,  many  of  them  large  and  magnificent,  but  uniiihabiti^d. 

On  the  arrival  of  the  Portuguese  on  the  Malabar  f’oast,  Goa  was  a most  ojinhuit  place,  and  well 
fortified.  It  was  subject  to  Zabaim,  a potent  monarch,  who  w as  then  engaged  in  war  with  several  tributary 
Princes.  Timoia,  a neighbouring  pirate,  who  had  submitted  to  the  rortuguese,  strongly  ndvi.si'd  the  great 
Albuquerque  to  seize  the  opportunity  of  attacking  Goa,  represented  its  great  opulence,  and  the  honour 
and  wealth  that  would  attend  hissucces.s.  The  Portuguese  listened  to  his  advice,  and  after  several  assaults, 
made  himself  master  of  the  city,  by  an  agreement  with  the  inhabitants.  This  h;q)pened  on  February  ICJtli, 
ISIO.  The  citizens  took  the  oaths  of  allegiance  to  King  Emanuel.  He  found  in  tlie  jdacc  imntcn.se 
quantites  of  ammunition,  forty  gi’eat  cannon,  in  the  dock.s  forty  men  of  war,  and  in  the  stables  numlx'i  s 
of  fine  Persian  and  Arabian  horses.  A mutinous  spirit  pervading  the  Porlugircse  army,  this  naturally 
infected  their  new  subjects,  who  repenting  their  disloyalty,  conveyed  their  sentiments  to  their  late  Sove- 
reign. He  assembled  a large  army  on  the  continent ; and,  notwithstanding  every  endeavour  of  Albu(|uer(jue, 
effected  a landing  on  the  island.  The  Portuguese  defended  themselves  witli  great  valour;  luit  finding  the 
place  no  longer  tetiable,  their  commander  determined  to  retire,  lie  einbaikcd  with  great  seen  cy  iveiy 
thing  that  was  necessary ; when  on  the  30th  of  May  of  the  same  year,  after  a sliort  conlliet,  he  madt*  good 
his  retreat  to  Rapander,  a neighbouiing  town,  where  he  resolved  to  winter.  Zabaim  proved  a In  ave  and 
active  enemy,  and  compelled  Albuquerque  to  remove  his  quarters  several  times.  At  leiiglh  receiving  a strong 
reinforcement  of  Portuguese  and  other  supplies,  he  renewed  his  attempt  on  Goa,  aiul  ai'ter  scver.il  sharp 
actions,  made  himself  again  master  of  the  city,  by  a most  fierce  and  bloody  as«ault,  the  delence  bring 
equally  obstinate  with  the  attack,  since  , which  period  it  has  remained  in  their  possession,  Albuquenpie 

QH 


SOS 


GOA. 


thereupon  gave  it  every  strength  by  increasing  the  fortifications,  and  encouraging  commerce.  It  flourished 
for  a scries  of  years  with  unrivalled  splendour,  and  became  the  centre  of  the  riclies  of  India,  and  one  of 
the  greatest  marts  in  the  universe. 

Goa  contains  a great  number  of  handsome  churches  and  convents,  with  a large  hospital,  well  endowed^ 
and  kept  in  good  repair.  In  one  of  these  churches,  dedicated  to  Bon  Jesus,  is  the  chapel  of  St.  Francis 
ile  Xavier,  whose  tomb  it  contains.  This  chapel  is  a most  superb  and  magnificent  place.  The  tomb  is  entirely 
of  fine  black  marble,  brought  from  Lisbon;  on  the  four  sides  of  it,  the  principal  actions  of  the  life  of 
the  Saint  are  most  elegantly  carved  in  basso  relievo:  these  represent  his  converting  the  difierent  nations 
to  the  Catholic  faith ; the  figure  is  done  to  the  life,  and  most  admirably  executed.  It  extends  to  the  top 
in  a pyraniidical  form,  which  t(Tminatos  with  a coronet  of  mother  o'pearl.  On  the  sides  of  the  chapel 
arc  many  excellent  paintings.  This  tomb  and  chapel  are  justly  esteemed  the  greatest  rarity  in  the  place. 

At  present  it  is  garrisoned  by  the  British  troops. 

COINS,  WEIGHTS,  and  MEASURES. 

Accounts  arc  kept  in  pardos,  tangas,  vintiiis,  and  budgerooks,  but  there  are  good  and  bad  of  each 
kind;  1 pardo  is  worth  4 good  or  5 bad  tangas,  16  good  vintins,  or  20  bad;  the  pardo  is  also  divided  into 
240  good  or  300  bad  rCas. 

3'Jie  current  coins  are,  the  St.  Thome,  a gold  piece  which  passes  for  1 1 good  tangas  ; it  weighs 
grains  troy,  and  is  of  the  purity  of  18  carats,  and  worth  about  6s.  8d.  sterling. 

The  silver  coin  is  the  pardo,  which  is  of  two  sorts  : the  Pardo  Xerapldin  passes  current  for  5 good 
tangas  each,  about  7}d.  sterling;  and  the  common  pardo  for  4 tangas;  the  former  has  on  one  side  a figure 

of  St.  Sebastian,  and  on  the  other  a sJieaf  of  arrows. 

The  budgerook  is  made  nf  tin,  having  on  one  side  a globe,  and  on  the  other  two  arrows  crossed. 

Spanish  dollars,  Venetians,  Rupees,  and  all  other  foreign  coins  pass  current  here,  but  the  price  fluctuates 
'according  to  the  quantity  in  the  market. 

Weights.— The  ipiiiital  of  4 arobas  is  in  common  use,  but  they  have  the  Indian  candy  thus  divided: 

lb.  oz.  *lrs. 

1 Rattle  { is  equal  to  avolrdupois^^^*^  10  8 

24  Rattles  V make  l 1 Maund  24  12  0 

20  Maunclii  * ^ ^ Candy  495  0 0 

COMMERCE. 

The  trade  carried  on  by  the  Portuguese  is  very  trifling,  compared  with  what  it  formerly  was.  There  are 
seldom  more  than  three  ships  sent  from  Portugal  to  India  in  the  year,  and  these  generally  proceed  to 
the  llritish  settlements,  to  complete  their  cargoes  for  Europe.  ^ ^ 

The  trade  from  Goa  to  China  consists  of  one  or  two  ships  in  the  year,  which  arc  called  China  ships; 
these  sail  in  November  and  December  to  Surat  and  ports  to  the  northward,  carrying  China  and  Europan 
goods,  anti,  returning  with  cotton  and  other  articles,  call  at  Goa  to  complete  tlieir  cargoes  for  China, 
and  depart  in  March  or  .\pril.  The  earliest  of  these  ships  returns  in  October  or  November  to  the  Coast  of 
Malabai’;  the  latest  arrives  generally  in  January.  They  commence  their  trade  at  the  most  southern  setlle- 
juent,  which  is  Anjengo,  from  thence  to  Cochin,  Calicut,  Tellidierry,  and  Mangalore,  and  then  to  Goa. 
At  all  the  above  places  they  take  pepper,  cardamums,  cassia  lignea,  and  other  articles,  which  they  resell 
at  their  nortliern  settlements,  completing  their  whole  voyage  p'ithin  the  year. 

The  coasting  trade  is  considerable,  wliich  is  carried  on  with  the  different  prts  on  the  coast  in  small 
vessels,  from  whence  they  return  to  Goa  with  produce,  which  forms  the  home  cargoes  of  their  ships. 

Since  tlie  city  has  been  garrisoned  by  the  English,  a trade  is  carried  on  with  Bombay  in  various  Euro- 
pan cummodities  for  the  use  of  the  miliUry,  by  pttemars,  or  small  ship  passing  down  the  coast. 


GOA. 


209 


COMMERCE  WITH  THE  BRITISH  SETTLEMENTS. 

Q he  followinij  is  a statement  of  the  merchandise  and  treasure  imported  into  Goa  and  the  Coast  of 
Concan  from  the  British  settlements,  in  the  years  1802  to  180G  inclusive,  likinvise  of  the  ni(‘rchandise  and 
treasure  exported  from  Goa  and  the  Coast  of  Concan  during  the  same  period,  together  with  a list  of  the 
articles  of  which  the  imports  and  exports  consisted  in  1805. 


IMPORTS  INTO  GOA  AND  CONCAN. 


FAPORTS  FROM  GOV  AND  (’ONCNN. 


Yturs. 

Merthandise 

Treasure. 

Total. 

Years. 

iMcrch.indise 

Trctisuie. 

Tuial 

Sicca  Rupoi's. 

Sicca  Rupees. 

Sicca  Rupees. 

.Sicr.i  Rui)cc.>. 

Suc.-i  |{ujuls. 

Sicc.i  Rupee-.. 

1802 

19,15,040 

34,088 

19,79,728 

1802 

11, .39, 099 

4,50,:H9 

15,95,418 

1803 

49,55,060 

1.3,71,722 

0.3,20,782 

1803 

9,04,712 

3,88,015 

13,52,757 

1804 

60,47,698 

14,76,4.59 

81,21,157 

1801 

7,09,043 

12,18,010 

19,87,089 

1805 

41,67,580 

5,23,408 

40,}M),9S8 

1805 

1 1, .33, 089 

5,70,140 

17,03,535 

1800 

42,19.209 

2,24,519 

44,41,728 

1800 

10,11,941 

8,.33,00() 

21,7.5,541 

Total. 

219,.34,.587 

36, .‘10,790 

255,05,38.3 

Total. 

50,48,510  * 

.'11,00,156 

91,11,972^ 

Articles  of  Import  in  1805. 
%%«'%»^«%%-%v%%^«^%Sicca  Rupees 


. v%  %%%%%«%<«  W %-v 

% % % v%%%  v% 


Piece-goods 
Raw  silk 
Grain 
Sugar 
W oollcns 

H 1 n g'V^'V*  V%  % %%^%  % v% 

Drug! 

Apparel 
Cotton 

Dates 

Iron 

Seeds 

Wine 

Vermilion 

Spices 

Luiuors  ^ 

Cochineal 
Glass 
Maniary 
Oil 
Paper 
Pepper 

Red  and  white  lead 
Shawls 
Tutenague 
Tin 
Horses 
Beetle  nut 
Provisions 
Kismisses 
Lametta 
PVuhs 
Sundries 
Treasure 


5,98,370 
(;,9I,7H0 
10,71,707 
a, 01,079 
1,3+,0H9 
1,(K),105 
1,54,945 
25,975 
47,314 
42,295 
6.5,338 
10,051 
78,372 

78. . 392 
31,219 
83,809 

48. . 341 

19.196 
27,945 
34,041 
19,615 
11,215 

56.196 
24,834 
17,240 
14,460 
25,838 
55,725 
21,184 
15,519 
14,803 
20,720 
20,517 

2,44,662 

5,23,408 


Imports  in  1805  MMM«.Sicca  Rupees  46,90,988 


jiiiirks  nf  Export  in  180.5. 

Grain  Huppe.'?  .3,85,452 

l*iece-f;oo(ls,.v,»,.» — 2,87,3(!2 

Heetlc  luit  91,327 

I'Icmp  93,>}12 

Old  biass 

t .'Ocoa  12,029 

Copjier  ware  ......  9,196 

t'otlon  1 1 ,.500 

Galls 

Jaggery  8,183 

Kismisses  19,383 

Seeds  »1, 183 

Sandal  wood  24,581 

Turmeric  28,914 

Wine  10,020 

Salt  24,159 

Stationery  N,t)9S 

Sundries  .52,025 

Treasure  70,416 


Exports  in  1805v,»v«Sicca  Rupees  17,03,.535 


HISTORICAL  FACTS  RELATIVE  TO  THE 


300 


Merchandise  imported  from  the  settlements  of  Fort  St.  George  and  Bombay  into 

Goa  and  the  Coast  of  Concan,  in  five  years  Siccfl  Kupecs  219,34,387 

Ditto  exported  from  ditto  to  ditto  36,48,316 

Imports  exceed  the  exports  162,86,071 

Treasure  imported  from  Fort  St.  George  and  Bombay  36, ,30, 796 

Ditto  exported  to  ditto%««%«%%«%%v%«^v.^^^^^^^.^.vv%«.«v^^  34,66,456 

1,64,340 

Balance  Goa  and  the  Coast  of  Concan  Rupees  161,21,731 

Being  in  favour  of  the  British  settlements  in  the  following  proportions: 

Madras  and  its  dependencies  ..^^^%^^^%^«^Sicca  Rupees  33,12,828 
Bombay  and  Surat  126,08,903 

PROVISIONS  AND  REFRESHMENTS. 

Ships  touching  at  this  place,  are  supplied  with  water  from  the  well  near  Algoada  fort;  they 
may  also  at  times  procure  some  poultry  and  vegetables,  and  in  May  fine  mangoes  and  other  fruits.  The 
river  abounds  with  fish  of  various  kinds,  many  of  which  are  excellent 

HISTORICAL  FACTS 

Relative  to  the 

PORTUGUESE  DISCOVERIES  AND  CONQUESTS  IN  THE  EAST  INDIES. 

The  Portuguese  were  once  the  principal  navigators,  and  were  the  first  Europeans  who  explored  the 
Coast  of  Africa  to  the  southward,  and  visited  the  East  Indies  by  the  way  of  the  Cape  of  Good  Hope. 

1410,  Previous  to  this  period  the  Canary  Islands  were  discovered,  and  the  extent  of  the  S.  W.  coast 
of  Africa  known  to  the  Portuguese  was  Cape  Non.  In  this  year  they  fitted  out  ships  for  discovery,  ad- 
mitting  Spaniards  and  others  who  were  skilled  in  navigation,  into  their  service  for  that  purpose.  These 
vessels  proceeded  as  far  as  Cape  Bojadore,  but  did  not  double  that  promontory. 

1418.  The  Island  of  Porto  Sancto  was  discovered  by  Tristan  Vas,  on  the  Feast  of  All  Saints. 

1419.  The  island  of  Madeira  was  first  visited  by  the  Portuguese,  when  it  was  ascertained  that  it 
had  been  visited  by  an  Englishman  named  Macham,  about  the  year  1844. 

1439.  Cape  Bojadore  was  first  doubled  in  this  year,  and  in  the  ibHowing  year  the  Portuguese  vessels 
proceeded  along  the  coast  as  far  as  Cajie  Blanco,  so  that  in  the  course  of  about  forty  yeajn|||^y  had 
discovered  about  500  miles  of  the  Coast  of  Africa. 

1444.  The  Portuguese  sent  an  embassy  to  Rome,  when  the  Pope  by  a bull,  dated  in  1444,  bestowed 
Cfn  the  crown  of  Portugal  the  sovereignty  and  dominion  over  all  the  lands  which  had  hitherto  been 
discovered,  and  ail  that  should  be  discovered  on  the  Coast  of  Africa  as  far  as  the  Indies. 

1446.  In  this  year,  Nuno  Tristan  doubled  C«pe  Verd,  on  the  Coast  of  Africa. 

1448.  The  Azores,  or  Hawk  Islands,  were  discovered.  They  were  at  this  time  uninhabited. 

1449.  The  Cape  de  Verd  Islands  were  discovered;  the  first  was  called  the  Isle  of  May,  because 
tfie  Portuguese  land^  on  it  on  May  Day;  they  also  landed  on  two  others,  which  were  named  St.  Jmesp 
and  St  Philip,  but  the  remainder  were  not  visited  till  about  1460. 

1463.  At  this  period  the  Portuguese  had  discovered  the  coast  as  far  as  Sierra  Leone. 

1471.  In  this  year  the  island  of  St.  Thomas  was  discovered,  and  on  New  Year's  Day,  in  the 
lowing  yeai^  anotlm  island  on  the  same  coasl^  which  they  called  Annabon. 


301 


PORTUGUESE  DISCOVERIES  IN  THE  EAST  INDIES. 

1484*.  Diego  Cam  discovered  the  kingdom  of  Congo,  and  liroiight  to  Portugal  an  account  of 
«•  Christian  monarch  who  reigned  in  ^Ethiopia,  which  iiuliiced  King  John  II.  of  Portugal  to  .send  some 
ti’ustjr  persons  to  gain  intelligence;  but  they  returncil  without  performing  much  service. 

1487.  Pedro  de  Covillam  and  Alonzo  de  Payva,  two  Portuguese  who  spoke  Araliie  perfectly,  set  out 
from  Portugal  for  ^Ethiopia.  They  went  to  Alexandria,  thence  to  (hiiro  as  merchants,  and  proceeded  with 
a caravan  of  Moors  to  Tor  on  the  Red  Sea,  where  they  were  informed  of  the  trade  to  Calicut.  Sailing 
thence  to  Aden,  they  parted,  CovillamAowards  India,  and  Payva  towards  .'Ethiopia,  resolving  at  an  appointed 
time  to  meet  again.  From  Aden,  Covillam  went  in  a IMoorish  ship  to  Cananore,  and  from  thence  to  Con. 
being  the  first  Portuguese  that  ever  was  in  the  Indian  seas.  From  thence  he  passed  to  Sofala  on  the  Fast 
Coast  of  Africa,  to  visit  the  gold  mines,  where  he  gained  intelligence  of  Madagascar,  called  hy  the  Moors 
tlie  Island  of  the  Moon.  From  Sofala  he  went  back  to  Aden,  and  so  to  l^gypt,  where  he  learned  that  hi.s 
companion  was  dead.  He  then  went  again  to  Tor,  thence  to  Aden,  where  hearing  of  the  tame  of  tlie  city 
of  Ormus,  he  sailed  thither,  and  having  observed  what  was  most  remarkable,  he  returned  to  the  Red  Sea. 
He  then  went  to  discover  the  Court  of  the  King  of  Abyssinia,  where  he  was  detained  a prisoner  till  1520, 
when  he  was  released,  and  returned  to  Europe. 

1492.  In  this  year  Columbus,  in  the  .service  of  the  King  of  Spain,  discovered  the  continent  of 
America,  the  sovereignty  of  which  he  claimed  for  that  Monarch,  and  by  a bull,  dated  May  4th,  1493. 
the  Pope  Alexander  VI.  confirmed  his  title,  and  strictly  prohibited  all  persons  whatever,  on  pain  of  ex- 
communication,  to  touch  at  any  port  or  place  within  the  limits  of  a line  wliich  he  decreed  to  be  drawn 
from  pole  to  pole,  at  the  distance  of  100  leagues  to  the  westward  of  the  Azores,  without  leave  of  the 
Spaniards.  The  Portuguese  were  dissatisfied  with  this  decree;  and  by  an  adjustment  between  the  two 
Crowns,  which  took  place  on  the  7th  of  June,  1493,  it  was  agreed  that  the  imaginary  line  should  be  ex- 
tended 270  leagues  farther  westward  of  the  Azores,  and  that  all  future  discoveries  made  eastward  of  the 
aaid  line,  should  belong  to  the  Portuguese,  and  all  westward  to  Spain. 

1493.  Bartholomew  Diaz,  a person  remarkable  for  prudence,  and  skill  in  navigation,  was  em- 
ployed by  the  King  of  Portugal  to  proceed  along  the  South  Coast  of  Africa,  which  he  accordingly 
trailed  till  he  reached  a liigh  cape,  which  he  doubled,  and  sailed  a good  way  beyond  it;  ho  gave  it  the 
name  of  Cabo  Tormentoso,  or  the  Cape  of  Storms,  from  the  boisterou.s  weather  he  experienced  near  it. 
On  his  return  to  Portugal,  tlie  King  changed  its  name  to  Cabo  Bona  ICspcranza,  or  the  Cape  of  Good 
Hope,  which  name  it  has  ever  since  retained. 

1497.  The  narrative  of  Diaz,  with  the  accounts  of  the  Indian  Peninsula  and  commerce  transmitted 
by  Covillam,  confirmed  the  opinion  which  had  been  long  entertained  of  the  practicability  of  opening  a 
passage  to  India,  by  sailing  round  the  southern  extremity  of  Africa.  The  Portuguese  therefore  equipped 
a squadron  of  four  ships  under  Vasco  de  Gama.  They  sailed  from  Lisbon  on  Friday,  July  8th,  1497,  rounded 
the  Cajie  of  Good  Hope,  November  20th;  and  having  proceeded  along  the  coast  as  far  as  the  River 
Cuama,  or  Good  Signs,  they  hove  down  and  repaired  tlieir  ships,  and  left  it  on  the  22d  of  January,  1498. 
On  the  1st  of  March  they  discovered  Mosambique,  where  they  had  a narrow  escape  from  being  cut  off  by  the 
Moors.  On  the  7th  of  April  they  arrived  at  Moinbas,  and  on  the  13th  at  Melinda ; at  the  latter  place  they 
were  received  in  a friendly  manner,  and  supplied  with  a pilot  for  the  Indies;  on  the  20th  of  May,  1498,  they 
arrived  at  Calicut,  and  met  with  a favourable  reception;  but  the  misrepresentations  of  the  Moors,  whose 
commerce  was  endangered  by  the  arrival  of  the  Portuguese,  had  such  an  effect  on  the  Samorin, 
Or  King,  that  he  began  to  lay  snares  for  their  destruction.  Do  Gama  had  early  intelligence  of  his  designs; 
he  therefore  hastened  on  board  his  ship,  and  wrote  a letter  to  the  Samorin,  complaining  of  tin's  breach 
of  faith*  The  Samorin  returned  a polite  answer,  laying  the  blame  on  his  ministers  and  the  Maho-^ 
metaiUt  and  added  a letter  to  the  King  of  Portugal,  wherein  he  accepted  the  propositions  made  him,  and 


302 


HISTORICAL  FACTS  RELATIVE  TO  THE 


promised  ft  free  trade  to  his  subjects.  De  Gama  thereupon  proceeded  to  Aiijediva,  wliere  having  repaired 
his  vessels,  ho  sailed  for  Europe*.  On  the  2()th  of  March,  MlH),  he  doubled  the  Cape  of  Good  Hope,  and  in 
the  month  of  September  arrived  safe  at  Lisbon,  after  a voyage  of  two  years  and  ten  months. 

1500.  The  second  Portuguese  fleet  for  India,  consisting  of  13  ships,  under  Cabral,  sailed  from  the 
Tagus  March  9th,  1500,  and  discovered  the  Coast  of  Brazil  April  24th.  They  experienced  very  tempes- 
tuous weather  oft  the  Cape  of  Good  Hope,  in  which  several  of  their  ships  were  lost.  In  one  of  them  was 
Bartholomew  Diaz,  who  first  rounded  the  Capt*.  They  visited  Mosambique,  Quiloa,  and  Melinda,  and 
arrived  at  Calicut  September  13th.  The  Samorin  sent  to  compliment  Cabral  on  his  arrival,  and  invited  him 
on  shore.  On  his  landing  he  was  kindly  received,  and  permission  granted  to  build  a factory ; but  in  conse- 
quence of  the  Samorlrfs  intentions  being  n'prcsented  as  mischievous,  the  Portuguese  General  commenced 
hostilities  by  seizing  the  ships  in  the  roads.  The  inhabitants  thus  provoked,  attacked  the  factory,  forced 
the  gates,  pillaged  and  bunit  the  house,  and  of  60  people  that  were  in  it,  murdered  50;  the  remainder  with 
difliculty  escaped  on  board  their  ships.  The  Portuguese  took  ample  revenge  by  burning  ten  vessels  richly 
laden  in  the  port,  making  slaves  of  their  crews,  and  battering  tlie  town  by  their  artillery;  after  whicli  they 
proceeded  to  (^ochiii,  olf  whieli  place  tlu'y  arrived  December  20tli,  1500,  concluded  a treaty  with  the  Prince, 
and  settling  a factory,  obtained  cargoes  for  their  ships,  and  on  January  10th,  1501,  sailed  for  Europe,  where 
they  arrived  on  July  31st,  having  on  board  ambassadors  from  Cochin,  Quilon,  and  Cananore.  Of  the 
ships  which  sailed  under  Cabral  six  only  returned,  the  others  having  been  lost  in  tlie  coui-se  of  the  voyage. 
On  his  passage  to  hhiropc,  Cabral  si  ttled  factories  at  Melinda,  Mombas,  and  Querimba,  ami  compelled 
several  of  the  Ihinces  on  the  East  Coast  of  Africa  to  become  trilmtary  to  the  Portuguese. 

1502,  Vasco  de  Gama  sailed  a second  time  for  India,  with  a fleet  of  20  ships  from  the  Tagus.  March 
3d  vibiU'd  Sofala,  and  being  kindly  received,  obtained  leave  to  settle  a factory.  He  then  sailed  for  Mosam* 
bi(pie,  where  he  experienced  a kinder  reception  than  on  his  former  voyage,  and  likewise  obtained 
permission  to  settle  a factory.  On  July  12th  he  arrived  at  Quiloa,  whose  Prince  became  tributary  to 
liiin.  He  then  proceeded  to  Cananore,  concluded  a treaty  of  commerce,  loaded  some  of  his  ships,  and  then 
departed  for  Calicut,  which  lie  cannonaded,  destroying  many  of  the  houses,  and  the  palace,  and  took  several 
ahips  in  the  roads,  wdiosc  cargoes  were  of  considerable  value;  he  then  returned  to  Cananore,  from  whence 
lie  sailed  for  Europe  December  20th,  1503,  and  arrived  at  Lisbon  September  1st,  1504, 

1503.  A fleet  from  Portugal,  under  Albuquerque,  visited  Socotra,  Guardafiii,  and  Curia  Muria 
Bay.  On  Ids  arrival  at  Cochin  he  obtained  leave  to  build  a fort,  and  likewise  .settled  a factory  at  Quilon, 
This  yeoi*  Saldaiilia  Bay  was  first  visited  by  the  Portuguese,  and  Mombas,  Zanzibar,  and  Brava,  on  the 
East  Coast  of  Africa,  became  tributary  to  them. 

1505.  Calicut  was  again  bombarded  by  the  Portuguese,  who  burnt  Cranganore,  and  captured  many 
vessels  belonging  to  the  Moors,  acquiring  considerable  booty. 

At  this  period  there  were  three  ports  in  the  East  in  which  the  Maliometans  were  established,  and 
from  whence  they  carried  on  all  their  commerce  to  the  most  distant  parts  of  the  Indies:  these  were,  Aden 
on  the  Coast  of  Arabia ; Ormus,  in  the  Persian  Gulf;  and  Malacca,  in  the  straits  of  the  same  name.  Tlie 
Portuguese  therefore  prepared  to  make  themselves  masters  of  them,  by  sending  out  large  fleets  with 
numerous  land  forces.  The  King  of  Quiloa  refusing  to  pay  tribute,  the  Portuguese  took  and  plundered 
the  town,  and  built  a strong  fort,  leaving  a garrison  of  600  men;  they  were  afterwards  driven  out  by  the 
Arabs,  who  have  kept  possession  of  the  j)Iace  ever  since. 

1507.  On  March  25th,  a licet  of  22  ships  sailed  from  Lisbon  under  Francis  Almeyda,  upon  whom 
the  King  of  Portugal  conferred  the  title  of  Vice  King  and  Governor  General  of  the  Indies.  He  arrived 
at  Mombas  on  August  8th,  where  his  boats  being  fired  upon,  he  battered  the  forts,  took  the  city 
by  storm,  and  made  slaves  of  the  iuhabitants.  From  thence  he  proceeded  to  Anjediva,  and  built  a fort 


PORTUGUESE  DISCOVERIES  IN  THE  EAST  INDIES. 


m 


He  then  sailed  to  Onore,  whore  being  ill  roccivod,  he  burnt  the  town,  and  the  shippinn;  that  wore  in 
the  harbour ; proceeding  then  to  ('ananorc,  he  likewise  built  a fort. 

In  this  year  the  Portuguese  built  a fort  at  Sofula,  surveyed  tlie  Maldive  Lslnnds,  and  discovered  the 
Island  of  Ceylon. 

1507.  IMu.skat  was  this  year  su!)jcctod  to  the  Portugueso,  w'ho  committed  groat  ravages  mi  the  towns 
upon  the  Coast  of  Africa,  plundering  and  burning  all  that  did  not  become  tributary.  Tin*  licet  un<lcr 
Albuquerque  made  an  attempt  upon  Ormus,  which  was  unsuccessful.  Malacca  was  first  viNited  by  the 
Portuguese  in  this  year. 

1508.  A fleet  in  two  divisions,  under  Tristan  d'Acunha  and  Alphonso  Albuquerque,  sailed  from 
Lisbon  March  (>th.  The  former  discovered  the  islands  which  bear  his  name.  On  (heir  passage  to  India, 
they  visited  Jlrava,  which  being  in  rebellion  against  the  Portuguese,  w'as  p1und(Ted  and  biii  nt,  and  great 
cruelties  practised  upon  the  inhabitants.  Socotra  was  likewise  taken,  after  considerable  resistance. 

1509.  The  Portuguese  made  an  unsuccessful  attempt  upon  Din,  but  the  shjp[)ing  in  the  harbour  was 
destroyed.  Tlie  Island  of  Sumatra  was  first  visited  by  the  Portuguese. 

.In  this  year  the  c.ty  of  Calicut  was  taken,  plundered,  and  burnt  by  the  Portuguese. 

1510.  The  city  of  Goa  was  surrendered,  and  the  Viceroy  Albuf[uerque  made  Ids  public  entiy 
February  17th ; it  was  soon  after  retaken  by  the  natives,  but  on  Noveanber  was  again  sulijccted  to  tin: 
Portuguese,  and  the  garrison  put  to  the  sword.  Several  forts  were  built,  and  Goa  from  this  period  became 
the  capital  of  the  Portuguese  possessions  in  the  East  Indies. 

Zanzibar  neglecting  to  pay  the  stipulated  tribute,  was  plundered  and  destroyed  by  the  Portuguese. 

1511.  On  May  2d,  Albuquerque  sailed  from  Goa  for  Malacca,  wdicre  he  arrived  July  Lt.  On  the 
24th  the  tow'ii  was  attacked,  and  after  an  obstinate  resistance,  taken  by  storm,  and  plundered.  The 
Portuguese  visit(*d  Siam,  and  were  kindly  received. 

1512.  Albuqucnpie  sent  three  ships  to  the  Spice  Islands.  They  visited  Palembang,  on  Sumatra ; 
the  islands  of  Ternate,  Bouro,  Amboyna,  and  Banda,  where  they  obtained  large  quantities  of  spices 
In  this  year  the  Portuguese  plundered  and  destroyed  Surat. 

1513.  Albuquerque,  wdth  a large  fleet  and  army,  made  an  attempt  upon  Aden,  w hich  w as  unsuccessful ; 
he  then  proceeded  up  the  Red  Sea,  being  the  first  Portuguese  wlio  had  entered  it.  They  wintered  at  tJie 
island  Cainaran,  and  then  returned  to  India,  without  effecting  any  object  of  importance. 

1514.  On  February  20th,  Albuquerque  sailed  for  Ormus,  wdiere  he  arrived  March  26th.  The  island 
was  surrendered,  and  a fort  built ; the  Viceroy  then  returned  to  India,  and  died  on  the  bar  at  Goa,  Decem- 
ber 16th,  1515.  At  this  period  the  Portuguese  power  was  at  its  height. 

1516.  The  successor  of  Albu(|ucrque,  Soarez,  fitted  out  a considerable  fleet  for  the  Red  Sea.  On 
his  way  thither  he  stopped  at  xVden.  The  inhabitants  being  ajiprchensive  of  an  attack,  sent  dejmties  to 
offer  their  submission.  The  Portuguese,  relying  on  their  professions,  neglected  the  erection  of  a fort,  and 
any  attempts  to  secure  the  place,  of  which  the  people  took  advantage,  and  in  a sliort  time  put  themselves 
into  such  a posture  of  defence,  as  to  defy  any  of  the  Portuguese  to  obtain  possession.  An  unsuccessful 
attempt  was  made  upon  Judda;  but  Zeyla  was  taken,  and  burnt. 

1517.  The  Portuguese,  under  Soarez,  proceeded  to  Columbo,  where,  after  a sharp  contest,  the  King 
agreed  to  become  tributary  to  them,  paying  annually  l,2f)0  quintals  of  cinnamon;  and  they  obtained 
possession  of  Point  de  Galle.  In  this  year  Ferdinand  Andrada  arrived  at  Canton,  where  he  settled  a trade, 
and  returned  with  a valuable  cargo  to  Molucca.  The  Portuguese  took  and  burnt  the  tow^i  of  Barbora. 

1519.  The  Spaniards  laid  claim  to  Banda,  and  the  Malacca  Islands,  as  falling  within  the  line  laid 
down  by  the  Poj)e  in  1493.  The  Emperor  (.'harles  V.  employed  Ferdinand  Magellan  to  explore  them 
by  a new  route  westward,  through  the  straits  which  bear  his  name.  In  Ins  way  he  discovered  the 
Philippine  Islands,  where  he  lost  his  life  in  a skirmish  with  the  natives.  The  ships  reached  Tidore,  and 


S04 


HISTORICAL  FACTS  RELATIVE  TO  THE 


returned  home  by  the  Cape  of  Good  Hope.  This  was  the  first  voyage  made  round  the  world.  The 
Spaniards  made  many  unsuccessful  attempts  to  obtain  possession  of  the  Moluccas ; at  length  the  King  of 
Portugal  lent  the  Emperor,  his  brotlier-in-luw,  350,000  ducats,  on  condition  of  Iiis  not  being  disturbed 
therein  till  the  money  was  repaid,  wlikli  was  never  done,  nor  has  Spain  ever  renewed  the  claim. 

1520.  The  islands  of  Bahreen  in  the  Persian  Gulf,  and  Catif,  subjected  to  the  Portuguese. 

1521.  A fleet  was  sent  against  Diu,  but  finding  it  strongly  fortified,  the  attack  was  abandoned.  Tliia 
year  the  Portuguese  l)uilt  a fort  at  TcTiiate,  and  found  the  Spaniards  had  obtained  possession  of  Tidorc. 

The  trade  with  (.’Iiina  liaving  been  secured  by  the  means  of  Andrada,  his  brother  Simon  in  this  year 
obtained  leave  to  proceed  thither  with  five  ships;  but  in  conse(|Ucnce  of  the  misconduct  of  the  Portuguese, 
•the  Chinese  massacred  the  greater  part  of  them,  and  the  rest  escaped  to  Malacca. 

The  spice  trade  was  at  this  period  so  advantageous,  that  De  Witt,  in  his  “ Interest  of  Holland,”  says 
it  yielded  the  King  of  Portiigal  above  200,000  ducats  yearly ; he  also  observes  tliat  when  the  spice  trade 
centered  in  Calicut,  the  great  staj)le  of  India,  and  ^vas  carried  to  Bussorah  and  Egypt,  and  from  thence 
to  ("airo  by  caravans,  and  shippi'd  for  Europe,  tlie  Sultans  of  Syria  and  Egypt,  through  whose  dominions' 
they  passed,  derived  an  annual  revenue  of  80,000  ducats  in  customs. 

The  Venetians  having  for  centuries  enjoyed  the  sole  commerce  in  spices,  till  lately  deprived  of  it  by 
the  Portuguese,  made  at  this  time  an  eflbrt  to  acquire  some  considerable  benefit  therefrom,  by  making 
a proposal  to  the  Court  of  Lisbon  to  take  off  all  the  spice  annually  imported  (over  and  above  what  that 
kingdom  itself  might  consume),  at  a certain  fixed  price ; but  tlie  proposal  was  rejected. 

The  Portuguese  made  an  attack  upon  Acheen  on  Sumatra,  in  which  they  were  repulsed  with  groat 
loss,  ill  consequence  of  which  the  Sumatrans  became  ever  after  very  inveterate  enemies  to  them,  and 
committed  numerous  cruelties  upon  such  Portuguese  as  fell  into  their  hands. 

1525.  The  fort  built  by  the  Portuguese  at  Calicut,  being  attacked  by  the  natives  in  considerable 
force,  they  were  compelled  to  withdraw',  after  having  demolished  the  fortifications. 

1520.  In  this  year  the  Portuguese  discovered  the  island  of  Celebes.  They  plundered  and  destroyed 
Dofar  on  the  Coast  of  Arabia,  and  Massuah  on  the  Coast  of  Abyssinia. 

1527.  Mangalore,  Porca,  and  Chitwa  on  the  Malabar  Coast  were  plundered  and  burnt  by  the 
Portuguese.  In  this  year  Tidore  was  taken  from  the  Spaniards,  and  the  island  of  Borneo  discovered. 

1529.  The  towns  of  Bassein  and  Tannah  were  this  year  subjected  to  the  Portuguese. 

1530.  A Portuguese  fleet  proceeded  up  the  river  Tapter,  buint  Surat,  and  several  other  villages. 
'About  this  time  Dumaun  was  taken,  and  a treaty  concluded  with  the  King  of  Cambay  upon  terms  very 
favourable  to  the  Portuguese,  who  obtained  bis  permission  to  build  a fort  at  Diu.  In  this  year  the  natives 
expelled  the  Portuguese  from  the  island  of  Temate. 

1531.  In  this  and  the  following  yeai*  the  Portuguese  destroyed  Gogo,  Fate,  Mangarole,  and 
most  of  the  other  towns  on  the  Coast  of  Gua^erat. 

1532.  Aden  was  this  year  rendered  tributary  to  the  Portuguese. 

1534.  The  King  of  Cambay  ceded  Bassein  and  its  dependencies  to  the  Portuguese  in  perpetuity. 

1537.  The  King  of  Cambay,  repenting  of  his  grant  to  the  Portuguese  to  build  a fort  at  Diu, 
made  an  unsuccessful  attempt  to  dislodge  them,  in  which  he  lost  his  life,  and  the  Portuguese  obtained  the 
entire  possession  of  the  island.  Malacca  was  twice  attacked  by  the  forces  of  the  King  of  Acheen,  but 
were  repulsed  with  considerable  loss.  In  this  year  the  island  of  Magindanao  was  discovered. 

1538.  The  Turks  fitted  out  a strong  fleet  at  Suez,  and  made  an  attempt  upon  Diu,  but  were  repulsed 
witli  great  slaughter.  On  their  return  to  the  Red  Sea,  they  expelled  the  Portuguese  from  Aden. 

1540.  About  this  period  the  Portuguese  first  traded  to  Patany,  Cambodia,  and  Cochin  Chin^ 

1542.  The  coast  of  Japan  W'as  discovered  by  three  Portuguese,  jwho  were  driven  thereon  in  n junki 
bound  from  Siam  to  China,  and  were  received  very  favourably  by  the  Japanese 


PORTUGUESE  DISCOVERIES  IN  THE  EAST  INDIES. 


m 

154d.  In  this  year  the  King  of  Cambay  made  another  unsuccessful  attempt  to  obtain  |)ossc5sion  of 
Diu,  in  consequence  of  which  the  Portuguese  took  and  destroyed  Gogo,  and  many  other  places  on  the 
sea-coast  of  his  dominions.  Dclagoa  Bay  was  this  year  first  visited  by  the  Poiliiguese. 

1517.  The  King  of  Achcen  made  another  unsuccessful  attempt  upon  Malacca. 

1648.  In  tliis  year  an  offer  was  made  to  the  Emperor  to  advance  the  350,000  ducats  to  redeem  the 
ipice  islands,  upon  condition  of  having  the  profits  of  the  trade  for  six  years,  and  after  that  period  to  re- 
volve to  the  Crown.  The  Emperor  would  not  admit  of  it,  so  tliat  the  Portuguese  retained  possession  of 
those  islands  till  their  kingdom  was  united  to  Spain. 

1555.  The  Portuguese  took  and  plundered  Tatta,  and  put  8(XX)  of  the  inhabitants  to  tlie  sword. 

1667.  The  western  powers  of  India  having  formed  a league  against  the  Portuguese,  the  King  of 
Achecn  was  invited  to  accede  to  it,  and  in  conformity  with  the  engagements  by  which  he  was  hound,  he 
attacked  them  in  Malacca  with  a numerous  fleet,  having  on  board  upwanls  of  15,000  men,  and  200  pieces 
of  artillery;  a regular  siege  was  commenced,  and  an  assault  given,  in  which,  after  prodigious  efforts  of  va- 
lour, and  imminent  risk  of  destruction,  the  besieged  remained  victorious.  This  was  esteemed  one  of  the 
most  desperate  and  honourable  sieges  the  Portuguese  experienced  in  India,  their  whole  force  consisting  of 
but  1500  men,  of  whom  only  200  were  Europeans. 

1670.  At  this  period  the  successes  which  had  attended  the  Portuguese  in  various  parts,  had  gained  them 
the  highest  military  reputation;  their  fleets  covered  the  ocean,  and  their  dominions  and  sdtiements  extended 
along  the  eastern  and  western  sides  of  fbe  vast  African  continent.  From  the  lied  Sea  to  China  and  Japan, 
they  were  sole  masters  of  the  riches  of  the  east;  and  in  America,  the  fertile  and  extensive  regions  of  Brazil 
completed  their  empire. 

1578.  The  King  of  Acheen,  having  made  .several  attempts  against  Malacca  without  success,  ho  ’ 
in  this  year,  assisted  by  some  of  the  neighbouring  Princes,  made  another  attempt,  and  invested  it  with  a fleet? 
of  300  sail,  80  of  which  were  junks  of  400  tons  each;  but  after  a siege  of  three  months,  and  the  loss  of 
upwards  of  10,000  men,  they  withdrew. 

1580.  In  this  year  the  Crown  of  Portugal  was  annexed  to  that  of  Spain,  from  wliicli  period  the  Por- 
tuguese interests  in  India  were  left  to  their  fate;  the  union  with  Spain  was  an  event  which  dampe^d  their 
national  character  and  spirit  of  adventure,  and  in  a great  measure  expatriated  the  Portuguese  in  Asia  from 
those  in  Europe,  now  forming  only  a dependency  on  the  Crown  of  Spain.  At  this  period  they  possessed 
the  following  places : 

Sofala,  Mosambique,  and  Mombas,  on  the  East  Coast  of  Africa,  Muscat  in  Arabia,  the  Island  of 
Ormus,  and  Bussorah  in  the  Persian  Gulf ; Diu,  on  the  coast  of  Guzzerat;  a fortified  factory  at  T)uniaui> 
the  town  and  castle  of*  Choul,  and  a factory  at  Dabul;  the  city  of  Bassein,  the  island  of  North  Salsetto, 
and  the  town  of  Tannah;  the  island  of  Bombay;  the  town  and  fort  of  Goa,  which  was  the  capital  of  their 
possessions ; a factory  at  Onore,  at  Barcelore,  at  Mangalore,  at  Cannanore,  and  the  town  of  Calicut ; 
a factory  at  Cranganore,  the  port  of  Cochin,  and  a factory  at  Quilon.  They  had  also  established  them- 
•elves  in  several  parts  of  Ceylon.  On  tlie  Coromandel  Coast  they  liad  stations  at  Negapetam,  St.  Thome, 
and  Mausulipatam,  and  had  established  commercial  stations  in  the  province  of  Bengal.  They  had  also 
factories,  or  liberty  of  trade,  at  Pegu  and  Martaban,  a station  at  Junkceylon,  and  had  taken  po.ssession  of, 
and  fortified  Malacca;  but  they  do  not  appear  to  have  had  any  establishments  of  consequence  on  the 
islands  of  Sumatra  or  Java. 

All  these  possessions  were  subordinate  to  the  supreme  government  at  Goa,  where  a Viceroy  presided 
over  Uie  civil  and  military,  and  an  Archbishop  over  the  ecclesiastical  ^airs  of  the  whole  of  this  extensive 
dominion. 

ilr 


306 


MISTOHICAL  FACTS  RELATIVE  TO  THE 


The  Crown  of  Portugal  derived  from  these  settlements^  during  a period  of  upwards  of  fifty  years,  a 
elear  annual  revenue  of  X'!s?.)0,UO0,  after  paying  the  salary  of  the  Viceroy,  about  X^4,000  a year,  together 
with  that  of  the  subordinate  Governors,  and  the  whole  expence  of  the  civil,  military,  and  ecclesiastical 
establishments.  This  revenue  was  derived  from  the  duties  leviedl  on  alt  goods  imported  and  exported  at 
the  diilereiit  places  that  have  Ikhmi  enumerated,  from  the  tribute  paid  by  some  of  the  small  states  on  the 
Coast  of  Malabar,  for  the  jjrotection  afforded  them;  and  from  the  sale  of  those  vessels  that  were  captured^ 
wdicn  found  trading  in  the  Indian  S(‘as,  without  a passport  from  the  Portuguese  Viceroy. 

With  j'cspeet  to  the  trade  carried  on  between  Portugal  and  India,  there  are  no  data  wherewitli  to  form 
a correct  estimate  of  its  proiits;  but  from  the  quantity  of  goods  sent  annually  to  Lisbon,  from  the  knovva 
value  of  those  gojxls  in  India,  and  from  the  prices  which  they  fetched  at  that  time  in  Europe,  the  profit  on 
them  could  not  have  l>een  less  than  i?  150,000  per  annum.  The  Portuguese  historians  state,  that  a fleet  of 
twenty  ships  of  various  burthens  sailed  regularly  every  year  from  Goa  to  Lisbon,  laden  wdtli  tlie  commo- 
dities of  India  and  China;  and  though  not  noticed  by  those  writers,  it  is  known  that  Indian  goods  then 
produced  in  Europe  a profit  of  at  least  30  per  cent.  In  estimating  ilie  wealth  which  Portugal  derived 
from  her  Indian  settlements  and  commerce,  the  private  fortunes  of  individuals  must  also  be  taken  into  tho 
•account.  In  the  course  of  the  filly  years  alluded  to,  some  of  the  Viceroys  returned  to  Portugal  witE 
X’300,(X)0,  several  of  the  Gorernors  and  Generals  with  i?  100,000,  and  many  subordinate  officers,  both  civil 
and  military,  with  from  l':5?0,000  to  £A0y00(K  The  priests  too  realized  considerable  fortunes,  both  from 
the  exorbitant  exactions  they  were  authorized  to  make,  and  from  plundering  the  native  villages,  in  order 
to  compel  the  inhabitants  to  embrace  tlie  llomish  faith.  It  appears  from  the  candid  narratives  of  some  of 
the  Portuguese  historians,  that  many  of  those  fortunes  were  acquired  in  an  iniquitous  manner;  and  that  in 
proportion  as  they  added  to  the  opulence,  they  promoted  the  corruption,  and  accelerated  the  downfal  of 
the  mother  country. 

1580.  At  this  period,  a pirate  committed  great  rarages  upon  the  coasts  of  Cliina,  and.  obtaining  pos-^ 
session  of  the  Island  of  Macao,  not  only  blocked  up  the  iwrt  of  Canton,  but  besieged  the  city.  The  Chi- 
nese had  recourse  to  the  Portuguese,  who  readily  offered  their  assistance,  and  not  only  compelled  the 
pirates  to  raise  the  siege,  but  drove  them  out  of  Macao.  The  Emperor  in  consequence  granted  them  the 
island,  with  permission  to  make  a settlement.  They  built  a town^  and  fortified  it  after  the  European 
manner,  which  iliey  still  continue  to  hold,  paying  tribute  and  customs  to  the  Chinese. 

1587.  The  Spaniards  being  about  to  invade  England,  Queen  Elizabeth  equipped  a strong  fleet  under 
the  command  of  Sir  Francis  Drake,  to  annoy  their  trade  and  that  of  Portugal..  He  took  several  ships,  one 
of  which  was  the  St.  Philip,  a Portuguese  earrack,  the  first  vessel  the  English  hod  ever  token  coming  from 
the  East  Indies.  The  papers  of  this  ship  afforded  so  much  information,  as  to  the  value  of  the  Asiatic 
trade,  and  the  mode  of  conducting  it,  that  the  English  historian^  Camden,  considers  them  as  having  fur- 
nished the  first  idea  of  establishing  a trade  thither  from  England. 

1592.  In  this  year  another  great  earrack,  called  the  Modre  de  Dios,,  was  taken  by  the  English,.and 
carried  into  Dartmouth.  The  following  account  of  the  ship  and  cargo  will  tend  to  shew  the  nature  of  the 
shipping,  and  the  extent  of  the  Portuguese  trade  witii  the  East  Indies  at  this  perigd. 

The  ship  was  165  feet  long,  from  the  beak  head  to  the  stem;  46  feet  10  inches  broad  on  the  secona 
close  deck,  whereof  she  had  three.  She  drew  31  feet  water  on  leaving  Cochin,  but  not  above  S6  feet  on 
her  arrival  at  Dartmouth,  September  7,  1592.  She  carried  in  height  seven  several  stories,,  one  main  orlop,, 
three  close  decks,  one  forecastle,  and  a spar  deck,  of  two  floors  or  j)ieces;  the  length  of  her  keel  was  100 
feet,  her  mainmast  121  feet,  and  her  main  yard  106  feet  long.  By  this  perfect  commensuration  of  the 
parts  appears  the  Imgencss  of  tl;c  whgle,  fgr  beyoud  tb^  WQUld  of  UiO  biggest  shippingin  England,  either 
for  war  or  commerce^ 


PORTUGUESE  DISCOVERIES  IN  THE  EAST  INDIES. 


A)? 


A catalogue  of  her  carp  was  made  out  in  LeadenhallStrett,  when  it  was  found  that  the  prineipul 

waves,  after  the  jewels  (which  were  no  doubt  of  great  value,  though  they  never  came  to  light),  consisted  of 


Aloes. 

Cocoa  nuts. 

Eiaiikincense, 

Ambergris. 

Camphire. 

(linger. 

Benjamin. 

Civet. 

Gahingal. 

Cloves. 

Elephants'  teeth. 

Hides! 

Cinnamon. 

Ebony  wood. 

Musk. 

Myrulxilans. 

INIace. 

Nutnu'gs. 
Porcelain  ve'?si‘ls. 
Popper. 


Of  silks,  and  other  piece-goods,  damasks,  tafTaties,  sarsnets,  coiinterfoit  cloth  of  gold,  unwronglit 
China  silk,  white  twisted  silk,  &c.  of  calicoes  hook  calicoes,  lawns,  broad  white,  fine  starched,  coarse 
white,  brown  broad,  and  several  other  sorts.  There  were  also  (|uilts,  carpets,  canopies,  and  various  other 
commodities;  the  whole  of  which  were  valued  at  a modi  rate  computation  at  50,000. 

The  Spanish  Court  being  totally  engrossed  by  their  immense  American  empire,  and  the  politics  of  Eu- 
rope, paid  little  attention  to  Portuguese  India.  Few  supplies  arrived  from  Europe.  The  commanders  on 
the  different  stations  ceased  to  act  in  concert  with  each  other;  unrestrained  by  a regular  government,  each 
endeavoured  to  enrich  himself  The  mother  country  groaned  under  the  yoke  of  Spain.  Mostly  natives  of 
the  East,  the  Portuguese  in  India  lost  all  relative  affection,  and  the  tie  which  bound  them  together,  was 
now  but  a single  thread. 

1595.  The  Dutch,  on  their  first  voyage  to  Bantam,  experienced  gi’eat  opposition  A'om  the  Portuguese 
in  conducting  their  commerce  with  the  natives,  in  consequence  of  which  a war  commenced,  by  which  the 
Portuguese  interests  in  India  suffered  very  considerably^ 

1001.  The  English,  on  their  first  appearanro  in  tlie  eastern  seas,  also  experienced  every  obstacle  from 
the  Portuguese  in  condacting  their  commerce,  whereupon  hostilities  commenced,  and  continu(‘d  for  many 
years.  In  this  year  Captain  Lancaster  captured  a large  Portuguese  ship,  bound  from  Goa  to  Malacca,  with 
a valuable  cargo  of  piece-goods,  and  other  commodities. 

1603.  The  Dutch,  with  a large  force  from  Europe,  made  attempts  to  dblodge  the  Portuguese  from 
Mosambique  and  Goa,  both  of  which  were  unsuccessful, 

1605.  The  Dutch  succeeded  in  expelling  the  Portuguese  from  Amboyna  and  Tidore,  and  by  degrees 
engrossed  the  whole  of  the  spice  trade,  which  they  retained  near  200  years. 

1609.  In  this  year  the  Spaniards  and  Dutch,  who  had  been  at  war  with  each  other  for  a considerable 
time,  concluded  a truce  for  twelve  years,  each  party  retaining  the  advantages  then  in  their  i)oss{*ssion, 

1610.  At  this  period  the  commerce  of  the  Portuguese  was  so  considerable,  that  an  English  traveller 
mentions  his  having  seen  in  one  fleet  240  sail  of  merchantmen  bound  to  Surat  and  Cambay. 

1611.  In  this  year  the  Dutch  were  driven  out  of  Tidore  and  Banda  by  the  Spaniards. 

1612.  The  Dutch  obtained  a grant  of  the  exclusive  commerce  in  cinnamon  from  the  King  of  Candy, 
and  the  prohibiting  all  Europeans  trading  thither  without  their  leave,  notwithstanding  the  Portuguese  were 
in  possession  of  the  principal  ports  of  the  island,  which  they  had  fortified. 

In  this  year  an  English  fleet,  under  Captain  Best,  was  attacked  near  Surat  by  a Portuguese  fleet  of  very 
superior  force,  and  after  four  successive  engagements,  the  Portuguese  were  defeated,  to  the  great  astonish- 
ment of  the  natives,  who  had  hitherto  considered  them  as  invincible. 

1615.  The  King  of  Acheen  made  another  attempt  upon  Malacca,  with  a fleet  of  590  sail,  of  which 
100  were  large  gallies,  having  on  board  60,000  men.  This  expedition  shared  the  fate  of  former  ones;  it  was 
defeated  with  a loss  of  20,000  men,  and  a great  number  of  their  vessels. 

1620.  The  Danes  made  an  unsuccessful  attempt  to  posRes.s  themselves  of  Cc’ylon.  The  Portuguese 
also  fearing  the  Dutch  had  the  same  object  in  view  (as  they  hod  formed  a treaty  with  the  King  in  1612)' 

Hr  2 


SOS 


HISTORICAL  FACTS  RELATIVE  TO  THE 


now  marie  sncIi  additions  to  their  fortifications  along  the  coast,  that  the  King  of  Candy  was  prevented  from 
liolding  a correspondence  with  any  foreign  power  without  their  permission. 

In  this  year  the  Portuguese  made  an  attack  upon  an  English  fleet,  under  Captain  Shillinge,  but  were 
defeated  with  loss,  and  the  English  commander  lost  his  life  in  the  action.  Ry  these  victories  the  English 
character  w’as  much  raised  in  the  estimation  of  the  natives,  while  that  of  the  Portuguese  declined. 

1622.  The  Portuguese  were  expelled  from  Ormus  by  the  Persian  and  English  united  forces;  they 
made  an  attempt  soon  after  for  its  recovery,  w hich  proved  unsuccessful. 

1C2S.  In  this  y(‘ar  the  King  of  Acheen  made  his  last  attempt  upon  Malacca,  with  a force  of  20,000 
men;  but  were  so  complettdy  defeated,  that  not  a ship,  and  scarcely  a man  escaped. 

lf>30.  A large  Portuguese  fleet  blockaded  Surat  with  a view  of  preventing  the  entrance  of  any 
English  ships  into  the  roads,  and  the  Viceroy  of  Goa  made  application  to  the  Governor  of  Surat  to  have 
the  exclusive  trade  of  the  port  granted  to  them,  which  was  refused.  On  the  appearance  of  an  English 
fleet  of  five  ships,  a sharp  action  ensued  with  that  of  the  Portuguese,  in  which,  without  being  decisive, 
the  English  ships  had  tlie  advantage.  This  action  was  followed  by  others,  the  English  being  still  able  to 
maintain  their  ground.  The  Portuguese  Admiral  made  an  unsuccessful  attempt  to  burn  the  English  ships; 
they  however  succeeded  in  making  good  the  landing  of  their  cargoes. 

1631.  In  this  year  the  Portuguese  were  expelled  from  Mombas,  on  the  East  Coast  of  Africa 

1634.  An  agreement  took  place  between  the  English  and  Porluguese,  in  the  form  of  a truce,  or  ces- 
sation of  hostilities,  by  which  the  Portuguese  ports  were  to  be  open  to  the  English,  and  the  English  facto- 
ries to  act  on  fi*k?n<lly  terms  towards  the  Portuguese;  and  this  truce  was  to  continue  between  the  two  na- 
tions till  six  months  after  the  determination  of  the  Courts  of  England  and  Spain  on  this  subject  should  be 
known  in  India.  This  contract,  however,  was  not  sanetionnl  by  the  English  Government. 

1635.  The  Dutch  expelled  the  Portuguese  from  the  Island  of  Formosa,  and  held  possession  of  it 
till  1661,  when  the  Chinese  succeeded  in  ilriviiig  them  oiiL 

163S.  In  con8e(|uence  of  the  cruelties  committed  by  the  Portuguese  in  Ceylon,  the  King  of  Candy 
eent  to  Batavia  for  assistance  against  tliem,  whereupon  an  alliance  was  concluded,  by  which  the  Dutch 
undertook  to  furnish  an  army  and  a fleet  for  the  service  of  the  King,  to  reduce  the  fortresses  in  the  posses- 
sion of  the  Portuguese,  and  when  dismantled,  to  put  them  into  his  hands ; on  tlie  other  hand,  it  was 
stipulated,  that  the  King  should  provide  an  army,  and  pay  the  Dutch  the  expence  of  their  expedition,  and 
that  they  should  be  allowed  to  keep  some  port  as  a secure  retreat.  In  consequence  of  this  treaty,  the 
Dutch  in  1639  sent  a considerable  force  from  Batavia,  and  made  themselves  masters  of  Trincomalee  and 
Satecalo,  which  they  demolished,  and  delivered  over  to  the  King,  and  in  the  following  year  they  reduced 
Negombo  and  Point  de  Galle.  The  Portuguese  soon  after  succeeded  in  retaking  the  former  place  fron^ 
the  Dutch,  and  blockaded  the  latter  for  two  years  without  obtaining  possession  of  it. 

1640.  In  this  year  Portugal  again  became  a separate  sovereignty;  but  the  spirit  of  the  nation  was 
much  broken,  and  from  the  increased  strength  of  the  Dutch  in  India,  they  did  not  possess  sufficient 
resources  to  recover  their  ancient  power  there.  The  English  at  Surat,  on  receiving  intelligence  of  this 
event,  formed  a convention  with  the  Viceroy  of  Goa^  for  their  mutual  defence. 

The  Dutch  in  Ceylon,  on  receiving  advice  of  the  revolution  in  Portugal,  and  of  the  tsuce  between  the 
King  and  the  United  Provinces,  agreed  that  eaeh  should  continue  possessed  in  the  Indies  of  what  was 
actually  in  their  power  at  the  conclusion  of  this  treaty.  From  the  imprudence  of  the  Portuguese  the 
treaty  was  broken  off,  and  the  war  continued  for  a series  of  yei^s  with  varied  success. 

In  this  year  the  Dutch  succeeded  in  obtaining  possession  of  the  port  of  Malacca^  which  was  a 
serious  loss  to  the  Portuguese^  as  their  trade  suffered  eoBsiderebly  in  consequence.  About  this  time,  the 


PORTUGUESE  DISCOVERIES  IN  THE  EAST  INDIES. 


sr« 


Portuguese  were  expelled  from  Japan,  at  the  instigation  of  the  Dutch,  after  experiencing  most  dread- 
ful persecutions  and  massacres,  in  which  it  is  said  upwards  of  4^K),(XX1  Japanese  Christians  perished. 

1G^1«3.  The  Dutcli  Government  at  Batavia,  with  a view  of  weakening  tlie  relations  bytween  the 
Portuguese  and  English,  sent  a commissaiy  to  Goa,  in  order  to  negotiatt*  a peace.  As  tlu*  Dutch  lind 
obtained  many  advantages  over  the  Portuguese  fleets,  it  was  proposed  that  the  Portugu(*se  should  cede 
their  possessions  in  Ceylon ; but  the  Dutch  having  experienced  several  defc*ats  on  that  island,  the  \ icc  roy 
rejected  the  proposal,  as  inadmissible.  The  negotiation  was  therefore  broken  off,  and  tlie  Dutch  assi  nibling 
their  fleet,  blockaded  Goa. 

1644.  The  negotiations  between  the  Portuguese  and  Dutch,  which  had  in  the  former  year  been 
broken  off,  w^as  renewed  on  the  1st  Noveml^er,  1644,  and  a treaty  of  peace  concluded  between  the  two 
powers  in  India,  by  which  the  prizes  taken  by  either  were  to  he  given  up,  and  a moiety  ol  the  cinnamon 
trade  ceded  to  the  Dutch. 

1648.  The  Arabs  succeeded  in  expelling  tlie  Portuguese  from  the  port  of  Muscat. 

165^.  The  war  on  Ceylon  between  the  Portuguese  and  Dutch  was  renewcui,  and  lasted  many 
years,  in  which  the  latter  power  sustained  several  defeats;  they  however  succeeded  ultimately  in  expelling 
the  Portuguese.  In  October,  1665,  they  captured  Caliture;  and  in  May  following,  the  fortress  of  ( olinnbo, 
the  capital  of  the  Portuguese  possessions  on  the  island.  The  King  of  Candy  assisted  at  this  siege,  and  in.* 
sifted  that  it  should  be  put  into  his  hands,  agreeable  to  treaty,  whieh  tlu^  Dutch  [)osibivL‘ly  reliiscil,  on  the 
plea  that  a large  sum  of  money  was  due  to  them,  for  which  they  meant  t(»  keep  ( oliimbo  as  a security, 

1656.  In  this  year  the  Dutch  obtained  pos.<*ession  of  Calicut  from  the  Portugiu'sc. 

1659.  The  Dutch  captured  Jafnapatam,  the  last  place  on  Ceylon  in  possession  of  tlie  Portuguese,  on 
June  24th,  1658.  The  garrison  were  made  prisoners  of  war,  and  transported  to  Butuviu.  Negapatam,  ami 
several  other  places  on  the  Coast  of  Coromandel,  were  likewise  taken  from  them  by  ilie  Dutcli. 

1661.  By  a treaty  of  marriage  between  the  Infanta  of  Portugal  and  King  Charles  II.  the  Crown 
of  Portugal  ceded  and  granted  to  England  the  island  and  harbour  of  Bombay  in  full  sovereignty  ; but 
it  was  not  transferred  for  some  time„  in  consequence  of  the  insti  uctioiis  not  bcuig  sufficiently  explicit,  the 
English  claiming  the  island  and  its  subordinates,  whereas  the  Portuguese  would  only  agree  to  tlie  cession 
of  Bombay  alone,  which  the  English  were  afterwards  under  the  necessity  of  accepting. 

At  the  mediation  of  England,  a negotiation  was  set  on  foot  between  PoitugaJ  and  Holland.  The 
Dutch  having  reduced  the  greater  part  of  the  Portuguese  jiossessions  in  India,  which  losses  were  in 
tome  measure  balanced  by  the  expulsion  of  the  Dutch  from  Brazil,  and  the  capture  of  numerous  Dutch 
ships  by  privateers,  a treaty  was  concluded  between  the  two  powers,  by  which  each  was  to  retain  wlmt 
was  then  in  their  possession. 

1664.  Notwithstanding  the  treaty  concluded  between*  the  Portuguese  and  Dutch  in  Euro|M',  tlie 
latter  power  continued  to  attack  the  Portuguese  settlements  in  India,  and  succeeded  in  capturing  Quilon 
in  1661,  Cranganore  in  1662,  Cochin  in  1663,  and  most  of  the  other  places  on  the  Malabar  Coast;  by 
which  acts,  in  open  defiance  of  a treaty  between  the  two  countries,  tlie  Dutch  became  the  paramount 
European  power  in  the  East  Indies,  and  Portugal  was  reduced  to  Uie  mere  possession  of  Goa,  of  Mosam- 
bique,  Diu,  Macao,  and  a few  other  dependencies  on  the  CoasU  of  Malabar  and  Coromandel. 

1669.  The  Dutch  took  Macassar  from  the  Portuguese,  likewise  St.  Thomt'^  near  Madras. 

1670.  The  Muscat  Arabs  invaded  and  plundered  Diu,  but  were  driven  out  in  a short  time  with 


considerable  loss.  , . i i x 

1699.  Dr.  Gemelli,  who  returned  this  year  from  his  six  years’  travels  round  the  globe,  treating  of  the 

Portuguese  conquests  in  the  East  Indies,  observed  that  the  remains  of  them  were  so  very  uiconsidcraWe, 

is  scarcely  to  defray  their  own  expences# 


niBTOUICAL  FACTS  RELATIVE  TO  THE 


aio* 


1731.  Tlic  Portuguese  trade  with  India,  although  rigorously  confined  to  the  subjects  of  tlie  mother 
CCTUntry,  was  never  put  into  the  hands  of  an  exclusive  Company  incorporated  by  charter,  except  during  a 
short  tiin<>in  1731,  w lien  the  King  of  Portugal  granted  permission  for  one  ship  to  make  me  voyage  to  Surat 
rtiid  the  Coast  of  Coromandel,  and  back  to  Portugal,  exclusive  of  all  others,  for  which  end  a Company 
was  established,  whose  capital  was  limited  to  600,000  crusados,  and  the  subscribers  were>  soon  after  the 
return  of  tlic  ship,  to  be  paid  back  their  principal,  and  dividend  of  the  profits.  This  experimi'iit  was  at- 
tended wdth  Init  little  success,  The  Sovereign  always  retained  the  direction  of  the  East  India  trade  in  his 
own  hands,  and  granted  from  time  to  time  privileges  of  letting  out  vessels,  in  a certain  limited  manner,  to 
private  copartnerships  and  individuals,  who  thus  enjoyed  a monopoly  of  the  supplies  required  of  both 
Indian  and  European  commodities. 

1752.  The  monopoly  of  the  East  India  trade  continued  vested  immediately  in  the  Crown  until  thk 
yc'ar,  when  it  was  said  to  be  abolished;  but  various  important  articles  still  continued  subject  to  the  royal 
privileges,  and  could  only  be  bought  in  India,  and  sold  in  b2urope  on  the  King's  account. 

1 780.  For  many  years  past  it  had  been  a matter  of  indifference  what  became  of  the  East  India 
trade.  From  the  splendid  pre-eminence  which  it  once  possessed  over  every  other  branch  of  the  Portu- 
guese commcTcc,  it  had  sunk  to  a few  annual  voyages,  in  consequence  of  the  bad  management  of  the 
trade,  the  limited  demand  for  Asiatic  commodities,  and  the  facility  with  which  Portugal  was  supplied  from 
Rrazil  with  many  of  the  articles  formerly  received  from  the  East.  The  few  remaining  Asiatic  possessions 
produced  so  little  to  the  Crown  of  Portugal,  that  it  had  been  more  than  once  debated  whether  it  would 
not  be  to  their  interest  to  abandon  them  altogether;  and  there  b reason  to  believe  that  it  was  purely  a reli- 
gious motive  that  hindered  this  measure  from  taking  place. 

1810.  The  following  is  a statement  of  the  commerce  carried  on  between  the  British  possessions  in 
India  and  Portugal,  from  the  year  1795  to  1806  inclusive.  In  the  first  seven  years,  1795  to  1801,  the  account 
of  imports  and  exports  from  Bengal  only  b stated;  those  of  Madras  and  Bombay,  of  which  no  correct 
account  has  been  kept  at  those  Presidencies,  are  estimated  together  at  one  fourth  of  those  of  Bengal.  lu 
ibc  years  1802  to  1806  that  of  the  whole  possessions  b stated  together. 


IMPOUTS  INTO  TIIK  BRITISH  SETTLEMENTS.  EXPORTS  FROM  THE  BRITISH  SETTLEMENTS. 


Yfars. 

Merchaiulise. 

Treasure, 

Total. 

Years. 

Merchandise. 

Treasure. 

Total. 

Sicca  Rupees. 

Sicca  Riipcea. 

Sicca  Rupees. 

Sicca  Rupees. 

Sicra  Rupees. 

1795 

1,88,298 

8,36,645 

10,24,943 

1795 

21,81,371 

21,81,371 

'179G 

72,855 

4,4.5,170 

5,18,025 

1796 

7,10,926 

7,10,926 

1797 

59,449 

6,34,871 

6,94,320 

1797 

12,85,595 

-■  — !■ 

12,85,595 

1798 

12,482 

1,91,700 

2,04,182 

1798 

4s40,880 

_ 

4,40,880 

1799 

a3,476 

45,92,915 

46,56,391 

1799 

33,44,435 

33,44;435 

1800 

2,6:1,989 

7,05,530 

9,69,519 

1800 

20,57,936 

20,57,936 

1801 

97, .555 

9,77,099 

10,74,654 

1801 

16,88,480 

16,88,486. 

Total. 

HBESinn 

83,83,930 

91,42,034 

Total.  I 

"117,69,629" 

117,09,629 

i 

1,89,526 

20,95,982 

22,8.5,508 

i ' 

29,27,407 

29,27;407 

1802 

5,92,339 

14,56,697 

20,49,036 

1802 

28,93,744 

28,93;744 

1803 

4,57,895 

:i;i,89,.'130 

38,47,225 

1803 

29,97,851 

— ...■  . 

29,97,851 

>804 

5,29,2.53 

2.3,18,968 

28,48,221 

1804 

29,96,955 

29,96,955 

1805 

6,46,979 

26,48,736 

32,95,715 

1605 

19,58,269 

I-  - . 

19,58,269 

1806 

9,14,713 

24,18,144 

33,32,857 

1806 

19,43,635 

— 

19,43,635 

Total. 

7227,11,787 

268,00,596 

iTotal.  1 274,27,490 

PORTUGUESE  DISCOVERIES  IN  THE  EAST  INDIES. 


311 


From  the  foregoing  statement  it  appears  tliat  the  amount  of  merchandise  imported  into  the 
British  settlements  in  India  from  Portugal,  in  the  years  17D.5  to  lS()(i  includvc, 

Sicca  lliipces  40,S8,809 

Amount  of  merchandise  exported  during  the  same  period  m 

Exports  exceed  the  3S,GSl 

Amount  of  the  treasure  imported  into  the  British  settlements  from  Portugal,  in  I he  years  liltj 

to  1806  inclusive  was,  <227,1 1,<S7 

Balances  favour  the  British  seUlem«iits^*,.v^*%<.^»%%^v».v*v^^%%%%v*»*%v»««4^*^***%Sicca  Rupees  “Idl^AOjlhS 

which,  at  the  rate  of  2s.  6d.  sterling  per  Sicca  Rupee,  is  .P.5,756,308  10s. 

In  1805  the  imports  into  the  Britisli  settlements  from  Portugal  consisted  of 


ARTICLES. 

B ‘nKal. 

Mad  1. is 

Boinliay 

'I'ulal 

Su  ca  RupPL's. 

Sici'a  Rujicei 

Ski  a ItujK’.'s. 

Shi  a UuiK’rs 

2,70,000 

_ 

1,00,800 

3,70,800 

Lisbon  wine 

1,18,079 



_ 

1,18,070 

Port.  winf-.-»->t 

13,188 

13,188 

Paper 

11,452 

05,762 

1,10,214 

Sundries  v**^*^****.^^.^^*^-**^ 

13,544 

— 

21,145 

3ls()80 

Alercliandisc 

4,20,263 

— 

2,17,71?> 

6,16,070“ 

*1  reasure  ■wx.%'x»v*wfc*x'w%%»%vx*'a. 

18,13,856 

1,30,000 

7,04,880 

2(1,18,736 

Total 

_22,A110_ 

1,30,00()_ 

0,22,506  _ 

“~:T2,05,715 

In  1805  the  exports  from  the  British  settlements  to  Portugal  consisted  of 


KouKal.  1 

Madras.  1 

Bonibaf^  | 

’Cot  III 

ARTICLES. 

Sicca  Rupees.  | 

""  Sicea  Ru|H*es  | 

Si(.ca  Rupees  j 

Sie.  .1  KiHiees, 

16,21,663 

1,52,227 

18,218 

Piece  goodsx<v»'vw«'v»^s.-\'vvw*‘v»» 
Indigo 

12, 13, .35.3 

1,. 52,227 

— 

4^  1 1 ,3 10  j 
18,218 

C ot ton  ->^1 A 

- - 

1,16,000 

1,16,000 

^oticia  nn/i  fiiiflQ  ^ ... 

0,050 

0,050 

18,000 

20,111 

Gram 

Sundries  

18,000 

12,763 

j 

7,348 

13,06,343 

.. 

.5761,026 

10,58,260 

Goa>  the  capital  of  the  Portuguese  possessions,  is  now  garrisoned  by  British  troops,  and  Macao  was 
abo  taken  possession  of,  but  the  Chinese  compeUed  them  to  restore  it  to  the  Portuguese.  Uiu,  Dmnttun, 
and  Mosambique,  with  part  of  Timor,  and  some  small  dependencies  thcieou,  are  all  that  remain  in  the 
of  the  Portuguese.  Such  U the  present  state  of  that  jrawer  in  India,  which  once  commanded 
the  while  of  Afiica  and  Asia,  from  the  Cape  of  Good  Hope  to  Japan. 


CHAPTER  XV. 


Coast  of  Canara. 


Its  Extent— ^artcar;  Description— Coins,  Weights,  and  Measures— ImpoHs  and  Exporl^Provumns  and 
Befreshments—Anjedimh—Merjee— Fortified  Island— Onore;  Description— Coins,  Weights,  and  Measures 
—Imports  and  F.xjiorts — Barcelore— Mangalore;  Description— Coins,  Weights,  and  Measures— Imports— 
Exports— Commerce  with  Madras  and  Bombay. 


COAST  OF  CANARA 

Extends  from  Cape  Ramus,  nearly  to  Mount  Oilly,  the  whole  of  which  is  subject  to  the  English. 


CARWAR. 


Carwar  Head,  which  follns  the  northern  extreme  of  the  bay,  is  in  latitude  14°  47'  North,  and  longitude 
7t“  16  East.  The  bay  is  about  two  miles  deep;  at  Uie  bottom  there  is  a river,  with  the  fort  of  Carwar  oi 
Sudashagur,  on  the  north  side  of  the  entrance;  the  river  is  capable  of  receiving  vessels  of  .100  tons.  ( arwar 
stood  about  three  miles  aliove  the  fort,  on  the  op|)ositc  bank  of  the  river.  It  was  formerly  a place  of  consi- 
derable trade;  but  during  the  reigns  of  Hydcr  and  Tiiipoo,  it  fell  to  decay,  and  at  present  is  of  little  note. 
Alwut  1640  an  English  factory  was  settled  here,  and  factors  from  Carwar  were  fixed  at  Hubeley  and  other 
places  to  sell  the  im|Hn  l.s,  and  eollect  the  cloths  intendcl  for  England,  whiel.  were  provided  on  the  other 
side  of  the  Ghauts;  for  according  to  Mr.  Fryer,  « Carwar  has  no  commodities  or  manufactures  of  its  own 
product  ” He  was  there  in  1676,  and  says  “ The  factory  was  decaying  by  reason  of  the  embroils  of  the 
country,  merchants  being  out  of  heart  to  buy  or  sell."  In  1684  the  trade  was  intemipted  by  the  crew  of 
oneof  the  Company’s  ships  then  loading  pepiicr  in  the  port,  having  stolen  a cow,  and  kiUcd  it.  Being  resisted 
by  the  Hindoos,  they  fired  at,  and  killed  two  children  of  rank,  which  uritated  the  natives,  who  would 
have  destroyed  the  factory,  had  they  not  been  deterred  by  the  Company’s  shipping  then  in  the  harbour. 
In  1683  the  investment  ordered  from  Carwar  was  consideralile,  and  consisted  ot 


200  tons  pepper. 

51,fKX)  pieces  of  dungarees. 
8^000  ditto  paulkaes. 
10,000  ditto  percollaes. 


50  bales  cardamums. 
2000  pieces  broad  baftaes. 
2000  ditto  sevaguzzies. 

50  candies  cassia  lignea. 


Dungaree  is  the  lighter  sail  cloth  of  India,  end  the  quantity  might  have  been  ordered  in  consequence 
of  some  expectation  of  a war  svith  Holland,  but  only  8000  pieces  were  procured.  The  intention,  never- 
theless, proves  that  thb  part  of  the  coast  was  at  that  time  in  repute  for  the  abun^ce  of  its  manufactures, 
which  at  present  scaroily  supply  more  tlian  the  consumption  its  dimmished  inhabitants  require. 


AXJEDIVAII. 


MA 


( GINS,  WEIGHTS,  AVD  MEAStmES. 

Coins.— Accounts  arc  kept  in  pii^rodos,  fhnams,  and  j)icc.  All  har/rains  with  the  country  nuurliHnfs 
are  made  for  Darwar  [)aiTodas,  wliioli  are  lanairi'^,  or  4S  iina,q;inary  jcttals ; — six  rash,  or  pier,  arc  riTkoiu'il 
a lanani  in  accounts,  hut  they  rise  and  fall  in  the  hazar ; one  pice  is  six  hiidgcrooks. 

The  Darw’nr  pagoda  always  pa‘-'ses  for  3}  rupees. 

'1  he  \ enetian  passes  for^  to  .57  jeltals,  or  4*;^  to  fanams. 

The  (iuhher  ditto  ,5J  to  .5t  ditto 


The  Darwar  pagoda  being  coined  in  the  pr*»vincc,  is  most  esteemed  hy  the  natives,  but  the  Ikeri 
pagodas  are  worth  more;  they  are  of  the  same  fineness,  laif  diHhr  in  form  and  weight,44)!:  of  these  being 
equal  to  Darwar  pagodas.  Spanisli  dollars  pass  curre  nt  here. 

WmoiiTs.— .One  seer  is  near  Soz.  Ifklwts.  Troy:  42  seers  make  1 maiind,  ami  2f)  niauiuls  1 candy, 
which  makes  the  candy  about  514  Ihs.  l ioz.  though  it  is  commonly  reckoned  52()lbs.  aroirdupoi**. 

Measure. — The  long  measure  is  the  covid,  equal  to  IH  English  inches. 


IMroilTS  AND  EXPORTS. 


During  th(»  period  the  I'nglish  had  a factory  liere,  a considerahle  trade  was  cairied  on  with  Persia  and 
Arabia.  Prom  the  former  place  were  Imported  almonds,  dat(‘s,  rose-wat(T,  and  raisins,  and  from  Arabhi, 
horses,  drugs,  &c.  Of  European  goods,  iron,  lead,  sword  blades,  knives,  branch  coral,  uiid  wearing  apparel 
for  the  Portuguese,  were  imported;  and  the  returns  were 


P(;pj)er,frce  on  board,  2‘2Danvar  pagodas  per  candy 
Coarse  brown  cloth  2 rupees  per  piece 
Coarse  brown  muslin^%3  ditto 


Goa  Arrack  % ^ % 'V  20  to  25  rupees  per  hhd, 

Schiraz  wiuc  40  rupees  per  cliest. 

Uose-wnter  40  ditto 


Besides  which,  cardamurns,  cassia,  nux  vomica,  some  bezoar,  ajid  a few  other  trifling  articles,  were  to  be 
procured.  The  best  pepper  on  the  coast  was  produced  in  this  district. 


PROVISIOxNS  AND  REFRESHMENTS. 


On  this  part  of  the  const  there  are  plenty  of  good  bullocks;  but  (hey  are  forbidden  to  be  killed,  on 
account  of  the  religious  prejudices  of  the  natives.  Poultry  may  be  procured,  ami  the  bay  abouiiJa  with 
various  sorts  of  excellent  fisli.  Wild  peacocks  are  in  plenty  in  the  neighbouring  woods. 


ANJEDIVAH. 

This  island  is  in  latitude  14°  41  North,  about  two  miIe.^from  the  shore,  to  the  southward  of  Carwar 
head.  It  is  about  a mile  in  length,  and  jiossessed  by  llie  Portuguese.  It  appeals  on  the  outside  barren  and 
rocky,  but  on  the  side  next  the  land  it  is  pleasant.  Here  are  a small  town  and  castle,  and  a few  gardens;  it 
is  chiefly  used  to  transport  felons  to  from  Goa  and  the  island  of  Dili.  Tliey  are  taught  to  spin  cotton  thrcRd 
and  yarn,  and  to  weave  stockings,  which  are  the  best  made  in  this  part  of  India,  and  very  cheap. 

Anjedivah  was  important  in  former  times  for  being  the  place  where  the  first  Portuguese  voyagers 
careened  and  refitted  their  ships,  and  it  was  the  retreat  of  the  British  troojis  sent  from  England  to  take 
possession  of  Bombay,  on  the  King’s  marriage  with  the  Infanta  of  I’ortngal;  but  theV  iceroy  of  Goa  refusing 
to  deliver  it,  the  troops  were  landed  here,  when  their  commander,  Sir  Abraham  Shipman,  died;  and  the 
troops,  for  want  of  provisions  and  accommodation,  and  from  the  unhealtliiness  of  the  climate,  were 
reduced  from  400  to  lO'I  men,  previous  to  the  island  of  Bombay  being  ceded  by  the  Portuguese,  which 
took  place  in  1661r-5. 

In  case  of  necessity,  a ship  may  find  shelter  from  the  S.  W.  moiuioon  uncU*r  tliis  island. 

S a 


314 


MERJEE—FOllTIFIED  ISLAND-ONORE. 


MERJEE. 

This  river  is  In  latitude  14®  30'  North,  and  longitude  74°  3r  East,  about  18  miles  S.  E.  fityta 
Anjedivah.  The  entrance  is  between  two  bluff  points,  one  to  the  northward,  the  other  to  the  south- 
ward, which  is  the  highest,  and  defended  hy  a redoubt,  near  which  is  a cluster  of  fine  green  trees  that 
makes  it  very  remarkable.  Just  within  the  south  point,  on  the  side  of  a hill,  stands  a small  square  fort 
built  of  brown  stone,  and  near  it  the  village.  This  place  suffered  in  a siege  it  sustained  from  Hyder,  and 
in  the  reign  of  his  son  it  w'as  nearly  deserted.  Merjee  river  is  recommended  for  ships  wooding  and 
watering,  it  being  very  expensive  and  tedious  at  most  other  places  on  the  coast.  Upon  the  northern  side 
of  the  river,  on  tJie  hill  you  may  cut  good  and  large  fire-w'ood,  and  rice  may  be  procured  in  any  quantity. 
Fresh  water  is  to  be  had  also  in  great  plenty,  extremely  soil  and  good,  nnd  with  the  greatest  ease,  as  you 
do  not  go  into  the  river ; the  watering  place  is  a very  fine  sandy  cove,  just  within  the  north  point  of  the 
westernmost  part  of  the  bay,  where  your  bouts  may  land,  and  you  can  roll  your  casks  upon  the  sand  to 
a low  stone  wall  about  a foot  high,  over  which  you  may  dip  your  buckets  into  the  pool  of  fresh 
water,  and  a large  fleet  may  water  in  two  or  three  days.  The  most  convenient  situation  to  anchor 
is  about  a mile  from  the  north  bluff,  having  Fortified  Island  near  Onore  in  one  with  the  southern 
extreme  of  the  land  bearing  S.  S.  E.  The  river  in  no  place  has  less  than  4{  fathoms  at  half  ebb ; on 
the  bar  there  are  3 fathoms,  and  within  it  7 fathoms,  till  near  the  town,  so  that  if  there  was  occasion, 
a ship  might  enter  the  river,  but  it  would  be  necessary  to  send  a boat  first  to  sound  the  bar. 

The  candy  at  Merjee  is  equal  to  540 lbs.  avoirdupois;  4^2  bales  or  robins  of  rice  are  a corge. 

FORTIFIED  ISLAND. 

This  island  is  in  latitude  14°  19  North,  about  two  miles  from  Onore;  it  derives  its  name  from  being 
fortified  all  round  with  a stone  w^all,  having  guns  mounted  on  towers  at  projicr  distances.  The  landing  place 
is  at  the  south  end,  where  there  is  a fort  witli  eight  guns  mounted.  The  island  is  about  six  miles  in  circum- 
ference, and  about  one  in  the  nearest  part  from  the  main  land  ; between  is  a channel  for  large  boats. 

A small  trade  is  carried  on  with  this  island  for  a kind  of  reddle,  which  is  used  by  the  natives  for 
painting  theii'  houses ; here  is  abundance  of  good  fresh  water. 

ONORE 

Is  situated  in  latitude  14°  18  Nortli,  on  the  north  side  of  a salt-water  river.  Near  its  entrance  is -a 
shoal,  on  which  are  only  nine  feet  at  low  water ; within  it  has  sufficient  depth  to  receive  vessels  drawing  16 
or  18  feet ; the  best  channel  is  at  the  south  part  of  tlie  entrance  of  the  river.  It  is  navigable  a considerable 
way  inland,  whicli  makes  it  convenient  for  bringing  down  the  pepper  and  sandal  wood,  which  are  the  prin- 
cipal articles  that  are  exported  from  hence.  A ship  may  anchor  in  the  roads  with  Onore  flagstaff  E.N.E. 
and  Fortified  Island  N.  by  W.  about  a mile  from  the  shore.  Fresh  water  is  rather  scarce  here. 

Onore  was  formerly  a place  of  considerable  trade,  and  Hyder  had  established  docks  for  building 
frigates  and  other  ships  of  war;  it  was  taken  by  the  English  under  General  Matthews  in  1783,  and 
the  garrison  put  to  the  sword,  but  restored  to  Tippoo  by  the  treaty  of  Mangalore,  who  soon  after  totally 
demolished  it.  In  the  river  are  the  remains  of  some  ships  which  were  sunk  by  our  troops  when  the  place 
was  taken.  It  is  now  recovering  fast,  a custom-house  and  many  new  houses  having  been  built. 

COINS,  WEIGHTS  and  MEASURES. 

('oiNs.— The  common  currency  here  consists  of  Ikeri,  Sultany,  and  >Bahadary  pagodas;  Surat  and  Madras 
rupees,  which  arc  considered  of  equal  value ; fanams,  a small  silver  coin ; and  dubs,  a copper  coin. 

10  ^ 1 fanam. 

5 1 fanams  y make  -<  1 rupee. 

4 rupees  ( i pagoda 


ONOnE. 


31^ 


Wecohts.— The  seer  weight  is  the  same  as  at  Mangalore;  it  ought  to  weigh  24  Bombay  rupees,  but 
tliesc  licing  scarce,  in  their  stead  dubs  are  commonly  used,  and  are  somewhat  heavier. 

The  number  of  seers  contained  in  the  mauiul,  varies  according  to  tlie  goods  sold,  i*’.:. 


Common  articles  in  the  bazar  are  40  seers  or 
1 eppei  % 42 

Beetle  nut  45  [ 

Dry  cocoa  nut  kernels  4hS 

Jaggery  44 


lbs.  24, .55* 

27,92 
29,40 
20,82 


Measures. — There  arc  two  kinds  of  grain  measures  in  use,  one  for  the  farmers,  and  one  for  the  mer- 
chants;  the  basis  of  the  former  is  the  hany,  containing  87^  cubical  inches. 


hanies  v%. 
20  colagas 
22jcolagas 
15  colagas 


kmakc 


1 colaga,  which  is  equivalent  to  bushels  0,816 
1 moray  or  mudy  for  common  use....v^.^  1,632 
1 moray  for  sale  1 ,8 1 3 

1 moray  for  seed  1,224 


The  basis  of  the  measure  by  which  the  merchants  deal,  is  the  sida  of  32  [ cubical  inches^ 
6 sidas  r 1 colaga  0,90T 


20  colagas 
30  morays 


1“  make  "I  ^ 


moray 

corge 


1,814 

J54,419 


The  bazar  moray,  and  that  of  the  farmers  for  sale,  ought  to  be  the  same,  but  they  differ  a little. 


IMPORTS  AND  EXPORTS. 


The  Company  had  a factory  here  in  Ilyder's  time,  where  they  annually  procured  about  900  candies 
of  pepper,  tlie  price  varying  from  110  to  120  nipees  per  candy  of  520 lbs.  They  had  also  the  whole  of 
the  sandal  wood : the  quantity  then  brought  to  pnorc,  varied  from  200  to  300  candies.  No  cardamums 
ever  came  tliis  way.  The  beetle  nut  exported  from  Onore  amounted  annually  to  1000  candies:  of  this  the 
Company  took  whatever  they  wanted,  as  they  had  always  a preference. 

The  trade  in  cocoa  nuts,  and  dried  nuts,  called  copra,  amounted  to  about  12,000  rupees  annually, 
and  was  in  the  hands  of  individuals.  Owuig  to  the  great  number  of  inhabitants,  rice  was  then  imported; 
at  present  it  is  the  chief  article  of  export.  There  never  were  in  this  country  any  manufactures.  The 
oppressions  of  the  late  Sultan  soon  destroyed  the  whole  trade;  but  the  merchants  are  now  returning  from 
the  countries  to  which  they  fled,  and  the  exports  at  present,  besides  rice,  are  a little  pepper,  beetle  nut,  and 
cocoa  nuts,  which  are  purchased  by  bouts  from  Goa,  Radjapour,  and  Bombay.  Ihe  pirates  on  this  coast 
arc  a great  obstacle  to  the  inhabitants  building  boats  for  the  exportation  ot  goods.  The  present  price  of 
the  staple  articles  here  is  os  follows:— 


Bice  for  slaves  corge  13  Pagodas. 

Ditto  coarse  15  ditto. 

Ditto  221  ditto. 

Black  pepper  ...^..^per  candy  30  ditto. 


Beetle  nut  boiled,  per  candy  15  Pagodas^ 
Ditto  raw  11  ditto. 

Cocoa  nut,  copra%^^ww%%^  10  ditto. 

Ditto  whole  % W'%'%  % 0 ditto  per  1000. 


Tbcrfr  were  no  duties  levied  on  exports,  and  no  pepper  was  exported  except  by  the  Company. 

S s » 


316 


BARCELOBE— MANGALORE* 


BARCELORE 


Is  about  14  leagues  to  the  southward  of  Onore,  in  latitude  13®  45'  North.  It  stands  on  the  banks  of 
a broad  river  about  4 miles  from  the  sea.  The  Dutcli  formerly  had  a factory  here  for  the  purpose  of 
purchasing  rice  for  their  garrisons  on  the  Malabar  Coast.  The  river  has  a bar,  on  which  are  13  feet 
water  at  spring  tides.  About  ten  miles’  distance  inland  is  a round  mountain,  called  Barcelore  Peak. 

A considerable  trade  is  carried  on  with  the  Muscat  Arabs,  their  vessels  bringing  horses,  dates,  kis- 
mbses,  &c.  taking  in  return,  rice,  pepper,  and  a few  other  ai  ticles. 

MANGALORE. 

This  town  is  situated  near  the  mouth  of  a considerable  river,  in  latitude  12°  50  North,  and  longitude 
75°  7 East;  it  is  navigable  only  by  small  vessels,  there  being  but  10  or  11  feet  water  on  the  bar.  The 
anchorage  for  large  ships  is  abreast  the  fort  and  river,  with  the  flagstaff  about  E.  by  N.  distance  from  the 
the  town  2 or  2}  miles.  The  castle  is  large  and  strongly  fortified,  and  so  situated  as  to  command  and 
protect  the  town  and  entrance  of  the  river.  There  are  some  other  small  forts  in  its  neighbourhood,  at  the 
back  of  the  town,  and  at  tlic  entrance  of  the  river.  The  town  is  of  considerable  extent. 

Mangalore  was  the  principal  seaport  in  the  dominions  of  Hyder,  and  a place  of  considerable  trade. 
In  17fi8  it  was  taken  by  the  English,  and  the  shipping,  consisting  of  nine  large,  and  several  smaller, 
brought  away;  it  was  however  soon  recovered  by  Hyder.  In  1781  he  had  so  far  replaced  his  navy  as  to 
have  nearly  finished  several  ships  of  the  line,  and  some  frigates  and  sloops,  when  it  was  taken  by  General 
Matthews.  In  1793  it  was  invested  by  'J'ippoo  in  person,  with  an  army  of  140,000  men,  assisted  by  the 
French.  The  Governor,  Colonel  Campbell,  made  a most  gallant  defence,  and  suffered  every  extreme  of 
famine,  till  the  place  was  givcm  up  on  honourable  terms  at  the  conclusion  of  the  war,  when  it  was  found 
a mere  heap  of  rubbish.  It  came  again  into  the  possession  of  the  English  at  the  conquest  of  Mysore,  and 
has  continued  so  ever  since. 

Since  the  Company  acquired  the  government  of  tlie  country,  many  considerable  merchants  froiiji 
Bombay,  Surat,  and  Cutch  have  settled  here,  and  the  trade  has  much  increased.  The  vessels  employed  in 
it  are  mostly  belonging  to  other  ports.  Vessels  from  Muscat,  Aden,  Mocha,  Judda,  and  other  places  come 
here  for  grain,  and  large  quantities  are  sent  to  various  places  on  the  coast. 


COINS,  WEIGHTS,  and  MEASURES. 


Coins.*— The  following  are  the  coins  in  common  currency  here,  and  their  value  in  rupees,  viz. 


Ikeri  or  Swamy  pagoda  4 Rupees. 

Baliadary  or  Hyder’s  pagoda^w^w.,,^^  4 ditto. 
Sultany  or  Tippoo’s  ditto  4 ditto. 

Eristna  or  Mysore  ditto<v«««%««%»%«<%%%%^««  4 ditto. 


Madras  or  star  pagoda  31  Rupees. 

Porto  Novo  ditto  3 ditto 

Canter  Raya  or  Ikeri  fanam  ditto. 

Vir  Raya  fanam  | ditto. 


Of  silver  coins,  the  Surat  and  Madras  rupees  are  considered  of  equal  value,  and  pass  for  5J  silver 
fanams,  the  same  as  are  current  in  Malabar;  in  the  bazar  they  exchange  for  10  dudus  or  dubs,  but  in 
revenue  are  taken  for  14  dubs  each. 

Of  copper  coins,  the  Bombay  pice  coined  in  England,  and,  Tippoo’s  dubs  are  current  here;  these 
with  their  fractions  },  and  J are  the  only  small  coins  in  use.  Cowries  are  not  in  circulation. 

In  payment  for  goods  or  debts,  eveiy  person  must  receive  these  coins  at  the  above  rate  of  exchange* 
The  money  changei’s  give  silver  for  gold  at  the  regulated  price;  but  they  take  a small  batta,  or  exdiangg^ 


MANGALORE. 


317 

W1.CI.  they  give  gold  for  .silver.  They  also  give  copper  for  silver  at  the  regulated  price,  hut  demand 
10 J dubs  for  the  silver  funaiii. 

Accounts  are  commonly  kept  in  Sultany  pagodas,  rupees,  and  annas;  olliers  are  kept  in  pagodas, 
a nominal  fanam  of  It)  to  a pagoda,  and  annas,  or  16  parts  of  tlicse  fannms. 

Weiohts.— Ihe  seer  used  for  Aveighing,  contains  4'^97  grains,  which  is  rather  more  tlian^itRomliay 
rapes.  The  seer  Ls  divided  into  halves,  quarters,  eighths,  and  sixteenths.  The  numher  of  seers  in  the 
maund  varies  according  to  the  goods  to  be  disposed  of. 


The  mannd  I)y  which  goods  are  sold  in  the  mai  ket  is 46  seers,  or  lbs.  t?8,l  t 

The  maund  by  which  the  merchants  purchase,  and  by  whicli  tlie  t'ompany  buy 
and  sell,  weighs  lb  rupees  more, 

Jaggery  is  bought  and  sold  by  the  maund  of’ 40  seers I j 


The  candy  contains  20  maunds,  and  varies  accordingly,  liom  .Vri  lbs.  to  5R1)}  llj«. 

Measures.— rhe  seer  in  the  bazar  is  formed  by  mixing  eipml  (juuntitit's  of  sail,  and  ol’lhe  nine  most 
common  grains,  and  then  by  taking  of  the  mixture  84  Bombay  rupees  weight;  this  fills  the  seer  measure, 
and  is  about  73,683  dec.  cubical  inches.  The  moray  contains  38  seers,  or  about  bushel. 

The  grain  measure,  by  which  the  farmers  sell  their  crops,  is  thus  formed:  64,125  cubical  inches  make 
1 hany,  14  hanies  make  1 cullishigay,  3 cullisliigays  make  1 niudi  or  moray,  which  is  about  J,2525  biisIicL 

Grain,  salt,  and  sometimes  pepptr,  are  sold  by  measure;  of  this  last  a pucka  seer,  or  73,683  cubical 
inches,  is  reckoned  to  weigh  51}  Bombay  rupees.  The  corge  for  rice  is  49  morays. 

IMPORTS. 

The  principal  imports  are,  cotton  cloths  from  Surat,  Cutcli,  and  Madras.  The  Surat  blue  cloth  is  the 
most  common;  it  is  36  cubits  long,  2 broad,  and  of  a very  dark  colour,  selling  here  from  18  to  50  rupees 
per  corge;  and  coarse  white  cloth  from  Cutch,  Bownaghur,  and  other  plac(‘s  to  the  northward  of  Bombay. 

Salt  from  Bombay  and  Goa;  the  former  sells  at  70,  the  latter  at  50  jiagodas  the  ciimba. 

Raw  silk  for  the  use  of  the  manufacturers  above  the  Ghauts,  is  imported  from  China  and  Bengal;  and 
from  Muscat,  a kind  of  red  dye,  a species  of  madder,  is  brought. 

Sugar  is  imported  from  Bengal  and  China,  and  oil  and  ghee  from  Surat  and  Cutch. 

Much  of  the  cloth  used  in  the  country,  is  brought  from  above  the  Ghauts  by  the  inercliants  of  (lie  plac(\ 

A few  European  articles  arc  annually  imiKirtcd  for  the  use  of  the  troops,  the  I'luropean  residents,  &c. 

EXPORTS. 

Rice  is  the  grand  article  of  export.  It  is  sent  to  Muscat,  Bombay,  Goa,  and  Malabar.  The  average 
price,  including  duties  and  shipping  charges,  varies  according  to  its  quality,  from  21  to  18  pagodas  per 
corge  of  49  morays : this  is  the  price  for  good  rice ; the  coarser  kinds  are  lower  in  proportion. 

Beetle  nut  is  the  next  article  of  export;  It  is  sent  to  Bombay,  Surat,  and  Cutcli.  The  export  price 
of  the  raw  nut  is  12  to  14  pagodas,  and  that  of  the  boiled  15  to  16  pagodas  per  candy. 

Pepper  is  the  next  great  article  of  export;  its  average  price  is  31  pagodas  per  candy.  The  customs  on 
pepper  are  lower  here  than  in  Malabar,  yet  the  price  is  in  general  higher  at  Mangalore  than  at  'IVlIicIicrry. 

Sandal  wood  is  sent  to  Bombay,  but  it  Is  all  the  produce  of  the  country  above  the  Ghauts. 

Cassia  is  sent  to  Muscat,  Cutch,  Surat,  and  Bombay;  it  is  exported  at  from  8 to  9 pagodas  per  candy. 

Turmeric  grows  here,  and  is  exported  to  the  same  places,  at  the  rate  of  8 pagodas  p(T  candy. 

The  trade  of  Mangalore  is  said  to  have  decreased  considerably  since  the  time  of  Hydcr.  The  principal 
merchants  were  Moplas ; but  since  the  Company  have  acquired  the  government  of  the  country,  many  men 


318 


MANGALORE. 


of  stibstancc  liave  come  from  Sarnt,  Bombay,  and  other  places  to  the  northward,  several  of  whom  arc  Per- 
sees.  J he  vessels  employed  in  trade  belong  chiefly  to  other  ports. 

llic  following  is  an  account  of  the  imports  and  exjmrts  into  the  province  of  Canara  in  tire  tw'o  last 
years,  whUc  under  Tippoo’s  government,  and  the  two  first  under  the  East  India  Company’s  government. 

Imports.  Exports. 

1 7!)7-8  ^^v^^Pfigodas  89,84.2^.^^,,^Pagodas  6,45,899 

179H— 9 60,508*^%%v^vw%»^^v..v*vw»%  6,76,342 

1 / 99-1 800  8,85,0.57 

1800-1  3,61,040^ 12,67,454 

t.]ie  above  includes  both  the  foreign  and  coasting  trade. 

COMMERCE  WITH  MADRAS  AND  BOMBAY. 

. The  following  is  a statement  of  the  merchandise  and  treasure  imported  into  the  provinces  of  Canara, 
and  Malabar  united,  from  Madras  and  Bombay,  in  the  years  1802  to  1806  inclusive;  likewise  of  the  mer- 
chandise and  treasure  exported  from  the  provinces  of  Canara  and  Malabar  during  the  same  period. 


IMPORTS  FROM  MADRAS  AND  BOMBAY.  EXPORTS  TO  MADRAS  AND  BOMBAY. 


Years. 

Morchuiulise. 

Treasure. 

HBSHI 

Mercliandise. 

Treasure. 

Total. 

Sicca  Rupees. 

Sicca  Rupees. 

Sicca  Rupees. 

Sicca  R upees. 

Sicca  Rupees. 

1802 

8, 4!), 603 

6,995 

8,56,598 

1802 

13,42,402 

50,483 

13,92,885 

1803 

25,82,191 

54,447 

26,36,638 

1803 

43,23,397 

7,496 

48i30i893 

1801 

8,90,340 

92,029 

9,82,369 

1804 

27,13,909 

15,109 

27,29,018 

1805 

7,99,44s3 

71,181 

8,70,624 

1805 

18,.W,.%2 

98,049 

19,63,401 

1806 

_ 7,00,773^ 

4,93,989 

11,94,762  I 

1806 

29,00,681 

43,735 

29,44,416 

'Potal 

58,22,350 

7,18,641 

65,40,991  il  Total. 

i31,.35,741  1 

2,14,872  ■ 

133,.60,613 

Merchandise  imported  into  Canara  and  Malabar  from  Madras  and  Bombay,  in  the  years 

1802  to  1806  inclusive Sicca  Rupees  58,22,350 

Ditto  exported  from  ditto  to  ditto 131,35,741 


Exports  exceed  the  imports 73,13,391 

Treasure  imported  into  (Canara  and  Malabar  during  the  above  period  ... 7,18,641 

Ditto  exported  from  2,14  872 

— 5,03,769 

Balance  in  favour  of  Canara  and  Malabar ^ Sicca  Rupees  78,17,160 


The  accounts  kept  of  the  imports  and  exports  of  Bengal,  include,  under  the  head  of  tlie  Coaat  of 
Malabar,  the  whole  commerce  of  the  w estern  coast  of  India. 


CHAPTER  XVI. 


Coast  of  Malabar. 


lis  Extent-^Billiapalam^Cananore;  Deacriplion^Coms,  Weisrhts,  and  Mcasxtres — Imports  and  Krports^ 
Laccadive  Islands-^Telltchernj ; Description — Cotns^  Weights^  and  Measures — Imports  and  Exports — 
Commerce  of  the  Coast  of  Malabar  with  Bengal-^Commercc  with  Madras — Import  and  Export  Duties 
•^Provisions  and  Refreshments— -Make;  Description— Calicut;  Description— Coms^  Weights,  and  Mea- 
sures—Imports  and  Exports— Prices  of  Drugs  and  Spices  at  Calicut  in  l!}20—Be^pour;  Description 
—Teak  Timber— Paniani;  Description— Imports  and  Exports — Chitica—Cranganorc;  Description- 
Cochin;  Description— Coins,  Weights,  and  Measures — Imports  and  Exports — Provisions  and  Refresh- 
ments-Alipee—Porca—Quilon—Anjengo;  Description— Coins,  Weights,  and  Measures— Commerce- 
Provisions  and  Refreshments— Cape  Comorin— Maidive  Islands;  Description— Coins— Imports  and 
Exports— Commerce  with  Bengal  and  Madras. 


THIS  coast  is  said  to  commence  about  eight  leagues  to  the  southw^ard  ot*  Mangalore,  at  a place  called 
Declah,  where  there  is  a white  wall  in  ruins  visible  from  the  offing.  From  thence  it  extends  to  Cape  C^o- 
morin/  but  Mount  Dilly,  a conspicuous  headland,  in  latitude  IP  59  North,  and  longitude  75“  .‘31  East, 
is  considered  by  navigators  as  the  limit  between  the  Coasts  of  Canara  and  Malabar.  This  is  the  noirowest 
part  of  the  channel  between  the  main  and  tlie  Laccadives,  the  distance  being  27  leagues. 

BILLIAPATAM 

Is  situated  on  the  banks  of  a river,  about  six  miles  to  the  eastward  of  Mount  Dilly.  The  river  extends 
.a  considerable  distance  inldnd,  but  is  only  navigable  by  smaU  vessels,  it  having  a bar  with  from  one  to  two 
fathoms,  abreast  of  which  ships  may  anchor  in  three  to  five  fathoms,  about  two  miles  off  shore. 

The  English  established  a factory  here  in  1669,  for  supplying  themselves  witli  pepper.  The  Dutch 
also  had  a resident  here  for  a number  of  years.  The  principal  produce  at  present  is  grain. 

CANANORE 

Is  situated  at  the  bottom  of  a small  bay,  which  is  one  of  the  best  on  the  coast.  The  town  contains 
many  good  houses  belonging  to  the  Mussulman  merchants;  the  remainder  are  chiefly  huts.  The  fort  is 
situated  on  a kind  of  peninsula,  which  forms  the  hay,  and  is  in  latitude  IP  51'  North,  and  longitude 
75“  25' East;  it  is  very  strong,  and  since  the  province  has  belonged  to  the  Company,  it  has  been  consi- 
derably strengthened  with  works  after  the  European  fashion,  and  is  now  the  head  quarters  of  the  tioopa 
atationed  in  Ae  province,  for  which  it  seems  well  adapted. 

Ships  may  anchor  abreast  the  fort,  in  from  ii  to  5 ^thorns.- 


320 


LACCADIVE  ISLANDS— MINICPY. 


Cananorc  was  first  visited  hy  tlic  Portuguese  in  1501,  where  they  were  kindly  received.  They  obtained 
permission  to  build  a fort,  and  soon  after  found  occasion  to  quarrel  with  the  inhabitants,  and  took  the 
city,  of  which  they  retained  possession  till  driven  out  by  the  Dutch  about  1660.  The  Dutcli  strongly 
fortified  it,  expending  in  the  year  1 670,.  «P50,000  on  the  fortifications.  At  length  finding  it  of  no  utility 
to  them  in  a commercial  point  of  view,  it  was  in  1770  sold  to  a native  Prince  for  100,000  rupees; 
it  was  afterwards  taken  by  Tippoo,  and  in  December,  1700,  it  was  taken  from  him  by  the  English, 
under  Major-General  Abercrombie,  and  has  remained  in  their  possession  ever  since. 

Some  indificrent  bullocks  and  poultry  are  to  be  procured  here;  watering  is  difficult  and  expensive,  and 
‘fire-wood  is  scarce. 


COINS,  WEIGHTS,  and  MEASUl 

All  sorts  of  Indian  coins  pass  current  here ; the  weights  and  meas^p  are  the  same  as  at  Tellicherry. 

IMPORTS  AND  EXPORTS. 


t 

isMs  £ 


The  district  of  Cananore  is  small,  extending  in  no  part  more  than  two  miles  from  the  fort ; yet  the 
Uiliby,  or  Queen,  pays  a revenue  of  14,000  rupees  as  a land  tax,  and  the  Company  receive  all  the  customs. 
She  is  allowed  to  collect  all  the  other  revenues.  Most  of  the  Laccadive  Islands  belong  to  her,  and  she 
lias  several  vessels,  which  constantly  trade  to  Arabia,  Bengal,  Surat,  and  Sumatra,  from  whence  the 
following  articles  are  imported. 


Almonds.  1 

Camphirc. 

Opium. 

Arrack. 

Dates. 

Piece-goods. 

Benjamin. 

Horses. 

Rose-water. 

Sugar  candy. 

Turmeric. 

Tobacco. 


By  the  outward-bound  East  India  ships  for  Bombay,  which  occasionally  stop  here  on  their  way  up 
the  coast,  and  by  roasting  vessels  from  Bombay,  are  imported  for  the  consumption  of  the  Europeans 
itationed  at  Cananore,  and  in  its  neighbourhood,  the  under-mentioned  articles,  viz. 


Ale  and  porter. 

Cloths. 

Hosiery. 

Saddlery. 

Boots  and  shoes. 

Glass  ware. 

Oilman's  stores. 

Stationery. 

Brandy. 

Guns  and  pistols. 

Perlumery. 

Salt  provisions. 

Books  & pamphlets. 

Hats. 

Plate  & placed  ware. 

Wines. 

The  exports  from  Cananorc  consist  of  the  under-mentioned  articles 

Cardamums.  j 

Cassia  Lignea.  i 

Pepper. 

Sharks'  fins. 

Coir.  1 

Nux  Vomica.  I 

Sandal  wood. 

Tortoise  shelL 

LACCADIVE  ISLANDS. 

This  Archipelago  of  low  islands  is  opposite  the  Coast  of  Malabar,  and  extends  from  latitude  10®  North, 
to  about  12®  North,  having  an  extensive  channel  separating  them  from  the  coast.  There  are  nineteen 
principal  ones,  most  of  them  surrounded  with  reefs  and  steep  rocks;  and  as  their  true  position  and 
limits  seem  not  correctly  determined,  are  avoided  as  much  as  possible.  The  southernmost  one  is 

MINICOY, 

And  is  in  latitude  8®  17'  North,  and  longitude  73®  18'  East.  It  is  about  miles  long,  and  half  a 
mile  broad,  extending  in  the  form  of  a crescent  to  the  N.  W.  having  a coral  reef  across  it,  the  channel 
Uirough  wliich  is  very  intricate  and  narrow,  having  only  two  fathoms  water.  The  town  is  situated 


KALPENI— UNDEROOT-.TELLlcnERRV. 


within  this  rerf;  the  inhabitants  are  very  civil.  A trade  is  carried  on  from  hence  to  Cannanore,  in  coir 
and  cocoa  nuts,  and  at  tfab  island  is  caught  the  fish  called  commelmutch,  so  niucli  esteemed  in  JMalabar. 

KALPENI 

Is  about  37  leagues  in  a N.  N.  E.  direction  from  Minicoy;  it  is  about  four  miles  long,  and  one  broad, 
surrounded  with  reefs,  through  which  is  a small  opening  on  the  S.W.  side  of  the  island,  where  boats  go  to 
the  town,  wliich  is  in  the  midst  of  cocoa  nub  trees. 

UNDEROOT.  ^ 

This  island  is  about  three  miles  long  from  oast  to  west,  and  1|  broad;  it  is  in  latitude  10®  4-8  North, 
and  longitude  74-®  East.  It  is  well  planted  with  cocoa  mit  trees;  the  town  is  on  the  north  side  of  the  island, 
and  consists  of  a few  houses  scattered  along  the  sca-side.  Turtle  may  be  taken  here.  TIio  water  is  tolei  ably 
good,  and  the  inhabitants  are  poor  and  inoffensive.  This  island  is  the  nearest  of  the  group  to  the  Malabai' 
Coast,  and  is  about  38  leagues  distant  from  Mount  Dilly. 

The  remainder  of  the  Laccadives  are  not  so  well  known  as  the  al)ove,  most  of  the  islands  being  sur- 
rounded by  coral  reefs,  and  are  dangerous  to  approach  in  vessels  of  any  burthen.  | 

The  greater  part  of  these  islands  are  subject  to  the  Queen  of  Cannanore ; the  inhabitants  arc  all 
Moplas,  and  very  poor;  they  subsist  chiefly  on  cocoa  nuts  and  fish,  liaving  no  grain;  their  boats  arc  made, 
of  cocoa  nut  stems,  and  their  houses  are  entirely^ consti  ucted  of  that  valuable  tree.  The  principal  export  im 
coir,  and  that  which  is  made  here,  has  been  at  all  times  esteemed  the  best  in  India ; it  lias  always  beeir 
used  by  the  Arabs,  and  our  ships  in  the  Indian  Ocean  generally  prefer  it  to  hempen  cordage  for  running 
rigging.  Ambergris  is  occasionally  to  be  met  with  among  these  island.s. 

These  islands  were  visited  \iy  the  Portuguese  under  Vasco  de  Gama  in  1499,  on  liis  return  to  Europe' 
from  Calicut,  where  he  furnished  his  ships  with  cordage,  of  which  they  were  in  great  want. 

TELLICHERRY, 

The  principal  English  settlement  on  the  Coast  of  Malabar,  is  in  latitude  1 1®  45'  Nortli,  and  longitude 
75®  32'  East,  and  about  ten  miles  to  the  southward  of  Cannanore.  In  fine  weather,  shipi  anchor  in  the 
“ roads  in  five  fathoms,  the  flagstaff  bearing  N.E.  by  N.  off  the  town  1|  to  2 miles  ; but  when  tlicre  is  a 
chance  of  unsettled  weather,  they  should  anchor  well  out  in  7 or  8 fathoms ; for  his  Majesty’s  ship  Superb,, 
of  74  guns,  was  lost  here  in  1782:  the  fleet  having  anchored  in  5 and  5{  fathoms,  a heavy  sea  began  to 
roll  in,  which  made  her  strike  on  the  anchor  of  another  ship.  There  is  a ledge  of  black  rocks  facing  the 
fort,  where  small  vessels  have  been  known  to  lie  during  the  S.W,  monsoon. 

Tellicherry  Fort  is  of  considerable  size,  with  strong  walls,  though  rather  in  a ruinous  condition^ 
having  convenient  houses  for  the  Chief  and  gentlemen  of  the  factory;  that  of  the  Chief  is  a large  and  hand- 
some building.  About  a mile  to  the  southward  is  a small  fort  called  Mile  End,  and  at  a short  distance 
to  the  northward  of  Tellicherry  is  a blockhouse,  surrounded  by  a stone  wall,  having  some  cannon  mounted. 
There  arc  two  towns,  one  bordering  on  the  sea-coast,  the  other  in  the  wood:  tlie  principal  inliabitants  of 
the  former  are  Portuguese ; those  of  thi  latter  natives.  Between  the  town  and  the  fort  is  an  extensive  and 
open  place;  on  one  side  is  a pleilsant  garden  belonging  to -the  Chief,  who  has  likewise  a small  one  ad- 
joining his  house.  There  is  an  excellent  ride  through  the  wood,  much  frequented  by  the  European  residents. 

In  1781  Tellicherry  was  for  a long  period  blocjcaded  by  Hyder  Ally’s  forces;  the  works  with  which 
they  blocked,  up  the  place,  were  covered  by  a fortified  camp  at  a moderate  distance.  In  January,  1782,  a 
considerable  reinforcement  arrived  from  Bombay,  under  the  command  of  Major  Abingdon,  who  imnie# 
diately  formed  a plan  for  relieving  the  town,  and  concerted  Lis  measures  so  well,  tliat  he  had  surprised, 
idtacked,  and  curried  the  enemy’s  several  forts  before  day  on  tlie  moruing  of  the  6th  of  January,  and 

T t • 


TELLICHERUV. 


3^ 

pursued  Ids  success  with  such  celerity,  that  he  stormed  their  fortified  camp  as  soon  as  it  was  light,  and 
completely  routed  their  forces.  Several  hundreds  of  the  enemy  were  killed,  and  near  1,500  taken  prisoners. 
Tlie  spoil  was  very  considerable,  consisting  of  a numerous  artillery,  with  a large  quantity  of  military  stores 
and  a number  of  elephants,  which  w'ere  found  in  the  forts  and  redoubts.  By  this  success  the  communi- 
cation with  the  country  was  opened,  and  the  coast  for  several  miles  on  either  side  of  Tellicherry,  wa» 
entirely  cleared  of  the  enemy. 

COLNS,  WEIGHTS,  and  MEASTTRES. 

Coins. — The  coins  current  here  are  pagodas,  rupees,  fanams,  pice,  and  tars.  There  are  two  kinds  of 
fanams;  the  one  is  a small  gold  coin,  with  a considerable  alloy  of  silver  and  copper ; the  other  a silver  coin ; 
the  pice  and  tar  are  copper,  coined  in  England. 

2 tars  'I  ^ I pice. 

10  pice  I make  } 1 fanam. 

5 fanams  ) Cl  Bombay  rupee. 

The  following  are  the  rates  at  which  gold  coins  commonly  pass  current  at  Tellicherry. 

Porto  Novo  pagodas  rupees.  Venetians,  5 nipees  each;  but  if  paid  to  merchants. 

Star  pagodas  3^  ditto.  520  rupees  per  100  Venetians. 

Sultany  ditto  4 0 50  Surat  gold  mohurs  15  nipees  each 

but  to  pay  for  goods,  430  rupees  per  1 00  pagodas  Bombay  ditto. 

In  selling  goods,  all  bargains  should  lie  made  for  Bombay  rupees,  or  you  will  lose  considerably  by  the 
coins  you  arc  obliged  to  take  here,  more  jiarticularly  the  Venetians,  which  seldom  fetch  more  tlian  four 
rupees  each  at  Bombay,  and  upon  j>agodas  the  loss  is  from  a quarter  to  half  a rupee  each. 

Accounts  are  kept  in  rupees,  quarters,  and  reas,  the  same  os  at  Bombay. 

Weights. — The  commercial  w'cights  are  pollams,  maunds,  and  candiCvS,  thus  divided:  20  pollams 
make  I maiind,  and  20  maunds  1 randy,  which  is  n^ckoned  equal  to  600 lbs.  avoirdupois;  but  the  maund 
does  not  exceed  281  Ih*-  which  makes  the  randy  only  .^70  lbs. 

Measures,-— The  long  mcusuies  are  the  covid,  and  the  guz ; the  former  18  inches,  and  the  latter  28 
inches. 

IMPORTS  AND  EXPORTS. 

A considerable  inland  and  foreign  trade  is  carried  on  here.  Most  of  the  ships  from  China  bound  to 
Bombay  and  Goa,  touch  here,  and  dispose  of  part  of  their  cargoes,  which  is  mostly  resold  to  the  inhabi- 
tants of  the  interior,  who  make  their  returns  in  the  produce  of  tlie  country,  such  as  ginger,  pepper,  cocoa 
nuts,  coir,  and  cotton  cloth,  which  is  very  good  and  cheap;  they  have  a particular  kind  of  towels, 
esteemed  the  best  in  India.  Here  are  several  Portuguese  merchants,  likewise  a few  Persees.  Many 
of  the  natives  are  men  of  considerable  profierty,  more  particularly  Mousa,  who  is  considered  the  richest 
man  on  the  Malabar  Coast. 

There  are  several  sliops  for  European  goods.  The  articifes  suitable  to  the  consumption  of  the  place, 
are  such  as  are  enumerated  at  Cannnnore,  being  chiefly  for  the  use  of  the  military  and  Europeans  sUtioned 
in  tlie  province;  but  the  quantity  required  is  not  to  any  considerable  extent. 

The  commerce  carried  on  between  the  British  Presidencies  of  Bengal,  Madras,  and  Bombay  with  the 
Coast  of  Malabar  is  considerable.  At  Bengal,  the  trade  of  the  whole  western  side  of  India  is  classed  under 
the  head  of  the  Coast  of  M&iabar;  at  Madras, ProTiace  of  Malabar  is  kept  separate ; and  at  Bombay  li 
is  classed  with  that  of  Canarck 


TELLICHERRY. 


m 


COMMERCE  OF  THE  COAST  OF  MALABAR  WITH  BENGAL. 


The  following  is  an  account  of  the  merchnndise  and  treasure  imported  into  tli(»  Coast  of  Malahar  fiom 
Bengal,  in  the  years  1802  to  1806  inclusive;  likewise  of  the  merchandise  and  treasure  exported  tVoni  tin* 
Coast  of  Malabar  to  Bengal  duritig  Uie  same  period,  togi^thcr  with  a list  of  the  ai  tides  of  which  the  im- 
ports and  exports  consisted  in  1805. 


IMPORTS  INTO  TIIK  COAST  OF  MALABAR.  EXPORTS  FROM  TIIK  COAST  OF  MAI.M^\R. 


Years. 

Mcrrhandisi?, 

Treasure. 

Total. 

Years. 

Trrasiiri*. 

Total 

Sirra  Rupees. 

Siccu  Rupees 

Sicca  Uujwes. 

Sirra  Ropers 

.Sic<a  Ropren. 

1802 

33,50,690 

- !■■ 

31,50,690 

1802 

8,71,026 

8,400 

8,79,426 

1803 

31,87,854 

31,87,354 

1803 

4,49,245 

78,790 

5,28,035 

1804 

67,93,196 

57,93,196 

1804 

3, 53, .594 

— 

3,.5: 1,594 

1805 

53,60,781 



53,60,781 

1805 

1,79,413 

1,79,413 

1806 

50,18,260 

— 

50,18,260 

1806 

1,38,452 

1 ,66,266 

3,04,718 

Total: 

227,10,781 

— 

227,10,781 

Totair 

19,91,730 

2,.53,4s56 

22,457186 

Articles  of  Import  in  1805.  Articles  of  Export  in  1805. 


Piece-goods^%%%w^^v^-w%  Sicca  Rupees 
Indigo 

Bug  ar  v%  %%  %% 

Raw  silk 
Grain  v%v%v«v«< 

Bengal  Rum 
Opium 
Saltpetre 
Ginger  ^ 

Canvas  and  gunnies 
Long  pepper  and  root%*^%^. 

Hemp,  flax,  ,and  twine 
Turmeric 
Seeds 
Carriages 

Stick,  and  shell  lack 
Sundries 

Imports  re^xportedf  viz. 

Liquors 

Madeira  wine^ 

Spi 

Vv  oollen8»%^^>%^^ov»»^>»%w»^^>v»- 
Sundries 


rW*'*  %%♦%%%%% 


13,65,093 

l,01,4^^a 

13,50,493 

16,38,652 

3,88,990 

1,20,133 

15,515 

3,900 

42,176 

72,165 

38,596 

12,384 

16,392 

22,457 

27.000 
6,567 

41,273 

20,365 

18.000 
11,695 

1,280 

46,233 


iror8es%^^%^%^^%v^»%»-^v»%^%%%%%%-%.»%8icca  Rupees 
Tea  » 

Ij  a m e tt  a'w%^'v%^w*-'%  *%»%♦ 

Nankeens 

Red  and  white  lead 

(tunpowder..^^^v^v-v<.,%. 

Beads  % > % % % %^  %%  v%-%  - 

Coir  and  coir  cable 

Piece-goods 

Liquors 

Timber 


44,800 

19,780 

11,975 

9,350 

7,713 

2,915 

4,545 

15,214 

17,188 

721 

5,‘K)0 

6,040 

33,272 


Exports  in  1805 


, Sicca  Rupees  53,60,781  Exports  in  1805. 


Sicca  Rupees  1 ,79,41 3 


Value  of  merchandise  imported  into  the  Coast  of  Malabar  from  Bengal,  in  the  years 
1802  to  1806  inclusive  Rupees 

Ditto  exported  from  ditto  to  ditto 


227,10,781 

19,91,730 


Imports  exceed  tlte  exports 

Treasure  exported  from  the  Coast  of  Malabar  during  the  above  period  2,«Xl,4«>6 


Balance  against  the  Coast  of  Malabar^. 


icca  xvupees 


Tt2 


TELLICHERRY. 


324. 


COMMERCE  OF  THE  COAST  OF  MALABAR  WITH  MADRAS 


The  following  is  a statement  of  the  merchandise  and  treasure  imported  into  the  Coast  of  Malabar  from 
Madras,  in  the  years  1802  to  1806  inclusive;  likewise  of  the  merchandise  and  treasure  exported  from 
the  Coast  of  Malabar  to  Madras  during  the  same  period,  together  with  a list  of  the  articles  of  which  the 
imports  and  exports  consisted  in  1805. 

IMPORTS  INTO  THE  COAST  OF  MALABAR.  EXPORTS  FROM  THE  COAST  OF  MALABAR. 


Merchandise. 

Treasure. 

Total. 

Merchandise 

Treasure. 

Total. 

Sicca  RuiJces. 

Sicca  Rupees. 

Sicca  Rupees. 

Sicca  Rupees, 

Sicca  Rupees. 

Sicca  Rupees. 

1802 

3,a3,fi84. 

3,33,684 

1802 

4,75,791 

4,75,791 

1803 

2,75,669 

1,83,969 

4,59,638 

1,52,924 

59,243 

2,12,167 

1804 

5,21,705 

38,726 

5,60,431 

3,95,744 

2,08,066 

6,03,810 

1805 

4,06,046 

27,954 

4,34,000 

1805 

3,95,588 

1,61,474 

5,57,062 

1806 

5,12,375 

84,432 

5,96,807 

1806 

5,28,803 

2,63,905 

7,92,708 

Ml 

20,49,47!) 

3,a5,081 

23,84,560 

[Total. 

19,48,850 

6,92,688  1 

[26,41,538 

Articles  of  Import  in  1805. 


Articles  of  Export  in  1805. 


Piece-goods, 
Sugars 
Bengal  Rum 
Cotton 
Beetle  nuU. 
Drugs 
Cliilu 
Sandal  wood 
Pepper,.^, 
Touacco 
Salt 
Cardamums 
Sundries 


Sicca  Rupees  1,05,828 
948 
1,03,338 
4,819 
23,882 
1,123 
1,889 
2,044 
3,779 
2,404 
1,090 
37,721 
30,622 


Td(juors 
Spices 
Woollens 
Sundries , 
Treasure*, 


*********  ************************** 

Imports  reexported f viz. 


57,051 

343 

293 

28,872 

27,954 


Imports  in  1805************  Sicca  Rupees  4,34,000 


Beetle  nut******* 
Drugs  ************ 

*************  Sicca  Rupees  1,15,616 
.******************************  1 2, 176 

>************^*******.^.***^.**  33,896 

Oils  ***************1 
Spices  ************ 
C/Otton  ************ 
Piece-^oods  ****** 
Provisions  *******. 

^***********************%  ******  4,665 

t******************************  1 3 1 62 

, , — 95,905 

Siicror 

... 

Li(|Uors  **************** ** *******************%**  9,550 
Grain 12.787 

Naval  stores*****. 

.**  *%*******%******  ^**%********  6,721 

9A  1 KA 

Ti  mber*  xin-n -1 -1  n ' 

Sundries  ^***.*.**..., 

.******************************  47|6ll 

Treasure********** 

1,61,474 

Exports  in  1805* 


*Sicca  Rupees  6,57,062 


Value  of  merchandise  imported  into  the  Coast  of  Malabar  from  Madras,  in 
the  years  1802  to  1806  inclusive  *^************************Sicca  Rupeea 
Ditto  expoiled  from  ditto  to  ditto , 

Imports  exceed  the  exports  . 

Treasure  imported  into  Malabar  during  the  same  period*^**********  3,35,081 
Ditto  exported  from  ditto*****v*»**»»*******i,*%<%*w*»»<%»»i>*%^*****^****^  6,92,688 


Balance  against  the  Coast  i 


20,49,479 

19,48,850 

1,00,629 


3,67,607 

4,68,236 


MAHE— CALICUT. 


se« 


IMPORT  ANi>  EXPORT  DUTIES. 

The  customs  are  farmed  by  a Perscc  merchant  resident  at  Tellicherry,  and  vary  according  to  the 
articles  bouglit  and  sold  ; it  is  therefore  best  to  make  your  agreement  to  be  exempt  from  all  duties,  which 
may  readily  be  done  with  the  merchants. 

PROVISIONS  AND  REFRESHMENTS. 

Bullocks  and  water  are  supplied  by  the  Master  Attendant,  tlie  former  at  12  rupees  each,  and  the 
latter  at  1 rupee  per  butt,  to  which  is  added  an  office  charge  of  12  per  cent.  Rice  and  paddy  are  very 
dear;  gram  is  to  be  had  at  14  to  15  rupees  per  candy;  poultry  is  indiilerent,  and  yams  and  other 
vegetables  scarce  and  dear. 

It  is  difficult  to  procure  plank  or  mats  for  dunnaging  the  hold,  and  stowing  the  pepper  here;  they 
should  therefore  be  brought  from  Bombay,  or  sent  for  to  Cochin. 

MAIIE. 

This  settlement  is  the  only  one  ever  possessed  by  the  French  on  the  western  side  of  the  Peninsula. 
It  is  about  5 miles  to  the  southward  of  Tellicherry,  on  the  banks  of  u small  river,  in  lulitiule  1 J 4()  \oi  tli ; 
the  river  has  a bar,  but  is  navigable  by  boats  for  a.consideral)le  way  inland.  The  I'rench  settled  li(*re 
about  1722;  it  was  taken  by  the  English  in  1761,  at  which  time  it  was  strongly  fortified,  having  lUO 
pieces  of  cannon  mounted.  Previous  to  its  evacuation,  it  was  completely  dismantled;  and  the  fortifications 
liaving  never  been  restored,  are  now  in  a very  ruinous  state.  It  was  again  taken  in  1793,  and  has  remained 
in  our  possession  ever  since.  The  commercial  resident  has  been  removed  to  this  place,  to  the  great 
injury  of  Tellicherry,  although  the  situation  is  preferable  for  commerce. 

When  in  the  hands  of  the  French,  a great  part  of  the  pepper  came  here;  but  since  its  captifrc,  the 
whole  has  fallen  into  the  hands  of  the  Company.  The  under-mentioned  are  the  (luantities  exported  from 
their  warehouses  in  the  following  years. 


Candies. 

nidd. 

lbs. 

Candies. 

inds.  ills. 

1782 

80 

13 

7 

1 793 

2199 

fi 

10 

1783 

132 

14 

19 

1794 

2400 

0 

0 

1784  — 

2185 

10 

8 

1 7 9^ 

1914 

11 

23 

1 7 85 

28 

7 

4 

1 796 

none 



015 

1 

5 

1797  of  crop  of  I796w^v^ 

4155 

4 

23 

1 7 89 

957 

19 

8 

1 797 

2070 

1ft 

7 

1790  

1148 

9 

1 

1798 

4778 

9 

1 

1791 

2107 

5 

5 

1 799  % %% » 

1133 

() 

1 

1792 

2001 

15 

7 

1 800  v%^% 

1145 

3 

10 

CALICUT 


Is  situated  m latitude  11°  15'  North,  and  longitude  76°  6'  East.  The  town  is  close  to  the  shore,  making  a 
handsome  appearance  from  the  sea,  but  is  far  from  being  so  in  reality.  The  streets  are  narrow  and  dirty, 
nor  are  there  are  any  handsome  buildings  to  attract  the  eyes  of  a stranger.  It  is  well  peopled,  and  has 
a considerable  trade  with  the  inhabitants  of  the  coast  to  the  northward.  A short  distance  to  the  northward 
of  CaUcut  is  a river,  which  is  navigable  by  boats  for  more  than  100  mUes  from  the  coast. 

Large  ships  anchorinSordfathoms,  with  the  flagstaffbearingE.  by  N.  off  Uie  shore  two  or  three  miles. 


S26 


CALICUT. 


Calicut  is  celebrated  as  being  the  first  land  in  India  which  the  Portuguese  saw;  it  was  discovered  by 
De  Guma  May  18,  1498,  and  was  at  that  time  the  greatest  emporium  of  all  India,  the  commerce  of  tlie 
Arabs  with  this  port  being  prodigious.  At  the  arrival  of  the  Portuguese,  it  was  govei  ned  by  a moiiarch 
called  the  Samorin,  who  had  all  the  other  Princes  of  Malabar  as  tributaries,  lie  Gama  wag  at  first  well 
received;  but  the  jealousy  of  the  Arabs  prevented  his  friendship  with  the  Samorin  being  of  any  duration. 
The  Portuguese  never  could  make  themselves  masters  of  the  place;  but  in  1503  A1buquer(|ue  prevailed  on 
the  reigning  Prince  to  permit  him  to  build  a fort  not  far  from  the  city.  This  gave  him  the  command  of  the 
trade,  notwitlistandii^  the  city  continued  under  its  ancient  rulers,  who  very  frequently  were  engaged 
in  wars  with  their  European  neighbours.  On  the  arrival  of  the  Dutch  on  this  coast,  they  assisted  the 
SoJTiorin  in  expelling  the  Portuguese  from  his  territories,  from  which  period  most  of  the  European  natious 
have  retained  factories  here,  for  the  convenience  of  commerce. 

Ilyder  Ally  having  advanced  towards  Calicut,  it  was  voluntarily  surrendered  to  him  by  the  Samorin, 
who  restored  him  to  his  dominions,  on  condition  of  paying  a small  tribute.  In  1782  it  was  taken  by  the 
English,  the  enemy  expelled  the  country,  and  the  Samorin  restored  to  his  possessions. 

The  town  was  afterwards  taken  by  Tippoo,  the  place  destroyed,  and  the  inhabitants  removed  to 
Ileypour;  but  when  the  English  conquered  the  province,  the  natives  returned,  and  rebuilt  the  town,  which 
at  present  contains  upwards  of  5000  houses,  mostly  mean  buildings. 


COINS,  WEIGHTS,  and  MEASURES. 

Coins.— The  principal  coins  in  circulation  are  tars,  fanams,  and  rupees ; but  accounts  are  kept  iu 
rupees,  quarters,  and  reas,  us  at  Bombay. 


IG  tars  or  vis 
5 fanams 
35  rupee's 
3i  rupees 
IG  rupees 


1 fan  am 
1 rupee. 

1 star  [mgoda. 

1 Port  Novo  pagoda. 

1 Bombay  gold  mohur- 


Weights.— 100  pools  make  1 niaund  of  301bs.,  and  20  maunds  1 cancly  of  GOOlbs.  avoirdupois. 
Long  Measure.— 1 covid  is  18  inches,  and  1 guz  is  287V  inches.  Timber  is  sometimes  measured  at 
Calicut  by  the  covid  and  borel ; 12  borels  (when  the  timber  is  sawed,  and  24  when  unsawed)  are  1 covid. 

IMPORTS  AND  EXPORTS. 


Vessels  from  the  Red  Sea,  and  Arabia,  the  northern  ports  frequent  this  place  for  timber  and  plank, 
bringing  with  them  the  commodities  of  their  respective  countries.  Very  little  European  goods  are  sold, 
except  a few  necessaries  for  the  use  of  the  military  stationed  here. 

Timber  and  plank  are  the  principal  articles  of  export;  but  the  under-mentionecli  are  sometime! 
procurable  here, 


('ardamiims. 
Coculus  indicus. 
Cassia. 

Cutch. 


Cowries. 
Columbo  root. 
Coir  cordage. 
Cocoa  nuts. 


Ginger. 

Pepper. 

Rice. 

Sharks’  fins. 


Sandal  wood. 
Turmeric. 
Tamarinds. 
Wax. 


Some  piece-goods  ore  manufactured  in  the  neighbourhood,  similar  to  the  Madras  long  cloth;  they 
are  of  six  calls  fineness,  that  is  to  say,  contain  in  the  warp  744  threads,  and  the  pieces  fire  72  covids  long, 


CALICUT. 


327 


by  9j  in  width.  The  prices  vary  from  30  to  35  gold  ftinams,  according  to  the  quality.  Very  few  are 
made  of  a superior  kind.  They  are  sometimes  bleached,  and  sent  to  Europe. 

The  duties  on  exports  are  rated  ad  valorem ; it  is  therefore  advisable,  in  making  bargains  at  Calicut,  to 
agree  at  a certain  price  deliverable  on  board* 

PRICES  OF  DRUGS  AND  SPICES  IN  CALICUT  IN  1520. 

The  following  list  of  commodities,  and  their  prices,  is  extracted  from  a Portuguese  author  wlio  visited 
Calicut  at  the  above  period,  which  will  serve  to  shew  the  nature  of  the  trade  then  carried  on. 

Lac  of  Martaban,  if  it  be  the  best,  is  worth  the  frazil,  which  is  221bs.  6oz.  of 
Portugal,  after  lOoz.  to  the  lb.  which  is  about  4()lbs.  weight  of  the 
subtele  of  Venice,  i.s  in  value  18  fanams,  which  are  18  marcels  of  silver, 
for  1 fanam  is  about  1 marcel  of  silver. 

Lac  of  the  country  per  frazil  12  fanams 

Borax,  that  is  good  and  in  great  30  to  M) 

Camphire,  that  is  gross  in  cakes  ditto  70  to  80 

Ditto  for  the  cliildren  to  eat  — nietigal  3 

Aguala  wood  frazil  300  to  4^)0 

Lignum  aloes,  black,  heavy,  and  fine lOtK) 

Musk,  the  best  is  worth  an  ounce  VV%%^%VV%  %%%■%■*  %%vd  it  to  3b 

Benjamin,  the  best 

Tamarinds,  4 

Calamus  Aromaticus 

Indigo  to  dye  silk  true  and  good  30 

Myrrh  18  to  20 

Frankincense,  good  and  in  grains  ditto  15 

Ditto  in  paste  of  tlie  basest  sort  ditto  3 

Ambergris  that  is  good  inetigal  2 to  3 

Myrabolans  in  conserve  of  sugar  frazil  lb  to  25 

Cassia,  fresh  and  good  ditto  1 to  2 

Bed  Sanders  .ditto  5 to  0 

White  Sanders  and  citron  which  grow  on  3'imor.^.^.^v.......%^^.%%^^^^*.^%ditto  40  to  00 

Spikenard,  fresh  and  good....  ...............ditto  30  to  40 

Nutmegs  which  come  from  Banda,  where  the  bahar  is  worth  from  8 to  10 
fanams,  which  import  Clbs,  weight  to  the  Marchetto,  are  worth  in 
Calicut  ... .....pcu  fi  azil  10  to  12 

Mace  from  Banda*^.^..  .......  . .......  . ...  ...  ..(.1 1 1 1 0 2«3  to  30 

Worm-seed  of  the  best  kind,  called  semenzana.......^............«...^^..%^.-*^ditto  18 

ditto  1 

Aloes  Socotrine  1 8 

Cardamums  in  grains  .....^wi..w*........^^'^v..w.%»^%^*^v............'...........ditto  20 

Rhubarb,  that  which  comes  from  China  by  way  of  Malacca  40  to  50 

Opium,  which  is  brouglit  from  Aden,  where  it  is  made,  to  Calicut  ^jwr  frazil  2H0  to  320 
Ditto  of  another  sort  made  in  Cambay  200  to  250 


sis 


BEYPOUIU-TEAK. 


BEYPOUR 

Is  situated  in  latitude  IP  10'  North,  and  longitude  75° 51'  East,  about  two  leagues  to  the  southward 
of  Calicut.  It  is  a small  town,  containing  120  houses  of  all  casts,  and  has  hardly  any  trade.  The  situa- 
tion is  beautiful,  on  the  north  side  of  a rirer,  a short  distance  from  the  sea.  Within  the  river  has  deep 
water,  but  like  all  those  on  the  coast,  has  a bar  at  its  mouth:  at  favourable  seasons  vessels  drawing  four- 
teen feet,  may  be  floated  over  the  bar  by  means  of  casks. 

Beypour  was  fixed  upon  by  Tippoo  as  his  principal  depot  of  naval  stores  and  materials  for  ship-build- 
ing. lie  had  commenced  building  a town  agreeably  to  the  European  manner;  the  regular  streets  crossing 
each  other  at  right  angles  bespoke  neatness  and  uniformity.  The  Durbar,  or  Government-House,  was  about 
half  finished,  and  when  completed,  would  have  formed  a square  of  no  inconsiderable  extent.  The  fort  was 
erected  on  a rising  ground,  nearly  three-quarters  of  a mile  above  the  town,  between  it  and  the  sea,  and 
above  1|  mile  from  the  entrance  of  the  river.  This  new  emporium  he  called  Ferro^mbad,  or  the^ 
Happy  Place. 

TEAK. 

This  tree  is  a native  of  the  forests  in  Malabar,  Coromandel,  Pegu,  Java,  Sumatra,  and  many  other 
parts  of  the  East;  it  grows  to  an  immense  size,  sometimes  50  feet  long,  and  20  inches  in  diameter.  For 
shij)-building  the  teak  is  reckoned  superior  to  any  other  sort  of  wood,  in  or  out  of  water. 

The  wood  of  this  tree  has  by  long  experience  been  found  to  be  the  most  useful  timber  in  Asia.  It  is 
easily  worked,  and  at  the  same  time  strong  and  durable.  That  produced  on  the  Coast  of  Malabar  is  the 
most  esteemed;  next,  that  on  the  Coromandel  Coast,  near  the  banks  of  the  Godavery;  then  that 
of  Pegu.  The  largest  quantities  are  produced  in  the  latter  place:  the  rivers  there  enable  the  natives  to 
bring  it  to  the  seaports  from  the  interior  of  the  country  at  a very  cheap  rate ; the  prices  are  therefore 
lower  than  in  any  other  part  of  India. 

In  the  year  1790, 10,000  teak  trees  were  brought  down  Beypour  River.  This  was  the  produce  of  several 
years ; but  it  is  estimated  that  from  2 to  3000  trees  may  be  annually  procured. 

Teak  timber  of  an  ordinary  quality  for  ship-building,  sells  at  9 or  10  rupees  a candy,  which  measures 
10 f English  cubical  feet;  the  foot  therefore  costs  from  Is,  Cd.  to  2s.  Choice  timber  sells  as  high  as  16 
rupees  a candy,  or  Is.  lOd.  a cubical  foot. 

Bombay  is  generally  supplied  with  teak  plank  from  this  part  of  the  coast ; the  Company  usually 
contract  for  what  they  require,  and  the  Resident  at  Cochin  frequently  has  the  contract.  The  following  art 
ilie  prices  at  which  the  Bombay  Government  was  supplied  in  1800. 

1st  sort,  40  to  50  feet  long  14  to  16  inches  8quare«%*^14  to  16  rupees  per  candy;. 

2d  ditto,  35  to  40  ditto,^.^..  12  to  14  ditto*....^-^^10  to  12  ditto. 

3d  ditto,  22  to  35  ditto.,..^^^  12  to  14  ditto 9 to  10  ditto. 

Flank  from  1 to  5 borels  tluck  rupees  per  100  guc. 

The  above  timber  was  of  the  first  quality,  and  the  plank  of  the  usual  length,  and  free  from  renti. 

In  purchasing  plunk,  it  is  better  to  agree  for  it  in  guz  and  borels,  in  preference  to  feet  and  inches, 
from  the  great  diflSculty  of  converting  English  measure  into  candies,  on  account  of  tiie  fractions,  which 
occasion  much  dispute  between  the  measurers.  If  the  dimensions  are  agreed  upon  in  guz  and  borels. 
the  above  timber  will  stand  thus: 

1st  sort  to  19  guz  long,  and  13  to  14  borels  square. 

2d  £tto  14  to  17  ditto  10  to  12  ditto. 

3d  ditto  9 to  14  ditto  10  to  12  ditto. 


PANIANI— CHITWA— CRANGANOUK. 


3:9 

NoiwithsUnding  the  Coast  of  Malabar  may  be  considered  the  storeliousc  for  lloiubny,  yet  the 
demand  for  teak  timber  has  so  much  increased,  that  within  these  three  or  four  years  past,  large  quuu- 
titles  have  been  imported  from  Rangoon,  the  principal  seaport  of  Pegu. 

PANIANI, 

Or  Panyany  River,  is  in  latitude  10=^38'  North,  and  longitude  70^  13  i:ast,  and  navi-ahh*  on]>  hy 
small  craft,  the  water  being  shoal.  The  town  is  scattered  over  a sandy  plain  on  the  south  side  the 
river,  and  contains  about  500  houses  belonging  to  the  trad(n\sj  with  above  40  mos(|U(>s,  and  up^\ard.s  ol' 
1000  huts  inhabited  by  tlic  lower  orders  of  people.  It  is  very  irregularly  built,  but  many  of  Liu*  bouN('> 
are  two  stories  high,  and  appear  to  be  very  comfortable  dwellings;  they  are  huilt  of  sLoiu*,  and  tlialehed 
with  cocoa  nut  leaves.  The  huts  are  inhabited  by  boatmen  and  fishermen,  wlio  wt  re  fornicrly  Miu  uas,  a 
low  cast  of  Hindoos,  but  now  tliey  have  all  embraced  the  fiiitli  of  JMahomet.  All  the  moMpu  s are  tbat<  lied, 
and  their  principal  entrance  is  at  the  cast  end,  where  the  roof  terminates  abruptly  in  faneit'ul  mouldings 
and  carved  work,  that  by  the  natives  are  considered  ornamental.  31ie  Frcntb  and  Fnglish  bad  formerly 
factories,  which  were  removed  about  1070. 

Near  this  place  there  is  a remarkable  gap  in  the  mountains,  called  the  Gliauts,  ilirough  whicli  tlic 
N.  E.  monsoon  blows  in  general  stronger  than  on  any  other  part  of  the  coast. 

IMP(3RTS  AND  EXPORTS. 

About  fifty  years  ago  the  merchants  of  this  place  were  very  ricli,  and  pt)^se^^ed  vessels  that  traded  to 
Surat,  Mocha,  Madras,  and  Bengal ; hut  tlie  oppression  of  Tippoo  reduced  them  t(»  great  povi  rty,  and 
most  of  them  are  now  under  the  necessity  of  acting  as  agents  to  Moiisa,  .a  rieli  Mussulman  merchant  of 
Telliclieriy.  They  have,  however,  many  trading  boats  called  patamars,  whicli  on  an  avei  agc  cony  50,000 
cocoa  nuts,  or  1,000  mudies  of  rice,  equal  to  500  Bengal  bags  of  2 maunds  each : these  frequent  Tellitberry 
and  Calicut  for  supplies  of  such  European  and  Bengal  goods  as  are  in  request  on  this  part  of  the  coast. 

Paniani  is  also  frequented  by  vessels  from  different  places  on  the  coast;  those  from  Bombay  bring-' 
wheat,  fenugreek,  several  kinds  of  pulse,  jaggery,  and  salt,  and  take  in  return  teak  wood  and  cocoa  nuts. 

From  Radjapour,  a town  in  the  Mahratta  country,  vessels  bring  the  same  kinds  of  grain  that  air 
brought  from  Bombay,  and  also  sugar  cane,  jaggery,  and  cutcb,  and  take  away  the  same  returns. 

From  Gheriah  arc  brought  mucli  jaggery  and  ciitcli,  and  coco.a  nuts  are  taken  in  return. 

Mucli  rice  is  exported  from  hence  to  the  northern  parts  of  the  province,  but  there  is  no  trade  carried 
on  with  the  Maldives. 

From  Cochin  are  imported  canoes,  spices,  sugar,  wheat,  mustard  seed,  &c.  The  returns  are  iron 
amelted  in  the  interior,  and  rice,  both  roiigli  and  freed  from  the  liusk. 

From  Anjengo  are  brought  piece-goods  manufactured  there,  cocoa  nuts,  and  coir  cordage. 

CHITWA 

Is  in  latitude  10®  23  North,  and  longitude  7(P20'  East,  about  six  miles  S.  S.E.  from  Paniani.  The 
village  stands  on  the  north  side  of  a river;  it  is  small,  and  a place  of  but  little  trade.  Ships  anchor  off  this 
place  in  six  fathoms  abreast  the  river,  which  Ls  wide,  but  will  only  admit  boats  or  small  vessels.  The 
])utch  had  formerly  a fort  here,  from  wliieli  they  wxre  driven  by  Hyder,  about  1770. 

CHANG  ANORE, 

Or  Aycotta  River,  is  about  three  miles  to  the  soutlnvard  of  Cliitwa;  it  has  a bar  at  its  entrance,  with 
five  or  six  feet  water  on  it,  and  14  or  16  feet  inside.  The  towm  is  about  three  mih’s  from  the  sea.  It  was 
visited  by  the  Portuguese  soon  after  their  arrival  in  India,  who  were  kindly  received.  Bi  return  tlic*y  captured 
a ship  laden  with  spices  bound  from  Calicut  to  Cranganoie,  The  inhabitanU  wtre  preparing  to  revenge 

IT  u 


330 


COCHIN. 


themselves,  when  a Portuguese  fleet,  under  Soarez,  landed  a body  of  men,  and  assisted  by  the  King  of  Cochin^ 
attacked  their  army,  gained  a victory,  pursued  the  fugitives  into  the  town,  and  set  it  on  fire.  This  hap- 
pened in  1.504-.  The  Portuguese  built  a strong  fort  near  the  spot,  and  a new  city  was  erected,  of  wliich 
they  retained  possession  till  1660,  when  the  Dutch,  under  Commodore  Goens,  made  themselves  masters  of  it 
without  meeting  the  least  resistance,  and  yielded  it  to  the  Samorin,  to  whom  it  formerly  belonged;  but  on 
his  breaking  his  word  with  them,  tliey  retook  and  fortified  it. 

Cranganore  was  first  visited  by  the  English  in  1615,  under  Keeling,  who  obtained  liberty  of  trade, 
and  permission  to  settle  a factory;  and  it  was  agreed  by  a treaty  with  the  Samorin,  dated  March  10, 1615, 
that  the  English  and  the  Samorin  should  join  their  forces,  and  expel  the  Portuguese  from  Cochin,  which 
when  conquered,  should  be  ceded  to  the  English;  but  it  does  not  appear  that  any  attempts  were  made  for  the 
purpose.  On  the  Dutch  obtaining  possession  of  Cranganore,  the  English  were  expelled,  and  the  natives 
of  tlie  coast  prohibited  from  trading  with  any  foreign  nation,  without  permissioti  of  the  Dutch. 

This  place  is  remarkable  for  liaving  been  the  residence  of  a republic  of  Jews,  part  of  the  tribe  of  Ma- 
nasseh,  who  had  been  carried  into  captivity  by  Nebuchadnezzar,  who  sent  numbers  of  them  to  this  distant 
place.  Tlieir  history  states  tliat  they  amounted  to  20,000,  and  that  they  were  three  years  in  travelling  to 
this  place,  from  the  time  of  their  setting  out  from  Babylon.  When  they  arrived,  they  were  treated  kindly 
by  the  natives,  and  allowed  every  indulgence.  In  process  of  time  they  increased  in  numbers,  and  grew  so 
wealthy  as  to  purchase  the  little  kingdom  of  Cranganore.  At  present  they  are  few  in  number,  and  very  poor. 

Cranganore,  and  a fort  on  the  opposite  side  of  the  river,  named  Aycotta,  gave  rise  to  the  important 
war  of  the  Mysore.  They  had  been  taken  by  the  Dutch  from  the  Portuguese  about  1660.  Hyder,  seeing 
the  conveniency  of  Cranganore  to  his  kingdom,  in  1780  seized  and  garrisoned  it.  In  the  ensuing  war,  the 
Dutch  repossessed  themselves  of  it.  In  1789  Tippoo  determined  to  make  himself  master  of  it,  and  raised 
a great  army,  which  so  alarmed  the  Dutcli,  that  they  resolved  to  dispose  of  the  two  forts  to  the  Rajah  of 
Travancorc,  an  ally  of  tlie  English,  in  order  to  divert  the  storm  from  themselves.  Tippoo  marelied  with 
his  whole  forces,  and  attacked  the  lines  of  Travancore.  The  battle  between  his  army  and  that  of  the  Rajah, 
the  latter  in  defence  of  Cranganore,  on  May  1,  1790,  was  the  signal  of  the  general  war,  on  which  com- 
menced the  first  campaign  in  June  following.  This  glorious  war  was  concluded  by  the  partition  treaty, 
which  put  us  ill  possession  of  the  whole  coast  for  an  extent  of  120  miles. 

COCHIN 

Is  situated  in  latitude  9®  57'  North,  and  longitude  76®  29'  East,  and  stands  on  the  south  side  of  the 
entrance  of  the  most  considerable  river  on  the  Coast  of  Malabar,  but,  like  the  other  rivers,  has  a bar,  which 
is  navigable  by  ships  drawing  14  or  15  feet  water.  The  channel  is  on  the  northern  shore.  There  is  at  times  a 
surf  on  the  bar ; strangers  ought  therefore  to  be  careful  in  running  for  the  river  in  their  boats,  as  accidents 
have  happened  to  persons  unacquainted,  crossing  the  bar  late  in  the  evening.  The  common  anchorage  is  in 
five  to  six  fathoms,  with  the  flagstaff  bearing  E.  N.  E.  about  three  miles  off  shore. 

Cochin  was  the  capital  of  the  Dutch  possessions  on  the  western  side  of  India,  the  seat  of  government, 
and  to  which  all  other  places  were  subordinate. 

The  present  town  is  small,  being  about  a mile,  or  little  more  in  circuit;  its  size  has  been  reduced  by 
the  Dutch,  in  order  to  make  it  more  defensible  with  a small  garrison,  and  it  is  now  completely  fortified. 
When  the  Dutch  first  took  it  from  the  Portuguese,  it  was  a large  city,  the  remains  of  which  are  now  a 
town,  about  a mile  and  a half  distant  from  Cochin,  called  Mutton  Cherry;  the  intermediate  space 
is  waste  ground,  excepting  a broad  and  deep  ditch,  which  forms  a semicircle,  extending  from  the  river 
to  the  sea,  over  which  is  a drawbridge.  As  the  town  is  close  to  the  sea  on  one  side,  and  the  other  side  is 
on  the  banks  of  the  south  entrance  of  the  river,  it  is  thus  by  art  made  a very  strong  island.  There  is  not 


COCHIN. 


irater  sufficient  fbr  large  ships  to  come  near  enough  on  the  seaside  to  batter  the  walls,  or  even  for  a fr  igate 
to  enter  the  harbour,  as  a bar  is  thrown  up  about  a mile  from  the  shore,  which  makes  it  very  dangerous 
even  for  boats  going  from,  or  coming  to  shore  at  improper  times.  The  entrance  of  the  river  is  narrow  for 
some  little  space  above  the  town,  when  it  widens  by  degrees,  and  becomes  large  and  spacious. 

There  are  in  this  town  one  large  and  two  smaller  squares.  At  the  end  of  the  former,  next  the  sea,  is 
the  Governor’s  house,  and  at  the  other  end  is  the  main  guard-house.  The  (jovcrnor'.s  is  a noble  edifice, 
with  a long  and  spacious  terrace  fronting  the  sea;  and  the  guard-house  is  liki:\vise  a handsome  build- 
ing, with  barracks  for  300  soldiers  on  the  ground  floor,  and  a shaded  walk  in  front,  with  arches,  over 
wliich  are  convenient  lodging-rooms  for  officers.  Hound  the  walls  of  the  squares  an*  planted  trees,  which 
not  only  afford  a cool  walk,  hut  a convenient  place  for  exercising  the  military  in  garrison.  Here  is  a large 
well-built  and  airy  church.  fi 

The  streets  are  all  straight;  the  houses  regularly  and  handsomely  built  of  brick,  and  kept  in  excellent 
order.  The  channels  for  the  water  are  on  each  side  the  street,  narrow  and  ileep;  the  sides  and  bottom  are 
covered  with  red  tiles,  each  about  fourteen  indies  square,  and  thick  in  proportion.  The  whole  town  is 
covered  with  small  gravel;  the  streets  and  squares  are  raised  in  the  middle,  and  slope  gently  to  the 
channels,  so  that  even  in  the  rainy  season  the  streets  are  clean  and  neat. 

The  ramparts,  which  extend  round  the  town,  arc  very  high  and  strong,  and  I)(*sidcs  having  guns 

planted  on  them,  arc  strengthened  by  three  bastions  on  the  land  side.  Here  are  only  two  gates,  one 

about  the  middle  of  that  side  facing  the  river,  (where  there  is  a handsome  wharf  the  whole  Icngtii  of 
tlie  town),  and  the  other  on  the  land-side  facing  the  drawbridge  leading  to  Mutton  Cherry.  In  the 
daytime  the  place  seems  to  be  well  inhabited.  The  natives  who  occupy  shops,  come  in  from  Mutton 
Cheny,  but  must  all  depart  before  sunset,  w^hen  the  gates  are  shut,  and  the  keys  carried  to  the  Go- 
vernor; and  none  but  the  garrison  and  inhabitants  are  suffered  to  remain  within  the  walls,  except 
passengers  by  sea,  who  must  take  their  lodging  at  the  tavern,  the  only  one  in  the  town. 

On  the  north  side  of  the  entrance  of  the  river  is  a spacious  handsome  green  lawn,  of  more  thnn 

ft  mile  in  breadth,  which  readies  along  the  banks  of  the  river,  opposite  to  and  above  the  town;  as 

the  river  is  there  very  narrow,  it  serves  as  the  town  ditch.  This  beautiful  lawn  forms  an  csjihinade, 
which  is  terminated  by  a thick  and  well-grown  wood  of  cocoa  nut  and  other  trees. 

Cochin  was  one  of  the  first  places  visited  by  the  Porliiguese  affer  their  arrival  at  Calicut.  It 
was  at  that  time  governed  by  a Prince  who  had  been  tributary  to  the  Saiiiorin,  and  who  shewed  every 
ftct  of  friendship  to  the  Admiral  Capral,  and  his  companions.  The  Prince  contiiiucil  faitidul  to  his  new 
ftllies,  and  assisted  them  with  a considerable  array  against  the  Samorin.  At  length  lorUinc  deciding  against 
him,  the  Samorin  burnt  his  capital,  and  made  himself  master  of  his  dominions ; but  the  Portuguese  in 
1503  expeUed  him,  and  reinstated  the  reigning  Prince.  The  imiiortant  service  thus  rendered  the 
l^rince,  led  the  way  to  the  foundation  of  their  eastern  empire ; they  solicited  permission  to  erect  a place  of 
strength,  for  the  better  protection  of  the  Portuguese  merchants  and  factors,  which  the  Piince,  grateful  for 
the  favours  he  had  received,  readily  granted.  Accordingly  a fortress  was  expeditiously  erected  on  an 
eminence  which  commanded  the  town  of  Cochin;  a church  and  other  public  buildings  were  also  built, 
officers  were  appointed  to  fill  the  different  civil  and  military  stations,  and  priests  were  chosen  to  perform 
the  public  duties  of  religion;  and  thus  the  first  establishment  of  the  Portuguese  in  India  was  regularly 
formed.  Cochin  became  under  its  new  masters  a place  of  great  commerce  tUl  the  year  IGfiO,  faUd  to 
the  Portuguese  power  in  this  part  of  India.  It  was  attacked  by  the  Dutch  under  Commodore  Goens, 
The  garrison  made  a most  gaUant  defence,  nor  was  it  taken  till  after  great  Joss  on  luith  sides.  Tlie 
Dutch  made  it  the  capital  of  their  settlements  on  the  western  .side  of  India;  hut  it  was  taken  from  them 
hy  the  English  at  the  commencement  of  the  war,  and  continues  in  their  possession. 

Uu« 


332 


COCHIN- 


COINS,  WEIGHTS,  AND  MEASURES. 

CorNS.— Accounts  are  kept  in  rupees  of  16  annas;  these  are  considered  of  equal  value  to  the  Bombay 
rupees.  Accounts  are  also  kept  in  fanarns,  20  of  which  are  reckoned  equal  to  a rupee. 

Most  Indian  and  other  coins  jiass  current  here : Venetian  sequins  for  72  fanarns;  Dutch  ducatoons  SO ; 

Spanish  dollars  40 ; Dutch  rix-dollars  32 ; and  Negapatam  pagodas  64  funams, 

WEiGiiTs.~Gold  and  silver  are  weighed  by  the  sicca  weight:  1 sicca  is  equal  to  31  fanarns ; 72  fanarns 
are  equal  to  8 pagodas,  or  1 dollar  weight ; and  93  fanarns  are  the  weight  of  10  sequins,  or  3 sicca  weight. 

The  great  weights  are  the  maund,  which  is  271bs.  2joz.  avoirdupois,  and  the  candy  of  20  maunds, 
or  54.3  lbs.  8oz.  avoirdupois. 

The  Cochin  candy  is  efjual  to  7 Rcngal  factory  mauiuls,  1 1 seers,  2[l!liittacks. 

IMPORTS  AND  EXPORTS. 


The  principal  part  of  the  commerce  carried  on  at  Cochin,  is  in  the  hands  of  Jew  merchants,  several 
of  whom  are  very  rich.  The  port  is  frequented  by  ships  bound  from  Bengal  to  Bombay  and  other  places- 
to  the  northward,  as  well  as  the  Portuguese  ships  from  China,  bound  to  Goa ; and  a considerable  trade 
is  carried  on  by  the  natives  of  India  and  Arabia.  Here  are  sometimes  50  vessels  from  Surat,  Boml)ay, 
Goa,  Mangalore,  Tcllicherry,  Onore,  Calicut,  and  other  places  of  less  note  on  the  coast,  besides  a 
number  of  Arabs  from  Mocha,  Judda,  and  Muscat.  By  the  vessels  from  Aluscat,  and  places  in  the 
Red  Sea,  are  imported  the  under-mentioned  articles: 


Almonds. 

Aloes. 

Assafa'tida. 


Brimstone. 
Cummin  seed. 
Dates. 


Gum  Arabic- 
Pearls. 

Rose  inaloes. 


Rose  water. 
Sharks'-tius. 
Salt. 


By  vessels  from  Bombay  and  the  different  ports  to  the  northward  are  imported: 


Arrack, 

Cummin  seed. 

Medicines. 

C'loths  of  sort^i. 

Grain. 

Opium. 

Cotton. 

Ghee. 

Quicksilver. 

Castor  oik 

Iron. 

Red  lead. 

toiiper. 

Lead. 

Rice. 

Saffron. 

Shawls. 

Steel. 

TobaccOi 

Wlieut. 


Since  the  capture  of  the  settlement  by  the  English,  considerable  quantities  of  European  articles  for 
the  use  of  the  military  and  inhabitants  are  im[)orted,  such  as  are  enumerated  at  Cananore. 

Prom  China  and  places  to  the  eastward  the  under-mentioned  ailicles  are  imported: 


Alum. 

Cloves. 

Dammer. 

Benjamin. 

China  root. 

Mace. 

Camphire. 

China-ware. 

Nutmegs. 

Cinnamon.* 

, Cinnabar. 

Sugar  candy. 

Silks. 

Sago. 

Teas. 

Tutenague. 


The  principal  articles  of  export  are  the  following,  mostly  produced  on  the  coast: 


Cocoa  nuts. 

Cowries. 

Fish  maws. 

Tamarinds. 

Cassia. 

Corulus  indicus. 

Ginger.  ’ 

Turmeric. 

Cardamums. 

Colombo  root. 

Pepper. 

Teak  wood. 

Coir. 

Elephants’  teeth. 

Sandal  wood. 

Wax. 

AVssels  wliich  do  not  draw  more  than  14  feet  water,  load  and  unload  at  Mutton  Cherry. 


ALIPEE—PORCA—QUILON. 


333 


PROVISIONS  AND  REFRESHMENTS. 


Plenty  of  good  provisions  may  be  Imcl,  particularly  all  kinds  of  poiiltry.  It  is  usual  for  ships  pro- 
ceeding on  their  voyage  to  and  from  Bombay  and  Surat,  to  toueh  at  this  place,  to  take  in  a stock  of 
fresh  provisions,  all  of  which  are  very  reasonable  when  coinpared  with  the  prices  paid  at  tlie  scUleinenls 
belonging  to  the  English  on  this  side  of  India. 

Geese,  large  and  good w (>  Rupees  a pair. 

Turkeys,  common  size  3 ditto. 

Ditto,  if  picked  and  4 ditto. 

Ducks  which  arc  middling  good  3 Rupt'es  per  do.'*:cn 

Fowls  are  in  general  small.  Bullocks  arc  procured  from  Cliitua,  hut  are  small,  at  about  8 rupees 
each.  Good  yams  and  other  vegetables  are  to  be  procured,  with  various  kiiuls  oi  Iriiit. 

ALIPEE 


Is  situated  in  latitude  42'  North,  near  a river,  which  has  a communication  wilh  that  of  Quilon, 
and  runs  neaidy  parallel  wdth  the  coast;  the  banks  are  woody,  aiul  tl»e  lands  well  cultivated,  'FIh*  town 
of  Alipce  is  of  considerable  size,  and  very  populous,  having  many  good  houses;  it  belongs  to  the  U.ij.ih 
of  Travaiicore,  whose  flag  is  generally  kept  flying:  there  are  a few  guns  on  the  beach,  but  no  regular  foili- 
fications.  There  is  a kind  of  a tavern  kept  by  a Portuguese,  but  the  accommodations  are  ilirty  and  had. 

There  are  a number  of  merchants  settled  here,  some  of  whom  act  as  agents  for  the  houses  at  Bombay. 
A few  drugs  are  to  be  procured  hero,  such  as  coeulus  indieus,  curdtunum.s,  zedoary,  cassia,  and  ct)lh*e. 
Elephants’ teeth  are  likewise  to  be  met  with  occasionally;  pepper,  grain,  and  tiiTdjer  form  the  pniu  ipal 
articles  of  trade,  but  the  pepper  is  reserved  for  the  Uajuh  to  supply  the  Company,  and  their  ships 
occasionally  stop  here  to  receive  it  on  bumd.  Small  coasting  vesse  ls  are  sometimes  built  liere. 

rORCA 


Is  situated  in  latitude  9^  30'  North,  and  longitude  76^  34  East,  about  9 leagues  S.  by  E.  from 
Cochin.  It  is  a small  town,  consisting  of  low  houses  covered  with  cadjau  leaves ; there  is  one  house 
with  white  walls  larger  than  the  others,  liy  which  this  place  may  be  distinguislud.  3’Jie  aiieliorage  is  in 
5 or  6 fathoms,  the  white  house  bearing  N.  E.  by  E.  distance  off  shore  1 1 to  2 miles. 

Porca  was  taken  by  the  Portuguese  about  1527,  wlio  erected  a factory  here,  of  wliieli  tliey  reluiiu  d 
possession  till  about  IGGO,  when  they  were  driven  out  by  the  Dutch.  The  English  liki  wisc  bad  a fietoiy 
for  procuring  pepper;  but  were  compelled  to  abandon  it  on  the  Dutch  obtaining  the  ascendency  on  this 

part  of  the  coast. 

There  are  several  villages  on  the  coast  between  Cochin  and  Quilon,  which  are  only  frequented  by  the 
small  coasting  vessels,  for  coir,  timber  for  ship-building,  and  pepper. 


QUILON. 

The  fort  of  Quilon  is  situated  on  a point  of  land,  in  latitude  8°  ol  North,  and  longitude  18 
East,  about  3 miles  to  the  southwawl  of  Iviker  river,  which  is  a wide  inlet  leading  to  scveial  livxrs,  one 
of  them  communicating  with  Alipee  and  Cochin,  navigable  only  by  flat-bottomc<l  boats.  1 ho  Company 
have  warehou.ses  at  Quilon  for  pepper,  and  their  ships  call  here  to  receive  it  on  board. 

The  Portuguese  settled  here  soon  after  their  arrival  on  the  Malabar  Coast.  At  that  penod  the  budd- 
ings were  very  splendid,  and  the  fortifications  numerous,  and  strong.  It  was  taken  from  Uicm  by  the 


334 


ANJENGO. 


Dutcli  in  1662,  who  reduced  it  to  a narrower  compass.  It  was  formerly  a place  of  considerable  trade,  but 
of  late  years  it  has  fallen  to  decay,  and  the  fortifications  arc  now  in  ruins.  There  are  many  bouses  scattered 
about  the  point,  and  to  the  southward,  near  the  pepper  warehouses,  is  a Portu;i;uese  church. 

ANJENGO 

Is  situated  in  latitude  30  North,  and  longitude  77"  East,  about  20  miles  to  the  southward  of 
Quilon.  It  is  tlie  most  southerly  possession  belonging  to  the  Company  on  the  Malabar  Coast.  The  fort 
is  regular,  having  two  bastions  joined  by  a curtain,  all  of  them  mounted  witli  cannon,  as  is  likewise  a 
platform  towards  the  sea.  On  tlie  land  side  it  is  secured  by  a broad  and  deep  river,  which,  after  winding 
round  the  greatest  part  of  tlic  fort,  empties  itself  into  the  sea  a little  to  the  southward.  This  river  would 
l)e  useful,  but  it  has  a bar  navigable  only  for  small  vessels.  The  ('hief,  and  the  Company's  servants  reside 
within  the  fort;  and  as  there  is  no  tavern  or  place  of  accommodation  for  visiters,  the  Chief  generally 
entertains  them  during  their  stay  in  the  roads.  There  are  a few  small  houses  and  huts  in  the  vicinity  of  the 
fort,  but  nothing  that  deserves  the  name  of  a town.  Ships  generally  anchor  with  the  flagstaff  bearing 
E.  N.  Fi.  in  11  or  12  fathoms,  about  2 miles  from  the  shore.  The  principal  intention  of  this  settlement  is 
the  procuring  pepper  produced  in  the  Travancorc  country,  the  Rajah  of  which  is  under  an  engagement 
to  the  Company  to  supply  a certain  quantity  at  a stipulated  price;  but  in  consequence  of  a misunderstanding 
relative  thereto,  a war  commenced  with  the  Rajah  in  1808,  whicli  ended  in  the  English  acquiring  possession 
of  all  the  strong  places  in  his  dominions,  and  settling  a peace  upon  their  own  terms. 

The  English  obtained  permission  to  settle  and  fortify  a factory  at  Anjengo  in  1694,  on  condition  tliat 
they  would  agree  to  purchase  all  the  pepper  produced  in  the  country,  and  pay  2^  per  cent,  on  all  goods 
imported  and  exported,  with  a present  of  75  sequins.  In  1720  the  Chief  and  several  of  the  Company’s 
servants  liaving  given  offence  to  the  Queen,  were  invited  to  her  residence  about  12  miles  from  Anjengo, 
where  they  were  treacherously  cut  off.  The  factory  was  soon  re-established  upon  its  old  footing,  and  since 
that  period,  the  Company  have  remained  in  undisturbed  possession. 


COINS,  WEIGHTS,  an»  MEASURES. 

Coins.— Accounts  are  kept  in  rupees,  fanams,  pice,  and  budgerooks,  thus  divided: 


4 budgerooks 
12  pice 

6 Gallion  fanams 

7 Travancore  ditto%<^^ 


1 pice. 

1 fanam. 
1 rupee. 
1 rupee. 


An  Anjengo  fanam  is  reckoned  in  the  Company’s  account  at  | of  a rupee.  There  arc  two  kinds  of 
fanams,  Gallion  and  Travancore;  the  former  are  the  best  by  16  per  cent. 

Foreign  coins  pass  current  here,  the  mean  rates  of  exchange  being  as  under: 


Negapatam  pagoda  passes  for 
Madras,  or  3 Swamy  pagodas 
Forto  Novo  pagoda 
Venetians 

Mexico  dollars,  full  weight.^ 

Ducatoons  in 

Borribay  or  Surat  rupees 


20  to  21  Gallion  fanams. 
19  to  19x  ditto. 

17  to  18  ditto. 

22  to  22i  ditto. 
12itol3  ditto. 

14|  to  15  ditto. 

6 to  5i  ditto. 


lOOox.  Mexico  dollars  at  12|  fanams  per  dollar  weight,  and  5 j fanams  per  rupee,  produce  Rs.  242  3 65, 
Weights.— The  maund  is  28  lbs.  avoirdupois,  and  20  niaunds  1 candy,  equal  to  560 lbs.  avoirdupois, 
Urbich  is  equal  to  7 factory  maunds,  20  seers  of  Bengal,  or  22  Madras  maunds,  3 vis,  8 pollams. 
Measures.— The  ADjengo  covidis  half  an  English  yard,  or  18  inchcs.r 


CAPE  COMORIN— MALDIVES. 


tm 


COMMERCE. 

Pepper  is  the  staple  commodity,  which  is  generally  purchased  on  account  of  the  Company,  and  shipped 
olT  in  tonics,  or  country  boats,  on  account  of  the  surf'.  There  are  some  coarse  wliitc  plece-goiKls  nianu* 
{oclured  here  for  the  Europe  market.  A few  drugs,  such  as  cassia,  zedoary,  coculus  indicus.  See.  are  to  be 
met  with,  and  coir  in  considerable  quantities.  The  European  articles  imported  arc  very  trifling,  con-- 
sisting  of  a few  necessaries  for  the  Chief  and  his  establishment. 

PROVISIONS  AND  REFRESHMENTS. 

But  few  articles  are  to  be  procured  here.  No  beef,  on  account  of  the  religious  prejudices  of  the 
natives;  a few  fowls,. vegetables,  and  fruit  are  all  that  can  be  reckoned  upon.  Water  is  scarce  and  very 
indifferent;  but  at  the  red  cliffs,  a few  miles  to  the  northward  of  Anjengo,  it  is  said  to  be  good,  but 
difficult  to  be  shipped,  on  account  of  a considerable  surf  which  generally  prevails  on  the  coast,  particularly 
to  the  southward,  which  renders  it  unsafe  to  attempt  landing  in  a ship's  boat.  The  charge  for  filling  water 
by  country  boats,  is  three  rupees  a butt. 


CAPE  COMORIN, 

The  southern  extremity  of  the  Peninsula  of  Hindostan,  b situated  in  latitude  8°  5 N.  and  longitude 
770  44'  East.  Between  Anjengo  and  tUs  Cape  there  arc  several  villages  on  the  coast,  which  are  only  fro-- 
quented  by  small  coasting  vessels. 

MALDIVES. 

These  are  a great  range  or  chain  of  numerous  low  islands  and  rocks,  nearly  on  a meridian  from 
7°  6'  North  to  0°  38'  South  latitude ; the  large  islands  are  inhabited,  and  abound  with  cocoa  nuts, 
but  many  of  the  others  are  only  sandbanks  and  barren  rocks.  The  greatest  breadth  of  the  range  i.s  said 
to  be  30  to  34  leagues,  and  is  formed  of  large  groups  or  clusters,  called  by  the  natives  Attoilons,  and  are 
thirteen  in  number,  the  principal  of  which  is  denominated  Male,  or  King  s Island,  and  is  on  the  east  side 
of  the  south  point  of  the  Male  Attollon.  The  road  seems  unsafe  for  large  .ships,  the  bottom  being  coral,, 
and  the  anchorage  very  near  the  shore,  which  is  lined  with  rocks ; it  is  customary  to  moor  with  tu  o or 
three  anchors  and  hawsers  fast  to  the  shore,  to  prevent  a ve.ssel  from  sheering  about.  The  boats  belonging  to 
the  natives  lie  inside  the  rocks,  the  passages  between  which  are  secured  at  night  by  booms.  The  houses 
are  built  of  wood,  and  covered  with  leaves  of  the  cocoa-nut  tree,  and  are  scattered’ about,  not  together  in  a 
town.  The  King's  house  is  two  stories  high,  and  a handsome  building.  They  Iwve  many  cannon  in 
different  parts  of  the  island,  more  particularly  near  the  King’s  residence,  where  is  their  magazine. 

These  t«land«  were  discovered  by  the  Portuguese  in  1507.  They  soon  after  obtained  leave  to  build  a 
fortified  magazine  at  Male,  which  they  accordingly  did  of  wood  and  earth,  having  no  better  materials; 
but  soon  shewing  a dbposition  to  rule  over  the  natives,  and  to  give  the  law  in  matters  of  commerce,, 
they  were  expelled,  since  which  period  no  European  power  has  endeavoured  to  form  a setUement. 

Formerly  these  islands  were  much  frequented  by  trading  ships  from  India ; but  from  the  ilifficulties 
f— «>rivn«»»»i  in  procuring  a cargo  for  a large  vessel,  and  the  danger  attending  the  navigation,  it  has  lately 
been  given  up,  and  the  trade  is  carried  on  in  their  own  boats,  some  of  them  of  30  tons  burden,  whicli  are 
formed  of  cocoa-nut  trees.  They  arrive  at  Balasorc  in  fleets  of  about  30  or  30,  in  the  months  of  June  or 
July,  when  the  S.  W.  monsoon  is  steady  in  the  bay  of  Bengal.  They  are  Mahometans,  dress  after  the 
of  the  Moors  of  Indio,  ond  appear  to  be  an  industrious  quiet  people. 


0 


33« 


MALDHTii. 


COINS. 

Tlioir  moDPy  is  of  silver  only,  called  larins,  and  the  value  about  a quai’ter  of  a rupee  each.  All  oilier 
monies  pass  current  by  weight,  and  every  man  keeps  weights  for  the  purpose,  so  that  they  are  frequently 
oblige<l  to  cut  dollars,  nipees,  &e.  into  j)ieces  to  pay  for  any  commodity. 


IMPORTS  AND  EXPORTS. 


Broad-clot  !i. 

Coflcc. 

Looking  glasses. 

Beetle  nut. 

Glass-ware. 

Opium. 

Coarse  rut  lory. 

Hard-wiin*. 

Piece  goods. 

China-ware. 

Iron  in  bars. 

Rice. 

In  n’turn  for  the  goods  they  carry  to  Bengal  and  Madras,  they  bring  back  the  following  articles : 

Sugar. 

Silk  stufis. 

Steel. 

Spices. 

The  ])rodnce  of  the  cocoa  nut  tree,  viz.  cocoa  nuts,  coir,  and  cocoa  nut  oil,  with  cowries,  form  the  prin- 
cipal part  of  their  c‘xports  to  Bengal.  ^Po  Acheen  they  send  large  quantities  of  dried  bonito,  in  small 
pieces  of  two  or  three  ounces  weigid,  which,  when  properly  cured,  is  us  hard  as  horn ; it  is  dried  in  the 
sun,  and  is  with  them  a staple  commodity.  Sonic  tortoisc-shcdl  is  to  be  met  with,  which  is  black  and 
smoolh,  liaving  many  curious  figures  in  it.  They  make  some  beautiful  reed  mats  at  these  islands. 

'riie  following  is  the  amount  of  imports  and  exports  from  the  British  settlements  of  Bengal  and 

Port  St.  George,  in  the  year  1805,  and  the  principal  articles  of  wduch  they  consisted. 

^ “t 


ARTICLES  OF  IMPORT. 


Grain 
Piece 

TobaccxK.wv^ 

I^ epper 
Sugar 
Ginger 
Sundries 

Imports  re-ex|)orted 


BciikuI. 

Madras. 

"rolnl 

Sjcca  Rupcfs. 

Sicca  Rupees. 

Sicca  Uupuis. 

3,6n 

4^,81 1 

13,227 

4,081 

17,308 

. 

4,148 

4,148 

770 

770 

3,566 

— .—1. 

3,566 

1,764 

1,764 

2,994 

330 

3,324 

242 

251 

493 

66,993 

13,191 

80,184 

ARTICLES  OF  EXPORT. 


Drugs 

Coir  and  coir  cable 
Gocoa  nuts  and  shells 
Cowries 
Spices  .... 

JajrSTPl-)' 

Emits .. 


Naval  stores 
Provisions 
Sundries 
Treasure 
“TotaK 


Sicca  Rupeesj 


Beiij^al 

Madras. 

Total. 

Sirca  Riii>t*es. 

Sicca  lliipers. 

Sicca  Rupees. 

- ^ 

2,864 

2,864 

4 1,626 

■ ■»— 

41,626 

20,293 

1,546 

21,839 

5,864 

2,840 

8,694 

7,959 

" 

7,959 

- - 

2,947 

2,947 



1,900 

1,9(X) 

— 

1,144 

1,144 

-- 

1,537 

1,637 

4,473 

996 

5,469 

- — 

2,317 

2,317 

~H3,205 

“ 18,091 

101,296 

CHAPTER  XVH. 


Ceylon. 


lit  Extent— Aripo—CotiJatchy-.Calpenktn-.Ncg„mbo—C, Jumbo;  DetcnptioH—Coim,  \V,ight.,,  ami  Mea- 
tnrca — Imports  and  Exports — Commerce  with  the  British  Settlemcnls  in  India— Import  and  Export 
Duties  and  Regulations— Regulations  in  the  Master  Attendant's  Department— Port  Charges— Proemons  and 
Refreshments— Point  de  Galle;  Description— Matura—Dondra  Ilead—l'engallc—Baticaloe—Trineomalee; 
Description— Jaffnapatam— Articles  proeurabk  at  Ceylon— Calamimbr  IVood— Ceylon  SUmcs—Chank 
ShclU--^Cinnaimi\r^Oil  of  Cinnamon — Pearls. 


CEYLON. 

This  island  is  separated  from  the  Peninsula  of  India  by  the  Gulf  of  Manar,  formed  between  it  and 
the  Tinnevelly  Coast;  the  gulf  is  bounded  to  the  N.  E.  by  a narrow  ridge  of  sand  and  roeks,  mostly  dry, 
which  is  called  Adam's  Bridge.  It  extends  nearly  east  and  west  8 or  10  leagues;  the  east  end  joining  to 
tlie  Island  Mauar,  which  lies  close  to  Ceylon,  in  latitude  about  9^  North,  and  the  west  end  to  the  Island 
of  Ramisseram,  which  is  situated  close  to  the  continent.  There  is  a narrow  passage  liir  small  count ly  ti  ad- 
ing  boats,  drawing  about  three  feet  water,  between  the  island  and  tlie  main. 

The  general  direction  of  the  island  is  north  and  south.  Its  length  from  Dondra  Head  tt)  Point  Pedro 
is  about  250  miles,  and  its  greatest  breadth  about  150,  in  shape  much  resembling  a pear.  TImj  territories 
belonging  to  Great  Britain  form  a belt  round  the  island,  extending  in  some  j)Iaces  not  more  than  six  miles, 
in  some  thirty,  and  on  the  northern  side  near  sixty  miles  into  the  interior.  The  inland  |)r(»viiices  cut 
off  from  all  communication  with  the  sea,  and  occupying  the  greater  |>art  of  the  island,  arc  still  sulyect  to 
the  King  of  Candy,  whose  capital  is  situated  nearly  in  the  centre  of  his  dominions. 

The  first  Europeans  who  made  any  settlement  on  this  island,  were  the  Portuguese,  ^\ho  landed  Iiera 
in  1505;  but  it  was  twelve  years  after  that  period  when  they  began  to  settle  factories  in  consequence  of  the 
opposition  they  experienced  from  the  Aiabs,  who  apprehended  tlie  loss  of  tlieii'  trade  in  cinnamon,  with 
which  they  had  hitherto  supplied  all  Europe,  'flie  Portuguese  were  kindly  received,  and  formed  a treaty 
with  the  King  of  Candy,  who  agreed  to  pay  annually  250,000  lbs.  of  cinnamon,  on  condition  tiuit  the  fleet! 
of  Portugal  should  defend  his  coasts  from  invasion.  They  soon  after  obtained  permission  (o  Iiuild  u fort 
at  Columbo.  In  1023  the  King  of  Candy  made  w^ar  against  them;  but  being  defeated,  was  obliged  to 
accept  of  a peace,  on  condition  of  paying  the  Portuguese  two  elephants  a ycai-  by  way  of  tribute. 

The  Dutch  first  landed  here  in  1602.  In  1038,  in  consequence  of  tlie  cruelties  and  insolence  of  the 
Portuguese,  the  King  of  Candy  sent  an  embassy  to  Batavia,  to  request  the  assistance  of  the  Dutdi  against 

K X 


S38 


ARirO— CONDATCIIY—CALPENTEEN. 


them.  An  alliance  was  formed,  and  the  Dutch  sent  an  army  and  fleet  for  that  service;  and  by  open  wars  and 
secret  contrivances,  they  in  the  course  of  about  fifty  years  expelled  the  Portuguese  from  tlie  island,  of 
wliich  they  retained  possession  till  179C,  when  the  ports  belonging  to  them  were  taken  by  tlie  English 
forces,  who  continue  masters  of  the  sea  coasts  of  the  island. 

The  principal  ports  and  trading  places  are  Aripo,  Calpenteen,  Negombo,  Columbo,  Matura,  Point 
de  Galle,  Batticaloe,  Trincoinalee,  and  Jafihapatam.  Of  these,  Columbo,  Point  de  Galle,  and  Trincomalee 
are  the  only  ones  frequented  by  large  ships. 

ARIPO 

Is  about  four  leagues  to  the  southward  of  the  east  end  of  Manar,  and  about  two  miles  north  of  the 
•cene  of  the  pearl  fishery,  in  latitude  about  8"^  47  North,  and  longitude  79^  40'  East.  Here  is  a small 
fort  of  two  bastions,  containing  one  building  of  two  stories,  end  some  lower  houses*  The  works  are  but 
slightly  constructed,  and  the  post  seems  never  to  have  possessed  either  strength  or  consequence.  Being 
intended  only  as  the  residence  of  an  occasional  guard,  and  situate  on  a barren  shore,  it  answers  all  the 
purposes  which  are  required.  About  500  yards  to  the  north  of  the  fort,  lies  a small  village  chiefly  inha- 
bited by  fishermen,  and  adorned  with  a neat  Portuguese  chapel  rising  from  its  centre.  The  beach  is  steep, 
And  the  large  donies  lie  so  close  to  the  shore,  that  a person  might  step  into  them;  at  the  same  time  they 
ride  in  perfect  security.  The  gulf  being  narrow,  no  surf*  is  perceptible.  A house  has  been  buflt  here  for 
the  Governor,  which  is  the  most  beautiful  building  on  the  island;  but  it  is  only  inhabited  during  the  period 
of  the  fishery,  which  is  carried  on  at 

CONDATCHY, 

About  three  miles  distant  from  Aripo,  where  in  general  nothing  is  to  be  seen  l)ut  a few  miserable  huts, 
and  a sandy  desert;  but  during  the  period  of  the  pearl  fishery,  it  branches  out  into  a populous  town,  seve- 
ral streets  of  which  extend  upwards  of  a mile  in  lengtli.  The  scene  altogether  resembles  a crowded  fair  on 
the  grandest  scale.  The  Bay  of  Condatchy  is  the  principal  rendezvous  for  the  boats  employed  in  the 
fishery.  The  banks  wlicrc  the  fishery  is  carried  on,  extend  several  miles  along  the  coast  from  Manar 
southward,  off  Aripo  and  Condatchy.  The  principal  bank  Is  opjmsite  to  the  latter  place,  about  twenty 
miles  from  the  shore,  and  is  10  miles  in  length  and  2 in  breadth. 

Tl)e  vessels  employed  in  the  fishery  do  not  belong  to  Ceylon,  but  come  from  different  ports  of  the 
continent,  particularly  Tuticorin,  Karical,  and  Negapatam  on  the  Coromandel  Coast,  and  Quilon  on 
tlie  Malabar  Coast.  The  fishing  season  commences  in  February,  and  ends  about  the  beginning  of  April. 

CALPENTEEN. 

Tlic  Fort  of  Calpenteen  is  situate  upon  the  north  end  of  a peninsula,  or  neck  of  land,  which  extends 
about  sixty  miles  along  the  coast,  and  during  the  N.  E.  monsoon  becomes  an  island.  The  fort  is  about 
.*100  feet  square,  and  has  four  bastions,  one  at  each  angle.  At  present  no  guns  are  mounted.  Within 
tlie  fort  is  a square  of  houses,  wliich  are  chiefly  occupied  as  barracks.  The  house  of  the  commandant  is 
about  400  yards  from  the  fori ; neai'  it  stand  several  other  excellent  houses  fronting  the  sea.  A large  native 
village  and  nriany  detached  cottages  are  interspersed  amongst  the  trees.  Here  are  an  excellent  wharf  and 
landing  place. 

A small  trade  is  carried  on  by  the  natives  in  exporting  salt  fish,  and  dried  fish  roes  to  Columbo,  and 
bringing  back  rice  in  return;  and  muck  wood  is  sent  from  this  part  to  the  Coast  of  Coromandel.  At 
this  place  are  raised  excellent  mangoes  and  pomegranates,  and  wild  honey  may  be  purchased  of  a very 
superior  quality.  It  is  in  a liquid  state,  of  the  consistenci^  of  oil,  and  preseiTed  in  pots  or  bottles^  with 
a few  grains  of  rice  in  the  husk  floating  on  the  top. 


KEGOMBO— C0LUMn6. 


.tiff 


NEGOMBO 

Is  situated  near  a small  rircr,  in  latitude  about  17'>  15'  Nortli,  and  is  about  (i  loaum  ^ liom  (^iluuibo 
The  anchorage  is  abreast  the  fort  in  5 or  6 fathoms.  'I'lic  fort  is  an  irregular  pentagon,  li.n  iug  foui'  bastions, 
on  each  of  which  is  erected  a round  turret.  Four  of  the  sides  arc  ccpial,  but  the  lirtli  is  t onsidoniblv 
smaller  than  the  rest.  The  greater  part  of  the  works  are  constructed  of  sand  and  tin  t’;  but  the  g.iti’w.iy, 
a front  of  wall  on  each  side  of  it,  and  a belfry,  are  built  of  stone  and  line  mortar.  The  area  within  i> 
occupied  by  ranges  of  low  barracks  formed  of  brick,  and  roofed  with  tiles.  TIu!  mansion  of  the  eomnuiiul- 
ant  stands  opposite  to  the  fort,  in  a cool  and  pleasant  situation,  between  tlie  sea  and  the  river.  'I'lie  village 
is  beautiful,  the  houses  arc  dean  and  neatly  built,  separated  from  each  other  by  rows  of  trees  connected 
together  by  lofty  hedges.  A consi<lerable  number  of  Dutch  iiimilies  have  fixed  their  residence  at  this  phu’c, 
many  of  whom  are  reduced  to  great  poverty.  The  parish  church  of  Negombo,  built  by  the  Dutch 
Government,  stands  within  the  village,  but  is  unroofed  and  in  ruins. 

In  the  neighbourhood  of  Negombo  the  cinnamon  plantations  commence,  and  spread  over  a wide 
.space  of  the  country,  and  with  only  a few  interruptions,  stretch  far  beyond  Columbo. 

Fish  is  caught  here  in  great  abundance  and  variety,  and  large  <juantitics  are  e.xpi)rted  in  a dried  state 

COLUMBO. 

Or  Colombo,  the  seat  of  governmgnt,  and  the  capital  of  the  British  possessions  on  the  island,  is  in 
latitude  6®  57'  North,  and  longitude  80°  East.  The  anchorage  for  large  shijis  is  about  2 miles  from  the 
town,  the  flagstaff  bearing  south,  but  small  vessels  run  nearer  in.  There  being  no  shelter,  this  roail  is  much 
exposed  in  the  S.  W.  monsoon ; it  is  therefore  unsafe  for  ships  to  remain  during  that  period. 

The  fort  is  composed  of  seven  bastions  of  different  sizes,  connected  by  intervening  curtains,  and  de- 
fended by  300  pieces  of  heavy  cannon.  It  measures  a mile  and  a cpiartcr  in  circumference,  and  occupies  a 
situation  almost  entirely  insulated : the  sea  encompassing  two-thirds  of  the  works,  and  the  other  third 
being  bounded  by  an  extensive  lake  of  fresh  w’ater.  A communication  is  opened  with  the  country  on  two 
sides  by  narrow  necks  of  land  or  causeways,  running  betwixt  the  sen  and  the  lake,  by  (he  cutting  of  which, 
the  fortress  would  be  converted  into  an  island.  From  the  nature  of  its  position,  and  there  being  no  rising 
ground  which  commands  it,  Columbo  is  a place  of  considerable  strength ; and  if  well  garrisoned,  capable  of 
making  a vigorous  resistance ; it  however  surrendered  by  capitulation  to  the  British  forces. 

Four  of  the  bastions  look  towards  the  sea ; the  three  others  face  the  lake,  and  command  the  cause- 
ways leading  into  the  fort,  the  situation  of  which  is  cool,  pleasant,  and  heultliy;  and  in  these  respects  it 
forms  a more  comfortable  residence  for  a garrison  than  any  other  military  station  in  India. 

A projecting  rock,  on  which  two  batteries  are  erected,  affords  shelter  to  a small  semicircular  bay  on 
Uie  north  side  of  the  fort.  Here  the  landing  place  is  rendered  pleasant  and  convenient  by  a wooden  ijuay, 
extending  about  100  feet  into  the  sea,  and  answering  well  for  the  loading  and  unloading  boats.  The 
deptlj  of  water  is  not  sufficient  to  allow  sloops  or  large  donies  to  lie  alongside  of  the  (piay;  those  not 
exceeding  100  tons  burden,  ride  at  anchor  at  the  distance  of  only  a cable’.s  length  from  it,  and  .smaller 
vessels  moor  close  along  the  shore.  Large  ships  seldom  come  within  this  road  ; and  when  they  do,  they 
keep  at  a greater  distance.  A bar  of  sand,  on  some  parts  of  which  the  water  is  not  ten  feet  deep,  extends 
from  the  projecting  rock  across  the  bay.  As  the  channel,  in  which  it  can  be  crossed,  is  liable  to  shift, 
and  not  easily  dbcovered,  ships  commonly  anchor  about  a mile  beyond  it,  and  only  in  the  fine  weather  ot 
the  safe  season  venture  to  go  witliin  the  bar.  The  outer  road  affords  secure  anchorage  tor  no  more  than 
<ix  months  in  the  year,  from  the  beginning  of  October  to  the  end  of  March,  when  the  wind  blowt 

Xx8 


340 


COLUMBO. 


from  the  N.  E.  off  the  land.  During  the  other  six  months,  the  S.  W.  wind  blows  from  the  sea  upon 
the  shore,  and  in  that  season  a ship  seldom  looks  into  the  road.  Strictly  speaking,  there  is  no  harbour 
at  Columbo;  for  the  little  bay,  which  affords  shelter  to  small  craft,  does  not  deserve  that  name. 

Near  to  the  wharf  stand  the  Master  Attendant’s  or  Harbour  Master’s  office,  and  the  sea  custom-house. 
From  thence  an  arched  passage  leads  to  another  gateway  opening  into  a square  green,  railed  in  for  the  gar- 
rison parade  in  the  north  corner  of  the  fort.  On  the  left  hand  is  the  Town  Major’s  office;  on  the  right  is 
seen  the  principal  street  running  from  north  to  south,  the  hjngth  of  the  town,  and  terminated  by  a lofty 
gateway  and  belfry.  On  one  side  of  the  parade  ground  stands  the  church,  of  a heavy  appearance;  on  the 
other  a houye  built  for  the  supreme  court  of  judicature,  ornamented  with  a light  cupola,  and  situated  in  the 
centre  of  a row  of  public  offices. 

The  internal  appearance  of  the  fort  is  extremely  beautiful,  the  streets  being  broad,  straight,  regularly 
planned,  intersecting  one  another  at  right  angles,  and  shaded  on  each  side  by  double  rows  of  trees.  The 
houses  are  neatly  built,  fronted  with  verandas  on  pavements  raised  several  feet  from  the  ground,  before 
which  are  plots  of  grass  and  flowers.  They  arc  built  of  stone,  and  in  general  have  only  one  floor. 
There  arc  a few,  however,  of  two  stories,  which  are  much  esteemed,  and  command  charming  prospects. 

The  Govcnimcnt  house,  which  fronts  the  seu  on  the  north  side  of  the  fnrt.  Is  u haiulsuinc  building  of 
two  stories,  with  two  wings  on  one  floor,  attached  to  which  are  the  offices  of  Government.  The  hospital 
is  a commodious  building  and  well  aired,  and  the  barracks  are  comfortable;  but  the  prisons  do  not  merit  so 
favourable  a description.  The  powder  magazine  is  a huge  and  awkward  structure,  lying  close  to  the^ 
cliurcli,  exposed  towards  the  sea,  and  but  ill  adapted  to  the  purpose  for  which  it  was  intended. 

Three  gates  open  from  the  fort  towards  the  sea.  Three  others  communicate  with  the  land : the  delfl, 
or  main  gate,  which  leads  to  tlie  pettah;  the  south  gate,  which  opens  on  the  road  leading  to  Point  de  Galle; 
and  a winding  sally|}ort,  wliicli  communicates  by  causeways  and  bridges  with  a rugged  peninsula,  commonly 
called  Slave  Island.  Here  is  a mud  village,  a bazar,  and  an  excellent  parade. 

The  pettah,  or  outer  town,  is  situated  a few  hundred  yards  to  the  eastward  of  the  fort.  The  town  is 
neat,  clean,  regular,  and  larger  than  that  within  the  fort.  Five  streets,  each  half  a mile  in  length,  run 
parallel  to  one  another,  and  the  same  number  intersect  them  at  right  angles.  The  pettah  is  of  a square 
form,  and  was  formerly  defended  on  the  land  side  by  a wall.  The  north  side  is  bounded  by  the  sea,  the 
south  by  the  lake,  and  the  west  by  fJie  eastern  esplanade.  On  this  side,  within  the  limits  of  the  pettah, 
stands  the  burial  ground  of  the  settlement. 

Beyond  the  pettah  many  straggling  streets  extend  in  various  directions  several  miles  into  the  country. 
The  fort  is  chiefly  occupied  by  the  English  inhabitants;  the  pettah  by  Dutch  and  Portuguese;  and  the 
suburbs,  wliich  are  by  far  tlie  most  populou.s,  by  native  Cing^ese.  Including  all  these,  Columbo  con- 
tains upwards  of  50,000  inhabitants. 

The  Portuguese  built  a fort  here  soon  after  their  arrival,  of  which  they  retained  possession  till  1655, 
when  it  was  attacked  by  the  Dutch,  and  partly  by  force,  and  partly  by  famine,  reduced,  so  that  on  May  10th 
it  was  surrendered.  The  Dutch  retained  it  till  1796,  when  it  capitulated  to  the  British  forces  on 
February  15th. 

For  some  years  after  its  capture,  Ceylon  was  under  the  controul  of  the  East  India  Company ; but  from 
the  beginning  of  1802,  it  became  entirely  a royal  Goveniment,  and  was  placed  under  the  immediate  direc* 
lion  of  his  Majesty’s  Ministers,  who  now  regulate  the  affairs  of  its  settlements.  The  Council  is  composed 
of  the  Governor,  the  Chief  Justice,  the  Commander  of  the  Forces,  who  is  also  Lieutenant  Governor,  and 
the  Secretary  to  Government.  In  1802,  a supreme  court  of  judicature  was  established,  consisting  of  a 
Chief  Justice  and  a Puisne  Judge;  annexed  to  it  are  bis  Majesty’s  Advocate,  Fiscal,  Registrar,  Sheriff, 
and  other  officers.  The  Chief  Justice  takes  precedence  of  all  his  Majesty’s  subjects  on  the  island,,  excepting 
the  Governor ; the  Commander  of  the  Forcesjanks  next,  nnd  after  him  the  Puisne  Justice. 


COLUMBO. 


.‘ill 


The  following  is  an  account  of  the  revenues  and  disbursements  of  Ceylon  during  the  period  It  n as 
tinder  the  controul  of  the  East  India  Company. 

PagoHd'!  Pngod.tc 

Nov.  1795  to  April  179(5  revenues  (5,98,33^  •.disbursements  7,07,l»lt> 

May  1796  1797  62,61.1 6,«2,2I.> 

1797  1798  6, 06, 622 

1798  1799  7, 38, .177  5,ti.l,04sl 

1799  1800 ^....9,83,9.38  8,2(i,H{M; 

1800  1801  7,30,000 

1801  to  Dec.  1801 ^.,.....5,45,687 6,21, .'>70 

Total  ^..,..,»..».»^Pagodas  50,6.5,.')69  .....^............ragodus  47,37,867 


The  receipts  include  the  revenues  of  the  island,  and  the  remittances  from  tlie  (>overnmcnts  in  India, 
or  disbursements  made  there  on  account  of  Ceylon.  'I'he  dishiirseiuents  contain  thegeneial  cluirges  of  tiu; 
island ; but  it  is  apprehended  that  only  the  extra  allowances  to  the  troops  are  inserted,  and  that  thc> 

regular  pay  is  Included  in  the  accounts  of  Madras,  &c. 

Since  the  island  has  been  in  the  hands  of  Government,  the  disbursements  are  stated  to  aniounf  to 
/‘330,000,  and  the  revenues  to  about  i^230,000  per  annum.  In  this  statement  of  the  revenue,  flie  produce 
of  every  source  is  included,  allowing  ^40,000  as  tlie  average  gain  by  the  fisheries,  and  the  .C60,(XK)  the 
East  India  Company  pay  yearly  for  cinnamon ; the  rest  of  the  revenue  is  derived  Irom  rents  ol  land,  mar- 
kets, and  fisheries,  taxes  of  various  kinds,  and  duties  on  impoi  ts  and  exports. 


COINS,  WEIGHTS,  and  MEASURES. 

("oiss. Accounts  are  kept  in  pice,  fanams,and  rix-dollars  or  elephant  rupees,  thus  divided; 


4 picc  1 ^ 1 fanam. 

12  fanams I make  4 1 rix-dollar  or  rufiee. 

63  ditto.... .«.)  ( 1 star  pagoda. 


Tlie  star  pagoda  varies  from  59  to  61{  fanams  in  bills  of  exchange  drawn  on  Madras.  The  civil 
servants  and  military  officers  receive  two-thirds  of  then-  pay  in  bills  at  15  fanams  to  a star  pagoda,  or  3i 
rupees  • these  are  called  accommodation  bills.  This  has  recently  undergone  some  alteration. 

The  Sicca  rupee  passes  for  18  fanams  either  in  specie  or  bills.  The  Bombay  rup.  e p«.s,scs  current  for 
17  fanams  in  exchange  for  bills,  and  for  18  in  the  bazar.  The  Spanish  dollar  varies  from  37  to  39  lanams, 
according  to  the  demand.  350  Arcot  rupees  are  400  Ceylon  rupees,  or  rix-«lollars,  or  100  star  pagodas. 

Weights  and  Measures.— English  weights  are  in  common  use,  in  receiving  and  deliver...^  foreign 
goods ; but  for  the  produce  of  the  island,  the  parah,  a iiiea.sure  1 6.  inches  long,  10.  u wide,  and  oA  deej), 
is  used,  its  weight  varying  according  to  the  ai  ticles. 


Parah  of  salt  weighs 
Ditto  of  coffee-. 


44  lbs. 
30 


Parah  of  pepper  weighs  301bs. 

Ditto  of  chunara 


The  ammonam  contains  16  parahs  to  the  northward  among  the  Malabars,  and  21  ammonums  to  the 
acre;  but  to  the  southward  among  the  Hindoos,  8 parahs  make  1 unimon^. 

The  Dutch  Bahar,  or  candy,  is  480  Dutch  lbs.  or  520  lbs.  avoirdupois. 

The  long  measure  is  the  covid,  equal  to  18  English  inches. 


COLUMBO. 


IMPORTS  AND  EXPORTS. 


The  demand  for  European  commodities  is  supplied  by  one  or  two  of  the  Honourable  Company’s  slups 
which  are  annually  destined  to  Ceylon  from  England,  and  by  the  merchants  and  shopkeepers  at  Madras, 
several  of  whom  have  agents  resident  at  Columbo.  The  following  are  the  articles  usually  imported : 


Ale  in  casks  & bottles 

Cordage. 

Musical  instruments 

Provisions,  salt. 

Blacking  & ])rushcs. 

Gin,  Hollands. 

Mathematical  ditto. 

Rum  shrub. 

Books  & pamphlets.  1 

Garden  seeds.  ! 

Millinery. 

Saddlery. 

Brandy. 

Guns  and  pistols. 

Nails. 

Ship  chandlery. 

Cabinet  ware. 

Gunpowder. 

Oil. 

Shut. 

(Iieesc. 

Glass  ware. 

Pipes,  tobacco. 

Shooting  tackle. 

Chintz  and  muslins. 

Gold  and  silver  lace. 

Painters’  colours. 

Spars, 

Canvas. 

Hams. 

Pickles.  • 

Steel. 

Cards. 

Hats. 

Pictures. 

Stationery, 

Claret. 

Hosiery. 

Perfumery. 

Tin  ware. 

Cojipcr. 

Jewellery. 

Plate. 

Tobacco. 

Corks. 

Iron. 

Plated  ware. 

Toys. 

Cutlery. 

Ironmongery. 

Porter 

Watches. 

Confectionary. 

Lead,  of  sorts. 

Port  wine. 

Woollens  of  sorts. 

The  annual  amount  of  the  above  articles  imported  into  Ceylon,  does  not  exceed  «P20,000 ; and  as  tlie 
island  produces  few  articles  of  commerce,  exclusive  of  cinnamon,  the  great  staple  of  the  island,  and  which 
is  reserved  for  the  East  India  Company,  individuals  are  obliged  to  make  considerable  sacrifices  to  obtain 
bills  on  Madras  or  Bengal,  in  payment  for  the  European  commodities  they  dispose  of  here. 


Prom  the  various  parts  of  India  arc  imported  the  under-mentioned  articles,  viz. 


Canvas. 

Piece-goods. 

Sugar. 

Grain. 

Raw  silk. 

Salt  provisions. 

The  few  articles  produced  on  the  island  exclusive  of  cinnamon,  are 

Arrack. 

Cocoa-nuts. 

Elephants. 

Beetle-nut  and  leaf. 

Ceylon  stones. 

rc])per. 

Coffee. 

Coir. 

Rice. 

Spices. 

Tea. 


Turmeric. 

Tobacco. 

Timber. 


The  whole  trade  of  the  island  is  but  trifling.  It  appears  that  In  1802  the  amount  of  duties  on  imports 
and  exports  was  only  -£49,160,  of  which  12,268  was  paid  on  beetle  nut  only. 

In  the  seven  years  previous  to  the  commencement  of  the  troubles  on  the  continent  of  Europe,  1785 
to  1791  inclusive,  the  Dutch  exported  from  Ceylon  to  Holland  on  an  average  the  under-mentioned 
articles,  viz. 


Black  pepper  623,452 

C>i  nnanion  «%%%%%%%%%%  329,473 


Coffee 
biigor 
( 'atchup 
A Iocs 


76,14.3 

69,303 

2,764 

3,985 


61 0,1 96 

1 lecc-goods  55,069 

Woods;.. lbs.  57,730 

Car(lamiims...^,^...w.^...^......lb*.  4,809 

Coivnes  168,778 

Cotton  yam  26 


The  sale  amount  of  the  cinnamon  during  the  above  period,  was  ^199,169  per  annum. 


COLUMTIO. 


313 


COMMER(  E Wiril  THE  BRITISH  SETTLEMENTS. 

The  followln"  is  a sSlatciiKMit  of  tlio  nicrcliandise  and  Ircasiiiv  imported  into  the  Island  of  Ceylon 
from  the  British  settlements,  in  tlie  years  1802  to  180t>  inelnsive;  likewise  of  the  inerehnndise  and  treasure 
e\j)oitt‘d  from  the  Island  of  Ceylon  to  the  British  settlements  during  the  same  j)eriod,  together  with  a list 
ul  the  articles  ol  which  the  imports  and  exports  consisted  in  1S0.5. 


IMPORTS  INTO  Cr.YLON.  TAPORTS  I ROM  rr\ I.ON. 


Years. 

MiTchandi.e 

TreasLijc. 

Total.  1 

1 

1 Yt'ars. 

Men  haiulnr 

TitMsme. 

Toi.il. 

Siica  Rtijioes. 

SiC(  a R 11  pits. 

Suca  R\iprt*s 

Sn'ia  Ru[ii’t.‘-'. 

Sicf.i  Rin>(>os. 

Sni.l  Rll|K*r^. 

1802 

4.,70.7?1 

09,120 

5, .30,897 

IH02 

7,92,100 

7,470 

7,99.012 

1803 

7,;10/^09 

1,45,974 

8,70,183 

1803 

8,37,805 

2, .584 

8,10,1 19 

1801 

12,27,1.73 

00,299 

12,93,7  72 

1804 

7,18,5:10 

9.772 

7,2S,:{()2 

18(.)5 

1.3,10,192 

13,000 

13,29,192 

180,5  ! 

7,55,()2() 

1,50.117 

9,11,77:1 

1800 

11,88,190 

55,000 

15,4:1,190  1 

i ISOO 

9, 15,0(); 

17,918 

9,0.^9S5 

Total.'l 

"■52.32,841 

3,'k),399  1 

55,73,2-M>  i| 

1 'fotaf. 

“To,  19,2^1^ 

L93,S97 

“12,1.1,151 

Articles  of  Import  in  1805. 


Sicca  Rupees 


•*  •v*  •%%  % % % 


Piece-goods^^^, 

1 epper 

Ra  w silk  •%  % %%'«'%'*«'%  % % 

( I ram 
(.’otton 
Metals 
(ilass  ware 
llor 

Sugar 

Tjong  pepper'v%v%'%'%'v»'»'%^^»^»%'w^v»-%%%v%^%»%%%%% 

Salt  provisions 
Qanvas  and  gunnies 
(t  inger 
W ax  candles 
Boots  and  shoes 
Sundries 


Liqii 


Imports  reexported,  viz. 


quors 

Broad  cloth 
Grain 
Provisions 
Piece-goods 
Glass 
China  ware 
Oilinan‘’s  stores 

Metals 
Sundries 
Treasure 


3,41,709 

1,.VW) 

3,852 

5,70,07(3 

2,830 

2,500 

2,137 

12,508 

4,335 

10,790 

5,131 

13,(i02 

2,448 

2,419 

3,1(30 

4,054 

82,349 


1,47,054 

1,188 

29,917 

8,247 

5,310 

4,512 

4,810 

3,113 

3,013 

20,004 

22,278 

13,000 


Imports  in  1805. 


>%%vw»v»v»v»i 


Sicca  Rupees  13,29,192 


Artivh's  if  I^\ port  in  1805. 

Coir  and  coir  cahle^*%^^....%^v%Sieea  Uupec  s 51,101 

rej)per 10,100 

1 1 .21 5 

Coffee 8,128 

Arrack  2,58,  HO 

Beetle  nut  l,l.j,7  70 

Spice  32,057 

t*nnmes  .>«%«.%%.%. ti,  t<vt^ 

Palmyras  0,  V72 

'PimlKT 41, -too 

1 ohaeco  '.-v.. %%.%■«%./.%%. 1.1,3(37 
Niaval  stoi  cs 27,88(j 

Sugar  .... — J0,(>J)5 

JOJephants J ()j)m 

Drugs  1,037 

Sundries  1,08, 109 

Treasurcv^.^  %%%%%%  v%%  % 1^50,1 


Exports  in  1805 


Sicca  Rupees  9,11,773 


COLUMBO. 


3U 

Value  of  mercliandise  imported  into  the  Island  of  Ceylon  from  the  British  settlements,  in 

five  years,  1802  to  180(i  inelusive»»»*vw»vw.»»»««,.»»»w^^.  % •■'V % ■%  Sicca  lUipccs  52,32,841 

Ditto  exported  from  ditto  to  ditto  40,49,254 


Imports  exceed  the  exports  11,83,587 

Treasure  imported  from  the  I^ritish  settlements  during  the  same  period%%Sicca  Hupees  3,40,399 
llitto  exported  to  1,93,897 

1,46,502 


Balance  against  the  Island  of  Ceylon 


being  in  the  under-mentioned  proportions  to  the  different  settlements: 


In  favour  of  BcngaL 
In  favour  of  Madras  and  its  dependencies  . 
Against  Bombay  and  Surat . 


Sicca  Rupees  10,77,821 
2,24,101 
2,64,837 


REGULATIONS  OP  GOVERNMENT,  DATED  1810, 

For  consolidating  and  simplifying  the  Import  and  Export  Duties^  levied  in  the  island  of  Ceylon, 

IMPORT  AND  EXPORT  DUTIES. 


Whereas  it  is  expedient  that  the  duties  and  customs  should  be  levied  on  one  uniform  and  systematic- 
plan  at  the  various  ports  of  this  island,,  and  that  the  said  duties  and  customs  should  be  defined  in  a more 
accurate  manner  than  they  are  at  present : 

The  Governor  in  Council,  with  a view  to  establish  a general  uniformity  and  regularity  in  levying  the 
duties,  and  in  order,  os  far  as  may  be,  to  consolidate  and  simplify  the  same,  is  pleased  to  declare  and  enact 

I.  That  all  former  regulations  relative  to  the  collection  of  the  duties  of  customs  in  this  island,  and  the 
prohibition  hitherto  in  force  as  to  the  exportation  and  importation  of  particular  articles,  and  all  penalties 
provided  for  breach  of  the  said  laws,  shall  cease  and  determine  on  April  30,  1810. 

II.  That  from  the  1st  day  of  M<Ty,  1810,  the  duties  on  all  goods  imported  or  exported  at  any  port  of 
this  island  (except  such  articles  as  are  herein  specially  prohibited)  shall  be  levicnl  at  the  rates  liereail^ 
mentioned,  to  be  computed  on  the  value  of  the  goods. 

III.  That  the  following  shall  be  the  legal  duties  on  imports. 

DUTIES  ON  IMPORTS. 


Cloth 

Grain  of  all  sorts 

British,  China,  and  India  goods.^, 
All  other  goods 


7 \ per  cent,  ad  valorem. 
%^v%l  ditto.  ‘ 

-.5  ditto. 

.-.^6  ditto. 


Cattle,  live  stock,  and  all  articles  of  wearing  apparel,  ready 


iQgd^  for  private  use 


-kDuty  free. 


COLUMBO. 


IV.  That  the  following  shall  in  like  manner  be  established  for  the  duties  on  goods  exported. 

niTTiKs  ON  Tixroms. 


8 rix-(loll.li  s |)cr  Irjl;;(  i. 


ditto  jier  ainmoniuu- 
10  ditto  |)(*r  ditto  of  Hp.iralis 
ditto  per  ( and)  . 
ditto  por  candy. 


% ^ ^ % v%.  % % % %%  %^ 


Arrack 

Arcca  nut,  uncut 
Ditto,  cut 

Tobacco,  1st  sort.*^.us^< 

Ditto,  2d  sort 

Calainindcr  wooil 20  per  cent,  ad  vninrnn. 

lieani  ditto 

Satin  wood  ... 20  ditto. 

El)ony  wood...............^.....v....^...-.-^-^— ditto. 

Pabiiyras,  rcapei's,  and  raftci  *S...  ...  V%.%'.'V.-......V.  %.“%•.......  ....V.'.V.  ditto. 

Planks  1 0 dittoi 


Staves,  and  every  sort  of  timber  ...............^.....^^........<.^...^10  ditto. 


Salt  fisli  ilitto 

Jaggery  ditto. 

Gingelee  .seed  and  oil  ditto. 

Illcpay  .seed  and  oil  ditto 

Margosa  seed  and  oil  1 0 ilitto> 

Fruits  and  roots  of  all  sorts,  with  the  exception  of  Cabja  root  .*10  ditto. 
Cocoa-nuts,  and  cocoa-nut  oil  from  Calpenteen,  Putlam, 

Jaffiuipatarn,  Manar,  Werteltivoo,  and  Aluletivoo  10  ditto. 
Ditto  from  elsewli(>re 

C'opperas  from  the  above-enumerated  places  .......****%****% v...*  10  ditto 

Ditto  from  elsewhere  ^ ditto 

Oram  of  all  kinds  .....*.*. ..*.'v****-v.**'**-w..********-*»'*'»'»»'^^"'^'»^*^'^'’^^  ^ ditto 


All  goods  non-enumerated  above  A ditto. 

All  articles  of  wearing  apparel,  being  ready  made  for  private  use,  Duty  free. 
Provisions  for  immediate  consumption.- 


V.  Goods,  the  produce  of  the  island,  exported  coastways,  to  p,ny  the  export  duly,  but  no  further  duty 
on  being  landed.  All  goods  re^exiiorted,  having  paid  an  import  duty,  to  be  subject  to  no  other. 

VI.  Tliat  for  ascertaining  the  price.s  on  which  the  said  dutie.s  are  to  he  computed,  a committee  shall 
he  appointed  by  Government  from  time  to  time,  and  at  such  periods  as  may  Iw  necessary,  who,  after  con- 
sulting with  the  best  informed  merchants,  shall  settle  a tariflT  of  fair  and  equitable  prices,  to  be  pidtlislicd  for 
general  informafion,  by  wliich  tariff  the  dutie.s,  as  well  export  as  import,  shall  be  computed,  with  the  ex- 
ceptions after  mentioned. 

Exception  1st.  As  to  articles  of  import  not  enumerated  in  tlie  tariff,  being  such  for  w hich  an  average 
price  cannot  be  conveniently  fixed,  the  importer  thereof  .shall  lurnish  a list  of  the  same,  with  the  price  or  sum, 
in  Ceylon  currency,  at  which  he  would  (Uspose  of  the  whole,  and  the  said  Ust  shall  be  affixed  for  hours  at  such 
public  and  conspicuous  places  ns  may  be  appointed,  during  which  period  any  person  slmll  be  at  'iherly  to 
hid  for  the  said  goods  on  the  terms  of  taking  the  svhole  together,  and  paying  ready  money;  and  the  higliest 
bidder  fiiot  offering  less  than  the  price  stipulated  in  the  seller’s  list)  shall,  at  the  expnation  of  tliat  time,  be 

Vy 


316 


COLUMBO. 


declared  the  purchaser,  in  wliich  case,  the  duties  of  the  goods  shall  be  computed  on  the  amount  of  such 
ofler,  otherwise  on  the  invoice  price.  Provided,  that  if  such  non-eniinierated  goods  shall  amount  to  more 
than  10,000  rix-dollars  on  tlie  iniporter's  estimate,  the  invoice  thereof  shall  not  be  published  without  the 
pcrniission  oi‘  the  Coniptrolh  r of  tlie  Customs. 

2(1.  AVIhtc  any  quantity  of  iniportc'd  goods,  being  partly  in  the  tariff,  and  partly  non-enumcrated, 
sliall  not  amount  to  more  than  1000  rix-dollars  in  the  whole,  the  importer  may,  at  his  option,  either  pay 
duty  by  the  tariff  as  to  tlie  articles  therein  mentioned,  and  advertise  tlie  rest  for  sale,  or  advertise  the  en- 
tire inv(\stment  in  one  list,  and  pay  the  duty  accordingly,  as  provided  under  the  foregoing  exception. 

3d.  Indiaim  n dirc'ct  from  Europe,  and  ships  direct  from  China,  will  be  permitted,  on  application  for 
tliat  piiipos(*5  to  land  the  whole  or  any  part  of  their  investnumts,  and  expose  the  same  to  sale,  and  to  re- 
ship llie  nndispos(‘d  goods  duty  fre(‘,  but  paying  duty  upon  those  sold  according  to  the  tariff,  as  to  all  arti^ 
cles  therein  mentioned,  and  for  other  articles  upon  the  sales,  an  account  wdiercof  is  to  be  exhibited  to  the 
Custom  Master  or  Comptroller,  on  oath,  if  required. 

4th.  lJnvalu(‘d  nrtieles  imported  by  native  traders,  not  exceeding  the  amount  of  200  rix-dollars, 
may,  at  tlu'  option  of  the  owner,  eitlicr  be  valued  by  advertisement  as  aforesaid,  or  by  the  Custom  Master, 
subject  to  the  revi^ion  of  tlie  (Comptroller. 

VII.  The  exportation  and  importation  respectively  of  the  following  artick^s  are  strictly  prohibited, 
except  under  the  (|ualifications  after  mentioned,  or  by  the  express  permission  of  Government. 

The  exportation  of  cinnamon,  except  a small  quantity  not  exceeding  ten  pounds,  being  hona  fdc  for 
the  vessel’s  use. 

Tlw  importation  of  salt,  salt[ictr(s  sulphur,  gunpowder,  lead,  ammunition,  and  arms,  except  such  as 
may  hahond  /i(k  for  the  use  or  defence  of  the  vessel,  or  intended  and  duly  reported  for  a different  destination. 

\ni.  That  it  such  prohibited  goods  shall  be  shipped  or  landed,  or  shall  bo  found  miexported  on  board 
any  sliip  or  vessel,  contrary  to  the  prohibition  contained  in  the  foregoing  articles,  or  if  any  unprohibited 
goods  sliall  be  shipped  or  landed  without  payment  of  the  duties  chargeable  on  the  same,  or  shall  be  found 
on  board  any  ship  or  vessel,  without  being  duly  entered  and  exported,  all  such  goods  shall  be  confiscated 
to  Ilis  Majesty’s  use,  together  with  tlie  ship  or  vessel  on  which  the  same  shall  have  been  shipped,  or  from 
w hich  landed,  or  in  which  found  unreported. 

IX.  That  it  shall  be  lawful  for  any  revenue  officer,  having  a warrant  under  the  hand  of  the  Comp- 
troller, or  Deputy  Comptroller,  or,  in  their  absenas  of  the  Custom  Master  for  that  purpose,  from  time  to 
lime,  and  as  often  as  may  be  necessary,  to  enter  on  board  any  merchant  ship  or  vessel,  being  wdthin  the 
limits  of  any  port  on  this  island,  to  search  for  prohibited,  run,  or  unreported  goods,  and  there  to  remain 
during  the  stay  of  such  ship  or  vessel  in  the  port,  or  for  such  shorter  period  as  may  be  thought  necessary 
Jbr  preventing  any  undue  proceedings. 

X.  33mt  all  persons  shipping  or  landing  any  goods  hereby  prohibited,  or  on  which  the  duties  shall 
not  have  licen  paid,  or  receiving  the  same  on  board,  or  on  shore,  or  in  either  situation  obstructing  or  mo* 
leslliig  any  revenue  officer  in  the  execution  of  his  duty,  or  bribing,  or  offering  to  bribe  any  such  officer,  or 
know'ingly  assisting  in  any  such  acts,  shall,  on  conviction  thereof,  be  liable  to  fine  and  imprisonment,  accord- 
ing to  the  nature  of  the  misdemeanour,  except  labourers ; such  as  boatmen,  carmen,  and  coolies,  who 
knowingly  assist  in  any  of  the  said  unlawful  acts,  shall  be  liable  to  imprisonment  and  corporal  punishment. 

XI.  That  in  carrying  the  present  regulations  into  effect,  and  in  all  matters  of  detail  falling  under  the 
provisions  of  the  same,  the  Comptroller,  Deputy  Comptroller,’  Custom  Master,  and  all  other  officers 
whom  it  may  concern,  shall  b(^  guided  by  such  instructions  as  shall  from  time  to  time  be  established 
by  the  aiilhorily  of  Government. 

CUumbo^  March  20,  1810. 


COLUMBO. 


Ml 


Hice^ 


Pacldv 


I.IST  OF  GOODS 

Upon  which  the  Duties  of  Customs  arc  to  he  h vied  according  to  the  foUoning  Vahuitxon 


GraIs. 


1 7 

Mooghy  (i 

CliittigaiTi  5 

Gocliin  1 

"j  Carra 

PcTrewelle^v^^^v^w  1 


Chamba 

Paclierein  2 

Cingalese  1 

f Chamba  0 

-<  Carra  and  Perre Welle  0 
V Cingalese  0 


F P. 

0 0 per  bag. 

6 0 ditto. 

0 0 ditto. 

0 0 ditto. 

9 0 per  parah. 
9 0 ditto. 

9 0 ditto. 

0 0 ditto. 

0 0 ditto. 

9 0 ditto. 

10  0 ditto. 

9 0 ditto. 

9 0 ditto. 


Wheat,  Rengal*^.v,.. 
Ditto,  Surat 


Horse  gram,  Ih’ngal 
Ditto,  Suratv%..^*v^%* 


Coast  gram^^*^ 4 

P(  as 
Dholk 
Pache 
Beans 


•1  * 


payro 


W arrego,  T o worry , ( ’arn  banpool  c 
Kew’erie,  and  all  grain  not 
enunierat(‘d  above  1 


1*.  P 

0 t)  per  bug 
0 0 ililto. 

0 0 ditto. 

0 0 ditto. 

0 0 ditto. 

0 0 per  parah. 
0 0 ditto. 

0 0 ditto. 

0 0 ditto. 

3 0 ditto 


J 0 ditto. 


The  duty  to  be  levied  upon  tlie  bill  of  lading,  or  the  passport,  or  upon  the  certilicate  of  the  tonnage 
of  the  vessel. 


Wine,  Beer,  and  Spirits. 


R 

F.  P. 

R 

V P 

Madeira  in  pipes 

700 

0 0 per  pipe. 

Hock 

40 

0 0 per  dozen. 

Ditto  in 

24 

0 0 per  dozen. 

Beer  in  hogsheads 

i.'io 

0 0 per  Ilhd. 

Teiieriffe  in  pipe's 

400 

0 0 per  pipe. 

Ditto  in  hollies 

12 

0 0 pc*r  dozen. 

Ditto  in  bottles 

18 

0 0 per  dozen. 

Brandy  in  casks 

5 

0 0 per  gallon. 

Port  in 

7 

0 0 per  gallon. 

Ditto  in  bottles 

20 

0 0 per  dozen. 

])itto  in  bottles».,-*.*^%*...%^%»%^-k-w 

28 

0 0 per  dozen. 

Jamaica  rurn  in  casks^^^.^..... 

r, 

0 0 per  gallon. 

Sherry  in  casks 

7 

0 0 per  gallon. 

Ditto  in 

20 

0 0 per  dozen. 

Ditto  in  bottles»'v-v%'%.v^^%%%^«^»^ 

28 

0 0 per  dozen. 

Bengal  rum  in  casks 

2 

G 0 per  gallon. 

Fnglish  claret 

40 

0 0 per  ditto. 

Ditto  in  bottles 

10 

0 0 per  dozen. 

French  claret  and  other  wines 

4. 

0 0 per  gallon. 

Gin  in  whole  cases 

:i() 

0 0 each. 

Dit  tO'%^«^ 

15 

0 0 per  dozen. 

Ditto  111  halt  dilto««%^«.‘%«%v%>% 

18 

0 0 ditto. 

Casks,  Iron,  Copper,  and  Lead. 

R. 

F.  P. 

u 

F.  P. 

Leagers  packed  with  hoops*> 

20 

0 0 per  leager. 

Iron  bars,  Gat 

21 

0 0 per  cwt. 

10 

0 0 per  -f  ditto. 

X^itto  s(|iiaie  % 

25 

0 0 ditto. 

DittoMadeira pipes  and  hhds. 

14 

0 0 per  pipe. 

Ditto  round 

28 

0 0 ditto. 

Deager  staves%^%^^-^'v‘kwb%'w* 

25 

0 0 per  100 

Copper,  thick  plates 

1 

0 0 per  lb. 

Ditto  old 

10 

0 0 ditto. 

Ditto  in  sheets 

1 

0 0 ditto. 

Hoop 

30 

0 0 per  cwl. 

13itto,  thin  sheeting  ««»■%■» 

1 

4 2 ditto. 

Ditto 

15 

0 0 ditto. 

X^ead,  sheet 

0 

4 1 ditto 

Yy  2 


318 


COLUMBO. 


Various 


R. 

F.  P. 

0 

9 0 per  lb. 

Sugar,  Bengal,  1st  soit^.^^^..^ 

25 

0 0 per  bag. 

20 

0 0 ditto. 

Ditto,  Batavia 

25 

0 0 ditto. 

Ditto,  China 

20 

0 0 ditto. 

Sugar-candy 

0 

6 0 per  lb. 

0 

2 2 ditto. 

25 

0 0 ditto. 

15 

0 0 ditto. 

Clov es 

6 

0 0 ditto. 

Wax  candles 

1 

3 0 ditto. 

Tallow  candles 

25 

0 0 per  100  lb. 

Goat  skins,  prepared 

8 

0 0 per  corge. 

Ditto,  raw»v%%%'««.‘««-«'%-«-»'%«.^«^«%*'v 

0 0 ditto. 

Opium 

20 

0 0 per  lb. 

% 

Articles,  the  Pi 

R. 

F P 

Coflee 

0 

6 0 per  parah. 

C oppi'r 

0 

5 0 ditto. 

Sapan-woodv%<%%««%«-«%«^%%'v^%.^«% 

25 

0 0 per  candy. 

t.  ardamuniS'v%%'%'%%%%«-%«'%«%%%'«'%%‘v 

0 

5 0 per  lb. 

CyQcoa  nuts 

1 

9 0 per  100. 

Cocoa  nut  oil%'%«.%^'%%%«%'%'%‘<k%*'%«'V 

0 

3 2per  measure 

20 

0 0 per  candy. 

(\)ir,  loose 

28 

0 0 ditto. 

( tables 

40 

0 0 ditto. 

Hawsers 

40 

0 0 ditto. 

i oils 

40 

0 0 ditto. 

Salt  6sh 

0 

2 0 per  lb. 

•1  aggery 

0 

0 3 ditto. 

Cliaiiks 

15 

0 0 per  100. 

Elephants  teeth 

1 

0 0 per  lb. 

(,  haya  root 

160 

0 0 per  candy. 

Firewood  in  billets 

0 

5 0 per  100. 

Wood  in  I. 

R 

F.  P. 

Calaniinder  wood 

3 

6 0 per  cuE  ft. 

Ebony 

3 

0 0 ditto. 

Ream  2 6 0 ditto. 

Satin  wood  2 0 0 ditto. 

Jack  wood  0 6 0 ditto. 

Teak  wood  0 9 0 ditto. 

Nendoo  woodv%vi^v%v«w%v»««%  0 9 0 ditto. 


Indian  Articles. 

R.  F.  p. 

Onions,  ginger,  coriander  seed 

andall  kinds  of  curry  sluR*  0 2 0 per  lb. 
Cardamiims  of  Cochin  4 0 0 ditto. 

Tortoise-shell^^#v^%^^..%wv  8 0 0 ditto. 
Ditto  worked  12  0 0 ditto. 

Campliire  5 0 0 ditto. 

Aminoneka  oil  0 8 0 per  bottle. 

Sandal“WO()il  0 4 2 per  lb. 

Indigo  0 3 0 ditto. 

Catticaiiibo  0 3 0 ditto. 

Kaypoo  0 G 0 ditto. 

Soap,  common  0 3 0 ditto. 

Potatoes  0 2 0 ditto 

Cliunain  10  0 0 per  last. 

Empty  quart  bottles  20  0 0 per  100. 

Produce  op  Ceylon. 

n F.  p. 

Chunam  10  0 0 per  last. 

Dried  Gorkas  0 0 2 per  lb. 

Dammer  and  rosinv^v%v%v%^%-*  0 2 0 ditto. 

Bees  wax %%%%>%  0 6 0 ditto. 


Gingelee  2 0 0 per  parali. 

lllepay  oil  0 10  Opermeasurc 


Margosa  oil  0 6 0 ditto. 

Gingelee  oil  0 6 0 ditto. 

Ghee  0 9 0 ditto. 

Honey  0 6 0 ditto. 

Tamarinds  0 2 0 ditto. 

Stonesforgrindingcurrystufi'  1 0 0 per  pair. 

Cotton  uiicleaned  0 10  per  lb. 

Ditto  cleaned  0 2 0 ditto. 

Cadjan  1 0 0 per  100 

Yams,  sweet  potatoes,  and 

other  roots  of  Ceylon  0 0 2 per  lb. 

ss  OR  Planks. 

R.  F.  P. 

I Moorootoe  0 6 0 per  cub.  ft. 

1 Mandoor  0 4 0 ditto. 

Horc  gass  0 3 0 ditto. 

Anjelike  0 3 0 ditto. 

Bakmie  0 3 0 ditto. 

Halinalile  wood  0 6 0 ditto. 

Hat  gassv%  0 4 0 ditto 


COLUMBO. 


3i9 


On  all  logs  containing  more  than  U,  and  less  than  20  cnbic  feet,  add  20  per  cent,  to  the  above  valuation. 
On  all  logs  that  contain  above  20  cubic  feet,  add  to  tlie  above  valuation  40  per  cent. 

On  all  wood  that  is  worked,  add  50  per  cent,  to  the  above  valuation. 

Palmyra  rafters,  when  less  than  4 to  a tree,  each  per  cubit 1 

Ditto  when  4 or  more  to  a tree, 

Hcapers,  Isl  sort,  10  rix-dollars  per  100;  2d  sort,  6 rix-dollars;  and  Jd  sort,  3 (i  per  100, 

Ditto  2(1  soil,  6 ditto. 

The  various  kinds  of  piece-goods,  imported  from  the  continent,  arc  enumerated  in  a separate  schedule, 
which  is  too  long  for  insertion;  Tuticorin  cambric,  for  instance,  being  of  1?)  sorts,  and  jialampores  of  52  sorts! 

REGUI-ATIONS  IN  THE  MASTER  A'r'fENDANTS  DEl’AllTMl'.N'r. 


The  following  are  the  regulations  and  rates  of  port-eharges  and  boat-hire,  for  the  Master-Attendant’s 
department  at  the  Port  of  Colnmbo. 

I.  Vessels  are  to  come  to  an  anchor  within  Cl  fathoms  water;  beyond  that  depth  they  will  be  ehar-red 

cloublu  boat-hire.  ’ ^ 

II.  All  square  rigged  vessels,  sloops,  ari.1  schooners  are  to  employ  Government  boats  only;  no  country 
Iwattobe  .allowed  to  ply  to  any  of  them,  without  leave  from  the  IVtaster.  tttendant.  who,  when  it  may  be 
deemed  expedient  by  Government,  for  the  sake  of  dispatch,  is  to  hire  .siu  h bouts. 

III.  Any  country  boat  plying  to  a stpiare-rigged  vessel,  sloop,  or  schooner,  without  leave  of  the 
Master-.Attendant,  in  writing,  to  lie  liable  to  confiscation. 

IV.  Vessels,  donies,  and  bouts  of  every  description,  having  customable  goods  on  board,  arc  Immediately 
after  coming  to  an  anchor,  to  send  a manifest  of  their  cargoes  to  the  ( ustom-house. 

V.  No  boats  to  be  allowed  to  go  alongside  to  receive  any  pa.  t of  a cargo,  till  such  manifest  shall  have 
been  delivered  in,  and  certificate  thereof,  signed  by  the  Custom  Master,  proiluced  to  the  Master-Altctr- 
dant,  or  his  officers. 

VI.  The  boatmen  belonging  to  the  Master-Attendant’s  department,  aie  not  to  be  emjdoyed  on 
board  any  vessels,  Ijy  the  comniandcTs  or  officers  of  such  vessels. 

VII.  No  boat  to  remain  alon^rside  of  any  vessel  after  five  o’clock  In  the  evening,  or  lo  remain  out  all 
night  under  any  pretence  whatever. 

VIII.  The  full  hire  of  every  boat  to  be  paid  for  every  day  it  is  empl()y(Ml  eitlier  in  receiving  or  dls- 
charging  the  cargo. 

IX.  The  addition  of  half  a trip  to  be  charged  for  each  boat  working  on  a Sunday,  whirli  addition 
is  to  be  appropriated  to  the  use  of  the  boatmen  in  the  following  manner : one  half  towards  forming  a fund 
for  decayed  and  wounded  boatmen,  and  the  other  half  to  be  distributed  amongst  them  on  the  1st  of  May 
in  each  year,  as  a reward  for  good  behaviour  and  punctual  attendance. 

X.  Boats  going  off  after  sunset,  to  be  charged  double  hire;  of  the  surplus  charge,  one  half  to  he 
divided  amongst  the  crew  on  duty,  and  the  other  to  he  appropriated  to  the  general  fund,  to  bedi.4rilmted  as 
a reward  for  good  behaviour  and  punctual  attendance. 

XI.  Persons  applying  for  boats,  and  not  uscing  them,  are  to  pay  the  full  trip  of  tli('I)oafs. 

XII.  No  goods  to  be  landed  or  shipped  but  at  the  wharf,  under  the  penalty  of  confiscalion,  without 
licence  in  writing  from  the  custom-master. 

XIII.  No  goods  which  are  liable  to  a duty,  to  be  put  on  shore,  or  taken  from  the  ship,  A\itliQut  a sp^ 
eial  warrrant  from  the  custom-master. 


POINT  DE  GAELE— MATUllA, 


PORT-CHARGES. 


rilrttnge  into  the  20  rix-dollars.  Water,  and  boat-hire^-.^v^  3 rix-dollars  per  leagei’. 

Anchorage  2.5  ditto.  Catamarans,  per  trip^^..%v  2 rix-dollars. 


The  large  boats  used  in  landing  a cargo,  called  Battle,  carrying  from  5 to  10  tons,  are  10  rix-dollars  per 
trip  ; and  the  smaller  ones,  called  laberlots,  are  five  rix-dollars  per  trip.  Coolies  unloading  and  conveying 
goods  jis  far  as  the  custom-house,  and  loading  the  bandies,  10  rix-dollars  per  battle,  and  five  rix-dollars  per 
laberlot ; besides  which,  there  is  a charge  for  tackle  hire  to  hoist  them  out  of  the  boat  on  to  the  jetty. 


PROVISIONS  AND  REFRESHMENTS.  ' 

Hullocks%%vv.^^**^,*^%v%%%%%%%%%v%^v30  rix-dollars  each.  Bengal  horse  gram  to  7 rupees  per  bag. 

Arrack,  per  leager  to  1,50  ditto.  Surat  ditto  to  12  ditto. 

1 atna  ricc*  10  rupees  per  bag.  Coast  ditto  4?  to  6 ditto. 

Mooghy  7 to  8 ditto.  Pepper  5 ditto  per  parah.  » 

Bengal  wheat. 7 to  8 ditto.  Coffee — 7 ditto. 

Surat  ditto  9 to  10  ditto.  I Loose  coir  20'ditto  per  candy. 


Salt  is  very  good.  31ie  retail  price  varies  from  12  fanaiAs  per  parah  of  40  lbs.  but  if  purchased  in  quan- 
tities, Government  would  sell  it  for  what  it  stands  them  in,  which  is  from  six  to  nine  fanams  per  parah. 

The  water  w^ithin  the  fort  at  Columbo  is  brackish,  consequently  bad  for  drinking.  Good  w ater  must 
be  brought  from  the  di^^tance  of  II  mile:  it  is  conveyed  in  skins  or  leathern  sacks. 

POINT  DE  GALLE. 

This  fort  and  tow  n are  built  upon  a low  rocky  promontory,  in  latitude  6°  4 North,  and  longitude 
SO"*  20  East:  the  harbour  is  formed  between  the  point,  and  a piece  of  sloping  land  to  the  eastward.  The 
entrance  of  the  hay  is  jihout  a mile  w ide ; but  having  many  scattered  rocks  about  it,  a pilot  is  necessary 
to  carry  a ship  to  the  anchorage,  which  is  abreast  the  town  in  five  fathoms. 

Th(‘  fort  is  about  a mile  and  a cpiarter  in  circumference.  Some  of  the  bastions  command  the  bay;  the 
works  are  substantial  and  extensive,  and  it  would  be  a place  of  great  strength,  w'ere  it  not  overlooked  by 
some  adjacent  eminences.  The  houses  in  the  fort  are  large,  commodious,  and  comfortably  furnished.  That 
of  tlic  C ommandant  is  a building  of  extensive  dimensions.  Almost  all  the  European  inhabitants  live  within 
the  fort ; only  a few  large  houses  are  built  without  it,  extending  along  the  shore  to  the  southward.  Cot- 
lag(‘s  and  hamlets,  the  abodes  of  the  native  Cingalese,  are  scattered  about  in  all  directions. 

Point  do  (ialle  ranks  next  to  Columbo  in  point  of  trade.  It  was  here  that  the  Dutch  used  to  ship  the 
cinnamon  and  other  |)roduce  of  the  island  for  Europe ; and  it  is  still  occasionally  used  for  that  purpose. 
Sliips  sometimes  call  here  on  their  way  to  Columbo,  and  take  in  what  cinnamon  is  raised  in  the  neighbour- 
hoofl ; aftei  w'ards  complete  their  cargo  at  the  Presidency,  and  on  some  occasions  sail  direct  for  England : 
otliers  proceed  to  Madras,  hnid  the  cinnamon  there,  to  be  divided  amongst  different  ships,  and  take  in  a 
new  lading;  this  latter  method  is  only  practised  in  time  of  war,  when  it  is  not  found  convenient  for  the 
regular  ships  of  the  Company  to  touch  at  Columbo. 

MATURA 

Is  situated  in  latitude  5®  58  North,  and  longitude  80^  40  East.  The  fort,  which  is  square,  and  built 
of  stone,  stands  on  the  west  side  of  a river.  The  gate  communicates  with  two  wooden  bridges  leading 


DONDRA  1IEAD-.TKNGALLE-.BATIC.\L0E. 


3.51 


across  the  water  to  a fortification  of  larger  dimensions.  The  works  of  this  fort  liave  been  begun  on  a re- 
gular and  handsome  plan,  but  arc  only  half  completed,  consisting  at  present  of  two  points  and  a half  of 
a pentagonal  star;  they  defend  the  place  as  far  as  it  is  immediately  conncf  ted  with  the  land,  but  it  lies  en- 
tirely open  both  towards  the  seu  and  the  river.  The  two  wooden  bridges  are  coiineeted  toge  ther  by  a sinall 
island,  lying  near  to  the  west  side  of  the  river.  They  arc  built  of  strong  |)iles  driven  into  the  sand,  and 
covered  with  planks,  of  sulfieient  breadth  for  carriages,  but  without  balustrades. 

The  guns  of  this  fort  were  sometime  since  removed  to  Point  cle  (ialle,  and  none  are  rd  present 
mounted.  In  the  centre  of  it  is  a large  square,  formed  of  good  houses,  and  a neat  Pi  otestant  cliapel;  from 
^ this  a fine  street  extends  along  the  banks  of  the  river  towards  the  sea,  occupied  by  families  of  Dutch  ex- 
traction. There'are  likewise  several  comfortable  well-furnished  houses  ranged  on  the  oppo>ite  sitle,  .it  a 
greater  distance  from  the  river,  in  one  of  which  the  Rewemie  Agent  for  the  district  resides. 

Plenty  of  wood  and  good  water  may  be  procured  in  the  river,  the  entrance  to  whicli  is  alioiit  half  a 
mile  to  the  westward  of  the  fort.  Boats  go  a small  distance  up  this  river  to  fill  water;  but  the  coming  in 
is  made  dangerous  by  the  rocks  which  lie  under  water,  and  the  outset  of  the  stream  is  to  strong,  that  any 
boat  touching  on  them,  is  in  danger  of  being  overset;  therefore  it  is  best  to  lia\e  the  nali\es  to  [lilot  you 
in.  Ships  anchor  here  in  the  N.  E.  monsoon  abreast  the  town  in  20  iathoms. 

DONDUA  HEAD, 

The  southern  extreme  of  Ceylon,  is  in  latitude  5.5'  Nortli,  and  longitude  SO^  \li  East;  it  is  n low 
point,  with  a grove  of  tall  cocoa-nut  trees  on  its  extremity.  Near  it  is  Dondra,  a jiopulous  village,  >\liirli 
must  at  one  time  have  been  a place  of  great  note,  and  much  resorted  to  on  account  of  a Iliiido)  temple  in 
its  vicinitv,  formerly  a magnificent  striietiire,  now  in  ruins.  The  I’ertugiUM'  and  Dutch  used  mimy  of  the 
stones  for  erecting  Matura  Fort.  Theie  is  still  a small  temple  much  iiequented  by  tlie  ('ingalese. 

TENGALLE 

Is  about  fifteen  miles  to  the  N.  E.  of  Dondra  Head,  and  is  known  by  tli(‘  small  foil  and  ruins  of  an 
old  pagoda,  situated  on  an  elevateil  ami  projecting  point  of  land  on  the  west  side  of  tlie  b.iy.  Th(‘  bay 
itself  is  of  considerable  extent,  l)eing  4;  miles  from  Tengalle  Point  to  the  extreme  point  of  land  opposite. 
Oft’ from  each  point  run  extensive  and  dangerous  reefs;  within  them  is  good  aneliorage  and  shelter  during 
the  S.  W.  monsoon.  Here  is  a fortress  of  two  bastions,  erected  on  the  summit  of  a small  hill,  containing 
the  ruins  of  three  large  houses,  and  on  the  sea  beach  are  the  remains  of  a large  building,  wliieli  appears  to 

have  becij.thc  mansion  occupied  by  tlie  Dutch  Resident. 

The  landing-place,  which  is  perfectly  free  from  surf,  lies  under  the  rising  ground  on  which  th(‘  fort 
stands,  having  the  ruins  of  a house  a little  to  the  south  of  it.  About  a cpiarter  of  a mile  from  tl.e  landing 
place,  passing  the  fort,  is  a well  containing  good  water.  A pathway  leads  directly  from  the  fort  to  the  well, 
where  water  may  be  filled,  and  the  casks  rolled  down  the  beach.  A small  jetty  built  at  the  landing-place, 
W'ould  greatly  facilitate  the  loading  of  the  boats. 

RATICALOE. 

About  two  miles  up  a small  arm  of  the  sea,  is  the  Island  of  Baticaloe,  in  latitude  7"  45  North,  and 
longitude  81°  53  East.  It  is  about  three  miles  in  circumference,  and  there  is  a pleasant  walk  on  the  sand 
bei^h  round  it.  The  fort  is  of  a square  construction,  having  four  bastions,  nearly  uniform,  on  which  2i 
guns  are  mounted.  The  internal  dimensions  are  small,  containing  only  a low  barrack,  a granary,  a ma- 
gazine,  and  the  spacious  mansion  of  the  Commandant.  Anittle  village  stands  a few  hundred  yards  from 
the  wafts  of  the  fort,  and  several  huts  are  scattered  over  the  island.  At  the  farther,  end  of  it  are  two  Por- 


TUIXCOJIALLE. 


rlJ? 

tiigiicso  rliiipcls  williiii  a Nliort  distanrc  of  oacli  otlirr,  neatly  built  of  stone.  The  great  body  of  the  inha- 
bitants arc  Hindoos  and  Alahonictaiis.  The  number  of  IVotostant  Christians  is  very  small. 

The  inlet  of  the  sea,  which  Min  oiinds  the  little  Island  of  Batiraloe,  extends  thirty  miles  into  the 
fountry,  and  contains  several  other  Islands  of  similar  diineiisions.  The  frith  in  many  places  is  one  mile 
broad,  and  affords  excellent  navigation  for  boats.  TJnfoilunately  a sand  bar  stretches  across  the  entrance, 
on  which  are  no  more  than  six  feet  water,  so  that  only  small  vessels  can  come  into  it ; but  when  once  en- 
tered,  they  ride  in  complide  security.  Hie  anchorage  is  about  two  miles  from  the  mouth  of  the  river,  bear- 
ing about  South,  and  the  Friar’s  Hood,  a remarkable  mountain  about  five  leagues  inland,  S.S.W.  The 
road  is  not  always  safe  in  the  N.Jl.  monsoon,  but  in  the  S.  W.  monsoon  it  is  always  so. 

You  may  ^^ater  at  the  island,  landing  your  casks  at  the  whaif,  and  roll  them  to  a well  on  the  green. 

It  is  nea'ssai  y to  carry  funnels  and  buckets  to  draw  the  water  up.  Wood  may  be  cut  on  the  banks  of  the 
river,  near  the  bar,  in  any  quantity.  Bullocks  and  other  rclV(‘shments  are  in  abundance. 

THINCOMALEE. 

'J  his  bay,  tin*  entrance  of  which  is  about  five  miles  broad,  is  formed  by  Foul  Point,  Its  S E.  extreme, 
and  Mag^tall  Point,  in  latitude  North,  and  longitude  81"  24  East.  This  point  is  the  northern  extre- 

mity of  a narrow  and  crooked  peninsula  that  bounds  the  East  and  S.  E.  sides  of  Trincomalce  Bay,  and 
sepai  att  s Buck  Jlay  from  it,  and  from  the  great  bay  to  tlie  southward.  Ships  generally  moor  abreast  the 
town  During  the  S.  W.  monsoon  ships  lie  in  Back  Bay,  with  Flagstaff  Point  bearing  S.  S E about 
a mile  distance.  This  harbour,  from  its  centrical  position,  and  tlie  easy  ingress  and  egress  which  it  affords 
at  all  seasons,  is  beltin’  adajitod  for  bi’ing  made  a marine  depot,  and  a rendezvous  for  his  Majesty’s  squa- 
drons, than  any  other  station  in  India.  The  view  of  Trincomalce  from  Back  Bay  is  striking  and  beautiful. 
On  one  band  stands  a projecting  clilf,  rising  in  many  places  perpendicularly  from  the  sea  upwards  of  100 
feet,  and  the  broken  hill  above  it  is  elevated  about  200  feet  more.  The  flag.staff  is  placed  near  to  the 
outermost  point  of  the  rock ; and  along  the  summit  and  declivities  of  the  higher  ground  are  situated  the 
bungalow’s  of  tlie  onieers,  and  barracks  of  the  private  soldiers.  On  the  other  hand,  a line  of  native 
villages  are  slnah'd  amidst  groves  of  cocou-nut  trees.  The  great  body  of  the  fort  and  town  of  Trin- 
comalee  is  situated  at  the  bottom  of  the  rock,  and  joined  to  a narrow  neck  of  land,  running  parallel 
to  the  .«ea,  and  separating  the  harbour  from  tw’o  adjacent  bays,  one  of  which  lies  on  each  side  of  the 
promontory. 

T\w  guns  of  Trincomalce  command  both  bays,  the  former  on  the  south,  the  latter  on  the  north  side 
ol‘  the  Ibi  tilled  rock.  Fort  Ostenburg  protects  the  mouth  of  the  harbour;  that  fortress  stands  upon  a mount 
three  miles  west  of 'rrinconinlee.  One  chain  of  the  butteries  surrounds  the  base,  rfnd  another  the  summit 
ofthi'  hill.  The  greater  part  of  the  w’orks  of  both  these  forts  w’as  built  by  the  Government  of  Portugal. 
Some  additions  were  made  to  it  by  theFreneb  during  the  short  time  they  had  posse.ssion  of  this  place:  but 
little  or  nothing  was  done  by  the  Dutch.  Seveiity-tw’o  pieces  of  cannon  are  mounted  on  the  ramparts  of 
Ti  incomal(‘^*,  and  ;>()  on  those  of  Ostenburg. 

Hie  fortifications  of  3’rincomalee  form  a sweep  upw’ards  of  a mile  in  length,  encompn.ssing  the  bottom 
of  the  rocky  hills  on  the*  sides  eoiiiiected  wnth  the  adjoining  land:  that  part  of  it  which  projects'  farthest  ' 
into  the  sen,  is  sufliciently  protected  by  the  steepness  of  the  cliffs,  and  the  depth  of  the  surrounding  ocean. 

A .small  redoubt  is  situated  on  the  declivity  of  the  hill  overhanging  the  town,  and  several  pieces  of  cannon 
are  planted  on  its  different  summits.  No  comiminicuiion  can  he  carried  on  with  this  promontory  but 
through  the  gates  of  the  fort;  and  w ere  all  the  works  raised  a little  higher  on  the  hill,  the  citadel  would 
be  im[)r(  pliable.  The  only  disadvantage  attached  to  this  noble  harbour  is,  that  the  tide  does  not  rise  to  a 
•JiiirK  lcnt  lK'ii>ht  to  admit  of  the  construcliou  of  wet  docks  for  vessels  of  a large  size. 


JAFFNAPATAM, 


The  houses  in  tlic  fort  arc  very  indiircrcnt,  far  inft,  ior  to  colia-rcs  In  Englan.l ; scarce  one  of  ll.cm  is 
wotor-proof.  Many  ol  the  buildings  are  in  ruins,  fr,m»  the  edicts  of  jiroUactod  sieges,  the  diI,u,idutions 
of  which  have  never  been  repaired.  The  roof  oftlie  ganison  cinncl.  was  likewise  hatt.-re.l  down,  in 
which  condition  it  stUl  continues,  and  the  si.ell  is  employed  as  a tennis  court  for  the  amusement  of  the 
soldiers.  About  half  a mile  from  the  foit  stands  a native  village,  where  the  produetion.s  of  the  country 
are  brought  to  market,  and  exposed  for  sale. 

Trincomalee  was  taken  by  assault  oa  January  11,  17S^,  by  the  llritish  forces  under  Sir  Edward 
Hughes;  but  on  26th  August,  it  was  wrested  from  tliem  l.y  the  French  under  Sulfrein,  who  restored  it  to 
the  Dutch  at  the  conclusion  ot  the  peace.  It  was  taken  posse.ssion  of  by  the  English  in  I7!).5,  and  still 
continues  in  their  Imnds. 

There  are  several  watering-places.  The  ships  that  take  their  water  in  Back-biiy,  hlJ  it  in  the  fort, 
where  a wooden  pier  is  built  to  facilitate  the  landing ; and  those  wlio  lie  in  the  liarbour,  must  fill  it  at  tlie 
well  in  the  town,  where  they  will  have  a t|uartcr  of*  a mile  to  roll  their  casks. 

Refreshments  for  present  use  may  be  got  here,  but  in  small  (|uaiititics,  and  not  more  than  sufTicient  to 
supply  two  men  of  war.  The  only  provisions  to  be  had  are  beef,  buffaloes,  bogs,  and  a few  fowls;  little 
or  no  vegetables,  and  those  very  dear.  As  for  salt  provisions,  there  are  none  to  be  piocured. 

Although  the  situation  of  this  porf  makes  it  a most  ronveniejit  plaee  for  trade,  yet  scarce  any  is 
carried  on,  and  there  is  not  a ship  belonging  to  the  place. 


JAFFNAPATAM. 

The  fort  and  town  of  Jaffnapatam  are  situated  in  latitude  9®  44  North,  and  longitude  80- 15'  East 
The  former  is  regularly  built  in  the  figure  of  a |>entagoii,  witli  five  ba.stioiis,  and  is  furnished  with 
broad  ditches  and  an  extensive  glacis.  It  appears  to  l>e  the  most  modern,  and  is  by  far  the  neatest  and 
best  constructed  fortress  in  Ceylon.  It  is  at  the  .some  time  extremely  clean,  and  in  a good  state  of  repair. 
One  side  runs  parallel  to  the  strait  which  separates  the  peninsula  of  Jaffna  from  the  rest  of  Ceylon ; the 
other  sides  are  environed  by  an  open  and  well-cultivated  plain.  A large  square  occupies  the  centre  of  the 
fort,  the  interior  of  which  is  a plot  of  grass,  enclosed  with  peat  rails,  and  bounded  by  streets  of  excellent 
houses,  shaded  by  majestic  trees.  On  one  side  of  the  square  stands  a large  church,  of  Dutch  architecture. 
* At  right  angles  to  it,  ai  e situated  the  commodious  mansion  of  the  Commandant,  and  other  public  buildings, 
employed  as  offices  for  the  purposes  of  Government.  The  third  side  is  composed  of  comfortable  houses 
rented  from  the  Dutch  by  English  officers;  and  the  fourth,  which  contains  the  gate,  is  made  up  of  barracks 
for  private  soldiers.  The  only  other  street  w ithin  the  fort  runs  parallel  to  tlie  l)ack  of  tlie  west  side  of  the 
square;  being  more  obscure,  it  is  inhabited  by  mechanics,  and  the  lower  orders  of  the  community.  Some 
large  buildings,  apparently  designed  as  barracks  and  magazines,  lie  unoccupied  facing  the  ramparts. 

About  half*  a mile  to  the  eastward,  stands  the  pettah,  or  outward  towm,  containing  several  thousand 
inhabitants.  All  the  streets  are  of  a proper  breadth,  one  lialf  of  them  running  parallel  to  each  other,  and 
thq  other  half  intersecting  them  at  right  angles.  The  houses  are  neat  and  clean,  and  tlie  outer  walls  com- 
pletely white.  The  principal  street  runs  tlu'ough  the  centre  of  the  town ; it  is  finely  shaded  on  each  side  by 
rows  of  large  trees  towering  above  the  houses,  which  are  only  one  story  high,  but  raised  a few^  steps  from 
the  ground  on  a paved  terrace,  having  verandas  or  porticos  before  them. 

All  the  native  inhabitants  are  included  under  the  description  of  Malabars.  About  one  Jialf  of  them  are 
Hindoos  ; the  other  half  are  nominal  Christians,  with  a small  proportion  of  Mahometans. 

Most  of  the  Dutch  families  who  formerly  resided  at  Trincomalee,  have  removed  to  this  place,  which 
affords  them  cheaper  living,  and  more  agreeable  retirement.  The  country  is  fruitful ; a constant  bustle  per- 
vades the  daily  mmkets,  and  a regular  trade  with  the  opjjosite  coast  of  India  aflbrds  many  opportunities  of 
improving  a small  fortune.  This  is  the  only  district  of  Ceylon,  the  revenue  of  which  exceeds  its  expences. 

Z z 


S64  ' 


CALAMINDER  WOOD— CINNAMON. 


Ariicks  procurable  on  the  Island  of  Ccylmiy  ivith  Directions  how  to  chusc  them, 
CALAMINDER  WOOD 

Is  the  name  given  to  a beautiful  wood  procurer!  at  Ceylon,  that  takes  a polish  as  smooth  as  a looking 
glass;  it  is  so  hard, tliat  the  common  edge-tools  cannot  work  it,  but  it  must  be  rasped  and  almost  ground 
into  shape.  The  heart  or  woody  part  of  the  tree  is  extremely  handsome,  with  whitish  or  pale  yellow,  and 
black  or  brown  veins,  streaks,  or  waves;  in  the  root  these  waves  are  closer  and  dai*kcr.  The  nearer  it  is 
taken  from  the  root,  the  more  it  is  esteemed,  as  higher  up  in  the  trees  the  veins  are  thinner  and  paler. 

CINNAMON. 

The  cinnamon  tree,  or  Laurus  Cinnamonum,  is  a species  of  laurel.  The  trees  in  their  uncultivated 
state  grow  to  the  height  of  20  to  30  feet;  the  tnink  is  about  three  feet  in  circumference,  and  puts  out  a 
great  number  of  large  spreading  horizontal  branches  clothed  with  tliick  foliage.  The  roots  are  fibrous,  hard 
and  tough,  covered  with  an  odoriferous  bark;  on  the  outside  of  a greyish  brown,  and  on  the  inside  of  a 
reddish  hue.  They  strike  about  three  feet  into  the  earth,  and  spread  to  a considerable  distance.  Many  ot 
them  smell  strongly  of  camphire,  which  is  sometimes  extracted  from  them. 

The  leaves  are  of  an  oval  shape,  from  four  to  six  inches  in  length,  and  from  two,  to  two  and  three 
quarters  in  breadth,  of  a smooth  surface  and  plain  edge.  They  are  strongly  marked  by  three  principal 
nerves,  which  with  four  smaller,  all  take  tlieir  rise  from  the  pedicle.  The  middle  nerve  stretches  to  the 
fioint  of  the  leaf.  The  two  others  nearly  bisect  each  half  of  it  lengthwise.  The  four  smaller  radiate,  in  a 
corre8|X)nding  manner,  towards  the  edge  of  the  leaf  From  these  a great  quantity  of  diminutive  fibres 
.spread  in  all  directions,  completing  the  textui’e  of  the  leaf.  The  stalk  of  it,  which  is  three-(j[uarters  of  an 
inch  in  length,  is  very  pleasant  to  eat,  and  when  chewed,  flavours  strongly  of  cinnamon;  but  is  fresher,  and 
more  full  of  juice.  The  leaf  itself  has  scarcely  any  taste.  When  the  young  leaves  first  shoot  out  from 
the  tops  of  the  branches,  they  are  partly  of  a bright  red,  and  pai'tly  of  a pale  yellow  hue.  Ailcr  a short 
time  they  become  of’  a beautiful  pea-greeii,  and  when  they  have  attained  full  maturity,  they  put  on  a dark 
olive  colour.  The  ujiper  surface  is  of  a deep,  and  the  back  of  the  leaf  ot  a light  gieen,  and  shoot  out 
from  the  stalks,  directly  opposite  to  each  other. 

The  blossoms  grow  on  slender  foot-stalks,  of  a pale  yellow  colour  from  tlie  axillsG  of  the  leaves,  and 
the  extremity  of  the  branches.  They  arc  numerous  clusters  of  small  white  flowers,  having  a brownisli 
tinge  ill  the  centre,  about  the  same  size  os  the  lilac,  which  it  resembles.  The  flower  is  monopetalous, 
stellated  into  six  points,  has  nine  stamina,  and  one  stile,  It  produces  a fruit  of  the  form  of  an  acorn, 
in  taste  resembling  the  olive,  and  when  dry,  it  becomes  a thin  shell,  containing  an  oval  kernel  about  the  size  of 
the  seed  of  an  apple.  The  smell  of  the  blossom  is  not  strong,  but  extremely  pleasant,  resembling  a mix- 
ture of  the  rose  and  lilac.  The  fruit,  when  boiled  in  water,  yields  an  oil  which  floats  ut  the  top,  and  an- 
swers for  burning  in  lamps.  When  allowed  to  congeal,  it  becomes  of  a solid  substance  like  wax,  and  is 
formed  into  candles.  The  smell  of  it  is  mucli  more  agreeable  than  that  of  cocoa-nut  oil;  but  it  is  only  used 
fur  these  purposes  in  the  interior  of  the  island. 

The  appearance  of  this  tree  strongly  resembles  that  of  tlie  Laurus  Cassia,  and  the  bark  of  the  old 
wood  [lossesses  the  same  qualities.  The  cinnamon  of  Ceylon,  however,  is  greatly  improved  by  cultiva- 
tion ; and  that  which  is  most  highly  prized,  is  sUipped  from  shoots  of  young  trees. 

The  trees  which  are  planted  for  the  purpose  of  obtaining  cinnamon,  shoot  out  a great  number  of 
branches  a[)parently  from  the  same  root,  and  are  not  permitted  to  rise  above  the  height  of  ten  feet.  Those 
sprouts  which*  are  cut  down  to  be  barked,  are  of  the  thickness  of  a common  walking  stick,  and  yield  an 
incomparably  fine  cinnamon  bark,  and  from  these  shoots  come  the  sticks,  which  in  appearance  resemble 
those  from  the  hazel-tree,  but  of  which  the  baik  has  a cinnamon  smell  when  rubbed.  Cinnamon  is 


CINNAMON. 


35r> 

barked  in  tlie  woods  at  two  cliiTrrent  seasons  of  tlic  year : tlio  first  is  termed  tlie  grand  Imrvest,  and 
lasts  from  April  to  August ; the  second  is  the  small  harvest,  and  lasts  from  November  to  January.  The 
barking  is  performed  in  the  following  manner: — A good  rinnamon-treo  is  looked  out  for,  and  ehostm  by  the 
leaves,  and  other  characteristics,  'fhose  branches  \>  liieh  are  thn  e years  old,  are  lopped  otf  willi  a common 
crooked  pruning  knife,  from  which  the  outside  pellicle  of  the  bark  is  scraped  olf‘;  the  twig^  are  then 
ripped  up  long  ways  with  the  point  of  a knife,  and  the  bark  gradually  loosened  till  it  can  he  entirely 
taken  off.  The  smaller  tubes  or  quills  of  it  are  inserted  into  the  larger,  and  tlius  spn*ad  out  to  dry, 
when  the  bark  rolls  itself  up  still  closer  together,  and  is  then  tied  into  bundles,  and  finally  carried  off: 
each  bundle  is  then  bound  round  with  rattans,  and  packed  up,  atler  having  previously  uinlergonc  an 
examination  by  tasting  and  chewing,  which  is  a very  tn)uhlesojnc  and  disagreeable  ollicc : it  is  but  seldom 
a person  is  able  to  hold  out  two  or  three  days  successividy,  as  the  cinnamon  deprives  the  tongue  and 
lips  of  all  the  mucus  with  which  they  are  covered.  Each  bundle  is  then  made  nearly  the  lengtli  of  four 
feet,  and  is  weighed  off  to  881hs.  subsequently  to  its  being  well  secured.  It  is  sewed  in  double  gunnies, 
and  when  .stowed  in  the  sliip’s  hold,  loose  black  pepper  is  spriiikl(*il  over  the  bales,  to  fill  up  every  hole 
and  interstice,  by  which  means  the  cinnurnon  is  preserved  in  its  original  goodness. 

The  Dutch  cinnamon  inspectors  divided  the  bark  into  the  following  kinds,  viz  : 

I.  The  first  and  best  sort  of  cinnamon,  which  is  peculiar  to  the  island,  is  called  by  the  natives  rasse 
coronde,  or  sharp  §wcet  cinnamon.  It  is  this  choice  sort  which  is  exporteil  yearly  by  the  East  India 
Compmiy,  by  whom  it  has  been  prohibited  under  severe  penalties,  that  any  other  sort  should  he  mix(*d  with  it. 

II.  Is  called  cannallc  coronde,  which  is  bitter  and  astringent  cinnamon.  The  bark  of  this  tree  comes 
off  very  easily,  and  smells  very  agreeably  when  fresh,  but  it  has  a bitter  taste. 

III.  Is  called  cappi roe  coronde,  which  implies  camphorated  cinnamon,  because  it  has  a very  strong 
smell  of  camphire.  This  sort  is  only  found  in  the  King  of  Candy's  dominions. 

IV.  Is  called  the  wcllc  coronde,  or  sandy  cinnamon;  because,  upon  chewing  it,  one  feels  ns  it  W'crc 
bits  of  sand  between  the  teetli ; hut  in  fact  there  is  nothing  sandy  in  it.  The  Irnrk  of  this  tree  comes 
off  readily,  hut  it  is  not  so  easily  rolled  as  other  sorts  are,  being  apt  to  burst  open  and  unfold  itself. 
It  is  of  a bhurp  and  bitterish  taste,  and  the  root  of  it  produces  but  a sjiiall  quantity  of  camphire. 

V.  Is  called  scwcl  coronde,  or  glutinous  cinnamon.  Tliis  sort  acquiiTs  a very  considerable  degree 
of  hardness,  which  the  chewing  of  it  sufficiently  proves.  It  lias  otherw  ise  little  taste,  and  an  ungrateful 
smell,  but  the  colour  of  it  is  very  fine,  and  it  is  often  mixed  with  the  first  and  best  sort,  the  colour  being 
much  alike,  excepting  only  that  in  the  good  sort,  some  few  yellowish  spots  appear  towards  the  extremities. 

VI.  Is  called  nicke  coronde.  The  bark  of  this  tree  has  no  taste  or  smell  when  taken  olf,  and  is  made 
use  of  by  the  natives  only  in  physic,  and  to  extract  an  oil  to  anoint  their  bodies. 

VII.  Is  called  davvel  coronde,  which  is  drum  cinnamon.  The  wood  of  this  tree,  when  grow'ii  hard, 
is  light  and  tough,  and  of  which  the  natives  make  some  of  their  vessels  and  drums.  The  liark  is  stripped 
while  the  tree  is  yet  growing,  and  is  of  a pole  colour.  It  is  used  in  the  same  manner  as  the  sixth  sort. 

VIII.  Is  called  cattc  coronde,  or  thorny  cinnamon,  for  this  tree  is  veiy  prickly.  The  hark  is  some- 
what like  cinnamon  in  appearance,  but  the  leaves  are  different;  and  the  bark  it  sell*  ha.s  nothing  either  of 
the  taste  or  smell  of  cinnamon.  Tlie  natives  use  it  in  medicine. 

IX*  Is  called  mael  coronde,  or  the  flowering  cinnamon,  because  this  tree  is  •alw  ays  in  blossom. 
The  substance  of  the  wood  never  becomes  so  solid  and  weighty  in  this  as  in  the  otlier  cinnninon-trco 
before  mentioned,  which  are  sometimes  eight,  nine,  or  ten  feet  in  circumference.  If  this  ever-flower- 
ing cinnamon  be  cut  or  bored,  a limpid  water  will  issue  out  of  the  wound,  but  it  is  of  use  only  for  the 
leaves  and  bark. 

The  inhabitants  of  Ceylon  say  there  is  yet  another  sort  of  cinnamon,  wliich  they  call  lonpat  coronde, 
or  the  three-leaf  cinnamon.  This  grows  in  the  Candy  country,  and  is  little  known. 

Zx2 


356  ' 


CINNAMON. 


The  cinnaiuon-tree  flourishes  only  in  a small  portion  of  the  island.  It  is  confined  to  the  S.  W.  angle, 
formed  by  the  sea  coast,  from  Ncgonibo  to  Matura.  The  largest  cinnamon  plantation  is  situated  in  the 
vicinity  of  Colunibo,  and  is  upwards  of  twelve  miles  in  circumference;  others  of  a smaller  size  lie  near 
Negonibo,  Calture,  Point  de  Galle,  and  Matura,  and  all  stretch  tdong  the  sea  coast. 

The  best  cinnamon  is  known  by  the  following  properties : it  is  thin,  and  rather  pliable;  it  ought 
to  be  about  the  substance  of  royal  paper,  or  somewhat  thicker.  It  is  of  a light  colour,  and  rather 
inclinable  to  yellow,  bordering  but  little  upon  the  browm : it  possesses  a sweetish  taste,  at  the  same  time  is 
not  stronger  than  can  be  bonie  without  pain,  and  is  not  succeeded  by  any  atlter  taste.  The  more  cinna- 
mon departs  from  these  characteristics,  the  coarser  and  less  sei*viceable  it  is  esteemed,  and  should  be  re- 
joc'ted  if  it  bo  hard,  and  thick  as  a half-crown  piece;  if  it  bo  very  dark-coloured  or  brown;  if  it  be  very 
pungent  and  hot  upon  the  tongue,  'with  a taste  bordering  upon  that  of  cloves,  so  that  it  cannot  be  suffered 
without  pain,  and  so  that  the  mucus  upon  the  tongue  is  consumed  by  it  when  several  trials  are  made  of 
it;  or  if  it  has  any  after  taste,  such  as  to  be  harsh,  bitter,  and  mucilaginous.  Particular  care  should  be 
taken  that  it  is  not  false  packed,  or  mixed  with  cinnamon  of  a common  sort. 

This  spice  was  known  to  the  ancients  long  before  nutmegs  or  cloves.  In  1621  no  mention  is 
made  of  cinnamon  as  an  article  of  import  from  India.  The  Portuguese  being  in  possession  of  Ceylon,  it 
was  to  be  procured  only  at  Lisbon.  In  1686  the  Dutch  imported  from  tlie  island  17(),0001bs.  of  cinnamon, 
which  is  stated  to  have  been  rather  less  in  quantity  than  in  some  preceding  years.  It  #Duld  be  difficult,  if 
not  impossible,  to  trace  the  quantities  brought  into  Europe  at  this  early  period.  In  1730  it  appanrs  tlie 
Dutch  imported  in  ten  ships  640,000  lbs.  In  1766  the  King  of  Candy  agreed  to  deliver  to  tlie  Dutch  all 
the  cinnamon  whicli  grew  in  his  territories  at  five  pagodas  per  bale  of  88  lbs.  In  the  five  years,  1775  to 
1770  inclusive,  the  amount  sold  on  an  average  was  380,000  lbs.  per  annum. 

The  following  Is  an  account  of  the  quantities  of  cinnamon  sold  at  the  Dutch  East  India  sales  in  tho 
years  1785  to  1791  inclusive,  together  with  the  sale  amount  in  each  yeai*. 


Years 

11)8. 

£ 

Years 

ibs. 

£ 

1785 

3()9,04<> 

199,470 

1789 

463,4<)0 

252,785 

1786 

4.53,920 

280,605 

1790 

375,^ 

205,045 

1787 

144, (XK) 

82,470 

1791 

183,765 

100,235 

1788 

485,600 

273,765 

In  1795,  on  the  capture  of  Ceylon  by  the  English,  the  East  India  Company  paid  £180,000  to  the 
captors  as  the  value  of  the  cinnamon  found  in  the  various  storehouses  on  the  island. 

The  following  is  an  account  of  the  quantities  of  cihnamon  belonging  to  the  East  India  Company,  sold 
at  their  sales,  in  the  years  1803  to  1810  inclusive,  with  the  sale  amount  thereof,  likewise  the  quantities 
retained  for  home  consumption,  and  the  net  revenue  collectetl  thereon. 


March  Sale.  1 

Sejiienibei  Sale.  \ 

Total. 

Retained. 

Revenue  net. 

Ycais, 

lbs. 

£ 

lbs. 

£ 

lbs. 

£ 

lbs. 

£ ' 

1803 

128,673 

27,403 

1.58,594 

36,101 

287,^7 

63,504 

8,762 

676 

1804 

158,501 

34, .509 

199,182 

44,150 

357,683 

78,659 

9,830 

2,084 

1805 

28,432 

6,986 

172,530 

45,579 

200,962 

52,565 

6,672 

1,466 

1806 

121,195 

29,111 

140,001 

32,105 

261,196 

61,216 

10,389 

3,513 

1807 

168,072 

48,587 

198,674 

67,914 

366,746 

116,501 

7,974 

2,463 

iscs 

167,817 

57,374 

166,814 

57,600 

334^631 

114,974 

13,116 

3,613 

1809 

S30,969 

72,8.54 

202,655 

80,772 

433,624  j 

153,626 

10,267 

3,487 

1810 

180,134 

75,426 

123,820 

50,132 

303,954  1 

12.5, .568 

11,564 

3,218. 

being  on  an  average  of  eight  years,  31 8,270  lbs.  and  the  sale  amount  £95,825  per  annum. 

8 cwt.  of  cinnamon  are  allowed  to  a ton.  The  permanent  duty  is  Is.  6d.  per  lb.  and  the  temporaiy  or 
war  duty  6d.  making  in  the  whole  2s.  per  lb. 


OIL  OF  CINNAMON— cnANK  SHELLS— FEAR  LS. 


' 357 


OIL  OF  CINNAMON. 

This  valuable  oil  is  drawn  from  the  broken  and  small  cinnamon,  which  yicldini;  but  a small  quantity 
of  essential  oil,  that  of  cassia  is  in  general  substituted  in  its  place.  If  the  oil  of  cinnamon  be  genuine,  and 
you  dip  the  point  of  a penknife  into  it,  it  will  not  llamc  at  a candle,  but  smoke;  if  il  soon  Haines,  it  is  adul- 
terated with  spirits  of  wine.  If  adulterated  with  an  expresseil  oil,  put  a few  drops  into  water,  and  shake 
it,  when  the  essential  oil  will  sink  to  the  bottom,  and  the  expressed  oil  ll(»at  on  the  Miiface.  Or  drop  it 
into  a glass  of  brandy,  and  it  good,  it  will  sink  in  a lump  to  the  bottom,  hut  if  adulterated,  part  only  will 
sink,  and  will  leave  an  oil  on  tlie  top  of  the  brandy.  Water  and  sug^n*  mixed  tt)g(‘ther  arc  the  strongest 
proof;  one  drop  in  a glass  will  make  the  glass  .above  tbe  litjuor  luin  blue,  which  is  a good  sign. 

The  permanent  duty  on  oil  of  cinnamon  is  .3s.  per  ounce,  and  the  tcmpouir)'  or  w ar  duty  Is.  per  oz. 

CHANK  i^IIELLS, 

Or  the  common  conch  shell,  is  an  article  of  trade  from  Cev ion  to  the  Coast  of  fUiromaiidel  and  Bengal, 
where  they  are  used  in  beetling  the  finer  cloths  manufactured  there,  and  as  wiist  ornainenls  for  the  women, 
when  sawed  into  narrow  rings,  and  the  edges  polished.  They  are  also  nu  t with  at  ('hlttagong  and  Aracan. 

These  shells  are  fisluxl  up  hy  divers  In  the  Gulf  of  Muiuir,  in  about  tv\o  fathoms  w ater.  They  are  of 
a spiral  form,  and  oi’e  chiefly  exported  to  Bengal,  where  they  are  saw  ed  into  rings  of  various  sizes,  and 
worn  on  the  arms,  legs,  fingers,  and  toes  of  the  Hindoos.  A chank  opiaiing  to  the  right  hand  is  highly 
valued  by  the  natives  of  India,  and  being  rarely  found,  always  sells  tor  its  weight  in  gold. 

PEARLS 

Are  hard,  white,  and  shining,  usually  roundish,  found  in  a testaceous  fish  of  the  oyster  kind;  they 
are  formed  of  the  nature  of  the  shell,  and  consist  of  a number  of  coats ‘spread  w illi  perfect  regiilurity  one 
over  another,  in  the  same  manner  as  the  several  coats  of  an  onion,  or  like  the  several  strata  of  stones 
found  in  the  bladder  or  stomachs  of  animals,  only  much  thinner. 

Pearls  are  generally  divided  into  oriental  and  occidental,  more  from  their  qualities  than  llu  ir  place  of 
produce,  tlie  oriental  being  reckoned  the  best.  The  principal  oriental  pe  arl  fisheries  are  in  the  (Julf  of 
Manar,  the  Persian  Gulf,  Sooloo  Archipelago,  and  on  some  of  the  Japan  Islands. 

The  principal  pearl  fisheries  in  America  are  St.  Margarita  and  the  Gulf  of  Ali  xmo.  In  Europe 
pearls  are  also  met  with  on  the  coasts  of  Livonia,  Courland,  Scotland,  and  vai  ious  other  places. 

The  Ceylon  oyster  banks  are  scattered  over  a space  at  the  bottom  of  the  Gulf  of  Manar,  e xtendi ng  about 
30  miles  from  north  to  south,  and  24  from  east  to  west.  There  are  14  beds,  hut  they  are  not  all  productive, 
and  not  more  than  two  or  three  can  be  fished  in  one  season;  the  largest  is  ten  miles  in  length,  and  two 
miles  in  breadth ; the  others  are  much  smaller.  The  depth  of  water  over  the  different  banks  varies  from 
3 to  15  fathoms,  but  tlie  best  fishing  is  found  in  from  six  to  eight  fathoms.  The  pearl  banks  are  about 
fifteen  miles  from  tlie  shore  of  Condatchy. 

The  pearl  oysters  in  these  banks  are  all  of  one  species,  and  of  the  same  regular  form,  but  of  dif- 
ferent  qualities  and  denominations,  from  the  nature  of  the  ground  to  wliich  they  are  attached.  1 lu;  shape 
of  the  oyster  is  an  imperfect  oval,  pretty  nearly  the  same  as  that  of  the  cockle,  about  9J  inches  in  cir- 
cumference, with  a segment  cut  off  by  a straight  line  at  the  hinge,  or  point  of  union  of  the  two  valves. 
The  body  of  the  oyster  is  white,  fleshy,  and  glutinous.  The  inside  of  the  shell  is  brighter  and  more 
beautiful  than  the  pearl  itself;  the  outside  is  smooth^  unless  when  covered  wUh  corals,  sponges,  and 
other  marine  production^ 


358 


PEARLS. 


Tlie  pearls  are  commonly  contained  in  the  thickest  and  most  fleshy  part  of  the  oyster,  contiguous 
to  one  of  the  angles  of  the  shell  close  to  the  hinge.  An  oyster  frequently  contains  several  pearls: 
one  lias  been  known  to  produce  150,  including  the  seed  or  dust  pearls;  and  100  oysters  have  been  opened 
without  yielding  one  pearl  large  enough  to  be  of  any  estinuitioii. 

The  pearl  oyster  is  said  to  attain  its  maturity  at  the  age  of  seven  or  eight  years ; after  which  its 
existence  soon  terminates,  and  its  contents  are  washed  away  by  the  waves. 

The  fishery  generally  bc'gins  about  the  20th  of  February.  Sometimes  Government  fishes  the  banks  at 
its  own  risk  ; sometimes  the  boats  are  let  to  many  speculators,  but  most  frequently  the  right  of  fishing  is 
sold  to  one  individual,  who  sub-rents  boats  to  others. 

In  1801.  the  fishery  was  let  by  Government  to  a notlve  of  Jafliiapatam.  For  thirty  days’ fishing,  with 
i.jO  boats,  he  came  under  an  obligation  to  pay  300,000  Porto  Novo  pagodas.  He  sold  the  right  of  fishing 
to  some  of  the  best  equipped  boats  for  .3000  pagodas  each,  and  that  of  others  for  2500,  but  kept  by  far 
the  greater  part  of  them  to  fish  on  his  own  account. 

3’he  bouts  with  their  crews  and  divers  come  from  Manar,  Jafliiapatam,  Nagore,  Tuticorin,  Travan- 
core,  .and  other  parts  of  the  Coast  of  Coromandel.  They  arrive  completely  equipped,  and  are  open  boats  of 
one  ton  burden,  about  45  feet  long,  7 or  8 broad,  and  3 feet  deep,  having  but  one  mast  and  one  sail ; and 
unless  when  heavily  laden,  do  not  draw  more  than  eight  or  ten  inches  water.  The  crew  generally  consists 
of  23  persons,  10  of  whom  are  divers,  10  mundnes,  or  men  to  haul  up  the  divers;  1 tindal,  1 steersman,  a 
boy  to  bale  out  water,  and  a man  to  take  care  of  the  boat.  To  these  is  added  a peon  on  the  part  of  the 
renter,  to  guard  against  fraud. 

The  period  the  divers  continue  under  water,  in  the  depth  of  seven  fathoms,  seldom  exceeds  a minute, 
sometimes  a minute  and  a half;  but  other  persons  who  are  willing  to  allow  the  greatest  latitude,  say  they 
never  knew  a diver  remain  under  water  more  than  two  minutes.  In  ground  richly  clothed  with  oysters, 
a diver  often  brings  up  in  his  basket  160  oysters  at  a dip ; but  when  they  are  thinly  scattered,  he  frequently 
collects  no  more  than  five.  One  boat  has  been  known  to  land  in  one  day  33,000  oysters,  and  another 
not  more  than  300. 

The  oysters  are  generally  allowed  to  remain  in  heaps  for  ten  days  after  they  are  brought  on  shore, 
that  time  being  necessary  to  render  them  putrid.  They  are  not  esteemed  good  to  eat,  being  of  a much 
fatter  and  more  glutinous  substance  than  the  common  oyster.  When  they  are  opened  fresh,  they  are  some- 
times dried  in  tlie  sun,  and  eaten  by  the  lower  classes  of  people. 

After  the  pearls  arc  separated  from  the  sand,  wa.shed  with  salt  water,  dried,  and  rendered  perfectly 
clean,  they  are  sorted  into  classes  according  to  their  sizes,  by  being  passed  through  ten  brass  sieves,  or 
saucers  full  of  round  holes.  The  saucers  arc  all  apparently  of  one  size,  but  made  so  as  to  go  one  withirr 
the  otlier.  They  are  distinguished  into  numbers,  20,  30,  SO,  80,  100,  200,  400, 600, 800, and  1000.  This 
is  a kind  of  ratio  to  estimate  the  value  of  the  different  sizes  of  pearls;  and  probably  the  distinguislung 
numbers  in  some  measure  correspond  with  the  quantity  of  holes  in  each  bason.  These  com|)]ete]y  occupy 
the  bottom  of  the  vessel,  and  as  they  increase  in  number,  they  nece.s8arily  decrease  in  size.  The  pearls  are 
thrown  into  a promiscuous  heap  into  the  uppermost  sieve,  which  being  raised  a little,  and  shaken,  the  greater 
part  of  them  pass  through  into  the  second  sieve,  and  only  those  remain  which  exceed  a large  pea  in  size. 
The  second  sieve  is  shaken  in  the  same  manner;  the  pearls  that  remain  in  it,  are  of  the  size  of  a small  pea, 
or  grain  of  black  pepper.  The  quantity  of  pearls  gradually  increases  as  the  size  diminishes.  Those  which 
full  through  the  tenth  saucer  (\o.  1000)  belong  to  the  class  of  tool,  or  seed  pearls,  so  called  from  the 
smallness  of  their  .size. 

The  pearls  contained  in  the  sieves  20  to  80  inclusive,  are  distinguished  by  the  general  name  of  mell, 
or  the  first  order.  Those  of  the  sieves  from  No.  100  to  1000  are  denominated  vadivoo,  or  the  second  order. 


PEARLS. 


359 


» 


Both  these  orders  are  divided  into  various  sorts,  according  to  their  shape,  lustre,  and  other  qualities, 
amongst  which  are  annees,  annadaree,  kayarel,  samadiem,  kulJipoo,  koorwel,  pesul,  and  tool. 

Annees  arc  the  first  sort,  perfectly  round,  and  of  the  most  brilliant  liistn*. 

Annadaree  is  a subdivision  of  them,  possessing  the  same  qualities  in  an  inferior  degree. 

Kayarel  is  the  next  in  beauty,  but  not  so  completely  round,  and  of  a duller  colour.  To  this  class 
belong  the  samadiem,  which  is  nearly  of  the  form  of  a pear,  and  the  kallipoo,  whicli  has  flat  sides. 

The  koorwel,  or  third  class,  is  a double  pearl,  ill-shaped,  and  of  a dull  water;  to  it  may  be  added  the 
pesul,  the  most  deformed  of  all  the  pearls,  and  the  tool,  or  seed  pearl,  the  most  diminutive. 

The  different  descriptions  of  pearls  arc  sent  to  different  markets;  hut  at  the  fishery  all  the  kinds  are 
generally  sold  mixed  together  at  200  pagodas  per  pound. 

The  method  of  determining  tlie  price  of  the  different  sorts  of  pearls  is  regulated  by  au  imaginary  cri- 
terion, estimating  the  proportion  of  that  quality  which  attaches  to  them  the  highest  value.  It  has  the  ap- 
pearance of  being  intricate  and  difficult,  but  is  considered  siiiiph*  by  those  who  understand  it.  Size,  round- 
ness, and  brightness  seem  to  be  the  qualities  on  wdiich  it  hinges. 

The  pearls  arc  then  drilled.  The  largo  ones  are  generally  drillc'd  first,  in  order  to  bring  in  the  hand  to 
work  with  more  ease  on  the  smaller  size,  and  an  expert  w^orkman  in  the  course  ot  a day  will  per- 
forate 300  small,  or  600  large  pearls.  They  are  then  washed  in  salt  and  wate  r,  to  prevent  the  stains  which 
would  otherwise  be  occasioned  by  tlic  perforating  instrument. 

The  next  branch  of  the  liusiness  is  the  arranging  the  pearls  on  strings;  this  is  considered  the  most 
difficult  operation  in  the  profession  of  the  pearl  merchant,  and  is  one  in  which  very  few  excel. 

The  pearls  of  the  largest  size,  being  most  costly,  and  esteemed  as  emblems  of  greatness,  find  a ready 
sale  among  the  rich  natives  of  the  Nizam's  dominions,  Guzzerat,  and  the  other  parts  of*  India. 

The  finest  annee  pearls,  from  the  size  of  tlie  .sieve  No.  30,  to  that  of  No.  80,  which  make  most  beau- 


tiful necklaces,  are  sent  to  Europe. 

A handsoiYK'  necklace  of  pearls,  smaller  than  a large  pea,  costs  from  ITM  to  .^300;  but  one  about 
tlie  size  of  a peppercorn,  may  l)C  procured  for  i>13:  the  former  pearls  sell  at  u Ruinea  each,  mul  the  latler 
at  eighteen  iwnce.  When  the  pearls  dwindle  to  the  size  of  .small  shot,  they  are  sold  at  a very  trilling  pnee. 

The  smaller  sorts  are  sent  to  the  markets  of  Ilydruhad,  Poona,  .and  Guzzerat,  in  whieli  lasl-mcn- 
tioned  place,  pearls  of  a yellow  tinge  are  preferred  to  those  of  a pmr  white,  being  considered  as  having 
arrived  at  greater  maturity,  less  liable  to  fade,  and  i-etaining  their  lu.stiv  to  a longer  jieriod.  'I’hc  n luse 
and  lower  orders  of  all  the  pearls  turn  to  good  account  in  the  China  market,  wl.ere  those  of  superior  value 

cannot  be  so  readily  sold.  ^ 

Pearls  are  sometimes  met  witli  of  various  coloui>,  of  an  exipiisite  silveriikc  brightness,  transparent, 

semi-transparent,  opaque,  brown,  and  black.  ^ , . i>,i  -l'- 

One  of  the  largest  pearls  liitherto  known,  is  described  by  Taveriiierto  to  he  in  the  |.osses.sion  of  the  Iv  mg 

of  Persia.  It  was  bought  by  him  at  the  Bahreen  fishery,  and  cost  .32,000  toinands,  upwards  of  X'1I0,000. 

It  is  in  the  shape  of  a pear,  very  regular,  and  without  fault. 

Another  pearl  belonging  to  the  Great  Mogul,  and  perfectly  round,  is  the  largest  in  the  world  of  that 

fimire  measurinir  0,62  English  inches  in  diameter. 

A li««l  dW  from  in  Sgore  the  .Iroping  li<m.  wmshmS  *>78  car«b,  cmriBl  for  mie  from  Ilol- 
ta.dtoSt.P.tmbur6hinim  It  w»  purolimbl  in  India  for  W.OOO  florin.,  ntonl  .n.l  .... 

offered  for  sole  nt  donbie  that  sum;  it.  colonr  and  rplendonr  rrere  remarkably  fine. 

The  Kina  of  Spain,  Philip  II.,  had  a pearl,  rrhioh  he  pareharod  from  a trareller.  It  aeighed 
85  carat.,  wa.  rained  at  160,000  ddhna,  «>d  wa.  prodaced  from  tlr.  pearl  0.1, cry  at  SI.  MergaeMte 

Smirraer  mentton.  a pearl  in  the  pomemion  of  the  Prince  Maroat.  a.  herns  ‘k'’  met  waadcrtal  m 


SGO 


PEARLS. 


« 

the  world,  not  so  much  for  its  siiBC,  for  it  weighed  only  carats,  nor  for  its  perfect  roundness,  but  be- 
cause it  was  so  clear  and  transparent  as  to  be  almost  seen  through.  The  Great  Mogul  offered  40,000 
crowns  lor  this  pearl,  which  was  refused.  Tavernier  also  mentions  having  sold  a pear-shaped  pearl  to 
the  uncle  of  the  Great  Mogul,  wliich  weighed  55  carats. 

Pliny  says  that  pearls  are  the  most  valuable  and  excellent  of  all  precious  stones ; they  were  much 
esteemed  by  the  ancients,  and  an  extraordinary  value  put  upon  the  larger  kinds.  We  are  told  that  Servilia, 
the  mother  of  Marcus  Brutus,  presented  one  to  Ciesar  of  the  value  of  jC’50,000  of  our  money  ; and  that 
Cleopatra  dissolved  one  worth  ^250,000  In  vinegar,  which  she  drank  at  a supper  wiiliMtu-k  Antony. 

IVarls  from  the  fishery  of  Ceylon  arc  more  esteemed  in  England  than  from  any  other  part  of  the 
world,  being  of  a more  i-egiilar  form,  and  of  a finer  silvery  white  than  the  Persian  |)earl.  They  should 
be  chosen  round,  of  a bright  lustre,  free  from  stains,  foulness,  and  roughness  ; tliey  are  sometimes  brought 
to  Europe  undrilled,  Imt  are  not  of  so  much  value  as  when  drilled  and  strung ; and  tlie  pearls  should  be 
as  near  as  possible  of  an  equal  quality  throughout  each  string. 

The  finest,  and  what  is  called  the  true  shape  of  the  peaid,  is  a perfect  round ; but  if  pearls  of  a consi- 
deral)le  size  arc  of  the  shape  of  a pear,  as  is  not  uiifrequeiitly  the  case,  they  are  not  less  valued,  as  they 
serve  for  ear-rings  and  other  ornaments ; their  colour  should  be  a pure  white,  and  tJiat  not  a dead  and  lifeless, 
but  a clear  and  brilliant  one;  they  must  be  peiiectly  free  from  foulness,  and  their  surface  must  be  naturally 
smooth  and  glossy.  Pearls  that  arc  rough  on  the  surface,  spotted,  or  dull  in  colour,  irregular  in  their  shapes, 
and  not  perfectly  round,  should  be  rejecled.  It  is  also  an  imperfection  when  tliey  have  large  drilled  holes, 
or  arc  rubbed  flat  about  the  edges  of  their  holes  hy  long  use.  As  no  allowance  is  made  for  tassels,  care 
should  be  taken  that  as  little  silk,  &c.  are  in  them  as  possible. 

Of  the  smallest  size,  or  seed  pearl,  the  most  diminutive  is  of  more  value  than  the  middle  size,  provided 
it  runs  smooth,  round,  and  of  a fine  silvery  lustre.  Tliis  kind  being  sold  by  the  ounce,  cai*c  should  be 
taken  that  the  tassels  are  very  slight,  as  an  allowance  of  £6  per  cent,  only  is  made  in  England,  though 
the  bilk,  &c.  are  generally  much  heavier. 

The  permanent  duty  on  pearls  is  i?10  cent,  and  the  tem|>orary  or  war  duty  £3.  Cs.  8d.  making 
in  the  whole,  jC’IS.  fis.  8d.  per  cent. 

The  revenue  derived  from  pearls  in  the  years  1803  to  1800  inclusive  was  £15,4^5.  159. 

CEYLON  STONES. 

Stones  of  various  kinds  are  found  on  Ceylon,  but  the  greater  part  of  them  are  of  a veary  inferior  quality, 
^rhe  Moors  carry  on  a considerable  trade  in  them.  All  such  stones  as  are  transparent,  and  sufficiently 
hard  to  take  a polish  by  grinding,  are  called  precious  stones.  They  are  known  by  the  following  names. 

UiJUY.— The  ruby  is  more  or  less  ripe,  which,  according  to  the  Indian  expression,  means  more  or 
less  higli-coloured.  The  ruby  is  for  the  most  part  blood  red ; the  deeper  red  the  colour,  the  larger  the 
stone,  and  the  clearer  it  is,  without  any  flaw,  so  much  greater  is  its  value ; however,  they  arc  seldom  found 
here  of  any  considerable  size  : for  the  most  part,  they  are  small,  frequently  of  the  size  of  particles  of  grave), 
grains  of  barley,  &:c.  'The  higher  the  colour,  the  clearer  and  more  transparent  they  are. 

Amethysts. — These  stones  are  sometimes  found  of  a large  size,  but  generally  very  small;  the  larger 
their  dimensions,  the  paler  and  less  coloured  they  are,  and  therefore  less  valued  and  esteemed.  The 
small  are  of  the  deepest  colour,  but  notwithstanding  of  no  great  value.  The  dearest  and  most  valuable  arc 
those  which  are  high-coloured,  without  flaws,  and  of  some  tolerable  size. 

Hoe  AI.S  are  dark-coloured  stones,  darker  than  the  ruby,  and  not  so  hard.  They  are  found  mostly  In  small 
pieces,  are  cut  for  .setting  in  rings,  and  ara  frequently  exposed  to  sale  for  rubies. 

Hyacinths  are  small  yellounsh  brown,  or  reddish  stonw,  which,  as  well  as  robals,  are  frequently 
oflored  for  sale  under  the  denomination  of  nibies. 


CEYLON  STONES. 


, 361 

CiNNAMOM  Stone  derives  its  name  from  iU  colour,  which  in  some  measure  resembles  the  oil  drawn 
from  the  best  and  finest  cinnamon  ; it  is  not  however  always  alike,  but  more  or  less  pale,  or  of  a deep 
orange  colour.  Phesc  stones  are  seldom  found  of  any  considerable  size  in  a perfect  state;  but  they 
are  in  general,  even  the  small  ones,  cracked  longways  and  across,  which  destroys  their  cl(*arnebs,  and 
renders  them  unfit  for  cutting. 

^ Cat’s  Evk  is  the  name  of  a very  hard  stone,  which  approaches  more  or  less  to  white,  or  green,  and  is 
semi'diaphanous,  with  a streak  of  the  breadth  of  aline  in  the  middle,  which  is  much  wdiitcr  than  the  stone 
itself,  and  throws  its  light  to  what  side  soever  it  is  turned.  In  this  respect  therefore  it  resembles  a cat’s 
eye,  whence  it  derives  its  name.  The  largest  is  of  the  size  of  a hazel-nut;  others  are  found  much 
smaller.  In  its  rough  state  it  seems  to  have  no  angles  nor  signs  of  crystallization.  Its  value  is  in  pro- 
portion to  its  size  and  purity.  One  of  the  size  of  a nut,  without  flaws  and  other  imperfections,  is  sojnctiincs 
valued  at  50  or  60  rix-dollars.  They  are  cut  convex  and  oblong,  without  faces,  so  that  the  streak  which 
intersects  them,  comes  in  the  middle,  and  they  are  afterwards  set  in  rings,  which  arc  worn  by  the  natives. 

White  Cuystal  is  found  both  crystallized  and  worn  smooth  by  tlic  whaler;  is  in  uneven,  Hal, 
and  long  pieces,  lull  of  pits  and  hollow's;  the  colour  is  clear,  more  or  l(‘ss  of  a watery  hue  or  shining  white ; 
it  sometimes  is  found  in  lump.s  of  six  inclies  in  diameter. 

Yellow  Crystal  is  nearly  the  same  as  the  white,  only  witii  tliis  distinction,  that  it  a|)p<wf  of 
a disagreeable  yellow  colour;  it  is  .seldom  if  ever  crystallized,  but  always  worn  down  smooth  by  the 
agitation  of  the  water  into  round  pieces,  with  a rough  knobby  surface. 

Brown  Crystal  is  distinguished  from  the  former  by  its  being  of  a blackish  cast,  or  that  of  [mlc  ink. 
When  laid  upon  any  substance,  it  does  not  seem  to  be  transparent,  but  may  be  seen  through  if  viewed 
against  the  light.  The  pieces  arc  the  size  of  a walnut,  and  are  cut  into  buttons  and  other  uses. 

Black  Crystal  is  quite  black  and  shining,  but  not  transparent;  some  pieces  are  as  large  as  a 
walnut,  others  as  small  as  a pea.  They  arc  cut  and  polished  for  buttons,  and  bear  a great  resemblance 
to  jet;  it  is  very  common,  and  of  but  little  value. 

Jarocon,  or  Zircon,  is  a kind  of  stone  of  the  nature  of  a diamond,  l)ut  much  softer;  according  to 
some  lapidaries,  the  jargoon  comes  next  in  hardnes.s  to  the  sapphire;  and  as  they  have,  when  cut  and  po- 
lished, a great  resemblance  to  the  diamond,  they  are  made  up  in  various  kinds  of  jewellery;  they  are 
generally  very  small,  of  a smooth  surface,  and  a bright  shining  lustre.  The  larger  they  arc,  tlie  more  they 
arc  esteemed. 

Blue  Sapphire. — Sometimes  these  arc  so  pale,  that  they  almost  exhibit  the  appearance  of  water,  but 
generally  they  are  of  a dark  blue,  uniformly  coloured,  and  of  round  and  various  other  sliapes ; th(*y  are 
sometimes  to  be  met  with  a.s  large  as  a hazel-nut,  but  most  of  them  are  much  smaller. 

Green  Sapphire  occurs  of  a bright  green,  a greenish,  and  a palish  white  colour,  and  is  a genuine 
sapphire,  which  is  fit  for  cutting,  and  njiplied  to  that  purpose. 

Water  Sapphire  is  the  name  of  a stone  which  very  much  resembles  white  crystul,  but  uJicn 
viewed  against  the  light,  is  both  clearer  and  whiter;  it  is  especially  distinguishable  by  its  hardness,  in  which 
it  surpasses  the  crystal,  and  is  much  dearer.  The  largest  are  of  the  size.*  of  a walnut. 

Red  Tourmalin. — When  laid  upon  a tabic,  it  appears  dark  and  opaque,  but  being  held  against  the 
lights  is  of  a pale  red  hue.  They  are  sometimes  as  large  as  a pea,  but  most  of  thePi  arc  about  the  .size  of 
a grain  of  rice,  and  frequently  damaged  and  imperfect;  the  colour  is  in  general  equally  distributed. 

3 A 


CEYLON  STONES. 


Grernt  Tourmalin  is  of  a dark  hue,  sometimes  bordering  a little  upon  yellow,  sometimes  upon  blue, 
most  frequently  upon  black ; it  is  in  not  a few  instances  transparent,  and  in  others  covered  with  an  opaque 
surface ; it  is  in  thick  and  thin  pieces  of  irregular  forms,  sometimes  os  large  as  a walnut,  sometimes  as  small 
as  groats.  The  green,  or  chrysoprase,  is  beautiful,  of  a grass  green  colour,  clear  and  transparent,  and  is 
used  for  cutting.  This  is  properly  called  the  green  tourmalin. 

Yellow  Tourmalin  is  called  likewise  tourmalin  topaz,  because  it  sometimes  bears  a great  resemblance 
in  colour  to  the  topaz ; in  appearance  It  is  very  much  like  amber;  some  are  more  saturated  or  ripe,  almost 
of  an  orange  colour;  some  are  of  a paler,  and  some  of  a whitish  yellow.  They  aie  cut  for  the  purpose  of 
settuig  in  rings,  and  are  frequently  handsome. 

"WiiiTE  Tourmalin.— It  is  more  or  less  white,  almost  always  the  colour  of  milk,  so  that  its  trans- 
parency is  not  perfectly  clear.  It  is  often  found  in  pieces,  which  have  spots  or  streaks  in  them.  It  is  cut 
for  setting  in  rings,  and  is  among  the  most  common  stones  in  Ceylon. 

Tar  IPO  is  the  name  given  in  Ceylon  to  a white  stone,  which  in  all  probability  is  nothing  more 
than  white  crystal ; its  colour  is  pure  white,  or  somewhat  of  a watery  cast,  but  not  so  dear  and  transpa- 
rent as  the  crystal.  It  is  always  in  shapeless  lumps,  and  is  cut  for  setting. 

Topaz. — This  is  in  general  a beautiful  transparent  stone,  of  a shining  gold  colour,  met  with  in 
various  parts  of  tlu;  world,  in  the  Brazils,  Ceylon,  and  Madras;  they  should  be  chosen  large,  of  a bright 
deep  colour,  free  from  cracks,  flaws,  or  clouds;  those  that  have  a reddish  tinge  should  be  rejected 


CHAFFER  XVIH. 


Coast  from  Cape  Comorin  to  Madras. 


Coofl  of  TinncveU^-^Tuticorin^Commerce  with  Madras-^^Point  Cahjmen---N€gap(ilmn--^Coins^Commr^ 

with  Madras  Nagorc — Karical — Tranquchar — Coinsy  Wtr^hiSy  and  Measures — Commerce Ilisloncaf 

P'oets  relative,  to  the  Commerce  of  Dcnmirk  with  the  East  IndicH — Ikvicotta — Porto  Novo Coinsy  Weifrhtsy 

and  Measures^Cuddalore-^Commerce  of  the  Southern  Division  of  the  Carnatic  ?vilh  Madras^lZndi- 
cherry;  Description — CoinSy  Weights,  and  Measures — Historical  Facts  rclatite  to  the  Commerce  and 
Conquests  of  Fratwe  in  the  East  Indies-^Allemparva^Sadras— Seven  Pagodas-^Covehng^Historical  J'acU 
relative  to  the  Commerce  of  Ostend  with  the  East  Indies^Mcluipour,  or  St.  Thomi. 


THE  Coast  of  India  from  Cape  Comorin  to  Point  Ramen,  which  forms  the  N.  W.  side  of  the  Gulf  of 
Manar,  is  culled  the  Tinnevelly  Coast.  It  is  only  frequented  by  small  coasting  vessels.  Point  Ramen  is  in 
some  degree  connected  with  the  Island  of  Ceylon  by  a narrow  ridge  of  sand  and  rocks,  called  Adam's  Bridge. 

TUTICORIN 

Is  the  principal  place  on  this  part  of  the  coast,  and  is  in  latitude  8^  53  North.  The  town  is  large, 
open,  and  well-built,  adorned  with  several  large  buildings  of  stone,  particularly  several  churches  erected 
by  the  Portuguese,  from  whom  the  Dutch  took  it  in  1658.  (’oiisiderable  quantities  of  piece-goods  are 
manufactured  here  and  in  the  neighbouring  villages.  Between  Tuticorin  and  Ceylon  are  numerous  sand- 
banks. A pearl  fishery  is  carried  on  here,  though  at  present  not  very  productive,  and  considerable  quanti- 
ties of  chank  shells  are  exported  from  hence. 

The  commerce  between  this  part  of  the  coast  and  Madras  in  piece-goods,  grain,  &c.  is  considerable. 

In  the  years  1802  to  1806  inclusive,  there  was  Imported  into  Tinnevelly  from  Madras, 

merchandise  to  the  amount  — Sicca  Rupees  9,07,007 


Ddring  the  same  period  there  was  merchandise  exported  to  the  amount  of  25,43,279 

Exports  exceed  the  imports^^v^^^^*^  16,35,672 

Treasure  exported  to  Madras  during  the  same  period  H,C00 


Bidance  in  faeour  of  the  Coast  of  Tinnevelly 


.Sicca  Rupees  16,21,720 


304 


NEGAPATAM. 


The  following  are  the  articles  of  which  the  imports  and  exports  consisted  in  1805. 


Arliclts  of  Import  in  1805. 


Pcppi 

Piece-goods 
Grain 
Beetle 
Timber 
Oil 

Liquors 
Sundries 


.»^..»Sicca  Rupees  56,732 
12,223 
7,626 
4,299 
5,602 
3,642 
1,311 
14,877 
29,400 


Imports  in  1805 


.Sicca  Rupees  1,33,71^5 


Articles  of  Export  in  1805. 


«<%«>%  v%%%  V 1 


Piece-goods^.^^v^%^v%^^w.^Sicca  Rupees 
Grain 

Jaggery  and  toddy 
Dnic[« 

Cotton 
Fruits 
Beetle-nut 
Pepper 
Sundries 


C,  17,336 
4:3,373 
'23,7  J.3 
dyKrZ 
11,618 
9,C43 
8,367 
4,434 
39,946 


Exports  in  1805 


Sicca  Rupees  3,63,3 1 4 


In  thw  district  arc  manufactured  calamaganzies,  aunni-ketchies,  and  put  ton -ket  clues.  These  cloths  are 
mdlie  of  a hard  long  grained  cotton,  are  of  an  even  regular  texture,  and  resemble  European  linen  more 
than  any  of  the  Indian  cloths.  They  are  preferable  to  the  long-cloths  manufactured  in  the  Circars,  and 
are  cheaper  by  at  least  30  per  rent. 

The  coast  from  Cape  Ramcn  to  Point  Calymere  comprehends  the  provinces  of  the  Marawars  and 
Tondiman;  the  principal  towns  on  the  coast  are  Tondy  and  Cottapatam,  frequented  only  by  small  coasters. 
On  Point  Calymere,  which  is  in  latitude  1(P  18'  North,  arc  two  remarkable  pagodas.  About  half  a mile  to 
the  northward  of  them  is  a small  river,  and  on  its  banks  stands  a large  village,  where  a considerable  trade  is 
carried  on  in  tobacco,  rice,  piece-goods,  &c.;  the  river  has  a bar,  so  that  only  small  vessels  can  enter.  The 
kingdom  of  Tanjore  commences  to  the  southward  of  Point  Calymere,  and  extends  to  the  northward  as 
far  as  the  Coleroon  River. 


NEGAPATAM. 

The  fort  is  in  latitude  10®  43  North,  and  longitude  79®  39'  East;  it  is  a regular  pentagon  with  wet 
ditches,  and  tlie  whole  of  the  fortifications  are  strong,  and  in  good  repair.  The  town  is  situated  to  the  north- 
ward of  the  fort,  near  which  is  a river  capable  of  receiving  small  country  vessels,  which  has  two  entrances, 
one  to  the  northward,  and  the  other  to  the  southward,  the  land  between  them  forming  an  island;  the 
boats  use  the  windward  entrance  in  passing  out,  and  the  leeward  one  in  returning,  according  to  the  monsoon. 
On  the  north  side  of  this  river  is  a strong  batteiy,  to  which  boats  entering,  must  go  within  the  length  of 
their  oars,  and  the  landing-place  is  close  to  it.  There  is  a bar  at  the  mouth  of  the  river,  which  in  bad  weather 
breaks  very  much,  and  becomes  dangerous. 

The  common  anchorage  in  the  fair  season  is  abreast  the  fort  in  five  fathoms,  1 ^ to  2 miles  off  shore. 
Tn  unsettled  weather  it  is  prudent  to  anchor  further  out  in  6 or  7 fathoms,  the  flagstaff  bearing  W.  | S. 
and  the  highest  of  the  five  pagodas  at  Nagore  N.  W.  which  is  good  holding  ground. 

Negapatam  formerly  belonged  to  the  Portuguese.  The  Dutch  took  it  in  l660;  they  strengthened 
the  fortifications,  and  it  became  the  most  considerable  place  belonging  to  them  on  the  Coromandel  Coast. 
Negapatam  was  besieged  by  the  English  in  1781.  The  fleet  under  Sir  Edward  Hughes  blocked  it  up 
by  sea,  and  the  land  forces  under  Sir  Hector  Munro  invested  it  by  land.  The  garrison  amounted  to  about 

8.000  men  of  all  sorts,  and  far  exceeded  tlie  besiegers  in  point  of  number,  whose  whole  force  did  not  exceed 

4.000  men  capable  of  effective  service.  On  October  29th,  1781,  the  strong  lines,  flanked  by  redoubts  which 
the  Dutch  hod  thrown  up,  to  cover  and  defend  the  approaches  to  ^e  town,  were  attacked,  and  carried  by 


negapatam. 


365 


storm.  On  November  3d,  the  General  opened  ground  against  the  north  face  of  the  fort ; and  the  approarhcs 
were  carried  on  with  unusual  rapidity.  On  the  7th  a battery  of  ten  1 8 pounders  being  ready  to  open  within 
300  paces  of  the  walls,  the  Adtniral  and  General  sent  a joint  letter  of  summon.s  to  the  Duteh  Governor, 
which  he  answered  with  great  respect,  but  no  less  firmness.  The  garrison  made  two  desperate  sallies  with 
almost  their  whole  force,  but  were  driven  back  into  the  town  with  much  loss  in  both.  A battery  being 
opened  w ith  great  effect  on  the  face  of  a bastion  which  was  intended  to  be  breached,  the  enemy  demanded  a 
parley , and  on  the  12th  of  November,  commissioners  were  sent  out  to  settle  the  terms  of  capitulation  with  the 
Admiral  and  General.  By  these  the  town  and  citadel,  and  every  thing  they  contained  belonging  to  the 
Goveniment  or  Company,  were  surrendered;  private  property  was  secured,  and  the  inhabitants  pro- 
tected in  their  house'’  and  estates,  upon  taking  the  oath  of  allegiance.  The  garrison  wer#  allowed  military 
honours,  and  then  became  prisoners  of  war;  and  the  Governor,  Council,  and  civil  officers  were  retained 
on  parole.  The  whole  loss  of  the  besiegers,  in  killed,  wounded,  and  missing,  amounted  to  no  more  than 
133  men.  A numerous  artillery,  with  large  quantities  of  shot,  .shells,  military  and  artillery  stores  were 
found  in  the  place.  The  Dutch,  at  the  (leace  in  1782,  ceded  the  place  and  its  dependencies  to  the  English, 
who  have  retained  it  ever  since. 

The  watering  place  is  about  half  a mile  up  the  river,  at  a large  tank  entirely  commanded  by  the  foi  l. 
The  watering  here  would  be  both  troublesome  and  tedious  without  the  assistance  <»f  the  natives  and  their 
boats.  Fresh  provisions  fur  present  use  may  be  got  here,  w ith  vegetables  and  fruit,  sufficient  fur  a fleet 
of  ships,  and  also  rice;  but  fire-wood  is  a scarce  commodity. 

COINS. 


During  the  period  the  Dutch  held  Negapatam,  a coinage  took  place  of  four  or  five  lacs  of  pagodas 
annually ; but  this  has  been  discontinued  since  the  English  obtained  pos.session  of  it.  As  there  is  no 
gold  coinage  in  any  other  place  to  the  southward,  nor  any  regular  circulation  of  rupees,  the  whole  currency 
of  those  provinces,  exceeding  the  pagoda.s  that  happen  to  be  in  use,  consists  of  fanams.  Of  these  every  dis- 
trict coins  a different  sort,  and  no  comparative  rate  having  been  established  between  the  star  pagodas  and 
those  inferior  coins,  tlieir  value  fluctuates  according  to  the  relative  demand,  and  the  coinage  of  one  pro- 
vince is  seldom  at  par  in  another. 

COMMERCE. 


The  kingdom  of  Tanjore,  of  which  Negapatam  is  the  principal  port,  was  formerly  a place  of  great  foreign 
tod  inf*"**  trade.  It  imported  cotton  from  Bombay  and  Surat,  raw  and  worked  silks  from  Bengal;  sugar, 
&c.from  Sumatra,  Malacca,  and  the  eastward;  gold,  horses,  elephants,  and  timber,  from  Pegu;  and 
various  articles  of  trade  from  China.  The  exports  of  Tanjore  were  muslins,  chintz,  liandkerchiefs,  ginghams, 
various  sorts  of  long-cloths,  and  a coarse  painted  cloth,  which  last  constituted  a material  article  in  the 
Investmento  of  the  Dutch  and  Danes,  being  in  great  demand  for  the  African,  West  Indian,  and  South 
markets.  The  trade  has  of  late  years  fallen  much  to  decay,  in  consequence  of  the  revolutions 
which  took  place  in  1771  and  1776,  and  the  irruption  of  Hyder  in  1781. 


A considerable  trade  is  carried  on  from  this  part  of  the  Coast  with  Madras.  In  the  years  1802 
to  1806  there  was  imported  into  Tanjore,  merchandise  to  the  amount  of-- Sicca  Rupees 
And  during  the  same  period  there  was  merchandise  exported .. — i — — — — — — 


The  exports  exceeded  the  imports  

During  the  same  period,  thequantity  of  treasure  exported  from  Tanjore,  exceeded  the  quantity 

import^ 

•MqUng  a balance  in  favour  of  Tanjore  of  Rupees 


10,96,791 

25,90,088 

14,93,297 

1,37,222 

13,50,075 


366  ‘ 


NAGORE—KAHICAI.— TUANQUEBAR. 


The  following  are  the  articles  of  which  the  imports  and  exports  consisted  in  1803. 

Articles  of  Export  in  1805. 

Cf  l*a  1 11  % vm.  Sicca  Rupees  5,30,331 

Liquors  68,137 

Fruits  31,49ii 

Drugs  1 0,385 

Metals  12,842 

T 34*,S03 

Sundries  WV%%«'V%  1 ,4s3jOOO 

Exports  in  Sicca  Rupees  7,93,601 

NAGORE. 

About  four  miles  from  Negapatam,  in  latitude  10°  47  North,  are  the  five  white  pagodas  of  Nagore; 
they  are  excellent  sea-marks  for  distinguishing  the  river,  whicli  is  close  to  them  on  the  north  side,  wliere 
a great  trade  is  carried  on  in  piece-goods,  rice,  &c.  The  river  has  a bar,  on  which  arc  eight  feet  at  high 
water,  spring  tides.  There  are  several  vessels  of  two  or  three  hundred  tons  burthen  belonging  to  this  place, 
navigated  by  natives,  w^ho  conduct  them  to  the  west  coast  of  Sumatra,  Acheen,  the  Straits  of  Malacca,  and 
other  places  to  the  eastw'ard,  where  they  have  a constant  trade.  The  anchorage  in  Nagore  Road  is  about 
miles  off  the  entrance  of  the  river,  in  3 or  6 fathoms,  the  five  pagodas  bearing  W.S.W.  Nagore  was 
tdken  and  plundered  by  the  French  under  Lally  in  1768. 

KARICAL 

Is  situated  in  latitude  10°  52  North,  and  longitude  80°  8'  East.  This  settlement,  with  the  places 
de[iending  on  it,  belonged  to  the  French,  and  was  granted  to  them  liy  the  King  of  Tanjore  in  1739;  and  in 
1 745,  a number  of  villages  was  added  to  it.  In  the  wars  between  the  English  and  French  it  frequently  changed 
masters.  It  carries  on  a great  trade  in  piece-goods  and  rice.  Two  rivers,  both  navigable  branches  of  the 
Cavcr>',  run  through  this  district,  and  fertilize  the  country,  ivhich  abounds  in  rice  and  other  provisions. 

The  fort  of  Karical  stands  300  yards  from  the  sea-side  on  the  northern  bank  of  a river;  it  is  an  oblong 
square  completely  fortified,  but  w'ants  space,  its  internal  area,  exclusive  of  the  four  bastions,  not  exceeding 
100  yards  from  west  to  east,  and  60  from  north  to  south.  The  bastions  admit  only  three  guns  in  their 
faces;  but  each  of  the  curtains  is  covered  with  a ravelin  much  more  spacious  than  the  bastions,  and  mounting 
six.  A wet  ditch  runs  between  the  three  curtains  to  the  north,  west,  and  south,  and  their  ravelins:  but  on 
the  east  face  the  ditch  surrounds  the  ravelin  likewise.  A covered  way  well  pallisaded,  and  a complete  glacis 
enclose  the  whole.  Karical  was  besieged  by  the  English  under  Major  Monson  in  1760:  it  surrendered 
in  April,  the  garrison  became  prisoners  of  war,  and  the  property  of  the  inhabitants  was  respected.  Besides 
small  arms  and  stores,  there  were  taken  in  the  place  155  pieces  of  cannon  of  all  sorts,  and  nine  mortars, 
with  a large  stock  of  ammunition.  At  this  period  the  French  had  acquired,  by  various  purchases  and 
008*410113  from  the  Government,  districts  round  the  fort  containing  1 13  villages,  of  which  the  Customs  of  the 
[)ort  and  town  produced  about  30,000  pagodas  a year.  It  was  surrendered  to  the  French  at  the  peace, 
but  again  taken,  and  is  now  in  the  hands  of  the  English.  The  'town  is  on  the  north  side  of  the  fort  sepa- 
rated by  an  esplanade,  and  is  large,  spacious,  and  well-built. 

The  marks  for  anchoring  vary  according  to  the  monsoon : in  the  southerly  one  bring  the  flag-staff 
to  bear  W.S.W.  in  five  or  six  fathoms;  and  in  the  northern  monsoon  it  b to  be  brought  to  bear  west.  By 
this  means  the  passage  becomes  easier  to  boats  passing  to  and  from  the  shore. 


Articles  of  Import  in  1805. 

riecc-goodswv%<.%.^-.^^%%v^»%Sicca  Rupees  1,03,019 

Iiuligo  29,8,34  I 

Bectle-nut  4,108  II 

Oram  4,285 


Sundries 


,v,  37,125 


Imports  in  1805  Rupees  1,78,451 


TBANQUIIBAR.  , 

1 10  settlement  belonging  to  the  Danes  in  the  East  Indies,  is  in  latitude 

11“  North,  and  ongitude  79^  58  East.  The  town  is  upwards  of  two  miles  in  circumferenc”  lie  st^et! 

bls^n“  surrounded  with  a good  stone  wall,  having  several 

bastions  well  provided  with  artillery.  Before  the  gate  that  leads  into  the  country  stands  a fine  citadd 

The  ^ort  towards  tlie  sea  is  well  built,  and  regular,  remarkable  for  its  extraonlinary  whiteness,  being  visible 
a great  distance,  and  the  bastions  arc  supplied  with  brass  cannon.  Within  the  walls  of  the  city  there  are 
tlwee  Christian  churches;  one  belonging  to  the  Portuguese  Jesuits,  who  were  settled  here  before  the  Danes 
Aion  IS  the  church  belonging  to  the  inhabitants  and  garrison.  The  third  is  that  of  the  Mis,slonaries,  called 
Jerusalem,  and  consecrated  August  U,  1707.  There  is  also  a large  mosque  for  the  Mahometans,  and 
sei  oral  pagodas  for  the  Gentoos  within  the  walls.  The  district  belonging  to  the  town  is  of  con.sider«blc 
extent,  full  of  villages,  many  of  them  large  and  well  built,  and  tl.e  p.  ineipal  one  is  thought  to  contain  as 
many  inhabitants  as  the  town  of  Danehurgh,  and  several  mosques  and  pagodas. 

Tramiuebar  was  first  visited  by  the  Danes  in  1016,  at  which  perioil  they  found  the  Portuguese  Jesuits 
settled  there,  who  had  built  a church,  and  made  a great  many  converts  among  the  natives.  The  Danes 
made  an  application  to  the  Kajah  for  permission  to  settle  a factory,  and  were  kindly  received.  In  about 
five  years  after,  the  Hajah  entered  into  an  agreement  with  them  for  the  port,  and,  a cei  tain  district  round  it, 
which  he  sold,  or  rather  farmed  to  them,  at  the  annual  rent  of  2000  pagodas.  In  1021  they  built  the  fort 
for  the  defence  of  the  place,  and  tlie  inhabitants  who  had  settled  in  tlie  town  under  its  protection. 
Tranquebar  soon  changed  its  appearance,  and  from  being  a place  of  no  note,  became  of  consi- 
derable  importance.  In  1699  the  Danes  being  on  bad  terms  witli  the  Rajah  of  Tanjorc,  he  resolved 
to  dispossess  them  of  Tranquebar;  and  assembling  an  army  of  J0,O(XI  men,  began  the  siege.  The 
Danes  applied  to  the  English  at  Madras  for  assistance,  which  was  readily  granted.  The  Rajah's  forces, 
after  incredible  labour  and  patience,  had  brought  their  trenches  within  jiistol-shot  of  the  walls,  when  the 
English  reinforcements  arrived.  In  a day  or  two  after  their  arrival,  a sortie  was  made  from  the  garrison, 
and  in  a short  time  the  Rajah  was  compelled  to  raise  the  siege,  and  retii  e wilhin  his  own  territories,  leaving 
the  inhabitants  to  continue  their  occupations  without  molestation.  It  was  again  besieged  by  the  Rajah  in 
1718,  but  he  was  unable  to  make  any  impression;  since  which  period  the  Danes  eontimied  in  undisturbed 
possession,  till  hostilities  commenced  with  the  English,  when  it  surrendered  to  them. 


GOINS,  WEIGHTS,  and  MEASURES. 

Accounts  are  kept  in  rix-dollars  of  12  fanams,  and  also  in  rupees  of  8 fanams;  the  funnm  is  divided 
into  80  cash.  The  rix-dollar  is  an  imaginary  coin,  and  is  reckoned  18  per  ci*nt  below  the  Danish  current 
rix-dollar ; it  is  therefore  worth  about  3s.  2d.  sterling. 

The  coins  current  are  silver  rupees,  double  and  single  fanams,  and  copper  dudus  or  cash. 

The  coinage  of  rupees  is  so  regulated,  that  1302  are  worth  600  old  Spanish  dollars,  weighing  431bs 
7oz.  2dwts.  troy;  the  value  of  the  Tranquebar  rupee  is  therefore  rather  better  than  2s.  sterling. 

Star  pagodas  pass  for  34  fanams,  more  or  less,  and  Spanish  dollars  from  19  to  21  fanams. 

The  maund  weighs  75Ibs.  avoirdupois,  being  reckoned  equal  to  68  lbs.  Danish. 

COMMERCE. 

The  commerce  carried  on  here  is  But  trifling.  The  ships  from  Denmark,  of  which  one  or  two  usually 
came,  brought  metals,  naval  stores,  wine,  &c.  Their  returns  were  made  in  piece-goods.  They  seldom  lyturncd 
direet  from  hence  to  Europe,  but  proceeded  to  Serhampore  in  Bengal  to  complete  their  cargoes.  The 
countiy  vessels  carry  on  a trade  with  the  coasts  of  Pegu,  Sumatra,  and  various  places. 


366 


TRANQUEBAB. 


COMMERCE  WITH  MADRAS. 


The  following  ig  a statement  of  the  merchandise  and  treasure  imported  into  Tranquebar  from  Madras 
and  its  dependencies  in  the  years  1803  to  1806  inclusive;  likewise  of  the  merchandise  and  treasure  exported 
from  Tranquebar  to  Madras  and  its  de{)endencies  during  the  same  period,  togetlier  with  a list  of  the  articles 
of  which  the  imports  and  exports  consisted  in  1805. 


IMPORTS  INTO  TRANQUEBAR. 


Total. 


Sicca  Rupees.  Sicca  Rupees, 


Sicca  Rupees. 

fr,rM 

3,91,680 
9, 54., 343 
9,62,606 
4,24,905 
28,n;i2l 


Articles  of  Import  in  1805. 

Piece-goods«««Mv»«.v,«w,.«  Sicca  Rupees 

Grain 

Hosiery 

Liquors 

Spices  »%»%»» % W 

Metals 

Saddlery 

Naval  stores 

Sundries 


EXPORTS  FROM  TRANQUEBAR. 


Merchandise. 

Treasure 

Sicca  Rupees. 

Sicca  Rupees. 

11,06,505 


6,08,611 

4,72,785 

2,44,923 

13,263*19 


.'^icca  Ru|iees. 

■2,06;24ir 

1,00,678 

9,44,527 

7,28,266 

4,52,111 

24,31,824 


vwv*v»^  % % v% 


8,61,341 

4,819 

1,844 

6,313 

34,775 

13,846 

10,943 

12,387 

3,711 

1,508 

2,048 

9,071 


Articles  of  Export  in  1805. 

Liquors,«vM..»MWM.,^,..,MSicca  Rupees 
Naval  stores 

Mother  o'pearlv,v».,...^vw,^vv^.».w,..^ 
Sundries 


1,32,840 

64,682 

11,072 

6,593 

13,480 

10,529 

2,561 

3,591 

10,133 

4,72,785 


Imports  in  1805v 


«Sicca  Rupees  9,62,606  Exports  in  1805. 


.Sicca  Rupees  7,28,266 


\ ahic  of  merchandise  imported  into  Tranquebar  from  Madras  and  its  dependencies  in  the 

years  1802  to  1806,  amounted  to  ......v»v....i....%......vw»vww..vv.%.%.v».%..Sicca  Rupees  28,11,121 

Merchandise  exported  during  the  same  period  — 11,05,505 

Xmpoits  exceeded  the  17,05,616 

Amount  of  treasure  exported  from  Tranquebar  during  the  same  pcrio(U».......»..«w.«.»>....>...  13,26,319 

Balance  against  Tranquebar.. ................Sicca  Rupees  30,31,935 


TRANQUERAtt 


3C» 


RISE  AND  PHOr.llKSS 

OF  THK 

COMMERCE  BETWEEN  DENMARK  AND  THE  EAST  INDIES. 

The  Danes  were  from  tlie  most  early  times  di.linsuislied  by  their  martial  temper,  and  addicted  to 
maritime  expeditions.  The  British  isles,  after  being  long  harassed  by  their  incursions,  bicame  for  a time 
a part  of  then-  dominions.  They  had  also  a large  share  in  the  holy  wars;  but  by  this  martial  spirit,  and  the 
losses  whieh  attended  it,  the  power  of  Denmark  deelined.  Christiern  IV.  was  the  first  monarch  who  applied 
himself  to,  the  promoting  commerce  and  discoveries,  and  he  gave  his  sanction,  about  the  year  1C12, 
to  a number  of  merchants  who  had  associated  themselves  at  Copenhagen  for  carrying  on  a trade  with  the 
East  Indies.  They  formed  a capital  of  250  shares,  of  1000  rix-dollars  each,  and  made  the  necessary 
preiiarations  for  equipping,  and  sending  a siiua.lron  to  the  East  Indies,  which  did  not  leave  Copenhagen  till 
1615,  and  arrived  on  the  Coast  of  Coromandel  in  1616,  where  they  were  kindly  received. 

1616.  A Dutch  factor,  named  Boschower,  being  sent  to  Ceylon  to  negotiate  a treaty  of  commerce  with 
the  King,  he  was  received  with  much  respect,  and  concluded  the  treaty,  which  was  confirmed  by  the  Dutch 
Government  at  Batavia.  He  so  ingratiated  himself  with  the  King,  that  he  became  Chief  of  his  Council, 
commanded  his  armies,  and  was  created  Prince  of  Migiionne.  He  prevailed  u|)on  the  King  to  send  him, 
with  the  title  of  Amba.ssador,  into  Europe.  His  credentials  were  directed  to  the  States-CIcneral ; but  besides 
these,  he  had,  in  case  his  application  to  them  should  fail,  full  power  to  treat  with  any  other  European 
put||utate,  who  shouhl  be  dispased  to  assist  the  King  in  recovering  his  dominions  from  the  Portuguese. 
He  sailed  from  Ceylon  May  9th,  1615.  On  his  arrival  in  Holland,  being  very  coldly  received,  he  proceeded 
to  Copenhagen,  where  he  was  treated  in  a manner  more  suitable  to  his  pretensions.  His  propositions 
were  favourably  received  by  the  Danish  East  India  Company,  who  entered  into  a negotiation  with  him; 
and  a treaty  being  coneluded,  it  was  ratihed  and  eonllrmed  in  the  suceewling  year  by  the  King,  Christiern  IV. 
who  granted  a man  of  war,  the  Elephant,  to  carry  him  back  to  Ceylon-  the  Com|)any  likewise  added 
some  of  their  ships;  and  the  whole  squadron  was  put  under  the  command  of  a Danish  nobleman.  They 
sailed  from  Copenhagen  March  30th,  1619,  and  anchored  at  the  Cape  of  Good  Hope  on  the  19th  of  July 
in  the  same  year,  from  whence  they  proceeded  to  Ceylon;  but  meeting  with  very  bad  weather,  numbers  died 
on  the  passage,  and  amongst  the  rest  the  Ambassador.  On  the  arrival  of  the  squadron  at  Trincomalee, 
advice  thereof  was  sent  to  the  King,  who  disavowed  the  treaty.  The  Danish  Commander  therefore  proceeded 
for  the  Coast  of  Coromandel,  when  he  purchased  of  the  Rajah  of  Tanjore  the  port  of  Tranquebar  and  a 
district  around  it,  and  left  the  forces  that  should  have  been  disembarked  at  Ceylon,  to  garrison  the  fort 
tliat  was  erecting,  and  on  which  he  bestowed  the  name  of  Danebourg.  In  his  return  he  anchored  in 
Table  Bay  August  30th,  1621,  and  arrived  safe  at  Copenhagen  early  in  the  following  year. 

The  materials  for  the  history  of  the  Danish  East  India  commerce  are  very  scanty;  but  it  appears  that 
in  twenty  years,  they  had  opened  a trade  with  the  Moluccas,  which  enabled  their  Directors  at  Tranquebar 
to  send  home  large  vessels  richly  laden,  with  cargoes  well  assorted  from  all  parts  of  India;  but  in  consequence 
of  the  wars  in  which  Denmark  became  involved,  the  affairs  of  the  Company  were  deranged,  and  they 
were  prevented  corresponding  regularly  with  their  settlement  at  Tranquebar,  which  circumstance  disabled 
the  colony  from  sending  ships  as  usual  into  Europe.  This  alteration  in  their  affairs  was  severely  felt  by 
them,  and  at  the  same  time  reduced  them  in  the  estimation  of  other  Europeans,  and  diminished  their 
credit  with  the  natives. 

1654.  'Ihe  state  of  the  Danish  commerce  was  so  reduced,  that  the  Government  of  Tranquebar  are 

3B 


370 


t 


RISE  AND  PROeiRESS  OP  THE  COMMERCE 


stated  in  this  year  to  have  made  an  offer  to  the  Dutch  to  deliver  up  the  fort  to  them,  on  payment  of 
their  debts,  which  offer  was  rejected. 

1661.  Walter  Schonten,  a famous  Dutch  navigator,  who  visited  Tranquebar  at  this  period,  observes, 
as  if  it  was  something  remarkable,  that  there  were  two  Danish  ships  in  the  port ; and  he  further  remarks, 
that  their  flags  were  but  rarely  seen  in  other  ports  in  the  Indies,  and  that  they  were  upon  very  bad  terms 
with  the  natives,  by  whom  they  were  kept  in  constant  alarm,  and  experienced  great  losses. 

1670.  The  Danish  East  India  Company  gave  up  their  charter,  and  made  over  their  settlements  to 
the  Government,  as  an  indemnification  for  the  sums  it  had  advanced.  A new  Company  was  therefore 
formed.  The  King,  Christiorn  V.  gave  them,  in  ships  and  effects,  to  the  amount  of  310,828  livres;  and  the 
adventurers  advanced  732,600  livres.  This  second  undertaking  being  entered  upon  without  suffieient  funds, 
proved  more  unsuccessful  than  the  former;  and  after  a few  voyages,  Tranquebar  was  left  to  itself. 

1684.  The  Rajah  of  Tanjore  having  under  various  pretences  interrupted  their  communication  with 
the  interior,  and  extorted  large  sums  of  money  from  tliem,  Tranquebar  was  so  reduced,  that  they  are  said 
to  have  pawned  three  of  the  bastions  of  tlie  fort  to  the  Dutch,  for  such  a sum  of  money  as  enabled  them 
to  keep  tlie  garrison  and  inhabitants  from  starving : these,  however,  were  redeemed  in  the  ensuing  year. 

1698.  The  Company  obtained  a new  charter,  by  which  they  were  bound  to  make  certain  advances 
to  the  royal  treasury. 

1699.  Ti’anqucbar  was  besieged  by  the  Rajah  of  Tanjore,  and  would  have  been  taken,  bad  not  the 
English  rendered  such  assistance,  as  compelled  the  natives  to  raise  the  siege. 

1705.  The  commerce  with  India  was  much  reduced  at  this  period.  In  this  year  the  first  missionaries 
were  sent  from  Denmark.  They  sailed  from  Copenhagen  the  25th  of  November,  1705,  and  arrived  at 
Tranquebar  in  the  beginning  of  July,  1706.  In  the  course  of  their  mission  they  met  with  innumerable 
obstacles  and  difficulties,  so  that  but  few  of  the  natives  were  converted  to  the  Christian  faith. 

1728.  The  Ostend  East  India  Company  liaving  been  suppressed,  a Dutch  mercliant,  who  had  been 
concerned  in  it,  proceeded  to  Copenhagen,  where  he  applied  himself  to  King  Frederick  IV.  and  made 
proposals  of  extending  the  trade  to  the  East  Indies.  The  arguments  he  made  use  of  induced  the  King  to 
suffer  his  sclicmc  to  be  put  iu  execution;  and  that  it  might  be  done  more  conveniently,  the  Danish  Com- 
pany were  transferred  from  Copenhagen  to  Altona:  and  in  order  to  induce  foreigners  to  engage  in  this 
undertaking,  his  Danish  Majesty  granted  a new  charter,  dated  in  April,  1728,  for  promoting  the  com- 
merce of  the  said  Company  to  the  Indies,  China,  and  Bengal,  the  chief  articles  of  which  were  these,  vis. 

“ The  nc>v  subscribers  shall  have  an  equal  share  and  right  with  the  old  members,  in  all  the  concessions 
and  privileges  granted  to  the  said  Company  by  his  present  Majesty  and  his  august  predecessors;  and  like- 
wise  in  all  the  forts,  settlements,  revenues,  houses,  magazines,  ships,  effects,  and,  in  short,  whatever  the 
Company  is  possessed  of  at  this  day,  or  may  acquire  in  time  to  come.— -The  old  shares,  or  actions,  which 
are  in  number  250,  of  1000  rix-dollars  each,  shall  subsist  and  remain  as  they  are,  and  shall  have  the  same 
right  as  the  new  shares. — The  Directors  shall  declare  and  affirm,  upon  their  honour,  that  all  Ihe  debts  of  the 
Company  do  not  exceed  160,000  rix-dollars  in  specie.-— TheUnited  Company  are  obliged  to  discharge  and  pay 
the  said  sum,  upon  condition  that  the  old  shares  shall  have  no  dividends  till  1733;  and  if  the  said  debts  should 
appear  to  exceed  the  said  sum,  the  old  shares  shall  be  answerable  for  the  overplus, and  the  new  subscribers  shall 
not  he  obliged  to  contribute  thereto. — Each  new  share  to  be  1000  rix-dollars,  payable  by  certain  instal- 
ments, and  not  to  be  liable  to  any  seizure  or  stop  upon  any  account  whatsoever. — The  Directors  shall 
yearly  communicate  to  the  subscribers  an  exact  and  particular  account  of  the  Company's  affairs*  The 


3TI 


BETWEEN  DENMARK  AND  THE  EAST  INDIES. 

dividend  shall  be  replated  upon  the  said  account  in  a General  Court  of  the  Company  by  the  majority 
ot  voices.— 1 he  Directors  are  not  allowed  to  undertake  any  trade  but  the  commerce  in  the  East  Indies 
upon  the  Company’s  account,  without  the  consent  of  the  members  thereof,  nor  lend  the  ( ompany’s  money 
to  any  person  whatsoever:  they  shall  take  an  oath  of  exact  observation  of  this  article.— All  the  merchan- 
dise  which  shall  be  sold  at  any  other  place  than  Copenhagen,  shall  be  paid  in  the  Bank  at  Hamburgh, 
to  one  or  more  merchants,  to  be  chosen  by  the  subscribers. — The  money  arising  from  the  new  subscription, 
shall  be  employed  in  sending  out  ships  to  Tranquebar,  Bengal,  and  China,  and  for  no  other  use  whatever.— 
A General  Court  of  the  Company  to  be  held  as  soon  as  possible,  to  chuse  Dii*ectors,  &c.” 

As  soon  as  it  was  generally  known  that  the  Danish  East  India  Company  were  actually  upon  the  point 
of  sending  ships  to  India  and  China,  agreeable  to  their  plan,  and  the  powers  vested  in  them  by  their  charter, 
the  Ministers  of  Great  Britain  and  Holland  at  the  (’ourt  of  Denmark,  used  th<*ir  utmost  endeavours  to 
procure  the  repeal  of  the  powers  granted  to  the  Society;  and  in  consccpience  of  their  instructions,  they  drew 
up  and  presented  a paper  to  the  Coiu-t  of  Denmai'k,  stating  the  injury  the  transferring  the  East  India 
Company  from  Copenhagen  to  Altona  would  do  to  the  commerce  of  their  subjects,  and  that  they  perceived 
with  concern,  that  almost  at  the  same  instant  they  were  making  so  great  efforts  to  stop  the  progress  of 
the  Ostend  Company,  the  King  of  Denmark,  their  good  old  friend  and  ally,  was  setting  up  another,  equally 
prejudicial  to  their  subjects;  and  hoped,  from  ins  Majesty’s  friendship,  that  as  soon  ns  he  should  be  informed 
of  the  uneasiness  this  novelty  gave  them,  he  would  withdraw  the  privilege  lately  granted  to  the  Company, 
and  leave  it  on  the  ancient  footing  as  it  had  always  subsisted  at  Copenhagen." 

To  this  memorial  an  answer  was  given,  wherein  his  Danish  Majesty  insisted  that  the  maritime  powers 
had  totally  mistaken  the  point,  because  it  never  was  the  King's  intention  to  erect  a new  Company,  but  to 
transfer  that  which  had  subsisted  above  110  years,  from  Copenhagen  to  Altona;  that  this  appeared  clearly 
from  the  charter,  wliicli  granted  no  new  powers  to  the  Company,  but  barely  confirmed  the  old  ones;  that 
the  voyages  proposed  direct  for  China,  could  not  be  esteemed  an  infraction  of  treaties,  any  more  than  the 
voyages  heretofore  made  from  Tranquebar ; that  hw  Danish  Majesty  was  not  restrained  by  any  treaty  what- 
ever from  maintaining  and  supporting  the  commerce  of  his  subjects  to  the  Indies,  which  it  was  bis  duty  to 
promote  and  extend  to  the  utmost  of  his  power;  and  that,  finally,  as  he  did  not  encourage  tliis  commerce 
with  any  view  of  injuring  the  East  India  Companies  of  bjigland  and  Holland,  but  purely  with  a design 
to  benefit  his  own  subjects,  he  could  not  discern  how  this  should  expose  him  to  the  resentment  of  any 
other  power  whatever. — This  answer  not  giving  satisfaction  to  Great  Britain  and  Holland,  another  me- 
morial was  presented  in  1729,  from  which  period  it  does  not  appear  that  any  further  applications  were 
made  on  the  subject.  The  King  of  Denmark  thought  proper,  however,  to  shut  up  the  house  at  Altona. 

The  old  Company,  with  a view  of  removing  any  objections  that  might  be  made  in  respect  to  their 
circumstances,  added,  that  they  had  many  valuable  effects,  such  as  the  town  of  Tranquel)ar,  a very  im- 
portant place,  with  200  pieces  of  cannon,  besides  ammunition,  and  a yearly  income  of  10, (XX)  crowns, 
and  also  several  duties  and  revenues  increasing  every  year  in  proportion  to  the  increase  of  inhabitants ; 
that  they  had  also  the  Castle  of  Danebourgh,  convmicntly  situated  for  trmle,  and  particularly  for  pearls 
and  diamonds;  that  they  had  also  Porto  Novo  on  tlie  same  coast,  and  a factory  at  (diinsurah;  two  ships 
with  their  cargoes  now  at  sea,  bound  to  Tranquebar,  and  some  other  ships,  factories,  &c. 

1732.  King  Christiern  VI.  gave  the  Company  a new  charter,  confirming  to  them,  for  the  term  of 
fbrty  years,  the  privilege  of  exclusive  trade  to  all  countries  beyond  the  Cape  of  Good  Hope,  as  far  us 
China,  by  the  name  of  the  Royal  Danish  Asiatic  Company,  under  the  following  regulations 

Tlie  Company  and  their  representatives  are  empowered  to  make  alliances  ami  treaties  with  the  native 
Princes  in  the  King’s  name,  and  to  defend  their  rights  by  force  of  arms;  they  are  confirmed  in  the 

3B2 


372  • 


RISE  AND  PROGRESS  OF  THE  COMMERCE 


possession  of  Tranquebar  and  its  tciritory,  with  power  to  erect  forts,  factories,  &c.  they  maintaining  the 
garrison,  and  paying  the  stipulated  rent  to  the  Rajah  of  Tanjore.— The  ships  and  merchandise  of  the 
Company  shall  never  be  detained  or  arrested  upon  any  account  whatever,  either  in  peace  or  war. — Their 
transactions  to  be  entirely  free. — All  kinds  of  merchandise  and  stores  required  for  equipping  and  victualling 
their  vessels  in  Denmark  or  in  India  ar^  exempted  from  all  duties  of  customs,  excise,  and  all  other  taxes 
upon  importation  and  exportation,  whether  in  Danish  or  foreign  vessels.— The  Company’s  own  vessels  are 
exempted  from  all  harbour  dues,  lastage  money,  and  other  charges,  except  100  rix-dollars  for  each  shij> 
returned  from  India.— 1 he  directors  to  give  in  an  attested  account  of  all  merchandise  imported  by  them 
from  India,  with  the  amount  of  their  proceeds  at  the  public  sale ; agreeable  to  which,  there  shall  be  a 
duty  of  1 per  cent,  on  the  value  of  all  such  merchandise  exported  to  foreign  countries,  and  2j[  per  cent, 
on  what  are  consumed  in  the  Danish  dominions.— All  India  goods  exported,  to  be  exempted  from  the 
Sound  duties,  for  the  first  ten  years.— All  foreigners  in  the  service  of  the  Company  to  enjoy  the  privileges 
of  Danish  subjects.— As  an  acknowledgment  for  the  royal  favour,  the  Company  are  required  to  carry 
in  each  of  their  ships,  outward  and  homeward,  three  bales  or  packages,  of  a limited  size,  free  of  any  charge 
or  freight,  and  the  King  engages  to  put  them  on  board  without  delay  or  expence  to  the  Coin])any. 

The  Company,  in  order  to  give  the  partners  the  liberty  of  taking  more  or  less  concern  in  their 
enterprise,  divided  their  capital  stock  into  two  parts,  ctdled  fixed  capital,  and  circulating  capital.  The 
former  consisted' of  shares  of  250  crowns,  and  was  employed  in  the  purchase  of  the  property  of  the  old 
C ompany  in  Europe  and  India.  The  eirciilating  capital  consi'itpd  of  money  advancwl  by  the  partners,  and 
was,  more  or  less,  according  to  the  number  of  vessels  to  be  loaded  and  fitted  out  in  tin*  course  of  the  year, 
so  that  any  partner  might  decline  being  concerned  in  the  voyage  of  any  particular  vessel ; in  which  case 
another  was  at  liberty  to  take  the  portion  so  resigned  by  him,  and  to  share  the  profit  or  loss  when  the 
account  of  the  voyage  should  be  made  up.  In  order  to  enlarge  the  fixed  capital,  which  was  considered  the 
Company’s  main  dependence,  it  was  agreed  that  a tenth  part  of  the  produce  of  the  sales,  and  a rate  of 
5 per  cent,  on  all  goods  shipped  at  Tranquebar,  should  be  constantly  added  to  it,  subject  to  a certain 
proportion  of  the  charges  of  trade.— No  vessels  built  in  Europe  should  be  sent  out  to  remain  in  India  5 but 
vessels  built  of  Indian  timber,  might  be  used  for  the  country  trade  : if,  however,  an  European  shiji  should 
lose  the  proper  season  of  returning  to  Europe,  she  should  be  sent  on  a trading  voyage  in  India,  in  order  to 
keej)  her  in  employment. — The  Company  to  have  five  directors,  possessing  four  shares  each  in  the 
Company’s  stock,  who  should  have  salaries  of  500  rix-dollars  each ; except  that  in  any  year  in  which  no 
vessel  sails  or  arrives,  they  should  have  no  salary.  There  should  also  be  five  assistant  directors,  having 
each  two  shares,  with  salaries  of  100  rix-dollars  each,  except  as  above.— No  money  to  be  lent  or  borrowed 
without  the  consent  of  a general  meeting  of  proprietors. 

1744.  In  this  year  the  Company  divided  each  of  their  400  shares  into  four  parts,  making  1,600 
shares,  each  of  which  gave  a qualification  for  a vote  in  the  management  of  their  affairs.  The  fixed  capital 
continued  to  increase,  and  in  1755  the  original  share  of  250  crowns  had  increased  to  1,600  crowns,  or, 
376  crowns  for  each  of  the  1,600  shares. 

1763.  From  the  renewal  of  the  Company's  charter  in  1732  to  1763,  they  dispatched  28  ships  to  India, 
and  32  to  China,  making  in  the  whole  60  ships.  Of  these  13  were  lost,  20  returned  safe  from  India  with 
valuable  cargoes,  and  27  from  China.  About  this  period  a factory  was  settled  on  the  Nicobar  islands. 

1764.  In  the  ten  years,  1764  to  1764,  the  Company  received  14  ships  from  India,  and  18  from  China. 

Their  sales,  in  the  years  1 763  to  1 763  inclusive,  produced  Rix-dollars  1 1 ,01 6,083 

The  outfit  and  cargoes,  during  the  same  period,  are  stated  to  have  cost«%v»  8,162,108 

Leaving  a profit  in  eleven  years  of% 


Rix-dollars  2,862,976 


BETWEEN  DENMARK  AND  THE  EAST  INDIES,  • 373 

^ The  dividends  were  regulated  according  to  the  profits  made  In  eaeli  year,  alter  .setting  ii.sidc  tlie  por- 
ti  n appropriated  for  the  auginentation  ot  the  fixed  fund,  and  keeping  a sullieient  sum  in  reserve  to  answer 
uuloreseeii  exigencies,  and  consequently  they  were  very  irregular. 

1772.  The  Company’s  charter  was  renewed  for  twenty  years,  under  the  following  regulations : 

Ihe  trade  to  China  was  secured  exclusively  to  the  Company;  but  every  subjeel  of  D.nmurk,  and 
even  foreigners,  were  permitted  to  trade  to  all  the  Danish  settlements  in  Imlia,  upon ‘condition  of  employing 
Danish  built  ships,  to  embark  upon  each  vessel  to  the  value  of  £'.5t)2  lOs.  sterling  of  the  national  manu- 
factures; to  pay  the  (.'ompany  2 per  cent,  of  the  value  of  the  cargo  uimn  its  going  out,  and  8 per  cent,  on 
Its  return.  Individuals  were  also  allowed  to  trade  from  one  poil  of  India  to  another,  by  pasing  a duty 
of  entrance  of  4.  per  cent,  on  the  productions  of  Asia,  and  2 per  cent,  on  those  of  ]■  iirope,  in  all  the 
Danish  settlements.  'I'he  Company  wa.s  formerly  exemiit  from  the  duties  settled  upon  all  articles  employed 
in  the  building  and  victualling  of  ships ; but  they  are  deprived  of  this  exemption,  an.l  allowed  an  indem- 
nity of  X2  16s.  3d.  per  last,  and  11s.  3d.  for  each  of  the  crews  of  the  slops  They  are  to  export  upon 
each  of  their  ships  to  India  .£*562  10s.  of  Danish  manufactures,  end  ti.'iO  upon  each  .ship  to  China.  The 
Custonrs,  which  were  formerly  ditfereiit  on  the  productions  of.Xsia  that  were  consumed  in  Denmark,  or  .sent 
to  other  parts,  are  made  equal ; they  all  pay  2 |)er  cent,  without  any  regard  to  the  place  of  their  des- 
tination. The  King  gave  up  the  practice  of  placing  annually  a certain  sum  in  the  Company’s  trade : to 
indemnify  him  for  this  sacrifice,  a fixed  sum  is  paid  for  each  ship  fitted  out.  3'he  Company  ahridged  tlic 
credit  which  tliey  had  been  accustomed  to  give  for  goods  bought  at  their  sales,  and  made  several  improve- 
ments  in  their  internal  arrangements. 

The  Company  haviiig  experienced  some  inconvenience  from  the  division  of  tlieir  cajirtal  into  two 
separate  stocks,  now  united  them  into  one ; and  they  made  a further  division  of  their  shares,  splitting 
every  one  into  two,  which  made  the  number  4,800,  which  was  done  for  the  sake  of  rendering  tlieni  more 
saleable.  They  also  established  a factory  at  (<anton,  with  four  factors  to  transact  the  business  wliicli  had 
hitherto  been  done  by  the  supracargo  of  each  ship. 


1775.  At  one  period  the  revenues  of  Tranquebar  weie  sufficient  to  defray  all  the  expcncos  of  Govern- 
ment; but  in  process  of  time  abuses  were  introduced,  the  revenue  fell  olf,  and  the  cxpcnccs  increased, 
trade  languished,  and  the  Company’s  factors,  unable  to  make  the  necessary  advances  to  the  manufacturers, 
were  obliged  to  purchase  tlieir  goods  at  an  advance  of  from  25  to  30  per  cent.  In  order  to  remedy  this 
evil,  the  Company  resolved  to  keep  a sum  of  money  employed  in  India,  no  part  of  w hicli  should  he  drawn 
home  for  at  least  ten  years,  during  which  the  profits  made  upon  it,  should  be  added  to  the  capital.  The 
state  of  affairs  at  Tran(|uel)ar  was  soon  greatly  improved ; new  regulations  produced  a more  economical 
management  of  the  revenue;  in  consequence  of  which,  the  Company’s  stock  sold  in  1775,  ut  25  to  30  per 
eent.  above  par,  while  their  dividends  were  about  10  per  cent. 

Raynal  states  that  during  the  forty  years  of  the  charter  of  the  Danish  East  India  Company, 

The  expence  of  their  vessels,  and  the  merchandise  shipjied  on  them,  amounted  X"4,079,738  16  3 

That  the  amount  of  their  returos  as  sold  at  the  Company’s  sales,  7,872,4  7 G 

Leaving  a profit  during  the  period  of  forty  years,  of  i^3, 702,747  1 1 3 

Of  the  whole  amount  of  goods  imported,  Denmark  was  estimated  to  consume  only  XI, 477, 094  5 o 

And  the  remainder  was  exported,  which  amounted  to  0,395,392  2 2 


1782. . The  American  war  contributed  so  much  to  the  prosperity  of  the  Danish  East  India  Company, 
that  the  actions,  or  shares,  sold  in  1782  at  1800  to  1900  rix-dollars,  the  prime  cost  having  been  500.  In  that 


371 


RISE  AND  PROGRESS  OF  THE  COMMERCE 


year  the  dividends  were  as  as  cent,  per  cent,  on  the  original  purchase-money,  and  in  the  subsequent 
peace  they  fell  to  40  or  50  per  cent  and  the  price  sunk  in  proportion,  being  only  700  rix-dollars  in  1788, 
and  to  440,  considerably  below  par,  in  1796.  The  average  gain  from  1783  to  1-790  was  about  9{  per 
cent,  upon  the  original  price,  or  taking  800  rix-doUars  as  the  medium  market  price,  6 per  cent.,  a greater 
profit  than  any  other  East  India  Company  has  made,  and  only  ascribable  to  the  extensive  privileges  of  the 
Corporation,  the  re.strictions  of  foreign  importation,  and  the  small  competition  of  capital  in  the  Danish 
market  for  the  Company’s  stock. 

1784.  In  this  year  the  Commutation  Act  took  place  in  England,  by  which  the  commerce  of 
foreigners  with  China  was  much  reduced.  Previous  to  this  period,  Denmark  sent  annually  several  ships 
to  China  for  teas.  The  greater  part  of  their  cargoes  were  afterwards  smuggled  into  England,  to  the 
injury  of  the  national  revenue,  and  the  detriment  of  the  English  East  India  Company’s  commercial  privileges. 

The  following  is  u statement  of  the  number  of  ships  laden  at  Canton  in  each  year  for  Denmark,  from 
17G7-8  to  1784r-5  inclusive,  with  the  quantity  of  teas  laden  on  board  them. 

Yoar^  Ships,  lbs.  Year*;.  Ship<i.  lbs. 

17G7-8 2 3,010,286  1776-7  2 2,487,300 

1768-0  1 1,430,874  1777-8  2 2,098,300 

1760-70- 1 1,449,306  1778-9  1 1,388,400 

1770- 1  — - 2 2,800,483  1779-80——  3 3,983,600 

1771- 2  no  account;  estimated  at  2,800,483  1780-1  — — 2 2,341,400 

1772- 3  2 2,999,600  1781-2  3 4,118,500 

1773- 4  2,867,300  1782-3  5,477,200 

1774- 5  2 3,237,300  1783-4  3 3,204,000 

1775- 6  2 2,833,700  1784-5  4 3,168,000 

forming  a total  of  51,686,0321bs.  being  on  an  average  of  18  years,  2,871,4461bs.  per  annum. 

1786.  The  Danish  East  India  Company,  though  commerce  was  their  only  object,  were  in  such 
distressed  circumstances,  that  they  requested  the  King  to  accept  a surrender  of  their  charter,  privileges,  and 
stock,  on  such  terms  as  lie  should  be  pleased  to  prescribe. 

1800.  The  increased  viplance  of  the  llritish  Government  against  the  smuggling  of  tea  into  England, 
CiUised  a remarkable  declension  in  the  prosperity  of  the  Danish  trade.  The  following  is  a statement  of  the 
number  of  Danish  ships  laden  at  Canton,  from  the  pa.s.sing  the  Commutation  Act  in  England  in  1784,  tQ 
1799-1800  inclusive,  with  the  (]uantities  of  teas  laden  on  them. 

Years.  Ships.  lbs.  Years.  Ships.  lbs. 

1785-6  4,678,100  II  1793-4  none. 

1 1 80— 7 2 2,092,000  1791— 1 %%%%%%%%%^%%  24,670 

1787- 8  2 2,664,000  1796-6  none. 

1788- 9  2 2,496,800  1796-7  — — 2 2,504,400 

1789- 90 1 1,773,000  1797-»  1,307,800 

1790- 1  1 520,700  1798-9  5 2,910,900 

1791- 2  none  | 1799^  1,132,266 

1792- 3  1 852,670  1800—1  4 963,467 

forming  a total  of  22,819,7731bs.  being  on  an  average  of  16  years,  1 ,426,2361ba.  per  annum. 

1801.  A rupture  having  takeji  place  between  Denmark  and  England,  the  settlements  of  Tranquebar 
and  Serhampore  were  taken  possession  of  liy  the  BritbU  fofees,  but  restored  at  tlie  peace. 


375 


BETWEEN  DENMARK  AND  THE  EAST  INDIES. 

The  following  is  a statement  of  ti>e  commerce  carriwl  on  between  Denmai  lc  an<l  the  British  settlements 
mthe  East  Indies  in  the  years  1795  to  1800  inclusive;  in  tlic  seven  years,  179.'>  to  1801,  it  is  tiiat  with 
Bengal  only:  the  other  two  Presidencies  are  estimated  at  one  fourth  that  of  Bengal;  the  remaining  five 
years,  1802  to  1806,  include  the  commerce  witli  tlie  whole  of  British  India. 


IMPORT.S  INTO  THE  BRITISH  SETTLEMENTS  EXPORTS  FROM  THE  BRITISH  SE1TI.FMFNTS. 


Years. 

Mcrclmndisc*. 

Treabiirc. 

Total, 

Years. 

Merchandise. 

'J'rtMsurc. 

Sicca  Ruj)e(-s. 

Sirca  Rupees 

Sura  Rupees. 

JSuta  Rupees. 

Sirca  Rupees 

Sicca  Rujiecs. 

1795 

7,47,666 

22,470 

7,70,1.36 

1795 

8,1.3,8.32 



8,1.3,832 

1796 

5,14,9.36 



5,14,939 

1796 

17,7.3,511 

17,7.3,511 

1797 

19,060 

66,243 

85,.303 

1797 

.3,.5(i,.572 

- 

3, .59,5  72 

1798 

3,78,07.3 

2,3), 979 

9,15,0.52 

1798 

1,1 1,087 

■ - 

131,087 

1799 

5,07,076 

5,09„398 

10,16,474 

1790 

9,56,14.7 

-- 

9,.76,M5 

1800 

4,46,806 

5,7.5,714 

10,22,520 

ISOO 

7,14,82:5 

■ - 

7,14,825 

1801 

— 

— 

— 

1801 

2,9.55 

_ 

2,9.75 

26,13,617 

'iijo;s()4 

40,24,421 

1 /,28,927 



•17,2H,927 

6,53,404 

3,.52,701 

10,09,10.5 

1 

11,82,2.32 

— 

1 l,N2,2.32 

1802 

4,51,645 

3,11,175 

7,f>.>,820 

1802 

.3, .39, 22:5 

(i,.300 

.3, 12..725 

180.3 

3,43,594 

G9.495 

4,1.3,089 

180,3 

.5,04,.519 

--  - - 

.7,01.,519 

1804* 

5,61,312 

2,55,714 

8,17,0.59 

1804 

1.3.01, 119 

1.3,01,119 

1805 

1,87,647 

9,08.834 

7,99,481 

1805 

9,54,2.3.3 

6,51,2.33 

1806 

2,42,777 

— 

2,12,777 

1809 

4,78,1.5.3 

— 

4, 7, S,  1,73 

Total.  1 

"50,56, 996~ 

.30,08,753 

80,95,749 

I'otaf 

91,8:5,  k3S 

<>,.300  “ 

91,91,738 

From  the  foregoing  statement  it  appears  that  the  amount  of  inorchaiulisc  exportoil  from  the 

Hritlsh  sfttlomenU  to  Denmark  in  the  years  1795  to  1809  inclusive,  was^^w  Sicca  Rupees  91,01,738 
Merchandise  imported  during  the  same  period  5(),5(i,{K»6 

Exports  exceed  the  imports  41,31,74^3 

Treasure  imported  into  tlie  British  settlements  during  the  same  period  .30,08,753 

Ditto  exported  from  ditto  6, .300 

30,03,4.5.3 

Balance  against  Denmark  in  12  years  ^ Sicca  Rupees  7 1 ,37, 1 9.5 

which,  at  2s.  Cd.  per  rupee,  is  d£?892,149  7s.  Gd.  on  an  average  of  twelve  years,  i7 1,345  15s.  9d.  per  ami. 

1807.  The  influence  of  France  rendering  it  impossible  for  Denmark,  however  desirous  to  be  neutral, 
to  preserve  its  neutrality,  and  it  becoming  absolutely  necessary  for  Great  Bi  itain  to  take  the  most  efrectual 
measures  to  prevent  the  arms  of  neutral  powers  being  turned  against  her;  application  was  made  to  the 
Court  of  Copenhagen  to  desire  the  temporary  deposit  of  the  Danish  fleet  in  one  of  the  British  ports,  in  trust 
for  the  King  of  Denmark,  to  be  restored  with  all  its  equipments  in  as  good  a state  as  when  received,  as 
soon  as  the  provisions  of  a general  peace  should  remove  the  necessity  which  occasioned  the  demand ; which 
not  being  complied  with,  a powerful  fleet  and  army  were  sent  to  Denmark  in  August,  1807,  which  succeeded 
in  obtaining  possession  of  the  Danish  capital  and  the  fleet.  The  latter,  consisting  of  18  sail  of*  the  line, 
15  frigates,  and  various  small  vessels,  with  their  stores,  &c.  were  sent  to  England,  and  the  capital  evacuated. 
On  the  arrival  of  this  intelligence,  an  expedition  was  fitted  out  from  Madras,  which  sailed  on  the  1 1th  of 
February,  1808,  and  on  the  following  day  arrived  off’  Tranquebar,  which  capitulated,  and  was  taken 
possession  of  by  the  British  troops.  Serhampore  likewise  surrendered  to  the  English  forces,  and  both  places 
contmue  in  th^  possession 


376 


DEVICOTTA— PORTO  N^PVO-^UDDALORE. 


DEVICOTTA. 

This  fort  u situated  on  a small  island  juk  witf^  the  entrance  of  Coleroon  Hirer,  in  latitude  about 
IP  22  North,  which  has  within  its  bar,  water  sufficiient  for  large  ships.  The  fort  is  strong,  and  built  of 
brick.  In  1749  it  was  in  the  possession  of  its  lawful  master,  the  Rajah  of  Tanjore;  but  the  English,  under 
Major  Lawrence,  determined  to  make  themselves  masters  of  it.  It  was  soon  forced,  and  the  garrison  obliged 
to  save  themselves  by  flight.  The  Company  had  it  in  contemplation,  to  form  this  acquisition  into  a harbour, 
and  obtained  a cession  of  distnct  from  the  Rajah;  but  the  project  has  bqen  long  abandoned.  In  this 
part  are  to  be  seen  up  the  country  the  four  famous  pagodas,  called  the  Chalambaram  pagodas. 

PORTO  NOVO 

Is  situated  in  latitude  11°  32  North,  and  longitude  79’  45'  East.  It  was  formerly  a place  of  consi- 
derable trade,  where  the  French  and  Dutch  had  factories.  Here  is  a river  navigable  only  for  small  country 
vessels.  Fresh  water  is  filled  out  of  a tank  a little  way  up  ihU  river,  hut  it  is  brackish,  had,  and  apt  to 
give  the  flux.  The  road  of  Porto  Novo,  by  being  sheltered  to  the  S.  E.  by  the  Coleroon  Shoal,  is  by  far 
the  smoothest  and  safest  on  the  Coromandel  shore.  Here  you  may  anchor  in  six  fathoms,  the  flagstaff 
W.  I N.  2 miles  off-shore,  and  the  southernmost  of  the  Chalambaram  pagodas  S.  W. 

COINS,  WEIGHTS,  and  MEASURES. 

Accounts  are  kept  in  collums  of  paddy,  or  in  chucknims.  The  collum  is  a measure  which  is  between 
70  and  80  quarts,  but  varies  in  different  parts.  The  medium  price  of  a collum  of  paddy  is  3|  gold,  or 
7 silver  fananis,  about  Is.  4d.  sterling;  so  that  100,000  collums  of  paddy  at  the  afore-mentioned  price,  will 
produce  15,555  Star  pagodas  25  fanams. 

In  the  Tanjore  country  the  Star  pagoda  is  valued  at  4.5  Madras,  or  silver  fanams;  1 chuckrum  is 
equal  to  20  Madras,  or  10  gold  fanams;  2 cliuckrums  and  1 fanam  is  equal  to  1 Porto  Novo  pagoda. 

The  Porto  Novo  pagoda  passes  current  at  Madras  for  37  j Madras  fanams.  100  Porto  Novo  pagodas 
are  reckoned  83^  Star  pagodas,  and  100  Star  pagodas,  equal  to  120  Porto  Novo  pagodas.  In  the  Company's 
accounts  the  Porto  Novo  pagoda  is  reckoned  at  30  fanams. 

CUDDALORE 

Is  about  three  leagues  to  the  northward  of  Porto  Novo,  in  latitude  1 1°  43  North,  and  longitude  79® 
50  East.  The  river  is  small,  shut  up  by  a bar  at  the  entrance,  and  navigable  only  by  boats.  The  town 
extends  about  three-quarters  of  a mile  from  north  to  south,  and  about  half  a mile  from  east  to  west.  Three 
of  its  sides  are  fortified:  that  to  the  sea  is  for  the  greater  part  open;  but  the  river  passing  between  Fort 
St.  David  and  the  town,  flows,  just  before  it  gains  the  sea,  along  the  eastern  side  of  the  town,  of  which, 
whilst  it  washed  the  skirts  on  one  hand,  it  was  on  the  other  separated  from  the  sea  by  a mound  of  sand, 
which  the  surf  throws  on  the  shore  in  most  parts  of  the  coast.  It  is  very  populous,  and  a place  of  some 
trade.  A little  above  the  town  stands  Trivada  pagoda,  which  forms  a citadel  to  a large  pettah,  or  town. 
The  marks  for  anchorage  are  tiie  flagstaff  N.  W.  and  Fort  St.  David  N.N.  W.  off-shore  about  1-J  mile. 

Fort  St.  David  is  about  a mile  to  the  northward  of  Cuddalore.  The  site  and  a small  district  was  in 
1696  purchased  from  a Mahratta  Prince  for  ^31,000,  for  the  use  of  the  India  Company,  by  Mr.  Elihu  Yale. 
The  fortifications  were  gradually  strengthened.  The  place  was  besieged  by  the  French  in  1758:  it  com- 
menced on  the  28th  of  April,  and  on  the  1st  of  June  the  garrison  surrendered  prisoners  of  war.  The 
fortifications  were  totally  destroyed ; but  on  the  peace  the  place  was  restored  to  us,  and  quickly  recovered 
former  prosperity.  In  this  district  are  manufactured  dimities,  and  various  descriptions  of  piece-ron^v 


fokdichebby. 


• 3tT 


COMMEBCE  WITH  MADRAS- 

'Hie  following  U a statement  of  the  merchandise  and  treasure  imported  into  the  Southern  Division  of 
the  Carnatic  from  Madrasi  in  the  years  1802  to  1806  inclusive;  likewise  of  the  merchandise  and  treasure 
exported  from  the  Southern  Division  of  the  Carnatic  to  Madras  during  the  same  period^  together  with  a 
list  of  the  articles  of  wliich  the  imports  and  exports  consisted  in  1 805. 

Merchandise  imported  into  the  Southern  Division  of  the  Carnatic  from  Madras,  in  the  years 

1802  to  1806  inclusive  Sicca  Rupees  13,13,012 

Ditto  exported  from  ditto  to  ditto  during  the  same  period  20,49,453 

®^p^rts  exceed  the  13,30,1*  11 

The  treasure  exported  to  Madras  exceeds  the  quantity  imported  from  thence  2,56,547 

Balance  in  favour  of  the  Southern  Division  of  the  Carnatic  in  five  years«^«^  Sicca  Rupees  10,79,894 


which,  at  2s.  6d.  per  rupee,  is  -^’1341,986 
ArticUs  of  Import  in  1805. 


Piece-goods^ 


.Sicca  Rupees 


Grain 
Cotton* 

Beetle 
Sundries«%^^^ 


1 7s.  6d.  on  an  average  of  five  years,  -P26,997  7s.  Od.  per  annum. 

Articles  of  Export  in  1805. 

1,48,992  Piece-goodsv%v%%%%^%vv^%......^vw^Sicca  Rupees  2,03,192 

1,83,173  Indigo  45,71 1 

.5,826  Timber  5,334 

3,091  Liquors  13,450 

30,058  Pepper  4, 1 28 

Treasure  1 ,50,582 

20,110 


Imports  in  1805%* 


^«%v«Sicca  Rupees  3,77,140 


Sundriesv^*.^. 
Imports  in  1805* 


Sicca  lluiiees  S, 08,51  U 


PiMe.goods  of  various  kinds,  similar  to  those  of  Surat,  in  point  of  dimensions,  colour,  and  qualities, 
are  manulactured  in  the  neighbourhood  of  Cuddalore,  and  at  prices  nearly'  the  same  as  at  Surat. 


PONDICHERRY 

Is  situated  in  latitude  11°  54'  North,  and  longitude  79°  58'  East.  It  was  the  capital  of  the  French 
settlements  in  India,  and  the  residence  of  the  Governor-Greneral  and  superior  ( Council ; and  before  its 
fortifications  and  public  buildings  were  destroyed  by  the  English,  Pondicherry  was  by  far  the  largest, 
strongest,  and  most  beautiful  European  settlement  in  the  East  Indies. 

Pondicherry  is  built  in  a circular  form  on  the  borders  of  the  sea,  and  strongly  fortified.  It  is  divided 
into  two  parts  the  Black  Town  and  the  White  Town;  the  latter  spreads  along  the  sea^oast,  and  is  again 
divided  into  two  parts,  the  north  and  south.  The  tower  bearing  the  flagstaff  is  in  the  middle,  and  sepa- 
rates the  two  quarters.  The  Black  Town  is  separated  from  the  White  by  a ditch  running  through  the 
whole  extent  of  Pondicheriy ; it  reaches  to  the  ramparts,  and  contains  a population  of  nearly  80,000  souls, 
and  a cathedral  belonging  to  the  Jesuits.  The  White  Town  is  very  inconsiderable.  Its  length  compre. 

the  whole  front  of  the  place  on  the  sea-shore;  but  its  width  from  the  shore  to  the  ditch,  which  sepa- 
rates  it  from  the  Black  Town,  is  not  more  than  300  tolses;  this  space  is  filled  with  handsome  houses,  but 
few  of  them  are  more  than  one  story  high.  It  contains  a parish  church,  the  duty  of  which  is  performed 
by  the  Capuchins  of  the  French  mission. 


378 


PONDICHERRY. 


Pondicherry  was  first  visited  by  the  French  in  1674.  After  their  retreat  from  StTbomej  they  obtained 
leave  of  the  King  of  Visiapour  to  form  a settlement  there^  and  soon  after  permission  to  erect  fortifications. 
In  1693  the  Dutch,  desirous  of  expelling  the  French,  besieged  Pondicherry  with  a numerous  army,  which, 
after  a long  siege,  surrendered  upon  very  honourable  conditions  on  the  6th  of  September,  1693.  The  Dutch, 
immediately  they  were  put  in  possession,  began  to  erect  fortifications,  which  rendered  it  at  that  period  one 
of  the  strongest  places  in  India.  On  the  conclusion  of  a general  peace  in  1696,  the  place  was  restored  to 
the  French,  who  put  it  in  such  a state  of  defence,  as  to  secure  it  against  any  attempts  on  the  part  of  the 
Dutch  or  native  powers. 

In  1748  Pondicherry  was  besieged  by  the  English  under  Admiral  Boscawen;  but  they  were  compelled 
to  raise  the  siege,  with  the  loss  of  a great  number  of  men.  In  1760  it  was  taken  by  Sir  Eyre  Coote, 
after  a blockade  of  nearly  six  months.  Orders  from  the  French  Court  having  been  intercepted,  directing 
Lally,  the  Governor-General,  to  destroy  every  maritime  place  in  India  belonging  to  the  English,  which 
might  fall  into  their  hands,  the  latter  adopted  the  same  resolution;  and  all  the  splendid  buildings  that 
the  bombs  and  shot  had  spared,  became  in  a very  short  time  a heap  of  ruins.  Pondicherry  was  restored 
at  the  peace.  The  French  quickly  rebuilt  the  town,  and  gave  superior  strength  to  the  fortifications;  it  was, 
however,  taken  by  the  English  in  October,  1778,  but  restored  at  the  conclusion  of  the  peace.  In  1793  it 
again  fell  under  the  dominion  of  the  English,  in  whose  possession  it  still  remains. 

COINS,  WEIGHTS,  and  MEASURES. 

Coins.— Accounts  are  kept  in  pagodas,  fanams,  and  cash ; 60  cash  making  1 fanam,  and  24  fanams 
1 pagoda.  The  coins  current  are  pagoda.s,  rupees,  and  fanams,  also  copper  cash  or  dudus,  thus  divided: 

20  dudus  ) f 1 fanam. 

24  fanams  » I 1 pagoda. 

There  are  various  kinds  of  pagodas  current  here,  and  are  nearly  all  of  the  same  weight.  That  of 
Pondicherry  was  originally  equal  in  value  to  the  Star  pagoda;  but  its  standard  has  been  considerably  lower- 
ed; it  passes  for  3}  rupees,  though  the  exchange  varies  from  350  to  360  rupees  per  100  Pondicherry 
pagodas.  The  exchange  for  Spanish  dollars  is  from  210  to  215  rupees  per  100  Spanish  dollars. 

Weights.— Gold  and  silver  are  weighed  by  the  seer,  pagoda,  rupee,  and  fanam;  a seer  weighs  28 j 
rupees,  81  j pagodas,  or  73^  fanams;  a rupee  weight  b equal  to  30  fanams,  or  480  nellos;  a pagoda 
weight  b 9 fanams,  or  144  nellos;  thus  3 ru|)ees  are  equal  in  weight  to  10  pagodas. 

71  j pagodas  weigh  a French  mark,  or  3778  English  grains,  so  that  the  seer  contains  4293  grains.  ' 

The  commercial  weights  are  the  candy  of  20  maunds,  each  maund  8 vb.  The  Pondicherry  maund 
is  25  lbs.  14oz.  5 dr.  avoirdupois. 

Measures. — Rice,  and  all  other  sorts  of  grain  are  sold  by  the  garce  of  600  mercals;  and  100  mercab 
are  nearly  18  English  bushels. 


COMMERCE. 

The  extent  of  the  commerce  carried  on  between  France  and  Pondicherry  b enumerated  hereafter 
under  the  head  of  the  Rise  and  Progress  of  the  French  Commerce  with  the  East  Indies.'  Piece-goods 
formed  the  most  material  article,  part  of  which  was  supplied  from  Karical  and  Yanaon,  two  sn^  settle* 
ments  subordinate  to  Pondicherry  on  the  Coromandel  Coast;  and  the  remainder  consisted  of  pepper, 
indigo,  and  a few  other  articles.  The  coasting  or  country  trade  carried  on  to  and  frOm  POndieherr/  was 
always  trifling,  it  being  principally  confined  to  the  Englbb  settlements. 


PONDICHERRY. 


379 


RISE  AND  PROGRESS 

OF  TilK 

COMMERCE  BETWEEN  FRANCE  AND  THE  EAST  INDIES. 

The  riches  which  the  Portuguese  drew  from  tlie  East  Indies,  in  consequiMice  of  the  discovery  of  the 
passage  round  the  Cape  ot  Good  Hope,  soon  induced  the  French  to  follow  them,  in  order  to  partake  of 
the  advantages  derived  from  the  commerce  carried  on,  and  to  supply  themselves  with  the  s|)i<Ts,  silks,  and 
other  Eastern  commodities,  of  which  they  con.sumed  considerable  quantities;  but  they  did  not  embark  in 
it  with  the  spirit  and  enterprise  necessary  for  the  success  of  so  arduous  an  undertaking. 

1.537.  Francis  I.  who  was  desirous  to  promote  the  prosperity  of  his  subjects,  exhorted  them  by  a 
proclamation  in  this  year  to  engage  in  foreign  commerce,  and  laid  before  them  the  advantages  that  would 
result  from  complying  with  his  desires.  The  proclamation  was  repeated  a few  yeiirs  allerwards.  This  con- 
duct was  imitated  by  Henry  III.  who,  in  an  edict,  dated  the  loth  of  December,  1.578,  pressed  the  same 
point,  but  with  very  little  eifect,  either  from  want  of  attention  in  his  subjects,  or  the  inability  of  tlie  Crown 
to  render  that  assistance  which  was  considered  necessary  in  such  an  undertaking. 

1601.  A society  in  Bretagne  fitted  out  two  ships  for  the  East  Indies,  in  May  IGOl . I'hcy  arrived  at 
Madagascar  in  February  following,  where  they  remained  till  May,  and  in  July  they  were  cast  aw^ay  on 
the  Maldivc  Islands.  Laval,  one  of  the  survivors,  remained  there  till  1611. 

1604.  Gerard  Lc  Roy,  a Fleming,  who  had  made  voyages  to  India  in  the  Dutch  service,  having 
offered  himself  as  a pilot,  in  case  a French  East  India  Company  could  be  established,  such  a company  was 
formed  under  the  King’s  Letters  Patent,  dated  the  1st  of  June,  1604,  by  which  they  had  an  exclusive 
trade  granted  them  for  fiflcon  years,  on  the  setting  out  of  their  first  ship ; and  they  were  exempted  from 
the  payment  of  all  duties  on  imports  for  the  first  two  voyages.  This  design,  however,  came  to  nothing, 
in  consequence  of  disputes  amongst  the  proprietors,  and  a want  of  sufficient  capital. 

1611.  The  project  of  trading  to  India  was  again  revived,  and  a new  Company  erected  by  letters 
patent,  dated  March  2,  1611 ; but  the  same  difficulties  that  rendered  the  former  scheme  abortive,  had  a 
similar  effect  upon  this,  so  that  for  four  years  no  attempt  was  made  to  carry  on  the  trade. 

1615.  Two  merchants  of  Rouen,  Muisson  and  Canis,  petitioned  the  King  tliat  the  privileges  granted 

to  tfeis  inactive  Society,  might  be  transferred  to  them,  offering  to  fit  out  ships  that  very  year.  This  proposal 

was  opposed  by  those  who  were  interested  in  the  former  establishment ; wlicreupon  a coalition  took  place 

between  the  two  parties,  and  letters  patent  were  granted,  dated  the  2d  of  July,  161.5,  which  were  regi- 

stored  in  Parliament  in  September  following,  allowing  them  an  exclusive  privilege  of  trade  for  12  years. 

% 

1616.  The  Company  fitted  out  two  shipn,  under  the  command  of  De  Nets  and  Beaulieu.  The  voyage 
was  in  aU  respects  fortunate  and  well-conducted,  though  In  the  end  it  did  not  turn  to  any  great  account; 
for  the  Dijtch  Government  at  Batavia  published  an  order,  requiring  all  the  subjects  of  the  States-General , 
that  wwe  on  board  those  ships,  to  quit  them  immediately.  The  commanders,  finding  it  out  of  tlieir  power  to 
bring  both  «hip«  home,  the  one  commanded  by  Beaulieu  was  therefore  sold,  and  all  their  goods  brought  to 
France tm  the  largest;  notwithstanding  which  unforeseen  difficulty,  and  the  great  cx|>ence  incurred  in  the 
undertaking,  it  was  managed  so  prudently  as  to  prove  a saving  voyage. 

1619.  The  Company  having  made  the  necessary  preparations  for  anotlier  voyage,  and  taken  all  pos- 
able  precaution  for  rendering  it  successful,  two  ships,  under  the  command  of  Commodore  Beaulieu,  sailed 
from  Harfleur,  October  9,  1619.  The  voyage  was  conducted  with  skill  and  address,  and  a cargo  for  both 

3C  2 


380  * RISE  AND  PROGRESS  OP  THE  COMMERCE 

ships  procured  at  Sumatra.  One  of  the  ships  wu  aOerwards  burnt  at  Bantam,  at  Aa  instigation  of  tiic 
Dutch,  liaving  a cargo  on  board  valued  at  near  ^80,000  sterling.  The  Commodore  arrived  with  the  other 
at  Havre  de  Grace  on  the  1st  of  December,  1620.  The  .sale  of  this  cargo,  chiefly  pepper,  which  bore  a 
liigh  price  in  France,  defrayed  the  cost  of  the  voyage,  notwithstanding  the  loss  of  the  other  ship  and  cargo. 

The  civil  war  which  broke  out  in  France,  interrupted  the  progress  of  the  Company,  disabled  the 
members  from  contributing  the  funds  necessary  to  its  support,  and  diverted  the  attentbn  of  the  Govern- 
ment, without  which  it  could  not  subsist.  Upon  which,  some  private  traders  in  Normandy  endeavoured 
to  avail  themselves  of  the  Company's  charter,  from  whence  sprung  the  original  design  of  forming  a set- 
t lenient  on  the  Island  of  Madagascar. 

10.13.  The  privileges  granted  to  the  Company  lieing  expired,  .some  merchants  of  Dieppe  sent  some 
>e';els  to  Madagascar  and  India,  which  made  profitable  voyages  j but  their  trade  w’as  very  limited. 

1012.  Cardinal  iliehlieu,  desirous  of  reviving  the  commerce  with  India,  obtained  a patent,  dated  the 
2Uh  of  June,  101-2,  for  a new  Company  (being  the  third)  of  twenty-four  persons,  with  the  cxclu.sive  trade 
ol  all  the  countries  beyond  the  Cape  of  Good  Hope,  for  ten  years.  These  privileges  w’ere  conflrmesl 
September  20,  1043.  All  these  it  quietly  enjoytMl  for  ten  years,  during  which  period  tliey  sent  every 
year  a vessel  to  Madagascar;  so  that  though  the  name  of  an  East  India  Company  was  kept  up,  yet  they 
were  possessed  of  no  trade,  but  contented  themselves  with  fruitless  attempts  to  settle  a colony  on  Mada- 
gascar, in  the  hope  that  it  might  be  the  means  of  rendcruig  their  future  commerce  with  India  more  secure 
and  advantageous. 

1652.  The  Company,  notwithstanding  the  langubhing  state  of  their  concerns,  obtained  a patent  for 
a renewal  of  their  privileges  for  fifteen  years  from  December,  1652.  Soon  after  the  Duke  de  la  Meilleray, 
Master  of  the  Ordnance,  succeeded  in  getting  possession  of  the  Company's  forts  on  Madagascar,  but 
found  them  not  worth  keeping.  At  his  death,  his  interest  in  the  island  was  sold  for  20,000  livres. 
By  this  transaction  the  Company  became  insolvent,  and  the  Duke's  property  was  all  lost. 

1660.  Some  merchants  of  Rouen  obtained  a patent  for  an  exclusive  trade  with  China,  Tonquin, 
Cocliin-China,  and  the  neighbouring  islands;  but  they  had  scarcely  begun  to  make  the  necessary  prepara- 
lioiis  for  carrying  their  privileges  into  effect,  when  they  were  absorbed  by  the  new  Company  of  the  Indies. 

1664.  The  famous  Colbert,  Minister  of  Louis  XIV.  conceived  the  design  of  reviving  the  French 
East  India  Company,  notw’ithstanding  the  misfortunes  which  had  disappoint^  the  hopes  of  his  prede- 
cessors. In  August,  1664,  an  edict  was  issued,  containing  forty-seven  articles.  Their  import,  among 
other  things,  was — ^I’hat  the  Company  should  be  formed  of  His  Majesty's  subjects,  even  of  the  Nobles, 
without  any  dread  of  derogating  from  their  nobility. — That  each  share  could  not  be  less  tbnq  LOOff  livres, 
nor  the  augmentations  under  500. — That  strangers  of  any  Prince  or  State  whatsoever,  migbi  be  incorpo- 
rated with  the  Company;  and  that  those  who  should  have  in  it  20,000  livres,  should  be  reputed  di»nigcn»^ 
and  in  that  respect  should  enjoy  all  the  privileges  of  real  subjects.— That  a chamber  of  general  direction 
should  be  established,  composed  of  twenty-one  directors;  whereof  twelve  should  be  of  the  City  of  Paris, 
and  nine  others  of  the  provinces;  and  that  the  said  chamber  might  estahluh  particular  ones  when  and 
where  it  should  judge  proper. — That  His  Majesty  empowered  the  Company  to  navigate  solely,  excluave 
of  his  other  subjects,  in  all  the  Indian  seas,  east  and  south,  during  the  term  of  fifty  years.— That  it 
shoidd  have  for  ever  the  possession  of  tlie  Island  of  St.  Lawrence,  or  Madagascar,  and  of  all  the  other 
lands,  places,  and  isles  it  might  conquer  from  the  enemy  and  the  natives,  to  enjoy  them  in'  aQ  property, 
scigneury,  and  justice,  without  reserving  any  thing  therein,  but  sole  fealty  and  liege-homage,  iW^  the 
duty,  rent,  or  service  of  a crown  and  sceptre  of  gold,  weighing  100  marks,  upon  each  demise  of  a King; 
granting  him  also  the  power  of  nominating  and  establishing  all  officers,  militaiy  and  civil  s though  tho 


BETWEEN  FRANCE  AND  THE  EAST  INDIES. 


381 


Con^MUij  might  hare  it  in  its  power  to  nominate  ambassadors  in  His  Majesty's  name  to  the  Indian 
Kings  and  Princes,  and  make  treaties  with  them.— That  the  Company  might  send  the  specie  in  gold  or 
ailrer  it  should  have  occasion  for  in  its  commerce,  notwithstanding  tlie  pruliibiliuns  enacted  by  the  laws 
and  ordinances  of  the  kingdom;  and  this  by  a paiticiilar  permission,  and  a writing  granted  in  its  favour. 
That  His  Majesty  should  advance,  or  defray  out  of  his  own  revenues,  the  fil'th  part  of  the  cxpencc 
necessary  for  the  three  first  equipments,  for  which  he  was  not  to  be  reimbursed  till  the  expiration  ot  the 
first  ten  years,  and  without  interest;  and  in  case  it  should  be  found,  by  a general  account,  that  the  Com- 
pany had  sustained  a loss  in  its  capital,  the  loss  should  devolve  upon  the  sum  advanced  by  His  Majesty. 
That  the  Indian  merchandises  consumed  in  France  should  pay  but  the  hall  ot  the  duties  regulated  by  the 
tariffs;  and  that  those  designed  for  other  countries,  and  the  exempted  provinces,  either  by  sea  or  land, 
should  pay  no  duties  on  importation  or  exportation;  as  also  the  timber  and  other  neci^ssary  articles  foi  tht 
building  and  fitting  out  of  the  Company’s  ships. — And,  lastly,  that  His  Majesty  should  pay  the  ( oinpany 
50  livres  per  ton  for  the  merchandise  its  ships  should  curry  into  the  countries  of  its  concession,  and  1!i 
livres  for  those  brought  back  and  discharged  in  the  kingdom.— His  Majesty  also  granted  the  t oinpan)  a 
seal,  having  for  a legend,  '‘Ludoviei  XIV.  Francitc  et  Navarra  Rv/ris  SigMwni,  L sum  supremi  Consilii  Galha 
OrimlaU.tC'  and  for  arms,  an  azure  globe  and  fleur-dc-luce  of  gold,  with  this  inscri|»tion,  “ Florebo  quocunupie 
Jerar;"^  the  supporters  being  two  figures,  one  representing  Peace,  and  the  other  Plenty. 

1665.  The  Island  of  Madagascar  being  considered  of  great  importance  by  the  French,  it  was  de- 
termined that  an  effectnal  settlement  should  be  formed,  and  a code  of  repilations  was  drawn  up  for  the 
colony,  which  attracted  the  public  approbation.  Numbers  of  persons  offered  themselves  to  go  over  an 
settle  there.  Accordingly  on  March  7,  1665,  four  large  ships,  equipped  both  for  war  and  trade,  sailed 
from  Brest,  and  arrived  safely  at  Madagascar  on  the  lOtli  of  July  following;  the  name  of  which  they 
changed  to  Isle  Dauphinc,  in  honour  of  the  heir  apparent  to  the  crown  of  France. 

1666.  The  King,  by  a declaration  in  June,  1666,  granted  the  Company  permission  to  make  e.sta- 
blishments  at  Port  Louis  for  their  magazines,  and  at  places  along  the  rivers  Ilennelon  and  Ponscot,  for 
dock-yards,  fit  for  the  building  of  tlicir  ships.  They  had  also  granted  them  all  void  and  waste  places  be- 
longing to  the  King  in  the  places  above  mentioned.  It  is  from  this  grant  that  Port  L'Orieiit  was  formed, 
which  the  Company  possessed  to  the  period  of  their  exclusive  trade  being  abolislicd. 


1668.  Hitherto  .the  Company  seem  to  have  confined  themselves  to  the  Isle  Dauphine;  and  the  ad- 
vantages they  began  to  draw  from  thence,  gave  them  great  exiiectutions  for  the  future.  Two  kreigners, 
who  offered  them  their  services,  induced  tlieni  to  carry  their  views  farther.  The  first  was  a Dutchman, 
namwl  CaTroii,  who  had  been  president  of  the  commerce  of  tliat  nation  at  Japan,  and  who,  trora  discon- 
tent, had  retired  into  Franco.  Tlie  otlier  was  Mareara  Avanchinz,  a native  of  Persia,  who  hud  spent  a 
creat  part  of  his  life  in  the  East  Indies,  in  the  quality  of  a mercliant.  Tlie  first  was  engaged  to  form 
^dements  for  the  Company  in  the  Indies  and  Japan,  in  1666;  in  the  same  year,  Mareara,  the  Persian,  set 
sail,  in  order  to  co-o|»rate  witli  him  in  the  same  cause,  being  invested  with  the  title  ot  Counsellor  to  the 
Council  of  the  Isle  Dauphine,  and  Director  of  all  the  Factories  of  the  Company  in  the  Indies,  Persia,  and 
the  countiy  of  the  South.  They  proceeded  to  tlie  Isle  Dauphine,  from  whence  tliey  departed  on  the 
Idth  of  October,  1667,  in  order  to  settle  the  first  factory  of  the  Company  in  llie  city  of  Surat,  they 
•nchored  at  Cochin  on  the  24th  of  December,  where  tliey  were  kindly  received  by  the  Dutch  ; from 
thence  they  proceeded  to  Surat,  where  they  arrived  February  13,  1668,  and  reported  they  « ere  to  e 
followed  with  large  consignments;  but  those  not  appearing,  the  native  merchants  a uia  conceive  a 
contempt  of  the  French  agents,  who  shortly  after  returned  to  the  Isle  Dauphinc. 

1669.  The  French  obtained  a phirmaund  from  the  King  of  Golcondali,  dated  Dewmber  .5,  1669, 

granting  permission  to  setUe  a factory  at  Mausulipatam,  and  to  negotiate  tlirough  all  his  domuuons  for 


382  « 


RISE  AND  PROGRESS  OF  THE  COMMERCE 


ever,  ^viliioLit  paying  any  duties,  either  inwarcU  or  outwards,  fur  the  King's  ships,  or  for  those  of  the 
Company.  A factory  was  therefore  established,  and  the  commerce  carried  on  with  zeal  and  diligence.  They 
also  obtained  permission  to  form  factories  at  Bantam  and  Siam,  and  commenced  a trade  with  Cochin  China. 

1670.  The  advantages  procured  from  the  Coast  of  Golcondah  were  the  more  valuable,  as  the  East 
India  Company  began  to  perceive  that  but  little  profit  was  to  be  expected  from  the  Isle  of  Dauphine:  every 
thing  was  ill-managed  in  that  island  by  the  Directors  and  Council,  and  the  Company's  funds  embezzled  ; 
for  which  the  King,  by  an  arret  of  the  1st  of  April,  1669,  ordained  a rigorous  enquiry  to  be  made.  His  Ma- 
jesty, having  taken  upon  himself  the  losses  which  the  Company  should  sustain  in  the  first  ten  years  of  this 
eiiterpris?,  was  in  a particular  manner  interested  in  repressing  those  abuses.  He  determined  to  take  back 
the  sovereignty  of  the  island,  which  he  had  yielded  in  perpetuity  to  the  Company.  This  change  was 
decided  by  an  airet,  dated  November  12,  1670.  The  Company  therefore  transferred  the  Sovereign  Council 
troiii  the  Isle  of  Dauphine  to  Surat,  to  the  members  of  which  full  powers  wxre  given,  both  in  civil  and 
criminul  cases,  by  letters  patent  in  the  month  of  January,  1671. 

1 672.  A considerable  armament  was  sent  out  under  De  la  Haye,  consisting  of  twelve  large  ships, 
liaving  2,(X)0  troops  on  board,  (great  part  of  whom  died  at  Madagascar),  with  a view  of  taking  possession 
of  Ce}lon,  and  oilier  places  belonging  to  the  Dutcb  in  India.  They  established  themselves  at  Trincomalee, 
ironi  which  the  Dutch  force  found  it  <Ufficult  to  remove  them.  From  thence  they  sailed  to  the  Coro- 
iiiaiidel  Coast,  and  unexpectedly  landed  300  men  and  some  cannon  at  St.  Thome,  which  they  took  by 
storm  in  July,  1672,  and  resisted  the  numerous  forces  of  the  natives,  who  could  not  expel  them.  The 
Dutch  having  sent  a considerable  force  against  it,  it  surrendered  to  them  on  the  26th  of  August,  1674, 
on  condition  that  the  garrison  should  be  transported  to  Europe,  and  the  place  reded  to  tlie  King  of 
Golcondah;  whereupon  the  French  obtained  permission  to  form  a factory  at  Pondicherry,  which  after- 
wards became  their  principal  settlement. 

167.5.  The  affairs  of  the  Company  being  in  a state  of  embarrassment,  a general  Court  of  the  Proprietors 
was  called  at  Paris,  before  whom  a true  state  of  their  concerns  was  laid,  and  a report  thereon  made  to  the 
King,  who  issued  a declaration,  dated  Sejitember  13,  1675,  importing  that  a dividend  of  10  per  cent, 
should  be  paid  to  such  of  the  proprietors  as  had  completed  their  payments ; tliat  with  respect  to  those  who 
had  not  completed  theirs,  they  should  have  to  the  1st  of  July,  1676;  and  upon  completing  their  payments, 
should  have  a discount  of  10  per  cent. ; that  the  capitals  of  such  as  neglected  to  complete  their  subscriptions, 
should  be  forfeited  for  the  use  of  the  Company ; and,  lastly,  tliat  whereas,  through  the  losses  and  discou- 
rngeinents  to  which  all  new  undertakings  are  liable,  the  East  India  Company  had  incurred  a debt  of 
4., 060, (MX)  livres,  His  Majesty  forgave  freely  and  for  ever  the  said  sum  advanced  for  their  service.  This 
e xtraordinary  generosity  of  the  Crown  was  followed  in  the  ensuing  year  by  the  freeing  the  merchandise 
bought  at  their  sales,  from  all  duties  inward  and  outward,  except  those  transported  to  Lyons,  and  even  those 
were  to  pay  only  a fourth  of  the  usual  duties  upon  entry,  and  those  of  the  custom-house  belonging  to  that 
city.  Such  was  the  situation,  and  such  the  benefits  bestowed  upon  this  Company  by  the  French  Govern- 
ment in  tlie  first  ten  years  of  its  existence. 

1681.  The  Company's  funds  being  still  inadequate  to  the  prosecution  of  the  trade,  some  private 
merchants  expressed  their  willingness  to  embark  their  fortunes  in  it,  provided  they  might  obtain  licences; 
and  the  Company  having  signified  to  the  King  that  it  might  prove  beneficial  to  them,  if  they  had  a power 
to  grant  such  indulgences,  His  Majesty  granted  permission  to  private  traders  to  engage  in  this  commerce 
iijion  the  following  conditions : — That  they  should  transport  themselves  and  their  effects  on  board  the 
Company's  ships,  both  outward  and  homeward ; that  they  should  pay  their  freight  and  passage  before 
their  de{^ure ; that  the  goods  they  brought  home,  precious  stones  only  excepted,  should  be  exposed  at 
the  Company’s  sales  and  sold  with  theirs,  paying  them  a duty  of  five  per  cent,  and  their  produce  fairly 


BETWEEN  PRANCE  AND  THE  EAST  INDIES. 


* 383 


accounted  for ; that  these  licences  should  be  in  force  for  five  years  only ; and  that  if  they  should  be  found 
prejudicial  to  the  affairs  of  the  Company,  the  directors  might  abridge  or  cancel  them  at  their  pleasure. 
The  public  came  so  eagerly  into  this  proposal,  that  the  directors  entertained  great  hopes  of  deriving 
considerable  benefit  from  it ; but  the  proprietors,  jealous  of  the  profits  made  by  the  free  traders,  in  two 
years'  time  obtained  a repeal  of  this  regulation,  and  their  charter  remained  in  full  force. 

1684.  With  a view  of  .supporting  their  monopoly,  and  restoring  their  credit,  the  Company  obtained 
permission  from  Uie  King,  to  new  model  their  Government,  by  putting  the  whole  management  of  their 
concerns  into  the  hands  of  twelve  directors,  who  were  each  of  them  to  pay  30,000  livres  upon  the 
forfeited  actions,  and  to  be  allowed  reasonable  salaries.  And  it  was  resolved,  that  all  who  had  not  made 
their  payments,  should  forfeit  their  shares  to  the  Company,  with  a proviso  that  if  in  two  years  they  mode 
good  their  payments,  they  should  enter  into  their  former  rights,  and  have  all  their  actions  restored.  This 
regulation  was  confirmed  by  a royal  edict,  dated  in  February,  l(>8o.  In  the  ensuing  year,  with  a view 
of  increasing  tlie  funds  of  the  Company,  eight  more  directors  were  added,  who  were  to  make  up  the  stock 
they  held  00,000  livres  each.  These  sums  brought  such  a supply  to  the  Company’s  cash,  that  ho|)es  were 
entertained  that,  alter  so  many  disappointments,  they  would  be  put  upon  a solid  foundation. 


1687.  The  East  India  Company  importing  considerable  quantities  of  gold  ajid  silver  brocades  and 
painted  cottons,  which  were  in  great  esteem  in  France,  and  met  a ready  sale,  the  manufacturers  set  up 
a general  clamour,  stating,  that  unless  a stop  was  imnie<liati‘ly  put  to  the  importation  ol  the.se  silks  and 
cottons,  they  should  be  all  ruined.  Whereupon  an  edict  was  published,  dated  January  27,  1087,  by 
which  this  branch  of  commerce  was  prohibited,  and  it  was  with  considerable  difficulty  that  the  Company 
obtained  permission  to  dispose  of  those  they  had  on  hand,  and  expected  by  the  next  ships. 

Soon  affer  the  alwve  edict,  another  came  out,  prohibiting  the  sale  of  piece-goods  to  forelgncr.s,  upon 
a supposition,  that  if  they  could  not  purcha.se  Indian  manufactures,  they  mu.st  purchase  those  of  1' ranee. 
A high  duty  was  also  laid  upon  raw  silk,  of  which  the  Company  Imported  at  this  period  considerable 
quantities.  From  these  circumsUnccs,  the  Company’s  affah-s  assumed  a more  gloomy  aspect  than  before. 

1693  The  war  which  broke  out  between  the  maritime  powers  in  Europe,  deeply  affected  the  whole 
commerce  of  France,  more  particularly  that  of  their  East  India  Company,  which  was  already  scarcely  able 
to  support  itself.  The  Dutch  landed  a conslilerable  quantity  of  arms  and  stores  from  a fleet  of  ninetL>en 
ships,  to  attack  Pondicherry,  and  which  they  invested.  It  surrendered  to  them  on  honourable  conditions, 
on  the  6th  of  September,  1693.  This  event  put  an  end  to  the  Company’s  authority  and  influence  on  the 
Coast  of  Coromandel.  The  Dutch,  on  obtaining  pssession,  raised  new  walls,  and  increased  the  fortifications. 

1696.  Upon  the  conclusion  of  a general  peace,  Pondicherry  was  restored  to  the  French,  with  all  its 
new  fortifications,  upon  payment  of  £5,000  to  the  DuUh  Government  for  the  expences  incurijd.  As 
soon  as  the  news  of  the  surrender  arrived  in  France,  the  East  India  (Company  rccinved  orders  from  the 
Government  to  put  the  place  into  such  a condition  as  to  secure  it  against  any  future  attempts  upon  it. 


1698.  The  Dii'ectors,  notwithstanding  the  unfortunate  condition  of  their  affairs,  resolved  to  use  their 
utmost  efforts  to  resume  their  trade  as  a Company;  but  were  unable  to  bring  about  what  they  desired: 
they  therefore  accepted  a proposal  for  carrying  on  a trade  to  China,  by  a private  person  under  the  authority 
of  theCompany.  This  was  effected  by  granting  a licence,  which  was  confirmed  by  the  Crown,  to  M. 
a rich  meiehant,  who  fitted  out  a large  ship,  called  the  Amphitrite,  for  that  voyage,  bhe  sailed  in  March, 
1698,  and  returned  safe  to  France  on  the  3d  of  August,  1700,  very  richly  laden. 

1701.  The  success  of  the  Amphitrite’s  voyage  encouraged  M:  Jourdan  and  those  who  were  concern^ 
with  him,  to  fit  out  the  same  ship  again,  which  they  did  in  the  Spring  of  the  year,  and  she  returned  in 


SM  ' 


itm  jkm  PBOGBSM  m n»tiQiiom 

the  month  of  September,  IfOS,  equaHj  iuccMsfiilMi  W the  ^ 

shipwreck  on  her  ftlling  down  Canton  Biver  to  proe^  on  her  lioiMweid4AB^^  ^ 

The  Companj  petitioned  the  King  in  the  begfainhig  of  thli  yeer,  ilettif  they  eeWb  mder  iliiii 
difliciilties,  that  without  his  Majeit/s  assistance^  their  trade  aad  eitahnshfnente  nwel  %e  dhaiMbhed: 
Louis  XIV.  therefore  lent  them  850, (KX)  Urres,  upon  condition  that  the  Dtrectom  adeanoed  ailA 
livres,  and  the  proprietors  50  per  cent,  upon  their  respective  capitals.  With  this  condition  the  Dlhxston 
complied,  but  the  Proprietors  absolutely  rethsed.  ^ Their  refusal  occasioned  a tedious  dispute^  wMch  lasted 
till  1704,  when  the  Court  decided  by  an  arret,  that  the  Proprietors  should  receive  the  profits,  and  be 
liable  to  the  debts  of  the  Company,  in  proportion  to  their  respective  interests  in  its  capital;  that,a  general 
state  of  their  affairs  should  be  immediately  laid  before  them;  and  that  a committee  oi  five  should  be  chosen 
out  of  their  own  body,  without  whose  consent  the  Directors  should  be  restrained  from  borrowing. 

1708..  It  does  not  appear  that  the  foregoing  regulations  had  any  good^effect;  for  in  this  year  the  Com* 
pnny  became  in  a manner  absolutely  bankrupts ; so  that  the  King  by  an  arret  staid  all  prosecutions  at 
law  against  them  for  debt;  and,  that  the  trade  to  India  might  not  entirely  cease,  granted  the  Company 
permission  to  enter  into  a treaty  to  lease  out  their  privileges  upon  the  best  terms  they  could,  to  any  private 
persons  w'lio  slioiild  be  inclined  to  contract  with  them.  In  pursuance  of  this  plan,  they  granted  leave  to 
M.  Croizat  to  fit  out  two  ships  in  the  name  of  the  East  India  Company,  upon  eondition  that  he  paid 
them  15  per  cent,  upon  all  goods  imported  under  this  privilege,  and  2 per  cent,  upon  all  the  prizes  they 
.should  make  beyond  the  line;  with  a farther  reservation  that  the  Company  might  be  at  liberty  to  brlllg 
home  on  board  his  ships,  ten  tons  of  whatever  commodities  they  pleased,  without  payment  of  freight* 

1712.  The  Company  entered  into  a treaty  with  some  private  traders  at  St.  Maloes,  by  which  Hnff 
yielded  up  to  them  all  their  privileges. 

By  an  arret,  dated  in  February,  1712,  a new  Company  was  established  for  trading  to  China,  uncon- 
nected with  the  East  India  Company,  or  witli  those  private  merchants  who  traded  to  India ; and  theii^ 
privileges  were  granted  for  a period  of  fifty  years ; but  they  only  sent  two  ships  to  China  previous  to  their 
being  incorporated  with  the  Company  of  the  West,  in  1719. 

1714.  The  East  India  Company's  privileges  being  nearly  at  an  end,  the  directors  represented  to  the 
King  that,  in  order  to  put  them  in  a condition  of  paying  the  debts  which  they  had  contracted  to  support 
the  trade,  they  most  humbly  prayed  him  to  extend  their  privileges  ten  years  longer.  His  Majesty  granted 
their  request,  with  this  restriction  only— That  the  tenth  of  all  prizes  taken  by  the  Company's  ships,  or 
those  of  their  associates,  beyond  the  line,  should  henceforward  belong  to  the  High  Admiral  of  France.  This 
arret,  wliicli  is  dated  the  29th  of  September,  1714,  renewed  the  prohibition  against  importing  into  France 
any  jirinted  cottons  or  stuffs,  of  silk  unmixed,  of  silk  and  cotton  mixed  with  gold  and  silver,  of  bark  oi 
trees,  and  unwrought  silk,  even  under  pretext  of  ex|>orting  them  abroad.  This  application  for  an  exten- 
sion of  their  exclusive  trade,  does  not  appear  to.  have  been  with  a design  to  make  use  of  it  thenuelves, 
but  to  enable  others  to  carry  it  on,  and  to  draw  some  advantage  from  their  advances  and  gains. 

1717.  In  the  month  of  August,  the  Government  of  France  established  the  Company  of  the  West, 
better  known  by  the  name  of  the  Mississippi  Company,  and  conferred  upon  them  for  twenty-five  years  the 
f'xclusive  trade  and  property  of  Louisiana,  together  with  the  beaver  trade  of  Canada ; the  Canada  Company 
being  on  this  occasion  incorporated  with  the  new  one. 

1719.  At  this  period,  besides  the  East  India  Company  and  the  Company  of  the  West,  th^e  were 
two  otliers  in  France,  that  of  China  and  that  of  Senegal.  As  these  separate  Companies  had  bad  no  success,  it 
was  believed  that  as  their  trade  extended  to  the  four  quarters  of  the  world,  a general  Conqpany,  which  should 
have  an  equal  privilege  with  all  the  others,  and  should  act  on  the  sanie  principles,  would  succeed  much 


9ETWE&K  AND  THE  EAST  INDIES,  , 88* 

betfcery  und  procure  'greater  ^advanUigei,  te  the  kingdom.  In  1718  the  Senegal  Company  was  united  to 
that  of  the  West;^  and  in  Mayi  1719^  the  East  India  Com|>any  and  tliat  of  China  likewise:  the  whole 
maumed  the  name  of  The  Company  of  the  Indies.*^  In  the  preamble  to  the  edict  we  have  a succinct  history 
of  the  Eaat  India  Company^  atid  tlie  ti'ansactions  upon  which  this  union  was  built.  It  is  therein  stated— 
The  Company  of  the  East  Indies,  as  established  in  August,  1069,  instead  of  employing  for  the 
aggrandiaetnent  of  trade,  the  exclusive  privilege  which  had  been  granted  them  for  fitly  years,  and  the 
repeated  succours  in  money  and  ships  given  them  by  the  late  King,  afler  having  contracted  debts  both  in 
France  and  the  Indies,  have  totally  abandoned  their  navigation,  and  have  resolved  to  yield  their  privilege 
to  private  merchants  upon  payment  of  10  per  cent,  on  the  product  of  their  sales  in  France,  and  ,5  per 
cent,  on  prizes,  and  retaining  50  livres  per  ton  on  goods  exported,  and  75  livres  per  ton  on  goods  imported, 
which  had  been  granted  them  by# Way  of  gratification.  We  are  sensible  that  their  w ant  of  success  has  not 
at  all  been  owing  to  the  nature  of  this  trade,  but  to  their  bad  management ; and  that  this  (^)mpany,  like 
those  of  neighbouring  States,  might  have  rendered  this  commerce  of  advantage  l»oth  to  the  proprietors  and 
the  nation.  This  enterprise  had  been  formed  witli  a capital  iiisuiTicient  to  carry  it  on.  Hie  Directors 
have  destroyed  one  part  of  those  funds  by  too  hasty  divideiKl*^,  at  a time  wdicn  there  were  no  profits ; and 
to  supply  these  deficiencies,  they  had  borrowed  money  upon  the  places  at  excessive  interest,  even  to  10  per 
cent,  and  at  other  times  had  borrowed  money  on  bottomry,  at  the  rate  of  5 per  cent,  per  month ; so  that 
the  profits  of  the  trade  were  exhausted,  and  below  the  charge  they  were  at  in  carrying  it  on.  Nevertheless, 
notwithstanding  this  bad  management,  the  late  King,  alw’ays  continuing  the  protection  he  bad  granted  to 
this  Company,  and  with  a view  to  put  them  into  condition  of  jiaying  their  debts,  has  granted  by  the 
declaration  of  1714*,  the  cnntinmitioii  of  their  jirivilegc  for  ten  years,  to  commence  from  the  1st  of  April, 
1716.  But  instead  of  fulfilling  so  laudable  an  object,  the  Indians  liave  laid  Iw^forc  uk  repented  complaints, 
that  the  Company  paid  them  neither  principal  nor  interest;  and  that  for  more  than  sixteen  years  past,  they 
had  not  sent  one  ship  to  Surat,  Tlius  this  commerce  languishing  for  several  years,  began  to  bo  entirely 
ruined,  if  care  bad  not  been  taken;  because  those  private  merchants  who  had  purchased  the  priNilege  from 
the  Company,  being  charged  with  the  payment  of  10  per  cent,  to  them,  could  not  carry  on  this  trade  in 
concurrence  with  foreigners;  and,  moreover,  for  fear  of  having  their  ships  seized  for  the  Company’s  debts, 
they  durst  not  send  their  ships  to  Surat,  a principal  city  of  the  Mogul's  country,  from  whence  tliey  hod 
their  cotton  wool  and  cotton  thread,  and  almost  all  the  drugs  and  s|)iccs  of  India  and  Arabia  ; so  that  our 
subjects  are  obliged  to  bring  from  other  countries  the  most  part  of  the  gooils  of  the  Indies  consumed  in  the 
nation,  and  those  proper  for  the  trade  of  Guinea  and  Senegal,  which  they  bought  at  ticblc  the  value,  and 
60  were  for  ever  deprived  of  the  advantage  of  buying  these  sorts  of  merchandises  in  the  kingdom. 

“ We  have  also  been  informed  that  the  separate  Company  of  China,  established  by  an  arret, 
November  28,  1712,  and  which  formerly  had  been  included  in  the  gi  ant  of  tlie  said  Company  of  the 
Indies,  have  made  no  use  of  the  exclusive  privilege  which  had  been  given  them,  and  tliat  this  Company  is 
in  still' greater  disorder,  if  possible,  than  that  of  the  Indies.  We  should  think  ourselves  wanting  to  the 
duties  which  we  owe  to  ourselves  and  our  subjects,  in  suflVring  such  disorder  any  longer  to  subsist  in  one 
of  the  most  considerable  branches  of  tralfic  in  our  kingdom ; and  we  are  also  of  opinion  that  it  is  for  the  nd- 
vanUge  and  good  of  our  State,  to  re-establish  and  advance  the  French  trade  in  the  Indies,  and  to  preserve  the 
honour  of  the  nation,  in  paying  those  people  their  debts  contraettid  by  the  Company.  For  this  efiTect  wc 
have  resolved  to  suppress  the  privileges  granted  to  the  Companies  of  the  Indies  and  Clii/ia,  and  to  unite  them 
to  that  of  the  West.  The  establishment  of  this  Company  settled  some  years  ago,  the  protection  which  we 
have  given  them,  their  prudent  management,  the  credit  which  they  have  acquired,  the  considerable  funds 
whichtheywai  possess  by  the  unanimous  conjunction  of  these  different  Companies  ; all  these  and  many 
other  advanUges  cause  us  to  believe  that  we  could  not  trust  the  trade  of  the  Indies  and  of  China  to  better 
bands  Moreover,  by  this  means,  and  by  the  union  made  between  this  Company  and  that  of  the  West  and 

3 D 


S8C 


RISE  AND  PROGRESS  OF  THE  COMMERCE 


tWo„  b,  h»  lb.,  pri,a.5.,  8».t«lKU»cJp.„,rfU«, 

of  “T"'  ""I""’  “1  ko'o  muitol,  nd  do*™,,  to  U»  Compui, 

tilt  West,  the  sole  privilege,  exclusive  of  aU  our  other  subjects,  to  trade  from  the  Cane  of  w ^ 

z T 't”  ““  B-Sd 

T ^ «s  also  from  the  Straits  of  Magellan  „r,A 

Le  Maire  into  all  the  Soush  Seas.-We  pmhil.it  all  others,  our  subjects,  to  cLr,  1 

give  .Zi  stut,  7 7"  “*■  "f  ■lN|»,  .nob  «orto,  .„d  ™o„htodi».-We 

f:.L"'!/‘  “'°,‘"’  P^x,  fc  J.nd.,  idto,  fort.,  h.bitoUo,», 

jpoioto,  to„„.b|o.,  immovtobla,  rent,,  .hip^  [..rk.,  »„llk.  pi„vi.b,„.,  beul. 

oTlS  ■"'‘•"rr';  Iodte,to.iL  ofCb..,lr„^ 

e“  * dtp  -f  “»  •»  “•Wy  Ui.  Otoditoi.  0?  u...  of  aZ 

oZl  to  ZlZ  . r„"  '“i  “1  r' ^ •”  .u  Un.  oMem  it 

ght  have,  a thing  which  cannot  be  done  but  by  the  help  of  considerable  funds,  we  have  nermitted 

ond  port,,,  .born  to  n.ko  85, 000, 000  of  oo.  „u..,.,  ,hioh  c.noo,  bo  boogb.  otit  f„3,S 

PhW.  ‘hfllZ'rf  IW “11°  ‘'“t  ^ “Irt  ““  of  «>•  Wort  550  INro.  for  o«l,  „Uon,  til 

1-To  Ir  " ,d  tul  7 7 7 U»  l<».«».000  of  tbo  Comprtiy  of  tboWost;  .„d  in  eon.idoluto. 

tlio  othor  ,■  ,7  70*"  ? 'oB  P*y  nirove  tbo  par,  we  will  tliat  they  enjoy  the  MOie  wirtotaees  with 

the  od,erwt.„,„  Woper,|,i,,be  Con,prt,y  ,0  ito.K,,,  the  e,.„„L  to  tbei.  .totrter  lS  rf 

stuffs  of  Silk  and  cotton,  mixed  with  gold  and  silver,  of  bark  of  trees  cottnn  f?v  / j • j 

“•  “7  - — .e.p.obibitodi„.be  kingdom  eliell to.’ w’SdTurliot 

If  S*!"  d-''“°  proliibltod  in  the  preoeding  mticle,  on  peytog  the  dntito'lmlllul'^ir b5“th.‘ ColtS 
Irt  bir  w T^loto  tbo  edieto,  deetortlion.,  erreto,  Jrt 8ul.L,._We" 

that  the  Company  of  the  West  be  henceforth  named  and  entitled,  « The  Company  of  the  Indies  " and  that 
they  bear  the  same  arms  which  the  Company  of  Uie  West  have  used  heretofore.— We  midntain  and 
confirm  the  said  Company  in  aU  rights  and  privileges  to  them  granted  by  the  edicts  of  1664  and  168fi  »•») 
o her  declarations  made  in  favour  of  their  commerce,  withou/exception.  os  ^ Ld  L" 
these  presents,  in  manner  as  the  Company  of  the  Indies  enjoys  them;  excepting  such  as  have  been  revok^ 
enio?  “ n to  the  nghts  of  the  Admiral  of  France,  which  he  has,  or  ought  to 

thmol7  declaration  of  September  3,  1712,  and  the  regulations  made  in  consequence 

enteror!s!!*^ii  ^ ”"***'^  ''**”^“*  Company  adequate  to  tlie  vast  extent  of  their  commercial 

ISS  to  U ^7  ^'"PO'vered  to  raise  25  milUons  of  capital  stock , but  such  an  eagerness  appeared 

HreZ  / \ T »“l>*eription  amount^  toSOmfc  . 

c rcum.stence  svhich  induced  the  Frencli  Government  to  issue  an  edict,  by  wliicli  they  should  take  off  four 

imes  the  number  of  old  actions  to  be  entiUed  to  the  new;  so  that,  in  onler  to  purchie  5,000  lines  o/the 

r r?  1 ' *"*’“"‘’7  “»  ^ke  20,000  livres  of  the  old  ones  The  great  end  prolljd 

*..1  ” h”*^/  **^  means  of  calling  in  and  suppressing  that  immense, quantity  of  paper  money  wWch^as 

hut  tld  ” t ^ annuities  to  tlie  value  of  25,000,000  livres  were  created  • 

toi  k to  dT  new  Company  of  the  Indies  offeei  thdr  «isisUnc^  L un^I 

wLch  amounted  m the  whole  to  near  60  miUions  sterling,  was  to  be  extinguished  by  the  end  of 


387 


between  prance  and  the  east  indies. 

173L  In  consideration  of  the  zeal  manifested  by  the  Company  in  this  projiosal,  the  King,  by  an  arret 
in  July,  1720,  was  pleased  to  change  the  terms  on  which  they  held  their  privileges,  and  to  declare  them 
perpetual;  and  thus  this  Company  acquired  the  title  of  “ The  Perpetual  Coinj)aiiy  of  the  Indies,''  witli  all 
the  privileges  of  the  oilier  four  companies  confirmed  to  them  Ibr  ever.  It  was  soon  atlLer  settled  and 
declared  tliat^  in  consecpicnce  of  the  annuities  granted  and  assigned  to  the  Company  from  the  Crown, 
they  should  be  able  to  divide  annually  the  sum  of  10  per  cent,  which  should  be  paid  ])unctually  for  ever. 
The  Directors  were  to  be  at  full  liberty  to  export  and  import  what  they  thought  jiroper,  witliout  being 
accountable  annually  to  their  constituents,  because  the  dividends  were  to  be  regular  and  certain;  and  they 
were  to  be  so  managed,  that  the  deficiencies  of  one  year  might  be  made  up  with  the  profits  of  another. 
Such  was  the  infatuation  that  people  of  all  ranks,  foreigners  as  well  as  natives,  sold  off  tlieir  property  of 
every  kind,  in  order  to  participate  in  the  surprising  advantages  expected  from  the  variou.s  operations  of 
the  Company  of  the  Imlies.  Stork  rose  every  day,  and  at  one  period  excee<k‘d  lOOOper  cent.;  and  Paris 
was  glutted  with  real  money,  the  greater  part  of  whicli  was  brought  in  from  foreign  countries. 

1720.  In  February,  the  management  of  the  Royal  Bank  of  France  was  transferred  to  the  Company 
of  the  Indies.  From  this  period  may  be  dated  the  downfal  of  the  system.  The  quantity  of  paper  thrown 
into  circulation  lowered  its  credit,  together  with  that  of  the  Company's  slock.  In  order  to  support  the 
system,  it  was  decreed  that  the  value  of  the  coin  should  be  raised,  and  that  the  bank-bills  should  be 
reduced  to  half  their  value,  and  the  shares  from  9000  to  5000  livres.  This  mode  of  reducing  the  dispro- 
portion between  the  paper  currency  and  the  coin  was,  perhaps,  the  least  unrcasonuhle  that  could  have 
been  adopted  in  the  desperate  situation  of  affairs  at  that  period;  it,  however,  tlirew  the  whole  country 
into  misery  and  confusion.  All  were  anxious  to  rescue  what  little  they  could  from  the  general  wTeck; 
many  families,  who  had  long  ilourislied  in  affluence,  were  utterly  ruined ; and  the  splendid  vision  of  re- 
establishing public  credit  vanished. 

The  Company's  stock,  at  the  termination  of  their  career,  consist'd  of  600,000  shares  of  .WO  livres 
each,  which  entitled  the  proprietors  to  annuities  of  80  livres  per  share,  proceeding  from  interest  of 
Government  paper-loans,  &c.  These  600,000  shares,  representing  300,000,000  livres,  probably  cost 
those  who  were  actual  stock-holders  at  the  time  of  the  stoppage,  near  300,000,000  livres.  There  originally 
belonged  to  the  King  100,000  shares,  and  a like  number  had  been  reserved  by  the  Company,  all  of  wliich 
hhd  been  sold  at  exorbitant  profits. 

In  this  year  the  Company  established  a factory  at  Moebn,  for  securing  to  themselves  a regular  supply 
of  coffee,  and  with  a view  of  participating  in  the  trade  of  the  Red  Sea. 

1721.  On  the  26th  of  January  an  office  was  created,  to  wliich  the  holders  of  the  Company's  shares, 
and  Government  securities  of  all  kinds  were  to  be  submitted,  and  their  validity  afterwards  discussed. 
The  result  of  this  inspection  was  that  the  bank-notes  which  had  been  circulated,  amounted  to 
JPl  12,350,000  sterling:  of  these  i’29,471,977  10s.  were  ordered  to  be  burnt,  without  any  compensation. 
The  stockholders  were  condemned  to  a restitution  of  ^7,808,912  10s.  lOd. : and  various  other  modes 
were  contrived  to  lessen  the  national  debt,  which  at  the  death  of  Louis  XIV.  amounted  to  near 
JP100,000,000  sterling,  but  which  was  now  reduced  to  less  than  one-fifth  of  that  amount.  The  Comjmny's 
shares  were  redaced  to  56,000;  but  it  does  not  appear  that  any  comiiensation  was  ever  made  to  the 
immense  moss  of  stockholders  whose  property  was  thus  annihilated. 

The  Directors  fitted  out  three  ships  for  India  towards  tlie  end  of  the  year  1720,  which,  besides 
carrying  a large  cargo  of  European  commodities  and  manufactures,  had  on  board  a great  quantity  of 
silver  in  specie  and  bullion.  This  measure  raised  the  credit  of  the  Company,  and  augmented  the  value  of 
their  actions.  The  Directors  likewise  ordered  improvements  to  be  made,  and  magazines  to  be  erected  at 
L'Orient.  The  arrival  of  these  ships  in  India,  and  the  accounts  of  the  changes  of  the  Company's  affairs 

3D  2 


388  ’ 


BISE  AND  PROGRESS  OF  THE  COMMERCE 


in  Europe,  astonished  their  seiTants,  more  particulaily  as  they  came  backed  \^ith  assurances  of  a regular 
correspondence  in  future.  They  therefore  began  to  discharge  the  most  pressing  of  the  demands  upon 
them,  and  to  provide  suitable  returns  with  the  remainder. 


1723.  In  the  course  of  1721  and  1722  the  Company  were  not  in  a condition  to  send  a single  cargo 
to  India.  This  interruption  of  their  commerce  excited  the  raillery  of  all  Europe.  In  1723  two  ships 
were  fitted  out  for  Pondicherry;  and  though  their  cargoes  were  not  very  valuable,  the  Directors  ol  the 
several  factories,  and  the  people  employed  under  them,  were  regularly  paid,  and  the  debts  of  the  old 
Company  w^ere  finally  extinguished. 

Notwithstanding  tlie  French  commerce  was  in  so  reduced  a state,  Pondicherry  was  strengthened  by 
new  fortifications;  in  con.spf|uence  of  which  the  inhabitants  increased  considerably.  The  walls,  which  were 
now  begun  on  a design  to  enclose  the  town  within  them,  were  to  be  completed,  In  part,  at  the  cxpence  of 
the  Company,  and  the  remainder  at  that  of  the  iiihabitunts.  About  this  period  tlie  French  obtained 
possession  of  Mahe,  on  the  Coast  of  Malabar. 

1725.  In  the  month  of  June,  Louis  XV.  being  conic  of  age,  confirmed  to  the  Company  for  ever  their 
privilege  of  exclusive  trade  in  slaves,  gold-dust,  &c.  from  Cape  Blanco,  along  th(‘  Coast  oJ'  Africa,  to  the 
Cape  of  Good  Hope,  and  the  sole  trade  of  every  kind  from  the  Cape  eastward  to  Cape  Horn  in  South 
America,  including  all  the  coasts  and  islands  of  the  Indian  and  Pacific  Oceans.  Tiie  King  also  made 
many  regulations  respecting  their  concerns,  and  gave  them  a discharge  of  all  demands  which  might  be 
made  upon  tliem  by  the  Bank.  He  also  caused  to  be  cancelled  many  old  and  intricate  accounts,  and  ordered 
all  papers  and  accounts  belonging  to  the  Company,  and  not  relating  to  commerce,  to  be  burnt.  It  was  only 
after  the  Company  of  the  Indies  were  delivered,  though  with  the  loss  of  almost  the  whole  of  their  capital, 
ftom  all  matters  of  finance,  that  they  could  be  truly  considered  as  a commercial  Company. 


1734.  Notwithstanding  the  serious  diflSculties  the  Company  of  the  Indies  had  been  involved  in, 
they  were  enabled  to  send  out  two  or  three  ships  annually  for  several  years.  Their  number  afterwards 
increased;  and  the  East  India  trade  had  by  this  time  so  greatly  improved,  that  fouiteen  ships  were  sent 
out  the  preceding  year,  whereof  twelve  arrived  in  August,  1734,  fi’om  the  East  Indies  and  China,  and 
they  were  enabled  to  put  up  to  sale  the  following  East  India  merchandise: 


5,334,712  lbs.  coflee,  tea,  drugs,  &c. 
387,820  pieces  of  calico,  stulFs,  &c. 

4,284  packets  of  canes. 

500  ditto  Malacca  ditto. 

71  pieces  Cossiinbuzar  handkerchiefs. 
39  ditto  painted  ditto  for  samples. 


5, (XX)  fans. 

2,124  sheets  of  paper,  painted. 
28,000  fish  and  counters. 

1,992  cabarets  of  varnish. 

55  chests  of  China^-warc. 
189  rolls  ditto. 


besides  numerous  small  articles,  the  particulars  of  which  arc  not  enumerated. 

In  this  ytar  the  Company,  being  desirous  of  extending  their  commerce,  sent  a mission  to  the  Court 
of  Persia,  which,  after  experiencing  many  difficulties,  obtained  permission  to  establish  a factory  at 
Bussorah;  but  the  trade  curried  on  was  but  of  trifling  extent. 

M.  Dumas,  the  Governor  of  Pondicherry,  obtained  permission  of  the  Mogul  to  coin  money  in  the 
Fort,  and  from  50  to  60  lacs  of  rupees  were  annually  struck  for  several  years,  by  which  the  Company 
derived  an  anmml  gain  of  near  4,00,000  rupees. 

1738.  The  French  obtained  j)ossession  of  Karical,  which  was  confirmed  to  them  by  a grant  from 
the  King  of  Tanjore,  dated  the  20th  of  February,  1739,  and  the  inhabitants  of  the  district  were  ordered 
to  acknowledge  and  obey  the  French  as  their  lawful  Sovereign.  The  revenue  arising  therefrom,  compre- 
hending the  farm  of  tobacco  and  betel,  with  the  duty  on  imports,  amounted  to  about  10,000  pagodas. 


BET^VEEN  FRANCE  AND  THE  EAST  INDIES. 


389 


1740.  The  Great  Mogul  having  been  dethroned  by  Thomas  Koli  Khan,  the  Viceroys  of  the 
different  provinces  began  to  erect  kingdoms  for  themselves.  The  Nabob  of  Arcot  assembled  a large  army, 
and  reduced  several  ol  the  neighI)ouring  Princes;  but  the  Mahrattas  declaring  themselves  against  him,  he 
was,  in  action  with  them  in  17JI),  defeated,  and  kilh^d.  llis  wife  and  family  took  refage  at  Pondicherry, 
where  they  were  kindly  treated.  At  thia  time  the  fortifications  were  in  such  reputation  among  a people 
who  had  never  before  .seen  any  thing  equal  to  tiumi,  that  the  principal  natives  sent  their  w'ivc  s,  children, 
and  treasure,  to  remain  there  during  the  war.  The  iNIalirattas  demanded  them,  and  threalened  to  besiege 
Pondicherry;  they  continued  in  the  fcid  till  April,  1741,  and  having  plundered  every  place  within  their 
reach,  and  tried,  without  snece  s whit  tliroafs  would  do  with  the  I’^eneli,  they  ac(‘Opted  a small  present, 
and  retired.  Thus  ended  this  wai',  wliieh  strongly  recommended  the  Krenth  to  the  favour  of  the  reigning 
Mogul  and  his  Miriisteis,  who  senl  th  * French  Governor,  Dumas,  a vest  of  honour,  'fhe  son  of  the 
deceased  Nabob  came  to  Poi:  liehu  iy,  and  made  a cession  to  M.  Dumas  personally  of  three  districts,  to 
the  value  of  near  X’lOOjOOo  stciiing  per  annum,  which  was  confirmed  by  the  Mogufs  letter  patent, 
who  also  declared  M.  Dumas  a Nabob,  being  the  first  honour  of  that  kind  ever  conferred  upon  an 
European  in  India,  and  gave  him  the  command  of  horse.  On  the  arrival  of  M.  Dupleix,  who 

succeeded  to  the  (Tovernment  in  1741,  these  testimonies  were  transferred  to  him;  and  having  received 
con^ide^able  reinforcements  in  men  and  money  from  the  Freneli  islands,  he  began  to  entertain  an  idea,  ia 
the  event  of  a war,  of  expelling  the  English  from  all  their  settlements  on  the  C'oast  of  Coromandel. 

1742.  The  following  is  an  account  of  thenumher  of  ships  which  sailed  from  Pondicherry  to  France 
in  the  years  1727-8  to  1741-2  inclusive,  and  the  prime  cost  of  their  cargoes: 


Yean.  Shi|is.  Pagoilai. 

1787-8 

1788  8,():j,.38U 

1789-30 3 8,18,oa3 

1730-1  — 0,00,711 

1731  3,02,(MjO 

1732- 3  2,00,040 

1733- 4  3,92,987 

1734- ^  75,341 


Years.  Shi[)><. 

173.)-() 

17.10-7 

1 7.17—8  5 

1738—9  .5  ... 

17.39-10  4 ... 

1710-1  4 «v» 


1711-8 


i[)x.  Pj/;ocIiw, 

.3  2,23,484 

^ K OO  T I K 

^,H0, l.^b 

4 4,8.:i,732 

4 ,5, 5.5, fi  Ft 

0,51,376 


1744.  War  was  declared  between  Great  Britain  and  France  in  March,  but  neither  party  took  any 
public  notice  of  the  situation  of  their  affairs  in  the  East  Indies;  however,  the  French  East  India  Company 
offered  the  English  a neutrality  in  tlie  East  Indies,  which  was  njected.  Irnmcdiatidy  on  the  declaration 
of  war,  the  English  Company  made  application  to  the  Admiralty  for  a squadron  tor  the  protection 
of  their  trade  and  settlements.  Accordingly  a fleet  of  four  ships,  under  the*  command  of  Commodore 
Barnet,  sailed  from  Portsmouth  on  the  5th  of  May;  this  squadron  did  not  proceed  immediately  to  the 
English  settlements,  but  cruised,  in  two  divisions,  in  the  Straits  of  Sinula  and  Malacca,  to  intercept  the 
homeward-bound  French  China  ships.  On  the  25tli  of  January,  1745,  they  captured  tlic  Dauphin, 
Hercules,  and  Jason,  each  about  7(J0  tons  and  30  guns,  very  deeply  and  richly  laden,  chiefly  with  tea. 
China-ware,  silks,  &c.  The  other  division  took  a large  privateer  and  a Freneli  ship  from  Manilla, 
richly  laden.  They  then  proceeded  to  the  Coromandel  Coast,  where  they  arrived  in  July,  174.5. 

The  appearance  of  this  squadron,  and  the  reinforcementa  which  were  expected  from  England,  alarmed 
M.  Dupleix  for  the  safety  of  Pondicherry.  He  prevailed  on  the  Nabob  of  Arcot,  in  whose  dominions 
Madras  was  situated,  to  insist  that  the  English  ships  of  war  should  not  commit  any  hostilities  against  the. 


l90 


RISE  AND  PROGRESS  OP  THE  COMMERCE 


French  possessions  in  his  territories,  and  at  the  same  time  assui'ed  the  English  that  he  would  oblige  the 
French  to  ol)$erve  the  same  law  of  neutrality.  The  Madras  Government  stated  that  they  were  alwayv 
I'eady  to  obey  his  commands  as  far  as  their  power  extended ; but  that  the  Commander  of  the  English 
squadron  was  the  immediate  officer  of  the  King  of  Great  Britain,  by  whose  orders  and  commission  he 
acted,  independent  of  the  India  Company's  agents  at  Madras.  The  Nabob  replied  that  all  the 
English  were  equally  obliged  to  respect  his  Government,  and  that  if  they  ventured  to  act  contrary  to  the 
orders  he  had  now  given,  the  town  of  Madras  should  atone  for  their  disobedience.  These  threats  made 
80  much  impression  upon  the  Government  of  Madras,  that  they  requested  and  prevailed  upon  Commodore 
Barnet  to  confine  his  operations  to  the  sea,  who  sent  a part  of  his  squadron  to  cruise  in  Balasore  lioads, 
where  they  captured  two  French  East  Indiamen  bound  to  Chandernagore. 

At  this  period  the  French  had  the  following  establishments,  which  formed  two  principal  Governments; 
indej)endent  of  each  other;  Pondicherry,  and  the  Isles  of  France  and  Bourbon.  The  former  compre-» 
bended  the  Town  of  Pondicherry,  where  the  Governor  resided ; the  factory  of  Mabe,  on  the  Malabar 
Coast;  Karical,  on  the  Coast  of  Coromandel;  and  Chandernagore,  in  Bengal  Hiver.  The  Government 
ef  the  Islands  comprehended  that  of  France  and  Bourbon,  with  the  French  ports  in  Madagascar. 

The  following  account  of  the  cargoes  of  seven  ships,  part  of  a fleet  of  twelve,  which  arrived  at 
L'Orient  previous  to  the  war,  will  shew  the  nature  of  the  French  trade  at  this  period: 


4-00,000  lbs.  Mocha  coffee 
1 ,240,000  ditto  Bourbon  ditto 
420,811  ditto  Boliea  tea 
10^501  ditto  Campoi  ditto 
10,178  ditto  Pekoe  ditto 
0,097  ditto  souchong  ditto 
00,060  ditto  common  green 
82,69/5  ditto  superior  ditto 
9,34-0  ditto  Hyson  ditto 
3,740  ditto  Imperial  ditto 
.(>95,377  ditto  pepper 
53.3,895  ditto  red -wood 
00,788  ditto  cowries 
49,947  ditto  tutenague 
23,107  ditto  esquiiie 
10,809  ditto  galangal 
3,040  ditto  turmeric 

43,200  ditto  tany  silk 
9,577  ditto  nankeen  raw  do. 
2,070  ditto  spun  cotton 
5,300  ps.  white  salempores 
47,085  ditto  white  Guineas 

2,900  ditto  white  dooties 
2,640  ditto  denabadies 
8,100  ditto  iieincales 
6,840  ditto  socretons 
2,800  ditto  chavonis 
3,780  ditto  tamatannef 
15,180  ditto  betellees 


740  pieces  organdls 
1,300  ditto  coast  basins 
995  ditto  3-thread  stuffs 
51,710  ditto  white  gurrahs 
13,780  ditto  white  baflas 

1.200  ditto  adattres 

6.900  ditto  samiocs 
4,440  ditto  banians 

14,340  ditto  casscs 
243  ditto  nainsooks 
7,199  ditto  tanjebs 
12,680  ditto  mulmuls 
349  ditto  atarasoys 
6,080  ditto  terrindains 
300  ditto  toques 
5,280  ditto  Bengal  . doreas 

1.900  ditto  basins 
1,500  ditto  doosooties 

100  ditto  napkins 
590  ditto  emb.  steinkirks 
1,252  ditto  embroideries 
7,858 .ditto  Patna  stuffs 

83.200  ditto  Bengal  napkins 
6,540  ditto  Tranquebu'do. 

34,356  ditto  Mausulipatam 
900  ditto  Pulicat  ditto 
9,400  ditto  Pondicherry  do 
960  ditto  blueSalempores 
17,700  ditto  ginghams 


1 1,94-0  ps.blue  Guinea  stuffs 
400  ditto  bejatapauts 
500  ditto  neganepauts 
2,160  ditto  chasselas 
100  ditto  chabbass 
400  ditto  elatcbes 
200  ditto  chuguelas 
840  ditto  alliballies 
400  ditto  dissouchaye 
600  ditto  seersuckers 
100  ditto  ginghams 
200  ditto  pinasseet 
200  ditto  nelis 
500  ditto  soosees 
100  ditto  tepoys 
640  ditto  gougourans 
538  ditto  damask 
100  ditto  striped  ditto 
040  ditto  plain  Pekins 
100  dkto  ditto  satins 
95  ditto  striped  ditto 
194  ditto  paduasojs 
50  ditto  large  lampus 
15  ditto  flowered  gauze 
2,257  fans  of  various  sorts 
8,085  tea-cliests 
186  chests  China*ware  ' 
345  parcels  ditto 
3,367  bundles  of  rattans 


BETWEEN  FRANCE  AND  THE  EAST  INDIE’S.  • 30! 

41.  f mounting  398  guns,  under  M.  de  la  Bourdonnais,  arrived  on 

the  Coromandel  Coast,  and  on  the  25th  of  June  had  an  action  with  the  English  fleet,  then  under 
Commodore  Peyton,  consisting  of  six  ships,  mounting  270  guns.  Commodore  Barnet  liaving  died  at 
Fort  St.  David’s  m April,  when,  after  an  indecisive  action,  the  French  Commander  proceeded  to  Pondi- 
cherry, and  the  English  to  Bengal. 

The  French  made  preparations  for  besieging  Madras,  whereupon  the  English  called  upon  the  Nabob 
to  fulfil  his  promise  of  restraining  the  French  from  committing  hostilities  against  them  by  land,  who, 
though  he  did  not  give  Mr.  Dupleix  a positive  permission,  he  refrained  from  making  any  prcjiarations,  or 
even  using  menaces  lo  prevent  tlic  French  from  attacking  them.  On  the  3d  of  September  the  French 
fleet  anchored  about  four  leagues  to  tlie  soutliward  of  Madras,  where  the  troops,  artillery,  and  stores 
were  landed;  the  army  consisted  of  1,100  p^uropeans,  400  Caffics,  and  UHJ  native  troops,  and  there 
remained  on  board  the  fleet  1,800  Eiiroiiean  seamen.  On  the  7th  of  Septemher  they  began  to  bombard 
the  town,  which  continued  till  the  10th,  when  it  surrendered  on  ca|)Itulation.  It  was  agreed  that  the 
English  should  surrender  themselves  prisoners  of  war,  that  the  town  should  be  imnu'diately  delivered  up, 
but  that  it  should  be  afterwards  ransomed.  The  French  colours  wen*  hoisted  on  the  Fort,  and  a C’om|)any’s 
ship  in  the  roads  was  taken  possession  of  without  resisbnice.  Thu.s  the  P'l  ench  obtained  possession  of  the 
principal  English  settlement  on  the  roast  without  the  lo.ss  of  a man,  which  they  retained  till  the  peace 
of  Aix-la-Chapelle;  The  French  made  two  unsuccessful  attempts  to  capture  Cuddalore.  The  Nabob  of 
Arcot  made  an  attack  upon  the  PVench  at  Madras;  but  his  array  was  repulsed,  and  a peace  was  concluded 
between  the  two  powers  In  February,  17i7. 

1748.  A considerable  English  fleet,  under  Admiral  Boscawen,  was  sent  to  India,  witli  instructions 
to  attack  the  Mauritius  in  his  way  to  the  Coast  of  Coromandel,  whlcli  was  attempted,  but  did  not  succeed. 
They  arrived  at  P'ort  St.  David  July  when  it  was  determined  to  undertake  the  si(‘gp  of  rondicla  rry, 
the  garrison  of  which  consisted  of  2,000  l!luropeans  and  3,000  native  troops,  under  M.  Dupleix.  The 
English  made  no  impression  on  the  place,  and  the  ai’my  being  sickly,  it  was  decided,  on  the  30lh  or 
September,  to  raise  the  siege,  during  which  they  lost  1,005  Europeans  in  action  and  by  sickness. 
M.  Dupleix  ordered  Te  Dennis  to  be  sung  as  soon  as  the  siege  was  rais(*(I,  and  sent  letters  to  all  the 
native  Princes  an  the  coast,  and  to  the  Great  Mogul,  acquainting  them  that  lie  liud  repulsed  the  most 
formidable  attack  which  had  ever  been  made  in  India,  and  be  received  from  them  the  highest  compliments 
on  his  own  prowess,  and  on  the  military  cliaracter  of  his  nation. 

While  a particular  war  was  thus  carried  on  in  Asia,  a general  peace  was  concluded  in  Europe,  which 
was  definitively  signed  at  Aix-la-Chapelle  on  the  7th  of  October,  whereby  it  was  agreed  “ that  there  .should 
be  a Christian,  universal,  and  perpetual  peace,  as  wtII  by  sea  as  land;  that  there  should  he  a general  oblivion 
of  whatever  had  passed  during  the  war;  that  each  party  should  be  put  into  the  posse.ssion  of  all  Iii.s  effects, 
honours,  and  revenues,  which  they  either  actually  enjoyed,  or  ought  to  have  enjoyi  d,  at  the  commencement 
of  the  war,  notwithstanding  all  disposals,  seizures,  or  confiscations  occasioned  by  the  war;  that  all 
prisoners  and  hostages  should  be  returned  without  ransom ; and  that  all  the  conquests  that  had  been  made 
since  the  commencement  of  the  war  in  the  East  Indies,  or  any  other  part  of  the  world,  should  be  restored 
without  exception.”  Madras  was  accordingly  restored  to  the  English;  but  tlie  French  had  destioyed  the 
greater  part  of  the  Black  Town. 

The  late  war  having  brought  to  Pondicherry  and  Foil;  St.  David  a number  of  troops,  greatly  superior 
to  any  which  either  of  the  two  nations  had  assembled  in  India  before,  the  two  settlements,  when  no 
longer  authorized  to  fight  against  each  other,  took  tlie  resolution  of  employing  their  anus  in  the  contests 
between  the  native  Princes.  On  the  death  of  the  Nizam  ul  Mulck,  Soubah  of  the  Decan,  which  took  place 
in  1748,  the  succession  was  contested  between  Nazir-jing,  the  son,  and  Muzapher  jlng,  the  grandson  of 


99«  . 


RISE  AND  PROGRESS  OP  THE  COMMERCE 


ihe  deceased.  A com})etition  was  also  maintained  for  the  Nabo1)sbip  of  Arcot,  on  the  part  of  Chunda-saib 
against  Anaverdy  Khan^  who  had  been  nominated  to  that  situation  by  the  late  Nizam.  Nazir-jing  and 
Anaverdy  Khan  united  their  forces  against  Muzapher-jing,  who  had  been  joined  by  Chunda*saib. 
M.  Dupleix,  on  the  part  of  the  French,  engaged  to  assist  the  latter,  on  a promise,  in  case  of  success,  of  being 
granted  the  town  of  Vilanour  with  its  dependencies,  consisting  of  4-5  villages.  A long  series  of  hostilities 
ensued,  during  the  progress  of  which  Anaverdy  Khan  was  killed  in  battle;  Nazii-jing  was  assassinated; 
and  Muzapher-jing  appointed  Soubahdar  of  the  Decan.  The  immediate  advantages  arising  to  the  French 
East  India  C'ompany  by  these  concessions  were  a territory  near  Pondicherry,  producing  annually  96,000 
rupees;  that  of  Karinil,  valued  at  106,000  rupees;  the  City  of  Mausulipatam  with  its  dependencies, 
yielding  a revenue  of  144,000  rupees;  in  all  a revenue  of  d£^4J, 2.50  sterling;  but  these  advantages  were 
small  in  comparison  of  those  which  M.  Dupleix  expected  to  obtain  from  liis  extensive  authority,  though 
it  was  not  constitutionally  confirmed  by  the  Mogul.  Chunda-saib  was  also  declared  Nabob  of  Arcot.  The 
treasures  of  Nazir-jing  were  computed  at  .P2,000,000,  and  ihe  jewels  at  -£^500,000.  The  new  Viceroy 
gave  1^50,000  to  the  French  troops,  and  as  much  to  the  East  India  Company  for  the  expeiices  they  had 
incurred  in  the  war.  On  this  M.  Dupleix  assumed  the  state  of  an  eastern  Prince,  held  his  Court,  and  was 
publicly  proclaimed  Nabob.  Muzapher-jing  was  soon  alter  killed,  and  was  succeeded  by  Salabat-jing, 
who  confirmed  every  thing  which  had  been  granted  to  the  French,  who,  in  return,  acknowledged  his  right 
to  the  Government;  Cliiinda-saib  also  lost  liis  life.  The  French  continuing  to  support  Salabat-jing  as  Prince 
of  the  Decan,  the  provinces  of  Mustaphanagur,  Ellore,  llajahmundy,  and  Chicacole  were  given  up  to  the 
French  East  India  Company  in  full  sovereignty.  This  acquisition,  added  to  Mausulipatam,  rendered  them 
masters  of  the  sea-coast  of  Coromandel  and  Orixa,in  a regular  line  of  6(K)  miles  from  Mootapilly  to  Jagger- 
naut.  The  revenues  of  these  provinces  were  computed  at  42,87,000  rupees.  These  territories  rendered  the 
French  masters  of  the  greatest  dominion,  both  in  extent  and  value,  that  had  ever  been  possessed  by  Euro- 
peans in  the  empire  of  Hindostan,  not  excepting  the  Portuguese  when  in  the  height  of  their  prosperity. 

1754.  The  dispute  between  the  French  and  English  East  India  Companies  became  the  object  of 
ministerial  consideration  in  Europe.  The  Directors  of  the  English  Company  made  representations  to  the 
Government  of  the  hostilities  in  which  they  were  involved  on  the  Coast  of  Coromandel,  and  solicited 
their  support,  either  to  terminate  or  carry  on  a war,  which  their  own  resources  were  unable  to  continue 
against  the  French  Company,  supported  by  their  Government.  The  British  Ministry,  seeing  the  necessity 
of  interfc'ring  vigorously,  began  a negotiation  with  that  of  France  on  the  subject,  and  ordered  a squadron 
of  men  of  war  to  be  equipped,  and  one  of  the  King’ s regiments  to  embark  for  the  East  Indies.  This 
convinced  the  French  Goveniment  that  a perseverance  in  their  schemes  of  conquests,  and  obtaining 
dominion  in  India,  would  soon  involve  the  two  nations  in  a general  war,  for  wliich  they  were  unprepared; 
they  therefore  consented  that  the  disputes  of  the  two  Companies  should  be  adjusted  by  Commissaries  in 
India,  on  a footing  of  equality,  without  any  regard  to  the  advantages  of  which  either  the  one  or  the  other 
might  be  possessed  when  the  treaty  should  be  concluded:  and  as  the  French  Company  considered 
M.  Dupleix  was  not  a fit  person  to  negotiate  a peace,  they  took  the  resolution  of  removing  him  from  the 
Government  of  Pondicherry,  and  appointed  M.  Godeheu,  one  of  their  Directors,  their  Commissary,  and 
at  the  same  time  Coinmunder-General,  with  absolute  authority  over  aU  their  settlements  in  the  East 
Indies.  The  English  (Company  appointed  Mr.  Saunders,  Governor  of  Madras,  to  treat  with  M.  Godeheu, 
who  arrived  at  Pondicherry  August  2,  1754;  and  immediately  on  landing,  proclaimed  his  commission,  and 
took  upon  him  the  administration  of  the  Government.  He  also  acquainted  Mr.  Saunders  of  the  intentions 
for  wliich  he  was  sent  to  India.  The  arrival  of  an  English  fleet,  under  Admiral  Watson,  induced 
M.  Godeheu  to  shew  such  moderation  in  his  proposals,  that  a suspension  of  anns  was  agreed  upon  before 
the  terms  of  the  treaty  were  adjusted.  The  allies  on  both  sides  were  included  in  this  suspension,  which 


BETWEEN  FRANCE  AND^TllE  EAST  INDIES.  , 303 

romlicherry,  niul  all  other  plates  nii  the  (oast  of  Coroniuiuld  where  the 
English  aad  hrencli  had  troops,  on  the  11th  of  Ottuher,  to  continue  till  the  IJth  of  January. 

A treaty  was  ailerwards  signed,  which  was  published  on  the  lltli  of  January,  17.W,  the  day  on 
which  the  suspension  of  arms  ended,  consisting  of  eleven  artieJes,  by  wbitli  it  was  agreed— 

I li  st,  tliat  the  tivo  Companies  should  renounce  for  ever  all  Moorish  (loM  rnnicnl  and  dignity,  and 
should  never  interfere  in  any  diflerence  that  might  arise  hehvren  the  Princes  of  the  country. 

1 be  second,  third,  fourth,  fifth,  sixth,  and  seventh  articles  relate  to  the  settlements  of  both  nations 
and  tlieir  distriels,  w^heretiy  it  was  agreed  that  all  places,  excepting  those  which  should  be  stipulateil  in 
the  definitive  Ireat)^  to  remain  in  the  possession  of  the  two  nations,  should  he  di  livi  red  up  to  the 
Government  of  Hindostun.  The  Governors  then  proceeded  to  give  their  opinion  what  plac(*s  each 
migiit  retain  without  a risk  ot  eng.igiiig  them  in  future  w^ars,  either  with  one  atmlher,  or  w ith  the 
Princes  ot  the  country.  In  the  Lanjore  country  the  English  were  to  possess  Devicottah,  and  the  Freneli 
Karical,  with  their  districts;  on  the  (voast  ot  Coromandel  the  English  were  to  enjoy  Fort  St.  David  and 
Madras,  and  the  hrench  to  keep  Pondicherry,  wdth  districts  of  e(|iml  value;  and  if  it  should  appear  that 
the  English  possessions  in  the  kingdom  ot  Tanjore  and  in  the  Carnatic  together,  wei'e  of  more  value 
than  the  French  possessions  in  those  countries,  then  the  French  were  to  be  allow'ed  an  equivalent  for  tliis 
difference  in  a settlement  to  be  chosen  between  the  River  of  Goiidecama  and  Nizampatam.  Mausiili- 
patam  and  Divi  were  to  he  ceded;  or  if  the  French  held  one,  the  English  were  to  retnin  the  fdher.  The 
Rivers  of  Narsipore  and  Ingerani  were  to  he  free;  and  as  the  English  had  Vizagapatiiin,  in  the  Chicacole- 
country,  the  French  were  to  settle  a factory  tliere  on  an  equality  witli  it. 

By  the  eighth  article  it  was  agreed  that  these  conditions,  accepted  on  botli  sidts,  nlthoiigh  they  were 
not  to  be  law  for  a definitive  treaty  in  Europe,  should  nevertheless  produce  a Irncc  Ix  Iuchmi  the  two 
nations  and  their  allies,  until  nows  was  received  in  India  of  the  answers  made  in  Euro|KJ  concerning  thi» 
agreement. 

By  the  ninth  article,  neither  nation  was  allowed  to  procure,  during  the  truce,  any  new  grant  or 
cession,  or  to  build  forts  for  the  defence  of  new  establishments,  hut  only  to  rebuild  and  n pair  the 
fortifications  then  subsisting  in  the  establishments  they  possessed  at  that  time,  in  order  to  jirevcnt  theif 
entire  ruin. 


By  the  tenth  article  it  was  agreed,  that  until  the  arrival  of  answers  from  Europe  to  these  articles, 
which  w'cre  to  be  dispatched  by  the  first  sliips,  to  be  submitted  to  the  decision  of  the  two  Companies, 
under  the  pleasure  and  approbation  of  the  two  Crowns,  the  two  nations  should  not  proceed  to  any  cession, 
retrocession,  or  evacuation  of  what  they  then  po.sses.sed;  and. 

Lastly,  that,  in  regard  to  any  indemnification  the  two  nations  might  expect  for  the  expences  of  the 
war,  this  article  should  be  amicably  adjusted  in  the  definitive  treaty. 

This  convention  w’as  in  reality  nothing  more  than  a cessation  of  hostilities  for  eighteen  months,  since 
there  was  no  positive  obligation  on  either  of  the  Companies  to  adopt  the  opinions  of  their  representatives, 
expressed  in  the  provisional  treaty.  The  French  were  left  to  enjoy  the  revc^nues  of  all  those  territories 
which  they  had  acquired  during  the  war.  These  incomes,  according  to  the  accounts  published  by  them, 
were  as  follow: — From  Karical  96,000  rupees;  from  Pondicherry,  and  the  villages  in  its  district,  105,000; 
from  MausuUpatara  and  its  dependencies,  and  from  the  contiguous  territories  of  Divi,  Nizampatam, 
Devicottah,  and  Condavir,  14,41,000;  from  the  four  provinces  of  Ellore,  Mustaphanaghiir,  RajaJimuiidrum, 
arild  Chicacole,  31,00,000;  from  lands  in  the  Carnatic,  17,00,0(K);  and  from  the  Island  of  Seringlmni  and 
its  dependencies,  4,00,0(}6;  in  all  68,42,000  rupees,  or  ^855,2.50  sterling. 

The  accessions  made  by  the  English  during  the  war  produced  only  a revenue  of  8,00,000  rupees,  or 
J?100,000,  drawn  from  lands  mortgaged  by  the  Nabob,  to  pay  what  they  had  spent  on  his  account. 

3£ 


394  < 


RISE  AND  PROGRESS  OF  THE  COMMERCE 


The  two  powers  being  now  at  peace  with  each  other,  gave  their  whole  attention  to  the  management 
of  their  respective  territories,  revenues,  and  alliances  to  the  best  advantage,  without  infringing  the  truce. 
M.  Godeheu,  having  fulfilled  the  principal  intentions  of  his  commission,  quitted  Pondicherry,  and  returned 
to  France,  leaving  the  power  of  the  Governor  much  more  limited  than  it  had  been  at  the  time  of 
M.  Dupleix. 

1757.  The  English  having  received  intelligence,  by  way  of  Aleppo,  that  war  had  been  declared 
between  France  and  Great  Ri  itain  in  the  preceding  month  of  May,  made  preparation  for  the  attack  of 
Chandei  nagore,  notwithstanding  the  disastrous  state  of  their  own  affairs  in  the  province  of  Bengal.  On  the 
21-th  ol’  March  the  i Inglish  attacked  the  Fort,  which,  after  a vigorous  resistance,  surrendered  by  capitulation, 
on  condition  that  the  officers  of  the  garrison  were  to  be  prisoners  on  their  parole  of  honour,  with  liberty  to 
cairy  their  effects  where  they  pleased,  on  promising  not  to  serve  against  the  English  during  the  war;  that 
the  soldiers  of  tin;  garrison  should  be  prisoners  of  war  so  long  as  the  war  continued;  that  the  Sepoys  were 
not  to  be  prisoners;  tluit  no  European  should  reside  at  Cliandernagore,  but  the  French  Jesuits  might  go 
wherever  they  pleased,  with  all  the  ornatneiits  of  their  Church ; and  that  the  French  Directors  and  Counsellors 
should  go  where  they  pleased.  This  was  a great  loss  to  the  French,  who  had  in  the  Foit  183  pieces  of 
cannon,  from  24  pounders  downwards,  with  great  quantities  of  ammunition.  Besides  the  ships  and  vessels 
sunk  below,  to  obstruct  the  channel,  they  sunk  and  ran  ashore  five  large  ships  almve  the  Fort,  and  the 
English  took  four  sloops  and  a snow  : the  plunder  collected  amounted  to  upwards  of  X^1(X),0(X)  sterling. 

A fleet  of  twelve  sail  arrived  at  Pondicherry  from  France,  Septembers,  1757,  and,  after  landing 
upwards  of  1,000  Europeans,  and  large  quantities  of  battering  cannon,  mortars,  and  ammunition, 
proceeded  to  the  Mauritius.  M.  Bussy,  who  commanded  the  French  forces  at  Mausullpatam,  imme- 
diately on  hearing  of  the  capture  of  Cliandernagore,  attacked  Vizagapatam,  which  surrendered  on  the 
24tli  of  June. 

1759.  A fleet  of  nine  sail  of  the  line  and  two  frigates,  under  M.  de  Ache,  having  a large  body  of 
troops  on  board  under  M.  Lally,  arrived  at  Pondicherry  on  the  22d  of  April.  Every  success  was  expected 
to  follow  the  arrival  of  this  armament.  The  ships  WTre  to  drive  the  English  squadron  off  the  coast;  the 
troops,  with  those  already  at  Pondicherry,  were  to  demolish  the  English  settlements;  and  such  was  the 
confitlcnce  of  not  meeting  an  enemy  in  the  field,  that  the  instnictions  formed  at  Versailles,  ordered  M.  Lally 
to  open  his  operations  by  the  siege  of  Eort  St.  David.  He  marched  from  Pondicherry  with  an  army  of 
3,500  Europeans  and  a larg(?  body  of  Sepoys,  entered  the  district  of  Fort  St.  David  on  the  29th  olf 
April,  and  invested  Cuddalore,  which  surrendered  on  the  3d  of  May.  The  French  then  began  the  siege 
of  Fort  St.  David,  which  surrendered  uj)on  capitulation  on  the  2d  of  June.  The  garrison  consisted  only 
of  200  Europeans,  IIT  invalids  and  artillery,  and  200  seamen,  w'ho,  together  with  their  officer^,  the 
Deputy-Ciovernor,  and  Council,  were  carried  prisoners  to  Pondicherry.  The  French  afterwards  destroyed 
the  foitilicalions  of  Fort  St.  David,  and  reduced  the  whole  to  a heap  of  ruins;  they  also  wantonly  destroyed 
the  villas  and  bullding-i  in  the  adjacent  country.  On  the  4th  of  June  Devicottah  was  abandoned  by  the 
English  on  the  approach  of  a detachment  of  the  French  army.  The  French  then  made  preparations  for 
besieging  Madra.s  with  an  army  of  3,500  Europeans,  2,000  Sepoys,  and  2,000  cavalry;  the  siege  com- 
menced on  the  12th  of  December,  1758,  and  continued  till  the  17th  of  February,  1759,  when  it  was 
abandoned,  after  sustaining  a \ery  heavy  loss  in  men,  ammunition,  and  stores.  The  adjacent  powers  1^ 
fixed  their  attention  on  tlie  siege  of  Madras,  and  the  English  acquired  much  reputation  in  the  eyes  of  the 
natives  by  the  deferxe.  They  soon  after  took  Mausulipatam  by  storm,  which  was  furnished  with  120  pieces 
of  cunoon  and  abundance  of  military  stores.  This  success  induced  Solabat-jing  to  desert  his  aUies,  the 


• 


BETWEEN  FllANCE  AND  THE  EAST  INDIES. 

French,  and  enter  into  a treaty  with  the  English,  by  which  he  Jigreeil  “ to  oblige  the  French  troops,  then 
in  the  Decaii,  to  evacuate  that  country;  never  to  permit  them  to  settle  there;  to  keep  none  of  them  in  his 
service;  and  neither  to  protect  them,  nor  to  call  them  to  bis  assistance;’ 

These  disasters  occasioned  great  bickerings  between  M.  Lally  and  the  Governor  and  Council  at  Pon- 
dicherry. All  the  revenues  collected  by  the  French,  when  their  poss(*ssions  were  most  extended,  had  nexor 
sufficed  for  the  expences  of  the  troops.  Much  ground  had  been  lately  recovered  by  the  English.  No  money 
remained  in  the  treasury  at  Pondicherry,  and  the  discontent  and  distres«(‘s  of  the  army  had  convinced  tlie 
Government  they  could  not  be  trusted  any  longer  than  they  were  regularly  paid. 

1759.  A .small  squadron,  under  Count  d’J'’staing,  captured  the  FiUglish  factoiy  at  (lond)roon,  in  the 
Persian  Gulf,  on  the  14th  of  October,  1759.  From  thence  they  proceeded  to  the  x\est  coast  of  Sumat  a, 
to  attack  the  English  settlements  there.  Natal  surrendered  at  discretion  on  the  7th  oi*  February  followinu; 
Tappanooly  shared  the  same  fate;  and  Bencoolen  was  attacked,  hut  defended  till  the  inhabitants  had 
secured  their  best  effects,  when  it  surrendered  to  the  French,  who  committed  all  the  ravages  in  their 
power,  and  carried  oil  all  the  effects  they  could  obtain,  to  Batavia  and  the  Isle  ol*  Fi  ance,  when  the  seltle- 
ment  was  abandoned. 

1760.  The  English,  under  Colonel  Cooto,  defeated  the  whole  of  the  French  force  under  IM.  I.ally 
at  Vandewash,  in  January,  with  great  loss;  their  cannon,  tents,  stores,  nr.d  l)aggage  weie  taken,  a wl  the 
remainder  of  tlie  army  letreated  to  Pondicherry.  The  English  nflterwards  took  Alempnrvah  nr.d  Arcot, 
and  in  April  they  obtained  posses.sion  of  Karical,  in  which  were  155  pieces  of  cannon,  with  a large  stock 
of  ammunition  and  stores.  This  loss  was  severely  felt  by  the  Freiu  h,  as  it  afforded  them  a constant  inlet 
to  the  territories  of  Tanjore;  and  by  various  purchases  and  cessions  from  the  Government,  they  had 
acquired  districts  round  the  fort  containing  1 13  villages,  of  which  the  farms,  with  the  customs  of  the 
town  and  port,  yielded  30,090  pagodas  per  annum.  Cuddalore,  and  most  of  tlie  other  places  in  possession 
of  the  French,  were  taken  by  the  Fnglish. 

1761.  Pondicherry  had  been  blockaded  by  land  and  by  sea  for  many  months,  and  surreiuleretl  on 
the  16th  of  January,  1761,  to  the  British  forces  under  Colonel  Coote.  3’lie  total  number  of  l luropean 
military  taken  were  2,072 ; the  civil  inhabitants  were  381 ; and  tlie  artillery  fit  for  service  were  500  pieees  of 
cannon,  and  100  mortars  and  howitzers.  The  ammunition  and  military  stores  were  in  great  ahiiiidanee. 
The  settlement  of  Malic,  on  the  Malabar  Coast,  surrendered  on  the  13th  of  February,  1761;  and  on 
the  6th  of  April,  Gingee,  the  last  place  in  possession  of  the  French,  was  siirrendei'cd  to  the*  English. 
This  day  terminated  the  long  contested  ho.stilities  between  the  two  rival  European  luUions  in  (.’oromaiulel, 
and  left  not  a single  ensign  of  the  French  nation  under  the  authority  of  its  Government  in  any  jiart  of 
India.  Thus,  after  a war  of  fifteen  years,  which  commenced  in  17d6,  and  eontinaed  from  that  time,  with 
scarcely  the  intermission  of  one  year,  tlie  same  measure  of  exlir|)ation  was  retaliated,  which  had  been 
intended,  and  invariably  pursued,  by  the  Frencli  Councils  against  the  English  commerce  and  power. 
Such  was  the  object  of  De  la  Bourdonnais’s  expedition,  of  the  whole  government  and  ambilioii  of 
•M.  Dupliex,  and  of  the  great  armament  of  naval  and  land  forces  which  arcompanied  M.  J.ally  to  India, 
who  constantly  declared  that  he  had  but  one  object,  whicli  was  not  to  leave  an  Englishman  in  the  Fi  nin- 
8ula.  To  retard  as  much  as  possible  the  facility  of  the  French  re-establishing  themselves  in  (’oromandel, 
if  restoration  should  be  made  at  the  conclusion  of  a general  peace,  the  principal  buildings  and  fortifications 
of  Pondicherry  were  destroyed. 

1763.  A definitive  treaty  of  peace  betxvcen  France  and  Great  Britain  was  concluded  at  Paris  on  the 
10th  of  February,  by  which  it  was  stipulated— 


3E  2 


m 


RISE  AND  PROGRESS  OF  THE  COMMERCE 


Article  1 1— In  the  East  Indies,  Great  Britain  shall  restore  to  France,  in  the  condition  they  now  are^ 
the  different  factories  which  that  C'rown  possessed,  as  well  on  the  Coast  of  Coromandel  and  Orixa  as  on  that 
of  Malabar,  as  also  in  Bengal,  at  the  beginning  of  the  year  1749.  His  most  Christian  Majesty  shall 
restore,  on  his  side,  all  that  he  may  have  eoncjiiered  from  Great  Britain  in  the  East  Indies  during  the 
present  war,  and  shall  expressly  cause  Natal  and  Tappnnooly,  on  the  Island  of  Sumatra,  to  be  restored; 
and  shall  farther  engage  not  to  erect  fortifications,  or  to  keep  troops  in  any  part  of  the  dominions  of  the 
Soubah  of  Bengal.  And,  in  order  to  preserve  future  pence  on  the  Coast  of  Coromandel  and  Orixa,  the 
English  and  French  shall  acknowledge  Mahomet  Ally  Khan  for  lawful  Nabob  of  the  Carnatic,  and  Salabat* 
Jing  for  lawful  Soubah  of  the  Decan;  and  both  parties  shall  renounce  all  demands  and  pretensions  of  satis- 
faction with  which  they  might  charge  each  other,  or  their  Indian  allies,  for  the  depredations  or  pillage  com- 
mitted on  the  one  side  or  the  other  during  the  war.'” 

1 764.  The  disasters  of  the  French  East  India  Company  abroad  were  aggravated  by  their  distressed 
situation  at  home.  Among  the  causes  which  had  occasioned  their  distress,  the  principal  was  the  dependence 
in  which  they  bad  been  kept  by  the  Government.  Ever  since  1723  the  Directors  liad  been  chosen  by  the 
Court.  In  1730  a Commissary,  appointed  by  the  King,  was  introduced  into  the  administration  of  tho 
Company ; and  from  this  period  there  was  an  end  to  all  freedom  of  debate ; all  w^as  directed  by  the  influence, 
and  according  to  the  views,  of  the  Court.  In  1764  the  proprietors  represented  to  the  Govermnent  that 
their  misfortunes  might,  in  a great  measure,  be  attributed  to  the  undue  interference  of  tlie  Government, 
and  to  the  management  of  their  afiairs  having  been  taken  out  of  their  own  hands,  and  that  they  w'ould  be 
ruined  unless  the  Company  were  brought  back  to  its  original  form,  by  restoring  its  freedom.  In  consequence 
of  this  representation,  the  freedom  of  the  Company  was  secured  by  an  edict,  dated  in  August,  1764,  and 
some  regulations  were  made,  to  put  the  direction  of  it  under  a new  form. 

Before  this  period  the  number  of  shares  amounted  to  60,268.  The  Government,  to  indemnify  the 
Company  for  the  expcnces  they  hud  incurred  during  the  war,  gave  up  11,833  shares,  their  property,  which 
were  cancelled;  there  then  remained  only  38,433.  The  Company  made  a call  of  400  livres  per  share. 
Upwards  of  34,(XK)  shares  answered  the  call;  and  the  remainder  were  reduced  by  the  terms  of  the  edict, 
which  empowered  the  Company  to  make  the  call  to  five-eighths  of  the  value  of  those  which  had  been  paid,  so 
that  by  this  operation  the  number  was  reduced  to  36,9205  shares.  The  dividend  paid  on  the  shares  of 
the  Company  varied  according  to  circumstances.  In  1722  it  was  100  livres;  from  1723  to  1745  it  was 
150  livres;  from  1746  to  1749  it  was  70  livres;  from  1750  to  1758  it  was  80  livres;  from  1759  to  1763 
it  was  40  livres;  and  in  1764  it  was  hut  20  livres;  from  the  fluctuation  in  dividends,  the  value  of  the  stock 
varied  from  near  4,000  livres  to  700.  The  proprietors  were  desirous  to  secure  the  fortunes  embarked  in 
the  trade  in  such  a manner  that  the  shares  should  at  all  times  bear  a settled  price,  and  an  interest  that 
could  bo  depended  upon.  The  Government  settled  this  matter  by  the  edict,  which  expressly  says  that,  to 
secure  to  the  proprietors  a settled  income,  independent  of  all  future  events  of  trade,  a sufficient  fund 
should  be  detached  from  that  portion  of  the  contract  which  was  then  free,  to  secure  to  each  share  a capital 
of  1,600  livres,  and  an  interest  of  80  livres;  and  that  neither  that  interest  nor  that  capital  should,  in  any 
case,  or  for  any  cause  whatsoever,  he  answerable  for  such  engagements  as  the  Company  might  enter  into 
after  the  date  of  this  edict.  The  Company  therefore  owed  for  36,920  J shares,  at  the  fixed  rate  of  80  livres 
each,  an  interest  amounting  to  2,953,660  livres.  They  paid  for  their  several  contracts  2,727,506  livres; 
making  in  all  5,681,166  livres  of  perpetual  annuities.  The  life  annuities  amounted  to  3,074,899  livres, 
forming  in  the  whole  a total  of  annual  payments  of  8,756,065  livres. 

By  the  edict  of  1764  the  Isles  of  France  and  Bourbon  became  the  property  of  the  Government, 
whereby  the  Company  saved  2,000,000  livres  per  annum.  They  were  likewise  relieved  from  the  expences  of 


BETWEEN  FBANCE  AND  THE  EAST  INDIES. 


I 


907 


Port  L’Orient.  The  Company  applied  themselves  to  the  re-establishment  of  their  commerce,  the  resto- 
ration of  their  forts  and  settlements  in  India,  the  construction  of  ships, 


1709.  The  trade  between  France  and  India  revived  very  considerably  after  the  peace.  In  a few 
years  tlie  annual  sales  amounted  to  near  2(),0()(),()00  livres,  and  in  1709  they  amounted  to  near  ,17,(K)0,()00 
livres.  Notwithstanding  this  apparent  prosperity,  tlie  (,'oinpuny\s  eoiicerns  were  rnpiiHy  declining:  their 
debts  were  daily  increasing;  the  expences  incurred  in  replacing  their  fortifications  and  buildings  in  India, 
far  exceeded  their  expectations;  the  profits  arising  from  their  trade,  fell  much  b(‘low  what  they  formerly 
were ; while  the  charges  of  their  Government  amounted  to  more  tlian  double  what  they  had  been  esti- 
mated at.  These  circumstances  induced  the  King,  by  a decree  dated  the  1.1th  ol  August,  1709,  to 
suspend  the  exclusive  privilege  of  the  India  Company,  and  granted  to  all  his  subjirts  the  liberty  of  nn\i- 
gating  and  trading  beyond  the  Cape  of  Good  Hope.  The  decree  which  opened  this  nen  tiact  to  piiMitc 
traders,  required  them  to  provide  themselves  with  passpoits  from  the  India  Company,  and  ob!ig(*d  them  to 
make  their  returns  to  Port  L’Orient,  and  no  where  else.  It  established  a duty  on  all  goods  imported,  uhidi, 
by  a second  decree,  issued  the  0th  of  Seiitemlier  following,  was  fixed  at  per  cent,  on  all  goods  toming 
from  India  and  China,  and  at  3 per  cent,  upon  all  commodities  of  the  growth  and  produce  of  the  Islands 


of  France  and  Bourbon. 

The  above  decree,  by  only  suspending  the  privilege  of  the  Company,  seemed  to  lea\e  th(‘  propiu  tors 
the  power  of  resuming  it;  but  they  determined  to  liquidate  their  concerns  in  such  a manner  as  to  .secure 
their  creditors’  and  the  remains  of  their  own  fortunes.  For  this  purpose  they  oilered  to  give  up  to  the  I mg 
all  their  ship.s,  thirty  in  number;  all  the  warehouses  and  other  buildings  belonging  to  them  at  1 ort 
L’Orientundin  India;  tl.e  property  of  their  factories,  with  the  munufaetures  dependent  on  U.em;  all 
naval  and  military  stores;  and,  lastly,  2,4^0  slaves  whieh  they  had  in  the  islands.  All  these  articles  nere 
valued  at  30,(X)0,000  livres  by  the  proprietors,  who  at  »h<!  same  time  reipiestei  le  pnyinen  o 
1«..500,0(K)  livres  whieh  were  due  to  them  by  Government.  The  King  agreed  to  tl.e  proposal  Im  lessened 
the  purchase-money ; not  that  the  effects  were  not  of  still  grealer  value  while  they  remained  n.  the  hands 
of  the  Company,  but  being  made  over  to  the  Government,  they  hiought  an  addition..  nu.«..d.n.nee  upon 
it;  so  that  instead  of -I6,.500,0(W)  livres  which  the  proprietors  demanded,  the  K.ng,  ^ 

with  them,  created  a perpetual  annuity  for  their  benefit  of  1,200,000  l.vres,  upon  .,  e.ip.la*  of  .10, 000,000. 

The  edict  for  that  purpose  was  issued  in  Januaiy,  1770.  , . . .i  i i i:r.. 

This  new  coniart  the  Company  mortgaged  for  12,000,000  livres,  which  they  borrowe.  upo.  1^ 
annuities  at  10  per  cent,  and  by  a lottery  in  February  following.  This  money  was  borrowed  to  enable 
them  to  fhlfil  thrcngagemciits  they  hiul  entered  into  when  they  undertook  the  last  exped.t.oi.s;  hut  it  mts 


annuities;  in  that  part  of  the  contract  of  9,000, 0(W  hvr^  w 

the  Hotel  of  Paris;  in  the  ^ to  be  called  in  from  debtors,  either 

«6, 000.000  hvres;  and  lastly.  Bourbon,  and  at  St.  Domin.m.  The  prop,  ietms 

solvent  or  insolvent,  in  n 14,768,000  Hvres,  to  be  raised  by  way  of  a eall,  wl.icb 

engaged  at  ^ime  to  Coveniment  in  accepting  these  sevenil  ofl-ers,  e..g.aged  on  tl.eir  part 

was  fixed  at  400  hvres  per  share.  The  » „ pay;  ..ll  tl.eir  other  engage- 

to  pay  an  the  perpetual  and  life  — s the  «-ted  l.y  the  Co.n.U 

ments,  amounting  to  about  4j,  , . P attending  a liqm- 

mnounting  to  80,000  livres  per  annum;  and,  lastly,  to  bear  b 

dation  that  must  necessarily  continue  some  years. 


398 


f 


RISE  AND  PROGRESS  OF  THE  COMMERCE 


The  capital  of  each  sliare,  which  hy  the  edict  of  1764  had  been  fixed  at  1,600  livres,  bearing  all 
interest  of  SO  Jivres,  was  now  raised  to  1^,500  livres,  bearing  an  interest  of  126  livres.  The  new  interest 
was  made  subject  to  a deduction  of  10  jut  cent.;  and  it  was  agreed  that  this  deduction  should  be  annually 
appropriated  to  the  paying  off  the  shares  by  lot,  on  the  footing  of  their  capital  of  2,600  livres;  so  (hat 
the  interest  on  the  shares  thus  paid  off,  would  increase  the  sinking  fund  till  the  whole  of  the  shares  were 
finally  liquidated.  These  respective  conditions  are  recorded  in  a decree  of  Council  of  the  8th  of  April, 
and  confirmed  by  letters  patent,  bearing  date  the  22d  of  the  same  month. 

1770.  From  the  time  the  English  East  India  Company  succeeded  to  the  territorial  revenues  of 
Bengal,  to  1770,  when  the  c‘dict  for  the  suspension  of  the  Frencli  Company’s  monopoly  arrived  in  Iiidiai 
the  amount  of  the  duties  paid  by  that  Company  into  the  Custom  House  at  Ilughley  was  as  follows: 

From  Sept.  1766,  to  April,  1766  SiccaRupees  10,085  8 0 

From  May,  1766,  to  April,  1767  12,579  5 8 

From  ^lay,  1/07,  to  April,  1708  8,354  13  4 

From  IVIay,  1768,  to  April,  12  4 

From  May,  1769,  to  April,  1770  12,186  13  8 

These  sums  multiplied  by  40,  give  the  total  of  the  French  Company’s  trade  at  that  factory,  as  stated 
by  themselves.  What  was  paid  by  their  factories  at  Patna,  Dacca,  &c.  or  by  private  French  merchants, 
(whose  duties  were  4 per  cent,  on  the  amount  of  their  invoices),  does  not  appear  from  any  books  or  accounts 
received  at  the  East  India  House. 

1777.  3’he  French  merchants  resident  in  Bengal  carried  on  their  commerce,  after  the  suspension  of 
their  Company’s  exclusive  privileges,  on  payment  of  tlie  same  duties  Avhich  had  formerly  been  paid  by  the 
(Company.  But  in  April,  1776,  the  English  Government  at  Calcutta  directed  their  revenue  officers  to 
charge  them,  as  individuals,  with  4 per  cent,  on  the  amount  of  their  invoices  on  all  goods  except  foreign 
salt,  on  which  all  persons,  whether  companies  or  individuals,  were  to-  |>ay  10  mpees  per  100  maunds. 
The  French  merchants  remonstrated  against  this  regulation,  and  urged  that  the  duties  of  2^  per  cent, 
had  l)een  paid  with  great  <*xaclness  hy  the  merchants  at  Chaiidernagore,  according  to  immemorial  usage, 
and  the  privileges  of  their  nation.  Tlie  Dutch  and  Danish  merchants  joining  in  the  application,  the 
English  Government  determined  to  let  the  goods  of  French  private  merchants  puss,  on  payment  of  per 
cent.,  still  reserving  their  right  of  4 per  cent,  when  they  should  think  proper  to  claim  it. 

1778.  I'lto  Americans  having  declared  themselves  inde|>endent  of  Great  Britain,  the  Frencli  entered 
into  a treaty  of  friendship  and  commerce  with  them.  This  was  considered  by  the  British  Government  as  a 
declaration  of  war,  and  acted  upon  accordingly. 

The  English  b'.ast  India  Company,  foreseeing  the  consequences  which  the  French  treaty  with  America 
must  nccessaiily  produce,  an*!  being  determined  not  to  hazard  the  security  of  their  possessions  by  paying 
tp/3  great  an  attention  to  formalitie.s,  which  carry  no  further  value  than  what  them  immediate  interest 
induces  the  respective  parties  to  affix  to  them,  a bold  and  decisive  measure  for  the  final  reduction  of  the 
French  power  in  India  was  immediately  resolved  upon.  Their  instmetions  were  fortunately  conveyed  with 
unusual  expedition  to  Madras,  and  preparations  were  immediately  made  for  undertaking  the  siege  of 
Pondicherry.  The  fiirce  destined  for  that  service  was  assembled  by  the  21st  of  August,  and  the  place 
closely  invested;  and  on  the  18lh  of  September  the  batteries  were  opened  under  the  powerful  fire  of  28 
pieces  of  heavy  cannon  and  27  mortars.  Notwithstanding  the  dismantled  state  in  which  Pondiclieriy  was 
restored  to  the  French  at  the  end  of  the  former  war,  the  fortifications  were  in  no  contemptible  condition, 
and  their  deficiency  in  strength  was  amj)ly  supplied  by  the  gallantry  of  M.  de  Bellecombe  (who  was  both 


BETWEEN  FRANCE  AND  THE  EAST  INDIES. 


I 399 


Governor  of  the  town  and  Gcneral-Coniinandant  of  all  the  Freiicli  settlements  in  the  Indies),  and  the 
resolution  of  his  brave  garrison,  who,  though  nearly  cut  oil'  from  every  hope  of  sueeour,  persevered  to  the 
last  extremity  in  a determined  and  nohle  defence.  On  the  Kith  of  Oetoher,  the  day  |)revious  to  that 
fixed  by  the  English  for  a general  assault,  a capitulation  was  proposed,  which  was  agreed  to  l)y  the 
English.  The  conquerors  gave  the  most  ample  and  honourable  testimony  to  the  gallantry  of  the  Flench 
in  the  terms  of  caj/itulalion.  The  conditions  were  suitahlc*  to  the  generosity  of  lho<e  entiinents; 
and  every  requisition  that  did  not  interfere  with  the  pnhlie  hcncfiL  or  security,  was  liherully  agreed 
to.  It  was  only  on  those  aecounls  tliat  it  was  determined  to  send  the  lliiropeaii  jmit  of  the  garrison  to 
France,  and  to  disband  the  Sepoys  and  native  troops,  instead  of  sending  them  tt)  the  Mauritius,  as  pio- 
posed.  The  garrison  were  allowed  all  the  honours  of  war,  and,  as  a pailicular  mark  of  attention  to 
M.  Bellecombe,  the  regiment  of  Fond ieherry  were,  at  his  retjuest,  allowed  to  keep  their  coh)urs.  A 
numerous  artillery,  amounting  to  about  300  jiieees,  heeame  a jirize  to  tlie  coinpierois;  all  pulilie  propeity 
underwent  the  same  fate,  hut  wdiatevor  was  private,  was  secured  to  the  owners  3 he  l^nglish  lrt)<)ps 
employed  in  the  siege,  amounted  to  10,500  men,  of  whom  1,500  weie  lMii*op(‘a  ns;  the  gaiiison  b)  mar 
3,000,  of  whom  900  w^ere  FiUropeans.  33ie  English  loss  amounted  to  2'^  I killed,  ami  G9J  woundeil,  that 
of  the  garrison  to  200  killed,  and  ISO  wounded. 

The  French  settlements  of  ( ’liaiulernagore,  Yanann,  Kaiieal,  and  Mail  nlipata!ii,  W itli  seveial  ships 
in  Bengal  river,  w’ere  also  taken  possession  of*  by  the  British  fbices;  so  that  in  the  shoit  peiiod  of  a lew 
months,  the  power  of  France  w’as  unniliilatcd  in  India. 

The  conduct  of  the  iiilialiitants  of  rondicherry,  when  the  were  eii<;aged  in  a war  with 

Hyder  Ally  and  llie  Muhraltas  compelled  Sir  Eyre  Coote,  wlio  ei.imnande.l  the  ^;n•;li^l»  foices  on  llie 
Coast  of  Coromandel,  to  di^alnl  the  iidiahitanls,  and  destroy  their  boats. 

1780.  On  the  trade  to  tlic  JCast  Indies  being  thrown  <)|ien,  a gieat  minil)er  of  merchnnls  filled  out 
ships  for  China,  Ucngal,  Mauritius,  Mocha,  Jlutavia,  and  the  East  Coast  of  Afrira.  'I'liis  last  was  staleil 
to  be  the  d<>.tination  of  many  of  the  ships,  and  that  they  eariieil  a great  iiiiinherol  slaves  to  tlie  Maud  of 
St.  Domingo.  How  far  tlie  trade  was  henefieial,  it  is  dinkiilt  to  ascertain;  but  in  many  in  .lane.* . it 

was  attended  w’illi  the  ruin  of  those  embarking  in  it. 

Tlie  following  is  a statement,  in  livres,  of  the  produce  of  the  public  sales,  at  I’lut  I.  Orient,  of  nier- 
lise  imported  from  India,  China,  and  the  Islands  of  Era  nee  and  noiirban,  by  tlio>e  merchants  who 
^ed  in  the  trade,  from  the  suspension  of  the  Company’s  privileges,  to  17 ?S  im  lu,ive. 


chandi! 
engaged  : 


Years. 

Sh'D8. 

Tons. 

1771 

H 

,5,900 

1772 

13 

8,100 

1773 

14 

0,850 

1774 

18 

8,700 

1775 

19 

10,550 

1770 

24 

10,8(M) 

1777 

23  I 

13,720 

1778 

12 

7,375 

Tll^ 

131 

'T1,095 

Aver, 

16 

8,902 

Iiuillk 


( 1)111.1 


I l-v.ji  ^ i.im  I \\  ml). lit. 


IfCil 


.'I,2.5r..fi'20  2 

l.'l 

H,711,7:i-t  10 
8,47.5,004  ll 
10,900,218  17 
10,4f)2,422  10 
10,010,901  14 
9,501,8^  19 
'80,081,219  '7j 


•J 

{)' 

0 

■' 


8,.5?.5,SOS 


10,110,327 


10,700,1.52  8 _5[ 


I 

I.' 

1,90(1,171 

s 

n 

IO,.{30,.5()4 

1 

s 

0 

1! 

i,i()s,n.) 

10 

10 

1.5;2hS,l10 

10 

H 

s 

i) 

0.50,128 

l.l 

1,5.183.911 

.3 

5 

7 

5, 

.50,3,904 

1 1 

3 

17,01.5,4117 

10 

0 

2 

0 

.507,709 

11 

0 

‘2‘2,3O0,.5S‘> 

0 

7 

17 

o’ 

1,0 19, .329 

17 

0 

'20,92(1,080 

10 

0 

4 

oi 

782,475 

U 

0 

‘27,.509,704 

12 

0 

13 

lo'i 

104,021 

ir 

0 

13,903,519 

0 

10 

12“ 

“-2!' 

7,(Kil,9?^V 

11 

11 

149,1 ‘2!  1,910 

11 

2 

\9 

'0, 

8T.5,24o‘ 

19 

Oj 

18,0  41, '243 

0 

5 

P„m  th.  .bo.,  period  the  ».Ie.  repidly  dl,ui,,bh«l,  .nd  were ,«  tbe  ,e.r  I7SI  oloo  oul, 
^.Freneb  GoienmeoS  on  the  eomnieoeement  of  tb.  w.e,  were  „n«™„cd  n,  li.e.r  exe,  l„m,  lo 
„..ni!rlb  . l.nd  .nd  ...Id  fore,  nltbe  M.nriU.S  » «».ld  no,  only  be  Ibe  nw.n,  n,  ree.n  er.ns  Ner 
»d  Innuenc  on  lb.  Cmwl  nf  Corom^deS  bnt  of  giving  .neb  . InUl  «.d  deenn.  blow  u, 


400  < 


RISE  AND  PROGRESS  OF  THE  COMMERCE 


her  old  rivals,  as  enable  lier,  with  the  aid  of  the  native  powers,  with  whom  the  English  were  at  war, 
to  chase  them  entirely  out  of  India.  A squadron  was  sent  out  under  M.  de  Sufirien,  who,  on  his  passage 
out  in  1781,  made  an  unsuccessful  attack  upon  an  English  fleet  in  Port  Prayo,  on  tlie  Island  of  St.  Jago, 
on  the  Ihtli  of  April.  From  thence  tiny  proceeded  to  the  Mauritius,  where  he  was  joined  by  some  French 
ships,  which  made  his  force  12  sail  of  the  lino,  besides  six  frigates,  and  transports  having  a considerable 
body  of  land  forces  on  board.  They  made  their  appearance,  and  anchored  about  four  miles  from  Madras  on 
he  lotli  of  February,  1782,  wlicre  the  English  Ih'et,  under  Sir  Edward  Hughes,  consisting  of  nine  sail 
of  the  line,  were  then  at  anchor.  The  French  fleet  weighed  in  the  afternoon,  and  stood  to  the  southward, 
Wlieii  tlic  English  follow  ed  their  example,  and  in  the  moming  tliey  captured aeveral  of  the  smaller  vessels, 
and  the  I.Hiiri'^lon,  a Ifirgo  ship  of  tons  burthen,  deeply  laden  wdth  a eargo  of  the  utmost  value  and 
importance  to  bolli  parties,  consisting  of  a considerable  train  of  artillery,  intended  as  a present  to  Hydcr 
Ally,  a large  quantity  of  gunpow^ler,  niul  a complete  assortment  of  other  military  stores.  This  valuable 
prize  had  likew  ise  on  hoard  a number  of  military  officers,  together  with  3(X)  European  troops.  This  brought 
on  a severe,  hut  iiuh’cisive  action  between  the  two  fleets.  Another  action  took  place  on  the  12th  of  April, 
in  wliich  both  fleets  suffered  severely:  the  French  proceeded  to  Batecalo  to  refit,  and  the  English  to 
Trincomnl(‘p,  which  w^as  then  in  their  possession.  Though  these  actions  were  not  decisive,  yet  they  werc» 
particularly  the  first,  of  great  importance  in  their  consequences  to  the  English.  Their  enemies  kept  that 
great  force  which  France  had  been  long  collecting  at  the  islands ; and  all  India  was  in  expectation  of  the 
mighty  blow  which  she  was  now  to  give,  and  which  it  was  supposed  would  have  proved  fatal  to  the  British 
interests  in  that  part  of  the  globe.  It  was  with  this  idea  that  Hydcr  Ally  first  ventured  to  invade  the 
Carnatic;  and  he  was  induced,  notwithstanding  his  repeated  defeats,  to  reject  every  overture  tending  to  an 
accommodation.  The  natives  of  India  were  astonished  to  observe  that,  with  so  vast  a superiority  of  force, 
the  French  fleet  would  not  venture  to  attack  the  English  in  the  open  road  of  Madras;  but  that,  on  the 
contrary,  the  latter  instantly  [lursued  tlu'  superior  enemy,  took  or  dispersed  the  convoy  under  his  protection, 
and  ill  a very  hard  fought  battle,  wherein  they  had  other  disadvantages,  besides  a superiority  of  force  to 
encounter,  left  the  claim  to  victory  undetermined.  Nothing  could  have  impressed  the  native  Princes 
and  States  more  strongly  with  an  opinion  of  the  great  superiority  of  tlie  English  in  all  naval  affairs  than 
these  circumstances,  and  they  afforded  great  mortification  to  Ilyder  Ally;  he  had,  however,  received 
some  assistance  IVoin  the  French  in  troops  and  stores,  w^hich  had  been  landed  at  Cuddalore,  still  in  pos- 
session of  the  French.  Another  action  took  place  between  the  fleets  on  the  6th  of  June,  in  which  both 
suffered  a great  loss:  the  English  had  310  men  killed  and  wounded,  and  the  French  779.  The  French 
fleet  afterwards  succeeded  in  taking  Trincomalce  on  the  29th  of  August,  which  was  of  great  importance 
to  them.  'Fhe  English  fleet  appearing  off  there  on  the  2d  of  September,  to  their  great  mortification, 
observed  the  f'rench  colours  flying  on  the  forts,  and  fifteen  sail  of  the  line,  and  ten  or  eleven  frigates, 
besides  smaller  vessels,  at  anchor  in  the  bay.  The  following  morning,  September  3,  the  French,  fully 
sensible  of  their  superiority,  stood  out  to  sea,  and  an  action  took  place,  which  was  reckoned  one  of  the 
iKjst  fought  actions  recorded  in  naval  history;  the  loss  sustained  by  the  English  amounting  only  to  51 
killed,  and  2S3  wounded,  and  it  afterwards  appeared  that  of  the  French  was  412  killed,  and  676  wounded. 
The  French  returned  to  Trincomalee  on  the  night  of  the  action,  wht*n,  in  going  in,  one  of  their  ships 
of  the  line  was  lost;  and  the  English  to  Madras,  from  whence  they  proceeded  to  Bombay  to  refit. 

1783.  The  English  fleet  returned  to  Madras  at  the  end  of  April,  1783,  from  whence  tliey  proceeded 
to  watch  the  motions  of  the  French.  The  great  object  of  the  English  was  the  expulsion  of  the  French 
from  the  Carnatic;  but  though  they  were  now  left  to  fight  the  battle  nearly  alone,  yet  they  Were  so 
strongly  fortified  in  Cuddalore,  so  abundantly  provided  with  artillery,  ammunition,  and  every  provision 
for  war,  and  their  force  so  considerable,  both  with  respect  to  the  quality  and  number,  that  it  was 


11)1 


BETWEEN  FRANCE  AND  THE  EAST  INDIES. 


considered  a task  of  great  difficulty  to  dispossess  them  of  that  hold  which  they  had  spent  so  much  time  and 
labour  to  render  unassailable.  The  Marquis  de  Bussy  had  lately  arrived  to  take  the  command,  and  had 
brought  with  him  the  last  division  of  the  forces  from  the  Mauritius;  these  consisted  of  some  ol'  tin*  best 
troops  and  oldest  regiments  in  the  French  service.  Their  European  force  was  thorcibie  very  considerable; 
and  it  was  further  strengthened  by  a body  of  Sepoys  which  Tippoo  Sultan  had  lell  to  act  as  auxiliaries. 
The  English  stormed  and  carried  the  outworks  on  the  7lh  of  June,  with  gr(*at  slaughter  on  both  sides. 
On  the  20th  of  June  another  action  took  place  between  M.  Sufli  ien  and  Sir  Edward  Hughes  oiV  Chiddalore, 
which  was  indecisive;  this  was  the  fifth  and  last  battle,  and  concluded  the  severe  course  of  naval  warfare 
between  the  two  nations  in  India,  in  which  great  valour  was  displayed  on  both  sides.  On  the  2.5th  of 
June  the  b rench  garrison  made  a sally  from  Cuddalore,  in  which  they  suffered  severely,  and  were  driven 
back.  In  this  action  the  24<th  battalion  of  the  English  Sepoys  on  tlu*  Bengal  estahlishmenf,  with  another 
belonging  to  Madras,  fought  some  of  the  oldest  and  best  troops  of  France  with  the  bayonet,  and  foiled 
them  at  that  favourite  European  weapon,  which  is  considered  the  most  trying  test  of  the  firmness  and 
excellency  of  soldiers.  The  loss  of  the  French,  in  killed  and  prisoners,  amounted  to  near  100  men;  that  of 
the  English  was  small,  and  principally  fell  upon  the  Sepoys. 

In  two  or  three  days  after  the  sally,  the  Medea  frigate  arrived,  under  a flag  from  Madras,  at  Cuddalore, 
and  brought  intelligence  of  the  conclusion  of  peace  between  the  two  nations;  in  conse(|ucncc  of  which,  a 
mutual  cessation  of  hostilities,  and  restoration  of  prisoners  immediately  took  place. 

The  French  under  Cossigny  w'cre  assisting  Tippoo  in  the  siege  of  Mangalore  when  the  news  of  peace 
arrived;  they  immediately  retired  to  Malie,  which  was  delivered  up  to  them. 

The  preliminary  articles  of  peace  were  concluded  at  Paris  on  the  20th  of  April,  17S3.  By  this  treaty 
it  was  agreed  that  Great  Britain  should  restore  to  France  all  the  settlements  taken  in  the  course  of  the 
war  in  Bengal,  Bahar,  and  Orixa,  with  the  liberty  of  surrounding  Chandernagore  with  a ditch  to  carry 
off  the  waters,  and  engage  to  secure  to  the  subjects  of  France,  whether  in  a Company  or  as  individuals, 
a safe,  free,  and  independent  trade  on  the  Coasts  of  Coromandel,  Orixa,  and  Malabar,  as  it  was  carried 
on  by  the  French  East  India  Company.  Great  Britain  was  also  to  restore  to  France,  Pondicherry  and 
Karical,  and  to  secure  the  two  districts  of  Villanour  and  Bahour  to  Pondicherry  ns  an  additional  district, 
and  to  Karical  the  four  Magans  bordering  upon  it.  Mahe  and  the  factory  at  Surat  were  to  be  restored  to 
the  FVench,  with  the  liberty  to  conduct  their  trade  on  tliat  side  of  India,  agreeable  to  llie  princij)Ics  con- 
tained in  the  thirteenth  article.  It  was  also  agreed  that  if  the  allies  in  India  of  cither  power  should 
refuse  to  accede  to  the  pacification  after  four  months'  notice,  they  should  thence  forth  lia\e  no  further 
assistance  on  either  side. 

The  India  trade  having  been  relinquished  both  by  the  Company  and  indl\ iiliials,  the  King  (]is|)utche(l 
a ship  for  China  on  his  own  account;  and,  with  a view  of  supplying  the  kingdom  with  Cliiiia  gorxls,  he 
issued  an  arret  on  the  21st  of  July,  1783,  for  the  rrcation  of  a new  Com|»any  of  C hina,  and  directed 
that  the  capital  should  be  divided  among  the  principal  seaports,  in  the  following  proportions: 


The  merchants  of  Marseilles  KX)  shares 

Ditto  Bourdeaux  320  ditto 

Ditto  Rochelle  80  ditto 

Ditto Nantes  140  ditto 


The  merchants  of  St.  Malocs  00  slmres 

Ditto  L'Orient  90  ditto 


Ditto  Havre  de  Grace  80  ditto 

Forming  in  the  whole  1,200  shares, 


of  5,000  livres  each,  and  making  a capital  of  6,000,000  livres.  The  capital  stock  was  ininicdiutcly  sub- 
acril^  by  the  merchants  in  the  different  ports,  who  all  formed  only  one  Company;  and  the  King  lent 
them  three  ships  of  1,200  tons,  which  wei-e  immediately  fitted  out  for  China,  and  returned  home  in  1785. 
On  winding  up  the  accounts,  after  the  termination  of  the  voyage,  it  appeored  that  no  profit  liad  arisen 
from  it  worth  dividing  among  the  proprietors. 

3 F 


402 


( 


RISE  AND  PROGRESS  OF  THE  COMMERCE 


1785.  The  Commutation  Act,  which  took  place  in  England  in  ITS^,  operated  very  much  against  the 
trade  carried  on  between  France  and  China.  Tlic  principal  import  from  thence  was  tea,  of  which  the  coii- 
simiption  in  France  was  very  limited;  the  greater  part  was  smuggled  into  England,  to  the  great  delriinent 
of  the  revenue  there.  The  following  is  an  account  of  the  number  of  French  vessels  which  were  laden  at 
Canton  in  the  years  1767-8  to  178!^-3  inclusive,  and  the  quantity  of  tea  shipped  on  them: 


Years.  Ships. 

1767- S 3 

1768- 9  3 

1 1()9— ro  .1 

1770-1 

1771  no  account 


Il)s  of  T<‘a. 

1,637,510 
2,337,654 
2,488,762 
1,869,338 


3,021,700 


Years.  Ships.  Mb*.,  of  Tea. 

1773- 4  4,786,800 

1774- 5 7 * 4,595,700 

1775- 6 3 2,521,600' 

1776- 7 5 5,719,100 

1777- 8 7 3,657,500 

1778- 9  2,102,800 


From  the  year  1778-9  to  1782-3  there  do  not  appear  to  have  been  any  French  ships  at  Canton. 

The  following  is  a statement  of  the  number  of  merchant  ships  and  their  tonnage,  together  with  the 
places  of  their  destination,  which  sailed  from  France  to  the  East  Indies  and  China,  from  the  period  of  the 
suspension  of  the  Company’s  privileges  in  1769  to  the  year  1785  inclusive: 


Years. 

No.  of  Ships. 

i 

a 

c 

S3 

H 

Mauntius. 

China. 

Mocha 

Bengal. 

Pondicherry. 

Various  Part8. 

0) 

P 

.2* 

e 

Mahe. 

Chandernagore 

.2 

S 

3 

1769 

6 

1,970 

3 

— - , 

3 

■ 

1 

■ 1 

— 

--  , 

1770 

7 

4,510 

4 

2 

_ 

1771 

15 

7,695 

6 

5 

1 

2 

1 

... 

1772 

14 

7,620 

5 

3 

2 

5 

1 

1773 

22 

10,545 

7 

4 

2 

6 

3 

1774 

26 

13,100 

13 

5 

1 

4 

1 

1 

1 

1775 

31 

16,065 

10 

6 

_ 

4 

3 

3 

..i. 

3 

2 

.»»l 

1776 

38 

18,485 

13 

6 

7 

6 

3 

...» 

2 

1 

1777 

21 

8,090 

13 

7 

I 

6 

2 

1.^ 

_ 

»»• 

1778 

11 

5,470 

5 

3 

_ 

— 

2 

3 

... 

... 

1779 

2 

1,1.50 

2 

— 

— 

— 

..M 

1780 

17 

5,450 

17 

— 

... 

.»i» 

... 

1781 

17 

7,240 

10 

— 

— 1 

..... 

7 

1782 

13 

4,900 

8 

1 

... 

3 

— 

1 

1783 

38 

17,170 

8 

6 

4 

3 

12 

3 

2 

1781 

33 

16,830 

9 

6 

1 

8 

4 

4 

... 

1 

1785 

21 

7,310 

13 

— 

— 

3 

2 

1 

— 

2 

— 

— 

The  King,  without  having  had  sufficient  time  to  ascertain  the  result  of  his  own  trade  and  that  of 
tljc  new  Company  to  China,  rcsolv(*d,  before  any  of  the  ships  had  returned,  to  establish  a new  Company* 
Ily  arret,  dated  April  14,  1785,  he  declared  that,  having  examined  the  accounts  and  state  of  the  Indian 
trade,  he  found  that  competition,  however  beneficial  it  might  be  in  other  branches  of  trade,  was  very 
detrimental  in  this  one;  that  the  European  goods,  being  ill  assorted,  and  in  quantities  disproportion ed  to 
the  demand,  had  been  sold  under  their  value  in  India;  that  the  competition  of  the  merchants  had  enhanced 
the  prices  of  the  goods  bouglit  in  India;  that  the  excessive  quantities  of  some  kinds,  and  the  total  want 
of  others,  rendered  the  imports  unprofitable  to  the  merchants,  and  inadequate  to  the  demands  of  the 
kingdom.  Considering  that  these  evils  proceeded  from  a want  of  concert  among  the  merchants,  and  the 


BETWEEN  FllANCE  AND  THE  EAST  INDIES. 


impossH)i)it3r  of  individuals  heinp;  able  to  support  the  outlay  and  risks  of  so  distant  a commerce,  ho  was 
convinced  that  the  trade  with  India  and  Ciiina  could  lie  cairicd  on  to  advantage  by  a privileged  C’un.pany 
only.  He  therefore  ordered  the  old  Company  of  the  Indies  to  confine  their  atU  ntion  to  llie  settlement  of 
their  aflairs,  and  conferred  on  anew  Company  of  the -Indies  for  seven  years,  to  be  eoinpuled  fiom  the 
sailing  of  their  first  ships,  and  not  including  y(.ars  of  war,  the  privilege  of  exclusive  tiaile  to  all  the 
countries  and  islands  to  the  eastward  of  the  Cape  of  (iood  Hope,  exc(‘pt  the  Isles  of  Eranc(*  and  Ihnu  bon. 
To  these  islands  all  Erencli  subjects  might  trade,  and  inipoit  from  thence  the  juodiiee  of  their  soil,  hut 
no  Indian  goods.  The  inhabitants  of  the  islands  might  trade  in  vessels  belonging  to  themsel\i‘>,  and 
provideil  with  a passpoil  from  the  new  Company  for  each  voyage,  to  the  scvi  ral  poifs  of  India,  hut  not 
to  the  Red  Sea,  China,  or  Japan;  but  no  European  goods  might  be  carried  from  the  islands  to  India, 
nor  any  Indian  goods  from  them  to  Ihirope  or  America  in  any  vessels  w hatsoever.  No  Erenrli  vessels 
returning  from  those  islands,  excepting  those  owned  in  them,  were  permitted  to  take  on  hoard  negro  slaves 
in  any  part  of  Africa.  The  Company's  capital  was  declared  to  be  20, 000, 000  livri's,  divided  into  20,000 
.shares  of  1000  livres  each,  'riie  direction  of  their  aflairs,  and  tin*  appointment  of  all  oflicers  of  every 
description  in  their  service,  were  vested  in  twelve  administrators,  a|)proved  of  by  the  King,  each  of  them 
being  subscribers' of  AOO  shares  In  the  capital  stock;  and  the  remaining  14,000  shares  were  leO  open,  to  he 
subscribed  by  the  public  at  large.  The  administrators  witc  reejuired  to  make  np  a state  of  the  ('ompany’s 
affairs  every  year,  for  the  inspection  of  the  Comptroller-General  of  the  Einanees,  which  should  also  be  a 
guide -to  themselves  in  fixing  the  dividends  to  be  paid  to  tlie  proprietors.  The  King  gave  them  gratui- 
tously the  use  of  a house  in  Paris;  all  tlie  warehouses,  do(k-yards,  rope-w’alks,  kc.  neci*ssary  for  their 
accommodation  in  1 /Orient;  and  all  the  forts  and  factories  in  Ids  own  hands  in  India,  to  be  possessed  by 
them  during  the  ferm  of  their  privilege.  He  promised  to  protect  them  by  fbjce  of  arms,  if  necessary; 
to  provide  their  ships  with  officers  and  seamen,  and  to  get  them  exchanged,  if  taken  by  an  enemy.  He, 
moreover,  granted  them  all  the  cxem|>tions  and  favours  bestowed  upon  the  old  (.’ornpany  respecting  their 
imports;  and  he  ordered  that  all  goods  imported  from  any  place  beyond  tlic  Cape  of  Ciood  Hope  into 
France,  either  by  the  Company  or  by  private  ships,  from  the  Isles  of  France  or  Bourbon,  should  be  landed 
at  L’Crienl,  and  there  sold  at  the  Conij)any‘*s  public  sale. 

The  Company  obtained  another  arret  in  July,  strictly  prohibiting  all  French  siihjecfs  from  purchasing 
from  foreigners  any  East  India  goods,  or  any  foreign  cotton  goods  of  any  kind,  except  tlM»se  destined  for 
the  African  slave-trade.  Those  w ho  had  such  goods  in  their  possession,  or  had  already  oidt  red  them  from 
foreigners,  were  allowed  till  the  lOlh  of  August,  1786,  to  dispose  of  them,  or  send  them  out  of  the  king- 
dom.  For  the  encouragement  of  the  Calico  Printers,  the  Company  w^ere  authorized  to  piircliasc  cotton 
goods  from  foreigners  for  the  siij)ply  of  the  print-fields,  till  their  ow  n imports  should  be  sufiicient  to 
answer  the  demand;  and  they  w' ere  obliged  to  sell  India  painted  calicoes  for  exportation  only,  the  use  of 


them  in  France  being  strictly  prohibited. 

The  King  made  over  to  the  Company  the  sliip  Dauphin,  which  he  had  sent  to  China  on  his  own  account; 
and  that  they  might  be  a body  purely  commercial,  he  relieved  them  from  the  cares  and  expeiiccs  of  sove- 
reignty in  India,  l)y  taking  them  upon  himself.  The  Company  immediately  made  a sale  at  1/Gricnt 
of  such  cotton  goods  as  they  had  bought  at  Copenhagen  and  other  places,  together  with  the  goods  imported 
from  India  by  the  private  merchants,  amounting  to  about  10,000,000  livres. 


1786.  In  March  and  April  the  Company  fitted  out  eight  ships  for  India  and  China,  which  with 
their  cargoes  cost  20,000,000  livres.  In  October  the  ship  Douphin  arrived  from  China,  and  several  sliips 
of  the  private  traders  from  India.  The  Company  made  a second  sale,  in  which  were  incliuicd,  as  in  the 
former  sale,  .some  goods  bought  of  the  foreign  Companies;  the  amount  was  about  24,000,000  livres,  and 
the  buyers  who  came  from  all  parts  of  the  kingdom,  were  well  pleased  with  their  purchases. 

* 3 F 8 


m 


RISE  AND  PROGRESS  t)F  THE  COMMERCE 


The  Company  now  dispatched  a second  fleet,  consisting  of  ten  ships,  the  outfit  and  cargoes  of  which 
cost  19,000,000  livres.  To  defray  this  expenditure,  they  obtained  an  arret  on  the  21st  of  September, 
1780,  for  adding  20,000,000  to  their  capital  stock,  ah3  extending  the  duration  of  their  privileges  to  15 
years.  The  new  stock  was  mostly  sidiscribed  for  by  the  monied  men  of  Paris,  which  gave  the  merchants 
at  the  seaports  a just  cause  of  complaint  against  such  an  abuse  of  the  exclusive  privilege  as  debarred 
them  from  obtaining  any  participation  of  it,  except  by  paying  a considerable  advance  on  it. 

1787.  Some  difficulties  having  arisen  in  the  East  Indies  relative  to  the  meaning  and  extent  of  the 
13tli  article  of  the  Treaty  of  Peace,  they  were  cleared  up  by  a particular  convention,  by  which  a safe, 
free,  and  independent  trade,  such  as  was  carried  on  by  the  French  East  India  Company,^  was  secured  to 
the  subjects  of  France,  “ whether  they  exercise  it  individually  or  as  a Company^  as  well  in  the  Nabob- 
ship  of  Arcot,  and  in  Madura  and  Tanjore,  as  in  Bengal,  Bahar,  and  Orixa,  in  the  Northern  Circars,  and, 
in  general,  in  all  the  British  possessions  on  the  Coasts  of  Orixa,  Coromandel,  and  Malabar.  The  French 
were  restricted  from  importing  more  than  200,000  maunds  of  salt  annually,  which  were  to  be  delivered  to 
them  at  a place  appointed  by  tlie  Government  of  Bengal,  at  the  fixed  price  of  120  rupees  per  100  maunds. 
18,000  maunds  of  saltpetre,  and  300  chests  of  opium  were  to  be  delivered  annually  for  the  commerce  of  the 
French,  on  the  demand  of  their  agents  at  Bengal,  at  the  price  established  before  the  late  war.  The  six 
ancient  factories  of  Cossimbuzar,  Chandernagore,  Dacca,  Jugdea,  Balasore,  and  Patna,  with  the  terri- 
tories belonging  to  them,  were  acknowledged  to  be  under  the  protection  of  the  French  flag,  and  subject  to 
French  jurisdiction.  The  ancient  houses  of  Soopore,  Keerpoy,  Cannicole,  Mohunpore,  Serhampore,  and 
Chittagong,  as  well  as  the  dependencies  on  Soopore,  were  also  secured  to  France,  together  with  the  faculty 
of  establishing  new  houses  of  commerce;  but  without  any  jurisdiction  or  exemption  from  the  ordinary 
justice  of  the  country  exercised  over  British  subjects.  The  French  without  the  limits  of  those  factories 
were  entitled  to  an  impartial  administration  of  justice  in  all  cases;  and  delinquents  flying  from  justice, 
whether  Europeans  or  natives,  were  to  be  reciprocally  delivered  up.  The  restitution  of  Yanaon,  already 
delivered  to  the  French,  was  confirmed. 

From  the  establishment  of  the  Company,  the  private  merchants  had  kept  up  a perpetual  outcry 
for  the  unlimited  freedom  of  trade;  and  they  persisted  in  demanding  licences  from  the  Government  for 
their  ships,  though  they  were  continually  refused.  They  however  steadily  persevered  in  demanding  the 
abolition  of  the  Company,  and  they  found  means  of  presenting  their  memorials  on  the  subject  to  the 
Members  of  the  Assembly  of  Notables,  who  met  in  1787.  The  King,  from  the  peculiar  state  of  the 
public  mind,  was  obliged  to  pay  attention  thereto;  and  in  October  he  appointed  eight  commissioners  to  a 
general  meeting  of  the  Company,  to  examine  the  state  of  their  affairs.  He  afterwards  sent  a message 
to  the  States-General,  requesting  them  to  consider  the  question  of  the  national  advantage  or  disad- 
vantage of  conducting  the  East  India  trade  by  means  of  a privileged  Company;  for  which  purpose  lie  had 
ordered  all  the  papers  necessary  for  throwing  light  on  that  important  subject,  to  be  laid  before  them,  and 
recommended  to  them  at  the  same  time  to  take  due  care  of  the  interest  of  the  proprietors  ot  the  Com- 
pany’s stock. 

1790.  On  the  20th  of  IVIarch  a committee  of  the  National  Assembly  gave  their  opinion  that  the 
East  India  Company  should  be  abolished,  and  the  commerce  with  India  be  free  to  individuals,  the  Com- 
pany remaining  in  possession  of  their  privilege  till  January,  1792;  and,  on  the  3d  of  April,  1790,  the 
National  Assembly  passed  a decree  that  all  French  subjects  might  freely  navigate  the  seas  beyond  the 
Cape  of  Good  Hope,  wbicli  was  sanctioned  by  the  King’s  proclamation  on  the  3d  of  May  following.  The 
unsettled  state  of  France,  from  this  period  to  the  commencement  of  the  war  with  Great  Britain,  however, 
prevented  any  con.siderable  equipments  either  for  India  or  China. 


BETWEEN  FRANCE  AND  THE  EAST  INDIES.  . 405 

1791.  The  article  of  piece-goods  formed  the  mo-st  proiuincnt  part  of  the  French  imports  from 
India.  Tlie  following  are  the  particulars  of  a sale  whicli  took  place  at  Tort  L'Orient  in  1791.  Tlie  parti- 
cular sorts  ot  each  manufacture  are  emuneratcd  under  tlie  head  of  piece-goods,  at  the  respective  places: 


65,025  pieces  of  Surat  and  Uonibay  goods 
241,993  &c.  from  China 

134,973  Coast  calicoes,  white 

37,383  ^-..^wvw^^^^^.*Ditto  muslins. 

85,478  Ditto  prohibited  goods  ...... 


93.381  calicoes  ....... 

18.382  ............Ditto  prohibited  goods 

40,727  Ditto  muslins 


717,042  pieces,  the  sale  amount  of  which  was 


....1M5,G7S 
— . 79,4,39 

185,137 

1 1,291 

101,299 

1 13,748 

1.3,015 

318,313 

1:3,227,887 


1793.  On  the  1st  of  l^^ebruary  tiie  French  (hmvenlion  declared  wcir  againt  Great  Hritain,  Intelli- 
gence of  this  event  reached  Madras  on  the  2d  of  June,  and  Jlengal  on  the  IKli,  wlu^reiipon  (he  Fngh.sli 
prepared  for  an  attack  upon  Pondicherry,  which  surrendered  to  a body  of  troops  under  Colonel  llralthwaite, 
on  the  19th  of  September.  This  event  was  followed  by  the  reduction  of  the  smaller  foils  and  setlh*inents 
belonging  to  France  in  the  East  Indies.  These  conquests  gave  romplele  security  to  tlie  oriental  posses- 
sions of  the  English. 

The  following  is  a statement  of  the  number  of  French  ships  whii  h wen’  laden  at  Carilon  in  each 
year,  from  the  commencement  of  the  peace  in  1783,  to  the  breaking  out  of  the  war  in  1793,  together 
with  the  quantity  of  teas  shipped  on  board  tliem: 


Yean  Slii|K,  1’k  of  Tea.  Y<’ds 

1783- 4-,..  ..............  8 ..................  4, 23 1, 200  17SH-0.. 

1 784- 5 4 4,900,000  1 789-90 

178.5-0........... 1 4<i0,000  1790-1  , 

1 780-7 — 1 — ,382,200  1791-2. 

1 787-8 — 3 1 ,728,900  1 792-3  . 


S)|i|'s  lb<;  of  T‘*a. 

292,100 

. I — 291.,3(M) 

..2 412,100 

..  4 7H4,0(X) 

-2 l,.510,(iT0 


being,  on  an  average,  since  tlie  English  passed  the  Commutation  Act,  in  17H4,  only  7H,.300  lbs.; 
whereas  the  two  years  previous  to  that  period  it  was  4,595,000  lbs. ; and  in  the  seven  years  jnevious  to 
the  war,  which  broke  out  in  1778,  the  average  was  .3,772,171  Ihs.  per  annum. 

At  the  commencement  of  the  war  in  India,  the  llritisli  commerce  suffered  very  severely  from  French 
cruisers:  thirteen  sail  of  frigates  and  large  privateers,  which  sailed  from  the  Mauritius,  c.iplured,  besides 
two  East  Indiamen,  numbers  of  the  most  valuable  ships  in  tlie  Country  trade,  and  n ould  speedily  have  anni- 
hilated the  commerce,  and  shut  up  every  port  in  India,  had  not  the  IJengal  (lovcrnmeiit  fitted  out  a 
squadron,  which  captured  several  of  the  privateers,  and  repulseil  their  grand  armament  under  M.  Rmaud, 
obliging  him  soon  after  to  return  to  the  Mauritiu.s.  An  expedition  was  afterwards  |)lunned  against  the 
French  islands  from  the  British  settlements;  but  it  was  abandoned  in  consciinence  of  a war  breaking  out 
with  some  of  the  native  powers.  Tlie  French  privateers  did  great  mischief  to  the  English  trade. 

1798.  The  French  Government  projected  a settlement  in  Egypt,  with  a view  not  only  of  opening  a 
trade  with  that  country,  Arabia,  and  Abyssinia,  but  of  giving  France  the  dominion  of  the  Mediterranean, 
and  supplanting  Great  Britain  in  her  trade,  and  with  the  aid  of  Tippoo  Sultan,  who  carried  on  a secret 
corresj^ndence  with  the  French  islands,  of  driving  her  subjects  from  tlieir  settlements  on  the  peninsula  of 


406 


RISE  AND  PROGRESS  OF  THE  COMMERCE 


India.  A fleet  of  thirteen  sail  of  the  line,  witli  an  immense  number  of  transports,  having  on  board  upwards 
of  2.5,000  veteran  troops,  under  the  command  of  General  Bonaparte,  sailed  from  Toulon,  effected  a landing 
on  the  Egyptian  coast,  and  took  Alexandria  by  storm.  An  English  fleet,  under  Admiral  Nelson,  attacked 
that  of  the  French  in  Aboukir  Bay  on  the  1st  of  August,  and  completely  defeated  it;  of  the  whole,  only  two 
ships  of  the  line  and  two  frigates  escaped;  the  rest,  nine  ships  of  the  line,  were  taken,  two  ships  and  a frigate 
burnt,  and  one  was  sunk.  The  secret  intrigues  which  Tippoo  Sultan  had  carried  on,  was  disclosed  by  a 
proclamation  which  IMalartic,  the  Governor  of  the  Isle  of  France,  published  on  lbe3()th  of  January,  1798. 
He  says,  “ The  Sultan  only  waits  the  moment  w'hen  the  French  shall  come  to  his  assistance,  to  declare 
war  against  the  I'higlisli,  wliom  he  ardor. tly  desires  to  expel  from  India.”  The  British  Government  in 
India,  at  the  head  of  which  was  Lord  Mornington,  being  thus  informed  of  tlie  hostile  designs  of  Tippoo 
Sultan,  lost  no  lime  in  making  the  necessary  preparations;  but  being  desirous  of  averting  the  evils  of  war, 
he  attempted  tlie  restoration  of  a good  understanding  between  thj?ni,  but  without  (‘fleet.  The  Englisli  army 
entered  the  field,  and  took  Seringapalam  by  assUiilt  on  the  4lli  of  May,  1799.  Tippoo  lost  his  life  in  the 
defence  of  his  capital.  By  this  event  the  complete  asrendciicy  of  the  English  in  India  was  confirmed. 


1801.  A treaty  of  peace  w^as  concluded  between  Great  Britain  and  the  Republic  6f  France,  the 
preliminary  articles  of  which  were  signed  on  the  1st  of  October,  1801,  by  which  it  was  agreed  that 

“ His  Britannic  Majesty  restores  to  the  French  Uepubiic  and  its  allies  all  the  possessions  and  colo- 
nies whicli  respectively  belonged  to  them,  and  which  have  been  eillier  occupied  or  conquered  by  the  Bri- 
tish forces  during  the  course  of  the  present  war,  with  the  exception  of  Trinidad,  and  the  Dutch  possessions 
in  the  Island  of  C’eylou.  The  Batavian  Kepublic  cedes  and  guarantees,  in  full  property  and  sovereignty,  to 
bis  Britannic  Majesty  all  the  possessions  and  establishments  in  the  Island  of  Ceylon,  which  previous  to  the 
war  belonged  to  the  Uepubiic  of  tlie  United  Provinces,  or  to  the  Dutch  East  India  Company. — The  port 
of  the  Cape  of  Good  IIop(‘  remains  to  the  Batavian  Republic  in  full  sovereignty,  in  the  same  manner  it 
did  previous  to  the  war.— The  ships  of  every  kind  belonging  to  the  other  contracting  parties,  shall  be 
allowed  to  enter  the  said  port,  and  there  to  purchase  what  provisions  they  may  stand  in  need  of,  as  here- 
tofore, without  being  liable  to  pay  any  other  imposts  than  such  as  the  Batavian  Republic  compels  the 
5hips  of  its  own  nation  to  pay.” 

The  peace  had  scarcely  been  concluded  between  France  and  Great  Britain,  when  the  French  Govern- 
ment indicated  a degree  of  jealousy,  which  almost  amounted  to  hostility,  and  committed  various  acts  of 
aggression,  which  occasioned  a rentwval  of  the  w-ar  in  180J. 

1809.  The  depredations  committed  on  tlie  commerce  of  the  English  during  the  war  by  the  privateers 
and  frigates  from  the  Mauritius  w^ere  very  extensive.  The  following  is  an  account  of  the  cargo  of  a French 
shi[)  that  sailed  from  tlie  Isle  of  France  on  the  20tli  of  Novemlier,  1809,  commanded  by  M.  SurcoufT,  and 
succeeded  in  reaching  France  after  a passage  of  seventy-three  days. 


307,1.50  lbs.  Bourbon  coffee. 
54,804  lbs.  Mocha  ditto. 
23,7C5  lbs. IsleofFrance indigo. 
1 00, 61 1 lbs.  Bengal  ditto. 
61,054  lbs.  Island  cotton. 
95,2:35  lbs.  Bengal  ditto. 
13,916  lbs.  elephants'*  teeth. 
504197  lbs.  pepper. 


9,750  pieces  Nankeens. 

102, 180  lbs.  brown  sugar. 
6,978  lbs,  cloves. 

2,507  lbs.  tortoise-shrll. 

536  lbs.  nutmegs  and  mace. 
29,992  lbs.  ebony  wood. 

1,197  lbs.  rhubarb. 

4,050  lbs.  nutgalls. 


762  lbs.  rbinosceros'  horns. 
360  lbs.  tea. 

75  lbs.  ostrich  feathers. 
1,115  lbs.  camphire. 

746  lbs.  vermilion. 

1,801  lbs.  raw  silk. 

237  hippopotamus  teeth. 
SOO  lbs.  gums. 


Exclusive  of  pearls,  gold-dust,  and  other  valuables;  the  whole  estimated  at  the  Isle  of  France,  at  a 
low  com[)utatioii,  at  1,444,010  Spanish  dollars. 


BETWEEN  FRANCE  AND  THE  EAST  INDIES. 


407 


IftlO.  he  Islands  of  Bourbon,  and  Mauritius,  or  tlio  Isle  of  Franco,  had  long  afforded  shelter  and 
protection  to  a very  largo  nurnbor  of  French  privateers,  many  of  which  were  of  great  force.  These  pri- 
vateers had  been  extiemely  fortunate  in  capturing  the  ships  Ix  longing  to  the  English  India  Cinnpany,  and 
those  ships  which  cirriod  on  the  trade  from  |3ort  to  port  in  India,  to  an  enormous  value.  Their  captures 
they  took  either  to  the  Isle  of  France,  or  Bourbo?i,  but  principally  to  the  former,  as  being  a place  not  only 
of  greater  strengfh,  hut  garrisoned  and  protected  by  a larger  force.  Tbe  advantage  to  the  captors,  how- 
ever, bore  IK)  pDoortion  to  the  loss  which  was  sustaineil  by  the  English;  for  though  the  prizes  generally 
reached  the  IslaiuK  with  saiety,  yet  it  was  impossible  to  convey  the  ])rodnce  or  the  cargoes  of  them,  witli 
the  smallest  chance  of  escape,  to  any  j)ai*t  of  lOurope.  In  these  islands,  therefore,  but  piineipally  in  the 
Isle  of  France,  was  deposited  immense  wealth,  consLtiiig  of  tlie  rich  cargoes  of  the  various  ships  which 
had  been  captured  dining  the  war.  In  tbe  hopes  of  gaining  this  bmity,  and  at  the  same  time  for  the  pur- 
pose of  rooting  out  the  numerous  privateers  wdiich  ariuoyed  the  Indian  sc.'W  and  trade,  an  i‘Xpe«!itioii  was 
planned,  first  agaii;st  Bourbon,  and  afterwards  again.st  the  Isle  of  Fiance. 

The  Island  of  Bourbon  surrendeicd  the  9th  of  July,  1810,  by  capitulation,  and  on  the  Jd  of  Decem- 
ber, 1810,  the  Isle  of  France  likewise  surrendeicd  to  a British  forte,  under  ()( neral  .Micreiomble  and 
Admiral  Bertie:  seven  frigates,  three  English  East  Indiamen,  and  numerous  country  ships,  with  an  im- 
incn.se  quantity  of  goods  of  various  kinds,  w ere  the  result  of  this  ex|)edition,  w hich  terminated  the  extirpa- 
tion of  the  naval  force  of  the  French  in  the  Indian  seas,  and.  the  sulijugation  of  their  last  remaining  colo- 
nial territory. 

ALLEMPARVA. 

This  fort  is  about  twenty-four  miles  to  the  northward  of  Pondicherry.  It  formerly  belonged  to  tbe 
Nabobs  of  the  Province,  and  was  given  by  them  to  the  French  in  1751).  It  has  many  w ells  of  good  w ater, 
which  arc  not  to  be  found  in  all  parts  of  the  coa.st  near  the  sea.  It  was  taken  by  the  English  in  iitiO. 
Tbe  fort  was  of  stone,  siiuare,  of  moderate  extent,  with  four  round  towers  at  the  angles,  a parapeted 
faussc-bray,  and  a wet  ditch  witliout  a glacis.  Tbe  petlah  extends  along  the  coast  to  the  nortinvard. 

SADRAS 

Is  about  .seven  leagues  N.  N.  E.  from  Allemparva.  Here  the  Dutcli  had  a settlement;  it  w’as  sur- 
prised by  a French  detachment  in  1759,  who  took  po.sse.s.sion  of  the  town,  and  made  the  garrison  and  all 
the  Dutch  inhabitants  prisoners,  notwithstanding  the  Dutch  w^ere  at  that  time  a neutral  nation;  but  it  was 
afterwards  delivered  up  again.  The  fort  and  towm  are  now  in  a ruinous  condition.  About  seven  miles  tu 
the  northward  of  Sadras  arc  the 

SEVEN  PAGODAS, 

Or  Mahabalipooram.  The  following  account  is  extracted  from  the  Asiatic  Resrarclies: 

They  are  situated  about  thirty-eight  miles  to  the  .southward  of  iAIadras,  and  present  to  the  distant 
view  only  a rock;  but  on  examination,  tbe  following  curious  ruins  are  found. 

“ The  attention  is  first  arrested  by  a Hindoo  pagoda,  covered  with  sculpture,  and  hewn  from  a single 
mass  of  rock,  about  26  feet  high;  a great  surface  of  tlie  rock  near  this  structure  is  covered  witli  large 
figures  of  men  and  animals,  all  proving  the  sculptor  to  have  possessed  no  inconsiderable  skill.  Opposite  to 
these,  and  surrounded  by  a wall  of  bricks,  are  several  pagodas  of  great  antiipnty.  Adjoining  are  several 
excavations;  a scene  of  sculpture  fronts  the  entrance  of  one  of  them,  in  which  arc  groups  of  very  interest- 
ing  figures.  In  the  way  up  the  rock  a prodigious  circular  stone  is  passed  under,  so  placed  by  nature  on 
g smooth  and  sloping  surface,  that  you  are  in  dread  of  its  crushing  you  before  you  clear  it.  The  top  of 


KISE  AND  PROGRESS  OF  THE  COMMERCE 


the  rock  is  strewed  with  bricks,  the  remains,  it  is  said,  of  a palace  anciently  standing  on  this  site.  De- 
scending over  immense  beds  of  stone,  you  arrive  at  a spacious  excavation,  having  a temple  with  numerous 
figures  of  men  and  animals.  Over  this  temple,  at  a considerable  elevation,  is  a smaller  one,  wrought  from 
a single  mass  of  stone.  Adjoining  is  a temple  in  the  rough,  and  a large  mass  of  rock,  the  upper  part 
roughly  fashioned  for  a pagoda.  This  whole  rock  is  a species  of  extremely  hard  granite,  and  must  have 
taken  immense  labour,  and  a great  number  of  men  to  have  finished  these  structures. 

“ East  of  the  village,  and  washed  by  the  sea,  is  a pagoda  of  stone,  containing  numerous  figures  ; one 
of  a gigantic  stature  is  observed  stretched  on  the  ground,  and  represented  as  secured  in  that  position.  The 
surf  here  breaks  as  far  out  as  the  ruins  of  the  city,  which  are  incredibly  large  and  magnificent.  Many  of  the 
masses  of  stone  near  the  shore  appear  to  have  been  wrought.  A Bramin,  about  fifty  years  of  age,  a na- 
tive of  the  place,  states  that  his  grandfather  had  frequently  mentioned  his  having  seen  the  gilt  tops  of 
five  pagodas  in  the  surf,  now  no  longer  visible.  About  a mile  to  the  southward  are  other  structuies  of 
stone,  that  have  been  left  unfinished;  the  southernmost  is  about  forty  feet  in  height,  hewn  from  a single 
mass;  the  outside  is  covered  with  sculpture.  The  next  is  also  cut  from  one  solid  mass  of  stone,  about  foi*ty- 
nine  feet  high,  and  rent  through  the  middle  from  the  top  to  the  bottom;  a large  fragment  from  one  corner 
is  observed  on  the  ground;  no  account  is  preserved  of  the  powerful  cause  that  produced  this  destructive 
effect.  Around  these  are  various  groups  of  figures,  such  as  lions,  elephants,  &c.’’ 

The  following  traditional  account  was  given  by  the  Bramins  on  the  spot: 

Another  Prince  (perhaps  one  of  the  conquerors)  about  KKX)  years  ago,  was  desirous  of  having  a 
great  work  executed;  but  the  Hindoo  sculptors  and  masons  refused  to  perform  it  on  the  terms  he  proposed. 
Attempting  force,  they,  in  number  about  4000,  fled  with  their  effects  from  his  country  hither,  where 
they  resided  four  or  five  years,  and  in  this  interval  executed  these  magnificent  works." 

COVELONG 

Is  about  three  leagues  to  the  northward  of  the  seven  pagodas.  The  Ostend  East  India  Company  oh., 
tained  permission  to  trade  here,  and  settle  a factory,  on  their  first  arrival  in  India;  they  afterwards  built  a 
fort,  which  became  their  principal  settlement,  and  of  which  they  retained  possession  till  their  charter  was 
suspended  in  1731.  The  fort  afterwards  went  to  ruins,  and  the  natives  built  another  near  it,  which  they 
called  Saudet  Bunder.  1'he  French  got  possession  of  it  by  stratagem  in  the  beginning  of  1750;  it  was  taken 
from  them  by  the  English,  under  Colonel  Clive,  in  1752.  The  garrison  surrendered  at  discretion.  The 
place  mounted  about  thirty  pieces  of  cannon ; besides  which,  there  were  found  fifty  other  pieces  of  the 
largest  calibre,  which  proved  to  be  part  of  the  artillery  taken  at  Madras  by  De  la  Bourdonnais. 


RISE  AND  PROGRESS 

or  THE 

COMMERCE  OF  OSTEND  WITH  THE  EAST  INDIES. 

When  the  Seven  United  Provinces  of  the  Netherlands  became  a free  State  in  1698,  the  inhabitants 
of  the  remaining  provinces  were  excluded  by  the  King  of  Spain  from  carrying  on  any  traffic  with  either 
the  East  or  West  Indies;  they  therefore  contented  themselves  with'  such  trade  as  they  could  safely  and 
legally  transact  till  1638,  when  the  King  of  Spain  granted  them  the  liberty  of  trading  to  those  parts  of 
India  which  were  possessed  by  the  Portuguese,  then  also  his  subjects ; but  before  any  benefit  could  be  de- 
rived from  this  grant,  Portugal  revolted,  and  their  kingdom  again  became  independent.  From  thii^  period. 


OF  OSTEND  WITH  THE  EAST  INDIES. 


» 


109 


for  near  sixty  years,  during  which  time  these  provinces  remained  subject  to  Spain,  notiiing  was  done  on 
the  subject  of  a trade  with  India. 

1698.  Charles  II.  the  last  of  the  Austrian  Kings  of  Spain,  granted  a clmrter  for  erecting  a Company 
to  trade  in  such  parts  of  the  East  Indies  as  were  not  in  the  possession  of  other  nations.  The  capital  was  to 
consist  of  2,000,000  florins,  one  fourth  to  be  raised  in  October,  1698,  the  rest  in  1700  and  1701 ; but  they 
were  prevented  from  taking  any  advantage  of  their  charter,  in  consequence  of  the  death  of  the  King  in 
1700,  and  the  long  war  which  took  place  for  the  succession  to  tlie  Crown  of  Spain;  and  when  the  Nether- 
lands fell  under  the  dominion  of  Austria,  the  merchants  w^erc  debarred  from  trading  to  India  in  any  other 
manner  than  that  which  had  been  allowed  to  the  subjects  of  Spain,  which  was  by  tlie  way  of  Cape  Horn, 
and  no  farther  west  in  the  Indian  Seas  than  the  Philippine  Islands. 

1717.  Some  private  merchants  obtained  permission  from  tire  Government  to  send  a ship  or  two  to 
India;  they  returned  with  valuable  cargoes,  and  their  success  encouraged  otliers  to  lit  out  more  in  the  same 
manner.  Some  enterprising  foreign  mercliants  observing  this  promising  commencement  of  an  East  India 
trade,  made  proposals  to  the  Court  of  Vienna  for  the  establishment  of  a regular  Company,  with  the 
Emperor  s charter  for  a term  of  years,  wdiich  were  favourably  received. 

The  Dutch  soon  after  captured  one  of  the  licensed  ships,  under  the  plea  that  she  w^as  engaged  in  an 
illicit  trade.  The  Emperor  made  a demand  for  satisfaction,  which  not  being  attended  to,  he  issued  a com- 
mission  of  reprisal,  and  the  sliip  was  retaken  and  brought  into  Ostend. 

1720.  The  merchants,  re-encouraged  by  the  patronage  and  support  of  the  Emperor,  dispatclied  five 
ships  to  India,  and  in  the  year  following  six  more;  three  for  China,  one  for  Mocha,  one  for  the  Coast  of 
Malabar,  and  the  last  for  Bengal.  The  Dutch  were  seriously  alarmed  hy  these  exertions,  and  seizeil  one 
of  the  ships,  and  ordered  her  cargo  to  be  sold,  notwithstanding  the  remonstrances  of  tlie  Imperial  Minister 
at  the  Hague.  This  misfortune  was  followed  by  another;  un  English  privateer  ca[)tured  one  of  the 
homeward-bound  ships  very  richly  laden,  which  so  discouraged  the  mercliants,  that  they  ordered  a new 
ship  they  were  then  fitting  out,  to  be  laid  up;  but  in  May  and  June,  1721,  two  sliips  arrived  safe  from 
India,  and  in  September  two  more,  the  cargoes  of  which  sold  so  w ell,  as  to  indemnify  the  merchants  for 
former  losses,  and  put  them  in  a condition  to  carry  on  their  commerce  with  more  spirit.  The  only  thing 
wanted  was  a legal  establishment,  which  had  been  promised,  but  liitlicrto  delayed,  to  avoid  an  open  quarrel 
with  the  maritime  powers,  who  had  remonstrated  against  the  violation  of  the  Treaty  of  Munster,  con- 
cluded in  1648,  by  which  the  Spaniards  had  agreed  to  preserve  their  trade  and  navigation  within  the  limits 
as  they  were  then  conducted. 

1723.  In  the  month  of  August,  the  Emperor  published  the  letters  patent  he  had  graiilcd  to  the 
Ostend  Company.  In  the  preamble,  the  Emperor,  in  addition  to  the  titles  ol  the  House  ol  Austria,  stybal 
himself  King  of  the  East  and  West  Indies,  the  Canary  Islands,  &c.  with  a view  .o  grace  tliis  new  ami 
ample  grant,  which  was  for  thirty  years;  with  licence  to  trade  to  the  East  and  West  Indies,  and  on  all 
the  coasts  of  Africa,  on  both  sides  of  the  Cape  of  Good  Hope,  their  ships  observing  the  usual  customs. 

The  capital  was  fixed  at  6,000,000  florins,  in  6000  actions  or  shares.— Twelve  of  these  shares  were  to 
entitle  the  proprietor  to  a vote,  but  foreign  proprietors  were  entirely  excluded  from  voting. — The  Company 
were  authorized  to  ship  military  stores,  and  all  kinds  of  merchandise,  without  any  exception  whatever.— 
They  were  permitted  to  build  forts  in  whatever  parts  of  the  Indies  tliey  should  think  fit,  and  also  to  furnish 
them  with  all  kinds  of  arms,  artillery,  and  ammunition  that  they  thought  convenient. — They  were  likcAvise 
allpwed  to  build  and  equip  ships,  of  whatever  size  they  thought  proper,  in  any  of  the  ports  of  his 
Imperial  Majesty's  dominions.— -They  were  authorized  to  make  leagues,  trcatic'<,  and  alliances  with  the 

3G 


410 


RISE  AND  PROGRESS  OF  THE  COMMERCE 


Princes  and  States  in  India^  in  the  name  of  his  Imperial  Majesty^  with  this  restriction,  that  they  should  not 
make  war,  without  the  leave  of  his  Imperial  Majesty,  and  his  successors  first  had  and  obtained.  In  consi- 
deration of  all  of  which  grants  and  privileges,  the  Company  bound  themselves  to  offer,  as  a homage  to  the 
Emperor  and  his  heirs,  on  every  succession,  a golden  lion  crowned,  of  the  weight  of  twenty  marks,  hold- 
ing under  his  two  fore-paws  the  arms  of  the  Company,  which  were  a spread  eagle  displayed,  with  the  ter- 
restrial globe  between  his  two  heads,  surmounted  by  an  Imperial  crown.  Lastly,  his  Imperial  Majesty 
undertook  to  protect  and  defend  the  said  new  Company  against  all  who  should  unjustly  attack  them,  and 
would  even,  in  case  of  necessity,  employ  the  whole  force  of  his  dominions  to  support  and  maintain  them 
in  the  full  and  free  possession  and  entire  enjoyments  of  the  commerce  and  navigation  granted  them  by  these 
letters  patent,  and  obtain  for  them  full  damage  and  satisfaction  from  any  nation,  state,  or  potentate  that 
should  presume  to  trouble  or  distui'b  them;  and  would  likewise,  for  the  future,  provide  in  every  respect  for 
their  safety  and  welfare,  by  any  treaties,  alliances,  or  leagues  into  which  his  Imperial  Majesty,  or  his 
successors,  should  hereafter  enter  into  with  any  power  whatever. 

As  soon  as  these  letters  patent  were  publislied  and  registered,  the  Directors  took  possession  of  their 
offices,  and  held  their  first  general  Court;  in  which  it  was  resolved  that  the  books  of  the  Company  should 
be  opened  at  Antwerp  on  the  11th  of  August,  which  was  accordingly  done,  and  witli  such  success  as  sur- 
prised all  Europe;  for  the  next  day  by  noon  the  capital  was  entirely  subscribed,  and  by  the  1st  of  Sep- 
tember the  Company’s  stock  was  1 5 per  cent,  above  par. 

The  Company,  under  a full  confidence  of  obtaining  this  charter,  had  dispatched  a ship  to  India  in 
January,  1723,  to  take  possession  of  a piece  of  ground  which  they  had  obtained  from  the  Great  Mogul  on 
the  banks  of  the  Hughley,  where  they  built  a small  fort;  and  to  form  an  establishment  on  the  Coast  of 
Coromandel,  which  they  did  at  Covelong,  and  this  they  intended  as  their  principal  settlement.  Their 
factors  being  chietly  persons  who  had  before  served  either  the  English  or  Dutch  East  India  Companies, 
managed  their  affairs  with  considerable  success,  and  obtained  permission  to  establish  a factory  at  China. 

1724.  The  English  and  Dutch  East  India  Companies  presented  memorials  to  the  Court  of  Vienna, 
in  which  they  stated  that  the  establishment  of  this  new  Company  was  in  direct  violation  of  treaties,  and 
used  every  exertion  to  obtain  either  the  revocation  of  the  authority  by  which  the  Company  acted,  or  at 
least  a suspension  of  it;  in  the  meantime  they  passed  several  severe  laws,  to  prevent  any  of  their  own- sub- 
jects having  any  concern  in  the  capital  of  the  new  Company,  or  in  the  management  of  their  concerns. 
France  and  Spain  also  took  umbrage  at  this  new  establishment. 

1726.  Notwithstanding  the  strenuous  opposition  of  all  those  nations  engaged  in  the  East  India  trade, 
the  affairs  of  the  Company  appeared  to  be  in  a very  prosjierous  state.  Several  ships  arrived  from  India 
and  China  with  valuable  cargoes,  the  sale  amount  of  which  was  about  5,000,000  florins.  In  the  month 
of  September  a meeting  of  the  proprietors  was  called,  when  the  Directors  stated  to  them  that  their 
trade  had  been  so  successful,  that  they  were  enabled  to  carry  250  florins  to  the  account  of  every  share  in 
the  capital,  of  which  750  had  already  been  paid  in,  which  completed  the  original  amount  of  the  share 
1000  florins ; but  this  prosperity  was  not  sufficient  to  keep  up  the  spirits  of  the  proprietors  under  the  pres- 
sure of  the  confederacy  raised  against  them. 

1727.  The  Court  of  Vienna,  being  likely  to  be  brought  into  a war  by  her  perseverance  in  favour  of 
the  Ostend  East  India  Company,  concluded  a treaty  with  the  maritime  powers,  which  took  away  those 
apprehensions  that  the  settlement  of  this  Company  had  raised.  The  treaty  was  signed  at  Paris  on  the  26th 
of  May,  1727,  the  first  article  of  which  runs  thus— « His  Imperial  and  Catholic  Majesty,  having  no  other 
view  than  to  contribute  to  the  public  tranquillity  of  Europe,  and  observing  that  the  commerce  of  Ostend 
has  given  birth  to  jealousy  and  uneasiness,  consents  that  there  shidl  be  a suspension  of  the  charter  of  the 


OF  OSTEND  WITH  THE  EAST  INDIES. 


411 


Ostend  Company,  and  of  all  the  traffic  between  the  Austrian  Netherlands  and  tlie  Indies,  during  the  term 
of  seven  years.”  By  the  fifth  article  it  was  agreed,  “ That  the  ships  which  sailed  from  Ostend  bbfore  this 
convention,  the  names  whereof  were  to  be  ^ven  in  a list  on  the  part  of  his  Imperial  Majesty,  were  to  be 
permitted  safely  to  return  home;  and  in  case  any  of  them  should  be  taken,  it  was  agreed  that  they  should 
be  bona  fide  restored  with  their  cargoes.” 

This  treaty  was  a terrible  blow  to  the  Ostend  Coinjiany.  The  proprietors,  aware  that  their  absolute 
suppression  would  be  required,  turned  their  thoughts  to  consider  whether  some  method  might  not  be  found 
of  establishing  themselves  in  some  other  part  of  His  Majesty’s  dominions,  where  it  might  not  bo  liable  to 
those  formidable  objections  which  had  been  raised  againist  this  attempt  in  the  Austrian  Netherlands.  Trieste 
and  Fiume,  both  in  the  Gulf  of  Venice,  were  the  only  seaports  in  the  Austrian  dominions.  The  Emperor, 
who  was  desirous  of  participating  in  the  East  India  trade,  did  his  utmost  to  render  these  ports  commodious; 
but  the  natural  obstacles  were  too  great  to  be  .surmounted ; and  much  money  was  spent  in  the  attempt  of 
establishing  magazines,  and  in  repairing  the  fortifications,  when  the  project  was  given  up. 


1730.  The  Directors  then  attempted  to  carry  on  a trade  under  the  passports  of  the  Kings  of  Prussia 
and  Poland,  in  which  they  encountered  great  difficulties.  One  ship,  the  St.  Theresa,  under  Polish 
colours,  proceeded  to  Bengal  for  a cargo,  where  she  was  taken  by  the  English;  another,  the  A|)olIo.  from 
China,  under  Prussian  colours,  arrived  .safest  Hamburgh  in  September,  1731.  The  ministers  of  the 
maritime  powers  resident  in  that  city,  presented  a strong  memorial  to  the  Senate,  insisting  that  the  vessel 
should  be  sequestered,  and  her  contents  secured;  but  matters  were  not  pu.shcd  to  extremities : the  Senate, 
however,  prohibited  the  citizens  from  having  any  concern  with  vessel  or  cargo  .so  circumstanced,  and  the 
proprietors  were  allowed  to  remove  their  goods  away  clandestinely. 


1732.  The  Emperor  in  a rescript  to  his  Minister  at  Hamburgh,  dated  October  1,  1732,  states, 
“ that  being  informed  that  the  late  Company  of  Ostend,  notwithstanding  the  signification  of  his  pleasure, 
had  caused  a ship,  freighted  with  commodities  from  the  Indies,  to  be  sent  thither,  in  oi-dcr  to  be  expo.sed  to 
sale  in  that  city,  his  Imperial  Majesty,  being  resolved  not  to  permit  either  the  lute  Company,  or  any  of  the 
subjects  of  his  hereditary  countries,  to  carry  on  a trade  contrary  to  treaties,  desired  that  they  would 
sequester  any  goods  which  might  be  brought  thither.”  This  determined  conduct  put  an  end  to  all  the  con- 
trivances of  the  Directors  of  the  Ostend  Company  to  elude  the  suppression  of  their  commerce  with  the  Eas»^ 
Indies,  which  had  given  so  much  uneasiness  to  the  different  maritime  powers. 


1775,  In  this  year  Mr.  William  Bolts,  who  had  formerly  been  in  the  service  of  the  Endl"' 
India  Company,  presented  a proposal  to  the  Empress  of  Germany  for  establi.shing  a trade  ®''‘' 

the  East  Indies  from  her  ports  in  the  Adriatic.  The  Empress  approved  of  his  proposal,  ^ 
of  June,  1775,  signed  a charter,  whereby  she  authorized  him,  during  the  space  often  yea^'^  ""  “ 

trade  with  vessels  under  the  Imperial  flag,  from  her  ports  in  the  Adriatic,  to  Fersiy^^^  freight"  03? 
Africa;  to  carry  negro  slaves  from  Africa  and  Madagascar  to  America;  to  takea^^^ 
for  the  Imperial  ports,  or  any  others,  for  account  of  foreigners,  whose  property 

fiscation,  even  if  they  should  belong  to  nations  at  war  with  her;  to  take  po^,^^  J 

territories  which  he  might  obtain  from  the  Princes  of  India;  and  she 
to  him,  or  freighted  by  him,  and  the  people  belonging  to  them,  should  be  edi 
at  aU  times,  whether  of  peace  or  war;  that  she  would  provide  hinv 


?hat  the  vessels  belonging 

tciiiwiiTO  o . , 1 iji  ®*’'’<-‘st  or  detention 

to  him,  or  freighted  by  him,  and  the  people  belonging  to  them,  should  b^ 

at  aU  times,  whether  of  peace  or  war;  that  she  would  provide  him/  f y , na 

would  take  care  to  obtain  redress  for  him,  if  attacked  or  molested.^^  connexion  with  a mercantile  house 
Having  thus  succeeded  in  obtaining  a charter,  Mr.  Bolts  f^p,  Leghorn  and  Trieste  and  th«e 

at  Antwerp,  Proli  and  Co.  They  agreed  to  fit  out  and  load  / ’ 


3G2 


H2 


RISE  AND  PROGRESS  OF  THE  COMMERCE 


Mr.  Bolts  should  proceed  to  India,  in  order  to  establish  factories,  and  conduct  the  business,  leaving  the 
charter  in  the  hands  of  his  partners,  with  authority  to  form  an  Indian  house  of  trade  at  Trieste.  He 
then  proceeded  to  London,  where  he  purchased  a ship,  and  sailed  for  Leghorn  in  March,  1776,  from 
whence  he  departed  for  India.  Having  settled  factories  at  Delagoa  Bay,  the  Nicobar  Islands,  and  on  the 
Malabar  Coast,  he  returned  with  three  ships  to  Leghorn,  where  he  arrived  in  May,  178L 

1781.  'Fhe  arrival  of  ships  laden  with  East  India  goods  in  his  dominions,  induced  the  Grand  Duke 
of  Tuscany  to  favour  Mr.  Bolts,  by  whose  exertions  this  measure  had  been  brought  about.  He  gave  him  a 
charter,  dated  May  20,  1781,  for  an  exclusive  trade  between  Tuscany  and  all  the  countries  beyond  the 
Cape  dc  Verd  Islands,  to  be  conducted  in  two  ships  under  Imperial  or  Tuscan  colours,  and  to  continue 
till  the  expiration  of  his  Imperial  charter. 

Immediately  that  Mr.  Bolts’s  arrival  at  Leghorn  became  known  to  his  creditors  in  various  parts  of 
Europe,  they  got  the  ships  and  cargoes  arrested.  This  measure  took  place  in  consequence  of  the  treachery 
of  his  partners,  who  had  refused  to  honour  the  bills  he  had  drawn  on  them  from  India,  and  who  left  him 
to  support  all  the  charges  he  had  incurred  in  forming  the  new  estahlislirnents.  Thus  circumstanced,  he 
was  under  the  necessity  of  transferring  the  Imperial  and  Tuscan  charters  to  his  partners,  in  order  to  raise 
a joint  stock  of  2,000,000  florins.  He  renounced  any  right  he  might  have  in  any  ships  they  had  sent  to 
China  during  his  absence,  except  a commission  of  2 per  cent,  on  the  gross  sales  of  the  cargoes;  «andhetook 
upon  himself  the  property  of  a ship  called  the  Grand  Duke  of  Tuscany,  with  her  cargo,  which  had  been 
seized  at  the  Cape  of  Good  Hope  in  1781.  In  return,  they  advanced  him  a sum  of  money  to  liquidate 
some  of  tlie  most  pressing  demands  upon  him,  for  which  they  took  security  upon  his  property  in  the  trade; 
it  was  also  stipulated  that  lie  might  for  once  send  two  ships  to  India  or  China  on  his  own  sole  account, 
only  [laying  to  them  6 per  cent,  on  the  gross  amount  of  the  sales  of  their  cargoes  in  Europe. 

This  agreement  was  confirmed  by  the  Emperor  Joseph  II.  who  authorized  them  to  raise  the  sum 
of  two  millions  of  florins,  the  proposed  capital  of  the  new  ‘‘  Imperial  Company  of  Trieste  for  the  Com- 
merce of  Asia.”  Proli  and  Co.  immediately  opened  subscriptions  to  complete  their  capital,  valuing  the 
present  stock  of  tlie  Company  at  1 ,()()0,(K)()  florins,  whereof  800,000  were  their  own,  and  200,000  the  pro- 
perty  of  Mr.  Bolts;  and  for  the  remaining  1,000,000,  they  invited  subscribers  to  take  sliares  of  10(X) 
florins  each.  They  appointed  tlieinselves  Directors  at  Antwerp,  and  Mr.  Bolts,  with  another,  Directors  at 
’^riestc;  and  they  reserved,  as  a compensation  to  themselves,  a commission  of  2 per  cent,  on  the  gross  sales 
**^^.uropc. 

t a meeting  of  proprietors,  held  at  Antwerp  in  September,  1781,  it  was  recommended,  in  conse- 
(picnce  0 jiiaritimc  powers  being  engaged  in  war,  to  send  out  as  soon  as  possible  six  ships  for  China 
and  Coast  of  Africa,  and  three  for  the  Southern  Whale  Fishery.  For  these  exten- 

sive outfits  proposed  to  borrow  a large  sum  of  money;  and  the  proprietors  present  authorized  them 
to  raise  a sum  ^ exceeding  the  amount  of  their  capital  subscribed.  The  Directors  immediately  began  to 
cfpiip  the  bhqis  t*  Trieste  and  Leghorn,  and  contracted  for  the  purchase  of  others  in 

England.  In  ^ reported  that  they  had  6,000,000  florins  and  six  ships  under  the  Imperial 

flag,  all  in  The  liopes  excited  by  the  bustle  attendant  on  these  preparations,  were  consi- 

derably dampe  y ^ rination  they  received  of  their  factory  at  Delagoa  Bay  being  destroyed  by  the 
Portuguese,  who  c aim  'overeignty  and  exclusive  commerce  of  the  East  Coast  of  Africa. 

In  this  year  five  s , ^ 

^ • b *d  3 428, Ostend,  which  had  been  declared  a free  port  in  1781,  from 

China,  having  on  oai  exclusive  of  China-ware  and  other  commodities.  This  fortu- 
nate arrival  was  ^ ^./^ompany’s  ship,  the  Imperial  Eagle,  having  on  board  a very 

valuable  cai  go,  eing  ^ harbour  of  Cadiz.  Many  of  the  proprietors  were  so 


OF  OSTEND  WITH  THE  EAST  INDIES. 


413 


dufheartencd  by  this  disaster,  that  they  sold  out  their  stock  at  near  40  per  cent,  below  par,  and  the  event 
soon  shewed  that  the  purchasers,  even  on  those  terms,  were  greater  suflerers  than  the  sellers;  for  In  the 
same  year  the  Company  were  declared  bankrupts  to  the  amount  of  1(),00(),()(K)  florins. 

1787.  Notwithstanding  the  Imperial  Company  were  in  such  a situation,  several  ships  were  sent  to 
India  from  Hamburgh,  Ostend,  Trieste,  I.eghorn,  and  several  other  ports,  laden  witli  large  quantities  of 
British  manufactures,  and  in  which  merchants  rc'^ident  in  London  were  interested,  by  which  the  markets 
were  so  overstocked,  that  most  of  those  concerned  in  these  adventures  were  ruined;  and  the  commanders 
and  officers  of  the  English  East  Indiamen  w’ere  sucli  sciious  sulTerers  by  this  unexpected  interference,  that, 
by  way  of  alleviation,  the  duties  upon  their  investments  were  remitted  by  the  Governments  in  India. 

Since  that  period  ships  have  occasionally  visited  India,  under  some  of  the  above-enumerated  flags; 
but  the  regulations  which  took  place  on  the  renewal  of  the  English  EjinI  India  (’ompuny's  charter  in  1793, 
entirely  put  a stop  to  the  foreign  trade  carried  on  with  British  ea})ital;  and  the  foreign  merchants  not 
having  sufficient  property  to  curry  it  on,  it  is  now  entirely  at  an  end. 

MELIAPOTJH, 

Or  St.  Thome,  is  about  three  miles  to  the  southward  of  Madras.  This  town,  wdiich  lies  close  to  the 
sc&*slde,  is  almost  a hca[)  of  ruins.  There  arc  some  chnrehes,  especially  a catlietlral,  the  See  of  a Bishop 
Suffiragan  to  Goa,  and  in  whose  diocese  arc  all  the  Portuguese  churches  on  the  Goast  of  Coronmndcl. 

Inland  there  are  high  mountains,  the  northernmost  of  which  is  known  from  the  others  round  it,  hy 
being  rounder  and  flutter,  with  a church  built  t)ti  its  top.  This  is  called  St.  Thomas's  IMoimt,  in  the  neigh- 
bourhood of  which  are  the  country  houses  of  many  of  the  European  residents  in  Mailras. 

At  the  time  the  Portuguese  became  possessed  of  Meliapour,  it  was  quite  in  ruins;  they  changed  the 
name  of  it  to  St.  Thorne,  from  the  discovery  they  had  made  that  St.  Thomas  had  siiffered  martyrdom  near 
this  place.  Marco  Paulo,  who  visited  India  in  12G9,  reports  that  he  was  informcul  that  the  body  was 
deposited  in  a chapel  in  that  city.  It  w as  discovered  on  the  search  made  after  it  In  1.522,  and  the  remains 
n'ere  carried  to  Goa,  wdiere  they  w ere  interred  with  much  I’espert.  It  w^as  to  this  place  that  the  Bishop 
of  Sherborn  was  sent  by  King  Alfred,  and  returned  w ith  rich  gills  of  spices  and  pearls.  The  Portuguese 
rebuilt  the  city,  and  it  became  an  opulent  place,  Imt  it  declineil  on  the  rise  of  Madias. 

In  July,  1072,  St.  Thomas  was  taken  hy  the  French,  under  l)e  la  llayc.  In  1074  it  was  retaken 
by  the  Dutch,  and  given  up  to  the  King  of  Golconduh. 


END  OF  THE  FIRST  VOLUME. 


Phinted  by  S.  M^Dowall,  Leadesuall  Street. 


