DUKE 

UNIVERSITY 


LIBRARY 


Digitized  by  the  Internet  Archive 
in  2018  with  funding  from 
Duke  University  Libraries 


https://archive.org/details/lordmintoinindia01mint 


LORD  MINTO  IN  INDIA 


LONDON  :  PRINTED  BY 


Si'OTTISWOODE  AND  CO.,  NEW-STREET  SQUAR 
AND  PARLIAMENT  STREET 


1 


:NOIiTH  &  CEOTKAL 


^anyong 


(/'■iltllp'''. 


Mooltan. 


OudlL 


Montbi> 


l^azrumru 


BOSTBAVo 


75 _ Xon^itixde  £  aat-  iroia  GregDavich. _ 60 


S K 

7 

1  #>«■ 

_  (# 

"bustar  .  ,^/ 

J  JY 

XcmdjOTL  j  LtmffTnanM  Sr  Cf^  • 


EAvrfWelLer 


////. 

LOED  MINTO  IN  INJ)IA 


LIFE  AM)  LETTERS 


GILBERT  ELLIOT,  FIRST  EAIiL  OF  MINTO 

FROM 

1807  TO  1814 


WHILE  GOVERNOR -GENERAL  OF  INDIA 


BEINO  A  SEQUEL  TO  HIS  “LIFE  AXl)  LETTERV’  PUBLISHED  IN  ISi-l 


EDITED  BY  HIS  GREAT-NIECE 

THE  COUNTESS  OF  MINTO 


LONDON 

LONGMANS,  GREEN,  AND  CO. 
1880 


.m  fiijhts  rtservtfd 


/'^  64-7  L 


PREFA  GE. 

In  one  of  Lord  Minto’s  letters  from  India  he  says,  in 
reference  to  a  recent  publication,  that,  in  his  judgment, 
a  biography  should  not  be  made  to  contain  all  that  can 
be  told  about  a  man,  but  should  rather  aim  at  giving  a 
judicious  selection  of  what  is  calculated  to  represent  his 
actions  and  character. 

Upon  this  principle  the  selection  from  his  letters 
and  papers  now  published  has  been  made. 

It  has  no  pretension  to  historical  comprehensiveness. 
The  historians  of  British  India  have  treated  the  period 
of  Ijord  Minto’s  administration  with  a  weight  of 
authority,  and  in  a  spirit  of  candour,  leaving  nothing 
to  be  desired. 

Many  important  transactions  are  recorded  in  their 
pages  which  find  no  place  in  this  correspondence,  and 
others  again  are  brought  prominently  forward  in  the 
letters  which  heretofore  have  been  well  nigh  overlooked. 

Nevertheless,  the  life  of  a  statesman  floats  on  the 
tide  of  history,  and  his  public  conduct  cannot  be  fairly 


PEEFACE. 


vii 

judged,  apart  from  the  conditions  of  the  time  in  which 
he  lived. 

When  Lord  Minto  landed  in  India  in  1807,  fifty 
years  had  barely  elapsed  since  the  British  merchants  of 
t'alcutta  had  become  sovereigns  of  Bengal.  One  of 
his  aides-de-camp  who  visited  the  battle-field  of  Plassy 
in  1808  was  conducted  over  the  ground  by  an  eye¬ 
witness  of  that  memorable  victory.  In  the  period  that 
followed  it,  the  genius  of  Clive  and  of  Warren  Hastings 
extended  the  Company’s  rule. 

Muthin  a  decade  of  Lord  Minto’s  assumption  of 
the  Grovernor-Generalship  the  victorious  arms  of 
Ijord  Wellesley  had  asserted  the  supremacy  of  the 
British  Power  over  the  greater  part  of  the  Peninsula. 
But  his  policy  was  disapproved  at  home ;  his  career  of 
victory  was  arrested  while  his  conquests  were  still  un¬ 
consolidated  ;  and  the  services  which  had  been  the 
instruments  of  his  success  were  subjected  to  a  somewhat 
drastic  treatment  of  retrenchment  and  reform. 

On  Lord  Minto’s  arrival  in  India,  he  found  a  con¬ 
dition  bordering  on  anarchy  in  the  newly  ceded 
territories ;  a  barely  suppressed  rebellion  among  the 
newly  subjugated  races ;  discontent  in  the  Company’s 
services ;  and  a  general  objection  to  the  restraints  of 
legality. 

Within  two  years  of  his  instalment  in  the  seat  of 


PREFACE. 


vii 

government,  he  came  into  conflict  with  pretensions  of 
all  others  most  dangerous  to  an  infant  State — those 
engendered  by  religious  bigotry,  and  by  the  spirit  of 
military  ascendancy.  How  unflinchingly  he  asserted 
the  paramount  authority  of  the  civil  power,  while  never 
forgetting  that  law  and  justice  are  the  only  stable 
foundations  of  government,  may  be  seen  in  the  corre¬ 
spondence  now  published. 

\.  .AI. 

Minto  :  Novemlcr  8,  1879. 


Note. — In  the  first  pages  of  the  Introduction  to  this  volume,  Lord 
Minto  is  stated  to  have  left  England  in  February  1807,  whereas 
October  1806  is  given  as  the  date  of  his  departure  in  the  last  volume 
of  his  ‘Life  and  Letters,’  published  by  me  in  1874.  It  had  been 
originally  fixed  for  the  earlier  period,  but  was  subsequently  post¬ 
poned  ; — a  fact  of  which  I  was  ignorant  when  the  volumes  of  his 
European  correspondence  were  brought  to  a  conclusion. 


CONTENTS. 


CHAF'TER 

I.  Introduction* . 1 

11.  VoYAoE  — Madras— Calcutta— Change  of  Ad¬ 
ministration — Lady  Malmesbury's  Letters  .  i:5 

III.  State  of  India  —  External  Policy —Internal 

Policy — The  Native  Races — The  Mission¬ 
aries  . 4!) 

IV.  Family  Correspondence . 83 

V.  Position  of  England — Defence  of  India — Rela¬ 

tions  WITH  Persia  and  Turkey — Mission  to 
Persia . ;)7 

VI.  Mission  to  Lahore . 141 

VII.  Mission  to  Cabul . 15!) 

VHI.  News  fro.m  Europe — May  in  India — Dacoities  .  ITK 

IX.  Mutiny  of  Madras  Ar.my . 1!)7 

X.  Family  Letters— Edinburgh  in  180‘J  .  .  .  228 


X 


CONTENTS. 


CII.VI'TKU  P.\OE 

XI.  Foreign  Policy— Conquest  op  French  Islands  .  239 

XII.  Expedition  to  Java . 24!) 

XIII.  Calcutta — Official  Correspondence — Letters 
FROM  London — from  India-  Ubcali  op  Lord 
Minto—  Earldom . 318 

XR".  Kbvievv  of  Lord  Minto’s  Internal  Administra¬ 
tion —  Finance  —  Schemes  for  IIetrench- 
ment — Free  Trade— Military  Expenditure 
—  Balance  op  Power— College  of  Fort 
William— Scheme  for  Native  Colleges  .  3.52 

XV.  Conclusion— Lord  Minto’s  return  to  England— 

London — Minto — His  Death . 382 


INDEX 


39,5 


LORD  MINTO  IN  INDIA. 


CHAPTER  I. 

TjORD  Minto  assumed  the  reins  of  government  at 
Calcutta  on  July  3,  1807. 

Before  entering  on  this  new  chapter  of  his  life  it 
will  be  desirable  to  cast  a  retrospective  glance  over  the 
circumstances  which  had  led  to  his  appointment  to  the 
government  of  India. 

On  the  formation  in  1806,  of  the  Whig  Ministry, 
called  that  of  ‘  the  Talents,’  Lord  Minto  became  Presi¬ 
dent  of  the  Board  of  Control,  and  in  that  capacity 
confirmed  ‘  under  reserve  ’  the  succession  of  Sir  George 
Barlow  to  the  office  of  Governor  General  which,  vacated 
by  the  death  of  Lord  Cornwallis,  devolved  as  a  matter 
of  course  upon  Sir  George  as  senior  member  of  Council, 
until  a  fresh  appointment  coidd  be  made  in  England. 

The  death  of  Lord  Cornwallis  had  occurred  almost 
simultaneously  with  the  advent  of  the  Whigs  to  power. 
It  will  be  remembered  that  the  brilliant  administration 
of  Lord  Wellesley  was  brought  to  a  close  by  his  recall. 

B 


2 


LOED  MINTO  IN  INDIA. 


While  he  was  engaged  in  creating  an  empire,  his  mas¬ 
ters  in  Leadenhall  Street  were  learning  to  their  dismay 
that  the  process  was  not  a  paying  one.  Impoverished 
finances  with  augmented  responsibilities  led  them  to 
the  conclnsion  that  the  interests  of  a  trading  company 
might  be  placed  in  safer  if  not  in  abler  hands.  At 
their  urgent  desire  Lord  Cornwallis  was  prevailed  on 
to  return  to  India  to  inaugurate  a  reign  of  peace, 
and  to  observe  a  strict  abstention  from  interference 
in  the  affairs  of  the  Native  States  beyond  the  British 
frontier. 

But  Lord  Cornwallis  was  old  and  infirm ;  he  felt 
that  he  went  out  to  die,  and  his  death  followed 
almost  immediately  on  his  arrival  in  India.  When  his 
authority  fell  to  Sir  Greorge  Barlow,  the  Directors 
were  happy  to  find  in  him,  though  a  quondam  pupil 
of  Lord  Wellesley,  a  thorough-going  supporter  of 
the  policy  which  they  had  committed  to  Lord 
Cornwallis,  and  would  gladly  have  confirmed  him  in 
the  office  of  Grovernor  Greneral ;  but  such  was  not  the 
intention  of  the  Cabinet. 

Early  in  February,  Lord  Minto  was  instructed  to 
inform  Sir  George  Barlow  that  the  permanency  of  his 
appointment  was  not  to  be  considered  as  determined, 
and  on  the  1st  of  April  he  wrote  again  to  announce  to 
Sir  George  the  intended  nomination  of  his  successor; 
remarking  at  the  same  time  that  when  in  his  former 
letter  he  had  stated  the  King’s  Government  to  have 
reserved  their  ulterior  judgment,  he  was  not  aware  it 
was  so  near  the  point  of  decision,  for  had  he  known  it 


INTEODUCTION. 


3 


he  would,  at  once,  have  frankly  and  candidly  imparted 
that  information  to  Sir  Gleorge  himself. 

Writing  to  his  old  friend  Lord  William  Bentinck, 
Governor  of  Madras,  on  the  same  day,  April  1,  Lord 
hlinto  says : — ‘  The  arrangements  with  regard  to  the 
Government  of  Bengal  are  always  considered  as  belong¬ 
ing  to  the  Cabinet,  in  which  I  have  not  a  seat.  But  in 
fact  this  particular  measure  has  been  settled  and  con¬ 
ducted  I  may  say  with  the  entire  exclusion  of  my  voice 
or  judgment  in  the  afhxir.  It  was  determined  upon 
some  weeks  before  it  reached  my  ears,  and  it  was  only 
communicated  to  me  on  the  day  on  which  I  was  de¬ 
sired  to  communicate  it  to  the  Chairs.  I  do  not  say 
this  in  the  way  of  complaint,  being  assured  that  the 
perfect  cordiality  of  Lord  Grenville  towards  me  pre¬ 
cludes  the  possibility  of  intentional  slight.’ 

Whatever  the  reasons  may  have  been  for  the  con 
duct  of  the  Cabinet,  it  certainly  had  an  appearance  of 
want  of  candour  that  sufficiently  accounted  for  the 
irritation  manifested  by  the  Court  of  Directors.  They 
had  not  forgotten  that  the  Prime  INIinister,  Lord  Gren¬ 
ville,  had  warmly  approved  of  the  administration  of 
Lord  Wellesley  which  they  had  condemned,  and  when 
the  name  of  Lord  Lauderdale  was  made  known  as  that 
of  the  chosen  successor  to  Sir  George  Barlow,  they  at 
once  refused  to  consider  the  nomination.  The  Govern¬ 
ment,  persisting  in  their  measure,  exercised  a  power 
given  to  the  King  by  33  Geo.  III.  c.  52,  and  vacated  the 
commission  of  Sir  George.  Both  parties  being  equally 
resolved,  the  quarrel  grew  hot  and  bitter.  Mr.  Fox 


4 


LORD  MINTO  IN  INDIA. 


supported  the  pretensions  of  Lord  Lauderdale  with  that 
passionate  carelessness  of  consequences  where  his  feel¬ 
ings  were  concerned  which  made  him  so  beloved  as  a 
friend  and  so  distrusted  as  a  statesman.  He  positively- 
refused  to  listen  to  any  other  name,  and  somewhat 
autocratically  desired  that  the  Ministry  should  abandon 
the  right  of  nomination  altogether,  rather  than  with¬ 
draw  the  one  they  had  made  in  comphance  with  the 
objections  of  the  Court  of  Directors.  The  discussions 
in  the  Cabinet  were  so  prolonged  and  warm  that  Lord 
Minto  appears  to  have  had  misgivings  as  to  the  extent 
to  Avhich  the  divergences  of  opinion  manifested  there 
might  ultimately  be  carried.  In  the  course  of  the 
summer  he  wrote  to  Lady  Minto  that,  while  believing 
Lord  Lauderdale  to  have  many  qualifications  for  the 
office  of  Grovernor  Greneral  which  would  justify  the 
appointment,  he  should  himself  resign  if  the  Grovern- 
ment  persisted  in  forcing  on  the  Company  an  indivi¬ 
dual  obnoxious  to  them.  A  rupture  between  the 
Directors  and  the  controlling  power  was  imminent 
when  Lord  Lauderdale  suddenly  withdrew  his  preten¬ 
sions,  induced  by  the  serious  illness  of  JMr.  Fox  to 
spare  him  further  agitation  on  the  subject. 

Lord  Grrenville  immediately  nominated  Lord  Minto, 
and  the  appointment  proved  to  be  equally  acceptable 
to  the  Directors  and  to  the  public. 

‘  When  the  appointment  of  Lord  Lauderdale  be¬ 
came  manifestly  impossible,’  wrote  Lord  Minto  to  Lord 
William  Bentinck,  ‘  the  views  of  all  parties  turned  to¬ 
wards  me,  and  the  accidental  union  which  manifested 


INTRODUCTION. 


5 


itself  on  this  choice  seemed  to  make  my  nomination  a 
sort  of  peace-offering  on  both  sides,  and  a  means  of 
compromise  and  reconciliation  which  might  solve  a 
great  difficulty.  Under  this  inducement  I  accepted, 
not  without  a  strong  private  and  domestic  struggle, 
nor  without  an  anxious  distrust  of  my  qualifications 
for  so  weighty  a  burthen,  a  situation  which,  so  far  from 
seeking,  I  thought  a  week  before  no  human  persuasion 
could  have  led  me  to  undertake.’ 

Though  by  no  means  an  adherent  on  all  points  to 
Lord  Wellesley’s  policy.  Lord  Minto  was,  as  Lord  Gren¬ 
ville  well  knew,  second  to  no  man  in  his  devotion  to 
the  honour  and  interests  of  the  Empire,  while  the 
natural  moderation  of  his  character  convinced  the 
Directors  that  no  hankerings  after  a  showy  policy 
would  prevent  their  instructions  from  being  rigor¬ 
ously  observed.  If  these  were  limited,  as  he  after¬ 
wards  playfully  declared,  to  a  general  recommenda¬ 
tion  to  maintain  a  system  of  non-intervention,  and  a 
more  definite  one  to  control  the  consumption  of  pen¬ 
knives,  we  may  assume  that  their  confidence  in  the 
new  Governor  General  was  complete. 

With  Lord  Grenville  he  had  many  conversations 
in  which  were  foreshadowed  the  main  features  of  the 
policy  that  before  the  close  of  his  administration  left 
Great  Britain  without  a  rival  in  the  Eastern  hemi¬ 
sphere. 

Such  having  been  the  circumstances  that  led  to 
the  appointment  of  Lord  hlinto  to  the  government  of 
India,  a  few  words  may  be  permitted  to  us  on  the  per- 


6 


LOED  MINTO  IN  INDIA. 


sonal  conditions  which  pointed  him  out  as  singularly 
fitted  for  the  post. 

Lord  Minto’s  early  and  intimate  connection  with 
Bmke  was  the  keynote  of  his  political  career.  For  that 
great  man  he  formed  an  enthusiastic  affection  which 
was  returned  with  so  much  tenderness  and  confidence 
that,  when  indulging  after  long  years  in  a  retrospect 
of  their  old  friendship,  he  was  able  to  say,  ‘  I  believe  I 
was  among  those  whom  Burke  loved  best,  and  most 
trusted.’ 

Some  of  Burke’s  finest  orations  were  due  to  the 
profound  interest  he  felt  in  the  relations  of  England 
and  India,  to  the  indignation  with  which  he  saw  the 
interests  of  the  native  princes  and  people  trafficked 
away  by  the  servants  of  a  trading  Company,  and  to  the 
disgust  with  which  he  recognised  that  the  riding  powers 
in  England  had  minds  too  small  for  the  sphere  of  their 
duty.  These  sentiments  were  intensified  by  the  natural 
bias  of  his  intellect.  There  was  an  epic  grandeur  in 
the  dramas  enacting  on  that  most  ancient  stage,  a 
tragic  dignity  in  the  fallen  estate  of  dynasties  as 
ancient,  a  magnitude  in  the  scale  of  the  crimes  and 
triumphs,  the  sorrows  and  sufferings  of  which  India 
was  the  scene,  that  stirred  his  keenest  sympathies,  and 
called  forth  the  scathing  eloquence  that  imparts  to 
those  who  hear  it  something  of  its  divine  fervour. 
Burke  must  be  allowed  the  honour  of  having  been  the 
first  to  awaken  in  the  British  Parliament  and  people 
a  sense  of  their  duty  to  the  native  races  of  India ;  yet 


INTRODUCTION. 


it  cannot  be  denied  that  when  the  light  of  his  imagina¬ 
tion  played  over  the  stores  of  his  knowledge,  an  ideal 
India  was  created,  brilliant  and  unreal  as  the  luminous 
pageants  which  Asiatics  love  to  trace  in  lines  of  fire  on 
midnight  skies.  The  following  passage  from  his  speech 
on  the  East  India  Bill  in  1783,  curious  for  various 
reasons  at  the  present  day,  may  serve  at  once  to  confirm 
this  assertion  and  to  show  the  traditions  of  a  school 
of  which  Burke  was  the  master. 

‘  This  multitude  of  men  does  not  consist  of  an  abject 
and  barbarous  populace ;  much  less  of  gangs  of  savages, 
like  the  Gruaranis  and  Chiquitos,  who  wander  on  the 
waste  borders  of  the  river  of  Amazons  or  the  Plate  ;  but 
a  people  for  ages  civilised  and  cultivated ;  cultivated 
by  all  the  arts  of  polished  life,  whilst  we  were  yet  in 
the  woods.  There,  have  been  (and  still  the  skeletons 
remain)  princes  once  of  great  dignity,  authority,  and 
opulence.  There,  are  to  be  found  the  chiefs  of  tribes 
and  nations.  There,  is  to  be  found  an  ancient  and 
venerable  priesthood,  the  depositary  of  their  laws,  learn¬ 
ing,  and  industry,  the  guides  of  the  people  whilst  living, 
and  their  consolation  in  death ;  a  nobility  of  great 
antiquity  and  renown;  a  multitude  of  cities,  not  exceeded 
in  population  and  trade  by  those  of  the  first  class  in 
Europe ;  merchants  and  bankers,  individual  houses  of 
whom  have  once  vied  in  capital  with  the  Bank  of 
England  .  .  .  millions  of  ingenious  manufacturers 
and  mechanics ;  millions  of  the  most  diligent,  and  not 
the  least  intelligent,  tillers  of  the  earth.  Here  are  to 
be  found  almost  all  the  religions  professed  by  men ; 


8 


LOKD  MINTO  IN  INDIA. 


the  Brahminical,  the  Mussulman,  the  Eastern  and  the 
Western  Christians. 

‘  If  I  were  to  take  the  Avhole  aggregate  of  our  pos¬ 
sessions  there,  I  should  compare  it  as  the  nearest 
parallel  I  could  find  to  the  Empire  of  Giermany ;  om 
immediate  possessions  I  should  compare  with  the 
Austrian  dominions,  and  they  would  not  suffer  in  the 
comparison.  The  Nabob  of  Oude  might  stand  for  the 
King  of  Prussia  ;  the  Nabob  of  Arcot  I  would  compare, 
as  superior  in  territory  and  equal  in  revenue,  to  the 
Elector  of  Saxony.  The  Eajah  of  Benares  might  well 
rank  with  the  Prince  of  Hesse,  at  least;  and  the  Eajah 
of  Tanjore  (though  hardly  equal  in  extent  of  dominion, 
superior  in  revenue)  with  the  Elector  of  Bavaria.  The 
Polygars  and  the  northern  Zemindars  and  other  great 
chiefs  might  well  class  with  the  rest  of  the  princes, 
dukes,  counts,  marquises,  and  bishops  in  the  Empire ; 
all  of  whom  I  mention  to  honour,  and  surely  without 
disparagement  to  any  or  all  of  those  most  respectable 
princes  and  grandees.’  * 

It  was  no  doubt  due  to  Sir  Grilbert’s  ardent  sym¬ 
pathy  with  the  views  and  the  labours  of  his  friend  that 
in  1783  he  was  designated  as  one  of  the  seven  Parlia¬ 
mentary  Directors  (the  Seven  Kings  as  they  were  called) 
to  be  appointed  under  the  provisions  of  ]Mr.  Fox’s  India 
Bill. 

The  measure  was  lost,  and  as  with  it  collapsed  the 
Ministry  and  the  reign  of  the  Whig  party,  the  honour 
was  a  barren  one;  but  his  first  appearance  on  the 
*  Speech  on  the  East  India  Bill.  Burhe's  Worlis,  vol.  i.  p.  338. 


INTEODUCTION. 


9 


political  stage  in  a  leading  part  was  nevertheless  des¬ 
tined  to  be  connected  with  the  interests  of  India. 
Two  sessions  had  passed  since  he  and  Mirabeau  stood 
together  at  the  Bar  of  the  House  of  Commons  to 
listen  to  the  great  tribunes  of  England,  when  Sir 
Gilbert  himself  made  his  first  important  effort  in  that 
formidable  assembly,  and  moved  the  Impeachment  of 
Sir  Elijah  Impey  in  a  speech  which  elicited  the  warm 
admiration  of  its  most  illustrious  members. 

In  the  following  year  he  became  one  of  the  man¬ 
agers  in  the  trial  of  Warren  Hastings.  ‘  His  earnest 
desire,’  he  said  in  his  opening  speech  on  that  occasion, 
‘  to  befriend  the  natives  of  India  had  decided  him  to 
undertake  a  business  in  many  respects  most  uncon¬ 
genial  to  his  nature.’  But  another  determining  cause 
was  the  urgency  with  which  Burke  besought  him  to 
throw  off  his  modesty,  ‘  his  only  fault,’  and  the  warmth 
of  encouragement  which  hailed  his  opening  effort.  A 
note,  written  in  December  1787  and  sent  to  Sir  Gilbert 
with  a  book  intended  to  be  of  use  to  him  while  euffaged 
in  the  preparation  of  his  charge  against  Sir  Elijah 
Impey,  ends  thus  : 

‘  God  bless  you  and  forward  your  good  under¬ 
taking.  Stick  to  it.  You  have  years  before  you,  and 
if  I  were  of  your  age,  and  had  your  talents  and  your 
manners,  I  shoidd  not  despair  of  seeing  India  a  happy 
country  in  a  few  years.  Yours  ever, 

‘  E.  Burke.’ 

Having  kept  all  these  things  in  his  heart  he  could 


10 


LORD  MINTO  IN  INDIA. 


not  but  ponder  on  them  at  the  moment  when  his 
destiny  was  about  to  lead  him  among  the  people  to 
whom  his  early  sympathies  had  been  given ;  nothing 
could  be  more  natmal  than  that  a  few  of  his  last  hours 
in  England  should  be  spent  with  all  that  remained  of 
his  old  friend.  ‘  I  paid  my  visit  to  h'lrs.  Burke  yester¬ 
day,’  he  wrote  to  his  wife  a  day  or  two  before  his 
embarkation,  ‘  and  took  leave  of  the  old  groves  as  well 
as  of  herself  by  walking  round  the  place  which  to  me 
and  a  few  other  people  is  sanctified — as  I  am  never 
there  without  feeling.  Sitting  there  alone  I  thought 
of  more  things  than  even  you  would  understand.’ 

From  the  groves  which  crown  the  heights  of 
Beaconsfield  it  was  only  a  pleasant  drive  to  Taplow 
Court,  where  Lord  and  Lady  Thomond  (Sir  Joshua 
Eeynolds’  niece)  owned  one  of  the  loveliest  places  on 
the  Thames  ;  thence  it  was  no  ‘  far  cry  ’  to  Dropmore, 
the  home  of  the  Grrenvilles  ;  nor  to  Park  Place,  that  of 
the  hlalmesburys,  with  the  little  ‘  Lavender  House  ’  ^ 
nestling  under  its  slopes.  Of  each  and  of  all  these 
familiar  haunts  he  took  a  long  farewell.  While  to 
some  of  those,  for  whose  sake  they  were  dear,  the  word 
itself  remained  unspoken. 

A  pathetic  proof  of  its  bitterness  to  others  as  well 
as  to  himself  is  given  in  a  letter  addressed  to  him  at 
Portsmouth,  by  Lady  Malmesbury. 

*  Belonging  to  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Culverden,  sister  of  Lady  Palmerston. 


INTKODUCTION. 


11 


‘  Spring  Gardens  :  February  10,  1807. 

‘  I  must  send  you  a  few  lines  to  thank  you  for 
sparing  me  the  most  wretched  of  all  things — a  parting 
scene.  People  feel  so  differently  on  these  points  that 
I  would  not  ask  you  to  do  so,  in  case  you  felt 
differently,  and  no  selfish  feelings  could  be  attended 
to  by  me  on  such  an  occasion.  In  youth  one  rather 
covets  such  things  as  call  forth  the  feelings,  but  in 
later  life  there  is  less  spring  to  support  them,  and  I 
am  inclined  to  believe  that  as  the  passions  weaken  the 
feelings  strengthen.  I  therefore  repeat  that  I  thank 
you  sincerely  for  not  coming  here,  and  that  I  consider 
the  last  squeeze  of  your  hand  as  fully  satisfactory.  .  .  . 
I  hope  and  pray  that  the  sacrifice  you  have  made  may 
be  rewarded  in  every  possible  shape,  and  that  the  in¬ 
terval  may  be  as  little  irksome  as  it  can  be.  I  am 
sure  that  the  retrospect  of  it  will  be  one  of  its  princi¬ 
pal  rewards,  as  the  will  of  doing  good  will  equal  the 
power  in  your  hands,  and  the  latter  is  unequalled 
perhaps  in  any  situation  on  the  globe.’ 

Lord  Malmesbury  wrote  in  like  strain  ; 


‘London  :  February  10,  1807. 

‘  I  really  could  not  make  up  my  mind  to  see  you 
before  you  left  London.  I  even  studiously  avoided  it. 
The  taking  leave  of  an  old  and  affectionate  friend, 
going  for  several  years  to  a  very  distant  country,  at 
my  time  of  life  and  with  my  infirmities,  is  a  very  pain- 


12 


LOED  MINTO  IN  INDIA. 


fill  task,  and  calculated  to  raise  so  many  melancholy 
sensations  that  I  shrank  from  attempting  it. 

‘  I  feel  almost  sure  you  guessed  and  understood  the 
motives  of  my  conduct,  but  there  is  a  satisfaction  in 
writing  them  to  you,  resting  on  the  same  feeling  which 
made  it  so  painful  for  me  to  express  them  personally, 

‘  If  we  do  meet  again,  why  we  shall  smile, 

If  not,  why  then  this  parting  was  well  made.’ 

Before  the  frigate  sailed  which  was  to  convey 
him  to  India,  Lord  Minto  sent  a  few  parting  lines  to 
his  wife,  in  which  the  following  passage  occurs. 

‘  February  6,  1807. 

‘  I  took  leave  of  Grilbert '  yesterday  after  sealing  my 
letter  to  you,  and  I  may  reckon  the  worst  moments  of 
my  probation  over.  The  last  was  one  of  those  of  which 
it  is  impossible  to  say  all  that  is  felt,  and  if  one  could 
it  is  better  to  suppress  it.  Many  people  have  said  of 
their  sons  that  they  have  never  given  them  pain ;  I 
can  say  with  perfect  and  literal  truth  that  there  has 
not  been  an  instant  of  his  life  on  which  I  have  reflected 
without  comfort  and  delight.  So  much  for  that.  The 
Avind  has  not  been  fair.’ 

'  His  eldest  son,  Gilbert  Elliot,  afterwards  second  Earl  of  Minto. 


VOYAGE  TO  INDIA. 


13 


CHAPTER  II. 

The  voyage  from  England  to  Madras,  in  the  ‘  Modeste  ’ 
frigate  commanded  by  George  Elliot,  Lord  Minto’s 
second  son,  took  four  months.  As  it  neither  pro¬ 
duced  a  sea  fight  nor  ended  in  disaster  it  was  con¬ 
sidered  to  have  been  favoured  by  fortune.  The  nearest 
ajjproach  to  such  naval  adventures  as  Lord  JMinto  had 
witnessed  in  the  Mediterranean'  was  a  chase  after  a 
couple  of  our  own  merchantmen,  whence  half-a-dozen 
sailors  were  extracted  to  make  up  the  ‘  Alodeste’s  ’  own 
very  deficient  complement,  chiefly  composed  of  raw  lands¬ 
men.  No  less  ill-fitted  than  ill-manned,  the  frigate  after 
weathering  a  severe  gale  reached  IMadeira  in  need  of 
serious  repairs.  ‘  A  little  more  would  have  been  too 
much  for  us,’  wrote  Lord  Minto  in  the  log  kept  for  the 
benefit  of  the  family  circle  at  home  ;  but  he  was  com¬ 
forted  for  the  delay  by  a  sight  of  scenery  that  reminded 
him  of  Nice  and  Bastia,  and  the  enjoyment  of  a  (piiet 
morning,  ‘  rusticating  in  all  the  ways  I  like,  among 
flowering  trees  and  shrubs  regaling  the  air  with  per¬ 
fume.’  A  pathetic  interest  is  lent  to  these  few  lines 
by  the  circumstance  that  never  again  in  his  journal- 
'  When  Viceroy  of  Corsica. 


14 


LOKD  MINTO  IN  INDIA. 


like  letters  is  meution  made  of  ‘  ways  ’  hitherto  so  fre¬ 
quently  recorded  as  to  form  part  of  his  habitual  life, 
whether  the  summer  hours  were  spent  on  the  craigs  of 
INIinto,  under  the  chestnuts  of  Sheen,  or  by  the  bright 
Avaters  of  the  Thames, — 

That,  as  they  bicker'd  thro’  the  sunny  glade, 

Tho’  restless  still  themselves,  a  lulling  murmur  made. 

Of  the  log  no  more  need  be  said  than  that  no  one  of 
those  for  whom  it  was  kept  but  could  find  some  con¬ 
genial  topic  there.  For  his  son  there  were  comments 
on  soldiers  and  sailors,  colonists  and  governors ;  for 
his  daughters  bright  little  word-pictures  of  Funchal 
and  Cape  Town — for  the  youngest,  the  only  child  left 
in  the  family,  tales  of  the  mids  that  came  to  his  cabin 
for  their  daily  treat  of  oranges,  and  of  their  pet  play¬ 
fellow,  a  goat  that  was  born  on  board  ship,  rated  her¬ 
self  one  of  them,  and  knew  no  more  of  craigs  than  the 
INIinto  pointers  had  told  her.^  Lastly,  for  his  wife  there 
was  the  constant  recurrence  of  words  showing  how  all 
his  thoughts  ended  in  her.  ‘Cape  Town,  May,  1807. 
In  the  country  I  am  now  driving  through,  there  is  a 
quarter  called  Franzneuk  or  French  corner.  It  is  so 
called  from  some  French  refugees,  expelled  by  the 
edict  of  Nantes,  who  took  refuge  in  South  Africa,  and 
obtained  grants  of  land  where  they  cultivated  the  vine, 
and  I  have  no  doubt  advanced  that  art  very  materially. 
To  what  country  has  that  event  not  brought  some 

'  Lord  Minto  was  carrying  a  couple  of  pointers  to  India  as  a 
present  to  his  son. 


JEt.  56] 


MADRAS. 


15 


precious  acquisition  ?  ’  It  will  be  remembered  that 
Lady  Minto  Avas.  descended  from  a  Huguenot  family. 

After  one  of  these  playful  entries  he  says  :  ‘  Heaven 
knows  I  am  serious  enough  as  the  serious  scene  draAvs 
near.’  "A 

The  next  day  he  was  at  Madras. 

The  ‘  Modeste  ’  anchored  in  the  Madras  roads  on  the 
evening  of  June  20,  1807.  At  six  o’clock  next  morn¬ 
ing  Lord  William  Bent  inch,  and  John  Elliot  ’  came  on 
board  to  Avelcomehim- — ‘both  unchanged, and  unchange¬ 
able.’  Though  Lord  IMinto  Avas  detained  at  IMadras  for  a 
fortnight  by  the  necessity  of  having  a  neAv  foremast  for 
the  ‘  Modeste,’  he  could  take  no  official  part  there  since 
his  commission  could  only  be  opened  on  his  arrival  at 
Calcutta,  but  he  profited  by  the  opportunity  to  ac¬ 
quaint  himself  Avith  the  affairs  of  that  perturbed  Presi¬ 
dency  Avhere  some  of  the  mutineers  of  Vellore  were  still 
under  sentence  awaiting  their  fate.^  As  those  parts  of 
his  letters  which  relate  to  that  disastrous  event  contain 
little  more  than  his  personal  opinion  upon  facts  long 
since  established  they  are  omitted.  His  first  impres¬ 
sions  of  Indian  life  have  more  interest. 

*  John  Edmund  Elliot,  third  son  of  Lord  Minto,  who  had  been 
appointed  to  a  writership  in  1805,  and  now  became  private  secretary 
to  his  father. 

-  The  European  barracks  at  Vellore  had  been  seized  in  the  night 
of  July  10,  1806,  by  two  battalions  of  Sepoys,  in  the  Company’s 
service,  and  their  inmates  put  to  tlie  sword.  The  mutiny  was  put 
down  almost  immediately,  but  a  general  revolt  of  the  native  troops 
was  for  some  time  apprehended.  A  proclamation  of  the  Madras 
Covernment,  dated  December  3,  1806,  states  the  cause  of  the  mutiny 
to  have  been  an  unfounded  belief  that  the  Government  meant  to 
convert  the  native  troops  by  forcible  means  to  Christiatiity. 


16 


LOKD  MINTO  IN  INDIA. 


‘  Madras :  June  29. 

‘  The  novelty  of  this  scene  exceeds  even  my  ex¬ 
pectations.  I  have  already  told  you  of  our  safe  arrival 
and  perfect  health.  I  do  not  find  the  heat  at  all 
amiss,  though  it  is  the  hottest  season  of  the  year.  I 
never  go  out  at  all  till  five  o’clock  in  the  afternoon  ; 
it  is  then  cool  enough  to  drive  in  the  curricle.  John 
is  my  coachman.  We  take  a  giro  on  the  Mount  Eoad 
which  is  the  general  resort  at  that  time  of  day,  and 
strike  off  occasionally  for  variety  into  other  roads. 
The  roads  are  all  as  fine  as  the  smoothest  gravel  walks, 
being  composed  of  pounded  brick ;  the  dust  of  this  is 
rather  troublesome.  They  are  extremely  wide,  with 
trees  on  each  side,  and  are  in  effect  handsome  avenues. 
The  whole  of  the  Choultry  plain,  which  extends  seven 
or  eight  miles  from  Madras,  is  divided  into  villas  and 
pleasure-grounds,  and  the  grounds  are  so  extensive 
that  the  houses  are  much  farther  from  each  other  than 
on  Putney  Heath,  or  Wimbledon  Common.  These  are 
the  habitations  of  the  English,  and  the  higher  class  of 
natives.  John  and  I  finish  our  drive  where  we  are 
invited  to  dine,  the  hoirr  being  seven  o’clock.  As  yet 
I  am  in  a  round  of  great  dinners,  at  which  I  meet  the 
same  thirty  or  forty  grandees  every  day. 

IMost  peojjle  come  and  go  in  their  palanquins,  and 
travel  at  the  rate  of  five  or  six  miles  an  hour,  carried 
by  four  bearers,  and  attended  by  four  more  to  relieve 
each  other,  all  running  and  always  singing  some  ditty 
or  other.  Indeed,  in  carriages,  going  a  good  round 
pace  with  four  horses  on  a  smooth  road,  you  are  always 


jEt.  66] 


MADRAS. 


17 


attended  by  men  on  foot,  one  for  each  horse,  and  oft(m 
more  for  dignity — so  that  it  is  not  one  running 
footman  or  two,  with  a  fine  gentleman  or  fine  lady  ; 
here  and  there  one,  as  in  Glermany  or  Italy,  but  every 
sort  of  person  here  is  followed  by  a  cloud  of  volantes. 
This  annoys  me  extremely,  very  much  to  John’s  amuse¬ 
ment,  who  assures  me  that  they  like  it,  while  I  am 
thinking  how  I  should  like  it  myself  with  my  lungs  in 
this  burning  sun.  They  run  thirty  miles  on  end  with¬ 
out  thinking  much  of  it,  and  will  set  off  back  again 
with  little  or  no  rest.  One  advantage  is  that  they  are 
not  burdened  with  a  heavy  wardrobe.  I  was  not  pre¬ 
pared  for  the  entire  nakedness  of  the  Oentoo  inhabitants. 
I  mean  the  men,  nine  tenths  of  whom  have  literally  no 
clothes  except  only  a  narrow  belt  about  the  waist  from 
which  another  is  passed  between  the  limbs  exactly  as  in 
the  South  Sea  Islands.  In  this  attire  crowds  are  in 
the  streets,  and  in  the  roads,  and  walk  about  your 
house.  It  seems  really  strange  to  a  griffin — the  cant 
word  for  a  European  just  arrived,  and  would,  I  suppose, 
seem  still  stranger  to  our  countrywomen  if  these  men 
were  white  instead  of  black  or  bronze.  The  Queen  (of 
Naples)  might  here  study  figures  without  anything  to 
“  abimer  ”  her  models.  This  race  of  men  are  not 
exactly  Academy  figures,  not  being  very  muscidar,  but 
their  forms  are  remarkably  delicate  and  elegant,  and 
many  of  their  countenances  uncommonly  fine.  .  .  The 
habit  of  walking  without  clothes  gives  them  a  free  and 
manly  as  well  as  a  graceful  gait.  The  rest  of  the  in¬ 
habitants,  who  are  Moors,  and  the  richer  Gentoos,  are 


C 


18 


LORD  MINTO  IN  INDIA. 


[1807 


dressed  in  varions  degrees  and  fashions,  but  universally 
in  white  muslin,  and  mostly  robed  down  to  the  feet. 
From  that  fortunate  class  to  the  lowest  there  is  a 
reafular  o-radation  of  dishabille.  The  women  are  almost 

O  O 

universally  very  ugly.  They  certainly  have  none  of 
them  livers,  for  the  vertical  sun  makes  them  no  hotter 
than  it  makes  a  cucumber.  They  work  hard  in  his  very 
beams,  and,  when  they  may  rest,  lie  in  them  on  the 
baked  sand  even  when  shade  is  close  to  them. 

‘  The  Hindoos  are  all  marked  with  the  distinctive 
sign  of  their  castes.  These  are  painted  or  rather 
plastered  on  their  foreheads  with  chunam,  a  sort  of 
very  fine  plaster  lime,  for  which  Madras  is  famous.  It 
is  coloured  in  various  ways,  sometimes  gilt,  but  gene¬ 
rally  of  a  yellow  tint.  The  marks  consist  in  a  score 
or  several  scores  upon  the  forehead,  some  horizontal, 
some  vertical,  some  oblique,  according  to  the  caste.  A 
very  frequent  mark  is  a  round  patch  just  above  the 
nose.  They  all  perform  their  ablutions  every  morning 
before  they  eat.  The  marks  of  caste  are  therefore 
effaced.  They  breakfast  without  them  and  renew  them 
immediately  afterwards.  The  best  sort  wash  before 
each  meal,  morning  and  evening- — and  must  renew 
their  decorations  therefore  twice  a  day. 

‘  There  are  two  sorts  of  distinction  amongst  these 
people  on  perfectly  separate  principles,  but  both  exist¬ 
ing  together  in  their  full  force  ;  one,  as  in  the  rest 
of  the  world,  consists  in  the  difference  of  fortune  and 
power ;  the  other  takes  no  notice  of  these  vulgar  sources 
of  consideration,  but  sets  them  all  at  defiance,  and 


^T.  56] 


MADRAS. 


19 


maintains  itself  in  spite  of  all  worldly  vicissitudes. 
A  Brahmin  of  the  highest  caste  may  be  the  servant  or 
at  least  the  humble  dependant  of  a  man  of  an  inferior 
caste ;  but  the  master,  in  such  cases,  must  not  pre¬ 
sume  to  sit  down  or  to  eat  in  the  presence  of  his 
servant,  and  the  latter  would  think  himself  dishonoured 
by  being  even  looked  at  by  his  rich  superior  while 
cooking  his  rice. 

‘  All  Christians  and  other  pagans  are  classed  with  the 
lowest  or  Pariah  caste.  Sometimes  people  of  this  caste 
enlist  in  the  Sepoy  regiments,  and  Sir  John  Cradock, 
Knight  of  the  Bath  and  Commander-in-chief,  told  me 
that  a  Pariah  Sepoy  had  sometimes  come  to  him  for  a 
furlough  or  some  other  small  favour,  and  by  way  of 
recommending  himself  has  said,  “  Master  know  I  be 
Master’s  caste,”  and  I  daresay  has  paid  master  no  small 
compliment  by  acknowledging  him  even  for  a  Pariah. 

‘  A  thousand  whimsical  consequences,  and  ten  thou¬ 
sand  inconvenient,  often  ruinous,  restraints,  result 
from  these  original  but  firmly  established  institutions. 
One  great  convenience,  however,  of  these  singularities  I 
must  mention,  which  is  that  no  servant  is  fed  or  even 
lodges  in  the  house.  They  receive  so  much  money, 
and  very  little  it  is,  and  provide  for  themselves.  The 
coachmen  alone  wear  liveries,  and  they  are  dressed 
exactly  like  English  postilions ;  but,  as  soon  as  they 
leave  their  box,  they  strip  oflf  their  European  finery, 
and  walk  off  stark  naked  to  their  own  huts  and  dress 
their  rice,  and  have  no  more  to  do  with  you  till  the 
carriage  comes.  The  coachman  would  scorn  to  rub  his 


20 


LOED  MINTO  IN  INDIA. 


[1807 


horse  down,  and  the  horse-keeper  would  scorn  to  rub 
more  than  one  horse ;  hence  it  is  lucky  that  all  these 
gentlemen  have  no  religious  prejudice  against  low 
wages  :  eight  or  ten  shillings  a  month  pays  all  wages. 

‘  I  suppose  there  are  fifty  things  in  sight  and  hearing 
every  minute  that  would  amuse  you  in  description, 
but  my  eye  is  spoilt  already,  and  I  hardly  know  what  is 
strange  and  what  is  common. 

‘  I  have  told  you  very  little  about  the  Nabob  (of  the 
Carnatic),  although  no  day  passes  without  messengers 
from  him,  in  the  morning  to  enquire  how  I  slept,  and 
in  the  middle  of  the  day  to  present  a  gift  of  fruit  and 
flowers.  He  insists  on  my  seeing  these  messengers 
with  great  silver  sticks  and  returning  my  salaams  by 
them,  which  is  a  great  and  grievous  bore  twice  a  day. 
After  my  first  visit  he  sent  me  a  dinner  of  at  least  fifty 
dishes,  each  of  which  was  brought  on  the  head  of  a 
black  damsel.  This  feast  was  displayed  on  the  floor  of 
the  colonnade,  and  I  was  brought  forth  to  see  the  rich 
embroidered  covers  taken  off,  and  to  admire  the  cook- 
shop.  I  made  my  salaam,  and  the  repast  was  devoured 
by  Lord  William’s  body-guard.  This  present  of  a 
dinner  is  an  established  custom  in  the  East.  The 
Nabob  is  a  very  fat  black-bearded  person  about 
thirty.  At  my  first  visit  he  received  me  at  the  door  of 
my  coach,  having  bargained  that  I  should  do  the  like 
when  he  returned  my  visit.  He  embraced  me  as  soon 
as  I  was  out  of  the  coach  with  most  affectionate  hugs, 
saying  each  time,  “  How  d’ye  do,  Grov'ernor  General  ?  ” 


^T.  56] 


MADEAS. 


21 


This  I  thought  a  very  suitable  salutation  at  our  meet¬ 
ing,  but  it  seemed  less  neat  and  appropriate  at  my 
departure,  when,  at  the  coach  door,  he  repeated  the 
four  embraces  with  “  How  d’ye  do.  Governor  General  ?  ” 
four  times  again.  During  the  reception  he  sat  on  a 
sofa  in  a  great  hall,  in  which  was  also  the  musnud  or 
throne,  I  on  his  right.  Lord  William  on  his  left.  Then 
our  interpreter  made  us  mutually  happy  by  assurances 
of  each  other’s  perfect  health,  and  the  Nabob  returned 
thanks  to  God  for  the  health  of  the  King,  the  Queen, 
the  Prince  of  Wales,  all  the  Princes  and  Princesses, 
the  Court  of  Directors,  the  House  of  Peers,  and  all 
the  Members  of  the  House  of  Commons,  every  one  of 
whom  I  assured  him  I  had  left  in  the  most  blooming 
health.  We  were  then  still  more  deeply  affected  by 
our  extreme  attachment  for  each  other,  and  by  the 
singular  felicity  of  beholding  each  other’s  faces.  Many 
other  similar  affairs  of  state  were  transacted  between 
us,  and  when  the  painful  moment  for  parting  arrived. 
His  Highness  dropt  a  few  drops  of  attar  of  roses  on 
my  handkerchief,  then  sprinkled  me  profusely  all  over 
my  best  Vienna  embroidered  coat  with  rose-water,  say¬ 
ing  affectionately  that  he  knew  he  was  spoiling  my 
coat  (but  what  is  a  coat  to  the  effusions  of  friend¬ 
ship  ?).  Then  he  put  on  my  neck  a  garland  of  white 
flowers  ;  gave  me  two  packets  of  betel-nut  and  then 
two  roses.  After  which  Lord  William  and  all  my 
family  were  treated  in  the  same  manner,  and  we  re¬ 
tired.’ 

The  next  day  the  visit  was  returned,  and  on  the 


22 


LORD  MINTO  IN  INDIA. 


[1807 


following  one  the  Glovernor  General  was  entertained  at 
a  Nantch — of  which  festivity  he  was  quite  unworthy — ■ 
t  hinking  he  had  never  seen  such  a  collection  of  hideous 
women  in  his  life. 

‘  I  am  sorry  to  say  the  season  has  been  most  cala¬ 
mitous  here,  from  the  entire  failure  of  the  usual  mon¬ 
soon,  and  a  consequent  loss  of  the  crop.  A  sad  famine 
is  at  this  moment  desolating  several  extensive  dis¬ 
tricts  ;  •  •  .  thousands  of  country  people  have  swarmed 
into  Madras  in  quest  of  bread ;  thousands  are  em¬ 
ployed  on  public  works ;  to  thousands  who  can’t  work 
rice  is  distributed  gratis  daily,  by  a  public  subscription. 
But  some  arrive  too  late  and  too  much  exhausted, 
others  refrain  too  long  from  pride  or  scruples  from 
accepting  this  relief,  and  it  has  been  common  to  see 
famished  wretches  broug^ht  at  last  by  friends  to  the 
Choultry,  where  the  distribution  is  made,  expire  after 
the  first  mouthful  of  food  which  their  stomachs  could 
no  longer  receive  in  safety.  It  has  been  worse  in  the 
country.  ...  It  seems  hard  that  the  people  of  this 
country  should  experience  distress,  for  none  can  expe¬ 
rience  fewer  wants  ;  a  little  rice  is  literally  the  only 
necessary  of  life.  The  man  requires  no  clothes,  the 
woman  little  more.  Fuel  to  cook  their  rice  is  all  they 
want,  and  they  need  pay  no  house-rent,  for  their  habi¬ 
tations  are  huts  composed  of  a  few  mats  or  hurdles 
fastened  to  upright  stakes  about  four  feet  high,  and  a 
roof  of  as  light  timbers  thatched  with  large  leaves. 
These  hovels  can  be  run  up  in  an  hour,  and  are  erected 
along  the  sides  of  the  high  roads  or  in  any  corner  of 


JEt.  56] 


MADRAS. 


23 


waste  land  they  like.  The  wind  passes  through  them 
freely,  which  is  all  the  better ;  but  the  rain  enters 
with  as  little  ceremon}' ;  and  in  all  wet  weather  they 
must  go  out  of  their  houses  to  have  any  chance  of 
being  dry.  They  enjoy  the  hottest  sun  and  bask  in 
the  baked  dust  without  shelter  and  for  pleasure  at 
noon-day,  but  they  all  look  as  miserable  as  cats  in  a 
shower. 

‘  One  thing  I  have  forgotten  to  tell  you  of — the 
prickly  heat.  To  give  you  some  notion  of  its  intensity, 
the  placid  Lord  William  has  been  found  sprawling  on 
a  table  on  his  back  ;  and  Sir  Henry  Giwillin,  one  of 
the  Madras  judges,  who  is  a  Welshman  and  a  fiery 
llriton  in  all  senses,  was  discovered  by  a  visitor  rolling 
on  his  own  floor  roaring  like  a  baited  bidl.  Here  I 
must  close  the  iMadras  chapter.  I  have  been  writing 
down  to  July  19,  and  must  embark  to-morrow  morning.’ 

On  Lord  Minto’s  arrival  in  Calcutta  Sir  George 
Barlow  resumed  the  position  of  senior  member  of 
Council  vacated  by  him  while  holding  the  office  of 
Governor  General.  After  his  appointment  to  the 
Government  of  IMadras  which  took  place  a  few  weeks 
later,  Mr.  Lumsden,  an  experienced  public  servant, 
Mr.  Colebrooke,  ‘  a  man  of  extraordinary  talents  and 
extremely  agreeable  manners,’  and  General  Hewitt, 
Commander-in-chief,  constituted  the  Council,  in  which 
there  were  no  further  changes  during  Lord  jMinto’s 
administration.  Mr.  N.  B.  Edmonstone  filled  the 
post  of  Secretary  to  Government.  Sir  Edward  Pellew 


24 


LOED  MINTO  IN  INDIA. 


[1807 


— aftenvards  Lord  Exmoiitb — held  the  chief  naval 
command,  ‘  a  sailor  of  the  Nelson  school,’  and  there¬ 
fore  particularly  acceptable  to  the  Grovernor  General. 
Ijord  Minto  was  justified  in  saying  that  he  found 
‘  plenty  of  ability  in  all  departments.’ 

‘Calcutta;  July  ill,  1807.' 

‘  To  have  arrived  at  our  destination  and  all  well,  is 
so  material  a  step,  though  the  first  one  of  our  design, 
that  I  feel,  perhaps  more  than  I  ever  did  before,  grateful 
to  Providence  for  this  good  beginning.  ...  To  return 
to  the  fussifications  of  my  arrival  and  accession.  When 
I  found  myself  lost  from  my  cobbler’s  stall  in  Arlington 
Street,  seated  in  full  possession  of  this  noble  and  mag¬ 
nificent  marble  hall,  the  crowds  of  servants  and  attend¬ 
ants  bowing  round  me  in  all  the  forms  of  Eastern 
jirostration,  I  felt  a  little  like  Nell  awaking  in  Lady 
Loverrule’s  bed,  with  the  difference,  however,  that  it  is 
not  at  all  like  my  notions  of  Paradise.’ 

‘Calcutta:  September  15.* 

‘  Notwithstanding  the  awkward  situation  in  which 
Sir  G.  Barlow  and  I  are  placed  with  regard  to  each 
other,  I  find  no  unpleasant  consequences  result  from  it. 
.  .  .  His  good  sense  and  some  other  neutral  qualities 
in  his  character  have  enabled  him  to  act  the  part  he 
had  chosen  with  dignity  and  with  many  marks  of  real 
magnanimity.  His  good  properties  are  of  a  high  class. 


*  To  Lady  Minto. 


*  To  Hon.  Gilbert  Elliot. 


Air.  56] 


CALCUTTA. 


25 


A  real  attachment  to  his  public  duties,  and,  I  have 
every  reason  to  believe,  a  naturally  sincere  and  honour¬ 
able  character,  secure  his  best  advice  as  a  colleague. 
A  constitutional  coldness  and  apathy  of  temper,  which 
has  exposed  him  to  the  reproach  of  indifference  to  the 
interests  of  other  men,  and  has  enabled  him  to  discharge 
many  harsh  duties  pretty  inflexibly,  seems  at  the  same 
time  to  have  kept  his  personal  feelings  in  a  temperate 
state,  and  to  render  a  second  place  less  irksome  and 
irritating  than  it  would  be  to  niuety-niue  men  in  a 
hundred  who  had  filled  the  first.  He  acknowledges, 
also,  the  great  attention  and  delicacy  I  had  shown 
towards  his  feelings  from  the  beginning  of  the  contro¬ 
versy  concerning  his  office  to  the  present  time.  I 
have  omitted  nothing,  which  a  real  and  strong  feeling 
for  the  unpleasantness  of  his  situation  can  suggest,  to 
diminish  his  own  discomfort,  and  create  a  cordial  instead 
of  a  jealous  feeling  between  us. 

‘  The  situation  of  public  affairs  in  this  country  is 
particularly  favourable  to  the  circumstances  in  which  I 
am  placed.  There  is  in  reality  nothing  of  great  moment 
depending,  and  nothing  stirring  in  the  great  scale  of 
politics  on  which  I  should  desire  to  act  on  views  and 
principles  of  my  mvn,  rather  than  on  the  mere  expe¬ 
rience  and  familiarity  of  other  men  with  the  subject. 
I  have  time,  therefore,  to  form  my  views  at  leisure,  and 
to  acquire  a  little  familiarity  of  my  own  with  affairs 
before  I  need  make  free  with  them.  In  the  mean¬ 
while,  my  total  inexperience  iu  the  details  of  current 
business  makes  the  assistance  of  a  colleague  who  has 


26 


LORD  MINTO  IN  INDIA. 


[1807 


been  living  with  them  on  the  most  intimate  footing  all 
his  life  particnlarly  seasonable.  The  principal  griev¬ 
ance  I  have  to  complain  of  is  that  the  quantity  and 
quick  succession  of  current  business  is  such  as  to  em¬ 
ploy  every  instant  that  I  can  command  from  ceremony, 
and  the  interruption  of  private  solicitation,  without 
affording  any  time  for  reading  back,  or  looking 
forward,  and  acquiring  general  information.  .  .  .  The 
routine  is  this :  the  secretaries  in  the  different  depart¬ 
ments  send  in  circulation  to  me  and  the  members 
of  Council  the  despatches  they  have  received  since 
the  last  Council,  and  the  documents  relating  to  all 
business  which  arises  in  the  interval.  These  are  ex¬ 
tremely  voluminous,  and  would  require  pretty  nearly 
the  whole  interval  for  mere  perusal.  The  number  and 
variety  of  affairs  is  also  immense ;  for  everything,  small 
as  well  as  great,  must  have  the  sanction  of  Govern¬ 
ment,  and  instead  of  being  transacted  by  the  secre¬ 
taries,  as  in  England,  must  be  actually  stated,  and  the 
orders  given  in  Council.  A  declaration  of  war,  and  an  es¬ 
timate  for  an  addition  to  a  barrack  a  thousand  miles  off, 
may  come  next  to  each  other  in  the  secretaries’  bundle. 
You  may  conceive  the  loads  of  such  ware  which  such  a 
country  as  this  produces.  The  secretaries  attend  at 
Council,  each  department  in  its  turn  with  its  mountain 
of  bundles.  The  secretary  reads,  or  often  only  states 
shortly  the  substance  of  each  paper,  and  the  order  is 
given  on  the  spot.  We  are  enabled  to  do  this  by  having 
read  these  bundles  at  home.  Now,  our  secretaries  are 
all  modest  men,  who  scarcely  read  above  their  breath. 


^T.  56] 


CALCUTTA. 


27 


It  is  a  constant  strain  of  the  ear  to  hear  them  ;  the 
business  is  often  the  heaviest  and  dullest  kind,  the 
voices  monotonous,  and  as  one  small  concern  succeeds 
another,  the  punkah  vibrates  gently  over  my  eyes ;  and 
in  this  warm  atmosphere  the  whole  operation  has  been 
found  in  the  course  of  five  hours  somewhat  composing. 
It  is  often  a  vehement  struggle  to  avoid  a  delec¬ 
table  oblivious  wink.  But  if  the  sovereign  nods,  the 
empire  must  fall  to  pieces  ;  the  fear  of  which  has 
hitherto  kept  my  fond  eyelids  from  kissing  each  other, 
but  not  from  most  loving  dispositions.  However,  if  we 
nod  and  listen  mtich,  we  have  little  occasion  to  write. 
The  secretaries  reduce  all  our  orders  into  minutes  of 
Council,  letters,  instructions,  &c.,  and  the  different 
Boards  and  other  executive  officers  carry  the  measures 
agreed  upon  into  execution.  We  hold  two  Councils  a  I 
week — Monday  and  Friday.  We  meet  at  ten  and  sit  / 
till  three  or  four.  From  Friday  to  Tuesday  I  have  my 
levees,  audiences,  dinners,  and  other  personal  commu¬ 
nications,  besides  the  reading  of  papers  for  Council. 

‘  On  Monday  evening  I  go  to  Barrackpore,  and 
remain  there  till  Friday  morning,  when  I  return  at 
five  o’clock  a.m.  by  water  to  Calcutta,  and  am  there  soon 
after  seven.  This  division  of  the  week,  besides  making 
half  of  it  delicious,  is  of  real  advantage  to  business. 
At  Barrackpore  I  can  read,  and  really  do  so  the  livelong 
day. 

‘  I  can  perceive  nothing  yet  in  any  quarter  that 
indicates  a  spirit  of  party,  and  there  is  certainly  none 


28 


LOED  MINTO  IN  INDIA. 


[1807 


now  existing  that  leads  to  hostility  towards  me.  If 
8ir  Gr.  Barlow  had  been  a  very  popular  character,  the 
case  might  have  been  different ;  but  he  is  not  popular, 
and  I  believe  his  merits  may  have  been  the  cause  of  it, 
or  at  least  one  among  others.  In  truth,  a  Company’s 
servant  raised  to  the  commanding  height  above  his 
fellows  which  the  Giovernor  Greneral  holds  here,  excites 
envy  rather  than  respect  or  love.  They  are  all  com¬ 
paring  themselves  with  him,  and  their  own  preten¬ 
sions  with  his. 

‘  I  have  never  felt  anything  here  equal  to  the  heat 
of  Bastia  or  even  Vienna  in  summer.  These  are  the 
most  oppressive  and  most  unhealthy  weeks  in  the  year 
— the  end  of  September  and  beginning  of  October. 
Afterwards  come  four,  or  sometimes  five  delectable 
months.  Barrackpore  is  really  delicious,  and  takes  the 
sting  out  of  India.’ 


‘  Calcutta  :  September  20,  1807. ‘ 

‘  The  hours  and  occupations  of  Calcutta  seem  con¬ 
trived  to  exclude  women  from  society ;  and  I  hardly 
know  how  it  can  be  helped ;  for  in  order  to  have  any 
air  or  any  exercise  you  must  be  riding  or  driving  by 
five  in  the  morning.  This  makes  it  necessary  to  most 
of  us  that  we  should  be  in  bed  by  ten.  In  the  evening 
between  five  and  six,  everybody  is  out  again  to  get  a 
gasp,  by  which  means  it  is  difficult  to  dine  before  eight. 
The  only  way  of  seeing  ladies  that  I  have  discovered  is 


‘  To  Hon.  A.  M.  Elliot. 


Mt.  56] 


CALCUTTA. 


29 


at  table ;  the  moment  the  meal  is  swallowed  it  is  time 
to  part.  At  table  I  have  hitherto  been  allowed  but 
one  dish — namely  the  Burro  Bebee,  or  lady  of  the 
highest  rank,  and  to  her,  therefore,  I  am  wedded,  and 
care  is  taken  that  I  should  be  a  faithful  husband. 
Since  one  cannot  have  one’s  own  wife,  I  should  think  a 
little  variety  not  amiss.  Accordingly  I  am  laying  plans 
for  that  purpose,  and  have  begun  to  invite  small  do¬ 
mestic  sort  of  parties  to  dinner. 

‘  I  drive  out  almost  every  morning  and  evening. 
The  formality  of  these  airings  is  uncomfortable  to  me 
to  a  degree  that  I  cannot  at  all  accustom  myself  to. 
I  am  always  followed  by  an  officer  and  six  troopers 
of  the  body-guard.  These  cannot  be  dispensed  with. 
Four  syces  or  horse-keepers  with  fly-flajopers  ran  along¬ 
side  of  the  horses  till  I  positively  rebelled  against  this 
annoyance.  Everybody,  European  and  native,  salaams 
as  I  pass,  and  the  natives,  who  swarm,  draw  up  in  lines 
and  touch  the  ground  almost  with  their  heads.  The 
consequence  is  that  my  right  hand  is  never  away  from 
my  head.  I  have  had  thoughts  of  sticking  a  wax  hand 
in  my  hat.  It  is  still  worse  with  a  palanquin.  Thirty 
people  go  before  in  two  lines  which  extend  a  great  way 
forward.  They  carry  gold  and  silver  maces  and  hal¬ 
berds,  and  embroidered  fans,  and  cows’  tails  to  keep  the 
flies  off,  besides  two  orderly  Sepoys  and  two  troopers. 
All  these  run  on  foot  at  a  round  trot,  some  of  them 
proclaiming  my  titles ;  which,  as  the  proclamation  is 
rather  long,  I  imagine  must  be  Hindostanee  for  Grilbert 
Elliot,  Murray  of  Melgund,  and  Kynynmound  of  that  ilk. 


30 


LORD  MINTO  IN  INDIA. 


[1807 


The  worst  of  all  is  the  excessive  annoyance  at  home 
by  the  same  sort  of  crowd  and  incessant  entourage. 
The  first  night  I  went  to  bed  at  Calcutta  I  was  followed 
by  fourteen  persons  in  white  muslin  gowns  into  the 
dressing-room.  One  might  have  hoped  that  some  of 
them  were  ladies ;  but  on  finding  that  there  were  as 
many  turbans  and  black  beards  as  gowns,  I  was  very  de¬ 
sirous  that  these  bearded  handmaids  should  leave  me  to 
single  Tom,  which  with  some  trouble  and  perseverance 
I  accomplished,  and  in  that  one  room  I  enjoy  a  degree 
of  privacy,  but  far  from  perfect.  The  doors  are  open, 
the  partitions  are  open  or  transparent  also,  and  it  is  the 
business  of  a  certain  number  to  keep  an  eye  upon  me, 
and  see  if  I  want  the  particular  service  which  each  is 
allowed  by  his  caste  to  render  me.  It  is  the  same  in 
bed  ;  a  set  of  these  black  men  sleep  and  watch  all 
night  on  the  floor  of  the  passage,  and  an  orderly  man 
of  the  body-guard  mounts  guard  at  the  door  with 
Sepoys  in  almost  all  the  rooms,  and  at  all  the  stair¬ 
cases.  These  give  you  a  regular  military  salute  every 
time  you  stir  out  of  your  room  or  go  up  or  down  stairs, 
besides  four  or  five  with  maces  running  before  you.  I 
have  gradually  got  rid  of  this  troublesome  nonsense, 
but  enough  remains  and  must  remain  to  tease  me  and 
turn  comfort  out  of  doors.  As  to  John,  he  is  oriental¬ 
ised  already,  and  is  mighty  content  to  have  five  fellows 
attend  his  toilet ;  one  holds  a  glass  before  him,  one 
has  hold  of  his  foot,  another  of  his  knee,  his  hair,  his 
body.  I  have  a  barber  to  shave  me  and  a  hair-dresser. 
Tom  thought  he  ought  to  have  some  office  also ;  and 


^T.  56] 


BARRACKPORE. 


31 


after  the  man  had  dressed  my  hair  he  chose  to  tie  my 
cue,  till  I  prevailed  on  him  to  be  less  oriental,  and 
leave  the  care  of  my  cue  to  the  hairdresser.  I  have 
banished  as  much  of  this  as  possible  from  Barrackpore, 
and  we  are  more  comfortable  there  ;  but  after  all,  I 
believe  the  best  way  will  be  to  endure  what  it  is  im¬ 
possible  here  to  cure  entirely.  Barrackpore  surpasses  all 
my  expectations,  in  the  beauty  of  the  ground,  the 
beauty  of  the  situation,  and  the  comfort  of  its  ways, 
compared  to  Calcutta.  The  grounds  are  a  mixture  of 
park  and  pleasure-grounds.  They  are  laid  out  with 
the  greatest  judgment  and  taste,  and  their  extent 
is  very  considerable.  There  is  a  great  variety  of 
fine  timber  and  curious  ornamental  shrubs  and 
flowering  trees.  Pools  of  water  of  very  pretty  forms 
and  certain  inequalities  of  surface  have  been  artificially 
produced,  but  the  real  beauties  consist  in  the  rich 
verdure  which  covers  the  whole,  the  magnificent  tim¬ 
ber,  and  the  fine  river  which  forms  one  side  of  the 
place  from  end  to  end.  Although  it  is  a  tide  river, 
there  is  no  mud  on  the  sides  ;  the  grass  extends  to  low 
watermark.  The  breadth  of  the  Ganges  here  is  suffi¬ 
cient  for  grandeur,  and  not  too  much  for  beauty.  It 
is  all  alive  with  a  brisk  navigation  of  boats  and  vessels 
of  different  build  and  dimensions,  and  all  of  the  most 
picturesque  forms  and  fashions.  The  present  house  is 
what  is  called  a  bungalow  or  cottage,  and  was  intended 
only  as  a  makeshift  while  the  great  house  was  erecting. 
It  is  a  cottage,  indeed,  but  a  very  considerable  building 
compared  with  the  European  scale.  The  bungalow 


32 


LOED  MINTO  IN  INDIA. 


[1807 


was  originally  composed  of  three  large  rooms,  which 
opened  into  a  verandah  surrounding  the  whole.  Sir 
George  Barlow,  by  converting  each  corner  of  the 
verandah  into  a  small  room,  has  greatly  improved  the 
comfort  of  the  house.  The  verandah  next  the  room  is 
a  charming  apartment.  It  affords  a  long,  shaded,  airy 
walk  with  a  most  beautiful  prospect,  and  we  find  it  an 
excellent  eating-room.  It  is  within  forty  or  fifty  paces 
of  the  water’s  edge. 

‘  Besides  this  principal  bungalow  there  are  a  number 
of  smaller  ones  like  neat  Swiss  cottages  scattered  about 
the  lawn.  These  afford  accommodation  for  aide-de¬ 
camps,  guests,  &c.,  &c.  A  better  and  more  regular 
house  will  certainly  be  proper.  Such  an  one  there 
was,  but  it  was  pulled  down  to  make  room  for  the  pro¬ 
jected  palace,  of  which  the  ground-floor  walls  are 
finished.  It  would  have  been  magnificent,  I  have  no 
doubt,  but  in  perfect  contradiction  with  every  purpose 
of  the  place.  It  would  have  been  to  come  from  Cal¬ 
cutta  to  Calcutta  again  ;  and  you  must  have  had  the 
same  multitude  of  troublesome  attendants,  and  have 
lived  the  same  full-dress,  intolerable  life  at  your  country 
house  as  in  town.  I  am  extremely  glad  it  has  been 
stopped,  and  am  selling  off  the  materials  which  had 
been  laid  in,  hoping  there  will  be  no  change  in  my 
time.  The  road  from  Calcutta  to  Barrackpore  is  beau¬ 
tiful  the  whole  way.  The  Danish  town  of  Serampore, 
immediately  opposite  to  these  windows,  is  extremely 
ornamental,  the  river  not  appearing  much  wider  than 
the  Thames  at  Westminster,  though  it  is  considerably 


^T.  56] 


CHANGE  OF  ADMINISTEATION. 


33 


broader.  But  the  clearness  of  the  atmosphere  and  the 
strong  light  make  all  objects  seem  near.  We  have  a 
cantonment  of  two  or  three  thousand  native  troops 
close  to  us,  and  that,  also,  is  very  ornamental,  though  it 
may  not  sound  so.  But  the  officers’  bungalows,  ranged 
along  the  banks  of  the  river,  are  extremely  pretty, 
and  the  men’s  huts  have  the  picturesque  character 
of  all  the  cottages  of  this  country.  The  men  them¬ 
selves  are  still  more  ornamental.  I  never  saw  so 
handsome  a  race.  They  are  much  superior  to  the 
Madras  people,  whose  forms  I  admired  also.  Those 
were  slender ;  these  are  tall,  muscular,  athletic  figures, 
perfectly  shaped,  and  with  the  finest  possible  cast  of 
countenance  and  features.  Their  features  are  of  the 
most  classical  European  models,  with  great  variety  at 
the  same  time ;  but  the  females  seem  still  as  hideous 
as  at  Madras,  and  one  cannot  conceive  that  they  should 
be  the  mothers  of  such  handsome  sons.’ 

The  first  fleet  that  came  out  from  England  after  Lord 
Minto’s  arrival  at  Calcutta  brought  the  unexpected 
news  of  a  change  of  Administration.  Though  it  was 
known  that  Ministers  had  encountered  considerable 
difficulty  in  proceeding  with  the  Catholic  Bill  as  it 
was  called  (a  measure  to  enable  Konian  Catholics  to 
serve  in  the  Army  and  Navy  with  no  other  condition 
than  that  of  taking  an  oath  of  allegiance '),  the  world  was 

’  The  bill,  though  intended  chiefly  for  the  benefit  of  the 
Catholics,  extended  the  proposed  concession  to  persons  of  every 
religious  persuasion. 

n 


34 


LOED  MINTO  IN  INDIA. 


[1807 


completely  taken  by  surprise  when  it  was  announced 
that,  in  consequence  of  the  irreconcilable  nature  of  tlie 
views  entertained  by  the  King  and  his  Ministers  as  to 
their  constitutional  duty  on  the  matter  in  question, 
Lord  Grenville  and  his  colleagues  had  been  dismissed. 
'In  the  course  of  the  Parliamentary  debates  which 
ensued  it  became  known  that  the  King,  not  content 
with  the  consent  of  IMinisters  to  withdraw  the  objec¬ 
tionable  Bill,  had  required  from  them  a  written  pledge 
that  they  would  never  again  propose  further  concessions 
to  the  Catholics.  This  pledge  they  refused  to  give, 
and  immediately  received  their  dismissal  from  the  King, 
who  desired  the  Duke  of  Portland  and  Mr.  Perceval  to 
form  a  new  Administration. 

The  Duke  was  the  nominal  chief  of  the  new  Cabinet. 
Its  chief  members  were  Lord  Camden,  President  of  the 
Council ;  Lord  Eldon,  Chancellor ;  Lord  Hawkesbury, 
Home  Secretary;  Mr.  Canning,  Foreign  Secretary; 
Lord  Castlereagh,  War  and  Colonial  Secretary;  ]\Ir. 
Perceval,  Chancellor  of  the  Exchequer ;  Mr.  Eobert 
Dundas,  President  of  the  Board  of  Control. 

The  new  Ministers  took  their  seats  on  April  8.  On 
April  16  Lord  Grenville  addressed  the  following  letter 
to  Lord  Minto  : — 


‘  Downing  Street:  April  16,  1807. 

‘  You  will  hear  from  other  quarters  of  the  sudden 
revolution  which  has  taken  place  in  the  political  situa¬ 
tion  of  your  friends  here.  I  have  little  doubt  that 
you  will  entirely  agree  in  the  propriety  of  the  conduct 


^T.  56]  COERESPONDENCE  WITH  LORD  GRENVILLE.  35 

which  they  have  held  throughout  the  whole  of  a  very 
difficult  and  delicate  business,  in  which  the  most  un¬ 
fair  advantages  have  been  taken  of  them,  and  a  spirit 
of  low  underhand  intrigue  employed  against  them, 
such  as  I  am  sure  you  had  much  rather  see  them  the 
victims  of,  than  think  it  possible  for  them  to  have 
counteracted  by  similar  means. 

‘  I  remember  nothing  that  I  have  thought  more 
profligate  than  the  attempt  to  excite  in  this  country  a 
spirit  of  religious  dissent  at  a  time  when  we  have  so 
much  need  of  showing  ourselves  as  an  united  people. 
Without  giving  to  our  opponents  too  much  credit  for 
talents  which  they  certainly  do  not  collectively  possess, 
it  is,  however,  difficult  to  think  so  meanly  of  their 
understandings  as  to  believe  that  they  really  are 
themselves  impressed  with  any  belief  of  the  dangers  to 
the  church  establishment  of  this  country  from  enact¬ 
ing  the  same  laws  here  which  have  for  fourteen  years 
been  in  force  in  Ireland,*  or  from  extending  those  laws 
in  so  far  as  was  necessary  to  reconcile  them  to  common 
sense.  All  this  you  will,  I  am  sure,  feel  as  strongly  as 
I  could  express  it,  and  I  need  not  therefore  dwell  upon 
it.  To  a  Grovernment  formed  by  a  Court  intrigue  and 
resting  for  its  support  on  an  hypocritical  attempt  to 

'  By  a  law  passed  in  the  Parliament  of  Ireland  in  1793,  Catholics 
■were  allowed  to  hold  commissions  in  the  army  in  Ireland,  and  to 
attain  to  any  rank  save  that  of  Commander-in-chief  of  the  forces, 
master-general  of  the  Ordnance,  or  General  on  the  Staff.  The 
measure  proposed  by  Lord  Grenville’s  Ministry  in  1807  extended 
to  the  Catholics  of  England  the  privileges  already  conceded  to  their 
Irish  brethren  and  removed  the  restrictions  enforced  by  the  Act  of 
1793, 

n  2 


36 


LOKD  MINTO  IN  INDIA. 


[1807 


excite  a  popular  clamour  in  favour  of  religious  interests 
which  no  man  of  sense  can  believe  in  any  danger,  no 
sentiments  can  exist  in  my  mind  but  those  of  decided 
hostility.  Nor  do  I  think  yonr  own  feelings  on  this 
point  can  be  at  all  different  from  mine.  You  will  hear 
that  the  Directors  have  recalled  Lord  William  Bentinck 
from  Madras ;  a  great  disappointment  as  I  believe  to 
those  who  meant  that  he  should  have  immediately 
superseded  you  in  Bengal.  With  respect  to  your  own 
conduct,  I  know  you  will  allow  me  to  speak  to  you 
with  the  utmost  plainness  and  sincerity.  I  am  far 
from  feeling  that  I  have  any  claim  upon  you  in  such  a 
circumstance,  nor,  if  I  had,  should  I  feel  the  slightest 
wish  to  use  that  claim  for  the  purpose  of  influencing 
in  the  least  degree  the  decision  you  may  take  about 
yourself.  If  you  think  on  a  deliberate  review  of  the 
state  of  things  at  home  and  abroad  that  you  can  remain 
where  you  are  with  advantage  to  the  public  and  with 
satisfaction  to  yourself,  be  assured  that  I  speak  quite 
sincerely  when  I  say  that  I  have  no  wish  that  you 
should  act  otherwise,  and  that  on  the  contrary  I  shall 
feel  sincere  pleasme  in  thinking  that  one  part  at  least, 
and  that  not  the  least  important,  of  the  interests  of 
the  country  is  in  hands  to  which  one  can  look  with 
confidence  and  satisfaction ;  and  that  neither  our 
private  friendship  nor  the  sentiments  I  entertain 
towards  you  as  a  public  man  will  suffer  the  smallest 
diminution  from  your  continuing  to  hold  your  office 
under  the  auspices  of  persons  of  whose  conduct  I  think 


Mr.  56]  COERESPONDENCE  WITH  LORD  GRENVILLE.  37 

SO  ill.  I  hope  therefore  you  will  judge  for  yourself, 
and  whatever  your  decision  is,  I  beg  you  to  be  persuaded 
that  I  shall  think  it  right,  because  it  depends  in  part 
on  circumstances  of  which  you  alone  can  judge — I 
mean  the  assurances  of  support  which  you  may  receive 
from  the  new  Ministers,  and  the  degree  of  credit  which 
you  may  attach  to  their  assm*ances.  If  your  resolution 
should  be  to  send  a  resignation,  let  me  then  suggest 
the  propriety  of  your  enclosing  it  to  Elliot  *  with  dis¬ 
cretionary  powers  as  to  making  use  of  it.  This  is  not 
said  because  I  believe  much  in  the  expectation  which 
some  entertain  of  another  change  taking  place  before 
long.  I  have  seen  enough  of  the  politics  of  this 
country  to  know  how  very  long  a  very  weak  and  in¬ 
efficient  Government  may  maintain  itself,  if  it  has 
the  Court  favour  with  it,  and  is  willing  to  make  large 
sacrifices  and  compliances  in  order  to  retain  that  favour. 
And  that  this  is  the  case  in  the  present  instance  I 
believe  no  man  doubts.’ 

In  a  letter  of  later  date.  Lord  Grenville  reiterated 
his  earnest  hope  that  Lord  Minto  would  take  no  deter¬ 
mination  to  resign  except  with  the  advice  of  his  friends 
in  England. 

Neither  of  these  letters  reached  him  until  he  had 
adopted  and  acted  upon  a  course  similar  to  that  indi¬ 
cated  by  Lord  Grenville.  He  sent  to  his  son  a  condi¬ 
tional  resignation  to  be  used  or  not,  according  to  the 
judgment  of  his  friends,  and  left  it  to  the  Ministry 

’  Right  Hon.  William  Elliot  of  Wells. 


38 


LORD  MINTO  IN  INDIA. 


[1807 


and  the  Court  of  Directors  to  decide  whether  or  no  the 
appointment  of  Grovernor  Greneral  of  India  should 
henceforth  be  considered  as  one  of  those  dependent  on 
the  change  of  parties  at  home.  In  his  letter  to  his 
son  he  said  : — 

‘  On  public  grounds  I  am  sure  that  this  distant 
Government  ought  not  to  change  with  every  turn  in 
domestic  politics.  The  contrary  principle  would  be 
productive  of  the  greatest  evil,  and  possibly  danger,  in 
India. 

‘  When  the  political  connexion  of  a  Governor 
General  with  parties  at  home  is  found  to  divert  him 
from  the  duties  of  his  office  it  is  time  enough  to 
remove  him.  On  the  question  of  adherence  to  political 
and  personal  connexion,  I  cannot  think  this  office  at 
all  implicated  in  those  considerations ;  but  I  hold  that 
point  as  so  sacred  that,  if  there  is  a  difference  of 
opinion,  or  the  slightest  feeling  on  the  subject  among 
my  friends  at  home,  I  hereby  authorise  you  to  resign 
for  me.  For  I  will  not  place  myself  or  consent  to 
stand  upon  doubtful  ground  in  that  respect.  I  received 
my  office  at  the  recommendation  of  Lord  Grenville,  in 
very  peculiar  circumstances,  from  the  Court  of  Directors. 
It  was  not  solicited  ;  it  was  to  me  a  real  sacrifice  of 
many  things  that  are  dear  to  me.  It  was  a  public  ac¬ 
commodation  at  the  time,  and  was  generally  gratifying 
to  Government,  to  the  Directors,  and  to  the  public.  If 
I  retain  it,  I  shall  not  hold  it  of  the  favour  or  good 
^vill  of  the  present  Ministers ;  and,  remaining  subject 
to  all  its  public  duties  just  as  before,  I  contract  no  new 


^T.  56]  COERESPONDENCE  WITH  LORD  GRENVILLE.  39 

political  obligations,  form  no  new  party  engagement  or 
connexion.’ 

The  next  fleet  brought  the  confirmation  of  Lord 
IVIinto’s  powers  from  the  new  Ministers,  coupled  with  ex¬ 
pressions  of  an  earnest  desire  that  he  should  continue  to 
administer  the  government  of  India,  and  a  number  of 
private  letters  from  Windham  and  others  urging  him 
to  remain  in  India.  To  Lord  Grenville  he  replied  : 

‘  Calcutta ;  October  10,  1807. 

‘  My  dear  Lord, — I  feel  most  sensibly  the  kindness 
of  your  letter  of  April  16,  which  I  have  just  received. 

‘  My  sentiments  on  the  scene  that  was  then  passing 

in  England  are  precisely  the  same  as  your  own . 

The  Ministry  which  has  succeeded  you  has  built  not  on 
sand  but  on  dirt,  which  is  a  less  stable  foundation  still.  . 
...  I  need  hardly  say  that  I  have  thought  much  and 
deeply  on  the  part  which  it  becomes  me  to  act  on  the 
present  occasion.  My  first  consideration  was  what 
political  connexion,  cemented  by  personal  attachment, 
required  or  suggested.  If  I  had  entertained  even  a 
doubt  upon  that  subject  I  should  have  considered  that 
doubt  as  amounting  to  a  decision,  and  I  should  have 
arrived  in  England  by  the  ship  which  will  carry  this 
letter.  But  my  judgment  on  that  point  was  clear  and 
immediate.  To  continue  in  the  exercise  of  this  office, 
distinguished  as  it  is  in  so  many  essential  points  from 
any  other  in  the  Empire,  holding  my  appointment  by 
your  express  nomination  and  by  the  authority  of  the 


40 


LOED  MINTO  IN  INDIA. 


[1807 


Court  of  Directors,  and  deriving  no  new  title  from  your 
successors  that  can  either  dissolve  or  weaken  former 
connexion  or  create  a  new  one,  appears  to  me  entirely 
free  from  any  indication  of  separation  from  friends, 
and  every  profession  of  party  connexion  with  those  who 
are  not  so. 

‘  I  had  determined,  however,  that  there  should  be 
nothing  questionable  on  that  point,  and  accordingly 
I  instructed  my  son  to  resign  for  me  if  there  should 
be  even  a  difference  of  opinion  or  of  feeling  upon  it, 
amonp'st  those  to  whom  I  am  in  heart  as  well  as  in 

O 

opinion  indissolubly  attached.  Your  letter  confirms 
my  own  judgment  on  this  point,  for  I  am  persuaded 
you  would  not  have  contributed  in  any  degree  to  the 
chance  of  subjecting  me  to  a  reproach  so  intolerable  as 
that  of  preferring  office  to  honour,  if  that  delicate 
point  had  appeared  to  you  involved  in  the  question. 

‘  My  opinion,  and  I  presume  the  universal  opinion, 
is  that  frequent  and  light  changes  in  the  local  Grovem- 
ment  of  India  are  extremely  hurtful  to  the  interests 
of  this  country.  ...  If  the  Ministers  have  the  same 
sense  of  their  public  duties  that  I  have  of  mine,  the 
service  will  suffer  no  prejudice  from  the  want  of  political 
connexion  or  even  of  personal  cordiality  between  us. 

‘  If  I  find  a  want  of  support  and  confidence  really 
detrimental  to  the  interests  I  am  charged  with,  and 
if  I  see  reason  to  apprehend  misconstruction  of  my 
conduct  dangerous  to  my  reputation,  in  either  case 
the  remedy  is  in  my  own  hands.  I  shall  not  suffer  in 


Mt.  56]  COEEESPONDENCE  WITH  LOED  GEENVILLE.  41 

the  meanwhile  prudential  considerations  to  weaken  or 
cramp  my  exertions  for  the  public  service,  but  I  may 
be  a  little  more  careful  to  preserve  the  means  and 
documents  of  my  own  justification.’ 

This  letter  produced  the  following  very  hearty  one 
from  Lord  Grenville  : — 


‘  Dropmore :  May  24,  1808. 

‘  ]My  dear  Lord, — I  cannot  express  to  you  the  satis¬ 
faction  which  I  derived  from  your  letter  of  October  10, 
the  only  one  I  have  yet  received  from  you  since  your 
arrival  in  Bengal.  I  had  no  doubt  that  your  opinions 
would  entirely  coincide  with  those  of  your  friends 
here,  both  as  to  the  general  question  which  has  for  the 
second  time  placed  me  at  a  distance  from  the  public 
service  of  my  country,  and  as  to  the  particular  measures 
which  we  adopted  under  the  singular  circumstances 
in  which  we  were  placed  last  year.  The  infatuation 
which  still  prevents  the  adoption  of  conciliatory  mea¬ 
sures  towards  the  mass  of  the  Irish  nation,  and  keeps 
that  island  exposed  to  the  double  peril  of  civil  war  and 
foreign  invasion,  is  indeed  deeply  to  be  lamented,  nor 
is  there  any  other  quarter  in  which  our  prospects, 
alarming  as  they  are  on  every  side,  are  so  gloomy  as 
they  are  in  respect  to  Ireland.  But  I  should  have  still 
more  dejdored  this  calamity  if  it  had  indirectly  led  to 
depriving  us  in  India  of  the  advantage  of  your  energy 
and  abilities  at  a  moment  when  they  are  likely  to  be 
so  much  wanted  there.  All  my  correspondence  will,  I 
trust,  have  sho\vn  you  that,  in  taking  the  resolution  of 


42 


LOED  MINTO  IN  INDIA. 


[1807 


remaining  there  in  the  discharge  of  the  duties  of  your 
most  important  station,  you  have  done  that  which  on 
every  public  and  private  ground  is  most  agreeable  to 
my  wishes.  But  even  if  you  had  been  led,  from  what¬ 
ever  motive,  to  have  adopted  in  the  first  instance  any 
different  resolution,  you  would,  I  am  confident,  have 
altered  your  sentiments  in  that  respect  as  soon  as  you 
learnt  the  danger  to  which  it  seems  likely  that  our 
Indian  Empire  is  soon  to  be  exposed.  As  I  have  no 
means  in  my  present  situation  to  learn  with  any  detail 
the  information  or  opinions  of  Giovernment  on  that 
subject  (and  indeed  keep  myself  studiously  at  a  dis¬ 
tance  from  both),  I  speak  only  of  what  is  publicly 
known.  It  is  impossible  to  be  without  apprehension 
on  a  matter  of  such  vital  importance  to  the  country, 
but  I  have  great  comfort  in  reflecting  on  the  means  of 
resistance  which  you  possess,  and  on  the  decision  and 
ability  with  which  I  am  certain  those  means  will  be 
employed  by  you.  I  wish  I  could  say  or  think  the 
same  of  this  country,  but  I  verily  believe  I  do  not 
speak  from  party  feelings  when  I  declare  that  no 
nation  was  in  my  judgment  ever  governed  by  councils 
more  deficient  in  every  principle  of  true  wisdom,  or  by 
men  more  bent  on  sacrificing  to  personal  motives  all 
those  considerations  by  which  the  conduct  of  a  Govern¬ 
ment  ought  to  be  directed.  What  the  issue  of  the 
strange  scenes  now  passing  is  ultimately  to  be  no 
man  can  pretend  to  prophesy,  but  it  is  difficult  even 
for  the  most  sanguine  mind  (and  mine  is  not  a  little  so) 
to  augur  good  from  them  to  this  country ;  and  if  evil 


^T.  56]  LADY  MALMESBUEY’S  LETTERS. 


43 


is  to  come  the  best  consolation  that  can  attend  it  will 
be  the  reflection  of  not  having  contributed  to  it. 

‘  With  my  best  and  most  earnest  wishes  for  your 
health  and  prosperity, 

‘  Believe  me  ever,  most  sincerely  and  faithfully 
yours, 

‘  GrRENVILLE.’ 

In  one  of  Lady  Malmesbury’s  letters  of  this 
period,  addressed  to  her  sister  at  Minto,  she  advised 
her,  ‘  to  collect  and  arrange  all  her  old  letters,  for 
there  is  nothing  so  ciu"ious.  To  consider  letters  as 
the  true  history  of  the  times  you  should  have  them 
on  both  sides  of  the  question,  for  we  know  how  dif¬ 
ferent  is  a  story  told  by  different  people.  Letters 
are  more  the  account  of  prejudices  and  parties  than 
the  truth,  but  it  is  that  very  circumstance  that 
makes  them  so  amusing,  as  they  give  the  history 
of  the  passions  instead  of  passing  judgment  upon 
them.’ 

The  contrast  between  her  version  of  the  circum¬ 
stances  that  led  to  the  dismissal  of  Ministers  in  1807, 
and  that  given  by  Lord  Grenville,  forms  a  most  apt 
illustration  of  her  remark. 

While  his  letters  show  a  natural  resentment  of  the 
unworthy  methods  by  which  his  Administration  had 
been  undermined,  she  saw  nothing  but  folly  and  ob¬ 
stinacy  in  an  attempt  to  uphold  principles  against 
prejudices. 

‘Your  surprise  will  be  equal  to  our  own,’  she  wrote 


44 


LOED  MINTO  IN  INDIA. 


[1807 


to  Lord  JMinto,  ‘  when  you  learn  the  great  and  wonder¬ 
ful  events  which  have  been  happening  at  home.  To 
account  for  (what  I  must  call  it)  the  infatuation  of 
Lord  Grenville,  in  bringing  forward  again  a  measure 
of  which  he  could  less  than  any  man  hope  for  the 
success  after  the  experience  he  had  had  on  the  sub¬ 
ject,  is  impossible.  Both  he  and  Lord  Howick  have 
admitted  that,  previous  to  this  business,  all  went  on 
smoothly  between  the  King  and  them.  But  even  ad¬ 
mitting  (what  I  do  not  at  all  believe)  that  he  wished 
them  away,  how  very  strange  to  give  him  the  only 
means  that  could  not  fail  ?  It  is  truly  what  Sheridan 
said,  “  they  built  a  wall  against  which  they  might  run 
their  heads,  and  took  care  to  secure  it  by  making  it  of 
the  strongest  materials.”  ’ 

Only  a  few  days  before  the  Ministers  went  out,  she 
had  met  most  of  their  successors  at  Blackheath,  at  a 
dinner  given  by  the  Princess  of  Wales.  The  devotion 
of  Lord  Eldon  and  Mr.  Perceval  to  her  cause  had  long 
since  obtained  for  them  special  favour  in  the  eyes  of 
Lady  Malmesbury.  On  this  occasion  she  described 
Lord  Eldon  as  particularly  agreeable,  and  he  had 
assured  her  that  ‘  he  would  not  take  office  if  he  could.’ 
Le  jpauvre  homme!  Within  a  week  it  was  thrust 
upon  him,  and  Lady  Malmesbury  -wrote  to  her  sister 
with  some  little  bewilderment : — ‘  The  Prince,  who  was 
supposed  to  hate  Lord  Eldon  and  Mr.  Perceval,  as 
friends  of  his  wife,  appears  to  be  very  well  pleased 
with  the  arrangement.  He  is  all  sweetness  about  it. 
This  I  think  proves  he  is  dying,  but  they  do  say  that 


^T.  56]  LADY  MALMESBURY’S  LETTERS. 


45 


the  Catholics  in  Ireland  have  been  praying  for  Mrs. 
Fitzherbert.  Nobody  is  pleased  except  Lady  Gren¬ 
ville,  who  is  delighted  to  escape  from  London  politics 
to  her  garden  at  Dropmore.’ 

For  a  time  a  more  than  common  bitterness  was 
infused  into  the  relations  of  politicians.  The  Whigs, 
whether  Grenvillites  or  Foxites,  were  bound  together  by 
a  principle  and  a  prejudice.  They  believed  in  the 
justice  of  the  Catholic  claims,  and  they  thoroughly 
mistrusted  Canning ;  their  opponents  asserted  that  the 
safety  of  Protestantism  depended  on  the  King  and 
Lord  Eldon,  and  that  the  mantle  of  Pitt  had  fallen  on 
the  shoulders  of  Canning. 

Even  the  correspondence  interchanged  between 
Spring  Gardens  and  Minto  assumed  a  sharper  tone 
than  was  usual.  ‘  You  are  outrageous,’  wrote  Lady 
Malmesbury  to  her  sister,  in  reply  to  a  letter  brim¬ 
ming  over  with  indignation  at  the  treatment  received 
by  the  dismissed  INIinisters,  and  at  the  loss  of  the 
cause  they  had  espoused.  ‘  You  are  almost  as  bad  as 
INIrs.  Neville,  who  called  my  friends  “  your  fellows,”  to 
my  face  !  ’ 

Some  of  Lady  IMalmesbury’s  most  intimate  friends 
had  come  into  power.  Mr.  Canning  had  taken 
the  seals  of  the  Foreign  Office  ;  her  son.  Lord  Fitz- 
harris,  held  the  appointment  of  Lbider  Secretary  for 
Foreign  Affairs ;  Lord  Palmerston,  whose  footing  in 
the  iNIalmesbury  family  was  almost  that  of  a  son,  was 
in  the  Government ;  and  Lady  INIalmesbury  was  not 
the  woman  to  abstain  from  praise  of  her  friends  lest 


46 


LOED  MINTO  IN  INDIA. 


[1807 


it  stould  displease  her  opponents,  nor  did  she  conde¬ 
scend  to  the  indifferentism  which  is  content  to  say : 

Tel  sera  mon  hfiros  et  tel  sera  le  votre  ; 

L’aigle  d’nne  maison  est  un  sot  dans  une  autre. 

‘  No  Foreign  Secretary,’  she  wrote  to  Lord  Minto, 
‘has  been  equal  to  Canning — unless  perhaps  Fox.  In 
these  times  when  the  fate  of  Europe  depends  on  the 
Foreign  Office  in  Downing  Street,  the  labour  is  beyond 
belief ;  and  when  you  add  to  this  the  House  of  Com¬ 
mons,  and  being  up  in  that  vile  place  till  two  or  three 
o’clock  every  night,  no  constitution  can  stand  it.  In¬ 
deed  Canning  is  quite  knocked  up,  for  to  bodily  fatigue 
anxiety  of  mind  must  be  added,  which  you  by  experi¬ 
ence  will  know  how  to  appreciate ;  and  Canning  is 
naturally  of  a  most  anxious  nature  and  not  blessed 
with  the  impassibilite  of  a  Grenville.  Although  in 
the  opposite  party,  I  am  sure  you  have  la  chose  puh- 
lique  too  much  at  heart  not  to  rejoice  that,  in  the 
opinion  of  the  very  best  judges,  his  talents  and  judg¬ 
ment  have  far  surpassed  even  the  expectation  of  his 
friends,  and  that  all  that  can  be  done  will  be  done  ; 
but  certainly  we  never  stood  more  alone.  I  think  this 
an  advantage,  as  we  never  yet  have  gained  anything 
from  our  Continental  alliances,  and  have  lost  a  great 
deal  often  and  many  times.  All  our  resources  will 
now  be  applied  to  our  own  use,  and  as  Eamsay  said 
yesterday,  “We  can  make  war  as  well — and  peace 
much  better.”  I  am  glad  to  see  they  have  left  off 
their  childish  quarrels  in  the  House  of  Commons. 
All  the  boys  now  think  they  have  a  right  to  speak  and 


vEt.  56]  LADY  MALMESBUKY’S  LETTERS. 


47 


discuss  and  decide,  and  the  two  schoolmasters  who 
fell  upon  them  with  their  rods  and  chastised  them 
well,  being  dead  and  gone,  they  run  riot  like  any  other 
schoolboys.’ 

Some  natural  rejoicing  at  Minto  over  the  success 
of  Lord  Milton,  the  Whig  candidate  for  the  'W’^est 
Riding,  brought  down  upon  them  the  following  cold 
water  douche.  ‘  You  have  heard  of  Milton’s  success 
against  Lascelles.  I  hear  there  is  to  he  a  petition. 
All  his  adherents  have  flared  about  London  in  their 
orange  colours.  It  is  curious  enough  that  this  is  the 
true  Anti-Catholic  colour;  the  old  King-William  badge 
against  popery.  Many  of  them,  amongst  the  rest  the 
Cavendishes,  had  the  good  taste  to  go  to  the  Duke  of 
Portland’s  ball  all  over  their  cockades,  and  somebody 
said  they  looked  as  if  they  had  stopped  at  his  stables 
and  taken  his  horses’  accoutrements.  These  are  true 
English  manners.’ 

M’'e  fear  she  must  have  thought  Scotch  prin¬ 
ciples  even  more  olijectionable  than  English  man¬ 
ners,  when  in  her  next  letter  to  Lord  Minto,  after 
congratulating  him  on  the  birth  of  his  first  grandson, 
she  asserted  that  she  had  only  consented  to  become 
his  godmother  on  receiving  a  petition  from  the  infant 
himself  complaining  of  the  hardship  of  his  case.  ‘His 
mother  a  Presbyterian,  his  father  he  could  not  tell 
what,  but  he  was  always  talking  about  Catholics  with 
a  tall  thin  gentleman  supposed  to  be  an  Irish  Jesuit — 
I  consented  to  undertake  the  charge  upon  sole  condi¬ 
tion  he  was  christened  IMartin  Luther,  which  I  think 


48 


LOED  MINTO  IN  INDIA. 


[1807 


must  secure  him  from  all  principles  of  emancipation. 
I  trust  I  shall  have  the  satisfaction  of  seeing  him  burn 
all  his  family  in  Smithfield  some  future  day.’ 

The  ‘  Irish  Jesuit’  was  no  other  than  her  old  friend 
]\Ir.  Elliot  of  Wells — ‘  Dominie  ’  as  she  herself  had 
named  him — who  after  the  recess  had  escaped  from 
London  to  join  his  relations  at  JNIinto  in  ‘making  love 
to  the  rocks  and  glens,  and  preferring  the  notes  of 
blackbirds,  thrushes,  and  cushat-doos,  to  all  the  Cata- 
lanis  and  Billingtons  in  Europe ;  ’  and  if  he  were  a 
little  tired  of  the  House  of  Commons,  ‘  was  it  wonder¬ 
ful  for  anybody  who  had  outlived  a  Burke,  a  Pitt,  and 
a  Fox  ?  .  .  .  besides  it  has  fallen  into  a  sad  snarling 
sort  of  style.’ 

‘  Wood-pigeons. 

‘  And  the  deep  mellow  crush  of  the  wood-pigeon’s  note 
Made  music  that  sweeten’d  the  calm.’ — Campbell. 


JEt.  56J 


STATE  OF  INDIA 


49 


CHAPTER  in. 


When  the  new  Governor  General  arrived  in  India  ^ 
he  was  to  Indian  politicians  ‘  a  dark  horse.’  Though 
he  had  taken  part  in  all  the  great  parliamentary  ques¬ 
tions  of  his  time,  his  reputation  as  a  public  man  rested 
mainly  on  his  conduct  of  affairs  while  employed  in  the 
Mediterranean  and  at  Vienna. 

The  few  months  during  which  he  held  the  office  of 
Vresident  of  the  Board  of  Control  had  given  him  a 
certain  knowledge  of  current  Indian  business,  but  had 
hardly  sufficed  to  make  him  known  to  Indian  officials. 

It  was  generally  understood  that  he  had  been  in  the 
front  rank  of  those  members  of  the  Whig  party  who 
had  been  first  to  see  that  the  principles  endorsed  by 
the  French  Jacobins  were  equally  subversive  of  civil 
liberty  and  of  national  independence.  There  were 
disciples  of  the  Wellesley  school  wdio  augured  well  of  a 
Governor  General  sent  out  by  Lord  Grenville,  and 
trained  under  Pitt ;  and  there  were  others  who  gladly 
remembered  that  he  had  sat  at  the  feet  of  Burke  before 
peace  and  retrenchment  had  been  driven  out  of  men’s 
minds  by  dread  of  an  impending  dissolution  of  civil 
society. 

While  he  was  taking  time  as  we  have  seen  to  gain 

E 


50 


LOKD  MINTO  IN  INDIA. 


[1807 


acqiiaintance  with  men  and  things,  he  himself  was 
being  subjected  to  the  closest  scrutiny,  and  very  oppo¬ 
site  interpretations  were  put  on  his  most  insignificant 
words  and  actions. 

Early  in  November  1807,  Colonel  Malcolm  *  wrote  1 
to  his  friend  Colonel  Close  ^  that  he  had  lately  learnt  ' 
from  a  deep  observer  that  Ijord  hlinto’s  character  , 
appeared  to  be  of  a  smooth  and  cautious  rather  than  of 
a  bold  and  enterprising  cast.  He  therefore  wished  to 
know  if  there  were  any  solid  ground  for  a  hint  thrown 
out  by  Colonel  Close  himself,  that  the  French  intrigues 
in  Persia  had  made  a  great  impression  on  Lord  Minto’s 
mind.  Whether  in  reply  Colonel  Close  divulged  his 
authority  or  not  is  unknown  to  us,  but  among  Lord 
Minto’s  MSS.  is  the  draft  of  a  letter  addressed  to  him 
(of  whom  Lord  Minto  in  very  early  days  formed  a  high 
opinion),  dated  a  month  earlier  than  Malcolm’s  enquiry, 
and  strongly  urging  him  to  abandon  a  half-formed 
intention  of  leaving  his  post  at  Poonah  to  return  to 
England,  on  grounds  which  proved  the  Grovernor 
Cleneral  to  be  thoroughly  alive  to  the  dangers  threaten¬ 
ing  India. 

‘  Colonel  Malcolm,  afterwards  General  Sir  John  Malcolm.  Well 
known  as  a  soldier,  diplomatist,  and  author  of 'several  Valuable 
historical  works  on  India  and  Persia. 

^  Colonel,  afterwards  Sir  Barry  Close,  distinguished  for  eminent 
services  in  India  as  a  soldier  and  diplo-matist. 


66] 


STATE  OF  INDIA. 


51 


To  Colonel  Barry  Close. 

‘  October  11,  1807. 

‘  The  views  which  I  entertain,  not  indeed  of  the 
actual  state  of  India  at  the  present  time,  but  of  pros¬ 
pects  which  events  now  in  progress  in  Europe  may 
possibly  unfold,  are  such  as  to  furnish  a  strong  call 
on  qualifications  so  tried  and  approved  in  the  public 
service  as  yours. 

‘  I  do  not  allude  at  present  to  any  expectation  of  an 
actual  invasion  of  the  British  territories  in  India  by  a 
French  army ;  but  many  circumstances  denote  very 
conclusively  the  extension  of  the  enemy’s  views  to  this 
country. 

‘  There  is  already  a  very  active  French  diplomacy  in 
Persia,  which,  after  establishing  an  actual  connexion 
with  that  kingdom  on  the  subversion  of  our  influence 
there,  is  seeking  we  know  with  great  diligence  the 
means  of  extending  its  intrigues  to  the  Durbars  of 
Hindostan. 

‘ .  .  .  One  of  the  least  doubtful  consequences  of  any 
considerable  success  in  the  quarter  to  which  the  exer¬ 
tions  of  France  are  now  directed,  must  be  to  unsettle 
the  minds  of  the  native  princes  of  India — the  counter¬ 
action  of  which  must  depend  on  the  personal  judg¬ 
ment  and  experience  and  the  established  weight  and 
influence  of  those  entrusted  with  British  interests  at 
the  principal  native  courts. 

‘ .  .  .  I  am  happy  to  think  there  may  as  yet  be  a 
good  deal  of  speculation  in  these  anticipations  of  dis- 


52 


LOED  MINTO  IN  INDIA. 


[1807 


tant  danger ;  but  when  so  great  an  interest  is  depend¬ 
ing,  prudence  will  look  beyond  the  scene  immediately 
under  our  eye,  and  provide  in  the  midst  of  apparent 
security  against  remote  but  possible  danger.’ 

On  the  very  day  on  which  Malcolm  had  written  to 
Close  to  discover  the  Grovernor  General’s  political 
sentiments,  the  latter  wrote  to  the  President  of  the 
Board  of  Control  a  general  sketch  of  ‘  foreign  affairs,’ 
including  an  account  of  the  aid  he  had  furnished  to 
the  Admiral,  Sir  Edward  Pellew,  towards  an  expedition 
intended  for  the  capture  of  the  Dutch  squadron  off 
Java,  and  the  demolition  of  the  fortifications  of  Crissy. 

Whenever  Bonaparte  annexed  some  European  State 
to  his  Empire  of  the  West,  Great  Britain  instantly 
took  charge  of  that  State’s  colonial  possessions  in  the 
East.  In  1807  Portugal  and  Holland  had  been  con¬ 
quered  by  France.  Plans  for  the  reduction  of  Macao, 
Goa,  and  Batavia  were  at  once  submitted  to  the 
Governor  General.  But  for  the  execution  of  such 
considerable  enterprises  the  hour  had  not  yet  struck. 

Some  of  the  considerations  which  decided  the 
Indian  Government  to  abstain  from  these  are  stated 
by  Lord  Minto  in  a  private  letter  to  Sir  Edward 
Pellew : ' 

‘  The  smallest  relaxation  in  the  economical  system 
which  is  known  to  be  indispensable  both  for  the  per¬ 
manent  restoration  of  our  finances,  and  (which  is  more 
immediately  in  point  at  this  moment)  for  avoiding 


'  Calcutta,  November  1,  1807. 


^T.  56] 


EXTERNAL  POLICY. 


53 


present  distress  or  embarrassment  at  our  treasury, — the 
smallest  departure,  I  say,  from  that  severe  principle 
creates  immediate  speculation  in  the  money  market 
against  us,  and  drives  us  back  from  eight  to  ten  per 
cent,  interest.  This  is  one  principal  consideration,  but 
far  from  the  only  one,  which  restrains  us  from  engaging 
in  plans  which  are  attended  with  expense  and  with  a 
great  display  of  it,  and  which,  although  useful  and  de¬ 
sirable  in  themselves,  are  however  not  absolutely  and 

obviously  necessary .  I  certainly  knew  from 

verbal  communications  with  the  ministers  whom  I  left 
in  office  that  they  thought  very  favourably  of  some 
designs  which  were  under  consideration  for  extirpating 
our  European  enemies  from  their  military  and  com¬ 
mercial  posts  to  the  eastward  of  India,  but  we  have 
under  our  eye  the  positive  prohibition  of  the  present 
ministers  conveyed  in  their  former  administration 
against  such  plans.  A  positive  prohibition  of  any 
expedition  to  Java  and  other  places  eastward  of  India 
was  transmitted  to  the  Indian  Glovernment  when  Lord 
Castlereagh,  at  present  War  Minister,  was  Secretary  of 
State  for  the  Colonial  and  War  Department,  and  also 
President  of  the  Board  of  Control.’ 

Notwithstanding  these  doubtful  impressions  of  the 
ministerial  views,  the  sketch  of  foreign  affairs  above 
mentioned  contains  a  tolerably  full  outline  of  the 
policy  which  Lord  Minto  designed  to  adopt  whenever 
the  condition  of  the  Company’s  finances  admitted  of 
such  action. 

‘  I  confess  that  if  economical  considerations  and 


54 


LOED  MINTO  IN  INDIA. 


[1807 


want  of  military  force  had  not  appeared  to  me  con¬ 
clusive  against  the  measure  ’  (a  proposed  enter¬ 
prise  against  Batavia),  ‘  I  might  not,  on  an  occasion  in 
my  judgment  so  important,  have  permitted  our  formal 
incompetence  to  stand  in  the  way  of  a  great  national 
service,  but  should  have  been  disposed  on  forming  the 
iirst  provisional  arrangements  to  exercise  the  best  dis¬ 
cretion  I  could  on  the  several  points  I  have  alluded  to, 
subject  to  the  future  consideration  of  government,  and 
to  embrace  the  responsibility  which  must  often  attach 
to  the  most  useful  public  exertions. 

‘  The  main  advantage  that  would  result  from  such 
an  enterprise  would  be  the  eradication  of  a  hostile 
power  and  influence  from  every  part  of  the  East,  and 
the  necessity  which  that  event  would  impose  on  our 
enemies  and  rivals,  of  conducting  every  enterprise 
against  us  immediately  from  Europe,  without  any  es¬ 
tablished  post  of  their  own  in  this  hemisphere  for  the 
various  indispensable  purposes  of  shelter,  supplies, 
military  depots,  naval  arsenal,  or  even  political  intrigue 
and  combination.’ ' 

Referring  to  rumours  current  in  India  of  a  project 
for  the  establishment  of  a  French  maritime  post  at 
the  entrance  of  the  Persian  Gulf,  he  wrote : 

‘  If  a  force  adapted  to  the  purpose  (of  invading 
India )  could  be  collected  there,  gradually  and  in  detail, 
either  by  sea  or  land,  and  the  obstacles  are  not  insur¬ 
mountable  either  way,  the  trade  of  the  Arabs  and  of 
the  Persian  Gulf  in  general  is  so  considerable  that 
>  To  the  President  of  the  Board  of  Control. 


^T.  56] 


EXTERNAL  POLICY. 


55 


tonnage  would  be  found  without  difficulty  to  transport 
any  number  of  troops,  and  the  passage  is  short  and 
easy  to  territories  occupied  by  our  professed  enemies 
in  India. 

‘  We  must  not  forget  the  nature  of  our  tenure  in 
this  Empire,  and  that  it  would  not  require  a  great 
European  army  to  disturb  our  security  in  India — 
20,000  French  troops  commanded  by  French  officers, 
supplied  with  all  the  means  which  attend  such  armies, 
would  not,  I  am  firmly  convinced,  subdue  us — but 
would  create  a  struggle  which  must  be  attended  with 
great  present  calamity,  however  successfully  and 
honourably  it  might  be  overcome.  For  these  reasons 
I  should  be  sorry  to  see  half  the  number  of  troops  landed 
in  India. 

‘  An  absolute  ascendancy  at  the  Porte  or  a  positive 
conquest  of  Turkey,  a  confederacy  with  Kussia  in 
Oriental  schemes,  would  tend  to  the  furtherance,  I  do 
not  say  to  the  accomplishment,  of  Bonaparte’s  scheme 
against  India. 

‘The  mission  of  an  able  minister  to  the  Court  of 
Persia  is  one  of  the  first  measures  that  presents  itself. 
On  that  point  I  would  take  the  liberty  of  saying  a  few 
words. 

‘  Whoever  resides  in  Persia  on  the  part  of  England 
should  represent  His  IMajesty  and  receive  his  instruc¬ 
tions  from  his  ministers.  The  interests  of  Persia  are 
now  so  much  connected  with  the  politics  of  Europe, 
that  no  negotiation  with  that  Court  of  a  general  nature 
could  be  carried  on  from  hence.  Yet  India  and  the 


56 


LOED  MINTO  IN  INDIA. 


[1807 


interests  of  England  in  Asia  are  so  deeply  concerned  in 
the  conduct  of  Persia,  and  so  naturally  implicated  in 
its  affairs,  that  I  trust  I  shall  be  excused  for  suggest¬ 
ing  two  useful  points  in  such  a  mission.  First,  that 
the  English  minister  should  have  a  close,  confidential, 
and  constant  correspondence  with  the  supreme  Grovem- 
ment  in  India,  and  should  receive  from  that  Government 
instructions  in  all  matters  of  local  concern  which  should 
not  commit  his  Government  at  home  on  points  of 
European  policy. 

‘  Next,  that  the  person  for  that  office  should  be 
selected  here,  or  at  least  from  the  servants  of  the 
public  in  this  country.  None  can,  from  their  habits 
and  from  the  peculiar  case  of  their  knowledge  and  expe¬ 
rience,  be  so  well  qualified  for  the  station.  I  confess  I 
have  one  individual  in  my  mind.  I  have  never  seen 
tlfis  gentleman  in  my  life,  but  hazard  the  suggestion  on 
a  certain  knowledge  of  Colonel  Malcolm’s  superior 
qualifications.’ 

Of  the  financial  prospect  Lord  Minto’s  auguries 
were  more  favourable  than  the  Coint  of  Directors  had 
ventured  to  anticipate  when  he  left  England ;  ‘  but,’ 
he  said,  ‘  in  the  event  of  war,  estimates  become  wholly 
fallacious ;  and  the  only  certain  financial  conclusion 
must  be  that,  pending  an  invasion,  no  surplus,  but  on 
the  contrary  a  great  increase  of  debt,  must  be  expected 
and  provided  for. 

‘  If  these  regions  ever  come  to  he  the  scene  of  our 
contests  Avith  our  European  enemies,  India  will  indeed 
be  the  apple  in  immediate  view  of  the  combatants. 


i?iT.  56] 


EXTERNAL  POLICY. 


57 


but  Europe  herself  will  be  the  real  prize  that  is  fought 
for.  The  struggle  will  be  between  two  mighty  Em¬ 
pires,  and  must  assume  a  character  and  require  an 
effort  far  beyond  the  scope  of  any  contest  which  the 
E.  I.  Company  can  maintain,  with  resources  calculated 
for  a  very  different  state  of  the  world.  P'or  that  occasion 
therefore,  if  it  should  ever  arise,  we  shall  receive  our 
orders,  and  be  supplied  with  proportionate  means  from 
England. 

‘  Consistently,  however,  with  this  view  of  things,  I 
think  it  right  to  apprise  you  that,  if  an  attempt  were 
actually  made  by  France  to  occupy  a  post  on  the  Coast 
of  the  Persian  Gulf,  or  on  any  other  point  so  situated 
as  to  facilitate  any  hostile  enterprise  against  our 
Indian  Empire,  I  should  feel  the  occasion  to  be  so  im¬ 
portant  and  so  urgent  as  to  require  an  immediate  and 
powerful  effort  to  dislodge  the  enemy,  and  to  defeat 
his  purpose,  before  so  serious  an  evil  had  time  to  take 
root.  I  shall  keep  the  possibility  of  such  an  event  in 
mind,  and  shall  endeavour  both  in  my  own  arrange¬ 
ments  and  in  my  suggestions  to  the  Admiral  not  to  be 
found  unprepared  for  it.’ 

In  the  meantime  Lord  Minto  was  able  to  open  his 
official  correspondence  with  the  satisfactory  assurance 
that  he  saw  no  reason  to  fear  interruption  to  the 
system  of  public  economy  on  which  so  much  depended. 
No  symptoms  gave  warning  of  any  impending  necessity 
for  military  intervention  in  the  affairs  of  the  native 
states.  With  all  the  more  powerful  princes  of  India 
the  E.  I.  Company  was  in  alliance ;  the  others  were 


58 


LOED  MINTO  IN  INDIA. 


[1807 


not  in  a  condition  to  cause  uneasiness.  The  sole  excep¬ 
tion  to  the  general  tranquillity  was  a  province  within 
British  territory  which  had  been  permitted  to  lapse 
into  a  condition  of  anarchy  for  want  ‘  of  good  rule,’ 
to  borrow  an  expression  once  familiar  on  the  Scotch 
Borders. 

The  province  of  Bundelcund '  had  been  added  to 
the  dominions  of  the  Company  a  few  years  before. 
Stretching  from  the  Jumna  to  the  great  mountain 
chain  that  crosses  India  from  the  Granges  to  the  Gulf 
of  Cambay,  it  includes  both  hill  and  plain — therefore 
also  the  human  varieties  which  in  unsettled  times  are 
as  true  to  those  respective  localities  as  vultures  and 
field-mice.  On  the  crests  of  hills  so  high  and  steep 
that  each  hill  is  a  natural  fortress,  stood,  in  the  early 
part  of  this  century,  150  forts  more  or  less  strong, 
held  by  as  many  chiefs,  who  rallied  to  their  standards 
all  the  discontented  spirits  of  the  district,  and  the 
waifs  and  strays  left  behind  by  the  ebbing  tide  of  war. 
Safe  in  the  inaccessibility  of  their  fastnesses  they  spent 
their  time  much  after  the  fashion  of  the  Christian 
Knights  of  Europe,  of  whose  exploits  many  a  ‘  castled 
crag’  remains  to  tell.  They  lived  by  plunder  and  rapine 
on  their  weaker  neighbours — till  at  last  a  great  cry 
went  up  from  throughout  the  land  which  found  a  merci¬ 
ful  hearing  in  the  Council-room  of  Calcutta. 

Lord  Lake  had  assured  the  Government  of  Sir 
George  Barlow  that  peace  would  never  be  restored  to 

‘  Bundelcund  had  been  ceded  in  exchange  for  some  districts  in 
the  South  Mahratta  country  by  the  treaty  of  Bassein. 


JEt.  56] 


INTEENAL  POLICY. 


59 


the  district  till  the  most  important  of  these  strongholds 
had  surrendered,  and  Sir  Greorge  had  made  answer 
that  ‘  a  certain  extent  of  dominion,  local  power,  and 
revenue  would  be  cheaply  sacrificed  for  tranquillity  and 
security  within  a  more  contracted  circle.’ 

Unhappily  something  more  than  this  was  likely  to 
be  sacrificed — viz.  the  character  of  the  British  Govern¬ 
ment  for  justice,  and  the  very  existence  of  the  popula¬ 
tion  it  was  bound  to  protect.  When  Lord  INIinto  arrived 
in  India  Bundelcund  was  rapidly  becoming  a  desert. 
One  of  his  first  measures,  taken  within  a  few  weeks  of 
his  arrival  at  Calcutta,  was  the  despatch  of  a  military 
force  into  the  disturbed  districts.  It  was  at  the  same 
time  officially  announced  that  ‘  the  Government  con¬ 
sidered  it  essential,  not  only  to  the  preservation  of 
political  influence  over  the  chiefs  of  Bundelcund,  but  to 
the  dignity  and  reputation  of  the  British  Government, 
to  interfere  for  the  suppression  of  internal  disorder.’ 
Writing  to  the  Chairman  *  of  the  E.  I.  Company  he  said  : 
‘These  petty  troubles  have  no  very  distinct  object, 
certainly  none  in  which  the  Company  have  any  other 
interest  than  that  which  they  must  always  feel  in  a 
punctual  and  easy  collection  of  their  revenues,  and  in 
the  discharge  of  a  duty  which  a  Sovereign  owes  to  its 
subjects,  I  mean  that  of  preserving  the  public  peace 
and  protecting  the  weaker  and  more  pacific  part  of  the 
community  against  the  oppression  and  violence  of  the 
stronger. 

‘  The  administration  of  Sir  George  Barlow  has 
'  E.  Parry,  Esq. 


60 


LOED  MINTO  IN  INDIA. 


[1807 


hitherto  employed  on  such  occasions  the  usual  and 
ordinary  powers  of  legal  government,  aided  by  every 
effort  of  conciliation  and  persuasion  to  repress  the  in¬ 
subordinate  spirit  of  which  I  am  speaking,  and  success 
has  in  general  attended  that  just  and  prudent  system. 
But  in  one  or  two  instances  these  means  have  been 
exhausted  without  accomplishing  the  object,  and  an 
immediate  necessity  has  arisen  of  resorting  to  military 
force,  for  the  double  purpose  of  suppressing  a  rebellious 
resistance  to  law,  and  of  displaying  both  the  power 
and  the  determination  of  Government  to  vindicate  its 
just  authority  in  the  eyes  of  a  people  who  would  wait 
only  for  the  assurance  of  an  opposite  character  in 
Government,  and  of  consequent  impunity,  to  fall  into 
general  disobedience  and  anarchy.’  The  tone  was 
new  to  ears  accustomed  to  that  of  late  assumed  by  the 
supreme  Government,  and  produced  an  immediate  and 
decisive  effect.  Many  a  petty  Kajah  rapidly  discovered 
his  interest  to  lie  on  the  side  of  order,  and  long  before 
the  British  force  succeeded  in  quelling  the  fiercer 
spirits  of  the  hills,  cultivation  and  peace  had  returned 
to  the  plains. 

The  reduction  of  the  most  important  of  the  moun¬ 
tain  strongholds  was  not  effected  till  after  several 
campaigns,  nor  without  considerable  losses — ‘  losses 
particularly  in  officers,’  wrote  Lord  Minto,  ‘  for  which 
one  feels  inconsolable  for  such  an  object.  That  object, 
however,  it  had  become  indispensable  to  accomplish, 
and  its  necessity  is  strongly  confirmed  by  the  difficulty 
which  has  attended  it.’ 


^T.  66] 


THE  NATIVE  RACES. 


G1 


While  the  rumours  of  intended  attacks  upon  our 
Eastern  possessions  acquired  with  every  day  greater 
consistency  and  probability,  the  attention  of  the  Govern¬ 
ment  was  earnestly  directed  to  the  maintenance  of  such 
relations  with  their  Indian  subjects  as  would  tend  to 
obtain  their  loyal  support. 

Of  the  races  subject  to  British  nde,  the  most 
adverse  to  our  power  was  necessarily  the  INIahommedan. 
To  the  Hindoos,  though  foreigners  and  conquerors,  we 
were  nevertheless  the  justest  and  gentlest  who  had 
ever  held  sway  over  them.  To  the  Mahrattas  we  were 
a  formidable  danger  indeed,  but  one  the  magnitude 
of  which  they  did  not  as  yet  thoroughly  appreciate. 
Among  the  IMussulmans  alone,  especially  of  the  higher 
class,  there  existed  an  immense  and  weighty  body  of 
irreconcilable  discontent,  the  natural  result  of  the 
establishment  of  the  Company’s  Government  over  a 
great  portion  of  the  Peninsula,  to  the  extinction  of 
the  Mussulman  power  and  the  ruin  of  the  individual 
influence,  consideration,  and  fortunes  of  the  race  in 
which  the  principal  native  energies  reside.  ‘  In  their 
minds  had  been  planted  all  the  hostile  dispositions  that 
are  bred  of  despair.’  Instruments  therefore  could  not 
be  wanting  to  foment  real  discontent,  or  to  create 
artificial  grievances.  Some  of  this  disaffection,  it  was 
hoped,  would  subside  by  the  mere  lapse  of  time,  by  the 
gradual  extinction  of  old  influences  and  the  growth  of 
new  interests  in  the  soil  and  prosperity  of  the  country, 
originating  in  and  dependent  upon  the  British  Govern¬ 
ment.  Such  had  been  the  case  in  Bengal,  where  the  same 


62 


LOED  MINTO  IN  INDIA. 


[1807 


course  was  run  from  the  demolition  of  the  Mussulman 
power  to  the  steady  establishment  of  our  exclusive 
authority,  and  the  perfect  identification  of  the  mass 
of  the  people,  their  interests  and  feelings,  with  our 
government.  ‘  If  we  avoid,’  wrote  Lord  Minto  to  the 
Chairman  of  the  East  India  Company,'  ‘  as  we  shall 
with  scrupulous  attention,  every  measure  that  might 
furnish  our  enemies  with  even  a  pretence  to  work  upon, 
— if  we  maintain  discipline  with  a  firm  hand,  and  keep 
a  watchful  and  observant  eye  on  every  attempt  to  prac¬ 
tise  on  the  prejudices  of  the  native  soldier — the  danger 
will  be  confined  to  those  general  circumstances  inherent 
in  our  situation,  for  which,  as  there  is  no  remedy,  it  is 
neither  profitable  nor  manly  to  make  them  the  topics 
of  fruitless  dread  and  lamentation.  .  .  .  The  only 
successful  engine  of  sedition  in  any  part  of  India  must 
be  that  of  persuading  the  people  that  our  Government 
entertains  hostile  and  systematic  designs  against  their 
religion.  This  persuasion,  if  it  could  be  established  in 
Bengal,  would  be  as  fatal  there  as  on  the  coast ;  but 
the  difference  is  that  nobody  in  Bengal  is  interested  in 
propagating  that  falsehood,  and  to  incur  danger  here 
we  must  ourselves  furnish  probable  cause  for  sincere 
alarm.’  The  belief  that  ‘this  engine’  could  be  suc¬ 
cessfully  worked  had  been  confirmed  by  recent  events ; 
for  though  the  Vellore  massacres  were  no  doubt  in 
part  attributable  to  the  general  state  of  disaffection 
and  humiliation  of  the  Mahommedan  population  of  the 
country,  it  was  clearly  proved  that  the  sentiment  on 
'  Lord  Minto  to  E.  Parry,  Esq.,  September  1807. 


^Et.  56]  DESPATCH  FROM  COURT  OF  DIRECTORS.  63 

which  the  agents  traded  was  a  universal  though 
unfounded  dread  that  the  British  Government  was 
about  to  exact  a  forcible  conversion  of  the  Sepoys  to 
Christianity.  What  to  the  natives  could  seem  less 
incredible,  or  indeed  more  natural  ?  Had  not 
Hindoos  seen  their  holy  places  defiled  by  Mahomme- 
dans  ?  Why  should  Christians  spare  either  the  one 
or  the  other  ? 

To  calm  such  apprehensions,  the  Court  of  Directors 
had  declared  in  a  despatch,*  dated  May  1807,  their 
firm  resolve  to  uphold  throughout  their  dominions 
the  most  perfect  toleration  of  all  creeds  and  rites  ;  and 
at  the  same  time  they  clearly  stated  the  position  of 
Government  in  respect  to  the  missionaries. 

‘  In  the  whole  course  of  our  administration  of  the 
Indian  territories  it  has  been  our  known  and  declared 
principle  to  maintain  a  perfect  toleration  of  the  various 
religious  systems  which  prevailed  in  them ;  to  protect  the 
followers  of  each  in  the  undisturbed  enjoyment  of  their 
respective  opinions  and  usages  ;  neither  to  interfere  with 
them  ourselves,  nor  to  suffer  them  to  be  molested  by 
others.  When  we  afforded  our  countenance  and  sanc¬ 
tion  to  missionaries  who  have  from  time  to  time  pro¬ 
ceeded  to  India  for  the  purpose  of  propagating  the 
Christian  religion,  it  was  far  from  being  in  our  contem¬ 
plation  to  add  the  influence  of  our  authority  to  any 
attempts  they  might  make ;  for  on  the  contrary  we 
were  perfectly  aware  that  the  progress  of  such  conver- 

‘  Instructions  addressed  to  the  Governor  of  Fort  St.  George, 
May  29,  1807. 


64 


LORD  MINTO  IN  INDIA. 


[1807 


sion  will  be  slow  and  gradual,  arising  more  from  a  con¬ 
viction  of  the  principles  of  our  religion  itself,  and  from 
the  pious  examples  of  its  teachers,  than  from  any 
undue  influence  or  from  the  exertions  of  authority, 
which  are  never  to  be  resorted  to  in  such  cases.’ 

In  accordance  with  these  instructions  it  became 
the  duty  of  the  Indian  Glovernment,  not  long  after  the 
Governor  General’s  arrival  in  Calcutta,  to  take  certain 
measures  which  had  the  result  of  embroiling  him  with 
the  missionaries  of  Serampore,  and  with  a  party  in 
Calcutta  and  in  London  of  growing  importance. 

It  is  well  known  that  Christian  missionaries  had 
long  been  familiar  to  the  populations  of  Southern  India. 
Eoman  Catholic  missions  had  been  established  since  the 
beginning  of  the  seventeenth  century  in  the  Portuguese 
and  French  settlements  on  the  west  coast  of  the  Pen¬ 
insula.  In  comparatively  recent  times  some  Protestant 
missionaries,  Danes  and  Germans,  had  established  them¬ 
selves  at  Madras,  whence  a  few  individuals  made  their 
way  to  Bengal.  But  it  was  not  till  the  last  decade  of 
the  eighteenth  century  that  an  Englishman  was  found 
to  carry  the  Gospel  to  the  natives  of  India.  William 
Carey  was  the  first  English  missionary  to  Bengal ;  and 
his  life  is  a  happy  illustration  of  what  may  be  done 
to  overcome  the  most  apparently  insurmountable  ob¬ 
stacles  by  a  noble  enthusiasm  and  an  ardent  character. 
Carey  was  the  son  of  a  shoemaker  in  Northampton¬ 
shire  ;  a  Baptist  by  creed.  Alone  and  destitute  of 
resources  he  arrived  in  Bengal,  where  without  the 
licence  of  the  Company  no  one  was  permitted  to  reside. 


^T.  56] 


THE  MISSIONAKIES. 


65 


but  where,  nevertheless,  he  remained  on  sufferance 
until,  being  joined  by  others  who  desired  to  assist  in 
the  good  work,  he  and  they  removed  together  to  the 
Danish  settlement  of  Serampore.  There  they  preached 
in  the  native  languages,  formed  schools  for  the  young, 
set  up  a  printing-press,  and  a  paper  manufactory  (this 
was  the  industry  by  which  they  lived),  and  devoted 
all  their  remaining  time  and  energies  to  the  translation 
of  the  Holy  Scriptures  and  the  dissemination  of  tracts 
in  the  various  native  dialects.  Soon  after  Lord  Minto’s 
arrival,  some  of  these  publications  attracted  the  atten¬ 
tion  of  Government,  and  it  being  undeniable  that  they 
were  calculated  to  ofl’end  the  feelings  of  the  native 
})opulation,  containing  as  they  did  oflensive  attacks  on 
the  Hindoo  mythology  and  the  Mussulman  Prophet,  the 
Secretary  to  Government  received  instructions  to  com¬ 
municate  to  the  Kev.  Dr,  Carey,  the  leading  member  of 
the  mission  at  Serampore,  a  resolution  arrived  at  by 
the  Governor  General  in  Council,  to  place  their  press 
under  regulations,  and  to  suspend  the  practice  of  public 
preaching  by  natives  in  the  native  dialects  at  the  seat 
of  government. 

In  an  official  letter  addressed  by  Mr.  Edmonstone  to 
Dr.  Carey  it  is  stated,  that  ‘  the  issue  of  publications  and 
the  public  delivery  of  discourses  of  the  nature  above 
alluded  to,  are  evidently  calculated  to  produce  conse¬ 
quences  in  the  highest  degree  detrimental  to  the  tran¬ 
quillity  of  the  British  dominions  in  India,  and  it  becomes 
the  indispensable  duty  of  the  British  Govermnent  to 
arrest  the  progress  of  any  proceedings  of  that  nature. 


66 


LOED  MINTO  IN  INDIA. 


[1807 


In  the  present  instance  this  objection  is  enforced  by 
the  necessity  of  maintaining  the  public  faith,  which 
under  the  express  injunctions  of  the  Legislature  has 
been  repeatedly  pledged  to  leave  the  native  subjects  of 
the  Company  in  India  to  the  full,  free,  and  undisturbed 
exercise  of  their  respective  religions.’  The  letter 
concluded  by  expressing  the  Grovernor  Greneral’s  ex¬ 
pectation  ‘  that  the  press  would  be  removed  to  the 
Presidency,  where  alone  the  same  control  that  is 
established  over  presses  sanctioned  by  the  Government 
can  be  duly  exercised.’ ' 

Though  the  action  of  the  Government  was  in  strict 
accordance  with  the  instructions  issued  by  the  Court  of 
Directors,  it  raised  a  storm  of  angry  feeling  which 
temporarily  obscured  all  sense  of  justice,  and  led  to  a 
remarkable  oblivion  of  the  Apostolical  injunction,  ‘  Be 
pitiful,  be  courteous.’ 

‘  This  is  the  first  instance,’  says  the  author  of  a 
well-known  biographical  work,^  ‘  in  which  the  Govern¬ 
ment  of  India  brought  forward  the  plea  of  being  bound 
by  a  ‘Pledge  to  grant  the  natives  the  undisturbed  exer¬ 
cise  of  their  “  respective  religions.”  No  such  pledge 
was  ever  exacted  by  the  natives  or  granted  by  the 
Government.  British  rule  was  established  in  India  by 
the  sword  and  the  sword  alone,  and  at  no  period  were 
the  conquerors  in  a  position  which  obliged  them  to 
give  pledges  to  the  conquered.’ 

Dean  Milman,  in  the  opening  chapter  of  his  ‘  History 

'  Letter  to  Kev.  Dr.  Carey,  Feptemher  8,  1807. 

2  Lives  and  Times  of  Carey.  Murslunan,  and  Ward. 


^T.  56] 


THE  MISSIONARIES. 


fi7 

of  Christianity,’  remarks  that  the  Romans  conquered 
like  savages,  but  ruled  like  philosophic  statesmen. 
‘The  kingdoms  which  were  won  by  the  most  unjustifiable 
aggression  were  for  the  most  part  governed  with  a 
judicious  union  of  firmness  and  conciliation,  in  which 
the  conscious  strength  of  irresistible  power  was  tempered 
with  the  wisest  respect  for  national  usages.’ 

Some  such  rule  as  that  under  which  Christianity 
found  its  appointed  time  appeared  to  Lord  INIinto  not 
unworthy  of  a  British  Government  though  deriving  its 
title  from  the  sword. 

When  a  public  man  is  better  liked  than  his  mea¬ 
sures,  it  is  not  uncommon  to  hear  them  ascribed  to  bad 
advisers.  So  it  was  in  this  case.  But  Lord  Minto  was 
not  willing  to  accept  a  defence  based  on  his  ignorance 
of  matters  which  he  was  bound  to  know;  still  less  on 
his  docility  in  accepting  views  inculcated  by  others. 
He  had,  he  said,  after  deliberate  investigation  and  re¬ 
flection,  thought  it  his  duty  to  prohibit,  for  a  time, 
public  preaching  by  natives  for  the  purpose  of  conver¬ 
sion,  and  also  to  prevent  the  dissemination  of  publica¬ 
tions  in  the  native  languages,  containing  scurrilous 
abuse  of  persons  and  things  holy  in  the  estimation  of 
our  Indian  subjects,  whether  Hindoo  or  ■Mahommedaii. 
He  had  not,  he  confessed,  been  aware  of  the  ruin  which 
a  removal  of  the  mission  press  from  Serampore  would 
inflict  on  the  missionaries,  ‘  owing  to  the  peculiar  circum¬ 
stances  of  their  property’ there.  No  sooner  was  this  in¬ 
evitable  consequence  of  the  intended  measure  seen  than 
the  order  for  it  was  rescinded.  It  was  due  to  Dr.  Leyden, 


68 


LOED  MINTO  IN  INDIA. 


[1807 


the  emiuent  Orientalist,  that  at  this  juncture  the 
Governor  General  and  the  leading  members  of  the 
mission  were  brought  face  to  face,  and  that  the  latter 
were  enabled  to  state  their  case  personally  to  the 
Governor  General.  Dr.  Leyden  stood  high  in  the  esti¬ 
mation  of  Lord  Minto,  by  whom  his  learning  and  his 
energy  of  character  were  fully  appreciated.  Moreover 
there  was  a  link  between  them  of  which  both  acknow¬ 
ledged  the  strength.  Both  came  from  ‘  Teviot-water,’ 
a  fact  held  sacred  even  on  the  banks  of  the  Ganges. 
Dr.  Leyden,  as  the  personal  friend  of  iV'Ir.  Marshman 
and  Dr.  Carey,  advised  them  to  lose  no  time  in  crossing 
the  river  to  the  pleasant  park  of  Barrackpore  ;  there  to 
seek  an  interview  with  the  ‘  great  chief,’  for  the  osten¬ 
sible  purpose  of  olfering  him  their  translation  of  the 
Eamayan.  With  knowledge  of  men,  not  always  pos¬ 
sessed  by  students  of  books.  Dr.  Leyden  had  seen  that 
sympathetic  relations  in  one  class  of  subjects  would 
indubitably  lead  to  smoother  ones  in  others.  So  it 
proved.  The  conversation  passed  easily  from  literary 
topics  to  those  specially  interesting  to  the  missionaries, 
and  when  the  interview  was  over,  both  parties  retained 
impressions  of  mutual  good-will.  His  visitors  recog¬ 
nised  in  Lord  Minto  the  candour  and  simplicity  that 
were  natural  to  him ;  he  found  in  them  a  sincerely 
pious  zeal,  tempered  with  discretion,  which  won  his 
respect.  The  Governor  General  declared  that  nothing 
was  further  from  his  intentions,  or  more  foreign  to  the 
views  of  Government,  than  to  affect  in  the  smallest 
degree  either  the  interests  of  the  missionary  body,  or 


Mt.  56] 


THE  SERAMPOEE  PRESS. 


69 


the  personal  comfort  and  convenience  of  those  worthy 
men,  and  he  remained  satisfied  with  their  assurance 
that  the  works  hereafter  to  be  printed  at  Serampore 
should  be  previously  submitted  to  the  revision  and 
sanction  of  Grovernment.  The  press  therefore  remained 
at  Serampore.  It  may  be  that  he  felt  a  little  dis¬ 
appointment  when,  a  few  days  after  these  events,  an 
address  was  presented  by  the  missionaries  to  the 
(Tovernment  of  Serampore,  in  which  the  concessions 
made  to  them  were  ascribed  to  the  particular  interposi¬ 
tion  of  Divine  Providence  and  the  instrumentality  of 
the  Danish  Governor.  ‘  I  confess,’  Lord  Minto  good- 
humouredly  remarked,  ‘  that  I  thought  it  was  to  the 
Governor  General  in  Council  that  gratitude  w’as  due, 
but  I  suppose  I  was  wrong.’ 

Nevertheless  his  kindly  sentiments  towards  the  in- 
dividvials  belonging  to  the  mission  and  his  respect  for 
their  aims  never  altered.  They  are  often  mentioned 
in  his  correspondence  as  his  ‘very  good  friends,’  and 
though  a  sense  of  public  duty  had  imposed  upon  him 
the  obligation  of  checking  their  over-zealous  haste, 
his  personal  feelings  ensured  to  their  literary  efforts 
his  constant  and  warmest  encouragement. 

The  whole  question  as  between  Calcutta  and  Seram¬ 
pore  was  disposed  of  in  less  than  a  month  from  the  date 
of  INIr.  Edmonstone’s  despatch.  In  reply  to  the  me¬ 
morial  of  the  missionaries — drawn  up  after  the  inter¬ 
view  at  Barrackpore — he  was  directed  to  state  that  ‘  the 
Governor  General  in  Council  was  fidly  convinced  of  the 
rectitude  of  the  intentions  of  the  Society  of  Missionaries, 


70 


LORD  MINTO  IN  INDIA. 


[1807 


and  that  the  precautions  which  Grovemment  deemed  it 
necessary  to  adopt  against  the  unlimited  employment 
of  the  press,  proceed  exclusively  from  the  duty  imposed 
on  Government  of  reserving  to  itself  the  authority  of 
determining  what  publications  may,  or  may  not,  expose 
the  public  tranquillity  to  hazard,  or  involve  a  violation 
of  public  faith,  instead  of  leaving  the  decision  of  such 
important  questions  to  the  judgment  of  others.’ 

But  in  the  meanwhile  ‘  the  Battle  of  the  Missions  ’ 
was  raging  fiercely  in  London,  where  it  occasioned  the 
publication  of  more  than  twenty-five  pamphlets ;  the 
charge,  repeated  again  and  again  in  them,  against  the 
Government  of  India  being  that  of  a  proved  desire 
to  root  up  the  Serampore  mission  and  extirpate  Chris¬ 
tianity  from  India. 

The  Indian  Government  had  distinctly  stated  that 
it  had  no  desire  to  impede  the  circulation  of  the  Scrip¬ 
tures  in  the  native  dialects,  ‘  if  unaccompanied  by  any 
comments  on  the  religions  of  the  country.’  This  was 
construed  into  a  prohibition  to  carry  the  Gospel  among 
the  natives  of  India ;  though  the  missionaries  were 
all  the  time  very  properly  using  the  privilege  accorded 
to  them  to  print  and  circulate  the  Scriptures  freely. 

Lord  Minto  himself  took  great  personal  interest  in 
the  translations  of  the  Scriptiues  proceeding  from  the 
Serampore  press.  In  a  public  and  published  discourse, 
on  the  occasion  of  his  annual  visit  to  the  College  of 
Fort  William,  after  warmly  praising  the  efforts  of  the 
mission  to  cultivate  the  Chinese  language,  he  said :  ‘  I 
must  not  omit  to  recommend  the  learned  and  pious 


^T.  O'j] 


THE  SEKAMPORE  PRESS. 


71 


persons  who  have  accomplished,  for  the  future  benefit, 
we  may  hope,  of  that  immense  and  populous  region, 
Chinese  versions  in  the  Chinese  character  of  the  Gos¬ 
pels  of  Matthew,  Mark,  and  Luke,  throwing  open  that 
precious  mine  with  all  its  moral  and  religious  trea¬ 
sures  to  the  largest  associated  population  in  the  world.’ 

Not  long  afterwards  a  specimen  of  printing  in  the 
Chinese  characters  by  the  natives  employed  on  the 
Serampore  press  won  Lord  iNIinto’s  hearty  admiration. 
He  would  gladly  have  headed  the  list  of  subscribers  to 
the  first  work  in  the  Chinese  language  to  be  pub¬ 
lished  at  Serampore — a  translation  of  the  Gospel  of  St. 
Matthew  ;  but  on  finding  that  he  could  not  ‘  step  out 
of  himself  and  separate  his  private  from  his  public 
character,’  and  that  objections  were  made  to  his 
appearing  in  the  undertaking  in  his  public  capacity, 
he  subscribed  largely  to  a  copy  of  Confucius  about 
to  emanate  from  that  press,  desiring  that  the  profits 
derived  from  the  sale  of  that  book  should  be  ap¬ 
plied  to  the  publication  of  the  Scriptures.  The  idea 
was  at  once  taken  up,  and  the  friendly  spirit  displayed 
by  Lord  Minto  was  cordially  acknowledged.  In  a  few 
days  subscriptions  to  the  amount  of  2,000^.  were  ob¬ 
tained,  intended  to  be  applied  collectively  to  the  pub¬ 
lication  of  the  Scriptures  ;  besides,  we  are  told,  direct 
contributions  to  the  extent  of  300^.  Every  gentleman 
in  Calcutta  was  ready  to  add  his  name  to  the  list. 
Lord  Minto’s  example  having  ‘  served  to  stimulate  the 
liberality  of  the  community.’  * 

‘  lAves  and  Times  of  Carey,  Marshman,  and  Ward. 


72 


LOKD  MINTO  IN  INDIA. 


[1807 


At  a  later  period  of  his  administration,  the  Grovern- 
ment  subscribed  a  sum  of  10,000  rupees  towards  de¬ 
fraying  the  expense  of  translating  the  Scriptures  into 
the  Malay  language. 

So  much  for  the  prohibition  of  the  sacred  Scriptures 
in  British  India. 

The  good  understanding  arrived  at  with  Dr.  Carey 
and  Mr.  Marshman  was  not  sufficient  to  allay  the  irri¬ 
tation  caused  by  the  censorship  instituted  by  the  Gio- 
vernment  over  the  publications  of  the  Serampore  press. 
There  were  men  in  Calcutta  whose  views  were  of  a 
more  worldly  nature,  and  who  were  by  no  means  un¬ 
willing  to  cause  trouble  to  the  Grovernment  by  assuming 
some  of  its  functions  to  themselves.  The  Kev.  Claudius 
Buchanan,  one  of  the  chaplains  of  the  Presidency,  was 
prominent  among  these.  Though  making  use  of  the 
Serampore  press,  and  in  friendly  relations  with  the 
missionaries,  nothing  could  be  less  like  the  simplicity 
of  their  tenets  than  those  held  by  him.  In  a  memoir, 
‘  on  the  expediency  of  introducing  an  ecclesiastical 
establishment  into  India  for  the  benefit  of  our  own 
countrymen,  and  as  a  foundation  for  the  ultimate 
civilisation  of  the  natives,’  of  which  Mr.  Buchanan  was 
the  author,  he  wrote  :  ‘  An  archbishop  is  wanted  for 
India — a  sacred  and  exalted  character,  surrounded  by 
his  bishops,  of  ample  revenue  and  extensive  sway.  .  .  . 
We  want  something  royal  in  a  spiritual  and  temporal 
sense  for  the  abject  subjects  of  this  great  Eastern  em¬ 
pire  to  look  up  to.’  Again  :  ‘  When  once  our  national 
Church  shall  have  been  confirmed  in  India,  the  members 


Mt.  56] 


ECCLESIASTICAL  PRETENSIONS. 


73 


of  that  Church  will  be  the  best  qualified  to  advise  the 
State  as  to  the  means  by  which  from  time  to  time 
the  civilisation  of  the  natives  is  to  be  effected.’  The 
belief  that  the  institution  of  a  hierarchy  would  be 
efficacious  in  producing  the  conversion  of  the  Hindoos 
was  so  firmly  held  by  Mr.  Buchanan  that,  as  it  was  re¬ 
lated  at  the  time,  while  rejecting  a  suggestion  that  he 
might  himself  be  the  first  archbishop  of  the  East,  he  ex¬ 
claimed,  ‘  Place  the  mitre  on  any  head.  Never  fear,  it 
will  do  good  among  the  Hindoos  !  ’  To  Lord  Minto,  as 
a  Scotchman,  it  may  have  been  hard  to  perceive  that  the 
placing  of  a  mitre  on  one  head  would  inevitably  infuse 
Christianity  into  another ;  but  he  fully  recognised  the 
meaning  of  the  claim  set  up  by  Mr.  Buchanan  on  behalf 
of  his  fellow-Churchmen  to  advise  the  State  on  the 
means  to  be  adopted  for  the  civilisation  of  the  natives, 
and  he  did  not  therefore  share  the  surprise  of  the 
simple-minded  men  of  Serampore  when  they  discovered, 
at  a  subsequent  period,  that  Mr.  Buchanan  had  never 
been  entirely  reconciled  to  the  influence  obtained  by 
the  press  /or  Dissenters. 

A  memorial,  drawn  up  by  Mr.  Buchanan  for  presen¬ 
tation  to  the  Governor  General  in  Council  in  reference 
to  the  measures  lately  adopted  by  Government  with 
reference  to  the  Serampore  mission,  was  forwarded  to 
the  Court  of  Directors,  with  the  comments  and  expla¬ 
nations  of  the  Governor  General  and  his  colleagues. 
These  appear  to  have  satisfactorily  disposed  of  the 
questions  at  issue.  But  it  is  remarkable  that  while  the 
statements  in  this  memorial  were  categorically  refuted 


74 


LOED  MINTO  IN  INDIA. 


[1807 


at  the  time,  they  have  reappeared  again  and  again  with 
all  the  virulence  peculiar  to  ecclesiastical  censures.  As 
late  as  June  1845,  the  ‘Calcutta  Eeview  ’  contained 
an  article  entitled  ‘  The  early  or  exclusively  Oriental 
period  of  Government  Education  in  Bengal,’  repeating 
the  three  leading  charges  in  the  paper  of  1807 ; — 
that  the  Government  had  virtually  suppressed  the 
circulation  of  the  Scriptures  and  the  preaching  of 
the  Gospel  ; — that  it  only  consented  with  extreme 
reluctance  to  abandon  an  intended  removal  of  the 
missionary  press  from  Serampore  upon  the  remon¬ 
strances  of  the  Danish  Governor,  who  felt  the  honour 
and  sovereignty  of  his  nation  to  be  involved  in  the 
issue ; — that  the  consequence  of  the  imprimatur 
imposed  by  Government  was  the  submission  of  religious 
works  to  their  native  officers. 

The  charge  of  having  suppressed  the  preaching  of 
the  Gospel  Lord  Minto  disposed  of  as  a  misrepresen¬ 
tation  of  facts.  ‘  I  suspended  the  public  preaching 
of  natives  to  natives  in  the  native  languages  at  the 
seat  of  government,  because,  with  the  zeal  of  proselytes, 
they  preached  the  same  inflammatory  matter  and  the 
same  exhortations  to  civil  dissensions  as  had  been 
printed.  The  press  is  not  suspended,  but  is  kept 
under  regulation.  Preaching  is  suspended,  but  is  not 
intended  to  be  Anally  prohibited.’ 

The  second  charge,  according  to  Lord  Minto,  ‘  did 
not  contain  a  particle  of  truth.’  Though  the  press  was 
set  up  in  Danish  territory,  the  only  market  for  its 
publications  was  British  India;  though  the  leading 


-Ht.  56] 


MEMOEIAL  OF  ME.  BUCHANAN. 


75 


missionaries  resided  at  Serampore,  they  were  British 
subjects  ;  Dr.  Carey  holding  moreover  an  official  appoint¬ 
ment  under  Government,  that  of  Professor  of  Sanscrit 
and  Bengalee  in  the  College  of  Fort  William.  Under 
such  conditions  it  never  occurred  to  anyone  concerned 
that  the  honour  of  the  Danish  Government  could  be 
affected  by  the  transactions  that  have  been  related,  nor 
that  the  amicable  relations  between  the  Governor  of 
Serampore  and  the  Government  of  Calcutta  were  en¬ 
dangered  because  the  former  had  made  friendly  repre¬ 
sentations  to  the  latter  concerning  the  peaceable 
demeanour  and  general  good  conduct  of  his  neigh¬ 
bours,  the  British  missionaries  residing  at  Serampore. 

To  the  third  subject  of  complaint,  that  the  impri¬ 
matur  established  by  Government  over  the  publica¬ 
tions  of  the  press  necessitated  the  submission  of  works 
on  the  subject  of  our  holy  religion  to  the  native  agents 
of  the  Government,  Lord  Minto  replied,  that  the 
intervention  of  a  native  was  not  necessary  to  enable 
members  of  Government  to  form  their  own  opinions 
of  writings  produced  in  Persian  and  Bengalee  ;  and 
that  the  regulation  complained  of  already  existed 
towards  all  the  presses  of  Calcutta.  If,  therefore,  the 
right  of  the  Government  to  exercise  an  imprimatur 
over  the  press  of  Serampore  were  denied  on  the  ground 
taken  up  by  Mr.  Buchanan  that  the  civil  power  was 
incompetent  to  form  a  sound  judgment  of  religious 
works.  Lord  INIinto  observed  that  the  next  step  must 
he  an  ecclesiastical  censorship  of  the  press  and  a 
return  to  the  dark  ages.  He  disclaimed  all  desire 


76 


LORD  MINTO  IN  INDIA. 


[1807 


to  judge  of  the  orthodoxy  or  the  error  involved  in  any 
theological  propositions,  but  he  asserted  that  it  was  in 
the  capacity,  and  that  it  was  the  duty,  of  Government 
to  decide  whether  or  no  the  publication  of  certain 
propositions  under  the  existing  conditions  could  be  con¬ 
tinued  with  safety  to  the  State.  In  illustration  of 
his  opinion  that  they  could  not  be  so,  he  quoted  in  a 
Government  letter  to  the  Secret  Committee  the  follow¬ 
ing  passage  from  a  religious  pamphlet  published  by 
Mr.  Buchanan : — 

‘  The  Mahommedans  profess  a  religion  which  has 
ever  been  characterised  by  political  bigotry  and  intem¬ 
perate  zeal.  In  this  country  that  religion  still  retains 
the  character  of  its  bloody  origin,  particularly  among 
the  higher  classes.  Whenever  the  Mahommedan  feels 
his  religion  touched,  he  grasps  his  dagger.  This  spirit 
was  seen  in  full  operation  under  Tippoo’s  government, 
and  it  is  not  soon  extinguished.’ 

It  might  well  be  asked  whether  such  a  passage 
as  this  should  not  reasonably  induce  the  licenser 
to  withdraw  Iris  imprimatur  from  a  book,  which, 
although  containing  no  proposition  that  is  not  ‘  ortho¬ 
dox  and  true,  and  entitled  on  that  account  to  a  severely 
ecclesiastical  imprimatur,'  might  nevertheless  sharpen 
every  Mahommedan  dagger  and  plunge  them  into  every 
Christian  bosom  in  the  country  ?  ’ 

'  A  somewhat  amusing  instance  of  the  carelessness  as  to  accu¬ 
racy  which  distinguished  the  opposition  to  Lord  Minto’s  measures  is 
to  be  found  in  the  accusation  that  he  had  manifested  an  intention  to 
suppress  the  Christian  prophecies.  The  fact  was  that  an  advertise¬ 
ment,  sent  by  Mr.  Buchanan  to  the  Government  Gazette,  of  the  in¬ 
tended  publication  of  a  series  of  sermons  on  the  Christian  prophecies, 


JEt.  56] 


CORRESPONDENCE  FROM  LONDON. 


77 


Lord  Minto’s  correspondence  from  London  left  him 
no  doubt  as  to  the  fierceness  of  the  controversy  that 
had  arisen  out  of  his  policy  towards  the  missionaries  ;  it 
had  extended  to  the  Court  of  Directors ;  but  he  was  con¬ 
fidentially  informed  that  he  had  not  only  the  entire 
approval,  but  the  warm  admiration,  of  four-fifths  of  the 
Court  for  the  courage  with  which  he  had  adopted  a 
policy  at  once  firm  and  moderate,  though  certain  to 
provoke  rancorous  hostility  to  his  government.  It  has 
been  said  that  to  some  such  hostility  may  be  attri¬ 
buted  the  fact  of  Lord  ]\Iinto’s  administration  having 
failed  to  obtain  the  measure  of  public  approbation 
which  was  its  just  due.  But  at  the  time  not  a  few 
of  those  statesmen  whose  opinions  he  most  highly 
valued  considered  that  he  was  entitled  to  the  warmest 
thanks  of  the  public.  Perhaps  it  was  only  to  states¬ 
men  that  the  full  extent  of  the  danger  to  our  empire 
in  India  was  a])pareut,  not  alone  from  the  immediate 

delivered  by  himself  in  the  Presidency  churches,  was  suspended,  ac¬ 
cording  to  the  usual  practice  of  that  paper,  until  the  MS.  had  been 
submitted  lo  the  superintendent  of  the  Company’s  press. 

The  MS.  never  was  so  submitted,  because  Mr.  Buchanan  thought 
it  his  duty  to  protest  against  the  civil  revision  of  any  theological 
work.  He,  however,  represented  his  sermons  to  have  been  suppressed, 
and  then,  ‘  by  a  graceful  negligence  of  style,’  said  Lord  Minto,  ‘  he 
made  it  appear  that  the  prophecies  themselves  had  been  supj)ressed, 
and  the  Government  was  threatened  with  their  accomplishment  as  a 
matter  of  great  alarm  and  affliction  to  themselves.’  What  the  con¬ 
tents  of  the  sermons  might  be.  Lord  Minto  would  not  undertake  to 
say,  as  he  had  had  no  opportunity  of  perusing  them.  The  Christian 
prophecies  would  certainly  not  have  been  objected  to,  and  the  so- 
called  suppression  of  the  sermons  was  due  entirely  to  Mr.  Buchanan’s 
scruples  of  conscience  which  did  not  permit  him  to  submit  them  to 
Government. 


78 


LOED  MINTO  IN  INDIA. 


[1807 


risk  of  collision  with  native  sentiment,  but  from  the 
pretensions  of  a  section  of  the  Anglo-Indian  community 
to  a  dictatorial  supremacy  over  the  policy  of  the  State. 
A  private  letter,  addressed  by  Lord  Minto  to  the  Chair¬ 
man  of  the  East  India  Company,  who  was  also  a  mem¬ 
ber  of  the  Society  for  Missions  to  Africa  and  the  East, 
and  who  was  therefore  naturally  to  be  supposed  well 
affected  to  their  cause,  shows  that  the  Governor 
General  was  prepared  uncompromisingly  to  assert  the 
views  on  which  his  Government  had  acted. 

‘  Let  me  recommend  to  your  serious  consideration 
the  principal  publications  which  have  issued  from  the 
Serampore  press,  in  the  native  languages,  the  sole  effect 
of  which  was  not  to  convert,  but  to  alienate,  the  pro¬ 
fessors  of  both  religions  prevalent  amongst  the  natives 
of  this  country.  Pray  read  especially  the  miserable 
stuff  addressed  to  the  Gentoos,  in  which,  without  one 
word  to  convince  or  to  satisfy  the  mind  of  the  heathen 
reader,  without  proof  or  argument  of  any  kind,  the 
pages  are  filled  with  hell  fire,  and  hell  fire,  and  still 
hotter  fire,  denounced  against  a  whole  race  of  men  for 
believing  in  the  religion  which  they  were  taught  by 
their  fathers  and  mothers,  and  the  truth  of  which  it  is 
simply  impossible  it  should  ever  have  entered  into 
their  minds  to  doubt.  Is  this  the  doctrine  of  our 
faith  ?  In  saying  that  it  is  not  mine  I  am  well 
assured  that  I  express  your  sentiments  as  well  as  my 
own.  If  there  are  two  opinions  among  Christians  on 
this  point,  I  can  only  say  that  I  am  of  the  sect  which 
believes  that  a  just  God  will  condemn  no  being  with- 


^T.  66] 


LETTER  FROM  LORD  xMINTO. 


79 


out  individual  guilt.  But  is  this  a  judicious  course  to 
pursue  for  the  purpose  of  conversion  ?  The  remainder 
of  this  tract  seems  to  aim  principally  at  a  general 
massacre  of  the  Brahmins  of  this  country.  A  total 
abolition  of  caste  is  openly  preached.  A  proposal  to 
effiice  a  mark  of  caste  from  the  foreheads  of  soldiers 
on  parade  has  had  its  share  in  a  massacre  of  Chris¬ 
tians.  Is  it  possible  that  your  Government  should  be 
required  to  countenance  public  exhortations  addressed 
to  a  Gentoo  nation  to  eft’ace  at  once,  not  a  little  spot 
of  yellow  paste  from  the  forehead,  but  the  whole  insti¬ 
tution  of  caste  itself,  that  is  to  say,  their  whole  scheme 
of  civil  polity  as  well  as  their  fondest  and  most  rooted 
religious  tenets  ?  This  is  to  be  accomplished  by  coarse 
and  sciirrilous  invective  against  the  most  revered  order 
of  Hindoo  society  and  addressed  to  that  order  itself. 

‘  I  leave  you  to  form  your  own  judgment  on  these 
performances,  which  will  be  that  of  a  Christian  gentle¬ 
man.  ...  1  am  no  enemy  to  the  progress  of  Christi¬ 
anity  in  India.  It  is  the  way,  I  observe,  of  some  who 
are  personally  engaged  in  the  work  of  conversion  to 
confound  any  little  check  in  correction  of  their  own 
errors  with  opposition  or  hostility  to  their  purpose, 
and  to  call  out  Atheism,  Deism,  and  above  all  persecu¬ 
tion,  whenever  a  slip  in  their  own  conduct  has  required 
to  be  rectified.  ...  I  do  not  think  we  shoidd  be  justi¬ 
fied  in  refusing  the  dispensation  of  the  Christian  reve¬ 
lation  to  this  great  country  for  our  interest  or  security, 
but  I  am  not  equally  ready  to  sacrifice  the  great  inte¬ 
rests  which  are  confided  to  me  to  a  blind  principle  of 


LORD  MINTO  IN  INDIA. 


80 


[1807 


complaisance  towards  every  indiscretion  which  zeal 
or  negligence  may  commit. 

‘  In  my  opinion  the  missionaries  would  advance 
better  by  mixing  with  the  people,  by  habituating  them 
individually  to  the  more  amiable  points  of  their  doc¬ 
trine,  and  attracting  to  the  latter  by  its  beneficent  in¬ 
fluences,  rather  than  by  the  mysteries  and  dogmas  of 
their  faith.  I  have  some  reason  to  think  that  the 
press  and  the  puljfit  have  not  worked  well.  In  many 
instances  I  know  that  those  who  have  not  been  made 
angry  have  been  made  merry  by  these  engines  of  con¬ 
version.  When  the  truth  of  his  faith  is  questioned 
the  Mahommedan  frowns  and  the  Hindoo  smiles.’ 

A  more  formal  document — namely,  a  general  letter 
to  the  Secret  Committee — ends  thus  :  ‘  With  regard  to 
translations  of  the  Scriptures  into  all  the  languages  of 
the  world,  it  is  a  work  with  which  we  warmly  sympa¬ 
thise,  and  to  which  every  countenance  will  be  cordially 
afforded  by  us  ;  but  if  the  pupils  of  Mr.  Buchanan  should 
employ  themselves  in  translating  the  wretched  compo¬ 
sitions  which  we  have  transmitted  to  your  Honourable 
Company,  we  shall  not  think  that  they  advance  the 
cause  either  of  religion  or  of  letters,  and  they  must 
expect  no  countenance  from  us  either  as  Christians,  as 
scholars,  as  statesmen,  or  as  gentlemen.’ 

Serampore  passed  from  Danish  into  British  hands 
in  January  1808,  just  a  month  after  the  date  of 
Lord  Minto’s  letter  to  Mr.  Parry.  Immediately  on  the 
receipt  in  India  of  the  intelligence  of  a  rupture  be¬ 
tween  England  and  Denmark,  the  order  to  occupy 


^T.  56]  MISSIONS  IN  NORTH-WEST  INDIA. 


81 


Serampore  was  given  to  the  Company’s  forces.  Writing 
of  this  event  to  Mr.  Parry,  Lord  Minto  said :  ‘  Our 
worthy  neighbours,  the  Serampore  missionaries,  have 
experienced  no  sort  of  inconvenience  from  our  occupa¬ 
tion  of  that  factory.  I  flatter  myself  I  am  on  the  best 
possible  footing  with  them,  at  least  in  temporal  con¬ 
cerns.  If  they  should  be  less  satisfied  on  other  points, 
I  may  hope,  from  the  religion  they  and  I  profess,  that 
charity  will  accompany  zeal,’ 

Two  years  later  he  actively  interfered  to  promote 
the  extension  of  the  ministrations  of  the  missionary 
body  to  the  great  cities  of  Northern  India. 

In  the  course  of  1810,  permission  was  sought  of 
the  Government  to  establish  missions  in  the  N.  W. 
Provinces.  Two  gentlemen  in  the  Serampore  mission 
desired  to  proceed  to  Agra  and  Delhi.  The  Governor 
General  in  Council  stated  that  he  saw  no  objection  to 
allow  them  to  do  so,  but  desired  them  to  make  the 
application  for  leave  to  proceed  there,  saying  nothing 
of  anything  else.  This  sentence  was  understood  to 
mean  that  as  their  objects,  more  distinctly  stated,  might 
provoke  a  prohibition  from  the  Court  of  Directors, 
Lord  Minto  took  it  on  his  own  responsibility  to  give 
them  the  desired  permission. 

It  seems  strange  that  this  act  of  grace,  instead  of 
being  grateful  to  the  missionaries,  drew  from  the  Kev, 
—  Ward  the  comment :  ‘  Now  we  are  likely  to  get 
stations  fixed  with  the  public  permission  of  Govern¬ 
ment,  and  we  shall  be  tolerated  like  toads,  and  not 
hunted  down  like  wild  beasts.’ 

a 


82 


LOKD  MINTO  IN  INDIA. 


[1807 


At  that  very  time  no  one,  however  influential,  was 
allowed  to  travel  in  India  without  a  passport,  or  to 
reside  there  without  a  direct  license  from  the  Court  of 
Directors.  There  are  copies  at  Minto  of  several  letters 
in  which  Lord  Minto  expresses  regret  that  he  cannot 
give  the  permission  requested  by  residents  at  Pondi¬ 
cherry  to  travel  in  the  Company’s  dominions ;  and  in  a 
letter  addressed  to  one  of  his  family  he  mentions  the 
receipt  of  a  somewhat  harsh  order  for  the  immediate 
return  of  a  gentleman  to  England,  who  had  gone  out 
in  the  same  ship  as  himself,  had  lived  eight  months 
in  his  house,  and  had  subsequently  held  some  small 
appointment  in  Calcutta.  That  he  had  so  done  with¬ 
out  license  was  no  doubt  an  irregularity,  and  the 
orders  of  the  Court  had  to  be  obeyed  ;  but  no  evidence 
remains  that  the  gentleman,  who  submitted  to  the 
undoubted  authority  of  law,  felt  himself  thereby  to 
have  had  anything  in  common  with  a  wild  beast. 

Yet  when,  in  1811,  some  missionaries  who  had 
arrived  in  India  without  license,  though  not  without 
knowledge  of  the  Company’s  regulations,  were  requested 
to  depart,  an  outcry  was  raised  against  the  persecution 
of  the  Grovernment,  and  the  irreconcilable  enmity  of 
its  members  to  Christianity. 


^T.  56] 


FAMILY  COKRESrONDEXCE. 


83 


CHAPTER  IV. 

Before  the  transactions  described  in  the  last  chapter 
came  to  an  end,  Lord  Minto  had  become  familiar  with 
Indian  life.  He  had  had  experience  of  summer  and 
winter,  had  found  the  cold  weather  delightful,  save  for 
the  insatiable  voracity  of  the  mosqiutoes  that  came  in 
swarms  from  the  cool  air  to  the  warmer  house ;  and  in 
the  heat  of  summer  had  cooled  and  consoled  himself 
‘  by  thinking  of  Minto  and  of  those  who  were  enjoying 
the  green  pleasures  and  calm  comforts  of  that  chosen 
spot.  So  pray  be  as  happy  there  all  of  you  as  ever 
you  can,  for  your  enjoyments  are  my  best  punkahs,  and 
your  repose  is  my  best  recreation  in  this  torrid  zone  of 
trouble  and  fatigue.’ 

One  of  the  greatest  trials  of  absence  in  those  days 
consisted  in  the  long  interval  which  necessarily  elapsed 
between  the  despatch  of  letters  and  their  delivery  in 
distant  lands :  it  was  sensibly  enhanced  by  the  un¬ 
certainty  attending  on  their  ever  reaching  their  desti¬ 
nation.  The  safest  course  was  to  entrust  them  to  the 
Indian  fleets,  which  only  sailed  twice  or  thrice  a  year, 
but  which,  being  escorted  by  a  convoy,  generally  arrived 
in  safety.  Next  to  the  fleet,  a  King’s  ship  was  pre- 


84 


LOED  MINTO  IN  INDIA. 


[1807 


ferred ;  but  chance  ships  or  single  merchantmen  were 
deemed  too  liable  to  be  captured,  to  be  safe  depositaries 
of  letters.  When  these  were  of  importance  duplicates 
were  generally  sent  by  different  vessels  ;  but,  in  spite  of 
all  precautions,  lamentations  were  perpetually  recurring 
over  the  loss  of  letters,  of  many  a  gift  of  ‘  orient  pearl 
and  barbaric  gold,’  and,  worse  than  all,  of  the  ships 
that  bore  them,  which  found  their  way  to  the  ports  of 
our  enemies  and  still  more  often  to  the  bottom  of  the 
sea 

Some  smaller  inconveniences  there  were  in  the 
slowness  of  communications  that  had  occasionally  a 
comic  aspect,  as  when  letter-writers  in  London,  who  had 
missed  the  May  fleet,  served  up  cold  at  Christmas  the 
materials  which  six  months  before  had  been  far  more 
highly  spiced ;  or  when  their  correspondents  in  India 
congratulated  them  a  year  after  date  on  events  already 
repented  of. 

‘•February  8,  1808.'  Our  last  letters  from  home 
were  still  dated  June,  but  we  expect  a  fleet  very  soon. 
It  will  bring  packets  from  you  all,  I  trust.  I  may  safely 
say  that  the  single  interesting  occupation  I  have  (bating 
my  business,  which  is  becoming  interesting  enough) 
is  thinking  of  you  and  all  your  occupations.  I  am 
ravenous  for  all  details  and  particulars,  especially  such 
as  are  agreeable  to  you,  within  doors  and  without. 

‘  Nothing  has  come  from  England  since  the  June 
fleet  which  sailed  the  23rd  of  that  month,  and  we  are 


To  Lady  Minto. 


^T.  56] 


FAMILY  CORRESPONDENCE. 


85 


wondering  that  some  vessel  or  other  has  not  been  des¬ 
patched  to  tell  us  of  the  events  which  have  happened 
since  that  time.  We  have  had  no  letters  overland,  the 
road  being  shut  that  way  as  you  know,  and  all  the 
news  we  live  upon  is  rumour  and  surmise  from  such 
places  as  Aleppo,  Bagdad,  Bushire,  Muscat,  and  other 
out-of-the-world  regions.  The  war  with  Denmark  came 
from  Aleppo,  where  the  Danish  consul  received  it  from 
Constantinople.’ 

It  was  not  till  April  14  that  the  long  looked-for 
letters  arrived.  ‘  It  is  totally  impossible  to  describe 
the  excessive  delight  which  they  have  bestowed  upon 
us.  In  the  first  place  I  never  received  such  a  num¬ 
ber  of  letters  in  my  life  ;  and  I  never  received  any  more 
precious  in  every  possible  way.  I  have  been  reading 
and  re-re-reading  all  yesterday  and  to-day.  Thank 
tiod  you  were  all  well  on  September  8.  I  assure  you  it 
is  a  nervous  thing  to  open  letters  after  an  interval  of 
several  months.  .  .  .’ 

The  tone  of  the  family  letters  was  especially  jubi¬ 
lant,  for  they  gave  the  news  of  the  birth  of  Lord 
Minto’s  first  grandchild — the  son  of  his  eldest  son — and 
the  answers  from  India  were  no  less  joyful. 

To  the  young  mother  Lord  Minto  wrote :  ‘  I  have 
so  many  things  to  thank  you  for,  I  hardly  know  where 
to  begin  :  first,  for  dancing  with  me  at  Kelso ;  secondly, 
for  marrying  graceless ;  thirdly,  for  making  him  so 
good  a  wife, — I  really  am  much  obliged  to  you  for 
that ;  fourthly,  for  being  such  a  good,  dutiful,  beautiful 


8G 


LORD  MINTO  IN  INDIA. 


[1807 


daughter  to  your  good  mother,  Grod  bless  her  !  fifthly 
and  sixthly,  for  two  letters  to  me ;  and  lastly,  but  indeed 
this  is  scarce  worth  mentioning,  for  being  the  mother 
of  Gilbert’s  son. 

‘ It  is  really  hard  upon  me  to  have  been  away 
just  when  all  this  was  about.  I  don’t  believe  any  of 
you  could  be  more  worthy  of  the  occasion,  or  busier,  or 
more  frightened,  or  more  nervous,  or  more  delighted, 
or  a  more  sincere  admirer  of  the  boy’s  fine  figure. 
It  certainly  is  very  hard  upon  me ;  that  you  must 
allow.  Still  this  most  happy  event  has  given  me  many 
a  pleasant  hour,  and  affords  such  a  quiet  dulcifying  sort 
of  satisfaction  of  mind  as  even  the  pains  of  absence 
cannot  sour.  I  may  live  to  toss  him  about  and  break 
his  bones  yet,  though  his  father  will  have  been  before¬ 
hand  with  me.  .  .  .  One  command  that  I  lay  upon 
you  all  is  that  he  shall  on  no  pretence  whatever  go  to  a 
Harlequin  Farce  till  I  return,  and  that  then  he  shall 
sit  between  his  two  grandfathers;  and  three  well-enter¬ 
tained  babes  we  shall  be.  How  we  shall  laugh — all 
three — except  a  few  compassionate  tears  which  I  may 
shed  at  the  cruel  crosses  of  poor  Columbine  and  at  the 
parental  distress  of  Pantaloon. 

‘  Now,  to  be  serious,  I  beg  you  to  make  the  boy  love 
grandpapa  with  all  his  little  baby  heart.  .  .  .’ 

His  letter  to  Lady  Minto  on  the  same  occasion  ends 
thus  :  ‘  The  perfect  happiness  of  the  worthless  pair, 
Gilbert  and  Mary,  is  really  a  sort  of  felicity  to  us  all 
that  makes  me  feel  independent  of  fate  and  fortune. 
Whatever  fall  out,  the  family  bark  seems  in  harbour. 


^T.  56] 


FAMILY  COREESPONDENCE. 


87 


Gilbert  himself  is  happy,  and  the  rest  can  never  want 
a  home  or  friend. 

‘  Guid  angels  keep  young  Minto’s  heir, 

And  a’  thae  lads  and  lasses  spare. 

I’ll  surely  trust  when  I’m  nae  mair, 

The  bairns  shall  prove, 

In  yon  true  fallow’s  bosom  there, 

A  Parent’s  luve.’ 

A  few  extracts  from  his  letters  to  his  family  will 
suffice  to  give  us  a  glimpse  of  what  may  be  called  his 
private  life — in  all  respects  so  different  from  any  of 
the  varied  experiences  of  former  years. 

‘  April  1808. 

‘  I  continue  to  enjoy  Barrackpore,  and  to  find  it  a  real 
consolation.  My  life  would  be  very  comfortless  without 
it.  I  hardly  ever  go  out  at  Calcutta.  There  is  but  one 
dusty  drive,  and  I  have  hardly  time  for  that  .  .  .  All 
that  is  to  be  done  with  people  belongs  to  Calcutta.  At 
Barrackpore  I  may  read  my  despatches  in  peace  and 
quiet  the  livelong  day,  and  write  what  requires  my  own 
pen  without  interruption.  Accordingly  these  are  my 
employments  from  early  in  the  morning  till  dinner  at 
eight,  excepting  only  a  walk  at  sunset  to  catch  the 
breeze  along  the  river-side.  My  walks  are  generally, 
I  may  say  next  to  always,  alone  ;  for  John  and  all  the 
young  party  are  at  that  time  hunting  jackals,  and  very 
fit  they  should.  The  evenings  as  well  as  the  mornings 
have  been  very  delightful,  and  as  the  walk  is  the  prin¬ 
cipal  event  of  my  Barrackpore  day,  it  answers  extremely 
well,  though  it  would  be  improved,  I  confess,  by  a  lady 


88 


LORD  MINTO  IN  INDIA 


[1807 


of  my  own  age  under  my  arm  to  tell  how  I  like  the 
breeze,  and  the  moon,  and  the  planets,  and  such  pretty 
prattle  .  .  . 

‘  The  principal  defect  in  my  comfort  here  is  the  total 
want  of  anything  that  can  be  called  society  to  me.  I 
am  never  alone,  I  mean  when  out  of  my  shop ;  but  there 
is  seldom  anybody  who,  either  in  age,  tastes,  or  any  other 
article,  has  anything  in  connexion  with  me ;  so  that 
except  on  business  there  is  a  total  and  constant  sus¬ 
pension  of  everything  that  is  properly  myself.  This  is 
nobody’s  fault  but  my  own,  for  what  business  have  I 
to  grow  old  ?  .  .  . 

‘  I  have  lately  had  a  most  agreeable  visit  from 
IVIr.  Smith,  ‘Bobus,’  *  the  Advocate  Gleneral.  Though  he 
is  not  exactly  my  contemporary,  he  has  a  great  deal  of 
excellent  conversation  that  is  a  feast  for  all  ages.  We 
think  alike  too  on  European  politics,  which  is  rare  here ; 
and  for  that  reason,  as  well  as  from  a  sense  of  propriety, 
I  abstain  entirely  from  that  topic ;  but  it  is  not  un¬ 
pleasant  to  be  agreed  with  once  in  a  way  when  one  gets 
into  good  company.’ 

One  of  Lord  Minto’s  most  characteristic  attributes 
was  his  sympathy  with  youth.  He  was  adored  by 
young  people,  and  was  equally  the  confidant  of  their 

*  Mr.  Kobert  Smith,  father  of  the  late  Lord  Lyveden,  and 
brother  of  the  Kev.  Sydney  Smith.  ‘  Bobus,’  though  he  preferred  a 
solitary  to  a  social  life,  was  well  known  to  have  no  small  measure  of 
the  same  gifts  for  which  Sydney  was  celebrated.  One  day  when 
the  Governor  General  complained  of  the  torment  he  suffered  from 
the  mosquitoes  at  dinner,  Bobus  had  a  resource  to  suggest :  ‘  You 

should  always  contrive  to  have  some  blooming  youth  fresh  from 
England  to  sit  next  to  you.  They  are  sure  to  go  to  him. 


jEt.  56] 


FATMILY  COREESPONDENCE. 


89 


pleasures  and  their  troubles.  If  an  imprudent  marriage 
had  to  be  condoned,  it  was  his  part  to  write  a  soothing 
letter  to  an  angry  parent,  and  to  insinuate  as 
gently  as  he  could  that,  ‘  after  all,  a  man  marries  to 
please  himself,  and  not  his  father  :  ’  but  when  by  vice 
and  folly  sons  brought  shame  and  ruin  on  their 
families,  and  cut  themselves  off  from  an  honourable 
career,  though  his  sympathy  with  the  sufferers  never 
failed,  he  was  inflexible  in  the  coiirse  he  deemed  due 
to  the  interests  of  the  public  service.  The  disclosure 
of  some  very  grave  irregularities  in  the  conduct  of  the 
cadets  at  the  military  college  of  Barasut  led  to  the 
ejection  of  some  of  the  offenders  and  the  removal  of 
the  governor.  His  successor  met  with  a  degree  of  re¬ 
sistance  on  his  first  appointment  sufficient  to  daunt  a 
keener  reformer,  whereupon  Lord  Minto  wrote  him  the 
following  letter,  which  inculcates  on  a  public  officer  the 
system  he  always  advocated  in  private  education  : — ‘  As 
few  rules  and  regulations  as  possible,  but  unswerving 
obedience  to  those  that  are  necessary.’  He  was  wont 
to  say  that  good  temper,  more  than  any  other  virtue, 
is  the  result  of  habit,  and  that  half  the  domestic 
unhappiness  in  the  world  is  caused  by  a  captious  and 
irritating  rule  in  early  life. 

To  Captain  Malcolm  Macleod,  Commanding  at 
Barasiit. 

‘  Barrackpore  :  July  26,  1808. 

‘  Dear  Sir, — You  will  receive  along  with  this  a 
public  letter,  which  will  afford  you  sufficient  support  in 


90 


LOED  MINTO  IN  INDIA. 


[1807 


carrying  the  proposed  indispensable  reforms  into  im¬ 
mediate  effect.  ...  I  do  not  at  all  agree  with  you  in 
thinking  that  your  first  arrival  at  Barasut  is  an  unfa¬ 
vourable  time  for  correcting  these  abuses  ;  on  the  con¬ 
trary,  it  was  entirely  expected  that  the  change  of  the 
Commanding  Officer  was  to  be  accompanied  by  a  change 
of  management ;  and  the  best  policy  is  to  begin  with 
the  same  system  which  you  are  afterwards  to  pursue. 

‘  I  should  wish,  both  for  your  own  ease  and  for  the 
benefit  of  the  institution,  that  you  may  enjoy  the  good¬ 
will  and  regard  of  the  young  men  under  your  charge. 
But  essential  points  must  not  be  sacrificed  to  that 
object.  Indeed,  it  is  not  the  way  to  obtain  it ;  the 
respect,  and  even  the  regard  of  boys  is  always  lost  by 
concession,  and  by  any  appearance  of  feeble  conduct, 
which  they  are  very  quick  at  perceiving.  Glreat  com¬ 
mand  of  temper  is  necessary  ;  they  should  be  dealt  with 
as  men,  and  as  gentlemen.  But  perfect  steadiness  in 
material  things  is  the  quality  most  sure  of  obtaining 
not  only  their  submission,  but  their  respect  and  affec¬ 
tion.  I  would  not  trouble  and  harass  them  much 
about  trifles,  but  be  inflexible  in  matters  of  importance. 
....  It  will  not  be  enough  to  ‘prohibit  private  enter¬ 
tainments  by  an  order;  you  will  have  to  enforce  the 
prohibition  by  seeing  that  it  is  not  infringed.  Your 
adjutants  must  occasionally  visit  their  quarters,  and 
take  every  other  means  to  know  whether  this  abuse  is 
still  practised. 

‘  I  flatter  myself  that,  with  every  proper  attention 
to  conciliation,  you  will  not  lose  sight  of  that  firmness 


JEt.  t56] 


FAMILY  COKEESPONDENCE. 


91 


without  which  such  a  republic  as  you  have  to  govern  is 
sure  of  running  into  anarchy. 

‘  The  want  of  that  one  quality  was  your  predecessor’s 
only  defect ;  and  that  defect  has  brought  this  important 
institution  into  discredit,  besides  drawing  ruin  upon 
a  number  of  young  men,  and  a  severe  affliction  upon  a 
number  of  families.’ 

In  another  letter  on  the  conduct  of  the  cadets,  he 
wrote :  ‘  I  hear  with  regret  of  cruel  and  oppressive 
conduct  to  the  natives.  This  I  consider  as  ungenerous 
and  unworthy  of  gentlemen.’ 

Occasionally  it  was  the  unreasonable  desires  of 
parents  on  behalf  of  their  sons  which  caused  him 
matter  of  regret.  In  a  letter  to  Lady  Minto  he  says  : 

‘  There  is  nothing  in  this  country  that  a  young  King's 
officer  can  hold  except  an  appointment  as  aide-de- 
camp.  It  is  no  sort  of  advantage  to  him  to  get  it ;  on 
the  contrary,  it  takes  a  young  man  entirely  out  of  his 
profession,  makes  him  idle,  luxurious,  and  expensive, 
the  consequence  of  which,  I  observe,  is  debt  and  dis¬ 
tress.  No  parent  at  a  distance  will  see  the  thing  in 
that  light,  and  I  have  been  obliged  to  place  several 
young  men  in  that  situation,  with  the  consciousness 
that  I  was  doing  them  a  real  injury  in  the  shape  of  a 
very  great  favour.  .  .  . 

‘  The  young  men  here  would  be  better  off  if  there 
were  neither  horses  nor  dogs  in  the  world.  ...  A 
hundred  pounds  is  no  violent  price  here  for  a  dog ;  and  as 
for  horses,  I  wanted  a  quiet  pad  for  my  own  hack,  only 
just  to  carry  me  safe  to  cover,  and  a  horse  was  brought 


92 


LORD  MINTO  IN  INDIA. 


[1807 


for  trial  the  other  day  who  was  nearly  blind,  so  as  to 
start  at  every  bush,  and  not  over  sure.  However  they 
only  asked  300L  for  him,  and  I  should  have  been 
tempted  by  the  bargain  if  John  had  not  advised  me 
against  a  blind  pad.  Yet  a  horse  I  must  have  at  any 
price,  for  I  ride  at  least  twice  a  year.  I  have  just  per¬ 
formed  on  a  charger,  having  presented  honorary  colours 
to  the  1 5th  regiment  of  native  infantry  at  Barrackpore, 
mounted  on  a  war-horse  decorated  with  gold  em¬ 
broidered  housings,  besides  the  ornaments  which  shone 
on  my  own  head  and  heels.  Prince  Esterhazy,  at  the 
head  of  the  Garde  Noble,  is  a  sloven  to  my  resplendence. 
Then,  as  my  respected  friend,  Mr.  Merryman,  would 
sometimes  truly  say,  “  The  riding  is  nothing  ;  speaking 
is  the  thing.”  However,  as  one  ought  not  to  do  two 
things  at  once,  I  thought  it  more  prudent  to  dismount 
before  I  delivered  a  neat  and  appropriate  speech.  This 
part  of  the  ceremony  was  at  sunrise ;  the  officers 
breakfasted  with  me,  and  I  dined  with  them.  Next 
day  they  gave  a  ball ;  but  I  was  best  entertained  with 
a  Nautch  given  by  the  Sepoys.  This  was  much  the 
prettiest  Nautch  I  had  ever  attended,  or  rather  ap¬ 
proached  nearer  to  pretty  than  any  former  specimens 
of  that  amusement  which  I  had  witnessed.  It  was 
performed  in  a  large  tent,  and  was  extremely  scenick. 
The  lights,  which  were  torches  of  hollow  bamboo,  with 
a  thick  wick  on  which  oil  was  poured  every  now  and 
then  by  way  of  snuffers,  were  held  by  men,  black  but 
handsome,  and  almost  as  naked  as  bronze  figures  which 
serve  for  candlesticks  usually  are.  Chairs  were  set  in 


^T.  56] 


FAMILY  CORRESPONDENCE. 


93 


a  semicircle  towards  the  bottom  of  the  pavilion,  on 
which  we  sat,  and  were  plentifully  sluiced  with  rose¬ 
water.  A  circle  was  formed  of  the  Sepoys,  in  their 
own  clothes  (not  in  regimentals),  all  seated  on  their 
hams,  and  making  a  most  picturesque  amphitheatre. 
In  front  the  dance  was  performed  with  the  music,  which 
was  all  national — instruments  as  well  as  airs  and  words 
— behind  the  dancers.  The  dancing  was  much  in  the 
same  monotonous  style  as  I  have  described  in  other 
letters,  but  the  girls  were  Cashmerians,  and  accounted 
very  superior  to  those  of  the  Bengal  provinces.  They 
were  handsomer  than  I  had  seen,  and  were  better 
dressed ;  but  beauty  would  be  a  strong  word  even  for 
these  paragons.  The  music  was  also  Cashmerian,  and 
some  of  the  airs  really  were  very  pretty.  They  danced 
with  something  approaching  occasionally  to  grace,  and 
managed  their  drapery  very  prettily,  so  as  to  remind 
one  for  a  moment  now  and  then  of  the  Etruscan  figures 
or  those  found  at  Pompeii.  But  they  are  over-clothed  ; 
nothing  is  seen  but  the  head,  arms,  and  toes — all  of 
which  are  displayed  for  the  sake  of  the  ornaments — and 
there  is  such  a  quantity  of  clothing  that  it  cannot  well 
take  the  picturesque  sort  of  folds  which  such  flexible 
stuffs  should  take.’ 


‘  Barrackpore  :  May  24,  1808. 

‘  I  often  wonder  at  my  being  able  to  labour  all  day 
and  every  day  in  this  climate  without  ever  flagging, 
much  less  having  any  notion  of  being  ill.  The  weather 
seems  a  dull  topic,  but  it  concerns  one  so  much  here 


94 


LOED  MINTO  IN  INDIA. 


[1807 


that  I  must  give  it  a  place  in  my  true  and  particular 
history  of  our  lives.  This  year  has  been  uncommonly 
favourable  to  beginners.  The  best  weather  generally 
comes  on  about  the  middle  of  March,  but  our  March 
was  the  finest  month  in  the  year  from  beginning  to 
end.  It  was  delightful.  The  heat  increased  about 
the  middle  of  April,  but  was  quite  endurable  till  the 
end  of  the  first  week  in  May.  By  that  time  the  hot 
winds  had  set  in,  and  their  very  name  is  sufficiently 
descriptive  of  discomfort.  However,  at  this  period  we 
have  relief  a  great  part  of  the  four-and-twenty  hours, 
for  at  sunset  the  wind  cools,  and,  continuing  to  blow, 
one  draws  it  in  luxuriously  and  revives.  The  heat  does 
not  come  on  again  till  next  forenoon.  During  the 
first  days  of  the  very  hot  winds  I  bore  it,  and  thought 
that  patience  would  carry  me  through ;  but  it  was  too 
oppressive  at  last,  and  I  submitted  to  use  the  tatty. 
That  invention  is  quite  effectual,  and  makes  a  temperate 
zone  between  the  tropics.  I  sat  the  livelong  day  be¬ 
hind  the  tatty,  subject  to  no  inconvenience  but  want  of 
light ;  however,  with  spectacles  I  coidd  manage  to  read 
my  book  and  write  my  lesson.  I  began,  nevertheless, 
to  count  the  days  to  the  rains,  which  I  had  fixed  for 
June  10;  when  all  at  once,  without  any  notice,  as  we 
sat  in  Council  on  Friday,  May  20,  it  became  so  dark 
that  we  could  not  see  our  desks,  and  then  came  a  deluge 
with  a  tempest  of  east  wind  that  woffid  have  made 
Elliot  shiver.  From  that  hour  the  climate  has  been 
quite  heavenly,  and  not  the  less  so  in  my  estimation 
for  a  good  pouring  shower  almost  everyday.  You  must 


AiT.  56]  FAMILY  COEEESPONDENCE.  95 

not  imagine  that  these  are  the  rains.  They  are  known 
by  the  name  of  the  small  rains ;  not  that  they  are  small 
while  they  are  falling,  for  they  come  down  in  buckets ; 
but  they  do  not  last  long,  and  there  is  always  an  in¬ 
terval  between  these  little  gentlefolks  and  the  grander 
rains  that  come  in  June.  The  whole  surface  of  the 
country  is  already  soaked,  and  the  wind,  therefore,  is 
cool  and  pleasant.  The  thermometer  was  about  96° 
in  the  shade  during  the  hot  winds. 

‘  28t/i — in  continuation.  I  came  to  town  yesterday  to 
Council.  I  started  at  half  after  five  in  the  morning 
which  is  early  enough  in  this  cool  weather.  An  hour  and 
fifty  minutes  is  the  time  I  generally  pass  on  the  road  ; 
the  distance  sixteen  miles  ;  but  the  road  as  smooth  and 
level  as  the  Mall ;  the  carriage  very  light  with  four 
strong  horses. 

‘  2dth. — I  have  been  at  church  to-day,  which  is  being 
a  very  good  Christian,  for  it  is  close  and  warm,  notwith¬ 
standing  punkahs  which  are  pulled  by  INIahommedans 
in  turbans  looking  on  their  masters  with  the  contempt 
which  the  faithfid  bestow  upon  infidels  performing  the 
impious  rites  of  a  false  religion.  There  are  few  coun¬ 
tries  in  which  thei'e  is  such  a  quantity  of  reciprocal 
contempt,  from  the  mixture  of  so  many  different  races ' 
professing  different  religions,  and  in  general  extremely 
bigoted  each  to  his  own.  However,  as  a  Christian,  I 
am  charitable  enough  to  despise  none  of  them,  but  only 
wish  some  of  their  superstitions  were  not  so  bloody 
and  cruel.  Human  sacrifices  are  kept  down  with  some 
difficulty,  and  particularly  infanticide.  Widow-burning 


96 


LORD  MINTO  IN  INDIA. 


[1807 


is  extremely  prevalent,  especially  in  this  neighbour¬ 
hood,  I  am  sorry  to  say.  The  Brahmins  have  some 
profit  from  it,  and  it  relieves  the  heir  of  the  jointure 
or  maintenance  of  the  dowager  ;  so  that,  to  be  sure,  one 
ought  not  to  wonder  at  Brahmins  and  heirs  for  encour¬ 
aging  the  practice.  The  odd  thing  is  that  it  prevails 
in  the  lowest  condition  of  life.  When  a  poor  miserable 
peasant’s  wife  happens  to  be  of  a  good  caste,  which  is 
often  the  case,  nothing  in  the  world  will  prevent  her 
burning  from  pure  gentility.’ 


f 


i^T.  57] 


POSITION  OF  ENGLAND. 


97 


CHAPTER  V. 

The  year  1808  was  memorable  in  the  annals  of  Eu¬ 
rope  as  that  of  a  supreme  crisis  in  her  fortunes.  It 
found  all  the  nations,  save  one,  enthralled  in  the  chains 
of  the  greatest  military  despotism  recorded  in  history. 
It  beheld  the  first  link  give  way,  when  the  spirit  of 
national  independence  burst  into  vigorous  life  on  the 
wild  hills  of  Spain. 

The  position  of  England  relatively  to  Europe  after 
the  Peace  of  Tilsit  (June  1807)  is  thus  commented  on 
in  a  letter  from  a  young  Englishman  in  India  to  a  friend. 
‘  What  an  unexampled  and  surprising  picture  the  state 
of  Europe  now  presents ;  France,  Russia,  Austria, 
Prussia,  Germany,  Holland,  Spain,  Portugal,  Denmark, 
Italy,  Turkey — all  Europe,  save  little  Sweden — com¬ 
bined  against  our  country.  We  may  truly  call  ourselves 
“  divisos  orbe  Britannos.”  Although  this  is  a  state  of 
things  which  no  one  could  ever  have  wished  to  see,  I 
confess  that  I  feel  a  pride  in  it.  ...  I  hope  that  we 
shall  do  as  well  as  possible  under  such  strange  circum¬ 
stances. 

‘  We  have  at  different  times  paid  Austria,  Prussia, 

H 


98 


LOKD  MINTO  IN  INDIA. 


[1808 


France,  and  Germany;  we  preserved  to  Turkey  a  great 
portion  of  its  empire,  driving  out  its  enemies,  the 
French ;  we  have  constantly  fought  the  battles  of 
'  Europe  against  France ;  and  all  Powers  are  now  ranged 
on  the  side  of  France  against  us.  Hurrah  for  the  tight 
little  Island !  ’ 

We  should  hardly  have  ventured  to  quote  so  glaring 
a  specimen  of  a  spirit  described  in  the  slang  of  the 
present  day  as  Jingoism  — the  English  language  having 
apparently  no  term  of  reprobation  for  it — had  the 
writer  borne  a  name  less  known  and  honoured  than  that 
of  IMetcalfe. 

It  was,  however,  the  sort  of  spirit  which,  combined 
with  conspicuous  ability  and  strong  character,  had 
attracted  the  attention  of  Lord  Wellesley,  who,  when 
Metcalfe  was  only  nineteen,  sent  him  in  a  political 
capacity  to  the  camp  of  Lord  Lake ;  and  which  in  this 
year,  1808,  marked  him  out  in  the  judgment  of  Lord 
Minto  for  a  still  more  important  mission.  To  appre¬ 
ciate  the  policy  of  the  Indian  Government  at  this 
juncture  it  is  necessary  to  revert  for  a  moment  to  the 
events  of  the  preceding  year. 

At  the  beginning  of  1806  Persia,  being  engaged  in 
hostilities  with  Russia,  sent  an  Ambassador  to  Paris 
to  desire  the  assistance  of  France.  A  cordial  reception 
was  given  him,  and  it  was  announced  that  a  splendid 
mission,  having  authority  to  make  a  treaty  of  alliance 
between  France  and  Persia,  would  be  despatched  from 
Paris  to  Teheran. 

In  order  to  counteract  the  effect  of  these  proceed- 


Mr.  57] 


DEFENCE  OF  INDIA.— PERSIA. 


99 


ings  a  similar  course  was  adopted  by  England.  An 
Envoy  was  appointed  to  Persia,  and,  with  the  object  of 
lending  greater  dignity  and  importance  to  his  creden¬ 
tials,  it  was  suggested  by  the  Court  of  Directors  that, 
while  remaining  their  own  paid  agent,  he  should  be  in¬ 
vested  with  the  character  of  representative  of  the  Crown. 
The  proposal  was  acceded  to  by  the  IMinistry  of  Lord 
Grenville.  There  coidd  be  little  question  that  Persia 
was  only  important  to  France  as  a  weapon  of  offence 
against  Great  Britain.  Hence,  those  who  knew  most 
of  Indian  matters  saw  the  necessity  of  selecting  the 
most  skilful  of  Indian  diplomatists  for  the  task  of 
countermining  the  progress  of  Phance  at  the  Persian 
Court ;  and  the  name  of  Colonel  Malcolm,  already 
known  in  connection  with  a  successful  mission  to 
Persia  in  the  time  of  Lord  Wellesley,  was  pressed  upon 
the  Directors  by  Sir  Arthur  Wellesley,’  by  Lord  Minto, 
then  President  of  the  Board  of  Control,  and  by  other 
qualified  judges  : — ‘  but,’  wrote  Sir  Arthur  from  London 
to  Malcolm  himself,  ‘  nobody  here  knows  or  cares  any¬ 
thing  about  Indian  matters,  nor  are  those  considted 
who  could  give  the  information.’  The  Wellesley  school 
of  politicians  was  not  in  favour  in  Leadenhall  Street  ; 
and  thus  it  came  about  that  the  claims  of  Malcolm  were 
ignored,  and  that  Sir  Harford  Jones  ”  was  appointed  to 
the  Persian  IMission,  to  represent  the  Crown  while  re- 

'  Afterwards  Duke  of  Wellinoton. 

2  A  baronetcy  was  gnnted  to  Mr.  Harford  Jones  on  Ids  appoint¬ 
ment  to  Persia,  which  was  not  made  till  after  Lord  Minto  had  left 
England. 


100 


LOKD  MINTO  IN  INDIA. 


[1808 


ceiving  instructions  from  the  Company.  Unfortunately, 
Sir  Harford,  though  he  had  lived  for  many  years  in  the 
East  as  a  merchant,  and  latterly  as  consul  at  Bushire, 
was  considered  in  India  to  be  totally  unfit  to  conduct 
so  delicate  a  mission. 

In  January  1808,  rumours  reached  India  of  the 
march  of  a  French  army  under  General  Menou  towards 
Persia  on  the  way  to  India,  while  it  became  known 
that  a  great  military  embassy  attended  by  four-and- 
twenty  French  officers  and  three  hundred  French 
soldiers  had  actually  arrived  there,  giving  it  out  that 
they  were  the  advanced  guard  of  an  army.  ‘  The  first 
project  is  believed  to  be  to  take  possession  of  a  port 
on  the  coast  of  the  Persian  Gulf,  by  which  they  may 
communicate  with  the  Mauritius,  and  receive  supplies 
by  sea,  and  from  whence  they  may  attempt  an  invasion 
of  the  western  coast  of  India,  and  unsettle  the  minds 
of  the  native  princes  by  promises,  menaces,  and  in¬ 
trigue.’  * 

Of  the  English  envoy  to  Persia  nothing  was  known 
at  all.  The  last  act  of  Lord  Grenville’s  administration 
had  been  the  appointment  of  Sir  Harford  Jones,  who 
was  directed  to  proceed  in  the  first  instance  to  St. 
Petersburg  to  offer  to  the  Czar  the  mediation  of  Great 
Britain  between  Eussia  and  Persia. 

The  peace  and  alliance  between  France  and  Eussia 
had  rendered  the  failure  of  this  preliminary  mission  a 
certainty ;  while  the  fall  of  the  Ministry  that  had  en- 


•  Lord  Minto  to  Lady  Minto. 


JEt.  67j 


DEFENCE  OF  INDIA.— PERSIA. 


101 


trusted  it  to  him  made  it  doubtful  whether  Sir  Harford 
Jones  would  be  confirmed  in  the  more  important  ap¬ 
pointment. 

In  the  meanwhile  the  aspect  of  affairs  was  becom¬ 
ing  daily  graver,  as  the  co-operation  of  France  aird 
Russia  in  the  East  grew  more  probable. 

‘  As  long  as  France,’  wrote  Lord  Minto,*  ‘  might  be 
engaged  in  continental  wars  in  Europe,  the  project  of 
directing  her  arms  towards  this  quarter  must  be  con¬ 
sidered  impracticable ;  but  if  her  armies  have  been 
liberated  by  a  pacification  with  Russia  and  by  the 
continued  submission  of  the  Powers  of  Europe,  the 
advance  of  a  considerable  force  of  French  troops  into 
Persia  under  the  acquiescence  of  the  Turkish,  Russian, 
and  Persian  powers,  cannot  be  deemed  an  undertaking 
beyond  the  scope  of  that  energy  and  perseverance 
which  distinguish  the  present  ruler  of  France. 

‘  If  one  body  of  troops  should  succeed  in  penetrating 
as  far  as  the  Persian  dominions,  others  may  be  ex¬ 
pected  to  follow ;  and  it  may  then  be  no  longer  at  the 
option  of  the  Government  of  Persia  to  prevent  the 
complete  establishment  of  the  French  power  and  as¬ 
cendancy  in  Persia. 

‘  The  ascendancy  of  France  being  once  established 
in  the  territories  of  Persia  in  the  manner  described,  it 
may  justly  be  expected  that,  from  that  centre  of  local 
power  they  may  be  enabled  gradually  to  extend  their 
influence  by  conciliation  or  by  conquest  towards  the 


'  Secret  and  separate  general  letter,  February  2,  1808,  par.  24. 


102 


LOED  MINTO  IN  INDIA. 


[1808 


region  of  Hindostan,  and  ultimately  open  a  passage 
for  their  troops  into  the  dominion  of  the  Company. 

‘  Arduous  as  such  an  undertaking  must  necessarily 
be,  we  are  not  warranted  in  deeming  it  in  the  present 
situation  of  affairs  to  be  altogether  chimerical  and 
impracticable  under  the  guidance  of  a  man  whose 
energy  and  success  appear  almost  commensurate  with 
his  ambition.  We  deem  it  our  duty  to  act  under  a 
supposition  of  its  practicabihty,  and  to  adopt  whatever 
measures  are  in  our  judgment  calculated  to  counter¬ 
act  it,  even  at  the  hazard  of  injury  to  some  local  and 
immediate  interests.’ 

In  a  private  letter  he  wrote  :  ‘  What  would  have 
seemed  impossible  has  become  scarcely  improbable, 
since  we  have  seen  one  State  after  another  in  Europe, 
among  them  those  we  deemed  most  stable  and  secure, 
fall  like  a  house  of  cards  before  the  genius  of  one 
man.’ 

Before  long,  the  vague  rumours  that  had  filled  the 
world  ever  since  the  interview  of  Tilsit  assumed  more 
definite  proportions.  Though  all  that  was  possible  had 
been  done  to  secure  secrecy,  and  though  no  written 
records  have  ever  come  to  light  of  the  personal  com¬ 
munications  interchanged  without  witnesses  between 
the  two  sovereigns,  it  is  now  pretty  well  ascertained 
that  the  surmises  hazarded  from  the  first  by  those 
accustomed  to  watch  the  political  skies,  were  nearly,  if 
not  absolutely,  correct.  Like  those  happy  strokes  of 
divination  by  which  great  discoveries  have  been  made. 


^T.  57]  DEFENCE  OF  INDIA.— PERSIA.  103 

what  seemed  to  be  the  intuitions  of  statesmen  were 
sagacious  deductions  from  certified  facts. 

The  indiflference  in  England  as  to  the  dangers  threat¬ 
ening  India,  of  which  Sir  Arthur  Wellesley  complained 
two  years  before,  now  gave  way  to  grave  apprehensions. 
He  himself  wrote  again  to  his  former  correspondent, 
Colonel  Malcolm,  that  ‘  the  state  of  affairs  caused 
great  anxiety,  but  it  is  of  that  nature  which  you  have 
occasionally  witnessed  in  timid  and  undecided  men 
who  fear  something,  they  know  not  what,  and  are  more 
afraid  of  the  remedy  than  they  are  of  the  danger  to 
which  they  are  exposed.’  This  was  in  February  1808. 
In  the  course  of  the  spring  Lord  Grenville,  in  a  letter 
to  Lord  Min  to  already  given,  alluded  to  ‘  dangers  to 
our  Indian  Empire,  in  presence  of  which  Lord  Minto 
could  hardly  have  executed  an  intention,  had  it  been 
formed,  to  resign  his  important  functions  there ;  ’  and 
the  official  correspondence  from  London  showed  that 
an  invasion  of  India  was  looked  upon  by  the  ministers 
as  a  very  serious  danger. 

It  was  believed,  on  what  was  considered  to  be  good 
authority,  that,  in  pursuance  of  an  arrangement  made 
at  Tilsit,  a  Persian  army  of  30,000  men,  with  a  body 
of  Cossacks,  was  to  assemble  early  in  the  spring  of 
1808  at  Astrachan,  to  penetrate  thence  through  the 
northern  provinces  of  Persia,  and  support  the  opera¬ 
tions  of  a  French  army,  advancing  simultaneously 
through  the  Turkish  dominions,  for  which  permission 
had  been  obtained  from  the  Porte.  To  these  projects 


104 


LOED  MINTO  IN  INDIA. 


[1808 


seemingly  pretty  generally  known,  was  added  the 
‘  secret  information,  to  be,  however,  received  with 
caution,’  that  advices  from  Paris  described  ‘  Bonaparte 
as  considerably  chagrined  at  learning  that  the  Kussians 
had  entirely  failed  in  their  engagement  to  assemble  a 
force  at  Astrachan,  alleging  the  impossibility  of  pro¬ 
viding  supplies  for  an  army  in  that  country,  and  the 
unwillingness  of  the  Cossacks  to  march  (possibly  in  a 
direction  where  there  was  no  plunder) ;  that  in  con¬ 
sequence  he  had  ordered  Caulaincourt  to  remonstrate 
most  strongly  with  the  Emperor  on  the  necessity  of 
fulfilling  his  engagement.  From  the  same  source  it  is 
stated  that  Sebastiani  has  written  from  Constantinople 
that  the  Pasha  of  Bagdad  (whom  he  accuses  of  being 
gained  over  to  the  English)  has  declared  his  resolution 
of  opposing  the  entrance  of  any  foreign  forces  into  his 
territory,  and  that,  the  Porte  having  obtained  informa¬ 
tion  (possibly  from  Mr.  Adair  at  Vienna)  that  by  the 
secret  articles  of  Tilsit '  Moldavia  and  Wallachia  were 
ceded  to  Kussia,  Servia  and  Bosnia  to  Austria,  and 
Greece  and  the  Islands  of  the  Archipelago  to  France, 
the  Turks  must  be  considered  as  either  secret  or  open 
enemies,  and  therefore  he  (Sebastiani)  presses  the 
immediate  march  of  the  French  troops  into  Macedonia, 

'  If  Turkey  resisted,  the  two  Powers  were  to  divide  her  do¬ 
minions.  ‘  Si  de  son  cote  la  Porte  n’acceptait  pas,  on  s’obligerait  A 
soustraire  au  joug  des  Turcs  toutes  les  provinces  ottomanes,  Con¬ 
stantinople  et  la  Roum61ie  except^es.’  Lanfrey,  from  whose  history 
of  Napoleon  the  quotation  is  made,  adds  that  the  authenticity  of 
these  stipulations  is  ‘  indiscutable.’ — Histirire  de  Napoleon, 
tome  iv. 


^T.  o7] 


KELATIONS  WITH  TUEKEY. 


105 


as  well  as  the  throwing  forces  into  the  islands,  when¬ 
ever  any  opportunity  of  escaping  the  English  fleet 
should  occur.’ 

The  sudden  revolution  in  the  Emperor  Napoleon’s 
policy  towards  the  Turk,  whom  he  had  so  lately  called 
his  best  ally,  was  an  essential  element  in  the  considera¬ 
tions  upon  which  the  policy  of  the  Indian  Government 
was  shaped. 

Lord  Minto’s  view  of  the  possible  eventualities 
which  might  ensue  is  given  in  a  private  letter  to 
Lord  Caledon:'  ‘A  partition  of  European  Turkey  is 
a  step  in  the  regular  approach  to  India.  It  seems  to 
facilitate  in  some  points,  though  it  may  retard  that 
enterprise. 

‘  In  other  respects,  I  should  think  it  reasonable  to 
hope  that  the  expulsion  of  the  Turks  from  Europe  may 
create  obstacles  in  the  way  to  India.  It  is  impossible 
that  the  Ottoman  Government  and  the  whole  Turkish 
race  should  not  conceive  the  deepest  and  most  bitter 
resentment  against  such  an  injury.  One  should  look 
for  a  close  communion  between  Great  Britain  and  the 
Turk.  And  if  that  consequence  were  to  follow  the 
partition  of  Turkey,  our  opposition  to  the  progress  of  a 
Erench  army  might  begin  on  the  banks  of  the  Bosphorus 
instead  of  the  Indus.  The  Turks  may  be  terrified,  it  is 
true,  and  grant  a  passage  to  the  French  through  their 
territories  in  Asia.  But  even  in  that  case  the  I'rench 
must  be  deeply  committed  in  countries  which  will 


Governor  of  tlie  Cape  of  Good  Hope. 


106 


LOED  MINTO  IN  INDIA. 


[1808 


abhor  them,  and  have  conceived  probably  an  affection 
for  our  cause.’ 

On  a  review  of  all  the  circumstances  Lord  Minto 
came  to  the  conclusion  that  the  Indian  Government 
would  be  wanting  in  vigilance  and  prudence  if  they  did 
not  put  themselves  in  a  state  of  preparation  to  meet  a 
possible  if  not  probable  struggle  with  France,  or  with 
France  and  Eussia  combined. 

‘  Yet  I  am  not  sure,’  he  wrote  in  a  letter  on  this  sub¬ 
ject  to  Lady  Minto,  ‘  that  I  shall  not  be  blamed ;  for  the 
attack,  though  we  are  strongly  and  positively  warned 
of  it,  is  not  certain,  and  the  most  necessary  preparations 
cannot  be  made  without  expense,  which  naturally  comes 
more  home  to  the  feelings  of  my  masters  than  remote 
dangers,  however  serious.  However,  in  this  as  in  every¬ 
thing  else,  I  shall  do  what  in  my  best  judgment  appears 
right,  and  not  be  led  astray  by  the  fear  of  the  Qu’en 
diror-t-on  ?  In  the  meanwhile  the  French  are  smoothing 
their  way  by  magnificent  embassies  and  numerous 
military  retinues  in  Persia,  and  by  swarms  of  agents  of 
all  ranks,  qualities,  and  countries,  all  over  the  East ; 
and  they  are  beginning  to  be  heard  of  at  the  Courts  of 
our  Indian  princes  and  chieftains.  But  I  think  we 
shall  overtake  them  in  that  race.’ 

To  an  enquiry  concerning  the  disposition  towards  us 
of  the  native  states  he  repHed  :  '  ‘  We  have  every  reason 
to  believe  that  all  the  states  of  India  are  satisfied  of 
our  disinclination  to  extend  our  dominions  or  to  invade 


*  May  16,  1808.  Secret  and  separate  general  letter. 


Air.  57] 


THE  NATIVE  STATES. 


107 


their  rights,  and  of  our  solicitude  to  maintain  peace.  But 
those  states  of  which  the  power  and  dominion  have 
been  abridged,  or  of  which  the  influence  has  been 
circumscribed,  and  against  which  the  field  of  ambition 
and  enterprise  has  been  closed  by  the  political  position 
of  the  British  power  and  ascendancy  in  India,  cannot 
reasonably  be  supposed  to  entertain  that  sense  of 
common  interest  with  the  British  Oovernment  which 
should  induce  them  to  prefer  the  security  of  their 
actual  condition  to  the  alluring  prospect  of  restored 
possessions,  consequence,  and  authority.  And  demon¬ 
strations  of  the  dangers  to  which  their  authority  and 
independence  would  be  exposed  by  the  ambition  of 
France  would  have  little  weight  when  opposed  to  the 
assurance  of  restoration  to  the  dominion  they  have  lost. 

‘With  states  of  another  description,  engagements  of 
co-operation  might  no  doubt  be  formed,  provided  these 
engagements  should  involve  obligations  of  defensive 
alliance  against  all  enemies.  Of  such  alliances  there  is 
too  much  reason  to  doubt  the  efficiency  and  the  policy.’ 

A  wise  man  will  not  allow  an  enemy  to  approach 
the  gates  behind  which  stand  doubtful  friends.  ‘  I  am 
strongly  of  opinion,’  wrote  Lord  Minto  to  Sir  George 
Barlow,  ‘  that  if  this  great  conflict  is  to  be  maintained, 
we  ought  to  meet  it  as  early  and  as  far  beyond  our  own 
frontiers  as  possible.  We  ought  to  contest  Persia  itself 
with  the  enemy,  and  to  dispute  every  step  of  their  pro¬ 
gress.  The  force  which  we  can  oppose  to  them  in  that 
stage  of  the  contest  is  indeed  much  smaller  than  they 
would  find  assembled  against  them  in  our  own  terrih)- 


108 


LORD  MINTO  IN  INDIA. 


[1808 


ries ;  but  in  Persia  we  should  have  much  less  to  contend 
with  also,  and  we  should  meet  an  enemy  much  less 
prepared  than  he  will  be  if  we  wait  at  home  till  he  is 
ready  to  face  us. 

‘  This  system,  however,  depends  on  the  disposition 
of  Persia  herself  to  neutrality- — that  is,  to  let  the 
French  and  us  fight  it  out  fairly  between  us.  For  if 
Persia  is  determined  to  support  the  French  with  all  her 
power,  I  acknowledge  that  we  cannot  possibly  detach 
such  a  force  from  our  Indian  Army  as  that  state  of 
things  would  require.  At  least  we  could  not  do  so 
without  finding  some  means  to  divide  Persia  and  to 
have  allies  on  our  side  as  well  as  the  French.’ 

For  the  elucidation  of  such  problems  as  these  the 
presence  of  an  Envoy  gifted  with  special  powers  of 
observation,  as  well  as  with  diplomatic  talents,  was 
imperatively  necessary.  The  state  of  affairs  admitted 
of  no  further  delay.  And  in  absolute  ignorance  of  Sir 
Harford  Jones’s  movements.  Lord  Minto  determined  to 
send  Colonel  Malcolm  on  a  mission  to  Persia.*  ‘  By 
Colonel  Malcolm,  if  by  any  man  living,  we  may  hope  to 
detach  Persia  from  her  hostile  alliance  with  our  enemy  ; 
and,  if  that  benefit  is  no  longer  attainable,  we  shall 
receive  from  Colonel  Malcolm  authentic  information 
and  judicious  advice.  If  Sir  H.  Jones  should  have 
arrived  in  Persia,  Colonel  Malcolm  will  of  course  with¬ 
hold  his  own  credentials  and  diplomatic  powers  in 
Persia,  and  I  do  not  see  any  necessary  and  unavoidable 
inconvenience  from  the  character  which  he  would  in  that 

*  To  Et.  Hon.  R.  Dundas,  President  of  the  Board  of  Control. 


JEt.  57] 


MISSION  TO  PERSIA. 


109 


case  assume  of  Political  Agent  to  the  Governor  General 
— the  political  (not  diplomatic)  representative  of  the 
E.  I.  Company,  and  of  British  affairs  in  India.  He 
might  furnish  essential  aid  to  the  King’s  Envoy.  If 
they  clashed  he  could  be  recalled.’ 

To  Malcolm  himself  he  wrote  '  most  confidentially 
upon  the  point  of  the  military  arrangements  which 
certain  contingencies  might  involve.  ‘  Of  these  trans¬ 
actions  our  opposition  to  Fi’ance  in  Persia  is  the 
anchor  on  which  our  hopes  must  rest ;  for  if  we  per¬ 
mit  that  country  to  be  the  depot  of  her  preparations 
against  us,  and  wait  at  home  till  the  enemy  thinks 
himself  that  he  is  equal  to  the  undertaking,  we  shall 
give  him  a  great,  and,  as  it  appears  to  me,  a  most 
manifest  advantage.  My  first  anxiety,  therefore,  will 
be  to  know  from  you  whether  the  disposition  of  the 
Persian  Court  or  the  state  of  that  country  admits  of  our 
meeting  the  enemy  at  the  very  moment  of  his  arrival 
or  approach  to  the  Persian  frontier.  I  am  aware  that 
this  system  will  require  a  very  considerable  force.  I 
shall  learn  from  you  what  its  amount  must  be,  and 
shall  in  the  meanwhile  make  every  effort  which  the 
state  of  our  resources  admits  of,  to  be  prepared  with  an 
army,  and  the  means  of  transporting  it.  In  the  mean¬ 
while,  I  have  imagined  that  a  force  of  20,000  or 
25,000  men  may  be  necessary.  This  will  be  a  great 
exertion,  and  I  don’t  think  that  we  can  go  further.  .  . 
If  10,000  French  troops  were  to  come  I  conceive  that 


’  This  letter  is  printed  in  Kaye’s  Cvrresjfoiidence  of  Sir  J. 
Malcolm,  vol.  i. 


]10 


LORD  MINTO  IN  INDIA. 


[1808 


our  force,  which  must  consist  of  Sepoys  in  a  great  pro¬ 
portion,  should  be  double ;  but  if,  instead  of  sending 
such  an  army,  as  has  been  announced,  they  should 
begin  by  collecting  gradually  a  small  force  capable  of 
establishing  a  French  post  on  the  coast,  and  endeavour 
to  take  root  there  before  the  grand  design  is  entered 
upon,  I  think  it  of  the  utmost  moment  to  disappoint 
this  preparatory  measure,  and  to  expel  the  enemy  with 
the  least  possible  delay.  We  shall  be  prepared  to  push 
off  4,000  or  5,000  men  on  the  first  summons.’ 

The  letter  ends  with  the  confession  that  ‘  Sir  H. 
Jones  is  rather  a  marplot  (I  am  writing  confidentially) 
in  our  play.’ 

The  instructions  sent  to  Colonel  IMalcolm  from 
Calcutta  show  that  the  policy  he  was  desired  to  pursue 
was  to  be  of  a  tentative  character. 

‘  First,  to  detach  the  Court  of  Persia  from  the 
French  alliance  ;  and  to  prevail  on  that  Court  to  re¬ 
fuse  the  passage  of  French  troops  through  the  terri¬ 
tories  subject  to  Persia,  or  the  admission  of  French 
troops  into  the  country.  If  that  cannot  be  obtained, 
to  admit  English  troops  with  a  view  of  opposing  the 
French  army  in  its  progress  to  India,  to  prevent  the 
cession  of  any  maritime  port,  and  the  establishment  of 
French  factories  on  the  coast  of  Persia. 

‘  Second,  to  obtain  authentic  intelligence  on  all 
points  interesting  to  the  Government.  It  is  scarcely 
necessary  to  particularise  those  points,  which  will 
necessarily  suggest  themselves  to  the  mind  of  Colonel 
Malcolm.  The  principal  of  them  are,  the  real  nature  and 


Mt.  57] 


MISSION  TO  PERSIA. 


Ill 


extent  of  the  engagements  entered  into  liy  France  and 
Persia,  and  the  real  disposition  of  Persia  respecting  the 
execution  of  them.  Colonel  IMalcolm’s  opinion  and 
advice  would  also  be  required  by  the  Government  as  to 
the  policy  to  be  adojjted  in  either  of  two  contingencies 
supposed — the  active  hostility  of  Persia,  or  her  neu¬ 
trality.’ 

With  these  instructions,  Malcolm  sailed  for  Persia ; 
but  before  he  left  Bombay,  though  not  in  time  for 
the  most  rapid  express  to  communicate  the  intelligence 
t  o  him,  the  news  reached  Calcutta  of  Sir  Harford  Jones’s 
arrival  at  the  Cape  of  Good  Hope  on  his  way  to 
India,  where  he  expected  to  receive  the  Governor 
General’s  instructions  for  the  mission  with  which  he 
had  been  entrusted  to  Persia. 

Up  to  the  arrival  of  Sir  H.  Jones’s  communication 
from  the  Cape,  everyone  in  India  had  been  in  total  ig¬ 
norance  of  his  movements.  It  was  possible  that 
IMalcolm  might  find  him  in  Persia,  in  which  case.  Lord 
Minto  I'elied  on  his  envoy’s  conciliatory  qualities  and 
magnanimity.  ‘  For  the  first  he  would  find  exercise  in 
his  intercourse  with  Sir  Harford  Jones,  and  for  the 
second  in  dealing  with  himself.’  The  contingency  of 
Sir  Hai'ford’s  arrival  at  Bombay  before  the  departure  of 
Malcolm  had  also  been  foreseen.  ‘  In  that  case,’  -ftTote 
Lord  Minto  to  Sir  George  Barlow,  an  old  and  cordial 
friend  of  Malcolm’s,  ‘  1  have  resolved  to  withdraw  i\Ial- 
colm’s  Persian  mission  altogether  ;  but  to  beg  Colonel 
Malcolm  to  accept  a  mission  to  Bagdad,  and  to  take 
charge  of  our  political  interests  and  affairs  in  all  the 


112 


LOKD  MINTO  IN  INDIA. 


[1808 


countries  westward  of  Persia  even  to  Constantinople. 
This  is  a  wide  and  important  field  ;  it  is  entirely  dis¬ 
tinct  from  the  province  assigned  to  Sir  H.  Jones,  and 
it  requires  judgment,  ability,  and  activity  which  are  not 
to  be  found  there  now.  We  should  lose  the  advantage 
of  Malcolm’s  talents  and  influence  at  the  Court  of 
Persia.  But  this  loss  we  cannot  avoid.  We  shall  gain 
his  exertions  still  nearer  to  the  approaching  danger 
.  .  .  and  his  observation  and  judgment  will  not  be 
confined  to  the  spot  on  which  he  may  reside,  but  will 
embrace  the  whole  range  of  politics  from  the  Indus  to 
Constantinople.*  This  measure  cannot  but  be  attended 
with  expense,  which  no  man  can  wish  to  avoid  more 
earnestly  than  I  do ;  but  to  save  the  expense  of  an 
essential  service,  and  to  lose  an  advantage  affecting  so 
deeply  the  interests  and  even  safety  of  the  State,  would 
be  the  greatest  and  worst  of  prodigalities. 

‘  If  India  is  invaded  by  a  French  and  Kussian  army, 
that  event  cannot  be  ascribed  to  the  character  or  coun¬ 
sels  of  the  Indian  Grovernment.  It  is  to  the  disasters 
of  Europe,  to  battles  in  Poland,  to  the  Peace  of  Tilsit, 
that  the  necessity  of  waging  a  burdensome  war  in  India 
must  be  traced.  This  is  a  consideration  very  fit,  in  my 
opinion,  to  weigh  in  the  councils  of  the  British  Empire, 
and  one  which  constitutes  a  strong  claim  on  the  policy 
of  the  British  nation  for  whatever  support  and  co¬ 
operation  the  defence  of  India  may  be  found  to  require.’  ^ 

This  was  written  on  April  2 1 ;  on  the  following  day 

’  To  Sir  George  Barlow. 

*  To  the  Chairman  of  the  East  India  Company,  April  21,  1808. 


JEt.  57] 


MALCOLM  IN  PERSIA. 


113 


came  the  letter  of  Sir  Harford  Jones,  announcing  his 
arrival  at  the  Cape.  On  the  23rd  Lord  Minto  wrote  to 
inform  Colonel  Malcolm  of  this  event. 

‘  After  perusing  all  that  has  been  written  to  us  from 
England  on  the  subject  of  the  mission,  and  after  con¬ 
sidering  the  authorities  (the  East  India  Company  as 
well  as  Grovernment)  from  which  his  powers  are  derived, 
I  confess  I  feel  that  no  authority  in  this  country  can  be 
competent  to  delegate  similar  powers  for  precisely  the 
same  purpose  to  any  other  person.  You  know  enough 
of  my  opinions  on  the  whole  of  this  important  subject 
to  make  it  unnecessary  for  me  to  describe  the  regret, 
public  and  private,  which  I  experience  in  renouncing  a 
measure  on  which  I  rested  my  chief  hope  of  a  successful 
issue  to  the  struggle  iir  which  we  are  engaging  ;  but 
there  is  no  deceiving  oneself  on  this  point,  and  it  is 
clear  that  your  mission  to  Persia  must  be  abandoned 
in  the  event  of  Sir  Harford  Jones’s  arrival  in  that 
country.’  The  letter  concluded  by  offering  Malcolm  in 
the  most  urgent  and  flattering  terms  the  commission 
to  Bagdad,  adding  that  his  information  and  counsels 
would  be  required  respecting  all  the  territories  from  the 
Indus  to  Constantinople. 

Of  the  success  of  his  mission  to  Persia,  or  at  all 
events  of  the  diplomatic  tact  and  skill  which  his  measures 
would  evince,  none  of  Malcolm’s  Indian  friends  permitted 
themselves  to  doubt.  Hence  it  was  with  equal  surprise 
and  consternation  that  his  first  despatches  from  Bushire 
were  received.  Lord  INIinto  has  told  the  story  many 
times  in  despatches,  letters,  and  minutes,  but  the  most 

I 


114 


LOED  MINTO  IN  INDIA. 


[1808 


informal,  and  therefore  the  best  version  of  it  is  that  in 
the  following  letter  to  Greneral  Hewitt,  the  Commander- 
in-chief. 


To  Lieutenant  General  Hewitt. 

‘  July  30,  1808. 

‘  I  am  sorry  to  say  in  strict  confidence  that  Malcolm 
has  disappointed  me  exceedingly  at  the  beginning  of  his 
mission.  Instead  of  facilitating  the  commencement 
of  his  negotiation,  he  has  begun  by  creating,  I  fear,  in- 
suiTnountable  obstacles  to  his  own  progress. 

‘  It  is  impossible  to  attempt  in  a  letter  even  a 
summary  of  the  proceedings  to  which  I  allude ;  but  the 
general  features  are  these.  He  charged  Captain  Pasley 
with  a  letter  to  the  King,  containing  little  more  than 
the  usual  complimentary  matter.  But  he  charged  him 
at  the  same  time  with  a  negotiation  to  be  conducted 
by  Captain  Pasley  with  the  principal  Ministers  of  the 
King  at  Teheran,*  the  professed  object  of  which  was  to 
obtain  certain  concessions,  in  the  way  of  prehminaries 
to  all  negotiations,  in  consideration  of  which  General 
Malcolm  might  be  prevailed  upon  to  advance.  Failing 
such  concessions,  he  threatened  the  immediate  vengeance 
of  the  British  Power,  and  declared  his  own  determination 
to  retire  immediately  from  the  Persian  territory.  You 
will  be,  I  daresay,  as  much  surprised  as  we  have  been 
to  learn  that  the  first  condition  required  by  Malcolm 
was  the  immediate  expulsion  from  Persia  of  the  French 

'  The  King  of  Persia  held  his  court  at  Teheran. 


^T.  57] 


MALCOLM  IN  PERSIA. 


115 


embassy  with  every  man  of  that  nation,  and  this 
Captain  Pasley  was  authorised  to  modify  only  by  ad¬ 
mitting  the  temporary  residence  of  a  few  French 
individuals  who  are  engaged  in  works  useful  to  Persia, 
but  the  whole  mission  was  to  he  peremptorily  dismissed. 
If  Malcolm  had  obtained  this  object  after  a  considerable 
residence  in  Persia,  and  after  the  utmost  exertion  of  his 
own  uncommon  talents,  I  should  have  thought  him 
eminently  successful.  But  I  am  compelled  to  say  that 
my  confidence  is  entirely  shaken  by  the  injudicious 
course  he  has  pursued,  and  the  disadvantageous  ground 
he  has  taken.  Persia  is  in  the  hands  of  France,  and 
was  only  to  be  weaned  from  that  connection  by  good 
and  convincing  reasons  urged  in  a  conciliatory  form. 
Intimidation,  which  INIalcolm  has  chosen  as  the  character 
of  his  negotiation,  cannot  succeed  against  the  united 
force  of  the  French  and  Russian  empires,  the  vengeance 
of  which  jNIalcolm  would  induce  Persia  to  provoke  by 
menaces  which  she  cannot  think  so  formidable. 

‘  Malcolm  was  received  with  every  mark  of  distinction 
at  Bushire  by  orders  from  Court,  and  Captain  Pasley 
no  less  so  at  Shiraz,  where  the  Prince’s  Court  professes 
to  be  entirely  English.  The  fact  is  that  Persia  is 
puzzled  between  the  two  great  candidates  for  her  fiivour, 
and  while  the  French  are  well  received  at  Teheran,  the 
intention  was  that  the  English  officers  should  be  con¬ 
ducted  with  similar  demonstrations  of  favour  to  Shiraz. 
A  Russian  Embassy  has  entered  the  Persian  provinces 
from  Georgia.’ 

‘  Malcolm’s  proceeding  at  Muscat,’  wrote  Lord  Minto 


116 


LOED  MINTO  IN  INDIA. 


[1808 


to  Mr,  Edmonstone,  ‘  has  been  affected  with  the 
original  sin  of  his  whole  system.’  What  that  was  may 
be  inferred  from  certain  passages  of  a  memorandum 
addressed  by  Lord  Minto  to  Gleneral  Malcolm,  contain¬ 
ing  an  explicit  condemnation  of  the  policy  adopted 
towards  Persia.  This  memorandum,  docketed  by  him¬ 
self  as  ‘  a  rough  draft  of  a  minute  to  be  forwarded 
immediately  to  General  Malcolm,  July  21,  1808,’ 
begins  by  expressing  the  great  concern  caused  him  by 
the  perusal  of  Malcolm’s  despatches  from  Bushire, 
setting  forth  the  line  of  conduct  which  had  resulted  in 
his  immediate  departure  from  Persia.  The  difference 
between  his  own  and  General  Malcolm’s  sentiments  on 
the  subject  of  the  mission  appeared  so  great,  as  to  touch 
the  general  principles  of  the  policy  to  be  pursued  at  the 
present  conjuncture.  Lord  Minto  therefore  felt  that 
he  must  not  from  motives  of  personal  delicacy  shrink 
from  the  duties  of  his  station,  but  must  endeavour  to 
provide  for  the  public  interests  by  recurring  to  methods 
more  likely  to  lead  to  the  important  objects  which  he 
desired  to  attain.  The  grand  and  ultimate  purpose  of 
the  mission  to  Persia  was  to  withdraw  that  Court  from 
its  new  and  dangerous  connection  with  France.  Mal¬ 
colm’s  peremptory  demand  for  the  expulsion  of  the 
French  mission  had  left  no  room  for  consideration. 

‘  The  demand  cannot  be  supported  on  any  ground 
of  justice.  Persia,  as  an  independent  Government,  has 
a  right  to  receive  accredited  ministers  from  any  other 
Court,  and  to  enter  into  any  negotiation  she  may  think 
advisable.  She  may  be  indeed  precluded  by  previous 


^T.  67] 


MINUTE  BY  LORD  MINTO. 


117 


treaties  with  us  from  contracting  engagements  in  con¬ 
tradiction  to  them  ;  bnt  if  our  claim  to  exclude  the 
French  mission  were  better  supported  on  the  point  of 
right,  it  would  still  in  the  actual  circumstances  of  the 
case  be-  unreasonable  to  insist  on  it  as  a  23reliminary. 
Persia  was  and  continnes  to  be  exposed  to  an  invasion, 
from  Pnssia,  which  is  to  her  a  subject  of  great  and 
reasonable  alarm.  She  first  applied  to  us  for  assistance. 
It  was  impossible  for  us,  consistently  with  the  relations 
in  which  we  stood  to  Russia,  to  afford  the  aid  she  asked. 
She  therefore  gave  us  fair  notice  that,  although  she 
would  have  preferred  our  co-operation  to  every  other, 
she  ■was  constrained  to  provide  for  her  safety,  by  look¬ 
ing  elsewhere  for  the  aid  which  she  could  not  obtain 
from  us. 

‘  Upon  this  ground  her  connection  with  France  has 
been  formed.  France  has  promised  on  certain  condi¬ 
tions  to  protect  her  against  a  Russian  invasion;  the 
promised  service  was  to  have  been  performed  by  military 
force.  France  is  now  in  alliance  with  Russia,  and  is  to 
employ  her  influence  instead  of  her  arms  for  the  pro¬ 
tection  of  Persia.  If  Persia  in  these  circnmstances 
suddenly  and  offensively  breaks  off  the  subsisting  nego¬ 
tiations  with  France,  instead  of  a  contest  3vith  Russia 
alone,  or  instead  of  being  protected  by  France  against 
Russia,  she  must  prepare  for  a  conflict  with  the  united 
force  of  those  two  Phnpires. 

‘  It  is  therefore  reasonable  that,  before  she  accedes  to 
a  demand  involving  her  in  such  consecpiences,  she  should 
be  informed  of  the  means  by  which  we  propose  to  ])ro- 


118 


LOED  MINTO  IN  INDIA. 


[1808 


tect  her  against  them.  This  is  matter  of  negotiation, 
not  for  a  preliminary,  &c.  &c. 

‘  Greneral  Malcolm,  knowing  the  political  complexion 
of  the  Court,  seems  to  have  conceived  that  timidity  was 
the  quality  on  which  he  had  the  best  chance  of  opera¬ 
ting,  and  that  the  fear  of  France  and  Eussia  could  only 
be  combated  by  a  still  stronger  apprehension  of  British 
power. 

‘  Intimidation,  therefore,  was  the  engine  he  proposed 
to  employ  in  the  first  stages  of  his  mission.  I  confess 
that  I  should  have  thought  it  more  advantageous  to 
give  an  entirely  different  character  to  the  negotiation. 
I  can  easily  believe  that  the  arrival  of  our  Envoy  in 
I'ersia  in  circumstances  which  would  justify  hostile 
measures  on  our  part  must  have  created  solicitude  con¬ 
cerning  the  intentions  of  this  Government,  and  that  the 
menace  of  some  great  measure  of  coercion  or  resentment 
on  our  part,  to  follow  on  General  Malcolm’s  retreat  from 
Persia,  might  operate  favourably  to  his  views  in  some  of 
the  minor  points  under  discussion ;  but  it  cannot  pro¬ 
duce  any  substantial  benefit,  because  in  truth  we  find 
I^ersia  herself  under  circumstances  of  extreme  difficulty 
from  which  she  cannot  be  driven  violently,  but  from 
which  she  requires  the  hand  of  friendship  to  extricate 
her  gradually.  I  regret  that  this  expedient  was  resorted 
to  ;  for  not  being  founded  in  truth  it  savours  more  of 
artifice  than  I  think  suits  the  true  dignity  of  this 
Government.  If  Persia  is  found  to  be  decidedly  hostile, 
it  does  not  enter  into  our  views  to  weaken  our  force  and 
resources,  in  the  fruitless  endeavour  to  subdue  that 


^T.  57] 


MINUTE  BY  LOED  MINTO. 


119 


great  country,  whether  supported  or  not  by  a  great 
European  army.  I  regret  it  also  because,  whether  any 
short  advantage  is  obtained  by  this  species  of  intimida¬ 
tion  or  not,  it  must  create  irritation  and  disgust,  and 
so  far  retard  the  desirable  work  of  conciliation  and  of 
union  which  we  have  in  hand. 

‘  I  should  certainly  not  think  it  either  becoming  or 
politic  to  approach  the  Persian  Court  in  a  posture  of 
supplication ;  on  the  contrary,  we  have  ground  for 
remonstrance  against  the  more  than  unfriendly  conduct 
of  that  Court.  But  we  have  not  now  to  learn  that  a 
temporising  compromising  policy  is  the  frequent  refuge 
of  weak  governments,  implicated  in  the  disputes  of 
more  powerful  States  ;  and  our  intercourse  with  her 
should  be  tempered  with  indulgence  for  those  obstacles 
to  a  cordial  demeanour  which  we  know  exist. 

‘  The  dignity  of  our  Sovereign  and  of  our  national 
character  will  not  be  impaired  by  forbearance,  which  is 
due  from  the  strong  towards  the  weak. 

‘  In  my  opinion  the  most  dignified  basis  on  which  we 
can  treat  with  Persia  is  that  of  common  interest.  The 
measures  we  have  to  propose  to  Persia  are  those  which 
I  sincerely  think  can  alone  afford  her  any  prospect  of 
escaping  from  the  pressing  danger  of  being  involved  in 
the  general  scheme  of  French  conquest.  I  would  avow 
at  the  same  time,  without  scruple  or  disguise,  that  we 
also  have  an  interest  in  securing  Persia  against  its  occu¬ 
pation  by  French  armies,  and  that  the  defence  of  Persia 
will  be  an  additional  means  of  security  to  ourselves. 


120 


LOED  MINTO  IN  INDIA. 


[1808 


‘  From  this  avowal  they  will  learn  nothing  that  the 
French  Ambassador  has  not  long  since  taught  them. 
But  we  shall  obtain  better  credit  in  the  advice  we 
prolfer  to  them  for  their  own  interests,  when  they 
know  we  have  at  least  no  hidden  motive,  and  when  we 
shall  have  given  this  pledge  of  our  friendship  and 
sincerity.’ 

The  minute  concludes  with  a  hope  that  a  door  may 
still  be  left  open  to  negotiation. 

INIalcolm  meanwhile  had  convinced  himself  that  the 
Persian  Court  was  under  the  absolute  control  of  the 
French  Ambassador.  It  had  issued  the  most  positive 
orders,  dictated  jointly  by  the  French  Ambassador  and 
by  an  Envoy  lately  arrived  from  the  Eussian  camp  on 
the  frontiers,  prohibiting  the  advance  of  Malcolm  or  of 
any  individual  of  his  mission  towards  the  capital.  It 
was  suspected,  and  the  fact  was  afterwards  admitted, 
that  designs  were  entertained  of  preventing  the  depar¬ 
ture  of  the  mission,  or  of  retaining  the  chief  members 
of  it  as  hostages.  Malcolm  therefore  took  the  resolu¬ 
tion  of  leaving  Bushire  without  awaiting  orders,  and 
of  proceeding  in  all  haste  to  Calcutta  to  make  his  ex¬ 
planations  and  to  receive  further  instructions. 

The  mission  from  which  so  much  had  been  expected 
had  failed.  It  is  possible,  even  probable,  that  a  more 
conciliatory  course  than  that  adopted  by  the  British 
Envoy  might  have  enabled  him  to  remain  in  Persia 
until  a  change  of  circumstances  produced  a  change  of 
sentiments  on  the  part  of  the  Persian  Grovernment, 
when  his  personal  popularity  and  his  conspicuous 


^T.  57] 


MALCOLM  KETURNS  TO  INDIA. 


121 


talents  might  have  restored  the  prestige  of  the  British 
name,  and  enabled  him  to  conduct  his  negotiations 
with  better  effect  than  Sir  Harford  Jones  ;  but  the 
neglect  with  which  the  Indian  Grovernment  had  treated 
Persia  during  the  years  that  had  elapsed  since 
Malcolm’s  first  mission,  had  perhaps  a  greater  share  in 
producing  the  present  disappointment  than  his  some¬ 
what  ill-timed  arrogance.* 

The  first  intimation  of  Malcolm’s  return  to  India 
was  given  by  the  despatches  which  he  brought  himself, 
and  forwarded  to  Calcutta  from  the  north  of  the 
Hooghly. 

It  appears  from  his  own  journals  that  he  was  some¬ 
what  doubtful  as  to  what  his  reception  might  be, 
and  was  proportionably  relieved  and  gratified  by  it? 
warmth. 

'  ‘  Malcolm,’  says  his  biographer,  ‘  found  our  enemies  supreme 
at  the  Persian  capital.  Whilst  we  had  been  sleeping  they  had 
been  striving.  We  had  left  the  field  of  action  clear  for  them,  and 
they  had  occupied  it  with  vigour  and  address. 

‘  Malcolm  had  not  estimated  aright  the  extent  of  this  occupa¬ 
tion.  He  had  relied  too  much  on  the  influence  we  had  established 
eight  years  before  at  the  Persian  Court,  and  had  not  sufficiently 
taken  into  account  the  alteration  of  circumstance  and  feeling  re¬ 
sulting  from  the  progress  of  Russian  arm.s  in  that  momentous 
interval.  The  Persians  believed  that  we  had  deserted  them.  We 
had  at  all  events  looked  unconcernedly  on,  or  purposely  turned  our 
backs  upon  them,  whilst  they  had  been  spoliated  by  the  Northern 
conqueror. 

‘  What,  they  asked,  had  we  done  for  them  ?  who  were  we  that 
we  should  now  expect  a  single  word  from  us  to  dissolve  a  promising 
alliance,  and  to  disperse  a  magnificent  embassy,  strong  in  all  those 
external  attributes  best  calculated  to  rivet  the  confidence  of  the 
Persians  in  the  military  strength  and  national  greatness  of  their 
energetic  allies  ?  ’ — Kaye’s  Life  of  Sir  John  Malcolm. 


122 


LOED  MINTO  IN  INDIA. 


[1808 


Lord  Minto  rejoiced  in  his  arrival  as  enabling  them 
to  discuss  future  measures  by  personal  communication, 
and  as  an  opportunity  given  to  Malcolm  ‘  to  acquire  a 
juster  notion’  of  his  sentiments. 

‘  I  confess  I  have  not  seen  reason  to  recall  the 
sentiments  I  entertained  concerning  the  general  policy 
adopted  by  him  in  Persia,  but  I  note  with  satisfaction 
that  what  appears  to  have  been  the  least  prudent  and 
judicious  course  has  proved,  as  often  happens  in  human 
affairs,  the  most  useful  and  advantageous. 

‘  Since  success  was  impossible,  it  is  satisfactory  to 
have  arrived  at  the  knowledge  of  that  fact  as  early  as 
possible,  and  since  moderation  and  forbearance  could 
have  made  no  difference  in  the  result,  it  is  well  that 
his  line  of  conduct  has  asserted  the  power  of  our 
country,  and  made  manifest  our  knowledge  of  the 
influence  under  which  Persia  had  adopted  so  hostile  a 
course.’ ' 

General  Malcolm’s  information  convinced  the  Indian 
Government  that  Persia  was  so  entirely  dependent  on 
France  and  Russia  as  to  give  no  mission  from  England 
a  chance  of  success.  This  state  of  things  was  not  occa¬ 
sioned  by  General  Malcolm’s  conduct,  as  was  proved 
by  the  plain  avowal  at  Shiraz  of  orders  issued  in  the 
most  peremptory  terms,  before  Malcolm’s  letters  had 
been  received,  to  prohibit  his  advance.  The  motive 
was  no  less  clearly  demonstrated — the  i/nsistanee  of  the 
French  and  Russian  Ambassadors,  accompanied  with 
menaces  of  an  immediate  rupture  if  the  King’s  unwill- 
’  To  General  Hewitt,  Commander-in-chief. 


iliT.  57] 


MALCOLM  AT  CALCUTTA. 


123 


ingness  to  break  altogether  with  England  were  not 
overcome. 

Terror  governed  the  conduct  of  Persia. 

A  French  Ambassador  could  not  but  be  absolute 
when  France  offered  the  only  visible  and  imaginable 
protection  against  Kussia. 

All  preparations  for  the  despatch  of  military  forces 
to  Persia,  on  a  large  scale,  and  for  the  purposes  de¬ 
tailed  in  the  instructions  carried  with  him  by  Malcolm,, 
were  now  set  aside ;  but  Lord  Minto  did  not  think  it 
advisable  to  renounce  altogether  ‘  that  interesting 
(quarter.’  While  refusing  to  entertain  the  whole  scheme 
elaborated  by  Malcolm  on  his  sea  voyage,  for  the  con¬ 
fusion  of  his  enemies.  Lord  Minto,  on  the  assumption 
that  Persia  was  fairly  entangled  in  the  schemes  of 
France  and  Kussia,  accepted  the  suggestion  that  a 
station  on  her  coast  might  under  the  circumstances  be 
usefully  occupied  by  British  troops.  This  station,  ‘  to 
serve  as  a  rendezvous,  a  depot,  a  point  of  departure 
and  a  point  of  retreat,  as  well  as  a  centre  of  observa¬ 
tion,’  was  to  be  the  Island  of  Carrack,  at  the  mouth 
of  the  Bassora  river.  It  contained  only  twelve  square 
miles,  was  healthy,  and  well  supplied  with  water,  and  on 
it  Malcolm  had  long  cast  covetous  eyes. 

‘  The  primary  inducement  to  the  adoption  of  that 
plan  (the  occupation  of  Carrack)  is  that  of  placing 
ourselves  in  such  a  posture  as  might  enable  us  to  pursue 
whatever  system  of  measures  the  progress  of  events 
and  the  many  possible  turns  and  changes  in  the  con¬ 
duct  of  the  adjacent  countries  might  render  expedient. 


124 


LOED  MINTO  IN  INDIA. 


[1808 


‘  The  separation  of  Persia  from  the  cause  of  our 
enemy  is  obviously  hopeless  at  present.  ...  If  Persia 
remains  hostile  to  the  last,  and  nothing  is  left  but 
to  impede  and  obstruct  the  joint  operations  of  that 
Government  and  France,  the  post  of  Carrack  can  alone 
furnish  the  possibility  of  putting  to  profit  such  oppor¬ 
tunities  as  may  offer  to  make  that  attempt. 

‘  To  follow  any  other  course  would  be  to  withdraw 
ourselves  from  the  whole  of  that  important  scene, 
without  divesting  ourselves  of  the  deep  interest  which 
attaches  to  it.  It  would  be  to  throw  up  the  game 
without  withdrawing  our  stake,  because  the  first  deal 
has  not  been  favourable  to  our  wishes. 

‘  Views  of  a  similar  nature,  but  applied  to  Bagdad, 
recommend  the  same  measure  of  an  independent  foot¬ 
ing  in  the  Gulf.  It  must  at  present  no  doubt  be 
considered  as  uncertain  whether  occasions  will  arise  or 
not  to  call  forth  our  exertions  in  the  quarter  now  under 
consideration.  The  route  of  the  French  army  may  be 
very  remote  from  the  shores  of  the  Gulf,  and  it  may 
happen  that  no  effort  of  ours,  either  in  the  southern 
provinces  of  Persia  or  in  the  territories  of  Bagdad,  can 
have  any  influence  on  the  actual  defence  of  India. 

‘  This  may  be  true,  and  our  position  and  preparations 
in  the  Gulf  may  not  impossibly  become  the  cause  of 
their  own  apparent  inutility,  by  diverting  the  enemy 
from  the  attempt  in  that  direction.  But  in  the  first 
place  this  is  not  certain,  and  we  should  leave  an  im¬ 
portant  post  unguarded  if,  on  any  such  speculation,  we 
should  abandon  that  great  means  of  our  defence,  and 


^T.  57] 


MEASUEES  OF  DEFENCE. 


125 


resign  the  whole  of  the  southern  route  to  fortune,  or, 
to  speak  more  justly,  to  the  uudisturbed  progress 
of  the  enemy.  In  the  next  place,  as  I  have  already 
hinted,  these  measures  may  accomplish  their  purpose 
by  impression  alone,  which,  though  its  operation  is 
less  perceptible,  may  not  be  less  efficient  to  its  end, 
and  the  actual  contest  may  be  precluded  by  these 
demonstrations  alone  that  we  are  prepared  to  main¬ 
tain  it.’  ‘ 

‘  There  are  so  many  turns  and  chances  in  human 
affairs  that  I  should  think  it  highly  imprudent  to 
abandon  all  connexion  with  the  countries  bordering  on 
the  Grulf  of  Persia.  If  a  partition  of  Turkey  in  Europe 
were  to  take  place,  it  would  become  advisable  that  we 
should  take  some  part  in  the  affairs  of  Asiatic  Turkey. 
I  should  not  play  the  whole  game  in  this  great  match 
if  I  neglected  to  provide  a  secure  station  for  that  pur¬ 
pose.’ 

General  INIalcolm  appeared  to  Lord  IMinto  singularly 
qualified  for  the  execution  of  measures  of  this  undefined 
but  eventually  active,  enterprising,  and  complicated 
nature ;  and  to  him  direction  of  fhem  was  therefore  to 
be  entrusted.  ‘  Particular  instructions  cannot  well  be 
framed  for  cases  which  are  only  seen  in  anticipation, 
and  may  assume  an  almost  infinite  variety  of  forms  and 
modifications ;  the  defect  must  be  supplied  by  the 
known  talents,  activity,  and  judgment  of  the  man  ;  and 
next  by  general  principles  laid  down  for  his  guidance 
which  will  embrace  many  particular  points  of  conduct, 
‘  To  the  Eight  Hon.  R.  Dundas, 


126 


LOED  MINTO  IN  INDIA. 


[1808 


and  serve  to  regulate  at  least  the  general  character  of 
the  system  ;  the  particulars  of  which  will  thus  in  its 
execution  be  more  easily  directed  by  himself. 

‘  In  the  result,  as  I  fear  no  want  of  energy  in 
General  Malcolm,  so  I  am  not  apprehensive  that  those 
restrictive  principles  by  which  it  ought  to  be  regulated, 
and  which  have  been  fully  inculcated  both  by  written 
instructions  and  by  frequent  personal  advice  and  ad¬ 
monition,  will  be  in  any  degree  forgotten.’ 

It  is  remarkable  that,  among  the  possible  contin¬ 
gencies  commanding  the  attention  of  Indian  statesmen, 
the  one  never  contemplated  was  that  which  actually 
occurred, — namely,  a  check  to  the  power  of  France  in 
Europe,  decided  enough  to  cause  the  abandoning  of  her 
views  on  the  East,  and  the  withdrawal  of  her  troops  from 
Persia.  That  France  might  do  as  she  listed  seemed  to 
have  become  an  axiom  in  the  pohtics  of  the  time. 

We  must  now  revert  to  Sir  Harford  Jones. 

He  had  arrived  at  Bombay  in  April,  following 
rapidly  on  his  letter  addressed  from  the  Cape  of  Good 
Hope  to  the  Governor  General,  yet  not  rapidly  enough 
to  arrest  the  departure  of  General  Malcolm,  which  had 
taken  place  before  his  arrival.  He  therefore  remained 
at  Bombay  to  await  the  result  of  Malcolm’s  mission — 
a  course  warmly  approved  and  encouraged  by  Sir  James 
Mackintosh,  then  Eecorder  of  Bombay,  and  a  hearty 
admirer  of  General  Malcolm.' 

When  intelligence  reached  Calcutta  of  the  probable 

'  Colonel  Malcolm  received  the  rank  of  a  Brigadier  General 
before  his  departure  for  Persia. 


^r.  67] 


SIE  HARFORD  JONES. 


127 


failure  of  Malcolm’s  negotiation  and  of  his  withdrawal 
from  Persia,  the  Governor  General  saw  no  further  reason 
for  detaining  Sir  Harford  in  India,  and  he,  to  whom  every¬ 
thing  relating  to  Persia  had  been  unreservedly  commu¬ 
nicated,  now  received  Lord  Minto’s  authority  to  depart 
on  the  mission  to  which  he  had  been  appointed  in 
England.  This  was  on  August  12.  On  the  22nd, 
JMalcolm  reached  Calcutta,  and  on  the  same  day,  before 
the  Governor  General  in  Council  had  finished  reading 
the  despatches  forwarded  from  the  mouth  of  the 
Hooghly  a  few  hours  before  IMalcolm’s  arrival,  orders 
were  sent  to  Sir  H.  Jones  to  await  fiu’ther  instructions 
at  Bombay. 

They  appear  to  have  had  the  effect  of  quickening 
his  movements.  He  stood  not  on  the  order  of  his 
going,  but  went  at  once.  On  the  29th  a  still  more 
urgent  communication  was  addressed  to  him,  after  the 
decision  to  occupy  Carrack  had  been  arrived  at ;  but, 
when  it  reached  Bombay,  Sir  Harford  was  on  the  high 
seas.  Letters  at  that  period  seem  usually  to  have  taken 
from  eighteen  to  twenty  days  on  the  road  between  Cal¬ 
cutta  and  Bombay.  On  this  occasion  the  rains  caused 
a  delay  of  five  days  in  the  arrival  of  the  express.  From 
Bombay  it  was  despatched  with  great  expedition  after 
Sir  Harford  in  a  quick  sailing  vessel,  and  would  have 
come  up  with  him  if  she  had  not  sprung  a  mast  and 
been  constrained  to  return  to  Bombay  to  repair. 

Fortune  at  this  juncture  decidedly  favoured  Sir 
Harford.  It  was  obvious  that  the  measures  in  contem¬ 
plation  could  not  be  proceeded  with  while  an  Envoy, 


128 


LOED  MINTO  IN  INDIA. 


[1808 


representing  His  Majesty,  was  on  his  way  to  Persia, 
Some  sanguine  spirits  entertained  the  belief  that  on 
the  receipt  of  Lord  Minto’s  despatches,  Sir  Harford’s 
re-embarkation  would  immediately  follow  on  his  arrival. 
Jjord  Minto  thought  otherwise ;  and  when,  at  the  end 
of  September,  he  acquired  intelligence  that  Sir  Harford’s 
determination  to  proceed  on  his  embassy  had  not  been 
shaken  by  the  first  despatch  from  Calcutta,  relating 
the  circumstances  under  which  Malcolm  had  withdrawn 
from  Persia,  Lord  Minto  did  not  hesitate  to  suspend 
the  preparations  which  Malcolm  had  gone  to  Bombay 
to  superintend.  On  September  30  the  Grovernor 
General  wrote  to  Malcolm  that  he  had  abandoned  all 
hope  of  arresting  Sir  Harford’s  departure,  and  that  in 
their  ignorance  of  the  reception  he  might  meet  with  in 
Persia  the  expedition  to  Carrack  must  be  necessarily 
suspended,  ‘  We  cannot  commit  hostilities  in  Persia 
while  the  King  of  England  is  negotiating  with  the 
King  of  Persia.  .  .  .  You  will  have  to  withdraw 
Captain  Pasley  and  all  your  establishment  from  Bushire. 
There  should  be  no  possibility  oi  jostling  between  any¬ 
thing  that  is  yours  and  Sir  Harford  Jones’s — I  mean, 
no  possibility  of  its  being  suspected  or  imputed  by 
him.’  The  letter  ends  with  the  remark  that  he  had 
great  doubts  of  being  able  to  control  Sir  Harford  from 
Bengal,  but  that  he  had  the  right  to  do  so,  and  should 
assert  it. 

It  must  be  remembered  that  at  this  time  the 
Government  at  Calcutta  was  convinced  of  the  futility  of 
any  negotiation  with  Persia,  and  of  the  reality  of  the 


^T.  57] 


CHANGE  OF  POLICY. 


120 


designs  against  India  entertained  by  those  who  guided 
the  counsels  of  the  Persian  Court.  It  followed  that, 
in  their  judgment,  Sir  Harford’s  proceedings  were 
simply  obstructive,  causing  loss  of  precious  time. 
But  in  the  course  of  the  winter  a  change  came  over 
the  views  of  Indian  statesmen.  The  apprehension 
of  a  French  invasion  had  diminished,  if  it  was  not 
altogether  removed,  and  in  March  1809  Lord  Minto 
was  able  to  write  to  General  Malcolm,  with  many 
expressions  of  regard  and  of  regret  at  the  inevitable 
disappointment  the  announcement  he  was  about  to 
make  must  cause  him,  that  he  had  determined  to 
abandon  the  expedition  to  the  Persian  Gulf ;  the  last 
information  from  England  having  satisfied  him  that 
the  affairs  of  Europe  were  sufficiently  agitated  to 
preclude  for  a  time,  on  the  part  of  the  French, 
such  difficult  and  distant  projects  as  had  called  forth 
the  late  policy  and  measures  of  the  Indian  Govern¬ 
ment. 

‘  He  knew  that  a  struggle  was  to  be  maintained  for 
Spain,  and  had  great  hope,  thank  God,  of  that  great 
and  noble  cause.’ 

With  this  letter  the  story  of  the  Persian  mission 
would  have  fitly  ended,  but  the  conduct  pursued  by  Sir 
Harford  Jones,  on  receiving  in  Persia  the  despatches 
forwarded  to  him  after  his  hasty  departure  from  Bom¬ 
bay,  produced  results  which  cannot  be  passed  over  in 
silence.  All  disputes  are  unpleasant  to  relate,  more 
especially  when  in  such  a  life  as  Lord  Minto’s  they  jar 
upon  one  like  a  false  note  in  music ;  but  as  this  episode 

K. 


130 


LORD  MINTO  IN  INDIA. 


[1808 


has  been  frequently,  and  not  always  accurately  related, 
it  is  necessary  to  treat  of  it  in  some  detail. 

It  has  been  represented  that  the  despatch  of  two 
missions  to  Persia  had  arisen  from  the  jealousy  enter¬ 
tained  by  the  Indian  Grovernment  of  an  Envoy  from 
the  Crown.  This  was  not  the  case.  The  resolution  to 
appoint  an  Envoy  to  represent  both  Crown  and  Com¬ 
pany  had  been  taken  with  Lord  Minto’s  knowledge  and 
participation,  before  he  left  England.  He  had  doubt¬ 
less  strongly  urged  the  propriety  of  selecting  the  in¬ 
dividual  to  fill  the  office  from  the  Indian  service,  which 
contained  many  eminent  men  well  qualified  for 
the  post;  but  the  advice  related  to  the  choice  of 
the  individual  Envoy,  not  to  the  nature  or  source  of 
his  powers;  concerning  these  there  had  been  no  discus¬ 
sion  or  difference  of  opinion.  For  nine  months  after 
his  arrival  in  India  Lord  Minto  heard  no  word  of  Sir 
Harford  Jones,  beyond  the  fact  of  his  having  been 
selected  for  the  mission  to  Persia,  to  include  a  prelimi¬ 
nary  mission  to  St.  Petersburg.  In  the  meanwhile 
events  were  hurrying  on :  the  circumstances  under 
which  the  appointment  had  been  made,  and  the  Ministry 
who  made  it,  had  changed.  The  state  of  affairs  in  Persia 
was  urgent.  It  caused,  as  we  have  seen,  great  anxiety 
in  England  as  well  as  in  India.  Lord  Minto  conse¬ 
quently  deemed  it  his  duty  to  send  a  mission  from 
India  to  Persia  on  the  distinct  understanding  that 
Colonel  Malcolm,  to  whom  he  entrusted  it,  was  not  to 
present  his  credentials  if  he  found  Sir  Harford  Jones 
there.  In  that  case  he  was  to  subside  into  the  agent 


JEt.  57] 


MALCOLM  RECALLED. 


131 


of  the  Governor  General.  Bnt  even  this  secondary 
position  originally  assigned  to  him  was  cancelled  im¬ 
mediately  on  the  receipt  of  Sir  Harford  Jones’s  commu¬ 
nication  from  the  Cape. 

Instructions  were  sent  forthwith  to  Malcolm  to 
abandon  Persia,  and  undertake  the  mission  to  Bagdad. 
But  in  those  days  weeks  were  requisite  for  the  transit 
of  letters  to  Persia,  and  it  does  not  appear  that  the 
orders  of  recall  had  reached  IMalcolm  before  his  hurried 
departure  from  Bushire.  When,  at  a  subsequent 
period.  Lord  IMinto  sought  to  arrest  Sir  Harford’s  em¬ 
barkation  at  Bombay,  it  was  under  the  conviction  that, 
the  time  for  profitable  negotiation  was  past.  His  desire 
that  there  should  be  no  clashing  or  jostling  between 
Malcolm  and  Jones  has  been  stated.  AMiat  then  was 
the  cause  of  the  bitter  strife  which  reams  of  paper  still 
exist  to  prove,  if  not  the  action  of  Sir  H.  Jones  in  re¬ 
pudiating  the  authority  of  the  Government  of  India, 
in  the  higher  character  of  rejjresentative  of  His 
Majesty  ?  On  his  arrival  in  Persia  he  found  that  the 
aspect  of  things  had  entirely  changed  during  the  three 
months  which  had  elapsed  since  IMalcolm’s  departure. 
French  promises  had  not  been  followed  by  performance  ; 
the  Persian  Court  had  cooled  towards  their  new  friends, 
and  had  grown  alarmed  at  the  prospect  of  a  rupture 
with  their  powerful  neighbour  in  India.  On  the  receipt 
of  the  intelligence  contained  in  the  despatches  to  Sir 
Harford  Jones  from  Calcutta,  of  the  intended  expedition 
against  Carrack,  anger  was  added  to  a})prehension. 
Thereupon  Sir  Harford  saw  no  better  wav  of  restoring 


132 


LORD  MINTO  IN  INDIA. 


[1809 


the  equanimity  of  the  Persian  Court,  and  of  smoothing 
his  own  advance  to  Teheran,  than  to  give  them  the 
assurance  that  a  greater  than  the  Governor  General 
stood  before  them  in  his  own  person.  Throwing  off  all 
allegiance  to  the  Indian  Government  he  proceeded  to 
give  a  solemn  pledge  that  no  aggression  should  be 
committed  on  the  dominions  of  the  King  of  Persia  as 
long  as  he  displayed  a  wish  to  jjreserve  amicable  rela¬ 
tions  with  the  King  of  Great  Britain. 

How  these  pretensions  were  viewed  at  Calcutta  will 
be  best  shown  in  the  following  extracts  from  the  corre¬ 
spondence  of  the  Governor  General  in  Council  with  the 
Secret  Committee.  They  distinctly  state  the  nature  of 
the  powers  with  which  Sir  H.  Jones  had  been  invested, 
and  also  the  responsibilities  which  attached  to  the 
Indian  Government.' 

‘  As  we  have  already  observed  in  our  despatch  to 
yoim  Honourable  Committee  of  January  20,  we  conceive 
that  it  was  the  express  intention  of  Government  in 
England  in  acceding  to  the  request  of  the  Honomable 
the  Court  of  Directors,  that  Sir  Harford  Jones  might 
be  vested  with  diplomatic  functions  on  the  part  of  the 
Crown,  to  add  weight  and  consequence  to  the  authority 
of  the  local  Government  of  India,  and  that  it  was  the 
special  duty  of  Sir  H.  Jones  rather  to  combine  than  to 
■separate  the  two  anthorities,  and  to  employ  the  one  as 
the  means  of  adding  dignity  and  efficiency  to  the  other. 
We  conceive  that  though  Sir  H.  Jones  was  vested  with 
a  commission  from  the  throne,  he  was  bound  by  the 
‘  Extract  from  secret  and  separate  general  letter,  April  3,  1809. 


JEt.  58]  LETTER  TO  SECRET  COMMITTEE. 


133 


spirit  and  letter  of  the  orders  which  accompanied  that 
commission  to  act  exclusively  under  the  instructions  of 
your  Honourable  Committee  and  of  the  Honourable 
Company’s  Government  in  India. 

‘  In  Mr.  Secretary  Canning’s  instructions  to  Sir 
H.  Jones  of  August  28,  1807,  it  is  stated  that  “  the 
Court  of  Directors  of  the  E.  I.  Company,  having  repre¬ 
sented  to  His  Majesty’s  ministers,  through  the  President 
of  the  Commissioners  for  the  affairs  of  India,  that  the 
mission  with  which  Sir  II.  Jones  was  charged  to  the 
Court  of  Persia  would  be  likely  to  experience  a  more 
favourable  reception  at  that  Court  if  he  were  directly 
accredited  from  His  Majesty,  and  enabled  to  bring 
forward  in  His  IMajesty’s  name  the  different  propo¬ 
sitions  which  he  might  be  instructed  to  submit  to 
the  consideration  of  the  Persian  Government.  IMr. 
Secretary  Canning  had  received  His  Majesty’s  com¬ 
mands  to  authorise  Sir  H.  Jones  to  assume  the  character 
of  His  jMajesty’s  Envoy  to  the  Court  of  Persia.’’  It  is 
further  distinctly  stated  in  the  same  letter,  that  the  in¬ 
structions  by  which  Sir  H.  Jones’s  conduct  in  the  execu¬ 
tion  of  his  mission  was  to  be  guided,  he  would  receive 
from  the  Court  of  Directors  of  the  E.  1.  Company,  or 
the  Secret  Committee,  or  from  their  Government  in 
India ;  and  to  those  instriictions  Sir  H.  Jones  was 
desired  to  conform.  Sir  H.  Jones  was  at  the  same 
time  authorised  to  sign  in  His  Majesty’s  name  any 
treaty  which  in  pursuance  of  these  instructions  he 
might  have  occasion  to  negotiate  with  the  ministers  of 
the  King  of  Persia,  but  was  informed  that,  in  the  event 


134 


LOKD  MINTO  IN  INDIA. 


[1809 


of  his  being  directed  to  hold  out  any  promise  of  pecu¬ 
niary  or  military  assistance,  such  engagements  were  to 
be  made  only  in  reference  to  the  forces  actually  in 
India,  and  to  the  funds  of  the  E.  I.  Company,  by  whom 
all  the  expenses  attending  his  mission  were  to  be 
defrayed. 

‘  Your  Honourable  Company  did  at  the  same  time 
communicate  to  Sir  H.  Jones  the  general  objects  of  his 
mission,  and  direct  him  as  prescribed  in  Mr.  Secretary 
Canning’s  letter  to  conform  to  such  instructions  as  he 
might  receive  from  their  Company’s  Government  in 
India  for  the  accomplishment  of  these  objects. 

‘  It  cannot  be  necessary  to  enter  into  any  discus¬ 
sion  for  the  purpose  of  demonstrating  the  inconsist¬ 
ency  of  our  being  charged  with  the  defence  and  security 
of  India  against  the  dangers  in  which  the  mission  to 
Persia  originated,  without  possessing  power  to  direct 
the  negotiation  with  that  Court,  or  to  control  the  con¬ 
duct  of  the  minister  deputed  there ;  mthout  being  at 
liberty  to  determine  the  point  of  time  at  which  negotia¬ 
tion  should  be  undertaken  ;  to  judge  whether  or  not 
the  prosecution  of  it  is  compatible  with  the  honour  and 
interests  of  the  Government  committed  to  our  charge, 
or  to  limit  or  extend  the  engagement  for  which  Ave  are 
exclusively  responsible. 

‘  A  state  of  affairs  may  readily  be  supposed  which 
woidd  render  the  prosecution  of  a  mission  to  Persia  on 
the  part  of  the  British  power,  utterly  subversive  of  the 
dearest  interests  of  this  country.  In  such  a  case  it 
cannot  be  contended  that  the  apppointment  of  a 


JKt.  58]  LETTER  TO  SECRET  COMMITTEE.  135 

minister  accredited  to  the  Court  of  Persia  by  the  au¬ 
thorities  in  England,  under  the  contemplation  of  a 
ditferent  condition  of  affairs,  should  supersede  a  discre¬ 
tionary  power,  on  the  part  of  the  local  Government, 
to  require  him  to  suspend  the  exercise  of  his  ministerial 
functions  ;  or  that  a  minister  so  appointed,  proceeding 
without  the  authority  of  this  Government,  or  in  direct 
opposition  to  it,  is  empowered  by  his  commission  to 
pledge  its  faith  to  the  adoption  of  a  course  of  measures, 
not  only  unsanctioned  by  the  Government  on  which 
the  execution  of  those  measures  must  depend,  but 
expressly  declared  to  be  incompatible  with  its  honour 
and  interest.  The  assumption  of  such  a  power  is  the 
assumption  of  the  government  of  this  country,  not  the 
exercise  of  the  ministerial  powers  delegated  by  the 
Crown  to  its  accredited  envoy.  It  is  the  assumption 
of  power  which  the  throne  itself  never  claimed  ;  and  it 
is  a  direct  opposition,  not  only  to  the  spirit,  but  to  the 
very  letter  of  His  ^Majesty’s  commands.’ 

Lord  Hinto,  describing  the  grounds  on  which  the 
supreme  Government  of  India  had  hitherto  carried  on 
the  connection  with  Persia,  continues  :  ‘By  the  , laws 
which  have  been  framed  for  the  management  of  the 
honourable  Company’s  affairs,  the  local  Government  of 
this  country  is  vested  with  the  power  attached  to 
sovereignty.  It  is  empowered  to  administer  civil  and 
criminal  justice,  to  levy  war,  and  to  conclude  peace. 
It  is  equally  essential  to  the  preservation  of  this  valu¬ 
able  branch  of  the  British  Em})ire  that  the  States  of 
Asia  should  consider  the  British  establishment  in  India 


136 


LOED  MINTO  IN  INDIA. 


[1809 


in  the  light  of  a  sovereign  State,  as  that  the  G-overn- 
ment  should  actually  exercise  the  powers  annexed 
to  it. 

‘  In  this  character,  the  Company’s  Government  has 
legitimately  negotiated  by  means  of  ambassadors,  and 
concluded  treaties  with  the  State  of  Persia  on  a  footing 
of  equality.  In  this  character,  the  State  of  Persia  has 
been  accustomed  to  consider  the  British  Government 
in  India  as  vested  with  absolute  authority  to  employ 
its  resources  in  aid  of  the  Persian  monarch  as  an 
ally,  or  to  direct  its  power  against  him  as  an  enemy. 
It  is  in  this  character  alone  that  we  have  been  enabled 
to  obtain  those  manifestations  of  respect,  that  regard 
to  the  claims  of  dignity,  which,  amongst  all  nations  of 
the  world,  but  in  a  special  degree  among  Asiatic  States, 
are  essential  to  the  maintenance  of  real  power  in  the 
scale  of  political  interest.  This  acknowledged  character, 
as  it  constituted  the  basis,  so  it  must  form  the  cement 
of  our  external  relations.  To  depreciate  therefore  that 
estimation  of  the  power,  and  the  dignity  of  the  British 
Government  in  India,  which,  under  a  sense  of  its  im¬ 
portance,  we  have  successfully  laboured  to  preserve 
amongst  neighbouring  States,  is  to  fix  upon  the  British 
Government  the  stigma  of  deceit,  to  affect  the  reputa¬ 
tion  of  our  public  faith,  and  to  expose  us  to  much  of  the 
danger  arising  from  a  real  loss  of  power  and  authority, 
by  diminishing  that  awe  and  respect  with  which  this 
Government  has  hitherto  been  contemplated,  and  on 
which  the  tranquillity  and  security  of  the  Britisfi 
dominion  in  India  mainly  depend.’ 


vEt.  58] 


TREATY  WITH  PERSIA. 


137 


In  the  meanwhile  Sir  Harford  had  succeeded  in 
negotiating  a  preliminary  treaty,  and  had  prevailed  on 
the  King  of  Persia  to  send  an  Ambassador  to  England 
in  company  with  Air.  IMorier.' 

The.  draft  of  this  treaty  was  sent  to  the  Indian 
(iovernment  for  ratification,  accompanied  by  a  letter 
from  the  King  of  Persia  to  the  Governor  General,  which 
was  couched  in  language  that  the  Indian  authorities 
deemed  to  be  intentionally  disrespectful.  Writing  to 
jVlalcolm  on  June  27,  1809,  Lord  iMinto  said:  ‘  iMr. 
Kdnionstoue  tells  me  that  in  every  circumstance  and 
form  of  language  it  is  wanting  in  the  respect  which  has 
till  now  been  rendered  to  the  station  of  Governor  General. 
It  acquaints  me  with  the  arrival  of  an  Envoy  from 
the  King  of  England,  and  the  conclusion  of  a  treaty  of 
alliance  between  the  two  Crowns.  It  therefore  requires 
me  to  give  effect  to  the  intentions  of  the  two  monar¬ 
chies  and  of  my  Sovereign,  by  attending  to  the  due 
and  strong  execution  of  all  the  conditions  agi-eed  on.* 

This  letter  was  looked  upon  as  amounting  to  a 

'  In  a  letter  of  the  following  year  Miss  Elliot  wrote  to  her 
father  that  ‘  the  new  Persian  Ambassador  wlio  came  home  with  Mr. 
Morier  is  very  handsome  and  extrc'mely  admired  by  the  ladies. 
Some  people  stispect  he  is  “  no  rvoAter,  hut  a  Knhjld  Templar  in  dis¬ 
guise”  or  rather  no  Ambassador,  but  a  renegade  Jew.  Some  wise 
man  asked  him  if  he  adored  the  sun  in  Persia;  he  said,  “  No,  not  in 
Persia,  but  he  should  adore  it  in  England  if  he  happened  to  see  it.” 
Ihere  is  only  one  lady  who  can  speak  Persian  to  him,  a  Miss 
Metcalfe,  who  cracks  Persian  jokes  to  him,  and  lauglis  in  Persian, 
just  as  if  it  was  English.  They  say  of  course  he  is  in  love  with  her, 
but  having  two  or  three  dozen  wives  already,  there  is  no  room  for 
her,  the  more’s  the  pit}'.’ — This  Persian  Envoy  is  the  hero  of  Mr. 
Morier’s  entertaining  work.  The  Adventures  of  llajji  Bala. 


138 


LOKD  MINTO  IN  INDIA. 


[1809 


deposition  of  the  Government  of  India  from  the  sovereign 
powers  with  which  it  had  been  invested. 

Lord  iMinto  did  not  hesitate  to  ratify  the  treaty, 
knowing  that  the  public  faith  of  England  was  thereby 
engaged,  but  he  sent  instructions  to  Persia  disavowing 
the  jDublic  character  of  the  Ambassador,  and  desiring 
him  to  quit  Persia  immediately,  on  pain  of  having  his 
bills  dishonoured.* 

This  was  in  the  summer  of  1809,  but  so  slow  were 
the  communications  with  England,  that  a  twelvemonth 
elapsed  before  the  final  decision  of  the  Home  Govern¬ 
ment  to  assume  the  sole  direction  of  diplomatic  rela¬ 
tions  with  Persia,  reached  India.  While  still  believing 
the  conduct  of  affairs  in  Persia  to  remain  with  the 
Government  of  India,  Lord  Minto  thought  it  his  duty 
to  re-assert  their  claim  to  supreme  authority  over  all 
their  agents  in  the  East. 

‘  To  despise  is  to  weaken.  Eeputation  is  Power’ — 
said  an  English  writer  well  versed  in  the  knowledge 
of  courts  and  men.  So  thinking.  Lord  Minto  asked 

‘  The  chief  points  of  the  treaty  were,  that  any  treaty  made  with 
other  European  powers  should  be  considered  void  ;  that  no  force 
commanded  by  Europeans  should  be  permitted  to  march  through 
Persia  towards  India;  and  that,  if  any  European  army  invaded 
Persian  territory,  the  British  Government  should  afford  the  aid  of  a 
military  force  or  subsidy,  ‘  The  last  point  is  the  only  one  of  im¬ 
portance,’  wrote  Lord  Minto  to  Sir  Gore  Ouseley,  ‘and  in  my 
judgment  it  is  fraught  with  mischievous  consequences  and  may 
entail  very  grave  ones.’  This  opinion  w^  justified  by  the  events  of 
1826-7,  when,  Russia  and  Persia  being  at  war,  these  stipulations 
were  not  fulfilled  by  England  ;  Mr.  Canning  being  War  Secretary  at 
Die  time,  Russia  was  allowed  largely  to  extend  her  territories  at  the 
expense  of  the  State  which  by  the  treaty  of  Teheran  England  was 
bound  to  defend. 


iEx.  58]  MALCOLM’S  SECOND  MISSION.  139 

Colonel  Malcolm  once  more  to  undertake  a  mission  to 
Persia,  from  whence  it  was  believed  that  Sir  H.  Jones 
had  retired  in  pursuance  of  the  orders  from  Calcutta. 
He,  however,  had  received  orders  from  the  Foreign 
Office  in  England  to  await  the  arrival  of  an  Ambassador 
from  His  Majesty — Sir  Gore  Ouseley,  who  in  pursu¬ 
ance  of  the  new  arrangement,  was  on  his  way  to  Persia. 
Thus  it  happened  that  IMalcolm  and  Sir  Harford  Jones 
met  at  last  in  Persia.  To  Malcolm  were  given  the 
honours  of  the  situation  by  the  King,  who  had  a  pei- 
sonal  regard  for  him,  and  created  for  his  special  behoof 
a  new  order  of  knighthood,  entitled  that  of  the  ‘  IJon 
and  the  Sun.’ 

But  Sir  Harford  Jones  carried  away  the  more  sid)- 
stantial  satisfaction  of  having  execmted  a  treaty,  which 
though  it  received  much  criticism  from  the  Indian 
Government,  was  accepted  and  ratified.* 

One  of  the  disadvantages  which  could  not  but  accrue 
to  the  diplomacy  of  the  Company’s  Government  by 
the  withdrawal  of  Persia  from  the  sphere  of  its  opera¬ 
tions,  was  seen  when  it  appeared  that,  by  an  article  of 
the  treaty  negotiated  at  Teheran  by  Sir  Harford  Jones, 
it  was  stipulated  that,  in  case  of  war  between  Persia  and 
Afghanistan,  ‘  His  IVIajesty  the  King  of  Great  Britain 
should  not  take  any  part  therein,  unless  at  the  desire 
of  both  parties;’  while,  in  ignorance  of  the  existence 
of  any  such  agreement,  Mr.  Elphinstone  had  been  au¬ 
thorised  to  form  a  defensive  alliance  with  Afghanistan 

'  It  was  not  finally  executed  till  1814,  when  the  name  of  Russia 
was  substituted  for  that  of  France. 


140 


LORD  MINTO  IN  INDIA. 


[1809 


against  an  attack  from  Persia,  as  was  stated  in  the  treaty 
signed  at  Calcutta  on  June  17,  of  the  same  year,  1809. 
Yet  Persia  and  Cabul  were  both  necessary  members  of 
the  confederacy  with  which  the  Indian  G-overnment 
had  proposed  to  resist  an  invasion  of  India. 


^T.  58] 


DEFENCE  OF  INDIA. 


141 


CHAPTER  VL 

LAHORE. 

In  order  to  obtain  an  nninterrupted  view  of  all  the 
circumstances  connected  with  the  Persian  mission,  they 
have  been  related  without  reference  to  other  measures, 
which  were  simnltaneously  cai’ried  out  and  directed  to 
the  same  object — namely,  the  formation  of  defensive 
alliances  with  the  independent  States  on  the  North- 
Western  frontier  of  India. 

In  a  minute  by  the  Giovernor  Ceneral,  September 
15,  1808,  it  is  remarked  that  even  should  France 
succeed  in  establishing  an  ascendancy  in  Persia,  much 
would  remain  to  be  accomplished  before  India  could  be 
successfully  invaded,  and  the  hostility  of  the  interjacent 
States,  especially  if  seconded  by  the  co-operation  of  the 
British  power,  might  yet  be  expected  to  frustrate  the 
design,  or  at  least  to  reduce  the  invading  army  to  a  de¬ 
gree  of  debility  which  would  give  our  troops  a  decided 
superiority  in  the  field.  The  importance  to  our  interests 
of  previously  establishing  with  these  States  a  direct 
conunnnication  was  obvious. 

It  was  therefore  proposed  to  send  missions  to  the 
States  lying  on  and  beyond  the  Indus — Lahore,  Cabul, 


142 


LORD  MINTO  IN  INDIA. 


[1808 


and  Scinde — for  the  purpose  of  organising  a  system  of 
defensive  alliances,  based  on  a  common  interest  in  re¬ 
sisting  the  advance  of  an  invading  force. 

The  Home  Government  had  been  prepared  by 
despatches  of  a  previous  date  for  the  measures  carried 
out  in  the  summer  of  1808.  In  a  letter  to  the  Pre¬ 
sident  of  the  Board  of  Control,  February  10  of  that 
year.  Lord  Minto  had  written  : 

‘  If  the  views  of  the  enemy  should  extend  to  the 
direct  invasion  of  India  by  an  army  proportioned  to  that 
undertaking,  their  march  must  probably  be  to  the  Indus, 
and  must  lead  through  the  kingdom  of  Cabul  and  the 
territbries  of  Lahore,  as  well  as  through  the  countries  of 
several  independent  chiefs  situated  between  Persia  and 
the  Company’s  possessions.  It  has  appeared  to  be  ex¬ 
tremely  desirable  to  push  forward  a  British  agency  as 
far  beyond  our  own  frontiers,  and  as  near  the  countries 
from  which  the  enemy  is  to  take  his  departure,  as  pos¬ 
sible.  We  have  not,  till  of  late,  had  much  inducement 
to  frequent  or  to  make  much  enquiry  concerning  the 
countries  beyond  the  Indus  ;  and  there  are  difficulties 
attending  the  usual  means  of  establishing  an  amicable 
intercourse  with  those  governments  or  their  subjects. 
We  cannot  safely  rely  on  the  fidelity  or  discernment 
of  native  agents,  either  for  furnishing  information 
or  accomplishing  any  political  objects  our  interests 
might  require.  I  understand  that  the  employment  of 
Europeans  in  such  services  would  be  subject  to  great 
difficulties.  Regular  and  avowed  embassies,  which  would 
furnish  occasion  to  the  fixed  residence,  dui'ing  periods 


Mt.  o7] 


MISSION  TO  LAHORE. 


143 


like  the  present,  of  Europeans  properly  qualified  in  those 
countries,  would  undoubtedly  be  best  calculated  to  fulfil 
my  present  views,  which  aim,  first  at  obtaining  early 
intelligence  of  the  enemy’s  designs,  and  secondly  at 
casting  obstacles  to  his  progress.  The  practicability  of 
obtaining  a  reception  for  such  embassies  as  1  have 
alluded  to,  at  any  Court  beyond  the  Indus,  is  still  to  be 
enquired  into.’ 

The  most  formidable  obstacle  to  any  successful 
combination  with  the  Western  States  was  to  be  found 
in  their  mutual  jealousies  and  conflicting  interests. 
Iletween  the  Jumna — at  that  time  the  British  frontier 
— and  the  Sutlege,  the  country  was  occupied  by  inde¬ 
pendent  principalities  belonging  to  the  semi-religions, 
semi-military  commonwealth  of  the  Sikhs.  Beyond 
the  Sutlege,  the  territory  known  as  the  Punjaub,  also 
occupied  by  Sikhs,  was  under  the  rule  of  Kunjeet 
Singh,  Eajah,  or  rather  INIaharajah,  of  Lahore — a  prince 
distinguished  for  military  capacity  and  ambition,  whose 
dominions  had  rapidly  increased  since  the  downfall  of 
the  Mahratta  power,  and  whose  intention  of  extending 
them  by  further  conquests  over  the  Sikh  chieftains 
eastward  of  the  Sutlege  had  roused  the  watchfulness  of 
the  Indian  Government.  Beyond  the  Indus  lay  the 
kingdom  of  Cabid — the  remains  of  a  once  splendid 
empire,  which  had  extended  from  the  Jumna  to  tlie 
Caspian  Sea,  from  the  Oxus  to  the  Persian  Gulf.  Of 
this  country  scarcely  anything  was  known  before  Lord 
Minto  sent  to  it  the  embassy  of  Mr.  Mountstuart 
Elphinstone.  The  States  immediately  surrounding  it 


144 


LOED  MINTO  IN  INDIA. 


[1808 


had  been  carved  out  of  its  ancient  dominions,  and  Persia, 
Tiahore,  and  Scinde  were  therefore  equally  the  objects 
of  its  open  or  covert  hostility.  Among  these  rival  po¬ 
tentates  it  became  the  duty  of  the  Indian  Grovernment 
to  decide  whose  alliance  would  be  the  most  valuable, 
and  to  discover  Avhether  any  of  their  conflicting  interests 
Avere  inveterately  antagonistic  to  our  own.  Unluckily 
it  proved  that  the  Eajah  of  Lahore,  whose  territory  lay 
in  the  track  of  every  invader  of  India,  was  at  once  our 
most  necessary  ally  and  our  most  dangerous  neigh¬ 
bour. 

In  the  stringent  instructions  given  to  Lord  Minto 
by  the  Company,  to  observe  a  policy  of  non-intervention 
in  the  affairs  of  States  beyond  our  borders,  it  does  not 
appear  that  any  rules  were  laid  doAvn  for  the  case  of 
an  urgent  appeal  by  them  for  such  intervention.  A 
claim,  based  on  the  right  of  the  weak  powers  to  obtain 
protection  from  the  stronger,  had  been  made  during  the 
administration  of  Sir  G.  BarloAv,  by  the  Sikh  principal¬ 
ities  lying  between  the  British  frontiers  and  the  Punjaub, 
Avhich,  after  the  overthrow  of  the  Mahratta  supremacy 
in  those  regions  by  the  arms  of  Lord  Wellesley,  were 
unable  to  protect  themselves  against  the  encroachments 
of  Runjeet  Singh.  The  appeal  had  been  met  Avith  a 
refusal ;  and  what  appears  to  be  the  inevitable  result 
among  populations  in  similar  conditions,  had  ensued 
— the  poAver  and  influence  resigned  by  the  Indian 
(rovemment  Avere  transferred  to  another.  The  Rajah 
of  Lahore,  in  his  character  of  protector  over  his  brother 
Sikhs,  now  threatened  us  with  the  establishment  of  a 


Mt.  57] 


MISSION  TO  LAUOEE. 


145 


formidable  military  power  on  our  frontier.  ‘  Eunjeet,’ 
wrote  Lord  Minto,  ‘  had  alone  been  induced  to  meditate 
the  extension  of  his  dominions  over  the  territories 
between  the  Sutlege  and  Jumna,  by  a  manifestation  of 
our  intention  not  to  exercise  those  rights  of  supremacy 
over  the  southern  Sikhs  which  had  been  exercised  by 
the  Mahrattas.  If  we  had  not  at  an  early  period  of 
time  declared  the  Sikh  chiefs  to  be  entirely  independent 
of  our  control ;  if  at  the  time  when  the  Eajah  pro¬ 
jected  his  first  invasion  of  those  territories  we  had 
declared  a  resolution  to  protect  them ;  or  even  if  we 
had  attended  to  the  united  solicitations  of  the  chiefs 
of  those  territories  about  the  middle  of  last  year  to 
protect  them  against  a  second  projected  invasion,  by 
announcing  that  resolution,  no  doubt  can  be  entertained 
that  the  mere  declaration  of  it  would  have  been  suf¬ 
ficient  to  deter  Eunjeet  Singh  from  the  execution  of  his 
design.’ 

To  prevent  him  from  carrying  it  out  was  an  impe¬ 
rative  duty  on  the  part  of  the  Government,  which  Lord 
Minto  did  not  hesitate  to  acknowledge ;  but  the  im¬ 
mediate  importance  of  securing  his  co-operation  in  a 
system  of  common  resistance  to  an  invading  force 
made  it  unadvisable  to  proceed  to  extremities  on  behalf 
of  the  southern  Sikhs,  until  all  diplomatic  methods  had 
been  exhausted  to  obtain  his  renunciation  of  further 
conquests  in  the  direction  of  Hindostan. 


L 


146 


LOED  MINTO  IN  INDIA. 


[1808 


‘  March  lf08.’ 

‘  Although  as  a  general  principle  we  cordially  recog¬ 
nise  the  wisdom  and  the  justice  of  abstaining  from  all 
interference  in  the  contests,  disputes,  and  concerns  of 
States  with  which  we  are  unconnected  by  the  obli¬ 
gations  of  alliance,  and  are  fully  convinced  of  the 
embarrassments  and  inconvenience  of  extending  our 
protection  to  petty  chieftains,  who  are  unable  to  protect 
their  territories  from  the  aggressions  of  more  powerful 
neighbours,  yet  we  are  disposed  to  think  that  cases 
may  occur  in  which  a  temporary  deviation  from  these 
general  principles  may  be  a  measure  of  defensive 
policy,  the  neglect  of  which  might  be  productive  of 
much  more  danger  and  embarrassment  than  the 
prosecution  of  it,  and  that  the  certain  resolution  of 
the  Rajah  of  Lahore  to  subjugate  the  States  situated 
between  the  Sutlege  and  the  frontier  of  our  dominion 
would,  under  other  circumstances  than  the  present, 
constitute  a  case  on  which,  on  grounds  of  self-defence, 
the  interposition  of  the  British  power,  for  the  purpose 
of  preventing  the  execution  of  such  a  project,  would  be 
equally  just  and  prudent.  Yet  the  accomplishment 
of  the  more  important  views  already  described  seems 
evidently  incompatible  with  a  rupture  with  him.’ 

It  was  reasonable  to  suppose  that  the  Courts  of 
Lahore  and  Cabul  would  consider  such  missions  as 
were  in  contemplation  as  a  peculiar  distinction  calcula¬ 
ted  to  give  them  consequence  in  the  eyes  of  surrounding 
'  Despatch  to  the  Secret  Committee,  par.  91. 


^T.  o7j  MINUTE  BY  GOVERNOR  GENERAL. 


147 


powers;  nevertheless  the  Governor  General  did  not 
consider  it  either  necessary  or  expedient  to  sufi'er  the 
prosecution  of  the  measure  to  depend  upon  the  result 
of  a  previous  reference  to  those  Courts.  He  therefore 
proposed  to  despatch  envoys  to  both  Courts  without 
delay. 

The  personal  solicitude  with  which  he  watched  over 
the  preparatory  arrangements  for  the  missions  is  shown 
by  a  minute  in  his  handwriting,  stating  the  grounds 
on  which  he  deemed  it  his  duty  to  disallow  a  measure 
proposed  by  the  Commander-in-chief,  General  Hewitt, 
namely,  the  appointment  of  two  officers  of  high  rank 
to  accompany  the  missions  for  the  purpose  of  making 
a  survey  of  the  country  for  military  purposes. 

‘June  1808.' 

‘  It  must  always  be  with  much  concern  that  I  find 
myself  under  the  necessity  of  objecting  to  any  mea¬ 
sure  proposed  by  the  Commander-in-chief,  especially 
on  occasions  of  importance,  and  on  points  on  which 
his  Kxcellency  appears  to  have  formed  a  decided 
ojiinion.  It  is  the  importance  of  the  proposition,  how¬ 
ever,  recommended  by  his  Excellency’s  minute,  which 
constrains  me,  after  a  full  and  anxious  consideration  of 
the  subject,  to  state  the  objections  which  in  my  mind 
oppose  its  immediate  adoption.  .  .  .  For  a  due  con¬ 
sideration  of  this  subject  it  is  necessary  to  keep  in 
mind  the  proper  object  which  is  proposed  by  these 


Minute  on  propo.sal  made  by  Commauder-iii-cliief, 


148 


LOKD  MINTO  IN  INDIA. 


[1808 


missions,  and  the  particular  circumstances  under  which 
they  are  undertaken. 

‘The  object  proposed  is  to  conciliate  the  Princes 
who  govern  the  States  of  Cahul  and  Lahore,  to  obtain 
their  consent  to  the  passage  of  our  troops  through 
their  country,  or  their  admission  into  their  territories, 
for  the  purpose  of  opposing  a  French  army  in  their 
projected  invasion  of  Hindostan ;  and  our  hope  also  is 
to  establish  such  defensive  engagements  with  those 
Governments  as  may  obtain  their  co-operation,  or  at 
least  their  friendly  aid  and  assistance,  to  our  military 
operations  and  to  our  cause  generally. 

‘  I  am  persuaded  that  the  Commander-in-chief  will 
agree  with  me  in  considering  it  at  least  as  questionable 
whether,  in  the  event  of  Cabul  and  Lahore  proving 
hostile  or  becoming  so,  it  would  be  advisable  to  pene¬ 
trate  through  their  countries  or  to  enter  them  at  all. 

‘  It  is  well  known  that  the  habitual  and  undistin¬ 
guishing  jealousy  which  is  the  personal  character  of 
Runjeet  Singh,  and  is  said  to  characterise  also  the 
regions  in  which  his  territories  are  situated,  has  been 
directed  specifically  against  the  British  Government. 
He  is  aware  that  our  interests  and  principles  are  un¬ 
favourable  to  some  of  the  chief  objects  of  his  ambition  ; 
and,  in  addition  to  this  particular  cause  of  distrust, 
means  have  been  found  to  create  in  his  mind  a  still 
stronger  jealousy — amounting  almost  to  personal  ap¬ 
prehension. 

‘  It  is  certain  that  our  endeavours  to  open  a  com- 


-SiT.  57]  MINUTE  BY  GOVERNOR  GENERAL. 


149 


munication  with  Cabul,  and  to  establish  intimate 
relations  with  that  State,  will  furnish  abundant  matter 
of  uneasiness,  and  supply  fresh  food  to  the  jealousy 
already  entertained  by  Kunjeet  Singh,  both  of  Cabul 
and  of  our  Government. 

‘  It  is  the  business  of  the  proposed  mission  of  ]Mr. 
jNIetealfe  to  remove  these  suspicions,  and  to  plant  in 
their  room  the  seeds  of  confidence  and  union.  This 
must  be  done  in  my  opinion  by  a  frank,  open,  and  sin¬ 
cere  avowal  of  our  ultimate  objects ;  and  the  best  sup¬ 
port  which  can  be  given  to  our  negotiation  must  be  a 
scrupulous  and  delicate  conduct  in  every  point  of  our 
intercourse  with  him.  .  .  .  The  progress  of  two 
officers,  especially  of  the  distinguished  rank  and  station 
proposed  in  his  Excellency’s  minute,  through  the  terri¬ 
tories  of  Lahore,  without  permission  or  even  any  inti¬ 
mation  of  their  intention,  for  the  avowed  purpose,  or,  if 
not  avowed,  for  a  purpose  which  cannot  be  otherwise 
than  obvious,  if  the  jnission  is  to  have  any  effect,  would 
be  an  occurrence  calculated  to  awaken  the  suspicion  of 
less  jealous  governments  than  that  of  Kunjeet  Singh. 
I  confess  it  appears  to  me  highly  improbable  that  these 
officers  woidd  be  allowed  to  advance  a  step,  after  the 
intelligence  of  their  operations  shoidd  have  reached  the 
ears  of  Eunjeet  Singh  ;  nor  could  anyone,  in  my  opinion, 
answer  for  the  personal  safety  of  these  gentlemen.  If 
they  should  attempt  to  cover  their  proceedings  under 
any  connection  with  the  political  mission,  it  would  only 
make  the  case  worse ;  because  it  would  give  to  the 
whole  measure  an  air  of  artifice  and  deception  which 


150 


LOED  MINTO  IN  INDIA. 


[1808 


must  preclude  all  hopes  of  conciliating  the  confidence 
of  Runjeet  Singh. 

‘With  regard  to  Cabul  the  objection  is  jorecisely 
similar.  With  the  King  of  that  country  we  have 
never  had  any  intercourse  whatever.  I  hope  that  a 
sense  of  common  danger,  and  a  real  identity  of  interests, 
may  in  the  very  able  hands  to  which  that  mission 
is  committed,  become  a  foundation  of  solid  union  and 
of  zealous  and  efficient  co-operation.  But  here  the 
work  of  confidence  is  to  begin.  All  is  yet  to  do, 
and  I  rely  for  success — here  as  at  Lahore — only  on 
the  candid  explanation  of  our  true  and  real  purpose, 
countenanced  and  supported  by  a  general  sincerity  of 
demeanour  and  by  the  absence  of  all  those  traces  of 
indirect  and  collateral  design  which,  while  they 
frequently  fail  in  their  own  object,  are  very  apt  to 
frustrate  and  disappoint  every  other  with  which  they 
are  in  any  way  connected.’ 

The  minute  ends  thus : — ‘  Speaking  purely  of  mili¬ 
tary  advantages,  my  opinion,  I  confess,  is  that  the 
movement  and  operation  of  troops,  as  well  as  the 
success  of  a  campaign,  would  be  more  facilitated  and 
favoured  by  the  friendship  and  assistance  of  the  country 
which  is  the  theatre  of  their  operations  without  a  pre¬ 
vious  topographical  knowledge  of  the  ground,  or  niifitary 
report  of  its  condition  and  resources,  than  by  the  pos¬ 
session  of  that  knowledge  in  a  hostile  country.’ 

Mr.  Metcalfe  '  was  the  envoy  selected  for  the  mission 

'  Afterwards  Lord  Metcalfe.  Late  Governor  General  of  India, 
Governor  of  Jamaica,  and  Governor  General  of  Canada. 


iRr.  57] 


CHARLES  METCALFE. 


151 


to  the  Punjaub,  and  a  more  difficult  task  than  that 
entrusted  to  him  can  hardly  be  conceived — to  woo  the 
great  Eajah  to  an  alliance,  while  refusing  him  the 
increase  of  territory  on  which  he  had  set  his  heart, 
(diaries  Metcalfe  was  at  this  time  twenty-three  years  of 
age  ;  he  was  a  lad  of  nineteen  when  Lord  Wellesley  sent 
him  as  political  officer  to  the  head-quarters  of  Lord 
I/ike,  wffiere  a  combination  of  tact  and  spirit  had 
established  his  reputation  as  one  of  the  most  promising 
of  the  younger  civilians.  On  Lord  Minto’s  arrival  in 
India  no  name  was  brought  before  him  with  higher 
encomiums ;  and  when  selected  for  the  most  delicate 
of  political  missions,  it  was  entrusted  to  his  sole 
charge.  He  ‘  was  to  move  ’  we  are  told  ‘  without 
secretaries,  assistants,  or  attaches;  a  military  escort 
was  to  be  provided,  and  a  proper  establishment 
of  moonshees,  writers,  and  servants  was  to  be  fur¬ 
nished.  But  the  work  of  diplomacy  was  left  entirely 
to  his  unaided  counsels.’  ‘  He  was  to  be  the  pioneer 
of  the  mission  to  Cabul.  Besides  collecting  and  com¬ 
municating  every  information,  political,  geographical, 
and  topographical,  concerning  the  country  he  was 
despatched  to,  together  with  the  real  disposition  of  its 
ruler,  the  state  of  his  government,  troops,  resources, 
tkc.,  he  was  to  push  his  reconnaissances,  by  means  of 
secret  news-writers,  to  Cabul,  Cashmere,  Peshawur, 
Candahar,  Herat,  and  as  far  as  possible  into  the  in¬ 
terior  of  Persia. 


Kaye's  Correspondence  of  Lord  Metcalfe, 


r 


152  LORD  MINTO  IN  INDIA.  [1808 

It  was  not  the  magnitude  of  an  undertaking  which 
would  have  daunted  the  men  of  those  days. 

IMetcalfe  left  Delhi  on  August  12,  during  the  monsoon 
of  1808  ;  on  September  12  he  reached  Runjeet’s  camp 
near  the  Sutlege,  after  a  weary  march  over  a  country 
under  water.  Eains  from  above,  quagmires  below,  had 
reduced  the  appearance  of  his  escort  to  that  with  which 
Sir  John  Falstaff  objected  to  march  through  Coventry, 
and  IMetcalfe  was  not  without  some  similar  sentiments. 
Rut  when  the  Eajah  contented  himself  with  sending 
his  Prime  Minister  and  an  escort  of  2,000  men  to  meet 
him  on  his  arrival,  the  young  Envoy  thought  he  might 
have  come  himself,  and  was  careful  to  let  it  be  under¬ 
stood  that,  whether  in  purple  or  in  rags,  he  came  to 
treat  as  the  representative  of  British  power ;  and  Eun- 
jeet — who  possibly  experienced  some  such  feeling  as  that 
expressed  by  Hyder  Ali  to  General  IMalcolm,  ‘  It  is 
not  what  I  see,  but  what  I  do  not  see,  that  I  fear  ’ — 
received  him  ever  after  as  became  his  ambassadorial 
character. 

Before  the  purpose  of  the  mission  was  opened,  its 
mere  arrival  had  sufficed  to  awaken  the  jealousy  and 
suspicions  of  Eunjeet  Singh.  When  its  object  appeared 
to  be  to  gain  his  aid  in  counteracting  the  advance  of 
hostile  armies  into  India,  the  Eajah  made  it  manifest 
that  his  co-operation,  against  a  danger  which  produced 
no  great  impression  on  his  mind,  was  only  to  be  secured 
by  the  furtherance  on  the  part  of  the  Company  of  his 
own  designs  against  the  territories  of  the  independent 
Sikhs.  On  finding  that  no  promise  of  countenance  to 


^T.  57] 


CHARLES  METCALFE. 


153 


these  designs  formed  part,  of  Mr.  INIetcalfe’s  instruc¬ 
tions,  the  Sikh  Prince  suddenly  broke  up  his  camp  and 
proceeded  to  cross  the  river  and  attack  the  coveted 
territories.  Then  began  a  weary  period  of  marching 
and  counter-marcliing, — of  fruitless  negotiations  and 
helpless  acquiescence  in  the  spoliation  of  those  whom 
]\Ietcalfe’s  employers  proposed  ultimately  to  protect  ; 
while  the  Government  at  Calcutta  looked  on,  not  without 
anger,  but  with  the  determination  to  avoid  a  rupture 
while  it  was  yet  uncertain  whether  the  big  cloud  in 
the  distant  horizon  was  to  burst  upon  them  or  to  dis¬ 
perse. 

During  this  period  of  doubt  and  suspense  IMetcalfe’s 
qualifications  as  a  first-rate  diplomatist  were  brought 
to  the  test.  Nothing  could  exceed,  we  are  told,  the 
lucidity  of  his  despatches,  or  the  tact,  skill,  patience, 
and  dignity  with  which  he  conducted  these  critical 
negotiations  and  finally  carried  all  his  points.  It  is 
impossible  not  to  be  struck  by  the  respectful  attention, 
the  warm  approbation,  with  which  the  practised  states¬ 
men  of  Calcutta  received  the  reports  and  adopted  the 
suggestions  of  a  youth  of  twenty-three. 

We  have  largely  developed  since  then  our  systems 
of  education,  but  it  is  questionable  whether  any  system 
of  mental  training  can  equal  that  of  early  initiation  int() 
important  and  responsible  business.  As  (loethe  says  : — 

Es  bildcf  sicli  ein  Talent  in  der  Stille, 

Sich  ein  Cliaracter  in  dem  Strom  der  Welt. 

Had  the  Government  at  this  juncture  taken  a  more 
decided  course,  and  prohibited  the  further  acquisitions 


154 


LORD  MINTO  IN  INDIA. 


[1808 


of  Runjeet  Singh,  ‘  they  must,’  %Yrote  Lord  Minto,’  ‘  have 
proceeded  at  once  to  employ  a  military  force  for  the 
purpose  of  affording  open  and  immediate  protection  to 
the  Sikhs.  For  to  declare  that  we  do  not  consent  to 
the  proposed  conquests,  and  at  the  same  time  to  look 
on  while  they  are  achieved,  is  a  contradiction  calculated 
alike  to  alienate  the  Sikhs  and  to  provoke  the  enmity 
of  Runjeet  Singh.’  But  though  temporising,  they  were 
not  idle.  The  Commander-in-chief  received  orders  to 
prepare  for  an  advance,  and  a  private  letter  to  him 
from  Lord  IMinto  shows  that  in  the  event  of  serious 
resistance  from  Runjeet,  it  was  in  the  contemplation  of 
Government  to  substitute  a  friendly  for  a  hostile  power 
between  our  frontier  and  the  Indus.  ‘  There  is  reason 
to  beheve  that  a  considerable  portion  of  the  country 
usurped  by  Runjeet  Singh  is  strongly  disaffected,  and 
should  any  grand  effort  be  made,  and  be  crowned  with 
success,  nothing  would  be  more  advantageous  to  our 
interests  than  the  substitution  of  friends  and  dependants 
hu’  hostile  and  rival  powers  throughout  the  country 
between  our  frontier  and  the  Indus.’ 

These  more  extensive  designs,  depending  on  the 
contingency  of  a  failure  in  the  negotiations  with  Runjeet 
Singh,  were  not  destined  to  be  carried  out.  When  from 
Europe  came  assurance  that  the  arch-disturber  of  the 
world’s  peace  had  turned  his  mind  from  Asiatic  conquests 
to  others  nearer  home,  the  Indian  Government  prepared 
to  withdraw  from  the  more  considerable  undertakings 
which  were  required  for  the  security  of  our  Indian 
'  Calcutta,  November  15,  1808. 


AiT.  57]  DECISION  OF  THE  INDIAN  GOVERNMENT.  155 

frontier.  But  with  the  cessation  of  their  apprehensions 
on  the  larger  question,  ceased  also  the  necessity  for  an 
alliance  with  Runjeet  Singh  at  the  expense  of  those  it 
was  the  desire  and  the  interest  of  the  Government  to 
])rotect.  l\Ir.  Metcalfe  was  informed  that  the  Govern¬ 
ment  had  come  to  the  conclusion  that  the  approxima¬ 
tion  of  the  Rajah  of  Lahore’s  military  dominion  to  the 
( ’ompany’s  possessions,  and  the  introduction  of  his  power 
into  Hindostan,  wordd  expose  to  imminent  hazard  the 
tranquillity  and  security  of  the  British  possessions. 
Upon  principles  purely  defensive,  the  Government  con¬ 
sidered  it  incumbent  upon  them  ‘  to  oppose  the  extension 
on  the  Indian  side  of  the  Sutlege  of  an  ambitious  and 
military  power,  which  would  be  substituted  upon  our 
frontier  for  a  confederacy  of  friendly  chiefs  rendered 
grateful  by  our  protection  and  interested  in  our  cause.’ 
He  was  desired  to  declare,  and  enforce,  if  necessary,  the 
resolution  of  the  Government  to  confine  the  dominions 
of  Lahore  within  their  ancient  limits,  and  to  inform  the 
Rajah  that  it  was  the  design  of  the  Indian  Government 
to  establish  a  military  post  near  the  frontier  of  the 
Punjaub,  not  only  for  the  security  of  the  independent 
Sikhs,  but,  as  our  advanced  post,  to  be  connected  mth 
future  defensive  arrangements  against  the  approach  of 
an  enemy  from  the  quarter  of  Persia. 

The  sacrifices  demanded  of  Runjeet  were  not  to  be 
wholly  without  compensation.  It  had  long  been  his 
desire  to  form  a  treaty  of  general  amity  with  the 
(lovernment  of  Calcutta,  by  which  the  territories  of 
each  Power  should  be  respected  by  the  other.  ‘  Although 


156 


LOED  MINTO  IN  INDIA. 


[1809 


he  mistrusted  the  sincerity  of  verbal  professions  of 
amity,  he  believed  that  implicit  confidence  might  be 
reposed  on  the  validity  of  our  ■written  engagements.’ 
Lord  IVIinto  was  not  of  those,  who,  according  to  the 
Eastern  proverb,  show  nothing  of  the  lion  but  his  claws  ; 
INIr.  Metcalfe  was  therefore  instructed  to  conclude  the 
desired  treaty  with  the  Kajah  whenever  the  previously 
stated  conditions  were  accepted. 

When  the  final  decision  of  the  Council  of  Calcutta 
reached  their  Envoy,  he  was  at  U mritsur,  where  the  Eaj  ah 
had  betaken  himself  to  rest  and  recreation  after  the 
fatigues  of  war.  Eevellings  and  feastings  had  succeeded 
to  military  conflicts,  and  it  became  as  difficult  to  And 
the  Eajah  sober  as  it  had  been  to  overtake  him  at  all. 
When  at  last  the  communication  of  the  Glovernment 
was  conveyed  to  him,  the  immediate  effect  upon  him 
was  that  of  ‘  a  shock  which  sobered  him  at  once.’ 
Next  day  he  took  advantage  of  a  disturbance  between 
the  Hindoos  and  Mussulmans  of  his  holy  city  to  remove 
to  Lahore ;  but  there  too  Metcalfe  followed  him,  and 
at  last  the  Eajah  was  brought  to  bay.  The  time  for 
defiance  as  well  as  for  conciliation  was  past.  He  must 
submit  to  retire  to  his  ancient  limits,  to  restore  his 
late  conquests,  and  to  learn  that  a  British  force  was 
advancing  to  see  that  the  work  was  done.  With  praise¬ 
worthy  self-restraint  Eunjeet  received  the  decree  in 
silence  ;  then,  turning  on  his  heel,  left  the  room.  A  few 
minntes  more,  and  the  astonished  Envoy,  looking  from 
the  window,  saw  him  madly  galloping  his  favourite  horse 
round  and  round  the  courts  of  the  palace.  Metcalfe 


^T.  58] 


RUNJEET  SINGH. 


157 


described  the  action  as  one  of  ‘  surpassing  levity :  ’  it  was 
more  probably  the  instinct  of  a  proud  and  fierce  nature 
aiming  at  self-mastery.  But  the  struggle  was  not  over  ; 
many  weary  months  were  still  to  pass,  and  many  were 
the  shiftings  of  purpose  and  of  place,  before,  on  April  25, 
1809,  the  treaty  was  signed  which  advanced  the  frontier 
of  British  India  from  the  Jumna  to  the  Sutlege. 

By  it  the  contracting  parties  bound  themselves  to 
respect  each  other’s  territories,  and  the  treaty  was  never 
infringed  to  the  day  of  the  Rajah’s  death. 

This  was  perhaps  the  most  decisive  moment  of 
Kunjeet’s  career.  The  last  great  event  of  his  life  was 
the  splendid  reception  given  by  him  to  the  Governor 
General,  Lord  Auckland,  when  he,  with  his  sisters, 
visited  Lahore  in  1838.  They,  the  nephew  and  nieces 
of  Lord  Minto,  were  in  the  Upper  Provinces  when  the 
old  man  died ;  and  our  last  sight  of  the  great  Sikh  is  in 
Miss  Kden’s  letters  from  ‘  Up  the  Country.’ 

Thirty  years  had  brought  about  many  changes. 
The  tide  of  Runjeet’s  conquests,  forcibly  arrested  in  the 
east,  had  rolled  back  over  the  territories  of  many  a 
chief  whose  palaces  had  been  made  desolate,  whose  holy 
places  waste.  Nor  had  those  of  the  great  King  of  Cabul 
been  spared ;  from  Peshawnr  to  JMooltau  all  was  the 
Sikh’s.  With  the  increase  of  dominion  and  dignity  had 
increased  the  Oriental  magnificence  of  his  surroundings. 
Gold  and  gems  wei’e  spread  with  lavish  hands  on  all 
things  pertaining  to  him — from  the  sacred  temple  of 
his  holy  city  to  the  trappings  of  his  steeds.  But  if 
there  was  less  of  martial  simplicity  than  in  his  early 


158 


LOED  MINTO  IN  INDIA. 


[1809 


habits  and  surroundings,  there  was  far  more  of  warlike 
pomp  in  the  display  in  which  his  eye  delighted ;  the 
English  visitors  were  not  left  in  doubt  that  the  Sikhs 
and  their  Ruler  were  more  even  than  of  yore  what 
their  great  teacher  had  proposed  to  make  them — Lions 
of  the  Punjanb — ‘  Lions  of  Giod  like  the  lion-like  men 
of  Moab.’  *  But  thirty  years  before,  the  facts  would 
not  have  been  recorded  by  an  English  lady  after  a 
morning  spent  in  quietly  sketching  under  the  limes  and 
the  oranges  of  the  Shalimar  gardens. 

Metcalfe’s  relations  with  Lord  Minto  during  his 
mission  to  Lahore  passed  rapidly  into  those  of  mutual 
regard.  On  his  return  to  the  seat  of  Grovernment  he 
was  added  to  the  establishment  as  deputy  to  Mr. 
Edmonstone — ‘for ’wrote  Lord  Minto  to  his  wife,  ‘  I 
have  lately  conceived  a  very  high  opinion  of  his  talents 
and  character,  and  particularly  of  his  cool  judgment 
and  conciliatory  disposition.’  And  a  little  later  on, 
when  Metcalfe  had  fallen  into  habits  of  intimacy  in  the 
society  of  Grovernment  House  he  wote  again — ‘he 
really  is  the  ugliest  and  most  agreeable  clever  person — 
except  Lady  GHenbervie — in  Europe  or  Asia.’ 

Lord  Minto’s  warm  regard  for  him  was  shown  in 
many  a  kindly  letter,  some  of  which  are  preserved  in 
his  biography ;  while  the  estimation  in  which  he  held 
the  young  diplomatist  was  evidenced  by  the  high 
appointments  in  which  he  placed  him ;  and  we  know 
from  private  sources  that  these  cordial  feelings  were 
returned  with  an  almost  filial  veneration. 


’  2  Samuel,  xxiii.  20 


JEt.  58] 


DEFENCE  OF  INDIA. — CABUL. 


159 


CHAPTEK  Vir. 

Of  the  three  great  missions  sent  ont  from  Britisli 
India  in  the  course  of  1808,  the  last — to  the  King  of 
Cabnl — was  by  no  means  the  least  interesting  to  the 
Governor  General.  Personally  unacquainted  with  Mr. 
Monntstnart  Elphinstone,  Lord  Minto  had  formed  a 
very  high  opinion  of  his  character  and  attainments. 
All  men  agreed  that  no  better  choice  could  have  been 
made  for  an  Envoy  to  what  was  still  one  of  the  most 
polished  of  Asiatic  Courts,  iMr.  Elphinstone  being 
as  distinguished  for  his  courteous  and  sympathetii- 
bearing  as  for  his  wide  accpiaintance  with  Oriental 
languages  and  literature.  By  Lord  IMinto’s  request  he 
was  to  correspond  freely  and  fully  with  the  Governor 
General ;  unluckily  only  a  few  out  of  a  large  number  of 
his  letters  are  preserved  at  Minto.  The  members  of 
his  mission  were  specially  chosen  for  their  fitness  to 
acquire  information  concerning  the  nature  of  countries 
and  populations  almost  unknown  to  us.  In  his  delight¬ 
ful  introduction  to  the  ‘  History  of  Cabul  ’  Mr.  Elphin¬ 
stone  says  :  ‘  The  countries  under  the  King  of  Cabul  had 
once  extended  sixteen  degrees  in  longitude  from  Sii’hind 
about  150  miles,  from  Delhi  to  Meshed  about  an  equal 
distance  from  the  Caspian  Sea.  In  breadth  they  reached 


160 


LORD  MINTO  IN  INDIA. 


[1809 


from  the  Oxus  to  the  Persian  Gulf,  a  space  including 
thirteen  degrees  of  latitude,  or  920  miles.’  This  great 
kingdom  had  suffered  considerable  diminution  before 
the  days  of  our  embassy  to  it,  but  there  was  a  stamp  of 
grandeur  about  it  still.  To  the  King  of  Cabul  not  only 
had  the  Mahommedan  Sovereigns  of  India  addressed 
their  complaints,  but  the  Mahratta  princes  had  done 
the  same.  Eunjeet  Singh,  though  himself  the  chief  de¬ 
spoiler  of  the  Douranee  power,  manifested  much  jealousy 
of  the  British  approach  to  the  throne  of  the  great 
King.  To  confront  this  potentate  with  due  dignity  the 
mission  had  been  fitted  out  with  considerable  care  and 
splendour. 

The  Envoy’s  staff,  suite,  and  escort,  were  unusually 
numerous  ;  nothing  was  neglected  to  ensure  its  success, 
or  at  all  events  to  give  a  proper  impression  of  the 
Power  whence  it  came. 

A  very  serious  obstacle  to  the  success  of  a  scheme  of 
co-operation  between  British  India  and  the  States  on 
her  north-western  frontier  lay  in  the  difficulty  of  com¬ 
munication.  The  length  of  time  required  to  move  from 
point  to  point  over  unsettled  districts,  imperfectly 
known  to  the  English,  could  not  be  calculated  upon 
beforehand,  and  each  Envoy  had  to  carry  on  his  nego¬ 
tiations  in  ignorance  of  the  success  of  those  simul¬ 
taneously  proceeding  in  countries  which  were  to  form 
part  of  a  combined  system. 

The  uncertainty  of  their  relations  with  Persia  and 
Lahore  had  obliged  the  Indian  Government  to  give 
very  indefinite  instructions  to  Mr.  Elphinstone  when,  in 


^T.  57] 


MISSION  TO  CABUL. 


161 


the  month  of  October  1808,  he  set  out  from  Delhi  on 
his  mission  to  the  King  of  Cabul ;  and  the  same 
uncertainty  as  to  the  disposition  of  Kuujeet  Singh  had 
led  Lord  yMinto  to  advise  the  adoption  of  a  route  by 
the  Cabul  mission  which,  though  longer  than  that 
through  the  Punjaub,  would  avoid  the  dominions  of 
Kunjeet,  and  would  also  give  an  opportunity  of  gaining 
information  concerning  a  part  of  the  country  unknown 
to  travellers. 

The  line  of  march  adopted  took  them  over  part  of 
the  desert — at  that  time  untrodden  by  Europeans  — 
which  lies  between  Delhi  and  the  Indus,  and  led  them 
by  the  great  town  of  Bikaneer,  where,  before  the  vast 
circumference  of  the  encircling  walls,  five  besieging 
armies  lay  encamped.  As  the  English  caught  sight  of 
the  high  battlements  and  forts,  the  cupolas,  domes, 
and  spires,  they  were  nigh  believing  that  the  delusions 
of  the  desert  accompanied  them  still,  and  that  the 
proud  city,  as  big  as  Delhi,  was  no  less  the  baseless 
fabric  of  a  vision  than  the  lovely  lakes  of  seemingly 
clear  and  transparent  water,  reflecting  in  their  jmre 
depths  every  passing  object,  every  tint  of  colour,  with 
which  the  mirage  had  adorned  the  barren  scene 
where  no  water  was.  From  Bikaneer,  where  they  were 
well  received,  though  with  great  astonishment,  they 
passed  on  through  dependencies  of  the  King  of  Cabul, 
till  they  reached  Mooltan,  five  hundred  miles  from 
Delhi. 

At  this  point  of  their  journey  they  were  detained 
for  some  time  while  communications  were  carried  on 

M 


162 


LORD  MINTO  IN  INDIA. 


[1808 


by  letter  witb  the  King  of  Cabul,  then  at  Candahar. 
Without  his  consent,  and  the  protection  of  a  guard 
from  His  Majesty,  ‘  it  would  be  impossible,’  wrote  Mr. 
Elphinstone,  ‘  to  travel  among  the  tribes  beyond  the 
Indus.’  The  answer  to  Mr.  Elphinstone’s  application 
was  long  in  coming,  for,  as  they  afterwards  learned, 
the  news  of  the  approach  of  the  mission  was  at  first 
regarded  with  strong  prejudice  and  distrust;  the 
Afghan  nobles  disliked  the  idea  of  an  alliance  between 
the  King  and  the  British  power,  as  likely  to  strengthen 
him  to  their  detriment ;  and  the  King  himself  thought 
it  ‘very  natural  that  the  British  should  seek  to  profit  by 
the  internal  dissensions  of  a  neighbouring  kingdom, 
and  endeavour  to  annex  it  to  their  empire.’  Curiosity 
is  said  to  have  had  much  to  do  with  the  final  decision 
to  receive  the  mission  at  Peshawur  ;  but  before  it  was 
made  known  to  Mr.  Elphinstone,  he  wrote  a  long 
letter  to  the  Grovernor  Greneral,  stating  fully  the  reasons 
which  appeared  to  him  to  necessitate  an  enlargement 
of  his  powers  and  authority  to  negotiate  with  the  Afghan 
Court. 

The  dissensions,  of  which  the  King  of  Cabul 
had  made  mention,  were  many  and  serious.  With 
Persia,  with  Lahore,  with  Scinde,  with  Cashmere,  the 
King’s  relations  were  troubled  ;  within  his  gates  his 
rebellious  brothers  had  raised  the  standard  of  a  civil 
war.  In  the  event  of  the  British  proposals  being  found 
acceptable  to  him,  there  could  be  little  doubt  that  he 
would  meet  them  with  conditions  which  would  secure 
assistance  from  the  Company  against  his  enemies,  and 


^T.  57j 


MISSION  TO  CAEUL. 


1(;3 


that  this  assistance  would  be  demanded  in  the  shape  of 
money,  troops,  and  ordnance. 

To  send  an  army  to  Cabul  Mr.  Elphinstone  thought 
would  be  impolitic,  ‘  because  it  would  be  to  meet  the 
French  on  equal  terms,  and  to  waive  the  advantage  of  the 
strong  frontier  to  the  westward  presented  by  the  rivers 
of  the  Punjaub,  the  Indus,  and  the  desert.  In  the 
present  state  of  the  intermediate  country,  I  fear  it  will 
be  found  impossible  to  defend  Cabul ;  it  is,  however, 
very  much  to  be  wished  that  it  were  practicable  for  us 
to  contribute  more  directly  to  prevent  that  country 
falling  into  the  hands  of  the  French ;  for  if  they  were 
once  in  possession  of  it,  their  invasion  of  our  territories 
would  no  longer  be  a  great  and  desperate  enterprise, 
but  an  attempt  which  they  might  make  without  risk 
when  they  pleased,  and  repeat  whenever  the  state  of 
our  affairs  gave  a  prospect  of  success.'  It  is  also  very 
desirable  that  we  should  be  able  to  hold  out  some 
advantage  to  the  King  of  Cabul  more  attractive  than 
that  of  mere  safety  from  the  French. 

‘  If  that  specious  people  send  an  emissary  to  the 
King  of  Cabul,  he  will  probably  assume  His  Majesty’s 
entire  safety  from  the  f'rench,  offer  protection  against 
the  designs  of  the  English,  and  promise  in  the  course 
of  the  operations  against  India  to  reduce  this  Soubah, 
Phawul  Khan’s  country,  and  Scinde,  entirely  under  the 
King’s  authority ;  perhaps  he  may  also  promise  tlie 

'  We  are  informed  that  papers  exist  to  prove  tiiat  Bonaparte 
iiad  fixed  on  the  Gomnl  Pass,  leading  from  Glniznee  to  Dera  Ismael 
Khan,  as  the  line  of  his  advance  from  Afghanistan  into  India. 


164 


LORD  MINTO  IN  INDIA. 


[1808 


Punjaub,  Cutch,  Griizerat,  or  some  other  country  on 
this  side  of  the  Indus ;  or  he  may  engage  to  procure  a 
desirable  settlement  of  the  disputes  about  the  Wharasan, 
getting  over  all  difficulties  by  promised  indemnities  in 
India. 

‘  Amidst  all  these  dazzling  prospects  I  fear  an  Eastern 
monarch  might  lose  sight  of  the  danger  to  which  he 
exposes  his  crown  by  associating  with  such  a  nation  of 
military  adventurers,  and  would  not  give  a  very  favour¬ 
able  hearing  to  a  person  who  could  only  offer  to  destroy 
the  illusion. 

‘  The  state  of  our  affairs  may  hereafter  admit  of 
our  holding  out  many  attractions  to  the  King  of  Cabul, 
but  at  present  we  can  only  display  that  of  money.  It 
might  be  expedient  to  instruct  me  how  far  to  offer  pe¬ 
cuniary  aid,  in  case  I  found  it  necessary  to  counteract 
French  promises,  and  what  assistance  we  could  give  in 
ordnance,  stores,  and  officers.  It  is  desirable  that  I 
should  be  furnished  with  those  materials  to  treat  on  as 
soon  as  possible,  as  some  open  negotiation  will  probably 
be  required  as  a  pretence  for  my  remaining  at  Cabul. 
The  Asiatics  know  nothing  of  the  character  of  a  resident 
minister,  and  so  much  are  the  Afghans  impressed  with 
the  idea  of  an  ambassador  being  always  charged  with 
some  important  communication,  that  their  etiquette 
allows  him  only  one  audience  to  deliver  his  message, 
receive  a  reply,  and  take  his  leave.  I  have  to  beg  your 
Lordship’s  forgiveness  for  obtruding  the  above  questions 
on  you,  but  great  importance  appears  to  me  to  attach 
to  their  early  decision.  I  am  afraid  it  will  appear  to 


JEt.  57] 


MISSION  TO  CABUL. 


165 


your  Lordship  that  my  progress  towards  Cahul  has 
hitherto  been  very  slow  ;  but  the  delays  which  have 
occurred  have  been  unavoidable,  and  they  are  of  the 
less  consequence,  as  1  must  remain  at  this  place  till  I 
receive  an  answer  to  my  letter  to  the  King.  It  would 
be  quite  impossible  to  travel  among  the  tribes  beyond 
the  Indus  without  a  guard  froin  Ilis  IMajesty.  I  expect 
to  receive  an  answer  in  course  of  a  week,  and  if  he  con¬ 
tinues  at  Candahar,  where  the  last  accounts  left  him, 
I  shall  be  able  to  join  him  in  a  month  from  the  time  I 
leave  INI ooltan.  Keport  states  his  intention  to  be  to 
move  to  Peshore,  in  which  case  I  should  probably 
meet  him  within  a  fortnight  after  I  leave  this  place.’  ‘ 
Before  this  letter  was  received,  the  policy  at  Cal¬ 
cutta  had  undergone  considerable  modifications,  and 
the  reply  informed  INlr.  Elphinstone  that  no  thought  of 
offensive  operations  against  Persia  was  any  longer  en¬ 
tertained.  He  was,  however,  authorised  to  accede  to 
engagements  of  a  purely  defensive  character  against 
her  in  the  event  of  her  aggression  against  the  State  of 
Cabul ;  in  this  case  military  stores,  arms,  and  ordnance 
would  be  furnished  to  the  King  on  condition  of  his 
readiness  to  oppose  the  advance  of  a  French  army  on 
India.  ‘  It  would  probably,’  said  the  despatch,  ‘  be 
found  impracticable  to  obtain  the  King’s  cordial 
attachment  to  our  views  and  interests  without  some 
sacrifice  to  his.’  These  instructions  were  stated  ‘with 
a  view  to  point  out  rather  what  is  admissible  than  what 

'  Mr.  Mountstuart  Elphinstone  to  Lord  Minto,  Mooltan,  Deccniher 
14,  1808. 


1G6 


LORD  MINTO  IN  INDIA. 


[1808 


is  desirable  in  the  present  situation  of  affairs,  and  under 
any  circumstances  the  Government  would  approve  of 
the  Envoy  endeavouring  to  limit  the  aid  to  be  eventually 
afforded  to  the  object  of  defensive  engagements  as 
much  as  possible,  and  consenting  to  afford  assistance 
in  ai'ms,  ordnance,  and  military  stores  rather  than  in 
troops.’  ’ 

The  instructions  from  which  the  above  extract  is 
made,  were  not  written  when  Mr.  Elphinstone  entei'ed 
Peshawur,  where  the  King  had  determined  to  receive 
him. 

On  leaving  Mooltan  the  mission  proceeded  up  the 
Indus,  with  much  discourse  of  Alexander,  whose  ex¬ 
ploits  appear  to  have  been  singularly  mixed  up  in  the 
traditions  of  the  people  with  those  of  Solomon  and 
of  Lord  Lake.  After  crossing  the  great  river  they 
followed  pretty  closely  the  line  of  the  late  frontier  at 
the  foot  of  the  Suleiman  mountains.  Encamping  at 
the  mouth  of  the  Kurrum,  where  English  troops  now 
hold  the  ascending  valley,  they  rested  later  on  by  the 
springs  and  the  sycamores  of  Kohat, — a  name  grown 
familiar  to  us  as  a  place  of  arms,  of  convoys,  and  of 


'  This  passage  of  the  despatch  to  Mr.  Elphinstoneis  an  adaptation 
of  the  suggestions  made  by  himself  in  a  pajrer  addressed  to  Lord 
Minto  some  time  before.  ‘  The  practicability  of  assisting  the 
King  with  troops  would  be  very  doubtful.  But  a  present  of  guns, 
stores,  &c.,  and  some  instruction  in  the  use  of  artillery  might  have 
the  best  effect.  Such  an  arrrangement  would  strengthen  the  King 
of  Cabul,  and  would  give  him  confidence  in  us  and  remove  any  sus¬ 
picions  he  may  be  persuaded  to  harbour  that  we  have  designs  on  his 
country,  and  would  show  him  that  we  take  a  lively  interest  in  his 
welfare.’ 


57] 


MISSION  TO  CABUL. 


167 


staff-officers,  but  to  the  Elphinstone  mission  suggest¬ 
ing  gentler  thoughts,  for  there  their  hearts  were  glad¬ 
dened  by  an  unexpected  meeting  with  wanderers  like 
themselves  from  English  lanes  and  fields.  The  songs 
of  thrushes  and  blackbirds  were  in  the  air;  wild 
raspberry  and  blackberry  bushes,  ‘  all  the  better  for 
being  out  of  leaf,  were  putting  forth  new  buds ;  ’ 
clover  and  chickweed,  and  golden  disks  of  dandelions, 
peered  up  among  the  ‘  soft  fresh  verdure  ’  of  the  early 
year;  and,  far  more  grateful  to  their  eyes  than  the 
monotonous  splendour  of  Indian  vegetation,  was  last 
year’s  brown  leaf,  and  the  willow’s  soft  and  scented 
buds. 

At  Kohat  to-day,  the  humble  English  flowers  may 
grow  by  English  graves,  in  the  shadow  of  the  church 
where  are  preserved  the  names  of  a  long  list  of  officers 
who  have  fallen  since  the  frontier  force  was  started 
about  thirty  years  ago  —  ‘names  scarcely  heard  of  in 
England,  but  acknowledged  out  here  to  be  those  of 
first-rate  leaders,  first-rate  soldiers,  who  have  fallen 
like  heroes,  one  after  the  other,  in  these  frontier  fights. 
The  Englishmen  we  have  on  this  frontier  are  a  race  to 
be  proud  of.’  ‘ 

When  the  mission  reached  the  fine  old  city  of 

'  Lord  Melgund  to  the  Editor.  Kohat,  February  1879. 

The  frontier  force  is  under  the  Government  of  the  Punjaub,  and 
has  held,  at  a  fearful  cost  of  life,  a  frontier  which  it  is  hoped  will 
now  be  exchanged  for  a  better.  This  force  is  composed  of  native 
troops  under  a  handful  of  British  officers,  and  its  duty  has  been  to 
keep  at  bay  all  the  wild  tribes  of  the  mountains,  over  a  line  ex¬ 
tending  many  hundred  miles. 


168 


LOED  MINTO  IN  INDIA. 


[1809 


Peshawur,  croAviied  with  its  palace,  shady  Avith  gardens 
and  oA^erflowing  AAnth  population,  the  surrounding  plain 
Avore  the  first  greenery  of  spring ;  and,  in  the  glory  of 
blossoming  orchards  and  young  leaves,  Asia  wore  to 
them  the  hues  of  England.  A  remark  to  that  effect 
having  been  repeated  to  the  King,  he  courteously  replied 
that  Avhere  there  Avas  such  affinity  betAveen  countries 
there  should  be  friendship  betAveen  their  peoples.  It 
was  no  doubt  politic  to  overlook  some  other  features  in 
the  scene  which  suggested  widely  different  thoughts ; 
for,  as  unlike  anything  English  as  the  barren  hills  that 
girded  the  plain,  Avas  a  sight  that  gave  the  Envoy  ‘  a 
strange  notion  of  the  system  of  manners  in  CabuL’ 

Perched  like  birds  of  prey  upon  the  rugged  rocks 
sat  ‘  a  number  of  armed  banditti,  the  fierce  clan  of 
the  Khyberees,’  appraising  the  worth  and  the  strength 
of  the  approaching  mission.  Nor  could  it  proceed  in 
safety  till  terms  had  been  made  with  the  leaders  of 
the  hand  by  the  Afghan  nobleman  deputed  to  conduct 
the  strangers  into  the  town,  Avho,  in  his  rich  dress  and 
golden  armour,  ventured,  almost  unattended,  into  the 
midst  of  their  matchlocks. 

At  this  very  time  the  Punjaub  was  quite  safe  for 
travellers.  ‘  The  Maharajah,’  says  one  of  Lord 
^linto’s  correspondents,  ‘  has  instituted  a  good  police, 
and  has  made  severe  examples  of  the  districts  in  which 
capital  crimes  and  robberies  have  been  committed,  by 
putting  to  death  all  the  iuhahitants  of  the  neighbour¬ 
ing  toAvns  and  villages.’ 

The  reception  of  the  embassy  by  the  king  took 


JEt.  58] 


MISSION  TO  CABUL. 


169 


place  on  March  5.  It  is  described  as  magnificent. 
After  passing  through  courts  filled  with  guards,  and 
halls  with  courtiers,  over  rich  carpets  and  under  silken 
draperies,  they  reached  the  presence  of  the  King,  Shah 
Soojah,  a  handsome  man  of  about  thirty  years  of  age, 
who  received  them  seated  on  a  throne  covered  with 
cloth  of  gold  and  pearls,  himself  a  blaze  of  emeralds 
and  diamonds,  the  fiimous  Kohinoor  being  conspicuous 
above  all. 

On  subsequent  occasions  the  Envoy  was  admitted 
to  more  private  interviews  with  the  King,  ‘when  it 
would  scarcely  be  believed  how  much  he  had  the  man¬ 
ners  of  a  gentleman,  and  how  well  he  preserved  his 
dignity,  while  he  seemed  only  anxious  to  please.’  The 
Afghan  nobility  struck  Mr.  Elphinstone  as  superior  in 
refinement  and  tastes  to  the  great  men  of  India — their 
jnanners  were  more  simple  and  their  knowledge  greater. 
It  soon  appeared  that  they  were  shrewd  enough  to 
perceive  that  dangers,  against  which  the  British  sought 
their  co-operation,  must  be  of  considerable  magnitude, 
and  that  an  advantageous  bargain  might  therefore,  not 
inq)robably,  be  struck  between  themselves  and  the 
C'ompany.  They  remarked  that,  before  making  common 
cause  with  either  of  the  European  powers,  they  ought 
to  hear  what  Erance  as  well  as  England  had  to  say. 

Some  among  them  were  by  no  means  ill-informed 
as  to  the  object  of  the  mission,  and  even  as  to  the 
events  of  recent  history.  IMr.  Elphinstone  having 
stated  in  conversation  with  the  Khans  that,  since  1745. 
there  had  been  no  rebellion  against  the  Government  of 


iro 


LORD  MINTO  IN  INDIA. 


[1809 


England,  one  of  those  gentlemen  smilingly  replied 
that  Mr.  Elphinstone  had  forgotten  the  American 
War ;  and  then  ‘  asked  seriously  why  the  insurance  of 
ships  should  be  raised  so  high  by  the  French  privateers 
when  we  had  so  manifest  a  superiority  at  sea.’  * 

A  despatch  ^  from  Mr.  Elphinstone,  written  some 
weeks  after  his  arrival  at  Peshawur,  gave  every  reason 
to  hope  that  a  treaty  of  alliance  against  the  common 
enemy  would  be  executed ;  but  it  was  rapidly  followed 
by  a  second  containing  far  less  favourable  intelligence. 
In  consequence  of  a  renewal  of  insurrectionary  move¬ 
ments,  the  King  earnestly  solicited  pecuniary  aid  from 
the  Company.  The  sum  said  to  be  required  by  him 
to  ensure  his  success  was  not  less  than  fifteen 
lacs  of  rupees.  The  Envoy,  however,  intimated  that  a 
much  smaller  sum  would  be  of  the  most  essential  con¬ 
sequence  to  the  King’s  affairs,  and  that,  if  he  were  at 
that  moment  authorised  to  offer  two  lacs  of  rupees,  he 
had  no  doubt  that,  for  the  mere  purpose  of  the  alliance, 
he  could  obtain  all  the  security  that  promises  and  treaties 
could  give  for  the  King’s  co-operation. 

‘  The  condition  of  the  King’s  affairs  as  represented 
in  these  despatches,  appeared  pregnant  with  danger, 

‘  The  knowledge  possessed  by  the  Afghan  nobleman  sinks  into 
insignificance  before  that  of  a  Caffre  chief  as  related  to  me  by  a  cor¬ 
respondent.  ‘  A  friend  of  mine  who  fought  in  one  of  the  early  Caffre 
campaigns  soon  after  1840,  I  think,  told  me  that,  when  after  some 
internecine  struggles  they  came  to  parley  with  their  native  foe, 
they  were  astonished  to  be  addressed  by  the  half-naked  chief  with 
the  remark  that  he  respected  the  British  infantry,  but  that  lie  had 
tieen  looking  into  Napier’s  Peninsula/)'  Ika?',  and  could  not  say  that 
either  then  or  now  he  thought  so  much  of  the  British  cavalry.’ 

Secret  and  separate  general  letter,  April  20,  1809. 


iEr.  58] 


MISSION  TO  CABUL, 


171 


and  it  seemed  probable  that  before  onr  instructions 
would  reach  the  Envoy  in  reply,  the  crisis  would  be 
j)assed,  and  the  King’s  dominion  be  either  confirmed 
or  subverted.  We  judged  it  proper,  however,  to  decide, 
and  communicate  immediately  our  decision,  on  the 
case  submitted  to  our  consideration,  and  we  observed 
that,  under  present  circumstances,  no  advantages  could 
be  obtained  from  the  state  of  Cabul,  so  important,  solid, 
and  permanent  as  would  warrant  a  pecuniary  sacrifice 
so  large  as  that  which  our  Envoy  had  represented  that 
the  King  would  require  to  ensure  success ;  that  the 
suspension  of  the  projects  of  h^rance,  and  the  alienation 
from  her  alliance  of  the  Persian  Court,  had  removed 
the  immediate  importance  of  an  alliance  between  the 
Indian  Government  and  Cabul ;  but  that,  if  the  Envoy 
had  reason  to  believe  that  a  sum  of  money  not  exceed¬ 
ing  three  lacs  of  rupees  would  produce  a  disposition 
(ui  the  part  of  the  King  of  Cabul  to  co-operate  cordi¬ 
ally  at  a  future  season  in  repelling  a  contemplated  in¬ 
vasion — in  other  words,  if  morally  assured  of  correspond¬ 
ing  benefit  to  the  British  interests — the  Envoy  was 
authorised  to  advance  that  sum. 

‘  We  are  aware,  and  have  frequently  advanced  the 
principle  as  a  rule  of  action  in  the  prosecution  of  the 
late  measures  for  the  formation  of  defensive  alliances 
against  a  European  invasion,  that  a  sense  of  common 
interest  and  common  danger  must  form  the  basis  of 
such  alliances.  At  the  same  time,  a  rigid  exclusion 
on  our  part  of  all  acts  of  concession,  and  of  all  assist¬ 
ance  to  the  views  of  the  other  party,  though  not  directly 


172 


LOED  MINTO  IN  INDIA. 


[1809 


tending  to  the  main  purposes  of  the  alliance,  is  adverse 
to  the  successful  cultivation  of  mutual  harmony  and 
good-will.  Such  acts  of  concession  or  assistance  may 
influence  a  disposition  balancing  between  the  advan¬ 
tages  and  the  hazard  of  accepting  or  rejecting  the  pro¬ 
posed  connection ;  and  a  seasonable  aid  may  afford  to 
the  other  party  that  latitude  of  choice  which  is  alone 
compatible  with  the  power  of  action,  by  enabling  it  to 
maintain  its  independence  and  preserve  the  means  of 
resistance  against  a  foreign  force,  which,  however  dan¬ 
gerous  as  an  ally,  a  conscious  sense  of  weakness  and 
the  dictates  of  a  temporising  policy  might  compel  it  to 
conciliate.’ 

In  the  instructions  forwarded  to  Mr.  Elphinstone 
himself,  of  which  the  substance  is  embodied  in  the 
above  despatch,  it  is  stated  that,  ‘  although  there  is  not 
now  the  same  immediate  exigency  for  forming  a  friendly 
connection  with  the  Court  of  Cabul,  yet  that  measure 
is  of  importance,  and  contains  an  object  of  sound  policy, 
in  the  event,  however  remote,  of  either  the  French  or 
any  other  European  Power  endeavouring  to  approach 
India  by  that  route.’ 

Almost  on  the  same  day  when  these  paragraphs 
were  being  written  at  Calcutta,  Mr.  Eljihinstone  was 
addressing  the  Governor  General  in  a  private  letter  as 
follows  : ' 

‘  A  very  xmfavourable  turn  has  taken  place  in  the 
King  of  Cabul’s  affairs.  For  some  time  past  his  pro¬ 
spects  had  appeared  to  be  much  improved.  During 
'  April  26,  1809. 


Mt.  58] 


MISSION  TO  CABUL. 


173 


this  period  the  negotiations  continued,  and  the  treaty 
was  signed  on  the  19th  inst.  It  merely  binds  your 
Lordship  to  assist  the  King  of  Cabul  with  money 
against  a  confederacy  of  French  and  Persians,  and 
the  King  of  Cabul  to  resist  these  Powers  while 
their  confederacy  lasts,  and  to  exclude  all  brenchmen 
from  his  country  for  ever. 

‘  A  few  days  ago  intelligence  was  received  of  the 
approach  of  Shah  jMahommed  s  troops  to  Cabul,  and 
of  the  entire  failure  of  Ameer  Ool  Moolk's  attack  on 
Cashmere,  and  of  the  loss  or  defection  of  the  greater 
part  of  his  army. 

‘There  are  many  contradictory  accounts  of  this 
affair,  but  it  seems  certain  that  Ameer  Ool  Moolk  had 
advanced  very  far  into  the  passes  when  his  supplies 
were  cut  off  by  one  of  the  Rajahs  on  the  hills  on  the 
way  to  Cashmere,  who  had  afforded  a  passage  to  his 
army,  but  whom  the  Minister  had  afterwards  disobliged. 
The  army  which  had  before  been  discontented  for  want 
of  pay,  being  now  reduced  to  much  distress,  and  the 
most  liberal  promises  being  held  out  to  deserters,  a 
considerable  number  of  the  troops  went  over  to  the 
enemy. 

‘  Shah  Ool  INIoolk  is  making  what  preparations  he 
can  to  oppose  his  enemies,  but  he  is  almost  destitute 
of  money  ;  and  though  several  of  his  ministers  are  rich, 
the  habitual  covetousness  of  the  Douranees  prevents 
their  giving  him  any  assistance.  Ameer  Ool  Moolk, 
who  is  said  to  be  possessed  of  a  crore  of  rupees,  has 
never  assisted  the  King  in  any  of  his  distresses,  and  is 


174 


LOKD  MINTO  IN  INDIA. 


[1809 


not  expected  to  do  so  in  this  extremity.  The  King’s 
forces,  it  is  said,  will  be  sent  out  immediately,  and  I 
suppose  he  will  march  as  soon  as  Ameer  Ool  Moolk 
arrives  on  the  way  to  Cabul. 

‘  He  is  reported  to  have  sent  off  some  of  his  jewels 
to  a  fort  of  Akran  Khan’s  among  the  Eusafzyes.  The 
Khybers,  in  whose  hills  he  formerly  took  refuge,  are  now 
divided,  and  part  of  them  have  refused  him  an  asylum 
in  case  he  is  defeated.  The  tribes  in  this  neighbour¬ 
hood  are  all  arming  and  assembling,  to  be  ready  to,  act 
as  the  times  may  require:  some  of  them  are  connected 
with  Mahommed,  but  the  greater  part  of  them  are  in¬ 
different  to  both  parties.  This  city  and  the  country 
round  it  continue  in  perfect  tranquillity. 

‘  As  the  battle  between  the  two  Kings  will  probably 
be  fought  at  no  great  distance  from  this,  I  shall,  for 
the  reasons  I  have  formerly  stated,  desire  to  have  my 
audience  of  leave,  which  it  was  always  understood  I 
should  have  when  the  King  marched  towards  Cabul. 
I  shall  then  repair  to  Attock,  and  wait  the  event  of 
the  struggle.  If  Mahommed  is  victorious,  I  shall  wait 
the  orders  of  Government,  unless  I  find  a  speedy  ac¬ 
knowledgment  of  the  new  King  necessary.  I  do  not 
conceive  that  it  will  be  difficult  to  prevail  on  Shah 
Mahommed  to  agree  to  the  same  terms  as  those  settled 
with  Shah  Soojah,  but  it  appears  to  me  that  to  do  so 
will  require  an  extra  expense  of  about  three  lacs  of 
rupees.  For  this  reason  in  particular  I  am  anxious  to 
receive  the  orders  of  Government  before  I  enter  on  any 
negotiation  with  him.’ 


^T.  58] 


MISSION  TO  CABUL. 


175 


On  June  14  the  mission  retired  from  Peshawur, 
leaving  its  cool  and  shady  gardens  and  sparkling 
fountains  with  regret.  On  June  17  the  treaty  men¬ 
tioned  in  Mr.  Elphinstone’s  letter  was  signed  at  Cal¬ 
cutta.  Before  the  month  had  expired  Shah  Soojah 
had  been  completely  defeated  and  had  fled  from  his 
dominions. 

With  his  successor  the  Envoy  was  not  authorised  to 
treat.  The  changed  aspect  of  affairs  in  Europe,  and 
the  friendly  relations  established  by  Mr.  Metcalfe’s 
diplomacy  with  Runjeet  Singh,  had  brought  the  Indian 
(lovernment  to  the  determination  not  to  risk  consider¬ 
able  expenditure  upon  uncertain  and  unprofitable 
alliances. 

The  most  important  result  of  the  policy  adopted  by 
the  Indian  Government  towards  the  frontier  States 
during  Lord  Minto’s  administration,  was  the  treaty 
with  Runjeet  Singh,  which  for  thirty  years  maintained 
peace  between  the  British  power  and  the  most  energetic 
and  powerful  of  native  rulers. 

The  treaty  with  Persia,  in  so  far  as  it  pledged  Great 
Britain  to  subsidise  Persia  in  the  event  of  her  being 
engaged  in  ‘  an  unprovoked  war  with  any  European 
State,’  was,  in  Lord  Minto’s  opinion,  calculated  to  pro¬ 
duce  grave  complications  in  the  future. 

The  treaty  with  Clabul  was  rendered  nugatory  by 
the  fall  from  power  of  one  of  the  contracting  parties 
who  signed  it.* 

'  An  original  copy  of  the  treaty  drawn  up  by  Mr.  Mountstuart 
Elphinstone  and  sigaied  at  Calcutta  in  1809,  is  still  inexistence,  and 


176 


LOED  MINTO  IN  INDIA. 


[1809 


It  may  nevertheless  remain  an  open  question 
whether  the  friendly  relations  established  between 
the  Company’s  Government  and  Afghanistan  might 
not  have  been  cultivated  with  better  success  if  the 
far-sighted  policy  iuaugm’ated  by  Lord  Minto  had 
been  pursued  and  developed,  and  due  importance 
attached  to  the  movements  of  European  States  in 
that  quarter :  in  such  a  course  there  might  have  been 
more  of  statesmanship  and  less  of  saltpetre. 

One  undeniable  and  important  result  of  the  scheme 
for  the  defence  of  India  was  the  greater  knowledge 
obtained  by  the  missions  of  the  countries  and  popula¬ 
tions  to  which  they  were  sent,  and  Mr.  Elphinstone’s 
‘  History  of  Cabul,’  Colonel  Malcolm’s  ‘  Persian  History  ’ 
and  ‘  Sketches  of  Persia,’  and  Sir  Henry  Pottinger’s  work 
on  Beloochistan  were  conceived  during  the  embassies 
sent  out  by  Lord  Minto.  The  first  two  works  were 
compiled  and  published  at  the  expense  of,  or  with  the 
assistance  of  ample  and  liberal  aid  from,  the  Indian 
Government,  at  the  instigation  of  the  Governor 
General. 

is  in  the  possession  of  Mir  Hasliam  Khan,  native  officer  in  the  12th 
Bengal  Cavalry,  and  grandson  of  the  Vizier  of  Shah  Soojah.  The 
fact  became  accidentally  known  to  Lord  Melgund,  the  great-grand¬ 
son  of  Lord  Minto,  while  with  the  column  of  General  Eoberts  in  the 
Kurrum  vallej’  in  the  spring  of  1879.  He  did  not  see  the  treaty, 
but  he  was  informed  that  the  original  signature  of  Lord  Minto  was 
attached  to  it.  MirHasham  Khan  is  described  as  a  very  smart  officer 
in  one  of  our  best  cavalry  regiments.  This  rapprochement  between  the 
descendant  of  the  Governor  General  and  of  the  Afghan  statesman, 
was  related  in  a  letter  from  India  while  the  foregoing  pages  were 
being  written. 


58] 


DEFENSIVE  ALLIANCES. 


177 


NOTE. 

The  State  of  Scinde  had  come  within  the  scope  of  the 
defensive  arrangements  pi'oposed  i)y  the  British  Government, 
but  the  indiscretion  of  theii'  agent,  Captain  Seton,  led  to  the 
annulling  of  the  treaty  concluded  by  him  with  the  Ameer 
of  Scinde. 

It  was  found  that  Persian  agents  were  negotiating  with 
the  Government  of  Scinde  at  the  same  time  as  the  Envoy  of 
the  Indian  Government;  that  they  had  authority  to  act  for 
both  France  and  Persia,  and  that  the  bait  held  out  to  the 
Govei'nment  of  Scinde  was  military  aid  to  throw  off  the  yoke 
of  the  King  of  Cabul,  to  whom  they  owed  a  nominal  allegi¬ 
ance,  and  the  possession  of  the  Afghan  fortress  of  Candahar. 
‘The  cliief  ruler  of  Scinde  informed  Captain  Seton  distinctly 
that,  despairing  of  the  good-will  of  the  British  Government, 
he  had  intended  to  close  with  the  offers  of  the  French  and 
Persians,  but  preferred  the  British  alliance  on  the  same 
terms.’  These  terms,  agreed  to  by  Captain  Seton,  were  not 
consistent  with  the  endeavours  making  to  secui’e  the  friend¬ 
ship  of  the  King  of  Cabul ;  hence  the  Indian  Government 
repudiated  the  engagements  made  by  Captain  Seton,  and 
sent  another  Envoy  (Mr.  II.  Smith)  to  Scinde,  to  renew 
the  negotiations  with  that  Government,  on  the  footing 
on  which  alone  Captain  Seton  had  been  empowered  to 
treat — namely,  the  admission,  as  a  preliminary  step  to  all 
further  transactions,  of  a  resident  agent  of  the  British 
Government  (the  commercial  resident  having  been  expelled 
in  1802). 

‘  Tins  measure  is  necessarily  preliminary  to  the  acccm- 
N 


178 


LORD  MINTO  IN  INDIA. 


[1809 


plishment  of  our  ultimate  purpose,  that  of  withholding  or 
detaching  the  Government  of  Seinde  from  connections  with 
our  enemies,  as  wmll  as  the  more  proximate  purpose  of 
securing  an  authentic  channel  of  information  and  intelli¬ 
gence  on  points  of  the  utmost  importance  to  our  interests.’ 
‘  No  specific  engagement  coiild  be  entered  into  with  that 
Government  without  the  establishment  of  direct  intercourse 
on  a  permanent  footing,’  ‘  the  attainment  of  which  will 
afibrd  the  means  of  watching  its  proceedings  and  of  obtain¬ 
ing  authentic  intelligence  concerning  the  designs  of  our 
enemies.’  * 

The  conditions  pi'oposed  by  the  British  Government 
were  ultimately  accepted  as  the  basis  of  a  treaty  of  general 
amity  between  the  Company’s  Government  and  that  of  the 
Ameer. 

'  Secret  and  separate  general  letter. 


AZt.  58J 


NiiWS  FKOM  EUKOPE. 


179 


CHAPTER  VIII. 

The  news  from  Europe  which  exercised  so  decisive  an 
influence  over  the  course  of  events  in  India  was  that 
of  the  determined  resistance  of  Spain  to  the  French 
invasion,  and  the  first  successes  of  the  British  army  in 
Portugal  under  Sir  Arthur  Wellesley. 

The  Battle  of  Vimiero  '  was  hailed  as  the  ‘  trumj)et 
of  a  prophecy.’  So  unbroken  had  been  the  tide  of 
Napoleon’s  prosperity  that  the  defeat  of  one  of  his 
lieutenants,  Junot,  by  Sir  Arthur  Wellesley,  was  magical 
in  its  effect  on  the  temper  of  the  nation.  ‘  All  the 
Whigs,  as  well  as  Tories,  down  to  democrats  and 
Methodists,  are  eager  to  send  English  troops  and  money 
to  the  assistance  of  that  oppressed  nation.  .  .  .  Tlie 
Princess  of  Wales  gave  a  dinner  to  the  Spanish  patriots. 
It  was  a  mixed  party,  but  none  the  worse  for  that,  as 
all  parties  there  were  united  in  the  grand  cause.’  ^ 

'  Auga^st  1808. 

^  Lady  Crewe  to  Lord  Minto,  December  1808.  She  goes  on  d 
propos  of  the  Princess's  dinner-party  :  ‘  You  would  have  smiled  if 
you  had  heard  the  Pindaric  jokes  which  flew  across  the  table  from 
our  Royal  hostess  to  Mr.  Windham  across  Mr.  Frere,  and  then  across 
other  people  to  Sir  William  Scott,  for  she  spared  no  one  of  the  party. 
There  is  nothing  more  propitious  to  mental  coquetry  than  a  dis¬ 
union  among  statesmen.’ 


180 


LOED  MINTO  IN  INDIA. 


[1809 


The  rejoicing  was  not  less  in  India.  ‘  Great  news 
is  come  to  town,’  wrote  Lord  Minto  on  February  2, 
1809.  ‘  A  ship  has  just  arrived  from  England  which 

she  left  on  September  17.  She  has  brought  us  the 
triumphs  of  Sir  A.  Wellesley  in  Portugal.  What  a 
sunshine  has  broken  upon  the  Avorld !  I  feel  now  as 
if  Gilbert  the  Sixth  *  might  have  a  chance  to  cut  the 
trees  which  you  are  planting,  which,  let  me  tell  you,  is 
a  comfortable  reflection.’  The  tidings  of  Wellesley’s 
victoi'y  swept  over  India  to  Metcalfe’s  little  camp  on 
the  distant  Sutlege,  and  were  sounded  again  from 
every  gun,  great  and  small,  as  they  poured  forth  a 
Koyal  salute.  On  learning  its  cause,  Kunjeet  desired 
his  guns  to  take  up  the  tale,  and  a  second  salute  from 
the  Sikh  Latteries  proclaimed  the  participation  of  the 
Eajah  in  the  British  rejoicing — an  act  of  courtesy  which 
was  much  appreciated  at  the  time. 

‘  The  news  continues  good  from  Spain,’  wrote  Lord 
INlinto,  ‘  yet  I  hope  the  rest  of  the  world  will  not  let  this 
occasion  slip  once  more ;  for,  if  they  give  him  leisure, 
the  monster  will  collect  his  rage,  and  it  may  go  hard 
with  the  beautiful  Spanish  cause  yet.  Oh  !  that  the 

In  his  reply  to  this  letter,  Lord  Minto  says  of  the  Princess  :  ‘She 
has  been  badly  treated,  for  the  stones  cast  at  her  do  not  come  from 
hands  entitled  to  throw  them.  One  bad  thing,  however,  she  is  guilty 
of — ingratitude  to  Windham.  I  say  nothing  of  myself,  though  she 
entertained  me  the  day  I  took  leave  of  her  not  only  with  the  wish 
that  Windham  might  be  turned  out  of  Norfolk  with  some  great 
personal  disgrace,  but  with  the  hope  that  Lord  Melville  would  dis¬ 
turb  me  in  India.  However,  I  continue  to  lament  her  discomforts  and 
to  wish  for  her  welfare.’ 

*  His  infant  grandson. 


JEt.  68]  CONDITION  OF  FEELING  IN  ENGLAND.  181 


fable  of  the  bundle  of  sticks  bad  ever  been  translated 
into  any  of  the  modern  languages,  for  want  of  wbicb, 
alas !  it  has  become  sad  sober  history  instead  of  fable.' 
The  first  fleet  that  arrived  in  India  after  these  lines 
were  written  told  that  the  pride  and  rejoicing  called 
forth  by  the  brilliant  campaign  of  Talavera  had  been 
severely  checked  by  the  retreat  of  our  armies  from 
Spain,  and  the  Convention  of  Cintra.  ‘  I  grieve,’  wrote 
Mr.  Windham,  ‘over  the  circumstances  that  prevented 
the  complete  defeat  of  Junot’s  army,  which  I  believe 
would  have  happened  if  Wellesley  had  been  left  to 
himself ;  though  no  doubt  the  insolence  of  the  Minis¬ 
ters,  founded  on  merits  not  their  own,  would  not  less 
have  excited  in  one’s  mind  great  impatience.’ 

‘  It  has  been  a  disastrous  month,’  wrote  Lady 
Malmesbury  in  February  1809  ;  ‘  but  after  all  the  French 
have  had  a  practical  lesson  as  to  our  fighting,  and  the 
world  has  seen  they  are  not  invincible.’  Lord  Minto’s 
correspondents  in  general  betook  themselves  to  the  usual 
consolation  of  Englishmen  in  disaster,  and  abused  the 
leaders  of  parties  all  round. 

‘  There  is  not  a  statesman  endowed  with  superior 
talents.  The  deaths  of  Pitt  and  Fox  have  produced  the 
same  effect  on  the  public  as  that  of  Garrick  did  on  the 
stage.  Stars  will  not  do  when  we  are  used  to  the  light 
of  the  sun.’ 

‘The  Hollands  are  in  Spain,’ wrote  Lady  Crewe; 
‘  but  Miss  Fox  wrote  to  me  some  months  ago  that  her 
brother  was  very  angry  with  his  Spanish  friends  for 
their  absurdity  in  supposing  that  they  shall  be  able  to 


182 


LORD  MINTO  IN  INDIA. 


[1809 


restore  their  present  King,  and  that  they  ought  to  feel 
gratitude  to  Bonaparte  for  having  rid  them  of  so  weak 
a  prince.  “  Is  it  possible,”  she  said,  “  that  we  are  to 
light  in  so  bad  a  cause  ?  ”  When  I  read  this,  I  could 
not  help  thinking  that  we  should  always  have  something 
to  dread  of  the  republican  hobby-horse  in  the  part  of 
opposition  !  I  am  sorry  to  say  that  I  see  this  tendency 
prevail  much  more  since  the  last  defeats  than  it  did 
before.  Mr.  Whitbrea,d,  however,  met  with  no  encour¬ 
agement  at  the  time  he  published  a  pamphlet  to  advise 
peace  with  Bonajaarte  in  the  summer,  and  Heaven 
grant  that  IMr.  Canning  may  have  influence  enough  over 
the  present  Parliament  to  prevent  that  experiment  for 
a  year.’ 

To  these  letters  Lord  Minto  replied :  ‘  Spain  is 
indeed  a  lamentable  tale.  As  to  the  invasion  of  India, 
I  presume  if  Europe  is  entirely  subdued,  the  King  of 
Men  may  carry  his  views  to  the  eastward,  but  I  am 
strongly  inclined  to  believe  that  they  would  be  limited 
to  disturbing  us  by  inciting  some  of  the  Asiatic  States 
to  make  incursions  into  Hindostan,  supported  and 
directed  by  partial  aid  in  small  bodies  of  French  and 
perhaps  Eussian  troops,  and  good  European  officers. 
The  difficulties  in  the  way  of  an  advance  by  a  lai'ge 
European  army  are  scarcely  surmountable.  However, 
we  should  always  have  ample  notice  ;  for  rapidity  is 
practicable  in  the  invasion  of  Spain  or  Italy,  but  is 
simply  impossible  in  transporting  a  French  army  to  the 
Indus,  with  all  its  artillery,  stores,  and  apparatus,  the 
whole  of  which  must  attend  it,  for  the  most  indis- 


Air.  58] 


MAY  IN  INDIA. 


183 


pen  sable  equipment  s  of  a  great  European  force  do  not 
exist  on  this  side  of  Vienna,  and  can  neither  be  kept 
up  nor,  if  lost  or  wasted,  can  be  renewed  in  Asia, 
excepting  only  in  our  own  provinces,  where  all  the 
r(*sources  of  war  abound,  and  are  to  us  at  hand.’ 

It  must  have  been  grateful  to  him  to  learn  from 
Lady  Minto  that  his  Indian  administration  had  won 
the  warmest  approbation  of  Lord  Wellesley.  ‘  He  highly 
approves  of  all  you  have  been  doing  in  your  kingdom. 
We  are  now  enjoying  Minto,’  she  goes  on,  ‘  in  its  greatest 
beauty.  Everything  looks  fresh  and  delightful :  you 
know  I  enjoy  this  season  (May),  and  this  year  it  affords 
me  double  pleasure,  for  I  have  learnt  to  look  with  com¬ 
posure  from  Minto  to  India,  and  without  the  misery 
which  made  even  green  leaves  look  dusky  and  the 
clear  streams  troubled.  I  believe  you  all  to  be  well 
and  happy,  and  I  hear  from  every  quarter,  and  in  every 
account  of  India,  nothing  but  praise  of  you  and  your 
government.  If  Burke  could  look  down  and  see  you 
at  the  head  of  that  oppressed  people,  it  would  increase 
even  the  happiness  of  heaven.’ 

May  in  India  wore  a  very  diiferent  aspect  from 
that  with  which  it  smiled  on  Minto. 

‘  I  do  remember  a  time,’  wrote  Lord  Minto,'  ‘w’hen 
iNlay  was  a  season  of  tempered  pleasures.  Here  it 
brings  rains  so  perpetual  and  heavy,  that  if  in  June 
greater  rains  come,  I  don’t  know  how  we  shall  get  our 


May  15,  IBCJ. 


184 


LORD  MINTO  IN  INDIA. 


[1809 


house  repaired,  which  is  already  leaking  at  every  pore. 
The  country  is  one  sheet  of  water.  Here  and  there 
you  see  a  little  island  about  the  size  of  half  an  acre, 
which  happens  to  stand  a  few  feet  higher  than  the  rest. 
It  is  no  exaggeration  to  say  that  persons  now  pass  in 
boats  across  the  country  which  they  were  ploughing 
two  or  three  days  back ;  but  the  crops  will  be  im¬ 
proved  by  this  operation,  for  paddy  rejoices  in  water. 
The  native  children,  I  mean  the  young  ones,  are  all 
stark  naked,  and,  most  of  the  habitations  being  on  the 
edge  of  ponds,  are  not  very  nnlike  tadpoles ;  they  are 
uncommonly  Lively  merry  monkeys,  and  I  am  not  at  all 
annoyed  by  their  black  skins.  You  never  saw  a  country 
so  swarming  with  population.  .  .  .  Business  here  ap¬ 
pears  to  me  to  breed  in  the  boxes,  as  Lady  Palmerston 
used  to  say  of  keys  in  a  lady’s  pocket.  However,  the 
business  is  pleasant  now,  consisting  principally  of 
orders  to  countermand  military  operations  and  prepa¬ 
rations,  and  to  save  Johnny  Company’s  cash.’ 

The  two  years  1808  and  1809  were,  perhaps,  the 
1  busiest  of  Lord  Minto’s  administration.  India  was 
supposed  to  be  at  peace ;  but  that  word  must  be  taken 
in  a  relative  sense,  for  in  India  the  public  peace  was 
kept  by  armies.  If  certain  feudal  chiefs  rejected  the 
authority  of  their  lord  paramount,  their  relations  with 
whom  had  been  recognised  by  the  Government  of 
Bengal,  British  troops  brought  them  to  reason.  If  an 
ambitious  Rajah  cast  a  covetous  glance  on  his  neigh¬ 
bour’s  territory,  a  British  detachment  gave  him  an 
unmistakable  reading  of  the  dictum,  ‘  Cursed  is  he 


Mt.  58] 


THE  DACOITS. 


185 


who  removeth  his  neighliour’s  landmark.’  If  tlie  free 
lances  of  the  hills  showed  too  great  a  fondness  for  the 
mango  groves  and  rice  fields  of  the  plain,  English 
colonels  and  their  soldiers  appeared  rapidly  on  the 
scene,  and  the  depredators  were  chased  Tip  the  high 
hills  and  expelled  from  their  strongholds  on  their 
summits.  From  such  operations  as  these  there  was 
no  rest.' 

The  internal  safety  of  Bengal,  how^ever,  remained 
intact  from  open  enemies,  and  it  was  with  equal  dismay 
and  surprise  that  it  was  found  necessary,  in  the  course 
of  1809,  to  employ  the  regular  forces  to  extirpate  the 
gangs  of  banditti  or  dacoits  who  had  penetrated  into 
the  heart  of  the  Presidency,  and  with  whom  the  native 
j)()lice  were  accused  of  being  in  league. 

‘  They  have  of  late  come  within  thirty  miles  of 
Karrackpore.''  The  crime  of  gang  robbery  has  at  all 
times,  though  in  different  degrees,  obtained  a  footing  in 
Bengal.  The  prevalence  of  the  offence  occasioned  by 
its  success  and  impunity,  has  been  much  greater  in 
this  civilised  and  flourishing  part  of  India,  than  in  the 
wilder  territories  adjoining,  which  have  not  enjoyed  so 
long  the  advantages  of  a  regular  and  legal  government ; 
and  it  appears  at  first  sight  mortifying  to  the  English 
administration  of  these  jirovinces,  that  our  ohlest 

'  In  1812-18  several  Rajahs  and  Chiefs,  such  as  the  Prince  of 
Rewa  and  the  Rajah  of  Machery,  were  punished  for  high-handed  deal¬ 
ings  wilh  their  neiglibours.  In  reference  to  such  oj>erations, Malcolm 
in  his  History  of  India  remarks  :  ‘  All  these  acts  of  consideration  and, 
vigour  kej)t  the  smaller  dependencies  of  the  State  in  good  humour. 

*  Lord  Minto  to  Lady  Minto. 


186 


LORD  MINTO  IN  INDIA. 


[1809 


possessions  should  be  the  worst  protected  against  the 
evils  of  lawless  violence. 

‘  It  has  been  said  that  the  prosperity  and  undis¬ 
turbed  tranquillity  of  these  lower  provinces,  which  have 
never  seen  war  within  their  limits  during  the  present 
generation  of  their  inhabitants,  that  is  to  say,  for  half 
a  century,  have  afforded  two  inducements  to  the  despe¬ 
rate  associations  which  have  so  constantly  harassed 
them  under  the  name  of  dacoits.  First,  the  riches  of 
the  country  have  presented  the  temptation  of  good 
plunder.  Second,  the  long  security  which  the  country 
has  enjoyed  from  foreign  enemies,  and  the  consequent 
loss  of  martial  habits  and  character,  have  made  the 
people  of  Bengal  so  timid  and  enervated,  that  no  re¬ 
sistance  is  to  be  apprehended  in  the  act,  nor  punish¬ 
ment  afterwards.  There  have,  however,  certainly  been 
other  more  specific  causes  for  the  extraordinary  preva¬ 
lence  of  the  crime  at  particular  times  or  in  particular 
quarters.  Among  these  has  been  the  nature  of  our 
judicial  and  police  establishments.  The  judge  and 
magistrate  is  an  English  gentleman ;  but  all  his  sub¬ 
ordinate  officers  and  instruments  are  necessarily 
The  probity  and  good  intentions  of  the  English  magis¬ 
trate  may  in  general  be  relied  upon  ;  but  his  vigilance, 
personal  activity,  intelligence,  or  talents,  are  not  equal 
in  all  cases  to  his  integrity.  The  consequence  often  is, 
that  the  practical  and  efficient  part  of  the  police  is 
cast  upon  the  black  subaltern  officers,  amongst  whom 
it  is  hardly  too  much  to  say,  although  it  sounds  like 
an  uncharitable  partiality  to  my  own  fair  complexion, 


^T.  58] 


THE  DACOITS. 


187 


that  there  is  scarcely  an  example  of  fidelity  to  any 
trust,  and  scarcely  an  exception  to  universal  venality 
and  corruption.  The  magistrate  derives  his  informa¬ 
tion  of  the  crimes  committed  in  his  zillah  from  this 
corrupt  source,  and  trusts  for  the  detection,  apprehen¬ 
sion,  and  punishment  of  the  criminals  to  these  venal 
agents.  The  consequence  has  in  many  instances  been, 
as  it  has  been  lately  ascertained  by  the  most  minute 
and  authentic  investigations,  that  the  magistrate  has 
remained  entirely  ignorant  of  a  very  large  proportion 
of  the  offences  committed  within  his  jurisdiction,  and 
has  congratulated  himself  on  the  good  order  and  exact 
police  of  a  country  in  which  the  inhabitants  could  not 
sleep  securely  in  their  houses,  and  in  which  great 
bodies  of  armed  banditti  have  been  robbing  and  burn¬ 
ing  the  villages,  and  murdering  and  torturing  the 
people  all  round  him.  The  native  officers  of  police 
have  very  generally  been  connected  with  the  gangs, 
and  I  may  say  universally  silenced  either  by  bribes  or 
intimidation.  Another  pecidiarity  in  India  is  the 
total  absence  of  a  local  gentry  to  whom  the  charge  of 
the  local  police  and  other  local  interests  may,  as  in 
England,  be  at  least  in  part  committed.  8o  far  from 
aid  in  these  objects,  (xovernment  has  often  to  contend 
with  the  counteraction  of  the  landed  interest.  The 
zemindars,  or  gentlemen  of  landed  property,  have  very 
commonly  no  other  idea  of  an  estate  than  as  a  field  to 
plunder  in,  nor  of  the  influence  which  property  gives, 
than  as  a  power  to  extort  and  pillage  amongst  the 
peo])le  subject  to  them.  The  leaders  of  the  dacoits 


188 


LOED  MINTO  IN  INDIA. 


[1809 


find  it  their  interest  to  conciliate  this  class  of  people, 
and  by  a  participation  in  the  plunder,  or  by  other  in¬ 
ducements,  obtain  a  secure  refuge  and  protection  in 
their  estates.  The  best  security  of  all,  however,  en¬ 
joyed  by  the  dacoits,  has  been  the  intimidation  of  the 
unhappy  people  who  are  the  objects  of  their  rapine 
and  cruelty.  It  is  impossible  to  imagine,  without  see¬ 
ing  it,  the  horrid  ascendancy  they  had  obtained  over 
the  inhabitants  at  large  of  the  countries  which  have 
been  the  principal  scene  of  their  atrocities.  They  had 
established  a  terrorism  as  perfect  as  that  which  was 
the  foundation  of  the  French  republican  power,  and 
in  truth  the  sirdars,  or  captains  of  the  band,  were 
esteemed  and  even  called  the  hakim  or  ruling  power, 
while  the  real  Government  did  not  possess  either 
authority  or  influence  enough  to  obtain  from  the  people 
the  smallest  aid  towards  their  own  protection.  If  a 
whole  village  was  destroyed,  not  a  man  was  found  to 
complain.  If  a  family  was  half  murdered,  and  half 
tortured,  the  tortured  survivors  could  not  be  prevailed 
upon  to  appear  against  the  criminals.  Men  have  been 
found  with  their  limbs  and  half  the  flesh  of  their 
bodies  consumed  by  slow  fire,  who  persisted  in  saying 
that  they  had  fallen  into  their  own  fire,  or  otherwise 
denying  all  knowledge  of  the  event  that  could  tend  to 
the  conviction  or  detection  of  the  offenders.  They 
knew,  if  they  spoke,  they  would  either  themselves  or 
the  remaining  members  of  their  families  be  dispatched 
the  same  evening.  By  these  measures  such  a  vigorous 
efficient  government  was  erected  by  the  banditti  in 


^T.  58] 


THE  DACOITS. 


189 


these  districts,  that  they  could  send  a  single  messenger 
through  the  villages  with  regular  lists  of  requisitions 
from  the  different  houses  and  families, — some  to  fur¬ 
nish  grain,  some  forage,  some  horses,  some  two  sons  to 
join  the  gangs,  some  labourers  to  carry  the  plunder,  or 
to  bear  torches,  or  to  act  as  scouts ;  some  were  to  send 
a  wife  or  daughter  to  attend  the  gangs. 

‘  I  was  not  a  little  shocked,  and  could  not  heljj  feel¬ 
ing  some  shame,  when  1  became  fully  apprised  of  the 
dreadful  disorders  which  afflicted  countries  under  the 
very  eye  of  Government ;  and  for  many  months  past  it 
has  been  one  of  the  principal  objects  to  put  this  mon¬ 
strous  evil  down.  Partly  by  a  new  selection  of  magis¬ 
trates,  who  appeared  peculiarly  qualified  for  that  species 
of  service,  by  new  regulations  and  additional  penalties, 
and  by  the  employment  of  the  most  active  efforts, 
supported  by  regular  force,  to  seize  the  sirdars  and 
make  some  signal  examples,  I  am  happy  to  say  that 
hitherto  the  success  has  even  exceeded  my  expecta¬ 
tions.  In  Nuddeah,  which  was  the  principal  seat  of 
this  evil,  there  has  not  been  a  single  dacoity  during  the 
last  months ;  and  it  is  in  that  one  district  that  the 
computed  average  of  persons  })ut  to  death  in  torture 
was  seventy  a  month.  Nine  sirdars  have  been  executed 
at  one  spot,  and  the  impression  of  that  example  was 
remarkable.  The  people  had  come  to  think  it  impos¬ 
sible  that  the  leader  of  an  established  gang  should  be 
punished,  or  at  least  capitally  punishtxi,  and  they 
looked  on  with  fidly  as  much  awe  as  satisfaction  on 
this  proof  of  the  supreme  power  of  Government.  The 


190 


LOED  MINTO  IN  INDIA. 


[1809 


consequence  of  these  examples,  and  of  the  determina¬ 
tion  Grovernment  has  evinced  to  subdue  these  villains, 
has  been  the  breaking  up  of  the  gangs,  the  flight  or 
seizure  of  the  captains,  and  a  sufficient  return  of  cour¬ 
age  and  of  confidence  in  the  protection  of  Government 
amongst  the  people  to  procure  both  prosecutors  and 
witnesses  for  the  detection  and  punishment  of  these 
and  all  other  crimes.  It  will  require  a  continuous 
exertion,  however,  with  such  improvements  in  the 
general  system  as  events  and  reflection  may  suggest,  to 
enable  us  to  triumph  finally  and  permanently  over  this 
deep-rooted  mischief.’ 

The  dacoits  unhappily  still  ply  their  trade  in  cer¬ 
tain  parts  of  India,  under  much  the  same  circumstances 
as  those  in  which  flourish  their  congeners,  the  ban¬ 
ditti  of  Europe  ;  but,  unlike  them,  they  follow  peaceful 
occupations  by  day,  and  their  own  peculiar  industry 
by  night.  Both  dacoit  and  brigand  are  at  the  lowest 
depth  of  their  respective  civilisations,  the  essential 
distinction  between  them  being  that  the  dacoit  begins 
his  campaign  by  a  propitiatory  sacrifice,  and  the  brigand 
ends  his  with  an  expiatory  offering. 

About  the  same  time,  the  early  part  of  1809, 
troubles  suddenly  broke  out  beyond  the  British  fron¬ 
tier,  which  brought  the  Indian  Government  face  to 
face  with  the  problem  how  to  reconcile  the  interests  of 
India  with  the  peremptory  instructions  issued  by  their 
chiefs  at  home  on  the  subject  of  non-interference  with 
the  internal  affairs  of  States  so  situated. 

One  of  the  consequences  which  had  followed  on  the 


JEt.  58] 


A  PATHAN  INVASION. 


191 


defeat  of  the  great  native  States  of  the  peninsula, 
before  the  British  power  was  far-stretching  enough  to 
assume  their  lost  authority,  was  an  increase  of  audacity 
on  the  part  of  the  semi-civilised  tribes  whose  home  was 
in  the  wild  recesses  of  the  Grhauts,  or  on  the  table-lands 
of  the  Deccan.  The  Pathans,  Pindarics,  and  others, 
with  more  or  less  countenance  from  the  Mahrattas, 
became  exceedingly  dangerous  to  their  weaker  neigh¬ 
bours. 

In  the  early  part  of  1809,  Ameer  Khan,*  a  Pathau 
chief,  at  the  head  of  a  numerous  army  invaded  the 
territories  of  the  Rajah  of  Berar — who,  though  not  an 
ally  of  the  British,  was  in  close  contiguity  with  their 
frontier — and  threatened  the  whole  country  of  Nag- 
pore.  Here  was  a  case  in  which  the  instructions  of  the 
Court  of  Directors  as  to  the  duty  of  non-interventioji 
could  only  be  observed  to  the  detriment  of  British  power. 

‘  The  question  was  not,’  observed  I.ord  Minto, 


'  Tliis  adventurer  made  himself  hateful  throughout  India  when 
in  the  following  year  he  instigated  a  murder  which  would  have 
seemed  less  unnatural  in  the  annals  of  antiquity  than  in  those  of  the 
nineteenth  century.  The  most  ancient  of  the  Rajpoot  Princes,  the 
Rajah  of  Oodypore,  had  a  daughter  so  young  and  fair  that,  like  a 
second  Helen,  she  set  the  world  on  fire.  Rajpootana  was  distracted 
by  the  wars  of  her  suitors,  till  one  fatal  day  it  was  suggested  to  her 
father  by  Ameer  Khan  that  peace  could  only  be  restored  to  his  dis¬ 
tracted  country  by  her  death.  Ameer  Khan's  power  lent  weight  to 
his  words ;  the  counsel  was  listened  to,  and  finally  accepted.  The 
elder  sister  of  the  ill-fated  princess  was  deputed  to  present  her  with 
a  poisoned  bowl,  desiring  her  to  save  her  country  by  the  sacrifice  of 
her  own  life.  iShe,  a  young  and  lovely  girl  of  sixteen,  is  .said  to  have 
accepted  the  decree  in  all  meekness,  and  to  have  drunk  off  the  fatal 
potion,  exclaiming,  ‘  This  is  the  marriage  to  which  I  was  fore¬ 
doomed.’ 


192 


LORD  MINTO  IN  INDIA. 


[1809 


‘  whether  it  was  just  and  expedient  to  aid  the  Rajah 
in  the  defence  and  recovery  of  his  dominions  ;  although 
in  point  of  policy  the  essential  change  in  the  political 
state  of  India  which  would  be  occasioned  by  the 
extinction  of  one  of  the  substantive  Powers  of  the 
Deccan,  might  warrant  our  interference ;  but  whether 
an  enterprising  and  ambitious  Mussulman  chief,  at 
the  head  of  a  numerous  army,  irresistible  by  any 
power  except  that  of  the  Company,  should  be  per¬ 
mitted  to  establish  his  authority  on  the  ruins  of  the 
Rajah’s  dominions,  over  territories  contiguous  to  those 
of  our  ally,  the  Nizam,  with  whom  community  of 
religion,  combined  with  local  power  and  resources, 
might  lead  to  the  formation  of  projects  for  the  subver¬ 
sion  of  the  British  alliance :  of  such  a  question  there 
can  be  but  one  solution.’  That  solution  was  the 
immediate  expidsion  by  the  Company’s  troops  of  the 
invader  from  Berar,  whose  Rajah  must  have  been 
agreeably  surprised  to  find  that  the  assistance  of  the 
British,  being  designed  for  the  preservation  of  their 
own  interests,  was  to  be  gratuitously  given.  Colonel 
t'lose,  who  commanded  the  troops  employed  in  the 
operation,  not  only  carried  it  out  successfully,  but 
proceeded  to  occupy  the  capital  and  territory  of  Ameer 
Khan,  who  retired  rapidly  before  the  British  advance. 
Its  arrest,  by  order  of  the  Grovernment,  at  the  moment 
when  the  annihilation  of  Ameer  Khan’s  power,  and 
the  dispersion  if  not  destruction  of  his  army,  were 
seemingly  within  the  grasp  of  the  English  commander, 
has  been  criticised  as  an  error  of  policy  on  the  part  of 


JEt.  58]  MINUTE  BY  THE  GOVERNOR  GENERAL.  193 


Lord  Minto’s  Groverninent.  He  himself  said  of  it  that 
‘  the  extent  of  the  political  arrangements,  as  well  as  of 
the  military  operations,  to  which  the  prosecution  of  these 
views  would  lead,  together  with  the  great  increase  of 
expenditure  which  must  ensue,’  had  determined  him  to 
content  himself  with  the  immediate  object  of  arresting 
the  invasion  which  threatened  the  integrity  of  our  own 
dominions. 

In  Enndelcund,  where  the  military  operations,  begun 
two  years  before,  were  not  yet  completed  ;  in  Mariana, 
a  territory  which  more  lately  the  Indian  Government 
was  forced  to  annex  in  the  interests  of  civilisation  and 
hnmanity,  ‘  because  nobody  else  woidd  have  it,’  he 
had  had  occasion  to  experience  the  truth  of  a  leading 
principle  in  the  government  of  semi-civilised  popula¬ 
tions — that  where  one  rule  is  destroyed,  another  must 
be  substituted. 

He  was  not  prepared  to  pursue  the  defeat  of  Ameer 
Khan  to  the  point  of  assuming  new  and  permanent 
responsibilities;  but  in  a  minute  dated  December  1, 
1809,  he  observed  that  ‘it  has  not  perhaps  been  suffi¬ 
ciently  considered  that  every  native  State  in  India  is  a 
military  despotism  ;  that  war  and  conquest  are  avowed 
as  the  first  and  legitimate  j)ursuit  of  every  sovereign 
or  cliief,  and  the  sole  S(nirce  of  glory  and  renown ;  it  is 
not  therefore  a  mere  conjecture  deduced  from  the 
natural  bias  of  the  human  mind,  and  the  test  of  general 
experience,  but  a  certain  conviction  founded  on  avowed 
principles  of  action  and  systematic  views,  that  among 
the  military  states  and  chiefs  of  India  the  pursuits  of 


o 


194 


LORD  MINTO  IN  INDIA. 


[1809 


ambition  can  alone  be  bounded  by  the  inability  to 
prosecute  them.  It  was  for  the  Grovernment  of  England 
to  decide  whether  it  was  expedient  to  observe  a  strict 
neutrality  amidst  these  scenes  of  disorder  and  outrage 
which  were  passing  under  our  eyes  in  the  north  of 
Hiudostan,  or  whether  we  should  listen  to  the  calls 
of  suffering  humanity,  and  interfere  for  the  protection 
of  those  weak  and  defenceless  States  who  implore 
our  assistance,  to  deliver  them  from  the  violence 
and  oppression  of  an  ambitious  and  lawless  upstart.’ 
When  these  observations  were  answered,  it  was  found 
that  a  considerable  change  had  come  over  the  policy 
of  the  Court  of  Directors.  They  stated  that  ‘  they  did 
not  conceive  that  measures  of  defensive  policy  could 
be  construed  into  acts  of  unnecessary  interference  in 
the  affairs  of  foreign  States,’  and  they  expressed  them¬ 
selves  ‘  not  satisfied  with  the  expediency  of  abstaining 
from  disabling  any  Power  against  whom  we  have  been 
compelled  to  take  up  arms,  from  renewing  its  aggres¬ 
sion’  (September  1811). 

A  more  complete  exoneration  of  the  Wellesley 
policy,  so  violently  assailed  a  few  years  before,  coidd 
hardly  be  required  ;  nor  a  more  instructive  commentary 
on  Talleyrand’s  celebrated  reply  to  one  who  asked  him 
the  meaning  of  the  term  ‘  non-intervention  ’ :  ‘  C’est  un 
mot  politique  et  metaphysique  qui  vent  dire  a  peu  pres 
la  meme  chose  qu’  intervention.’ 

Lord  Minto  was  in  Java  when  this  despatch  was 
addressed  to  him  :  after  his  return  to  Tndia  questions 
of  a  more  pressing  nature  occupied  his  attention,  but 


JEt.  68]  EXPEDITION  TO  THE  PEKSIAN  GOLF. 


195 


almost  his  last  letter  to  the  Secret  Committee  related 
to  the  increasing  importance  of  the  Pindarics. 

The  last  and  not  least  important  measure  of  this 
year  (1809)  consisted  in  a  naval  expedition  against  a 
formidable  horde  of  pirates  on  the  Persian  Gxdf. 
Their  settlements  extended  for  a  stretch  of  400  miles 
along  the  coast,  whence  these  sea  brigands  scoured 
the  Indian  seas,  their  small  fleets  carrying  off  the 
inhabitants  of  the  villages  of  the  shore,  destroying 
the  coasting  trade,  and  capturing,  not  only  small 
vessels,  but  any  stray  merchantmen  that  came  in 
their  way.  One  such  capture,  accompanied  with 
circumstances  of  great  barbarity,  was  an  exploit 
which  drew  upon  them  the  signal  vengeance  of  the 
Indian  Government.  A  formidable  expedition  con¬ 
sisting  of  two  frigates,  six  armed  vessels,  900  Euro¬ 
pean  troops,  and  500  Sepoys,  was  sent  to  their  coasts, 
and,  after  a  desperate  resistance,  their  settlements  and 
fleets  were  captured  and  destroyed,  and  the  commerce 
of  the  Persian  Gulf  was  rescued  from  their  depreda¬ 
tions. 

Thus,  by  land  and  sea,  the  Company  s  dominions 
were  preserved  intact,  and  its  power  upheld.  And 
every  despatch  to  England  contained  well-deserved 
encomiums  of  the  skill  and  valour  and  discipline  of 
the  forces  employed  in  defending  the  frontiers,  or 
in  protecting  the  subjects  of  the  Empire.  And  yet, 
while  the  events  described  were  in  progress,  a  cloud 
had  appeared  on  the  horizon  of  more  portentous  dimen- 


196 


LOED  MINTO  IN  INDIA,. 


[1809 


sions  than  any  of  its  predecessors  in  those  stonny 
regions.  ‘  I  have  determined  to  go  to  Madras  as  soon 
as  possible,’  wrote  Lord  Minto  in  June  1809.  ‘The 
differences  between  the  Madras  army  and  Sir  George 
Barlow’s  Government  have  risen  to  a  most  violent 
height,  and  more  suddenly  than  I  imagined.’ 


^T.  58] 


MUTINY  IN  THE  MADRAS  ARMA". 


197 


CHAPTEE  IX. 

The  troubles  in  the  coast  army  require  to  be  dealt 
with  in  some  detail,  because  Lord  Minto’s  share  in  their 
final  reduction  has  been  scarcely  appreciated,  while  he 
himself  considered  it  second  to  no  other  part  of  his 
administration  in  the  importance  of  its  results.  When 
he  arrived  in  India  in  1807,  he  found  Madras  still  sim¬ 
mering  in  the  dregs  of  the  agitation  produced  by  the 
mutiny  and  massacre  of  Vellore.  The  danger  frojn  the 
native  soldiery  was  past,  but  there  remained  a  state  of 
excited  feeling  and'  of  bitter  antagonism  among  the 
higher  officials  of  the  Presidency  that  boded  future 
mischief. 

Their  controversies  produced  a  general  spirit  of 
cabal  and  combination,  and  violent  attacks  made  by 
high  functionaries  on  each  other  diminished  the  respect 
due  to  them  in  their  pidilic  capacity.  While  the 
question  of  the  recall  of  Lord  William  Bentinck  was 
still  pending.  Lord  Alinto  gave  his  opinion  as  opposed 
to  that  measure.  lie  thought  that  the  conduct  of 
individuals  on  that  occasion  (the  Vellore  mutiny)  had 
been  blamed  with  too  little  attention  to  the  different 
points  of  conduct  under  consideration  in  connection  with 
tlie  precise  circumstances  of  the  time  when  they  took 


198 


LORD  MINTO  IN  INDIA. 


[1809 


})lace.  ‘  I  am  apprehensive  also  that  these  occurrences 
may  not  be  favourable  to  the  restoration  either  of  civil  or 
military  authority.  The  mutiny  was  completely  sub¬ 
dued,  opinions  were  settled,  and  men’s  minds  were  com¬ 
posed  on  these  questions.  Those  who  had  suffered  the 
sentence  of  the  law  were  regarded  as  criminals  justly 
punished  for  atrocious  offences.  Now  that  a  Grovernor 
and  Commander-in-chief  are  publicly  condemned  and 
punished,  on  the  other  hand,  in  the  view  of  the  very 
mutineers  and  their  adherents,  the  public  mind  may 
perhaps  be  unhinged  again,  and  those  who  were  hanged 
and  shot  by  the  subordinate  local  authorities  for  mutiny 
and  murder,  may  seem  to  have  been  justified  by  still 
higher  tribunals,  and  may  start  up  under  our  sanction 
into  saints  and  martyrs.  I  do  not  say  this  reasoning 
would  be  just,  but  worse  reasoning  has  often  satisfied 
men’s  passions  in  their  own  cause.’  ' 

These  representations  were  disregarded,  and  some 
of  the  consequences  foreseen  by  the  Governor  General 
took  place.  The  native  soldiery,  indeed,  do  not  appear 
to  have  been  affected  as  he  had  conceived  it  possible 
they  might  be  ;  but  the  dissensions  in  the  European 
society  were  aggravated,  and  the  Government  of  P’ort 
St.  George  necessarily  suffered  in  the  estimation  of  the 
Presidency. 

In  the  same  despatch  of  November  26,  1807,  Lord 
Minto  answered  in  the  following  terms  a  question  that 
had  been  addressed  to  him  by  the  Court  of  Directors  con- 

‘  To  the  Right  Hon.  R.  Duudas,  President  of  the  Board  of  Control, 
November  26,  1807. 


Mr.  58] 


DISSENSIONS  AT  MADRAS. 


199 


cerning  the  expediency  of  excluding  tlie  Coininanders- 
in-chief  of  the  two  minor  Presidencies  from  seats  in 
(’ouncil. 

‘The  point  is  so  entirely  new  that  I  cannot,  on 
the  sudden,  offer  any  opinion  worthy  of  attention.  I 
])resume  that  measure  may  have  been  suggested  to  the 
t’ourt  of  Directors  by  the  experience  they  have  so  fre¬ 
quently  had,  especially  at  Fort  St.  (leorge,  of  long 
controversial  and  often  warm  and  intemperate  dis¬ 
cussions  in  Council  between  the  civil  and  military 
authorities.  It  has  happened  also  in  late  instances 
that  notions  concerning  military  ascendancy  have  beeii 
entertained  and  asserted  which  are  wholly  incompatible 
with  the  received  and  established  principles  of  a  govern¬ 
ment  by  law. 

‘The  introduction,  for  example,  of  the  judicial  sys¬ 
tem,  that  is  to  say,  the  administration  of  civil  justice 
l)etween  man  and  man,  and  the  supj)ression  of  jjublic 
disorder  and  crime  by  a  regular  magistracy,  has  been 
objected  to  and  resented  as  a  degradation  of  the  military 
chai’acter,  and  an  unjust  diminution  of  its  influence 
and  authority  in  India,  where  it  once  stood  in  the  place 
of  law,  and  was  more  suited,  as  it  is  contended,  to  the 
habits  and  tastes  of  the  people  than  civil  justice  admin¬ 
istered  judicially  by  magistrates.  This  doctrine  will 
sound  so  strange  in  English  ears  that  the  fact  of  its 
being  maintained  will  scarcely  meet  with  credit.  These 
sentiments,  however,  have  been  distinctly  recorded  in 
the  enclosed  pamphlet  which  Sir  John  C'radock  left 
beliind  him,  and,  1  am  sorry  to  learn,  are  not  less 


200 


LORD  MINTO  IN  INDIA. 


[1809 


warmly  professed  by  General  McDowell  .  .  .  The  in¬ 
conveniences  which  have  been  in  some  instances  felt 
from  the  Commander-in-chief  holding  officially  a  seat, 
in  Council,  have  I  believe  been  very  real,  but  I  confess 
I  donbt  the  expediency  of  adopting  the  particular 
remedy  proposed.  I  am  disinclined  to  it  as  a  very 
considerable  change,  and  as  one  calculated  to  separate 
still  more  from  the  general  government  of  the  country, 
and  not  only  to  alienate  but  to  irritate  in  a  high  de¬ 
gree,  the  mind  of  the  army,  a  great  and  powerful  body 
in  India,  whose  cordiality  and  co-operation  in  the  views 
of  Government  is  extremely  essential. 

‘  There  is  little  doubt  that  the  measure  in  question 
would  produce  this  effect.  It  appears  to  me  that  other 
remedies,  not  liable  to  the  same  objection,  might  be 
applied  in  most  instances  to  the  inconvenience  com¬ 
plained  of.  The  first  is  a  careful  and  fit  choice  of  the 
man  for  the  office  of  Commander-in-chief.  Military 
endowments  he  ought  certainly  to  have.  He  should 
possess  also  a  sound  judgment  and  a  conciliatory  dis¬ 
position.  He  should  come  out  penetrated  with,  and 
well  instructed  in,  the  indispensable  subordination  of  the 
military  power  to  the  superintending  superiority  of  the 
civil  Government.’ 

The  Court  of  Directors  nevertheless  decided  on 
excluding  the  Commanders-in-chief  of  the  minor  Presi¬ 
dencies  from  Council,  and  appointed  General  McDowell 
to  the  post  of  Commander-in-chief  vacated  by  the  recall 
of  Sir  J.  Cradock. 

Thus  early  in  his  Indian  career  did  Lord  Minto 


JEt.  58] 


MILITARY  DISCONTENTS. 


201 


impress  on  the  Court  of  Directors  the  necessity  of  an 
unfaltering  insistance  on  the  supremacy  of  the  civil 
over  the  military  power.  His  own  experience  in  Cor¬ 
sica  had  shown  him  the  inconveniences  arising  from 
excessive  military  pretensions.  He  had  learnt  at 
Vienna  to  attribute  the  misfortunes  which  had  befallen 
Austria  to  ‘  a  military  faction  which  sidistituted  party 
spirit  in  the  room  of  all  the  duties  of  soldiers  or  citizens 
— that  party  spirit  spread  through  the  Empire.’  • 

He  found  in  India  a  state  of  atfairs  peculiarly 
favourable  to  the  developinent  of  strife  between  the 
civil  and  military  authorities.  A  recently  conquered 
and  imperfectly  settled  country  had  been  brought  under 
the  influence  of  the  civil  Government  within  the 
memory  of  the  senior  officers  of  the  army,  leaving  some 
chagrin  and  jealousy  with  those  who  had  been  used  to 
wield  both  political  and  military  authority.  Since 
1765,  when  Clive  put  do\vn  a  mutiny  of  the  officers  of 
the  Dengal  army,  scarce  a  decade  had  passed  without 
an  open  struggle  between  the  military  and  the  civil 
{)ower ; '  and  only  ten  years  before  Lord  IMinto’s  arrival 
in  India  a  mutiny  of  the  Bengal  officers,  which  had  la  st('d 
upwards  of  two  years,  had  ended  in  complete  victory. 
Sir  John  Shore,  afterwards  Lord  Teignmouth,  the  Go- 

'  In  an  able  article  on  the  mutiny  of  1809  which  appeared 
in  the  Qunrterhj  Berien'  for  May  1811  (vol.  v.),  the  following 
summary  of  the  various  mutinies  of  the  Company’s  officers,  from 
178.5  to  1798,  is  quoted  from  a  published  paper  entitled,  ‘  lieiilj"  to 
the  publication  of  William  I’etrie,  Esq.,  regarding  the  late  transac¬ 
tions  at  iMadras.’ 

‘  X  mutiny  of  the  officers  took  place  in  the  year  1766  ;  which  was 
only  suppressed  by  the  firmness  of  Lord  Clive. 


202 


LOrxD  JUNTO  IN  INDIA. 


[1809 


^•ernor  Greneral  at  the  time,  had  no  doubt  been  recalled ; 
but  the  fact  that  open  resistance  to  regular  authority 
had  successfully  wrung  from  a  weak  Government  more 
than  it  had  contended  for,  justified  the  belief  that 
representations  made  by  numbers  and  supported  by 
clamour  would  not  fail  to  obtain  their  ends.  Lord 
Wellesley’s  commanding  character  and  his  brilliant 
military  achievements  had  suppressed  any  open  ex¬ 
pression  during  his  government  of  military  discontent, 
but  there  still  I’einained  the  fact  that  India  had  been 
won  by  the  sword  and  was  held  by  the  sword.  Lord 

‘  At  an  earlier  period,  in  Bombay,  the  military  rose  upon  the 
civil  power,  and  assumed  the  government  which  they  held  and  re¬ 
tained  in  their  hands  for  two  years.  In  or  about  the  year  1776, 
Major-General  Stuart  at  the  head  of  the  army  seized  on  the  then 
Governor  of  Madras,  Lord  Pigot,  confined  his  person  and  subverted 
his  government.  In  the  year  1783  the  army  of  Madras  compelled 
the  Governor,  Lord  Macartney,  to  revoke  his  orders,  and  to  re-estab¬ 
lish  some  allowances  which  he  had  found  it  neoessaiw  to  discontinue. 
Actual  violence  was  not  indeed  resorted  to,  but  the  receipt  of  three 
addresses  on  the  same  day  on  the  subject  from  the  three  principal 
stations  of  the  army  convinced  his  lordship  of  the  necessity  of  giving 
up  the  point.  At  a  more  recent  period  in  Bengal,  in  or  about  the 
year  1796,  the  countenance  which  the  army  assumed  must  be  fresh  in 
the  recollection  of  everyone. 

‘  It  appears  further,  from  the  Parliament  ary  papers  before  us,  that 
even  at  the  commencement  of  the  late  mutiny,  180!),  the  notion  of 
the  rif/his  of  the  army,  and  that  of  forming  associations  to  plead 
these  rights,  were  familiar  to  the  Madras  officers.  In  notions  of 
this  kind  the  officers  of  the  Indian  army,  in  general,  seem  to  have 
been  encouraged  by  the  British  Government.  .  .  .  Persons  avowedly 
acting  in  the  capacity  of  agents  of  the  Indian  army  have  been  ad¬ 
mitted  to  a  formal  audience  by  Her  Majesty's  ministers  in  England. 
On  what  principle  men  of  the  highest  ability,  political  knowledge, 
and  patriotism,  for  such  these  ministers  were,  could  consent  thus  to 
recognise  in  the  arm)' an  independent  and  substantive  power,  we  are 
at  a  loss  to  imagine.’ 


^T.  58]  DISCONTENTS  AT  BOMBAY.  20.*? 

jNIinto  was  resolved  that  India  should  not  be  governed 
by  the  sword. 

In  the  course  of  1808  when  an  expedition  to  Persia 
was  under  consideration,  the  supreme  Government 
announced  to  that  of  Bombay  an  intention  of  raising 
a  cavalry  regiment  on  the  Bombay  establishment ;  it 
was  subsequently  found  that  this  might  be  done  with 
greater  facility  at  Madras,  and  the  first  plan  was 
therefore  abandoned ;  but  not  without  exciting  the 
resentment  of  the  officers  of  the  Bombay  army,  dhey 
considered  their  honour  and  dignity  to  be  wounded  by 
the  course  the  Government  had  adopted.  How  Lord 
Minto  received  their  complaints,  his  letter  in  reply 
to  Jonathan  Duncan,  Esq.,  Governor  of  Bombay,  will 
show. 

‘  I  enter,  I  assure  you,  warmly  into  every  feeling 
which  belongs  to  the  disappointment  of  expectations 
reasonably  entertained,  and  necessarily  near  the  hearts 
of  those  concerned,  although  I  cauuot  with  the  same 
truth  and  sincerity  consent  to  their  aggravation  by 
pressing  into  their  alliance  imaginary,  or,  at  best, 
gratuitous  sentiments  of  offended  honour  which  have 
no  room  in  the  case. 

‘  Our  option  lay  between  the  course  which  was 
evidently  the  best  for  the  public  advantage  and  secu¬ 
rity,  and  that  by  which  we  might  desire  to  gratify  a 
few  officers  of  the  Bombay  army  by  a  deliberate  sacri¬ 
fice  of  higher  interests.  We  made  the  choice  which 
our  duty  required,  and  which  must  obtain,  I  have 


204 


LOED  MINTO  IN  INDIA. 


[1809 


no  doubt,  when  clearly  explained,  tbe  suffrages  of 
the  Bombay  army  itself ;  a  body  as  much  distin¬ 
guished  for  genuine  public  spirit  as  for  mihtary 
excellence. 

‘  I  consider  the  interests  of  all  the  servants  of  the 
public,  and  more  especially  of  that  honourable  class 
vphich  provides  for  the  safety  and  prosperity  of  the 
country  by  their  own  dangers  and  privations. 

‘  But  the  interest  and  security  of  the  public  are  the 
first  and  highest  care  of  those  to  whom  that  public  has 
committed  the  trust  of  exercising  authority  in  its 
name,  and  that  great  charge  constitutes  the  primary 
duty  of  governments, — a  duty,  indeed,  in  which  all  those 
participate  to  whom  their  country  has  in  any  rank  or 
condition  confided  any  portion  of  its  power,  whether 
civil  or  military.  These  are  indeed,  very  trite  and 
general  principles,  but  they  are  none  the  less  those 
which  must  govern  my  conduct. 

‘  In  the  application  of  them,  therefore,  if  a  regiment 
is  to  be  added  to  the  Company’s  establishment,  the  first 
point  to  be  considered  in  the  mode  of  its  formation 
must  be  the  public  interest;  next,  but  subordinate 
to  that  consideration,  the  interest  and  pretensions  of 
individuals  or  bodies  connected  with  the  measure.  .  .  . 
Our  military  arrangements  in  all  circumstances  must 
be  determined  by  the  exigencies  of  the  State. 

‘  As  to  menace,  or  any  attempt  at  intimidation, 
the  case  is  not  to  be  supposed ;  the  suj)position  alone 
would  constitute  an  injury  and  insult  to  the  honourable 


ililT.  58] 


MUTINY  OF  OFFICERS. 


205 


men  who  compose  the  Bombay  army.  But  if  in  any 
(piarter  of  the  world,  where  I  might  happen  to  be  the 
depositary  of  public  authority,  such  a  case  should  arise, 
my  mind  is  settled  on  the  only  principle  adapted  in 
any  circumstances  to  that  exigency,— to  admit  of  no 
compromise  with  an  evil  far  greater  than  any  that  can 
be  incurred,  even  by  a  defeat,  in  resisting  it ;  but  to 
maintain  the  full  and  unqualified  sovereignty  which  is 
in  reality  the  safety  of  the  State,  by  combating  either 
the  seditious  combinations  and  cabals,  or  the  criminal 
violence,  of  its  servants,  to  the  last  and  utmost  extre¬ 
mity.  I  am  clear  that  if  such  an  event  could  be 
imagined,  it  would  be  better  for  the  public  interest  to 
be  fairly  subdued  than  to  yield.  The  former  would 
lx;  a  single,  local,  and  very  transient  evil,  quickly 
and  certainly  repaired.  The  latter  never  happens 
without  operating  a  general  and  permanent  re¬ 
laxation  of  authority  and  diminution  of  all  the 
public  energies  throughout  the  empire  in  which  it 
occurs. 

‘  I  take  the  two  great  pillars  of  every  human  govern¬ 
ment  to  be — first,  that  all  its  measures  be  directed  to 
the  public  good ;  next,  that  its  authority,  thus  exer¬ 
cised,  be  maintained  with  unshaken  firmness  and  reso¬ 
lution.’ 

This  warning  note  had  a  graver  significance  wdien, 
in  the  following  year  of  1809,  the  mutiny  of  the  officers 
of  the  iVIadras  army  broke  out.  It  was  no  doubt 
attributable  to  a  variety  of  causes,  among  which  must 
be  acknowledged  certain  real  grievances  on  the  part  of 


206 


LORI)  MINTO  IN  INDIA. 


[1809 


the  army,  and  certain  serions  mistakes  on  the  part  of 
Sir  Greorge  Barlow,  Governor  of  Madras.  A  considera¬ 
tion  of  these  lies  beyond  our  province,  which  is  simply 
to  relate  the  position  assumed  by  Lord  Minto  witli 
regard  to  the  powers  in  conflict — always  bearing  in 
mind  that  his  active  interference,  by  written  and 
personal  advice  and  support,  only  began  after  the  dis¬ 
content  of  the  officers  had  taken  the  form  of  insubor¬ 
dinate  opposition  to  the  Government.  The  immediate 
cause  of  the  disturbances  at  Madras  is  stated  in 
IMarshman’s  ‘  History  of  India  ’  as  follows  :  *  ‘  After  the 
Mahratta  War  the  Court  of  Directors  had  been  fierce 
for  retrenchment,  and  had  threatened  to  take  the 
pruning  knife  into  their  own  hands,’  if  the  Madras 
Government  hesitated  to  use  it.  ‘  Among  the  plans 
suggested  for  reducing  the  military  charges  was  the 
abolition  of  the  tent  conti'act,  which  furnished  the 
officers  in  command  of  regiments  with  a  fixed  monthly 
allowance  to  provide  the  men  ^vith  camp  equipage 
whether  they  were  in  the  field  or  in  cantonments. 
The  system  was  essentially  vicious,  .  .  .  the  Quarter¬ 
master  General,  Colonel  Munro,  had  been  requested  to 
draw  up  a  report,  and  both  Sir  John  Cradock  and  Lord 
William  Bentinck  had  come  to  the  determination  to 
abolish  the  contract,  when  they  were  suddenly  recalled. 
It  fell  to  the  unhappy  lot  of  Sir  George  Barlow, 
already  sufficiently  unpopular,  to  carry  this  resolution 
into  effect.  This  retrenchment  increased  the  resent- 


‘  Vol.  ii.  p.  240. 


^T.  58] 


MUTINY  OF  OFFICERS. 


207 


nient  of  the  officers,  and  they  determined  to  wreak  their 
vengeance  on  the  Qnarterinaster  General,  who  had 
stated  in  his  report  that  the  result  of  granting  the 
same  allowance  in  peace  and  in  war  for  the  tentage  of 
the  native  regiments,  while  the  expenses  incidental  to 
it  varied  with  circumstances,  had  been  found  by  experi¬ 
ence  to  place  the  interest  and  the  duty  of  commanding 
officers  in  opposition  to  each  other.  .  .  .  The  officers 
called  on  the  Commander-in-chief  to  bring  Colonel 
INIunro  to  a  court  martial  for  aspersions  on  their 
character  as  officers  and  gentlemen.  The  Judge 
Advocate  General  to  whom  the  question  was  fidly 
referred,  considered  that  the  officers  had  neither  right 
nor  reason  on  their  side;  but  General  McDowell,  then 
on  the  eve  of  retiring  from  the  serGce,  yielded  to 
their  wishes,  and  at  once  placed  him  under  arrest. 
He  appealed  to  the  Governor  in  Council,  under  whose 
authority  he  had  acted,  and  the  Commander-in-chief 
was  ordered  to  release  him.’ 

‘The  battle  was  then  joined,’  wrote  Lord  Minto  in 
a  private  letter  to  the  Chairman  of  the  East  India 
Company.'  ‘  The  Commander-in-chief  committed  open 
sedition,  and  sent  forth  an  inflammatory  appeal  from 
the  acts  of  Government,’  the  effect  of  which,  as  described 
by  Colonel  IMalcolm,  was  that  of  ‘  waving  a  torch  over  a 
powder  magazine.’  To  General  IMcDowell’s  unwearied 
efforts  ‘to  establish  a  confederacy  between  his  own 
resentment  at  his  exclusion  from  Council,  and  the 


'  April  25,  I80y. 


208 


LORD  MINTO  IN  INDIA. 


[1809 


imaginary  grievances  of  the  army,’  Lord  Minto  ascribed 
tlie  state  of  feeling  that  displayed  itself  in  the  absurd 
attempt  to  try  Colonel  Munro  for  his  report  on  the 
tent  contract.  The  arrest  of  Colonel  Munro  on  those 
scandalous  charges  was  a  gross  abuse  of  his  authority. 
‘  I  consider  the  standard  to  have  been  set  up  against 
the  Groverument  by  that  act,  the  scope  of  which  was 
to  bring  a  military  regulation  solemnly  adopted  by  the 
Government  of  Fort  St.  George  and  by  the  supreme 
Government,  under  the  cognisance  of  a  band  of  officers 
to  be  tried  as  a  base  and  scandalous  crime. 

‘  The  attempt  was  to  wrest  the  regulation  of  the 
army,  and  the  control  of  military  arrangements  and 
economy,  out  of  the  hands  of  Government,  in  which 
the  constitution  of  these  Provinces  and  of  e\'ery  other 
country  in  the  world,  and,  above  all  the  rest,  of  Great 
Britain,  has  anxiously  and  jealously  placed  it,  and  com¬ 
mit  it  to  the  officers  of  the  army  themselves.’ 

Up  to  this  point  there  seems  to  ha  ve  been  no  differ¬ 
ence  of  opinion  among  calm  men  as  to  which  party  in 
the  conflict  had  right  on  its  side  ;  but  a  change  became 
apparent  when  the  violent  order  of  the  Connnander-in- 
chief  was  immediately  followed  by  a  counter  order  no  less 
intemperate  from  the  Government,  coupled  with  the 
dismissal  of  two  officers  of  high  rank  who  had  counter¬ 
signed  and  published  the  order  of  their  superior.  Lord 
Minto,  true  to  his  principle  that  the  specific  questions 
iti  the  controversy  were  of  very  minor  importance  com¬ 
pared  with  the  fundamental  and  most  important  con¬ 
sideration  of  the  permanent  relations  between  the  civil 


.lilT.  58] 


MUTINY  OF  OFFICERS. 


209 


and  military  powers,  publicly  and  steadily  supported 
the  Government  of  P’ort  St.  George.  That  he  did  not  do 
so  in  a  spirit  of  blind  partiality  to  the  proceedings  of 
Sir  George  Barlow,  is  proved  by  a  confidential  letter  to 
his  son,  in  which  he  confessed  his  real  sentiments  and 
the  reasons  for  their  suppression. 

‘  This  measure — the  removal  of  the  Adjutant  and 
the  Deputy  Adjutant  General  for  giving  circulation  to 
General  McDowell’s  general  order  of  January  28 — 
started  a  question  likely  to  unite  military  opinions 
against  the  Government  of  Fort  St.  George.  It  became 
the  immediate  ground  of  the  general  combination  of 
the  army,  and  furnished  the  first  questionable  matter 
in  the  struggle  Sir  George  had  to  maintain  against 
a  military  faction  already  determined  to  carry  their 
personal  opposition  against  him  to  extremity.  It  was 
made  the  hinge  of  these  dissensions. 

‘  You  will  see  that  I  have  given  unqualified  support 
to  the  Government  of  Fort  St.  George  on  this  delicate 
point.  I  was  not  and  could  not  be  consulted  when  the 
measure  was  adopted.  If  my  judgment  had  been  to  be 
given  in  that  stage  1  should  certainly  have  dissuaded 
it ;  and  in  truth  both  I  and  my  colleagues  in  Bengal 
learnt  the  occurrence  with  the  greatest  possible  regret. 
Y'e  felt  distinctly  all  the  consequences  that  were  to 
follow  ;  a  general  bond  of  union  among  the  disaffected, 
and  a  plausible  pretext,  which  had  not  before  existed, 
for  discontent  and  clamour,  was  now  furnished  liy  this 
most  unfortunate  and  impolitic  measure.  I  am  making 
this  confession  most  confidentially  to  you  and  my  very 

p 


210 


LORD  MINTO  IN  INDIA. 


[1809 


few  confidants.  In  India  it  is  a  secret  to  everybody  but 
Mr.  Lninsden,  ]\Ir.  Colebroke,  and  Greneral  Hewitt. 

‘  I  had  to  consider,  however,  not  whether  the 
measure  was  to  be  taken,  but,  being  already  taken, 
whether  it  should  be  reversed.  To  put  Sir  Cleorge  in 
the  Avrong  on  any  point,  but  especially  on  the  main 
point,  was  to  overthrow  his  Groveminent  and  give  a 
complete  triumph  to  military  combination  for  all  time 
to  come  :  for  it  must  not  be  forgotten  that  the  success¬ 
ful  combination  of  the  Bengal  officers  in  1796,  when 
Government  at  home  took  fright,  is  the  real  root  of 
the  late  insubordination  in  the  army  of  the  JMadras 
Presidency. 

‘  I  had  nevertheless  to  satisfy  myself  upon  the 
abstract  merits  of  the  question  :  for,  although  the  pubhc 
safety  might  require  that  I  should  support  an  impolitic 
measure,  nothing  could  have  induced  me  to  strain  the 
point  of  justice  ;  and  if  these  officers  had  appeared  to 
me  unjustly  removed,  or  if  military  principles  had  in 
my  judgment  been  really  violated  on  this  occasion,  I 
must  have  restored  the  officers,  and  disavoAved  the 
principle,  Avithout  regard  to  consequences.’ 

The  letter  goes  on  to  state  at  considerable  length 
the  incontrovertible  gTounds  or  arguments  by  which 
Lord  IMinto  satisfied  himself  that  the  action  of  the 
Adjutant  and  Deputy  Adjutant  General,  in  publishing 
and  disseminating  the  general  order  of  the  Commander- 
in-chief,  in  defiance  of  the  regulation  that  all  orders 
should  be  in  the  first  instance  submitted  to  the  Govern¬ 
ment,  Avas  a  dereliction  of  duty  that  justified  their 


68] 


MUTINY  OF  OFFICERS. 


211 


dismissal  by  Sir  George  Barlow  from  a  legal,  though 
not  from  a  politic,  point  of  view.  Having  reached 
which  conclusion  he  did  not  hesitate  to  give  his  un¬ 
qualified  support  to  the  Government  of  Fort  St.  George. 
In  a  letter  to  the  Secret  Committee  he  urged  upon  them 
the  adoption  of  a  similar  course. 

‘  In  these  circumstances  the  safety  of  India  must 
depend  upon  the  support  given  to  the  local  Government 
by  the  authorities  in  England.  I  can  have  no  right  to 
dictate  any  judgment  to  those  to  whom  I  am  myself 
subordinate,  but  my  duty  requires  that  I  should  state 
my  opinion. 

‘  An  army,  that  is  not  subordinate  to  the  Govern¬ 
ment  of  the  country  in  which  it  serves,  is  its  master ; 
and,  while  this  inverted  order  of  things  continues,  no 
Government  can  be  responsible  for  the  conduct  of  affairs 
of  which  they  are  in  reality  divested.  The  present  is  a 
fair  trial  of  strength  between  legal  government  and  its 
most  formitliible  rival.  Feeble  measures  will  not  decide 
the  contest,  and  a  mere  negative  to  the  pretensions  of 
the  factions  will  not  prevent  the  frequent  repetition  of 
the  experiment  which  is  now  making.  That  can  be 
effected  only,  not  by  demonstrating  the  vanity,  but  by 
showing  the  dangers,  of  such  transgressions.  The  two 
leading  points,  therefore,  in  the  measures  which  I  re¬ 
commend  at  home  are,— first,  a  clear  and  distinct 
support  of  the  Government  of  Fort  St.  George  ;  second, 
the  signal  punishment  of  the  principal  offenders 

‘One  essential  point  is  to  take  care  that  the  present 
factions  be  not  enabled  to  claim  the  slightest  degree  of 


212 


LORD  MINTO  IN  INDIA. 


Ll80» 


success  in  any  of  their  real  or  professed  objects.  What¬ 
ever  may  be  thought  of  the  question  concerning  the 
restoration  of  the  Commander-in-chief  to  Council,  it 
could  not,  I  think,  be  adopted  at  the  present  moment 
Avithout  great  and  important  mischief.’  * 

When  Lord  Minto  wrote  these  lines  he  evidently 
thought  the  crisis  over.  Nothing  was  further  from  the 
truth.  Within  two  days,  on  May  11,  an  order,  issued  by 
Sir  Greorge  Barlow,  for  the  removal  of  four  officers  from 
their  commands,  and  the  suspension  of  eight  others, 
caused  the  scarcely  smothered  flames  of  disaffection  to 
burst  out  with  renewed  fierceness.  The  grounds  of  this 
summary  proceeding  were  stated  to  be  the  discovery  by 
the  Giovernor  of  the  existence  of  combinations  and  cabals 
among  the  officers ;  in  proof  of  this  a  memorial  was 
produced,  confessedly  drawn  up  by  the  officers  and  for 
private  circulation  among  them,  stating  their  grievances 
and  demands,  and  appealing  from  the  Grovemment  of 
Fort  St.  Gieorge  to  the  Grovernor  Greneral  to  whom  it 
was  addressed.  This  memorial,  having  been  obtained 
by  the  Government  of  Madras  from  sources  not  divulged, 
was  forwarded  to  Calcutta.  There  appears  to  have 
been  no  question  as  to  its  authenticity,  and  though  it 
had  not  reached  him  by  the  channel  intended  by  the 
memorialists,  the  Governor  General  answered  it  point 
by  point  in  a  letter  to  Sir  George  Barlow,  who  was 
directed  to  publish  it  to  the  Madras  army. 

This  paper  in  its  entirety  is  too  long  to  be  inserted 


'  April  25,  1809. 


jEt.  58] 


MUTINY  OF  OFFICEES. 


213 


here ;  it  is  too  good  to  be  mutilated.  It  is,  in  fact,  an  ex¬ 
haustive  statement  of  the  questions  at  issue  between  the 
officers  and  the  Madras  Government,  and  likewise  of  the 
general  principles  which  necessitated  the  subordination 
of  the  army  to  the  State.  When  in  due  time  it  reached 
England,  Lord  Malmesbury  described  it  as  the  finest 
and  ablest  State  paper  he  had  ever  read.  Lord  Minto 
himself  thought  it  far  too  long ;  but  he  desired,  he  said, 
‘  to  conGnce  the  reason  of  the  younger  officers  as  well 
as  to  enforce  their  obedience,  and  to  lay  a  statement 
before  the  army  of  principles  he  thought  ill  understood.’ 
While  Sir  George  Barlow  was  content  to  reiterate  that 
the  first  attribute  of  the  executive  is  strength.  Lord 
Minto  insisted  also  on  what  he  considered  to  be  the 
corollary  of  the  same  principle — that  the  strength  of 
the  executive  lies  in  its  being  derived  from  the  national 
will,  whence  its  rightful  claim  on  the  obedience  of  all 
classes  of  men.  The  antagonism  displayed  to  the 
executive  at  Madras  arose  in  its  seeming  to  be  the  will 
of  Sir  George  Barlow. 

It  was  a  habit  of  mind  with  Lord  IMinto  to  look  for 
the  causes  of  things  below  the  surface.  In  this  case 
he  saw  in  the  majority  of  the  officers  very  young  and 
half-instructed  men  (‘  and  who  so  confident  of  himself 
as  a  half-instructed  man  ?  ).  He  saw  them  brought  to¬ 
gether  in  a  distant  corner  of  the  Empire,  removed  from 
the  influence  of  such  pidilic  opinion  as  exists  in  all  large 
and  mixed  societies,  tempted  by  the  circumstances  of 
their  case  to  exaggerate  their  own  importance,  till  the 
interests  of  a  few  officers  became  in  their  eyes  the 


214 


LOED  MINTO  IN  INDIA. 


[1809 


cause  of  an  army,  and  till  the  reciprocal  duties  of 
brother  officers  became  more  to  them  than  the  primary 
relations  which  knit  together  the  citizens  of  a  common 
State.  He  entertained,  therefore,  a  sanguine  hope  that 
the  promulgation  of  sounder  principles  would  check  the 
progress  of  error.  From  the  letter  to  Sir  Gleorge 
Barlow  we  propose  to  quote  only  one  passage,  from 
which  the  general  tone  and  spirit  of  the  argument  may 
be  inferred. 

‘  We  are  accustomed  in  England,  without  distinc¬ 
tion  of  profession  or  degree,  to  speak  with  pride  and 
reverence  of  that  nice  and  scrupulous  solicitude  which 
pervades  the  constitutional  policy  of  Great  Britain  on 
every  point  that  affects,, however  remotely,  the  great 
and  primary  concerns  of  civil  liberty  and  domestic 
security, — blessings  which  it  is  natural  to  value  most 
highly  in  a  country  where  they  are  best  known  and  ex¬ 
perienced.  It  is  this  great  national  sentiment  which 
requires,  as  the  main  and  most  indispensable  provision 
for  civil  security,  the  absolute  unqualified  subordination 
of  the  army  to  the  State,  or  in  other  words  to  the 
Government  of  the  country.  Out  of  the  same  principle 
springs  the  necessity  of  peculiar  restraints  on  the 
military  body,  and  the  abridgment  in  their  case  of  some 
privileges  and  practices  which  are  permitted,  because- 
they  are  not  deemed  hazardous,  in  other  parts  of  life. 

‘  Among  the  chief  of  these  restraints  are  to  be  placed 
the  strict  prohibition  of  military  combination  for  the 
furtherance  of  professional  views  or  wishes,  and  of 
open  and  concerted  opposition  by  military  men  in  their 


^T.  58] 


MUTINY  OF  OFFICEKS. 


215 


military  character  to  the  Government  or  the  persons 
who  administer  it.  .  .  . 

‘  It  were  to  be  lamented,  and  little  to  the  credit 
of  military  men,  if,  on  points  which  touch  so  nearly  all 
that  is  most  dear  to  their  country,  they  should  cease 
to  think  and  feel  as  Englishmen  when  they  become 
soldiers,  and  should  suffer  the  partial  spirit  of  a  pro¬ 
fession  to  wean  them  from  those  sentiments  and  sym¬ 
pathies  which,  like  their  brethren  in  civil  life,  they 
imbibed  with  their  milk,  and  which  distinguish  and 
illustrate  their  nation.’ 

Though  this  paper,  dated  Fort  William,  May  27, 
1809,  purported  to  emanate  from  the  Governor  General 
in  Council,  and  was  therefore  signed  by  the  members  of 
Council  generally,  he  himself  said  of  it :  ‘  Whether  it 
is  thought  good  or  bad,  prosy  or  otherwise,  it  is  cer¬ 
tainly  my  own,  for  I  wrote  every  word  of  it  myself.’ 

Several  of  the  suspended  officers  went  to  Calcutta 
and  laid  their  grievances  before  Lord  Minto.  From 
them,  and  by  letter  from  Colonels  Malcolm  and  Close 
and  Sir  George  Barlow,  he  was  kept  aware  of  the  pro¬ 
gress  of  events.  INIalcolm  wrote  that  Barlow’s  blind¬ 
ness  to  the  increasing  dangers  amounted  to  a  disease 
of  mind  :  Barlow,  that  Malcolm’s  love  of  popidarity 
prompted  him  to  recommend  concessions  which  the 
honour  of  the  Government  forbad  it  to  grant.  Colonel 
Close  agreed  with  I..ord  Minto  that  submission  must 
precede  concession.  But  of  the  former  there  was  no  sign. 
A  regular  organisation  of  revolt  was  framed.  The  open 


216 


LORD  MINTO  IN  INDIA. 


[1809 


revolt  of  Masulipatam  (where  the  officers  seized  the 
fortress  and  put  their  commanding  officer  under  arrest) 
left  no  doubt  as  to  the  lengths  to  which  they  were 
prepared  to  go.  It  was  quickly  followed  by  the  mutiny 
of  Seringapatam.  From  Masulipatam,  where  he  had 
been  sent  by  Sir  Greorge  Barlow  on  a  mission,  Malcolm 
wrote  ‘  that  there  was  not  a  Company’s  corps  from 
■Cape  Comorin  to  Glanjam  that  was  not  implicated  in 
the  general  guilt — that  is  not  pledged  to  rise  against 
Government  unless  what  they  call  their  grievances  are 
redressed.’  Colonel  Close,  who,  on  account  of  his  great 
popularity  with  the  army,  had  been  sent  to  Hyderabad 
to  take  command  of  the  subsidiary  force,  was  met  at 
the  camp  by  the  whole  of  the  troops  under  arms  and 
prepared  for  action.  Plans  were  formed  for  concentra¬ 
ting  the  rebel  force ;  all  concealment  Avas  throAvn  off, 
and  menaces  were  heard  that  30,000  men  would  march 
upon  Madras.  The  Jaulna  detachment  actually  quitted 
their  station  in  the  execution  of  that  plan.  Public 
treasure  was  seized,  correspondence  interrupted — in  a 
word,  civil  war  had  commenced.  At  this  juncture  the 
cool  courage  and  energy  of  Sir  George  BarloAV  saved  the 
Empire  from  what  at  best  must  have  been  a  disastrous 
struggle.'  ‘  He  determined,’  says  Marshman  in  his 

‘  ‘  There  are  men  now  living,’  writes  Sir  J.  Kaye,  in  the  Corre¬ 
spondence  of  Sir  J.  Malcolm,  ‘  who  look  back  with  astonishment, 
almost  with  incredulity,  to  that  period  of  mutinous  excitement.  At 
many  of  the  large  army  stations  the  officers  of  the  Company’s  regi¬ 
ments  avowed  themselves  ready  for  any  act  of  daring  revolt.  They 
encouraged  one  another  in  treason  ;  they  talked  of  fighting  against 
a  tyrannical  Government  in  defence  of  their  rights  to  the  last  drop 


Mr.  58] 


MUTINY  OF  OFFICEES. 


217 


‘  History  of  India,’  '  ‘  if  necessary,  to  march  the  loyal 
portion  of  the  army  against  the  disaffected.  The 
fidelity  of  the  King’s  troops  coidd  be  relied  on.  To 
test  the  loyalty  of  the  officers  he  demanded  the  signa¬ 
ture  of  all,  without  distinction,  to  a  pledge  to  obey  the 
orders  and  support  the  authority  of  the  Government  in 
Council  at  Fort  St.  George  on  pain  of  removal  from 
their  stations  on  the  coast,  though  without  forfeiture  of 
rank  or  pay.  This  measure,  however,  did  not  produce 
the  intended  effect,  as  not  a  tenth  of  the  whole  body 
of  officers  consented  to  affix  their  signatures  ;  lastly, 
he  directed  the  commanders  of  native  regiments  to 
assemble  the  Sepoys  and  assure  them  that  the  discon¬ 
tent  of  the  officers  was  a  personal  affair,  and  that  the 
Government  had  no  intention  to  diminish  the  advan¬ 
tages  which  they  had  enjoyed,  but  were  rather  anxious 
to  improve  them.  The  Sepoys  and  native  officers  re¬ 
mained  faithful  to  their  salt.’ 

In  Lord  Minto’s  opinion  this  measure  was  as  wise 
and  bold  as  it  proved  to  be  decisive.  Without  their 
instruments  the  officers  were  ])owerless ;  they  had  not 
doubted  the  readiness  of  their  soldiers  to  adhere  to  them  ; 
inability  to  proceed  in  their  criminal  designs  was  the  real 

of  their  blood.  Seditious  toasts  were  given  at  the  mess  tables,  and 
drunk  with  uproarious  applause.  From  day  to  day  t  idings  went  forth 
from  one  excited  station  to  another-  tidings  of  progi'essive  insubor¬ 
dination  which  fortified  with  assurances  of  sympathy  and  support 
the  insane  resolves  of  liie  scattered  mutineers.  The  arrival  of  every 
post  raised  a  fever  of  expectancy.  Letters  from  tlie  disaffected  can¬ 
tonments  were  eagcrl}^  read  and  instantly  circulated.  The  moral 
intoxication  pervaded  all  ranks  from  the  colonel  to  the  ensign.’ 

'  Vol.  ii.  p.  243. 


218  LOED  MINTO  IN  INDIA.  [180i) 

ground  of  the  collapse  which  ensued.  Sir  James  Mack¬ 
intosh  took  a  different  view.  Writing  of  these  events 
to  Colonel  Malcolm  he  ‘  confessed  that  were  he  asked 
whether  the  deposition  of  a  Grovernor  by  military  force 
or  an  appeal  to  private  soldiers  against  their  officers  be 
the  greater  evil,  I  am  compelled  to  own  that  I  must 
hesitate.’  ’  Lord  Minto  did  not  hesitate  to  declare 
his  conviction  that  the  power  which  entrusts  to  the 
soldier  his  sword  has  a  supreme  claim  to  his  fidelity.^ 

‘  If,’  he  wrote  in  a  despatch  to  the  Secret  Com¬ 
mittee,  ‘  they  had  in  truth,  as  their  officers  appear 
never  to  have  allowed  themselves  to  doubt,  adhered  to 
their  cause,  and  had  been  thereby  betrayed  to  their 
ruin  in  the  pursuit  of  criminal  designs  totally  foreign 
to  their  own  interests  and  concerns,  it  is  impossible  to 
foresee  the  dreadful  extremities  to  which  they  might 
have  been  impelled  against  those  who  would  have  been 
justly  responsible  for  these  disasters.’ 

Lord  Minto  had  intended  to  go  to  Madras  in  July  ; 
but  the  confident  assurance  of  Sir  Gi.  Barlow  that 
matters  were  quieting  down,  added  to  his  own  wish  to 

'  Sir  J.  Mackintosh  to  Colonel  Malcolm.  Bombay,  August  20, 
180!),  published  in  Corres2>ondcnee  of  Sir  J.  Malcolm,. 

-  In  the  article  on  the  Madras  mutiny,  already  quoted  (  QuaM.crltf 
Revieiv,  Jlay  1811),  the  following  passage  occurs:  ‘The  policy 
of  detaching  the  Sepoys  from  their  rebellious  officers  had  been 
adopted  by  Lord  Clive,  the  father  of  our  Indian  dominion,  on  the 
mutiny  of  the  Bengal  officers  in  the  year  176.5.  In  truth,  he  in  1765 
carried  his  policy  to  a  much  further  extent  than  Sir  George  Barlow 
in  1 800  ;  for  the  former,  finding  that  the  refractory  officers  whom  he 
had  discarded,  showed  some  disposition  to  continue  embodied  in  his 
neighbourhood,  actually  dispatched  a  corps  of  Sepoys  to  disperse 
these  officers  or  to  laring  them  prisoners  into  the  camp.’ 


^T.  58] 


LORD  MINTO  AT  MADRAS. 


219 


let  tile  minor  Gmernment  do  its  own  work  if  it  could, 
caused  him  to  delay  his  departure,  until  the  news  of 
the  revolt  at  iNlasulipatam  reached  him,  when  he  at 
once  embarked  for  Madras  on  August  5.  Before  leaving 
Bengal  he  wrote  to  Gleneral  Hewitt,  who  was  at  Agra, 
to  prepare  himself  for  civil  war.  The  monsoon  delayed 
his  passage,  and  when  he  arrived  he  found  to  his  sincere 
satisfaction  that  the  crisis  was  at  an  end. 

Sir  J.  Alackintosh  was  not  disappointed  in  the  ex¬ 
pectation  he  expressed  in  a  letter  to  Colonel  Malcolm 
that  Lord  iMinto’s  great  abilities  and  humane  character 
would  dispose  him  to  conciliation.  On  his  arrival  at 
Aladras  he  was  informed  that  the  officers  had  made 
their  submission,  and  addressed  on  August  1 1  ‘  a  peni¬ 
tential  letter  ’  to  himself.  His  own  letter,  nominally 
addressed  to  Sir  (leorge  Barlow,  but  substantially  to 
the  army,  had  been  pidilished  by  order  of  the  IMadras 
Government  at  every  military  station  in  the  Presidency ; 
and  though  too  late  to  stay  the  seditious  proceedings 
then  on  the  point  of  breaking  out,  it  seems,  neverthe¬ 
less,  not  to  have  failed  altogether  of  effect  ;  for  it  was 
remarked  at  the  time  that  their  general  confidence  in 
Lord  Minto’s  justice  and  moderation  caused  the  news 
of  his  approach  to  be  welcomed  even  by  those  who  knew 
how  unflinching  had  been  his  support  of  Sir  George 
Barlow.  Lord  IMinto  desired  to  weaken  as  little  as  pos¬ 
sible  the  Government  of  Fort  St.  George  ;  he  therefore, 
on  arriving  at  ^Madras,  announced  his  determination  to 
interfere  in  no  degree  in  the  government  of  the  Pn'si- 
dency,  which  was  in  all  respects  to  be  carried  on  as  if 


■220  LOED  MINTO  IN  INDIA.  [180S> 

Calcutta  ■were  still  the  seat  of  the  supreme  authority ; 
but  he  felt  that  he  should  discharge  imperfectly  the 
extraordinary  powers  entrusted  to  him  if  he  contented 
himself  ■with  professing  a  blind  concurrence  in  counsels 
over  which  he  had  come  to  preside.  He  determined 
therefore  ‘  to  pursue  a  personal  investigation  of  the 
facts,  followed  by  a  mature  deliberation  on  their  results, 
before  committing  himself  to  any  of  the  principal 
points  depending.’ 

An  order,  dated  September  25,  1809,  conveyed  the 
judgment  at  which  he  arrived  after  the  most  search¬ 
ing  enquiry  and  anxious  consideration.  It  stated  in 
■clear  but  most  moderate  terms  the  offence  against  the 
just  authority  of  Government,  of  which  the  coast  army 
had  been  guilty,  and  then  proceeded  to  make  a  selection 
of  the  offenders  for  punishment. 

‘  The  selection,’  says  the  order,  ‘  is  to  consist  of  the 
officers  in  command  of  stations,  or  bodies  of  troops ; 
commandants  of  corps ;  and  persons  peculiarly  distin¬ 
guished  for  a  foi’Avard  and  violent  part  in  the  most 
criminal  acts  or  proceedings  of  the  army.  Officers  in¬ 
cluded  in  the  two  first  categories  would  be  sent  for 
trial  to  courts  martial,  the  number  not  exceeding 
twenty-one.’  Those  in  the  last  Avere  permitted  to  take 
their  choice  of  trial  or  dismissal  from  the  service.  To 
the  rest  of  the  army  a  general  and  unqualified  amnesty 
was  granted.  The  language  of  this  general  order  ad¬ 
mirably  reflected  the  spirit  of  its  author.  It  was  at 
once  firm  and  generous.  It  demonstrated  the  Governor 
General’s  determination  to  do  no  more  than  was  neces- 


JEt.  58] 


OEDER  TO  THE  ARIO^'. 


221 


sary  for  the  vindication  of  justice.  It  firmly  reasserted 
the  principles  of  military  sidiordination  to  legal  au¬ 
thority,  which  the  proceedings  of  the  army  had  set 
at  defiance,  and  it  did  not  shrink  from  a  tribute  to 
Sir  George  Barlow,  to  whose  firmness  and  energy  it  was 
due  that  a  monstrous  conflict  had  been  avoided  between 
the  coast  army  and  their  country.  The  order  ended 
by  an  earnest  exhortation  to  the  officers  to  think  less 
lightly  than  they  had  been  accustomed  to  do  of  violating 
the  first,  the  most  sacred,  and  the  most  characteristic 
duty  of  a  soldier,  fidelity  to  the  power  he  serves.  ‘  I 
entreat  them  to  be  persuaded  that  no  man  of  honour 
at  the  head  of  a  Government  will  ever  compromise  Avith 
revolt,  and  that  in  every  case  the  conflict  must  be 
carried  to  the  last  extremity.  ]My  sentiments  on  that 
subject  are  not  equivocal,  and  are  not  assumed  for  the 
occasion.  They  have  been  pronounced  long  since,  and 
previous  to  any  indication  of  troubles  on  the  coast.  JMy 
fixed  and  firm  principle  is,  that  the  utmost  e\dls  that  can 
flow  from  a  contest  with  revolt,  and  even  from  defeat,  are 
much  inferior  to  the  greater,  more  permanent,  and  more 
extensive  mischief  of  concession.  In  such  cases  the 
revolted  party  may  recede,  and  will  always  do  so  with 
honour,  sacrificing  nothing  but  passions  and  crimes. 
The  Government  against  which  the  revolt  is  made,  has 
no  option  but  to  maintain  the  contest  or  abandon  its 
trust  and  fly  from  its  duty.’ 

In  the  letter  he  addressed  from  Madras  to  the 
Secret  Committee,  congratulating  them  on  the  ter¬ 
mination  of  the  dangerous  troubles  which  had  agitated 


222 


LOKD  MINTO  IN  INDIA. 


[1809 


the  Presidency  since  the  month  of  January,  he 
says  : — 

‘  Greater  perils  have,  perhaps,  never  threatened 
the  possessions  of  the  Honourable  Company,  or  the 
British  empire  in  India  ;  and  so  great  an  alarm  has 
seldom  subsided  so  suddenly,  so  entirely,  and  with  so 
fair  a  prospect  not  only  of  the  permanent  restoration 
of  former  security  and  tranquillity,  but  of  the  improve¬ 
ment  of  these  blessings.  .  .  .  When  I  embarked  at 
Fort  William  on  August  5,  the  most  recent  events  were 
the  mutiny  and  revolt  at  Masulipatam.  I  received 
also  with  considerable  uneasiness  casual  accounts  of 
an  engagement  between  the  King’s  and  the  Company’s 
troops  at  Seringapatam. 

‘  The  only  certain  and  infallible  issue  of  a  contest  so 
unnatural  and  so  lamentable  as  that  which  we  might 
have  had  to  maintain  was  the  total  and  irretrievable 
ruin  of  thirteen  hundred  English  gentlemen,  who  were 
engaged  in  an  enterprise  equally  criminal  and  hope¬ 
less. 

‘  In  a  case  of  such  general  participation  by  a  nu¬ 
merous  body  in  the  offence  which  is  to  be  punished,  it 
is  obvious  that  the  penalty  cannot  be  extended  to  all, 
and  that  some  must  be  selected  for  examples ;  .  .  . 
that  these  examples  need  not  be  numerous  is  my 
opinion.’ 

In  a  later  letter,  describing  his  final  measures,  he 
wrote : 

‘  I  considered  that  the  mass  of  the  offending  officers 


^T.  58] 


OFFICIAL  CORRESPONDENCE, 


223 


were  to  be  necessarily  replaced  in  stations  of  trust ; 
that  our  native  armies  were  still  to  be  commanded  by 
them,  and  that,  whether  the  penalty  should  fall  on  few 
or  comparatively  on  many,  our  army  was  still  to  be 
composed  of  associates  in  the  common  offence. 

‘  Policy,  therefore,  if  not  a  more  generous  principle, 
points  to  conciliation  as  the  most  expedient  as  well  as, 
in  other  points  of  view,  the  most  commendable  founda¬ 
tion  of  our  measures.  The  change  in  events  has  changed 
the  principle. 

‘  \Miile  revolt  was  on  foot,  conciliation  which  would 
have  been  mistaken,  or  perhaps  justly  taken  for  weak¬ 
ness,  must  have  impaired  both  dignity  and  power. 
After  submission,  a  conciliatory  course  becomes  a 
point  not  merely  of  prudence  but  of  magnanimity.’ 

It  had  been  Lord  INIinto’s  anxious  wish  that  a  Com¬ 
mander-in-chief  should  arrive  at  Madras  from  England 
before  his  own  departure  took  place ;  when  that  was 
found  impracticable,  he  invited  General  Hewitt  to 
Madras.  ‘  The  fit  moment  had  arrived  for  the  important 
work  of  reviving  discipline.  The  power  of  Government 
and  of  the  Commander-in-chief  cannot  at  present  be 
disputed  or  opposed.  Futurity  is  so  impenetrable  that 
the  favourable  moment  ought  not  to  be  lost.  The  task 
will  not,  I  think,  be  difficult,  but  it  requires  prudence 
and  judgment  as  well  as  firmness  and  power,  for  the 
disease  is  pretty  much  fixed  in  the  habit.  It  is  one  of 
those  imdertakings  which  precipitation  has  a  tendency 
to  retard.  The  art  of  government  consists  in  distin¬ 
guishing  between  the  course  which  is  suited  to  extra- 


224 


LOKD  MINTO  IN  INDIA 


[1803' 


ordinary  conjnnctnres,  and  the  permanent  policy  by 
which  men  are  to  be  governed.’ ' 

‘  Revolt  must  first  be  subdued  ;  the  next  care  is  tO' 
prevent  a  return  of  that  evil.  No  doubt  the  strong  and 
successful  repression  of  the  late  seditions  would  tend 
to  discourage  similar  dispositions  in  the  future ;  but 
other  means  yet  more  efficacious  should  be  combined 
with  these,  for  the  actions  of  men  being  prompted  as 
much  by  their  passions  and  tempers  as  by  their  reason, 
a  sense  of  danger  will  not  always  restrain  them.  That 
real  grievances  must  be  redressed  will  not  be  disputed ; 
liut  it  appears  to  me  that  a  Government  should  study 
even  the  passions,  the  temper,  the  prejudices,  and  the 
errors  of  those  who  are  subject  to  their  rule.  It  would 
follow  from  this  principle  that  if  any  peculiar  circum¬ 
stances  in  the  late  events  should  appear  to  have  pro¬ 
moted  them,  or  to  have  increased  the  difficulty  of  re¬ 
straining  them,  and  that  these  circumstances  should 
be  capable  of  alteration,  it  should  be  done. 

‘  If  there  be  reason  to  think  that  any  obstacle  to  the 
restoration  not  merely  of  discipline,  but  of  temper  and 
harmony,  now  stands  in  the  way,  that  obstacle,  although 
it  should  be  connected  with  the  most  unreasonable  and 
most  unjustifiable  passions  and  prejudices  of  the  time, 
had  better  be  removed,  provided  the  measures  taken 
for  that  purpose  can  be  ascribed  to  a  spirit  of  wise 
conciliation,  and  cannot  by  any  possibility  be  set  down 
to  motives  of  intimidation — and  this  advantage  does 


*  Lord  Minto  to  the  Secret  Committee. 


jEt.  59] 


FAMILY  LETTERS. 


225 


belong  to  the  stronger  party  after  victory — with  a  view 
to  promote  future  harmony  with  a  subdued  adver¬ 
sary.’  * 

‘  Madras :  February  3,  1810.’ 

‘  It  is  quite  uncertain  when  I  shall  get  home  (to 
Bengal).  I  intended  to  go  about  the  middle  of  this 
month.  But  although  the  army  is  in  a  perfectly  safe 
state,  it  is  not  like  any  other  army  or  any  other  set 
of  people  that  ever  was.  There  is  a  good  deal  of  irri¬ 
tation  kept  up  by  the  courts  martial ;  and  different 
incidents  in  the  late  troubles  are  still  fresh  enough 
to  make  bad  blood  between  one  corps  and  another. 
Wherever  there  is  any  agitation  at  all,  the  Company’s 
officers  cut  the  King’s,  who  make  them  very  welcome 
and  hold  them  mighty  cheap,  as  well  they  may,  being 
in  the  right  and  the  others  in  the  wrong.  This  is  not 
like  discipline,  nor  like  an  entire  return  to  tranquillity, 
but  it  is  not  quite  out  of  nature ;  and  I  think  myself 
that  all  will  get  right,  provided  jthere  is  a  little  temper 
and  patience  with  this  temporary  evil.  Eegular  and 
steady  discipline  must  certainly  be  restored,  or  rather 
created,  for  it  never  existed  here ;  but  these  wild 
steeds  must  be  handled  and  bitted,  and  not  backed  in 
a  moment  by  a  rough-rider.  Everything  is  so  per¬ 
fectly  secure  on  material  points,  that  a  quiet  process 
may  be  tried,  without  danger  from  new  mischief.  As 
discipline  ^aust  be  enforced,  however,  quicker  or  slower, 

‘  The  letter  ends  with  some  practical  suggestions  for  improving 
the  condition  of  the  higher  ranks  of  the  army. 

’  To  Lady  Minto. 


226 


LORD  MINTO  IN  INDIA. 


[1809' 


that  undertaking  cannot  be  left  to  Sir  George  and 
General  Gowdie. 

‘  One  is  hated,  indeed  execrated,  though  unjustly, 
yet  heartily.  The  other  does  not  inspire  much  awe. 
I  propose,  therefore,  to  invite  General  Hewitt  here 
immediately.  He  has  all  the  qualities  that  suit  the 
occasion.  His  authority,  which  is  the  highest  military 
authority  in  India,  will  be  respected.  He  has  excel¬ 
lent  military  principles,  abhors  a  departure  from  the 
soundest  military  character,  is  firm,  temperate,  and 
judicious.  We  are  on  a  most  cordial  footing,  and  I 
shall  wait  for  him  here,  and  leave  him  in  charge  with¬ 
out  anxiety  when  we  have  thoroughly  compared  our 
ideas.  Coventry  is  the  order  of  the  day.  Indeed  there 
is  no  other  deviation  from  discipline,  or  none  to  speak 
of.  This  is  closely  connected  -with  the  recent  violence, 
and  if  no  new  exciting  cause,  as  Wilson  calls  it,  be 
created,  the  old  impressions  will  gradually  wear  them¬ 
selves  out,  and  the  effect  will  disappear  with  the  cause.’ 

The  disappearance  could  not  be  counted  upon  so 
long  as  the  courts  martial  continued  in  session,  nor 
until,  by  the  arrival  of  the  Commander-in-chief,  a  mili¬ 
tary  authority  should  have  been  established  superior 
to  that  of  the  very  well-intentioned,  but  not  able  officer 
who  commanded  the  coast  army  in  the  meantime ; 
and  thus  Lord  Minto  remained  at  Madras  for  fourteen 
months. 

The  sentences  in  several  instances  were  not  ap¬ 
proved  by  the  Government,  and  were  suspended  during 
re-consideration ;  and  in  England,  as  in  India,  a  violent 


^T.  59] 


FAMILY  LETTERS. 


227 


controversy  arose  upon  the  general  policy  which  had 
been  observed  towards  the  rebellious  army.  Some 
blamed  it  as  too  severe,  some  as  having  unduly  slack¬ 
ened  the  reins  of  authority.  It  was  no  doubt  due  to 
the  dissensions  on  the  subject  in  the  Court  of  Directors 
that  Lord  Minto  was  left  without  any  official  statement 
of  their  opinions  on  these  weighty  matters  for  more 
than  hoo  years  after  they  took  place. 


228 


LOED  MINTO  IN  INDIA. 


[1809 


CHAPTER  X. 

Lord  Minto’s  pre-occupations  at  Madras  were  not 
wholly  of  an  unpleasant  kind ;  for,  during  his  residence 
there,  a  marriage  took  place  between  his  youngest  son, 
John,  and  Ameha  Casamaijor,*  a  young  lady  whose  family 
had  long  been  in  friendly  relations  with  that  of  Lord 
Minto.  He  told  his  correspondents  at  home  in  a  very 
amusing  style  of  the  series  of  emotions  which  possessed 
his  whole  being,  and  dispossessed  each  other  during 
the  space  of  one  quarter  of  an  hour ;  from  the  incredu¬ 
lous  horror  with  which  he  had  learnt  that  ‘  the  boy  ’ 
contemplated  matrimony,  through  various  phases  of 
fury  and  amusement,  till  all  culminated  in  a  sudden  but 
profound  conviction,  that  it  was  the  very  best  thing 
that  could  have  happened ;  and  he  found  himself  blessing 
and  kissing  everybody  all  round,  thinking  in  his  heart 
all  the  time  that  it  would  have  been  more  natural  to 
fall  in  love  with  her  mother,  a  very  handsome  woman, 
than  with  a  chit  of  eighteen.  The  marriage  took  place 
at  Madras,  in  December  1809,  and,  besides  being  a 
very  happy  arrangement  for  the  principals,  greatly  con- 

■  Third  daughter  of  James  Henry  Casamaijor,  Esq.,  of  Madras. 


Mt.  59] 


FAMILY  LETTEES. 


229 


tributed  to  the  cheerfulness  and  comfort  of  Lord  Minto’s 
life  in  India. 

After  describing  the  wedding,  he  wrote  to  his  wife, 

‘  December  20,  1809. 

‘  My  domestic  longings  are  becoming  every  month 
more  importunate  and  unreasonable.  I  first  deter¬ 
mined  not  to  reckon  for  many  years  to  come,  well 
knowing  that  the  hours  of  expectation  would  not  be 
made  fewer  by  any  sort  of  computation  I  could  con¬ 
trive,  but  that  they  would  be  much  increased  in  length 
and  retarded  in  velocity.  Then  I  compromised  for 
quarters  of  a  year.  Then  it  came  to  months,  and  now 
I  grieve  to  say  that  I  am  actually  counting  days,  with 
all  the  exactness  of  a  clock.  The  days  are  innumer¬ 
able  indeed,  yet,  being  a  good  arithmetician,  I  actually 
know  their  number.  It  is  a  long  line  of  march  in 
which  one  rank  seems  to  stop  another,  and  the  whole 
column  seems  to  stand  still.  It  would  be  a  great  joy 
to  skip  a  day,  but  that  never  happens.  I  reckon 
this  diurnal  reckoning  one  of  the  most  improvi¬ 
dent  acts  of  my  life,  and  I  must  go  on  counting  and 
longing  to  the  end  of  the  chapter.  One  of  my  common 
vigils  is  performing  the  voyage  home,  and  then  the 
journey  from  one  well-known  sign-post  to  another, 
from  the  Ked  Lion,  Barnet,  to  Minto.  As  I  have  a 
perfectly  fair  wind,  and  plenty  of  it  all  the  way  to 
Portsmouth,  and  good  roads  and  horses  to  iMinto,  I 
meet  with  no  let  or  hindrance  till  I  come  to  the  Lower 
Lodge,  and  from  thence  to  the  Lilly  Law  is  a  tedious 


230 


LOED  MINTO  IN  INDIA. 


[1810 


distressing  job.  I  always  go  the  Cornhill  Eoad,  for 
the  sake  of  touching  at  Lennel,*  and  sometimes  I  meet 
a  Mintonian  there,  looking  out  for  me.’ 

‘March  29,  1810. 

‘I  shall  be  happy,  I  confess,  to  find  myself  at 
Barrackpore  once  more.  I  think  I  have  the  business 
in  as  favourable  a  state  here  as  it  is  reasonable  to  ex¬ 
pect.  The  ways  of  thinking  of  this  army  are  radically 
bad ;  but  there  is  not  a  shadow  of  danger  left,  and  I 
feel  great  confidence  in  the  efficacy  of  all  that  has  been 
done,  in  preventing  any  return  of  the  confederating, 
that  is  to  say,  in  truth,  mutinous  practices,  which  have 
been  witnessed  on  so  many  other  occasions,  There  is 
still,  however,  a  great  deal  more  petty  indiscipline, 
such  as  Coventry  and  insults  to  obnoxious  individuals, 
than  can  be  accounted  military  or  suffered  to  continue. 
But  these  irregular  habits  are  naturally  cultivated  in 
times  of  trouble,  and  they  have  been  kept  in  more  than 
their  usual  or  natural  activity  by  the  irritation  of  the 
courts  martial  sitting  on  the  comrades,  associates,  and 
only  the  other  day  accomplices,  of  those  who  witnessed 
their  proceedings.  The  trials  are  now  all  concluded  ; 
and  that  exciting  cause  being  removed,  a  steady  and 
temperate  course  of  alterative  remedies,  that  is  to  say, 
a  gradual  but  uniform  introduction  of  regular  discipline, 
and  inculcation  of  sound  military  principles,  of  which 
I  have  not  been  sparing,  may  in  my  opinion  accom¬ 
plish  the  object.  The  courts  martial  have  been  very 

'  The  residence  of  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Brydone. 


59] 


PKIVATE  LETTERS. 


231 


soft,  which,  besides  depriving  the  cause  of  discipline 
of  salutary  examples,  has  laid  Government  under  the 
necessity  of  doing  ungracious  things  and  incurring 
odium  which  ought  not  to  have  been  thrown  upon  it, 
by  censuring  and  refusing  to  confirm  sentences  of  too 
much  lenity.  The  courts  martial  have  found  all  those 
who  have  been  tried,  guilty,  except  one  who  is  honour¬ 
ably  acquitted,  directly  contrary  to  evidence  ;  and  those 
who  have  been  convicted  have  only  been  cashiered  for 
the  most  flagrant  and  dangerous  mutiny.  But  I  can¬ 
not  afford  to  write  another  despatch  on  this  subject.’ 

Soon  after  Lord  Minto’s  return  from  Madras  to 
Calcutta,  his  second  son,  George  Elliot,'  following  the 
example  of  his  younger  brother,  married  a  young  lady  of 
great  personal  attractions,  who  was  much  admired  in  the 
society  of  Calcutta.  Like  her  sister-in-law  she  was  im¬ 
mediately  installed  in  apartments  at  the  Government 
House,  which  ‘  was  much  improved  thereby  in  cheerful¬ 
ness  and  comfort.’  ‘  My  reigning  theme  is  my  daughters- 
in-law.  I  cannot  repeat  too  often  that  E.  is  really 
lovely  in  face,  person,  and  character.  There  never  was 
a  more  sweet  and  gentle  disposition ;  and  A.  is  my 
grand  favourite,  with  mirth,  good  temper,  good  sense, 
and  good  character.  I  have  occasion  for  all  the  comforts 
I  can  snatch  ;  for  my  work  is  hard  and  fatigues  both 
body  and  spirit,  not  by  bodily  exercise  but  by  the  effect 
of  mental  labour  on  a  body  entirely  at  rest.  I  am  as 
entirely  done  up  by  ten  o’clock  as  if  I  had  been  all  day 

'  Captain  George  Elliot,  afterwards  Admiral  and  K.C.B.,  married 
in  1810  Eliza,  daughter  of  James  Ness,  Esq. 


232 


LORD  MINTO  IN  INDIA. 


[181(> 


on  the  moors,  and  I  am  in  general  too  much  over¬ 
worked  to  be  frosty-mornish.  However,  I  have  a  good 
quiet  sort  of  contentedness,  and  spectator-like  enjoy¬ 
ment  of  all  the  happiness  about  me,  which  serves  my 
turn.  A  few  gulps  of  caller  air  down  our  strath  will 
make  me  too  young  and  oppressive  for  the  best  nerves 
among  you.’ 

A  present  from  his  eldest  daughter  of  Scott’s  last 
poem,  ‘  The  Lady  of  the  Lake,’  gave  him  great  delight. 
‘  I  wish,’  she  wrote  to  him  from  Edinburgh,  where  the 
family  were  spending  the  winter  of  1809-10, — ‘  I  wish 
that  the  Edinburgh  Review  was  to  be  out  before  the 
ships  go,  but  it  will  not.  Mr.  Jelfrey  will  certainly 
review  it  himself,  and  I  cannot  help  thinking  he  will  be 
a  little  puzzled ;  for  he  does  not  like  to  be  scolded  by 
Mrs.  Scott  or  to  hurt  Walter,  though  he  pretends  not 
to  care ;  and  yet  he  is  very  likely  to  bully  himself  into 
being  more  severe  than  he  would  naturally  be,  to  prove 
to  himself  he  really  does  not  care.  It  is  impossible 
for  anybody  that  does  not  know  this  odd  little  man  to 
enter  into  the  merits  of  his  character ;  but  it  is  the 
most  amusing  thing  to  watch  when  you  do  understand 
it,  and  to  observe  all  the  odd  contradictions,  or  seeming 
contradictions,  produced  by  the  same  causes.  It  seems 
a  paradox  to  say  that  he  is  not  in  the  least  ill-natured ; 
and  yet  I  never  knew  an  acquaintance  of  his  that  did 
not  say  the  same  thing,  and  though  he  wonders  how 
anybody  can  be  so  silly  as  to  mind  the  tone  of  ridicule 
he  assumes  and  the  severe  things  he  says  in  his  Reviews, 
he  really  is  sorry  when  they  do.  He  is  very  proud  of 


JEt.  69] 


EDINBURGH  IN  1809. 


233 


himself  because  he  has  bullied  us  all  (Jjord  Webb,'  and 
I  can’t  tell  you  who)  about  Crabbe ;  who  has  just 
published  a  new  volume,  full  of  horrors  of  all  kinds 
which  he  chooses  to  admire ;  and  we  expect  a  very 
favourable  review  of  it  in  the  next  number.  I  have 
not  much  objection  to  this  ;  but  if  he  is  not  more  re¬ 
spectful  in  his  review  of  ‘  The  Lady  ’  than  he  was  in  that 
of  ‘  Marmion,’  I  shall  vow  vengeance  on  his  little  head. 
How  to  execute  it  will  be  the  most  difficult  job  ;  for  he 
cares  for  nothing  that  anybody  can  say  or  do,  unless 
perhaps  one  was  to  gag  him  ;  but  then  death  would  soon 
put  an  end  to  his  torments,  and  he  woidd  die  of  a  reple¬ 
tion  of  words.’ 

The  winter  of  1809-10  was  a  very  pleasant  one  in 
Edinburgh.  Dugald  Stewart  had  not  yet  quitted  the 
chair  of  IMoral  Philosophy ;  and  the  influence  of  his 
character,  manners,  and  taste,  gave  a  tone  to  the  College 
which  was  said  to  be  of  even  greater  iidvantage  to  the 
students  than  that  they  derived  from  attendance  at  his 
lectures.  Playfair  still  occupied  the  chair  of  Natural 
Philosophy,  and  found  time  to  fall  into  the  chains  of 
the  lively  IMrs.  Apreece,  better  known  in  after  years  as 
Lady  Davy,  but  Avho  in  1810  made  the  world  of  Edin¬ 
burgh  stare  when  intn)duced  to  it  under  the  aus])ices  of 
the  Duchess  of  tlordon  as  the  true  Corinne.  Where 
Playfair  was,  generally  came  Lord  Webb  Seymour,  the 
gentle  and  the  wise,  the  two  friends  being  so  inseparable 
as  to  be  dubbed  husband  and  wife.  These  were  intimate 
friends  of  the  IMinto  family,  as  were  also  ‘John  Murray 
‘  Lord  Webl)  Seymour. 


234 


LOED  MINTO  IN  INDIA. 


[1810 


and  Henry  Cockbnrn,  as  full  of  fun  and  sense  as  an  egg 
is  full  of  meat,’  Thomas  Thomson,  ‘the  oldest,  the 
gra^’est,  and  the  most  learned  of  all,’  and  the  Clerks 
of  Eldin,  ‘  a  family  of  geniuses  ’  revolving  round  their 
aged  father,  irreverently  nicknamed  ‘  old  Tactics.’  ^  On 
this  foundation  Lady  IMinto  and  her  cousin.  Lady 
Carnegie,  had  in  a  former  year  instituted  a  coterie, 
dignified  by  the  name  of  the  ‘  Bro'wn  Toast  Club,’  in 
allusion  to  one  of  its  fundamental  laws — that  the  mem¬ 
bers  should  trust  to  ‘  the  cup  which  cheers  and  not 
inebriates  ’  for  their  exhilaration,  and  to  buttered  toast 
for  their  support.  So  popular  were  these  meetings  that 
hard-worked  lawyers  sat  up  all  night  to  prepare  their 
work  in  Court  next  day  rather  than  lose  the  evening 
hours  with  the  Brown  Toasters.  ‘  Jeffrey  is  most  enter¬ 
taining  with  his  miseries  of  Avriting  reviews  with  his 
head  full  of  bad  law,  and  his  law  with  his  head  full  of 
reviews,  and  passing  his  nights  scribbling  and  being 
abused  for  his  pains.  He  is  so  smitten  just  now  with 
M.’s  beauty  that  his  friends  say  she  must  cover  her  face 
if  he  is  to  write  any  more  reviews.  Many  people  would 
in  that  case  bid  her  show  it  for  humanity’s  sake.’  ^  To 
one  of  these  ‘  small  parties  ’  came  Madame  Catalani. 
‘  She  sang  one  song  delightfully,’  wrote  Lady  IMinto ; 
‘  then,  having  a  cold,  would  not  sing  again,  bnt  consented 
to  show  attitudes, — as  Lady  Hamilton  did  in  her  days  of 
beauty, — and  we  were  all  in  ecstasies.  I  think  her  beau- 

'  John  Clerk  of  Eldin,  ‘  inventor  of  the  modern  system  of  naval 
tactics.' 

^  Hon.  A.  M.  Elliot  to  her  father. 


Mi.  59] 


THE  BROWN  TOAST  CLUB. 


235 


tiful,  the  finest  eyes  I  ever  saw ;  and  her  manner  so  gay 
and  natural  as  well  as  graceful  that  I  rejoiced  I  was 
not  a  man  to  become  her  slave.  The  evil-minded  accuse 
her  and  her  family  of  being  spies  employed  by  Bona¬ 
parte:  certain  it  is  that  the  husband’s  sister  is  established 
here  as  a  person  of  very  considerable  fortune,  and  says 
Bonaparte  gave  her  permission  to  come  to  England  for 
no  given  time ;  but  I  do  not  see  what  they  can  spy,  for 
in  England  nothing  is  a  secret,  or  ever  will  be.  They 
may  tell  him  all  the  Ministers  are  at  variance,  and  the 
country  with  the  Ministers ;  but,  as  to  anything  they 
intend  to  do,  I  suspect  it  is  more  than  they  know  them¬ 
selves.’ 

To  these  cheerful  letters  I^ord  Minto  I’eplied  : 

‘  You  were  Bro^vn  Toasts  at  the  date  of  your  last 
letter  from  Edinburgh,  and  I  think  this  must  be  aliout 
the  pleasantest  part  of  your  lives ;  inasmuch  as  wit, 
and  learning,  and  good  sense,  and  good  humour,  and 
good  character  withal,  which  are  the  portion,  I  believe, 
of  every  member  of  your  Chdi,  make  excellent  four 
hours.  I  shall  be  delighted  to  be  admitted  to  your 
The,  though  not  legally  qualified ;  but  the  black  kettle 
and  brown  toast  would  make  my  outlawed  mouth  water 
if  it  were  only  for  the  base  corporeal  gluttony  of  the 
thing.  So,  Molly,  put  the  kettle  on,  and  I’ll  be  with 
you  in  a  trice.  You  will  find  me  an  old  carle ;  I  really 
am  tired — I  mean  weary ;  and  it  is  fidl  time  I  was  out  of 
harness,  and  without  my  shoes  in  one  of  your  mother’s 
best  improved  grass-parks.  It  would  be  a  vain  attempt 
to  tell  you  how  I  long  for  the  goal  of  my  seven  years’ 


236 


LORD  MINTO  IN  INDIA. 


[1810 


race.  I  have  been  at  full  speed  the  whole  way,  and  a 
round  or  two  more  would  break  me  down,  I  do  believe.’ 

The  last  fleet  of  1810  brought  to  India  the  dis¬ 
tressing  news  of  the  death  of  Mr.  Windham.  To  Lord 
Minto  it  was  an  irreparable  loss,  for  their  friendship 
had  begun  in  early  life  and  been  faithful  through  long 
years.  No  important  step  had  been  taken  by  the  one 
without  previous  consultation  with  the  other ;  and,  with 
considerable  difference  of  character,  there  had  been  sin¬ 
gular  harmony  in  their  sentiments. 

‘  Windham  expired  at  between  eleven  and  twelve 
o’clock  on  Monday,’ wrote  Lady  Malmesbury  on  June  6. 
‘  He  had  taken  the  opinion  of  eleven  medical  persons 
before  he  consented  to  the  operation,  and  only  one  was 
against  it.  He  is  universally  regretted  by  all  parties 
and  persons.  He  was  of  that  valuable  description  of 
men,  whom  Burke  so  finely  described,  that  become  daily 
more  valuable  as  the  race  becomes  extinct,  for  such  it 
will  be  soon — the  high-minded,  honourable,  true-born 
gentleman ;  and  yet  he  was  an  illegitimate  son,  and  his 
mother  of  the  lowest  description.  As  Fitzharris  said 
to  me,  he  was  one  under  whom,  if  bad  times  came, 
one  might  have  fought  without  fear  of  disgrace.  My 
Dominie  never  left  his  bedside  nor  rested  the  three 
last  nights.’  Another  correspondent  wrote :  ‘  I  am 
assured  by  the  physicians  that  the  solicitude  and 
enquiries  have  been  double  what  were  expressed  for  Mr. 
Pitt  and  Mr.  Fox.’ 

The  operation  mentioned  by  Lady  Malmesbury, 
which  appears  to  have  been  very  doubtfully  neces- 


Ml.  59]  DEATH  OF  WINDHAM.  237 

sary,  was  occasioned  by  the  results  of  an  accident  met 
with  by  Mr.  Windham  in  the  preceding  year. 

‘  One  night,’  wrote  another  correspondent,  ‘  in  the 
beginning  of  July  1809,  as  he  was  returning  home 
alone  and  on  foot  from  the  Miss  Berrys’,  where  he  was 
spending  the  evening,  he  perceived  a  fire ;  and  after 
tracing  it  found  it  next  door  to  the  house  of  his 
friend,  Mr.  North.  The  exertions  he  made  to  save 
different  articles  of  value  showed  all  his  characteristic 
energy.  In  carrying  a  load  of  books  he  fell,  and 
received  a  contusion  on  the  hip.  A  tumour  was  the 
consequence,  and  an  operation  the  conclusion.  His 
constitution  did  not  rally.  He  saw  the  approach 
of  dissolution  without  the  least  unmanly  repining, 
though  he  owned  he  had  many  reasons  for  •wishing  the 
prolongation  of  life,  particularly  in  so  far  as  affected 
Mrs.  Windham.  On  the  evening  before  he  died  he 
signed  a  codicil  to  his  will,  and,  having  done  so,  shook 
hands  with  the  witnesses  with  a  smile  on  his  face,  and 
in  half  an  hour  fell  asleep  never  to  awake  again  in  this 
world.  As  a  statesman,  an  orator,  a  man  of  literature 
and  science,  a  man  of  purity  and  integrity  in  public 
and  private  life,  of  various  accomplishments  and  social 
qualities,  he  has  not  left  his  equal  behind  him. 

‘  Previous  to  the  operation  he  wrote  to  his  friend, 
Ur.  Fisher,  and  told  him  what  he  was  about  to  undergo ; 
that  he  iinderstood  there  was  much  hazard  in  his  case 
either  way,  and  he  very  earnestly  wshed  to  receive  the 
Sacrament,  which  was  accordingly  administered  to  him. 
and  he  expressed  much  satisfaction  in  having  performed 


238 


LOED  MINTO  IN  INDIA. 


[1810 


this  duty,  as  if  he  expected  that  this  might  be  his  last 
opportunity. 

‘  By  an  observation  in  his  diaiy,  the  day  you  took 
leave  of  him,  he  seems  to  have  had  a  presentiment  that 
you  would  never  meet  again. 

‘  Though  he  reached  the  age  of  sixty,  I  wonder  how 
he  could  accomplish  half  the  manuscripts  he  has  left 
behind  him.  1st,  a  complete  translation  of  De  Thou’s 
history  ;  2nd,  an  immense  body  of  mathematics  ;  and 
lastly,  an  uninterrupted  journal  from  January  1782  to 
within  four  days  of  the  operation  that  proved  fatal 
to  him.  Nothing,  however,  is  likely  to  prove  fit  for 
publication  except  the  mathematical  works,  which  he 
desired,  only  two  days  previous  to  his  death,  to  be 
submitted  to  the  inspection  of  Dr.  King,  Bishop  of 
Eochester.’ 


^T.  59] 


FOREIGN  POLICY. 


239 


CHAPTER  XI. 

The  most  brilliant  chapter  in  Lord  Minto’s  Indian 
government  is  that  of  his  foreign  policy.  When  Mr. 
Canning  declared  that  he  would  call  the  new  world  into 
existence  to  redress  the  balance  of  the  old,  he  expressed 
in  an  effective  phrase  the  spirit  of  the  policy  carried 
out  by  Lord  Minto  in  the  East.  The  conquests  of 
England  in  one  hemisphere  redressed  the  balance  of 
power  in  the  other.  Every  fresh  gain  by  France  in 
Europe  was  followed  by  a  corresponding  loss  in  Asia. 
It  was  the  glory  of  Lord  iMinto’s  administration  that, 
whereas  at  its  commencement  dread  of  a  French  in¬ 
vasion  of  India  haunted  the  imagination  of  statesmen, 
at  its  close  France  had  lost  all  her  acquisitions  eastward 
of  the  Cape.  The  isles  of  Bourbon  and  of  France,  the 
Moluccas,  and  Java,  had  been  added  to  the  colonial 
possessions  of  Great  Britain,  the  fleets  of  France  were 
swept  from  the  Indian  seas,  and  England  was  without  a 
rival  in  the  Eastern  hemisphere. 

The  first  step  in  this  great  scheme  was  not  the 
most  successful.  On  the  conquest  of  Portugal  by  the 
French,  the  Indian  Government  received  orders  to 
occupy  the  Portuguese  settlements  in  the  East.  Goa 


^40 


LOED  MINTO  IN  INDIA. 


[1810 


was  already  protected  by  British  troops,  though  the 
civil  administration  was  still  carried  on  by  Portuguese. 
It  was  intimated  that  Macao  should  in  similar  manner 
be  protected  by  a  British  occupation  from  annexation 
to  France.  A  small  expedition  was  sent  from  India  to 
Macao  in  September  1809  ;  but,  though  it  effected  a 
landing,  it  was  met  with  such  firm  though  courteous 
opposition  by  the  Chinese  authorities,  that  it  was  deemed 
expedient  to  re-embark  the  troops  and  to  abstain  from 
any  further  designs  in  that  quarter,  leaving  the  Chinese 
to  guard  their  own  coasts,  which  they  appeared  well 
prepared  to  do. 

About  the  same  time,  three  ships  of  the  line,  car¬ 
rying  troops,  took  possession  of  Amboyna,  the  chief  of 
the  Dutch  Spice  Islands,  or  Moluccas,  and  early  in  the 
spring  of  1810  the  whole  of  the  group  was  annexed 
to  the  British  crown.  These  small  expeditions  were 
despatched  from  India  while  Lord  Minto  was  at  Madras. 
Immediately  on  his  return  to  Calcutta  preparations  were 
commenced  for  more  important  enterprises. 

It  -will  be  remembered  that  within  a  few  weeks 
after  Lord  Minto’s  assumption  of  the  reins  of  govern¬ 
ment  in  1807,  plans  were  submitted  to  him  for  the 
reduction  of  the  islands  of  Bourbon  and  Mauritius,  and 
of  Java,  which  the  fortune  of  war  had  transferred,  along 
with  the  Moluccas  and  other  settlements  eastward  of 
India,  from  the  possession  of  the  Dutch  to  that  of  the 
French. 

These  plans  had  been  laid  aside  on  the  ground 
that  the  time  for  their  execution  was  not  come  ;  first, 


^T.  59] 


FOEEIGN  POLICY. 


241 


because  of  the  financial  difficulties  in  which  the  Com¬ 
pany’s  affairs  were  then  involved ;  secondly,  because 
of  some  uncertainty  as  to  the  approval  of  the  Minis¬ 
try  which  had  lately  taken  office  in  England.  The 
Whig  Ministers,  Lords  Grenville  and  Grey,  while  yield¬ 
ing  to  none  in  their  desire  to  promote  a  system  of 
public  economy,  had  entertained  and  discussed  such 
‘  plans  ’  with  Lord  IMinto  before  he  left  England  ;  but 
the  Ministers  who  succeeded  them  were  believed  to  have 
other  views.  Lord  Castlereagh,  who  had  become  War 
Secretary,  had  in  1800  forbidden  any  operations  east¬ 
ward  of  India,  and  expeditions  against  the  French 
islands  had  been  positively  interdicted  to  the  Indian 
Government,  in  spite  of  the  severe  damage  sustained  by 
their  merchant  trade  from  French  cruisers. 

In  one  of  his  first  letters  from  India  to  the  Chair¬ 
man  of  the  East  India  Company,  Lord  Minto  had 
pointed  out  the  importance  of  a  concpiest  of  the  Isle  of 
France  or  IMauritius,  and  the  Isle  of  Bourbon  : — ‘  The 
Mauritius  aftbrds  a  secure  port  for  equipping  and  re¬ 
fitting  ships  of  war  and  other  cruisers  against  our 
trade,  and  a  place  of  refuge  and  safety  for  them  and 
their  prizes.  Every  project  of  the  enemy  which  re¬ 
quires  a  naval  and  military  force,  will  find  facilities  in 
the  possession  of  the  'Mauritius.  Troops,  stores,  and 
shipping  may  be  almost  imperceptibly  assembled  there, 
separately  and  in  detail,  which  could  not  without  ex¬ 
treme  hazard  of  failure,  be  dispatched  in  a  body  from 
France.’  Twice  during  the  administration  of  Lord 
Wellesley,  had  expeditions  to  the  Coast  of  Malabar 

K 


242 


LORD  MINTO  IN  INDIA. 


[1810. 


been  sent  out  from  the  Mauritius,  and  the  capture  of 
British  merchantmen  even  in  the  Bay  of  Bengal  had 
grievously  humiliated  the  Grovernment  of  India,  which 
would  at  once  have  resented  the  injury  by  a  descent 
upon  the  islands,  but  for  the  refusal  of  the  Admiral  on 
the  station  to  act  under  any  orders  unless  issued 
through  the  Admiralty.' 

In  1809  no  fewer  than  six  Indiamen  were  taken 
on  their  voyage.  It  was  then  felt  to  be  high  time  to 
protect  our  maritime  trade  from  further  depredations, 
and  early  in  1810  an  expedition  sailed  from  India  to 
the  P’rench  islands  under  circumstances  which  Lord 
INIinto’s  letters  will  best  describe. 

‘  On  the  first  occasion,  a  frigate  from  the  Mauritius  landed  a 
number  of  French  troops  and  others  at  Mangalore  on  the  coast  of 
Malabar,  who  joined  the  standard  of  Sultan  Tippoo,  dignified  him 
with  the  title  of  Citizen  Tippoo,  declared  his  dominions  a  republic, 
U7ie  et  indivisible,  and  planted  a  tree  of  liberty.  On  the  second  oc¬ 
casion  a  large  armament  arrived  off  Pondicherry,  consisting  of  two 
ships  of  the  line,  two  frigates,  and  two  corvettes,  with  a  large  staff  of 
officers  and  1,400  European  troops,  destined  to  re-occupy  Pondicherry 
after  the  Peace  of  Amiens  had  restored  that  dependency  to  France. 
On  the  appearance  of  the  French  squadron  in  the  roadstead  of  Pon¬ 
dicherry  they  were  informed  that  the  Governor  General  had  resolved 
not  to  give  up  the  French  settlements  (as  he  had  nevertheless  been 
ordered  by  Royal  warrant  to  do)  until  he  had  had  time  to  communi¬ 
cate  with  the  English  ministry.  The  fleet  returned  to  Mamitius, 
and  before  a  reply  to  Lord  Wellesley  was  received,  England  and 
France  had  resumed  hostilities.  Lord  Wellesley  had  designed  an 
exjjedition  against  the  French  islands  which  was  frustrated  by  the 
jealousy  of  the  Admiral.  The  troops  intended  for  the  pm-pose  were 
the  contingent  of  4,000  Europeans  and  5,000  Sepoys  afterwards  sent 
to  co-operate  with  Sir  R.  Abercromby  in  Eg3rpt,  and  who  encamped  on 
the  shores  of  the  Mediterranean  on  August  27,  1800.  This  exjsedition 
— for  the  troops  marched  120  miles  over  the  desert  to  the  Nile — was 
thought  at  the  time  a  feat  to  be  projd  of,  and  greatly  to  illustrate 
the  resources  of  the  Empire. 


^T.  59]  EXPEDITION  TO  THE  FRENCH  ISLANDS.  243 


‘  March  26,  1810.' 

‘  I  am  just  sending  an  expedition  to  make  the  con¬ 
quest  of  the  Isle  of  Kourhon.  There  is  the  fairest  pros¬ 
pect  of  success.  I  propose  to  follow  up  the  blow  hy 
attacking  the  Mauritius,  generally  called  the  Isle  of 
f'rance.  These  two  acquisitions  will  be  of  extreme  im¬ 
portance  :  they  are  the  only  French  possessions  east  of 
the  Cape,  and  furnish  the  only  means  our  arch-enemy  can 
command  for  annoying  us  in  this  quarter  of  the  world, 
till  an  army  can  come  here  in  its  shoes.  From  the  Isle 
of  France  all  the  cruisers  have  been  sent  out  against 
our  trade ;  against  which  a  very  large  squadron  have 
done  little  to  protect  us.  The  losses  of  the  Company, 
as  well  as  of  the  general  trade,  have  been  enormous. 
The  Islands  have  been  blockaded  by  a  squadron  under 
Admiral  Bertie  who  commands  at  the  Cape,  and  they 
have  experienced  some  distress  from  that  measure, 
but  none  sufficient  to  produce  a  chance,  as  it  appears 
to  me,  of  their  surrender.  In  the  meanwhile  the  small 
island  of  Rodriguez  was,  in  consequence  of  orders  from 
England,  taken  possession  of  by  a  detachment  of 
European  and  native  troops  from  Bombay.  The  in¬ 
tention  was  merely  to  secure  water  and  send  refresh¬ 
ments  to  the  blockading  squadron.  The  command  of 
the  troops  was  given  to  Lieutenant-Colonel  Keating. 
Two  captured  Indiamen  were  taken  by  the  P’rench 
frigate  Caroline  into  Port  St.  Paul  on  the  Island  of 
Bourbon.  This  tempted  Commodore  Rowley,  who 


To  Lady  Jlinto. 

K  2 


244 


LORD  MINTO  IN  INDIA. 


[1810 


commanded  the  blockading  ships,  and  Lieutenant- 
Colonel  Keating  to  attack  Port  St.  Paul,  an  enterprise 
which  was  conducted  and  executed  in  a  very  masterly 
manner,  and  with  entire  success.  .  .  The  success  of 
this  operation  induced  them  (these  officers)  to  recom¬ 
mend  that  a  reinforcement  of  about  2,000  men  should 
be  sent  from  India  with  which  addition  to  the  force  at 
Kodriguez  they  had  a  confident  expectation  of  being 
able  to  make  the  entire  conquest  of  Bourbon ;  which 
they  consider  as  an  important  step  towards  the  reduc¬ 
tion  of  the  Isle  of  France.  It  is  upon  these  grounds  that 
I  have  fitted  out  the  present  expedition,  which  I  have 
made  somewhat  stronger  than  was  desired,  in  order  to 
provide  against  the  preparations  for  defence  which  may 
have  been  made  since  the  attack  on  Port  St.  Paul. 

‘  A  second  expedition  must  be  sent  against  the  Isle 
of  France,  and  a  much  larger  force:  including  those 
going  now  about  10,000  men.  The  first  will  sail  from 
IMadras  about  May  1  ;  the  second  will  probably  depart 
from  India  in  August. 

‘  Calcutta ;  September  19,  1810. 

‘  I  have  been  forced  to  suspend,  much  longer  than 
I  like,  my  quotidian  plan  of  correspondence  by  two 
reasons,  hard  work  and  constant  attendance,  required 
principally  by  the  expedition  to  the  Isle  of  France, 
which  has  been  pushed  forward  through  many  difficul¬ 
ties,  sometimes  by  absolute  determination  rather  than 
by  visible  means.  I  have  been  pretty  nearly  alone  at 
times  in  thinking  it  practicable  to  make  the  attempt 


^T,  69]  EXPEDITION  TO  THE  FRENCH  ISLANDS.  245 


before  next  April,  a  delay  which  might  probably  have 
been  fatal  to  the  ultimate  success.  If  the  troops  do 
not  rendezvous  off  the  island  in  time  to  attack  by  the 
middle  of  November,  it  is  not  entirely  prudent  to  at¬ 
tempt  it  later,  for  the  violent  hurricanes  which  seem 
to  live  in  those  islands  and  to  come  out,  like  swallows, 
at  certain  seasons,  sometimes  are  experienced  in  the 
course  of  November,  though  seldom  before  the  middle 
of  December;  and,  indeed,  they  will  be  ([uiet  in  their 
caves  sometimes  the  whole  year,  without  taking  the 
trouble  of  coming  abroad  at  all.  Although  it  woidd  be 
hazardous  to  keep  a  large  fleet  of  transports  exposed 
to  these  birds  of  prey,  or  to  land  troops  at  a  time  when 
their  ships  and  stores  may  be  blown  off  or  worse  ;  yet 
single  ships  or  more  which  have  a  port  to  come  to, 
may  run  in  and  bring  succours  during  the  tempestuous 
season,  without  greater  hazard  than  the  object  deserved. 
The  French  accordingly  employ  the  hurricane  months, 
when  the  blockading  squadron  is  obliged  to  cpiit  the 
ground,  to  throw  in  supplies,  and  we  are  informed 
that,  in  consequence  of  the  ap])rehensions  excited  by 
our  late  measures,  the  most  positive  assurances  have 
been  given  to  the  Governor  of  the  Isle  of  France  that 
troops,  military  stores,  and  all  other  means  of  defence 
shall  be  dispatched  from  Europe  this  very  season.  It 
is  of  great  consequence  therefore,  that  we  should  be  at 
Port  Louis  to  receive  such  supjdies  from  France,  rather 
than  IMonsienr  I)e  (^aen.  This  is  one  of  several  reasons 
and  certainly  the  strongest,  which  has  made  me  dam- 
natus  ohstinoAvs  midier  (vide  Cowslip’s  translation), 


246 


LORD  MINTO  IN  INDIA. 


[1810 


and  determined  me  to  push  off  the  expedition  now, 
whether  it  was  possible  or  not.  The  weight  of  opinions 
Avas  strong  against  me  in  all  quarters,  but  Avhen  once 
the  point  Avas  decided,  all  hands  concurred  lustily  in 
the  execution,  and  lo  and  behold !  everything  is  actu¬ 
ally  afloat.  Three  divisions  of  troops  from  three  Presi¬ 
dencies  are  noAv  on  their  passage,  with  a  very  perfect 
equipment,  having  six  Aveeks  to  perform  a  voyage 
which  may  be  done  in  one  month ;  flve  Aveeks  is  a  fair 
allowance,  so  as  to  arrive  at  Rodriguez  before  Novem¬ 
ber  1.  And  this  reminds  me  of  a  Piedmontese  gentle¬ 
man,  Avho  said  that  he  had  watched  the  quarrels  of 
mides  Avith  men  for  several  years,  but  had  never  in  any 
instance  found  the  mules  in  the  wrong.  Our  fleets 
may  still  be  dispersed  by  bad  weather  on  the  passage ; 
or  some  accident,  not  to  be  foreseen,  may  occasion 
delay ;  but  we  have  done  our  part,  and  there  is  the 
most  reasonable  prospect  of  success.  The  force  is  quite 
equal  to  the  service,  according  to  the  most  prudent 
and  scientific  opinions ;  and  all  the  information  we 
possess,  down  to  a  very  late  date,  avouIcI  make  the  diffi¬ 
culties  less  than  Ave  are  prepared  to  surmount . 

None  of  the  officers  who  have  served  against  Bourbon 
consider  the  event  as  in  any  degree  doubtful.  .  .  .  We 
ought  not  therefore  to  fail,  although  War  is  a  fine 
lady  and  too  capricious  to  be  entirely  depended  upon.’ 

A  month  after  the  expedition  had  sailed  from 
India,  instructions '  were  received  from  home,  re- 

'  From  the  Right  Hon.  R.  Dundas,  dated  June  13,  1810. 


JEt.  69]  EXPEDITION  TO  THE  FEENCH  ISLANDS.  247 

commending'  the  measure  which — wrote  Lord  Minto — 
‘  a  strong  sense  of  duty  to  the  public  had  induced  him 
to  adopt  under  a  heavy  responsibility.’  ‘  About  the  time 
your  letter  reached  Fort  William,’  he  wrote  to  Mr. 
Dundas,*  ‘you  had  probably  received  in  London  ac¬ 
counts  of  the  surrender  of  the  Island  of  Bourbon  ;  and 
the  expedition  against  the  Mauritius  had  been  des¬ 
patched  from  the  three  Presidencies  a  month  before 
I  had  the  honour  to  receive  your  commands. 

‘  The  change  which  has  taken  place  in  the  finances 
of  the  Company  in  India  since  1807  has  removed  all 
the  difficulties  which  then  existed  in  the  supply  from 
hence  of  pecuniary  funds  for  the  expedition.  The 
remarkable  improvement  which  has  happened  in  that 
branch  of  our  affairs,  and  the  present  flourishing  state 
of  our  finances,  I  believe  unexampled,  afford  no  motive 
for  undertaking  chargeable  and  unnecessary  operations ; 
but  these  circumstances  do  certainly  remove  from 
measures  which  are  expedient  and  important,  the  ob¬ 
stacles  of  pecuniary  embarrassment ;  especially  when 
the  Company  is  only  required'  to  make  the  advances, 
without  being  ultimately  charged  with  the  burden,  as 
in  the  present  instance. 

‘  Let  me  here  indulge  the  flattering  hope  that, 
while  the  amount  of  this  armament  must  give  a  satis- 
facfory  proof  of  the  Company’s  resources  in  India,  .  .  . 
the  perfect  tranquillity  which  has  been  maintained  in 
the  absence  of  so  large  a  body  of  troops,  principally 
His  Majesty’s  regiments,  may  afford  views  not  less 

*  To  the  Right  Hon.  R.  Dundas,  Jan.  1,  1811. 


248 


LORD  MINTO  IN  INDIA. 


[1811 


favourable,  first,  of  oiir  political  state  without,  and 
next  of  that  more  important  point  of  our  security, 
which  depends  upon  the  entire  suppression  of  recent 
troubles  within.  The  expedition  against  Bourbon, 
composed  entirely  of  troops  from  the  establishment  of 
Fort  St.  Greorge,  sailed  from  Madras  roads  the  day  on 
which  I  myself  took  leave  of  the  coast.  I  certainly 
could  not  have  ventured  such  a  measure,  if  notwith¬ 
standing  some  vexations  and  disgusts  down  to  the  latest 
period,  which  might  be  regarded  as  the  dregs  of  former 
disorder,  1  had  not  confidently  relied  on  the  stability  of 
those  considerations,  stated  at  the  time  to  the  Secret 
Committee,  on  which  my  conviction  rested  of  the  effec¬ 
tual  suppression  of  insubordination  and  disloyalty  in 
the  Madras  army.  It  cannot  but  be  matter  of  public 
gratification  that  these  sentiments  have  been  con¬ 
firmed  by  every  subsequent  event. 


‘Fort  William  :  January  26,  1811. 

‘  I  have  this  morning  received,  by  despatches  from 
Mr.  Farquhar,  the  happy  accounts  of  the  surrender  of 
the  Mauritius.  I  will  not  postpone  my  cordial  congra¬ 
tulations  on  the  fortunate  accomplishment — with  loss 
so  much  less  considerable  than  might  have  been  ex¬ 
pected — of  a  service,  the  most  important  as  it  is  univer¬ 
sally  considered  here,  and  as  in  truth  I  believe  it  to  be, 
that  could  be  rendered  to  the  East  India  Company 
and  the  nation  in  the  East.’ 


60) 


JAVA. 


249 


CHAPTER  XI  r. 

In  a  letter  to  Lady  IMinto,  written  before  the  armament 
destined  to  capture  the  French  islands  had  sailed,  I.iord 
Minto  wrote: — ‘I  have  still,  one  object  more,  in  the 
event  of  a  prosperous  issue  to  the  present  enterprise, 
which  will  fill  up  the  whole  scheme  of  my  warlike  pur¬ 
poses,  and  which  will  purge  the  Eastern  side  of  the 
globe  of  every  hostile  or  rival  European  establish¬ 
ment.’ 

The  first  letter  of  1811  opens  thus: — ‘  We  are  now 
in  the  agony  of  preparation  for  Java  ;  and  I  will  whis¬ 
per  in  your  ear  that  I  am  going  there  myself,  not  to 
command  the  army,  but  to  s(h^  all  the  political  work 
done  to  my  mind. 

‘  “  Modeste  ”  is  to  be  my  state  coach.’ 

‘  Calcutta  ;  February  25,  1811. 

‘  I  am  to  emltark  in  a  few  days  for  IMadras.  I 
shall  then,  I  hope,  proceed  to  Malacca  on  board  the 
“  Modeste.”  '  .  .  .  My  going  in  ptu'son  upon  this  service 
is  not  a  very  usual  measure,  and  my  motives  not  being 
generally  understood,  many  ingenious  conjectures  are, 

'  The  ‘  Modeste,'  commanded  by  Captain  the  Hon.  George  Elliot, 
was  expected  at  Madra.s  from  China  on  JIarch  15. 


250 


LOED  MINTO  IN  INDIA 


[1811 


as  usual,  in  circulation.  The  first  notion  Avas  that  I 
was  going  home,  and  that  my  touching  at  Madras  Avas 
only  a  cover  for  my  retreat;  others  reported  that  I 
was  going  to  the  Mauritius,  and  from  thence  to  visit 
Bencoolen  and  all  the  other  outlying  settlements.  A 
third  conjecture  Avas  that  some  great  fault  had  been 
committed  at  Madras,  and  that  I  was  going  to  set 
things  right  there.  IMy  OAvn  reasons  are  that  there  are 
many  important  points,  regarding  our  future  relations 
Avitli  the  Dutch,  and  Avith  the  native  States  in  Java, 
which  ought  to  be  adjusted  at  the  moment  of  the 
attack ;  that  it  is  impossible  to  obtain  at  this  dis¬ 
tance  the  information  and  materials  on  which  a  satis¬ 
factory  judgment  can  be  formed,  and  which  should 
enable  me  to  issue  instructions  sufficiently  distinct  or 
well-founded  to  meet  all  the  possible  exigencies ;  that 
if  the  general  system  could  be  settled  here,  events 
might  require  modifications  not  to  be  foreseen  or  pro¬ 
vided  for ;  and  lastly,  that,  as  Admiral  Drury  acts  under 
a  distinct  authority  and  is  fond  of  acting  for  himself, 
I  have  no  security  for  the  execution  of  any  plan  I 
might  adopt,  or  any  instructions  which  might  be  given 
by  this  Giovernment.  Upon  the  Avhole,  I  am  of  opinion 
that  I  should  not  perfectly  discharge  my  duty  if  I  did 
not  attend  the  Avhole  affair  in  person ;  and  although  it 
is  not  necessary  that  the  public  should  be  in  possession 
■of  my  motives,  I  have  the  satisfaction  of  knoAving  that 
they  are  entirely  approved  by  my  colleagues  and  other 
men  of  experience  and  judgment  Avith  Avhom  I  have 
communicated  on  the  STibject.  I  have  had  Mr.  Eaffles, 


JEt.  60]  PEEPARATIONS  FOE  DEPAETUEE.  251 

secretary  to  the  Government  of  Prince  of  Wales’ 
Island,  a  very  clever,  able,  active  and  judicious  man, 
perfectly  versed  in  the  IMalay  language  and  manners, 
and  conversant  with  the  interests  and  affairs  of  the 
Eastern  States,  in  advance  for  some  months  past,  to 
collect  recent  intelligence,  to  open  communications 
with  the  Javanese  chiefs,  and  to  prepare  the  way  for 
our  operations.  I  carry  with  me  good  assistance  of 
every  sort,  though  few  in  number.  Among  these  are 
jMr.  Hope,  brother  of  Sir  John  Hope,  a  tolerable 
Dutchman,  with  excellent  talents  and  habits  of  busi¬ 
ness  ;  Dr.  Leyden,  a  perfect  Malay ;  Mr.  Seton,  now 
resident  at  Delhi,  who  is  to  be  Governor  of  Prince  of 
Wales’  Island  (in  the  room  of  poor  Mr.  Bruce,  Lord 
Elgin’s  brother,  lately  dead),  but  who  will  go  on  with 
me  to  Java.  Nothing  can  exceed  his  talents  except  the 
enthusiasm  of  benevolence  which  marks  his  character. 
I  have  John,  and  Taylor;*  Captain  Kobinson,  who 
married  a  Dutch  beauty  at  the  Cape,  and  mastered  his 
wife’s  tongue  ;  and  Lieutenant  George,  who  is  an  excel¬ 
lent  draughtsman.  .  .  .  The  object  we  have  in  view  is 
of  the  greatest  national  importance,  and  it  is  of  infi¬ 
nite  consequence  that  the  first  political  arrangement 
should  be  made  on  right  principles.  For  this  I  should 
have  been  equally  responsible  if  I  had  remained  at 
Calcutta,  but  I  could  not  have  made  an  adequate  pro¬ 
vision  for  it  by  any  other  course  than  that  I  am  now 
pursuing.  It  is  not  matter  of  taste  or  choice,  but  of 
duty,  or  rather  of  necessity,  that  I  am  going  to  friskify 
'  Captain  Taylor,  military  secretary. 


252 


LORD  MINTO  IN  INDIA. 


[1811 


in  this  manner,  although  I  confess,  since  it  is  right, 
that  I  never  engaged  in  any  affair  with  greater  interest 
or  with  more  pleasure ;  and  you  will  easily  conceive 
what  a  gratifying  break  this  kind  of  adventure  must 
make  in  the  monotony  of  my  not  less  laborious  life  at 
Fort  William. 

‘  I  expect  to  be  absent  from  Bengal  seven  or  eight 
months  ;  and  of  that  period  I  shall  probably  not  pass 
above  six  weeks  or  two  months  on  land,  so  that,  as  for 
sailing,  I  might  as  well  go  to  England  at  once.’ 

The  next  passages  from  his  journal  are  dated 
‘  “  Morleste"  at  sea :  ’ — ‘  I  have  been  reading  “  Ossian,” 
and  Crabbe’s  “  Borough,”  &c.  I  have  also  with  me 
“  The  Lady  of  the  Lake,’’  and  the  six  volumes  of  Scott’s 
works,  besides  Mr.  Dugald  Stewart’s  new  volume.  His 
matter  is  always  attractive  to  me,  and  his  style  most 
captivating.  Mr.  Fox’s  History,  the  whole  corpus  of 
Latin  poets,  and  Cicero’s  works,  not  to  mention  Dry- 
den’s,  edited  by  Scott.  These  Avith  many  manuscript 
volumes  to  read,  and  some,  alas !  to  write,  will  serve 
me  for  pastime  for  this  trip. 

‘  March  21. — We  have  thirty  soldiers  of  the  Com¬ 
pany’s  Bengal  European  regiment  sent  on  board  as 
marines.  They  are  all  recruits  just  come  out,  and  all 
boys  of  about  sixteen  or  seventeen  years  of  age, — fine- 
looking  lads,  but  never  having  seen  a  firelock,  without 
clothing,  without  an  officer,  commissioned  or  non-com¬ 
missioned,  or  so  much  as  a  corporal — in  short  the  raw 
raaterial  perfectly  unsophisticated.  John  has  under¬ 
taken  to  manufactulre  the  article,  and  has  accordingly 


^T.  60j 


JOUENAL  AT  SEA. 


253 


been  teaching  them  the  manoeuvres  on  deck  in  great 
style.  .  .  .  We  caught  a  shark  yesterday,  and  a  most 
butchering  business  it  was.  The  shark  would  not  have 
treated  one  of  us  half  so  inhumanly,  but  would  have 
put  us  out  of  our  pain  in  half  the  time. 

‘  April  2. — C - told  me  at  iMadras  that  his  plan 

is  to  consume  what  remains  of  life,  whatever  it  may  be, 
in  the  pursuit  of  fortune  for  his  family,  and  to  be  over¬ 
taken  by  the  gentleman  who  is  coming  up  behind  us 
all,  before  he  has  accomplished  his  object.  My  plan  is 
somewhat  like  his — with  this  difference,  that  I  have 
fixed  a  period,  and  that  I  propose  to  twaddle  a  space 
(I  have  not  settled  how  long)  amongst  you  all.  I 
allow  that  the  gentleman  behind  may  put  out  a  little, 
and  win  the  race  before  1  intend  it ;  but  this  is  no  part 
of  my  plan,  and  I  really  hope  he  will  not  be  so  uncivil 
nor  such  a  marplot.  After  all,  if  the  fellow  should  be 
a  brute,  I  hardly  know  how  I  should  have  the  face  to 
complain,  seeing  that  on  March  23  I  turned  the  corner 
of  three  score,  after  a  happy  and  prosperous  journey  so 
far,  and  seeing  that  much  of  my  plan,  by  far  the  best 
and  most  interesting  part  of  it,  I  mean  what  secures 
comfort  to  those  who  seem  now  to  make  me  live  be¬ 
yond  my  life  and  survive  myself,  will  have  been 
accomplished,  before  the  trouble-fete  could  come  up  to 
spoil  sport.’ 

‘  “  Modeste,”  at  sea,  May  1811. 

‘  Dr.  Leyden’s  learning  is  stupendous,  and  he  is  also 
a  very  universal  scholar.  His  knowledge,  extensive  and 
minute  as  it  is,  is  always  in  his  pocket,  at  his  fingers’ 


254 


LOKD  MINTO  IN  INDIA. 


[1811 


ends,  and  on  the  tip  of  his  tongne.  He  has  made  it 
completely  his  own,  and  it  is  all  ready  money.  All  his 
talent  and  labonr  indeed,  which  are  both  excessive,  could 
not,  however,  have  accnmulated  such  stores  without  his 
extraordinary  memory.  I  begin,  I  fear,  to  look  at  that 
faculty  with  increasing  wonder ;  I  hope  without  envy, 
but  something  like  one’s  admiration  of  young  eyes.  It 
must  be  confessed  that  Leyden  has  occasion  for  all  the 
stores  which  application  and  memory  can  furnish,  to  sup¬ 
ply  his  t-ongne,  which  would  dissipate  a  common  stock 
in  a  week.  I  do  not  believe  that  so  great  a  reader  was 
ever  so  great  a  talker  before.  Yon  may  be  conceited 
about  yourselves,  my  beautiful  wife  and  daughters, 
but  with  all  my  partiality  I  must  give  it  against  yon. 
Yon  would  appear  absolutely  silent  in  his  company,  as 
a  ship  under  weigh  seems  at  anchor  when  it  is  passed 
by  a  swifter  sailer.  Another  feature  of  his  conversation 
is  a  shrill,  piercing,  and  at  the  same  time  grating  voice. 
A  frigate  is  not  near  large  enough  to  place  the  ear  at 
the  proper  point  of  hearing.  If  he  had  been  at  Babel 
he  woidd  infallibly  have  learned  all  the  languages  there, 
but  in  the  end  they  must  all  have  merged  in  the 
Tividale  How,^  for  not  a  creature  would  have  got 
spoken  but  himself.  I  must  say  to  his  honour  that  he 
has  as  intimate  and  profound  a  knowledge  of  the  geo¬ 
graphy,  history,  mutual  relations,  religion,  character, 
and  manners  of  every  tribe  in  Asia  as  he  has  of  their 
language.  On  the  present  occasion  there  is  not  an 
island  or  petty  state  in  the  multitude  of  islands  and 


'  How,  twang. 


^T.  60] 


LEYDEN. 


255 


nations  amongst  which  we  are  going,  of  which  he  has 
not  a  tolerably  minute  and  correct  knowledge. 

‘  His  conversation  is  rather  excursive ;  because,  on 
his  way  to  the  point  of  enquiry,  he  strikes  aside  to  some 
collateral  topic,  and  from  thence  diverges  still  wider 
from  the  original  object.  I  have  often  tried  without 
success  to  fix  him  to  the  point  in  hand,  and  the  only 
way  has  been  a  more  peremptory  call  than  I  like  to  use, 
especially  to  one  whom  I  like  and  esteem  so  highly. 
But  nothing  can  differ  more  widely  from  his  conversa¬ 
tion  in  this  respect  than  his  writing.  His  pen  is  sober, 
steady,  concise,  lucid,  and  well  fed  with  useful  as  well 
as  curious  matter.  His  reasoning  is  just,  his  judgment 
extremely  sound,  and  his  principles  always  admirable. 
His  mind  is  upright  and  independent,  his  character 
spirited  and  generoiis  with  a  strong  leaning  to  the 
chivalrous ;  and  in  my  own  experience  I  have  never 
found  any  trace  either  of  Avrong  head,  or  of  an  imprac¬ 
ticable  or  unpleasant  temper.  The  only  little  blemish 
I  have  sometimes  regretted  to  see  in  him  is  a  disposi¬ 
tion  to  egotism  ;  not  selfishness — but  a  propensity  to 
bring  the  conversation  from  whatever  quarter  it  starts 
round  to  himself,  and  to  exalt  his  own  actions,  sufferings, 
or  adventures  in  a  manner  a  little  approaching  the 
marvellous.  I  have  indulged  myself  in  this  portrait 
because  I  feel  an  interest  which  I  know  you  all  share  in 
so  distinguished  a  worthy  of  Teviotside.’  * 

*  Dr.  Leyden  was  born  of  humble  parentage  in  the  village  of 
Denholm,  Roxburghshire.  In  his  native  districthe  is  best  remembered 
as  the  author  of  Scenes  of  Infancy  and  other  poems.  A  graceful 
monument  was  erected  to  his  memory  at  Denholm  a  few  years  ago. 


256 


LOED  MINTO  IN  INDIA. 


[1811 


‘  Penang,  Prince  of  Wales’  Island  :  May  12,  1811. 

‘  Mr.  Bruce,  Tjord  Elgin’s  brother,  was  the  last 
Governor  of  Prince  of  Wales’  Island  ;  and  his  death, 
which  is  much  and  justly  lamented,  placed  the  senior 
member  of  Council,  Mr.  Phillips,  provisionally  in  the 
chair.  We  were  received  therefore  by  him,  and  carried 
immediately  to  liis  house  about  two  miles  from  George 
Town,  the  only  place  to  be  called  a  town  in  the  island. 
Mr.  Phillips  is  magnificently  lodged  ;  and  his  house, 
which  he  built  himself,  is  one  of  the  handsomest  I  have 
seen  in  India.  .  .  .  This  mansion  is  not  quite  propor¬ 
tioned  to  the  island,  and  looks  like  the  great  lady  in 
the  little  parlour.  The  situation  is  beautiful — on  the 
bank  of  a  running  stream  fresh  from  mountain  springs. 
Beyond  the  stream  the  plain  extends  perhaps  a  quarter 
of  a  mile  to  the  foot  of  a  sublime  mountain,  and  not 
more  sublime  than  beautiful,  steep,  craggy,  broken  into 
smaller  hills,  and  the  whole  covered  with  the  most 
magnificent  wood,  interspersed  with  underwood,  and 
here  and  there  vacant  spaces  which  are  green  and 
flourishing.  On  the  otlier  side  of  the  stream  stands 
Kelso — a  bungalow  or  cottage  built  by  Scott  of  Raeburn’s 
eldest  son,  who  gave  his  house  and  ground  that  name, 
because  the  little  stream  divides  itself  into  two  branches 
and  forms  a  sort  of  microscopic  Tweed  and  Teviot, 
principally  I  presume  from  love  and  affection  for  home, 
which  is  brought  to  mind  by  slight  affinities.  I  ex¬ 
perienced  something  of  the  pleasure  which  the  giver  of 
the  name  found  in  it,  and  felt  comfort  from  the  view 


60] 


PENANG. 


257 


the  name  found  in  it,  and  felt  comfort  from  the  view 
and  neighbourhood  of  miniature  Kelso. 

‘  The  island  is  about  ten  miles  long,  and,  like  most 
high  islands,  has  a  space  between  the  sea  and  the  moun¬ 
tain  flat  enoiigh  for  cultivation.  The  interior  is  all 
mountain.  In  Penang,  however,  the  plain  is  narrow 
every^vhere,  and  in  a  great  part  of  the  circumference 
the  mountain  comes  down  steep  to  the  very  water,  so 
that  of  this  small  territory  a  very  small  proportion  can 
be  cultivated  or  even  inhabited.  The  principal  plain 
was  made  the  seat  of  the  settlement  ;  and,  considering 
that  it  was  desert  twenty-five  years  ago  when  it  came 
into  our  possession,  great  progress  has  been  made  both 
in  useful  and  ornamental  improvements.  The  popula¬ 
tion  is  called  in  round  mimbers  30,000  souls — of  which 
two-thirds  are  Chinese,  the  rest  Malays,  people  from 
the  coast  of  Coromandel  and  other  parts  of  India,  con¬ 
victs  from  Bengal — a  garrison  of  Bengal  Sepoys  of  about 
1,000  men,  and  about  100  English  gentlemen  and  sea¬ 
faring  2)eople.  The  whole  of  this  community  may  be 
considered  as  industrious,  for  without  industry  they 
could  not  live  ;  but  tlie  Chinese  are  superior  to  all  other 
Easterns  in  industry  and  ingenuity.  Agriculture  and 
most  of  the  handicraft  and  mechanic  trades  are  in  the 
hands  of  the  Chinese.  Georgetown  is  well  and  regu¬ 
larly  Imilt — the  fort  is  little  more  than  nominal.  1 
presume  you  know  that  Pulo  Penang  is  the  native 
name  of  Prince  of  Wales’  Island. 

‘  Upon  the  cession  of  the  island  the  English  colours 
happened  to  be  hoisted  on  August  12,  the  Prince’s 

s 


258 


LORD  MINTO  IN  INDIA. 


[1811 


birthday,  and  hence  this  new  part  of  Her  Majesty’s 
dominions  received  his  name. 

‘One  of  the  favourite  sights  is  a  flour-mill  and  bak¬ 
ing  establishment  invented  and  executed  by  a  Chinese. 
There  is  nothing  very  ciurions  or  difficult  in  the  ma¬ 
chinery;  but  the  estabhshment  is  on  a  great  scale,  and 
owes  its  success  not  only  to  the  ingenuity,  but  to  the 
capital  and  to  the  very  liberal  spirit  of  enterprise  of  the 
owner ;  —  to  crown  all,  the  bread  is  preferred  by  the  navy 
to  anything  they  had  even  in  England.  There  is  a  good, 
regularly  built  road  from  Gleorgetown  to  the  furthest 
extremity  of  the  island,  and  there  are  extremely  pretty 
green  lanes,  smooth  and  safe  for  buggies  or  little  phae¬ 
tons.  The  horses  are  universally  little  Acheen  ponies, 
an  excellent  and  handsome  breed  of  the  smallest  fairy¬ 
like  horses  you  ever  saw,  from  the  great  island  of 
Sumatra,  and  particularly  from  Acheen,  one  of  its  king¬ 
doms.  What  struck  my  Scotch  mind  most  forcibly  at 
Penang  is  the  timber  which  covers  every  inch  of  the 
surface  not  under  cidtivation.  I  am  certain  that  your 
poor,  diminutive  European  imagination  never  conceived 
such  trees  and  such  innumerable  multitudes  of  them. 
They  stand  as  close  to  each  other  over  the  whole  moun¬ 
tain  as  a  larch  plantation  that  never  was  thinned.  The 
height  of  the  bole  before  it  loses  the  character  of  timber 
may  be  called,  one  with  another,  150  feet.  They  are 
thick  enough  at  this  height  for  the  mainmast  to  a  large 
ship.  They  are  in  general  perfectly  straight  and  withoiit 
branch  for  seventy  feet  high.  The  thickness  near  the 


^T.  60] 


PENANG. 


259 


ground  is  magnificent.  I  am  afraid  though,  this  side  the 
Cape  and  far  ayont,  to  say  what  they  measure,  but  thirty 
feet  in  the  girth  is  common.  When  you  see  them  down, 
theyare  stupendous  sticks.  Being  straight,  they  do  not 
furnish  the  most  essential  timbers  for  ship-building  ; 
but  they  are  excellent  masts,  yards,  spars  of  all  sorts. 
The  luxuriance  and  vigour  of  all  the  Eastern  vegetation 
is  scarcely  to  be  conceived  on  your  side  of  the  Cape. 
The  freshness  and  verdure  are  well  maintained  here  by 
showers  like  the  Flood  every  night  in  the  year,  or  the7'eby, 
I  have  found  the  climate,  so  far,  much  more  temperate 
and  even  pleasant  than  1  expected  ;  and  I  reckon  that 
I  shall  skip  a  summer  by  this  trip,  for  in  Bengal  it  is 
at  this  time  the  height  of  the  hot  winds,  which  are  no 
joke.  Here  we  have  gratefid  and  refreshing  winds 
during  the  greatest  part  of  the  twenty-four  hours,  and 
rain  and  pui'gative  thunder,  and  the  sting  is  taken  out 
of  the  tropical  sun. 

‘  Mr.  Seton  was  put  in  possession  of  his  government 
the  day  we  landed,  and  I  took  my  seat  at  the  same 
time  as  Governor  General  in  Council,  converting  this 
small  presidency  into  the  supreme  Government  of  India, 
and  acting  myself  the  part  of  the  great  lady  in  the  httle 
parlour.  There  were  some  few  points  of  business  to 
transact,  and  Penang  will  have  upon  its  consultations 
some  proceedings  of  the  Governor  General  in  Council, 
which  is  an  odd  accident  in  the  history  of  both  Govern¬ 
ments.  We  landed  here  on  the  9th,  and  are  getting 
under  weigh  for  Malacca  on  the  12th — a  short  space  for 
so  long  a  chronicle.’ 


260 


LORD  MINTO  IN  INDIA. 


[1811 


‘Malacca;  May  31,  1811. 

‘  We  embarked  at  Penang  on  May  12,  and  arrived  at 
Malacca  on  the  18th.  Nothing  remarkable  happened 
on  the  passage.  The  weather  was  a  succession  of  calms 
or  light  winds  and  squall  s,  with  heavy  rain  and  thunder. 
This  is  the  case  pretty  generally  through  the  year 
in  the  Straits  of  Malacca.  .  .  .  The  passage  through 
these  straits  is  made  pretty  and  interesting  by  the  va¬ 
riety  of  islands,  and  by  the  high  coast  of  the  Malay 
peninsula,  which  is  always  in  view,  and  often  at  a  very 
discernible  distance.  Both  the  islands  and  the  main 
are  much  in  the  same  character  as  Penang — moun¬ 
tainous,  and  covered  with  timber,  of  which  there  must 
be  inexhaustible  treasures  in  these  regions.  We  some¬ 
times  had  the  Malay  coast  and  the  mountains  of 
Sumatra  in  sight  at  the  same  time,  to  our  right  and 
left.  At  iNIalacca  we  found  all  the  Bengal  troops 
arrived  .  .  .  the  troops  form  two  camps,  in  dry,  healthy 
situations,  on  the  sea-shore,  close  to  the  water.  One 
is  at  two  miles,  the  other  and  most  considerable  at  six, 
from  the  town,  which  helps  to  defend  them  against  the 
incursions  of  barrack-fever  and  dysentery.  The  camps 
very  much  adorn  and  enliven  the  scenery  of  this  pretty 
bay.  Malacca  stands  on  the  banks  of  a  small  stream, 
about  the  breadth  of  the  Rule  at  Spittal,  but  resem¬ 
bling  it  in  no  other  respect.  The  town  is  built  along 
the  right  bank  of  the  river,  one  side  of  the  houses  pro¬ 
jecting  a  few  feet  over  the  stream,  supported  on  piles, 
which  elevate  them  seven  or  eight  feet  above  the  surface 


JEt.  60j 


MALACCA. 


261 


of  the  water.  This  gives  the  place  in  that  quarter 
rather  an  amphibious  appearance.  The  town  runs 
down  to  the  edge  of  the  sea,  and  runs  back  in  the 
direction  of  the  beach,  sometimes  advancing  into  the 
tide  upon  piles,  sometimes  leaving  a  handsome  terrace 
between  the  houses  and  the  water. 

‘  (3n  the  opposite  bank  of  the  river,  close  also  to  the 
sea,  the  Portuguese  built  a  small  fort,  on  their  acqui¬ 
sition  of  the  place  in  the  sixteenth  century.  The  Dutch 
dispossessed  them  in  the  following  century,  and  main¬ 
tained  everything  as  it  was.  We  came  next,  about 
sixteen  years  ago,  and  by  orders  from  home  have  pulled 
down  the  fort.  This  work  of  destruction  has  been  very 
recently  accomplished,  at  considerable  expense — a  most 
useless  piece  of  gratuitous  mischief,  as  far  as  I  can 
understand  the  subject.  The  ruins  of  the  Avails  remain, 
and  Avill  long  transmit  a  memorial  of  the  narroAv,  and 
Avhat  is  felt  by  the  people  here  to  be  the  malevolent, 
policy  displayed  by  England  to  this  new  portion  of  her 
dominions.  The  (TOA^ernment  House,  hoAve\'er,  built 
by  the  Portuguese,  and  a  church  erected  by  the  Dutch 
Avithin  the  limits  of  the  fort,  are  still  on  foot,  together 
Avith  a  feAv  other  buildings,  public  and  priA'ate.  I 
iidiabit  the  Government  House,  Avhich  is  not  magni¬ 
ficent,  but  ansAvers  my  purposes  perfectly  in  most 
respects.  Puit  it  staiids  at  the  foot  of  a  steep  hill, 
Avhich  covers  the  Avhole  tenement  from  the  sea.  Noav 
as  the  sea-breeze  is  in  these  climates  the  true  vitcd  air, 
and  as  delicious  as  the  gas  of  Paradise,  suffocation  is 
our  portion  at  the  GoA’ernment  House.  As  I  see  you 


262 


LOED  MINTO  IN  INDIA. 


[1811 


gasping  at  this  account,  and  opening  all  the  windows  in 
spite  of  Elliot  of  Wells,  it  will  give  your  ladyship  great 
satisfaction  to  find  that  the  hill  makes  amends  for  the 
harm  it  does  below,  by  supporting  up  in  the  air  very  near 
the  top  a  small  bungalow,  composed  of  one  room  and 
an  open  verandah,  fronting  the  sea.  Greorge  is  the  real 
owner ;  but  the  dutiful  boy  permits  me  to  sit  in  the 
verandah  from  breakfast  to  dinner,  and  has  thereby, 
beyond  a  doubt,  prolonged  my  life  almost  a  fortnight 
already.  It  is  in  this  verandah  that  he  and  I  are  at 
present,  writing  love-letters  to  our  absent  wives.  We 
swallow  the  breeze  fresh  from  the  sea,  and  the  climate 
is  entirely  disarmed.  The  prospect,  too,  is  a  re¬ 
freshing  one  to  the  eye,  and  possesses  beauty  on  shore 
and  on  sea.  We  have  the  roads  with  all  the  ship¬ 
ping  and  a  string  of  small  islands  in  front;  to  the 
right  we  have  a  bird’s-eye  view  of  the  little  river  and 
town  beyond  ;  the  coast,  wooded  down  to  the  water, 
runs  curving  and  waving,  and  throwing  out  pretty  pro¬ 
jecting  points,  made  interesting  by  the  camps  at  different 
distances ;  the  whole  backed  inward  from  the  sea  by  an 
uneven  plain,  springing  first  into  elevations,  then  hills, 
and  at  length  high  mountains  in  the  distance ;  all 
clothed  near  the  eye  with  the  richest  vegetation  and 
verdure,  and,  far  as  well  as  near,  with  one  universal  wood. 
Of  the  distant  mountains  the  most  important  is  Mount 
Ophir,  which  has  pretensions,  of  which  I  will  not  pretend 
to  judge,  to  be  the  true  Mount  Ophir.  Certain  it  is 
that  gold  is  collected  there  at  this  day. 

‘  Even  close  to  [Malacca  the  country  seems  a  forest  of 


^3iT.  60] 


MALACCA. 


263 


lofty  timber.  But  the  timber  has  been  long  since  re¬ 
moved,  and  all  that  are  now  seen  are  fruit-trees,  some 
of  which  are  rather  of  the  forest  than  of  garden  dimen¬ 
sions,  and  under  their  close,  thick  shade  the  Malay  and 
Chinese  peasants  cultivate  their  grounds  with  industry 
and  not  without  skill.  There  are  many  green  drives 
from  three  to  five  and  six  miles  round  in  these  woods, 
and  they  pass  through  a  great  deal  of  beautifid  forest 
scenery.  The  conveyance  here,  as  at  Penang,  is  in  low 
buggies  and  phaetons  drawn  by  Acheen  ponies,  which 
l)ustle  on  with  great  activity  and  at  a  good  rate. 

‘  Mr.  George  has  made  a  number  of  sketclies  which 
will  help  to  fill  up  my  blanks. 

‘  There  are  about  15,000  souls  in  the  town  and 
adjoining  district.  About  two-thirds  of  these  are 
IMalays — that  is  to  say,  natives ;  the  remainder  are  prin¬ 
cipally  Chinese  who  have  been  long  settled,  and  have 
colonised  here  contrary  to  their  usiial  custom,  which  is 
to  ret\irn  to  China  when  they  have  made  a  little  inde¬ 
pendence  to  live  on  at  home.  The  Chinese  emigrants 
never  bring  women  with  them,  but  foregather  with 
Malay  females — mostly  slaves — and  leave  them  behind 
when  they  go  home.  At  iNIalacca  they  have  married 
the  daughters  of  these  Malay  mothers,  and  these,  inter¬ 
marrying,  have  in  a  number  of  generations  converted  the 
Malay  coarse  clay  into  fine  China;  so  that  the  colony  is 
now  whole  blood  on  both  sides  of  the  house,  and  maybe 
accounted  curious  in  that  respect  as  well  as  in  that  of 
the  men  not  b(*ing  emigrants  from  China,  but  descended 
from  emigrant  ancestors  and  born  for  several  generations 


264 


LOED  MINTO  IN  INDIA. 


[1811 


at  Malacca.  There  are  also  some  remains  of  the  old 
Portuguese  stock.  These  are  very  degenerate,  and  little 
trace  of  European  origin  is  left,  except  their  professing 
the  Catholic  religion.  There  are  people,  both  IMussul- 
man  and  Hindoo,  from  different  parts  of  India  ;  but  the 
most  thriving  class,  though  not  the  most  numerous,  is 
Dutch,  pure,  and  mixed  with  Malay  blood.  The  better 
kind  of  Dutch  are  the  only  substantial  part  of  the  com¬ 
munity.  They  continue,  under  our  Grovernment,  to  fill 
the  principal  offices,  particularly  the  judicial,  Dutch 
law  being  established  by  the  capitulation.  Some  are 
'merchants,  several  of  them  are  well-informed,  respect¬ 
able  people,  and  one  or  two  are  polite,  accomplished 
men.  Of  the  ladies,  the  elder  matrons  preserve  a  smack 
of  the  primitive  Dutch  colonial  fashion  in  dress  and 
manners.  The  daughters  dress,  dance,  and  flirt  very 
much  as  well-educated  young  women  do  in  Europe,  with 
the  advantage  of  being  intensely  and  beautifully  brown. 
You  are  lily-fair  compared  with  the  fairest  of  the 
Batavo-lMalaya  fail’  sex.  My  fidelity,  you  see,  is  put 
to  the  test.  Of  English  there  is  but  a  commandant 
with  one  or  two  officers  and  medical  men  attached  to 
the  small  garrison,  which  consists  of  two  companies  of 
Sepoys  from  Bengal.  Malacca  is  a  dependency  of  the 
Penang  Grovernment. 

‘  This  account  of  Malacca  is  for  ordinary  times.  At 
present  we  have  a  great  fleet  and  army  officered  by 
English  gentlemen ;  we  have  also  my  establishment, 
including  Mr.  Raffles,  who  has  a  pretty  numerous  family, 
Mrs.  Raffles  is  the  great  lady,  with  dark  eyes,  lively 


Mt.  60] 


MALACCA. 


265 


manner,  accomplished  and  clever.  She  had  a  former 
husband  in  India  ;  and  I  have  heard,  but  am  not  sure  of 
the  fact,  that  she  was  one  of  the  beauties  to  whom 
Anacreontic  INloore  addressed  many  of  his  amatory 
elegies.  .  .  . 

‘  I  have  mustered  the  whole  female  community  of 
Malacca  art  a  ball,  for  I  am  now  writing  on  June  7.  I 
celebrated  the  King’s  birthday  by  a  levee  in  the  fore¬ 
noon,  a  great  dinner  to  all  mankind,  and  a  ball  in  the 
evening  to  all  womankind.  I  escaped  during  the  first 
dance,  having  had  enough  of  the  day  by  the  earlier 
festivities ;  and  I  slept  that  night  up  in  George’s  bun¬ 
galow  to  be  oiit  of  earshot  of  the  fiddlers.  One  of  the 
pleasantest  j^arts  of  the  celebration  took  place  privately 
after  the  levee.  T  released  all  the  Government  slaves  at 
IMalacca,  presenting  to  each  with  my  own  hand  a  cer¬ 
tificate  of  their  freedom,  and  four  dollars  to  provide  for 
their  immediate  sulisistence  till  they  can  get  into  some 
way  of  life.  Tliey  ha\e  also  the  option  of  resuming 
their  former  state  if  they  find  a  difficulty  in  maintaining 
themselves.  They  are  only  nineteen  in  number,  male 
and  female,  of  all  ages,  from  infants  in  arms  to  old, 
helpless  people.  INIost  of  them  were  born  slaves  to  the 
Dutch  Company,  some  to  the  English,  and  all  their 
children  would  have  continued  slaves.  Slavery  is  esta¬ 
blished  in  all  these  couuti'ies  to  a  shocking  extent.  An 
insolvent  debtor,  however  small  his  debt,  is  condemned 
to  be  the  slave  of  the  creditor.  Some  have  been  slaves 
for  life  for  100  or  200  dollars,  and  if  the  sum  is  consider¬ 
able  the  whole  family  shares  the  same  fate.  IMen  may 


266 


LORI)  MINTO  IN  INDIA. 


[1811 


gamble  their  children,  their  wives,  and  lastly  them¬ 
selves  into  slavery,  in  satisfaction  of  bets  upon  fighting 
cocks,  or  any  other  gambling  debt ;  and  nothing  is  more 
common.  If  a  criminal  is  condemned  to  slavery,  his 
Avhole  family  goes  with  him  ;  or,  if  he  is  put  to  death, 
the  wife  and  children,  young  and  old,  after  mtnessing 
the  execution,  are  sold  into  slavery — the  mother  to  one 
master,  the  children  to  others.  I  speak  now,  not  of 
INIalacca,  but  of  other  Malay  countries,  including  Java. 
I  hope  something  may  be  done — -partly  by  authority, 
partly  by  influence — to  mitigate  these  horrors  ;  in  the 
meanwhile  the  people  of  IMalacca  have  been  told  and 
have  seen  that  the  English  think  no  man  should  be 
deprived  of  his  liberty  except  criminals.  Another 
proof  has  been  given  to  them  that  we  dislike  cruelty. 
Finding  some  instruments  of  torture  still  preserved, 
although  they  have  been  long  disused,  I  had  the  cross 
upon  which  criminals  were  broken,  and  another  wooden 
instrument  that  had  served  as  a  sort  of  rack,  burnt 
under  the  windows  of  a  room  from  which  executions  are 
seen  by  the  magistrates,  where  I  and  the  magistrates 
Avere  assembled  for  the  purpose ;  and  at  the  same  time 
various  iron  articles  for  screwing  thumbs,  wrists,  and 
ankles,  and  other  contrivances  of  that  diabolical  sort, 
Avere  carried  out  in  a  boat  by  the  executioner  into  the 
roads,  and  sunk  in  deep  Avater,  never  to  rise  or  screw 
poor  people’s  bones  and  joints  again. 

‘  Talking  of  slaves,  I  must  tell  you  that  I  am  myself 
the  master  of  several.  A  Eajah  of  Balli,  an  island 
adjoining  the  east  end  of  Java,  has  sent  me,  amongst 


Mt.  60] 


A  PEESENT  OF  SLAVES. 


267 


other  presents,  five  boys  and  two  girls,  all  slaves,  at  rny 
service.  They  have  been  some  time  kept  at  ]Mr. 
Eaffles’s  house,  who  has  agreed  to  take  one  or  two. 
They  are  all  emancipated,  of  course,  but  remain  an 
orphan  charge  upon  ns.  The  boys  are  from  about 
eight  to  thirteen  years  old,  and  are  all  fine,  spunky- 
looking  boys.  The  girls  are  four  or  five  years  old. 
Now  to  give  you  a  notion  of  the  manners  and  scenes 
they  are  accustomed  to  :  they  were  all  dressed  in  their 
bettermost  upon  the  occasion  of  their  being  first  showm 
to  me.  They  perceived  that  there  was  a  sort  of  so¬ 
lemnity,  which  seemed  to  give  them  some  uneasiness. 
While  they  were  paraded  in  this  manner,  and  they  were 
all  gazing  round  them,  two  Malay  spears  unfortunately 
caught  Taylor’s  eye,  in  the  corner  of  the  room,  and  of 
necessity  he  began  tossing  and  brandishing  them  about, 
and  at  length  the  scabbards  were  pnlled  otf  the  bright 
blades  at  the  ends  of  the  weapons.  The  moment  this 
happened  the  poor  boys  all  huddled  together,  and  the 
youngest  left  the  rest  and  came  with  his  little  hands 
joined  together,  in  the  7nost  supplicating  manner,  and 
with  the  most  imploring  fiice,  walking  from  one  of  us 
to  the  other,  and  evidently  begging  for  his  life,  though 
he  did  not  utter  a  word,  nor  even  cried  ;  but  he  appeared 
terrified.  It  was  like  one  who  had  little  hope  of  obtain¬ 
ing  his  request,  and  who  had  been  accustomed  to  con¬ 
sider  the  thing  he  feared  as  a  sort  of  natural  doom 
that  was  to  be  expected.  It  was  with  some  difficulty, 
even  after  the  spears  w,ere  removed,  that  the  children 
were  reassured.  They  certainly  thought  that  they  had 


268  LOED  MINTO  IN  INDIA.  [i8Il 

been  dressed  out  to  be  sacrificed  or  put  to  death  for 
some  cause  or  other,  and  when  they  saw  the  naked 
points  of  the  spears  they  thought  their  time  was  come. 
This  is  the  less  surprising,  as  there  is  every  reason  to 
believe  that  each  of  them  had  seen  his  father  put  to 
death  by  a  number  of  spears,  which  is  a  common  mode 
of  execution.  Next  day  they  were  all  very  merry  and 
happy.  Greorge  has  taken  one  of  the  boys  to  serve 
him  on  board  of  ship,  and  that  boy  has  fallen  on  his 
legs.  ]Mr.  Eaffles  will  take  care  of  one  or  two,  and  the 
rest  liave  fallen  to  my  lot.  They  will  probably  grow 
into  very  good  servants.  The  girls  will  puzzle  me 
most.  I  have  some  thought  of  baking  them  in  a  pie 
against  the  (bieen’s  birthday,  unless  I  shoidd  strike  out 
some  other  idea  in  the  meanwhile.  Upon  the  whole, 
this  present  from  the  Eajah  of  Balli  is  providential  for 
the  poor  children.  The  Eajah  has  sent  two  Vakeels,  or 
Ambassadors,  to  meet  me  here,  and  I  gave  their  Excel¬ 
lencies  audience  on  June  4.  They  are  young,  well¬ 
looking  men.  I  do  not  remember  having  seen  the 
same  costume  at  St.  James’s.  They  Avere  naked  doAvn 
to  the  middle ;  biit  the  garments,  Avheu  they  once  began, 
were  rich  enough.  I  have  one  slave  more  who  was 
given  me  in  a  present  from  the  Sidtan  of  Pontiana,  a 
great  chief  in  the  island  of  Borneo,  whom  I  am  likely 
enough  to  thank  in  person  on  my  way  to  Java.  This 
gentleman  is  Lord  Monboddo’s  geniiine  oran-outang, 
which  in  the  iNIalay  language  signifies  literally  wild 
man.  He  is  really  too  like  a.man — that  is  to  say,  a 
Malay  man.  His  features  and  the  Avhole  cast  of  his 


Mr.  60] 


‘  IIAKAYIT  ABDULLA.’ 


269 


face  are  identically  the  same,  for  iNIalays  are  all  exactly 
like  each  other.  Some  people  think  very  seriously 
that  the  oran-ontang  was  the  original  patriarch  and 
progenitor  of  the  whole  Malay  race,  and  there  is  cer¬ 
tainly  a  good  deal  to  he  said  on  both  sides.  It  is 
true  the  oran-ontang  has  one  manifest  advantage  over 
his  degenerate  posterity,  having  fonr  hands  instead  of 
two,  and  this  is  the  principal  difference.  My  Avild  man 
is  but  a  boy — indeed,  a  baby ;  but  he  is  much  larger 
than  any  monkey  I  ever  saw.  He  is  also  too  much 
civilised  to  deserve  the  name  of  wild.  I  saw  him  yes¬ 
terday  sitting  on  a  stool,  and  eating  his  rice  on  a  table 
like  a  Christian  gentleman.’ 

While  Lord  .'Minto  was  watching  the  gay  and 
moving  scene  from  the  Iningalow  on  the  hill,  it  was 
attracting  the  curious  gaze  of  the  natives  of  ^Malacca, 
who  had  never  before  assisted  at  pareille  fete,  and 
he  himself  was  more  closely  scanned  by  an  observant 
eye  than  he  was  at-  all  aware  of. 

A  most  entertaining  narrative  of  the  arrival  at 
Malacca  of  the  expedition,  consisting  of  ninety  sail, 
carrying  6,000  Kuropean  and  6,000  native  troops, 
forms  a  chapter  in  the  autobiography  of  a  IMalay, 
Abchdla  by  name,  Avhich  was  translated  by  the  well- 
known  vuiter  Mr.  .1.  T.  Thomson,  b  .K.fr.S.,  and 
published  about  six  years  ago.*  From  it  we  shall  ven¬ 
ture  to  (piote  a  few  passages  to  complete  the  narrative- 
contained  in  the  letters. 

'  Under  the  title  of  ‘  Hakayit  Abdulla.’ 


270 


LOED  MINTO  IN  INDIA. 


[1811 


Abdulla  was  only  fourteen  years  of  age  at  tire  time  ; 
yet,  in  his  description  of  their  camps,  he  is  said  to  have 
painted  the  Sepoys  to  the  life ;  and  in  the  few  lively 
touches  with  Avhich  he  puts  before  us  the  English 
officers,  and  the  Grovenior  Gleneral  himself,  we  are  able 
to  recognise  the  photographic  fidelity  of  his  sketches. 

‘  They  erected  their  tents  from  Lambongan  as  far 
as  Tanjong  Kling,  this  without  break,  each  with  their 
entrances.  And  amongst  these  were  various  races  of 
Hindoos  and  Mussulmans ;  and  I  saw  some  who  ate 
like  dogs,  to  wit,  they  licked  their  food  with  their 
tongues;  while  there  were  others  who,  on  being  seen 
eating,  would  throAV  the  food  away,  and  chase  you  as  if 
they  would  kill  you,  they  were  so  angry.  There  were 
some  who  only  half-heated  the  food,  and  ate  it  then,, 
covered  with  perspiration  as  if  bathing  in  it.  And 
when  they  had  eaten,  they  buried  the  rice  and  curry 
that  was  over  in  the  sand.  And  there  were  others  who 
tied  three  strands  of  thread  round  their  body  before 
they  ate,  nor  did  they  stop  eating  till  the  thread  had 
broken.  There  were  others  who  took  white  and  red 
earth  and  smeared  it  on  their  breasts,  with  three  stripes 
on  their  arms  and  brow ;  then  they  bowed  themselves 
in  front,  then  to  the  right  and  to  the  left,  then  to  the 
back,  then  off  they  ran  into  the  sea,  and  worshipped 
the  sun  for  some  time,  turning  their  faces  to  the  right 
and  left.  Then  they  came  ashore,  and  went  to  eat 
within  white  cloth  screens,  so  that  no  one  could  see 
them  at  their  meals.  But  if  persons  should  happen  to 
see  them,  they  would  cast  out  their  food,  and  break  the 


^T.  60] 


‘HAKAYIT  ABDULLA,’ 


271 


earthen  vessels  in  pieces,  haying  others  for  the 
next  time.  Others  there  were  who  could  eat  before 
people,  but  they  could  not  speak.  ...  I  saw  many 
foolish  customs.  .  .  .  How  many  forms  of  people  did 
I  then  not  see,  and  kinds  of  dresses  that  I  had  never 
in  my  life  seen  before !  And  it  was  to  be  perceived 
that  the  English  had  provided  their  leaders  with 
different  dresses:  some  had  tigers’  skins  for  coats, 
others  had  hats  covered  with  fowls’  feathers,  dyed  red, 
white,  or  black,  while  others  had  beasts’  skins  for  trou¬ 
sers  ;  there  were  others  who  had  clothes  spotted  like 
leopards.’ 

To  their  young  co-religionist — for  Abdulla  was  a 
IMussulman — the  ^Mahometan  Sepoys  from  Delhi  and 
Oude  wore  a  far  more  dignified  aspect  than  the  Hindoos 
with  their  strange  and  ‘foolish’  customs.  ‘These 
Sepoys  were  well  acquainted  with  the  Koran ;  amongst 
them  were  many  descendants  of  the  Arabs  of  the  race 
of  Syeds.  They  were  gracious,  manly,  and  courteous.’ 
‘  They  were  under  the  command  of  English  officers,  who 
drilled  f  hem  every  day.’  Here  follows  a  frait  as  charac- 
ferisfic  of  the  Englishmen  as  any  of  those  attributed 
to  the  men  under  their  command.  ‘And  when  they 
had  done  drilling  and  were  returning,  the  officers  did 
not  take  their  horses  through  the  gates,  but  leaped 
over  the  fence,  which  was  seven  cubits  high.*  The 
Malacca  people  came  in  hundreds  every  day  to  see 
this  feat,  and  the  officers  leaping  the  fence ;  loud  were 

'  The  Editor  informs  us  tliat  this  must  be  taken  as  Oriental 
hy^ierbole,  since  seven  cubits  would  be  ten  and  a  Italf  feet. 


272 


LOED  MINTO  IN  INDIA. 


[181 


they  in  their  cries  of  astonishment  at  seeing  the  skill 
of  the  horses — equal  as  it  was  to  that  of  mankind— in 
understanding  the  sound  of  the  trumpet.  Says  one, 
^‘This  is  not  men’s  bntywi’.s  work.’” 

When  at  last  came  the  ship  with  Lord  Minto  on 
hoard,  ‘  there  went  out  an  order  for  everyone  to  clean 
their  frontages  in  all  the  streets.  Then  thousands  of 
all  races  collected  at  the  sea-shore  to  have  a  sight  of 
him  and  his  dress,  his  name  being  so  great.  After  this 
a  great  noise  was  heard  of  the  regiments  coming  in 
full  force,  with  the  music  of  drums,  fifes,  and  other 
instruments.  .  .  .  And  the  multitude  in  Malacca  in¬ 
creased  so  greatly  that  there  was  no  kno\ving  who  they 
were,  but  that  they  were  of  the  human  race.  .  .  . 
At  the  time  of  his  lea\'ing  his  ship  the  cannon 
roared  like  thunder — the  sea  became  dark  with  smoke. 
And  when  I  had  seen  the  appearance  and  circumstance 
of  Lord  Minto,  I  was  much  moved ;  for  I  guessed  in 
my  mind  as  to  his  appearance,  position,  and  height, 
that  these  would  be  great,  and  his  dress  gorgeous.  .  .  . 
But  his  appearance  was  of  one  which  was  middle-aged, 
thin  in  body,  of  soft  manners  and  sweet  countenance, 
and  I  felt  that  he  could  not  carry  tiventy  cutties  (about 
thirty  pounds),  so  slow  were  his  motions.  His  coat  was 
black  cloth,  trousers  the  same,  nor  was  there  anything 
peculiar.  And  when  the  leading  men  desired  to  pay 
their  respects  they  remained  at  a  distance,  none  daring 
to  grasp  his  hand ;  but  they  took  off  their  hats  and 
bent  their  bodies.  .  .  .  When  he  landed  he  bowed  to 
the  right  and  to  the  left.  How  he  had  not  the  remotest 


JEt.  60] 


MALACCA. 


273 


appearance  of  pomposity  or  lofty-lieadedness ;  but  tliere 
was  real  modesty  and  kindly  expression.  .  .  .  Xow  as 
long  as  Lord  Minto  remained  in  ^Malacca  he  took  a 
round  in  his  carriage  every  evening,  one  day  visiting 
the  mosque,  another  the  t'hinese  Joss-house,  another 
the  Dutch  and  Portuguese  ('hurches ;  and  wherever  he 
was  met  by  rich,  poor,  or  low,  they  stopped  to  make 
their  bow,  which  he  returned  with  good-humour  and 
courtesy,  without  the  slightest  shadow  of  pomposity.’ 

Lord  Minto’s  visit  to  the  debtors’  prison  is  related 
with  much  sympathy  and  great  amplifications.  One 
fact  told  by  Al)dulla,  which  we  do  not  find  in  the  cor¬ 
respondence,  is  worthy  of  mention  ;  namely,  that  when 
the  cells  of  the  filthy  dungeon  were  destroyed,  a  new 
gaol  was  built  in  its  place  which  was  ‘  a  residence  free 
of  all  annoyances  but  one,  that  you  could  not  get  out 
of  it.’ 

We  learn  from  the  editor  of  Abdulla’s  autobiography 
that,  ‘as  a  memento  of  the  deliverance  of  the  prisoners, 
and  of  other  high-minded  acts  at  Malacca,  Lord  Minto’s 
portrait  was  procured  and  hung  up  in  the  resident 
magistrate’s  office,  where  he  is  represented  as  breaking 
the  shackles  of  cruelty.  When  I  saw  it  in  1848  1 
viewed  it  with  great  curiosity.  The  climate  had  so 
destroyed  the  colours  that  it  might  have  served  for  a 
black  Madonna.’ 

‘  H.M.S.  “  Modeste,”  off  Java  :  ended  August  3,  181 1. 

‘  The  fleet  having  at  length  assembled  at  ^Malacca 
it  was  despatched  towards  its  destination  in  a  number 

T 


274 


LORD  MINTO  IN  INDIA. 


[1811 


of  small  divisions,  which  sailed  successively,  each  under 
charge  of  a  frigate,  and  attended  also  by  sloops  of  war  or 
Company’s  cruizers.  The  “Modeste  ”  was  not  attached 
to  any  division,  and,  being  sure  of  overtaking  the 
earliest  and  swiftest,  we  remained  at  anchor  till  the 
whole  had  departed.  The  fleet  consisted  of  81  sail 
of  all  descriptions,  and  it  was  despatched  in  many 
divisions  because  we  had  several  narrow  straits  and 
difficult  passes  before  us,  which  must  have  occasioned 
confusion,  and  probably  accident  and  loss,  if  so  large  a 
body  of  shipping  had  kept  together.  This  voyage  is 
made  interesting  by  the  very  positive  opinions  which 
Admiral  Drury  had  given  himself,  and  had  managed 
to  obtain  a  countenance  to  from  several  quarters  of 
authority  on  such  questions,  that  it  was  absolutely 
impracticable  to  make  a  passage  to  Java  with  a  fleet  of 
transports,  if  it  should  sail  from  Madras  later  than 
March  1 .  It  was  with  this  opinion  that  I  had  to  con¬ 
tend,  pushing  forward  the  expedition  in  the  present 
season,  although  it  could  not  take  its  departure  so  soon 
as  the  day  fixed  by  the  Admiral,  by  six  weeks  accord¬ 
ing  to  my  expectations,  and,  as  it  has  proved  on  trial, 
by  two  months.  The  result  has  furnished  another 
testimony  in  favour  of  the  virtue  called  obstinacy, 
which  is  entitled  by  success  to  the  more  polite  name 
of  firmness.  The  difficulty  was  this.  As  soon  as  what 
is  called  the  south-east  monsoon  in  the  eastern  seas 
sets  in,  the  wind  blows  hard  and  pretty  steadily  from 
the  east  along  the  channel  between  the  north  of  Java 
and  the  south  of  Borneo ;  it  blows  to  the  north-west 


JiT.  CO] 


STRAITS  OF  MALACCA. 


275 


along  the  east  coast  of  Sumatra,  and  lietween  that 
coast  and  the  Malay  Peninsula ;  it  blows  to  the  north 
between  the  west  coast  of  Romeo  and  the  straits  of 
Malacca.  So  that,  starting  from  Malacca,  the  wind  was 
directly  contrary  in  every  part  of  the  course  to  the 
northern  coast  of  Java.  Besides  this  difficulty  there  is 
a  current  in  the  same  direction  as  the  wind  through¬ 
out.  To  carry  a  great  fleet  of  transports,  not  famous 
in  general  for  working  to  windward,  a  long  voyage 
directly  against  wind  and  current,  did  not  appear  pro¬ 
mising.  It  was  known,  however,  that  with  a  little 
patience  a  fleet  can  at  that  season  make  a  passage 
down  the  Straits  of  iNIalacca  by  any  one  of  the  several 
passages  which  lead  to  the  eastward.  This  is  done  by 
the  help  of  scpialls  which  generally  blow  from  the 
northward  ;  by  occasional  shifts  of  wind  ;  and  by  altera¬ 
tions  of  tide  or  current  which  afford  a  favourable  start 
to  the  eastward.  It  was  ascertained  by  investigation, 
eiupiiry,  and  actual  sm:vey  and  trial  recently  made  for 
the  present  occasion,  that  after  making  the  west  coast 
of  Romeo,  land  winds  at  night,  and  the  sea  breeze 
during  part  of  the  day,  together  with  a  slackening  of 
the  current,  and  even  a  fa\ourable  current  during 
particular  periods  of  the  tide,  will  enable  ships  to  make 
a  passage  along  the  coast  to  the  southward  without 
much  delay ;  and  from  the  south-west  point  of  Romeo, 
having  the  wind  at  east,  you  may  stand  at  least  as  high 
as  south  to  Java,  and  make  that  island  as  far  to  the 
east  as  Samarang — which  is  more  than  we  desire.  The 
plan  was  therefore  settled  upon  this  foundation.  The 


276  LORD  MINTO  IN  INDIA.  [l811 

fil'st  object  was  to  make  the  west  coast  of  Borneo  as 
much  to  the  southward  as  Ave  could.  ItAvas  determined 
to  go  through  the  Straits  of  Singapore  in  pi'eference 
to  any  of  the  more  southerly  issues  from  the  Straits 
of  Malacca,  partly  because  the  A¥ind  Avas  rather  more 
faA'ourable,  and  partly  because  it  is  the  common  way 
to  China  and  better  known  to  the  masters  of  ships 
under  couA^oy.  The  “  Modeste  ”  sailed  from  Malacca 
on  June  18.  We  soon  passed  a  great  part  of  the  fleet, 
and  left  them  in  the  Straits  of  Singapore,  Avhen  Ave  got 
into  the  open  channel  between  those  Straits  and  Borneo. 
The  navigation  so  far  is  beautiful  in  the  highest  degree. 
We  were  always  very  near  the  Malay  coast,  Avhich  is  richly 
furnished  Avith  islands  of  many  patterns,  and  were  often 
sailing  in  archipelagos  of  them,  so  close  and  thick  round 
us  that  Ave  could  not  ahvays  see  the  Avay  out,  and  at 
such  moderate  distances  from  the  opposite  shores  as 
to  alloAv  us  the  full  benefit  of  Avood,  mountain,  and  all 
the  shifting  lines  of  land  and  water  Avhich  make  that 
sort  of  scenery  interesting  and  picturesque  to  those 
passing  quickly  through  it.  We  cleared  the  Straits  on 
June  20,  at  sunset,  leaving  a  great  part  of  the  fleet 
at  anchor  behind  us,  and  stood  across  toAvards  Borneo. 
We  made  that  island  off  Sambas,  a  little  to  the  north 
of  Pontiana.  Here  Ave  came  up  Avith  a  division  under 
the  command  of  Captain  Cole,  Avhich  had  sailed  from 
Malacca  some  time  before  us,  and  which  was  preceded 
by  another  under  Captain  Edgell  not  yet  in  sight. 
We  soon,  hoAvever,  came  up  Avith  it,  and  had  then  the 
lead  of  all.  On  the  29th  anchored  close  to  the  island 


jEt.  go] 


PANAMBANGAN. 


277 


of  Panambangan,  which  was  the  first  rendezvous  from 
Malacca. 

‘  The  different  divisions  of  the  fleet  came  up  gradu¬ 
ally  and  slowly,  but  we  saw  them  arrive  with  great 
satisfaction,  as  the  possibility  of  working  to  the  south¬ 
ward  was  thereby  completely  established,  and  our  pas¬ 
sage  to  Java  appeared  to  be  secured.  The  “IModeste” 
remained  at  this  anchorage  from  June  29  to  July  6,  and 
it  was  the  more  fortunate  that  the  situation  was  un¬ 
commonly  pretty.  The  island  is  five  or  six  miles  long 
and  somewhat  less  across.  It  rises  into  three  or  four 
hills  of  different  shapes,  and  of  considerable  height, 
covered  as  usual  with  wood  of  various  sorts  and  dimen¬ 
sions.  There  are  several  snug  bays,  with  two  of  which 
we  wei’e  principally  concerned.  In  each  of  these  there 
is  a  waving  beach  of  Avhite  sand,  about  fifty  or  sixty 
paces  wide  from  the  sea  to  the  wood,  and  a  nice  stream 
of  fresh  water  running  into  the  sea.  The  scenery  all 
round  is  beautiful,  and  while  we  were  there  ani¬ 
mated  by  tents  and  watering  parties,  boats  and  their 
crews,  carpenters  and  their  gangs  felling  trees  for  spars 
and  planks,  washermen,  smith’s  forges.  Sepoys  bathing 
and  cooking — in  short,  a  most  gay  and  picturesque 
scene.  The  island  is  uninhabited  by  man,  and  nothing 
more  formidable  was  seen  of  the  brute  population  than 
wild  boars  ;  there  are  deer,  however,  and  some  of  the 
small  kind  called  mouse  deer,  really  not  so  large  as  a 
hare. 

‘  I  went  on  shore  once,  to  see  (ieorge  and  Captain 


278 


LOKD  MINTO  IN  INDIA. 


[1811 


Edgell’s  works.  They  constructed  dams  across  the 
stream  of  fresh  water,  to  raise  the  surface  higher  than 
the  tide  at  high  water.  The  pond  head  was  carried 
down  every  shower  that  fell,  which  were  not  a  few,  but 
they  renewed  the  work  next  morning  indefatigably, 
having  plenty  of  hands ;  and  in  fact  their  labours 
answered  the  purpose,  and  a  fidl  stock  of  excellent  water 
was  obtained.  The  Sepoys  are  particidarly  happy  on 
these  short  visits  to  the  land.  Their  religion  makes  it 
difficult  to  supply  them  with  food  at  all  on  board,  and 
it  is  always  attended  with  inconvenience  and  privations 
of  various  sorts,  the  whole  heightened  by  uneasy  scruples 
by  way  of  spice.  When  they  get  on  shore,  each  man 
cooks  his  own  meal  according  to  his  taste  and  pre¬ 
judices,  and  they  bathe  comfortably  both  to  their  sldns 
and  consciences.  The  Avhole  scene  of  black  and  white 
men,  of  trades  and  occupations,  with  the  sort  of  spirit, 
energy,  and  cheerfulness  which  belongs  to  British  sea¬ 
men,  made  this  Panambangan  beach  a  most  lively  and 
agreeable  spot. 

‘  From  Malacca  the  “  Modeste  ”  was  accompanied  by 
the  schooner  “  hlinto,”  a  vessel  attached  to  me,  and  con¬ 
taining  Dr.  Leyden  Avith  a  number  of  Malay  moonshees 
or  interpreters  and  writers  of  that  learned  language.  She 
is  commanded  by  Captain  Glreig,  a  remarkably  intelH- 
gent  country  ship-master,  who  is  perfectly  at  home  in 
the  eastern  seas.  He  has  already  been  of  the  greatest 
use,  both  by  missions  to  some  islands  adjacent  to  Java; 
and  more  particularly  by  having  pointed  out  the  passage 
which  Ave  are  now  making  to  .Java,  and  ascertained  its 


Mt.  60] 


PANAMBANGAN. 


279 


practicability  by  actual  survey  himself.  While  thus 
engaged  he  was  attacked  by  a  very  strong  Pirate  Prow, 
whom  he  beat  off  with  difficulty  and  with  the  loss  of 
several  killed  and  a  greater  number  wounded.  .  .  . 
Greig  is  a  plain,  modest,  unassuming  Fife-man,  with 
excellent  natural  parts  and  character,  such  as  “  Caly- 
donia,  altrix  terra  exuberaiitium  virum,’  so  often  sends 
from  her  lower  ranks  to  all  the  quarters  of  the  globe. 
Greig  is  ennobled,  however,  by  another  exuberant  member 
of  his  family,  who  sent  home  honour  and  reputation  to 
his  stock  from  Russia  and  the  Archipelago, — Admiral 
Greig  himself,  who  was  a  near  relation  of  our  Greig  of 
the  “  IMinto  ”  schooner.  .  .  . 

‘ .  .  .  I  return  to  Panambangan,  where  our  gay  fleet 
encampments  on  shore,  and  all  the  occupations  which 
this  halt  afforded,  would  make  a  mighty  good  engraGng 
to  illustrate  this  chapter  of  my  journal  when  it  is 
published,  as  it  will  be  by  my  executors,  in  quarto, 
price  ten  guineas. 

‘  You  must  know,  fresh  fish  is  a  great  treat  at  sea, 
and  with  this  luxury  we  solaced  ourselves  and  the  crew. 
There  were  oysters  also,  but  none  fell  to  my  share  ;  but 
do  not  imagine  our  pleasures  were  confined  to  the 
table ;  for  we  gratified  our  higher  tastes  and  improved 
our  minds  and  morals  at  the  Theatre.  A  play  has 
been  performed  every  Saturday  evening  by  His  Majesty’s 
servants  on  board  His  Majesty’s  Ship  “  Modeste,”  and 
when  the  fleet  was  collected  at  Panambangan  the 
house  was  crowded  with  rank  and  fashion.  I  omit 
beauty,  because  the  manager  admits  no  female  either 


•280 


LOED  MINTO  IN  INDIA. 


[1811 


before  or  behind  the  curtain ;  so  that  we  enjoy  the 
moral  entertainment  of  stage  plays  in  all  its  purity. 
T  was  never  near  so  well  amused  at  any  other  perform¬ 
ance  of  amateurs.  It  is  really  surprising  to  observe 
the  propriety  with  which  these  rough,  uninstructed, 
unassisted  sailors  represent  all  the  varieties  of  character 
which  are  found  in  comedy,  and,  amongst  the  rest, 
young,  accomplished,  and  generally  sentimental  ladies 
of  quality;  rendering  vdth  perfect  justness  all  that 
concerns  nature,  failing  only  in  what  is  artificial  and 
arbitrary,  as  in  the  extraordinary  work  they  make  of 
what  appears  to  us  very  ordinary  words  of  the  English 
language.  We  now  hear  exqtiisitive  for  exquisite, 
etiquity  for  etiquette,  and  axe  for  ask,  with  as  little 
prejudice  to  the  play  or  the  performer  as  a  Scotch 
vowel  or  phrase  is  heard  in  the  House  of  Commons  from 
an  eloquent  member  for  Scotland.  .  .  . 

‘  From  Panambangan  anchorage  we  were  to  pass 
lietween  that  island  and  an  adjacent  one  to  the  east¬ 
ward  in  order  to  make  the  west  coast  of  Borneo.  But 
no  part  of  this  track  had  been  examined.  Gleorge  ac¬ 
cordingly  sent  Captain  Glreig  with  the  “Minto”  schooner 
to  perform  that  service,  and  he  made  a  perfectly  satis¬ 
factory  report  before  Commodore  Broughton  had  arrived 
at  Panambangan  with  the  bulk  of  the  fleet. 

‘  Commodore  Broughton,’  who  is  the  most  cautious 
navigator  that  ever  wore  a  blue  coat,  was  not  satisfied 

*  Commodore  Broughton  had  taken  the  command  of  the  naval 
force  on  the  death  of  Admiral  Drury,  which  occurred  before  the 
expedition  left  Madras. 


JEt,  60] 


OFF  FORNEO. 


281 


to  abide  by  (ireig's  report,  but  ordered  the  “Modeste’^ 
to  go  ahead  and  reconnoitre  the  whole  passage  to  the 
Kendezvons,  thinking  very  properly  that  I  had  better 
be  drowned  than  he.  As  I  was  entirely  of  the  same 
opinion  I  accepted  the  service  very  thankfidly.  In 
reality  I  knew  that  George  was  much  fitter  to  perform 
this  duty  than  any  other  officer  in  the  fleet,  and  I 
thought  it  would  be  amusing  to  myself. 

‘ .  .  .  We  made  the  coast  of  Borneo  as  far  to  the 
north  as  we  coidd,  and  then  zigzagged  our  way  along 
the  shore  in  five  or  six  fathoms  of  water  to  the  point 
proposed. 

‘ .  .  .  The  C'omniodore  had  also  ordered  George  to 
survey  the  neighbourhood  of  I’ulo  Mancap,  which  is 
situated  beyond  the  rendezvous,  and  is  surrounded  with 
shoals.  This  duty  we  also  performed,  returning  to  the 
Eendezvous  before  the  Commodore  and  fleet  reached 
it. 

‘  We  had  fallen  in  with  a  fleet  of  nine  Bnggese  Brows ' 
when  we  went  out  towards  Bulo  IMancap,  and  from 
them  George  was  informed  of  a  shoal  which  lay  some¬ 
what  in  the  course  to  Java.  George,  in  commnnicating 
the  rest  of  his  information  to  the  Commodore,  men¬ 
tioned  this  shoal.  Ilpon  this  he  ordered  the  “  INIodeste  ” 
to  explore  it,  whereupon  we  sailed  again,  but  returned 
the  second  day  without  having  found  it.  Immediately 
after,  accounts  were  received  that  three  French  frigates, 
with  1,000  troops,  had  got  into  .Java,  and  again  the 

‘  Another  letter  says,  ‘  l’>u"gese,  jn’opeiiy  Bouginese,  I’rows, 
belonging  to  the  Rajah  of  Bontiana.' 


282 


LOED  MINTO  IN  INDIA. 


[1811 


Commodore  stood  my  frieud  imd  gave  me  the  post  of 
honour,  which  I  accepted  with  I’eal  pleasure.  He 
ordered  the  “  Modeste”  immediately  to  Java.  We. sailed 
that  night  and  fell  in  with  the  very  shoal,  which  we 
had  missed  by  one  mile  of  longitude  a  couple  of  days 
before.  But  as  the  Commodore  would  not  allow  us 
any  small  vessel  to  send  back  with  intelligence,  if  we 
should  meet  with  any,  we  could  not  convey  notice  to  the 
fleet  of  this  danger.  However,  there  is  little  risk,  for  it 
lies  further  to  windward  than  they  can  well  keep  up  to. 

In  less  than  forty-eight  hours  from  Eendezvous  Island 
we  were  near  enough  Java  to  have  seen  the  land  if  it 
had  been  daylight.  On  the  next  morning,  July  25,  we 
got  a  sight  of  the  Land  of  Promise.’ 

That  afternoon  Lord  INIinto  received  from  Captain 
Sayer  of  the  ‘  Leda,’  the  intelligence  that  Rear-Admiral 
Stopford,  on  learning  the  death  of  Admiral  Drury,  had  s 
determined  to  jjroceed  at  once  to  Java,  and  was  actu-  j 

ally  within  a  feAV  days’  sail  of  Java.'  ‘  The  little  Com-  ] 

modore’s  brief  hour  of  authority  came  to  an  end  to  the  j 
great  relief  of  all  in  the  fleet  and  army.  There  coidd 

*  Another  piece  of  intelligence  derived  from  Caijtain  Sayer  is 
recorded  thus  :  ‘  He  hrougiit  the  news  of  the  Enipresst  liariiui  an  heir. 

The  Empress  Maria  Louisa,  daughter  of  the  Emperor  of  Austria, 
granddaughter  of  Maria  Theresa,  niece  of  tlie  Queen  of  Naples,  wife 
of  Bonaparte  !  !  !  ’  It  was  no  doubt  strange  news  to  tJie  late  Envoy 
Extraordinary  to  the  Court  of  Vienna,  and  it  was  scarcely  less 
strange  that  it  should  have  reached  him  in  a  remote  island  in  the 
Java  Sea,  on  his  way  to  wrest  an  important  conquest  from  the  grasp 
of  Bonaparte.  ‘It  seems  to  me,’ wrote  Lndy  Malmesbury,  ‘that 
while  you  have  taken  to  make  conquests,  Bonaparte  is  becoming 
quite  a  family  man.’ 


Mt.  60] 


OFF  JAVA. 


283 


not  be  a  man  less  fit  for  the  important  situation  into 
which  chance  had  brought  him. 

‘  Wliat  information  we  have  is  all  favourable  to  our 
views,  and  I  do  flatter  myself  that  my  last  military 
labour  will  terminate  as  successfully  as  the  former  have 
done. 

‘  Having  met  a  prize  vessel,  very  lately  from  Grrissy 
in  the  east  of  Java,  we  have  learnt  that  the  new 
Governor  General  Janssens,  (formerly  Governor  of  the 
Cape)  arrived  in  one  of  the  French  frigates,  and  that 
Marshal  D’Aendels,  whom  he  has  superseded,  has  since 
departed  in  the  same  frigate.  The  other  two  frigates 
are  blocked  up  iu  Sourabaya.  We  have  been  long  ex¬ 
pected  in  .Java,  and  the  disposition  of  all  tribes  and 
nations,  inchiding  the  Dutch,  is  entirely  favourable  to 
the  establishment  of  our  Government. 

‘  Having  now  brought  these  annals  do^vn  to  the 
present  hour,  dinner-time,  July  27,  cruising  till  our 
expedition  comes  on,  I  shall  conclude  with  the  event 
whenever  it  happens,  and  ojien  a  new  number  for  our 
exploits  on  shore. 

‘  AuguM  3. — We  cruised  to  the  eastward,  and 
George  sent  his  boats  in  the  night  to  a  small  place, 
called  Taggul,  to  cut  out  some  Prows  of  which  he  had 
intelligence,  lading  rice  for  Hatavia  by  the  order  of  the 
Dutch  Government.  Instead  of  that  sort  of  (juiet 
craft,  the  boats  fell  in  with  four  strong  gun-boats,  each 
carrying  thirty-two  pounders  and  full  of  men.  Xot 
being  equipjieil  for  that  sort  of  contest  our  boats  re¬ 
turned  without  attacking.  We  returned  to  the  Rendcz- 


284 


LOKD  MINTO  IN  INDIA. 


[1811 


vous,  and  the  fleet  not  having  yet  arrived,  we  stretched 
out  again  to  the  eastward,  and  the  boats  of  the 
“Modeste”and  “  Leda”  went  in  again  to  Taggul  prepared 
to  carry  the  gun-boats.  But  this  time  these  warriors 
had  retired  and  sailed  towards  Batavia ;  so  that  onr  boats 
only  brought  off  a  small  brig  and  two  Prows  laden  with 
rice  for  Batavia. 

‘  On  returning  to  the  Rendezvous,  we  found  yester¬ 
day  morning,  at  daybreak,  a  ship  looking  out  for  us  to 
say  the  expedition  had  arrived  on  July  30,  and  had 
sailed  towards  Batavia  early  that  morning.  We  soon 
came  up  mth  them,  and  are  now  approaching  the  place 
of  disembarkation  which  will  take  place  this  morning 
or  at  daybreak  to-morrow. — God  bless  you.’ 

The  expedition  arrived  on  July  30,  and  on  August 
4  the  disembarkation  was  effected  at  a  small  town 
called  Chillinching  in  Batavia  Bay. 

‘  Chillinching,  Java:  August  6,  1811. 

‘  The  disembarkation  took  place  without  any  kind 
of  opposition.  All  the  troops,  a  few  field-pieces,  and 
part  of  the  stores  were  landed  that  evening  and  in 
the  course  of  the  night.  The  horses,  ordnance,  and 
additional  stores  were  put  on  shore  next  day.  .  .  . 
This  village  is  principally  Chinese.  They  made  us 
welcome,  and  brought  their  articles  out  for  sale  with 
very  flattering  confidence.  This  was  justified  by  the 
exemplary  behaviour  of  the  troops,  who  paid  their  way 
and  did  not  even  kiss  an  old  woman  without  her  con¬ 
sent.  There  has  been  but  one  drunken  man  in  two 
days. 


Mt.  60] 


JAVA. 


285 


‘  Aiigust  7.  As  everytliing  has  been  quiet,  and 
the  army  remains  at  Ghillinching,  where  the  Gieneral  ‘ 
occupies  the  only  gentleman’s  house,  I  have  continued 
on  the  “  Modeste,”  and  go  on  shore  when  I  like.  Yester¬ 
day  I  took  a  ride  with  the  General  to  the  advanced  post, 
about  four  miles,  and  then  returned  to  the  “  Modeste.” 
The  country  is  like  Chinese  paper  on  a  wall.  Canals, 
tanks,  and  narrow  ways  between  ;  here  and  there  a  little 
dry  ground,  and  these  spaces  are  in  a  state  of  high  cul¬ 
tivation.  Every  now  and  then  we  found  a  gentleman’s 
house  Avith  no  appearance  of  splendour,  but  always 
marked  by  the  characteristic  neatness  of  the  Dutch. 
Our  road  ran  westward  parallel  to  the  sea ;  the  right 
of  the  line  of  the  troops  on  the  sea,  the  left  inland. 
I  had  an  opportunity  of  observing  Avhat  may  be  deemed, 
I  believe,  a  pretty  nearly  unexampled  degree  of  disci¬ 
pline  in  the  troops.  They  do  not  use  tents,  and  have 
as  yet  had  only  their  salt  provisions.  They  are  posted 
in  gardens  and  orchards  with  cottages  and  houses  of  a 
better  description,  surrounded  Avith  poultry,  fruit,  and 
vegetables.  Xo  fresh  beef  or  pork  Avas  to  be  procured, 
the  cattle  and  pigs  having  been  very  generally  removed 
by  order  of  Government.  In  these  circumstances  Ave 
saAv  the  peasants  living  as  quietly  in  tlieir  OAvn  houses, 
and  carrying  on  their  usual  occupations  Avith  as  little 
annoyance,  apprehension,  or  OA^en  notice  of  an  invading 
army  in  the  midst  of  them,  as  if  Ave  Avere  all  their  nc'ar 
relations  on  a  visit.  You  see  the  trees  laden  Avitli 
cocoa-nuts  and  plantains,  acres  of  onions,  cabbage,  and 
'  Sir  Samuel  Auchmuty. 


28G 


LOED  MINTO  IN  INDIA. 


[1811 


many  tempting  things,  not  one  taken,  nor  the  slightest 
ofience  given  to  a  single  inhabitant.  Not  a  chick  or  a 
hen  made  free  with,  money  offered  and  given  in  every 
instance  for  what  the  people  are  willing  to  spare.  .  .  . 
The  gentlemen’s  houses  and  other  habitations  of  a 
middling  land  being  deserted,  with  some  old  slave  or 
servant  left  behind  to  look  after  them,  the  officers  have 
astonished  these  guai’dians  by  refusing  to  occupy  the 
houses  with  clean  beds  and  neat  furniture,  and  sleeping 
sometimes  in  the  verandah,  sometimes  in  a  separate 
pavilion,  and  never  in  the  house ;  and  the  cocks  are 
seen  fighting,  the  hens  and  chickens  pecking  about,  and 
the  ducks  gobbling  and  dabbling,  just  as  if  they  were 
our  own  fellow-subjects.  I  observed  yesterday  to  the 
General,  as  we  were  passing  the  house  of  the  Dutch 
Paymaster  General,  that  a  battle  which  we  saw  between 
two  of  his  cocks  was  the  only  thing  like  war  that  I 
could  perceive  in  our  invasion. 

‘  August  9.  The  advance  of  the  army  having 
moied  forward  to  a  place  about  three  miles  from 
Batavia,  the  General  sent  a  summons  to  the  city  which 
was  immediately  answered  by  a  surrender  at  discretion. 
The  enemy,  in  order  to  concentrate  their  force  at  a  place 
called  Cornelis,  had  withdrawn  their  troops  on  the  6th, 
and  set  fire  to  some  public  stores  and  to  the  citadel ;  the 
town  was  therefore  glad  of  our  protection  against  a 
disposition  to  plunder  and  disorder  manifested  by  the 
slaves  and  lower  class  of  Malays.  We  were  thus  in 
possession  of  the  metropolis  of  the  Dutch  East  Indian 


JEt.  60J 


BATAVIA. 


287 


Empire  the  fourth  day  after  our  landing.  Not  a  gentle¬ 
man,  not  a  person  of  any  note  was  left  in  the  city.  The 
Dutch,  that  is,  the  French  Governor,  had  required  them 
under  pain  of  death  to  quit  their  houses  and  repair  to 
the  head-quarters  of  the  army,  where  they  are  narrowly 
watched.  They  have  left  their  houses,  however,  richly 
furnished,  their  wives,  children,  and  slaves  to  the  safe¬ 
guard  of  the  invaders’  generosity  ;  and  we  are  all  Scipios. 
The  deserted  women  were  in  terror,  not  of  us  but  of  their 
own  slaves,  who  have  a  slavish  trick  of  using  the  oppor¬ 
tunity  of  public  disorder  to  gratify  their  private  pas¬ 
sions  by  rising  on  the  defenceless  whites  and  murdering 
those  they  rob.  .  .  .  Everything  p(.)rtable  of  public 
property  had  been  removed  from  the  town,  but  much 
valuable  public  property  was  consumed,  and  much 
plundered.  In  some  streets  people  walked  during  the 
first  days  of  our  occupation  over  the  shoes  in  sugar, 
coffee,  spices,  and  rice.  Ihit  much  has  been  preserved. 
In  that  great  city  were  fonnd  only  six  horses  (ponies) 
and  not  one  head  of  cattle. 

‘  I  sent  a  letter  yesterday  morning  to  General 
Janssens,  the  Governor  General,  containing  a  summons, 
and  distributed  at  the  same  time  a  sort  of  manifesto 
to  the  Dutch  inhabitants  to  remo\  e  their  apprehensions 
and  invite  their  co-operation.  The  summons  was  re¬ 
fused,  and  I  received  the  answer  that  night. 

‘  August  12.  I  went  on  shore  on  the  9th  about 
noon  to  speak  to  the  General.  Admiral  Stopford  had 
joined  the  fleet  that  morning,  and  landed  for  the  pur¬ 
pose  of  visiting  the  General  and  myself. 


*288 


LORI)  MINTO  IN  INDIA. 


[1811 


‘  Captain  Eohison,  my  aide-de-camp,  who  carried  my 
summons  to  Greneral  Janssens  found  him  at  Cornelis,  a 
strong  post  about  six  miles  from  Batavia.  He  went  to 
Weltevreeden,  halfway,  Avithout  molestation  ;  but  Avas 
blinded  the  rest  of  the  road.  As  far  as  Weltevreeden 
he  saw  that  there  Avas  no  obstacle  to  the  advance  of 
troops ;  from  thence  to  Cornelis  he  perceived  by  the 
motion  of  the  carriage  that  the  road  Avas  smooth  and 
the  bridges,  if  any,  Avere  standing.  Upon  this  rejiort, 
confirmed  by  their  information,  the  Greneral  determined 
to  push  on  and  take  post  at  Weltevreeden.  Welte¬ 
vreeden  is  an  immense  and  magnificent  military  can¬ 
tonment,  but  not  fortified.  Cornelis  is  a  military  post 
of  great  strength,  on  Avhich  all  the  art  of  French 
engineering  has  been  long  bestoAved.  It  is  considered 
as  the  citadel  of  Java,  in  Avhich  the  colony  itself  is  to 
be  defended.  The  advance  of  the  army  moved  foi’Avard 
accordingly  on  August  10,  and  Avere  followed  by  other 
troops. 

‘  They  met  no  opposition  till  they  had  passed  through 
the  cantonments  of  Weltevreeden,  but  immediately 
afterAvards  a,  very  slrarp  action  commenced.  It  lay 
principally  betAveen  the  riflemen  and  the  light  troops 
in  the  jungle  on  each  side  of  the  road,  and  in  this  con¬ 
test  the  superiority  of  our  men  was  immediately  decisive, 
driving  the  enemy  from  the  woods  Avith  great  loss. 
Another  principal  feature  of  the  day  Avas  the  capture, 
sword  in  hand,  of  four  of  the  enemy’s  field-pieces,  Avhich 
had  been  planted  in  the  road  behind  an  abbatis.  They 
Avere  deserted  by  the  men,  but  Avell  defended  by  an 


jEt.  60] 


JAVA. 


289 


officer  or  two  and  a  non-comnaissioned  officer  who  were 
cut  down  at  fheirgun.s.  Our  troops  suffered  principally 
on  this  road  from  grape  and  musketry  under  cover  of 
the  ahbatis;  but  they  drove  the  enemy  in  such  confu¬ 
sion  before  them  that  tVdonel  Gillespie  was  prevented 
only  by  repeated  orders  from  the  General,  from  dashing 
at  once  into  the  place  along  with  them.  Our  troops 
halted,  and  took  post  under  the  guns  of  Cornells.  This 
was  a  most  important  and  most  honourable  success. 
It  gave  us  every  imaginable  accommodation  for  the  army 
in  the  barracks  and  cantonments  of  Weltevreeden,  great 
stores  and  magazines,  some  hundred  pieces  of  artillery, 
mostly  brass,  of  all  calibres,  horses,  labourers,  and  an 
easy  conveyance  of  every  article  by  water. 

‘ .  .  .  .  The  loss  of  the  enemy  Avas  great,  ours  in¬ 
considerable.  Taylor,  who  is  attached  to  Gillesine,  dis¬ 
tinguished  himself  on  this  maiden  occasion  bv  the 
greatest  activity,  courage,  coolness,  and  judgment. 

‘  August  15.  I  continued  on  I)oard  the  “  Modeste  ” 
till  the  14th,  when  I  landed  privately,  and  settled,  Avith 
all  my  friends,  in  a  good  spacious  house  near  the  can¬ 
tonments  of  Weltevreeden.  Cornells  is  found  too  strong 
to  be  carried  without  heavy  artillery.  The  battering 
train  is  therefore  landing  from  the  transports,  and 
nothing  material  has  happened  since  the  10th.  The 
humanity  of  the  men  to  their  Avounded  ])risoners  on 
that  day  Avas  admirable.  No  distinction  of  colour  on 
that  occasion.  Our  soldiers  picked  uj)  English,  Dutch, 
and  Malay,  Avithout  distinction,  in  the  jungle  and  carri(‘d 
them  with  great  labour  to  the  hospital.  The  INlalays 

IT 


290 


LOED  MINTO  IN  INDIA. 


[1811 


and  other  native  troops  are  all  in  amazement,  having 
been  made  to  believe  that  we  are  savages,  and  should 
treat  them  with  all  sorts  of  barbarities  if  they  fell  into 
our  hands. 

Batavia  shines  in  the  national  neatness  of  the  Dutch. 
The  streets  wide,  not  paved,  hut  the  roads  formed  of 
very  fine  gravel,  and  excellent.  From  the  town  the 
roads  run  along  canals,  or  streams  of  water,  in  some 
places  quick  and  almost  lively,  mostly,  however,  slow, 
dull,  and  always  yellow.  On  the  other  side  of  the  road 
there  is  a  succession  of  garden  houses  ;  the  garden  gate 
and  rail  close  to  the  road ;  the  houses  more  or  less 
retired,  and  standing  each  in  an  open  space  of  its  own. 
They  are  not  remarkable  for  show  and  cheerfulness,  and 
the  architecture  is  not  Vitruvian  ;  but  they  indicate  the 
neighbourhood  of  a  great  capital,  and  they  convey  a 
strong  idea  of  opulence  and  luxury.  The  houses, 
indeed,  are  to  be  admired  for  space,  loftiness  of  rooms, 
and  fitness  for  a  warm  climate.  In  the  house  that  I 
inhabit  there  is  a  high  open  gallery  of  100  feet  by  32. 
My  bedroom  is  immediately  over  it,  and  of  the  same 
dimensions.  A  great  hall  crosses  from  the  gallery  to 
the  front,  so  that  the  winds  blow  in  and  through  from 
four  quarters. 

‘  August  23.  The  batteries  have  been  very  tedious, 
and  there  does  appear  to  have  been  a  good  portion  of 
fiddle-de-dee  twaddlification  in  the  departments  con¬ 
nected  with  our  works. 

‘  August  28.  Nevertheless,  the  enemy’s  impregnable 


Mt.  60] 


JAVA. 


291 


works  were  stormed  at  daybreak  on  August  26 — a  new 
day  in  our  military  calendar.  The  place  was  most 
formidable  in  strength,  and  it  really  seems  miraculous 
that  mortal  men  could  live  in  such  a  fire  of  round,  grape, 
shells,  and  musketry  long  enough  to  pass  deep  trenches 
defended  by  pointed  palissades  inclining  from  the  inner 
edge  of  the  ditch  outwards,  force  their  way  into  redoubt 
after  redoubt,  till  they  were  in  possession  of  all  the 
numerous  works,  which  extend  at  least  a  mile.  .  .  . 
The  slaughter  was  dreadful,  both  during  the  attack 
and  in  the  pursuit,  when  the  total  destruction  of  the 
enemy’s  army  was  prevented  only  by  their  surrender¬ 
ing  prisoners,  or  dispersing  and  finally  deserting  the 
French.  We  have  upwards  of  5,000  prisoners,  including 
all  the  Europeans  left  alive.  General  Janssens  escaped 
captiure  most  narrowly,  by  the  most  precipitate  flight, 
leaving  all  his  official  papers  behind  him.  General 
Jumelle,  a  Frenchman  sent  out  to  watch  and  succeed 
Janssens,  was  glad  to  get  into  a  bog  up  to  his  chin  till 
the  heat  of  the  pursuit  was  over,  and  then  crept  out 
in  a  dirty  plight  to  a  hospital,  where  he  remained  till 
dark,  and  then  made  off  as  hard  as  he  could  gallop  to 
Buitenzorg,  to  join  Janssens.  There  never  was 

such  a  rout. 

‘  The  General  immediately  despatched  Captain 
Eohison  with  a  second  summons  to  be  delivered  verbally. 
It  was  again  refused.  But  the  affair  is  not  the  less 
decided.  Janssens  has  not  600  men,  out  of  7,000  or 
8,000  whonr  he  commanded  in  the  morning,  and  his 
government  is  at  an  end.  Troops  will  advance  to- 


292 


LOKD  MINTO  IN  INDIA. 


[1811 


morrow  morning  to  Buitenzorg,  and  on  their  arrival,  two 
days  hence,  he  must  either  capitulate,  or  fly  alone  to  the 
eastern  part  of  the  island,  where  he  may  alfect  to  hold 
out  till  he  is  pursued.  ...  I  do  really  believe  that 
August  26  is  a  glorious  day  to  Sir  Samuel  Auchmuty 
and  the  army . The  seamen  have  afforded  enter¬ 

tainment  as  well  as  acquired  honour  by  their  eccen¬ 
tricities  and  courage.  They  fell  in  with  a  galloper  of 
the  enemy’s,  of  which  they  took  possession,  when  they 
mounted  the  four  horses,  and  drove  the  gun  on  in  the 
character  of  horse  artillery.  They  were  very  soon  all 
mounted  at  the  expense  of  the  French  officers  and 
troopers,  and  have  obtained  the  title  of  His  Majesty’s 
Marine  Light  Dragoons.  In  short,  Johnny  has  main¬ 
tained  a  consistency  of  character  with  no  feature  of 
which  I  hope  he  will  ever  part. 

‘  I  knew  the  night  before  that  the  storm  was  to  take 
place,  and  you  may  imagine  the  anxiety  with  which  I 
heard  the  cannon  and  the  musketry  rather  before  day¬ 
light.  By  its  long  continuance  and  violence  I  per¬ 
ceived  that  the  enemy  had  not  instantly  fled  in  a  panic ; 
and  if  they  stood,  with  such  an  advantage  as  their 
works  gave  them,  I  dreaded  the  loss  which  must  be 
sustained  even  with  success.  Taylor  and  Robert  were 
constantly  in  my  mind.  On  the  event  of  this  enterprise 
depended  also  the  issue  of  this  grand  undertaking. 
George  slept  in  my  room.  He  soon  got  on  horseback, 
and  I  into  my  buggy  with  Mr.  Hope  as  expeditiously 
as  I  could.  We  drove  on  briskly  to  the  field  ;  the 
action  still  lasting ;  but  at  a  mile  distance  I  met  a 


JEt.  60] 


STOEMING  OF  COENELIS. 


293 


wounded  officer  and  soldier  walking  tq  the  hospital,  a 
mile  back.  I  therefore  sent  Mr.  Hope  to  drive  them 
to  the  hospital,  and  walking  on  myself  soon  came  to 
the  field,  where  the  victory  was  by  this  time  decisive, 
and  the  enemy  in  fidl  flight.  The  General  hearing  I 
was  there  rode  to  meet  me,  and  reported  his  triumph 
with  a  most  radiant  countenance.  I  then  inquired 
after  Taylor  and  my  particidar  friends,  and  most  hap¬ 
pily  found  all  unhurt. 

‘  Next  morning  I  went,  before  daylight,  to  visit  all 
the  works — our  o^vn  as  well  as  the  enemy’s.  A  field  of 
battle  seen  in  cold  blood  the  day  after  is  a  horrid 
spectacle,  but  is  too  horrid  for  description.  The 
number  of  the  dead  and  the  shocking  variety  of 
deaths  had  better  not  be  imagined.  In  this  instance, 
besides  the  objects  scattered  along  the  road  and  over  a 
Avide  plain,  there  was  a  crowded,  accumulated  scene  of 
slaughter  and  destruction,  in  all  their  worst  shapes, 
collected  together  in  a  small  space  Avithin  each  of  the 
many  redoubts  that  had  been  taken  from  the  enemy. 
In  one  of  them  the  dead,  more  mangled  than  can  be 
described,  were  the  conquerors  themseh’es.  They  Avere 
the  Grenadiers  of  Iaax)  English  regiments,  and  of  course 
the  finest  men  in  the  army.  After  forcing  their  way 
into  the  Avorks,  and  having  given  three  cheers  for  their 
success,  the  explosion  of  a  magazine  in  the  centre  bleAv 
them  into  the  air. 

‘When  Hope  and  I  visited  this  place,  there  Avas  a 


•294 


LORD  MINTO  IN  INDIA. 


[18JI 


corner  or  bastion  still  burning  violently.  We  looked 
into  the  fire,  standing  close  to  its  edge,  and  going 
afterwards  a  few  paces  towards  another  corner,  we  were 
surprised  by  a  loud  explosion  from  the  place  we  had 
just  left.  This  proved  to  be  a  blind  shell  which  had 
become  red  hot,  and  went  off  close  to  us,  so  that  we 
might  have  paid  for  our  peeping.  Many  officers  were 
killed  and  wounded  by  the  explosion  of  this  magazine, 
which,  I  am  disposed  to  think,  happened  by  accident.’ 

In  a  despatch  addressed  by  Sir  Samuel  Auch- 
muty  to  the  Grovernor  Gleneral,  after  the  captm'e  of 
Cornells  and  the  subsequent  dispersion  of  the  enemy’s 
forces,  he  stated  that,  in  the  action  of  the  26th, 
near  5,000  prisoners  had  been  taken.  Among  them 
three  Gleneral  officers,  thirty-four  field  officers, 
seventy  captains,  and  one  hundred  and  fifty  subaltern 
officers.  Gleneral  Janssens  made  his  escape  mth  diffi¬ 
culty  during  the  action,  and  reached  Buitenzorg,  a 
distance  of  thirty  miles,  with  a  feAv  cavahry,  the  sole 
remains  of  an  army  of  ten  thousand  men.  This  place 
he  subsequently  evacuated,  and  fied  to  the  eastward. 

‘  August  29. — Janssens  is  gone  Avith  a  fragment  of 
his  force,  under  two  thousand  of  all  sorts,  towards 
Samarang.  Two  frigates  haAn  already  sailed  Avith  a 
small  force,  and  will  be  folloAved  by  more,  to  inter¬ 
cept  him.  The  game  is  ours.  .  .  .  The  Gleneral  con¬ 
siders  the  affair  as  so  entirely  decided  that  he  proposes 
returning  to  Madras  after  visiting  Samarang.  I  have, 
on  my  part,  published  a  proclamation  declaring  the 
French  Glovernment  to  be  dissolved  and  the  English 


^T.  60] 


STOKMING  OF  CORNELIS. 


2 'Jo 


estilblished.  Such  is  the  state  of  our  affairs  at  this 
date. 

‘  I  have  now  a  melaucholy  account  to  send  you  of 
the  heavy  loss  we  hav^e  sustained  in  my  poor  friend  Dr. 
Leyden.  He  was  seized  with  fever  a  few  days  after  1 
landed  at  Batavia,  and  struggled  hard  with  it  till 
yesterday  morning,  when  he  expired,  and  I  assisted 
at  paying  him  the  last  honours  in  the  evening  of 
the  same  day.  He  had  been  subject  to  bihous 
attacks  from  the  time  of  leaving  Calcutta,  and  indeed 
long  before ;  but  he  was  frequently  ailing  on  the 
voyage,  and  always  making  great  efforts  of  mental  and 
sometimes  of  bodily  labour.  In  Java  he  pushed  his 
exertions  of  every  kind  far  beyond  his  strength,  and 
was  totally  regardless  of  the  precautions  against  the 
sun,  which  are  indispensable  in  these  climates.  He 
was  seized,  after  great  fatigue  in  the  examination  of 
a  public  library  which  I  had  committed  to  his 
charge  ;  and  having  gone  heated  from  the  library  into 
another  room,  which  had  not  been  opened  for  a  long 
while,  he  was  suddenly  struck  with  a  chill.  He  ran 
ont  of  the  place  saying  it  was  enough  to  give  any 
man  a  fever ;  but,  in  truth,  his  habit  was  predis¬ 
posed,  and  he  never  surmounted  the  first  attack, 
though  he  struggled  against  it  longer  than  is  usual,  tor 
fevers  are  rapid  here.  This  must  be  accounted  the 
illness  of  a  hot  climate,  but  not  of  Batavia  in  par¬ 
ticular.  The  climate,  indeed,  in  this  place,  a  little 
above  Batavia,  seems  to  us  milder  and  more  favourable 
to  health  than  Bengal,  and  this  is  not  reckoned  a 


296 


LOEl)  MINTO  IN  INDIA. 


[1811 


healthy  month  by  the  inhabitants.  September  and 
October  are  among  the  best  in  the  year.  I  am  myself 
perfectly  well. 

‘  Septe'tnher  4. — The  despatches  for  England  are  to 
be  sent  on  board  this  day,  and  I  must  close  here.  Sir 
Samuel  has  embarked  for  the  eastern  expedition,  with 
3,000  men,  which  far  exceeds  the  force  required,  but  they 
\vill  garrison  that  end  of  the  island.  The  “  Modeste  ’’ 
carries  the  Greneral  to  the  easOvard,  and,  when  she  has 
landed  him,  will  retinn  to  be  ready  for  me.  I  still 
think  October  15  the  likely  time  for  my  departure. 
This  country  is  annexed,  like  the  East  India  Company’s 
territories.  I  leave  Mr.  Kafiles  with  the  title  of  Lieu¬ 
tenant  Giovernor,  and  this  Grovernment  is  sidiordinate 
to  the  Giovernor  Gieneral  in  Council  in  Bengal.  All 
these  arrangements,  however,  are  hitherto  made  provi¬ 
sional  by  me,  subject  therefore  to  confirmation  or 
alteration  at  home,  for  I  have  been  obliged  to  deviate 
materially  from  my  instructions.  The  country  is  great, 
fertile,  and  flourishing  beyond  my  expectations,  and, 
with  all  that  depends  upon  and  is  connected  with  it, 
will,  I  hope,  prove  an  acquisition  of  great  value  and 
importance. 

‘  Colonel  Gillespie  will  be  left  in  command  of  the 
troops  on  the  island.  He  has  been  the  great  hero,  and 
the  chief  means  of  our  success.  He  was  very  ill  of  a 
fever  the  day  he  led  the  storm  of  Cornells,  but  is  better ; 
and  T  think  this  appointment,  which  I  sent  Taylor  to 
communicate  to  him  yesterday,  will  prove  a  good  medi¬ 
cine.’ 


^T.  60] 


JAVA. 


297 


‘  Jina,  October  3,  1811. 

‘  This  letter  accompanies  the  final  surrender  of 
Java  by  capitnhition,  tincl  the  successful  temiination 
of  my  hist  m:irti;il  labour.  I  am  certainly  relieved 
from  many  cares  which  have  been  my  companions  from 
the  moment  of  losing  the  grand  care  of  the  IMadras 
mutiny ;  and  these  comrades  ha^■e  made  room  for  a 
most  comfortable  quiet  consciousness  of  having  done 
well,  and  employed  the  powers  that  have  been  placed 
in  my  hands  profitably  to  England,  from  which  I  held 
them.  Gilbert  tells  me  I  musf  not  expect  any  great 
rewards.  This  was  last  Eebruar}-,  on  the  occasion  of  the 
compiest  of  the  Mauritius.  I  do  not  expect  them  now, 
and  I  feel  little  concern  in  that  affair.  1  have  certainly 
deserved  some  public  acknowledgment  or  other  by 
a  very  unusual  train  of  successful  and  of  unusually 
important  services. 

‘  The  withholding  the  usual  recompense  of  seiAuce 
is  one  thing,  but  to  conceal  or  equivocate  about  the 
nature  of  a  ser\ice  is  another.  1  should  certainly 
not  become  a  suitor  for  reward,  which  loses  its  very 
substance  if  given  to  importunity  or  favour;  but  I 
would,  on  the  other  hand,  assert  my  right  simply  to  the 
pablic  k}iowle(l(je  of  what  I  ha\e  done.  I  cannot  help 
suspecting  that  an  attempt  has  been  made  by  ^Ministers 
to  cloke  themselves  in  my  feathers,  and  if  they  have 
done  so,  it  must  have  been  by  nothing  more  noble  than 
a  juggle. 

‘  I  have  seen  English  papers  down  to  the  middle  of 


■298 


LOEU  MINTO  IN  INDIA. 


[1811 


March,  and  I  certainly  cannot  perceive  that  any  mortal 
has  suspected  my  having  any  concern  mth  the  French 
islands,  beyond  the  execution  of  an  order  sent  out  by 
CTOvernment.  That  order  was  not  received  by  me  till 
the  army  sent  by  me  was  landing  in  the  Isle  of  France. 
That  order  was  for  an  expedition  in  April  1811  :  The 
Isle  of  France  surrendered  on  December  3,  1810,  to 
the  army  I  had  sent.  If  I  had  not  pushed  the  thing 
forward,  through  a  thousand  difticidties,  and  at  an 
immense  personal  hazard,  just  at  the  moment  when  I 
did,  the  expedition  ordered  by  the  Grovernment  could 
not  have  been  sent,  or  if  sent  could  not  have  been 
successful ;  for  the  island  would  have  been  reinforced 
— the  certainty  of  which  has  been  demonstrated  by 
the  arrival  of  French  squadron  after  squadron  since  the 
capture — and  would  have  been  impregnable  in  April  to 
any  force  it  was  possible  for  India  to  furnish.  If  I 
had  failed  in  my  own  expetlition,  from  whatever  chance, 
and  without  auy  fault  of  mine,  I  shmdd  have  been  torn 
to  pieces  by  the  very  same  iMinisters,  who  woidd  have 
told  the  world  very  distinctly,  and  without  any  equivo¬ 
cation,  whether  the  calamitous  expechtion  had  been 
.sent  by  me  or  by  themselves.  .  .  . 

‘  With  regard  to  Java,  I  acquainted  Government 
Avith  my  intention  to  folloAv  up  the  reduction  of  the 
French  islands  Avith  an  expedition  against  Java.  This 
Avas  done  in  my  first  communications  concerning  the 
fi'rench  islands ;  and  I  ])ressed  hard  for  instvactions  on 
the  latter  undertaking,  saying  that  I  should  Avait  as 
long  as  I  cmdd  for  their  ansAver  Avithout  hazarding  the 


Mt.  60] 


JAVA. 


299 


success  of  the  plan,  and  if  I  should  receive  no  orders, 
when  there  had  been  time  sufficient  to  send  them,  I 
shoidd  conchide  my  design  was  not  disapproved,  and 
should  proceed  to  the  execution  of  it.  In  the  mean¬ 
while,  everything  was  concerted  for  the  return  of  troops 
and  transports  from  the  Isle  of  France  to  India,  for 
the  purpose  of  serving  against  Java.  This  was  exe- 
■cuted  accordingly,  and  these  resources  arrived  in  time. 
Arrangements  were  made  at  all  the  Presidencies  of 
India,  and  every  preparation  was  put  in  motion  the 
moment  the  news  arrived  of  our  success  in  the  Isle  of 
France.  Everything  was  in  forwardness  when  I  re¬ 
ceived  the  orders  of  the  Secret  Committee  to  attack 
Java ;  and  I  shoidd  have  gone  on  that  expedition  when 
I  did  if  no  orders  had  come.  Java,  therefore,  so  far  as 
credit  is  concerned,  is  as  much  my  own  as  the  French 
islands  ;  for  the  plan  was  formed,  and  the  resolul  ion 
taken,  and  the  prejiarations  made,  and  the  service 
would  have  been  performed  precisely  as  it  has,  on  my 
own  judgment  and  at  my  own  risk.  I  do  not  think 
Government  has  neglected  anything  either.  They 
could  not  have  sent  their  orders  sooner.  But  cir¬ 
cumstances  were  such  that  if  I  had  not  taken  the 
whole  thing  upon  myself,  and  despatched  it  in  the 
shortest  imaginable  time,  the  orders  from  England 
would  have  been  too  late  in  both  cases.  This  is,  I 
think,  enough  on  the  first  pronoun  personal. 

‘This  country  far  surpasses  all  the  expectations  any 
stranger  had  ever  formed  of  its  fertility  and  the  richness 
of  its  produce,  its  population  and  civilimtlon,  a  praise 


300 


LOED  MIETO  IN  INDIA. 


[1811 


which  you  probably  did  not  look  for.  I  have  pleasure 
in  seeing  also  that  the  worst  system  of  government  and 
of  laws  imaginable  present  a  wide  field  for  active  im¬ 
provements,  which  better  principles  of  policy  and  a 
purer  administration  cannot  fail  of  producing.  If  I 
am  happy  enoirgh  to  see  some  progress  made  in  these 
^fiews,  and  to  Avitness  a  substantial  amelioration  in  the 
condition  of  the  five  millions  who  inhabit  this  beautiful 
country,  or  even  a  tendency  to  that  result,  from  the 
foundations  I  shall  have  laid,  I  shall  bear  the  want 
of  reAvards  Avith  the  greatest  equanimity  and  indiffer¬ 
ence. 

‘  I  am  a  great  philosopher  of  late,  having  studied 
hard  in  all  the  leisure  moments  of  this  expedition,  by 
sea  and  land,  under  the  best  precepts  and  the  worst 
practice  that  Avere  ever  united  in  the  same  master, 
Cicero  himself.  I  am  near  the  end  of  his  twenty  volumes, 
and  have  had  great  delight  in  almost  every  page.  Let 
Gilbert  read  you  the  “  Somnium  Scipionis,”  one  of  the 
finest  Avorks  of  antiquity ;  or  at  least  this  passage,  which 
is  near  the  end,  and  the  parting  advice  of  the  elder 
Scipio  to  his  son,  before  the  close  of  the  vision,  when 
he  returns  to  the  regions  of  light  and  immortality. 

‘  Igitur  alte  si  spectare  voles,  atque  hanc  sedem, 
et  aeternam  domum  contueri :  neque  te  sermonibus 
A’ulgi  dederis,  nec  in  premiis  humanis  spem  posueris 
rerum  tuarum :  suis  te  opportet  illecebris  ipsa  virtus 
trahat  ad  verum  decus.’  ‘  Verum  decus  ’  is  Latin  for 
nobility  Avithout  a  patent ;  and  the  last  passage,  begin¬ 
ning  ‘  suis  te  opportet  ’  and  ending  ‘  verum  decus,’  is 


^T.  60] 


JAVA. 


301 


most  beautiful.  I  have  chosen  it  for  the  family  motto, 
if  not  on  our  seals  and  panels,  on  our  lives.  In  the 
meantime  I  have  put  this  discourse  of  Scipio’s  appari¬ 
tion  to  his  son,  in  the  mouth  of  our  family  genius  in 
“  the  IMinto  vision.”  * 

Lot  Reason’s  torch  on  zeal  attend  ! 

Her  calm  undazzling  light  to  lend  : 

With  patriot  ardour  wisdom  blend. 

Be  these  your  guides  ! 

Your  country’s  good  the  noble  end, 

And  nought  besides. 

Heed  not  the  bellowing  crowd’s  acclaim, 

And  fleeting  roar  of  vulgar  fame. 

Powerless  to  giace  an  lionest  name, 

Or  to  defile ; 

The  drunken  praise  or  ruffian  Idame 
Of  clamoiu’  vile. 

Guerdons  that  prompt  the  worldly  race 
Thy  generous  toil  siiall  ne’er  debase  ; 

Won  by  fair  Virtue's  inborn  grace. 

Her  smiles  alone 
Sliall  woo  tliee  to  tlie  lofty  place 
Of  true  renown. 

Oh,  treasure  in  thy  filial  breast. 

My  parting  counsel,  last  and  best. 

Re  Virtue  for  herself  caress’d  ; 

Her  heavenly  love 

Such  transport  yields  as  Spirits  blest 
Enjoy  above. 

‘  I  shall  fjosltivehj  sail  by  tlie  2()th  lust.  (October)  ; 
I  hope  sooner ;  and  shall  be  most  h.ippy  to  turn  my 

‘  A  poem  written  by  himself  in  India  and  dedicated  to  his  family. 
“  Concluditur  prefect o,  et  virtutes  omnes,  et  honestum  illud,  quod 
e.v  his  virtutibus  exoritur,  et  in  his  h.eret,  esse se  expetendum. 
— Cic.  Dc  Finihux,  v.  215,  et  passim. 


302 


LORD  IMINTO  IN  INDIA. 


[1811 


head  towards  one  of  my  homes,  till  the  grand  departure 
of  all  arrives.  That  will  happen  at  latest  in  twenty- 
seven  months  from  October  1.  I  reckon  to  January 
1,  1814.’ 

‘  Java,  October  13,  1811. 

‘  Nothing  has  happened  since  my  last  at  all  memor¬ 
able  .  .  .  This  letter  goes  by  a  transport,  the  “  Countess 
d’Harconrt,”  which  carries  General  Janssens  and  his 
suite  to  England  as  prisoners  of  war.  If  you  should 
by  any  chance  come  in  his  way.  Palm,  he  civil ' — for  he 
is  one  of  the  very  best  and  most  estimable  men  I  ever 
knew.  He  has  suffered  a  great  and  severe  reverse, 
which  he  has  felt  so  deeply  as  to  affect  his  health. 
His  predecessor  was  a  -wretch  in  every  imaginable  way, 
one  of  the  monsters  which  the  worst  times  of  the 
hh'ench  Eevolution  engendered,  or  rather  lifted  from  the 
mud  at  the  bottom,  to  flounce  and  figure  away  their 
hour  upon  the  surface.  He  was  greedy,  corrupt,  and 
rascally  in  amassing  money  for  himself,  and  equally 
unjust  and  oppressive  in  procuring  public  supplies. 
He  was  cruel,  and  regardless  of  men’s  lives  beyond  most 
of  the  revolutionary  tyrants  in  the  Eeign  of  Terror,  He 
forced  the  Javanese  to  cut  a  road  through  a  morass  at 
the  expense  of  6,000  lives  for  that  short  space.  He 
ordered  two  Javanese  Princes,  confined  by  him  as  state 
prisoners,  to  be  pri\'ately  murdered,  and  became  savage 
from  the  delay  which  arose  from  the  scruples  of  the 
officer  in  Avhose  custody  they  were ;  a  providential 
delay;  for  Janssens  arrived  in  the  interval,  and  passing 
‘  A  phiase  frequently  addressed  by  Lady  Palmerston  to  her  lord. 


JEt.  60] 


JAVA. 


303 


throiigh  the  place,  on  his  way  to  Batavia,  saved  the 
victims.  D’Aendels  was  as  great  a  brute  as  tyrant  in 
his  pleasures — -no  man’s  family  was  safe.  ...  In  short, 
none  of  the  worst  of  the  Koman  pro-consuls  ever  vexed 
and  scourged  their  provinces,  too  distant  for  control, 
with  more  extortion  and  cruelty  than  this  villain.  His 
successor  is  his  opposite  in  every  point — a  virtuous,  just, 
and  humane  man  ;  a  brave  and  good  officer ;  and,  I  think 
from  his  conversation,  a  wise  and  even  enlightened 
statesman. 

‘  Bonaparte  certainly  did  one  good  action  in  sending 
a  character  so  respectable  to  supersede  D’Aendels  at 
twenty-four  hours’  notice ;  for  he  was  peremptorily 
ordered  to  resign  the  government  in  that  time,  and  to 
embark  immediately  for  Europe.  As  soon  as  the  ship 
was  under  weigh,  it  is  vmderstood  here  that  the  cap¬ 
tain  produced  an  order  to  carry  him  to  France  as  a 
prisoner.  The  attachment  of  all  ranks  of  men  to 
Janssens  is  remarkable ;  and  he  certainly  deprived  ns  of 
the  support  which,  if  we  had  found  D’Aendels  in  the 
government,  the  Dutch  part  of  the  colony  would  have 
given  us.  So  pray  he  civil  to  my  virtuous  predecessor 
in  Java,  if  you  have  an  opportunity. 

‘  Cteorge  sent  yon  the  history  of  my  orgies  at  a 
dinner  given  bv  me  to  Sir  Samuel  Auchmuty  and  the 
army.  The  army  has  since  given  a  ball  and  supper  to 
Sir  Saimiel  and  me  jointly  ;  and  we  entered  hand  in 
hand,  like  the  two  kings  of  Brenttord  smelling  at  one 
nosegay.  This  festival  was  at  the  residence  of  the 
former  (lovernors  General,  and  the  decorations  had  been 


304 


LORO  .MINTO  IN  INDIA. 


[1811 


all  or  nearly  so  in  a  state  of  preparation  for  the  cele¬ 
bration  of  Napoleon’s  birthday,  which  we  disturbed 
like  trouble-fetes  as  we  were,  by  landing  and  getting 
possession  of  Batavia,  (iovernment  Honse,  decorations 
and  all,  a  few  days  before  the  grand  occasion.  ...  It  is 
impossible  to  give  yon  anything  like  an  adequate 
notion  of  the  total  absence  of  beauty  in  so  crowded 
a  hall.  There  never  is  a  dozen  of  women  assembled 
in  Europe  without  a.  few  attractions  amongst  them. 
Here  there  was  no  difference,  except  in  some  few  varie¬ 
ties  of  ugliness  and  ordinariness  of  dress  and  manners. 
The  Dutch  rlid  not  encourage,  nor  indeed  allow  freely, 
European  women  to  go  out  to  their  colonies  in  India. 
The  consequence  has  been,  that  the  men  lived  with 
native  women,  whose  daughters,  gradually  borrowing 
something  from  the  father’s  side,  and  becoming  a  mixed 
breed,  are  now  the  Avives  and  ladies  of  rank  and 
fashion  in  Java.  The  young  ladies  have  learnt  the 
European  fashions  of  dress,  and  their  carriage  and 
manners  are  something  like  onr  own  of  an  ordinary 
class.  Their  education  is  almost  wholly  neglected ;  or 
rather  no  means  exist  here  to  provide  for  it.  They 
are  attended  from  their  cradles  by  numerous  slaves, 
by  whom  they  are  trained  in  helplessness  and  laziness ; 
and  from  such  companions  and  governesses,  you  may 
conceive  how  much  accomplishment  or  refinement  in 
manners  or  opinions  they  are  likely  to  acquire. 

In  dancing,  the  young  beauties  seemed  lame 
in  English  country  dances,  (jf  which  they  kneAv 
neither  the  steps  nor  the  figures  ;  but  in  their  own 


^T.  60] 


JAVA. 


305 


dance,  which  was  to  a  very  slow  valse  tune,  the  figure 
inuch  the  same  as  ours,  with  a  valse  embrace  however, 
instead  of  an  allemande,  they  were  at  home,  and  not 
without  grace  ;  while  our  English  damsels  and  cavaliers 
were  all  abroad,  and  about  as  awkward  and  cri2:)pled 
as  their  Dutch  fellow-subjects  had  been  before.  Mrs. 
Bunbury,  the  wife  of  an  officer,  a  young  pretty  English¬ 
woman,  stood  up  in  the  dance ;  but  seeing,  when  the 
first  couple  reached  her,  the  Dutch  gentleman  take  his 
partner  fairly  in  his  arms  and  hug  her,  as  it  appeared 
to  her  as  a  bear  does  his  prey,  she  fairly  took  to  her 
heels,  and  could  not  be  brought  back  again  by  any 
means,  to  see  or  share  such  horror.  The  Dutch  valsers 
certainly  deal  in  very  strict  embraces,  but  our  English 
gentlemen,  to  their  shame  be  it  said,  appeared  so  en¬ 
tirely  unpractised  in  that  art,  that  their  Dutch  partners 
gave  the  point  uji  as  a  bad  job,  and  were  forced  to  con¬ 
tent  themselves  with  merely  taking  hands  and  swinging 
the  loobies  about.  The  chapcn-ons  and  older  Dutch 
ladies  are  a  class  not  yet  described  in  Europe.  The 
principal  mark  to  know  them  by  is  their  immense  size. 
Tlie  whole  colonial  sex  runs  naturally  to  fat,  jvartly 
from  over-feeding— jxirtly  from  total  want  of  exercise. 
The  morning  air  is  the  grand  pursuit  of  the  English 
Orientalists ;  the  Dutch  of  both  sexes  have  a  honw  for 
it,  and  prefer  their  beds.  In  the  re.st  of  the  day  nobody 
can  go  out;  and  in  the  evening  they  think  a  drive  in 
a  carriage  too  great  an  effort.  They  pass  their  time 
as  follows.  There  is  a  canal  opposite  to  every  door  on 
the  other  side  of  the  road.  Each  house  has  a  little 


X 


306 


LOED  MINTO  IN  INDIA. 


[1811 


projecting  gallery  supported  by  posts  in  the  canal. 
The  lower  part  of  this,  that  is  to  say,  from  the  level  of 
the  road  down  into  the  water,  is  made  in  some  small 
degree  private,  by  upright  bars  at  a  little  distance 
from  each  other,  and  with  this  bath  the  road  communi¬ 
cates  by  wooden  steps.  Here  the  lady  of  the  house, 
her  relatives,  and  female  slaves,  lave  their  charms,  and 
here  you  may  behold  the  handmaids  of  Diana  sporting 
on  and  under  the  wave  in  sight  of  all  passing  Actaeons. 
Th  is  is  the  morning  scene.  In  the  evening,  as  I  was 
saying,  they  have  chairs  brought  out  in  the  gallery 
above,  and  sit  with  their  beaux  in  conversation  and 
repose.  Suppose  an  immense  woman  sitting  behind  a 
stall  mth  roasted  apples,  and  we  have  an  old  Dutch 
lady  of  the  highest  rank  and  fashion.  Her  upper 
garment  is  a  loose  coarse  white  cotton  jacket  fastened 
nowhere,  but  worn  with  the  graceful  neghgence  of  pins 
and  all  other  fastenings  or  constraints  of  a  Scotch  lass, 
an  equally  coarse  petticoat,  and  the  coarsest  stockings, 
terminating  in  wide  thick-soled  shoes  ;  but  by  standing 
behind  her  you  find  out  her  nobility,  for  at  the  back  of 
the  head  a  little  circle  of  hair  is  gathered  into  a  small 
crown,  and  on  this  are  deposited  diamonds,  rubies,  and 
precious  stones  often  of  very  great  value.  It  is  well 
■with  this  if  they  can  speak  even  Dutch,  many  knowing 
no  language  but  Malay.’ 

In  the  instructions  sent  from  the  Court  of  Directors 
to  Lord  Minto  respecting  an  expedition  to  Java,  no 
provision  was  made  for  any  permanent  occupation  of 
the  island  :  no  such  measure  had  been  in  contemplation 


^T.  60] 


JAVA. 


307 


previous  to  Lord  Minto’s  arrival  in  Java,  and  to  the 
personal  acquaintance  he  thereupon  attained  with  the 
condition  of  the  popnlation.  The  Court  of  Directors 
had  simply  intended  an  expedition  to  expel  the  Dutch 
Power,  to  destroy  the  fortitications,  and  to  distribute 
the  arms  and  stores  among  the  natives.  These  in¬ 
structions  Lord  Mintotook  it  on  his  own  responsibility 
to  disobey,  preferring  to  give  time  for  reconsideration  of 
orders  issued  in  ignorance  of  the  hicts,  to  their  execu¬ 
tion  at  the  cost  of  bloodshed  and  anarchy,  if  not  of 
certain  destruction  to  the  colonists. 

It  would  be  mere  waste  of  time  at  the  present  day 
to  enter  into  any  detailed  account  of  the  measures  in¬ 
augurated  by  Lord  Minto  for  the  administration  of 
Java,  thus  incorporated  into  the  British  Empire. 

A  few  extracts  from  his  despatches  will  siifhce  to 
show  the  condition  in  which  he  found  the  island  and 
the  nature  of  the  amelioration  he  proposed  to  effect. 
The  ‘History  of  Java,’  by  Sir  S.  Baffles,  and  other 
works  demonstrate  that  the  brief  period  during  which 
the  connection  of  Glreat  Britain  and  Java  existed,  was 
one  to  the  island  of  prosperity  and  traiKpiillity. 

In  a  despatch  to  the  Secret  Committee  dated 
September  3,  1811,  Lord  Minto  stated  that  he  had 
taken  possession  of  the  Island  of  Java  in  the  Company’s 
name. 

‘  I  am  aware,’  he  said,  ‘  that  all  conquests  of  terri¬ 
tory  from  European  Powers  accrue  by  the  constitution 
of  the  Empire  to  the  Crown  ;  and,  if  I  had  been  under 
the  necessity  of  prosecuting  this  enterprise  on  my  own 


308 


LOED  MINTO  IN  INDIA. 


[1811 


responsibility  and  witbont  orders,  Java  must  have  been 
simply  annexed  to  His  Majesty’s  dominions  subject  to 
any  arrangement  which  might  afterwards  be  adopted 
by  His  Ma,iesty  with  the  Company.  But  since  the 
-establishment  of  the  Board  of  Control,  every  order  that 
issues  from  the  Honourable  Court,  or  your  Honourable 
Committee,  bears  with  it  the  sanction  of  His  Majesty’s 
Government,  and  I  am  therefore  to  consider  the  com¬ 
mands  with  which  I  was  honoured  respecting  Java,  as 
importing  a  transfer  of  His  Majesty’s  rights  of  conquest 
in  this  instance  to  the  Honourable  Company. 

‘  I  shall  appear  on  first  sight  to  have  departed  from 
the  tenor  of  your  Honourable  Committee’s  instructions, 
by  keeping  possession  instead  of  dismantling  and  evacu¬ 
ating  the  island. 

‘  This  is  a  much  greater  country  than  I  believe  is 
generally  conceived,  and  the  destructive  field  of  massacre 
and  ruin,  to  which  the  disarming  of  the  colony  and 
arming  the  natives  must  have  led.  is  too  extensive,  and 
the  scene  would  have  been  too  shocking  to  every 
virtuous  and  natural  feeling,  to  remain  for  a  moment 
in  the  contemplation  of  minds  to  which  the  object 
should  have  been  presented  in  its  true  colours.  In 
deviating  from  this  part  of  the  plan  I  have,  therefore, 
most  assuredly  been  long  since  approved. 

‘  I  have  presented  no  exaggerated  view  of  this  sub¬ 
ject,  but  am  more  than  ever  confirmed  in  the  truth  and 
justice  of  the  picture  that  has  been  set  l^efore  you,*  by 


'  Id  an  earlier  and  fuller  despalcli. 


^T.  60] 


JAVA. 


309 


what  I  have  witnessed  of  terror  created  in  this  populous 
and  flourishing  quarter  of  Java  by  the  absence  of 
military  protection  for  the  short  interval  of  two  days 
only,  which  passed  between  the  departure  of  the  French 
and  the  arrival  of  our  troops ;  as  well  as  by  the  actual 
massacre  and  pillage  which  in  the  circiut  of  a  few 
miles  have  followed  the  dispersion  of  Janssen’s  army, 
before  a  detachment  of  our  own  could  be  advanced  to 
Buitenzorg. 

‘  It  would  have  been  an  abuse  therefore  of  the  word 
obedience,  and  offensive  above  all  to  the  authority  from 
which  the  order  had  been  issued  under  a  defect  of  local 
information,  to  have  carried  into  effect  a  command  of 
which  the  consequences  described  were  manifest  on  the 
spot  to  those  who  were  charged  with  the  execution. 

‘  Tlie  only  modification  of  which  the  measure  was 
susceptible,  would  have  been  to  provide  the  means  of 
retreat  and  of  future  security  and  maintenance  to  the 
imdtitudes  whose  lives  and  property  were  concerned. 
Tliis  would  have  entailed  an  immense  burden  on  the 
British  Government,  and  would  have  required  pecuniary 
sacrifices  and  arrangements  which  could  have  been 
hazarded  by  no  sid)ordiuate  authority  abroad. 

‘  The  three  courses  which  ai’e  open  to  your  choice 
are — to  withdraw  the  whole  European  population  and 
to  make  a  provision  for  their  support ;  to  restore  the 
colony  unweakened  to  the  Dutch  ;  ttr  to  retain  it  under 
the  British  protection  and  Government. 


310 


LOKD  MINTO  IN  INDIA. 


[1811 


‘I  have  found  here  the  favourable  disposition  which 
I  expected  from  the  Dutch  inhabitants.  They  are 
generally  repugnant  to  the  French  usurpation  both  of 
the  mother  country  and  of  the  colonies.  .  .  .  But  the 
French  Government  had  established  so  strong  a  power 
by  a  system  of  severity  and  terror,  and  there  still  exist 
so  many  collateral  means  of  influence  by  connections 
both  of  family  and  fortune  in  Europe,  that  we  have 
experienced  only  silent  and  inefficient  favour,  and 
derived  no  active  aid  whatever  from  the  friendly  dispo¬ 
sition  of  the  people.  Our  difficulties  have  been  con¬ 
siderably  increased  by  this  neutral  spirit ;  but,  had  the 
Dutch  been  apprised  that,  in  the  e\’ent  of  success,  it  was 
our  design  to  deliver  them  up  disarmed  to  the  Javanese, 
we  should  have  had  to  contend  with  all  the  energies  of 
despair,  and  I  am  quite  persuaded  that  we  should  have 
found  our  force  inadequate  to  the  enterprise. 

‘  The  multitude  of  arrangements,  especially  for  the 
public  security  and  tranquillity  which  the  sudden  as¬ 
sumption  of  the  government  demand,  do  not  in  the 
present  moment  leave  me  at  liberty  to  prosecute  in¬ 
quiries  and  pursrre  deliberations  concerning  your  more 
general  interests  in  this  quarter. 

‘  I  propose  to  vest  the  chief  authority  in  Mr. 
Raffles,  under  the  title  of  Lieutenant  Governor ;  .  .  .  . 
that  the  Government  of  Java  should  be  subordinate  to 
the  supreme  Government  of  Bengal ;  that  a  regular 
report  of  all  proceedings  should  be  made  there  ;  and  that 


JEt.  60] 


JAVA. 


311 


the  orders  of  the  Governor  General  in  Council  should 
be  binding  in  Java,  sidiject  to  the  higher  authority  of 
the  Honourable  Court  of  Directors.’ 

‘  I  can  say'  with  certainty  that  the  value  of  the  island 
and  the  face  of  prosperity  which  every  part  of  the  island 
wears,  even  weighed  down  as  it  has  been  by  a  most 
oppressive  system,  and  after  a  most  iniquitous  and 
grinding  administration  of  government,  very  far  exceeds 
any  other  which  had  ever  been  conceived  by  strangers, 
and  is  a  constant  and  general  subject  of  observation 
amongst  ourselves.  Yet  every  acknowledged  principle 
of  good  government  is  unknown  in  Java,  and  all  the 
mischievous,  deteriorating,  and  grievous  maxims  of  a 
narrow,  monopolising,  and  harsh  policy  are  in  full  force 
and  vigour  in  every  department  of  affairs.  No  man’s 
interest  in  land  exceeds  the  term  of  one  year.  This 
admits  of  a  small  number  of  partial  exceptions,  but  is 
generally  true.  The  whole  surface  is  the  property  of 
Government,  and  very  extensive  territories  are  cultivated 
and  managed  on  the  account  of  Government  under  the 
direction  of  pidilic  affairs.  Government  exacts  a  pre¬ 
emption  at  an  arbitrary  price  in  the  produce  of  many 
other  lands. 

‘  In  a  word  the  whole  system  of  property  is  vicious 
and  adverse  to  the  interests  of  Government  and  people. 

‘  The  revenues,  &c.,  have  long  been  all  in  farm :  the 
farmers  are  universally  Chinese,  who  have  no  competi¬ 
tors.  Hence  arises  necessary  loss  to  Government  and 

'  To  Uie  Secret  Committee  of  tlie  Court  of  Directors,  October  5, 
1811. 


312 


LOED  MIXTO  IN  INDIA. 


[1811 


oppressive  extortion  on  the  subject.  I  have  neverthe¬ 
less  been  obliged  to  renew  the  farms  for  the  remaining 
months  of  the  present  year.  A  change  in  the  system 
of  collecting  will  require  considerable  preparation  both 
in  regulation  and  in  providing  instruments,  who  ai’e  now 
entirely  Avanting.  The  duties  of  export  and  import  in 
the  harbour  of  Bata\ia  haA'e,  hoAvever,  been  placed  under 
a  custom-house,  collection  being  immediately  under  the 
A'igilance  of  Grovernment. 

‘  On  this  subject  it  may  be  satisfactory  to  your 
Committee  to  observe  that  I  have  abolished  the  duties 
and  suppressed  the  farms  on  gaming  and  cock-fighting, 
lea\dng  Grovernment  free  by  that  sacrifice  to  employ 
such  prohibitory  means  as  can  be  devised  to  check  this 
prevailing  and  destructive  vice  of  the  native  population. 

‘  The  state  of  slavery  has  attracted  my  serious  and 
anxious  attention.  That  monstrous  system  prevails  to 
a  calamitous  extent  throughout  these  Eastern  regions 
of  India,  and  produces,  as  it  cannot  fail  of  doing,  most 
of  the  miseries  incident  to  that  mode  of  procuring  the 
service  of  men.  But  it  is  too  general  to  be  suddenly 
suppressed  by  any  one  Power  in  so  many  separate  and 
independent  countries.  In  Java  it  is  fortunately  not 
grievous  to  the  slave ;  ser\’itude  being  almost  Avholly 
domestic  or  menial.  I  hope  something  may  be  done 
immediately  for  modifying  this  e\"il,  and  I  propose  that 
Grovernment  should  set  the  example  in  this  reform  by 
abstaining  entirely  from  the  future  purchase  of  slaves. 
A  return  is  preparing  of  the  public  slaves  of  Grovernment 
now  existing,  and  if  the  number  shoidd  prove  incon- 


^T.  60] 


JAVA. 


315 


siderable,  as  1  hope  it  will,  I  have  it  in  contemplation 
to  hazard  an  anticipation  of  yonr  approbation,  which  I 
shall  surely  receive,  by  emancipating  all  those  to  whom 
that  change  would  be  advisable.  The  importation  of 
slaves  may  also  be  checked,  although  it  cannot  yet  be 
abolished.’ 

‘  tVeltevreedeii.  Java  :  October  6,  1811.' 

‘  I  consider  the  main  point  as  ascertained,  and  that 
Java  will  supply  resources  at  the  least  for  its  own 
expenses.  I  need  not  say  to  you  how  great  a  benefit, 
not  reducible  to  the  columns  of  an  estimate  in  dollars, 
will  in  that  case  accrue  to  the  Company  and  the  nation. 
AVe  now  know  from  proof  that  it  was  the  policy  of  the 
Dutch  to  conceal  the  value  and  to  exaggerate  the 
defects  of  their  possessions,  especially  of  Java.  This 
will  account  for  the  inadequate  opinion  entertained,  at 
least  I  imagine  so,  at  home  of  this  island.  It  is  now 
most  nourishing ;  but  the  field  for  improvement  is  in¬ 
exhaustible.  All  that  I  fear  is  the  general  peace. 
This  ought  not  surely  to  prevent  us  from  beginning  to 
perform  the  first  duty  of  Crovenunents  in  improving  the 
condition  of  a  people  that  has  become  tributary  to  our 
authority  and  tributary  to  our  prosperity.  All  we  are 
justified  in  avoiding  is  the  prosecution  in  this  interval 
of  expensive  works.  The  exclusion  of  European  masters 
from  Java  is  impt)ssible  in  the  present  state  of  things. 
To  make  them  richer,  happier,  and  to  give  the  people 
itself  a  feeling  of  independence,  which  they  are  now 


To  the  night  Hon.  Ih  Hnndas. 


314 


LORD  MINTO  IN  INDIA. 


[1811 


totally  mtliout,  would  be  the  best  receipt  for  making 
their  country  less  accessible  to  European  invaders.  But 
in  our  orvn  times  this  cannot  be  looked  to,  and  the 
Giovernment  we  have  established  must  instantly  be  re¬ 
placed  by  the  French  whenever  it  is  withdrawn.  The 
more  flourishing  the  country  may  be  at  the  time  of 
such  a  revolution,  the  better,  I  think,  for  the  nations 
without,  although  it  may  also  be  advantageous  to  the 
ruling  European  power  mthin.  But  I  feel  assiured  that 
you  agree  with  me  in  thinking  our  policy  should  lead 
to  the  improvement  of  the  country,  and,  if  not  our 
policy,  the  eternal  and  fundamental  law  by  which  Gro- 
vemments  and  subjects  are  united.  I  think  we  ought 
to  make  it  an  English  colony  as  soon  as  we  can,  by  the 
introduction  of  English  colonists,  English  capital,  and, 
therefore,  an  English  interest.  This  does  not  require 
the  exclusion  of  the  old  Dutch,  who  will  not  bear  a 
great  proportion  to  the  whole,  and  who  will  become 
English  the  more  readily  as  they  are  now  -without  a 
country.’ 

‘  I  shall  embark  to-morrow  evening,  and  hope  to 
make  the  passage  in  about  thirty  days.'  Local  business, 
and  the  extreme  pressTire  of  such  affairs  as  concern 
either  bodies  of  men  or  individuals,  have,  as  is  usual, 
accumulated  irpon  me  to  such  a  degree  for  some  time 
past  in  the  expectation  of  my  approaching  departure, 
that  it  would  have  been  entirely  impossible  for  me  to 
throw  the  information  I  possess,  or  the  resolutions  and 

'  Extract  from  a  despatch  of  Lord  Miiitoto  the  Secret  Committee 
October  18,  1811. 


JEt.  60] 


JAVA. 


315 


opinions  I  have  been  able  to  form,  on  the  affjiirs  of  this 
new  Government,  into  a  shape  fit  for  inspection.  .  .  . 
The  leisure  of  my  voyage  to  Bengal  will  enable  me  to 
digest  the  material  I  take  with  me,  and  to  present  to 
your  Honourable  Committee  by  the  first  ship  from 
Bengal  after  my  arrival  there,  a  full,  and  I  would  anx¬ 
iously — fondly  hope,  a  satisfactory  report  of  my  pro¬ 
ceedings  in  this  country. 

‘  In  the  meanwhile,  conscious  that  in  the  share 
which  has  fallen  to  my  lot  in  the  arduous  but  successful 
measures  which  have  placed  this  important  territory  at 
your  disposal,  I  have  looked  only  to  the  general  interests 
of  the  nation  and  the  East  India  Company,  and  that  in 
every  point  of  the  arrangements  which  I  have  pro\rsion- 
ally  adopted  since  the  acquisition  was  made,  the 
advantage  of  the  Company  and  the  improvement  of 
the  country  have  been  the  united  but  exclusive  ob¬ 
jects  of  contemplation,  I  cannot  help  entertaining  an 
earnest  wish,  which  I  should  be  happy  indeed  if  all 
circumstances  authorised  me  to  call  a  hope,  that  suffi¬ 
cient  confidence  might  be  felt  in  the  judgments  which 
I  have  formed,  with  much  incpdry  and  reflection  on 
the  spot,  to  make  at  least  a  trial  of  the  system  and 
arrangements  I  now  presume  to  recommend.  ...  I  will 
therefore  specify  two  points  at  least  of  the  present 
system  in  Java,  which  in  my  faithfid  and  deliberate 
judgment  it  would  be  prejudicial  to  every  interest  of 
the  Conjpany  or  the  public  in  this  country  to  alter  or 
reverse  in  the  present  period  of  our  connection. 

‘  Fir.st,  I  strongly  recommend  that  the  arrangements 


316 


LOED  MINTO  IN  INDIA. 


[1811 


now  established  may  not  be  superseded  for  the  purpose 
of  uniting  the  Government  in  the  same  person  with  the 
command  of  the  army. 

‘  Secondly,  that  this  island  and  all  its  affairs,  civil 
and  military,  may  be  left  under  the  superintendence  of 
the  Governor  of  Bengal,  and  not  transferred  to  any 
other  authority  in  India. 

‘  I  am  happy  to  confirm  the  opinion  I  have  already 
submitted  to  your  honourable  Committee  that  the 
resources  of  the  island  will  assuredly  cover  all  charges, 
civil  and  military.’ 

Before  quitting  Batavia  Lord  Minto  remarked  to 
one  of  its  chief  residents,  that  it  was  not  certain  whether 
England  would  retain  permanent  possession  of  Java, — 
‘  but,’  he  added,  in  words  which  were  long  remembered, 
‘  while  we  are  here  let  us  do  as  much  good  as  we  can,’ 
To  the  close  of  his  administration  of  the  government 
of  India  he  watched  over  the  welfare  of  Java  with  un¬ 
failing  solicitude — a  fact  recognised  in  feeling  language 
by  Sir  Stamford  Baffles  when,  addressing  the  Batavian 
Society  subsequently  to  Lord  Minto’s  death,  he  said  : 

‘  A  tender  and  parental  care  for  the  island  of  Java  was. 
publicly  avowed  on  different  occasions ;  the  proofs  of  it 
were  received ;  the  European  community  was  saved  and 
preserved  by  his  humanity,  and  on  his  responsibility ; 
for  the  native  administration  principles  were  laid  down 
on  which  the  whole  of  the  present  structure  has  been 
raised ;  and  in  every  instance  a  wish  was  evinced  of 


^T,  ',60] 


JAVA. 


317 


improving  the  successes  of  war,  as  much  in  favour  of 
the  conquered  as  of  the  conqueror. 

‘  It  would  not  be  proper  on  this  occasion  to  enter 
into  particulars,  but  who  does  not  gratefully  recollect 
the  general  tenor  of  his  conduct  and  demeanour  Avhile 
in  Java  ?  administering  aid  and  assistance  with  his  own 
hands  to  the  maimed  and  wounded  of  his  enemies ; 
setting,  in  the  midst  of  his  successes,  an  example  of 
moderation  and  simplicity  of  manner  even  to  the  van¬ 
quished  ;  proceeding  often  in  public  without  any  other 
signs  of  greatness  and  distinction  than  what  the  whole 
community  singly  and  jointly  were  eager  to  show  him  ; 
never  missing  an  opportunity  of  doing  even  a  temporary 
good ;  and  conciliating  by  these  means  the  minds  of 
the  public  to  such  a  degree,  that  enemies  were  rendered 
friends,  and  that  the  names  of  conqueror  and  subduer 
were  lost  in  those  of  protector  and  liberator.’ 

The  energy  and  devotion  which  Lord  iMinto  brought 
to  bear  on  the  affairs  of  Java  were  all  the  more  praise¬ 
worthy,  because  of  the  acute  grief  he  endured  during 
the  months  passed  by  him  in  the  island.  There  he 
learnt  the  death  of  his  youngest  son,  William,  who  had 
been  left  at  hladras,  having  already  shown  symptoms 
of  the  illness  which  was  the  cause  of  his  death — an 
attack  of  congestion  of  the  lungs. 

Of  this  sad  event  Lord  Minto  said  to  tliose  who 
were  near  him  when  he  learnt  it,  that  ‘  it  was  the  first 
and  only  grievance  which  either  this  son  or  any  of  his 
children  had  ever  inflicted  on  their  parents.’ 


318 


LORD  MINTO  IN  INDIA 


[1811 


CHAPTEE  XIIT. 

Heavy  and  numerous  were  the  letter-bags  which  awaited 
at  Calcutta  Lord  Minto’s  return  from  Java.  It  was 
therefore  mth  no  small  share  of  surprise  that  he  found 
the  official  letters  addressed  to  him  absolutely  silent  on 
the  most  important  transactions  of  the  preceding  years, 
namely,  the  Madras  mutiny,  and  the  conquest  of  the 
French  islands. 

‘  It  does  not  appear,’  he  wrote  to  Lord  Melville,  in  a 
j:)rivate  and  confidential  letter  dated  December  10,  1811, 
‘  it  does  not  appear  from  anything  official  that  the 
Court  of  Directors  ever  heard  that  the  French  cruisers 
had  been  for  ever  excluded  from  the  port  of  Mauritius, 
and  that  the  French  islands  themselves  had  been  cap¬ 
tured  by  an  army  of  their  own  under  their  own  Grovem- 
ment.  This  seems  strange  to  ns,  to  whom  no  doubt 
those  events  have  appeared  of  greater  moment  than 
they  are,  owing,  perhaps,  to  their  having  so  long  occu¬ 
pied  our  whole  hearts  and  souls.  I  have  not  been  able 
sometimes  to  help  asking  myself  whether  the  same 
silence  would  have  prevailed  if  I  had  failed,  and  whether 
the  public  would  not  in  that  case  have  been  very  dis¬ 
tinctly  informed  whose  expedition  it  was.’ 


^T.  60] 


CALCUTTA. 


319 


In  another  letter  to  the  same  correspondent,  he 
wrote :  ‘  I  do  not  foresee  that  in  what  may  remain  of 
my  puldic  life  any  occasion  can  ever  occur  again  in  which 
the  interests  confided  to  me  shall  require  the  assumption 
at  my  own  hazard  of  unauthorised  powers.  I  am  firr 
from  thinking  that  measures  undertaken  on  respon¬ 
sibility  are  by  any  means  meritorious  on  that  account. 
On  the  contrary,  success  itself  should  in  my  judgment 
be  put  on  its  defence,  and  it  is  not  till  after  acquittal 
that  the  irregular  service,  however  important,  can  ob¬ 
tain  acknowledgment.  .  .  My  defence  is,  first,  I  knew 
in  an  authoritative  way  (I  include  the  French  islands 
in  this  argument)  that  the  objects  proposed  by  the 
measures  I  hazarded  were  deemed  desirable  by  Govern¬ 
ment.  I  knew,  secondly,  that  they  could  not  be  ob¬ 
tained  in  any  other  way.  Thirdly,  I  had  good  grounds, 
since  established  by  success  in  each  instance,  to  believe 
that  they  might  then  be  accomplished.  Fourthly  (and 
this  is  the  strong  point  of  my  defence,  without  which  all 
the  rest  would  be  invalid),  1  was  intimately  convinced, 
and  I  am  now  sanctioned  by  the  events,  that  the  service 
woidd  have  become  impracticable  by  delay. 

‘  It  has  been  made  manifest  that  if  the  PTench 
islands  had  not  been  reduced  before  the  last  hurricane 
month,  that  conquest  would  never  have  been  accom¬ 
plished  by  any  scale  of  force  or  measures  which  have 
hitherto  been  in  contemplation.  .  .  .  Three  thousand, 
or  four  thousand,  indeed  a  smaller  number  of  PTench 
troops  of  the  line — and  that  succour,  we  have  now 
reason  to  know,  would  have  been  actually  thrown  in— 


320 


LORD  MINTO  IN  INDIA. 


[1811 


would,  in  all  the  opinions  I  have  heard,  have  rendered 
the  Mauritius  impregnable  to  any  expedition  from 
India. 

‘  Again,  if  the  Mauritius  had  not  fallen  in  December, 
it  would  have  been  totally  impossible  to  prosecute  the 
views  against  Java,  always  combined  with  the  former, 
before  the  rainy  monsoons  in  the  Eastern  seas.  And  if 
we  had  waited  for  the  succeeding  favourable  season,  we 
have  now  seen  that  Java  would  also  have  been  re¬ 
inforced  beyond  any  means  we  could  have  employed 
for  the  conquest.  In  a  course  of  measures,  therefore, 
necessarily  to  follow  each  other,  depending  all  through 
upon  a  chain  of  success  without  a  broken  link,  and  each 
limited  to  the  narrowest  period  of  time,  and  treading 
upon  the  heels  of  the  other,  I  had, — first,  to  be  reasonably 
satisfied  that  by  great  exertion  success  was  possible 
and  probable, — and  next,  to  push  on  without  delay. 
“  Nos  quidem  hoc  sentimus  ” — this  is  the  sentiment  of 
Cicero  to  Lentulus  when  he  advises  him  ft)  undertake 
the  conquest  of  Egypt — “  si  exploratum  tibi  sit,  posse 
te  illius  regni  potiri,  non  esse  cunctandum ;  si  dubium 
non  esse  conandum.’’ 

‘  .  .  .  and  in  the  progress  of  these  successive 
anxious  events  I  have  been  more  than  once  reminded 
of  what  Lentulus  is  told  in  the  same  epistle  from  his 
friend:  ‘Totius  facti  tui  judicium,  non  tarn  ex  con- 
silio  tuo,  quam  ex  eventu,  homines  esse  factnros. 

‘  I  have  been  most  fortunate  in  Sir  S.  Auchmuty,  not 
only  as  a  Glen  era!  but  as  a  gentleman.  Collision  has 


^T.  60] 


CALCUTTA. 


321 


been  entirely  excluded  from  this  joint  service,  and  the 
most  cordial  harmony  has  prevailed  between  ns. 
Indeed,  I  have  taken  care  there  should  be  no  collision 
by  effacing  myself  entirely  till  the  conquest  was  made, 
and  the  moment  came  for  assuming  the  govern¬ 
ment  ;  taking  care  that  one  sun  should  be  in  eclipse 
while  the  other  was  shining  in  the  same  hemisphere. 
.  .  .  You  cannot  well  imagine  the  discomfort  I  feel  in 
writing  a  line  that  expresses  even  a  shade  of  discontent, 
and  especially  in  addressing  it  to  yourself,  whose  whole 
conduct  towards  me  has  been  calculated  to  inspire  sen¬ 
timents  of  the  very  opposite  kind ;  but  in  truth  I  have 
had  occasion  to  perceive  for  a  certain  time  back  a 
change  in  the  comfortable  footing  on  which  I  stood  at 
home  when  I  left  England.’  After  alluding  to  certain 
measures  which  in  his  judgment  appeared  to  claim  an 
acknowledgment  that  they  had  not  received.  Lord  Minto 
continued  :  ‘  At  the  head  of  these  I  place  all  that  relates 
to  the  IMadras  troubles,  on  which  I  am  anxious  to  say 
beforehand  that  I  join  issue  with  any  adversaries  I  may 
appear  to  have,  and  to  assert  for  myself  that  from  the 
first  origin  to  the  last  date  of  these  events  I  acted  the 
part  that  became  me,  considting  alike  the  duty  I  owed 
to  the  public,  and  the  justice  or  indulgence  which  it  was 
fitting  to  administer  to  individuals.  A  mutiny  of  officers 
and  gentlemen  was  subdued ;  the  distracted  army  was 
tranquillised  and  reconciled ;  the  same  army  has  since, 
and  did  indeed  instantly  evince,  not  merely  its  fidelity, 
but  its  courage  and  discipline  in  action  and  distin¬ 
guished  service.’ 

Y 


322 


LOED  MINTO  IN  INDIA. 


[1811 


And  to  the  Chairman  of  the  Court  of  Directors  *  he 
Avrote  in  the  same  strain ; — 

‘  If  I  had  acted  on  any  feeble  and  false  principle — if 
I  had  Aveakened  my  support  to  the  Company’s  govern¬ 
ment  by  any  refined  or  capricious  modification — if  I 
had  but  Avavered  and  suffered  a  shade  of  doubt  to  exist 
concerning  me,  Sir  Gleorge  himself  has  often  acknoAV- 
ledged,  since  the  event  has  been  closed,  that  all  Avas  lost. 
After  the  submission  of  the  guilty  I  claim  to  have  done 
all  that  Avas  necessary  for  discipline  and  future  security ; 
and  it  is  my  boast,  and  abvays  Avill  be,  that  I  did  no 
more ;  that  I  stopped  the  torrent  of  individual  calamity 
at  the  point  Avhere  it  ceased  to  be  indispensable  for  the 
public  interest  and  safety.  I  claim  to  have  tranquil- 
lised  the  army  as  quickly  after  the  tempest  as  the  SAvell 
that  survives  tempests  alloAved ;  and  from  a  condition 
dangerous  to  the  existence  of  our  nation,  I  sent  out 
that  army  instantly,  entitled  to  our  confidence  Avhen  it 
Avent,  and  to  our  thanks  and  applause  when  the  service 
was  performed. 

‘  In  the  last  days  of  1811  I  have  still  to  say  that  I 
do  not  know  by  a  single  official  word  that  my  residence 
at  Madras  during  eight  months  of  the  years  1809 
and  1810  has  ever  reached  the  ears  of  the  Court  of 
Directors.  I  hazarded  from  thence  several  important 
suggestions  for  the  public  good,  but  they  have  lain 
Avithout  notice  until  the  present  time.’ 

Again,  as  in  his  differences  with  the  missionaries, 


'  Dec.  12,  1811. 


^T.  60] 


LETTERS  FROM  HOME. 


,32.3 


the  Court  of  Directors  was  a  house  divided  against 
itself.  Sir  (xeorge  Barlow’s  friends  were  offended  liy 
the  leniency  shown  to  the  officers;  his  opponents 
resented  the  approbation  bestowed  by  Lord  Minto  on 
Sir  George  Barlow  for  the  energetic  measures  by  which 
he  had  stemmed  the  tide  of  mutiny. 

The  Governor  General  had  strcjiigly  recommended 
Sir  George,  ‘  and  other  faithful  servants  of  the  Madras 
mutiny,’  for  some  mark  of  public  approbation.  ‘  If 
this  is  not  done,  I  must  say  that  Government  will  be 
deficient  in  a  just  estimate  of  the  evil  that  has  been 
averted,  and  of  the  service  that  has  been  rendered  to 
the  empire,’  But  though  the  despatches,  when  at  last 
they  arrived  in  India,  contained  a  cordial  approbation 
of  the  part  taken  by  the  Governor  General,  the  con¬ 
duct  of  Sir  George  Barlow  was  commented  upon  in 
terms  which  foreshadowed  his  recall  in  the  following 
year. 

Some  passages  fixan  a  letter  written  by  Lord 
]\Iinto’s  eldest  daughter,  give  an  amusing  and  pro¬ 
bably  an  accurate  view  of  certain  circumstances  which 
deprived  her  father’s  services  at  this  period  of  their  just 
meed  of  approbation. 


‘  Minto,  May  1,  ISl  1. 

‘  T  think  it  has  been  the  way  all  along  for  the 
Foxite  Whigs  to  take  part  tvith  the  officers  at  Madras; 
and  I  Avas  convinced,  from  the  time  Cecil  Smith  came 
home,  that  not  only  the  ‘  Edinburgh  Review  ’  Avould  take 
that  side,  but  that  Sidney  Smith  Avould  be  the  oracle 


324 


LOED  MINTO  IN  INDIA. 


[1812 


upon  the  subject  at  Holland  House,  &c. ;  and  so  I 
verily  believe  it  is. 

‘  There  is  such  a  complication  of  plots  and  wheels  in 
the  political  world  that  it  is  not  very  easy  to  say  at  any 
time  what  will  be  thought  or  done  by  those  who  call 
themselves  your  friends.  I  believe  that  if  the  present 
fxovernment  brought  forward  any  proposal  of  rewarding 
you,  or  Sir  George  either,  for  the  Madras  business,  or 
had  even  voted  thanks  for  the  Isle  of  France,  Opposi¬ 
tion  would,  as  in  duty  bound,  have  opposed  the  mea¬ 
sure  ;  and  the  Directors,  amidst  the  variances  in  their 
Court  on  all  the  late  Indian  business,  may  think  like 
Mrs.  Beaumont,  in  “Manoeuvring,”*  that  m  general 
it  is  safest  not  to  mention  things.  As  for  the  Isle  of 
France,  they  wish  it  had  been  taken  for  them,  instead 
of  the  Crown.  The  Croivn,  or  at  least  the  Ministers, 
seem  detei’mined  not  to  approve  too  hastily  of  any¬ 
thing  you  do ;  and  therefore  General  Abercrombie  goes 
■without  his  thanks,  all  Melvillite  though  he  be.  Lord 
Grenville,  &c.,  think,  I  suppose,  that  it  might  have 
been  done  during  their  Administration  (as  Lord 
Wellesley  knows  he  might  have  done  it).  Lord  Grey 
is,  they  say,  chspleased  that  his  brother  did  not  com¬ 
mand  the  Expedition ;  and  while  in  their  eyes  your 
measures  are  those  of  the  present  iMinistry,  and  your 
honour  and  glory  theirs,  consequently  not  to  be  pro¬ 
moted — in  the  eyes  of  said  Ministers  you  are  an 
Oppositionist,  and  equally  an  unfit  person  to  be  exalted 


One  of  Miss  Edgeworth’s  Tales  of  Fashionable  Life. 


.Et.  61] 


LETTEES  FROM  HOME. 


325 


by  their  approbation.  The  great  men  of  the  age  are 
certainly  not  governed  by  great  motives.  So  much 
the  worse  for  them.  .  .  .  Certainly  if  it  were  possible 
to  unravel  such  mysteries,  one  would  think  that  one 
had  the  key  to  the  hearts  of  the  Directors,  when  one 

praised  Sir  G.  Barlow  ;  yet  G - always  seems  to  think 

his  friends  in  the  Direction  are  least  friendly  to  you. 
The  thing  I  dislike  is  the  apparent  indifference  of  the 
AMiigs ;  but  mamma  says  she  is  used  to  that,  and  that 
it  is  the  way  of  the  world  and  of  politicians ;  and  we 
certainly  don’t  worry  ourselves  about  any  part  of  it. 
We  never  can  be  sufficiently  thankful  that  the  Isle  of 
France  business  succeeded.  If  we  had  received  your 
letter  and  the  account  of  a  failure  at  the  same  time, 
and  in  these  times,  we  should  really  have  been  in  de¬ 
spair.  I  am  not  much  apt  to  think  about  politics;  but 
lately  they  have  come  in  everybody’s  way  to  observe, 
and  I  am  like  the  rest  of  the  world,  and  look  and 
wonder  how  it  will  all  end. 

‘The  King  seems  regaining  his  bodily  health;  but, 
as  no  one  seems  to  expect  his  mind  really  to  recover,  I 
cannot  see  any  reason,  public  or  private,  for  wishing  his 
recovery ;  excepting  that  in  that  case  Lord  Eldon  has 
almost  promised  to  depart  in  peace,  which  certainly 
woidd  be  a  pleasing  circumstance.  I  think  there 
would  be  some  pleasure  (enough  to  make  up  for 
many  disadvantages)  in  laying  one’s  hand  upon  his 
lordship’s  head,  and,  like  the  old  Abbot  in  “  Marmion  ” 
dismissing  him  with — “  Sinful  Brother,  part  in 
peace.'’  ’ 


326 


LOKD  MINTO  IN  INDIA. 


[1812 


As  ill  1811,  so  in  1812,  the  state  of  affairs  at  home 
absorbed  all  the  interest  which  in  more  fortunate  times 
might  have  been  extended  to  the  empire  at  large. 
After  the  death  of  Percexal  and  the  various  abortive 
attempts  at  the  formation  of  a  new  ministry  which 
followed  on  that  tragical  event.  Lord  Holland  wrote  to 
Lord  IMinto  that  ‘  whatever  indifference  may  have 
been  shown  to  events  in  India,  has  been  extended  also 
to  the  war  in  Spain,  the  concerns  of  the  North  of 
Europe,  the  Catholics  in  Ireland,  the  ( )rders  in  Council 
at  home,  and  the  events  in  America;  for  while  the 
various  negotiations  for  forming  a  ministry  Avere  pend¬ 
ing,  it  is  true  that  they  so  entirely  engrossed  all  the 
attention  of  the  public,  that  Auctories  and  defeats, 
peaces  and  Avars,  insurrections  and  scarcities  were 
OA^erlooked  as  matters  of  inferior  importance ;  and  a 
ueAvspaper  which  contained  nothing  but  extraordinary 
gazettes,  and  no  minute  of  a  conversation  between 
priA^ate  gentlemen  on  their  vieAVs  of  policy  or  party 
connections,  Avas  a  dull,  insipid,  and  uninteresting  pro¬ 
duction.  I  do  not  knoAv  Avhether  Ave  are  quite  come 
to  our  senses  yet — there  are  strong  suspicions  that 
Lord  Liverpool  has  said  something  to  Mr.  Canning,  and 
]\lr.  Canning  answered  something  to  Lord  Liverpool, 
Avith  Avhich  the  public  is  unacquainted ;  and,  in  the 
language  of  the  neAvspajAers,  the  Avorld  has  much  reason 
to  complain  of  this  suppression  of  intelligence.” 

At  the  present  time  neAvs  from  our  distant  depend¬ 
ency  comes  to  us  Avith  the  rapidity  of  the  lightning’s 
'  Lord  Holland  to  Lord  Minto,  September  1812. 


jEt.  61] 


LONDON  IN  1812. 


327 


flash,  and  not  seldom  with  something  of  its  dread 
effects.  In  the  time  of  Lord  Minto  it  travelled  like 
light  from  a  distant  star — paled  by  distance  ere  it 
reached  our  shores.  Besides  this  unavoidable  disad¬ 
vantage  attending  on  the  imperfection  of  communica¬ 
tion  between  England  and  India,  the  brilliant  residts 
of  the  expedition  to  Java  were  made  known  in  England 
at  a  moment,  not  only  of  political  anxiety,  but  of  great 
national  depression.  The  prolongation  of  the  war,  the 
consequent  rise  of  prices,  the  prevailing  disaffection  in 
the  country  towards  the  person  of  the  Regent,  had 
created  a  general  sentiment  of  uneasiness  among  the 
best-informed  portion  of  the  public.  Lady  Minto’s 
letters  from  London  in  1812  give  a  vivid  impression  of 
the  troubled  condition  of  the  times. 


‘April  22,  1812. 

‘  You  will  see  by  the  papers  that  the  whole  country 
is  up  in  arms  at  the  immoderate  price  of  everything. 
Bread  is  double  what  it  was  last  year,  and  four  times 
its  original  price,  and  all  other  necessaries  equally  high. 
As  to  luxuries,  they  are  beyond  imagination ;  but  you 
may  guess  that  of  necessaries  when  I  tell  you  I  am 
obliged  to  give  the  maid-servants  shillings  a  day,* 
which  with  difficulty  will  suffice.  Riots  have  taken 
place  in  most  of  the  great  manufacturing  towns,  of  a 
most  formidable  character ;  they  are  increasing  rather 
than  diminishing,  and  there  is  a  most  general  dread  of 
what  will  be  the  result  of  the  present  state  of  things. 


'  For  their  Board. 


328 


LORD  MINTO  IN  INDIA. 


[1812 


Koyalty  seems  to  court  its  downfall,  and  has  already 
forfeited  even  artificial  respect.  He  seems  determined 
to  leave  the  nation  to  its  fate,  and  mil  not  even  go 
through  the  labour  of  signing  his  name  to  one  paper 
in  twenty  that  awaits  his  signature.  He  gets  up  at 
three;  has  jewellers,  tailors,  and  all  sorts  of  tradesmen 
as  soon  as  he  is  up,  whom  he  receives  before  he  dresses  ; 
and  metamorphoses  the  dress  of  the  army  and  navy, 
and  fiddle-faddles  away  an  hour  or  two,  dresses  and 
goes  to  Hertford  House,  drinks  the  hottest  and  strong¬ 
est  mixtures  of  spirits  and  strong  wines,  and  forgets 
the  pleasures  and  the  cares  of  life.’ 

‘  May  21,  1812. 

‘  I  have  long  been  holding  forth  on  the  badness  of 
the  times,  but  the  horrible  and  atrocious  murder  of  the 
Prime  IMinister  ^  last  week  has  really  made  everybody’s 
hair  stand  on  end.  I  need  not  describe  it,  as  every 
circumstance  is  most  truly  detailed  in  all  the  news¬ 
papers.  It  does  not  appear  that  the  assassin  was  con¬ 
nected  with  any  of  the  great  variety  of  discontented 
or  riotous  mobs  which  exist  in  different  parts  of  the 
kingdom ;  at  the  same  time  his  conduct  has  been  ap¬ 
plauded  and  commended,  as  you  will  see  at  Nottingham, 
by  huzzas  and  ringing  of  bells. 

‘  In  London,  I  am  very  sorry  to  say,  the  lower  and 
even  the  middle  classes  rejoice  in  the  event,  and  make 
no  scruple  of  saying  openly,  “  It  is  all  the  better ;  more 
should  go  the  same  way.”  There  have  been,  and  still 

'  Mr.  Perceval  was  shot  by  Bellingham  on  May  11,  1812. 


JEt.  61] 


LONDON  IN  1812. 


329 


are,  numberless  anonymous  letters  sent  to  xarious 
persons  in  high  situations  of  the  most  threatening  de¬ 
scription.  Infamous  handbills  are  dropped  in  the  streets 
and  areas ;  and  one  yesterday  was,  “  Mr.  Perceval’s 
ribs  as  a  gridiron  for  the  Prince  Kegeut ;  “  another, 
“  10,000h  for  the  Prince  Regent’s  head.” 

‘  The  price  of  bread  and  the  want  of  work  have 
caused  the  riots  in  the  manufactm-ing  districts,  and,  as 
far  as  one  can  see,  must  continue  to  cause  them.  In 
addition  to  these  evils  the  season  has  been  wonderfully 
backward,  and  is  so  still ;  no  vegetation  has  taken  place, 
and  the  accounts  from  Scotland  are  dreadful.’ 

Nor  were  Lady  iMinto’s  opinions  of  the  society  of 
London  much  more  favourable  than  those  she  held  on 
the  state  of  the  nation.  After  five  years  of  absence, 
she  found  it  more  insipid  than  of  old ;  the  hours  had 
grown  so  late,  that  dinners  might  properly  be  called 
suppers.  ‘  Seven  is  the  hour,  and  ten  as  early  as 
even  ladies  can  get  away.’  The  heat  of  the  rooms 
seemed  to  have  increased  with  the  multitude  of 
Argand  lamps,  and  the  only  engagement  which  did 
not  deprive  her  of  a  night’s  rest  was  a  dinner.  In 
general  she  found  a  total  want  of  animation  where  all 
came  to  be  amused,  and  ‘  the  horrid  phrase  tvell-'imin- 
nered  means  silent,  dull,  and  no-carey.'’ '  ‘  It  is  melan¬ 
choly  to  see  the  total  want  of  character  and  capacity 
in  the  upper  ranks ;  the  excessive  expense  bestowed 

'  A  favourite  expression  of  the  sisters  Ladies  Minto  and  Malmes¬ 
bury  when  describing  tlie  nil  admirari  disposition  which  was  so 
antagonistic  to  their  own. 


330 


LORD  MINTO  IN  INDIA. 


[1812 


on  education,  and  by  men — nothing  attained.  A  young 
man  passes  through  the  common  routine  of  a  public 
school  and  Oxford,  and  escapes  acquiring  any  informa¬ 
tion  from  either  ;  having,  I  fancy,  only  got  into  a  variety 
of  scrapes  of  every  kind,  and  appearing  to  be  completely 
a  sheet  of  white  liaper.’ 

The  severity  of  these  remarks  is  occasionally  tem¬ 
pered  by  the  pleasure  she  received  from  the  society 
lirought  together  by  the  hosts  of  Holland  House  and 
1  iansdowne  House. 

Lansdowne  House  was  pleasant  enough  to  compen¬ 
sate  for  much  didness  elsewhere.  ‘  There  is  nothing 
in  this  town  half  so  comhjrtable  as  that  house  and  its 
inhabitants.’  Again:  ‘I  have  been  living  a  great  deal  of 
late  with  the  most  agreeable  people  I  have  met  with  :  the 
►Smiths,  who  are  delightful;  Sir  J.  Mackintosh,  who  is 
not  less  so.  I  wish  I  could  board  ;md  lodge  with  them. 

‘  All  London  is  now  agog  about  Lord  Byron,  a 
person  who  three  months  ago  was  not  known  or  thought 
of.  The  truth  is,  he  is  crazy  — as  all  his  forbears  have 
1  )een- — not  to  say  mad  and  bad  ;  b;it  he  lately  published 
a  poem  called  “  Childe  Harold,”  which  all  London  has 
fallen  in  love  with,  and  which  in  good  honest  truth  has 
a  good  deal  of  genius  in  it,  with  a  certain  portion  of  bad 
taste  and  bad  writing ;  but  certaiidy  very  striking  from 
a  man  of  five-and-twenty ;  and  so  he  is  all  at  once  the 
thing  to  see  and  to  meet.  Linfortunately,  he  has  been 
flattered  into  trying  his  hand  at  oratory,  and  made  a 
ridiculous  appearance.  To-morrow  we  dine  at  Lord 
Glenbervie’s  to  meet  him.’ 


^T.  61] 


CALCUTTA, 


331 


One  more  quotation  we  may  allow  ourselves  from 
Latly  Minto’s  letters  from  London;  because  it  is  always 
interesting  to  see  the  effect  produced  on  contemporaries, 
before  fame  has  been  attained,  by  one  destiired  to  fill 
a  large  space  in  public  estimation.  ‘  Harry  ’  (Lord 
Palmerston),  she  wrote,  ‘  is  doing  very  well — with  a  clear 
head  and  a  good  understanding.  He  will  never  be  a  great 
man  because  he  has  no  great  views ;  but  he  is  pains¬ 
taking  and  gentlemanlike  to  the  highest  degree,  and 
will  always  swim  where  greater  talents  might  sink. 
Nothing  can  be  more  amiable,  and  I  have  always 
regretted  that  he  should  have  set  out  in  life  on  the 
shahhif  side,  which  he  must  now  stick  to.’ 

Lord  Minto  returned  to  Calcutta  towards  the  end 
of  1811.  During  the  two  years  which  ensued  before 
he  resigned  his  high  office  into  the  hands  of  Lord  Moira, 
many  considerable  questions  fell  under  the  consideration 
of  his  Government,  and  led  to  measures  of  importance. 
Some  of  these  referred  to  the  relations  of  the  Company’s 
Government  with  that  of  the  native  States — of  Gude, 
of  Nagpore,  and  of  Hyderabad — and  to  the  irruptions 
of  the  Pindarees  on  the  British  frontier ;  others  to  the 
internal  administration  of  British  India,  to  the  revenue 
system,  and  to  the  settlement  of  the  ceded  and  con¬ 
quered  provinces  of  Bengal.  But  with  none  of  these 
shall  we  attempt  to  deal.  They  find  no  place  in  Lord 
IMinto’s  unofficial  correspondence,  and  they  occupy 
their  proper  one  in  the  valuable  histories  of  IMessrs. 
Wilson  and  IMarshman.  The  silence  maintained  in 
the  private  letters  with  regard  to  many  of  the  subjects 


332 


LORD  MINTO  IN  INDIA. 


[1812 


which  at  this  period  absorbed  Lord  Minto’s  most  care¬ 
ful  thoughts  and  laborious  hours  is  explained  by 
himself. 

‘  I  feel  anxious  to  tell  you  why,  with  the  same  good 
intentions,  I  have  fallen  lately  so  far  short  of  my  former 
voluminous  virtues  in  correspondence.  One  grand 
reason  is  that  I  have  too  much  to  do  by  several  hours’ 
work  every  day.  Our  conquests,  among  other  causes, 
have  increased  our  labours  greatly.  But  since  you  will 
know  my  infirmities,  the  honest  truth  is  that  I  am 
older  every  birthday,  which  is  very  common  in  the  East; 
and  I  find,  first  and  foremost,  that  writing  in  windy 
weather  by  candlelight  is  a  thought  more  kittle  than  it 
was  last  century ;  secondly,  and  lastly,  I  used  to  write 
to  Minto  between  the  evening’s  drive  and  supper  Avhich 
is  now  called  tea ;  but  now-a-days  getting  up  to  open 
my  shop  at  five  or  half-past,  and  slaving  like  a  maid-of- 
all-work  the  whole  day,  I  am  ashamed  to  own  that  be¬ 
tween  7  and  8  p.m.  I  am  so  thoroughly  done  up,  that 
I  coup  o'’er  like  a  leaden  statue,  on  a  sofa  ready  set 
in  the  breezy  verandah,  and  doze,  and  dream  of  Minto ; 
but  am  fairly  unable  to  sit  up  and  write,  fighting  TOth 
the  flare  and  with  the  darkness  and  the  mosquitoes,  as 
I  was  wont  in  my  youth,  a  year  or  two  ago.  This  is  the 
melancholy  truth.’ 

After  his  return  from  Java  a  perceptible  change 
came  over  the  tone  of  his  letters.  Passages  in  the 
minor  key  preponderate.  The  expressions  of  love  and 
longing  for  home,  frequent  enough  before,  become  almost 
painful  in  their  repetition  and  intensity — the  more  so 


JEt.  61] 


CALCUTTA. 


333 


when  a  certain  anxiety  is  discoverable  shadowing  the 
exuberance  of  hope. 

For  this  there  were  many  causes.  The  last  two  years 
had  brought  griefs  such  as  do  not  leave  a  man  without 
taking  away  great  part  of  himself.  The  death  of  his 
young  son,  the  Benjamin  of  the  family,  who  by  a  com¬ 
bination  of  modesty  and  spirit  had  wound  himself  closely 
round  his  father’s  heart  during  the  companionship  of 
the  long  sea  voyage,  and  the  lad’s  subsequent  adventures 
in  his  naval  career,  and  the  death  of  his  earliest  and, 
beyond  the  circle  of  his  family,  best  loved  friend,  Mr. 
Windham,  were  events  that  not  only  enshrouded  the 
present  in  gloom-,  but  cast  their  shadow  over  the  past 
and  the  future.  He  was  wont  to  say  that  no  grief 
shoidd  be  indidged  at  the  cost  of  duties  to  the  living, 
or  to  the  exclusion  of  a  thankful  acknowledgment  of 
past  happiness  and  of  blessings  untouched ;  and  he  did 
his  best  to  act  up  to  his  professions ;  Imt,  as  he  wrote 
to  his  wife,  ‘  though  their  names  may  be  seldom  on  my 
lips,  their  memory  will  be  ever  present  to  me ;  ’  and  again 
of  his  long  intimacy  with  Windham  ;  ‘  The  earliest  fruit 
of  friendship’s  tree  is  the  sweetest,  and  the  latest  in 
rotting ;  but  of  it  there  is  no  second  crop.’ 

By  the  side  of  these  weightier  griefs  he  himself 
would  have  given  no  place  for  such  disappointments  as 
arose  from  the  neglect  of  his  public  services  by  ministers 
and  directors.  Yet,  if  they  were  not  causes  of  depression, 
tliey  can  hardly  have  raised  the  tone  of  his  spirits  ;  and 
the  climate  of  India  and  hard  and  anxious  labour  had 
begun  to  tell  on  the  vigour  of  his  bodily  frauie. 


334 


LORD  MINTO  IN  INDIA. 


[1812 


Arriving  as  his  letters  did  at  long  intervals,  it  is 
possible  that  they  may  not  have  impressed  those  who 
received  them,  as  they  do  ourselves,  with  a  conviction 
that  he  had  already  recognised  the  first  tones  of  a  voice, 
‘‘  no  other  heard,  that  summoned  him  away.’ 

‘  Calcutta  :  begun  middle  of  January,  ended  February  7,  1812. 

‘  I  never  was  such  a  slave  since  I  came  to  India  as  I 
have  been  since  my  return  from  Java.  A  great  deal  of 
additional  work  has  fallen  upon  me  from  that  quarter  ; 
and  the  necessity  of  looldng  back  to  proceedings  here 
during  my  absence  has  also  increased  the  demands — 
always  greater  than  I  can  answer — upon  my  time. 
However,  there  is  nothing  saved  to  me  by  fatiguing  you 
all  with  my  fatigues.  .  .  .  This  Barrackpore  is  a  most 
happy  change  of  scene  from  Batavia,  and  is  indeed  to 
me  a  kind  of  little  Minto,  having  a  faint  smack  of  some 
virtue  in  it.  I  have  kept  January  3  in  a  grand  style 
this  year ;  giving  a  ball  and  supper  on  my  wedding  day, 
as  appearing  to  myself  more  worthy  of  celebration  than 
any  other  feast  in  the  calendar,  especially  as  it  is  also 
the  birthday  of  Cicero,  a  gentleman  who  attended  ns 
faithfully  through  the  whole  campaign.  Seven  hundred 
sat  down  to  supper,  and  you  see  how  I  must  oppress  the 
provinces  to  support  such  extravagance.  We  have  had 
a  christening  of  seven  souls  at  once.  .  .  .  Five  of  them 
were  presents  from  various  Jlalay  kings  and  potentates, 
“  rich  in  slaves,  but  low  in  cash,”  like  the  King  of  Cappo- 
docia — “  Mancipiis  locuples,  egit  seris  Cappadocum  rex.” 
You  have  heard  of  them  before  from  Malacca,  where  they 


Mt.  61] 


L JOTTERS  FROM  INDIA. 


335 


were  waiting  for  my  gracious  acceptance,  and  you  have 
also  heard  of  their  arrival  at  Calcutta  in  my  last.  I 
had  sjiven  the  simiames  of  Man  and  Fi’iend  to  the  two 
eldest  boys,  who  continue  to  he  my  owi  hlan  and 
Friend.  I  forget  whether  I  have  given  you  an  account 
of  these  sentimental  appellations  ;  hut,  to  save  you  from 
the  chance  of  a  second  seccatore,  I  shall  now  refer  you 
briefly  to  an  amiable  passage  in  Seneca,  Epistle  47, 
where,  preaching  humanity  and  kindness  towards  slaves, 
he  says :  “  Servi  sunt,  imo  homines ;  servi  sunt,  imo 
contubernales ;  servi  sunt,  imo  humiles  amici  (this  I 
think  beautiful),  servi  sunt,  imo  conservi,”  &c.  I  gave 
them  the  Christian  names,  therefore,  of  Homo  and 
Amicus,  that  I  may  always  be  put  in  mind  to  treat 
my  humble  property  like  men  and  friends  instead  of 
cattle.  Indeed,  they  deserve  it ;  for  better,  gentler  boys 
were  never  born  in  Christendom.  However,  they  were 
to  have  Christian  names  in  the  usual  sense  of  that  word 
at  their  baptism,  and  one  of  them  is  fhancis  ]Man,  and 
the  other  Edmund  Friend  ;  but  I  do  not  mean  to  jiart 
with  the  names  given  them  by  their  godfather  Seneca, 

and  they  will  continue  to  be  Man  and  Friend . 

‘  I  have  read  seven  volumesof  “  Madame  du  Deffand” ' 


‘  ‘There is  a booJc published,  called  Cm-roijmii dance  de  Madame  de 
Deffand,  which  contains  an  account  of  tlie  court  of  Madame  de 
Maine,  "reatly  roseuilding  what  is  to  be  seen  at  Kensington.  Tlie 
mixture  of  kindness  and  torment  exercised  towards  her  ladies,  tlur 
violent  walks  and  agitations  of  l)ody  to  malve  uj)  for  tlie  want  of 
events,  the  jealousy  about  her  friends,  and  her  caju'iee,  the  shortness 
of  her  emotions,  the  extreme  gaiety  and  extreme  dulness  of  her 
house,  are  exactly  like  tlie  ways  of  Kensington.' — Anna  Jlaria  Elliot 
to  her  fa'her,  Lord  Minto,  February  26,  1810. 


336 


LORD  MINTO  IN  INDIA. 


[1812 


most  faithfully,  which  I  confess  is  a  great  waste  of  life, 
especially  as  both  her  topics  and  her  thoughts  are 
identically  the  same  in  every  letter.  But  I  felt  so 
much  interest  both  in  herself  and  in  many  of  the 
persons  who  belonged  to  her  society  and  are  found  in 
her  correspondence  either  as  parties  or  subjects,  that  I 
did  not  like  to  skip.  Her  style  also  is  so  good  that  I 
was  afraid  of  losing  a  pleasure,  such  as  good  writing 
bestows,  if  I  missed  a  sentence.  I  did  really  feel  for¬ 
merly  a  sort  of  affectionate  veneration  for  her ;  but  I 
knew  nothing  more  of  her  real  character  and  value  than 
what  she  chose  to  show  in  the  best  part  of  her  day, — 
that  is  to  say,  in  her  evening  circle,  which  had  in  truth 
all  the  freshness  of  other  people’s  mornings,  as  she  was 
just  out  of  bed.  But  now  that  I  have  seen  the  rest 
of  her  four-and-twenty  hours,  and  am  in  all  the  secrets 
of  her  insomnies  by  night  and  her  ennui  by  day,  I 
confess  that  my  veneration  has  much  abated ;  and  if  a 
kind  feeling  still  remains  it  is  the  glimmering  of  an 
old  flame  which  a  knowledge  of  her  life,  character,  and 
opinions  has  not  served  to  feed  or  brighten.  There 
certainly  never  was  anybody  with  talents  and  a  good 
understanding  whose  philosophy  had  taught  them  less 
d(i  finilms,  and  who  had  lived  eighty  years  in  greater 
or  more  childish  error  concerning  the  ends  of  life  and 
the  means  of  happiness.  The  only  virtue  she  professed 
was  sincerity,  of  which  she  has  left  an  illustration  in  her 
correspondence  mth  Voltaire ;  and  her  only  passion 
friendship  ;  witness  her  teasing  quarrelsome  connection 
with  the  President  H4nault.  As  for  Mr.  Walpole,  his 


^T.  61 J 


MADAME  DU  DEFFAND. 


337 


brutality  seems  to  have  been  a  judgment  upon  her  sins 
to  others.  He  was  a  prim,  precise,  pretending,  con¬ 
ceited  savage,  but  a  most  uri-E utflisli  one.  It  is  not 
odd  that  she  should  have  thought  a  little  incorrectly 
of  the  English  character,  having  formed  her  notion  of 
it  principally  from  iMr.  Walpole,  Fish  Crawfurd,  and 
George  ISelwyn.  I  have  taken  of  late  a  good  course  of 
epistolary  reading,  just  before  Madame  du  Detfand, 
having  gone  through  the  whole  of  Cicero’s  correspond¬ 
ence  with  his  contemporaries,  Atticus  included. 

‘  Pray  never  pubhsh  mine,  for  it  is  a  sort  of  post¬ 
humous  work  that  I  think  seldom  does  much  for  the 
fame  of  the  writer.  But  Cicero  repays  the  reader  by  the 
history,  or  rather  memoirs,  of  a  period  more  interesting 
than  that  of  Louis  XV.,  and  by  the  charm  of  his  style, 
which  is  always  admirable.  I  am  now  reading  Middle¬ 
ton’s  “  Life  of  Cicero  ”  for  the  third  time.  It  has  always 
entertained  and  interested,  but  not  editied  me,  as  to  the 
character  of  the  times,  of  the  Koman  people,  of  Cicero 
the  hero  of  the  book,  or  of  any  one  of  the  able  but 
universally  profligate  and  generally  detestable  actors  in 
that  turbulent  and  calamitous  though  splendid  scene.’ 

‘  Calcutta:  March  10  1812. 

‘  1  am  in  perfect  health,  but  have  been  less  robust 
since  my  Java  excursion  than  before.  .  .  .  My  onl} 
concern  is  about  the  use  of  my  legs.  They  have  been 
so  entirely  confined  to  purposes  of  ornament,  having 
touched  nothing  harder  than  a  carpet  or  a  mat,  and 
carried  their  master  no  further  than  the  length  of  a 

z 


338 


LORD  MINTO  IN  INDIA. 


[181-2 


verandah,  for  so  many  years,  that  I  have  often  serious 
donhts  and  anxieties  ahont  the  craigs.  If  I  cannot 
enjoy  them,  wherefore  should  I  live  ?  and  at  Prince  of 
Wales’  Island,  scrambling  np  to  the  waterfall,  my 
gentlemen  gave  themselves  such  fine  airs  that  I  have 
been  rather  nneasy  on  the  subject  ever  since.  How¬ 
ever,  I  shall  hopQ  both  in  the  climate  and  the  exercise 
of  the  craigs,  for  the  recovery  of  at  least  some  share  of 
what  I  have  been  losing  all  this  time.  I  have  long 
been  content  to  ^valk  through  the  remainder  of  life, 
and  to  leave  the  old  leaping  and  skipping  paces  to  my 
betters  ;  but  if  I  cannot  follow  my  own  kilted  lady  to 
Topwood  or  Fatlips  I  shall  stand  in  need  of  more 
philosophy  than  any  of  my  books  have  yet  tanght 
me.  .  .  . 

‘  Jan  nary  1,  1814,  is  the  day  at  which  my  reckonings 
end.  It  cannot  probably  be  that  identical  day,  but 
it  will  be  as  few  over  or  under  as  we  can  contrive. 

By  the  deep  nine,  and  then  a  quarter  less  five,” 
will  be  sung  out  at  last,  and  reward  our  long  voyage 
with  home  and  perfect  happiness.  So  man  proposes ; 
the  out-tirrn  is  not  our  affair ;  and  we  have  a  right 
to  enjoy  hope  till  the  event  comes,  whatever  it 
may  be. 

‘  I  have  received  yonr  letter  of  April  8  ;  and  the  few 
words  it  contains  concerning  the  Farms,  the  House,  and 
other  subjects  of  that  sort,  gave  me  the  assurance  that 
you  had  resumed  your  ordinary  occupations,  and  that 
by  the  providential  and  merciful  arrangements  of 


J&T.  61 J 


FAMILY  LETTERS. 


.3.39 


nature,  surviving  cares  and  duties  and  the  daily  offices 
of  life  would,  with  the  healing  influences  of  time, 
soften  the  sharpness  of  recent  affliction  and  leave  only 
those  tender  impressions  which  are  not  inconsistent 
with  the  calm  enjoyment  of  our  remaining  blessings, 
and  with  what  may  be  considered  the  happiness  of  our 
period  of  life,  in  which,  without  losing  our  sensibilities 
either  to  good  or  evil,  the  edge  at  least  of  the  latter 
may  be  less  acute  than  when  life  and  all  its  events  are 
new.  ...  I  do  what  I  can  to  check  the  pains  of  im¬ 
patience;  and  in  that  difficult  attempt  I  am  much 
assisted  by  the  total  occupation  of  my  hours  and  even 
moments  in  this  laborious  office.  But  I  make  no 
endeavour  to  weaken  my  notions  of  the  happiness 
which  I  trust  awaits  us  all,  and  give  full  scope  to 
memory  and  imagination  in  painting  the  joys  of  home. 
1  am  sure  they  cannot  be  exaggerated,  because  I  am 
sure  of  your  love,  and  of  my  own,  and  of  the  love  of 
every  mother’s  son  and  daughter.  I  may  be  vexed  a 
little  by  the  injustice  of  the  world;  but  I  have  made  a 
true  estimate  of  all  that  can  happen  from  without,  and 
the  treasure  of  all  I  possess  within  sinks  the  rest  to 
cowries,  which  is  infinitely  less  than  brass  farthings. 
The  one  is  all  sterling,  and  the  other  all  Birmingham, 
and  not  worth  a  thought,  much  less  a  care. 

On  June  10,  1812,  the  following  sentence  begins  a 
letter  to  his  wife  :  ‘  I  have  received  from  Lord  TJver- 
pool  a  full  and  handsome  acknowledgment  of  my 
services  with  regard  to  all  the  conquests  in  which  1 


340 


LORD  MINTO  IN  INDIA. 


[1813 


have  had  a  share,  as  well  as  of  the  general  merit  of  my 
administration  in  India.’ 


‘  Calcutta ;  February  4  and  9,  1813. 

‘  The  whole  family  is  in  perfect  health. 

‘  If  we  can  but  take  care  and  keep  out  of  mischief 
this  last  year,  and  then  find  you  all  as  perfect  as  our¬ 
selves,  my  vows  and  hopes  will  be  fulfilled.  A  space 
more  for  you  and  me  to  witness  and  partake  in  the 
happiness  around  us,  and  to  make  up  for  the  spoils  of 
time  by  blessings  which  we  can  bestow  and  receive, 
whatever  the  young  may  think,  to  and  from  each  other 
as  long  as  we  live,  but  to  and  from  no  mortal  besides, 
will  be  a  welcome  winding  up  of  Fortune’s  beautiful 
gifts.  However  she  has  been  a  good  dame,  and  will 
be  out  of  debt  to  us  whenever  our  books  may  close.* 
My  thought  and  fancy,  having  a  free  choice,  dwell 
only,  and  that  perpetually,  on  the  bright  side  of  the 
prospect. 


‘  By  our  latest  news.  Parliament  was  prorogued, 
and  no  change  of  Ministry.  I  am  sorry  for  the  interests, 
and  indeed  honour  of  the  country  ;  and  one  cannot  see 
without  some  apprehension  the  inefficacy  of  a  vote  of 

‘  To  this  passage  Lady  Minto  replied  :  ‘  I  agree  with  you  tliat 
Dame  Fortune  has  not  dealt  unkindly  by  iis.  The  grand  favom"  of  all 
she  has  shown  us,  is  in  our  family ;  though  I  do  not  feel  insensible 
of  her  other  gifts  ;  but  without  the  first  the  rest  would  have  failed 
in  securing  the  happiness  we  can  now  enjoy  round  us.  Honours  have 
been  the  result  of  your  labours,  ability,  and  character;  but  the  dis¬ 
positions  of  a  family  do  not  always  go  with  inheritance.’ 


JiT.  62] 


FAJVIILY  LETTERS. 


.‘^41 


Parliament.  Parliament  stands  between  anarchy  and 
order,  and  when  that  defence  is  removed,  either  the 
Crown  or  the  people  must  be  vanquished.  The  Crown 
must  probably  fall  in  that  contest,  and  after  an  interval 
of  blood  and  misery,  either  a  foreign  or  domestic  des¬ 
potism  will  be  the  fruit  of  the  popular  triumph.  These 
may  seem  visionary  notions,  and  I  hope  and  pretty  well 
believe  they  are.  (_)uly  one  has  seen  in  our  own  time 
these  very  events  run  their  course,  and  many  a  time  in 
history.  Why  should  we  be  privileged  against  the 
common  laws  of  cause  and  effect  ?  The  times  require 
a  decent,  at  least  not  a  depraved  and  discredited. 
Court ;  an  able,  tirm,  and  well-supported  (xovernment, 
not  a  broken,  selffsh,  and  disjointed  gentry,  leaving 
mediocrity  in  possession  of  feeble  and  precarious 
power. 

‘I  have  read  “Portugal,”  by  Lord  Nugent,  and 
admire  both  the  versification  and  the  poetry.  ...  Yet 
in  one  point  I  could  have  wished  that  a  sentiment 
generally  good,  but  not  suited  to  the  times,  and  there¬ 
fore  not  a  virtue  of  the  day — I  mean,  a  longing  for 
peace — had  been  withheld  or  expressed  with  less  ear¬ 
nestness.  I  perceive  with  great  concern,  and  sometimes 
with  a  little  dismay,  a  tone  of  whimpering  after  peace, 
arising  gradually  iu  England,  and  growing  too  much 
into  a  fashion.  A  desire  for  peace,  because  we  are  tired 
of  war,  not  because  its  object  is  attained — which  in  the 
present  war  is  mere  security  against  subjugation — is 
little  better  than  to  call  craven,  and  submit  to  all  the 
consequences  of  defeat.  What  those  are  we  have  only 


342 


LORD  MINTO  IN  INDIA. 


[181S 


to  look  rovind  upon  the  craven-callers  of  Europe  to 
understand.’ ' 

Lord  hlinto  alludes  in  this  letter  to  a  vote  of  the 
House  of  Commons  on  a  motion  for  an  Address  to  the 
Prince  Kegent  praying  him  to  take  measures  for  form¬ 
ing  a  strong  and  efficient  Administration  which  was 
unexpectedly  carried  by  a  majority  of  174  to  170. 
The  prayer  was  not  granted,  and  on  June  8  Lord 
Liverpool  assumed  the  first  place  in  a  Grovernment, 
which  was  neither  strong  nor  efficient,  though  it  proved 
tough  and  lasting.  Parliament  was  dissolved  in  the 
autumn,  when  a  good  harvest  and  the  glorious  victory  of 
Salamanca  had  done  much,  in  spite  of  exorbitant  prices 
and  scarcity  of  grain,  to  counteract  the  depression  de¬ 
scribed  in  Lady  Minto’s  letters  in  the  early  part  of  1812. 

The  first  fleet  of  1813  brought  to  India  the  account 
of  the  general  election,  when  Lord  Minto’s  eldest  son 
came  into  Parliament  for  Eoxburghshire.  In  the  en¬ 
suing  session  (1813)  he  had  the  pleasnre  of  recording 
his  vote  in  support  of  the  very  measure  which  had 
turned  out  Lord  Glrenville’s  ministry  in  1806  ;  a  Bill 
to  allow  Roman  Catholics  to  hold  commissions  as  field 
officers.  ‘  This,’  wrote  Lady  Minto,  ‘  we  must  devoutly 
hope  will  prove  a  first  step  in  a  policy  of  liberality  and 
justice  towards  our  injured  fellow-subjects.’’^ 

'  ‘  La  paix  u’est  rien,’  said  Napoleon  I.  ‘  Ce  sont  les  conditions 
de  la  paix  qui  font  tout.’ 

^  In  one  of  her  letters  of  this  summer  Lady  Minto  gives  a  glimpse 
of  Teviotdale  which  seems  worth  preserving  : 

‘  Gilbert  is  at  Jedburgh  with  his  troop  ;  640  new  recruits  out  of 


Mt.  62] 


EECALL  OF  LOED  JVIINTO. 


343 


Lord  Miiito  had  intimated  to  the  Directors  his  wish 
to  be  relieved  from  the  government  early  in  1814.  The 
day  he  had  named  as  that  of  his  departure  from  India 
was  indeed  January  1.  In  the  summer  of  1813  he 
learned  that,  six  months  before,  it  had  been  decided  to 
supersede  him  in  the  government  of  India,  and  that 
the  appointment  had  been  bestowed  on  the  Earl  of 
IMoira,  to  whom  the  Prince  Eegent  conceived  himself 
peculiarly  indebted  for  the  assistance  rendered  by 
him  while  a  new  ministry  was  in  process  of  formation 
after  Mr.  Perceval’s  death.  It  was  stated  at  the  same 
time  that  Lord  INIoira  would  reacli  India  in  October 
1813.  The  Court  of  Directors  reluctantly  submitted 
to  the  pressure  put  upon  them  by  the  Board  of  Control 
and  accompanied  their  resolution  of  recall  with  another 
warmly  acknowledging  Lord  Miuto’s  euuuent  services. 
Nothing  coiild  be  more  undeserved,  more  ungracious, 
or  more  discreditable  to  the  parties  concerned,  than 
the  recall  of  an  able  and  uniforndy  successful  (xovernor 
General  to  make  room  for  a  personal  friend  of  the 
Kegent’s.  The  calmness  with  which  Lord  Minto  received 

his  800  men.  This  is  the  day  of  in.spection.  We  expect  our  cousin. 
Sir  John  Dalrymple,  here,  who  is  the  inspecting  General.  To  the 
lionour  of  the  race  of  Teviotdale,  Gilbert  says  he  never  saw  so  tine- 
looking  a  l)ody  of  men,  a  very  great  proportion,  five  feet  ten — fine 
hand.some  fellows.  The  breed  of  men  is  as  much  clianged  for  the 
better  of  late  years  as  that  of  other  stock,  and  we  have  often  observed 
among  our  hosts  of  masons,  carpenters,  and  labourers  in  the  last 
three  years  the  extreme  good  looks  of  the  population.  The  men  have 
got  before  tlie  women,  and  are  a  sharp,  cleanly  set,  though  1  am 
happy  to  see  the  younger  women  with  cleaner,  tidier  houses  than 
their  grandmothers,  and  all  are  anxious  to  adorn  their  walls  with 
roses  and  honeysuckles.’ — August  26,  1813. 


344 


T.OED  MINTO  IN  INDIA. 


f  i8i;^ 

the  first  intelligence  of  the  slight  ahont  to  be  put  upon 
him  may  be  seen  in  the  following  letter  to  Lady  Minto. 

‘June  26,  181:?. 

‘  Your  last  letter,  dated  Minto,  November  7,  brought 
me  the  first  notice  of  Lord  Moira,  or  of  any  intention 
to  supersede  me  earlier  than  the  time  I  had  myself 
fixed.  By  the  same  fleet  I  had  half  a  page  from  Lord 
Buckinghamshire  with  the  dry  fact  of  Lord  Moira’s 
appointment,  and  of  his  having  himself  proposed  an 
earldom  to  Lord  Liverpool,  who  had  concurred  very 
readily,  and  in  a  friendly  manner.  By  the  second  line 
from  Lord  Buckinghamshire  in  December  I  am  informed 
of  the  Prince’s  assent. 

‘  I  shall  not  launch  into  the  question  of  Lord 
Moira’s  appointment  to  this  office  before  I  had  re¬ 
signed  it.  The  feelings  and  opinions  of  us  all  upon 
this  occasion  must  be  very  much  alike.  .  .  .  Some  cir¬ 
cumstances,  however,  soften  the  matter  so  far  as  I  am 
personally  concerned.  First,  the  offer  of  the  earldom,* 
as  well  as  what  everyone  knows  of  the  motive,  origin, 
and  progress  of  the  measure,  proves  that  my  removal 
from  this  office  has  no  relation  whatever  to  my  con¬ 
duct  ;  and  the  measure  is  defended  by  its  authors 
and  instruments  by  arguments  entirely  foreign  to  the 
usual  merits  of  such  questions, — that  is  to  say,  upon 
the  several  grounds  of  excessive  favoiur  to  another  man, 

'  Lord  Minto  was  created  Viscount  Melgund  and  Earl  of  Minto 
on  February  24,  1813. 


^T.  62]  RECALL  OF  LORD  MINTO  R45 

of  political  arrangements  of  office,  and  of  commands 
which  must  be  obeyed  without  hesitation  or  remon¬ 
strance.  Part  of  this  is  new  in  England,  and  the 
remainder  entirely  new  regarding  the  (fovernment  of 
India,  but  it  does  not  touch  me  personally.  The  other 
softening  is  a  vigorous  protest  against  the  measure, 
both  on  the  personal  and  public  ground,  by  some  of  the 
ablest  and  most  respectable  members  of  the  Court  of 
Directors.  I  might  perhaps  have  felt  mortihed  (though 
the  feeling  would  have  been  false,  since  I  have  done 
nothing  amiss)  if  such  an  affront  had  been  passed  on 
me  through  such  a  body  without  dissent.  As  it  is,  1 
have  been  well  and  handsomely  defended,  and  the 
mere  obedience  of  the  servum  pecus  to  a  master  ought 
not  to  humiliate  me  or  any  other  man.  Whether  it  is 
pleasant  to  their  own  feelings  or  not  is  their  affair. 
It  may  be  from  this  view  of  the  subject  that  I  cannot 
perhaps  get  myself  to  be  quite  angry  enough. 

‘  The  consequence  of  the  arrangement  might  to 
many  people  he  uncomfortable.  1  must  remain  at 
Calcutta  some  months  after  my  successor  wn'll  have 
assumed  the  government,  but  I  confess  this  circum¬ 
stance  appears  to  me  perfectly  indifferent.  Lord  iNIoira 
is  naturally  disposed  to  act  handsomely  on  all  occasions, 
and  I  shall  have  no  disposition  to  give  him  umbrage ; 
so  that  I  think  the  rising  and  setting  suns  may  drive 
their  chariots  very  peaceably  and  amicably  round  the 
Calcutta  Course. 

‘  ...  It  is  comical  enough  that  my  resignation 


346 


LOED  MINTO  IN  INDIA. 


[1813 


should  have  arrived  just  at  the  moment  they  were 
turning  me  out  without  leave.  My  answers  to  the 
thanks  of  the  two  Houses  of  Parliament  were  received 
by  the  Chancellor  and  the  Speaker  at  the  same  critical 
time  when  the  movers  of  the  thanks  were  treating  me 
like  a  criminal. 

‘  We  have  got  through  the  hottest  hot  season  that 
anybody  ever  remembers  in  India.  It  has  lasted  longer 
than  usual,  and  the  rains  have  come  so  late  that  there 
has  been  a  pretty  serious  scarcity  in  the  provinces  ;  and 
some  apprehension  of  it  even  in  this  fertile  quarter ; 
for  Bengal  is  the  proper  granary  of  India.  The 
tanks  were  almost  entirely  dry,  and  the  little  water  that 
remained  was  of  course  putrid  and  corrupted.  This  is 
a  serious  evil  and  always  occasions  sickness  and  mor¬ 
tality,  as  well  as  distress  to  those  who  escape  disease 
or  death. 

‘  As  the  time  advances,  I  am  sorry  to  say  it  seems 
more  tedious  instead  of  more  rapid,  as  I  expected  it 
would.  I  have  opened  a  new  account  for  November 
instead  of  January,  and  am  at  my  old  work  of  counting 
days,  weeks,  and  decades,  with  painful  earnestness.  I 
dare  hardly  let  my  thoughts  loose  upon  the  end  of  our 
wanderings  and  separation,  because  it  makes  me  down¬ 
right  giddy  ;  and  yet  I  seldom  miss  a  night  dreaming 
of  being  at  home.  I  had  been  talking  of  the  discom¬ 
fort  of  waking  out  of  such  dreams,  and  the  next  night, 
three  or  four  nights  ago,  I  had  a  most  lively  and 
insidious  dream  of  Minto.  I  thought  we  were  aU 
walking  on  the  haugh  ;  John  was  one  of  the  party,  and 


Mr.  62] 


LETTEKS  FROM  HOME. 


347  ■ 


I  said  to  him  in  perfect  confidence  of  the  reality,  and 
by  way  of  triumph  in  that  certainty,  “  Now,  John,  if  I 
should  awake  this  moment  to  find  myself  in  India  ! 
That  would  be  a  proper  job,  would  it  not?”  1  said 
this  with  a  sort  of  grin  t)f  satisfaction  at  my  positive 
knowledge  that  I  was  in  the  midst  of  you  on  the  haugh 
at  jMinto.  I  had  hardly  spoken  the  words  when  1  did 
awake  at  Barrackpore.  However,  I  shall  be  revenged 
one  of  these  days  by  dreaming  myself  in  India  and 
waking  at  Minto. 

‘  I  should  certainly  wish  to  make  the  ash  ‘  that  has 
the  North  Pole  over  it  our  trystiug  tree  in  preference 
to  any  elm  in  Carlton  (xardens ;  and  I  know  you  will 
only  adopt  the  latter  plan  in  case  of  necessity.’ 

A  letter  from  a  friend  ^  he  highly  valued,  written 
when  the  decision  to  supersede  him  became  knowiiy 
finds  a  fit  place  here. 


‘  Edinburgh:  October  11,  1812. 

‘  Your  Indian  administration  has  been  thrown  away 
uj)on  an  administration  at  home  incapable  of  apprecia¬ 
ting  it,  and  perhaps  with  a  selfish  motive  of  keeping  it 
back  from  the  jinblic.  Either  IManritius  or  Batavia 
should  have  made  the  fortune  of  a  Governor  General; 
and  this  great  success  without  any  mixture  of  bad  for¬ 
tune,  should  at  least  afford  a  presumption  of  merit. 


'  The  old  ash  tree  which  .stands  on  the  grass  oijposite  to  the 
entrance  of  the  house  at  Minto. 

-  Mr.  George  Wilson,  an  English  barrister,  who  resided  in 
Edinburgh,  and  enjoyed  the  friendship  of  some  of  tlie  most  eminent 
men  of  his  day. 


348 


LORD  MINTO  IN  INDIA. 


[1813 


Yolir  peaceful  administration  of  India,  affording  fewer 
materials  for  history,  as  happy  times  always  do,  Avill 
probably  remain  unknowi  except  to  a  few  old  clerks  at 
the  India  House.  All  this  you  must  bear — with  this 
consolation  only,  that  it  has  been  the  lot  of  the  best 
and  wisest  men  in  all  ages,  and  will  continue  to  be  the 
lot  of  all  those  who  go  somewhat  beyond  the  reach  of 
the  times  they  live  in.  There  are  at  Minto  a  great 
quantity  of  letters  and  papers,  all  ready  in  portfolios,  for 
you  to  work  upon  ;  and  it  is  not  impossible  that,  fifty 
or  a  hundred  years  hence,  posterity  may  understand  a 
little  of  these  matters,  and  begin  to  do  you  justice. 
You  are  not  of  those  who  will  say  posthumous  fame  is 
of  no  value.  But  independent  of  that,  the  sons  or 
grandsons  of  the  present  little  Giilbert  may  feel  the 
effect  of  it,  and  people  mil  say,  “  He  comes  of  a  good 
stock.’'  ’ 

When  the  Grovernor  Gieneral’s  recall  was  made 
known  in  Calcutta,  surprise  and  indignation  were 
loudly  expressed.  As  the  moment  of  his  departure 
drew  near,  the  manifestations  of  regard,  of  respect, 
and  of  regret,  were  general  and  cordial.  Addresses 
poured  in  from  all  classes  of  the  community,  couched 
in  the  most  gratifying  terms.  Not  only  were  his  bril¬ 
liant  ser^dces  duly  acknowledged,  but  also  the  fact, 
patent  to  all,  that  from  the  beginning  to  the  end  of 
his  administration  he  had  laboured  unremittingly  for 
the  public  good,  and  that  he  and  his  family  had  given 
an  example  of  domestic  life,  not  only  irreproachable  in 


^T.  62] 


FEELING  IN  CALCUTTA. 


349 


its  purity,  but  attractive  by  its  social  charm.  No  other 
circle  in  Calcutta  contained  prettier  women  or  abler 
men.  Youth,  wit,  and  high  spirits  defied  the  languid 
atmosphere  of  India ;  and  wherever  the  Governor 
General  was  the  centre  of  the  society  it  could  not  be 
otherwise  than  distinguished  for  simplicity  of  manners 
and  cidtivated  tastes.'  Lord  IMinto  was  at  his  best  in 
the  ease  of  private  society.  In  London  and  at  Vienna 
some  of  the  most  brilliant  men  and  women  of  their 
time  had  shared  his  friendship  and  had  met  in  familiar 
intercom'se  under  liis  roof.  The  volumes  of  corre¬ 
spondence  preserved  at  Minto  testify  to  the  regard  in 
which  he  was  held  by  friends  whose  signatures  would 
rejoice  the  heart  of  a  collector  of  autographs ;  and 
who  wrote  to  him  with  the  sort  of  easy  confidence  that 
can  only  co-exist  \vith  perfect  social  equality.  At  Cal¬ 
cutta  he  was  a  big  man — bigger  by  head  and  shoulders 
than  any  one  near  him — yet  nobody  could  be  more  un- 
feignedly  grateful  than  he  when  some  amiable  person 
ignored  the  circumstance — nor  more  happy  than  when, 
under  the  shadow  of  the  banians  of  Barrackpore,  he 
gathered  round  him  those  to  whom  his  public  capacity 
was  the  least  of  his  merits. 

In  the  diary  kept  by  General  iNlalcolm  for  the 
benefit  of  his  wife  during  his  visit  to  Calcutta  in  1808, 

'  Luring  the  last  yeai's  of  Lord  Minto's  residence  at  Oalcutta, 
Government  House  was  thc'home,  not  only  of  the  f.amily  circle,  but 
of  Colonel  Taylor,  n  ilitary  secretary,  who  in  I80i»  married  Miss 
Petrie,  a  lady  remarkable  for  iiersonal  and  other  gifts,  and  of  the 
sisters  of  Mrs.  John  Elliot,  whose  popularity  and  agreeable  qualities 
had  made  their  father’s  house  at  Madras  a  centre  of  pleasant  society. 


350 


LOKD  MINTO  IN  INDIA. 


[1813 


we  find  the  following  entry:  ‘Mrs.  W -  happened 

not  to  have  been  introduced  to  Lord  Minto  when  he 
dined  here,  and,  mistaking  him  for  another,  she  said : 
“  Do  you  know  the  cause  of  Greneral  Malcolm’s  return 
to  Calcutta ?  ”  “I  believe  I  can  guess,”  was  the  Lord’s 
reply.  “  Pray  then  tell  me,”  said  the  lady.  Lord  Minto 
hesitated  till  after  we  were  at  table,  and  then  said : 
“  We  had  better  give  the  Greneral  plenty  of  wine,  and 
we  shall  get  this  secret  out  of  him.”  The  lady,  who 
had  now  discovered  his  rank,  began  to  make  apologies. 
“  I  assure  you,  my  Lord,”  she  said,  “  I  did  not  know  you.” 
“  I  am  delighted  at  that  compliment,”  he  replied ;  “  not 
to  be  known  as  Grovernor  Greneral  in  private  society  is 
my  ambition.  I  suppose  you  thought  I  looked  too 
young,  and  too  much  of  a  puppy  for  that  grave  old 
fellow,  Lord  JNIinto,  whom  you  had  heard  people  talking 
about.”  I  mention  this  anecdote  as  very  characteristic 
of  that  playful  pleasantry  which  makes  Lord  Minto’s 
society  so  agreeable  to  those  he  associates  with.’ 

In  another  passage  Malcolm  says  that  it  had  been 
‘  an  equal  subject  of  astonishment  and  delight  to  him  to 
find  a  man  whose  fife  had  been  passed  in  all  the  bustle 
of  public  affairs,  cherishing  local  attachments  with  all 
the  enthusiasm  of  a  country  gentleman,  and  resting 
his  happiness  upon  the  best  and  truest  basis,  natural 
ties,  and  consequently  finding  in  the  constantly  in¬ 
creasing  affection  of  his  family  that  which  gives  success 
its  highest  zest,  and  brings  comfort  under  every  reverse 
of  fortune.’  ‘ 


Kaye’s  Life  of  Malcolm, 


^T.  62] 


FEELING  IN  CALCUTTA. 


351 


The  sympathy  which  his  strong  love  of  home 
excited  among  his  brother  exiles  of  Calcutta  was 
gracefully  displayed  when,  at  the  close  of  1812,  the 
bachelors  of  Calcutta  gave  the  Glovernor  General  a 
ball.  As  he  entered  the  door,  the  opposite  end  of 
the  room  disclosed  a  \dew  of  Minto  House,  ‘  the  burn, 
the  green  hills  all  to  the  life,  and  on  so  large  a  scale  as 
to  reach  from  side  to  side  of  an  immense  room.’  Mer¬ 
cifully,  no  prophetic  instinct  warned  him  that  in  the 
vision  created  by  friendly  regard  he  was  alone  to  see 
the  scene  he  loved  so  well. 


352 


LOED  MINTO  IN  INDIA. 


[Ch.  XIV. 


CHAPTER  XIV. 

We  have  endeavoured  in  the  preceding  chapters  to  re¬ 
produce  from  Lord  Minto’s  correspondence  the  most 
eventful  transactions  of  his  government  of  India.  Yet 
that  which  he  would  himself  have  regarded  as  the  most 
important  branch  of  his  administration,  namely,  its 
internal  policy,  has  been  altogether  omitted.  To  enter 
into  any  details  of  the  financial,  judicial,  and  legislative 
measures  which  were  either  executed  or  prepared  while 
he  held  the  direction  of  public  affairs  in  India,  is  beyond 
the  competency  of  his  present  editor ;  but  to  show  from 
his  correspondence  the  general  principles  which  approved 
themselves  to  his  mind  in  connection  'with  the  subjects 
idDove  named  is  within  the  province  of  this  work.  It 
will  be  remembered  that  when  Lord  Minto  went  to 
■India  the  financial  affairs  of  the  Company  were  in  a 
[highly  embarrassed  condition.  Fresh  obligations  had 
been  recently  incurred  iDy  the  extension  of  their  territo¬ 
ries  ;  an  empty  exchequer  and  high  interest  threatened 
a,  financial  crisis  ;  and  the  necessary  retrenchments  of 
expenditure  consequent  on  the  deficiency  of  revenue 
had  gone  far  to  provoke  a  political  and  social  catastrophe. 


Ch.  XIV.]  SCHEMES  OF  RETRENCHMENT. 


.353 


During  the  interval  between  the  recall  of  Lord  Wellesley 
and  the  appointment  of  Lord  INIinto,  anarchy  had  spread 
unchecked  in  the  newly  ceded  proxdnces,  and  a  spirit  of 
dissatisfaction  had  crept  over  the  services  whose  emolu¬ 
ments  had  been  subjected  to  the  pruning  knife  with 
more  vigour  than  tact  by  Sir  (feorge  Barlow.  Lord 
Minto,  when  assuming  the  reins  of  gov^emment,  was 
strictly  charged  to  abstain  from  all  political  measures 
having  a  tendency  to  increase  the  expenditure  of  the 
Company,  and  to  reduce  all  expenses  capable  of  dimi- 
nution.  How,  under  these  instructions,  he  dealt  wth 
the  vexed  questions  which  he  found  seething  in  the  evei- 
boiling  cauldron  of  Indian  politics  has  been  already 
told.  His  views  concerning  the  advantages  to  be 
derived  from  further  reductions  in  the  general  ex¬ 
penditure  of  the  Company,  especially  in  regard  to  the 
emoluments  of  their  servants,  may  be  seen  in  the 
following  letter  to  IMr.  Elliot  of  Wells,  who  had  in¬ 
formed  him  of  the  probability  that  a  Commission,  com¬ 
posed  of  members  of  both  Houses,  woidd  be  sent  out  to 
India  for  the  purpose  of  inquiring  into  the  condi¬ 
tion  of  the  Company’s  finances  and  of  suggesting 
retrenchments. 

‘  September  4,  1809.' 

‘  With  regard  to  the  Commission,  the  two  services, 
civil  and  military,  have  scarcely  had  a  breathing  time 
from  an  operation  jirecisely  similar  in  its  object,  which 
was  executed  with  a  very  steady  and  a  very  efficient 

'  To  Mr.  Elliot  of  Wcll.s. 


A  A 


1 


354  LORD  IVUNTO  IN  INDIA.  [Ch.  xiv. 

hand  by  the  local  Government  imder  the  administration 
of  Sir  G.  Barlow.  It  is  evident  to  me  that  retrench¬ 
ments  can  no  longer  be  classed  amongst  the  material 
resources  of  the  Company.  The  establishments  will  in 
reality  not  afford  it.  I  do  not  mean  that  you  may  not 
lay  your  finger  upon  some  isolated  case  of  a  civil 
office  that  may  bear  a  reduction  of  salary,  or  some 
military  staff  appointment,  or  allowance  to  a  military 
office,  that  might  be  reformed  without  injury  to  the 
efficiency  of  the  service. 

‘  I  have  myself  constituted,  and  carried  through,  a 
formal  inquiry  of  this  nature  with  regard  to  the  civil 
departments  :  it  has  terminated  in  some  few,  but  in  no 
degree  considerable,  reductions  of  charge;  amongst  which 
I  may,  indeed,  reckon  the  diminution  of  my  own  salary 
as  the  principal.  The  investigation  has  nevertheless 
led  to  some  alterations  which,  both  in  point  of  economy 
and  regulation  may,  I  hope,  conduce  to  improvement  in 
the  prosperity  both  of  the  Company  and  the  provinces. 
But  it  is  demonstrated  by  the  same  proceeding  that 
retrenchment  of  civil  establishments,  though  not  to  be 
neglected,  can  afford  no  supply  adequate  to  the  great 
object  of  meeting  the  general  exigency  of  the  Company’s 
financial  situation.  It  is  an  unwelcome  truth,  I  know, 
at  home;  but  I  am  much  inclined  to  believe  that 
the  general  scale  of  legitimate  emolument  is  perhaps 
already  lower  than  is  entirely  consistent  with  justice 
to  the  Company’s  servants,  and  with  sound  policy,  even 
financial,  but  especially  with  those  general  principles  of 
Government  on  which  the  security  and  prosperity  of 


Ch.  XIV.]  SCHEMES  OF  EETEENCHMENT. 


355 


iStates  are  founded.  The  loose  principles  which  formerly 
prevailed  amongst  the  Company’s  servants,  and  the 
fashion,  if  I  may  so  term  it,  of  corruption  which  now 
forms  the  reproach  of  what  is  called  the  old  school, 
deserved,  however,  a  little  more  indulgence  perhaps 
than,  as  one  of  its  sworn  enemies  and  persecutors,  I  was 
disposed  to  show  it,  Pecidation  and  abuse  were  not 
merely  tolerated ;  they  were  in  a  manner  established 
and  authorised  by  the  parsimony  of  the  Company  in  tlie 
regular  remuneration  of  its  servants.  The  Company, 
perhaps,  in  those  older  times  pursued  that  impolitic 
policy  upon  a  principle  which  would  deserve  less  in¬ 
dulgence  than  the  practice  of  its  servants ;  I  mean  that 
of  'participation,  or  something  like  pjomidage,  in 
abuse  and  even  oppression ;  for  the  charge  of  adequate 
salaries  is  saved  by  the  toleration  of  irregular  emolument. 
If  these  supplementary  profits  had  continued  to  be 
furnished  oidy  from  the  extortions  and  oppressions 
practised  on  the  Princes  and  people  of  India,  and 
had  not  at  length — through  the  disorder  of  provinces 
become  our  own — touched  the  direct  interests  of  the 
Company  herself,  we  are  not  positively  entitled  to  say 
that  the  abuses  of  the  old  Indian  administration  would 
have  roused  the  vigilance  of  Parliament  so  effectually 
or  so  early,  and  that  the  only  radical,  as  it  is  the  only 
rational,  remedy  for  abuse  would  have  been  applied. 
The  provision  of  legal  and  authorised  emoluments,  cor¬ 
responding  with  the  just  and  fair  expectations  of  the 
Company’s  servants,  completely  changed  tlie  fashion ; 
and  at  this  day  I  have  great  satisfaction  in  saying  that 


356 


LOED  MINTO  IE  INDIA. 


[Ch.  XIV. 


a  more  pure  and  highly  honourable  administration  does 
not  exist  than  that  of  the  E.  I.  Company  in  India  ;  by 
administration,  I  mean  the  service  at  large. 

‘  Now  I  speak  from  a  firm  conviction,  founded  on 
personal  observation  and  knowledge,  when  I  say  that 
any  scheme  of  general  retrenchment,  which  should 
reduce  the  scale  of  authorised  and  avowed  emolument 
materially  below  its  present  standard,  would  have  the 
effect  of  countenancing  abusive  profits. 

‘  There  is  another  consideration,  which  recent  events 
have  rendered  too  prominent  to  be  overlooked — I  mean 
the  effect  on  the  pubhc  temper  in  India  — that  is  to  say, 
on  the  temper  of  the  British  public  in  India,  likely  to 
be  produced  by  frequent  and  teasing  renewals  of  odious 
and  alarming  investigations  which  seem  to  leave  no 
man  a  year’s  security  in  the  most  moderate  reward  of 
labour.  The  diminution  of  salary  is  not  in  this  countrv 
a  mere  loss  of  money,  but  it  retards  the  accompHshment 
of  that  wish  which  is  at  the  bottom  of  every  heart,  a 
return  to  England ;  and  in  many  cases  it  extinguishes 
even  hope  upon  that  subject.  .  .  .  Anything  like  de¬ 
spondency  or  loss  of  energy  in  the  temper  of  the  ser\dce 
would  cause  an  abatement  of  public  zeal  and  public 
usefulness,  which  would  seriously  damage  the  interests 
of  the  Company,  if  no  worse  evils  were  to  ensue. 

‘  With  regard  to  military  retrenchments,  anything 
short  of  reduction  of  the  establishment  itself  will  pro¬ 
duce  no  essential  relief  to  the  finances  of  the  Company ; 
and  the  excited,  well-nigh  disaffected,  state  of  feehng 
existing  in  large  portions  of  the  army  tend  to  make  the 


Ch.  XIV.] 


FINANCIAL  SITUATION. 


357 


operation  of  such  a  Commission  as  that  proposed  of  very 
doubtful  residt. 

‘  Great  injustice  woidd  be  done  to  me  if  it  were 
supposed  that  backwardness  to  incur  personal  odium  in 
the  performance  of  a  duty  has  any  influence  whatever 
on  my  opinions.  It  is  not  the  disaffection  of  the 
provdnces  over  which  I  preside  to  my  ‘person  that  would 
deter  or  for  a  moment  obstruct  me  in  carrying  through 
a  wise  and  beneficial  reform ;  it  is  disafiection  to  the 
Company  and  to  the  Government  itself  t  hat  I  apprehend, 
and  it  is  that  apprehension  that  appears  to  me  strongly 
to  dissuade  from  the  undertaking.  These  sentiments  are 
not  in  any  degree  inconsistent  with  a  vigilant  superin¬ 
tendence  of  the  public  expenditure,  with  the  suppression 
of  all  abuse  and  embezzlement,  or  even  mth  partial  and 
occasional  reductions  of  charge  in  which  the  interests 
aird  feelings  of  individuals  shall  not  be  too  harshly 
neglected.  In  this  course  I  am  proceeding,  not  without 
sensible  benefit  to  the  country,  and  without  any  sen¬ 
sible  opposition  from  the  public  or  individuals.  But 
my  views  have  always  been  more  directed,  because 
directed  with  better  hope,  to  an  improvement  of  the 
resources  of  the  country  and  an  augmentation  of  the 
Company’s  revenue  ;  and  I  do  flatter  myself  that,  by  the 
aid  and  advice  of  the  ablest  men  I  have  ever  met  mth, 
intimately  acquainted  with  all  the  affairs  of  this  country 
and  well  versed  in  political  science,  much  has  been 
effected,  and  more,  which  requires  a  little  time  to  mature 
its  fruits,  is  in  prospect. 

‘  A  solid  and  substantial  accession  of  resources  to 


358 


LOED  MINTO  IN  INDIA. 


[Ch.  XIV. 


(fovernment  will  arise,  coiiplerl  with  material  improve¬ 
ment  in  the  comfort  and  condition  of  the  people.  In 
effect  the  present  state  of  our  finances  is  so  much  more 
favourable  than  was  expected  by  the  most  sanguine 
Avhen  I  left  England,  that  we  may  wait  without  im¬ 
patience  for  the  benefit  which  rests  on  the  fair  fomida- 
tion  of  general  and  permanent  principles.  Instead  of 
annual  deficits  of  three  millions,  which  naturally  alarmed 
Government  when  the  Commission  was  proposed  as  a 
strong  expedient  in  an  ixrgent  case,  we  have  in  this 
very  year  of  account  to  show  a  surplus  of  one  million.* 
Therefore  I  say  with  the  best  physicians,  “Hands  off! 
let  Nature  work.” 

‘I  cannot  close  this  subject  without  saying  that  I 
have  never  conceived  the  Commission  to  have  been  pro¬ 
posed  in  any  quarter  in  an  unfriendly  spirit  to  me. 
The  apparent  distress  in  the  Company’s  affairs,  and 
the  necessity  of  going  to  Parliament  for  relief,  might 
naturally  suggest  some  extraordinary  measure  to  meet 
the  exigency;  and  I  am  satisfied  that  it  was  not  a 
diminution  of  the  authority  of  the  Indian  Government, 
but  a  relief  from  responsibility  and  an  accession  of 
strength,  that  was  truly  and  sincerely  proposed.’ 

The  close  connection  between  the  temper  of  the 
ruling  class,  and  the  character  of  their  rule,  is  briefly 

'  ‘  During-  the  three  concluding  years  of  Lord  Minto’s  adminis¬ 
tration  the  supplies  remitted  from  India  exceeded  the  value  of  the 
Company’s  investments  to  the  extent  of  nearly  10  millions  sterling. 
Of  the  amount  so  remitted  nearly  2  millions  were  in  bullion,  which 
was  unprecedented  in  the  history  of  the  commerce  of  India.’ — 
Wilson’s  History  of  British  India,  vol.  vii. 


€h.  XIV.] 


OFFICIAL  COERESPONDENCE. 


359 


touched  upon  in  this  letter :  it  finds  place,  however,  in 
many  others.  Writing  to  Lord  Grrenville  on  the  sub¬ 
ject  of  the  Company’s  affairs,  he  said : — ‘  I  subscribe 
heartily  to  the  advantage  of  a  general  and  comprehen¬ 
sive  view  of  that  subject  in  preference  to  partial  and 
individual  reforms. 

‘  To  keep  iip  establishments,  or  to  pay  them  on  a 
scale  for  which  onr  funds  are  insufficient,  is  impossible 
on  a  permanent  system.  On  the  other  hand,  I  doubt 
whether  reductions  of  emolnments  can  ever  furnish  a 
very  considerable  result ;  for  if  pushed  too  far  it  extin¬ 
guishes  exertion  and  energy  and  creates  general  dis¬ 
content  and  inaction.  Tt  produces  also  the  danger  of 
abusive  and  irregular  profits,  which  is  the  greatest  evil 
of  all.’ 

And  again  to  the  same  correspondent,  writing  with 
reference  to  the  salary  of  a  high  legal  functionary,  the 
Recorder  of  Prince  of  Wales’  Island,  he  says : — ‘  It  is 
of  great  moment  to  send  a  capable  and  respectable  man 
to  administer  civil  and  criminal  jixstice  where  he  will 
be  the  only  lawyer  in  the  country  ;  and  such  a  man  is 
entitled  to  live  without  penury  and  anxiety.  He  is 
not  placed  there  as  a  step  in  his  career ;  but  must 
limit  his  views  to  the  enjoyment  of  his  office  in  a  dis¬ 
tant  and  secluded  country  while  he  holds  it,  and  to  a 
very  moderate  retreat  at  the  close  of  his  labours  and 
exile.’ 

The  peculiar  conditions  in  which  the  British  rule 
in  India  exists  were  ever  present  to  his  mind  when  the 
interests  of  the  iState  or  of  individuals  were  under  con- 


360 


LOKD  MINTO  IN  INDIA. 


[Cn.  xiY. 


sicleration.  A  few  thousands  of  men  were  called  upon 
to  govern  millions ;  between  the  few  and  the  many 
there  were  no  sympathies  of  race  or  of  religion,  no 
similarity  in  civilisation,  none  of  the  links  which  bind 
men  together.  Exiles  from  their  native  country,  often 
from  their  families,  when  time  and  distance  were 
e\  ils  of  a  magnitude  ^vhich  we  can  hardly  appreciate, 
the  dearest  hope  of  Anglo-Indians  was  the  achieve¬ 
ment  of  such  an  independence  as  would  permit  them  to 
escape  from  the  land  where  the  best  years  of  their  man¬ 
hood  had  to  be  spent ;  yet  the  fate  of  India  depended 
on  the  faithfidness  of  such  men  to  the  functions  of 
go\"ernment.  To  their  energy  and  integrity  England 
looked  for  safety,  and  India  for  justice.  ‘  Destroy  or 
even  retard  their  hopes,  and  you  sap  their  energy,  and 
tempt  their  probity,  and  by  so  doing  you  weaken  the 
governing  power  of  your  empire.’ 

In  the  same  spirit  he  wrote  on  the  general  ques¬ 
tion  of  the  suitability  of  a  Commission  to  elfect  mea¬ 
sures  of  retrenchment. 

‘  All  schemes  of  sound  economy  must  be  combined 
with  other  points  of  public  policy.  If  simple  retrench¬ 
ment  is  ordered,  without  regard  to  other  principles  of 
government,  either  the  economical  result  will  itself 
lie  fallacious,  and  the  worst  as  well  as  greatest  of 
all  prodigalities  Avill  be  the  real  consequence,  by  the 
substitution  of  abuse  in  the  room  of  avowed  remunera¬ 
tion  for  service ;  or,  if  the  economy  should  prove  real, 
the  State  itself,  for  the  benefit  of  which  that  economy 
is  sought,  will  suffer  more  essentially,  perhaps  vitally, 


Cm.  XIV.] 


OFFICIAL  coerp:spondence. 


361 


iu  its  higher  interests,  liy  the  inefficiency  of  all  the 
branches  of  the  public  service.  .  .  .  Ketrenchment  is 
the  specific  object  of  the  appointment  of  a  Commission. 
It  is  in  that  branch  that  the  pnblic  looks  for  the  proofs 
of  their  exertion ;  and  the  accomplishment  of  those 
expectations  is  to  be  their  title  to  pnblic  notice  and 
approbation  on  their  return  to  Europe.  They  are  not 
sent  out  to  govern  India.  The  permanent  interests 
of  that  country  are  not  committed  to  them,  although 
these  objects  may  be  recommended  to  their  collateral 
regard.  In  this  respect,  therefore,  I  cannot  help  think¬ 
ing  a  Commission  of  retrenchment  is,  by  its  very  con¬ 
stitution,  subject  to  the  objection  of  separating  those 
objects  of  pnblic  policy  which  ought  to  be  combined, 
and  of  throwing  an  extraordinary  share  of  the  public 
authority  and  energy  into  a  single  branch  of  the  pub¬ 
lic  concerns,  in  a  manner  which  is  distinct,  from,  and  is 
on  that  account  prejudicial  to,  the  general  interests  of 
the  State.  It  is  in  this  view  that  I  still  consider  the 
established  government  of  India  as  the  most  convenient 
—  I  might  say,  as  the  only  convenient — instrument  of 
such  economical  reforms  as  the  present  conjuncture  of 
the  Company’s  concerns  may  require. 

‘  I  hope  that  a  remedy  for  the  disorder  in  our 
finances  may  be  sought,  in  part  at  least,  from  an  aug¬ 
mentation  of  resources  as  well  as  from  diminution  of 
charges.  I  am  persuaded  much  may  be  done  by  an 
economical  administration,  by  avoiding  unnecessary 
expenses,  and  by  combating  abuse,  fraud,  and  extrava¬ 
gance  in  the  pidilic  expenditure.’ 


362 


LORD  MINTO  IN  INDIA. 


[Ch.  xiy. 


One  source  to  which  Lord  Minto  looked  for  an 
augmentation  of  resources,’  was  the  gradual  extension 
of  free  trade,  in  the  place  of  the  existing  system  of 
exclusion  and  monopoly. 

In  a  private  letter  to  the  Hon.  E.  Dundas,  Decem¬ 
ber  1808,  he  wrote:  ‘  The  great  question  between  the 
Company’s  monopoly  and  the  private  trade  is  too  exten¬ 
sive  and  complicated  for  a  letter.  I  shall  only  say  that 
the  circumstances  on  which  the  necessity  for  monopoly 
for  the  trade  of  India  was  originally  founded,  have 
passed  away  ;  and  a  state  of  the  -world,  as  well  as  a 
change  in  the  condition  of  the  Eastern  world  itself, 
has  arrived  which,  so  far  from  requiring  monopoly,  will 
I  suspect,  be  found  no  longer  compatible  with  that 
system.  Sudden  and  radical  changes  in  great  institu¬ 
tions  are  however,  seldom,  perhaps  never,  free  from 
danger  and  evil.  'My  mind  certainly  leans  to  the 
system  which  appears  to.be  in  agitation — namely,  that 
of  relaxation  in  the  present  monopoly,  rather  than  to 
its  total  or  immediate  abolition. 

‘  Of  this  I  Avill  venture  to  assure  you,  looking  to 
the  Indian  side  of  the  question  only,  that  every  exten¬ 
sion  that  can  be  given  to  the  freedom  of  trade  Avill 
operate  most  powerfully  and  sensibly  to  the  instant 
improvement  of  the  wealth  and  prosperity  of  India.  I 
am  strongly  inclined  to  the  opinion  that  the  East  India 
Company  itself  will  find  more  advantage  in  the  pros¬ 
perity  of  its  territories  than  in  the  profits  of  its  exclu¬ 
sive  trade  ;  and  is  in  reality  more  interested  as  a  Stock 
Company  in  the  former  than  in  the  latter.  As  Sove- 


Ch.  XIV.] 


FKEEDOM  OF  TRADE. 


363 


reigns  of  an  Empire  the  question  Avill  admit  of  no 
doubt,  and  the  duties  arising  from  that  relation  may  be 
thought  entitled  to  their  share  in  its  decision.’'  ^ 

‘  I  should  conceive  that  if  the  import  and  exjiort. 
trade  is  thrown  open  to  the  extent  mentioned  in  the 
Articles  3rd,  4th,  and  7th,  of  your  letter,  a  liberty  to 
individual  traders  to  employ  European  factors,  of  their 
own  appointing,  in  the  interior  of  the  pimdnces  will 
become  necessary.  This  ^vill  increase  the  number  of 
Europeans  resident  in  the  provinces,  and  it  will  be  im¬ 
possible  to  protect  the  native  people  from  oppression 
if  Europeans  residing  in  the  provinces  continue  to  be 
amenable  only  to  the  Supreme  Court  in  Calcutta,  and 
exempt  from  the  local  control  of  the  Company’s  Courts. 
This  inconvenience  is  already  felt  most  sensibly.* 

‘Redress  is  in  reality  entirely  refused  if  it  must  be 
sought  by  poor  men  from  a  h^reign  court  at  a  great 
distance.  The  proper  remedy  will  in  my  apprehension 

*  Tlie  exclusive  monopoly  by  the  Company  of  the  India  trade 
was  abolished  on  the  renewal  of  the  Bast  India  Charter  in  1813. 
The  exclusive  trade  to  China  was  confirmed  to  them. 

*  The  system  of  judicature  referred  to  was  that  instituted  by 
Lord  Cornwallis,  of  which  the  chief  feature  was  the  establishment  of 
a  number  of  coiu'ts  throughout  the  British  territory — one  in  the 
chief  city  of  every  district — over  which  presided  a  judge  with  one 
or  two  assistants  chosen  from  the  Company’s  servants.  Eacli  court 
was  provided  with  a  native  to  expound  the  Hindoo  or  Mahommedan 
law.  All  descriptions  of  persons,  British  subjects  alone  excepted,  were 
amenable  to  these  tribunals.  From  their  decisions  there  were  two 
stages  of  appeal  ;  the  (irst  to  the  provincial  courts,  of  which  there 
were  four  ;  the  last  and  highest  Court  of  A])])eal  was  the  Sudder 
Dewanee  Adawlet,  composed  of  the  chief  members  of  Government, 
assisted  by  natives.  British  subjects  were  amenable  only  to  the 
Supreme  Court  at  Calcutta. 


364 


LOKD  MINTU  IN  INDIA. 


[Ch.  XIV. 


he  to  subject  Europeans  at  a  certain  distance  from 
Calcutta  to  the  jurisdiction  of  the  Company’s  Courts, 
with  such  limitations  as  may  be  thought  necessary. 
Ihit  I  must  take  the  liberty  of  cautioning  you 
auxiously  against  any  proposition  (and  such  will 
certainly  be  made)  for  extending  the  administration 
of  English  law  to  the  provinces ;  and  consequently 
sending  English  lawyers  and  attorneys  among  the 
people  of  India.  I  would  also  caution  you  against  any 
admixture  of  the  two  judicatures,  by  giving  appeals 
from  the  Company’s  courts  to  the  Supreme  Court,  or 
by  placing  a  judge  or  the  Chief  Justice  of  the  Supreme 
Court  ill  the  Sudder  Dewanee  Adawlet,  which  is  the 
Court  of  Appeal  from  all  the  Company’s  tribunals. 
Our  judicial  system  is  not  without  defects.  It  is  yet 
in  an  early  stage,  but  I  am  persuaded  it  will  mature 
itself  into  a  good,  rational,  and  for  this  country  whole¬ 
some  and  convenient  system  of  law,  with  a  pure 
and  efficient  administration  of  justice,  provided  it  be 
not  perplexed  by  an  alliance  with  a  foreign  code,  and 
borne  down  by  the  superior  authority  of  English  and 
professional  lawyers.’ 

The  great  burden  on  the  finances  of  the  Company 
was  the  size  of  their  army.  ‘  On  all  sides  I  am  assured,’ 
wrote  Lord  Aliuto,  ‘  that  this  great  expense  is  a  neces¬ 
sary  one.’  Surrounded  by  rival  ambitions,  by  popula¬ 
tions  indifferent  when  not  hostile,  the  ascendancy  of 
Great  Britain  could  only  be  maintained  by  indispu¬ 
table  military  supremacy. 

A  discussion  having  arisen,  in  connection  with  this 


Ch.  XIV.] 


lUL.VNrE  OF  POWER. 


365 


question,  between  the  Court  of  Directors  and  the 
Indian  Giovemment,  regarding  the  policy  of  endeav¬ 
ouring  to  restore  the  balance  of  power  among  the 
States  of  India,  which  it  Avas  assumed  had  been  de¬ 
stroyed  by  the  territorial  acquisitions  of  the  Company, 
Lord  Minto  observed  in  a  secret  despatch,  that,  ‘  as  an 
abstract  proposition,  all  opinions  will  agree  that  a 
balance  of  the  power  of  States,  united  in  political  or 
commercial  intercourse,  affords  the  best,  if  not  the 
only  security  which  human  ingenuity  can  devise 
against  the  projects  of  ambition  or  the  ruinous  effects 
of  reciprocal  enmity.  But  a  balance  of  power,  to  be 
efficient,  must  be  formed  on  principles  of  convention 
such  as  those  under  which  it  subsisted  on  the  Conti¬ 
nent  of  Europe  before  the  French  Bevolution. 

‘  It  must  arise  out  of  a  consentaneous  submission  to 
a  system  of  public  Lvav,  and  a  recognition  of  reciprocal 
rights  as  they  respect  the  several  States  individually, 
and  of  reciprocal  duties  as  they  relate  to  the  imposition 
of  restraints  on  their  own  ambition,  or  on  the  ambition 
of  their  neighbours.  It  must  be  foundcvl  at  least  on  a 
declared  renunciation  of  vieAvs  of  corupiest,  as  a  ])rin- 
ciple  of  government ;  and  it  must  operate  by  the  ajjpn*- 
hended,  and,  as  the  occasion  may  require,  the  actual 
association  of  several  States  to  resist  the  endeavours 
Avhich  any  one  State  may  employ  to  aggrandise  its 
power  at  the  expense  f)f  another.  At  no  period  of  the 
history  of  India  do  we  recognise  the  existence  of  any 
such  system  of  federation  or  balance  of  the  power  of 
States;  nor  indeed  is  it  compatible  with  the  character. 


366 


LOKD  MINTO  IN  INDIA. 


[Ch.  XIV. 


principles,  or  constitution  of  the  States  which  have 
been  established  on  the  Continent  of  India.  With 
them,  war,  rapine,  and  conquest  constitute  an  avowed 
and  legitimate  pursuit,  and  the  chief  source  of  public 
glory,  sanctioned  and  even  recommended  by  the  ordi¬ 
nances  of  religion,  and  prosecuted  without  the  sem¬ 
blance  or  pretext  of  justice,  Avith  a  savage  disregard  of 
every  obligation  of  humanity  and  public  faith,  and 
restrained  alone  by  the  poAver  of  resistance.  Under 
the  successful  impulse  of  these  principles  the  vast 
empire  of  the  hlahommedans  Avas  established  over  more 
than  the  Continent  of  India. 

‘  On  its  ruins  arose  the  poAver  of  the  INIahratta  States, 
Avhich  subsequently  branched  out  into  a  confederation 
of  chiefs,  professedly  directed  to  objects  of  conquest 
and  universal  exaction,  the  fruits  of  AAUich,  by  regular 
convention,  Avere  to  be  divided  in  specific  proportions. 
The  same  vieAvs  and  principles  animated  and  extended 
the  usurpations  of  Hyder  Ali  and  his  successor.  The 
checks  which  the  Mahrattas  and  the  rulers  of  Mysore 
occasionally  received  from  the  poAver  of  the  Nizam,  and 
from  different  combinations  among  these  three  States, 
Avere  the  result,  not  of  a  predetermined  federation  and 
))alance  of  poAver,  but  of  the  prevalence  of  a  system  of 
concpiest,  violence,  and  usurpation.  The  efforts  of  the 
contending  parties  Avere  directed,  not  to  the  just  limita¬ 
tion,  but  to  the  subversion  of  each  other’s  poAver,  and 
the  aggrandisement  of  their  OAvn  ;  and  it  is  unnecessary 
to  refer  to  the  testimony  of  specific  facts,  Avith  a  view 
to  demonstrate  the  self-evident  proposition,  that  the 


Ch.  XIV.] 


MILITARY  DISCIPLINE. 


367 


permanent  existence  of  a  balance  of  power  is  incompa¬ 
tible  with  reciprocal  views  of  conquest  and  ambition. 

‘  We  shall  not  adduce,  in  proof  of  the  existence  of 
that  spirit  of  insatiable  coiKpiest  which  we  have 
ascribetl  to  the  native  States  without  distinction,  the 
various  etforts  which  they  have  employed  to  subvert 
the  British  broverunieut  in  India,  since  the  period  of 
its  establishment.  The  existence  of  it,  as  the  actua¬ 
ting  principle  of  every  Indian  Power,  requires  no  de¬ 
monstration ;  and  we  found  upon  it  this  undeinable 
conclusion — that  no  extent  of  concession  or  territorial 
restitution  on  our  part  would  have  the  effect  of  estab¬ 
lishing  any  real  or  effectual  balance  of  power  in  India, 
or  forbearance  on  the  part  of  other  States  when  the 
means  of  aggrandisement  should  be  placed  in  their 
hands.  Vour  Honourable  Committee  has  indeed  justly 
remarked,  in  your  letter  of  October  30,  1805,  “that  to 
recede  is  often  more  hazardous  than  to  advance  ;  ”  add¬ 
ing  “  that  this  observation  is  peculiarly  applicable  to 
India,  where  there  is  little  probability  that  concession 
woidd  be  attributed  by  the  native  Powers  to  any  other 
motives  than  weakness  and  fear.”  To  enter  more 
amply  into  this  discussion  would  require  a  laborious 
review  of  events  during  a  long  course  of  years  .  .  . 
the  necessity  of  which  is  superseded  by  the  conviction 
which  we  entertain,  that  no  argument  can  be  retpusite 
to  demonstrate  how  vain  would  be  the  expectation  of 
augmenting  our  security  by  dinuuishing  our  power  and 
political  ascendancy  on  the  Continent  of  Asia.' 

It  is  perha])s  scarcely  sufficiently  remembered  that. 


368 


LOED  JUNTO  IN  INDIA. 


[Ch.  XIV. 


in  countries  where  a  low  state  of  ci\dlisation  exists, 
military  discipline  is  generally  found  to  be  the  first 
and  most  efficient  school  to  teach  the  rudiments  of 
social  order. 

A  curious  instance  of  this  ffict  is  given  in  a  passage 
of  a  journal  -written  by  Colonel  Taylor,  aide-de-camp  to 
Lord  ]\Iinto,  while  accompanying  the  Commander-in- 
chief  on  a  visit  to  the  Upper  Provinces.  After  de¬ 
scribing  a  visit  to  the  ruins  of  iShah  Soojah’s  palace 
on  the  Ganges,  he  goes  on  to  describe  a  mosque  some 
miles  further  on.  ‘  We  found  it  surrounded  with 
jungles;  in  it  a  very  picturesque  and  savage-looking* 
group  had  taken  possession  of  the  ruins ;  about  twenty 
hill-men  were  just  taking  their  breakfast  of  venison 
steaks  on  plantain  leaves  ;  half  of  the  deer,  not  skinned, 
lay  among  them ;  some  were  repairing  their  arrows ; 
each  had  a  large  bamboo  bow  leaning  against  the  wall, 
and  quantities  of  arrows  of  different  kinds  were  by 
them.  The  next  day  we  inspected  the  hill  rangers,  a 
corps  of  about  300  men,  formed  entirely  from  the  in¬ 
habitants  of  the  hills.  It  is  curious  to  see  men  who 
were,  before  enlisting,  such  as  rve  saw  in  the  Jumna 
Mesjid,  or  mosque  near  Kajemahl,  with  their  clothes, 
arms,  and  accoutrements  in  high  order,  and  going 
through  their  manoeuvres  by  the  word  of  command  in 
English  -with  more  steadiness  than  is  always  to  be  met 
with  in  an  English  regiment ;  though  I  observe  the 
native  corps  are  generally  slower  in  their  movements.’ ' 

*  The  discipline  of  the  Sepoys  was  shown  in  a  remarkable  degree 
during  a  great  riot  at  llonares  in  ISOlt. 


Ch.  XIV.] 


VAEIOUS  MEASURES. 


369 


Lord  Minto’s  expectations  as  to  the  development 
of  a  ‘  wholesome  and  convenient  system  of  law,’  from 
the  basis  of  the  scheme  instituted  by  liord  Cornwallis, 
do  not  appear  to  have  been  realised.  In  the  year 
following  that  in  which  this  letter  was  written,  he  had 
occasion,  as  we  have  seen,  to  deplore  the  lawless  con¬ 
dition  of  districts  at  no  considerable  distance  from 
Calcutta,  and  to  trace  them  in  part  to  the  ignorance 
of  European  magistrates,  and  the  corruption  of  the 
native  poUce. 

Various  measures  for  the  improvement  of  the 
administration  of  justice  were  under  consideration  at 
various  periods  of  his  tenure  of  office  ;  but  he  himself 
appears  to  have  rested  his  best  hopes  of  attaining  a 
more  efficient  system  upon  a  previous  amelioration  in 
the  relations  of  the  two  races,  and  upon  the  gradual 
instruction  of  the  native  population  in  those  elemen¬ 
tary  principles  of  truth  and  honesty  without  which 
there  can  be  neither  law  nor  justice. 

The  mutual  ignorance  of  eacli  other’s  motives,  in¬ 
tentions,  and  actions,  in  which  Europeans  and  natives 
seemed  content  to  live,  had  forcibly  struck  Lord  IMinto 
during  his  short  residence  at  IMadras  in  1807.  ‘  1  do 

not  believe  that  either  Lord  VVilliajn  (Bentinck)  or  Sir 
.John  Cradock  had  the  slightest  idea  of  the  aversion 
their  measures  woidd  excite.  I  fidly  believe  that  their 
intentions  were  totally  misapprehended  by  the  natives.’ 
His  subsequent  letters  show  his  conviction  that  the 
chief  impediment  to  the  improvement  of  the  native 
race,  and  the  chief  disadvantage  under  which  their 


B  B 


370 


LORD  MINTO  IN  IISDIA. 


[Ch.  XIV. 


European  rulers  laboured,  was  to  be  found  in  their 
reciprocal  ignorance  of  each  other’s  language  and 
modes  of  thonght.  One  of  the  first  objects  of 
Grovernment,  he  said,  should  be  to  assist  them  to 
understand  each  other. 

In  a  despatch  to  the  Home  Grovernment,  written 
soon  after  his  arrival  in  India,  the  following  passage 
occurs  : — ‘  Some  unnecessary  mortifications  experienced 
at  present  by  the  native  officer  might,  I  think,  be  re¬ 
moved  with  great  propriety  and  advantage ;  and  a  very 
material  and  essential  improvement  wonld  result  from 
every  encouragement  that  could  be  given  to  a  closer 
interconrse  between  European  officers  and  the  Sepoys 
they  command.  To  this  very  important  object  the 
attention  of  Grovernment  is  now  directed,  and  mnch 
benefit  may  be  expected  from  the  means  of  instruction 
in  the  native  language  which  are  now  furnished  to  the 
younger  branches  of  the  service.  It  must  be  the  care 
of  Grovernment  to  inculcate  throughout  the  army  that 
an  intimate  acquaintance  and  intercourse  with  the 
native  soldier  will  constitute  one  of  the  strongest  titles 
to  the  favour  of  their  superiors,  and  advancement  in 
their  profession.’ 

In  a  similar  spirit  Lord  Minto  addressed  himself  to 
the  students  of  the  College  of  Fort  William,  remind¬ 
ing  them  that  they  were  about  to  be  employed  in  the 
administration  of  a  great  country,  in  which  it  would 
not  be  much  beyond  the  truth  to  say  that  the  English 
iangnage  was  not  known ;  that  they  wonld  have  to 
deal  with  mnltitudes  who  could  only  communicate  with 


Ch.  XIV.]  COLLEGE  OF  FOKT  WILLIAM. 


371 


them  in  some  one  or  other  of  the  languages  taught  at 
the  College  of  Fort  William ;  that  ignorance  of  the 
languages  of  India  created  almost  unavoidable  and 
almost  unlimited  dependence  on  the  native  and  sub¬ 
ordinate  officers.  ‘  How  much  prejudice  to  the  inter¬ 
ests  of  the  Company,  how  much  vexation,  extortion,  and 
cruelty  towards  our  native  subjects,  how  much  indi¬ 
vidual  shame  and  ruin  have  resulted  from  this  cause,  a 
very  short  acquaintance  with  the  affairs  of  India  will 
too  clearly  show.’  He  could  not  therefore  declare  too 
explicitly  his  determination  to  give  the  preference  in 
the  selection  of  gentlemen  for  public  trust  and  employ¬ 
ment  to  those  who  should  have  established  a  reputation 
for  conduct,  diligence,  and  talents  during  their  studies 
at  the  College  of  Fort  William. 

The  College  of  Fort  William  was,  as  is  well  known, 
founded  by  Lord  Wellesley.  The  parsimony  of  the 
Directors  led  to  several  important  restrictions  of  its 
original  functions  before  Lord  Minto  went  to  India.  He, 
however,  lent  it  the  fidl  aid  of  his  support,  recognising 
in  it  the  twofold  object  of  promoting  knowledge  among 
the  Anglo-Indian  pidilic  servants  and  the  restoration 
of  (Oriental  literature  to  its  due  position  among  the 
scientific  studies.  A  number  of  important  and  learned 
works  on  the  science  of  language  and  of  jurisprudence 
were  published  by  the  College  in  the  years  1808,  1809, 
and  1810;  as  also  others  of  a  more  literary  character, 
reproducing  the  most  important  and  esteemed  produc¬ 
tions  of  Hindoo,  Persian,  and  Arabian  poets  and  writers. 
A  printing  press,  established  by  learned  Hindoos,  for 


JJ  B  2 


372 


LORD  MINTO  IN  INDIA, 


[Ch.  XIV. 


the  printing  of  books  in  the  Sanscrit  language,  was 
munificently  aided  by  T./ord  Minto,  and  was  encouraged 
by  the  College  to  undertake  an  edition  of  the  best 
Sanscrit  dictionaries,  and  a  compilation  of  the  Sanscrit 
rides  of  grammar. 

His  first  address  in  the  character  of  Visitor  to  the 
College,  in  1808,  contains  a  passage  which,  emanating 
from  the  lips  of  the  man  ivho  was  shortly  to  open  nego¬ 
tiations  with  the  ruler  of  Afghanistan,  and  who  later 
on  enrolled  an  important  portion  of  the  Malayan  race 
among  the  subjects  of  the  Company,  possibly  contained 
more  meaning  than  met  the  ear. 

There  were  two  languages  which,  though  included 
in  the  comprehensive  scheme  of  Oriental  study 
embraced  by  the  College  of  Fort  ’William  at  an  earlier 
period  of  the  institution,  were  not  provided  for  in  the 
modified  plan  of  instruction  to  which  the  College  was 
now  restricted — the  Alalay,  and  the  Afghan  or  Pushtoo. 

‘Yet,’ said  Lord  Minto,  ‘  I  cannot  think  either  of 
those  I  have  mentioned  entirely  devoid  of  interest ;  in 
the  first  place  as  branches  of  the  general  and  liberal 
pursuit  of  Eastern  learning  which  we  profess;  and  in 
the  next  place  as  bearing  either  a  present  and  imme¬ 
diate,  or  in  the  many  chances  of  human  vicissitude,  a 
prospective,  and  perhaps  not  remote,  affinity  to  our 
affairs.’  Some  steps  had  been  already  taken  in  the 
direction  indicated,  by  the  joint  labours  of  a  learned 
native  of  Peshawur  and  of  a  British  Orientalist,  of 
which  a  vocabulary,  dictionary,  and  essay  on  Afghan 
grammar  were  the  result. 


Ch.  XIV. J 


COLLEGE  OF  FORT  WILLIAM. 


373 


We  have  seen  it  stated,  with  what  trutli  we  know 
not,  that  at  the  present  time  fewer  of  onr  officers  are 
accjiiainted  with  the  Pushtoo  dialect  than  might  be 
desired,  and  ‘  enlightened  foreigners  ’  have  commented 
on  the  insufficient  knowledge  of  Oriental  tongues  ob¬ 
servable  among  British  agents  in  the  East. 

Not  one  of  his  public  duties,  said  Lord  INIinto  in  his 
last  annual  address  to  the  College  of  Fort  \\hlliam,  had 
excited  in  his  mind  a  more  cordial  concern  and  more 
lively  interest  than  those  appertaining  to  the  office  of 
A^isitor  of  the  College. 

And,  perhaps,  no  more  intellectual  treat  was  to  be 
olitained  at  Calcutta  than  was  offered  by  the  discourse 
of  Lord  INIinto  on  the  occasion  of  the  annual  chstribu- 
tion  of  honorary  degrees,  of  prizes,  and  medals  to  the 
successful  students  of  the  College.  Alauy  went  to 
hear  him  who  had  no  other  attraction  than  the  plea¬ 
sure  of  listening  to  a  thoughtfid  address,  expressed 
in  language  worthy  of  the  thought.  It  is  probable 
that  none  of  his  pnblic  appearances  were  so  well  adapted 
to  disclose  the  natural  bias  of  his  tastes  as  this;  in 
which  the  pursint  of  literature  in  all  its  branches  was 
his  theme,  while  the  almost  paternal  tenderness  with 
which  he  sympathised  in  the  hopes  and  eftorts  of  the 
young  gave  at  times  a  touching  as  well  as  impressive 
character  to  his  exhortations. 

It  is  pleasant  to  learn,  on  the  authority  of  the 
eminent  historian  of  British  India,  that  Lord  Alinto’s 
earnest  efforts  to  bring  into  fnll  operation  the  benefits 
intended  by  the  illnstrious  founder  of  the  College  were 


374 


LORD  MINTO  IN  INDIA, 


[Ch.  XIV. 


crowned  with  eminent  siiccess.  ‘  The  junior  members 
of  the  service  were  animated  to  hoirourable  exertions, 
which  formed  the  foundation  of  their  future  distinction ; 
their  seniors  were  induced  to  apply  their  knowledge 
and  acquirements  to  the  instruction  of  their  younger 
brethren ;  and  a  number  of  natives  of  talent,  exercising 
over  their  countrymen  the  combined  influence  of  learn¬ 
ing  and  religion,  who  were  engaged  in  the  servuce  of 
the  College,  derived  from  their  employment  some  com¬ 
pensation  for  that  neglect  to  which  the  decay  and  ex¬ 
tinction  of  native  patrons  of  rank  had  subjected  them, 
and  learned  to  identify  their  interests  with  those  of  a 
foreign  and  intrusive  race.  To  them  and  to  their 
European  associates  were  due  a  variety  of  useful  works, 
tending  to  make  the  Oriental  student  familiar  with 
the  laws  and  institutions,  the  religion  and  character  of 
the  people.  Every  attempt  so  directed  was  encouraged 
and  aided  by  Lord  Minto.’ 

Some  years’  experience  of  the  beneflcial  results 
already  attained  from  the  prosecution  of  Oriental  studies 
at  the  College  of  F ort  William,  and  through  the  medium 
of  the  learned  works  produced  by  the  Serampore  Press, 
induced  Lord  Minto  to  consider  the  propriety  of  in¬ 
stituting  colleges  for  the  two  great  races — the  Hindoo 
and  Mahommedan — forming  the  immense  majority  of 
the  population  over  which  we  were  called  to  rule.  Both 
were  races  boasting  histories  of  great  renown ;  \'isible 
monuments  of  their  public  spirit  were  scattered  over 
the  land — monuments  of  exquisite  art  and  refined  taste. 
In  Sanscrit  literature  lie  imbedded  some  of  the  earliest 


Ch.  XIV.] 


nativp:  colleges. 


375 


and  some  of  the  highest  theological  conceptions  to  which 
the  uninspired  mind  has  attained ;  and  with  Hindoo 
and  Mussulman — as  with  all  men — ‘  the  natural  law  of 
which  St.  Paul  speaks,  was  capable  of  development  under 
moral  cidture,  whatever  the  figments  of  their  faith. 

Therefore  it  seemed  to  Lord  Minto  that  to  give  a 
higher  education  on  general  subjects  of  learning  through 
the  channels  by  which  alone  they  could  receive  it,  was 
an  object  worthy  of  the  State,  and  shortly  before  he 
went  to  Java  in  1811  he  wrote  a  minute  from  which 
the  following  passages  are  extracted. 

‘Fort  William:  March  6,  1811.' 

‘  It  is  a  common  remark  that  science  and  literature 
are  in  a  progressive  state  of  decay  among  the  natives 
of  India.  From  every  enquiry  which  I  have  been  en¬ 
abled  to  make  on  this  interesting  subject,  that  remark 
appears  to  me  but  too  well  founded.  The  number  of 
the  learned  is  not  only  diminished,  but  the  circle  of 
learning,  even  among  those  who  still  devote  themselves 
to  it,  appears  to  be  considerably  contracted.  The 
abstract  sciences  are  abandoned,  polite  literature  neg¬ 
lected,  and  no  branch  of  learning  cultivated  but  what 
is  connected  with  the  peculiar  religious  doctrines  of  the 
people.  The  immediate  consequence  of  this  state  of 
things  is  the  disuse,  and  even  actual  loss,  of  many 
valuable  books ;  and  it  is  to  be  apprehended  that,  un¬ 
less  Government  interposes  Avith  a  fostering  hand,  the 


Minute  by  the  Governor  General 


376 


LOED  MINTO  IN  INDIA. 


[Ch.  XIV. 


revival  of  letters  may  become  hopeless,  from  a  want  of 
books,  or  of  persons  capable  of  explaining  them. 

‘  The  principal  cause  of  the  present  neglected  state 
of  literature  iu  India  is  to  be  traced  to  the  want  of  that 
encouragement  which  was  formerly  afforded  to  it  by 
princes,  chieftains,  and  opulent  individuals  under  the 
native  governments.  Such  encouragement  must  always 
operate  as  a  strong  incentive  to  study  and  literary 
exertions,  but  especially  in  India,  where  the  learned 
professions  have  little  if  any  other  support. 

‘  The  justness  of  these  observations  might  be  illus¬ 
trated  by  a  detailed  consideration  of  the  former  and 
present  state  of  science  and  literature  at  the  three 
principal  seats  of  Hindoo  learning,  viz.  Benares,  Tirhoot, 
and  Nuddea.  Such  a  review  would  bring  before  us  the 
liberal  patronage  which  was  formerly  bestowed,  not 
only  by  princes  and  others  in  power  and  authority,  but 
also  by  the  zemindars,  on  persons  who  had  distin¬ 
guished  themselves  by  the  successful  cultivation  of 
letters  at  those  places.  It  would  equally  bring  to  our 
view  the  present  neglected  state  of  learning  at  those 
once  celebrated  places  ;  and  we  should  have  to  remark 
with  regret,  that  the  cultivation  of  letters  was  now 
confined  to  the  few  surviving  persons  who  had  been 
patronised  by  the  native  princes  and  others,  under  the 
former  governments,  or  to  such  of  the  immediate  de¬ 
scendants  of  those  persons  as  had  imbibed  a  love  of 
science  from  their  parents. 

‘  It  is  seriously  to  be  lamented  that  a  nation  particu¬ 
larly  distinguished  for  its  love  and  successful  cultivation 


Ch.  XIV.]  MINUTE  I!Y  THE  GOVEliNOR  GENERAL.  377 


of  letters;  in  other  parts  of  the  empire,  should  have 
failed  to  extend  its  fostering  care  to  the  literature  of  the 
Hindoos,  and  to  aid  in  opening  to  the  learned  in  Europe 
the  repositories  of  that  hterature. 

‘  It  is  not,  however,  the  credit  alone  of  the  national 
character  which  is  affected  by  the  present  neglected 
state  of  learning  in  the  East.  The  ignorance  of  the 
natives  in  the  different  classes  of  society,  arising  from 
the  want  of  proper  education,  is  generally  acknowledged. 
This  defect  not  only  excludes  them  as  individuals  from 
the  enjoyment  of  all  those  comforts  and  benefits  which 
the  cultivation  of  letters  is  naturally  calculated  to  afford, 
but,  operating  as  it  does  throughout  almost  the  whole 
mass  of  the  population,  tends  materially  to  obstruct  the 
measures  adopted  for  their  better  government. 

‘  Little  doubt  can  be  entertained  that  the  prevalence 
of  the  crimes  of  perjury  and  forgery,  so  frequently 
noticed  in  the  official  reports,  is  in  a  great  measure 
ascribable  both  in  the  Mahommedans  and  flindoos,  to 
the  want  of  due  instruction  in  the  moral  anil  religious 
tenets  of  their  respective  faiths.  It  luis  even  been 
suggested,  and  apparently  not  without  foundation,  that 
to  this  uncultivated  state  of  mind  of  the  natives  is  in 
a  great  degree  to  be  ascribed  the  prevalence  of  those 
crimes  which  were  recently  so  great  a  scourge  to  the 
country. 

‘  The  latter  offences  against  the  peace  and  happiness 
of  society  have  indeed,  for  the  present,  been  materially 
checked  by  the  vigilance  and  energy  of  the  police  ;  but 
it  is  probably  only  by  the  more  general  diflusion  of 


378 


LORD  MINTO  IN  INDIA. 


[Oh.  XIV. 


knowledge  among  the  great  body  of  the  people  that  the 
seeds  of  these  evils  can  be  etfectually  destroyed. 

‘  Snfificient,  I  presume,  has  been  already  said  to 
show  the  fitness  of  incurring  some  additional  expense 
with  a  view  to  the  restoration  of  learning  in  the 
extensive  provinces  subject  to  the  immediate  govern¬ 
ment  of  this  Presidency.’ 

The  minute  indicates  certain  reforms  which  were 
required  to  adapt  the  existing  college  at  Benares  (for 
which  a  liberal  sum  was  allowed  by  Grovernment)  to 
the  prevailing  opinions  and  habits  of  the  natives,  and 
to  correct  the  abuses  which  had  crept  into  it ;  it  then 
proceeds  to  recommend  that  two  other  Hindoo  colleges 
at  Nuddea  and  at  Bhour  should  be  constituted ;  and 
ends  thus  : '  ‘It  will  be  observed  that  in  the  foregoing 
remarks  I  have  confined  myself  almost  exclusively  to 
the  plan  necessary  to  be  adopted  for  the  restoration  of 
Hindoo  science  and  literature.  .  .  .  With  the  difference 
only  in  the  population  of  Hindoos  and  Mahommedans, 
all  the  arguments  which  have  been  above  stated  in 
support  of  the  arrangements  proposed  to  be  adopted 
for  the  propagation  of  knowledge  among  the  former 
would  equally  apply  to  similar  institutions  for  the 
benefit  of  the  Mahommedans.  A  sentiment,  however, 
of  deference  for  the  Honourable  Court  of  Directors  re¬ 
strains  me  from  recommending  any  extension  of  the 
plan  until  their  orders  shall  have  been  received  on  the 
subject  generally  of  this  minute.  I  deem  it  therefore 
sufficient  to  add  on  the  present  occasion  that  Mahom- 
medan  colleges  might  be  beneficially  established  at 


Ch.  XIV.]  PUBLIC  ADDRESS  TO  LORD  MINTO. 


379 


Bhangiilpore,  Juanpore  (where  Persian  and  Arabic  litera¬ 
ture  formerly  flourished),  and  at  some  place  in  the  ceded 
and  conquered  provinces ;  and  that  it  might  be  advisable 
to  reform  the  iNIadrissa,  or  iMahommedan  collegiate  in¬ 
stitution,  at  ('alcntta,  on  the  principles  recommended 
with  respect  to  the  Hindoo  colleges.  The  attention  of 
the  Honourable  Court  will  be  of  course  drawn  to  this 
interesting  subject  in  the  next  despatch  from  the 
Revenue  Department.’  * 

We  cannot  terminate  this  chapter  more  effectively 
than  by  a  few  extracts  from  an  Address  presented  to 
Lord  Minto  on  his  departure  from  India  by  the  British 
residents  at  Calcutta. 

‘The  arduous  and  sacred  trust  of  administering  this 
great  government  devolved  upon  your  Lordship  soon 
after  the  termination  of  wars,  which  had  far  extended 
the  limits  of  the  Empire,  and  had  raised  to  the  highest 
pitch  the  reputation  of  the  British  councils,  together 
with  the  fame  of  the  British  arms ;  but  the  mighty 
efforts  necessary  to  ensure  those  splendid  results  coidd 
not  be  supported  without  proportionate  sacrifices.  To 
repair,  therefore,  the  evils  inseparable  from  the  most 

'  This  minute  is  quoted  in  an  article  on  the  ‘  Early  or  exclusively 
Oriental  period  of  Government  Education  in  Bengal,’  in  the  Cdlcvtta 
jR(‘vic)v,  vol.  iii.  1845,  and  is  ushered  in  with  the  remark  that  ‘  The 
Earl  of  Minto,  having  succeeded  to  his  heart’s  content  in  crushing 
the  efforts  of  Christian  evangelists,  next  directed  his  attention  to  the 
heathenish  institutions  which  owed  their  origin  and  support  to 
■the  munificence  of  some  of  his  predecessors.  These  he  re.solved 
not  only  to  perpetuate  but  to  render  still  more  efficient.  And  not 
only  so,  but  his  purpose  was  consentaneously  formed  to  add  to  their 
number  at  the  expense  of  the  State.  .  .  .  This  document  of  great 
historical  importance  is  little  known.’ 


380 


LORD  MINTO  IN  INDIA. 


[Ch.  XIV. 


fortunate  warfare,  to  recruit  and  husband  our  resources, 
to  consolidate  our  recent  conquests,  to  introduce  among 
our  new  subjects  the  inestimable  blessings  of  security, 
of  order,  and  of  justice,  were  among  the  first  objects 
which  called  forth  the  exercise  of  your  Lordship’s 
wisdom  and  talents. 

‘  The  consummate  prudence  and  complete  success 
of  the  measures  directed  to  the  accomplishment  of 
these  momentous  objects  are  attested  by  the  flourish¬ 
ing  condition  of  every  branch  of  the  public  revenue  ; 
by  the  state  of  tranquillity  in  which  these  Provinces 
have  been  maintained,  and  by  the  increasing  opulence 
and  prosperity  which,  notwithstanding  the  privation 
of  foreign  commerce,  they  unequivocally  manifest. 

‘  At  the  period  of  your  Lordship’s  arrival  in  India, 
the  undisguised  and  ambitious  projects  of  our  in¬ 
veterate  enemy  in  Persia,  in  Turkey,  and  in  every 
quarter  of  the  East  to  which  his  agents  and  emissaries 
found  means  of  access,  threatened  to  interrupt  the 
tranquillity  and  security  of  these  dominions.  .  .  .  The 
vigilant  exertions  and  comprehensive  arrangements  of 
that  period  of  your  Lordship’s  administration  were 
commensurate  with  the  exigency  of  the  times,  and 
were  eminently  calculated  to  secure  those  external  and 
internal  combinations  of  policy  and  power  which  in  the 
season  of  approaching  peril  constitute  the  most  efficient 
means  of  national  defence. 

‘  We  have  witnessed  the  successful  exertion  of 
promptitude,  energy,  and  foresight  in  restoring  tran- 
(|uillity  to  a  vast  portion  of  the  Empire  ;  in  repelling 


Ch.  XIV.]  PUBLIC  ADDRESS  TO  LORD  MINTO. 


381 


the  aggression  of  foreign  enemies  ;  in  maintaining  the 
efficiency  of  our  political  relations,  in  vindicating  the 
rights  and  dignity  of  the  British  Government,  and  in 
supporting  the  reputation  of  its  faith  and  the  vigour  of 
its  arms. 

‘  These  brilliant  results  of  foresight  and  of  energy 
formed  a  happy  presage  of  the  triumphant  expeditions 
in  which  the  zeal,  discipline,  and  valom-  of  our  armies, 
under  the  guidance  of  your  Lordship’s  councils,  ac¬ 
complished  the  subjugation  of  the  Islands  of  Bourbon 
and  Mauritius,  and  achieved  the  still  greater  compiest 
of  the  Dutch  possessions  in  the  East. 

‘  We  cannot  forego  the  gratification  of  bearing  our 
testimony  to  the  wisdom  and  humanity  which  extended 
to  the  conquered  the  blessings  of  British  protection 
and  of  British  laws,  and  saved  an  ancient  and  popidous 
colony  from  that  devastation  to  which  a  less  generous 
policy  might  have  doomed  it.’ 


382 


LORD  MINTO  IN  INDIA. 


[1814 


CHAPTER  XV. 

Lord  jMinto  returned  to  England  as  he  had  left  it,  on 
board  a  frigate  commanded  by  his  son,  Captain  George 
Elliot ;  but  on  this  occasion  accompanied  by  his  younger 
son  John,  and  the  wives  and  infants  of  both  brothers. 
All  the  family  had  assembled  in  London  to  receive  him, 
with  the  exception  of  his  wife  and  yonngest  daughter 
and  daughter-in-law.  These  awaited  him  at  Alinto. 

If  the  letters  of  1812  gave  us  a  glimpse  of  the 
gloomiest  period  of  England’s  long  struggle  with  the 
despotism  that  had  enchained  the  Continent  of  Europe, 
those  of  1 8 1 4  mark  the  high  tide  of  her  triumph .  London 
overflowed  with  Emperors,  Kings,  and  field-marshals. 

These  were  the  heroes  of  the  Harvest-Home,  but 
the  sheaves  had  been  gathered  by  the  nations  in  arms 
-  -from  the  Tyrolese  Alps  to  the  ramparts  of  Saragossa  ; 

From  Moscow,  self-devoted  in  a  blaze 
Of  dreadful  slaughter, 

to  the  heights  where  German  armies  paused  in  their 
headlong  course  to  gaze  upon  and  hail  the  free  ‘  exult¬ 
ing  ’  Rhine. 

And  in  English  hearts  was  the  proud  consciousness, 


JEt.  63] 


AKRIVAL  IN  LONDON. 


383 


to  which  a  great  Whig  statesman  '  has  given  expression, 
that  ‘  the  constancy,  courage,  and  perseverance  of  the 
J^ritish  people,  animating  the  prostrate  nations  of  the 
Continent,  had  at  length  achieved  a  triumph  over  the 
most  formidable  combination  of  military  genius,  war¬ 
like  popidation,  conquering  armies,  and  political  talent, 
which  ever  threatened  the  independence  of  our  country.’ 

‘  Is  it  not  (piite  glorious  to  have  lived  to  see  this 
holiday — this  festival  for  all  the  nations  under  heaven  ?  ’ 
wrote  the  calm  Lord  Webb  tSeymour ;  ^  ‘  yet  it  is 
humiliating  to  think  that  the  bar  to  all  this  happi¬ 
ness — the  bar  we  have  removed — was  the  ascendancy 
of  one  baneful  mind.^  This  is  a  sad  check  to  those 
splendid  contemplations  which  Mr.  Stewart  and  other 
philosophers  would  encourage,  respecting  the  influence 
of  general  causes  upon  the  progressive  improvement  of 
the  human  race.  ]\Ir.  Playfair  mil  go  to  Paris  if  he 
finds  Lord  J.  Pussell,  the  Miss  Jlerry’s,  or  any  old 
intimates  ready  to  go  with  him.’ 

Another  correspondent — deorge  Eden,  afterwards 
Lord  Auckland — did  go  to  Paris,  and  with  all  the 
sympathies  of  Holland  House  about  him,  saw  nothing 
so  interesting  there  as  Josephine  and  Hortense. 
‘  Very  few  of  those  to  whom  we  talked  disguised  their 
ailiiiiratiou  for  Napoleon ;  but,  with  the  exception  of 
some  of  the  army,  very  few  would  risk  their  internal 

'  Lord  Russell.  -  To  Lady  Minto,  May  lil,  1814. 

’  ‘  He  must  fall,’  wrote  Benjamin  Constant  to  Sir  James  Mack¬ 
intosh  (March  1814)— ‘he  must  fall  before  we  can  think  of 
anything  else  ;  he  mu.st  fall  that  we  may  have  time  to  think  of  any¬ 
thing  else.’ 


384 


LORD  MINTO  IN  INDIA. 


[1814 


quiet  to  have  him  back  again.  By  the  bye  have  you 
heard  the  calembourg  ?  “  Les  Anglais  nous  ont  vendu 
un  cochon  de  dix-huit  Louis  qui  ne  vaut  pas  un 
Napoleon.”  His  works  in  roads,  buildings,  and  mili¬ 
tary  establishments  are  magnificent  beyond  all  idea, 
and  I  conld  not  help  being  indignant  at  the  pains  taken 
to  efface  all  remembrance  of  his  being  the  author  of 
them.’ ' 

Into  this  scene  of  splendour  and  triumph  arrived 
the  returning  Grovernor  General;  but  to  him  and  to 
those  who  waited  for  him  all  other  feelings  were  swal¬ 
lowed  up  in  the  joy  of  reunion — actnal,  or  at  hand. 
What  that  moment  was  to  them,  and  what  too  the  days 
that  followed  it,  their  own  letters  will  most  fitly  tell. 

Lord  Minto  to  Lady  Minto. 

‘  H.M.S.  Hussar  ”  at  sea  :  May  7,  1814. 

‘We  are  all  well — off  the  sonth  of  Ireland — hope 
to  land  in  four  days.  We  fell  in  with  an  English  frigate 
this  forenoon  with  which  we  conversed  by  telegraphic 
signals  and  received  the  most  happy  intelHgence. 
“  Peace  with  France — the  old  kingdom  restored,”  by 
which  we  understand  the  Bourbons  restored.  We 
now  hear  from  the  Irish  boat  that  the  Emperor  of 
the  West  is  sent  to  Elba — relegatus  ad  insulas.  We 
are  all  out  of  our  wits,  and  especially  myself,  at  the 
thoughts  of  meeting  you  all. 

'  Lord  Auckland  to  Miss  Emma  Elliot,  who  was  at  Madras  with 
her  father,  the  lit.  Hon.  Hugh  Elliot,  Governor  of  the  Presidency. 


^T.  63] 


ARRIVAL  IN  LONDON. 


385 


‘  London :  May  19. 

‘  I  arrived  yesterday,  and  was  in  a  complete  whirl  of 
delight  for  the  first  two  or  three  hours  ;  and  I  was 
caught  by  the  last  bell,  the  sound  and  meaning  of 
which  I  had  forgot.  I  am  excessively  glad  that  you 
did  not  come  to  town ;  and  the  delay  in  our  meeting 
will  be  fully  compensated  by  the  superior  happiness  of 
meeting  at  home.  You  may  reckon  on  this  day  fort¬ 
night  as  the  longest  period  of  my  stay  in  London.  I 
was  delighted,  as  you  may  imagine,  with  A.  ]\I. 
and  Gilbert.  Yesterday  was  indeed  one  of  the  very 
happiest  days  of  my  life ;  but  there  is  one  happier  still 
in  store,  when  I  shall  have  you  once  more  in  my  arms, 
with  the  certainty  of  having  no  more  of  those  sad 
absences  from  which  we  have  so  often  suffered,  and 
Cat  an  to  kiss  and  to  spoil,  and  Mary  and  her  four 
upon  my  knee.  It  is  in  short  to  me,  like  the  events  of 
this  annus  mirabilis  to  the  world,  the  commence¬ 
ment  of  a  new  era  of  happiness  and  repose.  You  will 
have  heard  from  other  quarters,  and  spare  my  blushes 
in  repeating,  all  the  compliments  that  are  paid  me,  by 
everybody  I  meet,  on  my  youth  and  beauty.  To  the 
latter  I  must  plead  guilty,  since  they  all  tell  the  ssime 
story ;  but  of  youth  there  is  little  left.  I  have  seen 
crowds  of  old  friends  to-day — Glenbervies — Aucklands 
— Chichesters — Temples — Fred  North — Henry  Gaily 
Knight — Harrises — Mrs.  Robinson — Elliot  of  Wells — 
John  Frere.  I  go  to  Park  Place  in  my  way  to  Scot¬ 
land. 


V  c 


386 


LOED  JVnNTO  IN  INDIA. 


[1814 


Lady  Melgund  to  a  Friend. 

‘  Minto  :  May  20,  1814. 

‘  The  “  Hussar  ”  has  arrived,  and  every  soul  on 
board  well.  They  landed  at  Plymouth  on  the  14th ; 
wonld  get  to  London  as  yesterday  or  to-day.  We  shall 
probably  see  them  in  about  ten  days.  We  got  this 
joyful  news  yesterday  morning,  and  we  spent  such  a 
day !  It  would  have  raised  the  spirit  of  a  Dutchman 
to  see  the  happiness  that  reigned  at  Minto.  The 
news  spread  through  the  house  like  wildfire,  every¬ 
body  was  running  here  and  there,  not  knowing  how  to 
show  their  joy.  When  I  told  them  to  go  to  the  top  of 
the  house  to  cheer,  in  ten  minutes  there  were  about 
seventy  people  assembled ;  I  gave  them  a  quantity  of 
guns,  and  we  had  volleys  and  cheering  from  that  time 
till  one  o’clock,  the  local  militia  colours  flying  on  the 
house  all  the  time.  After  the  children’s  dinner  we  had 
a  grand  procession  of  all  the  people,  with  fiddles  play¬ 
ing  and  colours  flying,  followed  by  Lady  Minto,  Gilbert, 
and  me  in  the  little  gig,  to  the  Eocks,  to  fire  the 
cannon,  which  was  done  four  times  with  great  effect. 
Then  we  had  cheering,  &c.  till  dinner-time,  when  the 
procession  returned,  and  we  had  a  song  from  one  of 
the  workmen,  made  on  the  occasion.  The  moment  he 
heard  the  news  he  ran  home  to  make  his  poem,  and  it 
was  all  ready  by  two  o’clock.  In  the  evening  we  had 
dancing,  and,  as  one  of  the  carpenters  observed,  “  the 
day  ended  with  the  utmost  hilarity."  Lady  Minto 
behaved  admiiably;  she  was  not  overcome  with  all 


jEt.  63] 


LETTERS  FROM  MINTO. 


387 


this  joy;  but  it  was  a  long  while  before  she  durst 
trust  herself  to  speak  to  me.’ 

Lady  Minto  to  Lord  Minto. 

‘  Thursday,  May  19. 

‘  Oh,  dear  me  !  I  can  hardly  breathe  or  speak  or 
think  or  run  about,  or  sit  still,  or  believe  that  all  my 
cares,  all  my  wishes,  and  all  my  anxieties  are  whisked 
away  in  a  moment  by  the  most  delightful  certainty 
that  here  you  are  in  our  own  little  island  safe  and 
sound ;  and  I  cannot  say  how  more  than  delighted  I 
am,  as  a  secondary  feeling,  to  find  that  my  having  re¬ 
mained  here  proves  the  decision  you  wished  for.  I  felt 
so  sure  of  this  that  I  have  been  as  obstinate  as  any 
mule,  and  positively  set  my  face  against  the  opinions 
and  advice  of  most  of  my  friends,  feeling  sure  I  knew 
better  than  they  could,  all  the  feelings  you  must  have 
respecting  Minto  itself,  not  to  mention  the  everlasting 
delight  in  future  years  of  the  sweet  recollections  that 
will  ever  attach  to  the  spot  of  our  reunion.  I  will 
not  say  that  I  would  not  at  this  moment  give  my  ears 
to  be  amongst  you ;  but  even  at  this  moment,  in  ail 
the  delirium  of  delight,  I  know  it  is  best  as  it  is.  I 
can  be  patient,  and  shall  be  in  a  more  composed  state 
than  is  possible  just  now,  when  all  is  flutter,  flutter, 
and  not  one  idea  is  settled  for  an  instant,  and  every 
possible  demonstration  of  joy  has  been  made  through¬ 
out  the  house.  I  was  called  away  here  by  the  sound 
of  firing  from  the  top  of  the  house,  and  ran  upstairs 
to  that  beautiful  terrace,  where  I  was  received  with 


388 


LOED  MINTO  IN  INDIA. 


[1814 


three  cheers,  and  found  all  the  work-people  assembled. 
The  day  being  perfectly  divine,  I  thought  I  had  never 
seen  so  beautiful  and  interesting  a  scene,  the  air  ring¬ 
ing  with  joyful  sounds,  and  all  nature  gay  and  seeming 
to  partake  of  my  feelings. 

Friday. — I  have  not  slept  so  sound  for  years  as  I 
did  last  night. 

Saturday. —  You  really  are  in  London  —  only 
think  !  Comparatively  speaking,  I  feel  as  if  you  were 
at  Hawick  or  Jedburgh  ;  and  all  the  letters  to-day,  mad 
or  sober,  are  full  of  your  youthful  looks  and  beauty, 
and  declare  you  look  younger  and  fresher  than  when 
you  left  England.  I  begin  to  think  I  did  very  wrong 
to  stay  at  home ;  for  I  can’t  say  our  northern  blasts  have 
had  the  same  effect  on  me.’ 

Such  was  the  happiness  and  such  the  hopes  created 
by  Lord  Minto’s  return.  Every  day  brought  him  letters 
from  his  wife,  showing  that  she  lived  in  the  thought  of 
their  approaching  reunion,  while  with  the  unselfishness 
and  strong  sense  of  duty  which  distinguished  her,  she 
assured  him  she  would  not  be  miserable,  and  that  he 
must  not  hurry  away  from  London  till  all  claims  on 
his  attention  had  been  satisfied.  Nothing  interested 
her  but  the  preparations  for  the  moment  to  which  all 
were  looking  forward ;  nothing  calmed  her  but  an 
active  participation  in  them. 

‘  I  have  myself  been  arranging  the  rooms,  and 
dragging  about  the  furniture ;  Grilly,  who  certainly 
expects  to  find  you  the  youngest  thing  here,  has  a 
trap  and  ball  ready  for  you.’ 


r 


^T.  63] 


MINTO  AND  LONDON. 


389 


The  poor  little  Malay  boys  brought  home  from 
Malacca  were  welcomed  at  INIinto  as  the  first  detach¬ 
ment  of  the  home-coming  party.  Lady  Minto  shivered 
for  them  in  their  ship’s  clothing,  and  at  once  set  about 
clothing  them  in  flannel.  ‘Are  they  my  cousins?’ 
asked  the  little  son  of  the  house,  and  on  being  told 
not,  ‘  I  am  glad  of  that,  as  I  should  rather  not  have 
black  cousins,  but  they  are,  ver?/  nice.’  Then  black 
boys  and  white  went  off  to  the  hills  together,  which  the 
little  darkies  climbed  on  all  fours,  chattering  most 
excitedly  in  their  native  lingo. 


‘  Hay  20,  1814.' 

‘  I  breakfasted  this  morning  with  Mr.  Elphinstone, 
the  Chairman,  and  it  is  settled  that  I  am  to  dine  with 
the  Court  of  Directors  at  one  of  their  court  dinners, 
without  the  fussification  to  both  parties  of  an  immense 
public  dinner.  The  day  is  not  fixed,  but  it  will  be  very 
soon,  which  will  be  one  step  towards  Minto.  I  am  as 
perfectly  delighted  and  as  perfectly  happy  as  it  is  pos¬ 
sible  for  me  to  be  till  I  see  you.’ 

‘  May  24. — I  have  your  letters  of  Thursday  and 
Saturday,  and  I  am  thankful,  my  dearest  love,  that  your 
cares  are  heaved  overboard.  We  have  nothing  now  to 
do  but  to  be  thankful  and  happy.  The  period  to  come 
will,  I  trust,  be  unshadowed  by  absences,  or  that  they 
will  be  very  short,  and  that  we  shall  enjoy  the  tranquil 
comforts  of  content  and  of  mutual  love  for  the  rest  of 


•  Lord  Slinto  to  Lady  Minto. 


LORD  MINTO  IN  INDIA. 


390 


[1814 


our  time  while  the  younger  generations  flourish  away 
in  the  more  lively  joys  of  their  period  of  life.’ 

‘May  27,  1814. 

‘  I  meet  a  very  cordial  reception  from  everybody  of 
all  descriptions ;  and  general  esteem,  sincere  as  it 
appears  to  be,  is  a  satisfactory  result  of  public  life. 
jNIy  w'ish  is  to  close  it  here.  Indeed,  young  and  beau¬ 
tiful  as  I  am,  I  feel  that  I  am  not  equal  to  the  fatigues, 
either  mental  or  bodily,  of  public  business  in  England. 
My  legs  improve  a  little,  and  I  hope  to  make  them 
younger  at  Minto ;  but  really  young  they  can  never  be, 
of  course ;  and  I  am  not  only  content  to  toddle  on 
with  you  through  the  rest  of  my  journey,  but  shall 
think  and  find  it  the  best  part  of  our  lives.  There 
certainly  never  were  happier  parents,  and  the  children 
who  make  us  so,  appear  to  be  rewarded  by  happiness 
themselves.’ 

June  3,  the  day  after  the  Drawing-room,  was  fixed 
for  Lord  hlinto’s  departure  from  London ;  but  on  May 
28  an  event  occurred  which  altered  his  plans,  and  was 
big  with  fate.  Lord  Auckland,  who  had  gone  to  rest 
in  perfect  health,  was  found  dead  in  his  bed  by  his 
daughters  when  they  went  to  summon  him  to  break¬ 
fast.  In  order  to  be  with  his  sister  in  her  over¬ 
whelming  grief,  and  to  follow  his  brother-in-law  to  the 
grave.  Lord  Minto  at  once  postponed  his  departure. 
Unhappily  the  funeral  was  arranged  to  take  place  at 
Beckenham — the  parish  in  which  Eden  Farm,  the 
happy  home  of  the  bereaved  family,  was  situated — 


JEt.  63] 


DEATH  OF  LORD  AUCKLAND. 


391 


and  at  night.  The  sad  procession  by  road  from  London 
to  Beckenham,  and  the  subsequent  funeral  service, 
occupied  five  hours — from  half-past  seven  till  half- 
past  twelve,  in  a  cold  drizzling  rain.  Four  days  later 
we  have  the  first  note  of  the  coming  tragedy.  A 
cold,  which  Lord  Minto  had  complained  of  before,  had 
been  greatly  increased  by  the  exposure  of  that  fatal 
night.  He  was  ordered  to  stay  indoors.  On  the  8th 
‘  he  broke  prison  to  visit  Lord  Melville,  and  obtain  a 
nephew's  well-earned  promotion.’  On  the  13th  he 
confessed  himself  so  low  in  strength  and  spirits  that 
he  could  not  attempt  a  letter.  In  proportion  to  his 
bodily  weakness  was  the  increase  of  his  passionate 
longing  to  reach  iSIinto ;  and  his  family,  having  no 
apprehension  of  any  impending  danger,  were  equally 
anxious  with  himself  to  get  him  out  of  town  and  in 
the  safe  keeping  of  his  home.  ‘  With  the  affectionate 
kindness  which  never  flagged  he  resolved  to  visit 
Lady  Malmesbury  at  Park  Place,  although  this  added 
at  least  another  day  to  the  length  of  his  journey.’ 
There  he  made  the  greatest  exertions  to  conceal  his 
weakness,  and  his  conversation  was  cheerful  and  gay ; 
but  by  this  time  his  eldest  son,  his  constant  companion 
and  now  tender  nurse,  was  greatly,  though  still  in¬ 
sufficiently,  alarmed.  A  medical  man  was  sent  for  to 
attend  them  on  their  journey ;  and  from  him  it  was  for 
the  first  time  ascertained  that  Lord  jMinto  was  suffer¬ 
ing  from  an  attack  of  a  most  alarming  disease,  which, 
under  the  treatment  of  those  days,  too  frequently 
proved  fatal. 


392 


LOBD  MINTO  IN  INDIA. 


[1814 


His  longing  to  push  on  was,  however,  too  strong  to 
be  opposed.  Thejoumey  was  proceeded  with.  ‘He  has 
but  one  wish,  to  see  the  person  on  whom  his  thoughts 
are  ever  fixed ;  ’  one  anxiety — to  reach  home.  The  rest 
may  be  guessed.  From  the  first  horrid  misgiving, 
when  the  groimd  seems  to  fail  away  from  under 
one’s  feet,  to  the  full  con^iiction  that  there  is  no 
help,  no  hope,  no  escape  from  an  overwhelming  cala¬ 
mity,  most  of  us  know  the  course. 

By  short  stages,  Stevenage  on  the  northern  road 
was  reached ;  but  in  a  state  of  prostration  which  left 
no  room  for  hope  ;  and  there  he  quietly  sank  early  in 
the  night  on  June  21.  ‘Oh!  my  poor  mother — take 
care  of  her — I  know  you  will  do  all  you  can,’  was  the 
note  sent  home  by  his  son  that  night. 

How  fearful  the  shock,  how  profound  the  grief,  may 
be  imagined  by  any  reader  of  the  letters  now  pub¬ 
lished  ;  but  the  degree  and  the  faithfulness  of  the 
sorrow  with  which  he  was  mourned  may  best  be  told  in 
a  few  affecting  lines,  written  by  his  eldest  son  very 
many  years  after  the  event,  and  found  by  his  children 
at  his  death.  They  were  obviously  intended  to  find 
place  in  the  opening  chapter  of  a  biography  of  Lord 
Minto,  which  was,  however,  never  proceeded  with ;  for 
the  date  proves  that  the  writer’s  own  days  were  thence¬ 
forth  but  few. 

‘  During  the  period  of  an  absence  of  seven  years, 
engaged  in  laborious  and  absorbing  duties,  there  was  no 
one  day  in  which  the  evidence  does  not  exist  of  the 
fond  affection  with  which  his  mind  dwelt  on  the 


;Et.  63J 


DEATH  OF  LORD  MINTO. 


393 


domestic  circle  from  which  he  was  severed,  and  on  the 
distant  prospect  of  reunion  with  those  he  loved.  Nor 
on  our  side  was  there  a  single  day  in  which  he  was  not 
the  constant  object  of  our  thoughts,  or  in  which  we 
did  not  anxiously  count  the  days  of  our  separation. 
The  one  great  object  looked  to  on  either  side,  as  the 
greatest  happiness  that  could  await  us,  was  his  return 
to  England,  and  to  the  tranquil  enjoyment  of  honour¬ 
able  repose  in  the  home  he  loved.  In  order  to  under¬ 
stand  the  intense  anxiety  with  which  we  contemplated 
this  reunion,  it  would  be  necessary  to  have  known  the 
feelings  with  which  he  was  regarded  by  his  family — as 
the  friend,  the  companion,  the  playfellow,  the  guide 
and  example  for  all  ages — feelings  in  which  were 
combined  the  warmest  familiar  affection,  with  admira¬ 
tion,  respect,  and  veneration.’ 

Here  follows  an  account  of  his  gratifying  reception 
in  London;  the  splendid  success  of  his  government 
being  a  subject  of  general  congratulation ;  and  then, 
after  some  details  of  the  comrse  of  the  illness,  comes 
the  end :  ‘  Thus  at  once  were  dashed  those  hopes  in 
the  moment  of  their  accomplishment,  which  had  been 
the  solace  of  seven  years  of  painful  separation.  Any 
attempt  must  be  vain  to  describe  the  overwhelming 
weight  of  this  blow.  The  first  object  of  our  affection, 
of  our  reverence,  was  lost  in  the  first  days  of  its  resto¬ 
ration  ;  the  feehngs  and  the  mind  were  subdued  and 
prostrated  almost  to  a  condition  of  insensibihty  and 
indifference  to  all  the  interests  of  life.  Many,  many 
years  elapsed,  chequered  by  other  and  deep  affliction, 


394 


LORD  MINTO  IN  INDIA. 


[1814 


before  it  ceased  to  hang  as  a  dark  cloud  over  our  exist¬ 
ence  ;  nay,  even  now,  at  the  distance  of  nearly  forty 
years,  the  impressions  of  that  sad  time  are  fresh  in  my 
heart.  Though  grief  may  have  yielded  to  the  hand  of 
time,  the  fond  remembrance  of  affection  still  survives 
in  all  its  warmth.’ 

When,  in  process  of  time,  it  became  the  part  of 
another  generation  to  ‘  open  the  places  that  were  closed,’ 
and  when,  upon  those  who  did  so,  came  the  desire  ‘  to 
show  the  image  of  a  voice  and  make  green  the  flowers 
that  were  withered,’  the  last  year’s  letters  from 
IMinto  to  India^ — so  full  of  hope,  of  joy — were  found 
tied  together  with  a  black  string,  and  inscribed  ‘  Poor 
Fools.’  With  these  was  a  note  with  unbroken  seal, 
the  last  written  by  Lady  Minto  to  her  husband. 


INDEX, 


ABD 


BYE 


Abdulla,  extracts  from  Auto- ,■  "^entinck,  Lord  William,  15,  20, 
biography  of,  p.  269  sq.  21, -23,  36,  197,  206,  369 


Abercromby,  Sir  K.,  242  (note) 
Adair,  Mr.  104 

Afghanistan,  British  alliance 
with,  139  sq. ;  Mountstuart 
Elphinstone’s  mission  to,  159  sq  ; 
troubled  condition  of,  162 ; 
French  designs  upon,  163  ;  the 
king  and  nobility  of,  169,  170; 
despatch  on  affairs  of,  170 ; 
changed  prospects  of,  il>, ; 
anarchy  in,  174 
Amboyna,  240 
Ameer  Khan,  191,  192 
"Auchmuty,  Sir  Samuel,  285,  292 
294,  296,  303 

Auckland,  Lord,  157,  390 


ALLI,  Rajah  of,  266  .sq. 
Barasut,  cadets  of,  89 
“S^arlow,  Sir  George,  1,  2,  23,  24, 
25,  28,  32,  59,  107,  111,  144,  206, 
209,  211,  212,  213,  214,  215,  216, 
217,  218  (note),  219,  221,  226, 
322 

Barrackpore,  27,  28,  31,  334 

Batavia ,  64,  290 ;  surrendered  to 
the  British,  286  sq  ;  the  Dutch 
in,  304  sq. 

Jlengal,  natives  of,  32,  33  ;  ban¬ 
ditti  in,  185  .<tq. ;  mutinies  in, 
201,  202  (note) 


Berar,  Rajah  of,  191  sq. 

Bertie,  Admiral,  243 
Bikaneer,  161 

Bombay,  mutiny  in,  202  (note)  ; 

complaints  of  the  army  of,  203 
Bonaparte,  counter-policy  of 
Indian  government,  52  sq.  ;  his 
designs  on  the  East,  54,  56,  100 
sq.,  103  sq.,  163  (note) ;  on  treaties 
of  peace,  342  (note).  See  Minto. 

-JBourbon,  Isle  of,  240,  243,  244, 
247  sq. 

‘  Brown  Toast  Club,’  234 
Broughton,  Commodore,  280  sqq, 
Bruce,  Mr.,  251,  256 
Buchanan,  Rev.  C.,  72 ;  his 

memorial  to  the  Court  of 
Directors,  73  sq. ;  charges 
against  Lord  Minto,  74  sq. ; 
alleged  suppression  of  his  Ser¬ 
mons,  76  (note).  See  Mission¬ 
aries 

Bundelcund,  58  (note),  69  sq.,  193  ; 
reduction  of,  60 

Burke,  Edmund,  Lord  Minto’s 
affection  for,  6 ;  his  S3'mpathy 
for  India,  6,  7  ;  speech  on  the 
India  Bill  of  1783,  7  ;  letter  to 
Sir  Gilbert  Elliot,  9 
Burke,  Mrs.  10 

Bj’ron,  Lord,  described  by  Lad^' 
Minto,  330 


396 


INDEX. 


CAB 

OABUL,  Kingdom  of,  143  sq. ; 
British  mission  to,  147  sq., 
159  sq.,  169  ;  the  King  of,  162, 
169  sq.,  172,  175.  See  Afghan¬ 
istan.  Shah  Soojah. 

Caffres,  an  intelligent  chief,  170 
—  (iiote) 

Calcutta,  society  in,  28 ;  Lord 
Minto’s  popularity,  348  sq. ; 
address  of  Ilritish  residents  to 
Lord  Minto,  379  sq. 

Calcutta  Reviem  cited,  74 ;  'on 
Lord  Minto,  379  sq. 

Caledon,  Lord,  105 
Camden,  Lord,  34 
Canning,  Sir.,  34,  45,  46 , 182,  239, 
138  {note) 

Capetown,  French  refugees  in,  14-. 
Carey,  Dr.  William,  64  sq.,  68,  72, 
75 

Carnatic,  Nabob  of  the,  20  sq. ;  his 
present  to  Lord  Minto,  ih. 
Caroline,  Princess  of  Wales,  44, 
179  (note),  180  (note) 

Carrack,  Island  of,  proposed  occu¬ 
pation  of,  123  sq.,  127  sq.,  131 
Casamaijor,  Mr.  J.  H.,  228 
Casamaijor,  Miss.  A.,  228 
Caste,  marks  of,  18 
Castlereagh,  Lord,  34,  241 
Catalan!,  Mme.,  234  sq. 

Catholic  claims,  33  (note),  34,  35 
(note),  41,  45,  342 
Chillinching,  284  sq. 

Choultry  plain,  the,  16 
Cicero,  Lord  Minto’s  partiality 
for,  300;  passage  from  the 
‘  Somnium  Scipionis,’  ih. ;  from 
the  ‘  De  Pinibus,’  301  (note)  ; 
cited,  334,  337 
Clerks,  the,  of  Eldin,  234 
— •  Clive,  Lord,  201,  21 8  (note) 

_ ^Close,  Colonel  (Sir  Barry)  50 

(note),  51  sq.,  52,  192,  215,  216 
Cockburn,  H.,  234 
Cole,  Captain,  276 
Colebrooke,  Mr.,  210 
Constant,  Benjamin,  cited,  383 
(note) 


EDO 

Cornelis,  288,  289 ;  storming  of, 

291 

Cornwallis,  Lord,  death  of,  1,  2  ; 
his  Indian  system  of  judicature, 

363  (note)  1 

Coulaincourt  M.,  104  [ 

Councils,  Indian,  27  i 

Court  of  Directors,  in  collision 
with  the  Cabinet,  3  ;  despatch 
on  religious  toleration  in  India, 

63  sq.  ;  appoint  an  envoy  to 
Persia,  99 ;  on  Lord  Minto’s  i 

military  policy,  194,  198,  200  ;  ' 

instructions  concerning  Java,  j 

306  sq.  ;  silence  on  Lord  Minto’s  [ 

measures,  318  sq.,  323  sq.  See  ! 

India.  Minto,  Lord.  I 

-Cradock,  Sir  John,  19, 199  sq.,  206,  ; 

369  ; 

Crewe,  Lady,  letter  to  Lord 
Minto,  179  (note) ;  on  the 
afEairs  of  Spain,  181  I 


DACOITS,  in  Bengal,  185  sq. 
D’Aendels,  Marshal,  283,  302 
sq. 

Davy,  Lady,  233 
Deccan,  the  wild  tribes  of,  191 
DefEand,  Mme.  du.  Correspondence 
of,  355  sq. 

Drury,  Admiral,  250,  274,  280 
(note) 

Dugald  Stewart,  233 
Duncan,  J.,  Governor  of  Bombay, 
203 

Dundas,  Right  Hon.  R.,  34,  108 
(note),  246,  247,  362 
Dutch,  the,  in  Batavia,  304  sq. 


East  India  Company.  See 
Court  of  Directors.  Minto, 
Lord,  India 

Eden,  Miss,  her  letters  from  Up 
the  Country  cited,  157 
Eden,  Mr.  G.  (afterwards  Lord 
Auckland),  383 
Edgell,  Captain,  276,  278 


INDEX. 


397 


EDI 

Edinburcrh,  the  winter  of  1809-10 
in,  233  sqq. 

Edmonstone,  Mr.,  23,  65,  69,  116, 
137 

Egypt,  British  troops  from  India 
in,  242  {note) 

Eldon,  Lord,  34,  44,  45 

Elliot,  Sir  Gilbert.  See  Minto, 
Lord 

E^lliot,  Hon.  Gilbert  (2nd  Earl  of 
Minto)  12  {noti^,  85.  86,  297,300, 
342  :  on  the  death  of  his  father, 
392 

Elliot,  Hon.  George,  13,  231,  249, 
263,  268,  277,  281,  283 

Elliot,  Hon.  John,  15  {note),  16, 
17,  228,  251,  253 

Elliot,  Eight  Hon.  Hugh,  384 
{note) 

Elliot,  Right  Hon.  W.,  37,  48,  317 

Elliot,  Mr.,  of  Wells,  letter  to, 
from  Lord  Minto,  353  sq. 

Elliot,  Miss  A.  M.,  letters  to  her 
father,  137  {note),  232  sq.,  335 
{note) 

Elphinstone,  Mountstuart,  129 ; 
sent  as  envoy  to  Afghanistan, 
159  sq. ;  difficulties  of  his  mis¬ 
sion,  160  ;  lineof  march,  161  sq.  ; 
letters  to  Governor  -  General, 
162  sq.  ;  asks  for  increased 
powers,  163  sq.-,  delays,  165 ;  pro¬ 
gress  to  Peshawur,  166;  arrival 
at  his  destination,  168  ;  recep¬ 
tion,  169  ;  interviews  with  king 
and  nobles,  169,  170  sq.-,  des¬ 
patches  to  and  from  Indian 
Government,  ih.-,  signs  a  treaty, 
172  sq.-,  treaty  ratified  at  Cal¬ 
cutta,  175;  withdrawal  of  mis¬ 
sion,  ih. ;  the  treaty,  175  {note)  ; 
his  History  of  Ctihul,  176.  See 
Cabul.  Shah  Soojah. 

England,  Administration  of  the 
‘  Talents,’  1  ;  the  Duke  of  Port¬ 
land's  Cabinet,  34  ;  Lord  Gren¬ 
ville  on  home  politics,  34  sqq.  ; 
state  of  parties  in,  45;  Lady 
Malmesbury  on  the  Duke  of 


GWI 

Portland’s  Administration,  43  sq., 
46 ;  diplomatic  relations  with 
Persia,  138 ;  foreign  acquisi¬ 
tions  of,  239  sq.-,  state  of  in  1811- 
12,  326  sqq. ;  triumphs  in  1814, 
382  sqq.  See  Minto. 

Europe,  state  of,  after  the  Peace  of 
Tilsit,  97 


ARQUHAR,  Mr.,  248 
Fisher,  Dr.,  237 
Fitzharris,  Lord,  45 
Fitzherbert,  Mrs.,  45 
Fort  St.  George.  See  Madras. 
P'ort  William,  College  of,  371  sq. 
Fox,  Mr.,  3,  4,  8,  46 
Fox,  Miss,  181 

France,  ascendancy  of,  97  sq. ;  cap¬ 
ture  of  British  Indiamen,  242  ; 
expeditions  against  the  Eastern 
settlements  of,  243  sq.,  318  sqq. 
France,  Isle  of.  See  Mauritius. 
Frere,  Mr.,  179  {note) 


George  hi.,  dismisses  his 
Ministry,  34 ;  new  Cabinet, 
ih. 

Gillespie,  Colonel,  289,  296 
Goa,  239 

Gowdie,  General,  226 
Greig,  Admiral,  278  sq.,  279 
Grenville,  Lord,  37,  43,  44,  45,  46, 
99,  100,  103,  241  ;  his  approval 
of  Lord  Wellesley’s  administra¬ 
tion  of  India,  3  ;  nominates 
Lord  Minto  to  Governor-Gene¬ 
ralship,  4  ;  conferences  with  the 
new  Viceroy,  5 ;  fall  of  his 
Administration,  33,  34  ;  letters 
to  and  from  Lord  Minto,  34  sq., 
41  sq.,  359  ;  his  hostility  to  the 
Duke  of  Portland’s  Cabinet, 
35 

Grenville,  Lady,  45 
Grey.  Lord,  241 
Gwiilin,  Sir  U.,  23 


398 


INDEX. 


HAR 

HARIANA,  193 

Hawkesbury,  Lord,  84 
..-dBewitt,  General  (Commander-in- 
Chief  of  India),  23,  114  sq.,  122, 
147  sq.,  210,  223,  226 
Holland,  Lord,  letter  from,  to 
Lord  Minto,  326 
Hope,  Mr.,  261,  292  sq. 

Howick,  Lord,  44 
Huguenots,  at  Capetown,  14 
Hyder  All,  152 


MPEY,  Sir  Elijah,  9 
India,  successive  Governors- 
General  of,  1  sg. ;  action  of  the 
Cabinet  in  relation  to,  3 ; 
Burke’s  speech  on  the  Bill  of 
1783,  7  ;  native  sovereigns,  8  ; 
Lord  Minto’s  first  impressions 
of,  16  sq. ;  the  Gentoos  of 
Madras,  17  sq, ;  Caste,  18,  19  ; 
Pariahs,  19;  results  of  Caste, 
ib. ;  Nabob  of  the  Carnatic,  20 
sq.  ;  prickly  heat,  23  ;  famine  in, 
22  ;  condition  of,  on  arrival  of 
Lord  Minto,  25;  routine  of 
government,  26 ;  climate,  28 ; 
financial  prospects  of,  53,  56  sq., 
247,  353  sqq. ;  French  designs 
on,  54  sq.,  56, 100  sq.,  163  (note)  ; 
British  tenure  of,  55 ;  disaffec¬ 
tion  among  the  Mohamedans,  61 
sq  ;  religious  toleration  pro¬ 
claimed,  63  sq, ;  Christian  mis¬ 
sionaries  in,  64  sq.']  conflict  of  the 
Government  and  the  mission¬ 
aries,  65  sq. ;  an  ecclesiastical 
hierarchy  demanded  for,  73 ; 
licensed  missionaries,  81,  82 ; 
Government  accused  of  persecu¬ 
tion,  82  ;  inconveniences  of  life 
in,  83  sq. ;  prodigality  of  Euro¬ 
pean  residents,  92 ;  alternations 
of  climate,  94;  differences  of 
religion  in,  96 ;  apprehended 
French  invasion  of,  103  ;  letters 
of  Lord  Minto  on  defence  of, 
105  sqq. ;  disposition  of  the 


JAV 

Native  States,  106  sq.‘.  Lord 
Minto  on  the  powers  of  the  ; 
Governors-General  of,  135  sq. ;  * 

alliance  with  the  States  of  the  ' 
North-West,  141  .sq. ;  missions  to  i  < 
Lahore  and  Cabul,  14:7  sq. ;  rela-  j 
tions  with  Runjeet  Singh,  154  , 

sq. ;  Mormtstuart  Elphinstone's  ! 

mission  to  Afghanistan,  169  sq. ;  j 
results  of  Lord  Minto’s  scheme  ■  i 
for  defence  of,  176;  news  of 
British  victory  in  Spain,  179  [; 

sq. ;  Lord  Minto  on  the  possi-  1 
bility  of  a  French  invasion  of,  :  I 
182 ;  the  rains  in,  183 ;  the 
natives,  184 ;  dacoity  in,  185 
sqq. ;  mutinies  in,  201  (note)  ;  i 
strife  between  the  military  and 
civil  authorities,  201,208  ;  Lord  :! 
Minto’s  foreign  policy,  239  sq.; 
expeditions  sent  from,  240  sq. ; 
troops  despatched  to  Egypt  I 

from,  242  (note) ;  finances  of, 

247,  354  ;  indifference  of  Home 
Government  to,  297  sq.,  318  sqq.,  i 

323  sqq.;  last  years  of  Lord  j 

Minto’s  rule,  331  sq. ;  Viceroy’s  , 
account  of  his  civil  administra¬ 
tion  of,  353  sqq. ;  the  Company’s 
monopoly,  362  sq. ;  balance  of 

power  among  Native  States,  365  , 

.sq. ;  administration  of  justice,  , 

369  ;  obstacles  to  the  improve¬ 
ment  of, ■iJ.;  Native  officers,  370; 

Lord  Minto’s  Minute  on  educa¬ 
tion  in,  375  sq.;  address  to  the 
Viceroy  from  the  British  resi¬ 
dents  in  Calcutta,  379  sq.  See 
Minto 

Ireland,  the  Catholics  of,  36  (note) 


JANSSENS,  General,  283,  287, 
288,  291,  294,  302 

-Java,  British  expedition  to,  240, 
249  sq.,  269  sq.,  284  sq.,  287  sq., 
294  ;  arrival  of  French  troops 
in,  281;  surrender  of  Batavia, 
286;  action  at  Weltevreeden, 


INDEX. 


399 


jDr 

288;  storming  of  Cornells  by 
the  British,  291  sq. ;  made  a 
British  dependancy,  296;  the 
Dutch  in,  304  .‘‘q.  310  ;  instruc¬ 
tions  concerning,  from  Court  of 
Directors,  306  sq. ;  Lord  Minto’s 
settlement  of,  310  sq.;  slavery 
in,  312;  Lord  Minto’s  care  for, 
316  sq.  See  Minto 
Jeffrey,  Mr.,  232  .<iq.,  234 
.fnnpn  Sir  Harford,  envoy  to  the 
court  of  Persia,  99  sq.,  108,  110 
,sq.,  113,  126  sqq.,  129  sq. ;  Lord 
Minto  on  his  diplomatic  powers, 
132  sqq. ;  his  treaty  with  Persia, 
137,  139 ;  disavowed  by  Lord 
Minto,  138.  See  Persia.  Mal¬ 
colm.  Minto 
Jumelle,  General,  291 
Junot,  Marshal,  179,  181 


Kaye,  sir  John,  his  Zi/e  and 
Correspondence  of  Sir  John 
Malcolm  cited,  121  (jwte),  216 
(note),  350 ;  C'orrcspondenco  of 
Lord  (Metcalfe  cited,  151 
(note) 

Keating,  Lieutenant- Colonel,  243 
sq. 

Khyberees,  the,  168,  174 
Kohat,  166,  167 


Lahore,  Government  of.  See 
Runjeet  Singh 
Lake,  Lord,  58,  98 
Lanfrey,  M.,  his  Histoirc  dc 
Napoleon  I.  cited,  104  (note) 
Lauderdale,  Lord,  appointed 
Governor-General  of  India,  3  ; 
resigns,  4 

Leyden,  Dr.,  67  sq.,  251,  253  sq., 
255  (note),  278,  295,  339,  342 
London,  condition  and  society  in, 
in  1812,  328  sqq. 

Lumsden,  Mr.,  23,  210 


MAL 

ACAO,  240 

Macartney,  Lord,  202  (note) 
Machery,  Rajah  of,  185  (note) 
Mackintosh,  Sir  J.,  126,  218,  219, 
330 

Macleod,  Colonel  M.,  89  sq. 

Madras,  Government  of  and 
Vellore  mutiny,  15  (note);  Lord 
Minto’s  impressions  of,  16  sqq.  ; 
affairs  of,  197  sq. ;  mutiny  in 
the  army,  202  (note),  205  sqq. ; 
grievances  of  officers,  206  .‘tqq. ; 
conflict  of  civil  and  military 
authorities,  208  ;  memorial  of 
officers,  212  sqq, ;  Lord  Minto's 
answer  to  the  memorial,  213  sq.; 
progress  of  insubordination,  215 
sq.  ;  energetic  action  of  Sir  G. 
Barlow,  217 ;  effect  of  the 
Viceroy's  letter,  219;  General 
order  to  the  army,  220;  ter¬ 
mination  of  the  revolt,  221; 
Lord  Minto  on  the  revival  of 
discipline,  223  sq. ;  conflicting 
opinions  on  the  mutiny,  227, 
230,  321.  See  Minto.  Barlow 
Madrassees,  the,  17,  18  sqq. 
Mahommed  Shah,  173,  174 
Malacca,  260  sq. ;  slavery  in,  265 
sq.;  British  expedition  at,  269 
sq. ;  debtors’  prison  in,  273 
Malcolm,  Colonel  (Sir  John),  50 
(note),  99,  103,  112,  113,  128, 
129,  137,  152,  215,  216,  21£L- 
2 19  ;  sent  as  envoy  to  Persia, 
108  sq. ;  instructions  from  the 
Indian  Government,  1 10  sq. ; 
account  of  his  mission  to  Persia, 

1 14  sq.  ;  failure  of  his  embassy, 
120  sq. ;  his  scheme  for  the 
defence  of  India,  123  sq. ;  made 
brigadier-general,  1 26  (note)  ; 
again  deputed  to  Persia,  139 ; 
his  History  of  Perna  and 
Sltetclu'S  in  Persia,  176 ;  his 
History  of  India,  115  (note); 
his  Diar>'  quoted,  350.  Sec 
Persia.  .Jones,  Sir  Harford. 
Minto,  Lord 


400 


INDEX. 


MAL 

Malmesbur}^  Lady,  letters  to  Lord 
Minto,  11,  12,  4.S  gq.,  46,  181, 
282  {note)  ;  to  Lady  Minto,  43  ; 
to  her  sister,  44,  46 ;  on  the 
death  of  Mr.  Windham,  236 
Malmesbury,  Lord,  213 
Maria  Louisa,  empress,  282 
Marshman,  Mr.,  68,  72  ;  his  His¬ 
tory  of  India  cited,  206,  217 
Masulipatam,  military  revolt  at, 
216,  219,  222 

Mauritius,  240,  242  {note),  318, 320  : 
British  expedition  sent  against, 
244  sq. ;  surrender  of,  248 
McDowell,  General,  207  sq. 
Melgund,  Lady,  386 
Melgund,  Lord,  167,  176  {note) 
Menou,  General,  100 
Metcalfe,  Lord,  97  sq.,  149  sq. ;  sent 
as  envoy  to  Eunjeet  Singh, 
151  ;  his  services  and  instruc¬ 
tions,  ib. ;  proceeds  on  his 
mission,  152 ;  progTess  of  ne¬ 
gotiations,  152  ;  conclusion  of 
treaty,  156  sq. ;  his  relations  to 
Lord  Minto,  158.  See  Eunjeet 
Singh 

Milman,  Dean,  cited,  66,  67 
Milton,  Lord,  47 

Minto,  Lord  (Sir  Gilbert  Elliot), 
assumes  the  government  of 
India  1 ;  President  of  the  Board 
of  Control,  ib. ;  letters  to  Sir  G 
Barlow  and  Lord  William 
Bentinck,  3,  4,  5  ;  on  Lord 
Lauderdale’s  appointment,  4  ; 
his  Indian  policy  and  character, 
5  ;  early  intimacy  with  Burke, 
6 ;  designated  Parliamentary 
Director,  8  ;  speech  at  trial  of 
Warren  Hastings,  9 ;  letter 
from  Burke,  ib.  ;  moves  the  im¬ 
peachment  of  Sir  Elijah  Impey, 
ib. ;  his  visit  to  Beaconstield, 
10  ;  letters  from  Lord  and  Lady 
Malmesbury,  11 ;  letters  to  his 
wife,  12,  24, 91  sq.,  93  sq.,  \  %osq., 
225,  229  sq.,  384  ;  voyage  to 
India,  13  ;  at  Madeira,  ib. ;  log 


MIN  ; 

on  board  the  ‘  Modeste,’  14  ;  at 
Capetown,  14,  15  ;  at  Madras, 

15  ;  his  first  impressions  of  India, 

16  sqq. ;  reception  by  the  Nabob 
of  the  Carnatic,  20  sq. ;  descrip¬ 
tion  of  an  Indian  famine,  22  ; 
arrives  at  Calcutta,  23 ;  letter 
to  his  son,  24  sq. ;  condition  of 
India,  25  ;  routine  of  business, 

26  sq. ;  Councils,  27  ;  absence  of 
opposition  to  his  government, 

28  ;  his  mode  of  life  and  en-  | 
touraqe,  29  sq.,  87 ;  his  con¬ 
ditional  resignation,  37  ;  on  the  j 
office  of  Governor-General,  38 
sq. ;  confirmed  by  the  new  I 
Ministry,  39 ;  letter  to  Lord  t 
Grenville,  39  sqq. ;  hisreputation 
in  India,  49  ;  letter  to  Colonel 
Barry  Close,  51  sq. ;  to  Sir  E,  I 
Pellew,  52  sq. ;  correspondence 
on  Indian  and  Persian  affairs. 

53  sq. ;  on  the  state  of  Bundel- 
cund,  59  sq. ;  causes  of  Indian 
sedition,  62  ;  dispute  with  the  ; 
missionaries,  65  sq.,  67  sq.,  70  sq., 
liberality  to  the  missionaries 
71  ;  charges  against  him,  74  ; 

on  the  Serampore  press,  78  sq.‘, 
letters  to  and  from  home,  84  ; 
letter  to  Colonel  Macleod,  99  ; 

on  French  designs  on  India,  100 
sq.  ;  on  the  defence  of  India,  ' 
105  sq.,  109  sq.,  123  sq. ;  letter  to 
Eight  Hon.  E.  Dundas,  108 ;  to  ; 
Colonel  Malcolm,  113;  to 
General  Hewitt,  114  sq.,  122 ; 
memorandum  to  Colonel  Mal¬ 
colm,  1 16  sq.  ;  on  Sir  Harford 
Jones’s  mission  to  Persia,  128, 

132  sq. ;  ratifies  treaty  with 
Persia,  138,  139;  letter  to 
Board  of  Control,  142 ;  on 
intervention  in  the  affairs  of 
Native  States,  146 ;  on  the 
missions  to  Lahore  and  Pesha- 
wur,  147  sq. ;  relations  with 
Eunjeet  Singh,  154  sq.-,  opinion 
of  Mr,  Metcalfe,  158  ;  change 


INDEX. 


401 


MIX  MIE 


in  the  policy  of  his  government, 
165  ;  instructions  to  Mr.  Elphin- 
stone,  ih. ;  despatch  on  the 
affairs  of  Afghanistan,  170; 
private  despatch  from  Mr. 
Elphinstone,  172  .ti/. ;  results  of 
his  scheme  for  defence  of  India, 
176;  receives  news  of  the  battle 
of  Vimiero,  180 ;  on  Caroline, 
Princess  of  Wales,  180  (note)  ; 
on  the  possibility  of  French 
invasion  of  India,  182  ;  his  ad¬ 
ministration  during  the  years 
1808-0,  184  ;  on  the  cam- 

I)aign  against  Ameer  Khan,  10.8 
xq.  ;  sends  an  expedition  to  th3^ 
Persian  Gulf,  105;  on  the  affairs 
of  Madras,  107  sq. ;  on  the  ex¬ 
clusion  of  the  Commanders-in- 
Chief  from  seats  in  Council,  109 
xq.  ;  on  the  subordination  of  tlie 
military  to  the  civil  power,  201; 
on  the  complaints  of  the 
I’omba}'  army,  203  xqq.  ;  on  the 
military  disturbances  in  Madras, 
207  xq.  ;  on  the  conflict  of 
authorities  in  Madras,  200  .<uq. ; 
his  repl}’’  to  the  memorial  of  the 
Madras  officers,  213;  goes  to 
Madras,  219  ;  his  stay  at  Fort 
St.  George,  220,  221,  228; 

despatches  and  letters  on  the 
Madras  mutiny,  222  xq. ;  returns 
to  Calcutta,  231;  his daughters- 
in-'.avv,?7i.;  letter  to  his  daughter, 
235  ;  receives  netvs  of  Mr. 
Windham's  death,  236  .<iq.;  his 
foreign  policy,  230  .xq.;  plans  for 
the  acquisition  of  the  French 
settlements.  241  .xq. ;  expeditions 
for  the  purpose,  243  xq. ;  expedi¬ 
tion  to  Java,  240  xq. ;  reasons 
for  going  to  Jav.a,  250 ;  his 
suite,  251  ;  occupations  during 
his  voyage  thither  in  the 
‘  Modeste,'  252  xq.  ;  arrives  at 
Penang,  256  ;  his  description  of 
5Ialacca,  260  xq. ;  receives  at 
jiresent  of  slaves,  267— xy.  ; 


correspondence  on  the  Java  ex¬ 
pedition,  273  .xqq.,  284  xqq.,  285  ; 
storming  of  Cornelis  and  scenes 
after  the  battle,  291  xq.;  on  his 
relations  with  the  Home 
Government,  297  .xq.  ;  the* Mint o 
Vision,'  301  ;  on  the  annexation 
of  Java,  307  .xqq.  ;  settlement  of 
the  island,  310  xq. ;  his  care  for 
Java,  316  .xq.  ;  Home  Govern¬ 
ment  and  his  foreign  policy, 
318  xqq. ;  returns  to  Calcutta, 
318,  331  ;  correspondence  from 
Calcutta,  318  xq. :  letter  from  his 
daughter,  323  .xqq.  ;  last  years  of 
his  Viceroyalty,  331  xqq. :  long¬ 
ing  for  home,  332,  .346  ;  his 
Malav'  slaves,  334  xq.,  389 ;  re¬ 
cognition  of  his  services,  339  ; 
recalled,  343,  348  ;  created 

Viscount  Melgund  and  Earl  of 
Minto,  344;  correspondence  on 
Lord  Moira’s  appointment,  344 
.xqq.  ;  his  popularitj*'  in  Calcutta 
348;  his  social  circle  at  Govern¬ 
ment  House,  349 ;  Sir  John 
Malcolm’s  anecdote  of  him, 
3.50 ;  bachelors'  ball  given  to 
him  in  Calcutta,  351  ;  his 
internal  policy,  352  .xqq.;  corre¬ 
spondence  on  his  civil  adminis- 
tnition  cf  India,  353  .xqq.  ; 
addresses  to  the  students  of  the 
College  of  Fort  William,  370 
.xq.  ;  minute  on  education,  375 
.xq. ;  his  return  and  arrival  in 
England,  382,  385  ;  correspon¬ 
dence  with  Lad3'  Jlintoafter  his 
return,  385  .xqq.;  his  reception 
in  London,  3!t0 ;  falls  ill,  391; 
his  iournev’  northward,  392  ; 
iuid  death,  75.  8ee  India. 

Minto,  Ladv,  descended  from  a 
Huguenot  famiH,  15;  letters  to 
her  husband,  183,  386  xqq.,  391  ; 
on  the  state  of  England,  social 
and  political,  in  1812,  327  .xqq. 
See  Minto,  I.ord 

Mir  Hashan  Khan,  176  (ni  fe) 


I)  D 


402 


INDEX. 


EUN 


-Alissiouaries  in  India,  C3  sq.,  81  : 
action  of  the  Government  re¬ 
garding,  65  t:q.  ;  interviews  with 
Lord  Minto,  68  ;  their  partisans' 
in  England,  70.  See  Seram- 
]5ore. 

‘  IModeste  ’  frigate,  voyage  of,  to 
India,  13,  M,  15 ;  voyage  to 
Java,  252  sq. 

Mohamedans,  76.  See  India 
Moira,  Lord,  331  ;  appointed  Lord 
Minto ’s  successor,  3-13 
^Moluccas,  the,  210 
Mooltan,  161 
IMorier,  Mr.,  137 
-l^Iunro,  Colonel,  206  sq. 

IMurray,  J.,  233 

Mutinies  in  India,  201  {note). 
See  Madras.  Vellore. 


I^APIER,  Sir  W.,  his  History  of 
J-i  the  Peninsular  tl'ar  quoted 
by  a  Caffre  chief,  170  {?iote) 
Napoleon  I.  See  Bonaparte 
Nautches,  22,  92 
Ness,  Miss,  231 

North-West,  British  alliances  with 
file  States  of  the.  111  sqq. ;  rival¬ 
ries  of  the  States  of  the,  ih. 
See  Cabuh  lUinjeet  Singh 
Nugent,  Lord,  his  Portugal,  311 


0ODYPORE,  beautiful  daughter 
of  the  Rajah  of,  191  {note) 
Ool  Moolk,  Ameer,  173  sq. 

Ophir,  Mount,  262 

Ouseley,  Sir  Gore,  138  {note),  139 


PALMERSTON,  Lord,  15,  331 
Palmerston,  Lad_y,  184 
Panambangan,  Island  of,  277  sqrq. 
Pariahs,  19 
Parry,  Mr.,  78,  80,  81 
Pasley,  Captain,  114  sq.,  128 
Pellew,  Sir  E.  (Lord  Bxmouth), 
23,  52 


Penang,  Lord  Minto’s  arrival  at, 
and  account  of,  257  sq. 

Percival,  Mr.,  31,  41,  326,  328 
'ersia,  French  intrigues  in,  51  sq., 
54  sq.,  98  .vy.,  100 s^’.,  120,  121  sq.\ 
British  mission  to,  56,  99, 108  sq., 
114  sq.,  130  .'fj'g'.,  131  ;  an  ambas¬ 
sador  sent  from  the  Shah  to 
London,  137  (note)  ;  letter  from 
Shah  to  Lord  Minto,  137 ; 
treaty,  138  (iiote),  176.  See 
Jones,  Sir  Harford.  Malcolm. 
Minto. 

Persian  Gulf,  expedition  against 
brigands  of  the,  195 
Peshawur,  British  mission  at,  161  ; 
banditti  of,  ih.  ;  withdrawal  of 
mission  from,  175 
Petrie,  Miss,  349  {note) 

Phillips,  Mr.,  256 
Pigot,  Lord,  202  {note) 

Pindarries,  the,  191,  195 
Playfair,  Mr.,  233,  383 
Pontiana,  Rajah  of,  268,  281  {note) 
Port  St.  Paul,  capture  of,  244 
Portland,  Duke  of,  34 
Pottinger,  Sir  H.,  176 
Press,  Indian  missionary,  64  .sqq. 
71,72.  See  Missionaries.  Ser- 
ampore 

Pricklj"^  heat,  the,  23 
Prince  of  Wales’s  Island,  Recorder 
of,  359 

Punjaub  frontier  force,  167  {note). 
See  Cabul.  llunjeet  Singh. 
Afghanistan 
Punkahs,  95 


PAFFLBS,  Sir  S.,  251,  264,  268, 
11  296,  307,  310,  316,  317 
Rewa,  Rajah  of,  185  {note) 
Robison,  Captain,  261,  288,  291 
Rodriguez,  Island  of,  243 
Rowley,  Commodore,  243 
Runjeet  Singh,  143,  144,  180 ; 
ambitious  designs  of,  145 ;  pro¬ 
posed  mission  to,  147  sq. ;  his 
reception  of  Lord  Metcalfe’s  em- 


indp:x. 


403 


Rrs  -WIN 


bass}’  152  ;  progress  of  negotia¬ 
tions  with,  152  sq  ■,  treaty  con¬ 
cluded  witlj,  15C  sq.,  176  ;  his 
conquests,  157 ;  his  reception 
by  the  British,  and  death,  ib  ; 
his  jealousy  of  the  embassy 
to  Afghanistan,  IfiO  See. 

Metcalfe. 

Uussell,  Lord,  on  tlie  humiliation 
of  lionaparle,  H8.‘! 


^ALAMANC.\,  victory  of,  342 
O  Sayer,  Captain,  282 
Scinde,  French  and  I’ersian  in¬ 
trigues  in,  177  Kq. ;  British  treaty 
with,  178 

Scott,  Sir  William,  179  (note) 
Scott,  Sir  Waller,  his  Lady  of  the 
Lahe,  232 
Sebastiani,  .M.,  104 
Seneca,  quotation  from,  335 
Sejioys,  di.scipline  of,  3(58.  See 
Minto. 

Serampore  press  and  missionaries, 
32,  64  sq.,  70,  71,  72,  78,  80,  81 
Seringapatam,  military  revolt  at, 
216,  222 

Seton,  Mr.,  251,  259 
Seton,  Captain,  his  engagements 
with  the  Ameer  of  Scinde  re¬ 
pudiated,  1  77  sq. 

Seymour,  Lord  Webb,  233,  383 
Shal’.  Soojah,  British  mission  to, 
152  sq.,  162,  169,  170;  treaty 
with,  172  sq.,  175  (note);  turn 
in  affairs  of,  172  ;  his  defeat 
and  exile,  175.  See  Cabul. 
Afghanistan,  Klphinstone 
Sikhs,  the,  143,  144 
.Slavery  in  Malacca,  265  sq.  ;  in 
Java,  312 

ith,  Mr.  Bobus,  88  (note) 

Smith,  Mr.  II,,  envoy  in  Scinde, 
177 


Spain,  affairs  of,  179  ,sq. 

Spice  Islands,  240 
Stopford,  Admiral,  282,  287 
^.Stuart,  Major-General,  202  (note) 


T.\ LENTS,’  Ministry  of  the,  1, 
3,  8,  33.  See  Whigs 
Talleyrand,  on  non-intervention, 
194 

Tatties,  94 

Taylor,  Colonel,  251,  289,  349 
(note)  ;  citation  from  his  Jour¬ 
nal,  368 

Teignmouth,  Lord,  201 
Teviotdale,  the  men  of,  342  (note) 
Tlieatricals  at  sea,  279  sq. 
Thomson,  Mr.,  234,  269 
Tilsit,  Peace  of,  97,  103  sq. 

-Tippoo  Sultan,  242  (note) 


TTELLOIIE,  mutiny  of,  15  (iwte), 
>  62,  197  sq. 

Vimiero,  battle  of,  179 


W.VLES,  Prince  of,  44.  See 
Caroline,  Princess  of  M’ales 
Ward,  Rev.  Mr.,  81 
Warren  Hastings,  trial  of,  !i 
■  Wellesley,  Lord,  2,  3,  98,  151,  183. 
194,  202,  241,  242,  371 
AVellesley,  Sir  Arthur,  99,  103, 
179  sq'.,  180,  181 

AVeltevreeden,  battle  at,  288  sq. 
Whigs,  the,  1,  33,  43,  46,  47  sq., 
323 

Wliitbread,  Mr.,  182 
Widows,  burning  of,  in  India,  !)6 
Wilson,  Mr.  G.,  on  Lord  Minto's 
administration,  347  sq. 
Windham,  Mr.,  179  (note),  180 
(note),  236,  237,  333 


RpolliiW'wdi;  <1-  Co..  l’riiiie}\<,  Seic-st.-ott  Syuaee,  Londm. 


39  Paternoster  Row,  E.C. 
London,  July  1879. 


GENERAL  LIST  OF  WORKS 

PUBLISHED  BY 

Messrs.  Longmans,  Green  &  Co 

- - 

HISTORY,  POLITICS,  HISTORICAL 
MEMOIRS,  &c. 


A  History  of  England 

from  the  Conclusion  of  the  Great 
War  in  1815.  By  Spencer  Walpole, 
Author  of  ‘  Life  of  the  Rt.  lion.  Spencer 
Perceval.’  VoLS.  1.  &  11.  8vo.  36J. 

History  of  England  in 

the  i8th  Century.  By  W.  E.  H. 
Lecky,  M.A  Vols.  I.  &  11.  1700- 
1760.  2  vols.  8 VO.  36^. 

The  History  of  England 

from  the  Accession  of  James  II. 
By  the  Right  lion.  Lord  Macaulay. 

Student’s  Edition,  2  vols.  cr.  8vo.  12s. 
People’s  Edition,  4  vols.  cr.  8vo.  16s. 
Cabinet  Edition,  8  vols.  post  8vo.  48^. 
Library  Edition,  5  vols.  8vo.  £4. 

Critical  and  Historical 

Essays  contributed  to  the  Edin¬ 
burgh  Review.  By  the  Right  Hon. 
Lord  Macaulay. 

Cheap  Edition,  crown  8vo.  3^.  6(/. 
Student’s  Edition,  crown  8vo.  6s. 
People’s  Edition,  2  vols.  crown  8vo.  8r. 
Cabinet  Edition,  4  vols.  24^. 

Library  Edition,  3  vols.  8vo.  36J. 

Lord  Macaulay’s  Works. 

Complete  and  imifonn  I.ibrary  Edition. 
Edited  by  his  Sister,  Lady  Trevelyan. 
8  vols.  8vo.  with  Portrait  £y  5r. 


The  History  of  England 

from  the  Fall  of  Wolsey  to  the  Defeat 
of  the  Spanish  Armada.  By  J.  A. 
Froude,  M.A. 

Cabinet  Edition,  12  vols.  cr.  8vo.  £2. 12s. 
Library  Edition,  12  vols.  8vo.  ,^8.  i8r. 

The  English  in  Ireland 

in  the  Eighteenth  Century.  By  J.  A. 
Froude,  M.A.  3  vols.  8vo.  £2.  8s. 

Journal  of  the  Reigns  of 

King  George  IV.  and  King  William 
IV.  By  the  late  C.  C.  F.  Greville, 
Esq.  Edited  by  11.  Reeve,  Esq. 
Fifth  Edition.  3  vols.  8vo.  price  36^. 

The  Life  of  Napoleon  III. 

derived  from  State  Records  Unpub¬ 
lished  Family  Correspondence,  and 
Personal  Testimony.  By  Blanchard 
Jerrold.  In  Four  Volumes,  8vo.  with 
numerous  Portraits  and  P'acsimiles. 
Vols.  I.  to  III.  price  i8r.  each. 

The  Constitutional  His¬ 
tory  of  England  since  the  Accession 
of  George  III.  1760  1870.  By  Sir 
Thomas  Erskine  May,  K.C.B.  D.C.L. 
Plfth  Edition.  3  vols.  crown  Svo.  i8r. 

Democracy  in  Europe  ; 

a  History.  By  Sir  Thomas  Erskine 
M,\y,  K.C.B.  D.C.L.  2  vols.  8vo.  32^. 


A 


2 


JVOJ?A'S  published  by  LONGMANS  CO. 


Introductory  Lectures  on 

Modern  History  delivered  in  1841 
and  1842.  By  the  late  Rev.  T.  Arnold, 
D.D.  8vo.  price  yr.  6d. 

On  Parliamentary  Go¬ 
vernment  in  England  ;  its  Origin, 
Development,  and  Practical  Operation. 
By  Alpheus  Todd.  2  vols.  8vo. 
price  £1.  I  yr. 

History  of  Civilisation  in 

England  and  France,  Spain  and 
Scotland.  By  Henry  Thomas 
Buckle.  3  vols.  crown  8vo.  24^. 

Lectures  on  the  History 

of  England  from  the  Earliest  Times 
to  the  Death  of  King  Edward  II. 
By  W.  LoNGM.'tN,  E.S.A.  Maps  and 
Illustrations.  8vo.  15^. 

History  of  the  Life  & 

Times  of  Edward  III.  By  W.  Long¬ 
man,  P'.S.A.  With  9  Maps,  8  Plates, 
and  16  Woodcuts.  2  vols.  8vo.  28r. 

History  of  the  Life  and 

Reign  of  Richard  III.  To  which  is 
added  the  Story  of  Perkin  Warbeck, 
from  Original  Documents.  By  James 
Gairdner.  With  Portrait  and  Map. 
Second  Edition.  Crown  8vo.  los,  6(1. 

Memoirs  of  the  Civil 

War  in  Wales  and  the  Marches, 
1642-1649.  By  John  Roland 
Phillips,  of  Lincoln’s  Inn,  Barrister- 
at-Law.  Second  Edition,  in  One 
Volume.  8vo.  i6l 

The  Life  of  Simon  de 

Montfort,  Earl  of  Leicester,  with 
special  reference  to  the  Parliamentary 
Ilistoiy  of  his  time.  By  G.  W. 
Prothero.  Crown  8vo.  Maps,  gs. 

History  of  England  un¬ 
der  the  Duke  of  Buckingham  and 
Charles  1.  1624-1628.  By  S.  R. 
GapvDINer.  2  vols.  8vo.  Maps,  241. 

The  Personal  Govern¬ 
ment  of  Charles  1.  from  the  Death  of 
Buckingham  to  the  Declaration  in  favour 
of  Ship  Money,  i628-i63y.  By  S.  R. 
Gardiner.  2  vols.  8vo.  241-. 


Popular  History  of 

France,  from  the  Earliest  Times  to 
the  Death  of  Louis  XIV.  By  Eliza¬ 
beth  M.  Sewell.  With  8  Maps. 
Crown  8vo.  yr.  6</. 

The  Famine  Campaign  in 

Southern  India,  (Madras,  Bombay, 
and  Mysore,)  in  1876-78.  By  Wil¬ 
liam  Digby,  Secretary  of  the  Madras 
Famine  Committee.  With  Maps  and 
many  Illustrations.  2  vols.  8vo.  321-. 

A  Student’s  Manual  of 

the  History  of  India  from  the  Earliest 
Period  to  the  Present.  By  Col. 
Meadows  Taylor,  M.  R.  A.  S.  Third 
Thousand.  Crown  8vo.  Maps,  yr.  6d. 

Indian  Polity ;  a  View  of 

the  System  of  Administration  in  India. 
By  Lieut. -Col.  G.  Chesney.  8vo.  2ir, 

Waterloo  Lectures  ;  a 

Study  of  the  Campaign  of  1815.  By 
Colonel  C.  C.  Chesney,  R.E. 
8  VO.  I  or.  6d. 

The  Oxford  Reformers — 

John  Colet,  Erasmus,  and  Thomas 
More ;  a  History  of  their  Fellow- Work. 
By  F.  Seebohm.  8vo.  14s. 

General  History  of  Rome 

from  B.C.  y53  to  a.d.  4y6.  By  Dean 
Merivale,  D.D.  Crown  8vo.  Maps, 
price  yr.  6d. 

The  Fall  of  the  Roman 

Republic  ;  a  Short  History  of  the  Last 
Century  of  the  Commonwealth.  By 
Dean  Merivale,  D.D.  i2mo.  p.  6d. 

Carthage  and  the  Cartha¬ 
ginians.  By  R.  Bosworth  Smith, 
M.A.  Second  Edition.  Maps,  Plans, 
&c.  Crovm  8vo.  lor.  6d. 

History  of  the  Romans 

under  the  Empire.  By  Dean  Meri¬ 
vale,  D.D.  8  vols.  post  8vo.  48r. 

The  History  of  Rome. 

By  Wilhelm  Ihne.  Vols.  I.  to  III. 
8vo.  price  451-. 


IVOUKS  published  by  LONGMANS  6-  CO. 


3 


The  Sixth  Oriental  Mo¬ 
narchy  ;  or,  the  Geography,  History, 
and'  Antiquities  of  Parthia.  By  G. 
Rawlinson,  M.A.  With  Maps  and 
Illustrations.  8vo.  1 6s. 

The  Seventh  Great  Ori¬ 
ental  Monarchy  ;  or,  a  History  of 
the  Sassanians.  By  G.  Rawlinson, 
M.A.  With  Map  and  o?  Illustrations. 
8vo.  28s. 

The  History  of  European 

Morals  from  Augustus  to  Charle¬ 
magne.  By  W.  E.  H.  Lecky,  M.A. 
2  vols.  crown  8vo.  i6r. 

History  of  the  Rise  and 

Influence  of  the  Spirit  of  Rational¬ 
ism  in  Europe.  By  W.  E.  H.  Lecky, 
M.A.  2  vols.  crown  8vo.  i6r. 

The  History  of  Philo¬ 
sophy,  from  Thales  to  Comte.  By 
George  Henry  Lewes.  Fourth 
Edition.  2  vols.  8vo.  32s. 

Zeller’s  Stoics,  Epicu¬ 
reans,  and  Sceptics.  Translated  by  the 
Rev.  O.  J.  Reichel,  M.A.  Cr.  8vo.  14s. 

Zeller’s  Socrates  &  the 

Socratic  Schools.  Translated  by  the 
Rev.  O.  J.  Reichel,  M.A.  Second 
Edition.  Crown  8vo.  lor.  6d. 

Zeller’s  Plato  &  the  Older 

Academy.  Translated  by  S.  F rances 
Alleyne  and  Alfred  Goodwin, 
B.A.  Crown  8vo.  18^. 

Epochs  of  Modern  His¬ 

tory.  Edited  by  C.  Colbeck,  M.A. 

Church’s  Beginning  of  the  Middle 
Ages,  2s.  6d. 

Cox’s  Crusades,  2s.  6d. 

Creighton’s  Age  of  Elizabeth,  2s.  6d. 
Gairdner’s  Houses  of  Lancaster  and 
York,  2s.  6d. 

Gardiner’s  Puritan  Revolution,  2s.  6d. 

- - -  Thirty  Years’  War,  2s.  6d. 

Hale’s  Fall  of  the  Stuarts,  2s.  6d. 
Johnson’s  Normans  in  Europe,  2s.  6d. 
Ludlow’s  War  of  American  Indepen¬ 
dence,  2S.  6d. 

Morris’s  Age  of  Anne,  2s.  6d. 


Seebohm’s  Protestant  Revolution, 

price  2s.  6d. 

Stubbs’s  Early  Plantagenets,  2s.  6d. 
Warburton’s  Edward  III.  2s.  6d. 

Epochs  of  Ancient  His¬ 
tory.  Edited  by  the  Rev.  Sir  G.  W. 
Cox,  Bart.  M.A.  &  C.  San  key,  M.A. 

Beesly’s  Gracchi,  Marius  &  Sulla,  2s.6d. 
Capes’s  Age  of  the  Antonines,  2s.  6d. 

- Early  Roman  Empire,  2s.  6d. 

Cox’s  Athenian  Empire,  2s.  6d. 

- Greeks  &  Persians,  2s.  6d. 

Curteis’s  Macedonian  Empire,  2s.  6d. 
Ihne’s  Rome  to  its  Capture  by  the 
Gauls,  2s.  6d. 

Merivale’s  Roman  Triumvirates,  2s.  6d. 
Sankey’s  Spartan  &  Theban  Supre¬ 
macies,  2s.  6d. 

Epochs  of  English  His¬ 
tory.  Edited  by  the  Rev.  Mandell 
Creighton,  M.A.  Fcp.  8vo.  5^. 

Browning’s  Modern  England,  1820- 
1874,  9d. 

Cordery’s  Struggle  against  Absolute 
Monarchy,  1603-1688,  gd. 
Creighton’s  (Mrs.)  England  a  Conti¬ 
nental  Power,  1066-1216,  gd. 
Creighton’s  (Rev.  M.)  Tudors  and  the 
Reformation,  1485-1603,  gd. 
Rowley’s  Rise  of  the  People,  1215-1485, 
gd. 

Rowley’s  Settlement  of  the  Constitu¬ 
tion,  1688-1778,  gd. 

Tancock’s  England  during  the  Ameri¬ 
can  &  EuropeanWars,  1778-1820,  gd. 
York-Powell’s  Early  England  to  the 
Conquest,  u. 

Creighton’s  Shilling  His¬ 
tory  of  England,  introductory  to  the 
above.  Fcp.  8vo.  is. 

The  Student’s  Manual  of 

Modern  History ;  the  Rise  and  Pro¬ 
gress  of  the  Principal  European  Nations. 
By  W.  Cooke  Taylor,  LL.D.  Crown 
Svo.  ys.  6d. 

The  Student’s  Manual  of 

Ancient  History;  the  Political  History, 
Geography  and  Social  State  of  the 
Principal  Nations  of  Antiquity.  By  W. 
Cooke  Taylor  LL.D.  Cr.  8vo.  ys.6d. 


4 


WORKS  published  by  LONGMANS  6-  CO. 


BIOGRAPHICAL  WORKS. 


Memoirs  of  the  Life  of 

Anna  Jameson,  Author  of  ‘  Sacred  and 
Legendary  Art  ’  ticc.  By  her  Niece, 
Gerardine  Macpherson.  8vo.  with 
Portrait,  price  12s.  6ch 

Memorials  of  Charlotte 

Williams-Wynn.  Edited  by  her 
Sister.  Crown  8vo.  with  Portrait, 
price  loj.  6d. 

The  Life  and  Letters  of 

Lord  Macaulay.  By  his  Nephew, 
G.  Otto  Trevelyan,  M.  P. 

Cabinet  Edition,  2  vols.  crowm  8vo.  \2s. 
Library  Edition,  2  vols.  8vo.  36^. 

The  Life  of  Sir  Martin 

Frobisher,  Knt.  containing  a  Narra¬ 
tive  of  the  Spanish  Armada.  By  the 
Rev.  Frank  Jones,  B.A.  Portrait, 
Maps,  and  Facsimile.  Crown  8vo.  6s. 

Gotthold  Ephraim  Les¬ 
sing’,  his  Life  and  Works.  By  Helen 
ZiMMERN.  Crown  8vo.  lOr.  6d. 

The  Life,  Works,  and 

Opinions  of  Heinrich  Heine.  By 

William  Stigand.  2  vols.  8vo. 
Portrait,  2Ss. 

The  Life  of  Mozart. 

Translated  from  the  German  Work  of 
Dr.  LuDwiGNoHLby  Lady  Wallace. 
2  vols.  crown  8vo.  Portraits,  21s. 

Life  of  Robert  Frampton, 

D.  D.  Bishop  of  Gloucester,  deprived  as 
a  Non-Juror  in  1689.  Edited  by  T.  S. 
Evans,  M. A.  Crown  8vo.  lor.  6d. 

The  Life  of  Simon  de 

Montfort,  Earl  of  Leicester,  with 
special  reference  to  the  Parliamentary 
History  of  his  time.  By  G.  W. 
Protiiero.  Crown  8vo.  klaps,  gs. 


Maunder’s  Biographical 

Treasury  ;  a  Dictionary  of  Universal 
Biography.  Latest  Edition,  thoroughly 
revised  and  for  the  most  part  re-written,  ■  1 
with  over  Fifteen  Hundred  additional  1 
Memoirs,  by  William  L.  R.  Cates,  i 
Fcp.  8vo.  6a 

Felix  Mendelssohn’sLet-  i 

ters,  translated  by  Lady  Wallace.  | 
2  vols.  crown  8vo.  5a  each.  !  ] 

Autobiography.  By  John 

Stuart  Mill.  8vo.  p.  6d. 

Apologia  pro  Vita  Sua ;  i 

Being  a  History  of  his  Religious 
Opinions  by  John  Henry  Newman,  , 
D.D.  New  Edition.  Crown  8vo.  6j. 

Isaac  Casaubon,  1559- 

1614.  By  Mark  Pattison,  Rector 
of  Lincoln  College,  Oxford.  8vo.  I  8a 

Leaders  of  Public  Opi¬ 
nion  in  Ireland ;  Swift,  Flood, 
Grattan,  O’Connell.  By  W.  E.  H. 
Lecky,  M.  a.  Crown  8vo.  7a  6d. 

Essays  in  Ecclesiastical 

Biography.  By  the  Right  Hon.  Sir  J. 
Stephen,  LL.D.  Crown  8vo.  7a  6d, 

Caesar;  a  Sketch.  By  James 

Anthony  Froude,  M.A.  formerly 
Fellow  of  Exeter  College,  Oxford. 
With  Portrait  and  Map.  8vo.  i6a 

Life  of  the  Duke  of  Wel¬ 
lington.  By  the  Rev.  G.  R.  Gleig, 
M.A.  Crown  8vo.  Portrait,  6a 

Memoirs  of  Sir  Henry 

Havelock,  K.C.B.  ByJoHN  Clark 
Marshman.  Crown  8vo.  3a  6d. 

Vicissitudes  of  Families. 

By  Sir  Bernard  Burke,  C.B.  Two 
vols.  crown  8vo.  2Ia 


WORKS  published  by  LONGMANS  CO. 


5 


MENTAL  and  POLITICAL  PHILOSOPHY. 


Comte’s  System  of  Posi¬ 
tive  Polity,  or  Treatise  upon  Socio¬ 
logy 

VoL.  I.  General  Viewof  Positivism  and 
Introductory  Principles.  Translated  by 
1.  H.  Bridges,  M.B.  Svo.  21s. 

VoL.  11.  The  Social  Statics,  or  the 
Abstract  Laws  of  Human  Order.  Trans- 
ated  by  F.  Harriso.x,  M.A.  Svo.  14^. 

'  VoL.  III.  The  Social  Dynamics,  or 
the  General  Laws  of  Human  Progress  (the 
Philosophy  of  History).  Translated  by 
E.  S.  Beesly,  M.A.  Svo.  211-. 

VoL.  IV.  The  Theory  of  the  Future 
of  Man  ;  with  Comte’s  Early  Essays  on 
Social  Philosophy.  Translated  by  R.  CON¬ 
GREVE,  M.D.  and  H.  U.  IIUTTON,  B.A. 
Svo.  241-. 

De  Tocqueviile’s  Demo¬ 
cracy  in  America,  translated  by  H. 
Reeve.  2  vols.  crown  Svo.  i6r. 

Analysis  of  the  Pheno¬ 
mena  of  the  Human  Mind.  By 
James  Mill.  With  Notes,  Illustra¬ 
tive  and  Critical.  2  vols.  Svo.  2Ss. 

On  Representative  Go¬ 
vernment.  By  John  Stuart  Mill. 
Crown  Svo.  2s. 

On  Liberty.  By  John 

Stuart  Mill.  Post  Svo.  ys.  6d.  \ 
crown  Svo.  ir.  4ti. 

Principles  of  Political 

Economy.  By  John  Stuart  Mill. 

2  vols.  Svo.  3or.  or  i  vol.  crown  Svo.  5^. 

Essays  on  some  Unset¬ 

tled  Questions  of  Political  Economy.  I 

By  John  Stuart  Mill.  Svo.  6s.  6d.  j 

Utilitarianism.  By  John  I 

Stuart  Mill.  Svo.  Ss.  ■ 

The  Subjection  of  Wo-  , 

men.  By  John  Stuart  Mill.  Fourth  1 
Edition.  Crown  Svo.  6s. 

Examination  of  Sir  Wil-  i 

Ham  Hamilton’s  Philosophy.  By 
John  Stuart  Mill.  Svo.  16^. 


A  System  of  Logic,  Ra- 

tiocinative  and  Inductive.  By  JOHN 
Stuart  Mill.  2  vols.  Svo.  25^. 

Dissertations  and  Dis¬ 
cussions.  By  John  Stuart  Mill. 
4  vols.  Svo.  price  £2.  6s.  6d. 

Philosophical  Fragments 

written  during  intervals  of  Business. 
By  J.  1).  Morell,  LL.D.  Crown 
Svo.  5r. 

The  Philosophy  of  Re¬ 
flection.  By  S.  H.  Hodgson,  Hon. 
LL.D.  Edin.  2  vols.  Svo.  2is. 

The  Law  of  Nations  con¬ 
sidered  as  Independent  Political 
Communities.  By  Sir  Travers 
Twiss,  D.C.L.  2  vols.  Svo.  £1.  ijr. 

A  Systematic  View  of  the 

Science  of  Jurisprudence.  By  Shel¬ 
don  Amos,  M.A.  Svo.  iSr. 

A  Primer  of  the  English 

Constitution  and  Government.  By 
S.  Amos,  M.A.  Crown  Svo.  6s. 

A  Sketch  of  the  History 

of  Taxes  in  England  from  the 
Earliest  Times  to  the  Present  Day. 
By  Stephen  Dowell.  Vol.  I.  to 
the  Civil  War  1642.  Svo.  lor.  6i/. 

Principles  of  Economical 

Philosophy.  By  H.  D.  Macleod, 
M.A.  Second  Edition  in  2  vols.  VOL. 

I.  Svo.  15^.  Vol.  H.  Part  i.  12s. 

The  Institutes  of  Jus¬ 
tinian  ;  with  English  Introduction, 
Translation,  and  Notes.  By  T.  C. 
Sandars,  M.A.  Svo.  iSr. 

Lord  Bacon’s  Works,  col¬ 

lected  &  edited  by  R.  L.  Ellis,  M.A. 

J.  Spedding,  M.A.  and  D.  D.  Heath. 
7  vols.  Svo.  £2-  13s.  6d. 

Letters  and  Life  of  Fran¬ 
cis  Bacon,  including  all  his  Occasional 
W’orks.  Collected  and  edited,  with  a 
Commentary,  by  J.  Spedding.  7  vols. 
Svo.  £i,.  4r. 


6  WORKS  published  by  LONGMANS  6^  CO. 


The  Nicomachean  Ethics 

of  Aristotle,  translated  into  English 
by  R.  Williams,  B.A.  Crown  8vo. 
price  yj.  (>d. 

Aristotle’s  Politics,  Books 

I.  III.  IV.  (VII.)  Greek  Text,  with 
an  Englisli  Translation  by  W.  E.  Bol- 
LAND,  hi.  A.  and  Short  Essays  by  A. 
Lang,  M.  A.  Crown  8vo.  yr.  bd. 

The  Politics  of  Aristotle ; 

Greek  Text,  with  English  Notes.  By 
Richard  Congreve,  M.A.  8vo.  i8j'. 

The  Ethics  of  Aristotle ; 

with  Essays  and  Notes.  By  Sir  A. 
Grant,  Bart.  LL.  D.  2vols.  8vo.  32L 

Bacon’s  Essays,  with  An¬ 

notations.  By  R.  Whately,  D.D. 

8  VO.  I  or.  bd. 

Picture  Logic ;  an  Attempt 

to  Popularise  the  Science  of  Reasoning. 
By  A.  SwiNBOURNE,  B.A.  Post  8vo.  5r. 

Elements  of  Logic.  By 

R.  Whately,  D.D.  8vo.  lor.  (id. 
Crown  8vo.  4s.  6d. 

Elements  of  Rhetoric. 

By  R.  Whately,  D.D.  8vo,  lor.  6d 
Crown  8vo.  4r.  6d. 

On  the  Influence  of  Au¬ 

thority  in  Matters  of  Opinion.  By 

thelateSir.  G.  C. Lewis,  Bart.  8vo.  14^. 


The  Senses  and  the  Itljj 

tellect.  ByA.  Bain,  LL.D.  8vo.  ijigo 

The  Emotions  and  thlu 

Will.  By  A.  Bain,  LL.D.  8vo.  13 -iV 

Mental  and  Moral  ScflEoi 

ence  ;  a  Compendium  of  Psycholoj  ra 
and  Ethics.  By  A.  Bain,  LL.l  *10 
Crown  8vo.  lor.  6d. 

I  jj 

An  Outline  of  the  Neces  i  st 

sary  Laws  of  Thought ;  a  Treatii|  I, 
on  Pure  and  Applied  Logic.  By  Vi 
Thomson,  D.D.  Crown  8vo.  6s.  I  ip 

Essays  in  Political  am,  ^ 

Moral  Philosophy.  By  T.  E.  CliffIi 
Leslie,  Hon.  LL.D.  Dubl.  of  LirS 
coin’s  Inn,  Barrister-at-Law  ;  late  Ex 
aminer  in  Polit.  Econ.  in  the  Univ.  (1 
London  ;  Prof,  of  Jurisp.  and  Polii  b 
Econ.  in  the  Queen’s  University.  8vc  S' 
price  lor.  6d. 

Hume’s  Philosophica.' 

Works.  Edited,  with  Notes,  &c.  b;i 
T.  H.  Green,  M.A.  and  the  Rev' 
T.  H.  Grose,  M.  A.  4  vols.  8vo.  561! 
Or  separately.  Essays,  2  vols.  28r' 
Treatise  on  Human  Nature,  2  vols.  2Ss 

The  Schools  of  Charles 

the  Great,  and  the  Restoration  o\ 
Education  in  the  Ninth  Century.  B) 
J.  Bass  Mullinger,  M.A.  8vo. 
price  yr.  6d. 


MISCELLANEOUS  & 

The  London  Series  of 

English  Classics.  Edited  by  John 
W.  Hales,  M.A.  and  by  Charles  S. 
Jerram,  M.A.  Fcp.  8vo. 

Bacon’s  Essays,  annotated  by  E.  A. 
Abbot,  D.D.  2  vols.  6s.  or  in  i  vol. 
without  Notes,  2s.  6d. 

Ben  Jonson’s  Every  Man  in  His 
Humour,  by  PI.  B.  Wheatley,  F.S.A. 
Price  2s.  6d. 

Macaulay’s  Clive,  by  H.  C.  Bowen, 
M.A.  2s.  6d. 


CRITICAL  WORKS. 

Marlowe’s  Doctor  Faustus,  by  W,‘ 
Wagner,  Ph.D.  2s. 

Milton’s  Paradise  Regained,  by  C.  S. 

Jerram,  M.A.  2s.  6d.  j 

Pope’s  Select  Poems,  by  T.  Arnold, 
M.A.  2s.  6d. 

Miscellaneous  Writings  i 

of  J.  Conington,  M.A.  Edited  by  I 
J.  A.  Symonds,  M.  a.  2  vols.  8vo.  28r.  . 

Selected  Essays,  chiefly; 

from  Contributions  to  the  Edinburgh  I 
and  Quarterly  Reviews.  By  A.  Hay-  i 
WARD,  Q.C.  2  vols.  crown  8vo.  12s.  | 


WORKS  published  by  LONGMANS  CO. 


1 


iterary  Studies.  By  the 

late  Walter  Bagehot,  M.A.  and 
Fellow  of  University  College,  London. 
With  a  Prefatory  Memoir.  Edited  by 
R.  H.  Hutton.  2  vols.  8vo.  with 
Portrait,  28^-. 

.hort  Studies  on  Great 

Subjects.  By  J.  A.  Froude,  M.A. 

3  vols.  crown  8vo.  iSa 

lanual  of  English  Lite- 

■  rature,  Historical  and  Critical.  By 
T.  Arnold,  M.A.  Crown  8vo.  yr.  &/. 

rOrd  Macaulay’s  Miscel- 

.  laneous  Writings 

tBRARY  Edition,  2  vols.  8vo.  21A 

SOPle’s  Edition,  i  vol.  cr.  8vo.  4J.  6il. 

,ord  Macaulay’s  Miscel¬ 
laneous  Writings  and  Speeches, 
Student’s  Edition.  Crown  8vo.  6s. 

ipeeches  of  the  Right 

■  Hon.  Lord  Macaulay,  corrected  by 
Himself.  Crown  8vo.  3^.  Cd 

{elections  from  the  Wri¬ 
tings  of  Lord  Macaulay.  Edited, 
with  Notes,  by  G.  O.  Trevelyan, 
M.P.  Crown.  8vo.  6a 

'he  Wit  and  Wisdom  of 

the  Rev.  Sydney  Smith.  Crown 
8vo.  31'.  6(/. 

/liscellaneous  and  Post¬ 
humous  Works  of  the  late  Henry 
Thomas  Buckle.  Edited  by  PIelen 
Taylor.  3  vols.  8vo.  5 2a  6^/. 

/[iscellaneous  Works  of 

Thomas  Arnold,  D.  D.  late  Head 
Master  of  Rugby  School.  8vo.  ys.  6d. 

rerman  Home  Life ;  a 

Series  of  Essays  on  the  Domestic  Life 
of  Germany.  Crown  8vo.  dr. 

Realities  of  Irish  Life. 

By  W.  Steuart  Trench.  Crown 
8vo.  2J'.  6d.  boards,  or  31'.  6d.  cloth. 


Max  Muller  and  the 

Philosophy  of  Language.  By 

Ludwig  NoiRf.  8vo.  6a 

Lectures  on  the  Science 

of  Language.  By  F.  Max  Muller, 
M.A.  2  vols.  crown  8vo.  i6a 

Chips  from  a  German 

Workshop  ;  Essays  on  the  Science  of 
Religion,  and  on  Mythology,  Traditions 
&  Customs.  By  F.  Max  Muller, 
M.A.  4  vols.  8vo.  £2.  I 8a 

Language  &  Languages. 

A  Revised  Edition  of  Chapters  on  Lan¬ 
guage  and  Families  of  .Speech.  By 
P".  W.  Farrar,  D.D.  F.  R.S.  Crown 
8vo.  dr. 

The  Essays  and  Contri¬ 
butions  of  A.  K.  H.  B.  Uniform 
Cabinet  Editions  in  crown  8vo. 

Recreations  of  a  Country  Parson,  Three 
Series,  3a  6d.  each. 

Landscapes,  Churches,  and  Moralities, 

price  31-.  6d. 

Seaside  Musings,  3A  6d. 

Changed  Aspects  of  Unchanged 
Truths,  3A  6d. 

Counsel  and  Comfort  from  a  City 
Pulpit,  y.  6d. 

Lessons  of  Middle  Age,  3a  6d. 

Leisure  Hours  in  Town,  3A  6d. 

Autumn  Holidays  of  a  Country  Parson, 

price  3r.  6d. 

Sunday  Afternoons  at  the  Parish 
Church  of  a  University  City,  3A  6d. 

The  Commonplace  Philosopher  in 
Town  and  Country,  3A  6d. 

Present-Day  Thoughts,  3A  6d. 

Critical  Essays  of  a  Country  Parson, 
price  y.  6d. 

The  Graver  Thoughts  of  a  Country 
Parson,  Three  .Series,  35.  6d.  each. 


8 


WORKS  published  by  LONGMANS  6-  CO. 


1 


DICTIONARIES  and  OTHER  BOOKS  of 
REFERENCE. 


Dictionary  of  the  iinglish 

Language.  l)y  R.  G.  Latham, 
M.A.  IM.D.  Abridged  from  Dr. 
Latham’s  Edition  of  Johnson's  English 
Dictionary.  Medium  8vo.  24^. 

A  Dictionary  of  the  Eng¬ 
lish  Language.  By  R.  G.  Latham, 
M.A.  M.D.  Founded  on  Johnson’s 
English  Dictionaiy  as  edited  by  the  Rev. 
H.  J.  Todd.  4  vols.  4to.  £•]. 

Roget’s  Thesaurus  of 

English  'Words  and  Phrases,  classi¬ 
fied  and  arranged  so  as  to  facilitate  the 
expression  of  Ideas,  and  assist  in 
Literary  Composition.  Revised  and 
enlarged  by  the  Author’s  Son,  J.  L. 
Roget.  Crown  8vo.  10s.  6J. 

English  Synonymes.  By 

E.  J.  Whately.  Edited  by  R. 
■Whately,  D.D.  Fcp.  8vo.  3^. 

Handbook  of  the  English 

Language.  By  R.  G.  L.atham,  M.A. 
M.D.  Crown  8vo.  6s. 

Contanseau’s  Practical 

Dictionary  of  the  French  and  English 
Languages.  Post  8vo.  price  js.  6d. 

Contanseau’s  Pocket 

Dictionary,  French  and  English, 
abridged  from  the  Practical  Dictionary 
by  the  Author.  Squar'e  i8mo.  3^.  6d. 

A  New  Pocket  Diction¬ 
ary  of  the  German  and  English 
Languages.  By  F.  W.  Longman, 
Ball.  Coll.  Oxford.  Square  i8mo.  5r. 

A  Practical  Dictionary 

of  the  German  and  English  Lan¬ 
guages.  By  Rev.  W.  L.  Blackley, 
M.A.  &  Dr.  C.  M.  Friedlander. 
Post  8vo.  7^.  6d. 

A  Dictionary  of  Roman 

and  Greek  Antiquities.  With  2,000 
Woodcuts  illustrative  of  the  Arts  and 
Life  of  the  Greeks  and  Romans.  By 
A.  Rich,  B.A.  Crown  8vo.  yr.  6d. 

The  Critical  Lexicon  and 

Concordance  to  the  English  and 
Greek  New  Testament.  By  the  Rev. 
E.  W.  Bullinger.  Medium  8vo.  301-. 


A  Greek-English  Lexi 

con.  By  H.  G.  Liddell,  D.D.  Dei 
of  Christchurch,  and  R.  ScOTT,  D.I 
Dean  of  Rochester.  Crown  4to.  361'. 

Liddell  &  Scott’s  Lexi  i 

con,  Greek  and  English,  abridged  f 
Schools.  Square  l2mo.  yr.  6d. 

An  English-Greek  Lexi , 

con,  containing  all  the  Greek  Wore 
used  by  Writers  of  good  authority.  B' 
C.  D.  Yonge,  M.A.  4to.  2ij. 

Mr.  Yonge’s  Lexicon 

English  and  Greek,  abridged  from  hi 
larger  Lexicon.  Square  i2mo.  Sr.  6d, 

A  Latin-English  Diction 

ary.  By  John  T.  White,  D.Bi 
Oxon.  and  J.  E.  Riddle,  M.A.  Oxon 
Sixth  Edition,  revised,  i  vol.  4to.  281 

White’s  College  Latin 

English  Dictionary,  for  the  use  oi 
University  Students.  Medium  8vo.  151' 

A  Latin-English  Diction¬ 
ary  for  the  use  of  Middle-Class  Schools 
By  John  T.  White,  D.D.  Oxon 
Square  fcp.  8vo.  31-. 

White’s  Junior  Student’s 

Latin-English  and  English-Latir 
Dictionary.  Square  i2mo. 
English-Latin  Dictionary,  ^s.6d. 
Latin-English  Dictionary, yr.fii/. 
Complete,  121-. 

McCulloch’s  Dictionary 

of  Commerce  and  Commercial  Navi¬ 
gation.  Re-edited  by  Hugh  G.  Reid. 
With  1 1  Maps  and  30  Charts.  8vo.  631'. 

Keith  Johnston’s  General 

Dictionary  of  Geography,  Descriptive, 
Physical,  Statistical,  and  Historical ; 
a  complete  Gazetteer  of  the  World. 
Medium  8vo.  421-. 

The  Public  Schools  Atlas 

of  Ancient  Geography,  in  28  entirely 
new  Coloured  Maps.  Edited  by  the 
Rev.  G.  Butler,  M.A.  Imperial  8vo. 
or  imperial  4to.  yr.  6d. 

The  Public  Schools  Atlas 

of  Modern  Geography,  in  31  entirely 
new  Coloured  Maps.  Edited  by  the 
Rev.  G.  Butler,  M.A.  Unifonn,  5r, 


WORKS  published  by  LONGMANS  6-  CO, 


9 


ASTRONOMY  and 

Outlines  of  Astronomy. 

By  Sir  J.  F.  W.  IIerschel,  Bart.  M.  A. 
Latest  Edition,  with  Plates  and  Dia¬ 
grams.  Square  crown  8vo.  I2s. 

Essays  on  Astronomy. 

A  Series  of  Papers  on  Planets  and 
Meteors,  the  Sun  and  Sun-surrounding 
.  Space,  Star  and  Star  Cloudlets.  By 
R.  A.  Proctor,  B.A.  With  io  Plates 
and  24  Woodcuts.  8vo.  12s. 

’The  Moon  ;  her  Motions, 

Aspects,  Scenery,  and  Physical  Con¬ 
dition.  By  R.  A.  Proctor,  B.A. 
With  Plates,  Charts,  Woodcuts,  and 
Lunar  Photographs.  Crown  8vo.  ios.6d. 

The  Sun ;  Ruler,  Light,  Fire, 

and  Life  of  the  Planetary  System.  By 
R.  A.  Proctor,  B.A.  With  Plates  & 
Woodcuts.  Crown  8vo.  14s-. 

The  Orbs  Around  Us; 

a  Series  of  Essays  on  the  Moon  & 
Planets,  Meteors  &  Comets,  the  Sun  & 
Coloured  Pairs  of  Suns.  By  R.  A. 
Proctor,  B.A.  With  Chart  and  Dia¬ 
grams.  Crown  8vo.  "Js.  6d. 

Other  Worlds  than  Ours ; 

The  Plurality  of  Worlds  Studied  under 
the  Light  of  Recent  Scientific  Re¬ 
searches.  By  R.  A.  Proctor,  B.A. 
With  14  Illustrations.  Cr.  8vo.  lor.  6d. 

The  Universe  of  Stars; 

Presenting  Researches  into  and  New 
Views  respecting  the  Constitution  of 
the  Heavens.  By  R.  A.  Proctor, 
B.A.  Second  Edition,  with  22  Charts 
(4  Coloured)  and  22  Diagi'ams.  8vo. 
price  I  or.  6d. 

The  Transits  of  Venus ; 

A  Popular  Account  of  Past  and  Coming 
Transits.  By  R.  A.  Proctor,  B.A.  i 
20  Plates  (12  Coloured)  and  27  Wood- 
cuts.  Crown  8vo.  8s.  6d.  1 


METEOROLOGY. 

Saturn  and  its  System. 

By  R.  A.  Proctor,  B.A.  8vo.  with 
14  Plates,  i4f. 

The  Moon,  and  the  Con¬ 
dition  and  Configurations  of  its  Surface. 
By  E.  Neison,  F.R.A.S.  With  26 
Maps  &  5  Plates.  Medium  8vo.  3ir.  6d. 

A  New  Star  Atlas,  for  the 

Library,  the  School,  and  the  Obser¬ 
vatory,  in  12  Circular  Maps  (with  2 
Index  Plates).  By  R.  A.  Proctor, 
B.  A.  Crown  8vo.  5r. 

Larger  Star  Atlas,  for  the 

Library,  in  Twelve  Circular  Maps, 
with  Introduction  and  2  Index  Plates. 
By  R.  A.  Proctor,  B.A.  Folio,  15^. 
or  Maps  only,  12s.  6d. 

A  Treatise  on  the  Cy¬ 
cloid,  and  on  all  forms  of  Cycloidal 
Curves,  and  on  the  use  of  Cycloidal 
Curves  in  dealing  with  the  Motions  of 
Planets,  Comets,  &c.  and  of  Matter 
projected  from  the  Sun.  By  R.  A. 
Proctor,  B.A.  With  161  Diagrams. 
Crown  8vo.  lor.  6d. 

Dove’s  Law  of  Storms, 

considered  in  connexion  with  the 
Ordinary  Movements  of  the  Atmo¬ 
sphere.  Translated  by  R.  II.  Scott, 
M.A.  8 VO.  lOr.  6d. 

Air  and  Rain  ;  the  Begin¬ 
nings  of  a  Chemical  Climatology.  By 
R.  A.  Smith,  F.R.S.  8vo.  241-. 

Schellen’s  Spectrum 

Analysis,  in  its  Application  to  Terres¬ 
trial  Substances  and  the  Physical 
Constitution  of  the  Heavenly  Bodies. 
Translated  by  Jane  and  C.  Lassell, 
with  Notes  by  W.  Huggins,  LL.D. 
F.  R.  S.  8vo.  Plates  and  Woodcuts,  28i-. 


lO 


WOUKS  published  by  LONGMANS  CO. 


I 


NATURAL  HISTORY  and  PHYSICAL 
SCIENCE. 


Professor  Helmholtz’ 

Popular  Lectures  on  Scientific  Sub¬ 
jects.  Translated  by  E.  ATKINSON, 
F.C.S.  With  numerous  Wood  Engrav¬ 
ings.  8vo.  12S.  6d. 

Professor  Helmholtz  on 

the  Sensations  of  Tone,  as  a  Physio¬ 
logical  Basis  for  the  Theory  of  Music. 
Translated  by  A.  J.  Ellis,  F.R.S. 
8vo.  36^. 

Ganot’s  Natural  Philo¬ 
sophy  for  General  Readers  and 
Young  Persons  ;  a  Course  of  Physics 
divested  of  Mathematical  Formula:  and 
expressed  in  the  language  of  daily  life. 
Translated  by  E.  Atkinson,  F.C.S. 
Third  Edition.  Plates  and  Woodcuts. 
Crown  8vo.  ys.  6d. 

Ganot’s  Elementary 

Treatise  on  Physics,  Experimental 
and  Applied,  for  the  use  of  Colleges 
and  Schools.  Translated  and  edited 
by  E.  Atkinson,  F.C.S.  Eighth 
Edition.  Plates  and  Woodcuts.  Post 
8vo.  I5r. 

Arnott’s  Elements  of  Phy¬ 
sics  or  Natural  Philosophy.  Seventh 
Edition,  edited  by  A.  Bain,  LL.D. 
and  A.  S.  Taylor,  M.D.  F.R.S. 
Crown  8vo.  Woodcuts,  12s.  6d. 

The  Correlation  of  Phy¬ 
sical  Forces.  By  the  PI  on.  Sir  W. 
R.  Grove,  F.R.S.  &c.  Sixth  Edition, 
revised  and  augmented.  8vo.  I5r. 

Weinhold’s  Introduction 

to  Experimental  Physics ;  including 
Directions  for  Constructing  Physical 
Apparatus  and  for  Making  Experiments. 
Translated  by  B.  Loewy,  F.  R.A.  S. 
With  a  Preface  by  G.  C.  F oster,  F.  R.  S. 
8vo.  Plates  &  Woodcuts  3ir.  6d. 

A  Treatise  on  Magnet¬ 
ism,  General  and  Ten'estrial.  By  H. 
Lloyd,  D.D.  D.C.L.  8vo.  lor.  i>d. 

Elementary  Treatise  on 

the  Wave-Theory  of  Light.  By 
PI.  Lloyd,  D.D.  D.C.L.  8vo.  lor.  6(4 


Fragments  of  Science. 

By  John  Tyndall,  F.R.S.  Sixth 
Edition,  revised  and  augmented.  2  vols. 
crown  8vo.  ifir. 

Heat  a  Mode  of  Motion. 

By  John  Tyndall,  F.R.S.  Fifth 
Edition  in  preparation. 

Sound.  By  John  Tyndall, 

F.R.S.  Third  Edition,  including . 
Recent  Researches  on  Fog- Signalling. 
Croivn  8 VO.  price  10s.  6d. 

Researches  on  Diamag¬ 
netism  and  Magne-CrystallicAction; 

including  Diamagnetic  Polarity.  By 
John  Tyndall,  F.R.S.  New  Edition 
in  preparation. 

Contributions  to  Mole¬ 
cular  Physics  in  the  domain  of  Ra¬ 
diant  Heat.  By  John  Tyndall, 
F.R.S.  Plates  and  Woodcuts.  8vo.  i6l 

Six  Lectures  on  Light, 

delivered  in  America  in  1872  and  1873. 
By  John  Tyndall,  F.R.S.  Second 
Edition.  Portrait,  Plate,  and  Diagrams. 
Crown  8vo.  ys.  6d. 

Lessons  in  Electricity  at 

the  Royal  Institution,  1875-6.  By 
John  Tyndall,  F.R.S.  With  58 
Woodcuts.  Crown  8vo.  2s.  6d. 

Notes  of  a  Course  of 

Seven  Lectures  on  Electrical  Phe¬ 
nomena  and  Theories,  delivered  at 
the  Royal  Institution.  By  John  Tyn¬ 
dall,  F.R.S.  Crown  8vo.  ir.  sewed, 
or  ir.  6d.  cloth. 

Notes  of  a  Course  of  Nine 

Lectures  on  Light,  delivered  at  the 
Royal  Institution.  By  John  Tyndall, 
F.R.S.  Crown  8vo.  ir.  sewed,  or 
IS.  6d.  cloth. 

Principles  of  Animal  Me¬ 
chanics.  By  the  Rev.  S.  Haughton 
F.R.S.  Second  Edition.  8vo.  21s. 


WORKS  published  by  LONGMANS  dr*  CO. 


II 


Text-Books  of  Science, 

Mechanical  and  Physical,  adapted  for 
the  use  of  Artisans  and  of  Students  in 
Public  and  Science  Schools.  Small 
8 VO.  with  Woodcuts,  &c. 

Abney’s  Photography,  3^.  6</. 
Anderson’s  (Sir  John)  Strength  of  Ma¬ 
terials,  y.  6d. 

Armstrong’s  Organic  Chemistry,  3r.  6d. 
Barry’s  Railway  Appliances,  2s.  6d. 
Bloxam’s  Metals,  3^.  6d. 

Goodeve’s  Mechanics,  3^.  6d. 

_ -  Mechanism,  3^.  6d. 

Gore’s  Electro- Metallurgy,  6s. 

Griffin’s  Algebra  &  Trigonometry,  3/6. 
Jenkin’s  Electricity  &  Magnetism,  3/6. 
Maxwell’s  Theory  of  Heat,  3^.  6ii. 
Merrifield’s  Technical  Arithmetic,  3^.  6d. 
Miller’s  Inorganic  Chemistry,  3^.  6d. 
Preece  &  Sivewright’s  Telegraphy,  3/6. 
Rutley’s  Study  of  Rocks,  4s.  6d. 
Shelley’s  Workshop  Appliances,  3^  6d. 
Thome’s  Structural  and  Physiological 
Botany,  6s. 

Thorpe’s  Quantitative  Analysis,  4^.  6d. 
Thorpe  &  Muir’s  Qualitative  Analysis, 

price  3r.  6d. 

Tilden’s  Systematic  Chemistry,  3.?.  6d. 
Unwin’s  Machine  Design,  3^.  6d, 
Watson’s  Plane  &  Solid  Geometry,  3/6. 

Light  Science  for  Leisure 

Hours  ;  Familiar  Essays  on  Scientific 
Subjects,  Natural  Phenomena,  &c. 
By  R.  A.  Proctor,  B.A.  2  vols. 
crown  8vo.  "js.  6d.  each. 

An  Introduction  to  the 

Systematic  Zoology  and  Morpho¬ 
logy  of  Vertebrate  Animals.  By  A. 

Macalister,  M.D.  Professor  of  Com¬ 
parative  Anatomy  and  Zoology,  Univer¬ 
sity  of  Dublin.  With  28  Diagrams. 
8  VO.  I  or.  6d. 

The  Comparative  Ana¬ 
tomy  and  Physiology  of  the  Verte¬ 
brate  Animals.  By  Richard  Owen, 
F.R.S.  With  1,472  Woodcuts.  3 
vols.  8vo.  ;^3.  I3r.  6d. 


Homes  without  Hands ; 

a  Description  of  the  Habitations  of 
Animals,  classed  according  to  their 
Principle  of  Construction.  By  the  Rev. 
J.  G.  Wood,  M.A.  With  about  140 
Vignettes  on  Wood.  8vo.  14?. 

Wood’s  Strange  Dwell¬ 
ings  ;  a  Description  of  the  Habitations 
of  Animals,  abridged  from  ‘  Homes 
without  Hands.’  With  Frontispiece 
and  60  Woodcuts.  Crown  8vo.  yr.  6d. 

Wood’s  Insects  at  Home; 

a  Popular  Account  of  British  Insects, 
their  Structure,  Habits,  and  Trans¬ 
formations.  With  700  Woodcuts. 
8vo.  14^. 

Wood’s  Insects  Abroad ; 

a  Popular  Account  of  Foreign  Insects, 
their  Structure,  Habits,  and  Trans¬ 
formations.  With  700  Woodcuts. 
8vo.  14J. 

Wood’s  Out  of  Doors  ;  a 

Selection  of  Original  Articles  on 
Practical  Natural  History.  With  6 
Illustrations.  Crown  8vo.  Js.  6d. 

Wood’s  Bible  Animals ;  a 

description  of  every  Living  Creature 
mentioned  in  the  Scriptures,  from  the- 
Ape  to  the  Coral.  With  1 12  Vignettes. 

8 VO.  I4.r. 

The  Sea  and  its  Living 

Wonders.  'By  Dr.  G.  Hartwig. 
8vo.  with  numerous  Illustrations,  price 
I  or.  6d. 

Hartwig’s  Tropical 

World.  With  about  200  Illustrations. 
8vo.  I  or.  6d. 

Hartwig’s  Polar  World ; 

a  Description  of  Man  and  Nature  in  the 
Arctic  and  Antarctic  Regions  of  the 
Globe.  Chromoxylographs,  Maps,  and 
Woodcuts.  8vo.  lor.  6d. 

Hartwig’s  Subterranean 

World.  With  Maps  and  Woodcuts. 
8vo.  lor.  6d. 

Hartwig’s  Aerial  World; 

a  Popular  Account  of  the  Phenomena 
and  Life  of  the  Atmosphere.  Map, 
Chromoxylographs,  Woodcuts.  8vo. 
price  I  or.  6d, 


12  WORKS  published  by 


Kirby  and  Spence’s  In¬ 
troduction  to  Entomology,  or  Ele¬ 
ments  of  the  Natural  History  of  Insects. 
Crown  8vo.  5^. 

A  Familiar  History  of 

Birds.  By  E.  Stanley,  D.D.  Fcp. 
8vo.  with  Woodcuts,  3^.  6d. 

Rocks  Classified  and  De¬ 
scribed.  By  Bernhard  Von  Cotta. 
An  English  Translation,  by  P.  H. 
Lawrence  (with  English,  German,  and 
French  Synonymes),  revised  by  the 
Author.  Post  8vo.  14^. 

The  Geology  of  England 

and  Wales ;  a  Concise  Account  of 
the  Lithological  Characters,  Leading 
Fossils,  and  Economic  Products  of  the 
Rocks.  By  H.  B.  Woodward,  F.G.S. 
Crown  8vo.  Map  &  Woodcuts,  145'. 

Keller’s  Lake  Dwellings 

of  Switzerland,  and  other  Parts  of 
Europe.  Translated  by  John  E.  Lee, 
F. S.A.  F.G.S.  New  Edition,  en¬ 
larged,  with  206  Illustrations.  2  vols. 
royal  8vo.  42^-. 

The  Primaeval  World  of 

Switzerland.  By  Professor  Oswal 
Heer,  of  the  University  of  Zurich. 
Edited  by  James  Heywood,  M.A. 
F.R.S.  With  Map,  19  Plates,  &  372 
’Woodcuts.  2  vols.  8vo.  16s, 

The  Puzzle  of  Life  and 

How  it  Has  Been  Put  Together  ;  a 

Short  History  of  Praehistoric  Vegetable 
and  Animal  Life  on  the  Earth.  By  A. 
Nicols,  F.R.G  S.  With  12  Illustra¬ 
tions.  Crown  8vo.  3^.  6d. 

The  Origin  of  Civilisa¬ 

tion,  and  the  Primitive  Condition  of 

Man  ;  Mental  and  Social  Condition  of 
Savages.  By  Sir  J.  Lubbock,  Bart. 
M.P.  F.R.S.  8vo.  Woodcuts,  I 8l 

A  Dictionary  of  Science, 

Literature,  and  Art.  Re-edited  by 
the  late  W.  T.  Brande  (the  Author) 
and  the  Rev.  SirG.W.  Cox,  Bart.,  M.A. 
3  vols.  medium  8vo.  63^. 


LONGMANS  CO. 


The  History  of  Moden 

Music,  a  Course  of  Lectures  delivere] 
at  the  Royal  Institution.  By  JOHi 
Hullah,  LL.D.  8vo.  8a  (id.  | 

The  Transition  Period  o 

Musical  History,  from  the  Beginnin 
of  the  17th  to  the  Middle  of  the  i8t 
Century.  A  Second  Series  of  Lectures) 
By  the  same  Author.  8vo.  ioa  (id,  \  , 

I 

Loudon’s  Encyclopaedk  c 

of  Plants ;  comprising  the  Specifij 
Character,  Description,  Culture,  His 
tory,  &c.  of  all  the  Plants  found  i 
Great  Britain.  With  upwards  C; 
12,000  Woodcuts.  8vo.  42A 

De  Caisne  &  Le  Maout’s 

System  of  Descriptive  and  Analy 
tical  Botany.  Translated  by  Mrs) 
Hooker  ;  edited  and  arranged  accord  i 
ing  to  the  English  Botanical  System,  b; 
J.  D.  Hooker,  M.D.  With  5,S0(, 
Woodcuts.  Imperial  8vo.  31A  (id.  i 

The  Treasury  of  Botany, 

or  Popular  Dictionary  of  the  Vegetable 
Kingdom  ;  with  which  is  incorporated 
a  Glossary  of  Botanical  Terms.  Edited 
by  J.  Lindley,F.  R.S.,  and  T.MOORE,: 
F.L. S.  With  274  Woodcuts  and  20 
Steel  Plates.  Two  Parts,  fcp.  8vo.  I2j. 

Rivers’s  Orchard-House ; 

or,  the  Cultivation  of  Fruit  Trees  under 
Glass.  Sixteenth  Edition,  re-edited  by 
T.  F.  Rivers.  Crown  8vo.  with  25 
Woodcuts,  price  5a 

The  Rose  Amateur’s 

Guide.  By  Thomas  Rivers.  Latest 
Edition.  Fcp.  8vo.  4A  (id. 

Town  and  Window  Gar¬ 
dening,  including  the  Structure,  Habits: 
and  Uses  of  Plants;  a  Course  of 
Sixteen  Lectures  given  out  of  School- 
Hours  to  Pupil  Teachers  and  Children 
attending  the  Leeds  Board  Schools.  By 
Mrs.  Buckton,  Member  of  the  Leeds 
School  Board.  With  127  Woodcuts. 
Crown  8vo.  2s. 


WORKS  published  by  LONGMANS  6-  CO. 


13 


CHEMISTRY  and 

Miller’s  Elements  of  Che-  ! 

mistry,  Theoretical  and  Practical,  j 
Re-edited,  with  Additions,  by  II.  1 
Macleod,  F.C.S.  3  vols.  8vo. 

Part  I.  Chemical  Physics.  i6r. 

Part  II.  Inorganic  Chemistry,  24^. 
Part  III.  Organic  Chemistry,  New 
Edition  in  the  press. 

Animal  Chemistry,  or  the 

Relations  of  Chemistry  to  Physiology 
and  Pathology  :  a  Manual  for  Medical 
Men  and  Scientific  Chemists.  By 
Charles  T.  Kingzett,  F.C.S.  8vo. 
price  181-. 

Health  in  the  House : 

Twenty-five  Lectures  on  Elementary 
Physiology  in  its  Application  to  the 
Daily  Wants  of  Man  and  Animals. 

By  Mrs.  Buckton.  Crown  8vo. 
Woodcuts,  2s. 


PHYSIOLOGY. 

A  Dictionary  of  Chemis¬ 
try  and  the  Allied  Branches  of  other 
Sciences.  By  Henry  Watts,  F.C.S. 
assisted  by  eminent  Scientific  and 
Practical  Chemists.  7  vols.  medium 
8vo.  ;^|^io.  1 6s.  6d. 

Third  Supplement,  completing  the 
Record  of  Chemical  Discovery  to  the 
year  1877.  Part  I.  8vo.  36^.  Part  II. 
completion,  in  the  press. 

Select  Methods  in  Che¬ 
mical  Analysis,  chiefly  Inorganic.  By 
Wm.  Crookes,  F.R.  S.  With  22 
Woodcuts.  Crown  8vo.  121-.  6d. 

The  History,  Products, 

and  Processes  of  the  Alkali  Trade, 

including  the  most  recent  Improve¬ 
ments.  By  Charles  T.  Kingzett, 
F.C.S.  With  32  Woodcuts.  8vo.  12s. 


The  FINE  ARTS  and  ILLUSTRATED 
EDITIONS. 


In  Fairyland  ;  Pictures 

from  the  Elf-World.  By  Richard 
Doyle.  With  a  Poem  by  W.  Al- 
LINGHAM.  With  16  coloured  Plates, 
containing  36  Designs.  Folio,  15J'. 

Lord  Macaulay’s  Lays  of 

Ancient  Rome.  With  Ninety  Illustra¬ 
tions  on  Wood  from  Drawings  by  G.  j 
SCHARF.  Fcp.  4tO.  2is. 

Miniature  Edition  of 

Macaulay’s  Lays  of  Ancient  Rome, 
with  Scharf’s  90  Illustrations  reduced 
in  Lithography.  Imp.  i6mo.  10s.  6d. 

Moore’s  Lalla  Rookh. 

Tenniel’s  Edition,  with  68  Woodcut 
Illustrations.  Fcp.  4to.  21^. 

Moore’s  Irish  Melodies, 

Maclise’s  Edition,  with  16 1  Steel 
Plates.  Super-royal  8vo.  2ls. 

Lectures  on  Harmony, 

delivered  at  the  Royal  Institution.  By 
G.  A.  Macfarren.  8vo.  I2.r. 


Sacred  and  Legendary 

Art.  By  Mrs.  Jameson.  6  vols. 
square  crown  8vo.  price  iS-f- 

Jameson’s  Legends  of  the 

Saints  and  Martyrs.  With  19  Etch¬ 
ings  and  187  Woodcuts.  2  vols.  3ij.  6d. 

Jameson’s  Legends  of  the 

Monastic  Orders.  With  11  Etchings 
and  88  Woodcuts,  i  vol.  2is. 

Jameson’s  Legends  of  the 

Madonna.  With  27  Etchings  and  165 
Woodcuts.  I  vol.  21i’. 

Jameson’s  History  of  the 

Saviour,  Ills  Types  and  Precursors. 
Completed  by  Lady  Easti.ake.  With 
13  Etchings  and  281  Woodcuts. 
2  vols.  42r. 

The  Three  Cathedrals 

dedicated  to  St.  Paul  in  London. 
By  W.  Longman,  F.S.A.  With 
numerous  Illustrations.  Square  crown 
8vo.  21s. 


14 


WOjRXS  pMished  by  LONGMANS  6-  CO. 


The  USEFUL  ARTS, 

The  Art  of  Scientific 

Discovery.  By  G.  Gore,  LL.D. 
F.R.S.  Autliorof  ‘  The  Art  of  Electro- 
hletallurg)'.’  Crown  8vo.  15^. 

The  Amateur  Mechanics’ 

Practical  Handbook  ;  describing  the 
different  Tools  required  in  the  Work¬ 
shop.  By  A.  H.  G.  Hobson.  With 
33  Woodcuts.  Crown  8vo.  2r.  i>d. 

The  Engineer’s  Valuing 

Assistant.  By  H.  D.  IToskold, 
Civil  and  Mining  Engineer,  l6  years 
Mining  Engineer  to  the  Dean  Forest 
Iron  Company.  8vo.  31^.  ()d. 

Industrial  Chemistry ;  a 

Manual  for  Manufacturers  and  for  Col¬ 
leges  or  Technical  Schools  ;  a  Transla¬ 
tion  (by  Dr.  T.  H.  Barry)  of  Stoh- 
mann  and  Engler’s  German  Edition  of 
Payen’s  ‘  Precis  de  Chimie  Industrielle 
with  Chapters  on  the  Chemistry  of  the 
Metals,  &c.  byB.  H.  Paul,  Ph.D.  With 
698  Woodcuts.  Medium  8vo.  \2s. 

Gwilt’s  Encyclopaedia  of 

Architecture,  with  above  1,600  Wood- 
cuts.  Revised  and  e.\tended  by  W. 
Papworth.  8vo.  52r.  bd. 

Lathes  and  Turning,  Sim¬ 
ple,  Mechanical,  and  Ornamental.  By 
W.  H.  Northcott.  Second  Edition, 
with  338  Illustrations.  8vo.  l8r. 

The  Theory  of  Strains  in 

Girders  and  similar  Structures,  with 
Observations  on  the  application  of 
Theory  to  Practice,  and  Tables  of  the 
Strength  and  other  Properties  of  Ma¬ 
terials.  By  B.  B.  Stoney,  M.A. 
M.  Inst.  C.E.  Royal  8vo.  with  5 
Plates  and  123  Woodcuts,  36^. 

A  Treatise  on  Mills  and 

Millwork.  By  the  late  Sir  W.  Fair- 
bairn,  Bart.  C.E.  Fourth  Edition, 
with  18  Plates  and  333  Woodcuts. 

I  vol.  8vo.  25^. 

Useful  Information  for 

Engineers.  By  the  late  Sir  W. 
Fairbairn,  Bart.  C.E.  With  many 
Plates  and  Woodcuts.  3  vols.  crown 
8vo.  3ir.  6(/. 


MANUFACTURES,  &c. 

The  Application  of  Cast 

and  Wrought  Iron  to  Building 
Purposes.  By  the  late  Sir  W.  Fair¬ 
bairn,  Bart.  C.E.  With  6  Plates  and 
1 18  Woodcuts.  8vo.  16s. 

Hints  on  Household 

Taste  in  Furniture,  Upholstery, 

and  other  Details.  By  C.  L.  East- 
LAKE.  Fourth  Edition,  with  100  Illus¬ 
trations.  Square  crown  8vo.  14.?. 

Handbook  of  Practical 

Telegraphy.  By  R.  S.  Culley, 
Memb.  Inst.  C.E.  Seventh  Edition. 
Plates  &  Woodcuts.  8vo.  price  16s, 

A  Treatise  on  the  Steam 

Engine,  in  its  various  applications  to 
Mines,  Mills,  Steam  Navigation,  Rail¬ 
ways  and  Agriculture.  By  J.  BOURNE, 
C.E.  With  Portrait,  37  Plates,  and 
546  Woodcuts.  4to.  42r. 

Recent  Improvements  in 

the  steam  Engine.  By  J.  Bourne, 
C.E.  Fcp.  8vo.  Woodcuts,  6s. 

Catechism  of  the  Steam 

Engine,  in  its  various  Applications. 
By  John  Bourne,  C.E.  Fcp.  8vo. 
Woodcuts,  6s. 

Handbook  of  the  Steam 

Engine,  a  Key  to  the  Author’s  Cate¬ 
chism  of  the  Steam  Engine.  By  J. 
Bourne,  C.E.  Fcp.  8vo.  Woodcuts,  gs. 

Examples  of  Steam  and 

Gas  Engines  of  the  most  recent  Ap¬ 
proved  Types  as  employed  in  Mines, 
Factories,  Steam  Navigation,  Railways 
and  Agriculture,  practica’ily  described. 
By  John  Bourne,  C.E.  With  54 
Plates  and  356  Woodcuts.  4to.  yos. 

Encyclopasdia  of  Civil 

Engineering,  Plistorical,  Theoretical, 
and  Practical.  By  E.  Cresy,  C.E. 
With  above  3,000  Woodcuts.  8vo.  42^. 

Ure’s  Dictionary  of  Arts, 

Manufactures,  and  Mines.  Seventh 
Edition,  re-witten  and  enlarged  by  R. 
Hunt,  F.R.S.  assisted  by  numerous 
contributors.  With  2,604  Woodcuts. 
4  vols.  medium  8vo.  Ly.  ys. 


WORKS  published  by  LONGMANS  cS^•  CO. 


15 


Practical  Treatise  on  Me¬ 
tallurgy.  Adapted  from  the  last 
German  Edition  of  Professor  Kerl’s 
Metallurgy  by  W.  Crookes,  F.  K.S. 
&c.  and  E.  Rohrig,  Ph.D.  3  vols. 
8vo.  with  625  Woodcuts.  Pi,,  igs. 

Anthracen;  its  Constitution, 

Properties,  Manufacture,  and  Deriva¬ 
tives,  including  Artificial  Alizarin,  An- 
thrapurpurin,  &c.  with  their  Applica¬ 
tions  in  Dyeing  and  Printing.  By  G. 
Auerbach.  Translated  by  W. 
Crookes,  F.R.S  8vo.  12s. 

On  Artificial  Manures, 

their  Chemical  Selection  and  Scientific 
Application  to  Agriculture  ;  a  Series 
of  Lectures  given  at  the  Experimental 
Farm  at  Vincennes  in  1867  and  1874- 
75.  By  M.  Georges  ViLLE.  Trans¬ 
lated  and  edited  by  W.  Crookes, 
F.R.S.  With  31  Plates.  8vo.  210. 


Practical  Handbook  of 

Dyeing  and  Calico-Printing.  By 
W.  Crookes,  F.R.S.  &c.  With 
numerous  Illustrations  and  specimens 
of  Dyed  Textile  Fabrics.  8vo.  42s. 

Mitchell’s  Manual  of 

Practical  Assaying.  Fourth  Edition, 
revised,  with  the  Recent  Discoveries 
incorporated,  by  W.  Crookes,  F.R.S. 
Crown  8vo.  Woodcuts,  3ir.  6i/. 

Loudon’s  Encyclopaedia 

of  Gardening  ;  the  Theory  and  Prac¬ 
tice  of  Horticulture,  Floriculture,  Arbori¬ 
culture  &  Landscape  Gardening.  With 
1,000  Woodcuts.  8vo.  2IS. 

Loudon’s  Encyclopaedia 

of  Agriculture  ;  the  Laying-out,  Im¬ 
provement,  and  Management  of  Landed 
Property ;  the  Cultivation  and  Economy 
of  the  Productions  of  Agriculture.  With 
1, 100  Woodcuts.  8vo.  2IS. 


RELIGIOUS  and 
Four  Lectures  on  some 

Epochs  of  Early  Church  History. 
By  the  Very  Rev.  C.  Merivale,  D.  D. 
Dean  of  Ely.  Crown  8vo.  5a 

A  History  of  the  Church 

of  England  ;  Pre-Reformation  Period. 
By  the  Rev.  T.  P.  Boultbee,  LL.D. 
late  Fellow  of  St.  John’s  College,  Cam¬ 
bridge.  8vo.  1 5r. 

Sketch  of  the  History  of 

the  Church  of  England  to  the  Revo¬ 
lution  of  1688.  By  T.  V.  Short, 
D.  D.  Crown  8vo.  ys.  6d. 

The  English  Church  in 

the  Eighteenth  Century.  By  Charles 
J.  Abbey,  late  Fellow  of  University 
College,  Oxford;  and  John  H.  Over- 
ton,  late  Scholar  of  Lincoln  College, 
Oxford.  2  vols.  8vo.  36^. 

The  Human  Life  of  Christ 

revealing  the  Order  of  the  Universe, 
being  the  Hulsean  Lectures  for  1877  ; 
with  an  Appendix.  By  G.  S.  Drew, 
M.A.  Vicar  of  Holy  Trinity,  Lambeth, 
8vo.  8a 


MORAL  WORKS. 

An  Exposition  of  the  39 

Articles,  Historical  and  Doctrinal.  By 
E.  H.  Browne,  D.D.  Bishop  of  Win¬ 
chester.  Eleventh  Edition.  8vo.  i6a 

A  Commentary  on  the 

39  Articles,  forming  an  Introduction  to 
the  Theology  of  the  Church  of  England. 
By  the  Rev.  T.  P.  Boultbee,  LL.D. 
New  Edition.  Crown  8vo.  6a 

Historical  Lectures  on 

the  Life  of  Our  Lord  Jesus  Christ. 
By  C.  J.  Ellicott,  D.D.  8vo.  I2a 

I  Sermons  preached  most¬ 
ly  in  the  Chapel  of  Rugby  School 
by  the  late  T.  Arnold,  D.D.  Collective 
Edition,  revised  by  the  Author’s 
Daughter,  Mrs.W.  E.  Forster.  6  vols. 
crown  8vo.  yps.  or  separately,  Sa  each. 

The  Eclipse  of  Faith  ;  or 

a  Visit  to  a  Religious  Sceptic.  By 
Henry  Rogers.  Fcp.  8vo.  5a 

Defence  of  the  Eclipse  of 

1  Faith.  By  H.  Rogers.  Fcp.  8vo.  3r. 


i6  JVOJ?KS  puhlished  by  LONGMANS  CO. 


Nature,  the  Utility  of 

Religion  and  Theism.  Three  Essays 
by  John  Stuart  Mill.  8vo.  ioa  6i/. 

A  Critical  and  Gram¬ 
matical  Commentary  on  St.  Paul’s 
Epistles.  By  C.  J.  Ellicott,  D.D. 
8vo.  Galatians,  8r.  6d.  Ephesians, 
8r.  6d.  Pastoral  Epistles,  los.  6d. 
Philippians,  Colossians,  &  Philemon, 
I  or.  6d.  Thessalonians,  7r.  6d. 

Conybeare  &  Howson’s 

Life  and  Epistles  of  St.  Paul. 

Three  Editions,  copiously  illustrated. 
Library  Edition,  with  all  the  Original 
Illustrations,  Maps,  Landscapes  on 
Steel,  Woodcuts,  &c.  2  vols.  4to.  42r. 

Intermediate  Edition,  with  a  Selection 
of  Maps,  Plates,  and  Woodcuts.  2  vols. 
square  crown  8vo.  2ir. 

Student’s  Edition,  revised  and  con¬ 
densed,  with  46  Illustrations  and  Maps. 
I  vol.  crouTi  8vo.  gs. 

The  Jewish  Messiah  ; 

Critical  Plistory  of  the  Messianic  Idea 
among  the  Jews,  from  the  Rise  of  the 
Maccabees  to  the  Closing  of  the  Tal¬ 
mud.  By  James  Drummond,  B.A. 
8vo.  I5r. 

The  Prophets  and  Pro¬ 
phecy  in  Israel ;  an  Historical  and 
Critical  Inquiry.  By  Prof.  A.  KuENEN, 
Translated  from  the  Dutch  by  the  Rev. 
A.  Milroy,  M.A.  with  an  Introduc¬ 
tion  by  J.  Muir,  D.C.L.  8vo.  2ir. 

Mythology  among  the 

Hebrews  and  its  Historical  Develop¬ 
ment.  By  Ignaz  Goldziher,  Ph.D. 
Translated  by  Russell  Martineau, 
M.A.  8vo.  16s. 

Bible  Studies.  By  M.  M. 

Kalisch,  Ph.D.  Part  I.  TAe  Pro¬ 
phecies  of  Balaam.  8vo.  10s.  6d. 

Part  1 1.  The  Book  of  fonah.  8vo. 
I  os.  6d. 

Historical  and  Critical 

Commentary  on  the  Old  Testament ; 

with  a  New  Translation.  By  M.  M. 
Kalisch,  Ph.D.  Vol.  I.  Genesis, 
8vo.  iSs.  or  adapted  for  the  General 
Reader,  I2a  Vol.  H.  Exodus,  15^'.  or 
adapted  for  the  General  Reader,  12s. 
Vol.  HI.  Leviticus,  Part  I.  15^.  or 
adapted  for  the  General  Reader,  8i'. 
Vol.  IV.  Leviticus,  Part  H.  15^.  or 
adapted  for  the  General  Reader,  8r. 


Ewald’s  History  of  Israel  ; 

Translated  from  the  German  by  J.  E' 
Carpenter,  M.A.  with  Preface  by  Rl 
Martineau,  M.A.  5  vols.  8vo.  63^. 

Ewald’s  Antiquities  ol^ 

Israel.  Translated  from  the  Germatl 
byli.  S.  Solly,  M.A.  8vo.  i2j'.  6d.  i 

The  Types  of  Genesis, 

briefly  considered  as  revealing  tht 
Development  of  Human  Nature.  By 
A.  Jukes.  Crown  8vo.  "js.  6d.  !, 

The  Second  Death  and 

the  Restitution  of  all  Things ;  with 
some  Preliminary  Remarks  on  the! 
Nature  and  Inspiration  of  Holy  Scrip-' 
ture.  By  A.  Jukes.  Crown  8vo.  3A  6d,  i 

Commentaries,  by  the  Rev. 

W.  A.  O’Conor,  B.A.  Rector  of  St. i 
Simon  and  St.  Jude,  Manchester. 

Epistle  to  the  Romans,  crown  8vo.  3^.  6d.  J 
Epistle  to  the  Hebrews,  qr.  6d. 

St.  John’s  Gospel,  lOj.  6d.  !| 

Supernatural  Religion ;  i 

an  Inquiry  into  the  Reality  of  Di- 1 
vine  Revelation.  Complete  Edition, 
thoroughly  revised,  with  New  Preface  - 
and  Conclusions.  3  vols.  8vo.  36^. 

Lectures  on  the  Origin  j 

and  Growth  of  Religion,  as  illus-  j 
trated  by  the  Religions  of  India ; 
being  the  liibbert  Lectures  for  1878, 
delivered  at  the  Chapter  House,  West¬ 
minster  Abbey,  in  1878,  by  E.  Max 
Muller,  M.A.  Second  Edition.  8vo. 
price  I  or.  6d. 

Introduction  to  the  Sci¬ 
ence  of  Religion,  Four  Lectures  de¬ 
livered  at  the  Royal  Institution  ;  with 
Two  Essays  on  False  Analogies  and 
the  Philosophy  of  Mythology.  By 
Max  Muller,  M.A.  Crown  8vo. 
price  I  or.  6d. 

The  Four  Gospels  in 

Greek,  with  Greek-English  Lexicon. 
By  John  T.  White,  D.D.  Oxon. 
Square  32mo.  S-f- 

Passing  Thoughts  on 

Religion.  By  Elizabeth  M.  Sewell. 
Fcp.  8vo.  3r.  6d. 


WORKS  published  by  LONGMANS  G-  CO. 


17 


Thoughts  for  the  Age. 

by  Ehzaheth  M.  Sewell.  New 
Edition.  Fcp.  8vo.  3^.  6d. 

Preparation  for  the  Holy 

Communion  ;  the  Devotions  chiefly 
from  the  works  of  Jeremy  Taylor.  By  ! 
Elizabeth  M.  Sewell.  32mo.  3^. 

Bishop  Jeremy  Taylor’s  i 

Entire  Works ;  with  Life  by  Bishop 
Heber.  Revised  and  corrected  by  the 
Rev.  C.  P.  Eden.  10  vols.  ^5.  y. 

Hymns  of  Praise  and 

Prayer.  Corrected  and  edited  by 
Rev.  John  Martineau,  LL.D. 
Crown  8vo.  41.  bd.  32mo.  ir.  bd. 

Spiritual  Songs  for  the 

Sundays  and  Holidays  throughout  I 
the  Year.  By  J.  S.  B.  Monsell, 
LL.D.  Fcp.  8vo.  Sl  i8mo.  2s. 

Christ  the  Consoler ;  a 

Book  of  Comfort  for  the  Sick.  By 
Ellice  Hopkins.  With  a  Preface  by 
the  Bishop  of  Carlisle.  Second  Edition,  j 
Fcp.  8vo.  2s.  6d.  \ 


Lyra  Germanica ;  Hymns 

translated  from  the  German  by  Miss  C. 
WiNKWORTH.  Fcp.  8 VO.  51-. 

The  Temporal  Mission 

of  the  Holy  Ghost ;  or,  Reason  and 
Revelation.  By  Henry  Edward 
Manning,  D.D.  Crown  8vo.  8r.  6d. 

Hours  of  Thought  on 

Sacred  Things  ;  a  Volume  of  Ser¬ 
mons.  By  James  Martineau,  D.D. 
LL.  D.  Crown  8vo.  Price  "js.  6d. 

Endeavours  after  the 

Christian  Life  ;  Discourses.  By 
James  Martineau,  D.D.  LL.D. 
Fifth  Edition.  Crown  8vo.  "js,  6d. 

The  Pentateuch  &  Book 

of  Joshua  Critically  Examined. 
By  J.  W.  COLENSO,  D.D.  Bishop  of 
Natal.  Crown  8vo.  6s. 

Lectures  on  the  Penta¬ 
teuch  and  the  Moabite  Stone ;  with 
Appendices.  By  J.  W.  Colenso, 
D.D.  Bishop  of  Natal.  8vo.  I2x. 


TRAVELS,  VOYAGES,  &e. 


A  Voyage  in  the  ‘Sun¬ 
beam,’  our  Home  on  the  Ocean  for 
Eleven  Months.  By  Mrs.  Brassey. 
Cheaper  Edition,  with  Map  and  65 
Wood  Engravings.  Crown  8vo.  yr-  6d. 

A  Freak  of  Freedom ; 

or,  the  Republic  of  San  Marino.  By 
J.  Theodore  Bent,  Honorary  Citizen 
of  the  same.  With  a  Map  and  15 
Woodcuts.  Crown  8vo.  ys.  6d. 

One  Thousand  Miles  up 

the  Nile ;  a  Journey  through  Egypt 
and  Nubia  to  the  Second  Cataract. 
By  A.melia  B.  Edwards.  With  Plans, 
Maps  &  Illustrations.  Imperial  8vo.  42s. 

The  Indian  Alps,  and  How 

we  Crossed  them ;  Two  Years’ 
Residence  in  the  Eastern  Himalayas, 
and  Two  Months’  Tour  into  the  Interior. 
By  a  Lady  Pioneer.  With  Illustra¬ 
tions.  Imperial  8vo.  421-. 


Discoveries  at  Ephesus, 

Including  the  Site  and  Remains  of  the 
Great  Temple  of  Diana.  By  J.  T. 
Wood,  F.S.  A.  With  27  Lithographic 
Plates  and  42  Wood  Engi-avings.  Me¬ 
dium  8vo.  63X. 

Memorials  of  the  Dis¬ 
covery  and  Early  Settlement  of  the 
Bermudas  or  Somers  Islands,  from 
1615  to  1685.  By  Major-General  Sir 
J.  H.  Lefroy,  R.A.  With  Maps,  &c. 
2  vols.  Imp.  8vo.  6or. 

Eight  Years  in  Ceylon. 

By  Sir  Samuel  W.  Baker,  M.A. 
Crown  8vo.  Woodcuts,  Js.  6d. 

The  Rifle  and  the  Hound 

in  Ceylon.  By  Sir  S.amuel  W.  B.aker, 
M.A.  Crown  8vo.  Woodcuts,  Js.  6d. 


C 


i8 


WORKS  published  by  LONGMANS  CO. 


Guide  to  the  Pyrenees, 

for  the  use  of  Mountaineers.  By 
Charles  Packe.  Crown  8vo.  ^s.  6d. 

The  Alpine  Club  Map  of 

Switzerland,  with  parts  of  the  Neigh¬ 
bouring  Countries,  on  the  scale  of  Four 
Miles  to  an  Inch.  Edited  by  R.  C. 
Nichols,  F.R.G.S.  4  Sheets  in  Port¬ 
folio,  42s.  coloured,  or  341'.  uncoloured. 

The  Alpine  Guide.  By 

John  Ball,  M.R.I.A.  PostSvo.  with 
Maps  and  other  Illustrations. 


Central  Alps,  including  all 

the  Oberland  District,  ys.  6d. 

Western  Alps,  including 

Mont  Blanc,  Monte  Rosa,  Zermatt,  &c. 
Price  6s.  6d. 

On  Alpine  Travelling  and 

the  Geology  of  the  Alps.  Price  ir. 
Either  of  the  3  Volumes  or  Parts  of  the 
‘  Alpine  Guide  ’  may  be  had  with  this 
Introduction  prefixed,  ir.  extra. 

The  Fenland  Past  and 

Present.  By  S.  H.  Miller,  F.R.  A.S. 
F.M.S.;  and  S.  B.  J.  Skertchley, 
F.G.S.  of  H.M.  Geological  Survey. 
With  numerous  Illustrations  and  Maps. 
Royal  8vo.  311-.  6d.  Large  Paper,  fcp. 
folio,  50J.  half-morocco. 


The  Eastern  Alps,  lo^-.  6d  i 


WORKS  of  FICTION. 


Novels  and  Tales.  By  the 

Right  Hon.  the  Earl  of  Beacons- 
FIELD,  K.G.  Cabinet  Editions,  complete 
in  Ten  Volumes,  crown  8vo.  6s.  each. 


Lothair,  6s.  Venetia,  6s. 

Coningsby,  6s.  Alroy,  Ixion,  &c.  6s. 

Sybil,  6s.  Young  Duke  &c.  dr. 

Tancred,  6s.  Vivian  Grey,  6s. 

Henrietta  Temple,  6r. 
Contarini  Fleming,  &c.  6s. 


Stories  and  Tales.  By 

Elizabeth  M.  Sewell.  Cabinet 
Edition,  in  Ten  Volumes,  each  contain¬ 
ing  a  complete  Tale  or  Story  : — 

Amy  Herbert,  2s.  6d.  Gertrude,  2s.  6d. 
The  Earl’s  Daughter,  2s.  6d.  The 
Experience  of  Life,  2s.  6d.  Cleve 
Hall,  2s.  6d.  Ivors,  2s.  6d.  Katharine 
Ashton,  2s.  6d.  Margaret  Percival, 
2s.  6d.  Laneton  Parsonage,  3^.  6d. 
Ursula,  31-.  6d. 


Tales  from  Euripides ; 

Iphigenia,  Alcestis,  Hecuba,  Helen, 
Medea.  By  Vincent  K.  Cooper, 
M.A.  late  Scholar  of  Brasenose  College, 
Oxford.  Fcp.  8vo.  31'.  6d. 

Whispers  from  Fairy¬ 
land.  By  the  Right  Hon.  E.  H. 
Knatchbull-Hugessen,  M.P.  With 
9  Illustrations.  Crown  8vo.  3r.  6d. 

Higgledy-Piggledy;  or, 

Stories  for  Everybody  and  Every¬ 
body’s  Children.  By  the  Right  Hon. 
E.  H.  Knatchbull-Hugessen,  M.P. 
With  9  Illustrations,  Cr.  8vo.  3r.  6d. 


The  Modern  Novelist’s 

Library.  Each  work  complete  in  itself, 
price  2s.  boards,  or  2s.  6d.  cloth. 

By  Lord  Beaconsfield. 

Lothair. 

Coningsby. 

Sybil. 

Tancred. 

Venetia. 

Henrietta  Temple. 

Contarini  Fleming. 

Alroy,  Ixion,  &c. 

The  Young  Duke,  &c. 

Vivian  Grey. 


WORKS  published  by  LONGMANS  6-  CO. 


19 


THE  MODERN  NOVELIST’S  LIBRARY— 


By  the  Author  of  ‘The  Rose  Garden.’ 

Unawares. 


By  Anthony  Trollope. 

Barchester  Towers. 

The  Warden. 

V  By  Major  Whyte-Melville. 

Digby  Grand. 

General  Bounce. 

Kate  Coventry. 

The  Gladiators. 

Good  for  Nothing. ' 

Holmby  House. 

The  Interpreter. 

The  Queen’s  Maries. 

I  The  Novels  and  Tales 

the  Earl  of  Beaconsfield,  K.G. 
extra,  gilt  edges,  price  30J. 


By  the  Author  of  ‘  Mile.  Mori.’ 

The  Atelier  du  Lys. 

Mademoiselle  Mori. 

By  Various  Writers. 

Atherstone  Priory. 

The  Burgomaster’s  Family. 

Elsa  and  her  Vulture. 

The  Six  Sisters  of  the  Valleys. 

of  the  Right  Honourable 

Complete  in  Ten  Volumes,  crown  8vo.  cloth 


POETRY  and 

Lays  ot  Ancient  Rome; 

with  Ivry  and  the  Armada.  By  Lord 
Macaulay.  i6mo.  3^.  (id. 

\  Horatii  Opera.  Library 

Edition,  with  English  Notes,  Marginal 
I  References  &  various  Readings.  Edited 
’  by  Rev.  J.  E.  Yonge,  M.A.  8vo.  21^. 

I  Poems  by  Jean  Ingelow. 

I  2  vols.  fcp.  8vo.  loj'. 

First  Series,  containing ‘Divided,’  ‘The 
Star’s  Monument,’  &c.  Fcp.  8vo.  5^ 

'  Second  Series,  ‘A  Story  of  Doom,’ 

‘  Gladys  and  her  Island,’  &c.  Sr. 

Poems  by  Jean  Ingelow. 

First  Series,  with  nearly  100  Woodcut 
Illustrations.  Fcp.  4to.  2ir. 

Brian  Boru,  a  Tragedy. 

By  J.  T.  B.  Crown  8vo.  6r. 


THE  DRAMA. 

Festus,  a  Poem.  By 

Philip  James  Bailey.  loth  Edition, 
enlarged  &  revised.  Crown  8vo.  \2s.(3d. 

The  Iliad  of  Homer,  Ho- 

mometrically  translated  by  C.  B. 
Cayley,  Translator  of  Dante’s  Comedy, 
&c.  8vo.  121-.  (d. 

The  ^Eneid  of  Virgil. 

Translated  into  English  Verse.  By  J. 
Conington,  M.A.  Crown  8vo.  gr. 

Bowdler’s  Family  Shak- 

speare.  Genuine  Edition,  in  i  vol. 
medium  8vo.  large  type,  with  36  Wood- 
cuts,  I4r.  or  in  6  vols.  fcp.  8vo.  2ir. 

Southey’s  Poetical 

Works,  with  the  Author’s  last  Cor¬ 
rections  and  Additions.  Medium  8vo. 
with  Portrait,  I4r. 


RURAL  SPORTS,  HORSE  and  CATTLE 
MANAGEMENT,  &c. 

Annals  of  the  Road ;  or,  Down  the  Road  ;  or,  Re- 

Notes  on  Mail  and  Stage-Coaching  in  j  miniscences  of  a  Gentleman  Coachman. 

Great  Britain.  By  Captain  Malet.  [  By  C.  T.  S.  Birch  Reynardson. 

With  3  Woodcuts  and  10  Coloured  1  Second  Edition,  with  12  Coloured 

Illustrations.  Medium  8vo.  2ir.  1  Illustrations.  Medium  8vo.  21s, 


20 


WORKS  published  by  LONGMANS  6-  CO. 


Blaine’s  Encyclopaedia  of 

Rural  Sports ;  Complete  Accounts, 
Historical,  Practical,  and  Descriptive, 
of  Hunting,  Shooting,  Fishing,  Racing, 
&c.  With  600  Woodcuts.  8vo.  2ij. 

A  Book  on  Angling  ;  or, 

Treatise  on  the  Art  of  Fishing  in  every 
branch  ;  including  full  Illustrated  Lists 
of  Salmon  Flies.  By  Francis  Francis. 
Post  8vo.  Portrait  and  Plates,  151-. 

Wilcocks’s  Sea-Fisher¬ 
man  :  comprising  the  Chief  Methods 
of  Hook  and  Line  Fishing,  a  glance  at 
Nets,  and  remarks  on  Boats  and  Boat¬ 
ing.  Post  Svo.  Woodcuts,  12s.  6(f. 

The  Fly-Fisher’s  Ento¬ 
mology.  By  Alfred  Ronalds. 
With  20  Coloured  Plates.  8vo.  141-. 

Horses  and  Riding.  By 

George  Nevile,  M.  A.  With  31  Illus¬ 
trations.  Crorvn  Svo.  6s. 

Horses  and  Stables.  By 

Colonel  F.  Fitzwygram,  XV.  the 
King’s  Hussars.  With  24  Plates  of 
Illustrations.  Svo.  lor.  6cb. 

Youatt  on  the  Horse. 

Revised  and  enlarged  by  W.  Watson, 
M.R.C.V.S.  Svo.  Woodcuts,  12s.  6d. 


Youatt’s  Work  on  the 

Dog.  Revised  and  enlarged.  Svo. 
Woodcuts,  Cl 

The  Dog  in  Health  and 

Disease.  By  Stonehenge.  With 
78  Wood  Engravings.  Square  crown 
Svo.  7j.  6d. 

The  Greyhound.  By 

Stonehenge.  Revised  Edition,  with 
25  Portraits  of  Greyhounds,  &c. 
Square  crown  Svo.  151-. 

Stables  and  Stable  Fit¬ 
tings.  By  W.  Miles.  Imp.  Svo. 
with  13  Plates,  15J. 

The  Horse’s  Foot,  and 

How  to  keep  it  Sound.  By  W. 

Miles.  Imp.  Svo.  Woodcuts,  I2j-.  6d. 

A  Plain  Treatise  on 

Horse-shoeing.  By  W.  Miles.  Post 
Svo.  Woodcuts,  2s.  6d. 

Remarks  on  Horses’ 

Teeth,  addressed  to  Purchasers.  By 
W.  Miles.  Post  Svo.  ir.  6d. 

The  Ox,  his  Diseases  and 

their  Treatment ;  with  an  Essay  on 
Parturition  in  the  Cow.  By  J.  R. 
Dobson,  M.R.C.V.S.  Crown  Svo. 
Illustrations,  ‘‘js.  6d. 


WORKS  of  UTILITY  and  GENERAL 
INFORMATION. 


Maunder’s  Treasury  of 

Knowledge  and  Library  of  Refer¬ 
ence  ;  comprising  an  English  Diction¬ 
ary  and  Grammar,  Universal  Gazetteer, 
Classical  Dictionary,  Chronology,  Law 
Dictionary,  Synopsis  of  the  Peerage, 
Useful  Tables,  &c.  Fcp.  Svo.  6s. 

Maunder’s  Biographical 

Treasury.  Latest  Edition,  recon¬ 
structed  and  partly  re-written,  with 
above  1,600  additional  Memoirs,  by 
W.  L.  R.  Cates.  Fcp.  Svo.  6s. 

Maunder’s  Treasury  of 

Natural  History ;  or.  Popular  Dic¬ 
tionary  of  Zoology.  Revised  and 
corrected  Edition.  Fcp.  Svo.  with 
900  Woodcuts,  6s. 


Maunder’s  Scientific  and 

Literary  Treasury;  a  Popular  En- 
cyclopiedia  of  Science,  Literature,  and 
Art.  Latest  Edition,  partly  re-written, 
with  above  1,000  New 'Articles,  by  J. 
Y.  Johnson.  Fcp.  Svo.  6s. 

Maunder’s  Treasury  of 

Geography,  Physical,  Historical, 
Descriptive,  and  Political.  Edited  by 
W.  Hughes,  F.R.G.S.  With  7  Maps 
and  16  Plates.  Fcp.  Svo.  6s. 

Maunder’s  Historical 

Treasury;  Introductory  Outlines  of 
Universal  History,  and  Separate  His¬ 
tories  of  all  Nations.  Revised  by  the 
Rev.  Sir  G.  W.  Cox,  Bart.  M.A. 
Fcp.  Svo.  6s. 


WORKS  published  by  LONGMANS  6-  CO. 


21 


The  Treasury  of  Botany, 

or  Popular  Dictionary  of  the  Vegetable 
Kingdom  ;  with  which  is  incorporated 
a  Glossary  of  Botanical  Terms.  Edited 
byj.  Bindley,  F.R.S.  and  T.  Moore, 
F.L.S.  With  274  Woodcuts  and  20 
Steel  Plates.  Two  Parts,  fcp.  Svo.  I2j'. 

The  Treasury  of  Bible 

Knowledge  ;  being  a  Dictionary  of 
the  Books,  Persons,  Places,  Events, 
and  other  Matters  of  which  mention  is 
made  in  Holy  Scripture.  By  the  Rev. 
J.*Ayre,  M.  a.  Maps,  Plates  &  Wood- 
cuts.  Fcp.  Svo.  6s. 

A  Practical  Treatise  on 

Brewing  ;  with  Formulae  for  Public 
Brewers  &  Instructions  for  Private  Fam¬ 
ilies.  By  W.  Black.  Svo.  lor.  6d. 

The  Theory  of  the  Mo¬ 
dem  Scientific  Game  of  Whist. 
By  W.  Pole,  F.  R.  S.  Tenth  Edition. 
Fcp.  Svo.  2s.  6d. 

The  Correct  Card ;  or, 

How  to  Play  at  Whist ;  a  Whist 
Catechism.  By  Captain  A.  Campbell- 
Walker,  F.R.G.S.  New  Edition. 
Fcp.  Svo.  2r.  6d. 

The  Cabinet  Lawyer;  a 

Popular  Digest  of  the  Laws  of  England, 
Civil,  Criminal,  and  Constitutional. 
Twenty-Fifth  Edition,  corrected  and 
extended.  Fcp.  Svo.  gr. 

Chess  Openings.  ByF.W. 

Longman,  Balliol  College,  Oxford. 
Second  Edition.  Fcp.  Svo.  2s.  6d. 

Pewtner’s  Compre¬ 
hensive  Specifier;  a  Guide  to  the 
Practical  Specification  of  every  kind  of 
Building- Artificer’s  Work.  Edited  by 
W.  Young.  Crown  Svo.  6s. 

The  English  Manual  of 

Banking.  By  Arthur  Crump. 
Second  Edition,  revised  and  enlarged. 
Svo.  I  Sr. 

Modern  Cookery  for  Pri¬ 
vate  Families,  reduced  to  a  System 
of  Easy  Practice  in  a  Series  of  carefully- 
tested  Receipts.  By  Eliza  Acton. 
With  S  Plates  and  150  Woodcuts.  Fcp. 
Svo.  6s. 


Food  and  Home  Cookery. 

A  Course  of  Instruction  in  Practical 
Cookery  and  Cleaning,  for  Children  in 
Elementary  Schools,  as  followed  in  the 
Schools  of  the  Leeds  School  Board.  By 
Mrs.  Buckton,  Member  of  the  Leeds 
School  Board.  With  ii  Woodcuts. 
Crown  Svo.  2s. 

Hints  to  Mothers  on  the 

Management  of  their  Health  during 
the  Period  of  Pregnancy  and  in  the 
Lying-in  Room.  By  Thomas  Bull, 
M.D.  Fcp.  Svo,  2s.  6d. 

The  Maternal  Manage¬ 
ment  of  Children  in  Health  and 
Disease.  By  Thomas  Bull,  M.D. 
Fcp.  Svo.  2s.  6d. 

The  Farm  Valuer.  By 

•  John  Scott,  Land  Valuer.  Crown 
Svo.  price  5r. 

Economics  for  Beginners 

By  H.  D.  Macleoi),  M.A.  Small 
crown  Svo.  2s.  6d. 

The  Elements  of  Bank¬ 
ing.  By  H.  D.  Macleod,  M.A, 
Fourth  Edition.  Crown  Svo.  5r. 

The  Theory  and  Practice 

of  Banking.  By  H.  D.  Macleod, 
hi.  A.  2  voL.  Svo.  26s. 

The  Resources  of  Mod¬ 
em  Countries ;  Essays  towards  an 
Estimate  of  the  Economic  Position  of 
Nations  and  British  Trade  Prospects. 
By  Alex.  Wilson.  2  vols.  Svo.  24!-. 

Willich’s  Popular  Tables 

for  ascertaining,  according  to  the  Carlisle 
Table  of  Mortality,  the  value  of  Life¬ 
hold,  Leasehold,  and  Church  Property, 
Renewal  Fines,  Reversions,  &c.  Also 
Interest,  Legacy,  Succession  Duty,  and 
various  other  useful  tables.  Eighth 
Edition.  Post  Svo.  los. 

The  Patentee’s  Manual ; 

a  Treatise  on  the  Law  and  Practice  of 
Letters  Patent,  for  the  use  of  Patentees 
and  Inventors.  By  J.  Johnson,  Bar- 
rister-at-I.aw  ;  and  J.  1 1.  Johnson, 
Assoc.  Inst.  C.E.  Solicitor  and  Patent 
Agent,  Lincoln’s  Inn  Fields  and  Glas¬ 
gow.  P'ourth  Edition,  enlarged.  Svo, 
lor.  6d. 


22  WORKS  published  by  LONGMANS  6-  CO. 


INDEX. 


Abbey  ^  Overton's  English  Church  History 

- 's  Photography  . 

Acton's  Modern  Cookery . 

Alpine  Club  Map  of  Switzerland  . 

Alpine  Guide  (The) . 

Amos’s  Jurisprudence  . 

- Primer  of  the  Constitution . 

Anderson's  Strength  of  Materials . 


Armstrong' s  Organic  Chemistry  .  ii 

Arnold's  {Dr.)  Lectures  onModern  History  2 

- Miscellaneous  Works  .  7 

- Sermons  .  15 

■ - (T.)  English  Literature .  7 

Arnott's  Elements  of  Physics .  10 

Atelier  (The)  du  Lys  .  19 

Atherstone  Priory .  19 

Autumn  Holidays  of  a  Country  Parson  ...  7 

Ayre's  Treasury  of  Bible  Knowledge  .  21 

Bacon's  Essays,  by  Abbott  .  6 

• - - - by  Whatcly .  6 

- Life  and  Letters,  by  ...  5 

- Works .  5 

Bagehot's  Literary  Studies .  7 

Bailey's  Festus,  a  Poem .  19 

Bain's  Mental  and  Moral  Science .  6 

- on  the  Senses  and  Intellect  .  6 

- Emotions  and  Will .  6 

Baker's  Two  Works  on  Ceylon .  17 

Alpine  Guides  .  18 

Barry  on  Railway  Appliances  .  ii 

Beaconsfield' s  (Lord)  Novels  and  Tales  ...  18 

Beesly  s  Gracchi,  Marius,  and  Sulla .  3 

Bent's  Republic  of  San  Marino .  17 

Black's  Treatise  on  Brewing  .  21 

Blackley  s  German-English  Dictionary .  8 

Blaine's  Rural  Sports .  20 

Bloxam's  Metals  .  ii 

Bolland  and  Lang's  Aristotle’s  Politics .  6 

Boultbee  on  39  Articles .  15 

- 's  History  of  the  English  Church...  15 

Bourne's  Works  on  the  Steam  Engine .  14 

Bowdler's  Family  Shakespeare  .  19 

Bramley-Moore  s  Six  Sisters  of  the  Valleys  .  19 

Brande's  Dictionary  of  Science,  Literature, 

and  Art  .  12 

Brassey's  Voyage  of  the  Sunbeam  .  17 

Brian  Boru,  a  Tragedy  .  19 

Browtie's  Exposition  of  the  39  Articles .  15 

Brownings  Modern  England  .  3 

Buckle's  History  of  Civilisation .  2 

- Posthumous  Remains .  7 

Buckton's  Food  and  Home  Cookery .  21 

-  Health  in  the  House .  13 

- Town  and  Window  Gardening...  12 

Bull's  Hints  to  Mothers .  21 

-  Maternal  Management  of  Children.  21 

Bullinger's  Lexicon  to  the  Greek  Testa¬ 
ment  .  8 

Burgomaster's  Family  (The)  .  19 

Burke's  Vicissitudes  of  Families .  4 

Cabinet  Lawyer .  21 

Capes's  Age  of  the  Antonines .  3 

-  Early  Roman  Empire  .  3 

Cayley's  Iliad  of  Homer  .  19 

Changed  Aspects  of  Unchanged  Truths  ...  7 


Chesney's  Indian  Polity  . ( 

- Waterloo  Campaign  .  • 

Churcli s  Beginning  of  the  Middle  Ages... 

Colenso  on  Moabite  Stone  &c . 

- Pentateuch  and  Book  of  Joshua. 

Commonplace  Philosopher . 

Comte's  Positive  Polity  . 

Congreve's  Politics  of  Aristotle  . 

Conington  s  Translation  of  Virgil’s  ^neid  ] 

- Miscellaneous  Writings .  1 

Conta?iseau' s  Two  French  Dictionaries  ...  ! 


Conybeare  and  Howso?i's  St.  Paul .  i' 

Cooper's  Tales  from  Euripides  .  i 

Cordery  s  Struggle  against  Absolute  Mon¬ 
archy  . 

Cotta  on  Rocks,  by  Lawrence  .  j 

Counsel  and  Comfort  from  a  City  Pulpit...  ' 

Cox's  (G.  W.)  Athenian  Empire  . 

■ - Crusades . 

- - Greeks  and  Persians . 

Creighton' s  Age  of  Elizabeth . 


- England  a  Continental  Power 

- Shilling  History  of  England  ... 

- Tudors  and  the  Reformation 

Cresy's  Encyclopaedia  of  Civil  Engineering  i 

Critical  Essays  of  a  Country  Parson . 

Crookes's  Anthracen .  i 

-  Chemical  Analyses  . i, 

-  Dyeing  and  Calico-printing  .  i 

Crump's  Manual  of  Banking .  2 

Culley's  Handbook  of  Telegraphy .  i; 

Curteis's  Macedonian  Empire  .  ;l 

De  Caisne  and  Le  Maoui' s  Botany  .  i;t 

De  Tocqueville' s  Democraey  in  America...  I 

Digby's  Indian  Famine  Campaign  . 

Dobson  on  the  Ox .  2c| 

History  of  Taxes  .  I 

Doyle's  (R. )  Fairyland .  ij 

Drew's  Hulsean  Lectures  .  ig 

Jewish  Messiah  .  iC' 

Eastlake’s  Hints  on  Flousehold  Taste .  i,)i 

Edwards's 'leiWe .  17’ 

Ellicott' s  Scripture  Commentaries  .  iq 

- Lectures  on  Life  of  Christ  .  15I 

Elsa  and  her  Vulture  .  19' 

Epochs  of  Ancient  History .  3 

- - English  History  .  3' 

-  Modern  History  .  3* 

Ewalds  History  of  Israel  .  16 

-  Antiquities  of  Israel .  16 

Fairbairn  s  Applications  of  Iron .  14' 

- Information  for  Engineers .  14! 

- Mills  and  Millwork .  14 

!  Farrar’s  Language  and  Languages .  7I 

Fitzwygram  on  Horses  and  Stables .  20 1 

Frampton  s  (Bishop)  Life  .  4' 

Francis's  Fishing  Book  .  20I 

Frobisher's  lAiehy 'pones .  4 1 

- English  in  Ireland  . 

- History  of  England  .  i' 

- Short  Studies .  7’ 

Gairdner's  Houses  of  Lancaster  and  York  3J 
- Richard  HI.  &  Perkin  Warbeck  2 ' 


IS 


18 

18 

S 

5 

II 


WORKS  published  by  LONGMANS  6-  CO. 


23 


not's  Elementary  Physics  . 

- Natural  Philosophy  . 

rdiner's  Buckingham  and  Charles  . 

_ Personal  Government  of  Charles  I. 

I - First  Two  Stuarts  . 

j - Thirty  Years’  War  . 

rman  Home  Life . 

yldziher's  Hebrew  Mythology . 

\odeve  s  Mechanics . 

-  Mechanism  . 

res  Art  of  Scientific  Discovery . 

- Electro-Metallurgy . 

ant's  Ethics  of  Aristotle . 

aver  Thoughts  of  a  Country  Parson . 

Journal . 

\ipins  Algebra  and  Trigonometry . 

■ove  on  Correlation  of  Physical  Forces... 

'lilt's  Encyclopaedia  of  Architecture . 

\les  Fall  of  the  Stuarts . 

irtwig's  Works  on  Natural  History  and 

Popular  Science  . . . 

xughton's  Animal  Mechanics . 

lyward's  Selected  Essays  . 

•er's  Primeval  World  of  Switzerland . 

'ine  s  Life  and  Works,  by  Stigand  . 

\lmholtz  on  Tone . 

•Imholtz’s  Scientific  Lectures . 

'rschtls  Outlines  of  Astronomy . 

)ison's  Amateur  Mechanic  . . 

fdgson’s  Philosophy  of  Reflection . 

ipkins's  Christ  the  Consoler  . . 

\‘skold' s  Engineer’s  Valuing  Assistant  ... 

\dlah:s  History  of  Modern  Music  . 

[: -  Transition  Period  . 

[me  s  Essays  . 

\ - Treatise  on  Human  Nature . 

\ie’s  Rome  to  its  Capture . 

i —  History  of  Rome  . 

tiian  Alps  . 

%elow' s  Poems  . 

Vmeson's  Sacred  and  Legendary  Art . 

t —  Memoirs . 

\nJiins  Electricity  and  Magnetism . 

'xrrold's  Life  of  Napoleon . 

\hnson's  Normans  in  Europe  . 

I" -  Patentee’s  Manual . 

hnston's  Geographical  Dictionary . 

^nson's  (Ben)  Every  Man  in  his  Humour 

•  lies’s  Types  of  Genesis  . 

Ukes  on  Second  Death  . 

\%lisclis  Bible  Studies  . . 

- -  Commentary  on  the  Bible . 

Mcr's  Lake  Dwellings  of  Switzerland.... 
;rls  Metallurgy,  by  Crookes  and  Rohrig . 

\ngzett's  Alkali  Trade  . 

- -  Animal  Chemistry . 

Why  and  Spence's  Entomology  . 

tatchbull-Hugessen  s  Fairy-Land  . 

- - Higgledy-Piggledy 

'■lenen's  Prophets  and  Prophecy  in  Israel 

.ndscapes.  Churches,  &c . 

'.tham's  English  Dictionaries  . 

-  Handbook  of  English  Language 

icky's  History  of  England . 

f _ European  Morals . 

j - Rationalism  . 

- Leaders  of  Public  Opinion . 

proy's  Bermudas  . 

Insure  Hours  in  Town  . 


10 

10 
2 

2 

3 
3 
7 

16 

11 
II 

14 

II 

6 

7 

1 
II 

10 

14 

3 

11 

10 

6 

12 

4 
10 

10 
9 

14 

5 

17 

14 

12 

12 

6 
6 

3 

2 

17 
19 

13 

4 

11 
I 

3 
21 

8 
6 

16 

16 

16 

16 

12 

15 

13 
13 

12 

18 
18 

16 

7 

8 
8 
I 

3 

3 

4 

17 

7 


Leslie's  Essays  in  Political  and  Moral 

Philosophy  .  6 

Lessons  of  Middle  Age  .  7 

Lewes's  Biographical  History  of  Philosophy  3 

Lewis  on  Authority  .  6 

Liddell  and  Scott's  Greek-English  Le.xicons  8 
Lindley  and  Moore's  Treasury  of  Botany  ...  21 

Lloyd’s  Magnetism  .  10 

- Wave-Theory  of  Light .  10 

London  Series  of  English  Classics  .  6 

Longman's  (F.  W.)  Chess  Openings .  21 

- German  Dictionary  ...  8 

- (W.)  Edward  the  Third . .  2 

- Lectures  on  History  of  England  2 

- Old  and  New  St.  Paul’s  13 

London's  Encyclopedia  of  Agriculture  ...  15 

- Gardening .  15 

_ _  Plants .  12 

Lubbock's  Origin  of  Civilisation .  12 

Ludlow's  American  War .  3 

Lyra  Germanica  .  17 

Macalistcr's  Vertebrate  Animals  .  ii 

Macaulay's  (Lord)  Clive,  by  Bowen  .  6 

- Essays  .  i 

- History  of  England  ...  i 

- Lays,  Illus.  Editions...  13 

_ Cheap  Edition...  19 

_ Life  and  Letters .  4 

_ _ _ Miscellaneous  Writings  7 

- Speeches  .  7 

- Works  .  I 

_ Writings,  Selections  from  7 

McCulloch's  Dictionary  of  Commerce .  8 

Macfarrcn  on  Musical  Hpmony .  13 

Macleods  Economical  Philosophy .  5 

- Economics  for  Be^nners . .  21 

- Theory  and  Practice  of  Banking  21 

- Elements  of  Banking .  21 

Mademoiselle  Mori .  19 

Malet's  Annals  of  the  Road  .  19 

Manning's  Mission  of  the  Holy  Spirit .  17 

Marlowe's  Doctor  Faustus,  by  Wagner  ...  6 

Marshman  s  Life  of  Havelock  .  4 

Martineau' s  Christian  Life .  17 

- Hours  of  Thought .  17 

- Hymns .  17 

Maunder  s  Popular  Treasuries .  20 

Maxwells  Theory  of  Heat .  1 1 

Mays  History  of  Democracy .  1 

- History  of  England  .  i 

Melville's  (Whyte)  Novels  and  Talcs  .  19 

Memorials  of  Charlotte  Williams-  Wynn  4 

Mendelssohn  s  Letters  .  4 

Merivale's  Early  Church  History .  15 

-  Fall  of  the  Roman  Republic  ...  2 

- -  General  History  of  Rome  .  2 

-  Roman  Triumvirates .  3 

- -  Romans  under  the  Empire .  2 

Merri fields  Arithmetic  and  Mensuration. ..  ii 
Miles  on  Horse’s  Foot  and  Horse  Shoeing  20 

- on  Horse’s  Teeth  and  Stables .  20 

Mill  (J.)  on  the  Mind .  5 

Mills  (J.  S.)  Autobiography .  4 

- Dissertations  &  Discussions  5 

- Essays  on  Religion .  16 

- Hamilton’s  Philosophy  .  5 

- Liberty  .  5 

_ Political  Economy  .  5 

_ Representative  Government  5 


24 


WORKS  published  by  LONGMANS  6-  CO. 


Mills  (J.  S.)  Subjection  of  Women .  5 

- System  of  I^ogic  .  5 

- Unsettled  Questions  .  5 

- Utilitarianism  . 5 

Miller's  Elements  of  Chemistry  .  13 

-  Inorganic  Chemistry .  ii 

-  6=  Skertchley  s  Fenland  .  18 

Mitchell's  Manual  of  Assaying .  15 

Milton's  Paradise  Regained,  by  Jerratn  ...  6 

Modern  Novelist's  Library  . 18-19 

Spiritual  Songs .  17 

Moore's  Irish  Melodies,  Illustrated  Edition  13 

- Lalla  Rookh,  Illustrated  Edition..  13 

Morell' s  Philosophical  Fragments .  5 

Morris  s  Age  of  Anne .  3 

Mozart's  Life,  by  Nohl .  4 

Muller's  Chips  from  a  German  Workshop.  7 

- Hibbert  Lectures  on  Religion  ...  16 

- Science  of  Language  .  7 

- Science  of  Religion .  16 

Mullinger  s  Schools  of  Charles  the  Great  ...  6 

Neison  on  the  Moon .  9 

Neviles  Horses  and  Riding .  20 

Newman's  Apologia  pro  Vita  SuS, .  4 

Nicols's  Puzzle  of  Life .  12 

Noiri's  Muller  &  Philosophy  of  Language  7 

Northcott' s  Lathes  &  Turning  .  14 

O' Conor's  Scripture  Commentary .  16 

Owen's  Comparative  Anatomy  and  Phy¬ 
siology  of  Vertebrate  Animals  .  II 

Packe's  Guide  to  the  Pyrenees  .  18 

Pattison's  Casaubon . 4 

Payen's  Industrial  Chemistry .  14 

Pewtner's  Comprehensive  Specifier  .  21 

Phillips' s  Civil  War  in  Wales  .  2 

Poles  Game  of  Whist .  21 

Popes  Select  Poems,  by  Arnold  .  6 

PowelT s  Early  England .  3 

Preece  &  S ivewright's  T elegraphy .  1 1 

Present-Day  Thoughts .  7 

Proctor's  Astronomical  Works  .  9 

- Scientific  Essays  (Two  Series)  ...  11 

Prothero' s  De  Montfort  .  2 

Public  Schools  Atlas  of  Ancient  Geography  8 

- Atlas  of  Modern  Geography  8 

Rawlinson  s  Parthia .  3 

- Sassanians  .  3 

Recreations  of  a  Country  Parson .  7 

Reynardso7i' s  Down  the  Road  .  19 

Rick's  Dictionary  of  Antiquities  .  8 

Rivers's  Orchard  House .  12 

-  Rose  Amateur’s  Guide .  12 

Rogers's  Eclipse  of  Faith .  15 

-  Defence  of  Eclipse  of  Faith  .  13 

Roget’s  English  Thesaurus .  8 

Ronalds'  Fly-Fisher's  Entomology  .  20 

Rowley's  Rise  of  the  People  .  3 

- Settlement  of  the  Constitution  ...  3 

R Utley  s  Study  of  Rocks .  1 1 

Justinian's  Institutes .  5 

Sankey's  Sparta  and  Thebes  .  3 

Schellen's  Spectrum  Analysis .  9 

Seaside  Musings  .  7 

Scott's  Farm  Valuer .  21 

Seebohm' s  O-xford  Reformers  of  1498 .  2 

Seebohjn  s  Protestant  Revolution  .  3 


Sewelfs  History  of  France . 

- Passing  Thoughts  on  Religion  ... 

- Preparation  for  Communion  . 

- Stories  and  Tales  . 

- Thoughts  for  the  Age  . 

Shelley's  Workshop  Appliances . 

Short's  Church  History  . 

Smith's  (Sydney)  Wit  and  Wisdom . 

- (Dr.  R.  A.)  Air  and  Rain  . . 

- ( R .  B. )  Carthage  &  the  Carthaginians 

Southey's  Poetical  Works . 

Sta?iley' s  History  of  British  Birds . 

Stephen's  Ecclesiastical  Biography . . 

Stonehenge,  Dog  and  Greyhound . 

Stoney  on  Strains . 

Stubbs's  Early  Plantagenets  . . 

Sunday  Afternoons,  by  A.  K.  H.B . 

Supernatural  Religion . 

Swinbourne's  Picture  Logic  . 

Tancock's  England  during  the  Wars, 

1778-1820  . 

Taylor's  History  of  India  . 

- Ancient  and  Modern  History  ... 

-  (Jeremy)  Works,  edited  toy  Eden 

Text-Books  of  Science . 

Thomi's  Botany  . 

Thomson's  Laws  of  Thought . 

Thorpes  Quantitative  Analysis  . 

Thorpe  and  Muir's  Qualitative  Analysis  ... 

Tilden's  Chemical  Philosophy  . 

Todd  on  Parliamentary  Government . 

Trench's  Realities  of  Irish  Life . 

Trollope' sNlaxHtn  and  Barchester  Towers 

Twiss's  Law  of  Nations . 

Tyndalls  (Professor)  Scientific  Works  ... 

Unawares  . 

Unwins  Machine  Design  . 

Ure  s  Arts,  Manufactures,  and  Mines . 

Ville  on  Artificial  Manures . 

Walker  on  Whist . 

Walpole's  History  of  England  . 

Warburton' s  Edward  the  Third  . 

Watson's  Geometery  . 

Watts's  Dictionary  of  Chemistry . 

Weinhold's  Experimental  Physics . 

Wellington  s  Life,  by  Gleig  . 

Whately' s  English  Synonymes . 

- Logic  . 

- Rhetoric  . 

Whites  Four  Gospels  in  Greek . 

- and  Riddle's  Latin  Dictionaries  ... 

Wilcocks's  Sea-Fisherman  . 

Williajns's  Aristotle's  Ethics . 

Willich's  Popular  Tables  . 

Wilsons  Resources  of  Modern  Countries... 
Woods  (J.  G. )  Popular  Works  on  Natural 

History  . 

- (J.  T. )  Ephesus  . 

Woodward's  Geology . 

Yonge's  English-Greek  Lexicons  . 

-  Horace . 

Youatt  on  the  Dog  . 

-  on  the  Horse  . 

Zeller's  Plato,  Socrates,  &c . 

Zinijnern' s  Lessing  . 


II 

i; 

ii 

i; 

I 

I 


l< 

i: 

2( 

I. 

Vi 

i  ’ 

I( ' 


"■i 

I  ' 
( 

i;'' 

X. 

iC'i 

t : 

ic 

IC 

1] 
Ii 
IC 

2] 

] 

I] 

i: 

IC 

£ 

i 

t 

it 

I 

2C 

t 

21 

21 

II 

17 

12 

8 

19 

2C 

2C 

3 

4 


Sjfottiswoode  (Sr*  Co.,  Printers,  New-strect  Square,  London. 


> 

! 


r 


