PAPERS 


RELATING TO 


Xin. ro 


ey 


ty EAST INDIA AFFAIRS. 


. 
> 

f) ah ox 
P<. 


be 43 

; RE rt 

‘ te Sd: TTY 

th of Fiteeny and Cotton.—General Revenues of India; and Mr. Rickards’ 3 

System in part of Salsette.—Permanent Settlement in the Ceded and 
| EES Rickards's proposition for establishing a General 

—Revenue of Broach and Surat.—Jumma or Rental in Guzerat.— Political 

e Travancore Territory; and Treaty with the Rajah of ‘Travancore. 


ali aR ; 
i 


e of Malabar.—Occurrences at Quilon in Travancore. 


Ordered, by The House of Commons, to be printed, 
22 June 1813. 


Son i 
Pa is 3 sas A 


. LIST OF PAPERS ‘| 
Presented to The Honourable House of Commons, pursuant to Orders, 
dated 1**—3'*—16"—1§"—and 21 June—1813. 


—No.1.— 


Copy of a Memoxtan presented to the Court of Directors of the East India 
Company, by Robert Rickards, Esq. dated September 9" 1812, together with 
Copy of the Answer thereto, from the said Directors, signed by, Mr. Assistant 

- Secretary Cobd, dated February 26“ 1813... 


— No. 2.— 


Copy of Panacrarus N° 2. to N° 27, both inclusive, of a Letter from the 
Court of Directors of the East India‘Company, to the Csevncnieee of Bombay up 
» dated ohne 22‘ 1811, relative to the Cotton Trade... 1) 9.) 


i. 7 I 
— ite 3.— 

Copy of Papeete 2 to 8 of a.Letter in the Resenue Department, from 
the Governor in Council of Bombay, to the Court of Directors, dated the 
14" October 1808, with Copies of the Papers referred to therein; and Copy 


of the Reply of the Court of Directors, under date the 10“ of January 1810, 
to the said Communication. 


— No. 4.— 


Copy of a Minute recorded by Mr. Colebrooke, on the Revenue Consultations 
of Bengal the 20" June 1808, respecting the extension of the Permanent 
Settlement, to the Ceded and Conquered Provinces. 


— No. 5.— 


Extract of a Lerrer from the Governor General in Council of Bengal in 
the Public Department, dated the 30" June 1809, Paragraphs 109 to 117, 
both inclusive, together with the Papers reterred to therein. 


— No. 6. — 


Copy of ParaGrapus 31 to 38 inclusive, of a Revenue Letter from the 
Governor in Council at Bombay, to the Court of Directors of the East India 


Company; dated 20" February 1808. 


haat No. vg — 
Copy of Paracrarns 49 to 54 inclusive, of a Revenue Letter from the Go- 


vernor in Council at Bombay, to the Court of Directors; dated 14°" April 
1810. 


— No. 8. — 

Copy of Paracrapns 11 3 to 142 inclusive, of a Revenue Letter from coe 
Court of Directors, to the Governor in Council at Bombay; dated 10° 
January 1810. 

— No. 9. — 


Copy of a Lerrer from the Court of Directors in the Political Department, to 
the Governor in Council at Fort St. George ; dated the 29" September 1809. 


— No. 10. — 
Copy of the Trarary with the Rajah of Zravancore; dated the 28" January 
1793. 
— No. 11. — 


Copy of a Paracraru 226, of a Revenue Letter from the Governor ia 
Council at Fort St. George, to the Court of Directors of the East India Com- 
pany ; dated the 21° October 1807. 


(No. 12.)—Copy of a Lerrer from John Bebb, Esq. (a Director of the 
East India Company) to the Court of Directors, dated the 31°* May 1813; 
respecting the 13" Propvsition, submitted to the House of Commons 
on the renewal of the Company’s Charter —[This Paper being on a 
subject different from the matters in this Collection, has been printed, 
and delivered separate; and is not therefore here inserted. | 


— No. 13.— 


Copy of the 2* and 3* Paragraphs of the Muzitary Lerrer from the 
Governor in Council at Fort St. George, to the Court of Directors of the East 


India Company ; dated the 1* J uly 1812, relative to the late occurrences at 
Quilon in Travancore. 


East India House, 
22° June 1813. 
—_— 


- & 


aie ax oR _ eranmaaed Ed 
ps a ae iF 108 


“a > Epes 


5 Sala alia sane th" 


a, 5 . _ ms ~~ > ie ve ; > ; : 7 : 2 
GS Sire a Se | Oboe us tan G 
an 


“aa ipa tee alin Peak Be ewe Deitel. 
Ss tates ait mate Sal sutpreiE p30, Jee usisonned & 
¥ +1209 aibial send nls Yo nots Jo fates) ot os ayn 32. SA 3a 
So “Ren sai is ols be Df: 
oF = apts . iat Se ‘oa 

edt ae a 2k ak ne vod bee ae Z 

: cre gat fy cosat hel waaerieh to rete) 987 at (tema) oGii gp 

. poate smstt lt or baigindlie- eoulecton'h “ge. oct _pniioaype 
+ % WG Beara “neta BAL isrind De yrsqetro} rit 10. teaser Oef8 BO 5 ape 


. omg weed =n Sou wh AN Ae eh: serie sigue’ 
iA rn HOY, aiaik sort eh eee, OWI wrvasih ba" iG 


mee 


i 


Pin, Y - ” 


3 Fy : a yy Sapa : P 
a> F AS onnge ~~. 65 .0¥ii47- wg 
iS ni ‘antes saxtnd: yhathdd . adi do- aligerquwil "e saat, aaa 
5 Tie | ody Th, nye roa tL ‘te Tia. J alt oo SY int A sas ta Toe op Foe 
= ta evpadriaze isk odd od. 9izélor arer gah ME alt teste centro ae 
Ki, SM sees i 
- i ; | 
. a - 
- , 
- F ‘ ; 
* ‘ Ys 
> 
* 


“No. l. 


“Copy, of a MEMORIAL presented to the Court of Directors of 
“Phe “East India Company, by-Rosert Rickarps, Esq.’ dated 
. September 9th, 1812;— together with Copy of the Answer thereto, 
“from the said Directors, signed by Mr. Assistant Secretary Cobb, 

* dated’ February 26th, 1815. 


To the Honourable The COURT of DIRECTORS for the Affairs» of 
* Phe Howourable East India Company, &c. &e. ‘8&e. 


HonouraB_e Sirs, 


p or"soF J TAKE the earliest opportunity, aftet my‘return to this country, to solicit your ¢bn- No. 1. 
sideration of «a few facts connected with the subject: of your orders of the © Nf{r. Rickardi’s 
22d February 1811, which removed me from your Council at Bombay, and dechtred me ‘Memorial, 
’ unworthy of your future confidence. of g Sept: 1811. 
«4 ate -— Peel < 


- 2. After a residence and eervice of twenty-six years in India, and with a conscious sense 
of zealous and uninterrupted efforts to promote your real interests in that. quarter, it is no 
small pain to a-feeling mind, to one.that disclaims every other motive ‘than honesty of 
- intention, to be thus accused-and condemned. .Could L plead guilty to the charge, L should 
~ not presume to intrude on your further notice ; but J address myself to your honeurable 
Court, in the confidence of conscious innocence, and respectfully appeal to that justice-aad 
liberality which have so frequently distinguished your public acts, where there was injury 
. to be repaired, or-merit; however humble, to bé compensated. 


'. 3« The orders-of the 22d February ‘1811, being of course well known to yout honourable 

ourt, I shall only refer to them generally here,-begging to offer such explauations as may 
probably not have been before your honourable Court at the time these orders passed, and 
; aie may be yet necessary to-a- full- understanding ~ of: thetwo . questions therein 


_ 4. Thefirst object of censure it the orders above mentioned,-was a targo’of hemp con- 
signed -to Epgland-on the country: ship Cambrian. 


=°5. In‘April 1807,the Bombay Government were instructed. that the honourable Court 
~considered it an object of national importance to be able to supply India hemp for the use 
of the royal navy, and general consumption in England. Our particular attention to this 

object was enjoined at this time ; immediate importations were- not wanted ; improvement 
- O& quality smore-than quantity, was to be considered ; and extension of culture, with im- 
‘ sib methods of eleaning-and dressing it, seemed to~be the chief objects the *honvurable 
* Court had then in view. 


« 6. In December 1807, circumstances ‘are “represented «to have«materially changed ; and 
? that in consequence of a pressmg demand fur hemp, the honourable Court had agreed to 
» supply-his-Majesty’sSGovernment for three successive years, viz. 180qg—10+-12, with the 
: produce of Yndia, at the rates at which thissupphy should bona fide cost the Company in 
» its provision; purchases were. now enjoined, with advances to cultivators in the Company’s 

districts ; immediate supplies were required ; and we were directed to: extend: the quantity 
- of Salsette; or Rajepore hemp, in particular, which wemight be enabled to procure “ to its 
4 uttiost grieticalio limits,” consistently with due attention to the quality, and to the price 
Bot being materially enhanced. 


_z. These anxious orders were repeated to Bengal. in 1808, with intimations that not ony 
the prodace of the Company’s commercial factories, but- whatever could be purchased in the 
Bazars, of proper quality, was to be sent without any unnecessary delay. The engagement 

_ with his Majesty’s Government was stated to extend te a supply of 20,000 tons in three 
ears. «The Bengal Government sent'# copy of these orders to Bombay, expressing their 
Inability to furnish any thing near the quantity: required from that side of India; adding, 
that they “considered the spirit of these orders.equally applicable to the other presidencies, 
and directed»us immediately to adept such measures as should appear tous best calculated 
“to promote the:wishes of the honourable Court, and of his Majesty’s ministers. 


"966: ~s ks B “$. These 


Sommer 


No. 1. 


Mr. Rickards’s 
Memorial, 
of 9 Sept. 1811. 


6 PAPERS RELATING TO 


8. These orders were expressly stated to have been founded on the then existing circum- 
stances of the political state of Europe, which from every account, public and private, was 
that of a decidedly hostile disposition on the part of Russia, an entire stop to all commercial 
intercourse between that Power and England, and distress to the navy from want of the 
usual supplies of hemp, which if continued (and it then seemed probable) was expected to 
be attended with serious national inconvenience. Private letters in 1808 and 1809, received 
in India, stated the price of Russia hemp at from £.80. to £.110. £.115. and £.120. per ton, 


in the London market. A clear and able pamphlet, entitled, “ Observations on the cap 


Hemp of Betigal,” writtet under the sanction of the honourable Court, and found by me 
fhe poor of the Secretary’s Office at Bombay, stated the price of Bengal Sunn at £.66. in 
1808. 


9. This pamphlet urges with gréat force of argument the policy of relieving ourselves by 
every possible resource {rom a dependance on Russia for hemp, “ upon a due supply of which 
“ depends the equipment of the British navy in as eminent a degree as on a due supply of 
“ timber for the construction of the ships. Bengal, Bombay, and ils dependencies, are 
looked to for the means of enabling us to defy the enmity of Russia with that of her con- 
“ federates during war, and to make her on the return of peace sensible of ber mistaken 
“ policy, by inducing us to open other channels for those articles of commerce she has 
“ hitherto furnished.” 


10. The same pamphlet, stating that the Company in their public spirited efforts to supply 
the country with Sunn hemp in 1796-7-8 liad sacrificed upwards of £.45,000, it seemed 
highly desirable they should know, by experience of facts, whetuer the object ot con- 
templated could possibly be accomplished without subjecting them to a repetition of such 
enormous loss. 5 one 


_ 11. Under these circumstances, every effort was made by the Bombay Government; and 
chiefly by the Governor himself, the proper organ of Government, to meet the expressed 
wishes and orders of the Court of Directors in respect to supplies of hemp. Guzerat was 
ascertained to afford but little of any kind, and none of a quality fit for consignment to 
Europe. In Malabar the cultivation of hemp afforded for a moment a hope of supply, but 
isappointed at length our expectations. Orders were transmitted to every krown quarter 
for hemp; an, attempt to grow it on the Company’s account on Sulsette was ‘niade, and 
wholly failed ; advances were made to cultivators on Salsette, who only returned one-third 
of @ ton, and that at the average prime cost of £.51. 15s. to £.57. 10s. per ton. In short, 
every exertion that the most anxious, yet often misguided zeal, could suggest to supply the 
honourable Court’s indent proved abortive. | Se Fane? 


; : ‘tay ylileredil 
12.-It will be seen in the accompaniment, No. 1, that all that the authority, influence 
and zeal of the Bombay Government could collect together in three years, did not amount 
to 266 tons, to meet a demand for 26,000 ; and this costing the honourable Court id England 
Hot less Ona moderate Computation than £.86, to £88. per'ton. ESD ehee 


33.) When the tender therefore of Bruce, Fawcett. and Co. to send home 700 tons of 
Rajepore hemp came before the Board in July 1809, the impression, | believe, of every one 
of us was, that our past efforts had been little better than complete failure, and | 

fitite oties were likely to be attended with as little success. The tender was Sat hia I 

hailed as opportune, and cordially acceded to by all, under the belief that it would prov 

what) oar orders prescribed, equally calculated to promote the wishes of tle honourable 


Court, and of his Majesty’s ministers. Pa 


14. The Court’s orders, however, express a great degree of irritation at the whole transac 
tion, and are principally levelled at me, exculpating the Governor, who was its prime sup- 
porter altogether. The accompanying letter, No. 2, sufficiently testifies this fact. In th 


public proceedings on this subject, the Governor, it will be observed, dissents to no part, 3 


cept a slight intimation after the majority had given their votes, that “he appreh 
« Government is not authorized to ‘guarantee any price to Bruce, Fawcett and (o.” This 
is to be explained by a practice, common to the Governor in matters involving any respon 
sibility. As President of the Council be gave his vote last ; and wherever he had secret, 
rtial seruples, after the majority had decided a measure generally according to his wi 
fre would endeavour to shelter himself against possible censure, in respect to particular parts, 
by a hall record of his doubts, without openly expressing them in the firstinstance, for the 
equal and candid consideration of the other members. The late Commander in Chief of. 
Bombay can give a few notable instances of this practice by our late Governor. Were I 
to detail them, it might be ascribed to motives which 1 certainly feelnot towards the de- 
ceased. The honourable Court, however, having I apprehend, never fully understood the 
real terms of this agreement, their anger towards me alone continued. They re-appointed 
Mr. Dancan Governor of Bombay, and dismissed me from their Council. 7 


15. The honourable Court are:pleased; in the first place, to.accuse me of a positive breach: 
of both the letter and spirit of their former orders; which were, they say; to provide 
from their own territories, by advances for the cultivation of it, through the agency of their 
own servants ;' looking less to immediate than to-gradual and: progressive supplies ‘of ergs 
an extensive scheme, it is observed, requiring time and: gradual meliorations of culture, In 


one of the same paragraphs (the 5th,) it is notwithstanding distincUy admitted, that pur-' 


EAST INDIA AFFAIRS. 7 


chases of hemp were also ordered to be made, and that they did not miean to exclude the 
produce of Concan, which is not their own territory. 4 oe 


16. I have already stated, and the papers or record prove, that every effort whicn the 
veal and influence of the Bombay Government could suggest to supply the hemp required, 
both from the Company’s territory, and the Concan, had tailed. The Bengal Government 
had informed us. that the provinces in that quarter could not furnish any thing near the 
‘quantity required, and directed us to adopt such measures as should appear to us best calcu- 
dated to promote the wishes of the honourable Court, and His Majesty’s ministers. Tt was 
not therefore till after the Company’s districts were exhausted, till after every hope of ade- 
quate supply from them, or teeegh the agency of the Company’s subordinate servants, had 
vanished, that we acceded to the tender of Brace, Fawcett and Co. for a cargo of Concany 
hemp; and, as.this hemp was known to be of the best quality in all India, far superior to 
the cee Sunn, equal in some specimens of it at least to the produce of Russia, tendered at 
a rate cheaper than it was possible for us to make the supply through the mediam of the 
Company’s shipping ; and the produce of the Concan, which the honourable Court admit, 
was not meant to be excluded; nay, precisely that description of hemp, which the Court’s 
order to us of December 1807, desire may be sent in any procurable quantity, provided the 

rice be not much enhanced. I can confidently add, that so far from any intention to 
violate either the letter or spirit of their orders, the Bombay Government conceived they 
were actually fulfilling both. ; : 


17- As to the scheme requiring time and pans meliorations of culture, it is only neces+ 
sary to repeat, that all the experiments of this kind in Salsette had decidedly failed; whilst, 
as if anticipating disappointment from this source, our orders still required a supply of 
Salsette or Concany hemp “to its utmost practicable limits,” and + phe nave, restricted us 
toa period.of three years to make it, with a fourth year to clear off the remains on hand. 


~ 18. It should also be remembered, that the orders of April 1807, relating to gradua} sup- 
, and improved cultivation, expressly refer to “a state of amity between His Majesty 
“ and the Powers of the North,” whereas in December’ 1807, when circumstances had 
changed, and the demand was more urgent, we are as expressly instructed, that “ if whil 
“ this business (cultivation, &c.) shall be in progress, you can, {rom the usual produce o} 
the country, phen any quantity of Salsette hemp (the same as Concatiy or Rajepore} 
“ on account of Government, we Bleck ou to do so, taking care thatthe cost be not 
“ materially enhanced above the usual rate.”—It is also added, “ we expect with confidence 
“ that nothing will be wanting to ensure the supply of some considerable quantity of Sal- 
“* sette hemp being received by_us in the course of the year 1809.” ‘The tender of Lruce, 
Fawcett and Co. was made early in 1809; by accepting it we were enabled to fulfil; by re- 
jecting me should most certainly have disappointed, wis confident expectation of the 
onourable Court. 9h BS ; 


. 19. The honourable Court wilt they “ do not perceive any suggestion to enter on a pro- 
“ vision of hemp on account of the Company;” yet in my explanatory minute, 14th May 
1810, to which Seattle beg leave again to refer, the attempts made in this view, and 
their failure, are distinctly noticed; together with our report thereof to the Bengal Govern- 

These explanations, it would seem, were not then satisfactory to; the honourable 
a. ‘The failures, however, they refer to, impressed persons on the spot diflevently; aud 
were deemed indeed so decided and complete, as only to leave the Bombay Government in 
despair of being able to comply, in any :material degree with the honourable Court's 
inden t. ‘ s : a5) bor ri} ; ’ ti , 

‘20. The honourable Court next allege the Company’s agents could have procured this 
a i hemp as cheap, and in as large quantities at least, as any private merchant; that 
all the allegations to the contrary seem to them entirely groundless ; and that our adoption 
of Brace, Fawcett and Co’s, offer went, on the contrary, decidedly to prevent the-designs 
of His Majesty’s ministers and the Company. ~ ie peer 

a. The recital already given, together with the inclosed paper, No. 1, prove in the fullest 
manner, how little our direct efforts had been able to effect. t may be further added, that. 
previous to the tender of Bruce, Fawcett and Co. the Governor, as before observed, had de 


spaired, in common with, his colleagues, of procuring any but peity supplies of hemp, 


a9F #8 reported accordingly to. Bengal. . The fear, however, of a private effort succeeding, 
when all his owr exertions, backed by the strong hand of power, had so decidedly failed, 
would seem to have animated him to fresh exertion. The result of this further effort is 
given in the enclosure, No. 2, on which it is not for me to comment, further than. to submit 
to your honourable Court on which side obstructions to the supply of hemp really lay. 


¥ ; 4 , : , 

22. The honourable Court seem much displeased that the hense of Bruce, Fawcett and Co. 
Should secured, as they understand, in a profit on this transaction, abimadvert on a 
fixed. price being, guaranteed ie. them; aad continue to believe, that an unqualified option 
Pa with the owners of the Cambrian to sell this hemp in the market en their own 
it, so as thereby to disappoint His Majesty’s Government altogether, and to disappoint 
ac ag the agent.and medium of supply. ; 


‘23. It is not usual, | believe, for private merchants to engage in very distant speculations, 
without a certainty, or probability nearly tantamount to it, of profit. Even it willing to 
incur 4 certain lob, iit Would‘beunjust, aswell as unwise, in Government to encourage pro- 

306. se ww jects 
. od 08 


Not 
Mr. Rickards's 
Meworial, 


of 9 dept. A81be 
—__~_ 


= --— 


8 PAPERS RELVATING-TO 


No. jects so incompatible with the best principles of mercantile euterprize. «Nothing too is -more 
Mr. Rickarde’s ©2™mon than, sometimes from policy, and sometimes trom necessity, to guarantee reasonable 
Memorial, expectations of profit in infant undertakings. ; 


ofp Sept 18st. 94, In the present case, however, the guarantee price had no referenceto profit. £.65. per 
——~—— ton was estimated as barely.sufficient to secure the speculators against posilive loss, 

a chief object with them in this undertaking, as avowed in their own letter, was to. find 

employment for their shipping, during a general audwery distressing stagnation of the trade 

in India. Lean add now, from knowledge of the facts, that,.in cousequence of the inter- 

ference above explained, of the -Governorof- Bombay, in the parchases of Bruce, Faweett 

fe Co. in the Concan, the guarantee above mentioned has not, atler ally nearly reimbursed 

the costs and charges of the Cambrian’s cargo. ’ 


25. Of the act of guaranteeing ‘this price, and of the alledged unqualified option above 
referred to, I shall briefly:state what [ conceived the papers and explanations sent home 
would have-been long ago sufficient to illustrate. . If they have not done so, thefault is net 
with me, but.with those entrusted with the.preparation of the official dispatches, which are 
always supcrintended by the Governor himself, but which the Members of Council do not 
sometimes even-see, except to annex theirsignatures. The tender then of Bruce, Fawcett 
%& Co. was a supply of 700 or 800 tons of hemp, lo. be sent-home on a teak-built ship, in 
the saine way as hemp on the same accoutit had been sent home from Beagal, viz. through 
the medium and agency of the East India Company, for the use of his Majesty’s Govern- 
ment; but with this material difference and advantage, that-in respect to this particular 
cargo, neither the King nor Company had to incur the smallest degree of ¥isk. » For:this the’ 
merchants aforesaid: were to receive the market price of the day on its arrival in Englend ; 

- provided nevertheless they were iusured £.65. per ton, as otherwise they ohana 2 a 
unequivocally declared they could not even commence the undettaking. There was thas — 
an option reseryed-to the [ast India Compaay, in the first instance, either to retain and de- 
liver to Government, or-to reject this hemp at any higher market price than £.05,. per ton, 

_ and a fartheroption to reject, ander.any eircumstances, every parcel thereof, which should 
nol turn gut, on examination in England, to be, of the very first quality of Concany, Rajepor 

. .or Salsette hemp, of which the honourable Court were to.be the sole judges, The merchant. 

owners had. clearly no option jn..respect to this hemp, uutil the whole or any part of it, 

according as the terms of the agreement-sanctioned, should be thrown on heeds ee 

honourable Court. “They. certainly, therefore, diad_ wo, power to_diszppoint his Majesty's 

-~ Government and the honourable Court altogether, ' sin dasalee Se 


26. This-contract, it is-true, was not drawn out-indlue formof law ;bat these: are*the — 
plain terms of ity which the-house-of Brace;Fowoatt & Co. have always avowed, and to the 
Jast of my stay-ip india, invariably confirmed; und-these, and these only, are the terms. 
which L acceded te. ft swoned 


.© 27+ In judging of the-expediency of the guarantee price, I respectfully request it may be 

. considered, that mts was.granted to eucourage.an) infant andertak ing, of viral im e to 

» the interests of Great Britain, wlren every other means had failed of procuring, in adequate 

. quantities, this so highly desired and: particular species of: hemp; that~ without this) 
guarantee, the undertaking would positively not have been-commenced, and that > 2 
of excellent hemp vould baverbeen lost-to our ative country, at a timeowhen the dem 
for it was considered in‘Indito be mosturgent ; that Bengal Sunn. (an iniferier species) was’. 
velling at the time at £.66. per ton; that it was -probible Lis -Majesty’s Government’ — 
would not have scrupled giving a higher market price, if necessary, to encourage an infant’ 
undertaking of so much national importance, or if they did, that they had still, through 
the. medium of the Catntany. the power of rejecting it; that ifthe price fell, His Maj Ss” 
Government avauld still be furnished with the best material, (for to .none-other did ‘ 

_ Guarantee extend, every thing-short-of it might be shrown-back. onthe owners,) at a rate. 
far cheaper than it was possible for the Company,to furnish it.to. them in any other way. 
that in making sure of this inferiority of cost, reference was had to the honourable Court's 
orders, which so corfidently anticipated a supply of Concany hemp °to its .atmost prac 

. ticable limits, without any aatcrial enhancement of-price; whilst the-rate of the guarantee’ 
had so far further reference .to the-same orders, being only. the estimated prime~ cost aid” 
charges that.aere thus secured: tothe owners; and finally, that the whole of this transaction 
in England was, by. positive stipulation, to be earried en-through the medimmead agency of” 
the honoureble-Court alone. + Ne ae 


. 28. In respect..to the market.price being left.open to .the owners of the Cambrian,, it. 
should be remembered, we had only the option of acceding to the. offer as made, or to lose. 
so much good hemp at-a period of the greatest distress, altogether ;_£.65. per ton was 
estimated as the lowest sprice at which hemp could at that time be sent home by the private. 
merchant. Had we bargained fora fixed price, Brace, Fawcett & Co. 4¥ould have expected * 
a higher one; but as they were willing in this respect to take the chance of ‘the market,it” 
seemed better for the Compapy:todo so too, for whilst on the onevhand the market prite” 
was not likely to reach thatef the hemp freighted on the Company’s ships: (£286. to 88) ~ 
they bad on the other hand the chance of getung it at or near the price of the guarantee. * 
If, again, the mavket price fell beluw the guarantee, as the latter was the lowestrate at whieh 
Salsetteshemp could wt that time be conveyed to England, it was, stillan advantage, unless. 
it can be proved to be better for the King or Company to pay for.it at £.86, than at £.65.. 
at which it was at length procured. : bor - 
29. ‘Phe 


= 


=F: atl Nai ee ~_ 
= > . Ta as 
K 
f 
, 


EAST INDIA AFFAIRS ¢ 


_ ‘29. The honourable Court are pleased to say, that His Majesty's Government had rejected 
_ this hemp, thereby throwing it, with all consequent loss, on the Company’s bands. 
| have since learnt, that the Navy Board aflerwards took the whole cargo, with the 
_ exception of a small quantity damaged on the voyage, and which of course, by the agree- 
tient, reverted to the owners. It is also worthy of remark, that by tlre arrangement adopted 
the King get. this excellent material at £.65. per tun, when a few months afterwards the 
price of 


o. In respect to the honourable Court’s alledged apprehensions of loss, it is quite obvious, 
T respectfully submit, that the Company could incur none, By agreement with the Navy 
Board, the Company were to be reimbursed in the full cost and charges of their importations 
— -of Indian hem he guarantee had reference to this part of the agreement, as I have 
salready shewn that it was only the estimated cost and charges that were so guaranteed, 
whilst that cost was considerably lower than if the supply had been made through the medium 
-of the Company’s shipping. It was not to be supposed however, private merchants would 
-engage in an expensive speculation, without a prospect of advantage; and when they 
‘stipulated for the chance of a higher market price in London, we readily acquiesced, deeming 
— dt no unfair compensation for all the risks of loss and damage whieh they incurred, as well 
in the provision of the cargo as in ils conveyance to England, This, too, was evidently 
detter for the King; for here he incurred no risk ; whereas on the hemp conveyed in the 
--Company’s shipping, the risk was apparently all his own, the honourable Court's orders of 
December 1807, requiring all losses incurred in Lndia on parcels of hemp, to be added, as 
-argeneral average, to the consignments of the season. The agreement for the Cambrian’s 
also stipulated, that neither the King nor Company should be burthened with hemp 
-of inferior quality. {do not observe any such provision in respect to the consignments in 
-the Company’s ships from Bengal; a consideration which must be admitted to give the 
-consignment of hemp per Cambrian, a further decided advantage over the Bengal 
-supplies. ; 
31. These, at all events, are the considerations which influenced the bargain made by the 
»Government of Bombay for the Cambri:in’s cargo of hemp. Of the motives which actuated 
the measure, I can further solemnly declare, that [ ever conceived it, not simply, but emi- 
enently calculated to meet the wishes of His Majesty’s ministers, and of the honourable 
Court. 


32. The next occasion of the honourable Court’s displeasure, was a representation by the 
house of Forbes and Co. and Bruce, Fawcett and Co. in January 1810, of the ruinous price 
-which cotton had attained in 1809, begging Governwent to. withdraw its competition for a 
“season from the market, and offering to supply, at its actual cost, the quantity of cotton 
“they might i be to purchase for the Company’s China trade in the current year, a propo~ 
-sal in ‘which Government then thought it expedient to acquiesce, 


33. On this head it will only be necessary to premise, that the Company take the cotton 
_ of their own districts in Guzerat in kind, partly as revenue, and partly otherwise, at a re- 
duced price; and that for any additional quantity wanted, they enter the general market as 
; chasers; in which view the merchants thought that the Company’s competition was at 
_ Jeast one cause of the high prices of which they complained, and solicited that the eflects of 
—it8 removal might at all events be tried. 


€ sane commodity rose to £. per ton in the London market. 


34- In the honourable Court’s animadversions on this transaction, they are pleasedto 
-assume the following, as facts, viz——That the Company exercise no monopoly in their own 
cote icts, or throw the least obstruction in the way of private buyers; that their ser- 

-vants only take’from these districts the amount of the established revenue in cotton; that 

- this is aceounted for to the ryots, at a price equivalent to the general market rate of the sea- 
son; and that they do not exercise power or influence to get the commodity at a less price, 

«than the said market rate, or than the owners are content to sell it at.” Admiiting at the 

‘same time, that if this were really the case, “ there would then be at least a consistency be- 
_ “ tween the alledged cause and the alledged effect.”| Their competition in the general mar- 
_ Ket is also supposed to be attended with’ no injury whatever in ils effects. 


_ *35. From some of the more partial statements entered on the public records, it is possible 
these inferences may have been deduced ; and I have no doubt that these are both the con- 
‘viction and intention of the honourable Court, as well in reference to their own ryots, as to 

_ the merchants residing under their authority in India. But the real state of the case is 

_ widely different ; their records contain unequivocal proofs of the following facts, as { pledge 

: elf if necessary, to exhibit in the official reports of their servants, and an uninterrupted 

__ series of orders by the local government. 


Pata 
_First; That the Company monopolize the cotton in their own districts, or at least of the 
tor government lands, taking not only the whole revenue of these districts in cotton, 
the “ os san prodace at the reduced price fixed by their servants. Thus, Jet us 
pose the whole produce of a tulput district to be as 10, of which the grain produce is 
EE Se en, ee nee 8 
aypany’s share of. revenue will be in all 5, but of cotton only ~ = * 4 
_ The remainder of the revenue is grain convertible, according to established usage, 
to a money payment; but for this, cotton in kind is also substituted, and therefore 
biaeeene SO OE} F327 Sito: Sm Ee a Oh - a 


_ 806. Cc There 


No. t. 


Mr. Rickards’s 
Memorial, 
‘of 9 Sept. 1811. 
basa lh REIT 


No. 1. 
Mr. Rickards’s « 
“Memorial, 


of 9 Sept. 1811. 
Se SE 


aa PAPERS RELATING TO 


There then remains a “ surplus,” the unquestionable, exclusive and alléwed right of ~~ 


the cultivators of = - - ec .-y cos el eee > 
Over which the Company can have no possible claim but that of absolute force; yet 

this is also taken from the ryots at the reduced price fixed by their servants, ~ 

moking .- -° = =) (= y <2. (0105 Sig0* 2 oti l= peeed Fie 


Or the whole cotton produce of the district, without leaving any portion of the avowed share 
of the ryots at their own free disposal. : i) 


The produce of the tulput lands of the Broach collectorship in cotton is estimated on. 
record at 12,000 or 14,000 bales; that of the free lands at 3,000; so that the Company mono- 


polized in this collectorship, in the first instance, 4-5ths of the whole produce; the remaining 
5th belongs to the actual proprietors of estates called grassias and wuzeefadars; and whose _ 


rights, as such, are undisputed. Of these it is recorded in 1808, that the commercial resident 
attempted to take their produce on the same terms as that of the tulput lands. The wuzee- 
fadars strenuoasly resisted ; the commercial sesident loudiy complained. A reference was 


made by orders of Government to the judge of the district, and through his interference the 
wuzeefadars conformed to what was called the common practice of the pergunnah, [t — 


would seem from the record, that the wuzeefadars only submitted to the system in 1808, 
though the orders of Government, as seen in their proceedings, uniformly required the whole 


produce to be appropriated to the use of the Company. : 


Secondly; That this monopoly is a continuation of that established in 1791, under — 
Scindia’s government; and retaining some of its features, is thereby calculated to keep up the 
origival sense of its injustice, and to level our Government in the estimation of the natives, - 
with the despotism which preceded it. The plea of perpetuating the practice of the old. 
government, is only good in relation to usages whose proved uulity may have rooted them in 
the ailachmeat of the people, but no justification of the rapacious exactions of a Mahratta» 
fouzdar ; and the more especially, where even the pretence of antiquity cannot be advanced 
to Jay claim to our respect. 


Thirdly ; That this monopoly has been uniformly authorized, and even required, by the’ 
orders of Government, from the first of our footing in Guzerat, to the positive exclusion of 
all private buyers from the Company’s districts, though such a measure is now declared to’ 
be contrary to the intention and understanding of the honourable Court. Sahies) 


Fourthly; That this monopoly has had the effect of nearly doubling the price of cotton in 
Guzerat. eel 


Fifthly; That if the Company were row to relinquish this monopoly, and the trade were _ 
thrown open, the price would materially fall, whence it follows, that the Company’s inter- 
ference not only rises the market price of the article to buyers, generally, but that the 
Company’s agents still withhold from the ryots that market price which their own competi- 
tion ah materially contributed to enhance. 1 a 

Sixthly; That this cotton is taken from the cultivators, in the first instance, without 4 
price being either fixed or intimated ; the reduced price is only pronounced at the close of . 
the season, after all the cotton has been disposed of, and sent oif to Bombay ; it not being» 
right, as the report observes, “ to fix it at the commencement of the season, when the | 
“price is high, and expectation great, lest it might perhaps create some degree of discon- 


s 


S 
“ tent among the ryots.” oh 


It follows from this rule, and the orders of Government on which it is founded, and the. ¢ 


] 


4 


q 


price of cottou is fixed by the agents of the buyers alone, i.e. by the judge, the collector, — 


and the commercial resident, who exercise the whole civil authority of the district over, . 
generally speaking, a slavish, patient, and forbearing people; and that the sellers are in. 
reality allowed no voice in the value of their own commodity, or even suffered to know what . 
they shall get for it, till after it has been far removed from their reach, and the country, , 
by previous exportations to Bombay. “a 


Seventhly ; That orders were issued for a further reduction of price, if practicable; and 
that the servants to the northward, thought it their duty, in pursuance of these orders, to 
offer it as their opinion, that a further reduction of 10 or 12 per cent, might be unobjection- . 
ably effected. Re 

‘Eighthly; That the further reduction of price was not meant to be attended with a 


corresponding diminution of revenue, although the payers of this revenue are avowed to be 
the only sufferers by the reduced price of their cotton. mo? 


Nintkly ; That Government in this very report, and in reference also to the honourable 
Court's orders of the goth April 1806, expressed in December following their expectatio 


always tantamount in its effect to an order, to thg northern servants, that the price of the’ — 


Company’s cotton to the ryots should be fixed at 10 or 12 per cent. lower than the same class — 
of people get for it in the neighbouring Mahratta pergunnah. The Company’s price to 
the ryots has consequently been always under, and in 1809 was go rupees per candy or 25 
per cent, under the general market rate. Whatever may be said of the Company’s right to 
the revenue cotton at this reduced price, it is for the honourable Court to jodge how far it~ 
should also be applied to the “ surplus cotton,” which the ryots have certainly an avowed and 
exclusive right to dispose of, if they please, ia the general market; but which, contrary to 


‘EAST INDIA AFFAIRS. ir 


the declared intention of the honourable Court, it is thus seen they are positively restrained No. 1. 
from selling —And, Mr. Rickards's 
Finally, That though the honourable Court's orders of the goth April 1806, evidently Memorial, 
refer to a general reduction of the price of cotton, to save a branch of trade to the western ef 9 Sept. 1811. 
side of India, which it was otherwise expected to lose, yet the views of their servants in India 2 

never extended beyond reducing the cost of that portion, which was intended to constitute 
the Company’s annual investinents to China, It is remarkable, that the object of the honour- 
able Court’s orders was thus wholly defeated. They intended good, but produced in their 
operation a material aggravation of the very evil which the Court proposed to remedy. By 
their servants withdrawing a large portion of cotton from the ryots, or sellers, at a reduced 
rice, and the other means recurred to give effect to these orders, the residue of the com- 
modity became miterially raised in price in the general market. 


36. I have thought it best to state these heads generally; were I to detail all the proofs by 

Which they may be supported on record, it would extend this address to an irksome length, 
and build, I fear, wear the appearance of a controversial discussion with the honourable 
Court, which [ feel particularly anxious on the present occasion to avoid. As | pledge 
myself however, to prove these iacts, and as the records which contain the proofs are at 
- hand, there may be less difficulty in admitting them to justify any expressions | may have 
I used in reference to the injuries 1 thus knew to be sustained, and which my recorded 
| minutes specifically state were only intended to be applied locally, that is, exclusively to 
~- the internal trade of the country and government of its subjects, and to have no. reference 
whatever to the honourable Company’s exclusive privilege, which as sanctioned by the 
| Legislature, and myself a Company’s servant, L never had the slightest intention to comment 
upon or disturb, 1 ever considered it however, as much the study of a faithful servant, as 
_ the wish of the honourable Court themselves, that they should be fully apprized of important 
f facts connected with the prosperity of their Indian territories; and in what | recorded, as 
| __-well as what T would have continued to explain, on these subjects, 1 certainly meant no more 
i than a respectful disclosure of truths material for the honourable Court to know ; and which, 
after submission to their notice, it would of course rest with them to act upon, or otherwise, 


' as they might deem most conducive to their own true interests. 


yer. oT 


37- Several other injuries might be adduced, as resulting from this little understood state 
of the cotton trade; but the preceding are probably sufficient to answer all the purposes 
here intended.- 


~- 4 
38. These facts may also, I trust, serve to justify the disposition I have occasionally 
evinced to promote, where it seemed to require it, the internal trade of India generally, 
but which Pind has been unaccountably construed in this country into an ‘improper con- 
-curtence in the interested views of the two houses so frequently mentioned in this address. 
I should really think it beneath me to offer even a single explanation on so degrading a 
charge, did I not perceive it to have been artfully impressed on persons I sincerely respect ; 
and it is not a little mortifying to be obliged to deny an accusation at which the principles 
of my public conduct actually revolt. It is perfectly well known in Bombay, that [ never 
Wwas_-on terms of intimacy wiih either of these firms; that no intercourse passed between us 
but that of ordinary civility; and that for along time previous to the proceedings here 
~ treated of, and during the whole course of my subsequent continuance in office, I had not 
# pecuniary transaction of any description with either. In what respects therefore, these 
ses could have influence over me, remains to be explained by those who have clan- 
destinely preferred so base a charge. No civilized or enlightened government woild surely 
withhold its fostering care and protection from the legitimaie trade of its subjects; and in 
speaking of the merchants of India, I have always had in view that general body, which it is 
as much the policy as the duty of the governing power to favour equally; a principle which 
ahe honourable Court have, in their instruction to India, frequently enjoined, but which 
partiality to particular merchants or houses would effectuaily violate and defeat. 


$9- On the head of competition in the purchase of cotton, 1 shall, for the same reason as 
uced in the 36th paragraph, say butlittle. All | ever advanced ou this head was} that the 
mpany’s competition was one, though-not the sole cause of the high price which cotton 
had-attaived in Guzerat; the undue competition of the private merchants another, The 
honourable Court however insist on the latter fact, and deny the former altogether, on the 
authority of a report to this effect by the commercial resident at Surat; yet if the honourable 
Court will be pleased again to refer to the records of 1809, they will find the same commer. 
®ial resident avow, in the very same year, and when not personally accused himself of 
injudicious acts or heedless purchases, that “on the 11th Mare he had every ‘hope of 
Sit urchasing cotton at moderate rates,” whilst on the 25th following he adds, “ it has been 
‘unfortunate however, that the bonourable Company's views were publicly known at 
“ Broach before he received his orders; and the consequence was such an immediate influx 
© of competitors, as to occasion a considerable rise in the market price. By withholding for 
# ‘aday or two, I however was enabled to conclude engagements for about fourteen hundred 
« ‘bales pected, at 150 or 1514 R* per candy, being 1 to 1¢ less than it had risen to at: 
“© first; but it immediately afterwards obtained 155 and 156 K*, at which it has since: 
“ continued.” 
+ 40. In 1798 the commercial resident at Surat was first employed to purchase cotton (I 
ieve about 2,000 bales) for the Company. If the honourable Court will please to refer to 


their 


No. 1. 


Mr. Rickards’s 
Memorial, 
of 9 Sept. 1811. 


12 PAPERS RELATING TO 


their diaries of that period, they will see a series of mysterious proceedings, with injunctions 
to the strictest secresy, in this trifling purchase; and merely that the price of the article 


might not be affected by the Company's competition, or obstacles thrown in the way by a — 


knowledge of their intentions. 


41. Just before [ quitted the Council Board a letter was received from another commercial 
agent, ordered by Government to purchase timber, in which he remarks, “ 1 have, ia 
“ consideration of the tendency which the Company’s wants always have to raise the 
“* market, entrusted this business also to Mr. Crookenden’s management, and he has 
“« sent trusty people, fully instructed to make such arrangements as they may find 
“ practicable.” 3 


’ 42. To multiply proofs of this description, is however quite superfluous, for the records are 
full of them. 


43- Some years ago it was stated, on good authority, that 7o R* per candy of cotton to the 
grower, was equal to the pg which grain yielded. Ln 1808 the judge of Broach e 
that go R* per bhar, i. e. 794 ” 
this rate the ultimate exporter might expect to get cotton at 100 K* to 110 R® per candy to 
the northward, and therefore 120 to 130 rupees in Boinbay, at which rate it would admit 
cousignment to China; but when the nosthern price is so high that the ayerage of the season 
gives 


* per candy, would afford a good profit to the cultivator. At 


ya 


e 
A 


7 


$$ 


Dt - - STATEMENT of an Adventure in Cotton from Bombay to China, 


April 1. To cost of 4,000 bales, or 2,000 candies of cotton, at the average price 
of the last 5 years, (or since the Company have renewed their adventures 
in cotton) or R* 150 per candy, rupecs - - - 300,000 


Charges of packing, screwing, shipping, &c. at R* 10 per candy - 20,000 


Insurance on the above, to cover in case of loss from Bombay to China 
R* 360,000. at 6 per cent, being the lowest terms of the Bombay In- 
surance Office, including burbour risk while lading - + - = 


Rr 


December 1. Ditto on the returning funds from China to Bombay, covered as above, | 

on R® 488,000. at 5 percent. d® d® = = = = = =f 

1810, } 
April 1. Interest on rupees 341,600. for one year, and on R* 24,400, for 4 months, 
at 8 per cent. per annum, being the Company’s rate of interest, but 

which is 1 percent. less than the mercantile rate - - - en 


The expenses of the ship for the voyage, viz. Interest for one year on 
rupees 200,000, the lowest value of the block of a ship of 1,000 tons, 
at 8 percent. - - - - - - . . R* 16,000 

Insurance thereon to China at 6 per cent. - R* 12,000 

D° D® from China at 5 per cent. ~ - 10,000 

Interest on premium paid - - - 1,226 


23,226 


Wages to the commander, officers and crew, provision, 
wear and tear, &c. say for 10 months at R* 4,000. 
per month - - - - - - - - - 40,000 


Ship’s measurement in China (a harbour duty to the 
Chinese Government) say atleast - ~ - - - 15,000 


Rupees - 
eens 
N. B. As no more than one China voyage can be performed in the year, the adventurer must in 


all cases defray the full year’s interest on block; but iu order to state the expenses as low as 
only 10 months wages are supposed in this statement to be actually paid. 


46. To the sources of extraordinary competition above mentioned must be added the 
state of the seasons, and the limit thereby placed to commercial speculations in Guzerat, 
Generally speaking, no boats laden with cotton put to sea after the end of April; and every 
purchaser is anxious to complete his bargain in time, to convey his cotton to Bombay before 
the monsoon, in order to avoid the damage the additional expence of warehousing it to the 
northward, and the disappointment of not being able to send it in due season to China. The 

colton: 


SS eS ee 


EAST INDIA AFFAIRS. 13 


Sives,'as in 1809, 175 rupees per candy on the Bombay green, there is an end of all profitable 
speculation to China by private merchants. 


44. The honourable Court, in their orders of the 22d February 1811, seem to think there 
is no proof of the price being too high’; yet all the facts | have adverted to are on record, 
inclusive of their own letter of the goth April 1806, in which a much lower price than that 
of 1809-10 is considered by them as fraught with alarming consequences to this trade, 
Neither is it probable the merchants themselves would have wantonly represented this increase 
__ @f price in such strong terms to Government, if rain had not actually stared them in the face. 


= 


| _ 45. In Bombay I was at pains to collect an accurate account, taken from the books and 
correspondence of the first mercantile houses, of the selling prices of cotton in China, from 
1804-5 to 1809-10 inclusive. This price | can assure the honourable Court does not 
average more than 12 tales, 7} mace per pecu! ; the Company get more, but theirs is so far 
a nominal price, that is carried to account, without interest, with the Hong merchants, on 

_ which the latter now owe the Company L apprehend a heavy sum. The money prices of 
China, consequently the reai selling prices, are no more than what I have stated. 


The merchants can at all events get no higher. On these grounds the following state- 

ment will be found to exhibit a correct view of the out-tarn of a speculation in cotton to 

China, in a private ship navigated in India, which I believe the strictest scrutiny cannot 
- controvert. 


on a Country Ship of 2,000 Candies, or 1,000 Tons burthen. daikicg €r 


_1809. 
October. By sale of 2,000 candies of cotton, or 11,760 peculs, at 13 tales per pecul, 
, (being higher than the average price of the last @ years*) are tales 


152,880, or R* -. - - = 458,640 
Deduct landing charges, wastage and agency in China, say 

mul Shercehee =~ =e le ee 8088 

Net proceeds eo &  R® 435,708 


Or at 216 R* per 100 D™ Spanish d® ~ = = ) =) + 201,716 
Take off exchange on new 1D", at 1¥ per cent. shroflage and 
shipping charges in China, and landing charges at Bombay, 
Sayinalllg percent. - - - *= = m5 * 


3,025 


Spanish D™ - mote - 198,691 


: Which invested in new dollars, as the greater part of the returns from 
China have of late years been, and returned to Bombay, will realize 
there at the most 219 rupees per 100 dollars (the rate obtainable from 
the Company's mint), by the Ist of April 1810 - - - - R 435,133 


1810 
April 1, Probable freight from China to Bombay, allowed in this statement, but 
which is seldom earned by more than one or two ships of each season, 


apy Z zi - ' oi ¥ “= ” Ms 15,000 


Rupees | 450,133 


Balance, or net losson the adventure - © © = @& §& 38,071 
TF 
te. #. Rupees | 488,204 
Bombay, 1st April 1811. (Errors excepted.) 


_. ® The sales in China for the last six years only average 12 tales 74 mace per pecul; but I-have 
purposely assumed this higher rate of sule to obviate objection against this stutement, 


cotton dealers take advantage of these circumstances, to keep up a price which the pur- 
_ chasers are thus pressed by more than ordinary causes to acquiesce in. Among the injuries 
-# ined in the cotton trade, it is as well known in Bombay, as the bankruptcies of a 
Gai ate in London, that the causes of disorder which are thus shewn to have lon 
___ existed, have actually ruined and expelled from the trade a horde of petty merchants in Bom- 
bay, who used formerly to engage in it annually to China, and that none but the richer and 
306, D greater 


No.1. 
Mr. Rickards's 
Memorial, 


of 9 Sept. 1811. 
rd 


14 PAPERS RELATING TO 


Wo. 1. greater houses, have been able of late vears, to mappa the losses constantly attending it,’ — 
Mr. Rickards’s occasioned by higher buying prices in Bombay and Guzerat, than the selling price in Chi 


Memorial, was suflicient to cover. There are persons of the highest respectability now in Eng 
of 9 Sept. 1811. Who can attest the last mentioned fact, from an intimate knowledge of all the circum ance 


i______ of these distressing failures. > 


47. The proposal made by Bruce, Fawcett and Co. and Forbes and Co. in January 1810, 
‘was in perfect consistence with the views thus given of the slate of the cotton trade. Cotton 
had been raising in price from the causes above explained, til! in 1809, it attained the rate 
of from 173 to 180 rupees per candy in Bombay, with a few hundred bales at 184 rupees. 
‘With no prospect of abatement of price in the following year, the merchants represetitellthe 
ruinous consequences of such a state of things to their own interest, and entreated Govern- 
ment to withhold, at least, their own competition, as an experiment for one year; offerit 
to supply them with any quantity they wanied of good China market cotton at the bona — 
fide cost of the commodity to themselves. Beaters \ oy 


» 


4 ' PUP is ied 

48. On this proposal, when in circulation for the consideration of Government, and be- 
fore the meeting of Council to decide on it, [ recorded a short minute, adducing very con- — 
cisely the reasons which led me to think, as well in view to the public geod, as the cohtaes. E 
cial interests of the Company, that the proposal “ might merit consideration.” The Counei Bs 
afterwards met, were unanimous in their opinion of the advantage, if not necessity, ©: ‘ 
proposal; and all I did was to concur in this unanimous resolution. Yet, hard to say, ie 
whole blame of this transaction is again attached to me. I alone am accused of betraying _ 
the Company’s interests, and my own trust; of siding with their declared enemies against — 
them, of exposing and publishing their secrets to the world; and of not taking the proper 
meaus of communicating my sentiments to the honourable Court. When this heavy cen- 
sure first reached India, the humble and harmless minute against which it was levelled, had 
so long lain in oblivion and obscurity, that 1 had actually forgotten its existence. Tecan 
safely add, that at this time, no human being, excepting the Members of Government, the 
Court of Directors, and their respective Secretaries and Assistants, had to my knowledge 
seen it. If therefore it has been published to the world, it must be through some mischance, _ 
at the India House; for at Bombay, it was in profound rest, and nothing but the 
electric orders of the honourable Court, would ever have caused it to rise again from its — 
official dust. As to the mode [ have always adopted of ‘iimparting my sentiments to the 
honourable Court, permit me to ask in what other way I could have done it. The mode _ 
adopted was in the strict official line of my duty. _ Lt was a confidential communication, on 
records only open to the inspection of their Government in Ludia, and of the honourable 
Court at home, and involving no kind of publicity that was uot indispensibie to a iree dis- 
cussion, between masters and servants, of things intumately connected with the former's 
interests. 


49. To the arguments of the honourable Court, accusing us of throwing, on this occasion, 
the worst, and most injurious of all monopolies, into the bands of Forbes and Co. and Bruce, — 
Fawcett and Co, it is only necessary to oppose a statemeut, taken from the Custom-house 
records, of the imports of cotton into Bombay in the season in which the monopoly, as it 
is supposed, was granted to the houses aforesaid. ‘The other mercliant importers (exclusive 
of the honourable Company, and the two monopolizing houses) are no less than 7o in 
number ; all importing their usual quantities of this commodity ; whilst | am authorized to 
say, and ready to prove, that the aforesaid uisnamed monopolists only imported their usual 
supplies also, in addition to what they purchased for the Company. Neither were the pur- 
chases of these houses made jointly, as asserted by the honourable Court, so as thereby to 


reduce these two principal purchasers into one; they were actually made by separate a ae 
and even charged at different raies to the Company, Forbes and Co's. cotton cx 
R*156. 2. 18. per candy, and that of Bruce, Fawcett and Co. R* 153. 3. 14. Be 


50. As to the secresy of this transaction, it must be obvious to every one, that if Govern-_ 
ment had proclaimed their employment of these merchants to purchase cotton, it would have 
defeated the object in view. Had the sellers known that the Company were stillin the 
market, their motives for demanding a high price would have continued in equal force. 
Whether A. or B. were the agents of that buyer would have been a matter of perfect in 


difference to them. 7 


s 7 
51. Though the honourable Court are pleased to term a proposal, whose object was to 
narrow excessive competition, in a small degree monstrous and extraordinary, and incom= 
patible with the principles of commerce, there is yet nothing in it at variance with the ordis 
nary usage of Government, as the public records abundantly testify. , te oof m ue 


52. Previous to 1798, the Government always bought theit cotton in Bombay, and em- 
ployed no agent to compete in the Guzerat market. es ae 
re 
‘ 1 abet 

54. In 1802 they were pleased to approve a plan which narrowed the competition still’ 
more effectually than any thing that has been since adopted. A committee was then formed, 
consisting of a member of council, as resident, and a deputy from each commercial house, 
io make a joint purchase of the cotton required by the parties respectively. The plea for 
instituting this comumiltee was also the enormous price to which, under,competition; had 
raised the cotton in Guzerat, and the adulterations which are so fully explained inthe — 

: honourable : 


53. In 1801 they purchased cotton again, in Bombay, from the merchants. 


ia 


EAST INDIA AFFATRS. 15 


; vhonctrable Court's letter; and the object in view was then also to lower the price, and im- 
prove the quality, of the commodity, As the committee employed only one agent to make 
P their purchases to the northward, there was then, in fact, no competitor in the market. Yet 
a scheme thus more than barely narrowing the competition, was at this time acquiesced in 
‘without objection. 


- 


' 55. In 1804, on astrong representation from the same houses as in the present instance, 
coupled with that of Adamson (since dead), as to the very same evils experienced in this trade, 
‘Government agreed to withdraw from the Guzerat market, and to receive the quantity of 
-cotton they required, about 12,000 bales in that year, through the agency of the merchants, 
-at the bona fide cost of the season. 


3 56. The merchants, on this occasion, impressed in the most urgent manner on the atten- 

tion of Government, that nothing but a perfect union of measures on the “ part of Goyern- 
-© ment and the merchants, not only in the present but during several succeeding years, could 
“ preserve ‘to the settlement of Bombay the benefits of this extensive, and, they added, its 
almost only commerce.” This proposal further stipulated, “ that Government shall with- 
“ draw from the market, on the merchants engaging for the provision and delivery in Bom- 

“bay, of a quantity of cotton equal to the lading of the honourable Company’s tonnage 
“expected from Europe, for which payment shail be made at the average rate of their 
me purchases. In either case, however, it was to be understood that Government will, as in 
_ the season of 1801-2, by every reasonable means in their power, promote the object 
“ which the merchants had in view; namely, to prevent the adulteration, and reduce the 
‘“ price of cotton.” 


- 57. Government in acceding to this proposal, “adverted to the 98th and ogth para- 
«© graphs of the general letter from the honourable Court of the 24th June 1803, whence it 
“ appeared to be consistent with the opinion of the honourable Court, that this Government 
should, under the circumstances set forth by the merchants, continue its endeavours to- 
“€ wards counteracting the combination of dealers to the northward, for enhancing its price 
_ and debasing the quality of the cotton.” if 


58. This proposal, dated in February 1804, makes no particular mention of the Company’s 
interference in the trade, because the effect of their competition, coupled with the mono- 
‘poly of the cotton of their own districts, had not yet been felt. It was the first season of their 
entering the market, since the acquisition of Broach, and February was the commencement 

‘of that season ; but in April following the collector of Broach having secured from the ryots 
4,000 candies of cotton, by which it was withdrawn trom the general market, and therefore 
from fair competition, and having tendered it to the merchants for sale ata high price, these 
complained of it loudly, as a breach oi the original engagement with Government; adding 
“ this injudicious interference in the Broach market would be of the less consequence, if its 

«effects were confined to that district, but it had produced the prejudicial consequence of 
“ enhancing the price over the whole country to a most serious extent.” 


59. This, then, is an exact precedent. The proposal in both cases is the same ; the houses 
_-are the same, with the addition of Adamson ; the object isthe same ; the mode of execution 
the same ; and the policy which sanctioned both measures equally clear and urgent. The 
only discernible difference in their main features is in the adverse sentiments of the honour- 
able Court, who are pleased to punish with extreme severity in 1811, what in 1804-5 they 
saw no reason to disapprove. 


- 60. It is proper to mention, for the sake of entire accuracy, that Government, for want 
of funds to pay for it, finally returned this cottou to the merchants ; but this does not affect 
the strict analogy of the two cases; for the surrender of the cotton did not take place until 
after the purchase had been completed, and the cotton arrived in Bombay, and therefore 
not till afterall those supposed causes of evil, which the Court now ascribe to the trans- 
action, had had their full eifect. 


ra 61. There are also reports on record from the northern servants, actually recommending 
all com ition in the Guzerat markets to be suppressed. One of these, in addition to 8 
_ proposal for suppressing all competition, as equally conducive to the advantage of the Com- 

ny and the merchants, recommends “ that the whole cotton of the year might. be pur- 
_ * chased by the Company ; and such a proportion appropriated to supply the demaads 
© of individuals, as upon enquiry, or the experience of iormer years, might be found 
_ equitable.” 


62. Whilst measures and propositions like these were known to be on record, and favour- 
ably received, there was certainly little reason to apprehend that suggestions proposing the 
mé end by milder methods could be disapproved. ‘ 

, 63. Nay, if reference be had to the orders of the honourable Court of goth April 1806 
it will be seen that they anxiously pressed on the attention of Government the necessity of 
- recurrence to effectual measures for reducing the prime cost of Surat cotton generally, to 
_ prevent the annihilation they otherwise apprehended of this branch of trade. At the time 
these orders were issued, the price of cotton was much lower than ip 1809-10. When 
_ therefore, the evil had increased in magnitude, and the necessity for reduction became wore 
aanifest and urgent, it is submitted to the honourable Court's justice, whether a simple 
rence im the only immediate means of accomplishing it, and in which the whole 


Board 


No. lt. 


Mr. Rickards’s 
Memorial, 
of 9 Sept. 1811. 


No. 


Mr. Rickards’s 
Memorial, 
of 9 Sept. 1811. 


epee: tle 


. 


16 PAPERS RELATING’ TO 


Board unanimously voted, should draw down on me alone the utmost severity of their 
censure and punishment. 


64. As to the alledged disrespect of the merchants representation in 1810, atid the censure 


‘east on Government for not resenting it, the letter will be found to vary but little in substance 


from the similar representation above noticed in 1804. It appeared to me to contain 
nothing more than what the merchants had frequently represented before, both verbally and 
on record. The grounds of this representation were trae, and being fraught with extreme 
injury to their interests, might be allowed to justify some, warmth of expression; but even 
if this had passed the proper limits of decorum, it would yet remain to be proved, whether 


‘quickness in anger was more consistent with the dignity of Government, than that calm 


composure which, to inflexible steadiness in right actions, adds the charity of forbearance 
towards minor offences. 


~ 65. I can add, from my own knowledge, that no member of the Board, when this pro- _ 
posal was before us, eutertained an idea of offence being intended; indeed insult or disrespect 
were incompatible with the object of the representation. Men of sense seeking a favour 
of great importance to their interests, would hardly clothe it in language fatal to the 
success of their request. 


66. On the honourable Court's objection, that the arrangement with the houses above 
mentioned in 1810, went to prevent the export by the Company of cotton to Europe, when 
necessary, it will be sufficient to observe, that the cotton sent to Europe on account of the 
Company is always’ toomil, with the addition of the best picked bales of the other co 
to make up acargo. All this is invariably the produce of the Broach purgunnah ; 
which. the purchases of Forbes and Co. and Bruce, Fawcett and Co. could not, and were not 


‘ 


intended to interfere; wherefore not a single pound of the Company’s cotton could possibly 


have been prevented going to Europe, by the arrangement in question. 


67. Finally, it will be seen in the honourable Court’s own records, that the a price 
of the Company’s purchased cotton in 1809, was 175 rupees per candy, exclusive of mterest. — 
There was every probability as aforementioned, of the price continuing in 1810, bat for the 
arrangement we adopted with the merchants. Under this arrangement, the Company were 
supplied with about 4,000 candies of cotton in 1810, at the average cost from beth A 
and made up with interest to the 1st August 1810, of 155 rupees per candy. The Com 
must therefore be said to have saved by this transaction, more than 20 rupees per candy, 
therefore on the whole purchase of the year (near 4,000 candies) about 80,000 rupees, or 
£10,000 sterling. f 


rt ag 
ja { 


. 


I have the honour to be, with the greatest respect, | ren: 
Honourabie Sirs, i? 
London, your very faithiul, aud obedient humble Servant, = = 
oth September 1812. (Signed) R. RICKARDS. — 


: st) * 
Sir, Gs 
The Court of Directors of the East India Company have considered your letter, ing 
to their orders of the 22d February 1811, which removed you from your seat in pmorire 
and, as you state, “ declared you unworthy of the Court’s future confidence,” and appeal 
to that justice and liberality which have so frequently distinguished the Court’s p acts, 
when there was injury to be repaired, or merit, however humble, to be rewarded— , 


Tt appears to the Court, that there is an error in the above quotation made by you, of the — 
Court’s having declared you uaworthy of their future confidence, as will be evineed by 
concluding paragraph of their orders of February 1811, paragraph 27, which is as follows: 
— With respect to Mr, Rickards, although he has incurred our displeasure in the instance 
“ above-mentioned, yet, as we entertain a favourable opinion of his abilities in general, we 
« shall not object to his being employed in any situation under your presidency, to which 
“ he may be eligible from his rank in the service.” And the Court having referred to 
orders of the 22d February 1811, paragraph 24, which state, “ upon those grounds, and in 
“ consideration of the conduct of Mr. Rickards in the hemp transaction, we feel it impos- 
« sible to continue our confidence to him in the situation of a Member of our Council, and 
“ are therefore under the necessity of removing him, as we hereby do, from that office.” 


1 am directed to acquaint you, that upon a mature consideration of the whole of you? | 
case, they cannot depart from the resolution expressed in the said orders, vigies * 

| ain, Sir, &c. , 

East India House, (Signed) JAMES COBB, ; 

26th February, 1813. Assistant Secretary. 


Robert Rickards, Esq. 


"4 
’ 
a 


- - 
_ . 
w fi 
’ 
. 
. 4 


EAST INDIA AFFAIRS. PY 


No. 2. 


Copy of Paracrarpus, No. 2 to No. 27, both inclusive, of @ 

- LETTER from the Court of Directors of the East India Company, 

to the Government of Bombay, dated February 22, 1811 ;— 
relative to the Corron Trape. . 


EXTRACT PUBLIC LETTER TO BOMBAY, dated the 22d February 1811. 


a Paragraph 2. 

HE engagement entered into by a majority of your Council, with the house of No. 2. 

pe Bruce, Fawcett & Co. for a cargo of hemp deliverable in London, and the mode of 7p. Court of 

‘reasoning e which Mr. Rickards supported certain proposals of the tee merchants Directors to the 
relative to the cotton trade, appeared to us so highly objectionable, that we thought it Government of 

; incumbent upon us to take the earliest oceasion to convey to you the impressions made Bombay, 

| upon our minds by these proceedings, and accordingly our sentiments on them were imme- 22 Feb. 1811 :—on 

| diately communicated to you in our commercial letters of the 5th January and 1oth the Cotton Trade. 

October 1810 respectively. 


| _-g._ It was our meaning then to follow up these communications with our further determi- 
nation upon the subjects in question; and having since Fees! deliberated upon them, 
we come now to give the fitial opinions and orders which they call for from us. 


4. The extremely exceptionable and improvident nature of the hemp transaction was set 
forth in our letter of the 10th January 1810, above-mentioned. ‘The answer given by 
Mr. Rickards in his minute of the 14th May 1810, to the strictures contained in that letter, 
appear to us quite unsatisfactory, and indeed according to his own occount, his explanation, 
only “ leads him to hope that the guarantee may yet appear to contain some advantages, 
“ and not to be so complete a dereliction of the public interest, or neglect of the honour- 
able Court’s orders, as at first sight pronounced. 


_ - Our primary object in relation to the provision of hemp was, as our orders to our 
different Governments stated, both to make the territories of the Company available for the 
“service of the nation in a most important article, and to that end to afford the agency of 
‘the Company gratuitously, so as to bring the Indian hemp into the stores of Government 
here, at no other expense than the prime cost and actual charges disbursed. This was an 
‘extensive scheme, requiring time and gradual meliorations of a culture, still in its infancy 
4a India. Our instructions to you were conformable to this idea. You were to make pur- 
-chases of hemp, and advances for the cultivation of it, on account of the Company in a 
-series of years; and to use all proper means to extend the growth, and improve the quality 
of the article. In employing the term of “ Salsette hemp,” we meant to prefer what we 
“understood to be the best hemp; but not to exclude the produce fit to be exported, of any 
,part of our territories, nor consequently the hemp of the Concan, which Messrs. Bruce 
sand Co, furnished; and fox this sense of our orders, Mr. Rickards himself contends. 


6, Assuredly the Company’s agents must have been at least capable of procuring the hemp 
-of Rajalhipore from the first bands, as the agents of any private merchants; nor do we see 
the smallest reason to believe that our servants could not fave provided it on as low terms, 

and at least in. as large a quantity. Ail allegations to the contrary seem to us to be entirel 
‘groundless; and wecan have no doubt that the best, indeed the only way to accomplis 
sour design, was to employ the servants of the Company, whose agency must equally at 
Jeast with that of any other description of persons, have encouraged cultivation; and the 
= pe of their proceedings (a sel indeed which, Mr. Rickards says, followed the 
‘first operation commenced in a silent way of the agents of Messrs. Brace and Co.) must 
have contributed to that-encouragement. The orders of the Bengal Government to you, 
which Mr.‘Rickards pleads, had they differed from those of the Court of Directors, should 
not have-superseded them ; but they only enforced a compliance with our instructions to 
that*Government, of which they transinitied you a copy, enjoining you “ to adopt such 
“ measures as should appear to you to -be best calculated to promote the wishes of the 

Honourable Court of His Majesty’s Ministers.” Certainly, this language afforded no 
countenance to a scheme which weat directly to pervert the design both of the Government 


and the Company. 


7. Mr. Rickards, in-his minute-aboye quoted, pleads for the allowance and the exercise 
-of some discretion in our Governments abroad, ‘* situated at such a distance from the con- - 
i  ~* E ee “ trouling 


_-—— ee oe 


No, 2, 
The Court of 
Directors to the 
Government of 
Bombay, 
22 Feb. 1811 ;—on 
the Cotton Trade. 


© Court’s wish or t 


cadvert generally to 
trade. 


16 PAPERS RELATING TO ° 


* trouling authority in England, and in circumstances when they might conceive the 

+ public good to be thereby promoted.” But a deviation from plain 
and positive orders, which always incurs responsibility, and requires a strong justification, 
can only be acquiesced in under one or more important circumstances, essentially different 
from those in the contemplation of the Court, when the orders were given, No such 
essential difference can here be alledged. Indeed we looked less to an immediate than to 
a gradual and progressive supply of hemp; and we looked to that supply only by the means 
we pointed out; and if such a latitude of construction and alteration as Mr. Rickards 
contends for were allowed, very many of our orders might be nullified, and the controul at 
home greatly weakened. 


8. The very measure in question may be taken as an instance. Messrs. Letchmere and 
Rickards adopted it upon the alledged ground of our orders, and those of the Governor- 


‘General in Council; but it went as before intimated, in letter and spirit, entirely to con- 


travene and defeat them. Instead of a great public undertaking, conducted solely upon 
patrivtic disinterested principles, they substituted the private speculation of a mercantile 
house for one cargo of hemp, aspeculation, the prominent feature of which most evidently 
is not the certainty of any accommodation or supply to Government, but the certainty 
of gain to that house; because as remarked in our former letter, the house stipulated for, 
and Messrs, Letchmere and Rickards granted a guarantee of £.65. per ton for the hemp 
in London, with an option to dispose of it otherwise than to the Company or Government, 
if they thought fit; so that they were secured not only from loss, but. in a profit, if 

market here should prove ever so unfavourable; and if the price of hemp should be high, 
and Government consequently in want of that commodity, they were then at liberty to 

pose of their cargo to the best bidder, to disappoint Government, the supply of whom was 


medium of that supply; a supply, that to a certain extent, would have been cor 

and found by the Company themselves, but for the interposition of this scheme, w 
went to turn the provision into the channel of the private merchants, for we do not perceive 
any suggestion on the part of the majority of Council to enter upon a provision on account 
of the Company. sisi! 


g. The issue of this business has been, that the cargo of aig arrived here shes, the ¢ 
article was abundant, and the price low. The house of Messrs. Bruce and Co. therefore 

called on us in virtue of the guarantee, to take the hemp from them at £.65. per ton. We 
have been obliged to do so; Government have refused to receive it from us at that rate, as 
indeed, the hemp was not at all provided in the manner we had undertaken it should -be; 
and the article being still low, the cargo yet remains upon our hands ; Messrs. Brace and Co. 
having alone received any benefit by it. i'view 


10. In proceeding to consider the line of conduct adopted by Mr. Rickards, in the p: 
ticular question et He before you, respecting the Company’s trade in cotton, we § 
e circumstances in which the Company stand in ion to 


the original object, and to disappoint also the design of the Rompeog: be the vena 


11. The district of Broach, part of the lands ceded to us in Guzerat, pays a portion of its 
‘revenue in cotton. This practice did not originate with the Company, but was transmi 


district; and it is indeed, derived from a principle very ancient in Indian taxation, that 


uD” 


* 
a 


e 


to them from the Mahratta government, whom they succeeded in the possession noe a 
Loves Hy 


division of the actual produce of the soil, between the sovereign and the cultivator. _ 


12. The sovereign’s share is in modern times commonly converted into oe 
and such in fact is the case with respect to the cotton produce in question ; the cultivator is 
charged for the whole of his assessment or rent in money, but pays a certain portion of itin 


cotton, at a money rate agreed on by both parties. The first question that arises here, is 


whether the interest of the cultivator be properly secured in such a practice; and we are glad 
to receive satisfactory information on this head from the judge and magistrate of Broach; 
for agreeing with the sentiment expressed to that officer by our Governor, in his letterof 
the 4th of i uly 1808, we would not have the object of commercial advantage pursued to the 
prejudice of the just claims of the cultivator of the soil. Mr. Prendergast, however, the 


Judge and magistrate above alluded to, states, that whilst the farmers can get for copass or 


uncleaned cotton, at the rate of 30 rupees per bhar, it will be decidedly more profitable 
to them to cultivate it than the most valuable grain, but that they are sure both of 40 rupees” 
r bhar from the Company, and a certain sale. And Lieut. Colonel Walker, the resident 
pty in an instraclive paper recorded in your Proceedings on the Cotton Trade 
Guzerat, after stating that when there is a moderate competition, the price is from 32 to 3: 
rupees per bhar; but that when purchasers are more numerous, it rises mach hi 
observing further “ that great care should be taken not to reduce the price of the article too. 
““ much, which would discourage the cultivation ;” nevertheless, estimates the price which 
might be given by purchasers, at 35 rupees per bhar. This he does too in a plan for i 
many frauds and abuses in that trade, of which he has given an account, as they are 
‘by the various -classes of natives employed in it, between the first grower and the Jast 
purchaser, for exportation, both of whom suffer by the misconduct of the intermediate men, 
whether acting as sellers or as agents for the exporting merchant. From this account, which 
+has reference not so mach to the limited district of Broach, which pays a part of its cotton 
produce in kind to the Company, as generally to the other cotton districts, neti 


» 


" 


| 
; 
| 
; 


than a peenger. unconnected with them. The houses above. mentione 
ic 


EAST INDIA AFFAIRS. — 19 


-still under the Mahratta government, it appears. that “the moment the amount of the 
~ jummabandy is determined, the securities whom the ryots give for their assessment, 
“** proceed in communication with the ryots, but often at their own discretion, to settle the 
“** price of the .copass with the patelis, and the patells and tultaties account with the 
“* cultivators.” The securities termed manotudars, are the monied men of the country, 
-and the amuldar being commonly of their fraternity, they have the support of his authority. 
“The manotudars, or securities, usually sell the cotton in the state of copass, the purchasers 
-from them are the banians resident in the districts, who either sell it again on the spot, or 
~deliver it to the hanias to be cleaned. 


13. It is with the cleaning of the cotton that frauds begin to multiply. Every stage 
‘thenceforward is marked by trick and dishonesty; the article is mixed with one of an 
‘inferior sort, or packed when only imperfectly cleaned; it is removed from the cleaning 
wheels without being teased, in order 1o separate any remaining leaves or seeds, put into 
darkened damp warehouses, which are cow-dunged to keep them moist; and the cotton, to 
preserve it humid, is almost daily sprinkled with water, the deceit being covered by putting 
dry cotton on the outside of that which has been wetted. The night Ae the purchaser 
means to begin weighing, the setter exposes his cotton to the heavy dews, spreading it oa 
the ground to receive as much moisture as suits his purpose; the wind at the same time 
assisting his object, by blowing into the cotton a quantity of dust, sand, or other impurities, 
and all is deposited in warehouses again, moistened, some hours before the agents of the 
purchaser appear. Frauds still more gross are practised. The cotton is sometimes wetted 
with a mixture of sall and water, to increase doubly the weight; and even leaves, dirt, and 
stones are purposely mixed with it. The native agents employed in the district on the part 
of the exporting merchants of Bombay, to examine, weigh, and pack the cotton, are 

of oe A amteap in all these impositions; and from the detail of their conduct 
given ‘by Major Walker, it seems difficult to believe that they are not both negligent and 
corrupt *, ; 


14. The cotton dealers too, it appears from Major Walker’s account, take advantage of 
aseason of brisk demand, to put in practice all their arts to adulterate the article and 
enhance the price; and they sometimes also treat the purchaser with an insolence which 
feduces him to the dilemma of either taking a bad article on their terms, or running the 
hazard of losing the advance he had made. Hence, when the foreign market is unfavourable, 
and the demand for cotton but small, the dealers, afraid the article should remain on their 
hands, lower its price, and improve its quality. From the whole of this curious account, 
it is evident, that where the ealtivators of cotton are under the power of monied men, the 
Aealers in the districts, so utterly insensible to the true principles of trade, to a character, 
and to‘common honesty, and whilst the agents of the exporting merchants combine with 
those native dealers in their dishonest practices, real freedom of trade is not to be looked 
for. We, therefore, see no reason to doubt that the cultivators of cotton, who pay in kind 
to the Company, are better off than any other persons of the same class in Guzerat; and, in 
such a state of society, we think, that the community, instead of being injured by the 
Company's practice, of receiving a certain ‘pte of uncleaned cotton at a fair or rather 
liberal rate, may be benefited by the example of equitable attention to the interest of the 
syots, which is exhibited in the mode of conducting this business. 


45. Besides the cotton thus acquired, the Company also purchase in the general market, 
the mediuw of their European servants, a certain quantity of that article, chiefly 
with a view to aid their important commercial operations in China. This purchase is not 
«arried on to the exclusion of any other buyers, nor to the disadvantage of the owners of 
tton; for, on the contrary, the Company or their agents are accused, by the houses of 

E Laing Fawcett, and Co, and Forbes and Co., of having, by their purchases, raised the market 
price of cotton to an immoderate degree; a charge, however, which Mr. Wren, the com- 
mercial resident at Surat, defends himself from, and retorts upon them. But certain it is, 
that the Company do not exercise power either to monopolize the market, or procure the 


article below its just value, It is now, and has been long, well understood, that it is not the 


interest of the Company to do so; and the proprietor of au estate, who has a lasting con- 
ern in its prosperity, may be expected to be less disposed to take edrmninge of the tenants 

, however, have 
ventured publicly to complain to you “ of the ruinous consequences which the competition 
“ of Governmeut in the cotton market has unfortunately entailed on its own subjects ;” 
their appeal, they say, “ is founded on the principle, that the interference of a government in 
“ any market is destructive of fair competition, and necessarily tramples under foot all the 
“ ctive interests of its subjects :” and the remedy they propose is, that the Company 
shall not otherwise engage in the cotton market, than for the purpose of receiving revenue 
hein from the Broach pergunnahs, in which case these merchants offer to supply the 
Company with 4,000 bales of cotton for China, under a requisition, however, thiat the 


engagement may be kept secret. 


"us 16. A more extraordinary proposal, we are persuaded, does not stand upon our records. 


‘The Company is the oldest European trader now in India; it has opened the ports of the 
East to aes British subjects, who, fostered solely under its protection, have come at length 
to share in all its extended commerce, Indian and European; and particularly to enjoy 
va sin the inland trade of India, to which they could not have had access in the 
time.of the native sovereigns. But these two houses, now in eflect, claim for the private 
oa merchants 


No. 2. 
The Court of 
Directors to the 
Government of 
Bombay, 
22 Feb. 1811 ;—on 
the Cotton Trade, . 
uu ~—_—_/ 


* Major Walker's 
account of the 
Cotton Trade at 
Guzerat, recorded 
in Council, 


No, 2. 
The Court of 
Directors to the 
Government of 
Bombay, 
22 Feb. 1811;—on 
the Cotten Trade. 


ey 


— =. 


- 


20 PAPERS RELATING TO 


merchants the whole of the trade, Indian and European; because the principle on which 
they ground their appeal, however they may have meant to apply it, goes fully to that extent. 
In the name of those who could not have had a residence in India without the permission of 
the Company, and who have risen to commercial consequence under the auspices of their 
government, we are plainly told that they are not contented with beimg partakers in the 
commercial privileges of the Company, the whole should be left to them. 


17. Although no proof is attempted of the assumed principle which.involves this pro- 
position, or of the justness of its application, some notice will nevertheless be hereafter taken 
of it; but it may suffice to observe now, that the proposition contends for fair competition 
and an equitable regard to the interests of all the subjects of a state; consequently, we per- 
severe for the principle of freedom of trade. The Company are represented as violating 
all these; a scheme is proposed for the prevention of such violations, and what are the 
means it adopts?—A secret combination between buyers to narrow the competition. The 
two houses who bronght forward the scheme must before have agreed to act together as one 
buyer; because as such they offer to act for the Company also; thas they would redace 
three principal purchasers into one; and that one is to enter the market with all the advan- 
tage of knowing how much the competition wil! be narrowed, and with what certainty he 


can make his own large provision, whilst he offers only diminished prices. 


18. Thus, you were required on the principle of fair competition, and of shewing an 
equitable regard to the interests of all the subjects of a State, to forin a species of monopoly 
and combination in favour of two.purchasers against the sellers universally; such is the 

ractical result, in this case, of a high sounding criminating appeal to publie principles; 
it is a project of self-interest, directly at variance with those principles, Too much aceus- 
tomed as we have been to such perversion and abuse, in discussions relative to the commerce 
of the Company, we should not have dwelt so long upon this instance, (though certainly 
the extreme indecorum of such an attack from persons living and flourishing under the pro- 
tection of our Government, might naturally have led to particular observation,) ifa member 


of our Government had not sanctioned it in so remarkable a way. 


ig. Mr. Rickards not only appears to adopt the reasoning and scope ef the letter from 
the two houses, but endeavours to support their proposal wilh additional arguments. The 
first argument, which is directed to the propriety of reducing the selling price of cotton i 
the districts, is founded very much upon the principle, that if the return of cotton to 


grower were equal to the return of grain, it might be sufficient. We apprehend this 


rinciple of equalizing the profit on all other articles of culture to the profit on grain, to 
Sees and unsound; and we can have no doubt that any Government whis 

should attempt practically to establish it, would widely depart from the line of its duty, 
Besides, Mr. Rickards ought to have known, that the enhanced price at which the exporting 


merchant stores his cotton, is not to be ascribed to the rate paid to the cultivator,/but ta 
the passing of the article through different hands, each of which obtains a gain that swells — 


the ultimate cost. To the intermediate dealers between the grower and the exporter, and t 
Ahe competition for the purchase of the article, the rise of price to the final purchaser is 


chiefly to be ascribed. The.price.thus produced by the number and concurrence of buyers, ” 


Mr. Rickards, by a singular misuse of Janguage, calls “a monopoly price ;”” whereas, where- 
ever a real monopoly is exercised to exclude other buyers than the monopolist, it procures 
the commodity cheap ; and when used toexclude other venders, it sells the commodity dear. 


-Qn the contrary, nothing is better known, than that competition in buying has the effect 
of raising the price, and in selling of lowering it ; in both ways the effect may be excessive; — 
but it is only the nature of competition which is now in question. To counteract “ a — 


“ monopoly price,” which Mr. Rickards has so indefensibly assumed, he recommends a 
‘measure in its nature partaking, as has been already shewn, of real monopoly; a measure 
which he seems to think the more allowable, because few of the cotton sellers are our own 
subjects; and though it might have been natural for a servant of the Company, whe 
thought the principle of reducing the competition just, to propose that some of the private 
merchants should withdraw, in order to be served by the Company, rather than that the 
Company should withdraw, to become dependent on them; yet Mr. Rickards points 
solely to the latter; because, according to him, the Company’s purchases is one of the 
auses of the “ monopoly price ;” it being manilest, he says, that“ their agents go inte 
* the market backed with all the influence and authority of office, and the knowledge of a 
“ competitor in the market, who must at all eveuts be served, is only calealated to make 
« sellers hold back, antil their demands, perhaps exorbitant, be fulfilled.” a 


20. Now, if the charge had been, that the Company’s agents had by power and influence 
obliged the owners to sell cotton to them, whether they were willing or not, that they got 
the comincdity.at a less price than the usual rate of the market, or than the owners were 
content to sell it at; or bad not perimiited other purchasers to come into the market, or had 
forcibly taken from them any article they had bought there, would at least have a red a 
-consistency between the aliedged cause and the alledged effect; but what is the thing com- 
plained of? it is excessive price, and that price produced by the Company; but is Pied of 
anfluence wecessary to induce a seller to take the highest or even the fair price of the market 
for his commodity? The effect of force and influence, properly-so called, must be to depress 

roduce and competition and high prices; but here another complaint is, that-competition 
4s too great, which is the sure consequence of great.demand and a free market. ‘Insuch 
@ demand, and such a market, the best price and largest -capital give the only-power and 


: 
. 
le i ci me BP i 


en ee a el 


— <<. 


Sm! 


—— en a a > peli 


‘ 


RAST INDIA AFFAIRS: at 


influence, excepting the confidence which we believe the Company have established from 
general honour in their commercial dealings. Under such circumstances, what is the mean- 
ing of the knowledge of a competitor in the market, who must at all events be served. Prom the 
ecounecton in which this passage stands, and its geveral aspect, it anght seem that it alluded 
to force; but from the scope of the complaint, itcav only import, that the known ability and 
deierminativn of the Company to buy, must have the effect of raising the price. But so 
1 its degree must the price fall of every other competitor in such a maiket. Mr. Rickards 
himseif admits, “ that there is no other real, ostensible, or even assigned cause for the 
“ high price, than the too urgent competition of the buyers.” Any merchant however 
among those competitors would revolt at an attempt to restrict him in the use he should 
make of his capital; and may not the Company expect the same privilege as other mer- 
chants in adiscretionary use of theirs? Yet this is opposed sometimes in the way of direct 
argument, and as it is hee, by representing the iniluence of capital and character as the 
influence and authority of office. 


21. Objections, early derived from the very peculiar constitution of the Company, which 
has connected territorial dominion with commerce, have continued to be represented ina 
state of things extremely different from that under which they were first advanced, and the 
principles of political economy have been alledged in their support. The just application of 

eneral prisciples, even where they are well understood, is known to be a matter of 
difficulty. That science, which is itself very much built on fact and experience, may be 
supposed yet capable of improvement by further knowledge; and the constitution and 
sysiem of the Cowpany, instead of being judged by principles adopted before any sufficient 
experience was acquired of the effects of such a constitution and system, may afford new 
and useful data for enlarging the boundaries of the science. 


22. In the course of the last twenty-five years, a legislative code in many essential 
respects new, has been formed by the Company, for their territories in India. Let that body 
wf regulations be consulted, both as to the matter and tenor of them, and as to their 
practical effects, in order to determine whether they have been formed under the influence 
of a commercial spirit, or dictated by enlarged andtrae principles of policy and government; 
having for their grand object the welfare of the whole community, and every class of it, 
Certain commercial factories and prescriptive coumergial rights, were long enjoyed by the 
Company, under the native sovereigns in India. These have been indeed retained, but 
under such modifications and regulations as not to interfere with the general trade of the 
country, or the interest of those whom the Company employ; and further than to secure the 
right to advances and performance of engagements to which every private trader is entitled, 
no authority is allowed. Force and compulsion, as far as we understand and intend, are not 
used either to catry on the commerce of the Company, or obstruct that of other persons. 
And, as already intimated, in such a state of society as the great continent of India presents, 
where, from old inveterate habits, there is a disposition in every native, whether a trader or 
of any other class, to oppress those inferior to him with whom he ‘has to aet; the general 
example of fair dealing and punctuality to engagements, which the commercial branch of 
of the Company's affairs has exhibited, may be beneficial to the people, and rather lead 
them to improved notions of commerce, which among such a people, and where the subor- 
dinate details of administration must be trusted to natives, can never be well learned, while 
the moral habits are so corrupt. In fact, as the great objection against the Company, 
founded in the idea of their uniting the contracted selfish spirit of traffic with the character 
of a sovereign, and using-the latter to serve the views of the former, proceeds in the first 
place upon a supposition that no liberal just views in matters of governinent, are consistent 
with commercial pursuits, a supposition which the experience of this country sufficiently 
contradicts, so the large system of commerce which the Company have conducted in India 
since their acquisition of territory, may serve to shew that it 1s possible for Government to 
Manage a commercial departinent, without abandoning either the principles of government, 
-or those of commerce. 


23. That at present our Government employs no force to carry on the commercial pur- 
suits of the Company, or to hinder any individeal from buying and selling, and that no 
unfair influence is exercised in their commercial affairs, we take to be perfectly established, 
Decause otherwise, we cansot doubt that particular instances would have been pointed out. 
Theorists hostile to the Company, object to the union of the commercial character with that 
of sovereign, from the nature of the thing assuming that it must produce ill effects ; 
practical men dike the two mercantile houses in question, availing themselves of this pre- 
dice, advance the same objection as if ‘the actual bad consequences of this union were 
Ties aud indisputable; but those houses give no particular fact, and we cannot help 
expressing oar ‘surprize, that you should have passed over such asseitions as they have 
advanced, which indeed extremely implicate your own conduct, without calling for expla- 
Nations and animadverting on the most unbecoming terms in which they are delivered. 
But if we have reason to complain of the unfairness with which the combination of govern- 
“Ment and commerce in the system of the Company is used by those whose prejudices or 
‘interests ure in opposition to the Company, what shall we say of a servant of our own, a 
member of our Government piaced b¢ us ina confidential and honourable situation, who 
Tends his influence to contirm the prejudices just mentioned. If indeed, the union of the 
commercial with the political character had been productive of inconveniences, was it the 

ovince of Mr. Rickards to join the accusers of our system in holding it up to censure. 

Was there no other mode in which, if he entertained the sentiments he has expressed, he 
306. F might 


No. 2. 
The Court of 
Directors to the 
Government of 
Bombay, 
22 eb. 18113; —0n 
the Cotton ‘Trade. 
Seed 


No. 2. 
The Court of 
Directois of the 
Government of 
Bombay, 
22 Feb. 1811 ;—on 


. the Cotton Trade. 
——~ — 


22 PAPERS RELATING TO 


might have communicated them to-us? Far from wishing to repress free communication, we 
are desirous to encourage it on ail occasions, when becomingly made; but the occasion 
which Mr, Rickards has used to bring before us his opinion upon a very iinportant subject, 
is certainly not happily nor respectfully chosen ; and we think, that belore he entered upon 
the subject, introduced as it then was, he should have been careful to have proceeded upon 
solid grounds; bat he quotes no fact to shew that what he calls “ the heterogeneous union 
“ of the commercial and tutelary character,” has produced incouveniences and injuries; 
nor does he seem to know of any; he only “ apprehends that they cannot fail to ensue;” 
and on this presumption, coinciding with the evidently hostile accusation of the mercantile 
houses in question, he arraigns to the world the constitution of the Company, and gives to 
the opponents of the Company all the weight that can be derived from the opinion and 
authority of a member of our Government, who thus does us an injury which an open enemy 
could not inflict, not only uunecessarily, but as we conceive, agatust the real truth and faeis 
of the case; and all this in support of a speculation which has for its immediate object the 
private benefit of particular parties; and which militate against the true principles of 
political economy and of commerce ; and as it is also in our opinion contrary to that judg- 
meot and that sense of duty and propriety, which ought to have guided the cenduct of 
Mr. Rickards on such an occasion. 


24. Upon these grounds, and in consideration of the conduct of Mr. Rickards in the. 


hemp transaction, we feel it impossible to continue our confidence to him in the situation 
of a Member of our Council ; and are therefore under the necessity of removing him, as 
we hereby do from that office. Upon the same considerations, we remove from our Council 
Mr. Lechmere, who has concurred with Mr. Rickards in the measures and reasonings in 
question ; but as we understand that his arrival in England may be shortly expected, we do 
not think it necessary to enlarge further upon his conduct. 


25. It being necessary therefore, in nag aetna of these removals, that we should 
proceed to a new arrangement for the Bombay Council, we have resolved that the Council 
shall consist of the following persons; viz. Jon" Duncan, Esq. President and Governor; 
Lieutenant General the Honourable Jn° Abercromby, Commander in Chief, and Second in 
Council ; George Brown, Esq. Third in Council; Jn® Elphinstone, Esq. Fourth in Couneil ; 
and a Commission of Government, under the Company’s Seal, embracing that arrange- 
ment, will accordingly be forwarded ‘to you by the extra ship Northampton, now ant 
dispatch. ; 


26. We are aware that Mr. Nathan Crow succeeded to a seat in Council on the 3d 
November 1809, in consequence of our appointineat, from whence he retired on the arrival 
of General Abercromby, the 251h of the same month. By the orders contained in the 
114th paragraph of our Letter of the 27th June 1810, a person, under such circumstances, 
is not considered as entitled to succeed to Council upon any future vacancy, without a fresh 
appointment by the Court of. Directors. We continue to have the same opinion of the 


merits of Mr. Crow, which at first induced us to appoint him a provisional Counsellor; 


but being informed that the state of this Gentleman’s health is such as to render him ; 


inadequate to the active duties of that important station, we bave not included him in the 
present Commission. 


27. With respect to Mr. Rickards, although he has incurred our displeasure in the 
instances above mentioned, yet, as We entertain a favourable opinion of his abilities in 


general, we shall not object to his being employed in any situation wader your Presidency, 
to which he may be eligible from his rank in the service. f af? 


ee ee Oe ee eee Pe 


_— 


EAST INDIA AFFATIRS.. 23 


No. 3. 


Copy of Panacrarus, No. 2 to 8, ofa LETTER, in the Revenue 
Department, from the Governor in Council of Bombay, to the Court 
of Directors, dated 14 October 1808, with Copies of the Papers 
referred to therein ;—and Copy of the Reply of the Court of 
Directors, under date the 10th of January 1810, to the said 

_ Communication. 


PROCEEDINGS of the Governor in Council of Bombay, on 
Mr. Rickards’s Observations on the Revenue System of Judia; and on his 
Minutes relative to a General Reduction of Expences in the Establishments 
under the Presidency of Bombay. 


EXTRACT of REVENUE LETTER from BOMBAY; dated 14th O@ober 1808. 
Paragraph 2. 


TN availing onrfelves of the eligible opportunity that prefents itfelf, of forwarding our 

records in this department, by the honourable Company's fhip Wexford, we have only 
to fubmit to the confideration of your honourable Court, in purfuance of the promife 
made in the 3d paragraph of that difpatch, the minute recorded by our colleague Thomas 
Lechmere, Efg. on the fubject of the documents delivered in by Robert Rickards, Elq. and 
our Prefident, in refpect to the prevailing Revenue Syftems of India. 


3. Your honourable Court will obferve, that on recording Mr. Lechmere’s minute, we 
determined, purfuant to the fentiments of the majority of the Board, to avoid making any 
innovation, without a previous reference to your honourable Court on the fyftem and prin- 
ciples of fettlement, for the ifland of Salfette; which having been originally fanétioned by 
the Supreme Government, has fince been approved and confirmed by your honourable 
Court; this Refolution not, however, extending to fuch part of that illand, as is not under 
cultivation, and as fuch occupied by parties to whom a proprietary title has been announced, 
our receding determination was accordingly qualified under the motives adverted to in 
our Brefident’s remarks of the 8th of July, by a latitude to Mr. Rickards, to make trial of 

is financial fyftem, on thole parts of Salfette that were thus open to the experiment; in 
refpect to which, we expreffed our readinefs to concur in fuch meafures, as Mr. Rickards 
might, in contiftence with the preceding geaeral exception, fuggeft for that purpole. 


_ 4. And inafmuch as the inhabitants of Caranja appeared to have requefted Mr. Rickards 
fyitem of finance to be introduced among them, we intimated to that gentleman, that we 
were very defirous that he fhould immediately proceed with the experiment in that ifland, 
fuch as might alfo tend to facilitate the attainment of Mr. Rickards objects in deeming 
thereon practicable a further reduction in the charges of collection. 


_ 5. Mr. Rickards was at the fame time invited to bring forward, for our confideration, thofe 
reductions of expenfe on the iflands of Bombay and Salfette, and generally throughout the 
honourable Company’s potleflions under this pretidency, which had occurred to him to be 
available, and which the prefent exigencies render mott expedient to realize to the utmoft 
limits of prudence, found policy, and juftice; at the fame time, that the Governor has in his 
remarks of the 7th July, ftated his belief that the aggregate charges of revenue eftablifh- 
ments under this prefidency (however from local circumftances, varying in different 
collectorthips) are already to the full as moderate, or rather more fo, than under either of your 
other prefidencies in India. 


6. Mr. Rickards having delivered in a further minute, explaining at length the motives 
which impel him, to decline all management in the propofed reduction of the native 
eftablifhment on Salfetie, and the fettling of wealthy capitalifts on the wafte lands of the 


isjand, in coofideration chiefly to the latitude tendered to him, admitting but of a partial 


306. operatioa 


No. 3. 

Mr. Rickards 
(24 Sept. 1807) 
on Taxation and 

Revenue. 


Semin. senate 


24 PAPERS RELATING TO 


operation to his plan; we beg leave refpectfully to refer your honourable Court to that 
Geutiewan’s coulequent minute, and to a furiher one delivered in by our Prefident ou the 
occafion, in whole opinion Mr. Lechmere entirely concurs. 


7th. We take this oceafion to inform your honourable Court, that we have under confi- 
deration, feveral applications from wealthy inhabitants of Bombay, to become landed 
roprietors ov Salietie, on the fame principles and condiions as had been conceded before 
Min Rickards’ arrival to Ardaileer Dady ; but as the feveral applications have not yet been 
matured and finally arranged, we refrain from entering into particulars by the prefent 
diipatch, the more efpecially as the general fubject will foon be brought again under your 
contideration, in a fuiler point of view; aud meauwhile,we beg leave to refer to the minutes ; 
the prefent (light notice of the coutents of which, are to be viewed as merely indicatory of 
the outline of the courfe in which this important fubject has been hitherto conducted. — 


8. Duplicates of Mr. Rickards, and of the Governor's firft minutes on the fubject, (the 
originals of which were fenton the gth of July latt, by His Majefty’s thip St, Fiorenzo), 
accompanying this, a 


EXTRACT BOMBAY REVENUE CONSULTATIONS, oth July 1808. 


THE Governor delivers in for record, the following Letter, and Papers accompanying, 


which, having been addreiled to Government by Mr. Rickards, previoully to that Gentle- 


man’s taking his feat in Council, have fince remained with the Refideat, under the 
circumstances hereafter nuticed. 


Honourable Sir, : 

1 take the liberty of laying before you a few remarks on the fubjeét of Taxation in 
general, and of the prevailing Revenne Syftems of India; which | refpedttully hope may 
appear to you, as well as to the Honourable Court of Directors, to merit confideration, in 
view to the future profperity of this country. 


If [ conceive that profperity to be incapable of any confiderable permanent increafe, under 
the fyftem of land taxation now in force, L have, in advancing that opinion, cautioully 
endeavoured to avoid, as | fhould be much concerned in, giving the flightett offence. 


With fome experience in the revenue adminifiration of Lodia, and actuated by no motive 
but that of the public good, | hope to be exempt from the charge of arrogance or incon- 
fiderate desslagh ata: : an humble opinion can, atall events, do no harm ; and calm difenflion 
and fober inveftigation are, in all fpeculative queftions, the only fure road to the attainment 
or confirmation of truth, bres tit 


In the Effay now fubmitied, I have applied the principles with which Lam impreffed in 
the form of an arrangement for Salfeite, where, if approved, a trial may be made without 
rifk of the leaft particle of lofs to the honourable Company ; and where proofs will foon be 
given, from the peculiar fituation of the ifland, of the merit or demerit of the theor 
adduced. Failure in Salfette mutt determine its inapplicability to other parts of India. 
while fuceels may perhaps fanction the more general adoption of the fume princi ies 5, and 
though the fume degree of fuecels cannot be expected to follow the general introduglibn at 
fuch a fyfiem every where, fince the progrefs of improvement in all great countries mult 
be gradual, and flow ; yet uncquivocal proofs of their efficacy in one favoured fpot, are 
realonable grounds for anticipating fimilar confequences in others, as the courfe of dita wed 
and wealth fhall gradually, yet fimilarly, be extended to them: if, in fhort, the principles 
are proved to be good, they may be confidered as the ground-work of great and extenfive 
prolperity, which, itis humbly apprehended, is not a conitituent feature of our prefent revenue 
1) fiens. Dy iY 

Should any thing urged in these facets induce you, Sir, to make the propofed experiment 
in Salfetie, permit me to bex your particular attention to that part of the plan, which 
fuggelis the immediate contiruction ef refervoirs, and points out Ube practicable faving in the 
native efiablillaments. . : 


The advantages of the former are too manifeft to need further comment, whilft of the 
latter it may be oblerved, that under a plan of revenue fo fimple as the one I have recom- 


mented, itis by ao meais improbable but the eftabiifhments may adinit of fill further 


reduction ; but ifonly the fame principle of colleéiion be extended to the other collegtorthips 
under this Government, there may be anticipated an annua! faving of confiderable amount, 
(as exhibited in Voucher, No. 9,) fince, trom actual experience of the fufficieney of fuch an 
efiubluhiment for realizing revenue, even on. the old fyftem, with perfect fecurity, | cannot 
for a monent doubt, but that, with the good will of the collectors, it might be every where, 
and advantageoully, acted upon. 


In the preceding arrangements T had intended to include the ifland of Bombay; but 
finding the whole fyfiem, which has been long in force here, fo complicated; the mature of 
lauded tenures fo uncertain, yet fo important to be secnrately known; and much other 
matier requiling deep and probably long relearch, fatisfaccorily to elucidate, | ari it 

ther 


el 


EAST. INDIA AFFAIRS. 25 


better to comprefS all that related to this particular ifland into another feparate treatife ; and No. 3. 

I fhall accordingly continue my inquiries in this. view, if it meet the approbation of — yfr, Rickards 

} -— Government. it (24 Sept. 1807) 
| As Bombay, Salfette, and Caranjuh, with the fubordinate fmaller iflands, only conftitute on Taxation and 
one collectorthip, and that by no means an extenfive one, there is certainly no reafon why Revenue. 

| one cutcherry under the collector fhould not be fuflicient for the duties thereof. 

In the prefent plan, I have therefore declined framing the neceflary eablifhment for this 


eutcherry, until the Bombay arrangements fhould be completed ; but I fill trutt there are 
fufficient data given to judge, with accuracy, of the annual faving in’ that part: of the’ 
collectorthip treated of, and which, in Salfette and Caranjah, will be about 20,000 rupees per 
annum, or more than two-thirds of Lie prefent amount. 


It will not efeape the obfervation of the honourable Board, that the accompanying 
petitions from Sallette and Caranjah, contain many reprefentations beyond thofe adverted 
to'in the eflay, and which may require Jocal adjuftment previous to the adoption of any 
arrangement, whatever it be, for the permavent adminifiration of these iflands. 


_ Among other requefis, the inhabitants of Caranjah have particularly folicited the introduc- 
tion of the fyftem here recommended. It was explained to, and fully underftood by them ; 
but it has not been communicated to thofe of Salfette; though, from the frequent and de- 
tailed difcuflions f have had with men of influence and property conneéted with Salfette, 
Le reafon to be affured it would prove equally acceptable to the inhabitants of that 
i an . ; ; ’ 

I mvft finally apologize for any errors that may be difcovered in’ the accompanying 
treatife. It has been ily begun fince’ my late arrival in India, and neceffarily finifhed in 

_ more hafte than is perhaps confiftent with the importance'of fo grave a fubject. “ Still, if the 
principles are good, trifling omiffions or overfights may be pardoned, and however fond the 
fuppoled partialities of a man for his own productions, I thall be amply fatistied, if this only 
leads, wetter hands, to the afcertainment of truth. © 

eat I have the honour to be, &c 


_ Bombay, wrote | (Signed) ” R, RICKARDS. 
24th Sept. 1807. eB ats abbasaskf iinet 


ed igepiy ESSAY on TAXATIGN: 


Containing Principles attempted to be deduced from the Laws of Natare, and applied 
_ to the Revenue Syftem of Ludia, with Propofals for an experimental Amendment on 
the Ifands of Salfette and Caranja ; and a Plan of Collection, on fimple principles, 


_ by which the Revenue nang (éxclufive of European Allowances) on thote Iflaiids, 
are capable of reduction in at leaft two-thirds of théir prefent amount. Wise ei 


ie J ‘ i § ; ons = 
_1, IN the different branches of fcience and art, theories, or firft principles, feem to be 
mniverlally ufeful; they are often, indeed, derided and placed in difadvantageous comparifon 
with the fuperior utility of practice; and bad thedries' deferve it; but it muft be recollected, 
at all practice has its appropriate theory ; the Pipl of. apprentice, equally imbibe ‘the 
ft principles of their profefion or art, as they advance in habits of experimental {kill ; 
and in all obfervations wherein the mind is concerned, that execution’ is molt perfect where 
good theory and good praétice are combined.) 9 pera 
“2 A celebrated modern author has obferved, that"there is no feience in which firt 
rinciples are more neceflary than in‘ that of politicaleconomy. ‘There is, perhaps, none 
where eftablifhed maxims are in execution, fo often negleéted. In civil government, the 
ad to permanent profperity is, like the afcent to the temple of virtue, ftrewed with many 
culties, and many temptations to ftray: the mind is dazzled with a view of advantages, 
whieh a flight deviation from the prefcribed track feems capable’ of attaining; they are 
reedily grafped at by the hand of mifguided political zeal, on the plaufible pretence of 
public good ; and in the difappointment, or accumulated difficulties which enfue, we might 
ufefally learn, were not prejudice predominant, that durable profperity is only to be found in 
ithe ways of eternal juflice ; that perfeverance therein is indifpentfable at whatever temporary 
facrifice or forbearance it may require; and that deviations, under the fallacious hope of 
' collateral benefits. are often ruinous, or at belt yield but partial good, at the heavy lols of a 
__ difproportionate degtee of lafiing evil. 
a. The envious defite of exclufive advantage, coveted at the expenfe of ftriG juttice, 
pel aps of a neighbour's right, would feem to be the foundation of. that fyftem of rivalry 
und intrigue, in which'courts and minitters o vainly afpire to excel: diplomatic: fkill de- 
generates into artifice and cunning, and cuftom throws the veil of fulferance over the moft 


ighteous aéts; when thefe fail, violence is recurred to, and then follows the greatett of 
all political evils— the feourge of horrid war, 


Ae How often too, is the pretended honour of a nation, like that of a duellift, made to 
confift in blood and ruin; revenge is the moving caufe; eftablithed principles are difregarded ; 
. rhe wel od and benefit perverfely fought in the indulgence, rather than in the controul, of 
the moft odious pallions. =” 


5 Toa fimilar deviation from the broad path of juftice and forbearance, to the indulgence, 
in fact, of paflion, at the expenfe of reafon, may allo be afcribed moft of the interval 
306... ; G diforders 


?. 


_ 


ee 


_ No. ¢. 
Mr. Rickards 
(24 Sepr. 1807) 

on Taxation and 
Kevenue. 


Orig. 


26 PAPERS RELATING TO 
diforders of all political inftitutions. ‘The avarice, the vanity, and fometimes the feverity” 


of power, eftablifh, between a ftate and its fubjetts, wo diftiné interefts, which, in view 


to national profperity, ought ever to be infeparably anited. 


6. It is thus that power may be said to involve itself both in foreign broils and datemdin. 


difficulties, tempted by the flattering fuggeftions of human craft to forfake the unerring 
maxims of infinite wifdom, * 

7. There are fundry points in the fcience of political economy, concerning which the 
Jearned are ftill at variance, and oa which, therefore, it would be prefumptuous in an humble 
individual to intrude an unlearned opinion; but there are others fo obvioufly right, that we 


cannot be wrong in their aflumption; the only difficulty lies in their due adaptation to the 


fate of things in this country. 


8. Nature is the ground-work of all fcience; and it is from the laws of nature alone, or. 


the revealed will of God, that we can hope to derive principles of infallible excellence. If, 


therefore, we can difcover thofe laws, by which nature regulates her focieties ou earth, no 
man will furely prefume to deny the foe or even the necessity of their adoption, or to 
think the expedients or ingenuity of his own fallible reafon a better guide; and the confti- 


tation of the human mind, its natural powers, and its paflions, bear fo ftrong a fimilitude in 


nll countries, that the fame immutable Jaws of nature may be found equally efficacious, and 
equally prevalent among all the various races of civilized life. Z 


o. Itis generally admitted, that one of the moft univerfal laws on which the fabric of 


- 


human fociety is formed, is that of felf-love. It pervades the whole race of man, and even 
the virtues and energies of the mind are attributed to this fource. We do becaufe it 


is a gratification to ourfelves, or becaufe we expect benefits in return ; we labour to topply . 


the wants, or promote the conveniences .and luxuries of others, becaule we are ourlelves 
nefited by the exertion, in fortune, or in fame, felf-love, or {elf-intereft, in here the funda- 


mental fource of good to every branch of the fociety, and felf-intereft is only a modification 


of the fame. 


10. To give greater force and efficacy to this radical principle of human fociety, mature, 
all-wife and all-confiftent, has implanted in man a correfponding motive to aétion, in which’ 
the human is found effentially to differ from the reft of animal creation. Every animal 
in nature befides, has no wants but what its own power can fupply. Man alone (excepting 
pesinen the loweft fuvage) is a purely dependent being; he is unable to fupply the hundredth, 
nay, t 
farnith thofe of others, thoufands and ten thoufands are fimilarly employed to contribute to 
his own. Civilized man thus owes the enjoyments and comtorts of life to the afliftance of 
liis fellows: it is a common caufe, in which the wants of all call forth the exertions of all; 
and each finds his own advantage in conducing to the general demand. 


11. Selfintereft is therefure the law of nature, which prompts to this univerfal labour, for 


the benefit and ule. of others; and the natural dependence of man, or in other words, thofe — 


numerous waols which others only can fupply, give activity to the paflion, and call it itito” 
full exertion, The extent of thete wants is therefore the mealuve of public profperity in 
every fociety ; for it is the profitable fupply thereof, that oecalwons the profperity of indi- 
viduals, and what is public profperity but that of every individual combined, 1 


12. Self-love-or felf-intereft, is now difplayed in the garb of univerfal indufiry; profit, or 
as betore obferved, the profitable fupply of men’s wants, 1s its only natural fiimalus, and the 

neral good of the whole community is the natural refult. To reftrain thefe wants, or to” 
thare too deeply im the profits of induftry, are confequently impolitic acts of power, from 
being evident counteradtions of thofe very Jaws, by which alone fociety can be expected to 
profper: and we accordiaygly find thofe fiates to be moti remarkable for internal wealth and — 
firength, for the general {pread of the comforts of life among all clafles of the pear 
where the laws on which indufiry and profit are founded, are allowed to operate with 
gicateft efficacy and freedom. 


13. Look, on the other hand, to the fate of our Indian paffeflions; and with the exeep- 
tion of our chief commercial: towns, and fome few other favoured fpots, we are prefented 
with a view of what, comparatively fpeaking, may be called univerfal poverty, in one of the 
finett countries of the world ; and the caufe does not appear to ine to be hid in impenetrable’ 
obscurity. Agriculture being, more efpecially in extenfive and fertile coitinents, the moft 
natural employment of man, is here produdtive of at moft but little profit: the adtual annual 
produce of the foil is taxed, on the principle of Government being entitled to one-half of 
that prodace ; or in.cafes where the lands are made over in proprietary right to individuals, 
to upwards of eight-tenths of the net rent of fuch ftates. The rate of this lax is enormous, 
compared with that of. any known flourifhing country; and it is aggravated in very many 
inftances-by the exadtions of native fervants: it is aid on the immediate employments, and” 
Shares in the immediate profits of indujiry, and alfo tails direély on the moti unportant of 
the neceflaries.of life, all and each of which, are ferious political evils, 


14. But were the fuperfluous produce.of agriculture, or the major parthereof, left in the 
hands of thofe who ratied it, it is eafy to conceive how it would set in motion mechanical 
induftry, for the fupply of wants which every poffeflor of this fuperfluity would then natarally 


feel, and by difiribution among tke yarivus workmen im trades and prefelliens, contribute to” 
encreale 


sd 


e thoufandth part of his own wants ; and whillt labouring, within a limited fphere, to - 


ee eee 


te teaelenemnensil ie iat lala 


EAST INDIA AFFAIRS. 27 


Enereafe the comforts and the wealth of every part of the fociety; for, when the poffeffors 


and cultivators of land realize wealth, to be expended in the gratification of wants and wifhes, 


mechanics, &c. by the fupply of thofe wants, increafe in wealth and numbers alfo, fo as to 
require (in addition to the wealthy, idle confumer of every fociety) more aud more of the 
produce of their own, as well as of gaat labour; the increafing funds on both fides 
occafion a mutually increafing demand. 


15. But where the major part of this fuperflaous produce (or, which is the fame thing, the 
proceeds thereof) ‘is abforbed in a government tax, and then expended in purpofes foreign 
to the fupport and encouragement of induftry, it is equally clear that the wants of fociety 
can neither increale, nor the funils from which they originate. 


16. Let us conceive, for example, the effect of a heavy land-tax, raifed to fupport a large 
ftanding army in a country of no commerce, fuch a tax as the one under’ difcaflion, viz. 
half the grofs produce of Jands, or 8-10ths of the rent of eftates, can only be fuppoted at beft 
to leave a bare maintenance to the payers ; their means of fupporting labour and mechanical 
induftry moft therefore be very limited, Conceive next, the diftribution of this tax atnong 
the component members of the army, who are all idle confumers, or perfons not engaged in 


_ lucrative employments: here alfo it only affords a bare maintenance. In this progrefs of the 


limited circulating wealth of a country, there are no vifible grounds of auginentation or 
improvement of any thing, there is no increafing fund for the fupport of induftry ; no more 
food required in one year than the preceding, no greater fupplies of the neceflaries and com- 
forts of life ; all_is ftationary, becaufe all are equally poor; a people having attained the 
limit of its food, may thus exift from year tv year, but can never advance in durable 
profperity. 

17- Now, if a capital does by its employment, fay, forexample, in one year, produce a 
greater fund for the re-employment in the next year, of a greater quantity of labour to that 
originally employed, the indutiry of a country is manifeftly advancing: if it re-produces an 

ual fund, wee is ftationary ; but if it re-produces a lefler fund, i. e. a fund only equal to 
the employment of a lefler number of labourers, artificers, &c. than before, the indufiry and 


- profperity of a country are manifeftly declining. 


‘28. In India however, the circulating agricultural capital can only be faid, in the prefent 
fiate of the country and under the fyttem of taxation above fpecified, to re-produce at beft in 
each fucceeding’ year, but an egua/ fund, whence it may reafonably be concluded that our 
induftry is fateonery, andour population and our poverty alfo ; and the immoderate wants of 
Government, under fuch circumftances, may be feared to be more likely to caft the body 
politic into incurable decline, than their paternal care to advance it to a flate of growing 


vigour. 


120. On this part of the fubject it would bé unneceffary to enlarge, did not the fyftems 
and local practice of India leave reafon to fuppote, that in fixing the amount of a tax 
contributable by any people, it was deemed immaterial from what fource it were levied, or 
on what funds it were aflefied, whether on confumption, profits, lands, &c. &e. fince; in all 
orcither cafe, the people were only required to pay a fixed revenue, and no more. 


20: In oppofition ‘to this opinion, the illuftrious Dr. Smith would teach, that all taxes 
fhould, in the firft infiance, be equal; that is, contributed in proportion to men’s abilities, and 
otght therefore equally 10 affect rent, profit, and wages, the only fource’of revenue to indivi- 
duals. If they fail on ove only) of three forts of revenue, they are unequal, and therefore 
oppreflive. 

21. Secondly ; They ought to be certain, not arbitrary ; that is, clearly and plainly defined, 
fo that the payer of the tax may know exacily what be has to contribute. The uncertainty 
of taxation encourages the infolence-and favours the corruption of tax-gatherers (and no 
country has experienced this effect more fenfibly than India), whence Dr. Smith conceives, 
thateven a contiderabie degree of inequality is not fo great an evil as uncertainty. 


22. Thirdly; Taxes fhould be fo contrived as to take as little as poffible out of the pockets 
of the people, over avd above what is paid into the public treafury. A great number of 
officers, whole falaies may. eat up a great part of the tax, and whofe perquifites may impofe 
another additional tax on the people, are bad. 


23. No man acquainted with an Indian fyftem, and the number of native fervants which 
fo complicated a fyftem requires, will need any comment to feel the fll force of this maxim, 


a8 applicable'to our Eaftern poffetlions. 


24. Fourthly; Taxes, and particularly high ones on the neceffaries of life, are objection- 
able ; and all taxes generally, “‘ which obftruét the induftry of the people, and difcourage them 
pT heat nb ' Be neh AB MiG pie pe S' 
“from applying to certain branches of bufinefi, which might give maintenance and emp/loy- 

ment to greak multitudes.” 


25. Caw any obfirudtion or difcouragement be more effectual, than a tax which abforbs 
a lion’s thare of the profits of indutiry, us foon as ever individual labour hall haye acquired 


? 

26. Fifthly; Taxes on confumable goods, patsceleely luxuries, are probably the leaft 

oppreflive, becaufe-they are naturally, and without the interference of inguifitors and affef- 

fors, proportioned.to the means'of a conlumer, paid in a manner moft convenient to bim, 

by a little, as be buys goods; aud he is left to buy, or not to’buy, as -he piaiiinsse 
¢ 97. 


No. 3. 

Mr. Rickards" 
(24 Sept. 1807) 
on Taxation and 
Revenue. 


vA 


—_—_ TSN 


er 


ea, ee 


28 ; PAPERS RELATING TO 
No.3. 27. The tax, moreover, which is paid-on the price of a commodity, is feldom adverted to, _ 
Mri-Riekards' «and it confiitutes no partof a man’s view of bis profits; be labours with the-cheerin ' " 
(24 Sepa. 1807) peét before him of indefinite advatiage, therefore with every poflible incitement to the ex- 
on) Lexauon, aid certion of human induitry, andé with the further privilege of excsniting sHaiEe fr " 
Revenues in the purchafe, or. otherwife, of the taxed commodity, according as he may find hin 3 
——~poflelled of the means of gratifying his wants. iP ats @ulieso r 


3¢ perti¢he are 
-stated to be equal 


to.an English acre, of this rent and value pays cenfimento (tax) 15$ foldi per pertica, or 77 livres on the hun- 
20 soldi, one liyre. dred. The tax is paid by the farmer; -but, if it were not, it would form part of the land-* 
} 


28. In applying ‘thefe’maxims, and fubjoined remarks, to the rate,of land-taxation.in- 
Gndia, it will not be requifite to fay much on that which takes, under the permanent fell 
net, upwards of eighi-tenths of the annual net rent of eflates as the fhare of Gover 
‘The tax, I imagine, fpeaks for. itfelf, aud is furely au evident violation of the pre Por 
principles; from its inequality its amount, and the particular effects of “ dettruétion”™ 
“ difcouragement,” it is likely to perpetuate. The plea of wafte lands being attached to each 
efiate, which the proprietor may cultivate free of further tax, is, I humbly app: 7 
illafory ; for wate lands require capital to bring into a flate of cultivation, whofe produce ud 
moieover, is, until tried, always doubtful; and to cultivate on borrowed capital, theref 
wecarious. Whence then is this capital to originate? not farély from the generality 
{iadlords, who already pay upwards of eight-tenths of their profit from the cultivated pe 
of their-eflates. - A few rich individuals may extend their cultivation; or a portion of com- 
mercial capital, in the vicinity of towns, may be partially applied to this parpofe; but i 
very difficult to, difcover in this fyflem, the feeds of any great degree of improvement, « ni 
show agriculture is to become a productive fource of general wealth. art = 

7 : 4 ev aah 

‘29. Want of effe@tual demand for the fuperfluous produce of .fuch wafte lands is another 
-and infuperable bar to their cultivation: when the other branches of a community are too 
-poor, or too limited.to cénfume this fuperfuoas produce, agriculturifts would only raife it to 
their own lofS; and this lofs would be inevitable, if foreign demand were at the fame time 
dully fupplied, ie Petites.» 

go. The land-tax in England, though nominally four fhillings, varies in differen ids, 


Srom four fhillings to one fhilling in the pound, and in fome lefs ;,and this is calculated on | 
a very moderate value of eftates, framed in 1692, in the reignof King William 1, 1° 


31. Bat even this tax is not free from complaint, as well in refpeét to amount as fo the | 
mode of afleffment, and the partial diftribution thereof, in each fubdivition or diftrié ; aud > 
of late years, or in 1798, it was rendered fubjeét to redemption and purchafe, under the — 
avowed view, as flated in the preamble of the Adi, of “ frengthening and Supporting the 


~« publi¢'eredit, and augmenting the nation’s refources.” Paitin 


32. The land-tax, or contribution, (fonciére,) in France, is fiated in their own re 
to have been univerfally complained of as heavy, and to have fallen very unequally, altho i 
-only a profeffed fifth bf the net produce. Indeed, the evil of inequality would feem to be — 
incident to every fyftem of land-taxation that profeffes to levy a {pecific portion of ac 
produce, from the very great difficulty, if not total impoffibility, of correétly afcertaining or 

_ firing its amount or value for any length of time together. In very light taxes this ine es 
may not be much felt or complained of; but in heavy ones it can hardly fail, I ap 
to fall with the weight of oppreflion on a confiderable part of the agricultural com- 
anunity, i oft Sind - 

33.In the anceint dominions of ‘the King of Pruffia, the land tax is faid to be fe | 
at the rate of 20, 25, 38; 33, 40, 45, and 50 percent. of the revenue of: proprietors, accord- 
ing to their different ranks or privileges, and this country is confequently far behind 
England in point of profperity. ite ind F 


34 Io Arthur Young’s account of Lombardy, a very minute detail is given of the groft_ 
dt S “ 


-produce, rent, and taxation of land. we 
| é ; : ae 
35. Taking 100 pertiche in the Milanese, he ftates its grofs produce in corn, wine, and 


filk, at 1836 livres, of which the proprietor’s net fhare is 785 livres, exclufive of tax. Land 


ord’s fhare, making this latter 862 livres. The tax, therefore, to the proprietor is 77 livres, 
on $62 livies, which is 8 $gt or £.8. 16s. per cent. or 18. ‘9d. in the pound. 1 CTA 


36. Only half this contribution of 77 livres goes to the Sovereign, the other half is 
retained for roads, bridges, and other parochial charges, and, in fome cales, the ti 1 


iupport of the curees is included, 


37. “ But (as Mr. Young adds,) though the burden is nothing compared with thofe whic 
« crath us,” (alluding to the laud-tax, tithe, and poor-rates, all of which he eftimated « s 
to 8s. or 10s. in the pound,) “ in Baglan, yet 1s.9d. in the pound is. too heavy a land-_, 
“ tax ; itis throwing too great a burden upon landed property, and leflening too much 

profit which fhould arife from invetting capitals in it. Were 8 3-fourths per cent. ‘to be 
« Jaid on-vew invefiments, not one livre would be invefted.” ) OLY he a as 


38. If Mr. Young, a man of the firft experience in matters of this nature, deems ‘this 
tax a heavy burden, what would he think of one nearly ten times its weight. : 


- 39. On the lands above defevibed (which are alfo faid not to be rich) there feemsito have. 
ibeen laid a capitation tax equal to about 22} livres the 100 pertica. (xis Sy 
wi 40. Watered 


Ura 


EAST INDIA AFFAIRS. 29 


40. Watered dairy lands, yielding a net rent to the landlord of 10 livres per pertica, and No. 3. 
two livres five saldi, as censimento or tax; this latter equals 182%, per cent. or 38.8d. Mr. Rickards 
in the pound. In other parts he found the tax equal to 12 per cent. or 2s. 4d. in the (94 Sept. 1807) 

~ pound. ; on Taxation and 

41. Throughout the whole Duchy of Milan, the land tax is‘computed at something less Revenue. 
than one livre per pertica, which according to Mr. Young’s given admeafurement of the : 

pertica, may be said to make in English money and meafure, about 2s. per acre (suppofing 
the livre 8}-d. Englifh) or about 1s. 9d. per acre, suppofing it 74d. * i 
42. In the ecclesiastical ftate of Bologna, the land -tax is-computed at only 2d. the 
Englith acre. 
43- In Parma at about od. per acre,+ and in Modena, the common calculation is, that 
all taxes whatever, only equal a fifih of the grofs produce of land. 


, 
| 


ed 


44-.In Tufcany the land tax is in many places redeemed. That part of it which is paid to 

- communities for roads, &c. and is not thus redeemable, amounts to more than one-tenth of 

the net rent. ‘From the general tenor of Mr. Young’s obfervations, 1 fhould conclude, 

‘therefore, the whole of the land-tax, previous to redemption, to have been one-fifth of the 
net rent. . 

45- Numerous other-examples might be produced; but thefe perhaps are fufficient; alt 
thele rates are much lower than the one adopted in India. Indeed, I believe we-can find no 
other country in the world, under the rule of an enlightened government, whofe lands are 
AMubject to fo heavy an impofition. 


_ 46. With regard to our other tax, as referrible-to the actual produce of the Jands, and 
purporting to be one ha/f of that produce, it may be briefly oblerved, that Dr. Davenart 
fiates the land-rents of England, generally, to be to the grofs produce as nine to twenty-one, 
or three-fevenths, and the rents of corn-lands (which .are the -chief fund of taxation in 
Andia) as twe-ninths only of the produce. 


47. Dr. Smith (a later writer) fays, that “ in the prefent ftate of Europe, the fhare of the 
landlord feldom exceeds a third, fometimes not a fourth of the whole produce of the 

- Jand.”—It is therefore very clear, that in Europe, were there no landlords in the way, the 
lands generally could never pay a tax to the state of half produce. 


48. In China, the land-tax is faid to confift of one-tenth of the:produce. Even under the 
Mahomedan governments in . Bengal, it is only faid to have been a fourth or fifth of the 

roduce; in ancient Egypt the same. ‘In the province of Malabar, a mode of affefling 
Hands from time iminemorial, has been difcovered, whereby the rents to proprietors are 
estimated according to the fertiliuy of different foils, and as thefe are exceedingly rich in 
Malabar, an average of the whole, according to a table thereof framed in the year 1803, 
gives about a third of the produce generally as the proprietor’s fhare. 


40. But it may be safely alledged, on the ground: of experience, ‘that though some lands 
may be ‘fufficiently rich to yield half their produce to a landlord or government, the ‘other 
half being fufficient to defray the charges and reafonable profits of cultivation, yet this is 

mot the cafe generally ; in the majority of lands it will require from fix to eight tenths of 
the produce, and fometimes more, to defray.the charges and profits abovementioned ; and 
it thence follows, that a tax, regularly and correétly affefled at half the actual produce of 
lands, would not leave to the inhabitants of any extenfive country under heaven, a fufliciency 
sto fabfift on. 

50. The fyftem of metaying or letting out lands at half, which is often a third or fourth 
-of the produce, prevailed in France, and in fome parts of Italy ; as far as regards the divifion 
-of produce, its analogy to the Indian fyttem is ftriking, and like that too, it has been every 
where obferved by zgrticultural travellers and writers, (vide Mons. Turgot, Mr. Arthur 
her? &e.) to be attended with wretched poverty and diftrefs to the cultivators of 
the foil. en 

> 51. But there was a public tax under the ancient government of France, fimilar, in many 
refpects tothe one here treated of, both in its nature and operation, though not fo exorbitant 
in its amount; the tail/e was properly a land tax, chiefly laid on farmers, or the actual 
' eultivators of the foil; in fome diftricts it was affefled on the value of lands held in perpetuity 
by ignoble tenures, but in others. (and I believe moft generally) on the fuppofed profits of 
thofe employed in agriculture, both of which were in their effect { fimilar to the Indian 
afleffment, more efpecially in the important circumftance of direét interference, and fharing 
too deeply in the firft fruits of agricultural indufiry; for it bore a heavy proportion Lo the 
actual produce of lands; like the Indian tax it proleffed to be an affeflment proportioned te 
en, ’ J the 


- *N.B. Mr. Young attaches both these values to the livre of Lombardy. 

+ It is a common rule in Salsette to estimate the average produce‘of a-begah of land at one morah of 
Batty; a begah is about three-fourths of an acre. The morah of Batty is rated at 20 rupees, one- 
third of which is the Government skare, or somewhat less than seven rupees per begah. At this rate 
even the reduced land-tax on Salsette would average upwards of a guinea per acre. ' 

t The profit of agriculture arises out of the produce, whence a tax on the profits and a. taxon 

; wee are pretty nearly the same thing; a certain portion must always be allowed for the 
in of-cultivation ; whence the net produce, erg is the profit, is in fact the only taxable fund. 
. & 2 . 


30 PAPERS RELATING TO 


No. 9. the real abilities of diftriGs to pay ; and, like that too, it was liable not only to the ignorance 
‘Mr, Rickafds #?d mifinformation, but the partialities, private refentnents, and prejudices of affeffors, 
(24 Sept. 1807) ‘Thete ave evils incident to every affeiiment of this nature; it is utterly impoilible, and has. 
son ‘Vaxation and been found fo.in all countries, to make an-accurate furvey, which requires years to accomplith, 
Revenue. of the produce of lands, which is yearly varying. Irregularity and uncertainty, involuntary 
~ error, and wilful fraud; opprefiion on the one hand, and corruption on the other, are 

therefore the invariable churatteriftic marks of fuch a fyfiem of taxation, and no co 

prefents.a more accurate proof than India, of the melancholy exittence of thefe effedls. 


52. Dr. Smith, in fpeaking of the effects of the taille, draws a picture fo firikingly appli« 
-cable to yery many Indian diftri@s, and their ftute of agriculture, that | fhall here fubjoin it, 
Tn the countries, where, “the perfonal taillé takes place, the farmer is commonly afleifed in 
“ proportion to the stock which he appears to employ in cultivation. He 1s upon this 
“ account, frequently afraid to have a good team of borfes or oxen, but endeavours to 
“ cultivate with the meaneft and moft wretched inftruments of hufbandry that‘he can; sach 
“ is his diftruft in the juftice of his affeffors, that he counterfeits poverty, and withes to 
“ appear fcarce able to: pay any thing, for fear of min 3 obliged to pay too much. By this 
“ miferable policy, he does not, perhaps, always confult his own intereft in the moft effeQual 
“ manner, and he probably lofes more by the diminution of his produce than he faves 
“ that of his tax. The public, the farmer, the landlord, all fuffer more or lefs, by this 
degraded cultivation. Zhat the perfonal taille tends in many different ways to di 
cultivation, and confe sf to dry up ‘the principal fource of the wedlth of eoery great 
“* country, I have already had occafion to obferve,” &c. ’ 


53- Mr. Arthur Young remarks, on the fame tax :—“ One would naturally have fuppofed, 
“ from the grofs abufes.and cruelty of this method of taxation, that the objeét in view 
““wasas much to keep the people poor, as to make the king rich. As the taille was pro- 
“€ fessedly levied in a proportion to every one’s subftance, it had the mifchievous effeét of all 

“ equal land taxes, when levied even with honefty, for a farmers profit, his tuccefs, his 
“ merit was taxed exaély in proportion to the quantum, a fure method of putting a period to the 

* exijtence of cither profit, fuccefs, or merit. The farmers are really poor, or sppsreotae® j 
“« finee a rich man will affect poverty to efcape the arbitrary ufe of a tax, which protefies to 
“be in proportion to his power of kiedug it.” 


é . 
a es es eee ver hh ee ee eee. Vee ee! ee 


a a 
iS 


ee ee 


54. The preceding intimation refpecting land taxes, I believe to be perfeétly juft, as T 
may have occafion, at fome future time, more fully to elucidate. Our bufinels here is to 
weduce a tax deemed exorbitantly high, rather than to difcufs the merils and operation of 
Jand taxes generally. 


55- There were other taxes in old France, obfiruive of private induftry, and therefore, 
«checks to national profperity, infomuch that Dr. Smith, in comparing the fyftem of taxation 
in France and England, fhows that England, even then, paid twice us much as France, in 
comparifon to their refpective population, though the foil and climate of France, he adds, — 
are better, the country longer in a liate of improvement and cultivation, and therefore, 
better ftocked with thofe things which it requires time to raife and accumulate, fuchas 
great towns, convenient well-built houfes, &c. : | 


‘56. These natural advantages, however, were so much more than counterbalanced by the 
<ffect of the French system, and its immediate pressure on the pursuits of industry, that 
Dr. Smith conelades with the remarkable observation, that the people of France, it is 
“ generally acknowledged, are much more oppressed with taxes than the people of Great 
“« Britain,” notwithstanding, as above stated, the French did not, relatively to their popu- | 
Jation, pay one half as much in aggregate amount. x 


57- But, if the experience of other countries, and the arguments of our beft writers, 
againft a heavy Jand tax, fhould {till be thought inapplicable to this, let the matter be placed -_ 
in another point of view, and the merits of the quettion tried by the calm deductions of 
xeafon from pofitive fats. ; : 


58. In Sir John Sinclair’s Hiftory of the Public Revenue, a curious and interefting cir- 
eumfiance is fiated, viz. That from Michaelmas 1787 to Michaelmas 1788, the net produce 
of the perpetual excife upon malt was £.724,786.; the annual excife £.603,317.; the duties 
upon beer £.1,666,152., upon Britith {pirits £.509,167., fo that barley yielded a clear 
revenue of £.3,503,422. 


59. Now, the whole Jand-tax of England does not prodace annually more than about 
£.1,900,000., of which no great proportion can be confidered as at all referable to the pro- 
duce of barley lands ; but if, according to the Indian principle of laying the whole tax at 
once on the produce of Jand, thefe 32 millions were attached, in the firft inftance, to the 
cultivation of barley, and the people of England were told the tax (like unto the Indian 
practice) was fimplified and tixed for ever at this amount—“ You fhall have your malt, 
“« beer, and {pirits free:” Can any man, for a moment, fuppofe that this cultivation would 
not be immediately and effectually checked? Would capital be any more employed ina line 
where profit was at once onnihilated, or ought but hungry neceflity drive a people, under 
fuch circumftances, to the cultivation of their foil ? 


* 
eo — 


iu +t ie 


6o. Is it not evident that a firft tax on fuch principles, even though capable of payment, 
anaft be opprellive, and ebfiruct the progrefs of future improvement? Is it p: the 


| | EAST INDIA AEFAIRS. 31 


fame quantity of mait, beer, and fpirits, could ever be brought into being? Ts it not evident No. 3. 
| too, that the aggregate amount, to which the above mentioned taxes thereon are, or might — Mr. Rickards 
_-Be carried, is by this means utterly incapable of realization? Is it not, in fact, a quefiion (24 Sept. 1807) 
; ‘between confirmed poverty aud abundant wealth? And can we, therefore, hefitate as to the on Taxation and 
__ -preferability of the fyfiems here contrafied, or, for an inftant, doubt that the confolidation of Revenue. 
| taxes on lands, to the amount, at Jeatt, practifed in India, has thus a clear and manifeft ten- ~~ 
E dency to defeat its own object. 


61. But the fyfiem of uniting all the imposts of a country in one fingle land-tax is the 
-great principle of the French economitts, though not carried to fe ruinous aa excefs as in 
this country. A moderate tax on the “ produit net of eftates taken from exifiing accounts, 
~ contradis, or leates, and without any pretended reference to the aétual produce of the 
~« foil,” may be entirely unobjectionable. Arthur Young, however, would feem to combat 
-even this principle; and, though he may not be allowed to have fuecefsfully confuted it, 
che yet addoces a remarkable fact, which may be admitted to demonftrate the monftrous 
impolicy of fuch a tax as would abforb, like that of India, all, or almoft all, the net produce 
of lands, leaving little or nothing but a bare maintenance to proprietors and cultivators. 
It thews, I think, fatisfactorily that, under a heavy fyfiem of divided taxation, wealth may 
continue to exift, nay, to increafe, and to be expended advantageoully, whilft, by abforption 
of the net rent of lands, it is utterly extinguifhed. 


62. Afier pointing out the fuppofed. error of the French principle in forcible terms, 
Mr. Young fupports his argument with the following example; which is fo ftriking, 1 fhall 
give it in his own words, 


63. “ Relative to the utter impoflibility of extending land-taxes in England to fuch 
“ a degree as to include all others, I have it in my power to refer to an intiance of our 
“ taxation mott correctly given. I have inferted in the Annals of Agriculture, No. 86, an vide, A, Young, 
account of all the taxes I pay for my eftate in Suffolk; and in that account it appears ol, J. p. 592. 
“ that the tract of land which pays me net £.229. 128.7d. pays to the burthens of the 
“ public £.210. 18s. 5d.; deducting from fifteen millions and a half (the net revenue of 
e Great Britain) thofe taxes which enter into that fum of £.219. 18s. 5d. there remain ten 
. millions and a half; and as the prefent land tax, at two millions, burthens me £.40. 
a year, an additional one of ten millions and a half would confequently lay the further 
“ burthen of five and a halftimes as much, or £.220., that is to fay, it would leave me the 
“net receipt of £.9. for the whole clear income of my eftate. Perhaps the economifts 
““ never received direétly from faéts fo convincing a proof as this infiance offers, of the 
“ utter impracticability of their prepofterous fchemes.” 


64. From the contemplation however of thefe facts, all I fhould attempt to deduce is 
{and the conclufion feems to me inevitable), that a nent confolidated tax on the firft exertions 
of. any {pecies of induftry, abforbing the whole, or nearly the whole, of its profits, is ruinous 
and impolitic, from being an effectual bar to the creation of that produce, on which future 
“exertions might be pioktably employed; and through the medium of which, individual 
wealth and public revenue feem capable of being increafed to an almoft inconceivable extent. 
A land-tax, more efpecially of this nature, blafis the very production of that wealth, which 

' dnduftry would otherwife bring into being. 


65. It is not intended to be denied that taxes on confumption have their inconveniences 
and objections ; but merely to prove, that a divided fyftem is lefs ruinous and oppreffive 
_in operation, than the enormous confolidated land-taxes difcuffed in thefe theets. 


66. The exceflive amount of our Indian tax, and the peculiar mode of its operation, by 
falling on the immediate employments, and fharing in the immediate profits of indutfiry, 
and of that {pecies of induftry the moft important to man, the production of food, are 
therefore evidently fo many reftraints on the wants of fociety, and checks to the increafe 
of capital, which in the unobttru@ed courfe of nature’s laws would univerfally expand. 
If however, the neceflities of Government will not admit of an immediate reduction of the 
tee taxes, they may, at all events, be removed from thofe fources where indufiry is 

lafted in the bud, to others where their deadening and difheartening influence will, it is 
hoped, be lefs feverely felt; and fome idea in praétice of the utility of the change may be 
formed by a local application of thefe principles to the ifland of Salfette. 


67. The land revenue of Salfette, as per Abftract (A,), including the ay 38 or coolery 
tax, may be ftated at rupees 145,850. Though much fimplified by Mr. Rivett Camac, it 
is ftill drawn from fourteen different fources (exclufive of feven farms) liable to vexatious 
irregularities ; which are, in many inftances, accordingly felt and locally complained of, as 
ventive of extended cultivation and improvements. The main principle of Mr. Camac’s 
iyitem was a confolidation or abolition of many vexatious taxes, and a reduction of the 
baity revenues from one-half of the produce to a nominal third. The Government of 
bay, actuated by a further humane regard to the interefts of the natives, propofed on 
preceding principle to grant the tenants of batty lands cowles, making over the faid 
lands to them in proprietory right, fubjeét to the faid tax of one-third of the grofs produce, 
M perpetuity ; as the cowles contained an objectionable claufe, they have only been taken 
out by afew. The principle, however, has been acted on in the colleétion of the revenue ; 
and in this refpect the of Salfette are certainly more favoured than our other difiricts, 
where the principle of al produce fill prevails. 
306, 68. With 


— + 


SE ncn SSS 


No. 35 
Mr. Rickards 
(24 Sept. 1807) 
on. Taxation and 
Revenue. 


Seeman cememeeent 


‘B. on G. 


* Nute—Angdina 
dis a kind of Cspita- 
won or Body Tax. 


Orig. 


“encouragement, which, according to the beft eftablifhed and molt generally admitted. 


-ar figures, as the only, or rather utmoft tax to be for ever afterwards demanded thereo in. 
‘The jands having been previoufly made the private property of the precn tea free 
be for exer 


$2 PAPERS RELATING TO 
68. With deference to fuperior judgment, it is neverthelefs humbly Cubmitted; whether a 


tax, absorbing one-third of the grofs produce of land, is not higher than the landlord of an — 


eftate ought in found policy to pay in perpetuity? Whether, as the other numerous taxes 


are {till continued, the fame complicated fyftem of revenue will not-be perpetuated, liable 
to the fame rettraints on the inhabitants, aud the fame vexatious interference and exactions of 


mative fervants; and whether, in dhort, the prefent-cowles go the full length of that 


principles of political economy, ought to be granted to the purfuits of indufiry ?- 


_ 6g. If thefe be. anfwered in the negative, I would next humbly fuggeft, as well with nm 
‘view to more effectual relief from high taxation, and the interference and-exaétions of native — 


4ervants, as to the complete fimplification of the revenue fyftem. 


7o. Firft.—That all the various land-taxes now in force be confolidated into one general : 


tax,and wholly transferred from the lands and their produce to the houjes, which, accordi 
to the accompanying population tables, are about 11,500 in number; each houfe to pay at 
a certain proportionate rate, to be hereafter fixed in money, which I will myfelf, with the 
approbation of Government, fettle on the fpot; and which, to the prefent occupiers of land, 


mult neceffarily be regulated by the amount of their land-tax, as more fully explained in the — 


accompanying Abfiract, A. : 
71. Let all others now Paying tax to Government, have, for the fake of conformity, that 
es 1268 abIRS 


tax fimilarly fixed on their hou ; 
72. And as shopkeepers, who now pay nothing, may very reafonably be included in the 


propofed houfe .tax, whatever be levied from this new fource may, | fhould hope, be allowed, © 


in-the firft inflance, to’be fet againft a correfponding dedu@ion in the amount of the tax 
on the occupiers of land, and the more ef pbclil ly, as the Company are throughout the whole 
of the plan effectually guarded againf lols. a A 


73. The coolies, who now pay * Angdina, are fo well off, in comparison with th 
bours, that it is imagined no deduction of their tax, after being fixed on it 
will be found neceflary, at all.events not immediately. 


74. The tax thus fixed.on each houfe refpectively, may be painted thereon in large 


of all expense for cowls, &c. may then be declared by folemn proclamation to 
free from all tax; the produce, whether of thofe now in cultivation, er to be hereafier 
cultivated, to be wholly and entirely at the difpofal of each proprietor, fubjeét only to fule” 
of the faid /ands (not their produce) by public outery for arrears of houfe-tax, in cafe of 
neceflity; and to be wholly exempt from every other fpccies of interfercuce on the part of: 
the officers of government. rin wh 


75. Secondly.-Let proclamation be alfo made, that wafte lands will be granted in prow 
1! 


prietary right to any extent that may be demanded or applied for, on condition of immec ate 
cultivation, and under the fame folemo engagement ot being equally free from all tax 

ever, except the relatively fimall one, which may be now paid, where there are produc ‘ive 
trees, | he 


76. Thirdly—As capitalifts and men.of property may be expected to take lands on thefe 
conditions, the object fhould be encouraged by further proclaiming, that no houfe-tax will 


be collected from new fettlers cultivating watie lands, for the firft fifteen or twenty years of 


their occupancy, and that at the expiration of that period, they fhall only be fubjeét to the 
fame houfe-tax as may be in force among the old {fettlers, and which it is intended to reduce 
from its prefent amount, as other unobjeétionable fources of equivalent. taxation may be. 
difeovered to one moderate uniform fiandard throughout the ifland. This ftandard, as more 
fully explained in the Abftract (A.) it is anticipated, may be ere long fixed at a certain rate, 
fay 5 per cent. ad valorem (or any other Government may in preference decide on), without 
any reference whatever to the produce of land. Srotity 


77. But whether or not it be the mode in force generally for houfes on the ifland, at the 
expiration of the {uid fifteen or twenty years, as it is the principle to which the plan ulti- 
mately tends, it hould be applied, to the new houfes and new fettlers, whenever they become 
liable to the impofition of the faid tax. Tae Oe 


78. Fourth.—On the revenue fyftem now in force, if additional batty grounds be defired 
to be cultivated, or prefent cultivation to be improved, if dry grains or other produéts be 
raifed on the high grounds, or more trees planted, neither can be effected without fubjecting 
the {peculator.to an additional proportionate tax ; befides (what may not be always fo capable 
of direét proof) the neceflity of certain prefents to the local native fervants, for permiffion to. 
undertake the projected improvement, and the probability that the further annual exaétion 
of thefe fervants will be proportionately augmentated. ‘Thete are fo many checks to ex- 
tended cultivation, which the plan endeavours at leat to remove; fince by confining the 
Jand-tax to one fource, and fixing it for ever, all the profits of improved or extended calti- 
vation are the proprietor’s own, unfhared by any one, and the tax is moreover confined to a 
houfe, or it may be laid on any other preferable article of dead ftock, on which induftry is: 


mot either contiantly or annually employed. ; ri 
79. There 


( 
|. 


——. 


EAST INDIA AFFAIRS. 33 


~ 39. There will alfo be fewer native fervants, as will be feen in the concluding fheets of 
this eflay, to exaét the price of their fanGion or acquiefcence ; and the impofitions of. the 
f#emainder may be refirained by tran{porting fuch as are convicted of the crime. ; 


_ 80. Fifth—Another improvement, and one that I believe will be truly acceptable to the 
inhabitants, is propofed in the plan, as follows: the cowles contain a flipulation, that though 
the actual amount of tax be fixed for ever, its money value is liable to alteration at the 
expiration of a certain number of years, to guard againft the depreciations which time and 
circumftances may fuperinduce in the intrinfic value of the precious metals. This claufe is 
2 fource of doubt and uncertainty to the inhabitants, who fear left future governments or 
collectors may take advantage of the claufe, to raife the actual amount of the tax hereafter ; 
und I believe it may be difficult, if not impoflible, to eradicate thefe fears from the number 
of people wholly ignorant of the principles of money, and long habituated to fee increafe of 
revenue, not its diminution, an object of defire and neceffity with the fate. 


7 81. The houfe-tax propofed in the plan is, however, intended to be fixed in money, for 
ever, that is, never to rife ; and as the gradual diminution of this particular tax (without 


~ Jofs to the Company) is one of the moft important avowed objects of the plan, every depre- 


ciation in the value of money, or permanent rife in the value of grain, will then be an 
#Ctual reduétion thereof; whilit Government may always guard themfelves from lofs, by 
increafing in proportion the tax on articles of confumption, as for example, in the prefent 
cuftoms and forms. 


_ 82. But the value of money cannot be fuppofed to alter much in the courfe of 20 or 30 
years ; and it is hoped, that in a much fhorter period than this, the tax may be every where 
reduced to the uniforin ftandard propofed, of a rate ad valorem on houfes, and then it is 
perfectly immaterial, confidered in refpect to the revenue, how the value of money alters; 
for a revenue affefled on this principle may be augmented at pleafure and without objection, 
as the value of money is reduced; ancther advantage, 1 apprehend, which the cowles do 
not fs. te 


~ 83. Sixth —The poorer claffes, including the more lazy, are now alarmed at the amount. 

of the tax being fixed in its annua! amount, left the produce of their lauds in fome years be 
unequal to pay it. Here, however, all uncertainty is removed for ever; the tax is not only 
Timited, never to rife, but on the contrary, fubject to gradual reduction ; whilft by the cowles 
it is intended to be continued for ever to be fixed at high rate, preventive (if thefe principles 
be juft) of the progre(s of improvement. 


~ 84. As the lands, under thefe circumftances, will be more valuable to their poffeffors, the 
produce being ail their own, and the tax ever leffening, either pofitively or relatively in 
amount, an arrear need occafion no alarm, for money might be more eafily raifed, by 
mortgage on Jands fo circumftanced, or they would fetch a readier fale; whilft the fame 
ys to their cultivation remains to ftimulate the indolent, fince it is only from the produce 
-theirdands, that. the propofed houfe-tax can be expected to be difcharged. 


85. The cowles stipulate for the feizure of lands, and all the goods and chattels of every 
defaulter for arrear of revenue. The plan confines it to the Jodie alone; the one might 
pees an unfortunate fufferer to defperate and helplefs poverty ; the other, with adequate 

urity for the public revenue, leaves the means of temporary maintenance, till other 
employments offer. . 


, 86. Seventh.—The arrack and tobacco farms, particularly the former, are at prefent 
fources of heavy complaint, as may be feen iu the accompanying petitions (D & B); on 
enquiry | find there is fome ground fae the reprefentation ; the price of the arrack does not 
here altogether fall on the confumer. In the feafon of cultivation, the proprietor or occupier 
of land muff purchafe the requifite quantity of arrack for his labourers, for they refufe to 
work without ; fo that thus far, it clearly operates as an additional tax on agriculture. With 
a view therefore, to reconcile the inhabitants to its prefent price, (whiclt appears to be an 
objeé& with Government, confidered relatively to the morals of the people), I would propofe, 
that in proportion as the revenue from arrack and tobacco increafes beyond its prefent 
mien. a correfponding deduction be allowed to the old fettlers, in the commuted land or 

ufe-lax. ; 


'. 87. This may greatly expedite the much wifhed for reduction of the fuid tax, which is 
conceived to be an object of the highett importance and neceflity. 


* 88. The other complaints of the inhabitants as to-bad liquor and enhanced prices, even 
beyond that flipulated in the farmer’s contraét, may eafily be obviated by abolifhing the 
ent farms, and licencing {hops in each village, taxed at fo much per diem, which thops 
“will be mutual checks on each other, for if one thopkeeper ill ufes the inhabitants, either in 
_ the quality or price of the liquor beyond that of his agreement, they have their remedy by 
dealing with another. 


-_ 89. A plan on this principle has, I underfland, been already carried into effect in Caranja, 
bed the fale of liquor, with good fucceis, and is more fatisfactory to the inhabitauts than the 
farm. 


° 90. Eighth.—In affeffing the houfe tax, a diftinction is preferved between the old and 
new fettlers, which it is prefumed, is ftill Bi to ftrict juftice; the whole — 
. their 


. Nog: 
Mr. Riekards 
(24 Sept. 1807) © 
on Taxation and 

Revenue. 


No. 3. 

Mr. Rickards 
(24 Sept. 1807) 
on Taxation and 

Revenue. 


34 PAPERS RELATING TO 


their fitaation improved by the confolidation, commutation, and gradual diminution of the 
tax ; they are vefted with the exclufive property in lands, already in a tiate of full produce, 
and therefore juftly liable to a heavier tax than the new fettlers, who will have to expend 
capital in the cultivation of wafte lands, yielding perhaps, but a flow return, and therefore 
requiring greater encouragement, whilft the whole tax tends, with the progrefs of improve- 
ment, to altimate equalization, and will at length be equally light to all, without any inter- 
mediate facrifice on the part of the Company ; the lands will then be every where relieved of 
thofe burdens which are now conceived to check the progre{s of univerfal profperity, and the 
reat encouragement is in the interim given, as it fhould be, to thofe who have the 
if not the fole means of promoting it. 


o1. From a late report of the collector, the wafte lands on the iflands of Salfette are 
ftated at 1,729 inoralis capable, befides 312 morahs incapable of cultivation, i.e. | prefume 
incapable to the prefent poor aud indolent race, total 2,051 morahs or 4,102 FY 
befides, “ thofe wafte {pots fituated on the hills,” which the collector admits to be very capable 
of cultivation, with fome expenfe, ‘* adding, that a confiderable quantity of hemp might be 
“ produced therefiom.” yuith 


92. Although my experience in revenue matters leads me to believe, that revenue accounts 
Seldom, if ever, are correct ftatements of landed produce, or of admeafured quantities of land, 
or ever can be fo on our prefent fyftem; and knowing, as I do, that pattells who furnith the 
accounts on Salfette, have a manifelt intereft in concealing the extent of wafte lands, with 
a view of referving much more of them than is neceflary, for the pafture of their own cattle; 
yet adinitting, in the prefent inftance, that the accounts are nearly correét, there is ftill a 
confiderable quantity of ea ground admitted to be watte, befides thofe higher fpots 
above mentioned by the collector, capable of cultivation, and which may perhaps, without 
exaggeration, be fiated to include one half at leajt of the furface of the whole island. , 


93- Now, it is the whole of thefe lands, batty and high grounds inelufive, that the plan 


here fuggefted, would propofe to bring gradually into a ftate of cultivation, al 
“ every nook and corner of Salfette” (as Dr. Scott expreffes himfelf) “may be as: 

“ bought up, and fecured, as it is in Bombay,” but which the very fame report pr 
I think to be unobtainable under the prefent checks to agriculture; Dr. Scott’s own nr 
is alfo a further proof of what new fettlers might effect on the ifland, poffefling capital, and 
a difpofition to incite the inhabitants to greater labour. =” a 


04. Ninth.—If, after all, it be objected that the plan favours the rich at the expence of the 
poor—the new and wealthy fettler at the expence of the impoverifhed old one—that even 
an ultimate houfe tax, ad valorem, will be more felt by the lower than the higher orders, 
and that thefe taxes are therefore difproportioned to the refpective means of the con- 
tributors, I anfwer :— 


05. Firft—That the grand objec of the plan is ultimately to reduce all to the fame 


uniform fyftem of moderate taxation, without fubjecling the Company to any intermediate 


dofs in the amount of iheir annual revenue. 


96. Secondly.—That the ultimate houfe tax will be fufficiently moderate for the meaneft 
Jabourer to difcharge, and mutt in fact be paid in the amount of his wages, by the richer man, 
who employs him. And 


97: Thirdly —That, in refpeét to want of proportion, however plaufible at firtt fight fuch 
objections may appear, yet, to eflimate them properly, they fhould be confidered in relation 
to the nature of human {fociety. 


98. As providence has been pleafed to conflitute this world, it is utterly impoflible for 
every member of any large fociety to be rich; the major part mu/t neceffartly have no other 
means of fubfiftence, than what the different varieties of labour, bodily and mental afford: 
the object of wealth is the gratification of wants and wifhes; labour alone fupplies them ; 
and if all were too rich to work, where would be the ufe even of the largeft pofleflions? 
Gold and filver are not in themfelves either food or cloathing, or capable, without Jabour, 
of fupplying a fingle luxury, comfort, or neceffary of life. Without labour they are more 
aufelefs to their poileflors than the — foil they tread on. Without labour, wealth, ia the 
common acceptance of the term, would be abfolute poverty. 


gg. It is among the able, the indufirious, or the favoured few, that the acquifition of 
wealth is conducive to the profperity of fociety at large; for when acquired, it is infallibly 
circulated. Its liberal circulation in the employment of labour, is the only natural mean 
diftributing the comforts of life to the inferior clafles; and this diftribution is generally pro- 
portioned in all ftates to the degree of civil liberty they may be blefled with. [t is thus 
only that wealth is ufeful or contributive to the happinefs of mankind; and its natural utility 
and peculiar mode of operation ought to be the guide of all governments in promoting its’ 
acquifition. : : 


100. To tax the members of a fociety in proportion to their means is certainly an equit- 
able rule; but it is thought by many re{pectable authorities, that there are no more equitable 


or certain means of obtaining this end than by taxes on individual confumpltion; the gene- 


rality of mankind confume, in proportion to their income, from whatever fource it ari 
and therefore, taxes on the price of commodities are proportioned to people's menng VER, 


~ 


om ee ee 


EAST INDIA AFFAIRS: 35 


the medium of their expenditure. But taxes which bear immediately and heavily on No. 4 
individual profits, cannot fail to be oppreilive; they check the acquifition of wealth, confirm — Mfr, Rickards: 
eneral poverty, aud therefore obftruct the only poflible meaus by which the laborious, (24 Sept. 1807) 
a. e. the major part of every fociety, can be expected to profper. on Taxation and 


101. If, therefore, taxes affeGting the poor fall eafily within their limited means of pay- Revenue: 

ment, or occafion no forced rife in the wages of labour, and that the other taxes of a ftate a 
. leave the field of indufiry free and unobitruéted, the focial body has then all the benefit 

which government is capable of extending to it. To fecurity and protection is added 

proper encouragement; the lower benefit by the wealth of the higher clafles; their utility 
: and dependence on each other are reciprocal, and the good of all is promoted by its belt 
means of attainment, that of mutual advantage and affiftance. 
i 


102. Though there is an evident limit beyond which the wealthy few cannot pafs, or 
would ceafe to be productive of further good, yet it may be impoflible to define the precife 
number in any fociety that would be moft beneficial to the whole. But there is a natural 
Property in wealth in proportion to its own increafe, to increafe allo the laborious hands 

eftined to fupply its wants; the liberal recompence of labour enables the poorer clafies to 

live in greater comfort, to rear larger families, and, confequently, to increafe in numbers; or 

it invites additional hands from abroad ; fo that the proportion between rich and poor, if left to 

itfelf, will always balance itfelf. It is a cafe that would only bewilder haman governments 

, to define, and is referable to the laws of nature alone, by obfiructing which, we can never 
be right; by following which, we can never be wrong. 


103. Unlimited encouragement therefore, to all who choofe to adventure in the purfuits 
of induftry, fhould be the policy of thofe who rule, fince the acquifition of wealth, by the 
few, is the fource of univerfal profperity ; and the expenditure of it, among the many, the 
ouly practicable method of ameliorating the condition of the lower orders. 


104. Tenth.—From an arrangement, therefore, on thefe principles, or with fuch modi- 
fications as local circumfiances may, on carrying the plan into effeét, require, it is humbly 
hoped that the {pirit of induftry, which is faid. to have difappeared with the great Portuguefe 

Ts, may again revive on the ifland of Salfette. Without it, every hope of improvement 

is vain. The prefent inhabitants are certainly better off in fome refpects fince the intro- 
duétion of Mr. Rivett Camac’s fyftem of revenue than they were before; but neither have © N.B. The accoms 
their numbers, their cultivation, their energy, or their wealth increafed; long habituated to Panying population 
a ftate of hopelefs poverty, it is manifeft, that with the means, they loft alfo the inclination a4 borer chngrr nae 
to better their condition beyond the reach of ordinary encouragement to relieve; and fuch ‘the numbers to have 
are the habits of lazinefs flill prevalent, which poverty and oppreflion have long tended to decreafed fince the 
perpetuate, that were the whole revenue of the ifland furrendered to its prefent tenants, it 7° 18°*- 
might be longer before it ftiinulated to greater energy among themfelves. 


‘ 105. Capitalifts are therefore indifpenfably neceffary to recal into adivity the deadened 
powers of this degenerate race; but, without adequate profit, it cannot be expected that 
«capital will ever be devoted to fo defirable an end. ‘The prefent plan however, propofes this 
encouragement, by holding forth to its acquirers all the profit which the employment of 
agricultural capital is capable of affording, fubjeé, ultimately, to a moderute tax at the 
utmoft, wholly unconnected with, and independent of, the amount of profit in queftion. 
The tax being ever limited, though the profit be for ever increafing. 


106. The introduétion of capitalifts into the ifland mutt neceflarily bring about an improved: 
and extended cultivation ; the lower claffes will hence find conftant employment, and enjoy 
greater comforts; their numbers increafe, and, with the further addition of new lands to be’ 
employed on the prefent wafte grounds, occafion an increafed confumption of liquor, 
tobaceo, Kc. The old will thus be better reconciled to the new fettlers, not only from the 
improvement of their own circumftances, but from the effec of their augmentation in reducing, 
the rate of the old tax. Capitalifts will alfo, in many inftances, purchafe produétive lands. 
from the old fettlers, to the great advantage of the latter, who may find more comfort and 
prefit in being the well paid farmers, or even labourers of a wealthy landlord, than as the 
needy poffeflors of, to them at leaft, unproduétive eftates. ; 


107. Eleventh.—An abundant fupply of water is fo well known in this country to be one 
-of the moft eflential requifites in agriculture, that it may be needlefs to dwell on all its 
advantages. The impoffibility of any extended cultivation, without it, the extraordinary 
-eapacity of land in this country to produce, piper bist with it, and often, feveral crops 
in the fame year; and the means which large refervoirs of water would confequently afford 
to mitigate the calamities of dry feafons, render it an object highly deferving the attention 
of Government. 

1c8. From the generally impoverifhed ftate of our agricultural population in India, it is 
not to be ex d that works requiring a confiderable expenditure of money, however 
Aefirable, can be undertaken by them. Even tanks, already in exiftence, are fuffered to go 
into ruin and decay, from the inability of agriculturifts to clean and repair them. The 
aid of Government is perhaps indifpenfable ; and there is no doubt but it would operate 
as i important encouragement to agriculture, if only prudently and judiciouily - 
emp: . ‘ 

109. On the ifland of Salfette, for example, there are numerous fpots in the vicinity of: 
the hills, where water might be dammed up, and thereby referved for the ufe of cultiva- 
. tors 


Nox 3. 

Mr. Rickards 
(24 Sept. 1807) 
ou Taxation and 

Revenue. 


36 PAPERS RELATING TO 


tors throughout the year; the beds of rivers, now dry very fhortly after the rainy feafon, 
afford, by means of dams, another fource of eafy fupply; and refervoirs, Limagine, mi 
be formed of any required capacity in the places here alluded to, at a comparitively fimall. 


expence lo Government; and this expence admit, without inconvenience; of fuch arrange= - 


ment with the inhabitants as to be gradually reimburfed to Government, by an annual 
moderate tax from thofe in whofe favour and at whofe defire the outlay fhall have beea_ 
made. oak 


‘ 


110. I confefs that I am no advocate for the premature confruction of public works im 
an impoverifhed country, or one likely to continue fo: public canals or high roads, for 
example, in a defert would be ulelefs; they are little better in a country of confirmed 
poverty, where the inhabitants themfelves may be infenfible of their advantage, or deftitate 
of the means of turning them to account. In thefe cafes, the expence incurred is always 
difproportioned to the refulting good. A canal or a road, cannot of themfelves create. 
population, or excite the induftry of the confirmed poor, any more than a market-place can 
attract fupplies for which their is uo demand. In all thefe cafes I fhould prefer awaiting a 
general feufe of the ufes and benefits of fuch a work, previous to the expenditure of any 
confiderable fum in the execution; but in the cafe here recommended, of refervoirs, the 
benefit is fo obvious, and the ufe fo immediate and certain, as to juftity, it is hoped, this 
fuggeftion of the work to the favourable confideration of Government. 215335 


- 111. The fpeculations on this fubjeét, it may be added, are far from merely theoretical 
ones. The incalculable benefits of large refervoirs have been actually experienced in the 
agricultural practice of many nations; numerous proofs may be adduced of it, but I fhall 
only trouble the Board with the accompanying extracts (F.G. H. 1.) 


' 112, The animated defeription, by Mr. Townfend, of the wonderful effeéts of the pantano 
on the beauteous valley of Huerta in Spain, cannot be read without admiration. The effects. 
of the refervoirs mentioned by Neibhur, and the profperity and decay of the population and 
counuies therein referred to, which feemed to follow as confequences of, the abundant 
fupply and failure of water, as well as of change of government, are alfo ftriking; und, 
above all, the numerous oblervations and pofitive practical faéts adduced by the celebrated 
Arthur Young, of which, however, to avoid prolixity, 1 have only extraéted a few 
firiking inftances, will, I truft, be found to merit the particular attention of Govern<_ 
ment. ; oS tes or 
113. In the vicinity of Surat the refult of irrigation is {till more wonderful, From the 
accompanying {tatement received from Surat Defloys, now in Bombay, it would feem that_ 
fome of the well-watered lands are, worth about feven and ten times us much, in grofs pro- 
duce, as the bett of thofe that are only watered by the monfoon, and the revenue derived _ 
therefroin alfo proportionably greater. As thefe lands are under the Company’s authority, the - 
fact is capable of correct afcertainment, and it is of importance {ufficient to merit minute 
inveftigation, if this ftatemeut be‘only an approach to accuracy. $a) ean 


114. I have by me a jummabgndy of the diftriét of Ahmedan eet for Fuilee 1214, 
wherein the revenue, on an average per begah and per acre, is ftated at from four to near 
fix times as much, on conftant watered as on monfoon-watered lands. ae iteaeos 


115. In Baffeen, clofe to the northern boundary of Salfette, a moft beautiful and rich 
cultivation is alfo eftablifhed, with the aid of irrigation, and one that affords a ftriking but~ 
mortifying contraft with the agriculture carried on clote to it, within our own frontier; but 
where the fame effeéts might uudoubtedly be produced, if to a fpirit of induftry were only 
alee por fame means of increaling, through irrigation, the productive capabilities of 
the foil. ‘ , : Pee “ 

2/plqtr 


116. In Malabar, Corgo, and Wynaad, T have feen fimilar effects produced pa oa 
abundantly watered; but it is needlefs to multiply examples of facts fo well eltablifhed in” 
this, and perhaps every other part of the world. 19 SIB¥ ai 


tl eno 

117. [ believe I may confidently add, from a fuperficial knowledge of the laws of hydro- 
fiatics, that whoever, as ‘a profeifional man, is acquainted with that well known and fally_ 
eftablithed principle of the preffure of water, in proportion to the height of its columh, not 
to its actual bulk, might conftru@ thefe refervoirs on Sulfette at a very moderate expenfe ; 
another ftrong recommendation in favour of the experiment. ; at 1 


118. Another objec. in the eftablifhment of thefe tanks or refervoirs, though perhaps. 
fomewhat more diftant, yet not lefs important, is, that they may hereafter prove a fource of 
very confiderable revenue to the ftate. Whenever this may be, it is prefumed they will be. 
found unobjectionable fources of taxation, at the fame time that it may be prudent to re=, 
ftriét the taxes thereon, under prefent circumftances, to the mere reimburfement of their 
original coft, i.e, until their great utility and advantage be very generally felt, or until a. 
Spirit fhall be excited on the ifand to extend its agriculture beyond the limits to which it is 
now very generally reftri¢ied by an annual fupply of water from the heavens. “ataanind 


_a1g. At fome fature period therefore, and that not very diftant, it feems to be by no means 
vifionary to calculate on a clear revenue from this fource, which | would earneltly recom= 
mend, in the firft inftance, as a further fubftitute for the prefent land-tax, or to aid in the re=* 
duction thereof. And when this tax fhall be fufficiently reduced to be no longer an im- 
pediment to the progrefs of general profperity, it may be difficult to forefee to what extent 


ow 


ail 


- 


EAST INDIA AFFAIRS. 


fed houfe-tax and refervoir-tax may be carried. A refervoir-tax. is moreover, in 
umble Judginent, as unobjectionable as a houfe-tax, from its not interfering, as before 


‘the | 
m L 
voblerved, with the immediate purfuits, or fraring in the immediate profits of indujiry. A fixed 


@unual tax for a fupply of water, will contiitute no part of a man’s view of his profits from 
Abe fale of an untaxed produce; the tax is fixed while the produce may be any thing; and 
Ahe principle already repeated in the courte of this eflay, of holding forth to. the induttrious 
‘the profpect of indetinite profit, or of a profit extenfible to any practicable extent of his own 
exertions, is therefore equally adhered to, 
120. Lafily—In fhort, the whole plan proceeds on the rinciple of exciting univerfal in- 
b big by oiding forth its only natural incitement; and fuch is. the Scab fituation of 
the ifland, from its proximity to a market capable and ready to abforb its utmoft poflible 
> produce, that indufiry and profperity might be here carried to an incalculable and indefinite 
extent; and as general wealth increafed, if more revenue were requifite to an{wer the juft 
calls of Government, there would then be found abundant fources of unobjectionable 
-augmentations, 


‘421. In the interim, the Company, under any refalt, are effe&ually guarded againft lofs ; 
‘for their prefent revenue from the ifland is fully and cautioufly fecured to them throughout 
‘every fiage of the plan, with no reduction of what is deemed the objectionable tax, until an 
unobje@ionabie equivalent is prefented; and if the plan be otherwife fuccefsful, this mutt be 

ited to, be no finall additional advantage, in a country fo poor and yet lo highly 


‘Mlelied. 


122. By the reduction of the new eftablifhments the Company will moreover be ‘con- 
fiderable gainers, as more fully fhewn in the fequel. 


_ 193. The prefent ftate of Salfetre exhibits a fact highly interefting to political inquirers, 
cand on which a few semarks may 
cable to other paris of our Indian territories. 


124. In Mr. Rivett’s able report of the 25th of J une 1796, he afferts the ifland of Salfette 


to be equally populous, if not more fo than fome of the mott-profperous kuown countries. 


Its extent is ftated to be 240 fquare miles, and its population 51,000 fouls, which correfpond 
with the population tables accompanying this eflay; with the facts, it is curious to compare 
the late fiatemenis of the population of our mother country. 


In the Encyclopedia Loidinenfis, containing fome of the lateft furveys, the population of 
England and Wales is given at 8,400,000 fouls; and the extent of territory 49,540. {quare 
miles. This gives 169 inhabitants to every: fquare mile, whereas thole of Salfette 
are 212, Me 


425. If the fituation of thefe two countries be only viewed by the mof fuperficial ob- 
feryer, it is impoflible not to be ftruck with the aétive energy of the one peoples and the 
id apathy and helplefs indolence of the other; and thinking minds can hardly avoid 
the conclusion, that agriculture alone is not fufficient to promote or fupport a vigorous and 
-eflicient population ; and that population, however extenfive, is inefficient and comparatively 
utelefs, wilefs it be: frimulated to active employment. Without at all pretending, or even 
feeling qualified to.engage in the difputed points re{peéting agriculture and population, the 
example before us is too forcible to be invalidated by arguments derived from theory alone. 
_ We here clearly fee, that farmers and cultivators will raife food for themfelves, but not gra- 
pce hon forothers; neither will thofe others fupply the extra wants of the agricultural clafs, 
without an equivalent value in exchange ; extra exertions on both fides muft be routed by the 
application of proper incitements; if thele be wanting, agriculture alone, its consequent popa- 
ke, mn the profperity of the fociéty at large, have an evident limit, and that by no means 
exte ve one, 


at & 


| 126. By thefe obfervations it is not pretended to deny, that agriculture is a fource, and the 
original fource of wealth, but rather to contend that its productions lofe their character of 
“wealth, when confined to the ufes and confumption of the aétual producers; that wealth, in 
fhe more in the furplus produce of agriculture than in the portion which cultivators 
ammediately confume ; and that this wealth fhould neither be checked in circulation by 
‘impolitic retiraints, or drained from the pockets of its induftrious acquirers by heavy taxation; 
for, in the hands of the latter, wealth, with filial regard, as it were, to its parental fource, 
; pon indufiry,by ftimulating it to the fupply of greater wants, the chief of which is 
and food for a fouritting population can only be procured by extended agriculture, 
‘thas, and thus only, is enabled to pafs the abovementioned barrier that poverty and 


4 a wants would ieem to preferibe to it. 
__ 127. Without thefe fiimulus indeed there may be even fuperfluous produce in a country, if 
aided by foreign coniaumption, without conducing in the leaft to its own abandance or 
+ erity ; tor if the proceeds of that fuperfluous preduce or the major part, be equally with 
: eds of home confumption abforbed by high tawation, we may be fill fur removed 
progreffive courfe of improvement. Internal wealth is ftill wanting to excite the 
f es ind neceflitous, in the other mechanical branches of civilized lite; the price of 
: iF is coniequently too low, and its produce yielding but a fcanty fubfiftence, population 


tpt 

z fiationary, and at the fame time feeble, inefiicient, and comparatively ufelets. A 
y may thus be populous, as in Salictte; may even export a fuperabundance of grain 
ly aunyally, 


37 


No. 3. 

Mr. Rickards 
€24 Sept. 1807) 
on Taration and 

Reuenue. 


Neem nln 


be ufeful, particularly if they fhal! be found equally appli- | 


Recorded in the Re- 
venue Department of 
the 19th Augutt 1796. 

N.B. The population 
is rather disainithed 
fiuce Mr. Rivett’s time, 


N. B. Thefe, I appre- 
hend, are geographical 
miles, fixty to the de- 
gree ; for according to 
another computation 
now before me, the 
fuperficial contents of 
England are stated at 
66,548 {quare miles, at 
the rate of 69% miles 
to adegree; and even 
fuppofed to be as much 
as 73,306 {quare miles; 
according to the firlt of 
thete uumbers, the 
population is about 
1263, and according to 
the laft, about 114} per 
fquare mile. 

It may be obje&ted 
that Salfette is too 
limited u {pot to com- 
pare with Eugland and 
Wales as to relative 
population; but the 
average of Salfette, is 
alfo that of at leaft a 
large proportion of our 
Indian territories. The 
Bengal provinces for 
example, are alfo come 
puted to be peopled at 
the rate of about £00 
per fquare mile. 


No. 3. 
Mr. Rickards 
(24 Sept. 1807) 
‘on Taxation and 
Revenue. 


a) 


’ tots ame 


38 PAPERS RELATING TO : 


annually, and yet be wretchedly poor; and many of our Indian dijiricts are perhaps exifling 
proofs of this fac. 

128. It is acommon thing too in poor countries for the lands to be divided and fubdivided 
into finall poffeffions or farms. Our Indian territories prefent abundant examples thereof ; 
and wherever it is the cafe, an extenfive population may be fupported ; but as in Salfette, it 
muft be proportionately = and feeble, each {ubdivifion being entrufted to the management 
of a feparate family; it fo om 
tained, as long as each fpot fhall be capable of affording fufficient produce for the mainte- 
nance of its occupiers. Poa 


129. Subdivifion may be eafily conceived therefore fo minute, as that the whole produce, 
including reat and profit, fhall at length be abforbed in the maintenance in queftion ; there 
avill then remain no fuperfluity to excite employment in the other branches of the fociety ; 
the cultivators of the foil may be faid to labour almoft for themlelves alone ; and the 3 
of fuch a ftate is irremediable, except by the confolidation of fmaller pofleftions, till the 
furplus bears a high and due proportion to the grofs produce, and by fubitituting rich pro- 

rietors and capitalifis for wretched occupants, who, thus bordering on the condition of 


Srates. are refiriéted to the unnatural neceflity of almoft exclufively fupplying their own — 


wants, 


130. This is the utmoft limit of fubdivifion, and of confequent te ng and poverty 3 
but it mutt be remembered, that all approaches to it are only lefler degrees of the fame evil; 
and in the applications not unfrequently made on Salfette, for the circumferibing of lands, 
from want of means to cultivate, at the fame time that it is a proof of growing poverty. I 
would humbly recommend to Government this confideration of the probable confequences of 
prefent acquiefcence in the requeft. 


131. It would hence then feem to be impoflible to encreafe a people to any nfeful end, if 
the ways of aétive employment are obitracted, or fhut, and that kind of employment too, 
which renders them ferviceable toeach other. This employment only arifes out of reciprocal 
~vants ; wants are only created or encreafed wealti, and wealth is unattainable, or incapable 
of active circulation in a country like the interior of India, where the immediate fources and 
employments of indufiry are fo highly affeffed. 


132. “ The political economy of government is brought to perfection, when every clafs, 
“ in general, and every individual, in particular, is made to be aiding and aflifting to the 
“ community, in proportion to the afliftance he receives from it.” 


133. © That number of hufbandmen therefcre is the beft, which can provide food for all 
“« the fiate; and that number of inhabitants is the beft, which is compatible with the fudl 


“€ employment of every one of them.” 


134. Thus too the plan propofes to reanimate the Salfettetes to full and aGive employ- 
ment, by opening wide the field for indufiry, by holding forth the certainty of great, and 
the profpect of indefinite profit; and by the confequent introduction of capitalifts, with all 
their train of wants, io give life, energy, and a@ivity to the whole. If the old houfe-tax 
prove for a time heavy, it is {iijl removed to a far lefs objectionable fource, from one of the 
moft important of human employments, aad that employment ne longer clogged with the 
difteartening profpeé of its profits being about to be thared, nay difproportionately thared, 
as foon as labour {hall have acquired them; and it has been kept in view throughout, to 
give fall operation to thofe laws on which focieties are founded in nature, by removing the 
obfiructions which feemed hitherto to oppofe the natural extenfion of wants, and to giving 
to felf-love, or felf-intereft, a manifeft aimione in fupplying them. | See Aber 


135. The ficld of indufiry is not only opened to all, but freed alfo from interference or ; 


direction on the part of Government; and the free agency of man, his abfolute and unalien- 


able right, left at fall liberty to follow thote branches which he may himfelf find moft con- 


ducive to his own benefit, and of which he alone is the fitteft natural judge. Though this 
principle be generally admitted in theory, it is too often difregarded in practical fyfiems of 
taxation ; for all taxes, whofe operation is to check induftry in its natural channel, or to 
force it into others lefs zealoufly, and therefore leis advantageoufly purfued, are or 
lefler violations of this natural right. Man, as a free agent, is properly amenable to no 


retlraint, except in what may be abfolutely pernicious; ia other refpects the freeft exercise 


of his own will is his undoubted privilege; made by his creator to profper, rather than to 
pine on earth, his creator’s laws are contiltently directed to the fame end; they are accord= 
lng paris of one admirable whole, and muit therefore evidently operate with moft efficacy, 


where free agency is leaft rettruined. It is, in fhort, that enviable ftate of civil liberty, as 


much the happinefs of fubjecis to acquire, as it fhould be the pride of Government to 
eftablifh, 


136. Having in the preceding paragraphs intimated the practicability of reducing the — 


native efiablifaments on Saliette, Carauja, &c. it will be proper to fubjoin, that I propote 
this arrangement on the principles of a plan which I carried into effe& fome years ago, at 
with entire fuccefs, in a much more extenfive territory, and of more difficult colleétion. 


127- On Salfetie, if the prefeat fimple plan of revente be adopted, a fill fmaller eftablifh- 
ment than what I now propofe may very poflibly be found to anfwer; but if it be defired to 
extend it to other difiricts where the old fyftem of revenue continues, an adequate idea 


lows, that the more fubdivifions, the more will be the families main-— 


, 
| 


EAST INDIA AFFAIRS. 39 
will, 1 hope, be conceived from the enclofure K., wherein, with a view to more eafy com- No. 3 
prehenfion, | have adopted it to the prefent fyftem and revenues of Salfette. me 


138. This ifland, already containing feven diftriéts, is divided by the plan into as many (ag. Seb 907) 
patelthips, to whom, with a proper namber of peons, are entrufted the fuperintendence and yatta mee 
' controul! of the fub-patels, and the refponfibility of forwarding without delay the revenue, as tits 
colleéted to the cutcherry. The fub-patels are the immediate collectors of it (in diftrids 
I where more than one patel is neceflary) within circles of about fix or feven thoufand rupees 
| each, having a writer under them to keep accounts, of which copies fhould be forwarded 
| through the head patel, with every confignment of treafure, and three peons each, to aid in 
} ccalletiioa. and when necellary to be allowed to call on the head patel with his peons, to 
| gat their aififtance. In Salfette, if the prefent revenues be commuted for the propofed 
oufe-tax, it is poflible that one fub-patel, of capacity himfelf to keep a fimple account, 
1 may do in each circle, under the orders of the diftriét or head patel, without a writer under 
him ; ‘but in other countries, where the accounts are lefs fimple, a writer may be neceffury. 


"- 130° From the accompanying voucher (K), it will be feen that a fibbendy or village 

__eftablifhment, on this principle, falls confiderably within the amount of 5 per cent. on the 

fs collections, fo as to leave, I truft, an ample allowance for the cutclerry of the collector, 
without exceeding that per-centage. 


140. In another country, where T have already tried the experiment, [ found it abundantly 
fatisfaGtory to the natives. The employment of thefe, in preference to foreigners, afforded 
them a gratification which enabled mg to engage the fervices of men of the firft refpeétability 
and influence in the country, at falaries nearly correfponding to thofe inferted in the 
voucher; and by ridding the country of a horde of foreign native fervants, I not only eafed 
the public of a heavy unnece{lary expente, but the local inhabitants of the exactions of this 

_Soreign tribe, which from the total inability of a fingle European colleétor to controul, are’ 
‘very generally, perhaps univerfally, a most burthenfome addition to the weight of the eftablifhed . 
taxes, aud therefore a double bar to the means of improvement. 


- 141. I do not pretend that by the employment of refident natives of influence, men of  ‘ 
greater purity were introduced into office, but from identity of habits, and being long knowr 
-and refpeéted within their local fpheres, their adminiftration was more acceptable to the 
natives, and from paucity of numbers, and perhaps too a fellow feeling for friends and 


neighbours, lefs generally oppreflive. 
: (Signed) R. RICKARDS. 
Bombay, 24 Sept. 1807. 


MEMORANDUM of the Number of Taxes, and their Amount, from which the Lanp Revenux 
of Salsette is at present realized. 


MDs sec Mn m) es en = 6 106,84) 8.98 


2 Brab Trees, - - = - os 13,545 1 0 
3 Mohoturfa (Artificers hiv ot ae, Yon eeee-a- O25 
4 Baggai or Oarts oF) gey ie - 6,699 2 50 


‘5 Dannar Cocoa-nut Trees in peoples compounds - 558 3 0 
‘6 Rents orGodowns - - mt ee ee es 


7 Cocoa-nut Oarts belonging to Sircar - 0 3 of” 


nis is the produce of the 
. Oarts in kind. 
8 sat a Dey. = ee ew, ht ROB 10 9 
9 Wuskeesor Hill cultivation of Gingitie, &c. - , 28 .3 34 
- 1302 $ 66 Company's Property. 


410 Maryse and Codjans sis aie - - 

41 SircarsSalt-pans - - - = © = 434 208 Ditto let at outcry. 
42 Fuzendars Salt-pans - © = = = 77 372 pay $ of the produce. 
43 Ground allowed for garden = |¢ = «© 16 1 2 

a4 AngdanaorCooleyTax - - + - + 14,685 3 0 


Total - - Rs.1,45,850 3 68 

: ——SSS—=SSSSssa 
, Lanp Revenves - - - =) ve - - - 1,45,850 3 68 
15 Tobacco Farm Chetry 8 acs ei See Sa aed a a pith 28,825 0 08 
a6 Arrack Farm - - anny OLS Oe a a - 67,300 0 08 
a7 PammofHay= - - - + - - = -= « & 400 0 0 
a8 Ditto Date Trees - = ° = ant * = - - - $895 0 0 
19 Ditto Poonavem Flower ~ . - - - - - - e 735 0 0 
» 20 Ditto Stone Quarries - . - = cps if ee 914 foer is 167 O10 
- @1 Ditto Duty on Junger Sisal bh ogtigk i=, Suc eee, Nee. ee esos. On. 


- . 


Total - «- Rs.2,45,110 3 74 


WN. B. Of the preceding taxes that on batty alone, is intended to be included in the cowles, as now 
irawn out; and these cowles would perpetuate the said tax, at its present rate or rates, for ever, 
‘without any diminution iu its amount to the present or old settlers. The rates of this tax now are 
a nominal third of the produce of white batty grounds, 4-3-2, and 1 parrah per beggah on private 
sult batty grounds ; and half produce oy salt batty grounds, the property of the Company. From 
306. ? the 


4 


40 PAPERS RELATING TO : 

No. 3. the wording of these cowles being confined to the computed one-third of the’ rated’ gross prod 

Mr. Rickards _ the soil, it seems doubtful whether the last mentioned tax on’ Company's salt batty gr oo ! 
(24 Sept. 1807) _ intended to be included, it could not, without a fresh assessment, which would diminish the present 
on Taxation and amount of revenue. The tax, however, is payable in kind, but commuted into money at20 rupees 
Revenue. per moorah of white, and 161s. 2 qr. of black batty, liable to a future decennial: adjustment. 
“ia Bie lands, and the goods and chattels-of defaulters, are liable to seizure for arrears of revenue. 
Bombay, 24th Sept. 1807. (Signed) R: RICKARDS. o 


HEADS of the propofed New Plan. a o*S 

1. THE prefent revenue being derived from fourteen different fources (befides feven farms), 

and many of the payers contributing from two or three different heads, with a view of 

fying the revenue both to payers and receivers, it is propofed to confolidate the whe 

different land-taxes into one general tax, to be removed from the land and its prod 
fixed on houfes in perpetuity. a, : 

2. Cowles to be granted to every landbolder on the island of Salfette, making ¢ 


faid land to him which he now occupies and cultivates, after correct admeafut weit, ir ell 
and exclufive proprietary right. oe swanky ik 


3. The faid cowles to fpecify not only the extent of the land thus made over # he pr 
prietor, but the particulars of the different taxes now paid by him, the whole to be the 
confolidated and commuted into one genres houfe tax, fixed in money, never to rife, t ough 
fabjeét to diminution, as will be hereafter explained. aang. bit 


‘ 


_—= —~---# 


4. The tax being thus fixed on a houfe, will then have no reference wth dicey . 
F produce of land ; a proprietor may then extend or improve his cultivation within the | th 
: ipecified in his cowle, without any interference on the part of the fervants of govei = 
or being liable to one or more pice of tax. The profit of every improvement will then be 
wholly and entirely the proprietor’s own. Naty 


5. After the tax is thus fixed, any fervant who interferes with a proprietor ir 
vation or improvements, to be punifhed by traniportation beyond fea. ee 


LL! 


6. For the fake of conformity, the houfe-tax fhall extend to all thofe na 
L revenue on the ifland, and be proportioned in each cafe to fuch payment; it hal 
; * alfo in due proportion as this fource of revenue (which a new one) be produétive ; it 
; allowed to operate in diminution of the rate of houfe-tax to the prefent occu 
| cultivators of land; hence, no man will in any cafe pay more than he doés at_ it, but 
evidently lefs, even in the firft inftance. Another advantage of the commutation the | 
tax will thus be one and permavently fixed; i.e. never to rife, though individual profits may ; 
ie 


| ’ be perpetually increafing. 

: 7. Watte lands, which requite encoutagement and much expenfe to- cultivate, wil 

| granted free of all tax for ever, excepting fuch as may now be paid from wees of « 
articles thereon; any new houfes built on tlie ifland, to catry on the wafte cultivati 

be fubject to no tax for the firtt fifteen or twenty years. After which period the proj 


&c. will pay the fame houfe-tax as the reft of the ifland, which it is hoped may bé 
time be reduced to one uniform moderate ftandard every where. > 
8. In the event of arrears of revente, thé /ands of proptietors, but not their prodace, 
be liable to public fale to make good fuch arreat. - Wis 2 
9. In order to expedite the great object of the pln, viz. ‘the reduction of the 7 
F revenue to the flandard above adverted to, 1 allo jvopofe, that in proportion &$ thi 
arms of tobacco and arrack fhall, by fomé better mianagement become tore p 
than they now are, a correfponding anjount fhall be given up in the contiiuted tak te 


eaten op 


settlers. 

- 10. The plan alfo propofes the eftablifhment of tanks or refervoirs on the ifland, 

purpofe of irrigation. It is propofed to make thefe reféryoirs likewife a fource of t 

. firft, to reimburfe the expenfe of conftrnétion-; afterwards to be an equivalent for 
reductionsin the houfe-tax ; and when thefe combined fources fhall be found fufficie 

N perpofes now anticipated, it is finally propoled, that the houfe-tax be converted in 


valorem, and for eyer; after collected on that principle from all the houfes of the 
without any reference whatever to the produce of lands*, and this rate to be applie 
houfes of new fettlers, cultivators of wafte land, in fifleen ox twenly years from 4 
of their pofleffion, a . 1 apay amine 

11. And lafily, the plan propofes a eaving to the Honourable Company, by ¥e 
of ufelefs eftablifhment, ahd other charges of mofe than two-thirds. the prefent % 
uinount, ‘ 


Bombay, ; “ ei 
24th Septeinber 1807. } (Signed) _R. RICKARDS, 


> 


* Note.—On thefe principles it will be perceived, that the houfe-tax to old. fettlers 
undergo gradual reduction, a8 other equivalents offer, whence alfo the Company will a 
fufler Uie leaft a¢tual diminution of revenue; aud the faid houfe-tax will not be finally ‘co 
into a tax ad valorem, or an efijmated rent thereof, unul all uve proposed sources of -reven 
found productive of an equ. umvunt to that now derived frem the iflund. 


eee 


EAST INDIA AFFAIRS, 4i 
ottt a8 hee) ( ABSTRACT). Mr. Rickards 


tend a (24 Sept. 1807) 
‘Houses and Population, &c. of the Island of Salsette, taken from the late Collector’s “Yaspection on ‘Taxation and 


ier of Villages,” framed in 1802. “Revenue, 
od x 
pa nt Population. Houses. 


Mallar District 


- = 7 - = - - . 621 
Daravie D° - - - - - ~ - - rey 
‘Gorabunder D® - - © . - - - 10,663 
peeeecot “a - “ - - - - - - 23,883 
deal bigttieun feel =~ y.stsel test tn-3 ow fo REGS 
‘Tromba D°- - - - - - - - - 35,396 
Bandora D® - - - - - ~ - - 12,070 
Total - - 151,629 | 52,107 11,470 
(Signed) R. RICKARDS. 


(ABSTRACT). 


Numerical List of Population and Houses of the Island of Salsette, taken from the Collector's 
4 rot Records for the Year 1807. : 


Houses. - Population. 


Tannah District = se pes ie tg 10,972 
Garebutidar Dee! PEL ee gy Me Srl Cdl: ae 3,244 
Daravee- D® - ea b — - - . = ues 816 4,524 
> Mafol 2s Deere as ee et ok Clo ad eoel pe fh 1,241 oo 5,392 
Siombe = re eh i etihe, “ee fey Us 1,888 . 8,692 
OS ee ” 1.986 9,817 
Batidorah De P26" SP Sno gr aie rag eg 1,406 7,283 
Total ~ =<Wie 10,167. | 49,924 


a ¢ re 

“The popniation of the villages under Doctor Scott, and Mr.-Ashburner, is mot registered in the 
‘collector's books. The numbers therefore may not be accurate; they are probably less than the truth, 
fase taken from the table framed by the collector himself in 1802. Since these estates are perhaps 
_ the only part of the interior of Salsette where population encreases. 


(Signed) R.; RICKARDS, 


“TRANSLATE of a Reprefentation from the Patell Mattaras and Ryatts on the Ifland of ‘Sic. Orig. 
+ Sallette, dated.11 Auguft 1807. oe 


After Compliments; 


a, Reprefenting that your honour withed to know the reafon of the ryatts being in poor 
‘fituation, fo in what manner they will become rich, as alfo to ftate what hardthip they 
bears, confequently we now beg to propole as follows, viz. 

1. That the late Mr. Rivett, chief'of this ifland, having obferved the indigent fituation of 
‘the ryots, and have fited one-third of the produce as fircars toka allowed in the meantime 

_ ‘to pay for it at rupees 20 for white, and rupees 16 per morah of black batty; befides given 

pe feveral baptus or taxes, which made greatly happy to the ryots, requefting therefore 

pe ond honour (being in the place of Almighty) to fix the fame price ‘of batty to our 


ty. 
2. That in the ifland of Salfette have leafed two farms of arrack and tobacco,.which is 
great deal prejudicial to the ryots, viz. 


_ 1. The firear have bind the arrack farmer in his leafe, that he muft fupply to the ryots 
fix half maunds of arrack (foreach morah of land at the rate of rupees 1-1) per each half 
mnendpmnicn he -the farmer, according to the condition of the leafe, never fupplies to the 
individuals, but putting off from time to time for the delivery, till the fixed period of the 
; le is expired, and than offering at rupees 1-3 per each half maund, which is not even 
, but like water, and fome time four, which undoubtedly makes people fick; and the 
A who accuftomed to drink half feer of arrack in a day, he cannot fatisfy himfelf even 
th three feers; befides, the farmer purchafing bad arrack from the bandarees, at under 
tate, as of half'a rupee, and fome time fix annas per each half maund, and he difpofes the 
ae the confumers at the fircars fixed rate of rupees 1-3 per each half maund, even for 
306." L the 


No, 3. 

Mr. Rickards 
(24 Sept, 1807) 
on Taxation and 

Reyenue. 


{_____ ____ out, the ryots ufe to get 


Sic. Orig. 


_—_— 


49 PAPERS RELATING TO 


the payment of fuch decreafed rate, at which he purchafes the arrack from the 
evades them from time to time, and, laftly, don’t difcharge in full their due; however the 
bandarees in fuch cale paght te prefer their complaint before the judge; but the 
fears, for they obliges to break their time from two to four days to attend fer the 
thus they cannot proceed by laying their work at afide. Prior to the arrack farm is leafed 
fa two to three quarters of a-rupee per each half maund of 

arrack, 

2. The tobacco retailers, without recciving any wages from the tobacco farmers, paying 
him rupees’5 per maund of tobacco, and carrying the fame for the petty fales, who 


fell more thau three quarter pera feer of tobacco ; fo, at medium rate, the ryots obliges te 
urchafe at rupees 8 per maund, infiead of rupees 5, as all fort of people do Pin aa 5 


in the weight; befides the tobacco which the farmer fupplies is-of inferior quality, no doubt — 


he might, poueie at under rate. The perfon who have expenditure in-his houfe of 
one feer-of tobacco, ; 
them fick by cougl:ing. Prior to the farm is eftablifhed, the ryots ule to get from 2 to 


2-2 rupees per maund of tobacco, which is of a fuperior quality. Thus, Sir, the ryots 


labour under the detrimental fituation Owing to the aforefaid two farms. 


3. That in the ifland of Bombay no fees were collected from the ryots for the wedding 
permits, As in this illand fome people obliges to pay fee of rupees 2-25, from which article 
the fircar do not reap much revenue, confequently we the ryots requeft to give up this 
trifling tax to them, that they may celebrate the wedding without note, or paid any 
agreeably to the rule obferved in Bombay. 


4. The firear wifhes to give to the cultivators the deeds of property, but the toka and the 
rate of batty, which is fixed by the lute Mr. Rivett’s fyitem, as prayed in the 1ft article, i 
deeds of property to the cultivators, yet if any cunumbees is unable from his fituation to 
cultivate all the land now under his title, he may be at liberty to take out a cowle only for 
fuch part as he may with to retain, leaving the reft at the difpofal of Go t 
this, the brab trees, thofe that fiands upon their batty ground, the produce of which 
goes to the fircar, and not to them, they wifh to receive in the manner the trees were 
in Mr. Rivett’s time to the oart fazendars. Thele ryots, therefore, fuggeft, diss 
indulgence, as herein prayed, is given to them, the ryots will then readily receive the 
of property. : - | SSO St Vai 

5. That if any cultivator is failed from his fituation, the fircar fhould make him reafonable 
advance of money, which muti be recovered in three years without intereft, by inftulments, 


is 
-to abide them by adding the fame intothe deeds of property, and then to deliver the faid 


which will greatly fave the cultivators.. 


6. That in the ifland-of Salfette, the coolies who never goes to fifh, but cultivating the 


land, and they obliges to pay angdenah, which is very heavy to (hem, 


7- That the cooley and other caft people, from Marratta country, came and refided in this 
ifland, who do not pay any more to the fircar than one rupee per each houfe, and making 
or cultivating Dhuntteys in the Hill, the produce of which never enough to maititain them- 
felves, however in regard to thele people, the accompanying will thew your honour the 


-particular of it, and beg your honour will be pleafed to make neceflary arrangement about 


them. 


We refpectfully folicit your honour will be pleafed to take the premifes of the aforefaid 


_articles into your ferious confideration, and give the redrefs as your honour (is a father and 
mother to the ryots) withing to promote their poor fituation, which obliged them to fubwit — 


this petition. In grauting the aforefaid redrefs, it will keep the ryot ina happy fituation; 
and pray Almighty for your health and happinefs, acd ie 

The above petition is figned (the original) by upwards of 100 of the principal inhabitants 
for themfelves, and: the ather inhabitants of the ifland. 


Eos 
(Signed) R. RICKARDS, 


SRANSLATE.of a:‘PETITION from the Patel and Mattaras, and Ryots, on the Ifland 
of Salfette ; dated 11 Auguft 1807. eter 


A.C. 


1. Refpecting that the thieves and their firdars, inhabitants of continent country, came 
over one after another, and took their abode in this iland, as alfo in Bombay, and fh y 
the appearance of their being maintaining themfelves by work, but they became qu: 

with the fituation of the feveral character, people refiding in this ifland, as well as with the 
rule of juftice of the Britifh Government. i pect 


2. That on the laft dry feafon, in the feveral villages, thefe thieves having plundered four 


or five houfes, and by flog, ing the people of the houfes, carried away ready cafh and jewels 


whatever they had, but they never touched for any cloths or copper ware, for the fear of 
being hereafter found ; as the rule of the Britith juftice is, that no enquiry were making inlo 
the funds thus robbed by the thieves, as alfo heretofore they might have plundered, cons 

quently 


. 
,) ‘ 
——— aE ae eS ol 


Ce ee a ee 


e do not fatisfy-even with four feer, being -of bad quality, and it makes 


EAST INDIA AFFAIRS, | 43 


‘quently the booty they acquires is fafely remains for the ufe of their herb and in cafe if 
the. ots run after the faid robbers in order to catch them, and they by their turn happen to 
murder them, as they fure themfelves that they have no fear for their foul; on the contrary, 
‘the ryots if happened to kill the thieves, the juftice takes pain to examine into the matter ; 

Fd the thieves were caught by the ryots, the jultice afks evidences on their part, ftill if 


No. 4. 
Mr. Rickards 
Se Sept. 1807) 
on Taxation and 
Revenue. 


et. 
Tatisfadorily proved the fact, in fuch cafe they, the robbers, don’t meet with proper repriment. —“——_._____-# 


“Thus the rule is with the juftice, with which they, the robbers, became well knowa them- 
felves, and have already niaicerea feveral houfes, and we fure ourlelves they will fill continue 
jn the fame manner. 


‘3. In thort, if any perfon’s houfe is robbed, he and the village people for his help, takes 
great pain to find out the thieves, with hope that if they were caught, muft be properly 

nifhed ; but agreeably to the rule of the juftice, the aforefaid trouble fhews no effect, but 
increafes the animofily and fear of the thieves, as we are well known with their conduct, 
for their friends and children even will endeavour to take the revenge by foul, wherefore no 
perfon fhall or will offer help one to another hereafter. 


4. Thus, Sir, is the perplexity under which thefe Petitioners labour; moreover, thefe 
Petitioners are inhabitants of this ifland from their forefathers, and the eftate they pofleffes 
as houfes, oarts, fenotore, &c. &c. is appears now to them no more than poifon, owing to 
the aforefaid job of the thieves; there is not any fort of prejudice or hurt to thefe ryots, 
excepted this of the thieves, in the Britifh Government, contequently they have thus fub- 
mitted their petition to your honours favourable decifion, (being your honour is a father and 
protector of thé ryots), and they in the mean time requett, that according to the villages the 
number of garrifon fepoy with arms, is to be allowed, in order that in conjunction of them, 
the ryots of each village will watch three times in the courfe of a night, and by that means 
‘they will fave their lives. 


5. The fircar never derive any much revenue from thofe robber people, confequently 
nash omg hig that they, the robbers, fhould be banifhed from this ifland to their 
own, by which the ryots will remain quiet and happy, otherwife thefe ryots will oblige te 
‘quit their former place, and live where they will obferve fafe for them. It appears to thefe 
petitioners, that as foon as they quitted the place, the remainder poor ryots never will remain 
on the fpot without them ; confequently we refpe&fully beg your honour will be pleafed 
to confider the premifes of this petition, and make happy to the ryots. If your eee 
could not give decifion on the fubjeét, in fuch cafe, this petition pleafe to refer for the 
favourable decifion of the honourable the Governor in Council. 


Original figned by upwards of 150 of the principal inhabitants, for themfelves and the 
other inbabitants of the land. 7 : 


True Copy of the Tranflation, 
(Signed) R. RICKARDS. 


The Humble PETITION of the underfigned Inhabitants of Caranjab. 


“Sheweth, 
_ That your petitioners, with the greateft refpe& and humble fubmiflion, beg the liberty to 
-weprefent their cafe. That the deeds of property propofed by the honourable the Governor 
in Council to be granted to the cultivators of land, your petitioners are willing to take, 
provided the following alterations be made therein, inttead of the term of ten year already 
mentioned, by which your goodnefs fhall be acknowledged by them and their families for 
vever. . 


Article 1. That in the deeds of property, the particulars of the toka of the ground on their 
titles in the colleftor’s records, is to be {pecified in batty, and money revenue, at the prefent 
Fate; and that thele different taxes be made one, and fixed for ever payable to the fircar 
annually, the net amount in money ; and which may be commuted as a tax on their houles, 
and the fame be regiftered in fome-of the public offices ; but your petitioners firft requett to 
be confidered. 


_ Article 2. That the tax of rupees 12, on a beggah of baggayet, or garden ground, levied 
‘on this ifland, is a very heavy one; and in Sallette they only collect it at g rupees per 
beggah on the fimilar Reecstl agreeably to which they requett the rate to be at Caranjah. 


Article 3. That ever fince the introduction of new fyftem on this ifland, your petitioners, 


_ deprived of their right of a rent of two annas per each brab trees, formerly they ufed to 


recover from the bhandaries or the drawers of the toddy upon every tree ftands on the 

nd of which the cultivators are paying to the fircar a tax by beggah meafurement; 
7 they, requefting either to adopt the fame cuftom here as in fuch cafes practicable 
in Salfette, or to be continued an ancient cuftom prevalent among the bhandaries, that they 
ufed to A eo a tax of fix annas on every tree to the fircar, exclufive of the two annas rent to 
the poffeflors of the grounds. 


\ Article 4. That the petitioners cultivating beetle leaves in their gardens, which they fend 
to Bombay for fale, of which they pay cuftoms to the fircar, both at Caranjah and Bombay ; 


cegmae be therefore exacted at one of the places fimply. 


f : Article 


Sic. Origs 


‘ 
. 


No. 3: 

Mr. Rickards 
(24 Sept. 1807) 
jon Taxation aud 

Revenue. 


Sic. Orig. 


‘bare, and little fufceptible of cultivation ; the vallies are mofily mall, but remarkably 
‘the foil is fandy, with beds of clay and marle. The rock in general is calcarious ;_ 


‘ine in his coach to view this artificial lake, formed between two high mountains | 


direct revenue of vear two thoufand pounds a year by the diftribution of this water, 9) | 


- 


44 PAPERS RELATING TO 


Asticle 5. That the price of tobacco .at.Caranja is fixed at the rate of rupees 6. 1. 60. 
per maund, and in Salfette at five rupees per maund ; therefure you will be pleafed to reduce 
the price of it at Caranja,.agreeably to that of Sallette. “4 we ci oelp-aolbotrsss 


Article 6. That fome years ago fome of the cultivators abfconded, who indebted | » the 
fircar for certain revenues, in confequence of which an order was iffued by the fircar, th the 
heirs of fuch perfons abfeonded to make good the revenue to the fircar, and take in the 
feffion the grounds cultivated by the emigrants, which accordingly been done ; but thofe th: 
‘lett no heirs, the judge and the collector compelled the patells to make good the neces due 
by thofe that quitted this ifland, and ordered to make over to them the grounds held in their 
tile, which orders are not yet put inlo-execution; therefore your petitioners beg th 

faid ground wiil be translerred on their title in the culleétor’s books. eer 


Article 7. That the villages of Seven and Navern fuffer a great hardthip on paying | ‘ 
as er 
tate 


farmer toka on their high lands, which ought to be put on the fame footing as tl 
‘different villages on this iland, conformably to the new fyftem introduced here. — iy 


Aad your petitioners, as in.duty bound, fhall ever pray. a 
(Signed) I. Nellajer Patett,.. 


“Caranja, 15 Auguft 1807. and Seventeen more. 
(True Copy’) (Signed) -R. RICKARDS. ~ 


tL) Qyedt ine 
EXTRACT from Townfend’s Travels in Spain, on the fubje& of Irrigation. 


The country in the vicinity of Alicant is wild and broken; the mountains are lofty, ragge , 


is partly fed by a valley to the north, and by the Huerta, a rich and extenfive va 

‘chiefly by the vale of Murcia. The carriers bring wheat, and load back with filh, 
The Huerta is watered froin a vat refervoir, called Pantano, conftruéted in the mountain: 

at the diftance of above five leagues from Alicant. The governor had the goodnefs 


the dimenfions of which, reduced to Englifh feet, are as follow: one hundred : 
feven high ; two hundred and fixty-two wide at top, from mountain to mountain, : nd no 
‘more than twenty-four at bottom; the thicknefs of ‘the wail is fixty-feven feet at top, and — 
one hundred and twenty-one at bottom. [t is very properly made miptual to fuftain hi » 

dateral pretlure.of the water, but had the thicknefs of the wall been only feven feet at >t 
infteadof fixty-feven, there would have been more than fufficient, becaule perk yr 

furface being given, the preffure of fluids on that furface is in proportion to its depth. The 

depth being given, it matters not whether the quantity of water be one acre orten thoufand — 
acres, for the fame expente they might have conftructed many fuch refervoirs, one below 
the other; but when we confider the age in which this was wade (A, D. 1542) we are not 
furprized to fee fo much labour loft. Ey hay sala 


When the fiream comes near the Huerta, it is feparated into four ‘by the-adminiftrator, 
and each proprietor of land receives, or thould receive, the quantity allotted to him, in- 
portion to his land, paying for this the ftipulated price. ‘lo prevent violence andetlind. 
A. D. 1739, the Ring, by his royal edict, etiublithed fixty-two regulations for the difiribution 
of this water, and appointed a special court tu entorce thefe regulations; yet notwi i 
either through ignorance of hydroftatics in the managers, through their negligence, or — 
through the iwfluence of bribes, many obtained more than their jutt proportion, and others 
are left to murmur and complain. It is to be lamented that government does not conftruc 
more Pantano. The farmers in the Huerta could difpofe of five times as much as the 
receive at prefent, and were the whole interval between the mountains occupied with 
refervoirs, they might all be filed. This Pantano, although vaft, has been replenifhed by 
four hours rain. il 


: /Vilernts 


Independent of ‘the produee in all kinds of grain and herbage, Government derives a 


The rock is a fine limeftone, covering fchift ; and as the country preduces pinés, junip a 
‘and cofcoja in abundance; fuel for burning lime is oa the fpot; fo that the ex of 
eonttructing refervoirs would not be great. After having examined the Pantano, 1 § 
on the fucceeding days, the Huerta, to get acquainted with the agriculture of that } ak, 
‘well planted, and well watered valley. Pe 


; w¢i% a 
Going eastward. from the city, having afcended gradually for about a mile, ou sae 
upon a wide expante.of nearly thirty dioulaud acres, every where inclofed oe Jofty moun- 
tains, excepting towards the fea, and covered with oranges, lemons, figs, ined y 
almonds, cherries, apricots, peaches, nectarines, plumbs, apples, pears, pomegranates, c 
alganobos, the more humble yet not less profitable vine, and the liquorice, with every 
fpecies of grain, of liguminous plants, and of herbage for the cattle, ‘ag ng 


This vale is faid. to-contain more than twenty thoufand perfons, and.I can readily believe 
it; for wherever you pals, you fee old and young men, women and children iu 


od ami 


‘EAST INDIA AFFAIRS. 45 


all bufily employed, ploughing, fowing, reaping, treading out the grain with cattle, win- 
mowing the corn, or conveying it to granaries, hoeing in the vineyards, diftributing water to 
their crops, or digging their lands, and preparing it for freth productions. 


When I vifited this delightful vale, they had reaped their barley, and were engaged in 
treading it with mules. To thefe they added carts drawn backwards on the area, for the 
purpole of fepareling the grain, and of cutting the tiraw for fodder. Others were employed 
to wind off filk from the cones; their reel is five feet wide, and receives fix compound 
threads, from thirty, thirty-fix, or from forty-two cones, which {wim if a furnace of boiling 
water; thefe threads are made to traverfe on the reels, that they may not agglutinate 
together. 


I was much pleafed with the reticulated fences round mott of the little farms, compofed of 
reeds in pairs, crofling each other like a lattice frame, yet fo as to form, not rectangles, but 
lozenges or rhomboidal figures, with the reeds not interwoven, but bound together by 
e{parto threads. 


Every part of the Huerta is refrefhed with water once in fifteen days, during the fummer ; 
but in winter it may go three weeks or a month unwatered, Beside the refreshing stream 
derived from the Pantano, they have some norias, the moft remarkable of which, belonging 
to Mr. Arabit, is worked by wind, and raifes the water forty feet. 


i 
| 


The land never refls; for no fooner has it rewarded the farmer with one crop, than he begins 
to prepare it for another : In September he fows barley, and having reaped it about the latter 

Po April, or the firft week in May, he immediately puts in maize, which comes off 
about the middle of September; but before this ripens, he puts in Landias (the cucurbeta 
of Linneus,) or fome other efculent, which yields him a third crop in the courfe of the 
fame year. In November he fows wheat, and in June he reaps; the produce both of wheat 
and barley is from fifteen to twenty-four for one, having fowed of the former nearly two 
bufhhels to an acre, of the latter between three and four, Plax is put into the ground about 
September, or the beginning of October, and comes off in May; but hemp, which is fowed 
in April, continues on the land till Auguft. Thefe, with cucumbers, melons, garbawzos 
(cicer artiftinum,) oon French beans, lettuce, alfalfa (medeiago saliva,) form a rich variety 
of crops, which, cherifhed by a bright sun, and fed by abundant ftreams from the Pantano, 
prove a never failing fource of plenty. S 


In the fpring they abound with oranges and lemons; in summer they have plams, 
cherries, figs, apricots, and neétarines; in autumn pe moe grapes; and in winter a rich 
variety of fruits fupplies their tables. Thus Ceres and Pomona appear to be engaged in a 
never ceafing conteft, which fhall moft contribute to the wealth and profperity of this 
favoured Valley. 

One of the moft valuable productions of this country is the barilla. For this they plough 
their Jand four or five times, dung it well, and thev, haying turned the earth twice more, 
they make it fmooth with boards inftead of harrows, and fow their feed in the months of 
January and February, waiting always for wet weather, ] 


(True Extract.) (Signed) _R. RICKARDS, 


_ EXTRACT from Niebuhr’s Defcription de L’Arabie—Quart. Ed. page 240. 


___ & Mareb eft encore actuellement la principale ville de Dsj6f. Elle est 4 16 lieues d’Allem. 
i Peft-nord-eft de Sand, & ne confifte qu’en 300 maifons chétives; cependant elle a une 
muraille & trois portes. On prétend y avoir trouvé quelques ruines d’un palais de la reine 
Balkis, mais aucune infcription; ainfi elles ne valent peut-étre pas la peine d’étre vues. 
Le Seigneur qui y refide fe donnoit en 1763 le titre de Scherif Mahammedibn Achmedibn 
Alojibn Kh4letibn Hoffejnibn Mahammedibn N&lribn Mahammedibn Achmed; il étoit de 
la tamille d’Abut4leb ; hors de Mareb il ne pofledoit que Hofnabrid, Sahher & quelques 
autres petits villages, J’ai beaucoup entendu parler en Arabie du grand refervoir de 
Sabééns, que les Arabes nomment Sitte Mareb, mais perfonne ne m’en donna des notions 
fires qu'un homme de Mareb tres confideré, quiy Gtoit né & y demuroit. I] me 
déerivoit le refervoir ancien comme une vallée entre deux chaines de montagnes, qui avoit 
préfque une journée en longeur (5 lieues d’ Allem.) Dans cette vallée fe réuniffent fix ou 
«Eat riviéres qui coulent de l’oueft & du fud, & qui viennent en partie du domaine 
de Vim4&n; quelques-unes font poiffonneufes & ont de Yeau toute année. Ces deux 

ines de montagnes qui renferment cette vallée de deux cétés s’approchent si pres |’une 
de Vautre 4 J’eft, que l’on peut en paffer l'entervalle dans 5 46 minutes, On difvit, que cette 
ouverture avoit é\é fermée par une épaiffe muraille, pour retenir |’eau fuperflue pendant 
‘& apres les pluyes, & felon opinion de cet Arabe, pour la diftribuer dans les champs & dans 
Jes jardins qui font a l’eft & au nord, par trois portes pratiquees l'une fur l'autre. La muraille 
avoit 40 a 50 pieds de hauteur, elle étoit batie de fort grands pierres de taille, & il en refte 
encore des ruines des deux cétés. Mais elle ne retient plus |’eau qui s’écoule d’abord dans 
Ja plaine, & qui, fuivant le plus ou le moins de pluyes, fe perd 4 longue ou A ‘courte diftance 
dans les fables & les champs voifins. 


_ “ Ainfi le grand refervoir prés de Mareb, n’ avoil rien de merveilleux, Ailleurs & meme 
en Yemen, ou il ne pleut que dans une failon fixe, on ménage foigneufement l’ean, mais ces 
306. M refervoirs 


No. 3. 
Mr. Rickards 
(24 Sept: 1807) 
on Taxation 
Revenue. 


UH 


46 PAPERS RELATING TO 
No. 3. refervoirs font petits xuprés de celui-ci. Que de contrées par example en Egypte & dans la 


Mr. Rickards Paleftine, autrefois tres cultivée, & prefent defertes fautes de canaux & de reiervoirs ! Toute 
(24 Sept. 1807) comme an fage adminitirauon a rendu fertiles beaucoup de bonnes terres, auxquelles A 
on Taxation and ne manquoit que de l'eau. Ces mémes terres fout redevennes delertes dés que le gouverne- 

Revenue. menta changé, & furtout depuis qu’il n’y a plas eu d'union entre les habitans. I] seroit 
VW done tres-poflible par la nature du terroir, & aufli profitable aux ‘habitans, de retablir la 
: aurailie ‘Sitte Mareb pour contenir l'eau, qu'il leur fut autrefois poflible & utile de Ja faire 
conttrnire. Mais Mariaba étoit la réfidence d'un Roi, qui regnoit fur une grande partie de 

7 Yemen & de I’ Hadramant; & a Mareb il n’y a avjourd’hui qu'un pauvre Scherif, qui outre 

cette ville ne pofléde que quelques villages, & qui, loin de relever une si grande muraille, 

peut 2 peine défendre fon pays contres fes voifins (04 Queft. de Mons. Michaelis.) Les 

vefervoirs qui fournifleot Peau a Contiantinople, font conftruits couime’ l’étuit celui de 

Mareb, Mais ben qu’ils foient de beaucoup plus petits, ils ont-é1é batis par de. grands 

Empereurs, comme ils font encore entretenus par les Sultans; non que les des es 
excedederoient les torces des fujets, mais 4 caufe du peu d’ordre qui régne parm eux, 

& parceque les orientaux mettent entre les devoirs du Prince le fin d’entveprendre, ou 

‘d’entretenir ces fortes d’oavrages publics. Lorfque cette digne des Sabéens fut rompue, Mareb 

n’etoit peut-étre plus la refidence du Prince, peut-étre méine ce royaume autretois si puiffant 

etoit il divifée en plutieurs feigneuries. 11 ne faut aprés cela point s’éionner, si ces ouvrages | 

fuperbes n'ont pas été continués, ou si Pon ne les a pas rétabli.” 


Crue Extract. (Sigued) R. RICKARDS. 


EXTRACT from Arthur Young's Travels, &c. Vol. 2. on the fubje& of Irrigation, : | 


The celebrated Arthur Young, in the above-mentioned work, {peaks frequentiy of the great ; 
advantages of irrigation in agriculture. * 


In-that of Lombardy he defcribes the irrigation of the Milanefe, by means of refervoirs; 
-canals, &e. as “ perhaps the greatett exertion of the kind that ever was in the world.” The 
whole detcription being too long to copy, a few extracts may fuffice. 


« Their greateft exertions were ia irrigation, which was fo well known, that they fold their 
“ fuperfluous water, transferring the ule aad property of fome, by the hour, day, and week.” 


“ There are authors who have afferted, that agriculture is improved in confequence of | 
“ trade or manufactures only; but the infiance of the immente irrigation in the Milanele, 
« effected by thefe and many other canals, too numerous to mention, will notallow of fuch a 
“ conclufion being general ; and to thew that my opinion is not without foundation, a very 
“ brief review of the fiate of Milan, as far as it refpects thele periods, will not be difpleafing 
“ to a reflecting reader.” , the ‘ 
After this review, too-tedious to enter, he concludes as follows: Ain wi wat NS 


* The conclufion of the whole feems fairly to be, that we are not to attribute the irrigation 
“ of the countiy to wealth derived from foreign commerce; the fertility and excellent ~ 
“ management of the lands fupported a great population, which proved as induttrious as 
“ public calamities and confufiens would allow ; but it does not appear that this induttry was 
“ ever continued through a long feries of peace and happinels.” 


“ The fame law, that has been fo effe@ual in watering Piedmont, operates here alfo; and 
“ has done even greater things; he who difcovers a {pring conducts it where he pleafes, 
“ paying a fixed compenfation for cutting through the properties of others; all rivers: 
“as in Piedmont, to the Sovereign, who fells the waters to {peculators for the moft beneficial ' 
“ purpole of irrigation. ln the diftribution of it by fale, they do not meafure by the hour, a3 
“ in Piedmont, but by the ounce, 12 ounces are a bracico, or 22 inches ; ‘an ounce of water is 
“ a ftream that runs one bracico long, and one ounce deep; and the farther the water has A 
“ run, the higher is the price, as being more charged with manure.” | 


“ Asan example of the beneficial influence of this law, I was (hewn between Milan and | 
“ Pavia, a {pring that was difcovered two miles from the lands of the difcoverer, the proper- 
“ ties of many. perlons lying betweeu him and the {pring; he firlt bought the property of 
“ perfon in whole land it was fituated, which was ealily done, as it was too low to be there « 
“any ule, then he conducted it by a trench at pleafure, the two miles, paying the fixed price ' 
“for cuttiog through his neighbour's lands ; and having gained it upon his own, pre- 
“ fently changed poor hungry arable, into a very fine watered meadow.” ‘ 


3 hi te 

« Near Milan a watered meadow fells at Soo liv. the pertiea (£.32. 15s. the Englifh acre) | 

“ and the rent of fuel is about 39 liv. (£1. 58. the Englith aere); this mutt not however, bé 
“ clafled high, for there are lands that rife to 4,000 liv. (£.163. the Englidr acre); in land at ; 


“ Soeliv. of 1,000 liv. water often makes half of the value, that is, the rent to the owner 
“ the laud will be 15 liv. to 20 liv. and as much to fome ether perfun for the water” 


“ In viewing a great farm, fix or feven miles from Milan, in the road to Pavia, I found 
“ that all the watered meadow was mown four tines; and that what was watered iu winter, P 
“ prati di mercita, five times; fuch is the valoe of water here, that this farm, which watered 
“ js rented at 20 liv. the pertica, would not let at more than 6 liv. without water, the foi 
being gravel. Vie irrigation of the mercita begins in October, and lafts till Mareh, when 
itis regulated like all other meadows. All in yeveral begziu in April, and laf wll Sepe 
tember; 


— 


= 
- 


EAST INDIA AFFAIRS. a7 


<< tember; and if there be no rain, once in feven to fifteen days. Anvounce of water ramnivg No. 3. 
~* continually from 24th of March to the 8th of September, 1s worth, and will fell for 1,006 Mr. Rickards 
~« liv. When arable crops want water, it is always given, At Cari, wateredameadows are.cut (24 Sept. 1807) 


“ thrice commonly, but in fome featuus ivur times.” ee a es | 
| : : ' Revenue, 
| L:0.D.b. eS YY 


“ [cannot butefteem the ‘twenty miles as affording-ene of the moft curious and valuable 
«* profpects in the power of a fatmer to view ; we have fome undertakings in England that 
| * are meritorious, but they fink to nothing in comparifon with thete (meaning the canals, 

# &e. for irrigation in the duchy of Milav) great and truly noble works. lt is one of the 
¥ rides which [with thote ‘to take, who thirk that every ‘thing is to be feen in England.” 


| 

“ The meadows are commonly cut thrice, but the beft four times; the produce of hay per 

“ pertica 6 fassi of 100 Ibs. of 28 oz. at the ‘three ‘cuts. Price of the firft 8 liv. per fits ; of 
« the fecond 5 liv. of the third 44 liv.; they water immediately after clearing, if there be no. 

— * rain, Without irrigation, the-rent of the country in general would be only one-third of what - 

 - it is-et prefent.” . : 


i The meadows here are’cut thrice, and fed once; are never ploughed if good afd well 
“ watered. Water for irrigation here, as-in all Lombardy, is meafured with great care and’ 
“ attention by what is called quadrata, which is a fquare foot (the Verone foot is to the 
“ Englith about as twenty are to twelve). Twelve quadrata are fufficient to water five 
“ handred -campi of rice grounds-(about three hundred and eighty Englith acres); and the 
“ price of fuch a quantity.of water is commonly wbout three thoufand zechine (£.1,425. 
“ fierling.) The wheels in -this-city for raifing water for pt: Does gardens are very com- 

_“ plete; they receive the water as in Spain, into hollow fellies; there is one in the garden of 
“ the Daniele Monaftery, for watering about four campi, which are faid to yield a revenue.of 
“ three hundred zechin, which is one hundred zechin (of 95s. 6d.) per Englifh acre, ot . ? 
“ £.47. 10s. per acre—immente produce.” 


TURIN. 


“ The irrigation in all this vicinity is extenfive, and carried to great perfe@tion. Water is 
“ meafured with as much accuracy ‘as wine; an hour per week is fold, and the fee fimple. 
“ of the water is attended to, with the fame folicitude as that of the land. Rich meadows, 
“ without water, fell fer 1000 liv. and 1200 liv. a glanata; and arable worth 500 liv. 
“ without water, is in many inflances worth 2000 liv. with it. During the winter, as the: 
“ meadows are commonly fed with theep, they do not water at all. Thofe who have water 
enough, letit on to their land once a week during the whole fummer; but if the weather. 
“is wet, once a fortnight, and a day or two before cutting, if the water is perfectly clear. 
_ “ In regard to the quality of the water, they make no other diftinéion than that from 
-- mountains being cold, aud that of the Dora, near Turin, being charged with fo much 
“ fand as to be bad. They attend to the cutting of weeds in the canals, that they may’ 
“ rot; and fome good managers harrow the bottoms in the fpring, to foul the water, whic 
“€ then aéts more powerfully as ‘a manure. Another practice, which tends alfo to prove. 
“ what excellent farmers they are, in all that refpects meadow grounds, is thut of paring 
“and burning, which they perform on pieces that have a bad herbage or want improvement, 
« butdo not fow ‘them with corn, or any other plant, except hay-feeds, in order to renew 
“ the grafs with no other mterruption 5 it is impoftible to praife fach practices too much;. 
“ they call this hufbandry, Motura.” 
- ’ 


“« The,power of effe&ing the great works in irrigation, which are vifible over this whole: 
“ country, depends very much.en the law, which fuppofes the right and property of all 
“ rivers to be vefted in the King ; confequently all canals taken from them, are bought of: 
“ him; and this enfures another regulation, which. is the power of carrying the water, 
“when bought, at the pleafure of thofe who buy it, where they think fit; they cannot, 
™ however, cut acrofs any man’s ground, without paying rim for the land and the damage ; 
“ but the law does this. by regulations known to every one, and no individual is allowed a 
“ negative upon a meafure which is fur the yeneral good. ‘The purchafers of water from 
“ the King areatually confwerable land owners, or communities, that have lands wanting: 
“ water ; and it is of no conlequence at what difiance thefe lands may be from the rivet 
_“ whence the water is taken, as they have a right to conduct it where they choofe, provided 
“they donot cut through a garden or pleatore ground; nor can they carry the water under 
“ that of others whofe canats are already made, as they might in that cafe deprive them of 
“a part of their water; they are obliged to throw aquedutts over fuch canals. The benefit 
“ of water is fo great and well underftued, that nobody éver thinks of making objections ; 
“and in-cafe their lands are not already watered, itis no fmall advantage to have a new 
“canal brought through them, as they have the opportunity of buying water of the pro- 
“ prietors. At is fold per hour, per week, and even half an hour, and down to a quarter 5, 
* the common price-of an hour per week, for ever, is 1500 liv.” — ; 


© Mr. Young has many :more remarks on the advantages of Irrigation, and in feveral parts’ 
of] mrbudy compares the value of watered with that of unwatered, land, the gefult being’ 
+ B06, ee Ses every 


No. 3. 

Mr. Rickards 
(24 Sept. 1807) 
on Taxation aud 
Revenue. 


Vide Sir John 
Sinclair's Hiftory ofthe 
Public Revenue, 

Vol. 2, p. 98. 


48 PAPERS RELATING TO ee 
every where {jmilar to thofe above given. After a long differtation on the commerce of 
Lombardy, he clofes with the following pertinent obfervations : peat 


Page 282. « There is but one conclufion to be drawn from this detail of the commerce of 
“ Lombardy, viz. that eighteen-twentieths of it coufift in the export of the produce of 
“ agriculture, and therefore ought rather to be efteemed a branch of that art, than of 
“ commerce, according to modern ideas; and it is equally worthy of notice, that thus 
“ fubfifting by agriculture, aud importing manufactures, thefe countries mult be ranked 
“ among the moit flourifhing in the world, abounding with large and magnificent 
* decorated in a manner that fets all comparifon at defiance. The country ever oy 
“ cut by canals of navigation or irrigation, many of the roads fplendid, an on 
“ Jation, and fuch public avenues, that if Italy were united under one head, the — 
“ clafled among the firft powers in Europe. 


5 b a it is confidered that all this has been effeted generally under government 
“ the beft in Europe; when we further refleét, that England has for a century enjoyed 
“ beft government that exifts ; we fhall be forced to confefs perhaps, with afionifhment, th: 
« Great Britain has not made confiderable advances in agriculture, and in the cultivation 
« of her territory. The waftes of the three gh io are enormous, and far exceeding in 
“ proportional! extent all that are to be found in Ltaly ; while of our cultivated diftriéts, s Hag 
“ are buta few provinces remarkable for their improvements. Whoever has viewed Italy with 
“ any degree of attention, mult admit, that if a proportion of her territory contait 
“« as many people as the three Britifh kingdoms, had for a-century enjoyed as free a govern= 


“ ment, giving attention to what has been a principal object, viz. agriculture, inftead of - 


“ trade and manufacture, they would at this time lave made almofi every acre’ 
“ country a fertile garden, and would have been in every ref{pecta greater, richer, and more 
“ flourifhing people than we can poflibly pretend to be. What they have done under their 
“ prefent governments, juftifies this aflertion ; we, bleiied with liberty, bave en 
“< of dfuperiority. 1 (alt Seabee 
“« What a wafte of time, to have fquandered a century of freedom, and lavifhed a th 3 
million fterling of public money, in queftions of commerce! He who coufiders ha, 
“ inheritance of a hundred years of liberty, and the magnitude of thofe national im 


« ments which fuch immenfe fums would have effeéted, will be inclined to do more than 


“ queftion the propriety of the political fyftem which has been adopted by the legiflature 
“ of this kingdom, that, in the bofom of freedom, and commanding fueh fu 8, has nothin 

the agriculture of any part of her dominions, any thing to prefent, which marks fuch. 
“* expenie or fuch exertion, as the irrigation of Piedmont and the Milanefe”” = 


a 
_* 


In treating of the fume fubjeé in Spain, Mr. Young has the following further interesting 
p : Wwottgn °° 


yemarks : 
« Every time we fee any irrigation, we are ftruck more and more with the importance 


' 
» 
> 
¥ 


“ ‘of water, even on foils which are apparcntly mere rock ; and on the moft.arid deferts it gives 
une 


“ at once the utmoft (ururiance of vegetation, 


+ Wer ie 
« A journal, which is here alfo about an Englifh acre, of rich land in the vale, not watered 4 
a fells tor 500 liv.; watered, for 1,000 liv. tival ad St ae 


Page 324. ‘ Leaving Barcelona, enter immediately on extraordinary feenes of watered 


« cultivation, and which muft have given the general reputation to the province. _ Nothiag: 


** can well be finer; the crops in perpetual fucceflion, and the attention. given to their’ 
“ culture, great; not the idea of a fallow, but the moment one crop is off, fome other imme- 
“ diately fown. A great deal of lucern, which is cut four, five, fix and even feven times i a 
“ year, all broad-caft, and exceedingly thick and fine, from two and a half to three fe high: 
“ when cut; itis all watered every eight days. Advancing, the irrigated lands let from 


€ 24 to 40 Spanifh livres, that not irrigated at 15 livres; water therefore, here, more 


“ doubles the rent of the land; and in other places we have found’ the difference yet. | 
aha o 


“ greater. 


“ Land near canals, wel! watered, fells for 100 Spanith livres the journal ; vineyards be. 
“ 300 livres; they give in good years to 12 charges. Unwatered land 100 to 150 livres. _ 


“ Enter a flat vale, half a mile broad, not watered, hemp very poor; maize feyen feet” 
“ high; vineyards under regular plantations of olives; corn cut in flocks, and the land 
“ ploughed; a journal fells for 200 livres, and further on, when irrigated, for 1,000 livres, 
“ which is au aftonilhing difference.” is 8 liste 


Page 327. “ While the mountains and wafie parts of the province prefent an unfayour= 
“ able profpedt, the watered diftricts are, on the contrary, fcenes of moft exuberant fertility. 
“ To a perion from the north of Europe there can hardly be a more firiking fpeétucle than: 
“ the effect of watering in thefe fouthern climates ; it converts an arid floney wafie, which 


“ would yield nothing but vines and olives, on which every fort of grain would bardly return 


“ the feed, at once into fields pregnant with the richeft harvefts; on fuch foil it gives: 

“ almost the whole value of the land; and on the richeft it raifes it at the 

“ double, and in fome initances five times; it enables the cultivator to have a fucceffion- 

“ of crops, more important than any thing we know in the North. The reaping one crop 

“* js but the fignal for immediately putting in another, in doing which t ey exert 

“ themfelves with the utmost adtivity, ploughing univerfally as foon as the corn is cut,’ 
‘ «© and 


EAST INDIA AFFAIRS. 49 


“© and are’by this enabled to have conftantly two crops a year. The extreme fertility of 
~© thefe lands has, however, led many travellers into great or ignorant exaggerations; the 
~ have allerted, that the land yields many crops at the fame time, one under another, sohaahe 
gt both true and falfe ; it is a fact, that corn, wine, oil, and filk, are produced by the fame 
“ field, in fome few inftances; but it is not from hence to be coutledes that the goodnefs of 
-® the land, or the importance of irrigation, i8 at all fhown by that circumftance. _The fact 
* js, that it is impoffible to raife one crop under another, without lofing in one nearly as 
~“ much as you gain in the other; the olive being a large tree, cultivation may be carried on 
“ ander it; bat i ~_ is poor, and fhows, that exactly in proportion to the fKtade,’ 
~ is the injury fwiained by the produce which is fhaded. If the trees are thick the corn’ 
© js hardly worth reaping; it is the fame in other cafes; and I was well convinced, from‘ 
“© yeviewing their grounds with this defign, that the foil can carry, profitably, but one crop 
ata time; feveral may be crowded on it, but nothing is gained: with grafs under trees, 
-* this is not fo much the cafe in a hot climate; but even grafs is damaged ; and it is not the’ 
~~ queftion at prefent, as they have none; a country to-be fupported, and in a hot climate, 
« without meadows or paftures, founds very firange to. Englifh ears, and it is among 
the curious circumfiances of these parts, and I am told of the reft of Spain, if they applied, 
“to grafs the land that is prepa for it, they could not poflibly have bread to eat; tiraw 
“ here is given inftead of hay, and entirely fupplies its place; and the oxen and mules 
«* which we faw, did not fhow in the leaft, by their looks, any deficiency in nourifhment. 
~* Lucerne is not at all common through the interior parts of the province, and where they 
« cultivate it, itis ufed green. Maize is fometimes fown merely for its herbage, as it might 
* be, I believe profitably in England, late in the Spring to avoid our frofts; it is one of the’ 
*¢ moft nourifhing plants in the world. 


“ « The confequence of water being fo apparent in the province, I could not but attend , 


particularly to their exertions in conducting it, and I conclude that not one acre in twenty, ,. 


€ perhaps in forty, is watered, that might be in the flat vales, where canals of irrigation 
“© are made at a {mall expense, a very good though by no means a complete ufe is made of , 
“ them; but on the declivities of the mountains, it is neceflary to erect a maund of folid 
* mafonry acrofs the river, end to cat the canal partly out of rocks, and to fapport it by 
© walls of ftone, as I have feen in France; and having thus diverted a large portion of the” 
«© waterof a river, to carry it on its level along the fide of the mountain, as far as it will go, ' 


«* fuch exertions demand a much greater capital than is to be found upon the lands of‘ 


. Catalonia; it could be done only by a great lord, who knew the importance of fuch under- ' 
“© takings, who refided on his eftate, and whofe income was fpent in fomething elfe than 
© the tafte and pleafures of a capital. But leaving fuch exertions to individuals, who either 
have not the money, or not the will to employ it, is to perpetuate waftes ; it is the king 
-« only who can make thefe efforts: a monarch, who fhould be determined to improve his king-’ 
-« dom, would prefently find the means of doing it; the importance of water is fo well known, 
- that if a canal is made to conduét it, the proprietors or farmers of the lands below would, 
« readily and fpeedily make ufe of it, paying proportionably for the quantity they took ; this is. 
© the fyftem in Lombardy, and the effect is great; it would be the fame in Catalonia, but the. 
© capital for the great work of the canal muft probably be fapplid by the king; if not the 
«« whole, at leaft a confiderable portion ; fuch money fhould be lent to undertakers at a mo- 
© derate intereft; exertions of {uch a nature, with a proper general attention given to thefe 
« objeéts, would make them fafhionable among the great lords of the kingdom, and fertile 
“ sche ‘would foon be created out of barren and defolate waftes.. Arbitrary power has 
o exerted for ages in efforts of barbarity, ignorance, and tyranny ; it is time to fee it 
- employed in works that have the good of mankind for their aim. A beginning, and a’ 
« very good one, is made in the conftruction of fome great roads, on a feale of: trae mag- 
© nificence, which is never exhibited with fuch effect as in works of public utility; and’ 
whenever the importance of cultivation is well underftood in Spain, and the right means 
# of advancing it clearly analyzed, irrigation will then receive an attention that has not’ 
hitherto been given; fuch is the neceflity of water for various productions in this climate, 


« that rivers ought to be no more than infinitely multiplied channels, and collected in one: 


- fiream ouly, as a refervoir for frefh and repeated deviations. 
buys (Frue Extracts) (Signed) R. RICKARDS.” 


No. 3. 

Mr. Rickards 
(24 Sept. 1807) 
on Taxation and 

' Revenue. ~ 


a PAPERS RELATING TO 
as READ the following Minute from Mr. Rickards : | 
Further Remarks MINUTE. 


(7. July 1808) IN a former essay, delivered to Government on the 24th September 1807, I attempted 
by. om arenes to develop certain principles connected with the permanent prosperity of ‘social bodies 

— eee ane and states, founded on the laws of natural order, and applicable to the circumstances of all 
Rare ae: ee _civilized societies, in whatever clime or region. tes 


Man, it has been shown, is of necessity a social being; he has abundant wants which 
«others only can supply, and a greater interest in co-operating with his fellows in the 
- common advantages of reciprocal aid, than in the selfish pursuit of exclusively supplying 

himself: the greater benefits and comforts arising out of this general labour for the at 
- others, tie gi sources of individual industry ; industry creates wealth, and wealth agai 
:re-acts upon industry by an increase of wants, and the liberal recompense of the labo 
which supplies them. Pi ee ee 


The wise ordinations of nature, therefore, cause the greatest comforts and happiness 'of 
»every society to arise out of the greatest possible use and employment on account of each 
» other : ‘ > pte! Oe 
© Tn age, in infancy, from others’ aid a 
« Ts all our hope— 3 
-“ That, Nature’s first, last lesson to mankind.” Fbstdic a4 


‘It is the: union of humanity in one fraternal bond, an universal contribution of mutual as- 
- sistance, flowing from want on the one hand and supply on the other, and which the positive 
institutions of human government ought similarly to regard and encourage, as the surest, if 
not only basis of national prosperity. In this natural order, labour and wealth, the poor 
-and the rich, are equally dependant on, as they are equally and indispensably necessary to, 
each other ; equality of condition, or even that approach to it observable in the Wines 
part of India, is consequently incompatible with the growing prosperity of any civilize 
-community, from being positively adverse to the course and eflects of Nature’s laws. 


It follows then, that encouragement to the acquisition, and security to the enjoyment of 
-wealth, should be fundamental maxims in the practice of enlighiened states ; but the only 
- encouragement required is entire freedom; direction, interference, participation, are positive 

restraints, and according to the degree in which they are exercised, check the pr ion 

of that superfluity or abundant wealth which I have already remarked to be the only 
natural fynd for the increase of industry, the only natural channel for distributing the com- 
forts, or increasing the enjoyments of life, among the laborions and industrious, ¢. e. the 
major part of every society, as it is also the ouly fund from whose progressive increase the 
» Government can or. ought to.expect any increase of its own resources. eae ae 


“The superfluity or abundance above mentioned is most conspicuous in the existence of 
great capitalists, and the expenditure of wealthy proprietors ; but in all flourishing com- 
munities, lesser portions of the same abundance are universally distributed ; its egate 
.amount being always proportioned to the freedom of acquisition, as the sum of nattaal 
. prosperity is to its general distribution and expenditure. * S02 Se 
msi 
~It is evident that acquisition alone is not sufficient; for if, as .in this country, wealth be 
hoarded when acquired, from inability to employ it advantageously, or buried from the 
dread of arbitrary power, it.can neither operate in promoting the comforts or industry of 
the laborious orders, or constitute a productive source of supply to the exigencies of 
>the state. j . isda 
- It must be-spent, as well ron hak but its expenditure is also a natural pro ity ; the : 
ession of wealth is, generally speaking, the possession of so many wants wah eae : 
rape coes ty and there should consequently be as little obstruction to its expenditure or 
employment, as restraint in its acquisition: by free expenditure, the distribution of wealth 
is enabled to reach the obscurest retreats of society; it then supports, comforts, or en- 
riches all who have the. industry or the talent to acquire it, and is most useful to individuals, 


and most productive to the state, when most generally and abundantly spread. © 
‘Plus les hommes,sont en etat de consommer, plus ils sent utiles —— —Quand on 


-“ recoit gros, et depense gros, tout va bien.” —( Phil. Rurale.) 


Under the impression of these principles, my own mind has been long habituated to 
. ascribe the backward.state of all the Indian provinces [ have seen, to the want of that 
wealth, to the very scanty number of the possessors of .that abundance by which alone in- 
dustry can be invigorated, and the comforts of the community at large, or the resources of 
. the state, augmented. 1 shall confine my present remarks to this part of the subject: other 
pees y be better separately treated; but in the opinions either now or hereafter advanced, 
trust T may not be suspected of designing to reflect either on particular persons or parti- 
, cular acts of our local administration: L-solemnly disclaim-the inteation: the general object of | : 
the British Government in India bas been, I admit, to promote the prosperity of itssubjects; 
all | would argue is, that encouragement has been hitherto too sparing, or the means of 
_adininistering it at times mistaken: let me also hope that the agitation of this important — 
question will not be deemed an. officious act of public duty,.tempted to it, as am, not by 


* If the institutions of Government have a | and consequently the demand for-supply, can they 
sgendency to restrain the spread of human wants) | be said to be promotive of the order of nature? 
and ey 


j=) seca ha o> - a—«, 
+ 
‘ 
p 


Ee eee TT 


EAST INDIA AFFAIRS. 51 


he vain expectation of doing it that justice which its importance demands, but from the 
<onscientious conviction that the mere discussion of economical principles applicable to 
-our Indian territories, and their treatment in abler hands, may be productive of vast ad- 
vantage, as well to the Company’s interests in this quarter as to those of their numerous 
mative subjects *. . 


: Having already submitted it as my opinion, that our system of Indian taxation, alias a 


‘heavy consolidated land tax, is the prevailing cause of this universal poverty, 1 shall briefly : 


recapitulate the general principles of that taxation, and after a few remarks, founded upon 
existing facts, leave to the decision of the candid how far this opinion may be justly founded ; 
and whether any material progress can be made in the improvement of individual prosperity, 
or of financial resource, whilst the same system of taxation be persevered in. é 


In Guzerat the principle of half-produce is known, alias, a tax equal to an actual half of 
the actual produce of the soil; I beg leave to be understood however as speaking of the 
principle only, for I believe it is not generally, as indeed it never can be reduced to actual 


practice in any great extent of territory. 


In Salsette the same principle formerly prevailed, taken from our Mahratta predecessors ; 
but very laudably reduced by the Bombay Government to one-third of the actual produce. 


~ In Malabar it was also attempted to be enforced, first by the Mahomedan, and after- 


wards by the British Government; though the attempt operated most oppressively in many - 


instances, as the records of that province will show. 


~ Inthe provinces subject to the Madras Government, we have again the same principle, 
Authentic statements procured from that presidency, give the fullowing rates of assessment; 

_ © The gross produce of an acre of paddy land* may be, forexample - - 100 

_ “« From 10 to 12 per cent. is supposed to be deducted for reaping, cooly, &c.; 


“ variety of small charges, say 10 per cent. however- — - - 10 
Remain — go 
. ies 


. “ OF this remaining produce the Government is sometimes entitled to 35, 40, 45, or 50 
© per cent, according as custom has defined, under local circumstances, the right of the 
¢ syoter ur - 

_ The Government share is commonly denominated the gross collections; and the per- 
manent settlement at Madras is founded on these gross collections, or actual payments made 
into the public treasury on account of Government. 


_ “ From the gross collections, for an average of years, hereditary zemindars+ have been 
allowed one-third for charges, maintenance, profit; paying two-thirds to Government, 
“€ as a rent in perpetuity. Mootaldars, or those who purchase Government estates, or have 
them bestowed on them, have, as before stated, a reduction of from 11 to 25 per cent. 
made in their favour. . 


_ “ When estates, from the recent repairs of tanks or other causes, are known to be sus- 
‘€ ceptible of improvement, the reduction is small, viz. from 11 to 16 per cent.; but whea 
“an estate is known to be fully cultivated, and to be capable of little or no improvement, 
“ the deduction is greater, viz. from 20 to 25 per cent.” 


angel? ' . ‘ r 
. In the preceding statement, the gross collections constitute what may be termed in other 
countries the net produce.of lands, or that portion which farmers or cultivators would be 
we to pay as net rent to their landlords. Of this net produce or rent, landlords, 
ver the Permanent Settlement at Madras (with the exception, as above observed, of some 
‘few hereditary zemindars) are only allowed, it would seem, to retain from about one to two 
and ahalf-tenths, whilst the remainder, or from about nine to seven and a half-tenths, of that 
“produce or rent, constitutes the Government tax. : : 


2 chess: . F 
- In Bengal the Government tax is stated to have been originally calculated at ten-elevenths 
of the expected rents of estates,t leaving of course to the proprietors of such estates only 


_ one-eleventh. What pity these rates of division were not, in the first instance, reversed ! 
C gitt principle of a tax of half-produce seems to have been in force in Bengal previous to 


introduction of the Permanent Settlement. It is in fact the assumed basis of all our 
Indian land taxes; but even here, as elsewhere, the division of produce is stated to vary, 
and the cultivators to have been responsible for the payment, in some places, of one-half; 
in others, a fourth, two-fifths, &c. ‘ 


Pei? 


Even 
Dems 


aj? # En effet pel danger peut-il y avoir d’agiter | “ rents are founded on the right of Government 
“et de discuterles maticres Gconomiques sous un | “ toa share in the produce. The share of Govern- 
f  ocoesha qui ne désire que le plus grand | “ ment is less on dry grain than on wet grain, some- 
© bien? Que pourroit-on redouter de ces disputes | “ times not more than 25 or go.” 


“* rents | 1806, 


“Lentre citoyens, et qu’en peut-il arriver qui ne + Some consideration having been allowed for 

soit infiniment avantageux ?” their former manners and state. 

dairies 3 Physiocratie, vol. 4. p. 45- t Vide Remarks on the Husbandry, &c.of Bengal, 
_ 4* Paddy land is here taken, but all money | printed in Calcutta, 1804; re-printed in England, 


No. 3. - 
Further Remarks 
(7 July 1808) . 
by Mr. Rickards, 
on ‘Taxation and 

Revenue. ~ 


by 


Revenue. 


No. 3. 
Further Remarks 
(7 July 1808) 
Mr, Rickards, 
on Taxation and 


52 


also: proves the inapplicabi 
vin of the ae object 
hatever 


ions against it here intended to be advanced. 
; be the actual local rates however of collection in different 
ing out of the above-mentioned established principle, it is evident, and more es 


PAPERS RELATING TO 


Even this variation is a proof that an actual half caanot be universally collected ; and ity 
ity of a fixed rate of tax to a produce of indefinite diversity, in-, - 


\ 


districts, arise. 


— personal observation of the effect, that the land tax, added to the extortions of those who 


. Collect it, is universally exorbitant, and that the situation of the r 


eal cultivators is uni- 


- versally that of poverty and distress.* The division of produce leaves him a bare main 


» tenance, Government absorbs the rest. - It is consequently evident that no weal 


thy propric~ 


tors can, under such a system, arise out of the agricultural’ branch of the society ; and that! = 


every commerce cannot open a very extensive field either to the acquisition or 
- of capital, where the far major part of the population are wretchedly poor. 
that commezce is accordingly found to prosper; the demand 
it has to. supply being lesson its capital and the local employment thereof be limited, — 
M it is still more injuriously restricted by the effectual exclusion of all its. —, - 


favoused or eligible spots o 


aieo's, aud. 16 ia still macy 
. from investiture in agricultural pursuits. 


Encouragemen 


large is capab 
proportion to the very great popu 


a 


ation o 


From what then.can this proceed, but from our destructive system of heavy land taxation? — 
Man naturally covets the possession of land, it is an innate principle which all the habits” 
and wants of civilized life tend to strengthen and confirm ; but in countries where half the _ 
produce of the: soil is rated as the Government's share, there would seem to be no room for 
proprietors, rich or poor, either to enter or to arise ; they are positively excluded by the 


"EF a : 

t to. commerce, that is, a certain degree of freedom from restraint, and 

: from: heavy taxation, has, therefore produced in India a partial and local accumulation of — 
wealth, perhaps equally or nearly so, to what the impoverished state of the community at _ 

le of yielding or supporting ; but the possessors of it are compaatvely fe ia bs 
E F which they are members; and the fatal obs! » 
to its employment in the purchase or improvement of land, presents us with the curious* 

- phenomenon of rich commercial towns situated in territory little better than a wilderness, or 
ina deplorable and. wretched state of cultivation. The transition from. the limits of me 
cantile wealth to the dreary bounds of agricultural poverty, is immediate, since the sur 
wealth thus acquired is either hoarded, and therefore useless from want of expendit 
it is less beneficially employed than the natural propensities of its possessors, 

. interests of society would naturally dictate. by 


= 
Itis in afew 


of ere 


and t 


“ati. 34 
oe es 8! 


i he A be A BN i 


- 
“~~ v= 


if 


operation of the tax, and of the tax alone Government itself takes the place of the class off 


_ proprietors, and by this impolitic act of power, supersedes ail the ben 


* In the work already quoted, the recompense of 
a cultivator, at half-produce, is stated to be 
positively worse than that of a common labourer 
in the. cultivator’s field at 2 annas per diem. 
Page 102,—The remarks throughout this work on 
the rates of taxation and division of produce, are 
very interesting and appropriate. : 

An accurate view of an Indian System of 
Revenue, is also given in the first part of Reg. I. 
1808, of. this Government ; which, in addition to 
the division of half-produce, and other levies made 
by the Portuguese landlords from their tenants, 
sums up the aggregate of Mahratta taxes in the 
following words: “ So that on the whole there were 
added by the Mahrattas to the former imposts 
(meaning the leviesof the Portuguese landlords from 
their tenants) forty-six in money and/twenty-four in 
grain,,severalof which stand herafter more par- 
ticularly noticed;” and in a subsequent section 
these numerous levies are stated.“ unitedly to 
exceed in number 100 distinct heads of taxation,” 
and mostly laid on the direct produce of land. 
The bare contemplation of this: enormous list of 
taxes, is sufficient to account for the present de- 
plorable state of Salsette, in despite of the better 
oat introduced ten years ago by the present 


overnment, and which was certainly a great and, 


decided improvement. of the Mahratta course of 
administration. In respect therefore to this island, 
whenever mentioned, 1 hope never to be under- 
stood as meaning to arraign the late measures 

. adopted for its improvement; the principle: of 
Mr. UCamac’s plan is good, and its effects, no doubt, 
must-have been slowly and partially beneficial : 
all I would say in this respect, is what is now self- 

- evident, that there has, not yet been sufficient 
encouragement held -out to draw. to Salsette the 

- overflowing surplus of the commercial wealth. of 
Bombay, and-I selected this spot for the experiment 

¢ proposed to effect it in my former essay, from the 
advantage 


» these: —Permanency. of , tenure with: ren oval 


‘tural pursuits—consequently the few ition 
of wealth—consequently the impro of 


-as the reduction or removal of the consolid 


_in force: the same principles are. 


ts which they alone 
ee 

ag he rey 
advantage of its situation, and the opportunity it 
would afford to Government of pron it 
nessing its effects. ‘The anticipated objects of the’ 
experiment, it will be remembered, 


tax from the land, and its. gradual dim 
consequent encouragement and success to 


fiscal resources, and without the» least risk: o 
intermediate loss; a reductionofi native establis 
ments, the practicability of which is no long 
speculative, but: proved by actual experienc 
whence, not only'immediate saving of 

a blessing to the inhabitants, as’ great 


heavy land tax. In. short,, the plan suggested 
may be said to be rather an experimental im-, 
provement than a chunge.of the. ; 


as in 1798, only with greater encourageme 
to the employment and expenditure of wealth ;» 
all therefore that is proposed, according, to. the» 
remarks thereon of a learned and di . ah 
critic, is only a larger dose of the same medic 
and which the patient may perhaps now t 
admitted to require. . cam even — z 
to add, that on the terms of the proposed plan, >. 
several natives of the. first wealth and respectas 
bility in the settlement would immediately take 
waste lands on Salsette, and employ capital in — 
their improvement. Might not this therefo 
the best and most likely method of promoti 
Court of Directors views in respect to the culti: 
tion of hemp? Wy 
+ Vide Appendix (A.) where: the checks to 
commerce and manufactures, as supposed to arise 
out/of our: revenue system, are discussed more in 
detail than could:conveniently becomprized-withia 
the limits of a note. 


EAST INDIA AFFAIRS.” 53 


are capable of distributing through the other ranks of life, and even cuts short the improve- 
ment of its own resources ; since the revenue of the state must be necessarily limited by the 
we of its subjects; and taxation, under a system of confirmed poverty, be ever incapable 
of increase. 


roprietors of the earth, would 
soon extend their possessions beyond their own individual 
by tenantry would ensue ; and land proprietors, properly so called, being thus established, 
would, in the ordinary progress of civilized society and population, naturally become more 
numerous, more extensive, and more wealthy. ‘That these proprietors formerly existed, and 
perhaps universally in India, there cannot be the least doubt, it is equally certain that they 
must Cease to exist where the ruling power would absorb all the produce of the soil beyond 
a bare maintenance to the auetcbes! cultivators. That existence therefore must have been 
crushed at some later period, and landed proprietors swept away by the torrent of violence, 
from those countries where this principle of taxation was first enforced.* , 


ondly, We are informed that the Mahabharata authorizes “the prince to levy a fifth 
“ of the produce of mines, and a tenth of the corn.” Menue and other legislators “ authorize 
“ the sovereign to exact a sixth, an eighth, or a twelfth of the grain, according to circum- 
‘stances ; and a sixth part of the clear annual increase of the trees}.” The Lostitutes of 
Akber record, that former monarchies of Hindoostan exacted the sixth part of the produce 
of lands.t Under Akber the revenue was settled ata third of the average produce of 
lands; and in Mr. Grant’s Observations on the Revenues of Bengal, the assessment is 


said to have been limited not to.exceed in the whole a fourth of the actual produce of the 


soil. 


In) 
work disti 


Malabar, we have the authority of the printed Report of the first Commissioners, a 
tinguished for its useful and accurate information, to be assured that no land 


revenue was collected by its ancient princes; § and that when expensive preparations be- 


* We have some pretty clear indications of this 
being the case in the history of the conduct of 
Hyder Ally and Tippoo Sultaun, towards the 
Poligars of Mysore and the Landholders of Bed- 
nore.’ (Vide Major Wilke’s printed Report on 
Mysore, Fort William, 4th May 1805.) 

+ Husbandry, Bengal, page 61. 
tf Vide ‘vol. 1. page 347.—The whole Section 
here referred to, “ of tribute and taxes,” is very 
i sting, and applicable to the present question : 
it states the rates in Tuckey, luran, and Iran, to be 

a sixth or fifth and a tenth of the produce, and 
Parga account of the Akberian rates of 

lection from different descriptions of land. ‘The 
Subjoined account, taken from ancient Iindoo 
works of great repute, was furnished by a pundit 
in Bombay. 

- Translate of the coinscient of the twenty-fifth 

stanza, in section sixty-eight of the chapter 
Shantee Purua, a division of Mahabharat, written 

' by Kids, which treats on the state policy, and 
wherein Bheestna tells Rajah Dhuram how much 
‘@ rajah should collect from his en 

 “ One-sixth part of whatever the subjects will pro- 
“ duce from their land, and the same to be applied 
“ for their maintenance. Then whence shall the 
“rajah get money for his expenses ?—I observe, 
“he is to receive one-sixth of the produce of land 

_ “from his subjects, after measuring the grains, 
“and no more; to levy fines on the offenders as 
“well as on those that become variously vicious, 
“and annoy others, or to conquer the kingdoms of 
a by his own valour and thus gain wealth : 


“also, to collect customs from the merchants on 
“ pour they import by ships, or on bullocks. 
«Through all these means he shall reise funds, 
“thereby to defray his charges und to protect bis’ 
“subjects—not to become indolent himself in pur- 
“suing all these measures. ‘The subjects also, with 
“ willingness, are to pay the rajah’s cess. 


306. 


come 


Nulcunt Bhat, son of Narayan Bhat, an author 
of a book, intituled, “* Mayookh Darmashatra,” or 
“ Religious Institutions,” in which he treats on 
the subject of policy, observes, “ that the rajah 
« should show pride, and be compassionate, and 
*€ receive from his subjects,from year to year, one- 
“ sixth part of the produce, and protect them: if 
* this be neglected, he shall be liable to share half. 
“ of whatever sins they may commit, because he 
“ receives tribute from them,.”—Translate of the 
paraphrase of a stanza, the author called as in-. 
serted in the first chapter of a book written by 
him, intituled, “Raja Wounee (literally meaning, 
“ Offspring of Maghoo).” ‘*The rajah, for the, 
“ purpose uf doing good to his subjects, shall collect. 
“ trom them one-sixth of the produce.” The author 
adds the following simily : ‘‘ That the sun attracts 
‘““ water, and pours down seasonably, a thousand: 
“ times more than the attracted quantity as the 
*€ people on the earth want; so the rajah, having: 
“ received a sixth part of the produce, ought to 
“ expend a thousand times as much for the defence 
“ of his subjects.” 


§ It is remarkable, that the practice of the Mal-" 


abarians has in this respect a striking coincidence 
with a Jewish ordinance. ‘The Malabar rajahs have | 
from time immemorial possessed landéd estates, | 
from which to support the princely dignity ; and, as 
noticed in the text, exacted no land tax from their 
subjects. In the divine commands, through Ezekiel, 
to the Jews, on their prophesied restoration to the * 
land of their fathers, we find the following injunc- 
tions in respect to their princes, chap. xlv. verses 7 


& 8: “ Anda portion (of the land) shall be for the 
“ prince, &c. &c.” (describing its situation and 
extent. 


t 
0 ae land shall be his possession in Israel: ' 
“and my princes shall no more oppress~ my- 
“ people ; and the rest of the land shall they give to 
« the house of Israel according ‘to their tribes.” - 


Chap- 
+2) 


No. 3. 
Further Remarks 
(7 July 1808) 
by Mr. Rickards, 
on Taxation and 
Revenue. 


Orig. 


ft Saree 
[? i 


= 


54 PAPERS RELATING TO 


Neves -come necessary ‘against apprebended invasion, they only exacted from the Tandholders*a 
Further Remarks fifth of their i ‘Tins information is the more valuable, as the aboriginal laws and — 
(7 July 1808). customs of the Malebarians seem to have been preserved unimpaired from time immemorial, — 
by Mr. Rickards, down to the subversion of their principalities and government in 1766, by the power of 
on Taxation and Pjyder Ally, and must have had some reference at least to the established usages of sur- 


., __Rewenue. rounding countries.* 


mak 
_ In Guzerat it is also ascertained that no such principle was in general foree, 3 
period of the Mahomedan Conquest; and that even after the introduction of the 4 pret a 
power, the Grassia landholders successfully resisted, as they do to this day, the payment 


Te) 


eA, 


‘of any such tax; and, 


_ In Salsette, authentic records are still extant to prove, that it was neither — ry the 

‘Portuguese Goyernment. A statement now ii my possession, procured from the ; 
’ at Goa, exhibits the whole of the land revenue derived from the island by that governmes i 

‘as amounting only to 20,000 purdaws, or about 10,000 rupees per annum; whilst the | 

‘were given up in undisturbed and undivided possession to individual proprietors, who tht 


‘became numerous, respectable, and wealthy. 


Jegal institutions of the country, or by the natural established order of societies; and if viok : 
or the effects of despotic power, be its probable origin; it will I hope be allowed no. P 
to the privilege of being perpetuated in the civil institutions of a just and moderate govern- 


shed practice what is right; may even justify what is indifferent, but can never e. 
be decidedly. 


Unconsciousness of evil may indeed be some excuse for errors from precedent; but to err 
with our eyes open is an unjustifiable aggravation of injury +. 4 Haag dias | 
; sabor Bb: 


” ‘That the principle of a tax of half-produce owes its origin to violence, to conquest, or 

the more gradual oppressive exercise of despotic power, is rendered still 

from the circumstance of our having several traces of the division of half g 

the rate adopted between landed proprietors and their tenantry or cultivators: - 

it existed on Salsette, during the time of the Portuguese ; it still appears to obtain in the 

Bengal provinces under the Permanent Settlement ; it is probable therefore the principle 

may have been formerly more general; and on the annihilation, or ip ell 
as tart eh 


7 ie 
‘| 


‘prictors, it would be but natural for the despot who took their place, to. 

to himself their share in the produce of the soil. This was actually the c 

when the Mahrattas took the island from the Portuguese. The con 
rinciple of a tax at half-produce (which was before this the landhold 

Prat of the displaced Government) the class of proprietors soon d 


etn si 
: + ee rites? ‘ 
_ But the rate of division between proprietors and their tenants, is a very fallacious ground 
of assuwption in behalf of a Government tax, since the rent of an estate paid to a le 4 
and a land revenue paid to a government, are entirely and essentially different both in ’ 
nature and effects; for, x yes she saat: 
_ First, Every contribution to a government is a gratuitous payment, whence the contri- 
butors of a tax give so much of pais money for nothiag ; the payment of revenue thet 
is in the first instanee a dead loss to the contributors. , 


VIS Pe a ee eee a ls eee ee ee) 


of the, existence of the same. individual 


property in the soil,.as in Malabar ; and bably 
the same usage formerly prevailed in t 


~ Chap. xlvi. v. 18. “ Moreover the, prince shall 
“not take of the people’s inberitance by oppyres- 
“ sion, to thrust them out of their possession ;, but 


“ he shall give his sons inheritance out of bis own, 
“ possession : that my people be not scattered every 
“ man from his possession.” tease 
. lt would seem from, this latter verses, too, that 
the prophet clearly foresaw, both the advantage 
and absolute necessity of restricting the prince, and 
hjs posterity. to their own fo Bain ALS ot ly 
last the scattering of the people from. their posses- 
sions, should be, as he well knew, the infallible con- 
sequence of the sovereign becoming general or 
universal proprietor of the soil ; andas is so clearly 
exeimplified,in most of the modern Governments of 

India. 
_* In Travancore, Canara, Coorg, Bednore, and 
Bullum, we have ut this day recorded, knowledge 
of 


306, 


taxation, though there: is always this 
between the two; viz. that the ght of pr 
more likely to. be permanent, being only 
under great revolutions, whereas. the rates of 


taxation may be ever varying, according to the» 


necessities, of the. prince. ae ess cab 
+ “ lly ades préjuges” (says the eulogist of Des- 
cartes, in allusion to, this, very subject, 
rising science of physiocracy) “‘ non. moins pui 
* quuniversels, et il y a des, coutumes- 

“‘ opinions roenite et qui n'ont cessé lp roitre 
“ telles que par l'empire d’habitude.. hommes 
“ réfléchissent si peu, qu'un mal qui.se fait depuis” 
“ ceut ans leurs pardit presque un bie” 


RAST INDIA AFFAIRS. 53 


t But the payment of rent is a contribution for actual value received, it is the return in 
value for the use or loan of a valuable property ; or it is the interest of a capital sum either 
rh in the original purchase, or subsequent improvement of an estate, and which sum has 
been actually sent abroad, or distributed in promoting the comfort, the industry, and the 
wealth of the society at large. 
. Secondly, The aggregate amount of revenue is chiefly divided into small stipends or 
salaries, the expenditure of which has very little influence on the industry, and consequently 
on the comforts and wealth of the society. Of those deriving large salaries, from which they 
still only accumulate fortunes in a long series of years: few or none remain to expend 
them in this country. 

But the aggregate amount of rent contributes immediately to the elevation of a class of 
wealthy proprietors in the state, whose expenditure, as has been already repeatedly shown, 
is the only natural means of stimulating general industry, and of promoting the general 
wealth and comforts of the society. . 


© Thirdly, The amount of revenue is often expended on purposes foreign to the promotion 
of industry, and at a distance from the place of its collection ; not unfrequently, in foreign 
and ever mimical countries. 
~ But the rent of resident landed proprietors is always expended in the promotion of indi- 
vidual and domestic industry, and chiefly on the spot. _ 

Fourthly, Proprietors and their tenantry are left to a reciprocal view of their own interests 
in arranging their respective terms of tenure. In the natural order of things, both thie 
one and the other would of necessity be equally consulted. 

But the division of produce between a Government and its cultivators, must as necessarily 
be almost always arbitrary ; whence we find the interests of one party only considered, and 
those of the other almost wholly neglected. 

_ Fifthly, The local experience of resident landed proprietors, and their own private inte-. 
rests, naturally suggest the most advisable measures for improving the siaiaek of their 
estates, which is most eeojnally accomplished by improving the condition and resources 
of their farmers; and the natural impulses of humanity establish an intercourse of kindaess 
and assistance between a lord and his dependants, which the latter can never experience 
er expect from personal intercourse with a government. Its local officers have no interest 
in local improvements, but a manifest one in local exactions for their own benefit: in the, 
first case, the interest of the proprietors and tenant are co-operative to the same useful end, 
and the public good is promoted ; in the latter case, the interests of the local officer and 
tenant are decidedly at variance, and the public good is effectually frustrated. 


In short, it would scem to be impossible for a government in any way to occupy lands 
to any useful end; both the possession and th¢ cultivation of the soil is the exclusive busi- 
by of subjects, and should be surrendered to them, unrestrained interference on the part of 

e prince, is an infringement on their rights, their privileges, and their duties: in India 
it has even extinguished a class in the order of society, without which no society can 
materially improve® : it is foreign to the object of protection; a clear violation of the order 

_of nature; and we need be no longer surprised at its militating no less against individual 
prosperity, than against the amelioration, when required, of the resources of the state, 


Under the Permanent Settlement (I speak with deference to the distinguished and ac- 
knowledged abilities of its authors,) the case does not appear to me to be much altered ; 
the lands are divided into private estates, and of the former gross collections, or of the 
‘Government's share of produce, an eleventh, a tenth, or some other minute portion, is either 
given up, or sold to a proprietor: on this principle no proprietor can be rich, without 
possessing an estate equal to a principality in extent. Those who have estates only suited 
to their own capacity of superintendence and controul, must still be poor, and poor pro- 
prietors can neither improve present cultivation or extend it to the waste lands of their 
estates, the more especially if the demand for produce -be already fully supplied. ‘The 
miserable modicum of a proprietor’s share, will naturally drive him to seek the improvement 
aa own circumstances, by. trenching on the portion or rights of his helpless cultivators ; 
t prietor may often be a harsher task-master to his tenant than even the local officer 

overnment; his object will be to gain the utmost farthing from his estates, that of the 
tenant to oppose it: there can here be no communion of interest, or any thing better than 


dence and mutual assistance, which a satisticd dependence on each other would inspire, we 
may too often find nothing but distrust, aversion, and hate. ¢ 

s TH 

_ . That this is the case in districts where the Permanent Settlement has been introduced, I 
have seen vouchers of unquestionable authority to proves The barramahl, for example, is 
meats to Be in this state. In Bengal the same effects are also stated to be experienced. 


ds to tenants, to the great injary of agriculture, and ultimately indeed of themselves ; and 
that this is owing to the heavy land tax, can hardly be doubted, when we are informed by the 
ame valuable author, that the tenantry of the “ free lands, in the same provinces, are con- 


siderably better off.” 
“*«< Tn paisant les riches vous affamez les + Vide work already quoted, chapters iv. & v.- 


. “pauvres, que les riches seuls font vivre.” 


~ Phil. Rur, vol. 1. page 321- 
That 


the cunning of weakness struggling against avarice and power; and instead of that conti- 
ie 


‘The land-holders paying ten-clevenths of the rent of estates to Government, rack-rent their” 


ee 
Further Remarks 
(7 July 1808) 
by Mr. Rickards, 
on Taxation and 
Revenue. 


Tay 


No. 3. 


56 PAPERS RELATING TO : 
That Bengal may be ina state of slow progressive improvement, is very probable, and — 


Fuither Remarks the respectable authorities from which this assertion has often proceeded, leave no room to 


(7 July 1808.) 


doubt the fact; but it may be more difficult to admit the Permanent Settlement, on its — 


by Mr Rickards, present footing, as the efficient cause. The long-continued tranquillity of the Benge Ber i 


on Taxation and 
Revenue, 


vinces, their great fertility, the general security to property, and, in some cases, the fre 
of its employment; a moderately taxed commerce; and though last, not least, the great extent — 
of free lands in Bengal, said to be one-eighth of the whole cultivated area,* and the wealth 
thence produced ; are all sources of energy that would lead to partial good, in despite of the’ 
restraints and obstructions arising out of a heavy consolidated land tax. But that the pros-— 
perity above admitted, is at all owing to the introduction of a permanent tax, averaging — 
10-11ths of the rent of estates, is utterly inconceivable to me.}_ ba ang 
Indeed the reverse, from personal observation and experience in the revenue affairs of this’ 
country, is the impression of my mind; and it is the conscientious conviction thereof, and — 
no other motive, that leads me to covet the present discussion. Under the heavy land taxes” 
now in force, [ repeat it to be impossible, in my humble opinion, for wealthy a sion 
ever to arise in sufficient numbers to constitute a source of general prosperity. The system — 
not only extinguishes one necessary class in society, but materially affects the condition of 
the other cultivators, who, reduced to a bare maintenance, are deprived of every spark of enter- 
prize. Poverty, without a prospect of relief; bad husbandry, without the possibility of im= 
rovementt ; are the natural consequences. Tenants disheartened and depressed, yet prom F 
by necessity to the cultivation of the soil, naturally content themselves with portions 
of land sufficient, after the discharge of rent or revenue, for their own and families support: 
hence the origin of small farms, or tenures, and the deplorable subdivision of lands amongst 
a wretched inefficient population, to whom increase of numbers is only increase of misery~ 
Here we may also see equality of condition exemplified, as perhaps it only can be, in equal. 
poverty ; a people of few wants, and those nearly supplied to each individual by his 
own exertions; of little use, and therefore as little dependent on each other ; a poor and 
languid internal commerce, few comforts, little satisfaction, indifference to life itself, and 


no attachment to the Government, under which the far greater part may be said to drag ow 


an approximation even to brutal existence. 


Whatever may have contributed to this complication of evil, Government has at all 


events the power to remove it. 


It would be erroneous to say, that the natural indolence of 


the people is the cause of their degradation, for we have ample proofs, especially in the — 
free commercial towns, that this imputed degree of indolence is not characteristic of their 
nature. If they are habitually idle, drunken, lying and deceitful, these qualities, it should 


* Vide same work, page 17. 


+ The numerous advertisements contained in 
“the Calcutta Gazette, of estates to be sold to dis- 
charge revenue demands, cannot be deemed a proof 
of the prosperous progress of the Permanent Settle- 
ment, however much Bengal may be adinitted to 
prosper in other respects. 


According to the elements of the French ¢cono- 
mists, a “ Nation Agricole,” as Bengul certainly 
is, of 120 million arpens (Bengal, including Benares, 
contains, 1 apprehend, about 105 million acres) 
and containing go millions of inhabitants, as 
Bengal is supposed to do, ought, in a state of 
prosperity, to yield a gross produce (at 24 livres 
per pound sterling) of £. 265,300,000, of which 
£+ 83,333,330 would be product net, or the net 
rent of landed proprietors and two-sevenths of 


the latter sum, or £. 23,809,524, would be the - 


public revenue. 


Whether Bengil, under the present system, is 
in a fair way of reaching this possibly attainable 
degree of prosperity (for the calculations of the 
economists have been too much respected for the 
last 50 years, to be now deemed altogether vision- 
ary,) those who are best acquainted with its 
local means, will best judge. In the work already 
so often quoted (vide, pp.24, 25 ) the gross produce 
of lands in Bengal is estimated at Rs.329,130,000, 
whether siceas or current is not mentioned ; if the 
former, at 2s. 6d. we have £.41,141,250 sterling ; 
and if the latter, £. 32,913,000 only, as the gross 
procuce of what is always represented as one of 
the finest countries on earth. ‘The revenues of the 
same territory are, ] believe, about eight million. 
According tothese data, the gross produce of Bengal, 
supposing it at thirty-two millions sterling, is not 
one-eighth p.rt, and the revenues ebvut one-third 
of the sums calculated upon by the economists. 


t te 2 et] 


What is still more remarkable is, that on these. 
data, the whole annual gross produce of the lands in’ 
Bengal, does not equal even the annual revenue of 
Great Britain, a tract not half the size of the 
former; inferior in natural fertility, and not con-" 


taining probably more tham one half of itss — 


population. 7 es ce 1) | 
} There is no principle better established, than 
that agriculture is most effectually improved and 
promoted, both as to quantity and species of pro-! 
duce, by means of enterprizing farmers possessing” 
adequate capitals of their own; of men in sho 
capable of making those primitive and aunual 
advances, according to the aaa of the ‘econo- 
mists, which a perfect cultivation necessarily re- 
quires. The vast observable difference betwe 
the cultivation of rich farmers, and that of 
wretched metaying system in Europe, has been” 
often elucidated, as to require no other notice ker 
than merely to bring to recollection, that the syst 
of India bears a resemblance to the latter, 


before noticed; and. that the similitude- holds * " 


among other points, in the annual advances required — 


-to be made to the poor metayers and cultivators, — 


who are often in this country alike unable to cul- 
tivate without them. In some distriets, these 
vances are made by money-lenders, and are of a 
most ruinous description; cultivators have been 
known to borrow money for the season at go and 
40 per cent. to be paid principal aad interest ou 
the coming crop. The tuckavy advances of Go. 
vernment, to be returned with common interest, is — 
another species, and proves likewise the want of 
adequate means to cultivate with due effect. Th x 
state of our cultivated lands exhibits in conse- 
quence, very generally, but a poor’ and imperfect © 
husbandry, which cannot be expected to be im- 
proved under systems thus tending to confirm the - 
poverty of the cultivating class. ; 


—. 


= 


oP - 


eee Se CU 


d 
. 
| 


EAST INDIA AFFAIRS. 57 


be remembered, are the peculiar vices of poverty,. the natural consequence of helpless 
debility reduced to the daily necessity of opposing fraud and cunning to the unjust and 


~ unreasonable extortions of power. In morals as in physics, there is no effect without an 


pg cause ; and we have*no authority from reason, from experience, or the history of 
the human mind, to ascribe vices, the apparent consequence of a vicious system, to innate 


_ and irremediable depravity. ~From contemplation of the Indian character, particularly that 


of the Hindoos, there is on the contrary every reason to anticipate their moral improve- 
ment, with the improvement of their ohivsieal | situation, and the refinements both in man- 
ners and education, which this happy change would superinduce; but the first step towards 
this improvement must be taken by Government itself. Let the field of industry be thrown 


“open to all: let the sovereign withdraw from all interference in the rights, or participation 


in the proper functions of his subjects, and patiently await the acquired wealth of the 


latter, ere he attempts to enrich himself: let him revert to the original dignity of his in- 


a a zd 
- 4 . 


tended office, which consists more in protection than interference; and in estimating the 
niature and duties of his tutelary authority, let him remember, that the children of his care 
require no other protection than the security of their rights and properties, no other en- 
couragement than the utmost possible freedam; and that the surest road te universal 


_ prosperity, is the most unrestrained course of nature’s laws. 


“ La justice divine qui reprouve les mécharis, n’a accordé qu'une autotité tulelaire’ aux 


“* puissances qui gouvernent. les. nations. Si -elles-sortent des bornes et du resort de leur, 


“ institution, elles violent Yordre naturel de la loi supréme, et ne sont plus que les 
“ instrunens du disastre general et de leur propre dommage, toujours englobé dans le 
“* dommage public.”—(Phil. Rurale, Vol. 2. p. 106.) 

Bombay, 7 July 1808, (Signed) _ R. Rickards. 


- Appendix (A.) 


From the following view of the internal commerce of Bengal, an accurate judgment may 
‘be formed of its nature and extent in other parts of India:—* The languid state of internal 
“* commerce, inferred from the circumstances above mentioned, is confirmed by the review 
of the commodities which it exchanges, and by the estimate of their amount. The 
“ exportation of grain from’ ear districts, and the return of salt, constitute the principle 
“ object of this trade. The importation of cotton from the western provinces, and the 
“ exchange of tobacco for butternut, together with some sugar, and a few articles of less 
“ note, complete the supply of-internal consumption. Manufactures are almost limited 
“ to the wants of their immediate neighbourhoods, excluding from this consideration the 
“ provision of the public investment, and the calls of foreign trade; Riccesonte, silk, 
“* saltpetre, opium, sugar and indigo, pass almost wholly through the Company’s hands, 


“© excepting only what foreign commerce, and the traffics of various ports in {india, export 


of such among these articles as the Company do not monopolize.’ (Remarks on Hus- 
dbandry and Corn.—Bengal, page 168.) a subsequent paragraph, this commerce is 
estimated at about 8 or 10 million per annum, we may add million for the external com- 
aneree, and this constitutes the state of productions and ef wants of about 27-or perhaps 30 
million of people, in avowedly the richest provinces of the British dominions in India. 


Tt might lead to very useful results to compare these amounts with the estimated value 
f English commerce and produce, and more in detail than I have the means at present ot 
accomplishing. One record states the value.of exports and imports of Great Britain, in 1802, 
-at about 79 millions ; another record values the annual produce of the lands (which may give 
some idea of the value of the internal commerce of the country) at 70 millions. In India 
the annual revenue collected from at least 50 millions of subjects, is about 14 millions 


sterling; whilst ia ponies the annual and permanent taxes of 1804, raised from 14 or 16 


millions of people at the utmost, yielded upwards of 33 millions sterling. Even this imperfect 
pear exhibits a striking difference between a poor people of overgrown numbers and 

tiered industry, and an efficient population far less comparatively numerous, enjoying 
freedom of exertion, though still not altogether unobstructed in the course of nature's 


Jaws. 


-_ In viewing the usonaressive political state of both countries, the contrast is equally striking. 


The History of Great Britain, from the Revolution to the present day, exhibits a nation 
advancing in efficient population, in commerce, in agriculture, in arts, in science, and in 
the accumulation of vast wealth, in despite of the bloody and expensive wars of King 
William, Queen Anne, and the Georges, and in opposition to a heavy load of public debt, 
increasing in each reign with the national resources, till in our own times, exceeding 600 
millions; it still leaves Great Britain the richest country of the same extent on earth, a 
population nearly doubled, and a revenue raised from 2 millions.in the reign of King James, 
to more than 16 times that amount in present times, as the following Statement will 
evince; 


306. Pp ) STATEMENT 


No. 3. 
Further Remarks 
(7 July 1808) 
by Mr. Rickards, 
«vn Taxation and 
Revenue. 


58 ‘ PAPERS RELATING TO 


: a - . 
STATEMENT. a y RRNERe i, * 
-~* 4 - Lo a* “4 *, 

Value of 4 2 s— 8 Nationd ae 
Exports. Revenue. j Debt. 

7 £4, gar ernest. « 

GAH. 2 snips cane 2,048,049-{ Trotnc un to 1688 - 2,061,856. King Wm. borrowed» ~ 44,100, 
Revolution - 1688 - - - = 4,086,087. In - 1691 - ~ 4,249,759. Repaid - - - ae 34,034.01 


Last year of William IIL 1700-1-2 - 6,045,432-4 Willan’ iueomet 404150350. Remained in 1702 : - 10,066,7; 
Wars of Queen Anne, 1709, 1712 = 6,868,840. In 1707 - - - -\ - - + In 1711 first funded =~ 947 
ee of George I. 1713,1714,1715 - 7,696,573. In1708 - 5,292,758. On gist Dee. 1714"! SS0s8 
First of GeorgelL 1726, 1727,1728 - 7,891,739. In 17og- - - - ita of wi 3 
Peaceful years, - 1736,1737, 1738 - 9,993,023. In1710- - - -/ = = = Im1728 - = = = (= §1,028,4 


y eee " 
bels , “ 
tea 


re 
War of = 1799-1740-1741 = = 8870499. = = + = = = = In17g8 - = = = = 46,661,76 
Peace - 1749-1750-1751 - -32.599,112 - - - = = = = In1749 - = = = = 74221,68 
War of = 1755-1756-1957° “+ - A%B74DIG or ttt tet Tr tateS ae 
First of George II, 1760+ 15,781,175: - = = 2 © © + Ini762- => SPL SOR NE 


In 1783-4, the whole Revenue paid = ss —* ~ 


oo 1770 Rite Bak 2 15,996,569. Into the Exchequer 12.9959519. In 1775 -- + +1 7 
War - - - 1780 = - = = = 12,624,372. 2785-6, D® - D° = 25,397,471. In 1783 - = = = -212,302,4% 
1792, Net Produce of Annial 
ee - 20,120,120. { a } 17,000,000. In 3793: == Sa + 297,980.14 
- = = = = 4800 - - = = +)43,152,019. 1800 - D® - D® ~ 25,000,000, In 1801 ~ oy i eye 0 09,83; 

~ = = = - 1802 - = = = = 48,500,663. 1803 - D® - D® - | 31,000,000. eh et exerts * 
s (US Sh =. 
180g - D°® - D° -. 33,000,000. In 1804 - - = = -484,262,625 
be : ' In 1807 sees + 640,750,00 


Whole Value of the'Kingdom, according to Gregory King, | Estimate Value of the Capital of the King 
in1688 - - = = - = £. 650,000,000. 1804 oe a ee 


Yearly Income of the ‘Nation - D® - D® ~ 43,500,000. | Mr. Pitt’s Estimate of the Annual Income re 
of Great Britain - - -/ OS) get 


Population, according to - = D*- D° - ia Detaaaaes * - 
int696 -) = © = = Souls 5,500,000. | Latest Enumerations - + Sauls = 9,300,00 
: : t 1 a1 hats Ob ) 
rt me ae 


The preeeding Statement is compiled from various records, but chiefly Chalmer’s 
«In the intervening years, which I have not given, it is both eurious and sati 

remark, that whenever wars occurred to depress the exports of the kingdom, they invari- 
ably rose on the return of e, to an amount exceeding that of former prosperous yea 
a fact that may be admitted to prove that the sources of prosperity pervaded ey 
of industry, agriculture, manufactures and commerce, which thus rebounded, after every 
pressure, with redoubled strength of spring into fresh and ivereased vigour. Mr. Ch 
Chronological Table of Exports is of itself an interesting and instructive doeun 
only from the striking contrast which it exbibits of the opposite effects of war and peac 
on national prosperity, but from showing also, -when compared with the principles . 
national government, what incalculable wea'th and strength are capable of attainment by 
a people of free exertions and pursuits, of free and unrestrained industry. : 


on 


it as se SO 


In India the scene is different, and the result less brilliant; a series of wars, far less ex- 
pensive than an European contest, leaves nothing to the boast of pride beyond a: Be 


if not ruinous extent of overgrown dominion. In provinces long possessed, or subse= 
quently acquired, no material improvement is observed of any thing deemed advan s- 
in civil polity; and no increase of resources, except what may be said to result from _— 
extended conquest: but increased revenues, still alarmingly short of that indispen ‘i 


expenditure which conquest never fails to entail, can neither be esteemed a public or a 
private benefit; and a debt of 30 millions only, threatening the Goveynment.of at least 50 
millions of people with irretrievable ruin, is certainly a proof of want of due enconrage-, 
ment, in other words, of sufficient freedom, to industrious pursuits; a proof that the land 
ont debpet of our Indian possessions have not been rendered so productive as those of he 
104. mo ‘ 


| 


EAST INDIA AFFAIRS: = 


amother state at‘any given period here adverted to, and that the feult is not ascribable to No. 3. 
nature, since our population is comparatively more numerous, and the fertility of our lands Further Remark# 
not to be exceeded by any other equal extent of the habitable globe. It is therefore infer- (7 July 1808) 

- «able; though we have possessed extensive provinces for half a century, that a new era in Mr, Rickards, 
India yet remains to be commenced, in which, as Judge Blackstone pronounces of the ° phe 
epoch of the Revolution, “ prerogative and liberty may be better defined, the principles of, piabacaad 
““ Goverament more thoroughly examined and understood, and the sights of subjects more 
“« explicitly guarded by legal provisions.” (vol. 1. page 213.) 


So true also is the remark of another celebrated author, that “ by means of industry, the 
* heaviest burthens seem light; by the influence of sloth, the slightest duty appears 
“ intolerable.” ‘ 


But if commerce, according to the economists, is nothing more than an exchange of the 
productions, natural or manutactured, of the earth, how can it be extensive when these 
productions are limited? Or, considering commerce to be regulated, as it really is, by the 


state of human wants, what internal commerce can there be amongst a who 
scarcely any wants at all? An agricultural population, paying a tax of half-produce, will 
dispose of their annual surplus to realize funds for payment of their revenue; the remainder, 


peipading them « bare maintenance, requires but. little aid from internal commerce, for 

i from their own. cultivation, they have but little, very little left to exchange, 

aytes evidently a state of very limited wants, in which commerce-can hardly be expected 
-to thrive. ; 


The surplus produce, however, of cultivation, wherever it exists, constitutes wealth, and 
‘that wealth is yearly renewed; the question at issue, then, is, whether it be most for thé 
oo ‘that this wealth should eye pass into the hands of rich proprietors, or 
‘be distributed among the poor stipendiaries of a still poorer Government, overwhelmed 
with difficulty and debt. In the first case, it is evidently capable of incalculable increase, 
-of incalculable improvement of the public revenue, and of incalculable advantages to the 
-community at large, from its auivaell distribution and expenditure. But inthe latter case, 
the wealth that is produced passes in its expenditure through warious less useful and less 
-productive channels, and is accumulated in certain proportions into the hands of commercial 
agents, where the aggregate amount, though it will continue to circulate and enrich various 
individuals, seems incapable of useful increase or advantageous distribution, with regard to 
‘India, and for these reasons; viz. because that class in’ the society through whom alone 
productions and consumption can be most effectually increased, is utterly extinct; much, 
probably the major part of the surplus wealth accumulated in commerce, quits the count 
‘never to return; and even the channel to the increase of productions, by means of that 
wwhich remains, is obstructed. 4 


_ Indeed, under the peculiar system here discussed, it is even probable that if the exported 
surplus were, from other circumstances, compelled to remain in India, it would absolutely 
‘stagnate from wanting means of lucrative employment; in other words, that it would be 
very difficult, if not impossible, to find employment, under the present state of things in 
anda, for all the capital which a profitable external trade is capable of accumulating ; and _ 
as this one fact, if true, may tend to elucidate more fylly the various cheeks to progressive 
improvement, which are conceived to be in existence and in force, a little further digres- 
‘sion on the subject may not be misplaced. 


‘Doctor Smith has observed, that the principal improvements of agriculture, in all the 
«modern states of Europe, though contrary to the natural order of things, owe their birth to 
‘the surplus accumulations of merchants, manufacturers, &c.; and the same effects, it may 
%e inferred, ought to be produced in this country, from the similar overflowings of com- 
mercial gain s but there is this wide difference between the commercial and political state of 

and India, separately considered. In Europe, the course intimated by Doctor Smith, 
is perfectly correct and clear, for, as he himself observes, “in all the great countries of 
“ Europe, much good land still remains uncultivated, and the greater part of what is cul- 
“© tivated, is far from being improved to the degree of which it is capable. Agriculture 
*“ therefore is almost every where capable of absorbing a much greater capital -than has 
“ever yet been employed in it.” As the policy of Europe does not, moreover, positively 
sobstruct such employment, it follows that there has ever been a channel open for all, aiid 
seven move .than all the surplus capital of European commeree, to force the increase or im- 
_provement of agriculture. All the countries of Europe can boast a class more or less numerous 
of wealthy landed proprietors; they have all been more or less in a state of progressive 
improvement, the demand for labour has consequently inereased, consequently efficient 
population, consequently consumption, consequently productions, consequently commerce.and 
co cial capital. ‘lhe freest and most industrious commercial nations (England and 
‘Holl fo example) haye been the greatest accumulators of the gradually increasing wealth 
thus produced either at home or abroad: their prosperity and resources have gone on to 
baa because there has been no positive obstruction to the employment of their increasing 
accu ions in any of the different branches of human industry; and the prosperous stateot 
ese, increasing the demand for productions, has of course forced agriculture to supply it. 
There has been no positive obstruction (although certainly more advantageous in some 
-states than in others) to the.direct employment ot . ys fom in agriculture itselt, in whieh line 


itis admitted.and proved that the same.sum.of capital will put in motion a greater ‘quantity 


ea en | 


No. g. 
Forther Remarks 
(7 July 1808.) 
by Mr. Rickards, 
on Taxation and 
Revenue. 


. increase appéaring in 


. state of our agriculture, manufactures, and internal traffic, proves the accumulation to 


. country, where the exported surplus produce of our different provinces, is not chiefly; ‘as. 


. extent of capital: but in India a very considerable proportion of this surplus, Feeserri 
aci 


60 PAPERS RELATING TO 


of productive labour, will add more to the annual produce of the land and labour of the society 
than in any other. There has therefore been no positive obstruction to its employment m 
that very channel in which it is capable of promoting efficient population, consumption, pro= 
ductions and commerce, wealth aad revenue, human wants, and the means of supplying them, 
in the highest possible degree. ' Pi 


This seems to be a clear connecting chain of causes and effects; but in India it must be 
kept in mind, that none of the different branches of human industry, external commerce ex- 
cepted, either in our own countries or those around: us, are in a state of pro, ive improve- 
ment, or if they are, it is so very slow as to be imperceptible ; there is therefore, as far at least 
as regards those countries generally, no greater demand for labour in one year than in the 
former, therefore no increase of efficient population, ot amelioration of the circumstances of 
that which exists, therefore no increase of consumption, therefore no increase of d 
tions. Now if productions are not increased, commerce, which only circulates them, must 
in the aggregate be equally limited: it cannot circulate commodities which are not brow, 
into being ; the sum total of the capital employed in it, will therefore remain stationary also; 
the sum total will not increase, although the private capitals of individuals will, in those few, 
free, and industrious commercial towns where the productions that are annually brought into 
being, continue to be more and more accumulated : but in these few towns, it may be addec 
and must be admitted, that the demand for labour, efficient population and consumption, al 
increase; so far means are afforded for the employment of increased capital, and so far also 
imay it indirectly force an increase of productions to supply extended wants, and doubtless does 
so: But these are very narrow limits, compared with the possible augmentation of wants 
throughout the whole extent and population of the territories of India; yet to these narrow 
Jimits is our increasing prosperity apparently confined, and consequently the means of em- 
ploying increased capital, for the impediments to its employment beyond these bounds, 
would seem to be absolute, to be almost, if not wholly insuperable. 1 an 


duce of land, except what is barely necessary for the maintenance of the cultivatin 

in such countries capitalists will not even attempt to force agriculture, at all events beyond 
the limited extent above adverted.to, for they would rather bury their wealth than employ it 
to a loss. It is therefore evidently checked, if not wholly obstructed, in that very channel 
avhich of all others is most conducive to private and public prosperity. Y alice 


It cannot, for example, be employed in countries where the public tax absorbs all the pro- 
‘class’: 


: They cannot employ it either in the increase of home manufactures, beyond the yery 
limited increasing consemptieg of wealthy towns ; the Indian demand for these manufactures 
‘being otherwise, | apprehend, as stationary as the apparent state of their annual. luce 
and of the industry employed therein; while the European demand is supplied through 
‘other hands, and, according’ to the published statements of sale in Europe, is likewise 
stationary, or nearly so. Indeed in this branch of industry there would seem to be a dee 
plorable want of capital every where ; with clumsy wretched machinery, its commodities are 
almost universally supplied on advances from the immediate purchaser to the labouring — 
manufacturers ; and there cannot be a stronger proof of the poverty of the whole mann- 
facturing class, if not of the internal trattic and population of the country generally. 
This too, be it remembered, is the second most advantageous channel for the employment 
of capital, which in India seems almost incapable of attracting any. 3 a3 


It has been already shown, that increased capital is unlikely to find employment in the 
internal trade of tie country, or of the retail trade, except within the limits of the afore- 
said commercial towns; for all without is stationary, and unconquerable poverty, 


There only remains, then, the external commerce of the country, which is admitted to 
flourish partially ; and if the capital accumulated therein should increase, as I apprehend eher 
the few 


- it must do, beyond what is requisite to support the increasing prosperity o 


towns which engross this branch of industry, the overplus must, as before I 
either stagnate or seek employment in more distant and less feitered regions. If th 
obstructions to its domestic employment were removed, the same reasons which Doctor 


_ Smith gives for the capability of agriculture to absorb a much greater capital than has 


ever been directed to it, would apply with more force to this country than to 


of the European world; and if the agricultural channel only were but once freely opened, 


all the others would of themselves naturally and necessarily expand. 


ate) ae 

Should this ee thereof prove correct, it will satisfactori'y account for a gradual 
the returns of the external commerce of Calcutta, Madras, Bombay, 

&c.; the result of wealth annually and Jocally accumulated therein ; while the statio 


be of little use to the community at large, from want of internal employment and 
expenditure, and of as little use to the state ; which is still unable to relieve itself from the 
pressure of a comparatively trifling amount of public debt. It tends to verify another obser- _ 
tion of the celebrated author above referred to; that capital, employed in the” 
exportation, has the least effect, of any of its aforesaid employments, in =r orting 
ductive labour, or addiag to the amount ofannual produce. itis peculiarly the ease’ 


European states, exchanged for other commodities more in demand: were it am exchang 


of commodity against commodity, it would be here, as elsewhere, beneficial in 
support of productive industry to the extent of this exchange, and employ a pro ite 


pally 


EAST INDIA AFFAIRS. 61 


principally of rude produce, is exchanged for money, wherewith to pay the Company’s 
revenue; and this money, constituting for the most part a bare subsistence to a horde 
E> “oF poor public servants, is chiefly ex ended to procure the same rudé produce for 
-daily nourishment and support. So far therefore as this branch of commerce only 
‘goes to the exchange of rude produce for money, and of this money for rude produce 
| again, it only sets in motion half as much industry (or perhaps less) as itis evidently 
__ ‘eapableof in other free countries ; it gives em loyment only to a single, instead of a manifold 
‘capital, and exemplifies another striking check to nage Sey of commercial wealth, and 
the consequent improvement of national resource, wholly ascribable to a vicious revenue 
‘system. 

Here then again is a state equally adverse with the former to the increasing prosperity 
of our internal affairs. Commerce, wealth, industry, agriculture and the public revenue, 
have a stationary limit, a barrier of most difficult, if not impracticable passage, and which 

slans, expedients or regulations, will in vain attempt to remedy, save only the simplest and 

fone ail regulations,—entire freedom to every branch of individual industry, re-established 

at once the class of landed proprietors, effectually, not nominally; and when productions, 

the real riches of all countries, are thus freely called into existence by the wants of a 

- wealthy people, and allowed at the same time the utmost liberty and facility of ex- 

change, commerce, as the natural pom in the business of distribution and supply, will be 
found to require neither rules, prohibitions, or privileges, to promote its increase. 


meas (Signed) RR. Rickards. 
= oe t20%: 


, 


_ The Governor delivers in the following Minute, with three Accompaniments; on thé 
subject of the Papers above recorded from Mr. Rickards. 


ae oe PRESIDENT’S MINUTE. 

1. Te letter from Mr. Rickards, of the 24th of September last, together with that gentle- 
man’s Essay on Taxation, have lain by me thus long, chiefly because it became in conse- 
quence necessary to enquire into the progress of the settlement that had been authorized in 
the island of Salsette. Such have occupied during several months the short intervals of time 
I had to devote to that object, and which not being got through before the departure of the 
Fast ships, it was understood that the papers on this important subject, should certainly pro- 
ceed to our superiors by the first ensuing dispatch, for which purpose they are now delivered 
in ; at the same time that from the speedier departure of the present convoy than had been 
éx sd, f can by the present opportunity submit only a few general observations on 
those by Mr. Rickards, reserving the further remarks [ may have to make respecting the 
means of improvement to Salsette, for the purposed departure of the Teignmouth. 


‘ a, The impression I have received in ak Mr. Rickards’s Essay on Taxation is, that 

_ it purports to apply the rules of European, to t e widely different state of Indian society, 
sucti as may in many points of view be found difficult to assimilate, if not hazardous to 
treat of, as depending on a common principle. ; 


3.. Thus, in bis 58th paragraph, this gentleman shows, that in England, from barley alone, 
and’ its modified roducts, a revenue was not navy years since derived to the British 
_ Goyernment, of £. 3,503,422 sterling, whereas the whole land-tax of England. does not, 
he observes, produce annually more than about £. 1,900,000, of which no great proportion 
can be considered as at all referable to the produce of barley ; admitting which to be the 
é, it does not follow that in India any like circumstances could ensure the same result, 
amit’ at least the tastes and nourishment of Englishmen became those of Indians. There 
isno want of barley cultivation within the Company’s territories, but the natives do not 
convert it into tle products on which the excises are established in England, and the 
exses admit not therefore of accurate comparison, farther than to evince that the taxes 
noticed in the Goth’ paragraph cannot be, in India, earried even to the height to which this 
of Mr. Rickards's argument adverts, unless: the manners of the great body of the 


people be first entirely altered.. 


© 4. Whether ornot the gs of the French economists, of laying all the taxes on 
the land, be, as noticed in Mr. Rickards’s 61st paragraph, erroneous or otherwise, it is cer- 
ne y conformable to the prevalent system in India, nor is that theory supported by the 
_ Prencli alone, but by respectable authorities in England, who contend, that all taxes fall 
§ ultimately on the products of the soil, and that in advancing a different doctrine, the 
‘eminent author of the Wealth of Nations, is at variance with himself, inasmuch as his 
evious data Jead to that conclusion. 


pts state of Salsette, I refer to the printed regulation on that subject, enteréd'on the 
if ings ofthe 24th.of February, which will show, that’ some alterations have inter- 
_ mediately taken place, particularly in the abolition of the’ several farms, whence, exclusive 
_ of the.article of mothurfa, which may perhaps still require revision, [ am not aivare of any 


>: remaining head of collection that presses’ with undue weight on the inhabitants, provided 


_ the experiment: last: ear introduced of a new administration for the late tobacco ‘aid liquor- 
ph i ' = 


ase shall:be-found to answer their object; which remains to be determined, 
: Q 6. With 


; 5. With. respect to. Mr. Rickards’s application of the principles in’ his’ Essay to the’ 


No. 3. 
Furtber Remarks 
(7 July 1808) 
by Mr. Rickards, 
on Taxation and 
Revenue, 


_-. 


6a PAPERS RELATING TO 


No; 3. 6. With respect to the alleged objectionable clause in the cowles, or proposed deeds of 
President's Minute, property, as adverted to in Mr. Rickards’s 67th paragraph, by which | understand to be — 
(7 July 1808) — ineant, that they are (though erroneously) supposed by the natives to be revisable every 

ov Mr, Rickards’s ten years, with a view to an increase on the rentals, 1 rather impute more of them not 
Essay. having been taken out, to the causes adverted to in the clause 3d of Section XLV of the | 
—~_——— above-mentioned Regulation, and particularly to the last of them, as seems also supported 
by the petition presented by several of the natives of Salsette to Mr. Rickards, forming the ; 
voucher D, among the accompaniments to his plan: added to which, the Secretary’s fee 
established on these deeds was, | am now convinced, by far too heavy for the slender 
meaus of this numerous body of agricultural peasantry, and should therefore be either 
altogether abolished, or reduced, in due proportion to the extent and value of their 
yespective occupancies or estates; but under any modification, these deeds of property 
will probably never prove palatable to the majority of the cultivators, for experen 
indicates that we have thereby been attempting to obtrude on them a system which, how 
congenial soever in its aspect to our possessions, proves but little acceptable to their 
limited estimate of its benefits, which they consider more than counterbalanced by the 
tea ae | it involves of despoiling them of their patrimonial tenancies, of which dread 
they are relieved, by adhering to the customs of their forefathers, in sharing with Govern- 
ment the greater or less product of each year’s harvest; a rule, the origin of which is nearly — 
as untraceable from its antiquity, as in its application it must have always been peculiarly 
suitable to the periodical rains of India, that will ever prove the prime regulator of the — 
abundange or scantiness of the general crops. ‘ 


7. In considering the question propounded in the 68th paragraph of Mr. Rickards’s — 
Minute, I beg leave to premise, that the introduction of English terms into Indian finance, 
leads, as in ali other instances of verbal inaccuracy, to incorrect ideas. Thus we have trans- __ 
lated zemindar by landholder or landlord, although the more accurate version would eam | 
have been landkeeper, int the sense that the same Persian atiix “dah” is applied to the — | 


el i i 


viceroy of a province or soubah ; viz. soubah-dar, a term to which the obvious 
of the inference has guarded us from attaching, as in the former case, any notion of pro- 
perty; bur having once translated zemindar by the English term Jandholder, we have 
thence been led, too inconsiderately, to annex to it our general idea of a proprietor of land, — 
and to yicld to the consequent benevolent idea of raising them to that condition, whether 
with their will or against it: but the present race of cultivating peasantry in Salsette can _ 
be expected to opie to nothing coimparatively higher than that of rural yeomanry in | 
Englaud, who would not hesitate to pay as faraiers, to a landlord or superior, the third of 
the agricultural produce of their labour, although this be in fact a higher proportion than 
is rendered by not a few of the inhabitants of Salsette ; nor am I aware of any taxes being 
continued so as to affect this net residue of two-thirds at the least of the gross Dedslges , 
rice produce remaining with the coorumby or cultivating ryet, after the pri of his 
public rental. Saker 


&. Would not the laving en again a tax on shopkeepers, as proposed in Mr. Ri 3 


y an enhancement of the articles in which those shopkeepers deal: it was at least in the 


72 paragraph, operate as an additional burthen on the coorumbees, and other cst th p 


view that this tax was taken off, as noticed in the thirty-niuth section of the already cited — 


Regulatioa i. 1808. | 


+ © 1 ? 
©. I own T am not aware of the intrinsic advantage of Pap the tax from the land 
to the houses: and it seems also objectionable, on the mere groun 


of so important am in- 
novation, such as ought not to be lightly adopted in any case affecting the general nes ‘ 
; 
: 


of the present system, as being in conformity to the principles of the Permanent Settlement 
throughout India, it would be exceeding our powers to introduce so great an rati ny 
unless sanctioned by the Supreme Government, to which, under another order from the_ 
Honourable Court of the 21st of April 1790, this Government is authorized to refer on 
points respecting the fiscal economy of Salseite, or of the vicinal districts, perma 


7 
; 
of the community ; but it is needless to enter much into argument on this part of the sub- 
ject, as, under the orders of the Court of Directors of the 24th of August 1804, approving 
«faite - | 
10. With reference to the 75th, 76th, 77th, and 78th paragraphs of the Minute from Mr. 
Rickards, it nay be proper to notice that it has already been made fully known that sons 
uadertaking to bring waste lands into cu'tivation may, as several do accordingly, hold the 
same at a fixed rent in perpetuity, which appears to be an old and well-established rule in 
the island of Salsette, as sj-ecificd in the 2d clause of the fourth section of Regulation 1, 
1800. Few or no instances have, 1 fancy, yet occurred where the parties have desired “= : 
set free in such lands for so long a term as Mr. Rickards has suggested, but it in 
> emer be aflirmed that as long a period has in this respect been granted as solicited or 3 
eemed in anywise necessary ; nor am | aware, as seems implied in the last of these cited _ 
paragraphs, that the exaction of reygnue is consentaneous with the extension of or 
rice ; tillage from lands not already pertectly arable, and in a state. of due cultivation: neither 
cau any thing be clearer than that the principle of the system in, Salsette, as expressed in 
the proffered deeds of property, precludes any additional tax for either improvement or — 
extension of cultivation, whether on low or high grounds within every possessor’s own — 
limits, all which he or they are expressly declared to be at full liberty to apply tebe Hi 
growth of what products they prefer, without affecting thereby their fixed rental to Go- 
vernment; and had not Mr. Camac’s proposed tax on fruit trees been altogether given up, 


for the reasons assigned in the eighteenth clause of the 36th sectiun of Regulation 1, 1800, - 
306. - . Jit 


“EAST INDIA AFFAIRS. , 63 


it is difficul€ to suppose that the mere planting of trees could be attended, as set forth in Na. 3. 
these paragraphs, with any immediate exaction of revenue ; the genuine object of all terri-- President's Minute 

_ torial taxation in India being, that Government should share proportionally in its actual (7 July ,808) 
produce, without anticipating thereon ; a principle which must of course continue in force, on Mr. Rickards’s 
™m as far as the major purt of the present occupants of Salsette may prefer its contingent, Essay. 


but regulated operation, to the more precise limitations which have offered to them iu the “———_.—_-_ 
deeds of property. ; 


11. With respect to the doubts expressed in Mr. Rickards’s Soth paragraph, that the 
true sense of the present deeds of property will never be understood in respect to that clause 
thereof which renders the money value of the perpetually fixed grain tax decennially liable 
to alteration, it seems that after the expiration of the first ten years, the degree of obscurity 
thought to be involved in the clause in question must, bythe future practice, become 
sufficiently elucidated ; but this [ consider, either way, of no great moment, since, if deemed - 
requisite by our superiors, this defect may be cured by announcing to the cultivators that 


| the money value of the settled rent in kind is also fixed, so as not to be liable to future 
‘alteration. 


-. 12: Not clearly comprehending the inference in the 82d paragraph of the Essay, I pass, 
| it over without remark. 


q 13. On the 85th paragraph, I shall only say, that whatever terrors the cowls or deeds of 

| perty hold out, none of them have been lefi; the Company’s Government not havin 
Feet r ? { mp & 

itherto proceeded, to my knowledge, to the length of selling either lands or other property 

} for arrears due to the state. 

P 


14. With respect to the liquor farm, as adverted to in the next following paragraph, it 
has been already mentioned to have been abolished, and a system ordered to be introduced, 
since October last, founded on the Bengal abkary Regulations, which, when matured, may, 
it is hoped, answer the object of suppressing that inordinate use of spirituous liquors, 
such as in no part of India has probably produced such baneful effects, in debasing the 
minds and weakening the bodies of iis deluded votaries, as among the Christian part of 
the inhabitants in Salsette, who form so considerable a part of its population. 


15. The tobacco farm has likewise been discontinued from the same period, and a system 
substituted in pursuance of the experiment previously made in Caranja, of which Mr. 
Rickards has, in his 89th paragraph, expressed a beiter opinion, suchas it will be very 
agreeable to me to find it ultimately to merit. 


16. Mr. Rickards having adverted in the o3d paragraph of his interesting Essay, to the ° 
remarks by Dr, Scott, in reply to certain queries which i had on the 25th of July last ad- 
dressed to him, and to others, the most qualitied from local knowledge to pronounce on 
the state of Salsette; 1 shail annex those queries and Dr. Scott’s answers to the present 


remarks, and leave the whole to make their own impression with those who may peruse 
them. : 


Nos. 1. & 2. 


17- The result of Dr. Scott’s, as well as of Mr. Ashburaer’s exertions, and of all the Vide 
large capital they are said to have laid out on their respective estates, must | fear appear Mr. Ashburner's 
by the Jatter’s, and Dr. Scott’s agents joint late address, and the present state of the and Dhackjei’s 
former’s premises, to have fallen very short indeed of the expectations that Mr. Rickards Letter of the 14th 
seems to entertain of both in this part of his Essay. June R. D. 17th D*. 


The observations by Mr. Rickards, in his o8th and following paragraphs, might open a _ 
wide field for remark ; butas more immediately connected with the subject under discussion, — 
I shall only express a doubt whether the peasantry in India, under the genuine Moghul 
8 (such for instance as is still upheld in Broach, in the manner delineated in the Keport 
from the Commission of Revenue at that station, of the 31st May 1807) be not, as many 

_ of them, in a state of comparative ease in their circumstances, by sharing with Government, 
according to ascertained rules, the product of their agricultural industry, without the fear 
of dispossession from their hereditary tenancies, than can fall to the lot of the harassed 

_ commonalty of the same description in too many parts of Europe, these latter having over 
them lords, proprietors, with reference to whose severities to the more helpless classes of their 
rural fellow subjects living under their sway, the governments in that part of the world can . 
exert but a slight degree of corrective power ; whilst in India, its right and duty are in this 
important respect as well undeérstood, as frequently and beueticially exerted, insomuch that 

the great body of cultivating peasantry in India, would probably be disposed to reject, if 
tendered to them, the offer of being placed under our European constitution. Such as the — 
system for the permanent leases granted throughout the greater part of British India, 
ugh approximating to, has yet found it necessary to guard against this eventual abuse of, 
by. a variety of checks and provisos ; leaving the Company’s ryots in a state still material] 

different trom the relative insecurity of the like classes, in the region from which Mr. ° 

Rickards has drawn bis principal data. In as far therefore as that system may seem the 
‘most conducive to individual happiness to the greatest number of human beings, and 

necifically, in providing a state of relative security to that most numerous and valuable class 

oO mankind, the body of husbandmen, by conferring on them—not indeed riches, (which is 

*n very distinct from happiness) but a medium state of permanent quiet and contentment, 
it not remaiu in some degree questionable how far the balance may in these respects 
be.in favour of European or Asiatic economy, a consideration which may contribute 

haps to make us hesitate in hastily making use of our power for the introduction of s 


Tt 
pecu- 
lative 


No. 3. 
President's Minute 
“7 July 1808) 


<2 oe 


64 PAPERS RELATING TO 


lative ameliorations, such as the legislature appears to be jealous of, by requiring that the 
revenue rules of the country shall be maintained and respected in favour of the aatoin 


‘on Mr. Rickards’s 19. The fiscal system now in force in Salsette, has that of India for its basis, in like 


Essay. 


mafner as at Broach, but with this difference, that its inhabitants have suffered more from 


u—___ the successive conquests, not sie of Mahommedans, (which in common with the last cited 


district it has undergone) but by those of the Portuguese, Marhattas and British, each of 
whom have left the stamp of some part of their respective administrations, That however the 
natives of Salsette were the happy people under the Portuguese, that is apparently supposed in 
Mr. Rickards's 104th paragraph, appears doubtful from the accounts of that islan such’ 
travellers as are ee it during their dominion in the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries, 
al] of whom appear to represent the Indians under that nation, in a state of absolute and’ 
debased villanage (as per extracts in the accompaniment) whence the gay appearance of 
the Portuguese churches and buildings of that period, may stand no more in proof of 
idividual prosperity and bappiness, than the similar aspect of one of our West L 
slands, without retrospect to the number of slaves that compose the great majority of its: 
population. Jy THis 


20. But in howsoever degraded a state the inhabitants of Salsette may heretofore have 
‘been, from their former oppressions, or continue still under, the unhappy disposition of sc 
many of them to the excessive use of spirituous liquors ; the introduction of capitalists into 
that island, as adverted to in the 106th paragraph of the Essay, may be perhaps attended _ 
with less success than could be hoped for, in as far at least as may be judged from ei 
recent disappointments experienced by those who have had time to estimate the result — 
of their having, subject to the payment of one single tax, entered on such undertakings, com-_ 
bined with the necessity of such adventurers procuring, as in the last instance of Ardeshere 
Dady, the good-will of the present occupants, before we can, consistently with what has from 
the highest authority been announced to the people of Salsette in general, proceed in the 
plan of placing over them more real landlords, in the European sense of that expression, or 
rather perhaps zemindars, in the more qualified modern a. of that term, in the — 
British part of Eastern India ; for under the engagements in which Ardeshere stands bound © 
towards those who on such conditions consented to become his tenants, his power over — 
them, and his estate, approximates much more to one of the latter, than of the er 
description; but yet it was not without a considerable degree of precaution, and with some 
jealousy evinced on the part of the ryets on his estate, that they yielded to Ardeshere’s — 
becoming at all their superior, as must be inferred from the conditions the rbinanis: 9s 

_ their own security, as briefly enumerated in the fifty-fifth section of the Regulation already 
noticed. +t PL Sear 

21. Neither might our being able to introduce into Salsette the plan prog in the © 
Essay, constitute much proof of its easy extensioa into our other territories. We may, from — 
the local and peculiar circumstances of the natiyes of that island, act towards them, or pro-_ 
bably those of the smaller island of Caranjah, as we please, without risk of active resist-_ 
ance, but such is not the case with our far more extensive possessions in the vicinity of © 
‘Surat, and still less in the north-western parts of Guzerat, in which, innevations on the eus- 
toms and habits of the people will for years, and perhaps for ages to come, expose the 

Government that attempts them to avery undefined and vexatious series of evasive or more 


open opposition. j 
22. TL concur entirely with Mr. Rickards in_all the benefits to which that gentleman < ‘ing 
verts in the 107th, and other parts of his Essay, as coanected with the most pl 
supply of water for the purposes of irrigation in Salsette, and, I bave collected, ae 
mation on this part of the subject, which will shortly be submitted to the Board, in time — 
for any measures that may in consequence be undertaken on the commencement of the fair - 
season, such as will, Lhope, be found to, be in, genexal concurrence, with the several able 
suggestions of Mr, Rickards in this part of his work. yee 
‘23. The lands adverted to in Mr. Rickards’s 113th paragraph, are not under. the Cor as 
a 
’ - 


pany’s anthority, as that gentleman supposes. the perguunah of Gundavie Pree : 


the Guicawar; but this is of no consequence to the argument, us we possess other 
in’ the same vicinity, from which the ascertainment of the facts alluded to can casily he. 
made, or obtained from Gundavee itself, by a reference to the Resideat at Beroda, 
24. In Mr. Rickards’s 119th paragraph, he defines the.advantage of a-house or reservoir> 
tax, over one on land, to consist in its, “not interfering with the immediate uits, or | 
“ sharing in the immediate benefits of industry;” but does this amount, after ai, to more © 
than a verbal distinction? since, whether the tax be laid.on the house, oron-the lands, or on 
their product, it is this last alone that can pay the tax, which must therefore interfere yery — 
nearly as much, in one way as the otber with the husbandman’s. pursuits, and with the profits. 
of his industry; such fixed tax inferring, whether rated on Jand, or deriving from whatever 


ba rey = 


other real or nominal source, much the same requisites and consequences. 


25. The estimate of square miles assumed’ in the 74th section of the already mentioned al 
Regulation, differing considerably from that in the 124th paragraph of the Essay, itmay be. — 
proper to notice, that the former is taken from the Report of Captain Brookes, of the ca 
gineers, after a local ascertainment thereof by that able officer. shee 


26. It thence follows, that the relative population of Salsette is considerably more nume-- 10 
rous than as noticed in the Essay. ‘ent Fae 
27. The 


wee 
La 


? 
. 


 —_— = |.  —- 


ee a ee ee area a nD | ee me 


‘BAST INDIA AFFAIRS 65 


23. The contents of Mr. Rickards’s 125th paragraph, are well calculated to arrest the No, 3. 
attention of political economists; but I cannot say that the same results thence present President's Minute 
themselyes to me as to that gentleman ; which is perhaps because I contemplate the subject —_(7_July 1808) © 
‘more on Asiatic or Indian, and he (as already observed) with a greater view to the European on Mr. Rickards’ 
a” iples of rural economy. Prosperity, in its true sense, must bear material, and even chief Essay & 
‘weference to individual happiness, which is not always necessarily connected with what is--—~_——— 
in the Essay alluded to, under the term of * active industry,” in a : oe degree than is 
or eo be found in the undisturbed and easy life enjoyed by the majority of Indian 
_ seultivators, who (for a nearer approximation to English ideas) may be considered as the 
“Government’s soccage tenants ; and is it not somewhat repugnant to Mr. Rickards’s data, 
that Salsette, if so wretchedly an impoverished country, should nevertheless exhibit a rela- 
tive rae not far short of the double of the two most populous divisions of Great 
Britain ? for itis one of the leading maxims of European statistics, that “ where there are 
_ “ the wisest institutions, and the most happiness, there will also be the most people.” 


= 


- 28. The general argument in the next following paragraph of the Essay, seems not, by 

‘this rule AP atgmen very applicable to Salsette, inasmuch as in its present state it up- 

“holds from its agriculture a very numerous body of inhabitants, among Whom, and yet in a 

" gréater degree perhaps amongst the peasantry of India in general, there are but few under 

-really necessitous circumstances, enjoying, as they do in this respect, most of the requisites 

for comfortable existence in their rejatively humble sphests' whilst in Europe many a pea- 
(8) . 


sant is (if 1 be sightly informed) pinched for meat, clothes, and fire, for his family. 


~ 9. It does not appear to me that, as stated in tt Rickards’s 130th paragraph, the appli- 
cations occasionally made in Salsette (as in all other countries similarly constituted) Bet 

Pog pitagerribe their cultivation according to their circumstances and convenience, 

f any definitive proof of increasing general poverty, inasmuch as cultivators for these 
grounds, or their equivalent, are generally found, so as on the whole to maintain from year 
to year the cultivation at about its usyal standard, whilst on the oe hand it is obyious, as 
noticed in Section 36, Regulation I. 1808, that some parts in Salsette (and that too-where 
Mr. Rickards’s favourite experiment, or one approximating to it, by introducing capitalists, 
on a singly rated system of taxation, has not been” attempted) are of late years decidedly 
imptovl in their cultivation, internal industry, and exterior commerce. 


go. The 135th Paragraph, which closes the general plan of the Essay, is replete with 
_ -ttruisms, which no one will undertake to impeach, but 1am at the same time not aware of 
their peculiar applicability to Salsette, from not perceiving the advantage that Mr. Rickards 
views ‘in the hee ution of ahouse tax for one equally definite on land, my reasons for 
vawhich | have already assigned. ‘ 


__ gi. Mr. Rickards having, in his letter of the 24th of October, adverted to the situation of 
_  Caranja, it seems allowable here, and may Hes useful, ‘to contrast the state of that fully 
_ cultivated vicinal district with the relatively different condition of Salsette ; although, in point 
of fayour from Government, the latter has been abundantly more cherished than the former. 
bis not thence reasonable to conclude, that in the insalubrity of the air, and greater natural 

sterility of Salsette, are to be found the causes of its more tardy progress in bringing inio 
_~enlture the waste and jungles that yet cover too large a proportion of its extent, some of 
sthe central parts of which will however appear, fromthe eyideace in the Accompaniment 


No. 3, to have subsisted throughout the best times of the Portuguese administration. 


: bre 3 ea . . . . y 
ry: 2. An experiment is now however making in that jsland towards the clearing of the 


: ngles, and the application of those wastes to the rearing of hemp, teak, and other pro- 

_such as, if,attended with success, may diminish the regret that so much of the soil 
Salsette remains still at the public disposal ; but on this subject it would be premature to 
enter farther at present. By the dispatch of the next ships in February or March 1809,’ a 
‘decisive opinion may be formed of this operation. 


_.83-, With respect to that pe of Mr, Rickards’s plan that relates to the reduction of the 
expense of the revenue ,establishments in Salsette, Caranja, &c. [ beg leave to assure him 
_ -and the honourable Court, that 1 will most willingly place immediately In his hands the reali- 
zation of this saving, to be continued from our proceedings on that head, under date the 4th 
| “oF Sep ber last, which have brought them to the lowest state that the collector repre- 
: ‘sented to be compatible with the realization of the public rental : comparatively with their 
_ amount of revenue, it must be admitted that these disiricts, as well as the island of Bombay, 
may to have always been disproportionately burthened with extensive collecting 
_ establishments ;:but/in apology for this, it need scarcely be noticed, that small collectorships 
having also very minute parts of revenpe to realize, are apt to exhibit, to a certain degree, 
>this untavourablecontiast, when compared with much larger ones, in which the payments 
_ sare more .in.gross sums ; -but however, that may,be, no one will rejoice more. HE shall at 
_ the largest practicable reduction. of the present charge. 


34. olnithus desiving to commit-the amore immediate direction of this important branch of 
“the public:administration to, Mr. Rickards, in the hope of his being able on operate several 
ale-veforms:insit ; L,would wish-to,be, understood, that,these should ,be effected with 
of prejudice:as possible to the income of, the, present Patells in Salsette, who, thougl 
foo many of them unworthy andyuseless, as sufficiently appears by Regulation I, 1803, 
“possess, nevertheless, with theirfamilics, such jaa interest in the immunities hereditarily 
B06. R 7 attached 


No. 3. 
President's Minute 
(7J ae 1808) 
“on Mr. Rickards’s 
— Essay. 
eet 


we iy nae as 


‘ 


66 PAPERS RELATING TO 


attached to their situations, that to deprive them thereof, without some equivalent, would 
amount to a severe hardship. DO! fra: 


35. It appearing from Mr. Rickards’s communications, that the inhabitants of Caranja 
have announced their consent to the new system proposed by that gentleman, it is known — 
to him that I have (in view to that circumstance, and to the smaller interests involved 
in that comparatively flourishing island, combined with the less formal sanctions re- 
specting its existing revenue constitution, than have been passed regarding Sates 


_ pressed a disposition to his proceeding to make the experiment on it, of which the 


are unfolded in the Essay. oa 
35. The subject of the Petitions from Salsette and Caranja, which accompany Mr, Rickards’ p 

Essay, have, with respect to the particular grievances set forth in them, occupied my atte 

tion; the result of which [ hope soon to be able to bring before the Board. ~ 5 eal 
37- It may however be satisfactory to notice, that although these Petitions are professedly é: 


collections of every thing which the subscribers considered as remaining evils, and wished 
to be relieved from, any alteration in the rate of assessment on the lands of Salsette, or in 


yA 


_ the system for their territorial or grain rental, is not even glanced at: whence it follows, in 


concurrence with all the other information | possess, that in this essential point they con- 


sider themselves as too well treated to desire a change. _ 
nel J 


38. Mr. Rickards having included among the Accompaniments to his Essay, a 
state of the revenue establishments throughout the limits of this Government. it may be 
satisfactory to our honourable superiors to know, that they have since undergone eonsider- 
able reduction ; whence, upon the ground of information from the Accountant Getieralck may 


safely state, that upon the whole, they are now under nine per cent. on the landed jumima 
or rental, which is, [ conceive, within the proportion of such charges at the other presi- 


dencies. op 
Bombay, i eae 
7th July 1808. (Signed) ~— Jonathan Duncan. — a 


y 8 


Tuk Gs 


_ SUPPLEMENT, added on the 8th July 1808. 


1. HAvinG, since writing the preceding remarks, had an opportunity of perusing very . ice 
marily Mr. Rickards’s Minute of yesterday, I beg leave (under a natural anxiety 1odtaind 
as little as possibly in the way of an experiment, purporting to teem with so much publi 

4 
! 
: 


- 


benefit) to express my acquiescence. to give immediate effect to the terms of the plan as 
therein advyerted to, by acting on the announced intended proposals of “ several natives of 
“the first wealth and respectability, who are it seems desirous of taking waste lands i 

“ Salsette, and employing capital in their improvement,” which need not interfere until t 
experimental progress of clearing the jungle, and rearing of hemp for the Company, there 
being room for both operations concurrently ; nor should | have ever demurred to such an — 
object as is now announced, had [ understood it to be limited to lands not already under 
cultivation, or of which there are not occupants in possession, who would not probably be 
willing to have landlords placed between them and the Goyernment, of which they consider 
themselves as now immediately holding. ’ 


2. With reference to Mr. Rickards’s doubts as to the source whence the system of Indian 
finance could have originated, I may here notice a very modern publication, entitled, 
“ Patton’s Principles of Asiatic Monarchies,” wherein the source of it is attempted to be 
traced, and contrasted from that European one, of which proprietary landholders constitute — 
the main prop. pe seg la 


3. It is not to be inferred, from any remarks that I have offered, that I presume to decide _ 
which of those two systems is on the whole to be preferred; but as that of India is inter 
woven into all the habits of so extensive a population, | would only wish to recommend 
caution and deliberation before it be finally abolished. Were India to be populated by 
Englishmen or Europeans, their own system would certainly be for them the best: whether 
it be so for men differing from them entirely in religion aud manners, is @ momentous ques- 
tion, which nothing less than the united wisdom of our superiors, should be perhaps allowed 
finally to appreciate and decide. ee 


4. Proceeding with the sequel of Mr. Rickards’s Remarks of the 7th of this.month, [have — 
further to notice, with respect to his mention of the Portuguese Governments not haying — 
adopted in Salsette the Indian system, that the European landlords, among whom they 
divided it, did so; whence it was the same thing, or, on the whole, probably worse for the — 
aboriginal inbabitants, who appear (as already observed) to have been reduced and held by 
those foreign superiors, in a state of very abject servitude. nay ae 


s. It is remarkable that Mr. Patton deduces from the Sacred Records the very conyerse 
of the doctrine thence inferred by Mr. Rickards, as to the property of the soil being, accord- 
ing to this author, throughout the East, in the sovereign, and not in landholders, as Mr. 
Rickards judges thence to have been antiently the case. Whilst engaged in this subject, 
I took the opportunity of a visit this evening to poor Dondoo Punt, the late Marhatta kil 
of Lohgurh, to ask him whether among them the land or soil was understood to be private 

306. property, — 


EAST“INDIA AFFAIRS. ; 6; 


property, or to-belong to the sovereign. And he answered without hesitation in the latter 
sense, adding, that the Marhattas had a common saying, that “ the daughter belongs to 
her parents, but the land to the king.” 


' 6. Yet, although this may be the tree and most generally establistred theoretic definition, 
the practice perhaps in India, as now constituted, will be found (as trath does, in the greater 
‘of contests) between the two aforementioned extremes, by individuals holding a qua- 
ified possessory property in the soil; the nature and precise description of which, should 
not be reduced to the level of our habitual notions, but received, and admitted to operate, 
according to its own ene import, varying, as it a good deal does, through the several 
great divisions of Hindoostan, the Deccan, the Carnatic, and Malabar; and being, for instance, 
much more sensibly felt and acted on in the provinces of Bengal, than in that of Guzerat, 
the Grassia tenures in the latter excepted. In short, this is a subject that might require 
much time and consideration to discuss with entire accuracy, but meanwhile it may involve 
the least hazard, that the Company’s servants should uphold the genuine import of the set~ 
tled customs of the natives, provincial or general, as they find them, without adventuring to 
innovate on them without due authority, or endeavouring to compress them into their own 
meditated forms of amelioration. : 


. With respect to the situation of Malabar, its whole constitution, civil as well as fiscal 
was so different, till after the middle of last century, from any other in India, that I scarcely 
consider it as furnishing an apt criterion for general comparison. By those who are of an 

posite opinion to Mr. Rickards, (such as the well-known Mr. James Grant, who has with 
wonderful assiduity developed the whole Moghul constitution of India, or Mr. Patton, the 
author already quoted, or the honourable Mr. Greville, who is understood to be the author 
of “ India Analyzed,”) no term equivalent to that of a European landholder, is acknowledged 
to exist among the natives of Hindoostan, or the Deccan: and if the Portuguese Govern- 
ment constituted landholders in Salsette, they stood towards the former hereditary tenanury 
in lieu of that Government, and made the same collections that it might have realized; but 
ut of which his most faithful Majesty was satisfied with reserving a light quit rent, such as 
in many places is paid by agmadars in Bengal at the preseut day, and by grassias in their 
wanta tenures on this side of India. 


8. The just decision of the question thus at issue, may accordingly still seem to depend 
upon a thorough ascertainment of the first principles on which it rests; as to which, how- 
ever, the differing advocates for either conclusion, continue unhappily at entire variance 
1 have already intimated my own impressions, and I shall here take leave, for the present of 
a discussion on which the unexpected urgency of existing circumstances, with respect to the 
departure: of the convoy for England, having obliged me hastily to commit so far my sen- 
timents, that considerations may, I trust, apologize for the desultory order and imperfect 
tenor of the several remarks, that, pursuing the order of Mr. Kickards’s observations, I 
have, as a point of duty, and not of c noice, and with a diffidence proportionate to the great 
interest of the objects in view, been thus unavoidably called upon to submit. 

‘ (Signed) Jonathan Duncan. 


a 


~ (No. 1. —ACCOMPANIMENT to Mr. Dancan’s Remarks of 7th July 1808. 


QUERIES addressed to Doctor Scott and others, .respecting the state of Salsette, in a 
letter from the Governor in July 1807. 


1. Wnar proportion of Salsette do you think remains now waste, one half or one quarter 
part, or how much, with reference to what is already in cultivation ? 


a. Do you think the population has increased, or diminished, in this island, during the last 
yon years f : 

3. Do you consider the island to be in a progressive state of improvement, or decline ; or 
as stationary ? 


No. 3. 
Supplement to 
President’s Minute 
(7 July 1808) * 
on Mr. Rickards’s 

Essay. : 


Queries referred to 
in the 
President's Minute 
(7 July 1808) 
relative to Salsettes, 


_. 4. What improvements do you conceive would the island now admit of, with respect to its . 


‘government, the redress of grievances, or the security of the cultivators and landholders? 


(Signed) Jonathan Duncan. 


Dear Sir, 
“T suatt not fail to the best of my judgment to answer every part of the Queries with 
ee to Salsette. I certainly do consider the island as in a state of improvement. A man 
o thinks otherwise, must be blind and prejudiced at once, for nothing in my opinion is 
“more certain and obvious. 
; Dear Sir, 
‘ Yours, &e. 
24th July 1807. (Signed) H. Scott. 


‘ 


Answer to Queries 
to «\ 
President’s Minute 


relative to Salsette. 


dg et 


68 PAPERS RELATING TO = 
(No. 2.)~ACCOMPANIMENT to Mr. Duncan's Remarks on 


_ Tere. can be little doubt but that under the Portuguese, the. island of S sete 
a very flourishing condition ; the lands were then private property, and many of 1 
holders were wealthy: some remains of their buildings and public works give us an 
considerable opulence, and it is fully confirmed by tradition, which is not yet ve 
I have seen a man nearly 100 years of age, who died lately at Pasparely, who rem 
the. time when no less than 40 Europeans assembled every Sunday in the chureh c 
_ After the conquest of the Mabrattas, all was destroyed ; the landholders fled. ps 
from. the island, arid the conqueror introduced his oppressive and degrading syst 
-tuin of that of private property. Weer 


After a period of about 50 years the island was taken by the English, and for al 

5 oe it has remained in our possession. The English chiefs ae to have k 
iews of right policy than their predecessors the Mahrattas: they adopted ul th 
-of raising inoney from the people, and some of them, ( pase f4: 
articularly to be named) invented new, and I do think very 
eos us, the people certainly found themselves in no better a situation than a1 
Mahrattas: our chiefs never understood well the language of the country; the syst 
Jetting out the lands under the management of natives, was continued, and some excepti 
-means of raising money were over and above adopted by us. Mra? newt 


The first attempt at improvement by the Government of this ued 
made under the chiefship of Mr. 'Camac.. Several very exceptionablé tax 
relinquished, the lands were Jet out in a more equitable mode, aud their 't 
‘too high, were somewhat diminished. To these salutary changes, Mr. Di 
Court of Justice as it now exists, and which is certainly a great improvement 
system. Other means were gradually adopted to promote the cultivation of 
to encourage tlie people to industry. It was signified to the inhabitants, tha 
“avould ‘be transferred to them as private property, if they chose it, and without 
‘to their present payments :; a few accepted of this offer; but such was the debase 
which mankind had fallen by long oppression, that the rest rejected it, r le 
-proposal with sullen distrust and indifference. The property of the land ‘nes 
into their minds, nor had they the means, nor the energy to extend, or to 
cultivation. ; \¥ ine fd ea 
With the same view of increasing industry and cultivation, Governm 
res undertaking of Poway and Bandoop. Before those e: 
universal cultivation of Salsette was rice, nor had those rich articles whieh 
value to the tropical countries been attempted there, although the soil and clin 
‘sette are extremely favourable to'most of them. I may truly say, that inde 
ersonal advantage, the proprietors of those estates hid a Siticere wish for their: 
hey entered ‘on their untertakings with enthusiasm, and under many losses 
-this hour never relinquished the animating hope of success. They have certain 
sa good deal. Their cultivation ‘of ‘canes “and -other-articles “is*extensive: they 
many wells for the purpose of irrigation, and they have established a numerous 
where’some. years ago there hardly existed a human being. They ought not perk 
outset to have expected that they could clear and euitivate a large traet of land-a 
inhabitatits on ‘it, without some persdnal loss. This they have'severelyexperien ed, an 
one time a state of bankruptcy stared ‘them in the face.—1 allude to the time of the 
famine, which inspite of the active vigilance of Government, was felt severely in Sal 
‘but by none so much_as the proprietors ef Poway and Bandogp, where a large ca 
eimbarked, and where cultivation at ome period was nearly stopped. Since that tia 
favourable circimstances have occurred, ‘and among others, those estates have « 
. ~essential benefit from their spirit contracts. Government could certainly by no ot 
have given so cheap, or so appropriate an encouragement to Poway and Bandoop. 
‘I may say that this encouragement has not lost the public a single rupee, for we | 
past experience that those who deal in spirit would not have soRpisd it to Gove 
cheaper rate, sand it was often procured at a dearer rate. The best spirits the 
.the:sugar cane, and_I think Salsette will soon keep, by these means, a large sum: 
among us, which has hitherto been annually sent to foreign nations. A great ; 
must arise, too, to Government, from the supply being at hand, for distant supplies 
stantly attended by ill effects : the stores in such cases are too full of the article, or defic 
in it, and the price is always most irregular. “As soon as ‘the ‘present contracts ex, 
further expect that Government will get their supplies here at a much cheaper rate 
elsewhere, .and in as small or as great quantities as they require. All those are adya 
whieh a foreiga market cannot afford. rit a eae - 
Among the advantages that have already arisen from Poway-and. Bandoop, ‘Tay a 
-the rents iow paid for those estates, which are very considerable. This is a-permanent.gain: 
to the Company, for those: lands had fallen into such a state, that they, twelve y 
yielded litte or nothing. Population is always a farther gain to the public, and | 
increase of it on those estates, may fairly be reckoned among the late impro} 
Salsétte. -. ( ; OoEN 
The estates of Poway and Bandoop have at times, and chiefly in the beginning, st 
severely from disease: they were over-run with trees and underwood; and the luxuriant g 


Bec FP i: Pa S 
Pantin Tl 


a 
iS 


hehe 


- bee ‘ 
Pee x . 


CEAST INDIA AFFAIRS. 69 


, that; the fields produced uneaten by cattle, rotted, on the ground, and spread fatal fevers , Nog. 
over the: eountry ; this is too mackcthe case at this same many partsof Salsette. The Annes tp Gneries 
ehange on these estates is now surprising, for such is the-effect of cultivation, that those prvi ary Minute 
: .formerly so,destructive to mankind, are as free from disease as any part of Bombay, (7 July. 1808) 
and we no longer see the labours of the year disappointed in a moment by the morbid con- selative to Salsette. 
sideration of our cultivators. The natives have now lost their terrors, and they at last = 

"are eonviticed that they can live at Bandoop or Poway with perfect safety : I consider this. 

fact as highly important ; for the sad effects of disease in the beginning, not only exposed 

us to great pecuniary loss, but had almost induced us to relinquish hope. 


~ F think a man must be very full of prejudice who does not in many res see a great 
mprovement inSalsette within the last ten years. The causes detailed in the beginning of 
‘this Paper, have greatly contributed to that effect, but many no less important remain stb t0 
be mentioned. : 
The building of the causeway at Scin, and the new road to Tanna, have been of the. 
test utility. A few years ago a traveller in Salsette, on the most frequented road of the 
land, met with nobody besides a few passengers on foot; the high road is at present 
‘covered with carts, which transport to Bombay, ‘Panna, or other parts, the grain, straw, 
and other products of husbandry. There is not a moment that people do not pass the 
at Lion, with a variety of provision, &c. where formerly a solitary traveller Nes now 
‘and then made his appearance ; not only has the bridge and the great road facilitated this 
‘intercourse, but it has been promoted by various regulations. ‘Phe ferry, at the time 1 
allude to, was ill managed, and a system of pilfering prevailed which it is very difficult to 
prevent with the natives. Severe regulations have been made against such abuses, and 
‘with excellent effect. With regard to duties, &c. &c. it has been ordered, that Salsette 
‘and Bombay shall be on an eljual Roti that the intercourse shall be perfectly free, and 
that in almost all respects they shall be considered as one island. This regulation, adopted 
several years ago, gave very high satisfaction to the people of Salsette, and has been of 
-very material benefit to that island. It has given a security to the husbandman and the 
trader, which they knew not before, 


It is not alone the agreeable appearance of increased activity that makes me conclude 
‘that the improvement of Salsette is so considerable of late years; many other circumstancés 
‘confirm it, of late some respectable natives with capital, have with permission of Govern- 
‘tment, settled in Salsette. Such people deservedly meet with encouragement; but the 
disposition that men of this description now show to embark their property there, is a proof 
of the change of public opinion with regard to Salsette, for some years ago no man of pro- 
‘perty would have entered on such a speculation, Settlers of this kind will bring a new spirit 
‘with them, and’ will soon effect what the poor, indolent and long oppressed natives never 
could have done. I observe that even the purvoes of Bombay have dug some wells in Sal- 
sette, and made inclosures of stone. 


_ Thad long wished at Poway to induce the natives to take my lands from me on almost 
any terms they pleased. {I had become convinced that ng other method would ensure the 
general cultivation of the island, and that the West India practice of proprietors cultivating 
whole of their estates, was not applicable, for many reasons, to the state of things in 
‘this country. With this view I offered the natives wells, cattle and lands, for a triflin 
consideration, and even gratis, but I could get nobody to yenture on such an enterprize ; i 
was almiost in despair, weed to my astonishment [ found this season that I could let out 
much of my land to adventurers in agriculture, by giving them cattle and some other kinds 
‘of encouragement. I now soon expect to see the whole of my ground in cultivation, and 
Predocing various articles for the Bombay or foreign market, while I shall relinquish all 
mmediate income in agriculture; employing myself only in aiding or directing those who 
are immediately concerned in it. This is the state of things which I have long anxiously 
wished to see, for this alone can render permanent and useful all that we have hitherto done 
in Salsette. 
Asa further proof of the improving state of Salsette, I may observe, that about three 
ears ago I got from Government the village of Tankey. For a long time its population 
tad been diminishing, and in Salsette, the immediate consequetice of a diminished popula- 
tion, is an increase of jungle, or what is still worse, of grass, which give rise to feyers and 
ays 'y, and waste, in a proportion rapidly decreasing, the pedple who still remain. When 
i took Taikey not a single habitation remained, and the few people who had escaped from 
disease had gune to other parts. I have already collected a considerable number of people ; 
not less ‘I think than thirty houses ; and half of the lands are now in cultivation. Such is 
the present spirit, that I believe that every foot of the village will be occupied in ten or 
twelve months more. Among my adventurers in Tankey there are two Bombay puryoes, both 
amen of some property. 


Some things still exist in Salsette of the ancient establishment, which I think might be 
altered with advantage, and which are not consistent with the general spirit that has of late 


years regulated that island. 


There are some small farms, which produce yearly to the public but a few hundred rupees, 
while they ‘harass and injure the inhabitants. I can affirm from experience, that it is im- 
possible to authorize the servant of a tax-gatherer of any kind to wear a livery, without 
making lima little tyrant. ‘To this moment the poorest classes of the people know us not 
orn Tag They shave beeu used to Mahratta oppression, and will seldom venture to 
) resist, 


No. 3. 


‘Answer to'Queries 


referred to in 
President’s Minute 
(7 July 1808) 


relative to Salsette. 


70 PAPERS. RELATING. TO 


resist any body who comes in the shape of authority. Two of those farms I shall mention, 
the farm of Jungars, which is a tax on the husbandmen of Salsette, and unknown even to 
the Mahrattas ; 2d. the farm for cattle, sent from Bombay in the rains, to graze in Salsette : 
the farmer pays for this a mere trifle, and 1 have known him commit very-unw 

actions. , at 
It must be allowed that the lands of Salsette are let too dear, although something has 
already been done to lighten the burthen. The difference of rent would, [ think, be amply 
made up by the quantity of land let. __ 3 


tt aes 
A Marhatta practice still prevails. in Salsette, which greatly impedes the progress of 
-agriculture. hen a man has once rented a t iece of Tand trom the compettag nt - 
4 is” 


never again leave it, nor even relinquish a part of it; there he must remain; and 


children or relations, whose assistance only he was able to cultivate, were to. die, he must 
continue to hold and pay for the same quantity of ground. Even the widows of the de- 
eeased are obliged after the death of their husbands or children, to.engage for the usual 
amount of ground. This is a great bar to the letting of the Company’s lands to el 
who would otherwise be disposed to settle, and who look with terror at this unayoidal 
condition. . mal 
It might be useful to change the patells of villages yearly. They at present hold the 
office for life, and thus acquire a great influence among the people, which they sometimes 
apply to bad.purposes, both with respect to the public and individuals. In a village near 
iomak I know a patell who has amassed a great deal of money ; he turns to his own 
,account all the unoccupied lands, for which he pays nothing. ese lands. have now 
become a considerable proportion of the whole village, and are constantly on the i : 
As he feeds cattle, cuts hay, &c. &c. on those waste lands, it is highly for his interest that 
they should increase; and iene patells in other situations may have a similar interest, _, 


Another circumstance seems in Salsette to impede the progress of cultivation. As few 
“villages are fully cultivated, the inhabitants make choice of the. finest spots, allowing the 
rest to become waste. If any person wishes to settle in such a village, he finds it imp: 
sible, for the inferior grounds that are left are so intermixed with those of the first ey, 
that confusion would ensue, and the new settler would be harassed and ruined. ‘This ¥e 
a general evil, and exists to a great extent over much of the island; when new set! ers 
offer, they should be put in possession of a sufficient quantity of land annexed with 
lands of others : but ‘his will meet with a vigorous resistance. When I took part of the 
village of Paspauly it was with the greatest difficulty, and after every impediment th 
could devise, that [ could get what I required unmixed with occupied spots. I proct 
at last a third part of the village, and in spite of the difficulty that I had, one third 
to.this moment stil! remains uncultivated, producing nothing to the Company, 


It would be difficult to find in any part of the world, a spot better situated for. cu Itivatic 
than Salsette. It one day may be of pene value than the large island of Trinidad in the 


West Indies, for in the one case a perfect state of agriculture will be acquired and supported 
with great difficulty, while in the other there is every desirable facility, Salsette - 
tiguous to Bombay, and may be said to embrace it for above half of its circumfer 
on the other side it is separated by but a small channel from the continent of In 
has thus every facility that can arise from the neighbourhood of an immeasurable ] 
lation and great wealth. The riches of the mercantile community of Bombay are ext 
Sean Bi to possess the soil seems to be a natural passion of all mankind, and it is | 
-on this island by every class of the community. Even the bora quits his shop on his 
holidays, and flees to his little garden in the country. When we have fully convinced the 
wealthy inhabitants of Bombay that it is possible to cultivate the lands of Salsette to 
advantage, and that his property in the soil, and his property of every other kind is there as 
secure as in Bombay, the riches and the industry of this island will take that direction, anc I 
have no doubt but that at last every corner and nook of Salsette will be as eagerly bough: 
up and secured as it is here. The wealth of individuals is that of the state, and thus a 
comparatively small tract of jand may become to Government of infinitely more importanc 
than extensive provinces, where an imperfect agriculture does little more than feed als 


Pa 


population. Of late years much has been done for Salsette, and the effects that alre: 

appear, are flattering; to amend a degenerate people, or to improve a_ wretched state | 
agriculture, is not the work of a day. Iam very sensible that I am speaking to a far better 
judge than myself, on matters.of general policy, nor should I have ventured on the subject 
but at your desire ; but I may have observed some circumstances, from being on the spot, 
which have escaped your observation at a distance. Ree 
(Signed) H, Scott. 


> 


; 
} 
: 


ACCOMPANIMENT to Mr. Duncan’s Remarks on Salsette. 


: 3 
Extract from the voyages of John Francis Gemelli Barere, descriptive of the state” 
of Salsette, as it was in the year 1695 of the Christian era, ore 


“ Tue island of Salsette, in which the aforesaid pagod is seated, is about seventy miles in: ” 


compass, twenty in length, and fifteen in breadth; being very low, it is cut by several 
channels running in from the sea; but there are high mountains in. it covered with trees. 
The soil is very fruitful, and produces abundance of sugar-canes, rice, and fruit; such as. 


mangos, 


EAST INDIA ATFAIRS: 7% 
, cocoas, transalins, giacharas, tamarinds, ananas, papas, and other sorts, which shall 


No. 3. 


‘mangos 

‘be described elsewhere. There are in it several villages of poor wretched gentiles, moors, Historical Extraets 

_ and christians, living’in houses built with wattles, crusted over with mud, and covered with Telative to Salsette, 
Coes 


straw, or palin tree leaves. They go naked, both men and women, covering their privities 
with acluut, and their breasts with another, or else with a short jerkin, that does not reach 
below thernavel; leaving the arms, thighs, and legs bare.’ On their arms ‘they wear bracelets 
of silver and glass, and thick silver rings about the legs. The peasants are worse than 
vassals to the lords of the villages, for they are bound to til] the land, or to farm as much 
as may put them in a condition to poy the landlord: thus, like slaves, they fly from one 

illage to. another, and their landlord brings them back by force. They generally pay for 
theirland, four, six, or twelve morais of rice, so called when the husk is ott and vate when 
itis on, which is the way they usually deliver it. A morai is twenty-five paras, and the para 
twenty-four pounds Spanish; measures the Portuguese use for provisions, as they do the 
covedo-for long measure. If the peasants take the land to till, in the place of their abode, 
they pay no other duty ‘to king or landlord, (though somé exact some days of personal 
_ service;) but those held in fee, pay an. imposition according to what they are worth, every 
four months, to the kings, factors, or treasurers residing in all the northern cities. These 
villages are given in fee to soldiers who have served long, er to other persons that have well 
deserved of the Crown,. for three lives, after which they generally endeavour to. renew; but 
to the church they are given for ever.” 


~The author adds, that he travelled in Salsette “eight miles through a thick wood,” in the 
vicinity of the Canara caves; after passing, as he notices, “ over a mountain full of monkies, 
““tygers, lions, and other wild beasts and venomous creatures.” See pages 195 and 198 of 


‘Church M. Vol. V. 


EXTRACT ofa farther Account of Salsette : Written by Mr. Hamilton about the beginning 
i ala ate of the eighteenth century. ; 


_ “ Satserre is an island about 25 miles long, and in some places 10 miles broad. It 
is fruitful in roots and fruits, but not in corn; it is stocked wit villages and churches, but 
has no city in it but an old one called Cama, hewn out of the side of a rock; but by 
whom I could never Iearn. It is neara mile in length, and many antique figures and 
‘columns curiously carved in the rock, and has several good springs of water to accommo- 
date it. At present it is inhabited only with wild beasts and birds of prey. The island 
is almost cut in two by a narrow river, that bisects it at a town called’ Werwa, which 
lies on the sea shore, and has a little narrow harbour, deep enough to receive ships 
of the greatest burden, and is secured by a small fort standing on the north side; but 
the town is on the south side of the river. It drives a small trade in dry fish, made here 
and transported to the inland countries and villages that want the benefit of fishing, 
The fishers here catch their fish in long nets fastened to stakes placed in the sea, the 
outward ones, most of which are driven in the bottom in nine fathoms’ water, and they 
= gies to strangers like a wood in the sea. There are several villages standing between 

ersua and Bombay, on the sea shore; but Bandara is the most conspicuous, which fronts 
Mahim in Bombay, about a mile distant. The Portuguese have some great guns planted 
at. Bandara, but they have no trade, because.the river belongs to the English ; and all cus- 
toms of goods, either imported or exported, are paid to the custom-house of Mahim. The 
mouth of the river is pestered with rocks, that forbid entrance to any vessels of burden.” 

In anno 1694, the Muskat Arabs made a descent on Salsette, and committed great depre- 
dations, in plundering and burning villages and churches, killing the priests, and carried 
about 1,400 captives into irredeemable slavery. 


EXTRACT from Dr. Fryer’s Travels :—Begun 1672, and finished 1681: 


-“ Curtosity led me asecond time to visit the island Canorein (another name for Salsette,) 
having obtained leave for a longer stay ; nor went [ alone, some of the best quality on the 
island being led by the same desire: polaing themselves with me, we carried a train of 
servants, horses, and palankeens, which were ferried over before us; and we coming soon 
after, were met by the fraternity (of the Jesuits,) and conducted to the fathers, who detained 
us till the afternoon by a stately banquet; showing us the curiosities of the church and 
college, diverting us with instrumental and vocal music, and very good wine. 


_ “After which, we were dismissed; and four miles off Bandora, were stopped by the kindness 
of the padre superior, whose mandate, wherever we came, caused him to send his recorders 
(a term of congratulation, as we say, “ our service”,) with presents of the best fruits and wines, 
and whatever we wanted. 
* “Here, not adjoining to any town, in a sweet air, stood a magnificent rural church ; in the 
way to which, and indeed all up and down this island, are pleasant aldeas, or country seats of 
the gentry, where they live like petty monarchs ; all that is born on the ground being theirs, 
Ing sbemn in a perfect state of villanage, they being lords paramount. ' 
_“ From hence, when we had baited, the same night we travelled early to Magatana, 
using our fowling-pieces all the way, being here presented with rich game, as peacocks, 
doves, and pigeons, chitrels, or spotted deer.” 
See Fryers ravels, printed at London in 1698, page 71,-wherein he adds, that on_his 
way from Magatana to the Caves of Canara, le passed half a mile through a thick woot 
“ peopled” (to use his expression) “ by apes, tigers, wild buffaloes, and jackals,” 7 
1e 


Now 9. 


7 PAPERS RELATING TO ee 
The Travels of Carrere show that he approached the Caves-of Canara from the north- 


Historical Extratts ward, by Gorabunder, and the village of Deinse Dina, whilst Mir. Fryer’s route was from 
relative to Salsette. the south and west. Hence the difference, as to the extent of the wild tracks they passed 


Mr. Lechmere’s r 


Minute 
(16 July 1808) 


through, such as are generally traceable in those localities to this day. 


can be immediately pi on this subject ; but copies of them are in the meantime te be 
transmitted by the ships under dispatch, noticing to the honourable Court of Directors, 
that our further proceedings theréon, togetherswith such resolutions as shall thereon be 
passtd, will be communicated to them by the shortly expected dispateh of the honourable 
Company’s craizer Teignmoutly. 


' The above ately pase on not having been yet perused by Mr. Lechmere, no decision 


EXTRACT of BOMBAY REVENUE CONSULTATIONS, the 22d Joly 1808, 
Mr. Lechineré delivers in the following Minute :— 
Mr. Lechmere’s MINUTE. 
I #AV# pérused with much attention the Essay and Minate delivered in by Mr. Rickards, 
as well as the Minute and Accompaniments by Mr. Duncan, and should be happy, en 


- 


on Mr. Rickards’s inf my power; to state any thing that could further elucidate either side of the question. 
Essay and Minute. debate. 


_, This point having been so ably discussed on both sides, leaves it for me only to observe, 
that I Sanat in the opinions espoeued by the President ; and that I comesive tine question 
to be of such importance, that no material alteration ought to take place in the present 
-system, Without a previous reference to the honourable Court of Directors, who, om the 
‘arrival in England of the lately departed ships, will be in full possession of the subject, and 
no doubt will give us the earliest notice of their sentiments on the subject. 


‘The question appears to me to be, how far it may be politic and prudent to introduce a new 
system of taxation to the exclusion of local forms, customs, and usages, among the natives of 
this country, who, from their infaney, have been bigoted to them ; any deviation from whi 
we all know, they look upon with a most tenacious and jealous eye, even supposing that 
deviation be evidently for their good. wv 

I agréé with Mr. Rickatds, that it would be a most desirable thing to construct reservoirs 
for Water, ag Well as to have all the tanks cleared out, a subject, 1 know, Mr. Dancan has 
had for Soine tine past urder his consideration, as well as some police regulations; bat how 
far it thay be proper, just at this time, to make so large an outlay as will be requisite of 
the Cémpany’s money, is a question for serious consideration. bess 


It is more from this want of water that I conceive the cultivation on Salsette does not 
more rapidly increase, than from any cause of excessive taxation, the inhabitants only 
paying one-third of their produce, which I cannot call excessive. 


The paper given in to Mr. Duncan by Dr. Scott, who has for many years been in @ ma 


fer living on Salsette, ought to have much weight; and 1 am happy in having it in my 
i P Government; in 


power to say, that during a circuit I made of the island by desire of this 
the year 1803, { perceived with much satisfaction the very improved state of the inhabitants 
‘in general, when compared with the situation I saw them in some years . 


Since the period I made the tour of the island, I have almost the whole time acted as the 
Judge of the Provincial Court of Session, and consequently have had very frequent oppor- 
tunities of séeing the general state of the people and country, both of which have impressed 
ame with a conviction that the situation of the inhabitants was much improved, and that 
‘cultivation was increasing. : ef 


This improvement may not have been perhaps so rapid as might have been expected ! rom 
the various reliefs afforded the inhabitants by this Government for some years past ; yet, 
have not a doubt but it will continue gradually to increase, and the more particularly so if 


there should be a more abundant supply of water procured, : ere 


Whether this improvement would be accelerated by the introduction of a new plan 
sof management, must be a mere matter of speculative opinion, on which it may be ha 
‘ous to pronounce ; but as the island undoubtedly is, under the present arrangements, 
vancing in cultivation, I am not for interrupting that certain progressive amendment, 


- 


the ‘introduction of a system that may lead not only to undo what has already been done, — 
rove at af 


-ut may tend-much to alarm the inhabitants, and which may ultimately not p 
to answer any of the good purposes intended by it. 


«5 é 
If itis possible to decrease the expense of the collections, the measure will have my 
amost hearty support and approbation. ; nsehaen 


Should the honourable Court be inclined ‘to try the plan brought ‘forward, and so ab 
‘supported ‘by Mr. Rickards, they will communicate their directions to us, when 
Board will afford every facility that may lie in their power to the successful issue of the 
wadertaking. 
"Bombay, 16. July 1808. (Signed) Thomas Lechmere, 


‘EAST INDIA AFFAIRS. #98 
' Resolved, ‘Phat according to the sentiments of the majority, no innovation be made b 
‘this Government, without a reference to their dayetfors on he system and oridcinies oF 
settlement for the island of Salsette, which, having been originally sanctioned by the 


‘Supreme Government, has since been oved and confirmed by the h , 
ener emi appr med by the pngiiesihe the 


. ‘No. Cs 
Rev. Cons. 
Rerclyoa of the 
d respectin 
gs 


; This Resolution does not, however, extend to such part of the island of Salsette as is \—___ 


not under cultivation, and, as such, occupied by tenants to whom a proprie title’ 
been conceded, 3 5 ee 

In the event, therefore, of Mr. Rickards finding it practicable to make trial of his 
financial system in those parts of Salsette that lie thus open to experiment, the honourable 
the Governor in Council will very readily concur in ee a as Mr. Rickards may, 
in consistence with the preceding general exception, suggest for that purpose. 


And, inasmuch.as the inhabitants-of Caranja appear to have requested ‘Mr. Sickerds’ 


be Sy of finance to be introduced among them, the Governor in Council is very willing 
that Mr. Rickards should immediately proceed with the experiment in that island, which 
will also facilitate the beneficial object that Mr. Rickards views as practicable in making a 
large reduction in the charges of collection. 


Resolved also, that Mr. Rickards be invited to bring forward, for the consideration of 
the Board, those reductions of expense in the island of Bombay and Salsette, and generally 
‘throughout the Company's possessions under ‘this presidency which have occurred to bim 
to be available, and which the pean exigencies render most expedient to realize to the 
utmost limits.of prudence, sound policy and justice, with reference to which this Govern- 
ment has been engaged in such reforms for these twelve months past, and having not yet 
closed their proceedings, each member of the Board will, more patticularly in view to the 
recent call of the Secret Committee, as communicated from Bengal under date the 24th 
June last, be prepared to contribute whatever may appear to either of them to constitute 
remaining sources of admissible retrenchment within the limits aforesaid. 


- EXTRACT BOMBAY REVENUE CONSULTATIONS, 2oth July 1808. 


TN delivering in the following Minute, Mr, Rickards begs leave to observe that he had 
completed the rough draft previous to his seeing the letter from Bengal of the 24th ultimo, 
with its enclosure from the bcnnanitle Court of Directors. The remarks ‘have, therefore, 
no teference to any other than the vouchers mentioned in the first paragraph of bis Minute ; 
on the very important contents of the Bengal letter, he proposes to submit his ideas and 

tions separately, and shall be most happy to co-operate with his colleagues most 
ially and zealously in any measure likely to relieve existing difficulties, or promote the 


public good. 
ois Thick ards begs to est his present Minute may be transmitted to the Court of 
Directors by the first dispatch which may leave India, as a necessary sequel to the papers on 
this subject already submitted to the honourable Court’s consideration under date gth 
‘ ; 


oat Theot > MINUTE: 


‘YON the proositions contained in the honourable the Governor’s Minute of the 8th instant 


confirmed in Mr. Lechmere’s of the 16th, and the resolutions of Government of the 2ed, 
tendering to my management the proposed reduction of native establishments on Salsette, 

d the settling of wealthy capitalists on the waste lands of the island, I beg leave, in the 
East place, to express my acknowledgments of the Board’s acquiescence so far in the sug- 
gestions I have bad the honour of submitting in this respect to public consideration, but 
to decline having any thing to’ do in a partial execution of my proposed experiment, 
From a trial by piece-meal, and particularly of those parts of the experiment likely to be 
least relished by the present inhabitants, failure and discredit could alone be anticipated, 
Neither can it be desirable to run the risk of the whole experiment in opposition to the de- 


Mr, Rickards’s 
Minute 
(23 July 1808) 
respecting Salsette. 


cided opinidns of the first local authorities, and their consequent influence. I have no personal . 


Wish, or motive whatever, to interfere with the administration of Salsette; my reasons for 
ng the spot for an experiment need not be repeated; and, as the whole proceedings 
are referred to the Court of Directors, I prefer to abide by their decision. If they are 
pleased to view without offence a humble attempt to promote the public good, to order the 
experiment, aud that it should receive that entire and cordial up ort on the part of Govern- 
ment which a new undertaking of this nature may very possibly be found to require, my 
Bey tarcttions shall. still gladly be contributed to give it effect. In this case, however, [ 
could respecttully submit to the honourable Court the expediency of authorizing such 
€ventual sacrifices of present land revenue as particular cases of hardship, or views of useful 
meouragement, may seem to require; these may not be necessary; but even if they are, 
portions can only be trifling where the whole revenue of the island is in itself but incon- 
siderable. If, on the other hand, the honourable Court are pleased to deem the whole 
scheme inexpedient, I shall bow with paticnt submission to the decree, and feel personally 
aio other regret than that of the unnecessary trouble it has occasioned. [t is on public grounds 
ed acThave proposed it;—for public purposes alone that I should wish to prosecute it; and 
‘no other personal motives or expectation than that of public benefit ; but, if the scheme 
be finally proved and adjudged. to,be a vain speculation, far be from me the silly vanity of 
wiging it into further notice. : . 
306. se The 


No. .3. 
Mr. Rickards’s 
Minute 
(23 July 1808) 
respecting Salsette. 


74 PAPERS RELATING TO 


The honourable the Governor has correctly stated his having offered the island of Caranja. 
for the experiment proposed. | believe the offer was repeatedly made, but he, no doubt, also 
recollects it was as often rejected from the total unfitness of the spot. Its situation in: 
to Bombay affords no attractions to wealthy settlers; it is divided from the presidency i ya 
considerable extent of sea, always inconvenient, and often extremely tedious to cross, being 
very sinall, its valleys are already fully peopled and cultivated ; it has, therefore, no waste 
lands of sufficient extent or natural fertility to induce new settlers to occupy them ; and the 
wastes that are there consist chiefly of high hills of barren rock and slender soil, whi 
nothing but a superabundant population of the utmost efliciency and industry would ever 
attempt to cultivate. The honourable Court will, therefore, I trust, not impute to me a 
fastidious rejection of the honourable the Governor's offer, when it would seem to be but 
too certain that nothing again but failure and discredit could result from the attempt in so 


limited and altogether ineligible a district.* 


In composing the Essay of the 24th September 1807, subjects occurred, and are therein 
noticed, which it was impossible fully to elucidate without protracting that paper to a most 
inconvenient and tedious length. i therefore determined to enlarge on those partic 
subjects in subsequent supplemental Minutes ; that recorded under the gth instant is one of 
them ; others will also be submitted in support of other parts of the argument, as I may 
haye leisure to compete them, and these, from the particular subjects thereof, will contain 
my ideas on some of the general principles adverted to in the honourable Governor's Minute. 
Indeed, it is to these general principles I could wish the discussion to be confined ; questions 
of a particular tendency I sincerely deprecate. Rt<d 


There is one argument, however, adduced by my colleagues against the eral pro- 
positions I have taken the liberty of submitting A elsent art ef which et iaik fom 
its apparent plausibility, may, in the scrupulous breasts of English judges, be considered of 
more weight than it really merits, if not properly sifted, and therefore requires a few imme- 
mediate observations. {ts apparent plausibility, however, is only my present opinion ; 
I may be mistaken; and if so, shall be thankful for the communication of such lights as 
would convince me of my error; an additional inducement for noticing it here. The 


argument alluded to is the objection that seems to be preferred generally ‘Ei the 


propositions I have at different times advanced, that they are only calculated for 
and totally inapplicable to Asiatic polity ; and the great danger and impolicy of in : 
with the established usages and existing systems of the natives. icoby aE 


; Sts SD 
Although the greater part, and all the reflecting part, of my life has been passed in India, _ 
and though a aba setae earopad in various sianareahal of its administration vx 
not be supposed to be devoid of Asiatic impressions, yet, independently of these con- 
siderations, I must certainly have taken pains to very little purpose, to instruct myself 
in the principles of my present profession, if those principles have any other limits than 
that of the earth itself. The habits, the manners, the prejudices, of the inhabitants of 


‘different countries, are all of human institution ; their varieties are of course subject to 


local regulation, and justly claim the attention, though not the primary attention, of 
ractical politicians; but the principles of natural law have their origin in the divine will: 
That Jaw is immutable; it is not only the same every where, but the best every where; and 
instead of conceiving the genuine principles’ deduced therefrom to have a mere local use 
and applieation, I should rather be disposed to question the authenticity of such as were 
not generally useful and applicable in every region of the civilized world. ae 


It is but natural for the sciences to be most improved in countries where learning is 
most cultivated; all the other branches, astronomy, chemistry, &c. Ke. have also been 
brought to their present state of refinement among the most enlightened nations of Europe, 
but their local origin or progress does not affect the prevalence of their doctrines; these 
must be universal to be true; and is that which its most distinguished professors proudly 
boast to be the noblest and the most usefal of all, to be a solitary exception; must it be 
degraded to the jevel of a mere district regulation ? VDP R 


On what grounds, moreover, of experience or practice, these principles are admitted to. 
be applicable, but only applicable to the national intercourse of Europe, 1 cannot oon 
discern, for | know of no nations in that quarter which act up to them. Those few whicl 
approach , nearest in practice to the best economical principles are certainly the most. 
flourishing; whilst the widest deviations from these prescribed rules inyolye in 

as in Asia, the greatest checks to national improvement, and consequent political debility. . 


The universality and immutability of the great laws ef nature, in respect to civiliz 
societies, may however be inferred, among other proofs, from the invariable similarity of 
structure and constitution of the latter; we find every where the same classes of labourers, 
cultivators of the soil, manufacturers and mechanics, commercial agents of different de- 
nominations. Wealthy proprietors, where their existence is not suppressed, ministers and 
princes, or ruling authorities; different customs, laws, or religious prejudices, may oe. 


* TI do not mean by this to say, that that part | pected from these alone ; and the effect might, for 
of the experiment would not succeed in Caranja | a long time to come, be so little perceptible, that 
which regards the present inhabitants; but, far the | sceptical minds would still question its success, not _ 
reasons given in the Essay, little could be ex- | because proof did not exist, but because it was not 

pected ] sufficiently striking. : P 


EAST INDIA AFFAIRS. 75 


~these classes to different modifications or restraints, may even require different methods of 
-earrying the same principles into execution; but these do not affect the origin, or the relative 
-uses of the respective classes, the causes, or the consequences of their reunion in the great 
-social body. Since labour, therefore, every where supplies wealth, and wealth supports 
Jabour : since there exists universally the same dependence of the different classes on each 


: -other, it is but reasonable to infer, that their mutual comforts and advantages, their hap- 


\piness and prosperity: are alike promoted by the same rules, and dependent on the sam 
principles, hic et ubsque. : 
Considering too, the other more immediate objects of my remarks, is agriculture, permit 
me to ask, any thing in India but the cultivation of the soil? or commerce any thing but 
the distribution and exchange of its apr mre ? or manufactures any thing but the pre- 
paration of commodities for the supply of human wants? Do not mankind live by agricul- 
cure, commerce, and manufactures in India as in all other, though not quite so prepos- 
terously to be sure as in some parts of the civilized world? Are the love of gain, the desire 
of enjoyment, or the sense of self interest, different passions in Indian and European breasts ¢ 
Is wealth a different thing in the Asiatic and European world? Is its source or its mode of 
acquisition different ? or the purposes, after acquisition, to which it is applied? Are not the 
freest and lightest-taxed communities among us the most industrious, the most prosperous, 
and the most wealthy* ? And is not the greatest multiplication of individual wealth the most 
effectual method of conducing to the resources, the strength and permanency of the state. 
These are matters, I humbly presume, which depend much less on the habits and prejudices 
of men than on principles of a far higher origin. It is remarkable that the means of pros- 
perity in these branches are perfectly consistent with all the varieties of uational manners, 
except under the very worst of existing governments; aud it will probably be found on due 
investigation that those fundamental rules and principles for the promotion of prosperity are 
the best, whether in the East or in the West, in the North or in the South, which are most 
conformable to the immutable laws of natural order. 


But the argument of innovation should not, at all events, be used merely to answer the 
purposes of objection: if it is admissible in one instance, it must be in others. Now I 
apprehend the history of our administration in this country will be found to contain a long 
series of innovations to the full as striking, and some far more obviously, aad decidedly re- 
pugnant to long-established habits, than what I have lately ventured to propose, The 
records of every Goverument in India exhibit numerous examples thereof: the Permanent 
Settlement itself is an instance; but to say nothing of the various others, has not the 
Bombay Government very lately sanctioned one, and the supreme Government most highly 
approved of it ? And in a quarter too where innovation is alleged to be most dreaded, where 
the habits of the people have been officially represented to be “so vigorous and firmly 
“ established as to be most difficult to overcome.” I allude to the abandonment by the 
Guzerat and Kattywar chieftains of the old and prevalent usage of Muluckgeery, which 
the Resident at Baroda was authorized to negotiate, even under the co-operative influence 
and presence of a large military force, and which, with his usual ability, he at length 
brought to a successful issue. But can any man for a moment doubt the advantage of this 
abolition of an old custom; or conceive that the chieftains and inhabitants concerned in it 
wil] not be equally satisfied when they have experienced its benefits ? The argument, there- 
fore, is wholly inapplicable, unless the proposed innovation can be first proved to be mis- 
chievous, instead of beneficial: where the latter object only is in view, we have recorded 
proof, and the most confirmed experience +, of its being unobjectionable in cases not con- 
nected with the religious or superstitious sentiments of the people ; and, from long personal 
intercourse with the natives of this country, I can confidently affirm that their attachment 
to their own agricultural or commercial economy is not of a vature to render partial changes 


either 


* On a late excursion into the Deccan I was + In a late Letter from the Collector of Kaira, 


exceedingly pleased and surprized to observe the 
great appearance of prosperity which the city of 
Poonah exhibited, and which was the more re- 
markable after the scenes of desolation, plunder, 
aud famine, it had been so lately subjected to: all 
the principal streets and bazars were crowded with 
people, whose dress and general appearance dis- 
played symptoms of comfort and happiness, of 
business and industry, not to be exceeded in any of 
our own great commercial towns. ‘The whole, in- 
deed, was a smiling scene of general welfare and 
abundance. On noticing this to the Resident, he 
informed me that the Paishwa, since his return, 
with a view of promoting the prosperity of Poonah, 
had exempted it and the surrounding country from’ 
every description of tax ; and, to prevent the pos- 
sibility of exactions unknown to himself, had even 
abolished the office of cutwal. This fact is at 
least one proof, among various others, of the prac- 
ticability of introducing what are termed the 
uropean principles of economy into Indian socie- 
ties, with the same happy effects as have been 
experienced elsewhere. 


to whom a part of the above-mentioned mulvek- 
geeree negotiation was intrusted, we have an ad- 
ditional proof of what is here advanced, He res 
ports as follows: (Letter, 29th June 1808.) “ Al- 
“though 1 found it necessary to have several 
“ personal interviews and negotiations with the 
* Gago Zemandars before 1 could surmount the 
“ effects of their naturally inherent suspicions at 
“any change in the administration of circum- 
* stances connected with their pecuniary payments, 

« still their judgments were not at length inacces- 

“ sible to the great advantages to be derived from 

“ the permanent system of amelioration negotiated 

“ for their good by the Resident at Baroda.” We 

have pretty plain proof, indeed, in the whole of the 

late negotiation, that native Indians, (not the most 

remarkable for civilization, and not very firmly 

subjected to ourcontrol,) may be persuaded to sa- 

crifice many of their civil and military babits te 

views of personal benefit. : 


No, 3. - 
Mr. Rickards 
Minute —~ 
(23 July 1808) 
respecting Salsette. 


— vo 


76 PAPERS RELATING TO 
No. 3. either dangerous or impracticable, provided the people to be subjeetéd to the change «ire 
Mr. Rickards’ only first emae Ip plain pin i and clear demonstration, that it is: cckcnbandcas 
Minute promote their own benefit. Attempted changes without this previous convietion, or by 
gis July ee means of actual force, have frequently been attended with evil; but the case is wi 
sebecting alcette. 4iferent which receives the entire concurrenee and unreserved co-operation of all concern 
Se urge, indeed, the inviolability of human laws and customs, is, in fact, to maintain the 
impracticability of amendment, and supposes the passive doctrine of its being better to 
suffer existing evil than to make even the most virtuous efforts to remove it, in, 


After all, the proposed experiment differs essentially from a general innovation: a very 
simple change in the mode of revenue payments, confined to a very small district, where 
similar changes have been repeatedly and safely made, without an idea of compalsion, or 
even wish of extending it beyond have limits, except on confirmed proof of its : 
and consequently its probable acceptability, can scareely be deemed hazardous, or-likely to 
prove generally offensive. Or can it be justly said to intend the abolition of existing syste 
in any district, otherwise than as local circumstances may appear. to render advisable, and 
under such precautions as shall ensure the approbation, by consulting the prejudices, and 
local usages of the inhabitants? In all conversations on this get subject, in official 
papers, and once very lately on these records, | have uniformly expressed an aversion to 
the execution of any public measure affecting the private interests of Individuals, except 
with their full approbation and consent; and it was under this impression that 1 proposed 
myself to conduct the experiment; but, in the hands of a collector he might conceive any 
thing short of ‘the full execution of the measure, or of its enforcement, if necessary, an 
imperfect compliance with the wishes of Government. I had also another motive, and 
that is the conviction that theories, when reduced to practice, are seldom found to accom- 
plish the fulness of their promise: modifications are often necessary, without: ing their 
original principles, to adapt them to particular circumstances ; and I was desirous of satis: 
fying my own mind that nothing was attempted which should net afford a-teasonable 
probability of success. The Court of Directors, [ humbly hope, will hardly conceive that 
success to be at all dependent on a total change in the manners and tastes of the native: 


i J 


or ascribe any stich inference to a plain fact avowedly advanced, for no other purpose 
cther 


to show the advantage of moderate and divided taxation, not over the French 
economy*, but over the widely-different land-tax of India ;—=to show, in fact, whi 


be or be not ultimately paid by the land; that it is infinitely more advantageous ; ro- 
aluctive to allow wealth to circulate, and enrich a community, ane to its contributing to 


the public impost, than for Government to absorb that wealth before circulation, or 2s soon. 
as it is annually produced. : RI Sin 
rea Ts le (Signed). -R. Rickards. 
23 July 1808. ‘ inion” © 


; f wy JET « : 
“Ordered, That the preceding Minute be circulated for the consideration of the Board. ° 


: Shin 
EXTRACT REVENUE LETTER to BOMBAY, dated 10th January 1810. zt 
Para. 156. General discussions upon subjects of science, when conducted 


Letter from 9 July 1808. ubje ience, nm 
A: PERG 6p.) Referring to with temper and moderation, have, we are inclined to think, in all cases, at ne- 
an Essay on Taxation, delivered ficial tendency. In the observations, therefore, which we may think it nece sary 
in by Mr. Rickards previous to to make upon Mr. Rickards’ Essay and Minutes, so far from wishing to be 
his taking his seat in the Coun- ynderstood as meaning to discountenance any attempt to throw light upon ¢ 
cil, accompanied with Docu- sybject both intricate and important, we shall always feel disposed highly to 
ments and Explanations, Mi- approve of and encourage this species of disquisition, even when, as in ae 
sates by thet gente ees sent instance, we are not prepared to adopt. the conclusions which be 
1Kewise a Minute ; ; S nareresl ; . ‘ 
in by Governor Dunc "silt - eri by the et gee remeneri ie whic = a haw rn . € 
justrated with Docunsenté con- eit nature, and of invariable application. ‘To ‘thi | and talents of 
coe ea : Rickards, of which, on the present occasion, he has given utiequivecal tes 
taining his sentiments upon Mr. are Arce ? ob ret 
we are willing to do ample justice; and though we cannot avail ourselves 


Rickards’ proposition. : : rata . é 
a exertion Of them in its full extent, he will not on that account, we trust, sh 


himself less ardent or Jess active to promote the interest of his employers. 
157- Mr. Rickards’ financial project, though he only now proposes to make an e 


ment of its practical utility in Saisette, has no particular reference ‘to the acvual ¢ 4 
stances of that island; but seems equally applicable to any or all of our other orial — 
possessions. {tis founded upon defects supposed to be inherent in the constitution of our 
whole revenue system, and professes to be a general remedy for the numerous evils resulting, 
not from necessary causes, but from a unnatural, mistaken, and perverse policy. 
ay The» 


* Although the French economists proposed to | proprietors deriving the utmost possible produc 
draw the entire _— umposts directly from the | from their estates by the tNedhs therein explainec 
land, yet | apprehend the revenue systents of {ndia | and whose expenditure constitutes the most im- 
would be found on comparison to be -perfeetly | portant features of the French scheme, are here 
abhorrent to their liberal principles. ‘The great | entitely ‘watiting; the Véry source of prosperity — 

proprietors | retivainsyet'to‘be-created. ~ san 


at 


SS a 


EAST INDIA AFFAIRS. "7 


158. The leading features of Mr. Rickards’ plan may be described in very few words, 
Its objects are to relieve the land from all immediate burthens, and at the same time to pre- 


serve to Government a revenue equivalent to that which is now derived from the produce 


of the soil. For this purpose its author would make over in perpetuity the land in full 
proprietary right to the present occupiers, leaving them to cultivate and improve it without 
any control or interference on the part of Government; .the house of each occupier to be 
assessed with that portion of revenue which he now pays to Government from the land; the 
‘rate of this assessment on houses to be fixed in money, never to rise, but on the contrary, 
gradually to decrease, in proportion as it may be found practicable to transfer part of the 
urthen to shops, or to commute this source of revenue into taxes upon articles of con- 
sumption, such as tobacco, arrack, &c. till it be reduced to what is termed an uniform 
and moderate standard. The advantages of this arrangement are stated to be a simplitica- 
tion of the collection of the revenue, a strong encouragement to industry, consequent 
improvement, and a rapid increase of general prosperity. ‘The plan also provides for the 
tivation of waste lands, by a proposal to grant them free of all tax to any persons who 
may undertake to reclaim them; the houses of the occupiers of such lands at the end of 
fifteen or twenty years, and not until then, to become liable to the general house-tax, which 
it is su will, before that time, be every where reduced to the uniform and moderate 
standard already mentioned, that is, when a general tax ad calorem shall have been imposed 
upon all houses in the island, without any reference to the produce of the land. And lastly, 
r. Rickards proposes that Government shall establish tanks and reservoirs upon the island 
for the purpose of irrigation, subject to a tax sufficient not only to reimburse the expense 
of construction, but also to compensate for the reductions made in what may be called the 


representative house-taz. 


_ 159. Mr. Duncan having in his minute entered into a detailed examination of the merits 
financial project, of which we have just stated the outline, and the general scope of, 

his observations meeting our concurrence, it will not be necessary for us to expose at any 
t length the objections to which it seems liable ; objections which we should think must. 
appear even to its author, on further reflection, to be quite insurmountable. 


160. The principles of taxation, as developed in the beginning of Mr. Rickards” 
Essay, are unquestionably just. All the institutions by which the economy of states is: 
regulated or upheld, may be considered as more or less perfect, in proportion as* 
they are conformable’ or incongruous with the established and immutable laws of nature. 
But it must not be forgotten, that these laws, though invariable in their principles and: 
tendencies in everyclime and country, and among every race of men, are liable to be 
impeded, and sometimes obstructed in their operations, by the ignorance or perverseness, 
the prejudices or passions, of those whose welfare it is the object of the lawgiver to 
promote. It isas much the intention of Providence that we should be wise and virtuous, 
as that we should be prosperous and happy: nay, the possession of wisdom and virtue 
has, by an eternal and immutable law, a rendered necessary to the attainment of 


any considerable portion of happiness and prosperity. The obvious way, therefore, to 


make a wretched people happy, is by improving their moral habits ; and the way to make a 
poor nation rich, is by cpiaktente it. 

161. It is undoubtedly the duty of Governments by their institutions to come in aid of 
the laws of nature, to endeavour to invigorate their action where it is languid, and to restore 
it where it has been suspended. But this never can be a sudden and momentary 
poem As the declension of states is parents gradual and slow, so also must be 

rogress of their renovation. Hence the necessity to which legislators are reduced 
in ing their judicial and financial systems, of pep} not only the order of 
nature as originally established, but the actual situation of the people to whom they 


_ give laws. Hence also the distinctions universally acknowledged to exist, though fre- 


quently lost sight of in the warmth of discussion, between the theoretical and practical 
ditness of forms of polity. 

162. There thus arises a strong presemption @ priori, that a system of finance 
which might be well adapted to a nation highly enlightened, and far advanced in the 
career of civilization, would be unsuitable to a people, who, though not barbarous, are 
certainly ignorant ; and whose poverty is the result not of a faulty and short-sighted 


administration, but of deep-rooted prejudices and habits ; which, while they remain unshaken, » 


must by limiting their wants, for ever restrain their industry, oppose the accumulation of 
wealth, and are indeed altogether incompatible with the existence of a prosperous 
and flourishing country. It is inattention to this circumstance which must have led Mr. 
Rickards astray ; though it does to us appear surprising, that a gentleman of his experience 
and observation should so far have mistaken the nature of the evil for which he has attempted 
to propose a remedy. The artificial and unnatural division of a people into casts _is perhaps 


the most effectual method that could be devised by the ingenuity of man to check their | 


improvement and repress their industry. It is so diametrically opposed to the strongest 
rinciples of our nature, that wherever such a distinction exists and is rigidly observed, 
it is impossible for enterprize to thrive ; and it is altogether vain to talk of counteracting 
its mischievous tendency by any code of fiscal regulation. Did it ever occur then, to 
Mr. Rickards, when he was recommending a system of taxation founded upon the 
established order of nature, that this order has been so much disturbed in those 

countries where he wishes his system to be introduced as to render it wholly ina 
plicable to their present situation? Or if this a not escape his observation, is it poam e 
; J that 


= 


No. 3. 
Revenue Letter 
(io Jan. 1810), 

on Mr. Rickards’ 
.Essay and Minute, 
| 


98 PAPERS RELATING TO 
No. 4. he could imagine, * that. an alteration in the revenue system now in force wouldshave 
Revenue Letter the set of completely changing the character and habits of the people, and 
“(10 Jan. 1810) modelling the whole mis-shapea structure of society, in defiance of a strong host. of 
on Mr. Rickard’ prejudices of every description, arrayed against innovation, and resolute to maintain 
Essay and Minute. what fromage to age they have been accustomed to venerate. pineian 
163. Without meaning to lay it down as a maxim of invariable application, that ih no 
conceivable circumstance there should be any deviation from the principles and views 
which have influenced the formation of the permanent settlement of our territorial” 
sessions, it js desirable, for very many reasons, that the system adopted for their 
ministration should be as uniform as peries and particularly that where it has been 
once ptoclaimed it shou'd not be lightly abandoned. Were we to innovate orem 
own institutions, our measures would assume an appearance of fickleness and levity,” 
calculated to obtain that respect which is necessary to the stability of the Govern 


Bene! ae 1 Neca CANT 
164. In the pyesent instance, the change proposed does not in our opinion offer’ 
much asa contingent prospect of advantage. For what is it? Mr. Rickards wishes to 

transfer the tax from i 


he land and to lay it upon houses, still the change is only nominal 
the tax must, as before, be paid from the produce of the soil, and the land in: reality wi 
not be relieved of the smailest fractional part of the burthen to which it is at pre 
subjected. ‘There is indeed a very strong objection to a commutation of this sort, the 
it be merely specious and nominal ; which is, that a people of circumscribed notions lik: 
-the Hindoos would feel much more reluctance to pay a large revenue from a subject 
which yielded them nothing but imperfect shelter, than they would to admit the Govern- 
ment to a reasonable share of the profits which they derive trom cultivation, = 


previously existed. Mr. Rickards, therefore, has against him not only a-class of the most ’ 
acute, and as some think, of the most profound, reasoners .on matters of political : 
seience that ever existed, but the practical financiers of every couatry in, that part ef the 
world, upon the history and observation of which his notions seem to be chielly founded. — 
- 166. We are willing to concede to Mr. Rickards (but by no means to the full exte ‘6 
his argument) that considerable inconvenience does arise from Governinent absorbing . 
large proportion of the revenue of land before it has time to circulate and reproduce, 
But what tax has not its inconveniencies ? Would not a tax upon the bushel of corn, or 
a tax upon the loaf of bread, equally effect improvement by raising the wages of labour 
aS a tax upon the acre of ground? We have indeed the authority of Dr. Smith, that a tax 
on.jend bas no such eflect,—“* When,” says he, “ instead either of a certain portion of t 
“produce of land, or of the price of a certain portion, a certain sum of money p 
“ paid in full compensation for all tax or tithe, the tax becomes in-this.case e 

“ same nature with the land-tax of England” (and we may add of thesame nature with th 
tax imposed under the permanent settlement in British India). Thea, says the do t 
“it neither rises wor falls with the reat of land. . It neither encourages ner discour 
“ improvement.” noo onahhy Sa 


167. Had our revenue system been the same with that which obtained under the Moou 
and the Marhatta Government, and that which is in force in Guzzerat at this moment, 
then indeed My. Rickards would have just reason to complain of its paralyzing effect upe 
the active powers of the mind, aad consequently upea the general prosperity of theempi 
But the great object of our policy has been, and still is, to subdue the original vie 
character of that system, and)so to modify it, that, according to the high authority j 
quoted, it may have vo, teadency to discourage improvement. ‘cor 


Book.-v..Chap. 2. 


ees fi 
168. Mr. Rickards has founded much of his reasoning upon a division of society i nto two 
classes, the ove of which is supposed to be productive, the other unproductive. ‘ "he 
justice of this distinction, though it can boast the support both of the economists and the 
enlightened author of the Enquiry into the Nature and Causes of the Wealth of Nations, — 
has been very ably combated, by objecting the utter impdssibility of drawing any line by 
which it can be marked. For exampie, what possible reason can be given by the follower 
of Quesnai, for, considering the man who drives a plough as a productive, and the ma 
who makes a plough as an unproductive, labourer? Nor is it easier to conceive ay H 
Smith should. have ranked a person who sings a song in the latter, and a person. who write 
a song in the former, class, merely beeause the one produces something tangible, where: 
the other does nat. Governments are necessary to the protection of subjects, as eC 
are to the ret ar of Governments. The soldier who shields the peasant whilé he is eulli- 
vating his field, from. the annoyance of the foe, performs his part towards the improvement — 
of the land; and the Magistrate, whose duty it is to give security to property afier it is ac- 


306. qu 


| 
| 
| 


EAST INDIA AFFAIRS. 79 


uired, contributes more even than the capitalist himself towards the public prosperity. 
t it not be imagined, therefore, that the revenues of a state lose all powers of reproduc- 
tion from the moment that they pass into the chest of the Collector. 


_ 369. It may also be observed upon this branch of the subject, that capital is much less 
necessary to promote cultivation in India than in Europe. The soil, owing to its extreme 
fertility, with less labour; and the implements employed in agriculture are so sim- 
ple, that farming is carried on at a comparatively trifling expense. It is worthy of remark 
also, that in Salsette, where more capital perhaps has been expended than upon the same 
extent of territory any where else, its effects, according to Mr. Rickards, are scarcely pet- 
ceptible, and must be allowed on all hands not to have been very considerable. 


‘170. Neither is it irrelevant to the present subject of discussion to inquite, whether, in 
the Guzzerat; the grassia lands, which pa only one half or three quarters of a rupee per 
bhegha, are better cultivated than those of the Sirkar, which pay from three to four rupees. 
The ia proprietor seems there to be nearly in the situation of an European landlord, 
who derives a rent from the land, and pays avery moderate tax to Government. Yet we 
do not find, from any of the reports of our servants employed in that quarter, that this dif- 
ference of circumstances has produced an effect either upon the face of these districts, or 
the condition of the inhabitants, such as Mr. Rickards’ speculations would lead us te 


171. From every point of view, then, ia which the subject can be contemplated, we are 
compelled to return to the observation with which we set out,—that the project supposes a 
‘state of things which does not exist, and which it could in no way be instrumental in creat- 
ing. Mr. Rickards is himself aware of the impossibility of raising the revenue, in the first 
instance, from articles of consumption, and therefore he proposes to raise it from dead 
stock, till industry and wealth, dead consequently consumption, so far increase as to yield a 
Yevenue equal in amount to that now derived from the land. And all this, he calculates, 
‘may be brought about in the course of fifteen or twenty years! As if people whom it is 

cult, if not impossible, to convirice that there ié any value in‘a simple arrangement, 
‘by which security would be given to property, and stability. to thé relations: subsisting be- 
tween them and the Government, would all at once comprehend abstract and metaphysical 
deduction ; as if religious prejudice, the long-established order-of society, and ancient and 
rooted habits, would suddenly yield to reasoning, however persuasive, however forcible ; as 
if, in short, a financial theory could possess virtue to call into being desires, wants, the 
‘means and the power of gratifying them, in a society enthralled by ignorance, indolence, 


2. The comparison instituted by Mr. Rickards between our system of Indian finance, : 


1 
(if by that is meant the system practised under the permanent settlement) and the taille, 
or tax upon the profits of stock employed in agriculture, formerly levied in France and other 
countries of Europe, is wholly unfounded : no two things can be more unlike. The taille, one 
would think, must have been copied from the old Mogul practice, so closely did it resemble 
it in all its details. In France, the assessments were made by elections and generalities, as 
they are-made by villages and districts ini the Guzzerat at this day, varying from year to year, 
-accordiug to the reports delivered in to the council in the former instance, as they aré to the 
-callector in the Jatter, concerning the respective abilities of these villages and districts, 
founded upon a survey of the state of the crops. In France also the deficiencies of one 
erste made good. by the-other parishes in the élection, jast as a whole went in 
ndia was under the Moguls held responsible for the revenue payable by all its members ; 
this coincidence is very remarkable ; and when Doctor Smith, speaking of «the taille, repro- 
i 


bated it peecins to cae cultivation, and consequently to dry up the principal source 


of she Pana A OR Ye AY A K stronger rekon 
‘we have employed in this very dispatch, in treating of the financial system established by the 


Mogul Government in the Guzzerat, It is neither our wish nor, intestion i tcc system 
shall "endure and when the revenue system now in force in Bengal shall have been 
introduced into Salsette and the other, territories avhich have been lately annexed to the 
Bombay presidency, many of the’ evils for which Mr. Rickards proposes a remedy (indeed 
all whitch ‘it is practicable to cure by any code of financial regulation) will be found 96 


longer to. exist. 


LAS That some time may elapse before this change can be brought about is probable frora 
the indifference hitherto manifested by the inhabitauts of Salsetie, and also, perhaps, from a 
Po on our part whether it would be safe to give up that security for realizing the revenue 

hich we now possess by watching the cvops and keeping them in our possession till it-is paid. 
But Mr. Kickards’s plan is still-less like'y to suit the taste,and wishes of the inhabitants than 
that which we propose to them, because it is more difficult of comprehension and. diverges 

ther from the line of their present habits, while at the same time it offers no additional 


security. to the revenue. 
ad ‘4 . , 


174. From all these considerations we are decidedly of opinion ‘that uo advatitage could 
tesult from Mr. Rickards’ financial project, in.so far as it proposes a commutation of the 
revenue from Jand to houses, which may not be better attained under our Permunent Settle- 
ment, and that the former is even liable to some weighty objections from which the latter 
is exempt. 

175. There does not seem to be any thing in the plan proposed: by Mr. Rickards: for im- 
proving waste lands, whea separated {rom the other branch of his scheme, deserving pee 

cular 


o. 4. - 
Reventc Latter 
(10 Jan. 1816) 
on Mr. Rickards” 


Essay on Mitiite. 
‘ = 


ae 


Smiths Wealth of 
Nations, Book v- 
chap. 2. 


No. 3. 
Revenue Lettér 
(io Jan. 1810) 

on Mr. Rickards’ 


| 


80 PAPERS RELATING TO 

cular notice. We hope, indeed, that means will be found of rendering them productive in a 

shorter period than fifteen years. 
176. Of his suggestion to establish tanks and reservoirs in Salsette, with a view to pro- 


Essay and Minute, Mote the on ermae of cultivation, we highly approve. We are happy also to find that 


a measure of this sort had engaged the attention of our Governor, and that he is’ employed 
in collecting information which may facilitate its execution. From his exertions, united to 
those of Mr. Rickards, we participate a result highly beneficial, not only to the agriculture 
of Salsette, but generally to our territories situated on the western continent of India, and 
placed under your administration. For any expense, therefore, which Government may be 
at in constructions subservient to this object, we have no doubt that we shall be able amply 
to reimburse ourselves by a reasonable assessment, after leaving to the cultivator a propor- 
tionate share of benefit. This source of improvement therefore we particularly recommend 
as fit matter to employ your utmost industry and zeal. : 


Letter from 14 October 1808. 178. We observe that Mr. Lechmere coincided in opinion with our Goyernor 
(Para. 2 a 6.) Referring to a ypon Mr. Rickards’ a . We certainly should have strongly disapproved 


Minute delivered in by Mr. roceedi 
Lechmere, containing his opi- ee 17 a 


you attempted, without consulting us, to introduce a 
revenue system into Salsette, founded upon the principles already discussed. We 


nion upon the Essay and Mi- o7. for from regretting even that Mr. Rickards declined availing himself of the 
nutes of Mr. reg oe latitude which you left him, to make an experiment of his system upon the waste 
a eara aiatin eres lands of that island, or upon Caranja, convinced as we are that it would be 

< attended with no advantages which may not be better attained by other means. 


A general retrenchment in the present revenue estabiishment is certainly very 
desirable, but we know no way by which this can be so welt effected as under the Perma- 
nent Settlement, which when once introduced will, we trust, ia great measure supersede 
the necessity of employing the long retinue of native ageats now attached to the collector's 


cutcherry. 


Para. 7. Adverting to Proposals received from 179. You are already in possession of our sentiments re- 
some wealthy inhabitants of Bombay to become specting the general policy of arrangements of this sort, which 
landed proprietors in Salsette. we shall always be ready to sanction when formed upon an equi= 


No. 3 


table basis. 


No. 4. 


Copy of a MINUTE recorded by Mr. Colebrooke, on the Revenue — 3 
Consultations of Bengal, the 2oth June 1808 ;—respecting the 
Extension of the Permanent Settlement to the Ceded and Conquered. 


2 


‘ 
° 


Provinces. 


om ola 
EXTRACT BENGAL’ REVENUE CONSULTATIONS, 20th June 1808, & 
Mr. Colebrooke’s Minute. sas 


"THE final Report of the late Board of Commissioners for the settlement of the Ceded 
and Conquered Provinces, dated 15th-April, contains propositions of so-much impor- 
tance and_so greatly at variance with the previous resolutions of Government, that in re- 
cording my opinion, I think it necessary to. go at some length into the consideration of — 
the: reasons which have been urged by late Commissioners in support of their propositions. — 


Those reasons, as far as they relate to the-question of a permanent settlement, nd 
so precisely with arguments: which were fully and repeatedly discussed upon the. sior 
of the Permanent Settlements of Bengal and Behar in 1789-90, and the territories on the — | 
coast of Coromandel in 1799, that my task will be nearly confined to show their exact 
correspondence, and to refer. to thé former proceedings of this Government for the ample 


discussion which théy underwent, and for the final decision which was passed on the me- 
rits of the question by the honourable Court of Directors. 

2. E trust that arguments which were not suffered to weigh against a measure recom- 
mended by wise and enlarged views of policy, but not then promised to our subjects, 
will not be allowed greater weight at this momentous period against a similar equally 
recommended by liberal considerations of policy, and solemnly promised by an express de-— 
claration-in a legislative act. ; / 

3, Govern- 


EAST INDIA AFFAIRS. 81 


-’-g. Government is pledged by the proclamation of 14th July 1802, 15th September 1804, 
and 11th July 1805, to conclude a permanent settlement with the landholders at the expi- 
Tation of-the periods there specified, for such lands as may be in a sufliciently improved state 
of cultivation to warrant the measure, on fair and equitable terms. It was judged expedient 
‘on full consideration of the subject, and with ample knowledge of the circumstances now 
alleged, to anticipate those periods; and accordingly in June 1807, the Governor. General 
in Council notified to the zemindars and other proprietors, by Regulation X. 1807, that 
‘the jumma assessed for the last year of the ensuing settlement, shall remain fixed for 
-ever, if they be willing to engage, and the arrangement shall receive the sanction of the 
Court of Directors. - , 


4. The pledge which has been thus solemnly contracted, cannot be forfeited without such 
‘a glaring -violation of promise, as would indeed lose us deservedly the confidence of the 
people. I do not mean to intimate that the obligation which has been voluntarily con- 
tracted is so indispensable, that no exception can on any consideration be adinitted; some 
exceptions must unavoidably be made, and the postponement of the measure is not a matter 
of choice, but of necessity, in various instances which haye been already under consideration, 
and which must become the subject of further deliberation. But exceptions should be ad- 
mitted for only such reasons as are clear and intelligible even to the persons whom they 
concern. The general postponement of the measure, a twelye months after it was so- 
lemnly announced, and when.so many steps have been publicly taken for carrying it into 
‘execution, would demonstrate a degree of fickleness which would be far from creditable to 
Government, even independently of the higher considerations of public faith, 


. 5. The late Governor General, than whom no man was more conversant with the sub- 
ject of a permanent settlement, which had indeed engaged a large portion of his attention 
within the last twenty years, deliberately resolved on accelerating the highly beneficial 
‘measure of a permanent settlement of the land revenues in the Ceded and onquered Pro- 
vinces, upon a comprehensive view of the interests of the Honourable Company, and of 
its new subjects. There is room for regret, that the gentlemen to whom the execution of 
that measure was committed, should- co pee into deliberation, not the best means for 
carrying it into effect, but the expediency of the measure itself, which they were selected to 
execute, Giving them all credit for their good intentions in the call which they made 
upon the collectors to canvass a legislative enactment of Government, I feel it my duty 
to say, that the attention of the revenue officers would have been better directed ‘to the 
requisite preparation for the settlement which had been ordered, than to the discussion of 
its expediency upon partial views of a most important question, which had been already 
decided by the Governor General in Council. 


6. The objections alleged by several of the collectors, as well as by the late Commissioners, 
against the immediate conclusion of a permanent settlement, are principally the imperfect 
knowledge yet acquired of the resources of the country, the inequality of the present 
assessment, the great proportion of uncultivated lands, estimated generally at a fourth of 
the arable lands, the deficiency of population and want of capital to extend the cultivation, 
the’existing restrictions on commerce, the want of opulent consumers, the extent of resuma- 
ble land yet unascertained, the necessity of continuing certain farmers in possession of their 
farms, the general uncertainty in regard to the proprietary right either at present contested 
or not ascertained, in respect of extensive tracts of waste land, the doubtful value of the 
standard coin, the risk of disappointment should the settlement be disapproved by the 
Court of Directors. — 

Lest this brief abstract should inadequately convey the reasons alleged, I beg that 


pt ki may be made to the recapitulation in the 210th and the following paragraphs of 
the late Commissioners letter, where they are stated at full length. vilée 


_, 8. All these circumstances it will be remembered existed in Bengal. They were alleged 


as reasons against the conclusion of a permanent settlement, and partly as arguments 
for te immediate adoption of that measure, though now all marshalled against me. 


~ g. The argument on which, if I mistake not, the lateCommissioners chiefly rely, is, that the 


- right of participating in future improvement ought not tobe relinquished, because Government 


jis ina manner the landlord and proprietor of a vast estate, the resources of which are not yet 
fully brought forth, and because no other productive source of revenue exists to supply the 
place of the future revenue, which would be abandoned by an immediate permanent settle- 
ment. The late Commissioners therefore propose the postponement of a permanent settle- 
ment for four years, after the expiration of which period mocurrery grants to be made to the 
proprietors of estates which have attained a high state of cu'tivation. But where the 
tresources have not been brought forth, the settlement to be made on a russud or increasing 
jemma, and the assessment of the last year, whenever circumstances may permit, to be 


‘declared fixed for ever. 


10. The motive of this proposition is explained, where the late Commissioners estimate 
one quarter, of the arable lands to be yet uncultivated, and conclude that 75,00,000 rupees 
per annum would be relinquished, if the demand of Government be now limited to. the 
present ayailable jumma, of 2,25,00,000 rupees. 


-«11, It appears from instructions issued by the late Commissioners to the collectors, as well 
as from several passages in the Report now under consideration, ‘that they consider 10 per 
+ B06. ; x cent. 


-No4. 
Mr. Colebrooke's 
, Minute 
on extension of the 
Permanent Systein 
to the 
Ceded & Conquered 
_ Provinces. 


No. 4. 

Mr. Colebrooke’s 
Minute, 
onextension of the 
Permanent System 
to the 


Ceded & Conquered 
Provinces. 


Minute, 
the 18th June 1789. 
p. 109, 


Minute 
of 18th Sept. 1789. 


8: PAPERS RELATING ‘TO 


cent. to be a sufficient allowance for the landholder, both for income and charges of -col- 
lection, and that the landholders are not at present supposed to realize more. = = 


12. Without offering any opinion on the correctness of those estimates, I shall contrast — 
them with the declared intentions of Government, in regard to the landholders of . 
when the permanent settlement was concluded in this province. is 


13. Mr. Shore, (aow Lord Teignmouth) whese diligence of research, and whose therou 
knowledge of the revenues of Bengal are universally acknowledged, and need not the-tribute 
of praise, estimated no less than a third of the amount received from the cultivator, for } 
charges of collection and intermediate profit between Government and the raiat. — e. 
estimate is quoted and confirmed as corresponding with experience on the at 3 
Coromandel, by the Board of Revenue at Fort 51. George, in the very able Reportof that - 
Board, dated 2d September, 1799. api I 


14. It was with the belief that a third part of the collections made from the 
were applicable to the charges of collection, and the support of the zemindar, that 1 
assessment in Bengal and on the coast of Coromandel was fixed forever. At the s; 
time Lord Cornwallis estimated no less than a third part of the Company's territory te 
a jungle, and the researches in which | was engaged at that period, furnish me with groun 
for the opinion that the estimate may, with great approximation to accuracy, be unde 
as applicable to lands fit for the cultivation, and totally exclusive of lands barren 
irreclaimable. _ 


15. With this opinion as to the extent of the uncultivated lands, Lord Cornwallis, far fro 
desiring to reserve any right to participate in future improvement, argued strenuc 
against the pretension, and in these memorable words: “ If the idea of anency is to b 
“withdrawn from the settlement now in agitation, of what avail will the power of Mr 
“ Shore’s arguments be to the zemindars, for whose rights he has contended.” “ They ¢ 
“ to have the property in farm for a lease of ten years, provided they will pay a good re 
“ for it; and skis property is then to be again assessed, at whatever reat the Gi ernment ¢ 
“ the country may at that time think proper to impose. In any part of the world wh 
“ the value of property is known, would not such a concession of a right of property in thé 
“ soil, be called a cruel mockery.” : Sidwr 


16. The sequel is no less forcible ang convincing ; but it may bs suchen tee . 
ya 


that important document for the powerful arguments by whic 

strated the propriety of declaring the settlement permanent. His o P 
wer reserved to the Court of Directors, of confirming or annulling the 

boas important, and bear directly upon the subject now under pete 


important trust that had been reposed in them. Nothing, I am pursuaded, bat our ex, 
presssing doubts and fears, can make them hesitate ; and as I have a clear conviction inmy _ 
own mind of the utility of the system, I shall think it a duty 1 owe to them, to my counter 
and to humanity, to recommend it most earnestly to the Couyt of Directors to lose no time — 
in declaring the permanency of the settlement, provided they discover no material objec- 
tion or error, and not to postpone for ten years the commencement of the prosper 
solid improvement of the country. sh 


18. Before [ quit the subject of the Court of the Directors sanction, I must be i 
in one more quotation from the same Minute. It is not for the purpose of taking 
under a great and revered name, that I shall quote from Lord Cornwallis, instead of ¢ 
on new grounds, or in new words; but because the auswers by him, given, to the ob 
tions which are now revived, have received the seal of the approbation of the Con 
administration at home. 


19. Mr. Shore had stated, that if after the notification that the settlement, if ap 
the Court of Directors, would be declared permanent, the Court of Directors shou 
declare the pernianency, the confidence of the natives in general would be shaken, an¢ 
who relied on the confirmation would be disappointed, and conclude that it was meant t 
‘ceive them. Lord Cornwallis replies, “ 1 can only say in answer to this objection, that ] 
“ not believe any people to be so unreasonable as to accuse Government ofa breach of fait 
“ and. an intention to deceive them, for not doing what Government in express 
“ assure them it is not in their power to promise to do, as it must depend on the a 
“ bation of their superiors.” 


2 EAST INDIA AFFAIRS. . 83 


tS Pe i mnlinenes acoreenenen by the Heard of Commnlerionersy were it even still a matter No. 4. 
of choice. the question now for consideration were, whether the intended permanency of fr, Colebrooke' 
the settlement mem be notified or suppressed. : é Woe 


ait ‘ ane ee: ‘ on extension of the 
21. But the subject of participation in the future improvement to be expected from the Permavent System 


cultivation of waste lands, is not new to the Court of Directors. A doubt was expressed b +6 tha 

‘the honourable Court, in their general letter of 19th September 1702, on this point: “If thie Coded & Conquered 
“ different prorietors should be allowed to avail themselves exclusively of the whole benefit to Provinces. 

“ be derived from the land, (at present left uncultivated) in the improved state of cultivation \ , 
“ which the new system has an evident tendency to promote, such a circumstance may in 

bal of time add very considerably to the value of possessions already too large. _ It is 

a Seite to be considered, that if it can be effected without counteracting the principal object 

“ of encouraging industiy, Government ae 5 fairly expect in due time some reasonable par- 

“ ticipation in the wealth arising from such a source.” The honourable Court afterwards 

bonne that the subject is connected with points of considerable delicacy ; and add, “ nor 

« should we be inclined to adopt it, if it should on due consideration be thought to break 

__ “ in upon the principle of permanent property in the present landholders, or should appear 

$ eaten discourage or retard the progress of cultivation.” ‘ 


22. It was among the last duties of Lord Cornwallis’s administration to reply to the Court's $i; March iso 
letter. The general letter of 6th March 1793 expresses, “ with respéct to the suggestion — i ie 
“* concerning waste lands, we do not hesitate to offer it as our opinion, that any attempt to 
“ stipulate for a proportion of their produce, would greatly counteract, if not wholly damp 
“ that spirit of industry and improvement, to excite which is the great object of: fixing 
“ the tax upon each estate.” : 
23. After distinguishing two sorts of waste land, 1st. those in the level country, interspersed 
in more or less extensive tracts among the cultivated lands ; and secondly, the sunderbunds 
and the foot of the vast range of mountains which nearly encircle the Bengal provinces, it 
is observed :— 


24. “ The first-mentioned desctiption of waste ground will be easily brought inté 
“ cultivation when the zemindars have funds for that purpose, and provided they are certain 
*© of rea ing the profits arising from theimprovement. These lands, however, are not wholly | 
> onpedeagire to them at present; they furnish age for the great herds of cattle thi 
“ are necessary for the plough, and also to supply the inhabitants with ghee and milk 
«« two of the principal necessaries of life in this country. It is true that the lands in thig 
“¢ desolate state, far exceed what would suffice for those’ two purposes; but it is the ex- 
“ pectation of bringing them into cultivation, and reaping the profits, that had induced many 
“ to agree to the decennial jumma, which has been assessed upon their lands. It is this 
« additional resource alone which can place the landholders in a state of affluence, and enable 
« them to. cen against inundation or drought, the two calamities to which the country must 
«ever be liable, until the landholders are enabled to provide against them (as we are of 
« opinion. ion, they;in a great measure might) by the abovementioned and other works of art. 
“ To stipulate with them, therefore, for any part of the produce of their waste lands, would 
“not only, diminish the incitement’ of those great and essential improvements in the 
agriculture of the country, but deprive them of the means of effecting it. The landholders 
“and cultivators of the soil would continue (as they have hitherto been) little more thati 
# the farmers and labourers upon a great estate, of which: Government would be the land: 
“lord. In endeavouring therefore to obtain an addition to the public income, by 
“reserving a portion of the produce of the waste lands, Government would risk’ the 
“yealizing of the very ample revenue which has been assessed upon’ the country; and 
“landed property would continue at the yery depreciated value which it has hitherto 
ae, , 

25. It may not be superfluous to observe, that the Board of Revenue at Fort St. George, in 
their Report dated 2d September 1799, quoted this reply, as equally applicable to the waste 

nds on the coast of Coromandel, upon whicly they remark with regret, “ that the proportion 
is very considerable ;” and the Governor General in Council on the 31st of December 1709; 
authorized the Governor in Council at Madras “ to adopt the principles laid down in that 
reply, as the rules of their guidance with regard to waste lands.” 


_ 26. Thus, upon the important occasions of the permanent settlements of Bengal and 
Behar, and of the territories on the coast of Coromandel; and after mature deliberation, a 
-elaim of participation in the future improvement of the waste lands was relinquished, to a 
extent than the proportion at which they are computed by the late Board of 
aaron in the Ceded and Conquered Provinces. 


_ 27. The happy result of the measure is-now witnessed in Bengal: the reviving prosperity 
Eekesiastes, its increasing wealth and rapid improvement, are unquestionably: due to the 
permanent settlement, the prineiple of which was so wise, that even the serious errors which | 
were committed in filling up the outline of the plan, could not ultimately disappoint its 
_ 28, But the Commissioners argue, that we were’ better prepared for the measure in 
Bengal; that land is here more easily cultivateil, water more readily procured, wells aiid 
' public works unnecessary, capital seldom required. 
a 


308. , 


29. That 


"Nag 
Mr. Colebrooke’s 
Minute, 
on extension of the 
Permanent System 
j to the 
Ceded & Conquered 
Provinces, 


——. YY 


84 PAPERS RELATING TO 


29. That is not the picture of Bengal, as then drawn: a reference to the minutes recorded 
by. the members of Government will show, that the same representations were then made 
respecting the deficiency of information, the uncertainty of the proprietary right, the 
poverty of the landholder and cultivator, the scantiuess of population, the deeline of 
agriculiure, and the depreciated value of landed property. A permanent settlement was 
the proposed remedy of those evils; and it must indeed have been postponed for ever, if it 
waited until they were remedied by other means. eps, 


Re. Of all the objections which were then urged, the most serious was drawn from the 
still 


imperfect knowledge possessed by Goverament Pen the real resources of the 
different districts, and regarding the respective rights of the different classes of landholders 
and tenants, and the conseqnent extreme difficulty of distributing the assessment on the 
several districts with the requisite equality, and securing to the great body of proprietors 
‘and occupants the undisturbed enjoyment of their rights. A similar objection is repeatedly 
urged with great earnestness by the late Board of Commissioners, and by the collectors of 
the Ceded and Conquered Provinces ; it was urged no Jess strenuously in Bengal, after twenty 
years had been employed in successive investigations, and three years had been especially 
devoted to enquiries preparatory to the decennial settlement. Were the permanent 
settlement of the Ceded and Conquered Provinces now postponed, the same objection would 
be again advanced with equal force and truth at the expiration of four years, or of : 
greater period whatsoever. The deficiency of correct information is the unavoidab 
consequence of the system under which the revenue is administered ; persons of every 
description ave interested, or think they have an interest, in withholding information, and 
suppressing the truth. Apprised of this disposition to baflle their enquiries, the officers of 
Government can place no reliance on the information which they receive, tho it may 
happen to be correct. Under a different system, in which the adjustment of the. rent 
demandable from the cultivator would be the immediate duty of the officers of Government, 
and a first step towards a settlement of the revenues, accurate information would be collected 
in a long series of patient surveys. But it is not now a question, whether the influence and 
authority.of all intermediate orders of men between the ruler and the cultivator shall be 
suspended ; the settlement, even if temporary, must be made in the first instance with 
landholders or with farmers ; and the intervention of those, and of amils or tehsildars, must 
prevent the acquisition of accurate knowledge respecting the real resourees of the lands. 

iinute scrutinies would be vainly undertaken ; they would bharrass the people, with no real 
benefit to Government; and without such minute and vexatious scrutinies and measurements, 
the same complaints of the insufficiency of information obtained from general enquiries, or 
from accounts of doubtful accuracy, would be made at a future period as at present. 


31. After the lapse of eighteen years, we are now enabled to pronounce with certainty om 
the solidity of the objections which were urged against the permanent settlement of , 
That the distribution of the assessment was not originally equal, is indisputable ; that it is 
now equalized, will not be asserted; but experience has not shown that the i lity of 
assessment has been productive of those evils which were then foreboded, and which are 
now again anticipated, in regard to other provinces. “Oo. 


33- I appeal to this experience in preference to any speculative argument. The desig 
of the permanent settlement in Beugal has been fully answered. It was the wish of | 
Company’s administration at home, as well as of the Geren in Bengal, to limit the 
demand of Jand revenue, and fix its amount on a moderate scale ; it was computed that the 
assessment left, not ten per cent. but filty, on the sudderjumma, for the a rges of col- 
lection and income of the proprietors ; it was estimated that the landholders income alo 
amounted to ten or fifteen per cent. ; it was expected that the improvement of estates by the 
culture of waste lands, would enrich the landiiolder by the increase of his usuatincome, and 
enable him to meet the variations of seasons and temporary calamities of drought aad 
jnundation, without needing remissions of revenue. gt 


Those expectations have been realized ; and if the persons whose benefit was imme- 
diately intended, have not generally profited by the beneficence of Government; if a a1 
change have taken place in the property and occupancy of the lands; this event, the 
much to be Jamented, has arisen from extrinsic causes; and it remains an undot 
truth, that the landholders of Bengal are now in the enjoyment of an aggregate i 
not indeed greater than the author of the measure contemplated, but exceeding their former 
profits by more than the amount which the late Board of Commissioners think too grea 
reward of future improvement in the hands of the land proprietors of the Ceded and Caos 
quered Provinces. rh : : : 


‘3 


‘ pte fer 
Ifa permanent settlement on a moderate scale of assessment, leaving to the landholder 
the whole benefit of future improvement from the cultivation of waste lands, was in Bengal a 
judicious measure, which justice called for, which the policy dictated, and which the 
interests of the Company countenanced, how much more is a similar measure recommended 
by like considerations in regard to our new territories. lt is of the utmost importance; it 
is essential for the safety of the state, to conciliate the great body of the landed proprietorsy 
to attach to the British Government that class. of persons, whose influence is most permanent 
and most extensive; to render it their palpable interest to uphold the permanence of ; 
British domination; to give them a valuable stake in the present administration of the 
country. This can be in no other way accomplished but by creating for the proprietors or 
possessors 


“HAST INDIA AFFAIRS. . 8s 


“spossessors of the soil, abeneficial interest, which emanating from the British: Government, 
- would increase with its duration. The landholders enjoying their estates under a moderate 
assessment fixed in perpetuity, are not ignorant thata change of Government would be 
_ followed by the exaction of an enhanced assessment: love of novelty may blind some, 
-dissatisfaction with the local administration may indispose others, some may be turbulent 
+ by inclination, others may be restless by habit. But the greater number, sensible that they 
benefit by the continuance of the British authority, would be littie disposed to listen to the sug- 
, gestions of disaffection. If on the contrary the utmost revenue be exacted, the landholders 
Site nothing to fear and every thing to hope froma change, aad the consequent impulse 
“40 promote the event, will be permanently added to the other causes of indifference or 
* disaffection which have been pourtrayed by the Board of Commissioners, 


5. This has been viewed in a very just light by the late Commissioners when the settle- 
-anent of Zillah Agra was under their consideration. And though there be no inconsistenc 
in their taking a different view of the subject as relating to other districts, I cannot think 
* that the distinetiun is well founded. At this period especially (could there have been at 
any time a doubt) every part of our Indian ons mast be considered as exposed to 
the same hazard and the same means of conciliation tending to ensure internal tranquillity ; 
‘ what are expedient in a frontier district are advisable in all; and a limitation of the demand 
of revenue, from which salutary effects are expected in the one, cannot be less productive 
of good consequences in the others. 


__ 36. This point, as of the highest importance, deserves ampler illustration. It may be 
‘drawn from past ex perience. ; 


37- During the late war in Hindostan, the necessity of retaining a large force within the 
- Company’s territories, left but a small portion of a great military establishment applicable 
to active operations. it will be remembered that the safety of the state was thought to have 
been more than once hazarded in engagements fought under great disadvantage of numbers 
“against an enemy essentially inferior, but who was able to bring his whole force into action, 
wile a small part only of the British strength could be put forth against him. In future 
wars, the same necessity must again recur (1 need not say how much to be deprecated) if 
‘ the internal tranquillity of our provinces have not in the mean time been placed on a securer 
~ basis than that on which it then rested. But it is only by conciliating that class of men, 
‘ whose conduct and disposition, whose influence and example mustdetermine the character and 
condition of the people, that the tranquillity of the country can be secured. I allude to the 
zemindars, who are unquestionably the persons possessing most natural influence and ef- 
_ fective power over the minds of the people: it is only by conferring on them the benefit of a 
permanent assessment of the land revenue, that that great body, consisting not of a few indi- 
_ viduals, but of the numerous landholders of the country, may be suddenly and effectuaily 
gained, 
. It appears ‘to be a very he a opinion, that the British system of administration is 
” palatable to our Indian subjects.. Admitting this opinion to be not unfounded, 
it follows, that while they taste none but the unpalatable hy of that system, and while 
» the only boon which would be acceptable to them is withheld, the landed proprietors, and 
with then the body of the people, must be more and more estranged from the Government, 
in proportion to + expectations which they had formed, and the disappointment which 
_ they will have experienced. 


39. In Bengal, where the national temper is indeed less turbulent; in Behar, and in. 
“Benares, where the popular character and disposition are the same as in the western pro- 
vinces, the permanent settlement has been Jong since wied with ample experience of its 
- benefits; no disaffection, no discontent, are there supposed to prevail among the landholders 
and peasants. Is it credible that the zemindars, who have the experience of a moderate 
_and fixed assessment, should be so insensible to the advantages which they enjoy, or 
so ignorant of the consequences which would follow, as to desire or in any way promote 
a change? 

_ 40. In fact no apprehensions have been entertained for the public tranquillity, on with- 
drawing the military force from those provinces. And whenever the internal peace of the 
-Ceded and Conquered Provinces shall be as well secured, nearly the whole military establish- 
“ment will be available for the purposes of active warfare. No measure would more essen- 
tially contribute to this very desirable end, than that of a permanent settlement; and even 
if it be attended with some sacrifice of future revenue, that would be more than compensated 


38 
not 


by an increased efficiency of military strength, giving a greater disposable force in war, or 


permitting greater reductions of expense in peace. 


4i. Neither can it be admitted that the relinquishment of a claim to participate in the 
“future improvement of landed estates, is an entire sacrifice of the revenue. Though con- 
curring in many of the observations of the Board of Commissioners on the su ject of 
transit and excise duties, I cannot think it would be unreasonable to attribute the pro- 
ductiveness of the salt revenue and abkaree in Bengal and Behar, to the increased opulence of 
the country, ascribed to the permanent settlement as the paar cause of its general pros- 
perity. In the increase of the revenue from unexceptionable sources, the Company have 
ample compensation for the doubtful expectation which was abandoned. In these obserya- 
tions I do not mean to hint a propostion for renewing the attempt, which was unsuccessfully 
made to establish a salt monopoly in the eae hipaa The form of it was injudicious, 
and 


me 


No. 4. 
Mr Colebrooke’s 
Minute, 
on extension of the 
Permanent System 


te the 
Ceded & Conquered 
Provinces. 


ue» 


*No.~4. 
"Mr. Colebrooke’s 
? Minute, 


86, PAPERS RELATING TO 


-and the attempt to obtain a large ‘revenue from salt, was premature. But it does not follow 
that, at a future period, a judicious plan may not be devised for levying a large revenue 
upon that necessary of life. .Jn most countries it is heavily taxed; and it is almost the 


onextensionof the -Only necessary that can be taxed with propriety and effect, in the present state of society in 
Permanent System India. Where the opulent mdulge iess im personal enjoyment of Juxaries, than in main- 


to the 


taining numerous attendants, no productive sourse of revenue.can be looked for, except an 


Ceded & Conquered -impost on an article of primary necessity. 4 


Provinces. 


Para, 226. 
:D* - 151. 


$Para, 227. 
D° - 261. 


"Sic orig, 


42. I shall only state one further reason for a decided opinion in ‘favour of persevering in 
the proclaimed intention of immediately concluding a ‘permanent settlement for the Ceded 


‘and Conquered Provinces. I allude to the abuses to which tem ke settlements are liable, 


and which indeed have been usually attendant onthem. The Board of Commissioners ex- 
press themselves as aware that temporary seitlements are harrassing, and afford opportunities 
of frauds. They describe the possible misconduct of public officers, in language which has 
greatly the appearance .of ‘pointed ailusion ; Government has not befove it-the grounds of 
judging whether abuses, which are possible, and indeed probable, have been practised to a 
great extent; there certainly is no sufficient preventive, nor any effective remedy, agains 
abuses, without a permanent assessment of the revenue; and the purity of the civil service of 
the Company on this establishment, which was fixed in a basis apparently secure, by the 
system of administration, established by Lord Cornwallis, would be inevitably lost im the 
ne continuance of temporary settlements of the revenue in the extensive provinces above 
-Benares. 


43- For this and for other reasons, which have been here imperfectly stated, but which 
are fully set forth and amply illustrated in the copious minutes which were recorded on the 
settlement of Bengal, | am clearly of opinion, that the proposition of the late Board of 


Commissioners, for the Se postponement of the pefmanent settlement for a period of — 


‘four years, which upon the same ground on which it is proposed, would lead to a further and 
indefinite postponement, should not be adopted, and tliat the measure should be carried 


into effect in every practicable instance, conformably with the provisions of Kegulation X. 


1807. 


44. The proposition of the Board of Revenue, next.in importance, is for the continuance 
of the sabsildace on the former footing; this. proposal is stated contingent on the postpone- 
ment of the permanent settlement. it will consequently be unnecessary to discuss the 
reasons of it, under a contrary resolution respecting that question, ain 


45. I am glad however to observe so strong testimony borne by the Commissioners in — , 


favour of the general character of-the present tehsildars. .From the knowledge which the 
course of judici a 
<Goruckpore particularly, and of the western Zillas in general, I had ‘a less favourable im- 
pression of their character and conduct; but independently of this consideration, the power 
with which they are invested was unnecessarily great, and inadequately coatrolled, and the 
intervention of such a class.of persons between the landholders and the officer representing 
Government, appears highly objectionable. : 


46. In regard to the expected economy from the change of system, it will be recollected 
~that the Court of Directors.have disapproved the magnitude of the revenue-charges uadér 
the government of Fort St. George, and that the amount of the charges, as remarked b 

the late Government of that Presidency, is very short of the expense of coilection in- 


ceded and conquered provinces. A reduction of the charge has been promised by us, and — 


will no doubt be. expected: by the Court of Directors, aad the amount of the saving to be 
_looked for from this source, cannot be.rated at Jess than 10 lacs of rupees. ans 
47- Another proposition of serious importance brought forward by the late Board’ of- 
“Commissioners, is the rescinding of Régulation XI. 1793, and enatting a daw by which 
estates, not exceeding 500 rupees, shall go to the eldest son to the exclusion of the rest, If the 
“Regulation above cited, which abrogated the special customs of families in regard to the 
inheritance of land, were now first proposed, I should, without hesitation, vote against that 
-nearly fourteen years. 1 think it much more objectionable to interfere, as is now proposed, 
with the general law of inheritance, and in opposition to the usages of the country; we mus 


-interference with established. But it is late to rescind a law which has beea in foree for 


_beware of Jifting.a rash hand against civil institutions, which are sanctified by their associ- 


ation with the religion and dearest prejudices of our native subjects. Hie 
48. Very minute subdivision of landed property is no doubt inconvenient 'to Go ern 
‘ment. ‘But other means may be devised of remedying the inconvenience, without interfering 


with the law of inheritance, and without excluding co-heirs’ and co-partners from the en- 


_the, proper.remedy. Butihe considexation of this subject does not jpress- tor: 
attention. 


.joyment of their several rights. Regulation Vi. 1807, dves not, tomy apprebensinaapeame : 


49. I amhappy to concur entirely with the Board of Commissioners, on the expediency 
-of revising the Resrulatioad concerning different classes of landholders and ‘tenants, and 

rescribing definite rules ‘for determining claims to property in the soil. Instructions have. 
been issued on this subject to the Board of Commissioners, and information from them 
may be early expected. It may however be proper to draw their attention again to this 
very important subject. ee ee 


go. It 


dicial functions had given me of the tehsildars of Benares, Allahabad and — 


a 


ee 


oS Se 


Se 


= 


| 


EAST INDIA AFFAIRS. 87 
~'-s0. Tt would be wrong to prejudge the question of the concurrent rights of talookdars 
and zemindars. It ought to be decided on considerations of justice and preferable right, 
-and not on those-of policy and expediency. But if the scale of justice be so equally ba- 
anced as to leave room for the admission of other considerations, | am disposed to think, 
“that expediency might incline the scale in favour of the village zemindars against the su- 
_perior talookdar. 


51. The inferior class of landholders in the Ceded and Conquered Provinces, appears from 
“such information asis at present before Government, to be precisely similar to the village 
zemindars of Benares, and maliks of Behar. The talookdars correspond-to the pergunnah 
-zemindars of both these provinces. The preference was there given to the village zemin- 
dars, but that did not operate to the extent of entirely depriving the superior landholder of 
‘his estate. The greater part remained to him, as also happened in the case of the sepa- 
ration of inferior talookdars in Bengal, except perhaps a few instances, or a solitary one, in 
awhich nothing remained to the superior landholder, and here -the liberality of Government 
-interposed for his relief. 


52. Considering the hazard which may attend the measnre of depriving the powerful 
-talookdars in zillabs Allighur and Saharunpore, of the farms held by them, the late Com- 
missioners suggest, that the settlement may be made with them as amils, under a stipu- 
lation requiring them to grant pottahs to the inferior zemindars at fair and equitable rates, 
and under a prohibition to the judicial and revenue officers, against interfering on trivial 
occasions. 4 

¥ > S 
53. It is known to’ every judicial offieer in Bengal, ‘that the provisions in the Regulations 


for preventing undue exactions from department talookdars, have proved totally nugatory, 


t the courts of justice are open to them for recourse. The proposed stipulations 
fe more ee and would be a very illusory fulfilment of that guarantee 
_of private-rights, which in the Commissioners gpinion, it would be contrary to all principle 
-in any case to ‘suspend. 


-54. Lam by no means satisfied that any necessity exists for continuing “the powerful 
talookdars in, possession of all their farms. They do not pretend to have received any OM 
manent gtant of them, or to possess any proprietary right to them ‘That they will be best 
pleased to retain them on the advantageous footing which they at present enjoy, cannot be 

estioned. That they would be provoked to rebellion or irritated to disaffection by the 
_refusal. to renew their recent farms, may be: doubted. But even if it be necessary er advisable 
to conciliate these powerful chieftains by so great a sacrifice of public-revenue, it -would be 
-much morefor the interest of Government to grant them their entire estates in-Jageer, in 
-Jieu of the more extensive farms held by them for an. inadequate tribute, Their local influence 
‘would: be «thus-restricted to narrower limits ; the hazard of irritation from the interference of 
revenue and judicial officers would be greatly diminished; the sacrifice of the public 
resources would be not augmented; and Government would-be at liberty to fulfil with sin- 
-cerity its guarrantee of the rights of landholders. 


55. The late Commissioners propose, that clauses of the Regulations, under which the 
‘claims of farmers and landholders to be admitted to the settlement are maintained, 
-should be revised and explained. I am not aware of an objection to this proposal, and 
considering how much doubt has been entertained, and how desirable it is that no room 
-should be ‘eft for misconstruction er for any strain in favour-of one description of persons 
“to the injury of another,-I think it may be right to introduce into the intended Regulation, 
_a declaration of the true meaning of the clauses in question. 


‘56. T-cannot omit to remark in this.place an extraordinary misapprehension of the Re- 
hy which appears in-the Report of the collector of Etawa, transmitted by the Board 
of Commissioners. He says, that “as the Regulation for the guidance of collectors allowed 
-& no discrimination beyond the fulfilment of engagements on the part of the zemindars. or 


'- farmers, with whom the 2d settlement was in all cases ‘to be concluded, he could ‘not in 


“# any case eject the farmers. He could only referthe claimants to the adawlut, but he made 
“ it a rule to require an engagement from the faremr, that, if the-zemindar should obtain 
“ & decree, the farmer should account to him.” The collector had here totally lost sight 
-of the’7th section of the Regulation to which he alludes, (Regulation V. 1805) where pro- 
-yision is expressly made for the admission of the zemindars conformably with a former 
Regulation (Regulation XXV.1 803, section 33) and he had forgotten that the Court at that 
-period had no power to decree immediate possession to the zemindar, and dispossession of 
the farmer, in any other case but where it-was already the coliectors duty to admit the ze- 
-mindars in preference -to the farmer. 


57. There is some appearance of a misapprehension-of ‘the same kind in the Commissioners 
observations on the question: between ‘the zemindars and farmers, where they argue, that the 
‘zemindars, who declined the first settlement, voluntarily submitted to the consequences (of 
Deing excluded, not for the three years, but for ten), and especially where the Commissioners 
cite Regulation X XV. 1803, section 29, as directing the 2d and gd settlements should be made 
swith the same persons, whether zemindars or farmers, and as holding out the advantages of 
a long lease indiscriminately to both landholders and farmers. 


_ 306. 51. Another 


No. 4. 
-Mr, Colebrooke's 
Minute, 

‘on extension of the 
Permanent System 
to the 
~Ceded & Conquered 
Provinces, 


Para. 259. 


‘Para. 95% 


Para. 42. 


Para. 134» 
D° - 139 


No. 4. 
Mr. Colebrooke’s 
Minute, 
om extension of the 
Permanent System 


to the 
Ceded & Conquered 
Provinces. 


Para, 262. 


88 PAPERS RELATING TO 


58. Another proposition of the Commissioners regards a regulation intended? for. the 
security of sureties, by giving to them the right of mortgages when they have been com- 
pelled te make good the revenue for which they were answerable, and authorizing the 
collector to give them possession after a summary enquiry. 


50. Though consideration be undoubtedly due to sureties whom the bad faith of the 
landholders has subjected to heavy responsibility, I entertain some doubt of the propriety 
of creating by regulation a contract not in Contemplation of the parties. It may however 
be sdvissile that the opinion of the Sudder Dewanny Adawlut, and present Board of Com- 
missioners, should be taken on the proposed enactinent. 


60. I have felt so much concern in the necessity of repeatedly expressing my dissent 
cation 


from the propositions of the late Board of Commissioners, that I have a sincere gratifi 
in passing to other propositions which have my unreserved concurrence. 


61. Sales of land for arrears of revenue, should certainly be avoided to the utmost prac- © 
ticable degree. | entertain a hope, that means may be devised for the recovery of arrears, 
without recourse against the person of the defaulter, or the property of his estate. The 
Regulations for Benares, contained provisions ada; ted to that purpose ; and unless it appear 
on enquiry that they have been neglected for sufficient reasons, [ should recommend the — 
reviv of them in that province, and the extension of similar provisions to the western 
provinces. mT am 


62. The Board of Commissioners recommend a more efficient authority in the Ceded and 
Conquered Provinces, to afford security to the people, and guard the interests of Govern- 
ment. This is desirable, not only only for the immediate purpose hinted by them, but for 
the important end of conciliating our new subjects, who are acquainted with their British — 
rulers, in none but the invidious characters of lawyers and tax-gatherers. They see only 
judges adininistering obnoxious Jaws with undiscriminating rigour, and collectors exacting 
the utmost revenue with uncongenial punctuality. We cannot, perhaps, establish any con-— 
trolling authority, which is not connected either with the revenue, or with the administratic 
of law. But I am willing to believe, and an incidental remark of the Commissio ers au- 

the ie 


thorizes me in the belief, that the Court of Appeal may be less unpopular than 


trict Courts, and that a permanent controlling authority in the revenue branch, 
conciliatory and useful. itz 
SRE CP Pe sar 


63. I shall conclude by declaring my concurrence in the Commissioners recommendation, 
that steadiness, moderation, and justice should be the features borne by the administration 


of Govermnent. But it is not ‘by abandoning a measure diliberately resolved on, and 


beneficial to our subjects, that we shall approve our steadiness. Itis not by bar o+, oper’ 
highest revenue, and wringing from our peasants the utmost rent, that we hee our 
moderation. Nor is it by depriving the sons of our petty landholders of their birth right, 


that we shall demonstrate our sense of justice. aaa ken: 
; A ’ a,4 wots 
(Signed) H. COLEBROOKE. ° 

“2h sid: 


vite 


. No. 5.- 
EXTRACT of a Letter from the Governor General in Couneil of Bengal, 
in the Publie Department; dated the goth June 1809 :—ParaGRrarus 
>-109 to 117, both inclusive ; together with the Papers referred 
~ therein, 


PROCEEDINGS of the Right Honourable the Governor General in Countil, 
relative to Mr. Rickards’s Proposition for establishing a General Bank, and 
- other Financial Arrangements. 


~ EXTRACT of PUBLIC LETTER from BENGAL; dated 30 June 1809. ~- 


: t Para. 109. 


O* the Proceedings referred to in the margin, your Honourable Court will find 
recorded several letters from the Government of Bombay, referring for our 
consideration, various saggeotone and plans submitted to them by Mr. Rickards, at 
present a member of that Government. 


- 110. The principal measure proposed by Mr. Rickards, is the establishment of a 
General Bank, whose operations shali extend throughout India; but as we were suf- 
ficiently acquainted with the sentiments of your Honourable Court on this subject, 
and as the ideas of Mr. Rickards appeared to us to resolve themselves ipto mere 
speculation, without embracing objects capable of being realized, while the machinery 
proposed by that gentleman for the performance of a very simple operation, was 


extremely cumbrous and complicated ; we thought it sufficient to point out to the 


Government of Bombay, that no public Bank could be established without the sanc- 
tion of your Honourable Court: to whose eonsideration, therefore, Mr. Rickards’s 
plans, if persevered in, must, we observed, be submitted. 


111. Connected with the plan of a Genera) Bank, Mr. Rickards proposes the institu- 
tion of a Sinking Fund ; but your Honourable Court are aware that such a fund has 
long been established, both at this Presideney and at Fort Saint George; although, 
from the circumstance of the public securities having risen so much in-yalue ef late, 
the Commissioners at this Presidency haye been obliged to suspend their operations. 


»a12. Mr. Rickards does not suggest any means of raising, from any independent 
source, the supplies which might be required for a Sinking Fund ; except indeed 
by retrenchments, which he is of opinion may be made from the allowances of the 
native officers at the different Presidencies ; but if the reductions pointed at by 
Mr. Rickards can be effeeted, without injury to the public service, they ought of 
course to be made without aay particular reference to the objects to which Mr. 
Rickards would propose to appropriate the saving. 


113. At this Presidency your Honourable Court are apprised that the public 
establishments have undergone repeated revisions, and you were lately furnished with 
the Report.of a Committee, who were appointed by us to revise the establishments, 
with a yiew to effect every practicable reduction of charge; but with respect to the 
allowances of the native officers employed under this Government, we are far from 
thinking that they are, in general, upon too highva scale, or that the expense of this 
part of the public establishments can with propriety be reduced. We except from 
this remark the tehsildarry establishments in Benares, and in the ceded and con- 
quered provinces, in whieh it is expected that considerable reductions will be effected 
at an early period. . 


114. Mr. Rickards, in a Minute which your Honourable Court will find in our 


Proceedings of the 29 July 1808, proposes that the annual supplies required by the 


Government of Bombay should be obtained by bills on Bengal, rather than By raising 
306, Z loans 


“EAST INDIA'AFFAIRS: : $9, 


Pub. Cons. 
6 May 1808. 
29 July — 
g Sept. — 


No. 5- 


Papers relative to 
Mr. Rickards’s 
Proposition 
for establishing a 
General Bank, 


&e. 
YY 


oo PAPERS RELATING TO 


loans at Bombay; and the argument on which that gentleman’s proposition is founded, 
assumes, that a public debt having always the effect of raising prices, it must neces- 
sarily occasion inconvenience and disadvantage to every description of anuuitants, as 
well as to the Government itself. . 


115. But Mr. Rickards, in this proposition, seems to have overlooked, that the 
alternative suggested by him might have no other effect than to transfer the incon= 
venience apprehended, from Bombay to Bengal; for unless there should exist at the 
time a fund at this Presidency quite sufficient to meet all the demands from Bombay, 
whether for the discharge of debt or otherwise, the drafts from that Government 
might have imposed upon us the necessity of raising loans under the very same cir- 
cumstances which Mr. Rickards so strongly deprecates as having an injurious tendency 
at Bombay. - 


116. When that gentleman's proposition was first submitted to this Government, 
it did not appear to us that the whole annual supply required at Bombay could be 
conveniently provided for in Bengal; but as the state of our finances has since that 
period greatly improved, and our present resources will enable us to meet any 
demands which can be expected from Bombay, we have deemed it expedient to 
recommend to that Government to raise as large a proportion as possible of the 
funds required by them, by bills upon this Presidency. In recommending this ar- 
rangement, we proceeded upon the presumption that there is at present a surplus 
revenue in India applicable to the discharge of debt, after providing for the public 
disbursements at all the different Presidencies ; nor did we consider it at all necessary 
to advert to considerations connected with the question of prices. It was simply ob-) 
vious that it must be to the advantage of the Honourable Company, that any ex- 
isting surplus should be drawn to that quarter where funds might be required, 
or where they could be best appropriated to the discharge of existing debt. - : 

117. Mr. Rickards, we are persuaded, was actuated by the most laudable mo- 
tives in bringing forward his different plans; and. although ‘speculations of the kind’ 
do not always lead to practical results, the spirit of inquiry should not be discouraged. 
while it proposes to itself useful objects. ( to. Sar Sit ra 


EXTRACT of the BENGAL PUBLIC CONSULTATIONS ; ; 
dated 6th May 1808. it unaets 


. .. Government of Bombay, Political Department. 
To the Right Honourable Gizsert Lord Minto, Governor General in Council, 
at Fort William. 


My Lord, 4 , ' 
Ist. WE have the honour to forward the copy of a letter addressed to us by 
Robert Rickards, Esquire, a civil servant on this Establishment, who arrived some 
months ago from England, appointed by the Court of Directors to succeed to the: 
first vacancy in Council. a yd 


2d. This address being, with its accompaniments, so fully explanatory of the very 
important subject of which it treats, we are persuaded that it will be rendering an 
acceptable service to our honourable empldyers, and to the public, to submit it, in 
the channel of its present transmission, to that superior authority which can alone, 
if approving of the plan it delineates, give it also due-effect. 


3d. We have understood that some, or all, of the agency houses, who ‘may be’ 

esteemed as at the head of the monied interest of this Settlement, would pro- 

bably be disposed to promote the object of the proposed Bank, as far as respects 

the bits of this Presidency. . . 
We have, &c. 


(Signed) Jo" Duncan, 
Bombay Castle, LI’ Corkran, 
the 22d October 1808. Thos. Lechmere. 


“EAST INDIA AFFAIRS. gi 


To the Honourable Jonatuan Duncan, President and Governor in Council, 
&e. &e. Ke. 
Honourable Sir, 
AN humble attempt to promote the public advantage, and that more particularly of 
the Honourable Company’s Government in India, will, [ trust, be indulgently received by 
your Honourable Board. 


Having, since my re-appointment to India, reflected much on the financial state of the. 
Indian Governments, the amount of the public debt, the difficulties it is likely to entail, 
and the danger of its increase, a Plan has suggested itself of diminishing the weight of 
this heavy burthen; connected with other public advantages; which I venture to submit ta 
the favourable consideration of Government, and that of the Court of Directors. 


As in the vouchers A to E, I have endeavoured’ to explain every difficulty, and obviate’ 
~ every objection, it would be superfluous to add any thing on the subject here, further 
than to hope, that as it involves the most intricate and abstruse part of the science of 
Political Philosophy, my errors may be pardoned, in consideration to the motives which 


- have actuated the attempt. 


. I have, &c. 
(True Copy) (Signed) R. Rickards, 


(Signed) F. Warden, Chief Secretary to Government. 


(A.) 


OUTLINES of a PLAN for paying off the INDIAN DEBT. 


1. Suppose the debt 20 million*, de 


* This sum is stated more with a view to e ; alli 
calculation, than to the actual amount of debt. *y sired to be reduced to 6 million. 


The debt is considerably more ; but if the prin- 


ciples of this oa correct, they will be found 2. Constitute a General Bank, and 


equally ap to any other amount, make over to it, for the security of its 
issues in notes, territory or territorial re- 
venue to the amount of one million 
sterling per annum, to be paid in coin: 
this security to be inviolable under what- 
ever exigency, and to be proclaimed as 
such in the most solemn terms. Divide 
this Bank into three ; one at each Presi- 
dency, with a proportionate share of the 
above-mentioned security settled on each; 
the notes of ‘each to have a prescribed 
local currency ; and the amount in circu- 
lation to be always limited by the decision 
of the Bank Directors, independent of 
Government. 


3- Although the Bank be thus divisible 
into three, one at Calcutta, one at Madras, 
and oneat Bombay, which is an easy after- 
arrangement, let it, to avoid confusion of 
ideas, be considered as one General Bank 
throughout the remainder of the plan. 


4. Let the capital stock then of this 
General Bank be called £.12,500,000, 
yielding a certain annual income of one 
inillion, or 8 per cent. on this nominal 
capital. 

5. Advertise the bank-stock for sale 
in the market, to be paid or subscribed 
for either in coin or in the Company’s 
paper now in the hands of their creditors. 


6. Bank 


No. 5 


Papers relative to 
Mr. Rickards's 
Proposition 
for establishing a 
General Bank, 

c. 


eed 


No. §. 


‘Papers elatvet 
Mn Rickards's 
Propesition 
for establishing @ 
-General Bank, 
&e. 
ee) 
(A.) 


92 


per cent. settled on the best of all secu- 
rities, will I presume be deemed very 
acceptable property, and therefore readil 
purchased, more particularly, if, the busi- 
ness of the Bank (to be hereafter de- 
scribed) shall be profitable over and above 
the expenses of it. Of the merchant 
stockholders, @ certain number, both 
European and native, are then to be 
élected directors of the Bank, conjointly 
with an “officer of Government, or a 
member of Council,* as.may be thought 
best, under whose united management, 
the business of, the Bank is to be-con- 
ducted: . : 
7. But of the bank-stock aboye spe- 
cified, about. two-thirds of the whole 
amount, or £.8,500,000 only, should be 
sold: this will dispose of an equal amount 
of the present debt, supposing the whole 
to be subscribed for in Company's Ts 
if any part be paid for in 9 ee 
ponding proportion of the debt may be 


is paper in the market; so that we may 


here consider £. $,500,000 of the present 


debt to be converted into bank-stock, in 
the hands of individuals, the remainder, 
or four fnillions, will be Government's 
share, for purposes to be hereafter men- 
tioned. , < 


“8. The Bank thus. constituted: to. be 
conjoined with the Company's Treasury 
in: the receipt and payment of sums on 
bah of Government,; to be:a Bank of 
discounts, to grant. credit on unexception- 
‘able security, and.at such.times only as the 
Bank shall in their own judgment deem 
perfectly unobjeciionable, also. to 
engage in. the business of exchange by 
granting bills at a more. reasonable rate 
‘than can be procured from individuals, in 
favour of merchants applying for the same 
‘on any part of the Company's territories; 
and for this purpose to have. subordinate 
banks or offices in different parts of the 
‘country, as well to facilitate this business 
of exchange, as the circulation, if neces 
sary, of the notes; there may hence be 
fewer demands for coin on the Bank than 
xwould be otherwise preferred, less coin 
exported for the payment of foreign ot 
distant debts, particularly.if the great, In- 
dian shrofis are. concerned ip the. Bank, 
and therefore its. necessary deposits of 
specie less liable to inconvenient fluctua; 
tions. This operation will be a, great 
convenience to the mercantile body, who 
wiil be freed’from the losses and inconve- 
niences now’ suffered in exchange, and 
from the artifices of shroffs, and therefore 
find their pecuniary intercourse with every 
part of British India much facilitated. 

g. With 


PAPERS’RELATING TIO 
6. Bank-stock yielding a certain net 8. 


ry 


i) 


* Were I proposing the establishment of @ bank 
in England, 1 should certainly not select a 
of Government for a director, In free countries of 
open and’ extensive commerce, ; inde- 
pendence of a bank is. perhaps essential to ‘its 
credit and the general confidence of the public ; 
but in India, local circumstances should also be 
considered at each Presidency ; the chief merchants, 
who, comparatively spealki g, may be’said to en- 

ss the trade, are few: and were a general Bank 
intrusted to their exclusive management, these few 
are just as liable to enter into hurtful combinations 
to promote their own interest, as a Goyernment 


“js to injare public credit by arbitrary acts to 


relieve occasional distresses. By the union, these 


paid off: but this is not likely while there’ partics will operate as w cliecl oo: este Siaaa cee 


if after trial it be ponent pe Government 
to withdraw, the sequel of this. ides for 
such a contingency as oF paid. 

Native directors seem to me of importance 
to the complete success of the ; and the co- 
operation of the great. Indian shrofl3 in this 
estabhishment, woul facilitate many of its opera- 
4uons. ; isgog af ta 


Note.—It. shouldbe» clearly 4 
hand, that the Bank will exercise its own discre- 
tion in the granting of credits, in view to the 
amount of notes in circulation at the time such 
credits may be applied for, and to other local cir- 
cumstances. 


I do not enter into a detail of the business of 
the Bank, because it would extend this paper to a 
tedious and unnecessary length. The nature 
intended business is, J presume, sufficiently mani- 
fest in the plan, and it is surely not too much 
to anticipate, thut its profits, arising from these 
branches of business, may do a great deal more 
than defray the expenses of the institution, 


The granting of bills of exchange on, Ragin 


on favourable terms, might often be a con- 
venience to individuals in India, and also to the 
Bank; it may likewise be an accommodation to 
the captains and officers of the Indiamen, “These 
latter often bring out specie which might thus be 
supplied to the Bank if required. ‘This however 
is introduced as a suggestion, because the Court of 
Directors can alone determine how far it may be 
convenient to answer such drafts. 


T also pass over the means of supplying the Bank 
with its requisite deposits of spect eee 1 
apprehend all that may be required in is respect, 
may be derived without difficulty from the annual 
income, the revenue, the aid of merchants, pro- 
prietors of stock, and in the frequent imports of 
specie into India; and because the actual amount 
can only be ascertained by experience, though, 
from the nature of the Bank business, it 1s con- 
ceived this amount may never require to be 
considerable. 


» 


sq 


* This sum is stated in view to the expected 
extent of capability in the plan. Though a lesser 
amount be paid off in the manner here proposed, it 
will still not in the least affect the ultimate grand 


diquidate fourteen millions of debt in eight years 
at farthest, aud without any other aid beyond 
what the Bank and revenues of India can 


supply. 


- +The drafts on the Court of Directors will 
probably be much more whenever the debt comes 
to be paid off; but this large proportion of 3} 
amillion is purposely stated against India, to show 
what the plan is capable of. 


' 


t 


Not a single note should be offered to any 
eféditor ufless he voluntarily desires to receive 
them; the original compact with the Coimpany 
stipulates for payment in cash, &c. which is clearly 
7 and the clause should be litérally executed; 


between a and its creditors, being 
always a matter of the highest importance. 

§ An objéction may possibly here occur, that 
the associated Directors will not consent to this 
issue, on the plea of its diminishing other isstes in 
the discount of bills, by which they would benefit, 
but which they are thus deprived of. In reply, let 
it be considered, that the major part of this issue 
_of notes to the Company’s’ servants will be made 

ower in the first instance to their respective agents 
(thé principal of whom will be Bank Directors,) 
.or, in ordinary course, find their way back in 
revenue to the Company’s Treasury, 
owheré, as a certain sum of notes may be supposed 
ito be always accumulated, such sum, together with 
ake amount in the hands of the Directors, may be 
employed in re-issues to transact the private 
business of the Bank. These considerations may 
perhaps obviate the objection, and even bé found 
tO give the said directors, agents and merchants, 
ai interest itv receiving these notes, and therefore 
tend to promote their easy circulation. 


circulation, find their way, in large proportions, to 
the said agents and merchants, who will of course 
employ the notes in local currency, and in ail 
transactions with the Bank; the whole of the 
coin, in other profitable pursuits: hence arises a 


portion to the means and credit of each indi- 
vidual merchant, for all may thus partake of as 
afiuch of the said notes and coin as tlieir trade, or 
probable expectations of profitywill enable them to 
employ. 
- Wherefore, if these premises be correct, the 
Bank may,at its first opening, commence with the 
barge, in notes, of demands on the treasurers at 
the respective Presidencies for monthly allowances 
and on other atcount8; and as by the supposition 
‘these notes: will rapidly returm to the Bank or 
‘Treasury, it would seem to preclude the necessity 
of any extra issue of notes, or, at all events, greatly 
limit’ it; that’ is, the whole or nearly the whole 
private busiriess’ of ‘the Bank may thus, with the 
co-operation 


EAST INDIA AFFAIRS. 


object (as will be seen in the sequel), which is to - 


strict and literal preservation of public fiith. 


“Indeed ‘both the coin and notes above proposéd 
sto be issued, must, in the natural course of Indian” 


‘manifest increase of mercantile capital, and in due’ 


93 
~ 9. With the aid of a Bank thus con- 
stituted, Government may venture to pay 
off, say £. 4,000,000 of their debt,* after 
giving sufficient notice, as follows. The 
present paper contains a stipulation 
whereby it is to be liquidated according 
to number on the register, by cash, at the 
Presidency, or by bills on the Court of 
Directors: these clauses may, I conceive, 
be literally executed. The precise 
amount of the drafts on the Court of 
Directors, it is not material here to know; 
but that calculation may proceed on de- 
terminate data, we will suppose these 
drafts to absorb £.500,000,F and theére- 
fore 3} millions to be paid in Indid. =” 

10. Bank-notes, if as good credit as those 
of the Bank of England, will readily be 
accepted by the Company's sérvants in 
payinent of their monthly allowances, 
whatever they may be; by the creditors, in 
payment of debis}. Let the servants 
therefore be paid in Bank-notes issued ott 
the responsibility of Government, but 
with the consent of the associated Bank 
Directors, § to the amount of all in all of 
34 millions if possible, or to any lessér 
amount, that the general circulation may 
be locally found capable of receiving, 
without depreciation of the sdid notes; and 
in lieu thereof, let Government be prévi- 
ously prepared with an equal amount of 
coin reserved from the revenues as they 
are regularly paid in, to be deposited int 
the Bank, in addition fo its annual in- 
comé as stated in the 2d paragraph. 
With this coin, when sufficient is accu-' 
mulated, the ¢reditors may now be paid 
(after due previous notice) according to 
the literal and express conditions of their’ 
original contract. 


11. This issue of notes, whatever be 
the actual amount, may be made gra-' 
dually, to avoid unnecessary alarm, and 
should be proportioned with judgment 
to what the circulation will from time’ 
to time absorb. Three millions and a 
half being about three or four months 
ordinary expenditure, may perhaps be ab- 
sorbed in 6 months ; but whether it be so 
or not, it should be the chief object’ of 
the Bank’s atténtion, at its first institution,’ 
with which, until duly executed, the 
other branches of its intendéd business 
should not be allowed to interfere, or 
only be conducted with a proper pre-: 
cautionary regard to the ultimate success 
of this primary object. In a country 
yielding 14 millions annually of revenue, 
it sorely will not be difficult to reserve: 
the 3 millions above proposed, for this’ 
grand operation, or more if necessary. The: 

Aa annual 


—— 


Y Peis relative 
fs ards’s ~ 
_ Pto vere 


No. 5. 


Papers relative to 
Mr. Rickards’s’ 
’ Proposition 
for establishing a 
General Bank, 
; &e, 


(A) 


94 
annual imports of specie into India, present 
another source of eventual supply. 


~~ “4 = 


PAPERS RELATING TO 


co-operation of the merchants, be transacted by 
means of the very notes, or (which comes to the 
same thing) the same amount of notes thatsshall 


-be issued in the first instance in payments on account of Government. 

: The amount capable of circulation at the respective Presidencies, will thus be 
speedily ascertained, and accordingly limited. The subordinate provincial 
Banks may then be authorized to issue notes in the same way to a specified 
dimited amount from each ; these notes will again similarly return through the 
medium of merchants into the said Banks, and into the Company’s Treasury, 
in discharge of revenue; the Treasury and Bank being conjoined, . both at the 
Presidencies and Subordinates, will mutually assist each other;. and as 
moreover each Bank may, it is presumed, under proper authority, and in 


cases of necessity, either coin or destroy notes at pleasure, so, on 


the one 


chand, there need never be impediment to the private business of the Bank, 
while on the other, the amount of notes in circulation may always be kept 


within prescribed limits, 
explained. 
12, If the credit of the Bank be well 
‘established, this proposed 3 tnillions in 
notes, may not be too much for the ge- 
neral circulation of our Indian territories, 
for according to the plan, this will be 
the only issue of notes by the Bank. or 
its original landed security ; four millions 
moreover of the capital stock of the Bank 
is the Company’s own share, which, under 
the operation of the Plan, as shown in the 
annexed figured statement, will be annu- 
ally increasing, perfectly free from all in- 
cumbrance or engagemerit, and therefore 
of itself more than adequate for 3% mil- 
lions of notes intended to be circulated. * 


13. Of the present Indian debt of 
£. 20,000,000, there will now have been 
converted into bank-stock £. 8,500,000 ; 
paid in cash and by bills on the Court of 
Directors, £. 4,000,000 ; and _ there will 
remain in the hands of the creditors in 
promissory notes or bonds, £. 7,500,000 
more, which we are now to dispose of. 


14. The one third share of Govern- 
ment in this General Bank, or 4 millions, 
has been reserved to operate as.a Sinking 
Fund, to which may be added the annual 
million now applied to the use of the 
Sinking Fund, and .this combined fund 
willbuy up£.2,500,000 stock, and nearly 
extinguish the 74 millions of outstanding 
promissory notes or bonds in six years, as 
exhibited in the annexed figured state- 
ment: in other words, it will effectually 
annihilate in 6 years near £. 10,000,000 
of the existing debt. 


(Vide paper (B.) where this operation is further 


* Tt is perhaps impossible to state the precise 
amount of the Indian currency, or, until trial be’ 
made, how far commercial capital will admit of 
augmentation, or of a substitution in paper of that 
part which merchants must always keep by thent 
to answer occasional demands: ‘future cireum- 
stances must determine these points; but, inde- 
pendent of the probable conjectures to be derived 
from the amount of annual revenue which must be 
kept in view, as hereafter shown, there is one 
thing certain, that from the existing depressed 
state of industry in this country, it is capable, 
under proper stimuli, of incalculable increase, and 
therefore, of theemployment of an indefinite amount 
of circulating capital, if the common incentives to 
industry and improvement be not palsied by the 
immoderate wants and impolitic exercise of arbi- 
tary power, Gt Agats 

But whatever may be the immediate effect of a 
brisker circulation on Indian industry, the Plan, it. 
will be easily conceived, does not propose to over- 
load the currency with useless abu but 
merely to substitute, in the first instancé, notes of 
unquestionable credit, for coin; whici latter, in es 
far as it may then be redundant in the country, — 
will be exported, or employed in foreign commerce, 
It is at the same time meant to infer, that there is_ 
ample room for retaining, or at least for recalling 
this, and perhaps a greater addition to the circu- 
lating capital, through the medium of ine ; 
industry and trade, while, in the interim, the sub- 
stitution of good notes for coin, to the amount of 
three anda half millions, is not thought to be 4 
sive, in a country which, independent of a 
trade at the respective Presidencies, now pays. 
annually fourteen millions in specie to its Govern~— 
ment; or likely to prevent those lesser annu 
realizations from the revenues in coin, required 
the use of the Sinking Fund, as will be more 
explained hereafter. le 


Saad 


15. It being desirable to keep up 6 million of debt, which precise amount is 


‘now found in the hands of the stock-holders, Government may only be 


dered as debtor on the £. 3,500,000 of bank-notes supposed to be in circulation; — 
Government may also now determine to continuc, or withdraw its concern in the’ 
Bank: in either case, the proceeds of the combined Sinking Fund, are sufficient to 
call in and extinguish, if desired, the whole of the aforesaid £. 3,500,000 of 


bank-notes in two more years as shown .in the statement, or in 8 years at furthes 
to liquidate fully and effectually the proposed 14 million of debt, \eaving the divectors 
full liberty to proceed with the Bank either on the old or any new ing 
deemed eligible, In short, the £. 3,500,000 of bank-notes may be considered asa 
loan, without interest, from the Bank to Government, which the Jatter are now 
fully prepared to pay .off, or continue to employ in such way, and.according to. 


306. 


consi- 


_ 


4 
4 
P 
. 
1 
| 


3 EAST INDIA AFFAIRS. 05 


such arrangement, as may, under existing circumstances, be decided on between the No. 5. 

parties, : he aa Papers relative to _ 
16. The advantages of this plan may therefore be said to consist, under prudent lr. Rickards’s © 

management, in the certain reduction of £.14,000,000 of the Indian debt, in a, "7oPrsition 


period that we may all rationally look forward to see the accomplishment of, and General Bao $ 


therefore not so Jiable.to be counteracted by unforeseen accidents or events. &e. 
* 17. In eight years the annual payments on account-of interest and Sinking Fund, _ 4 
will be reduced to £' 480,000, or £.8 per cent. on the £. 6,000,000 of bauk-stock (A.) 
debt; viz. 
~ Present interest - . - - - . - £.1,600,000 
Applied to the use of the Sinking Fund - - - - 1,000,000 
4 , Total of present payment per annum - > « 2,600,008 
y Deduct : 
Amount of appropriation to the Sinking Fund, -no £. 
longer required - - - - 1,000,000 
Interest on 14 millions of debts now extinguished 
; at 8percent.- - - - = = 1,120,000 
2,120,000 
ch ———— oo 
Remains - - - £.480,000 © 
Whence there will be upwards of £.2,000,000 per annum to be ever afterwards 


applied to the augmentation of the Company’s own wealth and the improvement of 
their India territories. ‘The Company may then, I presume, trade without further - 
aid from loans ; their India investments ought then in fact to cost them no more than 

the,expense of transporting to England, which should enable them to undersell every 

other nation, to the very great benefit of the Mother Country. The outley of such a 

sum, in the support of industry in India, will proportionably contribute to the im-; 
provement of that country, where some such fostering aid is essentially required. 


18. The: commercial interests of India willbe greatly benefited, trade and 
industry increased, and therefore it is not unreasonable to expect the cordial and 
zealous co-operation of the mercantile body in promoting the success of the plan. 


19. It has also the advantage of requiring no additional tax: it depends for success ; 
on no probable reduction of the rate ef interest; and it preserves public faith with 
the creditors. ‘Those who get bank-stock for their present bonds, are likely to- be 
greatly benefited by the exchange, and the remainder are all paid according to the 
very letter of the original contract; should future wars incur future debts, a recur- 
rence to the same description of Sinking Fund as above specified, presents a certain 
mode of rapid liquidation. ; 


20. Finally, it has been observed in the Plan (vide notes of gth paragraph) that the 
drafts on the Court of Directors in part payment of the Indian debt, have been pur- 
posely stated low, to show, or at least to try the extent of capability in our Indian 
means. Now, to view the Plan in all its bearings and particularly those which may 
at first be apprehended to press heavily on the Honourable Court in England ; let 
us suppose the drafts, from the favourable rate of exchange, or other circumstances, : 
to be very considerable,—lesser difficulties may be disregarded, when the greatest are 
_ capable.of easy removal ;—let us give this its most formidable aspect, and calculate, 
_ for example, that, of the first £. 4,000,000 to be paid off, £. 2,000,000 at least will 
be demanded by bills on the Court of Directors, and £. 1,000,000 more in each 
_ successive year, till the whole be liquidated; it then follows, 


First.—That, as no attempt is made to pay off debt until the proposed amount be © 
reserved from the revenues, and in the hands of the Sinking Fund, £. 2,000,000. of 
_ this’sum, .or any other pertion, may be remitted to England through the medium of 
investment, or otherwise, to answer the bills so demanded on the Court of 


Secondly.—A cursory view of the figured statement will show, that another annual 
million, or any other required amount, may be similarly remitted, to answer drafts 
in each succeeding year ; and that the Sinking Fund is still capable of completing its: ” 
object of final liquidation precisely at the same period; And, ' 

: Thirdly.— 


’ . - Se 
: OF oe Cy te 
J : 


96 PAPERS RELATING TO 
No. 5. Thirdly,—There will always be abundant time to provide for the discharge of these 
ate drafts, because they are only payable 15 months after date, or 12 months after 


Papers relative to 
Mr, Rickards’s sight ; or, 
“ : iycaraey , _ Fourthly.—Should the Court of Directors prefer paying these drafts with funds 
General Bank, raised in England, and allow the Sinking Fund to accumulate at the same time, ~ 
&e. still appropriating to its use the interest of each portion of debt so remitted, the 
“—~——~ process of final liquidation in India will be most rapidly accelerated, as a short 
(A.) calculation will easily evince. 
Lastly.—In proportion to these remittances, there will be so much less coin ree 
quired to pay off debt in India, and therefore greater latitude for the circulation of 
bank-notes. 


21. Hence it may be confidently added, that in whatever proportions the debt be 
ultimately paid in India, ot in England, the resources of our Indian possessions are 
alone equal to the accomplishment of the object ; and all the advantages of the plan 
are, in these respects, at least equally realizable. 


(Signed) R. RICKARDS, 


se 


(Accompaniment to Letter A.) 


STA T EM ENT, to show how the combined Sinking Fund proposed in the Plan, will 
extinguish, in 8 years, 14 millions of D oe: consisting, Viz : 


Of Bank-stock to be bought up by the S ges: a of the Sinking 
' Fund - - £.2,500,000° 
Cb Bareninensy Notes, D - D - - - = = Jy500,000, 
And D° - to be paid off in the first soanenes, in coin reserved ; 
from the revenues, for which Bank-notes are to be substi ‘ 
tuted, and by Bills on Court of Directors - - - 4,000,000 
Total- - —————=- 14,000,000 


st Yea 
Proceeds of £. $000,000 of Bank-stock ing per cent. ay Gy 
per.annum,is = - - - + 320,000 be S447 al 
Add 1 million - - - - = 1,000,000 - : 
————. - - to be deducted - = 1,320,000 


£. 12,680,000 _ 


d Year 
Proceeds of £ argiaies — as above ; viz. 
Interest thereon - ij eal 425,600 
Addimillion - = = = 1,000,000 i) 
——— - - to be deducted ~- 1,425,000 


£. 11,254,400" 
gd Year oP» 
Proceeds of £. ieaaion Stook and Notes ; viz. \.. aan 
Interest thereon ~ -  ~ £. 539,648 ate 


Add 1 million - = #  « 1,000,000 : "9 ae 
——— -- to be deducted - - 1,590,648" ~ 
—— a 


L. 95714,75% 
4th Year: . - wydh 3, 
Proceeds of £. 8,285,248 Stock and Notes: viz. 
Interest thereon - - - =, 662,819 ‘e9 
Add.1 million - = = = 1,000,000 ‘ol 
———. -- tobededucted - 1,662,819 ~ 
£. 8 ; p 
5th Year: ee : 
Proceeds of £ 9,948,067 ‘Benck and Notes; viz. 
Interest thereon - Bete sry 795,945 ; a 
Addamillio: - - =. &  1,000,c00 


——— - - to be deducted - - 79585 
Carried forward - - - &. casio =} 
* It will be observed that the fund, in this-year, | lation has reference: to the, promissory nie nd 


will have done more than purchase the £-2,500,000 | bank-notes intended to be extinguished. 
stock proposed, whence the remainder of the calcu- 
lation 


a a eS a 


‘BAST INDIA AFFAIRS, _ 97 
Biers Brought forward = - £. 6,256,088 
6th Year : ; 
Proceeds of £. 11,743,912 Stock and Notes ; viz, 
Interest thereon - - - | = £. 939,513 


1,000,000 


Addimillio - +. - ; 
a. Fe —— - tobededucted - - 1,930,513 


L£. 4,316,575" 
7th Year: 
Proceeds of £. 13,683,425 Stock and Notes ; viz. _ 
Interest thereon - - +  -£.1,004,674 


Add 1 million - - - - 1,000,000 


————- - - tobe deducted - - 2,094,674 


£. 2,221,901 
- 8th Year: 
Proceeds of £. 14,000,000 Stock and Notes ; viz. 
Interest thereon. - - ~ - at. 1,120,000 
The full annual million being no longer 


required, add only - - = 601,901 
-———— - - to be deducted - - 1,721,901 
And there remains - - - £. 500,000 


Which the Plan supposes to have been liquidated by bills on the Court of Directors, or, if 
no such bills are granted (which however is highly improbable) a very small addition to the 
Sinking Fund would still liquidate the whole in India in the course of this 8th year. 

On this Statement it is further to be remarked, that until the sum of £. 4,000,000 be dis- 
charged (which the Plan supposes may be in six months after the establishment of the Bank) 


the whole debt will be running on at interest, as at present: whence it follows, that all that. 


is contributed in this intervening period, on account of the Company’s share of bank-stock, 
will be an extra charge on the revenues in the first year: this share being 4 million, and the 
interest thereon £. 320,000 per annum, the said extra charge on the revenues for six 
months, will bear a due proportion thereto. 

Against the additional expense, may be stated the sum minus the annual million in the 
last or 8th year of the above Statement, or £. 398,099, and indeed all its other advantages, 
which, for so small an extra sum in the first year, may be said to be cheaply purchased. 


(Signed) R. Rickards. 


(B.) 


STATEMENT, to show how 14 million will be liquidated, on the supposition 
of four million being paid off in the first instance, in the manner proposed in the oth, 
&e. paragraphs, vy sad A; but in the proportion of two million in coin, and two 
million by bills on Court of Directors. 


Tuts supposes an issue of two million of notes, in lieu of the coin required from the 
revenues to make the preceding payment, and in this case the annihilation of four millions 
debt will exactly counterbalance the extra charge of £. 320,000 per annum on the reve- 
nues, occasioned by the appropriation of four millions to constitute a Sinking Fund. 


That part of the debt which is intended to be reduced, will then consist, as follows, 


Of Bank-stock intended to be bought up by the Fund - J. 2,500,000 
Of Promissory Notes outstanding - D° - D° - + - 7,500,000 
And - D° - to be paid off in the first instance, as above 
speciied - - - - SS BT as Pee ae es - 4,000,000 
’ f Total - - —— 14,000,000 
ist Year: : 
Proceeds of £. 4,000,000 of Bank-stock at 8 per 
_ cent. is seat und Oe St A vated £999,000 
Addimillion - - - - - 1,000,000 
- ; ——_—— - - to be deducted - - 1,320,000 


Carried forward - - £. 12,680,000 


* The seven and a half million of promissory 
notes being nearly bought up by the Fund in this 
sixth year, the remaining two years are chiefly 
employed in calling in the bank-notes in circulation : 
but as these bear no interest, the accumtlation in the 


a 
; 


last of these two years, is calculated only on the. 


stock and promissory notes which do bear interest, 
and will at this juncture be found-in the hands 
of 


of the Commissioners of the Sinking Fund, as 
follows ; L. ; 
Original four millions of bank-stock - 4,000,e00 
Bank-stock bought up by the Sink- 
ing Fund - - - - - 2,500,000 
Promissory Notes - - D°.- - D° - 7,500,000 


Total - £. 14,000,000 


Bb 


No. 5. 
Papers relative to 
Mr. Rickards’s 
Proposition 
for establishing a 
General Bank, 
&e. 


(A.) 


- 
OP we PAPERS RELATING TO 
No. 5: : s Brought forward - - £. 12,680,000 
<a 2d Year: : ON ae 
Papers relative to . tit fe ER 
Mr. Rickards’s harcoate of £. s.50up0e Stock, as above ; ae pe Eevoon't 
mares ereon Peerage 0) 
for Maes gy AMA anillion = 68 = 5 Ywbqo60-~.~ ste Fs she RR 
ig a, ; : « oncieae 
General Bank, ea: - - to be deducted - - 1,425,600 
eT ond SEE ‘Proceeds £.- 6,745,500 Stock and Notes ; viz. ; 
(B.) Interest thereon sae Se £- 530,648 
: Addimillion - | - = = 1,000,000 beore:'i 
—+—— - = to be deducted - - 1,539,645 
£- 95714,752 


- 4th Year: : 
Proceeds of £. 8,285,248 Stock and Notes ; viz. 
Interest thereon - - - - £.662,819 
Addi1million - - - = = *1,006,000" tt 3, to whgegan't 
—+=— - ~ to be dedacted'-'- 1,662,819 


PRERESOM 
7 >. 7 Ot? Sees 


sth’ Year: ; 

Proceeds of £. 9,948,067 Stock and Notes ; viz. 
Interest thereon = = = - eae & 795,845 
‘Addi million = = * =) 1,000,000 - | aoe at 

———— - - to be deducted - - As 5,8. 


ot 


; 6256088 
£- 6,2 4 
. . ; * 
‘ ehied ST 6 


is 6th Year: ‘ titve) Barotdl 
oceeds of £. 11,743,912 Stock and Notes ; viz. bagac! 
Interest thereon = - == £939,513 | ‘dt el be 
Addimillion - = +. = 1,000,000 < lana! | bysbadittinan +) | 
: its ect!” Phe adgli« 
P. s of £. 13,683,425 Stock and Notes; viz. tek iw ork taseite 
nterest thereon - - - - Ds 1,004,674 df Hl 7. 


Add 1 million - - ~ - 1,000,000 : ta PRO wm tack - 
; ——— - - to be dedacted ++ 2,004,674 © . 


& 


And thereremains = += = 2,221,901 


Of which sum, it will be remembered two millions are proposed, in the preamble to this State- 
ment, to be paid by bills on the Court of ‘Diréctors; and if the Court are pleased to raise 
this sum in Egle it will only leave, at the end of the 7th year, the mere trifle of 
£- 221,901 to be finally liquidated. PATS. 
pee it. | 
' On ‘this plan, therefore, the whole fourteen million may be positively liquidated in seven 
years, without any other difficulty than that of the of Directors borrowing two _ 
million in England, and without subjecting the revenues in this country to extra charge on 
account of the Sinking Fund. abby ¢ aries 
~ But in considering the two proposals, which suggest, the one, an issue of 3 million of lena f ; 
notes, atid the other, of two walilion, it is not to ey saree that either proposal unfrsan 
absolute necessity for such issue; for an attentive consideration of the Plan, will show 1 
no such necessity exists. The Sinking Fund will notwithstanding perform all its ; 
with equal efficacy and régularity: but a Sinking Fund, it maybe objected, would 4 
the debt of itself, without other aid; then where the use of the Bank? Itis trne a 
Fund would do so, but how establish this Sinking Fund without being an extra cha 
the revenues, which the said revénues can ill bear; of without additional taxes,” 
would most assuredly be oppressive?” The ‘union of the Bank and Sinking Fund, obviates — 
this serious and important difficulty. bale ; 
ist. By the issue of 33 million of notes, as a substitute for so much specie, intended, 
another half million, by draft on the Court-of Directors, ta pay off four million of debt, a ‘ 
suth Of annual mterest (&£. 320,000). is extinguished, exactly equal to the annual extra sur 
or £. 320,000, required to support the Sinking Fund. 
ad. By the issue of two million of notes, and the payment of two million more by the 
Court of Directors, the same effect is.produced, and in both cases there is no extra ely 
on the revenue. t2 * 
_ gd. Should the issues. of the Bank, in ‘cither Of ‘these two cases, not reach the 
limit above defined, still every ‘approach to it will be a proportionate diminution of the 
extra charge on the -revenues. The probability indeed is, that it will be no extra charg 
at all,-and-therefore ‘certainly require no ‘additional tax ; and if this object is cote ; 
accomplistment, as anticipated in the Plan, it affords ample proof of the utility of the - pro- 
posed co-operative’ anion of the Sinking Fund/and the Bank. hares 


* “Ath. ‘Admitting the worst that can occur, viz. that a part of the support of the Sinkin: 
Fund do prove a charge on the revenues, still it need only be temporary,*for the : 
306. tatement 


: 
“ 


EAST IENDEA AFFAIRS, 99 


Statement shows the Fand to be annually increasing. In the 4th year, for, example,. it will 

be upwards of eight millions: at which period even the whole of the original £. 320,000 re- 
uired for its support, might be surrendered ; and it would still proceed in the rapid liqui- 
ation of the debt, though not quite so rapid as before. ~ 


But all this relates.to the advantage derivable. by Government, in the establishment of 
a Sinking Fund free of charge. To estimate the advantages, of which the Plan is supposed 
capable, to. the merchants (independent of those acknowledged general advantages de- 
rivable from the institution of an extensive bank) let us, for example, 

Suppose 24 lacs issued at Bombay and its subordinates, or any other sum determined on 
by the Bank Directors, and that a considerable portion passes into the hands of the mer- 
chants, and remains floating in circulation, that is employed in payments between 
individuals, or in circulating commodities locally ; and let us suppose, for the sake of 
the explanation, that ten lacs be employed in revenue payments to Government, i. e. to be 
constantly returning on the Company’s treasury. 


The first portion is a clear addition to the mercantile capital, as exhibited in note to 
para. 10. Plan A. to be employed as the said merchants think proper. Even this portion 
of the issue might be employed in the banking business without loss, probably with some 
degree of gain. 

But of the other portion, which is supapecd to be circulating through the different 
treasuries, dees not the union of the Bank and Treasury afford means to the former of em- 
ploying this amount to their own exclusive adyantage? The treasury, for example, lending 
it, as it were, to the Bank, free of interest. In other words, if notes can be coined and de- 
stroyed at pleasure, so as to keep a certain limited amount always floating, may not, the Bank 
employ in its private business, and to its own exclusive advantage, a sym of notes equal 
to what experience shall ascertain to be the amount always returning on the Company’s 
treasury in revenue payments, where each payment so received, will, for @ certain period, 
lie dead? Would not this be in fact the same thing as allowing the Bank a pee at the 
first issue on their own account? And would not the numerous points at which notes would 
be always readily received at par, viz. the treasuries, the different agents and merchants, 
and the Bank itself, tend greatly to facilitate the circulation of that quantity determined’ 
to be issued, and lessen, if not obviate, the danger of an inconvenient run on the Bank 
for specie? 


_, Another View of the same case : 

Suppose the circulation to absorb 24 lacs, of which 14 go to the merchants, ‘and 10 
return on the Company’s treasury. The first 14 is au addition to the merchants capital, 
to be employed as they think proper. saciraee ys 


Suppose the revenue 60 lacs per annum, paid in three instalments of 20 lacs each, i. e. ace 
in four months, of which, ten Jac in bank-notes; then as ten lac may be supposed withdrawn 
from the commercial circulation, and to return on the Company’s treasuries every four 
months, could not the Bank employ this 10 lac, or which is the same thing, an equal 
amount, in the conduct of its private business? In other words, might it not issue ten 
additional lacs into the commercial circulation, destroying a corresponding amount from 
the payments made daily or regularly into the Bank ; still limiting, by such destruction, 
the amount in circulation to the 24 lacs above specified ; and’ at the same time ‘gain’all 
the advantage of employing the ten lac which it was thus able to send abroad. . ar 


By this supposition, the Bank would go on issuing, we'll say, ten lac of notes at its dis- 
cretion, and according to its own judgment of the probability of their ate eens The 
notes cost the Bank nothing, and bear no interest; if therefore we suppose their daily receipts 
and issues to balance each other, they may surely destroy ten lacs of their receipts, while 

have all the advantage of the ten lac at issues, since the notes are of no value, either 
way, to them, but from the interest they produce. 


_ Let us next suppose this operation to occupy the four months above adverted to, or perhaps 
Six or eight months. By this time, the payers of revenue, who have another instalment to 
make good, will probably have withdrawn ten lacs more from the commercial cireulation. But 
there is also 10 lacs in the treasury: it is issued to Company’s servants, who disburse part, 
and pay the rest to their agents; and it thus goes to fll up the void in the commercial 
Circulation. 

_. There is now again exactly 24 lac in currency, of which 10 being thus capable of con- 
tinued employment in the private transactions of the Bank, they of course derive the advan- 
tage thereof, and the prescribed 24 lacs is not exceeded. 


It would be impossible, on this plan, to define the precise amount of notes which the Bank 
would be enabled to employ; but it is very certain that the amount would be considerable, 
as a large proportion of the notes issued would most wnguestionably form a part of all future 
revenue payments, and these notes would for a certain time be a ways lying dead, either in 
the treasury, or in the hands of the payers of revenue, expecting the day of instalment. 

_ If therefore the adyantage here.supposed be realizable, it should, including every other 
pea realizable from the pave business of the Bank, bé shared by the said Bank, free of 
their advantage in the first instance, arising out of the first issue of notes: with this they 


~ ought 


participation on the part of Government; for Government, it must be remembered, have’ 


‘No. 5. 
Papers relative to 
r. Rickards’s 
Proposition 
for establishing a 
General Bank, © 
Wa segs 


(B.) 


No. 5. 
Papers relative to 
Mr. Rickards’s 

, Proposition 
for establishing a 
ia: Bank, 
c 


Tay ee 


100 PAPERS RELATING TO 


ought in justice to be content, and therefore to cede all other profits to the directors and 
proprietors. 1} 2zaee. &c 

This is supposing always a first issue on account of Government: but as this operation 
may appear too complicated ; and as these two first proposals are intended more as exp 
natory suggestions than as plans for actual adoption ; let us proceed to a third, leaving to 
future determination, whether either of the submitted Plans, or modifications thereof (of 
which indeed the principle will be found abundantly capable,) be, or be not ultimately 


\ ; / feasible, with the advantages anticipated.in favour of Government and the Public. 


(B.) 


In a Letter from the 
Government of 
Bombay, of 22 Oct. 


(Signed) R. Rickards.  .* 


PROPOSAL (C.) 


1. Bur in the preceding Proposals A and B, it may still be objected, that difficulties will 
occur in keeping alarge amount of notes in circulation, or in accumulating sufficient specie 
in such case, from the revenues, to furnish the Bank and Sinking Fund with, for buying up the 
outstanding bonds or promissory notes: all of which contain a apg to be paid in cash, 
or by the bills on the Court of Directors ; or, finally, that they do not afford a certainty of 


sufficient profit to the directors and proprietors of stock : To which 1 answer, 


(on We st 
2. That if these difficulties be deemed insurmountable, the Plan may be executed in 
another mode; viz. ; Chg 


3. Let the Bank, after establishment in the way proposed in the Plan A, proceed with its 
business of credits, discount, and exchange, issuing notes on these accounts only ah i 
tioned to its actual deposits of cash; and let the Sinking Fund then operate on the whole of the 
bonds or promissory notes outstanding, which in this case will be equivalent to $i 1,500,000 
and the bank-stock intended to be bought up to reduce the debt to 6 millions, -_ 2,500,000 


toWe “o 


b j ; i : : 7 “Total sa Gn £. 14,000,000 
; 4 - :> * 
The preceding figured Statements show, that the proposed Sinking Fand is still more than 
equal to the liquidation of this amount in eight years; and this latter mode, if preferred, may 
therefore be followed. ' : gmat to oe 


4. But in this case, it must be remembered that the annual payments out of the revenues, 
on account of the Bank, willbe — - - - EER RS TI: - — $+1,000,000 
And interest on the above £.11,500,000 of outstanding bonds at £.8 per cent - 920,000 

; ' ’ ; Li 9! re é . 


. Total per annum - — £.1,920,000 
or, £-320,000 more than is now paid for interest on the debt, or in other words, an annual 
extra charge equal to the income derived by the Company from their oki share of bank 
Stock, to be appropriated, as above shown, to the use of the Sinking Fund. Sole 

5. And it must be further remembered, that in this case the notes in circulation may. not 
differ much, in their aggregate amount, from that of the first or second Pian; for though 
3% million, or otherwise 2 million, is proposed to be issued altogether, yet the Plan essly 
Jimits the amount to what may be always circulated at par, whilst from the immediate ré- 
turn of these notes to the Bank, in the ordinary course of Indian circulation, it merely 
anticipates the advantage of combining this important aid to Government, with the benefit 
which its other branches of business are capable of yielding to the directors and proprietors 
of stock. hg i? Ve 

6. If, however, this last mode be found to obviate real difficulties in the way of the ) 
and therefore preferred, there will only remain to provide, from the surplus revenues in In¢ 
for this extra charge of £. 320,000 per annum, which, compared to the annual revenue of the 
country, is but a trifle. A 


~ 


, 7 eon huwis- 
7. In opposition to this extra charge, may be stated the probable gains of the Bank over 
and above its certain £.8 per cent. income. They may possibly reimburse the Com m 
the full amount of the above-mentioned extra charge, or even more, and in this case coun: 
terbalance the required extra supply from the surplus revenue, or otherwise, being added to 
the sinking fund, annually tend to liquidate the whole debt in a proportionately shorter 
period. At all events, [ should anxiously hope that whatever portion of this extra char, 
may not be counterbalanced by the profits of the Bank, would be met by some prachicaber’ 
reform of present expenditure, rather than by the imposition of an additional tax; which, in 
the present distressed state of industry in India, particularly agricultural, I should earnestly 
deprecate. thn ll 
8. Whichever therefore of the three preceding plans, if indeed either be thought worthy 
of attention, every objection arising out of deficiency of specie, merits deliberate considera= 
tion, for the payment of the bonds or promissory notes in specie, as far as the discharge be re- 
quired in India, 1 take to be indispensable to the maintenance of public faith. On the aggre-— 
: gate 


4 
‘ 


4 
) 
; 
3 
| 
‘ 
; 


EAST INDIA AFFAIRS. 101 


gate amount of the coin now circulating in India, we can at best only speculate, or even © No. 5- 

‘as to the amount of notes that may be circulated without depreciation, having provided Panerai 
an adequate check against improvident issues, local experience and practical observation pie leg 
must necessarily determine the rest; yet to afford more distinct ideas on this part of the Pro weeping 
subject, it may be useful to repeat, and even keep constantly in view, that the 3} million ¢,, establishing ‘ 
or. the two million proposed to be issued in notes, will clearly be an addition to the present — General Bank, 


circulation, whatever it is; admitting therefore that the circulation may absorb this — — &e, 
amount always at par, and that in the manner proposed in the Plan (vide note, para. 10. Plan A. 
and Plan B.) the other business of the Bunk may be conducted--by means of this issue’ (C.) 


alone ; it still follows that it can only be a substitution in lieu of so much coin, which coin, 
in as fay as it cannot then be employed at home, will necessarily be exported. Let us 
suppose it all exported ; then, deducting the sum which merchants must keep always in hand 
to answer occasional demands, we may expect the major part of the remainder will be 
continually returning into the Company’s Treasury and the Bank. In proportion therefore 
to the amount of this first issue of notes, whatsoever it may be, and which ever plan be 
adopted, we may be assured that all future revenue payments will be made in paper ; and 
‘this is a yery material consideration in view to the ultimate success of the plan. 


| g- It is moreover probable the Bank will soon practically know what portion of the 
above sum is likely to be absorbed by mercantile capital, and the circulation of the respec- 
| tive Presidencies : there are further considerations required to be duly weighed in the first or 

radual issue of notes, for on this must depend the aniount to which each provincial bank 
; should then be positively and a Raorare, limited. 1 have stated this issue altogether at 
__ .g million, or at two million, in the avowed hopes of the Plan being capable, under prudent 
management, of circulating notes to.this extent ; but it remains now to be added, that the 
t issue must be limited to this amount, or to some other prescribed by local experience, until 
| the debt is liquidated, in view to the annual realization of coin from the revenues required for 
paying of the creditors, and other indispensable purposes. ae 
_10. The present bonds, or promissory notes, stipulate that the interest, as well as prin- 
cipal, is to be paid in cash, &c. alias specie. It hence follows that Government must con= 
_ tinue to pay every particle of interest on their debt in specie; so that the whole annual pay- 
ments, eo to be made in specie, after the 4,000,coo/. shall have been paid off, 
will stand as.follows: The total amount of debt will then be 16,000,000 /. ; 


The interest of which, at 8 per cent. £. 1,280,000 


Government's share of bank-stock These two sums of course include the 


interest, or 8/. per cent. on four  ‘gincome settled on the Bank, as per 2d 
milliots *= P Shacg— Lo 320,060 paragraph, ‘Plan (A.) ~ 

i -————-— 1,600,000 

The annual million for the use of the Sinking : 

Fund =00=..- - - =~ = 1,000p06 

i ‘ . -_-_—oooOo~ 


Total perannum = - £.2,600,000 
—— 


j 
j 11. From this view of the subject, the local authorities may judge of the probability of 
| ___ these sums being realized in:specie, in each succeeding year, from the revenues to be paid 
- into the Bank and Sinking Fund; and must ceckanaeily portion the issue of notes accord- 
ingly. But this coin, it must be remembered, will again return into the currency, and remain 
there ; it cannot quit the country, as the first 34 million or two million did, because it is not 
_ over and above what was in currency before, and therefore not over and above what the 
circulation of the country requires. There will be here no substitution of notes, as in the 
other case; for by the supposition almost all the notes in circulation will be continually re- 
turning upon the Bank, either in the course of its own business, or on account of payments 
to Government, and these again will be continually re-issued in the same way; so that after 
ascertaining what may be absorbed by mercantile capital, and the circulation of the Presi- 
dencies respectively, the above annual sum of 2,600,000 /. as being required in actual coin, 
will afford a very tolerable criterion by which to regulate the total issue of notes, should 
the first or. second plan be adopted ;_ or should the third mode be preferred, the annual sum 
in coin of 2,920,000/.* will be requisite, and therefore form the criterion; —* It will not, I trust, be conceived 
for if due proyision be made for securing either of these sums annually in here that either this sum or the preced- 
coin, accordiny as either plan may be adopted, it seems to me unobjec- ing one of £. 2,600,000, infer an addi- 
tionable to supply any portion of the remaining currency in paper, as long tional burthen or.charge on the revenues 
as that paper is of sufficient credit, and conducted with sufficient prudence spent An _ ae above sages 
A > 2 3 ) ° attentive perusal o 
M.cucr ee invariably and certainly at wate these sheets will show that they both 
: include the interest on the present debt and the annual million to the Sinking Fund, which, from the 
papers laid before Parliament, I suppose to be easily contributable in time of peace, 
‘The latter sum implies, it is true, an extra charge of £4320,000, as specified in the 4th paragraph of 
this Statement, but this (vide 7th paragraph) is again expected to be fully counterbalanced by the 
gains arising in this case out of the private busipess of the Bank. oi 


12. In this consideration of the aggregate amount of Indian revenue, it will now be seen 
that no conclusions are thence inténded to be drawn as to the actual amount of current coin ; 
it does not indeed afford grounds for any such calculations; but perhaps it is not unrea- 
sonable to. suppose, that in a’ country of depressed industry and languid circulation, a 

306. Ce greater 


102 ‘PAPERS RELATING TO 


No. 5: reater proportion of the actual curreney must be employed in the annual payments to 
Bato Jovernment than in those industrious states where a smail actual sum, by rapid change of 
Papers relative to hands, may serve to discharge a large annual amount. This supposition has, I confess, in- 
Mr. Rickards’s  tluenced some of the preceding suggestions ; but the whole are, with deference, submitted 
Proposition to better judgments. ; 
for establishing a (Signed) R. Rickards. 
General Bank, 
&c. 


a 


(D.) 


ALL the preceding Proposals are founded on the supposition of being able to establish « 
Sinking Fund equal to four million, in the first instance, free of all, or.at most but little 
extra charge on the revenues. But the plan, on the principle proposed, is evidently capable 
of modification, so as that the amount of the Sinking Fund, in the first instance, be ex- 
actly regulated by the io or profits which Government may be enabled to realize 
from the institution of the Bank. : 


First. Suppose, then, according to Plan (A.) and (B.), that only one million of notes be 
issued, in the first instance, on account of Government, and one million paid by draft on 
the Court of Directors, so as to admit of the establishment of a Sinking Fund, free of extra 
charge on the revenues, to the amount of two million at the first outset: or, 


Second, Su , according to Proposal C. that in order to establish the said fund, free 
of charge as above mentioned, the Government in India.be allowed to draw on the Court 
of Directors for two million, with which to purchase bank-stock in India: or, which comes 
to the same thing, to purchase some promissory notes to be converted into bank-stock ; a 
sinking fund is then established free of all charge on the Indian revenues. The two million 
will cost the Court of Directors in England 5 per cent. diminished, however, if not 
counterbalanced, or perhaps more than counterbalanced, by the profits arising in this 
country from the Government share in the Bank, and which may therefore be annually re-— 
mitted to meet the said charge in England. ; ste 


In either of these cases, a Sinking Fund of two million is established, which will have to 
operate on the following portions of debt ; viz. 


Bank-stock to be bought by the fund, so as to reduce the said 


Stock to six million = -  £.4,500,000 
And Promissory Notes outstanding -* - - 9 -— = 9,500,000 
14,000,000 
ist Year: 
Proceeds of two million of Stock, at 8 per cent. per 
annum - - - - - £- 160,000 


Add 1 million gnurs - = 1,000,000 ; 
- - to be deducted - - 1,160,000 


£-12,840;000_ 
2d Year: ‘ : 
Proceeds of £. 3,160,000 Stock, D? - De £. 252,800 ; 
: Addi million = - - - - 1,000,000 Ps 


- - to be deducted - -~ 1,252,800 


£.11,587,200 : 
3d Year: Leorg Zt 
‘Proceeds of £. 4,412,800 Stock, as above, £. 353,024 ¢ ne 
Addi million - - - - 1,000,000 ; 
— - - to be deducted - - 1,353,024 
-10,234,176 
4th Year: £10 ws _ 
Proceeds of £. 5,765,824 Stock, as above, £. 461,266 ; 
Add 1 million - = 2 - 1,000,000 er 
- - to be deducted - - 1,461,266 
- 8,772,910 
th Year: £-8:77219 
Proceeds of £.7,227,c90 Stock and. Notes, as 
above o sR Ne Coe melG LP 578467 
Adi 1 million - mz 8 ppt 1,000,000 


-———— - - to be deducted - - 1,578,167. 


Carried forward ~ - £. 7)194)743. 


| 


«id 


Proceeds ‘of £.- 12,350,451 Stock and Notes, as 


adverted to in the Planitself, and are too obvious and well known to require 
-nation. The advantage and utility of a certain degree of check on the other Bank 
Directors, is also adverted to, and will be further manifest in these remarks. 


EAST INDIA AFFATRS. 103 


6th Year: Brought forward ~ - £.7,194,743 No. 5. 


Proceeds of £. 8,805,257 Stock and Notes, as Papers ralabve 4, 
above = hm i ai ~ £- 704,420 Mr. Rickaras's 
Addimillion - - - 1,000,000 f 


Proposition 
for establishing a 
General Bank, 


- - to be deducted - - 1,704,420 . 


£- 51492323 &e. 
: th Year: : 3 
Proceeds of £. 10,509,677 Stock and Notes, as 
above wm et ve hoe out hit he Bgayzzg ; (D) 
Add 1 million = - - - 1,000,000 
————. - - to be deducted - - 1,840,774 
£. 3,649,549 
8th Year: 


above Jaom@t - £. 988,036 
Add 1 million - one a ee 1,000,000 
————- - - to be deducted - - 1,988,036 
1,661,313 

oth Yeat: 


Proceeds of £. 14,338,487 Stock and Notes, as above - - - 1,147,079 


And there remains - = = £.414,434 
which is all that will be required of the annual million in this year, to effect a complete 


_ liquidation of the proposed fourteen million of debt. 


This Statement, it will be observed, is calculated on the supposition that the principle of 


the last Plan C. be adopted, viz. to issue no notes in the first instance on account of 


Government ; but if that of either of the other proposals, which infer a first issue-on account 


- of Government, be preferred, the process of final liquidation will be exactly the same; for 


in this case the Sinking Fund in the last year will have to operate on bank-notes, instead of 


- promissory notes, which will cause no difference as to final results. 


(Signed) R. Rickards. 


(E.) 
EXPLANATORY REMARKS on the preceding Plan. 


1. SOME material parts of the Plan contained in the perceine sheets, seeming still to 
u 


require elucidation, a few additional Remarks may be use In a Letter from 


: the Government of 
2. It is already, I apprehend, sufficiently shown how the Bank, in all its operations and Bombay, 


decisions, will be independent of Government, whilst still deriving every proper aid from of 22 Oct. 1807. 


an union with the public treasuries, both at the presidencies and subordinates. The Bank 


Directors are all independent men, with the exception of one Government Director, the 


others may be at each presidency a member from each commercial house, with a certain 


“number of natives; and as all measures are to pass by majority of votes, it precludes the 
pee ars of undue influence on the — of Government, without an arbitrary and violent 


reach of the original compact. The advantage and utility of this eadenenienes are 


rther expla~ 


3. Both these are points of importance to require serious and very particular at- 
tention in the final arrangement of the Bank, should the Plan be ever carried into 


effect. 
_ . 4. The operation of the subordinate banks popees in the Plan, may be compared in 


some respects to that of the country banks in Eng 


and, relatively to that great cenue of cir- 
culation, the Bank of England. 


5. Under the controul of the Bank of England, the country banks are of the greatest 
use to country traders, who now transact their business with the metropolis through the 
banker in their own neighbourhood, with greater facility and expedition, at less risk, and 
a lower rate. of commission than when the said traders were obliged to employ their 


_ Separate correspondents. 


- 6. The advantages thus experienced in the commercial and pecuniary intercourse between 


_town and country, have been compared to those of the economized abridgment of 
labour which generally mark the growing prosperity of mechanical employments in a 


flourishing 


x A : Aer 


104 PAPERS RELATING TO 
No. flourishing country. The labour of keeping accounts, writing letters, receiving and in 
wg bills, is transferred to one house, which had before been divided ainong” nih a fir, = 


Papers relative to “ security afforded to the transactions between the metropolis and the country, by the 
=: Rickards’s “ interposed credit of wealthy and respectable country banks.”. cists 
iti - i = al - es a } < 
for establishing a 7- By the simplification, in. short, of pecuniary transactions, they are conducted at 
General Bank, _ less risk, as well as at less expense to individuals. 


> 8. The subordinate banks proposed in the Plan, are evidently capable of all the 
advantages enumerated or adverted to in the gee paragraphs ; the facility and 

(E.) security which they will afford to all commercial and pecuniary intercourse between the — 
respective presidencies and the subordinates, and between one part of the Company’s- 
territories and another, cannot fail to be beneficially feit.in-the internal trade of 
eountry, and to smooth many difficulties and obviate many hazards now unavoidably 
experienced. 


g. But the subordinate banks will do-more. By union and connection with the public 
treasuries in each district, they are capable of still greater henefit to the commercial 
community, by simplifying and regulating the. business of exchange. At present : €x- 
change all over India is liable to sudden aad violent fluctuations, w ich are ae! ue e 
any other grounds than the manoeuvres and secret dealings of shroffs: these ; dations 
axe often not to be accounted for by the actual state of the currency, or existing balances. 
of trade ; indeed their suddenness, violence and variableness, preclude their being attributed 
to causes which would naturally produce steadier effects ; and no man, I believe, entertains. 
adoubt of the secret mal-practices and artifices of shrofls being the ctual The. 
admitted fact is therefore a proof of the undue and pernicious influence of these over 
the course of trade, from which the fair and honourable dealer has long sighed to be effec- 
tually liberated. qe; oe 


10. It is therefore a principal object of the Plan to effect this liberation, and. fr 
oat 


entirely the trade of the Company’s. territories from this source of difficulty 
ment. The subordinate banks, from their union with. the public treasuries, and 
on the great presidency banks, are_the means of accomplishing it. Bills. of 2 
be freely given‘on any part of the Company’s territories at a reasonable rate of ex 7 
even alower rate than it is possible for private money-dealers to grant the same accom ; 
dation, and’ without the ibility, as far as I ean see, of obstruction from the shroffs — 
within the limits of the Company’s territories. That this scene ; 


cheaply granted by the banks than by individuals, is evident, because the 
no occasion to transport bullion or specie, or to use the bullion or specie of a correspondent, 
N.B.—TIt may be one of the articles who must be recompensed for the advance, may therefore do it with less 

of agreement between Governmentand charge ‘but equal profit; orif bullion should at afy time be required to 
the Bank, that in the few cases where be transported, it may, with the aid of Government, be so transported 
specie or bullion requires to be trans- 44 Jess expense to the Bank than to the individual ; and therefore, — 
. eta St Sat be done Seek se RAM ac, supposition, which is a case that will but seldom occur, the accom- 
o the Bank. This alone will give ; ?, een ac 9. eet 
the Bank a decided advantage over modation may still be more cheaply granted. : ’ “2 
the shrofis, who never can transport specie without considerable risk and expense. : 
' For this and: any other aid it may be in the power of Government to grant, they may consider == 
themselves amply recompensed in the speedy reduction of their debt and the general advaneement of == =~ 
commerce. . Both parties have a reciprocal interest in the success of the entire plan. A =? 


yf iy 
11. In short, the diminished labour and risk,-and consequently the diminished. 
with which these banks are capable of earrying on this business of exchange and tt 
must necessarily exclude all competition on the part of the sbrofl, ex individual m 
dealers. ‘wid 


~ 


12. When the shroffs are thus driven out of this part at least of the money market, t 
may not improbably seek, in the gradual course of time, a connection with the banks; it 
be their interest to do so; it is the only apparent method by which this connexion ¢ 

- brought about, and it is highly desirable, from the means which these shroffs, through 
“money connexions, possess of facilitating and extending the operations, of the saic 
In the outset of this institution, actuated by self-interest also, their first attempts will be 
to obstruct the banks; but these, | apprehend, must be vain, and wholly ineffectual: A 
in these attempts, the next incitement of self-interest may. be to co-operate; and i ore 
‘Indian shroffs are thus in time either impelled or persuaded to connect the . 
the institution, the same benefits as above described, will be no longer confined to our 
‘own territories, but follow the commerce of our merchants over the whole extent of India. 


13. Whether this object be accomplished in the whole, or in part, the bain oss: < 
change and remittance may at all events, to the extent of its accomplishment, be reduced 
to clear and definite rulés;. the rates of exchange may be always fixed and. known, 

-the expense of distant speculations calculated without a, possible risk, from this 4 
disappointment. : 


14. The first rule to be considered is, the state of the currency in different districts 
given weight of fine bullion, in the respective coins of any two districts, constitat 
real par of exchange; and this given weight, not the nominal value of ¢ 
the respective districts, affords the only equitable grounds of fixing the rate of | 
as far as it is likely to be effected by this cause; even the shroffs themselves mats ape 
head, be. guided by the same principle. For let us suppose, merely for the sake of 

argument 


EAST INDIA AFFATRS. ° 105 


‘argument, that a Bombay rupee and a Surat rupee were both ordered to pasé at the same 
- nominal value, the Bombay having 15, and the Surat 10 grains-of more silver; the Surat 
rupee is at this rate a depreciated currency, and every species of depreciated currency has 
. the certain effect of raising the piices of commodities. It is evident that a bag of rice 
_would be worth more Surat rupees than Bombay rupees, and no Surat shroff would give a 
bill at par on Bombay, knowing he received for his bill a coin worth less, by upwards of 
30 per cent. than the coin in which it was to be discharged. He would lose all this 
_ ___ difference in real value by the transaction. 


_. 15. There appears to me therefore no fear of counteraction from’ the shroffs, in the adop- 
tion of this equitable rule, because they could not counteract it without loss to themselves; 
; and a trade that is carried on at a loss cannot be long supportable. 


16. The next rule to be considered is, the balance of trade between: different 
countries, or, in other words, the differeace between their respective exports and imports. 
| Whiere the exports and imports are equal, tere will be a reciprocal equality of debts 

‘and credits; but where the imports exceed the exports of a country, there is a balance 
against that country; and the excess of imports must be paid for in bullion or specie : 
: cannot be sent to pay it, because no more are required. ‘The immediate purchasers 
of the excess of imports may pay their debt by a bill of exchange, but then they must 
7 advance to the shroff who grants it, all the expense, added to his own profit of sending 
= bullion to the spot, to answer the draft in question. 
'_ 17. It is therefore clear, that, all other things being equal, bills of exchange required to 
_ discharge an unfavourable balance, ought never to cost more than the expense of transport 
ing bullion to the spot where the debt requires to be discharged, for if they did, bullion 
would of course be remitted in their-stead. - 


18. But according to the Plan, the subordinate banks, from their connection with the pub- 
lic treasuries, will in most cases relieve the Presidency Banks, and also each other, from the 
necessity of remittances on this account; and as the cases must be few in which such remit- 
tances will be necessary, it follows, in further proof of a preceding assertion, that this 
_ branch of business may be conducted at a much ESiealie? rate by the banks, than is possible 
- for individuals. © 

19. Indeed, with due attention to these two rules, Ido not see why bills of exchange 
may not pass between all the banks at a very near approximation of the real par of exchange. 
The difference can only be what is necessary to reimburse expenses, with a moderate profit 

to the Bank, and possibly this may in no case exceed one or two per cent. © 


20. Surely then it is not too much to say, a grand and decided permanent advantage is 
here established in favour of our own commerce, facilitating its operations, and tending to 
the stability of its profits, without the possibility of successful opposition from the shroffs, 
at least as far as regards the immediate pecuniary intercourse of our own districts. 


21. The generality of the system will prevent any hurtful effect on the aggregate amount 
of local currencies, as few or no remittances will ta required to be made trom one part to 
another to answer drafts; there will be no violent interference in the natural course of the 
money circulation, though a treasury may be occasionally exhausted by the discharge of 
drafts; the money remaining in the same district, will again return to it in revenue payments; 

- due credit will of course be given for all advances on account of the Bank, and in the event 

_ of local distress any where, a neighbouring district, or the Presidency, will always be at hand 
to relieve it. 


22. Another object in the contemplation of the Plan, is to furnish as many checks as pos- 
_ sible against un excessive issue of paper, as prejudicial always in its effects to the public as 
to the Bank itself. To prevent over-traders (of whom many are found among the secondary 
_ elass of merchants in all countries) from taking improper advantage of the Bank, it is au- 
~ thorized and even particularly required to use its own discretion and judgment in granting 
-eredits or cash accounts; for men of the description above mentioned, on producing un- 
deniable security, might raise funds with a Bank to promote imprudent speculations, and 
by throw an excess of paper into currency ; for the inconveniences of which to the 
public, even the ruin of the speculator, would be no recompense, and the security of the Bank 
po remedy. ‘This means of excessive issue may therefore, itis hoped, be effectually checked 
in India, from the accurate knowledge in so limited a community, which Bank Directors 
may attain of the nature of their neighbours mercantile speculations ; whilst it appears ad- 
visable to extend this power to the Bank, lest it might otherwise be exercised by the shroffs 
to the prejudice of this institution. : ’ 


_ 23. In the business of discount, it is true, a bank is liable to be imposed on by speculators 

_ through the medium of bills of accommodation ; fictitious drafts may be presented for 
discount, and a capital or sum of money may thus be obtained from a bank under fraudulent 
tences; but in this country, again, as above intimated, where the commercial community 

1s so limited, and its members, generally speaking, so well known, frauds of this description 
ean hardly be practised to any great extent. It would seem to be within the power of 
vigilance on the part of the Bank, to restrain the evil so as never to produce permanent 
mischief; for the Bank may narrow its discounts, or in this country raise its rate of interest 
at pleasure ; and it is not a casual and Se, excess of paper that is so injurious po ine 
306. f ublic, 


-No. 5. 


Papers relative to 
Mr. Rickards's 
‘ Propoition 
for establishing a 
General Bank, 
&e. 


aie, ee F 
(E) 


406 PAPERS RELATING TO 


No.5. Public,as that.permanence of superabundant currency, which necessarily affects the nominal 
prices of all commodities. ‘gue 


& peniin® 24. Yet notwithstanding these checks on the speculations of others, experience teach 

teouee us that there is a manifest tendency in directors themselves and proprietors of bank-stock, t 

for establishinga inerease their issues of paper to an extent hurtful to the public, for the promotion of ther 
General Bank, |W private gains. The greatest banks in the world have been guilty of this error, and the 


&e. Bank of Iveland, and even the Bank of England, are at this day existing proofs of the 

| Ae res fact. 2 ; . , 2 ~ 
E as. After the restriction of payments in specie in 1797, the former had, in six years in- 
(F) wna its paper issues from about £.600,000, to upwards of 24 million ; and the latter, — 


from about 104 million, to upwards of 16 million ; and the bad effect is universally felt. 


~ 


26. It is here, then, that the Government Director may be found chiefly useful, with 
other interest in the Bank but what may arise out of an i de corps: ‘his chief cio 
will be directed to the successful operations of the Sinki Fund, aud to the public advanta; 
derivable from the whole institution; he may therefore successfully interfere, and 
exercise a salutary influence in checking speculations tending to promote private advz s 
at the expense of the public good. It is in this view of salutary check, without the power — 
of undue influence, that utility is anticipated from the services of a Government Direct 
and in this view, his mind should be familiar with principles enabling him to d Li 
between the advantages of the banking system and its abuse ; and to prescribe a to 
speculations beyond which Direetors should never pass, In this duty, however, he will only — 

oint out the rule which is still left to the good sense aad public spirit of the con) a 
Directors to adopt or reject. es 

27. It has been observed, that the most perfect and most commodious currency f any 
great commercial country, consists in a due union of paper with the precious metals 
N. B.—It is said by one of the some of the reasons above given are a proof of its conyenicnee 
ablest writers on this subject, that, merce: the value howeyer of every curreacy is measured by its nti 
when in England, payments under five the consequent confidence placed in it, by the concurrent epini 
pounds were made in cash, and larger world, as a medium of exchange. Divest the precious metal of 
payments in paper, convertible imme- commodity, and it is the general confidence of the world in its 
diately into specie, the system ap- convertibility into articles of use and consumption, that gives it 

peared to unite the conveniences, and ioney curréncy : for the same reason, paper must owe its : 
exclude the disadvantages of hig it possesses none within itself) to contidence: this confidene 

currency in the greatest posse Cf while it continues a real and useful representative of the p 


& ct Sg gables i which enjoy the general confidence of the world: but the p 


slightly relinquished in the practice of themselves haye their utility proportioned to the demand for themin any 
— 


ee oye earl 


Laat 


banks. Experience has proved the evil country, asa medium of exchange; their use diminishes with 

of deviation from salutary rules, dance ; in other words, their value lowers, and the currency is then said to 
) be depreciated: if this happens. to the metals themselves, how ET 
evidently must it be the case with paper? A superabundant currency, therefore, whatever it 
consist of, is a depreciated one; and in proportion as its own value is lowered, that of 
every other commodity is raised: a more striking example cannot be prodaced 
effect of the discovery of the American mines; it threw an abundance of metal 
great money market of Europe, which proportionably raised the money pric 
commodities for which it was exchanged: commodities are now estimated 

rice they stood at the conquest; other causes have contributed to this i 


t the abundance of money lowering its own value, is a chief one. 


price 

5ti 
© 

ie 


28. It is therefore evident that every currency should be proportioned to the 
demand there may be for its use, as a representative of value, or medinm of exchange :° 
and silver, if left to the natural course of things, would find their own proper limi 
paper currency, capable of arbitrary increase, requires to be regulated: it shoul 
exceed in amrount the quantity of precious metal a society would otherwise demand, 2 
which it is only intended to be an useful and cheap representative : its constant and 
diate convertibility into specie, is a satisfactory indication of its being always confined 
this, its proper boundary; without this convertibility indeed, it at once loses a pot 
that confidence which is its only value: with it, confidence is firmly established 
though at first it may be rather slow of growth, where the institution is quite novel, _ 
confirmed experience in this immediate convertibility into cash, must necessarily g 
length its just value to paper, in every commercial country in the world. a 


N. B.—When paper is issued into 2g, It must not however be supposed that. discount is the only, pi 
eurrrency, it will, in its first effect, excess in paper currency: bank paper may: be excessive to a conside 
supersede the use of so much coin. devree before it attains this poiat of depreciation ; the first effect of asi 
The coin not being required in home ghyndant currency is, asin the case of the precious metal itself, to 
circulation, will of course lose a portion pice of commodities by being lowered in its own yalue: this effect | 
of its value in that particular channel; 4; lain] f oe ‘ . c> 5 On Busy 
it naturally sccks emnpiiament ;,in, com OP ny perceptible as a positive discount, is the more dangerot 

mtn! y from its secret operation, and therefore the more necessary to ee 
others; more may be now employed : ‘ 2 : ue 

. ¥ ? w . “ . ‘ 
by jewellers and manufacturers in pre- 28S Every species of depreciated currency produces this 
cious metals, Merehants finding the Woen a known large quantity of paper exists in. circulation, it 
paper answer for the transaction of great probability, be assigned to this cause. Bullion being a cor 
home concerns, will employ coins like others in the market, and, generally speaking, more steady than 
in their commercial intercourse with other in its price and value, is commonly looked to as one test of this excess; 
foreigners, or in purchases or — and where its market price for a constancy exceeds the mint price, without — 

where bein 


wz 
2 ; 


‘ 


EAST INDIA AFFAIRS: 


being explicable by’an unfavourable balance ‘of ‘trade, it is generally es- 
‘teemed a criterion of debased currency. The course of exchange with diffe- 
rent foreign countries, is another common test, because the goods por. 
chased by nations from each other, will be ultimately estimated by their 


“bullion, not currency value, and all other things being equal, the exchange 
“will necessarily be, or appear to be, against that country whose currency is 


depreciated. “This test is a good one in countries ‘where the exchange is 
not under the influence and direction of money-dealing monopolists ; but 
in this country, where -shroffs almost exclusively regulate the course of'ex- 
change, as their own views or interests dictate, the test may not be se ap- 
plicable as that of the steady market price of bullion. 


no paper issued. 


107 


‘where eoin will go furtherhan the 
paper currency’; a quantity of coin 
proportioned to the issue of paper will 
thus silently and gradually he dis- 
placed in the ‘home circulation, and 
without any apparent éfiect on ‘the 
price of labour and commodities; but 
unless there be proper checks to the 
issue of paper, it may go on imper- 
ceptibly and gradually increasing, till 
it becomes excessive ; i.e. till there 
be more than the circulation would 
have absorbed of coin had there been 


This effect is first felt in a rise of prices, because the currency is depreciated by 


siperabundance ; but it does not follow that the paper will be at a discount, because gold and silver, 
possessing intrinsic value, will still find employment at home ; the greater loss and charges of exporting 
it, may proye a certain portion to continue in the home circulation along with the paper currency, 
and they must necessarily ‘pass (while the public confidence is not impared) at the same rates in 
respect to each other; but if the excess of paper continues to increase till the depreciation at 
home is so great as to render it actually profitable, after defraying all charges of freight, insurance, 
&c.'toexport the coin, ‘then it will ‘be forced abroad as it were for exportation sake; it may be said, to 
shun all further intercourse with the depreciated paper currency; and the latter will naturally bear 
a positive discount, because it must then pay a premium for retaining gold, &c. at home, which 
otherwise it would be more profitable to export. In the ititermediate gradations of debasement, 
saat however, it would seém that paper may continue fo circulate in excessive quantity, without this 


ew more observable and striking mark of degradation. 


30. The state of home currency is, however, a matter of the highest importance in the 
administration of an extensive or National Bank; for it must be remembered, that every 


depreciation of that currency is not only a public inconvenience, but 
ver lowers the intrinsic value of a currency, is a positive violation 
of every existing contract in the country. Every creditor finds the amount 
of the just debt due to bim diminished; every income is lessened in value, 
from inability to procure for its possessor an equal amount of the necessaries 
and co of Fre. Every description of wages is necessarily raised with 
the rise in the price of commodities. Every consrmer feels it, though he 
may not be aware of the reul cause; ahd even Government, the greatest 
consumer of ull, have all their expenses increased in the same proportion, 
and must accordingly have ultimate recourse for relief to increased taxes. 


ually. 


public injustice. 

N. B.—An excessive issue of paper 
is not only an inconvenience to the 
public in the rise’ of prices, but will be 
felt by the Bank itself, which is 
required to discharge its notes in 
specie on demand. For in the case 
of the market price of bullion ex- 
ceeding the mint price, there wilk 
naturally be a run on the Bank for 
specie to convert into bullion, a run 
whieh might subject the richest Bank 


to very heavy distress.—Hence it occurs, that the constant and immediate convertibility of bank 
paper into specie, is, as a general rule, perhaps the best security that can be adopted against excessive 


issue, for in the event of excess, the paper will naturally return on the Bank to be exchanged. 


31. An excessive issue of paper, therefore, though not subject to an actual 
discount, must have precisely the same effect on the community at large, 
as a proportionate depreciation in the gold or silver currency. It is the 
same, in effect, as those detestable expedients of the governments of old, in 
diminishing the intrinsic value, or raising the denomination of their coins 
for the sake of temporary gain ; and which have been the execration of all 
subsequent writers. It is, in short, a power too extensive, and too important 


_ in its consequences, to be solely intrusted in the hands of men who have a 


manifest interest in abusing it; and it is in this respect, therefore, in par- 
ticular, that [ think-a salutary check over the operations of the Bank, should 


It is this due limitation of paper 
currency, also, which gives it a stable 
and permanent value, and stability is a 
point of the utmost importance in 
every medium of exchange; an un- 
stable ¢urrency must be one of im- 
paired utility, considered as a measure 
of value ; and what stability can attach 
to paper that fluctuates beyond the 
limit of that intrinsic value which it is 
merely intended to represent? 


Constant and immediate convertibi~ 


de exercised by the Government itself. 
lity into specie is therefore a rule which cannot be too much insisted on. 


tA & 


__-g2. In other respects, and in all useful respects, the Bank will enjoy entire freedom. 


They will have every aid which Government is capable of affording; and that aid will, as it 

ight to be, liberally granted. The chief object of Government being the speedy reduction 
of the public debt, that object attained, its views of collateral advantages, from the establish- 
ment of the Bank, will, as they ought to be, proportionably limited. 


(8% (Signed) R. Rickards. 


act bel - ; ‘ Ae y 
Ordered, That the following Letter be written to the Honourable the Governot 
in Couneil of Bombay : 
_. To the Honourable Jonataan Duncan, Esq. Governor in Council 
er |b of Bombay.. 
Honourable Sir, 
WE have the jhonour to acknowledge the receipt of your Letter under date the 


20d of October last, transmitting copy of a Letter addressed to you by Mr. Rickards, 


the several Documents mentioned’ to atcompany it, on the subject of paying off 
the Indian Debt by the institution of a General Bank. 
2.The 


No. 5. 


Papers relative to 
Mr. Rackards's . 
Proposition 
for establishing a 
General Bank, 
_&e. 


(E.) 


~ 108 ‘PAPERS RELATING TO ; 
2. The Honourable the Court of Directors having in a late dispatch expressed 


their decided -opinion against the establishment of a public Bank, in which it is 
proposed that their Government should have an interest, without ‘their ‘previ 


sanction ; we do not consider it to be necessary to take the subject into our ¢ y= 


sideration, but recommend it to Mr. Rickards to submit the Plan in question. to the 
consideration of the honourable Court. At eee 
We have, &c. fr Sallie 

Fort William, (Signed) MINTO, dt ai 

the 6th May 1808. G. HEWETT, © pian tiey 

; . J. LUMSDEN, Asberadiey 


H. J. COLEBROOKE, © 


aa 


“EXTRACT BENGAL PUBLIC CONSULTATIONS, the 20th July 1808. | 


Government of Bombay. Ma 
To the Right Honourable Gitzerr Lory Mito, Governor General 3. 
vy in Council, Fort William. Be) 


My Lord, ss Hene 
AS connected with the subject of our Letter, dated the 22d of this month, w 
the honour to forward a copy of a Minute delivered in by our colleague, Rob 
Rickards, Esquire, on the subject of your Lordship's dispatch, under date the 23d of © 
Jast month. © 09 Oe 


2. Being specially restricted, by the repeated orders of the Supreme Gover 
from adopting any measure of finance connected with the annual supplies, 
than as your Lordship in Council may be pleased to sanction; and your 
the 23d of May, authorizing a recurrence to bills of exchange, on the condit 
of the loan now open at this Presidency, continuing to prove as unproduct 
the period of your late Instructions, all that we can, under such circumstance 
take, is to transmit a copy of Mr. Rickards’s Minute for your L 
anination, ee 


Bombay Castle, We have the honour, &c. 
24th June 1808. (Signed) : 
MINUTE. oy ects nae ell 


THE Letterof the23d ultimo from the Supreme Government, having directed ° ey 
to the system of drafts or bills to furnish the pecuniary exigencies of this Pre 
would beg leave to submit whether our immediate adoption thereof to the fu 
that may be authorized, may not be preferable to the mode of raising our supplie; 


Notwithstanding the supposed advantages of the present open loan, notwithstan 
that has been said or written in favour of Government loans, and that the payment of 1 
is no loss to the nation, since it is only a transfer of revenue from one part of the 
another, &c. &c. I apprehend it may still be found. liable to solid and fu 
objections. It is not my inteation to enter into a detailed discussion of th 
which would lead to tedious length, and at present unnecessary, but merely 
few plain reasonsio support of the objections 1 conceive to exist against this mot 
ever avoidable, of fiscal supply. re: 


To appreciate these, it will be necessary to go beyond the mere superfices of the 
which is but too apt at all times to mislead with false or imperfect yiews of im 
benefit, and to leave the mind unconscious of ultimate and permanent const 
and as the evil of misapprehension, in respect to the financial arrangem 
nation, is proportioned to the ‘importance, magnitude and extent of their 
it would seem to be the more advisable, as it is always practicable, to rect 
principles, and to keep in mind the effect of natural operations, which cannot be c 
nor even attempted to be opposed, without prejudice to the society at large. 


It will probably be admitted to have been clearly demonstrated by Doctor 
that the prices of all commodities are resolvable into three parts; viz the rent 
profits of stocks, and wages of labour ; that is, into some one or two of these three 
or, as most commonly happeds, into all three. The profits of) stock dr profit, - 
commonly termed, is, for example, an evident component part of the price ¢ 
vendible commodity, The wholesale merchant, who deals out thes¢ commoditi 
inferior traders, and to retail dealers, not only trades upon his own capital stock 


EAST INDIA AFFAIRS. 109 


* 

in what he may be able or disposed to borrow at the time in the society at the interest 
uthorized as established by law: the inferior traders and dealers do the same. The 
| rofits of their mercantile dealings, must therefore, among others, enable them to pay this 
4 terest: The interest being thus a paft of their profit, is consequently a component part 
of the price of every commodity they sell. It therefore raises the price of every commo- 
dity beyond what would be its natural standard, if no interest were to be paid to the 
lenders of money by the different descriptions of commercial dealers ; money howevet 
cannot be borrowed without interest ; but it is manifestly for the good of the whole society 
that it should be as low as possible, for it is a commerciaicharge on the price of the commo- 
dity ; all commercial charges are a burthen, however necessary, and the lower they can 
be reduced, in all cases, the better. In India the interest. of money is universally high, 
and competition can hardly expect to lower it, while the Company’s Treasury continues 

open at the present rate. — ’ 


Interest, moreover, is a child of commerce; and inasmuch as its influence is limited 
to raise the price of manufactured commodities, it necessarily lowers the value of rude 
produce for which the manufactured is exchanged, and thereby operates to the serious 

_ detriment of the mbst important, the most valuable, and the most productive branch of 
—haman industry. Ly : 


: The interest required for the payment of public debts, has still farther operation ; the 
interest is the price which Governments are obliged to pay for the-money they borrow, 
and in India is chiefly resolvable into the rent of land; Government absorbing, in some 
countries, all, and in others, by far the greater part of that rent in the public revenue ; the 
pernicious effects of which, [ bave endeavonred to explain in other papers. Inasmuch as 
this interest is raised from tolls, from farms, and other direct duties on consumable commo- 
dities, it is another direct enhancement of the price of such commodities ; and through 
the influence of these prices on the wages of labour, an indirect enhancement of their 
“recompense alone. — 
Taxes levied for the payment of this interest, diminished too in proportion -the general 
wealth ‘of the society, for the expenditure of this sum by Government, or even by 
‘dle annuitants, is not so profitable an employment as it would find, if left in the hands 
of individuals, by adding to the amount of productive capitals. The sum of annual re- 
“production is therefore dim; ished, or is notsolarge as it would be, had not the wealth 
absorbed in the afore-mentioned taxes’ been withdrawn. Inasmuch therefore as there ‘is 
‘a diminution in the quantity of annual reproductions, proportioned to the effectual demand, 
it will operate as a further enbancement of the price of Commodities, trom all which 


‘materially suffers, and Government more éspecially, the’ greatest consumer of all. 


* These effects are not the less severely felt, because not always perceptible within the 
limit of common observation, because the price of grain, for example, does not sensibly rise 
‘from 16 rupees per.cantly in one day, to 17 the next, 18'the next, and so on, or because 
athe wages of labour do not visibly increase from 10 rupees in one month to 15 ip 
another, &c. ; but let the price of commodities be compared, at given distant periods in 
‘any country, where more and more money is annually borrowed at fixed interest, and 
particularly a high one; let the Government of such countries similarly compare the 
amount of their own annual expenditure; let them compare the charges of military 
Pi ments, and the expenses of campaigning armies ; let them consider even the wants 
eir own domestic servants ; aby that ‘allowances, formerly thought handsome, are 
- now but a bare maintenance, and the effects above intimated will probably be thought 
re apparent. : Pee 
_ It is not intended to say that interest is the sole cause of the augmentation of prices ia 
«commercial commodities, neither are the preceding the only ways in. which itis supposed 
to’effect prices; but these are perhaps sufficient to show that it is ane evidently operative 
cause of increase, and that the injurious effects are equally felt by the society at large and 
ty Government. I should therefore always be disposed to prefer the raising of our supplies 
ty by bills on Bengal, as now directed by the Government General, and to the full extent to 
, aich they may be enabled to authorize our drafts, rather than recur to the alternative of a 
_ public loan, which, if the reasons above given be true, ought to be deprecated, except under 
_ circumstances of absolute necessity. 


“ 


roe 


f um, in short, of the preceding reasoning, is, that in proportion as interest tends to 
augment prices, the value of every income in the society is diminished ; the income of 
Government being the largest of all, they areof course individually considered the greatest 
sufferers ; and a ” calculation on these priciples, might show that the premium, for ex- 
le, now paid in subscriptions to the loan, was but a deceitful gain, contrasted with the 
red value of the public reyenue; the gain being limited, perhaps only nominal, the 
‘oss real and perpetual, and fell in the amount of every future outlay, as long as the debt 
And its interests may continue to exist. , 


2 


of the subject, although the Board may deem it utiworthy’ of adoption. 

Bombay, (Signed) ‘ - R. Rickards, 
June 23, 1808. =: ; : 
one wy € 


‘sources of enhancement, every consumer in the society, however ignorant of the cause, 


“py ea te if . ° bs ie < . t) ft. 
At all events, the reasoning here submitted, may afford hints for a more minnte view 
i Piet 


No. 5. 
Papers relative to 
Mr. Richards’s 

Proposition. 
_for establishing a 
General Bank, 
&c. 
Up 


110 PAPERS RELATING TO 


No. No. 5 P.S. Finding in a late. publication of some celebrity (which. I cannot. help th 
however, it owes more to the eculiar ¢ circumstances of the times, ,tl to. ‘its own 
Papers relat relative to merits) that the argument, gf interest 6 on national debt bein no public in 
* Mr. Rickards's 33 only a transfet of revenue from one to another, is again Kien t fo ¥ 
po nt ‘plausibility? a few remarks thereon, may tend to elucidate more ly he 
Geubtal Bank, % preceding Mi nute, “The author a —“ Those who contend that the « 
“ed which thie! doh of the interest of the national debt, are prkiuabiy su 


t - Si ‘ecessatily iminish the demand for the industry of the country, forget t 
~ “ the sums they pay, are not by themselves expended i in consumable commo¢ 
“ are 80 ex Ketel ut by the | feel vet ‘of the interest of the national debt, t 
me roppietae the farmer, the manufacturer, now consume less luxuries than if th 
“ ¥ y one half their income (which they really do pay in taxes); yet the st 
“ takes their places, he expends the sums which they save, and thus the ote 


“ on the prosperity of the nation.” 


To estimate aright the force or fallacy « of these arguments, let us su 
previous to’ the Uxfiende of the debt, had an income of £.2,000 per annum 
‘to the ‘premises of th the same author, tbat it be red: ad one half to A, b hal 
taxés j ‘which haif' is transferred to a stock-holder ; A, then, it is admit 
consuining diasiylahed by £.1,000 per annum, which is transferred to B; 
which thus diminished the former's income, are raised on consumable articles, at anc 
fore an addition to the price of such articles, which is now, on the preceding date 


The powers of B to consume, is therefore proportionately diminished also ; this 
per donuin will only purchase as many hjoyinent as ys 500 eat “ya 

- the specific origi Sat i income of £.2,000 ha: wer over the ug F th 
reduced 4 one fourth; althoug tthe full half ica to ‘the ieee Be oe i 
toto’ trans! erred to the ‘to <-hold th 


7 ae 


“more wi a iit cir expep 

free expenditure te) this Se i 
contribute to, in the | great var 

‘taxes and brisk Bealanen. it ch 
country might be ten ot bape old 
taxes, ‘his § power is impaired one 'h 
could be'made to enter. 


‘Supposing, however, aceording ie ine 


er ie of the subj ject, 


revenue of any society so a ected pam million s nen 
be levied to bay the ie rest © of ie} rapa t, Vwthich should os 
rices, it would seem that e the very se oe F our at m, | 
i h fact for the ind si of are ty: » Heals bed iminis! hed 15m ~ 
that'co sumable Srppoehies to th hg ig could n not. be va i ein 
Birches which there Pal e were there no interest, an nd ¢ 
5 participate. The effect therefo gfe ve: e general pro Atty rt cyan ‘ 
not be the same,—it ¥ mani be hig bly injurious ; whilst en revenue « or Gove 
of the original prop yriet tor of , 2,000 per angum, would | be diminished 
7. e. the same expenses <y establishments whic formerly cost them ten 1 million, 
cost them 20 million, an ee on from i to year to cost them more vil me 


~ 


debt or taxes were requi ‘to be increased = SBOE 
Bombay, Council Cc amber, (Signed), ¥ i 
“24th June 1808. ‘wily Salta 
A true Co Si ned) E. War 
ors PY) we Chief roa i esiabeat 


Ordered, That the following Letter be written to ving Governor in 
Bombay, in, reply to the foregoing, 


To the Honourable Joyatuan Duncan, Esquire, Governor in Goungi of ; f Bo 


nourable Sir, 
‘havé the honour to acknowledge the receipt. of your ket one 
M4 ultiane, transmitting a copy of a Minute recorded by Mr, 
“ph your Board, respecting t the mode of ‘providing the supplies rec 
of the Presidency of Bombay. 


i ee 
. 


EAST INDIA AFFATRS. 111 


2. -It-is-evident, that while the Admiral charges, and the emount required for the 
«provision-of -investmentvat-the several 'Presidencies, shall exceed the annual receipts, 
sthe deficiency of supplies which shall be required for the public service, must be 

sraised by means‘of loans, and we do not perceive the advantage which can arise to 

| “the public interest, by discontinuing that mode of raising the supplies required at 

Bombay, .and.opening your treasury for Lills.on Bengal, while we must have recourse 
‘to the very same measure here, viz. that of raising by loan the amount which may be 
Fequired to enable us'to answer those bills. 


_ __g. We are.of opinian that it is. advisable.to raise as large'a proportion of ‘the an- 
nual supplies at Bombay by loan as may be practicable, and that you should draw 

_ bills.on this Government only in the event of that mode of raising money being in- 
adequate to provide ‘the deficiency of your own Presidency. 


_ 4. It was conformably to these sentiments, therefore, that in our letter dated the 
23d of May last, we had the honour to recommend your opening your treasury for 

-on Bengal to sueh-an extent as may be required for the supply of your wants, 
in the event of your subscriptions to the loan now open at your Presidency, being 


inadequate for that purpose. 


We have the honour, &c. 
tyevt igned MINTO, 
Fert William, (Signed) J. LUMSDEN, 
the zgth July 1808. T. H. COLEBROOKE. 


osi) 


EXTRACT BENGAL PUBLIC CONSULTATIONS, the th Sept. 1808. . 
Government of Bombay, Political Vepartinent. ‘ 


Fort William. 


_ _ My Lord, jt 
___IN reference to your Lordship’s Letter of the 6th of May, we have the honour 
to transmit a copy of a Minute, dated the 17th of this month, and its enclosure, 
as delivered in by our colleague Robert Rickards, Esquire, bearing general reference 
to future reforms and reductions, such as our colleague views to be practicable, in 
the Establishments throughout India ; particularly in the Revenue and Judicial branches 
of the public expenditure; and upon which very extensive ameliorations being con- 
, in the general condition of the British possessions in India, it seems pro- 
per that a communication, inferring such beneficial effects, should be submitted to . 
that authority which can most extensively give them operation, 


ew FRIIS 


lic ne We have the honour to be, &c. 
Ener (Signed) Jon" Duncan, 
"Bombay Castle, + Tho Lechmeré, 
_ 22d July 1808. R. Rickards. 
MINUTE. 


- In pursuance of the recommendation of the Supreme Government of the 6th of May, and 
of my short Minute recorded thereon, under the 27th following, I now submit another cop 
of my scheme for paying off the Indian debt, to be thinned by the approaching dispatc 
to the honourable the Court of Directors. 


_-A complete copy’ of the scheme is contained in the vouchers from A to E, to go a number 
‘in the packet, as affording a more easy means of reference than direction to a voluminous — 
diary. Those vouchers therefore contain nothing new; but as it may be desirable, particu- 
larly at.so great a distance from the superior authority, to leave no conceivable objection 
that mi cere against the Plan unanswered, I propose, in this Minute, to state such as 
have been made to me in this country, together with my answers thereto; since, if the same 
objections should occur in England, these at least may, f hope, be found to be refuted with- 
out further reference. 

3. First—The most important of all the objections urged, is perhaps the want of surplus 
revenue to supply the Sinking Fund with the annual million said to be required for its use; _ 
and this objection has always erroneously run on the idea that the supply of an actual 
million annually, was indispensable to the execution of the Plan. 

f a 4. In 


To the Right Honourable Gitsert Lord Mixto, Governor General in Council, 


Wo. 5. 


Papers relative to 
—— 
ition 
for establishing'a 
General Bank, 
&e. 
en, permed 


No. 5. 
Papers relative'to © 
Mr. Rickards's 

. Proposition 
for establishing a 
. General Bank, 

&e. 


es 


‘unless it should be determined to persevere in opposition to confirmed 


annum to calculate upon; but an. attentive consideration of it, will at onee show, 


by redu 
“revenue native establishments alone, of 1,40,000 rupees per annum. In the first ve 


120 PAPERS RELATING TO 
' 4. Inthe scheme itself, Ihave;already stated the'reason why I took a million s Pe 


amount is by no means indispensable; in calculations, it is necessary to takes 
sum as the foundation thereof, and a million was accordingly assumed; but if 
revenues cannot afford this amount, they may afford some other lesser sum to. aid t 
ration of the Sinking Fund, and all in fact that the plan in this respect proposes, is the 
rapid liquidation of debt, under due controul, which our means and resources in Indi 
admitof ms Se 

5. It may, however, be urged, that under present circumstances there is no surp 
nue to contribute to the aid of the Sinking Fund; and some lately published statements gis 
reason to apprehend the fact. In this case, as the reduction of the Indian debt would 
appear to be an. object of the, first importance and necessity, and even the rapid red 
it, for reasons to be adduced presently, 1 would beg leave to refer the honourable 
the two papers I have taken ee liberty of recording; one dated the 24th Septem 
the other, 7th July 1808, on the revenue systems of India: wherein I have pointe 
means of reducing the revenue native establishments to a considerable amount. 
posed reduction is no vain speculation, for it has been put to the test of exp: 
Malabar for a series of years, with complete success ; one, I may also add, of the m 
collectorships in India. In that province, a saying was effected in 1803, ( 


reduction, more revenue was realized from Rg pronibes than ever had been receiv 
before; the successor of the collector who effected it, has gone on even with a_ 
smaller establishment than his predecessor left him, ‘and with continued and even 
success. ‘This fact, however, is here mentioned with no other view than merely to 
if similar reductions took place generally on the principles set forth in the uvo- 
Minutes above referred to, the Sinking Fund would no longer want the means 
operations on the Indian debt. It is not only a perfectly unobjectionable, but 
sirable method, also, of permanently reducing the ets expenditure, aud far 
my humble opinion, to.the measure of curtailing European allowances, the poli 
independent of the odium it excites, may in a national point of view be strongly ge 


6. I do not hesitate to add, on the froseds of experience likewise, that similar. 
are capable of being’made with equally. effect:in the Judicial department. 
judicial system is a theory to be admired, and founded for the most part-on 
hile the principles may be admitted to continue, or at all events with so 
cation, the mode of administering them in practice, must sooner or later 


insufficiency to fulfil the object in view, ‘The establishment of.a Zillah Court 
is so very expensive, that it will ever be.impossible to have a sufficient nu 
give justice to all who want it, in a country, generally speaking, far, moi 
ee! pe than-perhaps any European state, and at the same ‘time poorer to. 
whose daily labour is his own-and family’s support, cannet go 20 or 30 mi e 
to seck justice, when the-expenses of “his journey, arid-detention at the zill 
ceed the amount of his suit; he must content himself with the original injury ¢ 
attempt to remedy this inconvenience by means of native referees, is,4n my bi 
only to place power in the hands of people most sure to abuse it. But this i 
examine the merits of the judicial system. If the question ever comes to: be 
point out what I believe, from personal experience, to be the utéer impra 
nistering justice universally, or even generally, by means of the zillahs, on th 
ing; and also the means o very considerably reducing this branch of the public e 
the savings inswhich might.be equally applied, as far as was found requisite ore 
the uses of a.sinking ‘fund. By means of both these reductions, I should -conce 
be supplied with funds to any requisite amount, although no aid, under existing ¢i 
could S derived from surplus revenue. : 


* 

7. Secondly.—It has been objected, that -the proposed liquidation of debt is 
that all hasty movements in objects of finance, are to be deprecated ; and the-us 

are brought forward in respect to the convulsion it would occasion in property, 

known to be repeated ;-adding, that. the “ present sinking fund which appropriates er- 
“on the original amount of the Indian debt,” would liquidate the whole,in 24 years; ¥ 

slew operation is deemed preferable to the other. Yo sabe dove 


8. Admitting that a Sinking Fund of £.2 per cent. is capable of -telieving’G 
from the preseut grievous burthen of debt in 21 years, provided no intexruption ¢ 
ment intervenes, sull it does not follow that it will do so; for in so long a space 
wars and other casualties will in all human probability occur to arrest its pr 
its otherwise beneficial effect. .It has been the fate of most, if not all sin 
the slowness .of their operation, to yield a good that is but scarcely felt in 
public burdens, which accumulate before the object of the fund mg ne 
they thus diminish debt. without affording effectual relief; it is like help toa 
without taking him out of the water; life is continued, but with the fear and 
impending clestruction still before his eyes. Past experience, therefore, wa 
blishment of a fend of more rapid operation, of a fund in fact equal to its o 
ordinary obstructions and-difficulties. ae 


g. As to the convulsion of property apprehended from.the too rapid operation the 
it be remembered, that this property is, in part at least, that of the very persons who 


4 


=) 


EAST INDIA AFFAIRS. ! ang 


the inanagement of the Bank and Sinking Fund in their own hands,! and who, by primary 
‘fafrancement at the institution of the Establishment, or by majority of votes atany sub+. 
sequent period, may check this apprehended convulsion, whenever, if ever, it is found’ to be 


“tnjearious or inconvenient; the rapidity of its operation is therefore no argument against it, 


‘when that rapidity may be checked at pleasure. 


may be justly founded ; but if there be any truth in the pass which [ have already ha 


the pened of wars (added to the consideration of there being now, in time of peace, ne 


ap A revenue) is itself decisive of the necessity of employing the largest possible fund 


+ 


£. 1,320,000; the odd £.320,coo would however be an extra euares ony he ane ifa 
rres e aid of the Bank and 


mpany are bound to provide funds in England for paying off such part of the debt as 
é Nrafts, in whatever way and at whatever time it may be liquidated, 


the Company may not be provided with funds to answer these drafts, and that, on the con- 
trary, they should be obliged to borrow in England, not only the first £.500,000 to dis- 


uidated after the expiration of the 8 years, which the Sinking Fund, from its amount, will 
then be equal to accomplish in about 4 months longer. Lats 
“306. Ff 16. IP 


No. §. 


Papers relative to 


‘Mr. Rickards’s 


_ Proposition . 
‘for establishing a 


General Bank, 


Ging: & 


J 


No. 5- 


rs relative | 
i 38 Rickards, 
Proposition 
for establishing @ 
General Bank, 


4 &e. j 


_— 


alg PAPERS RELATING TO 


16. If this explanation then is perfectly clear with respect to A and B, it must be 
equally so with wen the lesser sums calculated upon in the modified Paper D (whieh 


the debt comes to be paid off ; for if we suppose iifiatey to bein full operation in oo 


2 
ort 


‘ 


17. At all events it is not to be ry an arrangement of this kind will be attem Y 
avithout previous preparation by the Court of Directors, or without perhaps the.sanction — 
of the Legislature ; some of the existing loans in India, it may be added, contain a stipula- — 
tion whereby the principal as: well as interest of the debt is payable by drafts on the Ce 
of Directors at any time optional with the holder of the promissory note. They are there. 
fore liable, even now, toa demand for millions (a late publication says 17) om any sudden 
alarm, and if not prepared to meet the demand, it may not be unacceptable to show the ~ 
means of relief whenever this difficulty may occur. PE A 


18. Thirdly —The remaining objections I have to notice, seem to me to arise” 
from misconception of the object and principles of the Plan. It is, for example 
that the Plan is of too gigantic a nature, that the issue of 3$ million of notes is more 
circulation of India will absorb, supposing, as the objection erroneously does, this ¢ 
to be indispensable, and four million to be in every case required.as applicable to the establish- 
ment of a Sinking Fund; and that the creation, as it is misnamed, of so enormous a capital — : 
as 8} million, for the stock of the Bank, is out of all proportion, is impracticable, and } 
dangerous, &c. and that the security for payment of the income of bank-stock 
plausible. pT 


‘19. The papers A and B, it is true, contain calculations founded on. the s 
of four million being paid off in the first instance, thereby forming the basis of a3 
but it is also evident that neither, of these papers absolutely require this,ame 
to be issued, or of debt to be paid off; it may be any lesser amount, suited to wha 
culation of India will easily absorb: and that this part of the subject might b 
a clearer point-of view, Paper D.was prepared. to show, and I think it cle: 
that the Plan, on the principles proposed, is capable of modification, so,as 

Fund, in the first instance, be exactly regulated by the advantage or 


Sinking Fund of two million only, the debt is shown to be capable of liquida 


20. As to the capital stock of the Bank, whether it be taken at 12% 
nature of it be duly considered, that it is in fact no new creation, that it alrea 
exists, and that its conversion into bank-stock is no more than a mere chan 
inay 1 apprehend be termed any thing but gigantic. Its amount will be o 
subscribers, if it yields a certain adequate income ; and none to the public, or G 
if it has the effect of a rapid liquidation of debt, and consequent diminution 
heavy taxes. The security for the payment of this income is real and not plausi 
sists, as at present, of a portion of territorial revenue now applied to the pa 
on the debt, which only requires, on the institution of the Bank, to be rep di 
way for as much of the said debt as may be converted into bank-stock. There i 
creation of a new and gigantic capital: it already exists, together with the revent 
priated to the payment of its interest: . its name only ischanged. In this view of | 
there would seem to be neither danger or impracticability in the conversion of 8; 
or of some other amount of debt, into stock; for supposing this stock secured to yit 
cent. certain interest, and that the holders of this stock realize, say only 2 per 
from the net profits of the Bank, making altogether 10 per cent. would not st 
description be greedily purchased? and if not subscribed for in promissory no 
sent debt, it must be paid for in money, which would serve to discharge the ¢ 
amount of notes. But of this sum of 84 million, as of ethers stated in the P 
still necessary to be observed, that in calculations tending to elucidate principles, it is nec 
to have recourse to specific sums, particularly where the subject is abstruse, i J 
through some clear connecting idea of cause and effect. If 8} million cannot be ¢ 
into stock, some other lesser sum surely can, and the amount of this conversion, whethei 
or small, is a matter of indifference lo the operation of the Sinking Fund... The conyers 
men stock is intended to establish an union of the Bank and Sinking Fund, for th 

306, . payer 


EAST INDIA AFFAIRS. 115 


explained in the Plan, and to induce the present creditors to subscribe their promissory 
notes for bank-stock ; the same pledge or security is given for bayment of interest, in addi- 
tion to all the eranieep which the said creditors, as stock-holders, will derive from the net 
ofits of the Bank. therefore 8} million of stock be not subscribed for at first, the only 
ifference therefore oceasioned is, that a proportionally smaller sum of revenue than 1 million 
per annum will be settled on the Bank. Some stock will certainly be purchased, and Go- 
vernment, with the aid of the Bank and stock-holders, will then be enabled to establish the pro- 
posed Sinking Fund of 4 million, or of some other lesser amount (as fully shown in Paper D,) 
free of extra charge on the revenues; which fund will Bead operate in the reduction 
of debt (as may be seen on reference to either of the figured Statements) whether it -be pro- 
missory notes or bank-stock that it is required to annihilate, The millions mentioned in 
the Plan may at first sound high, but an attentive consideration of the principles of the Plan, 
-with the modifications of which it is evidently capable, viewing the millions only as specific 
data on which to found easy calculation, will 1 think convince that it is in reality neither 
gigantic, or at all formidable or difficult of execution. 


_ . 21, Fourthly.—The establishment of the Bank has been objected to on the grounds of its 
ing a Goyernment Bank, and therefore deemed unconstitutional, and an. engine too 
dar us in the hands of any form of government, &c. The propositions in respect to 

eieen are also objected to on the same principles, and the impolicy urged of allowing 
any Government to interfere therein. 


22. A real Government Bank is doubtless impolitic, and may often prove a very danger- 
ous engine. The arguments on this head are incontrovertible. But can a Bank, consisting of 
one Government Director, with one vote, andan indefinite number of other Directors, say 
eight, ten, or twelve, with as many votes, be properly termed a Government Bank ; or be 
considered liable to the objections which are justly urged against a Bank directly conducted 
or controuled by an arbitrary government? The business of Government in the Bank here 
proposed, is chiefly co-operation, with a small, but pean salutary degree of check over 
private speculations of injurious tendency to the public, If the Bank of England is proved, 
from transgression in this respect, to bein need of salutary check, how much more requisite 
must it be in a general Bank in India, where at the Presidencies, the great commercial 

and who must be the chief Directors of the Bank, might otherwise be left at liberty 
to pursue their own particular interests, without any regard to those of the public? Reasons, 
however, are given at some length in the Plan, to show ihe necessity of a check on both sides ; 
‘and if the checks proposed against undue influence on the one hand, or imprudent specula- 
tion on the other, are inadequate, experience must furnish better ones. In the meantime I 
«cannot yet discover that this Bank is any other than a General Bank, encouraged and fostered 
by ce protecting hand of Government. It.certainly was intended to be precisely this; and 
to obviate the evils incident to a Government Bank, properly so called ; while niuch mutual 
advantage, it is hoped, may be derived, and inconvenience obviated, by this union of the 
mercantile body with Government in a firm bond of mutual interest. 


23. The supposed interference of Government with respect to exchange, will, I should 
hope, on due consideration, appear to be another misconception of the Plan. It cer- 
inly gives Government no power of interference ; Government contributes a co-ope- 


rative aid through the medium of its several treasuries; the whole business of exchange, - 


ineluding rates, &c. is left to the Bank Directors, in other words, to the great body of 
mndgohiints in every part of British India, to be re lated, in fact, by the bee course of 
trade. In any question that may arise on the subject, Government can have only one 
yote against perhaps a dozen. 


‘24. Fifthly—The conversion of any portion of the Indian debt into Government bank 
stock, has been received as a dangerous experiment seriously to be deprecated. Whilst 
the principles of the Plan are admitted to be generally correct, the ed which it con- 
_ tains in this respect have been considered as pregnant with all the evils, and liable to the 
same failure as occurred inthe similar attempts of the South Sea and Mississippi Schemes in 
the famous year 1720. 
25. The Plan being admitted to be generally correct in its principles, will surely 
bee on ea pl 5 the South Sea and Mississippi bubbles, w ose very name 
proves them to have been founded on no correct principles at all.—The failure of those 
schemes does not appear to me to be in the least attributable to the conversion of public 
debt into the joint stock of those Companies, but to the delusions practised on an infatuated 
public : neither one or the other was ever possessed of funds equal to the realization of 
those profits and promises which they held.forth to the world; the value of their stock 
was therefore artificially enhanced ; and when delusion could be kept_up no, longer, the 
_ bubble, as it has been commonly termed, burst.—Indeed the South Sea Company con- 
tinued to flourish for some time, under an incorporation, or conversion, of about nine, and 
> eleven, millions of the public debt into their geint stock. The fraudulent stock - 
jobbing speculations which followed upon the Statute 6 George L. seem to have been the 
sole cause of their downfall. 

‘26. The Mississippi Scheme, it is true, had in view the payment of the public debts of France: 
so far comparison may be admitted with the present Plan; but it is by no means equally 
evident that the conversion of public debt into the stock of Mr. Law’s Royal Bank. or 
Company, occasioned its failure. After a series of the most violent shocks to public credit, 


even from the year 1713, after various arbitrary changes decreed by the Duke of Orleans, . 


as 


No, 5. 


Papers relative to 
Mr. Rickards’s 
Proposition 
for estublishing a 
General Bank, 
&e 


SaaS 


Objection} 


Auswj 


Nv. 5. 
Pépers relative to 
Mr. Rickards's - 
Proposition 
fot establishing a 
General Bank, 


&e. 


Te ) 


_ overthrow of the whole concern. 


Objection. 


Answer. 


Vide secand 
supposition, 
Paper D. 


116 ' PAPERS RELATING TO™ 
as well in the metal as the paper money of the King din ; and after seve! 
if not fraudulent enhancements of the Company’s stock, the scene drew'to a close 
of the ‘most ‘extraordinary acts that ever betrayed the ignorance of Government in 

to the principles of money :—first, the issue of bank-notes to the amount of mo 
double that of the coin estimated to be necessary for the currency of the } 
secondly, the famous, or rather infamous arrét of the 21st May 1720, where 


in’circulation were at one blow reduced to one half of their former valu ~ 
till after these fatal measures, that the public became alarmed, or their confi 
scheme impaired ; and when to these are added a want of funds to fulfil promis 
oi all these actions or shares outstanding, we need look ‘to no other cause for 


. j é ; now jude pei 
27. In the present Plan, however, there is nothing that I can see that admits 
parison with the acts in the bimeoneph Scheme, of an arbitrary and perhaps i; 
vernment operating on an infatuated public. There is here no attempt at 
whole Plan might,.and perhaps ought to be published : its funds are ei eq 
anticipated result ; not a share that will not certainly yield its expected profit 
note issued beyond what the circulation may as certainly require. Gov 
do nothing, and therefore nothing is to be ed either from the influence 
exercise of arbitrary power. Under ‘such circumstances, I confess I neiti 
danger or inconvenience of giving, to a certain portion of the debt, a mei 
NAME ViVT Ss * f mola ¥ 2 i } City rath Lcsmearti ean 
“28. Sixthly.—There have been some other objections advanced : sich a ii 
that the notes would be thrown back on the Bank when money bore a pret 
possibility of issuing others without a loss equal to this. premium; the di 
nient runs on the Bank, when relief must be sought at a great distance ; and 
power of extending the issue of notes, &c. But as all these would seem to be ¢ 
refuted by the course and successful progress of banks in other parts of In lig 
circumstances apprehended, it may not be necessary for me to trouble the | Hi 


Court with any particular rémarks thereon. P ‘mien 
; r . | at a MI 


‘ag. Seventhly.—Finally, it has been urged, that the “ merchants: her 
themselves bankers ;” par that “ this pian would praesent eee 
«of their gains to the Bank; that the Bank can in no way hold out.an 
«-cient to prevail on the merchants to give up their present command. 
“to take merely a share of that of the Bank; that it would be like a 
«of bank-stock into a copartnery with them in a gainful part of their busine: 


‘30. Tn the Plan itself there are details of some length, to show the advan ba 
mercantile body may derive from a successful co-operation therein, and 
facilities which trade m gerieral would experience. Perhaps advantages ¢ 
seldom, attainable without corresponding sacrifices; but if the compro 
bé found sufficiently favourable to the merchants, there is still no reason» wh: 
tion may not be obviated. by an arrangement which should limit the amount. 
to the actual shares of the Directors, the merchants themselves would, be th 
and they would then have no copartnery in a gainful part of their busines 
example, might be a// their own, under some of the modifications of which 
the voucher ‘No. 1. to this Minute, show the Plan to be capable ; whilst.a $ 
uader this connection, would still be established, which is all that Govern 
of extra charge on the revenues. "7 tga 


~ hae | 
31.) But after all; however desirable the aid and co-operation of the m 
execution of the scheme in question, still if they should think proper to. 
in toto, or pro tempore, it is evidently in the power of Government. to este 
posed Bank and Sinking Fund independent of their aid, and to conduct t 
officers of their own, if just and established principles be scrupulously. adh 
the a er in view, viz. the reduction of debt, be accomplished to the full e 
be desired. . at 


‘Bombay, 17 July 1808. — 


No.1. 


Extract of a LETTER, &c. with Remarks annexed, on Mr. R’s Pl ] 
, Indian Debt; and Answer thereto,’ dated 16 October 18 


~Wuen I had the pleasure of seeing you at Dr. Scott's, I took the li 
ot two remarks, which the intricacy of the subject, added to that habitual: di 
feel in communicating my ideas in conversation, prevented me, I fear, from ex 
tq be intelligible; I have therefore used the -freedom of repeating, them in- 
memorandum X, in as few words as possible. | jane 


9 eer oe 
“I must again repeat, that none of the objections which Uhave heard started, ‘te 

degree against the foundation of the Plan : some of them suppose a«certain char 

channel of the money trade, but most of them are only difliculties, ‘such as every 


S ‘ 


BAST INDIA AFFAIRS. aay 


institution is ‘liable to, and which require, only an increase of vigilined ‘to foresee and 
eet. There seems no good reason why, in a country so rich and trading as India, a bank 

uld not prosper as much as in other countries. The novelty of the plan would occasion 
‘difficulties, which it is not ascribing too much to the talents of the original projector, and 


Papers relative to 
fr. Rickards’s 


‘the sagacity of the Bank Directors, to suppose they could overcome : judicious management , Proposition 
‘is of Sind 3 d in every such plan; and the objections seem tone to be chiefly con- ee inte rs 
‘siderations for the Bank Directors. The local experience of the merchants, would furnish eae exe 


invaluable assistance, and the limited extent of the first issues and operations, would tty 5 


the ground, and prove the best experiment how far the Plan could be gradually extend 
‘and what quantity of active stock might be required for its transactions. If the Plan C 
‘were adopted, of beginning business merely as a bank, in which the Company was a sharer, 
ander the agreement that after a limited time the issues of notes should be on the joint 
t -aceount of the Bank and of the Government, under such considerations and in such pro- 
portions as might easily be fixed, Government gains not only the agreed proportion of tlie 
notes kept in circulation, but the further proportion corresponding to its Tate in the Bank. 
The interest of Government and of the stock-holders and Nirectord is thus also united. Let 
the share allowed to Government be one half, as it has also a third of the remainder, the 
ain of Government wou'd be nearly two-thirds of the whole issue. If Government were 
oak five eighths, their third giving another eighth, their whole advantage would be three 
fourths of the issue, and a Jarge sum of profit would still go to the bank-sharers from the 
remaining fourth. ‘the Paper 4) shows indisputably that these and numerous other modifi- 

ations might be made, preserving the beneficial eflects of the original Plan. 


~ Perhaps the additional fund proposed in (C) might be delayed ; and some conjectural sum 
from the issues, rising progressively, substituted in its place. 
__ By giving Government a proportion of the issues, the Bank might be made to serve Go- 
-vernment exactly in proportion to its own success, and the increasing trade and prosperity 
of the country, sea 6: | 
I owe you many apologies for having detained the Papers so long, and still more for the 
freedom with which t haye written on a subject, of the principles of which I confess that 
1 have only some glimpses, and which can be best decided only by those persons, of great 
Joci see ampht extensive commercial transactions, who have been made acquainted 
-with the plan, and to whom the, difficulties and advantages of the schemes must be 
strongly visible. I confess I see no difficulties that are insurmountable ; and I cannot help 
-congratulating Government and the. Couatry ‘on possessing a practical politician, who, 
by so simple a plan, promises to relieve Government of so great a part of its burdens, 
‘by means which, far from being injurious to industry or trade, seem to offer new facilities 
to increasing the wealth, prosperity, and happiness of India. 


a ntl 


« MEMORANDUM-X. ANSWER to REMARKS. 


Sickie os mode in which the Bank is to be- | 1. Tux difficulty of a connected explana- 
gin its operations, is not perhaps auinercntiy tion in private conversation, on so abstruse 
ppparent. No fund, by means of which | a subject, renders it at the best always liable 
e operations are to be commenced, is | to some obscurity. In Plan A, I have 

stated that I purposely declined entering 


ee ed out by the Plan. The. capital js in 
eeten C £ into a detail of the business of the Bank, 


een used 


oh, “ie the. 
Ban has no 

_ indeed half a million is payable by Govern- 
ment, and a fund to that extent for Bank 


ws ations exists; but then it must be un- 
‘derstood that the purchasers of bank-stock 


“a passive fund to gain credit to the Ban 


"used by 


_Tion, the stock-holders must do without half 


‘becomes payable till six months after the 
‘period of she 


nds till then: at that time 


‘do not receive their first half year’s interest. 
he first instalment must be applied to form 
e active fund of the Bank: this is the first 
md they possess naturally for carrying on 
“their business; the large sum of stock in. 
~Government’s hands can be applied only as 

in 


a 


-Gts lodns and issue of papers. It is an ex- 


cellent security to the creditors, but can be. 
z the Bank only as an instrument of | 
credit, not as stock engaged in trade. If! 


what has ‘been here denominated the active 
fund of the Bauk, is to consist of half a mil- 


“a year’s interest: if it is to consist.of one | 
million, they must give up a whole year’s 
——_— Tnterest, 


which will of course be ultimately regulated 
and arranged by the Directors. This con- 
stitutes a material part of that detail; and 
the quantuin of deposit in specie required 
for the active operations of the Bank, must 
necessarily depend on the plan determined 
to be adopted, or the amount of capital 
issues in bank-notes. The Bank must of 
course, like all other banks, be at the ex- 
pense of its own deposit of specie. What I 
meant to sapisin was, that this expense will 
adinit, on the plans here suggested, of con- 
siderable diminution, in view to the pay- 
ments required to be made by Government 
into the Bank for the use of the Sinking Fund, 
viz.. the payments in the first year, for exe 
ample, ou this account, being 1,320,0c00/. 
might be made in monthly instalments of 
110,000 /. which will iacrease in arithmetical 
progression, say till the sixth month, or any 
other specilied time, when the aggregate 
sum ‘may be required to be applied to the 
uses of the said Sinking Fund. But in the 
seventh, or following month, another 110,000l, 
is paid in, and will similarly in¢rease monthly; 


_ 80 that in this way a very large sum of specie 
_will be continually in deposit in the Bank, 
J) : = ' 


intended 


~ 


No, 5. 


Papers relative to 
r. Rickards’s 
Proposition 

for estublishing a 

General Bank, 


&e. 


418 
“-MEMORANDUM X. 


interest, and so on in proportion. The sug- 
‘gestion that this fund might from the first 
gradually supplied by the regular coming 
in of the Company’s revenues, offers a partial 
corrective ; but as this proceeds on the idea 
not only of a full treasury, but of an accom- 
modation from the treasury to the Bank, not 
specifically pointed out in the Plan, and 
really forming a temporary loan without in- 
‘terest, from Government to the Bank, it is 
doubtful how far it would be prudent to rel 
on it. Itis not what the Bank can demand. 
Besides, it only operates during the six 
months: at the end of that time the interest 
- is due, and the money must either return to 
pay the stock-holders, or be by them per- 
mitted to remain employed by the Bank. 
The accommodation on the part of Govern- 
ment therefore ceases, and the burden of 
supporting the Bank’s operations devolves 
on the stock-holders, It therefore seems 
necessary, either that the Bank should begin 
its operations on credit, and by borrowed 
money, or that the fund should be raised 
gradually by detaining the half-yearly inte- 
rest of the stock-holders. 


2. Itis of much more importance to keep 
in mind, that in no instance can the holders 
of notes, or the merchants, gain by the issue 
of notes. The notes may be of very great 
convenience to the merchants and the public, 
but never can turn to the profit of any but 
the Government or Bank. By all. others 
they must be purchased, and stand only in 
the place of specie,, . 


3. It may ae? be doubted whether 
any inducement could be held out to. the 
Bank to take a deep interest in the notes, 
except either an agreement that a-certain 
proportion should be issued for the Bank, 
when a certain proportion was issued for the 
Government, that the Government and Bank 
should divide the total issues in certain shares, 
or an agreement that the Bank, on making 
Government a certain loan without interest, 
should have the sole benefit of the issues of 
notes, In the former way their interest wolud 
be mutual, and neither party would haye any 
inducement to urge an inordinate issue, par- 
ticularly if the expense of supporting the sum 
of cash for keeping up the circulation, were 
also divided in certain proportions : thus too 
the gain of Government would increase as the 
advancing prosperity of the country enabled 
the issues of paper to be extended. In the 
Jatter way, the total issues, after passing the 
loan to Ghieruaant, would accrue to the be- 
nefit of the Bank alone. It is to be observed 
that the supplies of foreign specie would 
come only as they do at present; any impor- 
tation from England, for example, must be 
purchased by value given by the Bank, as 
much as by any individual. ‘That in Bombay 
the trade runs very much in seasons, and 
hence the issues of notes would need to be 
considerably limited in the busy months, to 
prevent inconvenient returns afterwards. 


(True Copies.) 


J. Warden, 
Chief Secretary to Government. 


PAPERS RELATING TO 


ANSWER to REMARKS. 


intended for the use of the Sinking Fond at 
certain fixed periods: which deposit, 1 con- 
ceive, the Bank may intermediately use, 
provided proper care be always taken to— 
complete the amount at the particular times 
when the Sinking Fund demands it, and 
which will. therefore tend to lessen the ex- 
pense which other banks are subject to on 
account of a deposit necessary to the sup- 
port of their active operations. 16 


This, it may be objected, is an important 
aid conteibbeed by Goveensii to the Bank, 
free of interest :—True. But the Govern- 
ment have their advantage also, for on either 
plan they have a Sinking Fund established, 
with the aid of the Bank, free of extra 
charge on the revenues; and on Proposal © 
in particular, or any modification thereof, 
let it be remembered, that every diminution 
of the Bank expenses will be a - 
ing addition to the profits in which Goyern- 
ment have a prescribed share. The possi 
bility of reducing the debt in so short a 
period as from seven to nine years, is inore- 
over a matter of such high importance, as 
to be worthy some sacrifice at least to 
effect it. 4 


2 & 3. It will perhaps be Sates some 
recommendation in favour of the Plan, to 
find that its original principles ban 
of such various modifications; some of 
which it is at least hoped may be found 
perfectly unobjectionable. The very inge- 
nious remarks contained in these parazra ae 
are in fact modifications: of Ak Be which. 
infer a loan from the Bank to Go 
free of interest; in consideration of which, 


the Bank should enjoy a comespondliig pen 
Vv 


a Oe i! ae ee” ok 


portion, or all the advan arising 
its private business. Both these suggestions, 
however, and the simple modes o danter 


ing, are therefore perhaps preferab 
original Plan indeed aa a loan in 
erefore cost the 


bank-notes, which will 


or not ultimately feasible, and the latter there- 
fore preferred, should any difficulty arisefrom _ 
requiring so large a sum in specie as 2 mil 


as much thereof as shall not be taken b 

creditors in bills on the Court of Directe 
suppose then the merchants, i.e. proprietors 
of stock, lend in this way £. 1,200,000, and _ 
£.800,000 be paid by bills, let 12-20 be the — 
share of the said proprictors in the Bank pro- 

fits, and 8-20 the share of Government, which 

latter share will go to counterbalance the ex- 
pense to be incurred by the Court of Directors 
in raising the £.800,000in England, 


a 


(Signed) 


EAST INDIA AFFAIRS: 119 


No. 6. 


COPY of Paracrarns 31 a’ 38 inclusive, of a Revenue Letter from 
_ the Governor in Council at Bombay, to the Court of Direétors of the 
East India Company ; dated 20th February 1808. 


I. EXTRACT REVENUE LETTER from BOMBAY ; dated 2oth February 1808. 


Para. 31. 


Arte this detail respecting the Pergunnah of Broach, and our proceedings on its No. 6. 
revenue concerns, it is nota little pleasing to us to be able to close it with requesting your ay 3 
honourable Court’s attention to the further Report from the same Commissioners, under date Revere of Broach 
the 24th of January, exhibiting the progress made in its fiscal and other concerns ; the and Surst. 
result of which, in as far as respects the former head, is as follows : 


Rupees. 
1803-4 - - +--+ Collections - = ' =  10,54,599. 
1804-5 - - - De - - -  11,30,647. 
1805-6 ees De - = = 11,26,097. 


_ 1806-7— eff ado epdaulodP ts; - - ) 22,24,583. 
whilst the amount of those realized during the twenty years of Scindia’s tenure, averages 


no more than 8,35,105 rupees, 


32. Nor have we less satisfaction in requesting your honourable Court’s perusal, and 
attention to the Report under date the 26th of January, from the similar temporary 
Commission at Surat, showing that the cultivation, and, consequently, the revenues, have 
been rapidly increasing since our acquisitions from the cessions by the Paishwa and Guica~ 
war in the Attaveery, (or country between Demaun and the Nerbuddah,) the receipts from 
_ which having risen, in the space of four years, from the annual amount of 6,24,463 mpees 
to 7,28,122 rupees, yielding thus, in four years, an increased yearly return of 1,03,659 rapees. 


33. The ws from the collector of the very extensive territory dependent on the zilla 
or division of Kaira, under date the 20th of January, recorded in the same day’s proceedings, 
as above cited, will, we flatter ourselves, prove, in view to the particular circumstances of 
that cession, no less pleasing to your honourable Court than the consideration of the two 

receding narratives; as to the prosperous condition of the Broach Pergunnah, and of our 
Tistricts in the Attayeery. 


-. 


34. In submitting these briefs notices of the ‘revenue administration hitherto in progress 
throughout the three grand divisions of country intrasted to the charge of the Government 
of this Presidency, it will thence appear, that in all and each of them, very material ‘ame- 
liorations have taken place, not oly in the considerable increase of the annual receipts, but 
in the Regulations for the country, particularly under the division of Broach, in which a 
system of regularity, order, and quiet, has been uniformly advancing at the same time 
with the augmention of the funds for the revenue; which last has. been above shown to have 
increased, by nearly two lacks per annum, notwithstanding our having intermediately given 
up such parts of the former funds for it, under the late Government of Scindia, as were 
believed to have an oppressive tendency. ¢ 


35. The same general cbservations will be found applicable, in a considerable degree, to 
the division of Surat, in which the cultivation will appear to have been considerably exs 
tended, and the revenue in particular to have increased in a still greater proportion than 
within the collectorship of Broach. 


36. It will, on this occasion, be pleasing to communicate to the honourable Court, that 
relief has been afforded to the inhabitants of the city of Surat, by the abolition of a variety 
of the Moghul taxes, to which they were subject during the Nabob’s Government; and it 
is our intention to prosecute this object as far as future enquiries or sep ruce may indicate, 
more especially in the department of the customs, which are thought to fall too heavy on 
- the inhabitants there, in proportion to those at the Presidency. ‘ 


- 37. In as far as respects the extensive collectorship at Kairah, it may, in conclusion, be 
observed, that although the increased realization in the public funds, bas. in that quarter, 
been less'in proportion, the most orderly and highly regular manner in which the settled 
zeyenue haye been collectcd, redounds, in view to the peculiar description of a great part 

- eg 


J = dh f 


an 


No. 6. 


— 


Revenue of Broach of the civil servants in this line of employ. 


and Surat, 


920 ‘ PAPERS RELATING TO 
of its inhabitants, so mach to the credit of the collector's management, that we di 
only a duty in again distinguishing Mr. Diggle as one of the most promising and 


28. The success which is thus shown, on grounds the most obvious, to have attende 
administration of our lately acquired Northera territories, will constitute, it is hog 
best apology for our deferring till another opportunity to submit at grea 

timate and more fixed rules, which we may have to recommend for their p: 
vegee ere may. not, (generally Speaking) be many we could pro 

pted (a8 the result” has shows) to their general ‘prosperity hither, | 
faye been for the iw past years subject to; and as far as our impressions yet e 
subject of such gteat delicacy, we feel inclined to coincide in the principles ¢ 
cated by the Legislature; viz. that the established custoins of the natives should 
adhered to, affected only by such well-weighed improvements as have for 
guuding, (by the means, for instance, that are above mentioned to be intendec 
Written or printed deeds to be grauted to the patells of Broach) more paki a 
éstablished systems, from ick vicissitudes and abuses as experienve has shown t 
be liable to; in short, to endeavour to ameliorate their condition, without subverti 
foundation, of their hereditary rights; the preservation of which, as ere 


eit 


‘manners and impressions, must teud, it is conceived, most elficaciously, to 
happiness. 


oY st Te ek eile > opr tes SRR 
COPY of Paracrapus 49 2 54 inclusive; of a Revenue Lett 


the Governor in Council at Bombay, to the Court of. Dire 


14th-April 810. 
path gare) a | Baspake Bika 
"EXTRACT of REVENUE LEYTER fiom BOMBAY, dated sai 
ge gh, ‘Para. 48. i eat 


, ‘'T Broach, the revenue in arrear on the goth April 1808, stoo at Rs. 
~~ which, we have the satisfaction to atld, was entirely cleared by th 
following. year, Rs. 176. 1. haying. been alone remitted ; nor are, th 
account of former years under this collectorship. _ : — 


_..49. The jumma for, the: several districts included in the ,collectorship: of 
1808-9, amounted. to. Rs. 14,31,076. 2. 86.; the. collections within the ye 

‘Rs. 14,21,845. 0. 37. leaving a balance, on goth April 1809, of Rs..9,290. 
there was ihesdouke of realizing; and. the cause of which arises from the 
falling due within the period embraced by the, year of. account, as already 
preceding part of this Address. 
~ 0. The ‘disbiitsemicnts of this colleéetotship in 1808-0, on account of natit 
‘amounted to Rs. 21,522, being only’ 1.503 dec" per ¢ent. on the jummia; 
‘eovenanted ‘servants ‘amounted to’ Rs. 23,199. 3. 06. being 1.621 dec!* 
whilst the total of the charges bear only 3.125 dec" on the receipts. The 
Rs. 1,18,410. 2.65. and the native establishments amount to Rs. 5,383, bei 


percent. on the receipts. 1 asa a 


51. The total receipts therefore from the revenues and customs aggregate’ Rsi rs, 4 
and the total charges Rs. 50,109, being 3.234 dec per cent. on” i 
throwing the charges: of the judicial establishments (being Ks. 1,70;876. 15 
include the Court of Circuit and Appeal for the whole northern es 
computation, the disbursements on account of the revenue, customs, — 
éstablishiments (amounting -to Rs. 2,20,985), bear at the rate of 14.262 dec 
‘the receipts from this possession. ty ee lil 

52. On the settlement of the reventes ‘of this districtfor:the year 1868-9,” 
satisfaction to find that the-land-revenue of Broach still continues. to. encrease, . 
that year, Rs. 9,76,818. 3. which is Rs. 19,495 more than the. preceding ome. 


&3. The land revenue’of the Pergunnah of Broach: Proper (whiclv constitite 
principalsource of the above large rental) was never,undey any: forine : 


o 


rear 
© 


EAST INDIA AFFAIRS. rab: 


seer a together so high (according to our best information) as the first settlement made 
-by Revenue Commission in March 1805; and its permanency and increase are 
principally to be attributed to the investigations, which brought to light and abolished the 
‘various mal-practices of native revenue officers, and the many ruinous and 3. 3 ate 
systems introduced by Mahratta farmers, at the same time that they ascertained the true 
and old established system of assessment which has since constituted the rule of guidance ; the 
Jand revenue of that single Pergunnah of Broach Proper alone, is now Rs. 1,59,433- 2. 50. 
more than it was when the Revenue Commission was first ointed in January 1805; 
whilst, as described in the Commissioner’s Report of gist May 1807, the increase of 
income to the cultivators is to the full as much as that in the Government share or reyenue ; 
the surplus not resulting from any enhancement of the rate, but from that rate being levi 
on a more extended cultivation. 


- 54. The Leaeen improvement in the state.of the inhabitants of this district, is further 
very observable in the number of substantial houses to be seen in the villages, where huts 
of mud and straw stood about four years ago, as reported in the letter from the late Revenue 
Commission, dated the 26th February 1809. 


No. 8. 


COPY of Paracrapus 113 a’ 142 inclusive, of a Revenue Letter front 
the Court of Directors to the Governor in Council at Bombay; dated 
— 10th January 1810. 


EXTRACT REVENUE LETTER to BOMBAY; dated 10th January 1810. 


Para. 113. 


ef BE E third, and not the least important subject to which your enquiries have been 
* directed, is the mode of realizing the revenue. The information on this head, contained 
in the Report of Messrs. Prendergast and Steadman, of the 31st May 1807, and its aecom- 
paniments, is certainly more complete than any that had been previously acquired; but 
we cannot help thinking that by the aid of better arrangement, it might have been conveyed 
in a form more perspicuous and satisfactory. 


114. The principle upon which the jumma or rental is annually settled in the Guzerat, 


seems to be an equal division of the produce of the tulput land in cultivation between. 


‘Government and the farmer. Though it be competent for either party to insist upon this 
tinciple ‘being literally acted upon in fixing the jummabundy, | 

or levied in kind, the rent, according to ordinary practice, is commuted into money. 

A general rate of assessment has been fixed throughout the greater part of the per oma, 

where there is but little difference in the soil at 4 rwpees per bheega, for the better, and 

34 rupees for the inferior sort of land. But in the immediate vicinity of the Nerbaddah, 

the rent varies from two to twelve rupees per bheega, accortling to the different descriptions 


of soil and the crops, the share of Government being always calculated upon the estimated’ 
value of half the produce, whether the ground be a sandy hillock or a rich bottom, and the 


crop be rice or sugar-cane. This rate however, in uncommon seasons, or under par- 
ticular circumstances, is either increased or redueed, as the collector or husbandman may 


show cause. When the cropsare so far advanced as to admit of a fair estimate being made 


of their value, the melitas, tullaties, and patels transmit statements thereof to the col- 
lector’s cutchery ; Native Committees, consisting of a karkoon belonging to the collector, 
a/dessoy and moozumdar and ameen patel are sent out indifferent directions, to check the 
statements given in by the village revenue officers ; and when this investigation is com- 


pleted, amended statements are made out and remitted to these officers, who, agreeably © 


thereto, form jummas. of their respective villages. This being accomplished throughout 
the district, separated sunuds or notes are prepared for each village,specifying the amount 
of their individual assessment. The patels: assembled on a certaim day, sign these sunuds 
in token of their acquiescence, and when they return home, the mehta apportions the 
precise amount of the rent payable by each patel, according to the size and quality of his 
particular bang or share in the bangdarce villages, and according to the number and pro- 


ductive powers of the bheegas which he cultivates in the bheegotee village. The charges of » 


husbandry are borne by the cultivators ; the expense of collecting the Revenue is detrayed 
by the Government, and the periods of collection are fixed at those seasons when the farmer 
is ablest to pay, or when he has realized the value of his crops, the amount of the instal- 
ments by which the contributions are levied, being always proportioned to the estimated 
funds of the contributor at the dates when they become due. In fine, as a security for the 


upon half the produce 


payment of the Government rent, the crops can neither be reaped, housed, threshed out, © 


“306. Tih nor 


No. 8. 


122” PAPERS RELATING TO 


nor sold without the permission of the collector, or one of his authorized agents. Such is 
the general outline drawn in the Report of the Revenue Commissioners of Broach, of the — 


Jumma or Rental system now in force in that perguonah, and the principles which you conceive to have been: 


tevin 
Guzerat, 


acted upon by the Mogul Government, with little yariation, throughout the whole of their 
territories in the western part of India. Can Me. 


"115. That a system of this kind is liable to very grave objections, and that, bi 
principle and detail, it is in direct and uniform hostilit with the doctrines of political 
economy, which in this part of the world have been considered not only as theoretically t 
but practically beneficial, does not admit of doubt: and though it might be per 
every case to act conformably to these doctrines, without regard to local circumstance 
which may occasionally 5 sehr a deviation from them ; :so, on the other hand, there is 
some danger lest long and constant familiarity with inveterate prejudices, should lead us 
confound the rule with the exception, and to forget the difference between a necessary ¢ 
promise, and a voluntary renunciation of the first maxims of political science. 


pint delivered the moiety due to the sirkar, 2 house, thresh out, and dispose c 
own s 


. ns J9 >) 
117. It can hardly be necessary to point out the evils inseparable from a revenue system _ 
of this nature. It is troublesome and expensive in itself: it loads the productive : 
society with the support of a numerous train of unproductive pensioners: it unque 
tends to discourage improvement, by diminishing the motives to industry: it 
embarrasses the cultivator, by the imposition of restraints always irksome, often pre 
in fine, it offers a strong temptation to fraud and depredation on the part of the 
the trouble attending it must frequently occasion neglect or collusion on the 
collector... . yl seh eae 


; } . ’ T Of 
| 118. A tax levied, generally amounting to the estimated value of half f 
must operate very unequally, if ogee care be not taken to distribute in equal 
good and the bad land among the individual contributors: a precaution whieh | 
always practicable. It is evident that a certain portion of the produce of 
different situations, equivalent to a very different portion of the rent. In rich 
cultiyator may afford to give balf the produce, and at the same time have a ibe Pe 
profit; whereas in poor lands the produce may be so sinall, and the expense ° c 
so great, that were he to pay one quarter of the produce in the shape cither of 
he would not only bave nothing over, but would be without the means of subsis 
and family. ‘hat aa 
119. The practice of letting the lands from year to year, cannot fail to stifle e 
like enterprize on the part of the farmer. Though the claims of the patel as an b 
cultivator, may give him security against being dispossessed of his farm, he must, ; 
are now managed, be contented to share half the advantage of his improve 
Government, the same years even in which they are made, so that his mos: 
exertions serve only to add to the weight of his assessments, oy 0 ee 


120. But notwithstanding the strong objections to which the existing revenue sy tem is 
liable, even after the many ameliorations and improvements it has undergone in the. 

of your administration, (which we shal] notice by-and-by,) we entirely concur in 
that you entertain of the delicacy, impolicy, and danger of introducing an 
innovations among a people with whom antiquity of usage is regarded as p: 
every other sanction, and who are always averse to change, even when it is - 
redound to their advantage. F 


121. Judging, however, from the materials of which weare already in possession, it 
no means impossible to ingraft upon the existing institutions a system somewhat 
to that which has been established in the greater part of our other territories ; 
hints thrown out, rather incidentally indeed, in the 21st paragraph of the letter we : 
auswering, show that the expediency of granting lands to the patels upon z 
tenures, by which, instead of dividing the produce, they shall pay to Gove 
and invanable rental, has entered into your contemplation. Li ieee 

122. You at the same time express a doubt whether the patels would be ge 
willing to become parties to a permanent arrangement of this sort: this, we conce 
depend altogether upon the terms which may be proposed to them. No man would 
it worth while to become a proprietor of land upon terms which would-place him in a} 
ee than when be was only a cultivator. A patel, with his naturally strong ays 

306. 


‘EAST INDIA AFFAIRS. 1283 


“to change, will, it is presumed, if the matter be left entirely to his own option, require to No. 8 

‘have opened to him a prospect of greater benefit than would be necessary to decide the —— 

choice of a person of more versatile character. The terms, therefore, held out must be Jymma or Rental 

such as will present a considerable temptation to their acceptance; the moment that” in 

_property becomes saleable, that temptation exists. Ifthere were a warm competition among Guzerat. 

the bidders, it might be inferred that the temptation was too strong; and if there was no 

demand for it, even at the lowest price, in a market where there can be no glut, seeing that 

nothing of the kind ever appeared there before, it might be concluded that it is not wort 

shaving. The last conclusion, it may perhaps be alleged, would only be just, in circum- 

stances where every man acts under an wali ghvened sense of his own interests, which can 

never be the case, where obstinate and perverse prejudices are prevalent. 1t should, however, 

-be recollected, that the empire of prejudice, when it is opposed both by reason and 

immediate interest, is seldom so universally despotic that some minds will not be found 

vigorous and bold enough to burst its fetters when a fair opportunity occurs ; and alter a 

spirit of revolt manifests itself, the influence of example wil gradually achieve the over- 
row of its power. 


123. There is .also a wide distinction between indolent and active prejudices. The 
former there is seldom any danger in slighting, because they are not irritable in their nature; 
nay, all that is wanting often to their dispersion, is the spirit to encounter them. The latter 
indeed ought uniformly to be treated with forbearance, and frequently with respect: but 

the prejudices to which we now allude, can hardly be ranked among this class. 


124. From these observations, it follows that the establishment of a zemindary system is 
not likely to meet with any insuperable obstacles, provided its effect. be to improve the 
condition of the patel: its tendency to this object, must depend upon the terms of the 
‘settlement; and these terms may be considered sufficiently advantageous, if they render 
the land conveyed to him saleable, which will never be the case till, besides paying the ex- 
penses of cultivation, it yields a certain profit to the landlord, ‘ 


125. It will therefore be matter for your enquiry and consideration, whether land in the 
Ceded Provinces would be saleable, paying the present rental; estimated at the value of half 
the produce, or if any and what abatement would be necessary to render land transferrable 

' with a premium to the vender. At the same time that you communicate to us the result of 
your investigations and refiections upon this question, you will also state what other sugges- 
tions may occur to you respecting the formation of a permanent ea sig settlement that 
may be liable to the fewest present or future inconveniences, and which, while it provides 
for the comfort, prosperity, and security of all classes of the people committed to our charge, 
may not considerably, if at all, impair the actual income ot the State, or preclude Govern- 
ment from afterwards deriving an increased revenue from an eventual augmentation of | 
Tesources. ‘ ; 

126. Before any steps can be taken towards the execution of an arrangement of this 
sort, it will be necessary that the projected survey of Broach shall be* completed; and 
should the experiments, when made, be succesful in this province, it may afterwards be tried 
in the other districts. 1t will be be proper also that you shall previously acquire much more 
accurate information than you now possess, respecting the manner in which the patels 
collect the rents and revenue from the ryots, Foon the exact relations in which these two 
classes stand to each other. 


127. It can hardly be necessary to remind you, that it is neither our wish nor intention, 
in the formation of a system for the future administration of any part of our territories, to 
favour one class of our subjects at. the expense of another, much less to give rights to thé 
more opulent which they may exercise to the oppression of the lower orders. It must 
always be the policy, as well as the duty of an enlightened Government, in some measure 
to compensate, by the equality of its protection, for the unequal distributions of fortune, 


~ 128. Of your intention, after a survey of the Broach district has been made, to grant 
owritten or printed deeds to the patels, particularly ‘describing the portions of land which’ 
they occupy, with the view of guarding their possessions against those encroachments and 
; gsurpations which they have experienced in time past, we highly approve ; but we are not 
dispoed ‘to think that enough shall have been done till we have furnished them with new’ 
ives to industry, as well as with additional securities for what they already possess. 
Let the process of improvement be conducted with judgment, caution, and after mature 
deliberation, and the impediments by which it is at first retarded will gradually become. 
Tess embarrassing. : 


_ 129. Much has been effected since the cession of Broach to the Company, in the way of 
poring the ancient Mogul system from the abuses which had crept into it under the 
Marhatta administration ; the great, the intolerable evil of which was, not the excess of its 
imposts, but the mode of levying them. 


ot rte 4 

130. The Manotee system, by which the Government, in consideration of advanced 
a on the credit of the revenue, delivered over the persons and properties of its 
subjects to a band of merciless usurers, by whom they were tortured, plundered, and 
oppressed, it was one of the first steps of your administration to suppress. 


_ 131. The Sookree Chandla, that discreditable resource, consisting in a sale of licenses by 
Government to one class of its subjects, to make arbitrary exactions from another, was 
properly abolished, as a scandal to the British name. 


132. Instead 


124 PAPERS RELATING TO 


132. Instead of tannadars and jemadars stationed throughout the country under the 
pretence of maintaining the police, but really for the purpose of extortion, a Court of 


- Jumma or Rental Adawlut has been instituted, for the trial of offences according to the rules of law. 
no 


133. The Dungur Tojee, or assessments upon the first crops, proportioned to the wants 


4 ee of the treasury but not to the funds of the cultivator, and by the excess of which the patels 


Letter from, dated 20 February 1808, 139. We have great pleasure also in remarking, that the improveme 
(32 to 37) relative to the Revenues of have not been confined to Broach, but that they have been : tet 


were driven to the most ruinous modes of raising money, has given place to a system under 
which the demands of Government exactly correspond with the means of the contributors. 


134. The claims of the Dessoys and Moozundars have been put into a train of adjustment, 
the result of which, we trust, will be the relief of the laborious part of the community from 
a number of arbitrary fees and exactions by which they were vexed and impoverished ; and 
an economical reform has been introduced into seyeral branches of the village establishments, 
equally beneficial to Government and the ryot. 


15. In fine, Tuccavy, or the money advanced by Government to the farmer, to facilitate 
agricultural improvements, is lent at common interest, instead as before at the most 
exorbitant rate of usury. - 


136. The facility with which these changes, so creditable to your administration, have 
‘been effected, show the practicability of further amelioration, while at the same time their 
importance to a certain degree diminishes its urgency ; we would not therefore have you, 
on the one hand, to imagine that you had reached the utmost limits of improvement, oy 
on the other hand, to run the risk of failure by venturing too far, or proceeding withont due 
ireesntiogs ‘ aes i a a > 

137. We entirely agree with you in epinion, that the suggestions increasing the 
eyenues of Bréeck, rea fiend by Nes Patel, are paar unavailable for rthe 
purposes for which they were intended, if indeed they had any other object than thatof 
recommending himself to the Government by an apparent assiduity to promote its interests, 
and thus to retrieve the disgrace he had incurred by his former conduct, ) 29 aru 

198. Upon the whole, we have had much satisfaction in tracing the pro tag? 
administration in the Pergunnah of Broach. It seems by far the most able of th 
districts ceded to the Company in the Guzerat ; and its augmented and growing 
is the best proof which could be adduced of the wisdom which has presided over i , 
management, and of the zeal and ability of those who have carried into effect the plans 
devised by the Government. : Lc AEE ees 


Surat and the territories dependent on onr territories situated both to the southward and ‘northward — that - 


the Zillah of Kaira. _ ‘dependency. 


L vid 
140. Owing to the bad health of Mr. Morrison, the collector of Surat, we are not i in 
ssession of such minute information respecting his collectorsbip, as concerning t ys 
‘others ; but from the last Report made in his stead by Mr. Crow, the judge and m: 
there is reason to believe that agriculture is making rapid progress in the countries sit 
in the Attawery. Of this ndend there is positive proof, in the very great increase ¢ 
revenue, conjoined with the growing prosperity of the people, territories having p 
2,11,830 rupees more than the sum for which they were ceded by the Peishwa and Guica ..: 
and 1,03,600 rupees more than they yielded in the first year of your management, 


141. Though the increase of revenue in the division of Kaira, since it was placed 
Mr. Diggle’s care, does not amount to more than rupees 96,164, the actwal st 
‘that part of the country, compared with what it was when it devolved to the Comps 
not furnish less matter for congratulation than the improvements which have taken p 
our other possessions in the Guzerat; aad we embrace this opportunity of acknowles 
-with warm approbation, the judgment and zeal manifested by the collector in the di 
-of the very difficult duties of his oilice. Though the quantity of waste Jand wit 
‘bounds of that collectorship be inconsiderable, the ferocious manners of the ink 
seemed to oppose afar more impenetrable barrier to civilization than the most_ 
appearances which the surface of the earth can present. We are happy therefore 
that the people in that quarter already begin to show a sensibility to the comforts r 
from orderand obedience to.the laws ; that the number of the hardened and refra 
‘diminishing apace, that justice is gaining an ascendant over violence, that the ce 
vernment are, with few exceptions, willingly answered; and that, by persevering i 
of conduct marked by an union of Jenity and firmness, we need not despair of cireumse 
ne ae narrow units, if not of wholly suppressing, the dominion of anatehy ; 
barbarism, 


' 142. The investigation. which you caused tobe instituted into the loeal duties paid by 
‘inhabitants of the town of Surat, has led to the beneficial result of relieving them from a 
variety of impolitic and.vexatious imposts, without any material saerifiee of revenue. It 
will be always agreeable.to us to hear of, and encourage, similar inquiries. » : yes 

sa a a 


EAST INDIA AFFAIRS. 125 


No. 9. 


Copy of a LETTER from the Court of Directors, in the 
. Political Department, to the Governor in Council of Foré St. G eorge, 
dated the 29th September 1809. _ 


OUR GOVERNOR IN COUNCIL AT FORT ST. GEORGE. 


Paragraph 1... 


W 5 have received your several Dispatches in the Secret Department, of the 24th No. 9. 
VV. October and 2oth December 1808, the 27th January and 28th February 1809, aa 
describing the rise, progress and issue of certain discussions between you and the State of Letter from 
Travancore. These discussions, which related to arrears due to the Company under the <oe of einigcing 
treaty of 1805,'and brought the provisions of that treaty generally under review, have 20 eal ta og 
terminated no less anhappily than surprisingly, in the employment of the force and resources aa 


of the Travancore territory, by the Rayah’s minister, in deliberate hostile aggression and open ih he 


offensive war against the troops and the power of the British Government. 

2. Being by inclination, by interest and by duty, decidedly fixed in favour of a pacific 
system of Indian policy, we cannot sce any renewal of war, or an interruption of the 
relations of peace and amity with any of the Indian states, even when such interruption 
becomes unavoidable in self-defence, without keen regret; and hostility with an ancient 
ally, whose interest aud ours seemed to recommend a lasting union, must be still more 
_ paunful to us. , 


3. We entered therefore with anxiety into an investigation of the causes which could 
have induced the Government of such a State as Travancore, whose power and resources 
were so utterly disproportioned to those of the Company, and whose territory was accessible 
to us on every side, to take up arms against our Government. And this has led us toa 
review, which we shall here introduce, of the different stages of our connection with that 


State. ~ 


4. Mutual interest first formed, and afterwards cemented, the connection between the two 
Governments:. In the articles of pacification agreed on between our Government and 
Hyder Ally in 1769, the Rajah of ‘T'ravancore was included as an ally of the Company. 
The same care was taken of his interests in the treaty of peace, made between the Company 
and Tippoo Sultaun in 1784; to these treaties the Travancore State owed its security for 
a series of years, from the very unequal power and inordinate ambition of those rulers of the 
Mysore country ; and when at length ‘Tippoo, disregarding the articles of the treaty made 
with him in “1784, attacked the territory of Travancore, in the year 1790, the Company 
entered inte a war with that Prince in defence of their ally, whose safety was again secured 
by the peace made with Tippoo in 1792. ‘og 


j 
5 The treaty concluded between us and the Rajah of Travancore, in the year 1705, which 
stipulated that a British force should always be ready for his defence, against any war of 

ion made upon him, had particular respect to’ the danger to which he still stood 
exposed from the more powerful neighbouring state of Mysore, which rendered the pro- 
tection of the Company essential to hin, and to that protection he owed the continuance of 
his independence. 


6. Things remained in this state during the life time of the old Rajah, who was himself, as 
there was reason to believe, a prudent man, attached to the British connection, and was 
_ served by a Dewan of uncommon ability and worth. The Rajah diced in the year 1798, 
— and his death appears to have been followed by various circumstances unfavourable to the 
thaintenance of the cordial friendship that had long fubsisted between his State and the 
Company’s Government. Most of these circumstances are stated in the early correspon- 
dence of the resident, Colonel Macaulay, with the Supreme Government; and as he iad, 
from his situation, the best opportunities of knowing the internal state of Travancore ; as his 
communications, professing to «describe facts and events of the times at which he wrote, 
appear to have received entire credit from that Government, and to have been corroborated 
by subsequent occurrences, we see no reason for withholding our confidence from those 
communications. 


7. The old Rajah was succeeded by his nephew, a young man whose character seems ever 
since to have been marked by imbecility, caprice, aud other qualities which shew him to be 
wholly unequal to the task of government. The old and faithful Dewan of his uncle was 
. 306. Li supplanted 


No. 9. 


Leiter from 


226 PAPERS RELATING TO 

supplanted by low and vicious persons, who soon gained an ascendency over the Rajah, and 
influenced the conduct of affairs. In 1799, an insurreétion broke out in the distriéts. In 
1800, a cabal, headed by a person named Sumpreddy, seized the reigns of government. 


Court of Directors, Gross abuses po in many of the public departments; the revenues were decreafin 


29 Sept. 1809; on whilst the bu 


Political State of 
the Travancore 
Territory. 


, posed to have influenced its Re in respect to the British Government, whose friend 


k of the people were in the lowest state of depression; and another insur- 
rection took place on account of oppression in some branches of the collections. The 
time of the Rajah is described to have been chiefly engrossed by his pleasures, and by 
superstitious ceremonies among the Brahmins, who, with their dependants, were reckoned 
to be equal in number to the working class. The Jate Dewan, so much respected by the | 
people, was not suffered to live even in retirement. There is very strong reason to believe, 
that he was taken off by poison, and the British Resident thought it. his duty publickly to 
accuse Sumpreddy of this foul murder; but after a short arrest, and an appearance — 
inquiry, in which more solicitude was shown to avoid than to effect discovery, he was 
restored to his liberty and influence at the Durbar. This man is stated to have charged the 
late Dewan with ruining the interests of Travancore by connection with Europeans, particu- 
larly the English; and from all the details contained in the ample correspondence carried on — 
by the British Resident at that time, it is strongly to be inferred, that neither the Rajah nor 
those employed in the transaction of his affairs, regarded British connection with the 
ancient cordiality. — 


8. This change, it is probable, did not arise solely from the change of men, and the © 
very different characters of those who succeeded to the administration of the Travan core 
Government. The fall of Tippoo in 1799, placed that State in circumstances entirely new. 
The formidable danger to which it had been long exposed, from a more powerful neighbour, 
headed by a restless chief, was now removed; Mysore came under the controul of the — 
Company, who had been the best friend of Travancore, and from whom, asit probably feared _ 
no injustice, so it might seem no longer to need active support or protection. Sucha 
material alteration in the external relations of the Travancore State, may reasonably be sup-— 


would not hence appear an object of so much solicitude as it was before. In point 
the British Resident, Colonel Macaulay, who was appointed to that Durbar in 1800, ¥s 
thought that he perceived in it a coolness or diminution of regard towards the = 
connection. nit Stead 


- g. The Governor General had instructed the Resident, on receiving his appointmen 
pe 


ts. 5 


Fee 
St i 


-) = 4 
> 
¥ 
ge =>. Cf 


prevail if possible, on the Rajah to agree to a new modification of the treaty 
Company :—of this modification, the principal conditions to be proposed wer 
Europeans should be permitted to reside in the territority of Travancore, wi 
Sent of the British Government; that in lieu of the military aid which the R 
by the former treaty to furnish to the Company, when engaged in war, he shou 
oi eebeake of an additional battalion of Company’s troops; that he should ¢ 
defence of his territory to the Company, and receive their advice in the more im 
concerns of the civil administration. 


. 10. With respect to this measure, the change in the relative circumstances of 
States might naturally suggest some alteration in the existing treaty. It is justly obs 
the Governor General, in his instructions to the Resident, that the acca Travan 
by a long line of sea coast, renders it a country through which the British possession 

become vulnerable to an European enemy; to which it may be added, that the — 
military positions which the territory of Travancore affords, increases the importance o 
consideration. The British Government therefore, after having saved ‘ravancore 
being overwhelmed by the Mahomedan State of Mysore, though in this acting also 
fair view to British interests, had a right to expect, not only that it would ce vill 
prevent, to the utmost of its power, the enemies of Britain from availing themselves of 
ports and strong holds, bat would permit the British Government to employ for that pur- 
pose the necessary force which Travancore could not itself furnish. Whether all the © 
conditions proposed for a new trealy were requisite to the attainment of this object, may be 
considered hereafter; but it appears certain, that in the first negociations of Residen 
with the Rajah and his Ministers, and for several years afterwards, until the occurrence of 
new events, they shewed a settled aversion to accede to any terms more favourable to our 
Government than were contained in the old treaty. yee 


it. In 1801, the Rajah, after repeated representations from the Resident of the disorde 

state of the country, and the necessity of rescuing the management of affairs from th 
whom he had permitted to possess themselves of it, appointed a new Dewan, named 4 
Tomby. This person had been at the head of the insurrection of 1799; but being repu 
a man of ability and firmness, the Resident, in the great want of persons of that deserip 
approved of his appointment, and had reason to expect that he would be friendly t 
connection with the British Government. His subsequent conduct however did not j 
this expectation. The Resident, after some absence from his station, on returning to 
December 1801, found that all the relations of the old and respectable Dewan, who — 
himself had suffered a violent death, had also been murdered ; and that Sumpredd) the 
former favourite, had been disgraced and imprisoned by means of the new. Dewan, Bi 

Tomby. - « :, 


» i 


a 


| - 
12, After the peace of Amiens became known in India, towards the end of 1802, the 
Resident found increased difficulty in negociating with the Travancore Durbar for the 
; ex 


EAST INDIA AFFAIRS 12y 
exclusion of Europeans from his territory. The Rajah bad virtually given a qualified No. } 
‘assent to a proposition of this nature in 1800, but never could be persuaded to reduce it to — 


writing; and the return of peace seems to have led. him to desire and expect some inter- Letter from 
courses with the French and Dutch. Under this apprehension, the Resident, between the Court of Directors, 
| snonth of August 1802, and March 1803, pastes represented to the Supreme Govera- 29 Sept. 18095 om 
| ‘ment the necessity of measures to check the symptoms of disaffection in the minds of the Pvliticul State of 
| Rajah’s evil counsellors, and to prevent French influence, stating that he had reason to resigns 
apprehend the Rajah was disposed to the French, and that a political negociation had been. “™°'Y- 
opened with him by a French agent who landed there. If attempts of this nature were 
made, the renewal of the war with France, by removing the subjects of that country from 
_ ‘Travancore, probably put an end to them; and it led, in February 1804, to an agreement 
| on the part of the Rajah, advised no doubt by his Dewan, to place a respectable ferce at the 
_ disposal of the British Government. 


13. But so precarious was the possession of power in that State, that almost immediately 
after a strong conspiracy was formed against the Dewan, Vallay Tomby, in which the 
Rajah himself was supposed to be engaged. The Dewan was excluded from all confidence, 
his enemies openly triumphed, a near day was fixed on for his death, without any trial, and 
he fied to the British Resident, by whose firmness and remonstrances the Rajah was at 
Jength diverted from his purpose, the conspirators were thrown into prison, and the Dewan 
obtained not only his life, but the restoration of his power, The leading person in this 
‘conspiracy was a Gosseyn, one of an eminent religious order, and stated by the Resident to 
bein the French interest. The Resident's letter, written at this time, and in the two 
preceding years, describe in strong terms the degraded state, in point of character, both of 
the Government and of the principal people. 


. 14. Before the end of that year, 1804, a formidable revolt took place among the Naiz 
battalions in the service of the Rajah. Their original cause of dissatisfaction appears to have 
‘been a reduction in their allowances: these the Rajah restored, and a short calm succeeded, 
but the revolt burst forth again with increased violence; the ringleaders liberated the con- 
ooee in the former plot, increased their numbers to 10;000 men, and, as was asserted by 

e Rajah himself, at length extended their views to the subversion of the British power and 
influence in Travancore, and the assassination both of the Dewan and the British Resident, 

_ Intelligence also was received by the Resident, before this dangerous revolt was entirely 
suppressed, of a projected expedition from the French islands against one of the ports of 
Travancore. It was only by the judicious active conduct of the Resident, and the resolution 
of the British officer commanding the Carnatic brigade in the service of the Rajah, joined 
to the firmness of the Dewan, who had again fled to the Resident for protection, that this 
rebellion was put down. The treaty of 1705 did not specifically stipulate the aid of the 
British power in suppressing internal commotions in Travancore; but this was agreeable te 
the spirit of it, and became highly expedient on such an occasion, and the march of three 
of our battalions to the confines of Travancore, confirmed the tranquillity which had been 
ored there. ; 


_ 15. The Rajah, who had shewn great alarm in this crisis, was highly gratified by the 
mission of British troops for his support, and then professed an entire devotion to British 
interests, and the Dewan pledged himself to adhere, to his latest breath, to that system of 
measures which should receive and merit the approbation of the Governor General. Thus, 
what had before been steadily resisted, both publicly and privately, for five years, namely, a 
new treaty of subsidiary and defensive alliance, they both at length consented to, and con- 
cluded in January 1805. It may be observed, that during the two preceding years in which 
this measure had been fruitlessly pursued by the Resident, the British Government had 
been engaged in an arduous war with the Marbattas, and that it was brought to a very 
successful close, about the time when the domestic convulsion in Travancore appeared to 
turn the scale in favour of a more intimate British connection. 


16. The articles in which this treaty varied from the one of 1795, were chiefly these: the 
Rajah, who by the treaty of 1705 stood engaged to furnish the Company, when involved in 
war, with such part of his military force as he could spare, with safety to his own country, 
‘was, by the treaty of 1805, relieved from that obligation, and, in lieu of it, he stipulated to 
pay annually, in addition to the subsidiary payment under the former treaty, a sum equi+ 
valent to the expence of one regiment of native infantry, estimated to amount to ru 
4,01,655; and the disposal of the whole subsidiary force, either within the country of Trae 
_ Yancore or the limits of the Company’s dominions, was left to the option of the British 
_ Government. The Rajah also became bound, by the new treaty, to pay a due proportion 
of the expence of any troops, additional to the subsidiary force, which it might eventuall 
_ be necessary to employ for the protection of his dominions. It was expressly provid 
that whenever the Governor General in Council should have reason to apprehend a failure 
in the funds destined to defray either the expences of the permanent military force in time 
of peace, or the extraordinary expences in time of war, he should have full power to 
introduce regulations for the management and collection of the revenues, or to assume, on 
dehalf of the Company, the direct management of a part of the territorial possessions of the 
Rajah, as he might deem most expedient. And whereas the treaty of 1795 had respect 
chiefly to the internal defence of ‘Travancore, the Rajah promised, by the new treaty, to 
at all times the utmost attention to such advice as the British Government should 
weccasionally judge it necessary to offer him, in respevt to all the objects connected with the 
306. advancement 


—— 00 


er 


No. 9. 
Letter from 
Court of Directors, 
29 Sept. 1809; on 
Political State of 

the Travancore 
‘Territory. 


uicaualeoeh 


“which after allowing for the deductions stipulated in it of the Rajah’s military f 


328 PAPERS RELATING TO 


advancement of the internal interest of his Highness, the happiness of his people, and the 
mutual welfare of both States. us 


17. The ratification of the new treaty by the Supreme Government arrived at the Rajah’s 
capital in July 1805, and he and his whole Court gave public demonstration of joy on that 
occafion. The first account of it reached England in November 1805, but the papers 
connectéd with the negociation did not arrive till January 1806, and owing to the cireum- 
stances of that time, the treaty was not then taken into particular consideration. Th 
correspondence of the Resident, Colonel Macanlay, does not touch upon this treaty after 
the month of July 1805, until the month of October 1806, when he, having been put 
under the immediate orders of the Fort St. George Government, on the requisition of t at 
Government, stated, that no part of the additional subsidiary had been paid, and that the 
Governor General in Council had authorized the remission of one half of that subsidy for 
two years from the commencement of the treaty. ~ te atts, 


j ey ee 
18. By a letter from the Supreme Government to us, of the 1st May 1807, and a subse- 
quent one from Fort St. George, of the 21st October 1807, the following statements were 


gdly. That the Rajah earnestly desired to retain in his service thé corps known by 
of the Carnatic Brigade, which had proved on various occasions essentially usefe 


Z 
Q. 
- 
° 
° 
o 
x 
E. 
po a 
; 
= 
mo 
= 
3 
z 
2 
oO 
s 
er 
3 
s 
z. 
g, 
3 
g 
° 
~ 
Ss 
s 
eo 
io 
5 
ber} 
° 
Lene} 
As 
7 
oe 
i>) 
[=> 
a. 
= 
So 
s 
5 
2 
iJ 
& 
te 
”~ 
S 
Ss 
‘1. it ak 


portion of the subsidy to the maintenance of the brigade, and pleaded its con 
his service in support of his application for the permanent remission of that p 
the subsidy, for which the discharge of the brigade was intended in part 
thus, endeavouring to derive advantage from the abuse of a solicited ind 
urging that abuse as an argument for the obtainment of additional conce 
That the Supreme Government had determined to require provision to be m 
mediate, or at least gradual, discharge of the unremitted half of the addit 
and the gradual dischatge of the whole amount trom 12th January 1807 :—6 
although the discharge of the Carnatic Brigade was a measure obviously conformal 
spirit and intent of the treaty, by which the Company is charged with the whe ary 
defence of the State of Travancore, yet on account of the merit and attachr : 
Carnatic Brigade, the Supreme Government would not insist on its discharge of its 
nuance in the Rajah’s service were consistent with the provision of funds for the 
of the Subsidy :—7thly. That it was computed by the Resident, the resources of | 
vancore State would not be less than twelve lacks of rupees per annum, after de 
charges of a civil and military nature, with exception only of the Carnatic Bri 
after paying the full amount of the new subsidy :—And lastly, that the determinatic 
Supreme Government kaving been communicated to the Rajah of Travancore, no fu 
objection was made on the part of his Government, and the arrear of subsidy 
7 


become due, was in train of liquidation by instalments. i 


19. It was npon this view of things, that the answer contained in our political | 
to you of the 7th September 1808, was founded. We did not then go intoa consi 
of the original formation of the treaty of 1805, not being aware of various cireut 
iu the history of that transaction, which have been since found in our Indian r 
were not indicated in the dispatches from that quarter. We went merely on the 
of requiring the observance of a treaty, supposed to have been fairly and volun 


the relinguishment of all claim on him for military aid to the Company, im 
addition to the general expence of his Government, and a treaty which the Ra 


ij 
to be very able to fulfil. Our dispatch however could not reach you before the 
hostile measures, both on the part of the Dewan of Travancore and of our Goveram 


20. From the month of October 1807, when the arrears of subsidy were stated by 
be in a train of liquidation, until the month of October 1808, no progress appears: 
been made in that affair, although the Resident states, in July 1808, that for eight m 
preceding, scarce ten days had passed without his reminding the Dewan of the ar 
which then amounted to rupees 6,62,669: repeated letters in the course of that time,’ 
Resident and your Government, from the Rajah and his Dewan, which all seem 
been the work of the latter, complained in strong terms of the oppression of the new 
and the inability of the Rajah to pay the additional subsidy; the whole was said, | 
Dewan, to have been extorted contrary to humanity and the law of nations; and th 
is laid to the personal account of the Resident, according to an usage common ame 
ladians, who ia remoustrating against acts of Goverament, represent them as the 


EAST INDIA AFFAIRS. “129 
; ‘its agents only, although in this case, the Governor General had himself written to the No. 6. 
Rajah when the new treaty was first proposed; that what the Resident did, he did by his ——- 


| authority, and the Governments,both of Bengal and Fort St. George, had in their direct _ Letter froth 
‘communications with the Rajah and his minister, left them no pretence for affecting to Court of Directors, 
consider the new treaty and the-enforeement -of its stipulations, as the personal acts of the 29 Sept.1809; on 
Resident. In this period, they for the first time, explicitly demanded the relinquishment of Political State of 
the whole of the new subsidy, whereas before ‘they seemed to‘have-confined their applica- = Travancore 
-tion to an abatement of only two lacks. eacicort 


I 
them Seay 
21. With respect to the ability of the Travancore revenue to afford -the whole of the 
_ «subsidy, the Dewan appears to have acknowledged in March 1808, that he could not 
answer the statement of the Resident on that need, and you:have expressed our-conviction 
that the plea of inability was unfounded. We are «particularly pleased, however, that our 
‘Governments, both of Bengal and.Fort Saint George, Love distinctly declared to the Govern- 
anent of Travancore, that if it-could give any satisfactory evidence of inability, due con- 
‘sideration-would certainly be paid to that circumstance ; and it was doubtless more an 
evidence of unwillingness than of inability, that no retrenchments were made-in the milita 
-establishment of ‘Travapcore, the reduction of which, with the substitution of Com ce 
Aroops, was according to the evident understanding-of the parties, one of the proposed ends 
of the treaty. 


_ 22. Of such indisposition to fulfil those stipulations, independent of any question of 
-ability, there is sufficient proof even at that period; and it appears to be chiefly, if not solely. 
-imputable to the_Dewan, of -whose “ unhappy bias” the Resident speaks in his letter of the 
aoth March; and in your letter to Bengal, of the 5th of August 1808, you suspect thut 
‘Minister to entertain the design of disturbing the relations between the two States; in the 
same month, the Resident stated in a private letter to Mr. Secretary Buchan, that the Dewan 
~was of late greatly changed in temper, having become ferocious, and that the Rajah was 
~““ a mere cypher, ‘trembling at the very name of the Dewan.” The Resident also states in 
a letter of the 16th September, to Mr. Buchan, that the Rajah had several times conveyed 
‘to him his satisfaction in the subsidiary engagements, and bis perfect reliance on the honour 
_and liberality of the British Government. The letter, however, which you very properly 
-caused to be written to the Dewan, on the goth July 1808, appears to have produced the 
happiest effects upon him; he expressed to the Resident the deepest contrition for his past 
‘defaults, and on the 22d September he commenced paying the arrears, and with the hopes 
which this change encouraged, your letter of the 24th October 1808, closed. 


23. But those hopes were of short duration. By the month of November, the payment of 
-arrears amounted only to rupees 60,000, and the balance due was eight lacks; instead of 
a farther liquidation of debt, that month produces only a succession of informations from 
‘the Resident, evincing with increasing clearness, the certainty of what that officer at first 
alls “something like a systematic plan of contumacious resistance on the part of the 
““ Dewan,” which he says rendered it necessary to apprize the Rajah, that with a view te 
the proper regulation of the affairs of Travancore, another person should be chosen for the 
office of Dewan, in the room of Vallay Tomby. This is the man who first comes into notice 
as the leader of an insurrection in 1799; who, with the assistance of British influence, was 
advanced to be Prime Minister in 1801 ; whose early administration is clouded with suspicion, 
arising from the atrocious murder of the family of the deceased respectable Dewan ; who, in 
1805, vowed unalterable attachment to British interests, and only two months before professed 
sincere contrition for his failures in this respect. He now begins to appear as the sole raler 
of the Travancore State; the Rajah, though his disposition was deemed to be favourable to the 
British Government, is stated to have been incapable of following the course of his own wishes; 
he henéeforth ceases to be seen in public transactions, and the Dewan exercises in his own 
person all the powers of government. We hear of a “ faction formed under his protection, 
of an augmentation of Travancore sepoys, the manufacture of bows and arrows, his training 
the inhabitants to arms, his success in exciting a ferment, his sending to the Isle of France 
for 500 artillerymen, and expectation of assistance from thence, his rooted purpose of deter- 
‘mined hostility, his being capable of instigating his partizans to an attack, and the expe- 
diency of placing him as the prime mover and instigator of hostility under arrest.” Early 
in December you were told by the Resident, that the Dewan still continued,with unremitting 
activity, his plans of hostile preparations, and that in conjunction with the Rajah of 
Cochin’s Minister, a person who appears to have been a suitable confederate to him, and 
made a conspicuous figure in the subsequent transactions, he was endeavouring to force 
that Prince into measures of hostility against the British Government, urging him to unite 
with other chieftains friendly to Travancore, for the expulsion of the English, requiring him 
with that view to train particular classes of his subjects in the same manner as had been 
ordered in Travancore. You were at the same time informed by the officer commanding in 
Malabar, that a report prevailed there of an intended attack on the British Subsidiary Force, 
and that an army of 22,000 'Travancorians was assembled at no great distance from it. 


24. You therefore, with proper precaution, directed detachments of troops to proceed 
from Trichinopoly and Canara, to be prepared to penetrate the Travancore country 
on both sides, if the course of events should require measures of that nature; and you 
informed the Resident at the same time, that the Rajah was to be protected in his person, 
and in the exercise of all his rights, but that it was necessary such a system of internal 
administration should be establislied, as should ensure the exact fulfilment of the existing 

306. Kk treaty, 


Le 


us 


No. g. 
Letter from 


Court of Directors, 


29 Sept. 1809; on 
Political State of 
the Travancore 
Territory. 


ee 


“130 : PAPERS RELATING TO 


treaty, and guard against the recurrence of those evils which had menaced the public interests .* 
in that quarter. : ‘ ry z , a . 4 es 
7 °? 


25. After these measures were taken, the Dewan earnestly requested, through a 
.at Alleppe, in the service of Colonel Macaulay, to enter into a negociation with that — 
officer. The Dewan proposed to retire from his situation, and ty live at Callicut 
protection of the Company ; the terms, which seem to have been moderate on t 
‘settled apparently to his entire satisfaction. He on the 27th of December, tra 
Colonel Macaulay, through the same native agent, a sealed letter to the Rajah, 
tents of which he did now show, but he gave a translation of it, which is on your 
and contains the resignation of his office. The agent,a man of character, has’ a 
the Dewan on that occasion, said with great sensibility—* Tell the Colonel, I no 
“ acknowledge all my errors and faulis; [now kuow that I was wrong and mislec 
« Macaulay has twice saved my life, at the risk of his own; by to-iorrow I sh 
“ life to him a third time; all the country know that to him | am indebted. 
“ and authority [ have held; [ quit my office cheerfully, confiding in him; it 
« reparation | can now offer to him and the Rajah.” Colonel Macaulay states, that 
Dewan’s earnest request, he had weakened his own party of sepoys, and had 
palankeens and boats to provide for the Dewan’s security aud convenience, in cor 
at Cochin, whither he was to proceed on his way to Calicut.. ‘Ihe Dewan’s letter, 1 
the 27th of December, he dated the 28th, observing to the agent—* The Colonel 
“ jt to-morrow, and as to-morrow will be a lucky day for all parties, let it b 
“ morrow.” On the night of the 28th, a body of 1000 nairs, commanded bya pa 
of the Dewan’s, attacked the house of Colonel Macauley at Cochin, with 
mordering him ; several of his sepoys were killed, and his own escape was most 


+s 


and surprizing. On the goth of December, the Dewan iu person, with an army 
have been 30,000 strong, attacked the British Subsidiary Force at Quilon. Th : 

proceeding is marked by a character of signal perfidy and atrocity, which m 
on other parts of this man’s conduct. It renders credible the report o his 
1806, to have Colonel Macaulay poisoned, and was a prelude to the murder i 
which he afterwards ordered, of Dr. Hume and thirty-three soldiers of His M 
regimént, and to the cruelty he exercised towards the native adherents of the 
who fell into his hands, : x igh * 


26. Before you were apprized of these open acts of hostility, you had, o 
December, countermanded the orders for marching troops from the Carna 
to the frontiers of Travancore, and ali military movements and measures ag 
You also recalled Colonel Macaulay, and appointed another Gentleman 
the Residency. You have no where distinctly stated the reasons for this « 


ny 


notified to the Supreme Government on the 27th December, observing o 


“had been exaggerated.” You added, that it was well known the 
at variance with the Dewan; and that the latter did not cease to make, throw. 
channels, the strongest professions of his earnest desire and endeayour to preserve 
the subsisting relations between the two countries. - How far his conduct in respe 
creer of the subsidy, and after his earnest declarations upon the receipt of Si 
rlow’s letter, in the month of September preceding, accorded with these profe: 
had yourselves the means of judging ; and Colonel Macaulay’s private lett 
Secretary Buchan contained no intimation of a chauge of councils in the De 
contrary, his letter to Colonel Chalmers of the oth December, transmitted to 
states in the strongest terms the continuance of his hostile preparations. On 
indeed, he mentions, that the Dewan had shifted his ground, and that his object: 
suspicion asleep ; but this letter could not well have reached Madras in time to p 
change of measures adopted on the 25th. The real ground of this alteration in your s 
must have been a doubt of the accuracy of Colonel! Macaulay’s intelligence, and, 
from Mr. Petrie’s minate, of the propriety of his conduct; which doubts arose from pri 
information derived from other quarters; bat that private information has neither b 
communicated to us, nor to the Supreme Government. saa 


_ 27. With respect to the minute of Mr. Petrie, it delivers merely an opinion, with 
the facts or reasons on which it may have been formed; and it implies the opinion not 
have been first adopted at the time the minute was written; yet we find in no precedi 
part of your transactions relative to Travancore, any intimation of such an opinion. Uf 
the whole of this topic we shail only observe, that it is in general ‘im sible to 
judgment here of the wisdom and justice of the measures. pursued in Indi » unless: 

and reasons upon which they are grounded are distinctly stated. } ee 


28. We should however, suppose, that the private intelligence above alluded to was of ’ 
decisive a nature, as not ovly to have raised doubts of the accuraey of Colonel Macaulay’s 


Eka ¢ 


EAST INDIA AFFAIRS. 191 


enumerous informations, but to have prevented you from drawing the nateral, and indeed No. 
the necessary inference, from the ele yo attempt already described of the Dewan upon teas 
_ this life; which attempt, with all the train of atrocious and convincing circumstances attend= —_ Letter from 


dng it, was known to you on the 4th of January, when you, notwithstanding, renewed your Court of Directors, 
ers for the suspension of military measures. In the remarks made upon this devision in’ 29 Sept. 1809; on 

the letter of the Supreme Government, of the 29d January, we certainly concur, as well as in’ Political State of 

_ the general principles laid down in that very able letter. -1t was written upon the supposition: the Travancore 

that your reasons for doubting, both the propriety of ‘the Resident’s conduct, and the Tetitory~ 

accuracy of his iutelligence, were convincing. Uninformed as we still areof the particulars 

upon which your doubts were founded, we can pronounce no judgment. Your proceeding 

showever, is a full proof of your unwillingness to enter upon Betis: Yet whilst we do 

justice to your laudable motives for being thus reluctant, and for making every attempt toi 

conciliate ; and whilst we repeat our own decided aversion to war, and our sorrow for the: 

occurrence of those circumstances in which you were the placed, it still seems to us that 

after so flagrant an attack upon the public representative of the British Government, to 

suspend even the march of troops towards Travancore, was not the best mode of seeking 

conciliation, nor a mode suited to the just respect due to our own Government; and we 

cannot therefore but reckon it fortunate, that the zeal and aetivity of Colone! Macaulay, in 

very trying circumsiances, and she gallantry of Colonel Chalmers, and the troops under 

him, prevented part of the evil consequences which wiglit have resulted frony this delay. 


. 29. The attack upon the Subsidiary Force at Quilon, on the goth of December, left you no 

option but to resume the system of vigorous weasures. It is not our intention, at present, 
to go largely into this part of the dispatches now before us, nor into the military Operations 
which unbappily became unavoidable. But, as from our general confidence in the wisdom 
and decision of your Government, it. isan unpleasant part of our duty to slate our doubts 
upon any part of your conduct, we think it just to express our decided approbation of the 
energy and activity you displayed on this occasion. We approve of your letter to the 
Rajah of Travancore, and of your proclamation to his people, preliminary to the entrance of 
‘our troops into his country: but with respect to the instractions which you transmitted on 
the 1oth of January to Colonel Macaulay, for the regulation of the affairs of Travancore 
after tranquillity should be re-established, it appears to us that it was, at that moment, 
rather premature to determine exactly upon the future measures that should be adopted 
with respect to the Rajab, and that your instructions have an air of rigour which it might 
have been desirable to avoid; but on the general subject of our future relations with that 
Prince, we shall have occasion to make some observations in the sequel. 


' 30. The conduct of the military operations, so far as they have yet been reported to us, 
demands our unqualified praise. ‘The steady bravery and repeated victories of Colonel 
Chalmers and his troops, and his temperate yet firm behaviour Lowards the Dewan, were of 
great importance. The storining and capture of the lines of Travancore was an achievement 
of distinguished gallantry, which reflects great credit on the commanding officer, Lieut, 
Col. St. Leger, and the officers and men under him, in partieuwlar on Major Welsh, who led 
_ the storming party in a manner that does singular honour to his intrepidity and perses 

verance. The civil servants also, whose local situations gave them any part in these trans- 
actions, appear to have acquitted theinselves with zeal and ability ; particularly Mr. Warden, 
collector of Malabar, who communicated important informations ; Mr. Gillio, magistrate in 
Malabar; and Mr. Hepburn, collector of Tinuevelly. 


- 31. The prompt,zeal manifested by his Excellency the Governor of Ceylon, in dispatching 
early and material aid to our officers employed in Travancore, demands our acknowledg- 
ments; and we desire that you will take an early oppurtunity of making known to him the 
sense we entertain of his public spirited conduct on this occasion. 


"32. We are also’ sensible of the very useful aid derived to our service from the zealous 
- co-operation of Captains Byng and Foote, the Commanders of His Majesty’s ships the 
Belliqueux and Piedmontese. 


. 33: Nor can we omit to notice on this occasion, the becoming conduct of the late Rajah. 
_ of Cochin, who evinced the utmost reluctance to enter into combination against the 
Company, and whase life, it is strongly to be feared, was, in consequence of this reluctance, 
traitorously sacrificed to the views of the hostile party. We think the family and interests 
of that Prince entitled to our marked consideration, on account of his conduct and his 
sufferings, and we hope they will have received a due attention from you. 


44. With respect to Colonel Macaulay, we find, that soon after his arrival in Travancore, 
the Rajah complained of him as harsh in his conduct, and as seeking to impose a new treaty 
Pie him. It appears to us, that Colonel Macaulay, in his early intercourses with that 

‘overnment, assumed a tone of authority, higher, perhaps, than in the former reign had 
been either usual or equally requisite: by his own account, his public accusation of one of 
the Rajah’s disreputable favourites, of murder, drew upon him the resentment of the Durbar 

_of that time; and his refusal of money, of which he says he had large ‘offers, made him be 
counted an enemy. The Governor General, Lord W: ellesley, however, in answer to all the 
complaints made to him, declared that he was perfectly satisfied with Colonel Macaulay, 
and that what he had done, he had done by his order. Lord Clive, to whom similar com- 
plaints: were made, appeared to have been also satisfied; the new treaty brought on the 
carpet by him, seems, throughout, to have been the chief artiele of grievance. The other 
5 g05- a ' charges 


432 PAPERS RELATING TO 


Na. 9. charges advanced against him at that time, which were rather vague and of little import- 
— ance, and.apparently urged with the view of effecting his recal, (as Mr. Powney had, on 


Letter from -his complaint, been recalled before, merely because be was disagreeable to him), seem to 
Court of Directors, have been satisfactorily answered ; but the treaty was nevertheless represented to successive 
29 Sept.:1809; on Governors, both before it was made and afterwards, as the work of Colonel Macaulay, _ 
Political State of though as already noticed, Lord Wellesley’s Letter to the Rajah had distinetly declared that 
the Travancore measure to be his own. -With the Dewan‘Vallay Tomby, to. whom Colonel Macaulay had 
tap bramee “rendered such essential services, he seems to have had no quarrel till he began to require 
“the payment of the new subsidy in 1806, and.in respect to requisitions on that account, 
she seems to have been abundantly patient. ‘The tone which he adopted in his memorandum 
't8 the Rajah of roth March.1808, was .a proper-one, and his calling upon the Dewan for 
proof that.the-payment of the increased-subsidy pressed inconveniently upon the finances 
-of Travancore, as well-as his repetition of thestatement of their resources, which he had 
with great propriety explained upon a former-occasion to the Dewan, has our approbation; 
‘but we cannet give the-same approbation-to his ultimate determination, not to transmit the 
Rajah’s letter of 16th February 1808, because that determination naturally Jed to the irre- 
gular communication which ensued ; and we must also disapprove his having omitted, whea 
he withheld the letter, to-comornicate the correspondence which had taken place between, 
the Dewan and himself upon the subject of it to his Government, until the month of July. 
i808, when-he first mentioned it in consequence of the dispatch from the Chief Secretary. 
in the preceding month, returning the subsequent letters from the Rajah and the Dewan, to 
the Governor. These circumstances, we conceive, ought to have been noticed in your corres- 
pondence with the Resident, though it is indeed true, that as the declaration of the inability 
of ‘Travancore to discharge the full demands had been considered by the Governments of 
Bengal'and Madras as futile, and all requests for a further remission had been directly ne- 
gatived, the Resident may have been naturally led to think, that a mere repetition of these 
assertious and demands, unsupported by any fresh proofs or allegations, was unn , 
‘be transmitted; and our Government at Madras may upon the same grounds have thought 
it expedient to put an end to all hopes of relaxation, by considering the subject as closed. 
The most important letter of complaint received by your Government from the Dewan, 
appears to be that of the 1oth July 1808, which reached you in the interval between the 
receipt of Colonel Macaulay’s explanation of his conduct, as complained of in the Dewan’s 
former communications, and the transinission of your letter of reproof to the Dewan, 
dated the goth of the same month. In this letter of the 10th July, the Dewan alledges that 
the conduct of the Resident and of his nephew Doctor Macaulay, was gin? disres- 
pectful and offensive to the Rajah and himself, and he complains pointedly of the delega-- 
‘tion by the Resident, of his authority to the latter gentleman, inclosing a copy of a note to 
‘himself from Colonel Macaulay, dated the 26th June 1808, in which that delegation is. 
-‘yeferred to in a manner which seems to show that it had been matter of previous complaint. 
‘Of thisJetter, no other notice appears to have been taken by you, than the mention made 
‘of it in your letter of reproof to the Dewan, in the enumeration of the communications _ 
from him which are there acknowledged. We are surprised, that you should have thought 
it unnecessary to require any explanation from the Resident upon the subject of this letter. 
We should have supposed that a representation of this nature would have led you to call for 
-copies of all the correspondence which had taken place between Colonel Macaulay and the 
Court of Travancore for some time past, and for as full an account of his verbal communi- 
-cations, and those of Dr. Macaulay with the Dewan, as could be furnished; and we should 
have expected this the more upon such an occasion, because it is evident-from the silence 
-of the records, that the Resident was not in the habit of making a regular communication 
-to you of the particulars of what passed on the constant and pressing applications and re-" 
monstrances which had been made by him to the Travancore Government, in respect to the — 
‘pores of the subsidy. Upon the whole of this subject, it appears to us, that Colonel 
acaulay may have been wanting in a conciliatory temper, and that his residence at a 
‘distance from the seat of the Travancore Government, with his consequent transaction of 
the public business by a delegate, was inexpedient. We think also, that he committed an 
unfortunate error in making the new subsidy higher than the first instructions to him from 
the Governor General proposed, and upon this point we shall say something more hereafter ; 
‘but on the other hand, itis fair to allow, that as from the complaints that were. rei ds. 
against him, chiefly on the ground of the treaty, and the resistance he experienced tothe _ 
payment of the new subsidy, it became difficult for him to conciliate that Court, so, | 
although it is a matter of concern, that any plea of this nature should have been afforded 
for complaints, yet from the character of the Dewan, it cannot be supposed that the 
personal demeanor of Colonel Macaulay could be the cause of the extensive and d 
criminal views into which he entered; and as fafas we can judge from the information 
before us, Colonel Macaulay appears to have conducted himself with great integrity, es 
with distinguished ability and firmness in a difficult situation, and in a variety of trying 
-conjunctures. +4 


35- Before we quit this subject, we take occasion to observe, that it is of importance the : 
mode of intercourse between our Government and Courts which stand in a relation tothem, 
similar to that of Travancore, should be distinctly understood. This intercourse should, 
undoubtedly, be carried on in the regular form, between the Resident and the Prince, or his , 
Minister; but as cases may arise in which the country Powers may have, or think they 
‘have, reason to complain of the conduct of a Resident,and means ought to be afforded them 
of transmitting such complaints through a regular channel, nothing more can wa 

og 


ee ee 2 a — a. a - SS 


EAST ANDIA ATFATIRS,. 133 


oftlem, thaw that they should do, what appears in the ease immediately befare ns, to have 
been proposed, namely ; .to-transmit them openly through the hands of the Resident, thereby 
giving him.an ppportunity.et clearing himself from any unfounded charges which may be 
brought against h 

» Channels of complaint, and leave.no hopes of redress but in resistance. 


36. Having now reviewed the-state-of our relations with “the Government of Travancore, 


No. 9, 


fetter fiom 


im. The establishinent of.a different principle, would preclude all regular Court of Directors, 


29 Sep. 1806; on 
Political State of 
the ‘Travancore 


-.ffom an early period to the present dime, aud through a long course of friendly alliance, to ‘Territory, 


_ astute of comparative alienation, and at-length of open wartare, we proceéd to make some W-———_ 4 


- Observations on the causes which may have Jed-to this last.unhappy predicament iu which we 
are now-involved, and on the principles by which our futwre conduct towards that Goveru- 
ment ought tobe regulated. 


87- We have already noticed the -great.change produced in the external relations of the 
* Travancore. State, by the downfal of ‘Fippoo Sultan, aud of his power in 179@. Frou that 
‘time, as tke protection of the Company hus ceased to be essential, which before it was, to 
ne independence of Travancore, so it is certain that our friendship has been regarded by 
that State with less solicitude; but it might have been expected, that it would maintata its 
ancient relations, bet! in gratitude fer past services, and because it could not swerve from 
them without incurring-our just resentment; we had a right also, to expect in return, for 
securing that State froin destruction, by enemies external and internal, the most complete 
security which it could afford us against European force or intrigue ; and on the other hand, 
it was still of so. much importance to us, in reference especially to European enemies, to 
maintain the influence we had obtained over the political conduct of Travaneore, that it 
became our interest to make its connection with us as easy to that State as should consist 
with a due controul over its foreign relations. To secure the continuance of that controul, 
was in the new situation in which the two States were placed after our conquest of Mysore, 
an object of legitimate policy to our Government; but to increase to Travancore the expense 
of its connection with us to so large an extent, seems to have been inexpedient. According 
to these positions, it was fairly allowable to our Government to propose in 1800, a new 
moctificution of the treaty of 1795, and some increase of the Subsidiary Force; but beyond 
the amount which apon a just estunate the Rajah should be found likely to save annually, by 
being absolved from the stipulation to furnish the Company with military aid whenever they 
should, ina state of war, demand it, it appears to us, that no pecuniary concession should 
have been required of him, unless he had shewn a perfect willingness to have made up what- 
ever that estimate should have fallen short of the charge of a third subsidiary battalion of 
our troops ; for it became the interest of the Company, in the new state of things, to devote 
a third battalion to the care of that country, even if no allowance had been made to them 
for it. The Governor General in his instructions of February 1800, to the Resident, required 
jiim to propose that another battalion should be subsidized ; but the Resident, as we have 
already observed, unhappily proposed a regiment; this no doubt increased the disinclination 
of the Travancore Government to a new weaty, which it resisted for five years, and only 
-acceded to at last, in the moment when it was preserved chiefly by British support, froin 
being overwhelmed by domestic insurrection and revolt. The augmentation of the money 
-subsidy seems, both from what passed at the time and what has since transpired, to have 
‘been the objection most felt by the Travancore Government to that treaty. It is indeed, true, 
that the Resident was correct in believing the Rajah could afford to pay the additional 
“subsidy ; the vast military preparations of which Travancore has since been found capable, 
‘is a clear proof of this. It is also true, that since the inability of the country hus beer 
~pleaded, our Government has constantly professed a readiness to pay regard to:that plea, if 
‘any evidence could be adduced in support of it; and that no such evidence has been offered, 
is another proof of the ability of the country; it must further be admitted, that nothing 
scould be more improbable or less likely to be apprekended, than any hostility between one 
“Government and the State of Travancore, and thatin the situation of the Company’s finances 
“in the year 1805, to desire au additiona! subsidy for an additional force, trom a Prince who 
‘was able to afford it, who then owed a large balauce of obligation to the Company, and 
“was utterly unlikely to break his connection with them, might seem fairly allowable; but 
“after all these admissions, it is in our opinion to be regretted, that any new subsidy beyond, 
ae, fair commutation already mentioned, should have been demanded ; that the grounds of 
Sdiséontent on the part of the Travancore Government, either in respect to the treaty or the 
Seonduet of the Resident, as also the reported hostile preparations of that Government, were 
snotin due time closely scrutinized ; and it is a source of great concern to us, that either the 
“treaty or the manner of enforcing it should have been in any measure a real or aa assignable 
-<eauuse for the misunderstandings that ensued, and which at length unhappily ended in 
“enormities, on the part of the Dewan,-that nothing in the treaty or the adherence of oue 
Government to it could possibly justify. 


37. When the treaty of 1805 reached us in the end of that year, we were not aware that 
it had not been entered into with the good will of the ‘Travancore State, having then been 
quite uninformed of the resistance that had been made to such a treaty during four years 
_ preceding ; nor were the records which contained the details of the Resideut's correspondence 
during that period brought under our notice, ull your late advices called our attention to 

the subject. 

38. That-the Rajah of Travancore himself, or any other individual in his situation, would 


Ahave broken his: connection with the Company on such a ground as this, we see no reaspr 
406, Li to 


ES 


No. 9. ° 
Letter from 
Court of Directors, 
20 Sept..180g; on 
Political State of 
the ‘lravancore 
“herritory, 


clearly separated from any question arising out of treaties between the two States; 


134 PAPERS RELATING TO 


to believe; and that he should have been of so weak a character, and should have retained > — 
aman so unprineipled and malevolent as Vallay Tomby, in an office which enabled him tor 
exercise despotic power, are circumstances to be lamented ; but that Minister does not seem ~ 

at first to have entertained any idea of refusing the payment of the subsidy ; and by what” 
process of inind, by what combined views of daring ambition and enmity to our Govern=— 
ment, passions by which he seems to have been powerfully influenced, his ferocious spirit was. 

led into formidable military preparations and hostile negociations, and thence to the desp 


rate game he at length ventured upon for independent authority, it must be impractica le 


to ascertain; but the treaty of 1805 ought not to be considered as responsible for all the | 


consequences flowing from his subsequent illegal assumption of powers, which belonged only 


to his Sovereign, and fram the daring wickedness with which he used those powers. In — 
fact, he appenrs to have been influenced by events, as they successively arose to his view, and 
to imagive that be was steadily actuated from the beginning only, or chiefly by the motive 


-of resistance to the additional subsidy, would be to form a conclusion which the natare of 


his character by no means warrants. [t was only after the return to%ndia of Lord Cornwallis, — 
who was supposed to favour a system of external policy different from that of the preced- 
ing Governor General, that the Dewan first thought of complaining of the treaty; the changes 
which afierwards took place, both in the Governments of Bengal and Madras, encou . 
him, according to the Indian manner, to renew his complaint; and we are sorry to observe, from’ 
his English letters, and circuunstances mentioned by Colonel Macaulay, that European or 
Portugueze intriguers may have contributed to mislead him ; but the rumours which were 


-circulated in the country about the time of the Vellore mutiny, the commotions of that 


time, and above all, the reports of a French invasion, and a new war between the Com 
and the Mahratia States, seem to have made a strong impression on his mind, and to have 
disposed bim to entertain, schemes of aggrandizement and resistance; and as the most 


-effectual means of success, to look to an alliance with the French, with whom, if he could 


have established a connection, it would be inconsonant to his character to suppose, that he 
would not have supplied the benefit of it to the establishment of his own power, rather than 
to the service of his master, ‘Lhe daring lengths to which he is capable of going in his 
schemes, and in the means of accomplishing them, have been exemplitied in some of the 
transactions already noticed, and receive a further illustration from his plan to assassinate | 
the European officers of the Subsidiary Force, previous to the attack upon that c son the 
goth of December; and from his attempt to instigate by the most atrockbits “uogueled 
calumnies, the Zemorin and other chieftains of that part of India, to rise in arms for the sub- 
version of the British power; a man of such flagitious dispositions never could have been 
safely trusted, nor can it be at all concluded, that without any plea like that of the new 
-subsidy, his bad passions would not have led him to the greatest extremities. ~The po 

whicb he at length exercised in the Travancore State, rendered his master a rand | ’ 
inconsistent with the rights of that Prince, and the engagements subsisting between 


aud the Company. ‘The personal character and conduct of the Dewan were nee 7 


doubt not that in the settlement, which there is reason to hope has long since taken” 
of the affairs of Travancore, you will have seen the necessity, in justice both to the 
-and the Company, of depriving the author of all the late disturbances, of the power « 
any mischief in future. 


go. With the Bajah himself, who does not seem to have taken personally any active part 
sin the hostile proceedings of his Dewan, and may rather have been intimidated by him into 
acquiescence, we still wish that a lenient policy may have been pursued... Tova pertin . 
refusal to fulfil the obligation of a solemn treaty deliberately formed, and a refusal for 
which no satisfactory or valid reason was 2h aoe our Government could not, in jus 
-to itself yield ; and when this refusal was followed by active hostility against us, it bee 
necessary Lo have recourse to the law of arms; but when our military power shall h: 
_prevailed, as we trust it will, in so unequal and unprovoked a contest, it is our wish 
the temperate and indulgent consideration, into which we should trom the first have been — 
anost ready to enter, of the subsidy stipulated by the treaty of 1805, may still have had — 
place. The Juminous and judicious view given in the letter addressed to you by he 
Supreme Government on the 23d of January, already noticed, of the. principles Shek 
should regulate the conduct af the Company towards the State of Travancore, both in the 4 
eCritical circumstances then existing, and for the maintenance of permanent. ions 
-between us and that State, exhibits in general the sentiments we entertain upon this subject, 
articularly the latter:branch of it, which respects the future connection of the two States. — 
3ut we are not prepared to admit, with the Governor General in Council, that if it ¢ 
che proved the revenues of Travancore were, after defraying all expences, adequate to 
payment of the additional subsidy, that .circumstauce would alone be sufficient reason | 
dusisting on the.continuance of the standard of 1805. We are, however, fully of opinion, — 
that complete reparation ought to be made by the Travancore State, for the insults offered 
to our Government by .the hostile attacks made upon the house and person of the 
Representative, and.upon.the Subsidiary Force at Quilon, and for the expence of the detach- — 
aments of troops, which .those measures obliged the Company, in self-detence, to march into 
‘Travancore, We ave of opinion too, that no concession should be made which + 
appear to the Travancore Government, or to the rest of India, te be the effect of. 
or intimidation; but that alter the honour of our Government has* been sufficiently vine 
dicated and secured, our object should be, by manly and liberal policy, to conciliate the 
dusting allachincut of the Travancore State; and that if the amount at which the subsidy 
“wus 


EAST INDIA AFFALRS. 135 


‘avas fixed by the treaty of 1805 should be found to interfere with this object, it ought on No 9. 


that account alone to be reduced. —— 
aye ; : : Letter from 
40. On the whole, although we must ever lament the necessity which has impelled our Court of Directors, 


Government to-have recourse to arms against the aggressions of the Travancore State, we o9 Sep. 1809; on 
awould hope, that the-events which have lately passed there, and our conduct towards it, will Political State of 
Jead to a permanent settlement of our connection with that country, and tend to preserve’ the ‘Travancore 
othe general tranquillity of India. Territory. 


We are, 
Your loving friends, 
(Signed) Cnas. Grant. J, Hupirston. 
Wa. Asteun. Rost. WintiaMs. 
-London, 29th Sept. 1S00. T. Metca.r. - GeorcGeE Smith. 
Jno. INGits. Geo. Miturrrt. 
Jno. JACKSON. W. Wicnram. 


G.A. Roninson. Jas. Parrison. 
Ri C. PLowpen. 


No. 10. 


Copy of the TREATY with the Rajah of Travancore, dated: «+ 
the 28th January 1793. 


(Copy ) / ‘ : 
A RTICLES of Agreement made and-entered into by the Honourable Major General No. 10. 

Robert Abercromby, President and Governor of Bombay, for and on behalf of the —— : 
Honourable United English East India Company, and their Successors, on the one part; Treaty (28 January 
and Gueswa Pilla, Dewan to his Highness the Kajah of Travancore, for and on behalt of 1793) with the 
his said Highness, and his Successors, on the other part; this 28th day of January of the /Jeb of Tra- 
English year 1793, viz. menene: 


That this agreement shall not affect or interfere with any agreements subsisting between 
the said Honourable Company and the said Rajah; and the said Rajah shall deliver to the 
said Company, between the 10th February 1794 and 10th April following, three thousand 
candies (of 560 pounds weight) of clean pepper, at the sate of ene hundred and _fifieen 
Bombay rupees for each candy, exclusive of two rupees customs for each; and shall further 
deliver a similar quantity (three thousand candies) annually, at the same price and at 
_ similar periods, for nine successive years, thatis, three thousand every year, until the 10th 
of April 1804 (English computation.) 


That of the pepper above stipulated to be delivered annually, two thousand five hundred 
-eandies shall be delivered at Quilon, and the remaining five hundred candies at the said 
Company’s warehouse at Anjengo, into the hands of such officers as the Company may 
appoint for the purpose of receiving it. 


That the said Rajah shall receive, in part payment for the said annual contract for 
pepper, the undermentioned articles, at the usual prices for which he has been debited ia 
former contracts ; two thousand stand of arms complete, one hundred candies of lead, three 
+hundred yards of scarlet broad-cloth superfine, one thousand five hundred yards of ditte 
fine, twenty-seven thousand five hundred yards of red purpet, two thousand yards of blue 
-purpet, five hundred yards of yellow purpet, five hundred yards of green purpet. 


That the balance due for the said annual provision of pepper shall be discharged in 
Bombay rupees; which balance, together with the warlike stores stipulated to be taken ir 
part payment, shall be made good between the 10th February and the 10th April of each 
sespective year that this agreement shall be in force, in like manner as the Rajah engages to 
deliver the pepper within those periods. 


That should the Rajah fail to deliver the quantity of pepper contracted for by this agree- 
ment, within the periods specified, he shall forfeit to the said Company fifty-seven rupees 
-and an half penalty, for each candy of pepper so deficient. In like manner, should the 
Company fail on their part, to make good to the Rajah the amount specified in the 
agreement, within the terms prescribed, they shull forfeit a penalty of double the suor 
so deficient. e = 


In witness of the foregoing agreement, Major General Abercromby and Gueswa Pilla 
have subscribed to two copies thereof, which have been mutually exchanged, and have affixed 
their seals, this 28th day of January 1793. 

(Signed) Robert Abercromby. 


48 PAPERS RELATING TO” 


iz «Copy of a ‘PARAGRAPH, 226, of-a Revenue LETTER, 
Governor in Council at. Fort St. George, to the Court of 1 
of the, East India Company, dated vist October 1807, 


EXTRACT REVENUE, LETTER from FORT ST. GEORGE, — 


~ dated 21st October 1807. 


RY 


ol 


Para. 226. 


; °E following “Extract of tie Report. of the Board of Revenue, com 


ries 14. satisfactory description of the beneficial changes which have occurred in 
“On the Revenve _—‘tBat province :— at) [yet orf} : - 
of Malabar. «When we consider the destruction-of troops, enormous expendite 
ond money, and miserable state of confusion, which until very lately rendere 
tai “source of constant segret aid anxiety, we-cannot help. co nlati 
: , “© Council, on the very happy change which the public measures have e 
Nitta. - -« bat few instanees have been exhibited of a.speedier and. happier transi 


- poverty, and enormous expendiuure of the public.money, to perfect trangu y, 
- opulence, and comparative economy.” | id hea 


e 


. rei geianci oh aie oo Sutst 
~[N>. 12.—Copy of a Letter from John Bebb, Esq..(a Director of 
_ Company), to the Court of ‘Directors, dated g1 May 1813; respe 
~ Proposition, submitted to the House of Commons, on the renewal 

‘Charter ;—Aaving been already printed, is uot here inserted.] 


} : 


= ? “ lk te a ne - 


EAST INDIA AFFAIRS. 137 


No. 13. 


opy of the 2d and 3d Paracrarus of the Military LETTER, 
from the Governor in Council at Fort St. George, to the Court of 
Directors of the East India Company, dated the ist of July 1812, 
relative to the late Occurrences at Quilon in Travancore. 


EXTRACT MILITARY LETTER from FORT ST. GEORGE, 
dated ist July 1812. 


Para. 2. 
Ww: avail ourselves of the opportunity afforded tous by the departure of His Majesty’s ship No. 13. 
Doris for Europe, to transmit to you the enclosed Copies of further Communications oe 


from the Resident in Travancore, received since the date of that letter, respecting the late Occurrences at 
currences at Quilon. We have also the honour to enclose Copies of Letters dispatched by Quilon in Travan- 
our order to the Resident, and to His Excellency the Commander in Chief. core. 
RSE eS 


- 3. We are happy to inform your Honourable Court, that a careful consideration of the 
Resident’s dispatches has confirmed us in our belief, originally grounded on the a 
f the Military Committee of Enquiry, laid before us by the Commanding Officer of the 
Subsidiary Force, that the conspiracy at Quilon will ultimately appear, as far as regards the 
s, to have been confined to a few bad characters in one battalion of the army, and that 
the inhabitants of Travancore were entirely unconcerned in it. We have however, deemed 
it proper to direct, that four companies of His Majesty's Royal Regiment shall be detached 
from Trichinopoly to Travancore, as a temporary arrangement, until it shall be determined 
m what garrison the European force intended to be stationed in that country can be 
permanently spared. The native troops in Travancore have also been ordered to be 
relieved. 


og Br, mie ive Os ale /. poe: tare 
: a ‘ : ay .- 
os , 


» 
. 


‘8 ohio a = = Pe a 
A aT Ta waned ate. ¢ 
et E ne Be eee ae 
' Py oN ES - eu 
’ - T1077 OT SB 50Ss) YG 
sz Ss , 3 Fa oe 3 
¢ O16t yhite Arclét_cas totap 
= 7 “< fot ‘ 


0 


errs FSS Isastey fap ashe is eoOnSTIUS 


, * pea .? 0 a 
ya 4 cide ties GI 2p tiee Ue ne at 
ba ene Ce aioe ety ; 
ws GF) tid S fb Gy et oi 0 ot Pee © 
. i : f , = 
smerny Vie odie REA AITA TMT Balrig Hi yo 
% = . . pa , a > . . 
Bi dycia ee: hb Or Reged fide wpe 
> . . . ; 
z — eee | J ie 
: a5 : eVebsletas ee tess path it 7 
~ <—~ . 
i @ - eco Mew J) tie ip tpregen Ke oathgite ey vr 
ee. * « “ . - 4 l 
Ld Pt) Ss eerie ee! Tc ea fad 3 
sts Bue - , 
. > 45. TES Coo eyes PP stew tis 2 te, 
» P, 
* ty a . a 
. ties : wed 
sd ities iu 
~ . ‘ . 
a . eit: ta tian aid ty eens Vim 
=e ; s wes e ie 4 & ect 
= “ ; TGaeees Si, vf? tear wats el 65 


tea To ee stipe 


ee | po a a ae 


; ‘ 
a 4 > ’ 
, ’ . . ' 
. ‘ 
= ’ > acai : > ~ ~~ 
‘ 
: 
. 
« 
2 4 - 
- 
* - —— ~ a2 Queer ° 
Ms - 
¥ x ; 
. . 


_ Rf : 
"2 Fi yelifiitese wi} itie “pe m' 


+ bessill bre en af an nes 


fe. 


‘ dee ~ ‘ ah 2 


a eee eee eee Ss tee ne 


- * 


_ EAST INDIA AFE 
ee ec 


ASP. 


eaten MDZ PiatisterunysZentrun 
taatsBibliothet Digitale Bibliothek 


Papers relating to East India affairs growth of hemp and cotton ; General 
revenues of India and Mr. Rickards's finance system on part of Salsette 
permanent settlement in the ceded and conquered provinces 


[London] [1813] 


2 Brit. 85 d-7#Beibd.4 
urn:nbnide:bvb:12-bsb10936856-7 


