This  is  a  digital  copy  of  a  book  that  was  preserved  for  generations  on  library  shelves  before  it  was  carefully  scanned  by  Google  as  part  of  a  project 
to  make  the  world's  books  discoverable  online. 

It  has  survived  long  enough  for  the  copyright  to  expire  and  the  book  to  enter  the  public  domain.  A  public  domain  book  is  one  that  was  never  subject 
to  copyright  or  whose  legal  copyright  term  has  expired.  Whether  a  book  is  in  the  public  domain  may  vary  country  to  country.  Public  domain  books 
are  our  gateways  to  the  past,  representing  a  wealth  of  history,  culture  and  knowledge  that's  often  difficult  to  discover. 

Marks,  notations  and  other  marginalia  present  in  the  original  volume  will  appear  in  this  file  -  a  reminder  of  this  book's  long  journey  from  the 
publisher  to  a  library  and  finally  to  you. 

Usage  guidelines 

Google  is  proud  to  partner  with  libraries  to  digitize  public  domain  materials  and  make  them  widely  accessible.  Public  domain  books  belong  to  the 
public  and  we  are  merely  their  custodians.  Nevertheless,  this  work  is  expensive,  so  in  order  to  keep  providing  this  resource,  we  have  taken  steps  to 
prevent  abuse  by  commercial  parties,  including  placing  technical  restrictions  on  automated  querying. 

We  also  ask  that  you: 

+  Make  non-commercial  use  of  the  files  We  designed  Google  Book  Search  for  use  by  individuals,  and  we  request  that  you  use  these  files  for 
personal,  non-commercial  purposes. 

+  Refrain  from  automated  querying  Do  not  send  automated  queries  of  any  sort  to  Google's  system:  If  you  are  conducting  research  on  machine 
translation,  optical  character  recognition  or  other  areas  where  access  to  a  large  amount  of  text  is  helpful,  please  contact  us.  We  encourage  the 
use  of  public  domain  materials  for  these  purposes  and  may  be  able  to  help. 

+  Maintain  attribution  The  Google  "watermark"  you  see  on  each  file  is  essential  for  informing  people  about  this  project  and  helping  them  find 
additional  materials  through  Google  Book  Search.  Please  do  not  remove  it. 

+  Keep  it  legal  Whatever  your  use,  remember  that  you  are  responsible  for  ensuring  that  what  you  are  doing  is  legal.  Do  not  assume  that  just 
because  we  believe  a  book  is  in  the  public  domain  for  users  in  the  United  States,  that  the  work  is  also  in  the  public  domain  for  users  in  other 
countries.  Whether  a  book  is  still  in  copyright  varies  from  country  to  country,  and  we  can't  offer  guidance  on  whether  any  specific  use  of 
any  specific  book  is  allowed.  Please  do  not  assume  that  a  book's  appearance  in  Google  Book  Search  means  it  can  be  used  in  any  manner 
anywhere  in  the  world.  Copyright  infringement  liability  can  be  quite  severe. 

About  Google  Book  Search 

Google's  mission  is  to  organize  the  world's  information  and  to  make  it  universally  accessible  and  useful.  Google  Book  Search  helps  readers 
discover  the  world's  books  while  helping  authors  and  publishers  reach  new  audiences.  You  can  search  through  the  full  text  of  this  book  on  the  web 


at|http  :  //books  .  google  .  com/ 


:^.;/.X//^ 


'^7 


^ 


THE   HISTORY 
OF   BRITISH   INDIA, 

BY 

MILL  &  WILSON. 

IN  NINE  VOLUMES. 
VOL.  VII. 


THE  HISTORY  OF 

BRITISH    INDIA. 

FROM  1805  TO  1835. 
By  HOKACE  HAYMAN  WILSON,  M.A.,  F.R.S. 

MBJIBBK  or  TBI  BOTAI.  AlIATIO  80CIBTT,   OF  THB  ASIATIC  SOCIBTIU  Qt  PAKIB,   BOOTOK,  AHO 

CAliCUTTA,  AVD  OF  TBI   OBIUTAL    BOCUTT  OF  OBKHANT  ;  Ot  TBI  IMFBllAl  ACADIMIM 

OF  ST.    PBTIBSBUBOB   AMD  TIXMNA  ;  OF  TBB  IIIFBBIAL  BOaiTT  OF  NATVBA1.I9T0 

OF  MOBOOW,    AND  OF  TBB  BOTAL    ACADUflBS  OF  BBBIIN   AND  MUNIOB  ; 

COBBB8FONDINO  MfMBBB  UF  TBB  ACADEMY  OF  FBANCB:  PB.  DB.  IN  TBB 

INITBBeiTT  OF  BBBFLAU;   MBD.DB.    IN  TBB  CNITKBf>ITT  OF 

MABBURO,  BTC.    BTC.;    AND    BODBN  PROFBSBOB  OF 

|tANi>CBIT  IN   TRB  DNITBBSITT  OF  OZFOBD 

IN    THREE    VOLUMES. 


VOLUME  1. 


LONDON: 
JAMES  MADDEN,  8,  LEADENHALL  STREET. 


M.DCCC.XLVIII. 


Lmm  OF  THE 
LELAND  STAf^FORD  JR.  UI\/I)/ER8ITY. 


a  'ozi^\ 


ADVERTISEMENT. 


When  I  coiisented  to  cany  a  new  edition  of 
Mill's  History  of  British  India  through  the  press,  I 
engaged  to  continue  the  History  to  the  date  at 
which  the  East  India  Company's  charter  was  last 
renewed.  The  engagement  was  somewhat  ill-con- 
sidered. It  was  acceded  to  under  an  anticipation 
that  the  task  could  be  accomplished  with  compara- 
tive facility,  as  a  residence  in  Bengal  during  nearly 
the  entire  interval  had  made  me  familiar  with  the 
general  course  of  the  events  which  had  occurred, 
and  some  of  which  I  bad  at  various  times  attempted 
to  record.  It  was  soon  evident  that  I  had  much 
miscalculated. 

However  lively  the  impression  which  had  been 
made  by  the  interesting  and  important  character  of 
the  transactions  I  had  witnessed,  I  felt  it  to  be  my 
duty,  before  undertaking  to  narrate  them,  to  consult 
all  the  available  authorities  of  an  original  and  au- 
thentic description  in  which  they  were  to  be  traced. 
Foremost  among  these  were  the  valuable  but  volumi- 


VI  ADVERTISEMENT. 

nous  Records  at  the  India  House ;  an  unreserved 
access  to  which  was  readily  granted  by  Sir  John 
Hobhouse,  the  President  of  the  Board  of  Controul, 
and  W.  B.  Bayley,  Esq.,  then  Chairman  of  the 
Court  of  Directors.  The  obligation  of  making  use 
of  this  privilege,  however  imperfectly,  has  caused 
an  amount  of  labour  and  expenditure  of  time  far 
exceeding  my  expectations. 

Beside  the  manuscript  volumes,  to  which  the 
great  bulk  of  the  Records  is  necessarily  confined, 
very  extensive  portions  of  them  have  been  occa- 
sionally printed  by  order  of  Parliament,  or  under 
the  authority  of  the  Court  of  Directors.  To  these, 
also,  it  was  necessary  to  refer,  and  the  reference  was 
not  effected  without  incurring  additional  trouble 
and  delay. 

The  third  and  last  class  of  authorities  to  which 
extensive  application  has  been  made,  consists  of  the 
published  accounts  of  persons  engaged  or  interested 
in  the  occurrences  which  they  have  related.  There 
is  a  great  body  of  contemporary  evidence  of  this 
description,  varying  in  merit  and  in  weight,  but 
exacting  attention  from  all  who  wish  to  obtain  an 
accurate  knowledge  of  the  origin  and  progress  of 
events.  The  perusal  in  more  or  less  detail  of  as 
many  publications  of  this  class  as  I  could  meet  with, 
has  contributed  to  retard  the  completion  of  my  task 
beyond  the  limits  within  which  I  had  trusted  that 
it  would  have  been  concluded. 


ADVERTISEMENT.  Vll 

I  have  thought  it  necessary  thus  to  account  for 
the  delay  which  has  occurred,  and  which  is  not  yet 
at  an  end.  It  has  been  occasioned  by  an  anxious 
wish  to  offer  to  the  public  an  historical  work  in 
which  they  may  place  some  trust.  Whether  that 
object  has  been  attained,  remains  to  be  determined ; 
but  the  desire  to  merit  confidence  will,  perhaps, 
be  accepted  as  a  sufficient  excuse  for  the  apparent 
tardiness  of  the  writer. 

H.  H.  Wilson. 

London^ 
26th  'Nixwmiher,  1844. 


CONTENTS. 


BOOK  I. 

From  the  Conclusion  of  Pbacb  with  thb  Mahrattas,  1805,  to 
THB  Rbnbwal  op  THB  East  India  Company's  Chabtbb,  1813. 

CHAPTER  I. 

Page 
General  View  o£  the  Political  State  of  India. — Relations  of 
the  Britbh  Government  with  the  Native  States. — Accessions 
of  Territory. — Protection  of  Shah  Alem. —  Bundelkhand, 
Sketch  of  its  History  and  Condition.— Native  Princes. — 
Mofiammedans, — Kino  op  Delhi. — Conduct  of  Prince  Je- 
hangir. — Nawab  op  Oude. — Vicious  Administration  of  the 
Principality. — Nizam  op  Hyderabad. — Discontent — Deter- 
mination of  the  British  Government  to  maintain  the  Alliance. 
— Career  of  Raja  Mahipat  Ram. — Death  of  Mir  Alem. — 
Hindus. — Mahrattas. — Peshwa. — Attempts  to  recover  his 
Political  Consideration. — Gaekwar. — Pecuniary  Embarrass- 
ment^.— British  Interference. — Settlement  of  Kattiwar. — In- 
trigues at  Baroda. — Raja  op  Berar. — Dissatisfaction. — Re- 
linquishment of  Sambhalpur. — Sindhia. — Pecuniary  Difficul- 
ties.— Decline  of  Power. — Quarrels  at  hb  Court. — Conduct  to 
Bhopal. — HoLKAR. — Exactions  from  the  surrounding  States. 
— Death  of  his  Nephew,  Kandi  Rao — of  his  Brother,  Kasi 
Rao. — Derangement. — Tulasi  Bhai,  Regent. — Amir  Khan. 
— His  Rise  and  Power. — Rajputs. — RanaopUdaypur,  Rajas 
OP  JoDHPUR  AND  Jaypur. — Coutcst  for  the  Hand  of  Krish- 
na Kumari,  Princess  of  Udaypur. — Mahratta  Extortion. — Ap- 
plication of  Jaypur  for  British  Interference — refused. — Policy 
of  Holkar  and  Sindhia. — Amir  Khan  joins  the  Rana. — Death 
of  the  Princess. — Other  Rajput  Princes. — Bikanbr,  Kota, 
BuNDi,  Macheri. — Jdts, — Raja  op  Bhurtporb. — Rana  op 
GoHUD. — Treaty  with  him  annulled. — Sikhs^  their  Origin  and 
Constitution. — Rise  of  Ran  jit  Sing. — Remarks I 


CONTENTS. 


CHAPTER  II. 


Page 


Sir  George  Barlow,  Governor-General — State  of  the  Fi- 
nances.— Retrenchments. — Supplies. — Judicial  and  Revenue 
Arrangements  for  Cuttack,  the  Doab,  and  Bundelkhand. — 
Revenue  Settlements  in  the  Ceded  and  Conquered  Provinces. 
— Separation  of  Judicial  and  Revenue  Functions  at  Madras. 
— Murder  of  Europeans  at  Vellore. — Arrival  of  the  Dra- 
goons.— Fort  retaken.— Military  Inquiry. — Disposal  of  the 
Prisoners. — Causes  and  Circumstances  of  the  Mutiny. — Its 
Origin  in  religious  panic  occasioned  by  military  Orders. — 
Similar  Alarms  at  Hyderabad,  Walajabad,  and  Nandidrug 
allayed  or  suppressed. — Lord  W.  Bentinck  and  Sir  John  Cra- 
dock  recalled. — Ultimate  Decision  of  the  Court  of  Directors.   1 06 

CHAPTER  lU. 

Proceedings  in  England. — Refusal  of  the  Directors  tocon- 
cur  in  the  Appointment  of  the  Earl  of  Lauderdale  as  Gpver- 
nor-General. — Sir  George  Barlow  recalled  by  the  King's 
sign-manual. —  Discussions  in  Parliament  and  with  the  Board 
of  Controul. — Lord  Minto  appointed  Governor-General. — 
Proceeding^  in  the  House  of  Commons. — Impeachment  of 
Lord  Wellesley  by  Mr.  Paull.— Papers  moved  for. — Charges 
relating  to  the  Nawab  of  Oude. — Nawab  of  Furruckabad. — 
Zemindar  of  Sasnee  and  others. — Proceedings  interrupted  by 
dissolution  of  Parliament — Renewed  by  Lord  Folkestone. — 
Impeachment  abandoned. — Condemnatory  Resolutions  nega* 
tived. — Merits  of  the  Oude  question. — Motion  for  an  Inquiry 
into  the  Assumption  of  the  Camatic  negatived. — Censure  of 
Lord  Wellesley 's  Policy  by  the  Court  of  Proprietors. — Ap- 
pointment of  a  Select  Committee  of  the  House  of  Commons. 
—Diminished  Import  Trade  of  the  Company 146 

CHAPTER  IV. 

Lord  Minto  Governor- General. — Sir  G.  Barlow  Governor 
of  Fort  St.  George. — Character  and  Policy  of  the  Governor- 
General. — Determination  to  establish  Order  in  Bundelkhand. 
— Description  of  the  Hilly  district  of  the  province. — Colonel 
Martindell  sent  against  Ajaygerh. — Affair  of  Rajaoli. — Ajay- 


CONTENTS.  XI 


gerh  surrendered. — Lakshman  Dawa  sets  off  to  Calcutta — 
leaves  it  again  suddenly. — His  Family  put  to  death  by  his 
Father-in-law. — Operations  against  Gopal  Sing. — Nature  of 
his  Incursions. — His  submission. — Storm  of  Kalinjar — re- 
pulsed.— Fortress  surrendered. — Treaties  with  the  Raja  of 
Rewa. — Settlement  of  Hariana. — The  Sikh  Chiefs  east  of  the 
Setlej  taken  under  protection. — Treaty  with  Ranjit  Sing. — 
Embassy  to  Peshawar. — Revolutions  of  Afghanistan. — Disas- 
trous Life  of  Shah  Shuja. — Return  of  the  Embassy. — Mission 
to  Sindh. — Revolutions  in  the  Government  of  that  country. — 
Failure  of  Negociation. — Intercourse  l^ween  France  and  Per- 
sia.— Ill-concerted  measures  of  the  British  Authorities. —  Sir 
Harford  Jones  sent  as  Ambassador  from  England*— Sir  John 
Malcolm  from  India. — Unsatisfactory  result  of  the  latter  Mis- 
sion.— Return  of  the  Envoy. — A  military  Expedition  to  the 
Gulph  projected  by  the  Bengal  Government. — Sir  Harford 
Jones  departs  from  Bombay — proceeds  to  Shiraz. — Prosecu- 
tion of  the  Mission  prohibited. — He  perseveres — reaches 
Tehran— concludes  a  preliminary  Treaty. — Disavowed  by 
the  Indian  Government. — The  Treaty  confirmed. — Diplomatic 
relations  with  Persia  taken  under  the  niianagement  of  the  Bri- 
tish Mmistry. — Sir  Gore  Ouseley  Ambassador. — Definitive 
Treaty  concluded — productive  of  little  advantage 169 

CHAPTER  V. 

Appointment  of  Sir  G.  Barlow  to  the  Government  of  Ma- 
dras— unacceptable  to  the  settlement. — The  state  of  popular 
feeling. — Commencement  of  agitation. — Case  of  Mr.  Sher- 
son. — Proceedings  of  the  Commission  for  the  Investigation  of 
the  Debts  of  the  Nawab  of  the  Carnatic. — Trials  of  Reddy 
Rao — his  Conviction. — ^his  Pardon  and  Death. — Affairs  of 
Travancore. — Disputes  between  the  Raja  and  the  Resident. — 
Enmity  of  the  Dewan — sets  on  foot  an  Insurrection — abet- 
ted by  the  Dewan  of  Cochin. — Troops  ordered  to  Travancore. 
— The  Resident's  house  attacked — ^his  escape. — Operations  of 
the  Subsidiary  Force. — Murder  of  Europeans  by  the  Dewan. — 
Army  sent  to  the  Province  under  Colonel  St.  Leger. — Storm 
of  the  Arambuli  Lines. — Defeat  of  the  Nairs  at  Quilon. — Ad- 
vance to  the  Capital. — Submission  of  the  Raja. — Flight  of  the 


Xll  CONTENTS. 

Page 
Dewan. — Sanctuary  violated. — Death  of  the  Dewau. — Seizure 

and -Execution  of  his  Brother. — The  body  of  the  Dewan  gib- 
bAed.— -  Sentiments  of  the  Bengal  Government. — Disorganised 
Condition  of  Travancore« — Administration  of  Affairs  by  the 
Resident  as  Dewan  under  the  Raja  and  his  Successors. — Re- 
storation of  prosperity. — Similar  system  and  results  in  Cochin. 
— Disputes  between  the  Governor  and  Commander-in-chief. — 
The  latter  refused  a  seat  in  Council  by  the  Court — his  dissa- 
tisfaction and  resigrnation. — Discontents  of  the  Officers  of  the 
Coast  Army — their  causes. — Tent  contract  abolished. — Rea- 
sons assigned  in  the  Quarter- Master-GeneraVs  Report  offen- 
sive to  Officers  commanding  Corps — demand  a  Court-martial 
on  Colonel  Munro. — The  Commander-in-chief  places  Colonel 
Munro  in  arrest. — Government  cancels  the  arrest. — General 
Macdowall  issues  a  General  Order  on  the  subject,  and  em- 
barks for  England — Counter  Order  by  the  Government. — 
Subsequent  severity. — Suspension  of  Major  Boles.— Effect 
upon  the  Officers. — Orders  of  the  Ist  of  May. — Violent  pro- 
ceedings at  Hyderabad. — Mutinous  Conduct  of  the  Garrison  at 
Masulipatam. — Threatened  march  of  the  Troops  to  Madras. — 
Firnmess  of  the  Government — Consequent  arrangements. — 
Test  proposed  to  the  European  Officers. — Appeal  to  the  Na- 
tive Troops — their  allegiance. — The  Garrison  at  Seringapa- 
tam  in  open  rebellion. — Colonel  Close  sent  to  Hyderabad. — 
Officers  of  the  Subsidiary  Force  sign  the  test. — their  example 
followed. — Arrival  of  the  Governor-General  at  Madras. — 
Courts-martial. — Sir  Samuel  Auchmuty  Commander-in-chief 
and  Member  of  Council. — Proceedings  in  England. — ^Warm 
Disputes  in  the  Court  of  Directors. — Officers  restored  to  the 
service. — Sir  G.  Barlow  finally  recalled 23^ 

CHAPTER  VI. 

Foreign  Policy  of  Lord  Minto's  Administration. — Invasion 
of  Berar  by  Amir  Khan. — A  force  sent  to  the  aid  of  the  Raja. 
— Amir  Khan's  defeat  by  the  Berar  troops. — Retires  before 
the  British. — Disputes  between  the  Peshwa  and  the  Southern 
Jagirdars. — Compulsory  adjustment. — Suppression  of  Piracy 
by  the  states  of  Wari  and  Kolapur.  — Expedition  against  the 
Pirates  of  the  Persian  Gulph. — Joasmis  —their  ferocity — De- 


CONTENTS.  Xlll 

Page 
stniction  of  Ras-al-Khaiina  and  other  Pirate  stations. ~  Expe- 
dition to  Macao. — Operations  against  the  French  and  Dutch 
Colonies  in  the  Indian  Seas. — Successful  Depredations  of  the 
French  Cruizers. — Expedition  against  Rodrigues — its  occupa- 
tion.— Descent  upon  Bourbon. — Garrison  of  Rodrigruez  rein- 
forced.— Second  descent  upon  Bourbon,  and  capture. — Naval 
Transactions  at  the  Isle  of  France. — French  frigates  in  the 
harbour  of  Grand  Port  attacked  by  the  English  squadron. — 
Destruction  of  the  English  vessels. —  Naval  actions  off  the 
Islands  between  the  blockading  ships  and  the  French  frigates. 
— Arrival  of  the  Armaments  from  Bengal  and  Madras. — 
Landing  of  the  forces  in  Grande  Baye. — March  to  Port  Louis. 
— Capitulation  with  the  French  Governor.—  Blockade  of  the 
Dutch  Islands. — Expedition  against  the  Moluccas. — Capture 
of  Ambojna— of  Banda—and  of  Temate. — Expedition  against 
Java— accompanied  by  Lord  Minto.— Difficulties  of  the  voy- 
age—overcome. — Former  operations. — Destruction  of  Dutch 
vessels  at  Gresik. — Measures  of  General  Daendels  and  of  his 
successor.  General  Jansens. — Arrival  of  the  fleet  in  the  Roads 
of  Batavia. — Landing  of  the  troops. — Occupation  of  Batavia. 
— Advance  to  Weltevreeden. — Strength  of  Fort  Comelis. — 
Assault* — March  of  Colonel  Gillespie's  column. — Surprise  of 
the  outwark.-*Defences  forced. — Explosion  of  a  Redoubt^ 
the  Fort  taken — ^the  Pursuit  and  Dispersion  of  the  Enemy. — 
Cheribon  and  Madura  occupied. -r-Final  defeat  of  General  Jan- 
gens. — Surrender  of  Java  and  its  Dependencies. — Mr.  Raffles 
appointed  Governor.— Colonel  Gillespie  Commander  of  the 
Forces. — Capture  of  Yodhyakarta. — Expedition  against  Pa- 
lembang. — Sultan  deposed. — Views  of  the  Court  of  Directors. 
— Beneficial  results  of  the  British  administration  in  Java.  ...  30? 

CHAPTER  VIL 

Return  of  the  Governor-General  from  Java. — Internal  Ad- 
ministration.— Indications  of  future  Hostilities. — Relations 
with  Hyderabad  and  Nagpore. — Misgovemment  of  Oude. — 
Interference  of  the  Government  of  Bengal;— Differences  be- 
tween the  Nawab  and  the  Resident. — The  latter  supported  by 
Lord  Minto. — Defects  in  the  Judicial  and  Revenue  Systems 
of  the  British  Government. — Mohammedan  and  latter  Hindu 


XIV  CONTENTS. 

Systems — Concentration  of  Functions. — Judicial  Officers. — 

Circumstances  counteracting  defective  Administration State 

of  Civil  and  Criminal  Justice. — Consequences  of  establishing 
Civil  Courts — multiplication  of  Suits — arrears  of  Decisions — 
no  effective  remedy  applied* — State  of  Criminal  Judicature — 
similar  arrears. — State  of  Police. — Classes  of  Robbers — preva- 
lence of  Dakoiti,  or  Gang  robbery — Atrocities  perpetrated.— 
Difficulty  of  Detection  and  Conviction. — Evils  of  excluding  Na- 
tive co-operation — attempts  to  recover  it — failures. — Superin- 
tendents of  Police  and  Special  Magistrates  appointed. — Em- 
ployment of  Informers. — Diminution  of  Dakoiti. — Revenue 
System — review  of. — Proprietary  right  of  the  Sovereign  not 
of  Hindu  but  of  Mohammedan  origin. — Doctrines  of  the  latter. 
— Notions  of  the  people. — Nature  and  extent  of  public  de- 
mand under  the  Hindus  and  Mohammedans  in  earlier  and 
later  times — from  whom  demanded. — Variety  of  Proprietary 
rights. — Village  Communities  —their  origin— legislation — co- 
lonisation—conquest.— Traces  of  property  extinguished  by 
the  exactions  of  the  Government,  and  Village  communities 
destroyed — ^in  some  provinces — not  in  all. — Variety  of  Orga- 
nization— different  rights  of  the  members — peculiarities  of 
constitution — general  identity. — Classes  of  tenants — ^perpetual 
— temporary. — The  Public  Revenue  how  realised. — Revenue 
Officers. — Head-men  of  Villages — modifications  of  the  office. 
— Function  of  Zemindar — degree,  of  his  proprietary  right — 
contingent  advantages — consideration  among  the  people. — 
Course  adopted  by  the  British  Government. — Permanent  Ze- 
mindari  Settlement  ordered  for  Madras. — Commencement  of 
Ryotwar  Settlement. — Principles  of  assessment  urged  by  Lord 
W.  Bentinck— abandoned  by  the  Government  of  Madras. — 
Village  settlements  formed. — Perpetual  settlement  at  Madras 
prohibited  by  the  Court  of  Directors. — Settlement  of  the  Ceded 
and  Conquered  Provinces  of  Bengal. — Commission  of  Inquiry 
— recommend  delay  of  a  permanent  assessment — recommend- 
ation disregarded  by  the  Government. — Expected  advantages 
of  permanency — not  realisable — illusory  nature  of  the  provi- 
gion — ^moderate  assessment  all  that  is  essential — principle  dis- 
countenanced in  England. — Permanent  Settlement  of  the  Ce- 
ded and  Conquered  Provinces  forbidden. — Regulations  for  the 
protection  of  the  Ryots. — House-tax — resistance  at  Benares — 


Page 


CONTENTS.  XV 

,  .  .  ...  ^**® 

repealed.— -ReligiouH  riot  at  Benares. — Missionaries  in  Bengal 

—established  at  Serampore — checked  by  the  Government. — 

Lord  M into's  encouragement  of  Oriental  Literature — interest 

in  the  College  of  Fort  William. — Financial  qierations. — Close 

of  Lord  Minto's  Administration 371 

CHAPTER  VIIL 

Embarrassed  Finances  of  the  Company. — Application  to 
Parliament  for  assistance. — A  Loan  granted. — Inquiry  into 
abuse  of  patronage. — Renewal  of  the  Charter. — Previous  Cor- 
respondence with  the  Board. — Demands  of  the  Court. — Pro- 
positions of  Mr.  Dundas — objections  of  the  Court— communi- 
cation suspended — ^revived. — Determination  of  Ministers  to 
open  the  Trade  with  India  resisted,  but  finally  acceded  to  by 
the  Company. — Claims  of  the  Outports. — Change  of  the 
Ministry. — Lord  Buckinghamshire  President  of  the  Board. — 
Consequences  of  delay. — Resistance  to  the  claims  of  the  Out- 
ports.— Appeal  to  Parliament. — Resolutions  proposed  by  Lord 
Castlereagh  in  the  House  of  Commons ;  by  Lord  Bucking- 
hamshire in  the  House  of  Lords. — Application  of  the  Com- 
pany to  be  heard  by  Counsel  granted. — Questions  at  issue — 
political — commercial. — Trade  with  India — and  with  China, 
peculiarities  of  the  latter — secured  to  the  Company. — Struggle 
for  the  Trade  with  India. — Arguments  of  the  Company  —  of 
the  Merchants. — Company  consent  to  take  off  Restrictions 
from  the  Export,  not  from  the  Import  trade. — Financial  and 
political  evils  anticipated  and  denied — attempt  to  substantiate 
them  by  evidence. — Opinions  of  Warren  Hastings  and  others 
respecting  the  unrestricted  admission  of  Europeans. — Exten- 
sion of  Trade — independent  resort  of  Missionaries,  &c. — 
Debates  in  the  House  of  Commons — first  and  second  Reso- 
lution carried — debate  on  the  third. — Debates  on  the  Report 
of  the  Committee.  —  Thirteenth  Resolution  adjourned  — 
debate  on  it  resumed — carried. — Other  clauses  suggested. — 
Bill  finally  passed  in  the  Commons. — Debates  in  the  House 
of  Lords — previous  discussions. — Bill  passed. — Proceedings 
in  the  Court  of  Proprietors — Charter  accepted. — Remarks...   492 

Appendix 581 


HISTORY 


BRITISH    INDIA. 


BOOK  I. 

FROM  THE  CONCLUSION  OF  PEACE  WITH  THE  MAHRATTAS, 
180S,  TO  THE  RENEWAL  OF  THE  EAST  INDIA  COMPANY'S 
CHARTER,  1813. 


CHAPTER  I. 


General  View  of  the  Political  State  of  India. — Rela-  book  i. 

CUAP.  !• 

Horn  of  the  British  Gove^mment  with  tJie  Native . 


States. — Accessions  of  Territory. — Protection  of  i^os. 
Shah  Alem. — Bundelkhand^  Sketch  of  its  History 
and  Condition. — Native  Princes. — Mohamme- 
dans/—  Kino  of  Delhi.  —  C(mduct  of  Prince 
Jehangir. — Nawab  of  Oude. —  Vicious  Admi- 
nistration  of  the  Principality. — Nizam  of  Hy- 
derabad. —  Discontent.  —  Determination  of  the 
British  Government  to  maintain  the  Alliance. — 
Career  of  Raja  Mahipat  Ram. — Death  of  Mir  Alem. 
— Hindus. — Mahrattas. — Peshwa. — Attempts  to 
recover  his  Political  Consideration. — Gaekwar. — 
Pecuniary  Embarrassments. — British  Interference. 
— Settlement  of  Kattiwar. — Inbngues  at  Baroda. — 

VOL.  I.  B 


2  HISTORY   OF   BRITISH   INDIA. 

BOOK  I.  Raja  of  Berar. —  Dissatisfaction. —  Relinquish^' 
^^^^'  '•  ment  of  Sambhalpur, — Sindhia. — Pecuniary  Diffi- 
1805.  cutties. — Decline  of  Power. — Quarrels  at  his  Court. 
— Conduct  to  Bhopal. — Holkar. — Ea;actions  from 
the  surrounding  States. — Death  of  his  Nephew^  Kan^ 
di  Rao^ — of  his  Brother^  Kasi  Rao. — Derange- 
ment.—Tulasi  Bhai,  Regent. — Amir  Khan. — His 
Rise  and  Power. — Rajputs. — Rana  of  Udaypur. 
Rajas  of  Jodhpur  and  Jaypur. — Contest  for  tlie 
Hand  of  Krishna  Kumariy  Princess  of  Udaypur. 
— Mahratta  EMortion. — Application  of  Jaypur  for 
British  Interference^ — refused. — Policy  of  Holkar 
and  Sindhia. — Amir  Khan  joins  the  Rana. — Death 
of  the  Princess. — Other  Rajput  Princes. — Bikaner, 
KoTA,  BuNDi,  Macheri.— Jats. — Raja  of  Bhurt- 
PORE. — Rana  of  Gohud. — Treaty  with  him  an- 
nulled.— Sikhs,  their  Origin  and  Constitution. — Rise 
of  Ranjit  Sing. — Remarks. 

The  recent  hostilities  between  the  British  Govern- 
ment of  India  and  the  chiefs  of  the  principal 
Mahratta  states  had  entirely  altered  the  relative 
position  of  the  contending  parties,  and  had  engen- 
dered the  elements  of  still  more  momentous  change. 
The  Mahrattas  had  occupied  through  the  latter 
half  of  the  eighteenth  century  the  chief  place 
amongst  the  native  states  of  India :  they  had  brought 
under  their  sway  the  widest  and  most  valuable 
portions  of  Hindustan,  and  had  possessed  them- 
selves of  the  name  and  person  of  the  Emperor  of 
Delhi.  On  the  first  occasion  on  which  they  had 
come  into  collision  with  the  British  arms,  they  had 
inflicted  upon  them  discomfiture  and  discredit ;  and 


POLICY   OP  THE  MAHRATTA   PRINCES. 


they  had  plunged  into  the  late  struggle,  strong  both  book  i. 
in  military  resources  and  reputation,  and  confident    ^"^^'  ^ 


that  they  should  rid  themselves  of  a  dangerous  and     isos. 
encroaching  rival.   The  result  had  disappointed  their 
hopes,  and  accelerated  the  aggrandisement  of  that 
power  which  they  had  trusted  to  overthrow. 

In  the  outset  of  the  contest,  native  opinion  had 
inclined  to  the  Mahrattas ;  the  close  of  the  war  had 
shaken  belief  in  their  superiority.  Still,  however, 
-nuch  of  the  prepossession  in  their  favour  survived 
their  reverses,  and  the  fiill  consequences  of  the  en- 
counter seem  to  have  been  but  imperfectly  appreciat- 
ed even  by  those  who  had  been  engaged  in  the  strife. 
Engrossed  by  the  care  of  providing  for  immediate 
pecuniary  embarrassments,  the  British  Government 
overlooked  all  political  considerations;  and,  in  its 
impatience  to  relieve  financial  pressure,  threw  away 
some  actual  and  some  prospective  advantages,  shrunk 
from  the  commanding  elevation  to  which  it  had 
been  raised,  and  by  unseasonable  moderation  dis- 
seminated doubts  of  its  vigour,  and  held  out  en- 
couragement to  future  aggression.  The  Mahratta 
leaders,  justly  ascribing  much  of  their  adversity  to 
internal  disunion,  misinterpreting  the  motives  of 
their  enemy's  forbearance,  and  fretting  under  the 
losses  and  indignities  they  had  sustained,  accustomed 
themselves  to  undervalue  the  resources  and  energies 
of  their  conquerors,  and  to  look  forward  to  some 
ftivourable  opportunity  of  repairing  their  reputation 
and  recovering  their  territory.  At  the  same  time, 
with  the  improvidence  inseparable  from  the  charac- 
ter of  Indian  princes,  they  set  on  foot  no  adequate 
preparations  for  the  realisation  of  their  purposes. 

b2 


4  HISTORY   OF   BRITISH   INDIA. 

BOOK  I.  Instead  of  profiting  by  the  experience  of  the  past, 
J^_^J__  and  the  respite  which  had  been  granted  to  them ; 
1805.  instead  of  husbanding  their  means,  consolidating 
their  power,  and  cementing  that  union  in  which 
alone  lay  their  safety,  they  wasted  their  strength  in 
a  petty  and  predatory  warfare  with  the  princes  of 
Bajputana,  or  in  intestine  dissensions ;  and  with  ter- 
ritories almost  depopulated,  revenues  utterly  ex- 
hausted, troops  wholly  disorganized,  and  mutual 
animosities  incurably  exacerbated,  they  again  pro- 
voked the  resentment  of  the  British  Government 
when  in  the  full  exercise  of  its  energies,  and 
awakened  to  a  clear  perception  of  its  true  interests 
and  of  those  of  Hindustan.  The  last  act  of  this 
extraordinary  drama  was  then  consummated.  The 
Marquis  of  Hastings  completed  what  Clive  had 
begun,  and  all  India  acknowledged  the  supremacy 
of  Great  Britain. 

As  some  time  intervened  before  the  predomi- 
nance of  the  British  power  throughout  India  was 
finally  established,  we  may,  for  the  present,  pause  to 
contemplate  the  political  condition  of  the  country 
at  the  period  at  which  the  narrative  recommences ; 
and  for  a  few  years  following;  so  as  to  form  a  correct 
notion  of  the  extent  of  British  dominion  and  au- 
thority, and  of  the  circumstances  and  objects  of  the 
principal  native  states.  We  shall  thus  be  better 
able  to  understand  the  character  of  those  transactions 
which  led  to  a  renewal  of  the  struggle,  and  to  the 
final  attainment  of  that  commanding  attitude  which 
the  British  Government,  after  repeated  proofs  of  for- 
bearance, was  at  last  compelled  to  assume. 

The  capture  of  Seringapatam  and  death  of  Tippoo 


BRITISH   POWER   IN   THE  SOUTH   OF   INDIA.  5 

Sultan,  in  1799,  put  an  end  to  all  fear  of  any  for-  book  i. 
midable  enmity  in  the  south  of  India.    Those  events  ^^^^^^^^ 


had  added  largely  to  the  Company's  territory  in  the  isos. 
Peninsulas  and  had  restored  the  principality  of 
Mysore  to  the  representative  of  its  former  Hindu 
Rajas,  on  conditions  the  avowed  intentions  of  which 
were,  the  entire  command  of  the  resources  of  the 
country  in  time  of  war,  and  a  general  controuling 
power  over  its  government  in  time  of  peace.  Tri- 
bute  under  the  denomination  of  subsidy  was  also 
imposed  upon  the  Raja,  and  provision  was  made  for 
appropriating  the  whole  of  the  revenue,  subject  to  a 
pension  to  be  paid  to  him  in  the  event  of  his  failing 
to  fulfill  his  obligations.*  The  Raja,  Krishna  Raja 
Udayavar,  was  a  minor,  and  the  administration  of 
the  affairs  of  the  state  was  intrusted  to  a  native 
minister  named  Pumia,  a  Brahman,  a  man  of  ability 
and  judgment,  who  distinctly  imderstood  the  position 
in  which  Mysore  was  placed,  and  its  entire  depend- 
ence upon  the  power  to  which  it  owed  its  existence. 
As  long  as  he  lived,  the  connexion  was  maintained 
in  a  spirit  of  sincere  submission  on  the  part  of  the 
inferior,  and  of  implicit  confidence  on  that  of  the 
superior ;  rendering  Mysore  virtually  an  integral  por- 
tion of  the  British  Indian  Empire. 

The  western  coast  of  the  Peninsula  was,  with  a 
few  exceptions,  British  territory.     At  the  southern 

'  By  the  Partition  Treaty  of  Mysore,  July  1709,  territory  yielding  an 
annual  revenue  of  1S,74,000  Cantarai  Pagodas  was  reserved  to  the  Mysore 
Raja.  To  the  Company  was  assigned  a  portion  that  was  valued  at  C.  Ps. 
7,77,000 ;  to  the  Nizam  lands  to  the  amount  of  C.  Ps.  6,07,000,  and  of 
C.  Ps.  2,6S,057  to  the  Peshwa.  The  shares  of  the  two  latter  were  sub- 
sequently transferred  to  the  Company. — Collection  of  Treaties  and  Engage- 
ments with  Native  Princes  and  States  of  Asia,  published  in  1812,  p.  441. 

'  Treaty  with  Mysore,  8th  July,  1709,  and  supplementary  treaties,  1803 
and  1807.^CoU.  of  Treaties,  pp.  454,  248,  S02. 


6  HISTORY   OF   BRITISH   INDIA. 

BOOK  I.  extremity,  the  petty  states  of  Cochin  and  Travan- 

core  were  governed  by  their  own  Rajas.      These 

1806.  princes  had  been  rescued  by  the  interposition  of  the 
British  arms  from  the  tyranny  of  Tippoo,  and  had 
agreed  to  pay  a  stipulated  subsidy  for  the  protection 
which  they  received.*  The  amount  had  however 
been  determined  without  an  equitable  regard  to  the 
advantages  for  which  it  was  an  equivalent,  or  to  the 
sources  from  which  it  was  derived.*  The  demand 
became  an  exaction,  and  the  payment  speedily  fell 
into  arrear.  A  perpetual  and  imdignified  inter- 
change of  requisition  and  evasion  ensued,  and  mu- 
tual dissatisfaction  was  the  unavoidable  result.  This 
was  more  especially  the  case  with  the  Raja  of  Tra- 
vancore,  as,  upon  the  plea  of  danger  from  the  designs 
of  France,  an  additional  subsidy  had  been  levied 
upon  him  subsequently  to  the  capture  of  Seringapa- 
tam ;  and,  as  he  neither  understood  nor  dreaded  the 
peril,  the  cost  of  arming  against  its  occurrence  was 
felt  to  be  both  onerous  and  unjust.  Discontent  and 
indignation  were  consequently  brooding  over  the 
councils  of  Travancore,  and  their  dictates  shortly 
afterwards  impelled  the  Raja  to  an  unavailing  effort 
to  throw  off  the  burden  under  which  he  laboured. 
Proceeding  along  the  Malabar  coast  towards  the 

'  The  Riga  of  Cochin  'was  made  to  pay  to  the  Company  a  lakh  of  rupees 
annually ;  treaty,  1791. — Collection  of  Treaties,p.  421.  An  agreement  was 
made  in  1788  with  the  R^ja  of  Travancore,  by  which  he  engaged  to  sub- 
sidize two  battalions  of  Sipahis.  In  1795,  he  agreed  to  maintain  con- 
stantly one  battalion.  This  was  extended,  in  1797,  to  three  battalions,  and 
one  company  of  European  artillery.  In  1805,  the  Raja  was  compelled  to 
pay  for  a  fourth  battalion. — Collection  of  Treaties,  pp.  174, 170,  283. 

'  The  gross  revenue  of  Cochin  was  estimated  at  five  lakhs  of  rupees,  from 
which  the  charges  of  collection  were  to  be  deducted.  The  tribute  was 
therefore  about  one-fourth  of  the  net  receipts.  The  total  revenues  of  Tra- 
vancore, in  1807,  were  estimated  by  the  Resident  at  twenty  lakhs  of  rupees : 
the  Company's  claim  was  nearly  eight  lakhs. — MS.  Records. 


BRITISH   POWER  IN   THE   SOUTH   OP   INDIA.  1 

north,  a  few  districts  of  limited  extent  were  subject  book  i. 
to  petty  Mahratta  chiefs,  feudatories  of  Poona :  and . 


Goa,  and  a  narrow  territory  around  it,  still  remained  i^o^. 
to  the  Portuguese :  as  amicable  relations  subsisted 
with  the  superior  states,  the  subordinate  character 
of  these  dependencies,  as  well  as  their  insignificance, 
divested  them  of  all  political  consideration.  Goa, 
indeed,  was  occupied  by  an  English  garrison.  Far- 
ther to  the  north,  the  coast  belonged  to  the  Gaek- 
war  or  ruler  of  Guzerat ;  whom  a  subsidiary  treaty, 
and  a  connexion  of  the  most  intimate  nature,  at- 
tached inseparably  to  the  interests  of  the  British 
Government.  Cutch,  the  adjacent  country  to  the 
west,  although  independent,  was  distracted  by  civil 
broils,  the  chief  parties  in  which  appealed  for  assist- 
ance to  the  Presidency  of  Bombay.  Sindh,  the 
boundary  province  of  India  in  this  direction,  was 
governed  by  independent  princes,  who  had  shewn 
themselves  disinclined  to  entertain  any  correspond- 
ence with  the  Company's  authorities.  They  exer- 
cised little  or  no  influence  upon  the  politics  of  India, 
as  their  situation  and  circumstances  restricted  their 
intercourse  in  a  great  degree  to  their  western  and 
northern  neighbours,  the  Baluchis  and  Afghans. 

The  whole  of  the  eastern  or  Coromandel  coast 
of  the  Peninsula  was  British,  with  the  exception 
of  a  small  tract  occupied  by  the  Danish  settle- 
ment of  Tranquebar.  The  Nawab  of  the  Camatic 
and  the  Raja  of  Tanjore  had  been  deprived  of 
territorial  revenue  and  political  importance,  and 
had  been  reduced  to  the  irrevocable  condition  of 
pensioners  of  the  East  India  Company.  The  pro- 
vince of  Cuttack,  which  under  the  Mahratta  govern- 


8  HISTORY   OF  BRITISH   INDIA. 

BOOK  I.  ment  of  Berar  had  intercepted  the  communication 
between  the  Presidencies  of  Bengal  and  Madras, 
1805.  now  served  to  connect  them ;  as  it  had  been  taken 
from  the  Raja  in  the  late  war,  and  had  been  perma- 
nently annexed  to  the  Company's  possessions,  which 
now  extended  along  the  whole  line  of  coast  from 
the  Gulph  of  Manar  to  the  Delta  of  the  Ganges. 
Important  additions  to  the  British  dominions  in 
Hindustan  had  been  effected  by  treaty  or  conquest 
during  the  administration  of  Marquis  Wellesley. 
At  its  commencement,  the  Bengal  Presidency  was 
bounded  on  the  north  by  the  course  of  the  Gandak 
river,  and  by  the  confluence  of  the  Ganges  and  the 
Jumna.  The  cession  of  Gorakhpur  by  the  Nawab 
Vizir,  Sadat  Ali,  carried  the  boundary  across  the 
Gandak  to  the  foot  of  the  mountains  of  Nepal; 
and  the  transfer  of  the  lower  Doab,  Furruckabad, 
and  Bareilly,  by  the  same  prince,  extended  the 
British  authority  over  the  country  of  the  Bohillas. 
The  victorious  career  of  Lord  Lake  rescued  the 
upper  provinces  of  the  Doab  from  Mahratta  spo- 
liation, and  brought  them  as  far  as  to  the  north* 
west  of  Delhi  under  British  influence  or  rule.  Of 
the  conquests  on  the  west  bank  of  the  Jumna, 
a  narrow  strip  of  land  alone  had  been  retained; 
but  its  value  was  more  than  commensurate  with 
its  extent,  as  it  included  the  important  cities  Agra, 
Mathura,  and  Delhi, — the  first  celebrated  for  its 
reliques  of  Mogul  magnificence,  the  second  sanc- 
tified by  the  religious  veneration  of  the  Hindus, 
and  the  third  selected  in  every  age  of  the  history 
of  India  for  the  capital  of  those  Hindu  and  Mo- 
hammedan monarchs  who  aspired  to  the  universal 


BRITISH   POWER   IN   HINDUSTAN.  9 

sceptre  of  Hindustan.     Along  with   this  imperial  book  i. 
city  the   British   became  possessed  of  the  person 


and  family  of  the  representative  of  the  fallen  dy-  1805. 
nasty  of  Timur,  the  venerable  Shah  Alem,  alike 
distinguished  by  his  descent  and  his  misfortunes. 
Indebted  to  the  British  in  the  dawn  of  life  for 
safety  and  support,  he  had  passed  through  man- 
hood to  old  age  amidst  an  unvarying  succession 
of  danger,  tumult,  treachery,  and  disaster,  and  was 
happy  to  end  his  days  in  peace  and  security  under 
the  shelter  of  his  early  friends.  However  trifling  the 
accession  to  the  real  power  of  the  victors  which  might 
be  thought  to  accrue  from  their  holding  in  their 
hands  the  titular  sovereign  of  Hindustan,  and  al- 
though the  charge  was  not  unattended  by  circum- 
stances of  anxiety  and  embarrassment,  yet  that 
the  keeping  of  the  person  of  Shah  Alem  was  not 
devoid  of  political  value  might  be  inferred  from 
the  eagerness  vrith  which  the  prize  had  been  dis- 
puted by  military  adventurers  both  Mohammedans 
and  Hindus,  and  by  the  weight  which  chieftains 
the  most  lawless,  and  princes  the  most  powerful, 
still  attached  to  an  order  or  a  grant  that  bore 
the  seal  of  the  emperor,  even  though  the  docu- 
ment conferred  but  a  nominal  title  to  the  honours 
or  possessions  which  it  purported  to  bestow.  Shah 
Alem  himself  was  an  object  of  general  sympathy, 
from  the  injuries  or  indignities  which  he  had  un- 
dergone from  his  ovni  rebellious  servants  or  his 
Mahratta  allies ;  and  the  respectful  and  benevolent 
treatment  which  he  experienced  from  his  new  guar- 
dians contrasted  favourably  vrith  the  conduct  pur- 
sued  towards  him    by   their   predecessors.     There 


HISTORY 


BRITISH    INDIA. 


BOOK  I. 

FROM  THE  CONCLUSION  OF  PEACE  WITH  THE  MAHRATTAS, 
1805,  TO  THE  RENEWAL  OF  THE  EAST  INDIA  COMPANY'S 
CHARTER,  1813. 


CHAPTER  I. 


General  View  of  tlie  Political  State  of  India. — Rela-  book^i. 
tions  of  the  British  Government  with   tJw  Native . 


States. — Accessions  of  Territory. — Protection  of  ^^os. 
Shah  Alem. — Bunddkhand^  Sketch  of  its  History 
and  Condition. — Native  Princes. — Mohamme- 
dans.'—  King  of  Delhi.  —  Ccmduct  of  Prince 
Jehangir. — Nawab  of  Oude. —  Vicious  Admi- 
nistration  of  the  Principality. — Nizam  of  Hy- 
derabad. —  Discontent.  —  Determination  of  the 
British  Government  to  maintain  the  Alliance. — 
Career  of  Raja  Mahipat  Ram. — Death  of  Mir  Alem. 
— Hindus. — Mahrattas. — Peshwa. — Attempts  to 
recover  his  Political  Consideration. — Gaekwar. — 
Pecuniary  Embarrassments. — British  Interference. 
— Setde^nent  of  Kattiwar. — Intngues  at  Baroda. — 

VOL.  I.  B 


r 


12  HISTORY   OF   BRITISH   INDIA. 

BOOK  I.  supremacy,  acknowledged  the  new  Raja.  In  the 
'  reign  of  Mohammed  Shah,  however,  Bangash  Khan, 
1805.  the  Afghan  governor  of  Allahabad,  fell  suddenly 
upon  Chatrasal  with  an  overwhelming  force,  and 
dispossessed  him  of  his  dominions.  Chatrasal  had 
recourse  to  the  Mahrattas,  who  under  the  first 
Peshwa,  Baji  Rao,  were  at  this  time  advancing 
slowly  through  Kandesh  and  Malwa  to  Hindus- 
tan. The  opportunity  of  establishing  their  ascen- 
dancy in  Bundelkhand,  which  was  afforded  by  the 
application  of  the  Raja,  was  promptly  embraced; 
and  Baji  Rao  with  a  large  force  surprised  and 
defeated  Bangasli  Khan,  who  was  glad  to  escape 
with  his  life.  The  Mohammedan  yoke  was  now 
thrown  off  for  ever,  but  one  not  less  oppressive 
was  imposed,  in  the  domination  of  the  Mahrattas. 
In  the  first  instance  they  replaced  Chatrasal  in  his 
principality;  but  upon  his  death,  which  happened 
not  long  afterwards,  the  Peshwa,  whom  he  had 
adopted  as  a  son,  succeeded  by  virtue  of  that  adop- 
tion to  one-third  of  the  territory:^  the  other  two- 
thirds  were  equally  divided  between  the  two  sons 
of  Chatrasal;  one  of  whom,  Hirdi  Sah,  became 
Raja  of  Panna,  the  other,  Jagat  Sah,  of  Jetpur.* 

'  The  Mahratta  records  assert  that  this  disposition  of  his  Raj  was  the 
spontaneous  effect  of  the  Riga's  gratitude. — Grant  Duff,  Hist,  of  the 
Mahrattas,  i.  515.  It  is  more  probable  that  the  cession  was  the  price  of 
the  Peshwa's  assistance,  as  intimated  in  the  Seir  Mutakherin,  i.  282.  In 
the  memoirs  of  Amir  Khan  it  is  stated,  that,  after  the  expulsion  of  the 
Afghan,  Chatras&l  adopted  the  Peshwa,  and  at  once  divided  his  Raj  into 
four  parts,  of  which  he  retained  one,  and  apportioned  the  other  three  be- 
tween the  Peshwa  and  his  sons.  Govind  Pandit  was  nominated  manager 
of  the  Peshwa's  share,  which  included  S&gar,  Jhansi,  and  Kalpi,  or  a 
line  of  country  in  the  centre  of  the  province  from  the  Nerbudda  to  the 
Jumna,  by  which  the  Mahrattas  could  readily  march  from  the  Dekhin  to 
the  Doab. — Mem.  of  Amir  Khan,  55. 

*  The  Riga  of  Panna,  and  the  Rig'as  of  Ajaygerh,  Charkari,  Bgawar, 
Jetpur,  and  Sarila,  are  respectively  descended  from  these  princes. 


ORIGIN    OF  THE   NAWABS   OF   BANDA. 


13 


It  was  a  condition  of  the  arranffement  made  in  book  i. 

^  THAP.   I. 

favour  of   the   Peshwa,   that    the   government   of. 


Poona  should  guarantee  to  the  descendants  of  i^os. 
Chatrasal  the  portions  of  the  inheritance  set  apart 
for  his  sons.  The  stipulation  was  for  some  time 
faithfully  observed;  the  sons  of  Chatrasal  enjoyed 
their  portions  in  peace,  and  parcelled  them  at  their 
death  amongst  their  posterity.  Their  example  was 
imitated  by  their  successors,  subdivisions  were  in- 
finitely multiplied,  and  Bundelkhand  was  filled  with 
a  swarm  of  petty  Rajas  too  weak  to  defend  them- 
selves against  Mahratta  aggression,  and  too  turbulent 
to  refrain  from  those  mutual  hostilities  by  which 
their  weakness  was  aggravated :  the  state  of  confu- 
sion and  anarchy  into  which  the  province  was  thrown 
by  the  intestine  divisions  of  its  rulers,  offered  it  as  a 
tempting  bait  to  military  adventure ;  and  a  follower 
of  Sindhia,  Ali  Bahadur,  was  induced  to  avail  him- 
self of  the  favourable  opportunity. 

Ali  Bahadur^  was  a  Sirdar  of  some  repute  in  the 
service  of  the  Peshwa  when  he  was  dispatched  by 
Nana  Fumavez,  the  minister  of  Poona,  with  a  body 
of  troops  to  co-operate  with  Madhoji  Sindhia  in 
his  incursion  into  Hindustan.  He  bore  an  efficient 
part  in  the  operations  which  gave  Delhi  and  Shah 
Alem  to  Sindhia,  but  was  not  altogether  satisfied 
with  the  requital  which  his  exertions  had  received. 
Ali  Bahadur*,  therefore,  quitted  Sindhia,  and  at  the 

>  The  father  of  Ali  Bahadur,  Shamshir  Bahadur,  was  the  son  of  the 
Peshwa  Bigi  Rao,  a  Brahman,  by  a  Mohammedan  woman.  Agreeably  to 
the  ancient  Hindu  law,  he  was  of  the  caste,  which  in  this  case  was  equi- 
Talent  to  the  religion,  of  his  mother ;  a  characteristic  illustration  of  the 
laxity  of  manners  of  the  Mahratta  court,  and  of  Hindu  indifference  to  re- 
ligious creeds. 

'  According  to  Malcolm,  Ali  Bahadur  separated  from  Sindhia  upon 


14  HI8T0RT   OF  BRITISH   INDIA. 

BOOK  I.  instigation  of  Himmat  Bahadur,  who  was  the  mili- 

tary  leader  and  spiritual  head  of  a  large  body  of 

1805.  armed  Gosains,  combining  the  characters  of  reli- 
gious vagrants  and  mercenary  soldiers,  and  who  had 
acquired  some  territory  in  Bundelkhand,  he  marched 

A.  D.  1790.  into  the  province  with  a  considerable  force,  and  in  a 
few  years  reduced  under  his  authority  the  greater 
part  of  the  territories  which  had  been  distributed 
amongst  the  unworthy  descendants  of  Chatras4L 
The  stronghold  of  Kalinjar  alone  resisted  his  im- 
petuosity, and,  after  a  siege  of  two  years,  he  died  in 

A.  D.  1802.  camp  before  its  walls.*  He  left  two  sons,  Shamshir 
Bahadur,  and  Zulfikar  Ali.  The  former  at  the 
date  of  his  father's  death  was  at  Poona :  the  latter, 
who  was  an  infant,  was  thereupon  raised  to  the  prin- 
cipality by  his  uncle  Ghani  Bahadur ;  but  Shamshir 
Bahadur  speedily  arrived  to  vindicate  his  claim  to 
the  succession,  put  his  uncle  to  death,  and  assumed 
the  sovereignty  over  his  father's  conquests.  He  was 
not  long  able  to  maintain  his  authority. 

The  exchange  of  territory  accomplished  by  the 
Peshwa  was  a  genuine  exemplification  of  Mahratta 
diplomacy,  for  it  transferred  to  the  British  Govern- 
ment the  trouble  of  enforcing  claims  of  questionable 

the  adTftDce  of  the  latter  to  Delhi. — Central  India.  Grant  Duff  states  the 
separation  to  hare  taken  place  after  the  capture  of  Delhi. — Hist.  Mahr. 
ill.  75.  The  memoirs  of  Amir  Khan  (p.  86)  assert  that  he  invaded  Bun- 
delkhand by  command  of  the  Peshwa.  He  no  doubt  professed  to  act  as 
tiie  Peshwa's  oflker,  and  hoisted  the  Zari  Patka  or  regal  standard  of 
Poona. 

*  Ali  Bahadur,  to  erince  his  determination  not  to  relinquish  the  siege  until 
the  capture  of  the  fortress,  caused  a  house  to  be  built  near  the  fort  for  his 
residence.  The  Kiladar,  not  to  be  surpassed  in  braTado,  sent  him  a  pre- 
sent of  some  mango-seeds  to  sow  in  the  garden  to  be  attached  to  the  new 
edifice,  with  an  intimation  that  he  might  hope  to  take  Kalinjar  when  the 
seeds  should  have  grown  to  trees,  and  the  trees  should  have  borne  fruit.^- 
Pogson* s  Bundelas,  p.  123. 


POLICY  OF  THE  PESHWA.  15 

validity,  and  granted  to  them  districts  over  which  booki. 
the  court  of  Poena  had  never  exercised  actual  sove-  ' 
reignty.  The  cessions  were  taken  chiefly  from  the  1805. 
recent  conquests  of  Ali  Bahadur,  whose  right  had 
neither  become  confirmed  by  time  nor  by  the  recog- 
nition of  the  subjugated  people ;  and  whose  posses- 
sions, although,  inasmuch  as  they  had  fallen  to  a 
subject  and  officer  of  the  Peshwa,  they  might  be 
considered  as  in  some  degree  dependent  upon  the 
head  of  the  Mahratta  state,  yet  had  never  acknow- 
ledged such  dependence,  nor  contributed  in  any 
manner  to  his  power  or  resources.  The  attempt  of 
Shamshir  Bahadur  to  establish  himself  in  the 
country  which  his  father  had  conquered  was  as 
much  opposed  to  the  pretensions  of  the  Peshwa,  as 
to  the  claims  of  the  English  founded  upon  them, 
and  he  was  consequently  treated  as  the  enemy  of 
both.  His  father's  friend  and  coadjutor,  the  Gosain 
Himmat  Bahadur,  foreseeing  the  inability  of  Sham- 
shir Bahadur  to  resist  this  combination  against  him, 
speedily  made  terms  with  the  British,  and  joined 
their  forces  on  their  advance  into  Bundelkhand. 
After  an  ineffectual  show  of  resistance,  Shamshir 
Bahadur  was  content  to  desist  from  opposition,  and 
to  accept  a  pension  for  himself  and  for  his  family, 
with  permission  to  reside  at  Banda.^  Himmat  Ba- 
hadur soon  after  died ;  his  armed  bands  were  dis- 
missed upon  the  return  of  peace,  and  his  descend- 
ants were  settled  upon  a  Jagir  in  the  Doab.*  So 
far,  little  difficulty  was  found  in  the  introduction  of 

*  The  titular  Nawab  of  Banda  is  at  present  Zulfikar  Ali,  the  brother  of 
Shamshir  Bahadar,  who  resides  near  Banda,  and  receires  a  pension  of  four 
lakhs  of  rupees. — Bengal  and  Agra  Gazetteer,  1841,  vol.  ii.  part  2,  p.  283. 

'  Sekandra,  in  the  district  of  Cawnpore.    Ibid.  p.  287. 


16  HISTORY   OF  BRITISH   INDIA. 


BOOK  I.  British   authority   into   those  portions  of  Bundel- 
khand  which  were  nearest  to  the  Jumna  and  the 
1805.     division  of  Allahabad. 

The  establishment  of  a  government  in  Bundel- 
khand  that  proclaimed  order  and  insisted  upon  obe- 
dience was,  however,  no  easy  task.  The  feuds  of 
the  numerous  petty  Rajas,  and  the  depredations  of 
the  Mahrattas,  had  filled  the  country  with  military 
adventurers,  few  of  whom  had  other  means  of  sup- 
porting themselves  and  their  followers  than  levying 
contributions  on  the  peaceable  inhabitants,  and 
plundering  those  who  resisted  their  exactions.  Nor 
did  they  respect  the  new  acquisitions  of  the  Com- 
pany ;  and,  as  these  had  been  left  imperfectly  guard- 
ed by  the  precipitate  dismissal  of  the  irregular  bat- 
talions which  during  the  war  had  been  taken  into 
British  pay,  and  by  the  improvident  reduction  of  the 
regular  force  below  the  necessity  for  its  services,  the 
leaders  of  the  marauding  bands  were  long  suifered 
to  disturb  the  tranquillity  of  the  country,  and  pre- 
vent its  return  to  order  and  good  government.  The 
inhabitants  themselves,  a  bold  and  resolute  race, 
habituated  to  the  use  of  arms,  and  unaccustomed  to 
legal  controul,  were  little  inclined  to  submit  to  civil 
jurisdiction  or  fiscal  regulations ;  and,  when  unable  to 
resist  the  enforcement  of  the  laws  or  the  collection 
of  the  revenues,  they  deserted  their  villages  and 
augmented  the  ranks  of  the  banditti.  Where  this 
was  not  the  case,  they  not  unfrequently  entered  into 
a  compact  with  the  predatory  leaders  to  defraud  the 
state  of  its  dues,  by  paying  to  them  a  sum  less  than 
the  public  demand,  and  receiving  in  return  an  ac- 
quittance for   the  whole.     With   this  evidence  of 


PORTS  IN  BUNDELKHAND.  17 

their  having  been  compelled  to  pay  their  revenue,  book  i. 
they  claimed  exemption  from  farther  payment,  alleg- 


ing, with  sufficient  plausibility,  that  a  Government,  ^®^- 
which  could  not  defend  them,  could  not  claim  ful- 
filment of  their  obligations,  and  pleading  the  impos- 
sibility of  their  paying  double  the  amount  at  which 
they  were  assessed.  The  plea  was  admitted  until  its 
collusive  origin  was  detected,  and  the  refusal  to 
grant  exemptions  on  this  account  tended  to  put  a 
stop  to  the  fraud ;  but  not  until  a  loss  of  revenue 
had  been  sustained,  the  amount  of  which  would 
have  economically  defrayed  the  expense  of  a  protect- 
ing military  force.  Both  the  marauding  chiefs  and 
the  refractory  villagers  derived  support  in  their 
resistance  to  Government  from  the  numerous  small 
forts  with  which  the  province  was  studded :  at  the 
time  of  its  occupation  there  were  not  fewer  than 
one  hundred  and  fifty  within  the  limits  of  the  Com- 
pany's acquired  territory,  the  greater  proportion  of 
which  were  eventually  demolished,  but  not  without 
opposition. 

Amidst  the  many  strongholds  which  were  erect- 
ed in  Bundelkhand,  two  were  remarkable  for  their 
position  and  strength.  These  were  Ajaygerh  and 
Kalinjar.  They  were  both  in  the  hands  of  adven- 
turers who  had  risen  to  power  by  the  usual  methods 
of  military  rapine  and  violence,  and  who,  by  their 
own  armed  adherents,  or  the  marauding  hordes  to 
whom  they  aiforded  shelter,  spread  desolation  and 
alarm  through  the  adjacent  country.  A  vigorous 
effort,  early  made,  might  have  planted  the  British 
standard  on  their  walls  with  little  difficulty ;  but  as 
it  was  the. policy  of  the  Government  to  conciliate, 

VOL.  I.  c 


18  HISTORY   OF   BRITISH   INDIA. 

BOOK  I.  where  to  suppress  and  overawe  would  be  attended 
.  with  expense,  it  was  determined  in  the  councils  of 

1806,  Calcutta  that  "  a  certain  extent  of  dominion,  local 
power,  and  revenue  would  be  cheaply  sacrificed  for 
tranquillity  and  security  within  a  more  contracted 
circle."  It  was  argued,  that  "  it  was  not  to  be  appre- 
hended that  the  furtive  depredations  of  roving  ban- 
ditti could  be  supposed  to  have  intimidated  the 
military  power  which  had  overthrown  the  combined 
force  of  the  Mahratta  confederacy,  and  that  there 
was  every  reason  to  believe  that  the  concessions 
which  were  proposed  were  not  calculated  to  excite 
a  renewal  of  the  disorders  by  which  they  had  been 
obtained."^  Upon  these  principles,  falsified  as  they 
were  by  the  history  of  all  past  ages,  and  opposed  to 
the  opinions  and  recommendations  of  the  principal 
civil  and  military  functionaries  and  of  the  com- 
mander-in-chief,* the  occupants  of  Ajaygerh  and 
Kalinjar  were  left  in  possession  of  their  fortresses ; 
and  to  them'  and  to  other  usurping  chiefs  the  Go- 
vernment granted  sunnuds,  formally  recognising  and 
confirming  their  right  of  occupancy,  upon  conditions 
of  general  submission  and  allegiance.  In  like  man- 
ner, but  upon  more  legitimate  grounds,  the  descend- 
ants of  Chatrasal,  who  still  retained  portions  of  their 
patrimony,  were  confirmed  in  their  possessions,  but 

*  MS.  Records.     Proceedings  of  Bengal  Government,  10th  July,  1806. 

'  Lord  Lake  in  a  letter  to  the  Government,  recorded  the  17th  Jaly,  1806, 
expressed  his  conviction,  that,  until  Ajaygerh  and  Kalinjar  were  in  pos- 
session of  the  Government,  it  would  be  impossible  to  maintain  peace  in 
Bundelkhand.     Events  fully  corroborated  the  justice  of  bis  prediction. 

'  Lakshman  Dawa,  the  Kilad&r  of  Ajaygerh,  was  allowed  to  keep  his 
fort  for  two  years  upon  payment  of  a  small  annual  tribute,  and  to  hold  the 
district  adjacent  in  perpetual  farm.  Darya  Sing  Chaub^,  the  Kilad4r  of 
Kalinjar,  was  confirmed  in  the  occupancy  of  that  fort  and  the  adjacent  dis- 
trict ;  8th  December,  1806. 


RAJAS   OF   BUNDELKHAND.  19 

their  promise  of  allegiance  was  not  to  entitle  them  book  i. 
to  protection ;  and  so  far  was  the  doctrine  of  non-  ___LL 


interference  carried,  that  they  were  suffered  to  de-  isoe. 
cide  by  the  sword  those  disputes  amongst  themselves, 
to  which  the  complicated  questions  of  proprietary 
right  to  lands  that  had  repeatedly  changed  masters 
could  not  fail  to  give  rise.  It  was  not  until  a  change 
of  administration  in  Calcutta  had  taken  place  that 
"  it  was  deemed  essential,  not  only  to  the  preserva- 
tion of  political  influence  over  the  chiefs  of  Bun- 
delkhand  and  its  consequent  advantages,  but  also  to 
the  dignity  and  reputation  of  the  British  Govern- 
ment, to  interfere  for  the  suppression  of  intestine 
disorder,  by  compelling  that  submission  which  it  had 
till  then  been  found  impracticable  to  conciliate  or 
command."  * 

The  western  portion  of  Bmidelkhand  was  dis- 
tributed among  the  Rajas  of  Dattea,  Tehri,  and 
Sampthar.  They  were  descended  from  the  ancient 
Rajas.  They  were  acknowledged  by  the  British  as 
independent  princes,  and  were  bound  to  them  by 
treaties  of  amity  and  alliance.  No  submission  was 
required  from  them,  and  care  was  taken  to  avoid  any 
obligation  to  defend  them  against  foreign  aggression. 
They  remained,  consequently,  many  years  exposed 
to  Mahratta  insolence  and  spoliation,  and  were  re- 
duced to  the  verge  of  annihilation,  when  the  course 
of  events,  and  altered  political  views,  brought  them 
finally  within  the  pale  of  British  protection. 

Such  were  the  principal  accessions  to  the  terri- 
tory of  British  India  during  the  administration  of 

•  Proceedings  of  Bengal  Goverameot,   8th  September,  1807.     Lord 
Minto  had  recently  assumed  charge  of  the  Government. 

c2 


20  HISTORY   OF   BRITISH    INDIA. 


BOOK  I.  Marquis  Wellesley,  and  the  position  in  which  it  was 

_^^^^1^  placed  at  the  close  of  that  of  Sir  G.  Barlow  with 

1806.     relation  to  some  of  the  neighbouring  princes.     The 

situation  and  circumstances  of  the  more  important 

native  states  it  will  now  be  necessary  to  describe. 

The  great  distinction  of  the  native  ruling  powers 
was  two-fold.  They  were  either  Mohammedan  or 
Hindu.  The  latter  comprised  several  varieties,  and 
were  mainly  distinguishable  as  Mahrattas,  Rajputs, 
Jats,  and  Sikhs. 

Although  extensive  and  populous  territories  still 
acknowledged  the  sway  of  some  of  the  descendants 
of  the  Mohammedan  conquerors  of  India,  yet  their 
political  power  was,  in  every  instance  of  any  import- 
ance, extinct;  and,  with  one  or  two  exceptions  of 
little  note  or  influence,  they  were  either  directly  or 
indirectly  dependent  upon  the  British  Government. 
They  were  its  pensioners,  or  its  subsidiary  allies :  the 
former  compelled  to  forego  all  the  attributes  of  sove- 
reignty, except  an  empty  title ;  the  latter  obliged  to 
sheath  their  swords  for  ever,  and  rely  for  defence 
upon  troops  whom  they  alienated  their  dominions 
to  pay,  but  over  whom  they  held  no  command.  At 
the  head  of  the  former  class  was  the  Great  Mogul 
himself,  the  descendant  and  representative  of  Timur- 
lang. 

The  actual  occupant  of  the  throne  of  Delhi  did 
not  long  survive  his  transition  from  a  rigorous  to  a 
rfespectful  state  of  captivity.  Shah  Alem  died  on 
the  18th  of  December,  1806.  He  was  succeeded 
by  his  eldest  surviving  son,  who  Jiook  the  title  of 
Shah  Akbar  the  Second.  The  father  had  experi- 
enced the  misfortunes  inseparable  from  a  powerless 


THE   KING   OF   DELHI.  21 

sceptre  too  severely  to  regret  its  resignation  into  book  i. 
hands  able  to  wield  it  with  vigour :  the  son,  although 


no  stranger  to  distress  and  peril,  anticipated  from  I807. 
the  indulgence  or  indifference  of  his  protectors  a 
greater  share  of  real  power  than  it  was  convenient 
or  safe  to  permit  him  to  exercise.  His  attempts  to 
break  through  the  limits  prescribed  to  him  were  for 
some  time  after  his  accession  frequent  and  persever- 
ing ;  but  they  were  for  the  most  part  of  little  con- 
sideration, except  as  paving  the  way  for  pretensions  of 
a  more  ambitious  tendency,  and  they  were  checked 
without  much  trouble  or  the  exhibition  of  severity/ 
On  one  subject  alone  it  was  necessary  to  act  with 
energy;  and  the  manifestation  of  power  and  will, 
which  was  then  called  for,  terminated  the  aspira- 
tions of  Akbar  the  Second  to  "become  a  king  in 
more  than  name. 

The  King  of  Delhi  had  several  sons :  of  these, 
the  eldest  was  considered  to  be  entitled  to  the  desig- 
nation of  heir-apparent,  agreeably  to  the  laws  of  suc- 
cession upheld  by  the  British  Indian  Government ; 


'  A  principal  object  of  his  migesty*8  ambition  was  the  presentation  of 
Khelats,  or  honorary  dresses,  to  the  princes  of  Hindustan,  and,  above 
aU,  to  the  Governor-General.  As  the  acceptance  of  such  a  compliment  is 
an  admission  of  inferiority,  it  was  of  course  declined.  Having,  however, 
obtained  leave  to  send  an  agent  to  Calcutta  to  represent  to  the  Government 
matters  of  public  and  private  interest.  Shah  Akbar  endeavoured  to  carry 
the  point  of  the  khelat  by  a  little  ingenuity.  His  envoy  was  instructed  to 
present  to  Lord  Minto  an  old  cloak,  which  the  king  himself  had  worn,  as 
a  mark  of  personal  regard  ;  but  he  vms  to  contrive  to  do  this  at  a  public 
audience,  when  the  present  would  have  assumed  the  character  of  an  hono- 
rary distinction  conferred  upon  the  Governor-General  by  the  King  of  Delhi. 
Tlie  device  was  easily  seen  through,  and  as  easily  frustrated :  the  cloak 
was  thankfully  accepted  as  a  private  gift,  but  the  bearer  was  compelled  to 
transmit  it  through  the  unal  channel  of  communication,  through  the  office 
of  the  Persian  secretary.  Such  were  the  strange  vicissitudes  of  fortune, 
that  the  Great  Mogul  was  reduced  to  the  necessity  of  trying  to  trick  the 
chief  functionary  of  a  trading  company  into  the  acceptance  of  the  greatest 
honoar  in  native  estimation  which  it  was  in  his  power  to  bestow  I 


22  HISTORY   OF   BRITISH   INDIA. 


BOOK  I.  but,  influenced  by  his  favourite  queen,  Akbar  Shah 
J^ll^^^l^  strove  pertinaciously  to  obtain  the  recognition  of  his 
1808.  third  son,  Mirza  Jehangir,  of  whom  she  was  the 
mother,  in  that  capacity.  Although  willing  to  with- 
hold from  the  eldest  son  the  immediate  assumption 
of  the  title  which  it  considered  as  his  birthright, 
the  Government  of  Bengal  refused  to  gratify  the 
wish  of  the  king ;  and  obliged  him,  on  one  occasion, 
to  cancel  and  counteract  honours  and  privileges 
which  he  had  granted  to  Mirza  Jehangir  as  indica- 
tions of  a  purpose  to  raise  him  to  the  rank  of  heir- 
appaxent.*  Although  obliged  to  give  way  for  a 
season,  the  king,  unable  to  resist  female  blandish- 
ments and  tears,  resumed  his  project ;  and  the  sub- 
ject of  debate  might  have  long  continued  to  estrange 
him  from  his  European  advisers,  had  not  the  rashness 
and  presumption  of  the  prince  given  occasion  to  the 
British  Government  to  act  decisively,  and  remove 
Mirza  Jehangir  from  Delhi  altogether. 

Mirza  Jehangir,  having  been  empowered  by  the 
injudicious  liberality  of  his  mother  to  take  into 
pay  a  body  of  armed  retainers,  occasioned  so  much 
discomfort  and  alarm  within  the  palace  by  the 
turbulence  which  he  encouraged  and  the  excesses 
of  which  he  partook,  that  his  parents  were  at 
last  convinced  of  the  necessity  of  subjecting  him 
to  some  controul,  and  the  king  was  prevailed  upon 
to  allow  the  Company's  Sipahis  to  mount  guard  at 

*  These  were,  1,  the  use  of  the  AfUlbi,  a  flat  circular  parasol,  carried 
by  an  attendant,  not  over  the  head,  but  on  the  side  of  a  person,  or  palan- 
kin,  which  is  next  the  sun;  2,  the  Tapach,  a  sUte  cushion ;  and,  3,  the 
Nalki,  open  state  palankin.  They  were  confen^  in  full  Durbar,  with 
the  customary  solemnities.  By  desire  of  the  Government  the  AMbi  was 
discontinued,  and  the  use  of  the  other  articles  extended  to  all  the  princes, 
so  as  to  deprive  them  of  any  specific  significance. 


PRINCE  JEHAN6IR.  23 

the  palace  gates.    A  guard  was  accordingly  stationed  ^2??/" 
at  the  outer  gates,  when  the  followers  of  Jehangir . 


took  up  a  menacing  position  at  the  inner  gateway,  180»- 
and  insisted  that  the  Sipahis  should  be  withdrawn. 
The  British  Resident,  Mr.  Seton,  advancing  to  ex- 
postulate with  them,  was  fired  at  and  narrowly  es- 
caped being  shot,  as  the  ball  struck  the  cap  of  a 
soldier  who  was  close  by  his  side.  The  Sipahis 
were  then  ordered  to  take  forcible  possession  of 
the  inner  gates ;  and  after  a  short  conflict,  in  which 
some  of  the  assailants  were  wounded,  and  several 
of  their  opponents  were  killed,  the  gates  were 
carried,  and  the  followers  of  the  prince  were  dis- 
persed. The  prince  gave  himself  up  to  the  Re-24thJuiy. 
sident,  and  was  sent  a  state  prisoner  to  Allahabad, 
where  he  resided  until  his  death,  abandoning  all 
hopes  of  succession  to  a  titular  crown  and  passing 
his  days  in  indolence  and  indulgence.*  The  king 
gradually  ceased  to  exhibit  outwardly  any  concern 
for  his  fate,  and  abstained  from  all  endeavours  to 
interfere  with  the  disposal  of  the  throne,  or  to  ac- 
quire a  greater  portion  of  authority  than  it  was 
thought  fit  to  intrust  him  with:  this  resignation 
was  rewarded  by  an  increase  of  his  pension,  which 

>  He  was  at  first  lodged  in  the  fort  of  AJIahabad,  but  was  afterwards 
removed  to  a  building  that  had  been  a  Mohammedan  mausoleum,  part  of 
the  monument  of  Sultan  Khosni,  without  the  city.  The  author  saw 
him  here  in  1820.  He  was  allowed  considerable  personal  liberty,  and 
was  treated  with  as  much  consideration  as  was  compatible  with  his 
security.  He  seemed  to  be  cheerful  and  reconciled  to  his  situation,  and 
was  said  to  have  both  the  means  and  the  inclination  to  forget  political  dis- 
appointments in  personal  enjoymeot.  He  was  a  man  of  small  stature  and 
delicate  features,  of  a  pleasing  though  very  dark  countenance,  and  of  ele- 
gant manners.  He  woi:e  no  turban  nor  any  covering  on  his  head,  but  let 
his  long  black  hair,  which  shewed  symptoms  of  more  than  ordinary  care 
bestowed  upon  it,  hang  full  upon  his  shoulders.  It  was  impossible  not  to 
feel  some  sympathy  for  his  humiliation,  although  there  was  nothing  in  his 
character  or  conduct  to  inspire  respect. 


24  HISTORY   OF   BRITISH   INDIA.     . 

BOOK  I.  had  been  promised  conditionally  by  Marquis  Welles- 
'  ley,  and  was  granted  by  Lord  Minto.* 
1806.  A  prince,  second  only  to  the  King  of  Delhi  in 
Mohammedan  estimation,  and  far  superior  to  that 
sovereign  in  wealth  and  power,  the  Nawab  of  Oude, 
was  connected  with  the  British  Government  by  a 
subsidiary  alliance.  The  precise  nature  of  the  con- 
nexion will  have  been  made  known  by  the  ample 
details  and  discussions  relating  to  it  inserted  in  the 
preceding  pages.  For  all  objects  of  exterior  policy 
the  Nawab  was  a  nonentity,  and  even  in  his  interior 
administration  he  was  expected  to  refer  questions 
of  any  moment  to  the  consideration  of  the  British 
Resident,  and  to  adopt  no  measures  of  importance 
without  the  concurrence  of  the  Governor-General. 
The  reigning  Nawab,  Sadat  Ali  Khan,  was  far  from 
easy  under  the  bonds  which  attached  him  to  the 

'  The  original  pension  was  fixed  at  76,500  rupees  a  month,  to  be  pro- 
vided for  out  of  the  revenues  of  certain  lands  in  the  district  of  Delhi  set 
apart  for  that  purpose ;  and  a  promise  was  made,  that  the  allowance  should 
be  increased  when  the  funds  admitted  of  it.  The  extent  of  the  increase 
was  not  specified.  In  1809,  the  revenues  of  the  assigned  territory  conti- 
nued still  short  of  the  pension,  but  it  was  determined  to  increase  the  latter 
to  one  lakh  of  rupees  per  month,  of  which  7000  rupees  were  to  be  appro- 
priated to  the  heir-apparent.  —  6ovemor-General*s  Minute,  17th  June, 
iS09.  Other  augmentations  have  been  since  made,  making  the  allowance, 
including  stipends  to  members  of  the  fBxailj  both  at  Delhi  and  Benares, 
fifteen  lakhs  of  rupees  (150,000/.)  per  annum. — Bengal  and  Agra  Gazetteer, 
ii.  part  .2.  362.  His  migesty  has  been  long  urgent  for  a  farther  increase, 
upon  the  plea  that  the  revenues  of  the  assigned  lands  have  improved,  but 
**  it  was  never  proposed  either  to  limit  the  stipends  by  the  amount  of  the 
^*  produce  of  the  territory,  or  to  augment  them  to  an  extent  equal  to  the 
**  revenue  which  the  territory  might  eventually  yield :  the  obligation  which 
**  the  British  Government  had  imposed  on  itself  was  that  of  providing 
**  adequate  means  for  the  support  of  the  king  and  his  household  in  a  man- 
**  ner  suitable  to  the  condition  in  which  he  was  placed,  while  in  policy  it 
*'  was  inexpedient  that  the  provision  granted  should  exceed  an  amount  suf- 
"  ficient  for  that  purpose.** — Minute  quoted  by  Captain  Sutherland.  The 
same  authority  states,  that,  if  the  civil  and  military  charges  upon  what 
may  be  possibly  meant  by  the  assigned  lands  were  deducted  from  their 
revenue,  little  would  remain  for  the  payment  of  the  stipend  of  the  King  of 
Delhi.  — Sketches  of  the  Kelations  between  the  British  Government  of 
India  and  Native  States;  by  Captain  J.  Sutherland,  Calcutta,  1S3S. 


NAWAB   OF   OUDE.  25 

British ;  but  he  had  been  raised  by  them  to  the  book  i, 
throne,  and,  being  of  a  timid  and  inactive  character,    ^"^'''  ^ 


could  scarcely  have  maintained  his  dignity  without  isoe. 
the  support  of  his  allies.  Even  under  their  guar- 
dianship he  lived  in  constant  dread  of  domestic 
intrigue,  and  was  perpetually  haunted  by  unfounded 
suspicions  that  his  nearest  relatives  were  plotting 
against  his  throne  and  his  life.*  His  chief  grati- 
fication was  the  accumulation  of  treasure ;  and  the 
curtailment  of  his  revenues,  consequent  upon  the 
enforced  alienation  of  a  valuable  portion  of  his 
territory  in  commutation  of  the  subsidy,  was  the 
main-spring  of  his  dissatisfaction  with  the  relations 
in  which  he  stood  to  the  Government  of  Bengal. 
He  felt  aggrieved,  also,  by  the  immunity  from  transit 
duties  claimed  by  trading  boats  on  the  Granges  where 
it  formed  the  boundary  of  Oude,  under  passes  from 
the  Company's  custom-offices  on  the  opposite  bank, 
and  agreeably  to  a  commercial  treaty  into  which  he 
had  reluctantly  entered.  The  interference  of  the 
Resident  was  not  unfrequently  a  source  of  mortifica- 
tion to  him.  So  far  had  his  discontent  proceeded, 
that  he  renewed  to  Sir  G.  Barlow  the  proposition 
he  had  made  to  Lord  Wellesley,  to  transfer  the  ma- 
nagement of  his  dominions  to  his  eldest  son  and 
make  a  pilgrimage  to  Mecca.  When,  however,  the 
acquiescence  of  the  Government  was  expressed,  the 
project  was  apparently  abandoned,  as  the  proposal 
was  never  repeated.     In  his  personal  expenditure 

^  His  own  brothers,  Mirza  Mehdi  and  Shah&mat  Ali,  were  accused  by 
him  of  having  instigated  attempts  to  procure  his  assassination.  The 
charges  were  investigated  by  the  Resident  under  orders  from  the  Govern- 
ment, and  were  proved  to  be  void  of  any  foundation.  To  appease  the 
fears  of  the  Nawab,  the  princes  were  obligerl  to  leave  Lucknow,  and 
take  up  their  residence  at  Patoa  in  the  Company's  territories. 


26  HISTORY   OF   BRITISH   INDIA. 

BOOK  I.  Sadat  Ali  was  mes^ly  parsimonious,  and  the  amount 
^^^^'  '*  of  the  public  revenue  was  more  than  adequate  to 
1807.  the  public  disbursements.  The  landholders  were 
nevertheless  exposed  to  the  systematic  extortion  of 
contractors,  to  whom  the  Nawab  farmed  the  assess- 
ments, and  whom  he  authorised  to  levy  their  de- 
mands by  the  most  violent  and  oppressive  means.* 
Their  exactions  were  as  systematically  resisted,  and 
the  Zemindars  became  hal)ituated  to  refuse  pay- 
ment even  of  what  was  justly  claimable,  unless 
compelled  by  superior  power.  Their  villages  were 
not  unusually  fortified,  and  they  resided  in  mud 
forts  which  were  not  easily  captured  by  the  un- 
aided military  of  the  Nawab.  In  this  emergency 
it  became  necessary  to  have  recourse  to  the  subsi- 
diary force,  and  the  Company's  battalions  were  em- 
ployed to  reduce  refractory  landholders  and  collect 
the  revenue.  As  obvious  objections  to  such  a  duty 
existed,  the  aid  of  the  troops  was  always  granted 
with  reluctance;  another  subject  of  grievance  to 
the  Nawab,  who  considered  himself  entitled  to  com- 
mand the  services  of  a  force  which  he  virtually 
paid.  The  evil  was  not  so  serious  in  the  early  part 
of  the  reign  of  Sadat  Ali  as  it  subsequently  became, 
and,  upon  the  whole,  the  province  of  Oude  was  in 
a  peaceable  and  improving  condition ;  while  the 
character  and  situation  of  the  reigning  prince  en- 

'  The  contractora  rarely  benefited  by  their  bargains,  as  S4dat  Ali  was 
well  rersed  in  the  art  of  squeezing  the  sponge  when  it  had  done  its  office. 
As  soon  as  the  contractors  were  thought  to  be  sufficiently  gorged,  complaints 
against  their  oppression,  which  were  never  wanting,  were  readily  listened  to, 
and  they  were  seized  and  imprisoned  until  they  had  poured  into  the  Nawab's 
treasury  the  whole  or  greater  portion  of  their  spoils.  Their  incarcera- 
tion depended  upon  their  tenaciousness  of  the  booty.  In  1807,  the  Resi- 
dent stated  there  were  fourteen  farmers  of  the  revenue  in  prison  in  Luck- 
now,  some  of  whom  had  been  confined  for  years. — MS.  Records. 


THE   NAWAB   OF  HYDERABAD.  27 

sured  his  entire  subservience  to  the  political  views  book  i. 

1    .  n      1         -Tk    •    »    t      r>t  CHAP.  I. 

and  interests  of  the  Bntish  Government.  


Another  native  Mohammedan  sovereign,  Sekan-  ^8<>6. 
dar  Jah,  titular  Nizam,  Subahdar,  or  viceroy  of  the 
Pekhin,  possessed  of  equally  extensive  territories, 
was  also  a  subsidiary  ally  of  the  Company.*  The 
alliance  was  more  distasteful  to  him  than  to  the 
Vizir ;  and  his  capricious  and  violent  temper,  and  the 
frontier  position  of  his  country  in  contiguity  to  in- 
dependent states,  rendered  the  preservation  of  the 
political  relations  which  had  been  established  with 
him  a  subject  of  solicitude  and  apprehension.  He 
had  succeeded  to  the  principality  upon  the  demise 
of  his  father  Nizam  Ali,  in  1803,  without  opposi- 
tion, through  the  support  of  the  British  authorities ; 
by  whose  interposition  the  menaced  competition  of 
one  of  his  brothers,  who  enjoyed  much  more  exten- 
sive popularity  with  the  nobles  and  people  of  Hy- 
derabad, was  prevented.  The  sense  of  gratitude  for 
this  obligation  was  soon  obliterated  by  the  conscious- 
ness of  loss  of  independence ;  and  the  ill-concealed 
discontent  of  the  Nizam  gave  courage  to  many  of 
his  followers  to  organize  a  system  of  opposition  to 
the  British  councils,  and  still  further  estrange  the 
mind  of  their  master  from  the  connexion :  they 
even  contemplated  its  dissolution,  and  persuaded  the 

1  By  the  treaty  with  the  Nizam,  dated  12th  October,  1800,  the  subsidized 
force  was  fioally  fixed  at  eight  battalions  of  Sipahis,  or  eight  thousand 
firelocks,  and  two  regiments  of  cayalry,  or  one  thousand  horse,  with  their 
complement  of  gnns,  European  artillerymen,  lascars,  and  pioneers.  For 
the  payment  of  this  force  the  territories  acquired  by  the  Nizam  under  the 
treaty  of  Seringapatam,  13th  March,  1792,  and  tliat  of  Mysore,  22nd  June, 
1700,  were  given  back  to  the  Ck>mpany,  with  the  exception  of  some  dis- 
tricts north  of  the  Tiimbhadra  river,  for  which  Adoni  and  others  to  the 
south  of  it  were  exchanged :  the  annual  revenues  of  the  whole  were 
estimated  at  twenty-six  lakhs  of  Kanterai  pagodas,  about  874,000/.— 
Collection  of  Treaties,  p.  188. 


28  HISTORY   OF   BRITISH   INDIA. 

BOOK  I.  Nizam,  and  perhaps  credited  it  themselves,  that  it 

CHAP.  X.  *^  *^ 

was  practicable  to  form  a  combination   with   the 

1806.  Mahrattas  by  which  the  British  might  be  humbled, 
and  perhaps  expelled  from  Hindustan.  These  sug- 
gestions gratified  the  enmity  and  flattered  the  pride 
of  the  Nizam;  but  he  was  too  fondly  addicted  to 
low  and  sensual  indulgence,  too  irresolute  in  pur- 
pose and  contracted  in  intellect,  to  be  capable  of 
prosecuting  a  dangerous  design  with  the  steadiness, 
determination,  and  foresight  indispensable  to  its  suc- 
cess. Fortunately  also  for  the  ultimate  preservation 
of  his  throne,  his  prime  minister,  Mir  Alem,  who 
had  grown  old  in  the  service  of  the  state,  and  had 
"  been  an  actor  in  many  of  the  great  events  which 
had  occurred  in  the  Peninsula  during  the  reign  of 
the  late  Nizam,*  was  well  aware  of  the  relative 
strength  of  the  British  and  Mahratta  powers,  and 
accurately  appreciated  his  sovereign's  situation.  He 
knew,  in  fact,  that  the  government  of  Hyderabad 
subsisted  only  as  long  as  it  remained  under  British 
protection,  and  that,  the  moment  such  protection 
should  be  withdrawn,  the  principality  would  be  de- 
fenceless against  Mahratta  ambition,  and  would,  at 
no  remote  period,  fall  under  their  yoke ;  he  there- 
fore sedulously  advocated  British  influence  at  the 
court  of  Hyderabad,  and  was  in  requital  supported 


*  Mir  Alem  was  first  employed  in  1789  on  a  mission  to  Lord  Com- 
wallis,  and  afterwards  accompanied  the  Nizam*s  army  to  Seringapatam, 
where  he  conducted  the  negociations  for  peace.  In  1794  he  was  deputed 
to  Poona,  but  failed  in  his  negociation.  In  1798  he  negociated  with  the 
British  Resident  the  treaty  with  the  Nizam,  and  commanded  the  army  which 
joined  the  British  troops  in  the  capture  of  Seringapatam.  Some  time  after 
his  return  he  fell  into  disgrace,  and  was  unemployed  between  1800  and 
1803.  In  1804,  upon  the  death  of  Azim  ul  Omra,  the  prime  minister,  and 
at  the  recommendation  of  the  British  Resident,  he  was  appointed  to  that 
office.     He  died  in  the  66th  year  of  his  age. 


ENFORCEMENT   OF   THE  ALLIANCE,  29 

by  that  influence  against  the  effects  of  his  master's  book  i. 
caprice  and  displeasure. 


Notwithstanding  the  efforts  of  Mir  Alem  and  of  I807. 
several  of  the  most  respectable  members  of  the 
court  of  Hyderabad  to  preserve  unimpaired  the 
continued  friendship  of  the  British  Government,  the 
conduct  of  the  Nizam  so  manifestly  threatened  its 
forfeiture  and  the  dissolution  of  the  alliance,  that 
even  Sir  George  Barlow  deemed  the  occasion  such 
as  to  justify  avowed  interference.  Mir  Alem  was 
in  danger  of  assassination,  and  obliged  to  seek  shel- 
ter with  the  Resident :  secret  communications  were 
opened  with  Sindhia  and  Holkar :  all  appointments 
of  influence  and  trust  were  conferred  upon  individ- 
uals notoriously  inimical  to  the  British  connexion, 
and  considerable  bodies  of  armed  men  were  in 
course  of  assemblage  at  Hyderabad.  It  became  a 
question  whether  the  menaced  separation  should  be 
anticipated,  or  prevented;  whether  the  connexion 
should  be  spontaneously  relinquished,  or  its  continu- 
ation should  be  authoritatively  perpetuated.  The 
conclusion  was,  that  it  should  be  maintained  at  all 
hazards.  **The  alliance  with  Hyderabad,'*  it  was 
argued,  "  could  not  be  dissolved  without  subverting 
the  foundations  of  the  British  power  and  ascendancy 
in  the  political  scale  of  India,  and  without  becoming 
the  signal  and  instrument  of  the  downfall  of  the 
remaining  fabric  of  our  political  relations.  If  the 
subsidiary  force  were  withdrawn,  the  territory  alien- 
ated for  its  support  would  be  required  to  be  restored ; 
and  the  power  and  resources  which  the  British 
Government  had  a  right  to  demand  for  its  own  sup- 
port and  security  would  be  placed  in  the  hands  of  a 


30  HISTORY   OF   BRITISH   INDIA. 

BOOK  I.  hostile  party,  avowedly  eager,  not  merely  for  the 
__H.  abolition  of  the  alliance,  but  for  the  destruction  of 
1807.  the  British  Indian  Empire :  the  weapons  of  which 
we  were  now  masters  would  be  turned  against  us ; 
universal  agitation,  alarm,  distrust,  and  turbulence 
would  ensue ;  and  elements  of  a  renewed  combina- 
tion of  hostile  states  against  us  would  acquire  an 
uncontroulable  latitude  of  action  and  efficient  means 
of  success."*  Sir  G.  Barlow,  therefore,  concluded 
that  the  Nizam  had  no  right  to  depart  from  the 
obligations  of  the  connexion,  and  that  they  must  be 
vigorously  enforced.  The  political  wisdom  of  the 
conclusion  was  undeniable,  however  at  variance  with 
the  doctrine  of  non-interference,  which  even  in 
regard  to  the  Nizam  had  not  long  before  been 
inculcated  by  the  Bengal  Government.  The  argu- 
ments upon  which  the  resolution  was  formed  are 
applicable  to  all  similar  relations,  indicating  the  true 
character  of  subsidiary  alliances  as  well  as  the  diffi- 
culty and  danger  of  their  dissolution.  The  question 
of  right  has  different  aspects,  according  to  the  differ- 
ent positions  of  the  contracting  parties.  The  Bri- 
tish Government  might  have  the  right,  as  it  had  the 
power,  to  enforce  obligations  which  it  considered 
essential  to  its  own  security  and  support;  but  the 
Nizam  had  an  equal  right  to  claim  their  abrogation, 
if  he  regarded  them  as  non-essential  to  his  security, 
repugnant  to  his  feelings,  derogatory  to  his  charac- 
ter, and  detrimental  to  the  happiness  and  prosperity 
of  his  dominions.  It  was  not  a  question  of  right, 
but  of  power ;  and,  as  the  Subahdar  of  the  Dekhin 
was  no  longer  in  a  condition  to  assert  his  indepen- 

'  Minute  of  the  Governor- Geaeral. 


SUBMISSION   OF   THE   NIZAM.  31 

dence,  he  was  under  the  necessity  of  submitting  to  book  i. 
whatever  terms  his  European  masters  were  pleased  __J_L 


to  impose.  I807. 

The  Nizam  was  indeed  thoroughly  alarmed  by 
the  tone  which  the  Resident  was  authorised  to  as- 
sume. A  ready  source  of  intimidation  always  exists 
in  the  minds  of  native  princes  in  the  indeterminate 
laws  of  succession,  and  the  readiness  with  which 
the  ties  of  relationship  are  sacrificed  to  the  temp- 
tations of  ambition.  The  Nizam,  like  the  Nawab 
Vizir,  had  brothers  of  whom  he  stood  in  fear,  and 
of  whose  promptitude  to  become  the  instruments  of 
British  vindictiveness  no  native  courtier  or  politi- 
cian could  entertain  a  doubt.  That  he  would  be 
deposed  in  favour  of  his  younger  brother  was  the 
immediate  suggestion  of  his  own  suspicions,  and 
they  were  confirmed  by  the  sympathising  fears  of 
his  family  and  adherents.  He  therefore  changed 
the  tenor  of  his  conduct,  readily  acquiesced  in 
the  conditions*  to  which  his  assent  was  required, 
promised  to  repose  entire  confidence  in  Mir  Alem 
and  in  the  Resident,  and  engaged  to  dismiss  from 
their  oflSces,  whether  of  a  public  or  personal  nature, 
and  banish  from  his  capital,  certain  individuals 
known  to  be  hostile  to  the  British  interest,  and  ap- 
point to  their  duties  persons  in  whom  the  Resident 


'  They  were,  the  dismissal  from  his  presence  and  from  office  of  per- 
sons hostile  to  the  minister  and  the  British  alliance ;  the  separation  of  the 
military  from  the  civil  command  on  the  northern  frontier,  and  the  ap- 
pointment to  both  duties  of  persons  in  the  confidence  of  the  Resident ; 
admittance  of  the  Resident  to  an  audience  whenever  he  requested  it,  with- 
out any  conditions  ;  due  attention  to  the  just  claims  of  the  British  Go- 
Yemment ;  the  communication  of  all  petitions  and  statements  of  a  public 
nature  without  reserve  to  the  minister ;  and,  should  any  difference  with 
him  arise,  the  question  should  be  referred  to  the  British  Resident. — MS. 
Records. 


82  HISTORY   OF   BRITISH   INDIA. 


BOOK  I.  could  confide.     This  last  stipulation  was  not  accom- 
'      plished  without  the  employment  of  military  force 
1807.     for  an  object,  and  with  results  strikingly  character- 
istic of  the  disorganised  state  of  thfe  native  princi- 
palities, and  which  therefore  it  may  be  of  use  to 
describe  in  some  detail. 

The  chief  favourite  and  principal  adviser  of  the 
Nizam  was  Raja  Mahipat  Ram,  a  Hindu,  who  was 
originally  employed  as  Dewan,  or  man  of  business, 
by  Monsieur  Raymond  the  commander  of  the  French 
brigades.  In  this  situation  he  had  formed  an  inti- 
macy with  the  prince  Sekandar  Jah,  and  upon  the 
dispersion  of  the  French  force  was  taken  into  his 
service  and  obtained  his  confidence.  Upon  the 
elevation  of  the  prince  to  the  throne,  Mahipat  Ram 
received  the  honorary  title  of  Raja,  and  was  ap- 
jpointed  to  the  united  civil  and  military  command 
of  the  north-west  or  Berar  frontier.  His  public 
functions  he  discharged  by  deputy,  and  resided  at 
Hyderabad,  the  intimate  associate  and  secret  coun- 
sellor of  the  prince.  Aspiring  to  the  supreme  di- 
rection of  public  affairs',  he  became  the  opponent 
and  enemy  of  the  prime  minister,  and  of  those  by 
whom  he  was  upheld.  His  early  connexions,  and 
the  injury  to  his  fortunes  consequent  upon  the  break- 
ing up  of  Raymond's  corps,  had  no  doubt  disposed 
him  to  cherish  unfriendly  feelings  towards  Mir 
Alem's  English  friends ;  and  he  may  honestly  have 
desired,  however  inconsiderately  he  may  have  pro- 
posed, to  liberate  his  sovereign  from  dependence 
upon  a  foreign  power.  Whatever  may  have  been 
his  motives,  he  was  known  to  be  implacably  hostile 
to  the  British  alliance,  and  he  was  one   of  those 


REMOVAL   OF   RAJA   MAHIPAT   RAM.  33 

whose  removal  from  the  court  was  inflexibly  in-  book  i. 
sisted  on.     He  was  also  dismissed  from  his  com-   ^^^^'^' 


mand,  and  ordered  to  withdraw  to  his  personal  Jagir.     isos. 
However  unpalateable  to  the   Nizam  and  to  his 
favourite,    Mahipat    Ram,    after    some    ineffectual 
endeavours   to   obtain   a  milder   doom,  was   com- 
pelled to  retire  to  his  feudatory  estates. 

Raja  Mahipat  Ram  was  incapable  of  leading 
an  inactive  life,  or  abstaining  from  turbulence  and 
intrigue.  He  collected  a  force  of  five  thousand 
horse,  whom  he  employed  to  dispossess  some  of  his 
brother  feudatories  of  their  territories,  and  to  levy 
contributions  even  upon  the  districts  immediately 
subject  to  the  officers  of  the  Nizam ;  not,  as  there 
was  good  reason  to  suspect,  without  the  connivance 
of  his  prince,  who  preferred  the  vexation  and  em- 
barrassment of  his  minister  to  the  peace  of  his 
subjects  and  the  maintenance  of  his  own  authority. 
The  remonstrances  of  the  Resident  compelled  the 
Nizam  at  length  to  send  a  force  against  his  vassal, 
but  it  was  defeated ;  and  Mr.  Gordon,  an  officer 
who  commanded  one  of  his  disciplined  battalions, 
being  wounded  in  the  action  arid  taken  prisoner,  was 
put  to  death  after  the  engagement  in  the  presence 
of  the  Raja.  The  Nizam's  troops  being  either  un- 
able or  unwilling  to  suppress  the  insurrection,  it  be- 
came necessary  to  adopt  more  vigorous  measures ; 
and  a  considerable  portion  of  the  subsidiary  force  S 
under  its  commandant  Lieutenant-Colonel  Mon- 
tresor,  marched  against  the  Raja  at  Shahpur,  whilst  22iid  FcIk 
other  divisions  moved  from  the  north  and  the  south 

*  Five  companies  H.M.  33rd;  two  battalions  N.I. ;  two  regiments 
K.C. ;  a  brigade  of  artillery ;  and  a  body  of  the  Nizam's  troops. 

VOL.  I.  D 


34  HJlfOitl    OF   BEmSH   DTDIA. 

BOOK  L  to  intercept  him  in  the  erent  of  his  sttempting  to 
^^^'^  retire  into  the  adjacent  ]^Iahiatts  districts.  Unable 
iMflL  to  face  the  force  sent  against  hinv  Mahipat  Ram 
retreated  towards  Berar  with  the  utmost  expedi- 
tion, and  was  followed  by  ColcHiel  3Iontresor  with 
eqnal  celerity.  The  Raja  contrived  for  three 
months  to  evade  his  porsners,  bat  with  the  loss 
of  his  guns,  his  baggage,  and  his  infimtrj.  His 
flight  into  Berar,  where  it  was  apprehended  he 
would  find  numerous  adherents,  was  prevented  by 
the  judicious  movements  of  Colonel  Montresor,  and 
the  advance  of  Lieutenant-Ciolonel  Doveton  with 
8  division  of  the  subsidiary  force  from  the  fron- 
tier of  that  province.  Thus  foiled  in  his  purpose, 
Mahipat  Ram  directed  his  course  to  Kandesh. 
Turning  to   the  west   he    crossed    the    Godaveri, 

Mmy  7M.  Tapti,  and  Nerbudda  rivers ;  and  threw  himself 
into  the  territory  of  Holkar,  whither  his  pursuers 
did  not  consider  themselves  authorised  to  follow 
him*  The  detachment  imder  Colonel  Doveton  was 
left  to  guard  the  frontier,  and  the  main  body  re- 
turned to  Hyderabad.  Raja  Mahipat  Ram  was  no 
longer  formidable:  he  was  now  a  mere  military 
adventurer  ftt  the  head  of  a  party  of  roving  horse, 
willing  to  be  retained  by  any  foreign  prince  by  the 
promise  of  pay  and  the  prospect  of  plunder.  He 
won  accordingly  engaged  by  Holkar ;  but  the  situa- 
tion of  that  chief,  his  illness,  and  the  troubles  that 
difitractcd  his  court,  rendered  the  engagement  of 
little  other  value  than  the  personal  protection  which 
it  aflTorded  him. 

ft  wa«  Ntill  thought  advisable,  in  order  to  obviate 
the  recurrence  of  mischievous  intrigues  at  Hydera- 


MAHIPAT  RAM   PROTECTED  BY   HOLKAR.  35 

bad,  to  obtain  possession  of  the  person  of  Mahipat  book  i. 
Ram,  and  applications  to  that  effect  were  made  to   ^"/''' '' 


Holkar.  In  reply,  the  Mahratta  declared  that  it  isos. 
was,  and  had  always  been,  the  Raja's  intention  to 
proceed  to  Calcutta  and  appeal  to  the  Governor- 
General  against  Mir  Alem  and  the  Resident,  to 
whose  personal  animosity  he  attributed  his  misfor- 
tunes ;  professing  himself  ready  to  retire  from  public 
life  and  settle  at  Benares,  if  the  liberality  of  the 
British  Government  afforded  him  the  means.  This 
arrangement  had  been  proposed  before  his  insurrec- 
tion, but  he  was  now  held  to  have  forfeited  any 
claim  to  favour ;  and  a  pension,  although  granted  to 
bis  family,  was  refused  to  himself:  his  unconditional 
surrender  was  demanded,  with  which  he  declined  to 
comply.  There  is  no  reason  to  suppose  he  was 
sincere  in  his  professions,  as  at  the  same  time  he 
was  writing  to  the  Nizam,  offering,  if  his  sanction 
were  declared,  to  come  to  Hyderabad  with  fifty 
thousand  horse,  which  he  affirmed  Holkar  and  Amir 
Khan  were  prepared  to  dispatch  to  his  assistance  to 
enable  him  to  shake  off  the  English  yoke. 

It  was  not  in  the  power,  if  it  had  ever  been  the 
practice,  of  Holkar  to  observe  punctuality  in  the 
payment  of  his  soldiery ;  and  the  fiinds  of  Mahipat 
Ram,  although  assisted  by  secret  contributions  from 
the  Nizam,  soon  fell  short  of  the  means  of  main- 
taining a  corps  of  any  strength.  After  repeated 
mutinies  for  arrears  of  pay,  the  principal  part  of  his 
followers  deserted  him :  with  the  remainder  he  at- 
tached ^himself  to  the  party  in  Holkar's  camp  which 
after  that  chieftain's  insanity  aimed  at  the  direction 
of  affairs,  under  the  guidance  of  Tulasi  Bhai,  his 

d2 


36  HISTORY  OF   BRITISH    INDIA. 


BOOK  I.  wife.  The  opposite  faction,  headed  by  a  military 
CHAP.  L  i^g^j^j.  named  Dharma  Koar,  having  acquired  a 
1809.  temporary  superiority,  Mahipat  Ram  was  ordered  to 
quit  the  encampment.  Delaying  to  obey  the  order, 
he  was  attacked  by  a  party  of  Dharma  Koar's 
troops  at  a  time  when  his  own  men  were  dispersed  ; 
and  whilst  he  was  remonstrating  against  the  ag- 
gression, and  professing  his  readiness  to  depart,  he 
was  shot  in  the  tumult :  his  head  was  cut  off,  and 
cast  like  that  of  a  common  malefactor  before  the 
threshold  of  Holkar's  tent.  It  was,  however,  given 
up  to  the  entreaties  of  his  friends,  and  burnt  with 
the  body ;  but  his  effects  were  confiscated,  and  the 
horses  of  his  troopers  were  seized  for  the  use  of  the 
state.  Such  was  the  fate  of  an  individual  whose 
influence  had  threatened  to  subvert  the  alliance 
between  the  Nizam  and  the  British  Government, 
and  had  endangered  the  tranquillity  of  India.  He 
seems  to  have  been  a  man  of  an  active  and  enter- 
prising character,  whose  chief  error  was  embarking 
rashly  in  undertakings  in  which  he  had  no  possible 
chance  of  success. 

The  minister  of  the  Nizam,  Mir  Alem,  died  on 
the  8th  of  January,  1809.  A  negociation  for  the 
nomination  of  a  successor  ensued,  which  was  not 
unattended  with  difficulties ;  the  British  Government 
professing  to  leave  it  to  the  Nizam,. whilst  stedfastly 
resolved  to  suffer  no  one  unfriendly  to  its  interests 
to  exercise  the  administration,  and  the  Nizam  with 
equal  insincerity  pretending  to  defer  to  the  wishes  of 
the  Bengal  Government,  whilst  secretly  striving  to 
secure  its  acknowledgment  of  a  favourite  of  his  own. 
A  compromise  was  at  length  effected.     Monir  ul 


SETTLEMENT   OF   THE   ADMINISTRATION.  87 

Mulk,  the  choice  of  the  Nawab,  was  appointed  mi-  book  l 


CHAP.   I. 


uister  under  a  written  engagement  to  maintain  the 
British  connexion  unimpaired ;  but,  as  he  was  incom-  1809. 
potent  to  the  duties  of  his  office,  the  real  adminis- 
tration was  vested  in  the  hands  of  Chandu  Lai  as 
his  Peshkar  or  deputy,  a  Hindu  of  experience  and 
talent,  who  had  been  employed  by  Mir  Alem  in  a 
similar  capacity,  and  who,  like  him,  was  deeply  im- 
pressed with  the  essential  importance  of  the  Resi- 
dent's support,  both  to  his  own  authority  and  to  the 
integrity  of  the  Nizam's  dominions.  The  connexion 
with  Hyderabad,  after  the  brief  interruption  which 
has  been  described,  was  established  on  a  firmer  foot- 
ing than  before ;  and  the  growing  habits  of  excess  in 
which  the  Nizam  indulged,  as  well  as  his  natural 
timidity  amd  indolence,  enfeebled  his  own  sentiments 
of  aversion,  and  rendered  them  no  longer  objects  of 
apprehension. 

A  subsidiary  alliance^  united  the  Peshwa  also  with  isos. 
the  British  Government  of  India,  but  the  connexion 
was  distinguished  by  some  essential  differences  from 
those  which  had  been  formed  with  the  Mohamme- 
dan princes :  it  was  of  more  recent  date  and  less 
stringent  obligations  :  the  Mahratta  prince  retained 
a  much  larger  share  of  independence  and  power,  and 
more  consistently  contemplated  the  opportunity  of 
ridding  himself  of  a  controul  which  he  equally 
felt  to  be  intolerable,  but  which  he  had  the  policy 

*  By  this,  commonly  called  the  Treaty  of  Bassein,  dated  Slst  Decem- 
ber, 1802,  the  Peshwa  agreed  to  receive  a  permanent  subsidiary  force 
of  not  less  than  6000  regular  infantry,  with  the  usual  proportion  of  field- 
pieces  and  European  artillerymen  ;  for  the  regular  payment  of  which, 
certain  districts  in  the  Dekhin  were  at  first  assigned,  but  were,  as  already 
noticed,  commuted  for  others  in  Bundelkhand  by  a  supplemental  treaty, 
December,  1803. — Coll.  of  Treaties,  p.  233. 


38  HISTORY  OF   BRITISH   INDIA. 

BOOK  I.  to  affect  to  submit  to  with  cheerfulness  and  satisfac- 
'  tion/  Baji  Rao  had  entered  into  the  alliance  in  a 
1805.  moment  of  despair,  when  no  other  means  were  open 
to  him  of  escaping  from  the  violence  of  Holkar,  but 
the  treaty  was  scarcely  concluded  when  he  was 
busied  in  intrigues  with  the  other  Mahratta  princes 
for  its  infraction.  The  unexpected  close  of  the 
war  with  Sindhia  and  the  Raja  of  Berar  disap- 
pointed his  projects,  the  discomfiture  of  the  con- 
federates showed  him  that  it  was  vain  to  expect 
immediate  release  fi-om  his  engagements,  and  his 
next  object  was  to  turn  them  to  his  advantage : 
there,  also,  he  encountered  various  disappointments, 
and  these  contributed  to  enhance  his  discontent  with 
the  British  Government,  however  veiled  beneath  the 
show  of  cordiality  and  good-humour.  The  Court  of 
Poena  entertained  heavy  pecuniary  claims  upon  the 
Gaekwar  and  the  Nizam  for  arrears  of  tribute,  or 
for  payments  stipulated  by  treaty' :  these  claims  the 
British  Government  undertook  to  investigate  and 
adjust,  but  the  accounts  were  long  and  complicated, 
and   the   equity  of  the  demand  not  unfrequently 

^  For  a  time  he  appears  to  have  imposed  upon  the  Govemment  of  Ben- 
gal; as  the  satisfaction  which  he  expressed  was  one  of  the  arguments 
employed  by  Sir  G.  Barlow  against  the  modifications  of  the  treaty  of 
Bassein,  proposed  by  the  Secret  Committee. — Malcolm,  Political  History 
of  India,  i.  380. 

'  The  amount  of  the  demand  upon  the  Gaekwar  was  nearly  three  mil- 
lions sterling ;  upon  the  Nizam  about  six  hundred  thousand  pounds.  As 
an  instructive  illustration  of  the  nature  of  such  claims,  and  the  unfailing 
source  of  dispute  which  they  furnished  to  the  native  states  of  India,  the 
Peshwa's  account  with  the  Gaekwar  is  particularised  in  the  Appendix. 
It  is  clear  that  such  an  account  never  could  be  settled,  and  that  it  pro* 
vided  a  permanent  plea  of  quarrel  whenever  the  creditor  thought  himself 
strong  enough  to  insist  upon  a  partial  payment,  another  name  for  a  con- 
tribution ;  or  whenever  the  debtor,  in  the  same  belief  of  his  power,  thought 
fit  to  demand  an  abatement  of  the  claim.  The  ascendancy  of  an  umpire 
whose  award  is  not  to  be  disputed  has  put  an  end  to  all  such  grounds  of 
contention. 


DISCONTENT   OF   THE   PESHWA.  39 

questionable.     The  investigation  proceeded  slowly,  book  i. 
and  adjustment  was  deferred  until  the  patience  of  ^"^'  ^ 


the  Peshwa  was  exhausted,  and  he  felt  as  a  griev-  I807. 
ance  that  interposition  which  barred  his  attempting 
to  realise  at  least  a  portion  of  his  demands  by  a 
more  summary  process.  Another  subject  of  griev- 
ance was  the  decided  refusal  of  the  Government  to 
allow  the  Peshwa  to  use  the  subsidiary  force  as  an 
instrument  for  the  establishment  of  an  unprece- 
dented controul  over  some  of  his  feudatories,  and 
for  their  forcible  expulsion  from  their  Jagirs :  this 
was  especially  the  case  with  regard  to  Parasuram 
Srinivas,  the  Pratinidhi  or  principal  hereditary  no- 
ble of  the  Mahratta  state,  between  whom  and 
Baji  Rao  an  inveterate  feud  had  for  some  time 
subsisted,*  The  Peshwa  advanced  also  unfounded 
pecuniary  claims  upon  portions  of  Bundelkhand  not 
included  in  the  cessions  he  had  made  to  the  British; 
and  demanded  arrears  of  Chouth,  the  Mahratta  tri- 
bute, from  the  independent  Rajas  of  the  province, 
as  well  as  from  the  rulers  of  Jhansi,  Kalpi,  and 
Sdgar,  which  his  relations  with  the  British,  that  pre- 
vented him  from  engaging  in  hostilities  or  entering 
into  negociation  with  other  princes  without  their 
participation,  disabled  him  from  asserting  in  the 
manner  most  agreeable  to  Mahratta  policy.  He 
likewise  claimed  a  share  of  the  contributions  ex- 
torted by  Holkar  and  Sindhia  from  the  princes  of 
Rajputana ;  and,  attributing  the  difficulty  of  realising 
these  demands  to  the  non-appointment  of  such  a 
representative  in  Hindustan  as  had  been  charged 
with  the  interests  of  the  Peshwa  anterior  to  the 

*  History  of  the  Mahrattas,  ill.  S41. 


40  History  of  British  india. 

BOOK  I.  date  of  the  British  connexion,  he  was  urirent  with 

CHAP*    I* 

his  allies  to  sanction  the  revival  of  the  office  of 


1807.  Sir-subha,  or  Peshwa's  representative,  in  which  cha- 
racter he  proposed  to  send  one  of  his  principal 
officers  into  Bundelkhand.  To  this  proposition  an 
unqualified  refusal  was  given,  as  it  was  obviously 
designed  to  replace  the  Peshwa  in  the  position  of 
titular  head  of  the  Mahratta  confederacy,  and  to 
renew  that  system  of  combination  which  it  had 
been  the  especial  object  of  the  treaty  of  Bassein 
to  overturn.  The  nomination  of  an  officer  who 
should  be  acknowledged  by  Sindhia  and  Holkar  as 
the  Peshwa's  delegate  was  also  an  infringement  of 
the  stipulation  in  the  treaties  with  those  princes, 
as  well  as  with  the  Peshwa,  by  which  intemegocia- 
tion  of  a  political  tendency  was  prohibited.  The 
British  Government,  therefore,  required  the  Peshwa 
to  desist  from  the  appointment  of  a  Sir-subha,  offer- 
ing at  the  same  time  to  mediate  between  him  and 
the  chiefs  of  Bundelkhand  for  the  recovery  of  his 
just  demands.  The  firm  opposition  made  by  Sir  G. 
Barlow  to  this  insidious  project,  in  which  it  was 
ascertained  that  both  Sindhia  and  Ilolkar  had  se- 
cretly concurred,  inflicted  upon  Baji  Rao  severe 
disappointment  and  mortification.  He  professed, 
indeed,  to  place  entire  confidence  in  the  wisdom 
and  friendship  of  his  allies,  but  it  was  evident  that 
little  reliance  on  his  sincerity  could  be  entertained ; 
nor  were  positive  proofs  wanting  of  his  being  con- 
cerned in  negociations  incompatible  with  the  spirit 
and  letter  of  his  engagements  to  the  British  ;^  and  it 

*  The  villages  taken  from  Sindhia,  and  transferred  to  the  Peshwa,  after 
the  war  had  been  secretly  suflfered  to  remain  in  the  possession  of  the 


ALLIANCE   WITH   THE  OAEKWAB. 


41 


was  obvious  that  his  conviction  of  the  impossibility  book  i. 
of  forming  an  effective  combination  against  their. 


power,  alone  deterred  him  from  new  intrigues  cal-     18<>7. 
culated  to  disturb  the  existing  relations  and  endan- 
ger the  tranquillity  of  India.     The  other  members 
of  the  Mahratta  confederacy  were  not  in  a  situation 
favourable  to  their  co-operation  in  his  designs. 

The  bonds  of  union  with  the  Gaekwar  or  Mah-  iso-i. 
ratte  ruler  of  Guzerat  were  of  the  most  intimate 
description ;  and  the  maintenance  of  his  authority, 
his  very  existence  as  a  political  power,  depended 
entirely  upon  the  assistance  and  support  of  his 
English  allies.  The  contest  for  the  occupation  of 
Guzerat,  adverted  to  in  a  former  page,  terminated 
in  the  acknowledgment  of  Fattih  Sing.^  Upon  his 
death,  in  1793,  Govind  Rao  was  recognised  by  the 
Government  of  Poena  as  Raja.  He  died  in  1800, 
and  was  succeeded  by  his  eldest  son,  Anand  Rao,  a 
prince  of  weak  intellect  and  indolent  disposition,  who 
was  incapable  of  conducting  an  efficient  administra- 
tion. A  struggle  for  the  management  of  affairs 
ensued.  Kanhoji  Rao,  the  eldest  illegitimate  son 
of  Govind  Rao,  a  bold  and  ambitious  young  man, 
at  first  secured    to   himself  and  his   partisans   all 

former.  The  nominatioQ  of  a  Sir-subha,  as  mentioned  in  the  text,  was 
with  the  private  concurrence  of  Sindhia  and  Holkar.  When  a  quarrel  had 
ensued  between  those  two  chiefs  after  the  return  of  the  latter  to  Hindustan, 
an  envoy  was  sent  by  the  Peshwa  to  mediate  between  them.  As  this  was 
a  palpable  infraction  of  the  treaty  of  Bassein,  Baji  Rao  was  called  upon 
for  an  explanation.  He  at  once  disavowed  his  agent,  and,  in  proof  of  his 
fidelity  to  his  engagements,  produced  what  were  also  evidences  of  his 
intercourse  with  the  other  chiefs,  letters  from  Holkar  and  Sindhia  decla- 
ratory of  their  desire  to  renew  their  subordination  to  the  Poona  Govern- 
ment. Btgi  Rao  at  the  same  time  pretended  a  conviction  that,  although 
these  proposals  might  have  for  their  object  the  advantage  of  the  writers,  it 
was  for  his  own  advantage  to  adhere  to  the  terms  of  the  subsidiary  alli- 
ance.— MS.  Records  ;  also  Hist,  of  the  M ahrattas,  iii.  333. 
*  iu.  602. 


42  HISTORY  OF  BRITISH   INDIA. 

BOOK  I.  the  principal  oflSces  of  the  state ;  but  after  a  short 
^^J^^^J^  time  he  was  dispossessed  of  them  by  one  to  whom 


1808.  the  authority  could  be  more  safely  and  beneficially 
entrusted,  Raoji  Appa,  who  had  been  the  minister 
of  Govind  Rao,  a  man  of  ability  whose  exercise  of 
authority  was  not  incompatible  with  the  continua- 
tion of  Anand  Rao  as  titular  sovereign.  Kanhoji 
had  recourse  to  Mulhar  Rao,  a  cousin  of  his  late 
fether,  who  held  an  extensive  Jagir  under  the  Gaek- 
war,  and  was  a  chief  of  talent  and  enterprise.  Rao- 
ji Appa,  imable  to  oppose  this  combination,  made 
urgent  application  to  the  Government  of  Bombay 
for  the  formation  of  a  subsidiary  alliance.  The  pro- 
posal was  acceded  to,  and  Major  Walker,  with  a 
military  detachment,  was  sent  to  his  succour.  *  Mul- 
har Rao  and  Kanhoji  were  defeated :  the  former 
declared  his  submission  to  the  new  order  of  things ; 
but  Kanhoji  kept  aloof,  and  for  some  time  devas- 
tated the  country  at  the  head  of  a  predatory  body 
of  horse.  He  was  ultimately  routed  by  a  British 
division  under  Major  Holmes,  and  driven  out  of 
Guzerat.  Raoji  Appa  retained  the  functions  of 
prime  minister  and  virtual  ruler  imdisturbed,  and 
Major  Walker  was  appointed  Resident  at  Baroda, 
the  capital  of  the  Gaekwar.* 

'  By  the  agreement  entered  into,  the  Gaekwar  engaged  to  pay  for  the 
expenses  of  the  military  assistance  granted  to  him,  and  for  a  permanent 
force  to  be  furnished  by  the  Company ;  and  to  cede  in  perpetuity  the  Per- 
gnnna  of  Chikli  in  the  dependencies  of  Surat,  with  his  share  of  the  choath 
or  contribution  levied  on  that  city.  These  engagements  were  confinned  by 
a  formal  treaty  in  June,  1802.  It  was  also  provided  that  an  assignment 
of  territory  should  be  made  to  the  ConV^any  of  the  estimated  annual  reve- 
nue of  7,80,000  rupees,  for  the  maintenance  of  2000  native  infantry ;  and, 
as  the  number  was  subsequently  raised  to  3000,  with  a  company  of  Euro- 
pean artillery,  other  lands  were  made  over  by  a  treaty  dated  in  April, 
1805,  yielding  with  the  former  a  total  revenue  of  11,70,000  rupees. — 
Coll.  of  Treaties,  pp.  665-594,  and  schedule  A.  p.  601. 

^Hist.  of  the  Mahr.  iii.  216. 


EMBARRASSED   FINANCES  OF   GUZERAT.  43 

When  tranquillity  was  re-established,  and  oppor-  book  i. 
tunity  was  afforded  for  an  inquiry  into  the  condition  ^^^*^^jj|^ 


of  the  Gaekwar's  affairs,  it  was  found  that  they  were  I803. 
so  irretrievably  involved,  that  it  was  indispensably 
necessary,  if  it  were  thought  desirable  to  continue 
the  connexion,  to  extend  the  assistance  to  be  af- 
forded beyond  military  support,  and  to  prop  the 
rapidly  declining  resources  of  the  principality  with 
the  funds  and  credit  of  the  British  Government.  The 
annual  disbursements  greatly  exceeded  the  annual 
receipts  of  the  public  treasury  ;^  the  revenues  were 
intercepted  by  appropriations  and  mortgages,  the 
fruits  of  former  improvidence ;  heavy  debts,  bearing 
a  ruinous  rate  of  interest,  were  owing  to  the  bank- 
ers and  monied  men ;  and  long  arrears  of  pay  were 
due  to  the  troops,  the  discharge  of  which  was  a 
necessary  preliminary  to  their  dismissal,  and  con- 
sequent diminution  of  public  expenditure.  The  ad- 
ditional burthen  imposed  upon  the  state  by  the 
subsidy  to  be  paid  to  the  British  force  was  quite 
incapable  of  being  sustained;  and  it  was  evident 
not  only  that  the  engagement  could  not  be  fulfilled, 
but  that  national  insolvency,  general  confusion 
and  distress,  and  the  dissolution  of  the  Gaekwar's 
power,  were  unavoidable,  unless  vigorous  means 
were  promptly  employed  to  administer  present  re- 
lief and  ensure  future  amelioration.  Fortunately 
the  Resident  was  endowed  with  more  than  ordinary 
abilities,  industry,  energy,  and  judgment ;  enjoyed 
the  imreserved  confidence  of  his  own  Government ; 
and  speedily  commanded  the  same  implicit  credit 

^  The  revenue  of  Guzerat  was  estimated  at  60  lakhs  of  rupees  i>er  annum ; 
the  expenditure  exceeded  82  lakhs. — MS.  Rec. 


44  HISTORY  OF   BRITISH    INDIA. 

BOOK  I.  with  the  Gaekwar,  his  minister,  his  chief  officers, 
and  the  monied  and  commercial  members  of  the 
1803.    community.^ 

The  first  measure  of  reduced  expenditure  that 
was  adopted,  was,  the  discharge  of  the  Gaekwar's 
troops,  the  need  of  whom  was  superseded  by  the 
subsidiary  force ;  but  for  this  purpose  it  was  requi- 
site to  pay  the  arrears  due  to  them,  and  the  funds 
were  to  be  raised.  The  British  Government  agreed 
to  advance  part  of  the  sum  required  for  this  object, 
and  to  guarantee  repayment  of  the  remainder  to 
opulent  individuals,  who,  under  that  security,  were 
willing  to  furnish  what  was  requisite.  The  ad- 
vances in  both  cases  were  to  be  liquidated  out  of 
assignments  of  territory,  the  revenues  of  which 
were  to  be  collected  and  accounted  for  by  the 
Company.*      The    money    was    supplied,    but   the 

'  This  is  strikingly  expressed  in  the  counterpart  of  the  treaty  of  1805, 
written  by  the  Gaekwar  himself,  anticipating  the  possibility  of  his  falling 
into  the  hands  of  his  rebellious  subjects  or  mutinous  troops.  He  eigoins 
that,  ^*  in  such  a  situation,  his  subjects  will  pay  no  attention  to  his  orders, 
but  hear  what  Major  Walker  has  to  say,  strictly  following  his  instruc- 
tions." And  the  document  concludes  with  these  provisions :  "  Conformably 
to  Major  Walker's  suggestions  and  wishes,  the  articles  contained  in  this 
declaration  were  written,  and  to  them  I  have  given  my  assent ;  but  in  the 
event  of  any  evil-disposed  persons  attempting  anything  unfair  or  unrea- 
sonable against  my  person,  my  Dewan,  Uaoji  Appsji,  his  son,  his  brother, 
nephew,  or  relations,  and  Madhu  Rao  Tdntia  Mazamdar,  or  even  should 
I  myself,  or  my  successors,  commit  anything  improper  or  unjust,  the  Eng- 
lish Government  shall  interfere,  and  see  in  either  case  that  it  is  settled 
according  to  equity  and  reason.  I  have  also  required  of  Migor  Walker  on 
the  part  of  the  Company  to  promise  that  my  state  and  government  shall 
be  permanent,  and  shall  descend  to  the  lineal  heirs  of  the  Musnud,  and 
that  the  Dewanship  shall  be  preserved  to  Raoji  Appaji.  In  the  last  place, 
I  desire  to  form  the  most  intimate  connexion  with  the  Company,  and  that 
all  business  with  the  Poona  Durbar  may  be  jointly  managed  by  the 
English  Resident  and  my  Vakeel.  Given  at  Baroda,  28th  July,  1802. 
(Signed)  Anand  Rao,  Gaekwar;  Sena-kh&s-khel,  Shamshir  Bahadur." — 
Coll.  of  Treaties,  p.  669.  These  may  have  been  the  sentiments  of  the 
minister  rather  than  of  the  Raja,  but  they  were  generally  consistent  witli 
the  conduct  of  Anand  Rao. 

>  The  amount  required  was  41,S8,000  rupees  (t*41 3*800),  of  which  tlie 
British  Government  advanced  19,67,000  rupees  (i^l96,700) ;  the  rest  was 


REDUCTION   OF   EXPENDITURE.  45 


reduction  of  the  tl^ops  was  not  effected  by  pecu-  book  i. 

I  CHAP.  I. 

niary  means  alone.  

The  most  efficient  portion  of  the  Gaekwar's  army  I803. 
consisted  of  a  body  of  about  seven  thousand  Arabs, 
a  description  of  mercenaries  whom  it  was  fonneriy 
a  frequent  practice  in  the  Peninsula  to  engage,  and 
who  bore  a  high  reputation  for  fidelity  and  courage, 
but  were  equally  characterised  by  turbulence  and 
rapacity.  These  troops  formed  the  garrison  of  Ba- 
roda,  and  were  extremely  averse  to  the  loss  of  pay 
and  privileges  with  which  they  were  threatened. 
In  order  to  evade  their  dismissal,  they  advanced  the 
most  extravagant  demands,  and,  seizing  upon  the 
capital  and  person  of  the  Gaekwar,  refused  to  set 
him  at  liberty  unless  their  claims  were  satisfied. 
Major  Walker  having  endeavoured  in  vain  to  bring 
them  to  reasonable  terms,  Baroda  was  invested  by 
the  subsidiary  force  under  Colonel  Woodington, 
strengthened  by  a  European  regiment  from  Bom- 
bay. The  Arabs  defended  themselves  with  spirit, 
and  inflicted  some  loss  on  their  assailants ;  but,  after 
a  siege  of  ten  days,  a  practicable  breach  having 
been  made  in  the  walls,  they  capitulated  on  the 
promise  that  all  arrears  justly  due  to  them  should 
be  paid,  and  they  engaged  in  that  event  to  disband 
and  leave  the  country. 

This  transaction,  and  the  flight  of  Kanhoji,  re- 
stored tranquillity  to  Guzerat,  and  enabled  the 
minister  and  the  Resident  to  proceed  without  in- 

prorided  by  different  Sar&fs  or  bankers  at  Baroda  under  the  Company's 
Bh6nd&ri — a  general  assurance  that  they  should  be  repaid,  not  an  absolute 
surety  for  repayment.  An  annual  territorial  revenue  of  12,95,000  rupees 
was  appropriated  to  the  liquidation  of  the  principal,  with  interest  at  nine 
per  cent,  per  annum  until  the  whole  should  be  redeemed. — Coll.  of 
Treaties,  p.  601. 


46  HISTORY  OF   BRITISH    INDIA. 


BOOK  I.  terruption  in  their  projects  of  reform.  Raoji  Appa 
died  in  January,  1803,  and  was  succeeded  in  his 
1806.  office  of  Dewan  by  his  nephew  Sitaram,  who  pro- 
fessed the  same  principles,  and  for  a  time  pursued 
the  same  policy,  as  his  uncle.  The  reduction  of 
the  expenditure  proved  however  no  easy  task,  as 
extravagance  and  dishonesty  pervaded  every  de- 
partment, and  little  reliance  could  be  placed  upon 
the  co-operation  of  the  servants  of  the  state,  who 
were  themselves  the  chief  plunderers  and  default- 
ers. Sitaram  soon  became  weary-  of  a  duty  so 
troublesome  and  unpopular,  and  lent  himself  to 
the  prevailing  practice  of  profusion ;  so  that  the 
whole- labour  and  odium  fell  upon  the  Resident. 
He  was  ably  assisted  by  Gangadhar  Sastri,  an  ac- 
countant in  his  employment,  who  acquired  at  a 
subsequent  date  a  melancholy  celebrity  in  the  po- 
litical history  of  the  Peninsula,  as  we  shall  have 
occasion  to  relate.  The  Resident  was  also  firmly 
supported  by  the  bankers  and  public  creditors,  who 
had  a  deep  personal  interest  in  the  success  of  his 
proceedings. 

The  avowed  exercise  of  British  controul  over  the 
internal  administration  of  the  Gaekwar,  which  com- 
menced under  the  authority  of  Marquis  Wellesley, 
was  continued  on  the  same  footing  by  Sir  G.  Bar- 
low, although  an  admitted  departure  from  his  policy 
of  non-interference.  "  The  peculiar  situation,"  he 
observed  "  of  the  affairs  of  the  Gaekwar  state,  and 
the  circumstances  under  which  our  connexion  with 
that  state  has  been  established,  and  has  become  in  a 
manner  interwoven  with  its  internal  concerns,  dis- 
tinguish our  relations  with  Baroda  from  those  which 


RIGHT   OF   INTERFERENCE.  47 

subsist  with  the  other  powers  of  India,  although  the  book  i. 
general  political  relations  and  obligations  are  the  ^^^^'  ^' 
same.  The  interference,  therefore,  which  we  are  i807. 
called  upon  to  exercise,  cannot  be  considered  to 
constitute  a  deviation  from  those  principles  of  po- 
licy which  in  our  intercourse  with  other  allies  pre- 
clude our  interference  in  the  management  of  their 
internal  concerns.  It  is  evident  that  the  alternative 
of  our  interference  for  the  reform  of  the  affairs  of 
the  Gaekwar  is  not  merely  the  loss  of  the  advan- 
tages to  be  derived  from  the  efficacy  of  the  alliance, 
but  the  positive  dangers  to  which  the  certain  ruin 
of  the  state  would  expose  our  most  essential  inte- 
rests in  that  quarter  of  the  Peninsula.^'  These  ob- 
servations were  undoubtedly  just,  but  the  spirit 
which  they  evince  was  eminently  selfish,  and  no 
consideration  of  the  benefit  accruing  to  the  Gaek- 
war was  allowed  to  influence  the  maintenance  of 
the  connexion. 

At  the  same  time  that  the  right  and  policy  of  in- 
terference were  thus  explicitly  recognised,  the  eco- 
nomical timidity  of  the  Bengal  Government  sus- 
pended the  execution  of  a  measure  recommended 
by  the  Resident  as  essential  to  the  realisation  of  the 
resources  of  Guzerat, — the  enforced  levy  of  the 
tribute  due  to  the  Gaekwar  by  his  tributaries  in 
Kattiwar.  The  obvious  necessity,  however,  of  ren- 
dering this  source  of  legitimate  revenue  productive, 
and  the  expectation  that  a  judicious  display  of  the 
British  power  might  prevent  serious  opposition, 
overcame  the  reluctance  of  the  Govemor-General ; 
and  a  military  detachment  under  the  command  of 
the   Resident   undertook    the   performance  of  the 


48  HISTORY   OF   BRITISH    INDIA. 

BOOK  I.  Mulkgiri,  or  periodical  collection  of  tribute  by  the 
^^^^'  ^   march  of  troops  through  the  province. 
1807.         Although    correctly   applicable^  to    one    division 
only,  that  occupied  by  the  Katti   tribe,  the  term 
Kattiwar  designates  the  whole  of  the  peninsula  of 
Guzerat.     The  country  was  distributed  amongst  va- 
rious tribes,  of  whom  the  Rajputs  and  Kattis  were 
the  most  remarkable :  subject  to  a  number  of  petty 
chieftains  of  various  degrees  of  power,  and  possess- 
ing domains  differing  in  extent  and  value ;  some- 
times connected  with  their  neighbours  by  affinity  of 
descent,  but  all  equally  independent  in  their  own 
lordships ;  exercising  the  privilege  of  private  war, 
and  paying  little  more  than  nominal  obedience  to 
the  paramount  sovereign;  presenting,  in  many  re- 
spects, a  resemblance  to  the  kingdoms  of  Europe 
during  the  worst  periods  of  baronial  anarchy.     The 
province  had  been  regarded  as  tributary  successively 
to  the  Mohammedan  Kings  of  Guzerat,  to  the  Mo- 
gul,  and   to  the  Mahrattas ;  but  the  tribute  was 
never   spontaneously  paid,    and   its   collection  was 
only  to  be  effected  by  a  military  progress  amongst 
the  states.    Nor  was  this  method  always  attended  by 
success.     The  army  of  the  Peshwa,  or  of  the  Gaek- 
war,  even  when  amounting  to  twenty  thousand  horse, 
was   not   unfrequently  resisted.      The    Rajas    shut 
themselves  up  in  their  forts  or  castles,  and  from 
their  battlements  mocked   the   movements  of  ca- 
valry.    The  villages,  fortified  by  mud  walls,  impene- 
trable hedges,  and  the  martial  spirit  of  the  popula- 
tion, were  equally  inaccessible ;  and  the  invaders 
were   obliged   to   content   themselves   with   laying 
the  open  country  waste.     Nor  were  they  suffered  to 


TRIBUTE  OP  KATTIWAR  REALISED.  49 

cany  off  with  impunity  such  plunder  as  they  might  book  i. 
have  gathered;  hordes  of  Katti  and  Rajput  horse    ^^^' 


hovered  round  their  advance  and  harassed  their  re-     I807. 
treat,  and  the  expedition  not  unusually  terminated 
in  disaster  and  disgrace. 

The  diminished  power  and  impaired  resources  of 
the  Gaekwar  had  for  several  years  prevented  even 
such  attempts  at  militaiy  coercion,  and  trihute 
accordingly  had  ceased.  The  spirit  that  now  ani- 
mated the  counsels^  of  the  Government,  and  the 
means  at  its  disposal,  no  longer  permitted  the  chiefs 
of  Kattiwar  to  resist  its  rightful  demands  with  im- 
punity. Having  therefore  received  the  sanction  of 
bis  superiors,  Major  Walker  marched  with  a  divi-  Oct  I807. 
sion  of  the  subsidiary  force  to  Gotu,  in  the  district 
of  Murvi,  to  which  place  the  several  chieftains  had 
been  previously  directed  to  send  their  representa- 
tives :  the  greater  number  complied  with  the  requi- 
sition :  the  right  of  the  Gaekwar's  Government  to 
levy  a  tribute  was  universally  admitted,  but  it  was 
not  until  after  many  attempts  at  delay  and  evasion 
that  a  settlement  was  accomplished,  and  the  chiefs 
consented  to  pay  the  amount  regularly,  without 
waiting  for  the  Mulkgiri  process  of  coercion.  The 
sum  of  nine  lakhs  and  a  half  of  rupees  was  promised 
in  perpetuity,  and  security  was  given  for  a  term  of 
ten  years,  renewable  at  its  expiration.  The  security 
was  characteristic.  The  sureties  were  persons 
boasting  neither  rank  nor  wealth,  but  who  derived 
from  the  usages  of  the  country  inviolable  sanctity, 
and  were  entitled  to  implicit  trust.  They  were  se- 
lected from  the  tribe  of  Charans  or  Bhats,  the  here- 
ditary bards,   genealogists,    and   chroniclers  of  the 

VOL.    I.  E 


60  mSTOBY   OF   BRITISH  INDIA. 


BOOK  I.  principal  Hindu  races  of  the  West  of  India,  whose 
^__1__,  sacredness  of  person  had  been  received  as  a  substi- 
1807.  tute  for  law  in  a  condition  of  society  which,  whUst 
it  felt  the  necessity  of  social  obligations,  could  sub- 
mit to  none  of  the  human  restraints  by  which  they 
are  maintained  and  enforced.  Superstition  supplied 
the  defect.  The  Charan,  if  his  pledge  was  violated, 
murdered  himself  or  some  member  of  his  family ;  and 
the  retribution  for  blood  was  believed  to  fell  upon 
the  head  of  him  by  whose  default  he  had  been  im- 
pelled to  make  the  sacrifice.  The  dread  of  such  a 
destiny  was  generally  of  power  to  deter  the  least 
scrupulous  from  the  violation  of  an  engagement 
so  guaranteed.^  In  some  instances,  additional  secu- 
rities were  entered  into  by  chiefs  and  persons  of 
influence;  and  the  rights  of  the  Gaekwar,  then 
established  in  Kattiwar,  have  never  since  been  the 
subject  of  any  serious  contest.  At  the  same  time, 
the  chiefs  and  people  of  the  principal  sea-ports  of 

>  The  following  illastration  of  this  usage  is  narrated  by  Lieut.  Mac- 
murdo: — '<  In  the  year  1806,  a  Bhat  of  Veweingaum,  named  Kunna,  had 
become  security  on  the  part  of  Dossajee,  the  present  chieftain  of  Mallia  in 
Muchoo-kanta,  for  a  sum  of  money  payable  to  the  Gaekwar  Government : 
the  time  specified  for  payment  arrived,  and  Dossajee  refused  to  fulfill  his 
engagement.  Government  applied  to  the  surety,  who,  after  several  fruit- 
less attempts  to  persuade  Dossajee  to  comply  with  his  bond,  returned  to 
his  house,  and,  after  passing  some  time  in  prayer,  assembled  his  family  and 
desired  his  wife  to  prepare  a  daughter,  about  seven  years  of  age,  for  traga. 
The  innocent  child,  taught  from  her  earliest  infancy  to  reflect  on  the  sacred 
character  and  divine  origin  of  her  family,  and  the  necessity  which  existed 
for  the  sacrifice,  required  no  compulsion  to  follow  the  path  by  which  the 
honour  of  her  caste  was  to  be  preserved.  Having  bathed,  and  dressed 
herself  in  her  best  clothes,  she  knelt  with  her  head  on  her  father's  knee, 
and,  holding  aside  her  long  hair,  she  resigned  herself  without  a  struggle  to 
the  sword  of  this  unnatural  barbarian.  The  blood  of  a  Bhat  being 
sprinkled  on  the  gate  of  the  chieftain  produced  an  instantaneous  payment  of 
the  money :  presents  of  land  to  the  father,  and  a  handsome  mausoleum  or 
doree  to  the  daughter,  marked  the  desire  of  the  Rajput  to  avert  the  punish- 
ment supposed  to  await  the  spiller  of  a  Ch&ran*8  blood.** — ^Trans.  Literary 
Society  of  Bombay,  i.  281. 


CAPTURE  OF  KANDORNA.  51 

the  Peninsula,  all  of  whom  were  in  the  habit  of  book  i. 
committing  piratical  depredations  on  native  com- 


merce,  were  called  upon  to  renounce  piracy,  to  re-  I807. 
linqmsh  their  claim  to  vessels  wrecked  on  their 
coasts,  to  allow  the  free  resort  of  merchant-ships 
ftt)m  the  territories  of  the  Company  or  their  allies, 
and  to  assent  to  the  permanent  residence  of  a  com- 
mercial agent  at  their  principal  harbours.  They 
generally  acceded  to  these  stipulations.* 

The  only  active  military  operation  which  it  be- 
came necessary  to  undertake  was  designed  to  adjust 
a  difference  between  two  chiefs  of  some  considera- 
tion, and  to  demonstrate  the  ability  as  well  as  the 
determination  of  the  Government  of  Guzerat  to 
compel  obedience.  A  body  of  Makranis,  or  mer- 
cenaries, natives  of  Mekran,  in  the  service  of  the 
Raja  of  Purbandar,  mutinying  for  arrears  of  pay, 
seized  upon  the  fort  of  Kandoma  belonging  to  the 
Raja,  and  sold  it  to  a  rival  chief,  the  Jam  of  Noa- 
nagar.  This  transaction  occurred  after  the  arrival  of 
the  Resident  and  Gaekwar's  minister  in  the  pro- 
vince, and  was  held  to  be  contempt  of  the  superior 
authority,  as  well  as  disregard  of  private  rights. 
The  Jam  was  desired  to  restore  the  fortress ;  and,  as 
he  reftised  to  comply  with  the  requisition,  the  de- 
tachment marched  against  the  place :  batteries  were 
erected,  and  in  the  course  of  a  day,  two  practicable 
breaches  being  effected,  the  troops  were  drawn  out 
for  the  assault,  when  the  garrison  surrendered. 
Kandoma  had  formerly  sustained  successfully  a  siege 

1  The  sea- ports  were  Dhingi,  Bate,  Dwaraka,  Amramra,  Positra,  Jooria, 
and  Noanagar  on  the  north  coast,  and  different  parts  of  Janagerh  on  the 
south.  For  the  stipulations  with  them  severally,  and  with  other  of  the 
Kattiwar  principalities,  see  Coll.  of  Treaties,  pp.  00ft,  &c. 

B  2 


62  HISTORY   OF   BRITISH   INDIA. 

BOOK  I.  of  three  mouths  by  the  Gaekwar's  army,  and  was 
looked  upon  by  the  people  as  impregnable.  Its 
1807.  capture  on  the  present  occasion  in  so  short  a  time 
impressed  the  native  chiefs  with  a  deep  conviction 
of  the  uselessness  of  opposition  to  the  British  arms, 
and  produced  a  sensible  effect  upon  the  progress  of 
the  negociations. 

The  expedition  into  Kattiwar  was  considered  as 
affording  a  favourable  opportunity  for  asserting  au- 
thority of  a  different  description,  and  vindicating 
the  outraged  claims  of  natural  affection.  The  Jha- 
reja  Rajputs  of  the  province,  and  of  the  neighbouring 
principality  of  Cutch,  were  notorious  for  the  murder 
of  their  female  infants.  Preferring  the  death  of  a 
daughter  to  a  matrimonial  alliance  with  an  inferior 
race,  and  looking  upon  most  races  as  inferior,  pre- 
cluded by  custom  from  marrying  her  to  a  husband 
of  her  own  tribe,  the  Jharejas  believed  it  to  be 
more  humane  to  nip  the  flower  in  the  bud,  than  to 
await  the  risk  of  its  being  blighted  in  maturer 
growth.  A  female  child  was  almost  invariably  put 
to  death  as  soon  as  bom.  The  Government  of 
Bombay  had  for  some  time  past  been  anxious  to 
eradicate  this  cruel  and  unnatural  practice;*  and 
Colonel  Walker  was  instructed  to  endeavour  to 
obtain  from  the  chiefs  a  declaration  of  its  incom- 
patibility with  the  Hindu  religion  as  well  as  with 
the   laws   of  humanity,  and  a  promise   that   they 

*  The  head  of  the  Bombay  Government,  Mr.  Jonathan  Duncan,  had 
encountered,  when  Governor- General's  agent  at  Benares,  a  similar  custom 
among  the  Rajkumars,  a  Rajput  tribe  established  in  that  province,  and 
had  succeeded  in  obtaining  from  them  an  engagement  to  abstain  from  the 
commission  of  the  crime  ;  this  was  in  1789. — Papers  on  Female  Infanticide, 
printed  by  order  of  the  House  of  Commons,  17th  June,  1824,  p.  22;  the 
engagement  is  also  printed,  ibid,  p.  8. 


SUPPRESSION   OF   INFANTICIDE.  53 

would  desist  from  its  perpetration.  The  negociation  book  i. 
was  a  subject  of  some  delicacy ;  but  the  Resident  by  ^^^|^^^^ 
the  weight  of  his  character,  and  a  judicious  employ-  I807. 
ment  of  the  influence  with  which  the  situation  and 
interests  of  the  several  chiefs  invested  him,  over- 
came all  difficulties,  and  carried  the  instructions  of 
the  Government  into  effect.  An  engagement  was 
signed  by  all  the  principal  chiefs  for  themselves  and 
their  fraternities,  by  which  they  pledged  themselves 
to  renounce  the  usage  of  killing  their  female  chil- 
dren, to  expel  from  their  caste  any  person  who 
should  be  guilty  of  the  crime,  and  to  submit  to  any 
penalties  which  the  Gaekwar's  Government  and  the 
British  Resident  should  inflict  for  breach  of  the 
obligation.*  For  some  time  they  seem  to  have  ad- 
hered to  the  terms  of  the  engagement,  but  the 
Resident  and  the  Government  were  somewhat  too 
sanguine  in  their  belief  that  female  infanticide  was 
suppressed  in  Guzerat.  It  was  not  possible  that  the 
illusions  of  deep-rooted  prejudice  and  long- esta- 
blished custom  should  instantly  vanish  before  the 
voice  of  humanity  and  reason ;  and  fear  of  punish- 
ment, the  only  agent  of  adequate  power  to  work  so 
sudden  a  change,  could  exercise  but  little  controul 
where  the  detection  of  an  offence  committed  in  the 
impenetrable  secrecy  of  domestic  privacy  was  obvi- 
ously almost  impracticable.  Accordingly,  at  a  long 
subsequent  date,  there  were  groimds  for  believing  that 
the  crime  was  almost  as  common  as  it  had  been  before 
the  interposition  of  the  British  Government.*     The 

*  Report  of  his  proceedings  by  Colonel  Walker,  15th  March,  1808.— 
Pari.  Papers,  31. 
'  In  1817,  there  were  but  sixty-three  Jhareja  females  iiring  in  all  Katti- 


54  HISTORY   OF   BBITISH   INDIA. 

BOOK  I.  sentiments  of  that  Government  have,  however,  been 
sufficiently  made  known  to  insure  its  marked  dis- 


1807.  favour  to  any  chief  suspected  of  violating  the  spirit 
of  the  original  contract ;  and  a  sense  of  individual 
interest,  with  improved  principles  of  action,  manners 
softened  by  the  continuance  of  tranquillity,  and 
extended  intellectual  cultivation,  must  ultimately 
effect  the  extinction  of  a  practice  which  is  not  more 
inconsistent  with  reason  than  repugnant  to  natural 
instinct.* 

The  adjustment  of  the  Kattiwar  tribute  tended 
materially  to    facilitate    the    improvement    of  the 

Gaekwar's  finances,  but  their  final  settlement  was 

* 

retarded  by  the  aversion  which  the  new  minister 
exhibited  to  the  economical  measures  of  the  Resi- 
dent, and  the  secret  counteraction  which  he  coun- 
tenanced or  practised.  It  became  necessary,  there- 
fore, to  re-model  the  administration.  Sitaram  was 
removed  from  the  office  of  Dewan,  the  duties  of 
which  were  assigned  to  his  uncle,  Baba  Rao; 
whilst  a  general  controuling  and  sanctioning  au- 
thority was  vested  in  Fatih  Sing  Gaekwar,  the 
younger  brother  of  the  reigning  prince,  and  heir 
to  the  throne.  These  ministers,  holding  their  ap- 
pointments by  the  tenure  of  the  Resident's  ap- 
probation, co-operated  cordially  with  him,  and  re- 
sults the  most  beneficial  were  speedily  attained. 
In  place  of  the  seemingly  hopeless  condition  of 
the  public  finances  when  the  process  of  reform 
was    commenced,    when    the    expenditure    nearly 

war,  born  subsequently  to  the  engagement  with  Colonel  Walker. — Pari. 
Papers,  110.  In  a  village  called  Draffa,  containing  four  hundred  families, 
there  was  not  a  single  female  child. — Ibid.  112. 

'  Note  by  Mr.  Elphinstone  when  Governor  of  Bombay. — Ibid.  116. 


ALLIANCE   WITH   BEBAR.  55 


doubled   the   receipts,   the   revenue  of  the  Gaek-  book  i. 
war    was    raised    in    the   course   of  six    years    to    ^^^^'  ^' 
sixty-five   lakhs  of  rupees,  and  his  expenses  were     1807. 
reduced  to  fifty  lakhs,  leaving  a  surplus  of  fifteen 
lakhs  applicable  to  the  liquidation  of  his  debts  :  per- 
severance in  the  same  system  for  about  a  similar 
period  was  expected  to  ensure  his  liberation  from 
pecuniary  embarrassment,  and   the   full   command 
of  all  his  resources.*      The  connexion   which  the 
Gaekwar  had  formed  with  the  British  had  been  at- 
tended therefore  with  unequivocal  benefit  to  that 
prince,  and,  at  the  period  at  which  we  have  arrived, 
was  distinguished  above  all  the  existing  subsidiary 
alliances,  by  implicit  confidence,  intimate  union,  and 
mutual  satisfaction.^ 

The  other  Mahratta  states,  although  they  had 
acceded  to  relations  of  amity,  had  declined  a  closer 
alliance  and  the  engagement  of  subsidiary  troops. 
The  most  friendly  chief  amongst  them  was  the  Raja 
of  Berar.  A  British  Resident  was  admitted  at  his 
court,  and  exercised  considerable  influence  in  his 
counsels.  Some  of  his  ministers  also  were,  with 
his  knowledge  and  concurrence,  in  the  receipt  of 
pensions  from  the  Government  of  Bengal,  as  com- 
pensation for  private  losses  suffered  from  the  late 
war.  The  Raja  was,  however,  not  altogether  con- 
tented with  his  allies.  His  dominions  had  been 
heavily  mulcted  for  his  share  in  the  recent  hosti- 
lities.'    He  had  been  compelled  to  cede  part  of 

>  MS.  Records. 

'  Lieutenant-Colonel  Walker  left  Baroda  on  account  of  ill-health  in  the 
be^nning  of  1809.  He  returned  for  a  short  time  at  the  pressing  solicita- 
tion of  the  Goremment  of  Bengal  to  superintend  proceedings  relating  to 
he  afiairs  of  Cutch,  but  finally  quitted  India  in  1810. 

'  By  the  treaty  of  Deogaum,  17th  December,  1803.— Coll.  of  Treaties,  261. 


66  HISTORY   OP   BRITISH   INDIA. 

BOOK  I.  Berar  to  the  Nizam,  and  the  province  of  Cuttack 
to  the  Company,  and  he  contrasted  the  penalties 
1807.  that  had  been  inflicted  on  him  with  the  undeserved 
forbearance  which  the  British  Government  had 
shown  to  Sindhia  and  Holkar,  notwithstanding  the 
more  prominent  part  which  they  had  taken  in  the 
operations  of  the  war,  and  the  more  inveterate  ani- 
mosity which  they  had  manifested.  He  claimed, 
therefore,  at  least  equally  favourable  treatment,  and 
a  similar  restoration  of  his  dismembered  territories ; 
and  in  justification  of  his  expectations  he  pleaded 
an  implied  promise  of  Lord  Comwallis,  who,  in  a 
letter  addressed  to  the  Raja,  had  assured  him  of  his 
"intention  of  compensating  his  losses  to  the  utmost 
practicable  extent  consistent  with  equity  and  public 
faith."  The  letter  was  unquestionably  authentic, 
and  the  tenor  was  sufficiently  obvious,  although  the 
expressions  were  vague :  a  liberal  interpretation  of 
them  would  have  replaced  the  Raja  in  possession  of 
Cuttack,  if  not  of  Berar ;  but,  as  this  would  have 
been  inconvenient,  it  was  necessary  to  explain  away 
the  precipitate  generosity  of  the  noble  writer.  It 
was  argued  with  some  plausibility  that  it  would  be 
inconsistent  with  equity  and  public  faith  to  resume 
the  lands  ceded  to  the  Nizam,  and  it  was  main- 
tained with  less  show  of  reason  that  it  would  be 
equally  incompatible  with  justice  to  the  British 
Government  of  India  to  deprive  it  of  Cuttack.  Ra- 
goji  Bhonsla's  notions  of  justice  were  somewhat  at 
variance  with  those  of  the  Governor-General,  and 
he  not  unnaturally  demurred  to  the  decision  of  a 
judge  who  sat  in  judgment  on  his  own  cause,  and 
pronounced  sentence  in  his  own  favour.     He  was 


DISSATISFACTION   OP  THE  RAJA.  57 

obliged  to  submit,  but  he  acquiesced  unwillingly,  book  i. 


CHAP. 


To  fulfil  in  some  degree  the  purpose  of  restitution 
intimated  by  Lord  Comwallis,  it  was  proposed  to  1807. 
cede  to  the  Raja  a  tract  of  little  extent  or  value 
west  of  the  Warda  river,  and  the  more  consider- 
able district  of  Sambhalpur  on  the  east  of  Berar. 
The  Raja  declined  to  accept  the  former :  the  latter 
became,  after  a  season,  an  unwilling  and  unpro- 
fitable dependency  of  Nagpur.  Its  cession  was 
scarcely  compatible  with  a  strict  observance  of  the 
obligations  contracted  with  the  people  of  the  pro- 
vince when  it  came  into  British  possession. 

The  countries  of  Sambhalpur  and  Patna,  forming 
an  extensive  tract,  were,  for  the  greater  part,  over- 
run with  jungle ;  but  they  afforded  support  to  a 
scanty  population  scattered  about  in  detached  vil- 
lages, and  subject  to  the  authority  of  a  number  of 
petty  Rajput  chiefs,  loosely  connected  by  affinity  or 
allegiance,  but  not  unfrequently  disunited  and  at 
variance.  The  Mahratta  Rajas  of  Nagpur  had 
availed  themselves  of  the  opportunity  offered  by  the 
dissensions  of  the  chiefs  to  interpose,  and  set  up  a 
claim  of  supremacy  and  exact  payment  of  tribute ; 
but  they  had  never  been  able  to  establish  any  recog- 
nised influence  or  authority.  The  principle  of  the 
Mulkgiri  of  Kattiwar  was  therefore  here  also  in 
practice :  a  body  of  troops  was  sent  every  third  year 
into  the  province,  which  plundered  the  villages  and 
devastated  the  fields,  until  its  retreat  was  purchased 
by  the  pajonent  of  the  sum  demanded.  This  system 
of  extortion,  and  the  cruelty  and  spoliation  with 
which  it  was  enforced,  had  rendered  the  Mahrattas 
detested  alike  by  chiefs  and  people,  and  they  cor- 


58  HISTORY   OF   BRITISH   INDIA. 

BOOK  I.  dially  welcomed  and  assisted  the  British  division, 
^11^^*^  which,  in  the  late  war,  was  sent  in  their  direction. 


1807.  On  that  occasion  they  had  readily  promised  allegi- 
ance to  the  British  Government,  on  condition  that 
they  should  be  permanently  retained  amongst  its 
subjects.  As,  however,  little  advantage  to  the  re- 
sources of  the  Company's  dominions  was  to  be  ex- 
pected from  so  poor  a  dependency,  the  pledge  given 
to  its  inhabitants  was  disregarded,  and  it  was  re- 
solved to  consign  them  again  to  their  Mahratta 
oppressors.  With  a  show  of  attention  to  its  engage- 
ments, the  British  Government,  at  the  same  time 
that  it  announced  to  the  chiefs  its  determination  to 
relinquish  its  occupation  of  the  country,  pretended 
to  ask  their  consent  to  the  transfer;  offering  to  grant 
to  those  who  might  prefer  the  abandonment  of  their 
homes  to  submission  to  the  Mahrattas,  waste  lands 
in  the  adjacent  province  of  Cuttack. 

The  determination  of  the  British  Government  to 
abandon  them  filled  the  people  of  Sambhalpur  and 
Patna  with  consternation,  and  they  protested  against 
the  measure  in  the  most  earnest  and  affecting 
terms.*  Their  remonstrances  were  unavailing;  and, 
after  some  negociation,  they  were  prevailed  upon  to 
promise  acceptance  of  the  offer  of  compensation 
elsewhere,  and  agreed  to  quit  the  country  within  a 
given  period,  for  the  settlement  which  was  proposed 
to  them  in  Cuttack.     When  the  time  assigned  for 

*  A  notion  prevailed  amongst  the  people  that  the  province  vras  ceded 
by  the  British  Government  in  consequence  of  financial  embarrassments. 
The  head  men  of  the  villages  thereupon  assembled,  waited  upon  Captain 
Roughsedge  the  commissioner,  and  offered  on  the  part  of  their  respective 
communities  to  make  a  free  gift  to  him  of  half,  or,  if  that  were  insufficient, 
of  a  still  larger  proportion  of  their  property  of  every  description,  if  the 
sacrifice  would  prevent  their  being  abandoned. — MS.  Records. 


RELINQUISHMENT    OF    SAMBHALPUR.  59 


their  emigration  arrived,  natural  attachment  to  their  book  i. 
native  soil  and  the  homes  of  their  forefathers  ^^^^^[_^ 
overcame  their  hatred  and  dread  of  the  Mahrattas,  I807. 
and  they  refused  to  move,  declaring  it  to  be  their 
resolution  to  remain  upon  their  paternal  lands,  and 
defend  them  as  they  best  might  from  the  grasp  of 
the  spoiler.  Advantage  was  immediately  taken  of 
their  change  of  purpose:  their  tergiversation  was 
held  to  exonerate  the  Bengal  Government  from  the 
obligations  of  perpetual  protection  or  equivalent 
compensation,  and  the  recusants  were  abandoned 
to  their  fate.*  One  chief  alone,  Jujar  Sing  of 
Raigerh,  allowed  his  allies  no  such  pretext  to  shuffle 
off  their  responsibility :  he  had  consistently  refused 
to  be  a  party  to  the  agreement  to  leave  the  country, 
and  declared  himself  resolved  rather  to  suffer  any 
extremities,  leaving  to  the  British  Government  the 
odium  of  a  breach  of  faith.  They  were,  therefore, 
obliged   to   except   Raigerh   from   the   cessions   to 

'  It  is  stated  in  a  work  which  is  in  general  of  good  authority,  the  Ben- 
gal and  Agra  Gazetteer,  1841,  vol.  ii.  p.  S12,  <<  that  Sambhalpur  and  Patna 
were  restored  to  the  R^ja  of  Berar  by  General  Wellesley,  in  ignorance  of 
the  intention  of  the  Bengal  GoTemment  to  keep  them  as  tributary  depen- 
dencies ;  that  many  attempts  were  made  to  induce  the  R^ja  to  forego  the 
concession,  and  accept  an  equivalent ;  and  that  it  was  only  upon  finding 
him  adhere  pertinaciously  to  the  promised  restoration,  that  the  Govern- 
ment consented  at  last  to  relinquish  the  provinces ;  at  the  same  time,  in 
order  to  reconcile  the  people  to  the  proceeding,  they  were  told,  that,  should 
events  again  bring  them  under  British  rule,  they  should  become  permanently 
subject  to  it."  The  statement  does  not  seem  to  be  correct.  In  the  treaty 
of  Deogaum,  the  10th  article  confirms  all  treaties  made  by  the  British 
Government  with  the  feudatories  of  the  R^ja ;  and  the  stipulation  applies 
especially  to  the  agreements  with  the  Ri^as  of  Sambhalpur  and  Patna,  in 
which  they  had  conditioned  that  they  should  remain  permanently  under 
British  authority.  Their  districts  were  ceded  to  Nagpur  by  Sir  G.  Bar- 
low in  August,  1806,  by  a  formal  engagement,  in  the  preamble  of  which  it 
is  stated  that  the  Governor-General  agrees  to  restore  all  the  territory  of 
Sambhalpur  and  Patna  which  was  ceded  by  the  Raja  to  the  Company. 
It  is  clear,  therefore,  that  up  to  the  date  of  this  restoration  the  provinces 
had  been  held  by  the  Company ;  and  no  claim  to  them  by  the  Raja,  founded 
on  a  promise  by  Greneral  Wellesley,  could  have  been  preferred  or  recog- 
nised.—Coll.  of  Treaties,  pp.  961.  300. 


60  HISTORY   OF   BRITISH   INDIA, 

BOOK  I.  Nagpur ;  but  they  accompanied  the  exception  with 
^^^^^^^  strict  injunctions  to  the  Raja  to  avoid  giving  offence 
1807.  to  the  Government  of  Berar,  on  pain  of  forfeiting 
his  claim  to  British  support.  A  Mahratta  force  was 
sent  against  the  other  Rajas,  which,  with  some 
trouble,  and  more  by  treachery  than  force  of  arms, 
reduced  them  to  obedience.*  At  a  subsequent  era, 
and  under  a  different  system  of  policy,  Sambhalpur 
was  finally  reannexed  to  the  Presidency  of  Bengal. 

Although  deeply  disappointed  and  annoyed  by 
the  refusal  of  the  Bengal  Government  to  understand 
the  letter  of  Lord  Comwallis  in  the  sense  in  which 
he  interpreted  it,  the  Raja  of  Nagpur  was  not  in  a 
position  to  resent  its  conduct  or  dispense  with 
its  friendship.  He  was  pressed  for  large  pecuniary 
payments  by  Sindhia  and  by  Holkar:  the  latter 
threatened  to  exact  the  discharge  of  his  demands  at 
the  head  of  an  army,  and  the  threat  was  subse- 
quently carried  into  act  by  Holkar's  colleague. 
Amir  Khan.  Instigated  also  by  other  Mahratta 
princes  and  the  Nawab  of  Bhopal,  with  whom  the 
Court  of  Nagpur  was  at  enmity,  and  impelled 
by  their  own  habits  of  plunder,  the  confederated 
marauding  bands  known  by  the  designation  of 
Pindaris   committed   constant   depredations  on  the 

*  The  fort  of  Sambhalpur  was  at  the  time  of  the  cession  in  the  hands  of 
the  Rani,  the  I^ja  being  detained  a  prisoner  at  Nagpur.  Finding  himself 
unable  to  carry  the  place  by  force,  the  Mahratta  general  pledged  his 
Government  in  the  most  solemn  manner  to  release  the  R^ja  and  acknow- 
ledge his  authority,  on  the  Rani  consenting  to  a  moderate  tribute.  Having 
thus  thrown  her  off  her  guard,  he  took  advantage  of  her  confidence,  in  the 
course  of  the  negociations  that  followed,  to  surprise  the  fort  before  any 
defence  could  be  offered.  The  Rani  fled  with  a  few  followers ;  and  having 
with  great  difficulty,  and  after  much  fatigue  and  suffering,  escaped  into 
the  British  territory,  protection  and  a  small  monthly  pension  were 
granted  her.  She  was  one  of  those  who  at  first  entertained  the  proposal 
to  emigrate  into  Cuttack,  but  who  shrunk  from  its  accomplishment.— MS. 
Records. 


NEOOCIATIONS   WITH  SINDHIA.  61 

frontiers  of  Berar,  and  on  more  than  one  occasion  book  i. 
pillaged  the  country  even  in   the  vicinity  of  the. 


capital.  Bagoji  Bhonsla  and  his  ministers  were  18^7. 
well  aware  that  his  only  security  against  the  aggres- 
sions of  his  countrymen  was  the  British  alliance,  and 
they  were  carefiil,  therefore,  to  maintain  it  unimpair- 
ed. The  connexion  added  to  the  strength  and  repu- 
tation of  the  British  Government,  as  it  was  obvious 
to  all  the  native  states,  that  the  most  ancient  and 
respectable  branch  of  the  Mahratta  confederacy  was 
indebted  for  all  the  political  consideration  which  it 
retained,  to  the  friendly  relations  established  be- 
tween it  and  the  British  power,  unincumbered  by 
a  subsidiary  treaty,  and  not  incompatible  with  its 
independence. 

Of  all  the  Mahratta  princes  engaged  in  hostilities 
with  the  British,  Dowlat  Rao  Sindhia  had  suffered 
the  severest  military  and  political  inflictions.  The 
organised  battalions  which  had  rendered  him  irre- 
sistible to  the  native  powers,  and  formidable  to  his 
European  adversary,  had  been  almost  annihilated  ;^ 
and,  although  much  of  the  territory  conquered  from 
him  on  the  west  of  the  Jumna  had  been  restored, 
he  had  been  deprived  of  extensive  tracts  in  Hindus- 
tan, and  of  all  the  reputation  and  authority  he  de- 
rived  from  the   guardianship    of  the    Emperor   of 

'  The  regular  infantry  brigades  in  Sindhia*8  service  at  the  beginning  of 
the  war  consisted  of  seventy -two  battalions,  forming  a  disciplined  force  of 
43,000  men  in  a  highly  respectable  state  of  efficiency,  with  a  large  propor- 
tioD  of  field  artillery. — Malcolm's  Central  India,  i.  138.  After  the  war 
they  were  reduced  to  two  brigades^  under  the  commands  severally  of  a 
Frenchman  named  Baptiste,  and  an  Armenian  of  the  name  of  Jacob ; 
their  discipline  and  organisation  were  greatly  impaired. — Letters  from  a 
Mahratta  Camp.  There  were  other  bodies  of  troops  under  native  leaders, 
bat  they  were  of  a  still  more  imperfect  and  irregular  description. — Prin- 
fep.  Transactions  in  India,  i.  26. 


62  HISTORY   OF   BRITISH   INDIA. 


BOOK  I.  Delhi.  He  was  precluded  by  positive  engagements, 
'  as  well  as  by  his  fear  of  the  consequences  of  their 
1807.  infringement,  from  seeking  to  re-establish  his  ascen- 
dancy in  the  Mahratta  confederation ;  and  the  sole 
object  of  his  now  humbled  policy  was  to  obtain 
money,  on  various  pretexts,  from  the  British  Go- 
vernment, and  from  the  neighbouring  states. 

The  equivocal  behaviour  of  Sindhia  in  the  in- 
terval that  elapsed  between  the  treaty  formed  with 
him  in  1803,  and  that  with  Holkar  in  1805,  vir- 
tually annulled  the  existing  engagements,  and  ren- 
dered their  renewal  necessary.  A  new  treaty  was 
accordingly  entered  into  with  him,  by  which  some 
pf  the  stipulations  of  that  of  Sirji  Anjangaum  were 
abrogated,  others  confirmed.^  The  intercourse  that 
ensued  in  the  period  immediately  following  had 
principally  for  its  object  the  fulfilment  of  the  stipu- 
lations then  provided:  it  did  little  credit  to  either 
of  the  contracting  parties,  turning  mainly  upon  mat- 
ters of  pecuniary  interest,  in  which  it  was  the  aim 
of  the  Mahratta  to  get  as  much,  and  of  the  Go- 
vernor-General to  give  as  little,  as  possible.  The 
disputes  were  characteristic. 

The  treaty  of  Sirji  Anjangaum  permitted  Sindhia 
to  hold  within  the  British  possessions  certain  dis- 
tricts granted  him  in  Jagir  by  the  King  of  Delhi ; 

'  In  the  engagement  now  concluded,  no  notice  was  taken  of  the  sub- 
sidiary treaty  to  which  Sindhia  had  acceded  in  1804.  It  might,  therefore, 
be  considered  as  virtually  cancelled.  It  was  in  fact  altogether  nugatory. 
The  force  to  be  furnished  by  the  British  Goyemment  was  not  to  be  paid  by 
the  Riga,  nor  was  it  to  be  stationed  in  his  territory.  The  arrangement 
amounted  to  no  more  than  an  agreement  to  furnish  Sindhia  with  a  body 
of  troops  whenever  he  should  require  them,  if  the  purpose  for  which  he 
requiriMi  them  was  approved  of  by  the  Government  of  Bengal.  It  was 
very  little  probable  that  the  latter  would  often  give  their  sanction  to  Sind- 
hia's  military  policy,  and  as  little  likely  therefore  that  he  would  apply  for 
troops.     He  never  did  make  the  application,  and  the  treaty  was  a  nullity. 


DISPUTED  PECUNIARY   CLAIMS.  63 

and  it  secured  to  members  of  his  family,  and  to  book  i. 
some  of  bis  cbief  officers,  compensation  for  lands  ^^^'  ** 
beld  by  them  in  the  Doab  before  the  war,  either  by  I807. 
a  grant  of  similar  Jagirs  or  of  equivalent  pensions, 
provided  that  the  whole  amount  of  revenue  so 
alienated  did  not  exceed  the  annual  sum  of  seven- 
teen lakhs  of  rupees.  By  the  final  treaty,  Sindhia 
agreed  to  relinquish,  from  the  1st  of  January,  1805, 
pensions  to  the  amount  of  fifteen  lakhs  of  rupees  a 
year.  The  Jagirs  to  individuals  were  continued, 
not  merely  as  compensation  for  loss,  but  avowedly 
as  bribes  to  purchase  their  voices  for  peace ;  or,  as 
it  was  officially  expressed,  "  to  secure  the  support  of 
influential  officers  in  the  Councils  of  Sindhia,  whose 
interests  being  affected  by  a  war,  they  would  oppose 
its  occurrence."  The  same  engagement  contracted 
for  a  pension  to  the  Maharaja  himself  of  four  lakhs 
of  rupees  a  year,  and  a  Jagir  of  two  lakhs  to  his 
wife,  and  of  one  to  his  daughter.  The  Jagirs  were 
eventually  commuted  to  pensions,  which  lapsed 
with  the  death  of  the  pensioners.  These  grants  and 
commutations  were  the  subjects  of  long  and  some- 
times angry  discussion. 

Another  contested  item  was  the  balance  of  an 
account  between  Sindhia  and  the  Company,  in 
which  the  former  claimed  arrears  of  pension,  and  of 
revenue  collections  for  two  years  prior  to  1805; 
which  the  latter  admitted  to  a  limited  extent,  but 
met  with  a  counter-claim  for  the  public  and  private 
property  plundered  from  the  British  Residency  in 
1804,  and  for  monies  advanced  and  charges  of  col- 
lection. The  sum  claimed  by  Sindhia  was  nearly 
twenty-four  lakhs  of  rupees ;  that  demanded  by  the 


64  HISTORY   OF   BRITISH   INDIA. 

BOOK  I.  Company,  nearly  twenty-seven  lakhs.  They  agreed, 
^^^'  '•  however,  to  forego  a  portion  of  their  claim,  and 
1807.  admitted  a  balance  in  favour  of  Sindhia  of  63,000 
rupees  (6300/.),  an  amount  which  was  vastly  inferior 
to  his  expectations  and  his  necessities :  for  the  relief 
of  the  latter  he  was  therefore  obliged  to  look  to 
other  quarters. 

The  quarrels  of  the  Rajput  princes,  which  will 
presently  be  more  particularly  adverted  to,  offered 
an  ample  field  for  the  gratification  of  Mahratta 
rapacity,  of  which  the  Mahratta  princes  in  Malwa 
were  not  slow  to  reap  the  harvest.  The  exhaus- 
tion of  Sindhia's  resources,  and  the  impossibility 
of  raising  a  revenue  commensurate  with  his  ex- 
penditure from  his  wasted  and  depopulated  terri- 
tories, crippled  his  movements,  and  disabled  him 
from  appropriating  his  fiiU  share  of  the  spoil.  His 
troops,  still  too  numerous  for  his  means,  were  re- 
peatedly in  a  state  of  mutiny  for  arrears  of  pay, 
and  had  degenerated  into  a  lawless  horde  of  plun- 
derers, who,  in  the  realisation  of  their  demands, 
made  little  difference  between  the  country  of  friend 
or  foe,  and  pillaged  the  districts  of  their  own  master 
and  his  allies  as  remorselessly  as  those  of  his  ene- 
mies. The  only  prospect  of  providing  them  with  an 
equivalent  for  pay,  and  of  maintaining  amongst 
them  some  degree  of  subordination,  existed  in  the 
levy  of  contributions  from  the  neighbouring  princes ; 
and  from  time  to  time  considerable  sums  were 
exacted  from  the  Rana  of  Udaypur,  and  the  Rajas 
of  Jodhpur  and  Jaypur,  as  arrears  of  tribute  due 
under  former  engagements  to  the  Mahrattas,  or  as 
the  price  of  plighted  military  service,  which  was  at 


NAWAB   OF   BHOPAL.  65 


best  but  imperfectly  rendered.      But  Holkar  and  booki. 
Amir  Khan  had  taken  the  disputes  of  the  Rajputs  ^^^^^^ 
under  their  management,  and  Sindhia  was  unwilling     I807. 
or  unable  to  interfere  with  effect.     After  a  feeble 
attempt  at  interposition,  he  was  contented  to  allow 
some  of  his  principal  officers  to  take  occasional  part 
in  the  contest,  whilst  he  directed  his  attention  more 
especially  to  the  prosecution  of  designs  against  the 
independence  of  Bhopal. 

The  principality  of  Bhopal  presented  the  singu- 
larity of  a  petty  Mohammedan  power  in  the  very 
heart  of  the  Hindu  states.  It  was  founded  at  the 
close  of  the  seventeenth  century  by  Dost  Mo- 
hammed, an  Afghan  adventurer  in  the  service  of 
the  Emperor  of  Delhi,  who,  from  being  the  superin- 
tendent of  the  small  district  of  Bersia  in  Malwa, 
raised  himself,  by  that  mixture  of  courage,  activity, 
treachery,  and  political  cruelty,  which  is  not  uncom- 
mon in  the  character  of  his  countrymen  and  which 
in  the  latter  days  of  the  Mogul  empire  was  the 
usual  title  to  temporary  elevation,  to  the  command 
of  a  territory  of  some  extent,  and  the  appellation 
of  Nawab  of  Bhopal.  His  direct  line  continued 
through  his  three  successors.  The  two  last  of  these 
devoted  their  lives  to  religious  meditation  and 
prayer,  and  left  the  conduct  of  public  affairs  to  their 
ministers,  men  of  various  characters  and  fortunes; 
whose  administration  often  excited,  and  sometimes 
justified,  the  opposition  and  violence  of  the  tur- 
bulent nobles  and  officers  of  the  court.  At  this 
period  the  Dewan  or  minister  of  the  Nawab  was 
his  kinsman.  Vizir  Mohammed,  whose  father  had 
been    slain    in    an    unsuccessful    insurrection,    and 

VOL.  I.  F 


66  HISTORY   OF   BRITISH    INDIA. 


BOOK  I.  whose  youth  had  been  spent  in  exile  and  predatory 
^^'^  warfare :  placed,  after  many  vicissitudes,  at  the  head 
iao7.  of  affairs,  he  brought  to  their  administration  the 
qualities  of  activity,  courage,  and  prudence,  which 
promised  to  restore  the  declining  prosperity  and  re- 
putation of  Bhopal.  He  was  not  suffered  to  carry 
his  projects  to  maturity.  The  son  of  the  Nawab, 
Ghous  Mohammed,  jealous  of  his  ascendancy,  and 
apprehensive  of  his  ambition,  invited  the  Raja  of 
Berar,  and  Dowlat  Rao  Sindhia,  to  invade  the  prin- 
cipality, in  order  to  secure  his  succession  to  the 
throne.  The  invitation  was  readily  accepted.  The 
capital,  Islam-nagar,  was  captured  by  the  latter ;  and 
the  city  and  fort  of  Bhopal  were  occupied  by  Sadik 
Ali,  the  general  of  the  former.  Little  hope  re- 
mained that  the  state  would  recover  from  the  pres- 
sure of  such  a  formidable  combination. 

In  this  state  of  things,  the  old  Navrab,  Haiyat 
Mohammed,  died.  He  was  succeeded  by  his  son, 
who,  finding  that  his  allies  purposed  the  dismem- 
berment of  his  territory,  reconciled  himself  to  Vi- 
cir  Mohammed,  and  continued  him  in  the  office  of 
Dewan,  trusting  to  his  talents  for  the  extrication  of 
his  country  from  the  grasp  of  his  enemies.  His  ex- 
pectations were  not  disapi>ointed.  Vizir  Mohammed 
conciliated  Sindhia  by  promising  to  discharge  the 
tributo  which  Ghous  Mohammed  had  engaged  to 
pay ;  and,  with  the  assistance  of  the  Pindaris,  he 
repelled  the  forces  of  Berar.  Tlie  ruin  of  his 
country  was  arrested  for  the  time ;  but  Vizir  Mo- 
hammed  was  well  aware  of  the  inadequacy  of  his 
means  to  cope  with  such  i)owerful  adversaries,  and, 
anticipating  the  repetition  of  their  efforts  for  his 


DEATH   OF   SIKJI    RAO   OHATKA.  67 

destraction,  endeayoured  to  interest  the  British  Go-  book  i. 
vemment  in  his  fevour.     The  system  of  policy  then         ' 
lidopted,  rendered  his  application  ineffectual,  and  he     iw)7. 
was  left  to  his  own  resources  until  a  more  auspicious 
period  arrived,  when  the  debt  contracted  to  the  Na- 
wab  of  Bhopal,  Haiyat  Mohammed,  for  the  assist- 
ance which  he  gave  to  General  Goddard,  and  by 
which  alone  the  British  detachment  was  enabled  to 
march  unopposed  from  the  Nerbudda  to  Surat,  was 
repaid  by  the  seasonable  protection  afforded  to  his 
descendant. 

The  counsels  of  Sindhia  were  likewise  distracted  1809. 
by  the  conflicting  views  of  his  principal  officers  and 
lidvisers,  and  the  struggles  that  prevailed  amongst 
them  for  the  management  of  his  affairs.  Ambaji 
Inglia,  after  having  been  confined,  tortured,  and 
plundered,  as  has  been  described,  was  restored  to 
favour,  and  became  the  leader  of  a  party  opposed 
to  the  former  ministers.  In  order  to  strengthen 
his  influence,  he  invited  Sirji  Rao  Ghatka,  whom 
the  British  Government  had  banished  by  express 
stipulation  from  Sindhia^s  presence,  to  return  to 
camp;  and  although  the  measure  furnished  his 
adversaries  with  a  plea  for  alarming  the  prince,  and 
inducing  him  once  more  to  imprison  and  pillage 
Ambaji,  yet,  when  the  interdict  was  withdraiivm  by 
those  who  had  pronounced  it,  and  the  Government 
of  Calcutta  no  longer  entertained  an  undignified 
apprehension  of  the  intrigues  of  an  individual,  Sirji 
Rao  resumed  his  place  at  Sindhia's  durbar,  and  con-* 
ducted,  conjointly  with  Ambaji,  the  duties  of  the 
administration.  Neither  of  them  long  survived  the 
recovery  of  their  authority.      Ambaji  Inglia  died 

F2 


68  HISTORY   OF   BRITISH   INDIA. 


BOOK  I.  early  in  1809.  Sirji  Rao  Ghatka  was  killed  in  an 
_^^11J_L  affray  in  the  course  of  the  same  year.^  Dowlat  Rao, 
1809.  after  Ambaji's  death,  seized  on  his  fortress  of 
Gwalior,  and  for  the  greater  part  of  his  life  con- 
tinued encamped  in  its  vicinity,  until  his  camp 
grew  to  be  a  considerable  town,  which  is  still  the  ca- 
pital of  his  descendants.  No  other  change  ensued  : 
the  same  pecuniary  embarrassments  continued  to  be 
felt,  and  the  same  means  of  relieving  them  to  be 
employed  :  the  fruits  of  robbery  and  spoliation  were 
dissipated  by  the  wasteful  and  unprincipled  system 
under  which  they  were  gathered,  and  the  hordes  of 
licensed  banditti  which  were  let  loose  upon  the  sur- 
rounding states  were  a  source  of  weakness,  not  of 
strength,  to  the  prince  whom  they  nominally  served. 

'  The  importance  attached  to  this  individual  by  hig  special  exclusion 
from  Sindbia's  presence  as  an  article  of  treaty,  gives  interest  to  the  follow- 
ing details  of  his  death,  derived  from  an  authority  on  the  spot : — **  Sirji 
Rao  bad  gone  to  the  durbar  and  was  earnestly  pressing  Sindhia  to  accede 
to  some  of  his  proposals  ;  to  which  the  Maharaja  as  usual  returned  evasive 
and  unsatisfactory  replies,  and  ordered  his  equipage  to  be  got  ready  to  go 
to  an  elephant-fight.  As  he  was  about  to  depart,  Sirji  Rao  repeated  his 
remonstrances,  and  at  length  had  the  temerity  to  seize  the  skirt  of  his  robe 
and  endeavoured  to  detain  him  forcibly  in  his  seat.  Some  of  the  Huzuriyas 
(personal  attendants)  present,  incensed  at  such  an  insult,  thrust  him  back  ; 
and  Sindhia  escaped  from  the  tent,  giving  an  order  to  secure  the  minister's 
person.  Sirji  Rao  drew  his  sword  and  resisted  the  execution  of  the  order : 
a  violent  scuffle  ensued,  in  which  some  individuals  of  both  parties  were 
killed  and  several  wounded.  At  length  Sirji  Rao  effected  his  retreat  to 
his  own  tent,  but  was  followed  by  the  enraged  party  from  the  Deiiri, 
headed  by  Anand  Rao  and  Manaji  Phankra,  two  distant  relations  of  the 
Maharaja's  family.  In  one  minute  the  ropes  of  the  tent  in  which  the  un- 
fortunate minister  had  taken  refuge  were  cut,  and  he  himself  dragged  from 
beneath  it ;  and  in  the  next  he  fell  dead  in  the  public  street,  pierced  with  a 
dozen  wounds  inflicted  by  his  pitiless  enemies.  Sindhia  is  said  to  have 
given  orders,  when  he  heard  of  the  scuffle,  to  spare  his  father-in-law's  life, 
and  from  the  known  lenity  of  his  disposition  it  is  probable  he  did  so.  His 
pursuers  either  wilfully  or  ignorantly  mistook  these  orders,  and  in  all  pro- 
bability rejoiced  at  an  opportunity  of  getting  rid  of  a  man  who  was  an 
object  of  hatred  to  themselves,  of  dislike  to  their  master,  of  terror  to  the 
whole  army,  and  apprehension  to  every  court  in  India.** — Letters  from  a 
Mahratta  Camp,  by  Captain  Broughton,  commanding  the  Resident*8 
escort,  1809,  p.  223. 


PROJECTS  OF   HOLKAIC  69 

The   British   Grovemment,  unahle  to  rid  itself  of  book  i. 
former  impressions,  continued  to  treat  Dowlat  Rao         ' 


Sindhia  with  a  guarded  and  timid  policy  for  some     I809. 
time  after  his  friendship  had  ceased  to  be  an  object 
of  conciliation,  or  his  enmity  of  fear. 

The  power  and  resources  of  Jeswant  Rao  Holkar  ]806. 
were  in  like  manner  for  some  time  estimated  rather 
by  the  mischief  which  he  had  inflicted,  than  any 
which  he  retained  the  ability  to  commit.  Tlie  unme- 
rited liberality  which  the  British  Government  had 
evinced  towards  him  had  replaced  him  in  the  actual 
or  prospective  possession  of  an  extensive  and  valuable 
territory,*  and  its  selfish  disregard  of  inconvenient 
obligations  consigned  to  his  rapacity  the  chieftains 
of  Rajputana,  particularly  the  Rajas  of  Bundi  and 
Jaypur.*  The  motives  of  this  uncalled  for  genero- 
sity were  unmtelligible  to  the  native  princes,  and  to 
Holkar  himself;  and  both  ascribed  it  to  dread  of  his 
military  talents,  and  incapability  of  providing  longer 
for  the  exigencies  of  war.  The  necessary  conse- 
quence  of  this  notion  was,  the  inflation  of  Holkar's 
ambition  with  the  hope  that  he  should  soon  be  able 
to  reunite  under  happier  auspices  the  disjointed 
members  of  the  Mahratta  confederacy,  and  exact  a 
severe  retribution  for  the  mutilation  which  they  had 


'  The  treaty  with  Holkar  of  December,  1805,  restored  to  him  the  pos- 
sessions of  the  Holkar  family  in  Mewar,  Malwa,  Harauti,  and  the  Dekhin. 
— Coll.  of  Treaties,  p.  294. 

•  A  declaratory  article,  added  to  the  treaty  by  Sir  G.  Barlow,  abrogated 
the  second  article,  by  which  Holkar  had  renounced  all  right  to  Tonk- 
Rampora  and  the  districts  north  of  the  Bundi  Hills.  The  abrogation  was 
interpreted  by  him  as  a  virtual  withdrawal  of  the  protection  granted  to  the 
Bundi  R^ja.  By  the  eighth  article  of  the  treaty  Holkar  relinquished  all 
claims  of  every  description  upon  the  British  Government  and  its  allies, 
amongst  whom  the  R^ja  of  Jaypur  considered  himself  included :  his  claim 
was  not  admitted,  as  is  subsequently  noticed  in  the  text. 


70  HISTORY   OF  BRITISH   INDIA- 


BOOK  I.  suffered.  So  far  was  he  from  acknowledging  the 
___^J__  extent  of  the  leniency  which  had  been  shown  him, 
1806.  that  he  immediately  preferred,  in  insulting  lan- 
guage, new  and  unreasonable  claims ;  demanding  the 
cession  of  additional  lands  in  the  Dekhin,  and  of 
eighteen  districts  in  Hindustan,  and  the  grant  of 
Jagirs  for  his  family  and  adherents.^  Protracting 
his  inarch  southwards  as  long  as  he  could  find  any 
one  whom  he  might  plunder,  he  levied  contributions 
on  his  way  from  the  petty  chiefs  whom  the  British 
Government  professed  to  protect,  or  to  regard  as 
allies;^  and  he  made  no  secret  of  his  purpose  to 
punish  the  Bundi  Rqja  expressly  for  the  aid  which 
he  had  given  during  the  war  to  the  British.  He 
had  scarcely  returned  to  his  own  domains  when 
he  addressed  letters,  or  dispatched  emissaries,  to  the 
other  Mahratta  princes,  urging  them  to  renew  their 
ancient  connexions,  and  prepare  for  another  conflict 
with  their  common  foe.  They  were  suffering,  how- 
ever, too  severely  from  their  recent   discomfiture 

*  In  one  of  his  first  letters  he  declared  peremptorily  that  the  districts 
which  he  claimed  in  Hindustan  must  be  restored  to  him,  and  he  insisted 
that  others  should  be  assigned  to  Amir  Khan.  The  Bengal  Govenunent 
sheltered  its  dignity  under  the  plea  of  an  erroneous  translation  of  his  ex- 
pressions haying  been  made  by  Colonel  Malcolm,  through  whom  the  letter 
had  been  transmitted,  but  apparently  with  little  reason ;  and  there  was  no 
question  as  to  the  general  tone  of  the  epistle.  The  Governor-General  de- 
termined to  take  no  offence,  ascribing  Holkar's  language  **  to  the  un- 
bridled violence  of  his  temper."  The  application  was  answered  by  Lord 
Lake,  with  an  intimation  that  its  repetition  might  lead  to  a  renewal  of 
hostilities;  and,  although  this  intimation  did  not  silence  Holkar*8  preten- 
sions, it  induced  him  to  urge  them  in  more  decent  phraseology. — MS. 
Records. 

'  On  his  way  through  Hariana,  which  had  been  given  to  Abdul  Samad 
Khan  as  a  reward  for  his  services  in  the  war,  Holkar  levied  contributions 
on  the  villages,  and  laid  waste  the  lands.  The  Khan  applied  for  military 
succour :  this  was  refused  him ;  but  in  consideration  of  the  recent  date  of 
the  grant,  and  the  impossibility  of  his  having  had  time  to  organise  his  re- 
sources, pecuniary  compensation  for  his  losses  was  awarded  to  him. — MS. 
Records. 


PECUNIARY   EXACTIONS   FROM  THE  RAJPUTS.  71 

to  venture  precipitately  upon  so  dangerous  an  en-  book  l. 
terprise  ;^  and,  whatever  the  opinion  which  they   ^^^^'  ^ 


might  at  first  have  been  disposed  to  entertain  of     1807. 
Holkar^s  courage  and  conduct,  it  was  speedily  efiaced 
by  his  outrageous  behaviour  and  eventual  derange- 
ment. 

The  first  object  of  Holkar's  policy  after  his  re- 
turn to  Malwa  was,  the  maintenance  of  a  military 
force  for  beyond  his  own  unaided  resources.  The 
plunder  of  his  neighbours  offered  the  only  means  of 
filling  his  treasury ;  and  the  quarrels  of  the  Rajput 
princes  unhappily  afforded  to  him,  even  in  a  greater 
degree  than  to  Sindhia,  an  opening  for  pecuniary 
exactions.  On  his  return  from  the  Punjab,  Holkar 
halted  for  about  a  month  in  the  Jaypur  territory ; 
and,  whilst  his  army  laid  waste  its  fields,  he  received 
eighteen  lakhs  of  rupees  from  the  Raja  as  the  price 
of  his  withholding  his  aid  from  the  Raja  of  Jodhpur, 
with  whom  the  Raja  of  Jaypur  was  at  strife,  and 
who,  by  giving  shelter  to  Holkar's  family  when  the 
Mfthratta  fled  from  Lord  Lake,  had  established 
some  claim  to  his  gratitude.  ^The  money  extorted 
from  Jaypur  precluded  him  from  giving  personal 
assistance  to  Jodhpur,  but  he  evaded  the  strict  ful- 
filment of  the  bargain  by  permitting  his  chief 
leader  and  intimate  associate,  Amir  Khan,  to  carry 
his  mercenary  bands  to  whichever  of  the  contending 
Rajas  should  bid  most  largely  for  their  services. 
Holkar  then  occupied  himself  in  the  castigation  of 
the  Raja  of  Bundi,  exacting  from  him  heavy  con- 
tributions, and  in  enforcing  demands  of  a  similar 

'  Sindhia,.  the  Peshwa,  and  the  Raja,  of  Nagpur  severally  communicated 
these  letters  to  the  Residents  at  their  courts. — MS.  Records. 


72  HISTORY   OF   BRITISH   INDIA. 

BOOK  I.  nature  from  Zaiim  Sing,  regent  of  Kota.     He  then 
^^^'^  withdrew  to  Rampura-Bampura,  where  his  health 
1807.     rapidly  gave  way  to  habitual  intoxication  and  unre- 
strained   indulgence,    the    effects    of   which    were 
exacerbated  by  the  compunctious  visitings  of  con- 
science. 

The  animosity  borne  by  the  Peshwa  to  Holkar 
augmented  his  dissatisfaction  with  the  favourable 
terms  granted  to  that  chief;  and  he  strongly  ob- 
jected to  the  treaty  which  the  British  Government 
liad  concluded,  that  it  conferred  upon  him  rights 
and  possessions  to  which  he  had  no  claim.  In  truth, 
Jeswant  Rao  Holkar  had  become  the  head  of  his 
house,  partly  by  accident,  partly  by  his  own  exer- 
tions. Tukaji  Holkar,  his  predecessor,  left  two 
legitimate  sons,  Kasi  Rao  and  Malhar  Rao.  His 
third  son,  Jeswant  Rao,  was  his  son  by  a  concubine* 
Kasi  Rao,  the  eldest  son,  was  deformed  in  body  and 
infirm  in  mind,  and  his  imfitness  for  the  adminis- 
tration of  affairs  induced  the  chief  officers  of  the 
state  to  give  the  preference  to  his  younger  brother 
Malhar  Rao.  Sindhia  took  part  with  Kasi  Rao; 
and,  in  the  contest  that  ensued,  Malhar  Rao  was 
killed,  and  Jeswant  Rao,  who  had  upheld  his  cause, 
was  obliged  to  seek  safety  in  flight.  After  encoun- 
tering many  vicissitudes,  Jeswant  Rao  by  a  course  of 
successful  predatory  devastation,  in  which  he  was 
deeply  indebted  to  the  companionship  of  Amir 
Khan,  found  himself  strong  enough  to  drive  Sind- 
hia's  troops  out  of  the  territories  of  the  Holkar 
family,  and  establish  himself  in  their  government 
in  the  name  and  on  behalf  of  their  lawful  prince, 
Kandi  Rao,  the  infant  son  of  the  murdered  Malhar 


DEATH   OF  KANDI   RAO.  73 

Rao,  who  was  at  the  time  in  Sindhia's  hands,  as  well  book  i. 
as  Kasi  Rao,  his  uncle.     The  latter  was  allowed  his  ^J^J^^^^ 
liberty,  and  gave  himself  up  to  Jeswant  Rao ;  and,     1807. 
when  the  war  with  the  British  Government  was 
projected,  Sindhia,''in  order  to  secure  Holkar's  co- 
operation, resigned  to  him  the  charge  of  the  boy 
Kandi  Rao.     At  the  time  of  Holkar's  return  from 
the  Pulijab,  Kasi  Rao  was  living  peaceably  at  Ni- 
maur,  under  the  charge  of  Jeswant  Rao's  Gooroo, 
or  spiritual  guide,  Chimna  Bhao :  his  nephew,  Kandi 
Rao,  had  accompanied  him  on  his  march. 

A  body  of  Mohammedan  horse  in  the  service  of 
Jeswant  Rao  having  mutinied  for  arrears  of  pay,  his 
nephew  was  delivered  to  them  as  a  pledge  for  the 
promised  liquidation  of  their  demands.  As  the 
promises  made  to  the  mutineers  were  slow  of  ac- 
complishment, it  occurred  to  them  to  intimidate  Hol- 
kar  into  more  prompt  compliance  by  proclaiming 
Kandi  Rao  the  lawful  Raja,  and  threatening  to 
depose  Jeswant  Rao  as  a  usurper.*  The  danger  was 
imminent ;  the  money  was  raised ;  the  mutinous  sol- 
diers were  paid  and  dismissed :  they  dispersed  to 
their  homes  without  any  concern  for  the  fate  of  the 
unhappy  youth  whom  they  had  used  as  their  instru- 
ment of  intimidation,  and  abandoned  liim  to  those 
jealous  apprehensions  which  they  seem  to  have  first 
excited.  In  a  week  Kandi  Rao  was  no  longer  an 
object  of  fear.  It  was  given  out  that  he  had  died 
suddenly ;  but  it  was  the  universal  belief  that  he  had 

'  Malcolm's  Central  India,  i.  242.  According  to  Amir  Khan*s  account 
of  the  affair,  this  plan  of  enforcing  payment  was  adopted  by  his  recommen- 
dation, not  without  a  suspicion  on  Holkar*s  part  that  the  ^hole  was  a 
device  of  Amir  Khan  to  obtain  an  adjustment  of  his  own  claims. — Mem.  of 
Amir  Khan,  290. 


74  HISTORY   OF   BRITISH   INDIA. 

BOOK  I.  been  poisoned,  if  not  by  the  orders,  at  least  with 

^  ^  '''    the  acquiescence  of  Holkar.^ 

1808.  To  this  crime  succeeded  an  event  which  in  cur- 
rent belief  was  of  an  equally  atrocious  character — 
the  death  of  Kasi  Rao.  The  accounts  of  this  trans- 
action vary  in  some  of  the  details,  although  they 
correspond  in  the  outline.  Kasi  Rao  resided  in  a 
stronghold  in  the  province  of  Nimaur,  of  which 
the  governor  was  Chimna  Bhao,  the  Gooroo  of 
Holkar,  and  known  to  be  his  ready  counsellor  and 
agent  in  every  deed  of  infamy  and  guilt.  An  insur- 
rection under  some  military  leaders  had  broken  out 
in  the  adjoining  district  of  Kandesh,  and  one  of 
their  parties  attacked  Chimna  Bhao  with  a  view  to 
obtain  possession  of  the  person  of  Kasi  Rao,  and 
place  him  at  their  head.  To  disappoint  their  design, 
and  prevent  Kasi  Rao  from  falling  into  their  hands, 
Chimna  Bhao  caused  him  to  be  put  to  death.  There 
does  not  appear  to  be  any  conclusive  evidence  that 
Holkar  himself  had  suggested  a  pretended  attack 
upon  his  minister  as  a  pretext  for  the  murder  of  his 
brother,  or  any  reason  to  infer  that  the  act  was  not 
solely  attributable  to  the  unpremeditated  and  reck- 
less cruelty  of  Chimna  Bhao.*     The  imputation  of 

'  Central  India,  i.  244.  Amir  Khan  asserts  unhesitatingly  that  Hol- 
kar caused  poison  to  be  administered  to  his  nephew,  and  so  destroyed 
him ;  Mem.  307. 

'  According  to  Malcolm,  on  the  authority  of  Bangash  Khan,  one  of  the 
insurgent  Patau  leaders,  a  party  under  his  confederate,  Dadan  Khan,  at- 
tempted the  release  of  Kasi  Rao,  who  was  confined  at  Kargond,  in  Ni- 
maur ;  to  preyent  ivhich,  Chimna  Bhao  had  him  murdered  in  the  thicket 
some  distance  from  the  fort.  According  to  the  evidence  of  a  Sipahi  in  the 
service  of  Chimna  Bhao,  present  at  the  murder,  Kasi  Rao  was  killed  in 
Byaygerh,  a  fort  also  in  Nimaur,  from  which  Dadan  Khan  had  attempted 
to  carry  him  off.  The  dispatch  from  the  Resident  with  Sisdhia,  reporting 
the  transaction,  agrees  in  making  Bijaygerh  the  seat  of  the  prince's 
detention  ;  but  states  that,  orders  having  been  sent  to  bring  him  for  greater 
security  to  Holkar*s  camp,  Chimna  Bhao  was  escorting  him  on  the  way, 


INSANITY   AND   DEATH   OF   HOLKAR.  75 

being  accessory  to  the  deed  was  however  fixed  upon  book  i. 
Holkar  by  common  consent,  and  popular  belief  re-   ^^^-^ 


garded  his  insanity  as  a  just  retribution  for  the  mur-  1809. 
der  of  a  nephew  and  a  brother.  He  became  subject 
to  fits  of  mental  derangement  shortly  after  the  death 
of  Kasi  Rao :  they  alternated  with  intervals  of 
reason  for  about  a  twelvemonth,  when  they  sub- 
sided into  an  unintermitted  state  of  moody  fatuity, 
which  after  a  duration  of  three  years  terminated  in 
death. 

The  ai&irs  of  Holkar's  dominions  were  conducted 
during  his  incapacity  by  his  favourite  mistress  Tu- 
lasi  Bhai  and  her  minister  Balaram  Set ;  but  their 
hands  were  too  feeble  to  maintain  a  steady  curb 
upon  the  disorderly  troops  and  their  aspiring  cap- 
tains, and  the  country  speedily  became  the  scene  of 
plunder  and  confusion.  The  party  in  Kandesh  under 
Dadan  Khan  and  other  Patau  leaders  acquired  a 

when  he  was  attacked  at  night  by  Dadan  Khan's  men,  and,  in  the  affiray 
that  followed,  Kasi  Rao  was  accidentally  shot.  Amir  Khan*8  story  materi- 
ally differs  from  the  foregoing.  He  says,  that  the  Bhils  of  Kandesh,  being 
in  insurrection,  had  got  hold  of  the  wife  of  Kasi  Rao,  and,  she  being  preg- 
nant, they  declared  that  if  the  child  were  a  boy  they  would  make  him 
R^|a ;  that  Chimna  Bhao,  being  sent  to  quell  the  disturbance,  took  Kasi 
Bao  along  with  him  from  Galna,  where  he  had  been  detained ;  that  oo  the 
march  he  set  some  of  his  own  people  to  make  a  sham  attack  by  night 
upon  his  camp,  and,  in  the  confusion  thus  occasioned,  he  pretended  great 
alarm  lest  Kasi  Rao  should  fall  into  the  hands  of  the  Bhils,  and,  to  prcTent 
it,  ordered  him  to  be  put  to  death ;  the  whole  being  in  truth  the  device  of 
Holkar,  Although  it  is  true  that  the  Bhils  were  in 'a  state  of  insurgency 
at  this  period,  yet  the  policy  of  opposing  a  rival  to  Holkar  was  much 
more  likely  to  have  occurred  to  the  Patans,  and  it  was  no  doubt  to  guard 
against  their  availing  themselves  of  the  name  of  Kasi  Rao  that  he  was  mur- 
dered by  some  such  contrivance  as  is  imputed  to  Chimna  Bhao.  Holkar 
denied  that  he  had  given  orders  to  put  his  brother  to  death,  and,  ascribing 
it  to  accident,  publicly  expressed  himself  glad  that  it  had  occurred  at  a 
distance,  as  it  might  otherwise  have  injured  his  reputation.  The  varieties 
of  the  story  afford  a  striking  proof  of  the  difficulty  of  coming  at  the  circum- 
stances of  a  fact  even  upon  contemporary  testimony.  Mr.  Prinsep  hesitates 
to  affix  a  date  to  this  transaction;  from  the  official  correspondence  it 
appears  to  have  taken  place  about  the  middle  of  February,  1808. — Central 
India,  i.  244  ;  Mem.  of  Amir  Khan,  S13 ;  MS.  Records. 


76  HISTORY  OF   BRITISH   INDIA. 

BOOK  I.  formidable  consistency  after  the  murder  of  Kasi 
^^^^^Jl^^^  Rao.  They  placed  at  their  head  Mahipat  Rao  Hol- 
1809.  kar,  first  cousin  of  Jeswant  Rao,  and  proclaimed 
him  sovereign.  The  troops  sent  against  them  either 
joined  their  ranks  or  were  defeated ;  and  they  had 
a  fitir  prospect  of  success,  when,  unfortunately  for 
their  cause,  they  extended  their  depredations  into 
the  territories  of  Poena  and  Hyderabad,  and  im- 
posed upon  the  British  Government  the  duty  of  pro- 
tecting its  allies.  The  subsidiary  forces  of  both  states 
took  the  field.  Colonel  Wallace  marched  from  Poena 
with  one  division,  and  Lieutenant-Colonel  Doveton 
from  Jalna  with  another.  By  a  rapid  cavalry  move- 
ment of  one  hundred  miles  in  forty-eight  hours, 
Colonel  Doveton  came  unexpectedly  upon  the  in- 
surgents whilst  besieging  Amalner,  a  fort  belonging 
to  the  Nizam.  Most  of  their  horse,  and  part  of 
their  foot,  were  destroyed.  The  shattered  remains 
took  refuge  amongst  the  hills  north  of  Kandesh : 
they  were  vigorously  followed  thither  by  Colonel 
Wallace ;  and  the  leaders  were  seized  and  delivered 
to  him  by  the  Bhils,  the  inhabitants  of  the  forests 
with  which  the  hills  are  clothed.  The  Patau  chiefs 
were  conducted  prisoners  to  Poena :  Mahipat  Rao 
escaped,  but,  separated  from  his  military  associates, 
he  soon  fell  into  obscurity  and  occasioned  no  further 
trouble.* 

A  different  destiny  awaited  another  of  Holkar's 
Mohammedan  captains,  who,  by  a  singular  combina- 
tion of  enterprise,  craft,  and  good-luck,  rose  from 
the  condition  of  a  soldier  of  fortune  to  the  recog- 
nised rank  of  an  independent  prince.     Amir  Khan 

>  MS.  Records  ;  Central  India,  i.  284. 


RISE   OF   AMIR   KHAN.  77 

was  by  descent  an  Afghan,  whose  grandfather  had  book  i. 
emigrated  from  Buner,  and  settled  in  Rohilkhand.   ^'^^'  ^ 


From  his  earliest  youth  he  had  led  the  life  of  a  sol-  i8oy. 
dier;  seeking  service,  sometimes  with  a  few  followers, 
sometimes  with  a  larger  troop,  in  the  armies  of  the 
various  princes  and  leaders,  who  in  the  last  days  of 
the  Mogul  empire  were  ever  ready  to  enlist  adher- 
ents. For  a  considerable  time  his  fortunes  were 
precarious,  and  he  was  not  unfrequently  in  want 
even  of  a  meal ;  but  he  gradually  became  a  captain 
of  some  note,  and  took  a  conspicuous  share  in  dif- 
ferent military  and  political  transactions,  of  which 
Malwa  and  the  valley  of  the  Nerbudda  were  the 
principal  field.  He  lent  good  aid  to  Vizir  Mo- 
hammed in  the  defence  of  Bhopal;  but,  the  resources 
of  that  chief  being  exhausted,  he  listened  to  pro- 
posals from  Holkar,  and  united  himself  thenceforth 
steadily  to  his  interests.  Holkar  was  then  making 
his  escape  from  Nagpur,  where  he  had  been  de- 
tained by  the  Raja ;  and  had  no  greater  following 
than  a  rabble  of  two  or  three  hundred  men,  ill 
armed,  undisciplined,  and  living  by  plunder.  The 
jimction  of  Amir  Khan  with  a  force  respectable  in 
numbers  and  equipment  turned  the  tide  of  his  for- 
tunes, enabled  him  to  possess  himself  of  the  terri- 
tories of  his  family,  and  placed  him  in  a  position 
formidable  to  Sindhia,  to  the  Peshwa,  and  the  Eng- 
lish. Amir  Khan  shared  in  his  prosperity,  and  did 
not  desert  him  in  adversity.  He  accompanied 
Jeswant  Rao,  as  we  have  seen,  in  his  flight  to  the 
Punjab,  and  returned  with  him  to  Malwa.  Al- 
though professing  allegiance  to  Holkar,  and  acting 
in  his  name,  Amir  Khan  retained  the  independent 


78  HISTORY  OF   BRITISH   INDIA. 

BOOK  I.  command  of  his  own  troops,  and  held  himself  at 
^^^^'  ^  liberty  to  provide  for  their  support  by  contribu- 
1809.  tions  levied  at  his  pleasure  from  the  princes  in 
whose  dissensions  he  found  it  profitable  to  interfere. 
After  Holkar's  insanity  he  interposed  occasionally 
in  the  disputes  that  occurred  at  court,  but  large 
bribes  secured  his  general  support  of  Balaram  Set 
and  the  Bhai.  The  necessity  of  raising  funds  for 
the  payment  of  his  soldiers  after  he  had  drained  the 
coffers  of  the  Rajputs  impelled  him,  shortly  after 
the  date  at  which  we  have  arrived,  to  turn  his  steps 
in  the  direction  of  Berar,  and  brought  him,  as  we 
shall  subsequently  have  occasion  to  notice,  once 
more  into  collision  with  the  Government  of  British 
India.^ 

Such  was  the  utter  prostration  of  the  Mahratta 
confederacy  upon  the  close  of  the  war :  the  Peshwa, 
chafing  secretly  under  the  fetters  to  which  he  had 
rashly  submitted,  but  impotent  to  break  them, 
and  affecting  to  wear  them  with  cheerftdness ;  the 
Gaekwar,  saved  from  insolvency  and  ruin  by  the 
tutelage  of  his  allies ;  the  Raja  of  Berar,  unable 
without  the  same  assistance  to  protect  his  country 
from  Pindari  pillage  and  Afghan  arrogance;  Sindhia, 
humbly  begging  a  paltry  pittance  from  the  power 
he  had  lately  encountered  with  almost  equal  arms ; 
and  Holkar,  intoxicated  and  insane,  with  his  country 
devastated  by  his  own  rebellious  soldiery,  and  his 
court  disgraced  by  the  turbulence  and  profligacy  of 

'  Notices  of  the  career  of  Amir  Khan  are  to  be  found  in  Malcolm's  Cen- 
tral India,  Prinsep's  Administration  of  the  Marquis  of  Hasting,  &c. ; 
but  the  most  authentic  account  is  a  kind  of  autobiography,  or  Memoirs  of 
Nawab  Mohammed  Amir  Khan,  composed  in  Persian  from  his  own  dic- 
tation by  Munshi  Bas&wan  Lai,  translated  by  H.  T.  Prinsep,  Calcutta. 
18S2. 


PRINCES   OF   RAJASTHAN.  79 

factious  competitors  for  the  authority  which  he  was  book  i. 
no  longer  in  a  condition  to  exercise.     Yet,  notwith-   ^^'''  ^' 


standing  this  abject  state  of  the  two  last-named  iso; 
.  chieftains,  the  Bengal  Government  persisted  in  its 
purpose  of  conciliating  their  good-will,  by  leaving 
them  unquestioned  licence  to  prey  upon  their  still 
more  feeble  and  disunited  neighbours,  the  princes  of 
Rajputana. 

That  portion  of  Hindustan  which  extends  from 
the  districts  bordering  on  the  west  bank  of  the  Jum- 
na to  the  desert  that  skirts  the  eastern  borders  of 
the  Indus,  and  which  lies  between  the  Punjab  on  the 
north,  and  Malwa  and  Guzerat  on  the  south,  is  col- 
lectively known  as  Rajawara  or  Rajasthan,  as  being 
in  an  especial  degree  inhabited  by  tribes  allied  by 
community  of  origin,  institutions,  and  character, 
and  claiming  as  Rajputs,  or  "  sons  of  kings,"  to  re- 
present the  military  and  regal  caste  of  the  primitive 
Hindus-  The  coimtry  was  distributed  at  the  period 
in  question  amongst  a  number  of  princes,  some  of 
whom  were  of  comparatively  little  political  import- 
ance, from  the  limited  extent  of  their  territory; 
whilst  others,  although  ruling  over  more  spacious 
tracts,  were  equally  imimportant,  from  the  ste- 
rility of  the  soil,  and  the  scantiness  of  the  popu- 
lation. Among  these,  three  princes  were  acknow- 
ledged to  he  pre-eminent  in  rank  and  power,  the 
Rana  of  Udaypur,  the  Raja  of  Jodhpur,  and  the 
Raja  of  Jaypur,  so  entitled  from  their  respective 
capitals;  but,  more  correctly  speaking,  the  rulers 
of  Mewar,  Marwar,  and  Dhundhar,  the  names  of 
their  several  principalities. 

The  Rana  of  Udaypur  reigned  over  a  rugged  but 


80  HISTORY  OF  BRITISH   INDIA. 


BOOK  I.  not  wholly  sterile  territory  on  the  north-west  of 
Malwa.  He  pretended  to  a  direct  descent  from 
1807.  Rama,  the  mytho-historical  monarch  of  Ayodhya, 
or  Oude,  through  his  son  Lava,  who  migrated  to  the 
west.  The  Ranas  of  Udaypur  are  therefore  re- 
garded as  members  of  the  Suryavansa,  or  Solar  dy- 
nasty of  the  Hindus ;  but,  as  Rajputs,  they  belong  to 
the  Sisodya  branch  of  the  Gahilote  tribe.  They  are 
admitted  to  precedency  over  all  other  Rajput 
princes,  who  accept  from  their  hands,  upon  succeed- 
ing to  their  principalities,  an  ornament  worn  upon 
the  forehead,  in  confirmation  of  their  accession.' 
From  the  time  of  the  Mohammedan  invasion  of 
India,  the  Ranas  of  Udaypur  were  constantly  en- 
gaged in  warfare  with  the  kings  of  Delhi,  and  re- 
peatedly sustained  fearful  reverses.  Driven  from 
their  capital,  Chitore,  they  transferred  their  resi- 
dence more  to  the  west,  where  Udaya  Raja  built  a 
city,  named  after  him  Uday-piu*,  towards  the  end 

'  Colonel  Tod  reniarkB,  that,  whilst  the  genealogies  of  many  of  the 
Riyput  princes  are  questioned,  the  Hindu  tribes  yield  unanimous  suffrage 
to  the  ruler  of  Mewar  as  the  legitimate  heir  of  the  throne  of  Rama,  and 
style  him  Hindua-suraj,  the  Sun  of  the  Hindus.  He  subsequently,  how- 
ever, adverts  to  the  curious  tradition  mentioned  by  Abulfazi ;  Ay  in  Akbari, 
ii.  8,  and  repeated  in  fuller  detail  by  Wilford,  Asiatic  Researches,  ix.  23S, 
of  the  descent  of  the  Ranas  of  Udaypur  from  Naoshirwan,  king  of  Persia, 
through  his  son  Naoshizad.  He  is  said  to  have  rebelled  against  his  father, 
and,  being  defeated,  to  have  fled  into  Hindustan,  whence  he  returned  to 
Persia  with  an  army  of  Indians :  he  was  again  defeated,  and  was  slain  io 
battle,  but  his  issue  remained  in  India,  and  from  them  the  Ri^nas  descend- 
ed. Another  legend  traces  the  family  to  Maha-bh^u,  daughter  of  Yez- 
degird,  the  last  monarch  of  Persia. — Annals  of  Rajasthan,  i.  233.  Tod 
thinks  it  not  improbable  that  there  may  have  been  a  connexion  between 
the  Persian  and  Indian  families.  The  late  discovery  in  the  west  of  India 
of  coins  of  the  general  character  of  those  of  the  Sassanian  kings,  and 
blending  Indian  and  Persian  portraits  and  inscriptions,  establish  the  fact 
that  some  of  those  princes  exercised  authority  either  directly  or  through 
Indian  feudatories  on  the  confines  of  Hindustan,  and  render  it  possible 
that  some  such  iutereourse  as  that  which  subsequently  united  the  royal 
house  of  Timur  with  the  Rajput  princes  may  have  subsisted,  and  given  rise 
to  the  tradition. — Ariana  Antiqua,  p.  400. 


ORIGIN   OF   JODHPUB.  81 

of  the  sixteenth  century ;  and  in  the  strong  country  book  i. 
in  its  vicinity  they  maintained  their  independence.  ^^^^' '' 
Separated  from  Mewar  by  the  Aravali  Moun-  1807. 
tains  on  the  north-west,  lies  the  principality  of 
Marwar,  the  capital  of  which  is  Jodhpur:  great 
part  of  this  country  is  a  sandy  desert,  but  it  con- 
tains some  fertile  tracts,  especially  on  its  southern 
boundaries.  The  Raja  of  Jodhpur  is  a  member  of 
the  Rahtore  tribe  of  Rajputs,  and  traces  his  de- 
scent from  the  family  that  reigned  over  Kanoj  at 
the  period  of  the  Mohammedan  conquest ;  on  which 
occasion  two  sons  of  the  last  prince,  Jayadeva,  fled 
to  the  west,  and  settled  in  the  almost  unpeopled 
districts  of  Marwar.  From  the  elder  brother  de- 
scended the  reigning  dynasty ;  one  of  whom,  Jodha, 
was  the  founder  of  Jodhpur  in  a.d.  1459:  the 
younger  is  claimed  as  their  ancestor  by  the  chief 
Thakurs,  or  feudal  nobles  of  the  state.  The  Rah- 
tores  of  Marwar,  like  the  G^hilotes  of  Mewar,  suf- 
fered many  vicissitudes  in  their  encounters  with  the 
Mohammedans ;  but,  in  the  reign  of  Akbar  and  his 
two  successors,  their  Rajas  submitted  to  be  treated 
as  servants  of  the  Mogul  empire,  holding  high 
oflSces  both  civil  and  .military,  and  becoming  con- 
nected with  the  imperial  house  by  giving  their 
daughters  in  marriage  to  the  Emperor  or  his  sons. 
The  bigotry  of  Aurangzeb  forced  them  to  take  up 
arms  in  defence  of  their  religion ;  and  in  a  war  of 
thirty  years'  continuance,  although  frequently  de- 
feated in  the  field,  their  spirit  was  unbroken,  and 
their  principality  unsubdued.  After  the  death  of 
Aurangzeb,  their  friendly  intercourse  with  Delhi 
was  resumed,  and  they  were  seen  taking  a  prorai- 

VOL.  I.  G 


82  HISTORY   OF   BRITISH    INDIA. 

BOOK  L  nent  part  in  the  disorders  that  ensued.     The  de- 

^^^^^^J^  cline  of  the  empire  freed  them  from  all  semblance 

1807.     of  vassalage,  but  their  own  dissensions  and  crimes 

were  more  fatal  to  their  power  and  reputation  than 

their  subservience  to  the  Emperor. 

The  coimtry  of  Dhundhar,  or,  from  its  capital, 
Jaypur,  lies  on  the  north  and  east  of  Mewar  and 
Marwar,  extending  towards  the  Jumna.  It  is  the 
territory  of  the  Kachwaha  Rajputs,  who  consider 
themselves  to  be  the  posterity  of  Kusa,  another  son 
of  Rama.  The  origin  of  the  principality  dates  no 
earlier  than  the  tenth  century,  and  its  capital  was 
built  only  in  the  beginning  of  the  eighteenth. 

From  its  eastern  position,  the  principality  lay 
exposed  to  the  attacks  of  the  Patau  sovereigns  of 
Delhi ;  but  it  was  not  imtil  the  accession  of  the 
house  of  Timur  that  its  Rajas  became  feudatories 
of  the  empire.  From  the  reign  of  Baber  they  ac- 
knowledged the  supremacy  of  the  Mogul,  and  were 
distinguished  as  the  principal  officers  and  nobles  of 
his  camp  and  court.  They  were  early  connected 
also  with  the  imperial  house  by  marriage,  several 
maidens  of  the  race  becoming  the  brides  of  the  Mo- 
hammedan princes.*  Raja  Jaysing,  the  founder  of 
Jaypur,  was  actively  concerned  in  all  the  stormy 
transactions  of  the  disastrous  period  which  followed 
the  death  of  Aurangzeb;  until,  observing  the  irre- 
trievable ruin  of  the  empire,  and  the  irresistible 
progress  of  the   Mahrattas,  he   made   terms   with 

'  Bha^an  Das  is  said  to  have  been  the  first  Rig  put  who  submitted  to 
an  alliance  with  a  Mohammedan  family  :  his  daughter  was  married  to  the 
son  of  Akbar,  Prince  Selim,  afterwards  the  Emperor  Jehangir.  M&n  Sing, 
nephew  of  Bhagwan  Das,  was  a  great  favourite  with  Akbar ;  and  was 
successively  viceroy  of  Bengal,  Bahar,  the  Dekhin,  and  Kabul. — Annals 
of  Riyasthan,  i.  353. 


DISPUTES   OF   THE  RAJPUT  PRINCES.  38 

the  latter,  and  withdrew  from  the  politics  of  Hin-  book  i. 
dustan,  to  the  cultivation  of  the  arts  of  peace,  and  ^^^^^^^ 


the  improvement  of  his  country.     He  died  in  1743.     I807. 
After  his  death,  Dhundhar  became  a  prey  to  intes- 
tine divisions  and  Mahratta  spoliation. 

At  the  close  of  the  war  with  the  Mahrattas, 
Rana  Bhim  Sing  was  reigning  at  Udaypur;  M6n 
Sing  was  Raja  of  Jodhpur ;  and  Jagat  Sing,  of  Jay- 
pur.  Neither  of  them  possessed  the  qualifications 
which  the  times  demanded;  the  patriotic  senti- 
ments which  should  have  suppressed  selfish  feelings 
and  leagued  them  with  their  fellows,  the  judgment 
capable  of  estimating  their  own  true  interests,  or 
the  courage  and  energy  necessary  to  maintain  their 
independence.  Listening  alone  to  the  dictates  of 
personal  enmity,  they  paralysed  by  their  dissensions 
the  valour  of  their  subjects,  and  aided  and  abetted 
the  foreign  robber  in  the  work  of  mutual  destruc- 
tion. The  cause  of  quarrel  by  which  they  were  at 
this  time  exasperated  against  one  another  was  pe- 
culiarly characteristic  of  the  race,  and  to  be  paral- 
leled only  in  the  poetical  traditions  of  distant  ages. 

Krishna  Kumari,  the  daughter  of  Bhim  Sing,  Rana 
of  Udaypur,  was  a  maiden  of  reputed  beauty  and  of 
imdoubted  rank,  and  was  consequently  an  object  of 
desire  to  the  other  Rajput  princes.  Whilst  yet  a 
child,  the  Raja  of  Jodhpur,  named  also  Bbim  Sing, 
had  made  overtures  for  her  hand ;  but  the  alliance 
was  prevented  by  his  death.  She  was  then  solicited 
in  marriage  by  Jagat  Sing  of  Jaypur,  and  his  propo- 
sals were  accepted  by  the  Rana.  An  escort  of  three 
thousand  troops  was  sent  to  Udaypur  to  convey 
the  princess  to  Jaypur  for  the  solemnisation  of  the 

G  2 


84  HISTORY   OF   BRITISH  INDIA. 


BOOK  I.  nuptials,  when  the  negotiations  were  interrupted  by 
the  rival  pretensions  of  Man  Sing,  the  Raja  of 
1807.  Jodhpur.  He  demanded  the  princess  as  the  af- 
fianced bride  of  his  predecessor,  and  declared  that 
her  marriage  into  any  other  family  would  bring 
indelible  disgrace  upon  him  and  his  tribe.  Man 
Sing  is  said  to  have  been  instigated  to  the  asser- 
tion of  his  claims  by  one  of  his  chief  Thakurs, 
Sawai  Sing,  who,  for  purposes  of  his  own,  sought 
to  involve  his  liege  lord  in  hostilities  with  the  sur- 
rounding states. 

Bhlm  Sing,  the  preceding  Raja  of  Jodhpur,  left  at 
his  death  his  widow  pregnant;  and  it  was  a  condition 
of  Man  Sing's  accession,  that,  if  the  child  should 
prove  to  be  a  boy,  he  should  assign  to  the  infiemt 
prince  that  portion  of  the  royal  domains  which  were 
regarded  as  the  appanage  of  the  heir-apparent.  A 
boy  was  born;  but,  fearing  to  intrust  him  to  the  care 
of  the  Raja,  the  mother  kept  his  birth  secret,  and 
the  infant  was  sent  privily  to  Pokama,  the  castle  of 
Sawai  Sing,  where  he  was  concealed.  At  the  expi- 
ration of  two  years  his  protector,  finding  the  chief 
feudatories  of  Jodhpur  greatly  discontented  by  the 
preference  given  by  the  Raja  to  certain  of  his  fa- 
vourites, communicated  to  them  the  birth  and 
existence  of  the  prince,  and  secured  their  concur- 
rence in  the  vindication  of  his  claims.  They  re- 
paired accordingly  in  a  body  to  the  Raja,  and  de- 
manded the  fulfilment  of  his  engagement.  Man 
Sing,  with  some  reason,  required  evidence  of  the 
genuineness  of  the  pretended  heir;  but  the  Rani 
when  appealed  to,  fearing,  it  was  affirmed,  for  her 
own  safety,  denied   that  she  had  given  him  birth. 


CLAIMS   OP   THE   MAHRATTAS. 


H5 


The  chiefs  were  silenced,  but   not   satisfied;   and  book  i. 
Sawai  Sing  awaited  a  more  favourable   season  for 


advancing  the  pretensions  of  the  youth  whose  cause  I807. 
he  had  espoused.  It  was  with  this  view  that  he 
urged  Man  Sing  to  demand  the  hand  of  the  prin- 
cess of  Udaypur,  anticipating  the  series  of  diffi- 
culty and  danger  in  which  he  would  be  conse- 
quently involved.  The  anticipation  was  speedily 
realised.  The  party  sent  to  Udaypur  by  Jagat  Sing 
was  attacked  and  routed ;  and  the  Rana  was  com- 
pelled to  retract  his  assent,  and  affiance  his  daugh- 
ter to  Mku  Sing.  His  rival  was  furious  at  the  dis- 
appointment and  the  insult;  and  a  war  broke  out 
between  the  two  Rajas,  which  was  equally  destruc- 
tive to  all  the  Rajput  principalities. 

From  the  time  when  the  first  Baji  Rao  esta- 
blished the  ascendancy  of  the  Mahratta  power  in 
Central  India,  the  princes  of  Rajputana  had  been 
forced  to  pay  the  Chouth,  the  fourth  part  of  their 
annual  net  revenue,  or  a  sum  arbitrarily  estimated 
equivalent  to  a  fourth,  as  a  fixed  tribute.  The 
payment  was  at  first  made  to  the  Government  of 
Poona ;  but,  as  the  authority  of  Sindhia  and  Holkar 
came  to  supersede  that  of  the  Peshwa,  they  claimed 
it  as  their  right.  The  indefinite  scale  by  which  the 
tribute  was  measured,  and  the  relative  ability  of  the 
parties  to  enforce  or  resist  the  demand,  rendered 
the  actual  amount  payable  undetermined ;  and  it  was 
no  part  of  Mahratta  policy  to  admit  of  a  composi- 
tion, as  the  vagueness  of  the  sum  afforded  them  a 
convenient  plea  for  unlimited  exaction.  There  was 
consequently  a  constant  arrear  due  by  the  Rajput 
states,  and  a  constant   pretext  for  the  desolating 


86  HISTORY   OF   BRITISH   INDIA. 

BOOK  I.  incursions  of  the  Mahratta  troops.     In  the  division 

CHAP.  L  * 

of  the  spoil,  the  Jaypur  tribute  was  appropriated  by 

1807.  Holkar ;  that  of  Udaypur  and  Jodhpur  by  Sindhia : 
but  they  had  also  conflicting  pretensions  each  to  a 
portion  of  the  plunder  of  the  other.  The  Peshwa 
had  likewise  his  claims  to  a  share,  but  his  alliance 
with  the  British  debarred  him  from  their  compul- 
sory enforcement. 

The  Raja  of  Jodhpur  lost  no  time  in  influencing 
the  Mahratta  chiefs  to  befriend  his  cause.  Sindhia 
was  already  at  variance  with  his  rival,  the  Jaypur 
Raja  having  refused  to  pay  some  of  his  extortionate 
demands ;  and  Holkar  was  indebted  to  him  for  pro- 
tection which  he  had  given  to  the  family  of  that  chief- 
tain during  his  campaigns  in  Hindustan.  The  Raja 
of  Jaypur  disregarded  the  combination,  in  reliance 
upon  the  British  Government,  with  which  he  had 
entered  into  alliance ;  ^  and  which,  in  the  treaty  of 
peace  with  Holkar,  as  concluded  by  Lord  Lake,  had 
cancelled  the  Mahratta's  claims  upon  its  allies,  and 
dispossessed  him  of  all  territory  north  of  the  Bundi 
Hills.  The  declaratory  article  of  Sir  G.  Barlow,  as 
already  noticed,  annulled  these  stipulations,  and  vir- 
tually excluded  the  Raja  of  Jaypur  from  the  benefits 
of  the  alliance  upon  which  he  had  depended  ;  and  it 
was  not  to  be  wondered  at  that  he  should  have 
remonstrated  strongly  against  his  desertion.  His 
1804.  abandonment  was  wholly  indefensible.  It  was  not 
to  be  controverted  that  a  treaty  had  been  contracted 
with  him,  by  which  the  enemies  of  one  of  the  con- 
tracting parties  were  to  be  considered  as  the  enemies 

'  The  treaty  is  dated  12  Dec.  1803  ;  the  date  of  its  ratification  by  the 
Raja  is  left  blank. — Coll.  of  Treaties,  p.  253. 


TREATY   WITH   JAYPUR  ANNULLED.  87 

of  both ;  and  the  Raja,  in  the  event  of  a  dispute  book  l 
with  any  other  prince,  was  entitled  to  British  media-  ^^^^' 
tion  and  aid.  When  he  required  the  fulfilment  of  I8O6. 
the  stipulations,  he  was  told  that  "  no  treaty  existed  : 
it  had  been  virtually  abrogated  by  the  non-perform- 
ance of  his  part  of  the  compact.  He  had  recalled  his 
troops  from  Monson's  detachment  during  its  retreat ; 
he  had  not  sent  his  forces  to  join  the  British  army 
when  it  moved  northwards,  but  dispatched  them  to 
Udajrpur;  and  had  not  only  foiled  to  cut  off  Holkar's 
supplies,  but  allowed  him  to  march  through  the 
Jaypur  territory.  He  had  no  longer,  therefore, 
anything  to  expect  from  the  British  Government." 
The  Raja  denied  the  justice  of  the  charges  adduced 
against  him.  He  aflSrmed  that  his  troops  had  sepa- 
rated from  Colonel  Monson  with  that  oflScer  s  con- 
sent, and  by  the  orders  of  Lord  Lake;  that  although 
his  forces  were  on  their  march  to  Udaypur,  yet,  as 
soon  as  their  services  were  required,  they  suspended 
their  march,  and  joined  the  Bombay  army  under 
Greneral  Jones,  and  that  General  Jones  and  Lord 
Lake  had  both  furnished  him  with  their  written 
acknowledgments  of  the  promptitude  and  eflScacy  of 
his  co-operation.  Lord  Lake  had  also  given  him 
strong  assurance  of  the  stability  of  the  alliance. 
He  represented,  that,  if  the  British  Government  had 
been  dissatisfied  with  his  conduct  at  any  particular 
time,  it  should  at  that  time  have  expressed  its  dis- 
pleasure, and  at  once  have  declared  the  alliance 
annulled.  To  have  continued  to  employ  the  services 
of  the  Raja  until  they  were  no  longer  needed,  and 
reserved  all  expression  of  dissatisfaction  until  it 
could  be  used  as  a  pretext  for  getting  quit  of  an  in- 


88  HISTORY   OF   BRITISH    INDIA. 

BOOK  I.  convenient  obligation,  was  both  disingenuous  and 
CHAP.  1.   dishonourable ;  to  desert  an  old  friend  because  the 
1806.     tide  was  setting  against  him,  was  ungenerous  and 
unjust;  and   the  powers  of  India   could   not   but 
regard  the  conduct  of  the  Government  of  Bengal 
as    a    departure    from    that   good    faith   which    it 
had    hitherto    been    its    pride    to    preserve   invio- 
late.    The   argument   was   incontrovertibly   in   the 
Raja's  favour:  the  Government  had  continued  to 
exact  and  receive  from  him  services  to  which  he 
was  bound  by  treaty  after  the  commission  of  those 
acts  which  they  subsequently  held  to  have  virtually 
annulled  it.     Admitting  that  the  Raja  had  broken 
his    engagement,    the    Government,    by    accepting 
his  aid  as  if  no  such   breach   had    occurred,  vir- 
tually admitted  its  non-occurrence,  and  recognised 
the  engagement  as  still  subsisting.     It  was  however 
the  inflexible   policy  of  the  Governor-General   to 
abstain   from   interference,  and  the  remonstrances 
and  reasonings  of  the  Raja  of  Jaypur  were  unavail- 
ing.*    He  was  consigned  to  the  equally  inexorable 
policy  of  the  Mahrattas ;  and  the  first-fruits  of  his 
desertion    were    the    plunder    of  his    country    by 

'  The  remonstrances  of  the  Raja  were  strongly  supported  by  Lord 
Lake,  as  noticed  in  a  preceding  volume.  The  Court  of  Directors  also, 
although  they  did  not  enjoin  the  renewal  of  the  alliance,  disapproved  of 
its  dissolution,  conceiving  its  justice  extremely  questionable ;  "  as  although 
the  Raja  had  failed  in  the  performance  of  his  engagements  during  the  war 
with  Holkar,  yet  he  had  furnished  assistance  towards  its  conclusion  at 
the  instance  of  Lord  Lake,  and  under  an  expectation  held  out  by  his  Lord- 
ship that  the  protection  of  the  British  Government  would  be  continued  to 
him ;  and  they  thought  it  necessary  to  enjoin  the  Government  of  India 
to  take  care,  in  all  its  transactions  with  the  native  princes,  to  preserve  its 
character  for  fidelity  to  its  allies  from  falling  into  disrepute,  and  to  evince 
a  strict  regard,  in  the  prosecution  of  its  political  views,  to  the  principles  of 
justice  and  generosity,"  The  sincerity  of  these  expressions  would  have 
been  less  liable  to  question  if  the  policy  which  they  condemned  had  been 
countermanded. — Malcolm's  Political  Hist,  of  India,  i.  390. 


POLICY    OF  AMIE   KHAN.  89 

the   disorderly  bands  of  Holkar  as  they  returned  book  i. 
from  the  Punjab,  and  the  payment  to  their  leader  of 


twenty  lakhs  of  rupees  as  the  price  of  his  withhold-     1807. 
ing  assistance  from  the  Raja  of  Jodhpur.^ 

In  the  war  that  followed,  Holkar  so  far  adhered 
to  the  bargain  he  had  made  as  to  refrain  from  join- 
ing in  person  either  of  the  rival  Rajas.  It  did  not 
however  prevent  him  from  permitting  Amir  Khan 
to  enlist  his  mercenaries  in  their  quarrel.*  The 
Patau  entered  into  the  service  of  Jagat  Sing :  the 
Raja  of  Jaypur  was  also  joined  by  Sawai  Sing  and 
the  nobles  of  Jodhpur  who  supported  the  claims  of 
the  posthumous  son  of  their  last  Raja,  and  Man 
Sing  was  deserted  at  the  moment  of  encountering 
his  enemies  by  almost  all  his  principal  chiefs.  He 
was  compelled  to  fly,  and  seek  refuge  in  the  citadel 
of  Jodhpur;  while  the  confederates  overran  and 
ravaged  the  rest  of  the  country.  They  then  laid 
siege  to  the  capital:  but  it  suited  not  the  policy 
of  Amir  Khan  to  suffer  the  Raja's  extermination; 
and  taking,  or  affecting  to  take,  umbrage  at  want 
of  pimctuality  in  the  payment  of  his  troops  by  the 

*  Holkar^B  Vakeels  expressed  their  master's  acknowledgments  to  Lord 
Lake  for  the  abrogation  of  the  treaty  with  Jaypur  as  a  personal  favour  in- 
tended to  conciliate  him.  The  act  was  viewed  in  the  same  light  by  the 
Peshwa  and  Raja  of  Nagpur. — MS.  Records. 

'  The  Amir  and  Holkar  got  up  a  pretended  disagreement  as  an  excuse 
for  the  uncontrouled  proceedings  of  the  former  at  the  latter*s  suggestion : 
according  to  his  own  story,  he  makes  Holkar  say,  *<  You  must  now  separate 
from  me  in  public  as  in  quarrel,  so  that  our  enemies  and  the  world  in  gene- 
ral may  see  that  your  continuing  to  raise  troops  is  a  source  of  dissatisfac- 
tion  and  displeasure  to  me,  and  not  done  with  my  concurrence  or  sanction. 
We  may  still  understand  one  another  in  cas^  of  occasion  arising  for  us  to 
rejoin  our  forces.  When  the  Amir  took  formal  leave  in  open  durbar,  harsh 
words  passed  between  him  and  the  Maharaj,  and  so  to  the  time  when  the 
Amir  mounted  his  palki,  as  in  high  displeasure.  The  Maharaj,  running  on 
foot  some  paces  alongside,  took  hold  of  the  feet  of  it,  and  made  a  show  of 
endeavouring  to  soothe  and  appease  the  Amir.  The  Amir,  however,  pre- 
tended not  to  listen,  but  returned  to  his  army  ;**  p.  300. 


UtAfTUVi:  if.    lift-  <Wfl- 

^^hffdius^    JU-  istfr  rfan 

«iie  tif  iif(r  JvdioHr 

1M(^:«r:  tif  iiie  ^TMW^  man  T4  ««rfic  -iat 

40miA^  maam  ^$tbmmL  -»•  »  out  ^  inn:  iram  :aie 

AiMMMcr^bvAf  n'jsdk  JMImi  i«^ 

fiiffffii^.  4c%SAimAt^  dUw  ■■>■■■  iifmg  ex^e«£8Mtt^  to 


^  '?A^  ^Ui*  <4r/v  tffpmtmAf  ik$m/lin4kimj 

0^  dufSj  ^H^mg  w»  4f^  MNWMr  r#MMr  Im9c«  daued  a  nauaiBUiw  firoa  JarpVy 
^  mm**4  H^m  «Amk  ^i«m^^«m|  ^  il»«r  Jftypvr  cabsscj.  Upas  tke  Ruia*s 
/A^/^#W  M  «4fiMM«4  «^  IrM  lMig*4««,  deieted  the  troo|M  of  rdajimr 
///iMM./^  ^/  Mm>  4i^lf*4i  4Mt^Umttnif  w%kk  ht  diftpened  ;  uid,  encmBpiog 
^AW  r/^^^M#,  ^/^^«fiM  11^  II4MMI  l<i  miImdH  to  btt  cooditiow. — Auials 
tfl  lUii^it^H,  I  i^th  in  «^/HW  |4ii£«  W  Miyt,  M6a  Sing  aswnbled  dirre 
liffmiitHti  i*'tP0*^,  tthfi,  ^fihmu  Ut  iUifm  lb«  mirrceoary  bands  of  Heera  Sing 
Ihh  ff*4  iitt-  f^mit*^*  tff  HtiWMff  b#r  inUireepitd  the  nuptial  gifts  of  Amber; 
h  H^  lUt-  ft**4  H4*^*HHl  )«  |»f('tmblx  the  "««*  correct,  as  Tod  was  in 
HtHfUtlH*  ^HW^i  f  ttf  M  mttf  Ih*  p«MHiMilif  to  reconcile  the  two. 


MUBDEB  OF  SAWA]^  SING.  91 

the  British  Government  had   purposed  to  recom-  book  i. 
pense  the  attachment  of  its  adherents.  ^^^^'  ^ 


The  services  of  Amir  Khan  were  not  confined  to  I807. 
the  relief  of  Jodhpur  from  the  presence  of  a  victo- 
rious army,  or  to  the  retaliation  of  the  havock  which 
it  had  committed.  He  engaged  to  rid  Man  Sing  of 
an  enemy  more  formidable  than  his  rival  Raja,  and 
put  an  end  to  the  internal  divisions  that  in  a  still 
greater  degree  endangered  his  security,  by  the  mur- 
der of  Sawai  Sing,  and  the  extinction  of  the  faction 
of  which  he  was  the  head.  Simulating  a  quarrel 
with  Man  Sing,  Amir  Khan  quitted  him  in  seeming 
anger,  and  marched  to  Nagore,  where  Sawai  Sing 
and  the  pretender  had  fortified  themselves.  Here  he 
induced  the  Rahtore  chief  to  believe  that  he  might 
be  bought  over  to  their  cause ;  and  the  advantages 
resulting  from  his  alliance  blinded  the  Rajput  to 
the  peril  of  unguarded  intercourse  with  so  perfidious 
a  confederate.  With  the  assumption  of  entire  con- 
fidence Amir  Khan  visited  Sawai  Sing,  and  gave 
him  the  most  solemn  assurances  of  his  sincerity: 
suspicion  was  completely  disarmed,  the  visit  was 
returned,  and  the  Rajput  was  received  in  the  tent 
of  Amir  Khan  with  every  demonstration  of  respect 
and  cordiality.  Inventing  a  plausible  excuse  for  a 
short  absence,  Amir  Khan  withdrew ;  the  cords  of 
one  side  of  the  tent  were  immediately  let  loose, 
and,  whilst  all  vnthin  it  were  entangled  beneath  its 
folds,  an  indiscriminate  fire  of  musketry  and  grape 
was  poured  upon  them ;  Sawai  Sing,  his  friends  and 
attendants,  those  of  Amir  Khan  himself,  the  dan- 
cing girls  and  musicians,  all  who  had  been  present  at 
the  interview,  were  alike  the  victims  of  this  mur- 


92  HISTORJ  OF   BRITISH   INDIA. 

BOOK  I.  derous  device.      The  death  of  his  rebellious  feud- 
cHAP.  L   g^i^yy  p^^  ^^  Q^^  ^  ^Yie  danger  and  fears  of  the 

1807.  Raja  of  Jodhpur.^  Nagore  was  plundered,  but 
Dhokal  Sing  effected  his  escape,  and  found  a  pro- 
tector in  the  Raja  of  Bikaner ;  until  a  superior  force 
besieged  the  Raja  in  his  capital,  and  compelled  him 
to  withdraw  his  protection,  and  pay  a  heavy  fine 
for  his  hospitality.  The  young  prince  then  fled  to 
the  British  territories  and  there  remained  in  secu- 
rity. 

The  state  of  affairs  in  Holkar's  camp  having  called 
Amir  Khan  thither,  the  Rajput  princes  were  relieved 
awhile  from  his  exactions.  Jaypur  enjoyed  but  a 
brief  respite,  as  Sindhia  presently  demanded  com- 
pensation for  the  services  rendered  by  his  troops; 
services  which  he  had  pretended  not  to  sanction, 
and  which,  in  truth,  they  had  never  discharged. 
The  claim  was  not  admitted :  upon  which  he  led  his 
army  across  the  Chumbal,  and  sat  down  before 
Dhuni,  which  he  fruitlessly  besieged.  Foiled  in 
this  object,  he  listened  to  proposals  from  the  Raja, 
and  agreed  to  accept  seventeen  lakhs  of  rupees  as 
the  price  of  his  retreat,  having  inflicted  upon  the 
country  damage  to  an  infinitely  larger  amount. 

Although  the  Rana  of  Udaypur  had  taken  no  part 
in  the  war,  and  had  therefore  given  less  occasion 
than  his  neighbours  to  any  pretext  for  Mahratta 

'  Accord iag  to  Tod,  the  price  of  the  crime  was  ten  lakhs  of  rupees,  and 
the  two  towns  of  Mundhiawar  and  Kuchilavas,  each  yielding  an  annual 
revenue  of  30,000  rupees;  ii.  150.  Amir  Khan  states  the  sum  at  thirty- 
five  lakhs  of  rupees  of  which  half  was  paid  at  the  time.  The  conditions 
formerly  agreed  upon  were  renewed,  with  additional  specifications ;  and 
Jagirs  were  promised  to  his  son,  his  father-in-law,  and  others  of  his  princi-. 
pal  leaders.  The  Amir  tells  the  story  himself  without  any  attempt  at 
extenuation,  and  seems  to  regard  it  as  an  honourable  exploit ;  pp.  847.  SCO. 


APPLICATIONS  TO   THE   BRITISH  GOVERNMENT.  93 

extortion,  he  was  obliged  to  drain  his  treasures  in  book  i. 
order  to  purchase  the  forbearance  of  both  Sindhia  ^^||^^^ 
and  Amir*  Khan.  The  exhaustion  of  his  resources  I807. 
was  however  less  painful  to  him  than  the  degrada- 
tion which  he  felt  in  being  obliged  to  treat  them 
as  equals,  and  the  total  want  of  deference  which 
upstart  adventurers  and  military  robbers  paid  to  his 
exalted  rank  and  ancient  descent.  In  his  distress 
he  applied  earnestly  for  the  intervention  of  the 
British  Government,  and  offered  the  cession  of  one 
half  of  his  territory  if  it  would  protect  the  other 
half  from  Mahratta  spoliation.  The  same  interposi- 
tion was  solicited  by  another  Rajput  prince,  Zalim 
Sing  of  Kota,  who,  although  he  had  wisely  kept 
aloof  from  the  contest  between  the  rival  Rajas,  had 
nevertheless  been  repeatedly  mulcted  by  Amir  Khan 
and  Sindhia ;  and  the  contending  princes  of  Jaypur 
and  Jodhpur  made  a  similar  urgent  appeal  to  the 
Government  of  Bengal,  pledging  themselves  to  abide 
by  its  mediation,  and  to  submit  to  any  conditions 
it  should  please  to  impose.  They  depended  upon 
its  interference  as  an  obligation  which  it  was  bound 
to  fulfill  as  inheriting  the  paramount  sovereignty  of 
Hindustan.  The  dignity  and  power  of  the  imperial 
court  of  Delhi  had  been  appropriated  by  the  Go- 
vernor-General and  the  Council  of  Calcutta;  and, 
along  with  the  authority,  the  duties  which  the 
Emperors  were  accustomed  to  discharge  had  de- 
volved upon  them.  The  weaker  states  of  India, 
they  argued,  had  a  natural  right  to  look  up  to  the 
British  Government  for  protection  against  the  am- 
bition and  rapacity  of  the  stronger;  and  they  de- 
nied that  there  was  any  valid  excuse  for  its  ques- 


94  HISTORY  OF   BRITISH   INDIA. 


BOOK  I.  tioning  the  right  when  it  was  fully  capable  of  exer- 
^^^' ''  cising  the  power.  The  Mahrattas,  who  were  at  that 
1807.  moment  spreading  terror  and  desolation  from  the 
Setlej  to  the  Nerbudda,  were  wholly  incompetent  to 
offer  any  opposition  to  the  arms  and  authority  of 
the  Company ;  and  the  Govemor-Greneral  had  only  to 
speak  the  word,  and  universal  tranquillity  would  be 
restored.  The  policy  of  this  course,  they  main- 
tained, was  equally  obvious  with  its  justice  and  hu- 
manity; for  the  British  territories  would  derive 
security  and  prosperity  from  the  suppression  of  dis- 
orders, which  excluded  their  population  from  all 
amicable  intercourse  with  the  surroimding  countries, 
and  kept  their  own  frontiers  in  perpetual  disquietude 
and  alarm.  To  these  representations  the  principle 
of  non-interference  was  inflexibly  opposed ;  and  Cen- 
tral India  was  allowed  to  fall  into  a  condition  of 
anarchy  and  ruin,  which  was  accelerated  rather  than 
arrested  by  the  removal  of  the  innocent  cause  to 
which  its  present  misery  was  ascribed.^ 

When  all  hope  of  the  protection  of  the  British 
Government  was  resigned,  the  Rana  of  Udajrpur 
was  driven  to  the  unpalatable  measure  of  retain- 
ing the  services  of  Amir  Khan  :  a  fourth  of  his  re- 
venues was  assigned  to  the  Mohammedan  leader,  as 
the  hire  of  one  of  his  brigades  to  be  employed  in 
collecting  the  revenues  and  guarding  the  frontiers  of 

'  So  far  was  adherence  to  this  policy  carried,  that  when  the  Raja  of 
M acheri,  at  the  solicitation  of  the  Rani  of  Jaypur,  sent  a  party  of  horse  to 
escort  the  women  and  children  of  the  Raja  to  a  place  of  safety  in  his 
country,  he  was  enjoined  by  tlie  Resident  at  Delhi,  under  the  orders  of  the 
Government,  to  forego  his  purpose  and  recall  his  troops ;  and  was  told  that 
any  interposition  whatever  would  be  regarded  as  a  breach  of  the  alliance 
under  which  he  claimed  British  protection,  September,  1807. — MS.  Re- 
cords. 


DEATH   OF  THE  PRINCESS  OF  UDAYPUR.  95 

Mewar.^  The  influence  thus  obtained  by  Amir  Khan  book  i. 
in  the  counsels  of  Udaypur  aiforded  an  occasion  for   ^^^' '' 
a  new  display  of  his  recklessness  of  human  life,  and     I807. 
added  another  victim  to  the  many  whom  he  had 
unscrupulously  sacrificed  to  his  interest  or  his  po- 
licy.    He  instigated  the  Rana  to  put  his  daughter 
to  death.   He  also  hinted,  that,  as  the  ally  and  friend 
of  Man  Sing,  he  should,  if  he  found  an  opportunity, 
carry  her  off  by  force  and  deliver  her  to  the  Raja  ; 
and  he  promised,  if  the  Rana  followed  his  advice,  to 
assist  him  in  recovering  possession  of  a  district  in 
the  hands  of  Man  Sing  which  he  coveted.      The 
natural  reluctance  of  the  father  was  overcome  by 
the  blended  motives  of  policy,  fear,  and  hope,  and 
poison  was  administered  to  the  princess.' 

The  transactions  in  which  the  three  principal  Raj- 

'  The  Amir  relateg  this  arrangement  with  great  self-complacency,  re- 
marking that  the  Rana  and  he  exchanged  turbands  in  pledge  of  friendship ; 
p.  S99.  It  must  have  cost  the  <<  son  of  the  Sun*'  many  a  bitter  pang  before 
he  could  stoop  to  such  an  interchange  of  marks  of  equality  and  fraternity 
with  a  Mohammedan  trooper. 

'  Amir  Khan  relates  this  transaction  without  any  reserve.  According  to 
his  account,  the  Rana^  after  reflecting  on  his  recommendation,  said,  **  If 
you  will  pledge  yourself  to  get  for  me  Khali-rao  from  Raja  M^  Sing,  I 
will  in  that  case  contrive  to  get  rid  of  my  daughter  after  you  shall  have 
gone,  using  such  means  as  shall  create  as  little  odium  as  possible.*'  The 
Amir  agreed  to  the  condition ;  and  the  Rana,  after  his  departure,  caused 
poison  to  be  mixed  with  his  daughter's  food,  and  so  administered  it  to  her. 
It  happened  that  what  she  took  was  not  sufficient  to  effect  the  purpose, 
and  the  princess  guessed  the  object  of  her  father;  whereupon  she  sent  him 
a  message,  that,  as  it  was  a  matter  that  concerned  the  good  of  the  Raja 
and  the  honour  of  his  family,  and  it  appeared  that  her  living  longer  was 
inconsistent  with  these  in  her  father^s  opinion,  there  was  no  occasion  for 
him  to  have  gone  secretly  to  work,  for  that  she  was  prepared  to  die  by  her 
own  act  Accordingly,  having  bathed,  and  dressed  herself  in  new  and  gay 
attire,  she  drank  off  the  poison,  and  so  gave  up  her  precious  life,  earning 
the  perpetual  praise  and  admiration  of  mankind. — Mem.  399.  According 
to  Malcolm  and  Tod,  the  death  of  the  princess,  although  suggested  by 
Amir  Khan,  was  pressed  on  the  reluctant  Rana  by  one  of  the  Rajput 
nobles,  Ajit  Sing,  whose  memory  on  that  account  is  execrated  throughout 
Rajasthan.  They  both  agree  in  the  cheerful  submission  of  the  princess  to 
the  will  of  her  father,  and  the  grief  of  her  mother,  who  died  shortly  after- 
wards.— Central  India,  i.  339 ;  Annals  of  Rigasthan,  i.  463. 


96  HISTORY  OF   BRITISH   INDIA. 

BOOK  L  put"  states  were  involved  with  the  Mahrattas  for 
'  some  years  subsequently  to  the  restoration  of  peace 
1807.  between  the  latter  and  the  English,  have  been  de- 
scribed at  some  length,  not  only  on  account  of  their 
importance  in  the  general  history  of  Hindustan,  but 
of  their  connexion  with  subsequent  events,  by  which 
they  were  brought  within  the  pale  of  that  protec- 
tion which  they  now  solicited  in  vain,  A  brief  no- 
tice will  suffice  for  the  remaining  chiefs  of  the  Raj- 
put tribes, 

The  Raja  of  Bikaner,  Surat  Sing,  was  a  member 
of  the  family  which  reigned  over  Marwar.  His 
ineffective  support  of  the  pretender,  Dhokal  Sing,  has 
been  mentioned.  After  payment  of  the  stipulated 
contribution  he  was  left  unmolested,  the  desert 
surface  of  his  country  offering  little  temptation  to 
the  marauder.  The  same  circumstance,  and  the  re- 
moteness of  its  situation,  protected  the  neighbour- 
ing state  of  Jeselmer,  lying  north-west  of  Marwar, 
and  inhabited  chiefly  by  the  Bhatti  tribe  of  Rajputs. 
Although  secluded  from  the  aggressions  of  the  Mah- 
rattas, domestic  quarrels  did  their  work  as  well. 

In  an  angle  formed  between  Jaypur  and  Malwa, 
the  province  of  Haravati,  so  called  from  its  prin- 
cipal occupants  the  Hara  Rajputs,  was  divided  be- 
tween KotSL  and  Bundi.  Kota  was  under  the  ma- 
nagement of  Zalim  Sing,  nominally  minister,  but 
exercising  the  authority  of  Raja ;  his  sovereign  being 
content  to  lead  a  life  of  ease  and  exemption  from 
responsibility.  By  a  remarkable  association  of  craft, 
prudence,  and  resolution,  Zalim  Sing,  although 
obliged  to  pay  tribute  and  occasional  extraordinary 
contributions,  contrived  to  remain  on  friendly  terms 


KOTA   AND   BUNDI.  97 

With   the   Mahratta   leaders,   and   to  preserve  his  book  i. 
country  from  their  ravages :  he  had  also  established  ^^^^^^J^ 


a  character  for  firm  and  faithful  adherence  to  his  1807- 
engagements,  and  to  his  honour  and  integrity  the 
chiefs  of  every  nation  and  tribe  were  accustomed  to 
intrust  their  families  and  their  wealth.^  The  state  of 
Bundi,  which  in  the  reign  of  Akbar  was  one  of  the 
most  considerable  Rajput  principalities,  had  been 
reduced  to  narrow  limits  by  a  series  of  misfortunes 
arid  the  enmity  of  Jaypur.  In  consequence  of  the 
latter,  a  former  Raja  had  been  dispossessed  of  his 
patrimony ;  but  he  had  been  reinstated  by  Malhar 
Rao  Holkar,  and  had  thence  become  a  tributary  of 
the  Mahratta.  His  grandson,  the  ruling  Raja  at 
the  time  of  Colonel  Monson's  retreat,  had  given  the 
British  detachment  a  free  passage  through  his  ter- 
ritories, and  afforded  every  assistance  within  his 
means.  Those  whom  he  had  befriended,  abandoned 
him  to  the  resentment  which  his  conduct  had  pro- 
voked in  their  behalf;  and  for  several  years  he  was 
exposed  to  every  species  of  insult  and  extortion, 
from  the  vindictive  policy  of  Sindhia  and  Holkar.* 

The  only  other  Rajput  principality  of  any  consi- 
deration was  that  of  Macheri,  between  the  Jumna 
and  Jaypur.  Originally  a  feudatory  of  Jaypur,  the 
Raja  had  taken  advantage  of  the  enfeebled  condition 
of  his  liege  lord,  and  had  early  in  the  Mahratta  war 
placed  his  independence  under  the  shield  of  British 
protection.^    The  engagement  was  concluded  during 

*  Ambaji  Inglia  and  Ainir  Khan  both  placed  their  families  in  the  safe 
keeping  of  Zalim  Sing ;  and  the  former  deposited  at  Kota  his  treasures, 
which  were  of  considerable  amount. — Central  India,  i.  493. 

2  Annals  of  Rajasthan,  i.  501  ;  Duff's  Mahrattas,  iii.  281.  311. 

^  Coll.  of  Treaties,  251.     The  treaty  was  a  general  engagement  of  de- 

VOL.  I.  •      H 


98  HISTORY  OP   BRITISH   INDIA. 

BOOK  I.  the  administration  of  Lord  Wellesley,  in  conformity 
^"^''  '•  to  his  policy  of  interposing  a  chain  of  independent 
1807.  native  princes  between  the  Jumna  and  the  Mah- 
rattas.  As  this  was  contrary  to  the  views  of  his 
successors,  they  would  have  thought  it  fortunate  if 
the  Rajas  of  Macheri  and  Bhurtpore,  who  were  si- 
milarly circumstanced,  could  have  been  induced  to 
seek  the  dissolution  of  the  alliance:  they  were 
obliged  to  admit  however,  that,  as  the  engagements 
had  been  contracted,  it  would  be  inconsistent  wiUi 
the  credit  of  the  Government  to  refirain  from  grant- 
ing them  protection  against  the  menaced  aggres- 
sions of  Holkar.  Notwithstanding  reiterated  assur- 
ances to  this  effect,  the  Raja  of  Macheri,  alarmed 
by  the  abandonment  of  Jaypur,  continued  to  appre- 
hend a  like  desertion,  until  the  obvious  change  in 
the  counsels  of  Calcutta  dissipated  his  fears. 

It  is  equally  unnecessary  to  enter  at  any  length 
upon  the  condition  of  the  Jat  princes  of  Hindustan. 
Professing  to  descend  from  the  illustrious  tribe  of 
Yadu,  the  Jats  on  the  Jumna  had  been  trans- 
formed, by  the  necessity  of  self-defence,  from  a  race 
of  pacific  agriculturists,  into  a  nation  of  soldiers  and 
conquerors.  Forced  into  martial  distinction  by  the 
distractions  of  Hindustan  which  followed  the  reign 
of  Aurangzeb,  they  continued,  under  a  succession  of 
warlike  chieftains,  to  take  a  prominent  and  profit- 
able part  in  all  the  troubles  which  ensued,  until  the 
establishment  of  the  authority  of  Sindhia  at  Delhi. 
In   this   interval  their   leaders   acquired    extensive 

fensive  alliance :  troops  were  to  be  sent  to  the  aid  of  the  Riga  when  re- 
qaired,  after  failure  of  mediation  between  him  and  any  other  prince  with 
whom  he  might  be  at  enmity.     No  subsidy  or  tribute  was  imposed. 


RANA   OP   OOHUD.  99 

and  valuable  possessions ;  and,  although  their  power  book  i. 
had  been  diminished  by  the  superior  resources  of 


the  Mahrattas,  the  representative  of  the  original  .I807. 
ruling  family  still  retained  a  country  of  some  ex- 
tent, guarded  by  strong-holds,  one  of  which  was  for 
many  years  a  monument  of  British  discomfiture. 
The  Raja  of  Bhurtpore  had  become  subsequently  an 
ally  of  the  British  Government,  and  readily  had 
recourse  to  its  aid  in  moments  of  peril.^  The  suc- 
cessful defence  of  his  fortress  had,  however,  im- 
pressed him  strongly  with  a  mistaken  estimate  of 
his  own  importance,  and  in  his  intercourse  with 
the  protecting  state  he  displayed  equal  arrogance 
and  distrust. 

The  only  other  prince  of  this  tribe,  the  Bana  of 
Oohud,  was  descended  from  a  Jat  leader  who  rose 
to  distinction  in  the  time  of  the  first  Baji  Rao 
in  the  Peshwa's  service.  After  the  defeat  of  the 
Mahrattas  at  the  battle  of  Paniput,  he  set  himself 
up  as  independent  ruler  of  the  districts  which  had 
been  intrusted  to  his  charge ;  and  his  successor  was 
allowed  to  retain  them  on  condition  of  pajdng  tri- 
bute to  the  Peshwa.  The  chiefs  of  Gohud  were 
both  by  tribe  and  by  position  the  enemies  of  the 
Mahrattas ;  and  in  this  spirit  the  Bana,  during  the 
administration  of  Warren  Hastings,  joined  the  Bri- 
tish, and  rendered  useful  service  to  the  detachment 
under  Colonel  Camac,  After  the  peace  he  was  left 
-to  his  own  unassisted  means  of  defence,  and  these 
were  insufficient  to  save  him  from  the  resentment 
of  Madhoji   Sindhia.     His  territory  was  invaded; 

'  For  an  accoant  of  the  J6t8,  see  Tod*s  R^a«than,  ii.  370;  also  a 
sketch  of  their  history,  Calcutta  Quarterly  Magazine,  March,  1826. 

h2 


100  HISTORY   OF  BRITISH   INDIA. 

BOOK  I.  the  fort  of  Gwalior,  which  after  its  capture  from 
^^^^'  '•  Sindhia  by  the  British  had  been  given  to  the  Rana, 
1807;.  was  re-taken;  and  the  Rana  was  compelled  to  sur- 
render himself  a  prisoner,  upon  a  verbal  assurance 
of  personal  immunity.  In  the  late  war  with  the 
Mahrattas,  Ambaji  Inglia,  who  governed  Gohud  on 
the  part  of  Dowlat  Rao  Sindhia,  went  over  to  his 
enemies ;  and,  as  the  reward  of  his  desertion,  a  por- 
tion of  the  territory  was  guaranteed  to  him  by 
treaty,  whilst  the  Rana  was  replaced  in  the  occupa- 
tion of  the  remainder.*  The  policy  of  Sir  G.  Bar- 
low, and  his  anxiety  to  conciliate  Sindhia,  led  him 
to  annul  the  treaty  with  the  Rana  of  Gohud,  upon 
the  plea  that  he  had  not  fulfilled  its  conditions,  and 
that  the  agreement  was  therefore  virtually  can- 
celled. The  territory  was  in  consequence  restored 
to  Sindhia,  and  compensation  was  made  to  the 
Rana  by  the  cession  to  him  of  Dholpur,  which 
Sindhia  had  given  up.*  The  stipulations  of  the 
treaty  had  pledged  the  Rana  to  efforts  beyond  his 
means ;  and  his  failure,  as  it  proceeded  from  no 
defection  on  his  part,  was  not  a  sufficient  excuse  for 
the  violation  of  positive  engagements.  At  the  same 
time,  it  is  evident  that  the  British  Government  had 
formed  an  erroneous  conception  of  the  rights  and 
power  of  the  Rana  of  Gohud,  and  that  Sindhia  had 
good  reason  to  complain  of  an  arrangement  which 
had  converted  a  dependent  of  his  government  into 
an   independent    prince.      The    Rana    himself,    al- 

'  Ambaji  was  allowed  to  retain  territory  yielding  a  revenue  of  nine 
lakhs  of  rupees  a-year.  The  portion  assigned  to  the  Rana  was  estimated 
at  twenty-six  lakhs.^— Coll.  of  Treaties,  pp.  256.  258. 

»  .Second  treaty  with  Kirat  Sing,  Rana  of  Gohud,  1806.— Coll.  of 
Treaties,  298. 


ORIGIN  OP  THE  SIKHS.  101 

though  not  placed  in  the  position  which  was  at  first  ^^^  ^• 
designed  for  him,  had  no  little  cause  for  self-gratu- 


lation  in  his  transformation  from  the  condition  of  a  ^^^* 
prisoner  and  a  fugitive,  to  that  of  a  prince  reigning 
in  absolute  sovereignty,  under  the  security  of  Bri- 
tish protection,  over  a  portion  of  those  domains  the 
whole  of  which  were  held  by  his  ancestors  only 
through  the  sufferance  of  a  Mahratta  chieftain,  sub- 
ject to  his  exactions  and  liable  to  his  resumption.* 

Although  seceders  in  some  respects  from  the 
orthodox  religion  of  the  Hindus,  the  Sikhs  retain 
so  many  essential  articles  of  the  Brahmanical  faith, 
that  they  may  be  justly  classed  among  the  Hindu 
races.  In  their  original  institution,  the  Sikhs  were 
a  religious  community,  who,  in  consonance  with 
the  benevolent  objects  of  their  founder,  Nanak 
Shah,  a  native  of  the  Punjab,  proposed  to  abolish 
the  distinctions  of  caste,  and  to  combine  Hindus 
and  Mohammedans  in  a  form  of  theistical  devotion, 
derived  from  tlie  blended  abstractions  of  Sufyism  and 
the  Vedanta,  and  adapted  to  popular  currency  by 
the  dissemination  of  the  tenets  which  it  inculcated, 
in  hymns  and  songs  composed  in  the  vernacular  dia- 

1  The  conduct  of  Sir  G.  Barlow  in  regard  to  the  Rana  of  Gohud  has 
been  vindicated  by  high  authority.  In  the  debate  on  the  India  Budget  in 
the  House  of  Commons,  10th  July,  1806,  Sir  Arthur  Wellesley  is  reported 
to  have  asserted  that  Lord  Wellesley  had  himself  taken  into  consideration 
the  expediency  of  restoring  to  Sindhia  the  territory  of  Gohud  and  the  fort 
of  Gwalior,  and  that  the  cession  was  not  sooner  made  was  owing  to  a  want 
of  confidence  in  the  steadiness  and  consistency  of  Sindhia's  counsels.  Sir 
A.  Wellesley  states  also  that  it  had  always  been  his  opinion  that  Gohud 
and  Gwalior  ought  to  be  restored  to  Sindhia.  "  Upon  the  whole,**  he  con- 
cludes, **  the  committee  will  observe,  that  I  consider  Sir  G.  Barlow's  treaty 
with  Sindhia  to  have  been  consistent  vnth  the  spirit  of  that  which  I  was 
the  instrument  of  concluding  at  the  close  of  the  year  1803 ;  and  that  the 
late  Governor-General,  Lord  Wellesley,  intended  to  have  carried  into  exe- 
cution that  part  of  its  stipulations  which  refers  to  Gwalior  and  Gohud/ — 
Hansard's  Pari.  Deb. 


102  HI8TOBY  OF  BRITISH  INDIA. 


BOOK  I.  lects.    These  still  constitute  the  scriptural  authority, 

the  Grantha,  the  book  of  the  Sikhs.     The  doctrines 

i«07.  and  the  influence  of  the  teachers  gave  a  common 
fieiith  to  the  hardy  and  intrepid  population  of  the 
upper  part  of  the  Punjab,  and  merged  whatever  dis- 
tinctive appellations  they  previously  possessed  in  the 
new  general  designation  of  "  Sikhs,**  or  **  disciples,** 
which  thenceforth  became  their  national  denomina- 
tion. As  their  numbers  increased,  they  attracted 
the  notice  of  the  Mohammedan  rulers,  and  were 
subjected  to  the  ordeal  of  persecution.  They  had 
recourse  to  arms:  under  a  succession  of  military 
leaders,  the  sword  became  inseparably  associated  in 
their  creed  with  the  book ;  and  their  ranks  were  re- 
cruited by  fagitives  from  political  disorder  and  fiscal 
oppression,  who  readily  adopted  a  faith  which  made 
but  trifling  demands  upon  their  belief,  and  differed 
in  few  material  points  from  that  which  they  pro- 
fessed. Community  of  danger  became  the  bond  of 
both  a  religious  and  a  social  organization,  and  a 
nation  grew  out  of  a  sect.  As  the  birth-place  of  their 
founder  Nanak,  and  of  the  teacher  who  in  a  still 
greater  degree  gave  to  the  Sikhs  their  characteristic 
peculiarities,  Guru  Govind  Sing,  was  the  Punjab; 
it  was  there  that  they  congregated  and  became 
organised,  in  spite  of  the  efforts  of  the  viceroys  of 
Lahore  for  their  suppression,  imtil  they  had  become 
masters  of  the  whole  of  the  coimtry  from  the  Setlej 
to  the  Indus. 

The  circumstances  under  which  the  Sikhs  achieved 
their  independence  were  unfavourable  to  the  con- 
solidation of  their  power.  In  their  hostilities  with 
the   Mohammedans  they  acted  without  plan   and 


FORMATION   OF   THE  SIKH   CONFEDERACY.  103 

without  an  acknowledged  head,  and  adopted  a  de^  book  l 
sultory  system  of  warfare,  in  which  different  leaders  ^^''' 
collected  their  relations  and  friends,  and  unexpect-  1807. 
edlj  fell  upon  their  enemies  and  laid  waste  the 
country.  As  the  means  of  opposing  their  incursions 
declined,  they  were  emboldened  to  undertake  ope- 
rations of  greater  importance  requiring  concert  and 
combination;  and,  for  this  purpose,  the  different 
Sirdars  assembled  occasionally  at  a  public  diet 
usually  held  at  Amritsar,  the  site  of  their  principal 
shrine.  When  the  Afghans  supplanted  the  Moguls 
in  the  government  of  the  Punjab,  the  Sikhs  expe-^ 
rienced  some  severe  reverses  from  the  military  skill 
and  activity  of  Ahmed  Shah ;  but  after  his  death 
they  were  left  at  liberty  to  establish  themselves  as  a 
political  confederacy  in  the  countries  which  they  now 
occupy.  The  districts  were  divided  amongst  differ- 
ent associations  termed  Misals,  implying  assemblies 
of  equals  under  chiefs  of  their  own  selection.  The 
chief  was  to  lead  in  war,  and  arbitrate  in  peace :  he 
was  treated  with  deference  by  the  other  Sirdars,  but 
they  recognised  no  obligation  to  obey  his  commands. 
Towards  the  end  of  the  last  century  twelve  principal 
Misals  were  formed,  varying  considerably  in  the  ex- 
tent of  territory  which  they  governed,  and  in  the 
number  of  horse  which  they  could  bring  into  the 
field.^ 

In  the  course  of  time  the  inherent  defects  of  a 
military  federation  of  this  description  began  to  be 
manifested,  and  individual  ambition  and  ability  to 

'  An  intereAting  account  of  the  Sikh  federation  will  be  found  in  the 
**  Origin  of  the  Sikh  power  in  the  Punjab/*  compiled  by  Mr.  Prinsep 
chiefly  from  the  report  of  Captain  William  Murray,  Political  Agent  at 
Ambala ;  Calcutta,  1834. 


104  '      HISTORY   OF  BRITISH   INDIA. 

BOOR  I.  assume  that  ascendancy  which  they  were  calculated 
_^^;^^[^  to  attain.  Amongst  the  least  considerable  of  the 
1807.  Misals  was  that  of  Surat-Chak,  so  called  from  the 
lands  which  the  progenitors  of  the  chief,  Charat  Sing, 
had  originally  cultivated.  Charat  Sing  commenced 
a  career  of  aggrandisement  at  the  expense  of  his 
neighbours,  which  his  son  Maha  Sing  pursued 
with  still  greater  success.  The  son  of  the  latter, 
Ranjit  Sing,  had,  however,  surpassed  both ;  and  by  a 
singular  combination  of  courage  and  cunning  he  had 
brought  most  of  the  chiefs  on  the  west  of  the  Setlej 
under  his  controul.  The  chiefs  on  the  east  of  that 
river,  whose  possessions  were  contiguous  to  the  pro- 
vince of  Delhi,  professed,  after  the  close  of  the 
Mahratta  war,  an  undefined  allegiance  to  the  Bri- 
tish Government ;  and  some  uncertainty  with  regard 
to  the  protection  with  which  it  was  repaid  com- 
pelled Ranjit  Sing  to  proceed  with  caution  in  his 
project  of  extending  his  supremacy  across  the  Setlej. 
That  he  was  disappointed  in  his  projects  was  attri- 
butable to  the  altered  policy  of  the  British  Govern- 
ment upon  the  accession  of  Lord  Minto  to  the 
office  of  Governor-General.^ 

From  the  review  that  has  been  thus  taken  of 
the  political  circumstances  of  India  during  the 
administration  of  Sir  G.  Barlow,  it  is  evident 
that  the  supremacy  of  the  British  power  was 
virtually  established,  although  matters  were  not 
yet  sufficiently   ripe   for   its  open   avowal.      Some 

*  A  description  of  the  religious  tenets  of  the  Sikhs  will  be  found  in  the 
Asiatic  Researches,  vol.  xvii. ;  and  a  more  general  account  of  their  origin 
and  history  is  published  in  the  eleventh  volume  of  the  same  collection,  by 
Sir  John  Malcolm.  Mr.  Priosep^s  work,  just  referred  to,  describes  their 
later  progress  and  the  rise  of  Ranjit  Sing. 


RESULTS  OF  BRTTISH   POUCT.  105 

unnecessary  forbearance  was  no  doubt  exhibited,  book  i. 
and  some  degree  of  blame  deservedly  incurred  _^^^^^J^ 
for  apprehensions  needlessly  entertained,  and  en-  I807. 
gagements  unjustifiably  violated;  but  it  may  be 
questioned  if  the  policy  of  the  Government  did  not, 
however  undesignedly,  promote  the  consummation 
which  it  was  intended  to  avoid.  .It  would  have 
been  easy,  and  it  would  have  been  generous,  to 
have  interposed  in  defence  of  the  Rajput  princes 
and  rescued  them  from  Mahratta  rapacity ;  but,  had 
the  tranquillity  of  Hindustan  been  restored  by  a 
further  expenditure  of  the  resources  of  Bengal,  the 
latter  would  have  required  a  longer  period  for  the 
renovation  of  its  exhausted  vigour,  whilst  the  former 
would  have  been  earlier  placed  in  a  condition  to 
provoke  and  defy  its  resentment.  The  continued 
contests  of  the  native  princes  operated  favourably 
for  the  extension  of  British  ascendancy  :  they  dis- 
posed the  weaker  to  welcome  the  approach  of  fo- 
reign protection,  and  they  disabled  the  stronger  from 
offering  effective  opposition.  On  the  other  hand, 
the  suspension  of  military  operations  of  any  magni- 
tude for  several  years  afforded  the  British  Govern- 
ment opportunity  to  accumulate  and  improve  its 
resources,  and,  when  again  compelled  to  employ 
them,  to  put  forth  its  energies  with  a  might  which 
made  resistance  to  it  hopeless,  and  elevated  it  to  an 
eminence  from  which  it  directed  without  dispute 
the  destinies  of  Hindustan. 


106  HISTORY   OF   BRrnSH   INDIA. 


CHAPTER  II. 

Sir  George  Barlow,  Govemar-General. — Staie  of  the 
Finances.  —  Retrenchments. — Supplies. ^^  Judicial 
and  Revenue  Arrangements  for  CtUtack,  the  Doah, 
aivd  Bunddkhand.  — Revenue  Settlements  in  the 
Ceded  and  Conquered  Provinces. — Separation  ofJu^ 
dicial  and  Revenue  Functions  at  Madras.^^Murder 
of  Europeans  €U  Vellore. — Arrival  of  the  Dragoons. 
— Fort  retaken. — Military  Inquiry. — Disposal  of 
the  Prisoners. — Causes  and  circumstances  of  the 
Mutiny. — Its  Origin  in  religious  panic  occasioned 
by  military  Orders. — Similar  Alarms  at  HyderO' 
body  Walajabady  and  Nandidrug  allayed  or  sup^ 
pressed. — Lord  W.  Bentinck  and  Sir  John  Cradock 
recalled. —  Ultimate  Decision  of  the  Court  of  Di^ 
rectors. 

BOOK  T.  When  the  provisional  assumption  of  the  govern- 
CHAP.  II.  m^^fc  Qf  India  by  Sir  George  Barlow,  consequent 
1806.  upon  the  death  of  Marquis  Comwallis,  was  known 
in  England,  the  Court  of  Directors  determined  to 
nominate  him  permanently  Governor-General,  and 
the  nomination  was  acquiesced  in  by  the  Board  of 
Controul.  The  principles  of  the  policy  which  he 
pursued  towards  the  native  states  have  been  suf- 
ficiently explained,  and  their  consequences  exhi- 
bited in  the  preceding  pages.     The  other  transac- 


SYSTEM   OF  RETRENCHMENT.  107 

tions  of  his  administration  were  for  the  most  part  book  i. 
of  inferior  interest,  though  scarcely  of  minor  im-   ^^^' "' 


portance.  180«. 

The  first  cares  of  the  new  Governor-General 
were  engaged  by  the  state  of  the  public  finances, 
which  had  been  seriously  deranged  by  the  expenses 
of  the  war.  The  charges  had  for  some  years  past 
exceeded  the  revenues  by  a  considerable  amount, 
and  the  deficit  had  been  supplied  by  loans  con- 
tracted at  a  high  rate  of  interest,*  or  by  the  applica- 
tion of  the  Company's  commercial  remittances  to 
territorial  disbursements.  Heavy  demands  still  re- 
mained for  liquidation ;  the  pay  of  the  troops  was 
seven  and  eight  months  in  arrear ;  large  sums  were 
due  on  account  of  pensions  to  native  chiefs  and 
princes,  and  funds  to  meet  these  claims  were  for 
some  time  deficient.^ 

The  restoration  of  tranquillity  admitted  of  econo- 
mical retrenchments  in  the  principal  article  of 
public  expenditure,  the  charges  of  the  military  de- 
partment, and  in  nothing  more  than  the  dismissal 
of  the  irregular  troops  which  had  been  taken  into 
the  British  service  during  the  war :  these  were  dis- 
banded, in  several  cases  with  injudicious  haste ;  and 
Jagirs  were  assigned  to  some  of  their  leaders  in 
commutation  of  pay  or  pension.  A  present  incon- 
venience was  thus  in  a  great  measure  obviated,  but 
the  newly  acquired  districts  were  burthened  with 
establishments  which  even  in  the  present  day  in 

^  A  loan  was  opened  in  January,  1806,  at  10  per  cent,  by  which  sicca 
rupees  2,12»47,000  (£2,640,000)  were  raised. 

*  The  demands  payable  by  the  Bengal  Government  amounted  in  May, 
1806^  to  ninety  lakhs  of  rupees,  to  meet  which  not  above  forty  lakhs  were 
available. 


108  HISTORY   OP  BRITISH   INDIA. 


BOOK  I.  some  degree  diminish  the  revenue  that  might  else 
^"^'''  "*  be  raised  from  them.     Extensive  reductions  of  the 
1806.     regular  forces  were  at  the  same  time  effected. 

The  economical  principles  which  guided  the  pro- 
ceedings of  the  Government  of  Bengal  were  equally 
impressed  upon  the  attention  of  the  subordinate 
Governments,  and  the  importance  attached  to  the 
object  by  Sir  G.  Barlow  is  fiilly  shown  by  the  lan- 
guage in  which  his  views  were  communicated  to 
Bombay  and  Madras.  He  reminded  the  supreme 
authorities  at  both  Presidencies  that,  "  the  finances 
of  the  Company  having  been  involved  in  extraordi- 
nary difficulties  by  the  consequences  of  the  lat^ 
war,  it  had  become  the  solemn  duty  of  the  different 
Indian  Governments  to  establish  a  system  of  the 
most  rigid  economy  through  every  branch  of  their 
civil  and  military  expenditure;"  and  he  therefore 
enjoined  them  "  to  abrogate  all  such  charges  as 
were  not  indispensable  to  the  good  government  and 
security  of  the  provinces  under  their  controul.  The 
extraordinary  demands  upon  the  public  resources 
had  arisen,"  he  observed,  "  almost  exclusively  from 
the  enhanced  charges  of  the  military  departments ; 
but  the  circumstances  of  India  were  now  propitious 
to  their  retrenchment,  as  no  danger  was  to  be  ap- 
prehended from  French  aggression,  and  the  condi- 
tion of  the  native  states  not  in  alliance  with  the 
Company  precluded  all  apprehension  of  their  pos- 
sessing the  means  of  making  any  impression  upon 
the  British  power  for  a  long  course  of  years :  that 
independently  of  this  prospect  of  future  tranquillity, 
derived  from  the  preponderating  power  of  the  lat- 
ter, the  treaties  which  had  been  contracted  with 


EMBARRASSMENTS  TEMPORARY.  109 

Sindhia  and  other  princes  had  been  drawn  up  with  book  i. 
a  view  to  remove  all  grounds  of  difference,  and  to  ^^^^|^^^ 
conciliate  them  by  concessions  which  would  render     I8O6. 
it  their  interest  to  preserve  the  relations  of  amity 
so   established  inviolate."     The  Governor-General 
suggested  various  specifications  of  retrenchment,  and 
concluded  by  confidently  hoping  that   in  a  short 
time  the  reductions  from  those  sources  would  re- 
lieve all  pressure  upon  the  finances,  and  restore  de- 
preciated public  credit,  leaving  a  surplus  to  pay  off 
the  public  debt  and  provide  the  Company's  com- 
mercial investment. 

This  last  consideration,  the  provision  of  the  in- 
vestment of  goods  for  sale  in  England,  was,  in  fact, 
the  main-spring  of  Sir  G.  Barlow's  policy,  as  it  was 
of  that  of  the  Company.  It  was  the  pressure  upon 
their  commercial  credit  and  resources  which  the 
latter  were  most  anxious  to  relieve ;  and,  as  their 
instructions  to  that  effect  found  an  obedient  agent 
in  the  Governor-General,  the  necessary  result  was 
the  sacrifice  of  all  comprehensive  political  views 
to  present  commercial  exigencies.  The  financial 
embarrassments  of  the  Indian  Governments  were 
merely  of  a  temporary  nature:  the  return  of 
peace  necessarily  reduced  much  of  the  immediate 
charge;  and  the  revenues  were  rapidly  increasing, 
from  the  valuable  accessions  of  territory  acquired 
during  the  war,  and  the  certainty  of  their  improve- 
ment under  a  regular  and  efficient  system  of  admi- 
nistration. Nor  was  there  any  cause  for  alarm  in 
the  state  of  public  credit,  as,  although  it  had  been 
thought  necessary  to  offer  a  high  rate  of  interest, 
ten  per  cent,  per  annum,  on  a  loan  contracted  in  the 


110  BISTORT   OF  BRITISH   INDIA. 

BOOK  I.  early  part  of  1805,  tfce  rate  was  not  unprecedented 
^^^^^^^  or  unusual ;  and  in  the  course  of  1806  a  loan  was 
1806.  opened  at  eight  per  cent,  per  annum,  with  such  en- 
tire success,  us  in  the  course  of  a  few  years  to  ab- 
sorb all  preceding  and  more  burthensome  obliga- 
tions.^ The  rate  then  negotiated  commenced  a 
series  of  reductions  of  the  interest  of  the  public 
debt,  which  has  for  some  years  past  nearly  equalised 
the  interest  paid  in  India  with  that  which  com- 
monly prevails  in  the  kingdoms  of  continental  Eu- 
rope.* 

The  exertions  made  by  Sir  Greorge  Barlow  for 
the  diminution  of  the  public  expenditure  were  not 
in  vain ;  and  by  the  end  of  April  1807,  the  close  of 
the  Indian  official  year,  shortly  after  which  he  re- 
linquished his  office  to  his  successor,  he  had  re- 
duced the  excess  of  annual  charge  to  less  than  a 
half  of  its  amount  in  1805,  and  had  matured'a  sys- 
tem of  economy,  which,  in  the  first  years  of  Lord 
Minto's  administration,  transformed  the  deficit  into 
a  surplus.* 


,a 


^  Sicca  rupees  26,65,00,000,  or  about  £30,000,000,  were  tranafeired  and 
subscribed  to  this  loan  between  1805*6  and  1810-11,  when  it  chiefly  merged 
into  a  loan  at  no  higher  a  rate  than  6  per  cent. 

'  The  rates  of  interest  now  borne  by  the  public  debt  of  India  are  4  and 
5  per  cent. 

'  The  statements  appended  to  the  Second  Report  of  the  Select  Committee 
of  the  House  of  Commons,  printed  in  May,  1810,  present  the  following 
comparative  view  of  the  relative  revenues  and  charges  of  India  from 
J804-5  to  1807  8. 


Jiet?enue. 

Ckatye. 

Excui  of  Ckargt. 

1804-5     . 

.  £14,049,395     , 

.  £16,487,346     . 

,     .  £1,537,951 

1805-6     . 

.      15,403,409     . 

.      17,672,017     , 

,     .      2,268,606 

1806-7     . 

.      14,535,729     . 

.      17,688,061     . 

.      3,152,322 

1807-8     . 

.      15,669,005     . 

.      15,979,027     . 

300,122 

By  a  statement  in  the  author  s  possession,  compiled  in  the  oflice  of  the 
accountant-general  in  Calcutta,  the  returns  of  the  three  first  years  in  Sicca 
Rupees  are  as  follows  : 


DEMANDS  PROVIDED   FOR.  Ill 

In  order  to  provide  for  the  most  urgent  and  im-  book  i. 
mediate  demands,  funds  were  raised  by  a  loan  in 
1805-6 ;  by  which,  in  the  course  of  that  and  the  fol-     I8O6. 
lowing  year,  about  four  millions  sterling  were  sup- 
plied to  the  treasury:   the  deficit  which  remained 

Rewime,  Ckargt,  Exeus  qfCharpe. 

1804^    .  S.B.  13,06,49^1   .  S.R.  15,76,18,750   .  S.  R.  2,69,69,509 

1805-6    .      „     13,58,38,952   .     „     16,44,88,747   .      „     4,86,49,705 

1806-7    .     „     12,97,16,627   .     „     13,99,23,681    .     „      1,02,06,904 

and  in  the  fourth  year,  Sttrplus  Kevenue. 

1807-8  .  „  13,87,59,682  .  „  13,77,19,952  .  „  10,39,730 
wfai^h  snrphis,  calcolating  the  rupee  at  2f .,  which  is  something  less  than 
its  intrinsic  ▼alue,  is  equal  to  Xl  03,973.  These  particulars  agree  with  the 
fltttlements  gi^n'by  IVIr.  Tucker ;  of  which  he  remarks,  that,  as  they  were 
•prepared  from  oflScial  and  authentic  documents,  they  may  be  received  with 
confidence. — Review  of  the  Financial  Situation  of  the  East  India  Company, 
by  H.  St.  George  Tucker,  p.  13.  One  source  of  difference  in  the  two 
statements  is  the  difference  of  exchange  valuation.  The  old  accounts  of 
the  Elast  India*  Company  were  converled  from  Indian  into  English  mo- 
ney at  2«.  per  current  rupee  (116  of  which  were  equal  to  100  Siccas)  for 
Bengal,  8t.  per  pagoda  for  Madras,  and  2«.  3d.  per  Bombay  rupee :  a 
valuation  which,  however  correct  according  to  the  state  of  the  exchange, 
was  f»T  above  the  intrinsic  value  of  the  coins;  the  current  rupee  at  par 
being  worth  only  Is.  9d.'177,  the  pagoda  7«.6d.'886,  and  the  Bombay 
rupee  2s.  *008. — Report  of  Select  Committee  on  the  Finances  of  the  East 
India  Company,  August  1832,  App.  No.  20.  In  the  above  comparison  of 
receipts  and  dtsbarsements,  the  rate  being  the  same  on  both  does  not  very 
materially  affect  the  result,  but  the  excess  conveys  an  exaggerated  view  of 
their  amount  to  the  extent  of  about  one-seventh  of  the  aggregate  sums. 
Now,  although  the  exchange  values  of  the  Indian  currencies  might  be 
properly  taken  as  the  standard  for  their  conversion  into  English  money  in 
regard  to  all  receipts  and  disbursements,  whether  commercial  or  territorial, 
occurring  in  England,  yet  such  a  standard  was  wholly  inapplicable  to  re- 
venues and  charges  beginning  and  ending  in  India  itself.  The  intrinsic 
value  of  the  currencies,  as  compared  with  that  of  the  British  coinage,  was 
in  such  case  the  least  variable  and  most  correct  measure.  The  statements 
in  Sicca  Rupees,  converted  into  Sterling  at  2».  the  rupee,  would  therefore 
be  preferable,  as  nearer  the  truth  ;  but  their  use  is  inconvenient,  as  afford- 
ing results  different  from  those  given  in  the  Parliamentary  and  India 
House  accounts,  the  authorities  most  readily  available  :  these  will  there- 
fore generally  be  followed.  In  the  present  case,  besides  the  difference 
of  valuation,  there  is  a  discrepancy  in  the  relative  statements  vHiich  is 
not  easily  accounted  for.  The  annual  accounts  roust  have  been  roade  up 
either  on  different  principles  or  for  somewhat  different  intervals.  The 
aggregate  of  the  four  years,  adopting  the  conversion  of  the  sicca  into  the 
current  rupee,  offers  a  near  though  not  close  approximation;  the  Par- 
liamentary accounts  making  it  £7,268,008,  the  Calcutta  statements  sicca 
rupees  6,47,86,478  (equal  to  current  rupees  7,51,52,314,  and,  at  2«.  the 
current  rupee,  to)  £7,515,231. 


112  HISTORY  OP  BRITISH   INDIA. 

BOOK  I.  was  met  by  remittances  from  Europe,  which,  dur- 

^^^^^^  ing  the  three  years  from  1804-5  to  1806-7,  exceed- 

1806.     ed  by  two  millions   sterling  the  supplies  realised 

in  England  from  the  proceeds  of  the  Company's 

trade. 

Besides  the  measures  adopted  for  the  removal  of 
financial  difficulties,  the  Indian  Governments  were 
occupied  during  the  interval  between  the  departure 
of  Marquis  Wellesley  and  the  arrival  of  Lord 
Minto  in  extending  and  consolidating  the  revenue 
and  judicial  arrangements  in  various  districts  newly 
taken  under  their  authority.  Upon  the  annexation 
of  the  province  of  Cuttack  to  the  Presidency  of 
Bengal,  commissioners  were  appointed  to  effect  a 
settlement  of  the  revenue  with  the  landholders ;  and 
in  September  1804  the  latter  were  apprised  that  at 
the  expiration  of  a  twelvemonth  a  fixed  assessment 
would  be  levied  upon  their  lands,  upon  a  just  and 
moderate  consideration  of  the  receipts  of  former 
years.  This  announcement  was  confirmed  by  a 
regulation  of  the  Government  ;^  and  the  same  enact- 
ment recognised  the  principle  of  substituting  a  quit- 
rent  for  a  land  assessment  in  respect  to  certain 
petty  Rajas  and  Zemindars  residing  in  the  moun- 
tains and  thickets  of  Orissa.  AH  other  sources  of 
revenue  which  had  existed  under  the  Mahratta  Go- 
vernment were  abolished,  with  the  exception  of  an 
excise  upon  spirituous  liquors,  and  a  capitation  tax 
upon  pilgrims  to  the  temple  of  Jagannath.  The 
latter  was  the  subject  of  a  further  enactment^  in  the 
following  year,  by  which  the  amount  of  the  tax,  the 
mode  of  levying  it,  and  other  circumstances  con- 

'  Bengal  Regulations.     Reg.  xii.  1805.  >  Reg.  i?.  1806. 


JUDICIAL   ARRANGEMENTS   IN   CUTTACK.  113 

hected  with  it,  were  defined,  with  a  view  to  protect  book  i; 
the  pilgrims  from  the  unwarranted  exactions  of  the  ^^^'  "* 


officers  of  the  Government  or  of  the  temple,  and'  to  I8O6. 
maintain  order  and  security  in  the  town  of  Jagan-* 
nath-pur  and  its  dependencies-  At  the  same  time^ 
provision  was  made  for  the  administration  of  justice 
in  civil  causes  by  the  institution  of  a  provincial 
court,^  and  a  revision  was  effected  of  the  system  of 
police  which  had  been  previously  in  force  in  Cut- 
tack.  The  duties  of  the  police  during  the  Mahratta 
Government  had  been  intrusted  to  a  body  of  armed 
men,  termed  Paiks,  or  foot-men;  who  were  com- 
manded by  their  own  Sirdars  or  chiefs,  and  occupied 
lands  exempt  from  rent,  in  payment  of  their  ser- 
vices. They  were  subject  to  the  general  controul 
of  the  landholders  within  whose  domains  they  were 
located,  and  the  landholders  were  responsible  to  the 
Grovemment  for  the  prevention  of  disorders  and 
robberies  within  the  limits  of  their  respective  es- 
tates.* This  system  was  unchanged ;  but,  in  order 
to  fix  upon  the  landholdiers  a  better  defined  author 
rity  and  more  distinct  responsibility,  they  were 
formally  invested  with  the  title  and  powers  6f 
Darogas,  or  head-officers  of  police,  under  the  ge-» 
neral  superintendence  of  the  luagistrate  of  the. 
province. 


'  Reg.  xiv.  1806.  A  striking  instance  is  afforded  by  one  of  the  clauses 
of  this  regulation  of  the  high  value  of  money  und^r  the  Mahratta'  Govern* 
ment,  and  its  anticipated  reduction  under  the  British.  In  aU  disputes 
concerning  obligations  bearing  interest  which  originated  before  October, 
1803,  the  court  was  authorised  to  recognise  the  following  rates  :  on  sums 
not  exceeding  100  rupees,  30  per  cent,  per  annum  ;  on  larger  sums,  24  per 
cent,  per  annum.  Subsequently  to  the  date  specified,  the  rate  of  interest 
was  restricted  to  12  per  cent,  per  annum. 

•  Reg.  iv.  1804. 

VOL.  I.  I 


114  HISTORY   OF  BRITISH   INDIA. 


BOOK  L  The  introduction  of  the  Company's  judicial  and 
^^^'"'  revenue  regulations  into  the  territories  lastly  ac- 
IBQ6.  quired  in  the  Doab  and  in  Bundelkhand  had  been 
accomplished  by  previous  enactments/  Those  af- 
fecting the  revenue  were  based  upon  the  principle 
of  an  ultimate  settlement  in  perpetuity  in  the  Upper 
provinces  as  well  as  in  Bengal,  but  postponing  its 
conclusion  to  the  expiration  of  certain  definite  pe- 
riods. Two  successive  settlements  were  to  be  made 
for  a  term  of  three  years  each,  and  a  third  was  to 
be  concluded  for  a  period  of  four  years.  On  the 
close  of  each  of  the  two  first  periods,  the  assessment 
was  to  be  revised  and  augmented  according  to  the 
progressive  improvement  which  it  was  anticipated 
would  have  taken  place  in  the  value  of  landed  pro- 
perty ;  and  at  the  end  of  the  three  terms,  forming 
an  aggregate  of  ten  years,  it  was  proposed  to  con- 
clude a  perpetual  settlement  for  all  such  lands  as 
might  be  in  a  sufficiently  improved  state  of  cultiva- 
tion to  warrant  the  measure,  on  such  terms  as  the 
Grovemment  should  deem  fair  and  equitable.  This 
last  stipulatioi),  strictly  interpreted,  rendered  the 
pledge  of  little  worth ;  for  it  reserved  to  the  Govern- 
ment the  determination  not  only  of  the  final  rate  of 
assessment,  but  of  the  condition  of  the  lands  to  be 
assessed.  A  still  more  important  modification  of 
the  original  enactment  was,  however,  introduced  by 
Sir  George  Barlow.  On  the  termination  of  the 
first  triennial  period  of  the  settlement  of  the  Ceded 
provinces,  he  added  a  clause  to  its  renewal,  which 
Lord  Wellesley  either  overlooked  or  considered 
superfluous ;  and  enacted,  that  the  proposed  settle- 

*  Regs.  XXV.  1803;  v.  viii.  ix.  1805. 


ENACTMENTS   AT   MADRAS.  115 

ment  of  the  revenue  in  perpetuity  in  the  Ceded  and  book  i. 
Conquered  provinces  should  depend  upon  the  con-  ^"^^*  "* 


finnation  of  the  Court  of  Directors.*     Their  confir-     I8O6. 
mation  was  never  conceded. 

The  principal  legislative  enactment  at  Fort  St. 
George  had  for  its  object  the  discontinuance  of  the 
judicial  powers  theretofore  given  to  the  collector 
of  the  revenue  in  the  districts  which  had  not  been 
permanently  assessed.  Distinct  courts  of  civil  judi- 
cature were  established  in  the  several  Zillas,  and 
the  separation  of -the  judicial  from  the  revenue  de- 
partment was  completed  in  the  territories  of  the 
Madras  Presidency  as  well  as  in  those  of  Bengal.* 
At  the  same  time,  the  Supreme  Court  of  Appeal 
was  remodelled.  It  had  hitherto  been  constituted 
of  the  Governor  and  Members  of  Council,  a  board 
already  fully  occupied.  In  their  stead  three  Judges 
were  appointed  to  the  special  duty  of  hearing  ap- 
peals from  the  courts  below,  in  addition  to  a  Mem- 
ber of  Council  not  being  Governor  of  Madras,  who 
was  to  act  as  Chief  Judge.*  No  enactment  of  any 
interest  was  promulgated  during  this  period  at 
Bombay. 

In  the  midst  of  their  pacific  occupations  the  Go- 
vernments of  India  were  startled  by  the  occurrence 
of  an  event  unprecedented  in  the  annals  of  British 
India,  and  inspiring  fears  for  the  solidity  and  per* 

'  ''  The  Governor-General  in  Council  hereby  notifies  to  the  Zemindars 
and  other  actual  proprietors  of  land  in  the  Ceded  and  Conquered  proyinces, 
that  the  Jumma  which  may  be  assessed  on  their  estates  in  the  last  year  of 
the  settlement  immediately  ensuing  the  present  settlement  shall  remain 
ized  for  erer,  in  case  the  Zemindars  shall  now  be  willing  to  engage  for  the 
payment  of  the  public  revenue  on  those  terras  in  perpetuity,  and  the 
arrangement  shall  receive  the  sanction  of  the  Court  of  Directors.*'— Reg.  x. 
1807.    Sect  v. 

'  Reg.  ii.  1806.  '  Reg.  iU.  1807. 

I2 


116  HISTORY   OF   BRITISH   INDIA. 


BOOK  I.  manence  of  the  empire, — the  massacre  of  the  Eu- 

^^^'  "•   ropean  officers  and  soldiers  in  the  garrison  of  Vel- 

1806.     lore  by  the  native  regiments  on  duty  along  with 

them.     This  happened  on  the  morning  of  the  10th 

of  July,  1806/ 

The  fortress  of  Vellore,  situated  eighty-eight  miles 
west  from  Madras,  had  been  chosen,  for  the  conve- 
nience of  its  position  and  the  strength  of  its  de- 
fences, as  a  safe  residence  for  the  family  of  Tippoo 
Sultan,  which  consisted  of  twelve  sons  and  six 
daughters.  The  six  elder  sons  were  married,  and 
had  children  :  four  of  the  daughters  also  were  mar- 
ried, and  the  marriage  of  the  fifth  was  in  course  of 
solemnisation  when  the  mutiny  broke  out.  Their 
families,  with  their  connexions  and  followers,  formed 
an  assemblage  of  several  hundred  persons,  all  living 
in  the  former  palace  of  the  Nawabs  of  the  Camatic, 
vrithin  the  fort.  The  princes  had  been  treated  with 
a  degree  of  distinction  and  liberality  better  suited  to 
their  former  dignity  than  their  fallen  fortunes.  They 
were  under  no  other  personal  restraint  than  the  at- 
tendance of  a  guard  when  they  moved  out,  and  pro- 
hibition against  going  out  of  the  fort  without  the 
written  authority  of  the  commandant  of  the  garri- 
son and  the  paymaster  of  their  stipends.  Their 
allowances  not  only  provided  amply  for  their  wants, 
but  enabled  them  to  support  some  show  of  state, 
and   to   collect   around    them    a   swarm   of  needy 


'  The  chief  authorities  for  the  following  narrative  and  observations  are, 
the  MS.  Correspondence  of  the  Madras  Government ;  Papers  printed  for 
Parliament  in  1813 ;  a  Memorial  addressed  to  the  Court  of  Directors,  and 
afterwards  printed  in  1810,  by  Lord  William  Rentinck;  and  Sir  J. 
Cradock's  Address  to  the  Courts  printed  in  the  Asiatic  Annual  Register 
for  1807. 


MUTINY    AT   VELWRE.  117 

adventurers   and   vagrant  mendicants,   the   willing  booki. 
instruments  of  mischief  and   eager  fomenters    of 


discontent.^  The  general  charge  of  the  princes  i806. 
and  payment  of  their  pensions  were  consigned  to 
Lieutenant-Colonel  Marriott.  No  other  oflBcer  was 
allowed  to  enter  the  palace  without  the  permission 
of  the  princes,  and  no  European  sentinel  did  duty 
within  its  precincts.  The  native  sentries  were  posted 
only  at  the  outer  doors  of  the  several  dwellings. 
Colonel  Marriott  discharged  also  the  duties  of  su- 
perintendent of  police  for  the  fort  and  the  adjacent 
town  of  Vellore,  the  population  of  which  had  largely 
increased.  The  garrison  of  the  fort  consisted  of 
four  companies  of  his  Majesty's  69th  regiment,  six 
companies  of  the  first  battalion  of  the  1st  regiment 
of  Native  Infantry,  and  the  second  battalion  of  the 
23fd.  The  Europeans  were  about  three  hundred 
and  seventy  in  number,  the  natives  fifteen  hundred. 
The  whole  were  commanded  by  Colonel  Fancourt, 
the  colonel  of  the  69th.  Spacious  barracks  were 
severally  appropriated  to  the  use  of  the  European 
and  native  troops.  The  officers  occupied  sepa* 
rate,  and,  for  the  most  part,  detached  houses. 

About  three  o'clock  in  the  morning  of  the  10th 
of  July,  the  tranquillity  of  repose  was  broken  by 
the  sudden  discharge  of  fire-arms,  and  the  sound 
was  speedily  repeated  in  various  directions.  The 
Sipahis  had  been  assembled  silently  in  their  quar- 
ters under  arms   by  their  native  officers,  and  led 

'  The  four  elder  princes  were  allowed  50,000  rupees  a-year  each ;  the 
three  next,  25,000  rupees ;  the  two  youn^^er,  8,400  rupees  ;  and  the  remain- 
ing three,  6,000  each.  There  were  above  3000  natives  of  Mysore  in  the  fort 
and  adjoining  Petta  or  town,  and  above  500  Mohammedan  Fakirs.  The 
whole  population  of  the  town  was  about  8000. 


118  HISTORY   OF  BRITISH   INDIA. 

BOOK  I.  to  unexpected  assaults  upon  the   European  posts. 

CHAP,  n.  jj^^  ^^^  English  sentinels  on  duty  at  the  main- 
J806.  guard  and  the  powder  magazine  were  shot  or  bay- 
oneted almost  before  they  were  aware  of  their  dan- 
ger,  and  the  possession  of  the  magazine  secured 
to  the  insurgents  the  sole  supply  of  ammunition. 
Their  chief  body  beset  the  European  barracks,  firing 
through  the  open  doors  and  windows  volley  after 
volley,  and  repelling  every  attempt  of  its  inmates  to 
sally  forth,  by  a  murderous  discharge  of  musketry, 
and  the  fire  of  a  field-piece  which  they  had  planted 
opposite  to  the  doorway.  As  soon  as  these  attacks 
commenced,  detachments  were  stationed  to  watch 
the  dwellings  of  the  officers,  with  instructions  to  fire 
upon  any  one  who  should  come  forth  :  and,  in  pur- 
suance of  the  order.  Colonel  Fancourt,  as  he  de- 
scended from  his  house,  received  a  wound  which 
proved  fatal ;  and  Lieutenant-Colonel  M'Kerras, 
commanding  the  23rd,  was  shot  as  he  was  hastening 
to  the  parade.  After  the  barracks  were  surrounded, 
parties  of  the  native  soldiers  forced  their  way  into 
the  houses  of  the  Europeans,  and  put  to  death  with 
unsparing  ferocity  all  whom  they  could  discover. 
Thirteen  ofllcers  were  killed,  besides  several  Euro- 
pean conductors  of  ordnance.  In  the  barracks, 
eighty -two  privates  were  killed,  and  ninety -one 
were  wounded.  The  mutineers  did  not  venture  to 
enter  the  building,  where  they  would  have  had  to 
encounter  the  bayonets  of  the  soldiers,  but  con* 
tented  themselves  with  pouring  their  fire  into  the 
apartments ;  in  which  the  men,  unable  for  want  of 
ammunition  to  return  it,  screened  themselves  against 
its  effects  as  well  as  they  were  able  by  the  beds  and 


PROOEEDINOS   OF  THE   MUTINEEB8.  119 

furniture.  Early  in  the  morning,  a  few  officers,  who  book  l 
had  collected  in  one  of  the  dwellings  and  had  sue-  ' 
cessfully  defended  themselves,  made  their  way  to  iwe. 
the  barracks,  and,  placing  themselves  at  the  head  of 
the  survivors,  forced  a  passage  through  the  muti- 
neers and  ascended  the  ramparts,  where  they  took 
post  in  a  cavalier.  Hence  they  reached  the  maga* 
zine,  but  were  disappointed  in  their  expectation  of 
supplying  themselves  with  powder,  and  were  obliged 
to  return  to  the  ramparts,  where  they  found  cover 
above  the  main  gateway  and  in  a  bastion  at  the 
south-east  angle  of  the  fort.  In  these  movements 
they  were  exposed  to  a  continued  fire,  by  which  all 
the  officers  were  disabled  and  many  of  the  men 
were  killed ;  yet  they  maintained  their  ground  with 
steadfast  courage,  and  repeatedly  drove  back  their 
assailants  at  the  point  of  the  bayonet. 

During  the  whole  of  these  transactions  an  active 
communication  was  kept  up  between  the  mutineers 
and  the  palace,  and  many  of  the  servants  and  fol- 
lowers of  the  princes  were  conspicuously  active  in 
the  scenes  of  bloodshed  and  plunder  which  followed 
the  first  success.  By  some  of  these  a  flag,  which 
had  once  belonged  to  Tippoo  and  bore  his  insignia,^ 
was  brought  out  of  the  palace  and  hoisted  on  the 
flagstaff  amidst  the  acclamations  of  the  multitude ; 
but  it  was  speedily  pulled  down  by  the  men  of  the 
69th  as  they  passed  the  flagstaff  in  their  way  from 
the  barracks  to  the  ramparts.  The  indications  of 
regularity  and  conduct  which  marked  the  first  pro- 
ceedings of  the  insurgents  soon  disappeared  :  subor- 
dination was  speedily  at  an  end;  the  Sipahis  and 

'  A  sun  in  the  centre,  with  tiger  stripes  on  a  green  field. 


120  -      HISTORY  OF   BftmSH  INDIA. 


BOOK  I.  followers  of  the  palace  dispersed  in  quest  of  plunder ; 

''"^^'  "•  and  many  who  had  been  reluctant  participators  in 
1806.  the  mutiny,  who  began  to  fear  its  consequences,  or 
who  sought  to  secure  the  booty  they  had  obtained, 
availed  themselves  of  the  conftision  to  leave  the 
fort.  No  arrangements  had  been  made  to  hold  the 
fortress,  or  to  withdraw  to  any  other  position,  when 
the  alarm  was  given  that  retribution  was  at  hand. 

Arcot,  the  ancient  capital  of  the  Camatic,  and 
the  scene  of  dive's  celebrated  defence,  was  about 
nine  miles  distant  from  Vellore.  It  was  a  military 
station ;  and,  among  the  troops  cantoned  there,  was 
the  19th  regiment  of  dragoons  under  the  command 
of  Lieutenant- Colonel  Gillespie.  Information  of 
the  insurrection  reached  Arcot  by  six  in  the  morn- 
ing; and  a  squadron  of  the  19th,  with  a  strong  troop 
of  the  7th  Native  Cavalry,  with  Colonel  Gillespie 
at  their  head,  was  immediately  on  the  road  to  Vel- 
lore, the  galloper  guns  and  remainder  of  the  ca- 
valry being  ordered  to  follow  without  delay.  By 
eight  o'clock  the  first  party  was  before  the  gates  of 
the  fortress :  the  outer  two  were  open,  a  third  was 
closed ;  but  it  was  here  that  a  few  of  the  69th  had 
effected  a  lodgement,  and  some  of  the  men,  lowered 
by  their  comrades  from  the  wall,  opened  the  gate 
to  the  cavalry.  There  was  still  a  fourth  gateway, 
which  was  shut,  and  this  was  commanded  by  the 
mutineers  so  completely  that  it  was  necessary  to 
wait  for  the  guns  to  blow  it  open :  they  arrived 
about  ten.  Upon  their  approach,  Colonel  Gillespie 
caused  himself  to  be  drawn  up  to  the  rampart, 
where  he  put  himself  at  the  head  of  the  party 
which  had  maintained  the  position,  and  descended 


THE   FORT   RETAKEN.  121 


from  the  post  to  charge  the  insurgents,  at  the  same  book  i. 
moment  that  the  gate  was  blown  open  and  the  dra-  J^*^^^ 
goons  rushed  into  the  fort.  No  resolute  resistance  I8O6. 
was  offered :  after  a  feeble  and  straggling  fire,  the 
insurgents  scattered  in  all  directions,  and  were  cut 
down  by  the  cavalry,  or  bayoneted  by  the  men  of 
the  69th.  Between  three  and  four  hundred  were 
slain,  many  were  taken,  the  rest  escaped  by  dropping 
from  the  walls.  In  the  course  of  ten  minutes  the 
fort  was  again  in  the  possession  of  the  British  troops, 
and  an  unsparing  but  not  undeserved  punishment 
had  been  inflicted  on  a  great  number  of  the  muti- 
neers. There  still  remained  a  multitude  whose  de- 
gree of  participation  in  the  mutiny  and  consequent 
destiny  it  was  necessary  to  determine,  and  it  was 
also  of  importance  to  discover  the  causes  of  so 
alarming  an  outbreak. 

'  The  number  of  the  prisoners  was  speedily  in- 
creased by  the  apprehension  of  the  fugitives  in  va- 
rious parts  of  the  country  by  the  police  or  by  the 
villagers,  and  by  the  spontaneous  surrender  of  many 
who  either  were,  or  wished  to  be  thought,  innocent. 
Some  of  the  latfer  were  allowed  to  resume  their 
military  duties,  but  there  were  still  above  six  hun- 
dred Sipahis  detained  in  confinement  at  Trichano- 
poly  and  Vellore.  A  military  tribunal  had  been  in 
the  first  instance  instituted  for  their  trial,  by  which 
several  of  those  whose  guilt  was  substantiated  were 
condemned  to  death.^  The  criminality  of  the  rest 
was  referred  to  a  special  commission,  upon  whose 

'  Three  native  officers  and  fourteen  non-commissioned  officers  and  pri- 
vates were  executed  by  sentence  of  a  native  court-martial.— General 
Orders  by  the  Government,  Fort  St.  George,  14th  January,  1807. 


122  HISTOBY  OF   BRITISH   INDIA. 

BOOK  L  proceedings  the  Government  long  hesitated  to  pro- 
^"^^'  "*  nounce  a  final  sentence.  Although  little  doubt  could 
1806.  be  entertained  that  most  of  the  Sipahis,  whether  in 
confinement  or  at  large,  were  deeply  implicated  in 
the  mutiny,  yet  it  was  impossible  to  procure  satis- 
factory evidence  of  individual  guilt,  and  it  was  in- 
compatible with  justice  to  condemn  the  whole  upon 
probable  imputation.  To  restore  them  to  their  mi- 
litary functions,  was  to  insure  impunity  to  insurrec- 
tion ;  to  set  them  at  liberty  and  dismiss  them,  was 
to  disperse  over  the  country  a  number  of  desperate 
and  dangerous  men,  whose  example  and  instigations 
might  lead  to  greater  mischief.  To  transport  the 
whole  to  Penang  or  the  Cape,  would  be  expensive 
and  inconvenient,  even  if  it  were  just.  The  opinions 
of  the  Governor  and  the  Commander-in-chief  were 
at  variance ;  the  former  advocating  the  more  lenient, 
the  latter  the  severer  course.  The  former  event- 
ually prevailed.  The  officers  and  men  who  were 
absent  at  the  time  of  the  mutiny,  or  who  had  given 
proofs  of  their  fidelity  on  the  occasion  of  its  occur- 
rence, remained  on  the  strength  of  the  army :  the 
rest  were  discharged  for  ever  From  the  service, 
with  the  grant  to  the  officers  of  small  pensions 
for  their  support,  and  the  numbers  of  the  regi- 
ments were  erased  from  the  army  list.^  The  dis- 
posal of  the  prisoners  remained  undecided  until 
the  arrival  of  Lord  Minto  at  Madras  on  his  way  to 
Bengal.  It  was  then  resolved  that  a  final  investiga- 
tion should  take  place,  and,  with  the  exception  of 

'  Two  new  regiments  were  formed  in  their  place,  the  24th  and  25th^  to 
which  the  European  officers  of  the  Ist  and  3rd  regiments,  and  such  native 
officers  and  men  as  were  not  discharged,  were  respectively  transferred. — 
General  Orders,  14th  January,  1807. 


CAUSES   OF   THE   MUTINY.  123 

those  against  whom  proof  of  plunder  and  murder  book  i. 
could  be  adduced,  and  who  were  to  be  punished  ac-  _^J^^^^1^ 
eordingly,  the  whole  should  be  gradually  enlarged,     isoe. 
being  dismissed  from  the  service  and  declared  in- 
capable of  being  again  enlisted.    As  by  this  time  the 
agitation  had  subsided  and  the  confidence  of  the 
native  troops  was  restored,  the  decision  was  carried 
into  effect  without  difficulty,  and  without  being  fol- 
lowed by  any  perceptible  mischief.     The  ascertain- 
ment  of  the   causes   of  the   mutiny,   and  of  the 
principal  circumstances  attending  it,  was  equally  a 
subject  of  prolonged  deliberation  and  productive  of 
conflicting  opinions. 

Although  the  storm  had  burst  so  suddenly  upon 
the  victims  of  its  fury,  indications  of  its  approach 
had  not  been  wanting,  and  careful  and  intelligent 
observation  might  have  anticipated  its  violence  and 
guarded  against  its  consequences.  It  was  known 
early  in  May  that  deep  and  dangerous  discontent 
pervaded  the  troops  in  garrison  upon  the  subject  of 
orders  regarding  their  dress  and  accoutrements,  and 
rigorous  measures  were  resorted  to  for  its  suppres- 
sion. They  had  the  usual  effects  of  ill-judged  seve- 
rity. They  stifled  the  utterance  but  aggravated 
the  feelings,  and  embittered  dissatisfaction  by  for- 
cing it  to  assume  the  mask  of  acquiescence.  Secret 
associations  were  formed,  not  only  to  resist  the  ob- 
noxious orders,  but  to  brave  the  penalty  which  in- 
subordination incurred,  by  contracting  guilt  of  a  still 
deeper  dye ;  and  the  native  officers  and  men  were  / 
gradually  drawn  into  a  conspiracy  to  murder  all  the 
Europeans  in  the  fort,  and  elevate  one  of  the  sons 
of  Tippoo  to  the  sovereignty  from  which  his  father 


124  HISTORY    OF   BRITISH    INDIA. 

BOOK  I.  had  been  hurled  by  foreigners  and  infidels.  Not- 
^^^^^^^^  withstanding  the  oath  of  secresy  by  which  silence 
1806..  was  imposed  on  all  who  were  enrolled  amongst  the 
conspirators,  intimations  of  the  plot  transpired  suf- 
ficient at  least  to  have  put  the  objects  of  it  on  their 
guard.  Not  only  were  dark  rumours  of  an  ap- 
proaching tumult  current  in  the  fort  and  Petta, 
but  in  the  latter  a  Mohammedan  Fakir  repeatedly 
proclaimed  in  the  Bazar  the  impending  destruction 
of  the  Europeans.  Little  regard  was  paid  to  his 
denunciations,  as  they  were  uttered  with  a  wildness 
of  manner  and  vagueness  of  language  which  in- 
spired doubts  of  his  sanity.  Information  still  more 
positive  was  equally  disregarded.  At  midnight,  on 
the  17th  of  June,  a  Sipahi  of  the  Ist  regiment, 
named  Mustafa  Beg,  had  come  to  Colonel  Forbes, 
the  commander  of  the  corps,  and  communicated 
to  him  that  a  plot  was  concerted  to  murder 
the  European  part  of  the  garrison.  The  agitation 
which  the  man  exhibited,  and  the  imperfectly 
understood  purport  of  his  testimony,  induced 
the  Colonel  not  only  to  doubt  the  authenticity  of 
his  testimony,  but  to  refer  its  investigation  to  a 
committee  of  native  officers,,  who,  being  all  more  or 
less  implicated  in  the  conspiracy,  reported  of  course 
that  Mustafa  Beg  was  unworthy  of  credence,  and 
demanded  his  confinement  as  the  punishment  of 
his  calumnious  aspersions.  He  was  accordingly 
placed  under  arrest,  and  so  remained  until  the  mu- 
tiny and  murder  which  he  had  in  vain  announced 
had  taken  j)lace.*     The  utter  neglect  of  these  inti- 

'  Mustafa  Heg  escaped  during  the  tumult,  but  returned  to  the  fort  a  few 
days  afterwards,  and  was  rewarded  for  his  conduct  by  a  pecuniary  dona- 


DISREGARD   AND   DEFICIENCY    OF   INFORMATION.  125 

mations,  and  their  vagueness  and  infrequency,  might  book  i. 
seem  extraordinary,   if  there   were   not   reason  to   ^"^^•"' 


believe  that  there  prevailed  at  the  time  a  more  I8O6. 
than  even  the  usual  estrangement  between  the  Eu- 
ropean oflScers  and  the  native  troops,  which  is  too 
often  engendered  by  the  contemptuous  indifference 
entertained  by  the  former  for  the  feelings  and  opi- 
nions of  the  latter,  and  by  their  imperfect  acquaint- 
ance with  the  native  languages.  Had  there  been 
any  cordiality  between  the  European  officers  and 
the  native  garrison, — ^had  any  one  of  them  deserved 
the  confidence  and  attachment  of  his  men,  it  is  not 
to  be  credited  that  only  a  single  individual  should 
have  been  found  faithful  among  the  many  who  were 
privy  to  the  conspiracy,  and  that  Mustafa  Beg 
should  have  stood  alone  in  his  communications/ 
Had  there  not  also  been  some  want  of  vigilance  on 
the  part  of  the  officers  of  the  garrison,  it  is  dif- 
ficult to  conceive  that  they  could  have  been  so 
wholly  unprepared  for  such  a  widely  extended  and 
desperate  insurrection.' 

tion  of  2000  pagodas  and  a  Subahdar's  pension. — G.  O.  Madras,  7th 
Aug.  1806.  A  European  woman,  who  had  resided  some  years  in  Vel« 
Ifire,  also  apprised  Colonel  Fancourt  that  secret  meetings  were  held  by  the 
Sipahis  in  the  Petta,  at  which  seditious  language  was  held.  No  attention 
was  paid  to  her  testimony,  as  her  character  was  disreputable. — ^MS.  Pro- 
ceedings of  Court  of  Inquiry. 

^  Shortly  before  this  transaction,  Sir  John  Cradock,  the  Commander-in- 
chief,  addressed  a  letter  to  the  adjutant- general  for  circulation  to  the  army, 
in  which  he  stated  his  regret  to  find  that  it  was  the  preyailing  practice  of 
the  service  to  withhold  from  the  native  commissioned  officers  that  respect 
and  intercourse  to  which  their  situation  and  common  opinion  entitled 
them.  The  Court  of  Directors  also  remark,  '*  We  have  too  much  reason 
to  apprehend,  that,  to  the  neglect  and  disrespect  manifested  to  the  native 
officers  by  the  European  officers,  the  disposition  to  foment  and  conceal  the 
dissatisfaction  of  the  men  is  principally  to  be  attributed.**  They  also  ob- 
serve, <'  It  has  been  represented  to  us  that  the  deficiency  in  the  knowledge 
of  the  languages  of  the  country  prevalent  amongst  the  officers  of  the  army 
may  have  operated  as  another  cause  of  the  absence  of  confidence  between 
the  European  officers  and  the  native  troops.   We  are  aware  of  the  injurious 


12^  HISTORY   OF   BRITISH   INDIA. 


BOOK  I.  The  causes  of  this  alarming  occurrence  necessarily 
^^^'^  engaged  the  attention  of  the  public  both  in  India  and 
1806.  in  Europe,  and  an  acrimonious  controversy  ensued, 
which  can  scarcely  be  said  even  yet  to  be  at  rest. 
Not  that  there  was  any  sufficient  reason  for  differ- 
ence of  opinion.  To  an  impartial  judgment  the  real 
cause  was  liable  to  no  misconception ;  but  its  admis- 
sion involved  inferences  which  were  pressed  by  one 
party  beyond  their  due  limits,  and  of  which  the 
grounds  were  therefore  denied  altogether  by  the 
other.  The  question  of  converting  the  natives  of 
India  to  the  Christian  religion  was  supposed  to  de- 
pend for  its  solution  upon  the  origin  of  the  massacre 
at  Vellore.  By  those  who  were  unfriendly  to  mis- 
sionary efforts,  as  well  as  those  who  were  apprehen- 
sive of  their  effects  upon  native  feeling,  the  transac- 


effecfs  which  this  ignorance  on  the  part  of  the  European  officers  is  likely 
to  produce,  and  which  we  are  informed  prevails  to  a  great  extent.**  They 
proceed  to  suggest  a  plan  for  remedying  the  defect,  but  it  has  never  yet 
been  carried  into  operation.  A  general  order  of  the  Commander-tn*eliief, 
issued  in  August,  1806,  announced  that  he  would  not  recommend,  nor 
would  the  Government  approve  of,  any  officer  for  a  staff  appointment  whv 
did  not  possess  ''  means  of  distinct  communication  with  the  native  army.*" 
A  knowledge  of  Hindustani  had  previously  been  required  from  cadets  as  a 
condition  of  promotion,  and  from  all  officers  as  a  qualification  for  ftte  post 
of  acUutant.  Adverting  to  the  disregard  of  Mustafa  Beg's  informatkMi,  the 
Court  observe, ''  We  fear  that  Colonel  Forbes*s  conduct  upon  that  occasion 
proceeded  from  the  same  laxity  of  system,  which,  there  is  reason  to  suppose, 
prevailed  at  Vellore  for  a  considerable  period  before  the  unfortunate  Hiiiie 
was  sprung.*' — Letter  to  Fort  Sl.  George,  29th  May,  1807,  printed  for  the 
House  of  Commons,  13th  April,  1813.  That  the  discipline  of  the  garri- 
son was  relaxed,  is  proved  by  the  evidence  before  the  Committee  as  to  a 
neglect  of  military  doty  on  the  very  night  of  the  mutiny  ;  the  punctual 
fulfilment  of  which  might  have  detected  something  unusual  amongst  the 
■ative  soldiery,  and  perhaps  prevented  the  mischief.  The  European  offi- 
cer commanding  the  main-guard  being  summoned  to  go  the  rounds  at 
mklnight,  declared  himself  indisposed,  and  directed  the  Subahdar  to  take 
his  place.  The  Subahdar,  in  imitation  of  his  superior,  pleaded  the  same 
excuse,  and  delegated  the  duty  to  the  Jemadar,  who  was  one  of  the  chief 
leaders  of  the  conspiracy.  His  report  was,  of  course,  that  all  was  well 
at  the  very  hour  when  the  mutineers  were  arming  for  the  attack. — Pro- 
ceedings of  Committee  of  Inquiry ;  MS.  Records. 


DIFFERENCE   OF   OPINIONS.  127 

tion  was  appealed  to  as  decisive  of  the  reasonable-  book  i. 
ness  of  their  fears,  and  as  justifying  their  opposition.   ^^^^' "' 


No  better  reply  could  be  devised  by  the  friends  and  18O6. 
supporters  of  missions  than  a  denial  that  the  Vel- 
lore  mutiny  had  any  connexion  with  the  propagation 
of  Christianity, — a  denial  in  which  they  were  un- 
doubtedly wide  of  the  truth.*  The  essential  and 
main  spring  of  the  mutiny  was  religious  principle, 
although  its  occurrence  was  influenced  in  the  man- 
ner and  season  of  its  development  by  incidental  and 
local  excitement. 

Towards  the  end  of  1805  the  new  Commander- 
in-chief  at  Madras,  Sir  John  Cradock,  had  been  led 
to  adopt  the  project  of  reducing  the  regulations  of 
the  army  to  a  systematic  code.  The  article  of 
dress,  a  favourite  subject  of  consideration  with  mili- 
tary men,  at  least  in  time  of  peace,  received  all  the 
attention  which  its  importance  demanded ;  and  va- 
rious regulations  were  drawn  up  regarding  the  regi- 
mentals and  accoutrements  of  the  native  soldiery, 
with  the  avowed  purpose  of  assimilating  their  ap- 

'  The  Reverend  Dr.  Buchanan  thus  writes  to  the  Goyernment  of  Ben- 
gal:  '^  I  understand  that  the  massacre  of  Vellore  has  been  unaccountably 
adduced  as  some  sanction  to  the  principle  of  opposing  the  progress  of  the 
Christian  religion  in  Bengal.  I  had  opportunities  of  judging  of  the 
causes  of  that  event,  which  were  peculiar.  I  was  in  the  vicinity  of  the 
place  at  the  time.  I  travelled  for  two  months  immediately  afterwards  in 
the  province  adjacent  with  the  sanction  of  Government,  and  I  heard  the 
evidence  of  Christians,  Mohammedans,  and  Hindus,  on  the  subject.  That 
the  insurrection  at  Vellore  had  no  connexion  with  the  Christian  religion, 
directly  or  indirectly,  immediately  or  remotely,  is  a  truth  which  is  capable 
of  demonstration." —  Letter  from  the  Reverend  C.  Buchanan  to  the  Go- 
vernor-General, 7th  Nov.,  1807 ;  Parliamentary  Papers  relating  to  Mis- 
i^ooaries,  &c.,  14th  April,  1818.  Dr.  Buchanan  undoubtedly  believed  in 
what  be  asserted  so  roundly,  but  he  was  strangely  misinformed.  The  most 
sealous  and  able  defenders  of  the  cause.  Lord  Teignmouth  in  his  Conside- 
rations on  the  duty  of  diffusing  Christianity  in  India,  and  Mr.  Wilberforce 
in  his  speeches  in  1818,  afterwards  published  by  himself,  do  not  go  to  the 
same  length :  they  only  deny  that  the  Vellore  mutiny  was  connected  with 
any  unusual  extension  or  activity  of  Missionary  proceedings. 


1806. 


128  HISTORY  OF   BRITISH   INDIA. 

BOOK  I.  pearance  to  that  of  the  European  troops.  With 
'  this  intention,  the  Sipahis  were  forbidden  to  appear 
on  parade  with  ear-rings,  or  the  coloured  marks 
upon  the  forehead  or  face  significant  of  sectarial 
distinctions;  and  they  were  commanded  to  shave 
their  beards  and  trim  their  mustachios  according  to 
a  standard  model.  The  issue  of  these  orders  was 
suspended  in  a  few  instances  by  the  prudence  of 
commanding  officers  of  corps ;  but  they  were  gene- 
rally known  by  the  men,  and  almost  universally  in- 
terpreted to  imply  a  design  on  the  part  of  the  Go- 
vernment to  compel  the  native  troops  to  assume 
the  practices,  and  eventually  the  religion,  of  Euro- 
peans.* Other  innovations  in  their  dress  and  ac- 
coutrements, such  as  a  particular  undress  jacket, 
black  leather  stocks,  and  a  tumscrew,  which  some 
susceptible  minds  identified  with  a  cross,*  had  pre- 
viously occasioned  wide-spread  dissatisfaction ;  and 
the  last  drop  of  the  cup  was  poured  forth  when  a 
new  pattern  for  a  turban  was  devised,  which  in  the 
apprehension  of  the  Sipahis  resembled  a  hat.*  This 
confirmed  their  fears,  and  insubordination  was  the 
result. 

The  first  overt  exhibition  of  the  spirit  thus  gene- 

'  It  was  commonly  said  by  the  Sipahis, ''  We  shall  next  be  compelled  to 
eat  and  drink  with  the  outcast  and  infidel  English,  to  give  them  our 
daughters  in  marriage,  to  become  one  people,  and  follow  one  faith.** 

'  It  appears  that  Sir  J.  Cradock  was  not  responsible  for  the  two  former  ; 
they  were  certainly,  howerer,  in  use. — Lord  W.  Bentinck*s  Memorial, 
p.  61. 

^  It  is  not  easy  for  persons  unacquainted  with  the  East  to  understand 
why  so  harmless  a  head-dress  as  a  hat  should  have  excited  such  horror ; 
but,  in  the  estimation  of  the  natives,  the  hat  is  identified  with  the  wearer, 
and,  of  itself,  denotes  a  European  and  a  Christian.  The  term  Topi-wala, 
or  hat-man,  is  a  term  that  is  commonly  used  for  both.  To  substitute  a  hat 
for  the  equally  national  characteristic  head-dress,  the  turban,  was  there- 
fore  considered  to  be  a  change  of  deeply  significant  import. 


PREVIOUS   DISCONTENTS.  129 

rated  took  place  in   the   second   battalion  of  the  book  i. 
4th    regiment    of   Madras   infantry,    quartered    in  ^^^^' "' 
Vellore,  early  in    May.      The   grenadier   company     isoe. 
refused  to  make  up  the  turban,  stating  their  repug- 
nance to  it  honestly,  and  at  first  respectfully  and 
with  calmness.    Their  representations  were  received 
by  the  commanding  officer  of  the  regiment  with 
extreme  intemperance,  and  his  violence^  provoked 
some  disorderly  and  unmilitary  conduct ;  in  conse- 
quence of  which  nineteen  grenadiers  were  arrested, 
and  sent  to  Madras  for  trial,  by  order  of  the  Com- 
mander-in-chief, who  announced  his  resolution  to 
have  the  turbans  made  up  and  worn,  and  insisted 
on  prompt   and    imhesitating   obedience.      Of  the 
prisoners  sent  to  the  Presidency,  two  were  sentenced 

'  According  to  the  official  report,  the  captain  of  the  grenadier  company 
of  the  second  battalion  of  the  4th  regiment  informed  the  lieutenant-colonel 
commanding  the  corps,  that  several  of  his  men  had  waited  upon  him  and 
expressed  strong  objections  to  the  new  head-dress  on  the  part  of  the 
whole  company.  The  colonel  called  the  men  before  him  and  questioned 
them  regarding  their  repugnance ;  when  they  stated  firmly,  though  respect- 
fully, that  they  were  well  aware  of  the  consequences  of  disobedience,  but 
that  they  could  not  consent  to  wear  the  new  turban,  as  it  would  disgrace 
them  for  ever  in  the  eyes  of  their  countrymen.  Some  of  the  superior  offi- 
cers expressed  themselves  prepared  to  waive  their  objections ;  but,  as  the 
non-commissioned  officers  and  privates  persisted  in  their  refusal,  the  former 
were  immediately  reduced  to  the  ranks,  and  the  latter  placed  ia  arrest. 
In  the  evening,  when  the  battalion  was  mustered  for  parade,  the  men  at- 
tended without  their  side-arms  and  refused  to  put  them  on  :  on  which,  the 
colonel  deprived  even  the  superior  officers  of  their  swords,  and  dismissed 
the  battalion  ;  some  of  the  men  of  which,  as  they  dispersed,  called  aloud, 
*'  Dhurtt!  dhurtt!*'  meaning  '*  Away !  away!"  but  with  a  somewhat  uncivil 
import.  Upon  the  occurrence  being  reported  to  Colonel  Fancourt,  the 
commandant  of  the  garrison,  he  went  to  the  barracks  and  expostulated 
with  the  men  ;  but  they  unanimously  refused  to  wear  the  turban,  affirm iog 
that  it  was  really  a  hat.  Colonel  Fancourt  took  no  further  steps  in  the 
business  beyond  ordering  their  swords  to  be  restored  to  the  native  commis- 
sioned officers.  Some  further  excitement  was  manifested  on  the  following 
day,  but,  as  observed  by  the  Court  of  Directors  in  their  letter  to  Fort  St. 
George,  above  cited,  it  was  so  obviously  provoked  by  the  injudicious  con- 
duct of  the  commanding  officer  that  they  would  not  have  been  surprised  if 
a  mutiny  had  immediately  followed,  attended  with  all  the  fatal  conse- 
quences arising  from  the  offended  prejudice  occasioned  by  so  capricious  and 
wanton  an  exertion  of  authority. — Parliamentary  Papers. 

VOL.    I.  K 


130  HISTORY  OF   BRITISH   INDIA, 


BOOK  I.  by  a  native  court-martial  to  receive  nine  hundred 
^^^'  "*  lashes  each,  and  seventeen  to  receive  five  hundred 
1806.  lashes  each.  The  sentence  was  carried  into  exe- 
cution in  the  two  first  instances;^  in  the  others  it 
was  remitted,  in  consequence  of  the  professed  con- 
trition of  the  culprits.  The  award  showed  that 
there  was  no  hope  of  redress  from  temperate  repre- 
sentation ;  especially  as  the  Governor  in  Council 
took  up  the  subject  in  the  same  unquestioning  spirit 
as  the  Commander-in-chief,  and  published  his  de- 
termination to  enforce  the  order,  and  to  employ  all 
possible  means  of  suppressing  any  act  of  insubordi- 
nation. This  was  the  radical  error  of  the  whole 
proceeding :  it  proved  to  the  native  troops  that  they 
could  expect  no  countenance  from  their  European 
oflScers,  no  consideration  for  their  feelings  from  the 
Commander-in-chief  or  the  Government,  and  cor- 
roborated the  suspicion  that  the  latter  was  in- 
flexibly bent  upon  the  abolition  of  the  distinctions 
of  tribe  and  caste,  and  the  compulsory  introduction 
of  an  outward  conformity  at  least  to  the  practices  of 
Christians. 

In  vindication  of  the  course  pursued  by  the 
Government,  it  was  maintained  that  there  were  no 
reasonable  grounds  of  objection  to  the  turban ;  that 
it  had  been  -made  up  witiiout  hesitation  in  some 
corps ;  and  that  two  respectable  natives,  a  Moham- 
medan  Syed  and  a  Hindu  Brahman,  had  given  evi- 
dence that  there  was  nothing  in  its  construction  that 
was  incompatible  with  their  religious  faith.     This 

'  Lord  W.  Beotinck  says,  the  two  ringleaders  onJy  received  punishment. 
— Memorial,  p.  3.  See  also  Madras  General  Orders  by  the  Commander- 
in -chief,  2nd  July,  1806. 


MISTAKEN    INFERENCES.  131 


was  no  more  than  true;  but  although  particular  in-  booki. 
fluences  might  in  some  cases  have  overcome  the  ^^^^'  "* 
objection  felt  by  the  troops,  and,  as  is  not  at  all  un-     18O6. 
usual  among  the  natives  of  India,  a  few  individuals 
of  acknowledged   respectability   might   have   been 
more  free  from  prejudice  than  their  inferiors,  yet 
it  was  undeniable  that  a  very  strong  and  widely 
propagated  repugnance  to  the  turban  did  exist  in 
the  army,  and  it  would  have  been  more  just  and 
generous  in  the  Government,  as  well  as  more  po- 
litic, to  have  refrained  from  rating  the  shape  of  a 
cap  at  a  higher  value  than  the  affections  of  the  sol- 
diery. 

With  regard  to  the  order  abolishing  marks  of 
easte  on  parade,  and  enjoining  a  particular  cut  of 
the  beard  and  mustachios,  it  was  urged  in  defence 
of  the  Commander-in-chief,  that  although  not  a 
part  of  the  express  military  code,  yet  it  had  been 
introduced  very  generally  in  practice  before  the 
code  was  drawn  up,  and  that  similar  prohibitions 
and  injunctions  had  long  been  in  force  in  several 
regiments.  This  also  was  no  doubt .  true,  but  it 
evinced  great  ignorance  of  the  native  character  to 
infer  that  a  positive  and  universally  applicable  order 
to  that  effect  might  therefore  be  promulgated  with 
impunity.  The  commanding  officer  of  a  Sipahi 
battalion  who  has  acquired  the  confidence  of  his 
men  can  do  much,  even  in  opposition  to  their  incli- 
nations, without  exciting  that  dissatisfaction  which 
may  be  engendered  by  a  formal  order  of  the  Com- 
mander-in-chief;  and  it  can  scarcely  be  considered 
peculiar  to  the  natives  of  India,  although  in  an 
especial  degree  to  be  predicated  of  them,  that  pre- 


K   2 


132  HISTORY  OF   BRITISH   INDIA. 

BOOK  I.  judices,  which  soften  and  dissolve  before  gentle  and 
judicious  influence,  commonly  harden  into  intracta- 


1806.  ble  rigidity  when  abruptly  and  harshly  denounced. 
The  practice  of  particular  regiments,  therefore,  afford- 
ed no  safe  principle  for  universal  legislation;  and 
the  inference  displayed  little  acquaintance  with  the 
character  or  sentiments  of  the  native  army.* 

That  the  prejudices  thus  shocked,  and  the  feel- 
ings thus  exasperated,  should  have  produced  their 
fatal  effects  at  Vellore,  was  no  doubt  attributable  to 
an  additional  stimulus  applied  by  the  presence  of 
the  family  of  Tippoo  Sultan.  The  followers  and 
attendants  of  the  princes,  naturally  ill-disposed  to- 
wards the  British  Government,  availed  themselves 
of  the  opportunity  afforded  by  the  prevailing  dis- 
content, and  contributed  by  all  means  in  their  power 
to  confirm  the  impression  which  the  Sipahis  enter- 
tained of  the  ulterior  objects  of  the  innovations 
commanded ;  taunting  them  with  the  badges  of  Chris- 
tianity which  had  been  imposed  upon  them  in  the 
tumscrew  and  the  turban,  and  calling  upon  them  to 
die  rather  than  apostatise  from  their  faith.  It  was 
established  by  the  evidence  before  the  court  and 
commission  of  inquiry,  that  some  of  the  confidential 
servants  of  one  of  the  princes,  Moiz-ad-din,  had 
been  present  at  the  secret  meetings  which  had  pre- 
ceded the  mutiny,  and  had  brought,  or  pretended 
to  bring,  messages  from  the  palace  encouraging  the 
mutineers ;  promising  also,  that,  if  the  native  troops 
would  master  the  Europeans  and  hold  the  fort  for 

'  So  much  of  the  order  as  related  to  sectarial  marks  and  ear-rings  was, 
in  truth,  not  Sir  J.  Cradock's.  It  was  circulated  by  his  predecessor,  Ma- 
jor-General  Sir  J.  Campbell,  11th  January,  1805,  shortly  before  Sir  J. 
Cradock's  arrival. 


IMPLICATION   OF   THE   SONS   OF   TIPPOO.  133 

eight  days,  they  would  be  joined  by  other  regiments,  book  i. 
and  by  many  of  the  principal  Poligars,  with  whose  ^^^^'  "^ 


aid  the  Mohammedan  kingdom  of  Mysore  would  yoe. 
be  re-established.  The  influence  exercised  by  these 
instigations  was  the  more  immediate,  from  the  cir- 
cumstance that  the  first  regiment  of  native  infantry, 
which  consisted  principally  of  Musselmans,  had  been 
raised  chiefly  in  Mysore,  and  many  of  the  oflScers 
and  men  had  served  in  the  armies  of  Hyder  and 
Tippoo.  Former  associations,  therefore,  as  well  as 
community  of  country  and  of  creed,  rendered  them 
in  a  peculiar  degree  accessible  to  the  persuasions  of 
designing  men,  and  hurried  them  into  the  perpetra^ 
tion  of  atrocities  which  the  injury  offered  to  their 
prejudices  might  not  of  itself  have  impelled  them  to 
commit.  The  source  of  the  evil  was  still,  however, 
the  spirit  which  had  been  raised  by  the  severity 
and  inconsiderateness  of  the  English  authorities. 
Mischievous  hands  may  have  applied  a  torch,  but 
no  explosion  would  have  ensued  had  not  the  mate- 
rials of  conflagration  been  previously  accumulated. 

That  the  mutiny  of  Vellore  was  of  a  purely  poli- 
tical character,  and  arose  out  of  a  conspiracy  to 
replace  a  Mohammedan  dynasty  on  the  throne  of 
Mysore, — an  opinion  that  was  strenuously  advocated 
by  those  who  wished  to  shut  their  eyes  against  the 
evidence  of  its  religious  connexion, — was  wholly  in- 
capable of  demonstration.  Even  with  regard  to  the 
sons  of  Tippoo  themselves,  no  proof  could  be  elicited 
that  they  had  been  concerned  in  the  conspiracy. 
There  was  no  evidence  that  the  communications 
made  to  the  conspirators  in  their  name  had  pro- 
ceeded from  them,  and  it  was  clearly  established 


134  HISTORY   OF   BRITISH   INDIA. 

BOOK  I.  that  prior  to  the  mutiny  they  had  never  held  per- 
^"^^•°'  sonal  intercourse  with  any  of  the  insurgents.  Al- 
.1806.  though  it  appeared  that  during  the  tumult  some  of 
the  Sipahis  received  refreshments  at  the  houses  of 
two  of  the  princes,  Mohi-ad-din  and  Moiz-ad-din, 
and  that  the  Mysore  flag  was  brought  from  the 
residence  of  the  latter,  yet  it  was  also  in  evidence 
that  they  had  shrunk  from  the  clamorous  invitations 
of  the  crowd  to  come  forth  and  place  themselves  at 
their  head,  and  that  they  had  carefully  abstained 
from  every  word  and  deed  which  might  implicate 
them  in  the  riot.  No  suspicion  whatever  attached 
to  the  elder  members  of  the  family ;  the  younger 
were  of  too  tender  an  age  to  be  cognizant  of  such  a 
project;  and  the  utmost  criminality  that  could  be 
charged  against  some  of  the  intermediate  members 
of  the  fraternity  was  the  possibility  of  their  being 
aware  of  the  agitation  of  a  plot  against  the  Euro- 
pean part  of  the  garrison,  and  their  omission  to  give 
notice  of  it  to  the  only  European  officer  with  whom 
they  were  allowed  to  communicate,  Colonel  Mar- 
riott. Attachment  to  the  Company  was  not  to  be 
expected  from  them,  but  there  was  little  to  appre- 
hend from  their  animosity.  Their  own  characters 
and  habits  were  a  sufficient  security  for  their  harm- 
lessness.  They  were  bitter  enemies  to  each  other,* 
and  were  uniformly  destitute  of  activity,  enterprise, 
and  courage.  They  had  neither  the  spirit  to  con- 
ceive, nor  the  daring  to  execute,  a  project  that 
demanded  both ;  and,  whatever  may  have  been  their 
own  wishes  or  the  participation  of  their  adherents, 

'  It  was  believed  in  the  palace,  that,  on  one  occasion,  Moiz-ad-din  had 
attempted  to  poison  the  eldest  of  his  brothers. 


NO  PROOF  OF  A  GENERAL  CONSPIRACY.  136 

there  is  ample  reason  to  conclude  that  thfe  sons  of  book  i. 
Tippoo  were  not  personally  the  originators  or  instiga-  ^^^^'  °' 
tors  of  the  mutiny.     As,  however,  their  presence     laoe. 
was  calculated  to  keep  alive  the   hopes  of  their 
adherents,  and  furnish  a  railing  point  to  the  disaf- 
fected, they  were  removed  from  the  Madras  Presi- 
dency to  that  of  Bengal,  and  placed  under  easy  sur- 
veillance in  the  vicinity  of  Calcutta.^ 

Still  more  untenable  were  the  opinions  of  those 
who  beheld  in  the  transaction  the  evidence  of  a 
general  plot  among  the  Mohammedans  of  the  Dek- 
hin  to  restore  the  sovereignty  of  Islam  and  expel 
the  unbelievers;  yet  the  Government  of  Madras 
was  at  first  inclined  to  adopt  this  view,  and  declared 
its  impression  that  a  widely  diffused  confederacy 
had  been  formed  to  subvert  the  British  power  and 
raise  that  of  the  Mohammedans  upon  its  downfall. 
The  calm  and  soimd  judgment  of  Sir  George  Bar- 
low saw  the  business  in  its  true  colours,  and  ques- 
tioned the  reality  of  any  extensive  or  secret  com- 
bination of  the  natives,  and  Lord  William  Ben- 
tinck  retracted  his  opinion.  It  was  nevertheless 
persisted  in  by  Sir  John  Cradock  and  several  ofiicers 
of  the  Madras  army,  although  no  conclusive  proofs 
were  ever  adduced,  and  probabilities  were  decidedly 

'  They  were  removed  from  Vellore,  ou  the  28th  of  August,  1806,  amidst 
ftn  immense  concourse  of  spectators,  who  manifested  no  sympathy  in  their 
fate,  nor  was  it  apparently  any  object  of  anxiety  to  themselves.  They 
arriyed  at  the  Sand-heads  on  the  12th  September,  where  the  second,  Abd-ul- 
Khalik,  died :  the  rest  were  placed  in  suitable  residences  near  Calcutta, 
under  official  surveillance,  but  no  personal  restraint.  Moias-ad-din,  against 
whom  circumstances  were  most  unfavourable,  was  kept  for  some  time  in 
confinement,  but  was  eventually  liberated.  Some  of  the  brothers,  and  a 
multitude  of  descendants,  still  survive.  One  of  the  brothers,  Jami-ad-din 
Hyder,  who  at  the  time  of  the  Vellore  mutiny  was  about  ten  yean  of 
age,  spent  some  years  in  England,  and  died  here  in  1842. 


136  HISTORY  OF  BRITISH   INDIA. 


BOOK  I.  against  them.*  Of  whom  was  such  a  confederacy  to 
'  be  composed  ?  The  Mohammedan  princes  of  the 
1806.  Dekhin  were  not  likely  to  feel  any  great  sympathy 
for  the  descendants  of  a  military  adventurer  whom, 
whilst  living,  they  had  despised,  even  while  they 
feared  him.  The  principal  of  them,  the  Nawab  of 
the  Camatic  and  the  Nizam,  could  not  have  en- 
tered into  such  an  association  without  its  coming  to 
the  knowledge  of  the  English  authorities ;  and  no 
grounds,  even  for  suspicion  against  them,  were  ever 
detected.  It  was  still  less  probable  that  the  Hindu 
Rajas  and  Poligars  would  engage  in  a  scheme,  the 
success  of  which  must  have  brought  back  the  days 
of  Moslem  bigotry,  intolerance,  and  persecution.  In 
short,  all  the  evidence  examined  tended  to  show, 
beyond  the  possibility  of  cavil,  that  there  had  been 
no  intercourse  whatever  between  the  family  of  Tip- 
poo  and  any  chief  or  princes  out  of  the  fort ;  and, 
although  some  of  the  mutineers  talked  vaguely  of 
the  support  that  was  expected  from  one  or  two  in- 
significant Poligars,  yet  neither  messenger  nor  letter 

^  Much  stress  was  laid  upon  infonnation  received  from  a  natiTe  Subah- 
dar  of  cavalry,  who  had  been  long  in  the  service  of  the  Company,  and 
professed  devoted  allegiance  to  the  Government ;  but  all  that  was  fairly 
deducible  from  his  communications  was,  that  the  disaffection  of  the  troops 
was  more  extensive  than  had  been  imagined.  All  the  causes  of  this 
disaffection  he  declared  it  was  difficult  to  state,  but  he  expressed  his  belief 
that  it  arose  principally  from  the  intrigues  of  Tippoo*s  family  and  their 
adherents :  he  stated  that  a  number  of  persons  formerly  in  the  Sultan's 
service,  or  their  relations,  were  now  serving  in  the  native  regiments,  and 
that  agents  and  friends  of  the  family  were  employed  all  over  the  country 
in  instigating  discontent.  That  the  Company's  regiments  had  enlisted 
many  of  Tippoo*s  soldiers  was  well  known,  and  that  they  and  the  Moham- 
medans generally  were  dissatisfied  with  the  change  of  masters  was  highly 
probable  ;  but  there  was  no  evidence  of  any  agency  set  on  foot  by  Tippoo's 
sons,  and  the  discontent  of  the  Hindu  part  of  the  army,  much  the  most 
numerous,  could  scarcely  be  ascribable  to  intrigues  in  favour  of  a  Moham- 
medan dynasty.  The  Subahdar* s  information  was  merely  individual  belief, 
unsupported  by  evidence  of  facts. —  MS.  Records ;  Lord  W.  Bentinck's 
Memorial,  103. 


AGITATION   AT   HYDERABAD.  137 

had  ever  been  interchanged,  and  no  warrant  had  book  i. 
been  given  by  them  for  such  a  misuse  of  their  names.  ^"^'''  "' 


A  conspiracy  of  the  Mohammedan  princes  was  a    isoe. 
mere  shadow,  created  by  an  alarmist  imagination,  or 
by  a  wish  to  shift  the  responsibility  from  the  real 
cause,  the  military  orders,  to  one  wholly  visionary. 

But  positive  proof  that  the  mutiny  originated 
in  no  political  combination,  was  afforded  by  oc- 
currences in  other  quarters.  The  feelings  that 
instigated  the  mutiny  at  Vellore  were  likewise 
entertained  by  the  subsidiary  force  at  Hyderabad, 
and  consequences  equally  serious  were  apprehended. 
There,  however,  the  Resident,  Captain  Sydenham, 
and  Colonel  Montresor  the  commandant,  had  timely 
notice  of  the  agitation  that  prevailed  amongst  the 
troops,  and  justly  appreciated  the  cause.  They  took 
upon  themselves  the  responsibility  of  disobeying  the 
general  orders  of  the  Commander-in-chief,  and  pub- 
lished a  cantonment  order  in  which  the  Sipahis 
were  told  that  they  were  wholly  mistaken  in  sup- 
posing that  any  measures  enjoined  by  the  supreme 
authority  could  be  intended  in  the  smallest  degree 
to  infringe  upon  what  the  Government  held  so  sa- 
cred as  their  religion ;  but  that,  as  they  had  so  mis- 
conceived the  object  of  the  order,  the  commanding 
officer  of  the  subsidiary  force  had  no  doubt  that 
the  Commander-in-chief  would  countermand  the 
obnoxious  regulation,  and  in  the  meantime  he  di- 
rected the  making  up  of  the  new  turbans  to  be  sus- 
pended. The  effect  of  this  judicious  procedure  was 
immediate,  and  calm  and  confidence  at  once  revived 
among  tlie  troops.  In  the  investigation  which  suc- 
ceeded, it  was  found  that  some  of  the  disaffected 


138  HISTORY   OF   BRITISH  INDIA. 

BOOK  I.  nobles  of  the  court  of  Hyderabad  had  taken  advan- 
J^^^^J^  tage  of  the  existing  discontent  to  foment  the  irrita- 
1806.  tion,  and  that  one  or  two  of  the  native  oflScers  had 
so  far  listened  to  their  own  fears  and  the  counsels  of 
pernicious  advisers  as  to  declare  that  they  were 
ready  to  put  the  Europeans  to  death  rather  than 
become  Christians.  No  other  communion  with  Vel- 
lore  could  be  traced  than  that  of  similar  despera- 
tion, originating  simultaneously  from  similar  appre- 
hensions.^ 

At  Walajabad,  again,  a  like  disposition  was  dis- 
covered, arising  from  a  like  cause.  The  order  for 
the  new  turban  was  issued  early  in  June,  and  was 
received  with  expressions  of  dissatisfaction.  These 
were  silenced  for  a  while  by  the  trial  and  dismissal 
of  one  of  the  ring-leaders ;  but,  at  the  end  of  July, 
reports  of  a  design  of  the  men  to  murder  their 
European  officers  excited  the  alarm  of  the  latter.* 
The  1st  battalion  of  the  23rd  regiment  of  native 
infantry  was  marched  out  of  the  cantonments  until 
the  arrival  of  a  party  of  dragoons  from  Arcot,  when 
the  corps  was  disarmed  and  all  the  native  officers 
were  put  under  arrest.  The  men  submitted  quietly 
to  all  that  was  required  of  them,  and  the  investiga- 
tion that  took  place  showed  that  there  had  been 


*  Kuroours  the  most  extraordinary  and  incredible  spread  amongst  the 
troops  at  this  station ;  it  was  reported  that  the  Europeans  had  a  design  to 
massacre  the  natives,  that  a  hundred  Ixxlies  without  heads  were  lying  on 
the  banks  of  the  Miisa  river,  and  that  the  Europeans  had  built  a  church 
which  the  heads  of  these  decapitated  trunks  had  been  required  to  sanctify. 
There  were  other  stories  in  circulation  equally  monstrous. 

'  Their  discontent  had  been  first  manifested  about  the  24th  July,  in  con- 
sequence of  long  drills  and  generally  harsh  or  inconsiderate  treatment.  On 
one  occasion,  after  a  drill  from  sun-rise  till  7,  they  were  kept  in  the  bar- 
racks till  12  cleaning  their  arms  and  accoutrements.  On  being  dismissed, 
some  angry  and  menacing  exclamations  were  uttered. 


DISTURBANCE   AT   NANDIDRUG.  139 

great  exaggeration  in  the  tales  which  had  inspired  book  i. 
the  panic  ;  and  although  some  of  the  native  officers  ^^^^^^^ 
and  a  few  men  of  bad  character  had  been  active  in    isoe. 
aggravating  the  irritation  caused   by  the   general 
order,  yet  the  majority  of  the  men  were  innocent 
of  any  intention  to  commit  violence.    The  dismissal 
of  the  incendiaries,  and  the  revocation  of  the  offen- 
sive orders,  restored  tranquillity,  and  no  further  in- 
dications of  disaffection  were  displayed. 

It  was  not  to  be  expected  that  a  ferment  so  vio- 
lent, and  a  catastrophe  so  dreadful,  should  at  once 
have  passed  over  and  been  forgotten ;  and,  accord- 
ingly, some  months  elapsed  before  confidence  and 
seciuity  were  restored.  The  Sipahis  were  slow  to 
credit  the  sincerity  of  the  Government,  and,  still 
suspecting  its  having  entertained  sinister  designs, 
attributed  their  frustration  to  the  mutiny  at  Vel- 
lore;  they  therefore  looked  upon  those  who  had 
fallen  in  the  recapture  of  the  fortress  as  martyrs  for 
their  faith,  and  in  some  places  secretly  solenmised 
their  funeral  obsequies.  This  was  the  case  at  Nan- 
didrug,  where  part  of  the  18th  N.  I.,  a  regiment 
raised  in  Mysore,  was  stationed;  and,  consequent 
upon  the  excitement  thus  occasioned,  some  wild 
and  mischievous  excesses  were  in  contemplation : 
timely  precautions  prevented  their  commission,  and, 
upon  the  discharge  of  some  of  those  most  deeply 
implicated,  the  rest  expressed  their  contrition,  and 
the  agitation  subsided.  In  truth,  much  of  the  ex- 
citement that  prevailed  during  the  latter  months  of 
1806  was  the  work  of  the  officers  themselves:  pass- 
ing from  one  extreme  to  the  other,  they  exchanged 
the  supineness  of  security  for  the  restlessness  of 

/ 


140  HISTORY  OF   BRITISH   INDIA. 

BOOK  I.  suspicion,  credulously  listened  to  every  whisper  of 
^"^*  "*  insurrection,  trembled  at  every  idle  tale  of  intended 
1806.  tumult  and  massacre,  and  kept  both  themselves  and 
their  men  in  a  constant  fever  of  aimless  appre- 
hension. The  tranquillising  operation  of  time,  the 
repeated  injunctions  of  both  the  local  Government 
and  that  of  Bengal  to  the  officers  to  abstain  from 
all  manifestations  of  distrust,  and  the  strongest  as- 
surances published  to  the  troops  that  the  British 
Government  would  ever  respect  their  religious  creeds, 
gradually  allayed  anxiety  and  re-established  trust.^ 

Upon  considering,  therefore,  the  utter  improba-^ 
bility  of  any  combined  co-operation  of  the  Moham- 
medan princes  of  the  Dekhin  with  the  sons  of 
Tippoo,  the  absence  of  all  proof  of  its  existence,  the 
extension  of  the  discontent  to  places  where  no  poli- 
tical influence  in  their  favour  could  have  been  ex- 
erted, the  prevalence  of  disaffection  among  the  Hin- 
dus as  well  as  the  Mohammedans,  and,  finally,  admit- 
ting the  entire  adequacy  of  the  cause  to  the  effect, 
there  can  be  no  reason  to  seek  for  any  other  origin  of 
the  mutiny  than  dread  of  religious  change  inspired 
by  the  military  orders.  Here,  however,  in  fairness 
to  the  question  of  the  conversion  of  the  natives  of 
India  to  Christianity,  the  nature  of  the  panic  which 
spread  amongst  the  Sipahis  requires  to  be  candidly 
appreciated.  It  is  a  great  error  to  suppose  that  the 
people  of  India  are  so  sensitive  upon  the  subject  of 
their  religion,  either  Hindu  or  Mohammedan,  as  to 
suffer  no  approach  of  controversy,  or  to  encounter 

'  "  The  panic  wore  away,  the  Sepoys  forgot  their  fears  of  an  attack 
upon  their  religion,  and  the  officers  no  longer  slept  with  pistols  under  their 
pillows/ —  Lord  W.  Bentinck's  Memorial,  p.  40.  For  the  Government 
proclamation  see  Appendix. 


REAL  NATURE  OF  THE  ALARM.  141 


adverse  opinions  with  no  other  arguments  than  in-  book  l 
Rurrection  and  murder.  On  the  contrary,  great 
latitude  of  belief  and  practice  has  always  prevailed  laosT" 
amongst  them,  and  especially  amongst  the  troops,  in 
whose  ranks  will  be  found  seceders  of  various  de- 
nominations from  the  orthodox  systems.  It  was  not, 
therefore,  the  dissemination  of  Christian  doctrines 
that  excited  the  angry  apprehensions  of  the  Sipahis 
on  the  melancholy  occasion  which  has  called  for 
these  observations,  nor  does  it  appear  that  any  unu- 
sual activity  in  the  propagation  of  those  doctrines 
was  exercised  by  Christian  missionaries  at  the  period 
of  its  occurrence.  It  was  not  conversion  which 
the  troops  dreaded,  it  was  compulsion ;  it  was  not 
the  reasoning  or  the  persuasion  of  the  missionary 
which  they  feared,  but  the  arbitrary  interposition  of 
authority.  They  believed,  of  course  erroneously, 
that  the  Government  was  about  to  compel  them  to 
become  Christians,  and  they  resisted  compulsory  con- 
version by  violence  and  bloodshed.^  The  lesson  is 
one  of  great  seriousness,  and  should  never  be  lost 
sight   of  as   long  as   the   relative   position   of  the 

'  The  opinion  that  the  GoTernment  had  some  such  project  in  view  was 
not  confined  to  the  Sipahis.  Mir  Alem,  the  veteran  minister  of  the  Nizam, 
and,  as  has  been  seen,  the  staunch  friend  of  the  English,  expressed  his 
surprise  that  the  British  Government  should  think  it  just  or  safe  to  compel 
the  troops  to  wear  the  semblance  of  Christians ;  and  a  like  astonishment 
was  manifested  by  the  ministers  of  Nagpur. — Letters  from  the  Residents ; 
MS.  Records.  Of  the  universality  of  the  feeling,  there  is  also  published 
an  impartial  testimony.  Pnmia,  the  Dewan  of  Mysore,  gave  it  as  his 
opinion  that  the  Hindus  were  more  alarmed  and  dissatisfied  than  the  Mo- 
hammedans.— Lord  W.  Bentinck*s  Memorial,  45.  And  Sir  Thomas  Munro 
writes :  **  However  strange  it  may  appear  to  Europeans,  I  know  that  the 
general  opinion  of  the  most  intelligent  natives  in  this  part  of  the  country 
is,  that  it  was  intended  to  make  the  Sepoys  Christians.** —  Letter  to  Lord 
W.  Bentinck,  11th  August,  1806.  This  letter  also  shows,  that,  in  a  part  of 
the  Peninsula  where  the  adherents  of  the  family  of  Hyder  were  most  nu- 
merous, there  were  no  reasons  for  believing  that  any  intrigues  had  been  at 
work  in  their  favour. — Life  of  Sir  T.  Munro,  i.  363. 


142  HISTORY    OF   BRITISH   INDIA. 

BOOK  I.  Britisli  Government  and  its  Indian  subjects  remains 
CHAP,  u.  m^g^}t^red.     It  is  not  enough  that  the  authority  of 


1806.  the  ruling  power  should  never  interpose  in  matters 
of  religious  belief,  it  should  carefully  avoid  furnish- 
ing grounds  of  suspicion  that  it  intends  to  interfere. 
A  subject  of  minor  importance,  but  one  that  was 
agitated  with  no  less  vehemence,  divided  the  chief 
civil  and  military  functionaries  at  Madras;  each 
endeavouring  to  get  rid  of  the  responsibility  of 
having  issued  the  obnoxious  orders.  Sir  John 
Cradock  urged  in  his  defence  that  he  had  acted  by 
the  advice  of  his  official  military  counsellors,  the 
Adjutant-General  and  Deputy  Quarter-Master-Ge- 
neral, officers  of  experience  and  well  acquainted 
with  the  temper  and  character  of  the  native  troops, 
who  had  seen  nothing  unusual  or  exceptionable  in 
the  proposed  arrangements;  and  that,  before  the 
orders  were  embodied  in  the  code,  they  had  been 
submitted  to  the  Governor  in  Council,  and  had 
received  his  sanction.  To  this  Lord  W.  Bentinck 
replied,  that  it  could  not  be  expected  that  he  or  the 
members  of  Council  were  to  read  and  comment 
upon  every  article  of  a  voluminous  code  of  military 
regulations  compiled  under  the  instructions  of  the 
Commander-in-chief,  and  for  which  he  was  respon- 
sible ;  that  accordingly  they  sanctioned  the  regula- 
tions as  a  matter  of  form,  examining  those  only 
which  were  designated  as  novel,  and  passing  over 
those  to  which  their  attention  was  not  directed  as 
innovations  upon  established  practice.  In  this  man- 
ner they  were  not  aware  of  the  order  regarding  the 
marks  of  sect,  and  the  trimming  of  the  musta- 
cliios ;   although  they  did  notice  and  authorise  the 


EESPONSIBILITY   DISPUTED.  143 

alteration  of  the  turbans.  The  Governor  of  Madras  book  i. 
seems  to  make  light  of  the  latter,  and  attaches  most  ^^^^'  "* 
importance  to  the  former ;  but  certainly  the  shape  isoe. 
of  the  turbans  was  the  most  immediate  cause  of  the 
dissatisfaction  of  the  soldiers,  and  Lord  William 
Bentinck  was  as  decidedly  bent  upon  insisting  on 
its  adoption  as  was  Sir  John  Cradock.  Not  only 
had  he  declared  his  determination  to  enforce  obe- 
dience to  the  order,  on  occasion  of  the  dislike  ex* 
pressed  to  it  in  May  by  the  second  battalion  of  the 
4th ;  but  late  in  June,  when  the  Commander-in-chief 
began  to  apprehend  evil  consequences  from  the  mea- 
sure, and  solicited  the  advice  and  authority  of  the 
Governor  in  Council,  in  order  to  be  relieved  from  the 
anxiety  and  embarrassment  under  which  he  laboured 
in  consequence  of  information  he  had  received  from 
several  moderate  and  discreet  officers  of  the  almost 
universal  objection  which  prevailed  against  the  new 
turban;  his  willingness  to  rescind  the  order  was 
overruled ;  the  Government  repeated  their  convic- 
tion that  the  pattern  of  the  turban  did  not  militate 
against  any  religious  prejudice,  and  declared  that 
they  could  not  assent  to  give  way  to  clamour  aris- 
ing from  unfounded  prejudice.  It  was  proposed  to 
substitute  for  the  rescission  of  the  order  a  proclama- 
tion, which,  while  it  announced  the  determination 
of  the  authorities  to  enforce  obedience,  disclaimed 
all  purpose  of  religious  interference;  but  in  the 
mean  time  information  of  a  different  tenor  from  the 
preceding  having  reached  Sir  J.  Cradock,  he  was 
led  to  believe  that  the  dissatisfaction  had  subsided, 
and  that  the  proclamation  was  unnecessary.  It 
would  have  been,  no  doubt,  of  little  avail,  as  it  ex- 


144  HISTORY   OF   BRITISH   INDIA. 


BOOK  I.  pressed  the  obstinacy  of  the  authorities  in  persisting 
CHAP.  iL  j^  ^Y^^  offensive  innovation;  but  the  inaccuracy  of 
1806.  the  intelligence  which  suspended  its  publication 
was  presently  afterwards  demonstrated  by  actual 
occurrences,  and  a  proclamation  of  a  different 
purport  was  put  forth.  The  reference  of  the  Com- 
mander-in-chief, and  the  manner  in  which  it  was 
received,  are  decisive  of  the  degree  of  responsibility 
which  attaches  to  the  local  Government ;  and  how- 
ever injudicious  may  have  been  the  conduct  of  Sir 
John  Cradock  in  originating  measures  pregnant 
with  such  serious  mischief,  and  however  averse  he 
may  have  been  to  acknowledge  his  error,  the  course 
pursued  by  Lord  William  Bentinck  evinced  an 
equal  blindness  to  the  consequences  of  the  act,  a 
still  greater  degree  of  inflexibility  in  its  enforce- 
ment, and  a  similar  ignorance  and  disregard  of  the 
feelings  and  prejudices  of  the  native  army.  The 
spirit  by  which  both  functionaries  were  animated 
was  the  same — military  absolutism, — a  principle 
which,  however  just  and  necessary  in  the  abstract, 
requires  to  be  applied  to  practice  with  caution  and 
judgment,  and  not  without  due  consideration  for  the 
circumstances  which  may  call  for  its  exercise,  the 
feelings  which  it  may  embitter,  or  the  consequences 
which  it  may  provoke.^     Herein  consisted  the  error 

*  That  the  same  unbending  rigour  of  discipline  which  may  be  necessary 
in  the  management  of  European  soldiers,  is  not  needed,  or  is  injurious  as 
applied  to  natives,  we  have  had  the  testimony  of  competent  judges :  one  of 
the  latest,  and  not  the  least  worthy  of  credit,  says,  *'  We  are  apt  to  fall 
into  the  error  of  measuring  everything  according  to  the  standard  of  Euro- 
pean discipline,  forgetting  the  different  characters  of  the  native  and  the 
Englishman.  There  is  an  Asiatic  sensitiveness  and  propriety  in  the  con- 
duct of  the  Sepoy,  which  renders  the  roughness  and  severity  with  which 
we  treat  English  soldiers  offensive  and  unnecessary  towards  hiro.^ —  Re- 
lations of  the  British  Government  and  Native  States,  by  J.  Sutherland, 


SENTIMENTS  OP  THE  COURT.  145 

of  both   Sir  J.  Cradock  and    Lord  W.  Bentinck,  book  i. 
that  they  excluded  every  other  view  but  that  of  ^"^^' "' 


military  subordination.*  The  Court  of  Directors  leoe. 
considered  their  conduct  equally  unsatisfactory :  they 
were  accordingly  recalled ;  and  although  at  a  sub- 
sequent period,  and  upon  a  calmer  review  of  the 
transaction,  they  acquitted  Lord  W.  Bentinck  and 
Sir  John  Cradock  of  a  wanton  or  needless  violation 
of  the  religious  usages  of  the  natives,  yet  they  re- 
tained their  opinion  that  those  officers  had  been 
defective  in  not  examining  with  greater  caution  and 
care  into  the  real  sentiments  and  dispositions  of  the 
Sipahis  before  they  proceeded  to  enforce  the  orders 
for  the  turban.  This  decision  seems  to  be  fully 
justified  by  a  dispassionate  survey  of  the  transaction. 
A  carefiil  and  considerate  investigation  of  the  ob- 
jections to  the  turban,  which  were  advanced  by  the 
Sipahis  in  May,  would  in  all  likelihood  have  pre- 
vented the  mutiny  of  July. 

Captain  Srd  Bombay  Cavalry,  p.  10.  It  seems  extraordinary,  that,  after  so 
many  years'  experience,  the  character  of  the  native  army  should  be  imper- 
fectly understood,  but  recent  events  have  shown  that  it  is  not  even  yet 
accurately  appreciated  by  the  Indian  Government. 

'  On  receiving  advice  of  the  repugnance  of  the  4th  regiment.  Sir  J. 
Cradock  wrote  to  Colonel  Fancourt  to  direct  that  those  men  whom  the 
cidonel  had  placed  in  confinement  should  be  sent  to  Madras  for  trial,  and  that 
the  non-commissioned  officers  of  the  4th  who  had  declined  to  wear  the 
turban,  and  the  commissioned  officers,  should  immediately  make  it  up  aod 
wear  it,  on  pain  of  dismission  from  the  service.  The  officer  commanding 
the  19th  dragoons  was  ordered  to  march,  if  required  by  Colonel  Fancourt, 
to  Vellore,  to  assist  in  enforcing  obedience.  The  Commander-in-chief 
would  not  admit  of  hesitation  to  the  orders  he  had  given.*— Letter  from  the 
Commander-in-chief,  7th  May ;  Memorial  of  Lord  W.  Bentinck,  p.  92. 
Lord  W.  Bentinck  justly  observes  of  this  letter,  that  military  command 
never  was  expressed  in  higher  or  more  imperious  language.  His  own 
was  something  like  it.  "  The  opposition  which  has  been  experienced  in 
tlie  late  change  of  turbans  is  destitute  of  any  foundation  in  the  law  or 
usage  of  the  Mohammedan  or  Hindu  religion,  and  any  persons  who  may 
persevere  in  that  opposition  cannot,  in  consequence,  fail  to  be  subjected  to 
the  severest  penalties  of  military  discipline." — G.  O.  by  Government,  4th 
July ;  Memorial,  p.  94. 

VOL.  I.  L 


146  HISTORY   OF   BEITISH   INDIA. 


BOOK  I.      It  will  now  be  convenient  to  advert  to  the  pro- 
^^^''  "•  ceeding8  which   during  this   period  took  place  in 
1806.     Great  Britain  relating  to  the  administration  of  the 
affairs  of  the  Indian  empire. 


CHAPTER  III. 


1806. 


Proceedings  in  England. — Refusal  of  the  Directors  to 
cofwur  in  the  appointment  of  tlie  Earl  of  Lander- 
dale  as  Govemor-General.  —  Sir  George  Barlow 
recalled  by  the  King*s  sign-manual. — Disctcssions  in 
Parliament  and  with  the  Board  of  Controtd. — Lord 
Minto  appointed  Governor-General. — Proceedings  in 
the  House  of  Commons. — Impeachment  of  Lord  Wei- 
lesley  by  Mr.  PauU. — Papers  moved  for. — Charges 
relating  to  tlie  Nawab  of  Oude. — Nawah  of  Fur- 
ruckabad. — Zemindar  of  Sasnee  and  others. — Pro- 
ceedings interrupted  by  dissolution  of  Parliament. — 
Beneuwd  by  Lord  Folkestone. — Impeachment  aban- 
dofied.  —  Condemnatory  Resoluiiwis  negatived.  — 
Merits  of  the  Oude  question. — Motion  for  an  Inquiry 
iyito  the  Assumption  of  the  Camatic  negatived. — 
Censure  of  Lord  WeUesky's  Policy  by  the  Court  of 
Proprietors. — Appointment  of  a  Select  Committee 
of  tJie  House  of  Commons. — Diminished  Import 
Trade  of  the  Company. 

The  embarrassed  state  of  the  finances  of  the  East 
'  India  Company,  attributed  to  the  ambition  and  ex- 


PROCEEDINGS  IN  ENGLAND.  147 

travagance  of  Marquis  Wellesley,  and  the  counte-  300K  i. 

CHAP     III. 

nance  which  he  had  shown  to  the  extension  of  the        ' 


private  trade,  and  consequent  encroachment  on  the  isoe. 
Company's  commercial  priyileges,  had  excited  a 
strong  feeling  of  hostility  to  that  nobleman's  adminis- 
tration in  the  Court  of  Directors,  which  awakened 
a  corresponding  sentiment  in  the  majority  of  the 
proprietary  body.  Weakened  in  political  influence 
by  the  secession  of  many  of  his  adherents,  dis- 
heartened by  the  gloomy  aspect  of  affairs  in  Europe, 
and  broken  in  physical  strength,  Mr.  Pitt  was  not 
inclined  to  support  the  measures  of  Lord  Wellesley 
in  opposition  to  the  views  which  were  entertained 
at  the  India  House;  and  although  he  resisted, 
through  the  Board  of  Controul,  the  expression  of 
the  Coiuli's  disapprobation,  yet  he  consented  to  give 
it  full  effect  by  the  appointment  of  Lord  Com- 
wallis,  a  nobleman  of  different  character  and  prin- 
ciples. The  death  of  that  nobleman  threatened  to 
frustrate  the  purposes  of  his  nomination;  but  the 
zeal  with  which  his  intentions  were  carried  out  by 
Sir  G.  Barlow,  upon  his  assiuning  the  government, 
forcibly  recommended  to  the  Court  his  continuance 
as  Grovemor-General.  They  were  at  first  allowed 
to  hope  that  their  wish  would  be  complied  with : 
but  they  were  speedily  disappointed,  under  circum- 
stances which,  as  involving  questions  of  some  im- 
portance, merit  to  be  detailed. 

Information  of  the  death  of  Marquis  Comwallis 
arrived  in  England  at  the  end  of  January,  1806, 
upon  the  eve  of  the  total  change  of  Ministers  which 
followed  the  demise  of  Mr.  Pitt.  A  proposal  to  pay 
a  public  tribute  of  respect  to  the  memory  of  Lord 

l2 


148  HISTORY  OP   BRITISH   INDIA- 

BOOK  I.  Comwallis  was   one  of  the   last   measures  of  the 
CHAP,  m.  j.^^j,.jjjg  Administration :  it  was  readily  acceded  to 
1806.     by  their  opponents,    and  it  was  resolved  that  his 
statue  should   be  erected  in  St.  Paul's  cathedral/ 
The  East  India  Company  voted  a  grant  to  his  heir 
of  £40,000.      The  appointment  of  a  successor  de- 
volved on  the  new  Ministers,  amongst  whom  Lord 
Minto  was   charged   with    the   superintendence  of 
Indian  affairs  as  President  of  the  Board  of  Controul; 
and  by  him  a  communication  was  made  on  the  14th 
of  February  to  the  Court  of  Directors,  conveying  his 
impression  of  the  importance,  in  the  actual  state  of 
affairs  in  India,  of  investing  Sir  G.  Barlow  without 
delay  with   the  fullest  powers,   and  recommending 
that  he  should  be  at  once  formally  appointed  Gro- 
vemor-General  of  India.     The  recommendation  was 
immediately  complied   with,    and   the   commission 
was  made  out  and  signed  on  the  25th  of  February. 
It  was  therefore  with  no  small  degree  of  astonish- 
ment that  only  ten  days  afterwards,  on  the  7th  of 
March,  the  Court  was  apprised  that  Ministers  had 
determined  to  supersede  Sir  G.  Barlow  in  favour  of 
the  Earl  of  Lauderdale.     It  was  in  vain  that  the 
Directors  remonstrated  against  so  abrupt  a  change 
of  determination,  and  urged  the  advantages  of  ad- 
hering to  the  original  arrangement ;  until,  finding 
that  their  remonstrances  and  arguments  were  inef- 
fectual,   they  positively  refused  to  cancel  the  ap- 
pointment.    The  Ministry  retaliated  by  a  warrant 
under  the  King's  sign-manual  recalling  Sir  G.  Bar- 
low ;  and  the  Court  was  finally  compelled  to  agree 
to  a  compromise,  by  which  the  Earl  of  Lauderdale 

1  Hansard's  Parliamentary  Debates,  3rd  February,  1806. 


DIFFERENCES  WITH   THE  BOARD   OF  CONTROUL.  149 

ostensibly  declined  the  acceptance  of  the  office,  and  book  i. 
Lord  Minto  was  nominated  Governor-General.  ^"^'*  "'" 


The  difference  which  had  thus  arisen  between  I8O6. 
the  Directors  and  the  Ministers  afforded  to  the 
parliamentary  adversaries  of  the  latter  a  reasonable 
pretext  for  animadversions  upon  their  conduct ;  and, 
in  the  House  of  Lords,  Viscount  Melville  moved  for 
copies  of  the  correspondence  which  had  taken  place 
between  the  Court  of  Directors  and  the  Board  of 
Controul.^  The  course  pursued  by  the  Administra- 
tion was  vindicated  by  Lord  Grenville,  and  the 
motion  was  negatived  without  a  division. 

In  the  correspondence  with  the  Board,  as  well  as 
in  the  debate  in  the  House  of  Lords,  it  was  mani- 
fest that  there  were  two  main  points  of  difference 
between  the  contending  parties ;  one  of  a  private, 
one  of  a  public  nature.  No  exceptions  to  the  Earl 
of  Lauderdale  were  openly  advanced  by  the  Court ; 
but,  besides  the  preference  of  the  individual  in  the 
instance  of  Sir  G.  Barlow,  there  is  no  doubt  that 
the  Eiarl  of  Lauderdale's  knovm  opinions  in  favour 
of  fiee  trade  and  popular  government  rendered  him 
unacceptable  to  many  of  the  members  of  the  Direc- 
tion.* On  the  other  hand,  although  Ministers  were 
profuse  in  their  professions  of  the  high  sense  which 
they  entertained  of  the  merits  of  Sir  G.  Barlow,  yet 
his  line  of  policy  was  not  in  accordance  with  the 
views  of  the  leading  members  of  the  Cabinet ;  Lord 

1  Pari.  Debates,  8th  July,  1806. 

'  Lord  Lauderdale  was  a  zealous  supporter  of  Mr.  Fox's  India  Bill,  and 
an  opposer  of  the  Company's  privileges.  In  politics  his  opinions  were 
extreme,  and  led  him  to  advocate  the  principles  of  the  French  Revolution. 
He  made  himself  conspicuous  in  the  House  of  Lords  by  affecting  a  cos- 
tume supposed  to  characterise  Jacobinism. — Obituary  notice,  Gentleman's 
Magazine,  18S9. 


160  HISTORY   OF   BRITISH   INDIA. 

BOOK  I.  Grenville  declaring,  that  the  grounds  on  which  he 
^^^^^^J^  was  ready  to  admit  those  merits  being  Sir  G.  Bar- 
1806.  low's  zealous  concurrence  and  effective  co-operation 
in  the  measures  and  in  the  system  of  Marquis 
Wellesley,  whose  government  was,  in  his  opinion, 
the  most  splendid  and  glorious  that  India  had  ever 
known.  The  adoption  of  a  totally  opposite  system 
by  Sir  G.  Barlow  must  consequently  have  been 
utterly  incompatible  with  his  appointment  to  the 
office  of  Governor-General,  in  Lord  Grenville's  esti- 
mation. At  the  same  time,  the  Directors  com- 
plained with  good  reason  of  the  inconsistency  of 
the  Cabinet  in  precipitately  revoking  an  appoint- 
ment which  they  had  recommended,  chiefly  upon  the 
grounds  that  it  was  necessary  to  arm  Sir  G.  Barlow 
without  delay  with  full  authority  to  adjust  and 
settle  the  various  important  matters  which  had  been 
left  undetermined  or  doubtful  by  the  death  of  his 
predecessor.  Intimation  of  his  appointment  would 
be  so  immediately  followed  by  that  of  his  super- 
session, that  it  was  impossible  he  could  have  de- 
rived any  additional  power  or  consideration  from 
an  elevation  so  fleeting  and  delusive,  or  that  in  the 
interval  he  could  have  adjusted  and  settled  any 
doubtful  measures  of  public  importance.  Lord 
Minto  maintained  that  he  had  distinctly  apprised 
the  Court  that  the  arrangement  was  to  be  regarded 
as  merely  temporary,  until  there  should  be  more 
leisure  to  give  it  that  deliberation  which  its  import- 
ance demanded.  His  letter,  however,  expressly 
stated  that  there  was  no  intention  of  making  any 
immediate  change;  and  the  Court,  naturally  in- 
ferring that  a  much  longer  period  than  that  of  ten 


QUESTION   OF   PATRONAGE.  151 

dajTS  was  contemplated,  resented  the  suddenness  of  book  i. 
the  alteration  as  indecorous  towards  themselves,  and  J|^^^]J|1, 
unfair  and  unjust  towards  Sir  G.  Barlow.     Intended     isoe. 
disrespect  to  the  Court  was  of  course  disclaimed; 
and,  in  recognition  of  the  admitted  value  of  Sir  G. 
Barlow's  services,  a  hope   was   expressed   that  he 
would  continue  to  be  a  member  of  the  Supreme 
Council.     The  change  of  appointment  was  persisted 
in.     It  was  evident  that  the  first  announcement  of 
the  purposes  of  the  Ministry  was  premature,  and  that 
either  Lord  Minto  had   acted   without  consulting 
his  colleagues,  or   that,   in  the   novel   position   of 
the  party  to  which  he  was  attached,  they  had  not 
been  fiilly  aware  of  the  value  of  the  patronage,  or  of 
the  necessity  of  securing,  by  means  of  it,  parlia* 
mentary  support.^ 

A  question  of  greater  magnitude  than  the  relative 
fitness  of  individuals  was  involved  in  the  dispute, 
and  the  result  awoke  the  Directors  to  the  first  dis- 
tinct perception  of  the  virtual  power  of  the  Crown 
to  dispose  at  pleasure  of  the  highest  offices  in  India. 
It  had  been  hitherto  argued,  that  the  clause  in  the 
act  of  1784-— Mr.  Pitfs  bill— which  gave  to  the 
Crown  authority  to  recall  any  of  the  Company's 
servants,  civil  or  military,  and  to  compel  them  to 
vacate  whatever  situations  they  might  hold,  was 
intended  only  to  prevent  any  improper  abuse  of  the 
patronage  of  the  Court,  by  enforcing  the  return  of 
persons  whom  the  partiality  of  friends  in  the  Direc- 

^  Mr.  Fox  admitted  that  the  appointment  of  Sir  G.  Barlow  was  made 
before  the  Administration  was  fully  formed. —  Pari.  Deb.  10th  March, 
1806. 

'  24  Geo.  III.  cap.  25,  sec.  22. 


152  HISTORY   OF   BRITISH   INDIA. 

BOOK  I.  tion,  or  the  vehemence  of  partisans  in  the  Court  of 
^^^^'  "^  Proprietors,  might  uphold  in  office,  in  spite  of  no- 
1806.  torious  incompetency  or  misconduct.  In  such  an 
extreme  case  the  Crown  was  empowered  by  the  act 
to  interpose,  but  in  no  other ;  for  the  same  act  had 
vested  the  appointment  of  their  servants  in  India 
exclusively  in  the  Directors;  and,  although  they 
had  been  in  the  habit  of  communicating  with  his 
Majesty's  Ministers,  in  order  to  preserve  that  good 
understanding  which  was  essential  to  the  conduct  of 
public  affairs,  yet  they  denied  that  they  had  thereby 
relinquished  a  chartered  right.  "  If,"  they  enquired, 
**  the  removal  of  a  high  public  functionary  in  India 
were  to  be  combined  with  the  appointment  of  a 
particular  successor  nominated  by  the  King's  Minis- 
ters, and  the  choice  of  the  Court  were  confined  to 
that  person  alone,  then  would  not  the  absolute  ap- 
pointment to  the  important  situations  of  Governor- 
General,  or  Governor  of  the  subordinate  Presi- 
dencies, devolve  in  fact  upon  the  Crown?"  The 
same  arguments  were  repeated  by  Lord  Melville. 
He  affirmed,  that  it  was  alike  the  intention  of  the 
Legislature  and  the  sense  of  the  public,  in  the  act 
of  1784,  that  the  Court  of  Directors  should  continue 
to  enjoy,  without  interference,  the  patronage  of 
India ;  and  that  the  clause  which  gave  to  the  Crown 
the  power  of  recall  could  not  be  fairly  construed  as 
a  transfer  of  the  patronage,  by  enabling  the  Crown 
to  negative  appointments  made  by  the  Court :  and 
he  appealed  to  the  recollection  of  Lord  Grenville  to 
bear  him  out  in  his  understanding  of  the  spirit  of 
the  act,  in  conformity  to  which  alone  its  provisions 
should  be  interpreted.     In  his  reply  to  the  Court, 


REPLIES  TO  THE  OBJECTIONS   OF  THE  COURT.  153 


Lord  Minto  confined  himself  to  the  question  of  book  i. 
right;  admitting  that  of  the  Court  to  appoint,  assert-  ^^^^^^^ 
ing  that  of  the  Crown  to  recall.  Lord  Grenville*s  mo6. 
answer  to  Lord  Melville  was,  that  laws  were  to  be 
understood  as  they  were  expressed,  and  not  accord- 
ing to  the  fancies  or  feelings  of  individuals;  that 
the  same  objections  which  were  now  started  had 
been  made  when  the  clause  was  enacted ;  and  that 
it  could  not  be  contended,  that,  because  the  Crown 
had  the  power  of  negativing  an  appointment,  it 
followed  that  the  whole  of  the  appointments  in 
India  fell  under  the  controul  of  his  Majesty's 
Ministers.  He  granted,  that,  if  it  could  be  shown 
that  the  power  had  been  exercised  in  the  present 
instance  merely  for  the  purpose  of  procuring  the 
appointment  of  a  person  whom  Ministers  wished  to 
serve,  it  would  be  a  violation  of  the  law;  but, 
although  he  denied  that  the  measure  originated  in 
fevour  to  Lord  Lauderdale,  he  refused  to  assign  any 
motives  for  the  removal  of  Sir  G.  Barlow.  He  also 
denied  that  his  removal  was  founded  upon  any 
systematic  exclusion  of  the  Company's  servants  from 
places  of  the  highest  authority  in  India;  and  ob- 
served, that  such  an  insinuation  came  with  a  pecu- 
liarly ill  grace  from  the  members  of  the  late  Admi- 
nistration, who  had  exercised  their  patronage  upon 
the  same  principle,  and  had  sent  out  Marquis 
Wellesley,  Marquis  Comwallis,  and  other  noblemen 
to  India.  Lord  Minto  replied  in  a  similar  strain 
to  a  like  representation  from  the  Court  of  the  in- 
justice done  to  their  civil  servants  by  their  exclusion 
from  the  chief  dignities  in  India;  and  observed, 
that  no  disadvantage  had  resulted  from  the  nomina- 


154  HISTORY   OF   BRITISH   INDIA. 


BOOK  I.  tion  to  tbe  first  stations  in  that  country  of  persons 

CHAP*  Ills 

'  who  possessed  rank  and  influence  in  Great  Britain.^ 
1806.  He  further  remarked,  that  it  was  indispensable  that 
the  Government  at  home  should  have  at  the  head 
of  affairs  in  India  an  individual  in  whom  they  could 
implicitly  confide,  and  of  whose  views  they  could 
feel  assured:  a  principle  which,  the  Court  justly 
observed,  might  make  the  Governor-General  the 
mere  creature  of  a  party,  taking  and  leaving  office 
with  every  change  of  Ministry,  and  regulating  his 
proceedings  in  India  less  by  a  disinterested  regard 
for  the  prosperity  of  that  country,  than  by  anxiety 
for  the  retention  of  power  and  place  by  his  col- 
leagues in  England;  and  they  maintained,  with 
unanswerable  justice,  that  the  Governor-General  of 

^  The  absolute  exclasion  of  the  Company's  servants  from  the  highest 
offices  in  India  was  pever  advocated ;  it  was  only  asserted,  that,  wi£  re« 
gard  to  the  appointment  of  Governor-General,  advantage  had  resulted  from 
the  preference  of  persons  of  exalted  station  in  Great  Britain, — a  propositioo 
to  which  few  of  the  Company's  servants  would  hesitate  to  accede.  With 
respect  not  only  to  the  office  of  Governor-General,  but  to  those  of  subordi- 
nate Governors,  one  of  the  most  distinguished  and  respected  of  the  Civil 
servants  of  the  Company,  tbe  late  Mr.  Edmonstonc,  has  left  on  record  sen- 
timents to  which  all  who  seek  the  real  good  of  India  will  be  inclined  to 
subscribe.  While  admitting  that  there  may  be,  and  have  been,  splendid 
exceptions,  Mr.  Edmonstoue  observes, "'  My  opinion  has  always  been  gene- 
rally adverse  to  selecting  the  Governors  from  among  those  who  have  be- 
longed to  the  service,  because  I  think,  that,  with  very  few  exceptions, 
an  individual  who  has  passed  through  the  several  gradations  of  the  pub- 
lic service,  and  has  consequently  been  known  in  tbe  lowest  as  well  as  the 
highest  grades,  cannot  assume  that  tone  of  superiority,  nor  exercise  that 
degree  of  influence  and  controul,  and  attract  that  degree  of  deference  and 
respect,  which,  in  my  judgment,  contribute  importantly  to  the  efficient  ad- 
ministration of  the  office  of  Governor,  as  regards  both  the  European  and 
native  population.  A  person  of  eminence  and  distinction  proceeding  from 
England  to  fill  tliat  office,  if  duly  qualified  by  character  and  talent,  carries 
with  him  a  greater  degree  of  influence,  and  inspires  more  respect,  than  an 
individual  who  has  been  known  in  a  subordinate  capacity  in  India  can 
usually  command." — Evidence,  Commons*  Committee,  1832 ;  Public  Ques- 
tion 1701 .  There  are  other  obvious  advantages  from  the  appointment  of  a 
person  of  rank  and  connexion  to  tlie  office  of  Governor-General  in  particular, 
that  more  than  compensate  for  any  want  of  stimulus  to  exertion  which  the 
possibility  of  attaining  so  elevated  a  station  might  be  thought  to  afford  to 
the  servants  of  the  Company. 


FINAL  ARRANGEMENT.  155 

India  ought  to  be  unfettered  by  party  and  Ministerial  book  i. 
obligations.      The  qualification   of  partisanship  for  ^^^^'  "^ 


the  office  of  Governor-General  of  India,  although  laoe. 
first  avowed  by  the  Whigs,  is  too  congenial  to  the 
selfishness  of  that  party  spirit  which  governs  the 
national  councils  of  Great  Britain  to  want  advocates 
amongst  their  opponents  also ;  but  it  may  be  stated, 
in  justice  to  those  who  succeeded  to  the  short-lived 
Administration  of  1806,  that  the  principle  did  not 
regulate  their  practice.  Lord  Minto,  although  se- 
lected from  the  ranks  of  their  adversaries,  was 
allowed  to  remain  undisturbed  in  the  discharge  of 
his  Indian  duties  until  he  was  superseded  by  the 
Court  of  Directors. 

The  discussion  that  thus  arose  was  not  without 
ulterior  consequences.  Whatever  were  the  osten- 
sible motives  of  the  disputants,  however  veiled  by 
sophistical  reasoning  or  unmeaning  professions,  there 
is  no  doubt  that  patronage  was  the  prey  contended 
for,  and  that  which  the  original  clause  of  the  act  of 
1784  was  intended  unavowedly  to  appropriate.  The 
true  import  of  that  clause  was  now  brought  to  the 
test,  and  its  meaning  was  proved  to  be  the  nomination 
of  the  Governor-General  by  his  Majesty's  Ministers. 
It  had  been  proposed  to  effect  this  object  in  a  con- 
ciliatory manner,  by  leaving  the  appointment  with 
the  Court  of  Directors,  subject  only  to  its  con- 
tingent annulment  by  the  Board  through  the 
power  of  recall :  but,  as  on  this  occasion  the  Court 
manifested  a  disposition  to  assert  a  voice  potential 
in  the  designation  of  a  successor  to  the  Marquis 
Comwallis,  the  intimation  was  not  disregarded; 
and,  on  the  first  subsequent  opportunity  for  the  re- 


156  HISTORY   OP  BRITISH   INDIA. 

BOOK  I.  iiewal  of  the  charter,  a  clause  was  inserted*  more 
^"^'''  '"•  distinctly  enunciatory  of  the  power  of  the  Crown, 
1806.  by  which  the  appointments  to  the  offices  of  Gro- 
vemor-General,  Governors  of  Madras  and  Bombay, 
and  Commander-in-chief,  which  were  made  by  the 
Directors,  were  declared  thenceforth  subject  to 
royal  approbation.  The  patronage  has  been  since 
exercised  upon  this  arrangement ;  and,  as  the  Court 
can  appoint  no  persons  save  those  of  whom  it  has 
been  previously  ascertained  that  the  Board  approves, 
the  nomination  is  virtually  exercised  by  the  Admi- 
nistration of  the  day.* 

The  attention  of  the  House  of  Commons  was 
called  to  other  subjects  connected  with  the  Govern- 
ment of  India ;  and  many  of  its  deliberations  were 
devoted,  with  little  advantage  either  to  India  or 
to  Great  Britain,  to  a  futile  attempt  to  impeach 
the  late  Governor-General,  Marquis  Wellesley. 

Mr.  James  PauU  had  resided  some  years  in  the 
])rincipality  of  Oude,*  and  had  there  carried  on  a 
lucrative  traffic  in  the  cotton  manufactures  of  the 
country.  His  residence  had  necessarily  the  sanction 
of  the  British  authorities ;  and,  according  to  his 
own  account,  he  enjoyed  the  favour  of  the  Nawab 

'  63  Geo.  III.  cap.  155,  sec.  80. 

*  In  the  examination  of  Mr.  Auber,  the  Secretary  to  the  Court  of  Direc- 
tors, before  the  Commons*  Committee  of  1832,  the  relative  share  of  the 
Ministers  and  Directors  in  the  patronage  of  the  highest  offices  in  India 
was  a  subject  fully  discussed.  Mr.  Auber  contended  stoutly  for  the  power 
of  the  Directors,  but  was  obliged  to  admit  that  no  GoTemor-General  or 
Commander-in-chief  had  ever  been  named  by  the  Court  of  whom  the 
Crown  had  disapproved,  being  in  fact  nominated  upon  a  previous  comma- 
nicaUon  with  the  Board,  while  several  instances  of  disapprobation  of  infe- 
rior appointments  and  their  consequent  annulment  had  occurred.  The 
Directors  in  fact  may  be  said  to  exercise  a  kind  of  selection,  but  it  roust 
be  from  individuals  who  they  are  assured  will  be  acceptable  to  the 
Ministers. 

•  He  is  noticed  as  agent  for  one  of  the  Nawab's  creditors  in  1796. 


CHARGES  AGAINST  MARQUIS   WELLfeSLEY.  157 

until  the  period  of  a  visit  which  he  paid  to  England.^  book  i. 
Upon  his  return,  the  Nawab  strongly  objected  to  ^^^'  '"'. 


his  being  again  domiciled  in  Oude ;  but  his  objec-  isoR 
tions  were  withdrawn  in  consequence  of  the  inter- 
cession of  the  Governor -General,*  and  Mr.  Paull 
repaired  to  Lucknow,  "  sensibly  feeling  the  obliga- 
tions he  was  under  to  his  Excellency,  for  whom  he 
had  only  sentiments  of  gratitude  and  profound  re- 
spect."* These  sentiments  were  short-lived.  Mr. 
Paull,  soon  after  Lord  Wellesley's  resignation,  re- 
turned also  to  England :  his  first  step  was  the  pur- 
chase of  a  seat  in  the  House  of  Commons;  his 
second,  the  institution  of  charges  against  his  former 
patron  and  benefactor. 

In  the  prosecution  of  this  purpose,  Mr.  Paull 
moved,  on  the  25th  June,  1805,  for  the  production 
of  papers  intended  to  illustrate  the  nature  of  the 
connexion  established  with  the  Government  of 
Oude  under  the  administration  of  Sir  John  Shore, 
and  the  changes  it  had  undergone  during  that  of 
Lord  Wellesley;  by  which  the  Nawab,  in  defiance  of 
justice,  had  been  degraded  and  disgraced  in  the  eyes 
of  the  world,  and  in  the  face  of  the  most  solemn 
treaties  had  been  dispossessed  of  a  territory  which 
had  a  population  of  three  millions  of  attached  sub- 
jects, and  yielded  an  annual  revenue  of  nearly 
two  millions  sterling.  Papers  were  also  moved 
for,  relating  to  the  appointment  of  Mr.  Henry 
Wellesley  as  Commissioner  for  the  affairs  of  Oude ; 

^  Private  letter  to  Major  Malcolm,  Lucknow,  Qth  Feb.,  1803;  printed  by 
Anber,  History  of  India,  ii.  387. 

'  Letter  from  Persian  Secretary  to  the  Nawab  Vizir,  I7th  Sept.,  1802.— 
Papers  printed  by  order  of  Parliament,  I7th  July,  1806,  No.  28. 

*  Correspondence  printed  by  order  of  Parliament,  16th  June,  1806, 
No.  20. 


158  HisrroRY  of  brittsh  india. 

BOOK  I.  which  appointment,  he  not  being  a  senrant  of  the 
^^''  "^  East  India  Company,  was  in  defiance  of  an  act  of 
1806.  parliament  and  a  violation  of  the  law.  No  opposi- 
tion was  made  to  the  production  of  the  papers ;  and 
subsequently  similar  documents  were  granted  re- 
lating to  Lord  Wellesley's  treatment  of  the  Raja  of 
Bhurtpore,  the  Nawab  of  Surat,  and  the  Nawab  of 
Furruckabad.  The  first  charge  was  submitted  to 
the  House  on  the  23rd  of  April,  1806. 

The  tone  of  the  preliminary  proceedings  suflS- 
ciently  indicated  their  eventual  result.  The  in- 
dividual who  had  undertaken  to  establish  the 
criminality  of  Lord  Wellesley  was  ill  qualified  for 
the  task,  even  if  he  had  been  provided  with  more 
tenable  grounds  for  his  accusations.  The  intem- 
perance of  his  language  was  not  redeemed  by  any 
powers  of  eloquence,  or  extenuated  by  the  nature  of 
his  facts,  and  argued  more  of  personal  malignity 
than  public  spirit :  ^  he  stood  wholly  unsupported  in 
the  House,  even  by  the  members  of  the  Court  of 
Directors  who  were  present,  and  who  in  that  cha- 
racter had  concurred  in  the  unqualified  reprobation 
of  many  of  those  measures  of  the  Governor-General 
which  were  now  brought  under  Parliamentary  in- 
vestigation.*    He  was  opposed  by  both  the  political 

'  He  accused,  in  bis  charge  with  respect  to  Cade,  Lord  Wellesley  and 
Mr.  H.  Wellesley  of  committing  murder,  when  speaking  of  the  employ- 
ment of  a  military  force  against  the  refractory  Zemindars  in  the  Ceded 
districts ;  and,  on  a  subsequent  occasion,  he  calls  upon  the  House  to  cod- 
aider  the  situation  of  India,  from  the  accursed  day  when  Marquis  WeUea- 
ley  set  foot  there,  until  the  day  of  his  departure,  during  which  intenral  it 
exhibited  a  constant  scene  of  rapine,  oppression,  cruelty,  and  fraud  which 
goaded  the  whole  country  into  a  state  of  revolt. — Hansard's  Pari.  Debates, 
23rd  May  and  6th  July,  1806. 

'  Mr.  Thornton  observed,  that  impeachment  was  a  step  much  stronger 
than  anything  which  he  was  prepared  to  think  the  conduct  of  Marquis 
Wellesley,  improper  as  he  esteemed  it,  could  warrant  him  in  adopting ; 


CHARGE  OF   PRODIGAL   EXPENDITURE.  159 

parties  in  the  Commons :  by  the  one  as  participant  book  i. 
of  Lord  Wellesley's  measures ;  by  the  other  on  the  ^"^^*  "^ 
principle  that,  although  the  system  might  be  repre-     me. 
hensible,   yet    Parliamentary   inquiry   was    neither 
necessary   nor    expedient.^       And    he    derived    no 
weight  from   popular  interest,   as  it  was  engrossed 
by  considerations  of  nearer  and  more  vital  import- 
ance. 

The  first  charge  brought  forward,  the  prodigal 
expenditure  of  Lord  Wellesley's  government,  took 
the  House  by  surprise,  as  it  was  unconnected  with 
any  of  the  papers  previously  moved  for.  Even  Mr. 
Fox  felt  it  incumbent  upon  him  to  remark  upon 
so  irregular  a  course.  He  observed,  that  "  the  honour- 
able member  had  not  told  the  House  what  were  the 
documents  to  be  laid  before  it  in  support  of  the 
charge,  nor  when  they  were  to  be  produced:  he 
understood,  in  fact,  that  the  mover  had  really  no  do- 
cuments, although  he  had  proposed  a  day  for  discus- 
sion ;  and  if,  when  that  day  should  arrive,  he  should 
be  unprovided  with  means  to  substantiate  his  charge, 

and  Mr.  Grant,  although  he  certainly  judged  inquiry  to  be  necessary,  did 
not  deem  it  advisable  to  proceed  to  impeachment. —  Pari.  Debates. 

^  The  sentiments  of  Mr.  Fox  are  worthy  of  note,  from  the  difference  of 
his  language  on  this  occasion  and  that  which  he  used  during  the  proceed- 
ings against  Warren  Hastings.  He  said,  "  He,  and  others  who  agreed 
with  him,  had  no  wish  to  disparage  the  proceeding,  or  to  throw  obstacles 
in  the  way  ;  but,  because  he  disapproved  of  a  system  of  measures,  it  did 
not  follow  that  it  was  to  be  remedied  by  impeaching  the  individual.  He 
and  his  honourable  friend  (Mr.  Francis)  had  a  good  deal  of  experience  on 
the  subject :  this  was  certainly  not  a  proper  time  for  inquiry ;  he  might 
disapprove  of,  and  strongly  oppose  systems,  but  he  would  not  always 
think  it  necessary  to  resort  to  inquiries.  Impeachment  was  a  bad  mode  of 
proceeding,  except  in  particular  cases ;  and  certainly  it  was  not  advisable 
to  adopt  it  with  regard  to  a  Governor-General  of  India  merely  on  account 
of  his  system.  He  could  not  be  said  to  desert  a  person  whom  he  never 
encouraged ;  but,  since  the  trial  of  Mr.  Hastings,  they  might  say  if  they 
pleased,  he  shrank  from  all  India  impeachments,  or  flew  from  them,  or  any 
other  worse  term  might  be  employed,  if  worse  could  be  found.  To  this  he 
would  make  no  answer.*' — Pari.  Debates,  18th  April,  1800. 


160  HISTORY   OF   BRITISH   INDIA. 

BOOK  I.  he  would  find  himself  in  a  very  awkward  and  un- 
^^^'  "^  pleasant  predicament.^     So  ill  concerted  were  Mr. 


1806.  Paull's  proceedings,  that,  having  moved  that  the 
charge  be  taken  into  consideration  that  day  three 
weeks,  the  motion  found  no  seconder.  It  was  not 
until  after  some  pause  that  Sir  William  Geary  rose 
to  second  the  motion ;  not,  as  he  observed,  from  any 
conviction  of  the  culpability  of  the  accused,  but 
because  he  thought  that  the  dignity  of  the  House 
required  that  the  opportunity  of  proving  charges  of 
so  grave  a  tenor  should  not  be  denied.  The  ob- 
vious necessity,  however,  of  bringing  forward  written 
vouchers  enforced  an  alteration.  The  motion  was 
withdrawn,  and,  in  its  place,  papers  to  show  the  re- 
lative expenditure  of  successive  Indian  administra- 
tions were  moved  for,  and  granted. 

A  tangible  charge  was  at  length  elicited.  Re- 
verting to  the  treatment  of  the  Nawab  of  Oude, 
and  the  appropriation  of  the  Ceded  districts,  it 
was  affirmed  that  in  these  proceedings  Marquis 
Wellesley  had  violated  subsisting  treaties,  and  every 
principle  of  equity  and  right;  had  been  regardless 
of  his  duty  to  the  East  India  Company,  his  Sove- 
reign, and  his  country ;  had  contemned  the  Parlia- 
ment, the  King,  and  the  laws ;  had  dishonoured  the 
British  nation  and  name ;  and  had  in  these  respects 
been  guilty  of  high  offences,  crimes,  and  misde- 
meanours. A  second  charge  was  subsequently 
brought  forward,  accusing  the  Governor-General  of 
having  unjustly  and  violently  compelled  the  Nawab 
of  Furruckabad  to  give  up  his  territory.  Evidence 
was  heard  on  the  Oude  charge,  which  closed  on  the 
4th  of  July.     On  the  6th  Lord  Temple  moved  that 


OUDE   CHARGE   DISPOSED   OF.  161 

the  charge  should  be  taken  into  consideration ;  but  book  i. 
the  motion  was  resisted  on  the  plea  of  precipitancy,  ^^^^^^^^^ 


and,  as  further  papers  were  requested,  the  discussion     I807. 
was  postponed.     On  the  following  day  a  third  charge 
was    adduced,   relative    to    the    treatment    of  the 
Zemindar  of  Sasnee  and  other  Zemindars. 

The  end  of  the  session  put  a  stop  to  these  pro- 
ceedings; and,  upon  the  dissolution  of  Parliament 
which  ensued,  Mr.  PauU,  having  canvassed  unsuc- 
cessfully the  borough  of  Westminster,  ceased  to  be 
a  member  of  the  House  of  Commons.  The  attack 
upon  Lord  Wellesley,  however,  was  not  abandoned : 
it  was  resumed  by  Lord  Folkestone,  but  was  urged 
in  a  more  temperate  strain,  and  for  a  different  ob- 
ject ;  all  purpose  of  impeachment  being  disavowed. 
A  series  of  resolutions  was  proposed,  condemnatory 
of  the  demands  made  upon  the  Nawab  of  Oude,  in 
breach  of  the  treaty  of  1798,  and  the  consequent 
sequestration  of  a  considerable  part  of  his  domi- 
nions ;  but,  after  a  prolonged  discussion,  the  resolu- 
tions were  rejected  by  a  considerable  majority.  It 
was  then  moved  by  Sir  John  Anstruther,  and  car- 
ried by  a  majority  equally  numerous,  that  the 
Marquis  of  Wellesley,  in  executing  the  late  ar- 
rangements in  Oude,  was  actuated  by  an  ardent  zeal 
for  the  public  service,  and  by  the  desire  of  providing 
more  effectually  for  the  prosperity,  the  defence,  and 
the  safety  of  the  British  possessions  in  India. 

The  character  of  the  measures  which  were  thus 
subjected  to  Parliamentary  investigation  has  been 
explained  in  a  preceding  volume.^  It  is,  therefore, 
unnecessary  to  do  more  in  this  place  than  to  advert 

*  MiU,  Tol.  vi.  IQ8. 
VOL.  I.  M 


162  HISTORY   OF   BRITISH   INDIA. 

BOOK  L  briefly  to  the  principal  arguments,  which,  amidst 
__^J__^  much  irrelevant  matter,  were  urged  by  either  party. 
1807.     By  those  who  sought  to  obtain  a  vote  of  censure  on 
the  Marquis  it  was  maintained,  that  the  Nawab  of 
Oude  was  an  independent  prince,  with  whom,  in 
that  capacity,  treaties  had  been  contracted :  that  a 
treaty  had  been  recently  concluded  with  him  (in 
1798),  by  which  his  authority  over  his  household, 
his  troops,  and  his  subjects,  had  been  recognised; 
and  an  amount  of  subsidy,  fiilly  adequate  to  the 
expense   of  the  largest  force  ever   raised  for  the 
defence  of  Oude,  had  been  exacted  from  him :   that 
the  Nawal)  had  punctually  discharged  all  demands 
arising  out  of  this  stipulation ;  and  that  there  was 
nothing  in  his  domestic  circumstances  and  conduct, 
or  in  the  aspect  of  foreign  affairs,  which  called  for 
so  violent  a  measure  as  that  of  compelling  him  to 
convert  a  money  payment  into  a  territorial  conces- 
sion, and  to  give  up  half  of  his  dominions,  in  order 
to  secure  the  fulfilment  of  his  pecuniary  obligations : 
that   the   demand  had  been   submitted  to  by  the 
Nawab  solely  through  his  conscious  inability  to  re- 
sist it ;  and  that  the  injustice  thus  inflicted  upon  a 
native  prince,  the  ally  and  friend  of  the  Company, 
was   calculated  to  bring  discredit  on   the  British 
name   throughout   India:    that   the   acquisition   of 
territory   thus  obtained   was   in   opposition  to  the 
sentiments  of  the  Court  of  Directors  as  expressed 
in  a  dispatch  signed  by  them  all,  with  one  only  ex- 
ception ;  and  was  a  violation  of  the  declared  sense  of 
Parliament,  which  had  expressly  denounced  terri- 
torial extension  in  India  as  contrary  to  the  honour 
and  wishes  of  the  nation. 


POLICY   OP   THE   BRITISH   GOVERNMENT  168 

In  opposition  to  these  assertions  it  was  affirmed,  book  l 
that  the  Nawab  of  Oude  was  not  entitled  to  be  re-  ^^^'  '"* 
garded  as  an  independent  sovereign;  the  military  I807. 
defence  of  his  territories  having  devolved  upon 
the  British  from  their  first  connexion  with  Oude, 
and  their  interposition  in  its  internal  government 
having  been  repeatedly  exercised.  The  reigning 
prince  was  in  fact  indebted  to  that  interposition 
for  the  rank  he  held ;  his  predecessor,  Vizir  Ali, 
having  been  deposed,  and  himself  placed  on  the 
throne,  by  the  Governor-General.  That  the  treaty 
of  1798  had  reference  to  the  actual  position  of  the 
Nawab,  but  did  not  preclude  interference  whenever 
circumstances  should  urgently  call  for  it.  That 
subsequently  circumstances  had  occurred  which  de- 
manded strong  measures,  the  Nawab  having  in- 
timated his  apprehensions  that  the  impoverished 
and  declining  resources  of  his  principality  would 
not  long  suffice  to  pay  the  stipulated  subsidy :  that 
such  a  failure  was  to  be  anticipated  from  the  mal- 
administration of  the  Nawab,  and  his  inability  to 
maintain  subordination  and  realise  his  revenues: 
that,  while  the  means  of  keeping  up  an  effective 
subsidiary  force  were  likely  to  be  thus  deficient,  the 
necessity  of  augmenting  its  strength  had  been  ren- 
dered imperative ;  first,  by  the  absence  of  adequate 
provision  for  internal  defence ;  and  secondly,  by  the 
imminence  of  external  danger.  The  troops  of  the 
Nawab  were  a  disorderly  and  disaffected  body,  a 
source  rather  of  peril  than  of  safety,  whose  reduc- 
tion was  highly  advantageous  to  the  state.  Re- 
peated menaces  of  invasion  had  been  put  forth  by 

Zeman  Shah,  the  ruler  of  the  Afghans;  and  the 

M  2 


164  HISTORY   OF  BRITISH   INDIA. 


BOOK  I.  presence  of  Sindhia's  disciplined  brigades  under 
*^^''  "*  French  officers  ujwn  the  frontiers  of  Oude  menaced 
1807.  the  integrity  of  the  principality,  and  imperiously 
enjoined  defensive  preparations.  Under  these  emer- 
gencies, the  annexation  to  the  British  Indian  empire 
of  the  districts  in  the  Doab  which  were  most  ex- 
posed to  foreign  aggression  was  indispensably  neces- 
sary for  the  security  of  both  the  protected  and 
protecting  power. 

It  cannot  be  denied  that  the  political  interests  of 
the  British  Government  strongly  recommended  the 
approfiriation  of  the  Ceded  provinces.  Continued 
punctuality  in  the  payment  of  the  subsidy  was  an 
evident  imiwssibility,  from  the  diminishing  resources 
of  the  Nawab ;  and  the  subsidiary  force  must  have 
been  reduced  or  disbanded,  or  kept  up  at  the 
Company's  cost.  The  condition  of  the  districts  in 
the  Doab  was  also  a  subject  of  uneasiness,  as,  in  the 
event  of  a  collision  with  the  Mahrattas,  the  move- 
mentH  of  the  British  armies  would  have  been  em- 
bamiftsed  by  the  necessity  of  holding  in  check  a 
diwirganined  and  turbulent  population.  The  readiest 
mc»thod  of  preventing  such  results  was  the  establish- 
ment of  the  British  authority  in  the  territories  in 
qucHtion,  the  maintenance  of  order,  and  the  applica- 
tion of  the  revenues  to  the  payment  of  the  sub- 
sidiary force.  That  the  measure,  whilst  it  strength- 
eii(?d  the  British  Government,  would  be  conducive 
to  the  well-being  of  the  people  and  the  prosperity 
of  the  country,  was  to  be  anticipated ;  and  upon 
these  grounds  tlie  appropriation  was  susceptible  of 
vindicaticm  :  but  that  it  consulted  the  dignity  and 
power  of  the  Nawab,  or  could  be  acceptable  to  his 


REVIVAL   OP   CARNATIC   CHARGE.  165 

feelings,  it  was  absurd  to  pretend.     He  was  help-  book  i. 
less,  and  he  acquiesced ;  but  he  was  not  so  blind  to  ^"^'  °^ 
his  own  interests  as  to  be  deceived  by  the  specious     I8O8. 
plausibility  with  which  the  mutilation  of  his  autho- 
rity was  pressed  upon  him ;  and  there  can  be  little 
doubt  that  the  feeble  efforts  made  in  England  to 
procure  him  redress  had  their  origin  in  the  fallacious 
hopes  which  he  had  been  led  to  entertain  of  the 
reversal  of  the  sentence  of  spoliation  by  the  justice 
of  the  British  Parliament. 

Notwithstanding  the  victory  gained  by  the  friends 
of  Marquis  Wellesley  on  this  occasion,  the  ordeal 
which  he  had  to  undergo  was  yet  incomplete.  The 
minor  charges  relating  to  the  Nawab  of  Furruck- 
abad  and  the  Zemindar  of  Sasnee  were  disposed  of 
with  the  Oude  charge,  and  no  further  notice  was 
taken  of  the  case  of  the  Nawab  of  Surat.  The 
charge  of  prodigal  expenditure  was  also  abandoned ; 
as  it  had  all  along  been  admitted  that  the  personal 
integrity  of  the  late  Governor-General  was  unim- 
peachable, and  that  his  profusion  was  exclusively 
instigated  by  considerations  of  public  credit  or  ad- 
vantage. There  remained,  however,  a  topic  which 
had  been  formerly  brought  forward  by  Mr.  Sheridan, 
— ^the  treatment  of  the  Nawab  of  Arcot.  He  had 
moved  for  papers  relating  to  the  inquiry  in  De- 
cember, 1802,  but  had  then  allowed  the  matter  to 
drop.  He  still  declined  to  renew  its  agitation,  but 
he  declared  himself  prepared  to  support  any  member 
who  should  introduce  the  question.  Accordingly, 
on  the  17th  May,  1808,  after  an  interval  of  five 
years  and  a  half.  Sir  Thomas  Turton  mdved  a  series 
of  six  resolutions,  as  grounds  for  the  appointment  of 


1G6  HISTORY  OF  BRITISH   INDIA. 


BOOK  I.  a  committee  to  inquire  into  the  assumption  of  the 
CHAP.  III.  ^g^yn^|.|^  After  an  adjourned  debate,  the  resolu- 
1808.  tions  were  rejected ;  and  it  was  moved  and  carried, 
tliat  it  was  the  opinion  of  the  House  that  the  Mar- 
quis Welleslej  and  Lord  Powis,  in  their  conduct 
relative  to  the  Camatic,  appeared  to  have  been  in- 
fluenced solely  by  motives  of  anxious  zeal  and  soli- 
citude for  the  permanent  security,  welfare,  and 
prosperity  of  the  British  possessions  in  India.^  Thus 
ended  the  discussions  in  Parliament  respecting  Lord 
Wellesley^s  administration;  having  had  no  other 
effect  tlian  that  of  excluding  him  from  a  share  in 
the  administration  of  affairs  at  home,  when  his  co- 
operation would  have  been  of  value  to  Ministers  and 
to  the  country. 

A  very  different  result  attended  the  proceedings 
of  the  Court  of  Proprietors.  In  May,  1806,  a  mo- 
tion was  tliere  made  for  the  production  of  the  cor- 
respondence that  had  taken  place  with  the  Board  of 
Controul  on  the  subject  of  the  late  wars  in  India ; 
the  main  olyeet  being  to  confirm  the  condemnation 
of  many  of  Lord  Wellesley's  measures  which  had  been 
expressed  by  the  Court  of  Directors  in  the  draft  of  a 
letter  to  Bengal,  the  dispatch  of  which  had  been 
arrested  by  the  Board  of  Controul.  The  documents 
having  been  printed,^  a  motion  was  made  at  a  sub- 
set |uent  meeting,  that  "  this  Court,  having  con- 
sidered the  pai)ers  laid  before  it,  most  highly 
ai)i)n)ve  of  tlie  zeal  manifested  and  the  conduct 
])ursued  by  the  Court  of  Directors,  and  regard  a 
finn  adherence  to  the  principles  maintained  by  the 

'  The  numbers  were,  for  the  motion  98,  against  it  19 ;  majority  79. 
■  Papers  printed  for  the  use  of  the  Proprietors,  Tth  May,  1806. 


SENTIMENTS   OP   THE   PROPRIETORS.  167 

Court  to  be  indispensably  necessary  to  preserve  the  book  i. 
salutary  authority  over  the  government  of  India  ^^^^'  "' 
vested  by  law  in  the  Court  of  Directors,  to  restrain  isoe. 
a  profuse  expenditure  of  the  public  money,  and  to 
prevent  all  schemes  of  conquest  and  extension  of 
dominion, — ^measures  which  the  Legislature  had  de- 
clared to  be  repugnant  to  the  wish,  the  honour,  and 
the  policy  of  the  nation ;  and  this  Court  do  assure  the 
Court  of  Directors  of  their  most  cordial  and  zealous 
support,  with  a  view  to  preserve  unimpaired  the 
rights  and  privileges  of  the  East  India  Company.** 
After  a  debate  of  some  length  the  resolution  was 
submitted  to  decision  by  ballot,  when  a  very  large 
majority  of  the  Proprietors  expressed  their  concur- 
rence in  the  views  of  the  Directors.'  It  will  not 
fall  within  the  limits  of  this  work  to  describe  the 
proceedings  of  the  Company  at  a  date  long  subse- 
quent ;  but  it  deserves  to  be  noticed,  as  a  remark- 
able instance  of  the  inconsistency  of  public  bodies, 
that,  thirty  years  afterwards,  the  resolution,  now  so 
numerously  and  strenuously  supported,  was  virtually 
negatived  by  the  imanimous  determination  of  the 
same  Court  of  Proprietors  to  make  a  pecuniary 
grant  to  Lord  Wellesley  in  recompense  of  his  great 
services  to  the  Company,  and  to  erect  his  statue  in 
the  Court-room;^  thus  testifying  their  approbation 
of  the  general  policy  of  his  administration,  and 
consequently  of  the  principles  of  subsidiary  alliances 
and  territorial  aggrandisement. 

.^The  numberft  were,  in  favour  of  the  resolution  928,  against  it  195. 
Seven  hundred  and  thirty -three  Proprietors  recorded  their  condemnation  of 
Lord  Wellesley's  policy. —  Asiatic  Annual  Register,  1806 ;  Proceedings, 
India  House. 

■  Asiatic  Journal ;  Proceedings  at  the  India  House,  1st  November,  1837, 
and  17th  March,  1841. 


108  HISTORY   OF   BRITISH   INDIA. 

BOOK  L  The  only  other  proceedings  of  importance  at 
^'^'  "^  home  affecting  the  Company's  interests  were  partly 
1808.  of  a  financial  character,  and  partly  preliminary  to 
the  discussion  of  a  question  the  determination  of 
which  was  now  not  very  remote, — ^the  renewal  of 
the  charter,  which  expired  in  1813.  On  the  11th 
of  March,  1808,  Mr.  Dundas  moved  the  appoint^ 
ment  of  a  select  committee  to  inquire  into  the 
present  state  of  the  affairs  of  the  East  India  Com- 
pany. A  committee  was  appointed  accordingly; 
and  to  it  was  referred  a  petition  submitted  by  the 
Company,  praying  that  1,200,000/.  due  to  the  Com- 
pany by  the  Government  might  be  repaid,  and  a 
like  sum  be  advanced  by  way  of  loan,  to  enable 
the  Company  to  provide  for  the  deficiencies  of  their 
commercial  resources,  which  had  been  occasioned  by 
continued  remittances  of  goods  and  bullion  to  India^ 
and  the  suspension  of  investments  in  return,  in  con- 
sequence of  the  political  circumstances  of  India,  and 
the  pecuniary  wants  of  the  Government  of  that 
country.  On  the  13th  of  June  the  report  of  the 
committee  was  presented,  admitting  a  considerable 
balance  to  be  due  to  the  India  Company  by  his 
Majesty's  Government ;  and  it  was  accordingly  re- 
solved that  a  sum  not  exceeding  1,500,000/.  should 
be  paid  to  the  Company. 

It  was  at  the  same  time  shown  that  a  principal 
source  of  the  diminished  profits  of  the  Company's 
commerce  arose  from  the  rapidly  decreasing  value 
of  their  imports,  owing  to  the  failing  demand  for 
one  of  those  articles  which  they  had  hitherto,  in 
great  part,  successfully  inclosed  against  the  tres- 
passing of  private  trade.     The  improved  and   im- 


DECLINE   OF   COMPANY'S  TRADE.  169 

proving  cotton  manufactures  of  England  were  be-  book  i. 
ginning  to  exercise  a  sensible  effect  upon  the  similar  ^"^^'  '"* 
products  of  Indian  industry;  and  the  import  value  of     isos. 
Piece-goods,  which  had  hitherto  formed  a  main  item 
in  the  commerce  of  the  Company,  had  fallen  during 
the  last  ten  years  to  one-sixth  of  its  amount  at  the 
commencement   of  the   term, — from   nearly   three 
millions  sterling  to  less  than  half  a  million.^ 

'  Imports,  Piece-goods.  ITOS-Q.  180T-8. 

From  Bengal   ....  £1^19,828  260,262 

Coast           ....  1,560,470  136,177 

Anjengo                     .         .  193,202  36,381 


£2,993,490       £432,820 


Report  of  Select  Committee,  No.  1,  printed  by  order  of  the  House  of 
Commons,  12th  May,  1810. 

The  trade  in  piece-goods  was  deemed  of  such  importance  at  the  re- 
newal of  the  charter  in  1793,  that  it  was  stated  by  the  Committee  of  Corre- 
spondence, that  without  it  the  Company  could  not  liquidate  their  political 
debts,  still  less  furnish  the  means  of  participation  to  the  public  to  the  ex- 
tent which  was  proposed. — Resolution  8th,  April  Ist,  1793. 


CHAPTER  IV. 


Lord  Minto  Governor-General. — Sir  G.  Barlow  Go- 
vernor of  Fort  St  George. — Character  and  Policy 
of  the  Govemor-General. — Determination  to  esta- 
blish Order  in  Bunddkhand. — Description  of  the 
Hilly  district  of  the  province. — Colonel  MartindeU 
sent  against  Ajaygerh. — Affair  of  Rajadi. — Ajay- 
gerh  surrendered.  —  Lakshman  Dawa  sets  off  to 
Calcutta^ — leaves  it  again  suddenly. — His  Family 
put  to  death  by  his  Father-in-law.  —  Operations 


170  HISTORY   OF   BRITISH   INDIA. 

against  Gopal  Sing. — Nature  of  his  Incursions. — 
His  submission. — Storm  of  Kalinjar^ — repulsed. — 
Fortress  surrendered. — Treaties  unth  the  Raja  of 
Rewa. — Settlement  of  Hariana. — The  Sikh  Chiefs 
east  of  the  Setlef  taken  under  protection. — Treaty 
with  Ranjit  Sing. — Embassy  to  Peshawar. — Refoo- 
lutions  of  Afghanistan. — Disastrous  Life  of  Shah 
Shuja.  —  Return  of  the  Embassy.  —  Mission  to 
Sindh.  —  Revolutions  in  the  Government  of  that 
country.  —  Failure  of  Negodation.  —  Intercourse 
between  France  and  Persia. — El-concerted  measures 
oftJie  British  AiUhorities. — Sir  Harford  Jones  sent 
as  Ambassador  from  England, — Sir  John  Malcolm 

from  India Unsatisfactory  result  of  the  latter 

Mission. — Return  of  the  Envoy. — A  Military  JKr- 
pedition  to  the  Gtdph  projected  by  the  Bengal  Cro- 
vemment. — Sir  Harford  Jones  departs  from  Bom^ 
bay, — proceeds  to  Shiraz, — Prosecution  of  the  Mis- 
sion prohibited. —  He  perseveres^ — reaches  Tehran^ 
— concludes  a  preliminary  Treaty. — Disavowed  by 
the  Indian  Government. — The  Treaty  confirmed. 
— Diplomatic  relations  with  Persia  taken  under  the 
managemejit  of  the  British  Ministry. — Sir  Gore 
Ouseley  Ambassador. — Definitive  Treaty  condudedy 
— productive  of  little  advantage. 

BOOK  I.       The    nobleman    on    whom    the    government    of 
'       India    now   devolved    had    been    long   engaged    in 


1807.  public  life,  and  had  been  for  many  years  an  active 
member  of  Parliament.  Connected  with  the  Whigs 
in  political  principle,  and  the  personal  friend  of 
some  of  their  great  leaders,  Sir  Gilbert  Elliot  had 
been  chosen  as  one  of  the  managers  for  the  Com- 


PRINCIPLES   OF   THE   GOVERNMENT   OF   BENGAL.  171 

mens  in  the  trial  of  Warren  Hastings,  and  to  him  book  l 
had  been  intrusted  the  conducting  of  the  proposed  ^"^^'  '^' 
impeachment  of  Sir  Elijah  Impey.^  The  knowledge  1807. 
he  had  thus  acquired  of  Indian  affairs  recommended 
him,  upon  the  accession  of  his  friends  to  power,  to 
the  office  of  President  of  the  Board  of  Controul ; 
and,  when  it  was  found  impossible  to  overcome  the 
repugnance  of  the  Court  of  Directors  to  the  ap- 
pointment of  the  Earl  of  Lauderdale,  he  was  readily 
acknowledged  by  both  parties  as  eligible  for  the 
situation  of  Governor-General  of  India.  Lord  Minto 
was  accordingly  appointed.  He  left  England  in  the 
Modeste  frigate,  and  arrived  at  Madras  on  the  20th 
June,  1807.  There,  as  has  been  noticed,  he  stayed 
a  short  time  to  assist  in  determining  the  final  dis- 
posal of  the  Vellore  prisoners,  and,  resuming  his 
voyage,  reached  Calcutta  on  the  3rd  July.  Lord 
William  Bentinck  having  at  the  same  time  been 
recalled.  Sir  George  Barlow  was  nominated  Go- 
vernor of  Fort  St.  George,  and  repaired  thither  in 
December  of  the  same  year. 

The  sentiments  which  had  been  expressed  at 
home,  both  by  the  Ministry  and  the  Court  of  Di- 
rectors, adverse  to  the  system  of  policy  followed  by 
Lord  Wellesley,  necessarily  imposed  upon  Lord 
Minto  the  obligation  of  adopting  principles  of  a 
less  ambitious  tenor,  and  of  pursuing  the  measures 
which  had  been  instituted  by  Lord  Comwallis  and 
Sir  George  Barlow  for  the  retrenchment  of  public 
expenditure  and  the  preservation  of  external  tran- 
quillity. The  general  tone  of  the  new  Administra- 
tion was,  therefore,  moderate  and  pacific;  and  the 

'  See  vol.  V.  of  Mill's  History,  p.  8S. 


172  HISTORY   OF  BEITISH   INDIA. 

BOOK  I.  character  of  the  Grovemor- General,  delighting  in 
CHAP.  IV.  ^Yie  milder  glories  of  internal  prosperity,  the  ame- 
1807.  nities  of  domestic  society,  and  the  cultivation  of 
literature  and  the  arts,  accorded  with  the  spirit  in 
which  it  was  expected  that  his  government  should  be 
carried  on.  At  the  same  time.  Lord  Minto  was  not 
of  a  disposition  to  shrink  from  expense  or  exertion 
when  they  were  recommended  or  required  by  the 
interests  of  the  state  over  which  he  ruled ;  and  vari- 
ous important  transactions,  arising  out  of  Indian  and 
of  European  politics,  signalised  his  career,  and  ex- 
hibited not  unfrequent  departures  from  the  policy  of 
imperturbable  forbearance  and  scrupulous  non-inter- 
ference which  had  been  followed  by  his  predecessors. 
The  enforcement  of  submission  to  authority,  and 
the  final  establishment  of  order  in  the  provinces 
recently  annexed  to  the  British  territories,  were 
among  the  first  objects  of  the  Governor-General's 
attention.  The  avoidance  of  interference  in  the 
quarrels  of  the  petty  Rajas  of  Bundelkhand,  and 
the  attempt  to  secure  their  allegiance  and  good-will 
by  conciliatory  means,  had  entirely  failed.  The  im- 
punity with  which  some  of  the  most  notorious 
patrons  of  the  bands  of  free-booters,  by  whom  the 
province  was  overrun,  were  suffered  to  retain  pos- 
session of  the  districts  they  had  usurped,  served 
only  to  perpetuate  depredation;  and  the  uncon- 
trouled  liberty  which  had  been  left  to  the  Rajas, 
of  asserting  by  arms  their  own  real  or  pretended 
rights  to  each  other's  lands,  was  productive  of  in- 
terminable disputes,  and  a  disorganising  repetition 
of  internal  warfare.  It  was  obviously  necessary,  if 
it  was  worth  while  to  retain  the  province,  to  adopt 


HILL   DISTBICrS   OF   BUNDELKHAND.  173 

a  different  mode  of  governing  it ;  and  a  change  of  book  i. 
measures  was  resolved  on.      It  was   officially  an-  ^^^^'^^' 


nounced  that  the  submission  which  milder  means  laos. 
had  failed  to  introduce  should  be  established  by 
force,  and  that  the  Government  would  compel, 
where  necessary,  obedience  to  its  commands.  The 
promulgation  of  these  designs  went  far  to  effect 
their  fulfilment.  The  Rajas  who  had  hitherto  be- 
lieved that  the  interposition  of  the  British  Agent 
would  be  limited  to  advice  only,  which  they  had 
therefore  ventured  to  treat  with  utter  disregard, 
hastened,  when  they  found  that  something  more 
than  mere  advice  was  seriously  contemplated,  to 
refer  their  disputes  to  the  decision  of  the  superior 
authority ;  and  lands  and  villages,  long  and  fiercely 
contested,  were  awarded  to  those  to  whom  it  ap- 
peared upon  investigation  that  they  rightfully  be- 
longed, in  most  cases  without  any  necessity  for 
compulsive  measures.  It  was  not  found  possible, 
however,  to  exterminate  the  banditti  who  roamed 
through  the  country,  as  long  as  they  found  shelter 
and  support  in  its  principal  fortresses;  and  it  waa 
rendered  necessary,  by  the  persevering  contumacy 
of  the  castellans  of  the  forts  of  Kalinjar  and  Ajay- 
gerh,  to  employ  a  military  force  for  their  humiliation. 
The  province  of  Bundelkhand,  which  is  generally 
a  plain  where  it  is  contiguous  to  the  Jumna,  is  en- 
compassed on  its  southern  and  south-eastern  con- 
fines by  portions  of  the  great  Vindhya  chain  of  * 
hills,  which  stretches  across  India  from  the  Ganges 
to  the  gulph  of  Cambay.  The  portions  of  the 
chain  which  border  upon  Bundelkhand,  or  are  in- 
cluded   within    its    limits,    consist   of   four    nearly 


174  HISTORY  OP   BRITISH   INDIA. 

BOOK  I.  parallel  ranges,  running  obliquely  from  north-east 

CHAP     IV 

to  south-west,  distinguished  as  the  Vindhyachal, 
1808.  Panna,  Bhander,  and  Thamian  or  Kaimur  hills: 
they  are  not  of  great  elevation,  but  rise  one  above 
the  other  as  they  extend  to  the  south  and  west. 
They  are  separated  by  narrow  valleys  or  table-lands 
of  limited  extent,  which,  as  well  as  the  hills,  are 
for  the  most  part  rendered  difficult  of  access  by 
underwood  and  thick  jungle.  From  the  most  north- 
erly range,  or  Vindhyachal,  isolated  elevations  are 
thrown  out  northwards  into  the  plain,  forming  a 
characteristic  feature  of  this  part  of  the  country, 
and  affording  favourable  positions  for  the  construc- 
tion of  hill-forts:^  two  of  these  had  been  selected 
for  the  site  of  the  forts  above  named,  and  Kalinjar 
and  Ajaygerh  were  regarded  by  the  Bundelas  as 
impregnable,  both  from  the  natural  difficulties  of 
the  approach  to  them,  and  the  fortifications  by 
which  those  difficulties  had  been  enhanced. 

The  Kiladar  of  Ajaygerh,  Lakshman  Dawa,  ori- 
ginally the  captain  of  a  band  of  plunderers,  had 
become  possessed  of  that  strong -hold  through  the 
connivance  of  the  officer  who  had  been  placed  in 
command  of  it  by  Shamshir  Bahadur,  and  who  had 
been  directed  to  give  it  up  to  the  British  authori- 
ties. Lakshman  was  permitted  to  retain  the  fort  as 
a  temporary  arrangement,  and  to  hold  in  Jagir  the 
adjacent  lands,  on  condition  of  paying  a  small  annual 
tribute,  and  relinquishing  the  fortress  at  the  expi- 
ration of  two  years,  ending  in  1808.  The  tribute 
was  never  paid,  the  term  of  occupancy  had  expired, 

*  Memoir  on  Bundelkhand,  by  Captain  Franklin  ;  Trans.  Royal  Asiatic 
Society,  i.  250. 


CAPTURE   OF   AJAYGERH.  175 


and  no  intention  of  giving  up  the  fort  was  exhibited,  book  i. 
A  body  of  troops  was  therefore  assembled,  and  sent  ^^^^'  '^' 
under  Colonel  Martindell  against  Ajaygerh.  i809. 

No  opposition  was  encountered  by  Colonel  Mar- 
tindell's  detachment  until  they  arrived  at  Rajaoli,  a 
fortified  hill  about  ten  miles  from  Ajaygerh,  which 
was  occupied  by  a  select  body  of  Lakshman  Dawa's 
troops.  The  ascent  of  the  hill  was  by  steep  and 
narrow  paths,  overhung  in  many  places  by  project- 
ing rocks ;  from  the  shelter  of  which,  parties  of  the 
enemy  fired  upon  the  slowly  advancing  troops. 
Driven  from  these  stations  they  retreated  to  the 
summit  of  the  hill,  where  they  had  constructed 
parapet  walls,  and  behind  them  they  made  a  reso- 
lute stand.  As  no  ladders  could  be  brought  up 
with  which  to  scale  the  wall,  the  assailants  were 
recalled,  and  preparations  made  for  resuming  the 
attack  on  the  following  morning :  the  enemy  eva- 
cuated the  post  during  the  night.' 

On  the  following  day  Colonel  Martindell  pro- 
ceeded to  Ajaygerh,  and  batteries  were  raised  against 
the  fort.  Operations  were,  however,  suspended  by 
repeated  messages  from  Lakshman  Dawa  promising 
to  deliver  up  the  fortress,  and  negociations  were 
protracted  until  the  11th  of  February  in  this  ex- 
pectation. Further  delay  was  then  reftised,  and  the 
guns  opened  upon  the  principal  gateways  with  such 
effect  as  in  a  few  hours  to  lay  three  of  them  in 
ruins.  On  the  two  following  days  the  firing  was 
repeated,  and  early  on  the  13th  a  practicable  breach 
was  made.     The  Kiladar  anticipated  the  assault  by  a 

*  The  loss  of  the  assailants  was  28  Sipahis  killed,  and  115  wounded, 
including  three  officers,  of  whom  Lieut.  Jamieson  of  the  light  battalion 
died  of  his  wounds. 


176  HISTORY  OF   BRITISH  INDIA. 

BOOK  I.  timely  surrender,  and  Ajaygerh  was  taken  possession 
^^^'  '^*  of  in  the  course  of  the  day.*  Lakshman  Dawa  gave 
1809.  himself  up  to  Mr.  Richardson,  the  Govemor-Gene- 
raFs  agent,  and  was  allowed  to  remain  at  large  upon 
parole.  His  family  removed  from  the  fort,  and 
found  a  residence  in  the  adjacent  town  of  Nao- 
sheher,  where  a  tragedy  ensued,  not  unprecedented 
in  the  history  of  the  Hindus,  and  characteristic  of 
native  sentiments  of  personal  honour. 

Lakshman  Dawa,  in  surrendering  himself,  che- 
rished a  hope  that  the  British  authorities  would  rein- 
state him  in  the  possession  of  his  fort,  and  addressed 
a  petition  to  the  agent,  praying  either  that  he  might 
be  restored,  or  that  he  might  be  blown  from  the 
mouth  of  a  gun,  as  life  without  reputation  was  not 
worth  preserving.  As  Mr.  Richardson  declined  a 
compliance  with  either  alternative,  the  chief  re- 
solved to  make  a  personal  appeal  to  the  Governor- 
General,  and  secretly  quitted  the  camp  for  the 
purpose  of  repairing  to  Calcutta.  He  managed  his 
flight  with  so  much  skill  that  no  traces  of  him  were 
discovered  until  his  arrival  at  the  Presidency.  He 
was  treated  with  kindness,  and  left  at  large  under 
the  supervision  of  the  police ;  but,  as  no  hope  was 
held  out  to  him  of  recovering  a  possession  to  which 
his  only  titles  were  usurpation  and  fraud,  he  de- 
parted as  unceremoniously  as  he  had  arrived,  and 
endeavoured  to  effect  his  return  to  Bundelkhand  : 
his  flight  was  intercepted,  and  he  was  brought  back 
to  Calcutta^  where  he  was  detained  until  his  death.* 

■  Official  DiBpatcheB  and  Goyenunent  Orders ;  Ab.  Annual  Register, 
▼ol.  xi. ;  Chronicle,  p.  27. 

'  Lakshman  Dawa  died  in  the  neighbourhood  of  Calcutta  in  November, 
1S28.     He  had  from  the  first  refused  to  accept  any  provision  in  place  of 


DESTRUCTION   OF   LAKSHMAN   DAWA'S   FAMILY.  177 

Upon  the  disappearance  of  Lakshman  Dawa  from  book  i, 
camp,  it  was  considered  advisable  to  place  his  family . 


in  greater  security  as  hostages  for  his  conduct.  They  1809, 
were  ordered  to  prepare  for  removal  into  the  fort, 
with  assurances  that  they  had  nothing  to  apprehend 
from  their  detention ;  and  that  one  of  their  male  re- 
latives, who  had  not  forfeited  the  favourable  opinion 
of  the  British  Government,  should  be  intrusted 
with  their  guardianship.  Baju  Rao,  the  father-in- 
law  of  the  absent  chief,  was  instructed  to  conduct 
the  party  to  their  quarters.  He  undertook  the 
office  with  apparent  cheerfulness,  and  repaired  for 
that  purpose  to  the  house  in  which  the  family  re- 
sided. When  a  considerable  interval  had  elapsed 
after  his  entrance  into  the  house,  and  no  person 
seemed  to  be  coming  forth,  a  native  officer  of  the 
escort  entered,  and  found  the  old  man  seated  before 
the  door  of  an  inner  room  with  a  drawn  sword  in 
his  hand.  As  the  Subahdar  approached,  Baju  Rao 
retired  into  the  chamber,  and  closed  the  door. 
Assistance  being  obtained,  the  door  was  forced; 
when  the  mother,  the  wife,  the  infant  son  of 
Lakshman  Dawa,  and  four  female  attendants,  were 
discovered  lying  dead  on  the  floor,  having  been 
killed  by  Baju  Rao,  apparently  with  their  own  con- 
sent, as  no  cry  nor  any  expression  of  alarm  or  suf- 
fering had  been  heard.      As  soon  as  the  door  was 

the  lands  of  which  he  had  been  dispossessed,  and  was  for  some  time  under 
the  charge  of  the  police.  In  1811  his  misfortunes  affected  his  intellects, 
and  he  was  placed  under  the  care  of  the  Company's  medical  officer  at 
Alypore,  with  whom  he  continued  until  1822,  when  he  appears  to  have  re- 
covered his  understanding.  He  was  not  released  from  all  restraint  for  two 
years  longer,  when  he  consented  to  receive  a  pension  of  600  rupees  a  month. 
After  his  death  the  surviving  members  of  his  family  were  allowed  to  return 
to  Bundelkhand. — MS.  Records. 

VOL.  I.  N 


HISTORY   OP  BBnrSH  INDIA.    • 

opened,  Baju  Rao  inflict^  a  fatal  wound  ujion  him- 
self, Tlie  catastrophe  was  in  entire  unison  with 
natiye  feeling ;  and  several  of  the  Bundela  chiefs  in 
camp  hesitated  not  to  avow,  that,  under  similar  cir- 
cumstances, they  would  have  perpetrated  a  similar 
deed.* 

A  protracted  course  of  desultory  and  harassing 
hostilities  had  some  time  previously  been  com- 
menced against  Gopal  Sing,  a  military  adventurer 
who  had  usurped  the  district  of  Kotra,  the  inhe- 
ritance of  Raja  Bakht  Sing,  a  descendant  of  Chatra- 
sal.  The  right  of  the  Raja  had  been  formally  re- 
cognised by  the  British  Government  during  the 
preceding  administration,  and  he  had  been  autho- 
rised to  recover  his  lands;  but,  as  he  was  not  allowed 
to  receive  the  assistance  of  British  troops,  the  re- 
cognition and  sanction  were  mere  mockeries.*  With 
the  altered  policy  of  the  Government  its  grants 
became  realities.  A  British  detachment  was  sent  to 
place  the  Raja  in  possession.  Tlie  task  was  ea«jily 
accomplished,  and  even  Gopal  Sing  came  into 
camp  and  professed  submission.  From  motives 
which  are  unexplained,  or  from  the  instability  of 
purpose  which  is  not  linfrequent  in  the  native  mind, 
he  seems  to  have  speedily  repented  of  his  acqui- 
escence, and,  departing  abruptly  from  the  British 
encampment,  he  retired    with  a   few  followers  to 

'  MS.  Records ;  also  As.  Anuual  Register,  toI.  yi. ;  History,  p.  5. 

'  See  the  Ikrar  Nama,  or  pledge  of  allegiance,  and  Sunnud  granted  to 
Roja  Bakht  Sing;  Coll.  of  Treaties,  p.  331.  Tlie  documents  are  dated 
8th  June,  1807.  Tlie  first  article  of  the  answer  to  the  Raja's  solicitation  to 
be  reinstated  runs,  "Little  doubt  can  be  entertained  tliat  you  will  be 
able  to  establish  your  authority,  and  to  settle  the  Perguniias,  independently 
of  the  aid  and  support  of  the  British  Govenunent :  at  the  same  time,  every 
proper  and  necessary  aid  which  you  may  require,  with  t/if  exccpthm  of 
irwtpM,  shall  be  furnished  to  you.*' 


HOSTILITIES   WITH   GOPAL   SING.  179 

the  thickets  above  the  first  range  of  hills.     Sensible  book  i. 

CHAP     IV 

that  direct  resistance  to  the  superior  force  of  the 


supporters  of  Bakht  Sing  would  be  unavailing,  he  1809. 
adopted  a  course  of  destructive  irruptions ;  rushing 
down  upon  the  plains  and  spreading  terror  and 
devastation  in  all  directions  whenever  an  oppor- 
tunity occurred,  and,  when  pressed  by  his  enemies, 
taking  refuge  amongst  the  entangled  and  rugged 
country  between  the  first  and  second  ranges  of  the 
mountains.  Although  his  parties  were  frequently 
overtaken  and  dispersed,  they  immediately  re-as- 
sembled and  renewed  their  depredations;  and  it 
became  necessary  to  provide  a  permanent  check 
upon  their  ravages.  A  cantonment  was  therefore 
established  at  Tiroha,  at  the  foot  of  the  first  range, 
a  few  miles  to  the  north-east  of  Kalinjar,  from 
whence  detachments  were  sent  occasionally  to  guard 
the  passes;  the  unhealthiness  of  the  climate  pre- 
venting the  presence  of  a  force  above  the  ghats 
throughout  the  year.  The  marauding  attacks  of 
Gopal  Sing  were  in  some  measure  counteracted 
by  these  arrangements,  but  they  continued  at  in- 
tervals to  disturb  the  quiet  and  delay  the  pacific 
settlement  of  the  country. 

Towards  the  end  of  1809,  the  concentration  of 
the  British  force  in  Bundelkhand  under  Colonel 
Martindell,  in  a  different  quarter  of  the  province, 
having  drawn  off"  the  principal  part  of  the  troops 
opposed  to  Gopal  Sing,  the  protection  of  the  dis- 
tricts was  left  to  the  unaided  resources  of  the 
Rajas  of  Panna  and  Kotra.  They  proved  utterly 
inadequate  to  the  duty.  Their  united  contingents 
were  defeated  in  an  engagement  with  their  more 

n2 


180  HISTORY  OF   BRITISH   INDIA. 

300K  I.  warlike  adversary;  and  the  country  below  the  hills 
laid  open  to  his  attacks  was  remorselessly  devas- 


1810.  tated,  until  his  progress  was  stopped  by  a  detach- 
ment under  Major  Kelly,  which  was  sent  from 
Colonel  MartindelFs  camp  at  Chatterpur.  As  the 
force  advanced,  Gopal  retired  above  the  third  range 
of  ghats ;  in  the  vicinity  of  which  the  1st  battalion 
of  the  16th  native  infantry,  commanded  by  Captain 
Wilson,  was  stationed  to  keep  him  in  check,  while 
the  rest  of  the  detachment  rejoined  the  main  army. 
Gopal  Sing,  finding  himself  more  than  a  match 
for  the  force  which  remained  to  oppose  him,  re- 
sumed offensive  operations;  and  being  assailed  in 
a  strongly  stockaded  position  near  Kakarati  in  the 
Panna  principality,  by  the  detachment  under  Cap- 
tain Wilson,  repulsed  the  assailants  after  they  had 
suffered  considerable  loss,  and  compelled  them  to 
fall  back  towards  the  plains.^  The  junction  of 
Major  Delamain,  with  a  squadron  of  the  2nd  native 
cavalry,  restored  the  superiority  to  the  British ;  but 
Gopal,  turning  to  the  north  amongst  the  hills,  out- 
stripped their  pursuit,  and  coming  suddenly  down 
upon  Tiroha,  which  was  feebly  guarded,  he  plun- 
dered and  set  fire  to  the  cantonments,  before  troops, 
dispatched  from  Ajaygerh  as  soon  as  the  move- 
ment of  Gopal  Sing  upon  Tiroha  was  known,  could 
arrive  for  its  protection.  Major  Morgan,  who  com- 
manded the  detachment,  followed  the  retreating 
^nemy ;  but  whilst  Gopal  Sing,  at  the  head  of  his 
horse,  manoeuvred  so  as  to  engross  his  attention, 

^  On  this  occasion,  Gopal  Sing  showed  that  he  united  hamanity  with 
courage  and  conduct.  Several  of  the  wounded  Sipahis  having  fallen  into 
his  hands,  he  had  their  wounds  dressed,  and  sent  them  back  to  rejoin  the 
detachment. 


SURPRISE   OF   JHAR6ERH.  181 

the  infantry  marched  unperceived  again  upon^iroha,  book  i. 
where  they  not  only  completed  such  part  of  the  ^"^''*  '^' 


work  of  destruction  as  they  had  left  unfinished,  I810. 
but  laid  the  adjacent  town  in  ashes,  after  having 
first  made  themselves  masters  of  much  valuable 
booty.  The  audacity  of  this  enterprise  enforced  the 
adoption  of  more  vigorous  measures,  and  Colonel 
Brown  was  detached  from  Colonel  Martindell's 
camp,  with  the  1st  native  cavalry  and  one  squadron 
of  the  8th,  to  command  the  troops  engaged  in  this 
harassing  warfare.  A  battalion  of  native  infantry 
under  Major  Leslie  was  also  added  to  the  force; 
and  Gopal,  unable  to  encounter  such  an  armament, 
and  having  been  surprised  and  roughly  handled 
by  Colonel  Brown  at  Bichaund  near  Ajaygerh, 
reascended  the  passes,  and  took  shelter  in  an 
entrenched  position  at  Jhargerh  above  the  second 
range  of  ghats.  Captain  Wilson,  with  a  squadron 
of  native  cavalry,  the  1st  battalion  of  the  16th 
native  infantry,  three  companies  of  the  7th,  and 
a  company  of  pioneers,  was  sent  forward  in  pursuit. 
After  a  laborious  march  he  ascended  the  hills  un- 
perceived, and  arrived  at  Jhargerh  almost  before 
his  approach  was  discovered.  The  defences  con- 
sisted of  a  rampart  and  strong  stockades  situated 
upon  a  rocky  eminence  in  a  valley  overgrown  Mdth 
bamboos  and  brushwood  :  they  were  accessible  only 
on  one  face,  the  other  sides  being  covered  by  almost 
impenetrable  thickets;  but  the  garrison,  including 
Gopal  Sing,  were  so  much  taken  by  surprise  that 
their  only  thought  was  of  escape.  Guided  by  one 
of  his  prisoners.  Captain  Wilson  effected  his  en- 
trance into  the  main  body  of  the  works  as  they 


182  HISTORY   OF   BRITISH  INDIA. 

BOOK  X.  were  eVacuated  by  the  enemy,  who  phmged  into 
^^"^'  ^'  the  thickets  and  disappeared.  After  burning  the 
1810.  stockades,  and  levelling  the  fort,  the  detachment 
returned  to  its  post  at  Kakarati.  The  setting  in 
of  the  rainy  season  put  a  stop  to  further  proceed- 
ings. Gopal  retired  to  the  south ;  and  the  troops 
were  so  stationed  as  to  intercept  his  return  to  the 
north  and  west,  and  confine  him  to  the  rugged 
valleys  between  the  Bhander  and  Kaimur  hills,  to- 
wards the  sources  of  the  Sone  and  Nerbudda  rivers. 
As  soon  as  the  state  of  the  country  permitted, 
active  measures  were  resumed:  a  division  of  the 
force  under  Captain  Watson  marched  from  Amghat 
on  the  17th  November,  and  on  the  morning  of  the 
19th  came  upon  a  strong  body  of  Gopal  Singes 
troops  at  the  village  of  Bhamori,  commanded  by 
some  of  his  principal  Sirdars.  The  party  was  posted 
in  two  divisions:  one  in  the  village,  occupying  a 
brick  fort ;  the  other  and  larger  in  an  adjacent  grove, 
protected  by  a  deep  ravine.  As  soon  as  the  ravine 
was  turned  by  the  native  cavalry,  the  enemy's  horse 
fled,  and  were  pursued  for  some  distance  :  the  foot 
followed  their  example,  and  broke  upon  the  first 
volley  from  the  advancing  column.  The  troops 
in  the  fort  surrendered  at  discretion.  About  two 
hundred  were  killed  and  wounded,  and  above  one 
hundred  taken  prisoners,  with  little  loss  on  the 
side  of  the  British.  At  the  same  time  Major  Kelly 
advanced  from  Lohagong,  and  Colonel  Brown  from 
the  neighbourhood  of  Banda.  The  latter,  after 
a  long  and  fatiguing  march,  crossed  the  upper 
course  of  the  Sone  at  Hardi  Ghat,  and  overtook 
Gropal  Sing  near  the  village  of  Killeri,  whither  he 


SUBMISSION   OF   GOPAL   SING.  183 

had  retreated,  after  declining  to  accept  an  asylum  book  i. 
offered  him  by  the  Raja  of  Rewa,     His  followers. 


consisting  entirely  of  horse,  were  completely  routed ;  isii. 
and  Gopal  Sing  escaped,  almost  unattended,  into 
the  jungle.  Here  he  continued,  however,  to  main- 
tain himself  and  followers  for  several  months,  and, 
notwithstanding  his  repeated  discomfiture,  remained 
unsubdued. 

In  the  month  of  June,  Gopal  Sing  emerged  from 
his  retreat  at  Kshirgaon  in  the  country  of  the 
Berar  Raja,  and  once  more  descended  from  the 
hills.  His  movements  were  closely  watched  by  the 
detachments  of  Colonel  Brown's  force ;  and,  having 
been  nearly  surprised  by  Captain  Watson  in  the 
vicinity  of  Komtara,  he  retreated  to  the  protec- 
tion of  his  former  asylum.  Having  received  intelli- 
gence of  his  position.  Colonel  Brown  moved  with 
great  secrecy  and  expedition,  and  came  by  surprise 
upon  him  on  the  night  of  the  26th  June.  The 
enemy's  camp  was  pitched  at  the  head  of  the  Do- 
wani  pass  in  the  Marao  hills,  in  the  dry  bed  of 
a  swamp,  protected  by  thick  wood  on  every  side, 
and  accessible  only  by  steep  and  narrow  defiles. 
Through  one  of  these  the  infantry  advanced,  and 
first  gave  intimation  of  their  presence  by  a  volley 
fired  upon  the  camp.  The  enemy  fled  without 
attempting  resistance :  many  were  killed,  and  much 
plunder  was  recovered.  The  nature  of  the  country 
and  the  approach  of  the  monsoon  again  suspended 
pursuit;  but,  on  the  7th  September,  the  fortified 
post  of  Kshirgaon  was  attacked  and  carried  by  a 
detachment  commanded  by  Captain  Watson.  Gopal 
Sing,  once  more  an  almost  solitary   fugitive,  fled 


184  mSTOEY   OF   BEITISH   INDIA. 

BOOK  I.  into  the  district  of  Sagar;  but,  becoming  now  con- 
^^^^^^J^  vinced  of  the  hopelessness  of  so  unequal  a  contest, 
1812.  he  proffered  his  submission  on  the  conditions  of 
receiving  a  fiill  pardon  for  his  opposition,  and  pro- 
vision being  made  for  his  family.  The  British  Go- 
vernment, equally  weary  of  a  troublesome  and  un- 
profitable warfare,  acceded  to  the  terms,  and  granted 
him  a  Jagir  of  eighteen  villages  in  the  district  of 
Panwari  in  Bundelkhand,  which  is  still  held  by  his 
descendants.  *  The  transactions  are  worthy  of  re- 
cord as  an  instance  of  the  success  with  which  personal 
activity  and  resolution,  aided  by  a  difficult  country, 
but  destitute  of  any  other  means  than  plunder  and 
the  devotedness  of  a  slender  band  of  adherents, 
baffled  for  a  period  of  four  years,  and  ultimately 
tired  out,  the  resentment  and  the  resources  of  a 
powerful  antagonist.  * 

Tlie  final  establishment  of  order  and  tranquillity 
in  Bundelkhand  was  in  a  still  greater  degree  de- 
pendent upon  the  reduction  of  Kalinjar ;  the  strength 
of  which  fastness,  and  the  vain  attempts  made  in 
time  past  for  its  capture,  impressed  the  natives  with 
a  universal  belief  of  its  impregnability,  and  inspired 
its  Kiladar,  Dariao  Sing,  with  confidence  to  persist 
in  his  opposition  to  British  authority,  and  to  con- 
tinue his  scarcely  covert  encouragement  of  every 
predatory  leader.  The  mischievous  consequences  of 
allowing  Dariao  Sing*  to  retain  possession  of  Ka- 

>  Sec  the  Sunnud  ((ranted  to  Gopal  Sing  on  the  24th  Feb.,  1812 ;  Re- 
port of  Select  Committee,  August  1SS2 ;  Political  Appendix,  p.  661. 

*  For  the  operations  against  Gopal  Sing,  see  the  Asiatic  Annual  Re- 
gister, vol.  xii. ;  History,  40:  Chronicle,  pp.  0,  10,  61,  78:  and  Calcutta 
Annual  Register,  1821  ;  History,  p.  76. 

•  S*»e  p.  18,  note. 


SIEGE   OF    KALINJAR.  185 

linjar  were  vainly  pointed  out  when  the  British  au-  book  i. 
thority  was  first  introduced  into  Bundelkhand;  biit  ^^^^'  ^^' 


the  system  of  endurance  having  now  given  place  I812. 
to  a  policy  of  a  more  resolute  character,  it  was 
determined  no  longer  to  overlook  his  contumacy: 
a  force  was  accordingly  assembled  at  Banda/  the 
command  of  which  was  given  to  Colonel  Martindell, 
and  on  the  19th  January  Kalinjar  was  invested. 

The  fortified  hill  of  Kalinjar  is  situated  about 
twenty  miles  south-east  of  Banda,  and  about  half  that 
distance  from  the  first  range  of  hills.  It  rises  from 
a  marshy  plain  as  an  isolated  rock  to  the  height 
of  above  nine  hundred  feet,  being  at  the  base  ten 
or  twelve  miles  in  circumference,  and  inclosing  on 
the  summit  a  table-land  of  more  than  four  miles 
in  circuit.  On  this  plain  were  situated  the  resi- 
dence of  the  Kiladar,  the  cantonments  of  the  gar- 
rison, and  several  Hindu  temples,  apparently  an- 
cient:* the  sides  of  the  hill  are  abrupt,  and  are 
covered  with  an  almost  impenetrable  jungle  of 
bushes  and  bamboos,  the  haunts  of  beasts  of  prey 


'  A  squadron  of  the  8th  light  dragoons,  five  companies  of  the  53rd  foot, 
a  squadron  of  the  1st  N.  C.  and  three  of  the  3rd,  with  six  battalions  of 
N.  I.,  three  companies  of  pioneers,  a  detachment  of  European  artillery, 
and  a  battering  train  of  twelve  and  eighteen  pounders. 

'  In  some  places,  mutilated  inscriptions  were  found  in  characters  said  to 
be  the  same  as  those  on  the  staff  of  Firoz  Shah  at  Delhi.  They  have 
never  been  collected  or  published.  Cave  temples  also  are  described,  one 
of  which  is  dedicated  to  Nila-kantha,  a  form  of  Siva,  as  a  Linga.  Kilan- 
jara,  the  correct  appellation  of  the  mountain,  is  also  a  name  of  Siva— he 
who  sees  time  itself  decay — and  all  the  Hindu  traditions  relating  to  this 
hill  connect  it  with  his  worship.  Kalbhiroop  (or  correctly,  K41a-bhairava), 
whose  colossal  image  is  specified  by  Abulfazl  as  existing  at  Kalanjar, 
is  an  attendant  of  Siva,  or  one  of  his  minor  emanations.  See  the  word 
Callinger,  to  which  Kilanjara  is  commonly  barbarously  metamorphosed, 
in  Hamilton's  Gazetteer.  A  general  description  of  the  fort  and  its  anti- 
quities is  given  in  Pogson's  History  of  the  Bundelas,  but  the  latter  have 
been  but  cursorily  and  imperfectly  investigated. 


186  HISTORY  OF   BRITISH   INDIA. 

BOOK  I.  and  of  innumerable  monkeys.  The  crest  of  the 
^^^^^J^  hill  is  formed  of  a  ridge  of  steep  black  rock,  which 
1812.  forms  the  base  of  a  wall  with  loopholes  and  em- 
brasures surrounding  the  whole  of  the  summit.  The 
Petta,  or  town,  lies  at  the  foot  of  the  hill  at  the 
south-eastern  angle;  and  the  ascent  thence  to  the 
fort  is  by  a  broad  winding  road  cut  along  the  eastern 
face  of  the  rock,  and  defended  by  seven  fortified 
gateways.  Opposite  to  the  north-eastern  extremity, 
at  the  distance  of  about  eight  hundred  yards,  rises 
another  detached  elevation,  the  hill  of  Kdlanjari, 
nearly  as  lofty  as  the  main  rock,  but  of  much  less 
extent :  its  sides  are  equally  steep,  and  covered  in 
like  manner  with  a  thick  and  entangled  growth  of 
low  shrubs  and  bamboos. 

After  reconnoitring  the  defences  of  the  fort,  it 
wajs  determined  to  erect  batteries  on  the  lesser  hill ; 
and,  by  the  26th  of  January,  a  path  having  been 
cleared  of  the  jungle,  four  iron  eighteen-pounders 
and  two  mortars  were  hauled  up  by  main  force 
to  the  top.  Another  battery  of  two  eighteen- 
pounders  was  formed  lower  down  on  the  shoulder 
of  the  hill ;  and  another  of  two  twelve-pounders 
nearer  the  foot,  opposite  to  the  great  gateway  of 
the  fort.  Negociations  having  failed,  the  batteries 
opened  on  the  28th,  on  which  day  also  possession 
was  taken  of  the  Petta.  No  attempt  was  made  to 
disturb  the  construction  of  the  batteries,  and  not 
a  shot  was  fired  from  the  fort  until  they  opened ; 
it  being  a  point  of  Indian  honour,  it  is  said,  for 
a  fort  not  to  fire  until  fired  upon.  When  the  firing 
of  the  besiegers  commenced,  that  from  the  fort  was 
feebly  maintained  and  did  little  execution;  and  it 


ASSAULT   REPULSED.  187 

was  expected,  that,  as  soon  as  a  breach  should  be  book  l 

CHAP    rv* 

made,  the  fortress  would  fall  an  easy  conquest :  an        ' 


anticipation  that  was  fatally  disappointed.  I812. 

By  the  1st  of  February  the  batteries  had  effected 
what  was  considered  to  be  a  practicable  breach, 
and  at  sunrise  on  the  2nd  the  storming  party  ad- 
vanced to  the  assault.  The  party  consisted  of  the 
five  companies  of  his  Majesty's  53rd,  and  the  flank 
companies  of  the  native  regiments,  commanded  by 
Lieut.-Colonel  Mawbey.  As  they  ascended  the  hill, 
they  were  encountered  by  a  brisk  fire  of  matchlocks 
and  volleys  of  heavy  stones,  until  they  made  good 
their  footing  to  within  fifty  yards  of  the  breach, 
where  they  halted,  under  cover  of  an  old  wall. 
The  top  of  the  breach,  and  the  wall  on  both  sides 
of  it,  were  crowded  with  matchlockmen,  regardless 
of  the  fire  to  which  they  were  exposed  from  the 
destruction  of  the  parapet.  Upon  a  given  signal 
the  assailing  column  rushed  forward,  in  spite  of  the 
missiles  with  which  they  were  saluted,  and  reached 
the  foot  of  the  parapet.  Here  they  were  arrested 
by  the  precipitous  and  mostly  perpendicular  rock 
on  which  the  wall  had  stood,  and  which  it  was 
necessary  to  scale  before  they  could  arrive  at  the 
foot  of  the  breach.  Ladders  were  applied,  but  the 
irregularity  of  the  surface  rendered  it  diflScult  to 
fix  them;  and,  as  fast  as  the  men  ascended,  they 
were  knocked  down  by  heavy  stones  hurled  upon 
them  by  the  defendants,  or  were  shot  by  their 
matchlocks.  Equal  resolution  was  displayed  on 
either  side ;  but  the  disadvantageous  position  of  the 
assailants  rendered  the  conflict  so  unequal,  that, 
after  an   unavailing   struggle   of  about   thirty-five 


188  HISTORY   OF   BRITISH   INDIA. 

BOOK  I.  minutes,  the  stonning  party  was  recalled.     The  loss 
they  sustained  was  severe:*   that  suffered  by  the 
J812.     garrison  was  not  less.     The  attempt  was  not  un- 
availing ;  as  the  Kiladar,  apprehensive  of  its  repeti- 
tion, signified  on  the  day  following  his  acceptance 
of  the  conditions  which  he  had  previously  rejected. 
Lands  were  assigned  to  him  and  the  members  of  his 
family  who  held  a  united  interest  in  Kalinjar,  and 
they  agreed  to  cede  the  fortress.     This  strong-hold, 
which  had  baffled  Mahmud  of  Ghazni,^  which  had 
seen  Shir  Shah^  perish  before  its  walls,  and  which 
had  sustained  a  ten  years'  siege  by  Ali  Bahadur,*  was 
thus  added  to  the  trophies  of  British  conquest,  and 
ceased  to  be  the  rallying  point  of  lawless  spoliation. 
After  a  brief  occupancy  as  a  military  post  it  was 
dismantled  and  abandoned.      The  chiefs  who  had 
once  bid  defiance  from  its  ramparts  to  the  com- 
mands of  the  British  Government  became  peaceable 
subjects,  and  their  descendants  are  still  enumerated 
amongst  the  Jagirdars  of  the  province.* 

*  Capt.  Fraser,  Lieut.  Rice,  one  Serjeant,  and  ten  men  of  tlie  53rd, 
were  killed  ;  ten  officers  and  one  hundred  and  twenty  men  were  wounded. 
Lieut.  Faithful,  commanding  the  pioneers,  and  nearly  half  his  men,  were 
wounded.     The  Sipahis  had  no  opportunity  of  coming  into  action. 

'Mahmud  besieged  it  in  a.  d.  1023,  but  made  peace  with  Naiida,  its 
Hindu  Raja,  and  left  it  in  his  possession. —  Briggs's  Ferishta,  i.  66. 

'  Shir  Shah  laid  siege  to  it  in  a.  d.  1554,  and  was  killed  by  the  bursting 
of  a  shell,  and  consequent  explosion  of  a  powder  magazine  near  wliich  he 
was  standing. —  Briggs*s  Ferishta,  ii.  123. 

*  See  above,  p.  4. 

*  Villages  were  assigned  in  perpetual  Jagir,  not  only  to  Dariao  Sing 
Chaub^,  but  to  his  coparceners,  descendants  equally  of  Ramkrishna  Chaub^, 
to  the  number  of  eight. — See  the  separate  grants,  Report  of  Select  Com- 
mittee, August,  1832;  App.  Political,  p.  562;  also  Bengal  and  Agra 
Gazetteer  for  1841,  vol.ii.  part  2,  p.  286.  The  Jagirs  thus  granted,  as  well 
as  others  of  a  similar  class,  to  the  number  of  twenty-seven,  were  exempted 
by  a  special  regulation,  xxii.  of  1812,  from  the  operation  of  the  general 
regulations,  and  from  the  jurisdiction  of  the  courts  of  civil  and  criminal 
judicature. 


OPERATIONS   IN    REWA.  189 

The  conduct  of  Jay  Sing  Deo,  the  Raja  of  Rewa,  book  i. 
a  small  principality  situated  on  the  east  of  Bundel-  ^^^^^J^ 
khand,  in  countenancing  Gopal  Sing  and  other  1812. 
free-booters,  had  for  some  time  past  been  unsatis- 
factory ;  and,  very  soon  after  the  reduction  of  Ka- 
linjar,  a  party  of  the  plunderers  known  as  Pindaris 
penetrated  by  way  of  Rewa  into  the  British  terri- 
tory of  Mirzapur,  apparently  with  the  connivance 
of  the  Raja.  It  was  obvious  that  he  had  either 
permitted  their  passage  through  his  country,  or 
that  he  had  not  the  power  to  prevent  it;  and  in 
either  case  the  duty  of  self-protection  suggested 
interposition.  After  some  hesitation  the  Raja  was 
compelled  to  accede  to  a  treaty  of  friendship  and 
alliance,  by  which  his  possessions  were  guaranteed, 
and  his  supremacy  in  the  administration  of  his 
government  acknowledged;  but  he  was  interdicted 
from  communicating  with  foreign  states,  obliged  to 
agree  to  the  mutual  delivery  of  enemies  and  rebels, 
and  to  promise  co-operation  in  military  affairs.  The 
treaty  was  concluded  in  October,  1812. 

These  arrangements  were  scarcely  concluded  when 
the  Raja  manifested  a  disposition  to  violate  them. 
He  objected  to  the  establishment  of  a  military 
post  vdthin  his  boundary ;  opposed  a  communication 
through  his  country  between  the  British  districts 
which  it  separated;  treated  the  British  political 
agents  vnth  indignity ;  and  either  suffered  or  in- 
stigated the  petty  chiefs  of  Singrana,  his  depend- 
ants, to  commit  various  acts  of  aggression  on  the 
adjacent  country  under  British  protection.  To 
punish  their  ravages,  and  compel  the  observance  of 
the  stipulated  treaty.  Colonel  Martindell  marched 


)■■' 


190  HT8TORY  OF   BUnSH   DIDIA. 

y  BOOK  L  into  Rewa  early  in  1813.     He  had  advanced  near 

;  ^'^*'^'  ^'  to  the  capital  when  the  Raja  solicited  a  sospension 

/  i«ia.     of  hostilities,  and  consented  to  enter  into  a  new 

i  treaty,  confirming  the  former  stipulations^  and  en- 

j  gSLging  to  pay  the  expenses  of  the  military  op«m* 

/  tions.     He  shortly  afterwards  abdicated  in  fevour  of 

^  his  son. 

During  the  suspension  of  hostilities  with  the 
Rewa  Raja,  a  party  of  Sipahis  escorting  military 
stores,  marching  to  join  the  main  force,  and  pro- 
ceeding in  the  confidence  of  the  armistice  which  had 
then  been  agreed  npon,  were  suddenly  surronnded 
near  the  village  of  Sathani  by  a  strong  body  of 
horse  and  foot,  by  whom  some  of  the  men  were 
killed  and  the  baggage  was  plundered.  The  Raja 
disclaimed  all  participation  in  this  atrocity;  and  it 
appeared  to  have  been  the  unauthorised  act  of  some 
of  his  feudatories,  particularly  the  Raja  of  Sathani 
and  Safnaid  Sing,  Raja  of  Entouri.  A  force  under 
Colonel  Adams  took  the  field  immediately  after  the 
rains  to  punish  the  aggressors.  The  fort  of  Entouri 
was  stormed  and  carried,  after  an  obstinate  resist- 
ance. Samaid  Sing,  disdaining  to  survive  its  capture, 
strewed  a  quantity  of  gunpowder  upon  a  cloth,  which 
ho  tied  round  his  body,  and,  setting  fire  to  it,  termi- 
nated  his  existence.  Some  other  forts  were  taken 
and  destroyed ;  and  the  chiefs,  alarmed,  came  into 
camp  and  submitted.  A  third  treaty  was  then  con- 
cluded with  the  Raja  of  Rewa ;  by  which,  upon  his 
renewing  the  stipulations  previously  contracted,  he 
was  placed  in  possession  of  some  of  the  lands  which 
the  contumacious  Zemindars  had  forfeited,  with 
certain   rosorvatious,  under  strict  promise  that  he 


SETTLEMENT   OF   HARIANA.  191 

would  respect  whatever  guarantees  the  British  Go-  book  i. 
vemment  had  granted  to  any  of  his  chiefs,  and  would  ^^^^^^^ 


refrain  from  molesting  all  such  as  had  evinced  towards     I813. 
it  a  friendly  disposition.     The  Raja  necessarily  acqui- 
esced, but  the  resentment  felt  by  this  petty  court 
at  an  interference  which  it  had  provoked  has  per- 
haps scarcely  yet  given  place  to  friendly  feelings.^ 

These  operations  put  an  end  for  a  time  to  all 
serious  manifestations  of  the  turbulent  spirit  by 
which  the  Bundelas  have  been  long  distinguished. 
A  different  race,  but  of  a  congenial  temperament, 
in  another  portion  of  the  western  frontier,  required, 
about  the  same  period,  similar  coercion. 

At  the  termination  of  the  war,  the  extensive 
and  fertile  but  thinly  peopled  district  of  Hariana, 
lying  immediately  west  of  Delhi,  had  been  taken 
within  the  range  of  British  supremacy.  The  inha- 
bitants of  the  province,  who  were  of  the  Jdt  race, 
a  resolute  and  high-spirited  tribe,  had  some  years 
before  taken  advantage  of  the  enfeebled  adminis- 
tration of  affairs  at  Delhi  to  throw  off  the  alle- 
giance which  they  had  previously  professed  to  the 
Mogul.  Collected  together  in  village  communities 
they  formed  so  many  petty  republics  acknow- 
ledging no  individual  head;  and,  although  com- 
bining occasionally  against  a  foreign  enemy,  con- 
nected by  no  common  tie  of  political  interest  or 
authority,  and  not  unfrequently  at  deadly  feud  with 
each  other.      From  time  to  time   some  Mahratta 

1  See  the  three  treaties  of  the  5th  Oct.  1812,  2iid  June  1813,  and  2l8t 
March  1814,  with  the  Rewa  R^ja,  in  the  collection  of  treaties  printed  by 
order  of  Parliament,  27th  May  1818 ;  also  in  a  collection  printed  for  tlie 
Proprietors,  Aug.  1824. — Administration  of  the  Marquis  of  Hastings. 
The  operations  are  related  in  Calcutta  Annual  Register  fur  1821,  p.  60. 


192  HISTORY  OF   BRITISH    INDIA. 

BOOK  I.  or  Mohammedan  chieftain,  or  individual  of  their 
own  body,  established  a  military  ascendancy  over 
1809.  them  to  a  limited  extent,  and  for  a  brief  interval ; 
and,  in  one  instance,  George  Thomas,  an  Irish  ad- 
venturer,^ rendered  himself  the  lord  over  a  part  of 
the  province,  with  Hansi,  its  chief  town,  for  his 
capital.  His  reign  was  of  short  duration;  but  its 
overthrow  m  as  not  effected  by  the  discontent  of  his 
subjects  or  the  rivalry  of  his  equals,  and  it  demanded 
the  overwhelming  force  of  Sindhia's  disciplined  bri- 
gades, commanded  by  General  Perron,  to  dispossess 
him,  Hariana  was  then  governed  by  Perron  in 
the  name  of  Sindhia,  and,  with  the  defeat  of  his 
troops,  passed  over  to  the  British.  The  Govern- 
ment of  the  day,  unwilling  to  retain  the  conquest, 


'  George  Thomas  arrived  iu  India  as  a  sailor  about  1781.  At  Madras 
he  deserted,  and  entered  into  the  service  of  some  of  the  southern  Poligars  ; 
thence  he  made  his  way  through  the  heart  of  India,  and  reached  Delhi  in 
1787 :  he  there  received  a  commission  in  the  brigade  of  Begum  Sumroo, 
and  rose  to  high  favour ;  but,  being  supplanted  in  the  Begum*s  good  graces 
by  some  other  adventurer,  he  quitted  her  service  in  1792,  and  joined  Apa 
Khande  Rao,  one  of  Sindhia*s  discarded  captains,  who  was  endeavouring 
to  form  an  independent  state  in  the  country  west  of  Delhi.  He  succeeded 
in  his  project,  but,  dying  in  1797,  his  power  fell  to  pieces,  and  George 
Thomas,  thrown  on  his  own  resources,  determined  to  conquer  Hariana  for 
himself.  He  succeeded  so  far  as  to  make  himself  ruler  of  a  petty  prin- 
cipality, extending  about  100  miles  from  N.  to  S.  and  in  its  broadest  part 
about  75  miles  from  E.  to  W.,  comprehending  900  villages  and  several 
small  towns.  Hansi,  which  Thomas  found  in  ruins,  was  restored  and  for- 
tified by  him,  and,  becoming  his  capital,  was  soon  tenanted  by  between 
five  and  six  thousand  inhabitants.  George  Thomas  was  Raja  of  Hansi 
for  four  years,  and  had  little  to  fear  from  any  of  his  neighbours,  until  Sind- 
hia*s  authority  extended  to  Delhi,  and  introduced  a  power  far  superior  to 
that  of  the  European  potentate.  Thomas  was  besieged  in  Hansi  by  Du 
Perron  with  a  strong  and  well-organised  force,  and  surrendered  on  condi- 
tion of  being  conveyed  to  a  British  station.  The  stipulation  was  observed, 
and  he  was  conducted  to  the  British  frontier  in  January  1802.  He  thence 
proceeded  towards  Calcutta,  with  the  purpose  of  returning  to  his  native 
land,  but  was  taken  ill,  and  died  at  Berhampore  in  August.  His  career  is 
a  striking  illustration  of  the  distracted  state  of  a  country  in  which  a  com- 
mon sailor,  with  no  other  aid  than  European  energy,  personal  strength, 
and  intrepid  resolution,  could  raise  himself  even  to  ephemeral  sovereignty. 
— See  Life  of  George  Thomas,  by  Colonel  Francklin. 


SUBMISSION    OF   THE    VILLAGES.  193 

transferred  it  to  several  native  chiefs  in  succession ;  book  i. 
but  all  found  it  impossible  to  establish  their  power  ^^^^^^^i^ 


without  the  assistance  of  British  troops,  and  speedily  ]809. 
resigned  the  unprofitable  boon.  The  last  of  these, 
Abd-ul-samad  Khan,  a  military  leader  of  repute, 
who  had  joined  Lord  Lake  early  in  the  Mahratta 
war,  and  who  had  latterly  received  Hariana  in  recom- 
pense of  his  services,  found  himself  compelled  to 
follow  the  example  of  his  predecessors,  and  the  pro- 
vince was  thrown  again  upon  the  hands  of  the  British 
Government.  As  Hariana  was  conterminous  with  the 
districts  of  Delhi  under  British  administration,  the 
danger  arising  from  the  predatory  and  unrestrained 
habits  of  its  population  was  not  to  be  disregarded, 
and  it  was  determined  to  provide  against  the 
evil  by  midertaking  the  immediate  regulation  of  the 
country,  and  bringing  the  people  under  the  autho- 
rity of  British  functionaries.  With  this  design  the 
Honourable  Mr.  Gardner,  assistant  to  the  Resi- 
dent at  Delhi,  proceeded  with  a  strong  escort  into 
the  province.  Little  diflSculty  attended  his  pro- 
ceedings: most  of  the  head-men  of  the  villages 
obeyed  his  summons,  repaired  to  his  camp,  pro- 
fessed allegiance,  promised  the  regular  payment 
of  a  stipulated  revenue,  and  engaged  to  desist  from 
intestine  broils  and  from  the  plunder  of  travellers 
and  merchants.  Whatever  may  have  been  their 
sincerity,  the  prompt  display,  in  two  instances,  of 
the  determination  of  the  Government  to  suffer  no 
infringement  of  the  compact  awed  them  into  the 
observance  of  their  engagements.  The  people  of 
Baliali,  a  large  village  of  Jats,  who  professed  Mo- 
hammedanism, having  robbed  some  traders  almost 
VOL.  I.  o 


194  HisrroBY  of  British  india. 


BOOK  I.  in  sight  of  the  Commissioner's  camp,  a  military 
^^'''  '^'  detachment  was  sent  against  them.  They  fled  into 
1809.  the  adjacent  country  of  Bikaner,  and  their  village 
was  destroyed.  A  more  resolute  resistance  was  en- 
countered at  another  large  village  or  town,  that  of 
Bhawani.  The  inhabitants  of  this  place,  notorious 
for  the  audacity  of  their  depredations,  carried  off  the 
camels  and  baggage  of  a  party  of  Sipahis  on  their 
march  to  camp,  and  fired  upon  them  as  they  ap- 
proached the  town.  Immediate  measures  were 
taken  to  punish  the  aggressors.  A  force  of  four 
battalions  of  native  infantry,  one  regiment  of 
cavalry,  a  corps  of  irregular  horse,  with  a  train  of 
artillery,  commanded  by  Colonel  Ball,^  marched 
against  Bhawani,  and  appeared  before  it  on  the 
27th  August :  batteries  were  opened,  and  the  walls 
were  breached  by  noon  of  the  29th.  An  assault 
was  made  in  two  columns :  the  right  was  met  by  a 
sortie  of  the  inhabitants,  who  fought  with  courage, 
but  were  driven  back  and  followed  into  the  fort; 
the  left  column  also  forced  its  way  into  the  town, 
and,  after  an  obstinate  conflict,  in  which  severe  loss 
was  inflicted  on  the  enemy,  the  place  was  carried.* 
The  transaction  was  productive  of  the  good  effects 
expected  from  it.  The  lawless  and  turbulent  tribes 
of  Hariana  were  made  to  feel  that  they  had  now  a 
master.     Submitting  to  a  yoke  which  they  could 

1  Ist  battn.  of  the  9th,  2nd  of  the  18th,  Ist  of  the  22nd,  and  2nd  of  the 
23rd,  besides  some  companies  of  the  Ist  of  the  10th,  and  2nd  of  the  24th, 
with  the  6th  regt.  N.  Cavalry,  and  Skinner  s  horse. 

'  One  officer,  Lieut.  O'Brien  of  the  1st  batt.  of  tlie  22nd,  was  killed,  six 
were  wounded  ;  eighteen  privates  were  killed,  and  one  hundred  and  fourteen 
wounded.  The  loss  of  the  townsfolk  was  officially  estimated  at  more  than 
a  thousand. —  Asiatic  Annual  Reg^ter,  vol.  xi. ;  History,  p.  7 ;  Chronicle, 
p.  67. 


VIEWS   OF   RANJIT   SING.  195 

not  shake  off,  they  became  in  due  time  an  orderly  book  i. 
and  obedient  people,  and,  devoting  themselves  to  ^^^^'  ^^' 


agricultural  occupations,  rendered  the  province  one     isos. 
of  the  most  valuable  districts  subject  to  the  British 
Government. 

A  still  more  important  departure  from  the  prin- 
ciple of  non-interference  occurred  in  the  same  direc- 
tion, and  occasioned  an  extension  of  British  supre- 
macy to  the  frontier  which  still  forms  its  north-west- 
em  boundary, — the  left  bank  of  the  Setlej.  The 
success  with  which  the  Sikh  chief,  Ranjit  Sing,  had 
wrought  his  o^vn  aggrandisement  at  the  expense  of 
all  his  competitors  on  the  west  of  the  Setlej,  en- 
couraged him  to  pursue  the  same  line  of  policy 
with  respect  to  the  Rajas  on  the  east  of  the  river, 
and  to  attempt  to  spread  his  influence  and  power 
across  it  to  the  Jumna.  He  was  led  to  believe  that 
he  would  not  be  obstructed  in  the  execution  of  this 
project  by  the  British;  as,  although  the  Government 
had  accepted  the  proffered  submission  of  the  Sikh 
Rajas,  it  had  required  from  them  no  positive  stipu- 
lation of  tribute  or  allegiance,  and  had  contracted 
no  formal  engagement  to  protect  them.  He  went 
to  work,  however,  with  his  usual  caution.  A  vio- 
lent quarrel  having  taken  place  between  the  Rajas 
of  Patiala  and  Naba,  the  latter  called  Ranjit  Sing 
to  his  assistance.  The  call  was  promptly  answered ; 
and  in  October,  1806,  that  chief  crossed  the  Setlej 
with  a  strong  body  of  horse,  and  dictated  terms  of 
reconciliation  to  the  contending  parties.  Some  ap- 
prehension of  his  ulterior  objects  was  entertained  at 
Delhi ;  but  a  letter  was  received  from  him  express- 
ing his  profound   respect  for  the  British  Govern- 


o  2 


196  HISTORY   OF    BRITISH    INDIA. 


BOOK  I.  ment,  and  no  notice  was  taken  of  his  proceedings. 

CHAP      IV 

'  The  result  of  this  experiment  confirmed  him  in  the 
1808.  belief  that  he  had  no  opposition  to  dread  from  his 
more  powerful  neighbours  in  establishing  his  autho- 
rity over  the  states  between  the  Sctky  and  Jumna ; 
but,  having  other  designs  in  view,  or  not  considering 
matters  sufficiently  mature  for  the  consummation  of 
his  purpose,  Ranjit  Sing  departed,  and  re-crossed  the 
Setlej  in  the  beginning  of  1807. 

In  the  course  of  that  year  the  wife  of  the  Patiala 
Raja,  who  was  at  variance  with  her  husband  on  ac- 
count of  her  insisting  upon  an  assignment  of  re- 
venue for  the  use  of  her  son,  yet  a  minor,  had 
recourse  to  Ranjit  Sing,  and  he  again  crossed  the 
Setlej  into  the  Doab.  The  Sikh  chiefs  in  this 
quarter  now  began  to  be  seriously  alarmed,  and 
made  an  earnest  application  to  the  Resident  at 
Delhi  to  defend  them  against  the  growing  ambition 
of  their  countryman ;  protesting  that  they  had  ever 
considered  themselves  to  be  the  subjects  of  the 
Company,  and  entitled  to  its  protection.  Before 
any  reply  could  be  received  from  Calcutta,  the  Raja 
and  Rani  had  settled  their  dispute  amicably,  and 
had  purchased  the  withdrawal  of  Ranjit  by  a  valu- 
able diamond  necklace  and  a  celebrated  brass  gun  ; 
but,  before  leaving  the  country,  he  levied  contribu- 
tions on  some  other  petty  Rajas,  or  seized  upon  -their 
forts  and  confiscated  their  lands.  His  return  was 
probably  hastened  by  a  knowledge  of  the  negocia- 
tions  going  on  at  Delhi,  and  by  a  report,  which  the 
chiefs  industriously  circulated,  that  their  application 
had  been  favourably  considered.  In  order  to  dis- 
cover the  truth  of  this  assertion,  Ranjit  addressed  a 


MISSION   TO    LAHORE.  197 

letter  to  the  Governor-General,  statiiig  that  he  book  i. 
had  learned  that  troops  were  assembling  on  the  ^^^^^^^ 
Jumna,  and  requesting  to  be  informed  of  the  cause.  I8O8. 
He  declared  his  wish  to  continue  on  friendly  terms, 
but  ventured  to  add,  "  The  country  on  this  side  of 
the  Jumna,  except  the  stations  occupied  by  the  Eng- 
lish, is  subject  to  my  authority.  Let  it  remain  so.*' 
Although  Lord  Minto  was  resolved  to  resist  the 
pretensions  of  Ranjit  Sing  to  the  exercise  of  any 
authority  on  the  right  bank  of  the  Jumna,  yet  the 
policy  of  securing  his  concurrence  in  the  scheme  of 
defensive  alliance,  which  it  was  sought  to  frame 
against  the  hostile  designs  upon  India  avowed  by  the 
Emperor  Napoleon,  suspended  the  announcement  of 
the  Governor-General's  sentiments;  and  Ranjit  w^as 
referred  for  a  rei)ly  to  Mr.  (afterwards  Sir  Charles) 
Metcalfe,  whom  it  had  been  determined  to  send  on 
a  friendly  mission  to  the  Sikh  ruler.  The  envoy 
set  out  from  Delhi  in  August  1808,  and,  crossing 
the  Setlej  on  the  1st  of  September,  reached  the 
camp  of  Ranjit,  at  Kasur,  on  the  11th:  his  recep- 
tion was  at  first  courteous  and  cordial ;  but  in  a  few 
days  a  different  feeling  was  displayed,  and  much 
dissatisfaction  was  expressed  that  the  British  Go- 
vernment should  hesitate  to  acknowledge  the  Jumna 
to  be  the  boundary  between  the  two  states.  Still 
further  to  evince  his  displeasure,  and  to  induce  the 
Rajas  on  the  east  of  the  Setlej  to  believe  that  the 
British  envoy  acquiesced  in  his  designs,  Ranjit  broke 
up  his  camp,  crossed  the  river  with  the  envoy  in  his 
train,  dispossessed  the  chief  to  whom  it  belonged  of 
the  fort  of  Farid  Koth,  seized  upon  Ambala,  and 
exacted  tribute  from   the   Rajas  of  Shahabad  and 


198  HISTORY   OF   BRITISH   INDIA. 

BOOK  I.  Thanesar.  As  Sir  C.  Metcalfe  had  refused  to  follow 
^^^^'  '^'  his  extended  march  into  the  Doab,  Ranjit  retraced 
1808.  his  steps,  and  returned  to  Amritsar,  where  the  mission 
awaited  him.  The  circumstances  which  had  influ- 
enced the  Govemor-General's  external  policy  had 
now  in  some  degree  ceased,  and  it  was  no  longer 
necessary  to  temporise  with  the  Raja  of  Lahore. 
Ranjit  was  consequently  apprised  that  the  Rajas 
between  the  two  rivers  were  under  British  protec- 
tion ;  that  he  might  retain  such  acquisitions  as  he 
had  made  on  this  side  of  the  Setlej  previously  to 
the  existence  of  the  relations  which  had  been 
formed  with  the  protected  states,  but  that  he 
must  restore  all  that  had  been  made  subsequently ; 
and  that,  in  order  to  guard  against  any  future  en- 
croachments, a  military  post  would  be  established 
on  the  left  bank  of  the  river.  The  Raja  strenuously 
expostulated  against  this  declaration ;  arguing,  that 
ho  had  repeatedly  exercised  acts  of  authority  in  the 
Doab  of  the  Setlej  and  Jumna,  without  any  objection 
having  been  started  by  the  British  Government;  that 
appeals  made  to  the  British  Resident  at  Delhi  by 
refractory  chiefs  had,  to  his  certain  knowledge, 
received  no  countenance  or  encouragement;  that 
blood  had  been  shed,  and  treasure  expended,  in 
asserting  a  supremacy  which  he  claimed  as  his  right; 
and  that  it  was  as  unfriendly  as  it  was  inconsistent 
to  prevent  his  reaping  the  fruit  of  exertions  which 
had  been  suffered  to  come  to  maturity  in  seeming 
acquiescence.  He,  therefore,  requested  a  renewed 
consideration  of  the  subject ;  and  in  the  mean  time 
he  assembled  his  troops,  and  appeared  resolved  to 
maintain  his  pretensions  by  arms. 


AFFRAY  NEAR   AMRTTSAR.  199 

Having  come  to  the  determination  that  the  Setlej  book  i. 
should  be  the  limit  of  Ranjit  Sing's  acquisitions  in  ___!jll 


that  direction,  with  the  exceptions  above  intimated,  I809. 
the  British  Government  immediately  commanded 
the  advance  of  a  sufficient  body  of  troops  to  uphold 
their  resolution.  A  detachment  under  Colonel  Och- 
terlony  crossed  the  Jumna  in  the  middle  of  Janu- 
ary, and  proceeded  to  Ludiana,  whilst  an  army  of 
reserve  under  the  command  of  Major-General  St. 
Leger  was  prepared  to  support  the  advance,  should 
protracted  operations  become  necessary.  The  troops 
of  Ranjit  Sing  fell  back  as  Colonel  Ochterlony's 
detachment  approached  ;  and  an  incident  took  place, 
under  the  observation  of  the  Raja,  which  might 
have  suggested  to  him  their  unfitness  to  encounter 
disciplined  battalions. 

During  the  stay  of  the  British  embassy  in  the 
vicinity  of  Amritsar  the  anniversary  of  the  Mohar- 
ram  occurred,  and  the  deaths  of  Ali  and  his  sons, 
Hasan  and  Hosain,  were  commemorated  by  the  Shia 
Mohammedans  of  the  envoy  s  escort  with  the  pub- 
lic demonstrations  of  passionate  sorrow  and  religious 
fervour  usual  on  the  occasion.  Tlie  celebration  gave 
great  offence  to  the  Sikh  population  of  Amritsar, 
which  is  the  site  of  their  most  sacred  temple ;  and 
especially  to  the  Akalis,  a  set  of  Sikh  fanatics  who 
combine  a  religious  and  martial  character.  Headed 
by  a  party  of  these  men,  a  numerous  and  infuriated 
mob  attacked  the  envoy'^s  camp :  they  were  repulsed 
by  the  steadiness  of  the  escort,  although  it  consisted 
of  but  two  companies  of  native  infantry  and  sixteen 
troopers ;  but  not  until  several  of  the  assailants  were 
killed,  and   many   of  the   Sipahis  were  wounded. 


200  HISTORY    OF    BRITISH   INDIA. 


BOOK  I.  Ranjit  Sing  came  up  at  the  close  of  the  affray,  and 

^JJII^^^^  assisted  in  quelling  a  tumult  which  it  was  strongly 

1809.     suspected  he  had  in  some  degree  fomented.     Tlie 

camp  was  removed  to  a  greater  distance  from  the 

town,  and  no  further  molestation  was  experienced. 

The  advance  of  the  troops  to  the  Setlej,  and  the 
experience  of  their  quality  which  the  affair  at  Am- 
ritsar  afforded  him,  dissipated  Ranjit  Sing's  dreams 
of  conquest,  and  rendered  him  anxious  to  secure  the 
forbearance  and  friendship  of  the  British  Govern- 
ment. Accordingly,  on  the  25th  April,  a  treaty  was 
concluded  which  stipulated  that  peri)etual  friendship 
should  subsist  between  the  British  Government  and 
the  state  of  Lahore ;  that  the  former  should  have 
no  concern  with  the  territories  and  subjects  of  the 
Raja  to  the  northward  of  the  Setlej  ;  that  the  Raja 
should  never  maintain  on  the  left  bank  of  the  river 
more  troops  than  were  necessary  for  the  internal 
duties  of  the  territory  acknowledged  to  belong  to 
him,  nor  commit  nor  suffer  anv  encroachment  on 
the  possessions  or  rights  of  the  chiefs  in  its  vicinity  ; 
and  that  the  treaty  should  be  null  and  void  in  the 
event  of  a  violation  of  either  of  the  preceding  arti- 
cles. Thus  terminated  all  unfriendly  discussions 
with  the  Sikh  chieftain.^  That  he  was  deeply  mor- 
tified by  the  result  cannot  be  doubted ;  and  there 
was  reason  to  believe,  that,  if  he  could  have  relied 
upon  effective  support  from  Hindustan,  he  would 
not  have  submitted  so  peaceably  to  such  a  diminu- 
tion of  his  power  and  disappointment  of  his  hopes.* 

'  MS.  Records  ;  Prinsep's  Life  of  Runjeet  Singh,  Calcutta,  1834,  p.  04. 

•  There  was  credible  evidence,  that,  during  these  discussions,  a  commu- 
nication was  kept  up  between  the  Raja  and  Sindhia,  and  unavowed  agents 
were  resident  on  either  part  at  Gwalior  and  Lahore:  a  correspondence 


ALLIANCE  WITH    RANJIT   SING.  201 

Nor  did  he  for  some  time  lay  aside  his  distrust  of  book  i. 
the  ulterior  designs  of  his  European  neighbour.    An  ^"^^'  '^- 
exaggerated  notion  of  his  resources,  and  suspicion  of     1809. 
his  ambitious  projects,  continued  also  for  a  consider-  ^ 

able  period  to  regulate  the  policy  of  the  British  Go- 
vernment towards  him,  and  to  suspend  the  establish- 
ment of  a  cordial  intercourse  almost  to  the  term  of 
the  Raja's  existence.  During  the  last  five  years  of 
his  life,  his  confidence  in  British  faith,  and  reliance 
on  the  principles  of  non-interference  which  had  been 
originally  professed,  were  fully  confirmed  by  the 
cautious  abstinence  which  had  uniformly  left  him 
at  liberty  to  extend  his  power  over  the  independent 
principalities  and  states  north  and  west  of  the  Pun- 
jab without  any  interposition  or  even  remark.* 

The  seasonable  succour  thus  given  to  the  petty 
Sikh  chiefs  between  the  Setlej  and  the  Jumna^  put 
an  end   to  the   vague  character  of  the  connexion 

with  Saiji  Rao  Gbatka  was  also  detected.  Raiijit*s  sagacity,  however, 
8ooa  discovered  the  weakness  to  which  the  Mahrattas  had  been  reduced. — 
MS.  Records. 

*  Travellers  in  Raujit*s  territories  complain,  even  to  a  late  period,  of  ob- 
structions to  their  proceedings  thrown  in  their  way  by  his  subordinate  func- 
tionaries  and  officers,  and  ascribe  them  to  private  instructions  issued  by 
the  Raja,  whilst  ostensibly  he  gave  them  permission  to  go  wherever  they 
wished,  and  institute  whatever  inquiries  they  pleased.  This  might  have 
been  the  case  with  some  of  the  first  visitors  of  the  Punjab ;  but,  latterly, 
whatever  impediments  were  experienced  were  most  probably  ascribable  to 
the  ignorance  or  impertinence  of  the  subordinates.  —  See  the  travels  of 
Moorcroft,  Jacquemont,  Vigue,  &c. 

*  The  cliief  of  these  were  Saheb  Sing,  Raja  of  Patiala ;  Bhye  Lai  Sing, 
of  Kythal;  Jeswaut  Sing,  of  Naba ;  Bhag  Sing,  of  Jhind ;  Guru-dayal  Sing, 
of  Ladiia,  Jodh  Sing,  of  Kalasia;  Gopal  Sing,  of  Mauimajra;  Day  a  Run  war, 
Rani  of  Ambala ;  Bhanga  Sing,  Raja  of  Thanesar ;  Sodha  Sing,  of  Muha- 
wat;  Jawahir  Sing,  of  Bharup.  The  Patiala  Raja  had  a  revenue  of  six 
lakhs  of  rupees,  and  a  force  of  2000  horse  and  1000  foot.  The  revenues 
of  the  other  chiefs  varied  from  one  to  two  lakhs,  and  their  troops  from  500 
to  1000  horse.  There  were  about  twenty  others  of  still  inferior  importance, 
but  all  claiming  independent  authority  over  their  vassals  ;  presenting  in  fact 
a  state  of  things  very  similar  to  Uiat  of  the  early  feudal  anarchy  of 
Europe. —  MS.  Records. 


202  HISTORY   OF   BRITISH   INDIA. 


BOOK  I.  which  had  hitherto  united  them  with  the  British 
^^^^'  '^'  Government,  and  rendered  it  necessary  to  define  the 
1809.  reciprocal  relations  which  were  thenceforward  to 
subsist :  accordingly,  a  general  declaration  was  cir- 
culated to  them,  announcing  that  the  territories  of 
Sirhind  and  Maliia  had  been  taken  under  British 
protection  ;  that  it  was  not  the  intention  of  the  Go- 
vernment to  demand  tribute  from  the  chiefs,  but 
that  they  would  be  expected  to  furnish  every  facility 
in  their  power  to  the  movements  of  British  troops 
through  their  districts,  and  to  join  the  British  armies 
with  their  followers  whenever  called  upon.  The 
several  chiefs  were  permitted  to  exercise,  and  were 
guaranteed,  the  rights  and  authorities  which  they 
possessed  in  their  respective  territories;  but  sup- 
plies of  European  articles  for  troops,  and  horses 
for  cavalry  passing  through  them,  were  to  be  ex- 
empted from  transit  duties.  The  declaration  con- 
veying these  provisions  became  the  charter  of 
rights  to  which  the  Sikh  chiefs  have  been  accus- 
tomed to  refer  for  the  settlement  of  all  questions 
that  have  arisen  between  them  and  the  British 
Government  ;^  but  the  mutual  relations  of  supre- 
macy and  subjection,  appeals  from  the  inferior  to 
the  superior  in  disputes  amongst  themselves  or  in 
domestic  dissensions,  and  the  imperative  necessity  of 
maintaining  public  order  and  security,  speedily  multi- 
plied occasions  of  interposition,  and,  after  no  long 
interval,  compelled  the  British  Government  to  pro- 
claim the  right  and    the   resolution  to  interpose.' 

*  Life  of  Runjeet  Singh,  72. 

'A  public  proclamation  declaratory  of  the  right  and  determination  to 
interfere  between  the  different  Rajas  in  all  casefl  of  disputed  territory,  and 


PE0JECT8  OF  NAPOLEON.  203  ' 

The  regulation  of  successions  was  also  a  subject  book  i. 
which   from  the   first   demanded   the   intervention  ^^^^'  ^^' 


of  the  protecting  power  ;^  and  political  expedience     isos. 
has  dictated  the  enforcement  of  a  principle  recog- 
nised throughout  the  feudality  of  India,  the  appro- 
priation of  a  subject  territory  in  failure  of  lawful 
heirs  by  the  paramount  sovereign.^ 

There  is  no  satisfactory  proof  that  the  Emperor 
Napoleon  ever  seriously  contemplated  the  invasion 
of  India.  In  an  early  stage  of  his  career,  before 
his  path  to  greatness  was  distinctly  visible,  he  seems 
to  have  entertained  some  vague  and  wild  dream  of 
founding  for  himself  an  empire  in  the  East.^  The 
conquest  of  Egypt,  in  addition  to  the  purpose  of 
establishing  a  French  colony  in  that  country  which 
should  divert  the  stream  of  commerce  between 
India  and  Europe  from  the  Cape  of  Good  Hope  to 
the  Straits  of  Bab-al-mandal,  and  thus  annihilate 
one  of  the  sources  of  British  prosperity,  had,  ac- 
cording to   Napoleon,    for   one  of  its  objects,   the 

at  the  same  time  repeating  the  resolution  not  to  interfere  in  the  internal 
administration  of  justice  between  the  chiefs  and  their  subjects,  was  issued 
on  the  11th  August,  1811. — See  Report  of  Select  Committee,  House  of 
Commons,  1832  ;  Appendix  Political,  p.  560. 

^  In  1812,  the  Raja  of  Patiala,  having  rendered  himself  insupportable  to 
his  subjects  by  his  insane  oppression,  was  deposed  in  favour  of  his  son,  a 
minor,  under  the  regency  of  the  Rani,  by  the  British  Government.  The 
measure  was  obnoxious  to  some  of  the  Riga's  adherents  ;  and  one  of  them, 
an  Akali,  attacked  the  Agent,  Colonel  Ochterlony,  in  his  palanquin,  and 
severely  wounded  him. —  Life  of  Rui\jeet,  76. 

'  Commonly  to  the  exclusion  of  females,  except  in  a  few  families  where 
a  contrary  usage  has  prevailed.  Some  of  the  chiefships  have  so  lapsed,  the 
principal  of  which  are  Ambala  and  Thanesar. —  Bengal  and  Agra  Guide, 
1841,  vol.  ii.  part  2,  p.  268.  And,  still  more  recently,  Khytal. —  Calcutta 
Journals,  April,  1843. 

'  According  to  his  own  assertion,  if  he  had  taken  St.  Jean  d'Acre,  he 
would  have  brought  about  a  revolution  in  the  East,  would  have  reached 
Constantinople  and  the  Indies,  and  changed  the  destinies  of  the  world. 
— Las  Cases'  Journal,  i.  206;  Scott's  Life  of  Napoleon,  ii.  104,  111. 


204  HISTORY    OF    BRITISH    INDIA. 

BOOK  I.  formation  of  a  basis  from  which  to  accomplish  the 

^||^^[J^  invasion  of  India ;  but  it  is  scarcely  possible  to  be- 

1808.     lieve  that  he  could  ever  have  gravely  projected  so 

impossible  a  scheme  as  that  of  sending  sixty  thou- 

*  sand  troops  upon  camels  across  the  deserts  of  Arabia, 

*  and  barren  wastes  of  Baluchistan,  to  the  banks  of 
the   Indus.*      The  subsequent   mission  of  General 

i  Gardanne  to  Persia,  and  the  influence  acquired  at 

;  Tehran,   regarded    Russia   more   immediately   than 

]  India,  and   were  suggested    by  the  community  of 

J  political  interests,  as  Persia  and  France  were  simul- 

*  taneously  engaged  in  hostilities  with  the  former 
/  empire.  Such,  however,  was  the  impression  pro- 
J  duced  by  these  demonstrations,  and  such  the  dread 

of  Napoleon's  power  and  resources,  that  a  French 
I  invasion  of  India  was  reckoned  amongst  the  possi- 

ble contingencies  of  the  time,  and  one  against  which 
precaution   was   indispensable.     In   this  conviction, 
»  the  Governor-General  of  India  deemed  it  advisable 

to  endeavour  to  establish  amicable  relations  with  the 
f  frontier  princii)alities  of  the  Punjab  and   Afghau- 

[  istan,  and  to  renew  a  friendly  understanding  with 

,  the  king  of  Persia.     The  mission  to   Ranjit  Sing, 

^  *  L  Expedition  d  Egypte  avoit  trois  buts :  ^tahlir  sur  le  Nil  une  colonic 

;^  Franc^oise ;  ouvrir  un  d^boiich^?  h.  nos  uiauufactures  dans  I'Afrique,  TArabie, 

>  et  la  Syrie  ;  partir  d'Egypte  comme  d'une  place  d'armes  pour  porter  une 

*  arm^e  de  60,000  hommes  sur  Tlndus  soulever  les  Marattes  et  lea  peuples 
J  oppriro^s :  60,000  boninies,  moiti^  Europ^ens,  moiti^  recrues  des  cliuiats 
I  brulants  de  T^^quator  et  du  tropique,  transport's  par  10,000  cbevaux  et 
;  50,000  cbameaux,  portant  avec  eux  des  vivres  pour  cinquante  ou  soissante 

jours,   de   Teau   pour  cinq  ou  six  jours,  et  uu  train  d'artillerie  de  150 
.  bouches  k  feu  de  campague,  avec  double  approvisionnement,  arriveraient 

en  quatre  niois  sur  I'lndus.     L'oc'an  a  cess'  d'etre  uu  obstacle  depuis 
qu*on  a  des  vaisseaux,  le  d'sert  cesse  d'en  ^tre  un  pour  une  arm'e  qui  a 
en  abondauce  des  cbameaux  et  des  dromedaires. — INI'nioires  de  St.  H'- 
!<  l^ue,  ii.  214.     Scarcely  lebS  insane  was  his  speculation  of  invading  India 

by  sea,  and  sending  roun«l  ti>e  Cape  a  forct*  of  sixteen  thousand  troops  un- 
der convoy  of  thirty-two  bhips  of  the  line. —  Las  Cases'  Journal,  ii.  248. 


EMBASSY   TO    KABUL.  205 

which  originated  in  this  policy,  has  been  adverted  book  i. 
to,  and  we  have  now  to  notice  the  measures  adopted         ' 
with  respect  to  the  two  other  states.  isos. 

The  political  condition  of  Afghanistan  was  almost 
wholly  unknown  to  the  Government  of  Bengal.    No 
English  traveller  had  crossed  the  Indus  ^  since  Foster; 
and  his  journey  was  performed  under  circumstances 
of  personal   disguise  and   hazard,  which    restricted 
him   to   hasty  and    superficial   observation.     Ijittle 
information  was  to  be  gathered  from  his  narrative. 
It  was  known  from  original  authorities,  that,  of  the 
country  occupied  by  the  Afghan  tribes,  the  eastern 
portion,   including   Kabul   and    Ghazni,    had    been 
usually  dependent  uj)on  Delhi ;    and   the  western, 
comprising  Kandahar  and  Herat,  ordinarily  subject 
to  Persia.      Upon  the  murder  of  Nadir  Shah,  king 
of  Persia,    Ahmed  Shah,    of  the    Durani  tribe  of 
Afghans,  a  leader  of  distinction  in  the  Persian  army, 
took  advantage  of  the  distracted  condition  of  both 
India  and  Persia  to  found  a  kingdom,  independent 
of  either,  extending  from  the  Indus  to  Herat,  and 
ultimately  including  parts  of  Baluchistan  and  Sindh. 
Ahmed  Shah  was  succeeded  by  his  son,  Timur  Shah, 
who  enjoyed  a  long  and  tranquil  reign  under  the 
shadow  of  his  father's  fame.     Upon  his  death  the 
Durani  monarchy  speedily  fell  to  pieces.     He   left 
a  number  of  sons  necessarily  competitors  for  the 
sovereignty.*     Zeman  Shah,  although  not  the  eldest 

'  Mr.  Foster,  a  member  of  the  Civil  service  of  Bengal,  returned  from 
India  to  England,  through  the  Punjab,  Afghanistan,  and  Persia  :  he  tra- 
Telled  on  foot  in  the  character  of  a  pauper  and  garb  of  an  Asiatic  ;  and, 
although  he  communicates  some  novel  information,  yet  his  notices  of  the 
Afghans,  amongst  whom  he  was  in  much  danger,  are  unavoidably  meagre. 
—See  his  Travels. 

*  They  were  more  than  thirty.     Humayun,  the  eldest,  after  a  feeble 


206  HISTORY   OP   BRITISH   INDIA. 

BOOK  I.  of  these,  made  good  his  pretensions  with  the  aid 
^^^^[_^  and  support  of  his  younger  brother,  Shuja-al-mulk, 
1808.     and  retained  a  precarious  occupancy  of  the  throne 
for  seven  years.     The  injustice  and  insolence  of  his 
favourite  Vizir  provoked  a  conspiracy  against  him 
among  the  principal  nobles  of  his  court :    it  was 
detected ;  and  one  of  the  conspirators,  Sirafraz  Khan, 
chief  of  the  Barikzei  clan,  to  which  Shah  Zeman 
had  been  mainly  indebted  for  his  own  elevation, 
was  put  to  death.     The  act  was  fatal  to  the  mon- 
arch ;    for  Fatih  Khan,  the  eldest  son  of  Sirafraz 
Khan,  immediately  devoted  his  abilities  and  influ- 
ence, which   were   considerable,   to  the  service  of 
Mahmud,  a  brother  and  rival  of  the  king.      Shah 
Zeman,  deserted  by  his  troops,  was  taken  prisoner, 
deposed,  and  blinded,  and  Mahmud  was  made  Shah. 
The  character   of  Mahmud  was   unequal  to  the 
exigencies  of  his  perilous  position.     Indolent  and 
timid,  he  transferred  the  cares  of  the  government 
to  his  ministers,  and,  as  long  as  his  own  ease  and 
enjoyment   were    provided    for,    was   wholly   indif- 
ferent to  the  prosperity  of  his  kingdom.     By  his 
injudicious  partiality  to  his  Persian  guards,  and  the 
unbridled  licence  in  which  he  suffered  them  to  in- 
dulge, he  offended  both  the  religious  prejudices  and 
the  national  feelings  of  his  countrymen,  and  pro- 
voked them  to  insurrection.  ^      Shuja-al-mulk  was 

effort  to  maintain  Lis  right,  was  taken  by  Zeman  Shah,  blinded,  and  died 
in  captivity.  Zeman  Shah,  Mahmud,  and  Shuja-al-mulk,  in  tlieir  turns 
held  temporary  sway,  and  perished.  Firoz-ad  din  for  some  time  occupied 
Herat,  but  was  dispossessed,  and  fled  to  Persia,  where  he  died.  Shah 
Abbas,  who  was  set  up  as  king  for  a  short  time,  also  died  in  exile.  These 
were  the  only  members  of  the  family  who  acquired  notoriety. 

'  The  Gholam   Shiihis,   or  Kazal-bashis,   the  king*s  Persian  guards, 
were  obnoxious  to  the  Afghans,  not  only  from  their  insolence  and  licen- 


BEItiN   OF   SHAH    SHUJA.  207 


called  to  head  the  insurgents ;  and,  fortune  abandon-  book  i. 
ing  Mahmud,  his  adherents  were  defeated,  and  he  ^'^^^'  '^' 
himself  was  taken  prisoner.      Shuja  ascended  the     I8O8. 
throne  :  a  feeling  of  fraternal  affection  induced  him 
to  refrain  from  inflicting  upon  Mahmud  the  usual 
disqualification  for  sovereignty,   loss  of  sight ;    and 
this  act  of  clemency,  which  was  so  unusual  in  Afghan 
policy,  proved  ultimately  his  own  destruction. 

During  the  five  succeeding  years  Shah  Shuja 
was  nominal  monarch  of  Afghanistan;  but  his  au- 
thority and  life  were  repeatedly  endangered  by  the 
attempts  of  one  or  other  of  his,  brothers  to  supplant 
him,  and  by  the  aid  which  they  received  from  the 
turbulent  and  factious  nobles  of  his  court,  especi- 
ally from  the  powerful  family  of  which  Fatih  Khan 
was  the  head.^  Towards  the  close  of  this  period 
Mahmud  escaped  from  confinement  and  fled  to 
his  son  Kamran,  who  had  been  able,  during  his 
father's  detention,  to  maintain  himself  at  liberty 
on  the  western  frontier  of  Afghanistan.  Although 
joined  by  the  Barakzei  chief,  the  confederates  were 
defeated  by  Shah  Shuja,  and  his  power  seemed  to 
be  finally  established  on  a  secure  foundation.*     In- 

tiousness,  but  their  professions  of  the  Shia  form  of  Mohammedanism, 
which  considers  All  as  the  rightful  successor  of  Mohammed,  and  de- 
nounces imprecations  on  the  three  first  Khalifs^  Abu-bekr,  Omar,  and  Oth- 
man,  as  usurpers.  The  Afghans  are  bigoted  Sunis,  and  assert  with  equal 
zeal  the  lawfulness  of  the  succession.  An  insurrection  in  Kabul,  directed 
in  the  first  instance  against  the  Kazal-bashis,  and  ultimately  against 
Mahmud  as  their  patron,  prepared  the  way  for  his  deposal. — Elphinstone's 
Kabul,  8vo.,  vol.  ii.  334. 

'  The  sons  of  Sirafraz  Khan,  the  hereditary  chiefs  of  the  Barakzei  clan, 
were  twenty-two  in  number  :  one  of  them,  Dost  Mohammed,  the  chief  who 
has  of  late  years  acquired  such  extensive  European  celebrity,  was  then 
one  of  the  youngest  of  the  brethren. 

'  In  August  1808,  the  Resident  at  Delhi  reported,  that,  according  to  the 
latest  advices  from  Afghanistan,  the  authority  of  Shah  Shuja  was  fully 
established. — MS.  Records. 


208  HISTORY    OP    BRITISH    INDIA. 

BOOK  I.  stead,  however,  of  following  up  his  success,  and 
^**^^'  '^'  extinguishing  the  last  sparks  of  rebellion  by  the 
1809.  expulsion  or  capture  of  Mahmud,  he  returned  to 
enjoy  his  triumph  at  Peshawar,  and  with  singular  im- 
prudence dispatched  the  principal  part  of  his  army 
to  recover  the  province  of  Kashmir  from  the  chief 
by  whom  the  province  was  governed,  and  who  was 
in  arms  against  his  sovereign.*  It  was  at  this  season 
that  the  mission  from  Bengal  arrived  at  Peshawar. 

The  embassy  to  Kabul  was  fitted  out  in  a  manner 
intended  to  impress  the  Afghans  with  an  exalted 
opinion  of  the  power  and  dignity  of  the  Company, 
and  was  intrusted  to  a  member  of  the  civil  service, 
Mr.  Elphinstone,  whose  conversancy  with  the  lan- 
guage and  manners  of  native  princes,  and  whose 
abilities,  judgment,  and  personal  character  ensured 
its  success,  as  far  as  the  state  of  affairs  permitted. 
]\fr.  Elphinstone  left  Delhi  on  the  13th  of  October ; 
and,  as  it  was  uncertain  whether  Ranjit  Sing  would 
assent  to  the  passage  of  the  mission  through  the 
Punjab,  the  route  followed  travei-sed  the  hitherto 
untrodden  wastes  of  Bikaner  and  Jesselmer  to  the 
frontiers  of  Bahawalpur,  then  a  dej)endency  of 
Kabul.  Proceeding  through  Multan,  the  Nawab  of 
which  was  also  at  that  time,  nominally  at  least,  a 
feudatory  of  the  Afghan  monarch,  the  mission  reach- 
ed the  Indus,  and  on  the  7th  of  .January  crossed 
the  river  at  Kaheri  ferry.  On  the  5th  of  March 
Mr.  Elphinstone  entered  Peshawar,  whither  Shah 
Shuja  had  recently  returned  from  Kandahar. 

*  For  the  latter  history  of  the  Afghans,  see  Elphinstone's  Embassy  to 
Kabul,  vol.  ii.  p.  279,  and  Conolly's  Overland  Journey  to  India ;  Afghan 
History,  ii.  233.     See  also  the  later  accounts  of  Burnes,  Vigne,  &c. 


NEGOCIATIONS   AT   PESHAWAR.  209 

Although  the  envoy  met  with  a  courteous  recep-  book  i. 
tion,  and  much  cordiality  prevailed  between  the  ^"^'''  '^' 
members  of  the  mission  and  the  principal  persons  I809. 
of  the  court,  yet  the  objects  of  the  embassy  were 
never  fiilly  comprehended,  nor  was  a  feeling  of  dis- 
trust towards  it  ever  entirely  effaced.  An  alliance 
to  resist  a  combined  invasion  of  the  French  and  Per- 
sians seemed  to  the  Afghans  to  be  a  needless  pre- 
caution, as  the  danger  was  avowedly  contingent  and 
remote,  and  as  it  was  one  with  wliich  they  esteemed 
themselves  competent  to  cope.  The  circumstances 
under  which  the  alliance  was  sought,  showed  that 
British  rather  than  Afghan  interests  were  at  stake, 
and  the  court  not  unreasonably  desired  to  know 
what  benefit  was  to  accrue  to  them  from  the  con- 
federacy. It  was  shrewdly  enough  argued  by  the 
diplomatists  of  Peshawar  that  they  could  not  come 
to  any  decision  upon  an  ex-parte  statement,  and 
that  in  justice  to  themselves  they  ought  to  hear 
what  an  ambassador  from  France  might  have  to 
urge  before  they  made  common  cause  with  either 
French  or  English.  To  a  treaty  of  defensive  and 
offensive  alliance  generally  they  professed  them- 
selves to  be  willing  to  accede,  as  such  an  alliance 
proposed  a  reciprocal  advantage ;  but  they  objected 
to  enter  into  engagements  intended  solely  for  the 
protection  of  British  India.  They  saw  clearly  that 
the  British  Government  had  a  point  to  carry  with 
the  court  of  Kabul  for  interests  of  its  own;  and, 
when  they  found  that  the  equivalent  demanded 
was  withheld,  they  concluded  that  some  ulterior 
and  unacknowledged  purpose  was  entertained. 
The  importance  of  the  object  which  Shah  Shuja 

VOL.  I.  P 


210  HISTORY    OF    BRITISH   INDIA. 

BOOK  I.  and  his  ministers  had  in  view — ^the  assistance  of 
CHAP.  IV.  ^Y^^  British — was  speedily  enhanced  by  the  course 
1809.  of  events.  The  troops  sent  to  Kashmir  were  so 
entirely  defeated  that  not  more  than  two  thousand 
men,  dismounted,  disarmed,  and  wholly  disorganised, 
escaped.  Mahmud  immediately  resumed  the  offen- 
sive, occupied  Kandahar  and  Kabul,  and  threatened 
Peshawar.  The  army  was  annihilated,  the  treasury 
was  empty  and  the  means  of  levying  any  consider- 
able force  were  entirely  deficient.  In  this  emer- 
gency, a  pecuniary  grant  was  urgently  solicited  from 
the  British  Government ;  and  such  was  the  state  of 
popular  indifference  with  regard  to  the  contending 
parties,  and  the  readiness  of  the  chiefs  to  sell  their 
services  to  the  highest  bidder,  that  a  compliance 
with  the  application  would  in  all  probability  have 
secured  the  ascendancy  of  Shah  Shuja,  and  have 
seated  him  firmly  and  permanently  in  his  domi- 
nions.* The  measure  was  warmly  advocated  by  the 
envoy ;  but  imhappily  for  the  Shah,  and  for  the  fate 
of  Afghanistan,  doomed  to  a  long  and  still  unter- 
minated  course  of  civil  dissension  and  domestic 
anarchy,  the  policy  of  the  British  Government  had 
undergone  a  change.  The  invasion  of  Spain  by 
Napoleon,  and  the  commencement  of  the  Penin- 
sular war,  had  indefinitely  suspended  the  execution 

'  The  people  of  the  towns  were  in  general  well-aifected  towards  Shah 
Shuja,  who  was  recommended  to  them  by  his  moderation  and  justice.  The 
Hill  tribes  were  indifferent,  and  followed  their  own  chiefs,  most  of  whom 
were  ready  to  sell  their  services  to  the  highest  bidder.  Ten  lakhs  of  ru- 
pees would  probably  have  turned  the  scale  decidedly  in  favour  of  Shah 
Shuja,  and  have  secured  him  a  permanent  ascendancy.  The  grant  of  pe- 
cuniary aid  was  advocated  by  Mr.  Elphinstone,  but  the  measure  was  not 
thought  necessary  by  Lord  Minto,  expressly  on  the  grounds  that  the 
change  of  affairs  in  Europe  had  indefinitely  suspended,  if  not  entirely 
defeated,  the  projects  of  France  against  British  India. —  MS.  Records. 


TREATY    WITH    KABUL.  211 

of  his   designs   ii])on    India,  and   had  made  it  no  book  i. 
longer  necessary  to  conciliate  the  good- will  or  pur-  ^^^^'  ^^'' 


chase  the  co-operation  of  the  native  states  upon  the  i809. 
frontier.  It  was  therefore  resolved  to  decline  the 
grant  of  pecuniary  aid  in  any  form  whatever,  and 
to  withdraw  with  unmeaning  professions  of  amity 
from  all  intercourse  with  the  Durani  sovereign. 
The  consequences  of  the  ambition  of  the  French 
Emperor  thus  vibrated  to  the  heart  of  Asia;  and 
his  declaration,  that  the  Bourbons  had  ceased  to 
reign,  precipitated  Shah  Shuja  from  his  throne, 
consigned  him  to  a  life  of  exile  and  to  a  disastrous 
death,  and  ultimately  led  to  the  infliction  of  an 
indelible  stain  upon  the  military  reputation  of  the 
British  in  the  East. 

Notwithstanding  the  disappointment  of  his  hopes 
of  realising  an  equivalent  advantage  from  the  pro- 
posed connexion,  Shah  Shuja  agreed  to  the  terms 
of  a  treaty  in  which  it  was  stipulated,  that  if  the 
French  and  Persians,  who  were  in  alliance,  should 
endeavour  to  cross  Afghanistan  on  their  way  to 
India,  the  Shah  should,  to  the  extent  of  his  power, 
oppose  their  march  ;  that  the  expense  attending 
such  opposition  should  be  defrayed  by  the  British 
Government ;  that  friendship  and  union  should  con- 
tinue for  ever  between  the  contracting  states ;  that 
they  should  in  no  manner  interfere  in  each  other's 
countries ;  and  that  the  King  of  Kabul  should  per- 
mit no  individual  of  the  French  nation  to  enter  his 
territories.*  The  treaty  was  sent  for  ratification  to 
Calcutta:  it  was  signed  there  on  the  17th  of  June; 
but,    before    it    could    be    returned    to   Peshawar, 

1  Coll.  of  Treaties,  p.  301. 

p  2 


212  HiarroBY  of  British  india. 


Brx>K  I.  neither  kiug  nor  ambassador  remained  to  exchange 
^"^'''  '^'  its  authentication.  Mr.  Elphinstone,  who  had  left 
1809.  the  city  on  the  14th  of  June  to  await  the  restoration 
of  tranquillity,  received  on  his  route  the  order  for  the 
return  of  the  mission^  and  proceeded  accordingly  to 
the  British  territory  by  way  of  the  Punjab.  Shah 
Shuja  marched  against  his  rival :  on  the  29th  of 
June  his  army,  whilst  yet  in  disorder  after  its  march 
through  the  mountains,  was  surprised  by  Fatih 
Khan,  and  completely  routed.  The  Shah  fled ;  and, 
although  he  made  several  attempts  to  recover  his 
authority,  was  uniformly  unsuccessful.  He  then 
became  the  guest,  and  finally  the  prisoner,  of 
Ranjit  Sing;  but  effected  his  escape  from  Lahore, 
and  found  an  asylum  for  many  years  at  Ludiana, 
under  the  protection  and  with  the  support  of  the 
Government  of  India.  At  thq  end  of  1832  he  left 
his  residence,  and,  proceeding  to  the  westward, 
raised  a  force  with  which  he  defeated  the  troops  of 
the  Amirs  of  Sindh,  and  compelled  them  to  pay  him 
a  ])ecuniary  contribution.  He  then  advanced  to 
Kandahar,  which  he  besieged.  The  Barakzei  chiefs 
of  that  city  having  been  joined  by  Dost  Mohammed 
issued  into  the  field,  and  an  action  took  place  which 
ended  to  the  advantage  of  the  Barakzeis.  The 
Shah  might,  however,  have  recovered  the  supremacy, 
as  many  of  the  principal  leaders  of  the  enemy 
were  prepared  to  desert  to  him;  but  he  retreated 
precii)itately  from  the  contest,  and  hastened  back  to 
his  place  of  refuge,  to  be  thence  conducted  once 
more  to  Afghanistan,*  under  more  propitious  aus- 

'  Parliamentary  Papers  relative  to  Shah  Shiya*8  expedition  into  Afghan- 
istan, l833-a4;  printed  20th  March,  1830. 


STATE   OF    SINDH.  213 

pices  than  had  ever  smiled  upon  his  former  efforts,  book  i. 
— the  avowed  co-operation  of  Ranjit  Sing  and  the 


Government  of  British  India.  The  auspices  were  1809. 
deceptive.  The  powerful  support  upon  which  he 
relied  crumbled  beneath  his  feet,  and  left  him 
helpless  and  alone  amidst  inexorable  foes  and 
treacherous  friends.  The  end  of  his  chequered 
career  followed  close  upon  his  abandonment;  and 
the  hand  of  an  assassin  terminated  the  life  of  a 
prince  whose  alliance  the  Government  of  India  had 
once  courted,  whose  expulsion  from  his  dominions 
it  had  pitied  and  whose  distress  it  had  relieved,  and 
whom,  as  fatally  for  him  as  for  itself,  it  at  last  vainly 
engaged  to  replace  upon  his  throne. 

The  country  of  Sindh  constitutes  the  most 
western  limit  of  India  along  the  southern  course 
of  the  Indus.  It  was  conquered  by  the  Moham- 
medans in  the  commencement  of  the  eighth  cen- 
tury, and  was  retained  as  a  dependency  of  Persia 
until  its  subjugation  by  Mahmud  of  Ghazni.  Upon 
the  downfall  of  his  dynasty,  the  Sumras,  a  race  of 
chiefs  of  Arab  extraction,  established  themselves  as 
independent  rulers  of  the  country,  until  they  were 
dispossessed  by  the  Sumas,  who  were  Hindus,  and 
who  professed  a  nominal  fealty  to  the  Patau  sove- 
reigns of  Delhi.  In  the  reign  of  Akber,  Sindh 
became  more  intimately  attached  to  the  Mogul  em- 
pire; but  the  government  of  the  province  was  usually 
intrusted  to  native  chiefs,  whose  degree  of  subordi- 
nation was  regulated  by  the  ability  of  the  court  of 
Delhi  to  compel  obedience.  Towards  the  close  of 
the  seventeenth  century,  the  Kaloras,  a  race  of  reli- 
gious teachers  who  pretended  to  derive  their  origin 


214  HISTORY    OF    BRITISH    INDIA. 


BOOK  I.  from  the  Abasside  Khalifs,  and  who  converted  their 
CHAP.  IV.  reputation  for  sanctity  into  an  engine  of  worldly 
1809.  aggrandisement,  had  become  possessed  of  extensive 
territory  in  Sindh,  and  usurped  an  ascendancy  in  its 
government,  which  was  legalised  in  the  reign  of 
Mohammed  Shah  of  Delhi  by  the  appointment  of 
Nur  Mohammed  Kalora  as  Subahdar  of  Tatta,  The 
vicegerent  of  Sindh  was  speedily  relieved  from  his 
dependence  upon  Delhi,  but  was  compelled  to  pay 
tribute  to  the  conqueror.  Nadir  Shah.  The  death  of 
that  prince  dissolved  the  connexion  with  Persia ;  but 
the  new  sovereign  of  Afghanistan  claimed  the  like 
supremacy  over  the  country,  and  Sindh  became, 
nominally  at  least,  subject  to  Kabul.  Although  con- 
firmed by  Ahmed  Shah,  the  son  and  successor  of  Nur 
Mohammed,  Mohammed  Murad  Khan,  was  deposed 
after  a  reign  of  a  few  years  by  his  disaffected  nobles; 
and  his  brother,  Ghulam  Shah  Khan,  was  placed  on 
the  musnud  in  his  room.  After  a  turbulent  and 
distracted  reign  he  was  succeeded  by  his  eldest  son, 
Sirafraz  Khan,*  who  in  a  few  years  was  deposed  by 
the  heads  of  the  Baluch  tribes,  who  had  now  ac- 
quired a  leading  influence  in  the  affairs  of  Sindh, 
and  whose  enmity  he  had  incurred  by  putting 
Bahram  Khan,  the  chief  of  Talpura,  and  one  of  his 
sons,  Sobhdar  Khan,  for  some  offence  to  death. 
Tlie  confederates  first  placed  a  younger  brother  of 
Sirafraz  Khan,  and  then  a  cousin,  upon  the  throne ; 
but,  dissatisfied  with  their  own  choice,  successively 
removed  them,  and  seated  Ghulam  Nabi  Shah,  a 
brother  of  Ghulam  Shah,  on  the  musnud.  Shortly 
after  his  accession,  Bijar  Khan  Talpura,  another  son 

'  He  founded  the  prescut  capital,  U>derabad,  in  1182. 


EXPULSION   OF   THE   KAL0RA8.  215 

of  Bahrain  Khan,  returned  to  Sindh  from  Arabia,  book  i. 
whither  he  had  gone  on  pilgrimage,  and  undertook  ^^^^^i^ 


to  revenge  the  death  of  his  father.  He  was  joined  1809. 
by  his  clan,  and  by  their  friends.  Ghulam  Nabi 
Khan  immediately  assembled  his  adherents,  and  a 
conflict  ensued  in  which  he  was  killed.  Bijar 
Khan  then  marched  against  the  capital,  Hyderabad, 
where  Abd-un-nabi  Khan,  the  brother  of  the  de- 
feated sovereign,  had  fortified  himself,  and  had  put 
to  death  Sirafraz  Khan,  who  had  been  confined  there, 
and,  along  with  him,  other  princes  whose  pretensions 
he  thought  likely  to  interfere  with  his  own.  Bijar 
Khan,  unable  to  reduce  Hyderabad,  protested  his 
readiness  to  acknowledge  Abd-un-nabi  as  his  sove- 
reign, and  faithfully  adhered  to  his  professions. 
The  Kalora  prince  was  acknowledged  to  be  the 
paramount  prince,  and  the  head  of  the  Talpura  tribe 
became  his  hereditary  minister.  The  authority  ex- 
ercised by  Bijar  Khan  was  not  of  long  duration. 
In  little  more  than  two  years  he  was  assassinated  by 
agents  of  the  Raja  of  Jodhpur,  with  the  connivance, 
or  at  the  instigation,  it  is  said,  of  Abd-un-nabi. 
Tlie  belief  that  the  latter  was  implicated  in  the 
murder  of  Bijar  Khan  roused  the  vengeance  of  the 
Talpura  tribe;  and  Abd-uUah  Khan,  the  son  of  the 
deceased,  expelled  Abd-un-nabi  from  Sindh.  Abd- 
ullah assumed  the  sovereignty. 

Although  assisted  successively  by  the  chief  of 
Kelat  and  by  the  Raja  of  Jodhpur,  Abd-un-nabi 
Khan  was  unable  to  recover  his  authority,  and  was 
obliged  to  have  recourse  to  the  Afghan  monarch, 
Timur  Shah,  the  son  of  Ahmed  Shah.  A  force  was 
placed  at  his  disposal  which  his  enemies  were  un- 


216  HISTORY    OF    BRHISH    INDIA. 


BOOK  1.  able  to  resist,  and  an  apparent  reconciliation  was  ef- 
'^^^^'  '^'  fected  by  the  intermediation  of  the  principal  nobles. 
1809.  The  reconciliation  was  insincere.  The  Talpura 
chiefs  rebelled,  were  again  defeated,  and  were  again 
received  into  seeming  favour,  when  either  the  dread 
of  their  renewed  machinations,  or  resentment  for  the 
past,  induced  Abd-un-nabi  Khan  to  perpetrate  the 
murder  of  their  leading  men.  Inviting  Abd-uUah 
Khan,  vnth  two  of  his  principal  associates  and  kins- 
men, to  an  interview  on  board  his  boat  when  upon 
an  excursion  on  the  Indus,  he  had  them  seized  and 
immediately  put  to  death.  The  crime  was  fatal  to 
his  dynasty;  for  the  surviving  chiefs  of  the  Talpuras, 
led  by  Fatih  Ali,  the  son  of  Mir  Sobhdar  Khan,  the 
brother  of  Bijar  Khan,  who  had  been  put  to  death 
along  with  their  father  Bahram  Khan,  rose  in  arms, 
and,  assisted  by  the  neighbouring  chiefs  of  Khyrpur, 
Bahawalpur,  and  Daudputra,  compelled  Abd-un- 
nabi  once  more  to  seek  an  asylum  at  the  court  of 
Kabul.  Circumstances  were  no  longer  propitious 
to  his  cause ;  and,  although  assistance  was  promised 
him,  none  of  any  magnitude  was  afforded.  The 
representations  of  the  Talpura  chiefs,  their  profes- 
sions of  allegiance,  the  tribute  which  they  promised, 
and  the  bribes  which  they  distributed,  retarded  and 
ultimately  frustrated  the  intentions,  and  baffled  the 
efforts,  of  Timur  Shah,  and  his  successor  Zeman  Shah. 
Abd-un-nabi,  after  residing  some  years  upon  Jagirs 
assigned  him,  first  by  the  Afghan  monarch,  and  after- 
wards by  the  Raja  of  Jodhpur,  died  an  exile  in  the 
states  of  the  former  prince,  in  the  reign  of  Mahmud 
Shah,  and  the  Talpura  chief  finally  established  the 
authority  of  his  family  in  Sindh.     His  personal  ele- 


JOINT   GOVERNMENT    OF    8INDH.  217 


vation  was  not  undisputed,  even  by  his  own  rela-  book  i. 
tions ;  and  the  forces  on  either  side  were  drawn  ^"^^'  '^* 
out  to  decide  the  dispute  by  the  sword.  The  coun-  i809. 
gels  of  the  elders  of  the  tribe,  and  the  tears  and 
entreaties  of  the  women,  arrested  the  strife  upon 
the  eve  of  its  occurrence  ;^  and  an  accommodation 
was  effected,  by  which  Mir  Sohrab  of  Khyrpur  and 
Mir  Thara  of  Mirpur,  both  descended  from  a  com- 
mon ancestor,  were  acknowledged  to  be  independ- 
ent in  their  own  districts,  while  Fatih  Ali  was  re- 
cognised as  chief  ruler  of  Sindh.  This  power  he 
shared  with  his  three  brothers,  Gholam  Ali,  Karam 
Ali,  and  Murad  Ali.  At  the  period  when  a  friendly 
connexion  with  the  country  became  an  object  of  the 
policy  of  the  Government  of  India,  Fatih  Ali  was 
dead,  but  the  three  surviving  brothers  jointly  admi- 
nistered the  affairs  of  Sindh .^ 

Imperfectly  acquainted  with  the  history  and  the 
resources  of  Sindh,  and  attaching  to  its  com- 
merce and  alliance  more  value  than  belonged  to 
either,  the  Government  of  Bengal  had  made  several 
attempts  to  form  friendly  relations  with  the  court 
of  Hyderabad.  Its  advances  were  received  with 
coldness  or  repelled  with  insolence,  and  although  a 
commercial  agent  was  at  one  time  allowed  to  reside 
at  Tatta  and  carry  on  trade   there,  yet  little  en- 

^  An  interesting  account  of  this  transaction  is  given  by  Mr.  Crow  in 
his  report  on  Sindh,  and  is  extracted  ia  Captain  Postans's  account  of 
Sindh. 

'  See  Macmurdo's  account  of  Sindh,  Journal,  Koyal  Asiatic  Society,  i. 
223 ;  Visit  to  the  Court  of  Sindh  by  Dr.  Bumes ;  Personal  Observations 
on  Sindh  by  Captain  Postans ;  and  a  Persian  account,  translated  by  Captain 
Pogson  and  published  in  Calcutta.  This  latter  differs  in  some  details 
from  the  narratives  of  the  European  writers,  and  is  less  favourable  to  the 
Talpuras  ;  ascribing  to  the  latter  treacherous  designs,  which  provoked,  and 
in  some  degree  justified,  the  treatuient  they  experienced. 


218  HISTORY   OF   BRITISH   INDIA. 

BOOK  I.  couragement*  was  given  to  it  by  the  ruling  authori- 
^^^^^J^  ties ;  and  the  factory  having  been  attacked  and 
1809.  ])lundcred  in  a  popular  tumult,  for  which  no  repa- 
ration or  redress  was  procured,  the  agency  was  dis- 
continued. Circumstances  now  appeared  more  pro- 
mising. Alarmed  by  the  menaced  interference  of 
Shah  Shuja  on  behalf  of  the  expelled  prince,  Abd- 
un-nabi,  the  Amirs  of  Sindh  had  applied  to  Persia 
for  succour,  and  a  Persian  army  had  been  directed 
to  march  to  their  assistance.  The  death  of  Abd-un- 
nabi,  and  the  embarrassments  which  Shah  Shuja 
experienced  at  home,  removed  all  ground  of  fear 
from  Afghanistan,  and  the  Amirs  then  became  most 
apprehensive  of  peril  from  their  allies.  They  thought 
it  prudent,  therefore,  to  oppose  one  powerful  friend 
to  another, — British  India  to  Persia :  they  therefore 
began  to  conciliate  the  •  British  Government,  and 
sent  an  agent  to  Bombay  to  propose  the  renewal  of 
the  commercial  intercourse  that  had  formerly  ex- 
isted. The  proposal  was  favourably  entertained,  and 
Captain  Seton  was  sent  as  envoy  to  Hyderabad.  A 
treaty  of  offensive  and  defensive  alliance  was  con- 
cluded by  the  envoy  with  the  Amirs ;  but,  as  the 
stipulations  pledged  the  British  Government  to 
a  reciprocity  that  was  deemed  inexpedient,  the 
ratification  of  the  treaty  was  withheld,  and  Mr. 
Nicholas  Hankey  Smith,  a  Bombay  civil  servant, 
was  deputed  to  exi)laiu  the  cause,  and  to  contract  a 
less  conii)rchcnsive  engagement.  After  many  delays 
and  obstructions  o])posed  to  his  journey  by  the  ser- 

^  Ghulam  Shah  Kalora  granted  perwanaB  in  1758  to  a  Mr.  Sumption, 
in  the  service  of  the  East  India  Company,  exempting  the  goods  he  should 
import  fnun  all  duties,  and  authorising  him  to  buihl  a  factory  at  Aurang- 
bunder,  or  at  Tatta.—  Coll.  of  Treaties,  488. 


MISSION   TO   SINDH.  219 

vants  of  the  Amire, — ^not,  it  was  suspected,  without  book  i. 
their  secret  approval,* — Mr.  Smith  reached  Hydera- 


bad on  the  8th  of  August ;  and  on  the  23rd  of  that  laos. 
month  a  treaty  was  signed,  which  engaged  that 
there  should  be  eternal  friendship  between  the 
two  Governments,  tliat  vakeels  or  agents  should  be 
always  mutually  appointed,  and  that  the  French 
should  not  be  permitted  to  form  an  establishment 
in  Sindh.*  The  apprehension  of  a  French  invasion 
of  India  had  subsided,  and  there  remained  no  mo- 
tive of  weight  for  cultivating  the  friendship  of  a 
semi-barbarous  and  arrogant  court ;  while  the  Amirs 
were  equally  disinclined  to  maintain  an  intimate 
intercourse  with  a  power  which  they  feared,  and 
with  which  they  thought  they  had  reason  to  b(^  dis- 
satisfied, not  only  on  account  of  the  annulment  of 
the  treaty  entered  into  with  Captain  Seton,  but 
because  they  were  apprised  that  any  aggression 
upon  the  neighbouring  state  of  Cutch,  to  the  affairs 
of  which  we  shall  hereafter  have  occasion  to  recur, 
would  be  decidedly  resisted.  No  beneficial  result 
consequently  followed  the  connexion  formed  at  this 
period  with  the  rulers  of  Sindh. 

Negociations  of  greater  importance  and  of  more 
durable  consequences  were  at  the  same  period  set 
on  foot  with  the  Government  of  Persia.  They 
opened  inauspiciously,  but  their  complexion  was 
changed  by  the  influence  of  political  revolutions  in 
the  west;  and  the  course  of  events  in  Europe 
cleared  the  road  from  Bushir  to  Tehran,  and  sub- 

*  A  detailed  accoant  of  the  proceedings  of  the  mission  is  given  by  Lieu- 
tenaDt  (now  Sir  Henry  Pottinger)  in  his  Travels  in  Buloochistan  and 
Sindh,  p.  331. 

•  Coll.  of  TreaUcs,  300. 


220  HisrroRY  of  British  india. 

BOOK  I.  verted  the  influence  which  the  French  embassy  had 

^^^^^]_^  obtained  at  the  latter  city. 
1808.  Napoleon  had  endeavoured  at  an  early  date  to 
establish  a  connexion  with  the  King  of  Persia;  and, 
when  he  projected  the  invasion  of  Eg}'pt,  the  Direc- 
tory, at  his  suggestion,  sent  secret  agents  to  Tehran  to 
prevail  upon  the  reigning  monarch  Aga  Mohammed, 
to  make  a  simultaneous  attack  upon  the  Turkish  pro- 
vinces on  tlie  Euphrates.  The  unavowed  character 
of  the  French  emissaries  perplexed  the  Persian  sove- 
reign: his  death  shortly  afterwards,  and  the  accession 
of  Fatih  Ali,  caused  their  proposals  to  meet  with 
but  little  attention,  and  no  disposition  was  evinced 
to  adopt  the  views  of  France.  This  disappointment, 
and  the  successful  mission  of  Sir  John  Malcolm  to 
Tehran  by  Marquis  Wellesley,  excluded  the  in- 
fluence of  France  at  the  court  of  Persia  for  several 
years.  An  accredited  agent,  who  was  then  sent, 
died  shortly  after  having  had  an  audience  of  the 
King,  and  all  intercourse  was  again  suspended. 

In  the  beginning  of  1806,  Persia  being  engaged 
in  hostilities  with  Russia,  and  dreading  the  advance 
of  the  Russian  arms,  gladly  welcomed  an  agent 
from  the  French  minister  at  Constantinople,  and  at 
his  recommendation  dispatched  one  of  the  nobles 
of  the  court  to  Paris  to  negociate  a  treaty  of  of- 
fensive alliance.  A  second  envoy  from  Tehran  ac- 
companied Monsieur  Pontecoulant,  who  had  been 
dispatched  to  Persia  after  the  death  of  his  prede- 
cessor, and  who  was  now  returning  to  France.  This 
disposition  of  the  Persian  court  coinciding  with  the 
political  interests  of  the  French  Emperor,  met  with 
the   most  cordial    encouragement,  and   a   splendid 


FRENCH  EMBASSY   TO   PERSIA.  221 


embassy  was  sent  to  Tehran  under  General  Gar-  book  i. 
danne,  who  arrived  at  the  Persian  capital  towards  ^^^^'  ^^' 
the  end  of  December  1807.  His  suite  consisted  of  leoo. 
twenty-five  persons,  mostly  military,  besides  a  num- 
ber of  artillery  and  engineer  officers,  and  a  consider- 
able body  of  artificers.  The  draft  of  a  treaty  was 
speedily  completed,  and  sent  to  Paris  for  ratifi- 
cation. It  was  stipulated  that  France  should,  either 
by  force  or  negociation,  obtain  from  Russia,  Georgia 
and  other  frontier  provinces  conquered  from  Persia ; 
that  the  King  of  Persia  should  allow  an  army  to 
march  through  his  territories  to  invade  India, 
should  provide  for  its  wants,  and  join  it  with  all  his 
force ;  that  the  island  of  Kharak  should  be  ceded  to 
France,  and  French  factories  should  be  admitted  at 
Gombroon,  Bushir,  and  other  places;  and  that,  if 
the  Emperor  required  it,  the  King  of  Persia  should 
exclude  all  Englishmen  from  his  dominions.  During 
the  negociations,  and  the  interval  of  the  ratification 
of  the  treaty,  many  of  the  French  officers  attached 
to  the  embassy  were  dispersed  through  the  country, 
and  were  actively  engaged  in  making  military  sur- 
veys of  it  and  ascertaining  its  resources;  while 
those  remaining  at  the  capital  were  as  busily  em- 
ployed in  drilling  the  new  Persian  levies,  and  in- 
structing them  in  European  discipline. 

The  war  between  Persia  and  Russia  originated  in 
the  invasion  of  Georgia  by  the  former  power,  and 
consequent  recourse  to  the  latter  by  the  princes  of 
Georgia,  Heraclius  and  his  successor  Gurgein,  the 
second  of  whom  promised  perpetual  vassalage  to 
Russia  as  the  price  of  the  aid  solicited.  The  Per- 
sians had  been  driven  out  of  tlie  country,  and  they 


•o''  .-^li  o^  ^\rt-n«fv^  'n»«*r?  n  .\.rTn«*raa  urn  Dteiies^ 
-itn.  fn  ':he  -ir^f  mnm^^ts  -.r  iwcrpw  rae  fonrr  had 
■ifwKM  -rt  -h*»  rn«rian  ^  rnv«»rTnn«it  rnr  liiL  mder 
rh#»  ini^-'r^f.-^rr  ii^if?**  -if  -ni*  "TRuy  •oneinden  in. 
l»^»f.  ^hi•*^f  il#>fl*jrp<t  "ti*^  -TFn  4ca£*^  ro  nerpemai 
^^Tnir^-.  Thi«»  :nr<*rT>n*tation  ^r'  :hp^  ipticte  -raa  not 
/^riTi^irf*^  in  Sv  'h**  rii^v^nrauHic  i^t'  India*  and 
^rmM  /^ofifiifam**:*  -vn*  ipfiinptt.  Hie  retiiBAi  had 
HVi^nttf^  *h^  '•nnit  -tf  P=t^  rimin  :tie  Bridsk  oob-* 
iwriff^n.  imd  had  rbrown  it  into  rhe  irms  «>r  Fijnee, 
f^nr^rt^nTHifpN'  fnr  if*  'ion***,  rhe  pi>are  of  Tikff.  wiiirli 

Cr^rr^»Ttn#^  a*  T^-hntn.  iiart  :mitpd  "he  EmneffNr^  Xapf>* 
U'Tff}  »n^  Al^TJ^nder  !n  b^vndii  of  ner!!v>iud  Izieiidship 
arn^  lff*>\f*^^  of  mntiiftt  ae^rnuidiiieiiienr.  Altfaooeh 
nof  immedrnt^fy  avnwpd. — tilthnrurh  a^owof  n^sard 
irjw  df«pf»ypd.  and  oflerw  of  mediation  W5«re  pro* 
fo^Mtf^^^. — y^  at  th*?  vAfv  moment  when  the  JJing  of 
P<^fVT»  w-jw  admired  rliat  the  ^tmncpiit  interres^ion 
in  hi«r  fiivofir  ^lionM  he  addre5«»ed  to  the  Czar.  hi» 
psiir^  had  heen  ntterly  abandoned,  and  the  integritr 
of  hi«r  dowinionn  ^lunrificed  to  Rama,  in  exchange 
f(ff  ]Sf'ff\ff*  to  f he  Frewrh  Rmperor  to  pounce  with- 
tf^^t  fhf-fV  tff  binderanee  npon  Spain. 

^tht*  fff^^rifr-  of  a  French  emhctimj  at  the  Persoan 
t'tmrt  hnf)  mtf  fnr  a  ^lenefifriaI  operation,  that  it 
r/m<i/*/|  fh/*  artfhrrfif/feA  Ujfh  in  England  and  in  India 
Ur  n  nMino  tpf  fhe  uccimiij  of  rir-acqniring  some  con- 
n)th'fni\iiu  ni  Tehran.  I'nluckily,  their  measures 
vfft'th  iiiVHi  wMfiofft  previoiw  concert,  and  the  result 
wrf«i  fffr   frrMligntfleil   ami    impolitic  collision.      The 


BRITISH    MISSIONS   TO   PERSIA.  223 

Government  of  England,  in  communication  with  the  book  i. 
Court  of  Directors,  resolved  to  send  an  ambassador        ' 


to  Persia,  in  the  person  of  Sir  Harford  Jones,  who  18O8. 
had  held  for  several  years  the  office  of  Company's 
Resident  at  Bagdad.  He  was  accordingly  nomi- 
nated his  Majesty's  envoy  extraordinary  and  pleni- 
potentiary ;  although  his  allowances  and  the  cost  of 
the  mission  were  to  be  defrayed  by  the  East  India 
Company,  and  the  envoy  was  ordered  to  act  under 
instructions  from  the  Governor-General.  The  Go- 
vernor-General had  in  the  mean  time  determined 
to  dispatch  his  own  representative;  and  Sir  John 
Malcolm,  who  had  concluded  the  former  treaty, 
was  again  sent  by  Lord  Minto  in  the  same  capacity 
to  Persia. 

The  appointment  of  an  ambassador  to  Persia  was 
one  of  the  last  acts  of  the  administration  of  Earl 
Grey ;  and  his  departure  was  delayed  by  the  change 
of  ministry  which  took  place  in  March,  1807. 
From  this  and  other  circumstances.  Sir  Harford 
Jones  did  not  arrive  at  Bombay  until  April  in  the 
following  year,  and  on  his  arrival  found  that  Sir 
John  Malcolm  had  preceded  him  to  Bushir.  In 
compliance  with  the  orders  of  the  Governor-Gene- 
ral, he  remained  at  Bombay  until  it  should  be  as- 
certained in  what  manner  the  mission  was  received. 
Sir  John  Malcolm  reached  Bushir  in  May,  and  an- 
nounced his  arrival  to  the  court,  sending  his  dis- 
patches by  one  of  his  officers.  Captain  Pasley.  The 
letters  were  forwarded,  but  the  messenger  was  de- 
tained at  Shiraz  until  instructions  should  arrive 
from  Tehran.  After  some  delay  they  were  re- 
ceived.    The  King,  still  clinging  to  the  hope  that 


224  HISTORY   OF   BRITISH    INDIA. 

BOOK  I.  the  intercession  of  France  would  procure  the  re- 
^^^'  '^'  storation  of  some  of  his  lost  frontier, — a  hope  in 
1808.  which  he  was  strengthened  by  the  assurances  of  a 
Russian  agent,  and  the  protestations  of  the  French 
ambassador,— chose  rather  to  brave  the  resentment  of 
his  former  allies  than  give  umbrage  to  both  France 
and  Russia.  Affecting,  however,  an  equal  unwil- 
lingness to  displease  the  British  Government,  he 
directed  one  of  his  sons,  Hosein  Ali  Mirza,  go- 
vernor of  the  province,  to  carry  on  the  negociations 
with  its  representative  at  Shiraz.  To  this  Sir  John 
Malcolm  strongly  objected,  as  derogatory  to  the 
dignity  of  his  Government.  Believing,  from  the  pri- 
vate information  he  received,  that  the  French  em- 
bassy had  obtained  too  firm  a  footing  at  Tehran  to 
be  supplanted,  and  arguing  that  the  connexion  was 
a  breach  of  existing  engagements,  and  inimical  to 
British  interests,  he  abruptly  sailed  from  Bushir, 
and  repaired  at  once  to  Calcutta,  where  his  repre- 
sentations induced  the  Governor-Greneral  to  con- 
clude that  measures  of  intimidation  or  hostility 
were  necessary ;  and  orders  were  issued  for  fit- 
ting out  a  military  expedition,  which  should  oc- 
cupy the  island  of  Kharak,  and  hold  the  command  of 
the  navigation  of  the  Persian  Gulph.* 

The  first  impression  entertained  by  the  Governor- 
General,  founded  upon  the  envoy's  dispatches,  was, 
that  tlje  proceedings  of  Sir  John  Malcolm  had  been 
somewhat  precipitate,  and  that  no  suflficient  cause 
had  been  assigned  for  the  total  abandonment  of  the 
objects  of  the  embassy.  lie  had  therefore  authorised 
Sir  Harford  Jones,  in  the  event  of  his  predecessor's 

*  Malcolm's  Political  History  of  India,  i.  415. 


ORDERS  OF  THE  BENGAL  GOVERNMENT.  225 

withdrawal,   to  prosecute  his  voyage  "  without   a  book  i. 
moment's  delay,  should  the  circumstances  render,  in  ^^^^^^^ 


his  judgment,  such  a  step  advisable,  without  further  isoe. 
reference  to  Bengal."  The  information  which  he 
subsequently  received  induced  Lord  Minto  to  be- 
lieve that  a  representative  of  the  British  power 
would  not  be  admitted  to  the  presence  of  the 
King  of  Persia,  and  that  a  repetition  of  the 
attempt  to  obtain  an  audience  would  be  incom- 
patible with  the  dignity  of  the  Government,  while 
it  would  be  productive  of  no  advantage.  Sir  Har- 
ford Jones  was  consequently  instructed  to  await 
the  result  of  further  deliberations.  The  coun- 
termand was  too  late.  Before  it  reached  Bom- 
bay, Sir  Harford  Jones,  acting  in  the  spirit  of 
his  first  instructions,  had  sailed  for  Persia.  He 
arrived  at  Bushir  on  the  14th  of  October.  The 
aspect  of  affairs  had  changed.  No  progress  had 
been  made  towards  the  restitution  of  any  part  of 
the  Persian  territory,  and  the  court  had  begun  to 
lose  faith  in  the  professions  of  the  French.  In  this 
feeling  of  disappointment,  regret  for  having  given 
offence  to  the  British  Government,  and  apprehen- 
sion of  the  consequences  of  its  displeasure,  found 
easy  access  to  the  Persian  cabinet,  and  the  arrival 
of  his  Majesty's  ambassador  at  Bushir  was  regarded 
as  a  fortunate  means  of  escaping  from  its  embar- 
rassments. Still,  some  reluctance  seems  to  have 
been  entertained  to  break  so  entirely  with  France 
as  openly  to  sanction  the  advance  of  the  mission  to 
the  capital ;  and,  although  an  invitation  to  proceed 
to  Shiraz  was  very  soon  forwarded.  Sir  Harford 
Jones  consented  to  go  thither  upon  no  other  se- 

VOL.  T.  Q 


226  HISTORY  OF  BRITISH   INDIA. 

BOOK  I.  curity  for  his  ultimate  reception  at  Tehran  than  the 
CHAP.  IV.  ^gm^pggg  Qf  a  native  agent  that  on  his  arrival 
1809.  there  he  would  find  the  official  invitation  from  the 
King  and  his  ministers  to  continue  his  journey  to 
the  presence.  Upon  this  information,  the  envoy 
accompanied  the  Mihmandar  who  was  sent  to  con- 
duct him  to  Shiraz,  and  arrived  there  on  the  1st  of 
January.  Some  faint  attempts  to  inveigle  him  into 
negociations  with  the  local  authorities  were  easily 
baffled;  and,  all  difficulties  being  surmounted,* 
the  mission  departed  from  Shiraz  on  the  12th  of 
January.  Sir  Harford  Jones  entered  Tehran  on  the 
14th  of  the  following  month,  the  French  embassy 
having  quitted  the  city  on  the  preceding  day. 
During  the  stay  of  the  mission  at  Shiraz,  the  dis- 
patches from  Bengal  arrived,  recalling  the  ambas- 
sador, and  announcing  the  military  projects  of  the 
Government.  The  information  speedily  transpired, 
and  excited  great  alarm ;  to  allay  which,  Sir  Harford 
Jones  assumed,  as  the  representative  of  the  Crown, 
a  power  independent  of  the  Governor-General  of 
India,  and  entered  into  a  solemn  pledge  that  no 
aggression  should  be  committed  upon  the  dominions 
of  the  King  of  Persia  as  long  as  his  Majesty  dis- 
played a  wish  to  preserve  the  amicable  relations  by 

'  Malcolm  ascribes  this  to  **  the  anticipated  failure  of  the  French  to 
fulfil  their  extravagant  promises,  the  alarm  excited  by  the  military  prepa- 
rations in  India,  and  the  cupidity  of  the  Persian  court,  which  hod  been 
strongly  excited.** — Pol.  Hist.  i.  415.  Sir  Harford  Jones  states,  that 
Lord  Minto  accused  him  of  having  found  his  way  to  Shiraz  by  comiptioii. 
— Account  of  the  Mission  to  Persia,  i.  147.  According  to  the  plenipoten- 
tiary*s  own  account,  the  King's  willingness  to  receive  him  was  stimulated 
by  exaggerated  descriptions  of  a  valuable  diamond  included  amongst  tlM 
presents  intended  for  his  Majesty,  and  of  which  he  himself  remarks,  **  I 
so  managed,  that,  at  the  expense  of  £10,000  to  the  Company,  the  Shah  of 
Persia  considered  he  had  received  twenty  or  twenty-five  thousand  pounds 
from  his  Mi^esty's  envoy." —  Account  of  the  Mission,  i.  144. 


OBJECTIONS  OF  THE  GOVERNOR-GENERAL.  227 

which  he  had   been  connected  with  the  King  of  book  i. 
Great  Britain.  _1J__1 

The  appointment  of  an  ambassador  to  Persia  by  1809. 
the  home  Government  had  been  regarded  by  the 
Governor-General  b8  an  injudicious  departure  from 
the  practice  of  negociating  with  that  country 
through  India.  He  protested  against  the  inno- 
vation. Lord  Minto  argued,  that  it  was  inconsistent 
to  expect  from  the  Government  of  India  effective 
precautions  against  any  dangers  on  the  side  of 
Persia,  without  leaving  to  it  the  power  of  con- 
trouling  the  minister  deputed  to  the  Persian  court, 
and  directing  the  course  and  character  of  the  nego- 
ciations  to  be  carried  on  with  it :  that  such  a  mi- 
nister appointed  in  England  might  not  only  fail  to 
appreciate  the  interests  of  British  India,  but  might 
act  in  direct  opposition  to  them ;  and  might  not  only 
pledge  the  faith  of  its  Government  to  meajsures  un- 
sanctioned by  it,  but  even  to  such  as  were  incom- 
patible with  its  honour  and  safety :  that  the  Indian 
Government  was  vested  with  the  power  of  sove- 
reignty within  its  own  limits,  and  had  been  recog- 
nised in  that  character  by  the  King  of  Persia.  **  It 
was  in  that  character  alone  that  we  had  been  able 
to  obtain  those  manifestations  of  respect,  that  re- 
gard to  the  claims  of  dignity,  which  amongst  all 
nations  of  the  world,  but  in  an  especial  degree 
amongst  Asiatic  states,  are  essential  to  the  mainte- 
nance of  real  power  in  the  scale  of  political  interest: 
this  acknowledged  character,  as  it  constituted  the 
basis,  so  it  must  form  the  cement,  of  our  external 
relations.  To  depreciate  therefore  that  estimation  of 

the  power  and  dignity  of  the  British  Government 

q2 


228  HISTORY    OF    BRITISH    INDIA. 

BOOK  I.  in  India,  which  under  a  just  sense  of  its  importance 
^^^'  '^'  we  have  hitherto  successfully  laboured  to  preserve 
1809.  among  surrounding  states,  is  to  fix  upon  the  British 
Government  the  stigma  of  deceit,  to  affect  the  re- 
putation of  our  public  faith,  and  to  expose  us  to 
much  of  the  danger  arising  from  a  real  loss  of 
power,  by  diminishing  that  awe  and  respect  with 
which  the  Government  has  hitherto  been  contem- 
plated, and  on  which  the  tranquillity  and  security 
of  British  India  materially  depend."^ 

Notwithstanding  the  earnestness  with  which 
Lord  Minto  asserted  the  sovereign  prerogatives  of 
the  Governor-General  of  India,  the  transfer  of  di- 
plomatic relations  with  Persia  from  that  officer  to 
the  Ministers  of  the  Crown  was  persevered  in,  and 
ambassadors  to  Persia  have  ever  since  been  sent 
directly  from  Great  Britain  alone.  The  destinies  of 
Persia  are,  in  truth,  so  much  more  intimately  inter- 
woven with  the  political  interests  of  the  parent 
country  than  of  India,  the  consequences  deprecated 
by  Lord  Minto  as  likely  to  affect  the  latter  are  so 
much  more  calculated  to  exercise  an  influence  upon 
the  former,  that  the  relations  established,  or  to  be 
established,  with  Persia,  can  no  longer  be  con- 
sistently confided  to  the  arbitrement  of  a  delegated 
and  subordinate  functionary,  however  high  his  sta- 
tion or  absolute  his  authority. 

Until,  however,  the  question  was  decided  against 
him.  Lord  Minto  showed  himself  resolved  to  exercise 
his  power.  Highly  displeased  at  the  determination 
of  Sir  Harford  Jones  to  continue  his  journey  from 

'  Lord  Minto's  letter  to  the  Secret  Committee,  as  quoted  by  Malcolm. — 
Pol.  Higt.  i.  417. 


THE   AMBASSADOR   DISAVOWED.  229 

Shiraz,  the  Governor-General  addressed  dispatches  book  i. 
to  the  court  of  Tehran,  disavowing  the  public  cha-  ^^^^'  '^' 


racter  of  the  ambassador;  and,  to  Sir  Harford  Jones     laio. 
himself,  orders  were  sent  commanding  him  instantly 
to  leave  the  country,  with  the  intimation,  that,  on 
his  failing  so  to  do,  any  bills  drawn  by  him  on  the 
Indian    Governments  after  the   date   of  such  diso- 
bedience would  not  be  discharged.     His  Majesty's 
plenipotentiary  could  not  resist  the  weight  of  this 
argument,    and    signified    his    readiness    to    obey; 
but  in  the  mean  time  he  had  pursued  his  negoci- 
ation    with    great   activity,    had    accomplished    the 
execution  of  a  preliminary  treaty,  and  had  prevailed 
upon  the  King  of  Persia  to  send  Abul  Hasan  Khan 
as  his  ambassador,  in  company  with  Mr.  Morier,  to 
England.     The  Governor-General  consented  to  ra- 
tify the  treaty,  but  peremptorily  ordered    Sir   H. 
Jones  to  quit  Persia,  making  over  charge  of  the 
mission  to  a  medical  officer  of  the  Company  until  the 
arrival    of  Sir   John    Malcolm,   whom  he  still  re- 
solved to  employ.     On  the  other  hand,  orders  from 
England  directed  Sir  H.  Jones  to  remain  until  the 
arrival  of  another  ambassador  in  the  person  of  Sir 
Gore  Ouseley ;  and  he  continued  in  the  country  until 
after  the  winter  of  1810,  although   not  exercising 
apparently  any  ministerial  functions.     Sir  John  Mal- 
colm arrived  at  Tehran  in   June    1810,  —  for   no 
purpose  apparently  except  to  vindicate  the  dignity  of 
the  Governor-General  of  India,  and  put  the  Company 
to  an  unnecessary  expense.     His  presence  and  ser- 
vices in  Persia  being  speedily  rendered  unnecessary 
by  the  approach  of  Sir  Gore  Ouseley  as  his  Majesty's 
representative  at  the  Persian  court,  he  left  Tehran 


230  HISTORY   OF  BRITISH   INDIA. 

flooK  I.  in  the  following  month.  ^  There  were  consequently 
^^^^*  '^'  about  the  same  period  three  English  ambassadors  in 
1810.  Persia,  whose  relative  importance  it  must  have  per- 
plexed the  Persians  to  determine,  although  they 
were  astute  enough  to  take  advantage  of  so  much 
competition  for  their  friendship,  and  make  the 
better  bargain  for  themselves. 

By  the  preliminary  treaty  concluded  between  Sir 
Harford  Jones  and  the  ministers  of  the  King  of 
Persia  it  was  stipulated  that  the  articles  should 
form  the  basis  of  a  definitive  treaty  without  alter- 
ation*, that  every  treaty  made  by  the  King  of 
Persia  with  any  one  of  the  powers  of  Europe  should 
become  null  and  void ;  and  that  he  would  not  per- 
mit any  European  force  to  march  through  Persia 
towards  India.  That,  should  any  European  force 
invade  or  have  invaded  the  territories  of  Persia,  his 
Britannic  Majesty  would  afford  to  the  King  of 
Persia  a  military  force,  or,  in  lieu  of  it,  a  subsidy 
and  warlike  ammunition ;  the  number  of  the  forces 
and  the  amount  of  the  subsidy  to  be  regulated  by  a 
definitive  treaty.  Should  his  Britannic  Majesty  make 
peace  with  the  invading  power,  he  should  use  his 
efforts  to  negociate  a  peace  also  between  it  and  Persia ; 


'  A  fall  account  of  the  circumstances  connected  with  Sir  HarfordJoMs's 
embassy  has  been  published  by  himself, — An  Account  of  the  transactions 
of  his  Majesty *s  mission  to  the  Court  of  Persia  in  the  years  1807-11, 
by  Sir  Harford  Jones  Brydges,  Bart.  A  somewhat  different  view  of  them 
is  given  by  Malcolm  in  his  Political  History  of  India.  Some  notice  of 
the  proceedings  of  the  mission  occurs  in  Morier*s  First  Journey  through 
Persia.  Whatever  may  be  the  case  with  respect  to  the  means  employed, 
there  is  no  denying  that  Sir  Harford  Jones  effected  his  object;  tiiat  he 
made  his  way  to  Tehran,  and  negociated  a  treaty  which,  in  substance,  waa 
confirmed  by  the  British  Government ;  and  that  the  projected  military  ex- 
pedition to  the  Gulph  would  have  entailed  a  heavy  cost,  realised  no  solid 
advantage,  and  deeply,  perhaps  incurably,  wounded  the  pride  of  the  Per- 
sian monarch  and  the  patriotism  of  his  people. 


TREATY  CONCLUDED.  281 

but,  in  failure  of  success,  the  military  or  pecuniary  book  i. 
aid  should  be  still  supplied  as  long  as  the  invading  J^^^|^ 
force  continued  in  the  Persian  territory,  or  until  the  laio. 
conclusion  of  peace.  That,  if  the  Afghans  or  any 
other  power  should  attack  India,  the  King  of  Persia 
should  furnish  a  force  to  assist  in  its  defence.  That, 
if  any  British  troops  should  have  landed  at  Kharak, 
or  in  any  other  Persian  port,  they  should  not  possess 
themselves  of  such  places,  but  be  at  the  disposal  of 
the  King  of  Persia,  subject  to  the  alternative  of 
a  pecuniary  pajonent  in  their  place.  That,  if  war 
should  take  place  between  the  Afghans  and  the 
King  of  Persia,  the  King  of  Great  Britain  should 
take  no  part  in  it,  except  as  a  mediator  at  the 
desire  of  both  parties.  That  the  object  of  these 
articles  should  be  regarded  as  mutually  defensive; 
and,  finally,  a  hope  was  expressed  that  the  treaty 
might  be  everlasting,  and  produce  ^'  the  most  beau- 
tiful fruits  of  friendship  between  the  two  serene 
kings." 

A  definitive  treaty,  in  conformity  to  these  stipu- 
lations, was  entered  into  by  Sir  Gore  Ouseley ;  but 
some  of  the  conditions  underwent  a  modification 
in  England,  and  the  final  arrangements  were  not 
completed  till  1814,  when  the  terms  were  conclu- 
sively agreed  upon.  The  defensive  character  of  the 
treaty  was  more  explicitly  stated,  and  Russia  was 
specified  as  the  power  against  which  the  Persian 
frontier  was  to  be  defended.  The  amount  of  the 
subsidy  was  fixed  at  200,000  tomans,  about  £125,000 
per  annum  ;  and  it  was  further  agreed  that  the  said 
subsidy  should  not  be  paid  in  case  a  war  with  any 
European  nation  should  have  been  produced  by  an 


232  HISTORY   OF   BRITISH   INDIA. 


BOOK  L  aggression  on  the  part  of  Persia.  The  other  modifi- 
^  ^^'^ '  cations  little  affected  the  preliminary  conditions ;  and, 
1810.  at  a  subsequent  date,  the  Persian  court  was  compelled 
to  relinquish  the  stipulated  subsidy.'  Little  ultimate 
advantage  accrued  to  either  power  from  the  inter- 
course which  it  had  been  considered  so  essential  to 
the  political  interests  of  both  to  maintain. 

'  See  the  several  engagements  with  Persia  of  1809,  1814,  and  1828,  in 
the  treaties  printed  by  order  of  the  House  of  Commons,  1 1th  March,  18S9. 


CHAPTER  V. 


Appointment  of  Sir  G.  Barlow  to  the  Goveimment  of 
Madras, — miacceptable  to  the  settlement. — The  state 
of  popular  feeling. — Comrnencement  of  agitation. — 
Case  of  Mr.  Sherson. — Proceedings  of  the  Com- 
mission for  the  investigation  of  the  debts  of  the 
Nawab  of  the  Ca^matic. — Trials  of  Reddy  JRaOy — 
his  conviction, — his  pardon  and  death. — Affairs  of 
Travancore.  —  Disputes  between  the  Raja  and  the 
Resident. — Enmity  of  the  Dewan, — sets  on  foot  an 
insurrection, — abetted  by  the  Dewan  of  Cochin. — 
Troops  07'dered  to  Travancore  —  The  Residents 
house  attacked, — his  escape. — Operations  ofUie  Sub- 
sidiary force.  —  Murdei*  of  Europeans  by  the  De- 
wan. —  Army  sent  to  tlie  Province  wider*  Colonel 
St.  Leger. — Storm  of  the  Arambidi  Lines. — Defeat 
of  the  Nairs  at  Quilon. — Advance  to  tJie  Capital. 
— Submission  of  the  Raja. — Flight  of  the  Dewan. 


HISTORY   OF   BRITISH   INDIA.  233 

—  Sancttiary  violated.  —  Death  of  the  Dewan. — 
Seizure  and  execution  of  his  brother. — The  body  of 
the  Dewan  gibbeted.  —  Sentiments  of  the  Bengal 
Government.  —  Disorganised  condition  of  Travan- 
core. — Administration  of  affairs  by  the  Resident  as 
Dewan  under  the  Raja  and  his  successors. — Restora- 
tion of  prosperity. — Similar  system  and  results  in 
Cochin.—  Disputes  between  the  Governor  and  Com- 
mander-in-chief—  The  latter  refused  a  seat  in 
Council  by  the  Courts — his  dissatisfaction  and  resig- 
nation.—  Discontents  of  the  Officers  of  the  Coast 
army^ — their  causes. — Tent  contract  abolished. — Rea- 
sons assigned  in  the  Quarter-Master-GeneraTs  report 
offensive  to  Offi>cers  commanding  corps^ — demand  a 
court-martial  on  Colonel  Munro. — The  Commander- 
in-chief  places  Colonel  Munro  in  arrest. — Govem- 
fnent  cancels  the  arrest. — General  MacdowaU  issues  a 
General  Order  on  the  sulyject^  and  embarks  for  Eng- 
land.— Counter  Order  by  the  Government. — Subse- 
quent severity. — Suspension  of  Major  Boles. — Effect 
upon  the  Officers. — Orders  of  the  1st  of  May, — 
Violent  proceedings  at  Hyderabad. — Mutinous  con- 
duct of  the  garrison  of  Masulipatam. — Threatened 
march  of  tlie  troops  to  Madras. — Firmness  of  the 
Government — Consequent  arrangements. — Test  pro- 
posed to  the  European  Officers. — Appeal  to  the  Native 
Troops. — Their  allegiance. — The  garrison  of  Seinn- 
gapatam  in  open  rebellion. — Colonel  Close  sent  to 
Hyderabad. —  Ojicers  of  the  Subsidiary  force  sign 
the  testy — their  example  followed. — Arrival  of  the 
Governor-General  at  Madras. — Courts-martial. — 
Sir  Samuel  Achmuty  Commander-in-chief  and 
Member  of  Council. —  Proceedings  in  England. — 


234  HISTORY   OF   BRITISH   INDIA. 

Warm  disputes  in  the  Court  of  Directors. — Officers 
restored  to  the  service. — Sir  G.  Barlow  finally  recalled. 


BOOK  I.  To  compensate  to  Sir  George  Barlow  for  the  dis- 
cHAP.  V.  appointment  which  had  been  inflicted  upon  him 
1808.  by  his  supersession  in  the  high  office  of  Governor- 
General,  the  Administration  in  England  consented 
to  his  eventual  elevation  to  that  dignity,  and  in 
the  mean  while  concurred  in  his  nomination  to  the 
government  of  Fort  St.  George/  He  was  accord- 
ingly appointed  Governor  of  Madras,  and  assumed 
charge  of  his  new  duties  at  the  end  of  December, 
1807.^ 

Various  circumstances  conspired  to  render  the 
appointment  of  Sir  George  Barlow  unacceptable  to 
the  servants  of  the  Company  under  the  Madras 
Presidency.  His  being  a  member  of  a  different 
service  was  one  source  of  his  unpopularity,  and  his 
well-known  character  as  a  rigorous  advocate  and 
unrelenting  enforcer  of  measures  of  public  economy 
and  retrenchment  produced  a  still  more  universal 
and  profound  impression  adverse  to  his  person  and 

'  '*  He  (Sir  George  Barlow)  is  now  subjected  to  the  diBcredit  of  being 
superseded  in  the  Goremment-General ;  to  the  succession  of  which,  after 
having  once  actually  filled  that  high  office,  he  stood  for  the  third  time  ap- 
pointed."— Protests  of  Messrs.  Parry,  Astell,  Smith,  and  BeU,  against  the 
recall  of  Sir  G.  Barlow  in  1812.  So  Mr.  Grant  in  a  separate  protest 
observes,  **  I  come  now  to  speak  of  the  order  rescinding  the  appointment 
made  of  Sir  G.  Barlow,  in  May  1807,  to  be  Goyernor- General  of  Bengal 
in  succession  to  Lord  Minto." — ^Dissents,  &c.,  published  by  Sir  Bobert 
Barlow.     Murray,  1813. 

'  The  occurrences  of  Sir  G.  Barlow's  administration  are  fully  detailed, 
not  only  in  the  numerous  pamphlets  published  both  by  his  friends  and 
enemies,  but  in  the  official  documents  relating  to  the  transactions  them- 
selves, and  to  the  discussions  which  they  occasioned  in  the  Court  of  Di- 
rectors, which  were  printed  by  order  of  Parliament  at  the  following  several 
dates,  25th  May,  1810 ;  Ist  April,  1811 ;  3rd  May,  1811 ;  13th  June,  1811 ; 
2l8t  Jujie,  1811,  and  Uth  AprU,  1812. 


GOVERNOR  OF  MADRAS  UNPOPULAR.  235 

his  government.*      Unfortunately,  he  does  not  ap-  book  i. 
pear  to  have  been  qualified  or  disposed  to   dissi- 


pate  the  prejudices  which  anticipated  his  presence.  I8O8. 
His  manners  were  reserved  and  unconciliating :  a 
stranger  at  Madras,  and  of  retiring  habits,  he  gave 
his  confidence  too  exclusively  to  the  knot  of  civil 
and  military  functionaries  by  whom  he  was  imme- 
diately surrounded :  his  notions  of  the  claims  of  the 
executive  powers  of  Government  to  prompt  and 
unquestioning  obedience  were  lofty  and  uncompro- 
mising; and  in  the  stem  exaction  of  acquiescence  he 
undervalued  apparently  the  necessity,  which  "  every 
statesman  ought  to  feel,  of  mutual  accommodation 
and  concession  in  the  controversies  and  contentions 
of  mankind,  and  was  wanting  in  a  liberal  consider- 
ation for  human  feelings  and  infirmities."  These 
defects  were  not  counterbalanced,  in  the  estimation 
of  those  whom  he  was  set  over,  by  the  acknowledged 
merits  of  his  public  character,  his  conscientious  sense 
of  the  importance  of  his  duties,  or  his  industry  and 
ability  in  their  discharge ;  nor  was  time  allowed  for 
the  due  appreciation  of  the  excellence  which,  under 
an  unattractive  deportment,  distinguished  his  private 
life.  The  state  of  society  also  at  Madras,  and  the  sen- 
timents which  had  for  some  time  pervaded  the  Cioast 


*  ^  I  am  under  the  necessity  of  ayowing,  with  infinite  regret,  another 
▼ery  operating  principle  of  these  discontents,  which  have  since  matured 
fhemselyes  gradually,  but  without  interruption,  into  the  extremes  of  public 
diaorder.  I  allude  to  the  unjust  but  rery  general  and  vehement  prejudices 
against  the  person  and  character  of  Sir  G.  Barlow,  which  may  have  been 
in  some  deg^ree  the  unaroidable,  but  were  certainly  the  unmerited,  conse- 
quences of  his  firm  and  faithful  discharge  of  ungracious  and  unpopular, 
but  sacred  and  essential  duties,  not  sought  or  relished  by  himself,  but  cast 
by  circumstances  peculiar  to  the  times  on  the  period  of  his  administration 
in  Bengal.'* — Letter  from  Lord  Minto  to  the  Secret  Committee,  5th  Feb., 
1810 ;  Pari.  Papers,  Ist  April,  1811,  p.  948. 


236  HISTORY   OF    BRITISH   INDIA. 


BOOK  I.  army,  had  accumulated  elements  of  discord  which 
__^jj[^  the  slightest  breath  was  sufficient  to  set  in  agitation  : 
1808.  dissensions  and  discontents  accordingly  immediately 
burst  forth,  and  rendered  the  administration  of  the 
new  Governor  of  Madras  a  season  of  unprecedented 
private  misery,  and  unexampled  public  peril  and 
alarm. 

Tlie  first  occasion  of  offence  occurred  in  the  set- 
tlement of  Madras,  and  followed  closely  upon  Sir 
George  Barlow's  arrival.  On  assuming  the  reins 
of  power,  he  found  in  progress  an  inquiry  instituted 
by  order  of  his  predecessor,  Mr.  Petrie,  into  the 
conduct  of  a  Mr.  Sherson,  a  civil  servant  of  some 
standing,  of  a  resj)ectable  character,  and  a  person 
much  esteemed  in  society ;  who  had  held  the  office  of 
superintendent  of  the  public  stores  of  rice  laid  in  by 
the  Government  of  Madras,  to  be  retailed  in  small 
quantities  to  the  people,  as  a  precaution  against  the 
recurrence  of  those  famines  which  had  frequently 
desolated  the  Presidency.  Charges  of  fraud  in  this 
department  were  preferred  against  Mr.  Sherson,  and 
a  committee  was  appointed  for  their  investigation. 
That  abuses  in  an  arrangement  so  liable  to  be 
abused  seemed  probable;  but  their  nature  and  ex- 
tent were  undetermined,  and  the  partici[)ation  or  cog- 
nizance of  the  principal  unsubstantiated.  His  ac- 
counts submitted  to  the  civil  auditor  were  pro- 
nounced correct ;  yet,  as  they  did  not  tally  with  the 
native  accounts  of  the  office,  Mr.  Sherson,  and  Mr. 
Smith  the  auditor,  were  both  removed  from  their 
situations,  and  the  former  was  suspended  from  the 
service  pending  the  j)leasure  of  the  Court  of  Direc- 
tors.     An    opinion    generally  prevailed    that   both 


CIVIL    DISCONTENTS.  237 

these  officers  had  been  harshly,  if  not  unjustly,  dealt  book  i. 
with ;    and  Sir  George  Barlow  incurred  much  ob-  J^^^^^ 
loquy  from  having  precipitately  believed  represen-     I8O8. 
tations  asserted  to  be  interested  or  malicious. 

That  he  too  hastily  adopted  a  decided  opinion  in 
the  matter,  and,  in  his  intolerance  of  supposed  offi- 
cial peculation,  inflicted  severe  punishment  before 
its  justice  was  undeniably  established,  was  shown 
by  subsequent  events.  A  prosecution  was  com- 
menced in  the  Supreme  Court  of  Madras  against 
Mr.  Sherson,  and  after  considerable  delays,  during 
which  a  change  of  Government  had  taken  place,  the 
cause  came  on  for  trial.  Mr.  Sherson  was  acquitted, 
not  only  of  legal,  but,  in  the  opinion  of  one  of  his 
Judges,  of  moral  criminality.^  It  was  accordingly 
resolved  by  the  Court  of  Directors,  "  that  the  severe 
measures  adopted  relative  to  Mr.  Sherson  had  been 
founded  upon  erroneous  grounds;'*  and  he  was  re- 
stored by  them  to  the  service,  with  a  pecuniary  in- 
demnification of  20,000  pagodas  for  his  losses.  Tlie 
resolutions  were  confirmed  in  terms  still  more  em- 
phatic by  the  Court  of  Proprietors.^ 

Animosities  still  more  violent  and  extensive  were 
engendered  by  the  part  which  the  Governor  of  Ma- 
dras deemed  it  incumbent  upon  him  to  take  in 
support  of  a  committee  which  had  been  appointed 
under  an  act  of  parliament  for  the  investigation  and 
adjustment  of  the  debts  of  the  Nawab  of  the  Car- 


'  Sir  John  Newbolt :  the  other  Judges  were  Sir  Thomas  Strange  and 
Sir  Francis  Macnaghten. 

'  Report  of  Debate  in  the  Court  of  Proprietors,  28th  April  and  5th 
May,  1815,  by  Mr.  Fraser ;  London,  1815.  Report  of  Proceedings  in  the 
Supreme  Court,  Madras,  28th  March,  1814 ;  Honourable  Company  v. 
Sherson  and  others. 


238  HISTORY   OP   BRITISH   INDIA. 


BOOK  I.  natic.  The  principles  which  had  been  enjoined  by 
the  Board  of  Controul  in  1784  for  the  settlement 
1808.  of  all  claims  upon  the  Nawab  have  aU^ady  been 
described*/  and,  under  this  application,  the  amount 
of  debt  admitted  at  that  date  without  any  scrutiny, 
and  which  was  known  as  the  Registered  debt,  had 
been  liquidated  by  May,  1804.  But,  besides  the 
amount  of  debt  so  discharged,  claims  to  a  much 
greater  extent  had  been  advanced.  These  had  been 
submitted  to  examination  before  a  committee  which 
was  formed  at  Madras,  the  operations  of  which  con- 
tinued from  1785  to  1791.  They  allowed  some  of 
the  demands  brought  before  them,  but  left  the  far 
larger  number  for  further  investigation ;  and  there 
the  matter  rested.  When  the  entire  revenues  of 
the  Camatic  were  assumed  by  the  Company's  Gro- 
vemment,  it  was  considered  but  just  to  take  the 
incumbrances  along  with  them,  and  to  pay  off  all 
valid  demands  upon  the  former  Administration.  An 
engagement  to  this  end  was  concluded  between  the 
Company  and  the  creditors  in  July  1805,  and  com- 
missioners to  make  a  settlement  were  nominated. 
In  the  year  following,  an  act  of  parliament  v^^as 
passed  for  enabling  the  commissioners  acting  in 
execution  of  an  agreement  made  between  the  East 
India  Company  and  the  private  creditors  of  the 
Nabobs  of  the  Camatic  the  better  to  carry  the  same 
into  effect.^ 

The  engagement  thus  legalized  by  the  Legisla^ 

*  Vol.  ▼.  p.  S6. 

*  Parliamentary  Debates,  April  14th  and  16th,  1806.  In  moving  for 
leave  to  bring  in  the  bill,  Mr.  Hobhouse  gave  a  full  and  perspicuous  his- 
tory of  the  arrangements  vrhich  had  been  made  for  the  liquidation  of  these 
debts. 


CARNATIC   COMMISSION.  289 

ture  provided  that  a  fixed  annual  sum  (3,40,000  book  i. 
pagodas,  or  £136,000)  should  be  set  apart  from  the  '^^^'  ""' 


revenues  of  the  Camatic  for  the  payment  of  all  isos. 
such  debts  as  should  be  admitted  to  be  just  and 
valid  by  commissioners  appointed  in  England  for 
their  adjudication,  assisted  by  similar  commissioners 
at  Madras;  whose  duty  it  should  be  to  collect  infor- 
mation and  evidence,  both  oral  and  documentary, 
for  transmission  to  the  commissioners  at  home,  in 
whom  alone  the  power  of  final  admission  or  rejec- 
tion was  vested:  and,  in  order  that  the  Indian 
commissioners  might  be  as  free  as  possible  from  all 
motives  of  local  interest  or  influence,  it  was  agreed 
that  they  should  be  appointed  by  the  Govemor- 
Greneral,  and  that  they  should  be  selected  from  the 
Civil  service  of  Bengal.  Accordingly,  at  the  period 
under  review,  three  commissioners,  who  were  mem- 
bers of  the  Bengal  Civil  service,  were  sitting  at 
Madras  to  investigate  the  demands  of  persons  claim- 
ing to  be  creditors  of  the  Nawabs  of  Arcot,  and 
producing  bonds  and  other  vouchers  asserted  to 
have  been  originally  granted  by  those  princes  in 
acknowledgment  of  actual  loans  or  real  pecuniary 
obligations. 

The  long  interval  which  had  elapsed  since  the 
investigation  of  the  Camatic  debts  had  been  com- 
menced, and  the  prospect  which  the  present  ar- 
rangement encouraged  of  their  being  ultimately 
paid,  had  not  only  protracted  the  existence  of  those 
vouchers  which  were  of  unimpeachable  authenticity, 
but  had  prompted  the  fabrication  of  a  vast  mass  of 
fictitious  documents^  in  evidence  of  unreal  transac- 

'  The  extent  of  these  forgeries  and  fabrications  is  shown  by  the  result. 


240  HISTORY  OF   BRITISH   INDIA. 

BOOK  L  tions.      It   was   not  an   easy  task  to  discriminate 
CHAP.  V.  Ij^^^^^j^   ii^Q   foig^   g^jjj  lY^Q  l^rue  bonds;    and   the 

1808.  former,  having  long  passed  from  hand  to  hand  with- 
out question,  had  become,  in  the  ordinary  course 
of  transfer,  the  property  of  individuals  wholly  un- 
connected with  the  original  fraud,  and  entertaining 
no  doubt  of  the  goodness  of  the  security.  Many 
bonds  of  large  amount  had  come  very  honestly  into 
the  possession  of  persons  of  rank  and  influence  in 
the  society  of  Madras,  who  were  naturally  and  ex- 
cusably interested  in  establishing  the  validity  of 
deeds  upon  which  their  fortunes  mainly  depended. 
When,  therefore,  the  commissioners  from  Bengal, 
early  in  1808,  entered  upon  their  oflice  at  Madras, 
they  found  the  difficulties,  inseparable  from  the  na- 
ture of  their  duty  and  the  novelty  of  their  position, 
aggravated  by  the  opposition  which  they  encx)un- 
tered.  In  this  situation  they  gladly  availed  them- 
selves of  any  assistance  which  offered  a  reasonable 
chance  of  affording  them  the  information  they  were 
appointed  to  obtain  ;  and  they  were  fully  justified  in 
attaching  consideration  to  the  advice  and  opinions 
of  a  native  named  Roddy  Rao,  as  he  had  been  the 
principal  accountant  in  the  financial  office  of  the 
late  Nawab  of  Arcot,  and  was  fully  informed  of  the 
extent  and  character  of  the  claims  upon  his  master, 
and  as  he  was  a  man  of  ability  and  had  always  been 
reputed  respectable  and  honest. 

Shortly  after  this   selection   had   been  made,  a 
bond  held  by  Reddy  Rao  himself  came  under  the 

The  final  report  of  the  Cariiatic  commissiouers,  dated  March  1830,  states 
the  amount  originally  claimed  to  have  been  above  thirty  millions  sterling 
(£30,404,919  1«.  ^d,)  The  amount  allowed  was  little  more  than  two 
millions  and  a  half  (€2,686,148  12a.  8]f/.) 


FABRICATED   BONDS.  241 

inspection  of  the  commissioners.      Its  authenticity  book  i. 
was  challenged  by  Avadanam  Papia,  another  native  ^^^^'  ^' 


creditor.  The  commissioners,  upon  investigating  isos. 
the  charge,  pronounced  the  bond  of  Reddy  Rao 
genuine,  and  prosecuted  the  witnesses  Papia  had 
brought  forward,  for  perjury.  Papia  had  the  start  of 
them,  and  carried  his  accusation  of  forgery  before 
a  magistrate,  who  committed  Reddy  Rao  for  trial. 
Regarding  the  prosecution  as  a  mere  trick  intended 
to  deprive  them  of  essential  assistance,  the  com- 
missioners appealed  to  the  Government  of  Madras ; 
and  upon  their  representations,  and  at  their  request, 
the  law  officers  of  the  Company  were  ordered  to 
conduct  the  defence  of  Reddy  Rao.  This  measure 
and  the  proceedings  against  Papia  filled  all  classes 
of  creditors  with  alarm,  inasmuch  as  the  appearance 
of  (Jovernment  as  a  party  in  opposition  to  their 
claims,  was  calculated  to  deter  the  natives  from 
giving  any  testimony  which  they  might  think  unac- 
ceptable to  the  superior  authorities,  and  might  de- 
prive the  claimants  in  many  instances  of  the  only 
means  by  which  they  could  substantiate  their  de- 
mands. Great  excitement  spread  throughout  the 
settlement ;  and  many  individuals,  of  high  rank  in 
the  service  and  much  consideration  in  society,  in- 
veighed vehemently  against  an  arrangement  which 
was  attributed  to  the  partiality  and  prejudices  of 
the  Governor.  The  Government  persisted,  and  with 
reason ;  for  no  good  cause  could  be  assigned  why  the 
commissionei*s  should  be  debarred  from  the  aid  of 
the  legal  advisers  of  the  state.  But,  not  satisfied 
with  a  calm  perseverance  in  a  right  course,  measures 
VOL.  I.  R 


242  HISTORY   OF   BRITISH   INDIA. 


BOOK  I.  of  ill-timed  and  injudicious  severity  towards  indi- 
^^^^^J^  viduals  were  adopted,  which  had  the  appearance  of 
1808.  a  determination  to  substitute  intimidation  for  in- 
quiry. Indignant  at  the  impediments  which  had 
been  thrown  in  the  way  of  the  commissioners,  the 
Government  dismissed  the  magistrate,  Mr.  Mait- 
land,  by  whom  Reddy  Rao  had  been  committed; 
required  Mr.  Parry,  a  merchant  residing  at  Madras, 
who  had  taken  a  conspicuous  part  in  the  opposition 
to  the  acts  of  the  commission,  to  return  immediately 
to  Europe ;  and  removed  Mr.  Roebuck,  a  civilian  of 
long  standing,  from  the  situation  he  filled  at  the 
Presidency,  to  an  office  of  inferior  rank  and  emolu- 
ment in  the  provinces,  where  he  shortly  afterwards 
died.  In  these  manifestations  of  the  displeasure 
of  the  Government  undue  and  unnecessary  rigour 
was  exhibited.  The  opposition  may  have  originated 
in  interested  motives,  and  may  have  been  intempe- 
rate and  indecorous ;  but  some  consideration  might 
have  been  reasonably  entertained  for  the  feelings 
which  the  dread  of  loss  of  property  could  not  fail 
to  inspire,  and  the  virulence  of  which  would  have 
been  corrected  by  the  steady  perseverance  of  the 
commissioners  in  the  calm  and  im])artial  perform- 
ance of  their  functions.  It  was  not  in  the  power  of 
any  combination  to  defeat,  however  it  might  retard, 
the  objects  of  the  commission;  and,  although  en- 
titled to  the  supj)ort  of  the  Government,  it  needed 
not  its  >\Tathful  and  vindictive  interj^osition.  The 
interference  of  authority  also  in  this  stage  of  the 
business,  whilst  proceedings  in  the  highest  court  of 
judicature  were  ponding,  was,  to  say  the  least,  ex- 
ceedingly ill-timed,  as  it  afforded  a  specious  plea  for 


TRIALS   OF   REDDY   RAO.  243 

aecusing  the  Government  of  a  design  to  obstruct  book  i. 
the  administration  of  justice.  ^^^'  ^' 


The  trial  of  Reddy  Rao  took  place:  the  Chief  isoa. 
Justice  pronounced  an  elaborate  judgment  in  his 
favour;  the  jury  found  him  guilty.  A  new  trial 
was  moved  for,  but  the  decision  was  postponed ;  and 
in  the  mean  time  an  indictment  for  perjury  was 
preferred  against  a  person  named  Batley,  the  Eng- 
lish translator  and  secretary  of  the  Nawab,  and  one 
of  the  witnesses  on  behalf  of  Reddy  Rao.  It  was 
in  fact  a  second  trial  of  Reddy  Rao,  as  it  involved 
the  question  of  the  spuriousness  of  his  bond,  A 
verdict  unfavourable  to  his  cause  was  given  by  a 
special  jury,  in  the  conviction  of  the  defendant. 

A  third  trial  was  held :  Reddy  Rao  was  charged 
with  having  paid  a  debt  due  to  another  native  with 
a  forged  bond,  knowing  it  to  be  forged ;  and  he  was 
again  found  guilty  by  the  jury.  The  Chief  Justice, 
strongly  persuaded  of  his  innocence  and  of  that  of 
Batley,  suspended  delivery  of  the  sentence,  and  re- 
ferred the  evidence  through  the  Board  of  Controul 
to  the  King,  recommending  the  defendants  to  his 
Majesty,  "  not  as  the  objects  of  his  mercy,  but  as 
suitors  for  his  justice ;  conceiving  prosecutions  to  be  * 
the  King's,  and  that  a  greater  evil  could  scarcely 
happen  to  society  than  that  they  should  be  suffered 
to  become,  by  whatever  means,  the  successful  en- 
gines of  wrong."  ^  Necessarily  guided  by  the  opi- 
nions of  the  Chief  Justice,  the  pardon  of  the  Crown 
was  granted ;  but  before  it  reached  Madras  the  chief 
actor  in  the  scene  had  ceased  to  be  amenable  to 

^  Two  Utten  from  Sir  Thomas  Strange,  27th  Feb.  and  4th  May,  1809,  to 
the  Right  Honourable  R.  Dundas. — Parliamentary  Papers,  Camatic  debts. 

r2 


244  HISTORY  OF   BRITISH   INDIA. 

BOOK  I.  human  judgment :  Reddy  Rao  poisoned  himself  in 
^^^^'  ^'  little  more  than  a  twelvemonth  after  his  last  trial, 
isoa.  He  had  not  long  continued,  after  that  event,  to 
enjoy  the  confidence  of  the  commissioners.  Sus- 
picion was  awakened :  it  was  discovered  that  he  vras 
deeply  implicated  in  the  issue  of  the  fabricated 
securities,  and  in  other  frauds  upon  the  Nawab's 
treasury;  and  the  very  bond,  the  genuineness  of 
which  had  been  so  tenaciously  upheld  by  the  com- 
missioners, was  reported  by  them  to  their  fellow 
commissioners  in  London  a  forgery.  The  result 
was  little  calculated  to  gain  credit  or  favour  for  the 
Governor  of  Madras,  who,  in  his  eagerness  to  main- 
tain unimpaired  the  powers  of  the  commissioners, 
had  thrown  the  whole  weight  of  his  authority  into 
the  same  scale  with  an  impostor  and  a  cheat ;  and, 
in  defence  of  a  knave,  had  inflicted  on  men  of  cha- 
racter and  honour  penury  and  disgrace,  because  in 
protecting  valuable  interests  they  had  been  be- 
trayed into  indiscretion  and  intemperance.* 

However  inveterate  the  mutual  ill-will  which  was 
engendered  by  these  proceedings,  they  were  far  ex- 
ceeded in  intensity  and  importance  by  the  dissen- 
•  sions  which  about  the  same  time  broke  out  between 
the  Governor  of  Madras  and  a  large  division  of 
the  army.  Before  entering  upon  an  account  of  the 
lamentable  consequences  attending  them,  it  will  be 

*  The  best  authenticated  accounts  of  these  proceedings  are  to  be  found 
in  the  papers  printed  for  Parliament,  3rd  May  and  11th  June,  1811,  re- 
latin g  to  the  Camatic  debts.  Ex- parte  statements,  which  agree  as  to  the 
main  facts,  are  to  be  met  with  in  the  Parliamentary  papers  referred 
to  :  also  in  Marsh's  Review  of  Sir  G.  Barlow's  Administration ;  Lon- 
don, 1812:  Exposure  of  the  Misrepresentations  and  Calumnies  in  Marsh's 
Keview;  London,  1813  :  Short  Narrative  of  the  Late  Trials,  &c.;  London, 
1810  :  Correspondence  of  Messrs.  Abbott,  Parry,  and  Maitland,  with  the 
Court  of  Directors ;  London,  1813 :  and  in  other  pamphlets. 


AFFAIRS   OF   TRAVANCOBE.  245 

advisable   to    notice   the    political   occurrences   by  booki. 
which  they  were  preceded.  jchap^jt^ 

The  mutual  dissatisfaction  which  had  long  sub-  I8O8. 
sisted  between  the  Raja  of  Travancore  and  the 
British  Government  has  been  already  adverted  to. 
Towards  the  end  of  1808  the  subsidy  which  the 
Raja  was  bound  to  pay  had  fallen  into  a  long  ar- 
rear,  and  the  Resident  peremptorily  demanded  its 
liquidation.  The  Raja  and  his  principal  minister 
protested  that  the  revenues  of  Travancore  were  in- 
capable of  supporting  so  heavy  a  burthen  as  the 
charge  of  four  battalions  of  Company's  troops,  and 
required  their  reduction.  The  Resident  replied  by 
insisting  on  the  dismissal  of  an  imperfectly  dis- 
ciplined body  of  infantry  in  the  Raja's  service,  called 
the  Camatic  Brigade,  as  a  useless  and  expensive 
corps,  the  discontinuance  of  which  would  obviate 
all  difficulty  regarding  the  subsidy.  The  Camatic 
Brigade  was  looked  upon  by  the  Raja  as  an  essen- 
tial part  of  his  dignity,  and  indispensable  to  his  per- 
sonal safety;  and  the  proposal  to  disband  it  was 
treated  as  a  preliminary  step  to  the  seizure  of  the 
Raja's  person,  and  the  annihilation  of  his  authority. 
Appeals  were  made  by  the  Raja  to  the  Governments 
of  Madras  and  Bengal,  in  which  he  asserted  that 
the  treaty  of  1805  had  been  forced  upon  him ;  that 
he  had  been  intimidated  into  its  execution  by  the 
menaces  of  the  Resident;  and  that  the  expense 
which  it  entailed  upon  the  revenues  of  his  princi- 
pality were  beyond  their  means  of  defraying  it.^ 
These  assertions  were  denied  by  the  Resident. 

'  An  opinion  seems  to  have  prevailed  that  the  difficulty  in  the  realisa- 
tion of  the  subsidy  arose  from  the  refusal  of  the  Company's  Government  to 


246  HISTORY   OF   BRITISH    INDIA. 


BOOK  I.  Besides  the  cause  of  discontent  arising  ont  of  the 
CHAP.  V.  g^i^gijy^  which  was  common  to  the  Raja  and  his 
1808.  counsellors,  his  Dewan  or  prime  minister,  Vailu 
Tambi,  had  personal  grounds  for  fear  and  resent- 
ment. Considering  him  to  be  the  chief  instigator 
of  the  Raja's  backwardness  in  fulfilling  his  pecu- 
niary engagements,  the  Resident  had  insisted  upon 
his  removal  from  his  situation,  and  the  appointment 
of  a  minister  more  submissive  to  British  controul. 
The  Dewan  professed  himself  willing  to  resign 
whenever  a  successor  should  be  appointed;  but, 
under  cover  of  his  pretended  acquiescence  in  the 
Resident's  will,  he  set  himself  to  work  to  organise 
an  insurrection  of  the  Nairs,  the  martial  population 
of  Malabar,  and  to  accomplish  the  murder  of  the 
Resident,  whom  he  hated  as  the  scourge  of  his 
country,  and  his  own  avowed  and  inexorable  foe. 


receive  payment  in  pepper,  agreeably  to  the  terms  of  the  original  treaty ; 
but,  which  having  fallen  in  value,  a  money  payment  was  demanded.  In 
Sir  Thomas  Munro's  examination  before  the  Committee  of  the  House  of 
Commons  in  April,  1813,  he  was  asked,  '*  Have  you  not  heard  that  the 
Raja  originally  entered  iuto  the  treaty  with  great  reluctance,  and  received 
our  troops  into  his  dominions,  for  the  payment  of  which  the  pepper  was 
agreed  to  be  delivered  ? "  his  reply  was,  "  I  have  not  so  heard."  The 
notion  may,  perhaps,  be  traced  to  the  Asiatic  Annual  Register  for  1809,  in 
which  this  account  of  the  alteration  from  payment  in  pepper  to  that  in 
moucy  is  assigned  as  a  cause  of  the  discontent  of  the  Raja  and  subsequent 
disturbances.  The  statement  is  nevertheless  erroneous.  In  the  first  cor- 
respondence with  the  Raja  in  1788,  the  option  of  paying  the  subsidy  in 
pepper  or  money  was  offered  to  him  :  he  chose  the  latter.  In  1793,  a  con- 
tract was  entered  into  with  him  for  the  purchase  of  pepper  for  eight  years, 
wholly  unconnected  with  the  subsidy.  In  1795,  an  article  of  the  treaty 
provided  for  the  perpetuity  of  the  pepper  contract,  subject  to  such  modi- 
fications as  should  from  time  to  time  be  agreed  upon ;  but  there  was  no 
stipulation  that  its  price  should  form  part  payment  of  the  subsidy.  No 
allusion  to  such  payment  is  contained  in  the  treaty  of  1805.  The  ori- 
ginal contract  provides  that  the  pepper  shall  be  paid  for  in  goods ;  and, 
shouUl  they  leave  a  balance,  that  should  be  paid  in  money.  The  commer- 
cial and  political  engagements  were  throughout  distinct,  and  no  complaint 
occurs  in  tlie  correspondence  on  this  account.  The  main  ground  of  conten- 
tion was  the  C^amatic  Brigade. 


INSURRECTION   OF  THE  NAIRS.  247 

He  prevailed  upon  the  Dew?,n  of  the  Raja  of  book  i. 
Cochin  to  join  him  in  the  plot;  and,  giving  en-  ^^^^'  ^' 
couragement  to  some  French  adventurers  from  the  isoa. 
Isle  of  France  who  had  landed  from  an  Arab  vessel 
on  the  coast  of  Malabar,  spread  abroad  a  report 
that  a  large  French  army  was  about  to  come  to 
assist  him  to  expel  the  English.  He  also  wrote 
circular  letters  to  the  neighbouring  Rajas  to  sum- 
mon them  to  combine  for  the  defence  of  their  reli- 
gion, which  he  affirmed  the  English  designed  to 
overthrow.  His  instigations  were  effectual:  arms 
were  collected,  and  the  people  were  prepared  se- 
cretly for  their  use.  The  popular  excitement  be- 
came known  to  the  Resident,  and  at  his  request  re- 
inforcements were  ordered  to  Travancore.  His 
Majesty's  12th  regiment  and  two  native  battalions 
were  directed  to  move  from  Malabar;  and  his 
Majesty's  69th,  and  three  battalions  of  native  in- 
fantry, with  artillery,  were  commanded  to  march 
from  Trichinopoly  to  his  succour. 

Alarmed  apparently  by  these  precautionary  mea- 
sures, the  Dewan  professed  his  readiness  to  resign 
immediately  if  his  personal  safety  were  guaranteed, 
and  arrangements  were  made  for  his  private  removal 
from  Alepi  to  Calicut  on  the  night  of  the  28th  of 
December.  On  that  same  night  a  body  of  armed 
men  surrounded  the  house  of  the  Resident.  He 
had  retired  to  rest,  but  was  awakened  by  the  indis- 
tinct noise  of  the  approaching  multitude ;  and,  going 
to  the  window  to  discover  the  cause,  was  fired  at 
by  the  assailants.  Before  an  entrance  could  be 
forced.  Colonel  Macaulay,  with  a  confidential  ser- 
vant, had  time  to  hide  themselves  in  a  lower  cham- 


248  HISTORY    OF   BRITISH   INDIA. 

BOOK  I.  l>er,  the  door  of  which  could  not  be  easily  distin- 
CHAP.  V.  jTQigt^^ j  fj.Qjjri  iiiQ  exterior  wall.  The  insurgents, 
1808.  having  broken  into  the  house,  sought  for  the  object 
of  their  vengeance  throughout  the  night  in  vain. 
At  daybreak  they  beheld  a  vessel  under  British  co- 
lours entering  the  port,  and  other  ships  were  discern- 
ible at  a  little  distance  making  for  the  harbour. 
They  now  thought  only  of  their  own  retreat,  and 
hastily  quitted  the  premises ;  affording  Colonel  Ma- 
caulay  an  opportunity  of  making  his  escape  and 
taking  refuge  on  board  the  vessel,  which  proved  to 
be  a  transport  with  part  of  the  reinforcement  from 
Malabar.  The  more  important  division  from  Trichi- 
nopoly  had  been  countermanded,  the  Madras  Gro- 
vernment  giving  ready  credence  to  the  simulated 
submission  of  the  Dewan.  The  news  of  the  insur- 
rection obliged  them  to  repeat  their  first  directions, 
and  in  the  middle  of  January  the  Trichinopoly 
force  commenced  its  advance  under  the  command 
of  the  Honourable  Colonel  St.  Leger. 

Before  he  was  joined  by  the  principal  reinforce- 
ments from  Malabar,  Colonel  Chalmers,  command- 
ing the  subsidiary  troops  cantoned  at  Quilon,  had 
commenced  offensive  operations.  On  the  30th  of 
December  he  learnt  that  great  numbers  of  armed 
Nairs  had  collected  at  a  residence  belonging  to  the 
minister,  at  no  great  distance  to  the  north  of  the 
cantonments;  and  that  an  equally  numerous  body 
had  assembled  at  Parur,  about  ten  miles  to  the 
south.  His  measures  were  promptly  taken.  Five 
companies  of  the  1st  battalion  of  the  4th  regiment 
of  native  infantry,  with  a  field-piece,  were  detached 
to  occupy  a  low  hiii  commanding  the  Dewan's  resi- 


ATIACK  ON  THE  SUBSIDIARY   FORCE.  249 

dence.    They  had  scarcely  reached  the  spot  when  book  i. 
they  were  attacked  by  the  enemy  in  numbers  greatly  J^^^^]_2» 


superior,  but  they  maintained  their  ground  during  1809. 
the  night ;  and,  being  strengthened  by  the  two  flank 
companies  of  the  13th  N.  I.  at  day-break,  they  ad- 
vanced against  the  Nairs,  defeated  them,  and  took 
}>ossession  of  the  house,  with  two  brass  and  four 
iron  guns,  with  which  it  had  been  converted  into  a 
temporary  battery.  Information  being  received  that 
a  body  of  the  enemy  above  four  thousand  strong 
were  advancing  along  the  coast  from  the  north,  the 
detachment  commanded  by  Major  Hamilton  proceed- 
ed to  meet  them.  They  were  encountered  at  the 
estuary  of  the  Kaladi  river,  where  some  had  crossed 
the  bar,  while  the  Carnatic  Brigade  was  drawn  up 
on  the  other  side  of  the  stream.  Those  who  had 
crossed  were  attacked  and  compelled  to  retreat, 
but  the  main  body  stood  firm ;  while  a  strong  divi- 
sion ascended  the  river,  in  order  to  pass  it  higher 
up  and  get  into  the  rear  of  the  British.  At  the 
same  time  news  arrived  that  the  force  from  the 
south,  estimated  at  more  than  ten  thousand  men, 
was  rapidly  advancing,  and  it  was  judged  prudent  to 
recall  the  detachment  to  the  cantonment.  The  re- 
treat of  the  trooj)S  gave  courage  to  the  insurgents. 

The  increasing  numbers  and  confidence  of  the 
Nairs  obliged  Colonel  Chalmers  to  remain  on 
the  defensive  at  Quilon,  where  he  was  reinforced 
early  in  January  by  his  Majesty's  12th  regiment 
under  Colonel  Picton.  On  the  other  hand,  the 
Dewan,  having  concentrated  his  forces,  amounting 
to  between  twenty  and  thirty  thousand  men,  with 
eighteen  guns,  advanced  to  Quilon,  and  on  the  15th  of 


250  HISTORY    OF   BRITISH   INDIA. 

BOOK  I.  January  attacked  the  British  lines,  defended  by  one 
CHAP.  V.  Eui-Qpean  regiment  and  three  battalions  of  Sipahis. 
1809.  The  action  began  at  six  in  the  morning;  the  enemy 
occupying  a  rising  ground,  from  which  their  guns 
opened  a  fire  on  the  British  encampment.  Leaving 
the  4th  native  infantry  to  cover  the  camp,  Colonel 
Chalmers  formed  the  rest  of  his  troops  in  two  co- 
lumns, the  right  under  Colonel  Picton,  the  left 
under  Major  Hamilton,  and  led  them  against  the 
Travancore  force.  A  stout  resistance  was  encoun- 
tered, and  a  division  of  the  enemy  attempted  at  the 
same  time  to  storm  the  camp.  They  were  repulsed, 
and,  after  a  conflict  of  five  hours'  duration,  the 
whole  were  driven  off  the  field,  leaving  seven  hun- 
dred slain,  and  losing  fifteen  pieces  of  artillery. 
The  British  loss  was  comparatively  trifling. 

Thus  foiled  in  his  attempt  upon  Quilon,  the 
Dewan  directed  a  considerable  division  of  his  fol- 
lowers against  what  promised  to  be  an  easier 
prey, — the  post  of  Cocliin,  which  was  held  by 
Major  Hewitt  with  two  companies  of  the  12th  re- 
giment, and  six  of  the  1st  battalion  of  the  17th 
native  infantry.  The  enemy  advanced  on  the  19th 
of  January  to  the  attack  in  three  masses,  each  a 
thousand  strong:  the  one  on  the  left  was  met, 
charged,  and  routed.  The  victors  then  fell  upon  the 
other  two  bodies,  which  opposed  a  more  resolute 
resistance,  but  were  forced  to  give  way.  Desisting 
from  furtlier  engagements  in  the  field,  they  spread 
round  Cochin  on  the  side,  land  and  covered  the  sea 
with  their  boats,  so  as  to  cut  off*  all  supplies.  Be- 
fore this  manoeuvre  had  j)ro(luced  serious  distress, 
the    Piedmontese    frigate,    with    the    Resident    on 


MURDER   OF   EUROPEANS.  251 

board,  anchored  off  the  town ;  and  her  boats,  with  book  i. 
some    small   armed   vessels    belonging   to    Cochin,  ^"^'''  ^' 


quickly  drove  the  enemy's  flotilla  into  the  river,  i809. 
pursued,  and  set  it  on  fire.  The  blockade  was  con- 
sequently raised ;  but  the  enemy  still  continued  in 
overpowering  numbers  in  the  vicinity  of  Quilon 
and  Cochin,  and  straitened  the  resources  and 
checked  the  movements  of  the  subsidiary  force, 
until  they  were  called  off  by  the  approach  of  danger 
in  other  directions.  During  this  interval  they  dis- 
graced their  cause  by  acts  of  atrocity,  which  served 
no  purpose  except  that  of  provoking  retribution. 
An  assistant-surgeon  of  the  name  of  Hume,  tra- 
velling at  night  on  the  30th  of  January,  was  seized 
on  his  route,  and  led  into  the  presence  of  the 
Dewan;  who,  although  he  knew  the  young  man 
personally,  and  had  benefited  by  his  professional 
advice,  commanded  him  to  be  conducted  to  the  sea- 
side, where  he  was  put  to  death  and  buried  in  the 
sand.  About  the  same  time  a  small  vessel,  with 
some  of  the  soldiers  of  the  12th  regiment  on  board, 
having  touched  at  Alepi  for  supplies,  the  men  were 
induced  to  land  by  the  appearance  of  cordiality 
among  the  people,  and  assurances  that  part  of  the 
subsidiary  force  was  in  the  neighbourhood.  Un- 
aware that  hostilities  had  commenced,  the  men, 
thirty  in  number,  disembarked,  and  as  soon  as 
they  landed  were  made  prisoners,  and  shortly  after- 
wards murdered.  This  was  also  done  by  order  of 
the  Dewan,  who  thus  effaced,  by  his  perfidy  and 
cruelty,  whatever  credit  he  might  have  claimed  for 
zeal  in  the  cause  of  his  country  and  his  prince. 
Finding  it  no  longer  possible  to  avoid  the  cost  of 


252  HISTORY   OF   BRITISH   INDIA. 

BOOK  I.  military  operations,  the  Government  of  Fort    St. 

^^^*  ^'  George  resolved  to  act  with  vigour,  especially  as  the 
1809.  advancing  season  of  the  year  admitted  not  of  fur- 
ther loss  of  time.  Colonel  Cuppage,  commanding 
in  Malabar,  was  ordered  to  enter  the  province  of 
Cochin  from  the  north,  and  join  Colonel  Chalmers, 
with  his  Majesty's  80th  regiment  and  two  bat- 
talions of  native  infantry ;  and  Colonel  St.  Leger 
was  directed  to  march  immediately  from  Trichino- 
poly,  wth  a  force  composed  of  his  Majesty's  69th 
regiment,  a  regiment  of  native  cavalry,  and  three 
battalions  of  native  infantry,*  besides  a  detachment 
of  Royal  artillery,  and  the  3rd  Ceylon  or  Kafri  re- 
giment, which  was  to  join  from  Ceylon.  Two  divi- 
sions, consisting  of  a  European  regiment  and  a  bat- 
talion of  Sipahis,  severally  commanded  by  Colonel 
Wallace  and  Lieutenant-Colonel  Gibbs,  were  sta- 
tioned in  the  Tinnivelly  district  and  the  vicinity  of 
Wynad,  to  keep  the  Travancoreans  in  check,  and 
eventually  co-operate  with  Colonel  St.  Leger's 
force.  A  proclamation  was  issued  by  the  Madras 
Government,  and  distributed  with  Colonel  St.  Le- 
ger's advance,  ascribing  the  necessity  of  military 
measures  to  the  intrigues  of  the  minister,  and  de- 
claring that  "  the  British  Government  had  no  other 
view  than  to  rescue  the  Raja  from  the  influence  of 
the  Dewan,  to  put  an  end  to  the  power  of  that 
minister,  and  to  re-establish  the  connexion  of  the 


'  The  force  consisted  of  bis  Majesty's  69th ;  both  battalions  of  the  Srd 
native  infantry  ;  Ist  battalion  and  one  company  of  the  2nd  battalion  of  the 
13th  ;  five  companies  of  the  2nd  battalion  of  the  lOtli  native  infantry  ;  6th 
native  cavalry ;  a  detachment  of  artillery  and  pioneers ;  a  detachment  of 
Koyal  artillery ;  and  Srd  Kafri  regim«*nt  from  Coylon.  But  the  last  did 
not  join  till  after  the  capture  of  the  Arambuli  lines. 


ARAMBULl   LINES.  253 


two  Governments   on  a  secure   and   happy   foun-  book  i. 

J      ..  CHAP.    V. 

dation.  

The  principality  of  Travancore  is  divided  from     isoo. 
the  province  of  Tinnivelly  by  the  southern  portion 
of  the  mountain-chain  which  runs  nearly  parallel 
with  the  coast  of  Malabar,  from  the  upper  part  of 
the    Peninsula   to   Cape    Comorin,   and   is   usually 
known  by  the  appellation  of  the  Western  Ghats. 
The  mountains  are  lofty  and  covered  with  jungle, 
and  present  in  general  almost  insuperable  obstacles 
to  the  march  of  an  army  with  baggage  and  artillery. 
The  most  practicable  passes  are  situated  near  the 
southernmost   extremity  of  the   chain,  where   the 
mountains  decline  in  elevation  as  they  approach  the 
sea ;  and  through  one  of  these,  the  pass  of  Arambuli 
or  Aramuni,  it  was  determined  on  this  occasion  to 
force  an  entrance  into  Travancore.     The  Arambuli 
pass  was  defended  by  formidable  lines,  consisting  of 
a  number  of  small  redoubts,  each  mounting  two  or 
three  guns,  and  connected  by  a  strong  wall  of  ma- 
sonry.    The  whole  extended  about  two  miles  along 
the  sides  of  steep  and  rugged  hills,  and  terminated 
at  either  extremity  by  a  strongly  fortified  mountain 
flanked  by  impenetrable  jungle.      The  high   road 
from   Palamkota   led    through   the   centre   of   the 
works,  by  a  gateway  which  was  commanded  by  two 
large  circular  bastions  armed  with  several  pieces  of 
ordnance.^     Colonel  St.  Leger  arrived  at  the  foot  of 
the  lines  on  the  6th  of  February ;  and,  as  the  divi- 
sion was  unequipped  with  a  battering  train,  deter- 
mined to  attempt  to  carry  the  pass  by  surprise.     On 
the  night  of  the  10th,  Major  Welsh,  with  two  com- 

'  Welsh's  Military  Reminiscences,  vol.  i.  p.  288. 


254  HISTORY   OF   BRITISH   INDIA. 

BOOK  I.  panies  of  the  69th,  four  flank  and  five  battalion 
companies  of  the  3rd  native  infantry,  quietly 
1809.  climbed  the  hill  on  which  the  southern  works  were 
erected,  and,  after  six  hours'  arduous  ascent,  reached 
the  foot  of  the  wall  unperceived.  The  ladders 
were  planted,  and  the  ramparts  scaled,  before  any 
effective  resistance  could  be  opposed ;  and  although 
a  short  stand  was  made,  which  was  attended  with 
some  loss  of  life,^  the  redoubt  was  quickly  in  posses- 
sion of  the  assailants.  As  soon  as  the  day  broke, 
the  guns  of  the  bastion  were  turned  upon  the  de- 
fence's of  the  pass,  which  they  enfiladed ;  and,  rein- 
forcements being  sent  to  Major  Welsh,  he  was 
strong  enough  to  attack  the  rest  of  the  lines,  and 
the  whole  of  the  works  were  speedily  cleared  of 
their  defenders. 

Having  thus  secured  his  entrance  into  Travan- 
core.  Colonel  St.  Leger  advanced  on  the  17th  of 
February  into  the  interior;  and  dislodged,  after  a 
short  action,  a  body  of  troops  strongly  posted,  with 
nine  guns,  on  the  bank  of  a  river  near  the  village  of 
Nagarkoil.  Tlie  next  march  brought  the  troops  to 
the  forts  of  Udagiri  and  Papanavaram,  which  were 
abandoned :  the  gates  were  set  open,  the  garrisons 
had  fled,  and  ensigns  denoting  submission  were  seen 
flying  in  every  direction.  Communications  were 
shortly  afterwards  received  from  the  Dewan  and 
from  the  King,  breathing  a  pacific  spirit,  and  depre- 
cating the  nearer  approach  of  the  troops  to  Trivan- 
drum,  the  capital.  Having  referred  the  letter  of 
the  King  to  the  Resident,  who  was  at  Cochin, 
Colonel  St.  Leger  marched  to  a  position  half-way 

*  Captain  Cunningham  of  the  69th  was  the  only  officer  killed. 


THE  INSURRECTION  SUPPRESSED.  255 

between  Udagiri  and  Kalachi  on  the  coast,  detach-  book  i. 
ing  a  part  of  his  force  to  occupy  the  latter,  and . 


open  a  communication  with  Colonel  Chalmers  at  i^os. 
QuiloiL  This  officer  had  continued  to  be  hemmed 
in  by  the  enemy  during  Colonel  St.  Leger's  ad- 
vance; but,  having  been  reinforced  by  part  of  the 
19th  regiment,  had,  shortly  before  the  communi- 
cation now  opened,  rid  himself  of  his  opponents. 
Marching  out  of  cantonments  on  the  21st  February 
in  two  columns,  severally  commanded  by  Colonel 
Kcton  and  Colonel  Stuart  of  the  19th,  he  attacked 
the  enemy's  position  in  front  of  his  encampment; 
and  although  they  were  five  thousand  strong,  and 
were  defended  by  batteries  and  entrenchments,  he 
carried  the  works,  captured  their  artillery,  and  dis- 
persed their  force.  After  the  action.  Colonel 
Chalmers  marched  towards  the  capital,  and  arrived 
at  the  high  ground  within  twelve  miles  of  Trivan- 
drum  much  about  the  same  time  that  Colonel  St. 
Leger  took  up  a  similar  position  on  the  opposite 
side.  About  the  same  period  also,  the  division 
under  Colonel  Cuppage  crossed  the  frontier  on  the 
north  without  opposition,  and  advanced  to  Par  dr. 
The  country  was  now  completely  in  the  possession 
of  the  British :  the  Nairs  disbanded,  and  retired  to 
their  homes ;  the  Dewan,  despairing  of  forgiveness, 
fled  into  the  thickets ;  and  the  Raja,  left  to  himself, 
hastened  to  tender  his  submission,  and  profess  his 
readiness  to  conform  to  any  conditions  which  the 
Resident  should  please  to  dictate. 

The  troops  being  concentrated  round  Trivan- 
drum,  Colonel  Macaulay  proceeded  to  the  capital, 
and   concerted    with    the  Raja   the   conditions    on 


256  HISTORY  OF   BRITISH  INDIA.    . 

BOOK  I.  which   tranquillity   was   to    be   restored,   and    the 


CHAP.    v. 


prince  allowed  to  retain  possession  of  his  dominions. 
1809.  The  terms  were  adjusted  by  the  1st  of  March.  The 
Raja  consented  to  pay  the  arrears  of  the  subsidy 
and  the  expenses  of  the  war,  and  eleven  lakhs  of 
rupees  were  paid  on  the  former  account  before  the 
expiration  of  the  month.*  The  Camatic  Brigade, 
and  some  Nair  battalions  in  the  Raja's  service, 
were  dismissed,  and  the  defence  of  the  prince  and 
of  his  country  was  entrusted  exclusively  to  the  sub- 
sidiary force.  A  new  Dewan,  supposed  to  be  in 
the  interest  of  the  English,  and  recommended  by 
the  Resident,  was  appointed.  The  invading  forces 
were  withdrawn  immediately  upon  the  conclusion  of 
the  treaty:  a  portion  of  the  subsidiary  battalions 
was  permanently  quartered  in  the  proximity  of  Tri- 
vandrum ;  the  rest  returned  to  their  former  canton- 
ments. 

The  zeal  of  the  new  minister  in  the  cause  of  his 
English  friends  was  promptly  evinced  by  the  active 
measures  which  were  instituted  for  the  capture  of 
his  predecessor.  Traces  of  him  were  discovered 
among  the  mountains ;  and  means  were  devised  for 
preventing  his  being  supplied  with  the  necessaries 
of  life  by  the  peasantry,  who  had  hitherto  minis- 
tered to  his  wants.  Reduced  to  extreme  distress, 
the  Dewan  made  his  way,  as  a  last  resource,  to  the 
Pagoda  of  Bhagwadi,  which  from  ancient  usage 
enjoyed  the  privileges  of  a  sanctuary.     The  emis- 

'  The  Madras  Government  proposed  that  the  guns  and  stores  captured 
by  the  troops  should  become  public  property  upon  the  payment  to  the  army 
of  their  value,  which  should  be  charged  to  the  Raja.  The  Government  of 
Bengal  justly  objected  to  this  double  penalty,  and  directed  the  stores  to  be 
paid  for  by  the  Madras  Government. — Appendix  43,  Second  Report  of 
Select  Committee,  May,  1810 ;  and  MS.  Records. 


DEATH   OF   THE   DEWAN-  257 

varies  of  the  minister,  although  Hindus,  disregarded  book  i. 
the  sanctity  of  the  temple,  forcibly  entered  it,  and         ' 
broke  open  the  door  of  the  chamber  to  which  Vailu     I809. 
Tambi  and  his  brother  had  retreated.     As  they  en- 
tered the  apartment,  the  Dewan  was  found  expiring 
of  wounds  inflicted  by  his  own  hand,  or,  at  his  en- 
treaty, by  the  hand  of  his  brother,  to  save  him  from 
falling  alive  into  the  power  of  his  unrelenting  foes. 
The    brother    w^as    seized,    taken    to   Quilon,   and 
hanged  in  front  of  the  12th  regiment,  drawn  out  to 
witness  his  execution,  as  an  accessory  in  the  murder 
of  their  comrades.     Tlie  body  of  the  Dewan  was 
carried  to  Trivandrum,  and  exposed  upon  a  gib- 
bet, amidst,   it  was  said,   the  acclamations  of  the 
people. 

The  vindictive  measures  which  were  thus  adopted 
by  the  Resident  were  defended  by  him  upon  the 
plea  of  their  being  no  more  than  a  just  retribution 
for  the  foul  treachery  and  sanguinary  cruelty  of  the 
Dewan  and  his  brother.^  The  Government  of  Ben- 
gal admitted  the  defensibility  of  the  summary  exe- 
cution of  the  latter,  upon  the  understanding  that  he 
had  been  implicated  in  the  murder  of  Mr.  Hume 
and  the  British  soldiers ;  but  condemned,  in  terms  of 
merited  reprehension,  the  vengeance  which  had 
pursued  the  crimes  of  the  Dewan  beyond  his  life. 
The  ends  of  justice  and  the  purposes  of  public  se- 
curity were  attained,  the  Governor-General  re- 
marked, by  the  death  of  the  Dewan ;  and  the  prose- 
cution of  a  vindictive  policy,  when  the  object  of  it 

*  Beside  Dr.  Hume,  and  tlie  men  of  the  12th,  Vailu  Tambi  was  accused 
of  having  put  to  death  three  thousand  native  Cliristians,  charged  with  no 
crime  but  their  religion. 

VOL.  I.  S 


258  HISTORY   OF   BRITISH   INDIA. 

BOOK  I.  iiad  ceased  to  exist,  was  repugnant  to  the  feelings 
J^^^^[_^  of  common  humanity  and  the  principles  of  a  civi- 
1809.  lized  Government.  He  further  observed,  that  al- 
though ostensibly  the  act  of  the  Raja,  yet  it  would 
not  be  believed  by  the  public  that  it  had  not  the 
Resident's  sanction,  and  did  not  originate  in  his 
advice ;  and  that  had  it  been  the  Raja's  act,  with  a 
view  to  impress  upon  the  British  Government  the 
notion  that  he  had  not  participated  in  the  treachery 
of  his  minister,  yet  a  sentiment  of  just  abhorrence 
of  the  measure  itself,  and  a  regard  for  the  repu- 
tation of  the  British  Government,  should  have  in- 
duced the  Resident  to  prevent  the  exposure,  or,  if 
anticipated,  to  have  publicly  proclaimed  his  disap- 
probation. 

The  proceedings  in  Travancore  were,  in  truth, 
among  the  least  justifiable  of  the  many  questionable 
transactions  by  which  the  British  power  in  India 
has  been  acquired  or  preserved.  The  protection  of 
the  Raja  was,  in  the  first  instance,  generous  and 
politic ;  the  military  command  of  his  country,  sub- 
sequently, was  necessary  for  objects  of  British  po- 
licy, and  was  not  incompatible  with  the  pacific  in- 
terests of  the  Raja  and  prosperity  of  his  limited 
dominion.  To  impose  upon  him  the  maintenance 
of  a  force  infinitely  more  numerous  than  was  neces- 
sary for  the  defence  of  the  country,  and  the  cost  of 
which  heavily  taxed  its  resources ;  to  urge  the  ex- 
action with  unrelenting  rigour ;  and  to  resent  with 
unpitying  vengeance  the  passions  excited  by  a 
deep  sense  of  national  wrong  among  a  semi-bar- 
barous and  demoralised  race, — were  unworthy  of  the 
character  of  the  British  nation  for  justice  and  gene- 


CONTINUED    DISAFFECTION.  259 

rosity,  of  the  civilization  it  had  attained,  and  the  book  i. 
religion  it  professed.  jhap^ 

Notwithstanding  the  severities  exercised  upon  the  isio. 
leaders  of  the  late  rising,  and  the  submission  which 
the  irresistible  superiority  of  the  British  arms  had 
compelled,  the  spirit  of  disaffection  after  a  while 
revived,  and  in  less  than  two  years  the  new  Dewan 
was  suspected  of  being  concerned  in  a  plot  directed 
against  the  British  authority.  He  had  also  suffered 
the  payment  of  the  subsidy  again  to  fall  into  arrear, 
and  improvement  in  this  respect  was  not  to  be  ex- 
pected from  the  increasing  infirmities  and  imbecility 
of  the  Raja.  Under  these  circumstances,  the  Go- 
vernment of  Bengal  considered  itself  empowered 
by  the  fifth  article  of  the  treaty  of  1805  to  assume 
the  management  of  the  country,  but  suspended  the 
final  adoption  of  the  arrangement  until  it  should 
become  unavoidable.  Its  necessity  became  apparent 
at  last  even  to  the  Raja;  and  the  new  Resident, 
Colonel  John  Munro,  at  his  request  and  with  the 
authority  of  the  British  Government,  took  upon 
himself  the  administration  of  the  principality  as  the 
minister  of  the  Raja,  or  Dewan.*  The  condition  of 
Travancore  unquestionably  required  the  intervention 
of  a  stronger  and  wiser  controul.  The  Raja  was  a 
cypher :  the  Dewan  usurped  the  whole  power,  and 

'  We  have  Colonel  Monro's  own  statement  that  he  accepted  the  office  of 
Dewan  at  the  request  of  the  Riga.  In  answer  to  questions  put  to  him,  he 
states, ''  The  treaty  authorized  the  general  interference  of  the  British  Go- 
Yemment ;  but  I  assumed  the  charge  of  the  administration  at  the  express 
request  of  the  Raja,  with  the  authority  of  the  British  Goyemment**  And 
to  the  question,  whether  it  was  completely  Toluntary  on  the  part  of  the 
Ri^a,  he  replies,  **  It  was  at  the  earnest  request  of  the  Riga." — Evidence 
of  ColoDel  Munro;  Select  Committee  of  House  of  Commons,  March,  18S2. 
Hamilton  therefore  is  wrong  in  stating  that  the  arrangement  took  place 
wider  the  Riga's  successor. — Description  of  Hindostan,  ii,  SI 7. 

s  2 


260  HISTORY   OF   BRITISH   INDIA. 

BOOK  I.  employed  it  to  defraud  the  prince  and  oppress  the 
^^^^'  ^'  people.  Inadequate  as  were  the  resources  to  the 
1810.  public  exigencies,  the  country  laboured  under  the 
severest  fiscal  exaction  :  justice  there  was  none,  and 
a  general  state  of  disorganization  prevailed.  The 
judicious  regulations  introduced  by  Colonel  Munro 
restored  order,  secured  the  administration  of  justice, 
and,  whilst  they  liquidated  the  debt,  and  discharged 
the  stipulated  payments  with  punctuality,  they  more 
than  doubled  the  revenues  of  the  Raja,  and  in  a 
still  greater  proportion  lightened  the  burthens  of 
his  subjects.  *  The  Raja  died  in  1812.  He  was 
succeeded  by  his  sister,  such  being  the  order  of  in- 
heritance among  the  Nairs  of  Travancore.  Under 
the  government  of  this  lady,  and  the  regency  of 
her  successor,  Colonel  Munro  officiated  as  Dewan 
until  the  year  1814 ;  when  he  restored  the  ma- 
nagement of  the  state  to  a  native  Dewan,  extri- 
cated from  its  embarrassments,  with  a  greatly  aug- 
mented revenue,  and  in  a  situation  of  complete  in- 
ternal tranquillity.^ 

*  Evidence  above  referred  to :  also  Extracts  from  Colonel  Monro's 
Report  to  the  Madras  Government  in  1818,  quoted  by  Mr.  Jones;  App. 
Report  of  the  Select  C'ommittee  of  the  House  of  Commons ;  Political,  4to. 
ed.,  p.  287.  In  three  years,  Colonel  Munro,  beside  the  current  subsidy, 
«  succeeded  in  paying  eighteen  lakhs  of  rupees  due  to  the  Company,  and 
nearly  six  to  individuals ;  in  abolishing  the  most  oppressive  monopolies  and 
taxes,  and  in  settling  the  affairs  of  the  country  on  the  principles  of  justice 
and  humanity."  The  land  revenue  was  increased  from  nine  to  fifteen 
lakhs ;  the  duty  received  from  the  tobacco  monopoly,  from  five  to  eleven 
lakhs ;  and  that  on  salt,  from  thirty  thousand  rupees,  to  two  lakhs  and 
thirty  thousand ;  but,  to  the  relief  of  the  people,  as  many  oppressive  taxes 
and  all  illegal  exactions  were  abolished. 

*  For  the  military  transactions  in  Travancore,  see  Secret  Letter  from  Fort 
St.  George  printed  in  the  Second  Report  of  the  Select  Committee  of  the 
House  of  Commons,  App.  43;  Madras  Papers,  16th  March,  1811,  p.  15; 
Letter  from  the  Court,  29th  Sept.  1809,  printed  Pari.  Papers,  22nd  June, 
1813,  No.  10;  Welsh's  Military  Reminiscences;  the  Asiatic  Annual  Re- 
gister, vol.xi.  History,  ch.  3 ;  and  the  General  Orders  of  Groyemment  in  the 


REGULATION    OF   COCHIN.  261 

Although  the  Raja  of  Cochin  had  abstained  from  book  i. 
actual  hostilities  and  died  during  their  continuance,         ' 


not  without  suspicion  of  having  fallen  a  victim  to  I809. 
his  unwillingness  to  engage  in  them,  yet  the  partici- 
pation of  his  minister  in  the  projects  of  the  Dewan 
of  Travancore,  which  was  unequivocally  established, 
subjected  the  Raja's  successor  to  the  displeasure  of 
the  British  Government.  The  Raja  was  accordingly 
condemned  to  pay  a  third  of  the  expenses  of  the 
war,  and  to  sign  a  new  treaty,  which  added  to  the 
amount  of  his  tribute  the  cost  of  a  battalion  of  Sipa- 
his  in  the  field  in  place  of  his  own  troops,  whom  he 
was  required  to  dismiss,  beyond  such  as  might  be 
necessary  for  the  collection  of  the  revenue.  As  the 
state  of  his  country  differed  little  from  that  of  Tra- 
vancore, a  similar  system  of  reform  was  extended  to 
Cochin,  under  the  more  immediate  management  of 
Captain  Blacker,  the  Assistant  Resident.  Upon  his 
departure  Colonel  Munro  assumed  the  duty ;  and, 
under  their  joint  superintendence,  the  like  improve- 
ment was  effected  in  Cochin  which  had  been  accom- 
plished at  Travancore.^ 

Whilst  the  Company's  troops  were  thus  employed 
in  the  coercion  of  refractory  allies,  and  in  extend- 
ing the  authority  of  the  Government  of  Madras,  the 
Governor  and  the  Commander-in-chief  engaged  in 
a  dispute  which  speedily  involved  a  large  portion 
of  the  Coast  army  in  a  contest  with  the  civil  power, 


Chronicle  of  Madras  Occurrences.     The  MS.  Records  have  also  been 
consulted. 

^  By  the  treaty  of  1791  the  Rfga  of  Cochin  paid  a  tribute  of  100,000 
Arcot  rupees  per  annum.  By  this  of  the  6th  May,  1809,  he  was  compelled 
to  pay  in  addition  1,76,037  Arcot  rupees  ;  making  a  total  of  2,76,037  Arcot 
rupees. — Coll.  of  Treaties,  472. 


262  HISTORY   OF   BRITISH   INDIA. 

BOOK  I.  and  was  productive  of  the  most  alarming  and  dan- 
_^^^;J[^  gerous  results.^  Sir  John  Cradock  had  been  suc- 
1809.  ceeded  in  the  command  of  the  Madras  army  by 
Lieutenant-General  Hay  Macdowall.  The  former 
had  held,  as  Commander-in-chief,  a  seat  in  counoil : 
the  Court  of  Directors  had  thought  proper  to  refuse 
equal  rank  and  emolument  to  his  successors.  The 
appeal  of  General  Macdowall  to  the  Court  against 
this  infringement  of  his  dignities  had  been  answered 
by  the  appointment  of  a  civil  servant  to  the  vacant 
seat.  The  Commander-in-chief  felt  the  exclusion 
as  a  personal  grievance  and  af&ont,  and,  on  the 
final  extinction  of  his  hopes,  resigned  his  command  ; 
expressing  his  resignation  in  terms  strongly  indi- 
cative of  the  bitterness  of  his  mortification  and 
disappointment.^ 

'  **  The  East  India  Company,  and,  I  may  add,  the  British  empire  in  aU 
its  parts,  never,  I  believe,  was  exposed  to  greater  or  more  imminent  danger.** 
— Letter  from  Lord  Minto,  16th  Sept.  1809.  '*  The  late  revolt  of  the  officen 
of  the  Madras  army  is  the  most  remarkable  and  most  important  event  thai 
has  occurred  in  the  history  of  the  British  Administration  of  India  since  onr 
first  acquisition  of  territory  there.  It  led  to  the  commencement  of  a  civil 
war  in  the  Camatic ;  it  threatened  to  involve  the  whole  Peninsula  in  anarchy 
and  blood ;  to  encourage  the  numerous  adherents  of  the  fallen  families  of 
Tippoo,  and  Mohammed  Ali,  to  insurrection ;  to  incite  the  native  powers 
to  fall  upon  us  whilst  in  this  state  of  internal  convulsion ;  and  to  subvert  a 
Government  which  had  successfully  resisted  the  repeated  attacks  of  the 
neighbouring  states." — Paper  accompanying  Reply  of  Messrs.  Grant  and 
Astell  to  the  Dissents  of  several  Directors,  &c. ;  Pari.  Papers,  1st  Aprfl, 
1811,  p.  46.  We  may  be  permitted  now  to  think  that  this  language  is 
somewhat  exaggerated. 

*  ''  The  decision  of  the  Court  of  Directors  has  placed  me  in  so  extraor- 
dinary, so  unexampled,  and  so  humiliating  a  predicament,  that  the  most 
painful  emotions  have  been  excited ;  and  sixteen  months*  experience  has 
convinced  me  that  it  is  impossible  to  remain  with  any  prospect  of  perform- 
ing my  duty  with  credit  to  the  East  India  Company,  of  acquiring  for  myself 
any  reputation,  or  for  doing  justice  to  those  over  whom  I  am  called  to  pre- 
side ;  divested  of  the  power  of  selecting  for  commands  by  the  restriction  of 
military  patronage,  or  of  requiting  the  meritorious  oflScer ;  deprived  of  the 
respectability  which  attaches  in  this  country  to  a  seat  in  council,  and 
abridged  in  the  usual  emoluments  of  office.** — Letter  to  Sir  G.  Barlow  from 
the  Commander-in-chief,  1 5th  Jan.  1809;  Pari.  Papers,  25th  May,  1810, 
part  i.  p.  8. 


MILITARY   RETRENCHMENTS.  263 

Tt  has  been  mentioned,  that,  after  the  close  of  the  book  i. 
Mahratta  war,  the  Government  of  Bengal  urgently  ^^^^^^^ 


pressed  upon  the  subordinate  Presidencies  the  ne-  I8O8. 
cessity  of  extensive  retrenchments.  In  conformity 
to  these  injunctions,  various  plans  for  reducing  the 
military  expenditure  of  the  Presidency  of  Madras 
were  suggested  during  the  command  of  Sir  John 
Cradock;  some  of  vehich  were  acted  upon,  and 
deprived  officers,  in  command  of  regiments  or  bri- 
gades, of  different  sources  of  emolument.  These 
measures  were  naturally  unpalatable  to  the  army. 
The  difference  of  military  allowances  between  the 
Bengal  and  Madras  services  had  long  been  a  subject 
of  discontent ;  and  the  assignment  of  commands  to 
officers  of  his  Majesty's  regiments,  in  place  of  Com- 
pany's officers,  occasioned  amongst  the  latter  fre- 
quent murmurs.  The  personal  feelings  of  the  Com- 
mander-in-chief heightened  his  sympathy  with  the 
grievances  of  those  under  his  command,  and  fos- 
tered their  discontents  ;*  and  a  state  of  disquietude 
and  dissatisfaction  pervaded  the  minds  of  the  offi- 
cers, which,  as  compliance  with  their  expectations 

*  Memorial  of  the  Officers  of  the  Madras  Army  to  the  Court  of  Directors, 
forwarded  by  the  Commander-in-chief,  with  a  Letter  to  the  GoTemment  of 
Fort  St.  George,  2Srd  January,  1809.  The  Madras  Government,  viewing 
the  sentiments  expressed  in  the  paper  with  extreme  disapprobation,  de- 
clined to  transmit  it  to  the  Court  until  it  had  been  laid  before  the  Gover- 
nor-General.—Pari.  Papers,  25th  May,  1810,  No.  i.  p.  26.  At  an  earlier 
date,  1st  May,  1808,  General  Macdowall  enumerates,  as  the  seeds  of  dis- 
coBtent  widely  disseminated,  the  abolition  of  the  Bazar  Fund ;  the  de- 
gradation of  the  military  character,  from  the  Commander-in-chief  to  the 
youngest  ensign ;  the  late  reductions,  and  especially  the  abolition  of  the 
Tent  Contract ;  and  adds,  '*  I  much  lament  the  expediency  which  occa- 
sioned these  disgusting  measures.'* — Extracts  from  Lord  Minto*s  Letter  to 
the  Secret  Committee,  5th  Feb.  1810 ;  Pari.  Papers,  Ist  April,  1811,  p.  346. 
The  same  letter  supplies  instances,  if  not  of  '^  the  deliberate  intention  of 
the  General  to  make  the  army  an  instrument  of  opposition  and  disturb- 
aice,"  as  affirmed  by  Lord  Minto,  yet  of  great  dispoaitioii  to  foment  and 
heighten  the  prevailing  discontents. 


264  HISTORY   OF   BRITISH   INDIA. 

BOOK  I.  was  little  to  be  looked  for,  required  to  be  allayed 
'      by  gentle  management,  and  the  avoidance  of  addi- 
1808.     tional  irritation.     Unluckily,  fresh  occasions  of  ex- 
citement did  occur,  and  that  excitement  was  not 
gently  dealt  with. 

Among  the  articles  of  retrenchment  put  in  force 
by  the  Government  of  Madras  was  the  abolition 
of  what  was  known  as  the  Tent  Contract ;  an  ar- 
rangement by  which  officers  commanding  native 
corps  received  a  permanent  monthly  allowance, 
alike  in  cantonments  as  in  the  field,  in  peace  as 
in  war,  on  condition  of  their  providing  the  men 
with  suitable  camp  equipage  whenever  it  might  be 
required.*  The  retrenchment  was  originally  sug- 
gested by  Sir  John  Cradock  ;  and  he  called  upon 
Colonel  John  Munro,  the  Quarter-Master-Greneral  of 
the  army,  to  report  whether  it  was  not  practicable 
without  detriment  to  the  efficiency  of  the  troops,  and 
how  it  might  best  be  accomplished.  The  report 
advocated  the  change,  and  submitted  a  mode  of 
effecting  it.  The  plan  was  approved  of  by  Sir  John 
Cradock,  by  Lord  W.  Bentinck,  and  by  the  Govern- 
ment of  Bengal.  It  merely  fell  to  Sir  G.  Barlow 
to  carry  it  into  execution.  No  share  of  the  oppro- 
brium was  due  to  him,  even  if  the  measure  deserved 
it ;  but,  in  fact,  the  contract  was  open  to  objections 
of  so  obvious  a  character,  that  no  disinterested  per- 
son could  doubt  the  reasonableness  of  its  abolition. 
The  alteration  was  to  be  judged  of,  however,  by 
those  whose  interests  it  affected,  and  in  their  esti- 


'  Letter  from  Sir  John  Cradock  to  Lieutenant-Colonel  Munro,  7th  Feb. 
1807;  and  his  reply,  30th  June,  1807:  Pari.  Papers,  8rd  May,  1811, 
p.  94. 


ABOLITION   OF   THE  TENT   CONTRACT.  265 

iDation  it  was  a  grievous  wrong ;   but,  unable  to  book  i. 
deny  the  defects  of  the  system,  or  the  expediency  ,^||^^^1_^ 


of  its  reform,   their   dissatisfaction    found   an   ex-     laos. 
cuse    for   its   display   in    some   unguarded   expres- 
sions which  occurred  in  the  Quarter-Master-General's 
oflScial  report. 

The  transaction  of  public  business  in  India  by 
written  statements  is  not  without  its  inconvenience ; 
and  one  of  these  is,  the  temptation  it  offers  to 
public  functionaries  to  put  upon  record  more  than 
is  always  necessary  or  judicious.  Such  was  the 
case  with  Colonel  Munro.  Not  contented  with  in- 
dicating such  objections  as  could  not  be  disputed, 
he  proceeded  to  specify  others,  which,  although 
equally  true  in  a  general  sense,  were  capable  of 
individual  application,  and  might  be  construed  into 
an  accusation  that  the  officers  in  command  of  corps 
had  consulted  their  own  profit  at  the  expense  of 
the  public  service,  and  had  appropriated  the  tent 
allowance  without  keeping  up  an  adequate  tent 
establishment.  ^      The  officers   resented   the  impu- 

^  In  enumerating  the  objections  to  the  system,  the  Report  specifies  one 
of  them  as  follo'ws :  *'  By  granting  the  same  allowances  in  peace  and  war 
for  the  equipment  of  native  corps,  while  the  expenses  incidental  to  that 
charge  are  unavoidably  much  greater  in  war  than  peace,  it  places  the  in- 
terest and  duty  of  officers  commanding  native  corps  in  direct  opposition  to 
one  another :  it  makes  it  their  interest  that  their  corps  should  not  be  in  a 
state  of  efficiency  fit  for  field  service,  and  therefore  furnishes  strong  induce- 
ments to  neglect  their  most  important  duties.^'  It  would  have  been  prudent 
to  have  omitted  at  least  one  half  of  tliis  paragraph ;  but  still,  abstractedly 
considered,  it  was  scarcely  dis])utable.  The  measure  no  doubt,  in  theory, 
placed  the  interest  and  duty  of  the  officers  in  opposition ;  but  in  practice  it 
left  it  to  be  supposed  that  they  did  their  duty,  although  their  interests  suf- 
fered. Unfortunately,  the  objections  were  preceded  by  the  assertion,  that 
**  Six  years^  experience  of  the  practical  effects  of  the  existing  system  of  the 
camp  equipage  equipment  of  the  army,  and  an  attentive  examination  of  its 
operation  during  that  period  of  time,  had  suggested  the  objections/*  Here, 
therefore,  was  an  assertion  that,  practically,  the  officers  had  preferred  their 
interest  to  their  duty  :  an  assertion  the  more  objectionable,  as  no  proof  was 
given  ;  for,  as  the  officers  in  their  memorial  justly  replied,  **  If  such  a  case 


266  HISTORY  OF  BRITISH   INDIA. 

BOOK  I.  tation ;  and,  although  Colonel  Munro  earnestly  dis- 
^"^'  ^'  claimed  any  intention  of  reflecting  upon  the  honour 
1808.  and  integrity  of  any  portion  of  the  officers  of  the 
anny,  they  refused  to  be  appeased,  and  called  upon 
the  Commander-in-chief  to  bring  him  to  a  court- 
martial  for  aspersions  on  their  characters  as  officers 
and  gentlemen. 

Upon  the  receipt  of  the  charges  against  Colonel 
J.  Munro,^  the  Commander-in-chief  hesitated  whe- 
ther he  should  admit  them,  and  referred  the  question 
for  the  opinion  of  the  Judge- Advocate-General,  who, 
after  discussing  the  circumstances  of  the  case,  came 
to  the  conclusion  that  the  charges  were  such  as  the 
accusers  had  no  right  to  agitate  or  prefer.*  The 
officers  acquiesced  in  the  decision,  and  solicited  a 
suspension  of  the  direct  charge ;  substituting  in  its 
place  a  memorial  to  the.  Court  of  Directors,  praying 
them  to  investigate  the  subject.*  Previously,  how- 
ever, to  his  being  apprised  of  their  change  of  pur- 
pose, General  Macdowall  had  also  viewed  the  matter 

had  occurred,  why  was  it  not  noticed  at  the  time  ?"  They  had  reason  to  be 
offended ;  but  still,  as  the  offence  grew  out  of  an  indiscreet  mode  of  pro- 
pounding undeniable  generalisations,  and  was  eTidently  not  designed  to 
apply  to  any  particular  case,  they  might  have  been  satisfied  with  a  decla- 
ration to  that  effect,  and  would  no  doubt  have  been  so  contented,  had  not 
an  infectious  irritability  perplexed  their  sober  judgments. — Pari.  Papers, 
3rd  May,  1811,  p.  06;  ditto,  1st  April,  1811,  p.  65;  ditto,  25th  May, 
1810,  p.  IS. 

*  See  the  charges.  Pari.  Papers,  25th  May,  1810,  p.  18. 

'  Letter  from  Colonel  Leith,  Judge- Advocate-General,  to  the  Adjutant- 
General,  7th  Nov.  1808  ;   Pari.  Papers,  May,  1810,  p.  17. 

*  The  memorial  is  printed,  Pari.  Papers,  3rd  May,  1811,  p.  79.  The 
officers  say,  ^*  Finding  the  mode  (of  court-martial)  was  considered  by  the 
Judge-Advocate-General  to  be  irregular  and  ineffectual,  they  respectfully 
abide  by  that  opinion  for  the  present,  and  have  solicited  a  suspension  of  the 
direct  charge  against  the  individual,  whilst  they  have  appealed  to  the  can- 
dour and  justice  of  the  Court.'*  The  Government  refused  to  forward  it, 
as  the  question  was  considered  to  be  settled:  the  Court  disapproved  of  the 
refusal  to  transmit  the  memorial. — Pari.  Papers,  May,  1810,  p.  13. 


ABREST   OF   COLONEL   MUNRO.  267 

in  a  new  light,  and  had  determined  that  the  charge  book  l 
should  be  entertained.     On  the  eve  of  his  quitting  '^^^'  ^' 
Madras,  he  placed  Colonel  Munro  under  arrest,  to     i809. 
be  brought  to  trial  by  the  succeeding  Commander- 
in-chief;^  having,  as  he  declared,  received  an  opinion 
of  much  importance,  in  expectation  of  which  he  had 
suspended  his  decision.     From  what  quarter  this 
opinion  proceeded  is  nowhere  stated. 

It  appears,  however,  that,  in  the  interval  that  had 
elapsed  since  the  charge  was  first  brought  forward, 
circumstances  had  occurred,  which,  in  the  state  of 
the  Commander-in-chiefs  feelings,  were  possibly  not 
without  some  influence  upon  his  determination. 
Major  Blacker,  of  the  Quarter-Master-General's  de- 
partment, was  ordered  to  join  the  force  in  Travan- 
core.  Another  officer.  Captain  Macdowall,  who 
had  been  formerly  employed  in  the  province,  re- 
monstrated against  the  arrangement,  and  urged  his 
own  preferable  claims.  His  pretensions  were  sup- 
ported by  the  Commander-in-chief,  who  requested 
that  the  appointment  might  be  reconsidered.  This 
was  on  the  16th  of  January.  On  the  18th  the 
Government  of  Madras  declined  to  revise  the  nomi- 
nation, reprimanded  Captain  Macdowall  for  the 
tone  of  his  application,  and  threatened  to  'temove 
him  from  the  office  he  held.  On  the  20th  Colonel 
Munro  was  placed  under  arrest ;  the  effect  of  which 
was  to  compel  the  Government  to  revoke  Major 
Slacker's  appointment,  as  the  temporary  removal  of 
his  superior  rendered  his  presence  indispensable  at 
the  Presidency.*      The  close  concurrence  of  these 

>  Pari.  Papers,  25th  May,  1810,  p.  14.  '  Ibid.  p.  9. 


268  HISTORY   OP   BRITISH  INDIA. 

BOOK  I.  events  suggests  the  possibility  of  their  connexion, 
^^^'  ^'  and  the  likelihood  that  matters  of  comparative  in- 
1809.  significance,  magnified  into  mischievous  importance 
by  the  passions  of  the  individuals  interested,  contri- 
buted to  occasion  the  transactions  which  ensued. 

As  soon  as  Colonel  Munro  was  made  aware  of  the 
decision  of  the  Commander-in-chief,  he  appealed  to 
the  Government,  under  whose  authority  he  had  acted, 
and  by  whom  the  measures  he  had  recommended 
had  been  approved  and  adopted.  This  appeal  was 
in  the  first  instance  forwarded  through  the  Com- 
mander-in-chief; but,  upon  his  refusing  to  be  the 
channel  of  its  transmission,  it  was  addressed  direct 
to  the  Governor  in  Council. 

The  subject  of  the  communication  was  referred 
to  the  chief  civil  and  military  advisers  of  the  Go- 
vernment, the  Judge-Advocate-General  and  the  Ad- 
vocate-General, and  fortified  by  their  joint  opinions 
that  it  was  bound  to  protect  the  advisers  of  mea- 
sures which  it  had  made  its  own,  the  Government 
exercised  the  power  with  which  it  was  intrusted  by 
the  Legislature ;  and,  having  first  in  vain  requested, 
next  commanded  General  Macdowall  to  release 
Colonel  Munro  from  his  arrest.^  The  tenor  of  the 
Commander-in-chiefs  commission  subjected  him  so 
explicitly  to  the  authority  of  the  Governor  in  Council, 
that  he  was  under  the  necessity  of  yielding  obedi- 
ence, protesting  against  what  he  designated  as  an 
undue  interference.  Nor  was  he  satisfied  with  this 
expression  of  his  indignation :  on  the  eve  of  his  em- 
barkation for  England  he  directed  the  publication 
of  a  General  Order,  in  which  he  announced  that  his 

'  See  the  whole  correspondence,  Pari.  Papers,  25th  May,  pp.  12 — ^24. 


ORDER  OF   THE   COMMANDER-IN-CHIEF.  269 

departure  alone  prevented  him  from  bringing  Colonel  book  i. 
Munro  to  trial  for  disrespect  to  the  Commander-in-  __ll_l 


chief,  for  disobedience  of  orders,  and  for  contempt  1809. 
of  military  authority,  in  having  resorted  to  the  power 
of  the  Civil  Government  in  defiance  of  the  judgment 
of  the  officer  at  the  head  of  the  army,  who  had 
placed  him  under  arrest  on  charges  preferred  against 
him  by  a  number  of  officers  commanding  native 
corps ;  in  consequence  of  which  appeal  direct  to  the 
Honourable  the  President  in  Council,  Lieutenant- 
Greneral  Macdowall  had  received  a  positive  order 
from  the  chief  secretary  to  liberate  Lieutenant- 
Colonel  Munro  from  arrest :  and  the  order  proceeded 
to  stigmatize  the  conduct  of  Colonel  Munro  as  de- 
structive of  subordination,  subversive  of  military  dis- 
cipline, a  violation  of  the  sacred  rights  of  the  Com- 
mander-in-chief, and  a  most  dangerous  example  to 
the  service.  General  Macdowall  therefore  thought 
it  incumbent  on  him,  in  support  of  the  dignity  of 
the  profession,  and  his  own  station  and  character,  to 
express  his  strong  disapprobation  of  Colonel  Munro's 
unexampled  proceedings,  and  reprimanded  him  ac- 
cordingly.^ 

Thus  far  the  Government  of  Madras  had  acted 
with  a  degree  of  calmness  and  forbearance  whith 
derived  additional  lustre  from  the  contrast  which 
it  offered  to  the  violence  of  the  Commander-in-chief. 
Instead  of  interposing  to  heal  the  wounds  which  the 
needless  sensitiveness  of  the  officers  had  suffered 
from  the  incautious  but  indefinite  language  of  an 
official  report,  and  which  a  few  words  of  explanation 

•  General  Orders  by  the  Commander-in-chief,  head-quarters,  28th  Jan. 
1809.— Pari.  Papers,  25th  May,  1810,  p.  28. 


270  raSTORY   OP   BRITISH   INDIA. 

BOOK  I.  from  the  writer,  supported  by  their  own  good  sense 
^^^^'  ^'  and  the  mediation  of  their  common  superior,  must 
1809,  have  convinced  them  were  more  imaginary  than  real, 
General  Macdowall  echoed  and  aggravated  their 
complaints,  and,  mixing  up  their  grievances  with  his 
own,  employed  them  as  instruments  with  which  to 
assail  the  Government  in  the  person  of  one  of  its 
most  meritorious  and  efficient  servants.  For  the 
Government  of  Madras  to  have  allowed  Colonel 
Munro  to  fall  a  sacrifice  to  interested  clamour  or  per- 
sonal resentment  on  account  of  its  own  acts,  would 
have  forfeited  for  ever  its  claim  to  the  respect  of  its 
subordinates.  The  opinions  of  Colonel  Munro  had 
been  called  for  by  those  who  were  entitled  to  de- 
mand them,  and  so  enjoined,  it  was  his  duty  to  state 
his  honest  convictions  without  reserve.  These  con- 
victions were  pronounced  by  the  Commander-in- 
chief  of  the  day  to  be  his  own ;  and  the  Madras 
Government,  the  Government  of  Bengal,  and  the 
Court  of  Directors  all  concurred  in  their  justice 
and  truth,  and  took  them  as  the  principles  of  their 
public  acts.  The  responsibility  of  the  subordinate 
ceased  when  the  supreme  power  —  one  acknow- 
ledging no  responsibility  to  its  own  servants — deter- 
mined to  identify  his  counsels  with  its  own  decrees ; 
and  its  decrees  would  have  been  issued  in  vain,  if  the 
counsels  which  suggested  them  were  to  expose  any 
one  of  its  instruments  to  be  degraded  and  pimished 
by  another.  There  can  be  no  question,  therefore, 
that  the  Government  of  Madras  was  bound  to  shield 
the  Quarter-Master-General  from  the  anger  of  the 
Commander-in-chief;  and  that  it  was  legally  em- 
powered so  to  interpose,  was  substantiated  by  the 


RESENTMENT   OF   THE   GOVERNMENT. 


271 


enforced  submission  of  the  latter.     His  threats  of  book  i. 
what  he  would  have  done  if  he  had  remained,  were        ' 
like  the  fast-retiring  wave  of  the  Madras  surf  wasting     18<^9* 
itself  in  impotent  foam  and  fury  upon  the  beach. 

It  happened,  unfortunately  for  the  character  of  the 
Madras  Government  and  the  tranquillity  of  the  settle- 
ment, that,  departing  from  the  calm  assertion  of  its 
own  powers,  and  the  dignified  attitude  it  had  hitherto 
held,  the  Government  precipitated  itself  into  a  career 
of  recriminatory  and  vindictive  acts.  Instead  of  re- 
garding the  general  order  of  the  Commander-in- 
chief  as  the  idle  ebullition  of  an  angry  spirit,  the  in- 
flnence  of  which  was  neutralised  by  its  own  intempe- 
rance ;  instead  of  taking  time  to  weigh  deliberately 
the  probable  results  of  engaging  in  an  angry  con- 
test ;  the  Government  instantly  promulgated  a  pub- 
lic order*  of  scarcely  less  exceptionable  phraseology, 
charging  General  Macdowall  with  having  given 
utterance  to  insinuations  grossly  derogatory  to  the 
character  of  the  Government,  and  subversive  of 
military  discipline  and  of  the  foundations  of  public 
authority,  and  vnth  having  on  that  and  other  recent 
occasions  been  guilty  of  violent  and  inflanunatory 
proceedings,  and  of  acts  of  outrage  :  accusations  not 
wholly  borne  out  by  facts,  even  if  it  had  been  deco- 
rous to  proclaim  them.  Taking  advantage  also  of 
the  non-reception  of  General  Macdowall's  formal 
resignation,  the  order  cancelled  his  appointment,  and 
removed  him  from  the  station  of  Commander-in- 
chief  of  the  forces  of  Fort  St.  George  :  a  somewhat 
superfluous  mode  of  displeasure,  as  General  Mac- 

^  Tlie  Commander-in-chief  ^8  order  was  not  published  till  the  SOth  of 
Jan.    The  order  of  the  Government  is  dated  the  Slst. 


272  HISTORY  OF   BRITISH   INDIA. 

BOOK  L  dowall  was  on  board  the  ship  which  was  to  convey 
^^^^^^^^  him  to  England ;  a  destination  he  was  not  permitted 
1809.  to  reach,  the  vessel  being  lost  a£  sea  on  the  voyage. 
If  the  Madras  Government  had  vindicated  its 
authority  in  more  temperate  language,  and  directed 
that  the  offensive  order  of  the  General  should  be 
expunged  from  the  order-books  of  the  army,  it  would 
have  better  preserved  its  consistency  and  secured  its 
triumph.  Had  its  indignation  been  allowed  to  ex- 
pire with  the  cause  which  had  provoked  it,  few  would 
have  been  disposed  to  call  its  proceedings  seriously 
into  question ;  and  after  a  short  period  the  superficial 
and  inconsequential  ferment,  in  the  activity  of  which 
the  Commander-in-chief  was  so  vital  an  element, 
would  have  subsided.  Unhappily,  it  was  thought 
that  enough  had  not  been  done  to  \dndicate  the 
authority  and  dignity  of  the  Government.  Mea- 
sures were  adopted  which  irritated  the  passions  of 
the  army  more  than  anything  that  had  yet  occurred, 
and  infused  into  the  quarrel  feelings  of  personal  ran- 
cour, by  which  it  had  not  yet  been  generally  em- 
bittered. The  order  of  the  Government,  which  has 
been  just  described,  concluded  by  suspending  from 
the  service  of  the  Company  Major  Boles,  the  Deputy- 
Adjutant-General,  for  having  signed  and  circulated 
the  general  order  of  the  departing  Commander-in- 
chief  in  the  absence  of  his  immediate  superior,  who 
had  accompanied  General  Macdowall  on  board  ship. 
Colonel  Capper,  the  Adjutant-General,  avowed  him- 
self responsible  for  the  circulation  of  the  order,  and 
was  included  in  the  same  penalty.^     It  was  to  no 

*  General  Orders  of  the  GoYemment  of  Fort  St  George,  31  st  Jan.  and 
1st  Feb.,  1809  ;   Pari.  Papers,  26tli  May^  1810,  p.  29. 


SUSPENSION  OF  MAJOR  BOLES.  273^ 

purpose  that  these  officers  pleaded  the  merely  minis-  book  t. 
terial  character  of  their  duties,  and  the  obligation,  ^^^^^^^^ 


imposed  upon  them  by  military  discipline,  of  exe-  I809. 
cuting  the  orders  of  the  Commander  of  the  forces. 
It  was  argued  by  the  Government,  that,  by  giving 
authenticity  and  currency  to  a  paper  which  they 
could  not  but  be  aware  was  in  the  highest  degree 
disrespectful  to  the  Government,  they  were  acting 
in  direct  violation  of  their  duty  to  the  latter,  and 
thereby  knowingly  committed  an  illegal  act,  con- 
nected with  views  of  the  most  reprehensible  nature, 
which  no  authority  could  justify,  and  that  they 
therefore  deserved  the  punishment  they  had  incur- 
red. Colonel  Capper  sailed  for  England,  and,  like 
his  superior,  perished  on  the  passage.  To  Major 
Boles  it  was  intimated,  that,  if  he  acknowledged 
his  error,  the  sentence  might  be  mitigated ;  but  he 
refused  to  admit  that  he  had  done  wrong,  and  the 
penalty  was  enforced. 

It  is  very  possible  that  the  Adjutant-General  and 
his  deputy  were  more  inclined  to  take  part  with 
their  military  than  with  their  civil  superior,  that 
they  shared  in  the  prevailing  discontent,  and  that 
they  were  not  unwilling  instruments  in  the  issuing 
of  the  offensive  order.  Still,  the  plea  of  military 
subordination  was  a  plausible  excuse,  and  one  which 
was  calculated  to  find  favour  with  military  men.  It 
might  be  correct,  as  afterwards  argued  by  the 
Judge-Advocate-General,  that,  even  in  the  case  of 
military  men,  the  illegal  commands  of  a  superior  are 
invalid ;  but  then  comes  the  question,  by  whom  is 
the  illegality  to  be  determined?  Nothing  can 
justify  disobedience  of  orders  but  the  most  unequi- 

VOL.    I.  T 


274  HISTORY   OF  BRITISH   INDIA. 

BOOK  I.  vocal  and   universal   recognition  of  the   illegality ; 

^^^'  ^'  and,  wherever  a  doubt  is  admissible,  obedience  is 
1809.  the  safer  course.  That  General  Macdowall's  order 
was  illegal  is  a  proposition  by  no  means  so  self- 
evident  as  to  obtain  immediate  and  implicit  assent, 
and  was  little  likely  to  be  so  esteemed  in  the  actual 
state  of  military  feeling  at  Madras.  It  was  possi- 
ble, therefore,  that  those  who  obeyed  it  did  not 
consider  it  to  be  illegal;  and,  although  they  saw 
that  it  was  disrespectful,  they  did  not  hold  their 
interpretation  of  its  tenor  to  that  extent  only  to  be 
a  sufficient  reason  for  disobeying  the  positive  com- 
mands of  the  Commander-in-chief.*      At  any  rate, 

'  Major  Boles  ayers  that  he  does  not  consider  the  order  illegal  or  directed 
against  the  Government,  and  that  many  officers  of  rank  and  experience  in 
the  King's  and  Company's  services  concurred  with  him  in  concluding  it  to 
be  exclusively  applicable  to  Colonel  Munro. — Pari.  Papers,  25th  May, 
1810,  i.  37.  General  Maitland,  at  the  time  Governor  of  Ceylon,  in  an 
elaborate  examination  of  the  subject,  maintains  that  there  was  no  proof  of 
the  ministerial  officers  being  aware  of  the  illegality  of  the  order,  and  that,  if 
Major  Boles  erred,  he  erred  on  the  right  side ;  that  the  military  law  was 
completely  positive  on  one  side,  and  perfectly  indefinite  on  the  other ;  and 
that  he  followed  a  course  vindicated  by  many  precedents,  instead  of  one 
for  which  no  precedent  could  be  pleaded. — Pari.  Papers,  25th  May,  1810, 
No.  vi.  p.  158.  Although  the  Supreme  Government  considered  the  general 
order  of  General  Macdowall  to  be  of  a  seditious  character,  and  that  the 
Adjutant-General  and  his  deputy  in  issuing  it  had  become  thereby  guilty 
of  sedition,  (Pari.  Papers,  20th  May,  1810,  No.  iii.  p.  13,)  yet  the  Governor- 
General  avows  that  the  suspension  of  those  officers  gave  him  great  uneasi- 
ness, as  he  anticipated  that  it  would  furnish  a  plausible,  and  to  military 
minds  a  captivating,  pretence  for  a  more  general  combination  against  the 
Government  than  any  of  the  circumstances  which  preceded  it :  that,  although 
the  merits  of  the  question  as  an  abstract  point  were  clear  and  confident,  yet 
they  were  not  less  likely  to  be  questioned ;  and  he  felt  assured  tliat  in  the 
military  world,  which  was  the  quarter  of  the  greatest  authority  in  such  a 
controversy,  the  sentiment  was  likely  to  be  nearly  unanimous  against  the 
principle  adopted  by  the  Government  of  Fort  St.  George,  whilst  other 
opinions  would  be  much  divided. — (Pari.  Papers,  April,  1811,  No.vi.  p.l38.) 
The  sense  of  the  Court  of  Directors  was  still  more  decidedly  expressed;  as, 
immediately  after  the  arrival  of  the  first  intelligence  of  the  proceedings  of 
the  Madras  Government,  they  ordered  that  Colonel  Capper  and  Miyor  Boles 
should  be  restored  to  the  service.  **  As  those  officers  were  placed  in  a 
situation  of  difficulty,  their  removal  from  their  respective  emoluments  on 
the  staflf  would  have  been  a  sufficient  mark  of  your  displeasure,  and  we 
therefore  direct  that  their  suspension  from  our  service  be  taken  off.** — Letter 


SENTIMENTS  OF   THE   OFFICERS.  27i3 

the  plea  was  urged  in  extenuation  of  the  act,  and  it  book  i. 
would  have  been  prudent  to  have  so  accepted  it ;  for  ^^^^^^i^L. 


it  might  easily  have  been  foreseen,  that  to  visit  the  I809. 
ofTenee  with  extreme  punishment  would  excite  gene- 
ral commiseration  for  the  victims  and  unpopularity 
for  the  judge.  The  consequences  were  such  as  should 
have  been  anticipated.  Addresses  were  immediately 
forwarded  to  Major  Boles  from  all  the  divisions  of 
the  army,  approving  of  his  conduct,  denouncing  his 
sentence  as  cruel  and  undeserved,  and  proposing  to 
raise  by  subscription  an  income  equal  to  that  of 
which  the  Government  had  deprived  him.  The 
type  of  the  contest  was  now  for  the  first  time  durably 
stamped  upon  it.  Hitherto  the  officers  of  the  army 
had  felt  aggrieved  by  the  public  acts  of  the  Govern- 
ment: they  now  combined  in  hostility  to  the  Governor. 
It  was  henceforward  a  struggle  between  men,  rather 
than  between  principles;  between  Sir  George  Barlow 
and  a  body  of  officers,  rather  than  between  the  Go- 
vernment and  the  army  of  Fort  St.  George. 

An  interval  of  three  months  had  elapsed  from  the 
suspension  of  the  officers  of  the  Adjutant-General's 
department,,  when  another  general  order  of  the  Go- 
vernment,  dated   the    1st   of  May,    announced    a 


finom  the  Court,  15th  Sept.  1809.  When  subsequent  advice  of  the  part 
taken  by  the  officers  in  favour  of  Megor  Boles  reached  England,  they  re- 
scinded the  order  and  confirmed  the  suspension ;  '<  as  it  was  to  be  inferred 
that  he  had  become  a  rallying  point  for  dangerous  doctrines,  with  his  own 
coDfent." — Letter  from  the  Court,  29th  Sept. ;  Pari.  Papers,  May,  1810,  p.  18. 
They  afterwards  recur  to  their  first  view  of  the  case,  and  state  that  they 
cannot  discover  any  such  inherent  and  obvious  illegality  as  could  justify 
the  Adjutant  or  Deputy-Adjutant-General  in  refusing  to  obey  the  command 
they  had  received  from  Lieutenant-General  Macdowall  that  the  said  order 
should  be  circulated  to  the  army.  '*  We  therefore  continue  of  opinion  that 
Migor  Boles  ought  not  to  have  been  suspended  from  the  service.** — Military 
Letter  from  the  Court  of  Directors,  5th  Februar>',  1811 ;  Pari.  Papers, 
April,  1811,  p.  178. 

T   1 


276  HISTORY   OF    BRITISH   INDIA. 


BOOK  I.  sweeping  list  of  removals,  supersessions,  and  sus- 
pensions.     Four  officers   of  rank   were   suspended 
1809.     the  service;  an  equal  number  were  removed  from 
their   commands   or   staff  appointments,   and    four 
were   superseded   in    the  command    of  battalions: 
among  them  were  Colonels  St.  Leger,  Chalmers, 
and  Cuppage,  who  had  recently  performed  such  dis- 
tinguished  services   in   Travancore.^      The   officers 
thus  punished  were  accused  of  having  signed,  and 
influenced   others   to    sign,  an    address  to   Major 
Boles  of  the  purport  above  stated ;  and  of  having 
signed,  and  influenced  others  to  sign,  a  memorial 
which  it  was  proposed  to  send  to  the  Governor- 
General,  in  which  the  supposed  grievances  of  the 
Madras  army  were  detailed.    Some  of  the  offenders 
were  also  charged  with  having  signed  a  statement 
in  favour  of  General  Macdowall,  and  forwarded  it 
to  him  at  Ceylon.     Copies  of  these  documents  had 
come  into  the  hands  of  Sir  George  Barlow,  and 
were  communicated    by  him  to  his  council,  with 
whose  concurrence  the  order  of  the  Ist  of  May  was 
issued.^ 

Although  it  could  not  be  denied  that  the  officers 
of  the  army  had  entered  into  combinations  which 
were  as  decidedly  incompatible  with  their  military 
obligations  as  their  subordination  to  the  Civil  Go- 
vernment, yet  it  is  very  questionable  if  the  mea- 

>  General  Order,  let  of  May,  1809;  Pari.  Papers,  May,  1810,  2  A. 
p.2S.  The  officers  suspended  were  Lieutenant- Colonel  the  Honourable 
Arthur  St.  Leger,  Major  John  De  Morgan,  Captain  Josiah  Marshall,  Cap- 
tain James  Grant.  Removed:  Lieutenant-Colonel  Robert  Bell,  Lieutenant- 
Colonel  J.  M.  Chalmers,  Lieutenant-Colonel  J.  Cuppage,  Captain  J.  M. 
Coombs.  Superseded :  Captain  Smith,  Msgor  Keasberry,  M^jor  Muirhead, 
and  M^|or  Haslewood. 

*  Minute  of  the  President  in  Council,  with  enclosures,  1st  May,  1809 ; 
Pari.  Papers,  May,  1810,  2  A.  S. 


OFFICERS   SUSPENDED.  277 

sures  adopted  were  politic  or  necessary.  The  state-  book  i. 
ment  of  General  Macdowall's  conduct,  and  the  ^"^'''  ^' 
memorial  to  the  Governor-General,  had  been  drawn  i809. 
up  under  the  influence  of  that  excitement  which 
existed  at  the  time  of  the  embarkation  of  the  Com- 
mander-in-chief;  and  the  address  to  Major  Boles 
originated  in  the  occurrences  immediately  follow- 
ing. The  feelings  so  vivid  in  the  beginning  of 
February  had  in  some  degree  begun  to  cool  even 
early  in  March;  for  at  that  time  a  circular  letter 
was  addressed  by  the  new  Commander-in-chief, 
General  Gowdie,  to  the  officers  commanding  the 
principal  divisions  of  the  army,  desiring  to  know 
whether  the  memorial  had  been  circulated  amongst 
the  officers  under  their  command,  and  enjoining 
them  to  be  vigilant  in  bringing  them  to  a  sense  of 
their  duty ;  and  it  is  acknowledged  by  Sir  G.  Bar- 
low himself,  that,  with  one  exception,  the  replies 
were  in  general  perfectly  satisfactory.^  In  fact,  the 
memorial  never  was  sent;  and  it  is  admitted  that  all 
intention  of  sending  it  had  been  abandoned,  when 
it  was  made  the  ground  of  punishing  those  who 
were  accused  of  having  taken  an  active  share  in  its 
signature  and  circulation.* 

Another  objectionable  feature  in  this  proceeding 
was  its  being  based  on  private  information,  a  copy 
of  the  memorial  having  been  forwarded  to  Sir  G. 
Barlow  through  a  channel  which  he  did  not  wish  to 
reveal.  Its  existence  was  farther  substantiated  by 
the  testimony  of  some  of  the  country-bom  clerks  in 
the  offices  of  the  military  department,  who  had 
been  employed  to  transcribe  various  papers  by  some 

>  Minute  la»t  cited.  '  Rrmute  ditto. 


278  HISTORY   OF   BRITISH   INDIA. 


BOOK  I.  of  the  officers  particularised.  Their  depositions 
were  taken  privately.  Their  testimony  was  never 
1809.  communicated  to  the  accused,  and  might  or  might 
not  have  been  true.^  That  papers  such  sus  were  de- 
scribed had  been  in  circulation,  was  not  improbable; 
but  to  what  extent  some  of  the  individuals  con- 
demned were  implicated  in  their  distribution,  had 
not  been  clearly  established.^  Several  of  them  de- 
nied the  justice  of  the  charge ;  but  denial  was  use- 
less, and  proof  would  have  been  too  late.  Ac- 
cusation and  condemnation  were  simultaneous ;  the 
officers  so  summarily  punished  were  allowed  no  op- 
portunity of  excuse  or  justification.  They  first 
heard  of  the  charge  against  them  when  they  read 
their  sentence.  No  wonder  that  such  treatment 
should  have  addpd  fiiel  to  flame. 

A  further  unfortunate  circumstance  distinguished 
this  general  order  of  the  1st  of  May.  With  sin- 
gular ignorance  of  the  extent  to  which  the  same 
sentiments  pervaded  the  Madras  army,  and  with 
a  strange  unconsciousness  of  the  sympathy  which 
fellowship  in  service  and  in  fortunes  is  so  apt  to 
inspire  amongst  classes  of  men  and  particularly 
amongst  the  members  of  the  military  class,  the  Go- 
vernment thought  fit  to  compliment  the  subsidiary 
force  at  Hyderabad  for  its  satisfactory  and  exem- 
plary conduct  in  having  resisted  all  participation  in 

'  The  examinations  are  appended  to  the  Preaident*s  minute. 

*  The  officers  of  the  artillery,  under  Colonel  Bell's  command,  made  "  a 
solemn  and  unequivocal  declaration  that  he  had  neither  directly  nor  in- 
directly countenanced  or  influenced  the  circulation  of  any  paper  of  the 
tendency  alluded  to  in  the  order  of  Government."  Colonel  St.  Leger  and 
M^jor  De  Morgan  denied  having  taken  an  active  part  in  the  circulation 
of  the  memorial,  or  influenced  others  to  sign  it.  See  their  memorials  in 
the  Pari.  Papers. 


PROCJBEDINOS   AT   HYDERABAD.  279 

the  improper  and  dangerous  proceedings  which  the  book  i. 
order  described.     Nothing  could  have  been  more  ^^^^'  ^' 


mischievous.*  The  officers  of  the  Hyderabad  force  I809. 
instantly  and  indignantly  repudiated  the  distinction, 
and,  in  their  eagerness  to  show  that  it  was  unde- 
served, plunged  headlong  into  a  career  far  more 
violent  and  indefensible  than  any  which  had  yet 
annoyed  or  alarmed  the  Government.  They  imme- 
diately published  a  letter  to  the  army  and  to  the 
officers  suspended,  in  which  they  declared  their 
entire  disapprobation  of  the  suspension  and  removal 
of  so  many  valuable  officers  from  the  service  and 
from  their  commands;  their  willingness  to  contri- 
bute to  the  support  of  those  officers ;  and  their  de- 
termination to  co-operate  with  the  army  in  all  legal 
measures  for  the  removal  of  the  cause  of  the  pre- 
sent discontent,  and  the  restoration  of  their  brother- 
officers  to  the  honourable  situations  from  which 
they  had  been  removed.^  This  was  followed  by  an 
address  to  the  Governor  in  Council,  signed  by  a 
hundred  and  fifty-eight  officers  of  the  divisions  of 
Jalna  and  Hyderabad,  urging  strenuously  the  re- 
storation of  the  removed  officers  as  the  only  mea- 
sure likely  to  prevent  the  possible  and  probable 
consequences  which  they  else  apprehended ;  namely, 
the  separation  of  the  civil  and  military,  the  destruc- 
tion of  all  discipline  and  subordination  amongst  the 
native  troops,  the  ultimate  loss  of  a  large  portion  of 
the  British  possessions  in  India,  and  the  dreadful 
blow  it  would  inflict  on  the  mother  country.'     In 

^  General  Orders  of  the  Goveroment ;   Pari.  Papers,  May,  1810,  2  A. 
p.  24. 

«  Pari.  Papers,  May,  1810,  2  B.  p.  24.  »  Ibid.  p.  26. 


280  HISTORY   OF   BRITISH   INDIA. 

BOOK  I.  the  course  of  the  following  month  an  address  was 
^^^'  ^'  presented  to  Colonel  Montresor,  commanding  the 
1809.     Hyderabad   force,  by  his  officers,  of  a  still   more 
outrageous  description.* 

About  the  same  time  with  this  manifestation  of 
the  growing  sentiments  of  insubordination  at  Hy- 
derabad, an  overt  act  of  mutiny  was  committed  by 
the  Company's  European  regiment  quartered  at 
Masulipatam.  The  officers  of  this  corps  had  par- 
taken in  the  general  feelings,  and  had  been  ftirther 
irritated  by  the  indiscreet  harshness  with  which 
their  commanding  officer  had  visited  some  impru- 
dent expressions  of  those  feelings  in  a  moment  of 
conviviality.  The  men  were  also  out  of  humour  at 
being  occasionally  drafted  to  serve  as  marines  on 
board  of  the  ships  of  war  in  the  Bay  of  Bengal.  A 
report  was  current  amongst  them  that  the  whole 
corps  was  to  be  broken  up  in  this  manner;  and, 
when  an  order  was  issued  for  three  companies  to 
prepare  for  marine  duty,  the  men  refused  to  obey, 
and  the  officers  placed  their  own  colonel  under  ar- 
rest. The  command  was  assumed  by  the  next  in 
rank,  a  managing  committee  of  officers  was  insti- 
tuted, and  a  correspondence  was  opened  by  them 
with  the  Hyderabad  and  other  mutinous  divisions. 
Colonel  Malcolm,  who  was  at  Madras,  preparing  to 

^  On  the  21st  of  July  they  presented  to  Colonel  Montresor  a  paper 
which  they  styled  their  ultimatuin,  but  pledging  themselves  to  remain  quiet 
until  a  reply  from  Government  should  be  received.  In  this  they  demanded 
the  repeal  of  the  orders  of  the  Ist  May,  the  restoration  of  the  officers  sus- 
pended ur  removed,  the  removal  from  their  staff  appointments  of  the  officers 
who  had  been  the  principal  advisers  of  the  Go?emment,  and  the  grant  of  a 
general  amnesty  to  the  discontented.  The  signatures  of  all  the  officers 
except  those  on  the  staff  were  affixed  to  the  paper,  and  a  joint  movement 
from  Jalna  and  Hyderabad  on  Madras  was  projected  in  case  tlieir  demands 
were  not  complied  with. — Pari.  Papers,  May,  1810,  2  C.  p.  29. 


0CX7URRENCES   AT   MA8ULIPATAM.  281 

proceed  on  his  mission  to  Persia,  was  dispatched  to  book  i. 
Masulipatam  to  restore   order  and  subordination :  J^I^Ul. 


he  was  treated  with  courtesy,  but  returned  to  the  1809. 
Presidency  without  accomplishing  the  object  of  liis 
mission,  and  strongly  impressed  with  the  persuasion 
that  the  revocation  of  the  Government  order  would 
alone  prevent  a  general  and  fatal  insurrection.*  In 
fact,  on  the  3rd  of  August  garrison  orders  directed 
the  regiment  to  hold  itself  in  readiness  for  field 
service ;  a  plan  having  been  concerted  for  the  junc- 
tion of  the  troops  from  Masulipatam  with  those 
from  Jalna  and  Hyderabad,  and  their  united  march 
to  Madras,  where  they  threatened  to  compel  the 
restoration  of  the  officers,  and  to  depose  Sir  George 
Barlow  from  the  post  of  Governor.  Luckily  for  all 
concerned,  these  wild  and  criminal  projects  were 
arrested  by  the  seasonable  interposition  of  the  Go- 
vernor-General, and  the  return  of  the  most  violent 
and  rash  to  a  recollection  of  their  duty. 

The  Government  of  Madras  had  thus,  by  unques- 
tionable deficiencies  in  temper  and  discretion, 
brought  matters  to  a  position  from  which  it  was 
equally  dangerous  to  advance  or  recede.  Several 
of  the  most  distinguished  of  its  military  servants 
counselled  the  rescission  of  the  obnoxious  orders, 
and  the  restoration  of  the  suspended  officers  to  the 
service.*  Such  a  concession  might  have  moderated 
the  violence  of  the  tempest,  but  its  efficacy  in  pro- 


^  Pari.  Papers,  May,  1810,  2  B.  p.  33,  and  2C.  p.  1.  Culonel  Malcolm 
subsequeutly  published  "  Observations  on  the  Disturbances  of  tlie  Madras 
Army,"  in  two  parts;  London,  1812. 

^  By  Captain  Sydenham,  tlie  Uesldent  at  Hyderabad  ;  by  Colonel  Mon- 
tresor,  commanding  the  subsidiary  force ;  and  by  Colonel  Malcolm. — Pari. 
Papers. 


282  HISTORY   OF   BRITISH   INDIA. 

BOOK  I.  ducing  a  continued  calm  was  more  than  doubtful. 

CHAP.  V.  j^  would  have  been  an  acknowledgement  that  the 
1809.  Government  had  acted  with  inconsiderateness  and 
injustice,  and  possessed  neither  the  strength  nor  the 
spirit  to  assert  its  legitimate  rights ;  and  it  would 
have  established  a  dangerous  precedent,  and  en- 
couraged, in  time  to  come,  those  who  felt  or  fan- 
cied a  grievance,  to  resist  the  will  of  all  future  ad- 
ministrations, and  seek  redress  by  force  and  intimi- 
dation. There  was  an  end  of  all  civil  government, — 
of  all  government, — ^if  military  combination  was  al- 
lowed to  set  aside  constituted  authority ;  if  the  army 
was  suffered  to  dictate  its  own  laws  and  choose  its 
own  officers ;  if  the  weapons,  with  which  it  was  in- 
trusted to  defend  the  state  against  external  aggres- 
sion, were  aimed  against  those  functionaries  who 
had  been  appointed  to  guide  and  govern  in  India 
the  civil  and  military  servants  of  the  Company  and 
subjects  of  the  Crown.  Justice  demands  that  full 
weight  should  be  given  to  these  considerations  in 
appreciating  the  conduct  of  Sir  George  Barlow  at 
this  crisis.  His  determination  to  uphold  at  every 
risk  the  rightful  claims  of  the  Government  to  the 
obedience  of  the  army  was  defensible  on  the 
grounds  of  the  responsibility,  imposed  upon  him  by 
his  station,  of  preserving  undisturbed  the  social  re- 
lations of  the  civil  and  military  power  under  his 
authority,  of  asserting  the  superiority  of  law  over 
force,  and  of  maintaining  inviolate  the  principles  of 
the  constitution,  which  had  been  assigned  to  the 
various  members  of  the  Indian  empire  by  the  Le- 
gislature of  Great  Britain.  Nor  was  the  hazard  of 
actual    collision   so   imminent    or    so    great   as   it 


RESOLUTION   OF   THE   GOVERNMENT.  283 

seemed  to  be  from  the  menacing  attitude  which  a  book  i. 
part  of  the  army  had  assimied.  It  was  but  a  part,  ^"^'''  ^' 
and  a  considerable  portion  had  not  yet  taken  any  i809. 
share  in  their  proceedings.  The  Commander-in- 
chief,  and  the  great  majority  of  those  officers  who 
were  highest  in  rank  and  most  distinguished  in 
reputation,  and  whose  influence  with  those  under 
their  command  was  of  most  importance,  were 
staunch  advocates  of  the  principles  of  order  and 
military  subordination;  many,  who  had  been  in- 
volved in  the  proceedings  by  the  vehemence  of 
those  around  them,  were  known  to  be  averse  to  the 
extremes  to  which  they  were  urged ;  and  it  was  to 
be  expected,  that,  even  of  those  who  were  loudest  in 
their  denunciations,  many  would  pause  before  they 
incurred  the  guilt  of  actual  rebellion.  The  Govern- 
ment of  Madras  was  assured  of  the  decided  support 
of  the  Government  of  Bengal,  and  had  the  com- 
mand of  the  resources  of  that  Presidency,  as  well  as 
of  Bombay  and  Ceylon.  The  King's  regiments  stea- 
dily adhered  to  their  duty ;  and  there  could  be  little 
doubt  that  the  native  soldiery,  when  the  ease  was 
explained  to  them,  would  prefer  the  cause  of  the 
Government,  from  whom  they  derived  their  sub- 
sistence and  hopes  of  promotion,  to  that  of  their 
officers,  whose  objects  they  imperfectly  understood, 
and  from  whose  triunii>h  they  could  anticipate  no 
advantage.  Relying  on  these  considerations,  the 
Government  of  Madras  entered  upon  the  contest 
with  promptitude  and  vigour. 

In  order  to  ascertain  its  own  strength,  and  dis- 
cover what  proportion  of  the  officers  were  well- 
affected,  and  at  the  same  time  to  remove  the  dis- 


284  HISTORY  OF   BRmSU   INDIA. 


BOOK  I.  affected  for  a  season  from  situations  where  they 
cHAF.  y.  mi^i^^.  exercise  influence  or  authority,  the  officers 
1809.  generally  were  called  upon  to  sign  a  test  pledging 
themselves  to  support  the  measures  of  the  Govern- 
ment. Letters  were  addressed  to  the  commanding 
officers  of  stations,  furnishing  them  with  the  pro- 
posed form  of  the  test,  and  instructing  them  to  pro- 
cure to  it  the  signatures  of  the  officers  under  their 
command,  on  penalty  of  being  removed  from  their 
regiments  to  stations  on  the  sea-coast,  where  they 
would  be  required  to  reside  until  the  situation  of 
affairs  and  the  temper  of  men's  minds  should  allow 
of  their  being  again  employed.*  As  the  removal 
was  avowedly  temporary,  and  the  recusant  officers 
were  not  to  forfeit  their  pay,  all  appearance  of  un- 
necessary harshness  was  avoided,  and  a  reasonable 
plea  for  remaining  neutral  was  supplied  to  the  least 
violent.  At  the  same  time,  the  commanding  officers 
of  corps  were  ordered  to  assemble  the  native  officers, 
and  explain  to  them,  and  through  them  to  the  Sipahis, 
that  the  discontents  of  the  European  officers  were 
entirely  personal ;  that  the  Government  had  no  in- 
tention to  diminish  the  advantages  which  the  men 
enjoyed,  but,  on  the  contrary,  was  anxious  to  im- 
j)rove  them,  and  that  it  confidently  relied  upon  their 
attachment  and  fidelity.^  A  general  order  to  the 
same  effect  was  also  promulgated,  and  active  mea- 
sures  were    taken  to  secure    its   circulation.     The 

'  Pari.  Papers,  May,  1810,  2  C.  p.  41.  The  test  or  declaration  ran  thus : 
"  We,  the  undersigned  officers  of  the  Honourable  Company's  service,  do  in 
the  most  solemn  manner  declare,  upon  our  word  of  honour  as  British  offi- 
ccrs,  that  we  will  obey  the  orders  and  support  the  authority  of  the  Honour- 
able the  Governor  in  Council  of  Fort  St.  George,  ag^eably  to  the  tenor  of 
the  commissions  which  we  hold  from  that  Government." — Ibid.  2  B.  p.  9.    . 

"  Pari.  Papers,  May,  1810,  2  A.  p.  30. 


APPEAL   TO  THE   NATIVE  TROOPS.  28;") 

Company's  troops  were  also  so  distributed  in  con-  book  i. 
nexion  with  his  Majesty's  as  to  render  the  latter  an  J^[^^^_]^ 


efficient  check  upon  the  former,  and  all  the  avail-     I809. 
able  corps  of  the  central  division  of  the  army  were 
concentrated  in  the  vicinity  of  the  seat  of  Govern- 
ment. 

The  majority  of  the  officers,  even  of  those  whose 
loyalty  and  moderation  had  never  been  doubted, 
declined  to  sign  the  test,  and  were  consequently  re- 
moved from  their  stations.*  The  appeal  to  the  native 
officers  and  men  was  very  generally  successful. 
Wherever  the  orders  of  the  Government  reached 
them,  they  expressed  their  resolution  to  remain 
fiuthful  to  their  vows  of  allegiance,  and  to  obey  no 
commands  but  such  as  they  should  receive  from 
Government  direct,  or  from  officers  whom  the  Go- 
vernment should  set  over  them.  This  separation  of 
the  men  from  their  officers  was  calculated  to  relax 
the  reins  of  discipline  and  sow  the  seeds  of  disor- 
ganization in  the  native  army ;  but  the  Indian  soldier 
is  of  a  plastic  nature,  which,  where  his  own  imme- 
diate interests  or  prejudices  are  not  concerned,  soon 
takes  and  soon  parts  with  impressions.  The  only 
situations  in  which  the  agitation  was  not  suppressed 
without  recourse  to  more  stringent  correctives  were 
Mysore  and  Hyderabad. 

In  the  former  of  these  districts,  the  officers  of  the 
garrison  of  Seringapatam,  rendered  desperate  by  the 
measures  of  the  Government  for  separating  the 
native  soldiers  from  their  officers,  rushed  into  un- 

'  Obsenrations  of  Sir  John  Malcolm,  p.  32.  Colonel  Bannerman  states 
that  the  published  returns  show  but  one  hundred  and  fifty  sifj^natures,  out 
of  thirteen  hundred  officers  on  the  strength  of  the  Madras  army. — Dissent, 
Pari.  Papers,  April,  1811,  4.  23. 


286  HlflTTORT   OF   BRITISH   INDU. 

BOOK  I.  bridled  violence  and  open  rebellion.     Compelling  a 
*^^^'  ^'  small  detachment  of  his  Majesty's  troops  to  with- 


1809.  draw  from  the  fort,  they  seized  upon  the  public 
treasure,  drew  up  the  bridges,  and  placed  themselyes 
in  an  attitude  of  defiance;  disobeying  the  orders 
of  Colonel  Davies,  commanding  in  Mysore,  and  dis- 
regarding the  remonstrances  of  the  Political  Resi- 
dent, Mr.  Cole.  A  detachment  consisting  of  the 
25th  dragoons,  a  regiment  of  native  cavalry,  with  a 
regiment  of  his  Majesty's  foot,  and  a  native  battalion, 
commanded  by  Colonel  Gibbs,  marched  to  Seringa- 
patam,  where  they  encamped;  while  a  corps  of 
Mysore  horse,  which  had  been  supplied  by  the 
Dewan,  was  detached  to  intercept  the  advance  of 
two  battalions  which  were  on  their  way  from  Chittle- 
droog  to  reinforce  the  garrison.  The  Mysore  horse 
met  the  battalions  at  some  distance  from  Seringa- 
patam  about  the  7th  of  August.  No  forcible  oppo- 
sition was  offered  imtil  the  11th,  when  the  Chittle- 
droog  force  was  in  sight  of  the  walls  of  Seringapatam, 
and  of  the  camp  of  the  detachment  by  which  the 
fortress  was  observed.  Encouraged  by  the  proximity 
of  the  latter,  the  Mysoreans  began  to  harass  the 
march  of  the  battalions,  and  were  fired  upon.  The 
resistance  was,  however,  feeble;  for,  upon  the  ap- 
proach of  the  dragoons,  the  Chittledroog  battalions 
broke  and  dispersed.  The  greater  part  effected 
their  escape  into  the  fort,  the  garrison  of  which 
had  made  a  demonstration  in  their  favour.  The 
officer  who  commanded  was  wounded  and  taken 
prisoner;  another  died  of  fatigue  and  anxiety 
after  reaching  the  fort.  More  than  two  hundred 
Sipahis  and  followers  were  said  to  have  been  killed 


COLONEL   CLOSE   CALLED   TO    HYDERABAD.  287 

and  wounded.^     Of  the  dragoons  one  officer  was  book  i. 
wounded  slightly.      During  the  night  the    fortress  '^^^^'  ^' 
cannonaded   the   encampment;    and,    although    no     i809. 
great  mischief  was  done,  it  was  necessary  to  re- 
move the  tents   to  a  safer  distance.      No   further 
hostility  was  offered  by  either  party. 

Hoping  that  the  personal  character  of  Colonel 
Close,  the  Resident  at  Poena,  and  his  great  pojm- 
larity  with  the  native  soldiery,  might  enable  him  to 
exercise  a  salutary  influence  over  the  troops  at 
Hyderabad,  the  Government  called  him  from  his 
political  duties  to  take  the  command  of  the  sub- 
sidiary force.  He  arrived  at  Hyderabad  on  the  3rd 
of  August;  and,  notwithstanding  some  opposition, 
made  his  way  to  the  cantonments,  where  he  expos- 
^tulated  with  such  officers  as  were  present,  and  with 
such  of  the  native  officers  and  men  as  showed  a  dis- 
position to  listen  to  his  observations.  Little  effect 
was  produced  apparently  by  his  intervention ;  and, 
having  cause  to  apprehend  personal  restraint,  he 
thought  it  more  consistent  with  his  own  dignity  and 
the  intentions  of  the  Government  to  withdraw  from 
the  cantonment  to  the  Residency,  and  there  await 
further  instructions.  Immediately  upon  his  departure, 
the  committee  of  officers  summoned  the  divisions  at 
Jalua,  Masulipatam,  and  in  the  Northern  Circars. 
The  former  made  two  marches  in  advance,  and  the 


'  The  returns  give  nine  killed,  one  hundred  and  fifty  wounded,  and  two 
hundred  and  eighty-one  missing.  The  officers  of  the  Ciiittledroog  battalion 
affirm  that  the  men  were  ordered  not  to  fire  upon  the  Europeans,  but  only 
to  defend  themselves  against  the  Mysore  horse.  The  absence  of  all  casual- 
ties among  the  dragoons,  with  the  exception  of  one  officer  wounded,  which 
was  possibly  the  consequence  of  a  misunderstanding,  is  a  strong  corrobora- 
tion of  this  assertion. — Pari.  Papers,  May,  1810,  2  O.  p.  40 ;  also  2  F. 
p.  S3,  &c. ;  also  Trial  of  Colonel  J.  Bell;  Pari.  Papers,  April,  1811. 


288  HisrroRY  of  British  india. 

BOOK  I.  latter  were  under  orders  to  take  the  field,  when,  for- 
^'^^'  ^'  tunately,  the  determinations  of  the  oflScers  at  Hydera- 
1809.  bad  underwent  a  change.  On  the  1 1  th  of  August  they 
addressed  a  penitential  letter  to  Lord  Minto,  who 
was  expected  to  arrive  at  Madras;  signed  the  test  pro- 
posed by  the  Government  of  Fort  St.  George ;  and 
circulated  to  the  several  stations  of  the  army  a  paper 
wherein  they  stated  that  imperious  circumstances 
and  mature  reflection  had  induced  them  to  sign 
the  declaration,  and  they  earnestly  entreated  their 
brother-officers  to  follow  their  example.^  The  de- 
fection of  the  Hyderabad  force  arrested  the  progress 
of  the  mutiny.  The  Jalna  division  returned  to  can- 
tonments. On  the  16th  of  August  the  garrison  at 
Masulipatam  tendered  their  adhesion,  and  gave  up 
the  fort  to  General  Pater ;  and  on  the  23rd  the  gar- 
rison of  Seringapatam  submitted  unconditionally, 
and  evacuated  the  fortress.  The  declaratory  test 
was  universally  signed,  and  a  calm  as  profound  as 

'  The  motives  which  influenced  the  officers  are  recapitulated  by  Lord 
Minto  in  his  letter  of  the  12th  October,  1809,  to  the  Secret  Committee^ 
par.  72.  "  They  represent  themselves  to  have  proposed  at  no  period  any- 
thing beyond  intimidation  as  a  means  of  controuling  Government,  and  ex- 
acting the  concessions  they  required :  they  advanced  from  faction  to  sedi- 
tion, from  sedition  to  revolt,  confident  that  each  step  they  made  towards 
further  violence  would  be  sufficient  for  their  purpose.  In  this  course  they 
gradually  arrived  at  the  last  narrow  boundary  which  they  had  yet  to  pass 
before  the  commencement  of  civil  war ;  and,  while  they  yet  hesitated  on 
that  last  decisive  step,  the  measures  of  Government  convinced  them  that 
intimidation  would  fail,  and,  if  they  advanced  further,  the  contest  was 
actually  to  be  maintained.  They  then  describe  their  sense  of  the  public 
evils  incident  to  such  a  conflict,  and  their  compunction  at  becoming  the 
immediate  instruments  of  such  calamities;  sentiments  which  terminated  in 
a  resolution  to  sacrifice  their  own  objects  and  feelings  to  the  public  safety, 
and  to  submit  themselves  implicitly  to  the  discretion  of  Government.** 
Although  Lord  Minto  doubts,  to  its  full  extent,  this  account  of  their  rea- 
sons for  «o  suddenly  stopping  in  their  course,  and  ascribes  it,  in  part  at 
least,  to  a  seasonable  fear  of  failure ;  yet  he  admits  that  very  many  must 
have  been  urged  onwards,  against  their  own  better  judgments,  by  the  im- 
pulse of  example,  and  that  these  must  have  rejoiced  at  the  first  overture  of 
retreat. — Pari.  Papers,  May,  1810,  No.iv.  p.  9. 


RETURN  TO   OBEDIENCE.  289 

the    agitation    had    been   alarming   was    at    once  book  i. 
restored. 


The  causes  which  induced  this  seasonable  re-  i809. 
action  are  sufficiently  obvious.  The  officers  had  hi- 
therto ruslied  forward  hi  the  blindness  of  their 
anger,  without  seeing  whither  it  was  likely  to  lead 
them ;  but  they  had  now  arrived  at  the  very  verge  of 
the  precipice,  and  another  step  would  have  con- 
signed them  to  irretrievable  infamy  and  ruin.  It  is 
impossible  to  believe  that  the  most  daring  and  de- 
sperate did  not  at  this  moment  wish  for  an  excuse  to 
go  no  further.  The  senior  officers  in  almost  every 
command  had  throughout  acted  with  so  much  mode- 
ration and  judgment  as  to  have  secured  the  respect, 
although  they  had  not  been  always  able  to  repress 
the  violence,  of  those  subordinate  to  them;  and 
their  representations  contributed  to  awaken  in  the 
minds  of  their  younger  brethren  a  truer  perception 
of  the  perilous  situation  in  m  hich  they  stood.  It  is 
also  little  to  be  doubted  that  the  disposition  to  re- 
tract derived  confirmation  from  the  apprehension  of 
failure  in  advancing,  and  from  a  general  belief  that 
the  native  soldiery  m  ould  fall  off  from  their  officers 
if  the  quarrel  with  the  Government  were  urged  to 
actual  warfare.^  These  reflections  had  been  for  some 
time  at  work.  Even  in  the  almost  universal  rejec- 
tion of  the  test,  the  indication  of  a  returning  sense 
of  duty  was  manifested ;  as  the  chief  ground  of  re- 

'  In  several  of  tho  pamphlets  published  by  the  friends  of  the  officers,  it 
is  asserted  that  <<the  Sipahis  adhered  to  the  officers  to  the  last."  Lord 
Minto  observes,  that  "the  officers  never  allowed  themselves  to  doubt  of  the 
adherence  of  the  Sepoy  battalions." — Letter,  Tith  October,  par.  IC ;  Pari. 
Papers,  May,  1810,  p.  2.  In  general,  however,  the  native  officers  and 
troops  manifested  little  inclination  to  support  their  European  officers 
against  the  Government. 

VOL.  L  U 


290  HISTORY   OF   BRITISH   INDIA. 

BOOK  I.  fusal  was  not  its  general  purport,  but  the  possibility 
^^^^'  ^'  of  its  placing  those  who  signed  it  in  open  hostility 
1809.  to  those  with  whom  they  had  been  so  far  engaged 
in  a  common  cause.  Most  of  the  officers  declared 
themselves  from  the  first  willing  to  sign  it,  with  the 
reservation  that  they  should  not  be  required  to  take 
up  arms  against  their  brother-oflJcers.  The  readi- 
ness with  which  they  acquiesced  in  their  removal 
from  their  regiments  and  stations  evinced  a  similar 
state  of  feeling ;  and  it  wanted  only  a  beginning,  an 
example  of  suflJcient  weight,  for  the  change  of  sen- 
timent to  be  universally  and  imequivocally  exhi- 
bited. This  was  supplied  by  the  conduct  of  the 
Hyderabad  force,  which  had  been  foremost  and 
most  vehement  in  its  opposition,  and,  having  there- 
fore the  greatest  sacrifice  of  personal  feeling  to 
make  in  yielding  obedience,  was  the  more  deserving 
of  imitation.  With  regard  to  the  oflScers  of  the 
subsidiary  force,  they  were  of  course  influenced  by 
the  same  motives  as  their  companions  in  arms ;  and 
there  is  every  likelihood  that  the  arguments  and 
advice  and  the  character  of  Colonel  Close  mate- 
rially affected  their  feelings,  aided  their  judgment, 
and  decided  their  determination.  Another  and 
very  important  circumstance  came  opportunely  to 
alleviate  the  pain  and  effiice  the  discredit  of  such 
a  departure  from  their  previous  declarations.  It 
had  been  known  for  some  time  past  that  it  Mas 
the  intention  of  the  Governor-General  to  repair  to 
Madras,^  and  assume  in  person  an  investigation  into 
the  proceedings  of  the  army.  It  was  now  ascer- 
tained that  he  was  on  his  way.     To  his  justice  and 

>  General  Orders,  Fort  William,  20th  July,  1809. 


EXPECTED   PRESENCE   OF   THE   GOVERNOR-GENERAL.  291 

impartiality  the  officers  looked  with  confidence,  and  book  i. 
felt  assured   that  they  had  nothing   to   apprehend  ^^^^'  ^' 


in  him  from  personal  resentment.     Although  they     1809. 
signed  the  test  of  the  Madras  Government,  yet  it 
was  to  Lord  Minto,  and  not  to  Sir  George  Barlow, 
that  the  officers  at  Hyderabad,  Masulijmtam,  and 
Seringapatam  addressed  their  submission.^ 

Not  that  the  officers  of  the  Madras  army  had 
any  reason  to  anticipate  from  the  Governor-General 
a  favourable  award.  His  sentiments  were  known 
to  be  in  accordance  with  those  of  the  Governor  in 
Council  of  Fort  St.  George.  Communication  of 
their  proceedings,  from  the  latter  to  the  former,  had 
drawn  from  the  Supreme  Government  a  review  of 
the  whole  of  the  discussions,  an  elaborate  vindi- 
cation of  the  coiu^e  pursued  by  the  Government  of 
Madras,  and  an  unqualified  condemnation  of  the  in- 
subordinate and  seditious  spirit  which  the  officers 
had  displayed.*  The  letter  had  been  published  at 
Madras,  and  circulated  to  the  army ;  but,  notwith- 
standing its  general  tenor,  there  was  a  calmness  in 
its  tone,  and  a  reasonableness  in  its  arguments, 
which  opened  a  prospect  of  considerate  as  well  as 
just  decision.  Whatever  might  be  the  sentence  of 
the  Governor-General,  the  sting  of  personality  was 
removed ;  and  it  was  the  functionary,  not  the  indi- 
vidual, who  was  expected  to  pronounce  judgment. 

It  had  been  the  purpose  of  Lord  Minto  to  have 
sailed  for  Madras  before  the  end  of  July ;  but  his 

'  Address  from  the  officers  at  Hyderabad  to  Lord  Minto,  11th  August; 
Pari.  Papers,  May,  1810,  2  F.  1.  Declaration  of  those  at  Masulipatani ; 
ibid.  p.  12.     Address  of  those  at  Seringapatam,  2l8t  August ;  ibid.  p.  46. 

'  Letter  from  the  Supreme  Government  to  the  Governor  in  Council,  Fort 
St.  George,  27th  May,  1809;  Pari.  Papers,  May,  1810,  No.iii. 

u2 


292  HISTORY  OF   BRITISH  INDIA. 

BOOK  I.  departure  was  delayed  by  the  assurance,  which  the 
^^'  Madras  Government,  with  that  singularly  imperfect 
1809.  knowledge  which  it  had  on  other  occasions  evinced 
of  the  real  state  of  things,  conveyed  to  him,  that 
the  agitation  was  rapidly  subsiding,  and  that  a  fair 
prospect  existed  of  the  army's  returning  to  a  sense 
of  duty.*  As  soon  as  he  ascertained  that  the  in- 
formation was  incorrect,  he  embarked,  and  reached 
Madras  on  the  11th  of  September.  All  parties 
anxiously  awaited  his  fiat.  It  was  not  long  de- 
layed.* On  the  25th  of  the  same  month  a  general 
order  announced  to  the  army  the  Governor-Gene- 
ral's reprobation  of  their  past  conduct,  and  his  reso- 
lution to  inflict  such  punishment  as  might  be  com- 
mensurate with  the  oflences  committed.  This  de- 
termination was  expressed  in  language  designed 
and  calculated  to  assuage  all  irritated  feeling,  and  it 
was  too  evidently  grounded  upon  the  nature  of  the 
past  transactions  for  its  justice  to  be  called  in  ques- 
tion. The  necessity  of  vindicating  the  authority  of 
the  Government  was  based  entirely  upon  abstract 
and  incontrovertible  principles,  and  the  manner  in 
which  that  vindication 'was  to  be  exercised  was 
qualified  with  the  utmost  possible  leniency.  The 
decision  of  the  Governor-General  was  also  distin- 
guished by  one  remarkable  peculiarity, — the  more 
remarkable  from  the  contrast  which  it  presented  to 
the  whole  course  of  Sir  George  Barlow's  proceed- 
ingSjT— the  non-exercise  of  absolute  power ;  the  abey- 
ance of  the  right  of  the  Governor-General  to  decree 

'  Letter  from  the  Governor-General  to  the  Secret  Committee,  10th  Octo- 
ber, 1800,  par.  S7:  also  Minute  of  Governor-General,  15th  July,  1800; 
Pari.  Papers,  May,  1810,  No.  iv. :  and  MS.  Records. 

*  Pari.  Papers,  May,  1810,  No.  iv.  p.  14. 


COURTS-MARTIAL,  293 

punishment  of  his  own  will  and  pleasure ;  and  the  book  i. 
reference  of  those  who  were  charged  with  the  high-  ^^^^'  ^' 


est  degree  of  culpability  to  the  judgment  of  their  I809. 
peers.  A  few  only  of  the  offenders  were  selected ; 
such  as  officers  in  command  of  stations  or  of  bodies 
of  troops,  commandants  of  corps,  and  individuals 
conspicuous  for  violent  and  forward  behaviour.  For 
the  two  first,  courts-martial  were  ordered;  to  the 
others,  the  alternative  was  offered  of  investigation 
before  the  same  tribunal,  or  dismissal  from  the 
service.  The  whole  of  the  officers  of  the  Hydera- 
bad force  were  pardoned,  in  consideration  of  the 
important  example  which  they  had  set  of  submis- 
sion. Only  three  officers  came  under  the  first  class, 
eighteen  only  under  the  latter ;  a  general  amnesty 
tranquillised  the  rest.  The  order  wound  up  with 
expressions  of  affectionate  solicitude  for  the  charac- 
ter and  welfare  of  the  Coast  army,  which  sunk  deep 
into  minds  that  had  so  long  been  used  to  the  lan- 
guage of  unbending  sternness  and  unqualified  re- 
proof, and  which  now  laboured  under  the  humiliat- 
ing consciousness  that  personal  resentment,  how- 
ever provoked,  was  no  excuse  for  a  dereliction  of 
the  first  principles  of  military  duty, — obedience  to 
constituted  authority,  and  allegiance  to  the  state. 

Shortly  after  the  promulgation  of  this  order,  the 
trials  commenced.  Lieutenant-Colonel  John  Bell, 
the  commandant  of  the  garrison  of  Seringapatam, 
was  charged  with  joining  in,  and  with  heading,  the 
mutiny  of  the  troops.  The  defence  set  up  was,  that 
he  had  consented  to  take  the  command  only  to  pre- 
vent excesses ;  that  he  exercised  no  real  authority  in 
the  fort ;  that  he  had  signed  the  test  without  hesi- 


294  HISTORY   OF   BRITISH   INDIA. 

BOOK  I.  tation  himself,  and  that  it  was  through  his  influence 
^""^^^  ^'  the  officei-s  also  finally  signed  it,  and  that  the  gar- 
1809.  risen  finally  surrendered  the  fort  in  a  peaceable 
manner*  He  was  pronounced  guilty,  and  sen- 
tenced to  be  cashiered.  A  like  charge  and  sentence 
characterised  the  trial  of  Major  Storey,  who  had 
consented  to  hold  the  command  at  Masulipatam, 
upon  the  arrest,  by  his  brother-oflScers,  of  Colonel 
Innes,  their  common  superior.  A  similar  defence 
was  offered,  and  the  prisoner  was  recommended  to 
the  mercy  of  the  Commander-in-chief.  In  both 
cases  the  sentences  were  held  to  be  too  lenient,  and 
were  sent  back  for  revision ;  but  they  were  adhered 
to  by  the  courts,  and  eventually  confirmed.  Lieu- 
tenant-Colonel Doveton  was  charged  with  having 
moved  his  detachment  from  Jalna  with  a  mutinous 
and  seditious  design  against  the  Government  of 
Madras.  The  defence  was  the  same.  Colonel 
Doveton,  it  was  affirmed,  had  only  ostensibly  parti- 
cipated in  a  movement  which  he  could  not  hinder, 
with  a  view  so  to  controul  it  as  to  render  it  inoffen- 
sive: he  also  produced  a  private  letter  from  the 
Resident  at  Hyderabad,  sanctioning  his  accompany- 
ing the  troops,  if  he  could  not  prevent  their  march. 
He  was  consequently  fully  and  honourably  ac- 
quitted. This  sentence  also  was  disapproved  of  by 
the  Commander  of  the  forces,  but  was  confirmed 
by  the  court.  Colonel  Doveton  was  nevertheless 
suspended  by  the  Govemor-Greneral  from  the  service 
pending  a  reference  to  the  pleasure  of  the  Court  of 
Directors.  Of  the  second  class  of  officers,  two, 
Lieutenant-Colonel  Munro  and  Major  Kenny,  stood 
a  trial,  and  were  cashiered :  the  rest  accepted  the 


TERMINA'FION   OF   THE   DISPUTE.  295 


alternative  of  dismissal.^     Until  the  termination  of  book  i. 
the  trials.  Lord  Minto  continued  at  the  Presidency  ^"^'''  ""' 
of  Madras ;  and  when  he  quitted  it,  early  in  1810,     1809. 
his  authority  was  in  some  measure  replaced  by  the 
presence  of  General  Hewett,   the  Commander-in- 
chief  of  the  Bengal  army,  who  assumed  the  com- 
mand of  the  army  of  Madras.     At  the  end  of  1810, 
Greneral   Sir  Samuel  Auchmuty   relieved    General 
Hewett  from  his  duty,  and,  with  the  command  of 
the  army,  took  his   place  as  member  of  Council ; 
the  Court  of  Directors  having  learnt  too  late  from 
the  recent  dissensions  how  essential  was  the  j)osse8- 
sion  of  a  dignity,  so  vainly  coveted  by  General  Mac- 
dowall,  to  the  cordial  co-operation  of  their  chief 
civil  and  military  functionaries. 

Thus  terminated  a  struggle  which  at  one  period 
was  thought  to  threaten  the  constitution  of  the 
Madras  Presidency,  and  endanger  the  existence  of 
the  British  empire  in  India.  Tlie  danger,  though 
not  visionary,  was  perhaps  exaggerated.  The  quar- 
rel was  less  between  public  bodies  than  between 
individuals;  and  the  army  readily  yielded  to  Lord 
Minto  the  allegiance  which  it  had  withheld  from, 
and  ultimately  conceded  with  an  ill  grace  to,  Sir 
George  Barlow.  Ilow^ever  unreasonable  the  aver- 
sion thus  cherished,  and  however  indefensible  the 
extremities  to  which  it  hurried  unthinking  men, 
it  cannot  be  affirmed  that  the  feelings  so  widely 
spread  were  wholly  without  extenuation,  or  that 
the  measures  and  character  of  the  Governor  were 


'  Report  of  the  Tiialu;  Purl.  Papers,  1st  April,  1811,  No.  vii.  Lelter 
from  Lord  Minto  to  tlie  Secret  Committee,  ir>Ui  April,  1830  ;  ibid.  No.  ix. 
p.  953. 


296  HISTORY   OF   BRITISH   INDIA. 

BOOK  I.  not  calculated  to  provoke,  although  not  to  justify, 
disobedience.  Tlie  Indian  Governments  of  Sir 
1809.  George  Barlow's  day  were  wholly  unaccustomed  to 
have  their  proceedings  canvassed  or  their  wisdom 
impugned,  and  they  were  intolerant  of  opposition. 
This  had  been  particularly  the  case  in  Bengal,  where 
the  imperious  rule  of  Lord  Wellesley,  relieved  by 
the  brilliant  results  of  his  public  policy,  had  been 
long  accustomed  to  demand  and  receive  prompt 
and  unquestioning  submission.  Brought  up  in  his 
school,  it  is  not  to  be  wondered  at  that  Sir  George 
Barlow  carried  with  him  to  Madras  the  same  ex- 
alted notions  of  the  authority  entrusted  to  him ; 
and  when,  from  the  concurrent  causes  which  have 
been  adverted  to,  he  found,  both  in  the  civil  and 
military  branches  of  his  government,  contravention 
and  resistance,  he  not  unnaturally  referred  them  to 
unworthy  motives,  and  stigmatised  them  as  personal 
and  factious.  That  much  of  the  opposition  which 
he  encountered  was  personal  was  undoubtedly  true; 
but  it  was  not  at  first  personal  in  a  sense  relating 
to  him,  so  much  as  to  the  individuals  themselves, 
advocating  their  own  interests,  and  smarting  under 
mistaken,  perhaps,  but  not  the  less  bitter,  feelings 
of  injury  and  injustice.  These  feelings  might  have 
been  soothed,  and  their  mischievous  consequences 
prevented,  by  kindly  consideration  and  temperate 
forbearance.  General  Macdowall  had  no  right  to 
complain  of  the  Government  of  Madras  for  his  ex- 
clusion from  the  Council ;  that  was  the  act  of  the 
Court  of  Directors:  but  he  had  reason  to  feel  ag- 
grieved when  Government  gave  that  exclusion  prac- 
tical effect,   constructing   the   plan    of  a  campaign 


REVIEW   OF   THE   PROCEEDINGS.  297 

without  consulting  him ;  or  consulting  him  tardily  book  i. 
and  reservedly,  and  encroaching  upon  his  preten-  ^"^^'  ^' 


sions  to  military  patronage.  Had  he  been  treated  1809. 
with  the  same  deference  as  if  he  had  filled  a  seat 
at  the  council-board,  all  cause  of  offence  would  pos- 
sibly have  been  removed ;  for,  although  warm  and 
precipitate,  his  temper  does  not  appear  to  have 
been  unsusceptible  of  conciliation.  When  the  sea- 
son of  friendly  intercourse  had  passed,  and  General 
Macdowall  had  placed  himself  in  the  wTong  by  his 
unjustifiable  violence  in  the  case  of  Colonel  Munro, 
the  cancelling  of  the  arrest  was  so  necessary  and  so 
sufficient  a  vindication  of  the  authority  of  the  Go- 
vernment, that  it  must  have  ensured,  after  the  first 
heats  were  allayed,  the  concurrence  of  the  whole 
army.  The  annulment  of  the  General's  parting 
order  was  also  a  measure  the  propriety  of  which 
would  have  been  little  questioned,  although  the  lan- 
guage of  the  order  was  undignified  and  intemperate. 
But  the  measures  that  ensued  bore  a  different  cha- 
racter, and  were  hasty  and  imprudent,  and  in  some 
respects  unjust.  The  suspension  of  the  officers  of  the 
Adjutant-General's  department  for  obeying  the  com- 
mands of  their  military  superior;  the  condemnation  of 
officers  without  charge  or  trial,  upon  private  inform- 
ation ;  and  their  severe  punishment  for  an  unperpe- 
trated  offence — the  intended  transmission  of  a  me- 
morial which  was  never  sent ;  all  originated  in  that 
spirit  of  official  despotism  which  conceived  that  its 
own  judgment  superseded  all  need  of  hesitation,  all 
occasion  for  inquiry  or  trial.  That  Sir  George  Bar- 
low conscientiously  considered  the  station  in  which 
he  was  placed  to  be  endowed  with  such  prerogatives ; 


298  HISTORY  OF   BRITISH   INDIA. 


BOOK  I.  that  it  was  the  dignity,  not  so  much  of  his  own  per- 
J][^^;J[]^  son  or  power,  as  of  that  of  the  office  of  Governor  in 
1809.  Council  of  Fort  St.  George,  may  be  granted :  but 
the  removal  of  Major  Boles  was  regarded  even  by  the 
Government  of  Bengal  and  the  Court  of  Directors  as 
unjust ;  and  no  less  so  were  the  orders  of  the  1st  of 
May,  which  pronounced  sentence  upon  meritorious 
officers  for  an  uncommitted  crime,  upon  private  in- 
telligence and  without  a  trial.  That  they  were  most 
impolitic  was  proved  by  the  irritation  which  they 
excited ;  and  which,  from  a  smouldering  fire  that 
might  have  burnt  itself  out  among  its  own  ashes, 
was  thus  fanned  into  a  fierce  and  formidable  flame. 
In  the  subsequent  transactions,  although  the  army 
was  most  deeply  to  blame,  yet  the  Government  was 
not  exempt  from  fault.  The  stem  unfeeling  tone 
of  its  general  orders,  and  the  absence  of  all  attempts 
at  explanation  or  conciliation,  were  preserved  in 
stoical  consistency  to  the  last ;  until  the  Government 
of  Bengal  introduced  a  new  style,  and  did  not  dis- 
dain to  blend  the  language  of  affectionate  and  pa- 
ternal solicitude  with  the  assertion  of  authority; 
and  until,  which  was  still  more  important,  it  con- 
descended to  lay  aside  the  sword  of  justice,  and 
send  the  accused  to  those  tribunals  to  which  they 
acknowledged  themselves  to  be  amenable.  That 
a  profound  sense  of  public  duty  was  the  chief 
moving  principle  of  Sir  George  Barlow's  conduct 
it  is  impossible  to  doubt,  but  he  trusted  too  exclu- 
sively to  one  only  method  of  discharging  that  duty, 
— the  exercise  of  absolute  power. 

Although  anticipating  the  course  of  events,  yet, 
in  order  to  dispose  finally  of  an  unpleasant  subject. 


PROCEEDINOS   IN   ENGLAND.  299 

it  will  be  advisable  to  advert  in  this  place  to  the  book  i. 
proceedings  in  England,  to  which  the  transactions  ^"^^'  ^* 
at  Madras  gave  rise.  The  public  was  speedily  inun-  I809. 
dated  by  the  statements  of  the  opposite  parties;^ 
but  the  interest  excited  was  inconsiderable,  as  atten- 
tion was  absorbed  by  the  great  interests  of  European 
politics.  Several  motions  for  papers  were  made  in 
the  House  of  Commons,  and  the  documents  were 
printed;  but  no  ulterior  proceedings  were  based 
upon  them.  It  was  rather  different  at  the  India 
House.  The  Court  of  Directors  at  first  upheld  the 
measures  of  the  Government  of  Madras,  and  still 
more  cordially  approved  of  those  of  the  Governor- 
General;  but  when  the  alarm  had  subsided,  and 
the  transactions  were  more  calmly  considered,  a 
serious  difference  of  opinion  respecting  the  merits 
of  Sir  G.  Barlow,  urged  with  no  little  warmth  and 
acerbity,  divided  the  Court.  The  first  struggle  took 
place  upon  the  appointment  of  the  new  Commander- 
in-chief  to  a  seat  in  Council,  which  involved  the 
question  of  displacing  one  of  the  actual  members. 
After  several  days  of  debate,  on  one  of  which  the 
Court  was  so  equally  divided,  that,  agreeably  to  law, 
the  Treasurer  determined  the  question  by  lot,  Mr. 
Petrie,  who  had  been  opposed  on  many  important 
matters  to  Sir  George  Barlow,  was  removed.    The 

*  In  addition  to  the  publications  of  Mr.  Marsh,  a  gentleman  of  the  legal 
profession,  who,  while  at  Madras,  had  been  generally  the  adviser  and 
advocate  of  Sir  George  Barlow^s  opponents,  and  of  Colonel  Malcolm,  with 
the  observations  and  replies  which  they  produced,  the  principal  authorities 
on  either  side  are  the  following :  1.  A  View  of  the  Policy  of  Sir  George 
Barlow  ;  in  a  series  of  Letters  by  Indus,  181U.  2.  Letter  from  an  Oflicer  at 
Madras.  3.  An  Accurate  and  Authentic  Narrative  of  the  Dissensions  at 
Madras.  4.  Narrative  of  the  late  Trials,  &cc.  5.  Account  of  the  Dis- 
contents of  the  Madras  Army.  The  two  principal  Reviews,  also,  took 
different  sides  of  the  question. 


300  HISTORY   OF  BRITISH   INDIA. 

BOOK  r.  dissents  of  those  members  of  the  Court  who  disap- 
^^^^'  ^'  proved  of  the  decision,  and  the  reply  of  those  who 


1809.  supported  it,  took  a  review  of  the  whole  of  the 
transactions,  and  with  equal  ability  and  earnestness 
commended  or  condemned  the  policy  of  Sir  George 
Barlow/  Similar  discussions  attended  the  appeals 
made  by  the  dismissed  or  suspended  officers ;  and  at 
different  dates  their  dismission  was  both  confirmed 
and  cancelled.  The  milder  counsels  at  last  prevailed, 
and  all  who  had  been  suspended  or  dismissed  were 
pardoned  and  restored  to  the  service.*  In  July, 
1811,  a  motion  was  made  for  the  recall  of  Sir 
George  Barlow,  but  it  was  defeated  under  strong 
protests  from  some  of  the  Court.*  The  same  motion 
was  renewed  and  carried  at  the  end  of  the  following 
year,  and  was  equally  the  subject  of  a  protest  by 
those  members  of  the  Court  who  had  uniformly  sup- 
ported his  measures  and  vindicated  his  reputation.* 

^  The  proceedings  and  the  dissents  of  Messrs.  Bannerman,  Baring,  Inglis, 
Hiiddlestone,  Elphinstone,  and  Patterson,  with  the  reply  of  Messrs.  Grant 
and  Astell^  are  printed  in  the  Pari.  Papers,  1811,  No.  W, 

'  Most  of  the  suspended  officers  were  restored  in  181 1 ;  those  cashiered 
or  dismissed,  at  subsequent  dates. 

'  The  dissents  of  Messrs.  Parry,  Smith,  Astell,  Bebb,  and  Grant  were 
published  by  Sir  Robert  Barlow,  the  brother  of  Sir  George.  Murray,  181S. 

*  Little  occasion  now  exists,  perhaps,  for  an  appeal  to  authority  to  deter- 
mine the  character  of  the  proceedings  of  the  Madras  army ;  but  there  is  very 
high  military  authority  on  the  subject,  that  of  the  Duke  of  Wellington, 
who,  amid  the  anxieties  of  his  position  in  Spain  at  the  end  of  1809,  felt  a 
warm  interest  in  the  troops  whom  he  had  so  often  led  to  victory.  The  fol- 
lowing passages  occur  in  a  letter,  dated  Badsyoz,  3rd  December,  1809, 
addressed  to  Colonel  Malcolm. 

*'  You  cannot  conceive  how  much  I  have  felt  for  what  has  passed  on  the 
Madras  Establishment.  I  scarcely  recognise  in  those  transactions  the  men 
for  whom  I  entertained  so  much  respect,  and  had  so  much  regard,  a  few 
years  back  ;  and  I  can  only  lament  that  they,  and  the  army,  and  the  affairs 
of  that  Presidency  in  general,  have  been  so  much  mismanaged.  These 
transactions,  and  their  causes,  prove  that  it  is  not  always  the  man  who  has 
the  character  of  being  the  best  natured,  and  one  of  the  easiest  disposition, 
who  will  agree  best  with  those  placed  in  authority  over  him,  or  those  with 
whom  he  is  to  co-operate.    They  owe  their  origin  to  the  disputes  of  the 


HISTORY   OF    BRITISH   INDIA. 


301 


peraoDB  in  authority  in  India,  that  is  to  say,  between  the  Governor  and  the  BOOK  I. 
CoDunander-in-chief.  Both,  but  principally  the  latter,  looked  for  parti-  chap.  v. 
I  and  supporters ;  and  these  have  ended  by  throwing  off  all  subordina-  . 


tion^  by  relinquishinfi^  all  habits  of  obedience,  and  almost  by  open  resist-       1809. 
•nee.     Nothing  can  be  more  absurd  than  the  pretext  for  this  conduct. 

"  Colonel  Munro's  opinion  might  be  erroneous,  and  might  have  been 
harsh  towards  his  brother-officers ;  but  not  only  he  ought  not  to  have  been 
brought  to  a  court-martial  for  giving  that  opinion,  but  he  ought  to  have  been 
brought  to  a  court-martial  if  be  had  refrained  from  giving  it,  when  he  was 
called  upon  by  the  Comroander-in*chief  to  make  him  a  report  on  a  subject 
referred  to  his  official  consideration.  The  officers  of  the  army  are  equally 
wrong  in  the  part  they  have  taken  in  the  subsequent  part  of  the  question, 
which  is  one  between  the  Governor  and  the  Commander-in-chief,  whether 
tilie  former  had  a  right  to  protect  Colonel  M unro  from  the  acts  of  the  latter, 
upon  which  question  no  man  can  have  a  doubt  who  has  any  knowledge  of 
the  constitution  of  Great  Britain,  and  particularly  of  that  of  the  Indian 
Governments.  I,  who  have  arrived  pretty  nearly  at  the  top  of  the  tree, 
fhould  be  the  last  man  to  give  up  any  point  of  military  right  or  etiquette. 
But  I  have  no  doubt  whatever,  not  only  that  it  was  the  right,  but  that  it 
was  the  duty,  of  the  Governor  in  Council  to  interfere  to  save  Colonel  Munro ; 
and  that  if  he  had  not  done  so,  and  the  public  had  sustained  any  loss  or  in- 
convenience from  his  trial,  or  if  the  public  attention  had  been  drawn  to  the 
injustice  of  his  trial,  the  Governor  would  have  been  severely  responsible  for 
the  omission  to  perform  his  duty. 

**  So  far  for  my  opinion  upon  the  main  points  of  the  question.  As  for  the 
others,  the  conduct  of  officers  upon  the  addresses,  the  orders  issued,  the  re- 
solutions entered  into,  the  resignations  of  their  offices,  &c.  &c.,  they  are  con- 
lequences  of  the  first  error ;  that  is,  of  persons  in  authority  making  partizans 
of  those  placed  under  them,  instead  of  making  all  obey  the  constituted  au- 
tiiorities  of  the  state.  Tliis  conduct  in  the  officers  of  tlie  army  would  have 
.been  wrong,  even  if  the  cause  had  been  just,  and  the  Commander-in-chief 
had  wished  to  screen  Colonel  Munro  from  the  persecution  of  the  Govern- 
ment ;  and  it  is  really  not  worth  while  to  take  up  my  time  in  describing, 
or  yours  in  perusing,  a  description  of  the  folly,  the  inconsistency,  or  the 
breaches  of  discipline  and  subonlination  contained  in  all  those  documents. 
I  have  so  much  regard  for  the  Madras  army,  to  which  I  owe  much,  that  I 
would  sacrifice  a  great  deal  to  have  it  in  my  power  to  restore  them  to  that 
state  of  discipline,  union,  and  respectability  in  which  I  left  them  in  the  year 
1805 ;  and  I  assure  you  that  I  shall  rejoice  most  sincerely  when  I  shall  hear 
that  their  good  sense  and  good  temper  have  predominated  over  their  feelings 
of  party  and  their  prejudices.** — Dispatches  of  the  Duke  of  Wellington; 
Supplementary  volume  to  the  three  first  Parts,  p.  231. 


302  HiflrroRY  of  British  india. 


CHAPTER  VI. 

Foreign  Policy  of  Lord  MinUis  Administration. — In- 
vasion of  Berar  by  AmirKhan^ — a  force  sent  to  the 
aid  of  Hie  Raja. — Amir  Kharis  defeat  by  the  Berar 
troopSy — retires  before  the  British. — Disputes  between 
the  Peshwa  and  the  Southern  Jagirdars. — Compul- 
sory adfustment. — Suppression  of  Piracy  by  the 
States  of  Wari  and  Kclapur. — Ea^pedition  against 
the  Pirates  of  the  Persian  Gtdph. — JoasmiSy — their 
ferocity. — Destruction  of  Ras-al-Khaima  and  other 
Pirate  stations. — Ea?pedition  to  Macao. — Operas 
tions  against  tJie  French  and  Dutch  colonies  in  the 
Indian  Seas. — Successful  depredations  of  the  Frefich 
cruizers. — Ea^pedition  against  Rodriguez, — its  occu- 
pation. — Descent  upon  Bourbon. — Garrison  of  Ro- 
driguez reinforced. — Second  descent  upon  Bourbon, 
and  capture. — Naval  Transactions  at  the  Isle  of 
France. — French  frigates  in  the  harbour  of  Grand 
Port  attacked  by  the  English  squadron. — Destruc- 
tion of  the  English  vessels. — Naval  actions  off'  the 
Islands  between  the  blockading  ships  and  the  French 
frigates. — Arrival  of  the  Armaments  from  Bengal 
and  Madras. — Landing  of  the  forces  in  Grande 
Baye^ — march  to  Port  Louis, — capittdation  vnth  the 
French  Governor. — Blockade  of  the  Dutch  Islands. 
— Ea^edition  against  the  Moluccas. —  Capture  of 
Amboyna^ — of  Banda^ — and  of  Temate. — Earpedi- 

tion  against  Java, — accompanied  by  Lord  Minto 

Difficulties  of  the  voyage — overcome. — Former  ope- 
rations.— Destruction  of  Dutch  vessels  at  Gresik. — 


HISrrORT   OF   BRITISH   INDIA.  lUKt 

Measures  of  General  Daendeis  and  of  kis  SHceessor^ 
Getteral  Jansais. — Arriralof  the  fleet  in  the  HiXids 
of  Batatioy — la$iding  of  the  tro(^. — Occupation  of 
Batavia. — Adtance  to  Weiterreedenn — Strcnifth  of 
Fort  Comelis. — Assault. — March  qfOJonel  (Hilles^ 
pie's  column^  —  surprise  of  the  outirork^  —  defences 
forcedy — ej^plosion  of  a  redoubt^ — the  fort  tokePK — 
the  pursuit  and  dispersion  of  the  Bnemjf, — Churfnyn 
and  Madura  occupied.  —  Filial  defeat  of  Central 
Jansens. — Surrender  of  Java  and  its  dependencies. 
— Mr.  Raffles  appointed  Governor. — Coltmel  Gilles- 
pie  Cofnmander  of  the  Forces. — Capture  of  IWA- 
yakarta. — Ejppedition  agaimt  Paletniang, — Sulta$i 
deposed. —  Vietos  of  the  Court  of  Directors. — Bene^ 
ficial  results  of  the  British  Administration  in  Java. 

No  events  of  any  great  political  importance  took  boc^k  i. 
place  on  the  continent  of  India,  the  occurrence  of  *"^'^'  ^'' 


which  was  likely  to  aggravate  the  anxiety  expis  1809. 
rienced  by  the  British  Government  from  the  dissen- 
sions that  prevailed  at  Madras ;  but,  during  the  same 
period,  various  occasions  of  minor  moment  luul  arisen 
for  the  exercise  of  its  interference  and  the  mani- 
festation of  its  power.  Of  this  character  were  the 
proceedings  consequent  upon  the  conduct  of  Amir 
Khan,  of  whom  mention  has  been  made  in  our  pre- 
ceding pages,  and  who  provoked  at  this  time  the 
hostility  of  the  Government  of  Bengal.  Left  with- 
out controul  by  the  insanity  of  Holkar,  and  keeping 
together  a  numerous  body  of  troops,  for  the  i)ay- 
ment  of  which  he  possessed  no  means  of  his  own, 
Amir  Khan,  after  exhausting  the  resources  of  the 
Rajput  princes,  was  compelled  to  look  abroad  for 


304  HISTORY    OF   BRITISH   INDIA. 

BOOK  I.  plunder,  and  enlarge  the  field  of  his  depredations. 

^^^'  ^^'  The  Raja  of  Berar  was  selected  as  the  victim  of  his 
1809.     necessities. 

In  the  commencement  of  his  political  career  Jes- 
want  Rao  Holkar  had  been  detained  for  some  time 
as  a  prisoner  at  Nagpore,  and,  according  to  his  own 
assertions,  was  pillaged  by  the  Raja  of  jewels  of 
very  great  value.  Amir  Khan  now  demanded,  in 
the  name  of  Holkar,  the  restitution  of  the  jewels^ 
or  their  price;  and,  as  the  demand  was  not  com- 
plied with,  he  moved,  in  January  1809,  to  the  fron- 
tiers of  Berar  with  all  his  force,  swelled  to  a  large 
amount  by  the  accession  of  the  predatory  or  Pindari 
bands,*  who  had  long  spread  terror  through  the 
dominions  of  the  Bhonsla  Raja  by  their  daring  and 
devastating  incursions.  No  serious  opposition  was 
offered  to  Amir  Khan's  advance :  he  crossed  the 
Nerbudda  and  proceeded  to  Jubbulpore,  a  consider- 
able city  of  Berar,  of  which  and  of  the  surrounding 
country  he  took  possession. 

Although  not  bound  by  the  terms  of  the  existing 
treaty  to  give  military  aid  to  the  Raja  of  Nagpore 
against  his  enemies,  yet  the  aggression  of  Amir 
Khan  was  considered  by  the  Bengal  Government 
to  demand  its  vigorous  interposition.  There  were 
grounds  for  suspecting  that  his  movements  were  not 
unconnected  with  the  discontent  of  the  Subahdar  of 
Hyderabad ;  and  although  the  assertions  of  his  en- 
voys at  Nagpore,  that  their  master  had  been  induced 

^  MS.  Reconls.  Amir  Khan  mentions  the  manner  in  which  Holkar  be- 
came possessed  of  these  jewels ;  but  states  that  they  were  sold,  and  the  pro- 
duce was  expended  in  raising  troops,  when  he  was  seized  by  the  Bhonsla 
Raja. — Life,  p.  91. 

'  He  states  his  force  at  40,000  horse  and  24,000  Pindaris. 


MILITARY   PROTECTION   OP   BERAR.  305 

to  invade  the  country  by  the  invitation  of  the  book  i. 
Nizam,  who  had  offered  to  defray  the  cost  of  a  still  ''"'''^'  ""'' 
more  formidable  armament,  might  not  he  deserving  1809. 
of  implicit  credit,  yet  the  known  S}inpathie8  of  the 
parties  rendered  such  a  league  between  them  far 
from  improbable.  The  interests  of  the  British 
power  were  therefore  implicated  with  those  of  the 
Raja  of  Berar.  "  The  question  was  not,"  as  Lord 
Minto  observ^ed,  "  whether  it  was  just  and  expe- 
dient to  aid  the  Raja  in  the  defence  and  recovery 
of  his  dominions,  although  in  point  of  policy  the 
essential  change  in  the  political  state  of  India  which 
would  be  occasioned  by  the  extinction  of  one  of 
the  substantive  powers  of  the  Dekhin  might  war- 
rant and  require  our  interference ;  but  whether  an 
enterprising  and  ambitious  Musselman  chief,  at  the 
head  of  a  numerous  army  irresistible  by  any  power 
except  that  of  the  Company,  should  be  permitted  to 
establish  his  authority  on  the  ruins  of  the  Rajahs 
dominions,  over  territories  contiguous  to  those  of 
the  Nizam,  with  whom  community  of  religion,  com- 
bined with  local  power  and  resources,  might  lead 
to  the  formation  of  projects  probably  not  uncon- 
genial to  the  mind  of  the  Nizam  himself,  and  cer- 
tainly consistent  with  the  views  and  hopes  of  a 
powerful  party  in  his.  court,  for  the  subversion  of 
the  British  alliance.  Of  such  a  question  there 
could  be  but  one  solution;"^  this  was,  the  deter- 
mination to  defend  the  Raja  of  Nagpore :  and  Co- 
lonel Close  was  ordered  to  march  with  a  competent 
division  to  expel  Amir  Khan  from  the  Berar  terri- 

^  Minute  of  Governor-General,  Oct.  1809;  Malcolm's  Political  History, 
i.  402. 

VOL.  I.  X 


306  HISTORY   OF  BRITISH  INDIA. 


BOOK  I.  tory.  As  the  objects  of  the  expedition  were  in  an 
CHAP,  VI.  ^gggpt{g^j  degree  British,  the  assistance  was  wholly 
1809.  gratuitous,  no  compensation  being  demanded  from 
the  Raja.  Amir  Khan  protested  vehemently  against 
the  interposition ;  and  appealed  with  unanswerable 
justice,  although  with  no  avail,  to  the  stipulations 
of  the  existing  treaty  with  Holkar,  on  whose  behalf 
he  pretended  to  act,  which  engaged  that  the  British 
Grovemment  would  not  in  any  manner  whatever  in- 
terfere in  his  affairs :  and,  in  a  letter  addressed  by 
him  to  Colonel  Close,  he  argued  that  the  conduct 
of  the  Government  was  a  manifest  infraction  of  the 
treaty,  and  a  breach  of  the  solemn  promises  made 
to  Jeswant  Rao,  that  it  would  not  meddle  with 
his  claims  upon  the  Raja  of  Berar,  nor  oppose  his 
exaction  of  contributions  from  any  princes  not  in 
alliance  with  it.  These  representations  were  no 
longer  likely  to  be  of  any  weight.  It  was  not  at 
present  a  matter  of  deliberation  whether  a  helpless 
Raja  of  Jaypur  should  be  abandoned  to  the  grasp  of 
the  spoiler,  rather  than  a  passing  inconvenience 
should  be  encountered ;  but  whether  the  desertion 
of  a  friendly  power  might  not  involve  an  injuiy  to 
British  interests,  and  a  still  greater  injury  to  British 
reputation. 

An  army  was  accordingly  assembled  towards  the 
end  of  1809  on  the  eastern  frontier  of  Berar,  com- 
posed chiefly  of  the  -subsidiary  troops  from  Jalna 
and  Hyderabad ;  and  another,  of  sufficient  strength 
not  only  to  protect  the  province  from  danger,  but 
to  undertake  offensive  operations  if  necessary,  was 
collected  in  Bundelkhand.  Before  either  force, 
however,  could  be  fully  formed  and  brought  into 


RETREAT  OF   AMIR   KHAN.  307 

action,  the  invader  had  been  checked  by  the  un-  book  i. 
aided  troops  of  Nagpore.  Whilst  yet  halting  at  ^"^'''^ 
Jubbulpore,  Amir  Khan  was  threatened  by  the  ap-  i809. 
proaeh  of  a  considerable  force,  under  Sadik  Ali 
Khan,  to  Srinagar,  within  twenty  miles  of  his  en- 
campment. Placing  more  confidence  in  intrigue 
than  in  arms,  the  Nagpore  general  entered  into  a 
negociation  with  Amir  Khan,  and  engaged  to  pay 
him  thirteen  lakhs  of  rupees  as  the  price  of  his 
retreat.  The  Raja,  emboldened  by  the  promised 
support  of  the  British  Government,  refused  to  ra- 
tify the  disgraceful  bargain,  and  commanded  Sadik 
Ali  forcibly  to  compel  Amir  Khan's  departure.  And 
at  the  same  time  a  letter  was  delivered  to  that  chief 
from  the  Governor-General,  announcing  his  purpose 
of  dispatching  an  army  against  him  unless  he  im- 
mediately quitted  Berar.  Although  not  disposed 
to  relinquish  his  prey  without  a  struggle,  yet  Amir 
Khan  found  himself  unable  to  contend  with  the  Berar 
force  brought  against  him.  The  Pindaris,  who  had 
been  dismissed  for  the  rainy  season,  had  not  re- 
joined ;  and  part  of  his  troops  had  been  sent  to  the 
rear,  imder  the  impression  that  a  pacific  arrange- 
ment was  about  to  be  made.  Hostages  had  been 
given  him  as  a  security  for  the  payment  of  the  sti- 
pulated contril)ution ;  and  it  was  so  confidently  be- 
lieved by  several  of  his  principal  captains  that  part 
of  the  money  also  had  been  paid,  that  they  insisted 
upon  their  shares,  and  refused  to  fight  unless  they 
obtained  a  portion  of  the  spoil.  Weakened  by 
their  defection  and  the  reduction  of  his  force.  Amir 
Khan  attempted  to  retreat  to  Bhopal.  He  was 
pursued  by  Sadik  Ali,  and  overtaken,  on  the  17th 

x2 


308  HISTORY   OF   BRITISH   INDIA. 

BOOK  I.  of    November,   in   a   disadvantageous    position  at 


CHAP.    VI. 


Jabra  Ghat,  when  an  engagement  of  several  hours' 
1809.  duration  took  place ;  in  which,  after  the  loss  of  se- 
veral of  his  best  officers,  and  exposure  to  imminent 
personal  peril.  Amir  Khan  was  completely  defeated. 
He  effected,  however,  his  escape  to  Bhopal. 

Being  joined  by  Vizir  Mohammed,  and  rein- 
forced by  the  Pindaris,  Amir  Khan  was  soon  in  a 
condition  to  resume  the  offensive :  he  accordingly 
marched  against  Sadik  Ali,  who  had  fallen  back  to 
the  strong  post  of  Chouragerh,  one  stage  to  the 
south-west  of  Jubbulpore.  The  Berar  troops  were 
drawn  up,  with  the  fort  of  Chouragerh  in  their  rear 
and  a  rivulet  in  their  front,  the  approach  to  which 
was  rendered  difficult  by  deep  ravines  and  much 
thorny  jungle.  Disregarding  the  advice  of  Vizir 
Mohammed  to  turn  the  position.  Amir  Khan  at- 
tacked the  enemy  in  front.  Their  line  was  defended 
by  a  numerous  artillery,  the  fire  of  which  told 
heavily  upon  the  assailants  as  they  slowly  toiled 
to  make  good  their  way  over  the  rough  and  broken 
ground.  After  suffering  severely  from  this  cause, 
Amir  Khan  was  compelled  to  desist  from  the  attack, 
and  to  retire  once  more  into  the  friendly  terri- 
tory of  Bhopal.  Sadik  Ali  refrained  from  follow- 
ing up  his  advantage,  being  probably  little  desirous 
of  its  prosecution.^  This  was  of  no  consequence,  as 
the  contest  was  virtually  at  an  end.     Foes  more  for- 

*  Memoirs  of  Amir  Khan,  p.  368.  According  to  his  own  showing,  he 
returned  to  Chouragerh  after  his  second  defeat ;  and  so  closely  blockaded 
the  Hyderabad  force  in  its  entrenchments  there,  "  that  the  enemy  could  not 
breathe  or  scratch  his  head :"  at  tlie  same  time  the  Pindaris  scoured  the 
country  in  all  directions.  The  descriptions  of  the  different  actions  are 
animated,  and,  with  some  allowance  for  Amir  Khan's  personal  exploits  and 
perils,  are  in  the  main  apparently  accurate. 


TROOPS   RECALLED.  309 

midable  were  now  approaching  the  scene  of  action ;  book  i. 
Colonel  Close  had  arrived  at  Anirawati  on  the  1st  of  ^^^^'  ^^ 
December,  and  Colonel  Martindell  had  moved  to  isio. 
the  confines  of  Bmidelkhand :  the  former  crossed  the 
Nerbudda  early  in  January.  Well  aware  of  his  ina- 
bility to  cope  with  such  enemies,  Amir  Khan  divided 
his  army,  and,  sending  off  his  main  body  by  a  differ- 
ent route,  marched  from  Blio})al  to  Bhilsa  and  Se- 
ronj.  He  w^as  followed  to  the  latter  town  by  Colonel 
Close,  but  to  no  purj)ose.  Pretending  that  his  pre- 
sence was  urgently  required  by  Tulasi  Bai,  Amir 
Khan  abandoned  his  troops  and  set  off  hastily  for 
Indore.  All  danger  of  a  further  invasion  of  Berar 
had  therefore  evidently  ceased;  and  although  for  a 
season  it  w^as  in  contemplation  to  continue  military 
operations  until  the  complete  destruction  of  Amir 
Khan's  power  should  have  been  effected,  yet  the  pro- 
bability that  the  prosecution  of  this  policy  might 
lead  to  a  protracted  and  expensive  series  of  hostili- 
ties induced  the  Governor-General  to  depart  from 
his  original  design,  and  content  himself  with  the  ac- 
complishment of  the  main  object  of  the  armament. 
The  troops  were  therefore  recalled  to  their  several 
stations  in  the  Company's  territories  or  those  of  their 
allies;^  the  campaign  having  served  to  display  the 
power  and  the  spirit  of  the  Government,  and  the 
necessity  of  its  interference  for  the  preserv^ation  of  a 
state,  once  held  to  be  of  primary  consideration  in 

*  Colonel  Close  was  invested  with  a  discretionary-  power  of  acting  upon 
his  first  instructions,  but  he  was  not  disposed  to  take  upon  himself  a  re- 
sponsibility from  which  the  Governor-General  shrank.  The  Court  of  Di- 
rectors were  **  not  satisfied  with  the  expediency  of  abstaining  from  dis- 
abling any  power,  against  whom  we  may  have  been  compelled  to  take  up 
arms,  from  renewing  its  aggressions.*^ — Letter  from  Secret  Committee; 
Malcolm,  Pol.  Hist.  i.  406. 


310  HISTORY   OF   BRITISH   INDIA. 


BOOK  I.  the  political  scale  of  Indian  potentates,  against  the 
^"^^'  ^''  attacks  of  a  mere  soldier  of  fortune  and  his  pre- 
ui^.     datory  cohorts. 

The  state  of  af&irs  at  Poena  demanded  also  about 
the  same  period  the  demonstration  of  the  military 
power  of  the  British  Government.  A  spirit  of  reci- 
procal aversion  had  long  subsisted  between  the 
Peshwa  Baji  Rao  and  the  members  of  the  Putwur- 
dun  family,  who  held  extensive  Jagirs  in  the  south- 
em  portion  of  the  Mahratta  country  on  the  frontiers 
of  Mysore.  These  Jagirdars  were  the  sons  or  rela- 
tives of  Parushram  Bhao,  the  distinguished  officer 
who  commanded  the  Mahratta  army  in  the  first  war 
with  Tippoo ;  and  who,  as  the  friend  and  colleague 
of  Nana  Furnavese,  had  borne  a  leading  part  in  the 
expulsion  of  Baji  Rao's  father,  Raghunath  Rao,  from 
the  Peshwaship,  and  had  been  an  active  agent  in 
a  plot  for  the  exclusion  of  Baji  Rao  himself  from 
the  succession.^  A  reconciliation  had  been  effected, 
but  little  cordiality  had  been  restored;  and,  after 
the  death  of  Parushram,  his  descendants,  engaged  in 
constant  and  destructive  hostilities  with  their  neigh- 
bours, ascribed  their  sufferings  to  the  continued 
animosity  and  intrigues  of  the  Peshwa.*  On  the  ad- 
vance of  the  British  army  to  reinstate  Baji  Rao,  the 

>  In  1796 ;  Grant  DufT^s  Mahratta  History,  iii.  134. 

'  *'  Since  1800,  when  I  was  in  this  country  before,  it  has  been  one  con- 
tinued contest  for  power  and  plunder  between  the  different  chiefs  who  have 
armies  under  their  command :  between  the  Putwurdun  family  and  Gokla 
in  the  countries  bordering  on  the  Toombuddra,  the  Werda,  and  Malpoorba ; 
between  the  Putwurduns  and  the  Kaja  of  Kolapore  in  those  bordering  on 
the  Gutpurba  and  the  Kishna." — Wellington  Dispatches,  i.  124.  At  this 
time,  the  beginning  of  1803,  the  heads  of  the  family  were  three  brothers, 
sons  of  Parushram,  Appa  Saheb,  Baba  Saheb,  and  Dada  Saheb,  and  their 
cousin,  Chintaman  Rao ;  each  of  whom  commanded  a  force  of  about  seven 
thousand  horse  and  foot,  with  some  guns. — Ibid.  i.  93. 


SOUTHERN  JAOIBDABS.  311 

elder  brother  Apa  Saheb  was  induced,  by  his  regard  book  i. 
for  General  Wellesley,  to  accompany  him  to  Poena,  ^^^'  ^ 
and  to  contribute  to  the  Peshwa's  re-establishment.^  isio. 
A  seeming  renewal  of  friendly  intercourse  was  in 
consequence  effected  under  Sir  Arthur  Wellesley's 
mediation,  but  the  reconciliation  was  as  insincere  as 
before.  It  was  not  in  the  nature  of  Baji  Rao  to 
forgive  an  injury,  and  the  Putwurduns  were  too 
well  acquainted  with  his  character  to  place  any  faith 
in  his  professions.  They  accordingly  remained  neu- 
tral in  the  following  war,  declining  to  send  their 
contingents  upon  the  Peshwa's  requisition ;  but  their 
neutrality  was  considered  by  General  Wellesley  to 
have  been  an  important  object  for  the  Company's 
possessions,  and  to  have  been  capable  of  extenu- 
ation by  natural  and  excusable  sentiments  of  na- 
tionality. This  omission  was  made  one  ground 
of  an  application  from  the  Peshwa  after  the  war 
for  the  assistance  of  the  British  troops  to  dispos- 
sess the  Putwurduns,  and  transfer  their  lands  to 
one  of  his  own  officers,  Bapooji  Gokla;  but  Sir 
Arthur  Wellesley  firmly  opposed  the  application, 
not  only  on  account  of  the  claims  of  the  family 
to  the  regard  of  the  British  Government  for  the 
many  proofs  of  attachment  which  they  had  ex- 
hibited, but  on  account  of  its  manifest  impolicy 
and  injustice.^  In  conformity  to  his  sugges- 
tions, the  principles  to  be  followed  in  adjusting 
the  differences  between  the  Putwurduns  and  the 
Peshwa  were,  to  interfere  in  a  certain  degree,  to 

'  Wellington  Dispatches,  i.  145, 173,  174. 

'  See  the  conference  with  Bapooji  Gokla ;  Wellington  Dispatches,  il. 
121 :  and  afterwards  with  the  Peshwa's  ministers,  on  the  1st  March,  1804  ; 
ii.  140. 


312  HISTORY   OP  BRITISH   INDIA. 

BOOK  I.  ascertain   the  extent  of  the  service  to  which  the 
CHAP.  \n.  p^g]j^3^  ^gjg  entitled  from  the  southern  Jagirdars, 

1810.  to  oblige  them  to  afford  it ;  and,  on  the  other  hand, 
to  protect  them  from  the  oppression  of  the  Peshwa's 
government,  and  to  guarantee  to  them  their  pos- 
sessions as  long  as  they  should  continue  to  serve 
the  Peshwa  with  fidelity.^  Both  parties  were  inte- 
rested in  preventing  the  practical  adoption  of  these 
principles,  and  the  final  adjustment  of  the  differ- 
ences between  them  was  long  delayed. 

1811.  The  interposition  of  the  British  Government  had 
at  once  been  effectual  in  arresting  the  attempts  of 
the  Peshwa  to  crush  the  Jagirdars :  the  subsidiary 
force  afforded  his  only  hope  of  accomplishing  his 
purpose;  and,  its  employment  as  the  mere  instru- 
ment of  his  revenge  being  prohibited,  his  power  was 
paralyzed.  It  was  not  so  easy  to  bring  the  Jagirdars 
to  reason;  especially  as  they  were  required  to  sur- 
render certain  lands  which  were  not  comprised  in 
their  original  grants,  and  to  which  they  were  not 
legally  entitled.  Their  obstinacy  was  only  over- 
come by  the  movement  of  the  subsidiary  force  to 
the  Krishna;  when,  finding  that  the  British  Govern- 

1812.  ment  was  determined  to  uphold  the  rightful  claims 
of  the  Peshwa,  the  chiefs  consented  to  meet  the 
Resident  and  Baji  Rao  at  Punderpur,  and  attended 
them  to  Poena,  where  everything  was  definitively 
settled.  The  result  was  less  satisfactory  to  Baji 
Rao  than  to  the  Putwurduns,  as  he  had  long  hesi- 
tated to  accede  to  any  proposition  which  did  not 
comprehend  the  entire  resumption  of  their  Jagirs, 

'  Wellington  Dispatches,  ii.  140. 


SUPPRESSION   OF   PIRACY.  313 

and  the  annihilation  of  a  powerful  and  obnoxious  book  i. 

m  .11  CHAP.    VI. 

mmily.^  


The  presence  of  the  troops  in  the  field  afforded  1812. 
a  favourable  occasion  for  the  suppression  of  the 
piratical  practices  of  the  two  petty  Mahratta  states, 
Wari  and  Kolapur,  both  possessing  ports  on  the 
coast  of  the  Concan,  from  which  their  vessels  were 
accustomed  to  commit  depredations  on  native  com- 
merce. Their  lawless  proceedings  had  been  imper- 
fectly repressed  by  the  occasional  presence  of  one 
of  the  Company's  ships  of  war ;  but  it  was  now  re- 
solved to  put  an  end  to  the  system,  by  depriving 
their  rulers  of  the  harbours  which  gave  shelter  to 
the  pirates.  The  approach  of  the  British  troops  soon 
awed  them,  however  turbulently  disposed,  to  sub- 
mission ;  and  the  Desai  of  Wari  was  compelled  to 
cede  the  fort  of  Vingorla,  with  its  port  and  limits; 
while  the  harbour  of  Malwan,  which  included  the 
forts  and  island  of  Severndroog  and  its  dependencies, 
was  given  up  by  the  Raja  of  Kolapur.  Both  states 
were  bound  to  renounce  piracy,  and  to  permit  no 
armed  vessels  to  issue  from  their  ports.* 

It  had  been  found  necessary  at  a  previous  period*  I809. 
to  undertake  operations  for  the  sui)pression  of  piracy 
of  a  more  formidable  description,  and  in  the  year 
1809  an  armament  was  dispatched  from  the  western 
side  of  India  to  the  Persian  Gulph.  Oman,  the 
south-eastern  province  of  Arabia,  forms  a  triangle, 
the  base  of  which  borders  upon  the  deserts  ;  whilst 
one  arm  extends  along  the  Indian  ocean  to  Cape 

'  Malcolm's  Political  History  of  India,  i.  896. 

^  Grant  Duff's  Mahratta  History,  iii.  350 :  also  Treaties  with  the  Rajas 
of  Kolapore  and  Sawant  Waree ;  Collection  of  Treaties,  27th  May,  1818. 


314  HISTORY   OF   BRITISH   INDIA. 


BOOK  I.  Musendom,  and  is  met  at  that  point  by  the  other, 
CHAP.  VI.  ^jjj^]^  li^g  vrithin  the  gulph.  The  former  or  eastern 
1809.  coast  is  subject  to  the  Imam  of  Muscat,  and  is  occu- 
pied by  a  well-disposed  and  commercial  people.  The 
inhabitants  of  the  latter  or  western  shore,  thinly 
scattered  from  Cape  Musendom  through  a  distance 
of  nearly  four  hundred  miles,  had,  from  a  remote 
period,  been  so  notorious  for  piratical  habits  as  to 
have  secured  for  their  territory  the  denomination  of 
the  Pirate  coast.  Among  these  tribes  the  Joasmis 
were  distinguished  by  their  audacity  and  cruelty. 
They  had  recently  embraced  the  reformation  which 
Abd-ul-wahab  had  some  years  before  introduced  into 
Mohammedanism,  and  united  to  the  fierceness  of 
their  lawless  trade  the  ferocity  of  fanaticism.  Pro- 
fession of  the  faith  of  Islam,  or  instant  death,  was 
the  fate  of  their  captives.  Their  vessels,  known  as 
daos  or  bugalas,  varying  from  one  hundred  and  fifty 
to  three  hundred  and  fifty  tons'  burthen,  and  carry- 
ing from  one  hundred  and  fifty  to  two  hundred  men, 
were  clumsily  built,  with  a  single  mast,  and  mounted 
but  a  few  guns.  Singly,  they  were  little  formidable ; 
Jbut  they  usually  sailed  together  in  small  fleets,  from 
which  a  merchant- vessel  was  rarely  able  to  extricate 
herself.  For  a  considerable  period  they  refrained 
from  molesting  English  ships.  The  Comi)any's  armed 
vessels  were  instructed  to  exercise  similar  forbear- 
ance, and  to  confine  themselves  to  repelling  aggres- 
sion. Emboldened  by  this  policy,  and  impelled  by 
their  religious  ardour,  the  Joasmis  departed  from 
the  caution  they  had  hitherto  i)reserved,  and  no 
longer  })aid  any  respect  to  the  British  flag.  In 
1808  the  Sylph,  a  small  ship  of  only  one  hundred 


EXPEDITION   TO  THE  PERSIAN   GULPH.  315 

tons,  having  on  board  the  native  Persian  secretary  book  l 
of  Sir  Harford  Jones,  was  attaxjked  and  captured  in  ^"^'  ^^ 


sight  of  the  Nereide  frigate ;  by  which  she  was  re-  1809. 
taken,  and  the  pirate  vessels  were  sunk.  In  the 
next  year  the  Minerva,  a  large  merchantHship,  fell  in 
with  a  fleet  of  daos,  and,  after  a  running  fight  of  two 
days,  was  carried  by  boarding.  The  resistance  and 
loss  they  had  suifered  had  so  exasperated  the  pirates, 
that  every  male  Christian  on  board  was  murdered. 
It  was  no  longer  possible  to  permit  the  perpetration 
of  such  outrages,  and  it  was  determined  to  seek 
the  Joasmis  in  their  chief  port,  Ras-al-Khaima, 
inflict  upon  them  a  deserved  punishment  for  their 
past  crimes,  and  impair,  if  not  annihilate,  the  means 
of  future  mischief.^ 

The  expedition  consisted  of  two  of  his  Majesty's 
frigates,  the  Chifibnne  and  Clorinde,  and  six  of  the 
Company's  armed  vessels,  in  which  nine  hundred 
European  soldiers  and  five  hundred  Sipahis  were 
embarked.  The  flotilla  was  commanded  by  Captain 
Wainwright  of  the  Chiftbnne ;  the  land  division  by 
Lieutenant-Colonel  Smith,  of  his  Majesty's  65th. 
The  armament  left  Bombay  on  the  4th  September. 
Off  Cape  Musendom  it  fell  in  with  a  fleet  of  twenty- 
seven  daos  :  one  was  sunk,  the  others  were  dispersed. 
The  force  then  proceeded  to  Muscat,  the  Imam  of 
which,  equally  hostile  to  the  Joasmis  as  pirates  and 

^  Account  of  the  Wahabis,  by  Sir  Harford  Jones,  p.  211 ;  Travels  in 
Arabia,  by  Lieutenant  Wellsted  of  the  Indian  na>'y,  i.  243.  Both  mention 
that  the  prisoners,  not  Mohammedans,  were  brought  singly  to  the  gangway, 
where  one  of  the  pirates  cut  their  throats,  with  the  exclamation,  Allah 
Akbar!  God  is  great!  According  to  Lieutenant  Wellsted,  the  name, 
properly  Johasmis,  was  derived  from  Johasm,  a  Mohammedan  saint,  who 
had  pitched  his  tent  on  the  promontory  where  their  chief  port  was  built, 
hence  called  Ras-al-Khaima,  the  Cape  of  Tents,  i.  256. 


316  HISTORY   OF   BRITISH   INDIA. 


BOOK  I.  as  Wahabis,  gave  prompt  assistance  to  the  objects  of 
the  expedition.  Tlie  squadron  arrived  off  Ras-al- 
1809.  Khaima  on  the  12th  of  November.  Notwithstand- 
ing its  designation  of  Ras  or  head-land,  the  town 
was  found  to  be  situated  on  a  low  sandj  peninsula, 
nearly  a  mile  in  length.  The  neck  of  the  isthmus 
was  defended  by  a  wall,  and  the  sea-face  by  batteries 
and  entrenchments.  It  was  also  secure  from  the 
near  approach  of  vessels  of  war  by  the  shallowness 
of  the  water. 

In  consequence  of  this  difficulty  the  bombardment 
of  the  town  was  impracticable,  and  it  was  determined 
to  carry  it  by  assault.  By  a  skilful  disposition  the 
landing  of  the  troops  on  the  neck  of  the  isthmus 
was  effected  at  daybreak  on  the  13th  of  November; 
and,  in  spite  of  a  vigorous  resistance,  the  wall  was 
escaladed.  Guns  were  then  brought  up,  and,  under 
the  cover  of  their  fire,  the  troops  penetrated  into  the 
town.  All  the  principal  houses,  as  usual  in  Asiatic 
cities,  were  flat-roofed;  and  from  their  roofs,  and 
loop-holes  in  their  walls,  a  murderous  fire  of  match- 
locks checked  for  a  while  the  progress  of  the  assail- 
ants. Their  perseverance,  however,  triumphed :  the 
town  was  abandoned  by  its  surviving  defenders,  and 
by  two  o'clock  Ras-al-Kliaima  was  in  the  possession 
of  the  British.  Although  the  place  was  filled  with 
valuable  merchandize,  the  spoil  of  piratical  expedi- 
tions, no  plunder  was  permitted  :  the  dwellings  and 
magazines  were  set  on  fire,  and  the  whole  was  con- 
sumed, together  with  forty-eight  large  daos  and  a 
number  of  smaller  vessels.  Several  towns  of  in- 
ferior note  along  the  pirate  coast  shared  the  same 
fortune.     Some  escaped  it  by  the  sacrifice  of  their 


DESTRUCTION  OF  PIRATE  TOWNS.  317 

boats,  but  in  general  the  Arabs  exhibited  striking  book  i. 
proofs  of  their  national  spirit.     At  the  attack  of  the  ^"^'*'  ^'' 


castle  of  Shinas,  in  particular,  the  most  determined  1809. 
resistance  was  encountered.  After  a  breach  had 
been  made,  and  the  place  was  carried,  the  garrison 
retiring  into  two  of  the  towers  refused  to  surrender. 
Offers  of  quarter  were  made  repeatedly  to  them  in 
vain.  They  maintained  an  unceasing  fire  upon  their 
enemies,  and  tossed  back  with  the  most  deliberate 
resolution  the  hand-grenades  and  fire-balls  showered 
upon  them  without  giving  them  time  to  explode. 
Guns  were  brought  to  bear  upon  their  defences,  and 
the  towers  soon  became  a  mass  of  ruins.  At  length 
one  of  the  number  gave  himself  up,  and  through 
his  agency  his  companions  were  induced  to  believe 
that  their  lives  would  be  spared,  and  to  desist  from 
a  resistance  which  had  been  animated  by  a  notion 
that  no  more  mercy  would  be  shown  to  them  than 
they  were  accustomed  to  exercise  towards  their  cap- 
tives.^ Above  four  hundred  were  killed.  The  others 
were  protected  with  difficulty  from  the  fury  of  the 
troops  of  the  Imam  of  Muscat,  of  whom  four  thousand 
had  joined  the  detachment,  and  who  mostly  belonged 
to  a  tribe  which  was  at  deadly  feud  with  the  Joas- 
mis.  The  place  was  delivered  to  the  Imam.  At 
Luft,  also,  on  the  island  of  Kishme,  a  desperate  op- 
position was  experienced,  by  which  an  officer  and 
ten  men  were  killed,  and  many  of  the  men  were 
wounded. 

*  "  After  the  destruction  of  one  of  their  forts,  several  of  the  Arabs  were 
brought  on  board  our  ships  as  prisoners:  while  uncertain  of  their  fate,  and 
before  their  wounds  were  dressed,  they  were  asked  what  fate  they  antici- 
pated. *  The  same  immediate  death  as  we  should  have  inflicted  on  you  had 
your  fortune  been  ours,'  was  the  stem  and  characteristic  reply." — Well- 
sted's  Travels,  i.  219. 


318  HISTORY  OF  BRITISH  INDIA. 


BOOK  L  The  success  of  these  operations  struck  a  salutary 
^^^'  ^  terror  into  the  pirate  tribes  of  the  coast  of  Oman, 
1809.  and  procured  for  some  years  security  for  the  com- 
merce of  the  Persian  Gulph.  The  halnts,  the 
native  daring,  and  the  fanaticism  of  these  barbarians, 
gradually,  however,  resumed  their  inflnmice,  and 
impelled  them  to  the  revival  of  their  predatory 
courses,  which  provoked  a  severer  chastisement  and 
more  effectual  suppression.  This  will  be  the  subject 
of  a  future  narrative.  The  armament  employed  on 
the  present  occasion  returned  to  Bombay,  and  re- 
ceived the  merited  acknowledgments  of  the  local 
and  supreme  Governments.* 

While  thus  busily  and  anxiously  engaged  in  ap- 
peasing internal  dissension,  and  in  asserting  the 
ascendancy  of  the  British  empire  of  India  over  the 
nations  of  Asia,  the  attention  of  Lord  Minto  was 
earnestly  fixed  upon  objects  of  European  as  well  as 
of  Indian  interest  growing  out  of  the  war  which 
raged  in  the  Western  hemisphere.  Upon  the  occu- 
pation of  Portugal  by  the  French,  and  the  flight  of 
the  Prince  Regent  to  Brazil,  the  Bengal  Govern- 
ment received  orders  from  England  to  take  military 
occupation  of  the  Portuguese  settlements  in  the 
East,  to  prevent  their  following  the  fate  of  the 
parent  country.  Goa  had  some  time  previously  been 
partly  under  the  protection  of  the  British  troops, 
the  civil  administration  being  left  entirely  to  the 
Portuguese  authorities;  and  it  was  deemed  expedient 
to  provide  in  a  similar  manner  for  the  security  of 

'  Asiatic  Annual  Registers,  vol.xi.  Chron.  161,  and  vol.xii.  Chron.  122; 
Account  of  the  Expedition  against  the  Pirates  of  the  Gulph  of  Persia  in 
1800;  Asiatic  Monthly  Journal,  vol.  ii.  341. 


EXPEDITION   TO   MACAO.  319 


Macao.  A  small  expedition  was  accordingly  em-  book  i. 
barked  in  June  and  July  from  Madras  and  Calcutta,  ^^^^'  ^ 
the  troops  of  which  were  commanded  by  Major  1809. 
Weguelin  of  the  Bengal  European  regiment,  and 
the  ships  by  Rear-Admiral  DmiyJ  The  Madras 
diTision,  with  the  Admiral,  arrived  off  Macao  on  the 
11th  September.  Their  coming  was  unexpected, 
and  by  no  means  acceptable  to  their  allies.  Re- 
luctant to  part  with  any  portion  of  their  brief  autho- 
rity, and  fearful  of  giving  offence  to  the  Chinese, 
the  Portuguese  authorities  availed  themselves  of  the 
absence  of  instructions  from  their  own  Court  to 
resist  as  long  as  they  could  the  disembarkation  of 
the  troops.  Fortified  with  the  sanction  of  the  Vice- 
roy of  Goa,  and  determined  to  execute  the  instruc- 
tions of  the  Government  of  Bengal,  Admiral  Drury 
disregarded  the  remonstrances  and  procrastination 
of  the  Governor  of  Macao;  and,  by  landing  the 
troops  without  his  acquiescence,  extorted  from  him 
a  reluctant  assent  to  the  military  possession  of  the 
defences  of  the  town. 

There  was,  however,  a  still  more  potential  voice  to 
be  consulted — that  of  the  Chinese.  In  some  mea- 
sure instigated  by  the  intrigues  of  the  Portuguese, 
but  still  more  by  becoming  feelings  of  national 
dignity,  the  provincial  Mandarins  immediately  ob- 
jected in  the  strongest  terms  to  the  landing  of  the 
British  troops.     The  Select  Committee  of  Supra- 


'  The  troops  from  Madras  consisted  of  two  companies  of  his  Majesty's 
SOth  regiment,  and  were  embarked  on  the  Russell  and  Greyhound  ships 
of  war :  the  former  of  which  carried  the  Admiral.  From  Bengal,  two  com- 
panies of  the  European  regiment  and  six  hundred  Sipahis  were  embarked 
in  transports,  and  his  Migesty's  yeMels  Dover,  Phaeton,  Jaseur,  and  De- 
daigneux. 


320  HlfiTORT  OF   BRITISH   INDIA. 

BOOK  I.  cargoes  had  induced  the  Governor-General  to  be- 
cHAP.  VI.  ^^^^  ^^^^  ^Y^^  Chinese  would  be  indifferent  to  the 


1809.  temporary  occupation  of  Macao,  and  would  consider 
it  immaterial  whether  it  was  guarded  by  the  troops 
of  Portugal  or  Great  Britain.  They  had  not,  how- 
ever, ascertained  the  sentiments  of  the  Chinese,  and 
their  conjectures  were  erroneous.  The  local  officers 
were  still  more  vigorously  upheld  by  their  principals 
at  Canton  ;  and  the  Viceroy,  declaring  that  the  un- 
licensed entrance  of  foreign  soldiers  into  the  terri- 
tories of  the  Celestial  dynasty  was  a  violation  of 
the  laws  of  the  empire,  commanded  their  immediate 
withdrawal.  It  was  in  vain  urged  that  Macao  had 
been  ceded  to  the  Portuguese,  that  the  English 
came  as  their  allies,  and  that  their  only  pujrpose  was 
to  defend  it  against  the  attacks  of  their  common 
enemy  the  French.  The  Viceroy  replied,  that  Macao 
was  in  all  respects  a  part  of  the  empire,  that  the 
British  should  have  applied  for  permission  to  the 
Emperor  before  they  landed  their  troops,  and  that  it 
was  as  absurd  as  it  was  disrespectful  to  presume 
that  their  aid  was  required  to  protect  any  part  of 
the  Emperor's  dominions  from  foreign  aggression. 
He  repeated  his  orders  for  the  re-embarkation  of 
the  troops ;  and,  finding  that  obedience  was  delayed, 
first  put  a  stop  to  the  trade  with  the  Company's 
ships,  several  of  which  were  at  the  time  taking  in 
cargoes,  and  then  prohibited  their  being  furnished 
with  provisions  and  supplies. 

Thinking  that  the  objections  of  the  Government 
might  be  overcome  by  persisting  in  the  course  pur- 
sued, the  supracargoes  prevailed  upon  the  Admiral, 
against  his  own  judgment,  to  repeat  his  applications. 


OPPOSITION   OF  THE   CHINESE.  321 

and  to  repair  in  person  to  Canton,  and  demand  an  book  r. 
interview    with    the   Viceroy.      That    fiinctionary,  ^"^'''  ^'' 
though  he  declined  to  receive  the  Admiral,  sent     J809. 
some  Mandarins  of  rank  to  confer  with  his  oflScers, 
and  wrote  a  reply  to  his  letters.     The  tenor  of  his 
declarations  was  unchanged  :  the  withdrawal  of  the 
troops  was  insisted  on  as  preliminary  to  all  other  dis- 
cussion.    The  Admiral  returned  indignantly  to  his 
ships,  and,  still  acting  upon  the  suggestions  of  the 
supracargoes,  threatened  to  blockade  the  port,  and 
commanded   all   the   Europeans   to   leave   Canton. 
These  measures  were  unavailing.     An  order  arrived 
from  Pekin,  whither  information  of  the  transaction 
had  been  dispatched,  approving   of  the  Viceroy's 
conduct,  and  commanding  him,  if  necessary,  to  expel 
the  intruders   by  force.     The  imperial   commands 
were  communicated  to  the  Admiral :  troops  began 
to  collect  in  considerable  numbers  along  the  shores 
of  the  Canton  river,  boats  passing  to  the  ships  were 
fired  upon,  and  everything  indicated  hostile  proceed- 
ings unless  the  armament  was  withdrawn.     Major 
Weguelin,  who,  with  the  Bengal  detachment,  had 
joined  on  the  20th  October,  concurred   with    the 
Admiral  in  conceiving  that  they  were  not  warranted 
in  carrying  their  instructions  into  effect,  in  direct 
contravention  of  the  commands  of  the  Emperor ; 
and  the  supracargoes,  sensible  that  further  obstinacy 
might  lead  to  more  serious  consequences  than  they 
had   anticipated,   at   last    counselled   acquiescence. 
The  troops  were  accordingly  re-embarked  on  the 
23rd  December,  after  three  months  had  been  ex- 
pended in  the  vain  attempt  to  overcome  the  reason- 
able opposition  of  the  Chinese  to  the  unauthorized 

VOL.  I.  Y 


322  HISTORY   OF   BRITISH   INDIA, 

BOOK  I.  establishment  of  foreign  troops  upon  their  cosdstsi 
^^^'  ^  The  reason  of  the  case  was  not  only  clearly  on  their 
1809.  side,  but  their  conduct  exhibited  a  remarkable  com- 
bination of  firmness  and  forbearance.  However  un- 
yielding in  their  resolution,  no  violence  was  resorted 
to ;  and,  as  soon  as  the  ships  and  troops  had  de- 
parted, the  trade  was  resumed,  and  carried  on  as 
quietly  as  if  no  interruption  had  occurred. 

The  failure  of  the  expedition  to  Macao  was  more 
than  redeemed  by  the  success  which  attended  the 
employment  of  the  resources  of  British  India  in  the 
furtherance  of  other  objects  of  greater  national  im- 
portance ;  and  it  was  reserved  for  Lord  Minto's  ad- 
ministration to  accomplish  the  extirpation  of  those 
remains  of  the  colonial  possessions  of  France  in  the 
Eastern  hemisphere  that  had  so  long  been  suffered 
to  inflict  humiliation  and  injury  upon  the  subjects 
of  a  power  which  had  only  to  will  their  extinction, 
and  they  ceased  to  be.  The  measures  which  led  to 
the  conquest  of  the  Isles  of  France  and  of  Java 
have  now  to  be  described. 

It  has  been  already  noticed,  that,  notwithstanding 
the  presence  of  a  powerful  naval  armament  in  the 
Indian  ocean,*  armed  vessels  issuing  from  the  French 
islands  of  Mauritius  and  Bourbon  had  throughout 
the  war  preyed  upon  the  maritime  trade  of  India 
almost  with  impunity:  occasionally,  indeed,  they 
fell  victims  to  their  audacity,*  and  were  made  to 

'  Id  1807,  Admiral  Pellew  had  under  his  orders,  in  different  parts  of  the 
Indian  seas,  six  ships  of  the  line,  sixteen  frigates,  and  six  sloops. 

'  Among  the  most  gallant  actions  was  one  fought  in  the  Balasore  Roads 
in  February,  1798,  between  La  Forte,  a  frigate  of  the  largest  class,  and 
the  Sybille  of  forty-four  guns,  Captain  Cooke,  which  ended  in  the  capture 
of  the  former,  although  Captain  Cooke  was  killed ;  and  one  between  La 
Piedmontaise  and  San  Fiorenzo,  of  about  equal  force,  in  March,  1808.    In 


FRENCH   CRUIZERS.  323 

feel  the  superiority  of  British  skill  and  prowess ;  book  i. 
but  although  they  swept  the  seas  from  Madagascar  ^^'^^'  ^^ 
to  Java,  and  sometimes  carried  their  depredations  i80d, 
to  the  immediate  vicinity  of  the  British  harbours/ 
they  were  for  the  most  part  singularly  fortunate  in 
avoiding  the  track  of  English  frigates  and  men-of- 
war.'  Their  principal  spoil  arose  from  the  capture 
of  the  merchant-ships  employed  in  the  trade  of  the 
Eastern  seas,  whose  cargoes,  often  of  considerable 
value,  they  carried  for  sale  to  the  ports  from  which 
they  had  sallied;  but  they  also  inflicted  serious 
damage  upon  the  Company's  commerce,  and  from 
time  to  time  valuable  Indiamen  fell  into  their 
hands.^  The  equipments  of  these  vessels,  which 
were  well  armed,  and  on  the  outward-bound  voyage 
well  manned,  enabled  them  sometimes  to  resist  suc- 
cessfully the  attacks  of  their  enemies ;  and,  on  one 
memorable  occasion,  a  fleet  of  merchant-ships  re- 
turning from  China,  under  its  senior  captain,  Cap- 

this  also,  which  was  a  desperately  contested  engagement,  renewed  for  three 
days  successively,  and  terminating  in  the  capture  of  La  Piedmontaise,  the 
commander  of  the  English  frigate,  Captain  Hardinge,  fell. — ^Asiatic  Annual 
Register,  vol.  ii.  Chron.  87,  and  vol.  x.  Chron.  191.  The  official  reports  are 
given  in  both. 

'  The  Kent  Eastlndlaman,  Captain  Rivington,  was  captured  at  the 
mouth  of  the  Hoogly  river  by  the  Confiance  privateer,  M.  Surcouf,  in  Octo- 
ber, 1800,  after  an  action  of  an  hour  and  forty-seven  minutes :  her  captain 
was  killed.  M.  Surcouf  for  several  years  was  distinguished  for  his  intre- 
pidity and  successful  enterprise :  most  of  his  prizes,  and  they  were  nume- 
rous, were  taken  in  the  upper  part  of  the  bay  and  along  the  Madras  coast. 
— ^Asiatic  Annual  Register,  vol.  ii.  Chron.  141. 

'  The  merchants  of  Calcutta  presented  a  petition  to  his  Migesty's  Go- 
vernment, imputing  to  the  navy  some  degree  of  disinclination  to  exert  them- 
selves for  the  protection  of  the  trade. 

'  It  was  computed  in  October,  1807,  that  in  the  course  of  six  weeks  the 
losses  by  capture  to  the  port  of  Calcutta  alone  exceeded  thirty  lakhs  of 
rupees  (£300,000).  Between  1702  and  1810,  the  Company  lost  thirty 
vessels  by  capture :  the  cargoes  of  twenty-four  of  the  number  are  stated  to 
have  been  worth  above  .£800,000. — Commons*  Conunlttee,  1830;  First 
Report,  App.  ri. 

Y  2 


324  rasTOBY  OP  British  india. 

BOOK  I.  tain  Dance/  beat  off  a  French  squadron  of  vessels 
^^^^'  ^  of  war  commanded  by  Admiral  Linois.  In  some 
1809.  actions  between  single  vessels  a  similar  result  re- 
flected honour  upon  the  Company's  oflicers :  but  in 
general  the  merchantmen  were  unequal  to  contend 
with  a  French  cruizer  of  respectable  force ;  especially 
on  their  homeward  voyage,  when  they  had  been 
weakened  by  the  impressment  of  many  of  their  best 
men  on  board  his  Majesty's  ships  of  war.  Latterly 
cases  of  this  nature  had  become  more  frequent.  In 
1809  the  Company's  regular  Indiamen,  Europe  and 
Streatham,  were  taken  on  their  homeward  voyage 
by  the  French  frigate  La  Caroline ;  and  the  Charlton 
and  United  Kingdom,  by  La  Venus.  In  the  fol- 
lowing year  the  Windham,  Ceylon,  and  Astell,  out- 
ward bound,  were  met  off  the  island  of  Johanna  by 
the  French  frigates  Bellone  and  Minerve,  and  Victor 
corvette,  and  after  an  action  which  lasted  from  2  p.m. 
until  dark  the  two  former  struck.  The  Astell 
escaped  under  cover  of  the  night.  It  was  high  time 
to  rescue  the  commerce  of  India  from  the  risk  and 
peril  to  which  it  w^as  exposed,  and  to  vindicate  the 
pretensions  of  the  British  navy  to  the  undisputed 
sovereignty  of  the  ocean. 

The  most  obvious  means  of  paralysing  the  energies 
of  the  naval  power  of  France,  which  still  lingered  in 
the  East,  was  to  take  from  her  ships  those  places  in 

'  The  China  fleet,  consisting  of  sixteen  ships,  on  the  14th  of  February, 
1S04,  off  Palo  Aur,in  the  Straits  of  Malacca,  fell  in  with  the  French  squadron 
under  Admiral  Linois,  consisting  of  the  Marengo  of  seventy-four  guns,  two 
frigates  of  forty-four  guns  each,  and  two  brigs.  On  the  I5th,  after  some 
manoeuvring  and  the  exchange  of  a  short  fire  between  the  French  line  and 
the  headmost  ships,  Admiral  Linois  stood  off  under  all  sail,  deterred  from  a 
closer  contest  by  the  gallant  bearing  of  the  China  ships. — ^Asiatic  Annual 
Register,  vol.  vi.  Chron.  102 ;  Brenton*s  Naval  History,  iii.  336. 


EXPEDITION   AGAINST   K0DBIGUE2.  325 

the  Indian  ocean  where  they  found  a  shelter  and  book  i. 
obtained  supplies.     This  might  have  been  effected 
at  a  much  earlier  date ;  but,  for  reasons  not  easily     1809. 
comprehensible,   the  Company's  Governments  had 
been  interdicted  from  engaging  in  any  expedition 
against  the  islands,  as  involving  a  certain  expense 
both  for  their  reduction  and  maintenance  :^  a  piece 
of  parsimonious  prodigality,  in  which  even  the  pecu- 
niary saving  bore  no  ratio  to  the  pecuniary  loss ; 
as  the  value  of  the  captured  ships,  and  the  charges 
of  their  convoy  and  equipments,  far  outbalanced  in 
the  end  the  cost  which  in  the  beginning  would  have 
been  incurred  by  the  conquest  of  the  colonies.    The 
views  of  the  home  Administration  at  this  period 
underwent  a  change,  and  the  Government  of  Bengal 
and  the  chief  naval  officers  in  the  Eastern  seas  were 
authorized  to  adopt  arrangements  of  a  more  enter- 
prising description.     It  was  at  first  proposed  to  at- 
tempt nothing  more  than  a  rigorous  blockade  of  the 
Isle  of  France  and  Bourbon  by  the  squadron  at  the 
Cape  of  Good  Hope  under  Admiral  Bertie ;  but,  as 
this  was  impracticable  as  long  as  the  blockading 
ships  depended  upon  the  distant  settlements  of  the 
Cape  or  of  Bombay  for  their  supplies,  it  was  deter- 
mined to  occupy  the  small   island   of  Rodriguez, 
lying  about  one  hundred  leagues  east  of  the  Isle  of 
France,  and  establish  upon  it  magazines,  with  stores 
and  provisions  for  the  refitting  and  revictualling  of 
the  blockading  squadron.     A  small  force  of  two 
hundred  Europeans  and  an  equal  number  of  natives, 

'  *'  At  the  commencement  of  the  present  war,  intimation  had  been  given 
to  the  East  India  Company  to  guard  them  against  expending  large  sums  in 
expeditions  against  the  French  islands." — Speech  of  the  Chancellor  of  the 
Exchequer,  10th  January,  1812 ;  Hansard's  Debates. 


326  HIBTORT  OF  BRITISH   INDIA. 

BTXiK  h  commanded  bj  Lieatenaiit-Colonel  Keating,  was 
^^^^^^^^  diifpatcbed  from  Bombay  under  convoy  of  bis  Ma- 
1809.  jesty'H  ship  Belliqoeux,  Commodcnre  Byng.  Tbey 
arrived  off  tbe  island  on  tbe  4tb  of  August,  and 
found  upon  it  only  tbree  Frencbmen,  engaged  in 
growling  vegetables  for  tbe  use  of  tbe  larger  islands. 
Rodriguez  was  about  fifteen  miles  long  from  east  to 
west,  and  seven  from  nortb  to  soutb.  Wood  and 
water  were  plentiful,  and  various  vegetables  were 
raised.  Tbe  stores  were  landed,  and  additional  sup- 
plies were  sent  for ;  and  Colonel  Keating  adopted 
all  necessary  precautions  in  order  to  strengtben  bim- 
self  in  bis  position.  Tbe  captures  made  in  1809 
and  1810,  however,  sbowed  tbat,  whatever  benefits 
might  ultimately  result  from  the  occupation  of  Rod- 
riguez, it  was  not  followed  by  that  of  an  effectual 
blockade  of  the  French  islands.  French  frigates 
liad  continued  to  sail  from  their  ports,  and  returned 
to  them  with  splendid  and  valuable  trophies  of 
victory. 

Although  the  position  thus  taken  up  proved  in- 
adequate to  the  entire  prevention  of  maritime  de- 
predation, yet  it  had  the  advantage  of  enabling  the 
English  men  of  war  to  remain  more  steadily  and 
continuously  in  those  seas,  cramping  the  enemy's 
operations,  occasioning  frequent  distress  in  the 
islands  for  want  of  supplies,  and  affording  a  salient 
point  from  wliich  to  harass  and  annoy  them  by  oc- 
cawional  demonstrations  or  actual  inroads.  With 
this  purpose,  as  well  as  to  determine  how  far  ulte- 
rior and  more  definite  measures  were  practicable, 
the  forces  at  Rodriguez,  both  military  and  naval, 
were  streiigtheued,  and  in  September  1809  an  ex- 


DESCENT   ON   BOURBON.  327 

pedition  proceeded  from  Rodriguez  to  the  Isle  de  book  i. 
Bourbon.  chap^^ 


A  body  of  four  hundred  European  and  native  1809. 
troops  were  embarked  in  his  Majesty's  ships  Ne- 
reide  and  Otter,  and  the  Company's  cruizer  Wasp. 
Off  Port  Louis,  in  the  Isle  of  France,  they  were 
joined  by  his  Majesty's  ships  the  Raisonnable,  Com- 
modore Rowley,  and  the  Sirius,  Captain  Pym.  The 
whole  proceeded  to  Bourbon,  off  the  eastern  ex- 
tremity of  which  they  arrived  on  the  morning  of  the 
20th  of  September.  In  the  evening  a  detachment, 
raised  to  six  hundred  men  by  the  addition  of  seamen 
and  marines,  was  disembarked  to  the  southward  of 
Point  de  CJalotte,  about  seven  miles  from  St.  Paul, 
the  chief  town  on  the  western  side  of  the  island. 
The  disembarkation  was  unperceived  by  the  enemy ; 
and  the  troops  had  marched,  and  were  in  possession 
of  two  of  the  principal  batteries  on  the  east  of  the 
town,  commanding  the  shipping,  before  their  ap- 
proach was  apprehended.  On  the  advance  of  a 
column  to  storm  a  third  battery,  they  came  upon 
the  garrison,  now  collected,  and  reinforced  by  a 
hundred  men  of  the  troops  of  the  line  serving  on 
board  the  frigate  La  Caroline,  then  lying  in  the  bay 
with  her  prizes.  The  position  of  the  enemy  was 
strong,  and  was  supported  by  eight  pieces  of  artil- 
lery. Their  defence  was  resolute,  and  it  was  not 
until  the  main  body  of  the  assailants  was  concen- 
trated that  they  gave  way.  By  half-past  eight,  the 
whole  of  the  batteries,  and  the  town  and  magazines, 
were  in  the  hands  of  the  English ;  and,  the  escape  of 
the  ships  being  prevented  by  the  squadron,  they 
were  obliged  to  surrender.    The  French  ships  taken 


328  HISTORY  OF   BRITISH    INDIA. 

BOOK  I.  were  the  Caroline  frigate,  of  forty-six  gans,  and 

CHAT,  n.  ^j^^  small  trading  vessels ;  but,  besides  a  gun-brig 

1809.     and  some  small  traders,  two  Indiamen,  the  Streatham 

and  Europe,  were  recovered :  the  troops  were  then 

re-embarked. 

Upon  hearing  of  this  attack,  a  body  of  taroops 
under  the  command  of  General  Des  Bruslys,  the 
governor  of  Bourbon,  marched  from  St.  Denis,  and 
made  their  appearance  on  the  hills  on  the  evening 
of  the  23rd.  Finding  St.  Paul  in  possession  of 
the  English,  they  retired  during  the  night,  render- 
ing it  useless  to  continue  the  preparations  which 
had  been  made  for  the  relanding  of  the  troops.  A 
convention  was  then  concluded  between  the  Eng- 
lish commander  and  the  commandant  of  St.  Paul 
for  a  suspension  of  hostilities  for  three  days,  during 
which  the  English  were  to  remain  unmolested  in 
the  occupation  of  the  town.  The  death  of  Des 
Bruslys,  who  destroyed  himself,*  occasioned  the  pro- 
longation of  the  armistice ;  during  which  the  public 
property  was,  agreeably  to  the  stipulated  conven- 
tion, put  on  board  the  ships ;  and,  the  objects  of  the 
expedition  having  been  accomplished,  the  squadron 
with  the  captured  vessels  returned  to  Rodriguez.* 

The  success  which  had  attended  the  proceedings 
of  so  feeble  an  armament  confirmed  the  determina- 
tion of  the  Government  of  Bengal  to  attempt,  with- 
out waiting  for  specific  instructions  from  home,  the 

'  He  left  a  paper  intimatiiig  his  having  committed  suicide,  to  avoid 
death  on  the  scaffold  ;  and  recommending  his  wife  and  children  to  Provi- 
dence, and  those  who  could  feel  for  them.  His  family,  at  the  request  of 
his  widow,  was  sent  with  a  cartel  to  the  Mauritius. 

*  Official  report,  and  other  details ;  Asiatic  Annual  Register,  vol.  xi. 
Chron.  155. 


EXPEDITION   AGAINST   BOURBON.  329 

complete  reduction  of  the  French  islands ;  and  in  book  i. 
the  beginning  of  1810  a  reinforcement  of  sixteen  ^"^^'  ^'' 
hundred  European  and  as  many  native  troops  was  isio. 
dispatched  to  Colonel  Keating,  to  enable  him  to 
undertake  the  complete  subjugation  of  the  Isle  de 
Bourbon.  The  expedition  arrived  at  Rodriguez  on 
the  20th  of  June,  but  from  the  unfavourable  state 
of  the  weather  they  were  unable  to  proceed  to  their 
destination  until  the  3rd  of  July.  They  were  then 
conveyed  to  Bourbon  under  convoy  of  a  strong 
squadron  of  his  Majesty's  navy,  consisting  of  the 
Sirius,  the  Iphigenia,  the  Magicienne,  and  the  Ne- 
reide,  commanded  by  Commodore  Rowley,  in  the 
Boadicea,  and  arrived  off  the  point  of  debarkation 
on  the  6th.  Colonel  Keating  on  this  occasion  had 
determined  to  proceed  at  once  against  St.  Denis, 
the  capital,  in  the  hope  of  preventing  protracted 
operations  in  the  interior  of  the  country,  consisting 
chiefly  of  rugged,  and  in  part  inaccessible,  moun- 
tains. The  squadron  accordingly  sailed  to  the  north- 
em  coast,  where  the  forces,  previously  distributed 
into  four  brigades,  were  appointed  to  land  at  two 
different  points :  the  first  brigade,  under  Lieute- 
nant-Colonel Fraser,  being  directed  to  debark  at 
Grande  Chaloupe,  and  proceed  by  the  mountains 
against  the  west  side  of  the  town ;  whilst  the  other 
three  brigades,  under  Colonel  Keating  himself,  were 
intended  to  land  on  the  east  of  it,  at  Riviere  de 
Pluies,  and  to  cross  the  rear  of  the  town  to  the 
river  St.  Denis. 

About  two  o'clock  on  the  7th  of  July,  the  ships 
having  reached  their  stations,  the  landing  of  the 
principal  divisions  was  commenced,  and  about  three 


330  raSTORY  OF   BRITISH   INDIA. 

BOOK  I.  hundred  men  of  the  3rd  and  4th  brigades,  under 
CHAP.VL  QQ^Q^eig  Campbell  and  Macleod,  with  a  party  of 


1810.  seamen  under  Captain  Willoughby  of  the  Nereide, 
were  put  on  shore.  The  weather,  which  had  hitherto 
been  moderate,  became  suddenly  tempestuous :  the 
surf  rose  with  such  violence  that  the  boats  were 
stove  in  pieces  on  nearing  the  shore,  and  the  disem- 
barkation of  the  rest  of  the  troops  became  impracti- 
cable. The  division  on  shore  was  necessarily  left 
without  support ;  but,  after  a  communication  from 
the  commander-in-chief,*  Colonel  Macleod  advanced 
to  a  battery  on  the  Breton  river  at  Ste.  Marie, 
which  he  carried,  and  where  he  was  unmolested 
during  the  night. 

The  attempt  to  land  at  this  spot  was  seen  from 
the  town,  but  the  debarkation  was  considered  to  be 
impossible,  from  the  fiiry  of  the  surf,  and  the  prin- 
cipal attention  of  the  enemy  was  directed  to  the 
division  under  Colonel  Fraser.  His  brigade,  which 
was  composed  of  his  Majesty's  86th  regiment  and 
part  of  the  6th  regiment  of  Madras  native  infantry, 
with  a  small  detail  of  artillery  and  pioneers,  on 
board  of  his  Majesty's  ship  Sirius,  had  been  more 
fortunate.  They  reached  their  destination  off  Grande 
Chaloupe  early  on  the  forenoon  of  the  7th  July, 
and  immediately  effected  a  landing  without  loss,  al- 
though exposed  to  a  harassing  fire  from  the  light 
troops  of  the  enemy.  As  soon  as  the  landing  was 
accomplished,  Colonel  Fraser  pushed  on  with  his 
Europeans  alone   to  the  vicinity  of  the  town,  and 


'  Lieutenant  Foulstone,  of  his  Majesty's  69th,  volunteered  to  be  the 
bearer  of  Colonel  Keating  s  orders  :  he  was  carried  in  a  boat  to  the  edge  of 
the  surf,  and  then  swam  through  it  to  the  shore. 


ISLAND   SURRENDERED.  331 

occupied  the  heights  above  it  to  the  westward,  so  book  i. 
as  to  cut  off  all  communication  between  the  capital  ^^^^'  "^^ 


and  St.  Paul.  In  the  mean  time  the  Magicienne  isio. 
and  Boadicea,  with  the  2nd  and  4th  brigades,  and 
the  chief  military  stores  and  artillery,  finding  little 
chance  of  effecting  a  landing  at  Riviere,  sailed  to 
Grande  Chaloupe  in  the  night,  and  early  on  the  8th 
landed  the  troops  on  board.  Before  they  could 
move  forward  in  force,  the  business  had  been  de- 
cided. The  courage  and  activity  of  Colonel  Eraser's 
division  had  reaped  the  fiill  harvest  of  that  good 
fortune  which  had  given  them  the  lead  in  the  attack 
upon  St.  Denis. 

Having  been  joined  during  the  night  of  the  7th 
by  the  rest  of  his  force,  Colonel  Fraser  on  the 
morning  of  the  8th,  leaving  the  Sipahis  to  protect 
his  rear,  descended  from  the  hill  with  the  Euro- 
peans, and  soon  fell  in  with  the  enemy,  drawn  up  in 
two  columns,  each  with  a  field-piece,  on  the  plain, 
supported  by  the  heavy  cannon  of  a  strong  redoubt 
upon  their  flank.  On  reaching  the  plain,  the  regi- 
ment was  ordered  to  charge,  when  they  immediately 
rushed  upon  the  enemy  with  the  bayonet,  and 
broke  them.  The  French  attempted  to  form  be- 
hind the  parapet  of  the  redoubt,  but  they  were 
pushed  so  closely  that  they  were  unable  to  make 
good  their  footing,  and  left  the  redoubt  in  the  pos- 
session of  the  British,  who  turned  some  of  the  guns 
found  in  it  against  the  town,  and  were  enabled 
more  effectually  to  reply  to  the  batteries  by  which 
the  latter  was  defended.  At  four  o'clock  in  the 
afternoon  a  flag  of  truce  was  sent  out  from  the 
town  to  negociate  for  its  surrender.     By  that  time 


332  HISTORY  OF  BRITISH   INDIA. 

BOOK  1.  the  bulk  of  the  expedition,  which  had  been  sent  on 
^^^^'  ^  to  Grande  Chaloupe,  had  arrived,  and  advanced  to 
1810.  St.  Denis,  whilst  the  3rd  brigade  had  also  come 
up  from  the  east  to  take  its  part  in  the  assault.^ 
Dispositions  for  storming  were  made,  when  it  was 
prevented  by  the  submisdon  of  the  commandant. 
Colonel  St.  Susanne.  By  the  terms  of  the  capitu- 
lation which  ensued,  the  whole  of  the  island  was 
ceded  to  the  British  with  all  public  property :  the 
troops  of  the  line  surrendered  themselves  prisoners 
of  war,  to  be  sent  to  the  Cape  or  to  England.  Co- 
lonel St.  Susanne  was  allowed  to  proceed  to  the 
Isle  of  France  on  parole ;  and  Mr.  Farquhar,  of  the 
Bengal  Civil  service,  who  had  been  appointed  by 
Lord  Minto  in  the  confidence  of  success  to  the  go- 
vernment of  the  island,  assumed  charge  of  its  admi- 
nistration. Proclamations  were  issued  by  him,  as- 
suring to  the  inhabitants  the  secure  possession  of 
their  property  on  their  remaining  peaceable  and 
obedient,  and  promising  them  the  provisional  ob- 
servance of  the  established  forms  of  law  and  go- 
vernment, and  the  maintenance  of  the  established 
religion  of  the  colony.  This  important  acquisition 
was  effected  with  little  loss ;  or  eighteen  killed  and 
fifty-nine  wounded.  One  officer  only.  Lieutenant 
J.  S.  Munro,  of  his  Migesty's  56th,  was  amongst  the 
former.* 

The  capture  of  Bourbon,  so  creditable  to  both 
the   military  and   naval   forces   employed,  for  the 

'  There  is  a  slight  difference  between  the  report  of  Colonel  Keating  and 
that  of  Colonel  Eraser :  the  latter  says  that  Colonel  Drummond  joined  him 
at  four  with  the  2nd  brigade ;  the  former,  that  he  himself  arrived  at  that 
time,  and  commanded  dispositions  to  be  made  for  a  general  attack. 

'  Asiatic  Annual  Register,  vol.  xii ;  Official  details,  Chron.  pp.  27, 117. 


NAVAL   DISASTERS.  333 

judgment  by  which  it  had  been  planned  and  the  book  i. 
spirit  by  which  it  had  been  accomplished,  was  fol- 


lowed  by  a  series  of  singular  disasters  suffered  by  isio. 
the  navy,.ascribable  to  no  deficiency  of  courage  or 
conduct,  but  to  an  imperfect  acquaintance  with  the 
scene  of  action,  and  the  want  of  sufficiently  expe- 
rienced pilotage.  The  achievements  which  were 
projected  would  no  doubt  have  been  successful, 
could  they  have  been  executed  with  the  prompti- 
tude with  which  they  were  conceived. 

The  operations  against  Bourbon  had  been  carried 
on  without  any  attempt  at  interruption  from  the 
Isle  of  France,  in  consequence  of  the  absence  of  the 
principal  naval  strength  of  the  French.  On  the 
20th  of  August  the  Bellone,  Minerve,  and  Victor 
returned,  bringing  with  them  the  captured  India- 
men,  the  Windham  and  Ceylon.  Finding  Port  St. 
Louis  blockaded,  they  made  for  the  harbour  of 
Grand  Port,  also  called  Port  Imperial,  on  the  south- 
eastern or  windward  side  of  the  island.  On  near- 
ing  the  Isle  de  la  Passe/  a  small  islet  with  a  fort 
lying  off  the  mouth  of  the  harbour  about  three 
miles  from  the  land,  which  had  been  taken,  and 
was  now  occupied  by  a  small  detachment  from 
Bourbon,  the  French  squadron  was  surprised  by  a 
hostile  fire  from  the  guns  of  the  fort,  and  of  the 
Nereide  frigate,  which  had  been  stationed  off  the 
island.  With  some  loss  the  French  vessels  made 
their  way  into  the  harbour;  but  their  prize,  the 
Windham,  not  keeping  up  with  the  rest,  was  recap- 
tured by  Captain  Pym  with  the  boats  of  the  Sirius, 

'  It  had  been  taken  on  the  14th  of  August  by  the  boats  of  the  Sirius  and 
Iphigenia,  and  was  garrisoned  by  one  hundred  and  thirty  men  from  Bourbon. 


334  HISTORY   OF   BRITISH  INDIA. 

BOOK  L  which  was  cruizing  in  the  neighbourhood  in  main^^ 
^^^^'  ^  tenance  of  the  blockade.  Sending  off  his  prize  to 
1810.  Bourbon,  Captain  Pym,  in  communication  with  Cap- 
tain Willoughby  of  the  Nereide,  determined  to  at- 
tack the  French  ships  in  the  harbour,  and  on  the 
22nd  of  August  the  two  frigates  stood  in  for  that 
purpose.  Unfortunately  the  Sirius  grounded,  and 
could  not  be  got  off  until  the  next  day,  when  the 
Iphigenia  and  Magicienne,  under  Captains  Lambert 
and  Curtis,  arrived  to  take  part  in  the  engagement. 
The  delay  that  had  occurred  had  afforded  the  gover- 
nor, General  Decaen,  time  to  reinforce  the  crews 
of  the  vessels  with  seamen  and  soldiers,  and  to 
strengthen  the  batteries  which  had  been  erected  on 
this  part  of  the  coast  since  the  capture  of  the  Isle 
de  la  Passe,  and  which  mounted  sixty  guns.  These 
were  fully  manned,  and  were  supported  by  all  the 
troops  that  could  be  assembled,  and  a  numerous 
body  of  militia  and  volunteers. 

The  firing  commenced  at  a  little  after  5  p.m.  on  the 
23rd.  The  Nereide  anchored  within  half  pistol-shot 
of  the  Bellone  and  Victor.  The  Magicienne,  in  fol- 
lowing her,  grounded  in  such  an  attitude  that  very 
few  of  her  guns  could  bear  upon  the  Minerve,  to 
whom  she  was  opposed ;  but  the  Iphigenia  anchored 
on  her  larboard  quarter,  and  relieved  her  of  her 
antagonist.  The  Sirius  again  unluckily  took  the 
ground  nearly  out  of  gun-shot,  and  was  disabled 
from  rendering  effectual  aid.  The  French  ships 
were  soon  driven  out  of  their  line,  but  into  a  posi- 
tion which  enabled  them  to  work  their  guns  with 
advantage.  Their  loss  of  men  was  constantly  re- 
paired by  troops  from  the  shore ;  and  the  batteries 


VESSELS   DESTROYED.  335 

and  musketry  on  land  poured  a  galling  fire  upon  book  i. 
the  British  vessels,  which  were  incapable  of  manage-  ^^^'  ^'' 


ment.  isio. 

The  contest  was  nevertheless  continued  until  after 
dark.  At  ten  o'clock,  the  Nereide,  which  also  had 
previously  grounded, .  having  most  of  her  guns  dis- 
abled, the  greater  part  of  her  crew  killed  or  wounded, 
and  being  exposed  to  the  fire  of  the  land-batteries  as 
well  as  of  the  shipping,  struck  her  colours  ;*  but  the 
French,  not  noticing  or  not  perceiving  that  this  was 
the  case,  continued  firing  upon  her  for  some  hours, 
until  not  a  man  on  board  remained  unhurt.  The 
firing  continued  with  occasional  interruption  through 
the  night.  On  the  morning  of  the  24th,  all  hope 
of  success  being  necessarily  abandoned,  it  was  deter- 
mined to  endeavour  to  retreat.  The  Magicienne 
being  unmanageable,  and  on  the  point  of  sinking, 
was  quitted  by  her  crew,  who  set  her  on  fire  and 
retired  on  board  the  Iphigenia.  On  the  25th  the 
Iphigenia  warped  out  of  the  action,  and  attempted 
to  extricate  the  Sirius;  but,  finding  this  impracti- 
cable, she  also  was  set  on  fibce  in  the  evening,  and 
exploded.  The  Iphigenia,  the  sole  remaining  ship, 
contrived  by  extraordinary  exertion  to  get  back  to 
the  Isle  de  la  Passe,  where  she  landed  the  sur- 
viving crews  of  the  other  vessels.  In  this  situation, 
without  provisions,  and  surrounded  by  a  vastly  supe- 


'  The  report  published  by  order  of  the  GoTemment  of  Bengal,  Calcutta 
GoTemment  Gazette,  18th  Oct  1810,  states  that  the  Nereide  drifted  oa 
shore,  and  was  taken  possession  of  by  the  enemy :  the  account  in  the  text 
is  from  the  Nereide^s  log. — Brenton^s  Naval  History,  iv.  468.  TThe  French 
account  asserts  that  her  colours  were  flying  at  daybreak,  but  that  informa- 
tion of  her  helpless  situation  had  been  previously  received  from  a  French 
prisoner  on  board,  who  made  his  escape  and  swam  to  the  Minerve,  and 
that  from  that  time  she  was  not  fired  on. 


8S6  HISTORY  OF  BRITISH   INDIA. 

BOOK  I.  rior  force  of  the  enemy, — the  Astrea,  Venus,  and 
^^^'^  La  Manche  frigates,  with  the  Entreprenant  sloop, 
1810.  having  on  the  27th  come  round  from  Port  Louis, 
whilst  those  recently  engaged  were  rapidly  refitting, 
— Captain  Lambert  found  himself  under  the  necessity 
of  capitulating,  and  surrendered  to  Captain  Hamelin, 
the  commodore  of  the  French  squadron.  It  was  sti- 
pulated that  the  crews  should  be  prisoners  of  war,  but 
to  be  sent  immediately  on  parole  or  in  exchange  to 
one  of  his  Britannic  Majesty's  forts.  The  convention 
was  ratified  by  Greneral  Decaen,  the  governor  of  the 
Isle  of  France,  so  far,  that  he  consented  to  send  the 
prisoners,  after  the  expiration  of  a  month,  to  England 
or  the  Cape  of  Good  Hope  upon  condition  of  their 
not  serving  again  until  exchanged.^ 

The  only  British  ship  of  war  now  left  of  the 
blockading  squadron  was  the  Boadicea ;  and  Com- 
modore Rowley  was  unable  to  prevent  the  blockade 
of  the  Isle  de  Bourbon,  which  was  established  by 
the  French  frigates  Astrea  and  Iphigenia,  who  inter- 
cepted several  of  the  transports  arriving  with  troops 
and  stores  for  the  destined  expedition  against  the 
Isle  of  France.  On  the  12th  of  September,  how- 
ever, the  Africaine  frigate.  Captain  Corbett,  arrived 
from  England  ;  and  Commodore  Rowley,  thus  rein- 
forced, immediately  put  to  sea.     The  French  fri- 

^  Asiatic  Annual  Register,  vol.xii ;  History,  p.  8,  Chron.  65  :  Brenton's 
Naval  History,  iv.  465.  A  translation  of  General  Decaen^s  official  pro- 
clamation after  the  action  is  published  in  the  Calcutta  Grovemment  Gazette 
Extraordinary,  25th  November,  1810.  Some  gasconading  was  excusable 
on  such  an  occasion,  but  in  the  main  the  account  is  candid  and  temperate : 
the  loss  of  the  French  is  probably  under\'alued  at  four  officers  and  thirty- 
three  men  killed,  and  one  hundred  and  twelve  wounded ;  the  latter  included 
M.  Du  Perr^e,  the  captain  of  the  Bellone.  In  the  Nereide  alone  one  hun- 
dred and  sixteen  were  killed,  and  many  of  the  wounded  died  on  landing. 
Captain  Willoughby  was  wounded,  but  recovered  with  the  loss  of  an  eye. 


CHANGES   OF   FORTUNE.  337 

gates  fled,  and  the  English  gave  chase.  The  Boa-  book  i. 
dicea  being  a  heavy  sailer,  the  French  vessels  soon  ^"^^'  ^^ 
shot  far  a-head,  followed  closely  by  the  Africaine.  isio. 
Captain  Corbett,  apprehending  the  escape  of  the 
enemy,  brought  them  to  action,  whilst  the  Boa- 
dicea  was  five  miles  astern.  The  wind  died  away. 
The  Africaine  was  overpowered :  the  captain  was 
killed,  and  the  senior  lieutenant  was  obliged  to 
strike  his  colours.  The  balance  of  strength  again 
turned  in  favour  of  the  French ;  but  the  Boadicea, 
being  joined  by  the  Otter  sloop  and  Staunch  gun- 
brig,  continued  the  chase.  The  enemy's  frigates 
were  little  inclined  to  renew  the  contest ;  and,  having 
taken  out  such  of  her  crew  as  were  unhurt,  they 
abandoned  the  Africaine  in  a  crippled  condition. 
Rowley  returned  with  her  to  St.  Paul  on  the  18th 
of  September. 

Commodore  Rowley  had  not  been  many  hours  at 
anchor  when  three  sail  appeared  in  the  offing,  two 
of  which  had  suffered  in  their  masts  and  rigging. 
He  immediately  made  sail  in  pursuit  of  them,  at- 
tended by  the  Otter  and  Staunch.  The  vessel  that 
appeared  not  to  be  disabled  had  another  ship  in 
tow,  which  she  cast  off,  to  save  herself  by  flight. 
The  third,  having  no  top-masts,  bore  up  to  assist  her 
consort,  but  was  soon  obliged  to  strike  to  the  superior 
force  of  the  Boadicea;  whilst  the  crippled  vessel 
yielded  at  once  to  the  Otter.  The  former  proved  to 
be  the  French  frigate  Venus ;  the  latter,  the  Ceylon, 
an  armed  Indiaman  from  Madras,  which  had  been 
captured  that  morning,  after  a  smart  engagement, 
by  the  Venus  and  the  Victor  corvette,  the  vessel 
that  had  escaped.     The  resolute  resistance  made  by 

VOL.  I.  z 


338  HISTORY   OF   BRITISH   INDIA. 

BOOK  I.  the  Ceylon,  and  the  damage  she  had  inflicted  upon 

cHAP.vL  ^Y^^  Venus,  were  the  main  causes  of  her  own  re- 

1810.     covery,  and  of  the  capture  of  the  Venus.     On  board 

the  Ceylon  was  Major-General  Abercrombie,  who 

commanded  the  expedition  now  on  its  way  from 

India. 

The  struggle  thus  far  honourably  maintained  by 
the  French  was  now  soon  to  terminate,  and  an 
effort  proportioned  to  the  object  was  about  to  put 
an  end  to  their  maritime  depredations  in  the  seas  of 
India.  Shortly  after  the  action  last  noticed,  or  early 
in  October,  Vice- Admiral  Bertie  in  the  Nisus  frigate 
arrived  from  the  Cape  of  Good  Hope  in  the  bay  of 
St.  Paul.  Great  exertions  had  been  made  to  refit 
and  equip  the  vessels  which  had  been  captured ;  and 
eleven  days  after  the  Vice-AdmiraPs  arrival  he  was 
able  to  put  to  sea  with  the  Boadicea,  Nisus,  Afri- 
caine,  Venus,  now  named  the  Nereide,  and  the 
Ceylon,  well  manned  and  supplied.  With  this 
squadron  he  proceeded  to  Port  Louis,  off  which 
he  arrived  on  the  19th  October  Finding  that  of 
the  enemy's  vessels  lying  in  the  harbour  not  more 
than  two  were  ready  for  sea,  he  left  the  Boadicea, 
Nisus,  and  Nereide  to  maintain  the  blockade,  and 
resumed  his  voyage  to  Rodriguez,  to  join  the  expe- 
dition which  had  been  directed  to  rendezvous  at  that 
island.  On  his  way  he  fell  in  with  the  squadron 
from  India  under  Rear-Admiral  Drury,  proceeding 
to  the  same  destination,  and  in  company  with  them 
arrived  at  Rodriguez  on  the  3rd  of  November.  The 
division  from  Bombay  was  already  present,  and  that 
from  Madras  made  its  appearance  three  days  after- 
wards.    It  was  not  until  the  21st  October  that  the 


LANDING   ON   THE   ISLE   OF    FRANCE.  339 


armament  from  Bengal  arrived.  As  the  season  was  book  i. 
far  advanced,  and  the  period  was  approaching  when  ' 
the  winds  in  these  latitudes  become  variable  and  isio. 
violent  hurricanes  occur,  the  commander  of  the  ex- 
pedition considered  it  of  the  utmost  importance  that 
no  further  time  should  be  lost ;  and  accordingly  pre- 
parations had  been  made  for  the  embarkation  of  the 
troops  that  had  previously  arrived,  and  for  the  supply 
of  the  vessels  from  Bengal  with  such  stores  as  they 
might  require  without  their  dropping  anchor.  As 
soon  as  this  operation  vras  effected,  the  whole  of 
the  fleet  was  under  weigh,  and  early  on  the  29th 
November  came  to  anchor  off  the  point  selected  for 
debarkation  in  Grande  Baye,  near  the  north-east 
extremity  of  the  island,  about  fifteen  miles  north 
from  the  capital,  where  it  had  been  previously  ascer- 
tained that  a  fleet  might  be  anchored  in  the  narrow 
passage  between  a  small  island  called  from  its  out- 
line Gunner's  Quoin,  and  the  main-land,  and  where 
openings  in  the  reefs  allowed  many  boats  to  enter 
abreast.  A  landing  in  force  at  this  place  had  been 
deemed  impracticable,  as  it  was  supposed  that  ves- 
sels of  burthen  could  neither  make  their  way 
through  the  reefs  of  rocks  which  formed  the  ex- 
terior barrier  of  the  bay,  nor  find  anchorage  outside, 
from  the  great  depth  of  water  close  to  the  rocks. 
It  had  been,  however,  ascertained  by  the  officers  of 
the  navy,  that  a  passage  between  the  rocks  could 
be  accomplished,  and  that  a  fleet  might  lie  at  anchor 
in  the  situation  to  which  it  had  been  actually  con- 
ducted. No  opposition  was  experienced,  and  the 
whole  of  the  force  was  landed  by  three  o'clock  in 
the  afternoon.    The  troops  had  been  distributed  into 

z2 


340  HISTORY  OF   BRITTSH  INDIA. 


BOOK  I.  five  brigades.  *      The   first,   under  Colonel   Picton, 
^"^'''  ^^  consisted  of  his  Majesty's  12th  and  22nd  regiments, 
1810.     and  the  right  wing  of  the  Madras  volunteer  bat- 
talion ;  the  second,  under  Colonel  Gibbs,  of  his  Ma- 
jesty's 59th,  with  three  hundred  of  the  89th  and 
a  company  of  the  87th,  and  of  the  left  wing  of 
the   Madras  volunteers;   the   third  brigade,  under 
Lieutenant-Colonel  Kelso,  was  formed  of  the  14th 
regiment  and  the  second  battalion  of  the  Bengal 
volunteers ;  and  the  fourth,  commanded  by  Colonel 
Macleod,  of  the  69th  regiment,  of  the  Madras  native 
flank  battalion,  with  three  hundred  marines;  the 
fifth  brigade  was  composed  of  his  Majesty's  65th,  a 
troop  of  the  26th  dragoons,  and  the  first  battalion 
of  the  Bengal  native  volunteers.     There  was  also  a 
reserve  division,  commanded  by  Lieutenant-Colonel 
Keating,  comprising  the  84th  regiment,  the  flank 
companies  of  some  other  corps,  and   the  Bombay 
native  troops.     These,  with  the  artillery  and  a  large 
body  of  seamen,   formed   a  force  of  about  eleven 
thousand  men.     To  oppose  them  General  Decaen 
had  not  more  than  two  thousand  Europeans,  includ- 
ing the  crews  of  the  ships  of  war,  a  considerable 
number  of  colonists,  and  a  body  of  African  slaves, 
without  discipline,  and  badly  armed. 

As  soon  as  the  troops  could  be  formed,  the  force 

'  The  European  force  was  composed  of  his  Majesty  *8  regiments,  the  12th, 
14th,  22nd,  5Gth,  69th,  C5th,  G9th,  84th,  and  89th,  the  Bengal  and  Madras 
artillery,  and  a  company  of  the  26th  dragoons ;  six  thousand  three  hundred 
strong :  and  two  thousand  seamen  and  marines.  The  native  troops  from 
Bengal  and  Madras  consisted  of  four  volunteer  battalions  and  a  party  of 
Madras  pioneers,  tliree  thousand  men :  altogether,  eleven  thousand  three 
hundred.  The  squadron  cousi^ited  of  the  Illustrious  74,  and  the  frigates 
Comwallis,  Africaine,  Boadicea,  Nisus,  Clorinde,  Cornelia,  Mcuelaus, 
Psyche,  Ceylon,  Nereide,  Phoebe,  Doris,  and  Vesper,  besides  sloops  and 
gun-brigs. 


MARCH    OF   THE   ARMY.  341 

moved  towards  Port  Louis.  The  road  followed  the  book  i. 
direction  of  the  coast  for  the  first  five  miles,  passing  ^^^^'  ^ 
through  a  thick  wood  much  entangled  with  brush-  isio. 
wood,  through  which  the  men  made  their  way  with 
great  difficulty  and  fatigue.  No  enemy  was  seen 
until,  on  clearing  the  wood,  the  heads  of  the  co- 
lumns were  fired  upon  by  a  small  picquet,  by  which 
Lieutenant-Colonel  Keating,  Lieutenant  Ashe,  and 
some  men  of  the  advance,  were  wounded.  The 
enemy  were  quickly  dispersed,  and  greater  injury 
was  inflicted  by  the  excessive  heat  of  the  weather 
and  want  of  water.  Several  of  the  officers  and  men 
employed  in  the  laborious  duty  of  bringing  on  the 
artillery  and  stores  sunk  under  their  exertions,  and 
fell  dead  on  the  march.^  After  clearing  the  wood, 
the  army  bivouacked  for  the  night. 

On  the  following  morning  the  march  was  resumed, 
with  the  purpose  of  reaching  the  capital ;  but  the 
excessive  heat  and  scanty  supply  of  water  compelled 
General  Abercrombie  to  halt,  about  five  miles  short 
of  Port  Louis  upon  the  bed  of  the  Pamplemousse 
river.  On  the  31st  the  force  again  advanced,  and, 
soon  after  it  had  moved,  came  upon  the  enemy,  who 
had  taken  up  an  advantageous  position  in  front  with 
several  field-i)ieces.  The  European  flank  battalion, 
which  formed  the  advance,  was  led  against  them  by 
Colonel  Campbell  of  the  33rd ;  and,  by  a  spirited 
charge,  put  them  to  flight,  vdth  the  loss  of  their 
guns.  The  success  was  dearly  purchased ;  Colonel 
Campbell,  and  Major  O'Keefe  of  the  12th  regiment, 
being  killed  whilst  gallantly  leading  their  men  to 

*  Among  those  who  perished  from  heat  and  fatigue  were  Lieutenant  Dove 
of  bis  Majesty's  14th,  and  Captain  Yates  of  the  City  of  London  Indiaman. 


342  HISTORY   OF   BRITISH   INDIA. 


BOOK  I.  the  charge.  After  the  repulse  of  the  enemy,  the 
^^^^'  ^^  army  resumed  its  march,  and  drew  up  in  front  of  the 
1810.  lines  defending  Port  Louis,  preparatory  to  an  assault 
on  the  following  morning,  whilst  the  ships  of  war, 
which  had  now  come  round  to  the  harbour,  should 
cannonade  the  town  from  the  sea.  This  catastrophe 
was  prevented  by  the  offer  of  General  Decaen  to 
capitulate ;  and,  the  terms  of  his  surrender  being 
agreed  upon,  the  Isle  of  France  became  subject  to 
the  British  crown.  The  advanced  period  of  the 
season  rendering  it  unadvisable  to  protract  the  con- 
test, terms  more  favourable  than  were  merited,  al- 
though less  so  than  those  demanded,^  were  granted. 
The  troops  of  the  garrison  and  crews  of  the  ships  of 
war  were  to  be  conveyed  in  English  ships  to  Euro- 
pean France,  instead  of  becoming  prisoners  of  war ; 
taking  with  them  all  property  declared  to  be  private. 
The  ships  in  the  harbour,  with  all  stores  and  public 
property,  fell  to  the  captors.  The  inhabitants  were 
secured  in  the  continuance  of  their  religion,  laws, 
and  customs.*  Thus  instantaneously  disappeared  the 
fancied  strength  of  the  Isle  of  France  when  once 
the  vigour  of  British  India  emancipated  itself  from 
the  visionary  obstacles  which  the  selfish  fears  of  the 
British  Cabinet  had  opposed,  and  the  imperfect  in- 
formation of  the  Indian  Government  had  encouraged. 

*  Decaen  had  the  effrontery  to  demand  that  the  French  frigates,  with  all 
their  crews  and  appointments,  should  be  relinquished  for  the  conveyaote  of 
the  troops  to  France.  "  Que  pour  ce  transport  je  conserverai  les  quatre 
frigates  de  S.  M.  I'Empereur,  La  Manche,  La  Bellone,  L'Astr^e,  et  La 
Minerve,  ainsi  que  les  corvettes  La  Victoire  et  L'Entreprenante,  avec  leurs 
oflliciers  et  Equipages,  armements  et  munitions,  et  approvisionnement.*'  He 
must  have  expected  the  reply,  "  Altogether  inadmissible." — Calcutta  Go- 
vernment Gazette,  February  9,  IBll. 

'  Asiatic  Annual  Register,  xii.;  History,  p.  16  :  Calcutta  Government  Ga- 
zette, February  9th,  1811  :  London  Gazette  Extraordinary,February  IS,  1811. 


CONQUEST   OF   THE   DUTCH   SETTLEMENTS.  343 

The  very  effort  that  was  ultimately  made  evinced  booki. 
the  strength  of  the  misconception  that  had  invested . 


the  capture  of  the  Mauritius  with  such  unreal  danger;  isio- 
and  the  conquest,  although  creditable  to  the  spirit 
with  which  it  was  undertaken,  reflected  but  little 
honour  on  the  British  arms.  The  Isle  of  Bourbon 
was  restored  to  France  at  the  peace.  The  Isle  of 
France,  or  the  Mauritius,  as  it  was  originally  desig- 
nated, is  still  subject  to  Great  Britain. 

The  settlements  of  Holland  in  the  Eastern  Archi- 
pelago had  never,  even  after  their  enforced  submis- 
sion in  common  with  the  parent  country  to  France, 
afforded  to  any  great  extent  the  means  of  harassing 
the  trade  of  India.  French  privateers  only  occa- 
sionally haunted  the  roads  of  Batavia  or  cruized 
amongst  the  islands  of  the  Archipelago.  Still,  how- 
ever, they  constituted  a  rallying  point,  which  was 
likely  to  become  of  more  consideration  after  the  de- 
struction of  those  asylums  which  lay  more  in  the 
route  of  the  Indian  trade ;  and  it  was  incompatible 
with  the  interests  of  India  and  the  policy  of  England 
longer  to  permit  the  presence  of  an  enemy  in  any 
part  of  the  Eastern  hemisphere.  The  first  measures 
for  this  purpose  that  were  sanctioned  contemplated 
only  a  rigorous  blockade  of  Java  and  the  Spice 
islands ;  but  it  was  soon  found  that  the  instructions 
of  the  home  authorities,  issued  in  ignorance  both  of 
the  localities  of  the  islands  and  political  relations  of 
India  with  the  principalities  on  the  east  of  the  bay 
of  Bengal,  were  impracticable  and  mischievous. 
The  numerous  and  intricate  channels  among  the 
islands  of  the  Archipelago  could  be  effectually 
blocked  up  only  by  the  employment  of  the  whole  of 


344  HISTORY    OF   BRITISH   INDIA. 

BOOK  I.  the  naval  armament  in  the  Indian  seas ;  and  the  en- 
^"^'''  ^^'  forcement  of  laws  so  unintelligible  to  the  plain  sense 
1810.  of  the  Burmese  and  Malays  as  those  of  blockade, 
could  have  no  other  effect  than  that  of  irritating  and 
alarming  them,  and  interrupting  their  traffic  with 
our  own  settlements,  even  if  it  did  not  lead  to  a 
piratical  warfare  against  the  country  trade.  It  was 
judged,  therefore,  by  Lord  Minto  and  Admiral 
Drury  to  be  the  more  safe  as  well  as  more  honour- 
able plan  to  adopt  a  decided  course,  and,  instead  of 
confining  their  attempts  to  an  unavailing  blockade 
of  the  Dutch  islands,  attempt  their  annexation  to  the 
Crown  of  England.  No  great  difficulty  in  accom- 
plishing this  object  was  anticipated;  as,  although 
reinforcements  had  arrived  at  Java  from  Europe,  and 
the  island  was  commanded  by  an  officer  in  the  inte- 
rest of  France,  yet  the  Moluccas  it  was  known  were 
indifferently  prepared  for  resistance,  and  among  the 
Dutch  colonists  at  Batavia  there  existed  a  strong 
party  who  preferred  open  conquest  by  Britain  to  their 
insidious  subjugation  by  the  Emperor  of  France. 

In  conformity  to  these  views,  an  expedition  on 
a  small  scale  was  fitted  out  from  Madras  against 
the  Molucca  islands,  consisting  of  his  Majesty's 
ships  Dover,  Cornwallis,  and  Samarang,  having  on 
board  part  of  the  Madras  European  regiment  and  a 
small  body  of  artillery:  the  troops  were  commanded 
by  Captain  Court,  the  squadron  by  Captain  Tucker 
of  the  Dover.  They  left  Madras  on  the  9th  October, 
1809,  and  by  the  middle  of  the  following  February 
arrived  off  the  island  of  Amboyna,  the  most  consider- 
able of  the  Dutch  Sj)ice  islands  and  seat  of  govern- 
ment.    Tlie  vessels  anchored  off  the  town,  situated 


REDUCTION   OF  AMBOYNA.  346 

at  the  bottom  of  a  small  bay,  beneath  a  line  of  book  i. 
low  hills,  and  defended  by  batteries  along  the  beach  ^"^^'^'' 
as  well  as  on  some  of  the  neighbouring  heights,  and  isio. 
by  Fort  Victoria,  mounting  a  number  of  heavy  ord- 
nance. As  the  elevations  on  the  left  and  in  the 
rear  of  the  town  commanded  its  defences,  it  was 
determined  to  carry  them ;  and,  whilst  the  squadron 
occupied  the  attention  of  the  enemy  by  a  vigorous 
cannonade,  the  troops,  aided  by  seamen  and  marines, 
were  landed  on  the  right  of  the  bay  unnoticed.  The 
party  consisted  of  about  four  hundred  men,  and  were 
divided  into  two  bodies;  one  led  by  Captain  Phillips, 
the  other  by  Captain  Court.  The  first  stormed  a 
battery  erected  upon  an  elevation  near  at  hand,  the 
hill  of  Wanitu,  and  carried  it  after  a  resolute  resist- 
ance, in  which  the  Dutch  officer  commanding  the 
post  was  killed.  Captain  Court's  party  had  to  make 
a  circuitous  detour  to  the  south  of  the  town,  and 
were  further  delayed  by  the  rugged  surface  of  the 
country.  By  sunset  they  reached  their  destination, 
a  height  above  Fort  Victoria,  surmounted  by  a  re- 
doubt, which  was  abandoned  as  they  entered  it  from 
the  rear.  During  these  operations  the  ships  had 
kept  up  a  brisk  cannonade  on  the  sea-face  of  the 
town,  and  had  been  exposed  to  a  cross-fire  from 
the  batteries  in  front,  or  on  either  side  of  it,  from 
which  the  evening  land-breeze  enabled  them  to 
draw  off.  On  the  following  morning,  the  batteries 
in  the  possession  of  the  British  opened  on  the  town 
and  fort,  and  soon  silenced  their  fire.  A  summons 
to  surrender  was  thereupon  sent  to  the  Dutch  go- 
vernor, and  was  promptly  obeyed.  A  capitulation 
was  entered  into,  by  which  the  garrison,  composed 


346  HISTORY  OF   BRITISH   INDIA. 

BOOK  I.  of  more  than  thirteen  hundred  Europeans  and  Ma- 
^^^'  ^^  lajrs,  laid  down  their  arms  to  a  third  of  their  number. 
1810.  The  Dutch  troops  were  sent  to  Java,  where  the 
commandant  was  tried  and  shot  by  order  of  General 
Daendels.  The  Malays  were  taken  into  the  British 
service,  and  were  advantageously  employed  in  some 
of  the  succeeding  operations.  Ambojma,  once  the 
scene  of  British  disgrace  and  suffering,  acknow- 
ledged their  authority  during  the  remainder  of  the 
war.* 

During  the  winter  and  spring  months  succeeding 
the  conquest  of  Amboyna,  Captain  Tucker  reduced 
the  smaller  islands  in  its  vicinity.  In  the  com- 
mencement of  the  year,  the  Caroline  and  Piedmont- 
aise  frigates,  and  Baracouta  brig,  under  the  com- 
mand of  Captain  Cole  of  the  Caroline,  with  addi- 
tional details  of  the  Madras  European  regiment, 
commanded  by  Captain  Nixon,  were  dispatched  to 
reinforce  the  troops  at  Ambojma,  and  provide  for 
its  security.  Captain  Cole  was  authorised,  if  he 
saw  a  reasonable  prospect  of  success,  to  make  a  de- 
scent upon  the  Bandas,  a  cluster  of  small  volcanic 
islands  south-east  of  Amboyna;  the  principal  of 
which  were  Great  Banda,  or  Banda  proper,  and 
Banda  Neira,  separated  by  a  narrow  strait.  The 
latter  was  selected  for  attack,  although  defended 
by  two  forts — Forts  Belgica  and  Nassau,  by  bat- 
teries mounting  one  hundred  and  twenty  pieces  of 
cannon,  and  by  a  force  of  above  seven  hundred  re- 
gular troops  besides  militia.  These  were  stationed 
towards  the  northern  extremity  of  the  island,  where 
a  landing  had  been  effected  in  1801,  when  the  place 

*  Asiatic  Annual  Register,  xii. ;  History,  p.  21. 


CAPTURE  OP  BANDA  AND  TERNATE.  347 

was  taken  by  Admiral  Rainier,  and  where  it  was  book  i. 
expected  the  disembarkation  would  be  repeated ;  ^^^^'  ^ 
but  Captain  Cole  landed,  with  a  party  of  two  hun-  isio. 
dred  seamen  and  soldiers,  on  the  eastern  side  during 
the  night,  in  a  heavy  squall  of  wind  and  rain,  which 
effectually  concealed  his  movements.  A  battery 
close  to  the  landing-place  was  surprised,  and  its  de- 
fenders made  prisoners,  without  firing  a  shot ;  and,  a 
guide  having  been  procured.  Captain  Cole  directed 
his  march  to  Fort  Belgica,  about  half  a  mile  distant. 
The  men  advanced  in  profound  silence,  reached  the 
foot  of  the  ramparts  unperceived,  applied  their 
scaling-ladders,  and  cleared  the  wall.  The  greater 
part  of  the  garrison  had  been  drawn  oflT  to  strengthen 
the  main  body  of  the  troops  of  the  island,  and  but 
few  men  with  the  Governor  had  been  left  in  the 
fortress.  These,  after  a  feeble  resistance,  endea- 
voured to  escape  by  the  gate,  but  they  were  met  by 
a  party  of  sailors ;  and,  in  the  conflict  which  ensued, 
the  Governor  and  several  of  his  men  were  killed. 
When  the  day  dawned,  the  British  flag  waved  over 
Fort  Belgica,  which  completely  commanded  the 
town  and  its  defences.  Upon  the  threat  of  Captain 
Cole  to  lay  the  former  in  ashes,  the  officer  who  was 
second  in  command  agreed  to  surrender  the  island. 
A  valuable  booty  rewarded  the  intrepidity  and  con- 
duct which  had  so  brilliantly  achieved  a  valuable 
acquisition  without  suffering  any  loss. 

At  the  same  time  Temate  was  taken  by  Captain 
Tucker  with  a  detachment  of  Europeans,  the  seamen 
and  marines  of  the  Dover,  and  some  of  the  newly 
enlisted  Amboyna  corps.  Captain  Tucker  arrived  off 
the  island  on  the  25th  August ;  but  light  and  bafi&ing 


348  HISTORY   OF   BRITISH   INDIA. 

BOOK  I.  winds  kept  him  off  the  shore,  and  a  landing  was  not 
'^^^^'  ^^  practicable  before  the  28th.     A  hundred  and  seventy 


1810.  men  were  landed  in  the  night  with  intent  to  surprise 
the  forts  and  batteries  which  guarded  the  bay.  The 
difficulties  of  the  approach  frustrated  the  scheme, 
and  the  men  were  re-embarked.  Early  in  the  morn- 
ing they  were  again  put  on  shore ;  and,  whilst  the 
frigate  engrossed  the  attention  of  the  enemy,  they 
proceeded  unobserved  to  an  eminence  supposed  to 
command  the  fort  of  Kayomaira,  the  principal  Dutch 
post.  They  arrived  on  the  hill  at  noon,  but  to  their 
great  vexation  they  found  that  the  fort  was  screened 
from  their  view  by  an  intervening  forest.  They 
then  endeavoured  to  proceed  by  an  inland  route, 
but,  after  incessant  exertion  throughout  the  day,  it 
was  found  impossible  to  disencumber  the  path  of 
the  immense  trees  which  had  been  cut  down  and 
piled  across  it.  Turning  to  the  right,  they  followed 
the  course  of  a  rivulet  which  led  to  the  beach,  and 
brought  them  about  ten  o'clock  within  eight  hun- 
dred yards  of  the  fort  before  they  were  discovered. 
Disregarding  a  smart  fire  of  grape  and  musketry, 
they  rushed  forward,  cscaladcd  the  walls,  and  carried 
the  fort.  On  the  following  morning  the  combined 
operations  of  the  detachment  and  frigate  overpower- 
ed the  other  defences  of  the  bay,  and  by  the  even- 
ing the  town  and  island  were  surrendered.  Few 
casualties  impaired  the  exultation  of  the  victors. 
Their  conquest  completed  the  reduction  of  the  Mo- 
luccas, and  Java  with  its  dependencies  alone  re- 
mained in  the  possession  of  the  Dutch.  * 

'  Asiatic  AduuoI  Register,  xii. ;  History,  27;  Chronicle,  80;  Official 
Dispatches. 


DESIGNS   ON  JAVA.  349 

Prior  to  the  departure  of  Lord  Minto  for  Madras    book  t. 


CHAP.  VI. 


the  practicability  of  the  subjugation  of  Java  had 
been  brought  under  his  consideration  by  Mr.  Raffles,  isii. 
originally  a  member  of  the  Penang  Government, 
but  who  had  attracted  the  notice  of  the  Governor- 
General  by  his  acquaintance  with  the  languages  and 
political  circumstances  of  the  tribes  of  the  Archipe- 
lago, and  had  been  in  consequence  appointed  the 
Governor-General's  agent  at  Malacca.  After  Lord 
Minto's  return  to  Bengal,  the  subject  was  resumed : 
Mr.  Raffles  came  round  to  Calcutta  for  the  sake  of 
its  more  conmiodious  investigation,  and  his  state- 
ments so  entirely  satisfied  the  Governor-General  of 
the  feasibility  of  the  measure,  that  he  determined 
to  undertake  it  upon  his  own  responsibility.  Its 
execution  was,  however,  deferred  until  the  result  of 
the  expedition  against  the  French  islands  should  be 
known ;  and  in  the  interval  the  design  received  the 
prospective  sanction  of  the  authorities  in  England. 
No  time  was  lost  in  preparing  for  the  expedition. 
The  King's  regiments,  which  had  returned  to  Ma- 
dras^ from  the  Mauritius,  were  immediately  re- 
embarked,  with  the  addition  of  the  78th  regiment 
of  foot  and  a  portion  of  the  22nd  dragoons ;  whilst 
in  Bengal  his  Majesty's  59th,  four  battalions  of 
Sipahi  volunteers,  the  20th,  or  marine  regiment,  de- 
tails of  pioneers,  and  artillery,  horse  and  foot,  with 
the  Governor-General's  body-guard,  were  assembled 
under  the  command  of  Colonel  Wood.  The  com- 
mand of  the  whole  was  vested  in  Sir  Samuel  Auch- 
muty,  the  Commander-in-chief  at  Madras.  The 
Bengal  troops  sailed  early  in  March,  and  reached 

1  The  I4th,  60th,  and  80th :  the  Madras  pioneers  were  also  re-embarked. 


350  HISTORY   OF   BRITISH   INDIA. 

BOOK  I.  the  appointed  rendezvous  at  Malacca  by  the  end  of 
,^^^!^^^Z!L  April.  Lord  Minto  accompanied  them  in  the  Mo- 
1811.  deste  frigate,  in  the  capacity,  as  he  expressed  him- 
self, of  a  volunteer.  The  Madras  force  sailed  in 
two  divisions:  the  first,  under  Lieutenant-Colonel 
Gillespie,  on  the  18th  of  April ;  and  the  second, 
under  Lieutenant-Colonel  Gibbs,  on  the  29th.  At 
the  same  time  Sir  Samuel  Auchmuty  embarked  in 
the  Akbar  frigate,  and  Commodore  Broughton  com- 
manding the  fleet  sailed  in  the  Illustrious.  It  was 
fortunate  that  their  departure  had  not  been  de- 
layed, for  on  the  3rd  of  May  a  tremendous  hurri- 
cane set  in  at  Madras,  in  which  a  great  number  of 
vessels,  including  the  Dover  frigate,  were  driven 
ashore  and  lost.  The  fleet  had  reached  the  outer 
edge  of  the  vortex,  and  felt  but  little  of  the  vio- 
lence of  the  storm.  The  whole  of  the  expedition 
was  collected  at  Malacca  by  the  1st  of  June :  but 
this  was  much  later  than  had  been  intended,  the 
period  having  been  delayed  by  the  necessity  of 
awaiting  the  return  of  the  troops  and  transports 
from  the  Mauritius ;  and  it  now  became  a  question 
of  some  anxiety  whether  and  by  what  route  the 
fleet  could  proceed. 

The  setting-in  of  the  south-west  monsoon  ren- 
dered it  highly  inexpedient  to  attempt  the  usual 
navigation  through  the  Straits  of  Banca.  Besides 
the  danger  to  which  the  ships  might  be  exposed 
from  tempestuous  weather,  it  was  certain  that  the 
passage  would  be  tedious,  and  the  commencement 
of  military  operations  in  Java  could  not  take  place 
earlier  than  the  rainy  season  of  October  and  No- 
vember, when  the  climate  would  become  unhealthy. 


INTRICATE   NAVIGATION.  351 


and  the  troops  be  disabled  by  sickness.     The  same  book  i. 
objections  applied  to  the  track  round  the  north-east  ^ 


CHAP.  VI. 


of  Borneo;  and  there  remained  only  the  passage  isii. 
along  the  south-west  coast  of  that  island,  in  which 
the  fleet  would  be  sheltered  from  the  fiiry  of  the 
monsoon,  and  would  be  assisted  on  their  way  by 
the  breezes  from  the  land.  This  route  was  accord- 
ingly strongly  recommended  by  Mr.  Raffles,  upon 
the  authority  of  Captain  Greigh,  of  the  Minto  brig, 
by  whom  it  had  been  surveyed.  It  was  as  strongly 
objected  to  by  the  chief  naval  authorities,  who  pro- 
nounced it  to  be  impracticable;  but  Lord  Minto, 
confiding  in  the  information  of  Mr.  Raffles,  decided 
the  controversy  in  favour  of  the  inner  passage,  and 
led  the  way  in  the  Modeste.  The  difficulties  were 
easily  surmounted  under  Mr.  Greigh's  skilful  pilot- 
age. In  six  weeks  the  fleet  cleared  the  intricate 
channels,  through  which  it  had  passed  without  a 
single  accident,  crossed  the  sea  from  the  point  of 
Sambas,  and  anchored  on  the  2nd  of  August  off  the 
north  coast  of  Java.  Had  not  the  presence  of  the 
Governor-General  decided  the  question,  we  have  his 
own  testimony  that  the  enterprise  must  have  been 
suspended  until  the  following  year.* 

The  island  of  Java  had  for  some  time  been  al- 
most lost  sight  of  amid  the  convulsive  revolutions 
which  had  shaken  the  parent  country.  The  last  of 
these  pretended  to  extinguish  the  national  integrity 
of  Holland,  and  reduce  it  to  an  integral  department 

^  Parliamentary  Debates^  10th  January,  1812 ;  Thanks  to  the  army  and 
nayy,  and  to  Lord  Minto.  Life  of  Sir  Thomas  S.  Raffles,  p.  90.  Lord 
Minto  remarks  in  a  letter  to  the  Court,  '*  The  attempt  must  have  been 
abandoned  for  the  present  year  if  I  had  yielded  to  the  predicted  dillicultiei 
of  the  passage/* 


tmmm 


352  HI8T0RY   OF   BRITISH   INDIA. 


BOOK  I.  of  France.  Such  a  degradation  could  not  fail  to 
°"^^'^  excite  deep  dissatisfaction  both  at  Lome  and  abroad ; 
1811.  and  the  inhabitants  of  the  Dutch  colonies,  more 
removed  from  the  influence  of  the  French  Govern- 
ment than  their  countrymen  in  Europe,  were  in  ge- 
neral more  abhorrent  of  the  alteration.  Apprised 
of  the  prevalence  of  these  feelings,  and  of  the 
weakness  of  the  administration  of  Java,  Sir  Edward 
Pellew  had,  in  1807,  urgently  pressed  Sir  George 
Barlow  to  sanction  an  expedition  against  the  island ; 
for  the  reduction  of  which  he  required  no  more 
than  a  thousand  Europeans,  and  as  many  native 
troops,  in  addition  to  the  resources  of  the  vessels 
under  his  own  command.  The  economical  policy 
of  the  Bengal  Government  was,  however,  averse  to 
any  undertaking  which  involved  expense;  and  the 
disinclination  was  fortified  by  the  prohibitory  orders 
of  the  Court  of  Directors  against  embarking  in  en- 
terprises which  possibly  they  regarded  as  affecting 
the  interests  of  the  nation  more  immediately  than 
those  of  the  Company.  The  Admiral  was  per- 
mitted, however,  to  amuse  himself  with  a  simple 
demonstration.  Taking  on  board  five  hundred  men 
and  some  artillery  at  Madras,  Sir  E.  Pellew  sailed 
on  the  20th  of  October,  1807,  with  his  squadron,' 
for  Gresik,  a  harbour  on  the  east  coast  of  Java, 
where  it  was  known  that  several  Dutch  vessels  of 
war  were  laid  up.  He  arrived  off  Point  Parko  on 
the  5th  of  December,  and  pursued  his  course  with 
little  opposition  to  Gresik,  where  he  burnt  three 

'  The  squadron  consisted  of  the  CuUoden  and  Powerful  seventy-fours, 
Caroline  and  Fox  frigates,  and  Victoria,  Samarang,  Seaflower,  and  Jaseur 
sloops. 


JAVA   STRENGTHENED.  353 

line-of-battle  ships  and  an  Indiaman,  and  destroyed  book  i. 
the  fort  and  batteries.     By  a  convention  with  the  ^^^^'  ^^ 


Council  of  Surabaya  the  fleet  abstained  from  doing  asii. 
further  damage,  on  condition  of  being  furnished 
with  supplies,  which  were  accordingly  provided. 
The  facility  with  which  this  success  was  achieved 
demonstrated  the  feebleness  of  the  Dutch  force  in 
Java,  and  the  favourable  disposition  of  the  inha- 
bitants. 

The  impunity  with  which  the  demonstration  had 
been  followed,  awakened  the  attention  of  the 
French  Emperor  to  the  condition  of  Java ;  and  he 
immediately  ordered  arrangements  to  be  instituted, 
in  order  to  place  it  in  a  state  of  greater  security. 
Reinforcements  were  sent  out ;  and  General  Daen- 
dels,  an  officer  of  tried  activity  and  resolution,  was 
appointed  governor.  Unchecked  by  any  respect 
for  private  rights,  and  unscrupulous  in  the  means 
by  which  his  ends  were  attained.  General  Daendels 
studied  only  how  to  improve  the  military  attitude 
of  the  island,  and  prepare  it  for  a  contest  of  which 
he  anticipated  the  approach.  Every  consideration 
gave  way  to  this  design,  and  the  inhabitants  were 
compelled  to  submit  to  enormous  exactions,  in  order 
to  raise  funds  by  which  the  army  might  be  reor- 
ganised and  recruited,  the  existing  fortresses  re- 
paired, new  and  formidable  works  erected  in  the 
vicinity  of  the  capital,  and  ample  provision  made 
for  a  vigorous  defence  against  future  invasion.  He 
was  not,  however,  allowed  to  test  the  efficiency  of 
his  foresight :  on  the  eve  of  the  arrival  of  the  expe- 
dition he  had  been  recalled  to  France,  and  was 
succeeded  by  General  JTansens,  who  had  been  go- 
VOL.  I.  2  a 


354  HISTORY  OP  BRITISH   im>IA. 

BOOK  I.  vemor  of  the  Cape  of  Good  Hope  when  it  was 
^'^^'  ^''  taken  by  the  English,  and  had  recently  arrived  at 
1811.  Batavia  with  a  reinforcement  of  several  frigates 
and  a  body  of  one  thousand  European  troops.*  The 
whole  of  the  troops  on  the  island  were  estimated  at 
seventeen  thousand  men,  natives  and  Europeans,  of 
whom  thirteen  thousand  were  concentrated  in  the 
lines  of  Comelis,  a  position  strong  both  by  nature 
and  art,  about  eight  miles  from  Batavia. 

The  fleet,  the  command  of  which  had  been  as- 
sumed by  Rear-Admiral  Stopford,  in  the  Scipio, 
and  which  with  transports  and  brigs  mustered  above 
ninety  sail,  having  on  board  about  twelve  thou- 
sand troops,  European  and  Indian,  in  nearly  equal 
proportions,  anchored  in  the  bay  of  Batavia  on  the 
4th  of  August.  A  landing  was  immediately  ef- 
fected at  Chilingyi,  a  village  ten  miles  east  of 
Batavia.  No  opposition  was  met  with,  disem- 
barkation at  this  point  not  having  been  anticipated. 
The  army  was  moved  forwards  two  miles,  in  two 
divisions;  one  on  the  road  to  Comelis,  the  other 
fronting  that  to  Batavia.  No  effort  of  any  import- 
ance was  made  to  disturb  them ;  and,  the  horses  and 
guns  having  been  landed  on  the  6th,  a  general  ad- 
vance was  ordered  towards  the  capital.  On  the 
night  of  the  7th,  the  van,  commanded  by  Colonel 
Gillespie,  crossed  the  Anjole  river  by  a  bridge  of 

*  The  removal  of  Daendels  was  a  source  of  great  mortification  to  him, 
and  he  was  urgent  with  his  successor  to  abstain  from  the  assumption  of 
authority  until  after  the  expedition  should  have  arrived,  and  been,  as  he 
confidently  asserted,  defeated.  Although  it  is  possible  that  his  military 
talents  might  have  enhanced  the  difficulty  of  the  conquest,  and  delayed  its 
accomplishment,  yet  the  number  and  equipment  of  the  invading  force,  and 
the  resources  at  the  command  of  the  Government  of  India,  ensured  ultimate 
success. 


BATAVIA   OCCUPIED.  355 


boats,  and  by  dawn  hutted  near  the  suburbs.     In  book  i. 
the  course  of  the  day  a  small  detachment  was  sent . 


CHAP.  VI. 


into  the  city ;  by  whose  presence  the  work  of  plun-  laii. 
der  commenced  by  the  Malays  and  Javanese  was 
arrested,  and  large  stores  of  colonial  goods  were 
saved  from  the  flames.  Many  of  the  principal  in- 
habitants had  been  compelled  by  General  Jansens 
to  quit  Batavia;  but  those  who  remained,  readily 
submitted.  In  the  evening,  a  large  part  of  the  ad- 
vance was  quartered  in  the  town.  During  the 
night  an  attempt  at  surprise  was  made  by  the 
enemy ;  but,  finding  the  place  occupied  in  greater 
force  than  they  expected,  they  speedily  retired. 

On  the  morning  of  the  10th  of  August,  the  ad- 
vanced division  marched  out  of  Batavia  towards  the 
cantonments  of  Weltevreeden,  which  they  reached 
by  daybreak.  The  cantonments  were  abandoned; 
but  a  division  of  the  Dutch  army,  under  General 
Jumel,  the  second  in  command,  had  taken  up  a 
strong  position  about  a  mile  from  Weltevreeden,  on 
the  road  to  Comelis.  Their  right  was  protected 
by  a  canal  called,  the  Slokan:  their  left  was  ex- 
posed ;  but  the  approach  both  in  front  and  on  the 
flank  was  embarrassed  by  pepper  plantations  and 
marshy  ground,  as  well  as  defended  by  an  abatis, 
with  which  the  enemy  had  blocked  up  the  road. 
From  behind  this  entrenchment  they  opened  a  fire 
of  four  horse-artillery  guns  with  grape ;  whilst  the 
infantry,  posted  in  two  villages,  kept  up  a  brisk 
fire  of  musketry  on  the  advancing  columns.  The 
guns  were  answered  with  effect  by  those  of  the 
British  artillery,  and  the  musketry  was  replied  to 

by  the  skirmishers,  whilst  an  attempt  was  made  to 

2Aa 


356  HISTORY   OF   BRITISfl   INDIA. 

BOOK  I.  turn  the  enemy's  left  flank.  After  some  delay, 
.!!HI!l  arising  from  the  nature  of  the  ground,  the  attempt 
1811.  succeeded.  The  villages  were  set  in  flames,  and 
the  British  troops  rushed  forward  to  the  charge. 
The  enemy  broke,  and  were  pursued  with  vigour 
until  they  took  shelter  under  the  guns  of  Cornells.^ 
The  main  body  of  the  army  came  up  towards  the 
close  of  the  engagement,  and  took  post  at  Welte- 
vreeden ;  having  secured  a  free  communication 
with  the  town  and  shipping,  a  healthy  and  commo- 
dious station  for  the  troops,  and  the  command  of 
the  resources  of  the  country.  Three  hundred  guns 
were  found  in  the  arsenal  at  Weltevreeden,  besides 
great  quantities  of  ammunition  and  military  stores. 

Preparations  were  immediately  made  for  an  at- 
tack upon  Comelis,  which  General  Jansens  ex- 
pected to  be  able  to  maintain  against  all  assaults 
until  the  rainy  season  should  set  in,  and  sickness 
should  compel  the  retreat  of  the  invaders.  His 
post  was  an  entrenched  camp  between  two  rivers, 
the  Slokan  on  the  east,  and  the  river  of  Batavia  on 
the  west.  The  latter  was  unfordable  and  the  banks 
were  steep  and  overrun  with  jungle :  the  former  was 
more  practicable,  but  it  was  defended  by  powerful 
batteries  and  redoubts;  one  of  which  was  on  the 
near  side  of  the  river,  for  the  protection  of  the  only 
bridge  that  had  been  left  standing.  The  space  be- 
tween the  rivers  in  front,  above  six  hundred  yards, 
was  guarded  by  strong  entrenchments  and  redoubts, 
and  was  difficult  of  access  from  the  ruggedness  of 

*  Their  loss  was  severe ;  that  of  tlie  British  was  inconsiderable :  but 
seyeral  officers  were  wounded  ;  uf  whom  Lieutenant  Duffield  of  the  horse 
artillery  died  of  his  wounds.  Lieutenant  Munro  of  his  Mi^esty's  78th 
was  killed. 


OPERATIONS   AGAINST   CORNELIS.  357 

the  ground.     A  like  space  in  the  rear  of  the  works  book  i. 
was  still  more  strongly  fortified.     The  whole  cir-  ^"^'''  ^' 
cumference  of  the  lines  extended  nearly  five  miles,      isii. 
and  was  defended  by  two  hundred  and  eighty  pieces 
of  cannon. 

Although  the  necessity  of  an  ultimate  assault 
was  anticipated  by  the  Commander-in-chief,  yet  he 
thought  it  expedient  to  try  the  effect  of  regular  ap- 
proaches ;  and  a  battering  train  having  been 'landed, 
and  batteries  constructed,  the  army  broke  ground 
on  the  night  of  the  20th  of  August.  It  was  not  till 
the  morning  of  the  24th  that  the  batteries  could  be 
opened  with  effect,  and  during  the  interval  a  furious 
cannonade  was  kept  upon  the  works  by  the  enemy, 
by  which  some  loss  was  sustained.  On  the  24th 
the  guns  opened  upon  the  enemy's  lines,  and,  not- 
withstanding the  greater  number  of  their  ordnance, 
with  much  more  decided  effect.  The  principal  re- 
doubt was  repeatedly  silenced,  and  many  of  the 
guns  in  their  batteries  were  dismounted.  On  the 
25th  the  cannonade  was  resumed,  and  returned 
with  spirit:  but  although  the  enemy  suffered  se- 
verely both  in  men  and  guns,  yet  it  was  evident 
that  no  practicable  breach  could  be  made  until  the 
batteries  were  considerably  advanced ;  an  operation 
involving  delay,  and  demanding  from  the  seamen 
and  troops  an  amount  of  exertion  to  which,  from 
the  heat  of  the  weather  and  the  excessive  labour 
they  would  have  to  undergo,  they  were  unequal. 
In  the  mean  time  the  enemy  were  daily  adding  to 
their  defences,  and  using  every  means  to  render 
them  impregnable.  The  period  therefore  had  ar- 
rived at  which  the  place  must  be  carried  by  storm. 


368  msTORY  OF  British  india. 

BOOK  I.  or  a  protracted  and  exhausting  course  of  warfare 

^^^^'  ^'*  would  become  inevitable. 
1811,  The  comparative  facility  of  an  approach  on  the 
enemy's  right  by  the  Slokan,  and  the  possibility  of 
carrying  by  a  coup  de  main  both  the  redoubt  which 
was  on  this  side  of  the  river,  and  the  bridge  by 
which  the  river  was  crossed,  recommended  the  prin- 
cipal attack  to  be  made  in  that  direction.  The 
assault  was  intrusted  to  Colonel  Gillespie,  having 
under  his  orders  the  infantry  of  the  advance,  and  a 
part  of  the  right  brigade  of  the  line  commanded  by 
Colonel  Gibbs.  At  the  same  time  two  other  attacks 
were  to  be  made  upon  the  enemy's  lines ;  one,  under 
Lieutenant-Colonel  Macleod,  against  the  principal 
redoubt  in  the  angle  of  the  enemy's  front  and  left ; 
and  the  other,  under  Major  Yule,  upon  the  bridge 
leading  to  the  rear :  whilst  the  main  body  of  the 
army  threatened  the  front.^ 

Colonel  Gillespie's  column  marched  soon  after 
midnight  on  the  26th.  The  troops  had  to  make  a 
considerable  detour  through  a  difficult  country,  in- 
tersected by  ravines,  and  parcelled  out  in  pepper 
plantations  and  betel  gardens.  The  darkness  of  the 
night  aggravated  the  intricacy  of  the  path;  and  when, 
towards  morning,  the  head  of  the  column  had  ap- 

^  The  troops  under  Colonel  Gillespie  were  the  two  flank  battalions,  con- 
sisting of  the  grenadiers  of  the  78th  regiment,  and  of  the  5th  and  6th  natiye 
volunteer  battalions,  the  light  companies  of  the  14th,  59th,  69th,  78th,  and 
of  the  light  infantry  battalion  and  4th  native  volunteers,  the  rifle  companies 
of  the  14th,  59th,  and  78th,  five  companies  of  the  89th,  dismounted  dragoons 
and  body-guard,  a  body  of  marines,  and  Madras  pioneers.  Colonel  Gibbs* 
column  was  formed  of  the  grenadiers  of  the  14th,  59th,  and  69th,  first  batta- 
lion of  the  59th,  and  4th  and  light  infantry  volunteer  battalions.  Colonel 
Macleod  led  the  69th  regiment.  Major  Yule  had  under  his  orders  the  gre- 
nadiers of  the  20th  native  infantry,  two  companies  of  his  Miyesty's  69th,  the 
flank  battalion  of  the  reserve,  with  a  detachment  of  the  Madras  pioneers  and 
artillery,  and  a  troop  of  the  22nd  dragoons. 


FOBT   CORNELIS   STORMED.  859 

preached  near  to  the  works,  information  was  brought  book  i. 
to  Colonel  Gillespie  that  the  rear  division  had  fallen  .!!l^lll!l 


behind.  A  short  halt  was  ordered ;  but  as  it  was  I8II. 
impossible  to  remain  unobserved  after  daybreak,  and 
a  retreat  in  the  presence  of  the  enemy  might  hazard 
the  success  of  the  expedition,  Colonel  Gillespie  de- 
termined to  make  the  assault  at  once,  trusting  that 
the  strayed  column  would  be  guided  aright  by  the 
firing,  and  would  be  in  time  to  support  him  before 
he  was  seriously  engaged. 

The  morning  dawn  showed  the  enemy's  videttes 
at  hand,  and  the  column  was  challenged.  The  men, 
as  commanded,  reserving  their  fire,  rushed  forward 
with  the  bayonet ;  and  the  picquets  were  destroyed, 
and  the  advanced  redoubt  was  carried  almost  as  soon 
as  the  alarm  was  given.  At  the  same  moment  the 
grenadiers  of  the  78th,  under  a  heavy  fire  from  the 
enemy,  carried  the  bridge  over  the  Slokan,  a  slight 
structure  which  might  with  ease  have  been  de- 
molished. As  soon  as  the  passage  was  effected, 
Colonel  Gillespie,  turning  to  the  left,  stormed  a 
second  redoubt,  which  was  within  the  lines ;  and  not- 
withstanding the  superior  numbers  of  the  enemy,  and 
a  spirited  resistance,  which  caused  the  loss  of  many 
brave  officers  and  men,  carried  it  at  the  point  of  the 
bayonet.  Each  of  these  redoubts  mounted  twenty 
eighteen  pounders,  besides  several  twenty-four  and 
thirty-two  pounders. 

The  division  of  Colonel  Gibbs  having,  as  was  anti- 
cipated, been  guided  to  the  scene  of  action  by  the 
cannonade,  had  hastened  on  to  take  their  share  in 
the  conflict;  and,  having  crossed  the  Slokan,  the 
grenadiers  of  the  14th,  59th,  and  69th  regiments 


360  HISTORY   OF   BRITISH   INDIA. 

BOOK  h  moved  against  a  redoubt  on  the  right,  which  they 
^'^'^'  ^  stormed,  and  carried  with  the  bayonet  in  the  most 
1811.  gallant  manner.  They  had  scarcely  gained  possession 
when  the  powder  magazine^  attached  to  it  exploded 
with  a  stunning  sound,  and  scattered  piecemeal  the 
mutilated  limbs  of  both  defenders  and  assailants. 
This  awful  occurrence  was  followed  by  a  momentary 
pause ;  but  the  batteries  of  the  enemy  soon  opened 
again  upon  the  attacking  column.  The  assailants 
had,  however,  now  gained  a  firm  footing  within  the 
lines,  and  proceeded  with  renewed  spirit  to  storm 
the  remaining  redoubts  to  their  right  and  left. 

In  the  mean  time  an  active  cannonade  had  been 
maintained  on  the  front,  where  the  enemy  had  erro- 
neously expected  the  main  attack  would  have  been 
made,  and  under  this  persuasion  had  refrained  from 
reinforcing  their  troops  on  the  right.  The  column 
directed  to  the  rear  was  unable  to  cross  the  river, 
as  the  bridge  was  burnt,  and  was  obliged  to  remain 
contented  with  firing  upon  the  enemy  from  the  op- 
posite bank.  The  detachment  under  Lieutenant- 
Colonel  Macleod  carried  the  redoubt  against  which 
they  had  been  sent,  but,  unfortunately,  with  the 
loss  of  their  commander.  The  success  of  the  assault 
on  the  right,  however,  soon  opened  a  free  access  to 
the  entrenchment,  and  the  British  entered  Comelis 
in  every  direction. 

When  most  of  the  redoubts  had  been  stormed, 
and  daylight  rendered  objects  distinct,  the  enemy's 
reserve,  composed  of  several  battalions,  with  twenty 

^  It  was  said  to  have  been  purposely  fired  by  some  of  the  enemy's  officers, 
who  perished  in  the  explosion.  No  advantage  accrued  to  the  enemy  from 
the  catastrophe. 


CAPTURE   OF   THE   FORT.  361 

pieces  of  horse  artillery,  besides  heavy  guns,  and  a  book  l 
large  body  of  cavalry,  was  seen  drawn  up  on  the 


plain  in  front  of  the  barracks  and  lesser  fort  of  Cor-  isii. 
nelis,  the  guns  of  which  commanded  the  approach. 
The  duty  of  dispersing  these  was  consigned  to  the 
59th,  and  was  gallantly  effected  by  that  corps,  who 
not  only  drove  them  from  their  position,  but  cap- 
tured the  fort.  Tlie  dragoons  and  horse  artillery 
then  coming  up.  Colonel  Gillespie  placed  himself  at 
their  head,  and  pursued  the  fugitives  for  ten  miles, 
cutting  off  great  numbers,  and  completing  the  dis- 
organization of  their  army.  Those  who  sought  refuge 
in  the  thickets  were  killed  or  dispersed  by  the  14th 
regiment  and  detachments  of  the  Bengal  volunteers. 
The  efforts  of  their  oflScers  to  keep  them  together  as 
far  as  Beutenzorg,  where  entrenchments  had  been 
thrown  up,  and  a  second  stand  was  to  have  been 
made,  entirely  failed,  and  the  fate  of  Java  was  de- 
cided. Six  thousand  prisoners  were  taken,  mostly 
European  troops,  including  a  regiment  of  voltigeurs 
recently  arrived  from  France.  The  loss  of  the 
enemy  in  killed  and  wounded  was  likewise  very 
considerable.  The  victory  was  not  won  without  loss 
also  to  the  assailants.  In  the  previous  operations, 
and  in  the  assault  of  Comelis,  the  killed  and  wounded 
amounted  to  nearly  nine  hundred,  of  whom  eighty- 
five  were  officers.^ 

Although  the  dispositions  of  the  Commander-in- 
chief  rendered  the  fall  of  Comelis  little  doubtful, 

'  The  officers  who  were  lulled,  or  who  died  of  their  wounds,  were, 
Lieutenant-Colonel  C.  Macleod,  his  Migesty's  60th,  and  Lieutenant- Colonel 
Campbell,  78th  :  Captains  Kennedy,  14th ;  Oliphant,  59th ;  and  Koss,  69th : 
Lieutenants  Hutchins,  22nd  dragoons ;  Waring,  Lloyd,  Litton,  and  Mac- 
pherson,  59th ;  Hipkins,  69th ;  Coghlan,  14th ;  Macdonald,  5th  battalion 
volunteers;  and  Murrall,  ditto  6th  :  and  Ensign  Wolfe  of  his  Majesty's  59th. 


862  HISTORY   OF   BRITISH   INDIA. 

BOOK  I.  yet  that  it  was  accomplished  so  quickly,  and  with  a 
CHAP.  VI.  1^^  which,  though  severe,  was  disproportionate  to 
1811.  the  strength  of  the  position  and  the  importance  of 
the  capture,  was  mainly  attributable  to  the  decision 
and  activity  of  Colonel  Gillespie.  Had  he  paused 
for  the  junction  of  the  rear  division,  had  he  delayed 
an  instant  to  attack  the  exterior  redoubt,  and  make 
good  his  passage  over  the  Slokan,  the  difficulties  of 
the  attempt  would  have  been  immeasurably  en- 
hanced, and  success  would  have  demanded  infinitely 
greater  sacrifices.  The  same  promptitude  and  cour- 
age  characterised  his  subsequent  movements.  The 
defeat  of  the  reserve  and  the  pursuit  of  the  flying 
foe ;  the  final  dispersion  of  the  enemy's  troops,  and 
the  impossibility  of  again  concentrating  a  force  of 
any  consideration,  were  mainly  attributable  to  his 
exertions.  That  the  troops  he  commanded  were 
worthy  of  their  leader  is  an  additional  proof  of  his 
military  merit. 

After  the  annihilation  of  his  army,  General  Jan- 
sens,  with  a  small  body  of  horse,  retired  to  the  east- 
ern districts  of  Java.  A  squadron  of  frigates,  with 
the  marines  and  a  Bengal  battalion  under  Colonel 
Wood,  was  immediately  dispatched  to  Cheribon,  and 
arrived  there  two  days  after  General  Jansens  had 
passed.  The  place  was  immediately  surrendered. 
Another  expedition  proceeded  to  Madura,  off  the 
north-eastern  extremity  of  Java,  and  occupied  that 
island.  On  the  5th  of  September  Sir  S.  Auchmuty 
proceeded  against  General  Jansens,  who  had  assem- 
bled a  force  consisting  chiefly  of  native  horse,  and 
taken  up  a  strong  and  fortified  position  at  Jatu, 
about  six  miles  from  Samarang.   The  vessels  arrived 


CAPITULATION   SIGNED.  363 

off  the  latter  port  on  the  12th,  and  the  troops  were  book  i. 
landed  on  the  following  day,  the  town  being  aban-  ^^^^^^^_^ 


doned.  On  the  16th  they  came  in  sight  of  the  ene-  isii. 
my,  about  eight  thousand  strong,  principally  natives, 
with  twenty  pieces  of  cannon,  drawn  up  on  some 
high  and  rugged  hills  forming  the  southern  boundary 
of  a  valley  across  which  lay  the  road.  The  troops 
with  Sir  S.  Auchmuty  were  not  above  one  thousand 
in  number,  consisting  of  the  14th  and  78th  regi- 
ments, with  the  grenadier  company  of  the  3rd  vo- 
lunteer native  battalion,  and  details  of  artillery  and 
pioneers,  with  six  field-pieces.  Having  established 
his  guns  on  the  heights  facing  the  enemy,  so  as 
to  keep  dovm  their  fire,  Sir  S.  Auchmuty  directed 
the  troops  to  cross  the  valley  and  ascend  the  hills 
opposite.  The  advance  was  made  with  the  greatest 
alacrity  and  firmness ;  the  valley  was  traversed  with 
little  loss ;  and,  as  soon  as  the  heights  were  as- 
cended, the  enemy  retreated  in  confusion.  As  they 
consisted  chiefly  of  cavalry,  they  easily  outstripped 
pursuit ;  but  on  learning  that  tbey  showed  an  in- 
clination to  rally  under  the  cannon  of  the  small 
fort  of  Onarang,  about  four  miles  from  the  field 
of  battle.  Sir  S.  Auchmuty  marched  thither  with- 
out halting,  again  put  them  to  flight,  and  occupied 
the  fort.  This  was  the  last  effort  made  by  Gene- 
ral Jansens.  Finding  that  no  dependence  could 
be  placed  on  the  only  troops  he  was  now  able  to 
collect,  he  proposed  immediately  after  the  action 
to  treat  for  a  capitulation.  A  cessation  of  arms 
for  twenty-four  hours  was  allowed  him  ;  and,  after 
some  hesitation  on  the  part  of  General  Jansens, 
a  treaty  was  signed.     By  this  it  was  stipulated  that 


364  HISTORY   OF   BRITISH   INDIA. 


BOOK  I.  Java  and  its  dependencies  should  be  surrendered  to 
.^^^Illll  Great  Britain ;  that  all  the  military  should  be  pri- 
1811.     soners  of  war ;  and  that  the  British  governor  should 
be  left  unfettered  in  regard  to  the  future  adminis- 
tration of  the  island,  the  guarantee  of  the  public 
debt,  and  the  liquidation  of  the  paper  money.* 

Thus,  as  Lord  Minto  observed,  an  empire, 
which  for  three  centuries  had  contributed  greatly 
to  the  power,  prosperity,  and  grandeur  of  one  of  the 
principal  and  most  respected  states  of  Europe,  had 
been  wrested  from  the  short  usurpation  of  France 
and  added  to  the  dominion  of  the  British  crown, 
and  converted  from  a  seat  of  hostile  machination 
and  commercial  competition  into  an  augmentation 
of  British  power  and  prosperity.  The  reduction  of 
Java  left  the  Eastern  seas  without  an  enemy,  and 
the  merchant-vessels  of  Great  Britain  and  of  British 
India  were  at  liberty  to  pursue  their  peaceful  and 
beneficent  course  without  dread  of  molestation  or 
fear  of  plunder.  The  value  of  the  conquest  was 
perhaps  inadequately  appreciated  in  England,  but 
the  acknowledgments  of  the  Prince  Regent  were 
conveyed  to  the  army  and  navy.*  Medals  were  be- 
stowed upon  the  King's  and  Company's  officers  who 
had  distinguished  themselves  in  the  expedition,  and 


^  General  Jansens  had  been  formerly  governor  of  the  Cape  of  Good 
Hope  when  it  was  taken  by  the  English.  Adverting  to  this  disaster,  the 
French  Emperor,  on  his  departure  for  the  government  of  Java,  significantly 
remarked,  *<  Souvenez-vous,  Monsieur,  qu*un  G^n^ral  Francois  ne  se  laisse 
pas  prendre  une  seconde  fois.*'  He  had  little  reason  to  look  for  much  fa- 
vourable consideration  on  his  return  to  France. 

'  In  the  debate  in  the  Commons  on  the  vote  of  thanks  to  Lord  Minto  and 
the  army  and  navy  for  the  reduction  of  the  Isles  of  France  and  Java,  She- 
ridan and  Whitbread  professed  to  doubt  if  the  acquisitions  were  worth  the 
cost  of  money  and  life  by  which  they  had  been  made.  These  doubts  were 
clearly  the  mere  effusions  of  party  spleen. 


BRITISH   AUTHORITY   ESTABUSHED.  365 

Lord  Minto  was  raised  to  the  dignity  of  Earl  of  book  i. 

Tk/r,      ,  CHAP.  VI, 

Minto.  


After  the  reduction  of  Java,  the  government  of  leii. 
the  island  vras  placed  in  the  hands  of  Mr.  Raffles, 
with  the  designation  of  Lieutenant-Governor  of 
Java  and  its  dependencies,  and  the  command  of  the 
troops  left  on  the  island  was  conferred  upon  Co- 
lonel Gillespie.  Some  time  elapsed  before  the  au- 
thority of  the  new  government  was  established. 
The  Dutch  colonists,  who  could  have  no  particular 
affection  for  the  French,  and  who  had  experienced 
the  overbearing  and  extortionary  spirit  of  that  mili- 
tary rule  which  was  modelled  upon  the  despotism 
to  which  France  was  subject,  were  for  the  most 
part  well  pleased  with  the  change ;  but  some  of  the 
native  chiefs,  deeming  the  season  propitious  for  the 
subversion  of  all  European  ascendancy,  manifested  a 
hostile  disposition  which  it  became  necessary  to  sup- 
press. Among  these  chiefs,  one  of  the  most  power- 
ful was  the  Sultan  of  Yodhyakarta,  who  declared 
open  war  against  the  British,  and  called  upon  his 
countrymen  to  join  him  for  their  expulsion.  Having 
in  vain  attempted  to  come  to  a  friendly  understand- 
ing with  the  Sultan,  Colonel  Gillespie  conducted  a 
force  against  his  capital,  and  carried  it  by  storm. 
The  Sultan  was  taken  prisoner  and  exiled  to  Pe- 
nang,  and  his  son  was  placed  on  the  throne.  The 
capture  of  Yodhyakarta,  a  place  of  great  extent  and 
some  strength,  defended  by  one  hundred  thousand 
troops,  who,  although  defective  in  arms  and  dis- 
cipline, were  not  wanting  in  intrepidity  and  fierce- 
ness, added  another  laurel  to  the  wreath  won  by 
British  valour,  and  intimidated  the  native  princes 


366  HISTORY   OF   BRITISH  INDIA. 

BOOK  I.  into  a  peaceable  submission  to  a  government  whose 
^^^^'  ^''  conciliatory  policy  they  had  subsequently  occasion  to 
1812.     compare  with  the  oppression  which  they  had  been 
accustomed  to  suffer  from  the  Dutch. 

Previously  to  the  contest  with  the  Sultan  of 
Yodhyakarta,  it  had  been  foimd  advisable  to  dispatch 
an  expedition  against  the  Sultan  of  Palembang,  a 
state  on  the  north-east  coast  of  Sumatra.  Shortly 
after  the  conquest  of  Java,  conmiissioners  had  been 
sent  to  the  Sultan  to  renew  the  engagements  in 
which  he  was  held  by  the  Dutch.  They  had  been 
obliged  to  return  without  effecting  their  object :  the 
Sultan  denied  that  any  such  engagements  had  ever 
existed,  and  asserted  that  the  Dutch  factory  had 
been  abandoned  before  the  reduction  of  Java.  To 
remove  living  evidence  of  the  falsehood  of  this  as- 
sertion, he  razed  the  Dutch  fort  and  factory,  and 
caused  the  members  of  the  factory  at  Palembang, 
now  become  the  subjects  of  the  British  Govern- 
ment of  Java,  to  be  murdered.  To  punish  this 
atrocity,  and  enforce  the  stipulation  which  had 
long  been  maintained  in  regard  to  the  trade  with 
Banca  especially,  a  force  was  sent  against  the 
Sultan  in  March,  1812,  commanded  by  Colonel  Gil- 
lespie. He  arrived  off  the  Palembang  river  on  the 
18th  of  April,  and  the  troops  ascended  the  river  in 
boats.  No  resistance  was  offered;  and,  upon  the 
approach  of  the  detachment  to  Palembang,  the 
Sultan  fled,  leaving  his  capital  and  principality  at 
the  disposal  of  the  victors.  Colonel  Gillespie  with 
a  small  party  landed  on  the  night  of  the  25th  of 
April ;  and,  being  joined  by  the  principal  part  of  his 
force  on  the  following  morning,  commenced  an  in- 


SULTAN   OF   PALEMBANG   DEPOSED.  367 

vestigation  into  the  character  and  behaviour  of  the  book  i. 
fugitive  prince.     The  process  seems  to  have  been  ^^^^'  ^' 


summary.  Upon  the  depositions  of  two  natives  I812. 
who  had  been  sent  to  Palembang  by  the  British 
Government  of  Java,  and  who  accused  the  Sultan 
of  the  murder  of  the  Dutch,  he  was  declared  to 
have  forfeited  his  sovereignty  by  various  acts  of 
rapine,  treachery,  and  barbarity,  contrary  to  the 
laws  of  nations  and  his  existing  engagements  with 
the  Dutch,  to  whose  right  the  English  Company 
had  succeeded  in  virtue  of  the  cession  of  Java  and 
its  dependencies.  A  proclamation  to  this  effect  in 
the  Malay  language  was  read.  At  the  same  time 
it  was  announced  that  the  Commander  of  the  forces 
had  selected  Pangerang  Adipati,  the  Sultanas  bro- 
ther, in  consideration  of  his  virtues,  and  the  love, 
esteem,  and  veneration  with  which  he  was  regarded 
by  the  people  of  the  country,  to  fill  the  vacant 
throne.  This  person  was  accordingly  declared  true 
and  lawful  Sultan  of  Palembang  and  its  depend- 
encies, under  the  title  of  Sultan  Ratu  Ahmed  Na- 
jam-ud-din.  The  first  use  made  of  his  power  by  the 
new  Sultan  was  to  enter  into  a  treaty  by  which  he 
ceded  the  island  of  Banca,  a  dependency  of  Palem- 
bang valuable  for  its  mines  of  tin,  in  absolute  and 
perpetual  sovereignty  and  possession  to  the  English. 
On  the  18th  of  May,  Colonel  Gillespie,  leaving  with 
the  prince  whom  he  had  crowned  a  hundred  men 
for  his  defence,  returned  to  Java,  taking  possession 
of  Banca  on  his  way.  The  measures  thus  adopted 
by  Mr.  Rafiles  were  approved  of  by  the  Governor  of 
Bengal.^ 

*  Most  of  the  particulare  ghen  in  the  text  are  derived  from  Thorn's 


368  HISTORY   OF   BRITISH   INDIA. 


BOOK  I.  Although  the  Court  of  Directors  had  sanctioned 
^^''  ^^  the  expedition  against  Java,  their  views  did  not  go 
1812.  beyond  the  expulsion  or  reduction  of  the  Dutch 
power,  the  destruction  of  their  fortifications,  the  dis- 
tribution of  their  arms  and  stores  to  the  natives,  and 
the  evacuation  of  the  island.  Lord  Minto,  however, 
was  not  prepared  to  expose  the  Dutch  colonists 
without  a  government  or  without  arms  to  the  vin- 
dictive passions  of  the  Javanese;*  to  consign  a  rich 
and  prosperous  island  to  an  indefinite  perpetuation 
of  the  elements  of  disorder  and  bloodshed;  or  to 
throw  away  the  advantages,  both  commercial  and 
political,  which  the  occupation  of  Java  ensured  to 
British  India  and  to  GreSt  Britain.  He  therefore 
recommended  to  the  Court  a  reconsideration  of  their 
orders ;  and,  upon  the  conquest  of  the  island,  com- 
mitted it  to  a  government  composed  partly  of  the 
civil  and  military  officers  of  the  Company,  and  partly 
of  respectable  colonists  well  affected  to  the  English. 
Under  their  combined  administration  Java  soon  came 
to  enjoy  an  unprecedented  amount  of  tranquillity  and 
prosperity.  The  country  was  divided  into  districts, 
each  of  which  was  placed  under  the  management  of 
a  European  Resident,  who  was  charged  with  the 
general  collection  of  the  revenue,  and  the  distri- 
bution of  justice  according  to  such  laws  as  were  in 
force,  and  which  were  unexceptionable  in  principle. 
The  infliction  of  torture  and  mutilation  was  at  once 
abolished ;  and  natives  were  admitted  to  juries,  from 


Conquest  of  Java.     Migor  Thorn  served  as  Deputy  Quarter-Master-General 
to  the  forces  in  Java. 

'  Letter  from  Lord  Minto  to  Mr.  RafiSes^  February,  1811 ;  Life  of  Raffles, 

p.  as. 


IMPROVEMENT   OF   JAVA.  369 


which  they  had  under  the  Dutch  regime  been  ex-  book  i. 
eluded.  The  farming  of  the  revenues  and  imposts  ^^^^]j_^ 
was  abandoned,  and  the  collections  were  made  di-  isis. 
rectly  by  the  officers  of  the  Government  according  to 
fixed  rates.  The  arbitrary  exaction  of  an  undefined 
proportion  of  the  crops  was  discontinued,  and  a  set- 
tlement of  a  specified  amount  for  a  given  period 
entered  into  with  the  occupants  of  the  land.  All 
forced  requisitions  of  labour  were  prohibited,  transit 
duties  were  abrogated,  and  the  duties  on  external 
trade  equalised.  It  were  foreign  to  the  scope  of 
this  work  to  dwell  longer  upon  the  improvements 
effected  in  Java  whilst  under  British  authority ;  but 
the  prevalence  of  undisturbed  internal  order  and 
peace,  concurrently  with  the  improving  resources  of 
the  state,  evidenced  a  material  advance  in  the  pro- 
ductive industry  of  the  people,  and  an  amelioration 
of  their  condition.*  , 

The  question  of  retaining  Java  as  a  colony  of  the 
Crown,  or  of  leaving  it  under  the  government  of 
the  East  India  Company,  had  been  left  undeter- 
mined by  the  British  Administration,  amid  the 
mighty  transactions  which  at  this  period  involved 
the  destinies  of  the  world.  One  of  their  results 
was  the  re-establishment  of  the  Netherlands  as  an 
independent  monarchy,  and  the  revival  of  those  re- 
lations of  amity  which  had  at  various  intervals 
united  Great  Britain  and  Holland.  In  the  spirit  of 
the  connexion  thus  re-established,  the  British  Go- 

'  The  revenues  of  Java  realised,  in  1805-6,  rupees  492,128.  General 
Daendels,  in  1809,  raised  them  to  800,000.  In  1814  they  amounted  to 
5,368,065.  For  this  and  other  facts,  see  '*  Substance  of  a  Minute  recorded 
by  Sir  Thomas  S.  Raffles,  with  Appendix  ;  printed  (not  published)  by  Black 
and  Ck>.^  London,  1814  :  also  his  Life,  and  History  of  Java. 

VOL.  I.  2    B 


370  raSTORY    OF   BRITISH   INDIA. 


BOOK  I.  vemment,  without  weighing  with  suflScient  delibe- 
^^^'^  ration  the  circumstances  which  the  altered  political 
1814.  condition  of  Europe  had  created,  and  with  a  dere- 
liction more  liberal  than  politic  of  its  own  interests, 
hastened  to  replace  the  Dutch  in  their  ancient 
Eastern  possessions ;  and  by  a  convention  with  the 
United  Netherlands,  dated  13th  of  August,  1814, 
engaged  to  restore  all  the  colonies,  with  exception 
of  the  Cape  of  Good  Hope  and  some  places  in  the 
West  Indies.  Java  was  consequently  among  the 
cessions.  The  more  pressing  calls  at  home  upon 
the  attention  of  the  Batavian  Government  delayed 
its  availing  itself  immediately  of  the  generosity  of 
its  ally ;  and  Java  did  not  reassume  the  character  of 
a  Dutch  colony  imtil  the  end  of  1816,  five  years 
after  it  had  been  conquered  by  the  armament  from 
Bengal.  Sir  T.  Raffles  was  spared  the  pain  of  re- 
signing his  power  to  the  Dutch  commissioners,  by 
the  appointment  of  Mr.  Fendall,  of  the  Bengal  ser- 
vice, to  the  government  of  Java  in  the  beginning  of 
the  same  year.^ 

^  Some  measures  of  the  administration  of  Mr.  Ra£9es  had  been  disap- 
proved of  by  the  Court  of  Directors,  particularly  his  alienation  of  the  public 
domains  in  order  to  raise  funds,  in  place  of  re-issuing  a  greatiy  depreciated 
paper  currency,  under  an  emergent  demand  for  money,  and  the  inexpedience 
of  drawing  on  Bengal.  Charges  implicating  his  integrity  had  also  been 
preferred  against  him ;  which,  although  acknowledged  in  most  unqualified 
terms  by  the  Court  to  be  utterly  unfounded,  seem  to  have  produced  a  bias 
unfavourable  to  him  in  the  mind  of  Lord  Moira,  and  to  have  had  some  in- 
fluence in  his  supersession.  His  provisional  appointment,  by  Lord  Minto, 
to  be  Resident  at  Bencoolen  was  confirmed,  and  he  repaired  thither  after  a 
visit  to  England,  where  he  received  the  honour  of  knighthood  in  the  end  of 
1817.— Life,  p.  290. 


HISTORY   OF   BRITISH   INDIA.  371 


CHAPTER  VII. 

Return  oftlie  Goveitior-Generd  from  Java. — Internal 
Administration, — Indications  of  fuJture  Hostilities. 
— Relations  with  Hyderabad  and  Nagpore. — Mis- 
government  of  Ovde. — Interference  of  tJie  Gocerrir- 
ment  of  Bengal. — Differences  between  tJw  Nawab 
and  the  Resident. — The  latter  supported  by  Lord 
Minto. — Defects  in  the  Judicial  and  Revenue  Sys^ 
terns  of  tJie  British  Government.  —  Mohammedan 
and  latter  Hindu  Systems. — Concentration  of  Func- 
tions. — Judicial  officers. — Circumstances  counteract^ 
ing  defective  Administration.  —  Staie  of  Civil  and 
Criminal  Justice. — Consequences  of  establishing  Civil 
Courts^ — multiplication  of  SuitSy  —  arrears  of  De- 
cisionsy — no  effective  remedy  applied. — State  of  Cri- 
minal JudicaiurCy — similar  arrears, — State  of  Po- 
lice.— Classes  of  Robbers , — prevalence  of  Dakoiti^ 
or  Gang  robbery , — atrocities  perpetraiedy — difficulty 
of  detection  and  conviction. — Evils  of  concluding 
Native  co-operation^ — attempts  to  recover  ity— failures. 
Superintendents  of  Police  and  Special  Magistrates 
appointed. — Employment  of  Informers. — Diminution 
of  Dakoiti. — Revenue  System^ — review  of — Pro- 
prietary right  of  the  Sovereign  not  of  Hindu  but  of 
Mohammedan  origin. — Doctrines  of  the  latter. — 
Notions  of  the  people. — Nature  and  content  of  public 
demand  under  the  Hindus  and  Mohammedans  in 
earlier  and  later  times^—from  whom  demanded. — 
Variety  of  Proprietary  rights. —  Village  communi- 
ties,— their  origin,  —  legislation,  —  colonisation,  — 

2b2 


372  HISTORY   OF   BRITISH  INDIA. 

conquest — Traces  of  propertt/  eMinguished  by  the 
ea^actions  of  the  GovemmenU  and  Village  communis 
ties  destroyed^ — in  some  provinces^ — not  in  all. — 
Variety  of  Organization, — different  rights  of  the 
members, — peculiarities  of  constitution, — general 
identity. — Classes  of  tenants, — perpetual, — tempo^ 
rary. — The  Public  Revenue  how  realised. — Revenue 
officers. — Head-men  of  villages, — modifications  of  the 
office. — Function  of  Zemindar, — degree  of  his  pro- 
prietary right, — contingent  advantages,— considera^ 
tion  among  the  people. — Course  adopted  by  the  Bri^ 
tish  Government. — Permanent  Zemindari  settlement 
ordered  for  Madras. — Commencement  of  Ryotwar 
settlement. — Principles  of  assessment  urged  by  Lord 
TV.  Bentinck, — abandoned  by  the  Government  of 
Madras. —  Village  settlements  formed.  —  Perpetual 
settlement  at  Madras  prohibited  by  the  Court  of 
Directors. — Settlement  of  the  Ceded  and  Conquered 
Provinces  of  Bengal.  —  Commission  of  Inquiry,  — 
recommend  delay  of  a  permanent  assessment, — re- 
commendation  disregarded  by  the  Government. — ^jEr- 
pected  advantages  of  permanency, — not  realisable, — 
illusory  nature  of  the  provisio7i, — moderate  assess- 
ment  all  that  is  essential,— principle  discountenanced 
in  England.  —  Permanent  settlement  of  the  Ceded 
and  Conquered  Provinces  forbidden.  — Regtdations 
for  the  protection  of  the  Ryots. — House-taa^, — re- 
sistance  at  Benares, — repealed. — Religious  riot  at 
Benares. — Missionaries  in  Bengal, — establis/ied  at 
Serampore, — checked  by  the   Government. — Lord 
Mintds  encouragement  of  Oriental  Literature, — in- 
terest in  the  College  of  Fort  William. — Financial 
operations. — Close  of  Lord  Minto's  Administration. 


TRANQUILLITY    OF   INDIA.  373 

The   Governor-General   returned   from   Java   to  book  l 
Calcutta    towards    the    end    of    1811;     and    the  ^^^^-^^ 
remaining   period    of  his    administration   was   oc-     I812. 
eupied   with   the    resumption    and   prosecution   of 
measures    affecting   the  welfare    of  British   India 
in    its   amicable   relations   with   the   neighbouring 
states  and  its  allies,  and  in   the   promotion  of  its 
internal  prosperity. 

The  peace  of  India  remained  undisturbed ;  but 
various  indications  occurred  of  an  approaching  neces- 
sity for  departing  from  the  pacific  principles  which 
had  generally  regulated  the  policy  of  the  Govern- 
ment. On  the  north,  the  Court  of  Nepal  had  as- 
serted claims  to  territory  within  the  Companjr's 
boundaries  which  were  questioned  or  denied;  and 
had  instigated,  or  allowed  its  subjects  to  commit, 
encroachments  and  outrages  which  demanded  serious 
notice.  In  the  south,  the  style  assumed  by  the 
officers  of  the  King  of  Burma  in  their  intercourse 
with  the  English  functionaries  at  Chittagong,  arising 
out  of  insurrections  in  the  intermediate  province  of 
Aracan  lately  conquered  by  the  Burmese,  revealed 
an  arrogant  and  usurping  spirit  which  it  would  pro- 
bably require  force  to  repress.  On  the  western 
frontier,  the  banditti  known  as  Pindaris  were  be- 
coming daily  more  confident  and  daring;  and  in 
1812  a  party  of  them  violated  the  integrity  of  the 
British  dominions,  broke  through  the  boundaries, 
and  advanced  to  the  wealthy  commercial  city  of 
Mirzapore,  which  they  threatened  to  plunder.  The 
approach  of  troops  saved  it  from  destruction,  and 
the  Pindaris  retired.  To  prevent  the  repetition  of 
a  similar  irruption,  treaties  were  formed  with  the 


374  HISTORY   OF   BRITISH   INDIA. 

BOOK  T.  Rajas  of  Tehri  and  Rewa,^  by  which  they  were  bound 
CHAP.  VII.  ^^  ^i^g^  ^j^^  passes  in  their  several  principalities 
1812.  against  the  Pindari  incursions,  and  a  cordon  of 
troops  was  stationed  along  the  frontier  from  Bundel- 
khand  to  Midnapore.  At  the  same  time  that  these 
precautions  were  taken,  it  was  foreseen  that  they 
would  be  mere  palliatives ;  and  a  time  was  contem- 
plated when  it  would  be  necessary  to  undertake  a 
system  of  military  and  political  operations  calculated 
to  strike  at  the  root  of  this  great  and  increasing 
evil.*  The  period  was  not  long  deferred ;  but  the 
arrangements  adopted  belong  to  a  different  adminis- 
tration. The  same  was  the  case  with  the  course 
that  was  ultimately  pursued  with  respect  to  Nepal 
and  Burma ;  and  we  may  therefore  suspend  their 
consideration  until  the  power  of  the  British  Go- 
vernment vrss  exerted  to  place  its  rights  beyond 
dispute,  to  secure  its  confines  from  aggression,  and 
to  eradicate  the  predatory  pestilence  which  had  so 
long  preyed  upon  the  strength,  and  wasted  the  ener- 
gies, of  Central  India. 

The  subsidiary  alliance  with  Hyderabad  had 
undergone  no  material  alteration  since  the  interfer- 
ence of  the  Government  of  Bengal  in  the  appoint- 
ment of  a  minister.  The  Nizam,  discontented  and 
sullen,  took  little  concern  in  public  business,  and 
sought  consolation  for  wounded  pride  in  sensual  in- 
dulgence. His  minister,  Munir-al-Mulk,  equally  in- 
dolent and  incapable,  followed  his  sovereign's  ex- 

*  Treaty  with  Raja  Bikramajit  of  Tehri,  23rd  December,  1812.  The 
treaties  with  the  Rewa  Raja  have  been  previously  referred  to. — Treaties 
with  Native  Chiefs,  xlix. 

'  Secret  Letter  from  Bengal,  2nd  October,  1812 ;  Papers,  Pindari  War, 
p.  14. 


ARRANGEMENTS   AT   HYDERABAD   AND   POONA.  375 

ample ;  and  all  the  labour,  but  with  it  much  of  the  book  i. 
authority,  devolved  upon  the  Hindu  subordinate,  ^^^^'^' 
Chandu  Lai.  Strong  also  in  the  assured  support  1812. 
of  the  Resident,  the  Dewan  made  but  an  indifferent 
use  of  his  responsibility,  and  to  his  own  purposes  and 
emolument  sacrificed  the  interests  of  the  prince  and 
the  prosperity  of  the  people.  At  the  recommenda- 
tion of  the  Resident,  Chandu  Lai  consented  to  the 
reorganisation  of  the  military  contingent  which  the 
Nizam  was  bound  by  treaty  to  furnish,  and,  in- 
stead of  a  body  of  irregulars,  to  maintain  a  standing 
disciplined  force  under  British  officers.  This  was 
gradually  increased  to  above  twelve  thousand  men, 
horse  and  foot,  and  proved  itself  of  eminent  service 
in  the  subsequent  war.  Its  chief  value  in  the  esti- 
mation of  the  minister  was  the  weight  which  it 
gave  him  in  his  dealings  with  the  Court,  and  the 
coercive  means  it  enabled  him  to  employ  against 
refractory  landholders,  and  farmers  of  the  revenue, 
on  occasions  when  the  aid  of  the  subsidiary  brigades 
was  withheld.  The  sanction  of  the  Government 
was  given  to  the  arrangement.  A  similar  plan  was 
recommended  to  the  Peshwa,  and  he  also  assented 
to  the  formation  of  a  disciplined  brigade  under 
British  officers.' 

The  necessity  which  has  been  described  of  inter- 
fering for  the  defence  of  the  Rsya  of  Nagpore  natu- 
rally directed  the  attention  of  the  Government  to 
the  permanent  maintenance  at  his  expense  of  a 
military  force.  Negociations  with  this  view  were 
opened;  but  the  objections  of  the  Raja  to  a  sub- 

I  Report,  Select  Committee,  1832  ;  Political  Appendix,  pp.  133,  266. 


376  HISTORY   OF   BRITISH   INDIA. 


BOOK  I.  sidiary  alliance  were  not  to  be  overcome,  and  the 

^"^'''  ^"'  arrangement  was  deferred.^ 
1812.  A  long,  and  occasionally  an  uneasy,  discussion 
with  the  Nawab  of  Oude  engaged  at  this  time  in 
an  especial  manner  the  deliberations  of  the  Govern- 
ment and  of  the  Court  of  Directors.  The  frequent 
applications  made  by  the  Nawab  for  the  services  of 
the  subsidiary  force  in  the  compulsive  collection  of 
the  revenues  of  Oude  had  occasioned  extreme  dis- 
satisfaction in  the  minds  of  both  the  local  and  the 
home  authorities,  as  they  were  well  aware  that 
the  troops  were  in  this  manner  often  employed  on 
duties  incompatible  with  their  military  character, 
and  were  converted  into  instruments  of  extortion 
and  oppression.  Supported  by  the  sanction  and  in- 
junctions of  the  Court  of  Directors,  the  Governor- 
General  determined,  towards  the  close  of  1810,  to 
express  to  the  Nawab  in  an  unqualified  manner  the 
sentiments  with  which  his  fiscal  administration  was 
regarded,  and  the  conclusions  of  the  Bengal  Govern- 
ment that  a  change  of  system  was  indispensably  ne- 
cessary. A  letter  was  accordingly  addressed  to  him 
by  Lord  Minto,  earnestly  recommending  to  him  to 
institute  a  refonn  which  should  be  based  upon  the 
fundamental  principles  of  a  moderate  assessment,  to 
be  made  by  the  oflScers  of  Government  immediately 
with  the  landholders,  without  the  inter\^ention  of  a 
contractor  or  farmer  of  the  revenue.  The  settlements 
were  to  be  made  for  a  fixed  term  of  years,  and  the 
occupants  of  the  land  were  to  be  guaranteed  in  their 
occupancy  as  long  as  the  amount  of  the  assessment 

»  Report,  Select  Committee,  1832;  Political  Appendix,  p.  227. 


AFFAIRS  OF   OUDE.  377 


was  regularly  discharged.     Other  reforms,  relating  booki. 
to  the  police  and  the  administration  of  justice,  were 


CHAP.  VII. 


suggested  at  the  same  time ;  and  the  Resident  was     1812. 
instructed  to  use  an  urgent  and  decided  tone  in 
pressing  these  reconmiendations  upon  the  consider- 
ation of  the  Nawab. 

The  interference  which  was  thus  exercised  by  the 
Government  of  Bengal  in  the  internal  regulation  of 
the  affairs  of  Oude  was  grounded  upon  the  article  of 
the  treaty  of  1801,  in  which  the  Nawab  "  engaged 
to  establish  in  his  reserved  dominions  such  a  system 
of  administration,  to  be  carried  into  effect  by  his 
own  officers,  as  should  be  conducive  to  the  prospe- 
rity of  his  subjects,  and  calculated  to  secure  the 
lives  and  property  of  the  inhabitants ;  and  that  his 
Excellency  would  always  advise  with,  and  act  in 
conformity  to,  the  counsel  of  the  officers  of  the  Ho- 
nourable Company."  The  explanation  subsequently 
given  by  Lord  Wellesley  to  the  Nawab  of  the  prin- 
ciples which  were  to  regulate  the  intercourse  be- 
tween the  two  states  amplified  the  expressions  of 
this  article ;  and  whilst  it  declared  that  the  Resident 
was  to  be  the  representative  of  the  Governor- 
General,  and  the  channel  by  which  the  sentiments 
and  counsels  of  the  British  Government  were  to  be 
communicated,  enjoined  that  functionary  to  treat 
the  Nawab  with  the  utmost  degree  of  respect,  con- 
ciliation, and  attention,  and  to  maintain  cordial 
union  and  harmony  in  all  transactions. 

How  this  was  to  be  accomplished  when  the  senti- 
ments of  the  Nawab  differed  from  those  of  the 
Resident  ?  what  security  was  provided  for  the  ac- 
quiescence of  the  former  in  the  counsels  of  the 


378  HISTORY   OF   BRITISH   INDIA. 

BOOK  I.  latter  ?  who  was  to  detenniue  whether  the  counsels 
CHAP.  viL  ^£  ^Yi^  British  Government  and  of  its  representative 


1812.  were  really  calculated  to  promote  the  interests  of 
the  prince  and  his  people  ?  and  by  what  means  com- 
pliance was  to  be  enforced  consistently  with  the  de- 
gree of  independence  which  the  Nawab  was  allowed 
to  retain?  were  questions  which  the  vague  and  in- 
definite phraseology  of  both  treaty  and  explanation 
left  for  the  embarrassment  of  Lord  Wellesley's  suc- 
cessors. 

On  the  present  occasion  all  these  sources  of  per- 
plexity occurred.  Professing  himself  willing  and 
desirous  to  defer  to  the  advice  of  the  British  Go- 
vernment, the  Nawab  entertained  insuperable  and 
not  unreasonable  objections  to  the  propositions  sub- 
mitted to  him.  It  was  recommended  to  him  to 
take  as  a  model,  the  arrangements  introduced  into 
the  Ceded  provinces  with,  it  was  affirmed,  entire 
success ;  to  relinquish  the  practice  of  farming  the  re- 
venues ;  to  institute  an  inquiry  into  the  productive- 
ness of  the  lands ;  and,  upon  a  determination  of  their 
value,  to  settle  with  the  proprietors  a  moderate  rate 
of  assessment  for  a  period  of  three  years.  To  these 
recommendations  the  Nawab  at  first  gave  his  general 
assent ;  but  he  started  doubts  as  to  the  practicability 
of  their  execution,  the  delays  and  difficulties  which 
would  attend  the  valuation  of  the  lands,  and  the 
impossibility  of  finding  functionaries  qualified  and 
fit  to  form  settlements  with  the  landholders.  On 
the  other  hand,  the  Resident,  Major  Baillie,  san- 
guine ill  his  expectations  of  success,  treated  the 
Nawab's  doubts  as  evasive,  and,  instead  of  observing 
the  conciliatory  course  prescribed  by  Lord  Welles- 


DISPUTES   WITH  THE   NAWAB.  379 

ley,  pressed  the  reform  with  a  degree  of  positiveness  book  i. 
and  importunity  which  furnished  the  Nawab  with  a  ^"^^'  ^^ 


fresh  cause  of  alarm,  and  led  him  to  apprehend  that  1812. 
the  Resident's  objects  were  to  take  into  his  own 
hands  the  nomination  of  the  revenue  officers  and 
an  inquisitorial  scrutiny  into  his  revenues.  Each 
charged  the  other  with  a  virtual  infraction  of  the 
treaty ;  the  Resident  accusing  the  Nawab  of  disre- 
garding the  advice  of  the  British  Government,  and 
the  Nawab  complaining  that  he  was  not  permitted 
to  judge  what  measures  were  conducive  to  the  pro- 
sperity of  his  people,  or  carry  them  into  effect 
through  the  agency  of  his  own  servants.  There 
were  several  other  sources  of  disagreement,  arising 
chiefly  out  of  the  advocacy  by  the  Resident  of  the 
rights  and  claims  of  the  members  of  the  Nawab's 
family,  or  of  individuals  taken  under  his  especial 
protection,  in  opposition  to  the  wishes  of  the  Nawab. 
In  most  of  these  cases  the  conduct  of  the  Resident 
might  be  defended,  either  by  existing  or  implied 
engagements  with  the  British  Government ;  but  it 
necessarily  reminded  the  Nawab  of  the  unreality  of 
the  independence  with  which  Lord  Wellesley  had 
pretended  to  invest  him  in  all  matters  of  a  private 
and  domestic  nature. 

After  much  lengthy  correspondence  and  various 
personal  conferences,  in  which  the  Nawab  under 
the  operation  of  fluctuating  feelings  repeatedly  pro- 
mised acquiescence,  and  as  often  evaded  the  fulfil- 
ment of  his  promises,  the  Government  of  Bengal, 
then  administered  by  General  Hewett  as  Vice- 
President  during  Lord  Minto's  absence  at  Java,  de- 
termined to  refrain  from  urging  the   question  of 


380  HISTORY   OF   BRITISH   INDIA. 

BOOK  I.  reform  further.     They  argued  that  it  would  be  of 
CHAP.  VII.  ij^^jg  b.yb\1  to  enforce  the  Nawab's  adoption  of  a  plan 


1812.  the  execution  of  which  he  could  easily,  and  would 
most  certainly,  frustrate ;  that  his  objections  to  any 
particular  scheme  of  reform  could  not  be  construed 
into  a  systematic  disregard  of  the  counsels  of  the 
British  Government,  for  which,  on  the  contrary,  he 
professed  the  utmost  deference;  and  that,  conse- 
quently, to  have  recourse  to  the  only  method  of 
compulsion  which  could  be  contemplated,  that  of 
denying  him  the  services  of  the  subsidiary  force  for 
the  suppression  of  insubordination  and  resistance  to 
his  authority,  would  be  an  unjustifiable  departure 
from  the  conditions  of  the  alliance.  Whilst  ex- 
pressing therefore  extreme  dissatisfaction  with  the 
Nawab  for  the  insincerity  and  prevarication  which 
he  had  displayed,  the  Resident  was  instructed  to 
relinquish  for  the  time  all  further  efforts  to  obtain 
his  consent  to  the  proposed  reform.^  With  regard 
to  the  employment  of  British  troops  against  refrac- 
tory Zemindars  at  the  requisition  of  the  Nawab's 
collectors,  the  Government  confirmed  a  resolution 
to  which  they  had  previously  come,  of  not  allowing 
their  employment  without  an  investigation  by  the 
Resident  of  the  occasion  which  demanded  it. 

The  question  of  reform  remained  unagitated  dur- 
ing part  of  1812,  but  causes  of  disagreement  were 
not  wanting.     In  the  commencement  of  the  year  an 


'  Letter  from  the  Bengal  Government  to  the  Court  of  Directors,  15th 
October,  1811,  in  which  tlie  negociations  with  the  Nawab  are  detailed: 
Report,  Select  Committee,  1832 ;  Political  Appendix,  414.  The  correspond- 
ence between  the  Nawab,  the  Resident,  and  the  Goveniment,  are  printed 
also  in  the  **  Oude  Papers,"  printed  for  the  Proprietors  of  East  India  Stock, 
June,  1824. 


DISORDERS   ON   THE   FRONTIER.  381 

application  was  made  by  the  Nawab  for  troops  to  book  i. 
put  down  an  insurrection ;  but  the  Resident,  ascer-  ^^^^'  ^"' 


taining  that  the  disturbance  was  of  no  importance,  1812. 
and  was  connected,  as  usual,  with  the  exactions  of 
the  farmers  of  the  revenue,  insisted  on  the  prior 
investigation  of  the  merits  of  the  case,  or  the  depu- 
tation of  his  own  agents  for  the  purpose.  The 
Nawab  declined  compliance,  and  no  troops  were 
sent.  Shortly  afterwards,  some  of  the  Nawab's 
proceedings  encroaching  on  the  rights  of  the  Bhao 
Begum  of  Fyzabad,  the  widow  of  his  father,  were 
opposed  by  the  Resident,  as  these  rights  had  been 
guaranteed  by  treaty.  This  interference  in  his  do- 
mestic concerns  was  a  source  of  severe  mortification 
to  the  Nawab,  and  he  strenuously  denied  the  right 
of  the  Resident  to  interpose.  Towards  the  close  of 
the  same  year,  the  Government  of  Bengal  had  its 
attention  called  to  outrages  and  robberies  com- 
mitted on  the  British  frontiers  by  marauding  gangs 
from  Oude,  whom  the  Nawab's  officers  were  either 
unable  or  unwilling  to  restrain,.  As  this  evil  had 
been  the  frequent  topic  of  unavailing  represent- 
ation, it  was  now  announced  to  the  Nawab  that  the 
plunderers  would  be  pursued  into  his  country  by  the 
British  troops  without  his  permission  if  his  acquies- 
cence were  withheld.  All  these  sources  of  vexation 
produced  a  formal  complaint  of  the  Nawab  against 
the  Resident  for  insolent  and  arrogant  behaviour: 
the  charge  was  met  by  the  Resident's  denial,  and  a 
recriminatory  accusation  of  an  improper  want  of 
respect  to  the  British  representative  in  the  tone  and 
style  of  the  Nawab's  correspondence.  The  Govern- 
ment pronounced  their  entire  approbation  of  the 


382  HISTORY   OF   BRITISH   INDIA. 

BOOK  I.  Resident's   conduct,    and   required    the    Nawab   to 
CHAP,  vn.  g^^^p^  ^  more  deferential  style  of  address. 
1813.         These   proceedings  for  a  while  intimidated  the 
Nawab  into  professing  his  resolution  to  conform  to 
the  wishes  of  the  Government  in  all  things :  but  the 
imperfect  execution  of  his  promise  drew  from  Lord 
Minto,^  in  July,  1813,  an  address  of  remonstrance 
and  expostulation,  reminding  him  that  the  British 
Government  had  a  right,  founded  upon  the  basis  of 
the  subsidiary  treaty,  to  propose  such  reforms  in 
his  internal  government  as  it  deemed  essential,  and 
that   he   was   held  by  the   same   treaty  under  an 
obligation  to  follow  such  advice;  that  he  had  ad- 
mitted  the   necessity,    and    both   verbally   and   in 
writing  had  given  assurances  of  his  acquiescence  in 
a  manner  little  less  authentic  and  formal  than  if 
they  had  been  reduced  to  the  form  of  a  treaty,  and 
equally    binding    on    his   honour   and    good-faith; 
notwithstanding  which,  he  had  retracted  his  consent, 
and  opposed  the  most  determined  resistance  to  the 
efforts  made  by  the  Resident,  acting  under  the  posi- 
•  tive  orders  of  the  Government,  to  induce  him  to 
abide    by   the   terms   of  his   engagements.      Lord 
Minto  declared  also,  that,  upon  receiving  the  Na- 
wab's  acquiescence,  the  British  Government  would 
have  been  entitled,  and  was  perhaps  required,  to 
insist  on  his  carrying  the  proposed  plan  into  effect 
at  once;   and  instances  the  patience  and   respect 
with  which  his  objections  had  been  listened  to  and 
refuted,  as  undeniable  proofs  of  its  forbearance  and 
moderation.     Not  a  single    argument   against  the 

*  Letter  from  the  Governor-General  to  the  Nawab  Vizir,  2nd  July,  1813; 
Oude  Papers,  p.  606. 


nawab's  aversion  to  reforms.  383 

plan  had  been  adduced  but  had  been  respectfully  book  i. 
entertained,  deliberately  examined,  and  successfully  ^"^''-  ^"- 


combated ;  and  the  doubts  and  fears  still  professed  I813. 
by  the  Nawab  could  be  ascribed  to  no  other  mo- 
tives than  a  decided  resolution  to  oppose  the  intro- 
duction of  reform  altogether,  in  the  vain  hope  that 
the  Government  would  ultimately  abandon  the  ques- 
tion in  despair.  The  Nawab  was  assured  that  no 
lapse  of  time,  no  change  of  circumstances,  would 
ever  induce  the  British  Government  to  relinquish  a 
measure  which  it  considered  essential  to  the  happi- 
ness and  prosperity  of  Oude,  the  ease  and  reputation 
of  the  Nawab,  and  the  best  interests  of  both  states. 
He  was  also  warned,  that,  if  he  persisted  in  his  re- 
fusal, he  would  violate  an  express  stipulation  of  the 
treaty ;  and  he  was  requested  seriously  to  consider 
the  consequences  in  which  he  might  involve  himself 
by  such  a  course  of  conduct.  Lord  Minto  there- 
fore expressed  his  confident  expectation  that  the 
reform  recommended  would  be  carried  into  effect 
without  further  opposition  or  delay.  The  Governor- 
General  explained  his  views  upon  the  other  points 
under  discussion  in  a  like  peremptory  strain. 

Fortified  with  the  decision  of  the  Government, 
the  Resident  proceeded  to  insist  upon  the  Nawab's 
immediate  adoption  of  the  measures  proposed,  and, 
in  his  ardour  and  impatience,  demanded  for  the 
British  Government  a  degree  of  participation  in  the 
ordinary  administration  of  Oude  scarcely  warranted 
by  the  spirit  or  letter  of  the  existing  engagements, 
when  he  maintained  that  every  act  whatsoever — the 
lease  of  a  district  in  farm,  the  institution  of  a  court 
of  justice  in  the  capital,  the  change  of  any  police 


384  HISTORY   OF   BRITISH   INDIA. 


BOOK  I.  regulation, — without    the   previous   concurrence   of 

CHAP    VII. 

'  the  Governor-General,  was  a  direct  violation  of  the 
1813.  treaty,  for  which  the  Nawab  might  be  made  respon- 
sible ;  or,  in  other  words,  might  be  divested  of  all 
authority  whenever  it  pleased  the  Government  to 
call  him  to  account.  That  such  minute  and  vexa- 
tious interference  was  intended  by  the  original 
contract,  may  be  reasonably  questioned ;  but  the 
present  discussions  showed  the  extreme  difficulty  of 
defining  the  just  limits  of  interposition,  and  the  un- 
avoidable tendency  of  all  such  political  associations 
to  render  the  will  of  the  controuling  power  the  sole 
standard  of  the  necessity  of  its  interference.  The 
Nawab  became  alarmed,  and,  in  the  month  of  Sep- 
tember, he  announced  his  final  determination  to 
give  immediate  operation  to  the  project  of  reform, 
by  dispatching  officers  to  adjust  an  equitable  assess- 
ment ;  and  he  instituted  arrangements  for  affording 
satisfaction  on  the  minor  topics  of  dispute.  Before 
any  important  results  could  be  realised  from  these 
preliminary  measures,  the  Government  of  India 
passed  into  other  hands,  and  different  views  in- 
fluenced the  counsels  of  Lord  Moira. 

Although  the  countries  which  had  been  brought 
under  British  sway  had  derived  from  it  the  benefits 
of  exemption  from  foreign  invasion  and  internal 
disorder  for  some  years,  yet  the  progressive  ameli- 
oration of  the  condition  of  the  people  had  failed 
to  keep  pace  with  the  expectations  and  hopes  of 
their  rulers.  This  was  and  is  still  to  be  ascribed  to 
radical  defects  in  the  systems  of  judicature  and  reve- 
nue which  had  been  introduced;  and  which,  although 
they  were  based  upon  just  and  benevolent  principles. 


ADMINISTRATION   OF   JUSTICE.  385 

were  too  entirely  of  a  European  complexion  to  be  book  i. 
readily  identifiable  with  the  very  different  aspects. 


of  society  which  existed  in  Hindustan.  They  had  ibis. 
been  framed  upon  insufficient  inquiry,  and  had  been 
brought  in  abruptly,  without  having  been  suffered 
to  grow  up  gradually  and  spontaneously  with  the 
continuance  of  the  new  and  anomalous  constitution 
of  things  to  which  they  owed  their  origin.  They 
were  still  only  in  the  course  of  adaptation  to  cir- 
cumstances; and  it  was,  and  has  since  continued 
to  be,  the  anxious  object  of  both  the  local  and  home 
authorities  to  provide  a  remedy  for  those  defects 
which  their  developement  displays.^  The  subject 
has  been  already  treated  of  at  some  length;  but 
as  the  observations  made  in  a  former  volume  were 
in  some  degree  anticipatory,  and  the  facts  on  which 
they  were  founded  belong  to  the  period  now  under 
review,  as  also  they  were  restricted  to  the  Bengal 
provinces,  some  further  notice  of  them  here  may  not 
be  superfluous  or  out  of  place. 

Whatever  may  have  been  the  case  when  the 
Mohammedan  and  Hindu  governments  were  in  full 
vigour,  it  was  undeniable  that,  for  a  considerable 
time  before  the  establishment  of  British  supremacy, 
the  people  of  India  had  been  unaccustomed  to  any 
regularly  organised  and  administered  system  of  law 
or  justice.  In  Upper  India,  Mohammedan  domina- 
tion had  left  few  and  obscure  traces  of  Hindu  in- 
stitutions; and  those   which  they  had  substituted, 

'  la  1813  the  Court  of  Directors  circulated  queries  regarding  the  working 
of  the  Judicial  system  in  India,  to  sereral  of  their  most  distinguished  ser- 
vants then  in  England.  The  questions  and  replies  are  printed  in  the  Selec- 
tions from  the  Records  at  the  East  India  House  printed  by  order  of  the 
Court,  vol.  ii. 

VOL.  I.  2  C 


386  msTORT  OF  British  india. 

BOOK  I.  never  very  pure  or  perfect,  had  almost  equally  dis- 
__!_  appeared  in  the  anarchy  by  which  Hindustan  had 
1813.  long  been  distracted.  The  same  was  very  much 
the  case  with  the  territories  under  the  Madras 
Presidency  that  had  been  subject  to  the  Moham- 
medans ;  and,  if  Hindu  usages  lingered  in  the 
Mahratta  states,  they  had  lost  much  of  their  pri- 
mary character  amid  the  irregular  and  arbitrary 
practices  of  the  ruling  authorities.  The  main  prin- 
ciple that  everywhere  regulated  the  administration 
was  the  concentration  of  absolute  authority;  and 
the  same  individual  was  charged  with  the  superin- 
tendence of  revenue,  justice,  and  police,  with  little 
to  guide  or  restrain  him  except  his  own  perceptions 
and  sentiments  of  equity,  and  a  prudent  considera- 
tion for  his  own  safety  and  advantage.  Even  in 
the  best  of  times  the  sovereign,  whether  King  or 
Raja,  was  the  fountain  of  law  and  justice ;  and  the 
Subahdar,  the  Nawab,  the  Jagirdar,  all  holding  de- 
legated or  usurped  authority,  claimed  the  same  pre- 
rogative. The  Kazi,  or  Nyayadhipati,  Mohammedan 
and  Hindu  expounders  of  the  law,  were  sometimes 
retained  in  principal  towns  as  judges  of  civil  and 
criminal  law;  but  their  authority  was  ill  defined, 
their  labours  were  ill  paid,  and  justice  received 
little  profit  from  their  nomination.  The  police  of 
cities  was  also  in  some  places  under  the  authority  of 
an  appointed  oflScer,  the  Fojdar  or  Kotwal,  who  was 
responsible  to  the  governor  of  the  district  or  city ; 
but  in  th^  villages  and  in  the  country  the  village 
head-men,  or  Patois,  where  such  existed,  and  in  other 
parts  the  Zemindar,  who  combined  the  character 
of  landholder  and  collector  of  the  revenue,  claimed 


NATIVE   SYSTEMS,  387 

the  charge  of  the  police,  and  the  decision  of  civil  book  i. 
and  criminal  suits.     The  leading  object  of  the  native  ^^^^^^^ 


governments  was  the  realisation  of  the  largest  possi-  I813. 
ble  amount  of  revenue ;  and  all  persons  engaged  in 
this  duty,  whether  as  fiscal  oflScers  or  as  farmers 
and  contractors,  were  armed  with  plenary  powers 
both  as  magistrates  and  judges  :  a  pertinacious  appeal 
from  those  whom  they  oppressed  might  sometimes 
reach  the  ears  of  their  superiors,  but  in  general  this 
resource  was  imperfectly  available,  and  the  people 
were  left  to  the  uncontrouled  will  of  individuals.^ 

^  All  the  Bengal  civilians  concur  in  stating,  that,  according  to  their  belief, 
no  remains  of  ancient  institutions  existed  in  Bengal.  Of  the  state  of  law 
and  justice  among  the  people,  the  following  are  SOHW  of  the  results  of  their 
observations :  **  The  people  had  no  idea  of  being  protected  by  law  against 
abuses  of  power.  When  an  Aumil  (a  native  revenue  or  executive  officer) 
was  guilty  of  gross  injustice  and  oppression,  they  might  endeavour  to  get 
rid  of  him  by  a  clamorous  remonstrance  in  a  body  to  the  authority  to  which 
he  was  accountable  for  his  conduct ;  but,  generally  speaking,  they  were 
quite  at  his  mercy.  Probably  they  had  no  conception  of  a  more  safe  and 
rational  system  until  they  saw  the  effects  of  the  judicial  regulations  of  1793. 
The  spirit  of  the  old  institutions  of  Hindustan  survived  their  formal  aboli- 
tion as  long  as  the  Company's  servants  united  the  offices  of  collector,  judge, 
and  magistrate." — Ernst,  Records,  i.  p.  27.  *'  During  the  Mohammedan  go- 
vernment in  Bengal,  in  the  large  Zemindaris,  consisting  of  several  pergun- 
nas,  it  was  usual  to  have  pergunna  Cutcheris  (courts),  and  the  Tehsildar 
(collector)  of  tlie  pergunna,  who  was  the  Zemindar's  agent,  decided  in 
civil  suits ;  village  Gomashtas  (agents)  also  exercised  the  same  autho- 
rity, and  recourse  was  frequently  had  to  arbitration  by  their  orders.  The 
Zemindars  and  their  Dewans  also  decided  civil  suits  according  to  the 
ancient  Hindu  custom.  In  cities  and  large  towns,  and  in  each  pergunna, 
Kazis  were  appointed,  who  decided  in  civil  suits.  They  appear  to  have 
been  the  judicial  officers  on  the  part  of  the  Nawabs,  but  the  Zemindars 
never  gave  up  their  right  of  deciding  in  civil  suits." — Cox,  ibid.  p.  47. 
'*  Every  province  in  India  is  divided  into  small  tracts  called  villages :  the 
afiairs  of  every  village  are  managed  by  two  head-meiiy  the  Potail  and  the 
Cumum  ;  the  Potail  is  the  chief  of  the  village,  and  acts  in  it  as  judge,  ma- 
gistrate, and  collector.** — ^Munro,  ibid.  106.  **  The  authorities  by  whom 
civil  justice  was  administered  were  the  following :  in  the  country,  the  Potail; 
over  him  the  Mamlutdar  (district  collector),  and  Sirsubahdar  (head  of  a 
large  division) ;  and  above  all,  the  Peshwa,  or  his  minister*  Jagirdars  ad- 
ministered justice  in  their  own  lands ;  the  great  ones  with  little  or  no  in- 
terference on  the  part  of  the  Governments.  In  some  towns  there  was  a 
judicial  officer  called  the  Ny&y6desi,  (the  same  as  Ny&y&dhipati,  superin- 
tendent of  Ny4ya — justice,)  who  tried  causes  under  the  Peshwa*s  autho- 
rity ;  and  any  person  whom  the  Peshwa  pleased  to  authorise  might  conduct 

2c2 


388  HISTORY   OF   BRITISH   INDIA. 


BOOK  I.  Incompatible  as  such  a  state  of  things  must  be 
cHAP.vn.  ^.^^  ^^^  feelings  and  principles  of  Europeans,  its 
1813.  effects  upon  the  condition  of  the  inhabitants  of 
India  were  not  wholly  subversive  of  their  happiness. 
The  persons  placed  over  them  belonged  to  them- 
selves, were  assimilated  in  religion  and  language, 
conversant  with  their  usages,  and  not  regardless  of 
their  good  opinion.  Their  decisions,  although  not 
guided  by  a  code  of  laws,  were  founded  upon  an 
accurate  knowledge  of  persons  and  things;  and, 
when  not  distorted  by  sinister  influences,  were  com- 
monly conformable  to  equity  and  good-sense.  The 
proceedings  of  these  self-constituted  courts  were 
simple,  and  their  sentences  summary;  they  were 
not  embarrassed  or  retarded  by  complicated  forms 
and  technical  pleadings ;  and  the  people  escaped 
the  tax  upon  their  money  and  time,  which  more 
elaborate  judicature  imposes.  Another  advantage 
contributed  to  counteract  the  defects  of  the  sys- 
tem. In  the  absence  of  courts  of  justice  provided 
by  the  state,  the  people  learned  to  abstain  from 
litigation ;  and,  when  disputes  among  them  arose, 
submitted  them  to  the  arbitrement  of  judges 
chosen  among  themselves.*  This  expedient  had 
probably  descended  from  ancient  times,  in  which 
it  had  been  a  recognised  element  of  Hindu 
judiciary   administration    under    the   denomination 

an  investigation,  subject  to  his  highness's  confirmation." — Elphinstone's 
Report  on  the  M ahratta  Provinces  ;  Selections  from  the  Records,  iv.  p.  188. 
'  ''With  all  these  defects,  the  Mahratta  country  flourished,  and  the 
people  seem  to  have  been  exempt  from  some  of  the  evils  which  exist  under 
our  more  perfect  government :  there  must,  therefore,  have  been  some  advan- 
tages in  the  system  to  counterbalance  its  obvious  defects,  and  most  of  them 
appear  to  me  to  have  originated  in  one  fact ;  that  the  Government,  although 
it  did  little  to  obtain  justice  for  the  people,  left  them  the  means  of  procur- 
ing it  for  themselves.'^ — Elphinstone  ;  Selections,  iv.  194. 


INSTITUTION   OF   PANCHAYATS.  389 

of  Panchayat*/   but  it   had  fallen  into  desuetude  book  i. 
in    most    parts    of   India,    and    subsisted,    in   any  ^"^''•^^ 
degree  of  efficiency,  only  in  the  south.*     Although     I813. 
the   Panchayats  were  not  inaccessible  to  personal 
bias  or  corruption,  and  their  proceedings  were  occa- 
sionally irregular  and  tedious,  yet  they  were  suited 
to  the  circumstances  and  congenial  to  the  feelings 
of  the  people,  and  supplied  the  place  of  better  or- 
ganised and  more  solemn  tribunals.^ 

^  From  the  Sanscrit  word  pancha,  or  puncha ;  nevre,  quinqne,  fiye  :  tlie 
court  being  originally,  perhaps,  formed  of  that  number,  but  in  common 
practice  it  was  exceeded.  Mr.  Elphinstone  says,  ''  The  number  was  never 
less  than  five,  but  it  has  been  known  to  be  as  great  as  fifty." — Elphinstone ; 
Selections,  189. 

'  Sir  Henry  Strachey  says,  ^  I  do  not  recollect  any  remains  of  ancient 
Hindu  institutions,  not  even  the  Punchayet ;  but,  the  term  being  well  known 
in  Bengal,  it  is  probable  that  the  thing  exists  in  some  parts  of  the  Bengal 
provinces,  and  that  it  is  occasionally  resorted  to  voluntarily  by  the  Hindus 
in  disputes  concerning  caste,  and  perhaps  in  matters  of  village  accounts  and 
boundary  disputes.  I  remember  no  instance  of  parties  in  a  suit  proposing 
a  reference  to  the  Punchayet.  Our  civil  courts  never  discourage  any  kind 
of  arbitration ;  they  constantly  recommend  it  to  the  parties,  who  will  never 
agree  to  it." — Answers ;  Selections,  p.  63.  All  the  Bengal  civilians  state 
the  same.  Mr.  J.  A.  Grant,  of  Bombay,  says  of  the  Panchayats  on  that 
side  of  India,  **  They  direct  their  attention  chiefly,  I  believe,  to  matters  of 
discipline  and  ceremonial  observance,  connected  with  the  customs  and 
usages  of  their  several  sects.  They  exercise  no  judicial  authority." — Selec-- 
tions,  ii.  192. 

3  It  was  especially  in  the  Mahratta  provinces  that "  the  Punchayet  might 
be  considered  as  the  great  instrument  in  the  administration  of  justice." — 
Elphinstone.  Mr.  Elphinstone,  Ck>lonel  Munro,  and  Colonel  Walker  speak 
favourably  of  their  operations,  although  from  the  details  specified  they  seem 
to  have  been  clumsy  instruments.  The  members  were  selected  by  the  par- 
ties, and  were  not  uninfluenced  by  the  hope  of  presents  from  one  or  both  : 
the  attendance  of  the  members  was  very  irregular,  and  there  seem  to  have 
been  no  efficient  means  of  compelling  punctuality ;  '*  it  was  generally  effect- 
ed by  the  iutreaties  of  the  party  interested."  Proceedingii  were  seldom  re- 
corded :  <'  in  villages  the  Punchayet  was  often  conducted  in  the  way  of 
conversation,  and  nothing  was  written  but  the  decision,  and  not  always  that.*' 
*<  Throughout  the  whole  proceedings  the  Punchayets  appear  to  have  been 
guided  by  their  own  notions  of  justice;  they  consulted  no  books,  and  it 
was  only  on  particular  points  of  Hindu  law  that  they  referred  to  a  Sastri 
(one  learned  in  the  law)  for  his  opinion."  The  Panchayat  had  no  power  to 
enforce  its  decrees ;  they  required  to  be  confirmed  and  executed  by  an  ofiicer 
of  Government,  to  whom  "  for  this  cause  frequent  references  were  required, 
and  he  exercised  a  considerable  influence  on  the  progress  of  the  trial."  Not- 
withstanding these  imperfections,  the  Panchayat  must  have  exercised  a  be- 


390  HISTORY   OP   BRITISH   INDIA. 

BOOK  I.  Upon  the  establishment  of  regular  courts  of  jus- 
^^^^'  ^"^  tice  under  the  government  of  the  East  India  Com- 
1813.  pany,  the  novelty  of  a  channel  exclusively  dedicated 
to  the  hearing  and  determining  of  complaints,  and  a 
belief  that  they  would  be  investigated  in  an  upright 
and  impartial  spirit,  produced  inconveniences  which 
had  not  been  foreseen.  Every  one  who  had,  or 
fancied  he  had,  a  wrong  to  redress,  resorted  to  the 
courts ;  and  the  numbers  of  the  suitors  speedily  be- 
came so  numerous,  that  the  means  of  hearing  and 
adjudicating  their  cases  were  wholly  insufficient.^ 
The  jurisdiction  of  each  court  comprehended  an  ex- 
tent of  country  and  an  amount  of  population  vastly 
beyond  the  powers  of  a  single  establishment.  The 
very  qualities  which  constituted  the  peculiar  recom- 
mendations of  the  new  courts  added  to  their  in- 
sufficiency.* As  little  as  possible  was  left  to  indivi- 
dual discretion.  Deliberate  forms  and  prescribed 
modes  of  procedure,  whilst  they  secured  exactness, 
impeded  dispatch.  Reference  to  the  regulations  of 
the  Government,  and  to  the  written  authorities  of 
Hindu  and  Mohammedan  law,  retarded  decision ; 
and  the   multiplication  of  opportunities   of  appeal 


neficial  influence,  as  it  enjoyed  great  popularity ;  as  is  proved  by  the  current 
phrase,  "  Panch-Parameswara,"  Panchayet  is  God  Almighty. —  Elphin- 
stone;  Selections,  iv.  191. 

*  In  1797,  the  number  of  suits  instituted  was  330,977,  although  the 
western  provinces  bad  not  been  acquired :  they  began  to  decrease  from 
1803,  and  in  1813  were  only  184,790.— Selections  from  the  Records,  iv.  34. 

*  In  the  Bengal  Presidency  the  population  subject  to  a  Zilla  court  was 
generally  about  a  million.  The  Zilla  of  Midnapore  was  one  hundred  and 
thirty  miles  long  by  forty  to  fifty  broad.— Sir  Henry  Strachey  and  others. 
At  Madras  the  Zillas  were  more  compact,  and  generally  contained  about 
half  a  million  inhabitants. — Cockbum.  **  The  Ceded  districts,  at  first  di- 
vided into  three,  since  into  two,  Zillas,  contain  about  twenty-nine  thousand 
square  miles, — about  the  extent  of  Scotland,  but  more  populous.^^ — ^Thack- 
eray ;  Answers  to  Queries  ;  Selections. 


INSUFFICIENCY   OF   CIVIL   COURTS.  39h 

from  one  tribunal  to  another  encouraged  and  per-  book  i. 
petuated  litigation.    The  unavoidable  deficiencies  of  ^"^^•^°' 
laws,  which,  whether  Hindu,  Mohammedan,  or  Eng-     leis. 
lish,  were  devised  for  wholly  different  conditions  of 
society,  and  had  not  yet  become  adapted  to  the 
changes  still  in  progress,  with  the  unfitness  of  some 
of  the  European  judges,  from  their  imperfect  know- 
ledge of  the  languages  of  the  country  and  the  habits 
of  the  people,^  as  well  as  their  ignorance  of  the  prin- 
ciples of  law  and  their  occasional  negligence,  con- 
tributed to  aggravate  the  defects  of  the  system,  and 
to  obstruct  the  course  of  judgment.      Arrears  be- 
came in  consequence  so  numerous,  and  decisions 
were  so  long  delayed,  as  to  amount  to  a  virtual 
denial  of  justice.     Attempts  were  made  from  time 
to  time  to  remedy  these  imperfections :  charges  and 
fees  were  imposed,  in  order  to  render  justice  more 
expensive    and    discourage    litigation;    additional 
courts  were  established,  at  a  cost  which  became 
burthensome  to  the  state;  additional  powers  were 
given  to  the  judges,  and  the  privilege  of  appeal  was 
subjected  to  new  limitations; — measures  in  some 
respects  exceptionable,  and  in  all  inoperative;  and 
the  accumulation  of  arrears,  although  to  a  less  ex- 
tent, still  continued  to  constitute  a  serious  evil.* 
To  the  most  obvious  remedy,  the  multiplication  of 
courts  and  judicial  functionaries  in  an  equally  pro- 

'  **  There  is  a  want  of  somethiDg  like  professional  knowledge,  that  is, 
knowledge  of  the  general  principles  of  law,  in  both  the  Zilla  and  proTincial 
judges ;  and  part  of  the  persons  in  the  judicial  line  are  not  fit  for  that  part 
of  the  service.*' — ^Dorin ;  Selections. 

'  The  suits  depending  in  Bengal  at  the  end  of  1S02  were  170,706 ;  at  the 
end  of  1813, 145,168 :  for  the  clearance  of  which  it  was  estimated  that  three 
years  would  be  required  in  the  Zilla,  and  four  in  the  pro?incial  courts. — 
Commous*  Committee,  1832 ;  Judicial ;  Appendix,  vii.  479. 


392  HISTORY    OF   BRITISH   INDIA. 


BOOK  I.  gressive  ratio,  was  opposed  the  heavy  expense  of 
adding  to  the  number  of  European  magistrates.* 
1813.  Any  considerable  augmentation  of  native  judges, 
who  were  employed  to  a  limited  extent,  and  whose 
services  were  much  more  economical,  was  resisted 
by  a  violent  prejudice  against  their  agency.  Their 
fitness  for  the  ofiice,  as  far  as  it  required  ability  and 
knowledge,  was  generally  admitted ;  but  it  was 
maintained  that  their  notorious  want  of  integrity 
rendered  it  impossible  that  justice  could  be  distri- 
buted to  the  people  through  so  corrupt  and  impure 
a    channel.*       The    imputation    was    not    perhaps 

'  The  annual  expense  of  the  judicial  establishment  in  Bengal  was  cal- 
culated by  Lord  Cornwallis  at  £306,000.  In  1809-10  it  bad  risen  to 
£806,000.  The  whole  cost  at  the  three  Presidencies  was  at  that  time 
£1.260,840.     In  1813  it  was  £l  ,672,492. 

*  "  I  think  it  quite  out  of  the  question  to  trust  the  natives  with  any 
principal  part  in  the  administration  of  justice.  I  am  not  aware  that  they 
want  the  ability  sufficient  to  decide  ordinary  questions  with  tolerable  skill, 
but  even  the  better  sort  of  them  are  notoriously  open  to  corruption ;  there 
is  scarcely  any  thing  like  principle  among  them.  I  know  there  are  some 
who  think  these  native  judges  do  more  harm  than  good,  and  should  be  dis- 
pensed with  altogether.** — Dorin.  "  The  natives  can  rarely,  I  fear,  be  exclu- 
sively trusted  with  the  administration  of  justice  ;  and,  in  any  part  of  the 
judicial  system  allotted  to  their  execution,  they  must  be  superintended 
by  Europeans.** — Falconar.  Sir  Henry  Strachey,  Colonel  Munro,  and  Colo- 
nel Walker  entertain  different  views.  *'  It  is  my  opinion  that  all  the  judi- 
cial functions  of  Bengal  might  gradually  be  thrown  into  the  hands  of  natives, 
and  that  the  business  would  be  as  well  conducted  under  our  regulations  by 
the  natives  as  by  Europeans ;  in  some  respects  better,  and  at  one  tenth  of 
the  expense."  And  again:  "  I  am  of  opinion  that,  with  respect  to  integrity 
and  diligence,  the  natives  may  be  trusted  with  the  administration  of  justice. 
I  think  no  superintendence  of  Europeans  necessary.'*  "  We  place  the  Eu- 
ropean beyond  the  reach  of  temptation ;  to  the  native  we  assign  some  minis- 
terial office  with  a  poor  stipend  of  twenty  to  thirty  rupees  a  month  :  then 
we  pronounce  that  the  Indians  are  corrupt,  and  that  no  race  of  men  but  the 
Company*s  servants  are  fit  to  govern  them.** — Sir  H.  Strachey.  "  In  a  civil- 
ized populous  country  like  India,  justice  can  be  well  dispensed  only  through 
the  natives  themselves.  It  is  absurd  to  suppose  that  they  are  so  corrupt  aa 
to  be  altogether  unfit  to  be  entrusted  with  the  discharge  of  this  important 
duty :  if  they  were  so,  tliere  would  be  no  remedy  for  the  evil;  tlieir  place 
could  never  be  supplied  by  a  few  foreigners  imperfectly  acquainted  with 
their  customs  and  language.**  Again :  ^*  Give  a  native  judge  from  five 
hundred  to  one  thousand  rupees  a  month,  he  will  decide  thrice  as  many 
causes  as  a  European.     He  might  be  corrupt ;  turn  him  out  and  try  another, 


EMPLOYMENT   OF   NATIVE  JUDGES.  393 

wholly  unmerited,  but  the  charge  was  much  too  book  i. 
unqualified,  and  the  evils  anticipated  were  greatly  ^"^^•^"' 
exaggerated.  Nor  was  it  sufficiently  considered  by  isia. 
what  means  they  might  be  remedied  :  whether  they 
might  not  be  checked,  if  not  prevented,  by  better 
pay,  higher  dignity,  vigilant  superintendence,  and 
occasional  disgrace ;  whether  natives  might  not  be 
influenced  as  well  as  Europeans  by  the  hope  of  re- 
ward and  fear  of  punishment.  Corruption  could  not 
be  universal.  The  temptation  could  not  in  every 
case  outweigh  the  risk ;  and  no  account  was  made 
of  the  force  of  public  opinion,  to  which  the  natives 
of  India  are  not  insensible.  It  seems  also  to  have 
been  forgotten,  that,  for  centuries  prior  to  the  in- 
troduction of  European  agency,  law  and  justice  had 
been  administered  solely  by  natives ;  yet  society  had 
been  held  together :  and  there  had  been  times  when, 
according  to  the  testimony  of  travellers  and  his- 
torians, India  had  been  populous  and  flourishing, 
the  people  thriving  and  happy.  This  was  still  the 
case  in  some  parts  of  the  country ;  and,  if  it  was  not 
so  more  generally,  the  cause  was  to  be  found  in  the 
absence  of  good  government  and  the  prevalence  of 
internal  disorder,  in  which  all  institutions  had  been 
overturned,  and  the  principles  as  well  as  the  practice 
of  justice  had  disappeared.  It  was  taking  a  narrow 
and  ungenerous  view  of  the  question  to  draw  a  con- 

and  another.  Make  it  worth  his  while  to  retain  his  post,  and  he  will  cease 
to  risk  its  forfeiture.  If  we  pay  the  same  price  for  integrity,  we  shall  find 
it  as  readily  amongst  natives  as  Europeans." — Munro.  *'  The  aim  of  the 
preceding  observations  has  been  to  show  that  the  natives  of  India  may,  in 
respect  to  integrity,  be  trusted  with  the  administration  of  justice;  and  that 
some  of  the  civil  offices  of  government  may  be  confided  to  them  with  safety 
and  advantage."  —  Walker;  Answers  to  Queries;  Selections,  vol.  ii. 
There  will  be  subsequently  occasion  to  advert  to  later  opinions  on  this 
subject. 


394  HISTORY   OF   BRITISH   INDIA. 

BOOK  I.  elusion  unfiivourable  to  the  native  character  from 
CHAP,  vu.  ^YiQ  state  in  which  it  had  been  left  by  the  recent 
18)3.  times  of  trouble,  and,  overlooking  what  it  had  been 
in  better  days,  deny  the  probability  of  its  ameliora- 
tion under  more  propitious  circumstances.  The 
truth  was  beginning  to  be  discerned ;  and,  amid  the 
prevalence  of  a  contrary  opinion,  some  few  of  the 
Company's  servants  warmly  advocated  the  extended 
employment  of  the  natives  in  the  administration  of 
justice  as  the  only  practicable  means  of  proportion*- 
ing  the  supply  to  the  demand.  The  question  con- 
tinued in  suspense,  and  little  advance  was  made  in 
the  improvement  of  the  judicial  system  in  Bengal 
during  Lord  Minto's  government.  Measures  were, 
however,  in  progress  which  were  brought  to  matu- 
rity imder  his  successor.  Changes  of  more  con- 
siderable magnitude  took  place  at  Madras,  but  they 
also  underwent  important  modifications  at  a  shortly 
subsequent  period.* 

*  Bengal  Regulation  xiii.  of  1808  enacted  that  the  origination  of  ciyil 
suits  of  five  thousand  rupees  and  upwards  should  be  transferred  from  the 
Zilla  to  the  provincial  courts;  and  Regulation  xiii.  of  1810  provided  that  de- 
crees might  be  passed  by  one  judge  in  sundry  cases  where  two  had  been 
necessary,  and  that  the  fees  on  the  institution  of  suits  should  be  partly  or 
wholly  returned  when  the  parties  settled  the  cause  by  arbitration.  At 
Madras,  in  1808,  Regulation  v.  enacted  the  payment  of  fees  on  the  institu- 
tion and  trial  of  suits.  Regulation  vi.  empowered  the  senior  judge  of  the 
courts  of  circuit  and  appeal  to  take  his  tour  of  circuit  duty.  Regulations 
viii.  to  xiii.  eflected  a  new  arrangement  of  the  jurisdiction  of  the  Zilla  courts 
in  the  different  divisions  of  the  Madras  provinces,  and  established  four 
courts  of  appeal  and  circuit.  In  1809,  Regulation  vii.  proWded  for  the 
occasional  appointment  of  Zilla  judges,  extended  the  jurisdiction  of  the 
registers,  limited  appeals,  and  provided  head  native  commissioners  in  cer- 
tain cases.  Regulation  viii.  defined  the  duties  and  powers  of  judges  of 
the  provincial  courts  acting  singly.  Regulation  x.  increased  the  number 
and  powers  of  native  commissioners ;  and  Regulation  xii.  limited  and  regu- 
lated the  right  of  appeal.  Up  to  the  year  1 808,  the  Regulations  of  the  Bom- 
bay Presidency  were  framed  as  nearly  conformable  to  those  of  Bengal  as 
circumstances  would  admit,  with  exception  that,  while  the  Mohammedan 
law  was  there  alone  applicable  to  the  decision  of  criminal  trials,  the 
Hindus  under  the  Bombay  Presidency  were  allowed  the  benefit  of  the  laws 


ADMINISTRATION   OF   CRIMINAL   JUSTICE.  395 

Delays  of  a  similar  nature,  although  not  to  a  like  book  i. 
extent,  were  found  to  prevail  in  the  administration  ^"^'''  ^^ 


of  criminal  justice  ;  and,  in  a  great  measure  from  a  isis. 
like  cause,  the  inadequacy  of  the  provision  made  for 
its  distribution.  An  evil  of  a  still  more  pernicious 
tendency  originated  in  the  assignment  of  the  duty 
of  magistrate  to  the  city  or  district  judge.  If  as 
judge  he  devoted  his  attention  to  the  civil  suits  in 
arrear,  the  business  of  the  magistrate  was  necessa- 
rily interrupted,  and  an  interval  might  intervene  be- 
tween the  apprehension  of  a  prisoner  and  his  com- 
mitment, which  sometimes  subjected  the  innocent 
to  the  punishment  of  the  guilty,  and  detained  for  an 
indefinite  period  a  person  in  confinement  against 
whom  no  charge  could  be  substantiated.^  The  same 
remedy  that  was  applicable  to  the  former  case  was 
here  also  obvious,  and  the  separation  of  incompatible 
duties  was  a  necessary  preliminary  to  their  effective 
discharge.  For  this  purpose  the  Bengal  Government 
associated  the  Zilla  and  city  judges  in  some  instances 
with  magistrates  having  a  special  or  joint  jurisdiction 
in  criminal  matters  only,  or  gave  them  the  aid  of 
assistant  magistrates,  acting  in  general  subordinately 
to,  but  upon  emergencies  independently  of,  the 
judges.  Other  enactments  were  passed  for  the  more 
effective  conduct  of  previous  investigation  by  the 
local  officers,  for  admission  to  bail  upon  charges  not 

of  their  religion  in  all  trials,  of  whatsoever  description,  wherein  they  were 
the  defendant  or  accused  parties.  At  this  period  the  Government  of  Bom- 
bay exercised  the  right,  with  which  it  was  invested  by  the  47th  of  George  III. 
sect.  iii.  chap.  C8,  of  making  Regulations  of  its  own  authority ;  and  in  this 
and  subsequent  years  the  following  Regulations  provided  for  the  more 
t^ffective  administration  of  civil  and  criminal  justice  :  1808,  Regulation  ii. ; 
1812,  Regulations  iii.  to  xi. ;  1813,  Regulations  ii.  iv.  vil.  ix. 
^  Fifth  Report,  p.  69. 


396  HISTORY  OF   BRITISH   INDIA. 

BOOK  I.  of  a  heinous  nature,  for  the  dismissal  of  frivolous 

_^^^^J^  complaints,  and  the  avoidance  of  all  unnecessary 

1813.     delay  between  the  apprehension  of  a  person  accused 

and  his  examination  before  the  magistrate.^     The 

criminal,   as  well  as  the   civil  judicature,  was  the 

object  of  progressive  legislation.* 

The  state  of  the  police  formed  in  Bengal  a  more 
immediate  subject  of  solicitude  than  even  the  de- 
fects of  the  administration  of  civil  or  criminal  jus- 
tice. The  Lower  provinces  of  the  Presidency  were 
infested  by  the  increasing  numbers  and  audacity 
of  various  classes  of  robbers,  who,  under  the  de- 
signations of  Dakoits,  Choars,  Kuzzaks,  Budhuks, 
or  Thugs,  infested  the  country,  and  not  unfre- 
quently  added  murder  to  robbery.  The  Kuzzaks 
were  mounted  robbers,  who  occasionally  singly  be- 
set the  high  roads,  or,  having  collected  in  parties, 
attacked  and  plundered  whole  villages.  The  Bud- 
huks and  Thugs  were  distinguished  by  their  prac- 
tice of  strangling  unsuspecting  travellers,  with 
whom  they  contrived  to  fall  in  upon  a  journey. 
The  Dakoits  and  Choars  were  robbers  who  assem- 
bled in  gangs,  and,  entering  the  villages  by  night, 
attacked  the  house  of  some  one  person  reputed  to 
possess  valuables  or  money.      These  last  were  the 


*  Regalation  xvi.  of  1810. 

^  Regulations  ix.  1807,  and  iii.  1812.  Madras  Regulation  i.  1810  pro- 
vided for  the  apprehension  and  punishment  of  persons  resisting  or  evading 
the  processes  of  the  courts:  Reg.  i.  of  1811  directed  quarterly  jail  deli- 
veries to  be  held  in  certain  Zillas:  Reg.  iv.  of  1811  had  for  its  general 
scope  the  objects  of  the  Bengal  Regulations  :  Regs.  iv.  of  1807,  and  iii.  of 
1812,  the  more  speedy  trial  and  punishment,  or  acquittal,  of  persons  charged 
with  offences  not  of  a  heinous  nature  ;  this  also  enjoined  the  Zilla  magis- 
trates to  furnish  an  annual  report  of  all  cases  depending  on  the  31st  of  De- 
cember before  them  or  their  assistants.  The  Bombay  Uegulations  are  cited 
above. 


STATE   OF   THE   POLICE.  397 

most  formidable.  Their  depredations  were  first  no-  book  i. 
ticed  in  1772,  when  they  were  described  by  the  ^"^''•^'- 
Committee  of  Circuit  as  individuals  not  driven  to  isis. 
such  courses  by  want,  but  robbers  by  profession, 
and  even  by  birth,  following  the  profession  from 
father  to  son.  But,  however  true  this  may  have 
been  at  the  period  of  the  report,  there  was  no 
doubt  that  latterly  many  of  the  members  of  the 
several  gangs  were  not  professional  banditti,  but 
were  urged  by  necessity  to  enlist  in  the  gangs,  or 
sometimes  were  compelled  by  force  or  fear  to  join 
them.^  Aided  by  such  recruits  from  the  peasantry, 
the  Dakoits  acquired  greater  strength  and  con- 
fidence, and  from  1800  to  1810  kept  the  country 
in  perpetual  alarm.*  Extraordinary  efforts  became 
necessary  for  their  suppression. 

*  **  In  accounting  for  Decoity  or  robbery  in  a  Ziila,  our  first  step  ought  to 
be  to  examine  tlie  condition  of  the  Ryots,  and  we  shall  always  find  in  their 
poverty  and  oppression  the  chief  cause  of  this  evil.** — ^TytJer,  Considerations 
on  the  State  of  India,  i.  374.  *'  A  gang  of  Decoits  does  not  consist  entirely 
of  professed  robbers :  many  of  the  party  are  poor  honest  industrious  people 
who  are  seized  for  the  senrice  of  the  night" — Letter  from  £.  Strachey, 
Judge  of  Rajshahi ;  FiAh  Report,  App.  688. 

'  In  the  language  of  Lord  Minto,  "  a  monstrous  and  disorganised  state 
of  society  existed  under  the  eye  of  the  supreme  British  authorities,  and  al- 
most at  the  very  seat  of  that  Government  to  which  the  country  might  justly 
look  for  safety  and  protection.  The  mischief  could  not  wait  for  a  slow 
remedy ;  the  people  were  perishing  almost  in  our  sight ;  every  week's  delay 
was  a  doom  of  slaughter  and  torture  against  the  defenceless  inhabitants  of 
very  populous  countries." — Minute,  24th  Nov.  1810 ;  Pari.  Papers,  Ist 
July,  1819,  p.  23.  His  lordship's  language,  and  that  which  was  generally 
employed  on  this  occasion  by  the  members  of  the  Oovemment  and  by  the 
judges,  is  liable  to  the  charge  of  exaggeration.  At  this  very  time,  when 
it  was  said  by  the  judicial  secretary  that  **  there  was  no  protection  of  per- 
son or  property  to  the  people  of  India,"  it  was  very  possible  for  an  indivi- 
dual unconnected  with  the  judicial  department  to  be  scarcely  aware  that 
such  a  crime  as  gang-robbery  existed.  In  dwelling  upon  the  absolute 
amount  of  crime,  its  proportional  ratio  to  the  population  is  imperfectly 
adverted  to.  According  to  oflScial  returns,  the  total  number  of  murders, 
including  those  committed  by  Dakoits,  in  the  Lower  provinces,  was  in  the 
year  1813  two  hundred  and  ten,  the  population  being  above  thirty-seven 
millions.— Commons'  Committee,  1832;  App.  Judicial,  p.  606. 


^^^  HISTORY   OF  BRITISH   INDIA. 

^sA  .  W*  I'Wcoits,  although  in  their  aggregation  and 
^^  :H  iht^ir  ft>lIowing  acknowledged  leaders  or  Sirdars 
i*4.\  ilH\v  bore  an  analogy  to  the  brigands  of  the  south 
vrf  Kun>pe,  or  the  banditti  of  the  middle  ages,  yet 
n^^mbled  more  nearly  some  of  the  illegal  confede- 
rations which  have  been  organised  in  modern  days 
and  more  civilised  communities  in  Europe,  in  their 
assembling  by  night  only,  and  dispersing  and  fol- 
lowing peaceable  occupations  during  the  day,  most 
of  them  being  engaged  in  the  cultivation  of  the  soil 
or  following  mechanical  trades.  Individuals  among 
them  were  well  known  as  Sirdars,  by  whom  their 
expeditions  were  projected,  and  by  whose  orders 
the  gang  was  assembled  at  an  appointed  spot,  gene- 
rally a  grove  near  the  village  to  be  attacked.  The 
members  of  the  gang,  who  were  secretly  known  to 
the  Sirdars,  and  sometimes  to  each  other,  repaired 
to  the  place  variously  armed,  chiefly  with  swords, 
clubs,  and  pikes,  and  some  with  matchlocks.  Their 
numbers  varied  from  ten  or  fifteen  to  fifty  or  sixty. 
When  collected,  their  marauding  excursion  was 
usually  preluded  by  a  religious  ceremony,  the  wor- 
ship of  the  goddess  Durga,  the  patroness  of  thieves, 
typified  by  a  water-pot  or  a  few  blades  of  grass.  The 
ceremony  was  conducted  by  a  Braliman  of  degraded 
condition  and  dissolute  life.  Having  propitiated 
the  goddess  by  the  promise  of  a  portion  of  their 
spoil,  they  marched  with  lighted  torches,  and  little 
attempt  at  concealment  beyond  disguising  their 
faces  by  pigment,  or  covering  them  with  masks,  to 
the  object  of  their  expedition,  usually  the  dwelling 
of  some  shop-keeper  or  money-changer,  in  which  it 
was  expected  to  discover  treasure.     Occasionally  the 


GANG-ROBBERY.  399 


motive  of  the  attack  was  vengeance ;  and  inform-  book  i. 
ation  given  by  the  householder,  or  some  of  his  fa-  ^"^^'  ^"' 
mily,  against  any  of  the  members  of  the  gang,  18I8. 
brought  upon  him  the  resentment  of  the  whole 
fraternity.^  Upon  entering  the  village,  it  was  cus- 
tomary to  fire  a  gun,  as  a  signal  to  the  inhabitants 
to  keep  within  their  dwellings :  the  house  against 
which  the  operation  was  designed  was  then  sur- 
rounded ;  and,  whilst  some  of  the  gang  forced  an  en- 
trance, others  remained  as  a  guard  without.  Unless 
exasperated  by  resistance,  or  instigated  by  revenge, 
the  Dakoits  did  not  commonly  proceed  to  murder ; 
but  they  perpetrated  atrocious  cruelties  upon  such 
persons  as  refused  to  give  them,  or  were  unable  to 
give  them,  information  regarding  property  which 
they  suspected  of  having  been  concealed,  burning 
them  with  lighted  torches  or  blazing  straw,  or 
wrapping  cloth  or  flax  steeped  in  oil  round  their 
limbs  and  setting  it  on  fire,  or  inflicting  various  tor- 
tures, which  caused  immediate  or  speedy  death.^ 
The  object  being  accomplished,  and  the  booty  se- 
cured, the  gang  retired  before  daylight,  and  the  in- 

*  Mr.  Secretary  Dowdeswell's  Report,  Sept.  1809.  Of  the  three  cases  of 
which  he  gives  the  trials  in  abstract,  one  of  which  has  been  cited  by  Mr. 
Mill,  V.  563,  two  originated  in  revenge. — Fifth  Report,  App.  604. 

'  In  one  hundred  and  four  houses  attacked  by  Dakoits  in  the  course  of 
thirteen  months,  eight  persons  were  wounded,  three  were  tortured,  and  five 
killed.— Dowdesweirs  Report,  ibid.  606.  In  1813,  the  whole  number  of 
Dakoitis  under  the  Bengal  Presidency  was  six  hundred  and  ninety ;  in 
which  seventy-one  persons  were  lulled,  two  hundred  and  forty-six  tortured 
and  wounded.  The  returns  show  characteristic  differences  between  the 
Lower  and  Upper  provinces : 

DakoUit.    MurtUred.     Tortured  and  WotmdaL 

Lower  provinces      .       .         605  31  149 

Upper  provinces      .       .         185  40  97 

In  the  latter  more  were  murdered  and  fewer  wounded  in  little  more  than 
one  third  of  the  robberies ;  proofs  of  more  fierceness  but  less  cruelty. — 
Commons*  Committee,  1832 ;  App.  p.  606. 


400  HISTORY   OF   BRITISH   INDIA. 

BOOK  I.  dividuals  resumed  tlioir  daily  occupations.  Such 
CHAP.  viL  ^^  ^Y^^  terror  inspired  by  their  atrocities,  and  such 
1818.  the  dread  of  their  revenge,  that  few  of  their  neigh- 
bours ventured  to  inform  or  give  evidence  against 
them,  although  well  aware  of  their  real  character 
and  proceedings.  The  police,  intimidated  or  cor- 
rupt, rarely  interfered  until  the  robbery  was  com- 
pleted and  the  perpetrators  had  disappeared;  and 
their  interposition  was  far  from  welcome  to  the 
people,  as  their  unprofitable  and  vexatious  inquiries 
had  frequently  no  other  purpose  in  view  than  the 
extortion  of  money  as  the  price  of  forbearing  to 
drag  the  villagers,  unwilling  witnesses,  before  the 
European  magistrate,  or  even  of  falsely  accusing 
them  of  being  accessary  to  the  crime.^ 

The  Zilla  judge,  who  according  to  the  existing 
system  administered,  as  has  been  mentioned,  both 
the  criminal  as  well  as  the  civil  law,  and  was 
charged  also  with  the  duty  of  police  magistrate,  ne- 
cessarily resided  in  the  capital  town  of  his  juris- 
diction, which  might  be  a  hundred  miles  remote 
from  the  scene  of  a  robbery.  Fully  occupied  with 
his  other  dutics^  it  was  impossible  for  him  to  pay 
frequent  visits  to  places  at  any  considerable  dis- 
tance from  his  station ;  and  not  only  was  local  in- 
vestigation therefore  impracticable,  but  it  was  im- 
possible for  him  to  exercise  a  vigilant  personal 
supervision  over  the  officers  of  the  police.  The 
police  jurisdictions  were  originally  intended  to  in- 
clude tracts  of  about  twenty  miles  square ;  but  they 
were  of  greater  or  less  extent,  according  to  circum- 
stances, and   usually  embraced   a  numerous  popu- 

'  Dowdesweirs  Report,  and  Letters  of  tlie  Judges  preceding. 


NATIVE   POLICE   ESTABLISHBfENTS.  401 

lation.     fiach  of  these  was  under  a  head  officer  or  book  i. 
Daroga,  who  had  at  his  disposal  from  twenty  to  ^"^''•^"' 


fifty  armed  men,  a  very  inadequate  force  in  many  isis. 
cases  to  maintain  order  amongst  the  inhabitants  of 
the  district.  To  render  them  still  more  ineffective, 
the  pay  of  the  whole,  the  Daroga  included,  was  barely 
suflficient  for  their  support,  and  they  were  almost  of 
necessity  corrupt.  Little  or  no  assistance  was  to  be 
expected  from  the  people.  Their  ancient  institu- 
tions had  been  broken  up  either  directly  or  indi- 
rectly by  the  regulations  of  the  Government.  The 
Zemindars  had  been  formerly  charged  with  the 
management  of  the  police,  and  were  held  ac- 
countable for  all  acts  of  robbery  or  violence  com- 
mitted within  their  Zemindaris.  They  abused  their 
power  and  neglected  their  duty  in  some  cases ;  and 
they  were  relieved  of  the  one,  and  deprived  of  the 
other,  in  a  summary  manner,^  and  they  were  little 
inclined  to  interest  themselves  in  a  troublesome  and 
thankless  oflfice.  The  instruments  employed  under 
them  had  been  of  two  classes :  one,  under  the  term 
Paiks  and  Chokidars,  attached  to  them  and  their 
agents  personally;  the  other,  known  as  Pasbans, 
Nigahbans,  or  Haris,  connected  with  the  villages : 
the  former  were  the  police  of  the  whole  district, 
the  latter  the  watchmen  of  their  respective  hamlets. 
Both  were  paid  chiefly  by  allotments  of  land  rent- 
free,  or  held  at  a  low  quit-rent  under  the  Zemindar.*. 

'  By  Reg.  xxii.  of  1793 :  on  the  grounds  that  the  clause  in  their  en- 
gagements which  had  formerly  invested  them  with  the  authority  had  not 
only  been  found  nugatory,  but  in  numerous  instances  proved  the  means  of 
multiplying  robberies  and  other  disorders,  from  the  collusion  which  sub- 
sisted between  the  perpetrators  of  them  and  the  police-officers  entertained 
by  the  Zemindars  and  fanners  of  the  land. 

'  Their  numbers  may  be  estimated  from  those  of  one  district.    In  Burd- 

VOL.    I.  2d 


402  HurroRT  of  briti8h  ikdia. 

BOOK  L  ^^lien  he  eeased  or  was  forbidden  to  have  any  oon- 
^  cem  with  the  police,  he  had  no  inducement  to  keep 
isia.  np  a  police  establishment ;  and,  when  it  was  intimat- 
ed that  the  allowances  formerlr  made  to  him  for  the 
expense  were  withdrawn,  he  either  leTied  the  same 
rent  upon  the  allotments  of  the  watchmen  and  Paiks 
as  on  an  J  other  of  his  Ryots,  or  he  resumed  the  land. 
The  Paiks  were  generally  dismissed:  the  Tillage 
watchmen  lingered,  but  in  a  state  of  poverty  and 
inefficiency  which  rendered  them  worse  than  use- 
less. It  was  of  little  avail,  therefore,  to  place  them 
by  law  under  the  authority  of  the  new  Darogas,  and 
to  enact  that  they  should  be  kept  up  and  duly  regis- 
tered: the  enactments  were  disregarded,  and  the 
native  police  establishments  ceased  to  exist,  or  were 
in  no  condition  to  give  effectual  aid  in  preserving 
the  public  peace.  They  were  much  more  likely  to 
be  in  concert  with  its  disturbers.* 

The  evil  consequences  of  having  so  completely  ex- 
eluded  native  co-operation  had  long  been  urged  upon 
the  consideration  of  the  Government  by  many  of  its 
ablest  officers,  and  one  of  its  first  remedial  measures 
was  to  reinvest  the  Zemindars  with  a  portion  of 
*  their  former  authority.  Regulations  were  accord- 
ingly enacted,  by  wliich  respectable  inhabitants  of 

wan,  in  1788,  there  were  two  thousand  four  hundred  Pasbans  or  Tillage 
constables,  and  nineteen  thousand  Paiks. — Judicial  Letter  from  the  Court 
of  Directors,  Nov.  1814 ;  Pari.  Papers,  1  July,  1819,  p.  48. 

*  Reg.  i.  1793  reserved  the  option  of  resuming  the  whole  or  part  of  such 
allowances  as  had  been  made  to  the  Zemindars  for  keeping  up  police  than- 
nas,  or  the  produce  of  any  lands  which  they  might  have  been  permitted  to 
appropriate  for  the  same  purpose.  "  Extensive  resumptions  were  made 
under  this  clause ;  resumptions  were  also  made  by  the  Zemindars ;  and  the 
effect  of  both  was  to  reduce  the  native  police  to  a  state  of  want,  which  drove 
them  to  a  life  of  robbery  and  plunder  for  a  subsistence.** — Letter  from  the 
Court;  Pari.  Papers,  1819,  p.  60. 


ZEMINDARS   AUTHORISED   TO   ACT.  403 

the  several  provinces  were  commissioned  to  act  as  book  i. 
Amins   or   superintendents   of  police:    they   were 


authorised  to  receive  written  charges  of  all  offences  isis. 
of  a  heinous  nature,  issue  warrants  for  the  appre- 
hension of  offenders,  and  send  the  persons  so  appre- 
hended to  the  police  Darogas;  to  apprehend,  or 
cause  to  be  apprehended,  without  warrant,  persons 
engaged  in  the  actual  commission  of  a  heinous  crime 
or  flagrant  breach  of  the  peace,  and  have  them  con- 
veyed to  the  nearest  police  thanna ;  they  were  en- 
joined to  assist  the  Darogas  on  all  occasions;  to 
send  them  information,  and  see  that  t\^e  village 
watchmen  did  their  duty ;  to  obey  the  magistrate's 
orders  in  instituting  any  inquiry,  and  to  furnish  him 
with  a  monthly  report  of  the  persons  whom  they 
had  apprehended ;  and  they  were  declared  liable  to 
prosecution  in  the  criminal  court  for  any  act  of  cor- 
ruption, extortion,  or  oppression  done  by  themselves 
or  any  person  acting  under  their  authority/ 

In  these  regulations  for  enlisting  persons  of  credit 
and  influence  in  the  preservation  of  the  public 
peace,  there  were  several  radical  defects  which  en- 
sured their  failure.  These  police  Amins  were  not 
only  to  give  their  services  without  pay,  but,  "  con- 
sidering the  description  of  persons  from  whom  they 
were  to  be  selected,  it  was  not  expected  that  they 
would  require  any  distinct  establishment  of  public 
officers  at  the  charge  of  Government  to  enable  them 
to  perform  the  duties  required  of  them."  They 
were,  in  fact,  to  pay  a  police  as  well  as  perform  its 
functions.  It  is  not  surprising  that  few  should 
have  been  willing  to  accept  the  office.     Even  had 


'  Bengal  Regs.  xii.  and  xIt.  1807. 

2d2 


404  HISTORY   OF  BRITISH   INDIA. 

BOOK  I.  these  unreasonable  stipulations  been  omitted,  it  was 

CHAP    VIL  i% 

'  not  to  be  expected  that  many  persons  of  respecta- 
1813.  bility  would  have  been  ambitious  of  a  post  which 
made  them  subordinate  to  the  police  Darogas. 
The  regulations  were  rescinded  in  a  few  years;*  and 
the  penalties  of  fine  and  imprisonment  were  then 
imposed  upon  the  Zemindars,  and  all  holders  of  land, 
if  they  failed  to  give  early  and  punctual  information 
of  the  commission  of  any  public  offences,  or  the 
resort  of  robbers  in  any  place  within  their  estates ; 
and  if  they  afforded  to  such  offenders  food,  or  shel- 
ter, or  coi^cealment,  they  were  liable  to  forfeit  their 
lands  to  the  Government.*  Similar  penalties  had 
been  previously  denounced ;  but  to  so  little  purpose, 
that  it  was  doubted  if  a  single  instance  was  known 
of  their  having  been  enforced.^  With  respect  to 
the  inferior  agents,  Paiks,  Chokidars,  and  the  like, 
they  were  made  liable  to  corporal  punishment  by 
the  magistrate  if  proved  guilty  of  misconduct  or 
neglect  :*  no  provisions  were  enacted  at  this  time  for 
replacing  them  in  the  occupancy  of  their  lands,  to 
obviate  the  necessity  which  made  them,  according 
to  Mr.  Dowdeswell,  alternately  watchmen  and  rob- 
bers. 

Actuated  by  that  spirit  of  exclusive  reliance  upon 
European  agency  which  had  been  engendered  by  the 
institutions  of  Marquis  Comwallis,  the  Government 
of  Bengal  strengthened  the  department  of  the  police 
by  the  appointment  of  two  superintendents  of  police, 
one  for  the  Lower  and  one  for  the  Western  provinces. 

*  Bengal  Reg.  v.  1810.  2  Bengal  RegB.  ix.  1808;  iii.  1812. 

•  Dowdesweirs  Report-^;  Fifth  Report,  App.  614. 
^  Reg.  iii.  1812. 


SPECIAL   MAGISTRATES   APPOINTED.  405 

Tliese  oflScers,  acting  in  concert  with  the  magistrates,  book  i. 
or,  as  occasion  required,  independently  of  them,  were  ^^^^'  ^'' 


not  restricted  to  any  particular  station  or  defined  I8I8. 
district,  and  were  enabled  to  exercise  a  more  imme- 
diate supervision  over  the  Darogas  and  police  esta- 
blishments, and  to  apprehend  and  punish  offenders 
in  a  more  prompt  and  vigorous  manner.*  The 
arrangement  was  beneficial.  But,  besides  these  oflS- 
cers, magistrates  were  appointed  with  special  powers 
to  suppress  the  crime  of  gang-robbery  in  the  dis- 
tricts adjacent  to  Calcutta,  which  were  its  principal 
seats.  Selected  for  their  personal  intelligence  and 
activity,  and  for  their  knowledge  of  the  languages 
and  customs  of  the  people,  at  liberty  to  devote  their 
whole  energies  to  their  particular  duties,  and  armed 
with  large  discretionary  powers,  they  speedily  arrest- 
ed the  mischief;  but  in  their  zeal  they  had  recourse 
to  unjustifiable  rigour,  and  were  almost  as  severe  a 
scourge  to  the  country  as  the  Dakoits  themselves. 
The  inhabitants  of  the  villages  were  indiscriminately 
apprehended  upon  insuflScient  evidence:  many  of 
them  were  acquitted  upon  trial  after  having  been 
long  detained  in  prison :  some  died  in  confinement.* 

'  Regs.x.  1S08;  yiii.1810. 

'  At  Muddenpore,  some  treasure  having  been  plundered  by  Dakoits,  one 
hundred  and  ninety-two  persons  were  apprehended  upon  the  charge  of  an 
informer:  one  hundred  and  forty-two  were  released  upon  examination, 
forty-six  were  committed,  six  were  pardoned  upon  a  pretended  confession ; 
for  it  turned  out  on  the  trial  of  those  committed,  who  were  detained  in 
prison  above  a  year^  that  the  whole  were  innocent,  the  charge  having  been 
a  fobrication.  Three  of  the  prisoners  died  in  jail. — Sir  H.  Strachey ;  An-' 
swers  to  Queries;  Judicial  Records,  ii.  70.  At  Nadiya,  two  thousand 
and  seventy-one  persons  were  apprehended  as  Dakoits  from  the  20th  of 
May,  1808,  to  the  31st  of  May,  1809 ;  of  whom  no  less  than  one  thousand 
eight  hundred  and  twenty-eight  had  been  taken  up  as  men  of  bad  charac- 
ter and  on  vague  suspicion,  forty-four  only  had  been  convicted  before  the 
Court  of  (circuit  during  two  sessions,  three  hundred  and  sixty-nine  had 
been  released  by  the  magistrate,  two  hundred  and  sixty-eight  acquitted  by 


406  HISTORY   OF   BRITISH   INDIA'. 

BOOK  I.  It  was  argued  in  defence  of  this  procedure,  that, 
"*  although  the  acquitted  persons  might  not  have  been 
I8i3w  concerned  in  the  actual  offence,  yet  they  were  cog- 
nisant of  its  perpetration,  and  neither  took  any  steps 
to  prevent  it,  nor  to  bring  the  perpetrators  to  jus- 
tice ;  that  violent  diseases  required  strong  remedies ; 
and  that  it  was  better  that  a  few  innocent  persons 
should  suffer  than  the  whole  community  live  in  alarm 
and  danger.  Equally  exceptionable  was  the  subor- 
dinate agency  by  which  the  objects  of  the  magis- 
trates were  in  most  instances  obtained — the  em- 
ployment of  hired  spies  or  Goyendas :  it  was  ad- 
mitted that  the  system  was  liable  to  abuse;  that 
the  Goyendas  were  unprincipled  miscreants,  who 
made  their  power  the  means  of  extortion,  and  who 
hesitated  not  to  sacrifice  innocent  individuals  to 
their  cupidity  or  their  revenge.  But  it  was  main- 
tained that  their  instrumentality  was  absolutely 
necessary;  that  no  efficient  police  could  be  esta- 
blished in  any  country  except  upon  the  basis  of 
espionage ;  that  without  the  aid  of  hired  informers 
the  most  notorious  leaders  of  the  Dakoits  would  not 
have  been  apprehended  at  all ;  and  that  the  im- 
provement manifested  in  the  districts  round  Cal- 
cutta was  proportionate  to  the  skill  with  which  this 

the  court.  Of  those  who  remained  in  jail  after  the  first  sessions  of  1809, 
the  greater  part  had  not  been  brought  up  for  trial  at  the  two  sessions  which 
followed,  but  still  remained  in  confinement.  On  the  31st  of  May,  1809, 
there  were  no  less  than  one  thousand  four  hundred  and  seventy-seven  pri- 
soners in  the  Nadiya  jail  who  had  not  been  examined.  Besides  the  two 
thousand  and  seventy-one  prisoners  above  specified,  a  considerable  number 
of  persons  had  been  apprehended  as  Dakoits  during  the  same  period  by 
Messrs.  Blacquiere  and  Leyden,  the  magistrates  of  the  twenty-four  Per- 
gunnas  and  joint  magistrates  of  Nadiya,  and  by  their  Goyendas,  who,  in- 
stead of  being  examined  and  tried,  were  sent  down  to  the  Presidency  and 
there  kept  in  confinement. — Judicial  Letter  from  the  Court,  1st  Oct.  1814; 
Pari.  Papers,  June,  1819,  p.  25. 


SUPPRESSION   OF   DAKOm   IN   BUEDWAN.  407 


powerful  engine  had  been  wielded.^      These  were  book  i. 
the   sentiments  of  many  of  the  most  confidential 


CHAP.  VII. 


advisers  of  the  Government,  and  they  predominated  isia. 
in  its  counsels.  Notwithstanding  this  view  of  the 
case,  and  admitting  the  efficacy  of  the  Goyenda 
system  in  the  districts  which  were  most  disorgah- 
ised,  and  in  hands  better  adapted  to  a  harsh  than 
delicate  handling  of  a  public  nuisance,  it  was  shown 
by  contemporary  experience  that  such  extreme  and 
mischievous  methods  were  not  indispensable,  and 
that  the  evil  was  susceptible  of  alleviation  by  a 
milder  treatment.  In  one  district  at  least,  that  of 
Burdwan,  gang-robbery,  once  as  prevalent  there  as 
in  other  places,  was  nearly  extinguished  in  the 
course  of  a  twelvemonth  by  very  different  measures. 
The  instruments  employed  were  the  neglected  and 
undervalued  institutions  of  the  country  animated  by 
skilful  superintendence  and  encouragement:  the 
landholders  and  head-men  of  the  villages  and  of 
various  trades  were  called  upon  to  enter  into  en- 
gagements for  the  performance  of  those  duties, 
which  it  was  personally  explained  to  them  they 
were  expected  to  fulfil ;  and  the  village  watchmen 
were  punished  for  neglect  or  connivance,  and  re- 
warded for  courage  and  good  conduct.  Attempts 
to  deprive  them  of  their  service-lands  were  sedu- 
lously resisted,  and  the  villagers  were  encouraged  to 
give  them  more  liberal  subsistence.  In  this  in- 
stance it  was  unequivocally  shown  that  the  co- 
operation of  the  people  was  to  be  had,  and  that  when 
had  it  was  efficacious.^ 

'  Dowdesweirs  Report,  p.  616. 

'  In  the  year  1810,  Mr.  Botlerworth  Bayley  was  appointed  to  the  office 


408  HISTORY   OF   BRITISH   INDIA. 


BOOK  I.  Notwithstanding  this  evidence  of  the  feasibility 
*^^^'  ^'  of  a  different  system,  no  attempt  was  made  to  act 
1813.  upon  it  on  a  more  extensive  scale;  and  the  only 
enactments  of  the  Government,  in  addition  to  those 
already  adverted  to,  placed  the  rewards  which  had 
bden  given  for  the  apprehension  of  Dakoits  upon 
safer  principles.  The  amount  payable  upon  convic- 
tion was  augmented :  it  was  made  payable  wholly, 
or  in  part,  where  conviction  could  not  be  establish- 
ed, if  circumstances  justified  the  apprehension  of 
the  prisoner ;  and  it  was  to  be  withheld,  even  where 
conviction  ensued,  if  it  appeared  that  improper 
mean^  had  been  pursued  by  the  informer.  Rewards 
for  meritorious  exertions,  and  remuneration  for  ex- 
pense incurred  in  cases  not  specified,  connected  with 
the  discovery  and  apprehension  of  offenders,  were 
also  authorised.  The  combined  operation  of  the 
measures  of  the  Government  was  not  without  effect : 

of  magistrate  of  Burdwan.  In  Feb.  1811,  the  Circuit  judge  reports  that 
"  gang-robbery,  formerly  so  prevalent,  had  become  nearly  extinct ;  and  a 
regular  system  had  been  introduced  which  promised  fair  to  secure  the  co- 
operation of  the  community  in  the  detection  and  apprehension  of  offenders.** 
The  causes  of  improvement  are  thus  detailed  by  Mr.  Bayley ;  "  The  uniform 
punishment  and  dismission  from  office  of  tlie  village  watchmen  wherever 
there  was  any  appearance  of  neglect  or  connivance  on  their  part  in  robbe* 
lies,  and  the  rewards  which  were  constantly  given  to  them  for  any  proof  of 
bravery,  activity,  or  good  conduct  in  opposing  or  apprehending  Dakoits ; 
the  exertions  made  by  him  for  obtaining  a  more  adequate  subsistence  for  the 
village  watchmen,  by  carefully  preventing  all  attempts  on  the  part  of  the 
Talookdars  to  resume  any  part  of  the  Chakeran  lands,  and  by  encouraging 
the  head  villagers  to  subscribe  a  more  liberal  remuneration  for  the  support 
of  their  Chokidars  than  had  before  been  customary."  The  Mandals,  who 
were  the  principal  fixed  residents,  and  were  vested  by  long  usage  with  con- 
siderable local  authority  and  immunities,  and  the  Chokidars  under  them, 
were  the  chief  classes  upon  whom  Mr.  Bayley  relied  for  information  and  aid 
in  the  improvement  of  the  police.  He  however  took  Moochulkas  not  only 
from  them,  but  also  from  the  landholders,  gomashtas,  venders  of  spirituous 
liquor,  pawnbrokers,  gold  and  silversmiths,  &c.,  explaining  to  them  person- 
ally the  duties  they  were  enjoined  to  perform,  and  the  practices  from  which 
they  were  expected  to  refrain. — Letter  of  Court,  9th  Nov.  1814;  Pari. 
Papers,  June,  1819,  p.  53.  In  this  letter  the  Court  take  a  general  review  of 
tlie  past  and  actual  state  of  the  police  in  Bengal. 


REVENUE   SETTLEMENTS,  409 

the  crime   of  gang-robbery,   although    not  wholly  book  i. 
eradicated,  was  materially  checked,  and  during  the  ^^^^^^^J^ 
latter  part  of  Lord  Minto's  administration  it  became     I813. 
much  less  frequent,  and  was  less  marked  by  cruelty 
and  bloodshed. 

Shortly  prior  to  the  appointment  of  Lord  Minto, 
a  controversy  had  commenced  between  the  autho- 
rities in  England  and  in  India  respecting  the  course 
to  be  pursued  with  resi)ect  to  the  final  settlement  of 
the  revenue  from  the  land  in  those  parts  of  the 
British  territory  where  a  settlement  was  yet  to  be 
effected,  comprising  the  Ceded  and  Conquered  pro- 
vinces under  the  Presidency  of  Bengal,  and  the  pro- 
vinces in  the  south  of  India  which  had  been  annexed 
to  the  Madras  Presidency  by  the  humiliation  and 
downfall  of  the  Mohammedan  Government  of  My- 
sore. Opinions  at  home  had  undergone  a  material 
change.  Principles,  which  but  a  few  years  before 
had  met  with  universal  assent,  were  now  called  in 
question;  and  measures,  which  had  received  the 
sanction  and  commendation  of  the  Court  of  Direc- 
tors, the  Board  of  Controul,  and  of  successive  ad- 
ministrations, and  which  had  been  eulogised  by  high 
authorities  as  the  results  of  consummate  wisdom 
and  enlightened  disinterestedness,*  were  ncfw  stig- 

'  ''  The  distinguished  character  of  Lord  Comwallis,  and  the  authority 
which  the  permanent  settlement  derived  from  the  approbation  of  Mr.  Pitt, 
of  Mr.  now  Lord  Grenville,  and  the  late  Lord  Melville,  justly  clothed  it 
with  an  awful  veneration,  which  for  many  years  precluded  the  agitation  of 
any  question  as  to  its  merits.** — Commons*  Committee,  App.  p.  67 ;  Obser- 
vations on  the  Revenue  System  of  India,  by  the  Right  Hon.  John  Sullivan. 
In  the  Parliamentary  Debates,  House  of  Lords,  9th  April,  1813,  Lord 
Wellesley  observed,  *<  Every  Governor  of  India  had  acknowledged  the 
justice  and  policy  of  the  principle  of  the  permanent  settlement,  and  he  was 
satisfied  that  every  person  qualified  to  be  a  Governor  of  India  roust  do  the 
same.  It  formed  the  corner-stone  of  the  Government  of  India,  and  the  ex- 
tension of  the  principle  to  the  Conquered  provinces  would  found  a  solid  basis 


410  HISTORY   OP   BRITISH  INDIA. 

BOOK  I.  matised  as  improvident  and  precipitate,  as  origi- 
cHAP.viL  p^^j^g.  jjj  defective  knowledge  and  erroneous  ana- 
181S.  logies,  and  as  equally  detrimental  to  the  prosperity 
of  the  state  and  the  happiness  of  the  people.  The 
leading  members  of  the  Bengal  and  Madras  Govern- 
ments, trained  in  the  school  of  Lord  Comwallis, 
and,  with  the  exception  of  the  Governor-General 
himself,  the  instruments  and  coadjutors  of  that 
nobleman  in  framing  the  perpetual  settlement  of 
Bengal,  and  in  extending  its  provisions  to  Madras, 
tenaciously  adhered  to  the  principles  of  that  settle- 
ment, and  strenuously  urged  its  universal  adoption. 
The  principal  authorities  of  England,  on  the  con- 
trary, influenced  by  the  proceedings  and  sentiments 
of  some  distinguished  revenue  officers  of  the  Presi- 
dency of  Madras,  first  suspended,  and  finally  pro- 
hibited, the  conclusion  of  an  assessment  in  per- 
petuity in  those  provinces  to  which  it  had  not  been 
extended.^     To  render  this  change  of  purpose  intel- 


for  that  Govemment  to  rest  upon.**  On  the  same  occasion  Lord  Grenville 
urged  the  insertion  of  a  clause  in  any  charter  to  be  granted  to  the  Company 
declaratory  of  the  adherence  of  the  Indian  Government  to  the  principle  of 
permanency. 

^  The  Select  Committee  of  the  House  of  Commons,  in  their  celebrated  FifUi 
Report,  printed  July,  1812,  first  publicly  called  the  principle  in  question, 
employing  what  Marquis  Wellesley  termed  ambiguous  words,  tending,  ac- 
cording to  Lord  Grenville,  if  not  to  discredit  the  original  measure,  at  least 
to  discountenance  its  proposed  extension.  This  Report  is  known  to  haye 
been  the  composition  of  Mr.  Camming,  at  that  time  superintendent  of  the 
revenue  and  judicial  department  in  the  office  of  the  Board  of  Controul,  who 
was  an  implicit  believer  in  the  excellence  of  the  Ryotwar  settlement  as  ad- 
vocated by  Sir  Thomas  Munro. — Commons'  Committee,  1882,  App. ;  Reve- 
nue remarks  by  Mr.  Sullivan.  We  have  also  the  testimony  of  Mr.  Cour- 
tenay,  between  fifteen  and  sixteen  years  secretary  to  tlie  Board  of  Controul, 
that  the  opposition  to  the  permanent  Zemindari  settlement  originated  in  the 
Board,  not  in  the  Court :  **  I  may  here  mention,  that  the  system  known  by 
the  name  of  SirT.  Munro's  system  was  tlie  work  of  the  Board,  and  in  many 
parts  of  it  was  opposed  by  the  Court.  The  same  observation  applies  to 
many  matters  concerning  the  revival  or  maintenance  of  ancient  native  insti- 
tutions, and  the  employment  of  natives  in  public  functions.*'     And  again : 


LAND   THE   CHIEF   SOURCE   OF   REVENUE.  411 

ligible,  it  will  be  necessary  to  take  a  brief  survey  of  book  i. 
the  condition  of  the  agricultural  population  of  India, , 


and  the  principles  upon  which  the  realisation  of  the  I813. 
revenue  derived  from  land  was  founded,  previously 
to  the  establishment  of  the  British  Government,  as 
well  as  of  the  proceedings  of  the  British  Govern- 
ment subsequently  to  those  which  have  been  already 
described  in  connexion  with  the  permanent  settle- 
ments made  by  Lord  Comwallis. 

Land  is  the  main  source  of  the  revenue  of  the 
British  Government  of  India.  That  Government 
follows  in  this  respect  the  principles  and  practice  of 
its  predecessors,  both  Mohammedan  and  Hindu; 
and,  while  it  avails  itself  of  a  convenient  and  profit- 
able means  of  making  provision  for  the  public 
charges,  it  consults  the  advantage,  and  conforms  to 
the  notions  and  feelings,  of  the  people.* 

"  When  I  8€ud  that  Sir  T.  Munro's  system  was  the  work  of  the  Board,  I 
meant  that  it  was  taken  up  and  countenanced  by  the  Board  rather  than  by 
the  Court." — Commons*  Com.  18S2,App.;   Public  answers,  292.  1685. 

'  '^  In  India  the  land  has  always  furnished  the  chief  revenue  of  the  state, 
and  taxes  are  immediately  imposed  upon  it."— Minute  of  Lord  Teignmouth, 
Fifth  Report,  App.  205.  <<  By  the  ancient  law  of  the  country  the  ruling 
power  is  entitled  to  a  certain  proportion  of  the  produce  of  every  beega  of 
land,  deraandable  in  money  or^  kind,  according  to  local  custom,  unless  it 
transfers  its  right  thereto  for  a  time,  or  in  perpetuity." — Preamble  to  Reg. 
xix.  1793.  '*  Any  change  from  established  custom  in  India  gives  rise  to  a 
great  deal  of  dissatisfaction.  The  land-rent  is  what  the  people  readily  pay  ; 
and,  although  it  may  appear  exorbitant,  it  is  a  revenue  that  is  paid  without 
much  difficulty.  A  tax  in  any  other  shape,  however  small,  is  comparatively 
disliked." — Christian,  Evidence,  Lords'  Committee,  1830  ;  Question  848. 
"  Nine-tenths  probably  of  the  revenue  of  the  Government  of  India  is  derived 
from  the  rent  of  land,  never  appropriated  to  individuals,  and  always  consi- 
dered to  be  the  property  of  Government :  and  to  me  that  appears  to  be  one 
of  the  most  fortunate  circumstances  that  can  occur  in  any  country;  because, 
in  consequence  of  this,  the  wants  of  the  state  are  supplied  really  and  truly 
witliout  taxation.  As  far  as  this  source  goes,  the  people  of  the  country 
remain  untaxed." — Mill,  Evid.,  Select  Committee  of  House  of  Commons, 
1831 ;  Question  3134.  The  proportion  was  overrated,  as  was  subsequently 
remarked  by  the  Committee ;  it  was  about  six-tenths :  nor,  as  there  will  be 
occasion  to  remark,  was  it  quite  correct  to  say  that  the  rent  of  land  was 
never  appropriated  to  individuals. 


412 


HlffTORT  OF   BRITISH   INDIA. 


BOOK  h  Bat,  this  isLct  being  stated,  there  occur  sondiy 
qneationR.  which,  although  repeatedly  and  labo- 
i«i3.  riouslj  investigated,  have  not  yet  been  answered  in 
snch  a  manner  as  to  secure  universal  acceptance. 
They  may  be  briefly  resolved  into  the  following: 
1.  In  what  character  did  the  native  Governments 
claim  a  revenue  from  the  land  ?  2.  What  were  the 
nature  and  extent  of  their  demands  ?  3.  By  what 
class  or  classes  of  the  people  were  those  demands 
discharged  ?  4.  Upon  what  principles  were  the  de- 
mands of  the  British  Government  regulated  ?  We 
shall  endeavour  to  elicit  a  reply  to  these  queries 
from  the  mass  of  conflicting  statements  by  which 
the  subject  has  been  obscured;  but,  as  the  space 
which  can  be  devoted  to  the  inquiry  is  unavoidably 
disproportionate  to  the  quantity  of  unmethodised 
materials  which  have  been  accumulated  with  a 
view  to  its  elucidation,  it  will  be  necessary  to  select 
for  description  only  a  few  of  the  most  important 
points,  omitting  many  of  less  moment,  though 
of  scarcely  inferior  interest.* 

I.  The  demand  made  by  the  Sovereign  has  been 
commonly  referred  to  his  character  of  proprietor  of 
the  soil.     It  has  been  maintained  that  it  is  by  his 

*  The  principal  authorities  consulted  for  the  following  passages  in  the 
text  are,  The  Fifth  Report  of  the  Select  Committee  of  1810,  printed  1812, 
1  Tol.  folio;  Selections  finom  the  Revenaeand  Judicial  Records  at  the  India 
House,  printed  by  order  of  the  Court  of  Directors,  1820-1826,  4  vols,  folio ; 
Reports  of  the  Select  Committees  of  both  Houses  of  Parliament  in  1830, 
1831,  and  1832,  with  evidence  and  appendices,  reprinted  by  order  of  the 
Court  of  Directors,  16  vols.  4to ;  Colonel  Wilks's  History  of  the  South  of 
India ;  Sir  J.  Malcolm's  Central  India ;  Mr.  Elphinstone's  History  of  India ; 
Rouse  on  the  Land  Tenures  of  India ;  General  Briggs  on  the  Land-tax  of 
India  ;  General  Galloway  on  the  Law  and  Constitution  of  India;  Mr.  Tucker 
on  the  Financial  Situation  of  the  East  India  Company ;  Colonel  Sykes  on  the 
Land  Tenures  of  the  Dekhin ;  Mr.  Thomason  on  the  Revenue  Settlement 
of  Azimghur ;  and  a  variety  of  tracts  and  papers. 


PROPRIETARY  RIGHT.  413 

permission  only,  and  with  his  sanction,  that  the  land  book  i. 
is  occupied,  and  that  the  occupant  sows  his  seed  ^^^^-^^ 
and  reaps  his  crops;  that  whatever  produce  is  in     isis. 
excess  of  the  bare  subsistence  of  the  cultivator  and 
cost  of  cultivation,  is  the  property  of  the  king ; 
that  it  is  rent,  not  revenue,  to  which  he  is  entitled, 
for  he  is  the  one  universal  landlord ;  that  this  is  the 
character  in  which   the  sovereign  appears  in  the 
laws  and  institutions  of  the  Hindus,  in  the  laws  of 
the  Mohammedan  conquerors  of  India,  and  in  the 
practice  of  all  modem  native  governments,  and  in 
which  he  is  recognised  universally  by  the  people/ 

Notwithstanding  the  positiveness  with  which  it 
has  been  affirmed  that  the  proprietary  right  of  the 
sovereign  is  indissolubly  connected  with  the  an- 
cient laws  and  institutions  of  the  Hindus,  the  ac- 
curacy of  the  assertion  may  be  reasonably  disputed. 
In  adducing  the  authority  of  Hindu  writers  in  fa- 
vour of  the  doctrine,  two  sources  of  fallacy  are  dis- 
cernible. No  discrimination  has  been  exercised  in 
distinguishing  ancient  from  modem  authorities ;  and 
isolated  passages  have  been  quoted,  without  regard 
to  others  by  which  they  have  been  qualified  or  ex- 

^  See  Mill,  History  of  India,  i.  S05,  and  notes;  also  Grant's  Reports  on 
the  Northern  Circars  and  the  Revenues  of  Bengal ;  and  the  Minute  of  Lord 
Comwallis,  Fifth  Report,  App.  473.  Colonel  Munro  says,  "  Nothing  can 
be  plainer  than  that  private  landed  property  has  never  existed  in  India  except 
on  the  Malabar  coast.*' — Revenue  Sel.  i.  04.  And  the  Board  of  Revenue 
observe,  *'  We  concur  with  Colonel  Munro  in  thinking  that  Government  is 
virtually  the  proprietor  of  the  soil/ — Ibid.  486.  Such  also  is  Mr.  Fortes- 
cue's  opinion  with  respect  to  the  Western  provinces ;  and  at  a  long  sub- 
sequent date,  "  As  to  the  proprietorship,  my  belief  is,  that  the  Govern- 
ment is  the  proprietor  of  the  land,  and  that  the  person  occupying  it  is  well 
satisfied  with  the  occupation,  paying  the  rent." — Lords*  Committee,  1830, 
Evid.,  Question  511.  And  on  the  opposite  side  of  India  Colonel  Bame- 
wall  asserts  that  the  people  in  Guzerat  claim  no  property  in  the  soil.  Go- 
vernment is  vested  with  the  property  in  the  lands ;  and,  as  landlord,  entitled 
to  the  rent,  or  a  share  of  the  produce  equal  to  it. — Commons*  Committee, 
1832,  Evid.  1765. 


HISTORY   OF    BRITISH   INDIA. 

,  yjii^n^^  *  If  due  attention  had  been  paid  to  these 
-'^'^^^  v^MKaderstions,  it  would  have  been  found  that  the 
^u  sttlH^^s^d  proprietary  right  of  the  sovereign  is  not 
^raimnted  bj  ancient  writers ;  and  that,  while  those 
of  later  date  seem  to  incline  to  its  admission,  they 
do  not  acknowledge  an  exclusive  right,  but  one 
concurrent  with  the  right  of  the  occupant;  they 
acknowledge  a  property  in  the  soil,  not  the  property 
of  the  soil.  In  the  older  jurists  we  find,  indeed, 
ihe  right  of  kingly  power  over  the  whole  earth  as- 
serted ;  and  the  right  is  based,  with  every  semblance 
of  historical  truth,  upon  conquest :  but  there  is  no 
attribution  of  ownership  to  the  king,  nor  is  there 
anv  trace  of  a  royal  property  or  estate.^    Proprietary 

•  As  observed  by  Mr.  Mill,  i.  307  and  note,  the  Digest  of  Hindu  law 
^^ttpiled  by  the  desire  of  Sir  William  Jones,  and  translated  by  Mr.  Cole- 
|«r\M>ke,  favours  the  proprietary  right  of  the  sovereign,  particularly  in  stat- 
|ii|[,  that,  if  no  special  engagement  for  a  term  of  occupancy  has  been  made, 
iW  occupant  may  at  any  time  be  dispossessed  by  the  Kaja  in  favour  of  a 
yi«Hr»(tn  oflfering  a  higher  revenue. — i.  461.  Colonel  Wilks  accuses  the 
ISimlits,  who  compiled  the  Digest,  of  falsifying  the  law ;  but  the  charge  is 
^itHloM-'rved.  The  original  passages  of  the  Digest  are  not  the  law,  they  are 
ll^  opinions  of  the  compiler  as  to  the  meaning  of  the  law  ;  and  it  is  open  to 
^yv^  one  to  contest  or  admit  the  interpretation  according  to  the  purport  of 
|Ik«  ancient  texts,  which  are  also  given.  It  is  also  necessary  to  collate  this 
yd^jiMge  with  what  follows;  it  will  then  be  found  that  Tarka-Panch4nana, 
ll^  iH»mpiler,  does  not  deny  proprietary  right  in  the  subject,  he  only  infers 
IIk"  iH»-existence  of  concurrent  rights  :  "  There  is  property,*'  he  says,  "  of  a 
liMudivd  various  kinds  in  land :''  and,  when  treating  of  sale  without  owner- 
»ki|k,  he  observes,  "  The  property  is  his  who  uses  the  land  where  he  re- 
skklt^t  )Uid  while  he  uses  it;  and  tlius,  when  land  belonging  to  any  person 
ilk  mUU  by  the  king,  it  is  sale  without  ownership." — i.  475.     The  sale  is 

•  The  texts  of  Menu,  which  have  been  cited  in  proof  of  the  proprietary 
right  of  the  Raja,  have  been  misunderstood.  In  B.  viii.  v.  39,  the  phrase 
r^Uertnl  by  Sir  W.  Jones  "  lord  paramount  of  the  soil,"  is  Bhumer-adhi- 
l»atit  supreme  ruler  of  the  earth  :  the  title  Adhipati,  "  over-lord,"  no  more 
iiik|>lie!t  ownership  in  this  text  than  when  it  ih  used  to  denote  the  head-man 
yf  a  village,  Grdmadhipati ;  or  governor  of  a  district,  D^sadhipati.  In 
i^iH>lh«^r  text,  in  which  the  authority  of  a  king  is  intimated  to  be  analogous 
1^  (lial  of  a  husband  over  a  wife,  the  sources  of  property  in  subjects  are 
«Uho  iHiunciated  :  "  Ancient  sages  have  called  this  earth  (Prithivi)  the  wife 
vl  Prithu ;  they  have  called  the  field  his  who  has  cut  down  the  thicket ;  the 
vtKI  brtt»t  his  whose  shaft  has  slain  it.'^ — B.  ix.  v.  44.     The  subjection 


RIGHTS  OP  THE   SOVEREIGN.  415 

right  is  vested  in  the  individual  who  first   clears  book  i. 

CHAP   VII« 

and  cultivates  the  land :  it  is  therefore  referred  to        ' 


colonisation ;  a  source  which,  as  regards  India  and  I813. 
the  Hindus,  is  probably  in  a  great  degree  historical. 
The  king  may  occupy  unclaimed  or  uncultivated 
lands,  as  well  as  a  subject ;  he  has  no  preference : 
if  he  appropriates  them,  he  must  give  away  half  to 
the  Brahmans ;  if  they  are  appropriated  by  a  subject, 
the  king  claims  only  the  share  of  the  produce  as- 
signed to  him  by  law.  Concurrent  and  not  incom- 
patible rights  and  claims  are  thus  clearly  recog- 
nised ;  and  the  king's  dues  are  based,  not  upon  any 
indefeasible  right  of  property,  but  in  the  first  in- 
stance upon  conquest,  and  in  the  second  upon  pro- 
tection. 

The  notion  of  the  proprietary  right  of  the  sove- 
reign is  rather  of  Mohammedan  than  Hindu  origin. 
The  doctrines  of  the  Mohammedan  jurists  are  some- 
what at  variance  on  this  matter.    Those  who  belong 


of  the  earth  by  Prithu  is  clearly  an  allef^ry  of  its  conquest  by  the  military 
caste  ;  see  Vishnu  Purana,  p.  103.  The  compiler  of  the  Digest  expressly 
states  that  the  king's  proprietary  right  is  ''  denied  by  some,  because  Menu 
has  only  declared  that  subjects  shall  be  protected  by  the  king."— i.  471. 
Menu  then,  even  according  to  the  Pundits,  is  not  authority  for  this  doctrine. 
Another  ancient  lawgiver,  Yajnawalkya,  is  quoted  in  the  Digest  to  show 
that  the  king  has  no  particular  properly  even  in  unclaimed  or  uncultivated 
ground ;  if  a  subject  choose,  he  may  occupy  it  without  leave,  giving  the  Riga 
his  due. — i.  461.  Another  writer  of  antiquity,  Jaimini,  the  author  of  the 
Mimansa,  also  denies  the  king's  ovmership :  *<  The  kingly  power  is  for  the 
government  of  the  realm  and  the  extirpation  of  wrong,  and  for  that  purpose 
he  receives  taxes  from  husbandmen  and  levies  fines  from  offenders ;  but  the 
right  of  property  is  not  thereby  vested  in  him,  else  he  would  have  property 
in  house  and  land  appertaining  to  the  subjects  abiding  in  his  dominions. 
The  earth  is  not  the  king's,  but  is  common  to  all  beings  eiyojing  the  fruit 
of  their  own  labour." — Colebrooke  on  the  Mimansa  Philosophy,  Trans. 
Royal  Asiatic  Society,  i.  458.  Mr.  Elphinstone  justly  concludes,  from  the 
Hindu  laws  on  this  subject,  that  as  the  king's  share  was  limited  to  one-sixth, 
or  at  most  to  one-fourth,  there  must  have  been  a  proprietor  for  the  other  five- 
sixths,  or  three-fourths,  who  must  obviously  have  had  the  greatest  interest 
of  the  two  in  the  whole  property  shared. — History  of  India,  i.  42. 


416  HIOTORY   OP  BRITISH   INDIA. 

BOOK  I.  to  the  school  which  has  been  chiefly  followed  in 
cHAP.viL  jj^jig^  maintain  the  right  of  individual  ownership: 
1813.  yet  they  do  so  with  considerable  reservation,  for 
they  restrict  the  appropriation  of  all  uncultivated 
land  to  the  king ;  assign  to  him  the  property  of  all 
except  arable  land ;  authorise  him  to  dispossess  any 
occupant  who  neglects  to  cultivate  his  land,  and 
transfer  it  to  another;^  and  entitle  him  to  claim  the 
whole  of  the  net  produce  of  cultivation.  Other 
Mohammedan  lawyers  assert  unequivocally,  that  in 
all  conquered  countries,  and  India  is  in  their  esti- 
mation a  conquered  country,  although  the  inha- 
bitants may  be  suffered  to  retain  the  occupancy  of 
their  lands,  the  property  of  them  is  vested  in  the 
sovereign.*  It  is  apparently  to  these  doctrines,  to 
the  long  continuance  of  Mohammedan  domination 
over  a  large  portion  of  India,  and  to  the  influence 
which  it  indirectly  exercised  over  the  states  that 
remained  subject  to  Hindu  princes,  that  the  notion 
of  the  proprietary  right  of  the  sovereign  owed  its 
general  and  popular  acceptance. 

For  upon  whatever  system  of  law  that  impression 

.  *  The  Hindu  law,  as  it  appears  in  Menu,  docs  not  go  this  length :  it 
provides  only,  that,  in  case  of  neglect  to  cultivate,  the  owner  shall  be  fined 
ten  times  the  amount  of  the  king*s  share,  if  his  own  fault;  five  times,  if  that 
of  his  servants. — B.  viii.  v.  243.  There  is  not  a  word  of  confiscation  or 
transfer. 

'  Galloway  on  the  Law  and  Constittition  of  India,  p.  101.  According 
to  this  vmter,  a  high  authority  in  matters  of  Mohammedan  law,  the  school 
of  A.bu  Hanifa  was  that  which  was  chiefly  followed  in  Hindustan  ;  and  this 
jurist  affirms  that  in  conquered  countries  the  people  paying  the  legal  imi»ost 
preserved  their  proprietary  rights.  General  Galloway  also  states  that  this 
is  denied  by  the  Shafia  and  Malikia  schools;  according  to  which  the  lands, 
although  retained  by  the  pcH)ple,  become  the  property  of  the  sovereign. — 
Ibid.  45.  It  is  worth  observing,  that  all  the  authorities  cited  by  Mill,  i. 
808  note,  with  exception  of  Diodorus  and  Strabo,  whose  testimony  is  not 
entitled  to  very  great  deference,  derive  their  opinions  from  their  observation 
of  the  state  of  things  under  the  Mohammedan  governments. 


POPULAR   BELIEF.  417 

was  founded,  and  whether  erroneous  or  just,  there  book  i. 
is  little  reason  to  doubt  that  in  later  times  at  least  it  ^"^^'  ^"' 
has  prevailed  very  widely  amongst  the  people/  and  isis. 
regulated  the  practice  of  the  native  governments. 
This  gives  the  question  its  importance.  Abstract- 
edly considered,  it  signifies  but  little  whether  the 
king  be  called  the  lord  of  the  soil,  or  by  any  other 
title;  but,  when  in  this  capacity  he  superseded  all 
other  rights,  it  became  no  longer  a  matter  of  mere 
speculation.  Acting  upon  this  principle,  the  native 
rulers  required  that  a  formal  grant  should  legalise 
the  occupation  of  all  waste  land,  and  sequestrated 
estates  of  which  the  cultivation  was  neglected  or 
the  revenues  unpaid;  fixed  at  their  pleasure  from 
time  to  time  the  proportion  of  the  produce  which 
•  the  occupant  was  to  pay,  claiming  indeed  the  whole 
of  the  net  produce  as  the  rent ;  and  turned  out  ac- 
tual occupants  in  favour  of  others  offering  a  higher 
amount  of  payment.  The  almost  universal  practice 
of  recent  times  transferred  these  rights  and  powers  to 
contractors  and  farmers  of  the  revenue,  from  whom 
the  prince  exacted  as  much  as  he  could  obtain,  and 
then  left  them  at  liberty  to  extort  all  they  could, 
and  by  whatever  means  they  could,  from  the  people. 
His   right   to   do  so  was  not   questioned,  but   its 

'  The  belief  of  Mr.  Fortescue  with  regard  to  the  opinions  of  the  people  of 
the  Western  provinces  has  been  already  cited,  note,  p.  413.  The  Abb^  Dubois 
is  a  good  representative  of  the  popular  notions  prevailing  in  the  Dekhin, 
and  he  says,  <*  The  lands  which  the  Hindus  cultivate  are  the  domain  of  the 
prince,  who  is  sole  proprietor :  he  can  resume  them  at  pleasure,  and  give 
them  to  another  to  cultivate." — Description  of  the  People  of  India,  p.  496. 
The  author  has  heard  the  same  sentiment  expressed  repeatedly  by  well-in- 
formed Hindus  from  the  Upper  provinces.  They  have  admitted  the  full 
right  of  the  Government  to  dispossess  any  occupants  whatever,  although,  if 
the  customary  demands  were  paid,  such  act  would  be  considered  harsh  sAd 
oppressive.  In  Bengal  the  notion  has  probably  been  effaced  by  the  Com- 
pany's regulations :  the  Zemindars  have  been  taught  a  different  lesson. 

VOL.  I.  2   E 


418  HISTORY    OF    BRITISH   INDIA. 

BOOK  I.  exercise  through  such  instrumentality  was  resisted 

^^^^^^]^^  where  resistance  was  thought  likely  to  succeed ;  and 

1815.     the  consequences  of  the  system  were  such  as  might 

have  been  anticipated — the  decline  and  disorganisa^ 

tion  of  the  country. 

The  proprietary  right  of  the  sovereign  derives 
then  no  warrant  from  the  ancient  laws  or  insti- 
tutions of  the  Hindus,  and  is  not  recognised  by 
modem  Hindu  lawyers  as  exclusive,  or  incompatible 
with  individual  ownership.  It  is  the  doctrine  of  one 
of  the  schools  of  Mohammedan  law;  it  has  influenced 
the  practice  of  the  later  native  governments,  and  it 
had  obtained  a  very  general  belief  among  the  people. 
The  popular  belief  was  however  modified  by  the 
remembrance  of  original  rights  and  the  remains  of 
primitive  institutions;  and  while  in  theory  the 
people  admitted  the  right  of  the  prince  to  the 
lands  they  tilled,  yet  in  practice  they  very  com- 
monly regarded  them  as  their  own  as  long  as  they 
paid  to  the  sovereign  his  undisputed  share  of  the 
produce.  Unhappily  for  them,  this  share  was  of 
late  rarely  regulated  by  any  other  standard  than 
their  ability  to  comply  with  the  exactions  of  their 
rulers. 

II.  The  ancient  Hindu  law  enacts  that  the  de- 
mand of  the  Raja  shall  be  levied  in  kind.  The 
king  is  to  have  a  proportion  of  the  grain ;  a  twelfth, 
an  eighth,  or  a  sixth.^  It  is  also  declared,  that  in 
time  of  war,  if  he  should  take  one-fourth,  he  would 

'  Menu,  B.  vii.  v.  30.  The  commentator  explains  the  several  rates  to 
depend  upon  the  quality  of  the  land,  and  the  labour  required  to  bring  it 
into  cultivation ;  the  highest  rate  being  levied  on  the  best,  the  lowest  on  the 
worst  sort  of  land :  the  assessment  was  therefore  irrespective  of  the  actual 
crops. 


PROPORTION  OF  PRODUCE  LEVIED.  419 

commit  no  sinJ     A  fourth  of  the  actual  crop  con-  book  i. 
stituted  therefore  the  utmost  limit  of  demand,  and  ^^^^'  ^' 


that  only  in  time  of  war,  under  the  ancient  Hindu  1813. 
system;  and  this  proportion  evidently  left  such  a 
share  to  the  cultivator  as  was  equivalent  to  a  profit 
upon  his  cultivation,  or  to  a  rent,  enabling  him  at 
his  will  to  transfer  the  task  of  cultivation  to  tenant 
farmers,  and  placing  him  in  the  position  of  a  landed 
proprietor  as  far  as  ownership  of  rent  is  evidence  of 
such  a  tenure.*  The  Mohammedan  law  established 
a  totally  different  proportion.  It  extended  the 
claim  of  the  Crown  to  the  whole  of  the  net  pro- 
duce; assigned  to  the  cultivator  only  so  much  of 
the  crop  as  would  suffice  for  one  year's  subsistence 
of  himself  and  his  family,  and  for  seed;  and  reduced 
him  to  the  condition  of  a  mere  labourer  on  his  own 
land.  The  whole  of  the  profit  or  the  rent  went  to 
the  sovereign,  who  thus  became  the  universal  land- 
lord.'    The  more  equitable  spirit  and  sounder  judg- 

'  It  has  been  argued  that  this  law  would  furnish  a  plea  to  the  R^ja  to 
exact  a  fourth  at  all  times,  as  a  case  of  necessity  could  always  be  made  out ; 
but  this  is  not  possible  consistently  with  a  due  regard  to  the  language  and  ob- 
vious intention  of  the  law.  The  passage  should  be  thus  rendered :  '*  A  Ksha- 
triya,  in  time  of  calamity,  protecting  his  subjects  to  the  utmost  of  his  power, 
is  liberated  from  sin  altiiough  taking  a  fourth  part."  The  verse  occurs  in 
the  section  which  treats  of  the  conduct  of  the  different  castes  in  times  of 
distress,  and  is  detached  from  the  passages  concerning  revenue.  That  the 
distress  here  indicated  means  time  of  war  is  clear  enough  from  the  passage 
that  immediately  follows :  *'  for  battle  is  his  duty ;  he  should  never  turn 
his  face  from  fight :  protecting  the  cultivators  with  his  sword,  let  him  levy 
taxes  in  a  lawful  manner.'* — ^v.  1 19. 

*  Such  Mr.  Mill  considered  it,  and  remarked,  that  there  was  no  owner- 
ship of  rent  in  India  as  in  Europe. — Ck)mmons'  Committee,  18S1 ;  3288.  The 
assertion  was  incorrect :  there  was  ownership  of  rent  as  long  as  the  native 
Governments  suffered  it  to  continue  ;  and  there  still  is  such  ownership  under 
the  British  Grovemment,  where  the  assessment  is  light. 

*  *'  When  the  Imam  conquers  a  country,  if  he  permits  the  inhabitants  to 
remain  on  it,  imposing  the  Kharij  on  their  lands  and  the  Jezia  on  their 
heads,  the  land  is  their  property."  Not  very  valuable  property  it  should 
seem,  for  ^  Imam  Mohammed  has  said,  regard  shall  be  had  to  the  culti- 

2k2 


420  HISTORY   OF   BRTTISH    INDIA. 

BOOK  T.  ment  of  Akbar  limited  the  demand  of  the  sovereign 
^"^'''  ^''  to  one-third  of  the  average  produce  of  different  sorts 
1813.  of  land  ;  the  amount  to  be  paid  preferably  in  money, 
but  not  to  be  increased  for  a  definite  term  of  years/ 
Under  more  modem  Governments,  whether  Hinda 
or  Mohammedan,  the  demand  seems  to  have  fluctu- 
ated from  a  third  or  half  of  the  gross  produce,  to  the 
whole  of  the  net  produce,  or  even  to  have  exceeded 
those  proportions;*   leaving   to  the    cultivator  in- 

Tatar :  there  shall  be  left  for  every  one  who  cultivates  his  land  as  much  as 
he  reqnireft  for  his  own  support  till  the  next  crop  he  reaped,  and  for  that  of 
his  family,  and  for  seed.  This  much  shall  be  left  him ;  what  remains  ia 
KhaWiJ,  and  shall  go  to  the  public  treasury.**  This  is  the  dictum  of  a  great 
lawyer  of  the  Hanifia  school,  Sbams-ul-Aima  of  Sarakhs  ;  and  a  firman  of 
Aurangseb  directs  his  officers  to  levy  the  Khar^j  according  to  the  holy  law 
and  Oie  tenets  of  Abu  Hanifa.— Oalloway,  40,  43.  Here  is  evidently  the 
origin  of  the  sovereign's  claim  to  the  whole  of  the  rejit.  The  unhappy 
"  infidel "  cultivator  had  to  pay  a  capitation  tax  besides. 

'  Ayin  Akbari,  i.  806,  914.  The  term  was  fixed,  in  the  24th  year  of  the 
reign,  for  ten  years ;  but  the  general  assessment,  or  Jama-bandi,  of  Toral- 
Mal  was  apparently  intended  to  last  for  an  indefinite  period. — n>id. 
Appendix. 

'  In  the  south  of  India,  Harihara  Rai,  of  Bijnagar,  one  of  the  latest  in- 
dependent Hindu  principalities,  fixed  the  rate  at  one-fourth  of  the  gross 
produce,  fixing  it  on  each  field,  and  requiring  a  money-payment.  The 
Mohammedan  Governments  exacted  half  the  gross  pro<lace  of  the  irrigated 
lands,  and  a  money-rate  equal  to  from  thirty  to  forty  per  cent,  of  the  value 
of  the  unirrigated  and  garden  produce. — Kovenue  Selections,  i.  895.  Ac- 
cording to  the  Parnsara  Madhavlya,  a  work  on  law  by  the  minister  of 
Harihara,  the  king's  share  was  one-sixth.— Wilks,  i.  154.  In  the 
Western  provinces  the  (^vernment  share  was  considered  to  be  half  the  net 
produce.— Forlesrue  ;  Lords'  Committee,  Evidence,  Question  531.  Or 
cten  half  the  gross  produce.— Ibid.  aS2.  "  But  the  rule  authorizing  the 
fexcheqner  to  take  as  revenue  one-half  of  the  produce  in  the  bands  of  Go- 
vernment Is  In  a  great  manner  nominal ;  for  in  the  unsettle<l  districts  we  do 
ttot,  I  believe,  on  an  average,  get  more  than  one-fourth.*' — Mackenzie ; 
Commons*  Committee,  18S2,  Kvld.,  Question  2671.  Mr.  Mill  also  thinks 
It  impossible  that  such  a  proportion  should  ever  have  been  taken. — Com- 
mons* i 'ommittee,  !8ni,  Question  S887.  But  he  observes,  correctly  enough, 
with  regard  to  the  practice  of  later  times,  "  According  to  all  I  can  gather 
fVom  the  practice  of  fbrmer  Governments,  the  Go\'eniment  demand  wais 
nev«'r  lefts  than  the  ftill  rent,  in  many  instances  probably  more ;  not  unfre- 
quently  as  much  more  as  couM  be  raised  without  diminishing  the  number 
of  inhabitants  and  desolating  the  countr> ." — Ibid.,  Quf«tion  S114.  Tbe 
state  of  many  parts  of  India,  when  first  reduced  to  British  authority, showed 
that  these  checks  had  not  always  operated ;  and  thatthe  exactions  of  impro- 
vident and  arbitrary  princes,  enforced  through  the  agenc>'  of  faniiers  of  the 


PARTIES   INTEREOTED.  421 


sufficient    means    of    subsistence,   and   not    unfre-  book  r. 
quently  compelling  him  to  abandon  in  despair  the 


CHAP,  vn. 


cultivation  of  the  lands  which  his  forefathers  had     isis. 
tilled,  and  to  which  his  strongest  affections  chained 
him,  extortion  being  thus  punished  by  dearth  and 
depopulation. 

III.  According  to  the  principles  of  the  Moham- 
medan law,  and  the  consequences  to  which  they 
led,  the  classification  of  the  parties  interested  in  the 
produce  of  the  soil  was  exceedingly  simple.  Two 
only  were  recognised,  the  Ryot  or  cultivating  te- 
nant, and  the  Raja,  or  rent-owning  landlord;*  the 
first  earning  a  scanty  support  by  his  labour,  the  se- 
cond claiming  the  whole  of  the  surplus  return  on 
his  property.  Such  were  the  conclusions  of  the 
first  inquirers  into  the  tenure  of  lands  in  India. 
There  were  found,  indeed,  persons  intervening  be- 
tween the  state  and  the  cultivators,  but  these  it  was 
affirmed  were  in  every  case  persons  to  whom  the 
state  had  delegated  its  powers  or  transferred  its 
rights :  they  were  not — and  this  was  in  some  import- 
ant respects  quite  true — ^proprietors  of  the  soil :  there 
were  no  such  persons, — at  least,  there  were  no  per- 
sons who  had  a  right  to  intercept,  without  a  special 
grant  to  that  effect,  any  portion  of  the  rent  or  profit 
of  cultivation.    Further  investigation  showed  that  the 


revenue,  had  thinned  the  population,  and  consigned  extensive  and  fertile  dis- 
tricts to  the  denizens  of  the  forest. 

*  So  General  Galloway :  **  The  truth  is,  that  between  the  sovereign  and 
the  Reb-ul-arz,  (master  of  the  ground,)  who  is  properly  the  cultivator,  no 
one  intervenes  who  is  not  a  servant  of  the  sovereign." — p.  42.  *•  The  land 
has  been  considered  the  property  of  the  Circar  and  the  Ryots;  the  interest 
in  the  soil  has  been  divided  between  these  two,  but  the  Ryots  have  pos- 
sessed little  more  interest  than  that  of  being  hereditary  tenants." — Thack- 
eray, Fifth  Report,  App.  092. 


422  HISTORY   OF   BRITISH    INDIA. 

BOOK  I.  latter  propositions  were  not  altogether  accurate :  the 
^"^'''^"*  structure  of  agricultural  society  in  India  was  not  so 
1813.  exceedingly  simple ;  a  variety  of  proprietary  rights 
and  privileges  had  survived  the  disintegrating  ope- 
rations of  foreign  conquest,  foreign  laws,  oppressive 
government,  and  popular  misconception,  and  re- 
quired to  be  carefully  studied  and  correctly  under- 
stood before  it  could  be  safe  or  just  to  come  to  any 
unalterable  conclusion.  Traces  of  individual  pro- 
prietary rights,  of  personal  ownership  of  rent,  were 
extensively  discoverable ;  and,  where  they  were  faint 
or  extinct,  it  was  because  the  rapacity  of  the  ruling 
power  had  dimmed  or  extinguished  them. 

A  peculiarity  in  the  disposition  of  landed  pro- 
perty in  India,  which  was  early  observable,  was  its 
distribution  among  communities  rather  than  among 
individuals.  The  earliest  records  describe  the  agri- 
cultural population  as  collected  into  groupes,  vil- 
lages, or  towiishi})s,  having  attached  to  the  particular 
village  or  town  in  which  they  resided  an  extent  of 
land  the  cultivateable  portion  of  which  was  suf- 
ficient for  their  support,  and  which  was  apparently 
cultivated  in  common/  The  internal  administration 
of  the  affairs  of  the  village  was  left,  in  a  great 
measure,  to  the  people  themselves,  under  the  gene- 
ral superintendence  of  an  officer  appointed  by  the 


*  Menu,  vii.  120,  and  viii.  237.  Tlie  Madras  Revenue  Board  aflSnn  the 
village  system  is  as  old  as  Menu  ;  "  That  venerable  legislator  alludes  to 
disputes  about  boundaries  just  as  they  occur  at  present,  and  directs  a  space 
of  four  hundred  cubits  wide,  round  small  villages,  and  twelve  hundred 
round  large  ones,  to  be  left  for  pasture.  This  could  not  have  been  done  if 
the  land  had  been  exclusive  private  propert> ,  for  in  that  case  the  owner 
would  have  made  the  most  of  his  land,  and  not  left  it  waste  for  the  public 
use  of  the  inhabitants  ;  and  boundaries  of  fields  and  farms,  rather  than  of 
villages,  would  have  been  disputed." — Revenue  Selections,  i.  487. 


VILLAGE   COMMUNITIES.  423 

Baja,  by  whom  the  police  was  regulated,  the  go-  book  i. 
vemment  revenue  was  collected,  and  justice  was  "" 


administered,  in  communication  with  the  principal  1813. 
persons  of  the  village.  The  general  scheme  of 
these  village  corporations  has  been  repeatedly  de- 
scribed.^ Besides  the  officers  of  the  government, 
and  the  individuals  who  composed  the  community 
strictly  so  called,  the  village  comprised  a  varying 
number  of  persons  who  received  small  portions  of 
the  crops  as  the  hire  of  services  rendered  to  the 
whole,  and  persons  also  not  members  of  the  original 
establishment,  but  who  were  allowed  to  reside 
within  the  village  as  independent  artificers  and 
tradesmen,  or  even  as  cultivators  of  the  lands 
bought  or  rented  from  the  proprietors.  Establish- 
ments  of  this  nature  were  found  in  their  greatest 
completeness  in  different  parts  of  the  south  of  India, 
where  Hindu  principalities  had  been  longest  pre- 
served :  but  they  were  also  met  with  in  the  western 
provinces  of  Hindustan,  where  their  organisation  had 
assumed  something  of  a  military  character ;  and  ves- 
tiges of  them  were  not  wholly  obliterated  even  in 
Bengal. 

The  circumstances  which  led  originally  to  this 
distribution  of  the  lands  among  detached  communi- 
ties are  now  beyond  the  reach  of  history.  It  may 
have  been  the  result  of  a  legislative  provision,  de- 
vised for  the  ready  realisation  of  the  revenue  and 

*  See  the  description  in  the  first  volume  of  Mill,  p.  313,  from  the  Fifth 
Report;  Elphinstone,  History  of  India,  i.  120,  and  App.  476;  and  Wilks, 
Southern  India,  i.  117.  In  a  deed  of  gift  by  the  minister  of  Bukka  Raya, 
king  of  Vijayanagar,  dated  1109,  Saka  (a.d.  1187),  the  following  list  of  vil- 
lage officers  is  given: — 1.  Ueddi,  or  Pedda  Reddi,  head-man.  2.  Karnam, 
accountant.  3.  Purohit,  priest.  4.  Blacksmith.  5.  Carpenter.  6.  Mo- 
ney-changer.  7.  Kavely  village  watcher  or  police  officer.   8.  Potmaker.  9. 


424  HISTORY   OF   BRITISH   INDIA. 


BOOK  I.  convenient  administration  of  the  civil  government ; 

CHAP.  VII.  ^^^  there  is  no  record  of  its  institution  or  its  au- 
1813.  thor.  Tradition  ascribes  it  to  the  spontaneous  agree- 
ment of  mankind  in  an  early  stage  of  society,*  and 
it  may  have  been  suggested  to  the  first  Hindu  set- 
tlers in  India  by  the  necessities  of  their  situation. 
Whatever  may  have  been  its  origin  or  antiquity, 
there  is  no  reason  to  believe  that  the  village  com- 
munities now  in  existence  can  boast  of  any  remote 
date  or  legislative  creation.  They  represent  with 
differing  degrees  of  fidelity  the  primitive  forms  from 
which  they  are  copied ;  but  they  have  deviated  in 
various  respects  from  the  original  type,  and  are  in 
many  instances,  probably  in  all,  of  comparatively 
recent  date.  They  are  most  commonly  the  growth 
of  modem  colonisation  or  conquest,  and  the  pecu- 
liar features  which  they  present  have  been  modelled 
by  the  occurrences  from  which  they  have  sprung. 

The  political  revolutions  of  later  times,  and  pro- 
bably of  earlier  days  also,  have  occasioned  frequent 
migrations  of  the  people  of  India  from  one  part  of 
the  country  to  another.  Centuries  have  elapsed  since 
the  region  was  fully  peopled ;  perhaps  it  never  was 
wholly  occupied :  at  any  rate,  abundance  of  waste 
land  has  for  a  long  time  past  been  available,  and 
parties  from  the  neighbouring  or  from  distant  tracts 
have  located  themselves  upon  unoccupied  spots,  with 

Washerman.  10.  Barber.  11.  Barikudu,  messenger  or  menial.  12.  Chek- 
6ri,  shoemaker  or  worker  in  skins  and  leather.  These  are  essentially  the 
same  as  the  Bara-ballowati  of  other  authorities,  though  some  of  the  names 
differ ;  and,  in  place  of  the  leather- worker,  some  places  have  a  water-car- 
rier.—Ellis  on  Mirasi  right,  App.  p.  36.  Traces  of  village  institutions  y^ere 
found  by  General  Briggs  in  Bengal ;  Land-tax,  Supplement :  although 
there,  as  in  other  places,  the  corporation,  or  association  of  persons  con- 
stituting the  proprietary  and  governing  body,  had  disappeared. 
*  Vishnu  Purana,  p.  45. 


ORIGIN   OF   VILLAGE  COMMUNITIES.  425 

or  without  the  cognisance  of  the  ruling  power,  not  book  i. 
likely  to  throw  obstacles  in  the  way  of  those  who 


purposed  to  convert  an  unproductive  wilderness  into  isis* 
a  source  of  revenue.^  The  settlers  would  of  course 
be  either  of  the  same  family,  the  same  caste,  or  the 
same  tribe ;  and  would  be  linked  together  through 
succeeding  generations  by  community  of  origin,  as 
well  as  of  property.  There  is  an  active  spirit  of 
aggregation  at  work  in  Hindu  society :  the  very  in- 
stitution of  caste,  which  disjoins  the  people  as  a 
whole,  combines  them  in  their  subdivisions ;  like  the 
process  of  crystallisation,  which  destroys  the  uni- 
formity of  the  mass  by  the  condensation  of  the  par- 
ticles. But  this  is  not  the  only  source  of  reinte- 
gration ;  there  prevail  other  combinations  of  tribe  or 
avocation,  some  of  which  would  be  sure  to  influence 
the  movements  of  a  body  of  settlers  on  a  new  soil, 
and  unite  them  into  a  village  community  or  cor- 
poration. The  necessity  of  combination,  in  order  to 
protect  themselves  against  the  financial  oppressions 
of  the  state,  or  against  unauthorised  plunderers  and 
assailants,  would  further  contribute  to  cement  their 
union,  and  would  give  it  consistency  and  duration.* 

In  like  manner,  where  the  occupation  of  the  new 
country  was  an  act  of  violence  and  aggression  com- 

'  See  the  instructions  of  Aurangzeb  to  his  collectors,  as  cited  by  Gene- 
ral Galloway,  55. 

'  Instances  of  recent  colonisation  are  specified  by  Mr  Thomason.  <'  A 
family  of  Chandel  Rajputs  emigrated  from  the  Jonpur  district,  and  settled 
at  Purgunna  Natherpur,  where  they  acquired  much  land/*  *<  Tlie  rise  of 
some  Ahir  (shepherd)  communities  illustrates  the  formation  of  such  bodies 
by  sufferance.  Familiar  with  the  forest  (in  the  Azimghur  district),  they 
fixed  their  residence  in  some  favourable  spot,  and  began  to  cultivate;  and, 
when  a  settlement  (of  the  revenue)  came  to  be  made,  appeared  to  be  the 
most  convenient  persons  with  whom  to  enter  into  engagements  for  the  land.** 
— Account  of  the  Settlement  of  Azimghur,  by  J.  Thomason,  Esq. ;  Jour- 
nal, Asiatic  Society  of  Bengal,  voLviii.  p.  06. 


426  HISTORY   OF   BRITISH   INDIA. 


300K  I.  mitted  against  their  neighbours,  or  against  the  bar-* 
^^^^i^^  barous  tribes  inhabiting  extensive  tracts  in  different 
.1818.  parts  of  India,  identity  of  kindred,  caste,  or  tribe,  as 
well  as  of  interest,  would  unite  the  first  assailants, 
and  would  extend  a  bond  of  union  to  their  suc- 
cessors. Such  transactions  are  known  to  have  oc- 
curred within  very  recent  periods.^  In  some  in- 
stances one  village  community  has  fallen  upon  an- 
other, and  ousted  it  from  its  possessions :  in  others,  a 
military  adventurer  has  assembled  his  kinsmen  and 
followers ;  and,  having  conquered  an  extensive  tract, 
has  parcelled  it  out  amongst  his  chiefs,  very  much 
upon  the  plan  of  a  military  fief.  Time,  the  fiscal 
measures  of  the  Government,  and  the  partition  of 
inheritance  among  the  descendants  of  the  con- 
querors, have  loosened  the  original  compact;  and 
the  village,  once  held  by  an  individual  upon  con- 
dition of  military  service  to  a  chief,  may  have  as- 
sumed the  form  of  a  village  municipality,  or  it  may 
still  retain  many  features  of  its  original  feudal  cha- 
racter.*  In  some  places  the  original  occupants  have 

'  Mr.  Thomason  supposes  the  original  conquest  of  Azimghur  by  Rsgpats, 
some  time  prior  to  the  twelfth  century,  to  have  been  the  general  foundation  of 
the  existing  proprietary  right  of  the  soil ;  and  recently,  **  Achar  and  its  de- 
pendent villages  was  held  by  a  tribe  of  Kaut  Rajputs.  The  Dhunwars, 
(another  Rigput  clan,)  of  the  neighbouring  estate  of  Khulsa,  were  more 
powerful :  they  attacked  and  massacred  most  of  the  Kauts.  This  took  place 
only  a  few  years  before  the  cession.  Some  of  the  family  fled  into  the  neigh- 
bouring district  of  Ghazipur,  then  in  British  possession,  and  have  since  in 
vain  attempted  to  recover  their  rights." — J.  B.  As.  Society,  viii.  96.  Dar- 
ing the  course  of  the  inquiry  preceding  tiie  permanent  settlement,  it  was 
found  that  the  Pergunna  of  Mongir  was  divided  among  the  descendants  of 
two  Rajputs,  to  whom  tlie  family  tradition  ascribed  the  first  settlement  of 
the  country  under  grants  from  the  Emperor  Humayun,  having  taken  it  from 
the  wild  inhabitants  of  the  wilderness,  which  it  then  was,  without  the  smallest 
vestige  of  cultivation. — Letter  from  Mr.  Davis,  Assistant  Collector  on  De- 
putation, 11th  August,  1790  ;  Fifth  Report,  238. 

'  Such  is  the  case  with  the  greater  part  of  the  Zemindaris  along  the 
western  frontier  of  Bengal,  where,  while  the  peasantry  are  mostly  of  the 


RIGHTS   OF  THE  VILLAGERS.  427 

been  driven  away  or  exterminated :  in  others  they  book  i. 
appear  as  serfs  or  slaves  attached  to  the  soil  and 
accompanying  its  transfers,  or  being  sold  independ-     i8i3. 
ently  of  the  land.^ 

From  these  sources,  —  legislation,  colonisation, 
and  conquest, — and  from  the  two  latter  especially  in 
modem  times,  may  be  derived  the  origin  of  the 
village  communities  of  India,  or  confederations  of 
a  definite  number  of  individuals  claiming  a  certain 
extent  of  land  as  their  common  property,  and  a  right 
to  all  advantages  and  privileges  inherent  in  such 
property,  subject  to  the  payment  of  a  proportion 
of  the  produce  to  the  state.  When  that  proportion 
absorbed  all  the  profits  of  cultivation,  the  members 
of  the  commune  who  claimed  the  ownership  of  the 
lands  were  reduced  to  the  condition  —  which  has 

wild  forest  tribes,  Koles,  or  Gonds,  the  proprietors  of  the  villages  are  Raj- 
puts. That  these  latter  came  as  conquerors  as  late  as  the  sixteenth  and  seven- 
teeoth  centuries  is  well  known  amongst  themselves,  and  the  origin  of  their 
possessions  by  allotment  from  the  chief  on  the  tenure  of  military  service  is 
also  admitted.  The  relation  between  the  holders  of  the  several  lots,  and  the 
representatives  of  the  first  leader,  or  the  R^jas,  is  more  or  less  perfectly 
preserved,  but  it  retains  almost  universally  some  impress  of  its  origin. 
See  the  remarks  on  tenures  in  Sambhalpur,  Mill,  i.  p.  309,  note.  A  similar 
state  of  things  prevails  in  the  Pergunnas  of  Palamii,  Sirguja,  Chota  Nag- 
pur,  and  others  in  the  same  direction.  An  interesting  account  of  the  origin 
and  progress  of  the  feudal  Zemindari  of  Palamii  was  printed,  but  not 
published,  by  the  late  Mr.  Augustus  Prinsep,  of  the  Bengal  Civil  Service. 
Mr.  Prinsep  was  disposed  to  find  similar  feudal  institutions  m  many  of  the 
Zemindaris  of  Bengal  and  Behar. 

^  In  Malabar  and  Canara,  where  the  land  was  very  generally  divided 
and  occupied  as  separate  and  distinct  properties,  the  labourer  was  the  per- 
sonal slave  of  the  proprietor,  and  was  sold  and  mortgaged  by  him  inde- 
pendently of  the  land.  In  the  Tamil  country,  where  laud  belonged  more  to 
communities  than  individuals,  the  labourer  was  understood  to  be  the  slave 
of  the  soil  rather  than  of  any  particular  person.  In  Telingana,  where  it 
was  difficult  to  trace  the  remains  of  private  property  in  the  land,  the  la- 
bourers, usually  of  the  degraded  or  outcast  tribes,  were  free. — Minute, 
Board  of  Revenue,  Madras,  Jan.  1818';  Revenue  Sel.  i.  887.  Mr.  Thomason, 
describing  the  agricultural  labourers  of  Azimghur,  speaks  of  them  as  having 
been,  under  former  Governments,  predial  slaves,  who  were  beaten  without 
mercy  for  misconduct,  and  were  liable  to  be  pursued  and  brought  back  if 
they  attempted  to  escape. — ^J.  B.  Asiatic  Soc.  viii.  115. 


428  HISTORY   OF   BRTTISH   INDIA. 

BOOK  I.  been  ascribed,  incorrectly  it  may  be  thought,  to  all 
*''°'"''  ^^  the  agricultural  population  of  India — of  persons  cul- 
1813.  tivating  the  ground  with  their  own  hands  and  by 
their  own  means/  When  the  further  exactions  of 
the  officers  of  the  state,  and  the  usurpations  which 
in  the  absence  of  all  government  they  perpetrated, 
reduced  the  proprietors  to  extreme  distress  and  in- 
significance, the  village  corporations  were  broken 
up,  and  the  traces  of  proprietary  right  so  completely 
obliterated  as  to  suggest  a  belief  that  it  had  never 
existed.  Such  seems  to  have  been  the  state  of  the 
peasantry  in  Bengal  and  Telingana.  In  other 
places,  in  Canara,  in  the  Dekhin,  in  Bundelkhand, 
and  the  Western  provinces,*  the  right  of  property 
was  better  preserved.  Where  either  the  demands 
of  the  Government  had  been  more  moderate,  or  the 
villagers  by  union  and  courage,  or  combination  and 
craft,  had  resisted  or  evaded  extortion,  they  re- 
tained their  character  of  proprietors,  living  upon  the 
profits  of  their  own  lands.^     The  state  of  the  coun- 


1  Mill ;  Commons'  Committee,  1831,  Evid.  3114. 

'  Thus  io  Canara  and  Sonda,  where  the  lands  had,  until  a  late  date,  been 
lightly  assessed,  the  Government  demand  having  been  as  low  as  one-tenth 
of  the  produce,  and  never  more  than  a  third,  the  lands  were  generally  sub* 
let,  the  proprietors  sometimes  cultivating  a  portion :  none  of  them  held  any 
large  estates ;  few  averaging,  in  the  best  of  times,  a  rent  of  more  than  fifty 
pagodas  (or  about  twenty  pounds)  a-year.  The  respective  rights  of  the 
Government  to  the  land  revenue,  and  of  the  proprietor  to  the  land,  were 
well  known :  an  ancient  grant  to  a  temple  specified  the  grant  to  be  the 
Government  share  of  the  rent,  because  the  land  belonged  to  the  proprietor, 
and  could  not  therefore  be  given  away  by  the  state. — Fifth  Report,  803 ; 
Life  of  Sir  Thomas  Munro,  iii.  161. 

'  The  term  village  Zemindars  has  been  generally  applied  to  these  proprie- 
tors in  Hindustan. — Fortescue;  Thomason,  &c.  Janamkars,  or  birthright 
holders,  is  their  name  in  Malabar. — Board  of  Revenue,  Madras.  Amongst 
the  Mahrattas  they  were  called  Thalkaris,  holders  of  the  Thai,  (Sthal,  or 
land,)  or  Watan-dars  (holders  of  the  country) ;  Coates  on  the  Township  of 
Lony ;  Trans.  Literary  Society  of  Bombay,  iii.  226  :  and  in  the  Tamil  coun- 
tries of  the  Penihsula,  Mirasis,  or  Mirdsdars  (inheritors).     Of  the  latter 


VARIETIES   OF   ORGANISATION.  429 

try,  the  habits  of  the  people,  and  the  subdivision  of  book  i. 
property  by  the  laws  of  inheritance,  prevented  the  *^^^^'  ^"' 
aggregation  of  large  estates,  or  the  formation  of  a     I813. 
landed  aristocracy;  and  the  agricultural  proprietors 
were  therefore  little  else  than  petty  fanners,  employ- 
ing, superintending,  and  not  unfrequently  assisting 
the  labourers :  but  they  were  in  a  position  to  preserve 
their  hereditary  rights,  and  to  perpetuate  the  or- 
ganisation of  the  village  communities.     Much  va- 
riety, however,  prevailed  in  that  organisation,  not 
only  in  proportion  to  the  degree  of  entireness  in 
which  it  had  been  preserved,  but  from  circumstances 

Mr.  Ellis  observes, "  Miras,  originally  signifying  inheritance,  is  employed  to 
designate  a  variety  of  rights  differing  in  nature  or  degree,  but  all  more  or  less 
connected  with  the  proprietary  possession  or  usufruct  of  the  soil  or  of  its 
produce." — Ellis  on  Mirasi  right ;  Selections,  810.  The  Selections  have 
injudiciously  omitted  the  Appendices  of  this  valuable  document,  full  of  im- 
portant historical  illustration,  vrhich  no  one  but  Mr.  Ellis  was  competent, 
from  a  profound  knowledge  of  the  languages  and  literature  of  the  South  of 
India,  and  from  enlightened  experience,  to  famish.  In  the  Appendix, 
which  with  the  text  was  printed  at  Madras  in  1818,  we  find  the  following 
concluding  view  of  Mirasi  tenure.  ''The  Cani-sudantraiu,  or  proper 
Mirasi  right,  though  founded  on  the  principles  of  the  general  law,  implies 
peculiar  privileges  and  an  independent  enjoyment  of  landed  property  by 
the  actual  cultivator,  unknown  in  other  parts  of  India,  and  confined,  in 
fact,  to  those  provinces  of  the  South  which  formerly  constituted  the  domi- 
nions of  the  ancient  Tamil  princes :  this  mode  of  holding  landed  property, 
and  several  of  the  incidents  appertaining  to  it,  are  not  in  resemblance  only, 
but  in  fact,  tlie  same  as  those  which  prevailed  among  our  ancestors  pre- 
viously to  the  introduction  of  feudal  tenures  into  Europe,  and  which  is 
usually  designated  by  the  term  allodium,  with  which  the  word  Canyatchi 
(entire  and  absolute  possession)  in  derivative  meaning  intimately  corre- 
sponds. One  of  the  most  remarkable  incidents  in  Mirasi  is,  the  periodical 
interchange  of  lands,  which,  in  Tonda-mandalam  at  least,  was  anciently 
universal ;  the  holding  of  them  in  severalty  being  a  modern  practice.  Now 
this  was  also  a  practice  common  to  the  nations  among  whom  the  allodial 
possession  of  land  primarily  obtained,  and  from  whom  it  passed  to  their 
Prankish  and  Saxon  descendants;  as  Tacitus  observes,  'The  fields  are 
occupied,  in  proportion  to  the  number  of  cultivators,  in  turns  by  all,  and 
are  then  divided  among  them  according  to  the  rank  of  each  :  the  extent  of 
the  plains  facilitates  this  partition.  The  cultivated  fields  are  interchanged 
every  year,  and  yet  land  remains.' — De  Mor.  Germanorum,  c.  26,  Were 
I  to  endeavour  to  describe  the  mode  of  periodical  repartition  practised  in 
every  Arudicadei  village  in  Southern  India,  I  could  not  convey  my  mean- 
ing in  more  appropriate  or  precise  terms.** — p.  85. 


430  HiarroBY  of  British  india. 

BOOK  I.  connected  with  its  history  which  were  no  longer  to 
^^^'  ^°'  be  verified.  A  village  or  villages  had  sometimes  a 
1813.  single  proprietor,  more  commonly  a  greater  number; 
but  these  were  associated  under  a  variety  of  condi- 
tions. Sometimes  they  held  in  common,  sometimes 
in  severalty ;  and  the  rights  which  they  claimed  were 
of  various  descriptions.  They  were  mostly  reducible 
to  two  chief  classes,  the  rights  of  property  and  the 
rights  of  privilege :  they  were  both  hereditary,  but 
the  latter  only  were  indefeasible,  and  subsisted  where 
the  former  had  been  lost.  In  their  capacity  of  joint 
proprietors  of  village  land  the  members  of  the  asso- 
ciation generally  inherited  rather  a  definite  propor- 
tion of  the  whole  than  any  specific  spot  of  ground. 
Sometimes  the  same  family  cultivated  the  same 
fields  for  successive  generations;  but  it  was  more 
usual  to  arrange  amongst  themselves  for  fresh  allot- 
ments from  time  to  time,  and  to  distribute  different 
parcels  of  land  in  distant  parts  of  the  village  estate 
to  the  same  individual,  according  to  the  qualities  of 
the  soil,  and  in  conformity  to  regulations  sanctified 
by  prescription.  In  their  character  of  parties  re- 
sponsible to  the  Government  for  a  portion  of  its  de- 
mands they  sometimes  paid  it  individually,  in  pro- 
portion to  their  shares;  but  it  was  more  usual  to 
make  the  apportionment  amongst  themselves,  and 
pay  the  whole  collectively  through  their  head-man 
or  head-men.  The  shares,  or  the  land  where  the 
land  was  cultivated  separately,  might  be  mortgaged, 
or  let,  or  sold ;  but  the  act  ordinarily  required  the 
concurrence  of  the  other  membera  of  the  com- 
munity, in  whom  also  the  right  of  pre-emption 
was  vested.    The  alienation  of  the  land  to  a  stranger 


GENERAL   CX)NFORMITY.  431 

did  not  carry  with  it  of  necessity  his  admission  to  book  i. 
the  municipality,  or  give  him  any  voice  in  the  ma-  ^"^'''  ^^ 
nagement  of  the  affairs  of  the  village ;  neither  did  it  I813. 
divest  the  person  to  whom  the  share  or  land  had 
belonged,  of  his  right  to  interfere  in  the  counsels  of 
the  community,  to  assist  in  auditing  the  village 
accounts,  or  to  receive  his  portion  of  any  emolu- 
ments which  were  derivable  from  the  fees  paid  for 
permission  to  exercise  any  trade  or  calling  in  the 
village  by  persons  not  originally  belonging  to  it,  or 
from  any  other  source.  Should  he  at  any  time 
become  able  to  resume  his  land,  he  was  at  liberty 
to  do  so.  A  variety  of  minor  regulations  diversified 
the  village  constitution  in  different  parts  of  India; 
but  the  general  plan  and  most  characteristic  features 
were  everywhere  essentially  alike,  and  established 
the  virtual  existence  of  a  proprietary  right  in  the 
soil,  enjoyed  by  certain  classes  of  the  people,  wher- 
ever it  had  not  been  infringed  or  abrogated  by  the 
usurpations  or  exactions  of  arbitrary  rule.* 

*  Occasionally  an  entire  Tillage  might  hare  become  the  property  of  a 
single  indiyidnal ;  Minate,  Sir  Edward  Colebrooke,  Selections,  iii. :  but  in 
general  the  lands  were  dirided  into  an  indeterminate  number  of  subdivisions 
amongst  the  descendants  of  the  original  stock,  or  those  holding  in  right  of 
them.  Their  right  to  a  certain  number  of  shares  was  fixed,  but  adjustments 
took  place  from  time  to  time  according  to  the  pleasure  and  conyenience  of 
the  parties  interested :  the  divisions  were  effected  either  by  integral  allot- 
ment, or  by  fractional  parts  of  each  description  of  the  land,  to  be  divided 
according  to  its  quality.  By  the  former  method  the  shares  were  compact ; 
by  the  latter  they  consisted  of  many  particular  spots  situated  in  different 
quarters.  In  some  villages,  although  comparatively  few,  the  lands  are 
undivided ;  yet  this  circumstance  neither  alters  nor  affects  in  any  way  the 
right  of  property  in  them.  When  the  lands  are  undivided,  each  sharer 
usually  continues  to  cultivate  the  same  fields.  A  proprietary  share  is  con- 
sidered large  at  two  hundred  and  fifty  b^gas,  an  ordinary  one  about  seven 
b^gas ;  some  are  as  small  as  two  b^gas. — Fortescue  on  Tenures  in  the  Dis- 
trict of  Delhi ;  Selections,  iii.  404.  The  proprietary  right  may  rest  either 
in  a  singly  individual  or  in  a  community :  the  latter  may  divide  among 
themselves  the  profits  of  the  estate,  either  according  to  their  ancestral  shares, 
or  some  arbitrary  rule  having  reference  to  the  quantity  of  land  which  each 


432  HISTORY  OF   BRITISH   INDIA. 


BOOK  I.  The  existence  of  proprietors  of  the  soil  not  de- 
cHAP.  vn.  pgj^^jijjg  upon  manual  labour  involved  of  necessity 
1813.  the  existence  also  of  a  class  or  classes  of  persons 
willing  to  undertake  the  task  of  cultivating  the 
land,  paying  a  rent  for  the  occupancy  transferred  to 
them  for  that  purpose.  Such  persons  accordingly 
were  found  in  all  places  where  the  proprietors 
themselves  had  not  been  reduced  to  the  level  of  a 
labouring  peasantry;  as  was  the  case  in  much  of 
the  territory  of  the  Peninsula,  in  the  Mahratta  pro- 
vinces, and  in  Hindustan.  They  were  not  wholly 
wanting   even   in  Bengal.^      It  would  occupy  too 

member  cultivates. — ^Thomason;  J.  B.  Asiatic  Soc.  viii.  98.  In  yariouB 
places,  what  was  considered  the  original  number  of  shares  remained  un- 
altered ;  but  the  distribution  came  to  the  same  thing  as  their  mnltiplication, 
it  being  in  fractional  parts :  thus,  some  members  might  have  a  whole  share, 
some  a  half,  or  some  a  hundredth  part.  This  was  the  case  in  the  Tamil 
countries ;  and  the  Thais  of  the  Mahratta  villages,  and  P^ns  and  Thokas 
of  the  Western  provinces,  seem  also  to  have  represented  the  original  shares, 
and  indicated  the  number  of  persons  among  whom  the  land  was  first  divided. 
— Colebrooke,  Sykes,  &c.  In  the  South  of  India  the  lands  are  of  two  kinds, 
privilege  and  proprietary :  the  former  belong  to  the  whole  village,  and  a 
member  can  sell  his  share  only ;  the  latter  may  be  cultivated  collectively  or 
separately.  In  the  former  case  shares  only  are  subjects  of  sale,  in  the  latter 
the  land  is  saleable. — Minute,  Board  of  Revenue,  Madras  ;  Selections,  i. 
904.     The  other  statements  of  the  text  rest  also  upon  these  authorities. 

'  In  the  Western  provinces  there  were  the  Kudeem,  or  ancient  Ryot ;  the 
P^hi,  the  itinerant  or  temporary  Ryot;  and  the  Kumera,  or  labourer:  there 
was  also  the  Kamiu,  or  partial  cultivator,  an  artizan  or  the  like,  cultivat- 
ing a  few  bigas  at  his  leisure. — Fortescue  ;  Selections,  i.  406.  In  Azim* 
ghur  there  were  the  three  classes,  but  generally  resolved  into  two :  Ashraf, 
respectable ;  and  Arzal,  low. — ^Thomason ;  J.  B.  As.  Society,  viii.  112.  In 
Bengal  the  cultivators  were  long  since  distinguished  as  holding  Khud-kasht 
and  Pai-kasht  lands ;  the  former  cultivated  by  a  permanent  and  resident, 
the  latter  by  a  temporary  and  migratory,  tenant. — Harington,  Analysis  B. 
Regulations ;  Introduction.  The  Zeroindari  Regulations  have  merged  the 
proprietor  into  the  Khud-kasht  cultivator,  who  was  probably  the  perma- 
nent tenant.  But  there  are  other  designations,  less  known,  which  preserve 
the  distinctions;  the  Pnga,  (or  subject,)  having  the  right  to  sell;  the 
Kalpa,  paying  him  rent,  and,  while  so  doing,  having  the  right  of  occu- 
pancy ;  and  the  Patti-dar,  holding  of  the  same  by  annual  lease. — Briggs, 
Land-tax  of  India,  Supplement,  500.  In  the  South  of  India,  in  the  Tamil 
countries,  tenants  are  termed  Paya-karis,  cultivating  persons :  the  perma- 
nent, Ul-kudi  Paya-karis ;  the  temporary,  Para-kudi  Paya-karis:  in  Mala- 
bar, Patom-karis,  rent- payers:  in  Canara,  Gahinis,  literally  tenentes;  M61a- 


VARIETY   OF   TBNDBES.  433 

much  space  to  specify  the  various  tenures  by  which  book  i. 
they  hold,  and  it  will  be  sufficient  to  advert  to  them        ' 


as  distinguishable  into  two  principal  classes:  the  1013. 
one  possessing  a  right  of  perpetual  occupancy  as 
long  as  the  stipulated  rent  was  paid;  the  other 
having  only  a  temporary  possession,  either  for  a 
definite  number  of  years,  or  being  tenants  at  will. 
The  former  might  have  tenants  under  them,  and 
sublet  the  land,  remaining  themselves  responsible 
to  the  individual  or  community  of  whom  the  land 
was  held ;  they  were  also  allowed  to  mortgage,  but 
not  to  sell.  The  tenants  for  a  term  were  bound  of 
course  by  the  tenor  of  their  agreements :  the  tenants 
at  will  were  often  little  better  than  mere  labourers, 
and  sometimes  were  degraded  to  the  condition  of 
slaves. 

From  this  sketch  of  the  distribution  of  landed  pro- 
perty in  India  it  follows,  that,  whatever  might  have 
been  the  law  or  the  theory,  individual  proprietary 
right,  identifiable  with  ownership  of  rent,  had  a  very 
extensive  existence  even  to  the  latest  periods  of  na- 
tive administration.  The  precise  nature  of  the  title 
under  which  it  was  enjoyed  was  not  always  the 
same,  nor  was  it  always  perhaps  easy  of  verification ; 
but,  whether  originating  in  ancient  institutions,  in 
colonisation,  or  in  conquest,  it  had  a  real  and  sub- 
stantial vitality,  and  animated  the  exertions  of  the 

gahinis,  radical  or  permanent  tenants  ;  Chali-gahinis,  moveable  tenants. — 
Madras  Revenue  Board;  Selections.  In  the  Mahratta  countries  the 
tenant  is  termed  Upari,  an  '*  over"  or  *'  outer'*  man,  an  alien ;  Sukhwas, 
an  abider  at  ease ;  a  Mahiman,  or  guest :  but  the  only  tenure  here  known 
seems  to  be  that  of  a  tenant  by  agreement  or  lease.— Sykes,  Land  Tenures 
of  tlie  Dekhin.  Of  these  denominations,  some  are  Sanscrit,  some  Arabic, 
some  vernacular,  but  they  are  all  significant;  and,  had  their  significations 
been  properly  understood,  little  doubt  could  ever  have  been  entertained  as 
to  the  character  of  the  persons  to  whom  they  were  applied. 

VOL.  I.  2  F 


434  HISTORY   OF   BRITISH   INDIA. 

BOOK  I.  great  body  of  the  cultivating  population,  until  it  was 
^"^'''  ^^  destroyed  or  wrested  from  them,  partially  at  lesfiit, 
I8ia     by  the  progress   of  events,   and  by  the   extortion, 
injustice,  and  ignorance  of  their  rulers. 

IV.  The  produce  of  cultivation  being  divided 
between  the  proprietor  or  cultivator  and  the  sove- 
reign, it  was  necessary  that  the  latter  should  pro- 
vide agents  to  determine  and  realise  his  share. 
With  this  view,  under  the  Hindu  system  an  officer 
was  placed,  as  has  been  noticed,  at  the  head  of 
every  village  or  township,  who  was  accountable  to  a 
superior  in  charge  of  ten  villages ;  he  again  was  re- 
sponsible to  the  superintendent  of  one  hundred  vil- 
lages, and  he  to  the  head  of  a  thousand  villages.* 
This  last,  the  governor  in  fact  of  a  province,  paid 
the  revenue  into  the  royal  treasury.  The  Moham- 
medan Governments  adopted  divisions,  correspond- 
ing in  a  great  measure  with  those  of  the  Hindus,  but 
the  organisation  was  less  definite:*  and  in  the  anar- 
chy of  the  declining  empire,  and  in  the  general  em- 
ployment of  the  agency  of  revenue  contractors,  little 
trace  was  left  of  the  primitive  institutions  beyond 
the  head-man  of  the  village,  and  the  chiefs  of  one 
or  two  large  but  undefined  portions  of  territory;  the 
former  designated  in  various  parts  of  India  as  Mo- 
kaddam,  Mandal,  or  Patel,  the  latter  known  chiefly 
in  Bengal  and  Hindustan  as  Talukdar  or  Zemindar. 
The  head-man  of  a  village  was  the  only  fiinc- 


^  Menu,  vii.  119, 123 ;  Elphinstone's  History  of  India,  i.  39. 

'  In  Bengal  we  have  the  GrSma  or  Gaon,  the  village ;  the  Taraf,  the 
Parganna,  and  the  Taluk  or  Zemindari,  for  the  larger  divisions. — Haring- 
ton*s  Analysis,  ii.  67.  Among  the  Mahrattas,  the  Patel,  the  D^sxnukb, 
and  Sir-d^s-mukh,  for  the  gradation  of  officers. — Sykes ;  Journal  Royal 
As.  Society,  ii.  208. 


NATIVE   REVENUE   OFFICERS.  435 

tionary  that  was  identified  with  the  primitive  insti-  book  i. 
tution,  and  who  had  lived  on  with  it  through  all 
the  revolutions  which  India  had  experienced.*  Al-  isia 
though,  however,  the  office  subsisted,  it  had  not 
escaped  alteration.  The  tendency  of  all  public  em- 
ployment in  India,  from  the  office  of  the  prime- 
minister  to  the  function  of  village  watchman,  to  be- 
come hereditary,  is  familiarly  known.  The  station 
of  head  of  a  village  followed  the  prevailing  bias. 
From  being  an  officer  nominated  by  the  sovereign,- 
he  came  to  claim  the  post  in  virtue  of  his  descent : 
the  family  became  permanently  grafted  upon  the 
village,  and  the  representative  of  it  regarded  the 
superintendence  of  its  affiurs  as  his  right.  It  is  not 
unlikely  that  from  the  first  the  duty  was  entrusted 
to  a  leading  member  of  the  community,  who,  while 
he  was  acceptable  to  his  townsmen,  would  be  most 
competent  to  promote  the  interests  of  the  state  by 
his  influence  and  responsibility.  Time  wrought 
other  changes :  the  family  decayed  or  disappeared ; 
new  men  usurped  the  authority,  or  were  elected  by 
different  portions  of  the  community.     The  notion  of 

>  "  In  every  village,  according  to  its  extent,  there  are  one  or  more  head- 
men, known  by  a  variety  of  names  in  various  parts  of  the  country,  v^ho 
have  in  some  degree  the  superintendence  and  direction  of  the  rest.  I  shall 
confine  myself  to  the  term  '  Mandal  :*  he  assists  in  fixing  the  rent,  direct- 
ing the  cultivation,  and  making  the  collections." — Minute  by  Lord  Teign- 
mouth ;  Fifth  Report,  103.  He  particularises  the  Mandals  of  Birbhiim, 
Pumia,  and  Rajshahi,  districts  of  Bengal.  **  Amongst  the  crowd  of  pro- 
prietors, the  managers  and  leaders  of  the  villages  are  the  Mocuddims. 
These  have  been  from  time  immemorial  the  persons  through  whom  the  rents 
of  the  village  have  been  settled  and  collected,  and  who  have  acyusted  the 
quota  of  each  sharer.** — Fortescue;  Selections,  i.  408. 

'  In  the  Mahratta  countries  the  confirmation  of  the  head  of  the  state  con- 
tinned  to  be  regarded  essential  to  the  validity  of  the  Patel's  authority. 
"  The  Patels  about  Poona  say  they  hold  their  Patelships  of  the  Emperor  of 
Delhi,  or  one  of  the  Sattara  kings;  but  many  of  them  must  hold' of  the 
Peshwa." — ^Township  of  Lony  ;  Bombay  Trans,  iii.  183. 

2f2 


436  HISTORY   OP   BRITISH   INDIA. 

BOOK  I.  property  as  well  as  privilege  became  attached  to 
CHAP,  vih  ^^^  succession ;  and  the  person  holding  the  office 
1813.  sold  or  mortgaged  it,  or  a  part  of  it,  and  introduced 
a  colleague.*  Different  castes  found  admission  into 
the  village  society,  each  having  its  own  head;  or 
different  branches  of  the  same  family  chose  to  be 
severally  represented.*  The  headship  was  thus  di- 
vided amongst  fewer  or  more  individuals.  Nor  was 
this  a  partition  of  a  barren  title  or  a  post  of  honour : 
it  was  an  apportionment  of  shares  in  certain  fees, 
perquisites,  and  profits  attached  to  the  situation, 
founded  upon  the  provision  made  originally  for  the 
remuneration  of  the  head-man,  but  extended  to  a 
variety  of  objects  not  contemplated  in  the  primary 
institution.  From  these  and  other  sources  of  pecu- 
niary benefit,  the  oflice  became  in  some  parts  of 
India  a  means  of  acquiring  wealth,  and  an  object  of 
competition.' 

'  The  Patelship  is  hereditary  and  saleable,  but  the  office  is  looked  upon 
as  so  respectable,  and  the  property  attached  to  it  is  considered  so  perma- 
nent, that  there  are  few  or  no  instances  of  its  being  wholly  sold,  although 
part  of  it  has  been  so  transferred.  This  has  given  rise  to  there  being  two 
Patels  in  many  villages,  and  in  some  three  or  four. — Bombay  Trans,  iii.  184. 

°  General  Rriggs  found  in  a  village  near  Calcutta,  peopled  by  Moham> 
medans  and  Hindus,  four  Mandals;  three  for  the  former,  one  for  the  latter. 
^Supplement,  Land-tax.  And  in  a  village  near  Madras,  three  Pedda-kars, 
or  head-men ;  one  for  each  caste  of  the  population. — Supplement;  Coll., 
&c.  Colonel  Sykes  gives  an  amusing  and  instructive  account  of  the  solemn 
arbitration  of  a  dispute  in  which  two  Patels  of  a  village  had  sold  a  third  of 
the  office  to  a  third  party,  for  money  wherewith  to  pay  the  public  revenue. 
They  subsequently  contested  the  full  advantages  which  the  transfer  was 
maintained  to  convey  :  a  verdict  was  given  against  them  in  a  Panchayat  of 
Patels,  who  apportioned  to  each  his  separate  share  of  precedence  and  emo- 
lument. Among  other  things  it  was  decreed  that  each  was  to  have  a  pair 
of  shoes  a-year  from  the  village  shoemaker,  two  bundles  of  fire-wood  on 
festival -days  from  the  village  menials,  three  pots  of  water  daily  from  the 
watchmen,  and  a  third  of  all  sheeps*  heads  oflfered  to  the  goddess  Bhav&ni. 
What  was  still  more  valuable,  a  similar  partition  was  enacted  of  the  rent- 
free  lands  attached  to  the  office,  and  of  all  lands  that  might  lapse  from 
families  becoming  extinct. — ^Tenures  of  the  Dekhin ;  Journal  Royal  Asiatic 
Society. 

*  The  founder  of  the  family  of  Sindbia  was  a  Patel :   Madh^ji  affected 


OFFICE   OF  ZEMINDAR. 


437 


The  officers  to  whom  the  Mohammedan  desiraa-  book  i. 
tions  of  Talukdars  and  Zemindars  applied,  indicated 


less  distinctly  their  Hindu  original.  They  differed  I8I8. 
in  little  except  in  a  greater  extent  of  authority  and 
amount  of  collection,  and  not  always  in  that ;  and  it 
will  be  sufficient  in  this  place  to  confine  our  in- 
quiries to  the  latter.*  Conflicting  speculation  has 
confounded  our  conceptions  of  the  character  of  the 
Zemindar: 'some  of  the  perplexity  has  arisen  from 
the  application  of  the  term  to  different  classes  of 
persons,  and  some  to  the  combination  of  different 
characters  in  the  same  class  of  persons.  In  some 
places  the  title  Zemindar  signifies  the  proprietor  of 
the  soil,  either  as  landlord  or  cultivator,  in  his  indi- 
vidual capacity,  or  as  a  member  of  a  village  commu- 
nity :  in  some  places  it  denotes  a  sort  of  feudal  pro- 
prietor, either  paramount  or  subordinate :  and  in 
others,  an  individual  responsible  to  the  Government 
for  its  share  of  the  revenue  of  a  district  of  greater  or 
less  extent;  deriving  this  responsibility  from  inherit- 
ance, and  claiming  also  as  a  hereditary  right  an  allow- 
ance out  of  the  Government  share  for  maintenance, 
and  as  compensation  for  the  trouble  and  responsibi- 
lity of  collection.*   It  was  in  this  latter  capacity  that 

the  title,  whence  the  popular  saying, «  Madhaji  Sindhia  made  himself  master 
of  India  by  calling  himself  a  Patel." — Malcolm,  Central  India,  i.  124. 
Holkar,  the  Bhonsla  Raja,  and  others,  took  not  only  the  title,  but  claimed 
the  office  and  its  emoluments  in  particular  villages. — Sykes,  Land  Tenures. 

1  A  Talook  comprehended  only  a  few  villages  or  a  small  tract  of  ground. 
The  Talook-dar,  or  holder  of  a  '  dependancy,*  sometimes  held  under  a 
Zemindar,  sometimes  immediately  under  the  Government,  to  whom  his  col- 
lections were  paid.  In  the  language  of  the  Company's  Regulations  the 
latter  is  called  an  independent  Talookdar.  The  Hindu  name,  Choudri,  (a 
word  of  uncertain  etymology,  but  apparently  derived  from  Chaturtha-dhari, 
the  receiver  of  a  fourth  part,)  was  sometimes  applied  to  a  Zemindar. — 
Harington's  Analysis,  ii.  63. 

*  Of  the  first  class  are  the  Zemindars  of  the  Western  provinces,  as  already 


438  HISTORY   OF    BRITISH   INDIA. 

BOOK  I.  the  Zemindar  became  first  conspicuous  in  the  fiscal 

CHAP      Vila 

! —  arrangements  of  the  Governments  of  British  India, 

1813.     and  was  regarded  as  having  a  claim  to  property  in 
the  soil. 

Nor  was  this  notion  altogether  without  found- 
ation. The  whole  of  the  district  for  the  revenues 
of  which  a  Zemindar  was  accountable,  or  any  very 
considerable  part  of  it,  might  not  be  his  absolute 
property ;  but  there  is  reason  to  believe  that  he  was 
rarely  a  mere  functionary  of  the  Government,  hav- 
ing no  property  nor  interest  whatever  in  the  soil.  In 
his  case,  as  well  as  in  that  of  the  head  of  a  village, 
individuals  were  no  doubt  appointed  to  represent 
the  Government  in  a  particular  locality  because 
they  had  extensive  possessions  in  it,  which  conferred 
upon  them  local  authority  and  influence  on  the  one 
hand,  and  on  the  other  afforded  to  the  state  a  sub- 
stantial security  for  the  realisation  of  its  demands. 
The  additional  power  which  his  relation  to  the  Go- 
vernment placed  in  his  hands  was  liable  to  be  used 
by  the  Zemindar  for  his  own  advantage,  and  oppor- 

Doticed ;  and  of  the  second,  the  Zemindars  of  the  border  districts  of  Bengal, 
also  adverted  to.  The  Zemindars  of  Orissa,  according  to  Mr.  Stirling,  ar« 
also  the  representatives  of  feudal  chiefs,  holding  their  lands  by  the  tenare 
of  military  service ;  Asiatic  Researches,  xv.  229  :  So  are  the  ancient  Ze- 
mindars of  the  Northern  Circars,  and  the  Poligars  of  the  Dekhin  appear 
to  have  had  the  same  origin.  The  last  class  were  found  chiefly  in  Bengal 
bat  also  in  Hindustan.  Their  claim  to  a  portion  of  the  Government  reve^ 
nue  only  is  clearly  expressed  in  various  Sunnuds  or  grants  of  the  Mogul 
Government.  One  of  these,  quoted  in  the  original  by  Jlr.  Thoroason,  dated 
1609,  is  a  grant  made  by  Jehangirto  a  converted  Hindu,  and  his  descend- 
ants for  ever,  of  twenty-four  Purgannas  in  the  province  of  Allahabad  • 
from  the  Jumma  or  annual  revenue  of  which  he  is  to  deduct  one  hundred 
and  twenty-five  thousand  rupees  for  his  Nankar  or  subsistence,  and  one 
per  cent,  for  Zemindari  dues  (Abw6b-i-zemindari). —  J.  Bengal  Asiatic 
Society,  viii.  91 .  Mr.  Shore  (Lord  Teignmouth)  refused  to  admit  a  Sunnud 
to  be  a  foundation  of  Zemindari  tenure ;  Fifth  Report,  204 :  but  that  waa 
because  he  maintained  the  Zemindars  to  be  proprietors  of  the  land.  Mr, 
Grant  refers  their  origin  to  the  time  of  Akbar. — ^Ibid.  632. 


HEREDITARY   RIGHTS.  439 


tunities    were    not    likely    to    be    wanting    which  book  i. 

,11,.  :  1   .  1  CHAP.  VII. 

enabled  him  to  appropnate  to  his  own  uses  the 

rights  both  of  individuals  and  the  state.  The  latter  1813. 
not  unfrequently  waived  its  own  claims  in  his  fa- 
vour by  grants  of  waste  land,  or  by  the  assignment 
to  him  of  the  rent  of  different  places  in  perpetuity 
for  his  subsistence;  the  right  to  the  hereditary  posses- 
sion of  which  was  admitted  even  when  the  Zemin- 
dar was  relieved  from  all  share  in  the  collection  of 
the  revenue,  was  incapable  by  reason  of  age  or  sex 
of  performing  the  duty,  or  when  he  declined  to 
engage  for  the  amount  of  the  Government  claim.^ 
Besides  this  assignment,  the  Zemindar  received  a 

'  For  this  the  term  is  N4nk6r,  literally,  source  of  bread ;  General  Gallo- 
way explains  it  ^  bread  for  work :"  it  is  much  the  same  thing,  meaning  sub- 
sistence-money. In  the  Sunnud  last  referred  to  it  was  a  specified  sum  to  be 
deducted  from  the  whole  rent,  but  it  was  more  usually  the  rent  or  Government 
share  of  the  produce  of  certain  tracts  of  land  within  the  Zemindarl  set  apart 
for  the  support  of  the  Zemindar. — Harington,  ii.  65  ;  and  Fifth  Report,  633. 
Mr.  Trant  identifies  Nankar  with  N^ot,  the  own  proper  cultivated  land  of  the 
Zemindar. — Evid.  Com.  Committee,  1832 ;  Question  2037.  Agreeably  to 
the  tenor  of  the  Sunnud  quoted  in  the  preceding  note,  the  Nankar  was  a 
pension  assigned  upon  the  revenue  without  specifying  any  obligation  to  col- 
lect the  revenue,  and  hence  the  foundation,  probably,  of  all  such  claims. 
It  was  rather  a  special  grant  to  individuals  than  to  the  Zemindars  as  a 
class,  and  consequently  vfas  retainable  where  the  duty  of  collecting  the  re- 
venue was  resumed  or  declined.  There  was  another  allowance,  the  Mali- 
kana,  the  origin  of  which  is  not  so  obvious :  properly,  it  denotes  the  right  of 
the  Malik  or  owner;  but,  until  the  Zemindars  were  acknowledged  to  be 
owners  by  the  British  Govemmeot,  it  did  not  belong  to  them.  It  not  im- 
probably originated  (as  General  Galloway  supposes)  in  the  reservation  to 
the  owner  of  a  part  of  his  proper  share,  amounting  to  ten  per  cent,  of  the 
estimated  rent  where  the  whole  land  had  been  oppressively  assigned  away 
from  him. — ^p.  91.  In  the  course  of  time  it  seems  to  have  been  appropri- 
ated by  the  Zemindars,  and  to  have  been  converted  by  them  into  an  here- 
ditary claim  for  ten  per  cent  on  the  Government  collections ;  and  finally  it 
was  secured  to  them  professedly  in  the  capacity  of  proprietors  of  the  soil, 
and  therefore  independently  of  official  function,  by  the  imperfect  knowledge 
of  the  British  Government. — Regulation  viii.  1793,  clause  xliv.  The  same 
Regulation  secured  to  recusant  Zemindars  their  Nankar  lands  also,  as  long 
as  the  joint  amount  of  Malikana  and  Nankar  did  not  exceed  ten  per  cent. 
— CI.  xxxvi.  Certainly  the  Zemindars  had  no  right  to  Malikana  independ- 
ently of  employment  in  fiscal  duties ;  and  their  right  to  Nankar  depended 
upon  the  nature  of  the  original  assignment  under  which  it  was  held,  or  the 
degree  in  which  it  was  their  Ng  or  own  property. 


440 


HISTORY  OF   BRITISH   INDIA. 


BOOK  I.  per-centage  upon  the  actual  collections,  or  what 
'  were  understood  to  be  the  actual  collections ;  and  he 
1813,  was  authorised  to  impose,  for  his  own  benefit,  taxes 
upon  the  industry  of  the  people, — an  authority  of 
which  he  amply  availed  himself.^  The  distracted 
state  of  public  affairs,  and  the  imbecility  of  the  na- 
tive Governments,  left  the  Zemindars  still  more  at 
liberty  to  pursue  schemes  of  personal  aggrandise- 
ment and  profit,  to  encroach  upon  the  rights  of  the 
people,  and  withhold  the  dues  of  the  Government ; 
until,  in  some  instances  at  least,  they  raised  them- 
selves to  the  station  of  petty  princes,  levied  troops 
and  built  forts,  and  defied  the  sovereign  and  his  im- 
mediate representatives.  To  the  people  the  en- 
croachments of  the  Zemindars  upon  the  Govern- 
ment claims  were  either  acceptable  or  indifferent, 
and  they  were  not  without  equivalent  advantages, 
which  reconciled  them  to  a  curtailment  of  their 
own  rights.  As  long  as  they  were  allowed  to  re- 
main upon  their  lands,  it  made   no  difference  to 

*  The  unwarrantable  exactions  of  the  Zemindars  are  alluded  to  in  the 
instructions  of  the  Bengal  Government  of  1769 ;  and  some  striking  illustra- 
tions are  given  by  Mr.  Sisson  in  his  report,  dated  April,  1815.  **  One  man 
buys  a  house,  and  celebrates  his  occupation  of  it  by  a  religious  ceremony ; 
more  than  double  the  cost  is  exacted  from  his  Ryots  :  the  birth  of  a  grand- 
son costs  him  twelve  hundred  rupees ;  he  collects  from  them  on  this  ac- 
count five  thousand.  Another  has  bis  house  burnt;  he  not  only  extorts 
more  than  the  value,  but  makes  it  an  annual  permanent  charge  to  the 
Ryots.  A  third  makes  an  annual  progress  through  his  estate,  travelling 
in  great  state ;  the  Ryots  are  taxed  with  the  cost.  A  Zemindar  buys  an 
elephant ;  the  Ryots  pay  for  it.  Every  public  or  private  religious  ceremo- 
nial is  an  occasion  of  taxation  :  not  a  child  can  be  born,  not  a  head  shaved, 
not  a  son  married,  not  a  daughter  given  in  marriage,  not  a  member  of  the 
family  dies,  but  it  is  a  plea  for  extortion.** — Sisson,  Report  on  Rungpore  ; 
Selections,  i.  390.  This  was  the  state  of  things  in  Rungpore  so  late  as 
1815,  and  under  the  British  Government :  it  could  not  have  been  much 
worse  under  the  native  Governments.  It  was  the  same  in  the  South  of  India, 
although  there  these  extra  cesses  are  said  to  have  been  brought  to  the  credit 
of  the  Government,  no  doubt  very  imperfectly. — Comm.  Committee,  1832  ; 
Col.  Sykes,  1967. 


POPULAR  INFLUENCE  OF  THE  ZEMINDARS.  441 


them  whether  the  rent  they  paid  went  to  the  Ze-  book  i. 
mindars  or  the  viceroys  of  the  Sultan.  The  former  ^"^^'  ^^ 
lived  and  died  among  them,  generation  after  gene-  isis. 
ration ;  they  mixed  with  them  on  a  variety  of  oc- 
casions ;  they  expended  money  upon  public  festivals, 
and  supported  public  institutions;  they  kept  up  a 
large  following  and  an  expensive  household,  and, 
through  many  different  channels,  refunded  to  the 
peasantry  of  the  country  the  money  which  had  been 
extorted  from  them.  The  revenue  was  spent  among 
those  from  whom  it  was  raised.  When,  therefore, 
the  Zemindar  was  not  more  than  usually  oppressive 
and  extortionate;  when  he  was  satisfied  with  the 
proportion  of  the  produce  which  usage  ha<l  esta- 
blished to  be  his  due,  and  with  the  occasional  im- 
posts or  cesses  which  experience  had  taught  the 
cultivators  to  anticipate ;  he  was  looked  up  to  with 
respect,  or  even  with  affection,  and  the  people  were 
ever  ready  to  take  up  arms  in  defence  of  his  person 
and  possessions.  It  was  not  surprising,  therefore, 
that  he  should  have  been  confounded,  by  those  who 
first  contemplated  him  in  this  condition,  as  the 
hereditary  landlord  of  a  large  estate  and  the  pro- 
prietor of  the  soil ;  although,  had  they  duly  con- 
sidered the  limited  amount  of  his  acknowledged 
share  of  the  proceeds  of  that  estate,  it  might  justly 
have  inspired  doubts  of  the  validity  of  his  claims  to 
the  produce  of  the  whole.  It  had  that  result  with 
some ;  and  hence  arose  one  argument  in  favour  of 
the  proprietary  right  of  the  sovereign,  upon  which 
the  measures  of  the  British  authorities  in  1793 
were  founded. 

V.  The  proceedings  of  the  Marquis  Comwallis, 


442  HISTORY   OF   BRITISH  INDIA. 

BOOK  I.  recognising  the  Zemindars  of  Bengal,  Behar,  and 
CHAP.  viL  Orissa  as  proprietors,  and  fixing  for  ever  the  amount 
1813.  to  be  paid  by  them,  have  been  already  detailed; 
their  results  also,  as  far  as  they  had  been  then  ascer- 
tained, have  been  described.*  The  early  arrange- 
ments adopted  for  the  settlement  of  the  revenue 
of  the  Ceded  and  Conquered  provinces  have  also 
been  adverted  to ;  and  it  only  remains  to  notice  the 
course  of  proceedings  which  had  been  followed  at 
Madras.  The  territory  subject  to  Bombay  was  still 
too  circumscribed  to  require  separate  notice. 

Immediately  after  the  conclusion  of  the  perpetual 
settlement  in  Bengal,  the  home  authorities  directed 
its  extension  to  the  Presidency  of  Madras:  its  in- 
troduction was  delayed  by  the  difficulty  of  discover- 

'  Vol.  V.  617.  It  may  be  conyenient  here  to  refer  to  the  following  aa- 
thorities.  The  proprietary  right  of  the  Zemindars  was  advocated  at  an 
early  date  by  Mr.  Francis,  in  opposition  to  Warren  Hastings,  who  urged 
in  favour  of  a  proposed  commission  of  inquiry,  that  it  would  tend  to 
secure  to  the  Ryots  the  perpetual  and  undisturbed  possession  of  their 
lands.  Mr.  Francis  replied,  "  The  state  does  not  consist  of  nothing  bat 
the  ruler  and  the  Ryot;  nor  is  it  true  that  the  Ryot  is  the  proprietor  of 
the  land.  The  true  landlord  is  the  Zemindar." — Minutes  of  Hastings 
and  Francis,  Nov.  177G.  Mr.  Shore  says :  **  I  consider  the  Zemindars 
as  proprietors  of  the  soil,  to  the  property  of  which  they  succeed  by  right 
of  inheritance.*' — Fifth  Rep.  203.  The  doctrine  was  next  advocated  by 
Mr.  Rouse,  in  a  dissertation  on  landed  property  in  Bengal,  1791.  On 
the  other  hand,  it  was  stoutly  contested  by  Mr.  Grant :  "  There  is  not  in 
the  northern  Circars,  any  more  than  within  the  rest  of  the  wide  circle 
of  the  British  dominions  in  India,  with  exception  of  a  few  instances,  a 
single  individual  among  the  native  Hindoos,  calling  themselves  Rigas  or 
Zemindars,  who  have  the  smallest  pretension,  in  form,  right,  or  fact,  to  an 
inch  of  territorial  property.** — Fifth  Rep.  G33.  But  he  erred  in  confining 
the  right  of  property  exclusively  to  the  sovereign.  Mr.  Place,  at  a  some- 
what later  date,  1799,  took  up  the  claim  of  the  Ryots  or  husbandmen,  at 
least,  in  the  neighbourhood  of  Madras. — Fifth  Report,  714.  Most  recent 
evidence  is  adverse  to  the  claim  of  the  Zemindars  in  any  other  character 
than  that  of  hereditary  collectors  or  farmers  of  the  public  revenue ;  but,  in- 
asmuch as  it  is  exclusive,  it  is  just  as  erroneous  as  all  that  has  preceded 
it.  Mr.  Tucker^s  definition  is  also  applicable  in  many  instances,  though 
not  universally:  *<The  Zemindar  was  the  hereditary  administrator,  I  should 
say,  of  the  revenue,  with  a  beneficial  interest  in  the  land.*'— Commons' 
Committee,  1832 ;  Evid.  1813. 


REVENUE  ARRANGEMENTS   AT   MADRAS.  443 

ing  individuals  with  whom  the  engagements  were  to  book  i. 
be  concluded,  for  the  intervention  of  persons  analo-  ^^^'  ^'' 
gous  to  the  Zemindars  of  Bengal  between  the  culti-     I813. 
vating  population  and  the  Government  was  generally 
unknown.     The  reiterated  injunctions  of  the  Court 
of  Directors,  and  the  positive  orders  of  the  Bengal 
Government,  caused  Zemindars  to  be  discovered  or 
created  ;  and  several  regulations  were  passed  in  the 
course  of  1802,  declaratory  of  their  proprietary  right, 
and  announcing  the  principles  of  a  perpetual  settle- 
ment, which,  after  some  interval,  was  effected  in  the 
districts  that  had  been  longest  subject  to  the  autho- 
rity of  the  Madras  Government.^ 

Whilst  these  arrangements  were  in  progress,  a 
settlement  on  entirely  different  principles  had  been 
commenced  in  the  territories  latterly  conquered 
from  Mysore.  As  their  circumstances  and  resources 
were  imperfectly  known,  it  was  deemed  prudent, 
before  forming  any  assessment  in  perpetuity,  to 
institute  a  detailed  survey  with  a  view  to  the  de- 
termination of  its  amount,  and  in  the  interval  to 
conclude  temporary  arrangements  with  the  actual 
occupants  of  the  lands.  These  proceedings,  under- 
taken for  the  ultimate  purpose  of  effecting  a  per- 
manent Zemindari  assessment,  gave  rise  to  a  new 
system  of  revenue  administration,  since  designated 
Ryotwar,  or  a  settlement  individually  and  imme- 
diately with  the  Ryots,  meaning  by  the  term  the 
actual  cultivators  of  the  soil.  The  survey  was  con- 
ducted by  Colonel  Reade,  having  for  his  assistants 
Lieutenants  Munro,  Macleod,  and  Graham;  the 
former   of  whom,  afterwards   Sir  Thomas  Munro, 

'  The  northern  Circars,  the  Jagir,  part  of  Salem,  Madura,  and  TineTelly. 


444  HISTORY   OF   BRITISH   INDIA. 

BOOK  I.  became  subsequently  more  especially  identified  with 
CHAP,  vii.  ^^^  system.^  The  objects  they  were  directed  to 
1813.  determine  were,  the  extent  of  the  land  in  cultiva- 
tion, the  quality  of  the  different  sorts  of  land,  the 
tenure  by  which  it  was  held,  the  value  of  the  dif- 
erent  crops,  and  the  share  of  the  produce  to  which 
the  Government  could  justly  lay  claim.  An  annual 
adjustment  was  to  be  made  with  each  cultivator  for 
the  land  he  cultivated,  at  a  maximum  money  rent 
for  each  field,  according  to  the  circumstances  and 
capability  of  the  land,  whatever  might  be  the  pro- 
duce :  the  amount  to  admit  of  reduction  where  the 
necessity  of  reduction  was  shown,  and  to  vary  from 
year  to  year,  until  the  inquiry  should  be  sufficiently 
matured  to  allow  of  its  being  determined  for  ever.* 

The  proceedings  of  the  revenue  survey  were  first 
directed  to  the  districts  of  the  Baramahal  and  Salem. 
They  were  extended  to  the  Ceded  Provinces  above 
the  Ghats,  after  the  capture  of  Seringapatam,  under 
the  conduct  of  different  officers  who  had  been  mostly 
trained  under  Colonel  Reade.  There  was  some  va- 
riety in  their  methods  of  discharging  the  duty,^  and 

*  Military  collectors  were  appointed  to  this  duty  by  Lord  Comwallis  ex- 
pressly because  "few  of  the  civil  servants  were  acquainted  with  the 
country  languages,  and  were  therefore  obliged,  both  from  habit  and  neces- 
sity, to  fall  into  the  hands  of  Dubashes  (interpreters). — Letter  to  the  Court 
of  Directors,  May,  1792  ;  Fifth  Report,  744.  It  appears  that  the  implied 
rebuke  was  not  without  effect,  as  in  the  subsequent  settlements  several 
civilians  were  employed ;  although  this  was  the  effect  of  positive  orders 
from  Marquis  M'ellesley,  repeatedly  confirmed  by  tlie  Court  of  Directors, 
that  civilians  only  should  be  so  employed. — Commons*  Committee,  18S2. 
Public.    App.  (M.) 

*  Letter  of  Colonel  Munro  to  the  Board  of  Revenue,  30th  Nov.  1806, 
with  instructions  to  the  surveyors,  &c. — Fifth  Report,  783. 

*  "  The  revenue  surveys  under  the  Madras  Presidency  were  not  regu^ 
lated  by  any  uniform  rule,  and  in  some  respects  were,  perhaps,  defective  in 
principle.  The  most  ample  discretion  was  vested  in  the  local  officer  on 
whom  this  duty  was  imposed  in  each  district ;  and  the  details  naturaUy 


BYOTWAR  SETTLEMENT.  445 

still  more  in  the  rate  of  their  assessments :  but  their  book  i. 
operations  were  equally  based  upon  the  measurement  ^^^^'^"' 
of  the  lands,  both  cultivated  and  waste ;  the  deter-  I813. 
mination  of  their  fitness  for  particular  crops  ;^  the 
money  valuation  of  the  estimated  produce  of  the 
land  in  cultivation,  and  its  partition  between  the 
cultivator  and  the  Government ;  the  rate  varying 
from  one-third  of  the  supposed  value  of  the  gross 
produce  to  little  less  than  a  half,  or  forty-five  per 
cent.*  The  measurements  and  valuations  were  made 
in  the  first  instance  by  native  surveyors,  but  the 
final  assessment  by  the  head  collector  himself  in 
personal  conference  with  the  Patels  and  principal 
Ryots  of  every  village.  Reference  was  also  had  to 
the  recorded  collections  of  the  native  Governments; 
and,  where  the  total  of  the  survey  assessment  ex- 
ceeded it  materially,  some  remission  was  granted. 

yaried  with  the  particular  views  of  the  individual.** — Campbell  on  the  Land 
Revenues  of  India;  Commons'  Committee,  1832,  App.  44.  See  also  the 
Reports  from  the  collectors  Munro,  Ravenshaw,  Hurdis,  Garrow,  Wallace, 
&c. ;  Fifth  Report,  746. 

*  In  the  first  instance  the  land  was  distingruished  into  three  sorts :  Naiga, 
wet,  or  that  which  was  supplied  with  water  by  irrigation ;  Panja,  which 
depended  wholly  upon  rain :  in  these,  rice  and  various  other  grains  were 
reared.  The>  third  kind  of  land  was  that  fit  for  miscellaneous  products  other 
than  grain — tobacco,  pepper,  cotton,  and  vegetables.  Each  of  these  was 
subdivided  into  a  variety  of  species,  according  to  their  fertility :  as  many 
as  twenty  distinctions  of  each  class  are  enumerated  in  Colonel  Munro's  in- 
structions to  his  assessors ;  but  they  were  directed  to  restrict  their  specifi- 
cations to  ten  kinds  of  dry  land,  eight  of  wet,  and  six  of  garden  ground. — 
Instructions,  &c.  as  above  cited. 

'  Colonel  Munro  observes  of  the  Ceded  districts,  and  of  the  Delchin,  that 
the  mode  of  assessment  in  force  there  limits  the  Ryot  to  two-thirds  of  the 
gross  produce,  but  reduces  it  in  fact  nearly  to  a  half.  His  own  assessment 
was  forty-five  per  cent.,  but  as  a  permanent  rate  he  proposed  to  reduce  it 
by  one-fourth  ;  so  that  the  total  being  .         .         100 

Deduct  Government  share     .         .     46 

Less  one-fourth        .         .  11^ 

Final  deduction  .         .  3S] 

Leaving  to  the  Ryot  per  cent.    .     66i.^Fifth  Report,  342. 


446  HI8T0RT  OF  BRTTISH   INDIA. 

BOOK  I.  RemisBions  were  also  made   upon   the   realisation 
^^^'^^  of  the  yearns  revenue,  if  the  season  had  proTed  un- 


181S.     favourable  or  the  crops  defective. 

The  incidents  of  the  Ryotwar  settlement  attracted 
the  attention  of  Lord  William  Bentinck  during  his 
administration  of  the  government  of  Madras,  and 
led  him  to  the  conclusion  that  the  Zemindari  system 
was  incompatible  with  the  true  interests  of  the 
Government  and  the  community  at  large.  The 
right  of  private  property  in  the  soil,  ascertained  by 
Colonel  Munro  to  exist  in  Canara,  satisfied  him 
that,  although  similar  rights  might  elsewhere  have 
been  trodden  down  by  the  oppression  and  avarice  of 
despotic  authority,  yet  they  still  existed,  and  were 
to  be  discovered  in  every  village.  To  create  Ze- 
mindars, and  invest  them  with  a  property  to  which 
they  could  have  no  claim  but  the  arbitrary  will  of 
the  state,  was  neither  calculated  to  improve  the  con- 
dition of  the  people,  nor  provide  for  the  future  secu- 
rity of  the  Government/  The  Zemindari  settle- 
ments were  in  consequence  arrested,  and  the  prin- 
ciple of  the  formation  of  a  permanent  settlement 
with  the  Ryots  was  thenceforth  to  regulate  the 
revenue  arrangements  at  Madras.  The  determi- 
nation was  of  short  duration. 

The  survey  assessment  of  the  Ceded  provinces 
above  the  Ghats  was  scarcely  completed*  when  the 
Government  of  Madras  was  induced  to  entertain  a 
doubt  whether  it  was  not  desirable  to  relinquish  the 
Ryotwar  system,  and  substitute  for  it  some  plan  of 

*  Minutes  of  Lord  W.  BentiDck,  and  Memoir  of  Mr.  Thackeray ;  Fifth 
Report,  912. 
'  It  commenced  in  1802,  and  was  finished  in  1807. 


RYOTWAB   SYSTEM   SUSPENDED.  447 

settlement  approximating  more  nearly  to   that  of  book  i. 
estates  pennanently  assessed.     The  Board  of  Re-  ^^^^'  ^^ 


venue,  to  whom  the  subject  was  referred,  adopted  isis. 
a  view  unfavourable  to  the  continuance  of  the 
Ryotwar  system,  chiefly  on  the  grounds  of  its  in- 
compatibility with  the  judicial  regulations  recently 
introduced  at  Madras,  by  which  all  questions  of 
revenue  were  removed  from  the  cognizance  of  the 
revenue  authorities  to  regular  courts  of  justice.^  As 
long  as  a  country  was  unsettled,  and  great  discre- 
tional authority  was  vested  in  the  collector,  the 
Board  admitted  that  a  survey  settlement  with  the 
Ryots  was  well  calculated  to  develope  the  capabilities 
of  the  country,  and  detect  and  remedy  abuses ;  but 
when  the  settlement  was  effected,  and  regular  courts 
of  law  were  established,  the  power  of  discretionary 
and  summary  decision  was  necessarily  withdrawn 
from  the  collector,  and  all  disputes  were  referable 
to  legal  tribunals,  which  could  not  possibly  provide 
for  the  numerous  cases  that  so  many  and  such  minute 
disputes,  as  must  arise  under  the  Ryotwar  system, 
would  bring  under  their  cognizance.  The  perma- 
nence of  the  Ryotwar  system  depended  also  upon 
the  reduction  of  the  assessment,  as  proposed  by  Colo- 
nel Munro,  by  one-fourth  of  its  amount ;  a  sacrifice 


^  The  question  was  first  brought  forward  and  was  folly  treated  by  Mr. 
Hodgson,  who  had  been  a  member  of  a  committee  appointed  to  inquire  into 
the  causes  of  the  failure  of  the  permanent  settlement  in  Dindigul. — Selec- 
tions, i.  681.  It  is  also  worthy  of  remark^  that  at  this  date  Colonel  Mnnro 
had  gone  to  England,  and  Sir  George  Barlow  had  succeeded  Lord  W.  Ben- 
tinck  at  Madras.  The  great  adrocate  of  the  Ryotwar  system  was  absent, 
and  the  head  of  the  Goyernment  was  naturally  biassed  in  favour  of  a  sys- 
tem, "  a  large  portion  of  which  had  engaged  his  attention  for  twenty  years, 
and  which  he  had  deliberately  resolved  on  accelerating  in  the  Ceded  and 
Conquered  provinces"  of  the  Bengal  Presidency. —  Minute  of  Mr.  Cole- 
brooke,  Sel.  i.  45. 


448  HISTORY   OF   BRmSH   INDIA. 


BOOK  I.  which  the  exigencies  of  the  Gk)veniment  did  not 
cHAP.viL  ^]]q^  j|.  ^q  contemplate.  The  Board  therefore  re- 
1813.  commended,  and  the  Government  resolved,  that  the 
Ryotwar  plan  should  be  abandoned,^  and  that  of 
village  leases  substituted ;  the  villages  being  let  to 
the  head  of  the  village,  or  principal  cultivator,  for 
a  term  of  three  years,  for  the  annual  payment  of 
a  sum  determined  by  the  aggregate  collections  of 
former  years,  or  the  survey  rent  where  it  could  be 
depended  on.  The  regulations  of  the  Government, 
it  was  asserted,  were  fiiUy  adequate  to  protect  the 
Ryots  against  the  oppression  of  the  renter.  The 
course  thus  pursued  was  sanctioned  by  the  Court  of 
Directors,  who  at  this  period  seem  to  have  been  per- 
suaded that  no  advantage  was  to  be  expected  from 
the  further  prosecution  of  the  Ryotwar  assessments.' 
In  finally  approving  of  the  arrangement,  however, 
they  intimated  that  they  were  not  anxious  for  the 
early  extension  of  the  principle  of  permanency  into 
any  of  the  territories  into  which  it  had  not  been 
introduced,  and  restricted  the  Madras  Government 
from  concluding  such  a  settlement  in  any  district 
without  the  previous  sanction  of  the  Court.* 

*  Revenue  Letter  from  Fort  St.  George,  24tb  Oct.  1808  ;  Selections,  i.  48S. 

*  Extracts  of  Dispatches  from  the  Court,  30th  August  1809.  The  Court 
also  dwell  upon  the  obvious  defects  of  the  system, — the  minuteness  of  io- 
vestigation  which  it  involves,  the  necessary  employment  of  countless  native 
agents,  the  impossibility  of  effectually  preventing  their  malpractices,  and 
the  difficulty  of  adjusting  the  rents  to  all  tlie  varieties  of  seasons  and  public 
events ;  and  conclude,  that,  ''  although  the  plan  intelligently  followed  up 
might  be  well  calculated  to  discover  the  resources  of  a  country,  yet  it  was 
not  to  be  preferred  for  constant  practice  ;  and  tlie  doubt  which  Lieut.-Col. 
Munro  has  properly  stated,  whether  it  be  equally  well  fitted  for  the  im- 
provement of  a  country  as  for  the  discovery  of  its  resources,  would,  they 
were  strongly  inclined  to  believe,  be  resolved  in  the  negative.*^ — Selec.  i, 
508. 

'  The  date  of  this  letter,  Dec.  1811,  accounts  for  the  change  of  opinion 
which  it  expresses,— Selections,  i.  COO, 


DECENNIAL   LEASES.  449 

The  prohibition  against  concluding  a  settlement  book  i. 
in  perpetuity  in  any  of  the  Madras  territories  was  ^"^'''  ^^^ 
announced  scarcely  in  time  to  prevent  the  Govern-  1813. 
ment  of  Fort  St.  George  from  pledging  itself  to  the 
measure.  The  results  of  the  triennial  settlement, 
although  in  several  instances  unfavourable,  were 
considered  sufficient  guides  to  the  determination  of 
the  utmost  capabilities  of  the  land,  and  the  conse- 
quent limitation  of  the  Government  demand.  The 
benefits  of  the  measure  required,  it  was  affirmed,  no 
discussion ;  and  the  only  points  for  consideration 
were  the  time  and  mode  of  carrying  it  into  opera- 
tion. With  regard  to  the  former,  it  was  concluded 
that  the  period  had  arrived  at  which  the  Govern- 
ment might  proceed  to  a  final  settlement  of  the 
land  revenue  without  any  risk  of  compromising  the 
public  interests ;  and,  with  regard  to  the  latter,  that 
the  preferable  method  was  that  of  the  Mouzawar  or 
village  settlement.  It  was  resolved,  therefore,  to 
proceed  at  once  to  conclude  a  settlement  for  ten 
years  with  heads  of  the  villages  singly,  or  with  any 
respectable  inhabitants  of  the  village  or  district,  or, 
in  the  event  of  their  refusal,  with  any  responsible 
individuals,  conditioning  that  the  amount  of  revenue 
to  be  paid  by  them  should  become  a  permanent  set- 
tlement at  the  end  of  the  ten  years  if  approved  of 
by  the  Court.*  Their  approval  was  not  to  be  ex- 
pected :  and,  in  the  reply  of  the  Court,  the  grant 
of  the  proposed  decennial  leases  was  prohibited,  or, 
if  already  granted,  they  were  to  be  declared  ter- 
minable at  the  end  of  the  ten  years :  the  principle 
of  permanency  was  discarded,  and  positive  orders 

>  Letter  from  Fort  St.  George,  29th  Feb.  1812 ;  Sel.  i.  513. 
VOL.  I.  2   G 


450  HISTORY  OF   BRITISH   INDIA. 


BOOK  I.  were  given  for  an  immediate  return  in  all  possible 
^'^^'  ^'  cases  to  annual  and  individual  settlements  with  the 
18)8.  cultivators — to  the  Ryotwar  assessments.  The  or- 
ders were  complied  with.  Sir  George  Barlow  was 
presently  afterwards  removed  from  the  government 
of  Madras,  and  the  revenue  discussions  terminated 
for  the  present  at  that  Presidency.^ 

The  discussions  in  Bengal  turned  principally  upon 
the  question  of  permanenpy.  With  whom  the  set- 
tlement should  be  made  had  scarcely  yet  become 
a  subject  of  consideration  with  the  Government, 
which  looked  everywhere  for  Zemindars ;  but  among 
its  functionaries,  and  particularly  in  the  unsettled 
districts,  a  conviction  had  begun  to  spread  that  the 
question  of  tenure  was  still  to  be  investigated.  The 
fact  was  brought  to  the  notice  of  the  Government 
more  distinctly  than  it  had  hitherto  been  by  the 
members  of  a  special  commission  which  had  been 
appointed  to  superintend  the  engagements  that  were 
to  be  concluded  with  the  landholders  in  the  Ceded 
and  Conquered  provinces  upon  the  approaching  ex- 
piration of  those  which  were  in  force.^  It  was  at  the 
same  time  announced  to  the  Zemindars  and  other 
actual  proprietors  of  land  in  the  Ceded  and  Con- 
quered provinces  that  the  revenue  which  might  be 
assessed  on  their  estates  in  the  last  year  of  the  set- 
tlement which  was  now  to  be  made  should  remain 
fixed  for  ever,  in  case  the  Zemindars  were  willing 
to  engage  for  the  payment  of  the  public  revenue 
on   those   terms   in   perpetuity,   and   the    arrange- 

»  The  letter  of  the  Court  is  dated  ICth  December,  1812 ;  Sel.  i.  625.  In 
the  following  August  a  long  and  able  minute  of  the  Board  of  Rerenae  is 
recorded  in  vindication  of  their  views  and  proceedings. — Ibid.  577. 

'  Regulations  x.  1807  ;  vi.  1808. 


SETTLEMENT   IN   THE  WESTERN  PROVINCES.  451 

ment  should  receive  the  sanction  of  the  Court  of  book  i. 
Directors.  chap^vu. 


The  commissioners,  Messrs.  Cox  and  Tucker,  en-  leis. 
tered  upon  their  duties  at  the  end  of  1807.  Early  in 
the  following  year  they  submitted  a  report  of  their 
proceedings,^  and  a  description  of  the  several  coUec- 
torates  in  the  districts  which  they  had  visited ;  and 
they  came  to  the  conclusion  that  a  permanent  settle- 
ment of  the  revenue  of  the  Western  provinces  was 
at  that  moment  premature,  and  might  be  injurious  to 
the  people,  while  it  would  be  necessarily  attended 
by  a  material  sacrifice  of  the  public  resources. 
The  right  of  property  in  the  cultivated  lands  was  in 
many  cases  contested.  It  remained  to  be  deter- 
mined with  what  parties  a  settlement  should  be 
effected.  Lands  were  held  free  upon  tenures  the 
validity  of  which  required  proof,  and  there  were 
extensive  waste  lands  of  which  the  rightful  appro- 
priation was  to  be  ascertained.  At  least  a  fourth 
of  the  arable  land  was  yet  uncultivated,  and  neither 
the  resources  of  the  provinces  nor  their  means  of 
improvement  were  known.  Although,  therefore, 
professing  to  be  fully  aware  of  the  advantages  which 
might  be  expected  from  a  perpetual  limitation  of 
the  Government  demand,  the  commissioners  recom- 
mended that  -the  announcement  of  a  permanent 
settlement  should  be  suspended,  and  that  the  period 
for  which  the  engagements  were  to  be  renewed 
should  be  devoted  to  the  diligent  accumulation  of 
the  information  essential  to  its  establishment  on 
safe  and  equitable  principles.  Their  recommenda- 
tions were  at  variance  with  the  established  opinions 

'  Selections,  i.  45. 

2o2 


452  HISTORY   OF   BRITISH   INDIA. 

BOOK  I.  of  the  Supreme  Council.  Mr.  Colebrooke,  one  of 
^"^'''  ^"'  the  members,  objected  to  their  reasonings,  that  they 
1813.  were  the  same  which  had  been  overruled  or  refuted 
in  the  discussions  preceding  the  permanent  settle- 
ment of  Bengal ;  and  that  experience  had  confirmed 
their  fallacy,  as  the  design  of  the  permanent  settle- 
ment of  1793  had  been  fully  accomplished  in  that 
part  of  India.  The  same  advantages  were  therefore 
to  be  expected  from  the  application  of  a  like  measure 
to  other  places ;  and  the  Government  was  pledged, 
by  the  terms  of  the  preceding  regulations,  to  it«  im- 
mediate adoption  in  the  Ceded  and  Conquered  pro- 
vinces.* Mr.  Lumsden,  the  other  member  of  Coun- 
cil, although  differing  in  some  respects  from  his 
colleague,  came  to  the  same  conclusion ;  and  Lord 
Minto,  after  a  deliberate  consideration  of  all  the  pro- 
ceedings, declared  himself  satisfied  of  the  sound 
policy,  or  rather  the  urgent  necessity,  of  no  longer 
delaying  to  settle  the  revenue  assessment  of  the 
Western  provinces  in  perpetuity.*  The  determina- 
tion of  the  Government  was  disapproved  of  in  Eng- 
land. The  Court  of  Directors  declared,  indeed,  that 
they  neither  meant  to  undervalue  the  advantage  of 
the  permanent  settlement  in  Bengal,  nor  to  desert 
the  principle  on  which  it  was  formed ;  but  it  was 
evident  that  the  principle  was  reluctantly  enter- 
tained, and  that  doubts  began  to  be  suggested  whe- 
ther its  consequences  were  not  embarrassing  to  the 
Government,  without  yielding  an  equivalent  benefit 
to  the  people.' 

'  Stje  the  purport  of  the  reflations  referred  to  in  a  former  place,  p.  114. 

•  Revenue  Letter  from  Bengal,  September,  1808. 

»  Revenue  Letters  to  Bengal,  1st  Feb.  and  27th  Nov.  1811 ;  Sel.  Hi.  6. 


OBJECTIONS  TO  A  PERPETUAL  SETTLEMENT.         453 

The  expense  ot  any  scheme  of  administration  book  i. 
must  be  proportionate  to  the  advance  of  a  state  in  _ll_ 
wealth  and  power.  The  more  numerous  the  people,  1813. 
the  more  extensive  the  territory,  the  more  compli- 
cated the  internal  and  external  relations,  the  more 
costly  must  be  the  machinery  of  the  Government. 
The  golden  age  has  not  yet  come  back ;  and  from 
time  to  time  all  countries  must  be  placed  in  situa- 
tions in  which  an  unusual  application  of  all  avail- 
able resources  is  indispensable  for  their  safety.  It 
were  most  impolitic,  therefore,  if  it  were  possible,  to 
fix  for  ever  impassable  bounds  to  the  public  re- 
venues, in  ignorance  of  the  possible  extent  of  future 
exigencies.  Such  a  limit  was  of  course  never  in 
contemplation:  but  it  was  anticipated  that  the  re- 
striction of  the  Government  demand  upon  the  land 
would  be  followed  by  a  proportionate  improvement 
of  the  estates  of  the  landholders ;  that  capital  would 
accumulate,  expenditure  increase,  and  the  people 
be  placed  in  circumstances  favourable  to  an  aug- 
mented consumption  of  articles  both  of  necessity 
and  luxury ;  that  a  system  of  indirect  taxation,  like 
that  which  is  the  main  source  of  revenue  in  Europe, 
might  be  introduced  into  India;  and  that  in  the 
end  the  revenue  of  the  Government  would  augment 
with  the  augmented  affluence  and  prosperity  of  the 
country.  These  anticipations  had  been  indulged  in 
without  a  due  consideration  of  the  obstacles  which 
impeded  their  realisation ;  without  a  due  regard  for 


These  and  similar  dispatches  are  referred  to  as  the  letters  of  the  Court  of 
Directors,  a«  they  are  so  designated  in  the  Records.  Agreeably  to  the 
evidence  cited  in  a  former  note,  they  would  with  more  propriety  be  termed 
the  letters  of  the  Board  of  Controul. 


454  HISTORY   OF   BRITISH   INDIA. 

BOOK  I.  the  manners,  the  wants,  and  the  feelings  of  the 
CHAP.  VII.  p^Qpi^^  i^  would  be  scarcely  prudent  to  predict 
1818.  that  those  obstacles  will  never  be  overcome ;  but 
many  and  great  changes  must  take  place  before 
they  can  be  so  far  surmounted  as  to  justify  a  Gk>- 
vemment  of  India  in  ceasing  to  look  to  the  land  as 
the  principal  feeder  of  the  public  exchequer.  It 
were  an  act  of  suicidal  improvidence  prematurely  to 
divest  itself  of  so  commodious  and  productive  a 
source  of  revenue  to  any  extent  which  may  not  be 
in  excess  of  the  fair  claims  and  reasonable  expecta- 
tions of  the  agricultural  population,  and  which  is 
consistent  with  their  own  usages  and  opinions. 

With  respect  also  to  the  interests  of  the  agri- 
cultural population,  the  advantages  of  a  permanent 
settlement  are  in  a  great  measure  illusory.  The 
basis  upon  which  it  rests  is  a  proportion  of  the  pro- 
duce, a  third  or  a  half ;  and  this  is  then  determined 
to  be  a  definite  and  unvarying  quantity.  But  it  is 
universally  admitted  that  it  is  almost  impossible  to 
ascertain  with  precision  the  absolute  total  produce 
of  any  given  portion  of  land ;  and  the  proportional 
produce  must  be  fixed  therefore  in  most  cases  by 
conjecture,  involving  one  of  the  well-known  evils  of 
the  permanent  settlement — great  inequality  of  as- 
sessment. The  total  produce  indeed  cannot  be  fixed 
by  regulation :  it  must  vary  both  in  quantity  and 
quality  with  the  amount  of  labour  and  skill  be- 
stowed upon  its  production,  and  upon  the  recurrence 
of  favourable  or  unfavourable  seasons.  The  propor- 
tion, however,  being  a  fixed  unvariable  amount,  does 
not  fluctuate  with  the  causes  of  fluctuation ;  and,  in 
the  event  of  peculiarly  unpropitious  circumstances. 


VARIABLE   PROPORTION    OF   PRODUCE.  456 

this  amount  may  be  equal  in  quantity,  not  to  a  half,  book  i. 
but  to  the  whole  of  the  crop.  In  answer  to  this  it  Z^"^'*'^"' 
may  be  said,  that  in  favourable  times  the  fixed  rate  isis. 
may  bear  a  lower  proportion  to  the  whole,  and  that 
a  bad  year  consequently  is  compensated  for  by  a 
good  one ;  but  what  then  becomes  of  the  principle 
of  permanency,  for  the  cultivator  pays  at  different 
periods  a  different  rate  of  rent  ?  To  have  to  make 
provision,  whilst  he  prospers,  against  a  possible  re- 
verse, subjects  him  to  uncertainty  as  much  as  if  his 
payments  varied  from  year  to  year :  and  to  suppose 
that  the  Indian  cultivator  will  exercise  such  fore- 
sight, is  to  expect  a  total  revolution  in  his  character 
and  habits.  The  futility  of  such  an  expectation  was 
shown  in  the  immediate  effects  of  the  permanent 
settlement, — the  ruin  of  the  greater  number  of  the 
Zemindars,  and  the  sale  of  those  lands  of  which 
they  had  been  constituted  proprietors,  for  arrears  of 
revenue. 

If  a  variable  ratio  is  unavoidable  when  calculated 
upon  the  produce  in  kind,  it  is  still  more  obviously 
inevitable  where,  as  in  the  case  of  the  permanent 
settlement,  the  Government  demand  has  been  cal- 
culated upon  the  estimated  money  value  of  that 
produce.  That  this  value  should  remain  unaltered 
for  ever  is  as  impossible  as  that  society  should  stand 
still;  a  stagnation  less  to  be  looked  for  in  India 
than  in  any  other  part  of  the  world  amid  the  ele- 
ments of  incessant  change  that  are  daily  springing 
up  from  the  novel  ascendancy  of  European  prin- 
ciples and  forms  of  civilization.  A  fall  in  the  price 
of  silver,  and  augmentation  in  the  prices  of  labour 
and  commodities,  are  a  virtual  abatement  of  the  re- 


456  HIOTORY   OF   BRITISH   INDIA. 

BOOK  I.  venue  assessment :  a  rise  in  the  value  of  silver,  and 
*^"^^'  ""^  fall  in  the  price  of  grain,  are  a  virtual  enhancement. 
1813.  The  same  might  be  the  result  of  an  extraordinarily 
abundant  harvest,  and  consequent  diminution  of  de- 
mand ;  by  which  prices  might  be  so  depreciated,  that 
the  sale  of  a  farmer's  whole  produce  might  fail  to 
realise  the  fixed  money  value  of  the  Government 
share.*  It  is  evident,  therefore,  that  a  permanent 
settlement,  or  an  unvarying  amoimt  of  revenue  de- 
rivable from  a  money  valuation  of  an  unchanging 
quantity  of  produce,  is  invariable  or  permanent  only 
in  terms. 

It  does  not  follow  that  because  a  Government 
refrains  from  declaring  that  it  will  at  no  time,  and 
on  no  occasion,  raise  its  demand,  that  it  is  therefore 
to  discourage  the  industry  of  the  agricultural  popu- 
lation, or  obstruct  the  accumulation  of  capital,  by 
constantly  keeping  up  its  demands  at  a  maximum 
rate.  There  is  a  principle  of  permanency  which  is 
more  essential  to  the  prosperity  of  the  country  than 

'  In  the  assessment  made  by  Colonel  Briggs  in  Kandesh,  the  people  were 
at  first  bigldy  pleased  with  the  settlement,  which  was  formed  with  the  vil- 
lages upon  the  average  collections  of  ten  years.  At  first  it  fell  lightly ;  but, 
the  assessment  being  paid  in  money,  it  became  heavy  when  the  price  of 
grain  declined.  When  the  country  was  first  taken  under  Biitish  manage- 
ment, the  price  of  grain  was  about  four  shillings  a  bushel ;  in  four  years, 
in  consequence  of  increased  cultivation  and  diminished  demand,  from  the 
absence  of  troops  and  other  circumstances,  it  had  fallen  to  sixteen  pence  the 
bushel :  it  was  quite  impossible,  therefore,  the  villagers  could  pay  the  same 
amount  in  money  in  the  fourth  year  as  they  had  done  in  the  first.  The 
public  revenue  of  Kandesh,  notwithstanding  increased  cultivation,  therefore, 
was  reduced  from  sixteen  lakhs  of  rupees  to  eleven,  and  eventually  to  six 
lakhs. — Lords*  Committee,  18S0;  Evidence,  Question  4049.  So  also  Co- 
lonel Bamewall,  speaking  of  Guzerat,  observes,  that  in  consequence  of  the 
continuation  of  tranquillity,  and  tlie  reduction  of  public  establishments,  the 
bulk  of  the  population  has  become  agricultural,  and  the  supply  of  grain 
so  far  exceeds  the  consumption,  that  agricultural  produce  is  no  longer 
saleable  at  its  former  prices :  the  profits  of  the  farmer  are  consequently 
diminished,  and  he  is  unable  to  pay  tlie  revenue  demand  of  the  Govern- 
ment.— Commons*  Committee,  1832  ;  Evid.  Political,  151. 


MODERATE  ASSESSMENT   REQUIRED.  457 

that  of  a  nominally  perpetual  assessment^ — the  in-  book  i. 
variable  recognition  of  the  right  of  the  proprietor  of  ,^!11J__ 
the  soil  to  a  rent  from  his  estate.  As  long  as  the  i8i3. 
Government  constitutes  itself  sole  landlord,  and  ap- 
propriates the  whole,  or  nearly  the  whole,  of  the 
rent,  there  can  be  no  accumulation  of  capital,  no 
advance  in  wealth,  no  creation  of  collateral  re- 
sources among  the  mass  of  the  population,  for  what- 
ever period  the  assessment  may  be  fixed.  A  mode- 
rate rather  than  a  perpetual  settlement  is  the  real 
want  of  the  people.  Speculators  in  revenue,  middle- 
men. Zemindars,  may  be  anxious  for  a  perma- 
nently definite  amount  of  the  Government  demand ; 
which,  while  it  limits  what  they  are  to  pay,  permits 
them,  as  did  the  settlement  of  Lord  Cornwallis,  to 
crush  the  cultivator  under  exorbitant  exactions:  but 
there  is  every  reason  to  believe  that  the  actual  oc- 
cupants and  cultivators  think  and  care  little  about 
the  question  of  permanency.*  It  may  be  convenient 
to  all  parties  to  adjust  the  assessment  for  a  term  of 
years ;  but  as  long  as  the  amount  is  not  extortionate, 

^  The  evidence  of  Mr.  Fortescae  on  this  Babject,  as  regards  the  people 
of  the  Upper  proyinces,  is  conclusive.  '  According  to  him,  the  Ryots  or 
cultivators  know  little  or  nothing  about  a  permanent  settlement,  and 
have  no  desire  for  its  introduction:  some  dislike  the  notion  from  fear 
of  its  affecting  their  local  interests,  and  such  as  are  desirous  of  it  are  so 
from  the  representations  virhich  interested  persons  have  made  to  them  of 
its  advantages;  that  is,  Zemindars  of  the  village  engaging  for  the  reve- 
nue as  landholders,  and  who  expect  to  derive  from  it  the  authority  which 
they  are  told  that  it  confers  upon  the  Zemindars  of  the  Lower  provinces. — 
Commons'  Committee,  1832 ;  Questions  2S30-2340.  Mr.  Mackenzie  ob- 
serves :  *'  If  not  hated  by  the  people  (of  the  Upper  provinces),  we  are 
without  the  slightest  hold  on  their  affections.  This  seems,  it  may  be  proper 
to  remark,  to  have  no  connexion  with  the  permanent  settlement,  on  which  the 
very  few  who  were  interested  never  probably  relied,  and  of  which  the 
great  body  of  the  landholders  never  heard.  Of  some  thousand  peti- 
tions which  I  received  when  in  the  Western  provinces,  and  of  many  tens 
of  thousands  of  petitioners  whom  I  saw  and  talked  with,  not  one  touched 
upon  this  point." — Conunons'  Committee,  1832 ;  General  App.  212. 


458  HISTORY   OF   BRITISH   INDIA. 


BOOK  I.  and  a  persuasion  exists  that  it  will  not  be  increased 
^^^'  ^"'  without  an  adequate  cause,  the  agricultural  popula- 
1813.  tion  of  India  will  be  contented;  for  they  will  be  as 
prosperous  as  they  can  become  under  the  universal 
institution  of  infant  marriages,  the  equal  partition  of 
inheritance,  the  few  wants  which  the  nature  of  the 
climate  and  the  condition  of  society  impose,  and  the 
entire  absence  of  the  countless  objects  of  needless 
expenditure  which  in  part  disgrace  and  in  part 
dignify  society  in  Europe.  Upon  these  and  similar 
groimds  the  authorities  in  England  had  learned  to 
question  the  advantages  of  a  permanent  settlement 
as  affecting  the  interests  either  of  the  people  or  the 
state. 

In  addition  to  the  objections  which  might  be 
urged  to  the  measure  generally,  there  was  un- 
doubtedly ample  reason  to  question  the  propriety  of 
its  immediate  adoption  in  the  particular  case  of  the 
Ceded  and  Conquered  provinces.  The  experience 
acquired  in  Bengal  had  established  the  mischievous 
consequences  of  precipitancy.  Even  Mr.  Cole- 
brooke,  who  asserted  that  it  had  answered  the  ob- 
jects proposed  by  it,  was  obliged  to  admit  that  the 
persons  whose  benefit  it  was  intended  to  promote, — 
the  Zemindars,  whom  it  was  designed  to  enrich, — 
had  not  profited  by  the  beneficence  of  the  Go- 
vernment; the  greater  number  of  them  were  in 
fact  utterly  ruined.  Wholly  unaccustomed  to  punc- 
tuality in  their  payments  to  the  st^te,  and  bred  up 
in  habits  of  prodigality  and  improvidence,  they 
speedily  fell  into  arrears ;  for  the  recovery  of  which, 
under  the  stringent  enactments  of  the  Government, 
their  estates  were  immediately  and  absolutely  dis- 


RESULTS   OF   EXPERIENCE   IN   BENGAL.  459 


posed  of  by  public  sale.  In  the  course  of  a  few  book  i. 
years,  many  of  the  Zemindars  whom  the  settlement  ..^]1^1_^ 
of  1793  had  proposed  to  transform  into  a  landed  I813. 
aristocracy  had  been  reduced  to  indigence,  or  had 
utterly  disappeared ;  and  families,  which  had  survived 
the  successive  revolutions  of  the  native  Governments, 
vanished  before  the  inflexibility  of  the  Company's 
regulations.*  Nor  was  the  situation  of  the  Ryots  bet- 
tered by  the  change.  Originally  left  to  the  arbitrary 
will  of  the  Zemindars,  the  exactions  to  which  they 
were  exposed  were  tempered  by  the  beneficial  influ- 
ence of  a  long-established  intercourse  with  their  an- 
cient landlords.  To  the  new  purchasers  of  the  Ze- 
mindaris,  who  were  mostly  men  who  had  grown  rich 
in  the  service  of  the  English,  and  were  residents  of 
Calcutta  or  other  commercial  towns,  their  tenantry 
were  merely  objects  of  speculation,  from  whom  they 
proceeded  to  extort  the  largest  possible  return  for 
the  capital  which  had  been  invested  in  the  purchase. 
Under  such  task-masters  the  cultivators  were  soon 
reduced  to  the  state  of  a  pauper  peasantry,  scarcely 
gleaning  a  subsistence  from  the  soil,  and  in  no  con- 

*  <*  My  impression  is,  that  a  yery  small  proportion  of  those  with  whom 
the  permanent  settlement  was  made  are  now  owners  of  the  land,  very 
great  alienations  of  the  land  being  made  in  the  first  year  of  the  settlement." 
— Mill,  Commons'  Committee,  1831 ;  Question  3210.  In  Question  3997 
allusion  is  made  to  the  statement  of  the  Fifth  Report,  that  in  1796  one- 
tenth  of  the  whole  of  the  lands  in  Bengal,  Behar,  and  Orissa  were  put  up 
to  sale.  Mr.  Tucker  and  several  other  well-informed  officers  of  the  Com- 
pany affirm,  that  the  number  pf  estates  put  up  for  sale  is  no  evidence  of 
Ae  number  of  sales ;  but  Mr.  Tucker  admits,  that  of  the  three  largest 
Zemindaris,  those  of  Rajshahi,  Nadiya,  and  Burdwan,  the  whole  of  the  first, 
and  part  of  the  second,  had  been  sold  prior  to  1799,  and  that  a  very  con- 
siderable number  of  estates  passed  into  the  hands  of  the  merchants  and 
bankers  of  Calcutta. — Evid.  Commons'  Committee,  1832 ;  Revenue.  Ques- 
tion 1861.  Even  as  late  as  1821-2,  when  the  sales  were  much  fewer 
than  in  the  years  immediately  following  the  settlement,  the  number  of 
estates  sold  for  arrears  of  revenue  was  396. — Ibid.  Q.  2603. 


460  HISTORY   OF   BRITISH   INDIA. 


BOOK  I.  dition  to  swell  the  coffers  of  the  state  by  their  con- 
^^^'  ^"'  sumption  of  taxable  commodities/  To  disregard  the 
1813.  lesson^  and  repeat  the  same  errors  elsewhere,  would 
have  been  wholly  indefensible;  and  it  was  so  ob- 
viously the  duty  of  the  Government  to  guard 
against  the  evils  which  could  not  fail  to  follow  the 
conclusion  of  a  perpetual  settlement  upon  imper- 
fect information,  that  it  is  difficult  to  comprehend 
how  the  measure  should  have  found  advocates 
among  men  of  tried  ability  and  mature  knowledge. 
Their  advocacy  was  fruitless.  The  Court  of  Direc- 
tors persisted  in  their  prohibitions;*  and  the  Go- 
vernment of  Bengal  was  compelled  to  rescind  a 
regulation  which  had  enacted  that  the  amount  of 
revenue  levied  in  the  last  year  of  the  temporary 
settlement  then  subsisting  should  be  fixed  for  ever.^ 
At  the  same  time,  in  conformity  to  previous  enact- 
ments, it  was  provided,  that,  with  respect  to  those 
estates  which  the  commissioners  should  think  suffi- 
ciently improved  to  justify  such  an  arrangement, 
the  assessment  on  them  should  be  revised,  and  a 
rate  be  fixed  in  perpetuity.  The  provision  was  in- 
operative, as  was  probably  expected.     No  estates 

^  The  injurious  operations  of  the  permanent  settlement  of  Bengal  upon 
both  the  old  Zemindars  and  the  Ryots  are  detailed  in  the  Fifth  Report,  60  ; 
see  also  Mill,  v.  518,  522.  Sir  Charles  Metcalfe  observes  of  the  Bengal 
permanent  settlement,  that  it  was  an  experiment,  in  the  results  of  which  he 
can  discern  no  benefit  that  should  induce  its  repetition.  It  not  only  sa- 
'crificed  the  prospective  rights  of  the  Government  for  ever,  but,  by  declaring 
those  to  be  proprietors  who  were  not  proprietors,  it  in  effect  destroyed  the 
rights  of  all  the  proprietors  and  cultivators. — Commons*  Committee,  18SS ; 
App.  469.  Mr.  Mackenzie  states,  that  the  Bengal  assessment  led  to  the 
greatest  possible  inequality,  and  left  everything  in  a  state  of  utter  darkness 
and  confusion. — Ibid.  Evidence  ;  Q.  2581. 

*  Letter  from  the  Government  of  Bengal,  11th  July  1812.— Selec.  i. 
134. 

'  Regulations  x.  1807;  and  ix.  and  x.  1812. — Selec.  i.  162. 


RYOTWAR    SYSTEM   OBJECTED   TO.  461 

were  found  that  had  reached  the  utmost  limit  of  book  i. 
improvement.^  ""^"'""- 

A  difference  of  opinion  also  prevailed  with  re-  isia. 
spect  to  the  method  by  which  the  resources  of  the 
unsettled  provinces  were  to  be  ascertained.  To  the 
suggestions  of  the  Court  that  the  scheme  of  the 
Ryotwar  assessment  followed  at  Madras  should  be 
applied  to  them,  the  Government  of  Bengal  justly 
objected  its  inapplicability  to  a  territory  where  the 
lands  were  jointly  occupied  and  cultivated  by  nume- 
rous owners,  held  together  by  a  community  of 
tenures  imperfectly  understood.  To  form  engage- 
ments with  individual  occupants  was  quite  as  likely 
to  invade  and  overturn  the  rights  and  privileges  of 
the  landed  proprietary  as  the  Zemindari  settlement 
had  done;  and  to  deal  separately  vrith  individual  cul- 
tivators tended  to  disorganise  and  dissolve  the  village 
communities, — thereby  depriving  the  people  of  the 
salutary  habit  of  regulating  their  own  concerns,  and 
the  Government  of  a  ready  and  economical  channel 
by  which  the  revenue  might  be  realised.*  Instead 
of  forming  engagements  with  the  associated  pro- 
prietors, represented  by  respectable  persons  of  their 
own  election,  it  would  be  necessary  to  let  loose 
upon  the  land  a  swarm  of  locusts  in  the  shape  of 

'  Letter  from  the  Court,  16th  March,  1813  ;  Sel.  i.  186. 

'  Sir  C.  Metcalfe,  although  friendly  to  the  principle  of  Ryotwar  assess- 
ment, objected  to  its  introduction  into  the  Western  provinces,  because  it 
appeared  to  him  that  it  must  tend  to  loosen  and  ultimately  dissoWe  the  ties 
which  bind  the  village  communities  together.  Instead  of  all  acting  in 
union  with  a  common  interest  as  regards  the  Government,  and  adjusting 
their  own  separate  interests  among  themselves  according  to  established 
usage,  each  would  have  his  separate  independent  arrangement  directly 
with  the  Government,  and  could  hardly  fail  to  be  thereby  less  linked  with 
his  fellows.  The  village  constitution,  which  could  survive  all  outward 
shocks,  might  be  easily  subverted  with  the  aid  of  the  Government  regu- 
lations and  the  courts  of  justice.^Commons'  Com.  1882;  App.  p.  471. 


462  HISTORY   OF   BRITISH   INDIA. 

BOOK  I.  numberless  subordinate  collectors  and  assessors, 
CHAP,  vn.  ^)^Qg^  exactions  from  the  people  it  would  be  im- 
181S.  possible  to  check,  and  whose  frauds  upon  the  state 
it  would  be  equally  impossible  to  discover.  Whe- 
ther, therefore,  the  interests  of  the  Grovemment  or 
its  subjects  were  considered,  a  Ryotwar  assessment 
was  regarded,  and  with  reason,  as  alike  objection- 
able.* There  was  less  reason  in  the  objections  urged 
against  the  preliminary  measure  of  a  survey  of  the 
lands  to  be  assessed.  It  was  affirmed  that  the  plan 
had  been  repeatedly  tried,  and  had  been  attended 
with  so  much  inconvenience  and  such  unsatisfactory 
results,  that  the  Government  felt  satisfied  the  most 
experienced  and  capable  of  its  revenue  officers 
would  deem  the  revival  of  it  an  evil  burthensome 
and  oppressive  to  the  people,  and  unproductive  of 
any  substantial  benefit  to  the  pecuniary  interests  of 
the  state.  In  preference  to  such  a  mode  of  obtain- 
ing a  knowledge  of  the  resources  of  the  country  it 
would  be  advisable  to  rely  upon  the  Zemindari  and 
village  accounts,  although  it  was  admitted  that  they 
were  not  unfrequently  false  or  fabricated.  Such  a 
preference  was  evidently  dictated  by  strong  and 
unfounded  prejudice.  Revenue  surveys  may  very 
possibly  be  conducted  in  such  a  manner  as  to  be 
vexatious  to  the  people  and  unprofitable  to  the  Go- 
vernment :  the  conclusions  to  which  they  lead  may 
not  be  entitled  to  unqualified  credit :  but  experience 
has  demonstrated  that  they  can  be  carried  on  with- 
out giving  any  offence  to  the  people ;  while,  although 
they  may  not  be  exempt  from  error,  they  furnish 

'  Revenne  Letter  from  Bengal,  1 7th  July,  1813  ;  and  Second  Minute  of 
Mr.  Colebrooke ;  Sel.  i.  179. 


PBOTECnON  OF  THE  RYOTS.  463 

the  only  safe  means  of  making  an  approach  to  ac-  book  i. 
curacy  in  determining  the  productive  value  of  the . 


land.^     At  this  point  the  discussion  ceased.     Dif-     isis. 
ferent  views  influenced  the  measures  of  the  succeed- 
ing Administration. 

Some  attempts  were  instituted  by  the  Govern- 
ment of  Bengal  to  repair  the  evil  which  had  been 
occasioned  by  the  long  neglect  of  the  Government  to 
exercise  that  interference  which  at  the  time  of  the 
permanent  settlement  it  had  avowedly  retained  the 
right  to  exert  in  protection  of  the  equitable  claims 
of  the  Ryots.^  At  first  some  intention  was  mani- 
fested of  acting  upon  the  power  so  reserved;  and 
the  Zemindars  had  been  in  the  same  year  prohi-. 
bited  from  imposing  any  new  imposts,  from  cancel- 
ling leases  legally  obtained,  or  refusing  to  grant 
others  for  a  specific  amount  of  rent.*  The  main 
object  of  the  Government  in  the  regulations  then 
and  subsequently  passed  was,  however,  evidently  its 
own  security,  originating  in  an  apprehension  that 
the  Zemindars  might  plead  the  difiiculty  of  realising 
their  demands  from  the  Ryots  in  extenuation  of 

'  The  exceeflingly  defective  sources  of  information  on  which,  prior  to  the 
establishment  of  surreys^  assessments  were  based,  are  thus  enumerated  by 
Mr.  Mackenzie :  '*  Our  settlements  were  made  in  haste,  on  general  esti- 
mates or  surmises,  on  accounts  never  believed  to  be  accurate,  and  never 
brought  to  any  clear  test  of  accuracy,  on  the  offers  of  speculators,  on  the 
biddings  of  rivals,  on  the  statements  of  candidates  for  employment  seeking 
credit  with  Government  by  discoveries  against  the  people,  on  information 
of  all  kinds  generally  worthless." — Letter  to  Mr.  Villiers,  Commons*  Com- 
mittee, 1832 ;  Evidence,  417. 

'  Section  8,  Reg.  i.  of  1793,  declares,  that  "  it  being  the  duty  of  the  ruling 
power  to  protect  all  classes  of  the  people,  and  more  particularly  those  who 
from  situation  are  most  helpless,  the  Govemsr- General  in  Council  will, 
whenever  he  may  deem  it  proper,  onact  such  regulations  as  he  may  think 
necessary  for  the  protection  and  welfiu^  of  the  dependent  Talookdars, 
Ryots,  and  other  cultivators  of  the  soil." 

>  Reg.  viii.  1793. 


464  Bmcmr  ow  Btunm  ooha. 


BOOK  L  tbetr  fiuling  to  par  the  demands  of  tlie  state. 
ITfid#>r  these  impresnons,  it  was  enacted  that  no 
141X  leases  should  be  granted  for  a  period  lon^^  than 
ten  Teai« ;  and  that,  when  a  2!eniindari  was  mM  far 
arream  of  revenue,  all  existing  engagements  dioold 
be  roid  from  the  daj  of  sale,  the  pnrdiaBeTB  being 
entitled  to  eoUect  from  the  renters  according  to  the 
undefined  rates  and  usages  of  the  country.'  FinaDT, 
a  power  was  rested  in  the  landholders  of  snmmaril j 
distraining  for  rent.*  The  result  of  these  measures 
was  to  place  the  Rjot  completely  in  the  hands  of  the 
Zemindar,  and  to  enable  the  latter  to  raise  his  rents 
at  pleasure.  It  was  therefore  found  necessary  to 
interpose,  and  a  regulation  was  subsequently  en- 
acted' bjr  which  the  limitation  of  the  leases  was 
abrogated :  they  were  authorised  to  be  granted  for 
any  period,  and  on  any  terms  to  which  the  parties 
should  mutually  agree,  in  the  hope  that  they  would 
thus  be  obliged  to  come  to  some  definite  under- 
standing, instead  of  leaving  the  door  open  to  op- 
pressive fraud  and  endless  litigation,  which  the 
appeal  to  so  vague  a  standard  as  that  of  usage  ren- 
dered perpetual.  It  was  also  decreed,  that,  in  the 
event  of  an  attachment  or  sale  of  a  Zemindari,  the 
leases  should  not  be  annulled  within  the  year  in 
which  the  attachment  or  sale  should  have  taken 
place ;  that  where  the  collections  were  regulated 
by  pergunna  or  district  rates,  and  those  rates  were 
not  fixed  by  anything  more  precise  than  custom, 
they  should  be  of  the  same  amount  as  those  which 
were  actually  paid  in  the  neighbourhood  upon  lands 

'  RegB,  xliy.  1793,  and  iii.  of  1796. 

*  Reg.  vii.  1799.  *  Reg.  v.  1818. 


REVENUE    REGULATIONS.  466 

of  like  quality,  or  they  should  not  exceed  the  max-  300K  i. 
imum  rate  paid  upon  the  same  land  during  any  one  ^"^'''  ^"' 


of  the  three  preceding  years.  No  enhancement  of  1813. 
existing  rates  was  to  take  place,  except  under  an 
engagement  to  that  effect,  or  a  formal  and  written 
notice  of  the  specific  amount  to  be  required  during 
the  ensuing  year  being  served  upon  the  tenant. 
Process  of  distraint  was  prohibited,  except  after  due 
notification  in  writing  having  been  given  ;  and  agri- 
cultural implements  and  cattle  were  exempted  from 
seizure.  Process  was  also  to  be  suspended  where 
the  defaulter  engaged  by  bond  or  sufficient  security 
to  institute  a  suit  for  the  trial  of  a  contested  de- 
mand within  a  reasonable  period.  The  latter  clauses 
of  this  enactment  were  beneficial ;  but  the  liberty 
given  to  the  Zemindar  to  frame  engagements  for  an 
indefinite  period,  and  on  such  conditions  as  the 
parties  might  agree  to,  was  speedily  interpreted  into 
an  authority  to  dispossess  even  the  Ryots  claiming 
hereditary  occupancy  if  they  refused  to  accede  to 
his  demands,  however  exorbitant.*  The  limitation 
of  the  Government  assessment  in  the  Western  pro* 
vinces  rendered  it  necessary  to  limit  also  the  en- 
gagements between  individuals  in  those  provinces  ;* 
and  in  the  same  districts  the  collectors  were  autho-. 
rised,  under  the  Board  of  Commissioners,  to  investi- 
gate the  titles  by  which  la-kharaj  or  rent-free 
lands  were  held.  Rules  were  also  passed  for  the 
occasional  subdivision  of  estates  held  in  common,  so 
that  the  holder  of  a  joint  undivided  property  might 
have  his  share  verified  and  separately  assessed.^ 

*  Letter  to  Government  of  Bengal,  16th  Jan.  1819;  ^elections,  i.  360. 

*  Reg.  xiv,  1812.  '  Regs.  viii.  and  ix.  1811. 

VOL.  I.  2   H 


466  HI8T0RY   OP   BRITISH   INDIA. 


BOOK  I.  In  order  to  extend  the  public  resources  of  the 
CHAP.  viL  (Jovemment,  it  was  thought  advisable  to  impose  a 
1813.  tax  upon  houses  in  the  several  towns  and  cities 
of  Bengal,  Behar,  Orissa,  and  Benares:*  religious 
buildings  were  exempted.  Such  a  tax  had  been 
levied  for  some  years  without  any  difficulty  or  ob- 
struction in  Calcutta,  and  it  was  not  expected  that 
any  serious  opposition  would  be  offered  to  it  in  other 
cities.  The  Government  was  mistaken.  The  mea- 
sure was  regarded  as  an  innovation,  and  was  vehe- 
mently opposed.  At  Benares  especially  the  resist- 
iince  was  most  violent,  and  was  curiously  character- 
istic of  the  peculiarities  both  of  the  place  and  the 
people. 

As  soon  as  the  intentions  of  the  Government  be- 
came known,  great  excitement  prevailed  throughout 
the  city,  and  meetings  of  the  different  castes  and 
trades  were  held  to  determine  upon  the  course  to 
be  pursued.  No  obstruction  was  offered  to  the 
persons  employed  to  assess  the  houses;  but  the 
shops  were  closed,  every  kind  of  occupation  was 
abandoned,  and  such  numerous  crowds  assembled 
on  the  outskirts  of  the  town,  that  it  was  judged  ex- 
pedient by  the  magistrate  to  call  to  the  assistance 
of  the  police  a  detachment  of  troops  from  the 
neighbouring  cantonments.  Their  services  were  not 
needed,  as  the  people  quietly  dispersed ;  but  on  the 
same  day  a  solemn  engagement  was  taken  tby  all 
the  inhabitants  to  carry  on  no  manner  of  work  or 
business  until  the  tax  was  repealed.  Everything  was 
at  a  stand:  the  dead  bodies  were  cast  unceremo- 
niously into  the  river,  because  there  were  none  to 

'  Reg.  XV.  1810. 


HOUSBWTAX    AT   BENARES.  467 

perform  the  obsequial  rites ;  and  the  very  thieves  book  i. 
refrained   from  the  exercise  of  their  vocation,  ai-.!^llll!l 
though  the  shops  and  houses  were  left  without  pro-     18X3, 
tection,  —  the  people  deserting  the  city  in  a  body, 
and  taking  up  their  station  halfway  between  Benares 
and  Secrole,  the  residence  of  the  European  func- 
tionaries, about  three  miles  distant.     A  petition  was 
presented  to  the  magistrate,  praying  him  to  with- 
draw the  odious  impost,  and  declaring  that  the  peti- 
tioners would  never  return  to  their  homes  until  their 
application  was  complied  with :  a  reference  to  Cal- 
cutta was  all  that  was  in  the  magistrate's  power. 

Whilst  awaiting  for  a  reply  from  the  Government, 
the  people  of  Benares  continued  assembled,  and 
were  joined  by  many  persons  from  the  surrounding 
districts:  the  number  was  computed  at  more  than 
two  hundred  thousand,  comprehending  the  aged 
and  infirm,  women  and  children.  They  were  supplied 
with  food  regularly  at  the  expense  of  the  opulent 
classes,  and  were  actively  enjoined  to  unanimity  and 
perseverance  by  their  religious  guides  and  teachers. 
Their  conduct  was  uniformly  peaceable ;  passive  re- 
sistance was  the  only  weapon  to  which  they  trusted. 
They  continued  in  the  open  air  throughout  the  day, 
but  many  returned  at  night  to  their  homes. 

In  this  manner  about  a  fortnight  passed.^  The 
Government  somewhat  misconceiving  the  character 
of  the  assemblage,  and  at  any  rate  deeming  it  im- 
politic to  yield  to  any  semblance  of  intimidation, 
ordered  the  enforcement  of  the  tax,  and  the  dis- 
persion of  the  multitude,  if  necessary,  by  force.  A 
sufficient  strength  had  been  collected  for  the  pur- 

^  From  the  SIGth  December,  1810,  to  the  8th  January,  1811. 

2h2 


468 


HI^ORY   OF   BRITISH  INDIA. 


BOOK  I.  pose ;  but,  before  the  receipt  of  the  orders,  time,  re- 

CHAP.  VII* 

! — 1  flexion,  and  discomfort  had  enfeebled  the  vigour  of 

1813.  the  opposition,  and  the  people  had  for  the  most  part 
returned  to  their  dwellings.  The  determination  of  the 
Government  caused  them  to  reassemble,  with  the 
avowed  determination  of  marching  in  a  body  to  Cal- 
cutta to  petition  the  Governor-General  personally 
for  redress ;  but  this  was  a  much  more  arduous  un- 
dertaking than  a  bivouac  in  the  immediate  vicinity 
of  Benares,  and  could  not  be  prosecuted  with  the 
same  unity  of  purpose.  Every  householder  engaged, 
indeed,  either  to  go  himself,  to  send  a  representa- 
tive, or  contribute  his  quota  to  the  expense  of  the 
journey;  and  a  number  of  persons  met,  and  made 
one  march  towards  Calcutta:  but  the  defaulters 
were  so  numerous,  and  so  many  of  those  who  had 
set  out  deserted  by  the  way,  that  the  leaders  were 
sensible  of  the  futility  of  the  scheme,  and  wanted 
only  a  decent  excuse  for  its  relinquishment.  This 
was  furnished,  by  the  interposition  of  the  Raja  of 
Benares^  who,  at  the  desire  of  the  Government 
officers,  repaired  to  the  party,  overtook  them,  and 
counselled  them  to  turn  back,  and  rest  contented 
with  the  renewed  rej)resentation  of  their  grievances 
through  the  usual  official  channel  in  a  quiet  and  re- 
spectful manner.  His  advice  was  followed,  and  a 
second  petition  was  presented,  to  which  in  due  time 

attention  was  paid.^ 

• 

*  Personal  iuformation  and  MS.  Records.  The  public  petitions  pro- 
ceeding from  native  communities  in  India  which  are  much  intermixed  with 
Europeans  are  rarely  of  a  genuine  native  character.  They  betray  more  or 
less  European,  and  particularly  professional,  prompting.  At  Henares  there 
were  few  Europeans,  no  lawyers ;  and  the  pe  ition  of  the  inhabitants  was 
most  probably  of  their  own  unaided  dictation.  It  is  a  document  not  with- 
out interest,  as  it  not  only  expresses  the  sentiments  of  the  people  on  the 


TAX    REPEALED.  469 


In  consequence  of  this  opposition,  and  th6  uni-  book  i. 
vereal  unpopularity  of  the  tax,  it  was  repealed.*^     In  ^^^^'  ^°' 
the   following  year   it  was  revived  in  a  modified     I813. 
form,  and  limited  in  its  application  to  the  cities  of 
Dacca,  Patna,  and  Murshedabad.     In  those  towns 
it  was  to  be  applied  to  the  payment  of  a  municipal 
police,  to  be  appointed  and  maintained  by  a  couk- 
mittee  of  natives  chosen  by  the  inhabitants  of  each 
ward  in  the  presence  of  the  magistrate:   to  these 
committees  also  was  intrusted  the  office  of  assessing 
the  different  shops  and  dwellings  of  their  respective 
wards,  the  whole  not  to  exceed  a  maximum  average 
rate.*     Some  opposition  was  made  to  the  arrange- 
ment  at  Dacca,  but  it  was  finally  carried  into  ope- 
ration. 

Although  not  connected  with  any  of  the  financial 
measures  of  the  Government  of  Bengal,  nor  result- 
ing from  any  of  its  acts,  yet  it  may  be  useful  to 
advert  in  this  place  to  a  formidable  tumult  by 
which  the  tranquillity  of  the  city  of  Benares  was 
interrupted  in  the  year  preceding  that  in  which 
the  house-tax  excited  the  discontent  of  its  inhabit* 
ants ;  as  the  disturbance  was  characteristically  illus- 
trative of  the  peculiarities  of  one  of  the  most  re- 
markable towns  in  India,  and  of  the  discordant 
elements  of  Indian  society,  which  are  alone  re- 
strained from  frequent  and  destructive  conflict  by 
the  vigilance,  vigour,  and  impartiality  of  the  ruling 
power. 

Benares   is   the  holy  city  of  the  Hindus:    it  is 

occasion  on  which  it  was  presented,  but  shows  that  they  were  well  in* 
formed  of  the  proceedings  and  views  of  their  rulers.  It  is  therefore  Riven 
in  the  Appendix.  >  Reg.  vii.  1812.  '  Reg.  xiti.  181S. 


470  HISTORY   OF   BRITIBH   INDIA. 


fiooK  I.  crowded  with  celebrated  shrines :  pilgrimagef  to  it  is 
^"^''' """'  an  atonement  for  all  sin  :  to  die  within  its  precincts 
1813.  is  a  certain  passage  to  eternal  felicity.  Snch  ad- 
Tantages  ensure  it  a  large  resident  population,  and 
attract  to  it  a  numerous  resort  of  Hindu  pilgrims. 
The  character  of  both  classes  is  in  general  accord- 
ance with  the  reputed  sanctity  of  the  place :  its  effi- 
cacy in  expiating  crime,  and  purifying  from  iniquity, 
could  be  of  little  benefit  to  any  but  the  wicked  and 
the  profligate,  and  those  who  tenant  or  frequent  the 
city  are  for  the  greater  part  such  as  stand  most  in 
need  of  its  expiatory  virtues.  The  population  is, 
however,  not  wholly  Hindu.  Benares  is  a  town  of 
extensive  commercial  and  manufacturing  activity, 
and  has  always  comprised  a  considerable  body  of 
Mohammedans  engaged  principally  in  manufactures. 
Its  convenient  situation  had  also,  at  the  period  under 
review,  recommended  it  as  the  residence  of  several 
Mohammedans  of  high  rank,  members  of  the  reign- 
ing family  of  Oude,  or  the  Imperial  house  of  Delhi ; 
and  their  servants  and  retainers  were  numerous  and 
disorderly.  Religious  differences  could  not  fail  to 
find  in  such  a  mixed  multitude  ready  instruments 
of  quarrel,  and  the  mutual  animosity  which  at  all 
times  animated  the  followers  of  Brahma  and  Mo- 
hammed was  at  this  time  more  than  usually  invete- 
rate. It  had  unfortunately  happened  that  some  of 
the  moveable  feasts  of  the  Mohammedans  had  oc- 
curred simultaneously  with  some  of  the  most  popu- 
lar Hindu  festivals ;  and  the  multitudes  which  were 
collected,  and  the  feelings  which  were  excited, 
threatened  a  violent  collision.  The  precautions  of 
the  English  functionaries  suspended  the  season  of 


RELIGIOUS   DISTURBANCES.  471 

its  occurrence,  but  were  unable  to  prevent  it  from  book  i. 
eventually  taking  place,  and  towards  the  close  of  ^^^^' 
1809  an  open  rupture  could  no  longer  be  delayed.         isis. 

During  the  sovereignty  of  the  Mohammedans, 
Aurangzeb  and  other  bigoted  princes  had  forcibly 
taken  from  the  Hindus  of  Benares  several  of  their 
temples  to  transform  them  into  mosques,  and  had 
allowed  and  encouraged  the  Mohammedans  of  the 
city  to  erect  religious  edifices  in  the  immediate 
neighbourhood  of  those  places  which  were  esteemed 
most  sacred  by  the  Hindus.  In  this  manner,  in  one 
part  of  the  city  an  Imam-bara,  a  building  for  the  oc-^ 
casional  devotions  of  the  Musselmans,  was  built  in 
immediate  proximity  to  a  Lat  or  stone  column  typi- 
cal of  Bhairava,  one  of  their  subordinate  deities,  but 
held  by  the  Hindus  in  peculiar  veneration.  As  the 
Lat  and  its  neighbour  were  both  much  frequented 
by  the  followers  of  the  different  religions,  their  en- 
counters gave  frequent  rise  to  angry  feeling  and 
reciprocal  objurgation.  On  the  Inoming  of  the 
21st  of  October,  a  number  of  both  parties  having 
been  assembled,  they  proceeded  from  abuse  to 
blows ;  and,  in  an  interchange  of  missiles  which  en- 
sued, part  of  the  ornamental  architecture  of  the 
Imam-bara  was  injured,  and  a  hut  serving  as  a  tem- 
porary temple  to  the  deified  monkey  Hanuman  was 
demolished,  and  the  idol  was  knocked  over.  The 
intervention  of  the  police  prevented  further  mischief 
on  the  spot ;  but  the  affray  was  renewed  in  another 
part  of  the  town,  and,  swords  and  clubs  being  had 
recourse  to,  several  persons  were  killed  or  wounded 
before  the  disturbance  could  be  suppressed. 

The  presence  of  the  magistrate  and  a  small  de^ 


472  HISTORY   OP  BRITISH   INDIA. 


BOOK  I.  tachment   of   Sipahis   restored   the   appearance   of 
rif  \i'.  vit.  fcra^j^q^})|j^y .    ][^y|.  ^j^^y  were  no  sooner  withdrawn 

1813.  than  the  tumult  recommenced.  The  Mohammedan 
weavers  assembled  in  the  evening  in  great  numbers, 
and,  repairing  quietly  to  the  Hindu  Lat,  heaped  a 
quantity  of  combustibles  round  it  and  set  them  on 
fire,  and,  when  the  stone  was  hot,  threw  cold  water 
upon  it,  by  which  it  was  split  to  pieces.*  Intel- 
ligence of  this  profanation  reached  the  Hindus  late 
in  the  evening,  and  filled  them  with  horror  and 
fury.  Measures  were  taken  to  prevent  the  effects 
of  their  resentment  on  the  following  morning ;  but, 
before  a  sufficient  force  could  arrive,  an  enraged 
multitude  had  set  fire  to  the  Imam-bara,  killed  four 
or  five  of  the  persons  attached  to  it,  and  sprinkled 
with  the  blood  of  a  hog  the  tombs  of  those  who  had 
been  interred  in  its  consecrated  vicinity.  From 
thence  they  moved  to  destroy  the  Mohammedan 
tombs  at  a  burial-ground  of  reputed  extraordinary 
sanctity,  adjacent  to  a  shrine  dedicated  to  Fatima  the 
wife  of  Ali ;  and,  although  defended  by  a  Sipahi 
guard  and  a  number  of  Mohammedans,  the  mob 
partly  effected  their  purpose  before  reinforcements 
arrived  in  sufficient  strength  to  render  their  attempts 
unavailing.  Other  armed  bands  of  Hindus  had  at 
the  same  time  assailed  the  quarters  of  the  town  oc- 
cupied chiefly  by  the  Mohammedans,  murdering  all 

•  In  tlie  memorial  addressed  by  the  Hindus  to  the  magistrate,  extenu- 
ating their  own  conduct  and  calling  for  redress  against  the  Mohammedans, 
they  gravely  averred  that  the  lAi  resisted  every  effort  for  its  demolition, 
until  the  Mohammedans  killed  a  cow  and  a  calf,  and  threw  the  blood  upon 
the  column.  It  then  trembled  and  broke.  Some  of  the  fragments  were 
afterwards  collected,  purified  by  immersion  in  the  Gcingos,  and  enshrined 
in  a  hollow  copper  cylinder  which  was  set  up  where  the  stone  column 
formerly  stood. 


RIOT   SUPPRESSED.  473 

who  came  in  their  way,  and  plunderinff  and  settin&f  book  i. 

•^'  *  ®  ®     CHAP.  VII. 

fire  to  their  houses,  until  their  excesses  were  arrested 


by  the  military  dispositions  which  the  magistrate  and  ^^^^• 
the  commander  of  the  troops  were  able  to  effect. 
The  Sipahis,  although  of  both  persuasions,  discharged 
their  duties  with  perfect  impartiality  and  military 
steadiness:  the  police,  equally  mixed,  had  early 
taken  part  in  the  conflict  according  to  their  respect- 
ive creeds.  The  extent  of  the  mischief  inflicted,  or 
of  the  loss  of  life,  was  imperfectly  ascertained ;  but 
the  disturbance  was  not  suppressed  until  about 
twenty  Mohammedans  had  been  killed  and  seventy 
wounded.  The  principal  actors  in  the  tumult  were 
the  Rajputs  and  Gosains :  the  Brahmans  and  prin- 
cipal inhabitants  sat  fasting  upon  the  steps  by  the 
river-side,  night  and  day,  during  the  continuance  of 
the  disorder,  and  were  with  some  difficulty  prevailed 
upon  to  return  to  their  dwellings  on  the  afternoon 
of  the  23rd.  On  the  following  day  the  temples 
which  had  been  closed  were  reopened,  and  this  event 
was  followed  by  the  opening  of  the  shops  and  the 
bazars,  and  the  restoration  of  tranquillity.  Some  of 
the  most  active  and  violent  of  the  ringleaders  were 
apprehended  and  punished,  and  arrangements  were 
adopted  to  prevent  the  recurrence  of  a  like  popular 
commotion.  The  resort  of  persons  of  all  descrip- 
tions from  every  part  of  India,  and  the  dissolute 
and  riotous  conduct  of  a  large  proportion  of  its  in- 
habitants or  visitors,  rendered  the  maintenance  of 
order  and  tranquillity  in  the  sacred  city  of  Benares, 
for  some  time  at  least,  a  troublesome  and  imper- 
fectly accomplished  task ;  but  the  unrelaxing  firm- 
ness of  British   rule,  a  better  knowledge   of  the 


474  HISTORY    OF   BRITISH   INDIA. 

BOOK  I.  British  character,  and  the  improving  intelligence  of 

'. —  the  people,  gradually  lightened  the  labour,  and,  ten 

1813.  years  after  the  transactions  described,  Benares  was 
regulated  with  as  much  facility  as  any  other  city  in 
the  territories  of  the  Company.* 

Among  the  various  objects  of  internal  administra- 
tion at  this  season  which  deserve  notice  as  marking 
the  first  steps  of  important  changes  still  in  progress, 
and  likely  at  some  future  period  to  exercise  a  mo- 
mentous influence  upon  the  destiny  of  the  British 
Indian  empire,  must  be  comprehended  the  efforts 
which  were  made  in  Bengal  to  promulgate  the 
truths  of  Christianity.  The  South  of  India  had  for 
many  years  been  the  field  of  missionary  labours.  In 
the  beginning  of  the  seventeenth  century  the  church 
of  Rome  had  sent  thither  men  of  extraordinary 
ability  and  energy,  who,  by  completely  discarding 
all  the  indulgences  of  European  civilisation,  living 
among  the  natives  as  natives,  applying  themselves 
with  intense  diligence  to  the  study  of  the  languages 
and  literature  of  the  country,  and  acquiring  a  mas- 
tery over  the  vernacular  dialects  which  has  per- 
petuated the  writings  of  several  European  authors 
as  standard  Tamil  and  Telugu  compositions,  obtained 
a  widely  extended  influence  over  the  people,  and 
formed  a  numerous  body  of  professed  believers  in 
Christianity.*     The  political   agitations   of  Europe 

*  In  1820  the  writer  was  in  the  habit  of  traversing  every  part  of  Benares 
without  fear  of  molestation  or  insult.  The  materials  for  the  beautiful  map 
of  Benares,  executed  not  long  afterwards  by  his  lamented  friend,  Mr. 
James  Prinsep,  were  collected  by  him  in  the  city,  in  fearless  reliance  upon 
the  good  disposition  of  the  people,  which  he  invariably  experienced. 

'  Lettres  Edifiantes;  Asiatic  Researches,  vol.xiv.;  IIough*s  Christianity 
in  India,  ii.  400.  See  also  his  evidence,  Commons*  Committee,  1812,  Pub- 
lic. He  estimates  the  Roman  Catliolics  in  1823  at  between  three  and  four 
hundred  thousand. — Question  1852. 


^MISSIONS   IN   THE   SOUTH   OF   INDIA.  475 

severed  the  teachers  from  their  congregations,  and  book  i. 
the  latter  remained  Christians  in  little  except  the  ^"^'''  ^"' 


name.  To  the  Jesuit  missionaries  succeeded  those  I813. 
of  the  Lutheran  church :  they  were  sent  to  India, 
in  the  first  instance,  not  by  Great  Britain,  but  by 
Denmark  ;*  but  the  example  was  not  lost  upon  the 
former,  although  it  was  for  some  time  but  feebly 
imitated.  Some  pecuniary  assistance  was  granted 
to  the  Danish  mission ;  and  at  last  missionaries 
were  sent  direct,  at  the  expense  of  the  Society  for 
promoting  Christian  Knowledge.  One  or  two  indi- 
viduals found  their  way  to  Bengal,*  and  instituted 
missionary  operations  there ;  but  the  chief  field  was 
long  confined  to  Madras,  and  other  stations  on  the 
Coromandel  coast.  The  persons  employed  were 
natives  either  of  Denmark  or  Germany.  They  were 
for  the  most  part  men  of  learning  and  talent,  of 
simple  habits,  and  kindly  temperaments;  and,  al- 
though their  success  in  the  conversion  of  the  hea- 
then was  not  very  encouraging,  they  were  objects 
of  general  esteem  and  respect  to  both  natives  and 
Europeans,  and  wrought  an  impression  favourable 
to  the  ultimate  reception  of  the  doctrines  which 
they  taught. 

At  length,  at  the  close  of  the  eighteenth  century, 

'  Pearson's  Life  of  Swartz,  i.  12. 

^  A  Mr.  Kiemander  went  from  Madras  in  1758,  and,  notwithstanding 
many  difficulties  and  discouragements,  he  laboured  there  for  some  years 
with  exemplary  piety  and  diligence,  and  with  considerable  success. — Life 
of  Swartz,  i.  126.  It  was  to  hun  that  Dr.  Buchanan  probably  alluded 
when  he  stated  tiiat  the  Protestant  mission  in  Bengal  commenced  in  1758. 
Before  1770,  religious  tracts  were  translated  into  the  Bengali  language ; 
and  Hindu  converts  preached  to  their  countrymen  in  the  time  of  Hastings, 
in  the  town  of  Calcutta.  This  mission  continued  its  labours  till  about  the 
year  1700,  when  the  supply  of  missionaries  from  Europe  failed.— Letter  to 
the  Government  of  Bengal,  printed  in  Parliamentary  Papers,  14th  April, 
1813. 


476  HISTORY    OF   BRITISH  INDIA. 

BOOK  I.  a  private  individual,  a  member  of  the  Baptist  com- 
CHAP.  VII.  mm^JQ^^  ^|.j^  2eal  as  fervent  as  that  of  the  Ger- 


1813.     man  missionaries  of  the  South,  and  inferior  to  them 
only  in  a  less  scholastic  education,  William  Carey, 
the  son  of  the   master  of  a  small   free-school   at 
Paulerspury,    a    village    in    Northamptonshire,    by 
trade  a  shoemaker,  and  subsequently  a  preacher  in 
the  chapels  of  the  society  of  which  he  was  a  mem- 
ber, early  conceived   the  project  of  undertaking  a 
mission  to  Bengal ;  and,  in  the  face  of  the  most  dis- 
heartening difficulties,  succeeded   in  its  execution. 
Being  unable  to  obtain  permission  to  proceed  to 
India  in  a  Company's  vessel,  he  procured  a  passage 
in  a  Danish  ship,  and  arrived  in  Bengal  destitute  of 
money  and  friends  at  the  end  of  1793.     After  a 
short  interval  of  want  and  anxiety,  he  obtained  em- 
ployment as  superintendent  of  an  indigo  factory  in 
Dinajpur,  and  remained  in  that  situation  for  some 
years ;  pursuing,  as  far  as  circumstances  permitted, 
his  missionary  calling,  labouring  assiduously  in  the 
study  of  the  Sanscrit  and  Bengali  languages,  and 
applying  his  acquirements  to  the  translation  into 
them  of  the  Holy  Scriptures.    The  sufferance  of  the 
Government  permitted  his  unauthorised  residence  in 
the  country,  averse  as  was  the  policy  of  the  day  to 
the  admission  of  Europeans ;  and  his  diligence,  his 
learning,  and  piety  secured  him  friends.     His  com- 
munications with  his  correspondents  in  England,  the 
prospects  of  success  which  his  hopes  rather  than  his 
exj^erience  dictated,  and  the  example  of  his  ardour 
and  his  perseverance,  animated  their  zeal ;  and  a  so- 
ciety was  formed,  and  funds  were  raised,  for  the  pur- 
pose of  sending  other  missionaries  to  his  assistance. 


BAPTIST    MISSIONARIES.  477 

They  arrived  in  1799 ;  but,  having  come  to  Bengal  book  i 
without  the  licence  of  the  Court,  were  not  suffered  ^"'^'''^"' 


to  remain  in  Calcutta.  The  Danish  settlement  of  I8i3. 
Serampore  offered  them  an  asylum ;  and  there  they 
fixed  themselves,  with  the  permission  of  the  Go- 
vernor, and  subsequently  with  the  express  sanction 
of  the  King  of  Denmark.  They  were  immediately 
joined  by  Mr.  Carey,  and  a  fraternity  was  organised 
which  set  to  work  upon  a  definite  system ;  and  by 
preaching  in  the  native  languages,  by  forming  schools 
for  native  children,  by  the  composition  of  tracts  and 
translations  of  the  Scriptures,  commenced  a  pious 
warfare  against  the  false  doctrines  of  the  Moham- 
medan and  Hindu  religions,  which  has  been  carried 
on  ever  since  with  unrelaxed  vigour,  and  ^ith  im- 
proving prospects  of  eventual  triumph.' 

The  administration  of  Lord  Wellesley,  although 
it  avoided  giving  direct  encouragement  to  the  Bap- 
tist missionaries,  or  recognising  them  in  that  capa- 
city, was  upon  the  whole  propitious  to  their  exer- 
tions. The  learning  of  their  principal  was  one  of 
their  chief  recommendations  to  the  favour  of  the 
Marquis,  and  Mr.  Carey  was  appointed  one  of  the 
professors  of  the  College  of  Fort  William  soon 
after  its  institution ;  thus  obtaining  a  place  of  dis- 
tinction in  the  recognition  of  the  Government,  and 
a  certain  and  liberal  means  of  subsistence.  Tlie 
establishment  of  schools  for  European  children,  and 
of  a  printing-press  and  paper-manufactory  at  Seram- 
pore, evinced  the  industry,  and  added  to  the  re- 
sources of  the  missionaries:  they  were  further  aided, 
not  only  by  the  funds  of  their  own  community,  but 

^  Memoir  of  William  Carey,  D.D.,  by  Eustace  Carey ;  London,  183G. 


478  HISTORY    OF    BRITISH    INDIA. 

BOOK  I.  by  those  of  other  religious  bodies,  at  whose  expense, 
^^^^*  ^^^  especially  at  that  of  the  British  and  Foreign  Bible 
1813.     Society,  versions  of  the  Scriptures  into  a  great  va- 
riety of  the  Indian  dialects  were  executed;  and  they 
grew  daily  in  wealth,  consideration,  and  confidence 
under  the  countenance  of  the  Government. 

The  immediate  successor  of  Lord  Wellesley,  Sir 
George  Barlow,  looked  upon  the  proceedings  of  the 
Serampore  missionaries  with  a  less  favourable  regard. 
Entertaining,  in  common  with  most  of  the  Company'^s 
servants  of  that  day,  a  dread  of  the  multiplication  of 
uncovenanted  European  residents  in  India,  he  was 
disinclined  to  relax  any  of  the  restraints  which  the 
Legislature  had  imposed,  and  refused  to  sanction  the 
continued  presence  of  any  new  arrivals  who  had  not 
provided  themselves  with  a  licence  from  the  Court. 
The  teaching  of  the  missionaries  had  also  begun  to 
excite  some  uneasiness  among  the  natives  of  Cal- 
cutta, and  the  connexion  of  the  mutiny  at  Vellore 
with  their  religious  apprehensions  imposed  upon  the 
Government  the  obligation  of  setting  the  minds  of 
their  native  subjects  at  ease  with  respect  to  the 
designs  of  their  rulers,  by  the  public  prohibition  of 
those  expedients  resorted  to  by  the  missionaries 
which  were  most  likely  to  offend  the  religious  senti- 
ments and  exasperate  the  feelings  of  the  people.* 
The  missionaries  were  allowed  to  retain  the  dwelling 
which  they  occupied  as  a  chapel  in  Calcutta,  and 
perform  divine  service  in  it  in  the  Bengali  language 

*  Dr.  Buchanan  acquits  the  Governor-General  of  any  hostility  to  the 
dissemination  of  Christianity :  on  the  contrary,  he  says  of  him,  '*  Sir  G. 
Barlow  has  often  expressed  his  approbation  of  the  means  used  for  the  dif- 
fusion of  Christianity  in  India,  and  sincerely  desires  its  success.*' — Letter 
to  Government;  Pari.  Papers. 


RfiSTRICnONS  IMPOSED.  479 

as  usual,  and  no  restriction  was  imposed  on  their  book  i. 
private   instructions  or   scriptural  translations;  but  ^^^^-^^ 
they  were  forbidden  to  preach  in  the  public  streets,     18U. 
to  send  itinerant  native  preachers  through  the  vil- 
lages, or  to  distribute  gratuitously  controversial  and 
religious  tracts.    They  considered  it  prudent  to  yield 
to  the  storm,  and  promised  to  conform  to  the  wishes 
of  the   Government   in  all  respects  in  which  they 
could  conscientiously  acquiesce.^ 

The  degree  of  the  conformity  rendered  did  not, 
however,  satisfy  the  Government  of  Bengal ;  as  one 
of  the  first  acts  of  Lord  Minto's  Government  was  a 
renewal  of  the  injunctions  which  Sir  G.  Barlow  had 
been  obliged  to  adopt,  and  the  menace  of  still  more 
rigorous  restrictions. 

Pamphlets  in  Bengali  and  Persian  had  been  pub- 
lished, which,  in  the  judgment  of  the  Governor- 
General  in  Council,  were  calculated  to  excite  among 
the  native  subjects  of  the  Company  a  spirit  of  reli- 
gious jealousy  and  alarm,  which  might  eventually  be 
productive  of  the  most  serious  evils.  The  distribu- 
tion of  such  publications,  and  the  public  preaching 
of  the  missionaries  and  their  converts  at  the  very 
seat  of  Government,  might  be  supposed  to  have  re- 
ceived the  sanction  and  approval  of  the  supreme 
authority ;  and  the  prevalence  of  such  an  impression 
would  both  augment  the  danger,  and  render  more 
difficult  the  application  of  a  remedy.  Whatever 
might  be  the  propriety  of  exposing  the  errors  of  the 
Hindu  or  Musselman  religion  to  persons  of  those 
persuasions  who  sought  instruction  in  the  Christian 
faith,  it  was  contrary  to  the  system  of  protection, 

'  Memoir  of  Dr.  Carey,  48S. 


480  HI8T0EY   OF   BRITISH    INDIA. 

BOOK  I.  which  the  Government  was  pledged  to  afford  to  the 
CHAP.  VII.  undig^m-jjed  exercise  of  the  religion  of  the  country,  to 
1813.  obtrude  upon  the  great  body  of  the  people,  by  means 
of  printed  works,  exhortations  involving  an  inter- 
ference with  their  religious  tenets.  The  obligation, 
therefore,  to  suppress  within  the  limits  of  the  Com- 
pany's authority  in  India  treatises  and  public  preach- 
ings offensive  to  the  religious  persuasions  of  the 
people,  was  founded  on  considerations  of  necessary 
caution,  of  general  safety,  and  national  faith  and 
honour.  Accordingly,  it  was  deemed  necessary  to 
direct  that  public  preaching  in  the  mission-house  of 
Calcutta  should  be  discontinued,  and  to  renew  the 
prohibition  of  the  issue  of  religious  tracts;  and,  in 
order  to  bring  the  missionary  press  more  immedi- 
ately under  the  controul  of  the  officers  of  the  Go- 
vernment, the  missionaries  were  commanded  to  re- 
move it  from  Seranipore  to  Calcutta.' 

To  the  orders  and  injunctions  of  the  Government 
the  missionaries  proffered  a  temperate  and  judicious 
reply.  They  disowned  and  condemned  the  language 
of  a  pami)lilet  which  had  given  the  greatest  offence, 
— a  scurrilous  account  of  JVIohammed,  which  had 
called  forth  the  remonstrances  of  the  most  respecta- 
ble Mohammedan  inhabitants  of  Calcutta, — and  at- 
tributed it  to  the  intemperance  of  one  of  their  con- 
verts, who  had  translated  it  into  Persian :  they 
pledged  themselves  for  greater  caution  in  future, 
but  de])recated  the  removal  of  their  press,  as  sub- 
jecting them  to  great  inconvenience  and  ruinous  ex- 
pense.    The  tone  of  their  representations  disarmed 

*  Letter  from  Hcuigal  to  the  Secret  Committee,  2nd  Nov.  1807,  with  its 
enclosures;  Pari.  Papers,  Mth  April,  1813. 


LEARNIKO   ENCOURAGED.  481 

the  Government  of  its  rigour;  and  they  were  al-  book  i. 
lowed  to  continue  their  preaching  in  their  chapel,  ^^^^'  ^'^ 
and  to  remain  at  Serampore,  on  condition  that  I813. 
every  work  that  issued  from  the  press  should  be 
submitted  to  the  inspection  of  the  secretary  to 
Government.  The  condition  was  acceded  to;  and, 
as  the  general  conduct  of  the  missionaries  was  more 
guarded,  no  further  interference  with  them  ensued. 
The  alarm  of  the  Government  was  perhaps  more  vio- 
lent than  the  occasion  called  for,  but  the  check 
opposed  to  precipitate  and  indiscreet  zeal  was  not 
detrimental  to  the  ultimate  extension  of  Christianity. 
Little  benefit  had  accrued  or  was  likely  to  accrue 
from  street  preaching,  and  virulent  language  was  ill 
calculated  to  convey  conviction.  The  attention  of 
the  Serampore  missionaries  was  thenceforth  more 
entirely  given  to  the  establishment  of  schools  and 
the  translation  of  the  Scriptures;  means  more  safe 
and  certain,  although  their  fruits  might  more  slowly 
come  to  maturity.* 

Although  a  sense  of  public  duty  imposed  upon 
the  Governor-General  the  obligation  of  checking  the 
over-zealous  haste  of  the  missionaries  of  Serampore, 
his  personal  feelings  ensured  to  their  literary  efforts 
his  constant  and  warmest  encouragement.  The  as- 
sociate in  early  life  of  some  of  the  most  distin- 
guished ornaments  of  the  literary  society  of  Great 
Britain,  Lord  Minto  brought  with  him  to  India  an 
enlightened   and  cultivated   taste,  and  a  generous 

*  In  the  representatioii  to  the  Government  made  by  the  missionaries, 
which  is  dated  in  September,  1807,  they  state  that  they  had  baptized  up- 
wards of  one  hundred  natlTes. — Pari.  Papers.  No  great  number  in  eight 
years,  reckoning  from  1709  only :  if  from  1794,  a  still  more  inconsiderable 
proportion. 

VOL.  I.  2   I 


482  HISTORY    OF   BRITISH   INDIA. 


BOOK  I.  sjrmpathy  with  every  indication  of  intellectual  ex- 
cHAP.  VII.  ^Q^^^Q^  jjig  liberal  aid  was  therefore  given  to 
1818.  the  works  published  at  Serampore,  whether  trans- 
lations of  the  Scriptures,  or  publications  tending  to 
make  the  language  and  literature  of  India  more 
generally  known  and  more  easily  acquired.^  The 
same  feelings  led  him  to  befriend  those  natives  of 
India  who  professed  the  literature  of  their  country ; 
and  the  first  printing-press,  established  and  con- 
ducted solely  by  native  enterprise  and  skill,  and  for 
the  purpose  of  substituting  the  productions  of  the 
press  for  the  manuscripts  hitherto  in  use,  owed  its 
existence  to  his  patronage.  But  it  was  in  his  con- 
nexion with  the  College  of  Fort  William  that  his 
sentiments  were  most  especially  manifested;  and 
one  great  object  of  his  administration  was  to  carry 
into  full  operation,  as  far  as  the  orders  of  the  home 
authorities  allowed,  the  views  of  the  illustrious 
founder  of  the  institution.*  The  result  was  highly 
beneficial :  the  junior  servants  of  the  Company  were 
animated  to  honourable  exertions,  which  formed 
the  foundation  of  their  future  distinction;  their 
seniors  were  induced  to  apply  their  knowledge  and 
acquirements  to  the  instruction  of  their  younger 
brethren ;  and  a  number  of  natives  of  talent,  exer* 

'  Several  Grammars  and  Dictionaries,  and  other  rudimental  books,  in 
Bengali,  Telinga,  M ahratta,  and  Sanscrit,  were  printed  at  Serampore,  chiefly 
at  the  cost  of  the  Government.  Pecuniary  assistance  (ten  thousand  rupees) 
was  afforded  to  the  Malay  translation  of  the  Scriptures ;  and  aid  was 
liberally  given  to  the  Serumpore  translation  of  the  Ramayana,  the  works  of 
Confucius,  and  other  literary  publications. — Roebuck's  Annals  of  the  Ck>l- 
lege  of  Fort  William. 

'  It  was  not  mere  official  phraseology,  for  Lord  Minto  was  not  addicted 
to  its  use,  when  in  his  last  annual  address  he  observed,  '*  No  part  of  ray 
public  duties  have  excited  in  my  mind  a  more  cordial  concern  or  more 
lively  interest  than  those  which  are  attached  to  the  office  of  Visitor  of  this 
College/ '^Annals  of  the  College  of  Fort  William,  p.  S76. 


FINANCIAL   MEASURES.  483 

cising  over  their  countrymen  the  combined  influ-  book  i. 
ence  of  learning  and  religion,  who  were  engaged  in  ^^^^'  ^^' 
the  service  of  the  college,  derived  from  their  em-     I813. 
ployment  some  compensation  for   that  neglect  to 
which  the  decay  and  extinction  of  native  patrons  of 
rank  had  subjected  them,  and  learned  to  identify 
their  interests  with  those  of  a  foreign  and  intrusive 
race.     To  them,  and  to  their  European  associates, 
were  owing  a  variety  of  useful  works  in  the  lan- 
guages and  literature  of  the  East,  intended  to  facili- 
tate their  acquirement,  and  bring  within  the  reach 
of  the  Oriental  student  the  means  of  becoming  fami- 
liar with  the  lavns  and  institutions,  the  religion  and 
the  character,  of  the   people.      Every  attempt  so 
directed  was  encouraged  and  aided  by  Lord  Minto.* 

The  last  class  of  measures  to  which  we  shall  ad- 
vert, regard  the  financial  condition  of  India  during 
Lord  Minto's  administration. 

The  necessity  of  as  rigid  a  pursuance  of  the  sys- 
tem of  economy  commenced  by  Sir  G.  Barlow  as  was 
consistent  with  the  interests  and  honour  of  the  em- 
pire was  equally  impressed  upon  his  successor ;  and 
during  the  whole  term  of  his  government  a  careful 
avoidance  of  expenditure  was  adhered  to,  carried  in 
some  cases  perhaps  to  a  hurtful  excess.  The  occa- 
sions which  called  for  military  demonstrations,  the 
extraordinary  embassies  which  were  fitted  out,  and 

*  Amongst  other  arrangenieiits,  a  plan  was  proposed  by  the  Governor- 
General  for  the  foondatkm  of  Itindu  colleges  at  Nadiya  and  Tirhoot,  to 
counteract  the  want  of  public  endbvagement  afforded  to  native  literature 
by  princes,  chieftains,  and  opulent  individuals  under  the  native  Govern- 
ments, and  who  had  lost  both  the  means  and  the  inducement  to  continue 
their  patronage  under  the  British  GoyemmeBt.  He  had  also  in  contem- 
plation to  found  sittilar  institutions  for  the  cultivation  of  Mohammedan 
li^rature. — Minute  by  Lord  Minto,  6th  March,  IStl :  Commons'  Commit- 
tee, 1832;  Public ;  App.  p.  SS6. 

2i2 


484  HISTORY    OF   BRITISH    INDIA. 

BOOK  I.  the  expeditions  undertaken  against  the  maritime 
^'^^'^"'  possessions  of  France,  disturbed  the  equable  tenor 
1818.  of  financial  retrenchment,  and  involved  unusual  de- 
mands upon  the  public  treasury:  but  these  inter- 
ruptions were  only  temporary ;  and  the  general  re- 
sult was  an  augmented  amount  of  the  revenues  of 
British  India,  a  diminution  of  its  burthens,  and  no 
enhanced  rate  of  charge. 

It  has  been  already  mentioned  that  the  arrange- 
ments effected  by  Sir  G.  Barlow  secured  for  the 
first  year  of  Lord  Minto's  administration,  according 
to  one  system  of  computation,  a  surplus  receipt,  or, 
according  to  a  different  set  of  accounts,  reduced  the 
excess  of  charge  to  an  inconsiderable  sum :  the  same 
diversity  of  result,  arising  from  the  same  cause,  pre- 
vails in  the  following  year ;  but  from  thence  to  the 
close  of  the  period  both  statements  agree  in  show- 
ing a  considerable  net  local  revenue  after  pro- 
viding for  the  interest  of  the  public  debt :  the  sur- 
plus of  the  last  year  amounted  to  little  less  than 
two  millions  sterling.*  A  considerable  proportion 
of  this  arose  from  the  improved  revenues  of  the 
unsettled  provinces  under  the  Presidency  of  Bengal, 
and  the  imposition  of  new  taxes  at  Madras:  the 
rest,  from  the  reduction  of  the  rate  of  interest 
which  the  Government  was  enabled,  by  the  flourish- 
ing state  of  its  finances,  to  effect. 

The  history  of  the  Indian  debt  presents  a  sin- 
gular picture  of  the  growth  of  public  credit  along 

'  According  to  the  statements  furnished  to  the  Committee  of  the  Hoase 
of  Lords,  the  surplus  was  £l ,988,000.  In  Sicca  rupees  it  was  S.  R. 
1,45,33,190,  which,  at  two  shillings  to  the  rupee,  is  i8l,463,319.  For  a 
more  particular  comparison  between  the  two  periods  as  expressed  in  the 
home  accounts,  see  Appendix. 


INDIAN   DEBT.  485 

with  the  increase  of  financial  embarrassment,  and  book  i. 
of  the   increase  of  embarrassment  with  the  aug-  ^"^'''  ^'' 


mentation  of  the  public  resources.  In  proper-  1813. 
tion  as  the  British  Indian  empire  has  extended 
its  boundaries,  and  added  to  its  revenues,  so  have 
the  means  at  its  command  been  found  inadequate 
to  extraordinary  emergencies,  and  it  has  been 
obliged  from  time  to  time  to  apply  for  aid  to  the 
funds  of  individuals ;  and,  notwithstanding  the  addi- 
tions thus  made  to  its  incumbrances,  its  credit  has 
never  failed  to  procure  the  assistance  that  was 
needed,  on  terms  much  lower  than  the  ordinary 
profits  of  capital,  or  the  rates  of  interest  prevailing 
in  transactions  between  individuals.  In  fact,  the 
amount  of  the  public  debt  is  far  from  burthensome 
on  the  state;  and  the  inconvenience  which  it  occa- 
sions is  fully  compensated  by  the  connexion  which 
it  maintains  between  the  Government  and  the  fund- 
holders,  a  large  proportion  of  whom  are  natives  of 
the  country,  and  who  are  thus  interested  in  the 
stability  of  the  ruling  power.* 

In  1792  the  Indian  debt,  bearing  interest,  little 
exceeded  seven  millions  sterling:  the  interest  ex- 
ceeded six  hundred  thousand  pounds,  bearing  a  pro- 
portion of  eight  and  six  tenths  per  cent.*  In  1799 
the  debt  had  risen  to  ten  millions ;  and  in  the  short 
interval  of  five  years,  the  season  of  Lord  Wellesley's 
conquests,  it  was  more  than  doubled,  amounting  in 
1805  to  nearly  twenty-one  millions,  with  an  annual 


^  Calcutta  Annual  Register,  1821 ;  HiBtorical  Sketch,  18. 

'  This  was  the  arerage  rate.  Loans  opened  in  1790-1,  1796-7,  and 
1798-9,  bore  twelre  per  cent — Goyemment  Notices;  Bengal  and  Agra 
Gazetteer,  1841,  vol.  ii.  part  ii.  469. 


486  HISTORY   OF   BRITISH   INDIA. 


BOOK  I.  interest  of  £1,791,000.  During  the  two  following 
^"^''  ^'^  years  the  continued  effects  of  the  previous  period  of 
1818.  prodigality  were  still  felt,  and  the  debt  went  on  in- 
creasing; so  that  in  1807  it  amounted  to  more  than 
twenty-six  millions,  bearing  an  interest  of  £2,228,000. 
In  1813-14  the  amount  of  debt  remained  much  the 
same,  being  twenty-seven  millions ;  but  the  interest 
amounted  to  £1,636,000,  being  a  permanent  dimi- 
nution annually  of  £692,000.^  This  was  effected 
by  the  successful  opening  of  loans  in  August  and 
December,  1810,  at  an  interest  of  six  per  cent.,  to 
which  the  whole  of  the  outstanding  obligations 
were  transferred ;  the  capital  of  British  India,  and 
the  credit  of  the  Government,  having  thus  gone  on 
improving,  so  that  in  about  twenty  years  the  rate 
of  interest  on  public  securities  was  reduced  from 
twelve  per  cent,  to  half  that  proportion. 

Another  important  change  followed  the  flourish- 
ing state  of  the  finances,  and  the  pajonent  in  Eng- 
land of  the  principal  as  well  as  of  the  interest  of 
loans  contracted  in  India  ceased  to  form  one  of 
their  conditions.  When  this  provision  was  first  in- 
troduced, it  was  thought  likely  to  lead  to  the  trans- 
fer of  the  whole  of  the  Indian  debt  to  Europe, 
where  it  might  either  be  discharged  out  of  the 
profits  of  the  Company's  trade,  or  by  money  bor- 
rowed at  a  much  lower  rate  of  interest.  For  these 
purposes  the  Indian  Government  of  1785  was  au- 

*  Second  Report,  Commons' Committee,  1810,  App.  8.  It  must  be  borne 
in  mind  that  these  sums  are  higher  by  one-seventh  than  they  should  be, 
according  to  the  intrinsic  value  of  the  Indian  currencies.  The  real  debt  of 
1806-7,  in  Sicca  rupees,  was  23,15,30,125,  say  £23,153,000 ;  and  the  amount 
of  interest,Sa.  rs.  1,07,13,929,  or  £  1,971,000.— Official  Documents;  Lords' 
Committee,  1830,  App.  C.  No.  3. 


PROPOSED   TRANSFER.  487 

thorised  to  grant  bills  at  eighteen  months'  date  on  book  i. 
the  Court  of  Directors,  for  the  principal  of  the  debt  ^"^'''  ^"' 
then  owing,  to  the  extent  of  six  crores  of  rupees,  at     lais. 
the  exchange  of  1^.  Sd.  the  current  rupee,  at  the 
option  of  the  lenders;  and  in  the  first  year  they 
took  advantage  of  it  to  the  extent  of  about  a  fourth 
of  the  principal  sum.      In  the  following  year  the 
amount  applied  for  was  so  trifling,  that  the  arrange- 
ment was  looked  upon  as  a  fJEulure ;  a  result  ascribed 
by  the  Government  to  the  low  rate  of  exchange, 
the  remote  date  at  which  the  bills  were  payable, 
the  advantages  made  in  India  by  holding  Govern- 
ment securities,  and  the  more  advantageous  means 
of  remittance  through  foreign  channels. 

On  the  renewal  of  the  charter  in  1793  the  prin- 
ciple of  the  plan  was  recognised,  and  it  was  pro- 
vided that  the  Indian  debt  should  be  in  this  man- 
ner gradually  transferred  to  England,  until  it  was 
reduced  to  two  millions  sterling,  the  exchange 
being  fixed  at  1^.  lid.  the  current  rupee.  For  some 
time  the  amount  transferred  reached  the  prescribed 
limit  of  the  bills  to  be  drawn,  or  £600,000 ;  but  it 
ultimately  diminished,  and  in  1803-4  ceased  alto- 
gether. The  demand  for  funds  in  India,  the  exist- 
ence of  profitable  means  of  remittance  by  the  ex- 
tension of  the  private  trade,  and  the  conditions  of 
new  loans  granting  for  the  interest,  bills  at  2s.  6d. 
the  Sicca  rupee,  payable  six  months  after  sight,  and 
ensuring  similar  payment  of  the  principal  when  due, 
held  out  inducements  even  to  the  European  fund- 
holders  to  leave  their  capital  in  the  Indian  treasury. 
With  the  return  of  peace  in  India  capital  was  less 
in  demand  there;  while  the  political  state  of  Europe, 


488 


HISTOBY   OF   BRITISH   INDIA. 


1813. 


BOOK  I.  the  high  price  of  bullion,  and  the  depression  of  the 
^"*^'  ^"'  public  funds,  rendered  its  transmission  to  England 
highly  advantageous.  The  consequence  was  a  run 
upon  the  home  treasury,  which  was  productive  of 
much  embarrassment;  and  the  pressure  was  ag- 
gravated temporarily  by  the  measures  adopted  under 
the  orders  of  the  Court  for  its  relief, — the  reso- 
lution of  the  local  Governments  to  pay  off  all  the 
debts  the  principal  of  which  was  demandable  in 
England,  in  the  event  of  the  lenders  declining  to 
transfer  the  security  to  a  new  loan  opened  in  1810, 
which  offered  no  such  condition.  The  airangement 
was  so  far  successful  that  of  twenty-^three  millions, 
to  which  the  home  treasury  was  liable,  more  than 
thirteen  were  transferred  to  the  new  loan;  rather 
more  tlian  three  were  paid  m  cash  by  the  local  Go- 
vernments,  and 
be  discliarged  h^ 
the  purp*'  ' 
pany  had 
venience  ^ 
in  1812  m^ 
the  option  of 
by  bills  on 
home  funds  W€ 
demand.^ 

Nor  had  the  resoiu-cos 
thc^t^  heavy  demands?  wit 
hH^i!^ir  been  made  in  Ii 


thel 


oiunjoiift'  (\immii 


r-^' 

1 

^c         : 

r    \ 

^   1             td 

Ft    1                 *1 

ll        J 

n  :            1 

■ 

r 

ft 

<   I 

9 

1 
j 

v 
ft 

a' 

J* 
c 

H           > 
^  : 

'^■ 

n 

ri 

r7 

c 
p 

n 
sil 

M 

1 
1 

i 

O 

klA. 


489 


-fl  of  Lord  Minto's  book  i. 
itted  from  India  ^^^^^_^ 
jany'fl  investments  1813. 
ons  sterling,*  Of 
o  millions  were  in 
.^as  unprecedented 
>f  India,  and  inti- 
he  terms  of  its  in- 
saction  was  also  of 
of  its  occurrence : 
mies  whirh  were 
Europe  from  mili- 
eat  measure  upon 
?casian  called  for 
all  her  resources; 
proportion  to  the 
:ies  of  her  Indian 
erable   nor  uuim- 


^^m^^^^^^m^  -,- «  **^uourabIe  and  suc- 
cessful labours  was  now  ap])roacliing.    Tlie  influence 


i  nr  vuppJy  tf>  Loodon  : 

Jn  ItflM^             SiL  FS,  3,443,10332  ttt  2i.  ed.  £4,331,229 

IMS  II                          VU'lIf.f>7&  3,393,(>34 

181^14                          l/H),(K)jOOO  3,000^000 


i:0,T24»86S 
T«4t«r  fyttm  H^itfj^ixl ;    Papers  lyUtiiig  to  Fiuaiuea  of  India, 
t}f  Tim  (Jonrt  of  Proprietors,  March,  1634^  p.  IS. 

8ft.  n.  40,43>40T  at  Ss.  Od. 
8ft,4^1,0ti3 


XI, 858,7 1!> 
ugtund,  tlk«  remitbuicea  realised  more 


488  HISTORY   OF   BRITISH   INDIA, 

BOOK  I.  the  high  price  of  bullion,  and  the  depression  of  the 
^"^^'  ^'  public  funds,  rendered  its  transmission  to  England 
181S.  highly  advantageous.  The  consequence  was  a  run 
upon  the  home  treasury,  which  was  productive  of 
much  embarrassment;  and  the  pressure  was  ag- 
gravated temporarily  by  the  measures  adopted  under 
the  orders  of  the  Court  for  its  relief, — ^the  reso- 
lution of  the  local  Governments  to  pay  off  all  the 
debts  the  principal  of  which  was  demandable  in 
England,  in  the  event  of  the  lenders  declining  to 
transfer  the  security  to  a  new  loan  opened  in  1810, 
which  offered  no  such  condition.  The  arrangement 
was  so  far  successful  that  of  twenty-three  millions, 
to  which  the  home  treasury  was  liable,  more  than 
thirteen  were  transferred  to  the  new  loan;  rather 
more  than  three  were  paid  in  cash  by  the  local  Go- 
vernments ;  and  six  millions  and  a  half  remained  to 
be  discharged  by  bills  upon  the  Court.  It  was  for 
the  purpose  of  meeting  this  demand  that  the  Com- 
pany had  recourse  to  Parliament  for  aid.  The  incon- 
venience was  gradually  surmounted ;  and,  although 
in  1812  under  the  terms  of  a  new  six  per  cent,  loan 
the  option  of  demanding  payment  of  the  principal 
by  bills  on  England  was  partially  restored,  the 
home  funds  were  not  again  exposed  to  so  severe  a 
demand.^ 

Nor  had  the  resources  at  home  been  subjected  to 
these  heavy  demands  without  corresponding  efforts 
having  been  made  in  India  to   provide  for  them. 


*  Petition  of  the  Company  to  Parliament ;  Second  Report  of  the  Com- 
mittee of  the  House  of  Commons,  May  1810,  App.  6-10 ;  Bengal  and  Agra 
Gazetteer,  1841,  vol.  ii.  part  ii.  454 ;  Details  of  Public  Loans ;  Report  of 
the  Commons'  Committee,  1832,  article  Finance. 


SUPPLIES   FROM   INDIA.  489 

During  the  three  concluding  years  of  Lord  Minto's  book  i. 
administration,    the  supplies   remitted   from    India  ^^^^'^' 


exceeded  the  value  of  the  Company's  investments  I813. 
to  the  extent  of  nearly  ten  millions  sterling/  Of 
the  amoimt  so  remitted  nearly  two  millions  were  in 
bullion;*  a  circumstance  which  was  unprecedented 
in  the  history  of  the  commerce  of  India,  and  inti- 
mated an  approaching  change  in  the  terms  of  its  in- 
tercourse with  Europe.  The  transaction  was  also  of 
peculiar  importance  at  the  season  of  its  occurrence : 
the  movements  of  the  vast  armies  which  were 
working  out  the  deliverance  of  Europe  from  mili- 
tary despotism  depended  in  a  great  measure  upon 
the  wealth  of  England.  The  occasion  called  for 
and  deserved  the  application  of  all  her  resources ; 
and,  although  bearing  but  a  small  proportion  to  the 
extent  of  her  efforts,  the  treasuries  of  her  Indian 
empire  furnished  a  not  inconsiderable  nor  unim- 
portant contribution.* 

The  close  of  Lord  Minto's  honourable  and  suc- 
cessful labours  was  now  approaching.    The  influence 

*  Excess  of  supply  to  London : 

in  1811-12            Sa.  rs.  8,46,49,882  at  28. 6d.  £4,881,229 

1812-18                         2,71,49,075  8,898,684 

1818-14                         1,60,00,000  2,000,000 


£9,724,868 
— Financial  Letter  from  Bengal ;   Papers  relating  to  Finances  of  India, 
printed  by  order  of  the  Court  of  Proprietors,  March,  1824,  p.  18. 
^  Bullion  remitted  to  England  : 

in  1811-12  Sa.  rs.  40,42,407  at  2s.  6d.         £    506,801 

1812-18  85,44,988  1,068,128 

181814  22,82,859  285,295 


£1,858,719 
As  the  price  of  bullion  was  high  in  England,  the  remittances  realised  more 
than  even  the  exchange  yalue. 

^  Alison's  History  of  Europe,  viii.  63,  ix.  701. 


490  BISTORY   OF   BRITISH   INDIA, 

BOOK  I.  of  party  spirit,  so  long  suspended,  was  at  length 
^^''  ^'  allowed  to  operate ;  and  the  continuance  in  oflSce  of 
i8ia  an  administration  based  upon  principles  opposed  to 
those  of  the  mmisters  by  whom  the  Governor-Gene- 
ral had  been  nominated  was  found  incompatible 
with  the  longer  duration  of  his  power.  Circum- 
stances had  also  imposed  upon  the  ministers  the 
duty  of  conferring  office  upon  another  distinguished 
personage ;  and  the  endeavours  of  the  Earl  of  Moira 
to  carry  into  effect  the  wishes  of  the  Prince  Re- 
gent for  the  formation  of  a  ministry  which  should 
connect  the  actual  servants  of  the  Crown  with  his 
early  friends,  however  unsuccessful,  entitled  him 
to  the  consideration  both  of  the  Prince  and  of  his 
advisers.  It  was  consequently  proposed  to  reward 
his  exertions  by  his  appointment  to  the  govern- 
ment of  India,  and  to  make  way  for  him  by  the 
removal  of  the  Governor-General.  A  resolution 
was  accordingly  moved  by  the  Chairman,  under  the 
dictation  no  doubt  of  the  Board  of  Controul,  that 
Lord  Minto  should  be  recalled.  No  reason  for  the 
measure  was  assigned ;  but  it  was  adopted  in  oppo- 
sition to  the  tenor  of  a  letter  received  from  Lord 
Minto's  friends,  expressing  his  wish  to  be  relieved 
in  January  1814.  This  letter  was  assigned  as  the 
reason  for  the  immediate  appointment  of  Earl 
Moira ;  but,  as  objected  by  one  of  the  opponents  of 
the  arrangement,  Mr.  Charles  Grant,  the  plea  was 
delusive,  as  no  one  could  pretend  to  assign  it  as  a 
sufficient  reason  for  proceeding  to  the  choice  of  a 
Governor-General  in  November  1811,  whose  pre- 
sence at  Fort  William  could  only  be  necessary  in 
January  1814.     On  the  same  occasion  it  was  deter- 


CLOSE  OF  LORD   MNTO's  GOVERNMENT.  491 


mined  to  supersede  Sir  George  Nugent  as  Com-  book  i. 
manderJn-chief,  Lord  Moira  uniting  both  the  civil  ^"^^'  ^"' 
and  supreme  authority;  and  not  only  to  rescind  the  isis. 
conditional  appointment  of  Sir  G.  Barlow  as  Go- 
vernor-General, but  to  remove  him  from  the  go- 
vernment of  Fort  St.  George.  These  several  mea- 
sures were  made  the  subject  of  strong  protests  by 
several  leading  members  of  the  Direction;^  but  the 
objections  were  overruled  by  the  predominating 
spirit  of  ministerial  obligations,  and  the  change 
took  place.  Earl  Moira  was  appointed  Governor- 
General  of  India  and  Commander-in-chief;  and  Ge- 
neral Abercromby,  the  commander  of  the  forces  at 
Fort  St.  George,  was  nominated  for  a  time  Go- 
vernor of  Madras.  Lord  Minto  survived  but  a 
short  time  his  return  to  his  native  country ;  he  died 
in  the  course  of  the  same  year.  Few  Governors- 
General  have  stronger  claims  upon  the  gratitude  of 
those  over  whom  or  for  whom  they  ruled.  No  one 
ever  more  conscientiously  or  disinterestedly  laboured 
for  the  happiness  of  the  people  of  India,  for  the 
prosperity  of  the  East  India  Company,  or  the  ho- 
nour and  advantage  of  Great  Britain.  Other  ad- 
ministrations may  have  been  signalised  by  more 
stirring  events  and  more  splendid  triumphs;  but 
British  India  never  enjoyed  a  more  healthy  and 
contented  condition,  never  made  a  more  sure  and 
steady  though  an  unpretending  advance  in  social 
improvement,  than  during  the  government  of  Lord 
Minto. 

*  See  Dissents  of  Edward  Parry,  W.  Astell,  George  Smith,  and  John 
Bebb,  Esqrs.,  20th  Dec. ;  and  separate  Dissent  of  Mr.  Charles  Grant,  iOth 
Dec.  1812:  published  by  Sir  Robert  Barlow,  18ia. 


492  HISTORY   OF   BRITISH   INDIA. 


BOOK  I.  The  term  of  Lord  Minto*s  government  was  coeval 
^^^^'  ^"'  with  a  material  change  in  the  character  of  the  su- 
1813.  perior  authorities  under  whom  the  power  of  him- 
self and  his  predecessors  had  been  immediately 
held.  The  East  India  Company  ceased  to  retain 
the  monopoly  of  the  East  India  trade.  The  circum- 
stances which  led  to  this  event  we  shall  now  pro- 
ceed to  detail. 


CHAPTER  VIII. 


Embarrassed  finances  of  the  Company. — Application 
to  Parliament  for  assistance.  —  A  Loan  granted. — 
Inquiry  into  abuse  of  patronage. — Renewal  of  the 
Charter. — Previous  Correspondence  with  the  Board. 
— Demands  of  the  Court. — Propositions  of  Mr. 
Dundas — objections  of  the  Cofwrt — communication 
suspended — revived. — Determination  of  Ministers 
to  open  the  Trade  with  India  resisted^  but  jinaUy 
acceded  to  by  (he  Company. — Claims  of  ike  Out-- 
ports. — Change  of  the  Ministry. — Lord  Bucking- 
hamshire President  of  the  Board. — Consequences  of 
delay. — Resistance  to  the  claims  of  the  Outports. — 
Appeal  to  Parliament.  —  Resolutions  proposed  by 
Lord  CasHereagh  in  the  House  of  Commons ;  by 
Lord  Buckinghamshire  in  the  Hofuse  of  Lords.  — 
Application  of  the  Company  to  be  heard  by  counsel 
granted. — Questions  at  issue — political — commercial. 
— Trade  with  India  and  wit/i  China,  peculiarities  of 


HISTORY    OF   BRITISH   INDIA,  493 

the  latter — secured  to  the  Company. — Struggle  for 
the  Trade  with  India. — Arguments  of  the  Company 
— of  the  Merchants. — Company  consent  to  take  off 
restrictions  from  the  Ewport^  not  from  the  Impw*t 
trade. — Financial  and  political  evils  anticipated  and 
denied — attempt  to  substantiate  them  by  evidence. — 
Opinions  of  Warren  Hastings  and  others  respecting 
the  unrestricted  admission  of  Europeans — extension 
of  Trade — independent  resort  of  Missionaries^  8fc. — 
Debates  in  the  Hofuse  of  Commons— first  and  second 
Resduiion  carried — d^nUe  on  the  third. — Debates 
on  the  Report  of  the  Committee. — Thirteenth  Resolu- 
tion  adjoumed---dd>ate  on  it  resumed-^^arried. — 
Other  clauses  suggested. — Bill  finally  passed  in  the 
Commons. — DdnUes  in  the  House  of  Lords— previa 
ous  discussions — Bill  passed. — Proceedings  in  the 
Court  of  Proprietors.  —  Charter  accepted.  —  i2e- 
marks. 

The  appointment  of  a  Select  Committee  of  the  book  i. 
House  of  Commons  in  1808  to  inquire  into  the^|[^^J^ 
state  of  the  affairs  of  the  East  India  Company  has     isis. 
already  been  adverted  to;   as  have  the  measures 
which,  in   compliance  with  their  recommendation, 
were  adopted  by  the  Parliament  for  the  relief  of 
the  financial  embarrassments  of  the  Company,  by 
the  discharge  of  a  portion  of  tlie  debt  due  to  them 
by  the   public.     The   Committee   continued,   with 
occasional   modifications,   to   sit   through   the  four 
succeeding  years,  and  presented  to  the  House  in 
that  period  different  reports,  which  were  drawn  up 
with  remarkable  diligence  and  ability,  and  furnished 
a  mass  of  authentic  information   upon  every  im- 


494  HISTORY   OF   BRITISH  INDIA. 

BOOK  I.  portant  subject  relating  to  the  internal  administra- 
CHAP,  vm.  ^.^^  ^^  ^j^^  Indian  empire. 

1813.  The  relief  afforded  to  the  Company  in  1808  by 
the  sum  of  £1,500,000  received  from  the  Govern- 
ment, together  vnth  more  than  usually  favourable 
sales  of  merchandise,  enabled  the  Court  of  Directors 
to  provide  for  the  v^nts  of  that  and  the  following 
year  without  requiring  further  assistance.  This  state 
of  prosperity  was  of  no  long  duration,  and  in  the 
beginning  of  the  session  of  1810  the  Company  were 
again  obliged  to  apply  to  Parliament  for  pecuniary 
aid.^  A  deficit  of  two  millions  was  anticipated  in 
the  receipts  of  the  year  ending  March,  1811,  as 
compared  with  the  receipts;  arising  from  the  exces- 
sive and  unexampled  drafts  made  upon  the  Court, 
amounting  to  nearly  five  millions,  from  India,  in 
discharge  of  the  Indian  debt,  and  fit>m  the  unex- 
pected losses  sustained  in  the  Company's  shipping;* 
many  of  their  vessels  having,  in  the  course  of  the 
last  two  years,  been  taken  by  the  enemy,  or  perished 
at  sea.  As  the  state  of  the  money  market  rendered 
it  unadvisable  to  increase  the  Company's  capital 
stock,  as  empowered  by  law,  the  Court  applied  to 
the  House  for  such  aid  as  it  should  see  fit  to  grant, 
the  property  of  the  Company  being  offered  as  ample 
security  for  the  repayment  of  a  loan  from  the  public. 
The  petition  was  referred  to  the  Committee,  by 
whom  the  correctness  of  its  purport  was  confirmed.* 

'  See  petition  of  the  East  India  Company  for  relief;  Pari.  Debates, 
13th  April,  1810. 

'  In  the  years  1808>9  and  1809-10,  fourteen  large  vessels,  chartered  by  or 
belonging  to  the  Company,  were  captured  or  were  lost  at  sea :  their  cargoes 
alone  were  valued  at  more  than  a  million  sterling. — First  Report,  Commons* 
Committee,  1830,  App.  iv. 

•  Report  from  Select  Committee,  ordered  to  be  printed  11th  May,  1810. 


PETITIONS   OF  THE   COMPANY.  495 

Shortly  afterwards,  a  second  petition  was  presented/  book  i. 
praying  for  a  further  settlement  of  the  amount  due  ^^^'  ^*' 
by  the  public  to  the  Company :  it  was  also  referred  1813 
to  the  Committee,  but  does  not  seem  to  have  been 
made  the  subject  of  any  special  report.  The  time  was 
unpropitious  to  the  Company's  applications,  as  the 
Government  was  straining  the  resources  of  the  coun- 
try to  the  utmost  to  provide  for  the  magnitude  of 
the  national  expenditure,  and  was  floundering  amidst 
the  intricacies  of  the  Bullion  question.  The  ur- 
gency of  the  case,  and  the  vital  importance  of  main- 
taining unimpaired  eveiy  form  of  public  credit,  gave 
irresistible  weight  to  the  appeal ;  and,  after  some  dis- 
cussions, a  bill  was  passed  on  the  14th  of  June,  1811, 
for  a  loan  of  one  million  and  a  half  to  the  Company.^ 
In  the  following  year  the  Company  petitioned  the 
House  of  Commons  for  permission  to  raise  two  mil- 
lions upon  bond ;  and  a  bill  was  brought  in  for  the 
purpose,  which,  after  some  slight  opposition,  was 
passed.  In  June,  1812,  a  second  application  for  a 
loan  of  two  millions  and  a  half  was  made  to  the 
House  of  Commons,  and,  although  strenuously  op- 
posed by  Mr.  Creevy,  complied  with.* 

Transactions  affecting  the  moral  credit  of  the 
Court  of  Directors  had  also,  shortly  before  this 
period,  been  brought  under  the  consideration  of 
Parliament,  and  an  alleged  abuse  of  patronage  was 
made  the  subject  of  inquiry.  It  was  brought  for- 
ward by  the  members  of  the  Court  themselves,  in 
consequence  of  a  report  having  prevailed  that  ap- 

^  Pari.  Debates,  14th  May,  1810. 
^  Pari.  Debates,  10th  May,  1811. 
^  Pari.  Debates,  9th  and  15th  June,  and  3rd  and  7th  July,  1812. 


496  HISTORY   OP   BRITISH   INDIA. 

BOOK  I.  pointments  in  the  service  of  the  Company  in  India 
*^"^^'  ^"^  had  been  sold.      On  the  10th  February,  1809,  it 
1813.     was  moved  by  Mr.  Smith,  seconded  by  Mr.  Grant, 
that  a  Committee  of  the  House  of  Commons  should 
be  nominated  to  inquire  into  the  existence  of  any 
corrupt  practices  in  the  distribution  of  the  patron- 
age of  the  Court  of  Directors.    A  Committee  was 
accordingly  appointed,  which,  in  the  course  of  a  few 
weeks,  reported  the  result  of  the  investigation.    The 
rejport  exonerated  the  members  of  the  Court  from 
any  imputation  of  a  violation  of  the  oath  by  which 
they  were  solemnly  pledged,  neither  directly  nor 
indirectly   to    accept   any  pecimiary  consideration 
whatever  on  account  of  the  appointment  or  nomi- 
nation of  any  person  or  persons  to  any  place  or  office 
in  the  service  of  the  Company:*    but  it  appeared 
in  evidence  that  the  persons  to  whom  they  had 
given   appointments  had,  in   some   instances,   sold 
them  to  third  parties;  and  that  a  traffic  had  been 
carried  on  for  situations  in  their  India  service  with- 
out their  participation  or  knowledge.*     Three  civil 
and  twenty  military  appointments  were  traced  as 
having  been  sold.     The   obtaining  of  such  situa- 
tions by  purchase  being  prohibited  under  penalty 
of  their  forfeiture,  the  appointments  were  cancelled  ; 
but,  as  the  punishment  fell  heaviest  on  those  who 
were   not   the   offending  parties, — the  young  men 
holding  the  appointments,  —  much   sympathy   was 
excited  for  their  situation,  and  other  appointments 

^  This  formed  part  of  the  general  oath  to  be  taken  by  each  Director 
according  to  clause  160  of  the  SSrd  of  George  III. 

'  It  appeared  that  the  price  of  a  writership  was  about  £Zf500  ;  that  of 
a  cadetship  varied  from  i^l50  to  £600.— Report  of  Committee,  p.  2  to  8  ; 
and  Evidence. 


EXPIRATION    OP  THE   CHARTER.  497 

were  given  to  them  by  different  members  of  the  book  i. 
Court.^  '"^^'"^ 


The  main  question,  however,  which  occupied  the  isis. 
attention  of  the  Court  of  Directors  and  his  Ma- 
jesty*s  Ministers  was  the  renewal  of  the  Company's 
charter.  The  term  for  which  this  had  been  grant- 
ed in  1793  expired  on  the  10th  April,  1814.  It 
had  been  provided  that  notice  of  the  cessation  of 
the  charter  should  be  given  to  the  Company  three 
years  before  it  expired;  and  accordingly,  on  the 
4th  of  March,  1811,  the  Chancellor  of  the  Exche- 
quer moved,  and  it  was  ordered,  that  the  Speaker 
should  signify  in  writing  to  the  Directors  of  the 
East  India  Company  that  the  Company's  commer- 
cial privileges  would  cease  and  determine  on  the 
date  above  specified. 

The  renewal  of  the  charter  had  for  some  time 
previously  been  the  subject  of  a  correspondence  be- 
tween the  Board  of  Controul  and  the  Crown.*  On 
the  30th  of  September  1808  Mr.  Dundas  addressed 
a  letter  to  the  Chairman  and  Deputy  Chairman,  sug- 
gesting that  it  was  now  advisable  to  ascertain  whe- 
ther the  Court  of  Directors  were  desirous  to  agitate 
the  question,  and  submit  it  to  the  early  consider- 
ation of  Parliament.  Early  in  the  month  following, 
the  Chairs,  after  consulting  with  the  Secret  Com- 

'  Report  of  Committee  appointed  to  inquire  into  the  existence  of  abases 
in  the  disposal  of  the  patronage  of  the  East  India  Company ;  printed  by 
order  of  the  Court  of  Proprietors,  March  1809.  See  also  Pari.  Debates,  vol. 
xiii. ;  and  Asiatic  Annoal  Register,  Proceedings  India  House,  vol.  xii. 

'  The  several  communications  with  the  Board,  and  various  documents 
connected  with  the  discussion,  from  1808  to  July  1813,  were  printed  by 
order  of  the  Court  of  Directors,  for  the  information  of  the  Proprietors,  in  a 
series  of  fifteen  papers,  entitled  '*  Papers  respecting  the  Negociation  for  a 
Renewal  of  the  East  India  Company's  exclusive  Privileges,"  London, 
1812-1813. 

VOL.  I.  2    K 


498  HISTORY  OF   BRITISH   INDIA. 

BOOK  I.  mittee  of  Correspondence,  expressed  their  concur- 
cHAP.  vin.  y^j^^^^  considering  that  the  interests  of  the  public 
181  a  and  the  Company  would  be  best  consulted  by  an 
early  renewal  of  the  charter :  they  professed  at  the 
same  time  the  readiness  of  the  Court  to  pay  due 
attention  to  any  modifications  that  might  be  pro- 
posed, if  they  were  compatible  with  the  main  prin- 
ciples of  the  existing  system,  for  the  conduct  of 
the  trade  and  the  political  administration  of  the 
Government  of  India.  The  views  of  the  Directors 
were  more  fully  developed  in  a  letter  addressed  to 
Mr.  Dundas  on  the  16th  December,  consequent  on 
a  personal  conference  which  had  been  held  with 
him.  In  this  document  they  asserted  the  jight  of 
the  Company  to  their  territorial  possessions,  and 
stated  their  expectation  that  in  a  new  charter  the 
Proprietors  would  be  permitted  to  benefit  by  an 
enhanced  rate  of  dividends  on  their  stock  propor- 
tioned to  the  improvement  of  the  revenues  of  India  ; 
that  the  aid  of  the  British  public  would  be  con- 
tributed towards  the  liquidation  of  the  Indian  debt ; 
and  that  arrangements  would  be  devised  for  au 
equitable  apportionment  of  the  military  expenditure 
incurred  in  the  prosecution  of  interests  of  purely 
British  origin,  and  not  fairly  chargeable  to  India. 
Twenty  years  were  required  for  the  term  of  the  new 
charter.  The  tone  of  the  address  was  bold,  par- 
ticularly at  a  moment  when  the  Company  was  a 
suppliant  for  pecuniary  aid ;  and  the  eagerness  to 
extract  an  augmented  dividend  out  of  the  antici- 
pated improvement  of  revenue,  instead  of  proposing 
to  apply  such  additional  revenues  either  to  the 
reduction  of  the  public  debt  or  the  benefit  of  the 


CORRESPONDENCE  WITH  THE  BOARD.  499 

people  of  India,  savoured  more  strongly  of  the  little  book  i. 
selfishness  of  a  trading  company  than  of  the  liberal-  "^^'  ^"^ 


ity  becoming  a  great  and  enlightened  Government.       1813. 

In  his  reply,  dated  the  13th  Jan.  1809,  Mr.  Dun- 
das,  although  admitting  in  substance  the  advantage 
of  adhering  to  the  system  of  commerce  and  admi- 
nistration which  had  been  sanctioned  by  the  exist- 
ing charter,  declined  to  acknowledge  the  claim  of 
the  Company  to  a  right  to  the  territory  of  India,  and 
considered  it  premature  to  discuss  the  proportion  of 
benefit  that  was  to  be  derived  by  the  Company  or 
the  public  from  any  improvement  in  the  finances  of 
India  until  the  debt  should  be  discharged.  In  like 
manner,  the  liquidation  of  the  debt  must  be  contin- 
gent on  the  appropriation  of  the  revenues ;  as,  if  the 
disposal  of  them  should  be  assumed  by  the  public, 
it  would  be  impossible  to  disregard  the  fair  claims 
of  the  Company,  or  their  creditors,  to  a  reimburse- 
ment of  the  expenses  incurred  in  the  acquirement 
of  the  territory.  He  admitted  that  the  Company 
had  also  a  right  to  expect  that  the  public  should 
defray  the  cost  of  all  hostUe  operations  growing  out 
of  a  state  of  war  in  Europe,  whether  India  became 
the  scene  of  them  or  was  likely  to  be  their  aim. 

In  the  letter  from  the  Chairs  of  the  16th  Dec.  all 
specific  allusion  to  the  Companjr^s  exclusive  conmier- 
cial  privilege  had  been  carefully  avoided.  The  phrase 
employed,  "a  regulated  monopoly  of  the  trade,"* 
implied  of  course  that  the  commerce  was  to  be  left 

'  **  The  system  by  which  the  Legislature  has  continued  to  the  Company 
the  government  of  the  territories  acquired  by  it  in  the  East,  with  a  regulated 
monopoly  of  the  trade,  has  been  held  by  the  most  eminent  persons  conver- 
sant with  that  quarter  and  its  affairs  to  be  the  most  expedient  both  for  the 
foreign  and  domestic  interests  of  this  country.** — Letter  from  the  Chairs  to 
the  Right  Honourable  Robert  Dundas,  16th  December,  1808 ;  Papers,  p.  9. 

2k2 


5iX)  HunnoET  of  bbitish  ikdia. 

BOO%  L  on  ito  nctvoA  footing, — the  asagnment  of  a  certain 
cmAT.rtsL  jpjj^^mj^  ^f  tonnage  to  priTate  merchandise  in  ships 
lilt,  taken  up  by  the  Company,  and  the  sale  of  private 
imiKift  goods  through  the  Company^s  establishments. 
Mr.  I>undas  was  more  explicit :  he  announced  to  the 
Court  that  his  Majesty's  Ministers  would  not  concur 
in  an  application  to  Parliament  for  the  renewal  of 
any  privileges  which  should  prevent  the  merchants 
and  manufacturers  of  Great  Britain  from  trading  to 
and  from  India,  and  the  countries  within  the  limits 
of  the  Company's  exclasive  trade,  the  dominions  of 
•  the  Emi)eror  of  Cliina  excepted,  in  ships  and  vessels 
hired  or  freighted  by  themselves.  He  also  intimated 
that  it  was  thought  ad\isable  to  adopt  some  plan 
for  the  consolidation  of  the  Indian  army  with  the 
troo[>s  of  the  Crown  ser\'ing  in  India,  in  order  to  put 
an  end  to  the  jealousies  and  divisions  which  had  so 
rcf>eatedly  occurred  between  the  two  branches  of 
the  military  service  in  that  country,  and  to  the 
divided  responsibility  which  had  hitherto  impaired 
the  efficiency  of  both.  He  thought  this  would  be 
found  [)racticable  without  interfering  with  actual 
arrangements,  or  weakening  the  authority  of  the 
local  Governments  or  of  the  Court  over  his  Majesty's 
regiments  employed  in  the  Company's  possessions. 
These  intimations  were  anything  but  acceptable  to 
the  Court ;  and  they  replied,  that,  if  the  suggestions 
were  acted  upon  to  the  extent  which  the  terms 
seemed  to  convey,  they  would  effectually  supersede 
and  destroy  not  merely  the  rights  of  the  Company, 
but  the  whole  scheme  of  Indian  administration  es- 
tablished by  the  previous  acts  of  the  Legislature,  and 
conse(iucnces  fatal  to  the  Company  and  most  detri- 


NEGOCIATION   SUSPENDED.  501 

mental  to  the  nation  would  infallibly  ensue.     Al-  book  i. 
though,  therefore,  willing  to  take  into  consideration  ^"^^'  ^'' 
the  means  of  supplying  the  trade  of  private  mer-     isia. 
chants  with  more  beneficial  and  extensive  accom- 
modation as  far  as  was  consistent  with  the  preser- 
vation of  the  Company's  rights,  the  Court  declared 
that  they  could  not  recommend  to  their  constituents 
to  seek  a  renewal  of  the  charter  upon  conditions 
which  would  despoil  it  of  all  its  solid  advantages, 
deprive  the  Company  of  their  most  valuable  privi- 
leges, and  incapacitate  them  from  performing  for 
themselves  and  the  nation  the  part  hitherto  allotted 
to  them  in  the  Indian  system. 

The  negociation  here  came  to  a  pause,  and  the 
Ministers,  unwilling  to  engage  in  a  contest  with  the 
Company  whilst  heavily  embarrassed  by  the  state  of 
public  affairs,  and  finding  that  the  notice  of  the 
House  was  not  likely  to  be  yet  attracted  to  the 
question  of  the  Company's  charter,  determined  not 
to  press  the  subject.  At  the  end  of  1809  the  Court 
announced  their  readiness  to  resume  the  discussion; 
but  no  notice  seems  to  have  been  taken  of  their 
challenge  until  the  end  of  1811,  when  the  President 
of  the  Board,  now  Lord  Melville,  apprised  the  Di- 
rectors that  his  Majesty's  Ministers  could  not  recom- 
mend to  Parliament  the  continuance  of  the  existing 
system,  unless  they  were  prepared  to  assent  that  the 
ships  as  well  as  goods  of  private  merchants  should  be 
admitted  into  the  trade  with  India  under  such  re- 
strictions as  might  be  deemed  necessary.  If  the 
Court  would  agree  to  the  enlargement  of  the  trade, 
he  was  prepared  to  discuss  the  measures  it  might 
be  necessary  to  devise. 


502  msrroRY  of  British  india. 

BOOK  I.  In  their  reply  to  Lord  Melville  the  Court  eon- 
^^^''  sented,  however  reluctantly,  to  propose  to  the  Pro- 
181S.  prietors  the  opening  of  the  trade;  repeating  their 
opinion,  that,  whilst  it  would  be  productive  of  serious 
inconvenience  to  the  political  administraticm  of  India, 
it  would  not  realise  to  the  nation  the  benefits  which 
were  expected  from  it.  In  support  of  their  asser- 
tions, they  referred  to  the  accounts  of  the  trade 
which  had  been  submitted  to  the  Select  Committee. 
Influenced  too,  no  doubt,  by  the  measures  which 
they  understood  to  be  in  contemplation  by  the  mer- 
chants of  the  commercial  and  maritime  towns  in  va- 
rious parts  of  the  British  islands,  they  expressed 
their  confident  belief  that  no  intention  wss  enter- 
tained by  his  Majestjr's  Ministers  of  trying  the  ha- 
zardous experiment  of  dispersing  over  all  the  ports  of 
England  and  Ireland  a  trade  now  brought  with  so 
much  advantage,  both  to  the  Company  and  the 
public,  to  the  single  port  of  London.  The  letter 
also  entered  into  details  exhibiting  the  magnitude 
of  the  Company's  transactions,  and  vindicating  the 
Company  from  the  accusations  which  had  been  urged 
against  it,  and  from  the  objections  to  the  continu- 
ance of  a  system  which  they  believed  to  rest,  not 
upon  the  grounds  of  individual  interest,  but  upon 
the  firm  basis  of  national  advantage. 

On  the  day  preceding  the  date  of  this  letter,  a 
paper  of  propositions  to  be  submitted  to  Lord  Mel- 
ville had  been  approved  of  by  the  Court  of  Directors, 
and  was  accordingly  communicated  to  him  on  the 
6th  of  March,  1812.  To  these  propositions,  or  hints, 
as  they  were  denominated,  his  lordship  replied  on 
the  12th;  and  as  the  main  object  of  the  propositions 


PETITION   FOR   A   NEW   CHARTER.  503 


bad  been  to  secure  the  continuance  of  tbe  arrange-  book  i. 
ments  of  the  act  of  1793,  proposing  only  to  adopt, 


CHAP.  vni. 


such  modifications  as  should  give  greater  facilities  to  1813. 
the  private  trader,  but  no  greater  extension  to  the 
trade,  they  met  with  no  favourable  reception.  The 
President  of  the  Board  of  Controul  told  the  Court 
plainly,  that,  as  far  as  related  to  the  India  trade,  they 
did  not  appear  to  have  succeeded  in  showing  that 
any  detriment  would  accrue  to  the  public  interests 
either  in  this  country  or  India,  or  ultimately  even  to 
the  interests  of  the  Company,  from  tbe  introduction 
of  private  adventure ;  and  he  refused  to  acquiesce  in 
any  arrangements  which  imposed  a  restriction  upon 
an  improved  commercial  intercourse  with  India, 
approving  of  such  only  as  were  intended  to  restrain 
unauthorised  settlements  in  that  country,  and  to 
secure  a  strict  monopoly  of  the  trade  vrith  China. 
A  petition,  framed  in  consonance  with  the  views  of 
the  Board,  was  accordingly  prepared,  and,  being 
concurred  in  by  a  Court  of  Proprietors  held  on 
the  2nd  of  April,  was  presented  on  the  7th  to  the 
House  of  Commons,  praying  for  a  renewal  of  the 
charter. 

The  announcement  of  the  cessation  of  the  East 
India  Company's  exclusive  privileges  was,  we  have 
contemporary  evidence,  received  at  first  with  very 
little  interest.  Men's  minds  were  engaged  with 
mighty  events,  by  which  the  interests  of  commerce 
were  overshadowed ;  and  it  seemed  scarcely  worth 
while  to  dispute  for  the  profit  of  any  particular 
branch  of  trade,  when  the  independence  of  nations 
was  at  stake.  By  degrees,  however,  attention  was 
drawn  to  the  topic;  and  the  Parliament  had  no 


504  HISTORY   OF   BRITISH    INDIA. 

BOOK  I.  sooner  met  than  a  deluge  of  petitions  poured  upon 


CHAP.  VUL 


the  House,  assailing  the  principle  of  monopoly,  con- 
1813.  demning  the  career  of  the  India  Company,  calum- 
niating the  motives  of  the  Directors,  and  advocat- 
ing the  abstract  right  of  all  British  subjects  to  a 
participation  in  every  branch  of  external  commerce. 
The  language  of  the  petitions  was  prompted  by  the 
same  spirit  against  which  it  was  levelled.  The  peti- 
tioners looked  only  to  their  own  anticipated  advan- 
tages, and  in  their  selfish  eagerness  would  have 
trampled  upon  all  prudent  precaution  and  opposing 
claims.  A  quarrel  speedily  sprung  up  amongst 
themselves  for  the  spoils  at  which  they  grasped ; 
and  the  merchants  and  ship-owners  of  London  found, 
with  no  small  dismay,  that  the  unavowed  mono- 
poly which  they  had  enjoyed  under  the  protection  of 
the  Company's  privileges,  of  a  portion  of  the  trade 
and  the  whole  of  the  shipping,  was  no  longer  to 
remain  uninvaded.  Bristol,  Liverpool,  Glasgow, 
and  many  other  outports  had  merchants,  vessels, 
docks,  and  warehouses ;  and  demanded  not  merely  to 
be  permitted  to  send  goods  to  India,  but  to  bring 
back  its  products  to  their  own  doors  in  their  own 
ships,  and  to  be  liberated  from  all  dependence 
whatever  upon  the  metropolis.*  Not  only  were  pe- 
titions to  this  effect  presented,  but  delegates  from 
the  outports  were  sent  up  to  London  and  formed 
into  a  committee  empowered  to  act  for  the  mercan- 

^  Resolutions  of  the  Buyers  of  Piece-goods,  21st  April,  1812 ;  Merchants, 
Manufacturers,  Traders  of  London,  25th  ditto ;  Petition  ditto ;  Papers  re- 
specting the  negociation,  p.  133,  &c.  See  also  petitions  to  the  House  of 
Commons  from  the  Merchants,  Shipowners,  &c.  of  London,  and  others,  inte- 
rested in  the  trade  with  India,  and  in  the  tea-trade ;  Pari.  Debates,  6th 
May,  1812. 


CLAIMS   OF  THE   OUTPORTS.  505 

tile  communities  of  the  several  places,  and  watch  book  i. 
over  their  interests.    Besides  the  outports,   almost  ^^^^'  ^"^ 
every  trading  and  manufacturing  town  of  any  consi-     isia. 
deration  joined  in  petitioning  against  the  renewal  of 
the  Company's  charter.* 

Up  to  the  beginning  of  1812,  the  pretensions  of 
the  outports  had  excited  apparently  but  little  atten- 
tion, and  had  received  little  countenance  from  the 
Ministers.  Although  Lord  Melville  had  resisted  the 
attempt  of  the  Court  to  restrict  the  export  trade  to 
the  port  of  London,  he  had  nowhere  intimated  any 
inclination  to  extend  the  imports  in  a  similar  manner. 
On  the  contrary,  he  had  concurred  in  the  sixth  propo- 
sition of  the  Court,  which  provided  that  the  whole  of 
the  Indian  trade  should  be  brought  to  London,  and 
that  the  goods  should  be  sold  at  the  Company's  sales 
and  under  the  Company's  management,  as  likely  to 
secure  and  facilitate  the  collection  of  the  duties  upon 
articles  imported  from  India  and  China.  Had,  there- 
fore, his  propositions  been  acceded  to  in  the  first 
instance,  it  seems  not  unlikely  that  the  Ministers 
would  have  been  pledged  to  support  the  sale  and 
warehousing  system  of  the  Company,  and  the  ad- 
vantages realised  therefrom  would  have  been  pre- 
served. The  delay  which  the  repugnance  of  the 
Court  had  caused,  had  given  the  opponents  of  the 
Company  an  opportunity  to  advocate  the  claims  of 
the  outports ;  and  the  change  of  Administration 
which  occurred  at  this  season,  and  which  placed  the 
Earl  of  Buckinghamshire  at  the  head  of  the  Board  • 

'  See  Parliamentary  Debates,  Session  of  1812 ;  Petitions  from  Birming- 
ham, Manchester,  Sheffield,  Nottingham,  Blackburn,  Paisley,  Dundee, 
Perth,  Belfast,  and  many  other  places  in  the  three  kingdoms. 


506  HISTORY  OF  BRITISH   INDIA. 


BOOK  L  of  Controul,  was  another  event  which  was  unpro- 

^^^^|]_][^  pitious  to  their  pretensions.*     It  was  soon  evident 

1813.     that  the  Company  must  forego  all  hope  of  profit 

derivable,  directly  or  indirectly,  from  the  trade  with 

India. 

The  conferences  and  correspondence  with  the 
Board  still  continued;  and,  as  the  opinions  of  the 
new  President  of  the  Board  of  Controul  were  in 
fieivour  of  the  claims  of  the  merchants  of  the  oat- 
ports,  the  proceedings  that  had  taken  place  were  re- 
ported to  the  Proprietors  at  large.  The  sentiments 
of  the  Directors  could  not  fail  to  find  an  echo  in 
such  an  assembly,  and  a  series  of  resolutions  was 
moved  and  carried  in  a  General  Court,  held  on  the 
5th  May,  to  the  following  purport : — That  the  mea- 
sure of  opening  the  outports  to  vessels  of  all  descrip- 
tions from  India  was  fraught  with  consequences 
ruinous  to  the  Company,  and  to  the  long  train  of  in- 
terests connected  with  it:  the  removal  of  the  trade 
from  London  would  render  large  and  important 
establishments  useless,  and  throw  many  thousand 
persons  out  of  bread.  That  a  departure  from  the 
course  of  public  sales  would  be  injurious  to  the 
trade ;  and,  by  dispensing  with  the  interposition  of 
the  Company,  smuggling  to  an  unlimited  extent 
would  be  uncontroulable,  to  the  great  detriment  of 
the  public  revenue.  That  the  consequences  must  be, 
the  destruction  of  the  Company's  China  trade,  the 


'  This  nobleman,  as  Lord  Hobart,  had  been  Governor  of  Madras  from 
1794  to  1798.  He  had  experienced  the  inconvenience  to  which  the  Indian 
GoTemments  had  been  exposed  in  having  to  provide,  amidst  the  financial 
embarrassments  resulting  from  expensive  warfare,  for  the  Company's  in- 
vestments.— See  Memoir  of  the  late  Earl  of  Buckinghamshire,  Monthly 
Asiatic  Journal^  January  1817. 


RESOLUTIONS   OF  THE  PBOPBIETOBS.  507 

fiiilure  of  their  dividends,  the  depreciation  of  their  book  i. 
stock,  and  their  inability  to  perform  the  functions  ^^^'  ^°^ 
assigned  to  them  in  the  government  of  British  India.  I813. 
That,  if  the  constitution  of  the  British  Indian  empire 
were  subverted,  the  civil  and  military  services  would 
be  broken  down;  the  tranquillity  and  happiness  of 
the  people  of  India,  the  interests  of  Britain  in  Asia, 
and  the  constitution  at  home,  would  be  imminently 
endangered.  That  the  object  for  which  these  evils 
were  to  be  risked,  the  increase  of  the  commerce, 
was  illusory;  as  all  experience  had  shown  that  it  was 
not  capable  of  increase.  That  the  cause  of  the  Com- 
pany had  been  deeply  injured  by  prejudice,  igno- 
rance, erroneous  assumption,  and,  latterly,  by  exten- 
sive combinations,  and  by  unfair  representation,  can- 
vass, and  intimidation.  And  finally,  the  Court,  trust- 
ing that  Parliament  would  decide,  not  on  the  sug- 
gestions of  private  interests,  but  considerations  of 
national  policy,  approved  of  the  firmness  with  which 
the  Directors  had  maintained  the  interests  of  the 
Company,  and  enjoined  them  to  persevere  in  the 
negociation  with  his  Majesty's  Ministers  on  the  same 
principles. 

Although  unappalled  by  the  dark  catalogue  of  ima- 
ginary terrors  which  the  interested  fears  of  the  East 
India  Company  had  conjured  up  for  the  salvation  of 
their  monopoly,  yet  the  obvious  evils  attending  the 
transfer  of  the  details  of  an  extensive  trade  from  one 
class  of  persons  to  others,  and  the  confidence  with 
which  disappointment  and  ruin  were  predicted  to  those 
who  sought  to  benefit  by  the  transfer,  compelled  the 
Government  to  proceed  with  deliberation  and  caution, 
and  prevented  them  from  bringing  the  decision  of 


506  HISTORY   OF  BRITISH   INDIA. 

BOOK  L  of  Controul,  was  another  event  which  was  unpro- 

CHAP.  vnL  pj^iQ^g  ^^j  their  pretensions.^     It  was  soon  evident 

1818.     that  the  Company  must  forego  all  hope  of  profit 

derivable,  directly  or  indirectly,  from  the  trade  with 

India. 

The  conferences  and  correspondence  with  the 
Board  still  continued ;  and,  as  the  opinions  of  the 
new  President  of  the  Board  of  Controul  were  in 
favour  of  the  claims  of  the  merchants  of  the  out- 
ports,  the  proceedings  that  had  taken  place  were  re- 
ported to  the  Proprietors  at  large.  The  sentiments 
of  the  Directors  could  not  fail  to  find  an  echo  in 
such  an  assembly,  and  a  series  of  resolutions  was 
moved  and  carried  in  a  General  Court,  held  on  the 
5th  May,  to  the  following  purport : — That  the  mea- 
sure of  opening  the  outports  to  vessels  of  all  descrip- 
tions from  India  was  fraught  with  consequences 
ruinous  to  the  Company,  and  to  the  long  train  of  in- 
terests connected  with  it:  the  removal  of  the  trade 
from  London  would  render  large  and  important 
establishments  useless,  and  throw  many  thousand 
persons  out  of  bread.  That  a  departure  from  the 
course  of  public  sales  would  be  injurious  to  the 
trade ;  and,  by  dispensing  with  the  interposition  of 
the  Company,  smuggling  to  an  unlimited  extent 
would  be  uncontroulable,  to  the  great  detriment  of 
the  public  revenue.  That  the  consequences  must  be, 
the  destruction  of  the  Company's  China  trade,  the 


>  This  nobleman,  as  Lord  Hobart,  had  been  Grovernor  of  Madras  from 
1794  to  1798.  He  had  experienced  the  inconvenience  to  which  the  Indian 
Governments  had  been  exposed  in  having  to  provide,  amidst  the  financial 
embarrassments  resulting  from  expensive  warfare,  for  the  Company *s  in- 
vestments.— See  Memoir  of  the  late  Earl  of  Buckinghamshire,  Monthly 
Asiatic  Journal^  January  1817. 


PARLIAMENTARY   DISCUSSIONS.  509 

and  declared  their  conviction  that  they  might  ap-  book  i. 

CHAP       Villa 

proach  Parliament  with  confidence,  persuaded  that  ' 
the  wisdom  of  that  enlightened  body  would  never  isia. 
consent  to  the  sacrifice  of  the  clear  and  positive  inte- 
rests of  one  class  of  men  to  the  contingent  advan- 
tages of  another,  nor  demolish  a  mighty  practical  sys- 
tem which  had  been  raised  by  such  immense  exer- 
tions, in  order  to  place  its  materials  at  the  disposal  of 
interested  speculation.  Conformably  to  these  resolu- 
tions, a  petition  was  presented  to  the  House  of  Com- 
mons on  the  22nd  February,  1813,  in  which  the 
Company  prayed  for  the  renewal  of  the  privileges 
granted  in  1793,  and  deprecated  any  interference 
with  the  China  trade,  or  any  extension  of  the  import 
trade  from  India  to  the  outports  of  Great  Britain. 
Another  petition  was  submitted  at  the  same  time, 
soliciting  from  the  nation  payment  of  a  debt 
claimed  by  the  Company  of  £2,294,426.*  A  similar 
petition  was  presented  to  the  House  of  Lords. 

On  the  22nd  of  March,  1813,  the  subject  was  in- 
troduced into  the  House  of  Commons,  in  a  Com- 
mittee of  the  whole  house,  by  Lord  Castlereagh, 
who,  after  some  general  observations  in  which  he 
bore  testimony  to  the  excellence  of  the  Company's 
Indian  government,  declared  it  to  be  the  wish 
of  the  Government  not  to  interfere  with  the  poli- 
tical system  unless  compelled  so  to  do,  although 
circumstances  imperiously  demanded  the  relaxation 
of  their  commercial  privileges.  He  accordingly 
submitted  to  the  House  a  series  of  resolutions,  which 
proposed  to  renew  the  charter  of  the  Company  for  a 
further  period,   to  continue   to  them    during   that 

*  Pari.  Debates,  22nd  Feb.  I81S ;  see  also  Papers,  p.  262. 


510  HISTORY   OF   BRITISH   INDIA. 

BOOK  L  term  the  exclusire  right  of  trading  with  China,  bat 
^^"^'^"^  admitting  to  the  trade  with  India,  under  certain  re- 
1818.  strictions,  the  mercantile  community  of  Great  Bri- 
tain. Some  general  discussion  of  the  principles  on 
which  the  resolutions  were  founded  ensued,  but  the 
Ciommittee  agreed  that  the  resolutions  should  be 
read  pro  formd^  and  taken  into  consideration  at  an 
earlj  date.  In  the  House  of  Lords  similar  resolu- 
tions were  laid  on  the  table  by  the  Earl  of  Buck- 
inghamshire, and  on  the  motion  of  the  Earl  of 
Liverpool  they  were  referred  to  a  Select  Com- 
mittee. It  was  agreed  by  the  Lords  that  the 
petitioners  should  be  heard  by  their  counsel,  with 
permission  to  examine  evidence,  should  it  be  deemed 
necessary,  in  compliance  with  an  application  to  that 
effect  from  the  Company.  The  same  indulgence  was 
accorded  by  the  House  of  Commons,  and  evidence 
was  heard  at  the  bars  of  both  Houses  in  support  oiF 
the  Company's  objections  to  the  measures  proposed 
by  the  Administration.^  In  order  to  form  an  accu- 
rate notion  of  the  tenor  and  character  of  the  testi- 
mony thus  adduced,  it  will  be  convenient  here  to 
offer  a  summary  recapitulation  of  the  objects  and 
arguments  of  the  conflicting  parties. 

In  the  first  instance,  two  great  questions  were  in- 
volved in  the  consideration  of  the  renewal  of  the 
charter — first  the  political,  and  secondly  the  commer- 
cial claims  of  the  Company.  The  Court  of  Directors 
claimed  the  territory  of  India  in  the  Company's  pos- 
session as  theirs  by  right  of  conquest,  achieved  ori- 
ginally with  money  derived  from  the  profits  of  their 
trade :  they  had  paid  for  it,  and  it  was  theirs.    But 

*  ProceedingsofCourtof  Proprietors,  24th  March,  18IS;  Papers, p.  S05. 


CLAIMS  OF  THE  COMPANY.  511 

then  came  the  question.  What  was  the  Company?  of  book  i. 
whom  was  it  composed  ?  and  the  answer  was  neees-  ^^^^^^^ 


sarily  that  it  consisted  of  the  dutiful  and  loyal  sub-  I813. 
jects  of  the  King  of  Great  Britain ;  and  a  further 
doubt  inevitably  followed,  how  they  could  reconcile 
the  duties  of  obedience  to  their  sovereign  with  the 
regal  powers  which  they  pretended  to  exercise  in 
India.  This  anomalous  position  was  a  sufficient  con- 
futation of  their  claims,  without  adverting  to  the  con- 
ditions and  circumstances  under  which  an  association 
of  merchants  had  been  permitted  to  acquire  exten- 
sive dominions.  Waiving  the  question  of  right,  how- 
ever, the  Administration  was  not  only  disinclined  to 
put  down  the  Company's  authority,  but  was  anxious 
to  leave  them  in  the  undisturbed  enjoyment  of  the 
privileges  and  advantages  which  it  conferred.  The 
public  was  either  indifferent  to  this  branch  of  the 
discussion,  or  preferred  that  the  territory  of  India 
should  be  administered  through  the  Company;  as 
the  distribution  of  the  patronage  which  it  secured 
to  those  that  had  the  nomination  to  the  greater 
portion  of  the  Indian  appointments  was  safer  in 
their  hands  than  in  those  of  the  Ministers,  more 
likely  to  be  innocuously  distributed,  and  not  in 
danger  of  being  used  as  an  instrument  of  parlia- 
mentary corruption — an  article  of  barter  exchange- 
able for  a  vote. 

The  second  question,  the  commercial  privileges  of 
the  Company,  was  also  distinguishable  under  two 
heads — ^the  trade  with  China,  and  the  trade  with 
India.  Both  of  these  their  mercantile  antagonists 
sought  to  wrest  from  them ;  but  the  Ministers  came 
to  their  rescue,  and  were  disposed  to  listen  to  the 


51^  HISTORY   OF   BRITISH   INDIA. 

BOOK  I.  arguments  of  the  Court  in  defence  of  the  monopoly 
CHAP,  viu.  ^^  ^j^^  trade  with  China.  This  trade  was  carried  on 
1818.  under  peculiar  circumstances.  The  Chinese  Govern- 
ment entertained  a  violent  jealousy  of  foreign  inter- 
course, and  confined  the  trade  not  only  to  a  single 
port,  but  to  a  single  society, — to  a  certain  number  of 
native  merchants  of  Canton  incorporated  under  the 
designation  of  Hong, — interdicting  the  rest  of  its 
subjects  from  trafficking  with  strangers.  There  was 
no  field,  therefore,  for  competition ;  no  possibility  of 
multiplying  demand  by  reduced  prices,  as  the  people 
at  large  were  excluded  from  the  market;  and  the 
only  effect  of  the  increased  resort  of  English  mer- 
chants would  be  to  place  them  more  entirely  at  the 
mercy  of  the  Chinese  Hong.  Prompt  to  take  of- 
fence, and  affecting,  possibly  entertaining,  utter  in- 
difference for  foreign  trade,  the  Government  of 
Canton  upon  every  petty  disturbance  or  cause  of 
alarm  was  ready  to  place  an  embargo  upon  all  ship- 
ments whatever ;  and  it  had  often  required  the  ex- 
perienced judgment,  local  knowledge,  and  personal 
influence  of  the  members  of  the  Company's  factory 
at  Canton  to  prevent  or  remedy  occasions  of  um- 
brage, and  preserve  the  trade  from  suspension,  or 
restore  it  when  interrupted.  There  was  great  reason 
to  apprehend  that  from  the  ignorance  or  incaution 
of  British  traders  and  sailors,  subject  to  no  national 
controul,  and  setting  the  Chinese  authorities  at  de- 
fiance, frequent  interruption,  if  not  a  total  stop  to 
the  trade,  would  occur ;  to  the  serious  discontent  of 
the  people  of  England,  to  whom  tea  had  become  a 
necessary  of  life,  and  to  the  irreparable  injury  of 
the  revenue,  which  realised  nearly  four  millions  a 


CHINA   TRADE   RESERVED.  513 


year  of  duty  upon  this  article  of  import.*  It  was  book  i. 
maintained,  indeed,  that  there  were  no  just  grounds  ^^^^'  ^"'' 
for  apprehending  such  a  catastrophe.  The  Americans  1813. 
had  traded  largely  with  China  without  supracargoes 
or  factory,  yet  had  never  given  offence ;  and  the  ap- 
pointment of  a  British  consul  would  provide  suf- 
ficiently a  local  authority,  to  which  the  resident 
merchants  and  the  crews  of  British  vessels  might  be 
made  amenable.  The  salutary  effects  of  this  latter 
measure  were  regarded,  however,  as  doubtful ;  and  it 
seemed  not  improbable  that  the  immunity  of  the 
American  trade  from  obstruction  was  in  part  at- 
tributable to  the  Company's  establishment,  which 
without  actual  authority  exercised  an  influence  over 
all  the  foreign  trade  at  Canton  favourable  to  its 
prosperity.  It  was  also  argued,  that,  if  an  unlimited 
intercourse  with  China  were  permitted,  it  would  be 
impossible  to  prevent  smuggling,  by  which  the 
revenue  would  be  injuriously  affected ;  and  al- 
though the  impossibility  was  denied,  yet  undoubt- 
edly this  argument  had  great  weight  with  the  Admi- 
nistration, who  were  unwilling,  amidst  the  enormous 
pressure  upon  the  finances  of  the  country  during 
the  momentous  transactions  of  this  period  upon  the 
Continent,  to  hazard  the  diminution  of  a  resource  so 
valuable  and  so  easily  realised  as  tlie  duty  upon  tea 
paid  by  the  Company.  Accordingly  from  the  first 
they  declared  their  determination  to  uphold  this 
part  of  the  monopoly,  and  to  exclude  private 
traders  from  the  China  seas. 

•  Congiderationg  on  the  China  Trade,  by  Sir  G.  Staunton,  Bart.,  commu- 
nicated in  the  first  instance  to  the  Earl  of  Buckinghamshire,  and  subse- 
quently to  the  Court  of  Directors ;  Papers,  &c.  p.  281. 

VOL.  I.  2  L 


514  HISTORY    OF   BRITISH   INDIA. 

BOOK  I.      The  struggle  therefore  was  for  the  India  trade. 

CHAP,  vin.  rj^^  advocates  of  the  mercantile  interest  assailed 
1818.  the  Company  with  the  anti-monopoly  doctrines, 
which,  started  by  Adam  Smith,  were  now  received 
as  axioms  in  the  new  and  growing  school  of  poli- 
tical economists :  and  although  it  was  undeniable, 
that,  had  not  the  Company  possessed  originally  an 
exclusive  trade  with  India,  that  trade  would  never 
have  been  established  on  a  secure  and  permanent 
footing,  and  not  a  rood  of  land  in  India  would  have 
owned  the  rule  of  Great  Britain ;  yet  the  necessi- 
ties which  fully  justified  the  monopoly  for  many 
years  had  gradually  disappeared  before  its  conti- 
nuance, and  no  sufficient  reasons  coidd  now  be  as- 
signed for  excluding  the  merchants  of  Britain  from 
a  commercial  intercourse  with  British  India,  espe- 
cially as  that  intercourse  was  open  to  the  people  of 
America  and  to  all  foreign  nations.  The  Court  of 
Directors  were  unable  to  offer  any  valid  objections 
of  a  commercial  nature.  Their  only  argument  was, 
that  admission  to  the  trade  would  end  in  disap- 
pointment; that  the  merchants  who  so  eagerly 
sought  to  be  allowed  to  engage  in  the  commerce 
would  find  they  had  miscalculated  the  benefits  they 
derived  from  it.  The  experience  of  two  centuries, 
they  affirmed,  had  fully  determined  the  nature  and 
extent  of  the  trade  with  India;  and  proved  past 
questioning  that  it  could  not  be  carried  beyond  the 
bounds  to  which  it  had  attained,  and  which  yielded 
so  little  profit,  that  the  trade  was  scarcely  worth 
the  Company's  retaining.  The  imports  from  India 
were  of  a  limited  description,  and  were  either  on 
the  decline  in  competition  with  the  raw  produce  of 


EXTENSION    OF  TRADE   WITH   INDIA.  515 

America,  as  cotton ;  or  with  the  products  of  home  book  i. 
manufacture,  as  cotton  goods;  or  they  were  inca-  ^"^''' ^"'' 
pable  of  more  than  a  fixed  and  circumscribed  con-  laia 
sumption,  as  was  the  case  with  indigo  and  various 
drugs  and  spices.  The  same  applied  to  the  exports : 
they  could  not  be  increased ;  the  climate,  the  reli- 
gion, and  the  usages  of  the  people  were  all  opposed 
to  the  consumption  of  British  goods  and  manufac- 
tures; and  nothing  English  that  could  be  sent  to 
India  was  likely  to  find  a  sale,  except  among  the 
few  British  residents  in  the  coimtry.  The  interval 
that  had  elapsed  since  the  renewal  of  the  last 
charter  had  given  to  these  conclusions  the  sanction 
of  experience ;  as  the  amount  of  tonnage  then  pro- 
vided for  the  private  trade  had  never  been  fully  oc- 
cupied, and  not  a  single  new  article  of  export  had 
suggested  itself  to  the  interested  enterprise  of  the 
individual  trader. 

The  more  ardent  of  the  advocates  of  free  trade 
denied  the  justice  of  the  conclusions  drawn  by  the 
Court.  The  little  profit  attending  the  Company's 
trade  they  ascribed  to  the  prodigal  expense  of  the 
Company's  operations,  the  want  of  good  manage- 
ment, and  the  absence  of  judicious  speculation. 
The  delays  and  expenses  to  which  the  private  trade 
was  subjected  under  the  Company's  controul  suffi- 
ciently accounted  for  the  limited  demand  that  had 
been  made  for  the  tonnage:  yet,  notwithstanding 
these  obstacles,  the  Court's  own  returns  showed 
that  the  private  trade  was  on  the  increase ;  and,  not- 
withstanding the  assertion  that  no  new  article  had 
been  introduced,  it  had  been  found  profitable  to 
send  out  cotton  manu&ctures  to  India.  They  treated 

2l2 


516  HISTORY   OF   BRITISH   INDIA. 

BOOK  I.  as  monstrous  and  untenable  the  assertion  that  no 
CHAP,  viu.  extension  of  trade  was  possible  amongst  the  millions 
1813.  of  the  Indian  population.*  The  more  moderate  ar- 
gued, that,  although  it  was  very  possible  that  such 
an  extension  as  was  sometimes  anticipated,  might 
not  be  effectod  in  India  itself,  or  amongst  the 
Hindus,  yet  that  there  was  a  considerable  body  of 
Mohammedans  whose  habits  were  less  unpromising ; 
and  in  the  Indian  Ocean,  the  Gulph  of  Persia,  and 
the  Eastern  Archipelago,  new  channels  of  trade 
might  and  would  no  doubt  be  opened  out  by  the 
activity  and  enterprise  of  the  private  trader :  that,  at 
any  rate,  the  experiment  was  worth  trying,  as  it 
could  only  leave  the  trade  as  it  found  it ;  and  if,  as 
was  pretended,  it  yielded  little  or  no  profit  to  the 
Company,  that  was  a  reason  the  more  why  they 
should  not  be  unwilling  to  part  with  it.  The  exi- 
gencies of  the  commerce  of  Great  Britain  probably 
weighed  more  with  the  Ministers  than  the  argu- 
ments and  assertions  of  either  party.  Excluded 
from  the  Continent  by  the  decrees  of  Napoleon,  the 
merchants  and  manufacturers  were  labouring  under 
alarming  difficulties ;  and  the  country  was  menaced 
with  severe  distress  unless  some  new  vent  for  the 
issue  of  its  industrial  products  could  be  discovered, 
some  new  hopes  could  be  held  out  to  animate  and 
encourage  the  drooping  energies  of  manufacture  and 

*  It  was  stated  by  Lord  CastlereaKh,  that  in  the  last  twenty  years  the 
export  of  cotton  manufactures  to  India  had  increased  from  £  2000  to  £  108,000, 
and  was  clearly  a  growing  trade. — Debates,  June  2,  181 S.  See  also  Evi- 
dence of  Mr.  Brown  and  Sir  Robert  Peel,  App.  First  Report.  Mr.  Sulli- 
van, 3rd  June,  says,  the  average  export  of  manufactured  cottons  from 
1702  to  1790  was  £730,  whilst  between  1807  and  1811  it  was  £96,980  :  the 
amount  of  the  exports  of  private  trade  had  doubled  within  the  period  of  the 
charter. 


IMPORTS  TO  BE   RESTRICTED.  617 


trade.     To  this  great  state  necessity  the  interests  of  book  i. 
a  single  corporation  were  bound  to  yield ;  and  the 


CHAP.  VIII. 


Company,  with  however  bad  a  grace,  were  com-  lais. 
polled  to  consent  that  vessels  from  any  of  the  ports 
of  Great  Britain  should  be  allowed  to  export  British 
produco  and  fabrics  to  the  territories  of  India  under 
their  authority.  They  still,  however,  insisted  on 
the  condition  that  the  cargoes  which  the  merchants 
imported  from  India  should  be  brought  to  London, 
deposited  in  the  Company's  warehouses,  and  sold  at 
the  Company's  sales.  Upon  this  point  they  reso- 
lutely resisted  the  wishes  of  the  Government. 

The  arguments  with  which  they  opposed  the 
extension  of  the  imports  from  India  to  the  out- 
ports  of  Great  Britain  were,  the  injury  that  it 
M'ould  inflict  both  upon  the  Company  and  the  me- 
tropolis, rendering  the  extensive  and  valuable  docks 
and  warehouses  appropriated  during  many  years  to 
the  India  trade  no  longer  available,  and  throwing 
out  of  employment  thousands  of  persons  hitherto 
dependent  upon  their  establishments;  the  impossi- 
bility it  would  involve  of  regulating  the  supplies  by 
the  demand,  which  was  the  effect  of  the  Comi)any's 
sales, — the  Company  keeping  back,  even  to  their 
own  loss,  the  goods  they  imported,  when  they  found 
that  the  market  was  overstocked.  But  the  chief 
points  upon  which  they  rested  their  objections  were, 
the  impossibility  of  preventing  smuggling  in  Britain, 
and  checking  the  unlicensed  and  unlawful  naviga- 
tion in  the  Indian  seas,  which  must  result  from  ex- 
tending the  trade  to  other  ports  than  that  of  Lon- 
don. The  replies  of  the  representatives  of  the  out- 
ports  were,  either  of  a  general  tenor,  the  same  with 


518  HISTORY    OF   BRITISH    INDIA. 


BOOK  I.  which  the  principle  of  the  Company's  monopoly  had 
^^^'  ^'"'  been  assailed ;  or  they  were  specially  urged  against 
1818.  the  limitation  of  the  import  trade  to  the  port  of 
London,  which  they  denounced  as  unnecessary,  un- 
just, and  impolitic.  It  was  not  necessary  for  the  pro- 
tection of  the  revenue,  for  experience  had  shown 
that  the  Government  duties  could  be  levied  else- 
where with  as  much  regularity  and  security  as  in 
London :  it  was  unjust,  because  every  mercantile 
place  was  entitled  to  the  same  protection  as  the  capi- 
tal ;  and  it  would  be  only  a  transfer  of  the  monopoly 
from  the  East  India  Company  to  the  merchants  of 
London,  to  give  to  them  alone  the  privilege  of  im- 
porting goods  from  India :  and  it  was  impolitic,  be- 
cause the  superior  dispatch  and  economy  of  the  out- 
ports  were  requisite  to  secure  an  equality  in  the 
market  with  foreign  nations.  With  regard  to  the 
duties,  the  Ministers  also  took  the  care  of  them 
upon  themselves,  their  realisation  being  more  the 
business  of  the  State  than  of  the  Company;  and 
they  would  not  admit  that  any  greater  danger  could 
accrue  to  the  Company's  authority  in  India  from  the 
hotaeward  than  the  outward  trade,  as  the  increased 
resort  of  Europeans  to  India  was  quite  as  likely  to 
be  the  consequence  of  the  one  as  of  the  other.  The 
Court  of  Directors  had  also  impaired  the  force  of 
their  own  objections  on  this  ground,  by  acceding  to 
the  unlimited  extension  of  the  outward-bound  trade 
to  any  of  the  ports  of  the  United  Kingdom.  Not- 
withstanding this  palpable  objection  to  the  argu- 
ments of  the  Court,  the  dangers  resulting  from  the 
opening  of  the  trade  to  their  political  interests  were 
pressed  upon  the  Ministers  with  still  more  urgency 


DANGER  TO  THE  COMPANY.  519 

than  the  peril  of  their  commercial ;  and  their  tenure  book  i. 
of  the  sovereignty  of  India  was  declared  to  be  con-  ^"^^'  ^'"' 
tingent  upon  the  preservation  of  their  mercantile     I813. 
privileges.     The  dangers  were  of  two  kinds, — one 
financial,  one  political. 

The  revenues  of  British  India,  it  was  affirmed,  had 
never  been  equal  to  the  territorial  charges :  the  de- 
ficit had  been  made  good  partly  by  money  borrowed 
either  in  India  or  in  England,  and  partly  by  the  pro- 
fits of  the  Company's  trade.  Large  payments  on  ac- 
count of  Indian  loans,  and  of  expenses  growing  out 
of  the  Indian  system, — such  as,  the  supplies  of  stores 
and  the  pensions  of  retired  oflScers,  civil  and  mili- 
tary,— ^had  also  to  be  made  in  England ;  for  which 
the  commercial  capital  of  the  Company  was  wholly 
insufficient,  and  for  which  the  sums  Required  were 
raised  by  remittances  of  goods  from  India  or  China, 
and  the  proceeds  of  the  sales  at  the  India  House. 
Should  these  sources  of  supply  fail  in  consequence 
of  the  diversion  of  the  trade  to  private  hands,  money 
would  be  wanting  for  current  disbursements :  and, 
should  the  profits  of  the  trade  be  taken  away,  the 
excess  of  the  charge  of  the  Indian  territory,  the  inte- 
rest of  the  debt,  and  the  dividends  on  the  stock  could 
no  longer  be  provided  for ;  in  which  case  the  Com- 
pany's stock  would  be  valueless,  and  their  obligations 
could  not  be  discharged.  The  business  of  the  In- 
dian administration  could  no  longer  be  carried  on 
by  them,  and  the  rescission  of  their  commercial  privi- 
leges was  therefore  equivalent  to  the  annihilation  of 
their  political  existence, — to  the  subversion  of  that 
system  which  the  sense  of  the  nation,  the  testimony 
of  all  preceding  Administrations,  and  the  professions 


620  HISTORY  OF   BRITISH  INDIA. 


BOOK  I.  of  the  present  Ministers,  agreed  to  recognise  as  that 
CHAP,  vm.  ^jjj^j^  ^g^  ijgg^  fitted  to  maintain  the  British  domi- 
1813.  nion  in  India.  These  arguments  were,  however, 
disposed  of  in  a  great  measure  by  the  continuance 
to  the  Company  of  the  monopoly  of  the  tea-trade, 
from  which  it  was  admitted  that  their  commercial 
profits  were  principally,  if  not  wholly,  derived.  How 
far  their  territorial  expenses  had  been  defrayed  by 
their  commercial  gains,  was  also  a  matter  of  some 
uncertainty,  as  the  accounts  of  both  had  been  hi- 
therto blended  in  such  a  manner  as  to  render  it 
difficult  to  distinguish  to  which  head  many  of  the 
charges  correctly  appertained.  According  to  the 
Company's  adversaries,  the  Company's  investments 
were  largely  indebted  to  the  territorial  revenue. 

Thus  driven  from  all  the  disputed  posts, — most  of 
which,  to  say  the  truth,  were  utterly  untenable, — the 
Company  had  recourse  to  their  last  great  stay,  the 
danger  of  an  unlimited  resort  of  Europeans  to 
India.  It  was  asserted  that  merchants  and  agents 
would  of  necessity  follow  the  trade,  and  that  great 
numbers  of  persons  would  settle  in  the  country, 
upon  whose  steps  craftsmen  and  labourers  would 
necessarily  follow ;  and  European  colonization,  how- 
ever slowly,  would  surely  take  place.  Once  esta- 
blished, it  would,  after  the  example  of  the  Ame- 
rican colonies,  lead  to  independence,  and  India 
would  be  lost  to  Great  Britain,  Even  before  this 
consummation  took  place,  extreme  embarrassment 
and  no  small  peril  would  be  encountered.  Tlie 
weak  and  timid  natives  of  India  w^ould  be  the  vic- 
tims of  European  fierceness  and  brute  force.  If  they 
failed  to  resist,  they  would  be  subject  to  cruelty  and 


DANGERS   TO   INDIA.  521 

oppression,  which  the  Company's  functionaries  would  book  i. 
be  unable  to  prevent :  if,  taking  courage  from  their  ^^^^^J^ 


numbers,  they  ventured  at  resistance,  scenes  of  tu-  1813. 
mult  and  bloodshed  must  follow,  which  could  not 
fail  to  menace  the  stability  of  British  rule.  In  either 
case  there  was  an  immediate  or  a  remote  danger 
that  the  loss  of  India  would  follow  the  opening  of 
the  trade. 

These  apprehensions  had,  as  above  remarked,  been 
partly  neutralized  by  the  assent  which  the  Court  had 
actually  given  to  the  extension  of  the  trade  to  India, 
and  it  was  not  difficult  to  show  that  they  were  exag- 
gerated and  visionary.  The  resort  of  Europeans  grow- 
ing out  of  the  agency  of  commerce  could  neither  be 
numerous  nor  mischievous.  It  would  be  necessarily 
confined  to  the  principal  settlements,  where  alone 
trade  could  be  largely  and  profitably  carried  on,  and 
where  the  persons  engaged  in  it  would  be  immedi- 
ately under  the  eye  of  the  most  efficient  and  power- 
ful officers  of  the  state.  The  class  of  persons  who 
would  take  up  their  abode  there  would  be  peaceable 
merchants,  factors,  and  agents ;  not  classes  amongst 
whom  matter  deep  and  dangerous  to  the  Govern- 
ment was  likely  to  be  fostered.  Labour  in  India 
was  too  plentiful  and  too  cheap  to  hold  out  any  in- 
ducement to  the  most  numerous  and  disorderly 
classes  of  the  community  at  home  to  emigrate,  and 
all  danger  of  popular  commotion  from  such  a  source 
was  therefore  imaginary.  But,  it  was  argued,  some 
of  the  settlers  would  attach  themselves  to  the  soil, 
and  a  class  of  agricultural  as  well  as  commercial  co- 
lonists would  be  formed,  by  whom  ultimate  inde- 
pendence would  be  achieved.     To  the  objection,  that 


^^  HISTORY   OP   BRITISH    INDIA. 

.w».'ik  '.  ^'**>  ^^^  ^'^  ^^'y  occupied,  that  tbere  was  no  room 
"■**^  for  uew  cultivators,  the  answer  was,  that  the  new 
li^iik    oolouists  would  displace  the  natives;  but  this  could 
be  effected  only  in  one  of  two  ways — ^by  violence,  or 
by  purchase.     The   former  implied  that  there  was 
neither  law  nor  government  in  the  country,   and 
counted  vastly  too  much  upon  the  non-resistance  of 
the  natives,  who  have  everywhere  been  found  ready 
to  fight  for  their  lands,  and  who  in  many  parts  of 
India  are  destitute  neither  of  strength  nor  spirit. 
Purchase  involved  the  transfer  of  capital  from  Eng- 
land to  India,  to  be  invested  in  property  of  very 
equivocal  advantage  at  least,  and  little  likely  to  be 
attended  with  profit  under  European  management 
and  the  Company's  revenue  enactments.     The  cli- 
mate and  the  habits  of  the  two  people  rendered  it 
utterly  impossible  that  a  European  should  compete 
with  a  native  farmer  in  the  cultivation  of  crops  of 
rice,  and  the  claims  of  the  state  to  three-fifths  of  the 
net  produce  held  out  little  prospect  to  the  European 
cultivator  of  realising  a  fortune.     It  was  not  to  be 
doubted  also,  that  the  climate,  in  some  parts  of  India 
at  least,  was  unfavourable  to  the  fiill  developement 
of  the  European  organisation ;  and,  with  diminished 
physical   energy,  would   engender   an   inferior   de- 
gree of  intellectual  vigour :  so  that  the  children  of 
Europeans,  bom   and  bred  in  the  country,   would 
sensibly  degenerate;  and  the  course  of  a  few  gene- 
rations would,  in  all  probability,  find  them  rather 
below,  than  above,  the  level  of  the  native  population. 
These  were  facts,  however,  unknown,  or  kept  out  of 
sight,  by  those  who  held  out  colonization  and  inde- 
pendence as  bug-bears  to  the  advocates  of  free  trade; 


PRECAUTIONS   ADOPTED.  523 

and  the  phantoms  had  so  far  an  influence  upon  the  book  i. 

CHAP*  VIII. 

detenninations   of   the   Government,    that    it   was        ' 


thought  advisable  to  take  precautions  to  prevent  1813. 
their  substantial  existence.  It  was  agreed  that  no 
persons,  except  those  in  the  Company's  employ, 
should  be  allowed  to  go  to  India  as  residents,  with- 
out a  licence  either  firom  the  Company  or  the 
Board  of  Controul;  and  that  the  Indian  Govern- 
ments should  retain  authority  to  send  out  of  the 
country  any  individual  from  whom  they  might 
think  it  advisable  to  withdraw  the  licence  to  reside 
in  India.  This  was  considered  a  sufficient  conces- 
sion to  the  real  or  affected  panic  of  the  Court.  And 
with  regard  to  any  embarrassments  that  might  arise 
from  the  diminished  remittances  from  India  to  meet 
the  demands  upon  the  Company,  the  Ministers  en- 
gaged that,  if  it  should  arise  without  any  fault  of  the 
Company,  they  would  use  their  influence  with  Par- 
liament to  afford  the  necessary  relief,  as  far  as  equi- 
valent means  might  exist  in  India«^ 

The  improbability  of  the  extension  of  the  trade, 
and  the  great  risk  attending  the  attempt  to  effect  its 
extension,  were  the  especial  points  which  the  Com- 
pany endeavoured,  by  the  witnesses  whom  they 
called,   to  impress   upon  the  Parliament;  and  with 

'  The  arguments  in  favour  of  the  continuance  of  the  Company's  exclu- 
sive priyileges  are  to  be  chiefly  found  in  the  letters  from  the  Chairs  to  the 
Board  of  Controul,  and  the  petitions  of  the  Company  to  Parliament,  printed 
in  the  Papers  respecting  the  negociations,  &c.  Those  of  the  advocates  of 
free  trade,  in  the  petitions  of  the  several  towns,  and  in  a  shoal  of  contem- 
porary pamphlets:  among  which  may  be  noticed  Considerations  on  the 
Trade  with  India,  London,  1807 ;  and  Letters  on  the  East  India  Compa- 
ny's Monopoly,  published  at  Glasgow.  Nor  was  the  Company  without  its 
supporters ;  amongst  whom  one  of  the  most  respectable  was  Mr.  Robert 
Grant,  the  author  of  the  **  Expediency  of  continuing  the  system  of  the 
Trade  and  Government  of  India,  181 S." 


524  HISTORY   OF   BRITISH   INDIA. 

BOOK  I.  this  view  several  of  their  most  distinsfuished  servants 

CHAP.  VUU  ° 

were  interrogated  before  the  House.     The  first  per- 

1813.  gon  called  was  Warren  Hastings;  and,  as  if  impelled 
by  a  sudden  conviction  of  the  undeserved  severity 
with  which  he  had  been  treated  by  a  former  House 
of  Commons,  and  by  a  spontaneous  wish  to  offer  him 
such  atonement  as  a  unanimous  tribute  of  personal 
respect  could  render,  the  members  rose,  as  one  body, 
upon  his  entrance  into  the  House,  and  stood  until  he 
had  assumed  his  seat  within  the  bar.  Similar  indi- 
cations of  veneration  accompanied  his  withdrawal. 
The  House  of  Lords  received  him  also  with  marked 
courtesy  and  attention.  The  contrast  between  his 
position  now,  and  that  which  he  held  in  the  same 
presence  twenty-seven  years  before,  when  he  was 
arraigned  of  atrocious  crimes  and  misdemeanors  be- 
fore both  Houses,  must  have  been  some,  though  a 
tardy  and  insufficient,  compensation  for  the  unmerit- 
ed neglect  in  which  he  had  since  passed  his  unob- 
trusive life.^  His  evidence  was  confirmatory  of  the 
assertions  of  the  Company.  He  expressed  it  as  his 
opinion,  that  if  Europeans  were  admitted  generally 
to  go  into  the  country,  to  mix  with  the  inhabitants 
or  form  establishments  amongst  them,  the  conse- 
quence would  certainly  and  inevitably  be  the  ruin  of 
the  country:  they  would  insult,  plunder,  and  oppress 
the  natives,  and  no  laws  enacted  from  home  could 
prevent  them  from  committing  acts  of  licentiousness 
of  every  kind  with  impunity.  A  general  feeling  of 
hostility  to  the  Government  would  be  excited ;  and 

*  Of  his  reception  he  merely  remarks,  in  a  letter  to  a  young  friend,  **  I 
have  lately  received  two  most  convincing  and  affecting  proofs  of  my  haviiis^ 
outlived  all  the  prejudices  which  have  during  so  many  past  years  prevailed 
against  me.** — Life  of  Warren  Hastings,  iii.  458. 


EVIDENCE   AS  TO   COLONIZATION.  525 

although  the  armed  force  might  be  of  sufficient  book  i. 
strength  to  suppress  any  overt  acts  of  insurrection,  *^"^^'  ^'"^ 
yet  the  stability  of  the  empire  must  be  endangered  1813. 
by  universal  discontent.  The  opinions  of  Lord 
Teignmouth,  Colonel  Malcolm,  Colonel  Munro,  and 
other  distinguished  servants  of  the  Company  were 
of  a  similar  tendency,  and  deprecated  strongly  the 
unrestricted  admission  of  Europeans  to  the  interior 
of  the  country.  Experience  had  proved,  they 
affirmed,  that  it  was  difficult  to  impress  even  upon 
the  servants  of  the  Company,  whilst  in  their  novi- 
ciate, a  due  regard  for  the  feelings  and  habits  of  the 
people ;  and  Englishmen  of  classes  less  under  the 
observation  of  the  superior  authorities  w^re  notori- 
ous for  the  contempt  with  which,  in  their  national 
arrogance  and  ignorance,  they  contemplated  the 
usages  and  institutions  of  the  natives,  and  for  their 
frequent  disregard  of  the  dictates  of  humanity  and 
justice  in  their  dealings  with  the  people  of  India. 
The  natives,  although  timid  and  feeble  in  some 
places,  were  not  without  strength  and  resolution  in 
others ;  and  instances  had  occurred  where  their  re- 
sentment had  proved  formidable  to  their  oppressors. 
It  was  difficult,  if  not  impossible,  to  afford  them 
protection,  for  the  Englishman  was  amenable  only 
to  the  courts  of  British  law  established  at  the 
Presidencies ;  and  although  the  local  magistrate  had 
the  power  of  sending  him  thither  for  trial,  yet,  to 
impose  upon  the  native  complainants  and  witnesses 
the  obligation  of  repairing  many  hundred  miles  to 
obtain  redress,  was  to  subject  them  to  delay,  fatigue, 
and  expense,  which  would  be  more  intolerable  than 
the  injury  they  had  suffered.     There  was  in  fact. 


526  HISTORY  OP   BRITISH   INDIA. 

BOOK  I.  therefore,  no  redress ;  and  the  only  security  that  the 
cHAP.vm.  ua^tiy^  enjoyed  was  the  power  vested  in  the  Govern- 
isia.  ment  of  removing  a  troublesome  and  mischievous 
European  from  the  provinces  to  the  Presidency,  or 
even,  if  necessary,  of  sending  him  altogether  out  of 
India.  As  long  as  those  powers  continued  to  be 
vested  in  the  local  Grovemments,  and  as  long  as  the 
resort  of  Europeans  to  India  was  regulated  by 
licences  granted  by  the  authorities  either  in  Eng- 
land or  in  India,  it  was  thought  by  some  of  the  wit- 
nesses that  no  great  danger  was  to  be  apprehended. 
According  to  Colonel  Malcohn,  however,  the  re- 
strictions could  not  be  too  stringent  or  severe.^ 

In  all  the  questions,  however,  to  which  these  replies 
were  given,  it  was  assumed  that  not  only  an  unre- 
stricted but  an  unlimited  and  numerous  influx  of 
Europeans  would  follow  the  opening  of  the  trade, 
and  that  the  Europeans  would  settle  as  colonists. 
Admitting  the  inferences  to  be  legitimate,  the  pre- 
mises did  not  appear  to  all  the  witnesses  to  be 
equally  indisputable.  Thus  Colonel  Munro,  in  parti- 
cular, stated  his  opinion  that,  although  in  the  first 
instance  the  number  of  Europeans  might  be  con- 
siderably augmented,  yet  by  degrees  that  number 
would  be  limited  by  the  amount  of  the  trade,  for 
the  regulation  of  which  alone  their  residence  would 
be  advantageous.  They  would  not  become  manu- 
facturers, on  account  of  the  superior  skill  and  eco- 
nomy of  the  natives ;  they  could  not  hold  land,  as 
that  was  prohibited  by  the  Company's  regulations : 


^  See  Minutes  of  Evidence  taken  before  the  Select  Committees  of  both 
Houses  of  Parliament  in  1813,  printed  by  order  of  the  Court  of  Directors 
for  the  information  of  the  Proprietors. 


EVIDENCE   AS   TO   TRADE.  527 

and,  supposing  it  to  be  desirable  that  the  law  were  book  i. 
repealed,  it  was  not  likely  that  Europeans  could  co-  ^"^^'  ^^' 


Ionize  to  any  extent ;  they  would  be  borne  down  by     I8i3. 
the  superior  population  of  the  natives,  more  indus- 
trious and  economical  than  themselves. 

The  several  witnesses  agreed  also  as  to  the  impro- 
bability of  the  trade  with  India  being  susceptible  of 
any  material  extension.  The  simple  habits  of  the 
people,  taught  them  by  the  nature  of  the  climate  and 
the  condition  of  society,  rendered  them,  even  where 
able  to  purchase  superfluities,  little  inclined  to  pro- 
vide them.  A  few  opulent  natives  at  the  chief 
cities  occasionally  purchased  articles  of  European 
furniture  and  apparel,  in  compliment  to  their  Euro- 
pean friends,  but  commonly  put  them  aside  and 
made  no  use  of  them.^  Their  superfluous  wealth 
was  expended  in  the  marriages  of  their  children  or 
at  religious  festivals,  in  domestic  indulgences  or  on 
the  ornaments  of  their  women.  The  vast  majority 
of  the  people  were,  however,  devoid  of  the  means  of 
buying  European  manufetctures,-  even  if  there  existed 
amongst  them  any  propensity  to  make  use  of  them.* 

'  A  fourth  of  the  second  share  of  the  pruEe-money  of  Seringapatam  was 
to  be  paid  to  the  Nizam,  and,  with  a  prudent  regard  for  the  interests  of 
British  trade,  the  Government  of  Madras  thought  it  expedient  to  convert 
the  amount  into  broad-cloth,  plate,  china,  glass  and  the  like,  in  order  to 
initiate  his  Highness  and  his  Court  into  a  taste  for  the  elegant  superfluities 
of  European  living.  The  articles  were  graciously  receired ;  but  all  were 
consigned  to  the  Toshak-khana,  or  magazine  of  rare  and  valuable  commo- 
dities. On  visiting  this  magazine,  the  Resident  found  many  rooms  filled 
from  the  floor  to  the  ceUing  with  European  articles,  most  of  which  had  been 
presented  to  the  Nizam  and  his  father  by  the  Governors  of  the  French  and 
English  settlements :  some  as  old  as  the  time  of  Duplessy  and  Bussy,  sent 
direct  from  the  court  of  Louis  XV.  Of  course  the  greater  portion  bad 
become  the  nests  of  the  white  ant  and  the  moth. — Evidence  of  T.  Syden- 
ham, Esq.  before  the  House  of  Commons ;  Minutes,  p.  627. 

'  Various  testimonies  were  given  of  the  cheapness  of  labour  and  the 
trifling  amount  sufficient  for  the  maintenance  of  the  natives.  According  to 
returns  obtained  by  Colonel  Munro  whilst  in  India,  upon  a  popalatioii  of 


528  HISTORY   OF   BRITISH   INDIA. 


BOOK  I.  Here,  again,  the  same  sagacious  officer.  Colonel 
cHAP.vifi.  ]yJ^,^^J.Q^  placed  the  question  in  its  true  light.  Al- 
1813.  though  he  admitted  that  the  Hindu  was  as  unal- 
terable in  his  habits  as  it  was  possible  to  be,  and  had 
in  all  probability  adhered  to  them  ever  since  he  was 
first  known  to  the  Greek  invaders  of  his  country,  yet 
he  denied  that  the  people  of  India  entertained  any 
invincible  prejudices  against  foreign  fabrics :  it  was 
entirely  a  question  of  price:  whenever  we  could 
undersell  the  Hindus  in  any  article  which  they 
required,  it  would  find  its  way  into  the  interior  of 
the  country  without  much  help  from  the  British 
merchant,  and  in  spite  of  all  regulations  to  prevent 
it.  At  the  same  time,  he  did  not  conceive  it  likely 
that  there  would  be  such  a  reduction  of  price  as 
could  bring  British  manufactures  into  competition 
with  those  the  natives  required  and  could  produce 
in  their  own  country.  He  was  not  aware  what  ele- 
ments were  even  then  at  work  to  raise  the  British 
manufacture  of  one  of  the  necessaries  of  life,  cotton 
cloth,  upon  the  ruin  of  the  fabrics  of  India. 

A  question  of  still  graver  importance,  although 
not  affecting  the  continuance  of  the  Company's  pri- 
vileges, was  the  expedience  of  adopting  measures  for 
the  dissemination  of  Christianity  amongst  the  natives 
of  India.  The  advantages  of  placing  the  Company's 
chaplains  under  episcopal  authority  had  been  pressed 
upon  the  attention  of  the  Company  and  the  public 

two  millions  of  inhabitants,  the  average  annual  expenditure  of  each  indi- 
Tidual  for  clothes,  food,  furniture,  and  all  the  necessaries  of  life,  did  not 
exceed  26«. :  the  average  expenditure  of  the  rich  being  40«. ;  that  of  the 
middling  classes,  comprising  the  whole  of  the  agricultural  and  manufac- 
turing classes,  27«. ;  and  that  of  the  poorest,  18«.  It  was  not  likely  that 
any  of  these  classes  should  furnish  consumers  of  European  commodities. — 
Min.  of  Evidence  p.  204. 


EVIDENCE   REGARDING   MISSIONS.  529 


some  years  before/  and  the  Administration  was  will-  book  r. 
ing  to  give  effect,  in  part,  to  the  arrangements  so 


CHAP.  VUI. 


suggested.  The  appointment  of  a  bishop  and  arch-  isis. 
deacons  was  calculated  to  give  consistency  and  vigour 
to  the  clerical  establishment  of  British  India,  and  was 
not  likely  to  excite  any  hostile  feelings  amongst  the 
natives,  as  long  as  they  had  no  cause  to  suspect  that 
it  was  the  purpose  of  the  Government  to  employ 
such  agency  as  instruments  of  their  conversion.  To 
this  extent,  therefore,  the  Ministers  and  the  Company 
were  disposed  to  go :  but  there  were  not  wanting  a 
number  of  zealous  persons  who  endeavoured  to  force 
upon  them  the  adoption  of  provisions  in  the  new 
charter  for  the  communication  of  the  light  of  Chris- 
tianity to  the  benighted  heathens  of  India,  and  for 
affording  sufficient  opportunities  to  the  benevolent 
persons  who  should  be  desirous  of  going  to  India  for 
that  purpose;  or,  in  other  words,  to  authorise  and 
assist  the  exertions  of  the  missionaries.  Petitions  to 
this  effect  had  been  presented  to  both  Houses  of  Par- 
liament, and  the  members  naturally  therefore  wished 
to  hear  the  sentiments  of  those  who  were  best  quali- 
fied to  judge  of  the  probable  consequences  of  any  at- 
tempt of  the  Government  to  introduce  the  Christian 
religion.  There  was  no  hesitation  or  disagreement  in 
the  reply.  All  concurred  in  asserting  that  not  only 
the  attempt,  but  any  notion  amongst  the  natives  that 
such  an  attempt  would  be  made,  was  pregnant  with 
the  most  fatal  consequences :  it  would  not  only  defeat 
the  object  for  which  it  was  made,  and  prevent  the 
diffusion  of  that  religion  it  was  intended  to  establish, 

*  In  a  memoir  on  the  expediency  of  an  Ecclesiastical  establishment  for 
British  India,  by  the  Rev.  Glaudios  Buchanan,  1805. 

VOL.  I.  2   M 


£30  HISTORY  OF  BRITISH  INDIA. 

BOOK  I.  but  would  lead  to  universal  fear  and  discontent,  and 
^^^'  ^^^  would  in  all  likelihood  end  in  the  overthrow  of  the 
1818.  British  empire.  Divided  as  were  the  people  of  the 
country  by  religious  differences  and  distinctions  of 
caste,  any  dread  of  violence  to  their  several  forms  of 
belief  would  unite  them  in  a  common  cause ;  would 
convert  timidity  into  desperation,  and  subordination 
into  defiance;  and  would  kindle  a  flame  which,  in 
its  progress,  would  destroy  not  only  the  British  Gro- 
vemment,  but  all  who  professed  the  faith  it  was 
designed  to  propagate.  Even  Lord  Teignmouth, 
although  connected  with  the  religious  party,  ad-» 
mitted  that  considerable  peril  might  be  apprehended 
from  indiscreet  zeal;  that,  from  the  experience  which 
the  natives  had  had  of  the  disposition  of  the  Govern- 
ment during  very  many  years  to  pay  every  attention 
to  their  civil  and  religious  prejudices,  they  never 
could  be  brought  to  believe  that  it  meant  to  impose 
upon  them  the  religion  of  this  country;  that  any 
enactment  for  the  conversion  of  the  natives,  having 
the  appearance  of  a  compulsory  law  upon  their  con- 
sciences, would  be  attended  with  very  great  danger ; 
and  that  it  would  be  advisable  to  leave  in  the 
hands  of  the  local  Government  the  controul  to  be 
exercised  over  persons  professing  to  teach  Christi- 
nity  in  India.^ 

A  variety  of  conflicting  evidence  relating  to  the 

*  See  tlie  Resolutions  of  a  meeting  of  the  Protestant  Society  for  the  pro- 
tection of  Religious  Liberty,  2nd  March,  1818 ;  Papers,  &c.  276  :  of  a  spe- 
cial  meeting  of  the  Church  Missionary  Society,  24th  April,  1818 ;  of  the 
meetings  of  the  members  of  the  Church  of  Scotland,  the  Wesleyans,  Bap- 
tists, and  others,  in  March  and  April,  1813;  in  the  Missionary  Register  for 
April  of  that  year.  Tlie  subject  was  also  warmly  discussed  in  rarious 
pamphlets :  Lord  Teignmouth  and  Mr.  Fuller  taking  the  lead  on  the  side  of 
missionary  encouragement ;  and  Messrs.  Scott  Waring,  and  T.  Twiningy 
among  those  who  denied  its  expedience  or  safety. 


DEBATE  RESUMED.  531 

difficulty  of  repressing  smuggling,  and  the   expe-  book  i. 
dience  of  continuing  the  China  monopoly,  was  also  ^"^^'  ^"- 


heard.  The  officers  of  the  outports  generally  main-  I813. 
tained  that  there  existed  as  much  security  for  the 
realisation  of  the  duties  at  the  several  harbours  as 
in  London.  The  weight  of  authority,  however,  was 
against  them;  and  difficulty  was  anticipated,  al- 
though it  might  not  be  insuperable.  The  evi- 
dence of  the  Company's  officers  who  had  resided  in 
China  was  also  of  a  character  more  entitled  to 
credit  than  that  of  the  merchants,  who  attempted  to 
qualify  or  deny  the  descriptions  which  were  given 
by  Sir  G.  Staunton  and  Mr.  Davies  of  the  peculiari- 
ties under  which  the  trade  with  the  Chinese  was 
conducted,  and  the  danger  of  its  being  lost  should 
an  indiscriminate  traffic  be  allowed. 

On  the  25th  of  May  the  subject  was  again  brought 
before  the  House  of  Commons.  Lord  Castlereagh, 
presuming  that  the  members  were  now  in  possession 
of  the  evidence,  was  desirous  of  entering  upon  the 
discussion,  and  coming  to  a  conclusion  without  fur- 
ther delay.  Some  opposition  was  made  to  an 
early  day,  on  the  ground  of  there  not  being  time  to 
read  over  the  minutes  of  evidence ;  but  it  was  over- 
ruled, and  on  the  Slst  the  House  went  into  a  Com- 
mittee on  the  Resolutions.  The  first  resolution 
purported  that  the  privileges,  authorities,  and  immu- 
nities granted  to  the  East  India  Company  by  any 
acts  of  parliament  then  in  force,  should  be  con- 
tinued for  a  further  period  of  time  to  be  limited, 
except  as  far  as  hereafter  modified  and  repealed. 
In  objecting  to  this,  Mr.  Bruce,  the  Company's  his- 
toriographer, recapitulated  the  history  of  the  Com- 

2m2 


532  HISTORY   OF   BRITISH   INDIA. 

BOOK  I.  pany,  the  attempts  that  had  been  made  to  interfere 
CHAP,  viii.  ^^^  their  exclusive  rights,  the  little  success  with 
1818.     which   they  had   been   attended,  and  the  services 
rendered  to  the  trade,  and  the  prosperity  of  the 
state,  by  the  Company ;  and  he  argued  that  any 
deviation  from  the  existing  system  would  be  pro- 
ductive   of   dangers    and    losses   both    commercial 
and  political,  of  the  destruction  of  the  Company's 
trade  both  with  India  and  China,  and  of  the  sub- 
version of  their   Indian  empire.      It  would  be    a 
melancholy  reflection,  he  concluded,  to  have  lived 
to  see  one  political  and  financial  error  lose  to  the 
country  its  American  colonies ;  and  to  be  convinced 
that  the  proposed  resolutions,  if  passed  into  a  law 
in  opposition  to  a  most  fall  and  complete  body  of 
evidence,  would  in  a  short  time  probably  lose  its 
Indian  empire  to  Great  Britain.^     He  was  followed 
by  Mr.  Charles  Grant  junior,  who  impressed  upon 
the  House  the  peril  of  disturbing  a  system  of  ad- 
ministration under  which  the  people  of  India  were 
prosperous  and   happy,   for  the  sake  of  imaginary 
commercial  advantages  which   never  could   be  re- 
alised.    The  good  of  the  people  of  India  was  the 
real  point  at  issue ;  and  this  could  not  be  promoted 
by  letting  loose  amongst  them  a  host  of  desperate, 
needy  adventurers,  whose  atrocious  conduct  in  Ame- 
rica and  in  Africa  afforded  sufficient  indication  of 
the  evils  they  would  inflict  upon  India.     The  Com- 
pany had  been  charged  with  having  excited   wars 
in  India,  and  furnished  an  exception  to  the  general 
rule  that  peace  and  tranquillity  were  the  insepa- 

*  Substance  of  the  Speech  of  J.  Bruce,  Esq.;  Black,  Parry,  &  Co.,  1818  : 
also  Hansard's  Debates,  Slst  May,  1818. 


ARGUMENTS   OF   MR.  GRANT.  633 


rable  attendants  of  commerce :  and  by  whom  was  book  i. 
this  charge  made?  by  the  advocates  of  the  slave-  ^"^•^™- 
trade,  the  people  of  Liverpool.  The  natives  of  India  I813. 
deprecated  all  change:  he  gave  utterance  to  their 
prayers  when  he  conjured  the  House  not  to  make 
them  the  subjects  of  perilous  speculation,  and,  for 
the  sake  of  local  insignificant  interests,  barter  away 
their  happiness.  The  commercial  merits  of  the 
question  were  more  particularly  dwelt  upon  by  the 
father  of  this  speaker,  Mr.  Charles  Grant  senior, 
who,  as  Chairman  and  member  of  the  Court  of  Di- 
rectors, and  a  gentleman  of  great  ability  and  expe- 
rience, had  taken  the  lead  in  the  defence  of  the 
Company's  privileges.  He  urged  the  arguments  al- 
ready adverted  to,  of  the  impossibility  of  materially 
extending  the  trade,  which  he  was  satisfied  to  ob- 
serve was  now  generally  admitted.  He  denied  that 
the  union  of  the  character  of  merchant  and  sove- 
reign was  prejudicial  to  the  country  over  which  the 
Company  ruled;  that  any  loss  had  attended  their 
commercial  transactions,  the  commerce  having  not 
only  supported  itself,  but  contributed  to  the  ex- 
penses of  the  administration  of  the  territory :  he  as- 
serted that  the  remittances  made  to  England  were 
necessary  for  territorial  charges  in  that  country;  and 
that  they  were  better  effected  through  goods  than 
the  bills  of  private  merchants,  of  whose  solvency 
they  could  not  always  feel  secure.  He  maintained 
the  right  of  the  Company  to  their  territorial  posses- 
sions, having  been  acquired  at  their  own  hazard  and 
expense.  In  reply  to  the  inconsistency  of  appre- 
hending a  dangerous  resort  of  Europeans  to  India  if 
merchandise  were  brought  from  thence  to  the  out- 


534  HISTORY  OF   BRITISH   INDIA. 

BOOK  I.  ports,  and  not  anticipating  the  same  from  vessels 
^^^'"^^  fitted  out  by  them  for  the  export  trade,  he  observed 
1818.  that,  if  ships  were  not  allowed  to  carry  their  return 
cargoes  to  the  outports,  the  ships  fitted  out  from 
those  ports  would  be  comparatively  few.  Of  the  re- 
ality of  the  danger,  the  whole  body  of  the  evidence 
was  fall.  The  transfer  of  the  trade  from  London  to 
the  outports  would  yield  no  advantages  to  the  king* 
dom  at  large;  whilst  it  would  be  injurious  to  the 
metropolis,  and  dangerous  to  India. 

Amongst  the  speakers  on  the  opposite  side,  Mr. 
Canning  was  principally  distinguished.  He  very 
justly  observed,  that,  of  all  the  questions  ever  dis- 
cussed in  the  House  of  Commons,  the  present  was 
one  in  which  on  both  sides  the  greatest  exagge- 
ration prevailed.  He  bore  no  enmity  to  the  Com- 
pany, and  was  desirous  of  supporting  all  their  just 
claims :  but  he  could  not  admit  their  claim  to  the 
rightful  sovereignty  of  India ;  or  that  the  anomaly 
of  their  position  should  impair  the  principle,  that, 
whenever  British  subjects  acquired  dominion,  it  was 
comprehended  within  the  permanent  dominion  of 
the  empire.  When  Parliament  were  legislating  on 
the  government  and  commerce  of  India,  it  was  as 
clearly  competent  to  do  so,  as  to  enact  laws  respect- 
ing any  other  British  possessions  properly  denomi- 
nated colonies.  He  would  admit,  however,  the 
Company  to  retain  their  sovereign  capacity  as  a 
concession,  not  as  a  right ;  but,  if  it  should  seem 
good  to  take  it  away,  it  was  the  right  of  the  Par- 
liament so  to  legislate,  and  not  in  the  right  of  the 
East  India  Company  to  plead  their  possession. 
With  regard  to  the  objections  offered  to  the  open- 


SPEECH   OF   MR.  CANNING.  535 

ing  of  the  trade  on  account  of  the  anticipated  mis-  book  i. 
conduct  of  those  who  would  engage  in  it,  he  thought  ^"^^'  ^'"' 
it  was  rather  hard  and  unprecedented  language  for  I815. 
the  advocates  of  the  Company  to  say  to  the  mer- 
chants, ^^  You  are  a  pack  of  piratical  ragamuffins,  who 
want  to  lay  our  villages  in  ruins  and  blood,  and  to 
carry  away  our  children  into  captivity:  we  have 
heard  of  the  horrible  traffic  you  carried  on  for  the 
slave-trade  a  century  without  shame,  and  would  not 
abandon  without  a  struggle."  Fortimately  for  the 
private  trader,  the  right  and  power  of  interference 
did  exist  in  Parliament,  who  would  consider  the 
question  in  all  its  bearings,  without  heeding  the 
exaggerated  pretensions  of  those  commercial  lords 
of  Asia  to  dominions  acquired  by  British  enterprise, 
and  yet  held  by  British  arms. 

After  witnessing  the  changes  in  the  systems  of 
judicature  and  revenue,  and  in  the  military  organi- 
sation, which  had  been  effected  by  the  Company's 
Governments,  he  could  not  believe  in  the  alleged 
immutability  of  the  native  character  and  habit, 
which  was  to  render  impracticable  any  extension  of 
the  trade  with  them ;  and  still  less  could  he  imagine 
that  a  people,  who  had  been  quiet  and  submissive 
for  three  thousand  years,  should  lose  those  qualities 
all  of  a  sudden  if  a  few  pedlars  were  allowed  to 
travel  in  the  country  with  a  pack  of  scissors  or 
other  hardware  at  their  backs.  The  question  was, 
not  the  admission  of  British  merchants  to  trade 
without  restrictions,  but  their  trading  subject  to 
restrictions  and  regulations.  He  conceived  the  ge- 
neral principle  to  be  pretty  well  disposed  of,  except 
between    the    classes   who   went    to   the   extreme 


536  marroBT  of  British  india. 

BOOK  I.  length  of  contending,  on  the  one  side,  that  the 
cHAF.vm.  (^mpg^ay  should  be  abolished,  and  those  who,  on 
1813.  the  other,  maintained  that  not  a  single  feather 
should  be  taken  from  their  plume  of  sovereignty ; 
but  whilst  he  did  not  apprehend  any  insuperable 
difficulty  in  providing  for  the  government  of  India 
independent  of  the  Company,  yet  he  was  ready  to 
admit  that  the  system  had  many  advantages,  and 
was  desirous  to  continue  it  in  their  hands  as  long 
as  it  did  not  degenerate  into  a  system  of  exclusion. 
The  first  resolution  was  carried  without  a  division. 

The  second  resolution,  proposing  to  continue  the 
monopoly  of  the  tea-trade  with  the  Company,  was 
discussed  on  the  succeeding  day.  It  encountered 
some  opposition  from  Mr.  Marryatt,  Mr.  Ponsonby, 
and  Sir  J.  Newport ;  who  argued  that  it  was  impo- 
litic and  unjust  to  exclude  British  subjects  from  a 
trade  to  which  foreigners  were  admitted,  and  that, 
by  opening  the  trade,  the  public  would  be  supplied 
with  better  tea  at  a  lower  price,  the  prices  of  teas  in 
America  being  much  lower  than  those  at  the  Com- 
pany's sales.  In  reply  it  was  asserted,  that  the 
Company  put  up  their  teas  at  little  more  than  cost 
price ;  and  that,  if  the  rates  were  enhanced  by  the 
buyers,  it  was  their  act,  not  the  Company's.  Whilst 
also  it  was  not  denied  that  the  American  prices 
were  lower,  it  was  asserted  by  Mr.  Grant  that  the 
comparison  was  fallacious ;  as  the  articles,  although 
bearing  similar  appellations,  were  entirely  different, 
and  the  American  teas  were  of  inferior  quaUty. 
This  was  contradicted;  but  the  arguments  which 
had  influenced  the  Select  Committee — the  fear  of 
exciting  the  jealousy  and  provoking  the  opposition 


CLAUSES   AGREED  TO.  537 

of  the  Chinese  Government,  and  the  inexpediency  book  i. 
of  hazarding  valuable  and  readily  realisable  revenue  ^°*^J^ 


which  the  duty  on  tea  under  the  present  system     isis. 
secured, — ^proved  successful ;  and  this  resolution  was 
also  carried  without  a  division.     The  other  resolu- 
tions, with  reservation  of  the  third,  seventh,  eighth, 
and  thirteenth,  were  also  agreed  to. 

On  the  2nd  of  June  the  discussion  of  the  third 
resolution  took  place.  This  resolution,  which  gave 
permission  to  the  ships  of  private  merchants  to  sail 
from  any  port  in  Great  Britain  to  any  port  within 
the  limits  of  the  Company's  charter,  and  to  return 
to  certain  of  the  outports,  had  been  qualified  by 
various  clauses,  having  for  their  object  both  the 
security  of  the  Company  and  individuals  ;  the  most 
important  of  them  making  it  necessary  for  vessels 
trading  with  Tndia  to  have  licences  from  the  Com- 
pany, but  empowering  the  Board  of  Controul  to 
issue  licences  when  refused  by  the  Court  of  Di- 
rectors, if  not  satisfied  with  the  grounds  of  the 
refusal.  The  debate  was  opened  with  a  speech 
from  Mr.  Rickards,  objecting  altogether  to  the  con- 
tinuance of  the  Company's  privileges,  and  denying 
the  existence  of  that  prosperity  amongst  the  people 
of  India  which  they  had  been  described  as  enjoying 
under  the  Company's  adnunistration ;  attributing 
much  of  the  misery  that  existed  to  the  pressure 
upon  the  national  industry  arising  from  the  Com- 
pany's monopoly,  and  looking  for  its  relief  only  to 
the  extension  of  a  demand  for  the  produce  of  the 
country  through  the  enterprise  of  the  private  trader. 
He  was  replied  to  by  Mr.  Grant.  The  singular- 
ity of  the  debate  was  a  long  and  elaborate  speech 


538  HISTORY   OF   BRITISH   INDIA. 

BOOK  I.  from  Mr.  Tiemey,  who,  in  opposition  to  the  sent!- 
^^^'^^^  ments  of  his  colleagues,  maintained  that,  looking 
181S.  to  the  distinguished  character  and  generally  con- 
curring tenor  of  the  evidence  adduced  in  favour  of 
the  Company,  and  the  total  absence  of  any  evi- 
dence on  the  opposite  part,  the  existing  system 
ought  not  to  be  interfered  with.  In  fact,  there  was 
a  gross  inconsistency  in  the  resolution :  a  Court 
of  Directors,  that  could  not  be  trusted  with  the 
commerce  of  India,  was  to  be  confirmed  in  the  go- 
vemment,-^twenty-four  execrable  merchants  were 
to  make  excellent  political  governors !  But  there 
was  no  charge  against  the  Company:  the  main  object 
of  the  act  of  1793,  the  happiness  of  sixty  millions, 
had  been  attained.  The  government  of  India,  he 
asserted,  was  well  and  ably  administered,  and  was 
not  to  be  subverted  for  the  sake  of  a  little  more 
trade.  Amongst  all  the  arguments  in  favour  of  the 
benefits  that  were  to  accrue  to  the  people  of  India 
from  a  free  trade,  he  had  never  heard  it  proposed  to 
allow  one  manufacture  of  India  to  be  freely  import- 
ed into  Great  Britain.  It  was  true  that  they  would 
allow  cotton-twist :  but  then,  having  found  out  that 
they  could  weave  by  means  of  machinery  cheaper 
than  the  Indians,  they  said  to  them,  "  Leave  off 
weaving ;  supply  us  with  the  raw  material,  and  we 
will  weave  for  you."^    Now,  although  this  was  a  na- 

*  The  history  of  the  trade  of  cotton  cloths  with  India  affords  a  singular 

exemplification  of  the  inapplicability  to  all  times  and  circumstances  of  that 

principle  of  free  trade  which  advocates  the  unrestricted  admission  of  a 

.        cheap  article,  in  place  of  protecting  by  heavy  duties  a  dearer  one  of  home 

'       manufacture.     It  is  also  a  melancholy  instance  of  the  wrong  done  to  India 

\       by  the  country  on  which  she  had  become  dependent.     It  was  stated  in 

',      eridence  that  the  cotton  and  silk  goods  of  India  up  to  this  period  could  be 

sold  for  a  profit  in  the  British  market  at  a  price  from  fifty  to  sixty  per  cent« 

lower  than  those  fabricated  in  England.    It  consequently  became  necessary 


SPEECH   OF   MB.  TIEBNEY.  539 

tural  principle  enough  for  merchants  and  manufac-  book  i. 
turers,  it  was  rather  too  much  to  talk  of  the  philan-  ^^^^'  ^^ 


thropy  of  it,  or  to  rank  the  supporters  of  it  as  in  a  isia. 
peculiar  degree  the  friends  of  India.  If,  instead  of 
calling  themselves  the  friends  of  that  coimtry,  they 
should  profess  themselves  its  enemies,  what  more 
could  they  do  than  advise  the  endeavour  to  crush 
all  Indian  manufacture?  What  would  be  said  of 
the  East  India  Company  if  they  were  to  show  as 
decided  a  preference  to  the  manufactures  of  the 
natives  of  India  under  their  protection  as  we  did  to 
the  manufactures  of  England  ?  It  appeared  to  him 
that  the  alterations  in  the  resolutions  had  been  pro- 
posed for  no  other  purpose  than  to  conciliate  the 
clamour  of  the  merchants,  and  he  would  defy  any 
man  to  point  out  anything  like  the  good  of  India 
being  the  object  of  any  of  the  resolutions.  In  con- 
clusion, he  expressed  his  opinion  that  either  the 
present  system  must  be  maintained,  or  the  Com- 
pany set  aside  altogether.  Lord  Castlereagh,  in 
reply  to  Mr.  Tiemey,  urged  adherence  to  the  middle 
course  which  had  been  proposed  by  the  Ministers. 
In  the  adjourned  debate  on  the  following  day,  Mr. 
Sullivan  recapitulated  the  circumstances  which  had 


to  protect  the  latter  by  duties  of  seventy  and  eighty  per  cent,  on  their  value, 
or  by  positive  prohibition.  Had  this  not  been  the  case,  had  not  such 
prohibitory  duties  and  decrees  existed,  the  mills  of  Paisley  and  of  Man- 
chester would  have  been  stopped  in  their  outset,  and  could  scarcely  have 
been  again  set  in  motion,  even  by  the  powers  of  steam.  They  were  created 
by  the  sacrifice  of  the  Indian  manufacture.  Had  India  been  independent, 
she  would  have  retaliated ;  would  have  imposed  preventive  duties  upon 
British  goods,  and  would  thus  have  preserved  her  own  productive  indus- 
try from  annihilation.  This  act  of  self-defence  was  not  permitted  her ; 
she  was  at  the  mercy  of  the  stranger.  British  goods  were  forced  upon  her 
without  paying  any  duty;  and  the  foreign  mannfactorer  employed  the 
arm  of  political  injustice  to  keep  down  and  ultimately  strangle  a  compe- 
titor with  whom  he  could  not  have  contended  on  equal  terma. 


540  HISTORY   OF   BRITISH   INDIA. 

BOOK  I.  taken  place  on  the  renewal  of  the  charter  of  1793, 
^^^'  ^"''  and  the  measures  advocated  in  1800  by  Mr.  Dundas 
I8i3w  for  the  extension  of  private  trade,  by  the  admission 
of  India-built  shipping  belonging  to  merchants  in 
India  at  that  time,  and  observed  that  all  the  argu- 
ments brought  forward  against  the  propositions  now 
before  the  House  were  then  urged  with  greater 
force  and  ability  than  was  now  evinced  in  the  dis- 
cussion :  the  result  of  a  compromise  made  with  the 
Company  had  demonstrated  the  futility  of  all  objec- 
tions against  the  private  trade,  which  had  largely 
increased  during  the  period  of  the  charter.  Mr. 
Prothero  vindicated  the  merchants  of  the  outports 
from  the  sarcastic  observations  of  Mr.  Tiemey,  and 
maintained  that  they  had  shown  their  moderation 
in  not  insisting  upon  larger  concessions  than  it 
had  been  deemed  expedient  to  grant.  Mr.  Baring 
denied  the  advantages,  and  expatiated  on  the  dan- 
gers of  augmenting  the  facilities  already  given  to 
private  trade.  Several  other  members  took  part  in 
the  debate ;  but  the  discussion  turned  chiefly  upon 
the  general  merits  of  the  measure,  and  went  over 
the  grounds  previously  exhausted.  The  resolution 
was  carried  without  a  division ;  and  the  remaining 
resolutions  being  agreed  to,  with  a  reservation  that 
some  of  them  would  be  considered  more  fully  on 
the  bringing  up  of  the  report,  the  House  was  re- 
sumed, and  the  report  of  the  Committee,  consisting 
of  the  resolutions  in  detail,  was  received.^ 

On  the  14th,  when  the  report  was  taken  into 
consideration,  Sir  J.  Newport  moved  that  it  should 
be  postponed  to  that  day  three  months,  expressly 

'  Sec  Appendix. 


AMENDMENT   REJECTED.  541 

with  a  view  of  inducing  the  House  in  the  next  ses-  book  i. 
sion  to  abolish  the  monopoly  altogether.  Lord  ^"^''•^"'' 
Castlereagh  expressed  his  opinion  that  such  an  abo-  isis. 
lition  would  be  a  serious  calamity,  and  that  Ministers 
would  be  guilty  of  a  dereliction  of  duty  if  they 
agreed  to  any  postponement  of  the  question.  Mr. 
Whitbread  passed  some  severe  strictures  on  the 
Ministers  for  culpable  delay  in  bringing  the  question 
forward,  and  then  hurrying  it  to  a  decision :  he  ac- 
cused Lord  Castlereagh  of  inconsistency,  who,  when 
President  of  the  Board  of  Coutroul  nine  years  before, 
had  declared  that  the  Company  was  unable,  and 
ought  not,  to  exist  longer ;  and  yet  now  argued  that 
it  ought  to  be  supported.  He  completely  agreed 
with  the  sentiments  which  had  been  expressed  by 
Lord  Grenville  in  the  House  of  Lords,  disputed  the 
eulogium  which  had  been  passed  upon  the  Com- 
pany's administration,  considered  the  evidence  given 
in  their  behalf  as  prejudiced  and  contradictory,  and 
declared  that  the  information  was  insufficient:  one 
thing  only  was  clear,  there  should  be  no  compromise; 
if  the  Company  ought  to  be  destroyed,  destroy  it ; 
if  it  ought  to  be  maintained,  maintain  it :  he  voted 
for  further  delay.  Mr.  Tiemey  also  urged  delay, 
which  Mr.  Canning  opposed;  and,  upon  a  division,  the 
amendment  was  rejected  by  a  considerable  majority. 
The  debate  on  the  resolutions  was  adjourned. 

On  resuming  the  discussion  on  the  14th  June, 
Mr.  Howorth  argued  the  necessity  of  asserting  in 
the  preamble  a  declaration  of  the  sovereignty  of 
India  residing  in  the  Crown ;  and  Sir  J.  Newport 
proposed  a  motion  to  that  effect.  Lord  Castlereagh 
objected  to  the  amendment,  that  it  was  unnecessary; 


642  HisrroRY  of  British  india. 

BOOK  L  that  it  was  raising  a  doubt  where  none  had  been 
CMAF.  vm.  g^ggggj^ .  nu^j  lYiBt  it  would  be  well  to  consider 

1813b  what  Parliament  had  done  on  a  former  occasion, 
when  the  charter  was  renewed,  and  when  it  had  not 
been  thought  advisable  to  accompany  resolutions  of 
a  practical  and  specific  character  with  principles  of 
universal  applicability.  Mr.  Grant  said  that  the 
East  India  Company  had  never  laid  claim  to  the 
sovereignty  of  the  country ;  they  had  only  asserted 
that  right  in  the  soil  which  they  conceived  to  be 
given  them  by  the  charter.  The  amendment  was  ne- 
gatived. Lord  Castlereagh  then  moved  that  the 
term  for  the  duration  of  the  charter  should  be  twenty 
years,  which  Mr.  Ponsonby  proposed  should  be 
shortened  to  ten ;  in  which  he  was  supported  by  Mr. 
Creevey,  who,  however,  gave  a  decided  negative  to 
the  whole  of  the  resolution.  Lord  Castlereagh  main- 
tained that  a  period  of  less  than  twenty  years  would 
be  insufficient  to  enable  Parliament  to  judge  of  the 
merits  or  defects  of  the  system  about  to  be  esta- 
blished, and  reminded  the  House  that  they  retained 
the  power  of  superintending  and  controuling  the 
proceedings  both  of  the  Company  and  the  Ministers. 
Mr.  Canning  voted  for  the  shorter  period ;  and  Mr. 
Whitbread  declared  that,  from  what  he  had  heard  in 
the  course  of  the  debate,  he  should  vote  against 
the  resolution.  The  Company  had  governed  India 
badly,  and  had  no  right  to  the  monopoly  of  the 
trade  with  either  India  or  China.  The  amendment 
was  rejected,  but  the  minority  was  considerable. 
On  the  duration  of  the  exclusive  trade  to  China 
Mr.  Canning  also  divided  the  House,  proposing  to 
limit  it  to  ten  years ;  a  motion  intended,  no  doubt. 


MISSIONARY   CLAUSE.  543 


to  propitiate  his  Liverpool  constituents.    It  was  car-  book  i. 
ried  against  him.     An  attempt  was  made,  upon  the 


CHAP.  vm. 


third  reading  of  the  resolution,  by  Mr.  Baring,  to  isis. 
restrict  the  return  trade  to  the  port  of  London  at 
least  for  a  period  of  five  years :  but  it  was  vigorously 
opposed  by  the  representatives  of  the  maritime 
towns,  and  especially  by  Mr.  Canning,  who  de- 
nounced the  proposition  as  an  insidious  attempt  to 
destroy  the  whole  scheme  which  Parliament  had  de- 
vised ;  for  the  outports,  thwarted,  crippled,  and  con- 
fined by  such  a  regulation,  would  abandon  the  trade, 
and  then  the  Company  would  again  possess  its  mo- 
nopoly undisturbed.  The  resolution  was  carried. 
Some  further  discussion  ensued  upon  other  clauses 
and  resolutions,  but  they  were  agreed  to ;  except  the 
thirteenth,  the  debate  on  which  was  adjourned :  it 
being  understood  that  a  bill  should  be,  in  the  mean 
time,  brought  in  on  the  other  resolutions,  and  that 
they  should  be  sent  to  the  Lords. 

The  thirteenth  resolution,  the  object  of  which 
professed  to  be  the  affording  of  facilities  and  encou- 
ragement to  missionaries  to  India,  was  the  subject 
of  a  separate  discussion  on  the  22nd  June.  In  open- 
ing the  debate,  Lord  Castlereagh  felt  it  necessary 
to  correct  an  erroneous  impression  that  had  gone 
abroad,  that  the  resolution  was  intended  to  encou- 
rage an  unrestrained  and  unregulated  resort  of  per- 
sons to  India  for  religious  purposes :  this  was  not  th^ 
case.  It  was  never  conceived  by  the  authors  of  the 
resolution   that  an  unrestrained  resort  of    persons  * 

with  religious  views  would  be  consonant  with  the 
tranquillity  and  security  of  the  British  possessions  in 
India;  although  they  thought  that  no  danger  could 


544  HISTORY   OF   BRITISH   INDIA. 

BOOK  I.  arise  from  allowing  a  certain  number  of  persons,  un- 
CHAP,  vm.  j^^  ^j^^  cognizance  of  the  Court  of  Directors,  who 
181  s.     were  again  controuled  by  the  Board  of  Commis- 
sioners, to  proceed  as  missionaries  to   India:  with 
this  impression  he  proposed  the  adoption  of  the  re- 
solution. 

The  principal  speaker  on  this  occasion  was  Mr. 
Wilberforce,  who  gave  utterance  to  the  sentiments 
of  the  whole  religious  party  of  the  kingdom.  He 
denied  that  the  only  object  of  the  resolution  was  to 
secure  to  such  missionaries  as  the  Board  of  Controul 
should  sanction,  permission  to  go  to  India,  and  to  re- 
main there  as  long  as  they  should  continue  to  exer- 
cise the  duties  of  their  office  in  an  orderly  and  peace- 
able manner.  Another,  perhaps  a  principal  object, 
as  expressed  in  the  words  of  the  resolution,  was  to 
enlighten  and  inform  the  minds  of  our  Indian  sub- 
jects, by  which  he  understood  their  education;  and 
from  the  diffusion  of  knowledge,  the  progress  of 
science,  and  the  circulation  of  the  Scriptures  in  the 
native  languages,  he  anticipated  even  more  than 
from  direct  missionary  exertion.  He  also  dis- 
claimed, as  preliminary  to  the  discussion,  all  inten- 
tion to  advocate  for  the  conversion  of  the  natives 
the  influence  of  Government.  With  regard  to  the 
inveteracy  and  unalterableness  of  the  prejudices  and 
superstitions  of  the  Hindus,  Mr.  Wilberforce  argued, 
from  their  submission  to  so  many  changes  in  the 
constitution  of  the  government  and  the  adminis- 
tration of  the  laws,  that  they  were  not  so  incapable 
of  adopting  new  opinions  as  had  been  represented  : 
nor  were  they  incapable  of  change,  even  in  their  re- 
ligious sentiments ;  as  was  evinced  by  the  multitude 


SPEECH   OF   BCR.  WILBERFORCE.  545 

of  IVIohammedans  who  formed  part  of  the  population,  book  i. 
and  who  must  have  originated  from  conversion ;  by  *^"^'''^"'' 
the  formation  of  a  whole  nation,  that  of  the  Sikhs,  isia. 
who  within  a  few  centuries  had  thrown  off  the  re- 
strictions of  the  Hindu  religion;  and  by  the  preva- 
lence of  numerous  sectarial  divisions  amongst  the 
Hindus  themselves :  nay,  the  work  of  CQ^ver8ion  to 
Christianity  had  been  going  on  for  the  last  century 
with  signal  success,  and  there  were  at  that  moment 
hundreds  of  thousands  of  native  Christians  in  the  East 
Indies.  So  little  were  the  Hindus  indisposed  towards 
the  doctrines  of  the  Gospel,  that  the  most  zealous, 
laborious,  and  successful  missionaries,  such  as  Swartz 
and  others,  had  been  the  most  esteemed  and  beloved 
of  all  Europeans  among  all  classes  of  natives.  In 
answer  to  the  assertions  of  those  witnesses  who  had 
vindicated  the  moral  character  of  the  Hindus,  and 
affirmed  that,  if  practicable,  it  was  not  desirable  to 
effect  their  conversion,  he  quoted  largely  from  a 
memoir  on  the  Moral  State  of  India  by  Mr. 
Grant,  from  the  opinions  of  the  judges  and  ma- 
gistrates given  in  answer  to  a  call  from  Lord  Wei- 
lesley  to  report  upon  the  moral  condition  of  the 
people,  and  from  the  Appendix  to  the  Fifth  Report, 
to  establish  the  general  depravity  of  the  people  of 
Hindustan ;  and  intimated  that  the  opinions  which 
had  been  expressed  to  the  contrary  only  proved  the 
justice  of  Burke's  sarcasm,  that  Europeans  were  com- 
monly unbaptized  on  the  passage  to  India.  The 
charge  that  he  was  bringing  an  indictment  against 
the  whole  population  of  India,  who  had  done  nothing 
to  deserve  his  enmity,  he  indignantly  repelled ;  and 
accused  those  of  being  the  worst  enemies  of  the 
VOL.  I.  2  N 


646  HISTORY  OF   BEinSH   INDIA. 

BOOK  I.  people  of  India  who  would  keep  those  miserable 
CHAP,  vm.  ^j^jjjgg  i)owed  dowii  under  the  yoke  which  oppressed 
1813.  them.  The  course  he  was  recommending  tended  as 
much  to  their  temporal  as  to  their  spiritual  advan- 
tage ;  for  the  evils  consequent  upon  the  institutions 
and  superstitions  of  the  Hindus  pervaded  the  whole 
mass  of  th%population,  and  embittered  the  domestic 
cup  in  almost  every  family.  Such  were  the  effects  of 
the  distinctions  of  caste,  which  were  more  degrading 
and  intolerable  than  the  fetters  of  West  Indian 
slavery;  of  the  practice  of  polygamy;  of  infanticide  ; 
of  the  burning  of  widows,  of  whom  ten  thousand 
were  annually  sacrificed  in  Bengal  alone ;  of  the  ob- 
scene and  bloody  rites  of  their  idolatrous  ceremonies; 
and  of  the  destruction  of  human  life,  as  instanced  in 
the  worship  of  Jagannath  in  Orissa,  in  whose  service 
it  had  been  computed,  taking  in  all  the  various  modes 
and  forms  of  destruction  connected  with  it,  that  one 
hundred  thousand  human  beings  were  annually  ex- 
pended. Mr.  Wilberforce  then  vindicated  the  char- 
acter of  Dr.  Buchanan,  and  maintained  the  accuracy 
of  his  statements ;  and  he  defended  the  conduct  of 
the  Baptist  missionaries  in  Bengal,^  and  claimed  for 
them  the  merits  of  discretion  and  moderation,  as 
much  as  for  piety  and  learning.  Tlie  statements  and 
reasonings  of  Mr.  Wilberforce  were  contradicted  by 
a  few  of  the  members ;  but  no  serious  opposition 
was  made  to  the  resolution,  and  it  passed  the 
House. 

On  the  28th  June  the  resolutions  were  presented 
to  the  House  in  the  form  of  a  Bill,  which,  however, 
was  not  to  be  suffered  to  pass  without  further  discus- 

'  See  the  preceding  chapter. 


RENEWED  DEBATE   ON   MISSIONS.  547 

sion,  although  little  of  novelty  could  be  adduced  by  book  i. 
the  speakers.  On  this  occasion  Mr.  Grant  entered  *^"^^-  ^'"- 
into  a  long  defence  of  the  Company's  government  1813. 
of  India,  in  reply  to  the  censures  pronounced  upon 
it  by  Mr.  Rickards ;  and  Mr.  Lushington  vindicated 
the  moral  character  and  the  religious  practices  of  the 
people  of  India  from  the  unqualified  and  exagger- 
ated assertions  of  Mr.  Wilberforce.  On  the  1st 
July  several  clauses  again  underwent  examination, 
but  the  thirteenth  clause  was  the  principal  topic  of 
debate.  Sir  J.  Sutton,  although  friendly  to  the 
principle  of  the  clause,  objected  to  the  open  avowal 
that  persons  were  to  be  sent  to  India  for  the  propa- 
gation of  Christianity,  as  its  only  effect  would  be 
to  alarm  and  irritate  the  feelings  of  the  people  of 
India ;  and  he  therefore  moved  as  an  amendment, 
that,  instead  of  the  expression  in  the  clause  "  for 
the  above  purposes," — the  propagation  of  Chris- 
tianity,—  it  should  be  declared  "  expedient  to 
send  persons  to  India  for  various  lawful  purposes.** 
Lord  Castlereagh  objected  to  the  amendment,  al- 
though in  the  wording  of  the  clause  he  had  endea- 
voured to  satisfy  other  feelings  than  his  own.  But 
the  clause  enacted  nothing ;  it  declared  nothing ;  it 
made  no  provisions  for  enforcing  our  religion,  or 
abolishing  that  of  the  natives  of  India :  it  simply 
gave  the  weight  and  sanction  of  Parliament  to  the 
principle ;  but,  so  far  from  taking  away  or  doing  any- 
thing to  interrupt  or  abolish  the  religion  of  the 
natives,  its  free  exercise  was  in  this  very  bill  se- 
cured to  them.  Mr.  Marsh  then  at  great  length 
replied  to  the  former  address  of  Mr.  Wilberforce. 
He  considered  the  provision  as  a  most  portentous 

2n2 


548  HISTORY   OF   BRITISH   INDIA. 

BOOK  I.  novelty  in  Indian  legislation.  In  all  former  modes 
CHAP,  vm.  ^^f  policy  for  the  government  of  India,  the  inviola- 
1813.  bility  of  the  religious  feelings  and  customs  of  the 
natives  was  considered  a  sacred  and  undisputed 
axiom :  a  departure  from  that  policy  would  shake 
our  empire  in  that  part  of  the  world  to  its  centre. 
The  natives  of  India  could  not  distinguish  between 
the  projects  of  those  who  had  worked  themselves 
up  to  a  morbid  enthusiasm  on  the  subject,  from 
plans  countenanced  by  the  authority  and  intended 
to  be  effectuated  by  the  power  of  the  state.  They 
were  too  tremblingly  sensitive  on  the  subject  of 
their  religion,  and  too  little  versed  in  the  nature  of 
parliamentary  proceedings,  to  be  able  to  separate  the 
acts  and  opinions  of  a  large  portion  of  the  country- 
acting  permissively  under  the  state,  from  the  au- 
thentic and  solemn  act  of  the  state  itself.  To  give 
a  licence  to  a  missionary  to  go  out  to  India,  was  to 
impair  the  authority  of  the  Government  abroad  to 
send  him  back  if  he  misconducted  himself;  and  the 
probability  of  his  so  doing  was  sufficiently  evinced 
by  the  dispatch  from  the  Governor-General  of  the 
2nd  November,  1807,  which  stated  several  alarming 
instances  of  misguided  and  intemperate  zeal,  and 
of  low  and  scurrilous  invective  circulated  in  the 
native  languages  against  the  feelings,  prejudices, 
and  belief  of  the  people.  Mr.  Marsh  then  entered 
into  a  detailed  argument  to  prove  that  the  mutiny 
at  Vellore,  and  the  dangerous  plots  which  were  con- 
certed in  other  parts  of  the  Peninsula,  originated  in 
an  alarm  excited  amongst  the  natives  of  their  en- 
forced conversion;  which  fears  were  confirmed  by 
the  activity  of  the  missionaries  in  the  Madras  set- 


SPEECH   OF   MB.  MARSH.  549 

tleinent,  instigated  by  the  unusual  countenance  book  i. 
which  they  had  received  for  some  time  previous  to  ^^^^'  ^^ 
the  massacre.  Was  it  possible,  he  asked,  that  the  I813. 
House  would  fall  into  such  a  fit  of  absurdity  and 
fanaticism,  or  be  visited  with  so  fatal  a  fatuity,  as 
not  to  keep  so  awful  an  event  before  them  in  the 
grave  discussion  of  matters  affecting  the  religion  of 
the  country?  Mr.  Marsh  then  proceeded  to  ques- 
tion the  practicability  of  converting  the  people  of 
India  to  Christianity  in  spite  of  the  existing  insti- 
tutions, and  particularly  that  of  caste ;  the  loss  of 
which,  consequent  upon  the  adoption  of  a  new  creed, 
subjected  the  neophyte  to  the  most  cruel  of  all 
martyrdoms — to  separation  from  all  the  sweets  of 
social  communion,  the  ties  of  friendship,  the  chari- 
ties of  kindred,  and  all  that  life  contains  to  support 
and  adorn  existence.  He  denied  that  the  mission- 
aries were  fit  engines  to  accomplish  the  greatest  re- 
volution that  had  yet  taken  place  in  the  history  of 
the  world.  He  could  not,  he  observed,  sufficiently 
admire  the  inconsistencies  and  contradictions  of 
some  of  the  most  ardent  advocates  of  the  clause; 
of  those  who  would  most  jealously  exclude  from 
India  persons  invited  thither  by  commercial  en- 
terprise, and  having  an  obvious  interest  in  carry- 
ing on  a  quiet,  prudent,  and  conciliatory  inter- 
course with  the  natives ;  and  yet  would  throw  open 
every  port  in  the  dominion  to  swarms  of  indivi- 
duals whose  nature  and  character  it  is  to  consider 
themselves  absolved  from  all  human  restraints,  and 
free  from  all  human  motives,  in  effecting  the  ob- 
jects of  their  calling.  Nay,  the  same  reasoners,  who 
would  persuade  us  that  the  Hindus  were  unsuscepti- 


550  HISTORY   OF    BRITISH   INDIA. 

BOOK  I.  ble  of  change  in  regard  to  the  use  of  European  manu- 
CHAF.  vm.  fJ^^^J.gg^  would  have  us  believe  that  they  were  ready 
1813.     eagerly  to  welcome  whatever   articles  of  spiritual 
novelty  might  be  imported.     The  doctrine,  that  the 
people  of  India  were  so  brutalized  by  the  grossness  of 
their  superstition  as  to  be  incapable  of  any  redeem- 
ing virtue,  he  denounced  as  founded  on  the  falsest 
assumption ;  and  vindicated  their  moral  and  intellec- 
tual worth  from  the  calumnies  with  which  it  had 
been  assailed  by  partial  and  prejudiced  testimony. 
The  moral  obligation  to  diffuse  Christianity,  binding 
and  authoritative  as  he  admitted  it  to  be,  vanished 
when  placed  against  the  ills  and  mischiefs  which 
were  likely  to  follow  its  application  to  India.    There 
never  was  a  moral   obligation  to  produce  war  and 
bloodshed  and   civil  disorder;  such   an   obligation 
would   not  exist,  were  the  wildest  barbarians  the 
subjects  of  the  experiment :  but  when,  in  addition 
to  considerations  sanctioned  by  justice  and  policy,  it 
was  remembered  that  the  people  we  were  so  anxious 
to  convert  were  in  the  main  a  moral  and  virtuous 
people,  not  uninfluenced  by  those  principles  of  re- 
ligion which  give  security  to  life  and  impart  conso- 
lation in  death,  the  obligation  assumed  a  contrary 
character,  and  common  sense,  reason,  and  even  reli- 
gion itself  cried  out  aloud  against  our  interference.* 
The  support  given  to  the  amendment  proposed  by 
Mr.    Marsh    necessarily    produced    a    reply    from 
Mr.   Wilberforce.     He   defended    the   missionaries 
from  the  oj)probrious  terms  which  had  been  applied 

*  Substance  of  the  Speech  of  C.  Marsh,  Esq.,  in  a  Committee  of  the 
House  of  Commons  on  the  11th  July,  1813,  revised  by  the  speaker:  Loii« 
don,  1813. 


REPLY   OF   MR.  WILBERFORCE.  551 


to  them  by  Mr.  Marsh,  and  denied  that  the  transac-  book  i. 
tions  at  Vellore  were  in  any  degree  connected  with  ^"^'*'  ^°'' 
their  proceedings.      He  had  the  authority  of  the     1813. 
Governor  of  Madras  and    the  Court  of  Directors 
for  ascribing  it  to  the  military  regulations  which 
had  been  issued,  and   the   extreme  severity  with 
which  the  manifestation  of  reluctance  to  obey  them 
had  been  punished.     The  unsoundness  of  the  con- 
clusion drawn  from  this  affair  might  inspire  a  rea- 
sonable distrust  of  the  correctness  of  the  persua- 
sions entertained  by  the  opponents  of  the  measure 
with   regard   to   the  extreme   sensitiveness  of  the 
people  of  India  in  regard  to  their  religion,  when 
the  attempt  to  convert  them  was  made  in  a  spirit  of 
conciliation,  and  when  no  other  means  were  thought 
of  but  argument  and  persuasion.     In  fact,  there  were 
two  remarkable  instances  on   record  of  successful 
endeavours  to  root  out   inveterate  and   pernicious 
practices  in  India :  the  prohibition  of  sacrificing  at 
the   change  of  every  moon   many  victims,  chiefly 
children,   to   the    river    Ganges,   which   had   been 
enacted  by  Lord  Wellesley ;  and  the  suppression  of 
infanticide  in  Guzerat,  by  the  interposition  of  Co- 
lonel Walker.     The  law  had  been  obeyed  without 
a  murmur;  the  interposition  had  brought  down  on 
Colonel  Walker  the   benedictions   of  the   people. 
One  such  instance  as  either  of  these  wbs  a  sufficient 
encouragement  to  go  forward,  prudently  and  cau- 
tiously indeed,  but  with  firmness  and  resolution. 

It  was  not  enough,  however,  to  question  the 
reality  of  the  danger  with  which  it  had  been  en- 
deavoured to  intimidate  the  friends  of  the  mission- 
ary exertions.     It  was  time,  Mr.  Wilberforce  added. 


662  HISTORY   OF   BRITISH   INDIA. 

BOOK  I.  for  him  to  speak  out,  and  to  avow  that  he  went  mucfa 
CHAF. vuL  f^j^j^^Yier  than  he  had  yet  gone;  he  maintained  not 
1818.  only  that  it  was  safe  to  attempt  by  reasonable  and 
prudent  methods  to  introduce  into  India  the  bless- 
ings of  Christian  truth,  but  that  true  imperious 
and  urgent  policy  prescribed  the  same  course.  He 
could  not  think  that  the  British  empire  in  India 
rested  on  a  secure  foundation ;  on  the  contrary,  as 
long  as  the  people  and  their  rulers  were  separated 
from  each  other  by  such  total  differences  of  senti- 
ment and  opinion  as  now  existed,  it  was  impossible 
that  the  two  should  be  united,  or  that  the  Govern- 
ment could  depend  upon  the  permanent  attach- 
ment of  its  subjects,  whatever  benefits  its  adminis- 
tration might  confer.  Would  we  deserve  their  affec- 
tion and  secure  our  power,  we  should  endeavour  to 
perpetuate  our  influence  by  the  gradual  introduc- 
tion and  establishment  of  our  own  principles  and 
opinions ;  of  our  own  laws,  institutions,  and  manners ; 
and  above  all,  as  the  source  of  every  other  im- 
provement, of  our  religion,  and  consequently  of  our 
morals.  The  illustrious  Albuquerque,  when  govern- 
or of  Goa,  forbade  the  burning  of  widows ;  and,  so 
far  was  this  from  exciting  popular  discontent,  that 
no  governor  was  ever  so  much  beloved.  Long  after 
his  death,  when  a  Moor  or  a  Hindu  had  suffered 
wrong  and  could  obtain  no  redress,  he  would  go 
to  Albuquerque's  tomb  and  make  an  offering  of  oil 
at  the  lamp  which  burned  before  it,  and  call  upon 
him  for  justice.* 

^  These  statements  rest  upon  the  authority  of  the  Commentaries  of  the 
son  of  Albuquerque,  and  were  furnished  to  Mr.  Wilberforce  by  Mr.  Soathey. 
— Substance  of  Speeches,  &c.,  p.  93. 


REPLY   OF   MR.  WILBERFORCE.  553 

But,  after  all,  what  was  demanded  ?  not  that  the  book  i. 
Legislature  should  immediately  devise  and  proceed  ^^^^[^_^ 
without  delay  to  execute  the  great  and  necessary  is  is. 
work,  but  that  it  should  not  substantially  and  in 
effect  prevent  others  from  engaging  in  it ;  or  rather 
that  the  Government  should  not  be  prevented  from 
having  it  in  its  power  to  grant  licences  to  proper 
persons  to  proceed  to  India,  and  contmue  there, 
with  a  view  to  disseminate  Christianity.  The  com- 
monest principle  of  toleration  would  grant  much 
more  than  this :  it  was  toleration  only  that  was 
asked  for ;  the  advocates  of  the  measure  disclaimed 
all  idea  of  proceeding  by  methods  of  compulsion 
or  authority.  The  amendment  that  was  now  pro- 
posed came  under  a  plausible  and  specious  appear- 
ance, which  only  rendered  it  more  dangerous.  It 
proceeded  from  a  spirit  professedly  favourable  to 
the  clause,  and  objecting  only  to  its  publicity.  On 
this  head,  however,  nothing  was  really  to  be  appre- 
hended, as  it  was  in  evidence  that  the  greatest  diflS- 
culty  existed  in  making  matters  of  the  utmost  .in- 
terest known  amongst  the  people :  news  and  infor- 
mation of  all  kinds  were  slowly  and  inaccurately 
circulated  in  India.  If  the  people  should  read  the 
clause,  which  was  extremely  improbable,  they  would 
find  in  it  expressed,  for  the  first  time  Mr.  Wilber- 
force  believed,  a  clear  recognition,  an  effectual  secu- 
rity, of  their  right  to  preserve  their  religious  prin- 
ciples and  institutions  sacred  and  inviolate ;  the 
clause  would,  therefore,  produce  satisfaction  rather 
than  discontent  on  that  very  subject  of  religion. 
Nor  would  the  object  of  the  enactment  be  effected 
merely  by  securing  the  power  of  licensing  mission- 


554  HISTORY   OF   BRITISH   INDIA. 


BOOK  I.  aries :   by  affirming  the  duty  of  enlightening  the 
CHAP.  Yin,  jjjjjjjg  g^jj J  improving  the  morals  of  our  Blast  Indian 
1818.     fellow-subjects,    it   established    the    principle,    and 
laid  the  ground  for  promoting  education  and  diffus- 
ing useful  knowledge  of  all   kinds  among  them. 
When  truth  and  reason  should  obtain  access  to  the 
understanding  of  the  natives,  they  would  reject  the 
profane  ablsurdities  of  their  theological,  and  the  de- 
praving defects  of  their  moral,  system  :    they  would 
thus  be  prepared  for  the  reception  of  Christianity. 
To  omit  the  clause  would  be  to  omit  from  the  act  all 
mention  whatever  of  religion  or  morals,  and  would 
leave  the  case  as  it  was  left  by  the  charter  of  1793, 
when,  although  the  resolutions  of  both  Houses  of  Par- 
liament fully  recognised  the  obligation  of  endeavour- 
ing to  communicate  to  the  natives  of  India  the  bless- 
ings of  Christianity,  yet,  as  it  formed  no  part  of  the 
act  of  the  Legislature,  the  body  whose  business  it  was 
to  carry  the  provisions  of  that  act  into  execution 
could  not  be  chargeable  with  neglecting  any  duty 
which   that   statute  ordained;    when,  so  far  from 
favouring,  they  rather  thwarted  and  hindered  the 
attempts  of  the  missionaries.      The  neglect  which 
was  imputable  to  the  former  House  of  Commons 
would  be  still  more  glaring  on  the  present  occasion, 
as  the  subject  had  been   brought  so  fully   to   its 
notice :  and  if,  after  all  that  had  been  urged,  the 
same  omission  took  place,  it  would  be  necessarily 
inferred  that  the  Parliament  upon  due  deliberation 
had   disapproved  of  the   project   which  had   been 
offered  by  the  advocates  of  Christianity ;  and  the 
whole  question  had  come  to  this,  that,  as  Cliristianity 
was  the  religion  of  the  British  empire  in  Europe, 


ADDITIONAL   CLAUSES   PROPOSED.  555 


the  religion  of  Brahma  and  Vishnu  was  to  be  the  book  i. 
acknowledged  system  of  our  Asiatic  opinions.^  chap,  vm. 

Some  further  discussion  ensued  upon  the  subject  isis. 
of  the  proposed  amendment,  but  it  was  rejected 
upon  a  division.  Another  attempt  was  made  to 
get  rid  of  the  clause,  upon  a  motion  made  by 
Mr.  A.  Robinson  on  the  12th  June,  when  the  re- 
port of  the  bill  was  received  from  the  Committee. 
It  was  supported  by  Mr.  Forbes  and  Mr.  Tiemey, 
and  opposed  by  Mr.  Stephen  and  Mr.  Wilberforce, 
and  rejected. 

The  main  provisions  of  the  bill  having  thus  been 
carried,  no  opposition  of  any  importance  was  made 
to  the  remaining  clauses.  Some  additional  provisions 
were  suggested :  one  by  Mr.  R.  Smith,  for  the  appro- 
priation of  a  sum  of  money  for  the  promotion  o( 
native  literature  in  the  East,  and  the  establishment 
of  a  native  college  or  colleges ;  and  Mr.  W.  Dundas 
proposed  the  appointment  of  a  Scotch  clergyman 
to  each  of  the  Presidencies,  the  majority  of  the 
British  resident  in  India  being  Scotch,  and  of  the 
Presbyterian  communion.  The  latter  proposition 
was  withdrawn,  upon  the  assurances  of  Mr.  Thornton 
and  Mr.  Grant,  members  of  the  Direction,  that  the 
East  India  Company  would  do  not  only  what  was 
necessary,  but  all  that  could  be  required  for  the 
maintenance  in  India  of  clergymen  of  the  Church 
of  Scotland.  A  clause  was  proposed  by  Mr.  P. 
Moore  to  enable  the  servants  of  the  Company  who 
had  resided  ten  years  in  India  to  come  to  England 

*  Substance  of  the  Speeches  of  W.  Wilberforce,  Esq.,  on  the  clause  in 
the  East  India  Bill  for  promoting  the  religious  instruction  of  the  natives 
of  India,  on  the  22nd  of  June,  and  1st  and  12th  of  July,  1813,  published  by 
the  speaker:  London,  1813. 


556  HISTORY  OF   BRITISH   INDIA. 


BOOK  I.  and  return  to  India,  retaining  their  rank  in  the  ser- 
"^'''  ^"^'  vice,  without  the  customary  form  of  receiving  per- 
1813.  mission  from  the  Proprietors ;  but  this  was  objected 
to  by  Lord  Castlereagh,  on  the  ground  that  it  was 
not  the  policy  of  the  Government  to  multiply  facili- 
ties for  the  return  of  the  Company's  most  experienced 
servants  to  England.  An  attempt  was  made  to 
delay  the  third  reading  of  the  report  until  the  Pro- 
prietors of  East  India  stock  should  have  had  time 
to  read  and  consider  the  bill  in  its  amended  shape. 
Lord  Castlereagh,  however,  considered  that  any 
delay  would  subject  the  House  to  inconvenience  at 
so  advanced  a  period  of  the  season,  and  the  bill 
accordingly  was  read  and  passed. 

The  resolutions  adopted  by  the  House  of  Com- 
mons were  communicated  to  the  House  of  Lords  on 
the  17th  June,  and  went  through  similar  stages. 
They  were  introduced  by  the  Earl  of  Buckingham- 
shire, and  supported  principally  by  Lords  Liverpool 
and  Melville ;  and  opposed  by  Lord  Grenville,  Earl 
Grey,  the  Marquis  of  Lansdowne,  and  the  Earl  of 
Lauderdale,  the  latter  of  whom  recorded  a  strong 
protest  against  the  passing  of  the  bill.  The  sub- 
ject had  undergone  a  fuller  discussion  at  an  earlier 
period  of  the  session,  on  the  9th  April,  upon  the 
motion  of  Marquis  Wellesley  for  various  papers, 
chiefly  illustrative  of  the  financial  and  commercial 
condition  of  the  Company  prior  to  1812.  On  this 
occasion  the  Marquis  regretted  that  the  matter  had 
not  been  submitted  to  Parliament  at  a  time  and 
under  circumstances  more  fitted  to  its  magnitude, 
before  passion  and  prejudice  had  perplexed  and  in- 
terrupted the  course  of  calm  deliberation;  before. 


SPEECH   OF   LORD   WELLESLEY.  557 

on   the   one  hand,   an   idea  had   gone  forth  that  book  i. 

CHAP*  VIIl* 

the  Government  of  the  East  India  Company  was___l_ 
incapahle  of  improvement,  or,  on  the  other,  a  wild  I8I8. 
and  frantic  notion  had  been  set  afloat  of  throw- 
ing open  the  whole  trade  to  India.  The  principles 
of  political  economy,  however  true  in  the  abstract, 
were  inapplicable  to  a  case  so  complex  as  that  of 
the  Company,  in  which  commercial  and  sovereign 
interests  were  intimately  blended  by  the  manner  in 
which  they  had  grown  up  together.  Such  a  com- 
bination might  be  anomalous,  but  it  was  practically 
good :  it  ought  not  to  be  altered  merely  on  account 
of  its  anomalous  character. 

Lord  Wellesley  then  advocated  the  continuation 
of  the  Company's  commercial  privilege  of  exclusive 
trade  to  India  as  well  as  to  China.  It  might  be 
true,  although  he  did  not  admit  the  fact  to  the 
extent  to  which  it  had  been  asserted,  that  the 
former  was  attended  with  loss ;  but  it  did  not  there- 
fore follow  that  it  ought  to  be  taken  away :  it  was 
very  possible  for  one  branch  of  an  extensive  com- 
merce to  be  less  profitable  than  others,  and  yet  the 
connexion  between  them  be  so  intimate  that  its 
discontinuance  would  expose  the  whole  to  ruin. 
This  was  the  case  with  the  Company ;  and  the  Indian 
trade  was  equally  essential  to  the  maintenance  of 
their  commerce  with  China,  and  of  the  political 
administration  of  the  government  of  India.  Nor 
was  it  less  essential  to  the  interests  of  Great  Britain 
that  the  trade  with  India  should  be  subject  to  re- 
striction ;  as,  if  it  were  thrown  open,  he  was  certain 
the  products  of  the  Indian  loom  would  supplant 
the  cotton  manufactures  of  the  country  in  all  the 


658 


HISTORY   OF    BRITISH   INDIA. 


BOOK^i.  foreign  markets,  and  would  essentially  interfere  even 

CHAP    VIII  ____ 

'  with  their  domestic  consumption.  The  questions 
1818.  then  were,  What  had  been  the  effects  of  the  com- 
bination of  powers  ?  were  they  so  mischievous  as  to 
require  a  total  change,  or  so  beneficial  as  to  deserve 
careful  and  considerate  improvement?  In  his  opi- 
nion, there  never  was  an  organ  of  Government  so 
administered  as  to  demand  more  of  estimation  than 
the  East  India  Company:  that  administration  had 
been  productive  of  strength,  tranquillity,  and  hap- 
piness ;  the  arts  of  peace  and  agriculture  now  flon- 
rished  where  ruin  and  desolation  had  prevailed  ;  the 
situation  of  the  natives  had  been  ameliorated,  and 
the  rights  of  property  secured,  by  the  permanent 
settlement,  the  extension  of  which,  in  due  season,  to 
other  provinces  than  those  in  which  it  had  been 
established  was  alone  wanting  to  its  entire  success. 
No  Government  had  better  fulfilled  its  duties  to- 
wards its  subjects  than  that  of  India. 

Lord  Wellesley  then  criticised  the  several  reso- 
lutions seriatim.  Of  the  first  he  remarked,  that  the 
exceptions  it  provided  for,  not  only  impaired,  but 
destroyed,  the  whole  benefit  of  the  grant :  of  the 
third,  that  allowing  British  subjects  to  trade  with 
India,  was  of  a  similar  tendency ;  and  that  the  unre- 
stricted influx  of  Europeans  involved  great  danger 
to  the  stability  of  the  Government  and  the  happi- 
ness of  the  people.  The  power  of  sending  back 
unlicensed  persons,  now  exercised  by  the  Govern- 
ment, could  not  co-exist  with  a  free  trade ;  nor  could 
individuals  engaged  in  the  trade  be  limited  to  the 
Presidencies.  They  would  have  a  right  to  seek  for 
a  market  in  the  interior;  and,  once  scattered  over 


SPEECH    OF   LORD   WELLESLEY.  559 

the  country,  tliey  would  endanger  the  efficacy  of  book  i. 
the  Government,  and  outrage  the  prejudices  and  ^"^^'  ^"'' 
habits  of  the  natives.  *  isis. 

The  extension  of  the  import  trade  to  the  out- 
ports.  Lord  Wellesley  insisted,  was  objectionable  on 
various  grounds :  the  danger  of  interference  with 
the  national  manufactures,  the  additional  expense 
and  difficulty  of  guarding  against  illicit  speculation, 
and  the  injuries  it  would  produce  upon  the  com- 
merce and  the  shipping  of  the  port  of  London.  If 
the  question  were  one  of  a  free  trade  in  the  true 
sense  of  the  word,  he  would  not  oppose  it ;  but  if 
the  House  could  not  give  freedom  of  trade  with- 
out injuring  great  political  rights,  and  without  de- 
strojdng  vast  capitals  which  had  been  expended  on 
the  undoubted  understanding  and  good-faith  of  the 
existing  system,  they  could  not  be  justified  in  acced- 
ing to  the  measure. 

His  lordship  then  proceeded  to  notice  what  he 

1  Lord  Wellesley *8  advocacy  of  the  Company's  retention  of  their  Indian 
trade  was,  in  spirit  at  least,  a  wide  departure  from  the  sentiments  he  had 
formerly  expressed,  when  he  affirmed  ''  that  the  interests  of  the  Company 
and  of  the  British  nation  were  undivided  and  inseparable  with  relation  to 
this  important  question,  and  that  every  principle  of  justice  and  policy  de- 
manded the  utmost  possible  fiicility  to  the  British  merchants  in  India  for 
the  export  of  Indian  merchandise  beyond  the  amount  of  the  investment  which 
the  Company's  capital  was  able  to  provide  for  ;  and  for  which  branch  of 
commerce,  if  capital  did  not  exist  in  India,  no  dangerous  consequences 
could  result  from  applying  to  it  fundu  derived  from  Great  Britain."  Bene- 
ficial consequences,  he  affirmed,  would  certainly  result  to  the  British  em- 
pire in  India  from  any  considerable  increase  of  its  active  capital.  The 
extension  of  the  trade  would  not,  he  argued,  necessarily  produce  a  propor^ 
tional  augmentation  in  the  number  of  British  agents  resorting  to  India  ;  and, 
if  it  should,  the  local  Government  would  controul  their  operations  with 
more  ease  than  it  could  those  of  foreign  agents  to  whom  the  trade  was  then 
open.  The  noble  writer  was  obliged,  by  his  position,  to  insert  some  saving 
clauses  regarding  the  preservation  of  the  Company's  exclusive  privileges, 
but  his  main  object  was  decidedly  to  vindicate  at  that  period  the  policy 
of  giving  ample  space  and  verge  enough  to  private  commerce. —  Letter 
from  the  Marquis  Wellesley  to  the  Court  of  Directors,  SOth  Sept.  1800; 
printed  London,  1812. 


Sif^  HlffraBSr   OF  BKITifiH  miUu 

BOOK  I.  tegvtled  as  cauffiffioiffi  in  'die  resolutaanfi.  He  liad 
^»^'  *^"^  jaever  ^voeated  the  fiqiarstiaD  of  liie  ronrml  audio- 

""  i^u.     '^tv  from  that  of  tbe  CompaDj.  bat  lie  -diou^^  that 

aouie  improvesueut  wbb  required :  a  most  ^Bsentia] 

/  point  nafi,  that  the  local  Garemmente  «hofiild  know 

^  to  whom  tiiier  were  renpooffihle.    Tbe  inBtmctiaifi 

aaitt  out  to  them,  however  imiiortaiit,  were  now 
liable  W  be  diwvowed  at  pksssure;  tiiere  wk  no 
proritioD  for  this  puipose.    Not  a  word  wm  sud 

>  <of  the  ariBj^  exeept  as  re^iardad  tlie  quota  of  Ki^g^a 

troops ;  but  he  thought  it  highli-  enential  to  define 
a  littiJt  between  einl  and  militaiT  duties,  br  wluck 
all  dilfieuities  and  di^fmies  might  be  avoided ;  and  he 
eouAAdred  ako  that  it  was  the  dutr  <^  the  GoTem- 
meut  to  derive  some  means  of  ooaferring  honours  on 
the  Compan/s  oflk^ers,  who  were  now  held  for- 
ward  to  the  public  much  less  frequentlj  than  offieeia 
in  other  parts  of  the  worid^  and  felt  that  honours 
and  distiuetions  conferred  for  senioes  not  more  me- 
ritrmous  than  their  own  were  withheld  from  them. 
Whilst  approving  of  tbe  proposed  addition  to  the 
ecclesiastical  establishment^  be  thought  it  important 
trj  take  care  that  there  should  be  no  collif;ion  be- 
tween the  Government  and  the  Church  establish- 
ment With  regard  to  their  respective  powers ;  and  he 
was  suqirised  to  find  that  nothing  had  been  said 
regarding  tlie  education  of  either  the  civil  or  mili- 
tary servants  of  the  Company.  He  thought  it  would 
l>e  the  most  dignified  and  proper  mode  of  combining 
religion  with  learning  in  India,  as  we  were  accus- 
t^imed  to  see  the  association  in  England,  by  connect- 
ing the  proposed  Church  establishment  with  the 
College  of  Fort  William- 


SPEECH   OF    LORD   WELLESLEY.  561 

With  respect  to  extending  Christianity  to  the  na-  book  i. 
tives  of  the  East,  Lord  Wellesley  declared  there  was  '^"^''-  ^'"' 
no  person  less  willing  than  himself  to  throw  a  shade  isis. 
over  so  bright  a  prospect ;  but,  if  success  was  to  be 
expected,  it  must  proceed  from  temperate  and  gra- 
dual proceedings :  the  measure  should  not  appear  to 
be  recommended  by  the  authority  of  the  Govern- 
ment, because  in  the  East  the  recommendation  of 
the  ruler  is  supposed  to  be  almost  equivalent  to  a 
mandate.  He  never  heard  when  in  India  of  any 
danger  from  the  missionaries :  he  had  always  consi- 
dered those  who  were  there  in  his  time  as  a  quiet, 
orderly,  discreet,  and  learned  body ;  and  he  had  em- 
ployed many  of  them  in  the  education  of  youth,  and 
in  translating  the  Scriptures  into  the  languages  of 
the  East.  He  had  regarded  it  as  his  duty  to  have 
the  Scriptures  translated,  to  give  the  natives  access 
to  the  fountains  of  divine  truth.  He  thought  that 
a  Christian  Governor  could  not  have  done  less,  and 
he  knew  that  a  British  Governor  ought  not  to  do 
more.  In  conclusion,  he  observed,  that  if  a  project 
had  been  formed  for  the  complete  demolition  of  the 
Company,  and  the  creation  of  an  entirely  new  sys- 
tem, the  plan  might  have  been  called  bold  and  de- 
cisive; but  in  the  scheme  now  proposed  no  such 
vigour  was  to  be  traced.  The  Company  was  to  be 
continued  as  the  organ  and  instrument,  without  any 
power  or  authority,  and  was  to  be  called  upon  to 
discharge  duties  which  it  was  incapacitated  from  per- 
forming :  no  commensurate  advantage  was  offered  to 
the  country ;  the  revenues  would  be  endangered,  the 
manufactures  be  perhaps  ruined,  and  no  additional 
benefit  could  be  derived  from  an  oi)en  trade.     He 

VOL.  I.  2  o 


562  HISTOBY   OF   BRITISH   INDIiL 

BOOK  I.  therefore  felt  it  his  duty  to  resist  any  general  alter- 

cHAF.  vm.  ^^i^jj  q£  ^j^g  system ;  and  in  order  to  place  his  views 

1813.     in  the  clearest  light,  and  support  them  by  £a.ctSy  he 

called  for  various  documents  necessary  to  elucidate 

the  subject. 

The  Earl  of  Buckinghamshire,  in  reply  to  Lord 
Wellesley's  objections  to  a  free  trade^  quoted  the 
dispatch  written  by  the  latter  as  Governor-General 
in  1800,  when  he  had  strenuously  urged  the  enlarge- 
ment of  the  private  trade,  and  denied  that  any 
great  influx  of  Europeans  was  likely  to  arise  from  it, 
or  the  impossibility  of  maintaining  an  effectual  con- 
troul  over  their  proceedings  even  if  their  number 
should  increase.  If  such  were  the  opinions  of  the 
noble  lord  when  he  was  Governor-General  of  India, 
he  could  scarcely  expect  to  excite  in  the  minds  of 
the  members  of  that  House  an  apprehension  of  dan- 
gers which  did  not  alarm  him  in  the  responsible 
situation  he  then  held.  Lord  Buckinghamshire 
then  repeated  the  arguments  used  in  the  other 
House,  maintaining  the  probable  increase  of  the 
import  trade  from  India,  the  practicability  of  pro- 
viding against  smuggling;  and  concluded  by  anti- 
cipating no  results  injurious  to  the  Company,  but 
substantial  benefits  to  the  great  interests  of  the 
commerce  of  the  United  Kingdom. 

The  Earl  of  Buckinghamshire  was  followed  by 
Lord  Grenville,  who  took  a  view  of  the  subject  dif- 
fering from  those  of  both  the  preceding  speakers. 
The  present  deliberations  of  the  House  embraced 
the  whole  question  of  our  future  relations  with 
India,  the  government  of  a  vast  empire,  and  the 
regulation  of  the  British  commerce  with  every  port 


SPEECH   OF   LORD   GRfilTVlLLE.  563 

and  country  between  the  southern  promontories  of  book  i. 
Africa  and  America.     It  was  a  deception  to  speak  ^^^^'  ^'"' 


of  any  existing  rights  by  which  a  consideration  so  isis. 
immense  and  momentous  could  be  circumscribed. 
The  charter  of  the  East  India  Company  was  origin- 
ally granted,  and  had  since  been  renewed,  for  limited 
periods.  On  their  lapse  the  trusts  and  duties  of 
that  great  corporation,  its  commercial  and  political 
monopolies,  expired  together.  All  public  right,  all 
public  interest  in  the  subject,  thenceforth  devolved 
on  British  legislature,  bound  by  no  previous  grant, 
fettered  by  no  existing  law,  and  having  regard  only 
to  the  principles  of  moral  duty,  and  to  the  rules  of  a 
wise  policy  and  enlightened  government. 

The  measures  that  had  been  heretofore  adopted 
Lord  Grenville  considered  as  experiments  which 
had  not  always  been  successful,  and  which  furnished 
no  precedent  for  the  course  now  to  be  pursued. 
Whatever  was  to  be  done  was  not  therefore  to  be 
placed  out  of  the  reach  of  revisal,  even  for  the  pe- 
riod proposed :  twenty  years  would  at  any  time  be 
too  long  a  period  for  farming  out  the  commerce  of 
half  the  globe,  and  the  sovereignty  of  sixty  millions 
of  men ;  and  it  was  still  more  so  at  a  season  when 
the  events,  not  of  twenty  years,  but  of  the  next 
twenty  months,  might  be  decisive  of  the  whole  fate 
and  fortunes  of  the  British  empire.  He  therefore 
thought  that  the  continuance  of  any  plan  that 
might  be  devised  should  be  limited  to  the  return  of 
peace. 

Lord  Grenville  then  proceeded  to  assert  that  the 
primary  object  to  be  regarded  in  the  present  ar- 
rangement was,  not  the  confirmation  of  the  Com- 

2o  2 


564 


HISTORY   OF   BRITISH    INDIA. 


1813. 


BOOK  I.  pany's  privileges,  but  the  distinct  avowal  of  the 
cHAP.vui.  principle  that  the  sovereignty  of  India  resided  in 
the  sovereign  of  Great  Britain.  To  ask  whether  any 
territory,  dominion,  or  political  authority  in  any 
quarter  of  the  globe  could  be  conquered  by  British 
arms,  or  acquired  by  British  negociation,  otherwise 
than  to  the  British  Crown,  were  to  ask  whether  we 
lived  under  a  monarchy  or  a  republic.  The  as- 
sertion, because  it  was  undeniable,  was  not  indif- 
ferent. A  manly  avowal  of  the  sovereignty  of  the 
Crown  would  have  prevented  many  of  the  evils  ex- 
perienced in  India  from  conflicting  and  ambiguous 
authority,  was  necessary  for  the  effective  controul  of 
British  subjects  in  India,  and  still  more  for  the  re- 
straints to  which,  upon  the  restoration  of  peace, 
foreign  nations  would  be  exposed  in  their  inter- 
course with  that  country,  as  thev  would  never  submit 
to  be  excluded   from  f^  rr  access  at  the  will  of  a 


trading  company,  clai 

'lespotic  power  over 

vast  empire,  not  as  i 

utes  of  their  own  1 

but  as  the  pretended 

«f  a  deposed  31 

a  feigned  authority  i\ 

kn  nn  extinc^'t  ^ 

nioup 

The  sovertiiguty  vrlii* 

itllUMl  to  M 

we  were  nf*w  n^-T  ^r^  n   ; 

ifS  l^nTlm 

wa*^     ' '^  HI"'*    ^i'  - 

-  ir^  n 

AlA                            '  \i<'   I  i^ 

^ 

tha\                  ^'\  ^M- 

1 

rests^^^M 

p.  ,!  1  : 

happin^^H 

'M^  "^^^^^^1 

been  pro^B 

*t^^^H^^^^H 

the  interests  ^ 

plan  of  the  Miji, 

SPEECH   OF   LORD   ORENYILLE.  565 

Lord  Wellesley  had  in  view  the  entire  or  partial  book  i. 
perpetuation  of  the  privileges  of  the  East  India  ^^^^'^^' 
Company.     To  neither  of  these  would  he  give  his     isis. 
concurrence. 

The  existence  of  the  blended  character  of  mer- 
chant and  sovereign,  on  which  the  whole  of  the 
Indian  system  was  based,  was,  in  Lord  Grenville's 
opinion,  an  anomaly  inconsistent  with  all  sound 
principles  of  commerce  and  of  government :  no 
sovereign  ever  traded  for  a  profit ;  no  trading  com- 
pany ever  yet  administered  government  for  the  hap- 
piness of  its  subjects.  The  unerring  principles  of 
political  economy  had  nevei*  been  so  fully  illus- 
trated as  in  the  history  of  the  East  India  Company. 
For  fifty  years  they  had  exercised  dominion  over  a 
country  the  commerce  with  which  had  from  the 
earliest  ages  enriched  all  who  had  engaged  in  it, 
and  in  the  last  few  years  since  the  renewal  of  the 
charter  they  had  lost  by  their  trade  four  millions 
sterling.  With  the  country  which  they  governed 
they  lost  by  the  commerce  which  they  monopo- 
lised; and  they  traded  with  profit  only  to  China, 
where  they  had  neither  sovereignty  nor  monopoly, 
— ^not  even  the  common  benefit  of  free  access,  being 
condemned  to  a  commercial  quarantine  in  the  soli- 
tary emporium  of  Canton. 

But  it  was  not  so  much  for  its  own  sake,  it  was 
asserted,  that  the  commerce  of  the  Company  was  not 
to  be  interfered  with ;  but  because  its  preservation 
was  absolutely  necessary  to  enable  the  Company  to 
conduct  the  government  of  India,  and  this  govern- 
ment could  only  be  beneficially  administered  through 
their  instrumentality.     This  Lord  Grenville  denied. 


666  HISTORY   OF    BRITISH   INDIA. 

BOOK  I.  If  it  was  true  that  British  India  was  in  the  happy 
^^^•^"^  and  prosperous  state  in  which  it  was  described  to  be, 
1813.  the  merit  was  not  due  to  the  Company's  administra^ 
tion:  as  long  as  that  continued  uncontrouled,  scarcely 
aji  interval  of  three  years  could  be  found  in  which 
the  inherent  vices  of  the  system  did  not  forcibly 
compel  the  interposition  of  Parliament.  The  law  of 
1784  was  the  source  of  whatever  benefits  India  bad 
enjoyed :  it  was  the  line  of  demarcation  between  the 
bad  and  good  government  of  that  country.  It  was 
a  delusion,  therefore,  to  relinquish  any  just  hopes  of 
extending  the  commerce  of  the  country,  from  the 
fear  of  embarrassing  the  Company's  political  function. 
He  was  ready  to  admit,  however,  that,  if  the  pa- 
tronage of  the  Company  were  transferred  to  the 
Crown,  it  must  weigh  down  the  balance  of  the  con- 
stitution ;  but  he  thought  it  very  possible  to  devise  a 
middle  course.  The  highest  offices  of  the  Grovemment 
of  India  were  already  in  the  gift  of  the  Crown.  For 
all  the  servants  of  the  Company,  civil  or  military, 
below  the  Council,  the  regulations  actually  in  force 
might  still  be  continued ;  and  all  that  remained  for 
disposal  was  the  appointment  of  writers  and  cadets. 
The  former  might  be  chosen  by  competition  from 
the  great  public  schools  and  universities :  the  latter 
might  be  nominated,  by  some  fixed  course  of  succes- 
sion, from  the  families  of  officer^  who  had  fallen  in 
the  discharge  of  their  duties.  These  were  mere  sug- 
gestions; but  he  entertained  no  doubt  that,  if  the 
occasion  should  call  for  such  provisions,  they  might 
be  so  contrived  as  to  preserve  the  integrity  and 
efficacy  of  the  Indian  services,  without  adding  in  the 
slightest  degree  to  ministerial  Influence. 


SPEECH   OF   LORD   GRENVILLE.  567 

Lord  Grrenville  next  maintained  that  the  conti-  book  i. 
nuance  of  the  Company's  trade  was  not  expedient  ^^^^'  "^^ 
for  the  sake  of  effecting  remittances  to  meet  the  de-  isis. 
mands  payable  in  England  on  account  of  the  Go- 
vernment in  India.  If  a  subsidy  were  wanted  for 
the  Continent,  the  Ministers  would  never  think  of 
sending  their  agents  to  the  ports  and  manufactories 
to  purchase  the  goods  in  which  the  remittances 
would  really  be  made:  they  would  contract  as 
cheaply  as  they  could ;  probably  by  open  compe- 
tition with  merchants  for  their  bills,  through  which 
their  whole  purpose  would  be  at  once  effected.  A 
similar  course  might  be  pursued  in  India.  No 
doubt,  all  such  remittances  must  be  in  some  degree 
detrimental  to  the  prosperity  of  India,  constituting 
a  drain  for  which  no  return  was  made  but  in  pro- 
tection and  good  government ;  yet,  if  conducted 
through  an  open  trade,  and  regulated  by  a  due  con- 
sideration of  the  state  of  the  country,  he  saw  no 
reason  to  believe  them  incompatible  with  its  rapid 
and  permanent  improvement.  One  obvious  com- 
pensation, however,  to  India,  was  to  throw  her 
markets  open  to  British  capital  and  enterprise ;  and 
secure  to  her,  as  far  as  legislation  could  secure  it, 
the  fullest  benefit  of  the  most  unqualified  commer- 
cial freedom. 

The  arguments  against  opening  the  trade,  on  the 
grounds  that  it  was  unsusceptible  of  profit  or  exten- 
sion, were  then  combated  by  the  noble  earl.  The 
skill  and  vigilance  of  the  private  trade  would  realise 
a  profit,  where  the  Company's  management  entailed 
a  loss :  the  private  trade,  under  all  the  disadvantages 
under  which  it  laboured,  had  augmented ;  and  the 


568  HISTORY    OF   BRITISH  INDIA. 

BOOK  I.  Americans  had  carried  on  a  lucrative  and  growing 
CHAP.  VIII.  cQjnmerce  with  India  until  it  was  interrupted  by  hos- 
1813.  tilities.  All  history  showed  that  commerce  would 
increase  by  commerce,  and  industry  by  industry. 
India  was  no  exception  to  the  universal  law;  and  her 
people  would  derive  from  the  extension  of  trade,  as 
every  other  people  had  done,  new  comforts  and  new 
conveniences  of  life,  new  incitements  to  industry,  and 
new  enjoyments,  in  just  reward  of  increased  activity 
and  entei-prise.  The  same  principles  applied  to  the 
trade  with  China,  the  exclusive  possession  of  which 
by  the  Company  he  should  as  deeply  lament. 

Alluding  to  the  tone  adopted  in  the  Fifth  Report 
when  speaking  of  the  permanent  settlement.  Lord 
Grenville  expressed  his  entire  concurrence  with 
Lord  Wellesley  in  the  wisdom  and  benevolence  of 
the  arrangement,  and  his  dread  of  the  disposition 
intimated  by  the  language  of  the  report,  if  not  to 
discredit  the  original  measure,  at  least  to  discoun- 
tenance its  proposed  extension.  He  thought  it, 
therefore,  highly  necessary  to  insert  in  the  new  act 
a  declaration  of  the  principle,  such  as  it  was  declared 
in  1784;  and  to  place  the  Government  of  India 
under  the  obligation  of  applying,  at  a  convenient 
season,  to  the  Ceded  and  Conquered  provinces  the 
system  of  settlement  effected  in  Bengal.  Above  all 
he  wished,  by  a  solemn  and  authoritative  declaration 
of  this  purpose,  to  prove  to  the  natives  the  per- 
manency of  the  principle  of  right,  and  to  impress 
them  with  a  conviction  that  a  British  Legislature 
estimated  the  security  of  their  property  far  above 
the  possible  increase  of  its  own  revenue. 

Lord  Grenville  then  briefly  adverted  to  the  diffi- 


SPEECH   OF   LORD   OEENVILLE.  569 

cutties  attending  the  military  part  of  the  Indian  book  i. 
system ;  the  only  remedy  for  which  he  conceived  to  ^"^''-  ^"^ 


be  the  open  establishment  of  the  King's  authority     1813. 
over  that,  as  well  as  other  parts  of  his  dominion : 
to  the  defects  of  the  administration  of  justice,  the 
state  of  the  present  internal  legislation  and  police, 
and  the  unauthorised  power  of  taxation  in  the  local 
Governments,  all  of  which  required  deliberate  con- 
sideration :    and  he  concluded  by  pronouncing  an 
unqualified  encomium  on  Marquis  Wellesley's  col- 
legiate institution,  the  plan  of  which  was  limited 
and  mutilated,  and  existed  only  as  a  wreck  of  its 
first  noble  design.     Of  the  establishment  by  which 
it  was  partially  replaced  in  England  he  spoke  with 
strong  disapprobation  and  regret:  not  that  he  ob- 
jected  to   any  degree  of  attention  that  could  be 
given  to  the  earliest  instruction  and  discipline  of 
those  who  are  destined  for  the  Indian  service ;  but 
he  objected  decidedly  to  their  separation  in  edu- 
cation from  youths  of  their  own  age  and  station  in 
life,  and  to  the  formation  of  them  into  a  separate 
class.     Instead  of  rejecting,  they  should,  he  thought, 
have  eagerly  embraced  the  advantages  which  the 
great  public  seminaries  afforded ;  not  only  for  what 
they  professed  to  teach,  but  for  what  was  there  only 
to  be  found,  that  best  of  all  education  to  a  public 
man,  which  forms  the  mind  to  manly  exertion  and 
honourable  feeling, — the  education  which  young  men 
receive  from  each  other  in  the  numerous  and  mixed 
society  of  their  equals,  collected  from  various  classes 
of  society,  and  destined  to  various  ways  of  life.* 

'  Speech  of  Lord  Grenville  on  the  Marquis  of  Wellesley's  motion  in  the 
House  of  Lords  on  Friday  the  9th  of  April,  1819  ;  published  under  the  re- 
▼isal  of  the  speaker,  London,  1813. 


570  Hll^rORY   OF   BRITISH   INDIA. 


BOOK  I.       The  Earl  of  Liverpool  briefly  replied  in  defence 
CHAP.VHL  ^£>  ^^^  resolutions,  and  the  House  agreed  to   the 
1818,     motion  for  papers  made  by  Marquis  Wellesley.* 

The  passing  of  the  bill  by  the  House  of  Commons, 
and  the  certainty  that  it  would  suffer  no  material, 
if  any,  changes  in  the  House  of  Iiords,  imposed  upon 
the  Court  of  Directors  the  necessity  of  submitting  to 
their  constituents  the  alternative  of  either  accepting 
or  refusing  the  charter  now  offered.  They  resolved 
to  recommend  its  acceptance  ;  as,  although  it  in- 
volved changes  which  they  had  firmly  opposed,  and 
which  could  not  but  be  injurious  to  the  Company's 
trade  with  India,  yet,  in  the  retention  of  the  exclu- 
sive trade  with  China,  and  the  provisions  made  for 
the  payment  of  the  Company's  dividends,  it  pre- 
sented sources  of  profit  and  security  which  might  in 
some  degree  compensate  for  the  losses  which  it  in- 
flicted. The  wild  and  sanguine  expectations  of  an 
indefinite  extension  of  the  trade  had  been  so  far  sub- 
dued by  the  arguments  of  the  Court  and  the  general 
voice  of  men  of  Indian  experience,  that  the  mer- 
chants were  likely  to  embark  in  it  with  caution  and 
moderation :  consequently  there  was  less  reason  than 
at  first  to  apprehend  a  sudden  and  numerous  influx 
of  Europeans  into  India,  by  which  its  tranquillity 
would  be  endangered ;  or  of  a  great  resort  of  vessels 
to  the  Eastern  seas,  by  which  a  mischievous  and  illi- 
cit trade  with  China  might  be  carried  on.  The  regu- 
lations respecting  the  size  of  the  ships  admissible 
into  the  trade,  the  licensing  of  persons  to  proceed  to 
India,  and  the  additional  powers  of  controul  over 
them  when   in  India,   vested  in  the  local  Govem- 

1  Pari.  Debates  in  the  House  of  Lords,  9th  April,  181S. 


FINAL   VIEWS   OF   THE   COURT   OF   DIRECTORS.  571 


ments,  were  farther  calculated  to  alleviate  these  ap-  book  i. 
prehensions.     The  fears  of  the  Court  for  the  secu- 


CBAP.  vm. 


rity  of  the  dividend,  on  which,  as  had  been  repeat-  I813. 
edly  urged,  the  Company's  eflSciency  for  the  dis- 
charge of  their  political  functions  depended,  had 
been  proportionably  abated:  on  this  latter  sul]gect 
the  first  views  of  the  Ministers  had  been  materially 
modified  by  the  representations  of  the  Court. 

By  the  engagements  finally  adopted  the  commer- 
cial profits  of  the  Company  were  not  to  be  liable 
for  any  territorial  payment  until  the  dividend  was 
first  satisfied;  and,  if  in  any  year  the  fund  for  the 
dividend  should  fall  short,  the  surplus  of  territorial 
income  for  the  year  preceding  was  to  be  liable  for 
the  deficiency.  By  the  last  charter  a  million  ster- 
ling per  annum  was  to  be  reserved  from  the  surplus 
revenue  as  a  provision  for  the  Company's  invest- 
ment; a  condition  wholly  nugatory,  as  no  surplus 
existed.  By  the  present  it  was  stipulated  that  a 
sum  equal  to  the  disbursements  at  home  on  territo- 
rial account  should  be  paid  yearly  out  of  the  reve- 
nues for  investment ;  and  this  secured  to  the  Com- 
pany commercial  capital  in  India  to  an  equal  amount, 
in  addition  to  the  proceeds  of  goods  and  stores  ex- 
ported from  England.  With  regard,  also,  to  the 
amount  of  Indian  debt  transferred  home,  the  bill 
contained  an  important  provision ;  that,  in  case  suffi- 
cient funds  should  not  remain  after  payment  of  the 
dividend  to  dischai^e  all  such  bills  as  should  be 
drawn  for  the  interest  of  loans  contracted  in  India 
before  the  10th  April,  1814,  the  residue  of  those 
bills  should  be  discharged  in  such  manner  as  Par- 
liament should  from  time  to  time  direet.     In  all 


572  HISTORY    OF    BRITISH   INDIA. 

BOOK  I.  these  respects,  therefore,  the  security  of  the  divi- 
CHAP,  vm.  ^gjjj^  Qf  ^]^Q  home  funds,  and  of  annual  advances  in 
1813.     India  for  the  investment,  the  new  charter  might  be 
considered  an  improvement  on  that  which  the  Com- 
pany held. 

The  additional  powers  of  controul  vested  in  the 
Board  of  Commissioners  by  the  bill  were  no  doubt 
mortifying  to  the  Court  of  Directoi-s ;  but  they  mostly 
fell  within  the  scope  of  the  general  powers  given  to 
the  Board  by  former  acts,  and  their  operation  would 
depend  upon  the  spirit  in  which  they  were  exer- 
cised. If  that  spirit  were  temperate  and  just,  it 
would  be  practicable  to  carry  on  the  Company's 
business :  if  they  were  used  in  a  way  which  men  of 
character  and  liberal  feeling  could  not  brook,  the 
issue  might  be  serious  to  the  system  of  the  Com- 
pany. 

Upon  a  careful  consideration  then  of  the  compa- 
rative advantages  and  disadvantages  of  the  bill,  the 
Court,  although  they  deeply  felt  the  loss  of  power 
and  privilege  which  it  inflicted  upon  the  Company, 
recommended  to  the  Proprietors  to  accept  the  char- 
ter; trusting  that  if  obstacles  to  its  execution  should 
arise,  and  the  Company  be  unable,  after  a  fair  trial 
should  have  been  given  to  it,  to  act  under  its  pro- 
visions, the  Parliament  which  had  prescribed  the 
terms  would  be  disposed  to  relieve  them  of  the 
burthen.  Should  such  relief  not  be  given,  the  Com- 
pany would  have  the  time  and  the  means  of  making 
a  more  deliberate  and  safe  bargain  with  the  public 
than  if  they  threw  up  their  privileges  at  the  present 
moment;  whilst  there  would  then  be  a  better  op- 
portunity of  providing  also  for  the  future  govern- 


RECOMBiENDATIONS   TO  THE   PROPRIETORS.  573 

ment  of  those  immense  possessions  which  the  Com-  book  i. 
pany  had  acquired  for  the  country;  possessions  of 
which  the  interests  must  ever  be  dear  to  them,  1813. 
and  the  most  powerful  of  the  motives  for  continu- 
ing as  long  as  they  could  with  safety  in  the  manage- 
ment of  that  empire  which  had  so  much  flourished 
under  their  care,  and  for  the  prosperity  of  which 
their  system  appeared  to  be  peculiarly  calculated/ 

The  recommendations  of  the  Court  of  Directors 
were  communicated  to  the  Court  of  Proprietors 
held  on  the  16th  and  adjourned  to  the  21st  July  ; 
and  it  was  finally  resolved,  that  although  the  Court 
could  not  contemplate  the  bill  with  satisfaction,  yet, 
deferring  to  the  sense  of  the  Legislature,  and  rely- 
ing on  its  wisdom  and  justice  in  the  event  of  the 
expectations  held  out  by  the  act  being  disappointed, 
they  determined  to  accept  the  charter.  The  thanks 
of  the  Proprietors  were  voted  to  the  late  and  pre- 
sent Directors  for  the  talent,  zeal,  and  perseverance 
with  which  they  had  struggled  to  maintain  the 
rights  and  support  the  interests  of  the  Company.* 

Thus  closed  a  contest  in  which  the  first  serious 
blow  was  inflicted  on  the  monopoly  of  the  East 
India  Company,  after  it  had  been  enjoyed  by  them 
for  two  centuries.  During  this  period  a  mighty 
empire  had  been  raised  upon  the  narrow  founda- 
tions of  exclusive  commerce.  Upon  no  other  basis 
could  the  edifice  have  been  reared.  An  indiscrimi- 
nate resort  of  individual,  unconnected,  and   often 

*  Minute  of  a  Committee  of  the  whole  Court  of  Directors,  15th  July, 
1813;  Papers,  &c.  p.  492. 

'  Proceedings  of  a  General  Court  of  Proprietors,  21st  July,  1813; 
Papers,  &c.  521.  See  also  the  Debates  on  the  Charter  at  the  India  Honse 
during  the  first  six  months  of  1813;  separately  published,  London,  1813. 


574  HISTORY   OF   BRITISH  INDIA. 

BOOK  I.  hostile  competitors  could  not  have  been  attended 
CHAP,  vm.  ^.^j^  ^  consistent  or  enduring  course  of  operations ; 
1813.  and  must  have  subjected  the  trade  with  India  to  a 
feeble  and  precarious  existence,  dependent  upon  the 
caprice  and  venality  of  the  subordinate  officers  of 
the  native  governments,  and  momentarilj  menaced 
with  extinction  by  the  follies  and  passions,  the  ava- 
rice and  the  ignorance  of  Asiatic  despots.  Adventu- 
rers isolated  and  at  variance  with  each  other  would 
have  been  in  no  situation  to  resist  injustice,  repel 
aggression,  or  avenge  wrong :  much  less  would  they 
have  been  able  to  place  their  commerce  in  an  atti- 
tude not  merely  of  defence  but  of  defiance,  and  to 
apply  the  resources  which  it  furnished  to  the  acquire- 
ment of  political  power.  In  the  struggle  for  suffer- 
ance which  they  would  have  had  to  maintain  in  their 
limited  ambition  of  effecting  a  successful  trading 
speculation,  it  could  never  have  dwelt  within  their 
imaginations  to  gain  a  firm  and  lasting  footing  on 
the  soil  of  India,  to  put  down  and  set  up  princes,  to 
seize  upon  and  hold  amidst  difficulty  and  danger 
masterdom  and  sway.  The  oneness  of  the  Company 
for  so  long  a  period  consolidated  their  commercial 
system,  enabled  them  to  baffle  and  defeat  rivalry 
and  opposition,  to  exact  retribution  for  injury,  and, 
as  the  field  expanded,  to  extend  their  views  be- 
yond the  circumscribed  horizon  of  purely  commer* 
cial  profit.  At  the  same  time,  this  result,  although 
inseparable  from  the  system,  was  neither  project- 
ed nor  foreseen  by  its  authors,  and  was  brought 
to  maturity  in  spite  of  their  repeated  disapproval, 
or  at  best  with  their  reluctant  and  unwilling  con- 
firmation.    The    East   India   Company's  territorial 


CONCLUDING   REMARKS.  575 

dominion  was  not  the  aequi8ition  of  the  Company  so  book  i. 
much  as  of  the  Company's  servants,  who,  often  in  ^^^^'  ^"^ 
disregard  of  the  wishes  of  their  masters,  ond  some-  isis. 
times  in  disobedience  of  their  positive  commands, 
entered  with  no  common  audacity,  determination, 
and  foresight,  in  the  promising  path  which  the 
distracted  state  of  Indian  politics  laid  open  to  their 
ambition;  and,  with  energies  and  talents  of  more 
thaja  ordinary  natures,  applied  the  superior  resources 
of  civilisation  to  secure  rich  fragments  of  the  scat- 
tered reliques  of  native  misrule,  and  remodelled 
them  into  the  rudiments  of  power,  of  infallible 
future  expansion.  This  was  not  the  work  of  the 
Company,  although  it  never  could  have  been  brought 
to  pass  by  any  other  instrumentality  than  that  of 
the  Company's  Indian  servants.  It  was  the  work 
of  Clive,  of  Hastings,  of  Comwallis,  and  of  Welles- 
ley,  aided  and  impelled  by  the  irresistible  force  of 
circumstances,  by  the  inconsiderateness  and  temerity 
of  the  native  princes  of  India,  and  by  the  superior 
energy  of  the  European  character. 

Whatever  its  origin,  however,  the  system  was 
now  mature;  and,  whatever  the  assertions  of  the 
Company's  advocates,  it  was  no  longer  in  need  of 
national  commercial  sacrifices  for  its  ccmtinuance  or 
development.  On  the  contrary,  the  longer  duration 
of  the  connexion  was  mischievous.  As  sovereigns 
of  India,  it  was  the  duty  of  the  Company  to  look 
alone  to  the  interests  of  the  people  whom  they  go- 
verned ;  as  a  trading  body,  it  was  their  interest  to 
secure  to  themselves  as  large  a  pecuniary  profit  as 
such  a  capacity  justified.  An  exclusive  privilege  of 
trade,  that  barred  all  competition,  necessarily  pre- 


576  HIOTOST   OF   BRITUH   IKMA. 

JKKiK  I.  eluded  the  people  of  India  from  purehasiiig  foreign 
.l^l^^lllll  commoditief}  at  the  lowest  price,  and  from  realising 
i»i«.  the  fullert  value  for  the  proceeds  of  their  own  indns- 
try.  To  the  people  of  India  the  CompanT's  monopolj 
was  as  injurious  as  it  was  to  indiridual  enterjHise 
in  Great  Britain;  and  the  period  had  undoubtedly 
arrived  when  the  best  interests  of  both  countries 
demanded  its  extinction. 

Although  extraordinary  talents,  zeal^  and  perse- 
verance were  displayed  in  the  discussion  on  both 
sides,  yet  we  are  now  able  to  decide  from  events 
that  there  was  little  of  sound  judgment  or  prophetic 
prescience  in  any  of  the  contending  parties.  The 
twenty  years  of  the  renewed  charter  rolled  away ; 
and  colonisation,  which  was  so  confidently  predicted 
as  its  unavoidable  consequence,  was  as  little  probable 
at  its  close  as  at  its  commencement/  Neither  bad 
it  been  found  more  difficult  than  before  to  protect 
the  native  population  from  the  turbulence  or  vio- 
lence of  Euro[>eau  settlers.  The  predictions,  equally 
confident,  that  the  trade  was  unsusceptible  of  ex- 
tension, and  that  no  new  article  of  export  could  be 
introduced, — predictions  in  which  the  most  intelli- 
gent officers  of  the  Company  concurred,  and  to 
which  even  the  advocates  of  free  trade,  however  re- 
luctantly, assented, — were  signally  falsified.  The 
trade,  both  export  and  import,  did  obtain  a  consi- 
derable augmentation  under  the  new  system;  and 
articles  entirely  unknown    in  the  annals  of  Indian 

'  The  whole  number  of  applications  for  licences  between  1S14  and  1832 
was  but  1547 :  of  these,  1253  were  complied  with  by  the  Court,  and  71  by 
the  Boanl ;  makini;  the  whole  number  of  persons,  not  in  the  service,  who 
proceeded  to  India  with  leave  in  the  course  of  eighteen  years,  1324. — 
Commons*  Committee,  1831 ;  General  Appendix,  p.  368. 


GONCLUDINa   REBfARKS.  577 

imports  were  exported  thither  from  Great  Britain  to  book  i. 
an  immense  amount,  to  the  extinction  of  several  si-  ^"'^'''^"'' 
milar  products  of  domestic  labour/     This  effect  was     I3i3. 
prepared  for,  as  has  been  noticed,  by  an  iniquitous 
abuse  of  the  power  of  Great  Britain  in  excluding 
from  her  own  consumption  the  principal  manufac- 
tures of  India,  and  in  opening  the  ports  of  India  to 
those  of  Britain  free  of  charge ;  but  its  actual  oc- 
currence was  little  anticipated  by  any  of  those  who 
urged  or  resisted  the  removal  of  the  restrictions  on 
the  trade.* 

The  proceedings  that  took  place  on  this  occasion 
have  been  detailed  at  length,  because  it  is  of  import- 

*  The  value  of  the  whole  of  the  private  trade  with  ladia  was,  in 
1814-15,  Rupees  13,54,19,460,  or  £13,549,146;  in  1826-7  it  was, 
Rupees  14,83,33,640,  or  £14,833,364:  being  an  increase  of  £1,284,218. 
The  latter  period  affords  an  unfavourable  view  of  the  state  of  the  trade,  as 
it  was  one  of  commercial  depression,  llie  average  value  of  the  whole 
private  trade  for  fifteen  years  subsequently  to  1814-15  was  more  than 
seventeen  crores  or  seventeen  millions  sterling  per  annum,  being  an  ad- 
vance of  nearly  four  millions  a  year. — Lords*  Committee,  1830,  App.  B.  5, 
and  C.  40  In  1813-14  the  value  of  cotton  goods  imported  into  Bengal 
was  £47,000.  In  1827-8  it  was  £561,000.  In  the  former  year  cotton 
yam  was  unknown :  in  the  latter  the  value  imported  was  £188,000. 
Spelter  was  another  article  of  import  not  known  at  the  earlier  date.  At 
the  latter  it  was  imported  to  the  value  of  nearly  £120,000.— Wilson's  Exter- 
nal Commerce  of  Bengal.  These  articles  were  permanent  innovations ; 
for  in  1843-44  the  value  of  yam  imported  into  Bengal  alone  is  reported 
to  be  £515,000,  of  piece-goods  £1,516,667,  and  spelter  £68,000.— Wil- 
kinson, Report  External  Commerce  of  Bengal,  1843-4. 

'  There  seems  to  have  been  but  one  person  connected  with  the  trade  to 
India  who  distinctly  anticipated  the  possibility  of  such  a  revolution ;  and 
this  was  not  on  the  present,  but  on  a  former  occasion.  In  a  debate  on  a 
motion  for  papers  to  illustrate  the  comparative  value  of  private  British  and 
foreign  trade  with  India,  in  the  House  of  Commons  on  the  1 4th  March, 
1806,  Mr.  Alderman  Prinsep,  speaking  of  the  probable  substitution  of  raw 
cotton  for  cotton  goods  in  the  ships  of  -private  traders,  made  the  remark- 
able observation,  that  a  sufficient  supply  of  the  raw  material  would  acce- 
lerate the  period  which  he  saw  approaching,  when  the  natives  of  India 
should  be  supplied  with  cloth  made  in  England  of  their  own  cotton,  leaving 
to  the  mother  country  all  the  profits  of  freight,  agency,  commission,  insu- 
rance, and  manufacture :  all  these  and  many  other  beneficial  results  would 
follow  an  extension  of  the  private  trade. — Hans.  Pai'l.  Debates,  14th  March, 
1806. 

VOL.  I.  2    P 


578  HISTORY   OF   BRITISH   INDIA. 

BOOK  I.  ance  that  a  readily  accessible  record  should  be  pre- 
,!^llll!!!l  served  of  the  sentiments  of  the  many  very  eminent 
1813.  persons  who,  both  in  Parliament  and  in  the  Direction, 
took  a  principal  part  in  the  discussions,  and  because 
the  nature  of  the  connexion  which  united  the  trade 
of  the  East  India  Company  with  the  sovereignty  of 
India  now  first  underwent  a  fundamental  change.  It 
may  also  be  of  use  to  contemplate  the  spirit  by  which 
the  opinions  of  wise  and  good  men  were  unconsciously 
inspired,  and  to  observe  how  personal  interests  and 
cherished  prejudices  distorted  principle  and  dark- 
ened judgment.  With  few  exceptions,  and  those 
exercising  little  or  no  influence,  the  charter  of  1793 
was  discussed  upon  no  widely  or  liberally  compre- 
hensive views,  upon  no  distinct  perception  of  the 
advantages  which  it  might  realise  for  Great  Britain, 
upon  no  generous  purpose  of  providing  India  with 
a  compensation  for  the  evils  inseparable  from  the 
sovereignty  of  strangers.  Professions  of  a  concern 
for  the  interests  of  India  were,  it  is  true,  not  mispar- 
ingly  uttered,  but  it  would  be  difficult  to  show  that 
the  majority  of  the  parties  who  engaged  ia  the  dis- 
cussion were  solely  instigated  by  a  disinterested 
regard  for  the  welfare  of  the  Indian  subjects  of  the 
Crown.  The  Ministers,  it  was  evident,  had  mainly 
in  view  the  extension  of  their  o>vn  influence ;  and,  as 
the  bill  proceeded,  made  obvious  sacrifices  to  party, 
and  adopted  clauses  to  which  they  were  themselves 
indifferent  or  opposed,  in  subservience  to  particular 
interests,  in  order  to  conciliate  parliamentary  sup- 
port. In  their  original  correspondence  with  the 
Court  no  mention  was  made  of  the  outports,  and  the 
extension  to  them  of  the  import  trade  from  India 


CONCLUDING   REMARKS.  579 

was  extorted  by  their  clamour  and  perseverance,  booki. 
The  legislative  encouragement  yielded  to  mission-  ^"^'''  ^"'' 
ary  labours  was  also  a  graft  upon  the  original  design,  leis. 
with  the  purpose  of  propitiating  a  numerous  and 
influential  party.  Nor  were  they  negligent  of  their 
own  advantages ;  and  in  the  provisions  made  for  the_ 
nomination  to  the  episcopal  see,  and  for  the  con- 
firmation of  the  appointments  to  the  highest  tem- 
poral situations,  extended,  as  far  as  they  were  then 
prepared  to  extend  it,  the  patronage  of  the  Crown. 
The  advocates  for  the  authorised  extension  of  mis- 
sionary efforts,  although  they  might  claim  the  merit 
of  disinterestedness,  were  little  entitled  to  credit  for 
candour  or  discretion.  Placing  implicit  and  undis- 
criminating  reliance  upon  exaggerated  and  erroneous 
descriptions  of  the  condition  and  character  of  the 
Hindu  and  Mohammedan  population  of  India,  they 
disregarded  the  danger  of  precipitately  attempting 
their  reform,  and  overlooked  the  possible  peril,  that, 
where  a  state  withholds  its  protection  from  the 
national  faith,  the  people  may  exercise  the  right,  as 
they  have  the  power,  of  protecting  it  for  themselves. 
The  merchants  and  manufacturers  of  the  United 
Kingdom  avowedly  looked  only  to  their  own  profits ; 
and,  in  the  struggle  between  London  and  the  out- 
ports,  was  re-acted  the  battle  for  exclusiveness 
which  had  previously  been  fought  between  the  Lon- 
don merchants  and  the  Company.  Deprived  of  the 
monopoly  of  the  trade,  the  Company  made  a  stand 
for  warehouses  and  sale-rooms;  and,  despoiled  of 
these,  sought  consolation  in  the  security  of  their 
dividends.  All  these  motives  and  considerations 
were  appropriate  and  venial  as  regarded  the  indivi- 

2p2 


680  HISTORY   OF   BMTTSH   INDIA. 

BOOK  I.  dual  and  peculiar  interests  and  feelings  of  the  per- 
^^^'^°^  sons  concerned,  but  they  were  little  worthy  of  their 
1818.     collective  capacity  of  arbiters  of  the  destinies   of 
India. 


END   OF   THE   FIRST   BOOK. 


APPENDIX. 


I. 
Page  38. 

claims  of  the  peshwa  upon  the  qaekwar. 

Schedule  of  the  Sums  due  to  the  Poona  State  from 
the  Gaekwars  Government. 

Rupeet, 

Balance  of  an  account  settled  in  1798       .     .        39,82,789     No.  l. 
On  account  of  presents  .       7,79,000 

On  account  of  troops  (3000) 

not  maintained        .     •     .     .     6,75,000 


14,54,000 
N.  B.  These  sums  have  been  accumulating  for 

ten  years 1,45,40,000 

Damaji  Gaekwar  conquered  the  country  of 
the  Babi,  upon  condition  of  assuming  half,  and 
delivering  the  other  half  to  the  Peshwa;  and 
that  a  karkoon  on  the  part  of  the  Government 
should  settle  this :  and  a  memorandum  be  given 
in  of  the  division,  and  that  the  places  were  to 
be  given  up  in  the  year  1740,  and  whatsoever 
was  due  before  this  period  was  to  be  remit- 
ted. This  was  never  carried  into  effect.  In 
the  year  1771  the  Gaekwar  paid  one  lakh  of 
rupees,  and  in  the  next  agreed  to  pay  25,000; 

Carried  forward     .     .     .     1,85,22,789 


582  APPENDIX 

No.  I. 


Rupees, 

Brought  forward     .     .     .     1,85,22,789 
and,  when  Fateh  Sing  Gaekwar  should  come, 
then  it  should  be  executed.     This  was  settled 
in  1765,  but  has  never  been  carried  into  effect; 
therefore  a  lakh  of  rupees  per  year  is  due  for 

thirty-seven  years 37,00,000 

In  the  year  1794  the  dignity  of  Sena-khds- 
khel-Shamshir  Bahadur  was  granted  to  Govind 
Rao  Gaekwar,  besides  lands,  for  which  56,38,00 1 
rupees  were  given.  He  died;  and  the  same 
honours  and  lands  were  granted  to  his  son,  for 
which  he  is  to  pay        56,38,001 


The  whole  amounting  to     .     R'**  2,78,60,790 


In  the  year  1796  it  was  agreed  that  3000  horsemen 
should  be  furnished,  and  upon  a  requisition  4000 ;  and  that 
one  of  the  Gaekwar's  relations  should  remain  at  court; 
and  that  the  troops  should  at  all  periods  be  in  readiness, 
and,  if  not  necessary,  that  a  sum  of  money  should  be 
given  in  lieu. 

Ahmedabad  is  under  two  authorities,  but  the  same 
arrangements  continue  as  under  Madhu  Rao;  and,  if  any 
deviation  should  have  been  admitted,  let  it  be  abolished. 

You  agreed,  in  the  year  1792,  to  give  the  Sirkar  three 
of  your  best  elephants  and  five  horses;  but  it  has  not  been 
done :  therefore  fail  not  to  do  it  now. 

In  the  year  1793  you  borrowed,  through  our  intervention, 
the  sum  of  one  lakh  of  rupees,  for  which  we  were  secu- 
rities, and  agreed  to  pay  the  bills  drawn  upon  you ;  but 
this  has  not  been  done:  therefore  do  so  now,  and  pay  the 
interest. 

You  were  also  bound  to  present  a  lakh  of  rupees'  worth 
of  jewels ;  but  this  has  not  been  done :  do  so  now,  and 
adhere  to  the  engagements  which  were  concluded  in  the 
time  of  Madhu  Rao. 


APPENDIX.  683 

You  owe  Balaji  Naik  Bhora  Soukar  a  sum  of  money,     No.  I. 
for  which  Govermnent  became  security.     Liquidate  this      ' 
at  the  rate  of  one  lakh  of  rupees  per  annum,  and  so  treat 
Mulhar  Rao  and  his  family  as  to  prevent  his  complaints 
reaching  Government. 

In  addition  to  this,   engagements  were  also  made  in 
which  you  admitted  the  sum  of  ...     .    R'^  78,33,212 

but  only  paid 28,13,325 


So  that  there  is  still  a  balance  of      .     .   R«*  50,19,887 
Let  this  be  settled. 

You  have  held  the  village  of  Rani,  in  the 
Pergunna  of  Sandi,  for  these  thirteen  years, 
which  was  worth  2000  rupees  per  annum.  Pay 
this  money,  and  deliver  up  the  village  to  the 
Kamavisdar 26,000 


50,45,887 
and  wherever  the  villages  have  been  assessed  let  the  money 
be  returned. 

Several  of  the  papers  having  been  destroyed  or  laid 
aside  during  the  irruption  of  Holkar,  the  accounts  cannot 
be  completely  made  out ;  but,  as  the  records  are  found, 
other  items  shall  be  inserted. 

In  the  year  1796  bills  were  drawn  upon  you :  let  an 
account  be  furnished. 


II. 

Page  70. 

Holkar' s  Proposition^  llth  Dec.  1807,  to  Sindhia. 

1.  His  highness  the  Peshwa  is  our  sovereign,  and  we    No.  II. 
are  his  servants.      Let  us   therefore,  like  our  ancestors, 
continue  to  obey  his  orders. 


584  APPENDIX. 

No.  II.        2,  Let  us  keep  on  friendly  terms  with  the  Bhonsla  and 

other  Sirdars  of  the  Peshwa,  and  let  us  consult  with  them 

on  all  occasions. 

3.  Let  the  agreements  which  passed  between  us  at  Sub- 
bulgerh  under  the  sanction  of  our  oaths  be  abided  by, 
and  let  not  the  terms  of  friendship  which  existed  between 
our  ancestors  be  departed  from. 

4.  Any  Aumik  or  officers  of  either  party,  who  may  pro- 
ceed into  the  country  of  the  other  with  a  force,  will  take 
the  greatest  care  to  preserve  the  country.  Should  they, 
contrary  to  the  orders  of  their  master,  exact  any  money 
from  the  country,  their  master  will  account  for  it. 

5.  Should  any  new  enterprise  be  contemplated,  it  shall 
be  carried  on  by  mutual  consultation. 

6.  That  our  friendship  may  be  preserved,  and  doubts 
between  us  be  done  away,  let  neither  endeavour  to  tamper 
with  the  army  of  the  other;  and,  should  any  Sirdar  quit 
the  service  of  either  party,  let  him  not  be  retained  by  the 
other. 

7.  The  money  collected  by  Meer  Khan  from  the  Mahauls 
of  Sadourah  and  others,  the  five  Mahauls,  shall  be  repaid 
to  Maharaja  Dowlat  Rao  Sindhia. 

8.  Let  the  money  which  may  have  been  collected  by  the 
Soobahdars  of  one  party  from  the  Mahauls  of  the  other 
since  the  settlement  of  differences  at  Subbulgcrh  be  ac- 
counted for  mutually. 

9.  Let  a  respectable  Vakeel  from  each  party  attend  the 
Durbar  of  the  other.  Let  the  tribute  from  the  other  Rajas 
and  wealthy  chiefs  unconnected  with  us,  as  the  Gaekwar 
and  others,  remain  in  the  hands  of  those  who  have  been  ac- 
customed to  collect  them.  In  this  we  have  no  concern. 
Should,  however,  it  so  happen  that  any  new  arrangement 
in  regard  to  them  should  be  proposed,  let  it  be  prosecuted 
by  our  joint  counsels  and  consent. 

10.  If  any  of  the  ministers  or  Aumils  of  either  part 
should  treacherously  seek  the  protection  of  the  otlier,  let 
him  not  be  protected,  but  delivered  over  to  the  state  he 


APPENDIX.  585 

belongs  to ;  but,  if  he  be  a  man  of  rank,  let  the  matter  of    No.  II. 
dispute  be  fairly  inquired  into  and  adjusted. 

11.  Let  the  tributes  for  Jaypore  and  Joudhpore  continue 
to  be  collected  as  they  were  in  the  time  of  our  ancestors. 
You  (Sindhia)  will  not  create  any  disturbance  in  the  coun- 
try of  Ja3rpore,  nor  will  I  (Holkar)  interfere  in  the  country 
of  Marwar  (Joudhpore). 

Let  these  eleven  propositions  be  well  considered,  and  an 
answer  returned  to  them. 


in. 

Page  140. 

Proclamation. 


The    Right    Honourable    the    Governor    in    Council    No.  III. 

having   observed   that  in   some  late  instances  an  extra- 

ordinary  degree  of  agitation  has  prevailed  among  se- 
veral corps  of  the  native  army  of  this  coast,  it  has 
been  his  Lordship's  particular  endeavour  to  ascertain 
the  motives  which  may  have  led  to  conduct  so  differ- 
ent from  that  which  formerly  distinguished  the  native 
army.  From  this  inquiry  it  has  appeared  that  many 
persons  of  evil  intentions  have  endeavoured,  for  mali- 
cious purposes,  to  impress  upon  the  native  troops  a 
belief  that  it  is  the  wish  of  the  British  Government 
to  convert  them  by  forcible  means  to  Christianity;  and 
his  Lordship  in  Council  has  observed  with  concern, 
that  such  malicious  reports  have  been  believed  by  many 
of  the  native  corps. 

The  Right  Honourable  the  Governor  in  Council  deems 
it  therefore  proper  in  this  public  manner  to  repeat  to 
the  native  troops  his  assurance  that  the  same  respect 
which  has  been  invariably  shown  by  the  British  Govern- 


586  APPENDIX. 

No.  III.   nient  for   their  religion  and  for  their  customs  will   be 

always  continued ;  and  that  no  interruption  will  be  given 

to  any  native,  whether  Hindu  or  Musselinan,  in  the  prac- 
tice of  his  religious  ceremonies. 

His  Lordship  in  Council  desires  that  the  native  troops 
will  not  give  belief  to  the  idle  rumours  which  are  cir- 
culated by  enemies  of  their  happiness,  who  endeavour 
with  the  basest  designs  to  weaken  the  confidence  of  the 
troops  in  the  British  Government.  His  Lordship  in 
Council  desires  that  the  native  troops  will  remember 
the  constant  attention  and  humanity  which  have  been 
shown  by  the  British  Government  in  providing  for  their 
comfort,  by  augmenting  the  pay  of  the  native  officers  and 
Sepoys,  by  allowing  liberal  pensions  to  those  who  have 
done  their  duty  faithfully,  by  making  ample  provision 
for  the  families  of  those  who  may  have  died  in  battle, 
and  by  receiving  their  children  into  the  service  of  the 
Honourable  Company,  to  be  treated  with  the  same  care 
and  bounty  as  their  fathers  had  experienced. 

The  Right  Honourable  the  Governor  in  Council  trusts 
that  the  native  troops,  remembering  these  circumstances, 
will  be  sensible  of  the  happiness  of  their  situation,  which 
is  greater  than  that  which  the  troops  of  any  other  part  of 
the  world  enjoy ;  and  that  they  will  continue  to  observe  the 
same  good  conduct  for  which  they  were  distinguished  in 
the  days  of  General  Lawrence,  of  Sir  Eyre  Coote,  and  of 
other  renowned  heroes. 

The  native  troops  must  at  the  same  time  be  sensible, 
that  if  they  should  fail  in  the  duties  of  their  allegiance, 
and  should  show  themselves  disobedient  to  their  officers, 
their  conduct  will  not  fail  to  receive  merited  punishment ; 
as  the  British  Government  is  not  less  prepared  to  punish 
the  guilty  than  to  protect  and  distinguish  those  who  are 
deserving  of  its  favour. 

It  is  directed  that  this  paper  be  translated  with  care  into 
the  Tamul,  Telinga,  and  Hindoostanee  languages,  and  that 
copies  of  it  be  circulated  to  each  native  battalion ;  of  which 


APPENDIX.  587 

the  European  officers  are  enjoined  and  ordered  to  be  care-    no.  III. 

ful  in  making  it  known  to  every  native  officer  and  Sepoy 

under  their  command. 

It  is  also  directed  that  copies  of  the  paper  be  circulated 
to  the  magistrates  and  collectors  under  the  Government,  for 
the  purpose  of  being  fully  understood  in  all  parts  of  the 
country. 

Dated  in  Fort  St.  George,  the  3rd  December,  1806. 


IV. 
Page  176. 


Extract  from  Lakshman  Dawa's  Petition  to  the  Agent  of  the 
Governor-General  in  Bundelkhand,  27th  March,  1809. 

You,  Sir,  told  me  that  you  would  say  everything  you    No.  IV. 

could  for  me  to  the  Governor-General,  and  do  all  in  your 

power  for  me.  You  also  desired  me  to  continue  near  you : 
accordingly,  I  remained  in  your  presence.  My  condition 
and  case  is  this : — For  some  years  I  bave  kept  an  army, 
with  which  I  have  plundered  a  number  of  Brahmans,  vil- 
lagers, and  peasants ;  and  also  fought  against  your  forces^ 
and  destroyed  a  great  number  of  your  people.  I  enter- 
tained twelve  hundred  men  for  these  six  years,  seven  or 
eight  hundred  of  whom  have  perished  in  these  transactions. 
I  have  behaved  in  an  unparalleled,  imgrateful,  and  rebel- 
lious manner  to  your  Government;  so  as  no  one  in  this 
country  never  behaved,  nor  ever  will.  I  did  not  give  up 
the  fort  of  Ajaygerh,  as  I  promised  to  do,  within  two  years; 
neither  did  I  pay  the  money  which  I  promised  to  pay. 
The  greatest  ingratitude  and  faithlessness  appear  against 
me.  I  have  become  infamous  all  over  Bundelkhand.  All 
the  peasantry  are  in  expectation  of  my  death.  All  the 
Brahmans,  Mahdjans,    servants,  Sipahis,  Hindus,  Muts- 


588  APPENDIX. 

No.  IV.    eddis,  brothers,  connexions  of  my  own  father  far  off  or 
■  near,  all  the  Rajas,  Fojdars,  Amils,  religious,  educated, 

Gods,  Jagirdars,  Pddirthis,  Byragis,  Fakirs,  the  whole  of 
the  inhabitants,  great  and  small^  are  wishing  every  instant 
to  be  my  last.  I  would  that  their  wishes  were  fulfilled. 
If  I  continue  to  exist,  I  had  better  not  remain  in  this 
country ;  my  death  were  preferable.  I  have  four  or  five 
people  sitting  under  the  fort  of  Ajaygerh.  Having  called 
them  to  you,  you  will  advise  them  respecting  me,  and  blow 
me  and  my  family  away  from  the  mouth  of  a  cannon.  This 
will  be  well  for  me,  and  it  will  accord  with  the  wishes  of 
all.  They  will  be  pleased,  and  I  wish  it.  If  I  consent 
not  to  this,  I  am  a  liar,  and  agree  to  be  regarded  as  hateful 
to  God. 

If  I  hesitate,  I  call  upon  God  to  bear  witness.  Favour 
me  with  this  punishment,  and  it  will  be  well  for  me.  I 
beg  you  to  reflect  upon  it,  and  order  it  to  be  done;  and  I 
beg  of  you  to  give  my  brothers  and  connexions  two 
villages  each  for  their  support.  If  what  I  have  requested 
be  not  agreeable  to  you,  I  beg  you  will  exalt  me  as  you 
have  done  other  Rajas,  or  still  more.  The  way  to  exalt  me 
is  to  give  me  a  lakh  of  rupees  in  money,  and  all  my  own 
country,  as  well  as  what  is  mentioned  in  the  Sunnud  given 
to  me  by  Captain  Baillie.  If  this.  Sir,  should  please  you, 
it  is  well ;  if  not,  pray  blow  me  from  a  cannon's  mouth. 
The  last  is  honour  ;  the  first  a  mere  nothing.  Do  which- 
ever you  please,  I  shall  be  content.  I  cannot  be  content 
with  anything  else.  I  pray  you,  consider  it  well.  May 
the  sun  of  your  fortune  perpetually  shine ! 


APPENDIX.  589 

V. 

Page  268. 

general  orders. 

Head  Quarters,  Choultry  Plain,  28  Jan.  1809. 
General  Order.     By  the  Commander-in-chief. 

The  immediate  departure  of  Lieutenant-General  Mac-     No.  V. 

dowall  from  Madras  will  prevent  his  design  of  bringing 

Lieutenant-Colonel  Munro,  Quartermaster-General,  to 
trial  for  disrespect  to  the  Conmiander-in-chief,  for  disobe- 
dience of  orders,  and  for  contempt  of  military  authority, 
in  having  resorted  to  the  power  of  the  Civil  Government  in 
defiance  of  the  judgment  of  the  officer  at  the  head  of  the 
army,  who  had  placed  him  under  an  arrest  on  charges  pre- 
ferred against  him  by  a  number  of  officers  conunanding 
native  corps ;  in  consequence  of  which  appeal  direct  to  the 
Honourable  the  President  in  Council,  Lieutenant-General 
Macdowall  has  received  a  positive  order  from  the  Chief 
Secretary  to  liberate  Lieutenant-Colonel  Munro  from  ar- 
rest. 

Such  conduct  on  the  part  of  Lieutenant-Colonel  Munro 
being  destructive  of  subordination,  subversive  of  military 
discipline,  a  violation  of  the  sacred  rights  of  the  Com- 
mander-in-chief, and  holding  out  a  most  dangerous  ex- 
ample to  the  service,  Lieutenant-General  Macdowall,  in 
support  of  the  dignity  of  the  profession  and  his  own  sta- 
tion and  character,  feels  it  incumbent  on  him  to  express 
his  strong  disapprobation  of  Lieutenant-Colonel  Munro's 
imexampled  proceedings,  and  considers  it  a  solemn  duty 
imposed  upon  him  to  reprimand  Lieutenant-Colonel  Mimro 
in  general  orders ;  and  he  is  hereby  reprimanded  accord- 
ingly. (Signed)  T.  Boles, 

Adj  u  tant-(jreneral. 


590  APPENDIX. 


VI. 
Page  272. 

Fort  St.  George,  Slst  Jan.  1809. 

General  Order.     By  Government. 

No.  VI.        It  has  recently  come  to  the  knowledge  of  the  Honour- 

able   the  Governor  in   Council  that  Lieutenant-General 

Hay  Macdowall  did,  previous  to  his  embarkation  from  the 
Presidency,  leave  to  be  published  to  the  army  a  general 
order,  dated  the  28th  instant,  in  the  highest  degree  disre- 
spectful to  the  Government;  in  which  that  officer  has  pre- 
sumed to  found  a  public  censure  on  an  act  adopted  under 
the  immediate  authority  of  the  Governor  in  Council,  and 
to  convey  insinuations  grossly  derogatory  to  the  character 
of  the  Government,  and  subversive  of  military  discipline 
and  of  the  foundation  of  public  authority. 

The  resignation  of  Lieutenant-General  Macdowall  of 
the  command  of  the  army  of  Fort  St.  George  not  having 
been  yet  received,  it  becomes  the  duty  of  the  Governor  in 
Council,  in  consideration  of  the  violent  and  inflammatory 
proceedings  of  that  officer  on  the  present  and  on  other 
recent  occasions,  and  for  the  purpose  of  preventing  the 
possible  repetition  of  farther  acts  of  outrage,  to  anticipate 
the  period  of  his  expected  resignation,  and  to  annul  the 
appointment  of  Lieutenant-General  Macdowall  to  the 
command  of  the  army  of  this  Presidency. 

The  Governor  in  Council  must  lament,  with  tlie  deepest 
regret,  the  necessity  of  resorting  to  an  extreme  measure 
of  tliis  nature :  but,  when  a  manifest  endeavour  has  been 
made  to  bring  into  degradation  the  supreme  public  autho- 
rity, it  is  essential  that  the  vindication  should  not  be  less 
signal  than  the  offence;  and  that  a  memorable  example 
should  be  given,  that  proceedings  subversive  of  established 


APPENDIX.  591 

order  can  find  no   security  under  the  sanction  of  rank    No.  VI. 
however  high,  or  of  station  however  exalted.  

The  general  order  in  question  having  been  circulated 
under  the  signature  of  the  Deputy  Adjutant-General  of  the 
army,  it  must  have  been  known  to  that  officer,  that,  in 
giving  currency  to  a  paper  of  this  offensive  description,  he 
was  acting  in  direct  violation  of  his  duty  to  the  Govern- 
ment. As  no  authority  can  justify  the  execution  of  an 
illegal  act,  connected,  as  that  act  obviously  in  the  present 
case  has  been,  with  views  of  the  most  reprehensible  nature, 
the  Governor  in  Council  thinks  it  proper  to  mark  his 
highest  displeasure  at  the  conduct  of  Major  Boles,  by  di- 
recting that  he  shall  be  suspended  from  the  service  of  the 
Honourable  Company. 

The  general  order  left  by  the  Conunander-in-chief  for 
pubUcation,  imder  date  the  ^th  instant,  is  directed  to  be 
expimged  from  every  public  record ;  and  the  Adjutant- Ge- 
neral of  the  army  will  immediately  circulate  the  necessary 
orders  for  this  purpose. 

By  order  of  the  Honourable  the  Governor  in  Council. 
(Signed)  G.  Buchan, 

Chief  Secretary  to  Government. 


VII. 
Page  438. 


Zemindari  Sunnud  granted  by  Jehangir. 

It  has  happened  in  this  propitious  time  that  Abhiman   No.  VII. 

Sing,  Zemindax  of  Mahanagar  in  Nizamabad,   has  em- ' 

braced  Islamism,  and  been  honoured  with  the  title  of  Raja 
Nadir  Dowlat  Khan.  We  have  therefore  bestowed  upon 
him  twenty-two  Pergunnas  in  Soobah  Allahabad,  from  the 
commencement  of  the  Khuneef  crop,  and  according  to. the 
specification  below.     Our  illustrious  sons  and  rulers  of  the 


592  APPENDIX. 

No.  VII.  provinces  and  Mootsuddies  must  ever  use  their  strongest 
'  endeavours  perpetually  to  maintain  this  grant,  and  confirm 

the  Zemindari  of  the  above  Pergunnas  to  the  afore-men- 
tioned person  and  his  descendants  for  ever.  They  will  de- 
duct 1 9^5,000  rupees  as  his  Nankar  from  the  total  Jvmfima 
payable  to  the  Government,  in  order  that  he  may  spend  it; 
and  the  fixed  allowance  per  village  and  per-centage  in  the 
Jumma  and  other  Zemindari  dues  from  his  support.  This 
Sunnud  will  not  require  renewal.  Dated  Rubbee  ool  Akhir 
15th,  in  the  4th  year  of  the  reign.  (Specification  on  the 
reverse.)  Pergunnas  twenty-two  (then  follow  their  names). 
Nankar  1,25,000  rupees.  Zemindari  dues  per  village  two 
rupees,  per-cent  one  rupee. — J.  Asiatic  Society  of  Bengal, 
vol.  viii.  p.  93. 


VIII. 
Page  469. 


No.  VIII. 


The  Petition  of  all  the  Inhabitants  of  the  City  of  Benares ^ 

etc,  etc. 

Sheweth, 

That  we,  your  humble  petitioners,  have  been  nourished 
from  our  infancy  by  the  fostering  care  of  the  British  Go- 
vernment, and  have  been  protected  from  every  evil.  During 
the  government  of  Mr.  Hastings  especially  we  enjoyed 
ease  and  tranquillity,  when,  by  the  abolition  of  the  tax 
on  pilgrims,  the  fame  of  the  Government  was  extended 
from  one  end  of  India  to  the  other.  In  like  manner,  in  the 
time  of  the  Marquis  Comwallis  we  enjoyed  various  advan- 
tages :  the  Sayer  and  town  duties,  and  other  descriptions  of 
oppressive  duties,  were  abolished.  The  afiairs  of  this  pro- 
vince were  committed  to  the  administration  of  Mr.  Duncan ; 
and  such  was  the  indulgence  extended  to  us,  that,  for  the 
first  time,  Vakeels  were  appointed  in  the  courts  of  justice 


APPENDIX.  593 

on  the  part  of  Government,  and  the  claims  of  Government   no.viii. 

were  henceforward  judged  and  determined  in  common  with 

the  claims  of  other  people.  A  considerable  sum  of  money 
was  also  appropriated  for  the  expense  of  the  Hindoo  col- 
lege, and  hundreds  of  people  obtained  Jageers,  pensions, 
and  donations :  the  people  of  all  descriptions  were  secured 
in  the  enjoyment  of  their  laws  and  their  religion,  together 
with  the  customs  and  usages  to  which  they  had  been  long 
habituated.  The  fame  of  the  Government  extended  itself 
throughout  the  world ;  everything  submitted  to  its  will, 
and  the  population  of  the  country  increased  with  its  pro- 
sperity. 

When  the  court  of  justice  was  originally  established  at 
Benares,  the  fees  payable  on  the  institution  of  suits  were 
fixed  at  the  rate  of  five  per  cent. ;  but  the  people  claimed 
the  interposition  of  the  Governor-General's  agent  at  this 
place,  and  the  fees  were  reduced  in  consequence  to  the 
rate  of  one  per  cent.  We  fully  expected  that  in  a  short 
time  these  also  would  be  abolished,  but  after  that  gentle- 
man went  away  they  were  again  increased;  and  by  the 
introduction  of  the  stamp  duties,  transit  and  town  duties, 
by  the  Phatuckbundee  and  other  new  institutions,  your 
petitioners  were  reduced  to  distress  and  wretchedness. 

During  the  last  five  years  the  seasons  have  proved  un- 
favourable; the  harvests  have  been  injured  by  drought, 
hail,  and  frost ;  and  the  price  of  every  article  of  consimip- 
tion  has  increased  twofold.  In  this  state  of  things.  Regu- 
lation XV.,  1810,  is  introduced;  and  the  tax  it  imposes,  by 
affecting  all  ranks  of  people,  has  thrown  the  subjects  of 
your  Government  into  consternation.  Accordingly,  a  num- 
ber of  people,  in  the  confident  expectation  of  obtaining 
that  indulgence  which  Government  has  always  been  accus- 
tomed to  extend  to  its  subjects,  exposed  themselves  to  the 
inclemency  of  the  season,  and,  with  nothing  to  cover  them 
but  the  heavens,  bowed  their  faces  to  the  earth  in  suppli- 
cation :  in  this  state  of  calamity  several  of  them  perished. 
We  presented  some  petitions,  setting  forth  our  distresses  to 

VOL.  I.  2    Q 


594  APPENDIX. 

No. VIII.  the  magistrate;  and,  as  we  did  not  obtain  our  object,  we 

petitioned  the  provincial  court,  but  from  our  untoward 

fate  we  were  again  unsuccessful*  In  this  state  of  trouble 
the  proclamation  of  the  ISth  of  Jan.  1811  was  issued, 
under  the  impression  that  your  petitioners  were  in  a  state 
of  disobedience  to  the  Government;  which  we  humbly 
represent  was  never  even  within  our  imagination.  In  im- 
plicit obedience  to  this  proclamation,  as  to  the  decree  of 
fate,  we  got  up,  and  returned  to  our  homes,  in  full  de- 
pendence upon  the  indulgence  of  the  Government.  We 
set  forth  our  distresses  as  below  stated :  we  hope  that  you, 
under  the  authority  vested  by  Government  in  its  officers, 
upon  the  exercise  of  which  the  welfare  of  the  country 
depends,  will  be  pleased  to  translate  this  our  petition,  and 
forward  it  to  the  Right  Honourable  the  Governor-General 
in  Council,  that,  \mder  the  provision  contained  in  clause 
1st,  Regulation  xli.,  1793,  we  may  obtain  relief.  The 
indulgent  disposition  which  is  invariably  manifested  by 
the  Government  induces  us  to  entertain  a  confident  hope 
that  the  petition  of  its  afflicted  subjects  will  be  complied 
with. 

[The  following  representation  relates  to  Regulation  xv., 
1810,  and  the  proclamation  of  the  13th  of  January  181 1.] 
First.  By  Regulation  xxiii.,  1793,  the  expense  of  the 
police  establishments  was  to  be  defrayed  by  a  tax  levied 
from  the  merchants,  traders,  and  shopkeepers,  who  were 
considered  one  of  the  most  opulent  classes  of  the  people ; 
but,  by  the  rules  in  Regulation  vi.,  1797,  the  Regulation 
above  mentioned  was  rescinded,  and  it  was  declared  that 
the  tax  was  a  source  of  vexation  to  the  contributors. 
The  Vice-President  in  Council  accordingly  resolved  to  abo- 
lish this  tax,  and  to  substitute  the  duties  on  stamp  paper 
in  the  room  of  it.  Sire,  when  the  vexations  to  which  the 
people  were  exposed  by  being  subjected  to  the  tax  are  so 
fully  known  to  you,  there  can  be  no  necessity  for  us  to 
employ  much  detail  in  representing  them;  and  let  it  be 
understood  that  the  persons  who  then  were  affected   by 


APPENDIX.  595 

Regulation  xxiii.,  1793,  are  not  now  in  a  condition  better  No.  viii. 

calculated  to  submit  to  it.     In  the  new  Regulation  the  tax 

includes  every  one ;  thousands  who  have  not  wherewithal 
to  subsist  are  affected  by  it :  hence  to  extend  the  tax  to 
everybody  will  be  the  cause  of  general  ruin. 

Secondly.  The  protection  of  the  people  is  the  duty  of 
the  Government.  The  Governments  to  which  we  were  for- 
merly subjected  established  the  transit  and  other  duties 
upon  traders  to  defray  the  expenses  of  protecting  us ;  in 
other  words,  for  the  support  of  the  police.  Expenses  of 
other  descriptions  were  defrayed  by  the  produce  of  the 
Baitoolmaul ;  and,  although  these  duties  still  continue  to  be 
levied  in  Benares,  the  expense  of  the  roads  and  the  general 
protection  of  the  country,  such  as  the  establishment  of 
police  and  so  forth,  was  also  provided  for  at  the  settlement 
of  the  province :  besides  this,  the  stamp  duties  were  esta- 
blished to  defray  the  expense  of  the  police,  as  well  as  the 
Phatuckbundee,  which  has,  however,  been  abolished  by 
the  proclamation  of  the  13th  January.  These  various  re- 
sources for  the  support  of  the  police  well  merit  the  atten- 
tion of  the  Government. 

Thirdly.  In  Regulation  xv.,  1810,  it  is  stated,  that,  as 
the  tax  had  been  introduced  into  Calcutta,  it  should  be 
also  mtroduced  into  Benares.  Sire,  the  groimd  of  Calcutta 
is  the  particular  property  of  Government:  it  was  originally 
Government  property,  and  became  inhabited  according  to 
the  usages  established  in  England :  all  consented  to  pay  the 
tax  on  the  same  principle  as  if  it  were  a  ground-rent;  and 
every  one,  according  to  his  means  or  pleasure,  took  ground 
and  built  upon  it.  But  it  is  otherwise  in  Benares,  where 
the  ground  is  the  property  of  its  inhabitants,  who  have 
held  it  by  purchase  or  other  means  from  time  immemorial. 
Fourthly.  In  Regulation  xv.,  1810,  it  is  declared,  that 
all  places  of  worship  are  to  be  exempted  from  the  tax ; 
and  the  whole  extent  of  the  city  of  Benares  as  contained 
within  the  Punchkos  is,  in  fact,  a  place  of  worship,  there 
positively  is  not  a  point  of  ground  within  it  which  is  other- 

2q2 


596  APPENDIX. 

No.  VIII.  wise.     Let  this  be  ascertained  by  a  reference  to  the  Shas- 

ter.     Besides  this,  former  Governments,  on  all  occasions  of 

exercising  their  authority,  treated  this  city  with  peculiar 
indulgence;  and  the  British  Government  also  has  done  the 
same,  as  is  instanced  in  the  exemption  of  Brahmins  from 
capital  punishment :  hence  the  city  of  Benares  should  be 
especially  exempted  firom  the  tax  on  houses. 

Fifthly.  The  means  of  procuring  subsistence  in  these 
times,  such  as  they  are,  are  well  known  to  Government. 
From  the  annihilation  of  the  profits  of  our  labour,  from 
the  increase  of  the  taxes,  from  calamities  which  have 
raised  the  price  of  every  article  of  consumption,  from  the 
abolition  of  the  Tehseeldarree  system,  and  from  the  bank- 
ruptcy of  the  merchants,  your  petitioners  are  reduced  to 
such  a  state,  that  multitudes  are  unable  to  clothe  and  feed 
themselves,  or  support  and  educate  their  families:  hence 
numbers,  who  supported  themselves  in  a  respectable  man- 
ner, have  been  robbed  of  their  respectability  by  distress. 
Had  it  not  been  for  the  native  colleges  of  Calcutta  and 
Benares,  there  would  not  have  been  an  educated  or  well- 
bred  man  to  be  found  throughout  the  country.  How, 
then,  is  it  possible  to  pay  the  tax  ? 

Sixthly.  Thousands  of  people  in  these  times  have  not  a 
kouree  in  the  world ;  and  if,  in  order  to  realise  the  tax, 
their  household  property  shall  be  sold,  as  is  prescribed  in 
the  Regulation,  to  what  extremities  will  they  not  be 
reduced  ? 

Seventhly.  Since  the  commencement  of  the  English  Go- 
vernment the  rules  contained  in  the  Shera  and  Shaster,  to- 
gether with  the  customs  of  Hindostan,  have  invariably 
been  observed :  it  will  be  found  in  the  Shera  and  Shaster 
that  houses  are  reckoned  one  of  the  principal  necessaries  of 
life,  and  are  not  accounted  disposable  property.  Even 
creditors  cannot  claim  them  from  us  in  satisfaction  of  their 
dues ;  and  in  this  country,  in  the  times  of  the  Mahomedan 
and  Hindoo  princes,  houses  were  never  rendered  liable  to 
contributions  for  the  service  of  the  state. 


APPENDIX.  597 

Eighthly.  Men  of  business  possess  no  ostensible  pro-  NcVIII. 

perty  but  their  houses.     Houses  are  the  foundation  of  all 

worldly  affairs^  whether  in  the  collector's  office,  or  in  the 
courts,  or  in  mercantile  transactions.  If  the  tax  is  en- 
forced, what  with  providing  the  means  of  paying  it  on  the 
one  hand,  and  what  with  the  apprehension  of  future  inno- 
vations from  the  interference  of  Government  on  the  other, 
such  general  distrust  will  be  excited,  that  there  will  no 
longer  be  any  reliance  on  the  security  of  property :  all  mer- 
cantile transactions,  all  worldly  afi&irs,  will  be  overturned, 
and  the  public  at  large  will  become  distracted. 

Ninthly.  By  the  usages  of  this  country,  the  rights 
of  the  Government  as  they  were  exercised  in  the  times 
of  the  Mahomedan  and  Hindoo  princes  do  not  weigh 
heavy  upon  its  subjects :  hence  it  is  that  imder  the  English 
Government,  in  the  sale  of  estates  to  realise  the  public 
revenue,  the  houses  of  the  landholders  are  exempted.  If 
the  tax  is  enforced,  the  public  mind  will,  for  many  reasons, 
be  filled  with  apprehensions. 

Tenthly.  Although  Government  certainly  devotes  par- 
ticular care  and  expense  to  the  protection  of  the  inhabit- 
ants of  the  cities,  yet  the  town  and  transit  duties,  the 
mint  and  stamp  duties,  the  registry  of  deeds,  the  duties 
arising  from  the  quarries  and  the  Abkarree,  &c.  &c.,  all  of 
which  multiply  in  proportion  to  the  extent  of  the  popula- 
tion, are  levied  in  a  greater  degree  from  the  inhabitants  of 
cities  than  from  those  who  live  in  the  interior. 

Eleventhly.  If  the  tax  is  enforced,  the  rent  of  houses 
will  increase ;  and  many  of  the  people,  who  are  come  from 
distant  places  to  reside  in  this  city  and  rent  the  houses  they 
occupy,  will  no  longer  continue  to  remain  in  it.  People 
will  build  no  more  stone  houses ;  and  in  that  case  many 
classes  of  workmen,  such  as  carpenters,  blacksmiths, 
masons,  &c.  will  be  left  without  employment,  and  the 
city  will  be  depopulated. 

Twelfthly.  Those  who,  from  the  fame  of  the  justice 
and  protection  to  be  found  under  the  English  Government, 


598  APPENDIX. 

No.  VIII.  are  come  from  distant  countries  to  reside  in  the  city  of 

Benares^  and  whose  residence  in  it  adds  to  the  population 

of  the  place  and  benefits  thousands,  will  by  the  introduc- 
tion of  the  tax  be  disheartened.  They  will  go  away,  and 
multitudes  will  be  ruined. 

Thirteenthly.  The  Regulations  enacted  by  the  Marquis 
Comwallis  were  extended  to  Benares,  and  we  your  peti- 
tioners, satisfied  with  those  Regulations,  lived  happy  and 
contented:  the  whole  coimtry  increased  in  fertility  and 
population,  and  the  resources  of  Government  were  im- 
proved, at  least  so  it  appeared  to  us,  though  we  know  not 
if  it  appears  so  to  the  wisdom  of  the  Government. 

Fourteenthly.  As  a  number  of  persons  continued  for 
some  time  assembled  together  to  complain,  Government 
conceived  there  was  a  disturbance,  and  it  was  so  de- 
clared in  the  proclamation  of  the  13th  of  January,  1811. 
Sire,  if  an  order  be  passed  relating  particularly  to  one  in- 
dividual, and  other  persons  combine  to  support  him,  it 
might  in  that  case  be  denominated  a  disturbance.  As 
the  introduction  of  the  tax  affected  every  individual  of 
every  class,  every  one  presented  himself  to  obtain  justice. 
Thousands  of  men  and  women,  all  the  old  and  the  infirm. 
Brahmins,  devotees,  and  Pundits,  who  have  no  occupation 
but  prayer  and  penance,  abandoned  their  houses  and  were 
among  them.  None  were  armed,  even  with  a  stick.  The 
manner  and  custom  in  tliis  country  from  time  immemorial 
is  this :  that,  whenever  any  act  affecting  every  one  gene- 
rally is  committed  by  the  Government,  the  poor,  the  aged, 
the  infirm,  the  women,  all  forsake  their  families  and  their 
homes,  expose  themselves  to  the  inclemency  of  the  seasons 
and  to  other  kinds  of  inconveniences,  and  make  known  their 
affliction  and  distress,  that  the  Government,  which  is  more 
considerate  than  our  parents,  may  observe  their  condition 
and  extend  indulgence  to  its  subjects.  Besides  this,  when 
the  Brahmins  in  general  are  involved  in  distress,  it  is  in- 
cumbent on  all  Hindoos  to  abstain  from  receiving  suste- 
nance,  and  any  one  who  presumes  to  deviate  from  this 


APPENDIX.  599 

custom  must  incur  general  opprobrium.     If  your  peti-  NaVliL 

tionersy  by  assembling  together  in  this  manner^  can  be 

considered  to  have  created  a  disturbance,  it  is  our  mis- 
fortune. 

[The  next  representation  respects  the  houses  of  Benares.] 

First.  Many  Mohullahs  are  upon  ground  which  pays 
revenue  to  Government,  and  ought  accordingly  to  be  ex- 
empted. 

Secondly.  Many  houses  and  several  parts  of  the  city 
are  held  by  grants  from  the  native  princes  and  from  the 
Honourable  East  India  Company,  and  these  are  of  the 
same  nature  as  Ultumgah:  besides  which,  thousands  of 
people  subsist  on  the  boimty  of  Government. 

Thirdly.  Many  of  the  Seraies  and  other  public  places 
were  built  by  the  Mahomedan  princes  or  by  their  princi- 
pal officers,  and  ought  to  be  exempted. 

Fourthly.  There  are  hundreds  of  houses  in  this  city  the 
proprietors  of  which  pay  rent  for  the  ground  they  are  built 
upon,  while  the  owner  of  the  ground  receives  the  rent  as 
his  right;  which  right  has  never  been  disputed  by  any  Go- 
vernment. The  house  having  been  built  by  its  proprietor, 
he  holds  it  like  household  furniture,  exempt  from  tax- 
ation ;  the  materials  of  which  it  is  built  are  liable  to  town 
and  transit  duties,  and  to  the  quarry  duties,  which  are  of 
course  paid  upon  requisition.  Many  pieces  of  ground, 
and  several  of  the  houses  above  mentioned,  are  let  to  Go- 
vernment by  the  proprietors,  and  such  proprietors  cannot 
in  consequence  be  called  upon  to  pay  the  tax. 

Fifthly.  Many  houses  have  been  purchased  by  their 
present  proprietors  at  public  auction,  with  the  permission 
of  Government. 

Sixthly.  Many  houses  which  belonged  to  the  Baitool- 
maul  have  been  purchased  by  their  present  proprietors 
from  the  Government,  who,  on  paying  the  value  of  them 
to  Government,  were  put  into  possession. 

Seventhly.  Many  houses  are  still  in  the  Baitoolmaul, 
and  the  occupants  pay  rent  for  them  to  Government. 


600  APPENDIX. 

No.  VIII.      Eighthly.      Many  houses  have   been   bestowed   upon 

Brahmins  and  Fucqueers;   and  these  houses,  like  Kish- 

napun,  and  according  to  established  rules,  must  be  ex- 
empted. 

Ninthly.  Many  benevolent  and  humane  people  lend 
their  houses  for  the  accommodation  of  pilgrims  and  tra- 
vellersy  in  the  hope  by  so  doing  to  obtain  the  blessing 
of  Providence:  many  lend  them  out  of  civility  to  their 
friends.  If  the  tax  is  enforced,  civility  and  benevolence 
will  be  excluded  from  the  world. 

Tenthly.  Many  houses  have  been  built  by  persons  of 
rank  in  former  times ;  these  houses  are  deserted  and  fallen 
to  ruin.  Those  to  whom  these  houses  have  lineally  de- 
scended are  unable  to  repair  them ;  they  inhabit,  perhaps, 
but  one  room,  without  even  the  means  of  subsistence  :  such 
persons  surely  deserve  indulgence. 

Eleventhly.  Many  houses  are  mortgaged,  and  in  the 
possession  of  the  mortgagee.  The  tax  cannot  be  paid  by 
the  mortgager,  because  he  is  without  the  means  of  paying 
it ;  nor  can  it  be  paid  by  the  mortgagee  without  diminish- 
ing the  legal  profit  derivable  from  the  established  rate  of 
interest. 

Twelfthly.  Many  houses  belong  to  the  Nawaub  Vizier 
and  other  persons  of  distinction,  such  as  Manmundil  and 
Raujmundil. 

Thirteenthly.  Several  men  of  rank,  such  as  the  Moghul 
princes,  reside  in  Benares  by  order  of  Government :  they 
have  either  received  their  houses  from  Government,  or 
have  built  them  themselves. 

Fourteenthly.  Many  of  the  buildings  of  this  city  are 
either  Hindoo  or  Mahomedan  places  of  worship,  or  pious 
bequests.  After  exempting  buildings  of  these  descriptions 
and  the  houses  above  mentioned,  it  will  appear  upon  in- 
quiry that  the  produce  of  the  tax  will  not  be  worth  the 
consideration  of  Government,  wliich  expends  laks  of 
rupees  for  the  welfare  of  its  subjects  and  for  the  general 
prosperity  of  the  country. 


APPENDIX. 


601 


Our  existence  and  everything  we  possess  have  been  be-  no.VIII. 

stowed  upon  us  by  the  liberality  of  Government.     Your 

humble  petitioners  feel  themselves  totally  unable  to  con- 
tend, even  in  litigation,  with  a  Government  so  powerful ; 
but,  perceiving  that  the  Government  is  always  disposed  to 
be  kind  and  indulgent,  we  have  presumed  to  represent  what 
our  imperfect  imderstandings  have  suggested  to  us.  The 
indulgence  of  Government  has  given  us  the  power  to 
make  this  our  representation ;  and,  at  all  events,  we  hope 
for  its  indulgence  and  the  forgiveness  of  our  offences. 
(Translated.) 


IX. 


Page  484,  Note. 

Comparative  Statement   of  the  Revenues  and    Charges  of 
British  India  in  the  Years  1807-8  and  1813-14. 


1807. 

Bengal. 

Madras. 

Bombay. 

Receipts 

£9,972,000 

4,928,000 

770,000 

Cliargefl 

£6,372,000 

6,194,000 

2,059,000 

Total.         No.  IX. 

15,670,000 

13,625,000 


Surplus  Revenue       £2,045,000 
Deduct  Interest  on  Debt        £2,226,000 
Supplies  to  England        128,000 

£2,354,000 


Deficit  in  1807-8  £309,000 


1813-14. 
Receipts 
Charges 


Bengal. 
£11,172,000 
£  7,135,000 


Madras. 

5,297,000 

4,893,000 


Bombay. 

759,000 

1,689,000 


Surplus  Revenue 
Deduct  Interest  on  Debt  ;£l,537,000 

Supplies  to  England         116,000 


Total. 
17,228,000 
13,617,000 

3,611,000 


£1,653,000 


Surplus  in  1813-14     £1,958,000 


602 


APPENDIX. 


No.  IX. 


ITEMS  OF  AUCIMEIITED  RBCEIPT. 


Bengal. 

Madras. 

Boi 
1807-8. 

mbay. 

1807-8. 

1813-14. 

1807-8. 

1813-14. 

1813-14. 

MiDt                £17,000 

9,000 

99 

16,000 

t9 

6,000 

Post-Office        a5,000 

43,000 

17,000 

20,000 

M 

6,000 

Stamps                „ 

16,000 

w 

31,000 

» 

»» 

Judicial            113,000 

104,000 

w 

96,000 

» 

0,000 

Customs          511,000 

322,000 

114,000 

190,000 

167,000  108,000 

LandRev*.   3,729,000 

3,928,000 

1,040,(H>0 

893,000 

417,000 

37,000 

Do.Ced«*.P.  1,718,000 

2,271,000 

w 

w 

»i 

906,000 

I>o.Ced«*.&.,^,,^. 
Cooq.do.M'^^*'^ 

1,664,000 

w 

» 

» 

991,000 

Salt               1,895,000 

1,779,000 

»* 

155,000 

w 

99 

Opium             801,000 

964,000 

» 

*> 

w 

n 

Marine                 „ 

31,000 

» 

9,000 

» 

46,000 

Carnatic              „ 

» 

1,027,000 

1,131,000 

9> 

»* 

Tanjore 

»9 

502,000 

436,000 

» 

>9 

Mysore                „ 

» 

1,399,000  1,619,000 

w 

99 

Nizam                 „ 

» 

718,000 

685,000 

w 

»9 

Travancore          „ 

99 

46,000 

91,000 

43,000 

99 

Cochin                 „ 

w 

»> 

32,000 

9> 

99 

Farms  and  ) 
Licences  S        " 

» 

57,000 

62,000 

I43,OOC 

1  53,000 

Dutch  SetUe-^ 

7,000 

ments          S     " 

»> 

>» 

>» 

99 

TOTAL    INCKBASB   OP   RXVSNUB. 


1813-14 
1807-8 


Increase 


£17,228,000 
15,670,000 

£  1,558,000 


Of  which  the  Increase  in  Bengal  was  £1,200,000 
Madras   .  369,000 


The  Deficit  in  Bombay 
Net  Increase 


1,569,000 
11,000 


.   £1,558,000 


INCKRASB  OF  LAND   RBVENUB   IN    BENGAL. 


Lower  Provinces 
Ceded  ditto 
Conquered  ditto 


£199,000 
553,000 
651,000 

£1,403,000 


APPENDIX.  603 

These  particulars  are  compiled  from  the  Revenue  state-    No.  IX. 

ments  of  the  Second  Report  of  the  Select  Committee  of 

the  House  of  Commons,  1810,  and  the  Report  of  the 
Committee  of  the  House  of  Lords,  1830.  The  smaller 
sums,  below  a  thousand,  are  purposely  omitted.  It  must 
be  borne  in  mind  also,  that,  at  the  valuation  of  the  rupee 
adopted  in  the  Reports,  all  the  sums  are  about  one-seventh 
too  high. 


X. 

Page  540. 


Resolutions  {communicated  hy  the  Honourable  the  House  of 
Commons  to  the  Right  Honourable  the  House  of  Lords  at 
a  Conference)  respecting  the  Affairs  of  the  East  India 
Company. 

1.  Resolved,  That  it  is  expedient  that  aU  the  privileges,    No.  X. 

authorities,  and  inununities,  granted  to  the  United  Com- 

pany  of  Merchants  trading  to  the  East  Indies  by  virtue 

of  any  act  or  acts  of  parliament  now  in  force,  and  all 
rules,  regulations,  and  clauses  affecting  the  same,  shall 
continue  and  be  in  force  for  a  further  term  of  twenty 
years  ;  except  as  far  as  the  same  may  hereinafter  be  mo- 
dified and  repealed. 

2.  Resolved,  That  the  existing  restraints  respecting 
the  commercial  intercourse  with  China  shall  be  continued, 
and  that  the  exclusive  trade  in  tea  shaU  be  preserved  to 
the  said  Company  during  the  period  aforesaid. 

3.  Resolved,  That,  subject  to  the  provisions  contained 
in  the  preceding  Resolution,  it  shall  be  lawful  for  any  of 
his  Majesty's  subjects  to  export  any  goods,  wares,  or  mer- 
chandize, which  can  now,  or  may  hereafter,  be  legally 
exported  from  any  port  in  the  United  Kingdom  to  any 
port  within  the  limits  of  the  charter  of  tlie  said  Company, 


604  APPENDIX. 

No.  X.     as  hereinafter  provided ;  and  that  all  ships  navigated  ac- 

cording  to  law,  proceeding  from  any  port  within  the  limits 

of  the  Company's  charter,  and  being  provided  with  regu- 
lar manifests  from  the  last  port  of  clearance,  shall  respec- 
tively be  permitted  to  import  any  goods,  wares^  or  mer- 
chandize, the  product  and  manufacture  of  any  countries 
within  the  said  limits,  into  any  ports  in  the  United  King- 
dom which  may  be  provided  with  warehouses,  together 
with  wet  docks  or  basins,  or  such  other  securities  as  shall, 
in  the  judgment  of  the  Commissioners  of  the  Treasury  in 
Great  Britain  and  Ireland  respectively,  be  fit  and  proper 
for  the  deposit  and  safe  custody  of  all  such  goods,  wares, 
and  merchandize,  as  well  as  for  the  collection  of  all  duties 
payable  thereon,  and  shall  have  been  so  declared  by  the 
Orders  of  his  Majesty  in  Council  in  Great  Britain,  or  by 
the  Order  of  the  Lord  Lieutenant  in  Council  in  Ireland : 
Provided  always,  that  copies  of  all  such  Orders  in  Council 
shall  be  laid  before  both  Houses  of  Parliament  in  the  ses- 
sion next  ensuing. 

4.  Resolved,  That  as  long  as  the  Government  of  India 
shall  be  administered  under  the  authority  of  the  said 
Company  according  to  the  provisions,  limitations,  and 
regulations  hereafter  to  be  enacted,  the  rents,  revenues, 
and  profits  arising  from  the  territorial  acquisitions  in 
India  shall,  after  defraying  the  expenses  of  collecting 
the  same,  with  the  several  charges  and  stipulated  pay- 
ments to  which  the  revenues  are  subject,  be  applied 
and  disposed  of  according  to  the  following  order  of 
preference  : 

In  the  first  place,  in  defraying  all  the  charges  and  ex- 
penses of  raising  and  maintaining  the  forces,  as  well  Eu- 
ropean as  native,  artillery  and  marine,  on  the  establish- 
ments in  India,  and  of  maintaining  the  forts  and  garrisons 
there,  and  providing  warlike  and  naval  stores :  Secondly, 
in  the  payment  of  the  interest  accruing  on  the  debts 
owing,  or  which  may  hereafter  be  incurred,  by  the  said 
Company  in  India:    Thirdly,  in  defraying  the  civil   and 


APPENDIX.  605 

commercial    establishments    at    the    several    settlements    n©.  x. 

there :  Fourthly,  that  the  whole  or  any  part  of  any  sur 

plus  that  may  remain  of  the  above-described  rents,  re- 
venues, and  profits,  after  providing  for  the  several  appro- 
priations, and  defraying  the  several  charges  before  men- 
tioned, shall  be  applied  to  the  provision  of  the  Company's 
investment  in  India,  in  remittances  to  China  for  the  pro- 
vision of  investments  there,  or  towards  the  liquidation  of 
debts  in  India,  or  such  other  purposes  as  the  Court  of 
Directors,  with  the  approbation  of  the  Board  of  Commis- 
sioners, shall  from  time  to  time  direct. 

5.  Resolved,  That  the  receipts  into  the  Company's  trea- 
sury in  England  from  the  proceeds  of  the  sales  of  their 
goods,  and  from  the  profits  arising  from  private  and  pri- 
vileged trade,  or  in  any  other  manner,  shall  be  applied 
and  disposed  of  as  follows : — First,  in  payment  of  bills  of 
exchange  already  accepted  by  the  Company,  as  the  same 
shall  become  due :  Secondly,  for  the  current  payment  of 
debts  (the  principal  of  the  bond  debt  in  England  always 
excepted)  as  well  as  interest,  and  the  commercial  charges 
and  expenses  of  the  said  Company  :  Thirdly,  in  payment 
of  a  dividend  of  ten  pounds  per  cent,  on  the  present  or 
any  future  amount  of  the  capital  stock  of  the  said  Com- 
pany ;  also  in  the  payment  of  a  further  dividend  of  ten 
shillings  per  cent,  upon  such  capital  stock,  after  the  sepa- 
rate fund  upon  which  the  same  was  originally  charged  by 
the  124th  clause  of  the  33rd  Geo.  III.  cap.  52,  shall  have 
been  exhausted;  the  said  payments  respectively  to  be 
made  half-yearly :  Fourthly,  in  the  reduction  of  the  prin- 
cipal of  the  debt  in  India,  or  of  the  bond  debt  at  home, 
as  the  Court  of  Directors,  with  the  approbation  of  the 
Board  of  Commissioners,  shall  from  time  to  time  direct. 

6.  Resolved,  That  when  the  principal  of  the  debt  bear- 
ing interest  in  India  shall  have  been  reduced  to  the  sum  of 
ten  millions  of  pounds  sterling,  calculated  at  the  exchange 
of  2s.  the  Bengal  current  rupee,  3*.  the  Madras  pagoda, 
and  2s.  Sd,  the  Bombay  rupee,  and  the  bonded  debt  in 


606  APPEOT)IX. 

No.  X.     England  shall'  have  been  reduced  to  the  sum  of  three  mil- 

lions  of  pounds  sterling,  then  and  thereafter  the  surplus 

proceeds  which  shall  be  found  to  arise  from  the  revenues  of 
India,  and  the  profits  upon  the  trade,  after  providing  for 
the   payments  aforesaid,  shall   be  applied  to   the    more 
speedy  repayment  of  the  capital  of  any  public  funds  or 
securities  which  have  been  or  may  be  created  for  the  use 
of  the  said  Company,  the  charges  of  which  have  been  or 
may  be  directed  to  be  borne  by  the  said  Company,   in 
virtue  of  any  act  or  acts  of  parliament;  and  that  any 
further  surplus  that  may  arise  shall  be  set  apart,  and  from 
time  to  time  paid  into  the  receipt  of  his  Majesty's  Ex- 
chequer, to  be  applied  as  Parliament  shall  direct,  without 
any  interest  to  be  paid  to  the  Company  in  respect  or  for 
the  use  thereof;   but  nevertheless  to  be  considered  and 
declared  as  an  effectual  security  to  the  said  Company  for 
the  capital  stock  of  the  said  Company,  and  for  the  divi- 
dend of  10 J  per  cent,  per  annum  in  respect  thereof,  not 
exceeding  the  sum  of  twelve  millions  of  pounds  sterKng- ; 
and  that  of  the  excess  of  such  payments,  if  any,  beyond 
the  said  amount  of  twelve  millions,  one-sixth  part  shall, 
from  time  to  time,  be  reserved  and  retained  by  the  said 
Company  for  their  own  use  and  benefit,  and  the  remaining 
five-sixths  shall  be  deemed  and  declared  the  property  of 
the  public,  and  at  the  disposal  of  Parliament. 

7.  Resolved,  That  the  said  Company  shall  direct  and 
order  their  books  of  account,  at  their  several  Presidencies 
and  settlements  in  India,  at  their  factory  in  China,  at  the 
island  of  St.  Helena  or  elsewhere,  and  also  in  England, 
to  be  so  kept  and  arranged  as  that  the  same  shall  contain 
and  exhibit  the  receipts,  disbursements,  debts  and  assets, 
appertaining  to,  or  connected  with,  the  territorial,  politi- 
cal, and  commercial  branches  of  their  affairs  ;  and  that  the 
same  shall  be  made  up  in  such  manner  that  the  said  books 
shall  contain  and  exhibit  the  accounts  of  the  territorial 
and  political  departments  separately  and  distinctly  from 
such  as  appertain  to,  or  are  connected  with,  the  commer- 


APPENDIX.  607 

cial  branch  of  their  affairs ;  and  that  the  arrangement  of    no.  X. 

accounts  so  to  be  made  shall  be  submitted  to  the   ap 

probation  and  sanction  of  the   Board  of  Commissioners 
for  the  AflSiirs  of  India. 

8.  Resolved,    That  it  is  expedient  to  make  provision 
for  further  limiting  the  granting  of  gratuities  and  pensions 
to  oflBcers,  civil  and  military,  or  increajsing  the  same,  or 
creating  any  new  establishments  at  home,  in  such  manner  . 
as  may  effectually  protect  the  funds  of  the  said  Company. 

9.  Resolved,  That  all  vacancies  happening  in  the  o£Sce 
of  Governor-General  of  Fort  William  in  Bengal,  or  of 
Governor  of  either  of  the  Company's  Presidencies  or  set- 
tlements of  Fort  St.  George  or  Bombay,  or  of  Go- 
vernor of  the  forts  and  garrisons  of  Fort  William,  Fort 
St.  George,  or  Bombay,  or  of  Commander-in-chief  of  all 
the  forces  in  India,  or  of  any  provincial  Commander-in- 
chief  of  the  forces  there,  shall  continue  to  be  filled  up 
and  supplied  by  the  Court  of  Directors  of  the  said  United 
Company,  subject  nevertheless  to  the  approbation  of  his 
Majesty,  to  be  signified  in  writing  under  his  royal  sign 
manual,  countersigned  by  the  President  of  the  Board  of 
Commissioners  for  the  Affairs  of  India. 

10.  Resolved,  That  the  number  of  his  Majesty's  troops 
in  India  to  be  in  future  maintained  by  the  said  Company 
be  limited  ;  and  that  any  augmentation  of  force  exceeding 
the  number  so  to  be  limited  shall,  unless  employed  at  the 
express  requisition  of  the  said  Company,  be  at  the  public 
charge. 

11.  Resolved,  That  it  is  expedient  that  the  Church 
Establishment  in  the  British  territories  in  the  East  Indies 
should  be  placed  under  the  superintendence  of  a  Bishop 
and  three  Archdeacons ;  and  that  adequate  provision 
should  be  made,  from  the  territorial  revenues  of  India, 
for  their  maintenance. 

12.  Resolved,  That  it  is  expedient  that  the  statutes  and 
regulations  framed,  or  to  be  framed,  by  the  Court  of 
Directors  for  the  good  government  of  the  College  esta- 


608  APPENDIX. 

^Q  X      tlished  by  the  East  India  Company  in  the  county  of  Hert- 
— —         ford,  and  of  the  Military  Seminary  of  the  said  Company 
in  the  county  of  Surrey,  as  weU  as  the  establishment  of 
o£Sces  connected  therewith,  or  the  appointment  of  persons 
to  fiU  such  o£Sces,  be  subject  to  the  controul  and  regula- 
tion of  the  Commissioners  for  the  Affairs  of  India ;  and 
that  the  power  and  authority  of  the  Board  of  Commis- 
sioners for  the  Affairs  of  India  shaU  be  construed  to  ex- 
tend to  the  issuing  or  sending  orders  or  instructions  to 
the  Court  of  Directors,  for  the  purpose   of  their  being 
transmitted  to  India,  respecting  the  rules  and  regulations 
and  establishments  of  the  respective  colleges  at  Calcutta 
and  Fort  St.  George,  or  any  other  seminaries  which  may 
be  hereafter  established  under  the  authority  of  the  local 
Governments. 

13.  Resolved,  That  it  is  the  duty  of  this  country  to 
promote  the  interest  and  happiness  of  the  native  inhabit- 
ants of  the  British  dominions  in  India;  and  that  such 
measures  ought  to  be  adopted  as  may  tend  to  the  intro- 
duction amongst  them  of  useful  knowledge,  and  of  religious 
and  moral  improvement.  That,  in  the  furtherance  of  the 
above  objects,  sufficient  facilities  shall  be  afforded  by  law  to 
persons  desirous  of  going  to  and  remaining  in  India  for 
the  purpose,  of  accomplishing  these  benevolent  designs : 
provided  always,  that  the  autliority  of  the  local  Govern- 
ments,, respecting  the  intercourse  of  Europeans  with  the 
interior  of  the  country,  be  preserved ;  and  that  the  prin- 
ciples of  the  British  Government,  on  which  the  natives  of 
India  have  hitherto  relied  for  the  free  exercise  of  their 
religion,  be  inviolably  maintained. 


END  OF  VOL.  I. 


LONDON : 
Printed  1)}  S.  ft  J.  Bkntley,  Wilkok,  and  Flry,  Bangor  House.  Sho«  Lane. 


1« 


