THE    NAPOLEONIC    EMPIRE 


The 

Napoleonic  Empire 

In  Southern  Italy 

and  the 

Rise  of  the  Secret  Societies 


BY 

R.    M.  JOHNSTON 

AUTHOR    OF    'the    ROMAN    THEOCRACY    AND    THE    REPUBLIC,    1846-1I 
'  NAPOLEON  :    A    SHORT    BIOGRAPHY  ' 


VOLUME    I 


^'' 


MACMILLAN  AND   CO.,   Limited 

NEW    YORK  :    THE    MACMILLAN    COMPANY 
1904 

All  rights  reser-ued  \  ,.  ,-  X  O  \?  A.  '^  ^^^  * 


TO 
MRS.  W.   B.  WALKER 

A    KIND 
AND    VALUED    FRIEND 


Digitized  by  the  Internet  Archive 
in  2013 


http://archive.org/details/napoleonicempire01john 


PREFACE 

Naples  is  one  of  the  remote  corners  of  Europe,  but 
one  of  the  most  attractive,  for  Nature  and  History 
together  have  endov^ed  it  with  all  the  fascination  of 
the  grand,  extraordinary,  and  romantic.  As  one  gazes 
from  Posilipo  across  the  lovely  bay,  Capri,  the  haunt  of 
Tiberius,  arrests  the  eye  ;  to  the  left  Vesuvius  smokes 
watchfully  over  the  cities  it  has  swallowed,  while  in  the 
very  corner  of  the  gulf  nestles  Naples  ;  to  the  right 
are  Misenum,  Baias,  and  the  desolate  fields  where 
Virgil  meditated  the  JS.neid.  Every  promontory,  every 
island,  every  village,  every  stone  suggests  history ; 
and  wherever  the  eye  rests  the  azure  of  sea  and  sky 
frames  to  perfection  some  of  the  most  beautiful  scenes 
in  the  world.  Yet  it  is  not,  as  many  suppose,  from 
the  remote  past  alone  that  Naples  and  the  surrounding 
country  derive  their  mellowing  atmosphere  of  tradi- 
tion ;  the  moderns  have  some  claim  not  to  be  forgotten. 
For  the  history  of  ancient  Naples  can  show  no  more 
brilliant  or  romantic  figure  than  that  of  one  of  her 
modern  kings,  Joachim  Murat ;  no  more  momentous 
political  issues  ever  turned  on  her  possession  than 
those  evolved  by  the  gigantic  intellect  of  the  'Emperor 

Napoleon. 

vii 


viii  THE  NAPOLEONIC  EMPIRE 

It  is  to  trace  these  political  issues,  and  some  of  their 
more  immediate  consequences,  that  this  book  is  written. 
The  subject  has  been  much  neglected,  and  is  of  far 
more  importance  than  is  generally  assumed  in  histories 
of  wider  scope.  For  the  southern  end  of  the  Italian 
peninsula  was,  in  one  sense,  the  strategic  centre  or 
turning-point  of  the  great  war  between  France  and 
England.  From  1806  to  18 14  the  strength  of  the 
two  antagonists,  eagerly  watching  Egypt  and  the  route 
to  India,  balanced  at  the  Strait  of  Messina.  The 
British  occupation  of  Sicily,  the  events  associated  with 
the  names  of  Maida,  Ischia,  Capri,  Corfu,  and  Malta, 
have  been  undeservedly  lost  to  sight  behind  the  heavier 
cloud  of  war  that  rose  from  the  neighbouring  peninsula 
of  Spain. 

But  the  irruption  of  the  Napoleonic  influence  into 
southern  Italy  had  a  double  effect,  of  which  military 
affairs  present  only  one  aspect.  Not  only  will  the 
vicissitudes  of  the  struggle  for  the  Mediterranean 
between  France  and  England  and  the  tragic  fortunes 
of  King  Joachim  be  duly  chronicled,  but  also  the  fall 
of  feudalism,  the  creation  of  a  national  spirit  by  the 
French  conquest,  and  the  eventual  manifestation  of 
that  spirit  through  the  agency  of  the  secret  societies  in 
the  first  and  most  remarkable  of  the  Italian  national 
movements  of  the  Risorgimento.  It  may  further  be 
observed  that  the  date  always  assigned  for  the  begin- 
ning of  this  period,  18 15,  is  most  arbitrary  and  decep- 
tive. The  Risorgimento  was  essentially  Napoleonic  in 
its  origin,  and  its  history  is  meaningless  unless  drawn 
from  this  earliest  source  ;  indeed,  when  the  reader  has 


PREFACE  ix 

arrived  at  that  period  he  will  perhaps  agree  that  it 
would  be  more  justifiable  to  say  that  the  Risorgimento 
was  nearly  accomplished  in  1 8 1 3  than  that  it  only  began 
in  1 8 15. 

It  may  be  urged  that  the  scope  of  this  history  should 
have  been  extended  so  as  to  include  Sicily.  This  has 
not  been  done  for  various  reasons,  among  them  these  : 
that  it  would  have  been  destructive  to  the  unity  of  the 
book,  and  that  for  the  period  here  dealt  with  a  nearly 
indispensable  source  of  evidence  for  Sicilian  affairs 
remains  closed — the  dispatches  of  Lord  William  Ben- 
tinck.^  The  remarkable  conflict  between  Bentinck  and 
Queen  Mary  Caroline  is  the  key  to  the  central  period 
of  interest  in  Sicily,  and  when  entering  on  the  work  of 
collecting  material  for  this  history  I  could  not  foresee 
that  I  should  have  the  good  fortune  to  discover  a 
hitherto  unknown  manuscript  narrative  by  Queen  Mary 
Caroline,  in  which  one  side  of  this  political  drama  is 
circumstantially  stated.  As  to  this  MS.  the  reader 
must  be  referred  to  Appendix  D  ;  here  all  that  need 
be  added  on  the  subject  is  that  I  hope  to  be  able 
to  make  arrangements  for  editing  and  publishing  this 
valuable  document. 

In  the  course  of  this  book  more  than  one  new  reading 
of  history  will  be  met  with,  two  of  which  require  special 
mention  here.  The  portrait  of  Murat  is  so  far  removed 
from  that  generally  presented  that  it  may  be  thought 
the  work  of  an  apologist.  Nothing  could  be  further 
from  the  fact.     On  entering  into  the  preliminary  work 

^  Some  of  these  dispatches  are  accessible,  and  have  been  utilized  by  Mr.  Browning, 
Mons.  Weil,  and  others.  The  reference  is,  of  course,  to  those  that  have  been  specially 
held  back  by  the  British  Foreign  Office. 

VOL.  I  b 


/ 


X  THE  NAPOLEONIC  EMPIRE 

for  this  book,  I  accepted,  with  at  most  a  vague  mis- 
trust, the   current  historical  estimate  of  Murat.     But 
as  evidence  accumulated,  my  views   became  modified, 
and  gradually  shaped  into  the  presentment  the  reader 
will  find.     The  facts,  the  evidence,  the  conclusions,  are 
put   forward    in   no  spirit    of  laudation.      It   may   be 
added  that  it  is  not  on  a  few  specific  items  of  important 
evidence  that  I  rely,  but  rather  on  an  accumulation  of 
minute  indications,  many  of  them  not  directly  traceable 
in  the  text.      Much  of  a  man's  character  may  insensibly 
filter  into  the  historian's  perception  by  the  handling  of 
dry  official  minutes  in  which  a  scrawled  decision  and 
signature  in  the  margin, — usually  nothing  more  than 
the  word   Tes   or    No, — afford    the    only    clue.     The 
examination  of  many  such  papers  may  not  result  in  the 
acquirement  of  a  single  definite  historical  fact,  yet  may 
go  far  in  shaping  an  opinion  of  character.     There  can 
be  no  doubt  that  both  in  the  days  of  the  Empire  and 
since  there  has  been  a  tendency  to  distort  the  propor- 
tion  of  the    personages.     Napoleon   was  undoubtedly 
great,  and  writers  promptly  combine  to  dwarf  the  men 
about  him  so  that  he  may  appear  gigantic.     But  his 
admirers    claim    for    him,   and    truly,   that   he   was    an 
admirable  judge  of  men  ;  if  so,  how  is  Murat's  extra- 
ordinary career  to  be  explained  ?    Is  not  the  presumption 
clear  that  he  was  one  of  the  six  most  serviceable  men  in 
France  ^     Except  Massena,  and  perhaps  Davoust,  he  was 
the  most  trusted  of  Napoleon's  lieutenants  ;  even  when 
the  end  was  drawing  near,  when  Napoleon  suspected  his 
brother-in-law  of  treason,  he  continued  to  treat  him  as 
the  second  man  in  his  army.     If  the  Emperor  did  this 


PREFACE  xi 

during  the  last  critical  manoeuvres  of  the  campaign  of 
Saxony,  then  surely  either  Napoleon  was  a  bad  judge 
of  men,  or  Joachim  Murat  was  something  more  than 
the  empty-headed  beau  sahreur  of  the  legend.  The 
fact  isj  that  Murat's  figure  has  hitherto  been  reflected 
in  a  sort  of  historical  concave  glass  ;  all  the  features 
have  been  there,  and  in  their  due  place,  but  so  com- 
pletely distorted  as  to  make  the  likeness  undistinguish- 
able. 

The  other  matter  to  which  reference  must  be  made 
is  that  of  the  secret  societies.  The  point  of  view  I 
have  adopted  is  that  it  was  necessary,  however  deficient 
and  untrustworthy  the  material,  to  attempt  to  place 
this  essential  aspect  of  the  political  movements  of  the 
nineteenth  century  in  Italy  on  a  strict  historical  basis. 
The  evidence  is  of  the  most  distressingly  contradictory 
character.  There  is  little  that  is  really  authentic  for 
what  comes  before  1815  ;  after  that  date  the  ground 
is  slightly  firmer.  A  confidential  report  of  Sir  Richard 
Church,  of  which  the  MS.  is  at  the  Biblioteca  Nazionale 
at  Naples,  is  the  soundest  piece  ot  evidence  as  to  the 
secret  societies  with  which  I  am  acquainted  ;  it  affords 
a  good  starting-point  for  the  history  of  the  Carbonari, 
and  indirectly  shows  that  Bertholdi's  anonymous 
Memoirs  are  more  accurate  and  valuable  than  has  been 
generally  supposed.  Yet  whatever  care  and  judgment 
have  been  exercised  in  piecing  together  the  present  narra- 
tive, it  is  certain  that  here  and  there  inaccuracies  must 
have  crept  in.  I  have  thought  it  was  better  to  face  this 
risk,  believing  the  broad  outline  substantially  true,  than 
to  turn  away  from  an  important  aspect  of  the  history 


xii  THE  NAPOLEONIC  EMPIRE 

of  this  period  which  serious  historians  have  hitherto 
refrained  from  touching  because  of  the  undoubtedly 
treacherous  character  of  the  evidence. 

It  is  not  only  in  the  matter  of  the  secret  societies 
that  the  material  for  this  history  v^as  of  an  unsatis- 
factory character,  but  generally.  Few,  if  any,  of  the 
contemporary  Italian  authorities  are  reliable  ;  the  two 
most  important,  Pepe  and  Colletta,  are  frequently 
unveracious  and  chronically  inaccurate.  The  docu- 
mentary material  for  the  period  before  1 8 1 5  is  slight, 
fragmentary,  and  difficult  to  find,  as  at  the  Bourbon 
restoration  nearly  every  trace  of  the  French  kings  was 
effaced.  Their  improved  system  of  administration  was 
retained,  but  their  records  were  destroyed  and  the  very 
mention  of  their  names  was  prohibited. 

As  to  the  manuscript  and  printed  authorities  I  have 
used,  the  student  must  be  referred  to  the  notes  at  the 
end  of  each  chapter  and  the  critical  bibliography. 
Appendix  K. 

In  conclusion,  I  must  acknowledge  my  debt  of 
gratitude  to  the  following  institutions,  their  Ubrarians 
and  assistants  :  Archivio  di  Stato,  Napoli  ;  Biblioteca 
Nazionale,  Napoli  ;  Boston  Public  Library ;  British 
Museum  ;  British  Record  Office  ;  Cambridge  Univer- 
sity Library  ;  Harvard  College  Library  ;  San  Martino, 
Napoli ;  Societa  di  Storia  Patria,  Napoli ;  and  the 
Universita  di  Napoli.  I  am  also  indebted  to  the  Italian 
Government  and  to  the  American  Embassy  at  Rome 
for  assistance  in  obtaining  access  to  certain  MSS., 
to  Count  De  La  Ville-sur-Yllon  for  some  valuable 
suggestions,  and  to  Miss  S.  C.  Hart  for  reading  proof. 


PREFACE 


Postscript 


Xlll 


Since  the  above  was  written  more  than  four-fifths  of 
the  MS.  of  this  book  has  been  lost  while  out  of  my 
hands.  I  have,  therefore,  had  the  ungrateful  task  of 
rewriting  the  lost  portion,  and  not  being  in  a  position 
either  to  recall  the  words  of  the  missing  MS.  or  to 
undertake  a  journey  across  the  Atlantic,  my  work  has 
necessarily  suffered.  There  were  in  the  first  version 
passages,  extracts,  and  notes  that  were  taken  directly 
from  the  original  material,  and  that  in  this  second 
version  I  have  unfortunately  been  able  to  reproduce 
only  in  a  form  far  from  satisfactory  to  myself. 

Cambridge,  Mass.,  . 

February  1904. 


CONTENTS 


PART    I 


THE    NAPOLEONIC    EMPIRE    IN    SOUTHERN    ITALY 


CHAPTER   I 

State  of  Naples  in   1805 

Situation  of  kingdom  of  Naples — Geographical — Natural  resources — Origin  of 
people — Albanians — Mountaineers — Neapolitans — Continuity  of  customs 
— Oratory — Religion — Tlie  drama — Pulcinella — The  clergy — Education 
— S.  Gennaro — Italian  love  for  the  concrete — Rise  of  feudalism — Miser- 
able state  of  people — Low  morality — Feudal  law — Its  origins — Universita 
— Development  of  feudalism — Feudal  rights  and  abuses — Brigandage — 
Lazzaroni — Commerce — Agriculture — Finance — Public  debt — Fluctuation 
of  population — Bourbon  government — ^Justice — Foreign  policy 


PAGE 


CHAPTER   II 

Napoleon  and  Naples 

Ferdinand  I. — Mary  Caroline — Acton — World  politics — Taranto  and  the  East 
— Napplepn,  K-irig    of   Italy — Coerces    Naples — Elliot    and    Tatitcheff — 
Gallo's   warnings — Lacy   at  Naples — Treaty   of  neutrality — The   Anglo- 
Russians  at  Naples — Trafalgar  and  Austerlitz — PssihoXkSjX.Jtal^ — Retreat 
of   Anglo-Russians — Mary   Caroline's    negotiations — Craig    and    Sicily — 
Schoenbrunn  proclamation      .........     42 

XV 


xvi  THE  NAPOLEONIC  EMPIRE 

CHAPTER   III 

Conquest  of  Naples 
(Feb.-June  1806) 

PAGE 

Policy  of  Napoleon — French  finance — Napoleon  and  Joseph — Is  offered  crown  ^ 
of  Naples — S.  Teodoro's  negotiations — Flight  of  the  Court — Collapse  of 
Neapolitan  resistance — Massena's  movements — Joseph's  entry  into  Naples 
— Task  before  the  invaders — The  Neapolitan  forces — Regnier  marches 
into  Calabria  —  Campotanese — French  at  Reggio — Neapolitan  flight — 
Corpi  'volanti — Character  and  causes  of  the  rising  in  Calabria — Military 
situation  end  of  March — Insurrection  of  Calabria — Rodio — Joseph  visits 
Calabria — His  portrait  and  line  of  internal  policy — Gaeta — Its  garrison  and 
commander — Commencement  of  siege — Unsuccessful  bombardments — 
Campredon  takes  charge — Hesse's  appeals  for  help — Smith  at  Palermo — 
Embarks  Fra  Diavolo — His  history — Smith  relieves  Gaeta — Captures 
Capri — Fra  Diavolo's  raid  and  treachery — Sent  to  Palermo — Sorties  from 
Gaeta — Smith's  proclamations — Progress  of  French  works — Massena 
takes  command      ...........     79 


CHAPTER   IV 

Maida  and  the  Insurrection  of  Calabria 

Results  of  Trafalgar — British  Mediterranean  policy — France,  England,  and 
Sicily — Position  at  Messina — Stuart's  strategy — Leaves  Messina — Lands 
in  Calabria — Regnier  concentrates — Battle  of  Maida — Regnier  retreats — 
Humanity  of  Stuart — Rising  of  Calabria — Stuart's  proclamation — Regnier 
at  Catanzaro — Stuart  motionless — De  Michele  assumes  government — 
Rdgnier  abandons  Catanzaro — Papasodero  and  Stuart — Pane  di  Grano — 
Outrages  of  masse — Regnier  sacks  Strongoli — Retreats  to  Cassano — Verdier 
abandons  Cosenza — Storms  Cassano — Regnier's  position — Siege  of  Gaeta 
— Hesse  wounded — -Fall  of  Gaeta — Massena  marches  on  Calabria — Smith 
and  the  capimassi — Capri,  Ponza,  and  Canosa — Fra  Diavolo  at  Amantea 
— At  Fort  Licosa — At  Sperlonga — Calabria  proclaimed  in  state  of  siege — 
Pane  di  Grano  defends  passes  —  Lauria  sacked — Regnier  relieved — 
Instances  of  ferocity — Dispersal  of  masse — Massena  at  Monteleone — 
Partisan  warfare  —  Courts  -  martial — Disease  —  De  Michele  —  Amantea 
attacked  and  taken  —  Death  of  De  Michele  —  Fra  Diavolo's  last 
expedition — His  execution 116 


CONTENTS  xvii 

CHAPTER   V 

Joseph's  Internal  Policy 

PAGE 

Sen^iments_ of  Naples  towards  new  Goycrament — Changed  conditions — Papal 
hostility — Reform  and  .  its  agents  —  Peculation  —  Mass^na — Return  of 
nobility — First  Ministry — Finance — Roederer — Commerce — Thefotidiaria 
— Other  taxes — Land  registry — Farming  of  revenue — Forced  loan — Cedolas 
— Gran  Ubro — The  Hope  loan — Regal  expenses — Pompeii — Anti-feudal 
legislation  —  Judicial  commissions  —  Legal  reform  —  Administrative  — 
Council  of  State — Education — Military — Suppression  of  monastic  orders — 
Ministry  of  police — Saliceti — Mary  Caroline's  intrigues — Plots  at  Naples 
— Bruno's  correspondence  intercepted — Civic  patrols — Projected  rising  of 
June  1807 — Police  measures — Mosca's  attempt — Peace  of  Tilsit — Sicilian 
policy — Acton's  fall — St.  Clair — Sicilian  sentiments — Mary  Caroline  and 
the  British — Eastern  affairs — Fox  declines  to  act  in  Calabria — Hesse's 
expedition — Battle  of  Mileto — Calabrian  brigandage — Regnier  on  the 
Strait  of  Messina  —  Treaty  of  Tilsit,  Ionian  Islands  —  Gantheaume's 
expedition 147 

CHAPTER   VI 

Bayonne — MuRAT,  King  of  Naples 

Attempt  on  Saliceti — Finance — Army — Legislation — Napoleon's  policy — Im- 
perial succession — Joseph,  Eugene,  and  Italy — Venice  interview — Spanish  -»- 
affairs — British  policy — Fox — Abdication  of  Charles  IV. — Constitutional 
statute — Murat,  King  of  Naples,  his  life,  marriage,  and  character — Style 
adopted — Entry  into  Naples  —  Impression  produced  —  Capri  taken  — 
Amnesty — Napoleon,  Joachim,  and  Caroline — Fouche-Metternich  intrigue 
— Disgrace  of  Talleyrand — Coolness  between  Joachim  and  Napoleon  .   177 

CHAPTER   VII 

Murat's  Reforms 

Military  preparations — Militia — War  with  Austria — Anglo-Sicilian  armaments 
— Eckmiihl  and  Essling — Stuart  sails — Takes  Ischia — Alarm  at  Naples 
— Naval  action — Preparations  for  retreat — Saliceti — Stuart's  position — 
Wagram — Brigandage — Ionian  Islands — Reforms — Finance — Continental 
blockade — Seizure  of  American  vessels — Educational  and  judicial  reform — 
Feudal  Commission  —  Zurlo — Police  department — Maghella — Saliceti — 
Annexation  of  Papal  States — Death  of  Saliceti — Court  parties — Neapolitan 
.Rationalist)  and  Joachim — Constitutionalism — Electoral  colleges — Public 
apathy ^^  Results  of  Wagram  —  Metternich  —  Napoleon's  marriage  — 
Napoleon  and  Murat      ..........  207 


xviii  THE  NAPOLEONIC  EMPIRE 

CHAPTER  VIII 

Sicilian  Intrigues  And  Demonstrations 

PAGE 

Invasion  of  Sicily — Mary  Caroline  and  the  British — Her  secret  communications — 
Castrone — D'  Amitia — Donop^rrMoli^^^^i^Jio's  expedition — Marriage  of  Maria 
Louisa — Fears  of  British— ^Napoleon's  intentiorxs>— Relief  of  Corfu — Affairs 
of  Spain — Cadiz  letter — BritisITTeeling — Mary  Caroline's  disclaimer — 
Joachim  arrives  at  Scilla — His  command  and  forces — Military  operations — 
Expedition  abandoned — Feelings  of  Joachim — Napoleon's  recriminations — 
King  of  Rome — Anti  -  French  decree — Quarrel  between  Joachim  and 
Napoleon — Caroline  proceeds  to  Paris — State  of  Calabria — Manhes — His 
system — The  brigands — Manhes  at  Serra — Capobianco  and  the  Carbonari 
— Manhes'  character      .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .231 

CHAPTER   IX 

The  Defection  of  Murat 

Joachim  joins  Grande  Armee — Events  in  Russia — Commands  in  chief — Abandons 
army — Negotiations  between  Austria  and  Naples — Position  of  Metternich 
— Of  Joachim — Course  of  Sicilian  events  since  i8io — Bentinck — 
Negotiates  at  Ponza — ^Joachim  returns  to  army — Napoleon's  position — 
Joachim  and  Italy — Dresden  interview — Entreaties  of  Joachim — Negotia- 
tions of  Joachim  and  Metternich — Joachim  returns  to  Naples — Hesitating 

%.  policy — Italian  unity-^Fouche's  mission — Colletta  at  Bologna — Nugent 
at  Ravenna — Diplomatic  negotiations — Neipperg  at  Naples — His  letter  to 
Caroline — Austro- Neapolitan  alliance  —  Bentinck  at  Naples — Anglo- 
Neapolitan  armistice      .  .  .  .         .         .  .  .         .  -255 


CHAPTER   X 

Murat's  Incertitudes 

Armistice — British  attitude — French  at  Naples — Neapolitan  army — Generals — 
Rome  occupied — Advance  north — Joachim  at  Bologna — Tuscany  occupied 
— Eugene's  position — Correspondence — ^Decides  to  defend  Italy — Con- 
centrates on  Quadrilateral — St.  Dizier — Battle  of  Mincio- — Hesitation  of 
Joachim  —  British  policy — Bentinck's  instructions — Armistice  between 
Naples  and  Great  Britain — Nugent's  advance — Joachim  writes  to  Eugene 
and  Princess  Baciocchi — Champaubert — Napoleon  to  Caroline — Joachim 
to  Napoleon — Negotiations  with  Eugene — Joachim's  excuses  to  Bellegarde 


CONTENTS  xix 

PAGE 

— Nugent  active — Occupies  Casalmaggiore — Grenier  at  Piacenza — Takes 
Parma — Releases  Neapolitan  prisoners — Effects  retreat  to  Borgoforte — 
Joachim  decides  on  hostilities — Fight  at  Reggio — Neapolitan  generals  un- 
settled— Pepe  and  a  constitution — Petition  shelved — Bentinck  at  Naples 
— Sicilian  proclamations — Bentinck's  to  the  people  of  Italy — Joachim 
attempts  to  propitiate  him — Bentinck's  harsh  attitude — Intrigue  of 
Neapolitan  generals — Joachim  thinks  himself  sacrificed — His  letter  to 
Fouche — Napoleon  negotiates  with  Joachim — Conferences  at  S.  Giacomo — 
Alarm  of  Austrians — Bentinck's  note  to  Gallo — Allies  adhere  to  Austrian 
policy — BalatschefPs  mission — Castlereagh  quiets  Bentinck — Conference 
at  Rovere — Release  of  Pope — Arrives  at  Neapolitan  outposts — Meets 
Joachim — Nugent  crosses  Taro — Fighting  at  Piacenza — News  of  fall  of 
Empire — Joachim's  position — Convention  of  Schiarino  Rizzeno  .  .   282 


CHAPTER    XI 

Congress  of  Vienna 

Bourbon  restoration — Reaction  in  Italy — Neapolitans  evacute — Their  misconduct 
— Clerical  agitation — Insubordination  of  generals — Carbonaro  revolt — 
Joachim  returns  to  Naples — State  of  kingdom — Armaments — Generals' 
intrigue  with  Bentinck — Petition  Joachim — Pepe  arrested — Feeling  against 
Joachim — Bentinck  and  Castlereagh — Court  festivities  at  Naples — Re- 
settlement of  Europe — Congress  decided — Austria  and  Naples — Talleyrand 
and  Joachim — Death  of  Mary  Caroline — The  Czar  and  a  Bourbon 
restoration — Talleyrand  opposes  Naples — Neuville's  mission — Fagan  re- 
called from  Naples — Wellington's  attitude  —  Congress  opens  —  Naples 
excluded — Joachim's  excitement — Metternich  intervenes — Joachim  appeals 
to  England — Saxon  question — The  Marches — Hostility  of  clerics — 
Joachim  offers  the  Marches  for  recognition — Talleyrand's  obstinacy — 
Polignac's  mission — Joachim  challenges  France — Metternich's  note — 
Elba  —  Napoleon's  position  —  Correspondence  with  Naples  —  Countess 
Walewska — Madame  Mere  and  Joachim — British  at  Naples — Princess  of 
Wales — Oxford  arrested — Napoleon  leaves  Elba — News  at  Naples — 
Joachim's  assurances — Change  of  attitude — Joachim  joins  the  army  .   320 


CHAPTER   Xn 

Murat's  Last  Campaign 

Joachim  prepares  for  war — The  army — Hostilities  begin — Diplomatic  relations 
broken — Council  held — Joachim's  plans — His  effective  strength — Move- 
ment in  two  columns — Advance  from  Ancona — Bologna  occupied — Pro- 
clamation of  Rimini — Italian  national  convention — Public  apathy — Fight 


XX  THE  NAPOLEONIC  EMPIRE 

PAGE 

on  the  Panaro — Attack  on  Occhiobello — March  of  the  Guard — Austrian 
movements — Carascosa  at  Modena — Carpi — Bianchi  at  Modena — ^Joachim 
retreats — Council  of  war — Guard  in  Tuscany — Retreat — Frimont  at 
Bologna — Council  of  war — Bianchi  at  Florence — Joachim  on  the  Ronco 
— Demoralization  of  Neapolitans  —  Bianchi's  march  —  Carascosa  faces 
Neipperg — Fight  at  Monte  Milone — Battle  of  Tolentino — Defeat  and 
retreat — Belliard  joins  Joachim — Policy  of  Great  Britain — Bentinck  warns 
Joachim — Castlereagh's  letters  produced  to  Parliament — Dissatisfaction  at 
Naples — The  clergy — National  party — Constitution — Bourbon  restoration 
decided  —  Caroline's  measures — Joachim  arrives  at  Naples  —  Caroline 
negotiates  with  Campbell — Her  courage — Convention  of  Casa  Lanza — 
Scenes  of  last  days — Escape  of  Joachim — Caroline  goes  on  board  the 
Tremendous — Prince  Leopold  enters  Naples        .         .  .  .  .  -350 


CHAPTER   XIII 

The  Tragedy  of  Pizzo 

Murat  in  Provence — Waterloo — Royalist  reaction — Murat  pursued — Escapes  to 
Corsica — Franceschetti — State  of  Corsica — Gordon  visits  Murat — Decides 
on  expedition  to  Naples — Marches  toAjaccio — Carabelli's  mission — Arrest 
of  Otello — Correspondence  of  Murat  with  Naples — The  guetapens  theory — 
Macirone — Bastard  at  Bastia — Macirone  and  Carabelli  at  Ajaccio — Murat 
sails — His  plans — Lands  at  Pizzo — Situation  of  town — Coolness  of  in- 
habitants— Trentacapilli — Murat's  arrest — Nunziante  sends  troops — The 
news  at  Naples — Orders  sent  to  Nunziante — Court-martial — Execution 
of  Murat 386 


LIST    OF    MAPS 


Kingdom  of  Naples  in 

1806  . 

To  face  page       i 

Siege  of  Gaeta 

. 

„       „         105 

Maida      .          .          . 

. 

„       „         121 

Europe  after  Wagram 

. 

„       „        215 

Campaigns  of   1814,  18] 

5 

„       „        285 

Tolentino 

. 

„       „        369 

XXI 


PART    I 

THE  NAPOLEONIC  EMPIRE   IN 
SOUTHERN   ITALY 


ERRATUM 

Vol.  I.  page  7,  line  I'j^for  Constans  read  Constantius. 


CHAPTER   I 

STATE    OF    NAPLES    IN     1805 

Situation  of  kingdom  of  Naples — Geographical — Natural  resources 
— Origin  of  people — Albanians — Mountaineers — Neapolitans 
— Continuity  of  customs — Oratory — Religion — The  drama — 
Pulcinella — The  clergy — Education — S.  Gennaro — Italian  love 
for  the  concrete — Rise  of  feudalism — Miserable  state  of  people 
—  Low  morality  —  Feudal  law — Its  origins  —  Universita  — 
Development  of  feudalism — Feudal  rights  and  abuses — Brigand- 
age— Lazzaroni — Commerce — Agriculture — Finance — Public 
debt  —  Fluctuation  of  population  —  Bourbon  government — 
Justice — Foreign  policy. 

Towards  the  close  of  1805,  the  year  of  Trafalgar  and 
Austerlitz,  the  affairs  of  the  kingdom  of  Naples  had 
reached  a  crisis ;  a  remarkable  series  of  events  was 
soon  to  overtake  it.  The  people  of  the  southern  half 
of  the  Italian  peninsula  were  about  to  be  absorbed 
into  the  newly-formed  French  Empire  ;  they  were  to 
see  Napoleon's  kings  succeed  those  of  the  House  of 
Bourbon,  to  witness  and  suffer  merciless  wars  and 
dramatic  revolutions,  to  assist  at  the  overthrow  of 
feudalism,  to  participate  in  the  benefits  of  improved 
government,  to  feel  the  growth  of  a  new  spirit — that 
of  citizenship  and  nationality. 

To  understand  the  character  and   surroundings  of 
the    people    and    of    the    monarchy    with    which    this 

VOL.  I  B 


2  THE  NAPOLEONIC  EMPIRE  part  i 

history  will  be  concerned,  something  of  their  past  and 
something  of  their  mutual  relations  must  first  be  made 
clear.  This  shall  be  the  subject  of  the  present  chapter  ; 
in  it  will  be  considered  the  social,  economic,  and 
political  conditions  of  the  people  of  Naples^at^  the 
period,  at  which  this  history  opens. 

The  kingdom  of  Naples,  the  continental  portion 
of  the  monarchy  of  the  Two  Sicilies,  comprised  about 
one  half  of  the  peninsular  part  of  Italy.  Its  northern 
boundary  ran  from  the  Mediterranean  to  the  Adriatic, 
from  a  point  about  midway  between  Rome  and  Naples 
to  one  not  far  south  of  Ancona.  Midway  between  the 
two  seas  rose  the  lofty  chain  of  the  Apennines,  at  many 
points  an  impassable  barrier  ;  it  stretched  the  whole 
length  of  Italy,  from  the  plains  of  Lombardy  through  the 
Papal  States  and  the  kingdom  of  Naples  to  the  extreme 
point  of  Calabria  where  the  rock  of  Scilla  marked  the 
abrupt  descent  of  the  mountains  into  the  waters  of  the 
Strait  of  Messina.  At  the  Gran  Sasso,  in  the  Abruzzi, 
the  extreme  elevation  of  nearly  10,000  feet  is  reached  ; 
and  at  all  points,  within  a  few  miles  of  Naples  and 
among  the  rugged  forest-clad  fastnesses  of  Calabria, 
the  lower  summits  are  frequently  clad  with  snow  late 
in  the  spring  and  early  in  the  autumn.  It  was  at  the 
extremities  of  the  kingdom  that  the  mountain  influence 
was  most  felt ;  towards  the  centre  two  considerable 
tracts  of  fertile  lowland  gave  it  a  different  character. 
The  smaller  of  these  lay  along  the  western  coast, 
stretching  northward  from  Nola  along  the  foot  of 
Vesuvius  to  the  mouth  of  the  Garigliano  ;  the  greater 
extended  for  many  miles  along  the  Adriatic,  and  in- 
cluded the  rich  country  about  Foggia,  Bari,  and  Lecce. 
These  districts  and  many  of  the  mountain  valleys  were 
exceptionally    rich    in    soil  ;    the  whole    kingdom   was 


CHAP.  I  STATE  OF  NAPLES  IN  1805  3 

favoured  in  its  climate.  Everywhere  the  vine  and  the 
olive,  the  lemon  and  the  orange  grew  luxuriantly  ;  in 
the  volcanic  soil  about  the  city  of  Naples  two,  and  even 
three  crops  of  maize  and  garden  produce  might  be 
obtained  in  the  course  of  a  year.  The  neighbouring 
seas  were  as  rich  as  the  land,  and  rewarded  the  efforts 
of  many  fishermen,  harpooners,  and  divers.  Coral  and 
sponge  abounded,  and  fish  of  all  sorts — from  the  levia- 
than tunny  to  the  edible  sole.  Forests  of  oak  and  chest- 
nut clothed  the  mountains  of  Calabria,  and  might  have 
yielded  timber  of  the  finest  quality.  Mineral  resources 
were  fewer,  though  the  iron  deposits  of  the  Sila  might 
have  been  easily  converted  into  a  source  of  wealth. 
I  The  facilities  for  outlet  were  as  great  as  the  natural 
vresources  of  the  kingdom.  At  frequent  intervals  along 
the  rugged  coasts,  small  ports,  sufficient  to  accom- 
modate the  light  barks  of  the  Mediterranean,  might  be 
found,  while  larger  ones  were  not  few.  Nearly  with- 
out exception  the  important  centres  of  population  were 
within  a  few  miles  of  the  coast. 

The  people  who  dwelt  in  the  land  Nature  had  thus 
favoured  were  of  ancient  descent  and  presented  some 
curious  characteristics.  But  that  descent  and  these 
characteristics  differed  widely  in  the  various  provinces 
of  the  kingdom.  There  was  nothing  resembling 
national  homogeneity  to  be  found  among  the  subjects 
of  the  King  of  the  Two  Sicilies  save  the  compelling 
bond  resulting  from  the  exertion  of  personal  authority 
over  ignorance  and  poverty.  "  The  lively  Campanian, 
the  parsimonious  Abruzzese,  the  boorish  Pugliese,  the 
haughty  Calabrian  quarrelled  easily  and  showed  the 
heterogeneity  of  the  race,"  wrote  Cantu.  Not  only 
did  their  temperaments  differ,  but  also  th^^  j,ialects, 
to  the  point  of  mutual  unintelligibility.     Of  the  various 


4  THE  NAPOLEONIC  EMPIRE  part  i 

elements  of  the  population,  none  showed  more  charac- 
teristic features  than  the  Albanians,  a  race  that  shows, 
according  to  Virchow,  the  greatest  cranial  capacity 
in  Europe.  Their  settlements  were  the  result  of  the 
immigration  that  had  taken  place  from  beyond  the 
Adriatic  between  the  sixteenth  and  eighteenth  centuries 
under  the  pressure  of  Turkish  conquest.  The  Albanians 
numbered  about  75,000  ;  they  retained  their  religion, 
dress,  and  customs,  and  spoke  an  Italianized  Greek 
dialect.^  Several  of  their  settlements  had  attained  con- 
siderable importance,  chief  among  them  the  large  town 
of  Catanzaro  in  Southern  Calabria.  Their  principal 
church,  situated  in  Naples,  had  been  founded  by 
Thomas  Palaeologus  in  15 18.  The  descendants  of 
their  famous  leader  Scanderbeg  were  large  landholders 
in  PugHa  down  to  the  nineteenth  century.  The 
Albanians  were  not  the  only  extraneous  elements. 
Passing  over  the  waves  of  northern  invasion  that 
marked  the  close  of  the  Roman  Empire,  from  that 
of  the  Goths  to  that  of  the  Lombards,  it  may  be 
remarked  that  the  wars  of  the  Middle  Ages,  especially 
those  between  the  Swabians  and  Angevins,  added  new 
elements  to  the  population.  Bands  of  mercenaries, 
mostly  Germans  and  Saracens,  were  brought  into  the 
kingdom  by  the  contending  princes,  and  seasons  of 
war  and  devastation  were  often  concluded  by  the  estab- 
lishment of  a  colony  of  foreign  auxiliaries  in  one  of 
the  abandoned  towns  they  had  lately  desolated.  Of 
these  the  best  example  was  that  of  Lucera,  for  many 
years  a  purely  Saracen  settlement. 

The  hardy  mountaineers  of  the  Abruzzi  and  Calabria, 
a  population  of  shepherds  and  farmers,  might  well  pass 
for  the  descendants  of  the  ancient  Samnites,  Lucanians, 

1  See  a  paper  read  by  Prince  Lucien  Bonaparte  before  the  Philological  Society,  1890. 


CHAP.  I  STATE  OF  NAPLES  IN  1805  5 

and  Brutii  whose  conquest  had  cost  Rome  so  many 
lives,  for  in  their  mountain  valleys  the  wars  and  in- 
vasions of  twenty-five  centuries  had  introduced  as  little 
fresh  blood  as  they  had  civilization.  With  them  the 
village  was  but  a  larger  family,  justice  the  sanction 
of  revenge,  the  vendetta  a  dearer  gratification  than 
living.  As  individual  or  clan  fighters  they  were  un- 
surpassed in  craft,  courage,  ferocity,  and  endurance. 
They  were  the  most  redoubtable  combatants  of  Europe 
as  guerillas,  the  most  easily  demoralized  as  regular 
troops. 

In  the  plains  of  Puglia  were  to  be  found  the  dullest 
and  most  debased  among  the  numerous  types  of  in- 
habitants ;  in  the  city  of  Naples,  the  most  vivacious 
and  interesting.  There,  and  there  alone  in  Italy,  some- 
thing of  the  Greek  spirit  had  survived  —  nothing  of 
the  Greek  virtues,  much  of  the  Greek  failings.  All 
the  cities  of  Magna  Grascia  had  disappeared  :  Kumas, 
Sybaris,  Croton,  Paestum  were  no  more.  Only  Neapolis 
of  the  colonies  of  the  Hellenes  had  survived,  and, 
under  Roman  rule,  had  retained  much  of  her  original 
character.  For  not  only  had  the  Greek  traditions  of 
philosophy  and  art  been  adopted  in  the  Roman  world, 
thus  aiding  the  preservation  of  this  element  where 
present,  but  the  flow  of  travel  from  Greece  to  Rome, 
passing  along  the  Appian  Way  from  Brindisi  to  the 
capital,  ran  within  a  few  miles  of  Naples,  which  thus 
became  a  natural  link  between  the  two  civilizations. 
In  later  days  the  Greek  Empire  of  the  East  rescued 
Naples  from  the  dominion  of  the  northern  invaders ; 
and  at  the  time  of  the  Norman  Conquest  in  the 
eleventh  century  it  had  been  for  three  hundred  years 
an  independent  State  maintaining  close  relations  with 
Constantinople  and  Greece. 


6  THE  NAPOLEONIC  EMPIRE  part  i 

In  considering  the  connection  between  the  inhabit- 
ants of  Southern  Italy  and  the  Ancients,  the  sequence 
of  historical  facts  does  not  present  the  only  clue.  The 
daily  customs  and  manner  of  thought  of  the  people  will 
afford  another,  equal  in  importance,  perhaps  greater 
in  interest. 

The  most  evident  trait  in  which  the  Neapolitans 
revealed  their  Greek  descent  was  in  their  mercurial, 
oratorical,  gesticulating  temperament — a  temperament 
so  completely  opposite  to  that  of  the  various  popula- 
tions about  them,  Sicilian,  Calabrian,  Abruzzian,  or 
Roman.  The  democratic  Greek  spirit  of  popular 
government  by  means  of  market  -  square  oratory, 
always  latent,  promptly  asserted  itself  whenever  the 
hand  of  despotism  relaxed.  Among  them  volubility 
was  spontaneous,  the  use  of  the  superlative  indispens- 
able, gesticulation  second  nature.  Is  it  not  thus  that 
we  picture  the  market-place  politicians  of  the  old  Greek 
states  ?  Perhaps  not  the  few  great  orators  whose 
studied  eloquence  was  to  become  the  model  for  future 
centuries,  but  the  great  mass  of  common  demagogues  ? 
Their  hold  on  the  fickle  crowd  of  citizens  was  won  in 
daily  open-air  contests,  in  which  only  a  pliable  face  and 
eloquent  fingers  could  carry  conviction  and  overcome 
the  manifold  difficulties  of  open-air  speaking.^  Did  not 
Demosthenes,  the  first  among  them,  say  that  in  action 
lay  the  greatest  virtue  of  the  orator  ?  No  man  is  more 
imitative  or  quicker  in  his  imitation  than  the  Nea- 
politan, and  it  may  be  advanced  that  in  his  peculiar 
trick  of  gesticulation  he  is  but  reproducing  that  which 
his  ancestors  first  caught  in  the  deliberative  assemblies 
in  which  oratory  directed  the  fortunes  of  the  Greek 

^   On  the  necessity  of  action  in  ancient  oratory  see  some  interesting  observations 
by  Boissier,  Prnmenades  arch.  Rome,  68. 


CHAP.  I  STATE  OF  NAPLES  IN  1805  7 

cities.^  In  one  important  phase  of  this  history,  that 
which  deals  with  the  origin  and  methods  of  the  secret 
societies,  this  pecuhar  aptitude  of  the  Neapolitans  for 
expressing  with  a  barely  perceptible  muscular  contrac- 
tion of  eye,  of  face,  or  of  hand,  assent,  dissent,  and  a 
hundred  emotions,  will  be  seen  to  be  of  importance. 
The  dumb  language  of  Naples,  as  a  Swiss  observer 
called  it,  was  the  language  of  the  secret  societies. 

The  attribution  of  the  characteristic  just  noted  to 
such  a  remote  origin  need  cause  no  surprise,  for  it  will 
presently  be  shown  that  the  ancestry  of  the  principal 
legendary  hero  of  the  Neapolitans  may  be  traced  back  to 
a  civilization  anterior  even  to  that  of  the  Greeks.  In  the 
religion  and  superstition  of  the  people  there  had  indeed 
been  little  but  superficial  alteration  since  the  days  of 
the  prosperity  of  the  Roman  Empire.  Names  had  been 
changed,  but  not  ways  of  thought  and  belief.  Both  the 
inner  religious  sentiment  and  its  outward  ceremonial 
presentment  had  remained  very  nearly  what  they  were 
before  Jove  was  displaced  by  Jehovah.  The  religious 
revolution  of  the  fourth  century  was  more  significant 
in  its  political  than  in  its  theological  aspect,  nor  will 
those  who  are  acquainted  with  the  southern  Italians  of 
the  present  day  believe  that  their  ancestors  were  capable 
of  a  sudden  transition  in  their  beliefs  as  the  effect  of  an 
imperial  decree.  Before  the  edicts  of  Constantine  and 
Constans  the  religion  of  the  Neapolitan  had  for  centuries 
centred  in  his  own  worldly  interests  ;  his  deities  won 
his  allegiance  so  far  as  they  affected  his  good  fortune  in 

^  It  would  be  out  of  place  to  elaborate  this  point.  It  may,  however,  be  pointed 
out,  firstly,  that  a  sharp  distinction  may  be  drawn  between  the  constant  and 
wonderfully  varied  gesticulation  of  the  Neapolitan  and  that  of  any  other  Italian  j 
secondly,  that  the  Marseillais,  who  also  represents  a  direct  and  continuous  Greek 
tradition,  may  be  distinguished  by  precisely  the  same  trait.  Gesticulation  is  not,  as 
generally  supposed,  a  southern  characteristic.  The  Spaniard,  the  Sicilian,  the  Arab 
will  gesticulate  little  more  than  the  most  impassive  Northerner. 


8  THE  NAPOLEONIC  EMPIRE  part  i 

the  affairs  of  life,  and  no  farther.  After  the  edicts  that 
imposed  Christianity  his  religion  took  a  new  name, 
incorporated  new  theories,  attempted  to  assimilate  a 
decentralizing  and  humanizing  political  movement ;  but 
as  for  his  inmost  belief  he  remained  inalterably  con- 
vinced that  the  new  Gods  could  and  did  affect  his 
daily  and  worldly  interests,  exactly  like  the  old  ones, 
and  they  secured  his  allegiance  to  the  extent  that 
he  imagined  they  would  continue  to  bring  him 
temporal,  but  not  spiritual,  good  fortune.  Even  in 
outward  aspects  the  change  was  of  the  most  super- 
ficial character,  and  the  masses  accepted  with  unanimous 
unconcern  the  substitution  of  the  Jah  of  the  Hebrews 
for  the  Jove  of  the  Cretans,  on  the  implied  condition 
that  their  ceremonies,  festivals,  and  manners  of  thought 
were  left  practically  untouched.  How  largely  this  was 
the  case  may  still,  at  a  distance  of  sixteen  centuries,  be 
traced.  The  intercessions  addressed  to  God  for  rain 
were  the  reproduction  of  those  that  had  been  addressed 
to  Jupiter.  In  the  numberless  priests  and  monks, 
ministers  of  ignorance,  fed  from  the  fruits  of  lucrative 
superstition,  might  be  seen  the  transformed  priests  of 
an  earlier  and  no  less  usefully  employed  religion.  In 
the  tonsure  of  the  Christian  monks  might  be  recognised 
the  distinctive  mark  of  the  priests  of  Isis  ;  in  the  dress 
of  the  nuns,  the  costume  of  the  Vestal  Virgins  ;  ^  in 
the  churches  might  be  viewed  the  columns  and  marbles, 
sometimes  even  the  complete  structure  of  the  temples 
devoted  to  the  earlier  rite.  The  statues  of  Christian 
saints  were  the  no  longer  popular  images  of  the  gods  of 
Olympus  ;  the  toe  of  Peter  in  the  Vatican  was  worn 
away  by  the  devout  salutations  of  later  generations,  just 

^   In  the  Athenaeum  (1902,  305)  Signer  Lanciani  notes  an  interesting  link  between 
the  Vestal  Virgins  and  the  nuns  of  the  Catholic  Church. 


CHAP.  I         STATE  OF  NAPLES  IN  1805  9 

as  the  mouth  and  chin  of  Hercules  at  Agrigentum  had 
succumbed  to  those  of  their  forefathers  ;  when  Raphael 
painted  Jonah  in  the  form  of  Antinous  he  conformed 
to  the  tradition  of  earlier  Christians  who,  while  adopt- 
ing the  official  Jonah,  had  carefully  retained  every 
appearance  of  their  earlier  divinity.  Illustrations  might 
be  repeated  indefinitely.  The  saints  of  the  Church 
were  merely  the  transfigured  gods  of  Olympus, 
subject  to  all  their  far  from  heavenly  passions.  An 
altar  at  Viterbo  dedicated  to  Santa  Rosa  was  inscribed 
with  the  following  verses  : — 

Quis  tamen  laudes  recolat,  quis  hujus 
Virginis  dotes,  sibi  quam  pudicis 
Nuptiis  junctam  voluit  superni 
Numen  Olympi  ?  ^ 

To  find  Santa  Rosa  compared  to  Diana  when  wooed 
by  Endymion  is  no  more  remarkable  than  to  find  Dante 
invoking  Apollo  and  his  most  sublime  vision  of 
Almighty  God  in  the  same  breath.  The  chief  cult  of 
the  Italians  at  the  time  of  the  transformation  had  been 
the  goddess  Cybele  ;  she  was  promptly  metamorphosed 
into  the  Virgin  Mary.  The  lares  viales  at  the  intersec- 
tion of  cross-roads  were  converted  into  her  shrines  ;  the 
ancient  ceremonies  were  uninterrupted  ;  garlands  and 
wreaths  were  still  suspended  ;  the  new  deity  was  invoked 
to  avert  mischance  and  bring  good  fortune,  and  to  this 
day  the  zampognari  of  the  Abruzzi  devotionally  tune 
their  rude  bagpipes  in  honour  of  Mary,  at  the  self-same 
spot,  at  the  self-same  shrine  where  their  forefathers 
sounded  the  tibia  in  honour  of  Cybele.  At  Naples 
itself  Diana  appears  to  have  been  the  goddess  most  in 
favour,  and  traces  of  her  worship  may  still  be  found  in 

^  Who  shall  tell  the  praise,  the  virtues  of  this  virgin,  whom  the  ruler  of  high 
Olympus  desired  in  chaste  espousal  ? 


10  THE  NAPOLEONIC  EMPIRE  part  i 

the  cimaruta,  the  most  common  amulet  of  the  Nea- 
politans. An  acute  observer  has  even  traced  in  the 
sermon  of  a  Dominican  monk  of  the  present  day  some 
vestiges  of  the  formulas  used  in  the  worship  of  the 
Diana  Tifatina  of  Capua  fifteen  centuries  ago.^  At 
the  time  of  the  French  Revolution,  and  it  may  be 
much  later,  the  women  of  Naples  when  expecting 
childbirth  were  accustomed  to  hang  about  their  necks 
small  bags  containing  relics  of  St.  Come.  These  relics 
were  in  reality  small  Priapi,  and  recalled  one  of  the 
favourite  cults  of  pagan  days,  and  a  primitive  rite  of 
very  great  antiquity  that  still  survives  in  certain  parts 
of  India. 

If  Juvenal  was  justified  in  complaining  that  the 
gods  had  become  so  numerous  as  to  overburden  Atlas, 
Christianity  certainly  brought  no  relief.  The  extra- 
ordinary profusion  of  temples  and  ceremonies  of  the 
earlier  was  equalled,  if  not  surpassed,  by  that  of  the 
later  rite.  Begging,  once  restricted  to  the  priests  of 
Cybele,  extended  from  those  of  Mary  to  a  whole 
population,  and  became,  as  it  remains  to  this  day,  a 
national  misfortune.  The  emasculated  singers  who 
chanted  the  praises  of  the  Mother  of  the  Gods  were 
succeeded  by  equally  barbarously  used  choristers  whose 
dulcet  notes  proclaimed  the  glory  of  the  Mother  of 
Christ.^  The  festival  of  Hilaria,  dedicated  to  the 
older,  became  that  of  Lady  day,  sacred  to  the  younger 
deity. 

The  Neapolitan  was  as  deeply  attached  to  the  stage 
as  he  was  to  religion.  In  the  fourth  century  the  literary 
skill,  or  the  political  persuasion,  of  Gregory  Nazianzen 

1  Rolfe,  Naples  in  i88S,  I20,  12 1. 

2  For  the  practice  of  artificially  producing  these  voices  at  Naples,  see  Gorani, 
Mems.  i.  165.     It  was  made  illegal  in  i8o6  under  Joseph  Bonaparte, 


CHAP.  I  STATE  OF  NAPLES  IN  1805  11 

succeeded  in  supplanting  the  pagan  influence  of  the 
Greek  drama  ;  for  the  immortal  works  of  ^schylus, 
Sophocles,  Euripides,  and  Aristophanes  were  substituted 
the  devotional  compositions  of  Gregory  on  themes  such 
as  **  Moses  in  Egypt,''  the  "  Murder  of  the  Innocents," 
or  the  **  Sacrifice  of  Abraham/'  These  had,  after  an 
unvaried  course  of  representations  lasting  for  many 
centuries,  become  a  part  of  the  daily  hfe  of  the  people, 
and  perhaps  the  most  important  factor  in  the  formation 
of  their  theological  conceptions.  From  the  religious 
dramas  they  drew  the  symbolic  rites  of  their  societies,  and 
appropriate  images  to  express  their  joys  and  their  sorrows. 
But  if  the  Greek  drama  succumbed  to  the  irresistible 
efforts  of  Gregory  Nazianzen,  an  even  older  mani- 
festation of  man's  histrionic  propensity  managed  to 
survive — not  only  to  survive,  but  to  supply  Naples 
with  its  national  hero,  Pulcinella.  The  booths  in 
which  his  performances  took  place  were  generally 
crowded,  and  loud  laughter  greeted  his  buffooneries 
and  evanescent  witticisms.  This  character  and  his 
antics  had  come  down  from  the  ancient  Oscan  comedies, 
known  2isfabuU  Atellan^^  which  the  Greek  drama  and 
the  Aristophanic  comedies  never  succeeded  in  entirely 
supplanting.  When  Taine  thought  that  the  wildness  of 
imagination  shown  in  these  Pulcinella  farces  recalled 
the  buffooneries  of  Aristophanes,  he  was  perhaps  only 
noting  a  degeneration  suffered  by  the  ludi  Osci  from 
contact  with  the  decadent  Greek  spirit.  Since  the 
beginning  of  the  seventeenth  century,  when  the  comedian 
Fiorillo  elaborated  the  part  into  its  modern  aspect, 
Pulcinella  had  become  the  sole  important  personage  ot 
these  plays  and  the  comic  prototype  of  the  Neapolitan. 

^  Atella  was  a  small  town  on  the  site  of  the  modern  Aversa,  midway  between 
Naples  and  Caserta. 


12  THE  NAPOLEONIC  EMPIRE  part  i 

He  was  a  long-nosed,  inane,  irresponsible  booby,  a 
pursuer  of  women,  a  sceptic,  easily  gulled,  never  open- 
ing his  mouth  but  to  utter  a  stupidity  or  worse.  He 
held  nothing  sacred — save  superstition  alone  ;  and  in- 
congruity never  disconcerted  him.  His  carved  figure 
might  be  seen  supporting  the  lamp  before  an  image 
of  the  Virgin,  and  his  theatre  might  be  found  estab- 
lished in  the  same  building  as  a  nunnery  ! 

The  traditions  of  the  past  were  in  nothing  more 
faithfully  respected  than  in  the  immense  number  of  that 
class  of  the  population  that  lived  on  the  superstitions  of 
the  vulgar.  At  the  opening  of  the  nineteenth  century 
about  100,000  priests,  monks,  and  nuns  ministered  to 
the  spiritual  needs  of  the  kingdom  of  Naples.^  Yet 
notwithstanding  the  cj^edulity^nd^jKility^ 
the  handsome  revenues  of  the  princes  of  the  Church, 
the  constant  benefactions  received,  the  enormous  estates 
held,  notwithstanding  an  annual  revenue  of  some 
9,000,000  ducats,  the  position  of  the  greater  part  of 
the  clergy  was  miserable.  Generally  coming  from  the 
lower  class,  poor,  ignorant,  and  vicious,  they  resorted 
to  a  variety  of  means  for  supporting  life,  of  which 
beggary  was  generally  the  most  dignified  and  honest. 
In  Calabria  small  villages  were  furnished  with  large 
churches,  and  correspondingly  large  chapters,  of  which 
the  canons,  dressed  in  rags  and  dirty  linen,  had  not 
one  hundred  francs  to  divide  among  themselves  in  the 
course  of  a  whole  year.  From  a  Cardinal- Archbishop 
of  Naples,  or  an  Abbot  of  Monte  Cassini,  feudal  lord 
of  twenty -two  villages,  to  a  barefooted,  unkempt 
mendicant  friar  the  distance  was  great.     Yet  that  dis- 

^  Serristori,  a  good  authority,  gives  47,000  priests,  25,000  monks,  and  26,000 
nuns  j  Roederer,  who  was  well  placed  for  knowing,  the  high  figure  of  64,000  for 
monks  and  nuns  alone,  (Ewvres,  iv.  62  ;  Gorani,  in  the  year  1 794,  gives  a  total  of 
87,000  J  Bianchini  says  100,000. 


CHAP.  I  STATE  OF  NAPLES  IN  1805  13 

tance,  however  great,  was  not  an  impossible  one  to 
I  conquer,  and  the  man  of  low  birth  found  in  the  Church 
I  the  only  avenue  open  for  advancement.  To  this,  as 
well  as  to  their  superstition,  was  the  attachment  of  tl\e 
people  tor  the  Church  to  be  ascribed  ;  it  represented, 
m  a  curious  form,  the  embryo  of  democratic  institu- 
tions.Between  the  g^reat  mass  of  the  clergv  and  of 
the  people  there  was  a  perfect  similarity  of  views,  and 
I  it  the  people  were  generally  ignorant,  vicious,  and 
I  criminal,  so  were  their  spiritual  leaders.  In  the  pro- 
Vince  of  Puglia  in  the  year  18 17  one-fourth  of  the 
clergy  was  found  to  be  unutterably  bad,  and  mixed  up 
with  every  crime  and  outrage.  Priests  were  not  un- 
frequently  captains  of  bands  of  brigands.  In  the  city  of 
Naples  were  no  less  than  1 70  monasteries  and  convents ; 
the  churches,  as  the  official  almanac  for  1806  ingenu- 
ously states,  were  so  to  speak  **  innumerable."  Abject 
poverty  contentedly  feasted  its  eyes  on  the  gorgeous 
decorations  of  the  churches,  and  rubbed  shoulders  with 
sleek  ecclesiastical  dignitaries.  Free  distributions  of 
bread,  once  an  imperial  prerogative,  attached  to  each 
cleric  some  five  supporting  beggars  ;  and  thus  by  means 
of  this  most  ancient  and  honoured  of  political  methods 
a  strong  body  of  what  might  be  made  to  appear  public 
opinion  was  constantly  at  the  command  of  Religion. 

Nor  w^as  there  any  enlightenment  or  education 
to  check  the  gross  deceptions  of  the  priesthood,,__thie 
obscurantism  of  AutKonty.  The  Ignorantelli  and 
other  fraternities  made  some  show  of  pursuing  the 
vocation  of  teaching,  but  the  results  were  meagre. 
Even  in  the  highest  classes  knowledge  of  reading 
and  writing  was  far  from  universal.  De  Dedem 
speaks  of  a  daughter  of  the  Duchess  of  Cassano  who, 
on  leaving  the  convent  where  she  had  been  educated, 


14  THE  NAPOLEONIC  EMPIRE  part  i 

could  neither  read  nor  write  ;  while  Roederer  goes 
further,  and  states  that  ladies  belonging  to  noble 
families  took  pains  not  to  learn  the  art  of  writing  lest 
they  might  be  mistaken  for  bourgeoises.  One  of  the 
greatest  noKIemen  of  the  kingdom,  the  Prince  of 
Paterno,  carried  ignorance  so  far  as  to  be  unable  to  say 
where  his  Sicilian  estates  were  situated.  If  such  was 
the  aristocracy,  the  brutish  condition  of  the  mass  of  the 
people  may  be  imagined.  Of  the  inhabitants  of  the 
capital  one-third  were  paupers;  they  mostly  slept  in 
the  open  under  conditions  little  removed  from  those  of 
animals.  Is  it  surprising  that  they  accepted  the  crudest 
impostures  of  the  priests  .^  Is  it  surprising  that  when 
stirred  to  civil  faction  they  should  have  displayed  brutal 
and  hideous  ferocity  .^^  And  yet  the  inmost  com- 
ponents of  their  nature  were  amiable,  social,  and  docile ! 
"  Of  Christianity  they  have  nothing  but  superstition 
and  fear,"  said  Taine  ;  and  it  is  only  too  true  that  not 
the  people  so  much  as  the  terrible  conditions  under 
which  they  had  suffered  for  many  centuries  were 
responsible  for  all  this  misery  and  degradation. 

The  ignorance  and  superstition  of  Naples  were  well 
illustrated  by  the  cult  of  its  patron  saint  or  city  god, 
Gennaro.  Januarius,  or  Gennaro,  a  Christian  martyr 
under  the  persecution  of  Diocletian,  was  worshipped  in 
the  fine  Gothic  cathedral  of  Naples,  displacing  Apollo, 
until  then  venerated  at  the  same  shrine.^  S.  Gennaro 
was  held  in  great  awe  and  reverence  by  the  Neapolitans  ; 
he  requited  their  affection,  and  demonstrated  his  con- 

^  The  conversion  of  Buddha  into  Saint  Josaphat,  as  traced  by  the  late  Professor 
Max  Miiller,  suggests  the  possibility  that  the  less  startling  transition  from  Apollo 
to  Gennaro  may  some  day  be  worked  out.  The  cathedral  is  merely  the  ancient 
temple  transformed,  and  it  may  be  that  the  miracle  is  merely  the  lineal  repre- 
sentative of  a  form  of  divination  similar  to  that  which  Horace  left  the  Jew  Apella 
to  make  the  most  of. 


CHAP.  I  STATE  OF  NAPLES  IN  1805  15 

tinued  and  lively  interest  in  their  welfare  by  periodic 
miraculous  manifestations.  On  the  High  Altar,  near 
to  which  the  faithful  crowded,  the  solidified  blood  of 
the  decapitated  saint  was  exposed  in  a  phial.  In 
answer  to  the  shouts  of  encouragement,  or  abuse,  of 
his  devotees,  Gennaro  caused  its  contents  gradually  to 
liquefy  before  the  eyes  of  his  worshippers,  and,  by 
nicely  calculating  the  time  of  this  operation,  rendered 
more  or  less  favourable  auguries.  Thrice  in  every  year 
was  this  solemn  manifestation  repeated  ;  thrice  in  every 
year  a  devout  crowd  of  men  and  women  wailed  and 
supplicated  at  Gennaro's  altar-rail,  went  into  hysterical 
tears  and  raised  rapturous  shouts  at  the  saint's  response 
to  their  prayers,  deposited  their  alms  for  the  benefit  of 
those  whose  pious  ministrations  he  so  profitably  requited. 
Even  at  this  day  the  traveller  from  the  prosaic  West 
may  witness,  at  the  cost  of  a  modest  fee,  a  miracle 
performed  for  every  one  of  the  long  series  of  kings 
and  conquerors  recorded  in  the  annals  of  Naples. 
Gennaro's  blood  will  liquefy  with  as  ready  response  for 
him  as  it  did  for  Charles  VIII.  of  France,  for  Gonsalvo 
de  Cordova,  for  General  Championnet  and  his  atheistic 
grenadiers,  for  Ferdinand  of  Bourbon,  for  Joseph  Bona- 
parte, for  Victor  Emmanuel,  and  for  Garibaldi.^ 

The  miracle  of  S.  Gennaro  strikingly  illustrates  a 
marked  characteristic  of  the  Italian  people — the  con- 
stant desire  for  the  concrete  presentment  of  an  idea. 
If  the  worship  of  Peter  was  intended,  his  toe  must  be 
produced  ;  if  that  of  Januarius,  his  blood  ;  if  that  of 
Mary,  her  carved  image  festooned  with  ornaments;  if 
that  of  Christ,  the  sacred  heart  in  realistic  painting  ; 
if  that  of  the  Cross,  its  tangible  presentment  for  the 

^  A  description  of  the  miracle,  given  by  Count  Miot  de  Melito,  will  be  found  in 
Appendix  A,  vol.  ii. 


1 6  THE  NAPOLEONIC  EMPIRE  part  i 

worshipper  to  press  or  to  meet  with  moist  salutations. 
In  Italy  an  idea  must  be  embodied  or  symbolized  ;  hence 
it  may  be  just  to  pronounce  the  Neapolitan  Vico,  if  not 
the  greatest,  yet  the  most  typical  of  her  philosophers, 
for  the  whole  of  his  system  of  philosophy  turns  on  the 
interpretation  of  the  complicated  symbolic  device  that 
adorns  the  front  page  of  the  Scienza  Nuova,  The 
symbolism  that  had  centred  about  the  pagan  Pantheon 
had  been  largely  lost  in  the  Christian  metamorphosis, 
and  found  a  temporary  refuge  in  Neoplatonism.  The 
great  centuries  of  Italian  thought  and  art  resuscitated 
symbolism,  and  were  in  many  ways  a  reversion  to  the 
spirit  of  the  past.  When  the  love  of  the  concrete  and 
symbolic  animates  the  genius  of  a  people  dunng  an 
"age  that  produced  such  men  as  Dante,  Giotto,  Botticelli, 
Macchiavelli,  Michael  Angelo,  Palestrina,  or  Raphael, 
criticism  is  disarmed  by  admiration  and  wonder.  Of 
a  people,  of  a  spirit  that  could  produce  such  men 
what  shall  be  said  }  At  Naples  less  than  elsewhere  in 
Italy  did  genius  make  its  presence  felt ;  yet  the  quality 
of  mind  was  essentially  the  same,  and  in  the  varied 
gradations  of  intellect  that  may  be  traced  between  the 
philosophy  of  Vico  or  the  jurisprudential  work  of 
Delfico,  Filangieri,  Zurlo,  Briganti,  and  Giannone,  to 
the  burning  rhapsodies  of  the  improvisator e  Rossetti,  it 
is  impossible  not  to  recognise  a  breath  of  an  intellectual 
quality  second  to  that  of  no  other  people.  What,  then, 
is  wanting  ?  Why  does  such  a  fertile  field  remain  so 
long  fallow?  Perhaps  a  little  more  sincerity  is  the 
need,  a  little  more  precision  of  thought,  a  little  more 
freedom  from  the  distorting  inheritance  of  the  dark 
ages  ;  all  the  rest  is  there. 

Greatest  of  all    the  afflictions  suffered  by  Naples, 
inseparably  bound  up  with   all  others,   material,  ever- 


CHAP.  I  STATE  OF  NAPLES  IN  1805  17 

present,  immediate  and  brutalizing,  was  feudalism. 
Its  effects  were  to  be  traced  in  every  aspect  of  the 
social  system.  The  misery  to  which  it  had  reduced 
the  people  was  terrible,  and  in  a  northern  climate 
could  not  have  been  endured.  Even  in  the  city  of 
Naples,  one  of  the  largest  capitals  of  the  world, 
boasting  in  the  Toledo  a  street  unsurpassed  in 
Europe,  displaying  the  extremes  of  aristocratic  show 
and  magnificence,  beggars  walked  naked.  "  One  may  see 
quite  usually,"  wrote  King  Joseph,  "  men  lying  in  the 
streets,  naked  as  my  hand,  dying  of  hunger  ;  women 
and  children  also."  x\nother  writer  comments  on  the 
calmness  and  indifference  with  which  the  passers-by 
regarded  the  last  agony  of  a  woman  dying  in  the  road- 
way ;  the  sight  was  too  commonplace  to  arouse  the 
emotions.  Alongside  of  this  hideous  poverty  was 
invincible  indolence.  Roederer  in  his  correspondence 
reverts  again  and  again  to  this  apparently  incurable 
malady  of  the  Neapolitans  with  something  like  despair. 
Even  in  the  agricultural  districts  labour  aroused  little 
enthusiasm.  A  traveller  who  visited  Puglia  in  18 10 
described  the  state  of  the  peasantry  as  one  of  misery 
flanked  by  indolence.  If  anything  in  that  unhappy 
country  merited  the  name  of  national,  it  was  that  not 
infrequent  companion  of  indolence,  the  vice  of  gambling. 
In  the  streets  idle  men,  women,  children,  and  beggars 
played  with  the  hucklebones  dear  to  the  Romans,  or 
thrust  out  fingers  in  the  classic  game  of  mora.  Among 
the  aristocracy  more  advanced  methods  of  controlling 
the  exchange  of  coin  obtained.  The  publicist  Kotzebue 
states  that  the  principal  gambling-house  of  Naples  was 
kept  by  Prince  Rufando,  and  of  the  162  other  princes 
and  279  dukes  of  the  Neapolitan  aristocracy  more  were 
likely  to  envy  than  to  contemn  his  lucrative  eminence. 

VOL.  I  c 


i8  THE  NAPOLEONIC  EMPIRE  part  i 

Generally  speaking,  morality  was  at  the  lowest  possible, 
both  among  men  and  women,  and  the  character  of  the 
mhabitants  of  the  city  of  Naples  had  butTewl'edeeni- 
mg  traits.  The  expressions  of  a  contemporary  were 
perhaps  not  extravagant  when  he  said  :  "If  loyalty, 
honour,  firmness,  fidelity  to  institutions,  devotion  to 
country,  decency  and  morality,  social  virtues,  and  great 
traditions  are  the  real  constituents  of  a  national  char- 
acter, one  may  well  say  that  the  Neapolitans  have  no 
national  character."  ^  Neapolitans  agreed  with  foreigners 
as  to  their  own  unfitness.  Filangieri,  whose  personal 
bravery  was  exceptional  even  among  those  who  followed 
the  fortunes  of  the  Emperor  Napoleon,  wrote  to  his  son  : 
*'  Believe  me,  for  a  man  who  has  a  particle  of  honour 
and  of  blood  in  his  veins,  it  is  a  thousandfold  calamity  to 
be  born  a  Neapolitan." 

In  one  intellectual  distinction,  and  in  one  alone, 
Naples  was  pre-eminent  among  the  cities  of  Italy  ;  this 
was  in  the  unrivalled  doctrine  of  her  lawyers  in  matters 
feudal.  So  intricate  were  the  laws,  so  numerous  the 
tribunals,  so  litig^ious  the  contestants  and  so  learned 
Their  advocates,  that'  actions  frequently  exceeded  the 
ordinary  span  of  life,  and  occasionally  extended  over 
a  number  of  centuries.  For  the  possession  of  about 
half  a  square  mile  of  grazing  land  the  villages  of  Acerno 
and  Montecorvino  had  fattened  the  lawyers  for  over 
200  years.  Nearly  as  determined,  and  far  more  learned 
a  contest  was  waged  to  decide  the  tenure  of  a  plot  of 
land,  the  question  to  be  resolved  being  whether  Duke 
Ruggiero  the  Norman  had  intended  a  pious  gift  or 
a  grant  in  emphyteusis.  Similar  instances  could  be 
multiplied. 

To  realize  the  origin  of  the  afflictions  and  miseries 

^  Laurcnze,  Eaai  sur  Nap/es,  97. 


CHAP.  I         STATE  OF  NAPLES  IN  1805  19 

caused  by  the  feudal  system  at  Naples  at  the  beginning 
of  the  nineteenth  century,  some  of  the  antecedents  of 
an  institution  so  terrible  in  its  later  effects  must  first 
be  traced.  For  the  present  purpose  the  view  will 
be  adopted  that  the  introduction  of  feudalism  into 
southern  Italy  was  not  the  work  of  the  Lombards, 
but  of  Robert  Guiscard  and  the  handful  of  Norman 
knights  who  conquered  the  country  in  the  eleventh 
century. 

To  understand  the  manner  in  which  the  Normans 
established  themselves  and  grafted  their  institutions  on 
those  they  found  in  existence,  to  appreciate  how  it  was 
that  the  system  they  founded  remained  in  vigour  for  so 
long  a  period,  it  is  first  necessary  to  consider  a  physical 
characteristic  of  the  country  together  with  the  mode  of 
settlement  of  its  inhabitants. 

The  people  of  Italy,  unlike  those  of  the  north,  had 
lost  all  nomadic  proclivity  long  before  the  Christian 
era.  Their  instinct  was  for  town  life.  In  Graeco-Roman 
days  this  tendency,  variously  strengthened  by  the  con- 
centration of  civilization  and  wealth  and  the  pressure  of 
warfare,  drew  the  population  into  towns  and  villages  of 
which  a  protective  wall  was  an  invariable  feature.  The 
peaceful  era  that  marked  the  early  days  of  the  Empire 
might,  if  continued,  have  resulted  in  a  more  even 
distribution  of  the  population  ;  but  the  fourth  century 
marked  the  beginning  of  a  period  of  disintegration, 
and  during  the  fourteen  hundred  years  that  followed, 
the  conditions  of  the  country  were  far  too  unsettled  to 
encourage  any  change  of  system.  During  the  whole 
of  this  period  the  people  of  southern  Italy  were 
misgoverned,  suffered  frequent  and  violent  changes 
of  rulers,  perpetually  endured  the  ravages  of  con- 
quest   from   without    and   of  spoliation    from    within. 


20  THE  NAPOLEONIC  EMPIRE  part  i 

Brigands  and  outlaws  were  the  only  part  of  the  com- 
munity that  did  not  seek  the  nightly  shelter  of  a 
fortified  wall.  As  timid  sheep  will  huddle  together  on 
the  approach  of  danger,  so  the  south  Italians  sought 
what  shelter  was  to  be  found  from  the  pirates  of  sea 
and  land  by  nestling  together  in  their  villages.  These 
were  sometimes  buried  in  the  recesses  of  some  forest- 
clad  valley,  or  more  generally  perched  on  a  lofty  hill  or 
cliff  that  added  the  defences  of  Nature  to  those  of  art. 
In  the  valleys  or  plain  at  the  foot  of  the  village 
stretched  the  land  that  produced  the  necessary  food. 
This  land  was  generally  uninclosed  and  used  in  com- 
mon ;  and  in  common  the  villagers  held  most  of  their 
property,  laboured,  fought,  lived,  and  suffered.  The 
affairs  of  the  village  or  town  were  regulated  by  an 
elected  body  of  what  might  be^  termed  eiders,  or,^ 
use  the  proper  terms,  by  a  syndic,  giurati  or  councillors, 
and  giudici  or  judges.  These  received  a  salary  of  a  few 
carlins  per  annum  from  the  common  funds.^ 

In  practice  it  was  generally  the  syndic  who  directed 
the  affairs  of  the  community,  and  that  in  a  manner 
profitable  to  himself.  The^governing  body,  together 
with  the  village  or  town  it  represented,  was  known  as 
the  Universita ;  despite  this  imposing  title  and  the 
ancient  tradition  it  represented,  these  communities  had 
little  real  power,  and  were  mostly  plunged  in  abject 
penury.  Their  lands  were  not  those  fertile  plains 
bordering  the  sea  where  the  inhabitants  of  Croton, 
Passtum,  or  Sybaris  planted  fruitful  farms  and  delight- 
ful gardens  ;  these  tracts  had  long  since  been  made 
uninhabitable  by  the  ravages  of  Saracen  pirates,  and  had 
become,  what  they  still  are,  useless  and  malaria-infected 
swamps.     It  was  among  the   hills  and  valleys  of  the 

^  For  carlins,  and  all  Neapolitan  measures,  money,  etc.,  see  Appendix  B,  vol.  ii. 


CHAP.  I         STATE  OF  NAPLES  IN  1805  21 

Apennines  that  the   inhabitants    sought  refuge    and   a 
precarious  existence. 

This  peculiarity  in  the  conditions  of  life  of  the 
/  population  was  a  great  advantage  to  the  Normans  and 
to  the  development  of  the  feudal  system.  The  towns 
and  villages  were  singly  too  weak  to  resist  the  con- 
querors, and  quickly  passed  under  their  yoke.  When 
they  were  not  seized  by  force  they  were  occupied  at 
the  request  of  the  people,  who,  of  two  evils,  preferred  a 
protector  to  a  spoiler.  The  existing  fortification  was 
generally  strengthened  by  the  erection  of  a  baronial 
castle,  and  the  inhabitants,  whether  willingly  or  not,  and 
by  various  methods  of  absorption,  became  the  Baron^s 
feudal  dependents.  In  the  twelfth  and  thirteenth 
centuries  most  of  the  large  cities,  too  often  scourged, 
had  become  deserted ;  the  smaller  ones,  finding  no 
support  in  the  royal  government,  called  in  powerful 
Barons  as  their  only  possible  safeguard.  In  the 
fifteenth  century,  of  1500  Universita  in  the  kingdom, 
only  about  100  had  escaped  feudal  ownership.  A 
century  later  the  figures  were  little  changed  ;  but  in  the 
year  1786  very  few  of  the  free  Universita  survived, 
and  out  of  a  total  of  some  2000,  384  belonged  to  the 
Crown,  the  rest  to  the  Barons.-^ 

The  legal  and  constitutional  system  established  by 
the  Normans  in  southern  Italy  may  be  regarded  as  a 
fairly  uniform  superimposition  of  the  feudal  law  on  the 
great  variety  of  local  laws,  some  of  Roman,  some  of 
Greek,  some  of  Lombard,  some  of  Eastern,  some  of 
local  origin.  In  this  confusion  the  decrees  of  a  con- 
queror prevailed,  and  gave  some  sort  of  harmony  to 
the  whole.     From  the  end  of  the  twelfth  century,  when 

^  Moles,  quoted  by  Bianchini  ;  the  latter,  somewhat  contradictorily,  gives  a  total 
of  150  casali  or  hamlets  free  from  feudal  tenure  in  Puglia  alone  in  the  year  1586. 


22  THE  NAPOLEONIC  EMPIRE  part  i 

Ugolino  da  Porta  Ravignano  added  his  Decima  Col- 
lazione  to  the  Justinian  Code,  feudal  law  may  be  said 
to  have  prevailed  officially.  As  in  other  parts  of 
Europe  so  in  Naples,  it  rapidly  ran  through  its  period 
of  usefulness,  rapidly  developed  its  inherent  vices. 
The  property  of  the  Universita,  the  services  personal 
and  in  kind  of  the  people,  soon  depended  on  the 
Barons.  They  in  turn  yielded  service  and  paid  dues  to 
the  King  ;  but  their  greater  intelligence  and  strength, 
together  with  their  corporate  feeling,  made  them  equally 
able  to  resist  the  demands  of  the  Crown  and  to  impose 
their  commands  on  the  people.  The  helpless  inhabit- 
ants of  the  Universita  saw  their  every  property,  their 
every  right  disappear  into  the  bottomless  pit  of  feudal 
proprietorship. 

Among  the  early  rulers  of  the  kingdom  of  Naples, 
or  of  Puglia,  as  it  was  at  first  called,  the  great  legislators 
were  Ruggiero  of  the  Norman  kings,  and  Frederick  II. 
of  the  Swabians.  By  them  it  was  established  that  the 
Baron's  fief  was  inalienable  ;  that  is,  that  the  Baron's 
land  could  not  pass  out  of  his  hands  in  any  other  way 
than  by  reversion  to  the  Crown.  So  rigorous  did  the 
construction  of  this  all -important  rule  become,  that 
Pecchia,  commenting  on  Frederick  the  Second's  con- 
st itutio  diva  memoria^  states  that  the  inability  to  alienate 
must  be  held  to  extend  to  every  contract  of  whatsoever 
kind  that  might  tend  to  lower  the  value  of  the  ^^i} 
Although  the  constitutio  diva  memorise  did  not  remain 
in  force  until  the  nineteenth  century,  an  outcome  of  it 
did,  of  which  the  effect  was  nearly  equal.  This  was 
the  system  of  fideicomessi^  or  trusts  on  property,  of 
endless  effect,  generally  intended  to  favour  the  rights  of 

^  Frederick's  better-known  constitution,  qua  sint  regalia,  need  not  be  noticed  in 
this  necessarily  limited  view  of  the  subject. 


CHAP.  I         STATE  OF  NAPLES  IN  1805  23 

primogeniture.^  The  Courts,  imbued  with  the  tradi- 
tions of  feudalism  and  the  spirit  of  casuistry,  generally 
construed  these  trusts  in  the  spirit  in  which  they  were 
framed.  Thus  a  testamentary  disposition  would  be 
readily  enforced  that  directed  the  devolution  of  pro- 
perty for  certain  uses  for  the  duration  of  the  world,  or 
of  the  Holy  Sacrament,  or  of  bread  and  wine.  To 
such  a  point  had  the  system  been  carried,  so  inextricable 
was  the  maze  of  legal  complications  that  had  grown  up, 
that  money  was  unobtainable  for  any  transaction  involv- 
ing the  transfer  or  guarantee  of  immovables,  for  there 
was  no  certainty  that  a  binding  contract  could  be 
framed.  The  tendency  was  therefore  for  a  constant 
transference  of  land  from  the  weak  to  the  strong,  while 
the  law  stepped  in  to  prevent  the  breaking  up  of 
domains  once  acquired,  or  their  reversion  by  natural 
channels  into  the  hands  of  those  who  might  have  turned 
them  to  use. 

In  addition  to  their  tenure  of  the  land,  the  Barons 
had  acquired  vast  rights  from  the  kings.  Under 
Robert  the  Norman  they  had  extorted  the  so-called 
quattro  lettere  arhitrarie :  the  right  to  moderate  or  alter 
the  ordinary  law,  to  torture,  to  proceed  ex  officio  without 
previous  accusation,  and  to  increase  legal  penalties. 
While  such  extraordinary  privileges  were  wrung  from 
the  early  kings,  no  less  extraordinary  rights  were  forcibly 
acquired  over  the  people  and  their  property.  For 
every  reason  that  brutal  selfishness  and  ignorant  greed 
could  dictate,  spoliation  in  every  shape  was  wreaked  on 
the  towns  and  villages  of  Naples.  On  every  occupa- 
tion or  interest  of  life,  on  every  hour   and   on  every 

1  This  is  merely  a  rough  summary  of  the  matter  with  a  view  to  explain  what 
the  position  was  at  the  beginning  of  the  nineteenth  century.  It  must  not  be  taken 
as  a  history  of  feudal  law. 


24  THE  NAPOLEONIC  EMPIRE  part  i 

necessity,  on  every  right  of  proprietorship,  of  enjoy- 
ment, of  old-established  law  and  custom,  even  on  what 
they  made  but  a  burden,  on  existence  itself,  the  feudal 
proprietors  levied  their  tolls.  The  history  of  the 
accumulation  and  mutations  of  these  tolls  need  not  be 
entered  into  ;  suffice  it  to  say  that  at  the  beginning  of 
the  nineteenth  century  more  than  1400  feudal  rights 
were  in  existence  and  exercise.  In  theory  the  feudal 
system  had  come  to  an  end  a  few  years  before  the 
period  at  which  this  history  opens  ;  in  reality  the 
burden  had  not  been  appreciably  lightened  by  Bourbon 
legislation. 

Feudal  oppression  probably  reached  its  height  under 
the  Angevin  kings.  In  the  fifteenth  century  the  evils 
of  the  system  were  so  crying  as  to  suggest  reform.  In 
1482  Ferdinand  I.  of  Arragon  decreed  that  his  subjects 
should  be  free  to  let  their  houses  or  lodgings,  to  carry 
on  any  honest  business,  to  keep  taverns,  to  use  wood 
and  water,  to  buy  and  sell  wine  and  oil.  This  decree 
proved  too  radical,  too  revolutionary.  The  good  in- 
tentions of  the  monarch  were  fruitless.  After  the  long 
period  of  wars  that  ushered  in  the  eighteenth  century, 
and  resulted  in  the  establishment  of  the  younger  branch 
of  the  Spanish  Bourbons  on  the  throne  of  the  Two 
Sicilies,  it  appeared  for  a  short  time  as  though  better 
days  were  in  store.  Charles  III.,  a  successful  and  not 
unintelligent  ruler,  gave  promise  of  improvement. 
Bianchini  believes  that  a  great  change  was  eiFected 
during  his  reign.  The  change  in  reality  was  more 
of  detail,  more  administrative,  than  of  principle.  It 
might  in  a  distant  way  be  compared  to  that  effected 
in  France  half  a  century  earher  under  Louis  XIV. 
Charles  III.  issued  edicts  curtailing  several  baronial 
rights,  among  others  that  of  pardon,     tie  appears  to 


CHAP.  I  STATE  OF  NAPLES  IN  1805  25 

have  exercised  discrimination  in  appointments  to  judicial 
office  ;  he  compelled  the  Barons  to  reside  at  the  capital 
instead  of  on  their  estates,  and  generally  strengthened 
his  authority  at  their  expense.  Yet  the  oppression  of 
the  people  was  not  sensibly  lightened.  How  mediaeval 
the  spirit  of  the  age  remained  may  be  judged  when  its 
chief  philosopher,  the  admirable  Vico,  expressly  states 
that  on  questions  of  trespass  arising  between  two  Barons 
the  duel  was  the  proper  mode  of  trial. 

Under  Ferdinand,  the  successor  of  Charles,  whose 
long  reign  spanned  a  period  of  great  political  change 
(175 9- 1825),  the  prospect  of  reform  appeared  even 
better.  In  various  directions  improvements  were  in- 
troduced, though  they  largely  remained  a  dead  letter. 
But  the  direction  of  the  government  was  unintelligent^ 
and  had  there  been  a  real  desire  to  free  the  kingdom 
from  the  evils  of  feudalism  the  means  were  ready  to 
hand.  Itwas  evident  that,  as  a  feudal  possession  was 
not  alienable,  the  tenure  must  sooner  or  later  fail,  and 
the  property  eventually  revert  to  the  Crown.  These 
reversions  were  frequent ;  yet  as  they  did  not  form  a 
regular  part  of  the  income  of  the  Crown,  resales  might 
well  have  been  effected,  free  from  the  feudal  rights, 
and  with  some  consideration  for  the  advantage  of  the 
peasantry.  Such  a  system  pursued  for  a  century  would 
have  cost  the  Crown  nothing,  freed  a  part  of  the 
kingdom,  and  improved  its  conditions.  If  it  had  been 
supported  by  legislation  facilitating  redemption  from 
feudal  tenure,  and  if  the  Crown  had  shown  a  good 
example  with  respect  to  the  300  or  400  Universita 
of  which  the  King  was  the  direct  feudal  superior, 
Ferdinand  might  have  won  the  praise  of  posterity, 
increased  his  resources,  and  benefited  a  large  number 
of  his  subjects.     But  political  wisdom  was  a  difficult 


26  THE  NAPOLEONIC  EMPIRE  part  i 

end  for  a  Bourbon  to  achieve  ;  a  totally  opposite  policy 
to  that  indicated  by  reason,  by  interest,  and  by  humanity 
prevailed.  Even  in  cases  where  villages  belonged  to 
the  royal  domain,  with  the  privilege  of  never  being 
sold  out  of  it,  even  in  cases  where  the  Universita  had 
found  the  means  of  purchasing  itself  back  from  its 
Baron,  the  cash  offer  of  a  greedy  purchaser  would 
prove  too  much  for  the  cupidity  of  Monarch  or 
Ministers,  and  the  unfortunate  populations  would  be 
barbarously  resold  into  slavery.  In  the  early  days  of 
the  French  Revolution  a  Neapolitan  jurist  of  honoured 
memory,  Melchiorre  Delfico,  had  the  boldness  to  call 
public  attention  to  the  question  of  the  resale  of  feudal 
estates  by  the  Crown,  not  without  salutary  effect 
(^Rifflessioni  sulla  vendita  de  feudi  devoluti).  In  the 
course  of  the  next  few  years  several  estates  were  dis- 
posed of  under  an  allodial  or  freehold  tenure,  as  Delfico 
had  advocated,  instead  of  under  feudal  tenure.  But 
even  then  the  change  proved  more  nominal  than  real, 
for  though  the  feudal  designation  was  dropped,  the 
feudal  rights  were  enforced  in  their  entirety.^  The 
purchasers  of  land  no  longer  cared  for  the  empty 
forms  of  feudalism,  but  they  were  as  firmly  attached  to 
the  income  the  feudal  rights  represented  as  ever  their 
ancestors  had  been.  When  finally,  under  pressure  of 
the  great  popular  reaction  heralded  by  the  French 
Revolution,  the  abolition  of  feudalism  was  decreed, 
only  a  name  was  destroyed  ;  facts  were  left  practically 
untouched.  These  feudal  facts,  as  they  existed  at  the 
period  this  history  opens,  must  now  be  set  out. 

Feudal    tenures    of    some    fifty    different    varieties 
involved  services  in  person,  payments  in  kind  and  in 

^  A  few  Universita  were  successful  in  redeeming  themselves  at  this  period.     Thus 
Montesantangelo  freed  itself  from  feudalism  in  i8o2  at  a  cost  of  243,000  ducats. 


CHAP.  I  STATE  OF  NAPLES  IN  1805  27 

money,  under  more  than  1400  specified  heads.  This 
does  not  signify  that  at  every  village  of  the  kingdom 
some  1400  taxes  were  exacted,  for  many  were  local  in 
their  application,  and  a  few  were  enforced  only  in 
solitary  or  very  rare  cases.  The  landowners  were  few, 
and  generally  non-resident ;  their  interests  were  con- 
fided to  rapacious  agents  and  lawyers.  Zurlo,  in  his 
masterly  report  on  the  condition  of  the  royal  domain 
of  the  forest  of  Sila  in  1791,  laid  stress  on  this  aspect 
of  the  question.  He  courageously  stated  his  opinion 
that  the  infinite  number  of  rights  claimed  against  the 
peasantry  was  of  no  use  to  any  one  save  the  infamous 
class  of  men  who  lived  on  this  state  of  things.  The 
conditions  of  life  of  the  peasantry  were  perhaps  at 
their  worst  in  this  district,  notwithstanding  its  iron 
mines  and  wealth  of  timber  ;  yet  it  was  bad  enough  at 
the  very  gates  and  in  the  streets  of  Naples. 

It  was  from  the  necessaries  of  daily  existence  that 
baronial  extortion  derived  the  largest  revenue.  Mills 
and  baking  ovens  were  variously  taxed,  and  to  such  an 
extent  that,  bread  not  being  obtainable,  "  the  people 
were  compelled  to  cook  cakes  under  the  embers  and 
to  eat  them  for  bread.  And  it  happened  not  unfre- 
quently  that  the  Barons  instituted  proceedings  to  pre- 
vent the  exercise  of  this  miserable  privilege  which  even 
the  most  barbarous  people  enjoy.''  ^  Not  only  were 
mills  taxed,  but  the  exclusive  right  to  erect  them  was 
occasionally  claimed.  At  Cervinara  the  Universita  paid 
60  ducats  yearly  for  the  privilege  of  making  macaroni  ; 
and  in  1 809  no  less  than  forty-eight  villages  petitioned 
the  Feudal  Commission  for  freedom  to  collect  acorns. 
There  was  a  tithe  on  hens,  a  tax  for  keeping  them 
within  doors,  a  tax  for  selling  them,  for  killing  them,  on 

^  Bianchini,  296. 


28  THE  NAPOLEONIC  EMPIRE  part  i 

their  eggs  ;  in  some  baronies  it  was  forbidden  to  dis- 
pose of  them  ;  in  another,  the  right  of  taking  as  many  of 
them  as  the  Baron  required  was  asserted.  On  fish  there 
were  some  thirty  different  taxes,  about  ten  more  than 
on  mills.  For  the  right  of  sending  out  fishing-vessels 
the  village  of  Scilla,  on  the  Strait  of  Messina,  paid 
250  ducats  annually  ;  while  such  ancient  taxes  as  the 
Sessanlino,  dating  back  to  the  Norman  period,  were 
still  in  force,  as  at  the  little  village  of  Castignano.  No 
article  of  food  escaped  seigneurial  rapacity.  Chestnuts 
were  taxed  ;  so  were  melons,  wine,  grapes,  figs,  honey, 
cheese,  nuts,  and  grass.  On  every  animal  alive,  on 
every  animal  sold,  on  every  animal  transported,  on 
every  animal  taken  to  water,  on  every  animal's  increase, 
on  every  carcase,  the  Baron  claimed  his  due.  At 
Caselnuovo  Monterotaro  the  Universita  built  a  cattle 
trough  to  avoid  that  of  the  Baron,  for  the  use  of  which 
a  heavy  toll  was  exacted  ;  no  sooner  was  the  trough  com- 
pleted than  the  Baron  forbad  its  use.  Fuel  was  taxed  as 
thoroughly  as  food  :  hearths  paid  toll,  while  even  pine 
cones  and  dead  leaves  did  not  escape  exaction.  Every 
impediment  that  ingenuity  could  devise  was  thrown 
in  the  way  of  husbandry  and  agriculture.  Rain  water, 
perhaps  owing  to  its  proceeding,  like  the  Baron's  right, 
from  heaven,  was  his  exclusive  property.  His  was  the 
sole  right  of  erecting  barns,  his  horses  alone  could  be 
employed  in  hauling  such  merchandise  as  was  adven- 
tured along  the  tracks  that  did  duty  for  roads.  In 
some  localities  the  taxes  on  occupied  buildings  were  so 
accumulated  as  to  make  them  uninhabitable.  Galanti 
states  that  at  S.  Germano  the  whole  population  of  some 
10,000  people  abandoned  their  houses  to  the  baronial 
agents,  and  sought  an  abode  with  their  cattle  in  the 
fields  under  rudely  constructed  shelters.     The  right  of 


CHAP.  I  STATE  OF  NAPLES  IN  1805  29 

pasturing  on  the  common  land  was  taxed,  and  also  that 
of  using  a  spade  or  a  hoe  ;  while  every  harvester  paid  his 
due  to  the  Baron's  chest,  and  even  the  seed  reserved 
for  the  next  year's  crop  did  not  escape  imposition. 
Winspeare,  whose  authority  on  this  subject  is  in- 
disputable, furnishes  the  additional  detail  that  this 
abuse  was  worse  in  its  application,  and  that  in  the 
division  of  the  seed  the  Baron  and  his  agents  would 
make  no  allowance  for  a  bad  yield  or  damaged 
crops. 

The  tithes  could  be  so  called  only  by  euphemism, 
for  they  were  generally  extended  to  a  third,  a  fourth, 
or  even  a  half,  as  is  eloquently  testified  by  the  names 
of  such  taxes  as  the  mezzapietra^  mezzasemenza^  mezza- 
gallina^  and  others.  At  Christmastide  the  Baron, 
anxious  to  celebrate  this  festival  in  a  truly  religious 
spirit,  imposed  additional  taxation  ;  on  the  occasion  of 
his  marriage,  or  of  the  birth  of  an  heir,  for  the  main- 
tenance of  his  dogs,  or  for  that  of  his  agent,  again  the 
poor  man  had  to  pay.  The  Baron  had  an  exclusive 
right  to  snow,  to  the  dung  dropped  in  the  market- 
place ;  on  every  sale  at  a  fair  he  levied  a  percentage  ; 
every  ladder,  every  tree,  every  balcony,  every  wall, 
every  garden,  was  made  a  source  of  income.  At  Tufara 
the  peasant  was  made  to  pay  for  the  notable  privilege 
of  throwing  the  immondezze  of  the  household  out  of 
his  windows  into  the  street,  while  at  Conversano  the 
cause  of  sanitation  was  dissimilarly  advanced  by  the 
Baron,  who  exacted  payment  for  the  privilege  of  con- 
structing a  drain.  To__such_a_systemjhere^^ 
be  one  limit  worthy  of  serious  attention,  that  of  the^ 
resources  and  long-suffering  of  the  people^^TNo  con- 
lideration  oflaw,  of  justice,  of'oFTiumalTity^uld  be  said 
to  be  operative  when  a  Baron  imposed  a  fresh  tax  for 


30  THE  NAPOLEONIC  EMPIRE  part  i 

what  he  chose  to  describe  as  family  reasons — ragione 
di  famiglia^  or  even,  as  in  the  case  of  the  Universita 
of  Poggiardo,  for  reasons  feelingly  described  as 
unknown. 

One  class  of  feudal  imposition  has  not  yet,  however, 
been  dealt  with,  that  relating  to  personal  services.  In 
this  respect  there  had  been  considerable  improvement 
since  the  days  of  the  Roman  Empire  and  since  the 
mediaeval  period  ;  yet  things  were  bad  enough.  In 
many  of  the  Universita  the  peasantry  were  still  in  a 
state  little  removed  from  serfage.  In  theory  the  nature 
of  their  services  to  the  Baron  might  vary  according  to 
their  standing  as  angarii  or  perangarii.  In  the  first 
case  the  services  were  rendered  at  the  expense  of  the 
Baron,  in  the  latter  at  the  expense  of  the  peasant. 
Ducange,  however,  convincingly  gives  the  following 
definition  :  "  Engaraire,  c'est  a  saver  qu'ils  laboreront 
continuellement.*'  Whether  angarii  or  perangarii y  few 
who  have  examined  the  records  of  King  Joachim's  Feudal 
Commission  will  doubt  that  the  unfortunate  bondsmen 
of  feudalism  laboured  continuously  and  profited  nothing. 
If  the  Baron  had  an  exclusive  right  to  snow,  he  also 
exercised  that  of  compelling  his  peasantry  to  convey  it 
to  his  cellars  ;  when  the  olive  or  the  grape  was  ripe, 
the  Baron's  crop  must  be  gratuitously  picked  while  the 
peasant's  waited  and  sometimes  spoiled.  A  pleasantly 
named  right  was  that  to  the  Giornata  d'amore^  but  when 
this  day's  free  labour  was  extended  to  four  days  out  of 
the  seven,  its  agreeable  description  hardly  sufficed  to 
conceal  the  appearance  of  actual  slavery.  In  one  case, 
of  which  the  record  still  exists,  four  men  had  been 
worked  continuously  for  twelve  months,  and  had  re- 
ceived nothing.  It  must,  however,  be  said  that  the 
most    odious   form  of  personal    service,   the    right    of 


CHAP.  I  STATE  OF  NAPLES  IN  1805  31 

cunnatico  or  feminarum^  had  everywhere  fallen  into 
desuetude  or  been  compounded  for  money.^ 

With  the  feudal  burdens  such  as  they  have  just  been 
described,  it  was  not  remarkable  that  lawlessness  was 
universal.  For  centuries  brigandage  had  flourished. 
From  the  time  when  the  piratical  brigands  from  Nor- 
mandy had  assigned  to  themselves  the  Crown  and  the 
baronies  of  the  kingdom,  robbery  by  force  of  arms  had 
been  an  all-engrossing,  all  but  honoured  avocation.  It 
was  the  only  lucrative  one  open  to  the  man  of  enter- 
prise, save  only  the  law  and  the  church.  In  all  three 
an  equal  lack  of  conscience  was  essential  for  success, 
but  brigandage  called  for  one  manly  virtue,  courage  ; 
the  other  two  professions  did  not.  It  will,  therefore, 
hardly  be  an  exaggeration  to  say  that  it  engaged  the 
attention  of  the  best  element  in  the  population. 

In  the  reign  of  Philip  II.  so  formidable  and  so  well 
organized  had  the  brigands  become,  that  one  of  their 
leaders  was  known  as  King  Marcone  ;  at  Cotrone  he 
inflicted  a  signal  defeat  on  the  Spanish  infantry,  then 
the  first  in  Europe.  A  little  later  an  illustrious  and 
reverend  brigand,  the  Abate  Cesare  Riccardo,  attained 
a  wide  celebrity.  He  supplied  an  admiring  world  with 
his  autobiography  under  the  following  irresistible  title  : 
Nuova  istoria  del  famosissimo  e  forihondo  handito  Abate 
Cesare  Riccardo^  in  cut  si  racconta  in  ottava  rima  la  vita 
e  morte^  occasioni^  ricatti,  hravure  e  tutte  le  imprese  e 
scaramucce  fatte  con  la  Corte^  e  suo  testamento? 


1  Bianchini,  225;  Winspeare  is  less  decisive:  "  I  diritti  suUa  pudicizia  delle 
donne  erano,  per  lo  piu,  trasmutati  in  altrettante  capitazioni." — Abus'i  feudally  38. 
For  a  Sicilian  comparison  see  Leckie,  Historical  Swvey.  Yet  the  delicacy  of 
feudalism  did  not  go  far  when  money  advantages  might  be  secured,  and  in  the  six- 
teenth century  every  meretrke  of  Naples  paid  a  monthly  tax  of  two  carlins, — with  an 
additional  fifteen  grana  at  Christmas  and  Eastertide  ! 

2  "A  new  history  of  the  most  illustrious  and  furious  bandit  Abate  Cesare  Riccardo, 


32  THE  NAPOLEONIC  EMPIRE  part  i 

Under  the  Spanish  viceregal  government_^he  brig- 
ands,  or  malandrini^  were  at  their  worst.^  The  Govern- 
Inent  was  frequently  compelled  to  treat  with  them,  and 
the  Barons  constantly  employed  them  as  a  convenient 
militia.  Under  the  Bourbons  they  began  to  decline, 
although  more  than  one,  among  them  the  famous  Fra 
Diavolo  and  the  Reverend  Ciro  Annichiarico,  played 
a  conspicuous  part  in  the  events  that  will  later  be 
narrated.  Such  roads  as  existed  about  the  year  1800 
were  infested  with  footpads,  and  the  inevitable  pre- 
liminary of  a  journey  from  the  provinces  to  the  capital 
was  the  drawing  up  of  a  will.  Even  the  protection  of 
bodies  of  armed  retainers  was  insufficient  against  robbery, 
murder,  and  outrage.  Homicide  was  the  more  pre- 
valent owing  to  the  legal  subterfuges  and  judicial  cor- 
ruption that  rendered  escape  from  its  consequences 
easy.  Its  prevalence  and  influence  may  be  judged  from 
an  official  report  from  the  provincial  prison  of  Monte- 
fusco.  At  that  one  place  there  were,  in  May  1806, 
163  prisoners  charged  with  homicide  ;  some  of  them 
had  more  than  one  crime  to  account  for,  parricide  and 
other  atrocious  misdeeds  being  frequently  entered. 
The  whole  constitutes  a  frightful  catalogue  of  crime, 
and  sheds  a  most  instructive  light  on  the  social  con- 
ditions of  the  country. 

The  lawlessness  and  brigandage  of  the  provinces 
was  representedjin  tTie  capital  by  the  turbulence  and 
crlminaiitv  of  the  lazzaroni.  They  were  the  fisher- 
men, street  hawkers,  beggars,  and  thieves  of  Naples, 
and  recalled  in  a  vague  way  the  Roman  plebs  and  the 
crowd    of  the   agora   whence    they   might    trace    their 

in  which  his  life  and  death,  adventures,  escapes,  deeds  of  daring  and  his  attempts  and 
skirmishes  with  the  Government  are  recounted  in  verse,  together  with  his  last  will 
and  testament." 


CHAP.  I  STATE  OF  NAPLES  IN  1805  33 

descent.  The  system  on  which  they  were  governed 
had  not  varied  much  since  the  days  of  the  Cassars.  As 
the  Roman  Emperors  humoured  them  by  the  judicious 
ministration  of  bread  and  the  games  of  the  circus,  so 
Ferdinand  of  Bourbon  declared  that  to  rule  them 
three  things  were  necessary  :  festa^  forca  e  farina — holi- 
days, scaffolds,  and  bread  ;  the  method  had  not  greatly 
changed  in  twenty  centuries.  The  lazzaroni  were  not 
an  organized  corps,  though  possessed  of  a  wonderful 
corporate  instinct  or  power  of  rapidly  actingjn  rnasses. 
Superstition,  laziness,  and  dirt  equally  commanded  their 
allegiance  ;  they  observed  no  law  save  under  compul- 
sion; they  lived  free  from  the  conventional  trammels 
of  society.  Many  of  them  had  neither  family  nor 
name  ;  one  out  of  three  answered  to  that  of  S pose  to. 
This  word  was  derived  from  the  esposti^  or  foundhngs, 
who  were  numerous,  and  were  cared  for  in  one  of  the 
largest  charitable  institutions  of  Naples..  The  food  of 
the  lazzaroni  was  chiefly  bread,  macaroni,  and  fish  ; 
their  usual  habitations  by  night  were  baskets  made  of 
osiers  ;  their  favourite  haunts  were  along  the  sea  front, 
between  the  port  and  the  Mercato,  or  at  the  foot  of 
the  Pizzofalcone  along  the  beach  of  Santa  Lucia.  As 
for  their  clothing  it  was  generally  of  the  poorest  and 
scantiest,  relieved  by  some  gaudy  scarf,  handkerchief, 
or  cap.  Travellers  from  the  north  remarked  on  the 
contrast  presented  by  the  fashionable  Toledo,  where, 
amidst  all  the  luxury  and  display  of  wealth,  lazzaroni 
might  be  seen  lying  devoid  of  clothing  by  the  entrances 
of  shops,  begging  for  bread. 

Despite  their  abject  condition  and  ignorance,  the 
lazzaroni  were  a  power  in  the  State.  Their  numbers 
were  formidable,  perhaps  150,000  before  1799.  On 
more  than   one   occasion   they   had   asserted    their   in- 

VOL.   I  D 


34  THE  NAPOLEONIC  EMPIRE  part  i 

fluence  in  no  uncertain  manner.  In  the  seventeenth 
century,  at  a  time  when  the  misery  and  terrible  con- 
ditions of  the  poor  were  even  more  grievous  than 
usual,  the  imposition  of  an  extra  tax  on  fruit  hawkers 
led  to  an  insurrection.  Under  the  famous  Masaniello 
they  obtained  control  of  the  city,  and  for  some  time 
carried  on  a  republican  form  of  government  with  the 
assistance  of  the  French  under  the  Due  de  Guise. 
Their  most  remarkable  exploits  were  performed  two 
centuries  later.  In  1799,  under  the  inspiration  of  the 
clergy,  they  rose  and  opposed  the  entrance  of  the  army 
of  the  French  Republic  into  the  city.  General  Cham- 
pionnet's  force  was  small  but  finely  led  and  composed 
of  veteran  battalions,  yet  the  lazzaroni  for  several  days 
made  victory  uncertain.  At  the  Porta  Capuana  they 
died  in  thousands,  and  thrice  drove  out  the  redoubtable 
grenadiers  of  the  Revolution ;  it  was  only  after  a 
slaughter  such  as  General  Thiebault  declared  he  never 
saw  equalled  in  all  the  Napoleonic  campaigns,  that  their 
desperate  resistance  was  overcome.  If  their  defence  of 
the  city  had  been  creditable,  the  horrors  they  per- 
petrated a  few  months  later,  on  the  retirement  of  the 
French  from  Naples  and  the  fall  of  the  democratic 
government  they  had  instituted,  have  perhaps  not  been 
surpassed  in  modern  European  history.  To  the  atro- 
cities of  the  Spaniards  in  the  Netherlands,  to  those  of 
the  Septembriseurs  and  Terrorists  in  France,  must  those 
of  the  lazzaroni  of  Naples  be  compared.  The  catalogue 
of  their  misdeeds  is  fortunately  not  entitled  to  find  a 
place  here. 

Such  being  the  condition  of  the  mass  of  the  popula- 
tion of  town  and  country,  it  will  require  little  effort 
to  realize  that  the  state  of  commerce,  of  industry,  of 
agriculture,  and  of  the  general  finances  was  bad. 


CHAP.  I  STATE  OF  NAPLES  IN  1805  35 

The  only  road  in  the  kingdom  that  could  be 
accounted  better  than  a  mule  track  was  that  leading 
from  Naples  northwards  to  Rome.  Between  the  inland 
towns  and  villages  there  was  but  little  intercourse. 
Their  generally  inaccessible  situation,  the  absence  of 
trade,  the  violence  of  the  torrents  that  rush  down  from 
the  Apennines,  the  infrequency  of  bridges,  the  insecurity 
from  brigands,  the  innumerable  and  uncertain  obstacles 
presented  by  the  baronial  dues,  all  tended  to  keep 
the  villager  near  his  abode,  to  concentrate  his  attention 
on  his  patch  of  maize  or  herd  of  goats.  In  Calabria, 
wrote  King  Joseph  to  Napoleon,  there  were  neither 
roads  nor  justice.  Mountain  streams  converted  groves 
of  olive  and  orange  trees  into  swamps  ;  rich  forests 
had  disappeared,  destroyed  by  temporary  beneficiaries. 
Puglia,  once  famed  for  its  wealth  of  timber,  could  now 
afford  its  inhabitants  little  better  fuel  than  dung  ;  by 
its  application  to  this  use  the  land  correspondingly 
suffered.  The  spade,  hand  scythe,  and  wooden  plough 
were  the  only  implements  of  agriculture  employed  ; 
hoes  were  rare,  saws  and  scissors  unknown.  In  Puglia, 
the  most  important  of  the  agricultural  provinces,  there 
was  no  more  land  under  cultivation  in  the  year  1800 
than  there  had  been  in  the  middle  of  the  sixteenth 
century.  In  the  same  period  the  cattle  had  diminished 
from  about  three  million  head  to  less  than  one  and  a 
quarter.  Industry  was  all  but  non-existent,  the  expor- 
tation  of  wheat  prohibited,  public  works  were  neglected 
and  taxes  imposed  for  roads  that  were  never  begun. 
Commerce  was  restricted  by  import  and  export  duties  ; 
silk  spinning  had  once  been  a  profitable  occupation, 
but  declined  under  the  Bourbons.  At  Lauria  and  in 
several  other  places  it  was  prohibited  by  the  feudal 
lord  ;    at    Molano  the    Baron    exercised    the    right    of 


36  THE  NAPOLEONIC  EMPIRE  part  i 

taking  over  the  whole  production  at  a  price  fixed  by 
himself.  Under  such  conditions  the  industry  not 
unnaturally  languished. 

The  revenue  of  the  State  was  not  flourishing,  nor 
did  the  multitude  of  taxes  result  in  a  correspondingly 
overflowing  treasury.  There  were  more  than  one 
hundred  direct  taxes,  and  a  large  number  of  indirect 
ones.  The  supreme  financial  authority  was  vested  in 
the  Regia  Camera,  a  body  of  auditors  who  exercised  no 
real  control.  The  municipalities  levied  the  taxes,  of 
which  they  paid  an  arbitrarily  fixed  proportion  to  the 
Government,  applying  the  surplus,  by  ancient  privilege, 
for  the  benefit  of  the  feudal  lord.  Of  the  total  revenue 
one  quarter  went  to  the  nobility  and  as  much  to  the 
clergy,  monastic  orders,  and  charitable  foundations. 
The  only  general  principle  that  guided  the  raising  of 
the  revenue  was  that  of  making  the  poorer  man  pay 
for  the  enjoyment  of  the  richer.  On  salt  the  tax  was 
3  ducats  and  3  grana  per  tomolo^  and  its  consumption 
was  compulsory.  The  Universita  was  obliged  to  take 
a  yearly  quantity  fixed  on  the  basis  of  population. 
Nearly  every  other  article  of  food  was  taxed,  the 
collection  being  contracted  out  to  a  farmer  of  the 
revenue  ;  imposts  thus  raised  were  known  as  the 
arrendamenti,  A  tax  of  one  once  on  each  hearth  may 
be  noticed,  and  also  a  curious  one  that  well  illustrates 
the  arbitrary  nature  of  the  system,  that  known  as  the 
nave  bruciata.  This  had  been  first  levied  many  years 
before  as  a  special  contribution  to  replace  a  royal  vessel 
that  had  been  burnt  ;  the  vessel  had  never  been  rebuilt, 
but  the  tax  continued  to  be  levied  annually.  Under 
this  inconsequent  and  crude  system  it  was  as  simple 
to  decree  a  new  tax  as  it  was  diflicult  to  discover  a 
profitable  source  of  revenue.     The  Barons  paid  but  a 


CHAP.  I  STATE  OF  NAPLES  IN  1805  37 

small  proportion  towards  the  expenses  of  the  State,  the 
ancient  feudal  taxes  such  as  the  adoa^  rilevio^  cavallo 
?nontato^  and  others  producing  little.  The  incidence 
of  taxation  as  between  the  baronial  proprietor  and  the 
peasant  is  well  shown  in  the  estimate  of  revenue  for  the 
year  1790  given  by  Bianchini.  Out  of  a  total  of 
16,700,000  ducats  the  Universita  paid  in  direct  taxes 
2,100,000,  the  arrendamenti  yielded  3,000,000,  the 
gahella  2,900,000  ;  the  people  further  paid  in  various 
feudal  taxes  1,600,000,  and  in  support  of  the  church 
3,000,000.  The  Barons,  on  the  other  hand,  paid  as 
adoa  248,579  ducats,  and  under  less  important  heads 
an  insignificant  sum.  It  is  no  exaggeration  to  say, 
therefore,  that  the  poor  practically  supported  State. 
Crown^nd  aristocracy.  It  is  not  possible  to  advance 
what  the  public  debt  was,  for  no  one  appears  to  have  A  i 
known  ;  according  to  Bianchini,  whose  opinion  carries  (^  *  . 
weight,  it  probably  represented  in   1806  not  less  than  tv 

130,000,000  ducats. 

The  total  of  the  population  thus  burdened  had  risen 
from  about  one  and  a  half  millions  under  the  Angevin 
kings  to  five  millions  under  Ferdinand  of  Bourbon. 
But  it  was  subject  to  great  and  violent  fluctuations, 
owing  to  the  heavy  mortality  attending  the  political 
and  economic  accidents  of  the  period.  Thus  in  1 803 
and  1804  deaths  greatly  exceeded  births  in  the  city  of 
Naples,  and  in  the  year  i2^Q__the  lazzaroni  are  said 
to  have  J)een  diminished  by  no  less  than  100,000. 

Inseparably  bound  up  with  the  hideous  system  of 
feudalism  that  afilicted  this  unfortunate  kingdom  was 
the  ignorant,  brutish  selfishness  and  rapacity  of  those 
who  had  for  so  many  centuries  governed  it.  The 
Swabian  kings  may  have  been  better  than  the  Angevins, 
the    Bourbons    may  have    been    less   greedy    than    the 


38  THE  NAPOLEONIC  EMPIRE  part  i 

Spanish  viceroys,  yet  in  the  year  1805  it  might  well  be 
thought  that  this  cup  of  human  misery  was  full ;  that 
the  iniquities,  by  which  the  millions  of  Naples  were 
herded  together  without  education,  without  national  or 
civic  sentiments,  without  any  of  the  rights  that  breed 
self-respect,  honour,  courage,  and  virtue,  had  trans- 
gressed the  bounds  appointed  by  nature. 

But  relief  was  at  hand,  for  Ferdinand  of  Bourbon 
was  soon  to  be  driven  from  the  kingdom.  Something 
of  the  spirit  of  his  reign  has  already  been  seen  in  connec- 
tion with  the  feudal  question.  The  chief  reform  effected 
was  perhaps  that  in  judicial  procedure  whereby  judges 
were  required  to  state  the  reasons  for  their  decisions  in 
writing.  Its  effects  could  not  be  far-reaching  ;  judicial 
office  was  sold,  the  profit  being  a  royal  perquisite  ;  the 
law  was  chaotic  ;  the  decrees  of  twelve  conflicting  juris- 
dictions filled  a  hundred  volumes,  while  the  criminal  law 
was  buried  below  a  mass  of  precedents  and  customs.  The 
confusion  of  Roman,  canon,  and  feudal  law,  of  Norman 
and  Swabian  constitutions,  Spanish  pragmatic  decrees, 
private  statutes  of  the  city  of  Naples,  and  precedents 
of  the  Sommaria,  Vicaria,  and  other  tribunals,  would 
have  been  inextricable  had  not  the  sovereip^n's  preroga- 
tive made  his  decision  more  important  than  that  of  any 
or  all  of  his  judges.  Royal  interference  was  constant, 
exceptional  laws  and  speciallv  constituted  tribunals 
were  favourite  remedies,  while  before  the  opening  of 
any  trial  that  interested  the  King  or  his  Ministers  the 
sentence  was  dictated  to  those  whose  theoretical  duty  it 
was  to  expound  the  law  and  dispense  justice. 

The  state  of  criminal  was  even  worse  than  that  of 
civil  law.  Trials  were  conducted  in  secret,  and  although 
torture  was  no  longer  employed,  chains,  semi-starva- 
tion, and  the  manifold  horrors  of  the  prisons  were  but 


CHAP.  I  STATE  OF  NAPLES  IN  1805  39 

one  degree  removed  from  it.  Proofs  of  guilt  were 
paid  for,  and  so  full  were  the  prisons,  so  rapidly  were 
the  galley  slaves  worked  to  death,  that  trial  by  truglio 
was  invented  to  empty  the  tenants  of  the  cells  on  to 
the  rowing  bench  with  convenient  expedition.  The 
truglio  disposed  of  batches  of  twenty  and  more  prisoners 
at  one  sentence  ;  this  was  settled  before  trial  between 
the  judge  and  the  advocate  who  was  officially  appointed 
to  conduct  the  defence.  Its  double  advantage  was  that 
it  economized  judicial  time  and  manned  the  royal 
galleys. 

The  early  part  of  Ferdinand's  reign  passed  quietly 
enough,  and  his  policy  developed  on  normal  Bourbon 
lines.-^  With  the  king  of  Spain,  his  brother  Charles  IV., 
he  maintained  intimate  relations.  To  Austria  he  bound 
himself  by  the  close  tie  of  marriage,  the  Archduchess 
Mary  Caroline,  most  energetic  and  domineering  of 
the  daughters  of  Maria  Theresa,  becoming  his  wife  in 
1768.^  With  France,  where  reigned  the  head  of  the 
House  of  Bourbon,  first  Louis  XV.  and  later  Louis 
XVI.,  his  relations  were  too  close  to  lead  to  serious 
difficulty.  So  everything  appeared  to  prosper.  A  few 
Neapolitan  lawyers  and  noblemen  were  carelessly  per- 
mitted to  talk  of  reform  and  to  discuss  Rousseau's 
Contrat  Social.  Mary  Caroline  herself,  following  the 
lead  of  her  brother  the  Emperor  Joseph,  turned  liberal, 
and  even  instituted  a  lodge  of  female  freemasons.  But 
the  time  for  the  Queen's  political  sentimentalism  was 
not  well  chosen  ;  the  day  of  popular  reaction  against 
the  iniquities  of  divine  right  had  come.     In  1789  began 

1  In  Appendix  C  will  be  found  a  table  giving  the  relations  of  the  French,  Spanish, 
and  Neapolitan  Bourbons. 

2  It  is  curious  that  English  usage  names  the  Empress  and  her  daughters  Maria, 
Mary,  and  Marie.  It  would  be  pedantic  to  speak  of  Marie  Caroline,  or  of  Maria 
Antoinette,  or  of  Mary'Thertsa  ! 


40  THE  NAPOLEONIC  EMPIRE  part  i 

the  French  Revolution,  which  sounded  the  knell  of 
Bourbonism  and  sent  Mary  Caroline's  sister  and 
brother-in-law  to  the  scaffold.  The  detestation  of  the 
Sicilian  Court  for  the  new  government  of  France  was 
not  exceeded  in  vehemence  in  any  quarter  of  Europe. 
Finally,  in  1799,  the  army  of  Ferdinand  and  of  the 
First  Republic  met,  with  disastrous  results  for  the  King 
of  the  Two  Sicilies.  Champion  net  occupied  Naples, 
the  Court  sought  refuge  in  Sicily,  and  a  few  Neapolitan 
liberals  boldly  proclaimed  the  Parthenopean  Republic. 

But  the  country  was  not  ripe  for  such  a  form  of 
government ;  and  although  the  men  who  conducted  it 
showed  more  capacity,  moderation,  and  courage  than 
might  have  been  expected  under  such  remarkable  con- 
ditions, the  Republic  could  not  survive  the  withdrawal 
of  the  French  army  to  northern  Italy.  The  Partheno- 
pean  Republic  lived  but  a  few  months,  and  sank  in 
rivers  of  blood.  Defenceless  men,  women,  and  children 
were  butchered  in  hundreds  by  the  lazzaroni  and  by 
the  provincial  levies  of  Cardinal  Ruffo,  and  Ferdinand 
and  Mary  Caroline  were  re-established  on  their 
throne. 

The  horrors  of  the  royalist  reaction  were  soon  to 
be  atoned  for.  France  was  now  in  stronger  hands 
than  when  her  troops  had  been  forced  out  of  Italy  by 
Suvaroff.  Only  a  few  weeks  after  the  capture  of 
Naples  by  Ruffo  and  Nelson,  General  Bonaparte  returned 
from  his  expedition  to  Egypt,  turned  out  the  Directoire, 
and  established  the  Consular  Government.  As  First 
Consul  he  soon  returned  to  the  scene  of  his  great 
exploits,  and  having  won  the  victory  of  Marengo^  con- 
cluded a  peace  that  left  France  preponderant  once  more 
in  northern  Italy.  During  the  five  years  that  followed, 
he  remodelled  the  a'dmmistrative  system  and"tKe  army, 


CHAP.  I  STATE  OF  NAPLES  IN  1805  41 

forging^  a  weapon  fit  to  carve  out  his  fortune.  During 
this  period  the  government  of  Naples  was  constantly 
menaced  ;  the  sword  trembled  threateningly,  its  blow 
held  ever  suspended.     That  blow  was  at  last  to  descend 

j  as  a  consequence  of  the  first  campaign  of  the  Emperor 

^  Napoleon. 

Principal  Authorities  consulted 
MSS. 

BiBL.  Naz.  Napoli  ;  Church,  Secret  Report.  This  is  a  copy  of  an  original 
that  does  not  appear  to  be  at  the  Archivio  di  Stato  ;  perhaps  it  is  to  be  found 
among  the  papers  at  the  Royal  Palace,  to  which  access  has  so  far  been 
refused.  The  report  is  of  the  greatest  value  for  the  history  of  the  secret 
societies,  and  incidentally  for  social  and  economic  questions. 

Archivio  di  Stato,  Napoli  ;  Gmstizia,  1806:  several  interesting 
bundles  with  reference  to  feudal  legislation. 

Archivio  DI  Stato,  Napoli  5  Interna,  ^i,Commissione  feudale :  invalu- 
able collection  of  some  5000  bundles  of  MSS.  relating  to  the  abolition  of 
feudalism  together  with  the  Bolletino  Feudale,  Bolletino  delle  sentence,  and 
Supplimento  del  Bolletino,  for  which  see  Bibliography. 

Printed  Books 
(For  full  titles  and  critical  notes  see  Bibliography) 

Ammirati,  Gius  feodale  j  Barrio,  De  antiquitate  et  situ  Calabria } 
BiANCHiNi,  Finanze  di  Napoli;  Blunt,  Vestiges  of  Ancient  Manners; 
Bo  I  SSI  ER,  Promenades  Archeologiques ;  Bolletino  delle  sentenze ;  Bolletino 
Feudale ;  Calendario  della  Corte,  1806;  Cantu,  Cronistoria ,-  Cesare,  De, 
La  Fine  di  un  Regno  ;  Colletta,  Storia  di  Napoli ;  Dedem,  De,  Memoires  ; 
Delfico,  Riffiessioni  sulla  Vendita  de"  Feudi  De'voluti ;  Desvernois, 
Memoires;  Dumas,  Pre'cis  Militaire ;  Eustace,  Classical  Tour;  Fried- 
laender,  Toivn  Life  in  Ancient  Italy ;  Gorani,  Memoires  Secrets ;  Gian- 
none,  Storia  di  Napoli ;  Indice  de"  Diritti ;  Joseph,  Correspondance  du 
Roi ;  Kotzebue,  Travels ;  Laurenze,  Essai  sur  Naples;  Leckie,  Histor. 
Sur'vey  ;  M.  L.  R.,  Saggio  Politico  ;  Minasi,  Notizie  di  S cilia  ;  Miot  de 
Melito,  Memoires;  Nicola,  Diario ;  Novario,  De  Gra'vaminibus  Fassa- 
lorum ;  Orloff,  Memoires;  Palmieri,  Souvenirs  et  Pensees ;  Rehfues, 
Gemdlde  njon  Neapel;  Roederer,  CEu=vres;  Rolfe,  Naples  in  1888 ;  Savelli, 
Le'gion  Corse;  SEGVR,Hist.et  M/moires;  Serristori,  Statistica  delle  due  Sicilie; 
Supplimento  del  Bolletino  ;  Taine,  Foyage  en  Italie  ;  Thiebault,  Memoires; 
TuppuTi,  Reflexions  sur  F Agriculture  ;  Ungaro,  Prospetto  Economico  ;  Vico, 
Scienza  Nuo^a  ;  Winspeare,  Abusi  Feudali ;  Zurlo,  Rapporto,  1809. 


CHAPTER   II 

NAPOLEON    AND    NAPLES 

Ferdinand  I. — Mary  Caroline — Acton— World  politics — Taranto 
and  the  East — Napoleon,  King  of  Italy — Coerces  Naples — 
Elliot  and  Tatitcheff — Gallo's  warnings — Lacy  at  Naples — 
Treaty  of  neutrality  —  The  Anglo  -  Russians  at  Naples — 
Trafalgar  and  Austerlitz — Position  in  Italy — Retreat  of  Anglo- 
Russians — Mary  Caroline's  negotiations — Craig  and  Sicily — 
Schoenbrunn  proclamation. 

In  a  kingdom  ruled  as  was  that  of  Naples,  the 
character  and  prejudices  of  the  monarch  exercised  a 
disproportioned  influence.  The  relations  of  the  Two 
Sicilies  with  France  and  the  other  Powers  of  Europe 
were  more  largely  affected  by  the  temperaments  of 
Ferdinand  and  Mary  Caroline  than  by  the  crying 
necessities  of  their  subjects. 

Ferdinand  of  Bourbon  was  fourth  of  his  name 
among  the  kings  of  Naples,  third  among  those  of 
Sicily  ;  towards  the  close  of  his  reign  he  changed  his 
style  to  Ferdinand,  first  of  the  Two  Sicilies,  and  under 
that  designation  he  will  henceforth  appear  in  these 
pages.  Ferdinand  came  to  the  throne  at  the  early  age 
of  eight,  and  his  education  was  totally  neglected.  Prob- 
ably the  councillors  who  administered  the  kingdom 
during  his  minority  thought  it  to  their  interest  that 
the    young    King's     inclinations    and     abilities    should 

42 


CHAP.  II  NAPOLEON  AND  NAPLES  43 

develop  along  lines  that  rendered  unlikely  the  eventual 
curtailment  of  their  power.  The  boy  accordingly  grew 
up  in  ignorance.  He  read  with  difficulty,  and  could 
barely  write.  But  in  the  killing  of  all  sorts  of  game, 
in  riding  and  breaking  horses,  in  the  capture  of  fish, 
and  especially  in  harpooning  the  tunny,  he  acquired 
and  displayed  a  robust  body,  a  boorish  and  crafty 
intellect.^ 

He  found  the  associates  of  his  early  years  among 
grooms,  gamekeepers,  and  men  of  low  birth,  with 
whom  he  cultivated  and  acquired  a  truly  Neapolitan 
vulgarity  of  speech  and  manner.  During  his  whole 
life  Ferdinand  retained  the  use  of  the  dialect  and  tricksj 
early  caught,  and  few  of  his  habits  gave  more  delight 
to  his  faithful  subjects  than  that  of  having  macaroni!  v^^ 
served  in  his  box  at  the  opera  and  lapping  it  up  with 
all  the  grimaces  and  antics  of  a  lazzaro.  An  even 
more  popular  custom  of  the  King  took  him  several 
times  in  the  year  to  the  market-place,  the  famous 
Mercato,  the  scene  of  so  many  tragedies,  the  spot 
where  in  his  reign  so  many  died, — Manthone,  Eleonora 
Pimentel,  Marchese  Palmieri,  the  Duchess  of  Sanfelice, 
Fra  Diavolo,  and  so  many  others.  To  the  Mercato 
Ferdinand  would  proceed  when  laden  with  some 
particularly  good  haul  of  fish  from  his  lakes  at  Fusaro 
or  Patria.  Surrounded  by  a  shouting  mob  of  market 
men,  loafers  and  lazzaroni,  he  would  sell  his  catch  to 
the  highest  bidder,  meeting  the  coarse  jokes  of  the 
crowd  with  ready  and  vigorous  repartee.  Ferdinand's 
wit  and  manners  were  gross  ;  from  his  long  nose,  which 
with  his  lanky  figure  gave  him  a  striking  resemblance 

^  The  King's  brother,  Charles  IV.  of  Spain,  had  similar  tastes,  of  which  an 
interesting  account  may  be  read  in  Beausset.  In  Goja's  fine  portrait  at  Capo  di 
Monte,  the  Spanish  king  is  shown  in  hunting  dress.  One  may  easily  imagine  that 
this  picture  was  a  favourite  one  with  Ferdinand, 


44  THE  NAPOLEONIC  EMPIRE  part  i 

to  the  national  Pulcinella,  the  people  christened  him 
Nasone  ;  between  the  two  the  utmost  mutual  apprecia- 
tion and  good  humour  existed. 

That  the  small  section  of  the  community  engaged  in 
commerce  and  in  intellectual  pursuits  should  have 
viewed  Ferdinand  with  less  favour  is  perhaps  not  re- 
markable. Yet  even  among  the  thinking  classes  it  was 
generally  admitted  that  the  King  was  good-natured, 
and  that  below  his  ignorance  and  his  prejudices  he 
was  notabsolutel^^^deyoid  of  all  sense  of  justice  and 
luma^Tity^  Unfortunately  that  ignorance^aiTd'  those 
prejudices  were  so  great  that  it  was  at  times  difficult 
to  keep  sight  of  the  King's  good  side  through  the 
veil  of  crime  committed  under  his  authority.  Chief 
among  his  prejudices  was  that  covering  the  royal 
dignity,  such  as  it  was.  To  do  anything  which  the 
King  forbade,  or  to  leave  undone  anything  that  he  com- 
manded, constituted  an  offence  that  shook  Ferdinand's 
nature  to  its  utmost  depths.  Palmieri  relates  an 
anecdote  that  amusingly  illustrates  this  side  of  his 
character.  Before  1789  wigs  and  smooth  faces  had 
been  the  universal  mark  of  a  man  of  sufficient  rank  to 
be  admitted  to  Court.  But  the  French  Revolution 
was  nothing  if  not  thorough  ;  ardent  patriots  cut  their 
queues  and  wore  a  chevelure  a  la  Brutus ;  tonsorial 
fashions  became  political  badges,  portents  of  deep 
significance.  At  a  Court  ball  held  at  Palermo  a  young 
nobleman  named  RufFo,  a  staunch  royalist,  and  related 
to  the  famous  cardinal  of  the  same  name,  made  his 
appearance  duly  presentable  in  every  respect  save  for  a 
recently  fostered  growth  of  whiskers  that  adorned  his 
cheeks.  When  Ferdinand  caught  sight  of  him  he  was 
seized  with  violent  emotion  ;  he  rushed  up  to  the 
astonished  RufFo,  tightly  grasped  the  offending  whiskers 


CHAP.  II  NAPOLEON  AND  NAPLES  45 

in  his  hand  and  fiercely  shook  him,  crying  out  loudly 
the  while,  "  Porco!  hricconel  "  ^  It  was  only  with  great 
difficulty  that  RufFo  was  safely  extricated  from  the  hands 
of  the  infuriated  Ferdinand.  After  the  King's  return 
from  Palermo  to  Naples  in  18 15,  he  was  persuaded 
by  the  Duchess  of  Floridia  to  follow  the  then  prevalent 
fashion  and  to  cut  his  queue.  The  royal  example 
proved  irresistible,  and  was  immediately  followed  by 
the  Neapolitan  nobility.^ 

Although  he  married  young,  Ferdinand  maintained 
the  Bourbon  standard  of  immorality.  Fortunately  this 
side  of  his  character  had  no  influence  in  shaping 
political  events,  and  need  therefore  not  detain  us. 
For  matters  of  State  he  had  little  taste,  only  deep- 
rooted  prejudices  on  the  subject  of  the  royal  pre- 
rogative.  His  mind  was  engrossed  in  his  pastim.£a, 
and  he  sKowed  all  the  insouciance  proverbial  in  his 
family-  When  the  Court  fled  from  Naples  in  1798, 
one  of  the  royal  princes  died  on  the  British  flagship 
midway  to  Palermo  ;  yet  no  sooner  had  Ferdinand  set 
foot  on  land  than  he  set  about  organizing  a  hunting 
party.  Twenty  years  later,  when  his  brother,  Charles 
IV.  of  Spain,  died  at  Naples,  a  similar  incident  occurred. 

^  "  Pig,  rascal." 

2  In  1799  the  Neapolitan  republicans,  imitating  in  this  as  in  other  things  the 
example  of  their  French  supporters,  cut  their  queues  and  wore  their  hair  short  in 
the  latest  patriotic  fashion.  When  the  royalist  reaction  came,  many  paid  with  their 
head  for  its  tailless  condition.  Recourse  was  had  to  false  queues.  In  this  the 
populace  found  a  new  amusement,  and  for  several  weeks  no  one  could  walk  down 
the  Toledo  without  having  his  head  violently  jerked  more  than  once.  If  the  jerk 
had  no  result  he  was  safe.     The  following  amusing  quatrain  went  the  rounds  : — 

Vuoi  conoscere  il  Giacobino 
E  tu  tirali  il  codino, 
Se  la  coda  ti  viene  in  mano 
^uesto  e  vero  Republicano. 

If  you  ivant  to  knoiv  a  Jacobin — pull  at  his  tvig — if  the  queue  comes  aivay  in  your 
hand — he  is  a  real  Republican. 


46  THE  NAPOLEONIC  EMPIRE  part  i 

When  in  1814  Queen  Mary  Caroline  died,  he  allowed 
but  a  scandalously  short  interval  to  elapse  before 
re-marrying  ;  his  second  wife  was  the  Princess  Partanna, 
better  known  as  the  Duchess  of  Floridia.  Such  was 
this  truly  Neapolitan  monarch !  So  slight  was  his 
sense  of  responsibility,  so  great  his  impatience  of 
business,  so  inapt  his  fingers  for  clerical  labour, 
that  he  appended  his  signature  to  papers  presented 
by  his  Ministers  by  means  of  an  engraved  stamp. 
This  stamp  Ferdinand  always  carried  with  him 
and  jealously  guarded  ;  he  viewed  it  with  religious 
respect,  as  the  priceless  concrete  manifestation  of 
all  those  solemn  and  mysterious  doctrines  that  made 
of  him  the  autocrat  and  possessor  of  five  millions 
of  men. 

The  King's  intense  dislike  for  affairs  of  State,  and 
his  incompetence  for  performing  the  merely  routine 
work  of  royalty,  made  Queen  Mary  Caroline's  op- 
portunity. From  the  Empress  Maria  Theresa,  her 
mother,  she  had  inherited  a  marked  though  ill-balanced 
talent  for  government.  The  age  was  one  in  which 
many  women  played  prominent  parts  in  the  affairs  of 
nations  :  Elizabeth  and  Catherine  in  Russia,  Maria 
Theresa  in  Austria,  the  beautiful  Louise  in  Prussia, 
Marie  Antoinette  and  even  plain  Madame  Roland  in 
France.  For  nearly  half  a  century  Mary  Caroline  was 
the  directing  political  force  of  the  kingdom  of  the  Two 
SiciHespand,lrrherTast  ye^s,  its  evil  genius.  After 
her  death  she  found  no  defenders,  not  among  her 
subjects,  not  among  her  English  friends,  not  among 
her  kindred  ;  and  when  she  died  at  Vienna  in  18 14 
her  nephew,  the  Emperor  Francis,  declined  to  order 
Court  mourning.  Of  recent  years  she  has  been  more 
fortunate  ;     and    one    of    her    apologists    has    brought 


CHAP.  II  NAPOLEON  AND  NAPLES  47 

forward  views  that  certainly  merit  attention.^  But 
admitting  that  Mary  Carohne's  pernicious  influence 
was  much  exaggerated  by  contemporary  report,  there 
yet  remains,  after  all  deductions  made,  enough  to 
warrant  her  condemnation.  It  was  true  in  her  case,  as 
may  be  observed  so  frequently  in  the  study  of  human 
nature,  that  the  good  and  the  bad  qualities  were  both 
well  marked  and  inextricably  confused.  Hence  the 
facility  with  which  detractors  or  apologists,  emphasiz- 
ing the  lights  on  one  side  of  the  picture  or  the  other, 
have  painted  her  a  crowned  monster  or  a  deeply 
wronged  woman.  The  truth  is  that  Mary  Caroline 
was  not  so  much  a  monster  as  a  woman  of  nervous 
temperament,  whose  activity  of  mind  bordered  on 
derangement.  She  possessed  some  good  traits,  but, 
politically  speaking,  the  judgment  of  posterity  cannot 
be  less  severe  than  that  of  those  who  suffered  at  her 
hands.  The  Queen  of  Naples,  following  the  fashion  of 
her  age,  was  much  addicted  to  sensibility  ;  her  private 
aifections,  for  so  long  as  they  lasted,  were  generally 
strong  and  attended  by  circumstances  of  generosity  and 
even  prodigality.  To  her  numerous  children  she  was 
passionately  devoted,  and  in  their  company  displayed 
the  most  pleasing  and  amiable  aspect  of  her  character.^ 

In  stronger  and  purely  intellectual  characteristics  there 
was  also  much  in  her  to  praise.  The  Prince  de  Ligne,  who 
knew  the  Austrian  Court  so  well,  declared  that  she  was 

1  Baron  Helfert  himself  describes  his  Maria  Karolhta  as  an  "  Ehrenrettung."  It 
js  unfortunately  too  much  of  a  set  defence  not  to  be  considerably  weakened  ;  yet  the 
character,  judgment,  and  learning  of  the  writer  place  it  on  a  totally  different  plane 
from  the  work  of  other  apologists. 

2  The  love  of  children  and  sensibility,  so  prominent  among  the  qualities  of  Mary 
Caroline,  have  been  put  forward  by  the  most  vehement  and  least  convincing  of 
her  apologists  as  an  argument  for  rebutting  every  unfavourable  allegation.  The 
argument  hardly  appears  to  require  serious  answer.  Did  not  Murat,  known  to  his 
soldiers  as  the  "butcher,"  boast  that  he  had  never  killed  a  man.?  Did  not 
Robespierre  declare  that  he  could  not  bear  the  sight  of  blood  ? 


48  THE  NAPOLEONIC  EMPIRE  part  i 

the  only  one  of  Maria  Theresa's  children  who  resembled 
her  ;  a  British  minister  at  her  Court  said  that  she  was 
the  only  spirited  character  at  Naples.  She  could  take 
interest  in  the  minute  details  of  administration,  had 
**  nerves  stronger  than  her  principles,"  address,  and 
spirit.  But  what  intellectual  endowments  Mary 
Caroline  possessed  were  neutralized  by  her  complete 
lack  of  J  udgment.  Her  proud,  vindictive,  imperious, 
scheming  character  had  early  given  her  ascendancy  in 
the  councils  of  the  kingdom  ;  Ferdinand's  supineness 
soon  enabled  her  to  convert  this  into  all  but  absolute 
control.  The  Queen's  decisions  in  matters  of  State 
were  rarely  fortunate.  Energy  with  her  turned  to 
violence,  and  the  reasons  that  swayed  her  were  not 
based  on  the  considerations  that  appeal  to  a  statesman. 
What  influenced  her  were  those  petty  considerations  of 
vanity,  of  immediate  interest,  of  ambition,  of  pride,  of 
hatred,  of  friendship,  and  of  revenge  that  sacrifice  to  paltry 
and  individual  selfishness  the  interests  of  nations,  and 
make  the  happiness  and  the  lives  of  thousands  depend 
on  what  is  often  nothing  more  than  momentary  caprice.^ 
Yet,  however  pernicious  her  influence,  however 
great  her  responsibility,  it  would  be  unjust  to 
ascribe  the  calamities  of  Naples  to  the  Queen  alone  ; 
Ferdinand,  below  her  in  courage  and  talent,  was  her 
equal  in  falsehood  and  treachery.  That  he  some- 
times disapproved  of  the  Queen's  policy,  that  he  often 
acquiesced  in  it  from  ignorance  or  lassitude,  cannot  clear 
his  responsibility.     Lord  Collingwood,  a  man  of  cool 

^  Since  the  above  was  set  up,  the  valuable  Diary  of  Sir  John  Moore  has  appeared, 
from  which  the  following  extract  concerning  Mary  Caroline  may  be  added  :  "  In 
private  life  she  would  have  been  a  clever,  entertaining  woman,  violent  in  her  passions, 
but,  upon  the  whole,  kind  and  good.  As  Queen,  directing  a  government,  her  weak- 
nesses, which  in  private  might  have  passed  unobserved,  resolve  themselves  into 
crimes,  and  she  becomes  violent,  absurd,  cruel,  unjust.  .  .  ." — ii.  192. 


CHAP.  II  NAPOLEON  AND  NAPLES  49 

judgment,  wrote  of  them  as  follows  :  "  The  King  has 
much  the  appearance  and  manners  of  a  worthy,  honest 
country  gentleman.  .  .  .  The  Queen  .  .  .  would  be 
thought  a  deep  politician,  .  .  .  she  broods  over  what 
is  impracticable,  ...  and  frets  herself  continually 
that  others  are  not  as  dim-sighted  as  herself.  Her  lot 
.  .  .  has  been  cast  awry,  or  ...  so  loose  a  morality 
and  such  depravity  of  manners  would  never  have  been 
found  perched  upon  a  throne.''  ^  This  judgment  was 
severe,  but  not  unmerited.  The  Queen  was  as  un- 
dignified as  she  was  proud,  and  in  the  prolixity  of  her 
correspondence  and  memoirs  reveals  the  habitual  con- 
fusion and  vehemence  of  thought  that  inspired  her 
most  notable  acts.  Her  nature  was  passionate,  and  Jier 
personal  inclinations  played  _£ar_tQp  large  a  jpart  m  the 
political  arrangements  of  the  kingdom.  One  of  her 
favourites  and  ministers,  Acton,  extended  his  power  and 
fortune  to  the  point  of  concentrating  the  patronage  and 
emoluments  of  nearly  every  department  of  State  inlo 
His  hands.  Generally  inclined  to  temperate  and  com- 
mo3io us  courses,  it  may  be  said  of  him  that  the  direction 
he  gave  to  affairs  was  occasionally  beneficial ;  but  it 
cannot  be  said  that  he  was  either  a  virtuous  or  capable 
minister,  that  he  was  such  a  minister  as  the  needs  of 
Naples  cried  for,  or  that  any  other  influence  than  that 
of  the  Queen  could  possibly  have  kept  him  in  power. 

The  relations  between  Mary  Caroline  and  Ferdinand 
were  not  altogether  inharmonious  ;  on  one  ground  their 
views  completely  coincided,  that  was  on  the  assertion 
of  the  prerogatives  and  dignity  of  the  Crown.  Apart 
from  this,  the  King's  strongest  sentiment  with  regard  to 
the  Queen  appears  to  have  been  that  she  had  the  evil 
eye  or  jet tatur a ^  and  that  if  he  played  cards  her  presence 

^  Correspondence,  ii.  315. 
VOL.   I  E 


50  THE  NAPOLEONIC  EMPIRE  part  i 

was  certain  to  be  fatal  to  his  success  !  But  the  senti- 
ments of  her  subjects  towards  her  were  very  different, 
,  and  far  stronger.  To  her  they  were  accustomed  to 
ascribe  the  whole  action  of  the  political  machine  ;  to 
her  they  charged  the  excesses  of  1799,  the  massacre  of 
the  upper  and  middle  classes  of  Naples  by  Cardinal 
Ruffo's  Sanfedisti  masse  and  the  lazzaroni,  their  deci- 
mation by  the  butcher  tribunal  of  Speziale.  This  may 
have  been  not  altogether  unjust  ;  the  fury  of  the 
Queen's  cry  for  revenge  had  wide  effects,  and  it  cannot 
be  doubted  that  the  extraordinary  passion  that  impelled 
Nelson  and  the  Hamiltons  was  even  stronger  in  their 
inspirer.  It  is  not  just,  however,  that  Ferdinand  should 
have  escaped  his  share  of  responsibility  for  the  events  of 
those  unhappy  days.  His  personal  popularity  with  many 
of  his  subjects  blinded  them  to  his  faults,  yet  one  of  the 
most  iniquitous  deeds  of  the  royalist  reaction,  the  execu- 
tion of  the  Duchess  of  Sanfelice,  was  one  for  which  the 
King  was  beyond  all  doubt  entirely  and  solely  responsible. 
The  Duchess  of  Sanfelice  was  young,  lovely,  newly 
married,  and  not  given  to  politics.  Her  husband  joined 
the  republican  movement,  and  she  unwillingly  became  the 
agent  through  whom  a  royalist  conspiracy  was  discovered. 
On  the  entry  of  the  royal  troops  she  succeeded  in 
escaping  the  massacres,  but  was  soon  discovered, 
arrested,  imprisoned,  tried,  and  condemned  to  death. 
Friends  at  Court  succeeded  in  obtaining  a  respite  on  the 
ground  that  she  was  expecting  childbirth.  To  sub- 
stantiate this  she  was  conveyed  to  Palermo,  where  she 
remained  in  prison  many  months,  her  case  being  nov/ 
apparently  forgotten.  But  on  the  Princess  Royal  giving 
birth  to  a  son,  she  was  persuaded  to  claim  from  the 
King  the  pardon  of  the  Duchess.  It  was  an  ancient 
privilege  and  custom  that  such  a  request,  on  the  birth 


CHAP.  II  NAPOLEON  AND  NAPLES  51 

of  a  male  child  in  the  direct  line  of  succession,  could 
not  be  refused.  Ferdinand  did  refuse  it,  however,  and 
with  great  brutality  ;  he  also  issued  immediate  orders 
for  the  carrying  out  of  the  sentence.  The  unfortunate 
Duchess  was  placed  on  board  ship,  chains  at  her  wrists 
and  ankles,  and  thus  taken  back  to  Naples.  Nearly 
twelve  months  after  her  first  imprisonment  her  head  was 
struck  off  on  the  Piazza  del  Mercato. 

To  apportion  political  responsibility  and  blame  be- 
tween the  two  sovereigns  is  not  only  impossible  but 
unnecessary  ;  to  say  that  they  were  equally  censurable 
cannot  be  unjust  to  either.  Yet  from  the  time  of  the 
fall  of  the  Parthenopean  Republic  until  the  day  of  her 
death,  the  reputation  of  Mary  Caroline,  made  more 
terrible  by  the  magnifying  atmosphere  of  Naples,  hung 
like  a  cloud  of  gloom  over  the  city.  The  feariest  the 
insensate  Queen  should  return  once  more,  and  once  more 
let  loose  on  Naples  the  lazzaroni  and  the  free  companies 
of  Calabria  or  the  Abruzzi,  lest  once  more  their  property 
should  be  destroyed,  their  wives  and  children  plundered, 
tortured,  or  outraged,  became  the  political  nightmare 
of  the  citizens.^  Such  was  Queen  Mary  Caroline,  and 
such  her  reputation  with  the  best  class  of  her  subjects. 

Outside  of  her  dominions  the  Queen  was  viewed 
much  in  the  same  light,  accentuated  or  tempered  by 
political  considerations  :  in  England  as  a  woman  of 
excitable  and  ill -balanced  judgment,  but  a  necessary 
ally  ;  in  France  as  an  ogress  and  monster,  on  whom 
the  sword  of  Providence  must  sooner  or  later  descend. 
Mary  Caroline  was  to  suffer  equally  from  both  in  the 
great  struggle  between  these  two  Powers,  of  which  the 
control  of  the  Mediterranean  was  long  the  chief  object. 

^  See  especially  the  frequent  entries   in  Nicola's  Diario  ;  also  numerous  passages 
in  King  Joseph's  Correspondence,  and  the  contemporaries  generally. 


52  THE  NAPOLEONIC  EMPIRE  part  i 

The  conflict  was  to  balance  evenly  where  the  two  great 
divisions^  of  that  kinp^dom  meet,  where  a  river -like 
stretch  of  sea  runs  between  the  famous  rocks  of  Scilla 
and  Charybdis  and  divides  Sicily  from  the  mainland. 
At  that  point  the  fortunes  of  the  two  great  empires 
were  long  to  fluctuate  uncertainly  ;  British  and  French 
sentries  were  to  observe  one  another  across  the  interven- 
ing waters.  No  nearer  Egypt  and  the  East  could  the  great 
land  empire  stretch  ;  no  farther  back  towards  the  Alps 
could  the  mighty  sea  empire  drive  back  her  formidable  foe. 

In  the  early  years  of  the  great  cycle  of  wars  between 
Great  Britain  and  France,  Mary  Caroline  had  been  firm 
in  her  friendship  and  alliance  with  the  former  Power, 
firm  in  her  hostility  to  the  latter.  These  sentiments 
reached  their  climax  in  the  last  years  of  the  eighteenth 
century  at  the  time  of  the  extravagant  demonstrations 
made  on  Nelson's  triumphant  return  from  his  victory  of 
the  Nile.  For  the  next  few  years  the  Queen's  English 
proclivities  continued  strong,  though  the  removal  of 
Nelson  and  the  Hamiltons  to  other  scenes  made  the 
hold  of  their  Government  on  the  Sicilian  alliance  far 
less  secure  ;  in  1805  British  influence  began  to  decline 
rapidly. 

From  the  time  when  Bonaparte  seized  for  his  profit 
the  government  of  the  Republic,  France  had  been  the 
preponderating  power  in  Italy.  After  Marengo  her 
army  occupied  the  northern  portion  of  the  penin- 
sula undisturbed,  and  the  kingdom  of  the  Two  Sicilies 
was  in  imminent  danger  of  attack.  General  Murat, 
then  acting  Commander-in-chief,  dictated  the  terms  on 
which  invasion  and  the  occupation  of  Naples  might  be. 
avoided.  To  these  Ferdinand  and  the  temperate  Acton 
persuaded  Mary  Caroline  that  acquiescence  was  neces- 
sary ;   the    principal    clause    of  the    treaty  signed   was 


CHAP.  II  NAPOLEON  AND  NAPLES  53 

aimed  directly  at  Great  Britain,  and  provided  for  the 
temporary  military  occupation  of  the  Adriatic  provinces 
of  the  kingdom  by  French  troops!  To  understand  the 
significance  of  this  move  it  will  be  necessary  to  glance 
at  a  map  of  the  Mediterranean,  and  even  of  the  eastern 
hemisphere. 

The  last  wars  of  the  defunct  Bourbon  monarchy  of 
France  against  Great  Britain  had  seen  the  latter  Power 
acquire  two  great  colonial  empires  at  the  expense  of 
her  rival  :  Canada  and  India.  The  last  conflict  of  all, 
terminated  by  the  treaty  of  Paris  in  1783,  had  resulted 
in  the  humiliation  and  defeat  of  Great  Britain.  Yet 
she  retained  Canada  and  India,  and  while  France  sank 
rapidly  towards  bankruptcy,  the  finances  of  England 
showed  extraordinary  vitality,  her  prosperity  rising 
within  a  few  months  of  the  acknowledgment  of  her  de- 
feat to  a  point  never  before  reached.  The  impression 
widely  produced  on  the  Continent,  and  particularly  in 
France,  was  that  this  British  triumph  was  chiefly  due 
to  the  possession  of  India  and  other  colonies.  If 
Great  Britain  had  retained  her  prosperity  after  a  long 
war  that  had  seen  her  defeated  in  America  and  for 
several  weeks  defied  on  her  own  coasts  by  a  French 
and  Spanish  fleet,  it  appeared  to  many  that,  failing 
direct  invasion,  the  most  efl'ective  blow  that  could 
be  struck  at  her  was  through  her  commerce  and  her 
eastern  empire.  This  theory  was  eventually  adopted 
by  Napoleon  Bonaparte. 

To  reach  India  there  were  three  routes.  One  was 
wholly  by  sea,  around  the  Cape  of  Good  Hope ;  another 
wholly  by  land,  from  various  starting-points,  through 
Asiatic  Turkey  and  Persia  ;  a  third,  the  quickest,  partly 
by  sea,  partly  by  land,  through  the  Mediterranean  and 
Egypt.     The  first  of  these  routes  required  undisputed 


54  THE  NAPOLEONIC  EMPIRE  part  i 

control  of  the  ocean  ;  the  second  necessitated  the  con- 
currence of  Russia  and  the  co-operation  or  conquest 
of  Turkey  ;  the  third  presented  a  somewhat  complex 
problem. 

For  Great  Britain  to  utilize  the  Mediterranean  it 
was  essential  that  she  should  be  able  to  maintain  a  fleet 
there,  or,  in  other  words,  that  she  should  possess  naval 
bases.  Without  fortified  harbours  of  refuge,  without 
depots  of  shot  and  gunpowder,  of  cordage,  yarn,  and 
sailcloth,  of  tar  and  timber  and  hundreds  of  naval 
necessaries,  her  fleets  in  the  Mediterranean  could  never 
have  been  kept  in  a  condition  ready  to  meet  those  of 
France  and  Spain  sailing  directly  from  their  arsenals. 
Her  first  and  unconscious  step  towards  acquiring  a  route 
to  India  through  the  Mediterranean  was  taken  in  1704, 
when  Gibraltar  was  captured.  It  was  the  second  step, 
taken  nearly  a  century  later,  that  occasioned  the  move- 
ment of  French  troops  into  the  kingdom  of  Naples. 

The  Mediterranean  is  about  2500  miles  in  length, 
which,  in  days  of  sailing  vessels,  represented  under 
adverse  circumstances  a  navigation  of  many  weeks,  and 
even  months.  At  about  midway  between  Gibraltar 
and  Egypt  a  geological  formation,  a  continuation  of 
the  Italian  Apennines,  narrows  the  distance  between 
Europe  and  Africa  to  a  narrow  strait ;  in  the  midst 
of  this  strait  lies  the  island  of  Malta.  From  Gibraltar, 
the  naval  base  of  Great  Britain,  from  Toulon,  the  naval 
base  of  France,  the  way  to  Egypt  lay  past  Malta,  and 
as  long  as  there  was  no  great  disproportion  in  the 
naval  strength  of  the  two  Powers,  the  possession  of 
this  naturally  strong  position  was^ertain  to  carix..Di:£- 


ponderance  with  it.     When   General  Bonaparte  sailed 


on  his   expedition  to  Egypt  in    1798,   he  turned   the 
Knights  of  Malta  out  of  possession  and  established  a 


CHAP.  II  NAPOLEON  AND  NAPLES  55 

garrison  in  their  stronghold,  thus  giving  France  a 
great  strategic  advantage  for  future  operations  in  the 
East!  That  advantage  was  temporarily  neutralized  by; 
the  destruction  of  the  French  fleet  off  the  Nile  by 
Lord  Nelson,  and  by  Great  Britain's  alliance  with  the 
Two  Sicilies,  whereby  slie  was  enabled  to  repair  her 
vessels  at  Naples  and  in  the  ports  of  Sicily.  So  great 
was  the  danger  of  the  French  occupation  of  Malta  felt 
to  be,  that  the  island  was  promptly  attacked  by  an 
Anglo-Sicilian  force  under  General  Pigot.  Two  years 
after  its  capture  by  France,  at  about  the  same  time 
as  the  battle  of  Marengo  was  fought,  Malta  passed  into 
the  possession  of  Great  Britain. 

The  sequel  of  Marengo  was  the  treaty  of  Luneville, 
pacifying  the  Continent,  and  the  sequel  of  the  treaty  of 
Luneville  was  the  treaty  of  Amiens  between  Great 
Britain  and  France.  The  British  Cabinet  and  people 
were  weary  of  war,  and  Bonaparte,  whose  aim  prob- 
ably went  no  further  than  obtaining  an  advantageous 
truce,  persuaded  the  new -formed  administration  of 
Lord  Addington  into  ceding  nearly  all  the  colonial 
possessions  lost  by  France,  and  into  agreeing  to 
evacuate  Malta  in  favour  of  a  neutral  holder.  The  treaty 
also  stipulated  that  the  French  troops  should  be  with- 
drawn from  the  occupied  Neapolitan  provinces.!  The 
question  of  Malta  and  Naples  was  the  all-important 
one,  and  in  a  few  months  it  appeared  that  the  treaty 
had  not  solved  it.  Great  Britain  would  not  withdraw 
her  garrison  from  Malta,  nor  France  hers  from  Puglia. 
Lord  Hawkesbury,  the  English  Foreign  Secretary,  and 
Lord  Whitworth,  his  special  envoy  to  Paris,  were  con- 
vinced that  Bonaparte's  chief  project  of  foreign  policy 
turned  on  the  occupation  of  Egypt.  Every  effort  of 
the  First  Consul  to  get  the  evacuation  of  Malta  carried 


56  THE  NAPOLEONIC  EMPIRE  part  i 

out  revealed  the  importance  he  attached  to  it  and  con- 
firmed their  suspicions. 

The  British  statesmen  were  now  fully  persuaded 
that  in  agreeing  to  abandon  Malta,  the  watch-tower 
of  Egypt,  as  Whitworth  called  it,  they  had  com- 
mitted a  grave  blunder  or  made  an  unwarranted  sacri- 
fice. There  appeared  no  other  way  of  repairing  this 
mistake  than  by  evading  the  engagement,  and  no 
diplomatic  skill  could  avert  war  as  the  consequence. 
There  can  be  no  doubt  that  the  British  statesmen  were 
correct  in  their  views  as  to  the  nature  of  the  First 
Consul's  political  projects ;  the  events  of  the  years 
that  followed  amply  proved  it.  Apart  from  General 
Sebastiani's  mission  in  the  East,  which  need  not  be 
discussed  here,  the  occupation  of  Puglia  by  French 
troops,  as  an  avowed  counterpoise  to  the  occupation 
of  Malta  by  those  of  Great  Britain,  could  have  but  one 
signification. 

The  province  of  Puglia  borders  the  Adriatic 
where  Italy  approaches  most  nearly  to  the  shores  of 
Turkey  ;  at  one  point  the  distance  is  but  fifty  miles. 
In  this  province  were  several  small  ports  facing  the 
Turkish  coast — Bari,  Barletta,  Brindisi,  Otranto  ;  and 
one  of  first-rate  importance,  Taranto.  There  the  erec- 
tion of  modern  fortifications  and  the  accumulation  of 
stores  would  form  an  excellent  naval  base,  and  one 
somewhat  nearer  Egypt  than  Malta.  On  the  other 
hand,  Taranto  lost  much  of  its  value  from  the  presence 
of  a  British  fortress  on  its  line  of  communications  by 
sea  with  France.  But  it  was  not  with  a  view  to  purely 
naval  operations  that  Taranto  was  an  important  posi- 
tion ;  for  the  peculiar  conditions  of  the  Mediterranean 
rendered  possible  another  mode  of  approach  to  Egypt 
in  which  sea  operations  were  only  called   on  to  play 


CHAP.  II  NAPOLEON  AND  NAPLES  57 

a  subsidiary  part.  Li  the  days  when  vessels  were 
propelled  by  sails  only,  the  influence  of  sea-power  was 
greater  on  large  than  on  small  expanses  of  water. 
Between  two  far-distant  points  a  victorious  fleet  might 
check  all  hostile  movements  ;  between  two  points  close 
to  one  another  the  largest  fleet  might  be  neutralized 
during  a  few  hours  by  an  unfavourable  slant  of  wind, 
and  those  few  hours  might  suffice  to  carry  an  inferior 
fleet  from  the  one  point  to  the  other.  Precisely  this 
condition  existed  in  the  channel  of  Otranto  ;  British 
cruisers  might  patrol  it  for  days,  and  yet  a  strong 
north-westerly  wind  blowing  through  one  night  would 
suflice  to  carry  them  down  towards  the  Greek  coast 
and  to  carry  vessels  from  the  Italian  to  the  Turkish 
shore,  or  to  the  island  of  Corfu,  free  from  molestation. 
This  was  an  unsatisfactory  method  of  operating,  but  a 
perfectly  feasible  one,  as  was  shown  later.  The  con- 
ditions existing  at  Taranto  were  also  to  be  found 
further  east  ;  at  Constantinople,  at  the  Dardanelles, 
from  Greece  to  Crete,  from  the  Archipelago  to  Asia 
Minor. 

Taranto,  though  an  outlying  and  in  many  ways 
disadvantageous  base,  was,  m  fact,  directly  connected 
with  the  territory  of  France.  An  accord  between 
France  and  the  Powers  of  north-eastern  Europe  was  all 
that  was  necessary  to  clear  the  way  for  the  concentration 
there  of  as  large  an  army  as  might  be  thought  necessary 
for  the  conquest  of  Salonika,  Constantinople,  or  Athens. 
However  wide  the  mark,  however  nebulous  or  romantic 
the  object  may  appear,  it  must  yet  be  said  that  the 
diplomatic  and  political  difficulties  were  greater  than 
the  military  in  this  first  great  step  toward  the  Orient 
that  so  fascinated  the  mind  of  Napoleon.  From  the 
earliest  days  of  his  greatness  his  dream   had   been  to 


58  THE  NAPOLEONIC  EMPIRE  part  i 

effect  some  great  revolution  in  the  East,  nor  did  the 
failure  of  the  expedition  to  Egypt  shake  his  faith.  As 
will  be  seen  in  a  later  chapter,  when  he  reached  the 
height  of  his  glory  and  power  between  the  interviews 
of  Tilsit  and  Erfurt,  the  means  for  the  realization  of 
the  next  great  step  from  Taranto  eastward  took  a 
prominent  part  in  his  negotiations  and  measures. 

In  the  treaty  which  Murat  signed  with^the  Neapolitan 
Court^  the  one  point  of  Jiajiortance  therefore  was  to 
secure  Taranto,  the  counterpoise  of  Malta.  *'  That  is 
the  point  destined  to  play  the  biggest  part  one  day," 
wrote  Napoleon  to  his  brother  a  few  years  later  ;  and 
again,  ..."  You  will  be  of  the  greatest  assistance  in 
making  me  master  of  the  Mediterranean,  the  principal 
and  constant  object  of  my  policy." 

In  France  the  feeling  against  the  Neapolitan  Court 
was  strong,  especially  in  military  circles,  but  the  policy 
of  Bonaparte  was  influenced  less  by  motives  of  revenge 
than  of  expediency.  So  long  as  his  larger  naval  plans 
for  the  invasion  of  England  remained  operative,  so  long 
as  the  great  Powers  of  the  north-east  remained  in  a  state 
of  veiled  hostility,  he  thought  it  inexpedient  to  detach 
a  considerable  force  for  the  conquest  of  such  a  remote 

I  kingdom  as  that  of  Naples.  What  the  First  Consul 
wanted^  therefore,  was^  by  a  judicious  employment  of 
cajolery  and  threats,  to  maintain  the  existinp^  p;overnment 
of  the  Two  Sicilies  and  to  make  it  serve  his  present  pur- 

.  poses.  But  the  dictation  of  a  Napoleon  was  enough  to 
turn  an  even  less  proud  spirit  than  Mary  Caroline's. 
Hardly  were  the  French  troops  established  in  Puglia 
than  the  Sicilian  Government  was  ESicemptorily  called 
on  to  assume  an  attitude  of  hostile  neutralitvtowards 


GrHT^^BirSin^^^and^^t^^  heavy  guns^  munitions  of 

war,  and  artificers  for  the  works  with  w^^'^^  th^  pr^nrh 


CHAP.  II  NAPOLEON  AND  NAPLES  59 

military  engineers  were  rapidly  transforming^  Taranto 
mto  a  tirst-class  tortress. 

In  the  city  of  Naples  itself  circumstances  little 
likely  to  soothe  the  Queen's  susceptibilities  attended 
the  resumption  of  peaceful  relations  with  France.  The 
newly  appointed  Minister  of  the  Republic  was  Alquier, 
one  of  the  members  of  the  Convention  that  had  sent 
Louis  XVL  to  the  guillotine.  At  first  Mary  Caroline 
expressed  insurmountable  aversion  to  seeing  him  ;  later 
she  became  reconciled  to  his  presence,  and  finally 
exchanged  jokes  with  him.  Towards  Bonaparte  her 
dislike  was  tempered  by  extreme  curiosity  ;  and  in  the 
course  of  a  conversation  with  the  French  Minister 
in  the  year  1804  she  said  to  him,  laughingly  :  "You 
know  that  I  detest  your  country.  Yet  I  would  willingly 
travel  200  leagues  to  see  the  First  Consul.  He  loves 
glory  and  so  do  L  .   .  ."  ^ 

After  the  peace  of  Amiens  Ferdinand's  momentarily 
interrupted  diplomatic  relations  with  Great  Britain  were 
resumed,  Hugh  Elliot  being  sent  out  to  fill  the  arduous 
post  Sir  William  Hamilton  had  held  so  conspicuously. 
Elliot  proved  unfortunate  in  meeting  with  difficult 
circumstances  and  failed  to  earn  diplomatic  reputation. 
Through  the  new  British  Envoy  and  the  other  Ministers 
resident  at  Naples,  Mary  Caroline  was  kept  well  in- 
formed of  the  political  movement  of  Europe  against 
France  during  the  period  that  followed  the  treaties  of 
Luneville  and  Amiens.  Hostilities  between  Great 
Britain  and  France  broke  out  again  in  the  summer  of 
1803,  and  from  that  moment  the  former  Power  directed 
all  her  efforts  to  bring  Austria  and  Russia  to  her 
assistance.  Austria  was  not  reconciled  to  her  loss  of 
northern  Italy,  Russia  to  the  crushing  defeats  that  had 

1  Boulay  de  la  Meurthe,  ^elques  lettres  de  Marie  Caroline. 


6o  THE  NAPOLEONIC  EMPIRE  part  i 

annihilated  the  long -triumphant  army  of  SuvaroiF. 
Both  of  these  two  great  empires,  jealous  of  Bonaparte's 
rapid  increase  of  strength,  of  his  stride  from  Consular 
to  Imperial  dignity,  were  mal?:ing  ready  to  challenge 
his  fortune.  To  their  help  Mary  Caroline  anxiously 
looked  for  relief  from  the  hated  incubus  of  French 
occupation  and  dictation.^ When  in  the  spring  of  1805 
f^apoleon,  following  up  his  proclamation  as  Emperor 
at  Paris,  proceeded  to  Milan  to  be  crowned  King  of 
Italy,  the  alarm  of  the  Sicihan  Court  rose  to  fever  heat. 
This  turned  into  panic  when  it  became  known  that  the 
Emperor  had  received  the  Neapolitan  Envoy,  Prince 
Cardito,  with  harsh  and  threatening  expressions. 

Napoleon's  gigantic  plans  against  Great  Britain  were 
now  rapidly  maturing,  and  it___was  essentjaL  that, 
whether  by  threats  or  persuasion ^  the  lower  end  .of 
tKe_Italian  peninsula  sho^d^ for  jhe  moment  be  kept 
at  rest.  The  maintenance  of  his  relations  with  the 
kingdom  of  the  Two  Sicilies  on  precisely  that  footing 
he  had  chosen,  meant  the  employment  of  the  least 
possible  number  of  his  troops  in  that  distant  quarter, 
made  safe  the  right  flank  of  the  army  that  would  soon 
have  to  face  Austria  in  northern  Italy,  and  retained 
for  future  eventualities  his  advanced  post  towards  the 
East.  With  the  plans  for  the  invasion  of  England  on 
the  point  of  execution,  with  the  inevitable  campaign 
against  the  north-eastern  Powers  already  shaping  in  his 
mind,  he  had  no  desire  to  trifle  in  war  with  Mary 
Carohne.  In  January  1805  he  tried  the  eflect  of  a 
direct  appeal  and  wrote  to  the  Queen  a  remarkable  and 
characteristic  letter.  He  told  her,  in  bald,  unambiguous 
phraseology,  precisely  what  course  it  would  be  to  her 
interest  to  take  :  let  her  dismiss  the  British  Minister, 
let  her  firmly  resolve  to  follow  the  lead  of  France,  and 


CHAP.  II  NAPOLEON  AND  NAPLES  6i 

all  would  be  well  with  her.  Why  should  she  not  cease 
from  her  intriguing  and  perceive  her  real  interests  ? 

But  the  Queen  was  too  proud,  too  hopeful  of  the 
fast-formTng  iiur^eancoalition,  to  followNapoieon's 
advice.  She  declined  to  order  Elliot  to  leave  her 
Court,  and  it  was  in  answer  to  this  that  the  Emperor 
had  uttered  his  threats  to  Prince  Cardito  at  Milan. 
The  Queen  of  Naples,  in  her  fear  and  distress,  took 
a  further  step  towards  open  hostility  by  repeatedly 
pressing  her  nephew,  the  Emperor  Francis,  for  positive 
assurances  of  his  armed  support  against  France. 

The  weight  of  the  French  occupation  of  Puglia  was 
becoming^  more  and  rnore  oppressive.  Early  itTme 
year  the  commanding  general,  St.  Cyr,  summoned  the 
Sicilian  Government  to  dismiss  from  its  service  Count 
Roger  de  Damas,  a  French  emigre  and  a  capable  officer. 
This  claim  was  evaded  by  transferring  the  Count  from 
Naples  to  Palermo.  The  even  more  embarrassing 
demand  of  the  French  Government  for  the  dismissal 
of  Elliot  caused  greater  difficulty  ;  eventually  the  inter- 
vention of  the  Austrian  Envoy,  Count  Kaunitz,  resulted 
in  the  British  Minister  remaining. 

By  the  end  of  February  1805,  if  not  earlier,  Mary 
Caroline  had  determined  to  brave  France  at  the  first 
j  favourable  opportunity.  The  Powers  received  assur- 
ances of  SiciUan  co-operation,  and  when,  on  the  nth 
of  April,  Great  Britain  and  Russia  signed  a  treaty  of 
offensive  and  defensive  alliance,  an  article  was  agreed 
to  providing  for  the  security  of  the  kingdom  of  the 
Two  Sicilies.  By  this  treaty,  to  which  Austria  nearly 
immediately  acceded,  it  was  provided  that  the  alliance 
against  France  should  become  effective,  in  other  words 
that  hostilities  should  be  opened,  within  four  months. 
Great  Britain  was   thus    securing   her  great  object  of 


62  THE  NAPOLEONIC  EMPIRE  part  i 

effecting  a  military  diversion  that  would  draw  off  into 
the  heart  of  Europe  the  army  that  threatened  her  coasts. 
Her  diplomacy  at  Naples  strove  for  a  precisely 
similar  object  as  at  St.  Petersburg  and  Vienna.  To 
create  a  diversion  was  the  constant  effort  of  Elliot. 
He  diligently  played  on  the  Queen's  hatred  and  fear  of 
France,  he  insisted  on  the  advantage  that  would  accrue 
to  the  general  cause  were  Great  Britain  able  to  strike  a 
blow  at  her  enemy  in  the  Mediterranean  ;  finally  he 
presented  a  request  that  British  troops  should  be  per- 
mitted to  occupy  certain  points  in  Sicily  to  counter- 
balance the  French  occupation  of  Puglia.  From  this 
injudicious  diplomatic  step  may  be  traced  Mary 
Caroline's  suspicion  and  dislike  of  the  British  alliance, 
a  suspicion  that  was  to  develop  in  a  rapid  and  remark- 
able manner.  Nothing  could  have  been  more  ill 
judged  than  to  ask  a  Sovereign  whose  friendship  had 
been  constant  and  inspired  by  her  material  interests  to 
permit  a  military  occupation  entirely  to  the  profit  of 
her  ally  and  as  entirely  to  her  own  disadvantage.  For 
whatever  arguments  a  British  or  French  apologist  might 
put  forward  for  the  military  occupation  of  Brindisi  or 
Taranto,  of  Messina  or  Syracuse,  however  speciously 
the  one  might  argue  that  the  voluntary  surrender  of 
Puglia  was  compensated  by  the  retention  of  Naples,  or 
the  other  that  the  friendly  presence  of  British  troops 
was  more  a  protection  than  a  disadvantage,  the  fact 
remained  that  in  both  cases  the  real  power  of  the 
Sicilian  Crown  passed  into  the  hands  of  a  foreign 
government.  Mary  Caroline  did  not  nicely  balance 
whether  the  British  occupation  might  be  somewhat 
more  friendly  and  less  burdensome  than  that  of  the 
French  ;  she  merely  saw  in  it  a  further  abrogation  of 
her  sovereign  rights,  an  increase  in  the  number  of  the 


CHAP.  II  NAPOLEON  AND  NAPLES  63 

devourers  of  her  kingdom.  She  met  Elliot's  proposal 
with  much  coolness,  rejected  his  request,  and  from  that 
day  showed  him  far  less  favour  and  confidence.  The 
influence  of  the  British  Minister  received  another 
equally  severe  check  nearly  immediately  after  by  the 
arrival  of  the  newly  appointed  Russian  Minister 
Tatitcheff. 

The  Courts  of  St.  Petersburg  and  Naples  had  been 
on  cordial  terms  for  some  years.  In  1799  a  detach- 
ment of  Russian  troops  had  assisted  Cardinal  Ruffo 
in  his  capture  of  Naples,  and  since  that  time  the  Czar 
had  maintained  troops"  and  a  squadron  at  Corfu. 
There  was  nothing  in  Russian  policy  that  could  give 
umbrage  to  the  Court  of  Naples,  for  its  aspirations 
were  openly  fixed  on  the  Balkan  and  not  on  the  Italian 
peninsula.  There  was  therefore  nothing  to  tell  against 
Tatitcheff,  while  his  high  favour  with  the  Czar,  his 
personal  qualities,  his  loudly  proclaimed  Gallophobe 
sentiments  and  his  pushing  address  quickly  won  him 
Mary  Caroline's  ear.  There  was  no  political  reason 
why  Elhot  and  Tatitcheff  should  not  have  worked 
together,  but  personal  rivalry  asserted  itself,  and  the 
Russian  proved  successful  in  securing  the  royal  favour. 
The  British  Minister  had  attempted  to  drive  Naples 
into  war,  to  obtain  military  possession  of  the  most 
important  fortresses  of  Sicily  :  these  were  points  which 
the  Czar's  representative  did  not  fail  to  show  to  the 
Queen  under  the  most  unfavourable  light.  He  com- 
pared the  service  which  Russia  and  Great  Britain  might 
render,  the  one  disinterested,  the  other  not ;  he  pointed 
out  that  subjection  to  British  could  be  only  one  degree 
less  hateful  than  to  French  dictation. 

Not  long  after  Tatitcheff's  arrival  at  Naples,  in 
July,    the    European    situation    became    more    openly 


64  THE  NAPOLEONIC  EMPIRE  part  i 

threatening.  The  great  Powers  had  already  engaged 
in  those  preliminary  military  and  diplomatic  passes 
that  herald  an  approaching  conflict.  The  memorable 
cruise  of  Villeneuve  had  brought  the  French  fleet  near 
the  bare  headlands  of  Spain,  ofl^  which  the  greatest 
naval  battle  of  modern  times  was  soon  to  be  fought. 
Already  Napoleon*s  projected  invasion  of  England 
appeared  foiled  ;  in  his  mind  another  gigantic  and 
unexpected  stroke  was  fast  maturing.  From  Paris 
Ferdinand's  Minister,  the  astute  Di  Gallo,  sent  repeated 
warnings  of  danger.  The  storm  might  burst  at  any 
moment,  and  prudence  alone  could  save  Naples.  At 
Vienna  Paget,  and  at  St.  Petersburg  Leveson-Gower, 
urged  on  the  declaration  of  hostilities  under  threat 
of  suspending  the  payments  of  the  British  subsidies. 
Through  the  height  of  the  summer  that  was  to  have 
witnessed  the  invasion  of  England,  but  only  saw  Ville- 
neuve's  feeble  retreat  to  Cadiz,  the  strain  was  intense. 
War  was  evidently  coming,  but  how  and  when  none 
could  exactly  foresee.  On  the  4th  of  August  the 
Emperor  directed  Talleyrand  to  give  Alquier  a  free 
hand  to  break  ofl-'  relations  with  Naples  ;  this  discretion 
the  French  Minister,  however,  did  not  exercise.  At 
the  same  time  St.  Cyr  received  instructions  to  use  force, 
should  he  think  it  advisable^  for  the  purpose  of  dis- 
pelling an Y_  muster  of  militia  made  in  the  provinces 
occupied  by  the  French  troops  ;  his  corps  was  quietly 
remforced,  bringing  his  total  up  to  about  17,000  men 
with  37  guns  ;  finally  he  was  warned  that  political 
complications  might  lead  to  his  beingjordered  to  occupy 
the  city  of  Naples  _by__the_ijtho7September. 

This  menacing  attitude^ jja^oleonhad^en  caused 
by  tkejncrcasingly  hostiKxoursejjfjthe  Sidlian  Govern- 
men^.     Tatitchefl^  had  been  quickly  followed  by  Lacy, 


CHAP.  II  NAPOLEON  AND  NAPLES  65 

an  experienced  Russian  general,  who  was  in  command 
of  the  considerable  force  now  collected  at  Corfu. 
Mary  Caroline  was  aware  that  the  Austrian  and 
Russian  armies  would  soon  open  hostilities,  was  anxious 
to  concert  military  measures  to  protect  her  kingdom 
and  to  assist  the  Allies.  As  a  result  of  numerous  con- 
ferences, it  was  decided  to  form  an  army  on  the 
Neapolitan  frontier,  consisting  of  a  body  of  Russian 
troops  from  Corfu,  of  another  of  British  troops  from 
Malta,  together  with  the  forces  of  the  Sicilian  Crown. 
The  whole  was  to  be  under  the  supreme  command  of 
Lacy,  whom  his  English  descent,  experience,  and  tact 
well  qualified  for  the  task.-^ 

The  diplomats  of  Russia,  Great  Britain,  and  Austria 
had  many  difficulties  to  surmount  before  carrying 
through  the  arrangements  preliminary  to  placing  the 
projected  army  in  the  field.  The  Court  of  Naples 
appeared  unable  to  arrive  at  a  definite  decision  ;  two 
parties,  two  policies  struggled  for  supremacy.  Acton 
was  still  in  favour  of  a  prudent  course.  He  realized 
that  Naples  was  not  an  effective  factor  in  the  con- 
flict, and  that  the  events  of  Central  Europe  would 
decide  the  fate  of  the  monarchy.  He  was  for  assent- 
ing to  the  French  demands,  for  trusting  to  the 
military  success  of  the  Allies  for  relief,  but  not  for 
affording  the  Allies  assistance,  thereby  giving  France 
an  excuse  for  absorbing  the  kingdom.  Acton  was 
supported  by  Ferdinand,  who  in  this  crisis  showed 
more  interest  in  affairs  of  State  than  was  usual  with 
him.  On  the  other  hand,  Mary  Caroline  was  for  war, 
for  the  impetuous  course  that  would  relieve  her  over- 

^  The  British  officers  appear  to  have  been  fairly  satisfied  with  Lacy.  Bunbury's 
somewhat  adverse  opinion  seems  to  have  been  unduly  influenced  by  the  fact  that  the 
Russian  commander  brought  his  nightcap  to  councils  of  war. 

VOL.   I  F 


66  THE  NAPOLEONIC  EMPIRE  parti 

strung  nerves.  Acton  was  old,  she  had  tired  of  him, 
he  no  longer  possessed  his  former  influence  over  her. 
She  was  fully  informed  of  the  formidable  preparations 
of  Austria  and  Russia  ;  the  middle  of  August  had  been 
the  term  at  first  fixed  for  the  opening  of  hostilities  ; 
she  longed  for  revenge,  and  evoked  in  spirit  visions  of 
glorious  triumphs  over  her  detested  enemies.  The 
Queen  was  unable  to  resist  the  arguments  and  per- 
suasion of  TatitcheiF,  Lacy,  and  Elliot ;  she  overcame 
the  resistance  of  Ferdinand  and  Acton,  decided  to  face 
every  risk,  and  to  call  the  Russian  and  British  troops 
to  NaplesT^ 

At  the  very  moment  when  Mary  Caroline's  policy 
triumphed  at  Naples  and  an  irrevocable  step  was 
being  taken,  that  of  Ferdinand  and  Acton  asserted 
itself  at  Paris.  Alarmed  at  the  intentions  of  France, 
supported  by  his  instructions  from  his  Government, 
anxious  to  meet  the  views  of  Talleyrand  and  Napoleon, 
Gallo  offered  to  enter  into  a  treaty  whereby  Naples 
would  undertake,  under  certain  conditions,  to  maintain 
neutrality.  This  Neapolitan  diplomat  had  come  within 
the  orbit  of  Napoleon  as  early  as  the  year  of  Campo 
Formio,  1797,  when  he  had  witnessed  the  famous 
meeting  between  the  commander  of  the  army  of  Italy 
and  Count  Cobenzl.  From  that  moment  he  became 
deeply  impressed  with  a  sense  of  the  power  of  the 
future  dominator  of  Europe,  whose  fortune  he  was  so 
long  to  follow.  Gallo  had  been  Ferdinand's  Minister 
at  Paris  during  the  Consulate,  and  had  witnessed  the 
proclamation  of  the  Empire.  His  early  admiration  for 
Napoleon  had  increased  with  years,  and  this,  together 
with  his  unconquerable  greed  for  pecuniary  benefits, 
makes  it  probable  that  at  the  period  now  in  question  he 
might  fairly  be  regarded  nearly  as  much  the  tool  of 


CHAP.  II  NAPOLEON  AND  NAPLES  67 

Napoleon  as  the  agent  of  Ferdinand.  He  at  all  events 
responded,  for  one  reason  or  another,  to  every  sugges- 
tion of  Talleyrand,  and  relying  on  the  necessities  of  the 
case  for  the  sanction  of  his  Government,  signed  the 
treaty  of  neutrality.  Its  terms  were  not  unfavourable  ; 
they  provided  that  the  Sicilian  Government  should 
maintain  neutrality  towards  FranceTthat  it  should~not 
permit  the  landing  of  foreign  troops  m  any  part  of  the 
two  kingdoms,  and  that  it  should  dismiss  from  its 
service  all  foreign  officers  ;  in  return  the  French  troops 
were  immediately  to  be  withdrawn  from^the  occupied 
provinces.  Talleyrand  and  Gallo  signed  this  treaty  on 
the  2 1  St  of  September  ;  the  Emperor  immediately  ratified 
it ;  on  the  23  rd  Marshal  Berthier  sent  orders  to  St. 
Cyr  in  which  he  notified  him  of  the  terms  of  the  treaty, 
and  gave  him  alternative  instructions  to  march  on 
Lombardy  or  on  Naples,  in  the  event  of  the  Sicilian 
Tjovernment  ratifying  or  refusing  to  ratify  the  treaty . 

On  the  3rd  of  October  the  treaty  of  neutrality 
arrived  at  Naples  ;  Alquier  gave  the  Government 
twenty-four  hours  in  which  to  decide  whether  it  would 
ratify  or  not,  and,  after  a  momentary  hesitation,  the 
necessary  signatures  were  given.-^  At  the  same  time 
a  protest  was  drawn  up  and  handed  to  Lacy,  in  which 
it  was  stated  that  the  treaty  of  neutrality  was  only 
signed  under  compulsion.  Thus  the  Sicilian  Court 
adopted  a  deliberately  deceptive  policy,  and  entered  on 
courses  which  Elliot,  the  Minister  of  one  of  its  allies, 
bluntly  declared  were  "  as  disgusting  as  they  were  dis- 
graceful." 

Mary  Caroline  had  been  content  to  rid  herself  of 

^  In  her  manuscript  memoirs  the  Q,ueen  makes  the  curious  assertion  that  Elliot 
counselled  compliance  with  the  French  demands.  A  dispatch  of  Kaunitz,  dated 
October  4,  may  throw  light  on  the  real  state  of  the  case  ;  in  this  he  writes  :  .  .  .  "  le 
ministre  d'Angleterre  parait  tres  pique." — Helfert,  Konigin  Karolina^  182. 


68  THE  NAPOLEONIC  EMPIRE  parti 

St.  Cyr's  presence  at  the  cost  of  ratification  ;  she  was 
none  the  less  firmly  resolved  on  bringing  the  Anglo- 
Russians  to  Naples.  Even  had  she  wished  to,  she  had 
now  gone  too  far  to  recede.  For  a  month  already  mili- 
tary action  had  been  agreed  on  in  principle,  only  matters 
of  detail  remaining  over  for  diplomatic  adjustment. 

As  soon  as  St.  Cyr  was  informed  of  the  ratification 
of  the  treaty  of  neutrality  he  broke  up  his  cantonments. 
He  rapidly  marched  northwards  to  join  the  army  with 
which  Marshal  Massena  was  preparing  to  face  the  Arch- 
duke Charles  in  the  passes  of  the  Tyrol.  No  sooner 
were  the  French  columns  well  advanced  along  the 
Adriatic  coast  than  the  long -delayed  summons  was 
dispatcKed  calling  the  Russian  and  British  fleets  to  the 
Bay  of  Naples.^ 

Whatever  opinion  the  generals  and  diplomatists  of 
Russia  and  Great  Britain  might  privately  entertain  of 
the  political  conduct  of  the  Sicilian  Court,  their  instruc- 
tions, and  the  interests  of  their  countries,  could  leave 
them  no  ground  for  hesitation  in  seizing  the  oppor- 
tunity now  presented.  Sir  James  Craig,  the  very  able 
commander  of  the  British  force  assembled  at  Malta, 
described  the  ratification  of  the  treaty  of  neutrality  as 
an  "  act  of  perfidy,"  and  appears  to  have  felt  a  moment- 
ary embarrassment  in  taking  advantage  of  it.  Yet  on 
the  3rd  of  November  he  embarked  with  7500  good 
troops.  A  few  days  later,  off  the  coast  of  Sicily,  his 
fleet  met  that  conveying  some  14,500  Russians  from 
Corfu  ;  the  two,  proceeding  together,  reached  the  Bay 
of  Naples  on  the  19th  of  November.  On  the  same 
day  Alquier  hauled  down  the  French  flag  and  left  the 
capital. 

In   the  meanwhile   greater  events   than   these    were 

1  Apparently  on  the  i6th  of  October. — Bunbury,  201. 


CHAP.  II  NAPOLEON  AND  NAPLES  69 

taking  place.  After  weeks  of  inaction  the  combined 
fleet  of  France  and  Spain  left  Cadiz,  and  on  the  21st  of 
October,  off  Cape  Trafalgar,  met  with  irretrievable 
disaster.  Britain's  greatest  victory  resulted  in  the 
assertion  of  her  superiority  over  the  combined  navies  of 
France  and  Spain  ;  it  also  ended  in  the  glorious  death 
of  an  inspired  naval  leader  whose  presence  appeared  to 
charm  victory,  of  a  personal  friend  and  beloved  hero 
of  the  Queen  of  the  Two  Sicilies,  whose  influence  for 
good  or  evil  was  never  more  to  be  felt  in  the  Medi- 
terranean. 

One  day  before  Trafalgar  the  army  of  the  newly 
formed  French  Empire  brought  to  a  successful  close 
the  first  of  its  remarkable  operations.  As  a  result  of  one 
of  the  greatest  and  most  skilful  marches  recorded  in 
military  history,  the  French  army  had  been  moved  from 
its  positions  along  the  Channel  and  German  Ocean,  over 
the  Rhine,  through  the  heart  of  the  Black  Forest  and  the 
Swabian  Alps.  Unexpectedly  and  swiftly  it  emerged  on  the 
line  of  communications  of  the  Austrian  army,  destroyed 
its  isolated  divisions,  drove  Mack  into  Ulm,  and  on  the 
20th  of  October  received  his  surrender.  Wasting  not 
an  instant,  the  Emperor  continued  his  march  on  Vienna, 
but  without  receiving  peaceful  overtures.  The  Allies, 
though  momentarily  disheartened  by  the  destruction 
of  Mack,  determined  to  continue  the  struggle.  The 
Austrians  assembled  new  divisions  and  fell  back  on  the 
large  Russian  army  that  was  advancing  on  Vienna. 
While  the  military  struggle  still  promised  to  be  severe 
the  diplomatic  position  looked  menacing  for  Napoleon. 
Prussia's  hatred  of  the  new-born  military  power  of 
France  was  bringing  her  into  line  with  the  Allies,  and 
threatened  to  place  her  large  army  between  the  Emperor 
and  the  Rhine.     The  procrastination  of  Prussia  in  the 


70  THE  NAPOLEONIC  EMPIRE  part  i 

field  of  diplomacy,  the  impetuosity  of  Alexander  in  the 
field  of  war,  relieved  Napoleon  from  a  position  of  the 
utmost  difficulty,  and  enabled  him  to  retain  supremacy 
by  winning  the  brilliant  victory  of  Austerlitz  on  the 
2nd  of  December. 

The  sudden  assault  of  the  hill  of  Pratzen  in  frozen 
Moravia  by  the  corps  of  Soult  and  Bernadotte  sealed 
the  fate  of  the  Anglo- Russian  army  at  the  southern 
end  of  the  Italian  peninsula,  700  miles  away.  Between 
the  disembarkation  of  Lacy's  and  Craig's  troops  and 
the  arrival  of  the  news  of  Austerlitz  only  a  month 
passed.  In  that  space  of  time  nothing  of  moment  took 
place  ;  yet  for  the  sake  of  an  idle  military  demonstra- 
tion Mary  Caroline  had  deliberately  violated  a  not 
unfavourable  treaty  and  had  jeopardized  her  throne. 
The  position  she  had  now  taken  up  was  past  all 
equivocation,  nor  could  the  Court  of  Naples  return  to 
the  sheath  the  cumbrous  sword  it  had  ventured  to 
brandish  at  the  dominator  of  Europe.  Even  had  the 
French  Minister  desired  to  avoid  a  breach  of  diplomatic 
relations,  the  flagrantly  hostile  nature  of  the  step  taken 
left  him  no  option.  But  his  intimate  knowledge  of  all 
that  passed  in  the  Court  circle  had  certainly  prepared 
him  for  an  aggressive  move.  Neither  Alquier,  nor  St. 
Cyr,  nor  yet  Napoleon  could  have  felt  much  doubt  as  to 
what  would  result  from  the  march  of  the  French  troops 
from  Puglia  to  the  Quadrilateral,  nor  can  it  reasonably 
be  supposed  that  the  Emperor  was  guided  by  any  but 
military  reasons  in  his  negotiations  with  Naples.  The 
presence  of  St.  Cyr  in  northern  Italy  was  an  imperative 
necessity,  for  Austria  had  mistakenly  concentrated  her 
strongest  army  under  her  best  general  in  the  Tyrol  and 
Massena  was  outnumbered.  The  Austrian  Government 
had  stipulated  with  its  allies  that  the  operations  of  the 


CHAP.  II  NAPOLEON  AND  NAPLES  71 

Archduke  Charles  should  be  supported  by  the  march 
northwards  of  Lacy's  army.  It  was  intended  that  the 
Austrians  and  the  Anglo-Russians  should  effect  their 
junction  in  the  plains  of  Lombardy.  But  these  diplo- 
matic arrangements  presupposed  success,  and  that  the 
generals  of  the  Allies  were  not  for  the  moment  in  a 
position  to  command. 

For  a  few  days  events  proceeded  smoothly  for  the 
Anglo-Russians.  The  first  dismay  caused  by  Mack's 
capitulation  was  over  ;  the  fortune  of  war  appeared 
once  more  to  balance  ;  the  intervention  of  Prussia,  the 
advent  of  the  Czar  were  eagerly  expected  ;  and  while 
the  allied  generals  prepared  their  transport  and  mounted 
their  cavalry,  they  were  cheered  with  the  news  of  the 
victory  of  Trafalgar.  It  had  never  entered  into  the 
calculations  of  Lacy  or  Craig  that  their  20,000  men 
should  advance  up  the  whole  length  of  the  Italian 
peninsula  unsupported.  They  anticipated  the  assistance 
of  a  large  body  of  Neapolitan  troops.  Much  to  the 
chagrin  of  Sir  James  Craig,  it  was  now  discovered  that 
material  assistance  could  not  be  expected.  The  royal 
army  was  too  small,  too  disorganized,  to  place  any 
considerable  corps  in  the  field  at  short  notice. 

Under  these  circumstances  Lacy  and  Craig  agreed 
that  the  best  course  was  to  begin  by  occupying  defensive 
positions  on  the  frontier,  leaving  farther  movements  to 
be  guided  by  events.  Accordingly  the  British  took  up 
a  line  extending  from  the  Mediterranean  along  the 
Garigliano  towards  the  mountains  of  the  Abruzzi. 
Their  left  was  in  touch  with  the  fortress  of  Gaeta, 
garrisoned  by  royal  troops  under  the  Prince  of  Hesse 
Philipstahl,  their  right  with  the  Russians,  who  from  San 
Germano  stretched  their  detachments  through  the  passes 
of  the  Apennines.     A  small  body  of  Neapolitan  troops 


72  THE  NAPOLEONIC  EMPIRE  parti 

under  Count  Roger  de  Damas  completed  the  line  on 
the  Adriatic  coast,  and  were  placed  under  the  direct 
orders  of  the  Russian  Commander-in-chief. 

On  the  4th  of  December  the  Government  issued  a 
decree  designed  to  remedy  the  weakness  of  the  army  by 
ordering  a  levy  en  masse  of  all  able-bodied  men  between 
the  ages  of  twenty  and  forty.  By  means  of  a  generous 
application  of  the  truglio  and  a  general  emptying  of  the 
prisons,  the  gaps  in  the  ranks  were  to  a  certain  extent 
reduced.  But  among  the  people  at  large  the  demands 
of  the  Government  met  with  far  from  ready  response. 
This  call  of  a  whole  population  to  arms  was,  most 
modestly,  expected  to  produce  30,000  soldiers  ;  in  fact 
it  produced  but  6000,  and  of  these  a  large  number  were 
bent,  on  desertion  at  the  first  opportunity.  So  great 
was  the  feeling  against  military  service  that  many 
preferred  self-mutilation. 

Through  the  first  half  of  December  the  operations 
of  the  Allies  in  Naples,  though  purely  defensive,  pro- 
ceeded smoothly.  The  Neapolitan  battalions  gradually 
grew  larger,  and  a  Russian  reinforcement  of  some  6000 
men  was  landed  in  Puglia  and  helped  to  swell  Lacy's 
army  to  respectable  proportions.  But  any  hope  of  an 
eventual  advance  was  crushed  before  Christmas  by  the 
news  of  the  defeat  of  the  Austrian  and  Russian  Emperors 
at  Austerlitz.  So  profound  was  the  sensation  caused  by 
this  intelligence  that  on  the  very  day  of  its  circulation 
the  report  spread  through  Naples  that  the  Court  would 
take  refuge  at  Palermo.^ 

There  was  ample  reason  for  alarm.  The  Neapolitan 
Court  had  deliberately  challenged  Napoleon,  and  Jiow 
that  his  armies  were  triumphant,  but  Ojae-~i:£sult  could 

^  The   news   reached  Naples    on    the   22nd    of    December,    though    the   official 
dispatches  were  much  later. 


CHAP.  II  NAPOLEON  AND  NAPLES  73 

follow.  Neither  help  nor  sympathy  was  to  be  expected  ; 
'and  even  its  agents  could  find  nothing  to  say  in  paTITa- 
tion  of  such  political  blunders  and  duplicity.  At  first 
Gallo  attempted  to  keep  up  the  pretence  that  friendly 
relations  still  continued  between  the  two  Governments  ; 
he  protested  that  he  knew  of  no  infraction  of  the  treaty 
of  neutrality,  and  that  the  presence  of  the  Anglo- 
Russians  at  Naples  was  contrary  to  the  wishes  of  his 
Court.  This  position  was  not  long  tenable,  and  he 
finally,  and  far  more  intelligibly,  declared  that,  in  any 
event,  he  desired  not  to  leave  Paris,  where  he  would  be 
content  to  be  permitted  to  live  and  die.  In  a  private 
letter  to  Prince  Joseph  Bonaparte  he  expressed  in  un- 
measured terms  his  condemnation  of  the  Queen's  policy, 
and  earnestly  begged  for  the  personal  favour  of  the 
Emperor. 

In  her  own  resources  Mary  Caroline  could  not  con- 
fide. At  Paris  nothing  could  be  done.  At  Vienna  alone 
was  there  hope  of  succour.  To  the  Emperor  Francis, 
her  nephew  and  her  ally,  the  Queen  wrote  letters 
entreating  that  he  should  secure  the  inclusion  of  the 
Two  Sicilies  in  any  armistice  or  treaty  concluded  with 
France.  But  the  Austrian  Emperor  had  too  difficult 
a  situation  to  face  to  concern  himself  about  the  fate 
of  Naples,  nor  would  Napoleon  have  listened  to  pro- 
posals on  the  subject.  Russia  alone  remained  in  the 
field,  but  the  Czar  hesitated  whether  or  not  to  continue 
the  war.  His  army  was  shattered,  and  one  of  his  first 
steps  after  Austerlitz  was  to  provide  for  the  safe  with- 
drawal of  the  body  of  troops  he  had  ventured  in  far-away 
Naples.  Lacy  was  first  instructed  to  obtain  an  armistice, 
and  afterwards  to  transport  his  army  back  to  Corfu. 

The  Russian  immediately  informed  the  British 
Commander    of    the    instructions     he    had     received. 


74  THE  NAPOLEONIC  EMPIRE  parti 

and  Craig,  to  whose  judgment  his  Government  had 
wisely  given  great  latitude,  decided  that  he  could  not 
undertake  the  defence  of  Naples  unassisted,  and  must 
therefore  evacuate  simultaneously  with  the  Russians. 
Mary  Caroline  opposed  her  vehement  entreaties  to  the 
retirement  of  the  Anglo-Russians.  Convinced  now  of 
^her  political  errors,  prepared  for  the  most  bitter  sacrifices, 
she  sent  Cardinal  Fabrizio  Ruffo  to  Rome  on  the 
yth  of  January  with  instructions  to  attempt  negotia- 
tions through  the  intermediary  of  the  Pope  and  Cardinal 
Fesch.  He  was  given  powers  to  make  the  most  ample 
concessions.  To  give  this  negotiation  proper  support 
it  was  necessary,  the  Queen  argued,  to  keep  up  an 
appearance  of  material  strength  ;  it  was  necessary  that 
the  allied  army  should  retain  its  positions,  and  thereby 
induce  some  compromise  from  the  enemy.  TatitchefF 
strenuously  supported  this  not  unreasonable  contention. 
He  urged  Lacy  to  delay  his  movement  ;  Elliot,  gained 
to  the  same  viev/,  made  similar  representations  to  Craig. 
The  Russian  general,  although  he  had  received 
instructions  to  retire  to  Corfu,  at  first  showed  some 
inclination  to  interpret  his  orders  widely,  and  to 
afford  the  Queen's  negotiations  support  by  delaying 
his  departure.  After  some  discussion  with  Craig,  with 
whom  he  had  remained  on  good  terms  from  the 
beginning  of  their  co- operation,  he  proposed  to  the 
Court  that  the  allied  army  should  retreat  to  Calabria, 
and  there  take  up  a  strong  defensive  position.  This 
proposal  was  rejected,  and  in  terms  so  violent  and 
insulting,  that  Lacy  refused  to  accept  their  communica- 
tion.^ He  now  decided  that  further  discussion  would 
be    useless,  and    proceeded    to    carry  out    his    original 

1  Craig  to  Castlereagh,  Feb.   lo,   1806,  War  Off.  Or'ig.  Corr.  170,  "...  terms 
of  indiscreet  invective  ..."  is  Craig's  expression. 


CHAP.  II  NAPOLEON  AND  NAPLES  75 

intention.  Craig's  conduct  conformed  to  that  of  his 
colleague.  The  Russian  and  British  Ministers  were 
greatly  angered  at  the  decision  of  the  generals ;  Mary 
Caroline  was  in  despair  at  a  departure  which  her  own 
violence  had  hastened.  To  Elliot  the  Queen  expressed 
herself  In  these  remarkable  terms  :  "  Degradation  and 
injury  will  be  the  price  we  shall  have  to  pay  for  the 
short  and  expensive  Anglo-Russian  visit.  We  are  sick 
at  heart  ;  nothing  could  have  surpassed  our  good  faith 
and  dignity.''  ^ 

But  Craig,  though  deaf  to  Elliot's  persuasion,  though 
determined  not  to  risk  his  small  corps  unsupported 
against  a  French  army  of  invasion,  was  at  the  same 
time  anxious  to  secure  for  his  Government  such  military 
positions  as  were  both  advantageous  and  defensible. 
Craig's  instructions  did  not  urge  him  to  secure  Sicilian 
but  British  interests  ;  a  possible  conflict  between  the 
two  was  even  anticipated,  and  his  orders  were  that,  in 
case  of  necessity,  he  was  to  occupy  Sicily,  and  even 
"  to  take  possession  of  it  without  the  concurrence  of 
His  Sicilian  Majesty."^  The  rights  of  Ferdinand  and 
Mary  ■  Caroline  were  no  more  sacred  to  the  British 
Government  and  its  commander  than  they  were  to 
Napoleon  and  St.  Cyr. 

Craig's  first  idea  appears  to  have  been  to  occupy  and 
defend  Gaeta,  but  the  suggestion  that  British  troops 
should  enter  the  fortress  was  instantly  repelled  by  the 
Prince  of  Hesse.  Failing  this.  Sir  James  Craig  decided 
that  the  next  best  point  at  which  he  could  check  a 
French  invasion  was -on  the  Strait  of  Messina.  Pro- 
ceeding on  military  considerations  and  in  the  spirit  of 
his  instructions,  he  firmly  resolved  to  place  his  force  at 

^  Minto,  391. 
2  Craig  to  Elliot,  Jan.  27,  1806,  War  Off.  Orlg.  Corr.  170. 


76  THE  NAPOLEONIC  EMPIRE  parti 

that  point,  notwithstanding  the  strong  opposition  of 
Elliot.  No  sooner  was  the  Anglo-Russian  retirement 
decided  than  Craig  formally  applied  for  permission  to 
disembark  his  troops  at  Messina.  This  was  met  by  a 
curt  refusal.  So  far  did  the  resentment  of  the  Sicilian 
Government  go  that  orders  were  promptly  sent  that 
any  attempt  at  landing  on  the  part  of  the  British  was 
to  be  resisted,  and,  if  necessary,  by  force  of  arms.-^ 
Under  these  difficult  circumstances,  unsupported  by  his 
country's  diplomatic  representative,  Craig  showed  equal 
firmness,  coolness,  and  judgment.  Sailing  from  Castella- 
mare  on  the  19th  of  January,  he  carried  his  troops 
direct  to  Messina.  There  he  cast  anchor,  and,  without 
attempting  to  land  a  single  man,  awaited  circumstances 
that  would  compel  Ferdinand  to  call  for  the  aid  of  his 
unwelcome  defender.  His  judgment  was  soon  justified 
by  events,  and  on  the  13th  of  February  the  hostile 
orders  were  rescinded  and  the  British  troops  left  free 
to  disembark. 

The  departure  of  the  British  and  Russian  armies 
had  left  Mary  Caroline  well-nigh  defenceless.  In  her 
despair  the  Queen  issued  a  multitude  of  orders,  often 
contradictory,  generally  useless.  On  the  nth  of  January 
she  called  out  the  masse  for  the  defence  of  the  kingdom  ; 
they  were  those  same  free  companies,  midway  between 
the  comitiva  of  a  brigand  chief  and  the  slightly  less 
unruly  bodies  of  provincial  militia  that  had  followed 
Cardinal  Ruffo  to  the  assault  of  Naples  in  1799.  Often 
enough  they  were  but  bands  of  outlaws  attracted  to 
the  royal  service  by  a  free  pardon,  by  the  adornment 
of  their  chief  with  some  such;,  title  as  captain  or 
colonel,  and    by  the  hope  of  plunder.     Among    their 

1  Arch.  Nap.  "  Guerra,"  xxv.  2248,  Jan.  4  and  20,  1806  j  also  Circello  to  Elliot, 
Jan.  21,  1806,  War.  Off.  Orig.  Corr.  170. 


CHAP.  11  NAPOLEON  AND  NAPLES  77 

leaders  were  such  illustrious  freebooters  as  Sciarpa  and 
Michael  Pezza,  otherwise  known  as  Fra  Diavolo.  So 
detestable  did  this  measure  appear  that  Count  Roger 
de  Damas  refused  to  have  them  under  his  orders,  and 
that  Baron  Rodio,  who  had  been  among  the  most 
staunch  of  the  royalist  leaders  in  1799,  declined  to 
allow  his  name  to  be  connected  with  them  again. 

While  the  Queen  called  out  the  masse  and  urged 
her  irresponsive  ministers  and  diplomats  to  futile 
efforts,  whiJe  the  King  with  great  good  humour  enjoyed 
the  pleasures  of  the  chase  at  Capo  di  Monte  and 
Fusaro,  Napoleon  resolved  the  fate  of  their  kingdom. 
Having  concluded  peace  with  Austria,  he  addressed  the 
following  proclamation  to  his  army  from  Schoenbrunn 
on  the  27  th  of  December  : — 

Soldiers,  for  ten  years  I  have  left  nothing  undone  to  save 
the  King  of  Naples  ;  he  has  left  nothing  undone  for  his  ruin. 
After  the  battles  of  Dego,  of  Mondovi,  of  Lodi  he  could  have 
offered  but  the  feeblest  resistance.  I  listened  to  the  promises 
of  this  Prince,  and  I  treated  him  with  generosity. 

When  the  second  coalition  was  destroyed  at  Marengo,  the 
King  of  Naples,  first  to  wage  an  unjust  war,  abandoned  by  his 
aUies  at  Luneville,  remained  isolated  and  defenceless  5  he  im- 
plored me,  and  for  a  second  time  I  pardoned  him. 

But  a  few  months  have  passed  since  you  were  at  the  gates 
of  Naples  ;  I  had  good  enough  grounds  both  to  suspect  the 
treason  there  hatching  and  to  avenge  the  insults  already  suffered. 
Again  I  was  generous.  I  recognised  the  neutrality  of  Naples  ; 
I  ordered  you  to  evacuate  that  kingdom,  and,  for  the  third 
time,  the  House  of  Naples  was  supported  and  saved. 

Shall  we  pardon  for  a  fourth  time  ?     Shall  we   trust  for  a 
fourth  time  a  Court  without  faith,  without  honour,  without  f 
judgment  ?     No  !    no  !    the  dynasty  of  Naples  has  ceased  to 
reign  ;  its  continued  existence  is  incompatible  with  the  repose 
of  Europe  and  the  honour  of  my  Crown. 

Soldiers,  forward  !     Hurl  into  the  waves,  if  they  should  await 


78  THE  NAPOLEONIC  EMPIRE  parti 

you,  the  feeble  battalions  of  the  tyrants  of  the  seas  ;  show 
the  world  how  we  chastise  perjury  ;  announce  without  delay 
that  all  Italy  is  subject  to  my  laws  or  to  those  of  my  allies, 
that  the  most  lovely  land  on  earth  is  free  from  the  yoke  of 
the  most  perfidious  of  people,  that  the  sanctity  of  treaties  is 
avenged,  and  that  the  souls  of  my  brave  soldiers  slaughtered 
in  the  ports  of  Sicily  on  their  return  from  Egypt  after  escaping 
the  dangers  of  shipwreck,  of  the  desert,  and  of  battle,  are  at 
last  appeased. 

Soldiers  !  my  brother  will  lead  you  ;  he  knows  my  plans  ;  he 
carries  my  authority  ;  he  has  my  complete  confidence  ;  encircle 
him  with  yours.^ 

Principal  Authorities  consulted 

MSS. 

Brit,  War  Off.,  Orig.  Corresp.  169  and  170,  containing  a  number  of 
dispatches  to  and  from  Elliot,  Craig,  Castlereagh,  Circello,  and  others 
concerning  the  British  force  under  Craig. 

Archivio  di  Stato,  Guerray  xxv.  2248,  contains  several  documents 
bearing  on  the  same  question. 

BiBL,  Naz.,  Memoirs  of  ^een  Mary  Caroline.  This  is  a  highly  im- 
portant source  of  information,  covering  the  period  1806-18 14,  very  copious 
in  personal  reminiscences  from  18 10.     See  Appendix  D. 

Printed  Books 
Abrantes,  d'  (Mme.  Junot),  Memoirs;  Browning,  England  and  Napoleon 
in  1803 i  Browning,  Hugh  Elliot;  Boulay  de  la  Meurthe,  S^uelques 
lettres  de  Marie  Caroline;  Bunbury,  Military  Transactions ;  Colletta, 
Storia ;  Collingwood,  Correspondence ;  Dumas,  Precis  militaire ;  Galt, 
Foyages;  Gorani,  Memoirs  ;  Helfert,  Konigin  Karolina;  Helfert,  Maria 
Karolina ;  Joseph,  Roi,  Correspondance ;  Las  Cases,  Memorial ;  Ligne, 
Memoirs;  MASsm  a.  Memoirs ;  Mavrice,  Diary  of  Sir  J.  Moore  ;  Metter- 
NiCH,  Memoirs ;  Minto,  Hugh  Elliot ;  Morgan,  Lady,  Italy ;  Napoleon, 
Correspondance  ;  Neumann,  Recueil  de  trait es ;  Nicola,  Diario  ;  Orloff, 
Memoirs;  F almieri^  Pens/es  et  sowvenirs ;  Roederer,  CEwvres ;  Schoell, 
Hist,  des  trait^s ;  Segur,  Hist,  et  Memoir es;  Treaties  and  Correspondence,  1806  ; 
Vandal,  Napoleon  et  Alexandre. 

^  The  generally  accepted  date  for  this  proclamation  is  that  given  in  the  text,  but 
it  did  not  make  its  appearance  in  the  Moniteur  till  the  ist  of  February.  Yet  its 
purport  was  known  at  Naples  on  the  25th  of  January,  so  that  whether  officially 
published  or  not  its  contents  must  have  been  revealed  not  much  later  than  its 
ostensible  date.  See  Napoleon,  Corr.  xi.  509  ;  Schoell,  Hht.  des  traites,  viii.  9  j 
Nicola,  ii.  188. 


CHAPTER   III 

CONQUEST    OF    NAPLES 

(Feb. -June  1806) 

Policy  of  Napoleon — French  finance — Napoleon  and  Joseph — Is 
oiFered  crown  of  Naples — S.  Teodoro's  negotiations — Flight 
of  the  Court — Collapse  of  Neapolitan  resistance — Massena's 
movements — Joseph's  entry  into  Naples  —  Task  before  the 
invaders  —  The  Neapolitan  forces  —  Regnier  marches  into 
Calabria  —  Campotanese  —  French  at  Reggio  —  Neapolitan 
flight — Corpi  volanti — Character  and  causes  of  the  rising  in 
Calabria — Military  situation  end  of  March — Insurrection  of 
Calabria — Rodio — Joseph  visits  Calabria — His  portrait  and  line 
of  internal  policy — Gaeta — Its  garrison  and  commander — 
Commencement  of  siege  —  Unsuccessful  bombardments  — 
Campredon  takes  charge — Hesse's  appeals  for  help — Smith 
at  Palermo  —  Embarks  Fra  Diavolo  —  His  history  —  Smith 
relieves  Gaeta  —  Captures  Capri  —  Fra  Diavolo's  raid  and 
treachery — Sent  to  Palermo — Sorties  from  Gaeta — Smith's 
proclamations — Progress  of  French  works  —  Massena  takes 
command. 

The  enmity  between  the  Bourbon  dynasty  of  the  Two 
Sicilies  and  the  people  of  France  had  been  transmitted 
from  the  events  of  the  great  Revolution  ;  the  military 
occupation  of  Puglia  by  the  Consular  Government  had 
been  intended  as  a  compensation  for  the  English  occupa- 
tion of  Malta  and  as  a  move  towards  future  operations 
in  the  eastern  Mediterranean  basin.     These  two  salient 

79 


8o  THE  NAPOLEONIC  EMPIRE  part  i 

facts,  and  the  events  attending  them,  had  been  among 
the  principal  causes  leading  to  the  Schoenbrunn  proclama- 
tion, but  there  had  been  others  also, — military,  financial, 
and  dynastic  considerations, — that  went  far  to  influence 
the  Emperor  Napoleon's  decision. 

He  had  just  delivered  a  crushing  blow  at  Austria, 
the  third  in  less  than  ten  years,  and  his  military  sup- 
remacy on  the  Continent  appeared  securely  established. 
He  found  himself,  for  the  moment,  with  but  one  enemy 
to  face,  that  powerful,  pertinacious  foe,  whose  wealth, 
maritime  genius,  and  dogged  hatred  were  at  the  end  to 
vanquish  him.  Already  Great  Britain  had  smirched  the 
magnificent  laurel  wreath  of  the  new-born  Empire  with 
the  indelible  trace  of  Trafalgar,  and  it  was  with  a  pang 
of  jealous  hatred  that  Napoleon  now  turned  to  strike  at 
her.  If  the  white  cliffs  ofjDover  were  beyond  his  reach, 
he  would  at  all  events  strike  wherever  he  could  find  a 
single  red-coated  soldier  ;  if  the  British  fleets  covered  the 
Channel  he  could  yet  move  foot  by  foot  nearer  that 
strategic  centre  of  the  world  where  three  continents 
meet,  and  where,  he  imagined,  lay  the  key  to  India. 
From  Naples,  from  Taranto,  from  Sicily,  whence  he 
would  drive  the  British,  he  would  stretch  across  the 
Adriatic,  and  his  still  considerable  fleets  would  furnish 
him  with  sufficient  sea  power  thence  eventually  to  aim 
a  deadly  thrust  at  Egypt  and  the  power  of  Britain. 

But  in  the  practical  mind  of  the  Emperor  these  plans, 
however  vast,  were  made  to  fit  in  with  a  carefully 
conceived  system  of  large  armaments  combined  with 
rigid  economy.  For  Napoleon  had  already  embarked 
on  his  ruthless  policy  of  making  war  self-supporting.^ 
At  a  time  when  he  was  struggling  to  restore  the  finances 
of  France  from  the  chaos  of  the  Revolution,  when  the 

^  This  policy  is  admirably  described  in  Fisher's  Napoleonic  Statesmanship,  Germany. 


CHAP.  Ill  CONQUEST  OF  NAPLES  8i 

market    quotation    of  French    5    per    cents    was    with 
difficulty  brought  up  to  50  (^6  in  March   1803),  he 
already  declared  that  the  day  France  went  to  war  he 
would    remit    twenty   millions   of  taxation.     In    1804 
and    1805   the  heavy  outlay   caused   by  the   war   with 
England  and  by  extraordinary  military  expenditure  had 
resulted   in   heavy  deficits  in  the   French  budget,  and 
the  campaign  of  1805  had  been  fought  on  a  financial 
basis  that  threatened   disaster.      Austerlitz   had   saved 
Napoleon   not   only   politically   but   financially.     As   a 
result  of  the   victory   and  of  the  heavy  contributions 
levied  from  Austria,  the  credit  of  the  French  treasury 
rapidly    improved.      Napoleon   now  began   to   put   in 
force  on  a  large  scale  the  system  that  eventually  con- 
tributed  so  largely  to  his   ruin.     Though  continental 
peace  was  secured,  he  proposed  maintaining  the  army 
on  a  war  footing  and  not  reducing  the  effective  strength 
of  his   battalions  by   one   man  ;    and   so   as   to   avoid 
irritating  French  public  opinion  by  calling  on  France 
to    meet    this    abnormal    expenditure,    he    so    shuffled 
the   political   cards   as   to   quarter   many   corps   of  his 
army    on    foreign    soil,    and    at    the    charge    of  those 
on   whom    they   were   quartered.      The   application   of 
this  system  in  Germany,  where  it  was  carried  out  on 
the  largest  scale,  will  not  concern  us,  but  it  is  necessary 
to  point  out  that  this  policy  was  one  of  the  factors  that 
dictated   the   conquest   of  Naples.     An  army  of  fifty 
thousand   men,   detached  to   southern   Italy   at  a  time 
when  its  presence  was  not  required  elsewhere,  would 
not  only  accomplish  certain  political  purposes,  but  would 
be  paid  for  by  the  conquered  people  and  relieve  the 
French  finances  to  a  corresponding  extent. 

One  last   aspect   of  the   Neapolitan    question   as   it 
presented  itself  to  Napoleon  must  be  dwelt   on, — the 

VOL.  I  G 


Si  THE  NAPOLEONIC  EMPIRE  parti 

dynastic  one.  He  was  virtually  in  occupation  of  the 
throne  of  the  Bourbons.  He  felt  that  his  fall  would  be 
less  likely  to  lead  to  a  republican  reaction  than  to  a 
Bourbon  restoration.  For  that  House  he  had  much  of 
the  genuine  republican  detestation  of  a  true  child  of  the 
Revolution.  Every  blow  aimed  at  its  possessions  or 
repute  was  doubly  gratifying  to  him  ;  and  in  the 
impending  fall  of  the  Neapolitan  branch  of  that  House 
he  saw  the  opportunity  not  only  of  lowering  the  prestige 
of  a  possible  competitor,  but  of  increasing  his  own.  For 
his  secret  thought  had  long  been  to  come  to  no  terms 
with  Ferdinand  and  Mary  Caroline  but  to  transfer 
their  dominions  and  their  crown  to  a  new  king  of  his 
owrPmaking.  That  king  could  be  none  other  than 
Napoleon's  eldest  brother  Joseph. 

In  the  summer  of  1805,  while  the  diplomatic 
manoeuvres  preceding  the  breaking  out  of  war  with 
Austria  and  Russia  were  taking  place,  Napoleon,  in  the 
hopes  of  securing  Austrian  neutrality,  had  offered  to 
separate  the  crowns  of  France  and  Italy.  Whether  he 
expected  anything  to  come  of  this  proposal  or  not 
there  was  certainly  a  report  current  that  the  Emperor 
would  resign  the  crown  of  Lombardy  in  favour  of 
Joseph  Bonaparte.-^  But  Austria's  non-acceptance  and 
the  event  of  the  war  were  to  effect  a  change  in  Joseph's 
destination.  Lombardy  was  to  remain  under  the  king- 
ship of  Napoleon,  while  his  brother  was  to  be  com- 
pensated with  the  throne  of  Naples. 

While  the  Emperor  led  his  army  into  Germany, 
Joseph  Bonaparte  had  remained  in  Paris  to  direct  affairs 
of  State.  The  correspondence  of  the  brothers  was 
constant  and  voluminous,  but  two  dates  will  sufficiently 

^  Roederer,  iii.  520.     Miot,  whose  authority  is  doubtful,  gives  quite  a  different 
version,  ii.  84,  107,  ill. 


CHAP.  Ill  CONQUEST  OF  NAPLES  83 

establish  the  development  of  Napoleon's  policy  as  it 
affected  the  question  of  Naples:  on  the  31st  of 
December,  having  then  left  Vienna  and  reached 
Munich,  he  wrote  appointing  Joseph  his  Lieutenant 
commanding  the  army  of  Naples,  with  authority  over  the 
Marshals  of  France.  Three  weeks  later,  from  Stuttgard, 
he  formally  offered  his  brother  the  crown  of  Naples. 

If  Count  Miot's  account  is  to  be  trusted,  Joseph 
Bonaparte  did  not  accept  this  regal  gift  without  reluct- 
ance. The  throne  of  Naples  was  in  theory  independent, 
and  its  occupant  could  not  at  the  same  time  hold  that 
of  France.  But  Napoleon  was  childless,  Joseph  was 
the  eldest  of  his  brothers,  and  the  throne  of  Naples 
appeared  a  poor  thing  when  compared  with  that  of 
France.  So  Joseph  hesitated,  until  Napoleon  intervened 
in  his  usual  authoritative  and  decisive  fashion.  At  the 
end  of  January,  Joseph,  who  was  now  on  his  way  to 
Italy,  had  not  yet  given  his  formal  acceptance  of  the 
offer.  The  Emperor  summoned  Miot,  his  brother's 
intimate  friend,  and  told  him  that  in  case  of  refusal  he 
would  make  another  appointment  to  the  crown  of 
Naples,  and  also  adopt  a  successor  to  his  own, — perhaps 
Eugene  Beauharnais.  This  proved  conclusive,  and 
Joseph,  fearing  worse  things,  agreed  to  accept  the 
crown  of  Ferdinand  and  Mary  Caroline. 

It  was  not  remarkable  that  with  the  Emperor  and 
his  brother  meditating  such  projects  the  negotiators  of 
the  Court  of  Naples  should  have  met  with  scant  success. 
Cardinal  Ruffo's  mission  having  resulted  in  nothing, 
the  Duke  of  S.  Teodoro  was  dispatched  to  Rome,  but 
accomplished  no  more.  On  the  28th  of  January  the  ^  (, 
Duke  was  admitted  to  an  interview  with  Joseph,  handed 
him  a  letter  from  the  Hereditary  Prince,  and  verbally 


84  THE  NAPOLEONIC  EMPIRE  parti 

offered  the  abdication  of  Ferdinand  and  Mary  Caroline 
in  favour  of  their  son,  if  peace  could  be  obtained  on 
such  terms.  The  French  Prince,  adhering  firmly  to 
Napoleon's  constantly  reiterated  instructions  that  he 
was  not  to  listen  to  terms  of  any  sort,  declined  to 
consider  the  Duke's  proposal.  S.  Teodoro,  a  slippery 
personage  whose  allegiance  was  already  wavering,  re- 
turned to  Naples,  but  apparently  did  not  report  the 
absolutely  barren  result  of  his  mission.  Following  his 
deceptive  assurances  as  to  the  success  of  his  negotia- 
tions the  order  for  the  levy  en  masse  was  rescinded. 
The  Queen  herself  gave  a  fanciful  account  of  these 
negotiations  to  Elliot,  while  in  her  Memoirs  she  makes 
the  curious  statement  that  the  Duke  reported  his 
negotiations  at  Rome  to  be  progressing  favourably, 
and  tried  to  persuade  her  to  journey  to  Terracina  with 
the  Hereditary  Prince,  there  to  have  an  interview  with 
Joseph.  Suspecting  some  treason  of  the  Duke,  she 
declined. 

The  complete  failure  of  the  peace  overtures  was, 
however,  soon  realized,  and  struck  alarm  in  the  hearts 
of  the  Court  of  Naples  ;  since  the  beginning  of  January 
valuables  from  the  royal  palaces  had  been  removed 
to  ships  ready  for  conveyance  to  Palermo  ;  on  the 
23rd  Ferdinand  decided  to  transfer  his  hunting  head- 
quarters to  Sicily,  leaving  the  government  to  the 
nominal  control  of  the  Hereditary  Prince,  and  of  a 
Giunta  composed  of  Naselli,  Canosa,  and  CianciuUi. 
On  the  nth  of  February  Mary  Caroline  followed  the 
King's  example,  taking  with  her  everything  of  value 
that  could  be  easily  conveyed.-^ 

1  This  appears  to  be  the  reasonable  view.  Extreme  statements  are,  however, 
easy  to  find,  and  in  opposite  directions  see  Joseph,  Corr.  ii.  14,  70  j  Helfert,  K'onigin 
Karolwa,  222  :  Segur,  ii.  502. 


CHAP.  Ill  CONQUEST  OF  NAPLES  85 

There  was  good  cause  for  the  Queen's  departure, 
for  the  French  columns  were  nearing  the  frontier,  and 
they  had  acquired  a  terrifying  reputation  for  celerity 
of  movement.  Under  Marshal  Massena,  perhaps 
the  most  able  and  vigorous  of  all  Napoleon's  generals, 
the  French  corps  of  invasion  were  rapidly  concentrat- 
ing. So  great  was  the  fear  they  inspired  that  even 
their  presence  appeared  scarcely  necessary  to  secure 
victory  ;  early  in  January,  when  they  were  as  yet  very 
far  distant,  the  Neapolitan  artillery  did  not  feel  secure 
in  convoying  guns  from  Naples  to  the  fortress  of 
Capua  save  with  lighted  matches !  Such  soldiers  as 
had  been  hastily  recruited  did  not  appear  likely  material 
to  face  the  enemy  ;  they  came  mostly  from  the  prisons, 
and  had  merely  changed  the  form  of  their  service  to 
the  State  by  means  of  a  sliding  scale  that  established 
an  equivalent  between  seven  years  at  the  galleys  and 
ten  years  of  military  service.  The  levy  of  soldiers 
from  the  unconvicted  section  of  the  population  was 
a  matter  of  greater  difficulty  ;  rioting,  disorder,  and 
seditious  placards  were  frequent,  especially  in  Puglia. 
The  withdrawal  of  the  Russian  and  British  troops  had 
completely  crushed  all  hope  of  successful  resistance,  and 
the  royal  cause,  which  had  found  so  many  zealous 
supporters  in  1799,  was  for  the  moment  without  a 
defender.  In  the  Campagna  there  were  no  enrolments, 
and  even  the  flying  corps  only  existed  on  paper. 

There  was  thus  practically  nothing  to  oppose 
Massena's  advance  but  a  few  weak  battalions  of  the 
regular  army,  too  few  in  numbers  to  venture  into  the 
open  Campagna  through  which  lay  the  road  to  Naples. 
By  the  middle  of  January  Massena  had  35,000  men  in 
the  Roman  States,  of  which  about  25,000  were  in 
the  first  line.     Early  in  February  he  could  dispose  of 


86  THE  NAPOLEONIC  EMPIRE  parti 

30,000  men  and  twenty-four  guns  for  actual  operations, 
with  nearly  10,000  more  advancing  to  his  support 
under  Duhesme,  and  on  the  8  th  he  crossed  the  Gari- 
gliano.  Joseph  Bonaparte  was  with  Massena,  and  as 
the  French  army  crossed  the  frontier  he  issued  a  pro- 
clamation to  the  people  of  Naples  assuring  them  that 
they  would  receive  friendly  treatment,  and  that  the  aim 
of  the  invaders  was  merely  to  chastise  the  breach  of 
faith  of  Ferdinand. 

Massena  pushed  directly  on  for  the  capital,  meeting 
with  no  opposition  save  from  the  fortresses  of  Gaeta 
and  Capua,  before  which  detachments  were  left  in 
observation.  At  Aversa  he  received  the  surrender  of 
Naples  from  the  regency,  and  on  the  14th,  six  days 
after  crossing  the  Garigliano,  a  French  detachment 
made  its  entry  into  the  city.  Before  their  arrival 
the  property -holders  had  formed  a  citizens'  guard 
for  protection  against  any  excesses  of  the  lazzaroni, 
and  the  rapidity  with  which  Massena  moved,  together 
with  the  promptitude  of  the  provisional  Giunta's 
surrender,  prevented  a  repetition  of  the  furious  defence 
and  terrible  slaughter  that  had  taken  place  when  Cham- 
pionnet  captured  Naples  for  the  Directoire  six  years 
before. 

On  the  15  th  of  February  Joseph  Bonaparte  made 
his  formal  entry  surrounded  by  a  brilliant  staff;  he 
took  up  his  abode  at  the  Royal  Palace,  styling  himself 
Prince  of  France,  Grand  Elector  of  the  Empire,  and 
Lieutenant  of  the  Emperor.  The  city  acquiesced 
,  passively  in  the  change  of  government,  and  the  French 
were  able  to  take  possession  of  no  less  than  200  pieces 
of  ordnance  and  large  stores  of  gunpowder  that  had 
neither  been  removed  nor  destroyed. 

Notwithstanding   the   facility   with  which  this   first 


CHAP.  Ill  CONQUEST  OF  NAPLES  87 

conquest  had  been  accomplished,  the  French  army  was 
in  reahty  far  too  small  for  the  task  set  before  it.  Even 
had  Napoleon  transferred  another  50,000  men  from 
Germany  to  Massena's  command,  that  general  would 
have  disposed  of  insufficient  numbers.  The  80,000 
men  placed  under  his  orders  in  Lombardy-Venetia 
represented  but  40,000  in  the  Papal  States,  and  but 
25,000  in  the  city  of  Naples  ;  while  the  further 
stretch  from  that  point  to  the  extremity  of  Calabria 
would  mean  an  even  greater  proportionate  reduction. 
And  if  the  Strait  of  Messina  was  to  be  crossed, 
the  effective  force  left  available  for  the  conquest  of 
Sicily  would  be  quite  insignificant.  But  the  funda- 
mental political  consideration  on  which  the  strategy  of 
the  French  generals  should  have  been  based,  a  con- 
sideration that  was  indeed  in  Napoleon's  mind,  was 
that  no  conquest  of  Naples  could  be  complete  and  final 
unless  the  Bourbon  Court  was  driven  out  of  Sicily  as 
well.  From  this  was  deducible  the  further  consequence 
that  a  rapid  attack,  giving  no  time  for  the  elaboration 
of  a  system  of  defence,  offered  the  best  chance  of 
success.  As  it  was.  Napoleon  and  his  generals  com- 
pletely underestimated  the  total  of  troops  necessary  to 
enable  the  offensive  to  be  carried  beyond  the  Strait  of 
Messina,  and  no  provision  was  made  for  the  maritime 
transport  that  would  be  necessary  for  crossing  the  small 
branch  of  sea  that  separates  the  island  from  the  main- 
land. The  result  was  that  the  French  military  strength 
just  reached  the  strait,  but  there  fell  powerless,  and  that 
the  best  opportunity  that  was  ever  to  present  itself  of 
completing  the  conquest  of  the  whole  kingdom  passed 
away,  never  to  be  renewed. 

Before  Napoleon  even  knew  that  Massena's  columns 
were  in  position  to  cross  the  frontier,  he  urged  on  his 


88  THE  NAPOLEONIC  EMPIRE  parti 

brother  that  he  must,  without  a  moment's  delay,  get 
22,000  men  to  Reggio,  whence  Sicily  could  easily  be 
taken  in  the  first  moment  of  panic.  Nothing  could 
be  sounder  than  the  considerations  on  which  this  order 
was  based,  but  the  means  for  its  execution  were  want- 
ing, nor  had  the  officers  to  whom  it  was  intrusted 
for  execution  that  unerring  discrimination  between  the 
vital  and  the  subsidiary  that  so  often  enabled  Napoleon 
to  concentrate  a  sufficient  amount  of  energy  on  the 
really  decisive  point. 

Immediately  after  the  occupation  of  the  city  of 
Naples,  Joseph  asserted  the  supreme  military  control 
given  him  by  his  brother;  Massena  was  placed  in 
charge  of  the  troops  concentrated  in  the  capital  and  its 
vicinity  ;  the  command  of  the  detached  force  operating 
on  the  Adriatic  side  towards  Puglia  was  given  to  St. 
Cyr,  while  all  the  troops  available  for  an  advance  into 
Calabria  were  placed  under  the  ablest  of  the  divisional 
generals  at  Naples,  Regnier.  He  was  instructed  to 
march  to  the  Strait  of  Messina  without  delay. 

When  Regnier,  at  the  end  of  February,  was  on  the 
point  of  marching  south,  the  forces  of  the  Sicilian 
Government  were  divided  into  two  bodies.  The 
one  under  Marshal  Rosenheim,  with  whom  was  the 
Hereditary  Prince,  was  retreating  before  Lecchi's 
advance  on  the  Adriatic  side  of  the  Apennines  ;  the 
other,  under  the  Comte  de  Damas,  maintained  a  corre- 
sponding position  on  the  western  slope,  observing  from  a 
distance  the  French  in  Naples.  Damas  had  some  6000 
or  7000  regulars  and  a  certain  number  of  Calabrese 
militia  ;  Rosenheim's  numbers  were  somewhat  less. 

Regnier,  at  the  head  of  about  10,000  men,  advanced 
from  Naples  with  exemplary  celerity  and  plunged  into 
the    mountains    of    Calabria,    and    into    winter.     His 


CHAP.  Ill  CONQUEST  OF  NAPLES  89 

advance  lay  along  the  mule  track  that  did  duty  as  the 
principal  artery  of  communication  between  that  remote 
province  and  the  capital,  and  led  to  the  town  of 
Cassano.  Towards  Cassano,  which  lies  on  the  Adriatic 
slope,  lay  the  converging  lines  of  retreat  both  of  Rosen- 
heim and  of  Damas.  The  latter,  who  was  directly  on 
Regnier's  line  of  march,  determined  to  face  the  French 
in  the  high  mountain  passes  they  would  have  to  cross 
before  they  could  reach  that  town. 

On  the  6th  of  March,  at  Lagonegro,  the  armies  got 
into  touch,  and  a  heavy  skirmish  was  fought  between 
the  advanced  guard  of  the  French  and  the  rear-guard 
of  the  royal  forces.  This  rear-guard  was  made  up  of 
irregulars  and  militia  under  the  command  of  Sciarpa, 
one  of  the  best-known  of  the  leaders  of  the  Masse  in 
1799.  The  French  light  infantry,  manoeuvring  with 
rapidity  and  skill,  captured  four  guns  and  drove  the 
royalists  before  them  with  a  loss  of  300.  Three  days 
later  Regnier  came  up  with  Damas'  main  body  at  Cam- 
potanese  and  found  the  Sicilians  occupying  a  formidable 
position  in  a  small  plateau,  to  which  the  inlet  and  outlet 
were  narrow  defiles.  Damas  had  some  14,000  men, 
of  which  about  one  half  were  regulars,  drawn  up  across 
the  pass  ;  his  position  was  carefully  chosen  and  its 
front  was  completely  covered  with  breastworks  ;  his 
two  flanks  were  apparently  protected  by  the  mountain 
sides.  It  was  a  truly  admirable  position  for  defence, 
but  had  one  great  fault,  that  in  case  of  defeat  there  was 
but  a  narrow  outlet  for  retreat. 

The  French,  with  forces  far  inferior  in  numbers,  far 
superior  in  quality,  advanced  to  attack  this  formidable 
position  on  the  morning  of  the  6th  of  March.  It  was 
cold,  and  a  heavy  fall  of  snow,  driven  by  a  gusty  wind 
up  the  pass,  blew  directly  into  the  defenders'  eyes  and 


90  THE  NAPOLEONIC  EMPIRE  parti 

veiled  the  movements  of  the  French.  Regnier  sent 
his  light  infantry  up  the  mountain  flank  on  his  left, 
and  placed  his  most  dashing  brigadier,  General  Com- 
pere, in  charge  of  a  column  intended  to  advance  on  the 
Sicilian  centre  with  the  bayonet.  The  light  infantry, 
with  wonderful  agility,  wormed  their  way  along  the 
snow-beaten  cliiFs,  turned  a  difficult  passage  in  single 
file,  and  finally  came  out  on  Damas'  right  flank  and 
rear.  They  immediately  advanced  in  skirmishing 
order  and  opened  fire  ;  the  royal  troops  attempted  to 
manoeuvre  so  as  to  face  this  unexpected  attack,  and 
in  doing  so  fell  into  confusion.  At  this  moment 
Compere,  who  had  gradually  edged  up  nearer  and 
nearer,  rushed  his  column  forward  ;  one  or  two 
volleys  were  fired,  and  then  in  a  moment  the  Sicilian 
line  broke  and  Damas  was  defeated.  A  crowd  of 
fugitives  rushed  down  the  pass  only  to  find  the  narrow 
egress  blocked  by  the  first -comers,  and  the  active 
French  troops  were  able  to  capture  not  only  all  the 
artillery  of  the  defeated  army  but  2000  prisoners, 
including  two  generals  and  many  officers  of  rank. 

On  through  the  rain,  and  snow,  and  mud,  the  French 
kept  pushing  behind  the  melting  Sicilian  army,  and 
that  night  Regnier's  headquarters  were  carried  as  far  as 
the  village  of  Morano.  A  foretaste  of  the  horrors 
that  were  soon  to  fasten  on  Calabria  was  the  scene  in 
that  village  on  the  night  that  followed  the  French 
victory,  —  a  scene  vividly  depicted  by  an  officer  of 
Regnier's  stafl^  who  also  happened  to  be  a  master  of 
French  prose,  Paul  Louis  Courier.  Outside  the 
miserable  house  where  the  general  had  found  shelter 
were  rain,  mud,  and  darkness,  soldiers,  desperate  with 
fatigue  and  hunger,  searching  for  provisions,  some 
pillaging,  some  massacring.     At  the  door  of  the  house 


CHAP.  Ill  CONQUEST  OF  NAPLES  91 

were  two  naked  corpses,  visible  by  the  fitful  blaze  of 
a  barn  set  on  fire  by  the  soldiers  ;  on  a  corner  of  the 
stairs  another  corpse  ;  in  the  bare  room  above,  the 
general  dictating  orders,  while  exhausted  staff-officers 
lay  on  the  floors  ;  the  whole  scene  punctuated  by  the 
piercing  and  continuous  shrieks  of  a  woman  complaining 
of  outrage.  No  fire,  no  bread,  no  furniture,  and  the 
next  house  ablaze.  Thus  were  the  horrors  of  war 
introduced  into  Calabria,  and  thus  began  a  campaign 
which  a  French  officer  described  as  "  one  of  the  most 
diabolical  waged  in  many  years."  ^ 

On  the  13th  of  March  Regnier  reached  Cosenza, 
a  difficult  march  of  sixty  miles  from  Campotanese 
through  mountainous  country.  Only  one  week  later 
the  French  advanced  posts  were  at  Reggio,  on  the  Strait 
of  Messina.  Of  the  army  beaten  at  Campotanese  but 
few  reached  Sicily.  The  Hereditary  Prince  crossed  the 
strait  a  few  hours  in  advance  of  the  French,  and  the 
British  from  Messina,  where  they  were  now  installed, 
ferried  over  some  two  or  three  thousand  in  all  of  the 
troops  of  Rosenheim  and  Damas. 

Regnier's  extraordinary  march  had  been  if  anything 
too  rapid,  for  few  of  the  flying  Neapolitans  had  been 
able  to  keep  in  front  of  their  pursuers,  and  most  had 
merely  dispersed  on  either  side  of  the  French  line  of 
march.  Every  village  that  Regnier  left  in  his  rear 
was  soon  after  his  passage  alive  with  disorganized 
militiamen  and  a  medley  of  fugitives  and  deserters  from 
the  Sicilian  regulars.  In  the  course  of  his  hurried 
flight  the  Hereditary  Prince  had  issued  proclamations 
at  every  village  urging  the  formation  of  corpi  volanti^ 
or  flying  corps,  and  the  elements  for  forming  these  thus 
came  conveniently  to  hand.     The  preparations  for  the 

1  Courier,  i.  99,  160. 


92  THE  NAPOLEONIC  EMPIRE  parti 

levy  of  irregular  corps  had  long  been  made  ;  the 
circumstances  had  now  arisen  that  were  to  make  them 
eiFective  ;  and  no  sooner  had  the  French  column  passed 
by  than  its  line  of  communications  was  immediately  cut. 

The  rising  of  Calabria  against  the  French,  of  which 
these  events  were  the  immediate  origin,  lasted  more 
than  four  years,  and  in  the  acts  of  ferocity  that  charac- 
terized it,  can  only  be  compared  to  the  Spanish  rising 
that  occurred  a  few  years  later.  The  two  events  have 
often  been  likened,  but  in  one  most  important  aspect 
were  totally  dissimilar.  The  rising  of  Spain  against 
the  French  was  national  in  its  scope,  that  of  Calabria 
was  not.  The  Calabrese  had  not  reached  a  sufficiently 
advanced  stage  of  political  evolution  to  have  any  national 
conceptions  or  feelings.  Their  personal  relations  to  a 
feudal  lord,  or  the  common  prejudices  and  interests  of 
a  village  community  were  the  predominant  factors  that 
shaped  their  political  sentiments.  Their  province  was 
the  wildest  of  the  kingdom  ;  the  high  ranges  of  the  Silla 
in  its  centre  were  covered  with  dense  forests  of  beech, 
oak,  chestnut,  and  pine,  a  nearly  impenetrable  mass  of 
verdure  in  summer,  of  snow  and  mud  in  winter. 
Roads  were  non-existent.  The  barbarous  and  desolate 
condition  of  this  remote  province  was  enhanced  by 
the  indelible  traces  it  bore  of  a  terrible  earthquake 
that  had  visited  it  in  1783.  This  calamity  had  in- 
volved the  loss  of  100,000  lives.  Reggio,  one  of  the 
principal  towns,  was  described  as  still  in  ruins  in  the 
year  18 13.  At  the  time  of  the  French  invasion  hardly 
any  of  the  churches  had  been  rebuilt. 

The  Calabrese  were  three  centuries  behind  their  time, 
and  might  well  be  called  the  "  savages  of  Europe."  ^ 
Yet   they  were    a    remarkable   and    individual    people. 

1  Rivarol,  i8. 


CHAP.  Ill  CONQUEST  OF  NAPLES  93 

They  were  generally  of  middle  stature,  muscular  and 
well-proportioned,  great  walkers  and  very  frugal.  One 
French  officer  thought  them  very  like  the  Spaniards, 
while  another,  of  Corsican  birth,  was  strongly  impressed 
with  their  resemblance  both  in  appearance  and  customs 
to  the  people  of  his  native  island.  They  certainly 
had  much  of  the  Corsican  spirit  of  vendetta  ;  in- 
dividuals, families,  and  even  villages  were  constantly 
at  open  warfare  with  one  another.  Beneath  the 
dark  cloak  with  which  they  draped  themselves  were 
concealed  the  daggers  and  other  arms  that  were  their 
constant  companions.  As  a  sign  of  approaching 
revenge  they  allowed  their  hair  and  beard  to  grow, 
and  when  thus  unkempt,  with  their  tall  conical  hats 
adorned  with  images  of  their  saints,  a  gun  on  their 
shoulder,  knives  stuck  in  their  belts,  the  appearance 
they  presented  was  equally  suggestive  of  romance  and 
of  homicide.  Internal  feud  was  the  normal  state  of 
Calabria. 

Apart  from  the  questions  of  daily  life,  disputes  of 
rivalry,  of  love,  of  money,  in  which  numerous  individuals 
were  engaged,  there  were  contentions  of  a  more 
political  character.  These  were  most  marked  where 
a  foreign  element  of  population  came  into  play.  The 
numerous  villages  whose  population  was  Albanian  were 
generally  more  prosperous  and  more  peacefully  inclined, 
and  had  occasionally  to  defend  themselves  in  arms 
against  lawless  neighbours.  More  progressive  yet  was 
a  small  but  important  section  of  the  community,  the 
trading  and  professional  circles  of  the  principal  towns, 
such  as  Monteleone,  Catanzaro,  and  Cosenza.  Here 
elements  of  education  and  of  political  thought  were  to 
be  found,  which  turned  to  hatred  of  Bourbon  rule.  In 
1799  this  became  republicanism,  in   1806  it  meant  a 


94  THE  NAPOLEONIC  EMPIRE  parti 

strong  inclination   to   meet   the   French  conquest  half 

way.       (jKiabl*^* 

The  method  adopted  by  the  French  for  administering 
the  province  was  to  form  a  commission  of  government 
in  each  town  or  village,  on  which  the  responsibility  of  y 
maintaining  order  was  placed  ;  where  there  was  no 
liberal  or  French  party  the  village  priest  was  frequently 
chosen  to  preside  over  this  body.  In  many  cases  the 
new  organization  represented  nothing  more  definite  than 
the  personal  enemies  of  the  pre-existing  authorities, 
and  their  sole  bond  with  the  invader  was  that  inspired 
by  their  desire  of  satisfying  their  personal  vendettas. 

Invasion  and  foreign  occupation  normally  excite 
restlessness  and  resentment ;  in  the  circumstances  of 
the  French  invasion  of  Calabria  there  was  much  to 
intensify  such  sentiments.  The  French  columns  had 
moved  free  from  the  shackle  of  waggon  transport,  and 
had  lived  on  the  country.  Although  the  army  was  in 
a  good  state  of  fighting  discipline,  it  was  otherwise 
demoralized  for  lack  of  administrative  care.  It  had 
entered  Naples  in  a  lamentable  condition,  "  with  less 
than  nothing,"  as  Segur  tersely  put  it.  It  had  no  pay, 
no  clothing,  and  no  boots.  Short  of  food,  short  of 
necessaries,  and  short  of  money,  the  troops  naturally 
provided  for  themselves  and  pillaged.  Joseph,  who 
may  be  suspected  of  attenuating  the  truth,  wrote  to 
Napoleon  that  the  disorder  of  a  few  soldiers,  especially 
of  the  Polish  legion,  had  filled  the  dearest  wish  of 
Queen  Mary  Caroline,  and  had  stirred  the  people  to 
revenge.  The  French  civil  officers,  who  quickly  followed 
the  military,  and  who  frequently  rivalled  the  former  in 
their  exactions,  rapacity,  and  contempt  for  the  feelings 
of  the  inhabitants,  added  to  the  hatred  with  which  a 
large  section  of  the  people  soon  regarded  the  invaders. 


CHAP.  Ill  CONQUEST  OF  NAPLES  95 

No  attempt  will  be  made  to  adopt  from  either 
French  or  Italian  writers  a  date  or  the  name  of  a 
locality  fixing  the  outbreak  of  the  rising  of  Calabria. 
There  was  a  gradual  though  rapid  transition  from  a 
state  of  criminal  lawlessness  before  the  French  invasion 
to  a  state  of  barbarous  warfare  after.  The  bands  of 
brigands  who  had  terrorized  the  country  before,  were 
transformed  into  patriotic  free  corps  loyally  fighting 
for  their  king  and  country,  while  the  royal  troops  that 
had  fled  before  the  French  were  now  transformed  into 
brigands  terrorizing  the  country.  On  the  other  hand 
the  peaceful  inhabitants  from  the  first  resented  the 
looting  propensities  of  the  French  troops  and  resorted 
to  armed  defence. 

From  a  strict  military  point  of  view,  however,  the 
situation  of  the  French  appeared  at  first  fairly  satis- 
factory. Duhesme,  with  a  supporting  column,  had 
followed  Regnier  south  from  Naples ;  the  large  garrison 
and  military  stores  of  Capua  had  been  surrendered. 
Gaeta  and  a  few  inconsiderable  forts  alone  remained 
unsubdued,  and  the  strength  of  the  army  of  occupation 
had  risen  to  over  40,000  men.  It  was  therefore  officially 
announced  to  the  inhabitants  of  the  capital  that  the 
*' comic"  defence  of  Calabria  was  at  an  end,  and  the 
new  proprietor  of  the  kingdom  of  Naples  prepared  to 
pay  a  visit  to  the  outlying  parts  of  the  dominions  he 
prematurely  accounted  his  own.^ 

But  already  fighting  more  severe  than  any  the 
French  had  yet  met  with  at  the  hands  of  the  armies 
of  Damas  and  Rosenheim  had  taken  place.  At 
Soveria  a  peasant  named  Carmine  Caligiuri  headed  the 
villagers  in  an  attack  on  a  French  detachment  which 
lost   fourteen   men.      Four   days  later  he   ambuscaded 

^  Morjitore,  March  21,  1806. 


96  THE  NAPOLEONIC  EMPIRE  parti 

a  considerable  French  column,  defeated  it  with  the  loss 
of  a  colonel  and  forty  men  killed,  and  captured  a  rich 
booty.  His  success  and  example  inspired  the  neigh- 
bouring villages,  and  soon  all  that  part  of  the  country 
was  up.  Some  of  the  chiefs  were  peasants,  others 
noblemen  and  landowners.  Some  were  prompted  by 
greed,  some  by  loyalty  ;  all  were  equally  imbittered 
by  the  conduct  of  the  French  commanders  and  soldiers. 
That  conduct  was  certainly  not  free  from  reproach. 
One  of  their  own  officers  wrote,  with  equal  candour  and 
terseness,  that  of  the  generals  those  who  were  young 
pursued  women,  and  those  who  were  old  money.  The 
rationless  soldiers  looted,  the  Poles  especially  showing 
great  lack  of  discipline.  At  Scigliano,  on  the  march  to 
Reggio,  a  detachment  of  fifty  men  was  left  behind. 
Their  behaviour  was  disorderly,  a  woman  was  outraged, 
the  inhabitants  took  arms,  and  the  French  were  nearly 
all  massacred.  Such  events  as  those  at  Soveria  and 
Scigliano, — and  there  were  many  similar  outbreaks, — 
were  met  by  the  French  generals  by  one  uniform 
method  of  retaliation, — the  sacking  and  burning  of  the 
offending  village  ;  and  every  such  operation  naturally 
resulted  in  increasing  the  troops  of  brigands  or  free 
companies  whom  the  French  had  to  face. 

While  Calabria  thus  balanced  between  acquiescence 
in  French  rule  and  general  uprising,  the  other  provinces 
of  the  kingdom  had  been  overrun  with  little  difficulty 
— with  the  exception  of  the  blockade  of  Gaeta,  that 
became  eventually  a  memorable  siege  ;  but  one  incident 
of  the  military  operations  outside  Calabria  merits  atten- 
tion,— the  capture  and  death  of  Rodio.^  '' 

1  A  somewhat  different  character  of  Rodio  from  that  given  here  may  be  found 
in  Rodino's  narrative,  Arch.  Star.  Nap.  vi.  259.  This  account,  however,  is  so 
markedly  partisan  and  inaccurate  that  for  the  present  purpose  it  has  been  nearly 
entirely  rejected. 


CHAP.  Ill  CONQUEST  OF  NAPLES  97 

Among  the  leaders  of  the  royahst  reaction  of  1799, 
few  had  rendered  greater  service  to  the  Crown,  and 
none  had  shown  greater  humanity,  than  Don  Giovanni 
Batista,  Marchese  Rodio.  He  was  a  man  of  birth,  of 
education,  of  discretion,  of  honour,  and  withal  zealously 
attached  to  the  Crown.  After  the  capture  of  Naples 
he  was  given  an  important  command,  and  did  what  was 
possible  to  repress  the  irregularities  of  the  capimassi, 
such  as  Sciarpa  and  Fra  Diavolo,  who  were  placed  under 
his  orders.^  When  the  military  occupation  of  Puglia 
by  the  French  occurred,  Rodio  was  specially  detached 
from  his  post  as  Preside  or  Governor  of  Calabria  Citra, 
and  deputed  to  represent  the  Sicilian  Government  at 
St.  Cyr's  headquarters.  The  task  was  an  onerous  one, 
and  he  appears  to  have  discharged  it  faithfully  and 
well.  Yet  a  man  so  placed  could  not  fail  to  make 
many  enemies,  and  he  appears  to  have  had  bitter  ones 
both  among  the  French  and  the  Neapolitans. 

At  the  beginning  of  the  year  1806  Rodio  was  in  the 
Abruzzi,  which  the  French  had  evacuated  three  months 
before,  strenuously  maintaining  the  royal  authority 
under  difficult  conditions.  On  the  13th  of  January 
he  was  sent  to  Aquila  to  organize  flying  corps,  and  a  few 
weeks  later,  on  Massena's  advance,  was  sent  to  Matera 
as  Governor.^  Towards  the  end  of  February  the  French 
columns  were  approaching  Basilicata,  and  Rodio's  posi- 
tion had  become  insecure.  He  remained  faithful  ^to 
his  duty  to  the  end,  however,  doing  his  utmost  to 
organize  resistance,    and    staying    at    his  post   so  long 

•'•  Rodio  figures  as  a  colonel  in  the  official  calendar  for  1805.  Helfert  states  that 
he  was  promoted  to  general's  rank  in  1799, — on  what  authority  does  not  appear. 
There  is,  however,  a  document  in  the  Archives  at  Naples  by  which  it  would  seem 
that  he  was  promoted  brigadier  on  Jan.  lo,  1806  {Guerra,  xxv.  2136). 

2  Arch.  Nap.  Guerra,  xxv.  2136,  Feb.  10,  1806.  This  date  weakens  UUoa's 
statement,  Intorno  alia  Storia^  192  j  at  page  201  this  author's  remarks  become  so 
obviously  extravagant  as  not  to  require  refutation. 

VOL.  I  H 


98  THE  NAPOLEONIC  EMPIRE  part  i 

that  he  was  finally  threatened  by  French  columns  in 
various  directions.  He  retreated  into  the  valley  of 
the  Basento.  The  invading  troops  operating  from 
Gravina  and  Matera  drove  him  down  that  valley 
towards  the  sea,  but  when  he  reached  the  little  town 
of  Pisticci  he  found  another  French  force  under 
General  Ottavj  blocking  his  way  at  Bernalda.  Here, 
on  the  8th  of  March,  he  surrendered  himself  an 
unconditional  prisoner  in  the  hands  of  the  French.-^ 

From  Bernalda  Rodio  was  sent  to  Naples  under 
close  guard.  Two  men  were  at  that  moment  respons- 
ible for  the  action  of  the  government  under  Joseph 
Bonaparte,  Marshal  Massena  and  the  head  of  the 
police  department,  Saliceti.  They  decided  to  have 
Rodio  tried  by  a  military  commission  on  the  truly 
extraordinary  charges  of  rebellion  and  incitement  to 
insurrection.^  What  prompted  this  action  it  is  im- 
possible to  say  precisely,  and  surmise  must  be  offered 
as  a  substitute  for  verified  fact.  It  appears  certain 
that  Massena  convened  the  military  court  at  Saliceti's 
prompting,  and  that  the  Minister  of  Police  was 
influenced  partly  by  political,  partly  by  personal 
considerations.  Politically  he  may  have  felt  bound  to 
defer  to  the  constantly  renewed  injunctions  of  the 
Emperor  from  Paris  that  vigorous  methods  and  a 
little  terrorism  at  the  outset  would  eventually  make  for 
the  pacification  of  Naples  ;  personally  there  was  the 
constant  pressure  of  the  group  of  Neapolitan  liberals 
and  ex-republicans  who  swarmed  about  the  new  Govern- 

^  Massena,  v.  177.  The  Monitor e  gives  Pomarico,  a  few  miles  north  of  Pisticci, 
as  the  scene  of  Rodio's  capture,  and  says  that  he  was  betrayed.  The  writer  of  the 
news,  presumably  a  Neapolitan  liberal,  displays  great  rancour  against  the  prisoner. 
Monitore,  March  21  and  25,  1806. 

2  This  was  not  the  first  military  commission  formed,  as  Greco  asserts ;  one  was 
assembled  a  week  earlier,  on  March  18. — Arch.  Nap.  Giustizia,  1806. 


CHAP.  Ill  CONQUEST  OF  NAPLES  99 

ment,  and  especially  about  the  chief  of  the  police  depart- 
ment. These  men  saw  in  Rodio  a  leader  of  the  opposite 
camp  whom  they  might  now  safely  hound  to  death,  thus 
avenging  the  execution  and  murder  of  so  many  of  their 
friends  and  relations  when  Ferdinand  had  conquered 
the  Parthenopean  Republic  in  1799. 

These  considerations,  however,  do  not  appear  to 
have  weighed  with  the  military  commission.  It  did 
honour  to  the  unfortunate  royal  Governor,  and  to 
itself,  by  promptly  acquitting  him.  Infuriated  at  this 
result,  a  mob  of  Rodio's  enemies  proceeded  to  Saliceti's 
and  Massena's  offices  with  loud  outcries.  The  result 
was  deplorable.  The  Marshal  and  the  Minister  decided 
to  order  a  new  trial.  A  fresh  military  commission  was 
appointed.  It  met  at  the  Castel  del  Uovo,  and  during 
the  three  hours  it  required  to  work  itself  up  to  con- 
viction point,  Rodio  defended  himself  bravely,  claimed 
that  he  had  surrendered  as  a  prisoner  of  war,  and 
demanded  the  treatment  of  a  soldier.  He  received 
it  only  in  the  form  of  his  sentence,  for  he  was  found 
guilty  and  condemned  to  be  shot  on  the  following  day, 
the  30th  of  March. 

Thus  was  judicially  murdered,  for  doing  his  duty, 
perhaps  the  most  worthy,  most  faithful,  most  honour- 
able, and  certainly  most  unfortunate  of  the  servants  of 
Ferdinand  and  Mary  Caroline.  What  some  of  the 
French  officers  serving  in  Naples  thought  on  the  subject 
may  be  recorded.  When  the  "  deplorable  news  "  was 
communicated  to  Segur  he  described  it  as  an  "  ugly 
stroke  attributed  to  Saliceti."  General  Dumas  wrote  : 
"  The  execution  of  the  Marchese  Rodio,  who  had 
surrendered  to  General  Duhesme's  forces,  caused  the 
indignation  of  all  honourable  men,  and  the  exasperation 
of  all   those   who   were   still    secretly   attached   to  the 


100  THE  NAPOLEONIC  EMPIRE  part  i 

ancient  Court."  ^  Courier  was  even  less  reserved  in  his 
comments  ;  speaking  of  Rodio  he  wrote  :  ^'  His  death 
passes  here  as  a  murder.  .  .  .  Every  one  was  horror- 
struck,  perhaps  even  more  the  French  than  the 
NeapoHtans."  Joseph  is  said  to  have  been  ignorant 
of  his  Minister's  proceedings,  and,  after  the  event  ex- 
pressed regret  for  the  course  taken.  It  is  difficult, 
however,  after  reading  the  correspondence  between 
him  and  the  Emperor,  not  to  retain  some  little 
doubt  as  to  whether  the  French  Prince  did  not  in 
reality  merely  shut  his  eyes  to  the  proceedings  of  his 
Ministers. 

Satisfied  that  the  security  of  Naples  was  assured  in 
the  keeping  of  such  men  as  Massena  and  Saliceti,  the 
French  Prince  determined  to  visit  the  province  of 
Calabria.  So  local  and  unimportant  did  the  disturb- 
ances in  that  province  as  yet  seem,  that  his  escort  con- 
sisted of  only  four  companies  of  light  infantry.  On 
the  3rd  of  April  Joseph  left  Naples,  accompanied  by 
Count  Miot,  acting  Minister  of  the  Interior,  and  by 
General  Mathieu  Dumas,  acting  Minister  of  War. 
His  object  was  to  ascertain  for  himself  what  the  state 
of  the  country  was,  how  far  he  might  hope  to  win 
support,  in  what  directions  he  might  succeed  in  intro- 
ducing a  better  system  of  government. 

Joseph's  zeal  to  improve  the  conditions  of  the 
people  and  to  repress  injustice  and  exaction  among 
the  soldiers  and  functionaries  is  beyond  question,  and 
among  his  Ministers  were  men  well  able  to  second 
him,  men  whose  ability  was  equalled  by  their  integrity, 
such  as  Dumas  and  Roederer.  At  Naples  he  had 
insisted  on  the  shooting  of  French  soldiers  for  criminal 
disorder,  and  at   one  of  his  first  stops  in  Calabria,  at 

^   Dumas,  Precis  milh.  xv.  130. 


CHAP.  Ill  CONQUEST  OF  NAPLES  loi 

Lagonegro,  he  ordered  two  commissariat  officials  to 
be  handed  over  to  a  court-martial  for  robbing  the 
inhabitants.  Thus  heralded,  representing  power,  excit- 
ing curiosity,  Joseph  met  with  a  wonderfully  good 
reception  from  many  of  the  villages  on  his  route,  and 
at  one  or  two  of  the  large  towns  demonstrations  of 
welcome  were  organized  that  might  nearly  be  described 
as  enthusiastic.  At  Cosenza,  the  capital  of  Calabria, 
Napoleon's  brother  received  an  ovation.  Segur,  who 
was  one  of  his  staff",  has  left  a  lively  account  of  it.  The 
whole  population  of  the  town  and  neighbourhood  turned 
out  decked  in  their  gayest  attire.  They  appeared 
enraptured,  though  it  may  be  doubted  whether  this 
represented  much  more  than  their  love  for  a  festa 
and  their  racial  mobility  of  intellect.  Their  joy 
appeared  to  Segur  as  unfeigned  as  it  was  difficult  to 
credit. 

At  a  spot  just  beyond  Cosenza  an  impressive  and 
highly  characteristic  scene  awaited  the  French  Prince 
and  his  attendants.  A  mountain  village  had  sent  its 
men  to  greet  the  new  ruler.  The  track  led  through 
dense  forest,  and  there  unexpectedly  a  double  line  of 
dark,  swarthy,  athletic  figures  lined  the  pathway  on 
either  side.  Clad  in  their  draped  cloaks,  tall  ribboned 
hats,  and  thonged  buckskins  they  looked  picturesque, — 
and  formidable  from  the  pistols  and  daggers  in  their 
belts.  Any  apprehension  the  French  might  have  felt 
was  quickly  allayed,  for  they  explained  the  friendly 
nature  of  their  errand  by  pointing  to  their  guns  thrown 
on  the  sward  behind  them. 

One  more  scene  witnessed  by  Joseph  on  his  tour 
through  Calabria  must  detain  us, —  the  most  curious, 
perhaps  the  most  impressive  of  all.  The  way  led 
through  one  of  those  unfortunate  villages  on  which  the 


102  THE  NAPOLEONIC  EMPIRE  parti 

extreme  sentence  of  war  had  been  passed  and  executed 
by  the  French  commanders,  —  execute  militatrement 
was  the  semi-technical,  euphemistic  term.  Desola- 
tion reigned  where  the  village  street  had  once  been  ; 
the  church  alone  was  left  standing.  What  remained 
of  the  population,  men,  women,  and  children,  clad  in 
rags,  their  heads  encircled  with  crowns  of  twisted 
thorns,  knelt  in  the  ashes  of  their  homes,  covering 
their  heads  with  dust  as  the  conquerors  passed.  Their 
rude  and  pathetic  symbolism  was  more  eloquent  than 
the  redundant  platitudes  with  which  the  authorities  of 
Cosenza  had  greeted  Joseph,  and  the  Prince  and  his 
escort  were  profoundly  moved. 

It  was  while  on  this  journey  through  Calabria  that 
Joseph  received  his  brother's  instructions  to  assume 
the  royal  title.  Having  proceeded  as  far  as  Reggio, 
therefore,  he  thence  turned  back  towards  Naples  to 
make  a  solemn  entry  in  his  capacity  of  king. 

Having  thus  arrived  at  the  official  beginning  of 
Joseph's  reign,  it  will  not  be  improper  to  take  advantage 
of  such  a  notable  occasion  for  giving  a  portrait  of  the 
new-made  monarch  of  Naples,  or  of  the  Two  Sicilies, 
as  he  chose  to  style  himself.  King  Joseph  bore  no  very 
striking  resemblance  to  the  brother  who  had  crowned 
him.  In  face  and  feature  there  was  some  likeness  ; 
the  intelligent  forehead,  finely  cut  nose,  well-shaped 
eyes  and  mouth  were  there,  but  the  breadth  and 
strength  of  Napoleon  were  lacking  in  Joseph.  He 
was  a  man  of  considerable  intellectual  ability,  and 
showed  his  intelligence  in  nothing  more  than  in  his 
blind  devotion  and  unquestioning  obedience  to  his 
younger  brother.  In  his  correspondence  with  Napoleon 
Joseph's  tone  never  attains  regal  independence  and 
dignity,  but   remains  at  the  level  of  an  average   pro- 


CHAP.  Ill  CONQUEST  OF  NAPLES  103 

vincial  governor.  Indeed  he  was  little  else.  His 
docility  and  subservience  were  as  noteworthy  as  the 
imperiousness  of  his  brother's  exhortations,  counsels, 
and  commands.  In  opinion  he  long  continued  a 
moderate  republican,  realizing  and  taking  pride  in 
the  immense  benefit  conferred  on  his  country  and 
Europe  by  the  great  Revolution,  applying  the  excel- 
lent qualities  of  his  heart  and  head  to  extending  the 
bounds  of  good  government  and  justice.  He  had 
many  of  the  attributes  of  a  good  and  a  wise  man,  but 
they  were  nearly  entirely  neutralized  by  a  weakness 
that  made  of  him  politically  little  more  than  the  docile 
tool  of  his  brother,  and  morally  little  more  than  a 
supine  sensualist.  His  convictions  remained  repub- 
lican when  his  brother  was  already  grasping  the  Im- 
perial diadem  ;  yet  they  failed  the  instant  a  crown 
was  pressed  on  his  acceptance.  His  conscience  re- 
volted from  the  exactions  and  robberies  that  disgraced 
so  many  of  the  French  generals,  yet  his  repubHcan 
sentiments  were  not  proof  against  the  regal  revenues 
that  afforded  him  the  means  of  gratifying  his  extremely 
regal  appetites.  He  was  just,  mild  almost  to  shyness, 
and  bore  his  royal  dignity  with  awkwardness.  He  was 
the  most  unwarlike  of  men,  although  he  had  in  the 
early  days  of  the  Empire  preferred  his  title  of  Colonel 
to  that  of  Prince.  In  the  cause  of  peace  he  came 
nearer  asserting  a  personal  influence  than  in  any  other, 
and  his  persistent  diplomacy  had  nearly  avoided  the 
rupture  between  France  and  England  in  the  year 
1803. 

His  wife  was  an  unpretentious  young  woman, 
Julie  Clary,  whose  more  attractive  sister  had  been 
an  early  flame  of  Napoleon,  later  marrying  Berna- 
dotte    and    becoming    Queen    of   Sweden.      To    Julie 


104  THE  NAPOLEONIC  EMPIRE  parti 

Joseph  wrote,  shortly  after  his  elevation  to  the 
throne,  a  letter  that  shows  very  clearly  one  side  of 
his  character  : — 

.  .  .  Remind  mother  that  at  every  period  of  my  life,  as  an 
obscure  citizen,  as  a  farmer,  as  a  legislator,  I  have  always  cheer- 
//  fully  sacrificed  pleasure  to  duty.  I  am  not  one  to  underesti- 
mate an  elevated  station  or  to  slumber  in  it ;  for  me  it  means, 
it  shall  always  mean,  duties^  and  not  rights.  .  .  .  Justice  demands 
that  I  should  make  this  people  as  happy  as  the  scourge  of  war 
will  permit. 

The  new  King's  tour  through  Calabria  showed 
clearly  how  benevolent  were  his  sentiments  towards  the 
people  of  Naples,  and  how  distinctly  he  perceived  the 
abuses  of  French  rule.  Thus  he  wrote  to  Napoleon 
that  he  found  "  the  people  as  well  disposed  as  possible; 
wherever  honest  commandants  have  been  established 
some  time,  the  people  willingly  give  whatever  they  are 
asked  for."  But  three  days  later  he  found  at  Barletta 
a  precisely  opposite  state  of  affairs,  dishonesty  and 
official  rapine  prevalent.  The  civil  prefect,  the  sub- 
prefect,  and  the  general  in  command  were  all  rascals, 
and  were  all  dismissed  from  their  functions. 

Among  the  matters  in  which  the  opinions  of  the 
brothers  did  not  exactly  coincide  was  that  of  the  basis 
on  which  the  people  of  Naples  should  be  governed. 
Joseph,  his  ears  full  of  the  adulations  of  Court 
flatterers,  and  of  more  noisy  than  sincere  popular 
demonstrations,  gave  free  rein  to  his  instinctive  sense 
of  justice  and  benevolence.  But  to  Napoleon  such 
sentiments  as  these  were  mere  moonshine.  "You 
do  not  understand  the  people  generally,"  he  wrote, 
"  and  even  less  the  Italian  people.  You  attach  far 
too  much  importance  to  the  demonstrations  they  give 
you.    .    .    ."       And     on     another     occasion  :     "  The 


CHAP.  Ill  CONQUEST  OF  NAPLES  105 

Neapolitans  are  behaving  well  ;  there  is  nothing  ex- 
traordinary in  that ;  you  have  spared  them,  and  they 
expected  worse  things  from  a  man  at  the  head  of 
50,000  troops.  You  are  mild,  moderate,  you  have  a 
kind  disposition,  and  are  appreciated  ;  but  from  that 
to  a  national  sentiment,  to  a  rational  and  interested 
submission,  is  a  far  cry." 

Two  of  the  new  King's  principal  advisers,  Massena 
and  Saliceti,  were  as  firm  believers  in  a  policy  of  vigour 
and  repression  as  was  the  Emperor,  and  their  stroke 
at  the  unfortunate  Rodio  was  probably  largely  founded 
on  terrorist  considerations.  In  the  first  days  of  the 
French  occupation  of  the  city,  when  soldiers  were 
nightly  assassinated  in  the  streets  by  the  lazzaroni,  the 
Marshal  had  been  anxious  to  strengthen  the  forts  of  St. 
Elmo  and  Castelnuovo,  and  from  them  to  dominate 
and  terrorize  the  capital ;  but  Joseph  declined  to  follow 
this  course.  He  was,  however,  quickly  disillusioned, 
for  the  first  few  prosperous  weeks  were  rapidly  coming 
to  a  close,  the  real  struggle  for  the  possession  of  Naples 
was  only  just  about  to  open. 

The  defence  against  the  French  invaders  had  so  far 
done  little  to  enhance  the  prestige  of  the  dispossessed 
Government.  The  military  prowess  of  a  German 
soldier  of  fortune,  Lieutenant-General  the  Prince  of 
Hesse-Philipsthal,  was  partly  to  retrieve  the  honour 
of  the  Sicilian  arms.  To  this  officer  had  been  in- 
trusted the  defence  of  the  principal  fortress  of  the 
kingdom,  and  his  obstinate  and  nearly  successful 
resistance  to  the  French  for  a  time  threatened  disaster 
to  the  whole  enterprise  of  the  invaders. 

The  name  of  Gaeta  is  venerable ;  its  rocky  pro- 
montory has  been  honoured  in  the  two  great  epics  of 
the  Ancients.     The  town,  built  on  the  site  immortalized 


// 


io6  THE  NAPOLEONIC  EMPIRE  parti 

by  Homer  and  Virgil,  contained  some  8000  people,  and 
was  situated  on  a  hilly  peninsula,  of  which  the  highest 
point  faced  the  mainland.  A  low  neck  of  sand  and 
rock,  rather  more  than  a  quarter  of  a  mile  wide,  formed 
the  only  approach,  and  tier  after  tier  of  fortifications 
rose  from  it  towards  the  Tower  of  Orlando,  that  marked 
the  highest  point,  400  feet  above  sea -level.  The 
batteries  of  Gaeta  swept,  raked,  plunged,  and  converged 
on  to  this  approach  in  a  way  that  made  the  position 
very  formidable.  A  further  element  of  strength 
arose  from  the  fact  that  the  peninsula  broadened 
immediately  to  a  width  about  double  that  of  the 
neck,  so  that  half  of  the  batteries  that  faced  the 
mainland  were  protected  by  the  sea,  while  the  guns 
placed  in  them  could  be  trained  on  the  neck.  The 
total  development  of  the  fortifications  that  faced  the 
mainland  was  about  1300  yards,  and  most  of  this 
length  was  guarded  by  two,  and  in  places  three,  lines 
of  bastions,  with  numerous  outworks  and  covered  ways. 
Some  of  the  works  were  cut  out  of  the  granite  of  the 
hill,  and  some  were  placed  at  a  considerable  height,  the 
Breach  Battery  being  1 50  feet  above  sea-level,  while  the 
great  Queen's  Battery  was  even  higher,  and  commanded 
everything  within  range.  The  lofty  position  of  many 
of  these  works  was,  however,  in  one  way  a  source  of 
weakness,  for  it  exposed  the  base  of  the  bastions  to  the 
fire  of  a  besieger's  guns,  thus  rendering  breaching  more 
easy.  At  the  back  and  south  side  of  the  hill  on  which 
stood  the  Tower  of  Orlando  nestled  the  closely  packed 
houses  of  the  town,  many  of  which  were  thus  sheltered 
from  any  possible  bombardment.  The  small  port  ar 
the  further  extremity  of  the  town  could  be  just  reached 
by  batteries  along  the  coast,  but  as  a  set-off  the  bay 
afforded   excellent  anchorage,  and    communication    by 


CHAP.  Ill  CONQUEST  OF  NAPLES  107 

sea,  though  it  might  be  made  difficult,  could  hardly  be 
made  impossible. 

Strategically  the  position  of  Gaeta  was  very  im- 
portant, for  it  lay  just  off  the  road  that  led  from 
Naples  to  northern  Italy  through  Rome,  and  was 
therefore  a  perpetual  menace  to  the  French  line  of 
communications.  From  the  former  city  it  was  forty- 
seven  miles  distant,  from  the  latter  ninety. 

The  Prince  of  Hesse  had  plenty  of  men  and  plenty 
of  guns  to  defend  Gaeta,  but  their  quality  was  rather 
doubtful.  Through  January  he  continuously  received 
batches  of  recruits  who  could  not  have  been  much  less 
dangerous  to  the  fortress  than  the  French  themselves. 
The  prison  dregs  sent  from  Naples  and  from  Sicily  to 
Gaeta  had  little  other  notion  of  military  service  than 
burning,  stealing,  and  rioting.  The  4000  men  that 
had  been  assembled  by  the  time  the  French  crossed 
the  frontier  would  have  probably  disbanded  or  become 
an  easy  prey  to  the  enemy  had  it  not  been  for  the 
magnetic  energy  and  courage  of  their  commander. 

The  Prince  of  Hesse  was  a  short  man,  with  a  red  face 
and  aquiline  nose  ;  he  was  an  eccentric,  hard-drinking, 
well-trained  soldier  of  fortune.  An  English  officer 
who  knew  him,  speaking  of  his  influence  over  his 
wretched  soldiers,  said,  "  his  familiar  buffoonery  and 
his  daring  example  mastered  their  fears,  their  affection, 
and  their  admiration."  ^  From  the  day  on  which  the 
French  first  made  their  appearance  in  front  of  the 
fortress,  the  Prince  of  Hesse  stationed  himself  at  the 
famous  Breach  Battery  with  the  determination  of  re- 
maining there  till  the  siege  ended.  He  is  then  said  to 
have  gravely  handed  the  key  of  a  convenient  cellar  to 
the  Bishop  of  Gaeta,  whom  he  solemnly  adjured  to  allow 

^  Bunbury,  234. 


io8  THE  NAPOLEONIC  EMPIRE  parti 

him  but  one  bottle  a  day.  Whether  this  temperate 
resolve  was  closely  adhered  to  appears  doubtful, 
for  at  times  he  behaved  somewhat  extravagantly ; 
as  on  one  occasion  when  the  French  sappers  had 
pushed  close  under  the  walls  of  the  fortress  and 
the  Prince  ran  up  on  to  the  rampart  and,  through  a 
speaking-trumpet,  bawled  out  to  the  enemy,  "  Gaeta 
is  not  Ulm  !     Hesse  is  not  Mack  !  " 

About  the  time  that  the  French  entered  Naples, 
a  small  detachment  appeared  before  Gaeta  and  de- 
manded its  surrender  (February  13).  This  summons 
was  answered  by  a  cannon  shot,  and  the  invaders 
retired,  leaving  a  small  force  in  the  neighbouring 
hills  to  observe  the  fortress.  In  March  the  siege 
began  in  earnest  ;  Marshal  Massena  personally  made 
a  reconnaissance  and  placed  General  Lacour  in  com- 
mand of  the  attack.  The  French  took  possession 
of  the  little  fishing  village  of  Mola  di  Gaeta,  and 
established  themselves  on  the  rising  ground  to  the  east 
of  the  neck  leading  to  the  fortress.  The  field  artillery 
was  strengthened  by  heavier  pieces  from  Capua  and 
Naples,  batteries  were  hastily  thrown  up,  and  on  the 
21st  of  March  Gaeta  was  summoned  to  surrender  for 
the  second  time.  The  Prince  of  Hesse  replied  that 
his  answer  would  be  found  in  the  breach  ;  and  so  the 
besiegers'  guns  opened  fire.  They  were  nearly  im- 
mediately silenced  by  the  overpowering  weight  of 
metal  thrown  by  the  eighty  pieces  the  Prince  of  Hesse 
had  massed  on  the  fortress'  land  front.  Undaunted 
by  their  failure,  the  French  set  to  work  repairing  the 
damage  to  their  works,  dug  their  trenches  along  the 
hill  slopes  nearer  and  nearer  the  neck,  and  brought  up 
new  guns  to  strengthen  their  batteries.  On  the  5  th 
of  April  a  new  effort  was  made  to  persuade  Gaeta  into 


CHAP.  Ill  CONQUEST  OF  NAPLES  109 

surrender,  and  once  more  the  besiegers'  fire  was 
promptly  and  completely  crushed  by  that  of  the 
defenders. 

So  far  the  French  siege  operations  had  not  been 
carried  out  on  anything  like  the  scale  necessary  for 
reducing  a  fortress  of  the  first  class.  Men,  guns,  and 
ammunition  were  scarce,  and  all  the  reserves  that  could 
be  disposed  of  were  being  drained  by  the  operations  in 
Calabria.  It  had  been  hoped,  from  the  early  experi- 
ences of  the  war,  that  a  demonstration,  accompanied  by 
a  warm  cannonade,  would  suffice  to  reduce  Gaeta. 
The  vigour  and  complete  success  with  which  the 
fortress  had  repelled  the  two  attacks  delivered,  immedi- 
ately changed  the  aspect  of  affairs,  and  made  it  a 
matter  of  first  necessity  to  proceed  to  its  reduction 
in  accordance  with  all  the  forms  of  the  military  art. 
General  Campredon,  one  of  the  best  engineers  in  the 
Imperial  service,  was  placed  in  charge  of  the  siege 
works  ;  he  decided  to  push  trenches  and  batteries  down 
from  the  hills  right  on  to  the  neck  and  to  the  base  of 
the  bastions,  proceeding,  if  necessary,  to  the  conclusion 
of  battering  a  breach  and  pouring  in  a  storming  column. 
The  proposed  operations  were  difficult,  and  it  was 
realized  that  they  would  require  some  time.  The 
works  of  the  besiegers  had  so  far  been  carried  along 
the  lines  of  two  small  hills,  the  plateau  of  Atratina  and 
the  Monte  Secco,  the  latter  about  600  yards  distant 
from  the  fortress.  It  now  became  necessary  to  work 
down  from  the  Monte  Secco  on  to  the  neck,  where  not 
only  would  the  besiegers  be  exposed  to  the  plunging  fire 
of  the  Queen's  Battery,  but  where  the  ground  was  of 
such  a  rocky  nature  that  it  was  necessary  to  transport 
from  a  distance  all  the  material  for  the  heavy  revete- 
ments  of  the  trenches. 


no  THE  NAPOLEONIC  EMPIRE  parti 

While  the  French  toiled  at  their  works  and  kept  up 
a  constant  fire  on  the  port  from  their  coast  batteries, 
the  Prince  of  Hesse  for  a  while  suffered  more  appre- 
hension from  within  than  from  without.  His  troops 
were  so  bad  that  he  could  not  venture  on  sorties.  He 
was  more  concerned  to  retain  his  men  within  the  walls 
than  to  lead  them  without,  for  deserters  were  numerous. 
Of  those  who  thus  escaped  from  the  fortress,  a  con- 
siderable part  were  returned  by  the  French  commanders 
to  the  prisons  from  which  they  had  been  dragged  by 
Ferdinand  to  save  their  country. 

Although  communications  by  sea  were  open,  it  was 
long  before  the  garrison  of  Gaeta  received  the  supplies 
and  munitions  that  its  situation  called  for.  In  vain 
Hesse  appealed  to  the  Hereditary  Prince  for  the  means 
of  clothing  and  arming  his  soldiers.  Despairing  of 
obtaining  assistance  from  his  own  Government,  he 
turned  eagerly  to  the  commander  of  a  British  fleet  that 
had  now  arrived  in  Neapolitan  waters.  Sir  Sidney 
Smith.  Through  April  and  May  the  Governor  of 
Gaeta  addressed  numerous  demands  for  food  and  muni- 
tions to  the  British  Admiral,  and  eventually  received 
help. 

Smith,  not  attending  very  strictly  to  the  instructions 
under  which  Lord  Collingwood  had  dispatched  him 
to  Palermo,  had  fallen  in  with  the  projects  of  Mary 
Caroline.  He  had  taken  on  his  four  men-of-war 
the  guerilla  chiefs  or  capimassi  whom  she  wanted 
disembarked  at  various  favourable  points  along  the 
coast  of  Calabria  to  foster  the  insurrectionary  move- 
ment. It  was  unfortunate  that  Sidney  Smith  should 
have  fallen  in  with  this  scheme,  unfortunate  that  the 
blandishments  of  Mary  Caroline  and  the  grant  of  full 
powers  from  the  Sicilian   Court  should  have  led  him 


CHAP.  Ill  CONQUEST  OF  NAPLES  iii 


•s^ 


to  act  contrary  to  the  spirit  of  his  instructions  and 
against  the  opinion  of  the  English  military  officers  at 
Messina,  for  he  thus  became  closely  connected  with 
perhaps  the  most  desperate  and  most  atrocious  of  all 
the  freebooters  for  which  the  kingdom  of  Naples  was 
for  so  many  centuries  renowned,  the  illustrious  Fra 
Diavolo. 

Colonel  Michele  Pezza,  as  he  was  officially,  and  only 
officially,  styled,  was  of  humble  origin  ;  he  was  born 
at  Itri,  a  few  miles  north  of  Gaeta,  about  the  year 
1770.  His  youth  was  criminal,  and  his  good  fortune 
such  that  however  outrageous  his  misdeeds,  however 
desperate  his  position,  he  always  escaped  capture  and 
prison.  In  the  popular  imagination  only  the  devil  or 
a  monk  could  be  thus  gifted,  and  therefore  Pezza  soon 
became  known  as  Fra  Diavolo.  Under  that  name  he 
rapidly  acquired  reputation,  influence,  and  a  large  circle 
of  followers.  In  1799,  under  a  promise  of  amnesty  from 
the  Government,  he  became  an  official  instead  of  a  private 
freebooter,  and  led  one  of  the  free  corps  that  followed 
the  flag  of  Cardinal  Ruffo.  Even  in  that  marvellous 
assemblage  of  ruffians  and  cut-throats  Fra  Diavolo's 
remarkable  qualities  made  themselves  felt,  and  his  band 
was  pronounced  by  General  Bourcard,  who  had  nominal 
control  of  all  the  masse,  as  the  most  undisciplined 
and  insubordinate,  "  committing  the  most  monstrous 
misdeeds."  -^ 

At  the  close  of  the  troubles  of  the  year  1799  the 
Government  managed  to  get  rid  of  the  services  of  this 
brigand  whom  it  had  decorated  with  the  title  of 
Colonel.  He  withdrew,  on  his  profits,  to  live  in 
dignified    retirement    at    his    birthplace,     and     thence 

1  "  .  .   .   Commettendo  i  piu  enormi  attentati." — Bourcard's  report,  ^rc^.  Nap. 
Guerra,  xxv.  6o2. 


112  THE  NAPOLEONIC  EMPIRE  parti 

importuned  the  Government  for  the  payment  of  large 
sums  which  he  claimed  were  due  to  him  for  the  sub- 
sistence of  his  men  in  the  course  of  the  campaign. 
In  this  he  was  unsuccessful,  but  during  the  next 
few  years  he  appears  to  have  been  the  terror  of 
the  country-side,  and  to  have  been  engaged  in  more 
than  one  homicidal  fray.  In  1806,  when  Mary  Caro- 
line was  looking  about  in  despair  for  some  means 
of  defending  the  kingdom,  this  ruffian  was  once 
more  called  to  the  assistance  of  the  throne,  and  he 
received  instructions  to  form  a  flying  corps.  He 
apparently  did  not  succeed  in  doing  this,  but  followed 
the  retreat  of  the  Court  to  Palermo.  The  arrival  of 
Sidney  Smith,  however,  together  with  the  necessity  of 
giving  Gaeta  some  assistance,  appeared  an  opportunity 
for  the  further  utilization  of  his  services. 

Sidney  Smith  sailed  leisurely  along  the  coast  of 
Calabria  landing  capimassi^  issuing  proclamations,  and 
communicating  with  and  encouraging  the  insurgents. 
Fra  Diavolo,  his  three  brothers,  and  another  well- 
known  brigand,  by  name  Guariglia,  appear  to  have  been 
landed,  and  to  have  made  a  short  raid,  although  the 
Sicilians  they  commanded  were  very  short  of  arms. 
Eventually  the  English  squadron  reached  Gaeta,  into 
which  it  threw  provisions,  four  heavy  ship's  guns,  a 
few  English  gunners,  and  Fra  Diavolo.  The  British 
Admiral  further  organized  a  small  squadron  of  gun 
vessels  under  the  orders  of  Captain  Richardson  that 
contributed  greatly  to  the  defence  by  blockading  a 
similar  French  flotilla  in  the  mouth  of  the  Garigliano. 
From  Gaeta  Sidney  Smith  sailed  -south  once  more, 
threatening  the  French  at  various  points.  At  Ischia 
and  Procida  he  was  beaten  off  by  the  shore  batteries, 
but  he  made  a  demonstration  in  the  Bay  of  Naples  with 


CHAP.  Ill  CONQUEST  OF  NAPLES  113 

six  large  and  a  number  of  small  ships  on  the  very  day  on 
which  Joseph  made  his  solemn  entry  as  King  of  Naples. 
That  night,  as  the  city  illuminated  in  honour  of  its  new 
monarch,  the  British  surprised  the  small  garrison  of 
Capri  and  established  themselves  in  that  commanding 
and  threatening  position. 

Owing  to  Sidney  Smith's  intervention  the  Prince 
of  Hesse  was  now  prepared  to  meet  the  more  formid- 
able French  attack  with  renewed  vigour.  He  deter- 
mined to  make  what  use  he  could  of  the  irregular 
leaders  sent  to  him,  and  issued  a  proclamation  offering 
pay  at  the  rate  of  three  carlins  a  day  to  all  those 
enrolling  in  the  free  corps,  together  with  a  full  amnesty 
for  any  and  all  crimes  up  to  then  committed  by  these 
patriotic  volunteers.  Fra  Diavolo,  at  the  head  of  a 
considerable  body  of  these  irregulars,  was  dispatched 
to  the  mouth  of  the  Garigliano,  where  he  succeeded  in 
effecting  a  landing.  He  raided  the  country  on  the 
French  lines  of  communication.  For  a  few  days  he 
proceeded  without  interference,  but  later  was  driven 
back  into  the  fortress  again.  Debarred  from  pursuing 
his  lucrative  profession  outside  the  city,  he  turned  his 
attention  to  what  might  be  done  profitably  within  its 
walls,  and  early  in  May  proposed  to  the  French  com- 
manders that  he  should,  for  a  pecuniary  consideration, 
place  them  in  possession  of  one  of  the  gates  of  the 
fortress.  The  betrayer  was  betrayed  ;  the  Prince  of 
Hesse  had  him  arrested  and  shipped  to  Palermo,  where 
this  ruffian  was  received  with  becoming  sympathy, — at 
all  events  his  services  were  very  soon  again  requisitioned 
by  the  Sicilian  Government. 

Deprived  for  the  moment  of  the  co-operation  of 
Colonel  Pezza,  the  commandant  of  Gaeta  was  able  to 
devote  greater  attention  to  the  enemy  outside  the  walls. 

VOL.  I  I 


114  THE  NAPOLEONIC  EMPIRE  parti 

On  the  13th  of  May,  and  again  two  days  later,  sorties 
were  made,  the  latter  commanded  by  Captain  Richard- 
son. The  French  were  surprised,  some  guns  were 
spiked,  and  a  few  prisoners  were  made.  But  towards 
the  end  of  May  the  French  troops,  that  had  up  till  then 
never  totalled  more  than  4000  men,  began  to  receive 
considerable  reinforcements,  and  the  works  progressed 
fast.  Sidney  Smith's  fleet  and  Richardson's  flotilla, 
however,  still  kept  Gaeta  free  by  sea,  and  the  sick  and 
wounded  were  now  regularly  removed  to  Sicily,  fresh 
men  being  introduced  to  replace  them. 

The  British  Admiral  did  not  confine  his  eflx>rts  to 
the  military  sphere,  but  tried  to  damage  his  enemy  by 
political  weapons  as  well.  Among  the  numerous  pro- 
clamations he  issued  was  one  in  which  freedom  to  trade 
with  all  ports  in  British  occupation  was  promised  to 
Neapolitan  vessels  flying  Ferdinand's  flag  ;  by  others  he 
incited  the  foreign  troops  in  the  French  service,  especi- 
ally a  battalion  of  blacks  from  San  Domingo,  to  desert 
the  Imperial  colours. 

In  the  early  part  of  June  the  French  trenches  had 
been  driven  half  across  the  neck,  up  to  about  200 
yards  of  the  glacis,  and  over  100  heavy  guns  were  in 
position  ready  to  open  fire.  But  though  the  besiegers' 
artillery  was  as  yet  silent,  awaiting  the  hour  for  the 
final  bombardment,  that  of  the  defenders  kept  up  a 
heavy  and  constant  fire  that  cost  the  French  many 
lives,  among  others  that  of  General  Vallongue,  killed 
while  directing  the  work  of  the  sappers  in  the  most 
advanced  parallel.  Reinforcements  were  constantly 
arriving,  and  on  the  28  th  of  June  the  French  force 
amounted  to  8000  men.  On  that  day  Marshal 
Massena,  impatient  of  the  delay  that  had  for  five 
months  neutralized  a  considerable  part  of  the  army  of 


CHAP.  Ill  CONQUEST  OF  NAPLES  115 

occupation,  arrived  to  take  personal  charge  of  the 
operations.  It  was  indeed  time  that  Gaeta  fell,  for  at 
that  very  moment  a  new  and  unexpected  danger  was 
menacing  the  French  arms,  and  threatened  the  complete 
destruction  of  Regnier's  army  in  distant  Calabria. 

Principal  Authorities  consulted 

MSS. 

Arch,  di  Stato,  Guerra,  xxv.  602,  2136  ;  the  same,  Corpi  Folanti,  145, 
224  :  miscellaneous  papers  on  Rodio  and  Fra  Dlavolo  ;  1071,  1974,  2132  : 
cruise  of  Sidney  Smith  and  siege  of  Gaeta. 

Arch,  di  Stato,  Giustiziay  1806  :  miscellaneous  papers  on  disorders, 
recruiting,  courts-martial,  siege  of  Gaeta,  Rodio,  etc. 

Brit.  Admiralty,  Medit.  32  :  reports  on  affairs  in  Calabria  from  British 
agents  at  Messina,  notably  by  Cancellier,  a  Calabrian  capomassi ;  also  on 
Sidney  Smith's  cruise.  In  this  file  are  several  copies  of  the  Gafita  Gazette^ 
published  during  the  siege. 

Brit.  War  Off,,  Orig.  Corresp.  170:  a  few  dispatches  on  the  abandon- 
ment of  Naples  by  the  Bourbons. 

BiBL.  Naz.,  Mary  Caroline  Memoirs,  see  Appendix  D. 

Printed  Books 

Annual  Register,  1806;  Ayala,  Memorie  ,•  Bianchini,  Finanze  di 
Napoli ;  Browning,  England  and  Napoleon;  Bun  bury,  Mi/zV.  Transacs.  ; 
Cacciatore,  Esame  i  Colletta,  Storia ;  Courier,  Mems. ;  Crescieri, 
Memorie;  Desvernois,  Mems.;  Dumas,  Precis  mi  lit. ;  Dumas,  Souvenirs; 
DuRET  DE  Tavel,  Sejour  en  Calabre ;  Gaeta  Gazette;  Gorani,  Mems.; 
GouRBiLLON,  Voyage  a  I'Etna;  Greco,  Annali ;  Helfert,  Konigin 
Karolina ;  Joseph,  Corresp.;  Mass^na,  Mems.;  Metternich,  Mems.; 
MiOT,  Mems.;  Monitore  Napolitano ;  Orloff,  Mems.;  Rivarol,  Notice 
hist  or. ;  RoDiNO,  Narrazione,  Archivio  storico  Napolit.  vi.  ;  Roederer, 
(Ewvres ;  Savelli,  Legion  Corse;  Segur,  Hist,  et  Mems.;  Treaties  and 
Corresp.  1806  ;  Ulloa,  Intorno  alia  Storia. 


CHAPTER  IV 

MAIDA    AND    THE    INSURRECTION    OF    CALABRIA 

Results  of  Trafalgar  —  British  Mediterranean  policy  —  France, 
England,  and  Sicily — Position  at  Messina — Stuart's  strategy — 
Leaves  Messina — Lands  in  Calabria — Regnier  concentrates — 
Battle  of  Maida  —  Regnier  retreats  —  Humanity  of  Stuart — 
Rising  of  Calabria — Stuart's  proclamation — Regnier  at  Catan- 
zaro — Stuart  motionless — De  Michele  assumes  government — 
Regnier  abandons  Catanzaro — Papasodero  and  Stuart — Pane  di 
Grano — Outrages  of  masse — Regnier  sacks  Strongoli — Retreats 
to  Cassano  —  Verdier  abandons  Cosenza — Storms  Cassano — 
Regnier's  position — Siege  of  Gaeta — Hesse  wounded — Fall  of 
Gaeta — Massena  marches  on  Calabria — Smith  and  the  capi- 
massi — Capri,  Ponza,  and  Canosa  —  Fra  Diavolo  at  Amantea 
— At  Fort  Licosa — At  Sperlonga — Calabria  proclaimed  in 
state  of  siege — Pane  di  Grano  defends  passes — Lauria  sacked 
— Regnier  relieved — Instances  of  ferocity — Dispersal  oi masse — 
Massena  at  Monteleone — Partisan  warfare — Courts-martial — 
Disease — De  Michele — Amantea  attacked  and  taken — Death 
of  De  Michele — Fra  Diavolo's  last  expedition — His  execution. 

The  defence  of  Gaeta  by  the  Prince  of  Hesse  had 
been  possible  only  because  England  controlled  the  sea, 
and  thus  kept  open  his  communications.  The  question 
of  naval  supremacy  in  the  Mediterranean  was  indeed 
the  all-important  one,  and  deserves  careful  examination. 
Trafalgar  had  had  great  results,  yet  perhaps  not  so  great 
as  was  generally  supposed.  The  invasion  of  England 
was  now  no    longer  threatened,   partly  owing   to  the 

ii6 


CHAP.  IV  THE  INSURRECTION  OF  CALABRIA  117 

failure  of  Villeneuve's  campaign,  partly  owing  to  the 
enforced  displacement  of  the  French  army  from  the 
shores  of  the  Channel  to  the  forests  of  Germany.  So 
far,  then,  Trafalgar  had  been  decisive ;  it  had  also 
affirmed  the  prestige  and  superiority  of  the  British  navy, 
and  had  resulted  in  a  considerable  loss  in  ships  to  its 
opponents.  But  strategically  the  naval  position  was 
little  altered,  and  so  far  as  the  Mediterranean  was 
concerned  the  two  great  adversaries  remained  much  as 
they  were.  There  were  still  French  battleships  at  various 
ports  awaiting  the  opportunity  and  the  order  that  should 
concentrate  them  for  some  decisive  purpose.  Even  off 
Cadiz,  where  Trafalgar  had  left  the  British  nearly  as 
much  weakened  as  their  opponents,  Collingwood's  fleet 
had  but  little  margin  of  strength  for  the  duties  it  had 
to  fill.  Through  the  six  months  that  followed  Nelson's 
great  victory,  the  British  Commander-in-Chief  was  in 
constant  fear  lest  his  weak  squadron  might  be  unable 
to  prevent  the  French  Atlantic  fleets  from  passing  into 
the  Mediterranean.^ 

Trafalgar  had  inspired  the  British  Cabinet  with  a 
false  sense  of  security  and  naval  supremacy,  and  the 
strength  of  the  Mediterranean  fleet  was  allowed  to  run 
down  to  a  perilously  low  point.  Early  in  1806, 
however.  Sir  Sidney  Smith  was  sent  out  from  England 
to  co-operate  with  the  British  land  force  under  Sir  James 
Craig.  The  chief  intent  of  the  British  Cabinet  in  dis- 
patching this  reinforcement  was  to  prosecute  operations 
against  the  French.  The  support  of  the  allied  Court  of 
Sicily  was  a  matter  of  subordinate,  if  of  any,  interest. 
Lord  Collingwood  gave  Sir  Sidney  Smith  the  following 

1  Collingwood  to  Marsden,  Feb.  22,  1806,  Adnt'ir.  Medk.  32  ;  cf.  also  Colling- 
wood, Corr.  A  few  months  later  the  French  had  12  sail  of  the  line  at  Cadiz,  6  at 
Cartagena,  4  at  Toulon,  and  6  at  sea  under  Willaumez.  Collingwood,  off  Cadiz, 
had  but  9. 


ii8  THE  NAPOLEONIC  EMPIRE  parti 

instructions  :  that  the  chief  object  of  the  British  forces 
was  to  prevent  the  French  from  obtaining  possession 
of  Sicily,  and  that  his  ships  were  to  be  disposed 
accordingly  ;  should  the  Sicilian  Court  come  to  terms 
with  France,  his  instructions  were  still  to  hold  good, 
**  notwithstanding  any  remonstrance  which  the  King  of 
Naples  may  make  on  the  subject."  ^  To  Elliot  he 
confirmed  these  instructions  a  week  later,  stating  that 
"  it  is  the  intention  of  His  Majesty  that  the  French 
should  not  in  any  event  be  suffered  to  possess  them- 
selves of  Sicily." 

This  southernmost  point  of  Italy  was  now  indeed 
the  only  real  point  of  contact  between  the  two  great 
empires,  and  the  position  of  Sicily  as  a  stepping-stone 
towards  the  Orient  urged  both  Powers  to  wrestle  for 
the  possession  of  what  was  left  of  King  Ferdinand's 
dominions.  Napoleon  was  as  firm  on  this  point  as 
the  Ministers  of  George  III.  "I  would  rather  a  ten 
years'  war,"  he  wrote  to  Joseph,  *'than  leave  your 
kingdom  incomplete  and  Sicily  an  unsettled  question." 

From  the  moment  that  Regnier  had  reached  the 
Strait  of  Messina,  preparations  had  been  made  for  the 
crossing  ;  but  the  difiiculties  were  so  great  that  progress 
was  slow.  The  French  general's  force  was  far  too 
small  to  furnish  the  numerous  detachments  and  flying 
columns  necessary  to  keep  down  Calabria  and  at  the 
same  time  to  concentrate  in  any  strength  between 
Reggio  and  Scilla.  His  engineers  toiled  to  construct 
a  passable  road  that  should  connect  Naples  and  Reggio, 
while  his  gunners  attempted  with  varying  fortune  to 
navigate  barges  full  of  artillery  material  down  the  coast 
from  Taranto  and  other  points.     Yet,  however  slow, 

^  CoUingwood  to  S.   Smith,   March   2i,    1806,  Adm'ir.  Med'it.   32,     "King  of 
Naples,"  i.e.  Ferdinand. 


CHAP.  IV  THE  INSURRECTION  OF  CALABRIA  119 

some  progress  was  made,  and  the  trunk  road  under 
construction  promised  the  early  transportation  of  the 
formidable  siege  train  assembled  before  Gaeta  as  soon 
as  that  fortress  should  fall. 

To  meet  the  threatened  invasion  of  Sicily,  the 
British  army,  now  no  longer  commanded  by  Sir  James 
Craig  but  by  Sir  John  Stuart,  still  retained  its  positions 
in  the  neighbourhood  of  Messina.  Mary  Caroline's 
action  had  proved  so  disastrous  that  Ferdinand  had 
reinstated  Acton,  and  was  now  in  favour  of  a  policy 
based  on  British  friendship  and  support.  The  King 
and  his  Minister  visited  the  camp  at  Messina,  where  the 
splendid  discipline  of  the  British  troops,  and  the  ready 
money  they  carried  with  them,  had  placed  their  relations 
with  the  inhabitants  on  a  very  amicable  footing.  So 
pleased  was  Ferdinand  with  his  visit,  that  on  the  1 2th  of 
April  Acton  addressed  a  note  to  Elliot  whereby  Messina 
with  its  neighbourhood  was  formally  confided  to  British 
protection,  and  an  auxiliary  corps  of  6500  Sicilians  was 
placed  under  Stuart's  orders.  But,  as  was  so  often  the 
case  with  the  measures  of  the  Sicilian  Government,  this 
represented  more  on  paper  than  in  effect,  for  Messina 
was  now  nothing  more  than  a  British  garrison,  while 
the  6500  Sicilian  troops  were  not  to  be  found.  There 
were  officers  in  plenty,  but  recruits  were  for  the  most 
part  taken  from  the  prisons  and  galleys. 

The  British  commanders  attached  no  more  importance 
to  the  military  assistance  of  the  Sicilian  army  than  their 
Government  did  to  the  territorial  rights  of  the  Sicilian 
Court.  Sir  John  Stuart,  though  not  a  general  of  much 
ability  on  the  field  of  battle,  possessed  sufficient  strategic 
insight  to  grasp  the  broad  factors  of  the  military  situation.^ 

^  Bunbury's  judgment  of  Stuart  must  be  accepted  with  much  caution.     His  own 
opinions  as  to  the  conduct  of  affairs  are  very  far  from  sound. 


120  THE  NAPOLEONIC  EMPIRE  parti 

His  army  was  far  too  small  to  be  risked  in  offensive 
operations  in  Italy,  under  even  the  most  favourable 
conditions.  The  experience  of  several  centuries  of 
military  history,  and  particularly  of  the  last  few  years, 
had  shown  conclusively  that  the  mastery  of  Italy  was 
to  be  gained  in  the  plains  of  Lombardy,  and  that  what- 
ever Power  dominated  at  that  point  really  controlled  the 
Peninsula. 

It  never  entered  into  Sir  John  Stuart's  mind  that 
he  was  in  a  position  to  embark  on  offensive  operations, 
but  as  the  French  preparations  on  the  Strait  of  Messina 
became  more  and  more  threatening,  he  decided,  accord- 
ing to  the  soundest  principles  of  strategy,  that  he  could 
best  ward  off  the  attack  on  his  front  by  striking  a  blow 
himself  at  the  enemy's  line  of  communications.^  Every- 
thing appeared  to  favour  such  a  project.  The  French 
were  not  yet  strong  enough  to  attempt  any  serious 
movement  against  Messina ;  Calabria  was  wholly  in  a 
state  of  unrest,  partly  in  arms  ;  Gaeta  was  severely 
pressed,  and  needed  either  direct  help  or  a  strong 
diversion.  Under  these  circumstances  the  British 
general,  having  secured  the  co-operation  of  Sir  Sidney 
Smith  and  his  squadron,  decided  to  transport  his  little 
army  into  Calabria,  and  there  to  strike  a  blow  at  the 
French,  which,  if  successful,  would  raise  the  province 
and  drive  them  from  it. 

Stuart  had  one  great  advantage  over  Regnier,  that 
his  troops,  once  embarked,  could  strike  the  French  line 
at  any,  and  perhaps  the  most  unprotected  point.^  The 
one  eventually  chosen  was  the  flattest  and  narrowest  of 
lower  Calabria,  where  the  Adriatic  and   Mediterranean 

1  Stuart  to  Windham,  July  2,  i8o6,  War  Off.  Orig.  Corr.  170. 

2  "  Eight  thousand  men  on  the  English  vessels  are  worth  fifty  thousand  here,  for 
in  eight  days  they  may  appear  at  eight  different  points."  Joseph  to  Napoleon,  Joseph, 
Corr.  ii.  358. 


CHAP.  IV  THE  INSURRECTION  OF  CALABRIA  121 

approach  to  within  little  more  than  twenty  miles  of 
one  another.  It  was  the  very  spot  that  Crassus  had 
chosen  many  centuries  before  for  the  trench  and  wall 
with  which  he  had  attempted  to  coop  Spartacus  up 
within  the  peninsula  of  Reggio. 

Just  as  Massena  was  arriving  at  Gaeta  to  take 
charge  of  the  siege,  the  British  troops  were  leaving 
Messina.  On  the  ist  of  July  Sir  John  Stuart  disem- 
barked his  expedition,  consisting  of  4795  infantry  with 
sixteen  guns,  on  the  northern  shore  of  the  Gulf  of  S. 
Eufemia,  close  to  the  little  village  of  the  same  name.^ 
The  British  general  sent  out  detachments  as  far  as 
the  important  town  of  Nicastro,  and  at  the  same  time 
began  throwing  up  intrenchments  between  the  coast- 
line and  the  hill  on  which  the  village  of  S.  Eufemia 
was  situated.     His  lines  faced  a  little  east  of  south. 

It  was  from  the  south,  or  from  Reggio,  that  Sir 
John  Stuart  had  danger  to  fear.  To  the  north  of  him 
stretched  for  many  miles  the  most  dense,  mountainous, 
and  disaffected  part  of  Calabria,  where  the  small  French 
garrisons  and  flying  columns  had  as  much  as  they  could 
do  to  prevent  a  general  outburst  of  hostilities.  To 
the  south  was  a  considerable  depression  in  the  hills 
that  became  a  plain  of  some  extent  along  the  coast, 
traversed  by  the  little  river  Amato.  This  sluggish  and 
swampy  stream  ran  into  the  sea  about  ten  miles  to  the 
south  of  S.  Eufemia.  Beyond  the  Amato  the  hills,  on 
one  of  which  the  village  of  Maida  showed  conspicuous, 
regained  something  of  their  elevation,  and  were  lost  in  the 
horizon  of  lower  Calabria.  It  was  thence  that  Regnier 
might   be  looked   for.     The   French   general  had   for 

1  War  Off.  Orig.  Corr.  1 70  ;  Stuart's  report.  This  figure  includes  the  20th 
Regiment,  which  only  landed  the  day  of  the  battle.  Bunbury  (p,  237)  says  5200,  but 
probably  includes  some  Calabrese  under  Cancellier. 


122  THE  NAPOLEONIC  EMPIRE  parti 

some  days  been  keeping  an  anxious  watch  on  the  slow 
movements  of  the  British  transports,  and  as  soon  as  he 
learned  that  they  had  come  to  anchor  in  the  bay  of 
S.  Eufemia  he  immediately  sent  out  orders  for  collecting 
every  available  man. 

Regnier,  an  officer  of  great  ability  and  experience, 
could  have  come  to  no  other  decision  than  that  which 
he  adopted, — to  attack  the  English  at  the  earliest 
possible  moment.  For  they  were  directly  on  his  line 
of  communications,  and  the  slightest  British  success 
would  probably  raise  Calabria  against  him.  He  there- 
fore abandoned  all  but  two  or  three  indispensable  posts 
in  lower  Calabria,  drawing  in  every  available  man,  and 
on  the  evening  of  the  3rd  of  July  pitched  his  bivouac 
close  by  the  little  village  of  Maida.  There  on  the 
following  morning  he  mustered  a  force  equal  to  that  of 
the  British  commander  :  he  had  5150  men,  including  a 
regiment  of  chasseurs  a  cheval  and  a  battery  of  horse 
artillery.  He  was  thus  slightly  inferior  in  infantry 
and  artillery  to  Stuart,  but  superior  in  cavalry  ;  it  will 
be  no  Injustice  to  either  side  to  say  that  they  were 
evenly  matched. 

On  the  morning  of  the  4th  of  July,  therefore,  the 
two  armies  were  encamped  about  nine  miles  apart,  one 
to  the  north,  the  other  to  the  south  of  the  swampy 
lowland  through  which  ran  the  Amato.  Stuart's  position 
was  intrenched,  and  was  further  strengthened  by  the 
presence  of  Sidney  Smithes  ships  drawn  close  in  to 
shore  ;  but  it  was  unsuited  for  long  occupation,  as 
malaria  had  already  broken  out  among  the  men. 
Regnier  was  strongly  posted  on  the  hill  of  Maida  in  a 
position  which  Stuart  apparently  considered  could  not  be 
successfully  attacked,  but  the  French  commander  thought 
himself  insecure,  as  the  surrounding  woods  might  afford 


CHAP.  IV  THE  INSURRECTION  OF  CALABRIA  123 

shelter  for  the  Calabrese  irregulars  and  brigands.  They 
were  closing  in  on  all  sides  to  witness  the  fray,  and 
already  a  body  of  200  under  Cancellier  had  marched 
into  Stuart's  camp.  Thus  neither  general  was  anxious 
to  remain  in  his  position. 

Stuart  was  first  to  move.  Having  reconnoitred  the 
French,  he  ordered  his  little  army  to  advance  in  one 
column  directly  along  the  beach  southwards.  If  his 
intention  was  to  tempt  the  French  commander  to  attack 
him  while  thus  dangerously  placed,  he  succeeded. 
Regnier,  seeing  the  British  leaving  their  intrenchments 
and  offering  him  a  chance  of  driving  them  into  the 
sea,  hastened  to  take  advantage  of  the  opportunity. 
His  troops  were  of  excellent  quality,  and  inspired  him 
with  every  hope  of  success  ;  he  doubted  not  but  that 
he  would  literally  fulfil  the  injunction  of  Napoleon's 
Schoenbrunn  proclamation  and  "  hurl  into  the  waves 
.  .   .  the  feeble  battalions  of  the  tyrants  of  the  seas." 

Regnier  directed  his  march  from  Maida  towards  the 
mouth  of  the  Amato,  at  which  point  he  expected  to 
strike  the  British  advance.  As  the  French  neared  the 
coast-line  they  were  observed  by  the  British,  and  Stuart 
came  to  a  halt.  The  English  general  now  faced  his 
battalions  inland  and  advanced  towards  the  French. 
The  ground  on  which  the  two  armies  met  was 
immediately  north  of  the  Amato  River,  on  a  scrub- 
covered  plain  turning  to  sand  near  the  sea  and  to 
swamp  near  the  river. 

The  two  generals  adopted  somewhat  similar  dis- 
positions ;  each  placed  his  infantry  in  a  line  of  echelons, 
but  whereas  Regnier  advanced  with  his  left  wing  leading, 
Stuart  adopted  the  opposite  mode.  The  French  left 
and  British  right  were  thus  bound  to  come  into  contact 
while  the  French  right  and  British  left  were  yet  far  apart. 


124  THE  NAPOLEONIC  EMPIRE  parti 

This  echelon  formation  of  the  two  armies  appeared 
very  favourable  for  the  French,  as  their  infantry  was 
seasoned,  well  led,  and  quick  in  manoeuvres.  Had  the 
leading  French  echelon  either  outflanked  or  broken 
through  the  leading  English  echelon  it  was  probable 
that  a  rapid  change  of  front  would  have  resulted 
in  the  rolling  up  of  the  British  line.  But  Stuart 
had  parried  against  being  outflanked  by  resting  his 
right  wing  on  the  Amato,  and  by  further  protecting 
it  with  a  detachment  of  riflemen  on  the  further  bank. 
Regnier's  chance  of  success  therefore  depended  on  his 
breaking  down  the  English  right  wing  at  the  first 
collision.  He  determined  to  do  this  by  a  rapid  advance 
in  solid  column,  ending  in  a  bayonet  charge,  which 
he  intended  should  decide  the  fate  of  the  day.  He 
selected  the  i^'  leger  for  this  duty,  as  fine  a  body  of 
light  infantry  as  was  to  be  found  in  the  French 
army.  General  Compere  was  placed  in  charge  of  the 
movement. 

The  British  had  halted  to  await  the  French  onset. 
The  ships  and  gunboats  stood  in  as  close  to  the  shore 
as  they  could,  though  too  far  out  to  take  any  active 
share  in  the  engagement. 

It  fell  to  Kempt' s  Light  Infantry  to  meet  the  first 
shock  of  the  battle.  To  the  massed  column  of  the 
French  tacticians  it  opposed  the  long-drawn-out  line 
retained  by  British  usage.  For  some  minutes  nothing 
could  be  seen  but  a  screen  of  cavalry  pickets  thrown 
out  by  Regnier  to  mask  his  movements.  Then  the 
horsemen  suddenly  wheeled  and  disappeared,  and  a 
great  cloud  of  dust  rolled  up.  Presently  the  glint  of 
bayonets  flashed  through  the  cloud,  the  rapid  tramp  of 
many  feet  beat  the  earth,  uniforms  and  men's  faces 
appeared.     A  general  oflicer  rode  in  front ;  flags  were 


CHAP.  IV  THE  INSURRECTION  OF  CALABRIA  125 

waving  ;  drums  were  rolling.    The  i^'  leger  was  march- 
ing at  a  quick  step  straight  for  the  British  line. 

Kempt's  Light  Infantry  awaited  the  French  advance 
with  the  extraordinary  rigidity  of  discipline  that  then 
distinguished  the  British  army.  The  muskets  remained 
steadily  at  the  carry  until  the  coolly  and  unerringly 
judged  words  of  command  released  a  terrific  volley  into 
the  French  ranks.  Big  gaps  opened  in  the  files  of  the 
i^"^  leger  and  the  42nd  of  the  line  following  them  ; 
Compere  and  two  colonels  fell.  But  the  advance  was 
not  checked  ;  the  men  now  broke  into  a  charge  with 
bayonets  aligned.  On  they  came,  nearer  and  nearer, 
while  the  machine-like  British  line  went  through  the 
reloading  commands  with  the  relentless  precision  of  a 
machine.  The  French  had  rushed  up  to  not  much 
more  than  thirty  yards  when  for  the  second  time  that 
long  line  of  muskets  was  raised  and  discharged  ;  at  that 
point-blank  volley  the  whole  front  of  the  column 
melted.  The  ground  was  covered  with  dead  and  dying ; 
the  i^"^  leger  vf2i%  literally  annihilated.  A  few  brave  men 
struggled  on  and  were  shot  down  within  fifteen  yards  of 
the  British  line,  but  the  attack  had  hopelessly  failed  ; 
the  French  left  was  destroyed,  and  Regnier's  army  was 
practically  defeated  by  this  one  mortal  blow. 

Had  Stuart  now  taken  advantage  of  the  gap  in 
the  French  left  and  advanced  rapidly,  he  might  have 
crushed  Regnier.  But  the  British  general  and  his 
troops  understood  defensive  better  than  offensive  tactics. 
As  it  was,  Kempt's  Light  Infantry  indulged  in  a 
disorderly  and  unprofitable  pursuit  of  the  column  they 
had  shattered,  while  the  other  British  echelons  remained 
in  position.  Thus  Regnier  was  given  time  to  reform 
his  line  ;  this  he  did  with  great  promptitude,  skill,  and 
determination.     His  centre  and  right  were  brought  up 


126  THE  NAPOLEONIC  EMPIRE  parti 

into  line,  and  not  yet  despairing  of  success,  he  attempted 
to  outflank  the  British  left.  But  Regnier  did  not 
venture  on  charging  tactics  again,  and  the  French  fire 
did  not  do  much  execution  ;  the  dust  and  smoke  was 
being  blown  straight  into  the  eyes  of  the  French  by  a 
westerly  wind,  and  their  few  field-pieces  were  not  well 
served.  Yet  they  were  making  some  progress  towards 
circling  around  the  British  left,  when  just  at  the  critical 
moment  the  20th  Regiment  came  up  from  the  beach, 
where  it  had  just  disembarked,  and  covered  Stuart's 
threatened  flank. 

Regnier  now  decided  on  retreat,  and  in  defeat  showed 
unimpaired  resource  and  resolution.  He  rapidly  drew 
off  his  infantry,  and  under  cover  of  his  cavalry  and 
horse  artillery  retired  in  the  direction  of  Catanzaro, 
carrying  with  him  about  300  wounded.  He  had 
left  between  1200  and  1500  dead  and  wounded  on 
the  battlefield.^  The  British  loss  was  only  45  killed 
and  282  wounded.  Thus  ended  a  battle  that  had  lasted 
barely  one  half-hour,  but  that  had  cost  the  defeated 
side  one-third  of  its  eff^ective  force  in  killed,  wounded, 
and  prisoners. 

There  was  no  pursuit  after  Maida.  The  English 
troops  were  exhausted  after  their  long  march  and 
strenuous  engagement  under  a  blazing  sun.  Nor  did 
their  lack  of  cavalry  and  the  caution  of  their  commander 
counsel  pursuit.  The  troops  therefore  went  into  camp, 
leaving  the  French  to  the  care  of  the  Sicilian  and 
Calabrese  irregulars.  The  numerous  French  wounded 
were  brought  in  and  cared  for.  General  Compere 
received  attentions  that  enabled  him  to  recover  from 

^  Stuart's  official  estimate  was  700  killed  and  1000  wounded.  Regnier  brought 
300  wounded  into  Catanzaro.  This  would  give  a  total  of  2000,  which  is  all  but 
incredible.  The  contemporaries  generally  placed  Regnier's  loss  at  from  1200  to 
1500. 


CHAP.  IV  THE  INSURRECTION  OF  CALABRIA   127 

his  wounds;  he  was  afterwards  exchanged,  and  was 
eventually  killed  at  the  head  of  his  division  six  years 
later  at  Borodino. 

So  far  Sir  John  Stuart  had  met  with  complete 
success,  and  the  immediate  results  of  his  victory  were 
precisely  what  both  he  and  his  opponent  had  foreseen. 
Calabria  nearly  instantly  blazed  out  into  open  revolt. 
Every  church  bell  was  set  ringing,  and  the  villages 
about  Maida  that  contained  nothing  but  spectators  in 
the  early  afternoon  poured  bands  of  armed  loyalists 
into  the  British  camp  before  night.  A  cloud  of  guerillas 
hung  on  the  French  retreat,  and  the  British  general 
had  all  he  could  do  to  preserve  his  captured  and 
wounded  enemies  from  the  murderous  intents  of  his 
new-found  friends.  To  prevent  the  excesses  and 
atrocious  conduct  of  the  masse,  Sir  John  Stuart  offered 
by  proclamation  what  was  for  Calabria  the  very  large 
sum  often  ducats  in  gold  for  every  French  soldier,  and 
fifteen  ducats  for  every  French  officer  brought  in  to  his 
camp.  Even  this  proclamation  and  the  personal  exer- 
tions of  the  British  officers  were  not  in  every  case 
sufficient  to  preserve  from  death,  and  often  from  torture, 
more  than  one  unhappy  fugitive.^ 

In  the  meanwhile  Regnier,  finding  his  retreat  north- 
wards through  Cosenza  cut,  had  retired  over  the  hills  to 
the  Adriatic  side.  He  hoped  either  to  hold  his  ground  at 
Catanzaro  or,  at  the  worst,  to  make  his  way  to  Cassano 
by  following  the  Adriatic  coast.  He  was  only  able  to 
collect  some  4000  men  all  told,  and  his  troops  had 
been  seriously  demoralized  by  their  recent  defeat. 

For  three  weeks  Regnier  held  Catanzaro,  fifteen  miles 

1  It  is  interesting  to  recall  that  the  humanity  of  the  British  was  deeply  appreciated 
by  the  French.  An  acknowledgment  came  in  i8og  when  Soult  had  a  monument 
erected  at  Corunna  to  Sir  John  Moore,  who  had  been  prominent  in  the  operations 
in  Calabria. 


128  THE  NAPOLEONIC  EMPIRE  part  i 

from  Maida,  harassed  by  the  masse  but  unmolested 
by  the  British.  But  the  Calabrese  were  now  sufficiently 
inspirited  and  sufficiently  numerous  to  contain  the 
French  force  unassisted,  nor  did  Stuart,  a  man  of 
honourable  and  generous  sentiments,  feel  any  inclina- 
tion to  associate  the  troops  under  his  command  with 
those  of  Ferdinand  and  Mary  Caroline's  capimassi. 
It  was  a  relief  to  the  French  that  Stuart  remained 
motionless  on  the  bay  of  S.  Eufemia,  and  the  opinion 
appears  to  have  been  generally  entertained  that  had  he 
at  once  marched  northwards  Regnier  must  have  capitu- 
lated and  nothing  could  have  stopped  the  British  short 
of  Naples.  Even  as  it  was,  Regnier  at  Catanzaro  was 
helpless  to  prevent  the  extension  of  the  Calabrese 
rising  north  and  south.  At  Cosenza  on  the  13th  of 
July,  one  week  after  the  battle,  a  royal  governor,  De 
Michele,  was  installed  and  a  decree  was  issued  appoint- 
ing Sir  John  Stuart  the  King's  Lieutenant  for  the 
Province.  To  the  south  the  British  commander  sent 
detachments  to  reduce  the  small  French  garrisons  left 
on  the  Strait  of  Messina  at  Reggio  and  Scilla. 

Finally  Regnier  decided  on  retreat,  and  on  the  26th 
of  July  started  on  his  march  north.  He  was  closely 
followed  by  some  8000  Calabrese  under  the  command 
of  Pane  di  Grano  and  Gernaliz,  whom  Ferdinand  had 
appointed  to  command  the  local  militia. 

These  Calabrese  leaders  merit  a  short  description, 
for  it  is  no  exaggeration  to  say  of  them  that  they  were 
little  better  than  savages  ;  ^   they  were  capable  of  the 

^  De  Blaquiere,  i.  519.  See  also  Fox  to  a  Court,  fVar  Off.  Orig.  Corr.  170  j 
Annual  Register,  1806,  146  j  Bunbury,  and  Moore's  Diary.  Exceptionally  a  few 
chiefs  of  the  masse  behaved  well,  as  Necco,  who  sent  the  French  he  captured  at 
Lagonegro  to  the  British  ships  (Greco,  Annali,  70).  Guariglia  and  Fra  Diavolo 
also  occasionally  preserved  their  prisoners'  lives,  but  it  may  be  questioned  whether 
humanity  so  much  as  commercialism  was  the  prompting  motive. 


CHAP.  IV  THE  INSURRECTION  OF  CALABRIA  129 

most  monstrous  atrocities.  One  of  them,  Papasodero, 
had  a  price  placed  on  his  head  by  his  official  ally  Sir 
John  Stuart ;  the  ruffian,  nothing  daunted,  retorted  by 
placing  a  similar  price  on  that  of  the  British  general. 

Don  Nicola  Gualtieri,  more  generally  known  as  Pane 
di  Grano,  had  been  one  of  the  chiefs  of  the  masse  in 
1799,  and  was  a  major  in  the  second  regiment  of  the 
Cosenza  militia  at  the  time  of  the  French  invasion. 
He  and  his  family  resided  at  Conflenti  ;  they  were 
ardent  royalists,  and  his  son  Fortunato  had  been  among 
those  executed  by  the  French  in  repression  of  the  out- 
breaks at  Soveria  and  Pedace.  His  hatred  of  the  in- 
vaders was  intense,  and  as  commander-in-chief  of  the 
masse  that  attacked  Regnier  on  his  retreat  he  gave  it 
full  vent.  He  proved  as  ferocious  a  leader  as  Fra 
Diavolo  himself.  The  masse  were  capable  of  all  the 
horrors  that  diabolical  ingenuity  could  devise.  At 
Nicastro  they  crucified  the  commandant  of  the  guard 
of  honour  that  had  greeted  Joseph  on  his  tour  through 
Calabria,  and  gouged  out  his  eyes.  At  Strongoli 
seventeen  French  soldiers  were  prisoners  ;  on  each  of 
seven  consecutive  days  one  of  these  unfortunate  men 
was  led  out,  placed  on  a  platform,  tortured  and  killed, 
to  the  great  delectation  of  the  inhabitants.  But 
these  savages  were  soon  deprived  of  their  amusement. 
Marching  northward  through  Cotrone,  where  he  had 
to  abandon  his  wounded,  Regnier  reached  Strongoli 
on  the  eighth  day,  the  29th  of  July,  and  rescued  the 
ten  survivors.  The  town  was  stormed,  sacked,  and 
burnt. 

The  fate  of  Strongoli  was  that  of  every  village 
passed  by  the  French  from  which  the  masse  had  received 
assistance.  At  Giro  the  population  was  in  arms,  but 
had  repressed  disorder  and  not  supported  the  insurgents ; 

VOL.  I  K 


130  THE  NAPOLEONIC  EMPIRE  parti 

the  French  troops  treated  it  as  friendly.  At  Corigliano 
conditions  were  different,  and  a  hard  fight,  in  which  the 
masse  suffered  heavy  losses,  ended  in  the  capture  and 
burning  of  the  town.  It  was  on  the  ist  of  August 
that  the  French  reached  Corigliano,  nearly  loo  miles 
from  Catanzaro,  which  testifies  to  the  fact  that  Regnier 
had  lost  none  of  his  vigour,  his  troops  none  of  their 
celerity. 

From  Corigliano  Regnier  marched  to  Cassano,  where 
he  effected  his  junction  with  a  small  force  under 
General  Verdier,  and  took  up  a  strong  defensive 
position.  The  latter  had  been  in  command  at  Cosenza. 
The  British  victory  and  the  subsequent  rising  had  com- 
pelled him  to  concentrate  all  his  detachments  on  the 
capital  of  the  province,  where  he  had  assembled  600 
men.  Threatened  by  a  large  force  under  Gernaliz  and 
being  short  of  ammunition,  he  had  decided  to  retreat. 
The  masse  at  once  occupied  the  town,  and  De  Michele 
was  installed  as  royal  governor.  Disorder  followed  ;  a 
number  of  houses  were  sacked  and  the  hospitals,  full 
of  French  sick  and  wounded,  were  nearly  burned.  In 
the  meanwhile  the  masse  had  already  cut  off  Verdier's 
retreat  by  occupying  Cassano,  and  the  French  general 
was  only  able  to  capture  this  position,  vital  to  him 
and  to  Regnier,  after  a  desperate  fight,  in  which  he 
expended  all  his  ammunition  and  only  succeeded  by  the 
last  desperate  expedient  of  using  the  bayonet. 

Although  Regnier  had  thus  succeeded  in  saving  some 
remnant  of  his  defeated  army,  he  had  lost  the  whole 
of  lower  Calabria  and  suffered  a  disastrous  retreat ; 
unless  reinforcements  and  supplies  v/ere  to  reach  him 
soon,  he  would  be  compelled  to  abandon  even  Cassano 
and  to  retreat  further  towards  Naples,  either  through 
the  defile  of  Campotanese  or,  if  that  should  be  held  in 


CHAP.  IV  THE  INSURRECTION  OF  CALABRIA  131 

force,  excentrically  towards  Taranto.  But  the  obstacle 
that  had  long  prevented  the  Government  from  sending 
an  adequate  number  of  troops  to  Calabria  had  at  last 
been  removed,  and  Regnier  was  cheered  with  the  news 
that  he  might  now  expect  the  reinforcements  that  six 
weeks  earlier  could  not  be  spared.  For  the  siege  of 
Gaeta  was  at  last  at  an  end. 

When  Massena  arrived  at  the  camp  before  Gaeta 
on  the  28th  of  June,  the  Government  felt  how  urgent 
it  was  to  capture  the  fortress  immediately  and  thus 
release  the  large  body  of  troops  occupied  in,  the  siege. 
Massena  decided  to  make  one  more  attempt  to  frighten 
the  defenders  into  surrender  without  waiting  for  the 
completion  of  the  trenches.  To  lend  a  more  imposing 
and  decisive  appearance  to  this  demonstration.  King 
Joseph  proceeded  to  join  the  marshal  in  camp,  and 
was  present  when  fire  was  opened.  It  was  time  the 
besiegers'  artillery  spoke,  for  the  Sicilians  had  already 
fired  120,000  shot  and  22,000  shells. 

The  French  artillery  was  now  heavy  and  numerous 
enough  to  assert  superiority.  Fifty  large  guns  and 
twenty-three  mortars  rained  a  storm  of  iron  on  the 
fortifications  of  Gaeta ;  but  though  several  of  the 
defenders'  pieces  were  dismounted,  though  their 
defences  began  to  break  down  and  crumble,  though  a 
constant  stream  of  dead  and  dying  set  in  from  the 
ramparts  to  the  city,  the  Prince  of  Hesse  showed  no 
symptom  of  weakening.  By  the  ist  of  July  a  con- 
siderable impression  had  been  made  and  the  besieged 
had  suffered  the  loss  of  three  magazines  through  ex- 
plosion. The  French  fire  now  slackened,  however, 
while  the  trenches  and  batteries  were  pushed  nearer  to 
the  fortress.     It  had  become  a  question  of  fatal  moment 


132  THE  NAPOLEONIC  EMPIRE  parti 

with  Massena  whether  his  stock  of  ammunition  was 
sufficient  to  carry  a  bombardment  to  its  fit  conclusion. 
So  uncertain  did  this  appear  that  a  reward  of  fifty- 
centimes  was  offered  for  every  unexploded  shell  of  the 
enemy  brought  in,  and,  thus  stimulated,  the  men  of 
the  battalion  of  coloured  sappers  from  San  Domingo 
freely  lost  their  lives  or  enriched  themselves  by  the 
reckless  way  in  which  they  tore  the  burning  fuses  from 
the  enemy's  missiles. 

On  the  3rd  of  July  the  besieged  received  a  reinforce- 
ment of  1 500  men  by  sea,  and  on  that  night  an  attack 
was  delivered  by  Captain  Richardson's  gunboats,  of 
which  the  result  was  indecisive.  For  three  days  more 
the  French  toiled  nearer  and  nearer  the  fortifications, 
and  at  three  o'clock  on  the  morning  of  the  7th  they 
opened  fire  again  with  ninety  guns  and  at  shorter  range. 
Their  artillery  was  now  mostly  directed  against  the 
Queen's  Battery,  whose  fire  was  soon  reduced.  But 
Gaeta  refused  to  be  silenced  altogether,  and  through 
the  8  th  the  four  heavy  ship's  guns  landed  by  Sidney 
Smith  kept  up  a  heavy  and  damaging  fire,  while  the 
rapid  exhaustion  of  the  French  ammunition  caused  the 
greatest  anxiety  to  their  commanders.  On  the  loth 
furious  fighting  took  place  ;  the  French  sappers  were 
now  close  under  the  walls,  and  an  attempt  was  made  to 
establish  a  breaching  battery  quite  close  to  the  shore. 
The  defenders  rained  shot  and  shell  on  the  French 
works,  while  the  French  batteries  attempted  to  keep 
down  the  fire  of  the  fortress.  The  besiegers  were  finally 
repulsed,  but  not  before  one  of  their  shells,  bursting  in 
the  Breach  Battery,  struck  down  the  Prince  of  Hesse, 
and  inflicted  the  greatest  loss  on  the  garrison  it  could 
have  suffered.  No  sooner  was  the  event  known  in 
the  French  camp  than  Massena  ordered    his  batteries 


CHAP.  IV  THE  INSURRECTION  OF  CALABRIA  133 

to  redouble  their  fire  and  threw  a  stream  of  shot  and 
shell  into  the  town. 

On  the  following  morning  General  Dedon,  in  com- 
mand of  the  artillery,  earnestly  represented  to  Marshal 
Massena  that  the  firing  must  be  slackened,  as  the 
ammunition  could  not  hold  out  ;  but  Massena,  aware 
of  the  perilous  position  of  affairs  in  Calabria,  and 
boldly  judging  the  situation,  declined  to  listen  to  this 
officer's  remonstrances.  He  was  right  in  thinking  that 
the  defence  of  Gaeta  would  collapse  with  the  loss  of  its 
brave  Governor. 

The  Prince  of  Hesse's  wound  was  thought  mortal, 
though  he  eventually  recovered.  He  was  taken  from 
the  post  he  had  so  splendidly  defended  for  five  months 
and  placed  on  board  an  English  vessel,  on  which 
he  was  transported  to  Palermo.  The  command  de- 
volved by  right  of  seniority  on  Colonel  Hotz,  an 
officer  of  moderate  ability,  but  lacking  prestige  and 
the  qualities  of  a  leader.  He  refused,  however,  to 
capitulate  when  summoned  to  do  so  by  Massena  on 
the  1 2th  of  July.  On  that  day  two  breaches  were 
just  beginning  to  show  in  the  fortress'  walls,  one  at 
the  Breach  Battery,  the  other  low  down  at  the  south- 
east angle  of  the  shore  defences. 

Four  days  later,  on  the  i6th  of  July,  the  crisis  was 
reached.  Massena  now  knew  that  Regnier  had  been 
defeated  in  Calabria  and  cut  off ;  he  feared  even  worse 
news  might  follow.  The  night  before  one  of  his 
engineer  officers  had  waded  through  two  feet  of  water 
from  the  end  of  the  most  advanced  French  sap  to  the 
lower  breach  at  the  corner  of  the  sea-front,  and  reported 
that  there  was  a  possible  passage  for  a  storming  party. 
He  had  now  only  1 84,000  pounds  of  powder  and  less 
than  5000  shot  and  shell  left, — a  supply  for  two  or 


134  THE  NAPOLEONIC  EMPIRE  parti 

three  days.  No  reinforcement  was  to  be  looked  for  ; 
on  the  contrary,  Napoleon  was  drawing  troops  towards 
northern  Italy  and  strengthening  the  army  in  Germany 
for  the  war  with  Prussia  that  was  just  on  the  point  of 
breaking  out.  Reviewing  this  position,  Massena  deter- 
mined to  stake  all  on  the  throw,  to  fire  away  his  remain- 
ing ammunition,  and  then  if  possible  carry  Gaeta  with 
the  bayonet. 

All  through  the  17th  of  July  the  breaches  grev/ 
larger  and  larger  under  the  constant  pounding  of  the 
French  guns.  On  the  morning  of  the  i8th  it  was 
officially  given  out  in  the  camp  that  both  were  practic- 
able, and  preparations  were  made  for  storming. 

One  of  the  most  obvious  rules  that  guide  a  general 
when  about  to  attempt  the  capture  of  fortifications  is 
to  conceal  his  preparations  so  as  to  deliver  his  attack 
unexpectedly.  Had  the  Prince  of  Hesse  still  been  at 
his  post  on  the  Breach  Battery,  it  is  probable  that 
Massena  would  have  followed  this  rule  ;  with  Colonel 
Hotz  in  command  he  was  probably  wise  in  not  doing 
so.  In  the  course  of  the  morning  two  heavy  columns 
were  ostentatiously  assembled  in  the  trenches.  That 
on  the  left,  intended  to  move  against  the  lower  breach, 
was  made  up  of  chasseurs  and  grenadiers,  and  was 
placed  under  the  orders  of  a  brilliant  leader,  General 
Donzelot.  That  on  the  right,  intended  to  attack  the 
more  difficult  breach  under  the  Queen's  Battery,  was 
made  up  of  voltigeurs^  and  was  under  the  orders  of 
General  Valentin.  Supporting  columns  were  brought 
into  the  trenches  with  some  deliberation.  These  long- 
drawn-out  preparations  finally  produced  the  effect 
Massena  had  been  anxiously  hoping  for.  At  3  p.m. 
the  white  flag  rose  on  the  walls  of  Gaeta  ;  the  long 
siege  was  at  an  end.     Within  three  hours  of  the  raising 


CHAP.  IV  THE  INSURRECTION  OF  CALABRIA  135 

of  the  white  flag  the  conditions  of  the  capitulation  were 
agreed. 

So  honourable  did  the  defence  of  Gaeta  appear 
to  Massena,  or  so  advantageous  its  capture,  that  he 
granted  very  lenient  terms.  The  fortress,  with  all  its 
guns  and  munitions  of  war,  was  to  be  surrendered,  but 
the  garrison  was  to  be  permitted  to  retire  to  Sicily  on 
condition  of  not  bearing  arms  against  the  French  during 
twelve  months.  No  sooner  had  hostilities  ceased,  how- 
ever, before  a  large  part  of  the  royal  troops  took 
the  opportunity  of  deserting  to  the  French  camp. 
The  spoils  of  Gaeta  included  about  170  cannon,  of 
which  one-third  were  damaged.  In  the  course  of  the 
siege  the  French  had  dug  9000  yards  of  trenches,  and 
they  acknowledged  the  loss  of  1000  killed  and  wounded, 
their  real  loss  being  probably  twice  as  great. 

The  instant  Gaeta  surrendered  Massena  directed  his 
attention  to  the  critical  situation  of  Regnier.  On  the 
very  next  morning  after  he  obtained  possession  of  the 
fortress  some  of  the  troops  were  started  on  their  march 
towards  Naples  and  Calabria. 

It  was  well  indeed  for  King  Joseph  that  Gaeta  had 
fallen,  for  the  whole  kingdom  had  been  blazing  with 
insurrection  for  some  weeks  past  ;  only  a  few  towns 
were  under  effective  control,  and  for  some  days  the 
situation  had  appeared  so  desperate  that  the  complete 
withdrawal  of  the  Court  and  army  to  the  north  had 
been  seriously  contemplated.  The  coasts  were  patrolled 
by  British  and  Sicilian  ships,  from  which  bands  of 
irregulars  were  disembarked  without  difficulty.  This 
policy  was  actively  supported  by  Sidney  Smith,  but 
the  British  military  officers  opposed  it  strongly,  as  will 
appear  from  the  following  extract  from  a  dispatch 
written  by  Sir  John  Moore  to  General  Fox  : — 


136  THE  NAPOLEONIC  EMPIRE  parti 

His  [Sidney  Smith's]  interference  in  Calabria,  where  in 
his  imagination  he  is  directing  the  operations  of  armies,  but 
where  in  reahty  he  is  only  encouraging  murder  and  rapine,  and 
keeping  up  amongst  that  unhappy  people,  whom  we  have  no 
intention  to  support,  a  spirit  of  revolt  which  will  bring  upon 
them  the  more  severe  vengeance  of  the  French  Government. 
As  long  as  Sir  Sidney  had  money,  he  distributed  it  profusely  ; 
and  now,  with  as  little  judgment,  he  is  distributing  arms, 
ammunition,  and  provisions  .  .  .   (Aug.  24,  1806).^ 

So  great  was  the  activity  of  Sidney  Smith  and  his 
allies  that  Naples  itself  hardly  appeared  secure.  British 
ships  cruised  in  sight  of  the  city.  From  Capri  they 
controlled  the  waters  of  the  bay,  and  the  Governor, 
Hudson  Lowe,  maintained  close  communication  with 
the  small  chain  of  islands  that  stretched  away  to  the 
north-west  towards  Gaeta,  of  which  Ponza  and  Vento- 
tenne  were  the  most  important.  From  these  islands, 
and  from  Gaeta  before  its  fall,  a  constant  stream  of 
conspiracy  flowed  into  Naples.  They  also  served  as 
the  base  for  the  operations  of  Fra  Diavolo,  Guariglia, 
Ronca,  and  other  chiefs.  The  principal  agent  of  the 
Sicilian  Government,  or  of  Queen  Mary  Caroline,  at 
Ponza  was  the  young  Prince  of  Canosa,  an  unscrupulous 
intriguer  with  all  the  instincts  of  a  spy,  informer,  and 
gaoler,  who  was  to  earn  an  eminence,  unenviable  even 
in  those  unhappy  times  and  countries,  for  his  duplicity 
and  vices. 

In  the  first  week  of  July,  Sidney  Smith,  after  con- 
voying Stuart's  transports  to  the  Bay  of  S.  Eufemia, 
had  once  more  sailed  up  the  coast.  He  had  been  given 
large  powers  by  the  Sicilian  Government,  and  exercised 
the    right    of  appointing    capimassi   and   of  acting    as 

^  Bunbury,  436  j  cf.  Moore's  Diary.  There  was  great  tension  between  Sidney 
Smith  and  the  generals  5  but  with  Collingwood,  Duckworth,  and  Martin  there  was 
always  harmonious  co-operation. 


CHAP.  IV  THE  INSURRECTION  OF  CALABRIA  137 

the  King's  direct  representative.  At  Amantea,  just 
north  of  Maida,  he  landed  Fra  Diavolo.  The  French 
garrison  retired  on  Cosenza,  from  which  place  Verdier 
retreated  soon  afterwards.  A  royalist  local  adminis- 
tration was  at  once  formed,  and  a  military  leader  of 
some  capacity  was  selected  in  the  person  of  Mirabelli. 
From  Cosenza,  under  the  general  leadership  of  Gernaliz, 
the  masse  had  moved  north  towards  Cassano,  where 
Regnier  and  Verdier  had  effected  their  junction  on 
the  3rd  of  August.  Not  daring  to  attack  the  French 
in  the  strong  defensive  position  they  occupied,  the  bulk 
of  the  insurgents  marched  to  the  mountain  pass  leading 
down  towards  Lagonegro,  where  Damas  had  been 
defeated  a  few  weeks  earlier.  There  they  hoped  to  be 
able  to  beat  back  any  reinforcements  that  might  be  sent 
from  Naples  to  Regnier. 

The  fall  of  Gaeta  made  the  advance  of  a  consider- 
able force  probable,  and  Sidney  Smith,  to  support  the 
flank  of  the  masse,  cruised  with  a  considerable  fleet  in 
the  Gulf  of  Policastro.  On  the  14th  of  August 
the  British  Admiral  and  Fra  Diavolo  captured  Fort 
Licosa,  garrisoned  by  a  small  detachment  of  the  Corsican 
Legion.  This  was  the  last  success  of  the  Anglo- 
Sicilians.  The  tide  of  war  was  fast  turning  against 
them. 

The  vigour  and  rapidity  with  which  Massena  relieved 
his  defeated  lieutenant  was  on  a  level  with  that  which 
had  distinguished  the  French  movements  since  the 
first  invasion  of  Naples ;  on  the  1 9th  of  July  he 
entered  Gaeta,  on  the  8  th  of  August  he  had  already 
struck  a  mortal  blow  at  the  masse,  160  miles  away. 
Rapidly  collecting  all  the  troops  that  could  be 
spared,  Massena  advanced  south  from  Naples.  He 
issued   a  proclamation  on  the    31st    of  July  declaring 


138  THE  NAPOLEONIC  EMPIRE  part  i 

Calabria  in  a  state  of  siege,  placing  the  French  troops 
at  the  charge  of  the  municipalities,  confiscating  for  the 
public  service  the  property  of  the  capimassi^  announcing 
the  closing  of  every  monastery  assisting  the  royal  forces, 
and  granting  pay  to  the  municipal  guards  faithful  to 
the  French  king.  To  oppose  the  French  marshal  Pane 
di  Grano,  Gernaliz,  Carbone,  and  Mandarini  had 
collected  some  8000  or  10,000  men,  a  mixture  of 
militia,  masse^  and  brigands,  which  included  many  newly 
landed  Sicilian  convicts.  With  these  they  prepared  to 
defend  the  passes. 

As  far  as  Lagonegro  Massena  met  with  little 
opposition.  On  leaving  that  town  the  French  column 
plunged  into  the  wildest  parts  of  Calabria,  and  followed 
the  defile  that  runs  under  the  Monte  del  Papa.  Through 
the  thick  glades  might  be  heard  clanging  the  church 
bells  of  the  little  village  of  Lauria  ringing  the  alarm, 
announcing  the  approaching  fight.  For  at  this  point 
the  masse  had  decided  to  make  their  stand.  When 
the  French  arrived  in  sight  of  the  village  they  found 
the  surrounding  heights  strongly  held  ;  but  Massena 
attacked  without  a  moment's  hesitation. 

At  the  beginning  of  the  engagement  one  of  those 
incidents  that  so  often  occur  when  regular  and  irregular 
troops  are  opposed,  and  that  are  sometimes  properly 
described  as  treachery,  happened,  by  which  the  Corsican 
Legion  was  caught  in  a  trap  and  suffered  heavily.  The 
loss  was  avenged.  Massena  manoeuvred  skilfully,  and 
eventually  cut  off  a  large  number  of  the  enemy  in  the 
village  ;  Gardanne  stormed  Lauria  at  the  point  of  the 
bayonet  ;  the  desperate  defenders  kept  up  the  struggle 
street  by  street,  house  by  house  ;  no  quarter  was  given  ; 
fire  and  massacre  completed  the  work  of  destruction. 
Of  a  town  of  7000  people  nothing  but  ruins  remained  ; 


CHAP.  IV  THE  INSURRECTION  OF  CALABRIA  139 

the  population,  men,  women,  and  children,  perished  in 
the  flames. 

Lauria  was  nearly  as  decisive  as  Campotanese. 
Massena  followed  up  his  advantage  swiftly,  shooting 
and  hanging  such  armed  men  as  fell  in  his  hands, — in 
one  week  no  less  than  600.  He  successfully  effected 
his  junction  with  Regnier  and  entered  Cosenza  with 
about  1 8,000  men  on  the  14th  of  August,  Pane  di  Grano 
abandoning  the  city  an  hour  previously.^  The  masse 
retreated  southwards,  Regnier  being  at  once  sent  on 
after  them,  but  a  stand  that  Gernaliz  attempted  to  make 
just  south  of  Cosenza  came  to  nothing,  and  he  lost  his 
life,  assassinated  by  one  of  his  own  men.  Massena, 
seeing  the  collapse  of  armed  resistance  and  judging  that 
his  ruthless  march  had  struck  terror  in  the  hearts  of 
the  Calabrese,  decided  to  adopt  milder  courses  and  to 
put  into  effect  instructions  he  had  received  from  the 
King.  On  the  17th  of  August  he  issued  orders  to  his 
generals  to  abstain  from  burning  villages. 

But  the  evil  was  too  deep-seated,  the  country  too 
harried,  the  people  too  imbittered,  feuds  had  been 
carried  too  far  ;  for  many  weeks  Calabria  remained 
unpacified  and  was  swept  by  a  wave  of  reckless  ferocity 
of  which  the  details  must  not  be  dwelt  on.  Yet  the 
duty  of  the  chronicler  cannot  be  altogether  evaded,  and 
one  of  many  similar  incidents  that  will  paint  the  miser- 
able state  of  the  country  must  be  selected  and  presented 
to  the  reader. 

At  the  little  village  of  Acri,  in  the  Sila,  the  retreat 
of  the  French  after  Maida  was  the  signal  for  a  royalist 
revolution.     A  small  number  of  the  inhabitants,  some 


1  Joseph,  Corr.  iii.  149;  Dumas,  Precis,  xv.  171;  Massena,  v.  262.  The  dis- 
crepancy in  the  totals  given  by  these  authorities  probably  arises  from  including  or 
excluding  Regnier's  force. 


140  THE  NAPOLEONIC  EMPIRE  parti 

twenty  in  all,  had  sided  with  the  French,  that  is  to  say, 
they  had  accepted  at  the  hand  of  the  conquerors 
various  village  functions  from  which  their  neighbours 
had  been  ousted.  On  the  15  th  of  August,  a  sacred 
and  auspicious  day,  the  mob,  headed  by  a  man  named 
Spaccapitta,  deposed  the  French  office-holders.  The 
people  naturally  attributed  their  success  not  so  much 
to  their  overwhelming  numbers  as  to  Mary  the  mother 
of  God,  and  fitly  to  celebrate  their  victory  and  her 
intercession  slowly  roasted  their  prisoners  alive  in  the 
public  square.  Spaccapitta  showed  himself  a  worthy 
leader  of  a  worthy  people  by  producing  a  piece  of  bread 
from  his  pocket  which  he  plastered  from  the  dissolving 
body  of  one  of  his  victims  and  ate.  Acri  suffered 
further  vicissitudes,  but  was  finally  reoccupied  either  by 
a  detachment  of  French  troops  or  of  national  guards 
from  Cosenza,  and  Spaccapitta,  with  two  other  ring- 
leaders, suffered  the  talion's  law  and  were,  according 
to  one  account,  burned,  to  another  impaled.^ 

But  the  heart  sickens  at  such  details,  and  after 
repeating  that  the  incident  at  Acri  was  only  typical  of 
what  was  occurring  at  many  points  in  Calabria,  the 
operations  of  the  French  may  once  more  be  followed. 
They  were  now  to  meet  with  but  few  obstacles.  The 
masse  were  hopelessly  broken.  Sir  John  Stuart  had 
long  since  withdrawn  his  troops  to  Messina,  leaving 
behind  only  a  small  garrison  at  Scilla.  The  principal 
chiefs  of  the  masse,  with  the  exception  of  Pane  di 
Grano  and  Papasodero,  fled  to  Sicily.  On  the  ist  of 
September  Lamarque,  with   a  flying  column,   inflicted 

1  Greco,  Annali^  126,  129,  155.  Greco,  De  Angelis,  Courier,  and  other  authori- 
ties furnish  considerably  more  matter  of  the  same  sort.  The  impaling  incident  at 
Lagonegro,  which  Colletta  states  he  witnessed,  can  hardly  be  accepted  without 
corroboration.  A  particularly  dramatic  anecdote  is  that  recorded  by  Lamarque, 
ii.  142. 


CHAP.  IV  THE  INSURRECTION  OF  CALABRIA   141 

severe  losses  on  the  masse  under  Guariglia  at  Camma- 
rata.  A  few  days  later  Massena,  who  had  declined 
overtures  made  by  the  Duke  of  Floridia,  now  in  com- 
mand for  King  Ferdinand,  entered  Monteleone.  In 
this  town,  the  capital  of  lower  Calabria,  the  French  were 
hailed  as  deliverers,  the  inhabitants  having  long  been 
noted  for  their  liberal  and  anti-Bourbon  sentiments. 

Here  the  campaign  may  be  said  to  have  ended. 
But  all  through  the  autumn  and  winter  a  fierce 
partisan  warfare  was  carried  on  in  Calabria ;  the 
small  bodies  of  masse  were  constantly  dispersed  and 
beaten,  and  were  as  constantly  renewed  by  fresh  drafts 
of  volunteers  and  of  enlisted  convicts  shipped  over 
from  Sicily.  Occasionally  considerable  bodies  of  the 
latter  would  surrender  at  the  first  summons,  and  the 
French  commanders  sent  large  batches  of  them  to 
Naples.  By  the  middle  of  September  no  less  than 
10,000  prisoners  of  this  description  were  in  the  capital. 
The  special  military  tribunals  or  courts-martial  estab- 
lished by  Massena  at  Cosenza  constantly  replenished 
their  numbers  and  assembled  many  firing  parties, 
exercising  a  terror  that  was  perhaps  salutary. 

This  narrative  of  the  conquest  of  the  kingdom  of 
Naples  by  the  French  cannot  be  completed  without 
giving  some  account  of  two  detached  incidents  of  minor 
importance  :  the  prolonged  defence  made  by  the  little 
town  of  Amantea  and  the  last  expedition  of  Fra 
Diavolo. 

On  the  approach  of  Massena,  De  Michele  abandoned 
Cosenza  and  retired  to  Fiumefreddo,  whence  he 
continued  to  issue  proclamations  and  carry  on  his 
duties  as  Preside.  He  was  now  at  the  central  spot  of 
the  remarkable  line  of  coast  that  stretches  for  some 
100  miles  from  the  Gulf  of  Policastro  to  the  Gulf  of 


142  THE  NAPOLEONIC  EMPIRE  parti 

S.  Eufemia  in  one  nearly  unbroken  line  of  cliffs.  Here 
the  mountains  descend  sheer  into  the  depths  of  the  sea, 
broken  here  and  there  by  wild,  precipitous  ravines. 
Towns  and  villages  are  occasionally  concealed  in  the 
depths  of  the  mountains,  occasionally  perched  on  some 
commanding  and  inaccessible  rock.  Communication 
from  north  to  south  is  practically  impossible  save  by 
sea  ;  towards  the  west  a  few  difficult  mountain  tracks 
lead  to  Cosenza  and  the  valley  of  the  Crati. 

De  Michele  controlled  the  coast,  for  the  British  cruisers 
kept  the  sea  free.  He  promptly  inaugurated  a  royalist 
reign  of  terror  along  the  whole  coast-line  ;  Longobardi,^ 
suspected  of  French  sympathies,  was  sacked,  its  popula- 
tion was  destroyed,  and  many  other  scenes  of  horror 
and  outrage  followed. 

Of  the  numerous  villages  and  towns  dotted  along 
this  coast  the  two  most  important  were  Maratea,  at  the 
entrance  of  the  Gulf  of  Policastro,  and  Amantea,  just  to 
the  north  of  the  Gulf  of  S.  Eufemia ;  both  were  strongly 
placed  and  fairly  well  fortified,  and  the  French  detached 
strong  columns  to  reduce  them  at  the  earliest  possible 
moment.  In  the  middle  of  September  Verdier  marched 
from  Cosenza  to  attack  Amantea  ;  his  force  was  small, 
his  supplies  scanty.  Mirabelli  showed  a  bold  front,  the 
French  assault  failed,  and  Verdier  retreated.  So  over- 
joyed were  the  Sicilian  troops  and  masse  at  their  victory 
that  they  immediately  started  shooting  the  inhabitants 
and  sacking  the  town  they  were  charged  to  protect. 
Verdier's  retreat  through  the  mountains  was  harassed 
by  the  ferocious  Parafante  at  the  head  of  3000  masse. 
For  nearly  three  months  more  it  was  thought  im- 
possible to  attempt  the  capture  of  Amantea  ;  finally,  on 

^  Immediately  south  of  Fiumefreddo,  not  the  village  of  the  same  name  between 
Monteleone  and  Pizzo. 


CHAP.  IV  THE  INSURRECTION  OF  CALABRIA  143 

the  4th  of  December,  Verdier  started  from  Cosenza 
again,  this  time  with  four  battalions  and  four  guns. 
Once  more  Mirabelli  successfully  repelled  the  French 
attack  and  forced  Verdier  to  retreat.  He  was  pursued 
by  the  masse  to  the  very  gates  of  Cosenza. 

The  situation  was  becoming  humiliating  if  not 
dangerous  for  the  French.  The  fortifications  of 
Amantea  were  growing  formidable,  and  now  mounted 
ten  guns  ;  the  garrison  was  flushed  with  success  and 
replenished  from  Sicily  ;  stores  and  munitions  had  been 
thrown  in  by  sea.  It  was  decided  that  a  formal  siege 
must  be  undertaken,  and  reinforcements  were  hurried 
back  from  Monteleone. 

The  third  attack  on  Amantea  began  on  the  3rd  of 
January  1807.  Regnier  himself  reconnoitred  the  town, 
and  the  attacking  force  consisted  of  four  battalions  of 
French  troops,  2000  Calabrese  national  guards  newly 
recruited  at  Cosenza,  with  several  guns  and  howitzers. 
The  operations  took  the  form  of  a  regular  siege, 
by  trenches  and  breaching  batteries,  and  the  town 
was  cut  off  from  the  sea  by  a  few  v/ell-placed  guns. 
The  first  trench  was  quickly  opened  within  too 
yards  of  the  wall,  and  on  the  14th  of  January  a 
storming  column  was  sent  to  the  attack.  After 
furious  fighting  and  heavy  losses  it  was  driven  back. 
Nothing  daunted,  the  French  went  to  work  again  with 
pick  and  shovel,  dragged  their  guns  up  closer,  and  on 
the  30th  of  January  opened  fire  anew.  Six  days  of 
constant  pounding  opened  a  gaping  hole  in  the  walls 
of  Amantea,  and  after  exploding  a  heavy  mine,  once 
more  a  column  was  sent  to  the  assault  ;  this  time 
the  French  succeeded  in  effecting  a  lodgment.  But 
Mirabelli,  while  the  French  bombarded,  had  been 
building  up  a  second  line  of  defence  and  had  closed  up 


144  THE  NAPOLEONIC  EMPIRE  parti 

the  gorge  of  the  threatened  bastion.  No  sooner  had 
the  storming  party  gained  the  breach  than  he  poured 
down  a  heavy  fire  on  them  from  this  inner  wall,  and 
finally  drove  them  back  beaten. 

The  besiegers  had  now  lost  800  killed  and  wounded, 
and  it  proved  fortunate  for  them  that  Mirabelli  had 
exhausted  his  provisions.  He  offered  to  surrender,  and 
received  honourable  terms,  Verdier  occupying  the  town 
on  the  6  th  of  February. 

Since  the  end  of  November  the  other  districts  of 
Calabria  had  been  rapidly  pacified,  and  the  French 
were  now  able  to  concentrate  more  men  in  the  neigh- 
bourhood of  Cosenza.  Several  attempts  were  made 
by  flying  columns  to  surprise  and  capture  De  Michele. 
Finally  he  was  taken  at  Fiumefreddo  on  the  21st  of 
January  ;  he  was  promptly  passed  before  a  drum-head 
court-martial  and  shot. 

While  these  events  proceeded  in  Calabria,  the  rest 
of  the  kingdom  had  been  suffering  nearly  as  severely 
from  rapine  and  disorder,  and  no  part  more  than  that 
stretching  from  Gaeta  through  the  mountains  of  the 
Abruzzi  to  the  Adriatic.  It  was  in  the  heart  of  this 
country,  the  scene  of  his  boyhood,  that  the  spell  was  at 
last  to  be  broken  that  had  earned  Fra  Diavolo  his  name. 

After  his  co-operation  with  Sidney  Smith  at  Point 
Licosa,  he  had  been  conveyed  to  Sperlunga,  near  Gaeta, 
where  his  band  was  disembarked.  From  that  point  he 
executed  several  successful  raids,  notably  at  Terracina, 
and  quickly  increased  his  following  and  resources.  At 
Itri  he  faced  a  French  flying  column  sent  to  put  an 
end  to  his  proceedings  ;  after  a  desperate  fight,  in 
which  he  lost  160  men,  he  was  defeated.  He  then 
pushed  further  towards  the  Abruzzi,  sacking,  burning, 
and    murdering.      The    whole    country  was   now  up  ; 


CHAP.  IV  THE  INSURRECTION  OF  CALABRIA  145 

brigandage  and  disorder  became  so  prevalent  that  a 
band  of  100  men  showed  themselves  as  near  Naples 
as  Caserta. 

By  the  middle  of  September  Fra  Diavolo  had  made 
his  way  to  the  little  town  of  Sora,  in  the  heart  of  the 
Abruzzi,  where  he  effected  his  junction  with  Sciablone, 
who  had  long  harried  those  parts,  and  mustered  an 
imposing  force  of  2000  men  with  five  guns.  But 
several  French  columns  under  General  Despagne  were 
now  converging  on  the  brigand  chief,  and  he  was 
compelled  to  make  a  stand.  The  French  took  Sora 
by  storm,  the  masse  were  routed,  Fra  Diavolo  himself 
was  severely  wounded.  He  managed,  however,  to 
escape  capture.  With  wonderful  endurance  and  re- 
source he  slipped  away  from  village  to  village,  and 
finally  reached  the  town  of  Avellino,  to  the  south  of 
Naples.  Near  this  place,  in  the  lofty  and  picturesque 
monastery  of  Monte  Vergine,  he  found  shelter.  But 
his  secret  was  soon  betrayed  ;  he  was  arrested  and 
taken  to  Naples.  A  cartel  was  sent  in  from  the  vessels 
cruising  about  the  bay  claiming  him  as  a  superior 
officer  of  the  Sicilian  army  and  proposing  his  exchange. 
But  where  no  mercy  had  been  shown  to  Rodio,  none 
could  be  expected  for  Fra  Diavolo.  He  was  brought 
before  a  court-martial,  and  on  the  9th  day  of 
November  was  shot  before  a  great  concourse  of  the 
lazzaroni  on  the  Piazza  del  Mercato. 

Such  a  blow  did  the  end  of  this  illustrious  free- 
booter appear  to  the  Bourbon  cause  that  solemn 
obsequies  in  his  honour  and  prayers  for  the  repose 
of  his  soul  were  ordered  by  the  Court  in  the  cathedral 
of  Palermo. 

Towards  the  end  of  the  eventful  year  1806  matters 

VOL.  I  L 


146  THE  NAPOLEONIC  EMPIRE  part  1 

were  getting  more  settled  in  the  much-harried  kingdom 
of  Naples,  and  Calabria  was  so  far  pacified  that  Massena 
left  Monteleone  to  return  to  the  capital  on  the  21st 
of  December. 

It  is  now  therefore  time  to  turn  from  the  field  of 
war  to  that  of  peace,  and  to  relate  what  the  French 
civil  administrators  had  found  to  do  and  had  accom- 
plished while  the  question  of  military  supremacy  was 
being  decided. 

Principal  Authorities  consulted 

MSS. 

Arch,  di  Stato,  Guerra,  xxv.  1071  :  papers  relating  to  the  siege  of 
Gaetaj  2248  :  papers  relating  to  the  British  at  Messina  j  xxx.  41  :  pro- 
clamations and  other  papers  relating  to  Massena's  advance  into  Calabria. 

Arch,  di  Stato,  Giustizia,  1806  :  reports  on  the  state  of  the  provinces. 

Brit.  War  Off.,  Orig.  Corresp.  170  :  Stuart's  dispatches  and  other 
papers  on  operations  in  Calabria. 

Brit.  Admiralty,  Mediterranean,  32  :  dispatches  and  proclamations 
of  Collingwood,  Sidney  Smith,  and  others  covering  operations  from  Messina 
to  Gaeta,  with  numerous  references  to  Fra  Diavolo. 

Printed  Books 

Annual  Register,  1806  j  Blaquiere,  Letters  from  the  Mediterranean  ^ 
BuNBURY,  Milit.  Transacts.  ,•  Cacciatore,  Esame  ,•  Calendario  delta  Corte, 
1806;  Colletta,  Storia ;  Collingwood,  Corresp.;  Courier,  Mems. ; 
Davidson,  78M  Highlanders;  Desvernois,  Mems. ;  Dumas,  Fricis 
Milit  air  e ;  Dumas,  Souvenirs ;  Duret  de  Tavel,  S^jour  en  Calabre ; 
Greco,  Annali;  Greco,  Narrazione  ;  Helfert, Konigin  Karolina  ;  Joseph, 
Corresp. ;  Lamarque,  Mems. ;  Masse'na,  Mems. ;  Maurice,  Diary  of  Sir 
John  Moore;  MiOT,  Mems.;  Monitore  Napolitano ;  Vepe,  Mems.;  Roederer, 
(Eunjres ;  Savelli,  Souvenirs ;  S^gur,  Hist,  et  Mems.  ;  Ulloa,  Sollevazione. 


CHAPTER  V 

Joseph's  internal   policy 

Sentiments  of  Naples  towards  new  Government — Changed  condi- 
tions— Papal  hostility — Reform  and  its  agents — Peculation — 
Massena  —  Return  of  nobility  —  First  Ministry  —  Finance  — 
Roederer  —  Commerce  —  The  fondiaria — Other  taxes  —  Land 
registry — Farming  of  revenue — Forced  loan — Cedolas — Gran 
libro — The  Hope  loan — Regal  expenses — Pompeii — Anti-feudal 
legislation — Judicial  commissions  —  Legal  reform — Adminis- 
trative— Council  of  State — Education — Military — Suppression 
of  monastic  orders  —  Ministry  of  police  —  Saliceti  —  Mary 
Caroline's  intrigues — Plots  at  Naples — Bruno's  correspondence 
intercepted — Civic  patrols — Projected  rising  of  June  1807 — 
Police  measures — Mosca's  attempt — Peace  of  Tilsit — Sicilian 
policy  —  Acton's  fall  —  St.  Clair — Sicilian  sentiments — Mary 
Caroline  and  the  British — Eastern  affairs — Fox  declines  to  act 
in  Calabria — Hesse's  expedition — Battle  of  Mileto — Calabrian 
brigandage  —  Regnier  on  the  Strait  of  Messina  —  Treaty  of 
Tilsit,  Ionian  Islands — Gantheaume's  expedition. 

The  unopposed  entrance  of  Joseph  Bonaparte  into  Naples 
had  been  a  source  of  great  satisfaction  to  a  large  part 
of  the  citizens.  The  lazzaroni  had  been  given  no  time 
to  organize  disorder  ;  the  French  had  been  given  no 
provocation  for  attacking  the  city.  Thus  the  large 
class  whose  political  affections  are,  not  unreasonably, 
more  guided  by  considerations  of  material  interest  than 
by  sentiment,  were  in  a  sense  well  disposed  towards  the 
new  sovereign  ;  but  before  the  French  prince  had  been 

147 


148  THE  NAPOLEONIC  EMPIRE  parti 

in  possession  many  weeks,  this  feeling  began  to  pass, 
and  was  gradually  supplanted  by  the  apprehension  lest 
a  further  revolution  should  bring  back  the  old  Court, 
and  with  it  all  the  destruction  and  horrors  that  marked 
the  restoration  of  1799.  Yet  not  a  few,  some  in- 
spired with  confidence  and  a  zeal  for  reform,  others 
eager  to  obtain  official  station  at  any  risk,  made  show 
of  actively  supporting  the  new  Government.  Among 
these  were  many  of  the  amnestied  republicans  of 
1799,  and  not  a  few  prominent  men  who  had  hitherto 
proved  faithful  Bourbonists.  Cianciulli,  one  of  the 
regents  who  had  surrendered  the  city,  promptly  de- 
cided to  accept  office  ;  the  Duke  di  Gallo  threw  in 
his  lot  with  the  conquerors  before  even  the  frontier 
was  crossed  ;  many  other  prominent  men  followed  this 
example. 

There  were  many  reasons  why  the  French  conquest 
should  be  more  willingly  and  more  hopefully  accepted 
in  1806  than  it  had  been  in  1799.  The  mihtary 
i  prestige  of  the  young  Empire  was  even  greater  than 
^^  that  of  the  First  Republic  ;  its  ideals  of  civil  govern- 
ment appeared  to  avoid  the  extremes  both  of  democracy 
and  of  autocracy ;  last  and  perhaps  most  important  of  all 
to  the  inhabitants  of  a  country  so  firmly  attached  to 
Catholicism  as  Naples,  France  had  officially  been  con- 
verted back  from  atheism  to  her  ancient  faith,  so 
that  the  opposition  of  the  clerical  element  was  now  far 
less  unanimous,  far  less  envenomed  than  formerly. 
Since  1799  Bourbonism  had  displayed  its  most  revolting 
colours  ;  Bonapartism  had  shown  youthful  vigour  and 
healthy,  constructive  energy.  Can  it  be  wonderecTthat 
a  great  part  of  the  aristocracy  and  thinking  class  of 
Naples  showed  a  disposition  to  accept  the  new  order, — 
a '  disposition  tempered  only  by  a  fear  of  the  terrible 


CHAP.  V       JOSEPH'S  INTERNAL  POLICY  149 

consequences  that  might  attend  the  return  of  Ferdinand 
and  Mary  Caroline  ?  ^ 

Yet  even  under  these  circumstances  Joseph's  re- 
ception as  he  made  his  solemn  entry  into  the  city 
on  assuming  the  royal  dignity  astonished  his  friends. 
But  at  the  ceremonial  service  celebrated  at  the 
Church  of  the  Spirito  Santo,  the  clergy  showed  less 
enthusiasm  ;  Cardinal  Ruffo,  Archbishop  of  Naples, 
who  had  been  prevailed  on  to  officiate,  went  so  far 
indeed  as  to  omit  pointedly  all  mention  of  the  new 
king.  The  Cardinal's  omission  was  but  a  poor  re- 
compense for  the  magnificent  collar  of  diamonds  which 
Joseph  had  already  offered  at  the  shrine  of  S.  Gennaro, 
but  he  only  conformed  to  the  Pope's  opinion,  which 
was  that  the  new  King  of  Naples  was  no  king  at  all, 
but  merely  an  usurper.  This  attitude  of  the  higher 
clergy  and  of  Pius  VII.  towards  Joseph  was  one  of  the 
causes  that  led  to  the  quarrel  between  Napoleon  and 
the  Papacy,  a  quarrel  of  which  other  phases  will  be 
noticed  later  ;  suffice  it  to  say  for  the  present  that  the 
Emperor's  energetic  remonstrances  at  Rome  had  no 
effect  in  shaking  Pius,  who  clung  obstinately  to  his 
opinion,  and  therefore  Joseph  had  to  remain  an  un- 
consecrated  monarch, — a  very  serious  defect  in  his  title 
in  the  eyes  of  all  true  Neapolitans. 

If  he  could  not  obtain  sanction  of  religion,  and  thus 
gain  the  superstitious  reverence  of  his  subjects,  Joseph 
was  yet  very  firmly  resolved  to  win  their  personal 
affection  by  conferring  on  them  improved  and  decent 
methods  of  administration. 

The  task  of  introducing  reform  at  Naples  was  one 

1  How  deep-seated  that  fear  was  can  only  be  realized  by  a  perusal  of  the  con- 
temporaries. Nowhere  is  it  more  frequently  or  more  vividly  painted  than  in 
Nicola's  Diario. 


150  THE  NAPOLEONIC  EMPIRE  parti 

that  would  have  discouraged  any  but  the  men  who  had 
breathed  the  fortifying  atmosphere  of  the  great  Revolu- 
tion. It  was  fortunate  for  Joseph  that  he  had  several 
men  attached  to  his  service  who  had  learnt  their  state- 
craft at  that  wonderful  school.  For  Joseph  was  a 
king  more  by  his  weak  points  than  his  good.  As  a 
monarch  he  took  his  pleasures  royally,  and  was  apt  to 
forget  that  as  a  man  he  ardently  believed  in  the 
beneficent  duty  of  rulers,  in  education,  progress,  and 
civil  liberty.  The  work  of  reform  was  made  possible 
by  the  goodwill  of  the  King  and  by  the  fine  abilities, 
hard  work,  and  drastic  methods  of  such  men  as  Roederer, 
Dumas,  Miot,  and  Saliceti.  The  King  himself  took  no 
small  interest  and  part  in  their  labours,  and  if  we  could 
take  his  own  statements  literally,  laboured  scarcely 
less  than  the  great  Frederick  himself  at  affairs  of 
State. 

Unfortunately  there  came  into  Naples,  alongside  of 
the  men  of  real  ability  whose  talents  were  necessary  to 
the  country,  a  swarm  of  French  officials,  military  and 
civil,  distinguished  for  little  else  than  rapacity  and 
insolence.  To  them  Naples  was  a  conquered  country 
out  of  which  a  fortune  was  to  be  made  in  the  shortest 
possible  time.  Unfortunately  the  most  conspicuous  and 
most  unscrupulous  of  them  all  was  the  great  soldier 
who  commanded  the  French  army, — Marshal  Massena. 
Notwithstanding  the  eminence  and  fame  he  had 
attained,  he  could  not  discard  the  methods  of  his 
younger  days  when  his  occupations  had  been  those 
of  the  merchant  and  the  smuggler.  With  Massena 
victories  always  resolved  into  financial  profits,  and 
of  late  years  his  private  fortune  had  been  growing  by 
leaps  and  bounds.  One  of  his  chief  sources  of  revenue 
had    been   the    granting  of  so-called    licences  whereby 


CHAP.  V       JOSEPH'S  INTERNAL  POLICY  151 

cargoes  of  English  goods  were  surreptitiously  intro- 
duced and  sold  at  ports  occupied  by  the  French  forces. 
The  immense  sums  made  by  Massena  and  his  chief  of 
staff  in  northern  Italy  had  led  to  serious  difficulties 
between  him  and  the  Emperor.^  But  Napoleon  had 
not  felt  able  to  make  an  example  of  his  ablest  lieu- 
tenant, and  the  marshal  continued  in  command  of  the 
troops  in  the  kingdom  of  Naples,  and  continued  to 
set  the  most  evil  of  all  examples  to  his  subordinates. 
Fortunately  an  honest  man,  Mathieu  Dumas,  was 
appointed  Minister  of  War  ;  it  taxed  all  his  energies 
to  keep  under  some  sort  of  control  the  robberies  and 
exactions  of  his  military  commandants. 

One  of  the  first  objects  of  the  new  Government  was 
to  rally  to  its  support  the  nobility  of  the  kingdom, 
and  a  ready  means  of  securing  their  acquiescence,  if  not 
their  sympathy,  was  quickly  found.  Many  members 
of  the  aristocracy  had  followed  Ferdinand  in  his  flight 
to  Sicily,  but  a  decree  confiscating  the  landed  property 
of  all  absent  proprietors  soon  had  the  effect  of  bringing 
the  exiles  to  terms  and  of  thinning  the  ranks  of  the 
Court  circle  at  Palermo.  The  return  of  many  mem- 
bers of  the  aristocracy  to  Naples  helped  to  restore  its 
normal  appearance  to  the  capital.  There  had  in  fact 
been  little  break,  for  the  administrative  departments 
of  the  Government  had  continued  active,  and  it  was 
speedily  announced  that  although  reforms  were  to  be 
effected  no  sudden  change  would  be  introduced. 

The  names  of  the  King's  principal  French  advisers 
have  already  been  given,  and  will  soon  and  frequently 
recur  ;  they  were  helped  by  Neapolitans  from  the 
beginning,    and    Joseph's    first    ministry    included    the 

^  Amusing  accounts  of  how  Massena  was  made  to  disgorge  his  millions  may  be 
read  in  Lamarque  and  Marbot. 


152  THE  NAPOLEONIC  EMPIRE  parti 

Duke  di  Gallo,  Minister  for  Foreign  Affairs,  the 
Marquis  Cianciulli,  and  afterwards  Count  Ricciardi, 
Ministers  of  Justice.^ 

The  first  and  most  pressing  question  that  King 
Joseph's  Ministers  were  called  on  to  solve  was  that  of 
finance.  Neapolitan  credit  was  bad  enough  before 
the  war  ;  it  had  now  fallen  to  vanishing  point.  Gold 
was  not  to  be  found.  The  invaders  were  penniless,  and 
Napoleon  expected  the  conquest  of  Naples  to  earn 
money.  All  available  gold  and  silver  had  been  removed 
when  Mary  Caroline  left  the  capital,  and  the  English 
merchandise,  which  the  French  hoped  to  seize,  had 
all  been  safely  disposed  of  before  their  arrival.  Yet 
it  was  imperative  to  find  immediately  3^  millions 
of  francs  monthly  for  military  expenditure  alone. 
Joseph  pleaded  hard  for  assistance  from  his  brother, 
but  met  with  an  unwavering  negative  for  more  than 
a  year.  There  was  only  one  thing  Napoleon  would 
give  him,  and  that  was  advice.  He  repeatedly  enjoined 
on  him  to  levy  a  war  contribution  of  30,000,000  francs 
on  Naples  ;  but  Joseph,  w^hose  disposition  was  all  for 
milder  and  more  popular  courses,  could  not  bring 
himself  to  such  heroic  remedies.  He  called  to  his  aid 
instead  his  intimate  friend  of  republican  days,  the 
publicist  Roederer,  who  became  Minister  of  Finance 
in  November  1806.  He  was  eminently  the  man  for 
the  task,  for  though  lacking  the  polish  of  manner 
necessary  for  the  pursuit  of  diplomacy,  he  had  the 
strong  intelligence,  inflexible  rectitude,  ability  in 
administrative  and  drafting  work  that  go  to  the 
making    of  a    practical    financier.     He  was    not  only 

^  There  were  numerous  changes  in  the  first  few  months  not  of  sufficient 
importance  to  be  noted.  Other  Neapolitans  who  held  ministerial  office  were  the 
Prince  of  Bisignano,  Com.  Pignatelli,  Duke  of  Cassano,  Duke  of  Campochiaro,  and 
Duke  of  Laurenzano. 


CHAP.  V       JOSEPH'S  INTERNAL  POLICY  153 

above  peculation,  but  during  the  term  of  his  ministry 
at  Naples  even  refused  the  increase  of  his  salary  that 
the  King  pressed  on  him,  and  that,  in  the  estimation 
of  all  but  himself,  his  services  merited. 

The  problem  that  faced  this  capable  administrator 
was  doubly  difficult,  because  the  French  conquest  had 
brought  with  it  a  state  of  maritime  war  and  a  con- 
sequent closing  up  of  normal  trade  channels.  Exporta- 
tion of  wine  and  oil  had  fallen  to  nothing,  and  to  make 
matters  worse,  the  first  harvest  reaped  under  the  new 
Government  fetched  only  one-third  of  the  price  obtained 
in  the  preceding  year,  and  in  March  1807  Puglia  was  so 
full  of  wheat  that  it  was  practically  unsaleable.  From 
1806  to  1808  olive  oil  accumulated  to  such  an  extent 
tnat  in  the  latter  year  some  80  or  100  million  francs' 
worth  was  waiting  for  a  purchaser  that  could  not  be 
found.  In  the  meanwhile  British  merchants  looked 
for  new  sources  of  supply,  and  Sicily  profited  to  the 
extent  that  Naples  lost. 

Yet  so  great  were  the  administrative  improvements 
introduced  that  they  probably  compensated  for  the  lost 
trade,  while  the  incidence  of  taxation  was  very  greatly 
altered  in  favour  of  the  poorer  class.  Instead  of  the 
numerous  taxes  on  agriculture  and  produce,  a  single 
new  tax  was  levied,  based  on  the  taxpayers'  estimated 
revenue  from  land  and  other  sources  ;  this  was  known 
as  the  fondiaria.  For  the  purposes  of  assessing  the 
fondiaria  a  cadastral  survey  of  the  kingdom  was  pro- 
jected, which  was  soon  afterwards  commenced,  and  was 
completed  after  the  Bourbon  restoration  in  18 18.  In 
addition  to  the  fondiaria  three  principal  sources  of 
revenue  were  established,  —  the  Customs,  the  royal 
domain,  and  the  consolidated  taxes,  among  which  the 
lottery,  tobacco,  and  stamps  were  the  principal.     The 


J54  THE  NAPOLEONIC  EMPIRE  parti 

farming  of  the  revenue  was  stopped,  and  some  of  the 
taxes  that  had  borne  most  heavily  on  the  poor  were 
lightened,  as  for  instance  that  on  salt,  which  was 
reduced  by  5  grana  per  rotolo. 

But  finance  on  these  lines,  even  if  an  improvement 
on  the  past  and  promising  for  the  future,  was  quite 
useless  to  meet  the  crying  necessities  of  the  immediate 
present.  Ready  money  was  urgently  needed.  The 
credit  of  the  new  Government  was  not  yet  equal  to 
raising  a  loan  from  bankers,  nor  would  Napoleon  help 
his  brother  even  to  the  extent  of  paying  the  French 
troops  employed  in  the  kingdom.  Joseph  would  not 
impose  the  contribution  of  war  of  thirty  millions  the 
Emperor  constantly  urged  ;  he  had  recourse  instead  to 
a  forced  loan  of  1,200,000  ducats  (July  1806).  The 
acknowledgment  given  to  the  unwilling  creditors  of  the 
State  was  in  the  form  of  a  4  per  cent  cedola,  or  bond, 
secured  on  freehold  land  belonging  to  the  Government. 
Property  of  this  description  was  about  the  only  asset 
with  which  the  Government  was  well  furnished.  This 
v/as  largely  owing  to  the  operation  of  the  decree  against 
absent  landlords  already  noticed.  It  was,  therefore, 
further  decided  to  offer  some  of  this  property  for  sale 
in  small  holdings,  the  price  being  payable  one  quarter 
in  cash  and  three  quarters  in  cedolas.  This  tended  to 
establish  a  real  open  market  value  for  the  new  bonds. 
Cedolas  were  also  issued  in  satisfaction  of  the  claims  of 
the  farmers  of  the  arrendamenti^  whose  contracts  were 
terminated  ;  amongst  these  ecclesiastical  corporations 
figured  largely.  The  holders  of  the  cedolas  were 
registered  on  a  "  Gran  libro  de'  Creditori  dello  Stato," 
instituted  by  Roederer,  in  which  was  also  specified  the 
State  property  on  which  each  cedola  was  secured.  The 
first  debit  entry  or  specification  of  State  property  set 


cHAP.v       JOSEPH'S  INTERNAL  POLICY  155 

aside  for  the  creditors  in  the  year  1806  represented 
an  official  valuation  of  10,000,000  ducats. 

For  many  months  the  financial  struggle  was  severe, 
but  the  position  slowly  improved,  and  in  the  early 
part  of  1807  Napoleon  was  at  length  persuaded  to 
come  to  his  brother's  assistance,  in  the  first  instance  by 
granting  him  a  personal  allowance  of  half  a  million 
francs  a  month.  Towards  the  middle  of  1807  the 
finances  of  the  new  Government  were  beginning  to 
present  a  satisfactory  aspect,  and  as  at  this  precise 
moment  a  state  of  peace  had  been  re-established  on  the 
Continent  it  became  at  last  possible  to  negotiate  a  loan. 
This,  curiously  enough,  was  obtained,  after  roundabout 
negotiations  through  Lisbon  and  Amsterdam,  from 
the  well-known  Anglo-Dutch  house  of  Hope.  The 
nominal  amount  of  the  loan  was  3,000,000  florins.-^ 

Notwithstanding  Roederer's  efforts  Joseph  com- 
plained that  he  had  never  been  so  poor  ;  he  would  have 
been  more  correct  had  he  said  that  he  had  never  had 
so  much  to  spend.  His  regal  state  rivalled  and  even 
outshone  that  of  the  Bourbons.  At  the  palace  he 
employed  no  less  than  800  servants  at  salaries  of  twelve 
ducats  a  month  or  less,  and  his  Court  was  proportion- 
ately large  and  expensive.  Twenty-one  generals  and 
colonels  received  gifts  representing  annual  incomes  of 
from  2000  to  10,000  ducats,  while  the  ladies  of  his 
court,  both  married  and  unmarried,  had  no  ground  to 
complain  of  lack  of  attention  or  of  lack  of  generosity. 
Madame  de  Blaniac  and  Mile.  Miot  each  received 
dotations  of  nearly  6000  ducats  a  year,  and  the 
capitalized  value   of  such  gifts  rose  to  a   grand    total 

^  A  lengthy  file  of  documents,  covering  the  negotiations  with  the  inter- 
mediaries employed  by  the  Hopes,  may  be  consulted  in  the  Neapolitan  Archi'ves, 
XXX.  224. 


156  THE  NAPOLEONIC  EMPIRE  parti 

of  over  2,000,000  ducats.     It  was  not  remarkable  that 
recourse  to  the  Hopes  had  been  necessary. 

Joseph  rewarded  those  Neapolitan  noblemen  who 
paid  him  their  court  no  less  than  his  French  officers. 
He  instituted  an  order  of  knighthood,  of  the  Two 
Sicilies,  the  star  of  which  bore  the  legend  ''  Renovata 
patria."  He  coined  money  also  as  king  of  the  Two 
Sicilies  ;  Ferdinand  at  Palermo,  with  rather  more  justi- 
fication, doing  the  same.  In  general  he  displayed  a 
pomp  and  luxury  that  conciliated  some  men,  indisposed 
others,  but  did  not  succeed  in  making  his  awkward 
figure  and  affected  manner  kingly,  or  even  in  imposing 
on  the  keen  perceptions  of  the  populace.  Yet  the 
contrast  between  the  old  court  and  the  new  was  not 
altogether  to  the  disadvantage  of  the  latter.  Fashions 
had  changed  as  well  as  men  during  the  great  upheaval 
of  the  last  twenty  years.  Ruffles  and  lace,  flounces 
and  true  lovers'  knots,  hoops  and  rigid  corsets,  com- 
plicated head-dresses  and  delicate  Watteau  tints,  had 
disappeared  with  the  great  ladies  they  had  adorned. 
The  son  of  a  lawyer  and  the  daughter  of  a  merchant 
now  sat  on  the  throne  of  Naples, — and  how  changed 
was  the  scene  in  the  apartments  of  the  Royal  Palace  ! 
Women  dressed  in  too  low-cut  and  too  clinging  draperies 
of  classic  form  and  unrelieved  colour,  their  ornaments 
suggestive  of  the  buried  cities  of  the  Campagna  that 
so  dearly  interested  the  King,  their  looks  alternately 
bold  and  languishing,  and  as  a  background  the  straight 
lines  of  mural  decoration  and  rigid  furniture,  the 
brilliant  and  often  extravagant  uniforms  of  soldiers, 
bold  men  and  loud-voiced,  barrack -room  parvenus, 
but  brave  and  efficient  on  the  battlefield.  Perhaps  the 
atmosphere  suggested  vulgarity  and  pushful  struggle, 
yet  the  Court  centred  about  a  sovereign  whose  fore- 


CHAP.  V       JOSEPH'S  INTERNAL  POLICY  157 

head  and  whose  surroundings  proclaimed  intelligence  and 
power.     Could  as  much  be  said  of  Ferdinand  Nasone  ? 

Joseph  not  only  supported  the  classical  revival  as  a 
matter  of  fashion,  but,  being  a  good  latinist,  supported 
it  intelligently.  He  purchased  the  ground  covering 
the  lost  city  of  Pompeii,  and  took  an  active  and 
understanding  interest  in  the  work  of  excavating  its 
treasures.  He  liberally  encouraged  education,  art, 
and  music.  But  we  have  dwelt  long  enough  on  the 
financial  and  personal  aspects  of  the  assumption  of 
the  Neapolitan  crown  by  Joseph  Bonaparte  ;  matters 
of  administration  and  of  law  must  now  be  dealt  with, 
and  especially  those  relating  to  the  feudal  system. 

The  declared  policy  of  the  Government  and  the 
personal  inclination  of  the  King  were  to  sweep  away 
without  mercy  every  vestige  of  feudalism.  Feudal 
tenures  v/ere  immediately  abolished  on  the  private 
domains  of  the  Crown,  and  the  peasantry  was  relieved 
from  vexatious  restrictions  and  encouraged  in  agri- 
cultural pursuits.  So  firmly  were  the  old  feudal  ideas 
rooted,  however,  so  little  was  it  understood  what  the 
advent  of  a  Napoleonic  government  meant,  that  no 
sooner  had  Joseph  arrived  in  Naples  than  he  received 
various  petitions  from  barons  who  had  been  deprived 
of  some  of  their  privileges  after  the  troubles  of  1799, 
praying  for  the  restitution  of  their  feudal  rights  of 
jurisdiction.  Such  misconceptions  did  not  long  con- 
tinue. By  decree  of  the  2nd  of  August  1806  all 
baronial  jurisdiction,  all  rights  to  personal  services, 
and  all  water  rights  were  abolished.  A  month  later 
a  decree  was  issued  providing  for  the  division  of  feudal 
land  among  actual  occupiers.  Land  situated  near  a 
village,  not  actually  in  the  use  of  the  feudal  owner,  but 
occupied,  and  especially  if  improved  by  the  occupier, 


158  THE  NAPOLEONIC  EMPIRE  parti 

was  to  be  assigned  in  freehold  to  the  Universita  at  a 
compensation  to  be  fixed  by  the  council  of  the  chief 
civil  functionary  of  the  province.  Another  decree 
(September  1806),  following  the  precedent  set  by  the 
Neapolitan  Republic  in  1799,  declared  majorati  and 
fideicommessi  illegal ;  it  aimed,  in  other  words,  at  remov- 
ing the  fetters  of  inalienability  that  was  the  chief  cause 
of  the  stagnation  of  Neapolitan  property  and  capital. 

Much  of  this  legislation,  however,  remained  in- 
effective save  that  it  prepared  the  way  for  the  more 
drastic  measures  that  were  to  follow  and  finally  rid 
Naples  of  feudalism.  Yet  a  number  of  Universita 
endeavoured  to  obtain  what  advantage  they  could  from 
the  new  laws  and  from  the  favourable  spirit  of  the  new 
Government.  Hence  a  great  mass  of  litigation  was 
started  or  revived.  This  only  made  matters  worse, 
and  to  clear  the  legal  congestion  and  cut  through  to 
a  reasonable  working  basis  it  was  finally  decreed,  in 
November  1 807,  that  a  special  court  should  be  assembled 
in  the  course  of  the  year  1808  to  try  all  cases  turning 
on  contested  feudal  rights  between  the  Universita  and 
the  barons.  The  notable  proceedings  of  that  court 
shall  receive  notice  in  due  course  ;  here  they  can  find 
no  place,  as  they  belong  to  the  events  of  another  reign 
and  not  to  that  of  Joseph  Bonaparte. 

With  the  kingdom  in  such  a  state  of  criminal, 
pohjdcal,  and  military  disorder  as  it  was  during  the 
period  immediatdyToIIowing  the"  invasion,  it  was  found 
necessary  to  have  recourse  to  extraordinary  and  summary 
judicial  processes.  Alongside  of  the  courts -martial, 
four  exceptional  judicial  commissions  were  constituted. 
In  four  months  they  disposed  of  5000  prisoners.  In 
August  1806  these  commissions  were  converted  into 
regular    tribunals  dealing  with  matters  of  brigandage. 


CHAP.  V       JOSEPH'S  INTERNAL  POLICY  159 

high  police,  and  treason.  In  the  meanwhile  prepara- 
tions were  being  made  for  codifying  Neapolitan  law 
on  the  model  of  the  Code  Napoleon.  The  Emperor 
repeatedly  urged  on  his  brother  the  introduction  of 
the  imperial  legislation,  and  the  chief  features  of  the 
French  system  were  gradually  brought  in.  Trial  by 
jury  was  not  established,  and  it  may  be  doubted  whether 
it  would  have  been  politic  to  do  so.  A  great  step 
forward,  however,  was  marked  by  the  introduction  of 
publicity  of  debates,  and  the  people  of  Naples  quickly 
availed  themselves  of  this  beneficial  innovation  by 
thronging  the  courts  of  justice.  So  great  was  the 
popular  impression  made  by  this  reform  that  a 
contemporary  historian  of  Naples  remarked  of  it  : 
"  The  law  which  .  .  .  had  been  only  an  instrument 
to  preserve  tranquillity  .  .  .  became  for  the  future 
an  instrument  of  political  rights."  -^ 

Matters  of  administration  as  of  law  were  recast  on 
the  French  model.  The  ancient  territorial  divisions 
of  the  kingdom  were  reframed.  The  Universita  were 
given  a  local  government  body  of  ten  to  thirty  land- 
holders styled  decurionato^  who  elected  their  syndic  and 
sent  a  representative  to  a  provincial  council.  The 
syndic  was  checked  by  the  sotto  intendente  of  each 
district,  and  he  in  turn  by  the  intendente  of  the  province, 
who  depended  directly  on  the  Minister  of  the  Interior, 
and  whose  functions  might  be  described  as  including 
matters  of  administration,  of  taxation,  and  of  high 
police.  The  municipal  and  provincial  councils  of 
landowners  were  merely  consultative,  and  as  they  were 
for  the  most  part  made  up  of  men  who  were  partisans 
of  the  Government  and  unversed  in  matters  of  adminis- 
tration,   they    did    little    to    modify    the    rule    of    the 

■^  CoUetta,  Storia,  ii.  65, 


i6o  THE  NAPOLEONIC  EMPIRE  parti 

Minister  of  the  Interior  and  the  hierarchy  of  Govern- 
ment functionaries.  A  hasty  judgment  might  indeed 
lead  to  the  opinion  that  the  whole  system  was  little 
more  than  a  sham, — a  tax-collecting  and  administrative 
machine  ostentatiously  swathed  in  popular  and  repre- 
sentative forms.  Yet  this  judgment  would  be  more 
rightly  applied  to  the  system  as  exemplified  in  France 
under  the  Empire  than  in  Naples  under  the  French 
kings.  For  in  France  the  centralized  bureaucracy  of 
Napoleon  was  a  retrogression,  but  on  the  contrary  in 
Naples  the  system  introduced  by  Joseph  Bonaparte 
was  a  great  political  advance.  In  the  opinion  of  many 
educated  and  liberal  Neapolitans  it  was  quite  as  great 
an  advance  as  the  country  was  ready  for.  And  it 
might  further  be  pointed  out  that  these  reforms  were 
sincerely  intended  as  steps  towards  a  more  liberal 
and  better  system  of  government  by  Roederer,  by 
the  King,  and  especially  by  such  Neapolitan  adminis- 
trators as  Zurlo,  Ricciardi,  and  Winspeare.^  Another 
step  forward  was  marked  in  the  formation  of  a  Council 
of  State  of  thirty-six  members,  whose  functions  were 
to  debate  and  consult  on  every  measure. 

In  matters  of  education  the  Government  took  even 
greater  steps  towards  progress  than  in  civil  administra- 
tion. It  was  decreed  that  every  Universita  should  be 
endowed  with  a  free  school  for  both  sexes,  and  every 
province  with  a  college.  A  Royal  Academy  was  also 
founded  devoted  to  the  encouragement  of  history, 
literature,  science,  and  art.  Schools  for  the  deaf -mute 
were  founded  and  the  prisons  were  reformed. 

The  militia  of  the  kingdom  was  maintained  under 

^  Roederer  in  an  official  report  to  Joseph  shows  clearly  the  line  of  future  progress 
aimed  at  when  he  says  :  "...  in  establishing  the  provincial  general  councils  your 
Majesty  has  laid  the  foundations  of  a  national  representation." — Rapporto,  1806,  15. 


CHAP.  V       JOSEPH'S  INTERNAL  POLICY  i6i 

a  slightly  modified  form,  and  steps  were  soon  taken 
to  reconstitute  a  native  army.  Brigands  and  Sicilian 
recruits  were  obtained  in  large  numbers,  and  from 
this  unpromising  material  four  regiments  were  formed 
under  French  discipline  and  supervision.  Neapolitan 
officers  were  attached  to  the  King's  staff,  among  others 
the  dashing  Filangieri  and  D'  Ambrosio,  who  both  rose 
to  high  rank  later.  A  regular  conscription  was  decreed, 
that  took  one  man  per  thousand  for  military  service  in 
1807,  ^^^  t^^t  afterwards  rose  to  three  per  thousand 
in  1808,  and  five  per  thousand  in  1809.  The  navy 
was  reorganized  on  similar  lines.  Many  gunboats  were 
built,  and  at  the  close  of  1807  there  were  eighty  ships 
ready  for  action. 

The  most  dangerous  of  all  the  reforming  measures 
of  the  new  Government  was  that  of  suppressing 
religious  corporations.  The  clergy,  and  especially  the 
monks,  were  hostile  to  the  French.  It  was  at  a 
monastery  that  Fra  Diavolo  had  obtained  shelter  at 
Avellino  ;  that  monastery  the  Government  suppressed 
as  a  punishment.  Its  large  estates  were  duly  confiscated, 
and  were  inscribed  in  the  Gran  Libro  as  a  security  for 
the  holders  of  cedolas. 

The  closing  of  this  monastery  proved  so  simple, 
so  satisfactory,  and  so  lucrative  an  operation  that  the 
Government's  appetite  was  whetted.  Precedents  were 
not  wanting ;  Joseph's  two  predecessors,  Charles  III. 
and  Ferdinand,  had  profited  not  a  little  from  the 
expulsion  of  the  Augustinian,  Jesuit,  and  other  Orders, 
and  where  they  had  led  the  way  the  French  Prince 
could  not  hesitate  to  follow.  The  suppression  of  the 
monasteries  was  purely  and  simply  a  measure  of 
spoliation  dictated  by  lack  of  money  ;  nothing  shows 
this  better  than  the  form  of  Joseph's  announcement  of 

VOL.  r  M 


1 62  THE  NAPOLEONIC  EMPIRE  parti 

the  fact  to  Napoleon  :  "I  have  just  suppressed  all 
the  rich  Orders."  The  monasteries  whose  property- 
was  thus  confiscated  numbered  213  ;  their  value  was 
estimated  at  about  150  millions  of  ducats;  they 
belonged  to  Orders  following  the  rule  of  S.  Bernard 
and  S.  Benedict,  which  included  the  Cassinesi,  Olivetani, 
Celestini,  Verginiani,  Certosini,  Camaldolesi,  Cisterciani, 
and  Bernardoni.  It  was  provided  that  their  property, 
now  devolving  on  the  Crown,  should  be  applied  to  the 
benefit  of  the  creditors  of  the  State.  Each  monk 
received  a  life  pension  of  from  60  to  120  ducats 
per  annum  ;  and  100  were  specially  excepted  for  the 
special  purpose  of  caring  for  the  valuable  libraries 
and  archives  of  Monte  Cassino,  La  Cava,  and  Monte 
Vergine.  The  preamble  of  the  decree  of  confiscation 
was  drawn  up  in  the  most  soothing  terms,  but  that 
could  not  alter  the  fact  that  every  one  of  the  dis- 
possessed monks  at  once  became  a  focus  of  dissatisfac- 
tion and  sedition  to  the  new  Government. 

Sedition  was  in  truth  the  most  serious  of  all  the 
difficulties  the  Government  had  to  cope  with,  and  the 
duty  of  facing  it  was  especially  intrusted  to  the  most 
astute  and  capable  of  all  King  Joseph's  Ministers. 
On  the  7th  of  March  1806  the  Monitore  contained  a 
decree  instituting  a  Ministry  of  Police,  and  placing 
Cristoforo  Saliceti  at  its  head. 

Saliceti  was  a  remarkable  man.  Of  Genoese 
parentage,  though  a  French  citizen,  he  had  been  a 
member  of  the  Convention,  had  sat  with  the  Mountain, 
had  voted  the  death  of  Louis  XVI.,  and  had  himself 
narrowly  escaped  the  guillotine  a  little  later.  Yet 
Saliceti  was  one  of  the  most  capable  of  the  violent 
republicans.  He  had  great  administrative  and  executive 
talents,  was  indefatigable,   ardent,   and  courageous   to 


cHAP.v       JOSEPH'S  INTERNAL  POLICY  163 

the  point  of  audacity.  Napoleon  had  known  him 
through  their  mutual  friend  Madame  Permon,  and 
had  formed  a  just  estimate  of  his  exceptional  ability. 
During  the  campaign  of  Italy,  in  1796,  Saliceti  had 
been  attached  to  the  young  general's  headquarters  as 
representant  du  peuple ;  in  this  capacity  he  obtained 
Murat's  promotion  to  the  rank  of  general,  and, 
early  recognising  the  extraordinary  genius  of  Napoleon, 
he  adopted  the  policy  of  following  his  fortune  and 
accepting  his  superiority.  Between  him  and  the  future 
Emperor  there  appears  to  have  been  neither  love  nor 
esteem,  only  that  mutual  respect  and  understanding 
that  one  high  intelligence  feels  for  another.  When 
Napoleon  attained  power  he  declined  to  employ 
Saliceti  in  France  ;  he  once  declared  to  Dumas  that 
the  Minister  of  Police  was  doing  fine  work  in  Naples, 
and  that  there  he  might  stop  ;  his  return  to  France 
could  not  be  permitted,  for  it  was  not  possible  for 
him  to  protect  "  les  miserables  qui  ont  vote  la  mort 
de  Louis  XVI."  Yet  he  did  not  scruple  to  employ 
Fouche ! 

Saliceti  had  followed  the  French  armies  at  a  time 
when  peculation  was  at  its  worst,  and  it  has  never 
been  suggested  that  he  set  his  face  against  it. 
Napoleon,  in  fact,  openly  accused  him  of  it  in  con- 
nection with  some  English  merchandise  confiscated  at 
Leghorn,  and  Miot,  who  shared  his  labours  at  Naples, 
recorded  the  following  dubious  opinion,  that,  "  without 
perhaps  seeking  to  increase  his  own  fortune,  he  allowed 
those  about  him  to  make  theirs."  ^ 

The  methods  of  the  Neapolitan  police  and  the  army 
of  spies  and  informers  with  which  its  head  was  soon 
surrounded,  created  an  atmosphere  where  honesty  and 

1  Miot,  ii.  181. 


i64  THE  NAPOLEONIC  EMPIRE  parti 

truth  stood  every  chance  of  being  stifled.  The  vendetta, 
interested  denunciations,  and  imaginary  plots  made  up 
a  large  part  of  the  work  of  this  department  of  State. 
But  alongside  of  much  that  was  personally  vindictive, 
much  that  was  purely  imaginative,  there  were  also 
grains  of  real  conspiracy  constantly  sown  by  the 
emissaries  of  the  Court  of  Palermo.  For  it  will 
hardly  be  too  much  to  say  that  Saliceti's  tenure  of 
office  was  one  long  secret  duel  with  Mary  Caroline. 

From  Palermo  the  defeated  Queen  urged  every  step 
that  might  restore  her  stolen  throne.  Among  the 
refugees  who  returned  to  Naples  at  the  threatened 
confiscation  of  their  estates  were  many  of  her  spies. 
Her  capimassi  and  agents  were  landed  at  every  point  of 
the  coast.  From  Ponza  Canosa  worked  a  vast  network 
of  secret  correspondence,  that  stretched  from  Naples 
all  over  the  kingdom.  At  Leghorn  and  Florence 
she  had  private  agents  who  received  instructions  and 
advice  from  her  own  hand,  often  in  writing  rendered 
invisible  by  the  use  of  lemon  juice.  From  Palermo 
to  Capri  and  from  Capri  to  Leghorn  cruised  small 
feluccas  conveying  her  emissaries  and  correspondence ; 
this  cost  her  large  sums,  and  was  eventually  of  far  more 
profit  to  her  chief  agent,  Castrone,  than  to  herself,  as 
she  afterwards  discovered.  For  several  years  the  Queen 
spent  from  one  to  one  and  a  half  million  ducats  a  year 
on  spies,  informers,  and  pensioned  Neapolitans. 

Mary  Caroline's  firm  belief  was  that  all  Naples  was 
for  the  Bourbons  except  the  lawyers  and  the  aristo- 
cracy, and,  making  allowance  for  the  large  neutral  mass 
that  had  little  prejudice  except  against  violent  change, 
the  Queen  was  perhaps  not  so  far  wrong.  Among  the 
lazzaroni  and  the  lower  classes  at  all  events  there  was 
much  unrest,  dissatisfaction,  and  hope  for  the  return  of 


CHAP.  V       JOSEPH'S  INTERNAL  POLICY  165 

Ferdinand.  The  working  of  the  well-organised  police 
under  Saliceti's  energetic  superintendence  was  an  in- 
novation that  was  far  from  relished.  Crime  was  sternly- 
repressed  ;  the  streets  of  Naples  were  lighted  ;  large 
batches  of  convicts  were  shipped  to  Toulon  to  work  at 
the  new  docks  ;  military  commissions  ordered  numerous 
executions  for  treasonable  offences. 

For  the  executions  there  was  absolute  necessity  if 
the  French  dominion  was  to  be  maintained.  Already, 
in  June  1806,  while  the  tide  of  the  invaders'  first 
success  was  yet  flowing,  there  was  a  conspiracy  and 
attempted  rising  in  Naples.  The  Sicilian  red  cockade 
was  shown,  but  the  police  was  warned,  and  the  trouble 
was  not  allowed  to  come  to  a  head.  The  date  chosen 
for  the  outbreak  was  the  14th  of  June,  anniversary  of 
the  capture  of  Naples  by  the  royalists  seven  years  before, 
and  the  whole  current  of  public  sympathies,  opinions, 
hopes,  and  fears  recalled  the  period  of  the  fall  of  the 
Parthenopean  Republic.  But  for  a  time  the  energies 
of  Mary  Caroline  and  the  Sicilian  Court  were  diverted 
to  the  insurrection  of  Calabria,  which,  fanned  into  flame 
by  the  French  defeat  at  Maida,  offered  for  many  weeks 
some  hopes  of  success  for  the  royal  cause.  As  these 
hopes  declined,  conspiracy  and  agitation  were  renewed 
at  Naples,  und  through  the  winter  of  1806  the  police 
was  kept  vigorously  at  work. 

In  the  spring  of  1 807  the  royalist  intrigues  culminated ; 
but  Saliceti  held  the  threads  in  his  hands.  In  December 
1 806  a  letter  had  come  into  the  possession  of  the  police 
addressed  by  Bruno,  who  commanded  the  Sicilian  flotilla 
at  Capri,  to  a  royalist  partisan  named  Agostino  Jiovine. 
The  letter  was  answered  by  the  police  in  the  name  of 
Jiovine,  and  a  regular  correspondence  was  carried  on 
for  several  months,  whereby   the  plans   of  the   Court 


1.66  THE  NAPOLEONIC  EMPIRE  parti 

became  completely  known  to  Saliceti.  Mary  Caroline's 
design  was  apparently  to  invade  Calabria  and,  on  the 
dispatch  of  French  reinforcements  from  Naples  to  the 
threatened  point,  to  raise  an  insurrection  in  the  city. 
The  military  part  of  this  plan  was  intrusted  to  the 
Prince  of  Hesse,  now  recovered  from  his  wounds,  and 
for  the  present  all  that  need  be  said  of  it  is  that  it 
proved  a  complete  failure.  At  Naples  the  danger  run 
by  the  Government  was  far  greater. 

The  public  mind  had  been  much  agitated  by  distorted 
rumours  on  the  subject  of  the  winter  campaign  fought 
between  the  French  and  Russians  in  eastern  Prussia, — so 
long  with  undecisive  results.^  The  lazzaroni  were  full 
of  the  idea  that  the  time  had  now  come  when  the 
French  would  have  to  retreat  to  the  north  and  Ferdinand 
might  reascend  the  throne  ;  the  fear  and  dismay  of  the 
middle  and  upper  class  was  scarcely  less  than  it  had  been 
in  1799.  The  civic  guard  anxiously  patrolled  the  city  at 
night.  The  excitement  and  rumours  increased  until  at 
last,  when  the  Government  knew  that  Hesse's  expedi- 
tion was  on  the  point  of  sailing  from  Sicily  for  Calabria, 
the  blow  fell.  The  first  week  in  June  had  been  fixed 
as  the  date  for  the  revolt,  and  it  was  reported  that  the 
burning  of  the  Palazzo  Satriano  was  to  be  the  signal  for 
the  approach  of  Bruno's  Sicilian  flotilla,  and  perhaps  also 
of  the  British  vessels  off  Capri.  All  this  was  well  known 
to  the  police.  On  the  22nd  of  May  a  great  number  of 
arrests  were  ordered,  and  a  perfect  reign  of  terror 
ensued.  A  number  of  the  principal  royalist  leaders 
were  immediately  tried,  and  numerous  executions 
followed,  notably  those  of  the  Duke  di  Filomarino  and 
the  Marquis  Palmieri.  On  the  Piazza  del  Castello,  at 
one  of  these  executions,  the  crowd  became   somewhat 

^   Pultusk,  Dec.  25,  1806  J  Eylau,  Feb.  8,  1807  ;  Friedland,  June  14,  1807. 


cHAP.v       JOSEPH'S  INTERNAL  POLICY  167 

disorderly.  This  proved  a  sufficient  incentive  to  the 
civic  guards  to  charge  the  lazzaroni  and  to  clear  the 
square  and  adjoining  streets,  with  considerable  con- 
sequent mortality.  The  city  was  seething  with  excite- 
ment, but  the  resolute  bearing  of  the  Government 
carried  the  day.  For  six  weeks  Naples  lived  under 
Saliceti's  new  reign  of  terror,  of  which  the  culmination 
was  marked  by  Mosca's  attempt. 

Agostino  Mosca  was  a  leader  of  free  corps  of  much 
the  same  general  character  as  Fra  Diavolo  ;  Ferdinand 
had  granted  him  the  rank  of  colonel,  and  when  arrested 
in  the  woods  near  Castellamare,  just  south  of  Naples,  he 
was  attired  in  the  scarlet  uniform  of  the  Sicilian  army. 
The  part  he  was  intended  to  fill  in  the  conspiracy  was 
that  of  assassinating  King  Joseph,  and  to  attain  that 
object  he  was  heavily  armed,  though  it  does  not  appear 
precisely  in  what  manner  he  intended  to  carry  out  the 
deed. 
(  ,>fr  Mosca  had  been  landed  through  the  agency  of  the 
\  Prince  of  Canosa  ;  and  on  him  was  found,  among  other 
things,  a  bracelet  woven  from  a  woman's  hair,  which  he 
admitted  to  be  that  of  the  Queen's,  and  to  have  been 
given  to  him  by  Canosa.  Various  letters  were  also 
found  on  him  ;  several  from  Canosa  and  the  Marchesa 
di  Villa  Tranfo,  one  of  Mary  Caroline's  ladies,  inciting 
him  to  murder  Joseph.  One  letter  in  the  Queen's  own 
writing,  addressed  to  Mosca,  was  produced  at  the  trial, 
and  was  in  the  following  terms  : — 

Agostino  Mosca,  perform  zealously  and  energetically  that 
which  you  have  promised  to  do  for  the  good  service  of  the 
king  ;  if  successful,  you  may  rely  on  my  protection.  28th  of 
February  1807.     Carolina. 

The  evidence  was  damning  against  Mosca,  it  not  against 


i68  THE  NAPOLEONIC  EMPIRE  parti 

Mary  Caroline.  He  was  tried,  found  guilty,  and  duly 
executed  in  the  Piazza  del  Mercato,  where  he  died 
somewhat  ungracefully,  clad  in  his  scarlet  uniform, 
reeling  from  too  copious  potations,  and  whiningly 
confessing  his  crime.^ 

For  several  weeks  the  police,  Saliceti,  and  terror  ruled 
Naples,  and  then,  in  the  middle  of  July,  came  the  news 
that  Napoleon's  great  victory  at  Friedland  had  been 
followed  by  a  peace  signed  at  Tilsit.  All  danger  of 
revolt  was  by  this  time  crushed  out,  all  fear  for  the 
stability  of  the  French  Empire  was  removed,  and  Joseph 
immediately  decreed  rejoicings  in  honour  of  peace,  and 
proclaimed  a  general  amnesty  for  political  offences 
(23rd  of  July  1807). 

Thus  was  foiled  the  last  serious  attempt  made  by 
the  Court  of  Palermo  to  unseat  King  Joseph,  and  that 
chiefly  owing  to  the  acuteness  and  remorseless  energy 
of  Saliceti.  One  episode  of  that  attempt  that  has  so  far 
only  been  briefly  alluded  to  must  now  be  dealt  with, — 
the  Prince  of  Hesse's  expedition  to  Calabria.  For  the 
better  understanding  of  events  it  will  now  be  necessary 
to  return  to  the  course  of  military  affairs  in  the  southern 
province,  and  to  trace  the  operations  of  the  French  and 
British  for  the  control  of  the  eastern  Mediterranean. 

The  struggle  between  the  two  parties  in  the  Sicilian 
Court  had  continued  after  its  arrival  at  Palermo.  Acton, 
strong  in  the  support  of  the  King  and  in  the  failure  that 
had  attended  Mary  Caroline's  policy,  promptly  recovered 
power.     His  object,  one  in  which  Ferdinand  concurred, 

^  Doubts  have  been  thrown  on  the  reality  of  Mosca's  attempt,  but  there  is 
nothing  in  the  evidence  given  at  the  trial  that  appears  at  all  improbable.  As 
nothing  definite  has  ever  been  put  forw^ard  to  rebut  that  evidence  one  must  accept  it, 
though  guardedly.  In  the  account  here  given,  the  official  report  has  been  generally 
followed.     See  Saliceti,  Rapporto  ,•  Nicola,  Diario  ,•  Joseph,  Corr. 


cHAP.v       JOSEPH'S  INTERNAL  POLICY  169 

was  more  to  preserve  Sicily  than  to  reconquer  Naples, 
and  to  secure  that  end  he  was  prepared  to  place  his 
conduct  completely  under  British  guidance.  The  Queen, 
at  first  unduly  depressed,  soon  recovered  spirits  and 
influence  ;  she  turned  openly  against  her  old  friend 
Acton,  established  the  amiable  St.  Clair  as  her  declared 
favourite,  showed  her  dislike  to  the  British,  and  to 
Elliot  in  particular,  more  plainly  than  before,  and 
entered  on  a  course  of  which  some  of  the  results  in 
Calabria  have  already  been  noted.  Before  the  end  of 
1806  Ferdinand  had  virtually  resigned  the  direction  of 
affairs  once  more  to  his  wife,  and  Acton  was  honourably 
sent  into  retirement.  But  the  Queen's  policy  remained 
largely  a  personal  one  ;  St.  Clair,  who  was  no  politician, 
counted  for  nothing. 

Among  the  Sicilians  were  several  parties,  but  none 
favourable  to  the  Queen.  A  few  hoped  for  a  French 
invasion  ;  others  derived  British  sympathies  from  the 
increased  trade  and  prosperity  of  the  island  ;  others 
again  dreamed  of  Sicilian  progress  and  constitutional 
autonomy  ;  only  the  band  of  pensioned  Neapolitans 
and  of  salaried  spies  supported  the  policy  of  blind 
vindictiveness  pursued  by  the  Queen. 

The  British  generals  without  exception,  —  Craig, 
Stuart,  Fox,  and  Moore, — detested  the  Queen  and  her 
policy.  They  had  witnessed  the  horrors  committed  by 
the  masse  in  Calabria,  and  preferred  leaving  the  British 
arms  unstained  by  association  with  them  to  attempting 
military  operations  with  their  help.  After  Stuart's 
return  to  Messina  he  had  been  superseded  by  Fox,  and 
the  latter  was  soon  after  succeeded  by  his  second  in 
command,  Sir  John  Moore.  The  British  troops  were 
largely  reinforced,  and  for  a  time  it  looked  as  though 
the  British  Cabinet  meditated  a  strong  military  diversion 


170  THE  NAPOLEONIC  EMPIRE  parti 

against  Napoleon  in  Italy.  Russia  urged  this  course, 
and  the  failure  to  effect  this  diversion  was  eventually 
put  forward  by  Russia  as  an  excuse  for  the  signing  of 
a  separate  peace  with  France  at  Tilsit. 

But  the  thought  of  offensive  action  in  Italy,  for  a 
moment  flattered  by  the  brilliant  stroke  at  Maida,  soon 
gave  way  to  more  pressing  considerations.  Danger 
now  threatened  England  at  a  point  much  closer  to 
Egypt.  By  a  great  diplomatic  victory  Napoleon  had 
succeeded  in  detaching  Turkey  from  the  ranks  of  his 
enemies.  British  influence  no  longer  predominated  at 
Constantinople  ;  the  communications  of  Russia  with 
the  Mediterranean  were  cut  off,  and  England  viewed 
with  misgiving  a  change  in  the  political  arrangements  in 
the  East,  of  which  the  next  development  might  prove 
of  an  even  more  threatening  nature.  The  Cabinet 
resolved  to  attack  the  Turk  vigorously  by  sea  and  land, 
and  to  make  sure  of  the  possession  of  Egypt.  Admiral 
Duckworth  was  sent  to  bombard  Constantinople,  and 
Moore  received  orders  to  detach  5000  men  from 
Messina  for  the  capture  of  Alexandria  (November  1 806). 

Just  at  the  time  when  the  British  army  in  Sicily  was 
thus  reduced  Mary  Caroline  began  meditating  the  plan 
for  the  recovery  of  the  kingdom,  of  which  the  projected 
insurrection  of  Naples  and  the  assassination  of  King 
Joseph  were  parts.  She  was  anxious  to  secure  the  co- 
operation of  the  British  forces  in  an  invasion  of  Calabria. 
Drummond,  who  had  succeeded  Fox  as  British  Minister, 
concurred  in  Mary  Caroline's  views,  and  attempted  to 
persuade  Moore  into  compliance,  but  in  vain.  The 
English  general  would  not  co-operate  with  the  Queen 
on  any  terms,  and  Sir  John  Moore  went  so  far  as 
openly  to  advocate  that  she  should  be  removed  from 
the  throne. 


CHAP.v       JOSEPH'S  INTERNAL  POLICY  171 

This  refusal  only  increased  Mary  Caroline's  jealousy 
and  hatred  of  the  British.  Her  determination  to 
strike  her  great  blow  was  not  shaken.  She  decided 
that  if  British  assistance  could  not  be  obtained  the 
Sicilian  army  alone  should  invade  Calabria,  and  she 
chose  the  Prince  of  Hesse  for  the  chief  command. 

The  Sicilian  general  selected  as  his  point  of  dis- 
embarkation the  extremity  of  the  peninsula.  The 
French  had  as  yet  but  small  detachments  south  of 
Monteleone,  and  had  not  even  attacked  the  British 
garrisons  left  behind  by  Sir  John  Stuart  after  Maida  at 
Reggio  and  Scilla.  He  had  with  him  some  5000 
Sicilian  troops,  and  advanced  directly  on  Monteleone. 
A  number  of  capimassi  accompanied  him,  including 
Pane  di  Grano,  Cancellier,  Neco,  and  Carbone.  On 
the  evening  of  the  27  th  of  May  he  reached  Mile  to, 
where  he  took  up  a  strong  position.  Regnier  had  col- 
lected a  small  force  at  Monteleone,  six  miles  away,  to 
repel  the  Sicilian  invasion.  On  the  night  that  the 
Prince  of  Hesse  arrived  at  Mileto  the  French  general 
left  Monteleone,  and  at  4.30  of  the  following  morning 
attacked  the  invaders'  positions  in  three  columns.  The 
action  was  short  and  decisive.  One  Sicilian  regiment 
under  a  capable  officer.  Colonel  Nunziante,  made  an 
honourable  defence,  the  rest  fled  at  the  sight  of  the 
French  bayonets.  The  masse  looked  on,  and  so  soon 
as  the  Sicilians  were  defeated  successfully  plundered 
their  baggage  train.  Hesse  lost  in  the  action  1633 
men  and  6  guns,  and  only  about  1000  of  his  army 
returned  to  Sicily. 

The  battle  of  Mileto  may  serve  to  mark  the  end  of 
regular  warfare  in  Calabria.  From  this  time  the  French 
generals  only  had  to  operate  against  brigands,  and  of 
their  doings  only  the  incident  connected  with  the  name 


172  THE  NAPOLEONIC  EMPIRE  parti 

of  Manhes  will  require  specific  mention.  It  will  suffice 
to  say  that  for  the  remainder  of  Joseph's  reign  brigand- 
age was  rife  in  Calabria,  but  gradually  decreased,  and 
became  more  and  more  clearly  criminal  and  non-political. 
Treachery,  barbarity,  the  burning  of  villages  did  not 
come  to  a  sudden  end,  nor  did  the  brigands  fail  on 
occasion  to  raise  the  cry  of  ''  Vivano  i  Borboni !  "  In 
February  1808  it  was  still  necessary  to  detail  a  whole 
battalion  to  escort  the  army  mail  in  the  passes  near 
Lagonegro,  but  in  the  spring  of  that  year  a  very  decided 
improvement  set  in. 

Regnier  followed  up  his  success  at  Mileto  by 
establishing  himself  firmly  on  the  Strait  of  Messina. 
In  January  1808  he  besieged  the  Sicilian  garrison  at 
Reggio  and  the  British  at  Scilla,  and  soon  captured 
these  posts.  By  the  middle  of  February  1808  every- 
thing was  at  last  ready  for  the  long-deferred  invasion 
of  Sicily  ;  the  French  general  could  dispose  of  9000  or 
10,000  men  on  the  strait,  and  as  many  more  could 
be  moved  up  from  Naples  on  short  notice.  At  this 
moment  a  difference  of  opinion  between  the  King  and 
Regnier  led  that  general  to  leave  his  command,  in  which 
he  was  replaced  by  General  Cavaignac. 

The  treaty  of  Tilsit  between  Russia  and  France, 
signed  on  the  7th  of  July  1807,  ^^^  profoundly 
modified  the  European  situation,  and  had  enabled 
Napoleon  to  turn  from  the  contests  of  the  North 
towards  his  cherished  schemes  for  securing  supremacy 
in  the  Mediterranean.  By  the  terms  of  that  treaty, 
terms  that  were  intended  to  be  kept  secret,  the  Ionian 
islands  were  abandoned  to  Napoleon  by  the  Czar  ;  the 
French  Emperor  lost  no  time  in  securing  this  new 
stepping-stone  towards  the  East.     Troops  were  at  once 


CHAP.  V       JOSEPH'S  INTERNAL  POLICY  173 

dispatched  from  Taranto  and  Brindisi  to  occupy  Corfu 
and  other  Islands.  Large  shipments  of  food-stuffs  were 
sent  over  as  the  wind  favoured  escape  from  the  British 
cruisers,  and  in  November  an  officer  in  whom  the 
Emperor  placed  great  reliance,  General  Donzelot,  took 
command  at  Corfu  after  narrowly  escaping  being  captured 
by  an  English  frigate. 

But  the  provisioning  and  supplying  of  Corfu  from 
the  ports  of  Puglia  was  a  slow  and  expensive  process, 
and  Napoleon  determined  to  mark  his  occupation  of 
this  new  possession  by  a  considerable  naval  operation. 
A  plan  that  Napoleon  had  prepared  a  year  before,  and 
that  CoUingwood  had  always  foreseen  and  feared,  was 
now  slightly  modified  and  put  into  execution. 

Early  in  January  1808  the  Emperor  decided  that 
the  Rochefort  fleet  should  sail  around  into  the  Medi- 
terranean, operate  its  junction  with  the  Toulon  fleet, 
and  proceed  to  Naples.  There  9000  men  were  to  be 
embarked  under  Marshal  Jourdan,  and  this  force  co- 
operating with  Regnier's  was  to  effect  the  crossing  of 
the  Strait  of  Messina.  The  naval  part  of  this  pro- 
gramme was  dangerous,  but  by  no  means  impossible, 
as  was  soon  proved.  From  a  military  point  of  view 
the  time  was  well  chosen,  as  a  large  reduction  in  the 
British  forces  at  Messina  had  just  been  made,  Sir 
John  Moore  having  been  ordered  to  Gibraltar  with 
some  8000  men.  But  the  Emperor  was  at  heart  more 
anxious  about  the  Ionian  islands  and  Turkey  than  he 
was  about  Sicily,  and  it  was  not  to  Naples  but  to  Corfu 
that  he  finally  ordered  his  fleet.^ 

On  the  loth  of  February  Gantheaume  sailed  from 
Toulon  with  two  three-deckers,  eight  80-  and  74-gun 

^  "  Corfu  is  of  so  much  importance  to  me  that  its  loss  would  deal  a  fatal  blow  to 
my  plans.  .  .  ." — Napoleon  to  Joseph,  Feb.  7,  1808,  Joseph,  Ccrr.  iv.  128. 


174  THE  NAPOLEONIC  EMPIRE  parti 

ships,  several  frigates,  four  transports,  and  some 
smaller  vessels,  and  shaped  a  course  due  south,  for  the 
Tunisian  coast.  A  storm  dispersed  the  fleet,  but  after 
a  rapid  passage  Gantheaume  and  his  subordinate 
Cosmao  anchored,  the  one  at  Corfu  on  the  23  rd  of 
February,  the  other  at  Taranto  two  days  later.  The 
French  admirals  soon  joined  forces,  poured  a  large 
supply  of  food  and  munitions  of  war  into  Corfu,  and 
set  sail  for  Toulon  again,  which  they  reached  unmolested. 
So  elated  was  Napoleon  at  the  complete  success  of  this 
naval  expedition  that  he  wrote  to  congratulate  Gan- 
theaume on  his  success  in  warm  terms,  and  announced 
the  increase  of  the  French  navy  and  preparations  for 
the  early  convoy  of  20,000  men  and  800  horses  to  an 
important  point. 

Just  as  when  Napoleon  had  sailed  the  length  of  the 
Mediterranean  to  Egypt  in  1798,  so  now  again  ten 
years  later  the  British  fleet  had  been  unable  to  find  the 
enemy  and  engage.  Collingwood  had  hurried  into  the 
Mediterranean  in  the  wake  of  the  Rochefort  fleet, 
anxious  to  protect  the  British  army  in  Sicily.  On  the 
6  th  of  December  the  British  admiral  was  cruising  off 
Syracuse  when  he  was  informed  that  the  Toulon  fleet 
was  at  sea.  The  news  was  premature,  but  Collingwood 
sailed  towards  Corfu,  where  he  awaited  the  French  till 
the  first  week  in  January.  Getting  no  further  informa- 
tion, however,  he  returned  to  Sicily.  He  then  slowly 
cruised  around  the  island,  reaching  its  north-western 
point  just  at  the  time  when  Gantheaume  was  leaving 
Toulon  and  running  down  the  Sardinian  coast  towards 
Africa.  But  Collingwood  could  get  no  tidings  of  the 
French,  and,  while  Gantheaume  was  circling  to  the 
south,  cruised  within  call  of  Messina  and  Palermo. 
Finally  he   made  his  way  slowly  northwards   up    the 


cHAP.v       JOSEPH'S  INTERNAL  POLICY  175 

Italian  coast,  but  not  until  Gantheaume  had  accom- 
plished his  mission  and  was  heading  for  Toulon  once 
more. 

CoUingwood's  mortification  at  having  failed  to  find 
the  French  fleet  was  extreme,  and  this  failure  served  to 
show  that,  notwithstanding  the  great  British  victories, 
there  was  yet  sufficient  strength  in  her  adversary  and  a 
sufficient  element  of  uncertainty  in  naval  warfare  to 
make  possible  a  vital  blow  at  Great  Britain's  maritime 
ascendancy.  If,  instead  of  sailing  to  Corfu  while  the 
British  were  at  Palermo,  Gantheaume  had  conveyed 
10,000  men  to  Palermo  while  the  British  were  at 
Corfu,  it  appears  far  from  improbable  that  Sicily  would 
have  changed  masters.  At  all  events,  though  little 
enough  was  ever  to  come  from  it.  Napoleon's  maritime 
blow  was  successfully  struck.  Corfu  was  victualled  and 
supplied  with  munitions  ;  and  another  effect  was  gained, 
for  Gantheaume's  success  produced  a  deeper  impression 
on  the  sea-depending  Neapolitans  than  any  four  such 
distant  Napoleonic  triumphs  as  Austerlitz  or  Friedland. 

Principal  Authorities  consulted 

MSS. 

Arch,  di  Stato,  Giustizia,  1806  :  miscellaneous  matters,  disorders, 
military  commissions,  etc. 

Arch,  di  Stato,  xxx.  21,  194:  anti-feudal  measures,  etc.;  192  :  the 
same,  suppression  of  the  monastic  orders,  cedolas,  provincial  administration  ; 
193  :  miscellaneous  accounts  ;  244  :  Hope  loan,  etc. 

Arch,  di  Stato,  Guerra,  xxv.  5  :  Corfu  operations  ;  1049  •  Calabria 
misc.  and  Mary  Caroline  ;   1974  :  Calabria  ;  2142  :  Mileto  operations. 

Mary  Caroline  Memoirs,  for  Sicilian  politics,  the  fall  of  Acton,  and 
the  Queen's  action  generally. 

Brit.  Admiralty,  Medit.  32  ;  and 

Brit.  Foreign  Off.,  Sicil}>,  30,  a  few  dispatches  on  British  policy  in 
Sicily. 

Printed  Books 

Abrantes,    Mems. ;    Annual  Register,    1806;    Bianchini,   Finanze   di 


176  THE  NAPOLEONIC  EMPIRE  parti 

NapoH  s  Blaquiere,  Letters ;  Boulay  de  la  Meurthe,  S^uelques  lettres ; 
Bulletino  delle  Leggi, 1 808  ;  Bunbury,  Milit.  Transacts. ;  Cacciatore, Esame; 
CoLLETTA,Storia  ;  CoLhi^GWOOD,  Corresp.  ;  Desv ER^oiSy  Mems. ;  Dumas, 
Precis  militaire  ;  Dumas,  Sounjenirs  ,•  Duret  de  Tavel,  Sdjour  en  Calabre  ; 
Greco,  Annali ;  Helfert,  Konigin  Karolina ;  Jeaffreson,  ^een  of 
Naples;  Joseph,  Corresp. ;  Lamarque,  Mems. ;  Maurice,  Diary  of  Sir 
J.  Moore;  Minto,  Hugh  Elliot;  MiOT,  Mems. ;  Monitore  Napolitano ; 
Napoleon,  Corresp. ;  NicolX,  Diario  ;  Okloff,  Mems. ;  P ALMiERiy  Storia 
costituz. ;  Papers  respecting  Austria ;  Pepe,  Mems. ;  Rivarol,  S^jour  en 
Calabre ;  RiviELLO,  Cronaca  Potentina ;  Roederer,  (Ewvres ;  Roederer, 
Rapporto,  i8o6j  Saliceti,  Rapporto ;  Savelli,  L/gion  Corse;  Serristori, 
Statistica;  ZuRLO,  Rapporto,  1809. 


CHAPTER   VI 

BAYONNE MURAT,    KING    OF    NAPLES 

Attempt  on  Saliceti  —  Finance — Army — Legislation  —  Napoleon's 
policy — Imperial  succession — ^Joseph,  Eugene,  and  Italy — 
Venice  interview — Spanish  affairs  —  British  policy — Fox — 
Abdication  of  Charles  IV.  —  Constitutional  statute — Murat, 
King  of  Naples,  his  life,  marriage,  and  character — Style 
adopted  —  Entry  into  Naples  —  Impression  produced  —  Capri 
taken — Amnesty — Napoleon,  Joachim,  and  Caroline- — Fouche- 
Metternich  intrigue  —  Disgrace  of  Talleyrand  —  Coolness 
between  Joachim  and  Napoleon. 

The  last  few  months  of  Joseph  Bonaparte's  short  reign 
as  King  of  Naples  were  marked  by  only  one  striking 
incident,  an  after  effect  of  the  projected  revolt  crushed 
by  Saliceti  in  June  1 807.  The  lazzaroni,  though  cowed, 
were  still  firmly  convinced  that  Ferdinand's  return 
would  not  be  long  delayed.  Royalist  agents  still  found 
plenty  of  listeners  and  helpers.  If  a  revolution  appeared 
for  the  moment  out  of  the  question,  it  might  be  pos- 
sible to  be  at  least  revenged  against  the  Government's 
chief  agent  of  repression. 

Saliceti  inhabited  the  Palazzo  Maresca  on  the  Riviera 
di  Chiaja  with  his  daughter  and  her  husband,  the 
Neapolitan  Duke  di  Lavello.  The  building  was  of 
three  stories,  and  had  its  ground  floor  let  off  as  shops 
with    separate    entrances    on    the    street.      The    chief 

VOL.  I  177  N 


178  THE  NAPOLEONIC  EMPIRE  parti 

apartments  of  the  house  were  immediately  over  these 
shops.  At  one  o'clock  in  the  morning  of  the  31st  of 
January  1808  Saliceti  was  driven  home.  He  was  just 
ascending  the  stairs  of  the  palace  when  a  terrific  explo- 
sion occurred  and  he  was  thrown  to  his  feet.  A  great 
hole  had  been  blown  through  more  than  twenty  rooms  of 
the  Palazzo  Maresca,  and  a  great  mass  of  debris  had 
crashed  down  into  the  courtyard.  Everything  was 
plunged  in  darkness  and  in  a  moment  the  whole  neigh- 
bourhood was  panic-stricken. 

Saliceti,  by  a  miraculous  chance,  escaped.  He  had 
been  thrown  down,  badly  bruised,  and  cut,  but  save 
for  an  ugly  gash  in  his  left  cheek,  he  was  not  seriously 
wounded.  The  Duke  and  Duchess  of  Lavello  had 
been  hurled  from  the  room  where  they  were  sleeping 
into  a  mass  of  wreckage  that  filled  the  courtyard  of  the 
palace  ;  they  were  soon  extricated,  and  were  found  to 
have  suffered  nothing  more  serious  than  bruises  and 
lacerations.  One  servant  was  killed,  however,  and 
several  were  dangerously  wounded.  The  police  were 
soon  on  the  spot  and  busy.  In  the  course  of  the  morning 
numerous  arrests  were  made  ;  and  a  technical  inquiry 
conducted  by  Generals  Campredon  and  Dedon  showed 
conclusively  that  the  explosion  had  been  caused  by  an 
infernal  machine.  Before  many  hours  had  passed, 
several  of  the  assassins  were  in  the  hands  of  the  police. 

The  trial  revealed  the  following  facts.  One  of  the 
shops  under  the  Palazzo  Maresca  was  let  to  an  apothe- 
cary, Don  Onofrio  Viscardi,  who  was,  though  not  in 
any  very  zealous  or  prominent  way,  a  Bourbonist.  On 
the  night  of  the  28  th  of  January  his  two  sons,  Domenico 
and  Pasquale,  with  three  other  men,  entered  his  shop. 
They  had  just  arrived  in  Naples,  having  come  from 
Palermo   by  way  of  Ponza   in   a  small  sailing  vessel. 


CHAP.  VI         MURAT,  KING  OF  NAPLES  179 

They  told  the  apothecary  that  they  were  acting  under 
instructions  from  the  Prince  of  Canosa,  who  had  been 
appointed  Viceroy  of  Naples,  and  that  their  mission  was 
to  make  away  with  Saliceti.  The  old  apothecary  reluct- 
antly allowed  himself  to  be  persuaded  to  give  up  the 
key  to  a  small  store-room  at  the  back  of  his  shop,  and 
here  the  conspirators  placed  a  shell  containing  about 
1 00  lbs.  of  gunpowder.  It  was  this  engine  that  wrought 
the  destruction. 

The  manner  in  which  the  trial  was  conducted  and 
the  official  report  cannot  inspire  much  confidence. 
Onofrio  Viscardi  saved  his  life  by  giving  evidence,  and 
it  is  not  difficult  to  believe  that  he  stated  whatever  the 
police  suggested  to  him.  The  public  prosecutor  put 
his  case  forward  as  follows  :  "  The  ex-Queen,  Canosa, 
Pasquale  Viscardi  and  his  companions  are  the  authors 
and  the  executors  of  this  attempt."  A  correspondence 
carried  on  with  high-placed  personages  at  Palermo  was 
put  in  and  proved  by  Viscardi,  in  which  the  King  and 
Queen  were  constantly  referred  to,  though  not  in  a 
way  directly  implicating  them.  On  the  whole  it  can- 
not be  said  that  anything  very  material  was  proved 
beyond  the  facts  of  the  explosion  and  the  agency  of 
the  Viscardis.  The  Court,  however,  fully  accepted  the 
contentions  of  the  public  prosecutor,  and  condemned 
Domenico  Viscardi  and  one  of  his  accomplices  to 
death  ;  Pasquale  Viscardi  had  not  been  caught,  and  so 
escaped  the  death  penalty.  Several  other  accomplices 
received  lesser  sentences.^ 

Although  the  Sicilians  had  not  succeeded  in  killing 
Saliceti,  they  had  shaken  him  severely,  for  it  was  nearly 

1  Processo  per  /'  esplosioite,  passim  ;  the  evidence  of  Onofrio  Viscardi  is  of  such 
doubtful  value  that  in  this  particular  instance  it  would  appear  best  to  accept  Helfert'y 
vindication  of  Mary  Caroline.  But  one  may  adopt  the  Austrian  historian's  con- 
clusion w^ithout  entirely  sharing  his  confidence. 


i8o  THE  NAPOLEONIC  EMPIRE  parti 

two  months  before  he  was  again  seen  in  public  ;  but, 
fortunately,  his  presence  was  not  now  so  essential  to  the 
conduct  of  affairs  as  it  had  been  a  few  months  earlier. 
How  far  matters  had  progressed  towards  a  normal 
course  can  be  judged  from  a  rapid  glance  at  the  affairs 
of  the  various  departments  of  State. 

The  treasury  receipts  that  amounted  to  900,000 
ducats  per  month  in  October  1807,  reached  1,000,000 
in  February  1808,  and  at  that  figure  balanced  expendi- 
ture. The  Neapolitan  army  had  rapidly  grown.  In 
the  summer  of  1807,  when  Napoleon  was  trying  to 
recover  from  the  heavy  losses  inflicted  on  him  by 
Bennigsen  in  Poland,  three  Neapolitan  regiments, 
some  4000  men,  had  been  sent  to  northern  Italy. 
In  March  1808  the  Neapolitan  native  army  mustered 
21,600  men.  In  the  field  of  legislation  various  decrees 
issued  in  the  early  months  of  1808,  bearing  chiefly  on 
criminal  law,  paved  the  way  for  the  introduction  of  a 
code.^  Martial  law  was  not  yet,  however,  entirely  dis- 
pensed with,  and  it  was  enacted  (May  12,  1808)  that 
all  enemies  landing,  not  forming  part  of  the  regular 
army  or  drawn  from  the  galleys,  should  be  court- 
martialled  and  shot.  Brigandage,  except  in  some  parts  of 
Calabria,  had  fallen  to  normal  proportions,  and  was  being 
actively  dealt  with  by  the  civil  and  military  authorities. 
As  a  general  rule  the  brigands  acted  in  small  bands 
and  for  the  purpose  of  robbery.  Murders  were  not  in- 
frequent, but  atrocities  quite  exceptional.  The  finances 
of  the  State  were  now  in  a  position  to  afford  some  relief 
to  the  sufferers  from  lawlessness,  and  in  the  last  few 
months  of  Joseph's  reign  the  grants  of  money  to  victims 

^  Bulletim  delle  Leggi,  1808,  209  (decree  on  judicial  organization)  j  230  (procedure 
before  justices  of  peace  and  tribunals)  j  299  (operative)  j  301  (criminal  law  and 
penalties)  ;  429  (operative). 


CHAP.  VI         MURAT,  KING  OF  NAPLES  i8i 

of  brigandage  were  frequent,  in  one  case  1,000,000  ducats 
being  allocated  from  the  proceeds  of  sale  of  monastic 
lands  for  this  purpose. 

The  time  was  now  fast  approaching  when  might  be 
expected  the  cessation  of  the  evils  that  had  attended  the 
change  of  dynasty  at  Naples,  and  the  fruition  of  the 
great  reforms  introduced  ;  but  just  at  this  moment  it 
was  fated  that  Joseph  should  resign  his  Italian  throne. 
He  was  only  a  piece  in  the  world-wide  game  of  chess 
in  which  Napoleon  had  made  kings  his  pawns,  and  a 
new  phase  of  the  game  now  required  Joseph's  presence 
on  another  square. 

The  twelve  months  that  elapsed  between  Tilsit  and 
Bayonne  mark  the  central  point  of  the  history  of  the 
French  Empire.  Before  this  was  the  struggle  to  obtain 
mastery,  afterwards  the  struggle  to  retain  it.  All 
questions  of  external  policy  seem  to  go  up  to  or  come 
down  from  that  culminating  point,  and  it  is  time  to  see 
what  relation  the  affairs  of  Naples  bore  to  the  other 
great  questions  then  revolved  by  Napoleon.  After 
Austerlitz  his  fortune  had  appeared  firmly  established. 
The  Empire  was  crowned  by  victory  ;  public  confidence 
and  financial  stability  were  both  assured.  Napoleon 
returned  to  Paris  an  appreciably  changed  and  older  man 
physically,  and  no  less  so  politically.  The  eighth  day 
of  Nivose  of  the  year  XIV.  had  marked  the  end  of  a 
period,  the  ist  day  of  January  1806  ushered  in  a  new 
one.  From  this  date  the  Empire  might  be  viewed  as 
an  established  institution,  and  the  question  of  how  it 
was  to  be  carried  on  as  an  institution,  that  is,  apart 
from  the  life  of  one  man,  rapidly  made  headway  as 
one  of  vital  moment.  The  question  of  his  succession 
was  indirectly  involved  in  the  Italian  policy  of  the 
Emperor. 


i82  THE  NAPOLEONIC  EMPIRE  parti 

Joseph  Bonaparte,  as  the  eldest  and  as  the  most 
docile  of  the  Emperor's  brothers,  had  some  preten- 
sions. The  decree  by  which  he  was  appointed  King  of 
Naples,  although  it  precluded  the  joining  of  the  French 
and  Neapolitan  crowns,  had  not  excluded  Joseph  from 
his  brother's  succession.  In  northern  Italy  a  similarly 
ambiguous  state  of  affairs  prevailed.  In  the  designa- 
tion of  what  had  formerly  been  the  Cisalpine  Republic, 
and  in  his  declarations  to  the  Lombard  representatives  at 
Lyons,  [Napoleon  had  indicated  the  possibility  of  Italian 
nationality.  In  a  note  of  Champagny  to  Cardinal 
Caprara  he  had  declared  that  "  all  Italy,  Rome,  Naples, 
and  Milan  form  an  offensive  and  defensive  league."  ^  In 
his  offers  of  renouncing  the  crown  of  Italy  in  1 805,  in 
his  acquiescence  in  the  generally  expressed  view  that  his 
stepson,  the  Viceroy  Eugene  Beauharnais,  might  soon 
wear  a  crown.  Napoleon  left  vague  and  dangerously 
unsettled  not  only  the  question  of  Italian  nationality 
but  that  of  the  succession  to  the  French  throne/} 

Although  for  a  time  it  appeared  as  if  the  Emperor 
would  direct  that  succession  through  the  line  of  his 
brother  Louis,  whom  he  had  made  King  of  Holland, 
yet  it  was  clear  to  thinking  minds  that  if  Napoleon's 
life  was  cut  short, — and  it  was  menaced  from  many 
sides, — none  but  a  man  of  conspicuous  ability  and  char- 
acter could  possibly  hope  to  succeed  him.  One  of  the 
Emperor's  faults, — a  fault  without  which  he  would  not 
have  reached  the  eminence  he  did, — was  the  tenacity 
with  which  he  clung  to  power.  He  could  not  bear  to 
surrender  one  iota  of  his  authority,  and  in  that  respect 
had  well  chosen  his  two  Italian  subordinates  :  Eugene, 
who  always  obeyed  orders  with  military  punctiliousness  ; 
Joseph,  who,  playing  the  king  to  his  subjects,  played 

^   Schoell,  Recueily  i.  136. 


CHAP.  VI         MURAT,  KING  OF  NAPLES  183 

the  subject  to  Napoleon.  The  Emperor  was  well 
pleased  with  Joseph,  whose  subservience  contrasted 
favourably  with  the  independence  of  Louis  and  Lucien, 
and  in  the  first  week  of  December  1807  a  very  cordial 
interview  between  the  two  brothers  took  place  at  Venice. 
At  this  meeting  the  affairs  of  Naples,  of  Sicily,  and  of 
the  East  were  discussed,  and  it  appears  probable  that 
Napoleon  also  touched  on  the  probability  of  a  French 
intervention  in  Spain. 

During  the  early  weeks  of  1808  the  attention  of  the 
Emperor  appeared  centred  on  Turkey  and  the  East, 
and  he  supported  Gantheaume's  expedition  to  Corfu  by 
diplomatic  negotiations,  of  which  the  object  was  a  parti- 
tion of  Turkey  between  France,  Austria,  and  Russia.  But 
these  negotiations  were  not  easy  to  conduct,  and  by  the 
month  of  March  Napoleon  was  seriously  considering 
another  move  that  appeared  easier  of  accomplishment. 
Under  pretext  of  the  difficulties  between  France  and 
Portugal  a  number  of  French  corps  had  been  sent  south 
of  the  Pyrenees,  ostensibly  as  alHes  of  Spain.  Napoleon 
now  appointed  his  brother-in-law  Joachim  Murat,  Grand 
Duke  of  Berg,  commander-in-chief,  and  gave  him  in- 
structions to  occupy  Madrid.  The  events  that  followed 
belong  more  properly  to  the  history  of  Napoleon  than 
to  that  of  Naples.  Suffice  it  to  say  that  the  Emperor 
probably  anticipated  that  he  could  conquer  Spain  as 
easily  as  he  had  Portugal  a  few  months  before.  But 
before  going  further  the  development  of  Napoleonic 
aggression  in  the  direction  of  Spain  must  be  viewed 
more  closely  in  connection  with  the  relations  between 
France  and  Great  Britain. 

In  1806,  with  Fox  as  Prime  Minister,  peace  had 
been  for  a  moment  in  sight.  Fox  was  the  only  states- 
man whose  inclination  and  whose  influence  could  have 


i84  THE  NAPOLEONIC  EMPIRE  parti 

made  peace.  Napoleon  had  a  genuine  regard  for  the 
Whig  leader,  and  appears  for  a  time  to  have  nego- 
tiated in  expectation  of  a  settlement.  In  June  1806  he 
had  written  to  Joseph  that  only  the  question  of  Sicily 
still  divided  Talleyrand  and  Lord  Yarmouth.  An  in- 
demnity to  King  Ferdinand  for  the  abandonment  of 
Sicily  was  finally  discussed,  and  the  recognition  of 
Joseph  as  King  of  the  Two  Sicilies  was  virtually 
accepted  by  the  British  Cabinet.  The  compensation 
to  the  Bourbon  king  was  to  be  the  Balearic  Islands, 
together  with  some  American  possessions.^  The  death 
of  Fox  in  September  of  the  same  year  brought  these 
negotiations  to  nothing,  and  removed  the  last  chance  of 
an  understanding  between  the  two  great  rivals. 

The  Tory  Cabinet  that  succeeded  Fox  pursued  a 
less  conciliatory  policy  towards  France,  a  less  incon- 
siderate policy  towards  Sicily.  On  the  30th  of  March 
1807  Drummond,  the  British  Minister  at  Palermo, 
concluded  with  the  Marquis  of  Circello,  Minister  for 
Foreign  Affairs,  a  treaty  of  alliance,  offensive  and 
defensive.  It  was  provided  by  this  treaty  that  neither 
party  should  come  to  a  separate  peace,  that  an  annual 
subsidy  of  three  hundred  thousand  pounds  sterling 
should  be  paid  by  England  to  Sicily  for  military  pur- 
poses, and  that  England  should  defend  Messina  and 
Augusta  with  10,000  men. 

England's  failure  in  her  double  attack  on  Turkey 
and  Egypt  shortly  before  this  treaty  was  signed  had 
resulted  in  the  return  of  her  troops  to  Sicily,  and  that 
island  had  now  come  to  be  jlooked  on  as  the  indispens- 
able basis  of  her  operations  in  the  Mediterranean. 
Had  not  Napoleon  at  this  period  attempted  the  con- 
quest of  the  Spanish  peninsula  it  appears  probable  that 

^  Undated  memorandum,  Foreign  Off.  Sicily,  30  j  cf.  Napoleon,  Corr.  xiii.  41. 


CHAP.  VI        MURAT,  KING  OF  NAPLES  185 

England  would  soon  have  attempted  military  operations 
on  a  large  scale  against  Naples.  As  it  was,  Junot's 
march  on  Lisbon  was  promptly  answered  by  sending 
Sir  John  Moore,  with  8000  men,  from  Messina  to 
Portugal,  where  he  was,  a  few  months  later,  to  fight 
the  campaign  that  terminated  at  Corunna.  From  this 
beginning  arose  that  famous  and  obstinate  war  of  the 
Peninsula  that  raged  for  six  years,  and  the  fluctuations 
of  which  will  have  more  than  once  to  be  taken  into 
account  when  relating  the  history  of  southern  Italy 
for  the  same  period. 

At  the  end  of  March  1808  Murat  occupied  Madrid 
at  the  head  of  a  large  army.  A  few  weeks  later  Napo- 
leon proceeded  to  Bayonne.  There  he  saw  Charles  IV. 
of  Spain  and  his  son  Ferdinand.  On  the  5th  of  May 
the  Emperor  obtained  from  the  Spanish  sovereign  a 
renunciation  of  the  throne,  and  on  the  i  ith  he  dispatched 
what  was  practically  an  order  to  Joseph  to  assume  the 
Spanish  crown.  "You  will  receive  this  letter  on  the 
19th,"  he  wrote,  "you  will  leave  on  the  20th,  and  you 
will  arrive  here  on  the  ist  of  June."  Such  was  the 
military  precision  with  which  Napoleon  manoeuvred  his 
vassal  sovereigns. 

Joseph  was  well  trained.  He  received  his  brother's 
orders  on  the  21st  of  May,  and  left  Naples  on  the  23rd, 
virtually  intrusting  the  government  to  Marshal  Jourdan 
and  Saliceti  ;  they  were  well  fitted  to  exercise  dictatorial 
power  during  an  interregnum.  The  object  of  the 
King's  sudden  journey  was  not  given  out  to  the  public. 
The  announcement  was  not,  however,  long  delayed. 
Within  a  few  days  of  his  arrival  at  Bayonne  Joseph 
wrote  a  letter  to  Roederer,  in  which  he  informed  him  of 
his  change  of  crowns,  and  expressed  regret  at  leaving 


i86  THE  NAPOLEONIC  EMPIRE  parti 

Naples  just  when  the  results  of  their  labours  might  be 
looked  for.  He  added  that  it  was  his  intention,  with 
the  Emperor's  sanction,  to  issue  a  constitutional  decree 
as  his  parting  benefaction  to  his  subjects. 

A  few  days  later  Joseph's  accession  to  the  throne  of 
Spain  and  his  constitutional  concession  were  officially 
announced  in  the  following  extremely  characteristic  pro- 
clamation : — 

Bayonne,  June  23,  1808. 

Joseph  Napoleon,  King  of  Naples  and  Sicily 

People  of  the  Kingdom  of  Naples — 

Providence,  whose  designs  are  inscrutable,  having  called  us 
to  the  throne  of  Spain  and  the  Indies,  we  have  been  placed 
under  the  cruel  necessity  of  leaving  a  people  we  have  had  such 
good  cause  to  love,  whose  happiness  was  the  dearest  care  of  our 
heart,  the  one  object  of  our  ambition.  He  alone  who  reads  in 
the  hearts  of  men  can  judge  of  the  sincerity  of  our  sentiments, 
notwithstanding  which  we  have  obeyed  another  call,  have 
accepted  another  burden,  imposed  on  us  by  the  concession  of 
rights  over  the  crown  of  Spain  acquired  by  our  august  brother 
H.M.  the  Emperor  of  the  French  and  King  of  Italy. 

In  these  solemn  circumstances,  convinced  that  institutions 
alone  are  permanent,  we  have  perceived  with  some  grief  that 
your  social  organization,  undertaken  by  us,  was  not  yet  com- 
plete, and  we  have  thought  that,  inasmuch  as  we  were  going 
far  from  you,  all  the  more  was  the  obligation  incumbent  on  us 
to  secure  in  every  way  possible  your  present  and  future  happi- 
ness. We  have  therefore  put  the  finishing  touch  to  our  work 
by  completing  the  Constitutional  Statute  of  the  Kingdom  on  the 
lines  already  partly  laid  down,  and  in  the  way  best  adapted  for 
the  necessities  of  our  times,  for  our  relations  with  neighbouring 
states,  for  the  national  character,  a  knowledge  of  which  we 
have  striven  to  acquire  from  the  moment  at  which  we  assumed 
the  responsibility  of  power,  to  the  best  advantage  possible  under 
the  circumstances  in  which  we  were  placed. 


CHAP.  VI        MURAT,  KING  OF  NAPLES  187 

The  principal  objects  aimed  at  in  this  document  will  be  : — 

1.  The  preservation  of  our  Sacred  Religion. 

2.  The  creation  of  a  pubHc  Treasury  distinct  from  the  Crown 

revenues. 

3.  The  creation  of  an  intermediate  body  and  of  a  national 

ParHament,  capable  of  enlightening  the  Sovereign,  and 
of  rendering  him  useful  services,  as  well  as  to  the 
Nation. 

4.  A  judicial  organization  that  shall  leave  the  judges  inde- 

pendent of  the  Sovereign,  and  that  shall  treat  all  citizens 
as  equals  before  the  law. 

5.  A  municipal  organization  that  shall  be  monopolized  by 

no  one,  but  aid  all. 

6.  The   protection    of  those    institutions    which    we    have 

founded,  by  means  of  which  the  creditors  of  the  State 
may  be  paid,  and,  it  is  to  be  hoped,  the  debts  which  we 
found  so  burdensome  on  our  assumption  of  the  Crown 
may  before  long  be  liquidated. 
As  the  Emperor  of  the  French,  King  of  Italy,  our  august 
brother,    desires    to    interpose    his    authoritative    and    potent 
guarantee  in  this  act  which  lies  so  near  our  heart,  we  feel  con- 
fident that  our  hopes  for  the  welfare  of  our  deeply- beloved 
people  of  the  Kingdom  of  Naples  will  not  be  deluded,  reposing 
as  they  do  on  the  stainless  arch  of  his  immense  glory. 

Joseph. 

The  constitutional  statute  was  published  at  the  same 
date  as  Joseph's  farev^ell  proclamation  ;  it  was  constitu- 
tional more  in  name  than  in  fact.  The  only  serious  step 
it  contained  towards  popular  government  was  a  provision 
for  an  assembly  pompously  and  misleadingly  described 
as  a  Parlamento  nazionale  (Tit.  viii.).  This  assembly, 
which  was  never  convened,  was  to  be  made  up  of  ^n^ 
orders, — clergy,  nobility,  landowners,  men  of  learning, 
and  merchants, — each  sending  twenty  delegates.  All 
these  delegates  were  to  be  nominated  by  the  Crown 
with  the  sole  exception  of  the  twenty  landowners,  who 


i88  THE  NAPOLEONIC  EMPIRE  part  i 

were  to  be  annually  chosen  by  selected  voters  named 
by  the  Crown.  From  the  tenor  of  this,  by  far  the  most 
important  concession  of  the  statute,  may  be  judged  the 
spirit  in  which  it  was  granted  by  Joseph,  or  rather  by 
Napoleon.  And  if  this  so  -  called  constitution  never 
came  into  effect  it  was  more  owing  to  its  uselessness 
than  to  its  liberality.  The  reality  was  that,  proceed- 
ing from  Joseph,  it  meant  nothing,  proceeding  from 
Napoleon  it  meant  only  this  :  that  he  wanted  to  reconcile 
the  people  of  Spain  to  his  usurpation  by  demonstrating 
that  his  rule  was  synonymous  with  benevolence  and 
liberalism. 

Having  now  for  the  second  time  removed  an  occu- 
pant of  the  throne  of  Naples,  it  became  necessary  for 
Napoleon  once  more  to  provide  a  King.  This  time 
his  choice  fell  on  a  soldier,  a  companion-in-arms,  the 
brilliancy  of  whose  military  career  and  the  closeness  of 
whose  connection  with  the  Emperor  made  it  impossible 
for  him  to  be  overlooked, — the  Grand  Duke  of  Berg, 
Great  Admiral  of  the  Empire,  and  Commander-in-Chief 
of  the  French  armies  in  Spain. 

Joachim  Murat  had  not  risen  so  high  as  Napoleon, 
but  he  had  risen  nearly  as  much,  for  his  start  had  been 
humbler.  He  was  only  the  son  of  a  postmaster,  and 
was  born  at  La  Bastide  Fortuniere,  near  Cahors,  in 
Gascony,  on  the  25th  of  March  1771.  His  father's 
walk  of  life  determined  Murat's  great  love  and  under- 
standing of  horses  ;  and  although  his  earliest  education 
was  for  the  church,  a  youthful  escapade  very  naturally 
landed  him  in  the  ranks  of  a  cavalry  regiment.  He 
proved  as  fractious  to  military  as  to  theological  disci- 
pline, and  before  many  months  had  passed  was  dismissed 
from  the  army  for  insubordination.     But  on  the  break- 


CHAP.  VI        MURAT,  KING  OF  NAPLES 


ing  out  of  the  Revolution  he  became  an  ardent  patriot, 
and  once  more  tried  the  trade  of  arms.  In  1791  he 
received  his  first  promotion,  the  first  of  many  that 
were  to  follow,  and  thus  naively  recorded  the  matter 
in  a  letter  to  his  brother  :  "I  am  working  hard  to  get 
promotion  and  shall  succeed.  I  shall  soon  be  made 
corporal/*^  A  year  later  he  wrote  again  :  "At  last  I 
am  a  sub-lieutenant,  from  which  my  family  will  gather 
that  I  have  not  had  to  show  too  much  patience."  ^  Four 
years  later  he  was  Colonel  of  the  21st  Dragoons,  and 
attached  to  the  first  army  that  Bonaparte  commanded. 
At  the  battle  of  Mondovi,  the  representant  du  peuple, 
Saliceti,  noticed  his  brilliant  conduct,  and  got  him  pro- 
moted to  the  rank  of  general. 

Had  Murat's  military  career  been  in  the  old  army 
and  under  Bourbon  auspices,  it  is  extremely  improbable 
that  his  name  would  ever  have  emerged  from  the 
obscurity  of  the  ranks  ;  his  low  birth  and  his  impetu- 
osity would  equally  have  told  against  him.  But  his 
remarkable  military  aptitude,  his  fiery,  undisciplined 
temperament  and  patriotic  fervour  brought  him  oppor- 
tunity, recognition,  and  rapid  promotion  in  the  loosely 
organized  and  democratic  armies  of  the  First  Republic. 
The  Revolution  had  transformed  the  art  of  war,  as  it 
had  transformed  so  many  institutions  and  habits.  The 
system  of  evolutions  founded  on  the  traditions  of 
Frederic,  but  no  longer  vivified  by  his  genius,  had 
degenerated  into  an  artificial  and  largely  unsound 
method  of  tactics,  alHed  with  a  vicious  theory  of  a  war 
of  positions.  To  keep  every  company  of  a  regiment 
in  solid  line  had  come  to  be  looked  on  as  of  greater 
importance  than  to  seize  house,  wood,  or  hill  by  means 
of  skirmishers  ;  to  capture  a  fortress  according  to  the 

1   Murat,  Corr.  i.  5.  2  /^/^^  i_  ^ 


190  THE  NAPOLEONIC  EMPIRE  part  i 

rules  of  Vauban  of  more  importance  than  to  overrun 
a  fertile  but  unfortified  province  ;  to  maintain  winter 
quarters  for  a  regularly. established  number  of  months 
of  more  importance  than  to  strike  a  decisive,  but 
theoretically  irregular,  blow.  The  volunteers  of  the 
Revolution  and  their  improvised  generals  shattered 
these  military  ideals.  To  the  machine-like  manoeuvres 
of  the  Duke  of  Brunswick's  Prussians,  Dumouriez 
answered  triumphantly  with  his  ragged  and  half-armed 
lines  chanting  the  Marseillaise  in  world  -  resounding 
cadence  ;  at  Jemmappes  the  Austrian  commanders  were 
as  completely  shocked  as  they  were  defeated  by  Belliard 
galloping  over  their  intrenchments  at  the  head  of  a 
regiment  of  hussars.  Brune  captured  men-of-war  in 
the  frozen  Zuyder  Zee  with  cavalry.  The  brilliant 
young  generals  of  the  Revolution  soon  evolved  from 
their  apparent  deficiencies,  and  from  their  experience 
of  victory,  a  new  system  of  warfare.  Rapidity  of 
movement,  paid  for  at  nearly  any  price  ;  complete  dis- 
regard for  obstacles,  seasons,  and  the  accepted  maxims 
of  war  ;  irregular  tactics  in  which  the  soldiers'  intelli- 
gence and  initiative  were  employed  ;  a  large  use  of 
skirmishers ;  more  confused,  more  rapid,  and  more  head- 
long attack  ;  a  prosecution  of  victory  by  every  means 
possible  to  horsemen,  and  at  all  risks,  without  con- 
sideration for  the  formation  of  the  parade  ground  ; — 
these  became  the  fundamental  articles  of  the  creed  of 
the  great  school  of  soldiers  whose  most  skilful  and 
most  methodical  master  was  Napoleon. 

In  such  a  school  Murat  could  not  fail  to  reach  a  high 
rank.  His  exceptional  ability  as  a  leader  of  horse  was 
quickly  recognised  by  Napoleon.  For  he  had  an  unerring 
judgment  in  manoeuvring  any  number  of  horsemen,  a 
perfect  eye  for  country  and  for  pace,  to  which  he  added 


CHAP.  VI        MURAT,  KING  OF  NAPLES  191 

lightning-like  decision,  and  a  courage  with  just  the  pro- 
portion of  recklessness  that  makes  a  great  leader  of 
cavalry.  The  man  who  would  lead  horsemen  must 
take  risks,  must  ride  in  front,  in  plain  view  ;  Murat's 
striking  person  was  soon  familiar  to  every  trooper  of 
the  French  army.  With  only  a  switch  in  his  hand, 
gorgeously  attired,  his  hat  surmounted  with  tufts  of 
feathers  clasped  with  diamonds  and  rubies,  long  lines 
of  glittering  horsemen  galloping  behind  him,  the  ex- 
traordinary, flaming  figure  of  Joachim  Murat  soon  fed 
the  legends  of  every  camp  fire.  His  was  the  brillant 
apparition  that  the  Austrian,  Prussian,  or  Russian  most 
dreaded  to  see  bursting  from  the  whirling  dust-cloud 
that  swept  across  the  battle-field.  Ever  foremost  in 
battle,  and  riding  into  his  opponents'  ranks,  he  never 
made  use  of  sword  or  pistol,  and  prided  himself  on 
never  having  killed  a  man.  So  exceptional  was  his 
courage,  so  picturesque  his  personality,  that  the  Czar 
Alexander  is  reported  to  have  issued  orders  that  no 
Russian  soldier  was  to  fire  at  him ;  yet  so  irresistible 
was  his  instinct  for  charging  any  and  every  force  of  the 
enemy  he  might  meet,  that  the  French  troopers  had 
nicknamed  him  ''  le  boucher  de  I'armee,"  while  the 
Empress  Josephine  once  declared  that  he  positively 
reeked  of  gunpowder,  and  would  have  sabred  the  Eternal 
Father  himself.  The  Marechal  de  Castellane,  at  one 
time  attached  to  his  staff,  has  left  the  following  account 
of  Murat  and  of  one  of  the  extraordinary  costumes  he 
loved  to  appear  in  : — 

A  braver  man  than  the  King  of  Naples  is  not  to  be  found  ; 
he  faces  greater  dangers  than  his  troopers.  Wherever  a  shot  is 
fired,  there  he  will  certainly  be  found,  dressed  in  some  such  way 
as  this — a  wide  hat  trimmed  with  heavy  gold  braid,  over  that  a 
white  plume  surmounted  by  a  long  white  egrette  surrounded 


192  THE  NAPOLEONIC  EMPIRE  part  i 

with  other  feathers  ;  his  hair  long  and  curled  ;  a  cloak  of 
green  velvet  trimmed  with  gold  braid,  under  that  a  sky-blue 
frogged  tunic,  also  braided  with  gold  .  .  .  ;  crimson  breeches 
of  Polish  fashion,  braided  with  gold  ;  and  yellow  boots. 

Murat's  personal  appearance  was  as  striking  as  his 
manner  of  attiring  himself.  His  heavy  lips  and  mouth, 
his  large  blue  eyes,  and  masses  of  curling  black  hair, 
gave  him  a  somewhat  coarse  and  sensual  appearance 
that  was  only  redeemed  by  the  strength  marked  by  the 
line  of  the  nose  and  brow,  and  by  the  affability  pro- 
claimed by  the  winning  smile  that  rarely  left  him. 

From  the  opening  of  the  Italian  campaign  of  1796, 
Murat's  rise  was  rapid.  Notwithstanding  a  personal 
incident  in  which  both  he  and  Josephine  Bonaparte 
showed  some  little  indiscretion,  he  became  one  of  his 
commander's  most  trusted  subordinates.  He  followed 
him  to  Egypt,  and  there  proved  himself  a  horseman 
worthy  to  cross  sabres  with  the  Mameluk  cavalry. 
He  was  one  of  the  few  selected  to  return  to  France 
with  Bonaparte,  and  the  choice  turned  out  fortunate, 
for  on  the  1 8  th  of  Brumaire,  when  the  would-be  dictator 
faltered  before  the  storm  of  Republican  anger  that 
greeted  him  in  the  Council  of  Five  Hundred,  it  was 
Murat's  arm  that  supported  and  sheltered  him  from 
their  fury  ;  it  was  Murat  who  brought  his  grenadiers 
into  the  Hall ;  it  was  Murat  who  at  that  doubtful 
moment  rent  the  existing  Constitution  with  his  bayonets, 
saved  Napoleon  from  Caesar's  fate,  and  made  possible 
the  Consulate  and  the  Empire. 

His  services,  though  not  proclaimed  from  the  house- 
tops, were  fittingly  rewarded.  He  was  made  Com- 
mander-in-Chief of  the  French  troops  in  Italy,  and 
there  began  to  show  that  his  mind  was  not  entirely 
given  up  to  military  matters.     He  successfully  cultivated 


CHAP.  VI        MURAT,  KING  OF  NAPLES  193 

the  good  graces  of  the  Pope,  who  showed  him  great 
marks  of  esteem.  He  also  made  a  flying  visit  to  Naples, 
acting  on  Napoleon's  prophetic  prompting,  "Ce  sont  des 
connaissances  locales  qu*on  ne  se  repent  jamais  d'avoir."  ^ 
At  Naples,  where  he  only  stayed  a  few  days,  his  striking 
presence,  affability,  and  open-handed  generosity  created 
a  favourable  impression.  King  Ferdinand,  more  from 
fear  than  any  other  sentiment,  offered  him  the  Orders 
of  the  Kingdom.  How  little  could  he  foresee  that  but 
seven  years  later  the  strange-looking,  low-born  repub- 
lican general  whom  he  secretly  viewed  with  contempt, 
would  be  sitting  with  greater  magnificence  and  greater 
prestige  than  his  own  on  the  throne  from  which  he  now 
condescended  to  honour  him  ! 

In  the  early  campaigns  of  the  Empire,  Murat  held 
supreme  command  of  the  cavalry,  and  took  a  brilliant 
part,  especially  in  the  destruction  of  the  Prussian  army 
after  Jena.  He  became  Grand  Duke  of  Berg,  a  con- 
siderable principality  on  the  borders  of  Holland,  and 
entered  the  Confederation  of  the  Rhine.  In  1808, 
when  it  came  to  Spain's  turn  to  enjoy  the  benefits  of 
French  invasion,  it  was  to  the  Grand  Duke  that  was 
given  the  supreme  command  of  the  large  army  collected 
for  the  purpose.  It  was  in  the  early  part  of  May, 
while  his  headquarters  were  at  Madrid,  that  Murat 
received  his  greatest  and,  as  it  proved,  final  promotion. 
Napoleon  offered  him  his  choice  between  the  thrones 
of  Portugal  and  Naples.  There  may  have  been  a 
moment's  hesitation  ;  there  may  have  been  disappoint- 
ment that  the  apparently  richer  prize  of  Spain  was  not 
destined  for  him.  But  Murat's  mind  did  not  balance 
long  on  the  alternative  offered  for   his  consideration, 

1  "  One  never  regrets  this  sort  of  local  knowledge." — Napoleon  to  Murat,  July 
27,  1801. 

VOL.  I  O 


194  THE  NAPOLEONIC  EMPIRE  parti 

and  his  choice  prudently  fell  on  the  crown  just  vacated 
by  Joseph  Bonaparte. 

An  important  factor  in  the  rise  of  Murat  had  been 
his  marriage.  Shortly  after  Brumaire  Maria  Annun- 
ziata,  afterwards  named  Caroline,  youngest  sister  of  the 
First  Consul,  became  his  wife.  Caroline  Bonaparte  had 
all  the  traits  of  beauty  usual  in  her  family  ;  good 
features,  fine  eyes,  a  perfect  skin,  delicately  modelled 
hands  and  feet.  She  resembled  Napoleon  in  character 
more  closely  perhaps  than  did  any  other  of  his  brothers 
or  sisters.  Napoleon  said  that  in  her  was  "  much 
stuff,  much  character,  and  unbounded  ambition  "  ;  he 
might  with  equal  justice  have  said  it  of  himself.  In 
Caroline  ambition  was,  in  truth,  the  master  passion,  and 
made  her  dominate  other  failings,  and  to  a  certain 
extent  preserve  appearances  which  her  sisters  were  far 
too  apt  to  neglect. 

The  marriage  of  Joachim  Murat  and  Caroline 
Bonaparte  was  a  love  match.  General  Thiebault  has 
left  in  his  Memoirs  a  delightful  glimpse  of  them  in  the 
early  days  : — 

I  had  breakfast  with  General  Murat.  ...  It  would  not  have 
been  easy  to  be  more  simple  than  was  Murat,  more  unaffected 
than  was  the  future  Queen  of  Naples  .  .  .  she  as  lovely  as 
an  angel,  he  superb  in  figure,  in  strength,  in  features  .  .  . 
covered  with  laurels  gathered  in  Italy,  in  Germany,  in  Egypt, — 
was  there  anything  lacking  to  complete  their  happiness  and  their 
hopes  ?  .  .  .  After  an  excellent  breakfast  served  on  handsome 
china,  a  coarse  earthenware  pot  was  brought  in  containing 
some  raisine  :  "  This  is  one  of  our  provincial  titbits,"  said 
Murat  J  "  my  mother  makes  it  and  sends  it  me."  ^ 

The    early    affection    of   the    Murats    unfortunately 

^  Thiebault,  Mems.  iii.  141  j  raisine  is  a  preserve  into  which  pears,  grapes,  and 
other  ingredients  enter. 


CHAP.  VI        MURAT,  KING  OF  NAPLES  195 

dwindled,  though  some  show  of  fondness  and  an  official 
pretence  of  correct  conjugal  relations  was  maintained. 
Before  long  Caroline's  ambition  began  to  play  a  large 
part  in  the  life  of  husband  and  wife.  Murat  required 
little  enough  pushing  on  the  road  on  which  his  wife  was 
urging  him,  and  on  this  subject  complete  harmony  long 
subsisted  between  them.  However  far  the  unreasonable 
exigencies  of  Napoleonic  warfare  might  lead  him,  Murat 
always  had  at  Paris  a  scheming,  plotting,  bold  and 
unscrupulous  agent,  in  whose  hands  his  interests  were 
constantly  being  pushed.  Right  and  left  Caroline  made 
friends,  and  at  any  cost.  No  one  could  predict  the 
future — and  what  could  be  more  possible  than  that  the 
Emperor  might  be  killed  in  battle  ?  Foreseeing  that 
possibility  and  others,  Caroline  cultivated  with  success 
the  friendship  of  Junot,  military  Governor  of  Paris. 
She  also  made  a  friend,  who  later  stood  her  in  good 
stead,  in  the  person  of  the  Austrian  Ambassador,  Count 
Metternich. 

The  grant  of  the  crown  of  Naples  to  Joachim  and 
Caroline  satisfied  an  ambition  they  had  long  felt. 
Caroline  was  now  the  equal  in  rank  of  her  brothers 
Louis  and  Joseph,  and  Joachim  satisfied  a  desire  that 
had  arisen  as  early  as  1806,  when  he  already  aspired  to 
become  monarch  of  a  resuscitated  kingdom  of  Poland. 

With  Murat  now  a  king  the  question  must  be  asked  : 
what  were  his  qualifications  for  that  exalted  position  ? 
As  a  corporal  he  had  deserved  promotion  at  his 
colonel's  hands  ;  as  a  colonel,  the  representant  du  peuple 
Saliceti  had  commended  him  ;  as  a  general.  Napoleon 
had  made  him  his  Master  of  the  Horse  ;  was  he 
likely  to  win  equal  success  as  a  king  }  Without 
any  question  he  possessed  that  most  conspicuous  of 
all    kingly    qualities,    military    courage.      His    ability 


196  THE  NAPOLEONIC  EMPIRE  part  i 

as  a  leader  of  cavalry  has  already  been  noticed,  but 
it  must  be  added  that  as  a  commander-in-chief  he 
could  not  be  placed  in  the  first  rank  of  the  generals  of 
his  day, — in  the  same  rank  as  Massena  or  Wellington. 
Murat  could  lead  troops,  but  he  was  often  far  too 
impetuous  ;  he  did  not  excel  in  organizing,  was  a  bad 
disciplinarian,  and  had  no  eye  for  the  selection  of  sub- 
ordinates. When  he  became  King  of  Naples,  men  of 
no  military  capacity  rose  from  captains  to  generals  in  a 
few  years,  while  in  France  officers  of  the  finest  abilities, 
Regnier,  Belliard,  St.  Cyr  and  so  many  others,  could 
barely  earn  a  step  by  long  and  extraordinary  services. 

Murat's  open-handed  bountifulness  perhaps  became 
a  kingly  part,  perhaps  helped  to  make  his  striking 
personality  popular,  but  it  demoralized  the  Neapolitan 
army.  His  bearing  was  dignified,  his  demeanour  affable, 
his  smile  engaging,  a  military  brusqueness  covered  with 
a  becoming  veil  lapses  into  the  language  or  behaviour  of 
the  camp.  He  was  by  no  means  deficient  in  ability  and 
political  instinct,  but  he  always  remained  thoroughly 
Gascon  in  his  suspiciousness  and  jealousy  of  control. 
Murat  spoke  Italian  well,  and  was  always  able  to  hold  his 
own  in  the  discussions  of  his  Ministers.  If  his  qualities 
proved  not  sufficient  to  retain  the  difficult  crown  he 
was  called  on  to  wear,  yet  it  might  fairly  be  said  of  him, 
as  an  old  German  diplomat  once  told  Cavaignac,  that 
there  was  no  other  king  in  Europe  better  fitted  for  the 
part  he  had  to  play.  In  political  ability  he  was  the 
equal  of  most  of  the  European  sovereigns,  in  goodness 
of  heart  he  excelled  most,  in  the  military  virtues  he  was 
the  superior  of  all. 

One  more  trait  must  be  added  to  complete  the 
portrait  of  the  new  King  of  Naples,  one  the  importance 
of  which   has   been  somewhat  exaggerated.      He  was 


CHAP.  VI        MURAT,  KING  OF  NAPLES  197 

very  given  to  exhibitions  of  what  was  known  as 
sensibiHty,  a  fashionable  habit  of  emotional  exaggera- 
tion then  prevalent.  This  habit  frequently  threw  him 
into  paroxysms  of  tears,  and  together  with  a  hasty 
temper  led  to  many  scenes  in  which  Caroline  generally 
played  the  more  dignified  and  not  least  successful  part. 
It  will  be  seen  that  when  Murat  reached  the  great  crisis 
of  his  life,  his  hastiness  and  sensibility  became  matters 
of  considerable  political  importance. 

On  the  28  th  of  June  the  Monitor e  announced  the 
elevation  of  Joseph  to  the  crown  of  Spain,  and  on 
the  2nd  of  August  it  published  the  decrees  proclaiming 
the  accession  to  the  throne  of  Naples  of  Joachim  Murat 
and  his  guarantee  of  the  constitutional  statute.  The 
style  adopted  by  the  new  king  in  these  decrees  ran  as 
follows :  "  Gioacchino  Napoleone,  per  la  grazia  di  Dio 
e  per  la  costituzione  dello  Stato  Re  delle  Due  Sicilie." 

On  the  6th  of  September  King  Joachim  made  his 
formal  entry  into  his  capital.  He  rode  through  the 
streets  attired  in  one  of  his  most  briUiant  uniforms,  and 
followed  by  a  large  and  glittering  staff.  At  the 
Cathedral  of  San  Gennaro  a  solemn  service  was  held,  and 
illuminations  followed.  The  people  appeared  greatly 
pleased  with  their  new  monarch's  splendid  and  martial 
appearance,  with  his  radiant  and  smiling  face,  and  gave 
him  a  good  welcome.  The  general  satisfaction  was 
increased  by  the  fact  that  there  had  been  a  widespread 
fear  lest  Joseph's  removal  might  result  in  the  incorpora- 
tion of  Naples  with  the  French  Empire.  Two  weeks 
later  Caroline  arrived  ;  her  handsome  presence  and 
bearing  producing  a  favourable  impression. 

Murat,  with  characteristic  impetuosity,  lost  not  a 
moment  in  giving  to  his  reign  the  military  impulse  it  could 


198  THE  NAPOLEONIC  EMPIRE  parti 

not  fail  to  have.  His  bearing  and  affability  made  an 
instantaneous  and  profound  impression  on  the  Neapolitan 
officers  who  were  received  by  him  ;  he  expressed  the 
utmost  confidence  in  them,  and  promised  them  victory, 
glory,  and  promotion.  They  were  completely  dazzled, 
and  saw  in  him  a  second  Charles  XII. 

From  the  windows  and  terrace  of  the  Palazzo  Reale, 
that  Joachim  Murat  now  occupied,  may  be  seen  one  of 
the  most  lovely  and  majestic  views  in  the  world.  The 
Bay  of  Naples  stretches  its  dancing  blue  waters  across 
from  the  busy  arsenal  towards  the  long,  curving 
sweep  of  coast  over  which  the  lofty  cone  of  Vesuvius 
rears  its  smoking  crest.  Along  the  distant  cliffs  of 
Sorrento,  whence  white  villas  flash  back  the  rays  of 
the  descending  sun,  the  coast  curves  further  and  further 
towards  the  open  mouth,  where  the  long  rocky  back  of 
Capri,  like  a  slumbering  dragon  of  the  waters,  guards 
the  entrance  to  the  bay.  This  is  the  culminating  point 
of  the  landscape  ;  it  was  the  point  that,  in  the  year  1808, 
drew  the  soldier's  and  the  sovereign's  eye.  Was  he 
the  master,  was  he  the  lord  of  that  wonderful  country, 
or  was  that  Power  whose  hostile  flag  waved  on  the 
topmost  summit  of  the  island  ^  For  several  days  after 
he  took  possession  of  the  palace,  Joachim  paced  the 
terrace,  often  stopping  and  gazing  at  Capri  through  a 
telescope,  and  finally  he  resolved  on  its  capture. 

The  operation  on  which  the  King  now  directed  all 
his  energies  was  one  of  extreme  difficulty, — foolhardy, 
as  a  British  officer  described  it.  The  island  of  Capri 
is  about  three  miles  long  from  east  to  west  by  half  as 
wide.  It  is  entirely  mountainous,  and  presents  a  nearly 
unbroken  line  of  cliff.  The  landing-places  are  two 
small  open  roadsteads, — one  to  the  north,  the  other  to 
the   south  ;  between   them   the   island  is  narrower  and 


CHAP.  VI        MURAT,  KING  OF  NAPLES  199 

lower  than  at  its  eastern  and  western  points.  On  the 
crest  between  the  landing-places  was  perched  the  little 
town  of  Capri,  the  fortifications  of  which  and  of  the 
whole  island  had  been  much  strengthened  by  the 
Governor,  Major  Hudson  Lowe.  Five  forts  and 
numerous  breastworks  made  doubly  strong  this  natural 
fortress,  and  had  earned  for  it  the  name  of  the  "  little 
Gibraltar."  Sir  John  Stuart  had  recently  added  to 
Hudson  Lowe's  garrison,  which  consisted  of  an  ex- 
cellent battalion  of  Corsican  Rangers,  a  battalion  of 
recently  recruited  Maltese  riflemen,  of  rather  poor 
quality. 

The  Neapolitan  preparations  were  quickly  made  and 
with  great  secrecy.  A  considerable  number  of  small 
gun  vessels  were  got  ready,  including  twenty  -  five 
equipped  and  presented  to  the  King  on  his  accession 
by  the  merchants  of  Naples  ;  this  flotilla  was  placed 
under  the  command  of  the  brave  and  dashing  Captain 
Bausan,  a  Neapolitan  officer  trained  in  the  British  navy. 
Detachments  were  carefully  picked  from  the  regiments 
quartered  at  Naples,  and  early  in  the  morning  of  the 
4th  of  October  1 500  grenadiers  and  chasseurs  left  Naples 
for  Capri  in  sixty  boats.  A  similar  detachment  of  400 
men  started  from  Salerno  at  the  same  time.  Lamarque 
was  in  command  and  d'Hautpoul  was  in  charge  of  the 
engineers.  One  frigate,  one  corvette,  and  twenty-six 
gun  vessels  convoyed  the  troops. 

Joachim,  with  Regnier  and  Saliceti,  and  attended  by 
his  staff,  took  up  his  position  at  the  nearest  point  of  the 
mainland,  the  Punta  di  Campanella,  and  followed  the 
operations  through  a  telescope.  The  flotilla  divided 
into  three  sections,  and  at  about  3  p.m.  the  leading  one 
got  close  in  under  the  cliffs  at  the  south-eastern  corner 
of  the  island,  and  the  men  scrambled  from  the  boats 


200  THE  NAPOLEONIC  EMPIRE  parti 

on  to  the  rocks  and  began  to  work  their  way  up  the 
cliffs. 

At  Anacapri,  towards  the  south-west  of  the  island, 
the  French  equally  made  good  a  lodgment,  and  by 
means  of  ladders  and  ropes  began  clambering  up 
towards  the  plateau.  It  was  now  discovered  that  the 
precipitous  nature  of  the  ascent  was  more  of  an 
advantage  than  a  difficulty  to  the  assailants,  for  the 
Maltese  riflemen  posted  on  the  edge  of  the  plateau 
above  could  And  no  mark  they  could  hit  so  directly 
below  them.  The  fact  that  the  defenders  were  raw 
recruits,  the  attackers  picked  veterans,  decided  this 
curious  combat  in  favour  of  the  French.  Well  led  by 
Lamarque  and  a  number  of  experienced  officers,  the 
grenadiers  and  voltigeurs,  in  groups  and  singly,  worked 
their  way  up  the  cliffs,  took  shelter,  and  opened  fire  as 
opportunity  offered,  and  although  in  some  places  parties 
had  to  pass  the  whole  night  in  exposed  positions  midway 
up  the  cliffs,  yet  by  the  following  morning  the  plateau 
of  Anacapri  with  many  prisoners  had  fallen  into  the 
hands  of  the  French  ;  this  gave  them  complete  control 
of  the  western  half  of  the  island. 

The  situation  that  followed  was  curious.  Hudson 
Lowe  withdrew  his  forces  into  the  town  of  Capri  and 
the  French  overran  the  two  high  ends  of  the  island, 
got  a  foothold  at  the  northern  landing-place,  and  there 
managed  to  land  one  or  two  small  guns  to  attack  the 
garrison.  But  the  French  seemed  no  more  able  to 
carry  the  town  than  the  British  to  drive  them  from  the 
island.  A  deadlock  ensued  that  lasted  for  two  weeks, 
and  that  Murat  watched  with  the  utmost  impatience 
from  the  Punta  di  Campanella.  During  this  time  high 
winds  and  storms  cut  off  Lamarque  from  communica- 
tions, drove  some  British  cruisers  from  the  neighbour- 


CHAP.  VI        MURAT,  KING  OF  NAPLES  201 

hood  of  the  island,  and  compelled  General  Macfarlane, 
who  had  embarked  three  regiments  at  Messina  for 
Lowe's  relief,  to  return  to  port.  Finally,  on  the  i8th 
of  October,  having  reached  the  end  of  his  supplies  and 
munitions,  the  British  Governor  surrendered  with  780 
men.  The  terms  of  capitulation  provided  that  they 
should  be  prisoners  of  war  for  one  year  on  parole. 
Thus  King  Joachim,  within  six  weeks  of  ascending 
the  throne,  accomplished  the  brilliant  feat  of  removing 
the  British  colours  from  the  all  but  impregnable  rock 
whence  they  menaced  the  security  of  his  capital.  ^ 
So  delighted  was  the  King  at  this  auspicious  begin- 
ning of  his  reign,  or  so  beneficial  did  he  judge  the 
impression  produced  by  his  victory,  that  he  immediately 
proclaimed  an  amnesty  for  all  political  offences. 

With  Joseph  on  the  throne,  the  relations  of  Naples 
with  France  had  always  been  on  a  clear  and  well- 
defined  basis,  for  his  pliancy  and  subservience  to  his 
brother  were  beyond  all  possibility  of  question.  But 
with  the  new  king  a  totally  new  position  immediately 
arose. 

Joachim  Murat  was  too  much  a  man  of  action,  too 
successful,  too  self-reliant,  tamely  to  submit  to  any 
encroachment  on  what  he  considered  his  due.  At  the 
time  when  Napoleon  had  made  him  Grand  Duke  of 
Berg  he  had  already,  perhaps  rather  ridiculously,  asserted 
his  rights  as  against  the  Emperor.      Napoleon  asked 

^  A  few  well-known  incidents  of  the  capture  of  Capri  have  been  purposely 
omitted  as  being  of  slight  importance.  One  of  these  is  the  retreat  of  Church's 
company  from  Anacapri,  another  is  that  of  Colletta's  reconnaissance  of  the  island. 
The  Neapolitan  historian's  account  of  this  last  matter  is  clearly  apocryphal  in  part ; 
to  discuss  how  many  grains  of  truth  his  account  contains  appeared  unnecessary  and 
uninteresting.  As  to  Colletta's  credibility  see  Quintavalle,  Pignatelli-Strongoli, 
Discorsi ;  Borrelli,  Appendice.  On  Colletta's  own  showing,  d'Hautpoul  rejected 
his  proffered  advice. 


202  THE  NAPOLEONIC  EMPIRE  part  i 

him  to  give  up  the  fortress  of  Wesel  to  the  Empire, 
for  which  he  offered  in  exchange  the  duchy  of  Nassau, 
and  the  principality  of  Dissemburg  ;  the  Grand  Duke 
flatly  declined,  and  talked,  in  loud,  Gascon  fashion,  of 
shutting  himself  up  in  Wesel  and  defending  it  to  the 
last  cartridge.  Finally,  it  became  necessary  to  send  a 
detachment  of  French  troops  to  occupy  the  fortress 
without  the  Grand  Duke's  consent.  This  was  only  a 
foretaste  of  what  was  soon  to  come. 

From  the  moment  of  the  arrival  of  Caroline  at 
Naples  there  was  an  atmosphere  of  intrigue  about  the 
Court,  and  the  King  and  Queen  were  soon  at  the  head 
of  two  opposed  parties.  Caroline,  strong  in  her  abilities 
and  ambition,  in  her  relationship  and  influence  with  the 
great  dispenser  of  royal  dignities,  in  the  special  rever- 
sion created  for  her  to  the  crown  of  Naples  in  the  event 
of  Joachim's  predeceasing  her,  aspired  to  rule  in  the 
field  of  politics,  leaving  to  her  husband  the  more  con- 
genial pursuit  of  war.  She  began  by  reposing  her 
policy  on  her  brother's  support,  and  secured  an  im- 
portant ally  in  the  person  of  his  Minister  to  the 
Neapolitan  Court,  d'Aubusson  Lafeuillade.  Between 
Napoleon  and  Joachim  there  was  still  some  little  coolness 
subsisting  from  the  Wesel  incident  and  others,  so  that 
what  with  his  wife  and  his  Imperial  brother-in-law,  the 
new  king  found  the  throne  of  Naples  not  altogether  a 
comfortable  one  to  occupy. 

Napoleon,  though  making  a  great  pretence  of  dis- 
tributing thrones,  could  not  bear  to  surrender  one  iota 
of  authority,  nor  to  see  another  making  show  of  climb- 
ing the  same  ladder  of  which  he  had  himself  reached 
the  topmost  rung.  The  Emperor  evidently  anticipated 
from  the  first  that  Joachim  would  make  a  very  diff^erent 
sort  of  provincial  governor  from  Joseph,  and  he  appears 


CHAP.  VI        MURAT,  KING  OF  NAPLES  203 

to  have  decided  to  keep  him  under  strict  subordina- 
tion. Napoleon,  among  his  first  assertions  of  authority, 
issued  instructions  that,  in  his  capacity  of  commander 
of  the  French  troops  stationed  in  the  kingdom,  the 
King  of  Naples  should  draw  up  official  reports  in  due 
form  for  CJarke,  the  Minister  of  War.  The  Emperor's 
communications  to  the  King  were  pointedly  framed  in 
a  crisp,  commanding  style,  and  he  did  not  hesitate  to 
express  trenchant  opinions  and  often  commands  on  the 
most  minute  details  of  the  affairs  of  Naples.  When 
Joachim,  conforming  to  the  custom  of  centuries,  a 
custom  still  officially  recognised  at  our  day,  paid  his 
devotion  to  the  miraculous  performance  of  S.  Gennaro, 
Napoleon,  more  tersely  than  politely,  wrote  :  "J'apprends 
avec  peine  que  vous  avez  fait  des  singeries  pour  St. 
Janvier."  ^  When  the  Emperor  was  informed  that  a 
change  was  contemplated  in  the  Neapolitan  Code,  with 
a  view  to  meeting  the  strong  religious  prejudices  of  the 
Neapolitans  on  the  question  of  divorce,  he  ordered  that 
the  change  should  not  be  made  in  the  same  imperative 
form  that  he  would  have  used  for  ordering  the  move- 
ment of  an  army  corps. 

Not  long  afterwards  occurre4  an  incident  that  very 
much  increased  the  latent  antagonism  between  the  two 
brothers-in-law.  The  treaty  of  Tilsit  had  closed  the 
first  cycle  of  the  wars  of  the  Empire,  and  had  left  it  at 
its  height  of  glory,  prestige,  and  power.  Yet  even  at 
that  moment  the  Austrian  Ambassador  at  Paris,  the 
shrewdest  of  European  diplomatists,  Count  Metternich, 
foresaw  nothing  but  anarchy  in  the  event  of  the 
Emperor's  death,  and  wrote:  '' It  is  in  truth  curious 
that  Napoleon  .  .   .  has  never  taken   one   single    step 

^  "It  pains  me  to  hear  you  have  played  monkey  tricks  in  honour  of  S,  Gennaro." 
Napoleon  to  Murat,  Nov.  14,  1808.     Napoleon,  Corr.  (Brotonne),  151. 


204  THE  NAPOLEONIC  EMPIRE  parti 

tending  to  ensure  the  existence  of  his  successors."^  The 
fact  probably  was  that  Napoleon  neither  knew  where, 
nor  cared,  to  look  for  a  successor.  His  brothers  and 
sisters,  with  the  possible  exception  of  Joseph,  had  proved 
more  troublesome  than  helpful,  and  among  them  not 
one  was  fit  to  hold  the  Empire  together.  The  once- 
contemplated  succession  of  the  eldest  son  of  his  brother 
Louis  and  of  Hortense  had  only  excited  the  ill-will  of 
the  other  members  of  his  family.  There  were  in  reality 
but  three  persons  to  be  found  among  the  members  of 
the  Imperial  family  who  could  reasonably  hope  to  hold 
the  throne  after  Napoleon  :  Joseph  Bonaparte,  Eugene 
Beauharnais,  and  Joachim  Murat.  The  first  had  the 
best  claim  as  head  of  the  Bonaparte  family,  as  already 
a  king,  as  the  staunch  and  unswerving  executor  of 
Napoleon*s  behests  ;  but  he  was  weak,  and  inspired  ftw 
men  either  with  attachment  or  respect.  The  Viceroy 
of  Italy  was  strong  in  the  Emperor*s  adoption,  in  his 
undoubted  political  and  military  ability,  in  his  mother's 
great  solicitude  and  constant  endeavour  to  further  his 
interests  ;  but  he  was  very  young,  and  had  not  proved 
his  mettle  as  he  did  later.  Murat  was  pre-eminent  in 
the  favour  of  a  great  part  of  the  army^  in  the  precedence 
he  had  long  held  over  other  marshals,  in  the  unscrupu- 
lous ambition  and  intriguing  power  of  his  wife. 

For  the  many  who  believed  that  a  change  of  govern- 
ment must  turn  on  the  opinion  of  the  army,  the  support 
of  the  most  conspicuous  and  not  least  popular  figure 
in  that  army,  the  support  of  a  brother-in-law  of  the 
Emperor,  appeared  desirable  if  not  indispensable.  How 
Caroline,  competing  with  the  Empress  Josephine,  had 
secured  the  benevolent  regard  of  Junot,  Governor  of 
Paris,  has  been  related.     Nothing  came  of  this  intrigue, 

^  Metternich  to  Stadion,  July  26,  1807,  Metternich,  Mems.  ii.  145. 


CHAP.  VI        MURAT,  KING  OF  NAPLES  205 

for  the  eventuality  on  which  it  hinged  did  not  arise. 
But  when,  in  1808,  the  Emperor,  after  barely  a  year's 
repose,  plunged  once  more  into  warfare,  shrewd  men 
began  to  view  with  misgiving  his  growing  abuse  of  mili- 
tary genius  and  power,  and  wondered  whether  a  Spanish 
bullet  or  knife  might  not  touch  the  charmed  life  that 
had  so  often  braved  unscathed  the  Austrians,  Prussians, 
and  Russians.  At  this  moment,  in  December  1808, 
while  Napoleon  was  toiling  through  the  snow- clad 
passes  of  revolted  Spain  after  Sir  John  Moore,  Talley- 
rand and  Fouche,  long  enemies,  became  reconciled. 
"  These  two  political  personages  made  their  entrance  at 
a  fashionable  reception  arm  in  arm,  and  ostentatiously 
promenaded  their  alliance  before  the  astonished  guests. 
It  was  a  little  thing  and  yet  it  was  a  great  one  ;  for 
Talleyrand  and  Fouche  were  the  two  most  delicate 
political  weathercocks  in  France,  and  if  they  both  veered 
together  it  was  safe  to  conclude  there  was  something  in  the 
wind."  ^  The  political  circles  of  Paris  were  astonished 
and  alarmed  at  this  move,  and  suddenly  realized  possi- 
bilities that  the  triumphs  of  Napoleon  had  momentarily 
obliterated. 

It  was  evident  that  at  any  moment  might  arise  a 
political  situation  in  which  Napoleon  would  not  be  a 
factor  ;  when  it  did  arise,  Talleyrand  and  Fouche  were 
prepared  to  solve  it.  The  contemporary  authorities, 
however,  are  pretty  well  agreed  that  this  intrigue  did 
not  go  very  far,  and  it  is  only  from  events  that  took 
place  a  year  later  that  it  might  be  inferred  that  Murat 
took  an  active  part  in  it.  Yet  it  seems  clear  that  it 
was  on  him  that  the  two  politicians  looked  as  the  future 
occupant  of  the  Imperial  throne,  and  that  it  was  in  this 
sense  that  the  Emperor  himself  understood  the  situation. 

1  Johnston,  Napoleon,  i6i. 


2o6  THE  NAPOLEONIC  EMPIRE  part  i 

This  at  all  events  may  be  taken  as  the  starting-point  of 
an  antagonism  that  finally  became  an  open  breach. 

Napoleon  suddenly  left  his  army  in  Spain,  reached 
Paris  late  in  January  1809,  and  vindicated  his  authority 
by  disgracing  and  earning  the  undying  hatred  of  Talley- 
rand, the  astute  statesman  who  had  for  so  many  years 
and  with  so  much  dexterity  managed  the  foreign  relations 
of  France.  His  brother-in-law,  however,  the  Emperor 
could  not  touch ;  all  he  could  do  was  to  keep  him  at  a 
distance,  and  when,  a  few  weeks  later,  the  French  armies 
were  once  more  set  in  motion  towards  the  frontiers  of 
Austria,  they  lacked  the  inspiring  presence  of  their  great 
cavalry  leader,  whom  the  Emperor,  doubtless  to  the 
regret  of  Caroline,  informed  that  his  presence  would  be 
of  greater  value  at  Naples  than  with  the  army. 

Principal  Authorities  consulted 
MSS. 

Arch,  di  Stato,  Guerra,  xxv.  1049  :  miscellaneous  ;  1974  :  expedition 
to  Capri. 

Arch,  di  Stato,  xxx.  193,  and  Interno^  z^  In'ventario,  5077,  5078,  5079  : 
Internal  disorders. 

San  Martino,  Balsamo  MS. :  expedition  to  Capri. 

Brit.  Foreign  Off.,  Sicily,  30  :  peace  negotiations  of  1806. 

Printed  Books 

Abrant^s,  Mems.  ;  Borrelli,  Appendice  ;  Brit.  State  Papers,  1 8 14-18 15  ; 
Bulletino  delle  Leggi,  1808  ;  Bunbury,  Milit.  Transacs.;  Cantu,  Cronistoria ; 
C  AV  AiGi<i  AC,  Mems.  ;  CuvRCH,  Mems.  ;  Collett  a,  S  tori  a  ;  Collingwood, 
Corresp. ;  Consalvi,  Mems.;  De  Dedem,  Mems.;  Duret  de  Tavel, 
S^'our  en  Calabre  ;  Fouch^,  Mems. ;  Gallois,  Hist,  de  Murat ;  Helfert, 
Maria  Karolina  ;  Joseph,  Corr.  ;  Maciro^e,  Interesting  Facts ;  Madelin, 
Fouch^i  Metternich,  Mems. ;  Miot,  Mems. ;  Monitore  Napolitano  y 
Napoleon,  Corr.,  and  Brotonne  ;  NicolX,  Diario  ;  Minernja  Napolitana  ; 
Murat,  Corr.;  Murat,  Murat  en  Espagne ;  Pasquier,  Mems.;  Pepe, 
Mems. ;  Pignatelli-Strongoli,  Discorsi ;  Potocka,  Mems. ;  Processo  per 
r  esplosione  ;  Qvit^tavalle,  Notizi a  S tor.  ;  RiuvsAT,  Mems.  ;  Roederer, 
(Lucres;  Roederer,  Rapporto ;  St.  Amand,  Marie  Amelie ;  Savelli, 
Legion  Corse;  Schoell,  Recueil ;  Segur,  Mems.;  Talleyrand,  Corr. 
inidite ;  Thi^bault,  Mems.;  Vandal,  Napole6n  et Alexandre. 


CHAPTER   VII 

murat's  reforms 

Military  preparations — Militia — War  with  Austria — Anglo-Sicilian 
armaments — Eckmiihl  and  Essling — Stuart  sails — Takes  Ischia 
— Alarm  at  Naples — Naval  action — Preparations  for  retreat — 
Saliceti  —  Stuart's  position  —  Wagram  —  Brigandage  —  Ionian 
Islands — Reforms — Finance — Continental  blockade — Seizure 
of  American  vessels — Educational  and  judicial  reform — Feudal 
Commission — Zurlo — Police  department — Maghella — Saliceti 
— Annexation  of  Papal  States — Death  of  Saliceti — Court  parties 
—Neapolitan  nationalists  and  Joachim  —  Constitutionalism  — 
Electoral  colleges  —  Public  apathy  —  Results  of  Wagram  — 
Metternich — Napoleon's  marriage — Napoleon  and  Murat. 

The  capture  of  Capri  was  not  followed  by  any  further 
military  success.  Although  in  the  early  months  of  the 
new  reign  it  was  freely  rumoured  that  the  conquest  of 
Sicily  would  soon  be  undertaken,  although  new  regiments 
were  raised  and  the  army  total  increased  to  23,000 
French  and  27,000  Neapolitan  troops,  yet  events 
passing  on  a  larger  scene  than  that  of  Naples  proved  of 
preponderating  importance.  So  far  from  undertaking 
offensive  operations,  Joachim  for  several  months  of  the 
year  1809  had  as  severe  a  struggle  to  retain  his  crown 
as  his  predecessor  had  when  pressed  by  Sir  John  Stuart 
and  the  Prince  of  Hesse. 

Whether  the  conquest  of  Sicily  or  the  defence  of 
Naples    was    uppermost,    it    was    equally    necessary   to 

207 


2o8  THE  NAPOLEONIC  EMPIRE  parti 

strengthen  the  army.  A  premium  was  put  on  things 
military  at  Court,  and  the  provincial  militia  was 
organized  on  an  effective  basis.  The  militiamen  were 
drawn  from  the  middle  class,  citizens  paying  the 
fondiaria  to  the  extent  of  not  less  than  five  ducats 
annually ;  each  district  furnished  a  battalion,  each 
province  a  legion.  Home  service  was  unremunerated, 
save  for  one  picked  company  per  battalion  that  received 
the  same  pay  as  regulars. 

The  military  character  of  the  new  reign  received  its 
official  sanction  in  a  grand  national  festival  and  review 
held  on  the  26th  of  March  1809.  The  King  with 
much  martial  pomp  and  circumstance  watched  12,000 
Neapolitan  troops  march  past,  and  presented  flags, 
rewards,  and  decorations.  But  at  the  very  time  when 
the  new -formed  Neapolitan  troops  were  parading  on 
the  Chiaja,  events  were  shaping  that  were  to  put  their 
discipline  and  their  loyalty  to  King  Joachim  to  a  severe 
test. 

Napoleon's  hasty  journey  from  Galicia  to  Paris  in 
January  1809  had  been  partly  caused  by  the  political 
demonstration  of  Talleyrand  and  Fouche,  partly  by 
impending  danger  of  a  new  conflict  with  Austria.-^  War 
appeared  to  be  on  the  point  of  breaking  out  in  Germany 
once  more,  and  the  Imperial  Guard  was  ordered  to 
follow  close  on  the  Emperor's  footsteps  and  march 
towards  the  Rhine  and  Bavaria.  In  the  early  weeks  of 
1809  military  preparations  became  even  more  marked. 
French  and  Neapolitan  troops  were  steadily  drained  from 
the  south,  and  sent  either  to  the  Austrian  frontier  or 

^  The  argument  of  General  Maurice  (Moore's  Diary)  that  his  return  was  caused 
by  Moore's  movement  and  the  consequent  disarrangement  of  his  plans  in  Spain  does 
not  appear  well  founded. 


CHAP.  VII  MURAT'S  REFORMS  209 

to  Spain  ;  and  as  Naples  became  weaker,  so  the  hope  of 
any  offensive  movement  against  Sicily  rapidly  dwindled. 
Soon  it  was  reported  that  Naples  itself  would  be 
attacked.  The  British  Government  was  anxious  to 
effect  a  diversion  to  assist  Austria  in  the  coming 
struggle,  and  it  was  known  that  a  large  Anglo-Sicilian 
expedition  was  being  fitted  out  at  Messina  and 
Palermo. 

Hostilities  between  the  French  and  Austrians  began 
in  the  middle  of  April,  and  events  followed  much  the 
same  course  as  they  had  in  1805.  On  the  22nd  of 
April  the  Archduke  Charles  was  defeated  at  Eckmiihl 
in  Bavaria  ;  on  the  12th  of  May  Napoleon  once  more 
occupied  Vienna.  Ten  days  later  the  Emperor 
attempted  to  cross  the  Danube  but  was  met  by  the 
Archduke  Charles,  who  drove  him  back  from  Aspern 
and  Essling  on  the  northern  bank  into  the  island  of 
Lobau,  where  the  French  army  found  a  precarious 
refuge  and  intrenched  itself. 

A  few  days  after  the  news  ot  this  great  check  to  the 
French  arms  arrived  at  Naples,  other  news,  equally  or 
even  more  threatening,  came  from  the  opposite  direc- 
tion. On  the  nth  of  June  the  Anglo-Sicilian  fleet 
sailed  from  Messina  and  other  ports  ;  it  carried  14,000 
soldiers,  of  which  more  than  half  were  British,  the 
whole  being  under  the  command  of  Sir  John  Stuart. 
The  British  force  was  imposing.  The  hopes  of 
Mary  Caroline  had  once  more  risen  to  a  high  pitch. 
Her  second  son.  Prince  Leopold,  accompanied  the 
expedition  as  a  volunteer.  Sir  John  Stuart  having 
declined  his  assistance  in  any  other  capacity.  Yet  the 
expedition  was  weak  in  the  extreme  caution  of  its 
commander  -  in  -  chief,  in  his  strong  aversion  for  his 
Sicilian  allies  and  for  the  methods  of  revolution, 
VOL.  r  p 


210  THE  NAPOLEONIC  EMPIRE  parti 

proscription,  and  bloodshed,  which  he  and  his  officers 
believed  would  follow  a  Bourbon  restoration  at  Naples. 

Slowly  the  great  fleet,  250  British  and  Sicilian  ships, 
sailed  along  the  Calabrian  coast  northwards,  occasionally 
landing  small  parties.  The  end  of  June  had  come 
when  it  reached  the  Bay  of  Naples,  and  after  destroying 
a  number  of  Neapolitan  gunboats,  landed  troops  on 
the  island  of  Ischia,  of  which  the  principal  town  and 
fortress  were  besieged  and  reduced  on  the  last  day  of 
the  month. 

The  presence  of  so  large  an  hostile  army  within  a  few 
miles  of  the  capital  caused  alarm  and  almost  consterna- 
tion at  Naples.  The  available  military  force  had  just 
been  still  further  reduced  by  a  detachment  of  6000 
men  sent  to  Rome,  which  Napoleon  had  annexed  to  the 
Empire  by  a  decree  issued  on  his  reaching  Vienna.  All 
the  troops  that  Joachim  could  collect  amounted  to  no 
more  than  1 1 ,000  men  ;  he  therefore  decided  to  con- 
centrate and  to  bring  closer  to  the  capital  the  division  in 
Calabria.  Partouneaux,  who  had  succeeded  Cavaignac 
in  the  command  of  that  province,  was  accordingly 
ordered  to  get  his  troops  together  and  prepare  to  march 
towards  Naples.  Scilla  was  blown  up  ;  4000  men  were 
concentrated  at  Monteleone,  and  1600  at  Lagonegro. 

Not  only  did  Joachim  decide  to  hasten  to  the 
defence  of  his  threatened  capital  all  his  available 
military  strength,  but  also  such  ships  as  he  possessed. 
Orders  were  sent  to  Bausan  to  bring  from  Gaeta  a 
frigate,  a  corvette,  and  some  gunboats  stationed  there. 
He  started  at  night,  and  reached  the  channel  between 
Procida  and  the  mainland  in  the  early  morning.  The 
wind  was  light,  but  Bausan  was  already  well  to  wind- 
ward of  most  of  the  British  ships  in  the  waters  of 
Ischia.      The    frigate     Cyane    and    a    brig,    however, 


CHAP.  VII  MURAT'S  REFORMS  211 

managed  to  draw  up  to  the  Neapolitan  flotilla.  After 
doubling  Cape  Miseno  most  of  the  gunboats  turned 
towards  Baia  and  Pozzuoli,  several  of  them  being 
destroyed  by  the  British  or  run  ashore.  Bausan, 
however,  fought  his  way  across  the  bay,  made  the 
point  of  Posilipo,  and  then  steered  for  the  Arsenal. 
The  Cyane  clung  closely  to  the  Neapolitan,  but  Bausan 
kept  up  a  running  fight  ;  when  at  last  he  reached  the 
mole  the  British  frigate  was  beaten  off  by  a  heavy  fire 
from  the  harbour  defences  that  turned  her  decks  into 
shambles.  Joachim  who,  with  all  Naples,  had  been  a 
spectator  of  this  naval  duel,  immediately  went  on  board 
Bausan's  vessel  and  congratulated  her  captain  and  crew 
on  their  notable  engagement. 

In  the  meanwhile  the  greatest  excitement  reigned  in 
the  capital,  and  many  a  Bourbon  supporter  thought  a 
restoration  was  imminent.  The  weakness  of  the  French 
was  known,  the  strength  of  the  Anglo  -  Sicilians  was 
exaggerated,  while  the  reports  from  Vienna  made  it 
appear  as  though  Napoleon's  career  of  victory  had 
closed.  Preparations  for  evacuating  Naples  were  made. 
Troops  were  echelonned  towards  the  frontier,  valuables 
from  the  Royal  Palace  were  packed  ready  for  trans- 
portation, and  Marshal  Perignon  openly  advocated  the 
abandonment  of  Naples.  At  this  critical  juncture 
Saliceti  arrived  from  Rome,  where  he  had  been  absent 
on  a  mission  that  will  presently  be  noticed.  His 
unfaltering  courage  and  statesmanlike  advice  restored 
confidence.  With  admirable  insight  he  accurately 
gauged  the  spirit  of  the  British  generals  and  declared  : 
"  They  are  even  more  undecided  than  we  are  ;  that  will 
save  us."  ^ 

Saliceti  was  right ;  Sir  John  Stuart  at  Ischia  appeared 

^  De  Dedem,  177  j  Savelli,  166, 


212  THE  NAPOLEONIC  EMPIRE  parti 

content  to  await  events,  just  as  after  Maida  he  made 
his  operations  turn  on  the  strategic  consideration 
that  the  control  of  Naples  really  depended  on  that  of 
northern  Italy.  He  apparently  determined  to  await 
the  result  of  the  operations  on  the  Danube  and  to  make 
the  further  prosecution  of  his  enterprise  turn  on  the 
success  or  non-success  of  the  Austrians.  He  was  far 
from  satisfied  with  his  position  at  Ischia.  Collingwood, 
who  was  blockading  Toulon,  was  not  reassuring.  He 
wrote  to  Stuart  that  his  move  was  good  only  as  a 
diversion,  that  Ischia  was  a  bad  position  to  remain  in, 
and  that  to  invade  Naples  was  useless  unless  there  was 
a  popular  movement.  There  was  the  further  danger 
that  should  a  strong  north-west  wind  arise,  the  British 
fleet  would  lose  touch  with  Toulon  and  the  French 
might  slip  out  and  sail  into  the  Bay  of  Naples  before  the 
British  admiral  could  know  that  they  had  left  their 
anchorage.  This  dispatch  of  Collingwood  reached 
Stuart  at  a  decisive  moment,  for  the  news  had  just 
become  known  at  Naples  that  on  the  6th  of  July 
Napoleon  had  extricated  himself  from  all  his  difficulties 
by  the  brilliant  victory  of  Wagram. 

The  receipt  of  this  news  decided  the  result  of 
the  Anglo-Sicilian  expedition.  Ischia  was  abandoned. 
The  troops  were  re-embarked  and  ingloriously  returned 
whence  they  had  come,  while  Joachim  hastily  dispatched 
orders  to  Calabria  for  his  army  to  re-occupy  the  positions 
they  had  for  a  moment  abandoned. 

Unfortunately  even  the  short  space  of  time  during 
which  the  French  weakness  had  lasted  had  sufficed  to 
replunge  Calabria  into  a  state  of  anarchy.  From  the 
ships  of  the  fleet  or  from  small  vessels  sent  out  from 
Sicily  numerous  parties  of  freebooters  were  landed  at 
every  point  of  the  peninsula.     For  the  Adriatic  was  as 


CHAP.  VII  MURAT'S  REFORMS  213 

much  under  British  control  as  was  the  Mediterranean, 
and  a  small  expedition  had  even  reduced  the  French 
islands  of  Zante,  Cephalonia,  Ithaca,  and  Cerigo,  while 
the  British  cruisers  and  Sicilian  corsairs  flying  the 
Union  Jack  cut  off  the  food  supplies  of  Corfu  and 
reduced  Donzelot  and  his  garrison  to  great  distress.^ 
Right  up  the  Adriatic  coast  capimassi  landed  and 
carried  their  devastations.  One  in  Puglia  gave  himself 
out  as  Prince  Francis  of  Bourbon,  and  levied  taxes  in  all 
due  form.  But  it  is  needless  to  catalogue  the  details  of 
a  state  of  brigandage  precisely  similar  to  those  already 
described.  It  will  be  enough  to  say  that  Calabria  and 
many  districts  of  other  provinces  were  soon  in  as  bad  a 
state  as  they  were  three  years  before,  suffered  the  same 
horrors,  the  same  devastation,  and  the  same  punish- 
ments. An  official  report  gave  the  number  of  criminal 
offences  classed  under  the  head  of  brigandage  for  the 
year  1809  as  33,000  ;  it  must  be  added  that  this  figure 
appears  almost  incredible  even  for  Naples. 

After  the  abandonment  of  Ischia  by  Sir  John  Stuart 
and  his  return  to  Sicily  the  situation  rapidly  improved. 
Reinforcements  of  French  troops  arrived  from  the 
north  ;  soon  the  Neapolitan  army  reached  a  total  of 
30,000  men.  Every  position  formerly  held  on  the 
Strait  of  Messina  was  re-occupied  ;  and,  greatest  relief 
of  all,  the  Prince  of  Canosa  left  Ponza.  It  only  now 
remained  to  allay  and  pacify  the  internal  inflammation 
of  the  kingdom,  to  carry  out,  extend,  and  make 
fruitful  the  reforms  begun  by  Joseph.  This  work  was 
at  once  taken  in  hand,  and  it  is  curious  to  reflect  in  this 
connection   that  it  was  in  the   lawgiving   attributes  of 

^  The  excesses  of  many  of  the  Sicilian  privateers  that  sheltered  under  the  Union 
Jack  was  a  source  of  great  distress  to  the  British  army  officers.  A  number  of 
interesting  papers  concerning  a  particularly  odious  case  of  this  sort  at  Cotrone,  in  the 
summer  of  1807,  are  preserved  in  the  Archives  at  Naples. 


214  THE  NAPOLEONIC  EMPIRE  parti 

kingship,  and  not  in  the  military,  that  Joachim  Murat 
has  earned  the  larger  title  to  the  consideration  and 
esteem  of  posterity. 

It  may  be  said  fairly,  and  in  no  spirit  of  deprecia- 
tion, that  the  reforms  initiated  by  Joseph  had  remained 
largely  on  paper  and  of  no  effect.  The  administrative 
machine,  the  police,  and  to  a  certain  extent  the  work 
of  legislation,  had  been  established  ;  but  the  mass  of 
the  people  still  moved  according  to  their  ancient 
customs  and  viewed  with  indifference  or  with  contempt 
the  work  of  innovation.  But  if  the  two  years  of 
Joseph's  reign  showed  very  little  real  result,  the  first 
two  of  Joachim's  did  bring  some  very  real  changes 
into  the  existence  of  the  Neapolitans. 

When  Joseph  left  Naples,  Roederer  followed  him, 
and  it  had  not  proved  easy  to  fill  the  vacant  post  of 
Minister  of  Finance.  A  Neapolitan,  Pignatelli,  assumed 
the  charge,  but  with  little  success,  and  was  soon  relieved 
by  Agar  de  Mosbourg.  The  new  Minister  was  a  French 
administrator  of  some  ability  who  had  been  attached  to 
Murat  when  Grand  Duke  of  Berg,  very  much  in  the  same 
way  as  Roederer  had  been  to  Joseph.  Under  his  rule 
financial  matters  continued  to  mend,  though  very  slowly. 
The  credit  of  the  State  at  the  close  of  1 809  was  certainly 
better  than  it  had  been  three  years  before,  yet  it  was 
far  from  good.  Ce dolus  representing  100,000,000 
ducats  had  been  issued,  and  covered  the  whole  public 
debt ;  their  current  quotation  was  20,  that  is  a  deprecia- 
tion of  80  per  cent  from  the  face  value.  Making  allow- 
ance for  the  exceptional  events  of  1809,  the  revenue  con- 
tinued to  gain  steadily.  In  the  early  part  of  1808  it 
had  balanced  expenditure,  as  already  related.  In  18 10 
the  budget  showed  an  income  of  13,367,000  lire,  with 
a  surplus  of  1,353,000  lire,  and  in  181 1  it  had  further 


CHAP.  VII  MURAT'S  REFORMS  215 

risen  to  15,687,000  lire,  with  a  surplus  of  2,147,000. 
This  expansion  of  the  revenue  was  largely  obtained  by 
a  gradual  increase  of  the  rendite  patrimonalii  bearing  on 
the  rich,  accompanied  by  a  decrease  in  the  dazii  di 
consumo  bearing  on  the  poor.  Thus  in  18 10  it  might 
be  said  that  the  Neapolitan  finances  were  progressing 
rapidly  in  the  direction  of  prosperity,  and  only  needed 
political  stability.  In  that  year  a  useful  financial  step 
was  taken  by  fixing  a  limit  of  2,000,000  ducats  for  the 
annual  increase  of  the  Gran  Libro  indebtedness  ;  cedolas 
quickly  rose  to  25. 

The  great  source  of  weakness  of  the  State  finances 
was  the  stoppage  of  commerce  that  arose  from  the 
hostilities  between  France  and  Great  Britain.  Some- 
thing of  the  evils  arising  from  this  cause  has  already 
been  noticed  ;  a  wider  view  of  the  subject  may  now 
with  advantage  be  taken. 

Already  before  the  period  of  the  French  Revolution 
the  extensive  maritime  trade  of  Great  Britain  and  her 
insular  invulnerability  had  given  a  gradually  more  and 
more  pronounced  commercial  character  to  wars  in  which 
she  had  been  engaged.  If  England  could  not  be  invaded, 
the  colonies  whence  she  obtained  her  food  and  her  wealth 
might  be  ;  the  vessels  that  conveyed  her  food  and  her 
wealth  could  be  seized.  She  could  be  despoiled  of  her 
possessions  and  of  her  ships,  ruined  and  starved.  Such 
was  the  theory  of  those  who  could  see  no  way  of 
invading  her.  The  French  Republic,  with  robust  faith 
but  far  from  adequate  resources,  attempted  to  reduce 
this  theory  of  warfare  to  practice,  and  not  content 
with  striking  at  British  merchandise  carried  under  the 
British  flag,  issued  decrees  whereby  a  neutral  flag  should 
not  avail  to  protect  British  goods  from  seizure. 

This    system    was    ended    when    Bonaparte    became 


2i6  THE  NAPOLEONIC  EMPIRE  parti 

First  Consul,  and  the  peace  signed  at  Amiens  gave  for 
a  time  promise  of  better  things.  The  two  countries 
were,  however,  soon  at  war  again,  and  Napoleon,  with 
the  splendid  army  he  had  built  up  out  of  the  soldiers 
and  the  spirit  of  the  Revolution,  determined  to  settle 
the  long-standing  quarrel  between  France  and  Great 
Britain  in  the  only  decisive  way,  by  marching  to  London 
at  the  head  of  his  troops.  But  the  Grande  Armee  was 
called  away  from  the  sands  of  Boulogne  to  face  the 
Powers  of  the  north-east  ;  Villeneuve's  fleet  fell  victim 
to  Nelson,  and  the  projected  invasion  of  England  was 
soon  relegated  to  a  very  uncertain  future.  Foiled  in 
his  attempt  to  deliver  his  great  blow  at  England's 
heart,  the  baffled  Emperor  fell  back  on  the  only  other 
policy  of  attack  he  was  in  a  position  to  use,  and  set  to 
work  to  follow  the  direction  and  to  extend  the  scope 
of  the  'Directoire  s  operations  against  British  commerce. 

The  first  of  the  decrees  marking  the  policy  of  the 
Continental  blockade  was  issued  at  Berlin  on  the  21st 
of  November  1806.  It  declared  the  British  Isles  in  a 
state  of  blockade  and  cut  oiF  from  all  intercourse  ;  it 
further  decreed  that  all  British  subjects  were  liable  to 
capture  as  prisoners  of  war  and  to  seizure  of  their 
property.  No  neutral  ship  having  touched  at  any 
point  in  England  was  to  be  admitted  to  port,  and  a 
false  declaration  as  to  this  was  to  entail  seizure. 

The  policy  thus  announced  must  here  be  viewed 
in  its  application  to  the  aifairs  of  the  kingdom  of 
Naples  ;  yet,  even  from  that  restricted  standpoint,  a 
few  observations  of  a  general  character  should  first  be 
made.  In  his  insatiable  thirst  for  domination  and  in  his 
blind  confidence  in  his  genius.  Napoleon  had  set  up  an 
absolutely  retrograde  ideal  of  warfare.  He  apparently 
aimed  at  destroying  Britain  as  Sparta  had  Athens,  or 


CHAP.  VII  MURAT'S  REFORMS  217 

Rome  Carthage  ;  in  avowing  that  aim  he  proclaimed 
himself  not  a  child  of  the  Revolution,  not  a  man  vi^ith 
views  ahead  of  his  times,  but  an  enemy  of  progress  and 
civilization.  He  had  set  up  his  will  and  his  appetite 
to  override  the  consensus  of  informed  and  educated 
opinion  that,  in  the  mutual  intercourse  of  states  even 
when  that  intercourse  took  the  form  of  hostilities, 
certain  conventions  of  mutual  consideration,  of  inter- 
national obligation,  of  civilized  duty,  must  be  observed. 
He  failed  to  perceive  that  his  individual  will  and  power, 
however  much  it  might  surpass  that  of  other  individuals 
and  rulers,  could  not  surpass  that  of  a  century,  or,  at 
least,  could  only  do  so  on  the  one  condition  of  following 
the  same  current  and  outstripping  it.  In  the  political 
calculations  on  which  the  Emperor  based  his  policy  of 
the  Continental  blockade  he  ascribed  far  too  large  an 
effectiveness  to  his  decrees,  far  too  slight  an  effectiveness 
to  economic  conditions  and  public  opinion,  English 
ships  supplied  the  Continent  with  cotton  and  wool,  sugar 
and  coffee,  paper  and  cutlery,  every  necessary  and  every 
luxury  of  life.  Could  one  man  prevent  unanimous 
millions  from  purchasing  the  food  they  were  used  to, 
the  delicacies  they  relished,  the  clothes  in  which  wives 
and  daughters  looked  their  best  ?  Could  one  man 
compel  undying  hatred  to  the  enterprising  suppliers  of 
these  things  ?  Napoleon  would  ask  no  such  questions. 
He  struck  at  Great  Britain  with  all  his  strength  ;  he 
succeeded  in  dealing  a  damaging,  but  not  a  vital  blow 
to  her  commerce,  and  injured  himself  far  more  severely 
by  the  recoil. 

Every  one  conspired  to  defeat  the  Imperial  policy. 
Marshal  Massena  was  not  the  only  functionary  who 
made  a  fortune  out  of  the  licences  issued  for  the 
bringing    in    of    English    goods,    and    even    in    the 


2i8  THE  NAPOLEONIC  EMPIRE  parti 

immediate  circle  of  the  Emperor  the  lucrative  practice 
was  carried  on.  From  the  Baltic  to  the  Adriatic 
English  merchandise  filtered  in  through  every  port, 
though  with  difficulty,  and  King  Joachim  himself 
never  went  without  English  manufactured  goods. 
But  exportation  was  a  matter  of  far  greater  difficulty, 
and  the  valuable  produce  of  Naples  could  find  no 
outlet. 

Great  Britain  did  not  fail  to  return  blow  for  blow. 
The  retaliatory  measures  of  the  British  Cabinet  made 
matters  worse,  and  the  Orders  in  Council  of  January 
and  November  1807  declaring  neutral  ships  lawful 
prizes  unless  trading  through  a  British  port,  placed  such 
ships  in  an  impossible  dilemma.  In  the  Mediterranean 
the  neutral  vessels  carrying  foreign  trade  were  largely 
American,  and  President  Jeffisrson  declared  to  Congress 
in  October  1807  :  "Under  this  new  law  of  the  ocean 
our  trade  in  the  Mediterranean  has  been  swept  away  by 
seizures  and  condemnations,  and  that  in  other  seas  is 
threatened  by  the  same  fate."  ^  So  completely  was  trade 
for  a  while  annihilated  that  when  Collingwood  was 
cruising  in  search  of  Gantheaume  in  the  winter  of 
1 807-1 808,  he  found  the  utmost  difficulty  in  getting 
information,  for,  as  he  wrote  to  Castlereagh,  there 
was  not  "  a  ship  of  any  nation  to  be  met  with  on 
the  sea.'' 

The  policy  of  Naples  followed  closely  that  of  France 
in  the  matter  of  the  Continental  blockade.  After  the 
interview  at  Venice  and  the  Milan  decrees  in  the  winter 
of  1 807-1 808,  it  was  enacted  that  no  cotton  goods  should 
be  introduced  into  Naples  except  on  the  production  of 
a  certificate  of  origin  giving  France  or  the  kingdom  of 
Italy  as  the  place  of  manufacture  ;    at  the  same  time 

^  Message  of  Oct.  27,  1807. 


CHAP.  VII  MURAT'S  REFORMS  219 

vessels  trading  with  England  were  declared  denational- 
ized. Early  in  1808  Napoleon  wrote  as  follows  to 
Joseph  :  "  Be  vigilant,  and  see  that  all  my  blockading 
measures  are  carried  out.  Every  American  ship  calling 
at  one  of  your  ports  comes  from  England  :  take  that 
as  your  guiding  principle.''  ^  Yet  American  traders, 
attracted  by  the  prospect  of  large  profits,  attempted 
to  carry  on  trade  with  Naples  in  spite  of  the  decrees. 
In  1809,  when  the  schooner  Rait  of  Baltimore  was 
seized,  the  remonstrance  of  the  Consular  agent  of  the 
United  States  resulted  in  the  Duke  di  Gallo's  consent 
to  her  release  as  she  had  sailed  direct  from  Baltimore 
without  touching  at  an  English  port.  The  success  of 
this  ship  encouraged  others,  but  with  less  good  fortune, 
for  towards  the  end  of  the  same  year  several  American 
vessels  were  seized.  The  cargoes  were  confiscated  and 
sold,  which  was  only  a  judicial  farce  for  putting  money 
into  the  pockets  of  the  various  officials  concerned ;  in 
one  instance  a  bankrupt  French  speculator  named 
Bastide  was  assigned  a  cargo  of  nankeen,  and  cleared 
100  per  cent  on  an  immediate  turnover.  The  American 
Consular  agent  made  strong  representations,  and  after 
some  months  elicited  the  worse  than  diplomatic  reply 
that  the  seizure  of  the  cargoes  was  founded  on  the 
Act  of  Congress  interdicting  commercial  intercourse 
between  the  United  States  and  Great  Britain  and 
France  and  their  dependencies. 

It  will  be  convenient  to  dispose  of  this  question  of 
the  American  ships  finally  at  this  point.  Redress  for 
these  seizures  was  never  obtained  from  King  Joachim's 
Government.  Later,  in  1818,  Mr.  Pinckney  was  sent 
to  Naples  on  a  special  mission,  but  failed  ;  it  was 
not    till    1832    that    the    claim    was    recognised    and 

*  Joseph,  Corr.  iv.  2Z6. 


220  THE  NAPOLEONIC  EMPIRE  parti 

damages  to  the  extent  of  over  2,000,000  ducats  were 
paid.^ 

The  Continental  blockade  was  the  chief  cause  that 
prevented  Naples  from  entering  on  an  era  of  prosperity 
which  her  improved  political  system  would  otherwise 
undoubtedly  have  given  her.  Though  everything  was 
done  to  promote  a  coasting  trade  with  France,  though 
internal  commerce  was  encouraged  by  the  establishment 
of  fairs  and  markets,  by  the  building  of  roads,  by  the 
abolishment  of  feudal  taxes  and  impediments,  nothing 
could  serve  to  draw  out  of  the  kingdom  that  rich 
stream  of  natural  produce  that  should  have  sent  back 
in  its  stead  a  returning  flow  of  wealth  and  prosperity. 

Although  not  altogether  successful  in  promoting  trade, 
the  Government  of  Naples  accomplished  excellent  results 
in  the  field  of  education.  The  system  decreed  by  Joseph 
was  now  put  into  practice,  and  his  other  undertakings 
were  generally  pursued  and  placed  on  a  basis  of  practical 
utility.  The  reforms  that  evoked  most  opposition 
were  those  of  a  judicial  nature,  such  as  the  compulsory 
registration  of  mortgages.  Many  of  the  provisions  of 
the  Napoleonic  Code,  especially  that  by  which  a  civil 
ceremony  as  well  as  a  religious  was  necessary  to  validate 
a  marriage,  encountered  bitter  hostility.  One  legal 
measure  of  the  Government,  however,  met  with  warm 
approval  and  appreciation,  the  institution  of  the  Feudal 
Commission.  The  various  decrees  of  Joseph's  reign 
dealing  with  and  restricting  the  application  of  feudal 
rights  had  led  to  a  vast  amount  of  litigation  that  seemed 
to  make  matters  even  worse  and  more  complicated 
than  before.  It  was  decided  that  a  special  tribunal 
must  be  formed  to  determine  these  questions,  and  the 

^  Arch.  Nap.  Confische  dei  legni  Americani  ^   Martens,  Recueily  iv.  359  j  Papers  laid 
before  Congress^  Feb.  28,  18 18. 


CHAP.  VII  MURAT'S  REFORMS  221 

Feudal  Commission  came  into  existence  by  decree  of 
the  3rd  of  December  1808. 

The  statesman  to  whose  charge  it  fell  to  direct  the 
proceedings  of  the  Feudal  Commission  was  Giuseppe 
Zurlo,  Minister  of  the  Interior,  the  most  eminent 
administrator  that  Naples  produced  in  those  troublous 
times.  Intelligent,  active,  public -minded,  liberal  yet 
temperate,  and,  above  all,  honest,  Zurlo  might,  in 
better  days,  have  earned  the  reputation  of  a  great 
statesman.  He  had  already  risen  to  important  posi- 
tions under  the  Bourbons.  His  reports  on  the  royal 
domains  in  the  Sila  were  more  truthful  than  palat- 
able, yet  his  ability  and  utility  had  raised  him  from 
the  rank  and  file  of  the  public  servants.  In  1799, 
although  zealous  for  reform,  he  had  enough  fidelity 
to  Ferdinand,  or  distrust  of  the  Parthenopean  Republic, 
not  to  join  the  revolutionary  government.  He  held 
aloof,  and  soon  after  the  return  of  Ferdinand  was 
placed  by  Acton  in  the  difficult  position  of  director 
of  the  finances  of  the  kingdom.  In  1803  he  was 
disgraced,  more  from  the  fault  of  the  system  than 
his  own,  but  his  integrity  remained  above  suspicion. 
Unappreciated  by  a  government  the  depths  of  whose 
ineptitude  he  had  sounded  more  deeply  than  most  men, 
he  had  been  among  the  first  who  had  thrown  in  their 
lot  with  the  new  order.  Under  Joseph  and  Joachim 
he  had  been  intrusted  with  high  charges  ;  he  was  now 
to  superintend  a  work  which  his  special  knowledge, 
temperate  spirit,  and  honest  statesmanship  was  to  do 
much  to  bring  to  a  good  end,  a  work  that  deserves 
to  be  honourably  recorded  in  the  pages  of  history,  and 
with  which  his  name,  as  well  as  that  of  his  sovereign, 
must  be  for  ever  associated. 

The    Feudal    Commission    was    presided    over    by 


222  THE  NAPOLEONIC  EMPIRE  parti 

Dragonetti,  and  among  its  subordinate  officials  were 
Pasquale  Borrelli  and  D.  Winspeare,  who  as  a  pro- 
vincial commissioner  and  the  intimate  and  confidant  of 
Zurlo  was  of  large  assistance.  In  a  little  more  than 
a  year  this  court  disposed  of  no  less  than  5000  cases. 
The  work  that  this  commission  undertook  has  been 
already  indicated  in  the  first  chapter,  and  details  there 
given  cannot  now  be  repeated.  The  principal  objects 
of  the  Feudal  Commission  were  to  pronounce  final 
sentence  in  all  litigation  pending  between  the  Univer- 
sita  and  the  Barons,  to  effect  the  distribution  of 
domanial  land  to  communities  and  individual  occupiers 
and  assess  the  cornpensation  to  be  paid,  to  enforce  the 
abolishment  of  such  personal  and  feudal  rights  as  had 
been  abrogated  by  the  decrees  of  Joseph.  The  dis- 
tribution of  the  domanial  land  was  to  be  concluded  by 
the  end  of  1809,  but  it  cannot  be  thought  inexpeditious 
that  it  was  two  years  later  before  this  great  labour  was 
completed. 

Among  the  feudal  rights  abolished  may  be  mentioned 
that  of  free  transport,  which  was  nearly  the  only  per- 
sonal service  that  had  not  been  transformed  into  a 
money  payment  ;  this  was  effected  by  a  decree  of  the 
9th  of  October  1806.  The  abolition  of  the  right  of 
free  pasture  by  Joachim  was  of  great  and  immediate 
benefit  to  agriculture,  especially  in  Calabria.  In  that 
province  the  Barons,  so  as  to  enjoy  their  privilege  of 
pasturage,  prevented  the  ploughing  and  sowing  of  land, 
and  turned  many  fertile  tracts  into  uncultivated  wilds.-^ 

But  it  is  impossible  to  carry  the  reader  through  the 
catalogue  of  1 400  feudal  rights  abolished  by  the  French 

^  Zurlo,  Rapporto,  1808,  1809,  28.  The  Barons  appear  to  have  struggled  hard  to 
retain  this  privilege.  As  late  as  18 13  Zurlo  was  giving  directions  to  enforce  the  law 
against  them  5  Supplimento  del  Bolletino^  xxxii.  169. 


CHAP.  VII  MURAT'S  REFORMS  223 

kings.  The  ground  those  rights  covered  has  already 
been  indicated.  The  records  of  the  Feudal  Com- 
mission are  voluminous  ;  they  are  to  be  found  in 
ninety-six  printed  volumes  and  about  5000  bundles  of 
documents  now  stored  at  the  Archivio  di  Stato  at 
Naples.  The  work  of  reducing  this  great  mass  of 
litigation  to  order,  of  giving  a  final  decision  in  every 
case,  of  compensating  proprietors,  of  distributing  land 
to  small  holders,  of  abolishing  unrighteous  privileges, 
of  maintaining  just  rights,  and,  most  arduous  of  all,  of 
cutting  through  legal  obstacles  to  a  quick  but  equitable 
judgment,  all  this  in  the  ultimate  resort  fell  on  Zurlo. 
And  what  was  perhaps  most  noteworthy  in  his  conduct 
of  this  essentially  revolutionary  work  was  that  he  never 
allowed  his  zeal  for  reform  and  for  improving  the  lot 
of  the  peasantry  to  outstrip  his  sense  of  justice  and 
equity.  He  knew  how  to  refuse  the  tenant  an  unjust 
release  as  well  as  how  to  compel  the  Baron  to  con- 
tribute his  due  to  the  prosperity  of  the  community. 
Thus  the  Ministry  of  the  Interior  was  one  of  the 
busiest  and  most  beneficent  departments  of  State  during 
the  first  years  of  Joachim's  reign. 

The  police  department  also  continued  to  be  of  great 
importance.  Its  policy  was  founded  on  an  elaborate 
system  of  spying  and  delation,  a  close  inquisition  into 
the  acts  of  individuals,  a  constant  intercepting  and 
opening  of  letters  and  even  on  occasion  of  diplomatic 
dispatches.  Popular  demonstrations  were  led  and 
organized  by  paid  agents,  and  when  the  King  visited 
the  opera,  500  free  seats  were  distributed  to  selected 
persons,  resulting  in  gratifying  demonstrations  of  loyal 
enthusiasm.  Although  the  severity  of  the  police  had 
been  somewhat  relaxed  in  the  early  months  of  the 
reign,  it  had  been  reasserted  with  great  vigour  during 


224  THE  NAPOLEONIC  EMPIRE  parti 

the  troubles  of  1809,  and  not  a  little  of  the  efficacy  of 
its  measures  of  repression  had  been  due  to  Saliceti*s 
chief  subordinate,  the  Genoese  Maghella. 

Maghella  was  an  advanced  liberal,  a  subtle  and 
strong  politician,  a  compatriot  of  Saliceti  and,  in  a  way, 
of  Bonaparte.  He  was  given  to  secret  and  devious 
ways  that  were  perhaps  suitable  in  a  police  official,  but 
that  in  a  private  capacity  would  probably  have  led  him 
into  trouble.  He  was  one  of  a  small  but  important 
group  of  Italians  who  saw  in  the  existing  political  con- 
ditions of  Naples  a  transitional  stage  that  was  to  be 
turned  to  profit,  that  was  to  lead  to  more  liberal 
institutions,  that  was  to  result  perhaps  in  a  republic, 
perhaps  in  the  establishment  of  an  Italian  state,  at  all 
events,  of  one  in  which  Italians  should  have  the  decisive 
voice.  Such  sentiments  could  hardly  be  avowed  in 
public.  But  in  private,  under  the  strict  pledge  of 
secrecy,  under  the  veil  of  that  thin  allegory  and 
delicate  allusiveness  which  the  Italian  imagination  so 
rapidly  invents  and  pierces,  such  ideas  were  gradually 
permeating  the  minds  of  the  Italian  functionaries, 
civil  and  military,  that  stood  about  the  throne  of  their 
French  monarch. 

Saliceti  was  more  wary,  even  more  difficult  to  con- 
nect with  any  disloyal  intent,  than  Maghella.  To  his 
clear  eye  it  must  have  appeared  certain  that  the  time 
was  not  yet  ripe.  His  influence  among  liberal  Italians 
was  great ;  yet  he  was  very  guarded,  a  man  of  few 
words,  and  it  is  not  probable  that  he  went  far  in 
encouraging  the  rising  group  of  Italian  nationalists. 
One  of  his  contemporaries  at  Naples  said  of  Saliceti  : 
"  Although  he  had  accepted  the  i8th  of  Brumaire  and 
wore  the  colours  of  the  new  dynasty,  he  could  not  but 
think  his  surroundings  paltry  as  to  the  men,  debased  as 


CHAP.  VII  MURAT'S  REFORMS  225 

to  their  object.  I  do  not  say  he  was  still  a  republican  ; 
but  the  period  of  that  monumental  period,  of  the  titanic 
Comite  de  Salut  Public^  still  lived  in  him  and  lent  to  his 
attitude  in  his  new  functions  and  towards  his  new 
colleagues  a  shade  of  disdain  that  pierced  through  his 
usual  reserve."  ^  Yet  so  prudently  did  he  guard  his 
inmost  thoughts,  so  actively  and  well  did  he  perform 
the  functions  intrusted  to  him,  that  on  his  death  not 
only  did  the  citizens  of  Naples  regret  his  loss,  but 
Napoleon  declared  that  of  all  his  Ministers  he  had 
served  him  best. 

When,  just  before  his  check  at  Essling,  Napoleon 
determined  to  despoil  the  Pope  and  to  annex  the  Papal 
States  to  the  Empire,  he  specially  deputed  Saliceti  to 
perform  this  delicate  mission.  Six  thousand  Nea- 
politan troops  marched  to  Rome  to  carry  out  the 
Emperor's  measures. 

The  annexation  of  the  territory  proved  a  simple 
enough  matter,  but  when  the  news  of  Essling  reached 
Rome,  Pius,  doubtless  believing  that  God  had  inter- 
posed to  save  his  Vice -Regent,  attempted  to  second 
the  Austrian  arms  by  pronouncing  sentence  of  excom- 
munication against  the  great  spoiler.  With  the  Imperial 
army  hemmed  in  to  the  island  of  Lobau  by  the  Arch- 
duke Charles,  with  Sir  John  Stuart  at  the  gates  of 
Naples,  and  with  the  head  of  the  Catholic  Church 
rattling  his  pontifical  thunders,  the  situation  was  so 
alarming  that  many  men  even  of  tried  ability  would 
have  faltered.  But  Saliceti  had  studied  politics  at  a 
vigorous  school,  and  was  not  to  be  intimidated.  He 
promptly  arrested  Pius,  sent  him  under  guard  to 
France,  placed  Rome  under  martial  law,  and  then 
hurried  back  to  Naples,  where  he  arrived  in  time  to 

^  Cavaignac,  259. 
VOL.  I  Q 


226  THE  NAPOLEONIC  EMPIRE  part  i 

give  fresh  heart  to  Joachim's  Ministers,  and  to  prevent 
the  abandonment  of  the  capital. 

Saliceti  was  not  long  to  survive  the  invaluable  services 
he  rendered  to  Napoleon  and  to  Joachim  in  the  summer 
of  1809.  He  had  been  in  failing  health  for  some  time 
and  liable  to  gastric  trouble.  In  December  of  the 
same  year  he  was  taken  suddenly  ill  at  the  theatre  one 
evening  after  dining  with  Maghella  ;  a  few  days  later 
he  died.^  He  was  succeeded  by  Maghella,  whose 
appointment  was  much  resented  by  the  Queen. 

It  has  already  been  related  that  from  the  first  advent 
of  the  new  King  and  Queen  to  Naples  the  Court  had 
divided  into  two  parties.  Saliceti  had  for  a  time  inclined 
to  side  with  Caroline,  knowing  her  qualities  and  her 
influence  with  the  Emperor.  But  the  Queen's  circle  was, 
unfortunately,  largely  composed  of  young  men,  pleasure- 
lovers,  dashing  officers  like  Lavauguyon,  Livron,  and 
Montrond.  To  participate  in  the  ambitions  and  counsels 
of  these  young  '' godelureaux,"  as  he  called  them,  was 
impossible  for  a  man  of  Saliceti's  calibre  and  character. 
He  appears  to  have  then  turned  towards  another  and 
important  party  that  soon  began  to  gain  influence  in 
the  entourage  of  the  King. 

Joachim's  character  invited  the  exercise  of  those  arts  of 
cajolery  and  flattery  in  which  the  Italians  are  adepts,  and 
that  constitute  their  favourite  means  of  attaining  their 
ends.  Among  the  Neapolitans  who  formed  a  part  of 
the  Court  circle,  those  whose  views  went  beyond  mere 
personal  advancement  saw  in  Joachim  a  vain,  good- 
hearted  soldier,  unfit  to  govern,  but  fit  to  be  led. 
Concessions  might  be  gradually  coaxed  from  him  ;  his 

^  The  theory  that  Saliceti  was  poisoned,  whether  by  Maghella  or  not,  appears  to 
repose  on  nothing  solid  ;  Cavaignac,  260  ;  Radowsky,  120  j  Savelli,  176  j  but  cf. 
Romeo,  13  j  Ulloa,  Intorno  alia  Storia,  256  ;  CoIIetta,  Storia,  ii.  109  ;  De  Dedem, 
chap.  ii.  and  Nicola,  510. 


CHAP.  VII  MURAT'S  REFORMS 


227 


French  entourage,  little  by  little,  might  be  alienated  ; 
Italian  functionaries  and  methods  might  in  time  entirely 
prevail.  A  few  ardent  spirits,  deluded  by  an  imaginative 
interpretation  of  the  scope  of  the  constitutional  statute 
of  Bayonne,  already  saw  a  constitutional  monarchy,  with 
a  representative  chamber,  as  the  form  of  government  of 
their  country. 

The  statute  of  Bayonne  never  came  into  effect,  yet 
it  is  not  true,  as  many  writers  have  asserted  on  an 
authority  that  is  often  deliberately  false,^  that  it  remained 
totally  unacted  on.  The  people  of  Naples  were  unfit 
for  and  undesirous  of  representative  institutions,  yet 
King  Joachim's  Ministers  attempted  by  gradual  steps 
to  bring  these  conditions  nearer.  The  year  1809  was 
too  unsettled  to  permit  of  the  introduction  of  such 
measures  as  might  be  thought  the  natural  outcome  of 
the  Bayonne  statute,  but  several  decrees,  preparing  the 
ground  for  the  future,  were  issued.  By  these  electoral  dis- 
tricts were  marked  out ;  arrangements  for  the  assembling 
of  conventions  of  merchants  and  landowners  in  various 
cities  were  made  ;  and  the  incompatibility  of  functions 
between  a  member  of  the  Parliament  and  a  Councillor  of 
State  was  laid  down.  In  all  these  decrees  the  King's 
title  was  referred  to  as  proceeding  from  the  grace  of 
God  and  the  Constitution.  In  18 10  a  further  step  in 
advance  was  made  by  ordering  the  convocation  of  the 
electoral  colleges  of  merchants  and  of  landed  proprietors. 
From  many  subordinate  officials  came  expressions  of 
gratitude  and  appreciation  for  these  measures  of  the 
Government.  The  Intendente  of  Basilicata  wrote  to 
Count  Zurlo,  Minister  of  the  Interior,  that  the  electoral 
college  of  landed  proprietors  viewed  their  convocation 
as  the  final  accomplishment  of  the  political  regeneration 

1  Colletta. 


228  THE  NAPOLEONIC  EMPIRE  parti 

of  their  country,  and  that  they  looked  forward  to  ap- 
pointing delegates  to  proceed  to  Naples  to  place  their 
desires  before  the  Government.  The  historian  Colletta, 
then  a  provincial  governor,  joined  the  chorus  of  approval, 
and  so  did  Giuseppe  Poerio,  another  Government  official. 
The  Intendente  of  Teramo  wrote  to  Zurlo  that  the 
articles  of  the  decree  would  be  executed,  "  bearing  in 
mind  the  provisions  of  the  constitutional  act  of  the 
kingdom."  Yet,  as  a  whole,  it  must  be  said  that  the  re- 
sponse to  this  measure  of  the  Government  was  extremely 
disappointing.  Sheaves  of  excuses  and  refusals  to  act 
on  the  electoral  colleges  were  received,  and  if  the  decrees 
proved  as  a  whole  non-effective,  it  must  be  pronounced 
to  have  been  the  fault  neither  of  the  Government  nor 
of  its  officials,  but  entirely  that  of  the  people.  Their 
supineness  or  fear  rendered  abortive  what  was  perhaps 
not  a  liberal  measure,  but  certainly  was,  and  was  intended 
as,  a  step  towards  representative  institutions. 

Wagram  and  the  peace  that  followed  had  great 
results.  The  shattered  fortunes  of  the  Austrian  Empire 
were  intrusted  to  a  great  statesman  who  was  destined 
to  retrieve  them.  Count  Metternich.  The  Emperor 
Napoleon,  his  mind  fixed  on  that  quarter  of  the  poli- 
tical horizon  to  which  Talleyrand  and  Fouche  had  so 
ominously  pointed  a  few  months  before,  decided  on 
a  stroke  that  was  to  set  at  rest  the  ambitions  of  those 
that  stood  nearest  his  throne.  Shortly  after  the 
Emperor's  return  from  Vienna  a  family  council  was 
called,  to  which  the  King  and  Queen  of  Naples  were 
summoned. 

Joachim  reached  Paris  about  the  end  of  November. 
He  passed  through  Rome  on  the  way,  where  he  reviewed 
the  French  and  Neapolitan  troops  of  the  garrison,  but 


CHAP.  VII  MURAT'S  REFORMS  229 

was  received  with  scant  courtesy  by  such  of  the  cardinals 
as  had  remained  there  after  the  departure  of  Pius. 
When  the  family  council  met  it  was  found  that 
Napoleon  had  resolved  to  divorce  Josephine  and 
marry  again,  so  as  to  provide  an  heir  for  the  Empire. 
The  details  of  this  matter  do  not  concern  us  ;  it  will 
suffice  to  say  that  the  announcement  did  not  prove 
equally  agreeable  to  all  the  members  of  the  council. 
There  was  opposition.  But  the  Emperor  could  not  be 
shaken,  and  the  only  question  worth  discussing  was  as 
to  the  choice  of  the  new  Empress.  Joachim  upheld  the 
policy  of  the  Russian  alliance,  but  for  many  reasons  it 
was  the  Austrian  Archduchess  Maria  Louisa  who  was 
chosen.  It  was  a  great  diplomatic  victory  for  Metter- 
nich,  a  great  disillusion  for  the  ambitions  of  Joachim 
Murat. 

In  March  18 10,  one  month  before  the  marriage  of 
Napoleon,  the  King  of  Naples  was  once  more  in  dis- 
agreement with  his  imperial  brother-in-law,  this  time 
because  the  best  soldiers  of  the  French  regiments  at 
Naples  were  being  drafted  into  Joachim's  guard. 
Napoleon  threatened  to  send  a  French  general  to  take 
the  command  of  his  troops  at  Naples  unless  these  men 
were  at  once  sent  back  to  their  regiments,  and  the  King 
had,  as  usual,  to  comply.  A  month  later  Joachim 
assisted  at  the  great  function  at  Notre  Dame,  and  saw, 
with  mixed  feelings,  his  wife,  the  Queen  of  Naples, 
helping  to  carry  the  imperial  mantle  of  the  new 
Empress  of  the  French. 

Principal  Authorities  consulted 

MSS. 
Arch,  di  Stato  ;  Interna^  2°  Inventario,  5079  :  numerous  documents 
relating  to  the  measures  for  carrying  out  the  Bayonne  Constitution. 
Arch,  di  Stato,  xxx.  24,  197  :  same  subject,  and  legal  reforms. 


230  THE  NAPOLEONIC  EMPIRE  parti 

Arch,  di  Stato  ;  Interno,  41  ;  Commissione  Feudale,  and  Giustiziay  1808, 
Casalnuovo,  with  other  files,  for  the  Feudal  Commission. 
Arch,  di  Stato  ;  Confisc/ie  dei  legnt  American'i. 
Arch,  di  Stato  ;  Guerra^  xxv.  1974  :  a  few  miscellaneous  matters. 

Printed  Books 

Bertholdi,  Mems.  ;  Bianchini,  Finanze ;  Bolletino  delle  Sentenze ; 
Bolletino  Feudale  j  British  State  Papers^  1815-1816  ;  Bolletino  delle  Leggi, 
1808;  BuNBURY,  Milit.  Transacts. i  Cavaignac,  Mems.;  Colletta, 
Storia ;  CoLLiNGWOOD,  Corr. ;  Consalvi,  Mems.;  De  Dedem,  Mems.; 
DuRET  DE  Tavel,  S^'our  en  Calabre  ;  Greco,  Annali ;  Helfert,  Konigin 
Karolina ;  Joseph,  Corr. ;  Martens,  Recueil  de  Traites ;  Massarello, 
//  decennio ;  Napoleon,  Corr. ;  Nicola,  Diario ;  Orloff,  Mems. ; 
Palmieri,  Souvenirs;  Pepe,  Mems.;  Quintavalle,  Notizia  Storica ; 
Radowsky,  Cosi  memorahili ;  Roederer,  (Ewvres ;  Romeo,  Specchio  del 
disinganno ;  Savelli,  Legion  Corse;  Schoell,  Recueil;  Supplimento  del 
Bolletino;  Ulloa,  Interna  alia  Storia;  Vita  Politica  di  Medici;  ZuRLO, 
RapportOy  1808,  1809,  18 10,  181 1. 


CHAPTER   VIII 

SICILIAN    INTRIGUES    AND    DEMONSTRATIONS 

Invasion  of  Sicily — Mary  Caroline  and  the  British — Her  secret 
communications — Castrone— D'  Amitia — Donop — Moliterno's 
expedition  —  Marriage  of  Maria  Louisa  —  Fears  of  British — 
Napoleon's  intentions — Relief  of  Corfu — Affairs  of  Spain — 
Cadiz  letter — British  feeling — Mary  Caroline's  disclaimer — 
Joachim  arrives  at  Scilla — His  command  and  forces — Military 
operations  —  Expedition  abandoned  —  Feelings  of  Joachim — 
Napoleon's  recriminations  —  King  of  Rome — Anti- French 
decree  —  Quarrel  between  Joachim  and  Napoleon  —  Caroline 
proceeds  to  Paris — State  of  Calabria — Manhes — His  system — 
The  brigands  —  Manhes  at  Serra  —  Capobianco  and  the 
Carbonari — Manhes'  character. 

When  the  dynasty  of  Naples  had  ceased  to  reign ^ 
when  Joseph  Bonaparte,  Lieutenant  of  the  Emperor, 
and  Marshal  Massena  had  appropriated  to  the  uses  of 
Napoleon  the  continental  portion  of  the  kingdom  of 
the  Two  Sicilies,  it  had  been  intended  that  the  French 
army  should  not  pause  in  its  march  until  after  the 
Strait  of  Messina  had  been  crossed,  until  the  tricolour 
had  been  planted  on  the  ramparts  of  Palermo.  How 
that  design  failed  has  been  recorded.  But  through  all 
the  vicissitudes  that  attended  the  policy  of  France  and 
of  Naples  the  conquest  of  Sicily  had  always  taken  rank 
as  an  object  of  the  first  importance.  It  was  not,  how- 
ever, until  the  year   1810  that  circumstances  appeared 

231 


232  THE  NAPOLEONIC  EMPIRE  parti 

to  make  it  possible.  France  was  once  more  at  peace 
with  the  north-eastern  Powers,  only  England  and  Spain 
for  the  moment  engrossed  the  Emperor's  attention. 
However  great  the  force  required  to  maintain  the 
doubtful  hold  of  France  on  the  southern  peninsula,  it 
was  now  possible  to  move  considerable  detachments 
down  from  Lombardy  to  Naples. 

Accordingly,  numerous  bodies  of  French  troops, 
together  with  many  of  the  battalions  recruited  by 
Joachim,  were  slowly  moved  more  and  more  threaten- 
ingly near  the  Strait  of  Messina.  But  to  get  a  clearer 
view  of  the  curious  situation  that  shortly  arose  at  that 
point,  it  will  be  necessary  for  a  moment  to  consider 
the  position  on  the  further  side  of  the  Strait,  and  to  see 
what  were  the  relations  existing  between  Great  Britain, 
Sicily,  France,  and  Naples.  For  behind  all  the  hostile 
demonstrations  was  a  network  of  political  intrigue,  and 
it  is  by  no  means  certain  either  that  Napoleon  had  any 
design  whatever  on  Sicily,  or  that  if  the  French  troops 
had  effected  a  landing,  the  Court  of  Palermo  would  not 
have  received  them  with  open  arms. 

The  rapid  development  of  Mary  Caroline's  hostility 
to  the  British  has  already  been  noted.  So  early  as 
May  1807  an  Englishman  residing  in  Sicily  wrote  of 
her  that  whenever  she  saw  one  of  his  compatriots  "  she 
feels  the  guillotine  on  her  neck.''  ^  The  Queen's  senti- 
ments were  repaid  in  kind  by  the  great  majority  of  the 
officials  sent  to  Sicily  by  the  British  Government,  and, 
to  counterbalance  the  Queen's  influence,  they  supported 
a  party  of  Sicilian  noblemen  led  by  the  Prince  of  Bel- 
monte  who  were  hostile  to  the  Queen  and  in  favour  of 
a  reforming  and  liberal  policy.     A  Sicilian  Parliament 

1  Leckie,  98. 


CH.  VIII  INTRIGUES  AND  DEMONSTRATIONS  233 

assembled,  and  questions  of  supply  decided  against  the 
Queen's  wishes  accentuated  the  ill  feeling  between 
Belmonte's  party  and  Mary  Caroline. 

The  disputes  with  her  Sicilian  subjects,  her  helpless- 
ness against  the  British  generals  at  Messina,  constant 
ill  success,  and  the  disappointing  failure  of  the  Arch- 
duke Charles  and  of  Sir  John  Stuart  in  1809,  had 
further  impaired  the  Queen's  already  doubtful  health, 
bodily  and  mental.  Rage  and  dejection  alternately 
seized  her  on  the  return  of  the  Anglo-Sicilian  fleet  in  the 
autumn  of  1809.  She  reviled  her  son  Prince  Leopold 
for  his  inglorious  expedition,  and  in  a  letter  to  a  friend 
at  Vienna,  Canon  Boehme,  she  complained  that  affairs 
were  in  a  lamentable  position,  and  admitted  that  she 
constantly  took  opium  to  soothe  her  overstrung  nerves. 
Yet  she  continued  intriguing  with  all  the  restless 
folly  of  a  diseased  imagination.  She  had  no  right 
to  wield  regal  authority  in  a  direct  way,  and  all  her 
schemes  depended  on  the  exercise  of  personal  influence 
and  the  employment  of  secret  methods.  As  early  as 
1807  Lord  Collingwood  had  discovered  that  communi- 
cations were  passing  between  the  Queen  and  Marseilles, 
but  it  seems  probable  that  in  this  there  was  nothing  of 
more  importance  than  the  smuggling  of  the  latest  Paris 
fashions.^  Whether  the  Queen's  explanation  of  the  fact 
be  true  or  not,  it  is  certain  that  the  British  authorities 
viewed  her  with  such  dislike  and  suspicion  that  her 
every  step  was  construed  as  far  as  possible  to  her  dis- 
favour. Nothing  tended  to  increase  this  British  pre- 
judice more  than  the  network  of  spying  that  the  Queen 
had  thrown  from  Palermo  over  Naples  and  Messina 

^  Probably  through  Vacaro,  a  Palermitan  dealer  in  Parisian  fashions  patronized 
by  the  Queen. — Mary  Caroline  Memoirs.  Cf.  also  Sir  John  Moore's  Diary  for  similar 
reports,  possibly  with  the  same  origin. 


234  THE  NAPOLEONIC  EMPIRE  part  i 

and  the  Tyrrhenian  Sea.  Doubtful  go-betweens  passed 
from  place  to  place,  as  often  as  not  paid  by  both  sides 
and  lying  to  both.  At  the  head  of  the  passport 
department  at  Palermo  was  a  low  poHce  agent,  Castrone 
by  name,  who  dispatched  all  the  Queen's  emissaries  and 
letters  and  chartered  her  vessels.  After  employing 
him  for  five  years  Mary  Caroline  finally  concluded 
that  he  cost  much  and  effected  little,  that  he  lived  in 
scandalous  luxury  and  was  an  endless  cause  of  vexation. 

There  was  a  not  altogether  unjustified  predisposition, 
arising  from  this  system  of  Mary  Caroline,  to  believe 
that  behind  it  were  intrigues  of  the  most  discreditable 
kind.  The  terror  her  name  inspired  at  Naples,  the 
affair  of  Mosca,  the  explosion  at  the  Palazzo  Maresca, 
the  doings  of  the  capimassi^  were  placed  to  her  discredit ; 
and  her  hatred  for  her  enforced  allies  at  Messina  was 
undisguised.  Just  at  the  moment  when  the  French  at 
last  really  threatened  the  invasion  of  Sicily,  the  coin- 
cidence of  two  or  three  curious  incidents  created  a 
belief,  not  yet  altogether  dispelled,  that  Mary  Caroline 
was  secretly  in  league  with  the  French,  that  she  had 
made  terms  with  Napoleon  through  the  good  offices  of 
her  grand-daughter  the  Empress  Maria  Louisa,  and  that 
she  had  agreed  to  raise  Sicily  against  the  British  and 
execute  a  second  Sicilian  Vespers. 

Undoubtedly  at  this  period  secret  communications 
did  pass  between  Mary  Caroline  and  France.  A  Sicilian 
officer  named  D'  Amitia  was  landed  in  Illyria  in  January 
1810  from  a  Sicilian  armed  brig;  he  saw  Marshal 
Marmont,  the  governor,  claimed  that  he  was  charged 
to  negotiate  a  rapprochement^  was  sent  to  Paris,  and  was 
there  imprisoned  by  order  of  the  Emperor.  Careful 
research  has  failed  to  throw  any  further  light  on  the 
incident,  or  to  trace  D'  Amitia  beyond  the  fortress  of 


CH.  VIII   INTRIGUES  AND  DEMONSTRATIONS  235 

Vincennes.  In  the  following  month  a  French  officer, 
F.  Donop  by  name,  who  was  then  a  prisoner  in  Sicilian 
hands,  was  released  and  dispatched  by  Castrone  to 
Trieste.  The  secrecy  in  which  his  departure  was 
shrouded,  his  destination,  and  the  fact  that  he  was 
supplied  with  money,  all  go  to  show  that  his  mission 
was  probably  of  the  same  general  nature  as  that  of 
D*  Amitia.i 

At  the  very  moment  when  the  Queen  was  sending 
these  emissaries  to  France,  the  Sicilian  Government  was 
making  great  show  of  preparations  for  an  expedition 
against  Naples.  Many  boats  were  collected,  together 
with  a  force  of  some  1200  or  1500  men  under  the 
Prince  of  Moliterno.  These  preparations  could  hardly 
be  taken  as  representing  a  serious  attempt  against  King 
Joachim.  They  were  viewed  with  great  suspicion  by 
Admiral  Martin,  who  had  succeeded  Collingwood. 
Moliterno  was  not  a  man  who  inspired  confidence. 
Although  a  republican  in  1799,  he  was  now  an  agent  of 
the  Queen,  in  receipt  of  secret  service  money,  and  had 
lately  passed  through  Paris  and  London. 

Martin  and  the  British  Minister  Amherst  paid  an 
official  visit  to  the  Queen  to  protest  against  Moliterno's 
expedition.  They  obtained  the  assurances  they  asked 
for,  but  Mary  Caroline,  though  prepared  to  make  every 
concession  necessary,  also  plainly  showed  that  in  her 
opinion  Great  Britain  had  no  intention  of  reconquer- 
ing Naples  or  even  of  restoring  Sicily  to  her  lawful 
sovereigns.  Not  only  was  Moliterno's  expedition 
abandoned,  but  the  hope  of  reconquering  Naples  was 
soon  changed  to  alarm  at  the  threatening  concentration 
of  troops  in  Calabria  and  at  the  preparations  going  on 

1  ArcL  Nap.  Guerra,  xxv.   2061.      Castelli's  MS.,  Cronaca  di  Sicilia,  quoted   by 
Bianco,  apparently  confirms  this  point. 


236  THE  NAPOLEONIC  EMPIRE  part  i 

in  the  small  ports  close  to  the  Strait  of  Messina. 
On  the  I  oth  of  March  1 8 1  o  Mary  Caroline  wrote  to 
Vienna  :  "  I  hope  to  God  that  Murat's  enterprise  will 
not  prosper,  that  would  be  a  terrible  misfortune  ;  in 
that  event  I  am  resolved  not  to  go  to  England  to  beg 
the  bread  of  necessity,  but  to  await  here  the  fate  of  the 
Due  d'Enghien/'  ^ 

A  few  days  later  news  of  the  utmost  importance  was 
received ;  an  event  had  taken  place  that  appeared  to  have 
as  confusing  an  effect  on  the  policy  of  the  Court  of 
Palermo  as  on  that  of  Naples.  A  Neapolitan  gazette 
arrived  announcing  the  marriage  of  Napoleon  and 
Maria  Louisa.  Mary „  Caroline's  first  movement  was 
one  of  horror  and  indignation  at  the  thought  of  her 
progeny  being  allied  to  the  greatest  man  of  his  age  ; 
but  soon  other  thoughts  arose,  and  before  long  the 
Neapolitans  of  her  entourage  were  in  high  spirits, 
and  busy  building  hopes  that  this  event  portended 
peace  and  the  restoration  of  the  Bourbons  to  Naples. 
Soon  the  Queen,  on  slight  enough  grounds,  was  in  a 
triumphant  mood  ;  and  Amherst,  who  believed  her  to 
be  in  secret  communication  with  Vienna  on  the  subject, 
was  indignant  and  was  pacified  only  with  great  difficulty. 

The  avowed  hostility  of  the  Queen  to  the  British 
made  their  position  very  difficult,  if  not  dangerous. 
The  force  that  Murat  was  mustering  appeared  formid- 
able. So  critical  did  the  situation  appear  that  on  the 
I  oth  of  May  Lord  Amherst  recorded  his  opinion,  that 
"  in  the  present  insufficient  means  of  defence  of  this 
island,  the  landing  of  an  hostile  army,  even  of  no  very 
considerable  magnitude,  would  probably  be  followed 
by  the  subjugation    of  the   kingdom.''  ^      The   alarm 

^  Helfert,  Konigin  Karolina^  396. 
*  Amherst  to  Wellesley,  May  10,  18 10,  Foreign  Off.  Sicily y  39. 


CH.viii  INTRIGUES  AND  DEMONSTRATIONS  237 

reflected  in  this  dispatch  of  Lord  Amherst  was  in  all 
probability  precisely  the  result  aimed  at  by  Napoleon. 
Otherwise  the  slowness  with  which  his  army  concen- 
trated on  the  Strait  of  Messina  and  the  unguarded  way 
in  which  their  objective  was  publicly  advertised  must  be 
pronounced  contrary  to  his  usual  methods.  The  con- 
clusion appears  warranted,  when  viewing  the  events  of 
1 8 10  as  a  whole,  that  Napoleon  did  not  intend  to 
attack  Sicily,  and  it  is  possible  that  towards  the  middle 
of  the  year,  June  or  July,  Mary  Caroline  received  some 
secret  intelligence  or  authoritative  hint  that  she  had 
nothing  to  fear  from  the  French  army  gathered  in 
sight  of  Messina.  But  if  Napoleon  did  not  intend  to 
invade  Sicily,  he  certainly  intended  his  movements  on 
the  Strait  to  be  productive  of  results.  One  of  these 
was  duly  accomplished,  for  the  British  naval  strength 
being  drawn  to  Messina,  Corfu  was  relieved  from  the 
blockade  and  had  large  stores  of  supplies  thrown  into 
it  from  Brindisi  and  Taranto,  thus,  for  once,  affording 
to  the  farmers  of  Puglia  the  opportunity  of  selling  their 
grain.  Another  result  aimed  at  was  to  prevent  the 
British  Government  from  dispatching  reinforcements 
to  Spain,  where  the  Emperor  had  concentrated  a  large 
army  under  Massena  with  which  he  intended  to  crush 
Wellington  and  terminate  the  Peninsular  War.-^ 

On  the  29th  of  May  the  Cadiz  Gazette  published 
two  French  intercepted  dispatches,  one  of  which  pur- 
ported to  be  written  by  Napoleon  to  Mary  Caroline. 
It  alluded  to  the  possibility  of  an  arrangement  based  on 
the  Queen's  driving  the   British   out   of  Sicily.     This 

;  1  It  may  be  recalled  that  in  the  summer  of  i8io  Wellington,  heavily  out- 
(numbered,  operated  a  long  retreat  before  Massena,  fought  a  defensive  action  at 
/Busaco,  and  finally  fell  back  on  the  lines  of  Torres  Vedras  in  front  of  Lisbon,  w^hich 
|he  held  j  only  his  fine  generalship  and  foresight  saved  the  British  army  and  com- 
)  pensated  for  the  reinforcements  that  he  needed,  but  did  not  receive. 


238  THE  NAPOLEONIC  EMPIRE  parti 

supposed  communication  between  the  Emperor  and  the 
Queen  may  now  be  easily  perceived  to  have  been  a 
clumsy  forgery,  very  probably  a  police  device,  intended 
to  make  its  way  into  British  hands,  or  perhaps  the 
lucubration  of  a  journalist  whose  methods  anticipated 
those  of  a  more  anxiously  competitive  age.  Yet  at  the 
first  moment  the  genuineness  of  this  communication 
was  largely  believed,  and,  curiously  enough,  by  Mary 
Caroline  herself.  In  Sicily,  at  the  time  when  this  sup- 
posed letter  from  the  Emperor  to  Mary  Caroline  was 
published  in  Spain,  the  feeling  of  hostility  between  the 
British  and  the  Queen  and  the  sense  of  insecurity  were 
hourly  increasing.  The  British  Minister's  dispatches 
are  full  of  the  "  strange  incredulity  "  of  the  Palermo 
Court  as  to  the  French  invasion.  The  inactivity  and 
jealousy  of  the  Sicilians  are  complained  of.  The  fear 
is  expressed  that  the  British  will  have  to  face  not  only 
a  French  attack,  but  a  defection  in  their  rear.  Finally, 
Amherst  recommended  the  course  advocated  by  Sir 
John  Moore  more  than  two  years  before,  the  deposi- 
tion of  the  Queen.  "  I  further  think  it  absolutely 
necessary,"  he  wrote  to  Wellesley,  "  that  the  Queen 
should  cease  to  take  the  lead  in  public  affairs."  ^ 

From  the  Neapolitan  side  these  fears  of  the  British 
were  assiduously  fostered,  and  just  as  the  news  of  the 
Cadiz  letter  arrived  in  Palermo  from  Spain,  a  proclama- 
tion reached  it  from  Naples  in  which  Joachim  announced 
to  his  troops  that  the  Sicilians  were  ready  to  co-operate 
with  them  and  to  rise  against  the  British.  On  the 
15th  of  July  Mary  Caroline  sent  for  Lord  Amherst. 
She  had  just  received  a  copy  of  the  Cadiz  Gazette^  and 
was  in  a  state  of  some  excitement.  She  read  to  the 
British  Minister  Napoleon's  supposed  letter,  and  then 

1  Amherst  to  Wellesley,  June  11  and  19,  18 10,  Foreign  Off.  Sicily,  39. 


CH.  VIII  INTRIGUES  AND  DEMONSTRATIONS  239 

declared  that  she  thoroughly  believed  in  its  genuine- 
ness, but  that  for  herself  she  was  unsv^^erving  in  her 
devotion  to  the  British  alliance.  Her  yiqw  that  the 
letter  was  genuine  was  soon  modified,  however,  for  a  few 
weeks  later,  at  the  request  of  the  Sicilian  charge  d'affaires 
at  Cadiz,  it  was  officially  announced  that  the  letter  was 
a  forgery  by  the  Spanish  Council  of  Regency. 

It  is  now  time  that  we  recrossed  the  Strait  to  follow 
the  operations  of  Napoleon  and  Joachim.  The  King 
of  Naples  arrived  at  Scilla  on  the  3rd  of  June,  saluted 
by  the  ringing  of  bells  and  by  salvos  of  artillery  that 
were  re-echoed,  but  with  solid  shot,  by  the  British 
batteries  on  the  further  side.  The  Strait  of  Messina 
at  this  point  appears  little  more  than  a  river  winding 
between  hilly  and  picturesque  banks.  It  gradually 
widens  from  about  two  miles  across  at  the  Faro  to 
eight  or  nine  miles  at  Messina.  The  troops  of  both 
armies  were  mostly  encamped  at  the  narrowest  point, 
and  so  slight  was  the  distance  between  them  that  from 
the  lofty  rock  of  Scilla,  550  feet  above  the  sea,  nearly 
all  the  British  camps  and  intrenchments  could  be  dis- 
covered. From  the  further  side  the  view  was  no  less 
remarkable  and  clear,  and  one  English  traveller  claimed 
to  have  distinguished  and  recognised  from  the  Faro 
through  a  telescope  the  person  of  the  King  of  Naples. 

The  command  of  the  French  and  Neapolitan  army 
was  nominally  in  the  hands  of  the  King,  with  General 
Grenier  as  his  chief  of  staff.  But  the  latter  was  in 
direct  communication  with  Paris,  and  was  responsible 
to  the  Minister  of  War  for  the  movements  of  the 
French  troops.  These  amounted  to  no  less  than 
18,000  men  on  the  i6th  of  July,  while  the  Neapolitans 
at  the  same  date  numbered  17,000.-^ 

^  Arch.  Nap.  Guerra,  xxv.  1050  {e'tats  de  situation)  j  CoUetta  gives  the  total  as 


240  THE  NAPOLEONIC  EMPIRE  part  i 

Along  the  winding  shore  that  runs  from  Palmi 
southward  to  Reggio  hundreds  of  small  vessels,  includ- 
ing sixty  gunboats,  were  drawn  up  ready  to  embark 
the  expedition.  From  the  other  side  of  the  Strait  they 
appeared  like  a  "wood  of  masts." 

To  oppose  the  French  Sir  John  Stuart  mustered 
north  and  south  of  Messina  14,000  men  in  British  pay, 
of  which  about  one -half  were  Germans  and  other 
auxiliaries,  together  with  some  7000  or  8000  Sicilians 
of  very  doubtful  value.  In  one  respect  Stuart  was 
much  stronger  than  his  opponents,  for  a  large  British 
and  Sicilian  fleet  held  complete  command  of  the  Strait. 
A  number  of  English  cruisers  had  been  collected  from 
the  Mediterranean  and  Adriatic,  together  with  three 
battleships,  and  were  supported  by  about  100  gunboats 
each  mounting  one  18-  or  24-pounder. 

In  view  of  the  preponderance  of  the  Anglo-Sicilians 
at  sea,  it  was  evident  that  the  crossing  could  only  be 
attempted  above  or  below  Messina,  at  some  time  when 
a  favourable  slant  of  wind  should  drive  the  opposing 
ships  out  of  reach  of  the  French  transports.  The 
town  itself,  well  fortified  and  protected  by  forts,  could 
not  be  attacked  from  seaward  with  the  slightest 
hope  of  success.  But  the  heavy  British  ships  were 
generally  kept  cruising  just  outside,  to  the  north  of 
the  Strait,  while  the  harbour  of  Messina  afforded  a 
convenient  shelter  for  several  frigates,  so  that,  however 
the  wind  blew,  there  was  always  a  British  naval  force 
ready  to  protect  the  coast-line  between  Messina  and 
the  Faro.  It  was  therefore  only  to  the  south  of 
Messina,  and  with  the  wind  blowing  about  south,  that 

16,000,  Pepe  as  22,000.  It  is  quite  possible  that  the  official  estimate  was  inflated 
as  part  of  the  scheme  for  alarming  the  British,  yet  Colletta  and  Pepe  are  so  absolutely 
unreliable  that  on  the  whole  it  appears  better  to  reject  them  even  in  favour  of  official 
figures. 


CH.  VIII  INTRIGUES  AND  DEMONSTRATIONS  241 

a  chance  of  a  successful  landing  existed.  In  conse- 
quence of  this  the  Neapolitan  vessels  and  transports 
were  gradually  concentrated  at  Reggio  and  Pentemele, 
while  only  small  detachments  of  them  were  left  about 
Scilla  and  Palmi. 

On  the  30th  of  June  a  grand  rehearsal  of  the  invasion 
of  Sicily  took  place.  The  whole  of  the  French  and 
Neapolitan  troops  were  embarked  at  11  p.m.,  remaining 
on  board  two  hours,  after  which  they  were  sent  back  to 
their  quarters.  This  embarkation  may  have  also  been 
intended  to  alarm  the  defenders  of  Messina,  for  it  took 
place  precisely  at  the  time  when  by  proclamations,  and 
devious  ways  untraceable  by  the  historian,  the  dangerous 
position  of  the  British  army  in  Sicily  had  been  tenfold 
magnified.  Day  and  night  skirmishes  occurred  along 
the  Strait.  One  of  these  affrays  was  graced  by  the 
presence  of  King  Ferdinand  himself,  who,  attended  by 
a  group  of  British  officers,  watched  a  naval  encounter 
from  one  of  their  batteries  "  with  childish  eagerness  ; 
at  every  shot  he  laughed  aloud,  threw  out  his  long 
bony  limbs  in  strange  gesticulations,  and  poured  volleys 
of  buffoonery  in  the  lazzaroni  dialect."  ^  Shots  from 
the  British  batteries  occasionally  carried  as  far  as  the 
magnificent  marquee  of  King  Joachim  that  stood  a 
conspicuous  mark  on  the  hill  of  Piale  ;  on  one  occasion 
three  fell  in  quick  succession  in  a  tent  occupied  by  some 
of  his  Neapolitan  staff  officers. 

As  the  summer  weeks  passed  and  no  decisive 
movement  took  place,  dissensions  arose  in  the  French 
camp  ;  before  long  it  was  rumoured  and  believed  that 
differences  had  arisen  between  the  King  and  Grenier. 
It  was  reported  that  the  French  general  held  orders 
direct    from    Paris   that    his  troops  were  not   on    any 

1  Bunbury,  224. 
VOL.  I  R 


242  THE  NAPOLEONIC  EMPIRE  parti 

account  to  cross  the  Strait.  Between  French  and 
Neapolitans  a  certain  amount  of  feeling  also  arose, 
especially  among  the  officers  of  the  two  nations  who 
served  on  Joachim's  staff.  Rumours  and  jealousies  of 
the  most  opposite  kinds  were  thus  current  in  the  two 
camps,  and  although  skirmishing  proceeded  daily, 
though  many  Neapolitan  boats  and  an  English  brig 
were  destroyed,  yet  matters  of  real  importance  seemed 
indefinitely  at  a  deadlock. 

Finally,  after  some  heavy  gunboat  engagements,  the 
King  gave  the  order  for  the  troops  to  be  embarked. 
It  was  the  night  of  the  i8th  of  September,  the  wind 
was  blowing  lightly  from  the  east,  and  Cavaignac's 
division  was  carried  across,  landing  near  Scaletta,  i8 
miles  south  of  Messina,  in  the  early  hours  of  the  morn- 
ing. This  movement,  however,  remained  unsupported 
by  the  rest  of  the  army ;  it  may  be  that  Grenier  refused 
to  move,  either  in  execution  of  orders  from  Paris  or 
for  the  perfectly  comprehensible  military  reason  that 
the  movement  was  too  wide  to  be  safe.  At  all  events, 
Cavaignac's  division,  quickly  attacked  by  superior 
forces,  was  compelled  to  re-embark,  and  returned  to 
Reggio,  having  lost  a  battalion  of  Corsican  infantry 
of  looo  men  who  were  cut  off  and  taken  prisoners. 
The  Monitore  ascribed  the  failure  of  the  rest  of  the 
army  to  cross  to  the  lack  of  wind,  but  it  may  be 
remarked  that  it  was  to  the  lack  of  wind  alone  that 
Cavaignac  owed  the  return  of  his  boats  without  damage 
from  the  British  cruisers. 

This  proved  the  end  of  the  projected  invasion  of 
Sicily.  Eleven  days  later,  on  the  29th  of  September, 
the  royal  standard  was  hauled  down,  the  camps  were 
broken  up,  and  Joachim  returned  to  Naples.  The 
stormy    autumn   season  was    approaching,  yet  as  that 


CH.  VIII  INTRIGUES  AND  DEMONSTRATIONS  243 

had  not  deterred  Joachim  from  his  difficult  enterprise 
against  Capri,  it  does  not  appear  a  sufficient  reason  for 
the  abandonment  of  the  Sicilian  undertaking.  The 
real  reasons  were  written  large  on  the  face  of  events. 
Whatever  may  have  been  the  King  of  Naples'  precise 
policy  during  the  summer,  it  was  plain  that  neither  the 
British  nor  yet  the  Emperor  had  been  discomfited  ; 
but  he  certainly  had  been.  By  many  the  King's 
precipitate  abandonment  of  his  enterprise  was  ascribed 
to  his  firm  conviction  that  some  sort  of  understanding 
had  been  arrived  at  between  Napoleon  and  Mary 
Caroline. 

The  Emperor,  however,  whether  playing  a  part  or 
legitimately  displeased  at  his  lieutenant's  precipitate 
retreat,  complained  strongly  of  his  conduct.  Anxious 
at  the  approaching  crisis  at  Lisbon,  news  of  the  occupa- 
tion of  which  he  was  awaiting  from  Massena,  he  com- 
plained to  Joachim  that  his  retreat  from  the  Strait  of 
Messina  might  well  result  in  the  reinforcement  of  the 
British  in  Portugal  with  troops  that  would  otherwise 
have  been  dispatched  to  Sicily.  A  little  later  the 
Emperor,  still  far  from  sympathising  with  the  King's 
discomfiture,  reproached  him  for  the  bad  management 
that  had  failed  to  carry  the  whole  army  across  the  Strait 
and  had  resulted  in  the  loss  of  the  Corsican  battalion  ; 
not  content  with  this  he  blamed  Joachim  for  the  bad 
management  of  his  finances,  and  for  mustering  an  army 
of  40,000  Neapolitans,  when  20,000  would  be  just  as 
useful,  as  everything  in  reality  depended  on  the  French 
troops. 

Truly  Napoleon  was  a  hard  master  to  obey  and  to 
please  ;  in  these  letters  he  revealed  his  insincerity  so 
openly  that  the  King  of  Naples  was  exasperated  to  a 
dangerous  point.     The  fear  lest  the  kingdom  of  Naples 


244  THE  NAPOLEONIC  EMPIRE  parti 

should  suffer  the  same  fate  as  that  of  Holland/  the 
discovery  of  Napoleon's  deception  and  bad  faith, 
turned  his  thoughts  to  bitterness  and  resentment.  In 
the  opinion  of  an  officer  of  rank  it  '^  paved  the  way  for 
the  future  defection  of  a  prince  who  was  absolutely 
determined  to  be  an  independent  king."  ^  The  feeling 
of  hostility  between  Joachim  and  the  Emperor  was 
marked  through  the  winter  of  1810-1811  ;  it  increased 
perceptibly  in  the  early  spring. 

On  the  1 9th  of  March  1 8 1 1  occurred  an  event  on 
which  many  hopes  and  ambitions  depended.  The  new 
Empress  of  the  French  gave  birth  to  a  son,  and  he 
was  immediately  announced  to  the  world  as  the  King 
of  Rome.  The  title  was  a  suggestive  one,  and  might 
be  thought  to  raise  for  the  future  both  the  question  of 
Italian  nationality  and  that  of  the  possible  dispossession 
of  Joachim. 

The  King  of  Naples,  who  had  proceeded  to  Paris 
for  this  solemn  occasion,  suddenly  left  without  awaiting 
the  splendid  ceremonies  appointed  to  mark  the  birth  of 
the  heir  to  the  Empire.  Immediately  on  arriving  at 
his  capital  he  issued  a  decree  whereby  no  civil  or 
military  appointment  in  his  kingdom  could  be  held  by 
any  but  a  native-born  or  naturalized  Neapolitan.  The 
step  was  hasty,  premature,  and  ineffective  ;  even  among 
the  Neapolitans  men  of  sense,  like  Zurlo,  disapproved  of 
the  King's  rash  measure.  It  is  difficult  to  state  pre- 
cisely the  reasons  that  induced  Joachim  to  make  such 
a  move.  It  appears  equally  probable  that  irritation 
with  the  Emperor,  a  desire  to  assert  his  independence 
by  appealing  to  Neapolitan  nationalism,  and  jealousy  on 

}  1  Difficulties  between  the  Emperor  and  King  Louis  led  the  latter  to  abdicate  in 
(favour  of  his  son  in  the  summer  of  1810.  On  this  Napoleon,  by  decree,  annexed 
"the  kingdom  to  the  Empire.  ^  De  Dedem,  183. 


CH.  VIII  INTRIGUES  AND  DEMONSTRATIONS  245 

account  of  an  intrigue  of  the  Queen  with  a  high-placed 
French  official,  denounced  by  Maghella,  entered  into 
them. 

Napoleon's  reply  to  the  decree  of  the  King  of 
Naples  was  instant  and  crushing.  The  Moniteur  an- 
nounced that  it  was  unnecessary  for  the  French  com- 
rades of  Joachim  Murat,  by  whose  aid  he  had  ascended 
the  throne,  to  become  naturalized  in  order  to  hold 
civil  and  military  offices  in  the  kingdom  of  Naples. 
Joachim's  rage  at  the  Emperor's  conclusive  retort 
was  unbounded.  He  tore  from  his  breast  the  Legion 
of  Honour,  and  vowed  he  would  wear  that  decoration 
no  longer  ;  so  violently  was  he  moved,  indeed,  that  he 
fell  ill. 

To  make  the  quarrel  between  the  brothers-in-law 
even  more  serious,  it  was  just  at  this  time  that  a  secret 
correspondence  of  Joachim  with  Paris  was  discovered 
by  the  police.  This  correspondence  revealed  that 
Joachim  kept  in  close  touch  with  Fouche  and  the 
small  party  of  intriguers  who  would  have  welcomed, 
in  certain  eventualities,  his  succession  to  the  Imperial 
throne.  General  Ayme,  of  the  Neapolitan  army,  was 
arrested  and  imprisoned  at  Vincennes,  while  Lavauguyon, 
one  of  Joachim's  equerries,  was  sent  out  of  Paris. 
Napoleon  further  ordered  instructions  to  be  forwarded  to 
the  Governor  of  Rome,  General  Miollis,  to  sequestrate 
the  famous  Farnese  Palace  and  collections  belonging  to 
the  Neapolitan  crown. 

Things  had  gone  far.  One  more  step  would  have 
marked  an  irreparable  breach.  At  this  crisis  of  their 
fortunes,  when  it  appeared  as  though  their  throne  might 
at  any  moment  be  taken  from  them,  Joachim  and 
Caroline  agreed  for  a  while  to  sink  their  differences. 
The   tension   between   Paris    and    Naples    immediately 


246  THE  NAPOLEONIC  EMPIRE  part  i 

relaxed.  Marshal  Perignon,  Governor  of  Naples, 
officially  announced  to  the  King  that  he  had  instruc- 
tions to  declare  that  the  Emperor  had  no  intention  of 
annexing  Naples  to  the  Empire  ;  such  an  annexation 
was  unnecessary,  as  Naples  in  reality  was  but  a  portion 
of  the  Greater  Empire  ;  it  was  agreeable  to  the 
Emperor  that  Joachim  should  be  King  of  Naples, 
but  it  was  not  to  be  forgotten  that  Napoleon  was  none 
the  less  Emperor  there. 

In  Court  circles  at  Naples  and  among  the  diplomats 
an  open  breach  was  freely  talked  of.  Even  the  possi- 
bility of  an  armed  conflict  was  discussed,  and  in  one  of 
his  dispatches  the  Austrian  Minister,  Count  Mier, 
thought  it  worth  while  to  express  the  opinion  that 
Joachim,  in  such  an  eventuality,  could  not  rely  on  the 
French  and  foreign  officers  in  the  Neapolitan  army. 
Three  weeks  later  he  wrote  as  follows  : — 

This  incertitude  as  to  the  continued  existence  of  the  king- 
dom not  only  impedes  the  operations  of  government,  but 
greatly  affects  private  affairs  ;  no  one  dares  enter  into  con- 
tracts and  bargains  but  from  day  to  day  ;  and  the  government 
has  stopped  all  public  works  so  as  not  to  spend  what  money  is 
in  hand,  and  this  economy  is  specially  with  a  view  to  having 
specie  ready  in  case  of  trouble.^ 

Towards  the  end  of  October  it  was  thought  advis- 
able that  the  Queen  should  proceed  to  Paris  to  placate 
her  brother.  The  step  proved  in  a  measure  successful. 
Caroline's  influence  was  effective,  and  tangible  proofs 
of  Napoleon's  lessened  resentment  were  soon  aflx)rded 
by  the  restoration  of  the  Farnese  property  and  the 
release  of  Ayme. 

Caroline  remained  in  Paris  through  the  winter  of 
i8i  1-1812,  while  Joachim  stayed  at  Naples  not  only 

1  Mier  to  Metternich,  Oct.  n,  i8ii,  Helfert,  Murat,  128. 


CH.  VIII  INTRIGUES  AND  DEMONSTRATIONS  247 

in  conjugal  but  in  political  isolation.  All  correspond- 
ence between  him  and  the  Emperor  ceased  ;  and  the 
separation  did  not  tend  to  improve  the  long -shaken 
relations  between  the  King  and  Queen.  The  prevailing 
impression  in  the  spring  of  1 8 1 2  was  still  that  any 
pretext  would  suffice  to  cause  the  annexation  of  Naples 
to  the  Empire,  when  the  threatened  outburst  of  the 
greatest  and  most  terrible  of  the  Napoleonic  wars 
served  to  divert  the  Emperor's  attention  to  other 
matters,  served  to  give  price  once  more  to  the  invalu- 
able services  of  the  great  cavalry  leader  of  the  Empire. 
His  presence  had  been  too  much  missed  in  1809  to 
make  him  less  than  indispensable  to  the  gigantic  army 
mustering  for  the  great  plunge  into  the  steppes  of 
Russia. 

While  Joachim's  relations  with  the  French  Empire 
thus  progressed,  there  had  been  plenty  to  engage  his 
attention  within  the  boundaries  of  the  kingdom.  The 
reforms,  finance,  and  legislation  of  this  period  have 
already  received  notice,  but  some  of  the  consequences 
of  the  expedition  to  the  Strait  of  Messina  have  not 
yet  been  related,  and  must  now  find  place.  So  often 
had  Calabria  been  officially  declared  pacified,  so  often 
had  regal  generosity  amnestied  the  province,  that  from 
these  two  facts  alone  it  might  fairly  be  concluded 
that  the  state  of  lawlessness  had  been  uninterrupted. 
Insurrection  turned  to  brigandage,  and  brigandage  to 
insurrection  with  the  same  rapidity  with  which  a 
peaceful,  slumbering  peasant  would  dart  up  and  un- 
sheathe his  knife  from  its  hidden  resting-place,  or  with 
which  a  red- coated  Sicilian  colonel  would  exchange 
his  regulation  sword  and  theoretical  civilization  for 
a   blunderbuss   and   the   military   ethics    of   a    North- 


248  THE  NAPOLEONIC  EMPIRE  parti 

American  Indian.  The  summer  of  1806  had  been 
very  bad,  that  of  1807  a  little,  and  of  1808  much 
better  ;  in  1 809  there  had  been  another  outbreak,  which 
even  the  presence  of  the  large  army  collected  in  the  pro- 
vince in  1 8 10  hardly  brought  within  bounds.  Convoys 
for  the  camps  along  the  Strait  of  Messina  were 
frequently  cut  off,  and  in  the  very  outskirts  of  the 
King's  headquarters  at  Piale  murders  by  brigands  were 
frequent. 

The  system  of  civic  guards  had  proved  so  far  of 
little  effect  in  restraining  and  punishing  excesses,  but  the 
chief  fault  had  undoubtedly  been  the  constant  variation 
of  policy.  Brigands  who  laughed  at  their  pursuers  were 
grandiloquently  amnestied  by  a  magnanimous  prince, 
but  were  promptly  hanged  in  spite  of  all  amnesties  if 
by  any  chance  taken  prisoner.  There  was  neither 
rigour,  nor  clemency,  nor  consistency  about  the  system 
pursued,  until,  after  the  break-up  of  the  camp  at 
Reggio,  General  Manhes  was  appointed  military 
governor  of  Calabria,  with  unlimited  powers  to  act  in 
the  King's  name. 

Manhes  was  a  young,  dashing  cavalry  officer  of 
Joachim's  staff,  who  had  followed  him  to  Naples  with 
advantage  to  himself.  For,  only  a  lieutenant  at 
Austerlitz,  he  had  four  years  later  received  the  rank  of 
general  in  the  Neapolitan  service.  He  had  held  various 
commands  in  the  Abruzzi  and  Calabria,  and  had  shown 
energy  and  capacity.  Daure,  Minister  of  the  Interior, 
prepared  a  lengthy  report  recommending  a  series  of 
administrative  measures  to  pacify  the  province,  which 
the  King  at  first  was  inclined  to  adopt.  But  finally  he 
appears  to  have  concluded  that  only  military  rule  and 
vigorous  measures  could  effect  a  cure,  and  fixed  on 
Manhes  to  carry  them  out.     After    some    persuasion 


CH.  VIII  INTRIGUES  AND  DEMONSTRATIONS  249 

from  Zurlo,  Mosbourg,  and  Pignatelli,  he  accepted  the 
charge. 

Manhes  arrived  at  Monteleone  on  the  9th  of 
November  1 8 1  o.  He  had  already  issued  a  proclama- 
tion announcing  that  he  was  invested  with  full  powers 
for  pacifying  the  province,  that  former  measures  had 
been  unsuccessful,  and  that  in  the  future  no  more 
amnesties  would  be  granted.  For  a  few  weeks  the 
new  governor  did  nothing,  apparently  inactive  and 
powerless.  But  he  had  worked  out  a  plan  based  on  a 
principle  that  made  this  delay  necessary.  At  last,  when 
the  first  winter  snows  made  their  appearance  on  the 
mountain  tops,  he  issued  his  decrees.  The  plan  of 
Manhes  turned  on  two  fundamental  facts  :  that  the 
inhabitants  of  Calabria  were  nowhere  a  scattered  popu- 
lation, but  lived  entirely  in  village  communities,  and  that 
the  brigands  could  not  remain  in  the  mountain  fastnesses 
without  obtaining  food  from  the  villages.  He  there- 
fore decreed  that  every  one  of  the  rank  and  file  of 
the  brigands  who  surrendered  immediately  should  be 
pardoned,  and  receive  pay  at  the  rate  of  one  carlin 
per  day.  The  chiefs,  however,  were  not  included,  and 
had  a  price  put  on  their  heads.  Every  village  was  to 
live  under  military  guard,  the  cattle  were  to  be  kept 
under  watch  by  day,  within  the  walls  at  night.  No 
food  of  any  sort,  not  even  in  the  most  minute  quanti- 
ties, was  to  be  taken  beyond  the  walls  of  the  towns  or 
villages  under  penalty  of  death.  The  same  penalty 
was  to  be  awarded  to  any  one  holding  any  communi- 
cation with  the  brigands. 

These  drastic,  but  not  illogical,  measures  were  an- 
nounced by  every  parish  priest  of  Calabria  ;  they 
proved  largely  successful,  because  they  were  executed 
to  the  letter.     That  they  inflicted  hardship  is  true,  but 


250  THE  NAPOLEONIC  EMPIRE  parti 

that  milder  steps  would  have  succeeded  is  not  probable  ; 
and  it  cannot  be  thought  that  the  war  of  extermination 
against  the  brigands  was  unjustified.  A  staunch  Bour- 
bonist  described  their  excesses  as  more  worthy  of 
cannibals  than  men,  and  his  judgment  was  far  from 
an  exaggerated  one.  How  useless  was  the  civic  guard 
system  had  just  been  demonstrated  by  Parafante  who, 
near  Cosenza,  routed  a  whole  battalion  of  them  in 
pitched  battle.  For  four  years  he  had  harried  the 
country  between  Cosenza,  Amantea,  and  the  Sila,  but 
the  measures  of  Manhes  brought  him  to  bay  at  last. 
His  men  could  find  no  food  on  the  mountains.  The 
decrees  of  the  French  governor  were  followed  up 
with  cruel  vigour.  At  Stilo  some  women  and  boys  who 
took  bread  with  them  as  they  went  out  into  the  fields  to 
pick  olives,  were  shot.  At  Cosenza  a  father  was  shot  for 
supplying  food  to  his  son.  At  Nicastro  a  woman  who 
received  and  tended  a  new-born  babe  given  to  her  by 
a  girl  who  followed  the  brigands,  was  shot.  Millers 
who  had  sold  flour  to  the  outlaws  were  shot.  In  every 
village  lists  of  brigands  who  were  to  be  shot  at  sight 
were  posted,  and  all  the  while  every  particle  of  food  was 
kept  within  walls.  For  the  capture  or  head  of  Para- 
fante, Manhes  offered  everything  that  could  be  given, 
money,  honours,  promotion.  This  atrocious  murderer 
and  mutilator  was  finally  reduced  to  a  following  of  five 
men,  and  with  these  he  was  shot  down  in  the  forest  of 
Nicastro  in  the  month  of  February  1 8 1 1 . 

Among  the  most  prominent  of  the  brigand  chiefs 
who  came  to  a  similar  end  only  Benincasa  and  Taccone 
need  be  mentioned.  The  former  was  one  of  the  capi- 
massi  who  followed  Cardinal  RufFo  in  '99.  Like 
Parafante  he  had  harried  the  country  since  1806,  and 
was  chiefly  known  for  the  hundreds  of  men  whose  noses 


CH.  VIII  INTRIGUES  AND  DEMONSTRATIONS  251 

had  been  slit  by  his  orders.     He  was  finally  killed  not 
far  from  Maida  in  March  1811.^ 

Taccone  had  a  period  of  success,  and,  posing  as  a 
political  personage,  characteristically  ordered  solemn 
processions  and  a  service  in  the  cathedral  at  Potenza, 
for  a  while  in  his  possession.  Equally  characteristically, 
with  the  same  unswerving  zeal  for  the  cause  he 
represented,  he  ordered  the  burning  of  women  whose 
views  did  not  happen  to  coincide  with  his.  The  civic 
guards  of  Potenza  finally  captured  this  atrocious  ruffian, 
and  he  was  happily  executed. 

But  a  more  pleasing  aspect  of  those  few  ferocious 
months  during  which  Manhes  reigned  over  Calabria 
must  also  be  noted.  At  the  little  village  of  Serra,  in 
the  wildest  part  of  the  Calabrian  mountains,  the  Syndic 
and  French  captain  in  command  were  enticed  into  a 
house,  treacherously  attacked,  and  murdered.  On  the 
news  reaching  Montelcone,  Manhes  instantly  started  in 
person  at  the  head  of  sixty  lancers.  He  arrived  at 
Serra  late  at  night,  and  on  the  following  morning 
ordered  the  people  to  be  collected  in  the  public  square 
As  soon  as  they  had  assembled,  he  addressed  them  in 
terms  that  may  be  shortly  rendered  thus  : — 

You  have  committed  a  brutal  outrage.  There  is  not  a  foot 
of  this  country  you  have  not  drenched  in  innocent  blood.  I 
declare  you  unworthy  of  making  part  of  a  civilized  community ; 
you  are  wild  beasts,  sanguinary,  ferocious,  respecters  neither  of 
divine  nor  of  human  law.  I  now  command  your  interdiction 
and  exclusion  from  all  authority,  spiritual  and  temporal ;  I 
command  that  the  doors  of  the  churches  of  Serra  be  nailed  up  ; 
and   I   enjoin   on   the   neighbouring  villages   that  every  path 

^  Copia  delle  lettere^  5  j  as  an  example  of  his  outrages  and  cruelties  the  following 
short  passage  may  be  quoted  :  "  Dodici  infelici  del  Reggimento  29  di  Hnea  Francese 
furono  da  lui  inchiodati  agli  alberi  del  Bosco  di  S.  Eufemia,  e  furono  trovati  .  .  . 
col  membre  virilo  reciso,  ed  indi  posto  nella  loro  bocca." — Noti%ia  sulle  Vite^  14. 


252  THE  NAPOLEONIC  EMPIRE  parti 

leading  to  Serra  be  watched,  preventing  all  communication, 
and  shooting  down  all  who  would  approach  as  wild  beasts 
suffering  from  hydrophobia. 

The  inhabitants  were  seized  with  consternation, 
which  increased  as  they  saw  the  threatened  measures 
being  carried  into  execution  and  their  priests  being 
removed  from  the  village.  Soon  they  agreed  to  hunt 
down  the  murderers,  and  before  long  satisfied  justice. 
A  month  later  Manhes  remitted  his  sentence  against 
the  village.  That  part  of  the  country  was  permanently 
pacified. 

One  of  the  numerous  persons  executed  at  this  time 
was  Capobianco,  who  has  sometimes  been  called  the  first 
martyr  of  the  Carbonari.  The  rise  and  origin  of  this 
secret  society  will  engage  our  attention  a  little  later  ; 
all  that  need  be  said  for  the  present  is  that  in  1808, 
when  Calabria  was  fairly  peaceful,  and  a  great  muster- 
ing of  soldiers  and  militia  had  been  urged  by  Joachim, 
Briot,  intendente  of  the  province,  had  largely  made  use 
of  freemasonry  as  a  means  of  getting  together  local 
bodies.  Shortly  afterwards  Napoleon's  anti-papal 
policy  had  turned  the  Calabrian  clergy  more  strongly 
against  the  new  order,  and  secret  associations  on  more 
or  less  masonic  lines  were  employed  against  the  Govern- 
ment in  several  places,  a  certain  Canon  Le  Piane  being 
a  specially  active  agent.  Some  such  association,  with 
a  combination  of  other  exciting  causes,  led  a  farrier 
named  Capobianco,  Grand  Master  of  a  lodge,  and  who 
had  before  this  had  some  difficulties  with  the  Govern- 
ment, to  head  an  armed  movement  that  Manhes  very 
courageously  and  adroitly  mastered.  Capobianco  was 
arrested,  tried  by  court-martial,  and  hanged.^ 

1  Manhes'  letter  to  the  Paris  Moniteur  (Dec,  5,  1835)  makes  Colletta's  account 
valueless. 


CH.  VIII  INTRIGUES  AND  DEMONSTRATIONS  253 

His  treatment  of  Serra  reveals  a  side  of  Manhes' 
character  that  shows  him  not  to  have  been  the  monster 
that  Calabrian  legend  has  made  him.  He  was  a 
haughty  man,  somewhat  spoiled  by  good  fortune  and 
the  King's  favour,  who  made  more  enemies  than 
friends,  yet  honest,  just  according  to  his  own  lights, 
indefatigable  and  tenacious.  With  the  English  governor 
of  Messina  he  maintained  courteous,  nearly  friendly, 
relations.  To  his  subordinates  he  nearly  as  frequently 
inculcated  strict  observance  of  legal  forms  as  the 
constant  pursuit  of  malefactors.  He  did  not  extirpate 
brigandage  from  Calabria,  because  even  if  swept  from 
the  mountain  sides  it  could  not  be  eradicated  from 
the  hearts  of  the  people,  yet  after  a  few  months  of 
his  rule  Calabria  ..."  assumed  the  appearance  of 
civilization  and  public  safety,''  and  this  was  undoubtedly 
a  great  step  forward.^  So  highly  were  his  services 
esteemed  that  the  King  created  him  a  count,  and 
promoted  him  to  the  rank  of  lieutenant-general,  while 
the  city  of  Castrovillari  presented  him  with  a  sword  of 
honour,  and  that  of  Cosenza  elected  him  a  free  burgess. 

Principal  Authorities  consulted 
MSS. 

Arch,  di  Stato  ;  Interno,  2°  In^entario,  5079  :  measures  of  internal 
administration,  Calabria,  etc. 

Arch,  di  Stato  ;  Guerra,  xxv.  1050  :  official  returns,  troops,  etc.  j 
2061,  Donop. 

BiBL.  Naz.  :  Mary  Caroline  Memoirs :  events  in  Sicily. 

Brit.  Foreign  Off.,  Sicifyy  30  :  dispatches  of  Drummond,  etc.  ;  39, 
dispatches  of  Amherst,  with  several  inclosures,  including  Cadiz  Gazette, 
Murat  proclamations,  etc. 

Brit.  Museum,  Egerton,  2401. 

Printed  Books 
Abrantes,    Mems. ;    Bianco,    Sicilia ;    Blaquiere,  Letters;    Botta, 
Storia ;  Bunbury,  Milit.  Transacts.;  Cacciatore, Esame ;  Canosa,  Piffari 

^  Colletta,  Storia,  ii.  119. 


254  THE  NAPOLEONIC  EMPIRE  parti 

di  Montagna  ;  Castlekeagh,  Dispatc/ies  ,•  Cavaignac,  Mems.  ;  Cockburn, 
Foyage ;  Colletta,  Storia ;  Collingwood,  Corr. ,-  Copia  delle  lettere  del 
Manhh  i  Crescieri,  Mems. ;  De  Dedem,  Mems. ;  Buret  de  Tavel, 
S(jour  en  Calabre  ;  G.,  M.  DE,  Notice  hhtorique  ;  Gallois,  Hut.  de  Murat ; 
Galt,  Voyages ;  Greco,  Annali ;  Helfert,  Kdnigin  Karolina  ;  Helfert, 
Maria  Karolina;  Helfert,  Murat;  Leckie,  Hist.  Sur'vey ;  Marmont, 
Mems.;  M^neval,  Mems.;  Monitor e Napolitano ;  Napoleon,  Corr.;  Nicola, 
Diario  ;  Notizia  sulle  Fite  ;  Orloff,  Mems.  ;  Pepe,  Mfwi. ,- Quintavalle, 
Notizia  Storica ;  Radowsky,  Cost  Memorabili ;  Riviello,  Cronaca  Potentina  ; 
Romeo,  Specchio  del  disinganno ;  St.  Amand,  Marie  Amdie ;  Savary, 
Mems.  ;  Savelli,  L/gion  Corse  ;  Turouan,  Saeurs  de  NapoUon. 


CHAPTER   IX 

THE    DEFECTION    OF    MURAT 

Joachim  joins  Grande  Armee — Events  in  Russia — Commands  in 
chief — Abandons  army — Negotiations  between  Austria  and 
Naples  —  Position  of  Metternich  —  Of  Joachim  —  Course  of 
Sicilian  events  since  1810 — Bentinck — Negotiates  at  Ponza — 
Joachim  returns  to  army — Napoleon's  position — Joachim  and 
Italy' — Dresden  interview  —  Entreaties  of  Joachim — Negotia- 
tions of  Joachim  and  Metternich — Joachim  returns  to  Naples 
—  Hesitating  policy  —  Italian  unity  —  Fouche's  mission  — 
Colletta  at  Bologna — Nugent  at  Ravenna — Diplomatic  negotia- 
tions— Neipperg  at  Naples — His  letter  to  Caroline — Austro- 
Neapolitan  alliance — Bentinck  at  Naples — Anglo-Neapolitan 
armistice. 

For  the  three  years  that  passed  between  18 12  and 
1 8 15  the  fortunes  of  the  kingdom  of  Naples  depended 
so  intimately  on  the  movements  and  decisions  of  one 
man,  that  the  centre  of  interest  of  its  history  must  be 
transferred  to  the  vast  scene  of  war  and  politics  that 
was  stretched  between  the  Kremlin  at  Moscow  and 
the  Palace  at  Fontainebleau.  During  that  period, 
while  the  great  events  that  marked  the  collapse  of 
the  Napoleonic  Empire  were  passing,  every  reasonable 
man  at  Naples  felt  that  the  future  of  the  kingdom 
would  be  decided  far  from  its  boundaries.  Yet  few 
foresaw  the  magnitude  of  the  revolution  that  was 
coming  about. 

255 


256  THE  NAPOLEONIC  EMPIRE  parti 

King  Joachim,  after  considerable  hesitation,  decided 
to  accept  the  command  of  the  cavalry  of  the  Grande 
y  Armee  which  Napoleon  had  offered  him.  One  of 
Caroline's  dearest  wishes  was  now  gratified,  for  when  in 
April  the  King  proceeded  to  Germany  she  was  installed 
as  Regent  of  the  kingdom. 

The  march  of  Napoleon  into  Russia  was  so  obviously 
hazardous,  that  even  before  the  French  army  crossed 
the  frontier,  Paris  was  full  of  apprehension ;  long 
before  Moscow  was  reached  the  Grande  Armee  was 
seriously  disorganized,  demoralized,  and  reduced.  Even 
before  the  victorious  carnage  of  Borodino  (September 
7,  1 8 12),  Napoleon's  marshals  clearly  showed  that 
prosperity,  or  common  sense,  had  wearied  them  of 
war,  and  that  they  judged  the  enterprise  on  which 
their  master  had  embarked  foolhardy.  The  spirit  of 
criticism  that  had  been  checked  by  the  wave  of  success 
of  the  opening  years  of  the  Empire  was  now  alive 
once  more.  The  leader  who  had  formerly  been  their 
companion,  and  later  their  divinity,  had  appeared  to 
many  observers  weak  and  ineffective  at  the  battle  of 
Borodino,  where  Davout,  or  the  King  of  Naples,  if 
supported,  might  have  turned  the  Russian  defeat  into 
a  disaster. 

In  September  and  October  no  man  in  the  army  was 
more  profoundly  depressed  and  dissatisfied  than  the  King 
of  Naples.  In  command  of  a  detached  corps,  mostly 
made  up  of  cavalry,  he  was  hard  put  to  it  to  keep 
the  Cossacks  at  a  distance  from  Moscow.  He  was 
sick  of  his  work  and  of  semi -starvation,  and  fore- 
saw the  ensuing  disaster.  Together  with  his  disgust 
with  fruitless  skirmishing  in  a  half- desert  country, 
Joachim  was  irritated  by  constant  disagreement  with 
the  policy  of  Caroline  and  the  Neapolitan  Ministers, 


CHAP  IX      THE  DEFECTION  OF  MURAT  257 

whose  action  he  vainly  attempted  to  direct  from  his 
headquarters. 

On  the  retreat  from  Moscow  the  King  of  Naples, 
leader  of  a  horseless  command,  did  nothing  of  note. 
He  was  not  one  of  the  few,  among  whom  Ney  and 
Prince  Eugene  were  most  conspicuous,  whose  fortitude 
shone  brightly  through  the  clouds  of  adversity.  He 
followed  the  footsteps  of  Napoleon  wearily  and  moodily 
through  burning  Smolensk  and  across  the  corpse-laden 
Berezina.  One  of  the  last  incidents  of  the  retreat  was 
of  special  importance  to  Joachim,  and  must  therefore 
be  mentioned.  Two  regiments  of  light  horse  of  the 
King*s  Guard  had  just  arrived  from  the  south.  They 
joined  the  army  at  Osmiana,  and  were  detailed  to 
escort  the  Emperor  to  Wilna,  two  days'  march  ;  so 
intense  was  the  cold  that  less  than  a  hundred  of  them 
arrived  at  the  journey's  end. 

On  the  5th  of  December  Napoleon  left  what 
remained  of  his  great  army.  Before  departing  he 
signed  a  decree  appointing  the  King  of  Naples  to  the 
command,  much  to  the  chagrin  of  Prince  Eugene. 
The  appointment  was  dictated  by  political  rather  than 
by  military  considerations,  for  at  this  crisis  in  the 
Emperor's  fortunes  he  considered  it  advisable  to  give 
himself  all  the  apparent  strength  he  could  by  present- 
ing the  King  as  his  chief  subordinate.  He  probably 
also  thought  that  his  interests  at  Naples  would  be  safer 
in  Caroline's  than  in  Joachim's  hands.  That  he  really 
trusted  the  King  is  not  possible,  for  there  had  been 
little  direct  intercourse  between  them  during  the 
campaign,  and  Napoleon  had  shown  an  extreme  and 
unreasonable  jealousy  at  the  frequent  and  not  un- 
friendly intercourse  that  Joachim  held  with  the 
Russians  when  in  command  of  the  outposts. 

VOL.  I  s 


258  THE  NAPOLEONIC  EMPIRE  part  i 

At  a  council  of  war  which  Joachim  held  nearly 
immediately  after  assuming  command,  he  is  reported  to 
have  inveighed  bitterly  against  Napoleon's  insensate 
ambition,  to  which  he  ascribed  all  the  disasters  of  the 
army.  His  remarks  were  more  conformable  to  common 
sense  than  to  military  discipline,  and  several  of  the 
marshals  raised  their  voices  in  protest.  The  retreat  was 
continued  to  Konigsberg,  whence  Joachim,  writing  to 
his  wounded  chief  of  staff,  Belliard,  declared  :  "  Every- 
body wants  to  leave  the  army.  I  am  really  indignant 
at  the  general  demoralization.  If  this  state  of  affairs 
continues,  it  is  impossible  to  say  how  far  it  will  go."  ^ 
Only  a  few  days  later  he  himself  did  what  he  had  thus 
reprobated  in  others.  On  the  march  from  Mariens- 
werder  to  Posen  he  received  a  courier  from  Naples. 
The  news  contained  in  the  dispatches  handed  to  him 
appeared  to  agitate  him  greatly.  A  few  hours  later  he 
resigned  the  command  of  the  army  to  Prince  Eugene, 
and  took  the  road  for  Naples  with  the  same  precipitancy 
that  he  had  shown  in  the  year  1 8 1 1 .  The  return  of 
the  King  to  Naples  was  marked  by  a  coolness  between 
him  and  the  Queen  and  by  the  disgrace  of  a  prominent 
courtier,  in  which  facts,  rather  than  in  any  sudden 
political  calculation,  is  to  be  sought  the  explanation  of 
the  King's  abandonment  of  his  charge. 

Napoleon  was  indignant  when  he  heard  of  the  deser- 
tion of  his  command  by  the  King  of  Naples.  He 
immediately  wrote  to  Prince  Eugene  that  were  it  not 
for  the  critical  state  of  affairs  he  would  have  court- 
martialled  the  King.  When  he  met  the  Duke  of 
Carignano,  Neapolitan  Minister  at  Paris,  he  pointedly 
inquired  after  the  health  of  the  Queen ;  the  King  he 

1  Belliard,  i.  114. 


CHAP.  IX      THE  DEFECTION  OF  MURAT  259 

passed  over  in  silence.  The  Moniteur  announced  to  the 
world  the  change  in  command  of  the  French  army  on 
the  Russian  frontier  with  the  insulting  comment  that 
Prince  Eugene's  talents  were  better  suited  for  the 
duties  which  the  absence  of  the  King  had  devolved  on 
him.  When  this  number  of  the  official  paper  reached 
Naples,  Joachim  was  wounded  to  the  quick.  He  wrote 
to  Belliard  strongly  complaining  of  the  treatment  he 
was  subjected  to,  vowing  unalterable  fidelity  to  the 
Emperor,  and  expressing  the  hope  that  he  would  soon 
meet  his  old  chief  of  staff  once  more  at  the  head  of 
his  troops. 

Nearly  immediately  after  this  an  exchange  of  views 
took  place  between  Prince  Cariati,  the  Neapolitan 
Minister  at  Vienna,  and  Count  Metternich,  and  between 
Count  Mier,  Austrian  Minister  at  Naples,  and  Joachim. 
Mier  was  a  trusted  diplomatist,  whose  part  at  Naples 
had  been  for  two  years  a  very  passive  one,  but  who 
was  now  to  use  to  some  purpose  the  personal  influence 
he  had  established  with  the  sovereigns  to  whom  he  was 
accredited.  The  precise  position  of  Austria  at  this 
moment  was  that  she  was  still  nominally  the  ally  of 
the  French  Empire.  Yet  every  one  knew  that  alliance 
to  be  one  of  necessity,  that  would  be  broken  at  the 
first  favourable  opportunity.  No  sooner  had  the 
first  intimations  of  the  catastrophe  of  Russia  reached 
Vienna  than  Austrian  diplomacy  began  to  stir.  If  the 
great  game  of  politics  was  to  turn  against  Napoleon, 
Metternich  was  anxious  to  obtain  his  share  in  the 
division,  of  the  spoils.  As  yet  few  men  realized  the 
extent  of  the  disaster  that  had  overtaken  the  French 
arms,  and  no  man  could  foresee  what  the  future 
would  bring.  Yet  every  day  that  passed  showed  the 
position  of  Napoleon  under  a  more  threatening  aspect. 


26o  THE  NAPOLEONIC  EMPIRE  parti 

As  the  hold  of  the  French  army  on  north-eastern 
Germany  gradually  relaxed,  the  sentiment  grew  in 
Vienna,  as  it  did  elsewhere,  that  the  time  had  now  come 
when  it  had  become  possible  to  check  the  extravagance 
of  Napoleon's  policy,  that  a  time  had  arrived  when  he 
might  be  persuaded  to  see  reason,  or  if  not  persuaded, 
then  compelled  to  see  it. 

The  views  held  in  Vienna  during  the  early  weeks  of 
1 8 1 3  were  in  reality  not  very  far  removed  from  those 
professed  quite  widely  in  Paris ;  they  were  even  closer 
to  those  of  the  King  of  Naples.  So  great  was 
Joachim's  anxiety  for  a  general  settlement  and  for 
peaceful  possession  of  his  throne,  that  a  whisper  of  the 
Emperor's  intention  of  uniting  Naples  to  the  Greater 
Empire,  once  more  circulated  in  the  spring  of  1813, 
sufficed  to  make  him  seek  in  Vienna  that  stable  support 
he  had  never  found  in  Paris.^  Knowing  as  he  did  how 
complete  had  been  the  destruction  of  the  Grande  Armee^ 
he  probably  based  his  whole  political  calculation  on  the 
supposition  that  the  Austrian  army  must  prove  a  factor 
of  such  weight  that  it  would  force  Napoleon  to  a 
settlement.  Joachim  had  not  yet  gauged  the  super- 
human resourcefulness  and  inflexibility  of  that  extra- 
ordinary man. 

In  April  the  first  diplomatic  pourparlers  took  place 
at  Naples.  They  were  carried  on  without  the  know- 
ledge of  the  Minister  for  Foreign  Affairs,  the  Duke  di 
Gallo,  for  he  was  too  strong  a  supporter  of  Napoleon 
to  be  trusted.  The  overtures  came  from  the  Neapolitan 
side,  and  Mier  was  able  to  report  to  his  court  that 
Joachim's  mind  was  set  on  one  thing  only, — the  guar- 
antee of  his  actual  possessions  and  independence.     If  he 

1  Helfert,  Konigin  Karolina^  514.     In  the  absence  of  any  other  authority  than 
Mier  one  may  venture  the  supposition  that  this  rumour  was  of  diplomatic  origin. 


CHAP.  IX     THE  DEFECTION  OF  MURAT  261 

could  only  obtain  this  he  was  prepared  to  follow  the 
Austrian  lead,  and  if  necessary  to  join  in  the  mediation 
which  Metternich  then  contemplated  as  a  means  of 
obtaining  a  settlement. 

Although  Austria  seemed  the  most  important  factor 
in  the  diplomatic  situation  for  Naples,  Great  Britain 
appeared  most  threatening  of  the  actual  belligerents. 
To  conciliate  her  was  at  least  as  necessary  as  to  con- 
ciliate Austria,  and  this  Joachim,  on  finding  Count 
Mier  in  a  friendly  disposition,  prepared  to  do.  The 
turn  that  Anglo-Neapolitan  relations  now  took  will  be 
more  clearly  understood  if  a  brief  retrospect  of  events 
that  had  taken  place  on  the  further  side  of  the  Strait 
of  Messina  since  18 10  be  first  attempted. 

The  persistent  circulation  of  the  reports  of  secret 
correspondence  between  Napoleon  and  Mary  Caroline 
had  the  double  effect  of  alienating  the  King  of  Naples 
from  the  Emperor  and  the  British  from  the  Queen  of 
Sicily.  The  British  generals  were  strong  in  their  denun- 
ciations of  the  Queen  ;  her  spies  were  caught  and  tried 
by  court-martial,  and,  on  more  than  one  occasion,  shot. 
An  exchange  of  letters  between  the  Queen  and  Lucien 
Bonaparte  was  jealously  watched.  A  trap  was  success- 
fully set  on  various  Sicilian  officers  who  declared  their 
readiness  to  fight  against  the  British.  It  had  now 
become  a  burning  question  whether  Mary  Caroline 
or  the  representative  of  Great  Britain  was  to  rule 
Sicily. 

It  was  at  this  period  that  the  British  Cabinet  decided 
to  send  to  Sicily  Lord  William  Bentinck,  who  in  the 
dual  capacity  of  diplomatic  representative  and  Com- 
mander-in-Chief was  virtually  intrusted  with  dictatorial 
power.  Bentinck  was  a  complex  personality,  of  which 
the  two  most  salient  features  were  inflexible  resolution 


262  THE  NAPOLEONIC  EMPIRE  parti 

and  bluntness  of  manner.  Mary  Caroline,  after  her 
first  interview  with  him,  described  him  to  the  Court 
circle  as  a  "  boorish  corporal,''  and  Bentinck  at  once 
demonstrated  his  lack  of  diplomatic  qualifications  by- 
manifesting  open  resentment.^  His  political  aims  were 
liberal,  inspired  by  a  genuine  aspiration  for  improve- 
ment, but  tinctured,  so  far  as  an  Italian  policy  was  con- 
cerned, by  a  violent  anti-French  sentiment  that  brought 
him  for  a  time  nearer  the  views  of  Castlereagh  than 
those  of  the  late  leader  of  his  own  party.  Fox.  By 
profession  he  was  a  soldier.  In  India  he  had  proved 
his  determination,  or  obstinacy,  to  the  point  of  arous- 
ing revolt  ;  at  Marengo,  with  Melas,  he  had  witnessed 
one  of  the  greatest  of  French  victories  ;  in  Germany, 
and  later  in  Spain,  he  had  been  in  the  field  against 
them,  though  with  but  ill  success.  As  director  of 
British  policy  in  the  Mediterranean  he  aimed  at  dealing 
a  blow  at  the  French  power  in  Italy.  From  the  first 
he  appears  to  have  thought  that  in  a  national  revolt  of 
the  Italian  people  lay  the  hope,  not  only  of  overturning 
the  throne  of  Naples,  but  of  effecting  some  radical 
improvement,  some  step  towards  the  nationalization 
and  liberalization  of  the  peninsula. 

For  some  months  after  Bentinck's  arrival  at  Palermo 
there  arose  no  opportunity  for  undertaking  any  of  the 
schemes  he  revolved.  Until  the  summer  of  1812  Spain 
remained  the  only  scene  of  active  operations,  and  the 
British  Government  was  more  disposed  to  utilize  what 
strength  it  could  dispose  of  in  the  Mediterranean  for 
assisting  Wellington  than  for  any  new  and  problematic 
movement  in  Italy.  But  even  had  Bentinck  disposed  of 
the  means,  he  would  have  lacked  the  leisure  to  invade 
Naples,   for  he   was  fully  occupied  during   two  years 

^  Mary  Caroline  Memoirs. 


CHAP.  IX      THE  DEFECTION  OF  MURAT  263 

settling  the  political  conditions  of  Sicily,  or,  in  other 
words,  depriving  Mary  Caroline  of  political  power. 

The  complicated  threads  of  the  political  intrigues 
of  those  two  years,  the  history  of  the  English  -  made 
constitution  presented  to  the  Sicilians  by  Bentinck, 
cannot  be  traced  here.  It  will  suffice  to  say  that  by 
the  beginning  of  1 8 1 3  the  affairs  of  Sicily  had  reached 
the  following  position.  The  Queen  was  virtually  a 
State  prisoner  in  British  custody,  and  under  engage- 
ment to  leave  the  island.  The  King  was  engaged  in 
his  favourite  occupation  of  hunting,  and  no  longer 
resided  at  Palermo.  The  Hereditary  Prince,  Francis, 
Duke  of  Calabria,  held  the  regency  confided  to  him  by 
his  father.  He  and  a  Sicilian  Parliament  ostensibly. 
Lord  William  Bentinck  in  reality,  ruled  Sicily.  The 
British  agent's  declared  policy  was  the  maintenance 
of  the  Bourbon  rights  as  stipulated  in  the  treaty  of 
aUiance,  and  the  freeing  of  Italy  for  the  benefit  of  the 
Italians  who  should  be  left  at  liberty  to  declare  for 
whatever  form  of  constitution  they  preferred.  In  the 
first  respect  his  views  accorded  with  those  of  the  British 
Cabinet ;  in  the  second  they  did  not. 

In  a  military  way  Bentinck  had  not  as  yet  effected 
much.  To  form  Sicilian  troops  was  a  difficult  task, 
for  such  recruits  as  could  be  obtained  deserted,  and  the 
officers  were  so  poor  that  they  were  not  above  begging 
for  charity  in  the  streets.  In  1 8 1 2  an  expedition  sent 
to  Catalonia  effected  little,  but  preparations  were  made 
for  another  and  larger  one  in  18 13. 

The  destruction  of  the  French  army  in  Russia,  and 
the  apparent  inclination  of  the  King  of  Naples  for 
peace,  gave  Bentinck  an  opportunity  for  detaching  him 
from  the  fortunes  of  Napoleon.  Having  in  the  early 
weeks  of  1 8 1 3  completed  all  preparations  for  his  pro- 


264  THE  NAPOLEONIC  EMPIRE  part  i 

jected  expedition  to  Spain,  and  also  for  the  removal  of 
Mary  Caroline  from  Sicily,  he  sailed  for  the  small  island 
of  Ponza  late  in  May.  There  he  had  interviews  with 
some  secret  agents  of  Joachim,  the  English  merchant 
Jones,  and  a  subordinate  of  the  Neapolitan  Ministry 
for  Foreign  Affairs.  They  were  not  able  to  persuade 
him  into  offering  better  terms  than  these  :  that  the 
King  should  immediately  join  the  Alhes  with  all  his 
troops  ;  that  he  should  renounce  the  throne  of  Naples  ; 
in  return  Joachim  should  be  provided  with  an  equiva- 
lent compensation,  and,  until  such  compensation  was 
provided,  retain  Naples. 

These  proposals  of  Bentinck  were  not  accepted,  for 
the  whole  object  of  Joachim's  policy  was  the  retention 
of  Naples.  Yet  the  mere  fact  that  he  had  opened 
negotiations  with  Austria  and  Great  Britain,  in  which 
his  taking  sides  against  Napoleon  was  proposed,  marked 
a  big  step  forward.    As  Wellington  wrote  to  Bentinck  : — 

Your  late  discussions  with  Murat's  agents  have  entirely 
altered  the  appearance  of  affairs  in  Italy.  .  .  .  It  is  very  difficult 
to  form  an  opinion  of  Murat's  sincerity,  but  I  am  quite  certain 
he  will  do  nothing  unless  the  Emperor  of  Austria  should  take  a 
line  with  the  Allies.^ 

At  the  very  moment  that  Bentinck  was  at  Ponza 
the  aspect  of  affairs  in  France  and  in  northern  Europe 
was  rapidly  changing,  and  Joachim  was  once  more 
drawn  back  towards  Napoleon.  The  attitude  of  the 
King  had  caused  alarm  at  Paris.  On  the  3rd  of  June 
the  French  Minister  at  Naples,  Durand,  addressed  a 
note  to  Gallo  complaining  of  the  negotiations  proceed- 
ing between  Vienna  and  Naples.  At  the  same  time 
Joachim  received  from  Paris  private  letters  urging  him 

1   Wellington,  Disps.  x.  482. 


CHAP.  IX      THE  DEFECTION  OF  MURAT  265 

to  join  the  army  in  Germany  and  not  to  leave  his  old 
comrades  to  fight  without  him.  For  some  weeks  he 
wavered,  though  had  Bentinck  agreed  to  guarantee  him 
Naples  he  would  doubtless  have  joined  the  Allies. 

These  entreaties,  the  unsatisfactory  proposals  of 
Bentinck,  and  the  rapid  advance  of  Napoleon's  new 
army  on  Berlin  all  served  to  check  the  King's  move- 
ment towards  the  Allies.  Yet  when  pressed  by  the 
Emperor  to  detach  troops  to  reinforce  Prince  Eugene 
in  northern  Italy  he  wrote  to  him  that,  although 
he  was  prepared  to  march  north  with  30,000  men,  it 
was  only  on  condition  that  he  should  hold  supreme 
command  south  of  the  Alps.  On  other  terms  he  would 
not  move  a  single  soldier. 

Metternich  had  now  advanced  so  far  towards  open 
hostilities  with  France  that  the  reserve  he  had  shown 
towards  the  Neapolitan  advances  in  April  had  become  im- 
patience in  July.  If  Austria  was  once  more  to  take  the 
field  against  Napoleon  it  was  of  desperate  importance 
that  every  possible  assistance  should  be  promptly  secured. 
He  urged  Mier  in  the  strongest  terms  to  obtain  the 
accession  of  the  King  to  the  Allies,  and  when  he  signed 
the  treaty  whereby  Austria  entered  the  coalition  he 
added  a  clause  providing  for  the  entry  and  indemnifica- 
tion of  the  King  of  Naples. 

On  the  2nd  of  May  Napoleon  won  the  battle  of 
Lutzen,  and  on  the  21st  the  battle  of  Bautzen.  For 
these  victories  Joachim  ordered  Te  Deums  to  be  sung, 
and  finally,  on  the  2nd  of  August,  on  receiving  a  letter 
from  Napoleon  inviting  him  to  Dresden,  he  suddenly 
decided  to  leave  Naples  and  join  the  French  army. 
He  appears  Jo  have  been  prompted  to  this  resolve 
by  various  motives  ;  among  them  was  the  belief  that 
he   could   successfully   interpose    and,   by  his  personal 


266  THE  NAPOLEONIC  EMPIRE  part  i 

influence,  mediate  a  peace  between  the  Emperor  and  the 
Allies.  But  Joachim,  however  independent  at  a  distance, 
was  in  the  presence  of  Napoleon  little  more  than  a 
"  poule  mouillee,"  as  Rapp  said.  Although  he  arrived 
at  headquarters  at  a  moment  when  negotiations  for  a 
settlement  were  proceeding  actively,  yet  once  face  to 
face  with  Napoleon,  he  was  able  to  play  no  part,  and 
sank  back  at  once  into  his  accustomed  role  of  a  mere 
mihtary  subordinate. 

The  position  of  Napoleon  at  this  moment  was  an 
extraordinary  one.  He  was  attempting  to  browbeat  a 
league  of  every  Power  of  Europe  with  an  army  but  half 
as  large  as  that  he  had  led  into  Russia,  of  which  but 
one-third  was  French,  and  in  which  conscripts  took 
the  place  of  veterans,  criticism  and  lassitude  the  place 
of  enthusiasm  and  confidence.  Every  sacrifice  had 
been  made  in  order  to  collect  troops  in  Germany. 
Grenier,  with  three  seasoned  divisions,  was  ordered 
north  from  Naples,  Italy  was  denuded  of  French  and 
German  troops,  and  between  February  and  November 
1,000,000  conscripts  were  taken  from  their  homes. 
After  Lutzen  Napoleon  intrusted  the  defence  of 
northern  Italy  to  Prince  Eugene,  and  ordered  the  King 
of  Naples  to  detach  20,000  men  to  serve  under  the 
Viceroy's  orders.  This  Joachim  declined  to  do,  though 
had  the  Emperor  promptly  and  ungrudgingly  given 
him  the  supreme  command  of  everything  south  of  the 
Alps,  it  appears  probable  that  a  great  part  of  the 
Neapolitan  army  would  have  marched  north,  and  that 
the  policy  of  Joachim  would  have  taken  a  different 
turn. 

Joachim  reached  headquarters  at  Dresden  just  as  the 
armistice  concluded  after  Bautzen  was  coming  to  a  close. 
That  armistice  had  been  marked  by  negotiations  during 


CHAP.  IX      THE  DEFECTION  OF  MURAT  267 

which  Austria  had  interposed  her  armed  mediation,  and 
Metternich  was  at  Dresden  submitting  to  the  Emperor 
the  terms  on  which  peace  might  yet  be  concluded.  For 
seven  hours  did  Metternich's  interview  with  Napoleon 
last,  for  seven  hours  did  the  King  of  Naples  and  several 
of  the  marshals  anxiously  await  the  result  in  an  ante- 
room. The  Austrian  negotiator  failed.  Napoleon 
could  not  bring  himself  to  sacrifice  what  was  required 
of  him.  "  Your  sovereigns  born  to  the  throne  may  be 
beaten  twenty  times,"  he  said  to  Metternich,  "  and  still 
go  back  to  their  palaces  ;  that  cannot  I,  the  child  of 
fortune.  .  .  ."  ^  Yet  the  French  army  was  crying  aloud 
for  peace.  To  the  expostulations  of  his  marshals  and  of 
his  most  trusty  advisers  the  Emperor  turned  a  deaf  ear. 
Caulaincourt,  Berthier,  Belliard  pleaded  with  him  in 
vain.  Duroc,  a  {qw  days  before  his  death,  declared 
that  things  had  gone  too  far.  Ney  and  the  King  of 
Naples  earnestly  remonstrated  against  eternal  warfare, 
and  on  Napoleon  calling  Joachim  a  traitor,  the  latter 
put  his  hand  on  his  sword.  At  Dresden  both  the  King 
and  Caulaincourt  actually  went  on  their  knees  begging 
the  Emperor  to  conclude  peace.  It  was  all  of  no  avail. 
The  strongest  declarations  could  not  move  him,  and 
when  Joachim  came  out  from  Napoleon's  study  he  said 
to  Belliard:  "Ah,  wretched  man!  he  will  sacrifice 
France  and  the  army,  and  kill  you  all.  .  .  .  Caulain- 
court told  him  some  very  strong,  even  harsh,  truths. 
He  listened  to  everything  with  perfect  composure."  ^ 

On  the  loth  of  August  the  armistice  came  to  an 
end.  Two  hundred  thousand  Austrians  now  joined  the 
Allies,  and  military  operations  were  resumed.  Joachim 
took  command  of  the  French  cavalry,  though  by  a 
strange  fiction  the  kingdom  of  Naples  continued  normal 

1  Metternich,  i.  i86.  2  Belliard,  i.  119,  124. 


268  THE  NAPOLEONIC  EMPIRE  parti 

diplomatic  relations  with  Austria,  and  the  King's  presence 
with  the  French  army  was  declared  to  be  merely  in  the 
capacity  of  a  volunteer.  That  one  volunteer  proved  a 
host  in  himself  so  long  as  fortune  remained  favourable. 
At  the  battle  of  Dresden  a  circling  movement  of  several 
divisions  of  cavalry  unerringly  led  by  Joachim  brought 
victory  once  more  to  the  Imperial  eagles. 

After  Dresden  came  much  marching  and  counter- 
marching. The  Emperor  divided  his  army  in  two, 
marched  in  person  towards  Berlin  against  Blucher,  and 
left  Joachim  to  hold  Schwarzenberg  in  check.  At  last 
the  French  and  allied  armies  gradually  closed  on  the 
town  of  Leipzig,  and  in  the  terrific  battle  that  was  there 
fought  the  fortunes  of  Napoleon  suffered  an  irretrievable 
blow.  The  French  army  began  its  retreat  from  Leipzig 
on  the  night  of  the  i8th  of  October,  but  already  a 
month  earlier  Metternich  had  resumed  his  efforts  to 
detach  Joachim  from  the  Emperor.  He  had  told  the 
King,  with  the  consent  of  Lord  Aberdeen,  British 
Ambassador  to  Vienila,  that  ''Austria  was  in  a  position 
to  make  communications  of  the  greatest  importance 
on  behalf  of  England  and  of  the  Prince  Regent  of 
Sicily.   .  .   ."^ 

The  fact  was  that  the  instructions  given  to  Lord 
Aberdeen,  on  his  leaving  London  for  Vienna  in  August, 
were  completely  in  accord  with  the  policy  adopted  by 
Bentinck  in  the  Ponza  negotiations,  and  directed  him 
that  the  British  Cabinet  was  not  prepared  to  sacrifice 
the  claim  of  King  Ferdinand  to  Naples,  but  was  pre- 
pared to  consider  the  compensation  of  Joachim  with  a 
"  liberal  establishment  "  in  central  Italy.^  Joachim  was 
not,  however,  acquainted  with  the  tenor  of  Lord  Aber- 

^  Foreign  Off.  Austria^  102,  undated,  but  presumably  not  later  than  Sept.  25. 
^  Rose,  ii.  301. 


CHAP.  IX      THE  DEFECTION  OF  MURAT  269 

deen's  instructions,  and  it  is  indeed  doubtful  whether 
any  of  Metternich's  communications  actually  reached 
him  between  Dresden  and  Leipzig.^  But  after  that 
battle,  whether  any  communication  from  Metternich 
reached  him  or  not,  he  appears  to  have  decided  that  to 
go  on  longer  would  be  folly.  If  the  Emperor,  if  his 
old  companion-in-arms  was  determined  to  continue 
pouring  out  these  endless  libations  of  blood  against  the 
opinion  of  Europe,  of  France,  and  even  of  his  most 
trusted  lieutenants,  why  should  he  participate  longer 
in  such  folly  ?  Why  should  one  insane  will  prevail 
against  the  common -sense  of  mankind  ?  Was  he, 
Joachim  Murat,  to  be  drawn  against  his  wish  into  the 
vortex  of  destruction  into  which  Napoleon  Bonaparte 
was  straightway  plunging  ?  Was  it  wrong  to  compel  the 
war-mad  Emperor  to  desist,  and  that,  if  necessary,  by 
force  of  arms  ?  How  could  Napoleon  refuse  longer  to 
sign  that  peace  which  the  world  called  for  aloud  if  his 
old  friend,  his  brother-in-law,  the  Master  of  the  Imperial 
Horse,  the  possible  successor  to  the  French  throne,  the 
most  brilliant  soldier  of  his  army,  came  to  him  with  his 
sword  drawn  and  said  :  "  Sire,  what  you  seek  is  beyond 
nature  ;  it  has  turned  your  own  children  against  you  ; 
in  the  name  of  reason,  in  the  name  of  France,  you 
must  accept  peace."  Thus  probably  reasoned  the 
unhappy  Joachim  to  himself  on  that  mournful  march 
southwards  from  Leipzig  through  Weimar  and  Erfurt, 
through  the  scenes  of  the  brilliant  triumphs  of  former 
years. 

After  leaving  Erfurt,  where  he  saw  Napoleon  for  the 
last  time  of  his  life,  information  reached  Joachim  that 

1  From  the  letter  of  the  King  of  Bavaria  to  Prince  Eugene,  Oct.  8,  1813,  the 
inference  may  fairly  be  drawn  that  no  satisfactory  assurances  were  given  by  Joachim. 
— Planat  de  la  Faye,  Prkce  Eugene,  2. 


270  THE  NAPOLEONIC  EMPIRE  parti 

he  might  yet  count  on  the  goodwill  of  Metternich,  and 
negotiate  with  Austria  on  the  basis  of  his  retaining  the 
throne  of  Naples.  Possibly  a  communication  reached 
him  through  the  Austrian  lines  at  Ollendorf  on  the 
22nd  of  October.^  On  the  following  day  the  Duke  of 
Rocca  Romana  joined  him  at  Eisenach  with  dispatches 
from  Naples,  and  that  night  Murat  left  the  army  and 
started  as  fast  as  post-horses  could  gallop  for  Italy. 
On  learning  of  the  King's  abandonment  of  the  army 
Napoleon  was  greatly  enraged,  and  issued  orders  for  his 
arrest  if  he  should  pass  on  French  soil. 

The  arrival  of  Joachim  in  his  capital  was  immediately 
marked  by  a  step  that  unmistakably  proclaimed  a  com- 
plete reversal  of  policy.  The  King  arrived  on  the  4th 
of  November  ;  on  the  1 1  th  a  decree  was  issued  throw- 
ing the  trade  of  Naples  open  to  neutral  vessels.  Yet 
Joachim's  intentions  were  in  reality  far  from  fixed.  The 
very  next  day  after  the  issue  of  this  decree  he  wrote  to 
Napoleon  offering  to  march  into  Lombardy  at  the  head 
of  40,000  men,  but  asking  in  return  that  the  Emperor 
should  proclaim  the  independence  of  Italy.  He  was,  in 
fact,  open  to  the  first  good  offer,  and  was  faced  by  this 
difficulty  that  on  the  one  hand  Napoleon  was  not  accom- 
modating, and  that  on  the  other  he  had  to  deal  not  with 
one  but  with  several  parties,  one  of  which  alone,  so  far, 
had  shown  signs  of  meeting  him.  Metternich  was  ready 
to  enter  into  a  treaty,  but  was  that  of  real  value  if  Great 
Britain  was  not  prepared  to  concur  in  it  ?  Neither 
Castlereagh  at  the  Foreign  Office  nor  Bentinck  at 
Palermo  showed  signs  of  a  friendly  disposition,  though 

^  The  supposed  interview  between  Murat  and  Mier  has  been  conclusively  demon- 
strated to  be  apocryphal  by  M.  Weil  in  his  Prince  Eugene  et  Murat  ,•  yet  it  appears 
more  than  probable  that  some  communication  from  the  Austrian  lines  reached 
Murat  at  this  point,  perhaps  accompanied  by  a  passport  to  enable  him  to  pass 
through  southern  Germany. 


CHAP.  IX      THE  DEFECTION  OF  MUR AT  271 

Lord  Aberdeen  appeared  disposed  to  concur  in  the 
Austrian  policy.  But  the  British  Ambassador  to  Vienna 
was  young  and  had  yet  much  to  learn  in  politics  and 
diplomacy.  His  uncertain  grasp  of  the  whole  question 
may  be  judged  from  the  following  extract  from  one  of 
his  dispatches  to  Castlereagh  :  "  The  grand  thing,  in 
the  first  instance,  is  to  precipitate  his  (Murat's)  acts  of 
hostility  against  Bonaparte  without  committing  our- 
selves by  any  engagement  or  precise  understanding."  -^ 

A  few  days  before  offering  his  assistance,  for  a  price, 
to  Napoleon,  Joachim  had  made  a  similar  offer  to  Met- 
ternich.  Writing  in  cypher  to  Prince  Cariati  at  Vienna, 
he  expressed  himself  strongly  against  the  Emperor's 
folly,  stating  that  he  was  prepared  to  march  at  the  head 
of  80,000  men,  and  hoping  that  the  Allies  would  treat 
him  not  less  favourably  than  they  had  treated  Berna- 
dotte  and  Sweden.  This  dispatch  was  written  on  the 
journey  between  Eisenach  and  Naples.?-^ 

Since  his  return  from  Russia  in  the  early  weeks  of 
18 13  a  vast  political  scheme  had  been  growing  in 
Joachim's  mind,  until  it  had  now  become  the  central 
idea  about  which  all  his  plans  revolved.  If  the  French 
Empire  was  falling  to  pieces,  if  France  was  to  be  driven 
back  to  her  natural  frontiers  of  the  Rhine  and  the  Alps, 
why  should  not  an  Italian  State  be  constituted,  and  why 
should  not  he,  Joachim  Murat,  be  its  ruler  ?  The 
whole  peninsula,  though  nominally  under  three  govern- 
ments, was  under  similar  laws  and  administration. 
Whether  as  inhabitants  of  Naples,  of  the  French  depart- 
ments, or  of  the  kingdom  of  Italy,  Italians  had  fought 
side  by  side.  Did  the  break-up  of  the  Empire  portend 
the  break-up  of  this  outline  of  an  Italian  nationality  as 

1  Aberdeen  to  Castlereagh,  Nov.  lo,  1813,  Foreign  Off.  Austria^  102. 
2  Ibid. 


272  THE  NAPOLEONIC  EMPIRE  parti 

well  ?  The  constitution  of  Italy  as  a  national  unit  was 
no  new  conception ;  men  of  capacity  like  Saliceti, 
Maghella,  and  Bentinck  had  realized  its  possibility  ; 
Napoleon  had  announced  his  faith  in  it  by  creating 
Lombardy  the  kingdom  of  Italy  and  his  son  the  King  of 
Rome.  Many  believed  the  time  ripe  and  the  means 
found.  King  Joachim's  understanding  was  convinced, 
his  ambition  was  inflamed  ;  he  embarked  on  a  scheme 
full  of  dangers,  and  for  the  carrying  out  of  which  he 
had  few  qualifications  to  succeed. 

Yet  had  Napoleon  been  willing  to  benefit  Italy,  to 
sacrifice  his  personal  pride  to  the  interests  of  a  people, 
had  he  at  this  precise  moment  decreed  the  unification 
of  Lombardy,  the  French  departments  and  Naples 
under  Joachim,  he  would  have  covered  one  frontier  of 
France  and  might  have  concluded  an  honourable  peace. 
But  such  a  policy  could  not  commend  itself  to  the 
combative  and  selfish  genius  of  Napoleon.  His  anxiety 
at  the  position  of  affairs  south  of  the  Alps,  and  especially 
at  Joachim's  attitude,  was  great,  but  the  only  measure 
he  would  take  was  to  dispatch  Fouche  to  estimate  the 
possibilities  of  the  position  and  to  persuade  the  King  to 
return  to  his  military  obedience.  -^ — --^ — 

As  the  ex-Minister  of  Police  started  on  his  journey 
south  the  King  of  Naples  was  pressing  on  military  pre- 
parations and  his  troops  were  marching  northwards. 
Soon  Joachim  informed  Napoleon  that  his  army  was  in 
motion  for  northern  Italy.  An  engineer  officer.  General 
Colletta,  was  sent  to  Bologna  with  instructions  to 
reconnoitre  the  country  along  the  south  of  the  Po,  and 
to  cultivate  friendly  relations  with  Fouche  and  with 
General  Pino  of  the  Italian  army,  commandant  of  the 
important  fortress  of  Ferrara.  At  Bologna  Colletta  met 
Pino,  Lavauguyon,  and  Fouche,  and  the  latter,  perhaps 


CHAP.  IX      THE  DEFECTION  OF  MURAT  273 

with  a  view  to  piercing  the  King's  intentions,  made 
the  conversation  turn  on  the  independence  of  Italy. 
This  was  indeed  the  one  subject  of  political  discussion 
in  the  peninsula,  especially  among  all  classes  of  military 
and  civil  officials. 

From  Bologna  Fouche  proceeded  to  Naples,  where 
he  had  several  interviews  with  the  King.  Joachim 
assured  him  that  he  was  faithful  to  the  Emperor  and 
intended  to  support  him,  but  that  the  danger  of  an 
attack  from  the  British  made  it  necessary  that  he 
should  dissemble  the  object  of  the  march  of  his  troops 
towards  the  north.  But  the  conferences  of  Fouche 
and  the  King  were  useless  and  could  lead  to  nothing. 
Behind  the  theatrical  magnificence  and  gallantry  of  the 
Court  of  Naples,  behind  the  specious  conversational 
parries  with  which  the  King  met  Fouche's  probably  not 
very  sincere  attacks,  Joachim  was  insensibly  slipping 
down  a  fatal  plane.  His  mind  was  dazzled  with  the 
idea  that  he  could  create  a  nation  and  seat  himself  on  a 
throne  greater  than  that  of  Naples. 

Facts  quickly  came  to  dispel  these  dreams.  Early  in 
December  a  small  Austrian  force  opened  operations  for 
the  Allies  close  to  the  mouth  of  the  Po.  From  Ravenna, 
on  the  I  oth  of  December,  the  commander  of  that  force, 
Count  Nugent,  addressed  a  proclamation  to  the  Italian 
people,  declaring  that  Austria  came  to  liberate  them  from 
the  yoke  of  France,  and  that  now  they  were  "  destined 
to  become  an  independent  nation.''  ^  This  proclamation 
aroused  Joachim  to  fury,  and  for  a  moment  he  appeared 
likely  to  turn  against  Austria.  He  wrote  to  the  com- 
mander of  his  most  advanced  corps.  General  Pignatelli- 
Strongoli,   to  tell   General   Pino,   in   command   of  the 

^  Chodzko,  Traites,  xiii.     In  1809  the  Archduke  John  had  issued  a  very  similar 
appeal  to  the  Italians. 

VOL.  I  T 


274  THE  NAPOLEONIC  EMPIRE  parti 

French  garrison  of  Ferrara,  that  he  must  hold  out 
against  the  Austrians  to  the  last  extremity,  that  the 
Neapolitan  army  would  promptly  relieve  him,  and  that 
the  King  would  start  for  the  front  in  person.^  To 
Napoleon  he  wrote  once  more  in  the  most  urgent  terms, 
stating  that  he  had  35,000  men  and  50  guns  within  a 
few  days'  march  of  Florence  and  Bologna,  and  pressing 
him  for  a  declaration  of  the  independence  of  Italy. 

Time  passes  (he  wrote),  the  enemy  gains  in  strength,  I  am 
reduced  to  silence,  and  the  moment  cannot  be  delayed  long 
when  I  shall  in  turn  be  compelled  to  explain  myself  to  my 
people  and  to  the  enemy.  A  longer  silence  on  my  part,  the 
consequence  of  yours,  would  lose  me  the  opinion  of  the  public, 
and  that  opinion  is  my  sole  strength  ;  once  that  is  lost  I 
can  do  nothing  either  for  you  or  for  myself.  Answer,  answer 
positively.  .  .  . 

And  in  a  postscript  he  added : — 

Sire,  in  the  name  of  all  you  hold  most  dear  in  this  world,  in 
the  name  of  your  glory,  do  not  remain  obstinate  longer.  Make 
peace,  and  at  any  price  ;  gain  time  and  you  will  have  gained 
all ;  your  genius  and  time  will  do  the  rest.  If  you  refuse  to 
listen  to  the  entreaties  of  your  subjects,  of  your  friends,  you  are 
lost,  and  so  will  be  all  your  friends.  .  .  .  Believe  me  for  once. 
Put  to  one  side  your  pretensions,  your  passions ;  it  is  still  time 
to  save  Italy,  but  explain  yourself.^ 

This  letter  shows  very  clearly  the  double  current  of 
thought  coursing  through  Joachim's  mind, — on  the  one 
hand,  a  perception  far  more  clear  than  Napoleon's  of 
the  impending  ruin,  and  a  desire  for  peace  and  settle- 
ment at  any  cost ;  on  the  other,  the  ambitions  that  ob- 
scured such  plain  considerations  as  those  of  the  soldier's 
point  of  honour.  The  letter  remained  unanswered. 
At  the  same  time  as  Joachim  wrote  this  letter  to  the 

1  Murat  to  Pignatelli-StrongoH,  Dec.  19,  18 13,  San  Martino,  Murat  MS. 

2  Murat  to  Napoleon,  Dec.  25  (wrongly  given  28),  1813,  Weil,  iii.  291. 


CHAP.  IX      THE  DEFECTION  OF  MURAT  275 

Emperor,  Fouche  supported  it  with  another,  written 
two  days  later  from  Rome.  In  this  he  used  every 
argument  that  made  for  Napoleon's  proclaiming  the 
independence  of  Italy,  and  stated  clearly  that  the  King 
of  Naples  was  negotiating  with  the  Allies,  and  was  in 
hopes  of  getting  favourable  news  from  Vienna  very 
shortly. 

It  was  true  that  Joachim  was  negotiating,  and  not 
only  Fouche,  whose  motives  might  be  suspected,  but 
Caulaincourt,  Napoleon's  best  and  most  faithful  adviser, 
pressed  on  him  the  policy  of  liberating  Italy.  Caulain- 
court was  for  the  middle  course  of  giving  to  Joachim 
what  lay  south  and  to  Eugene  what  lay  north  of  the 
Po  ;  but  on  the  27th  of  December,  when  he  drew  up 
his  report  on  the  question  for  the  Emperor,  he  already 
thought  the  time  was  past  when  such  a  measure  could 
be  effective.  A  week  later  Napoleon  wrote  to  Caulain- 
court accepting  this  policy  ;  it  was  already  too  late.^ 

It  was  true,  as  Fouche  had  reported,  that  Joachim 
was  negotiating  ;  but  it  was  unfortunately  the  case  that 
the  reason  for  his  continued  offers  to  join  Napoleon,  on 
terms,  was  partly  because  no  information  was  reaching 
him  from  the  allied  headquarters,  while  from  Sicily 
and  Bentinck  his  reports  were  altogether  discouraging. 
In  the  course  of  the  first  week  of  January,  however,  the 
situation  v/as  largely  cleared. 

It  was  the  fatal  weakness  of  Joachim's  position  that 
his  negotiations  with  Austria  were  of  practically  no 
value  so  long  as  Great  Britain  did  not  concur  in  them. 
It  was  Great  Britain  and  '  not  Austria  whose  fleet 
patrolled  the  coast-line  of  Naples ;  it  was  Great  Britain 
and  not  Austria  whose  army  might  at  any  moment  and 
without    warning   appear  at   the   gates   of  his   capital. 

^  For  these  two  dispatches  see  Weil,  iii.  302,  345. 


276  THE  NAPOLEONIC  EMPIRE  part  i 

When  Joachim  decided,  after  Leipzig,  to  trust  fortune 
in  basing  his  policy  on  Metternich's  overtures,  he  may 
have  taken  the  best  step  possible  under  the  circumstances, 
but  more  than  that  cannot  be  said.  It  was  now  imperative 
that  he  should  come  to  some  arrangement  with  Great 
Britain,  and  on  the  19th  of  November  he  sent  to  Sicily 
a  secret  agent,  Schinina  by  name,  to  sound  Lord 
William  Bentinck.  They  met  at  Syracuse  on  the  12th 
of  December. 

''  Schinina  asked  Bentinck  to  sign  an  armistice  on  the 
ground  that  a  treaty  of  alliance  was  about  to  be  con- 
cluded between  Austria  and  Naples,  and  that  Joachim 
could  not  move  his  troops  north  in  support  of  the 
Austrians  unless  assured  that  he  had  no  attack  to  fear 
from  the  Anglo-Sicilians.  As  evidence  of  the  Austrian 
attitude  he  produced  dispatches  showing  that  on  the  7th 
of  October  Metternich  had  offered  Murat  recognition 
at  the  price  of  an  alliance.  But  Bentinck  was  not 
satisfied  as  to  the  sincerity  of  these  overtures,  and 
pointed  to  the  fact  that  since  the  date  of  Metternich' s 
proposals  the  King  of  Naples  had  taken  part  in  the 
battle  of  Leipzig.  He  could  see  no  reason  to  assume 
that  Metternich  would  be  prepared  to  repeat  an  offer 
made  before  an  event  of  such  magnitude,  and  on  that 
ground  declined  to  negotiate.  This  was  a  pretext, 
though  not  a  bad  one  ;  Bentinck's  real  motives  for 
refusing  to  negotiate  were  probably  somewhat  mixed. 
He  appears  for  one  thing  to  have  been  jealous  of 
Austrian  influence.  He  wanted  Italy  to  become  free, 
and  England  to  help  her  on  the  way  to  freedom.  He 
thought  the  most  effective  military  weapon  against 
Napoleon  would  be  a  national  insurrection  similar  to 
that  which  had  enabled  the  British  arms  to  win  such 
signal    triumphs    in    Spain.      Perhaps    he    dreamed    of 


CHAP.  IX      THE  DEFECTION  OF  MURAT  277 

becoming  the  Wellington  of  Italy.  These  views  were 
somewhat  insecurely  founded,  but  Bentinck  made  no 
mistake  when  he  considered  Murat's  position  at  Naples 
very  precarious,  and  it  is  difficult  to  see  that  he  com- 
mitted an  error  of  judgment  in  declining  to  enter  into 
negotiations  of  which  the  first  result  would  have  been 
to  enable  Murat  to  move  30,000  men  to  the  valley  of 
the  Po." ' 

His  mission  having  thus  failed,  Schinina  returned  to 
Naples,  and  it  is  not  difficult  to  establish  the  coincidence 
between  his  return  empty-handed  and  the  last  attempts 
of  Joachim  to  persuade  Napoleon  into  his  policy  of 
Italian  nationalization.  But  although  Bentinck  held 
out  no  hope  of  British  complaisance,  better  news  soon 
reached  the  King  from  another  quarter. 

Early  in  December  Metternich  decided  to  conclude 
a  treaty  with  Naples  on  the  terms  which  he  knew 
Joachim  considered  indispensable, — the  retention  of  his 
crown.  He  prepared  instructions  for  Count  Neipperg, 
whom  he  charged  with  the  negotiations,  and  submitted 
these  instructions  to  Lord  Aberdeen.  There  was 
unfortunately  a  fundamental  difference  between  the 
positions  of  Austria  and  Great  Britain  in  the  question 
of  Naples  which  the  British  Ambassador  failed  to  seize. 
Austria  had  recognised  and  maintained  diplomatic 
relations  with  Joachim  for  some  years,  and  she  had  no 
treaty  with  Ferdinand.  Great  Britain,  on  the  contrary, 
had  never  recognised  Joachim,  had  been  and  still  was  at 
war  with  him,  and  was  bound  by  a  treaty  of  alliance  to 
maintain'  Ferdinand*s  rights  to  Naples.  Oblivious  of 
these  facts,  falling  completely  under  the  influence  of 
Metternich,  Aberdeen,  on  the  12th  of  December, 
handed  him  a  note  in  which  he  stated  that  he  had  taken 

1  Johnston,  Lord  William  Bentinck  and  Murat,  Eng.  Hist.  Re'v.  xix. 


278  THE  NAPOLEONIC  EMPIRE  parti 

cognizance  of  the  instructions  given  by  Metternich  to 
Count  Neipperg  for  negotiating  an  alliance  with  the 
King  of  Naples  ;  that  he  saw  nothing  in  these  instruc- 
tions contrary  to  the  views  of  the  British  Government ; 
that  he  must,  however,  declare  formally  that  the 
British  Government  would  not  become  party  to  a 
treaty  guaranteeing  Naples  to  Murat  without  providing 
a  just  compensation  for  the  King  of  Sicily.  To  this 
Metternich  replied  that  the  indemnification  of  King 
Ferdinand,  in  case  he  should  renounce  his  rights  to 
Naples,  was  an  essential  part  of  the  views  of  the 
Austrian  Court,  and  would  be  provided  for  by  the 
treaty  it  was  proposed  to  conclude.^  In  this  exchange 
of  notes  it  is  clear  that  Aberdeen  completely  lost  sight 
of  the  essential  diiTperence  between  compensating  Ferdi- 
nand for  not  returning  to  Naples  and  compensating 
Joachim  for  giving  it  up. 

Neipperg  arrived  at  Naples  on  the  3 1  st  of  December 
18 13.  He  was  a  dashing  cavalry  officer,  and  intended 
to  negotiate  as  briskly  as  he  would  lead  a  charge. 
Metternich's  terms  were  to  be  taken  or  refused,  and  in 
no  event  was  Joachim  to  be  allowed  to  assume  a  neutral 
attitude.  Either  he  was  with  the  Allies  or  against  them. 
Neipperg  was  bearer  of  a  letter  from  Metternich  to 
the  Queen,  in  which  the  Austrian  Minister  stated  that 
Napoleon  was  on  the  point  of  coming  to  terms,  that  he 
was  prepared  to  let  the  Allies  dispose  of  Italy,  that 
through  the  influence  of  the  King  of  Bavaria  something 
might  be  done  in  favour  of  the  Viceroy,  and  that  it  was 
important,  therefore,  that  Naples  should  come  to  terms 
immediately. 

Thus  pressed,  assured  by  Neipperg  that  Bentinck 
would  fall  into  line  with  Aberdeen,  and  further,  that 

1  Weil,  iii.  227,  228  j  Johnston,  Bentinck  and  Murat,  Eng.  Hist.  Rev.  xix. 


CHAP.  IX     THE  DEFECTION  OF  MURAT  279 

Austria  would  if  necessary  use  force  to  compel 
Ferdinand's  renunciation  of  Naples,  Joachim  signed 
the  treaty  that  turned  him  against  his  old  flag.  Yet 
one  fact  must  be  remembered,  that  at  this  moment 
neither  he  nor  Caroline  anticipated  that  their  action 
was  contributing  to  the  dethroning  of  Napoleon.  Few 
if  any  foresaw  such  an  event ;  to  compel  him  to  make 
peace  was  the  common  aim  ;  even  such  an  active 
Bourbon  agent  as  de  Vitrolles  admitted  that  no  one 
then  believed  in  a  royalist  restoration. 

The  treaty  between  Austria  and  Naples,  signed  on 
the  nth  of  January  18 14,  was  one  of  amity  and  of 
alliance  for  the  joint  prosecution  of  the  war.  Peace 
was  not  to  be  made  by  either  party  independently  of 
the  other.  Austria  guaranteed  the  actual  possessions  of 
the  King,  and  agreed  to  use  her  good  offices  to  procure 
the  accession  of  her  allies  to  this  guarantee.  On  his 
part  Joachim  renounced  all  pretensions  to  Sicily. 
Austria  undertook  to  place  60,000  men  and  Naples 
3O5OOO  in  the  field.  By  several  secret  clauses  it  was 
further  stipulated  that  Austria  would  use  her  good 
offices  to  procure  from  Ferdinand  a  renunciation  of  his 
claims  to  Naples  ;  that  Joachim  should  not  be  expected 
to  act  until  reassured  as  to  Great  Britain's  intentions  ; 
and  that,  at  a  general  peace,  Austria  would  support  the 
King's  claim  to  an  increase  of  territory  out  of  the  Papal 
States  with  a  population  of  400,000  souls. 

Neipperg  had  opened  communications  with  Bentinck 
immediately  on  arriving  at  Naples.  He  communicated 
the  terms  of  the  treaty  and  tried  to  persuade  the  British 
agent  into  concurrence.  Bentinck,  however,  was  with- 
out direct  instructions  from  Castlereagh  and  declined 
to  follow  Aberdeen's  lead.  In  that  he  proved  well 
advised,  for  when  he  heard  from  the  Foreign  Office  he 


28o  THE  NAPOLEONIC  EMPIRE  parti 

was  instructed  that  the  policy  of  the  British  Cabinet 
was  not  correctly  represented  by  Lord  Aberdeen,  and 
was  unmodified  as  to  the  claims  of  Ferdinand  and 
Joachim.  Under  those  circumstances  he  acted  in  com- 
plete accordance  with  the  intentions  of  his  Government 
in  refusing  to  sign  anything  more  than  a  suspension 
of  hostilities.  This  he  negotiated  in  person  at  Naples 
and  signed  on  the  3rd  of  February  ;  it  merely  pro- 
vided that  hostilities  between  Great  Britain  and  Naples 
should  be  suspended  subject  to  resumption  at  three 
months'  notice,  and  that  commercial  relations  should 
be  resumed. 

On  the  3rd  of  January,  when  on  the  point  of 
signing  the  treaty  with  Austria,  Joachim  wrote  as 
follows  to  Napoleon  : — 

Sire,  I  have  reached  the  most  unhappy  day  of  my  life,  I  am 
the  prey  of  the  most  painful  emotions  that  have  ever  stirred 
me.  I  must  choose.  And  I  see  on  one  side  the  inevitable 
loss  of  my  states,  of  my  family,  of  my  glory  even  ;  on  the 
other  an  engagement  contrary  to  my  eternal  attachment  for 
Your  Majesty,  to  my  unalterable  devotion  to  France.  Since 
four  days  an  Austrian  plenipotentiary  is  here.  .  .  . 

What  can  I  do,  menaced  on  all  sides,  and  with  no  help  to 
look  for  ?  If  I  commanded  a  French  army  I  would  risk  all.  .  .  . 
But,  Sire,  do  you  imagine  I  can  do  so  with  Neapolitan  troops  ? 
Do  you  imagine  that  I  could  lead  them  across  the  Alps  ?  Do 
you  imagine  that,  however  great  their  attachment  for  me,  they 
would  not  desert  a  sovereign  who  deserted  their  country  ? 

Such  circumstances  may  well  make  it  my  duty  to  take  sides 
against  my  most  constant  affections.  Should  this  happen,  may 
Your  Majesty  pity  me  !  I  shall  have  made  for  the  sake  of  my 
subjects,  my  children,  my  crown,  the  most  painful  sacrifice 
that  could  be  torn  from  me. 

But  perhaps  even  now  it  is  not  too  late  !  Ah,  if  it  be  so, 
prevent  the  effect  of  these  cruel  circumstances. 

I  implore  you  again,  for  the  sake  of  all  you  hold  dear,  for 


CHAP.  IX     THE  DEFECTION  OF  MURAT  281 

the  sake  of  France,  for  the  sake  of  all  Europe,  and  by  all  the 
griefs  that  torment  me  at  this  terrible  moment,  I  implore  you 
make  peace  !  Deign  to  recall  that  this  was  what  I  intreated 
before  the  battle  of  Dresden,  after  that  battle,  before  leaving 
Your  Majesty  in  Germany,  that  this  I  have  never  ceased  to 
repeat  since  your  return  to  Paris.  I  repeat  it  to-day  with  all 
the  more  insistence  because  I  am  on  the  eve  of  being  cut  off 
from  communication  with  Your  Majesty.  .  .  . 

Sire,  if  a  harsh  necessity  compels  me,  as  I  fear,  into  relations 
apparently  hostile  to  your  interests,  but  that  may  perhaps  be 
useful  to  Your  Majesty  and  to  France  in  the  negotiations  for 
peace,  I  dare  hope  that  you  will  judge  me  with  calm,  with 
impartiality,  with  reasons  of  State,  and  with  the  feeling  that  I 
have  done  all  that  was  possible  to  prevent  such  a  misfortune.  .  .  .^ 

Principal  Authorities  consulted 
MSS. 

Brit.  Foreign  Off.,  Austria,  102  :  Aberdeen's  dispatches  with  a  few 
useful  inclosures  and  copies. 

Brit.  Foreign  Off.,  Sicily,  39  :  Amherst's  dispatches  ;  92  :  Bentinck's 
dispatches. 

Mary  Caroline  Memoirs,  for  the  struggle  between  the  Queen  and 
Bentinck. 

S.  Martino,  a  Murat  letter. 

Printed  Books 

Bausset,  Mems. ;  Belliard,  Mems.  ,•  Bianchi,  Diplomazia  European 
Bianco,  Sicilia  durante  V  occupazione  ^  Bovlger,  Bentinck ;  British  State 
Papers,  1814-1815  ;  Browning,  ^een  Caroline ;  CantIj,  Cronistoria  ; 
Castlereagh,  Corr.;  Cavaignac,  Mems.;  Chodzko,  Traites;  Cockburn, 
Voyage;  Colletta,  Opere ;  Colletta,  Storia ,•  De  Dedem,  Mems.; 
Desvernois,  Mems. ;  Fouch^,  Mems.  ;  G.,  M.  de,  Notice  histor.  ;  Gallois, 
Hist,  de  Murat ;  Helfert,  Konigin  Karolina  ;  Helfert,  Murat;  Johnston, 
Lord  William  Bentinck  and  Murat;  Madelin,  Pouchy ;  Marbot,  Mems.; 
Memorie  sulla  Condotta ;  Metternich,  Mems.;  Morisani,  Ricordi ; 
Napoleon,  Corr.  and  Brotonne  ;  Palmieri,  Sounjenirs;  Palmieri,  Storia 
costitut.  ;  Pasquier,  Mems.;  Planat  de  la  Faye,  Prince  Euglne ;  Romeo, 
Specchio  del  disinganno ;  Rose,  Napoleon;  St.  Am  and,  Marie  Amdie ; 
Savary,  Mems.;  Schoell,  Recueil ;  S^gur,  Mems.  ;  Vienna  Ga%ette,  1813  ; 
ViTROLLES,  Mems. ;  Weil,  Prince  Euglne  ;  Wellington,  Dispatches. 

1  Weil,  iii.  336. 


CHAPTER   X 

murat's  incertitudes 

Armistice — British  attitude — French  at  Naples — Neapolitan  army 
— Generals  —  Rome  occupied  —  Advance  north — Joachim  at 
Bologna — Tuscany  occupied — Eugene's  position — Correspond- 
ence— Decides  to  defend  Italy — Concentrates  on  Quadrilateral 
— St.  Dizier — Battle  of  Mincio  —  Hesitation  of  Joachim  — 
British  policy — Bentinck's  instructions  —  Armistice  between 
Naples  and  Great  Britain — Nugent's  advance — Joachim  writes 
to  Eugene  and  Princess  Bacciocchi — Champaubert — Napoleon 
to  Caroline — Joachim  to  Napoleon — Negotiations  with  Eugene 
— ^Joachim's  excuses  to  Bellegarde — Nugent  active- — Occupies 
Casalmaggiore — Grenier  at  Piacenza — Takes  Parma — Releases 
Neapolitan  prisoners — Effects  retreat  to  Borgoforte — Joachim 
decide  son  hostilities — Fight  at  Reggio — Neapolitan  generals  un- 
settled— Pepe  and  a  constitution — Petition  shelved — Bentinck 
at  Naples — Sicilian  proclamations — Bentinck's  to  the  people  of 
Italy — Joachim  attempts  to  propitiate  him — Bentinck's  harsh 
attitude  —  Intrigue  of  Neapolitan  generals — Joachim  thinks 
himself  sacrificed — His  letter  to  Fouche — Napoleon  negotiates 
with  Joachim — Conferences  at  S.  Giacomo — Alarm  of  Austrians 
— Bentinck's  note  to  Gallo — Allies  adhere  to  Austrian  policy — 
BalatschefF's  mission — Castlereagh  quiets  Bentinck — Conference 
at  Rovere — Release  of  Pope — Arrives  at  Neapolitan  outposts 
— Meets  Joachim — Nugent  crosses  Taro — Fighting  at  Piacenza 
— News  of  fall  of  Empire — Joachim's  position — Convention  of 
Schiarino  Rizzeno. 

The  treaty  of  alliance  between  Austria  and  Naples 
marked  a  period  in  the  history  of  Joachim,  but  it  did 
not  mark    the  end  of  his  incertitudes  or  hesitations. 

282 


CHAP.  X  MURAT'S  INCERTITUDES  283 

The  treaty  was  not,  could  not  be,  a  satisfactory  arrange- 
ment. It  did  not  completely  safeguard  Joachim  against 
the  claim  of  Ferdinand,  which  the  British  would  not 
abandon  ;  it  did  not  gratify  the  ambition,  that  his 
Neapolitan  advisers  ardently  fostered,  to  make  of 
Naples  the  nucleus  of  Italian  independence  ;  it  plunged 
him  into  a  worse  than  equivocal  position  with  regard 
to  Napoleon  and  all  French  citizens.  The  French,  who 
made  up  a  large  part  of  the  Court  circle,  the  French 
military  officers  in  the  Neapolitan  service,  the  French 
civil  functionaries  and  soldiers,  soon  gave  Joachim  cause 
for  anxiety,  if  not  repentance. 

Perignon,  military  governor  of  Naples,  presented 
himself  at  the  Palace,  and  requested  a  formal  audience. 
The  King  received  him  in  presence  of  the  Queen, 
and  listened  to  his  remonstrances.  Failing  to  move 
Joachim,  the  old  Marshal  turned  to  Caroline  ;  but  she 
met  his  reproaches  unperturbed.  The  Queen  merely 
smiled  mockingly,  bowed  her  head  towards  her  husband, 
and  said  :  "  Monsieur  le  Marechal,  you  must  be  aware 
that  a  wife's  duty  is  obedience.''  ^ 

The  feeling  of  indignation  was  especially  strong 
among  the  French  officers,  and  nearly  all  of  them 
declined  to  serve  longer  under  Joachim.  At  Nola, 
where  the  Corsican  Legion  was  quartered,  a  remarkable 
scene  occurred.  At  the  cafe  where  the  officers  were 
accustomed  to  meet  in  the  evening,  they  protested 
against  the  King's  policy  by  raising  loud  and  continued 
shouts  of  "  Vive  I'Empereur  !  "  Joachim's  treason  was 
denounced,  and  from  the  colonel  to  the  youngest 
lieutenant  all  declared  they  would  never  bear  arms 
against  their  old  comrades.  They  eventually  had  to 
be  shipped  to  France. 

1  Cavaignac,  262. 


284  THE  NAPOLEONIC  EMPIRE  parti 

In  the  Corsicans  Joachim  lost  one  of  the  best 
regiments  in  his  service,  one  he  could  ill  afford  to 
spare,  for  the  army  he  was  placing  in  the  field  was  far 
less  well  composed  than  numerous.  From  29,000 
men,  exclusive  of  French  troops  in  the  kingdom,  which 
it  numbered  in  July  18 12,  it  had  risen  to  35,000  in 
October,  and  to  46,000  a  year  later.  Every  effort  was 
made  to  increase  it  further.  At  Court  a  premium  was 
set  on  all  things  military  ;  promotions  and  decorations 
were  lavished  ;  the  Neapolitan  officers  who  had  served 
in  Germany  or  Spain  had  rewards  showered  on  them. 
But  it  was  impossible. that  such  large  bodies  of  troops, 
raised  at  short  notice  from  a  population  that  had  no 
military  tradition,  and  was  wholly  impatient  of  dis- 
cipline, could  be  good.  The  rapid  promotion  of 
officers  by  Court  favour  and  the  injudicious  leniency  of 
the  King  did  not  tend  to  improve  them. 

Most  of  the  commanding  generals  had  ranked  as 
lieutenants  or  captains  when  Joachim  ascended  the 
throne,  and  few,  if  any,  had  military  talents.  Carascosa 
and  D'  Ambrosio  had  enough  tactics  to  manoeuvre  a 
brigade  ;  Lecchi  had  great  experience  but  was  past 
active  warfare  ;  Filangieri's  courage  and  dash  were 
unsurpassed  ;  Florestano  Pepe  was  the  only  general 
officer  of  real  ability  and  value,  and  he  was  with  Rapp 
besieged  in  Dantzig.  Of  the  other  generals  none  but 
Guglielmo  Pepe  and  Colletta  possessed  other  military 
virtues  save  courage,  and  one  or  two  no  better  recom- 
mendation than  Court  favour.  The  indiscipline  of  the 
generals  was  as  great  as  that  of  their  men ;  the 
Neapolitan  soldiers,  marauders,  deserters,  thieves,  had 
been  for  some  years  the  affliction  of  their  country  ; 
they  were  now  to  become  the  plague  of  northern 
Italy. 


CHAP.x  MURAT'S  INCERTITUDES  285 

As  early  as  December  the  Neapolitans  had  entered 
Rome.  The  French  governor,  General  Miollis,  could 
only  dispose  of  a  few  hundred  men,  and  was  not  in  a 
position  to  defend  the  city.  He  affected  to  accept  the 
protestations  of  friendship  of  the  Neapolitans,  but  shut 
himself  up  in  the  castle  of  S.  Angelo,  where  he  awaited 
developments. 

So  exhausted  were  the  resources  of  the  Empire  by 
the  campaigns  of  Russia  and  Germany,  that  south  of 
the  Po  there  were  not  more  than  2000  French  troops 
in  all.  These  slowly  withdrew  as  the  Neapolitans 
advanced,  leaving  behind  them  small  garrisons  in 
Rome,  Civita  Vecchia,  and  Ancona.  Yet  the  move- 
ment of  the  Neapolitan  columns  northwards  during 
December  and  January  was  slow,  and  their  occupation 
of  the  French  departments  was  made  to  appear  by  the 
King's  functionaries  not  as  a  hostile  move,  but  as  a 
normal  and  friendly  transference  of  authority. 

On  the  23rd  of  January  Joachim  joined  the  head- 
quarters of  his  army  in  the  neighbourhood  of  Ancona, 
and  thence  directed  his  columns  towards  the  Po.  As 
the  Neapolitan  generals  advanced  they  addressed  pro- 
clamations of  a  nationalist  character  to  the  inhabitants, 
calling  on  them  to  rise  for  the  independence  of  Italy. 

Marching  through  Cesena  and  Imola  on  Bologna, 
the  capital  city  of  Romagna,  the  King  came  into  con- 
tact on  his  right  with  Nugent  and  an  Austrian  column 
of  about  8000  men  advancing  in  the  same  direction 
through  Ravenna  and  Commachio.  In  the  evening 
of  the  31st  of  January,  preceded  by  a  detachment  of 
the  cavalry  of  the  Guard,  and  surrounded  by  his 
generals  and  a  large  staff,  Joachim  made  his  entry 
into  Bologna.  There  was  a  little  enthusiasm.  Many 
a  handkerchief  fluttered  as  the  brilliant  cavalcade  passed 


286  THE  NAPOLEONIC  EMPIRE  parti 

by  ;  and  in  the  piazza  a  crowd  assembled  that  greeted 
the  King  with  shouts  of  "  Viva  il  gran  Gioacchino  ! 
Viva  il  re  d'  Italia  ! "  These  acclamations  were  re- 
echoed by  the  soldiers,  but  probably  did  not  represent 
much  more  than  a  judicious  expenditure  on  the  part  of 
the  Neapolitan  secret  agents. 

On  the  day  following  his  arrival  the  King  visited 
the  city,  and  entered  among  other  places  the  Court  of 
Appeal.  There  he  made  a  speech  to  the  assembled 
judges,  in  which  he  declared  that  his  heart  and  aspira- 
tions were,  and  had  always  been,  for  the  Emperor  and 
for  France.  But  as  Napoleon  had  failed  to  support 
him,  he  had  been  compelled  against  his  wish  to  accede 
to  the  proposals  of  Austria,  and  to  become  the  ally  of 
the  Emperor  Francis. 

While  Joachim  with  the  main  body  thus  occupied 
Bologna,  detachments  of  his  army  marched  into  Tuscany, 
the  French  officials  and  such  small  bodies  of  troops  as 
were  with  them  everywhere  retiring.  Elise  Bonaparte 
and  her  husband.  Prince  and  Princess  Bacciocchi, 
abandoned  Florence,  and  soon  a  large  part,  nearly  one 
half,  of  the  Italian  peninsula  was  in  the  actual  occupation 
of  the  Neapolitan  troops.  The  remainder,  the  part 
that  lies  about  a  line  drawn  from  Genoa  through  Milan 
to  Venice,  was  now  to  be  contended  for  by  the 
Neapolitans,  by  the  Austrians,  by  the  British,  and  by 
the  French.  In  that  most  curious  and  complicated 
struggle  nearly  all  the  honours,  military,  diplomatic, 
and  of  personal  conduct,  were  to  remain  with  the 
Viceroy  of  Italy,  Prince  Eugene  Beauharnais. 

Notwithstanding  his  treaty  with  Austria,  notwith- 
standing his  military  occupation  of  so  many  cities  and 
departments  that  had  formed  part  of  the  French  Empire, 
there  had  been  so  far  no  open  hostility  between  Joachim 


CHAP.  X  MURAT'S  INCERTITUDES  287 

and  the  French.  It  was  perfectly  conceivable  and 
widely  believed  that  the  King's  ambition  to  become 
head  of  a  great  Italian  state  might  in  some  way  be 
reconciled  with  a  support  of  the  French  arms  against 
the  Allies.  So  did  the  Viceroy  of  Italy  think  and  hope 
until  the  end  of  December.  On  the  14th  of  January, 
being  in  ignorance  of  the  treaty  signed  three  days 
earlier,  he  wrote  to  Joachim  urging  him  not  to  turn 
against  the  French  arms,  pointing  out  that  the  con- 
ferences in  progress  between  Napoleon  and  the  Allies 
would  probably  lead  to  peace,  and  that  the  King  would 
make  a  mistake  in  committing  himself  under  such 
circumstances.  He  closed  with  protestations  of  un- 
diminished personal  friendship,  and  by  asking  that, 
should  the  worst  happen,  he  might  at  all  events  receive 
full  warning  of  Joachim's  intentions.  A  few  days  later 
he  sent  to  Naples  one  of  his  most  trusted  staff  officers, 
General  Gifflenga,  whose  mission  was  to  discover  what 
course  Joachim  was  likely  to  adopt. 

A  decision  of  vital  importance  depended  on  the 
result  of  these  inquiries  of  the  Viceroy  ;  for  he  had 
immediately  before  making  them  received  orders  from 
the  Emperor  that  he  was  to  abandon  Lombardy  and 
retreat  to  the  Alps  on  being  officially  informed  that 
Joachim  had  declared  in  favour  of  the  Allies.  But  it  so 
happened  that  the  King  was  not  prepared  to  make  such 
a  declaration  to  the  Viceroy,  notwithstanding  his  treaty 
of  alliance  with  Austria.  To  the  Viceroy's  communi- 
cation he  replied  that  he  could  not  move  his  troops  to 
assist  the  French  arms  north  of  the  Po,  for  not  only 
had  the  Emperor  made  no  request  that  they  should  be 
thus  employed,  but  he  had  also  left  the  question  of  their 
supreme  command  unsettled.  Yet  the  movement  of  his 
army,  he  claimed,  had  been  of  great  assistance  to  the 


288  THE  NAPOLEONIC  EMPIRE  parti 

Emperor.  If  he  had  abstained  from  attacking  the 
Austrians,  it  was  owing  to  the  peace  conferences  in 
progress  and  to  the  presence  of  an  Austrian  negotiator 
at  Naples.  Should  he,  however,  to  his  deep  regret, 
eventually  be  compelled  to  separate  his  policy  from 
that  of  France,  he  undertook  to  give  the  Viceroy  the 
warning  he  asked  for  before  attacking  him.  For  the 
present  his  instructions  to  his  generals  were  not  to 
engage  in  hostilities  with  the  French  (Jan.  21,  18 14). 

On  receiving  this  dissembling  letter,  on  considering 
the  uncertainty  of  the  political  horizon,  and  the  in- 
evitable necessity,  as  it  seemed,  that  Napoleon  should 
soon  accept  the  terms  proposed  to  him  by  the  Allies, 
the  Viceroy  decided,  however  small  his  resources,  to 
maintain  his  position  in  Lombardy  for  the  present 
rather  than  retreat.  His  intention  was  to  prevent 
the  Neapolitans  from  crossing  the  Po  by  holding 
the  line  of  that  river  from  the  bridge  of  Borgoforte, 
just  south  of  Mantua,  to  Piacenza,  and  at  the 
same  time  to  prevent  the  Austrians'  advance  from  the 
north  and  east  by  contesting  with  them  the  lines  of 
the  Adige  and  Mincio  and  the  fortresses  of  the  Quad- 
rilateral,— Peschiera,  Verona,  Mantua,  and  Legnago. 
This  position,  one  of  the  most  famous  in  military 
history,  was  immensely  strong,  and  commanded  the 
northern  half  of  the  valley  of  the  Po,  blocking  the  two 
great  roads  that  come  down  into  Italy,  one  from  the 
Tyrol  along  the  Adige,  the  other  from  Austria  through 
Vicenza.  Yet  the  Quadrilateral  had  the  weakness  of  so 
many  elaborately  planned  military  positions :  it  required 
a  large  body  of  troops  to  occupy  all  its  fortifications 
and  to  cover  the  passages  of  the  rivers.  Prince  Eugene 
was  short  of  men,  and  he  would  have  with  inferior 
numbers  to   face  a  large  Austrian  army  coming  from 


CHAP.  X  MURAT'S  INCERTITUDES  289 

the  east  and  a  smaller  Neapolitan  army  coming  from 
the  south.  Yet  he  resolved  to  attempt  the  defence  of 
the  line  of  the  Mincio,  making  Mantua  the  pivot  of  his 
operations. 

Under  these  circumstances  he  was  naturally  anxious 
to  profit  by  the  conduct  of  the  King  of  Naples,  however 
much  he  might  secretly  despise  it.  He  therefore  sent 
notice  to  the  Neapolitan  headquarters  that  the  crossing 
of  the  Taro,  a  small  affluent  of  the  Po  between  Parma 
and  Piacenza,  would  be  construed  an  act  of  hostility  ; 
he  then  withdrew  every  available  man  from  that  quarter, 
leaving  at  Piacenza  a  small  garrison  of  about  3000,  and, 
in  the  first  days  of  February,  concentrated  on  the 
Quadrilateral  nearly  the  whole  of  his  army,  in  all  40,000 
men,  of  whom  but  1200  were  French  by  birth.  So 
bad  did  he  judge  his  position  that  had  Murat  continued 
his  march  and  advanced  from  Bologna  to  Piacenza  the 
Viceroy  would  immediately  have  abandoned  Lombardy. 

In  reality  Prince  Eugene  had  little  cause  for  anxiety 
as  to  his  flank.  Just  at  the  moment  when  he  was 
concentrating  his  troops  on  the  Quadrilateral  to  face  the 
Austrians  under  Marshal  Bellegarde,  the  soldiers  were 
inspirited  with  the  news  of  Napoleon's  victory  over 
Bliicher  at  St.  Dizier,  the  first  battle  of  the  campaign 
of  France.  Coinciding  with  this  came  a  further  letter 
from  the  King  of  Naples  reiterating  his  assurances  that 
he  would  not  act  before  giving  the  Viceroy  warning. 
In  a  postscript  he  added  :  "Be  good  enough,  my  dear 
Eugene,  to  recall  my  name  to  the  Emperor,  and  to 
tell  him  of  my  sorrow  ;  I  weep  as  I  write  you  these 
few  words." 

On  the  3rd  and  4th  of  February  the  Viceroy 
abandoned  the  line  of  the  Adige  and  the  fortress  of 
Verona  ;  his  army  was  too  small  to  cover  so  extended 
VOL.  I  u 


290  THE  NAPOLEONIC  EMPIRE  parti 

a  line  and  so  large  a  fortress.  He  fell  back  to  a  new 
position  on  a  much  shorter  front  behind  the  Mincio, 
his  left  resting  on  Peschiera,  his  right  on  Mantua.  The 
latter  place  covered  the  passage  of  the  Po  at  Borgoforte, 
where  a  bridge  of  boats  had  been  established,  and 
formed  the  pivot  or  hinge  of  the  Viceroy's  position  ; 
it  was  intrusted  to  the  care  of  General  Zucchi. 

On  the  5  th  of  February,  Bellegarde  crossed  the 
Adige  and  advanced  on  the  line  of  the  Mincio.  He 
issued  at  the  same  time  a  proclamation  to  the  Italian 
people  announcing,  not,  as  was  usual,  that  the  era  of 
liberty  was  about  to  dawn,  but,  as  was  more  honest,  that 
the  ancient  governments  were  about  to  be  re-established. 
He  also  wrote  a  letter  to  Joachim  in  which  he  ascribed 
the  Viceroy's  abandonment  of  the  line  of  the  Adige 
to  the  arrival  of  the  Neapolitan  army  at  Bologna. 

The  Viceroy  had  decided  to  take  advantage  of  the 
respite  given  him  by  the  King  of  Naples  to  deal  a  hard 
blow  at  the  Austrians,  and  thus  make  good  his  hold  on 
the  line  of  the  Mincio.  After  demonstrating  as  though 
he  intended  continuing  his  retreat  from  the  Mincio 
back  to  Piacenza,  he  rapidly  concentrated  the  bulk  of 
his  troops  on  Mantua,  and  issuing  from  that  fortress 
on  the  morning  of  the  8th,  fell  on  the  Austrian  flank 
near  Valeggio.  There  he  fought  a  long,  confused 
battle  with  Bellegarde,  of  which  the  result  was,  on  the 
whole,  more  favourable  to  the  French  than  to  the 
Austrian  arms.  The  Viceroy  was  entitled  to  claim  a 
success,  for  he  was  on  the  defensive  and  he  had  stopped 
the  Austrian  advance.  He  reported  to  the  Emperor  that 
had  he  completely  defeated  Bellegarde  he  would  im- 
mediately have  crossed  the  Po  at  Borgoforte  and  marched 
against  the  Neapolitans.  From  this  it  is  clear  that 
whatever  the  Viceroy  thought  it  advisable  to  write  to 


CHAP.  X  MURAT'S  INCERTITUDES  291 

the  King,  he  would  have  had  no  hesitation  in  attacking 
him  had  he  been  strong  enough  to  do  so. 

In  the  meanwhile  what  was  King  Joachim's  position  ? 
He  was  still  at  Bologna  with  his  army,  profoundly- 
uncertain  what  to  do.  The  efforts  of  Napoleon  in 
France  and  of  Prince  Eugene  in  Italy  had  for  a 
moment  made  the  success  of  the  Allies  appear  doubtful. 
The  Austrian  guarantee  of  his  throne  appeared  well- 
nigh  useless  while  Great  Britain  continued  to  support 
King  Ferdinand.  The  treaty  of  alliance  called  for 
modification  in  some  of  its  details,  and  was  not  yet 
ratified  by  the  Emperor  Francis.  Bentinck,  though 
he  had  signed  the  armistice,  was  so  openly  unfriendly 
that  Joachim  viewed  the  British  agent  as  a  barely  dis- 
guised enemy  awaiting  the  first  favourable  opportunity 
of  attacking  him  from  behind. 

Bentinck's  dream  was  that  Italy  should  be  freed  from 
the  French,  not  for  the  benefit  of  Joachim,  nor  of 
Ferdinand,  nor  of  Austria,  nor  of  any  of  the  dis- 
possessed princes,  but  for  that  of  the  people,  under  a 
national  and  constitutional  form  of  government.  His 
views  were  plainly  expressed  ;  they  were  well  known  to 
the  liberal  circles  and  the  police  agents  of  Naples.  The 
British  Cabinet  had  had  too  much  cause  to  be  satisfied 
with  the  way  in  which  Bentinck  had  reduced  Sicily  to 
order  and  removed  Mary  Caroline  from  the  political 
scene  to  feel  any  disposition  to  recall  such  a  valuable 
servant ;  yet  no  Tory  Cabinet  could  possibly  sym- 
pathize with  his  views  as  to  Italian  emancipation.  It 
might  suit  them  as  a  matter  of  convenience  to  see  a 
popular  insurrection  drive  the  French  beyond  the  Alps, 
but  nothing  more.  Just  at  the  time  when  Bentinck 
was  negotiating  the  armistice  with  Naples  he  received  in- 
structions from  the  War  Office  to  prepare  an  expedition 


292  THE  NAPOLEONIC  EMPIRE  parti 

which  he  was  to  direct  against  northern  Italy,  thus 
co-operating  with  the  converging  movements  of  the 
Allies  on  France.  Lord  Bathurst's  dispatch  did  not 
contain  much  to  encourage  Bentinck  in  his  Hberalizing 
views.  His  principal  objective  was  to  be  Genoa,  and 
his  instructions  ran  :*'...  provided  it  be  clearly  with 
the  entire  concurrence  of  the  inhabitants,  you  may  take 
possession  of  Genoa  in  the  name  and  on  behalf  of  his 
Sardinian  Majesty."  This  plainly  showed  the  trend 
of  British  policy,  how  far  it  was  from  supporting 
Bentinck's  views,  how  anxious  it  was  to  conform  with 
the  political  sentiments  that  permeated  the  views  of  the 
Continental  Powers  and  that  shortly  after  became 
embodied  in  the  decrees  of  the  Congress  of  Vienna. 
The  British  Cabinet  under  the  guidance  of  Liverpool 
and  Castlereagh  was  already  virtually  in  accord  with 
Austrian  policy. 

Lord  Castlereagh,  the  Foreign  Secretary,  had  pro- 
ceeded in  person  to  the  headquarters  of  the  Allies, 
where  British  interests  were  not  sufficiently  safe  in  the 
hands  of  Lord  Aberdeen.  One  of  his  first  acts  had 
been  to  protest  against  the  terms  of  the  treaty  of  alliance 
between  Austria  and  Naples.  He  felt,  however,  that 
as  the  treaty  had  been  signed,  some  concession  must  be 
made.  He  saw  that  the  smaller  objects  must  be  made 
subservient  to  the  greater,  and  agreed  to  help  secure 
the  military  co-operation  of  King  Joachim  by  so  far 
departing  from  his  original  position  as  to  abandon  all 
idea  of  continuing  the  war  against  him,  provided  only 
Ferdinand  might  be  persuaded  to  accept  some  equivalent 
compensation  for  the  throne  of  Naples.  Bentinck  was 
therefore  instructed  by  Castlereagh  to  offer  explanations 
to  the  Court  of  Palermo,  and  to  make  clear  that  the 
interests  of  Sicily  must  be  subordinated  to  the  general 


CHAP.  X  MURAT'S  INCERTITUDES  293 

cause.  A  little  later  he  received  a  dispatch,  an  extract 
from  which  will  serve  to  illustrate  the  position  of  Great 
Britain  more  clearly.  Speaking  of  the  treaty  between 
Austria  and  Naples,  Castlereagh  wrote  : — 

The  British  Government  never  liked  the  measure,  but 
being  taken  they  are  perfectly  ready  to  act  up  to  the  spirit  of 
the  Austrian  treaty,  and  to  acknowledge  Murat  upon  a  peace, 
on  two  conditions  :  i,  that  he  exerts  himself  honourably  in  the 
war  ;  and  2,  that  a  reasonable  indemnity  ...  be  found  for 
the  King  of  Sicily.^ 

The  propriety  and  soundness  of  the  position  taken 
up  by  Castlereagh  appear  unquestionable  ;  yet  however 
favourable  to  him  British  policy  might  be  in  reality, 
Joachim  had  no  certain  information  to  this  effect,  and 
justifiably  viewed  Bentinck  as  directly  hostile.  The 
position  he  was  now  in  at  Bologna  was  a  distressing 
one ; — not  knowing  whether  to  attack  his  old  comrades 
or  his  old  enemies ;  not  knowing  whether  to  keep 
faith  with  Napoleon  or  with  Metternich  ;  not  knowing 
whether  the  Viceroy  from  Borgoforte,  the  Sicilians  from 
Palermo,  the  British  from  the  sea,  or  the  Austrians  from 
Venetia  would  first  attack  him  ;  surrounded  by  incom- 
petent and  intriguing  officers  ;  aspiring  to  be  King  of 
Italy,  yet  fearing  he  should  not  long  be  King  of  Naples. 
He  made  his  position  even  worse  by  falling  into  an 
error  not  common  with  him,  but  not  extraordinary 
under  the  circumstances,  that  of  indecision.  He  accepted 
the  Viceroy's  far  from  disinterested  advice,  and  deter- 
mined that  his  best  course  would  be  not  to  commit 
himself  to  either  party  too  soon. 

Count  Mier  and  Marshal  Bellegarde  acted  con- 
sistently as  though  there  were  no  question  as  to  the 

1  Castlereagh  to  Bentinck,  February  21st,  18 14,  Brit.  State  Papers,  1814-1815, 
ii.  236. 


294  THE  NAPOLEONIC  EMPIRE  parti 

long-delayed  ratification  of  the  Austro-Neapolitan  treaty 
of  alliance.  Nugent,  who  commanded  the  small  Austrian 
corps  south  of  the  Po,  was  placed  nominally  under  the 
orders  of  the  King.  But  this  general,  an  impetuous, 
resourceful,  and  indefatigable  officer,  viewed  the  King 
of  Naples  with  as  much  suspicion  and  dislike  as  did 
Bentinck.  It  was  not  long  before  difficulties  arose 
between  him  and  Joachim.  Nugent*s  military  sense 
made  him  perceive  plainly  what  the  Viceroy  well  knew 
was  his  weak  point.  He  determined,  however  small  in 
numbers,  to  push  up  the  south  bank  of  the  Po  and  to 
attack  Piacenza.  A  diversion  would  compel  Prince 
Eugene  to  weaken  the  line  of  the  Mincio  and  would 
give  Bellegarde  a  better  opportunity  for  crossing. 

On  the  8th  of  February,  the  day  on  which  the 
battle  of  the  Mincio  was  fought,  Nugent  reached  the 
Enza,  a  little  stream  midway  between  Reggio  and 
Parma,  along  which  Carascosa's  Neapolitan  division  had 
already  placed  a  line  of  outposts.  On  the  approach  of 
the  Austrians  the  Neapolitan  general  at  once  issued 
confidential  orders  that  they  were  not  to  be  allowed  to 
proceed  beyond  the  river.  He  also  wrote  to  the  chief 
of  the  general  staff,  General  Millet  de  Villeneuve,  stating 
that  Stahremberg  with  his  brigade  intended  marching 
on  Parma,  and  asking  whether  it  was  intended  that  he 
should  prevent  this  movement  by  force  of  arms.^ 
Nugent,  however,  did  not  heed  Carascosa's  opposition, 
and  did  not  await  the  arrival  of  instructions  from 
Joachim's  headquarters.  He  continued  his  march  and 
occupied  Modena  on  the  9  th,  where  he  proclaimed  a 
provisional  government  in  the  name  of  the  Grand  Duke 
Francis.  Thence  he  pushed  on  towards  Piacenza,  but 
after  some  inconclusive  skirmishing  was  compelled  to 

^  Arch.  Nap.  Guerra,  xxv.  1057. 


CHAP.  X  MURAT'S  INCERTITUDES  295 

fall  back.  Nugent  now  took  up  an  attitude  of  observ- 
ation, reported  the  presence  of  a  large  body  of  troops 
in  the  fortress,  and  called  on  Carascosa  to  support  him, 
which  the  latter  showed  little  inclination  to  do. 

So  indisposed  was  Joachim  for  co-operating  with 
the  Austrians,  that  during  this  time  he  had  secretly 
continued  in  close  correspondence  with  the  Viceroy. 
Immediately  after  Bellegarde's  check  on  the  Mincio  he 
sent  an  officer  to  the  French  lines  with  overtures  for  an 
arrangement.  At  the  same  time  and  with  the  same 
object  he  wrote  to  Elise  Bonaparte,  Princess  Baciocchi  ; 
she  immediately  informed  the  Emperor  of  this  in  the 
following  terms  : — 

I  have  received  several  letters  from  him  [Murat]  that  con- 
trast strangely  with  the  movements  of  his  troops.  The  King 
is  in  a  state  of  great  mental  excitement,  and  expresses  astonish- 
ment that  the  Viceroy  should  have  abandoned  the  line  of  the 
Adige,  and  that  I  should  have  withdrawn  from  Tuscany  with 
the  idea  that  he  could  be  the  enemy  of  your  Majesty  and 
France.  ...  I  am  told  that  in  his  communications  with  the 
Viceroy  the  King's  speeches  and  behaviour  are  the  same.  .  .  .^ 

To  the  few  French  officers  who  had  followed  his 
fortunes, — Millet  de  Villeneuve,  Livron,  and  others, — 
Joachim  repeatedly  declared  that  he  would  soon  turn 
and  side  once  more  with  his  former  brothers-in-arms. 

But  suddenly  the  scene  changed  again.  On  the 
14th  of  February  General  Pignatelli-Strongoli  arrived 
at  Joachim's  headquarters  from  France,  where  he  had 
been  sent  on  a  mission  to  the  allied  sovereigns.  He 
brought  with  him  dispatches  that  reassured  the  King 
as  to  the  attitude  of  the  Emperor  Francis,  and,  which 
was  probably  even  more  effective,  news  of  the  battle  of 
La  Rothiere,  fought  on  the  ist  of  February,  in  which, 

1  Elise  to  Napoleon,  Feb.  14,  1814,  Brit.  State  Papers,  1814-1815,  ii.  300. 


296  THE  NAPOLEONIC  EMPIRE  parti 

as  it  appeared,  Schwarzenberg  had  defeated  Napoleon 
completely.  Joachim  then  immediately  resolved  to  take 
the  decisive  step,  and  formally  notified  the  Viceroy  that  he 
would  open  hostilities.  But,  by  another  sudden  change 
of  fortune,  forty-eight  hours  later  he  repented,  for  Prince 
Eugene  was  firing  triumphant  salvos  along  the  banks 
of  the  Mincio  to  celebrate  Napoleon's  brilliant  victories 
over  Bliicher  at  Champaubert  and  Montmirail. 

Joachim,  now  once  more  plunged  into  incertitude, 
could  see  no  other  solution  of  his  difficulties  than  that 
of  siding  with  whichever  party  remained  uppermost. 
Fortune  appeared  to  smile  on  Napoleon  again,  and 
again  the  Neapolitan  generals  were  instructed  to  hold 
their  troops  back. 

Towards  the  middle  of  February  it  appeared  as 
though  Napoleon's  gigantic  efforts  to  stem  the  tide  of 
invasion  might  be  rewarded.  The  Russians,  Prussians, 
and  Austrians  were  in  retreat,  and  success  might  even 
at  this  eleventh  hour  be  attained.  On  or  about  the 
27  th  of  that  month  he  at  last  decided  on  making  a 
direct  appeal  to  his  rebellious  lieutenant,  and  he  wrote 
to  Joachim  in  the  following  terms  : — 

I  shall  not  allude  to  my  displeasure  at  your  conduct,  which 
has  been  contrary  to  your  duty.  This  comes  from  your  weak- 
ness of  character.  You  are  a  good  soldier  on  the  battlefield, 
but  otherwise  have  no  decision,  no  character.  Turn  to  profit 
an  act  of  treason,  which  I  attribute  to  fear,  so  as  to  serve  me 
by  a  mutual  understanding.  I  rely  on  you,  on  your  contrition, 
on  your  promises.  I  imagine  you  are  not  one  of  those  who 
think  the  lion  is  dead.  If  that  is  your  idea,  it  is  mistaken. 
You  have  done  me  every  injury  possible  since  Wilna,  but  we 
will  not  speak  of  that.  The  title  of  King  has  turned  your 
head  ;  if  your  desire  is  to  retain  it,  act  well  and  keep  your 
word.  .  .  .^ 

^  For  the  date  and  authenticity  of  this  letter  see  Appendix  E,  vol.  ii. 


CHAP.x  MURAT'S  INCERTITUDES  297 

These,  and  probably  other  similar  communications, 
reached  Joachim  towards  the  end  of  February  and 
beginning  of  March,  while  it  was  still  supposed  in  Italy 
that  Napoleon  was  pursuing  a  course  of  unchecked 
victories.  At  some  time  in  the  first  week  of  March 
Joachim  wrote  in  turn,  probably  in  direct  reply  to  the 
dispatch  just  quoted  : — 

Sire — Your  Majesty  is  in  danger,  the  capital  of  France  is 
menaced,  and  neither  can  I  defend  nor  can  I  die  for  you,  and 
your  Majesty's  most  loving  friend  appears  his  enemy  ! 

Sire,  pronounce  but  one  word,  and  I  will  sacrifice  my  family, 
my  subjects,  I  will  lose  all,  but  I  shall  have  served  you,  shall 
have  continued  to  prove  that  I  have  always  been  your  most 
devoted  friend.  That  is  all  I  ask.  ...  I  trust  the  Viceroy 
has  informed  you  of  all  I  have  done  —  tears  prevent  my 
continuing  my  letter.  I  am  here  alone  in  the  midst  of 
strangers.  I  have  to  conceal  all,  even  my  tears  !  This  letter. 
Sire,  makes  you  wholly  master  of  my  fate  ;  my  life  is  yours  -, 
my  honour  is  already  pledged  to  die  for  your  Majesty.  If  you 
could  see  me,  if  you  could  realize  what  I  have  suffered  these 
two  months,  you  would  pity  me.  Always  love  me  ;  I  was 
never  more  worthy  of  your  kindness.     Till  death  your  friend, 

Joachim  Napoleon.^ 

In  these  untutored  words  who  can  fail  to  recognise 
that  strong  blend  of  the  good  and  bad  side  of  human 
nature  that  was  so  conspicuous  in  Joachim  Murat  ? 
Moved  to  tears  by  generous  sentiments,  yet  acting 
the  ungenerous  part ;  crying  enough,  yet  hankering 
for  more  ;  confiding,  yet  dealing  doubly  ;  deceiving 
others,  and  himself  a  great  deal  more. 

But  while  Joachim  negotiated  and  remained  inactive, 

^  Planat  de  la  Faye,  Eugene,  79.  Mons.  Weil  fixes  the  4th  of  March  as  the 
date  of  this  letter,  but  it  would  appear  better  on  the  whole  to  place  it  just  before  the 
3rd,  at  which  date  Murat  received  the  letter  whereby  the  Emperor  Francis  ratified 
the  Austro-Neapolitan  treaty  of  alliance.  Schoell,  whose  text  differs  in  several 
particulars,  places  the  date  one  day  later  than  Weil. 


298  THE  NAPOLEONIC  EMPIRE  part  i 

the  Viceroy  pursued  an  opposite  course.  He  responded 
to  every  overture  that  came  from  the  Neapolitan  camp, 
but  without  any  faith  in  an  agreement  being  reached 
and  without  any  relaxation  of  his  utmost  military 
endeavour.  On  the  27  th  of  February  he  wrote  to  the 
Princess  Augusta  : — 

In  two  days  I  shall  finally  know  whether  the  King  of 
Naples  will  really  join  us. 

Two  days  later  : — 

I  send  you  herewith  a  short  statement  of  the  conditions  the 
King  of  Naples  has  had  the  impudence  to  put  forward,  pro- 
posing on  these  conditions  to  declare  against  the  Austrians. 
He  has,  however,  sent  me  a  verbal  promise  not  to  engage  his 
troops.  Of  this  I  am  taking  advantage,  though  not  altogether 
pinning  my  faith  to  it. 

The  Viceroy  had  already  gained  considerable  advan- 
tage from  his  negotiations  with  the  King,  for  Belle- 
garde  was  now^  in  a  state  of  complete  check  on  the 
Mincio.  On  the  loth  of  February  he  had  made  an 
attempt  to  cross  at  Valleggio,  but  had  been  vigorously 
repulsed  by  the  Viceroy.  The  Austrian  Field-Marshal 
had  since  been  content  to  maintain  an  expectant  attitude, 
for  not  only  had  he  no  certainty  of  defeating  the 
Viceroy,  but  he  could  not  tell  but  that  the  Neapolitan 
army  might  at  any  moment  appear  on  his  flank.  To 
Bellegarde's  and  Nugent's  reiterated  demands  that  the 
Neapolitan  army  should  advance  on  Piacenza,  the 
plausible  reply  was  reiterated  by  Joachim  that  an 
advance  on  Piacenza  would  leave  his  line  of  com- 
munications open  to  an  attack  from  the  Viceroy  de- 
bouching from  Borgoforte.  That  this  reason  was 
hardly  sound  in  view  of  the  great  numerical  inferiority 
of  the  Viceroy  was  amply  demonstrated  by  the  eventual 


CHAP.x  MURAT'S  INCERTITUDES  299 

course  of  operations,  and  by  the  bold  and  not  altogether 
fruitless  course  pursued  by  Nugent. 

This  commander  was  determined,  at  whatever  cost, 
whether  supported  by  the  Neapolitans  or  not,  to  effect 
a  diversion  on  the  southern  bank  of  the  Po  that  should 
in  some  way  facilitate  the  operations  of  Bellegarde  on 
the  northern  bank.  After  his  repulse  in  front  of 
Piacenza  early  in  the  month,  he  had  fallen  back  on  the 
line  occupied  by  the  Neapolitans  along  the  river  Enza. 
King  Joachim's  headquarters  were  at  Reggio,  midway 
between  the  Enza  and  Modena,  and  Nugent  established 
himself  on  the  right  of  Carascosa's  division  towards 
Guastalla.  On  the  21st  he  crossed  the  Enza,  marched 
through  Sacca,  and  after  throwing  a  bridge  of  boats 
across  the  Po,  occupied  Casalmaggiore  on  the  further 
bank. 

A  movement  of  this  sort,  carried  out  by  a  small 
corps,  was  more  alarming  than  dangerous  for  the 
Viceroy,  nor  could  Joachim  be  expected  to  take  such 
a  risk  as  to  follow  it  with  his  whole  army.  So  little 
importance  did  he  attach  to  the  movement  that  he 
placed  a  detachment  of  Neapolitans  under  Nugent*s 
orders,  and  these,  notably  the  sailors  of  the  Royal  Guard, 
were  commended  by  the  Austrian  general  for  their 
behaviour  in  the  skirmishing  that  took  place,  and  for 
the  skill  with  which  they  carried  out  the  necessary 
bridging  operations. 

Nugent,  still  trying  to  drive  the  Neapolitans  into 
activity,  requested  Carascosa  to  support  his  demonstra- 
tion by  moving  his  division  towards  Borgoforte.  Had 
he  done  so  it  is  conceivable  that  the  Viceroy  might 
have  felt  compelled  to  weaken  his  hold  on  the  Mincio 
in  response  to  this  double  threat,  thus  affording  Belle- 
garde  an  opportunity  for  resuming  the  offensive  ;  but 


300  THE  NAPOLEONIC  EMPIRE  part  i 

Carascosa  merely  referred  the  matter  to  headquarters 
and  remained  passive.-^ 

Nugent's  restless  activity  determined  Prince  Eugene 
to  strike  a  blow  across  the  Po,  as  he  had  already  struck 
a  blow  across  the  Mincio.  The  Viceroy  was  inspired 
by  a  very  clear  understanding  of  that  first  principle  of 
the  military  art  that  makes  an  offensive  movement  the 
soundest  form  of  defence  ;  ^  he  showed  a  keen  intuition 
of  what  risks  his  position,  that  of  the  Empire,  and  his 
adversaries'  abilities,  called  on  him  to  take. 

Prince  Eugene  made  great  show  of  activity  along 
Bellegarde's  front,  at  Borgoforte  and  towards  Casal- 
maggiore,  but  he  directed  these  movements  in  such  a 
way  as  to  facilitate  the  rapid  concentration  of  some 
20,000  men  at  Piacenza  under  the  command  of  Grenier, 
one  of  the  most  capable  generals  in  the  Imperial 
service.^  Grenier's  orders  were  to  strike  quickly  and 
hard  at  the  Austrian  division  south  of  the  Po,  but, 
as  far  as  possible,  to  avoid  engaging  the  Neapolitans  ; 
these  orders  he  carried  out  vigorously  and  well.* 

On  the  2nd  of  March  Grenier,  driving  Nugent's 
detachments  before  him,  occupied  Parma,  where  he 
took  some  2000  prisoners.  Among  them  were  60 
Neapolitans,  and  these  the  French  commander  ordered 
to  be  released  and  sent  back  to  the  King.  On  the 
following  day  the  Viceroy  wrote  to  Joachim  informing 
him  that  any  of  his  troops  that  happened  to  be  taken 
would  be  released,  and  that  Grenier  had  orders  to 
march  to  Borgoforte,  to  which  movement  he  hoped  the 

^  Carascosa  to  Millet,  Feb.  23,  18 14,  Arch.  Nap.  Guerra,  xxv.  1057. 

^  Sir  John  Stuart's  MaiHa  expedition  is  another  excellent  illustration  of  precisely 
the  same  principle. 

2  Zucchi,  71  J  Brit.  State  Papers,  ii.  251-262;  Du  Casse,  Eugene,  x.  197. 
Carascosa  estimated  Grenier's  force  at  not  more  than  12,000,  Arch.  Nap.  xxv. 
1057. 

*  Eugene  to  Joachim,  March  3,  18 14,  Du  Casse,  Eugene,  x.  200. 


cHAP.x  MURAT'S  INCERTITUDES  301 

King  would  oifer  no  opposition.  It  is  difficult  to  say- 
precisely  what  this  extraordinary  communication  meant. 
It  was  in  one  sense  the  logical  outcome  of  the  negotia- 
tions that  had  been  proceeding  between  the  Viceroy 
and  Joachim,  yet  the  Prince's  move  and  intentions  were 
now  all  but  openly  hostile  ;  he  was  quite  ready  to  deal  the 
Neapolitans  a  decisive  blow  if  the  opportunity  should 
offer,  and  it  seems  probable  therefore  that  his  object 
was  that  this  dispatch  should  fall  into  Austrian  hands, 
or  at  all  events  that  the  current  of  events  should  sow 
irreparable  mistrust  between  his  two  opponents. 

Nugent  was  quite  unable  to  withstand  Grenier's 
advance,  for  the  Austrians  were  greatly  outnumbered 
and  Carascosa  would  not  help  them.  On  the  day  after 
capturing  Parma  the  French  general  pushed  one  of  his 
divisions,  under  Severoli,  to  Reggio,  Carascosa  and 
Nugent  falling  back  before  him.  With  his  two  re- 
maining divisions  he  turned  off  to  his  left  and  marched 
to  Guastalla.  There  he  effected  his  junction  with  the 
Viceroy,  who  had  assembled  a  considerable  force  at 
Borgoforte  to  protect  his  lieutenant's  march,  and  at 
the  same  time  to  threaten  Bellegarde  should  he  attempt 
a  forward  movement.  On  the  morning  of  the  4th  the 
success  of  Prince  Eugene's  operations  south  of  the  Po 
was  assured,  and  late  that  same  night  he  was  back  again 
at  Volta,  the  central  point  of  the  line  of  the  Mincio, 
prepared  to  face  Bellegarde  in  full  force. 

Grenier's  march  was  a  hazardous  but  brilliantly  con- 
ceived operation  ;  it  must  be  realized  that  its  success  de- 
pended on  Grenier's  retreat  being  not  back  to  Piacenza 
but  forward  to  Borgoforte.  Had  Grenier  been  met  on 
the  Enza  by  the  whole  Neapolitan  army  his  retreat 
must  have  been  by  Piacenza,  and  Bellegarde  would 
have  had  ample  warning  and  time  to  strike  at  the  line  of 


302  THE  NAPOLEONIC  EMPIRE  part  i 

the  Mincio  before  the  Viceroy's  detached  three  divisions 
could  have  marched  back  again  by  Piacenza  and 
Cremona.  As  it  was,  Prince  Eugene's  movements  at 
Borgoforte  and  Guastalla  threatened  the  line  of  the 
Enza  and  at  the  same  time  opened  his  lieutenant's 
retreat  to  the  point  where  his  presence  was  immedi- 
ately required,  that  is  to  the  line  of  the  Mincio.  It 
was  a  very  bold  but  masterly  movement,  and  entirely 
successful. 

Grenier's  march  had  been  executed  only  just  in  time 
to  avoid  Neapolitan  resistance,  for  on  the  3rd  of 
March  an  incident  occurred  that  brought  Joachim  to  a 
strong  resolution.  On  that  day  he  received  an  auto- 
graph letter  from  the  Emperor  of  Austria  that  con- 
tained the  long-delayed,  long-hoped-for  ratification  of 
the  Austro-Neapolitan  treaty  of  alliance.  He  at  once 
decided,  for  the  second  time,  to  open  hostilities  in 
earnest,  and  on  the  5  th  of  March  he  wrote  to  the 
Viceroy  announcing  that  his  troops  would  enter  on 
active  operations. 

Grenier,  having  joined  Prince  Eugene  with  the  bulk 
of  his  troops,  had  left  Severoli  with  a  weak  division  at 
Reggio.  In  front  of  him  was  a  considerable  force, 
comprising  Nugent's,  Carascosa's,  and  D'  Ambrosio's 
divisions,  covering  Modena.  It  was  not  long  before 
Nugent  discovered  that  Grenier  with  the  main  body 
of  the  enemy  was  no  longer  in  front  of  him.  He 
promptly  decided  to  resume  the  offensive  and  attack 
Reggio. 

On  the  morning  of  the  7  th  of  March  Nugent  got  into 
action,  a  Neapolitan  brigade  under  G.  Pepe  supporting 
him.  From  the  headquarters  at  Modena,  fifteen  miles 
away,  Joachim  sent  orders  to  the  Austrian  general  not 
to  engage  ;  he  followed  in  person.     When  the   King 


CHAP.  X  MURAT'S  INCERTITUDES  303 

arrived  in  front  of  Reggio,  he  found  not  only  that  his 
orders  had  been  disregarded,  but  that  his  generals  had 
been  gradually  drawn  into  supporting  Nugent's  move- 
ments. The  Franco -Italians,  heavily  outnumbered, 
had  been  forced  from  their  outlying  positions  and  were 
now  surrounded  and  at  a  great  disadvantage,  owing 
to  Severoli's  having  been  dangerously  wounded.  An 
hour's  truce  was  agreed  on,  and  the  King,  taking 
advantage  of  this,  arranged  that  the  Imperial  troops 
should  surrender  Reggio,  but  be  free  to  retreat  wher- 
ever they  liked.  It  was  the  universal  opinion  in  both 
armies  that  only  Joachim's  arrival  saved  the  French 
division  from  capture  or  destruction.  In  the  engage- 
ment the  Austrians  had  suffered  about  300  casualties, 
the  Neapolitans  had  36  killed  and  85  wounded. 

Joachim  now  established  his  headquarters  at  Reggio 
once  more,  and  the  Austro- Neapolitan  outposts  were 
pushed  out  towards  Piacenza,  gradually  reoccupying 
the  ground  from  which  Grenier  had  driven  them. 

The  extraordinary  fluctuations  and  uncertainty  of 
the  King's  policy,  the  anomaly  whereby  the  Italian 
generals  and  soldiers  alongside  of  whom  they  had  been 
used  to  fight  were  now  their  opponents  and  the 
detested  Austrians  their  friends,  the  contradictory 
orders  so  often  received,  the  indubitable  fact  that 
Joachim's  conduct  was  as  dangerous  as  it  was  deceitful, 
had  shaken  the  confidence  of  his  generals.  Their  long 
and  trying  inaction  in  front  of  the  enemy  had  given 
them  an  opportunity  for  indulging  in  the  most  irre- 
pressible of  the  sins  to  which  Neapolitan  flesh  is  heir 
to — that  of  intriguing.  Several  of  them,  chief  of  whom 
was  G.  Pepe,  were  ardent  nationalists ;  many  had 
vague  aspirations  for  a  united  Italy  ;  nearly  all  were 
animated  with  jealousy  towards  the  few  French  officers 


304  THE  NAPOLEONIC  EMPIRE  part  i 

whom  the  King  had  retained  in  his  employment  ;  with 
scarcely  an  exception  they  were  ready  and  anxious  for 
any  change  that  might  result  in  personal  advantage. 
They  therefore  started  an  intrigue.  The  plot  had 
for  its  object  the  forcing  of  a  constitution  from  the 
King,  and  it  is  possible,  if  Pepe's  own  statements  on  the 
subject  are  accepted  at  face  value,  that  he  was  the  only  one 
of  the  generals  who  was  thoroughly  sincere  in  the  idea 
and  prepared  to  carry  it  out  at  all  costs.  From  early 
boyhood  he  had  been  an  ardent  republican.  With  his 
brother  Florestano  he  had  participated  in  the  revolution 
of  1799,  ^^^^  ^^^  later  been  engaged  in  intrigues  against 
the  Bourbons  and  suffered  imprisonment.  He  now 
became  particularly  active  in  promoting  an  address  to 
the  King  calling  on  him  to  grant  Naples  a  constitution. 

But  Pepe  was  not  yet  sufficiently  influential  in  the 
army  to  carry  matters  his  own  way.  The  generals 
hung  back,  as  yet,  from  extreme  courses  ;  the  King 
received  their  petition  and  promised  to  consider  it. 
Instead  of  granting  a  constitution,  however,  he  won  over 
the  two  most  influential  of  the  intriguing  officers  by 
conferring  on  them  personal  favours.  They  probably 
appreciated  these  no  less  than  they  would  have  prized 
the  public  advantages  which  the  King  showed  no  inclina- 
tion for.  Carascosa  and  Pignatelli-Strongoli  received 
various  benefits  from  the  King,  grand  crosses  of  the 
Order  of  the  Two  Sicilies,  a  command  in  the  Royal 
Guards,  and  such-like  matters,  and  Pepe,  finding  sup- 
port weakening,  had,  for  a  while,  to  subside. 

But  if  Joachim's  hand  could  not  yet  be  forced  in 
the  matter  of  a  constitution,  there  was  another  matter 
that  equally,  and  with  perhaps  greater  propriety,  exercised 
his  generals,  and  to  which  they  now  turned  their  atten- 
tion,— that  of  the  conduct  of  the  campaign.     Foiled 


CHAP.  X  MURAT'S  INCERTITUDES  305 

in  their  constitutional  endeavours,  they  petitioned 
Joachim  to  call  a  council  of  war,  and  the  King,  either 
from  good -nature  or  from  necessity,  endured  this 
flagrant  breach  of  discipline,  though  he  did  not  accede 
to  their  wishes.  This  occurred,  in  all  probability, 
immediately  before  the  engagement  at  Reggio  ;  a  few 
days  later  a  new  turn  was  given  to  the  situation  by  the 
arrival  at  headquarters  of  Lord  William  Bentinck. 

The  representative  of  Great  Britain  in  the  Medi- 
terranean had  remained  in  Naples  for  several  days  at  the 
time  of  the  conclusion  of  the  armistice,  and  it  is  instructive 
to  note  what  his  impressions  then  were  ;  for  Bentinck, 
whatever  his  limitations  and  failings,  was  a  man  whose 
honesty  of  purpose  made  him  incapable  of  stating  that 
which  he  did  not  believe.  From  Joachim's  capital  he 
wrote  to  Castlereagh  on  the  6  th  of  February  setting 
forth  his  views  on  various  aspects  of  the  Italian  question. 
As  to  Sicily  he  was  under  no  illusion,  and  recognised 
that  the  constitution  of  the  island  would  not  last  longer 
than  the  British  protectorate.  However  hostile  to 
Joachim  Bentinck  might  be,  he  was  strongly  impressed 
with  the  universal  dismay  felt  at  Naples  at  the  thought 
of  a  return  of  the  Bourbons,  and  frankly  wrote  to 
Castlereagh  :  *'  It  is  not  easy  to  conceive  the  terror 
universally  felt  at  the  unforgiving  temper  of  their 
Majesties."  His  hope  appears  to  have  been  that  the 
Bourbon  government  in  Sicily,  which,  under  British 
protection,  had  become  a  constitutional  state,  might  be 
"...  not  only  the  model  but  the  instrument  of 
Italian  independence."  ^ 

Those  words,  the  train  of  thought  they  reveal,  the 
political  propaganda  that  had  been  pushed  among  certain 
masonic    and    other   circles  at   Naples,   all   these  were 

^  Castlereagh,  Corr.  ix.  239. 
VOL.  I  X 


3o6  THE  NAPOLEONIC  EMPIRE  parti 

influences  that  were  plain  to  Joachim,  as  they  were 
plain  to  all  who  knew  what  was  passing  behind  the 
scenes.  Bentinck*s  character  was  far  too  direct  to 
conceal  his  sympathies  and  sentiments,  and  it  is  small 
wonder  if  his  official  friendship  alarmed  the  King  of 
Naples  scarcely  less  than  his  old-time  hostility.  The 
Anglo  -  Sicilian  expedition  now  starting  for  northern 
Italy  to  assist  in  the  campaign  against  the  Viceroy 
proved  a  consistent  sequel  to  the  whole  of  Bentinck's 
policy. 

That  expedition,  comprising  some  14,000  Anglo- 
Sicilian  troops,  left  Palermo  for  Leghorn  at  the  end  of 
February  and  beginning  of  March.  Both  before  the 
departure  of  this  expedition  and  after  its  landing,  pro- 
clamations were  addressed  to  the  Sicilian  troops  by  the 
Hereditary  Prince  in  which  they  were  reminded  that  the 
Bourbon  claim  to  the  throne  of  Naples  was  not  aban- 
doned, and  that  the  Neapolitans  were  their  brethren. 
This  was  the  more  provocative  for  two  reasons,  one 
that  the  chief  command  was  being  directly  exercised 
by  Bentinck,  the  other  that  Leghorn,  where  the  Anglo- 
Sicilians  disembarked  on  the  13th  of  March,  was  no 
longer  under  the  French  flag,  but  in  peaceful  possession 
of  the  Neapolitans.  As  though  to  show  that  not  only 
Sicily  but  also  Great  Britain  was  hostile  to  the  avowed 
policy  of  Joachim,  Bentinck  himself  issued  a  proclama- 
tion at  Leghorn  in  the  following  terms  :• — 

Italians — Great  Britain  has  landed  her  troops  on  your 
coasts  ;  she  offers  you  her  assistance  in  order  to  rescue  you 
from  the  iron  yoke  of  Bonaparte.  .  .  . 

After  reviewing  the  national  uprisings  of  Europe  he 
continued  : — 

...  Is  then  Italy  alone  to  remain  under  the  yoke  ?     Shall 


cHAP.x  MURAT'S  INCERTITUDES  307 

Italians  alone  contend  against  Italians  in  favour  of  a  Tyrant,  and 
for  the  thraldom  of  their  country  ?  Italians,  hesitate  no  longer ; 
be  Italians  and  let  Italy  in  arms  be  convinced  that  the  great 
cause  of  the  country  is  in  her  hands. 

Warriors  of  Italy  !  you  are  not  invited  to  join  us  ;  but  you 
are  invited  to  vindicate  your  own  rights  and  to  be  free. 

Only  call  and  we  will  hasten  to  your  relief ;  and  then  Italy 
by  our  united  efforts  will  become  what  she  was  in  her  most 
prosperous  periods,  and  what  Spain  now  is.  Bentinck.^ 

Thus  the  Anglo-Sicilian  expedition,  which  was  in- 
tended to  co-operate  with  the  allied  Austrian  and 
Neapolitan  armies  by  virtue  of  a  treaty  with  the  one 
Power  and  an  armistice  with  the  other,  arrived  on  the 
scene  heralded  by  declarations  that  openly  avowed 
claims  hostile  to  those  of  the  King  of  Naples,  and  con- 
trary to  those  of  the  Emperor  of  Austria.  Nor  did 
Bentinck's  unconciliatory  attitude  contrast  favourably 
with  that  of  Joachim. 

The  King  of  Naples  was  anxious  to  propitiate  Great 
Britain,  and  however  much  it  cost  him  to  have  the 
Anglo  -  Sicilians  disembark  on  territory  his  troops 
already  occupied,  he  declared  to  Count  Mier  that  on 
Bentinck's  arrival  at  Leghorn  it  would  not  be  his  fault 
if  everything  in  dispute  between  them  was  not  settled 
amicably.  But  an  amicable  settlement  depends  on  a 
friendly  spirit  being  displayed  by  both  parties,  and 
Bentinck  was  far  from  showing  himself  ready  to  meet 
the  King  half-way.  He  was  irritated  at  finding  the 
Neapolitan  flag  flying  throughout  Tuscany,  and  at  the  idea 
that  perhaps  Joachim  would  succeed  in  his  ambition  of 
forming  an  Itahan  State.  At  all  events  he  left  Leghorn 
on  the  13th  of  March,  and  arrived  at  Reggio  two  days 
later,  and  by  the  course  he  adopted  there,  he  very  nearly 

1  Morning  Chronicle,  Feb.  12,  1815. 


3o8  THE  NAPOLEONIC  EMPIRE  parti 

succeeded  in  driving  Joachim  back  into  the  arms  of 
Napoleon. 

The  King  of  Naples  received  the  British  envoy  with 
every  outward  show  of  courtesy,  nay  more,  went  out  of 
his  way  to  please  him.^  Pepe's  brigade  was  passed  in 
review  in  his  honour,  and  every  compliment  and  attention 
shown  him.  But  Bentinck  now  knew  that  communica- 
tions had  passed  between  Joachim  and  the  Viceroy, 
while  Nugent  and  the  Austrian  officers  indignantly 
told  him  of  the  reiterated  refusals  of  the  Neapolitans 
to  march  against  the  French,  of  Grenier's  release  of  his 
Neapolitan  prisoners,  of  Severoli's  escape  from  Reggio. 
Although  the  nature  of  Joachim's  communications  with 
Prince  Eugene  was  unknown,  it  was  sufficiently  evident 
that  they  could  not  be  inspired  by  a  desire  to  promote 
the  interests  of  the  Allies. 

Unmoved  by  the  blandishments  of  the  King,  Bentinck 
took  up  an  attitude  blunt  in  his  presence,  all  but  openly 
hostile  out  of  it.  He  frankly  avowed  his  detestation  of 
Joachim  to  all  who  cared  to  listen,  and  openly  described 
him  as  a  counterpart  of  Bernadotte.  To  Bellegarde  he 
wrote  that  Joachim  was  not  fulfilling  his  obligations  : — 

...  Is  it  not  the  language  of  all  his  officers  and  of  himself 
that  all  Italy  should  be  united,  and  that  he  should  be  the  chief 
of  Italian  independence  ?  ...  Is  there  any  man  in  Italy,  is 
there  any  man  or  officer  in  the  Austrian  army  south  of  the  Po, 
has  your  Excellency,  or  have  I  myself,  any  confidence  whatever 
in  his  sincerity  ?  Do  not  all  believe  that  his  sole  object  is  to 
gain  time  ?  ^ 

Two  questions  were  the  chief  object  of  discussion 
between  Joachim  and  Bentinck :  that  of  the  occupation 

1  " .  .  .  se  mit  en  coquetterie  pour  lui  plaire."  Mier  to  Metternich,  Helfert, 
Konigin  Karolina,  574. 

2  Brit.  State  Papers,  1814-1815,  ii.  237. 


cHAP.x  MURAT'S  INCERTITUDES  309 

of  Tuscany  and  that  of  the  King's  military  action. 
The  King  offered  to  evacuate  Tuscany  in  favour 
of  the  Anglo- Sicihans,  but  demanded  in  return  that 
Bentinck  should  sign  a  treaty  with  him  similar  to  the 
Austrian  treaty.  Bentinck  declined,  and  insisted  that 
the  Neapolitan  troops  must  be  immediately  withdrawn 
from  Tuscany,  threatening,  in  case  of  refusal,  to 
drive  them  out  and  to  invade  Naples  in  the  name  of 
King  Ferdinand.  Bentinck,  in  fact,  completely  lost 
sight  of  the  point  that  the  chief  object  of  his  negotiation 
should  have  been  to  secure  the  Neapolitan  co-operation 
against  the  Viceroy,  instead  of  which  he  was  assuming 
an  attitude  that  could  not  but  alarm  Joachim  and  make 
him  hang  back  even  more  than  he  had  hitherto.  So 
far  did  he  carry  his  disregard  for  Joachim's  susceptibilities 
that  he  avoided  addressing  him  in  the  forms  usual  with 
royalty  and  wore  the  Sicilian  red  cockade  in  his  hat. 

The  untactful  attitude  of  Bentinck  made  a  profound 
impression  on  the  King's  uneasy  conscience  and  suspicious 
temperament  ;  he  came  to  the  conclusion  that  he  was 
*'  already  sacrificed."  ^  In  despair,  and  notwithstanding 
the  news  of  the  reverses  that  were  now  overtaking  the 
Emperor  in  France,  he  turned  once  more  to  the  Viceroy 
for  help. 

On  the  20th  of  March  Bentinck  left  Reggio  for 
Verona,  where  he  intended  to  confer  with  Bellegarde; 
he  had  accomplished  less  than  nothing,  for  at  the  very 
time  he  was  leaving  the  Neapolitan  headquarters, 
clandestine  negotiations  with  the  French  camp  were 
resumed  by  Joachim.  It  so  happened  that  his  renewed 
desire  to  treat  coincided  with  the  arrival  of  a  dispatch 
from  Napoleon  to  the  Viceroy  in  which  the  Prince  was 
ordered    to    reopen    negotiations.     This    dispatch   had 

1  Mier  to  Metternich,  March  20,  18 14,  Helfert,  Murat,  151. 


310  THE  NAPOLEONIC  EMPIRE  parti 

been  written  by  Napoleon  three  days  after  his  defeat  at 
Laon,  and  shortly  after  receiving  Joachim's  letter  of 
the  I  St  or  2nd  of  March  already  given.  The  Emperor 
wrote  as  follows  : — 

My  Son — I  send  you  copy  of  a  most  extraordinary  letter  I 
have  received  from  the  King  of  Naples.  .  .  .  Send  an  agent 
to  this  extraordinary  traitor,  and  make  a  treaty  with  him  in  my 
name.  Don't  touch  either  Piedmont  or  Genoa.  .  .  .  Later 
we  shall  do  what  we  choose,  for,  in  the  face  of  such  ingratitude 
and  such  circumstances,  nothing  can  be  binding.^ 

The  Viceroy  received  this  letter  on  the  19th  of 
March,  and  at  the  very  same  time  one  from  Joachim 
dated  the  i8th, — that  is  two  days  before  Bentinck  left 
Reggio, — in  which  the  King  hinted  clearly  that  he  was 
open  to  negotiate.  Under  these  circumstances  the 
Viceroy  acted  at  once.  He  wrote  to  Joachim  that  he 
had  just  received  full  powers  from  the  Emperor  and 
was  prepared  to  conclude  a  treaty  ;  he  demanded  that 
in  the  meanwhile  hostilities  should  be  suspended.  He 
had  no  other  intention  than  to  amuse  Joachim  and  gain 
time. 

These  negotiations  led  to  no  more  result  than  those 
of  a  month  earlier.  General  Zucchi,  Commandant  of 
Mantua,  made  the  necessary  arrangements,  and  an 
interview  between  him  and  General  Carascosa  took 
place.  This  was  followed  by  one  between  the  Viceroy, 
accompanied  by  Zucchi,  and  Livron,  representing 
Joachim.  This  last  interview  took  place  on  the  28th 
or  29  th  of  March,  when  Joachim's  relations  with  the 
Austrians  and  British  were  already  entering  a  new 
phase.  As  had  happened  before,  the  sincerity  of  the 
two  parties  was  so  slight,  their  views  and  ambitions  so 

1  Napoleon  to  Eugene,  March  12,  1814,  Du  Casse,  Eugene,  x.  215. 


cHAP.x  MURAT'S  INCERTITUDES  311 

divergent,  that  nothing  came  of  the  interviews  save  a 
certain  amount  of  intriguing  among  the  Neapolitan  and 
Italian  generals. 

The  chief  effect  of  Joachim's  negotiations  with 
Prince  Eugene  during  the  last  ten  days  of  March  was 
unpremeditated  ;  they  greatly  alarmed  Bellegarde,  whose 
army  was  in  a  deplorable  condition  through  sickness, 
and  induced  him  to  make  a  strong  effort  to  maintain- 
amicable  relations.  Count  Mier  had  deeply  resented 
Bentinck's  gruff  intrusion  on  his  diplomatic  labours ; 
Bellegarde  was  aghast  at  the  prospect  of  having  to  face 
a  joint  attack  from  the  Viceroy  and  the  King.  Queen 
Caroline,  too,  feared  lest  at  the  last  minute,  just  when 
the  cause  of  the  Allies  appeared  more  certain  than  ever 
to  triumph,  Joachim  would  impetuously  plunge  into 
some  fatal  course  ;  she  sent  S.  Teodoro  and  Mosbourg 
from  Naples  to  press  her  advice  on  him. 

Mier's  efforts  at  Joachim's  headquarters  to  keep  the 
King  in  a  friendly  disposition  were  supported  from 
Verona,  where  Bentinck  had  joined  Bellegarde.  "  There 
he  discussed  matters  with  the  Austrian  commander  and 
the  British  officer  on  his  staff.  Sir  Robert  Wilson, 
who  was  as  distinguished  for  his  charm  of  manner  as 
Bentinck  was  for  his  bluntness.  In  every  quarter 
opinion  was  against  Bentinck.  It  was  not  very  material 
to  the  Austrians  whether  the  Neapolitans  or  the  British 
momentarily  controlled  Tuscany  ;  what  they  wanted  in 
the  first  place  was  that  Murat  should  be  persuaded  by 
some  means  or  other  to  march  his  army  on  Piacenza. 
That  done,  the  line  of  the  Mincio  must  fall,  and  Prince 
Eugene  must  retreat  to  the  Alps.  The  Austrian  view 
was  entirely  supported  by  Sir  Robert  Wilson  at  Verona, 
and  Castlereagh  was  writing  dispatches  from  France 
to  Bentinck  enjoining  on  him  a  conciliatory  attitude 


312  THE  NAPOLEONIC  EMPIRE  parti 

towards  Murat  and  the  subordination  of  his  operations 
to  Bellegarde's. 

"  Bentinck  was  profoundly  displeased  at  the  situa- 
tion ;  he  was  angered  at  finding  that  Prince  Eugene 
with  his  small  army  of  conscripts  was  successfully  hold- 
ing Lombardy  against  the  much  larger  forces  of  the 
Allies.  He  ascribed  the  failure  to  the  adoption  of  the 
Austrian  policy,  instead  of  that  on  which  he  had  set  his 
heart.  Yet  the  unanimity  of  opinion  against  him,  the 
representations  of  Bellegarde  and  Wilson,  the  tenor  of 
his  instructions,  all  warned  him  that  he  had  gone  very 
far.  He  appears  to  have  realized  that  he  was  no  longer 
acting  in  the  spirit  of  his  instructions,  and  on  returning 
to  the  Neapolitan  headquarters,  now  at  Bologna,  he 
took  Wilson  with  him. 

"  All  felt  that  an  understanding  of  some  sort  must  be 
come  to.  Murat  now  put  forward  a  new  proposal  :  he 
offered  to  evacuate  Tuscany  if  Great  Britain  would 
sign  peace  ;  this  was  immediately  rejected  by  Wilson. 
On  the  2nd  of  April  a  note  was  drawn  up  by  Bentinck 
and  presented  to  Gallo.  In  this  document  are  clear 
indications  that  the  British  agent  felt  that  he  must 
abandon  the  position  he  had  taken  up  at  Reggio, 
though  it  can  hardly  be  described  as  conciliatory.  He 
formally  declared  that  Great  Britain  approved  the 
Austro-Neapolitan  treaty,  and  that  the  signature  of  a 
treaty  of  peace  was  declined  merely  out  of  consideration 
for  the  just  claims  of  the  allied  Sicilian  Government. 
He  invited  the  Neapolitan  Government  to  consider  the 
question  of  compensation  to  King  Ferdinand,  with  a 
view  to  arriving  at  a  settlement.  But  in  addition  to 
these  official  views,  Bentinck  stated  a  personal  opinion. 
He  complained  that  the  Neapolitan  Government  had 
not  participated    in    the  military  operations,  and    that 


cHAP.x  MURAT'S  INCERTITUDES  313 

suspicious  negotiations  had  taken  place  with  the  French 
camp  ;  he  also  protested  against  the  apparent  project  of 
permanent  occupation  of  the  territory  overrun  by  the 
Neapolitan  army.  He  concluded  by  recommending, 
not  demanding,  the  cession  of  part  of  Tuscany  to 
facilitate  the  British  operations,  a  prompt  co-operation 
with  the  Austrians,  and  the  renunciation  of  all  projects 
of  political  aggrandizement."  ^ 

This  note  represented  a  considerable  change  in 
Bentinck's  attitude,  yet  it  was  far  from  satisfactory  to 
Joachim.  The  Duke  di  Gallo  politely  parried  it  by 
referring  to  negotiations  that  had  taken  place  between 
Prince  Cariati  and  Lord  Castlereagh  at  Chalons.  On 
this  Bentinck  decided  to  rejoin  his  troops  and  operate 
in  the  direction  of  Genoa,  leaving  to  the  Austrians  and 
Sir  Robert  Wilson  the  charge  of  all  further  arrange- 
ments with  the  King  of  Naples. 

Every  courier  from  France  now  brought  news  that 
reassured  Joachim  as  to  the  intentions  of  the  Allies, 
that  strengthened  the  conviction  that  Napoleon^s  was  a 
lost  cause.  The  statesmen  of  the  Allies  assembled  at 
Chaumont  had  decided  that  in  view  of  existing  circum- 
stances it  was  better  that  the  Austrian  treaty  with 
Naples  should  be  indorsed  with  the  formal  adhesion 
of  the  Powers.  Metternich  was  prepared  to  admit 
that  the  long -delayed  ratification  of  the  treaty  by 
the  Emperor  Francis  constituted  a  partial  excuse  for 
the  non-activity  of  Joachim  ;  yet  now  that  every 
guarantee  was  offered  by  the  Powers,  the  time  had 
arrived  when  further  hesitation  would  not  be  tolerated. 
To  remove  some  of  the  King's  apprehensions,  the  Czar 
sent  General  Balatscheif  to  Joachim's  headquarters 
with  full   powers  to  concur  in  the  Austro-Neapolitan 

1  Johnston,  Bentinck  and  Murat,  Er.g.  Hist.  Rev.  xix.  277. 


314  THE  NAPOLEONIC  EMPIRE  parti 

treaty,  and  Castlereagh,  doubtless  in  accord  with 
Metternich,  wrote  to  Bentinck  in  somewhat  severe 
terms  instructing  him  to  subordinate  himself,  especially 
in  matters  concerning  relations  with  the  Allied  Powers, 
to  Field  -  Marshal  Bellegarde.  He  thought  that  it 
might  be  best  for  the  Anglo-Sicilian  force  to  be  incor- 
porated with  the  Neapolitans,  and  added,  "  It  is  in  vain 
to  hope  for  any  useful  concert  from  Murat  whilst  a 
system  of  menace  prevails  .  .  .  with  respect  to  his 
title  at  Naples.  .  .  ."  i 

As  a  result  of  the  clearly  expressed  intentions  of  the 
Allied  Powers  a  conference  was  held  on  the  yth  of 
April  at  Rovere  on  the  Po,  just  east  of  Mantua.  This 
was  attended  by  Field-Marshal  Bellegarde,  the  King  of 
Naples,  Count  Mier,  and  Sir  R.  Wilson.  Joachim  was 
now  reassured  as  to  the  intentions  of  Austria  and  Great 
Britain  ;  he  also  knew  that  Schwarzenberg  had  beaten 
Napoleon  at  Arcis-sur-Aube  and  was  marching  on  Paris. 
Under  these  circumstances  he  was  prepared  to  accede 
to  any  reasonable  proposal.  It  was  therefore  decided 
that  the  Anglo-Sicilians  should  evacuate  Tuscany  and 
confine  their  operations  to  the  Genoese  territory,  and 
that  the  Neapolitan  army  should  at  once  advance  on 
Piacenza.  These  decisions  were  put  into  immediate 
execution. 

After  the  engagement  at  Reggio  the  Austro-Neapolitan 
outposts  had  been  pushed  as  far  as  the  line  of  the  Taro, 
beyond  which  they  had  not  ventured.  Here  Nugent, 
always  as  near  to  the  enemy  as  he  could  get,  fixed  his 
quarters,  and  here,  towards  the  end  of  March,  a  curious 
incident  occurred  that  must  now  be  related. 

In  his  struggle  against  the  toils  that  the  Allies  were 
fasticlosing  about  him.  Napoleon,  though  never  abandon- 

1  Castlereagh  to  Bentinck,  April  3,  18 14,  Brit.  State  Papers^  1814-1815,  315. 


CHAP.x  MURAT'S  INCERTITUDES  315 

ing  sufficient  to  obtain  peace,  had  yet,  one  by  one,  sur- 
rendered most  of  the  objects  of  his  ambitions.  Driven 
from  Spain,  he  had  released  Ferdinand  VII.,  nearly 
driven  from  Italy,  his  pretensions  as  the  successor  of 
Charlemagne  vanished,  and  he  released  the  Pope.  "  To 
embarrass  him  [the  King  of  Naples]  I  have  given 
orders  that  the  Pope  should  be  sent  to  the  outposts 
by  way  of  Piacenza  and  Parma,"  he  wrote  to  the 
Viceroy.^ 

This  sudden  appearance  of  a  new  factor  in  Italian 
politics  was  a  very  real  embarrassment  to  the  King.  The 
Pope  was,  within  certain  bounds,  the  greatest  power  in 
Italy  ;  Neapolitans  who  would  at  a  word  change  their 
allegiance  from  Ferdinand  to  Joachim  or  from  Joachim 
to  Ferdinand  were  unswerving  in  their  devotion  to  the 
Head  of  the  Church  ;  Pius  was  the  chief  priest  of  a 
religion  that  was  blindly  obeyed  by  Joachim's  subjects, 
and  that  had  never  consecrated  his  tenure  of  the 
throne  ;  he  claimed  temporal  as  well  as  spiritual 
dominion  over  a  great  part  of  the  territory  now  occu- 
pied by  the  Neapolitan  army, — territory  annexed  to 
the  French  Empire,  but  that  on  its  fall  was  claimed  in 
reversion  by  its  former  owner. 

On  the  unexpected  news  reaching  him  that  Pius  VII. 
had  set  out  from  Piacenza  for  the  Neapolitan  outposts 
Joachim  sent  orders  to  Nugent  to  detain  him  on  the 
further  side  of  the  Taro.  The  Austrian  general  did 
precisely  the  contrary  of  what  the  King  ordered  ;  he 
received  the  Pope  with  full  military  honours,  treated 
him  with  the  utmost  respect,  provided  him  with  a  suit- 
able escort,  and  promptly  sent  him  on  his  way  towards 
Parma.  Then  the  King  sent  Carascosa  from  Bologna, 
where  headquarters  then  were,  to  stop  the  Pope  from 

^  Napoleon  to  Eugene,  March  12,  18 14,  Du  Casse,  Eugene,  x.  216. 


3i6  THE  NAPOLEONIC  EMPIRE  parti 

proceeding  beyond  Reggio.  The  Neapolitan  general 
informed  Pius  that  he  must  break  his  journey  at  that 
city,  as  there  were  no  post-horses  obtainable ;  but 
strong  in  the  rectitude  of  his  cause,  strong  in  the 
attraction  of  Rome  that  called  him,  strong  in  the 
crowds  that  knelt  at  his  passage  and  invoked  his 
blessing,  the  Pope  replied  :  "  Then  I  will  pursue  my 
way  on  foot,  and  God  will  give  me  strength."  ^ 

There  was  no  stopping  so  resolute  a  traveller,  and 
if  Napoleon  had  ventured  to  arrest  Pius,  that  was  an 
enterprise  his  lieutenant  might  not  safely  contemplate. 
The  Pope  continued  his  journey  in  spite  of  Carascosa's 
efforts,  and  at  his  next  stopping- place,  Modena,  was 
met  by  another  emissary  of  the  King,  the  Duke  di 
Gallo.  The  King  of  Naples'  Minister  for  Foreign 
Affairs  had  mission  to  discuss  with  the  Pope  certain 
political  questions  that  his  return  involved  ;  he  met 
with  no  better  success  than  Carascosa,  however,  for 
Pius  firmly  declined  all  discussion  until  such  time  as  he 
should  be  restored  to  his  capital,  his  throne,  and  his 
government,  and  be  able  to  speak  and  act  as  became 
him. 

Failing  in  these  attempts  at  negotiation,  Joachim 
took  perhaps  the  best  middle  course  that  safety  and 
ambition  might  jointly  dictate,  and  addressed  a  letter 
to  Pius,  in  which,  after  assuring  him  of  his  personal 
devotion,  he  stated  that  he  would  immediately  take 
every  step  to  place  him  in  possession  of  the  dominions 
of  which  he  had  been  deprived  when  he  left  Rome. 
This  meant  the  capital  and  two  adjoining  departments  ; 
it  left  entirely  out  of  account  Romagna  and  the  Marches 
with  the  two  important  cities  of  Bologna  and  Ancona, 
actually  in  the  possession  of  the  NeapoHtans. 

1   Colletta,  Storia,  ii.  183  ;  Du  Casse,  Eugene,  x.  233. 


cHAP.x  MURAT'S  INCERTITUDES  317 

At  Bologna  the  Pope  and  King  met.  Both  must 
have  recalled  their  earliest  relations  twelve  years  before, 
when  Joachim  was  General  Murat,  Commander-in-Chief 
of  the  army  of  the  French  Republic.  Extraordinary 
events,  in  which  both  had  played  great  parts,  had  filled 
the  pages  of  history  since  then,  and  as  they  met,  cover- 
ing their  antagonism  with  a  formal  veil  of  courtesy, 
each  must  have  felt  that  the  end  of  that  extraordinary 
cycle  of  events  was  not  yet  reached. 

This  interview  was  immediately  followed  by  the 
conference  at  Rovere,  already  related,  of  which  the 
result  was  the  adjustment  of  the  differences  between  Nea- 
politans, British,  and  Austrians,  and  the  arrangement 
that  the  King  of  Naples  should  march  on  Piacenza. 

That  advance  accordingly  took  place,  though  not 
without  some  further  slight  delay.  On  the  13  th  of 
April  Nugent  took  the  lead  and  crossed  the  Taro, 
supported  by  Pepe^s  brigade,  and  followed  by  the  whole 
army.  There  was  fighting  during  the  whole  day, 
especially  at  S.  Donino,  the  French  falling  back  steadily 
towards  Piacenza.  The  Austrians  bore  the  brunt  of  the 
fighting,  but  Pepe's  brigade  was  in  action,  and  its  com- 
mander earned  commendation.  Early  on  the  morning 
of  the  15th  the  advance  continued,  and  the  French  were 
driven  into  Piacenza,  Nugent  capturing  the  monastery 
of  San  Lazaro  after  some  heavy  fighting. 

Joachim,  though  present  with  the  army,  had  so  far 
not  taken  a  very  active  part  in  the  operations.  He  now 
ordered  headquarters  forward  to  a  small  house  close 
under  the  walls  of  the  city.  Piacenza  was  a  fortress  he 
had  attacked  once  before, — -in  the  year  1800,  when  the 
divisions  of  the  Army  of  Reserve  had  swept  down  into 
Italy  from  the  Great  St.  Bernard,  and  the  First  Consul 
had  marched  to  the  fields  of  Marengo.     He  had  found 


3i8  THE  NAPOLEONIC  EMPIRE  parti 

the  task  easier  to  perform  then  with  French  cavalry 
than  it  now  appeared  to  be  with  Austrian  infantry. 

The  King's  advance  on  Piacenza  had  coincided  with 
news  of  defeat  and  disaster  to  the  Imperial  arms,  though 
for  the  last  few  days  information  from  France  had 
totally  failed.  Where  the  armies  of  the  Allies,  where 
that  of  the  Emperor  had  vanished,  was  wrapped  in 
mystery.^  As  Joachim  paced  the  garden  of  the  house 
where  he  had  taken  up  his  quarters,  conferring  with 
an  engineer  officer.  General  Colletta,  dispatches  were 
brought  to  him.  He  took  them  in  person  from  the 
staff  officer,  opened  and  read  them.  Those  present 
watched  him,  and  saw  him  grow  pale.  He  then  turned 
quickly  away,  walking  in  an  agitated  and  nervous 
manner.  At  last  he  called  up  his  staff,  and  in  a 
disheartened  way  told  them  what  had  happened — that 
Paris  was  in  the  hands  of  the  Allies,  and  that  Napoleon 
had  abdicated.  He  was  utterly  dejected,  and  remained 
in  that  state  for  several  days. 

As  so  often  happens  in  the  affairs  of  life,  Joachim, 
now  brought  face  to  face  with  the  termination  of  the 
struggle,  found  himself  quite  differently  placed  from  what 
he  had  anticipated.  *'  I  am  here  alone  in  the  midst  of 
strangers,  I  have  to  conceal  all,  even  my  tears  !  "  he 
had  written  to  the  Emperor  six  weeks  earlier  ;  but 
now,  how  much  greater  was  his  isolation !  What 
friendship,  what  sympathy  could  he  look  for  in  any 
direction  ?  What  had  been  his  political  conduct  to 
friends,  to  allies,  to  enemies  ?  What  had  been  the 
military  achievements  of  the  brilliant  Joachim  Murat  ? 
He   had  been  dragged  into  action  at  the  heels  of  an 

1  A  dispatch  of  Castlereagh  was  written  from  Dijon  on  April  3rd  in  evidently 
complete  ignorance  of  the  fact  that  the  allied  armies  were  already  comfortably 
quartered  in  Paris. 


cHAP.x  MURAT'S  INCERTITUDES  319 

Austrian  brigadier  ;  he  had  incurred  the  well-founded 
distrust  of  Austria  and  Great  Britain  ;  he  had  earned 
the  hatred  and  contempt  of  France  and  of  Napoleon  ; 
he  had  forfeited  such  esteem  as  his  own  Neapolitans 
felt  for  him  ;  and  what  had  he  gained  ?  He  had  kept 
his  throne,  —  a  precarious  possession  compounded  of 
anxieties  and  remorse,  the  only  tottering  pinnacle  that 
remained  of  the  vast  edifice  of  Napoleon. 

The  Viceroy  and  Marshal  Bellegarde,  without  refer- 
ring to  the  King  of  Naples,  signed  a  military  convention 
at  Schiarino  Rizzeno  on  the  i6th  of  April  that  put  an 
end  to  military  operations  in  northern  Italy.  To  its 
terms  the  King  subsequently  acceded. 

Principal  Authorities  consulted 
MSS. 

Arch,  di  Stato,  Guerra,  xxv.  105 1  :  army  returns;  1054,  Corsican 
legion  incident  ;  1057,  campaign  of  18 14. 

Printed  Books 

Bianco,  Ultimi  a^v^enimenti ;  Brit.  State  Papers,  1 814-1 815;  Cantu, 
Cronistoria  ;  Carascosa,  Mems. ,-  Carrano,  Fita  di  G.  Pepe;  Castlereagh, 
Corr.  i  Cavaignac,  Mems.;  Colletta,  Storia ;  Consalvi,  Mems.;  De 
Dedem,  Mems.  ;  Desvernois,  Mems. ,-  Du  Casse,  Prince  Engine  ;  Fouche, 
Mems.  i  Helfert,  Konigin  Karolina ;  Helfert,  Murat ;  Johnston, 
Bentinck  and  Murat,  Eng.  Hist.  Re'v.  xix. ;  Macirone,  Interesting  Facts; 
Memorie  sulla  Condotta  ;  MoRis ani,  Ricordi ;  Morning  Chronicle  ;  Miner'va 
Napolitana;  Napoleon,  Corr. ;  Orloff,  Mems.;  Pepe,  Mems.;  Pigna- 
telli-Strongoli,  Memorie;  Planat  de  la  Faye,  Prince  Eugene; 
Savelli,  Legion  Corse;  Schoell,  Recueil ;  Weil,  Prince  Eugene; 
Zucchi,  Memorie. 


CHAPTER   XI 

CONGRESS    OF    VIENNA 

Bourbon  restoration  —  Reaction  in  Italy — Neapolitans  evacuate — 
Their  misconduct  —  Clerical  agitation  —  Insubordination  of 
generals  —  Carbonaro  revolt — Joachim  returns  to  Naples — 
State  of  kingdom  —  Armaments  —  Generals'  intrigue  with 
Bentinck — Petition  Joachim — Pepe  arrested — Feeling  against 
Joachim  —  Bentinck  and  Castlereagh  —  Court  festivities  at 
Naples — Resettlement  of  Europe — Congress  decided — Austria 
and  Naples  —  Talleyrand  and  Joachim  —  Death  of  Mary 
Caroline — The  Czar  and  a  Bourbon  restoration  —  Talleyrand 
opposes  Naples  —  Neuville's  mission — Fagan  recalled  from 
Naples  —  Wellington's  attitude  —  Congress  opens  —  Naples 
excluded — Joachim's  excitement  —  Metternich  intervenes — 
Joachim  appeals  to  England — Saxon  question — The  Marches 
— Hostility  of  clerics — Joachim  offers  the  Marches  for  recog- 
nition— Talleyrand's  obstinacy — Polignac's  mission — Joachim 
challenges  France — Metternich's  note — Elba  —  Napoleon's 
position — Correspondence  with  Naples — Countess  Walewska 
— Madame  Mere  and  Joachim — British  at  Naples — Princess 
of  Wales — Oxford  arrested — Napoleon  leaves  Elba — News  at 
Naples — Joachim's  assurances — Change  of  attitude — Joachim 
joins  the  army. 

Few  had  foreseen  that  Napoleon  would  prolong  his 
desperate  contest  with  combined  Europe  to  a  point  that 
would  involve  his  descent  from  the  throne.  His  fall 
meant  not  only  more  than  his  defeat,  but  something 
fundamentally  different.  Till  past  the  middle  of 
March,  Metternich,   whose   influence  in   such   a  crisis 

320 


CHAP.  XI  CONGRESS  OF  VIENNA  321 

would  have  been  decisive,  was  prepared  to  come  to 
terms  with  the  Emperor,  and  it  was  but  barely  two 
weeks  before  Napoleon's  abdication  that  a  Bourbon 
restoration  appeared  within  the  bounds  of  political 
probabilities.^  But  the  idea,  once  planted,  grew 
phenomenally  fast.  The  statesmen  of  the  Allied 
Powers  were  not  slow  to  realize  the  full  significance  of 
this  new  development,  and  perceived  that  they  had 
accomplished  more  than  the  defeat  of  Napoleon.  Not 
only  had  they  pulled  down  the  restless  conqueror  who 
had  carried  fire  and  sword  to  every  corner  of  Europe, 
but  also  such  of  the  principles  of  civil  equality  and  of 
political  freedom  that  had  survived  the  Republic  and 
been  carried  on  by  the  Empire.  It  was  immediately 
felt  that  the  restoration  of  the  Bourbons  meant  a  step 
back  towards  the  past. 

In  Italy  all  hopes  of  nationalization  vanished  with 
as  much  rapidity  as  might  have  the  smoke  from 
the  funeral  pyres  of  the  eloquent  proclamations, — 
Austrian,  British,  and  Neapolitan,  —  in  which  the 
Italians  were  called  on  to  rise  against  the  French 
tyranny  and  win  their  freedom.  Lombardy,  where 
more  than  once  an  independent  and  constitutional 
state  under  Eugene  Beauharnais  appeared  about  to 
come  into  existence,  was  occupied  by  Austria  ;  Pied- 
mont, with  the  addition  of  Genoa,  fell  to  the  King  of 
Sardinia ;  Tuscany  to  the  Grand  Duke.  Joachim 
unostentatiously  withdrew  his  troops  from  the  greater 
part  of  the  country  he  had  occupied.  On  the  28th  of 
April  he  concluded  a  military  convention  with  Belle- 
garde,  whereby  it  was  agreed  that  the  Austrians 
should  be  left  in  occupation  of  the  Duchies  and  lega- 
tions, while  the  Neapolitans  were  to  retain  possession 

1  De  VitroUes,  i.  128. 
VOL.  I  Y 


322  THE  NAPOLEONIC  EMPIRE  parti 

of  the  Marches,  including  Ancona,  Macerata,  and 
Fermo. 

Early  in  May  the  Neapolitan  evacuation  was  carried 
out,  much  to  the  relief  of  the  inhabitants.  The 
occupied  departments  had  been  denuded  of  money,  of 
provisions,  of  forage  by  the  successive  visitations  of 
French,  Austrians,  and  Neapolitans,  and  had  been 
thrown  into  a  state  of  great  ferment.  This  had  been 
especially  menacing  at  the  time  of  the  passage  of  the 
Pope,  by  many,  if  not  by  most  of  the  inhabitants, 
considered  their  legitimate  sovereign,  temporal  and 
spiritual.  The  Neapolitans  in  particular  had  shown 
disgracefully  bad  discipline.  Deserters  were  numerous, 
at  one  time  several  hundreds  passing  one  point  in  a 
few  days.  Murder  and  pillage  were  frequent,  and 
some  regiments  were  indeed  little  better  than  criminal 
associations.  The  garrison  of  Rome  gave  their  general 
much  cause  for  anxiety.  Lavauguyon  reported  to  the 
King  that  the  behaviour  of  his  soldiers  was  ferocious, 
undisciplined,  and  frightful. 

Of  all  the  provinces  he  had  overrun,  Joachim 
only  retained  possession  of  the  strip  of  Adriatic  coast- 
line that  ran  from  the  Neapolitan  border  to  the 
proximity  of  Bologna.  It  included  the  port  and 
fortress  of  Ancona,  and  it  gave  him  a  military  outlet 
into  the  valley  of  the  Po.  He  had  a  specious  claim  to 
it,  for  he  had  conquered  it  from  the  French  Empire  ; 
he  had  by  his  treaty  of  alliance  with  Austria  been 
assured  of  an  increase  of  territory,  and  his  military 
convention  with  Bellegarde  explicitly  assented  to  his 
present  occupation.  But  the  population  of  the  province 
was  not  content,  and  the  Papal  Government  claimed  a 
restoration  of  the  temporal  power  within  the  boundaries 
first  diminished  by  the  treaty  of  Tolentino  in  1797. 


CHAP.  XI  CONGRESS  OF  VIENNA  323 

Clerical  influence  soon  began  to  assert  itself,  and 
was  at  no  pains  to  disguise  its  hostility  to  the  intruding 
government.  From  the  Marches  the  agitation  spread 
into  the  Abruzzi.  On  the  3rd  of  May,  at  Borrano,  a 
small  village  near  Civitella  del  Tronto,  a  hermit  named 
Fra  Agostino,  of  the  suppressed  order  of  the  Minori, 
attended  a  religious  solemnity  and  inflamed  the  people 
by  seditious  rumours,  making  them  shout  :  *'  Viva 
Ferdinando  !  Mora  Gioacchino  !  "  At  Compli  near  by, 
two  days  later,  the  parish  priest  gave  out  that  Napoleon 
was  dead  and  that  Joachim  soon  would  be,  to  the  great 
agitation  of  his  congregation.  These  disturbances  were 
promptly  allayed  by  the  arrest  of  their  authors,  but 
served  to  show  the  sensitive  state  of  public  opinion. 

That  there  was  no  reliance  to  be  placed  in  Nea- 
politan popular  support  had,  indeed,  been  amply 
demonstrated  in  the  course  of  the  war.  A  revolu- 
tion had  nearly  been  organized  among  the  secret 
societies  that  had  recently  become  so  popular.  The 
system  of  making  a  masonic  or  other  lodge  the 
cementing  bond  of  the  provincial  militia  had  extended 
widely  since  its  introduction  in  Calabria  during  the 
reign  of  King  Joseph ;  it  had  in  fact  infected  both  the 
army  and  militia.  Lodges  of  all  sorts  were  now 
numerous,  especially  those  of  the  Carbonari.  Their 
meetings  became  the  focus  of  political  discussion — it 
might  in  a  limited  sense  be  said  of  national  regeneration. 
In  1812-1813  a  considerable  immigration  had  set  in 
from  Sicily  to  Naples,  and  exaggerated  reports  of  the 
constitutional  system  introduced  into  that  island  by 
Bentinck  became  the  principal  subject  of  discussion 
of  the  lodges.  The  agitation  took  on  a  liberal  and 
nationalistic  aspect,  and  the  Sicilian  influence  was 
exerted  to  turn  it  as  far  as  possible  into  an  instrument 


324  THE  NAPOLEONIC  EMPIRE  parti 

for  the  overthrow  of  Joachim.     In  this  Bentinck  and 
the  SiciHans  were  not  altogether  successful. 

The  Carbonari  first  caused  anxiety  to  the  Govern- 
ment while  the  King  was  with  the  Grande  Armee  in 
Russia  ;  Caroline  supported  Maghella  in  an  attempt  to 
put  down  their  lodges,  but  could  not  altogether  sup- 
press them.  On  the  return  of  Joachim,  the  Minister 
of  Police,  who  was  himself  in  close  touch  with  Italian 
nationalism  and  masonic  circles,  appears  to  have  shifted 
his  position.  He  seems  to  have  judged  the  constitu- 
tional and  national  spirit  strong  enough  for  success,  and 
advised  the  King,  as  did  other  prominent  officials  and 
courtiers,  to  declare  frankly  for  Italian  independence. 
The  advice  was  bold,  yet  it  must  be  said  that  the  course 
Maghella  suggested  was  perhaps  not  less  promising  than 
that  actually  taken  by  the  King  in  1814  and  1815. 
The  result  of  this  advice  was  unfortunate  for  Maghella  ; 
the  Imperial  police  became  duly  informed  of  his  atti- 
tude ;  Napoleon  arranged  that  Maghella  should  be  sent 
to  Paris  on  an  ostensible  mission,  and  on  his  arrival 
promptly  had  him  arrested  and  placed  in  prison. 

Having  decided  not  to  make  use  of  this  secret 
agitation,  yet  unable  to  suppress  it,  the  Government 
tried  to  control  and  direct  it.  An  attempt  was  made, 
following  the  model  of  the  Napoleonic  policy,  to 
capture  the  Masonic  Grand  Lodges.  The  lodge  la 
Concorde  had  as  its  Grand  Master  Marshal  Jourdan 
(in  1 8 13),  while  its  members  comprised  many  civil 
functionaries.  Its  secretary  was  the  famous  impro- 
visatore  Gabriele  Rossetti,  later  to  become  perhaps 
the  most  ardent  of  all  Neapolitan  liberals.  But  now, 
in  1 8 13,  the  lodges,  although  filled  with  police  agents, 
began  to  show  symptoms  of  revolt,  that  of  Giuseppina 
taking  a  prominent  part.     Through  1 8 1 3  the  agitation 


CHAP.  XI  CONGRESS  OF  VIENNA  325 

increased,  and  spread  into  every  rank  of  the  army  ;  in 
the  early  part  of  18 14  it  had  become  dangerous.  At 
a  review  held  just  before  the  troops  marched  to  the 
north,  a  salute  with  blank  cartridges  was  ordered,  but 
a  bullet  was  fired  by  a  Carbonaro  that  nearly  hit  the 
King.  Joachim  at  once  rode  up  to  the  line,  com- 
manded the  reloading  of  the  muskets,  and,  facing  the 
men,  ordered  a  second  volley.  It  passed  harmlessly 
over  his  head. 

Coincident  with  the  King's  departure  for  the  army 
and  the  intriguing  of  his  generals  at  Reggio,  con- 
stitutional agitation  became  more  active  at  Naples,  and 
early  in  February  of  18 14  a  Grand  Lodge  according 
to  the  Scotch  Rite  was  formed  in  the  city  of  Naples 
that  attempted  to  assume  control  of  the  Carbonaro  and 
other  influences  at  work  against  the  Government.  But 
the  only  movement  that  took  place  was  in  the  provinces. 
In  the  last  week  of  March  an  armed  insurrection  broke 
out  in  the  Abruzzi  ;  in  the  space  of  a  few  hours  nearly 
the  whole  province  rose  in  arms.  The  suddenness  and 
unanimity  with  which  the  local  militia  organizations 
came  out  was  no  less  remarkable  than  the  extra- 
ordinarily divergent  aims  announced  by  the  suddenly 
revealed  leaders  of  the  insurrection.  They  represented 
no  less  than  four  distinct  political  ideals.  Some  leaders 
declared  for  Ferdinand,  others  for  a  Republic,  others  for 
a  constitutional  and  independent  government,  others  for 
the  Holy  Faith.  The  whole  province  of  Teramo  was 
controlled  by  the  insurgents  ;  and  it  looked  as  though 
the  Abruzzi  might  be  lost.  Manhes,  who  as  a  French 
officer  had  resigned  his  official  position  at  Naples, 
declined  the  mission  of  subduing  the  province,  but 
General  Montigny  restored  order  promptly,  though 
not  without  the  exercise  of  considerable  severity.     In 


326  THE  NAPOLEONIC  EMPIRE  parti 

Calabria,  where  the  Carbonari  had  been  in  close  relation 
with  Sicilian  emissaries  since  the  days  of  Capobianco,  an 
insurrection  occurred  at  Polistena,  south  of  Monteleone. 
There  in  a  few  days  several  thousand  armed  militia- 
men assembled,  their  banners  inscribed  Indipendenza 
d'  Italia ;  but  General  Desvernois,  in  command  of  the 
province,  speedily  dispersed  them  and  restored  order. 

On  his  return  from  the  army  to  his  capital,  there- 
fore, Joachim  found  matters  only  superficially  quiet. 
Yet  the  kingdom  was  undoubtedly  more  prosperous 
than  at  any  former  period  of  its  history,  showing,  after 
several  years  of  comparative  quiet,  the  effects  of  the  vast 
transformation  and  improved  administrative  methods 
introduced  by  the  French.  For  the  first  time  in  its 
history  the  kingdom  of  Naples  possessed  a  semblance 
of  national  institutions  :  an  army,  a  system  of  education, 
uniform  laws  and  administration.  For  three  years  a 
scheme  of  commercial  accounts  had  been  in  thorough 
working  order,  and  the  State  finances,  notwithstanding 
the  exceptional  military  expenditure,  were  steadily 
improving.  Cedolas  had  risen  to  '^^.  Industry  and 
agriculture  were  encouraged.  Cotton  -  growing  was 
showing  good  results  in  quantity  and  quality,  as  also 
the  beet-sugar  industry.  But  unfortunately  for  Naples, 
industry  and  commerce  had  to  be  subordinated  to 
political  and  military  considerations.  The  army  was 
still  being  rapidly  increased, — to  70,000  men  in  July, — 
and  the  money  expended  in  this  way  and  in  Court 
pageants  necessitated  larger  budgets.  The  tax-payer 
resented  this  the  more  owing  to  the  severity  meted 
out  to  him,  and  to  the  indulgence  shown  to  a  soldiery 
whose  thieving  and  pillaging  propensities  were  too 
often  unpleasantly  demonstrated  to  his  cost. 

The    bad    conduct    and     insubordination     of    the 


CHAP.  XI  CONGRESS  OF  VIENNA  327 

Neapolitan  generals  was  no  less  than  that  of  the  men. 
After  the  close  of  the  campaign,  Carascosa  had  been 
left  in  command  by  the  King  ;  he  soon  called  a  meeting 
of  the  generals  at  his  headquarters  of  S.  Donino. 
Now  was  the  time,  they  thought,  for  securing  a  con- 
stitution for  Naples.  Carascosa  and  D'  Ambrosio  were 
for  obtaining  the  support  of  Bentinck,  and  Filangieri 
was  deputed  to  wait  on  him  with  the  proposal  that 
the  generals  should  be  furnished  with  fifty  thousand 
pounds  sterling,  the  pay  of  the  army  for  two  months, 
to  enable  them  to  march  on  Naples  and  proclaim  a 
constitution.     This  proposition  Bentinck  rejected.^ 

Feeling  unable  to  carry  the  army  without  money, 
the  generals  then  fell  back  on  a  less  drastic  policy  :  they 
drew  up  a  petition  for  the  grant  of  a  constitution  and 
the  dismissal  of  all  the  French  in  the  employ  of  the 
Government.  This  petition  was  signed  by  Carascosa, 
Filangieri,  D'  Ambrosio,  F.  Pepe,  G.  Pepe,  Pignatelli- 
Strongoli,  Pignatelli  -  Cerchiara,  Arcovito,  Medici, 
Petrinelli,  D'  Aquino,  and  Colletta.  This  comparatively 
mild  form  of  insubordination  did  not,  however,  satisfy 
the  more  ardent  spirits.  On  the  army's  taking  up 
quarters  in  the  Marches,  G.  Pepe  with  his  brigade  was 
stationed  at  Pesaro.  He  opened  communications  with 
his  Carbonaro  friends  in  the  Abruzzi  with  a  view  to 
a  new  rising,  and  tried  to  induce  the  other  generals 
stationed  about  Ancona  to  participate.  But  this  time 
the  plot  was  denounced  ;  Pepe  was  promptly  placed 
under  arrest  and  sent  to  Naples. 

Joachim  did  not  treat  his  refractory  general  with 
the  severity  that  might  have  proved  most  salutary. 
For    Pepe,    in    his    unmilitary,    insubordinate    fashion, 

1  a  Court  to  Castlereagh,  July  lo,  1820,  Foreign  Off.  Sicily,  90  j   Pepe,  Relation, 
Pamphleteer,  xxiii.  314  j  Pepe,  Memi.  ii.  2,  3. 


328  THE  NAPOLEONIC  EMPIRE  parti 

unfortunately  represented  that  embryo  of  public 
opinion  that  the  French  rule  had  created  in  Naples, 
and  without  the  support  of  which  Joachim  could  not 
hope  to  survive.  That  public  opinion,  even  though 
nationalist  and  constitutional  in  character,  was  all  that 
Joachim  had  to  lean  on.  He  thought,  and  doubtless 
correctly,  that  he  could  neither  afford  to  punish  Pepe 
nor  yet  to  trust  him  out  of  his  sight.  He  there- 
fore reproached  him  for  his  conduct,  explained  to 
him  that  it  was  quite  impossible,  in  view  of  the  reac- 
tionary course  on  which  the  Allies  were  embarking, 
that  he  should  openly  defy  them  by  proclaiming  a  con- 
stitution, and,  for  the  rest,  kept  the  general  dancing 
attendance  on  the  Court  and  safely  away  from  his 
troops. 

Joachim  had  certainly  good  reason  for  wishing  to 
secure  the  goodwill  of  his  army,  for  it  was  evident  that, 
should  the  full  details  of  his  intrigues  with  the  Viceroy 
and  Fouche  become  known  to  the  Allies,  he  might  well 
have  to  fight  for  his  throne.  Prince  Eugene,  Napoleon, 
Fouche,  Carascosa,  Zucchi,  numerous  staff  officers 
might  easily  reveal  a  part  or  the  whole  of  a  secret  that 
was  already  well-nigh  pierced.^ 

The  feeUng  against  him  was  so  bitter  that  at  the 
close  of  military  operations,  on  his  sending  the  Grand 
Cross  of  the  Order  of  the  Two  Sicilies  to  Field- 
Marshal  Bellegarde,  the  Austrian  general  returned  it. 
And  if  he  was  viewed  with  such  disfavour  by 
Austrians,  he  stood  even  worse  with  others.  It  was 
in  fact  only  Austrian  protection,  only  Metternich's 
determination  to  abide  by  his  treaty,  that  saved  Naples 


^  It  is  remarkable  that  so  little  of  the  proceedings  of  Joachim  became  known. 
It  was  not  till  many  years  later  that  the  publication  of  the  correspondence  of  Prince 
Eugene  by  Du  Casse  gave  the  first  substantial  historical  basis  of  these  events. 


CHAP.  XI  CONGRESS  OF  VIENNA  329 

from  immediate  attack.  So  hostile  to  Joachim  was  the 
attitude  of  Great  Britain,  that  before  the  end  of  May 
Metternich  was  compelled  to  address  a  strongly  worded 
note  to  Castlereagh,  in  which  the  British  statesman  was 
reminded  that  Great  Britain  had  acceded  to  the  treaty 
of  Prague  (July  27,  18 13),  whereby  it  was  stipulated, 
among  other  things,  that  Austria  should  have  full  power 
to  conclude  a  treaty  guaranteeing  possession  of  the 
throne  of  Naples  to  Joachim  and  to  promise  him  an 
indemnity  in  return  for  his  assistance  ;  and,  further 
(Art.  30)5  that  Austria  should  have  a  free  hand  in  the 
resettlement  of  Italy .^ 

Castlereagh  and  the  British  Cabinet  were  convinced 
of  Joachim's  treachery,  and  could  see  no  reason  for  not 
putting  a  forcible  end  to  his  tenure  of  the  throne  of 
Naples.  Yet  the  attitude  of  the  Opposition,  the  wide- 
spread criticisms  of  Lord  William  Bentinck's  conduct, 
and  Metternich's  firmness  in  adhering  to  his  engage- 
ments, made  a  temporary  acquiescence  in  the  existing 
situation  the  most  convenient  course.  Bentinck  had 
clearly  gone  to  the  length  of  disobeying  positive  instruc- 
tions, as  in  certain  proceedings  of  his  at  Genoa,  and  in 
not  sending  one  of  his  officers  to  serve  on  Joachim's 
staff.  He  was  now  entirely  out  of  favour,  and  the 
attitude  of  the  Ministers  towards  him  will  appear  from 
an  extract  of  a  letter  from  Castlereagh  to  Liverpool  : — 

If  Bonaparte  had  been  enabled  to  maintain  himself  in  the 
field  in  France,  between  Murat's  rascality  and  Bellegarde's 
timidity,  and  Lord  William  Bentinck's  impracticability  and 
Whiggism,  which  seems  to  follow  him  everywhere,  we  should 
have  been  in  danger  of  a  serious  disappointment  in  that 
quarter.2 

^  Metternich  to  Castlereagh,  May  26,  1814;  Bianchi,  i.  333. 
2  Castlereagh,  Corr.  ix.  509. 


330  THE  NAPOLEONIC  EMPIRE  part  i 

It  was  probably  with  a  sense  of  relief  that  Castlereagh 
received,  early  in  May,  an  application  for  leave  of 
absence  from  Bentinck.  The  request  was  immediately 
acceded  to. 

Yet  the  removal  of  Joachim's  greatest  enemy  from 
the  scene  hardly  served  to  make  Great  Britain  less 
hostile  than  before.  Her  diplomatic  representative  at 
Palermo,  a  Court,  consistently  referred  to  Joachim  as 
an  usurper  ;  the  Quarterly  Review  and  other  publica- 
tions demanded  the  King's  instant  removal  from  his 
throne  ;  Joachim's  agent  in  England,  Ancillotti,  could 
not  obtain  a  hearing  ;  and  no  other  representative  save 
a  consular  agent  named  Fagan  was  sent  to  represent 
Great  Britain  at  Naples.  It  will  soon  appear  that  his 
functions  were  not  intended  to  be  anything  more  than 
commercial. 

Joachim  and  Caroline  resolved  to  put  the  best  face 
on  this  threatening  position.  Never  had  Naples  seen  a 
more  festive  Court.  In  the  halls  and  along  the  terraces 
of  Capodimonte,  among  the  princely  villas  that  crown 
the  crest  from  the  Vomero  to  Posilipo,  dancing,  dining, 
singing,  and  merry-making  went  gaily  on, — brocades, 
cloth  of  gold,  embroideries,  rouge,  feathers,  and  jewels, 
deceived  the  eyes  of  those  who  could  not  perceive  that 
the  hearts  beneath  were  stricken  with  anguish  at  the 
thought  of  the  political  volcano  rumbling  below  their 
feet.  Light  feet  and  heavy  hearts,  sweet  smiles  and 
double  thoughts,  glittering  gems  and  ruin  stalking  near, 
— and  now  what  is  there  left  of  all  the  pageant }  under 
a  glass  case  at  the  Museum  of  San  Martino  a  few  worn 
tufts  of  light-blue  plumes,  a  velvet  cloak  embroidered 
with  golden  bees,  once  worn  by  Joachim  ;  and  on  the 
wall  facing  them  the  death-like  waxen  mask  of  Ferdinand 
vacantly  staring  at  the  few  surviving  relics  of  his  great 


CHAP.  XI  CONGRESS  OF  VIENNA  331 

competitor.  Pepe,  an  unwilling  participator  in  these 
revels,  has  left  some  record  of  them,  has  narrated  with 
mournful  indignation  how  at  the  villa  occupied  by 
Pauline  Bonaparte  on  the  Vomero,  his  talents,  panting 
for  nationalism,  constitutionalism,  and  such  matters, 
had  to  comply  with  the  Princess'  decrees  and  turn  to 
the  degrading  occupation  of  playing  pet  its  paquets  with 
the  ladies  of  her  suite. 

Besides  holding  court  pageants,  hunts,  balls,  and 
reviews,  Joachim  made  more  serious  bids  for  popu- 
larity. Trade  was  encouraged,  the  tax  on  cabotage 
was  removed,  and,  as  a  partial  concession  to  the 
nationalists,  it  was  decreed  that  to  hold  office  under 
the  Government,  Neapolitan  birth  or  naturalization  was 
essential. 

While  Joachim  thus  displayed  his  regal  splendour 
and  increased  his  military  strength,  the  statesmen  of 
the  four  great  Powers  that  had  conquered  France 
turned  their  attention  to  the  resettlement  of  the  affairs 
of  Europe.  Much  readjustment  had  taken  place  spon- 
taneously on  the  retreat  of  the  French  armies.  Thus 
in  Italy,  notwithstanding  the  proclamations  and  avowed 
policy  of  Bentinck  and  other  British  agents,  Lombardy 
reverted  to  Austria,  as  in  1796,  and  Piedmont  to  Sar- 
dinia. But  other  territorial  matters  remained  unsettled. 
Austria  and  Naples  were  both  in  actual  possession  of 
territory  once  the  Pope's ;  the  duchy  of  Parma,  assigned  to 
the  Empress  Maria  Louisa  by  the  treaty  of  Fontainebleau, 
the  city  of  Genoa,  and  other  points,  gave  rise  to  con- 
flicting claims.  As  in  Italy,  so  in  other  parts  of  Europe, 
notably  in  Saxony  and  in  Poland,  difficult  questions  of 
possession  and  right  arose  that  could  not  be  settled 
without  prolonged  discussion.     The  Powers  therefore 


332  THE  NAPOLEONIC  EMPIRE  part  i 

decided,  when  signing  peace  with  the  new  government 
of  France,  that  a  Congress  should  assemble  in  the 
autumn  at  Vienna  to  dispose  of  all  debated  territorial 
questions.  Now  it  was  evident  that  this  so-called 
European  Congress  was  something  different  from  what  it 
professed  to  be.  It  was  in  reality  a  conference  held  for 
the  purpose  of  parcelling  out  among  the  conquerors  of 
Napoleon  the  profits  of  their  victory,  and  it  appeared 
probable  that  the  Congress  would  do  little  else  than 
register  the  decrees  of  Austria,  Russia,  and  Prussia, 
with  due  propitiation  of  Great  Britain  and  Bourbon 
France.  The  attention  of  every  monarch  and  people 
of  Europe  was  soon  concentrated  on  the  diplomatic 
proceedings  at  Vienna,  and  none  more  than  Joachim's 
and  his  subjects'. 

The  King  of  Naples'  best  guarantee  that  his  interests 
would  be  protected  at  the  Congress  was  the  goodwill 
of  Austria.  With  that  Power  he  had  a  treaty  of  amity 
and  alliance.  With  Prince  Metternich,  Queen  Caroline 
retained  some  relations  of  friendship  and  some  influence. 
To  strengthen  this  position  against  the  hostility  of 
Great  Britain  and  the  intrigues  of  the  Bourbon  Powers 
and  of  Queen  Mary  Caroline,  now  residing  at  the 
Castle  of  Hetzendorf  near  Vienna,  Joachim  sought  the 
support  of  one  who  had  formerly  been  his  friend, 
Talleyrand,  now  chief  director  of  the  foreign  policy 
of  his  most  Christian  Majesty  Louis  XVIII.  Secret 
agents  passed  between  the  two,  though  the  nature  of 
the  communications  is  unknown.  It  appears  probable, 
however,  that  financial  proposals  were  made  to  Talley- 
rand in  connection  with  his  Neapolitan  principality  of 
Benevento,  and  with  his  possible  services  at  the 
approaching  Congress  at  which  he  was  to  represent 
France.      Perhaps  some  pecuniary  transactions  did  in 


CHAP.  XI  CONGRESS  OF  VIENNA  333 

fact  take  place,  but  it  is  certain  that  however  much 
Talleyrand  may  have  profited  by  it,  Joachim  did  not, 
for  the  representative  of  France  proved  his  most  bitter 
and  venomous  enemy  for  the  whole  duration  of  the 
Congress. 

Immediately  before  the  opening  of  the  conferences 
occurred  an  incident  not  unconnected  with  this  history, 
the  death  of  Queen  Mary  Caroline.  Expelled  from 
Sicily  by  Lord  William  Bentinck,  she  had  travelled  by 
way  of  the  Black  Sea  to  Austria.  Her  nephew,  the 
Emperor  Francis,  appointed  for  her  residence  the  small 
Castle  of  Hetzendorf,  immediately  adjoining  Schonbrunn. 
There  the  aged  Queen,  physically  spent,  intellectually 
weakening,  politically  dead,  found  enough  fire  in  her 
hatred  of  Bentinck  to  prepare  against  him  a  statement 
the  publication  of  which  was  to  expose  his  misdeeds  to 
the  statesmen  and  people  of  Europe.  She  completed 
her  work,  but  it  never  saw  the  light,  for  a  few  weeks 
later  the  Queen's  life  came  to  an  end.  She  died 
suddenly  on  the  night  of  the  7th  of  September  18 14, 
apparently  from  apoplexy.  Thus  ended  a-  princess 
whose  misfortunes  and  misdeeds  were  equally  con- 
spicuous, whose  immorality  was  not  greater  than  that 
of  her  age  and  station,  whose  over-active  intelligence, 
guided  by  a  shallow  and  selfish  judgment,  produced 
great  calamities  at  a  time  of  trouble  and  revolution, 
whose  love  for  children  and  friends  was  balanced  by  a 
rancorous  hatred  of  those  she  chose  for  enemies  that 
made  her  name  a  threat  of  affliction  to  the  city  of 
Naples  for  many  years.  Her  death  was  not  mourned. 
Though  a  daughter  of  Maria  Theresa,  though  a  queen, 
though  in  misfortune,  the  Emperor  neither  attended 
her  obsequies  nor  assumed  mourning.  ''  The  Queen  of 
Naples  is  little  missed,''  wrote  Talleyrand  ;  "  her  death 


334  THE  NAPOLEONIC  EMPIRE  parti 

appears  to  have  relieved  Metternich."  ^  None  took 
notice  of  the  event,  and  a  few  weeks  after  her  death 
Ferdinand  married  anew.  But  when  the  news  reached 
the  Royal  Palace  of  Naples  in  the  midst  of  a  State 
ball,  Joachim  immediately  withdrew  and  ordered  the 
evening's  entertainment  to  be  concluded. 

Joachim  had  serious  cause  to  regret  the  death  of 
Mary  Caroline.  For  the  fact  that  to  dispossess  the 
French  occupant  of  the  throne  of  Naples  meant  the 
restoration  of  Ferdinand  and  his  queen  was  a  serious 
embarrassment  to  those  statesmen  who,  founding  their 
political  aims  on  the  plausible  basis  of  legidmity  and 
pre-established  rights,  derived  from  these  theories  the 
conclusion  that  Joachim  must  be  removed  from  the 
throne  of  Naples.  But  the  Bourbon  restoration  of 
1799  was  not  forgotten  ;  the  stains  of  blood  were  not 
yet  effaced.  The  Czar  Alexander  announced  in  un- 
equivocal terms  that  he  was  opposed  to  the  restoration 
of  the  "  butcher  king  "  to  the  throne  of  Naples  ;  and 
the  Emperor  Francis  and  Metternich,  though  strongly 
dissatisfied  with  Joachim's  conduct,  declared  that 
Austria  would  not  act  in  the  matter.  But  now  that 
Mary  Caroline  was  dead  a  great  obstacle  to  the 
Bourbon  restoration  was  removed. 

On  the  30th  of  September  a  diplomatic  conference 
was  held,  preliminary  to  the  actual  meeting  of  the 
Congress.  At  this  conference  both  France  and  Spain 
were  represented,  as  well  as  the  four  great  Allies,  and  the 
question  of  Naples,  the  only  unrecovered  Bourbon 
possession,  was  immediately  raised  by  them.  Labrador, 
representing  Spain,  declared  himself  strongly  against 
the  retention  by  Joachim  of  the  throne  of  Naples,  and 
Talleyrand,  with  sublime  disregard  for  the  past,  stated 

^  Talleyrand,  Corr.  hied.  4. 


CHAP.  XI  CONGRESS  OF  VIENNA  335 

his  opinion  that  no  guarantee  of  his  throne  should  ever 
have  been  given  to  Joachim,  and  that  in  no  event  could 
France  treat  such  a  guarantee  as  binding. 

This  pronouncement  of  the  restored  Bourbon 
monarchs  in  favour  of  the  youngest  branch  of  their 
House  was  the  more  threatening  because  closely  accom- 
panied by  steps  that  portended  military  action.  Colonel 
Hyde  de  Neuville,  a  staunch  Bourbonist  proscribed 
under  the  Empire,  was  sent  to  Turin  on  a  secret 
mission  by  the  French  Court.  He  arrived  there  early 
in  November  ;  his  object  was  to  secure  the  co-operation 
of  Sardinia  with  France,  Spain,  and  Sicily  in  an 
expedition  having  the  dethronement  of  Joachim  for  its 
object.  The  Sardinian  Government  appears  to  have 
referred  the  matter  for  the  advice  of  Metternich,  who 
declared  that  he  would  not  permit  French  troops  to 
operate  in  those  parts  of  central  Italy  occupied  by 
Austria.  Metternich  thereupon  formally  notified  the 
French  and  Neapolitan  Governments  that  no  military 
movements  on  either  part  would  be  permitted,  and 
with  this  Hyde  de  Neuville's  mission  came  to  an  end. 

The  hopes  of  the  Sicilian  Court,  foiled  in  this  first 
attempt,  now  turned  on  England,  whose  hostility  to 
Joachim  was  only  too  evident.  Fagan,  the  British 
Consul,  attempting  to  encroach  on  the  diplomatic 
field,  had  entered  into  a  correspondence  with  Gallo  in 
the  course  of  which  he  expressed  "  his  desire  to  con- 
solidate the  good  understanding  existing  between  the 
British  Government  and  that  of  his  Neapolitan 
Majesty  "  ;  whereupon  a  Court  at  once  recalled  him  to 
Palermo,  leaving  a  subordinate  official  in  charge  of  the 
consular  office  at  Naples.  Even  more  hostile  and 
far  more  influential  than  a  Court  was  Wellington. 
He  proposed  to  Castlereagh  in  September  that  Great 


336  THE  NAPOLEONIC  EMPIRE  parti 

Britain  should  proceed  against  Joachim  by  force  of 
arms,  but  that  statesman,  in  view  of  the  relations  of 
Great  Britain  with  Austria,  was  hardly  prepared  to  go  to 
such  lengths.  His  position  was  fairly  stated  when 
he  declared  to  Campochiaro,  the  Neapolitan  envoy  at 
Vienna,  that  as  Joachim  had  not  fulfilled  his  obligations 
to  the  Allies  the  question  of  Naples  must  be  considered 
open  for  the  deliberation  of  the  Congress.  To  Talleyrand 
Castlereagh  promised  his  general  support,  though  not 
without  some  reservation  as  to  the  attitude  of  Parliament. 
He  probably  hoped,  as  did  Wellington,  that  with  such 
a  concentration  of  diplomatic  talent  as  there  was  in 
Vienna  some  method  of  separating  Joachim  from  the 
throne  of  Naples  would  be  discovered. 

On  the  1st  of  November  the  Congress  formally 
opened,  one  of  its  earliest  decisions  being  that  the 
representatives  of  the  King  of  Naples  should  not  be 
admitted  to  the  deliberations.  Talleyrand  followed  this 
up  by  claiming  once  more  that  the  question  of  Naples 
should  be  discussed.  Metternich  wished  on  the  con- 
trary to  postpone  it,  and  was  in  a  measure  successful, 
for  the  Congress  decided  to  turn  its  attention  to  the 
territorial  readjustment  of  northern  Europe  before 
approaching  the  affairs  of  Italy. 

Joachim  was  represented  at  Vienna  by  Campochiaro 
and  Cariati,  together  with  certain  unofficial  personages, 
such  as  Roccaromana  and  Filangieri.  The  exclusion  of 
his  accredited  representatives  from  the  Congress,  and 
the  cool  and  even  hostile  reception  they  met  with  in 
every  quarter  greatly  alarmed  him.  The  King  became 
very  excited,  made  parade  to  the  Austrian  Minister  of 
his  large  military  resources,  and  threatened  to  invade 
the  Papal  States,  until  Mier  had  to  declare  that  any 
movement    of    the    Neapolitan    troops    towards    the 


CHAP.  XI  CONGRESS  OF  VIENNA  337 

interior  of  Italy  would  be  viewed  by  Austria  as  a  casus 
belli.  To  moderate  the  irritation  of  the  King,  however, 
Metternich  instructed  Mier  to  explain  that  the  posi- 
tion of  Campochiaro  was  no  different  from  that  of  other 
delegates,  such  as  those  of  Sardinia  or  Bavaria,  while 
Filangieri  was  intrusted  with  an  autograph  letter  from 
the  Emperor  to  the  King.  On  receipt  of  this  letter 
Joachim  at  once  saw  Mier,  and  protested  to  him  his 
fidelity  to  the  Austrian  alliance.  At  the  same  time 
Metternich  insisted  on  the  self-evident  truth  that  on 
Austrian  support  alone  could  Joachim  rely,  that  all 
Europe  was  against  him,  and  that  the  slightest 
imprudence  on  his  part  might  be  fatal. 

"The  existence  of  the  King,"  wrote  Metternich  to  Mier, 
"  excites  opposition  in  all  Europe  ;  if  we  abandon  him,  he  will 
fall.  .  .  .  Any  efforts  we  might  make  to  persuade  the  Bourbon 
Courts  to  recognise  the  King  would  be  in  vain  ;  but  strong  in 
our  support,  in  direct  relations  with  our  other  allies,  the  King 
of  Naples  may  hope  for  the  best  if  he  is  wise  enough  to 
conduct  himself  calmly  and  prudently  ;  but  one  imprudent  act 
may  lose  all.  .  .  ."  ^ 

For  Joachim  to  gain  the  goodwill  of  Great  Britain 
and  the  Bourbon  Courts  appeared  impossible,  though 
even  that  was  not  left  unattempted.  A  secret  agent, 
Saint  Elie,  made  fruitless  overtures  in  Paris.  From 
Naples  Gallo  forwarded  to  Lord  Liverpool  an  autograph 
letter  from  Joachim  to  the  Prince  Regent,  making  an 
appeal  for  recognition,  while  at  Vienna  Campochiaro 
and  Cariati  presented  a  formal  note  to  Castlereagh. 
In  this,  after  referring  to  the  formal  concurrence 
of  Great  Britain  in  the  Austrian  policy,  and  to  the 
treaty  between  Austria  and  Naples,  the  British  Cabinet 
was    invited    to   enter   into    a    treaty    of  peace.     The 

1  Metternich  to  Mier,  Nov.  29,  1814  j  Helfert,  Murat,  167. 
VOL.  I  Z 


338  THE  NAPOLEONIC  EMPIRE  part  i 

move  was  ineffective.  Joachim's  letter  remained  un- 
answered ;  yet  Castlereagh,  notwithstanding  Talley- 
rand's pressing  invitation  that  Great  Britain  should 
recognise  Ferdinand,  clung  fast  to  his  policy  of  not 
breaking  with  Austria  on  the  Neapolitan  question. 
This  was  now  the  more  essential  as  the  Congress  had 
revealed  wide  divergencies  of  views  between  the  Powers. 
The  partition  of  Saxony  and  Poland  and  other  minor 
points  had  led  to  estrangement,  and  Great  Britain, 
Austria,  and  France,  on  the  3rd  of  January  18 15, 
secretly  signed  a  treaty  of  alliance  covering  the  event- 
uality of  a  war  in  which  those  three  Powers  should  find 
themselves  face  to  face  with  Prussia  and  Russia. 

The  conflict  of  interest  between  the  Powers  became 
more  and  more  acute  and  appeared  to  give  Joachim 
some  chance  of  profit.  When  the  Congress  towards 
the  end  of  December  began  to  settle  north  Italian 
questions,  Gallo  protested  to  Mier  that,  according  to 
the  terms  of  the  treaty  of  Prague,  Austria,  and  Austria 
alone,  was  entitled  to  interfere  in  Italian  affairs.  To 
have  Austria  alone  adjudicate  on  Italian  matters  would 
have  been  convenient  for  the  King  of  Naples,  as  the 
Congress  was  now  approaching  the  question  of  the 
Papal  territory. 

Rome  and  Naples  were  not  on  good  terms,  nor 
was  the  military  occupation  of  the  Marches  the  only 
grievance  of  the  Papal  Court.  The  Neapolitan  agent 
at  Rome,  Cavaliere  Zuccari,  was  a  Carbonaro  and 
in  close  touch  with  the  liberal  element  in  the  city. 
Between  him  and  the  Government  trouble  was  constantly 
arising.  While  Pius,  through  his  representative  at  Vienna, 
Cardinal  Consalvi,  exerted  his  influence  against  Joachim, 
the  clergy  of  the  Marches  circulated  petitions  against 
the  Neapolitan  Government  intended  to  strengthen  the 


CHAP.  XI  CONGRESS  OF  VIENNA  339 

Papal  case  at  the  Congress.  Metternich  was  disposed  to 
abandon  Bologna  and  the  Legations  to  the  Pope,  and 
he  thought  that  Joachim*s  best  policy  would  be  to 
admit  the  Papal  claim  to  the  Marches.  This  course 
was  suggested  to  the  King  by  Mier  and  by  Campochiaro, 
but  did  not  commend  itself.  There  was  indeed  an 
attempt  at  negotiating  with  Rome,  but  neither  party 
was  really  prepared  to  concede  what  the  other  required 
and  there  was  no  result.  Joachim  thought  he  could 
not  give  up  his  position  in  the  Marches  unless  in 
return  he  secured  complete  recognition  from  the  Pope. 
To  let  the  Papal  State  extend  to  the  Adriatic  was 
not  only  to  deprive  him  of  a  possession  he  thought 
himself  entitled  to  by  treaty,  it  was  also  to  consent 
to  being  shut  off  from  all  access  to  the  north,  to 
accept  being  hemmed  in  to  the  extremity  of  Italy, 
with  the  Papacy  to  the  north,  Bourbonism  to  the 
south,  and  the  fleets  of  Great  Britain  to  the  east  and 
west. 

The  Pope,  though  at  heart  unfriendly,  was  prepared, 
on  terms,  to  adopt  a  neutral  attitude  towards  Naples  ; 
but  the  Bourbon  States  were  openly  and  uncompro- 
misingly hostile.  By  the  first  article  of  the  treaty  of 
the  30th  of  May  18 14,  the  new  French  Government 
had  entered  into  relations  of  peace  and  amity  with  the 
Emperor  of  Austria  "  and  his  allies."  Metternich, 
anxious  to  arrange  the  Italian  question  on  the  basis  of 
Joachim's  recognition,  and  so  to  strengthen  his  position 
against  an  attack  then  threatening  on  the  part  of 
Russia  and  Prussia,  now  urged  Talleyrand  to  agree  to 
the  due  execution  of  this  article  of  the  treaty.  But 
the  latter  evaded  all  engagements  and  took  refuge  in 
the  plea  that  at  the  time  of  the  signature  of  the  treaty 
the  French  Government  had  no  official  knowledge  of 


340  THE  NAPOLEONIC  EMPIRE  part  i 

the  alliance  between  Austria  and  Naples.  Urged  by 
Campochiaro  and  Cariati,  Metternich  thereupon  officially 
brought  to  the  notice  of  the  French  plenipotentiary 
the  treaty  of  the  1 1  th  of  January  1 8 1 4,  but  failed  to 
get  anything  more  definite  from  him  than  that  he  was 
prepared  to  allow  the  state  of  peace  then  existing  to 
continue. 

Notwithstanding  the  continued  ill-success  of  his  dip- 
lomacy, Joachim,  following  Metternich's  advice,  had  well- 
nigh  resolved  to  withdraw  from  the  Marches,  with  the 
exception  of  the  fortress  of  Ancona  which  he  intended 
to  retain  until  the  close  of  the  Congress,  when  the 
French  Court  sent  Jules  de  Polignac  to  Rome  on  a 
mission  hostile  to  the  King.  This  move  showed  such 
an  unswerving  current  of  hostility,  the  tendency  of 
events  was  so  persistently  contrary  to  his  interests, 
that  finally  Joachim,  yielding  to  an  impulse  not 
unnatural  in  an  impetuous  soldier,  determined  to 
arrive  at  some  end  by  directly  challenging  the  French 
Government. 

The  moment  appeared  opportune,  for  the  tension 
between  the  two  northern  Powers  and  Austria  had 
reached  an  acute  stage.  In  a  great  European  war 
the  Neapolitan  army  might  be  accounted  a  useful 
factor,  and  already  Russia  gave  indications  of  con- 
templating overtures  to  Joachim,  while  the  Prussian 
Minister,  Hardenberg, -showed  signs  of  a  more  favour- 
able disposition  to  the  Neapolitan  envoys.  A  crisis 
appeared  to  be  rapidly  approa<:hing,  and  in  this  Joachim 
probably  hoped  to  find  the  circumstances  that  should 
force  his  recognition  from  the  Powers.  Of  the  three 
governments  arrayed  against  Prussia  and  Russia,  Austria 
was  friendly,  France  hostile,  and  Great  Britain  might 
reasonably  be  expected  to  follow  the  lead  of  the  other 


CHAP.  XI  CONGRESS  OF  VIENNA  341 

two.  At  all  events,  neither  Lord  Castlereagh  nor 
Lord  Liverpool  had  committed  themselves  further  than 
by  declaring  that  the  question  of  Naples  was  one  for 
discussion.  Metternich  resolutely  maintained  his  posi- 
tion under  the  treaty  of  the  nth  of  January  18 14; 
"  Lord  Castlereagh  every  time  [the  question  of  Naples] 
was  presented  to  him  seemed  to  be  walking  on  hot 
coals  ;  he  would  not  declare  for  or  against.   .  .   ."  ^ 

Under  these  circumstances  to  place  a  pistol  at  the 
head  of  France  appeared  to  Joachim  the  most  satisfactory 
course  to  pursue.  Campochiaro  received  instructions 
on  the  24th  of  February  to  deliver  a  note  to  Talleyrand 
categorically  asking  for  the  immediate  recognition  of 
Joachim  by  France.  Unfortunately  for  him  this  note 
reached  the  envoy  of  the  King  of  Naples  at  a  most 
inopportune  moment.  A  new  turn  in  the  wheel  of 
diplomacy  had  just  taken  place  and  the  Saxon  question, 
over  which  the  Powers  had  so  nearly  plunged  into  war, 
had  been  settled  to  the  satisfaction  of  every  country, 
save  Saxony.  Campochiaro  saw  the  danger,  but  could 
not  altogether  disregard  his  instructions.  He  decided, 
therefore,  to  address  his  note,  not  to  Talleyrand,  but  to 
Metternich.  This  course  appeared  milder  to  him,  but 
resulted  in  a  disastrous  check,  as  Metternich  answered 
it  immediately  by  a  note  in  which  he  declared  that 
Austria  would  tolerate  no  military  movements  in  Italy, 
and  this  he  backed  up  by  threatening  to  concentrate 
1 50,000  men  and  200  guns  on  the  Po.  The  Austrian 
Minister  addressed  a  similar  note,  though  not  worded 
in  the  same  menacing  form,  to  Talleyrand,  which  was  at 
once  accepted. 

The  news  of  this  diplomatic  defeat  was  at  once  dis- 
patched to  Naples  by  Campochiaro  ;  it  reached  Joachim 

^  Gentz,  Memorandum;   Metternich,  Mems.  ii.  583. 


342  THE  NAPOLEONIC  EMPIRE  part  i 

on  the  yth  of  March.  But  at  that  date  a  new 
and  startling  political  development  had  revolutionized 
European  politics,  to  understand  which  it  will  be 
necessary  to  consider  the  position  occupied  in  relation 
to  these  events  by  the  disthroned  Emperor  of  the 
French. 

By  the  treaty  of  Fontainebleau  Napoleon  had  secured 
for  himself  the  island  of  Elba  alone  out  of  all  his  vast 
dominions.  Of  this  little  island  off  the  coast  of  Tuscany 
the  Powers  agreed  to  recognise  him  as  the  independent 
sovereign.  There  he  retained  a  few  hundred  of  his 
old  soldiers  and  a  semblance  of  sovereignty.  But  no 
sooner  had  this  last  treaty  of  all  been  signed  with 
their  mighty  enemy  than  the  Powers  quickly  repented 
having  left  him  so  much  as  that  small  Mediterranean 
island.  The  frame  in  which  Napoleon  was  now 
placed  was  so  evidently  undersized  that  it  was  uni- 
versally feared  it  could  not  long  hold  him.  Nor  were 
the  perfectly  moderate,  reasonable,  and  not  onerous 
conditions  of  the  treaty  carried  out  in  their  fulness ; 
and  in  this  and  other  ways  the  Emperor  was  needlessly 
irritated.  By  the  time  the  sovereigns  and  diplomats  of 
Europe  had  assembled  at  Vienna  the  question  of  Elba 
had  become  nearly  as  burning  a  one  as  that  of  France 
had  been  before  the  fall  of  the  Empire.  On  the  2nd 
of  November  the  King  of  Sardinia  wrote  to  his 
Ambassador  at  Vienna  :  "  We  are  entirely  of  Prince 
Metternich's  opinion  on  the  necessity  of  getting  rid 
(eloigner)  of  Napoleon.  .  .  .  Italy  will  never  be  com- 
pletely at  rest  as  long  as  that  man  remains  so  near  it.'*  ^ 
Even  earlier  than  this  Talleyrand  had  been  able  to 
report  to  Louis  XVIII.  that  a  general  disposition  existed 
to  remove  Napoleon  from  Elba.      "  No  one  has  yet 

^  victor  Emmanuel  to  St.  Marsan,  Nov.  2,  18 14  5  Bianchi,  i.  388, 


CHAP.  XI  CONGRESS  OF  VIENNA  343 

any  precise  idea  as  to  where  to   put  him,"  he  wrote. 
"  I  have  suggested  one  of  the  Azores."  ^ 

As  the  sittings  of  the  Congress  continued,  this  feeling 
became  more  marked ;  yet  it  cannot  be  said  that 
Napoleon's  conduct  excused  it,  for  he  gave  no  sign, 
merely  observing  with  keen  eye  that  political  horizon 
the  danger  signals  of  which  he  was  so  skilled  in  inter- 
preting. With  the  continent  of  Italy,  and  with  Naples 
in  particular,  he  entertained  but  little  correspondence. 
Pauline  Bonaparte  Princess  Borghese,  unswervingly 
staunch  to  her  brother  in  his  adversity,  had  visited  him 
at  Elba  and  thence  passed  to  Naples,  where  she  occupied 
a  villa  on  the  Vomero.  While  at  Elba  she  received 
communications  for  Napoleon  from  Joachim,  in  which 
the  King  professed  vague  sentiments  of  devotion  to  the 
Emperor.  She  doubtless  carried  with  her  to  Naples 
some  verbal  or  other  message  from  the  Emperor  to  his 
sister  Caroline,  and  perhaps  a  letter  of  some  sort  from 
Napoleon  to  Joachim.^  A  little  later  the  Countess 
Walewska,  a  great  favourite  of  Napoleon's,  with  her 
child,  afterwards  Minister  of  Foreign  Affairs  to  Napoleon 
III.,  visited  Elba  and  thence  proceeded  to  Naples,  this 
being  the  possible  and  sure  vehicle  of  any  message  that 
the  Emperor  might  have  wished  to  send.  Even  more 
direct  communications  between  Elba  and  Naples  passed. 
For  Elba  possessed  a  number  of  small  vessels  flying  the 
flag  of  its  sovereign/  and  these  were  not  infrequently 
seen  along  the  Neapolitan  coasts  ;  while  direct  evidence 
exists  that  dispatches  were  sent  from  Elba  to  Naples  on 
Neapolitan  vessels.  Yet  on  the  whole  it  does  not 
appear  probable  that  Napoleon  concerted  any  political 


^   Corr.  ined.  43. 

2  Pacca  to  Consalvi,  Dec.  3,  18145   Consalvi,  Corr.  175. 

2  White  and  red  stripe  with  three  golden  bees. 


344  THE  NAPOLEONIC  EMPIRE  part  i 

scheme  with  Joachim  during  his  sojourn  at  Elba,  or 
entered  into  direct  communication  with  him  until  just 
as  he  was  making  ready  to  leave  the  island.-^ 

It  would  not  perhaps  be  unfair  to  see  Napoleon's 
feelings  towards  Joachim  reflected  in  the  conduct  of 
his  mother.  For  when  Madame  Mere  went  to  take  up 
her  abode  at  Rome,  Joachim  sent  her  a  present  of 
eight  carriage  horses,  which  Letizia  Bonaparte  at  once 
returned  to  the  donor.  Yet  Napoleon's  feelings  to- 
wards the  King  of  Naples  were  certainly  tempered 
by  political  considerations,  and  it  was  evident  to  most 
observers  that  the  attitude  adopted  by  the  Powers 
towards  Joachim  was  one  that  could  not  fail  to  make 
him  regret  the  past,  regret  the  fall  of  the  Empire, 
regret  that  he  had  no  longer  the  powerful  arm  of 
Napoleon  to  lean  upon. 

While  Napoleon  thus  sombrely  watched  from  Elba 
Europe  rapidly  drifting  towards  new  wars  and  France 
rapidly  drifting  to  an  anti- Bourbon  revolution,  at 
Naples  the  appearance  of  gaiety  and  festivity  was 
bravely  maintained.  Had  a  stranger  guiltless  of  poli- 
tical knowledge  harboured  in  the  city  he  would  have 
thought  that  a  Court  more  happy,  more  light-hearted, 
more  devoted  to  pleasure  and  to  festivity  had  never  been. 
Naples  was  full  of  visitors,  among  whom  the  English 
showed  conspicuously.  The  pacification  of  the  Con- 
tinent after  the  long  cycle  of  wars  had  resulted  in  a 
general  exodus  of  the  long-pent-up  British  aristocracy. 
Among  those  soon  conspicuous  at  Naples,  and  received 
with    evident    favour    at    Court,    were    the    Duke    of 

1  Napoleon's  own  statements  in  his  correspondence  and  the  Memorial  are  here 
preferred  to  Pepe's  vague  assertion  and  to  Meneval's  remarks,  which,  apparently, 
refer  to  Colonna's  mission.  In  any  case  Meneval  was  actually  at  Vienna,  and  his 
information  must  be  judged  by  the  light  of  that  fact. — Meneval,  iii.  409  5  Pepe, 
Mems.  ii.  passim  ;   Helfert,  Murai,  34. 


CHAP.  XI  CONGRESS  OF  VIENNA  345 

Bedford,  Lord  Holland,  Lord  Oxford,  Lord  Sligo,  Lord 
Llandaff,  and  General  Matthews,  all  members  of  the 
Whig  Opposition.  The  Englishmen  viewed  Joachim 
from  the  strict  standpoint  of  party  politics,  and  their 
admiration  of  him  grew  in  proportion  as  the  Tory 
Cabinet  discovered  its  hostility.  The  King,  on  his 
side,  unversed  in  the  nature  of  parliamentary  opinions, 
did  not  stop  to  consider  the  strength  of  Lord  Liver- 
pool's position,  nor  the  evil  that  might  result  from 
associating  with  an  impotent  Opposition,  and  showered 
favours  on  his  English  admirers.  Worst  of  all,  the 
Princess  of  Wales,  wife  of  the  Prince  Regent,  also 
arrived  at  Naples  during  the  winter  and  showed  an 
extreme  of  admiration  for  the  King  that  may  have 
been  perfectly  genuine,  but  was  certainly  neither 
decorous  nor  advantageous  to  either  party  .^ 

What  a  positive  disadvantage  his  friendship  with 
the  British  Opposition  was  to  Joachim  may  be  judged 
from  the  following  incident.  In  December  Lord 
Oxford  was  returning  to  England.  Joachim  in- 
trusted him  with  dispatches  for  his  secret  agent  at 
Paris,  St.  Elie.  By  some  means  or  other  the  French 
police  got  wind  of  this,  and  on  the  road  to  Paris, 
Oxford  was  arrested  and  all  his  papers  were  seized. 
Castlereagh,  so  far  from  showing  indignation  at  this 
violent  proceeding  against  an  English  traveller,  ex- 
pressed himself  to  Talleyrand  as  charmed  at  what  had 
happened. 

Had  there  been  no  Elba  and  no  Napoleon,  it  is  not 
difficult  to  forecast  what  the  result  of  all  the  diplomatic 
and  political  manoeuvring  of  the  winter  of  1814-1815 


1  " .  .  .  Her  conduct  is  fidiculous,  extraordinary,  and  unbecoming.  .  .  .  She  has 
conceived  a  fine  passion  for  the  King,  and  makes  no  pretence  of  concealment." 
— Mier  to  Metternich,  March  5,  181 5  5  Helfert,  Murat,  30. 


346  THE  NAPOLEONIC  EMPIRE  part  i 

would  have  eventually  meant  for  Joachim  ;  but  at 
the  very  moment  when  Campochiaro  was  delivering 
his  note  to  Metternich,  six  small  vessels  flying  the 
red  and  white  flag  with  the  golden  bees  were  speeding 
across  the  waters  of  the  Gulf  of  Genoa  from  Elba  to 
France,  and  the  face  of  Europe  was  once  more  changed. 
When  the  news  reached  Vienna,  it  was  at  first  not 
realized  that  Napoleon  was  bound  for  France.  His 
men  and  Campbell,  the  British  Commissioner,  both 
thought  their  destination  was  southern  Italy  ;  but  the 
Emperor  had  no  such  intention  ;  he  was,  as  usual, 
aiming  his  blow  at  the  vital  point. 

Immediately  before  Napoleon's  departure  from  Elba 
some  communication  passed  between  him  and  Joachim, 
though  probably  it  did  not  enlighten  the  King  as  to  the 
Emperor's  exact  project.  It  was  on  the  4th  of  March 
that  Joachim  first  got  news  of  Napoleon's  departure 
from  Elba ;  it  produced  complete  confusion  in  the 
King's  councils.  It  was  not  clear  for  one  thing  how 
the  enterprise  embarked  on  by  Napoleon  would 
terminate.  Besides  this  the  dissension  between  the 
Allies,  together  with  the  King's  diplomatic  step  for 
obtaining  recognition  from  France,  held  out  hope  of 
good  news  arriving  from  Vienna.  Joachim  therefore 
kept  the  information  from  Elba  quiet  as  long  as 
possible,  and,  when  the  news  finally  transpired,  sent 
for  Mier.  Not  without  some  excitement,  the  King 
informed  him  that  he  held  firmly  by  his  engagements 
with  Austria  and  that  he  had  instructed  Campochiaro 
in  the  same  sense.  Towards  Great  Britain  the  same 
course  was  pursued.  After  a  Cabinet  meeting  held 
on  the  6th  of  March,  Gallo  sent  for  the  British 
consular  agent.  Walker,  and  declared  to  him  the 
King's  ^*  firm  and  most  decided  resolution  to  cultivate 


CHAP.  XI  CONGRESS  OF  VIENNA  347 

and  preserve  the  friendship  of  Great  Britain."  ^  At  the 
same  time  assurances  of  the  same  general  character 
were  transmitted  to  Prince  Castelciccala  to  give  to 
the  British  Cabinet. 

On  the  6th  of  March  the  official  Monitore  published 
an  article  commenting  on  a  recent  number  of  the 
London  Morning  Chronicle^  in  which  Joachim's  conduct 
during  the  campaign  of  18 14  was  severely  criticized. 
The  Neapolitan  journal  put  forward  the  following 
explanation  of  Joachim's  conduct.  Napoleon  had  been 
willing  to  give  Joachim  supreme  command  of  the  army 
in  Italy,  had,  in  fact,  drawn  up  the  necessary  decree  ; 
to  this  the  King  had  only  been  prepared  to  accede  as  a 
preliminary  to  a  general  pacification.  That  condition 
was  not  met  and  the  negotiations  came  to  nothing. 

On  the  following  day,  the  7th  of  March,  the 
attitude  of  the  King  of  Naples  completely  changed. 
On  that  day  he  received  from  Campochiaro  the  news 
of  the  ill-success  of  his  last  move  at  Vienna,  and  the 
ominous  information  that  Austria  was  preparing  to 
concentrate  150,000  men  and  200  guns  on  the  Po. 

From  this  moment  the  King's  protestations  of 
fidelity  to  the  Austrian  treaty  became  weaker.  About 
him  there  was  a  party,  in  which  the  Duke  di  Gallo 
was  perhaps  most  influential,  strong  in  its  support  of 
Napoleon.  That  party  now  rapidly  regained  its  ascend- 
ant. On  the  1 2th  of  March  Joachim  spoke  of  the 
Bourbons  publicly  before  the  Court  circle  and  declared  : 
"  I  am  their  enemy,  as  they  are  mine."  Considerable 
movements  of  troops  towards  the  frontier  were  taking 
place,  arising  doubtless  from  the  course  which  the 
Neapolitan  Government  had  decided  to  adopt  towards 
France  ;    Mier    asked    for    explanations    as    to    these 

1  Walker  to  Castlereagh,  March  7,  1815,  Brit.  State  Papers,  18 14-18 15,  ii.  281. 


348  THE  NAPOLEONIC  EMPIRE         part  i 

movements.  The  King  assured  him  that  he  was 
faithful  to  the  Austrian  alliance,  but  showed  his 
sympathies  without  disguise  by  declaring  that  the 
news  from  Napoleon  was  good,  and  that  the  chances 
of  his  success  were  excellent.  To  Mier's  demands 
Gallo  formally  replied  on  the  14th,  but  in  purely 
evasive  terms.  On  the  following  day  information  of 
Napoleon's  triumphant  entry  into  Grenoble  reached 
Naples,  and  on  the  15  th  Gallo  had  an  inter- 
view with  Mier.  He  complained  of  the  coolness  of 
Austria  to  Naples,  declared  it  was  evident  that  it  was 
intended  to  sacrifice  the  King's  interests,  and  com- 
plained of  the  way  in  which  Campochiaro's  note  had 
been  received. 

No  diplomat  could  mistake  what  these  declarations 
portended.  Joachim  had  given  way  to  a  strong  re- 
action of  sentiment  and  had  now  practically  decided 
on  his  course.  The  events  of  the  spring  of  18 14, 
the  precarious  recompense,  the  bitter  sorrow  they 
had  brought  had  profoundly  affected  him.  Before 
the  Emperor  left  Elba  Joachim  was  preparing  to 
fight  for  his  throne  ;  now  that  the  tricolour  was  once 
more  the  national  flag  of  France,  he  believed  that 
his  opportunity  had  come  for  ridding  himself  of  the 
burden  of  shame  he  had  borne  for  twelve  long 
months,  and  for  striking  a  far  more  effective  blow 
for  his  own  interests  than  appeared  possible  but  a 
few  days  before.  Not  only  this,  but  the  vision  of 
Italian  independence  was  once  more  evoked,  and  the 
national  movement  of  France  against  the  Bourbons 
suggested  the  possibility  of  a  similar  Italian  movement 
against  the  Austrians  and  the  restored  governments. 
This  time  Joachim  was  not  in  a  hesitating  mood  ;  he 
was  determined  never  again  to  be  led  into  the  vacilla- 


CHAP.  XI  CONGRESS  OF  VIENNA  349 

tion  and  half  measures  which  he  had  been  drawn  into 
the  preceding  year.  Before  Napoleon  had  reached 
Paris,  Joachim  left  Naples  to  join  his  army.  The 
Monitore^  however,  merely  announced  that  the  King 
had  left  for  the  Abruzzi  on  a  tour  of  inspection,  and 
might  be  absent  several  weeks. 

Principal  Authorities  consulted 

MSS. 

Arch,  di  Stato,  Guerra,  xxv.  1052  :  disturbances  in  Abruzzi,  returns, 
etc.  :  1054,  1057,  1058  :  campaign  of  1814  and  occupation  of  the 
Marches  ;  2082,  2083  :  immigration  from  Sicily  in  18 12-18 13. 

SociETA  Patria,  D'  Ambrosio  MS.  :  narrates  the  campaign  of  18 15,  and 
was  apparently  made  large  and  unacknowledged  use  of  by  Colletta  for  his 
narrative  of  the  same  event. 

Mary  Caroline  Memoirs  :  for  a  few  points  of  subsidiary  interest. 

Brit.  Foreign  Off.,  Sicily,  30  and  90  :  various. 

Printed  Books 

Beauchamp,  Hist,  des  c  amp  ague  s ;  Bertholdi,  Mems. ;  Bianchi, 
Diplomazia  Europj  Bianchini,  Finanze  di  Napoli ;  Bianco,  Ultimi 
a'wenimenti ;  Brit.  State  Papers,  1814-1815;  Cacciatore,  Esame ; 
Canosa,  Piffari  di  montagna ;  CANTtr,  Cronistoria ;  Carte  Segrete  della 
polizia  Austriaca ;  Castlereagh,  Corr. ;  Colletta,  Storia ;  Consalvi, 
Corr.  i  Desvernois,  Mems. ,-  Fouche,  Mems. ;  Hansard,  Pari.  Debates, 
xxxi.  ;  Helfert,  Konigin  Karolina  ;  Helfert,  Murat ;  Inaugurazione  del 
G.\  O .-.  al  Rito  Scozz.-.;  Jeaffreson,  ^een  of  Naples ;  Las  Cases, 
Memorial;  Mac i rone,  Interesting  Facts ;  Melzi,  Memorie  ;  Memorie  sulla 
Condotta ;  Meneval,  Mems.;  Metternich,  Mems.;  Monitor e  Napolitano ; 
Orloff,  Mems.;  Pasquier,  Mems.;  Pelissier,  Registre  de  Vile  d'Elbe; 
Pepe,  Mems. ;  Pepe,  Relation,  Pamphleteer,  xxiii.  ;  Planat  de  la  Faye, 
Prince  Engine;  ^arterly  Renjie<vj,  xii.  ;  Quintavalle,  Notizia  storica ; 
Savary,  Mems. ;  S6gur,  Mems. ;  Tableau  des  Memhres  de  la  R  /,  L  .-. 
Joseph  la  Concorde;  Talleyrand,  Corr.  in^dite  {Pallain) ;  Tonelli, 
Bre-ue  idea ;  Vitrolles,  Mems.;  Wellington,  Suppl.  Dispatches;  Witt, 
Mem.  secrets ;  Zurlo,  Rapporto,  1 8 1 o-i  8 1 1 . 


CHAPTER    XII 

murat's  last  campaign 

Joachim  prepares  for  war  —  The  army  —  Hostilities  begin  — 
Diplomatic  relations  broken  —  Council  held  —  Joachim's 
plans — His  effective  strength — Movement  in  two  columns 
— Advance  from  Ancona — Bologna  occupied — Proclamation 
of  Rimini  —  Italian  national  convention  —  Public  apathy 
— Fight  on  the  Panaro — Attack  on  Occhiobello — March  of 
the  Guard — Austrian  movements — Carascosa  at  Modena — 
Carpi — Bianchi  at  Modena — Joachim  retreats — Council  of 
war — Guard  in  Tuscany — Retreat — Frimont  at  Bologna — 
Council  of  war — Bianchi  at  Florence — Joachim  on  the  Ronco 
— Demoralization  of  Neapolitans — Bianchi's  march — Caras- 
cosa faces  Neipperg — Fight  at  Monte  Milone — Battle  of 
Tolentino — Defeat  and  retreat — Belliard  joins  Joachim — 
Policy  of  Great  Britain — Bentinck  warns  Joachim — Castle- 
reagh's  letters  produced  to  Parliament — Dissatisfaction  at 
Naples — The  clergy — National  party — Constitution — Bour- 
bon restoration  decided  —  Caroline's  measures — Joachim 
arrives  at  Naples — Caroline  negotiates  with  Campbell — Her 
courage — Convention  of  Casa  Lanza — Scenes  of  last  days — 
Escape  of  Joachim — Caroline  goes  on  board  the  Tremendous — 
Prince  Leopold  enters  Naples. 

Although  Joachim  was  now  resolved  to  trust  his 
fortunes  to  the  ordeal  of  the  sword,  he  was  not  willing 
to  declare  himself  prematurely.  On  leaving  Naples  to 
join  his  army  he  sent  the  Count  de  Bauffremont  to 
Napoleon  to  inform  him  that  he  might  rely  on  his 
assistance,  but  it  was  not  till  the  end  of  March  that 

350 


CHAP.  XII       MURAT'S  LAST  CAMPAIGN  351 

he  heard  of  the  Emperor's  triumphant  entry  into  the 
capital  on  the  20th  and  that  Napoleon  wrote  to  the 
King  announcing  his  success  and  assuring  him  of  his 
support.  Yet  as  early  as  the  1 2th  of  March,  Maghella, 
who  had  returned  from  Paris  a  few  months  before,  was 
placed  in  charge  of  the  poHce  department,  and  on  the 
17th  Manhes  was  appointed  military  governor  of  the 
city  of  Naples.  Both  these  appointments  suggested  that 
the  Government  had  serious  work  on  hand.  Mier's 
endeavours  to  maintain  the  alliance,  perhaps  supported 
by  the  influence  of  Caroline,  were  powerless  against  the 
influence  of  the  Bonaparte  party,  headed  by  the  Princess 
Borghese  and  the  ex-King  of  Westphalia. 

The  numbers  of  the  Neapolitan  army  had  risen  from 
70,000  in  July  1 8 14  to  85,000  at  the  end  of  that  year, 
and  at  that  figure  had  remained  about  stationary. 
Recruiting  had  been  especially  active  on  the  frontier, 
where  the  generals  received  orders  not  to  give  up 
Austrian  deserters  and  to  secure  as  many  soldiers  as 
possible  from  that  source  and  from  the  disbanded  army 
of  the  ex-kingdom  of  Italy.  In  the  Marches,  provincial 
legions  had  been  organized.  Maghella  was  sent  on  a 
secret  mission  to  stir  up  sentiments  favourable  to 
Joachim  at  Ancona,  and  favours,  titles,  and  decorations 
were  showered  on  all  whose  influence  could  be  secured 
for  the  Government. 

As  early  as  January  Neapolitan  troops  were  being 
concentrated  on  the  Roman  border,  and  when  in  March 
a  sudden  crisis  arose,  the  NeapoHtan  army  was  already 
in  position  and  as  fit  for  war  as  was  possible  under  the 
circumstances.  On  the  1 3th  of  March  Joachim  secretly 
issued  orders  for  mobilization  and  by  the  end  of  the 
month  he  knew  that  Napoleon  was  in  full  possession 
of  the  government  of  France.     Joachim  now  dropped 


352  THE  NAPOLEONIC  EMPIRE  parti 

the  mask,  and  without  waiting  to  hear  whether  the 
Emperor  intended  war  or  peace,  whether  his  co- 
operation would  be  more  useful  at  any  other  time  or  in 
any  other  manner,  he  straightway  ordered  his  columns 
across  the  frontier. 

The    warlike    steps    of   the    King    of  Naples  were 
explained   according   to  the  formulas  of  diplomacy  by 
Campochiaro  to  Metternich.     He  stated,  as  is  usual  in 
such  passes,  that  Naples  was  still  as  anxious  as  formerly 
to  maintain  peace  and  to  carry  out  all  her  engagements. 
But  the  Austrian  note  announcing  the  concentration  of 
150,000  men  on  the  Po  was  of  so  threatening  a  nature, 
and  so  contrary  to  Austria's  engagements,  that  the  King 
in  order  to  protect  his  interests  felt  bound  to  reoccupy 
those  positions  south  of  the  Po  which  he  had  held  the 
year  before.     The  answer  of  Metternich  to  this  barely 
veiled  declaration  of  war  was  immediate  and  categorical. 
He  addressed  a  note   to  the  Neapolitan  Minister,  in 
which  he  shortly  covered  the  diplomatic  ground  and 
finished  by  stating  that  the  crossing  of  the  frontier  by 
King  Joachim's  troops  was  an  act  of  hostility,  in  con- 
sequence  of  which   he   inclosed    the   passports  of  the 
Neapolitan  plenipotentiaries.     At  the  same  time  Count 
Mier  received  a  note  from  the  Queen  announcing  that 
hostilities  had  begun  and  that  his  passports  would  be 
sent.     This  was  on  the  3rd  of  April. 

Viewed  narrowly  there  was  little  apparent  cause  for 
a  war  between  Naples  and  Austria.  To  many  it  came 
as  a  surprise,  and  it  did  not  respond  to  any  real  demand 
of  public  opinion.  Shortly  before  the  King  left  Naples 
for  the  army  he  held  a  council.  He  declared  to  his 
assembled  Neapolitan  and  French  councillors  that  he 
could  place  80,000  men  in  the  field  besides  twelve 
legions  of  provincial  militia,  and  that  Italy  both  north 


CHAP.  XII       MURAT'S  LAST  CAMPAIGN  353 

and  south  of  the  Po  was  ready  to  rise  for  independence. 
But  his  arguments  in  favour  of  war  met  with  little 
response.  His  French  advisers  urged  delay  so  as  not 
to  embarrass  the  policy  of  France,  the  Neapolitans  were 
anxious  not  to  put  their  fortunes  to  such  a  risk  as  that 
necessarily  entailed  by  a  war  with  Austria. 

On  leaving  the  council,  Joachim  met  General  Manhes, 
and  so  excited  was  he  that,  without  stopping  to  take  a  hat, 
he  took  the  general  with  him  and  drove  in  his  carriage 
along  the  sea  towards  Posilipo  in  heated  conversation. 
The  King's  chief  idea  in  hastening  on  hostilities  was 
not  altogether  unsound.  If  he  stood  any  chance  what- 
ever of  arousing  northern  Italy  and  defeating  Austria, 
it  was  only  by  some  such  means  as  he  appears  to  have 
contemplated.  A  sudden  irruption  into  Lombardy, 
attended  by  some  military  success  before  Austrian  re- 
inforcements could  appear,  might  lead  to  a  rising  in 
Milan  and  place  him  in  a  position  to  balance  between 
France  and  Austria  and  so  proceed  to  a  favourable 
settlement.  The  Austrians  had  enrolled  many  officers 
and  men  from  the  old  Italian  army,  and  these  elements 
might  prove  unreliable ;  besides  this,  Milan  had  been 
the  scene  of  much  active  intriguing  since  the  Austrian 
occupation,  notwithstanding  the  politic  and  tactful 
methods  of  the  military  governor,  General  Sommariva. 
Secret  societies  such  as  the  Carbonari  and  the  Spilla  Nera 
had  been  very  active  in  keeping  up  nationalistic  and 
anti-German  sentiment.  The  latter  society  was  largely 
made  up  of  old  Napoleonic  officers,  and  had  attempted 
to  open  communications  with  the  Emperor  while  at 
Elba.  Joachim's  political  plans  turned  on  these  and 
similar  considerations,  and  so  did  his  military  projects. 
Above  all  things,  he  was  firmly  resolved  that  hesitation 
should  not  mark  his  conduct  ;  he  was  determined  to 
VOL.  I  2  A 


354  THE  NAPOLEONIC  EMPIRE  part  i 

show  as  much  celerity  of  movement  in  1 8 14  as  he  had 
dilatoriness  in  1815.  'Z^^^'^J 

The  Austrian  strength  in  Italy  was  about  60,000 
men  in  the  Quadrilateral  and  some  34,000  more  dis- 
tributed between  Lombardy,  Tuscany,  and  Romagna. 
Joachim  might  therefore  hope  by  prompt  action  to 
overpower  any  force  opposed  to  him  in  the  last-named 
province.  His  plan  was  to  effect  this  and  then  to 
possess  himself  of  the  passages  across  the  Po  at  Occhio- 
belloj  near  Ferrara,  and  at  Borgoforte.  His  flank  thus 
secured,  he  could  continue  his  march  on  Piacenza, 
straight  in  the  direction  of  Milan,  straight  in  the 
direction  of  France.  The  plan  was  intelligible,  but 
bold,  and  it  appears  probable  that  it  was  undertaken 
by  too  small  a  force  in  presence  of  too  large  a  one. 
For  notwithstanding  his  heavy  muster-rolls  and  im- 
posing statements,  it  was  not  a  very  large  army  that 
Joachim  was  able  to  place  actually  in  the  field  ;  its 
eff^ective  strength  was  about  35,000  men,  5000  horse, 
and  60  guns.  Of  these  the  guards  (some  4000  or 
5000  in  number)  were  picked  men,  largely  foreign, 
and  good  troops  ;  their  generals,  however,  Pignatelli- 
Strongoli  and  Livron,  were  incapable.  The  four 
divisions  of  the  line  were  under  Carascosa,  D*  Ambrosio, 
Lecchi,  and  Rossetti.  Millet  de  Villeneuve  was  chief 
of  staff;  Pedrinelli  commanded  the  artillery,  Colletta 
the  engineers.  The  army  was  short  of  light  infantry 
and  of  heavy  cavalry,  while  the  artillery  officers  were 
ill  trained. 

The  King's  first  intention  had  been  to  concentrate 
the  whole  of  this  force  at  Ancona  and  thence  lead  it  in 
one  body  straight  into  Romagna,^  but  political  considera- 

1  Orders  were  issued  from  Solmona  on  the  1 8th  of  March  for  the  Royal  Guard 
to  march  on  Ancona. — Arch,  di  Stato^  Guerra^  xxv.  1059. 


CHAP.  XII      MURAT'S  LAST  CAMPAIGN  355 

tions,  so  often  the  soldier's  bane,  dictated  a  change  at 
the  last  moment.  If  the  Neapolitan  army  was  concen- 
trated wholly  to  the  east  of  the  Apennines,  the  Austrians 
would  be  able  to  gather  force  on  the  west  coast  from 
the  Papal  and  Tuscan  governments  and  to  threaten  not 
only  the  King's  flank  but  perhaps  even  Naples  itself. 
If,  on  the  other  hand,  a  portion  of  the  Neapolitan 
troops  marched  to  the  Po  through  the  Papal  States  and 
Tuscany,  a  certain  amount  of  strength  that  Austria 
might  gain  would  be  diverted  to  Naples  instead.  For 
this  reason  Joachim  decided  to  make  a  detached  com- 
mand of  the  Royal  Guard,  and  to  move  it  to  the  valley 
of  the  Po  through  Rome  and  Florence. 

Under  Pignatelli-Strongoli  and  Livron  this  column, 
about  7000  strong,  marched  into  Papal  territory  ;  the 
generals'  orders  were  to  observe  a  friendly  attitude 
to  the  inhabitants,  to  leave  Rome  at  their  left  hand, 
and,  marching  through  Foligno  and  Arezzo,  to  reach 
Florence  on  the  3rd  of  April.  Joachim  announced  the 
approach  of  his  troops  to  the  Grand  Duke  in  a  letter, 
assuring  him,  somewhat  paradoxically,  that  his  territory 
would  be  respected. 

While  Pignatelli-Strongoli  marched  through  Papal 
territory,  Joachim  with  the  rest  of  the  army  advanced 
from  Ancona  northwards.  On  the  28th  of  March  he 
published  a  decree  annexing  Urbino,  Pesaro,  and 
Gubbio.  On  the  29th  six  Neapolitan  gunboats  were 
ordered  to  sail  up  the  coast  from  Ancona  to  Rimini, 
a  frigate  following  them  ;  they  were  intended  to  operate 
in  conjunction  with  the  army  as  it  advanced  up  the 
coast. 

South  of  Bologna  the  Austrians  had  but  few  troops, 
merely  outposts  ;  they  withdrew  before  Joachim's  rapid 
advance,  and  the  only  shots  exchanged  were  in  a  slight 


356  THE  NAPOLEONIC  EMPIRE  part  i 

skirmish  at  Cesena.  After  this  affair  Joachim  had  a 
number  of  his  officers  to  dine  with  him,  and,  probably  to 
animate  them  with  a  breath  of  his  own  ardent  spirit, 
talked,  much  to  the  surprise  of  his  hearers,  of  the  valour 
and  excellence  of  the  army  and  of  the  conquests  that 
lay  before  them.  On  the  2nd  of  April  Joachim  reached 
Bologna,  which  the  Austrians  abandoned  at  his  approach. 
So  rapidly  had  the  Neapolitan  columns  been  hurried 
along  the  Emilian  road  that  Lecchi's  division  alone  had 
600  laggards.  The  King's  reception  from  the  Bolognese 
was  not  so  warm  as  it  had  been  the  year  before,  yet  a 
number  of  women  could  not  resist  the  desire  of  waving 
a  handkerchief  at  the  striking  figure  of  the  first  horse- 
man of  Europe,  and  caused  him  to  turn  smilingly  back 
to  his  staff  with  the  remark  :  "  Well,  you  see,  the  ladies 
are  all  for  us  !  "  ^ 

The  Neapolitan  army  had  been  preceded  by  a 
number  of  emissaries  whose  business  it  was  to  stir  up 
nationalist  movements.  At  Rimini,  on  the  30th  of 
March,  a  proclamation  was  issued  in  which  the  Italians 
were  informed,  with  all  due  emphasis  and  not  for  the 
first  time,  that  Providence  destined  them  for  in- 
dependence, that  the  hour  in  which  this  high  fortune 
was  to  be  accomplished  had  at  last  arrived,  and  that  the 
King  of  Naples  with  80,000  men  was  marching  for  the 
liberation  of  the  Peninsula.^  But  this  proclamation  pro- 
duced no  perceptible  effect ;  nor  did  another  issued  by 
Joachim  from  Bologna  a  little  later  convoking  an 
Italian  national  convention  to  assemble  at  Rome  on  the 
8  th  of  May.  Nowhere  was  there  any  semblance  of  a 
movement ;  the  energy  of  Italy  had  been  expended  in 

1  Pepe,  Mems.  H.  44. 

2  This  proclamation  is  attributed  to  Pellegrino  Rossi  (afterwards  the  ill-fated 
Prime  Minister  of  Pius  IX.)  by  Sig.  Lemmi,  though  on  somewhat  inconclusiv« 
grounds. — ^rch.  Star.  Napoli,  xxvi.  192. 


CHAP.  XII       MURAT'S  LAST  CAMPAIGN  357 

the  wars  of  Napoleon  ;  her  faith  had  been  shattered 
by  the  selfish  ambitions  of  the  princes  who  had  so 
frequently  invoked  the  vision  of  a  nationalism  that  was 
always  the  more  magniloquently  proclaimed  as  it  more 
nearly  coincided  with  their  own  immediate  interests. 
Joachim's  efforts  were  fruitless  ;  Italy  was  not  ripe  for 
revolution  but  yearning  for  repose,  and  even  from  among 
the  old  soldiers  of  Napoleon,  who  were  not  a  few  among 
the  population,  he  only  succeeded  in  raising  a  corps  of 
some  400  men  under  Colonel  Negri. 

At  Bologna  the  King  of  Naples  scarcely  paused  in 
his  headlong  march  ;  he  dispatched  thence  several 
columns  in  various  directions  to  carry  out  the  next 
part  of  his  plan  of  operations.  D'  Ambrosio  with 
his  division  was  detached  to  Ferrara.  He  was  to 
occupy  that  town,  capture  the  citadel,  and  secure  the 
passages  of  the  Po  just  beyond  at  Lagoscuro  and 
Occhiobello.  Joachim  himself  with  Carascosa's  division 
pushed  straight  along  the  great  Emilian  road  towards 
Modena. 

The  Austrian  commander  Bianchi,  who  had  so  far 
felt  obliged  to  retire  before  the  superior  forces  in  front 
of  him,  now  thought  himself  in  sufficient  strength  to 
make  a  stand.  To  protect  Modena  he  took  up  a 
position  where  the  Emilian  road  crosses  the  Panaro. 
He  appears  to  have  expected  to  defend  this  position 
successfully,  for  he  neglected  the  obvious  military  pre- 
caution of  destroying  the  long  bridge  of  Sant'  Ambrogio 
on  which  the  road  is  carried  across  the  river.  Bianchi 
had  some  5000  men  and  9  guns.  On  the  4th  of  April 
the  King  of  Naples  attacked  the  Austrians  ;  he  had 
with  him  Carascosa's  division,  one  regiment  of  cavalry, 
and  two  batteries,  in  all  more  than  7000  men.  The 
Neapolitans  deployed  along  the  river  banks,  above  and 


358  THE  NAPOLEONIC  EMPIRE  part  i 

below  the  bridge.  In  several  places  they  managed  to 
wade  across  the  channels  and  wide  sandy  bed  of  the 
river  ;  at  one  spot  a  whole  battalion  reached  the  further 
side,  but,  unwilling  to  face  the  Austrian  fire,  took 
refuge  under  the  bank  and  eventually  surrendered. 
Close  to  the  bridge  no  progress  was  made,  the  Austrian 
field-pieces  sending  their  fire  straight  down  the  long 
causeway  to  where  Joachim  and  his  staff  watched  the 
undecisive  firing  proceeding.  Then  an  act  of  fine  mili- 
tary courage  turned  the  fortunes  of  the  day.  Joachim 
called  on  General  Filangieri  to  carry  the  bridge.  That 
brave  officer  immediately  placed  himself  at  the  head  of 
a  small  squadron  of  lancers,  and,  followed  by  twenty 
or  thirty  of  the  bravest  of  them,  galloped  the  whole 
length  of  the  bridge,  successfully  driving  the  Austrians 
from  their  position  at  the  further  end.  Filangieri  fell 
covered  with  wounds,  but  his  bold  dash  was  promptly 
supported  by  the  King,  the  Neapolitan  infantry  soon 
made  good  a  lodgment  on  the  further  bank  of  the 
Panaro,  and  Bianchi,  seeing  his  centre  thus  pierced, 
retreated  in  good  order  on  Modena.  The  Austrians 
had  lost  69  killed,  316  wounded,  and  66  missing  ;  the 
Neapolitans  26  killed,  95  wounded,  and  542  missing. 

Carascosa  pressed  on  after  the  retiring  Austrians 
and  occupied  Modena,  whence  he  threw  outposts  in 
the  direction  of  Reggio  and  of  Borgoforte.  Joachim 
did  not  continue  with  this  division,  however,  but  turned 
back,  for  he  was  not  in  sufficient  strength  to  push 
beyond  Modena  for  the  present.  Until  his  right  flank 
and  rear  had  been  secured  by  D'  Ambrosio's  operations 
near  Ferrara  he  could  not  safely  advance  further  towards 
Piacenza. 

D'  Ambrosio  had  marched  through  Ferrara,  where 
the  small  Austrian  garrison  took  refuge  in  the  citadel. 


CHAP.  XII      MURAT'S  LAST  CAMPAIGN  359 

to  Occhiobello,  where  he  found  a  strongly  fortified 
bridge-head  sufficiently  garrisoned,  and  was  brought  to 
a  standstill.  Joachim  hurried  back  from  his  successful 
engagement  on  the  Panaro  to  the  help  of  D'  Ambrosio. 
The  King  arrived  at  Ferrara  on  the  6th,  but  found  the 
citadel  too  strong  for  a  coup-de-main.  The  next  day 
with  D'  Aquino's  brigade  he  captured  the  Austrian 
positions  at  the  bridge  of  Lagoscuro  and  marched 
thence  to  Occhiobello,  where  he  effected  his  junction 
with  D'  Ambrosio  on  the  night  of  the  7th.  On  the 
8  th  the  King  directed  a  strong  attack  on  the  Austrian 
fortifications,  now  defended  by  nearly  3000  men.  That 
attack,  like  all  those  previously  made  by  D'  Ambrosio, 
failed,  and  with  it  failed  the  whole  plan  of  campaign. 
Six  days  did  the  Neapolitans  remain  in  front  of 
the  bridge-head  at  Occhiobello  in  the  hope  of  driving 
out  the  Austrians,  but  the  attack  of  the  8  th  of  April 
when  Joachim  in  person  led  them  proved  to  be  the 
turning-point.  Each  day  after  that  the  Neapolitan 
attack  became  more  feeble  and  the  Austrian  defenders 
received  reinforcements  from  the  north. 

It  was  perhaps  in  the  operations  at  Occhiobello  that 
the  absence  of  the  Royal  Guard  from  the  main  army 
was  most  felt,  for  had  the  heads  of  column  been  a 
little  more  resolute  the  positions  would  probably  have 
been  carried.  Pignatelli-Strongoli  and  Livron  had  not 
equalled  the  King  in  the  celerity  of  their  march.  In- 
stead of  arriving  at  Florence  on  the  3rd  of  April,  which 
should  have  enabled  them  to  get  into  touch  with  Caras- 
cosa  at  Modena  on  the  6th,  they  did  not  reach  the 
capital  of  Tuscany  till  the  8th.  Although  now  ^yq 
days  late,  they  lost  even  more  time,  for  they  remained 
inactive  at  Florence  for  three  days  with  5400  infantry, 
1 900    cavalry,   and    16    guns,    a    force    more  valuable 


36o  THE  NAPOLEONIC  EMPIRE  part  i 

than  the  whole  of  the  rest  of  the  Neapolitan  army. 
But  the  8th,  the  day  on  which  Pignatelli-Strongoli 
reached  Florence,  and  the  day  on  which  he  ought 
to  have  effected  his  junction  with  Carascosa  at  Modena, 
was  precisely  the  day  on  which  Joachim  failed  to  carry 
the  bridge-head  of  Occhiobello.  Had  his  Guard  been 
one  week  earlier  in  the  field  and  resolutely  led,  he 
might  still  have  retained  the  offensive  ;  as  it  was,  it 
passed  to  his  opponents. 

The  Austrians  had  been  completely  taken  by  surprise 
by  Joachim's  sudden  irruption  into  Romagna.  On 
the  25  th  of  March  Prince  Schwarzenberg,  who  had 
intrusted  the  command  in  Italy  to  Frimont,  was  com- 
pletely in  the  dark  as  to  the  King  of  Naples'  intentions. 
So  rapidly  did  Joachim  rush  his  army  forward  from 
Ancona,  that  the  action  on  the  Panaro  was  fought 
before  Metternich  had  handed  their  passports  to  Campo- 
chiaro  and  Cariati.  One  day  later,  at  the  same  time 
as  diplomatic  relations  were  broken  off,  Schwarzenberg 
wrote  to  Frimont  instructing  him  that  the  King  of 
Naples  was  marching  north  in  two  columns,  that  his 
plan  might  be  to  strike  into  Lombardy  between  Pia- 
cenza  and  Alessandria,  that  it  was  necessary  to  dispose 
of  the  Neapolitans  before  thinking  of  operations  against 
France,  and  that  he  should  therefore  assume  a  strong 
offensive  and  endeavour  to  bring  the  King  to  a  decisive 
engagement  as  near  to  the  Po  as  possible. 

These  instructions  the  Austrian  commander  rapidly 
carried  out.  Reinforcements  were  promptly  sent  from 
the  Quadrilateral  and  Lombardy  to  Borgoforte  and 
Occhiobello.  The  latter  position  was  saved  as  we 
have  seen.  At  the  same  time  Austrian  reinforcements 
were  steadily  crossing  the  bridge  of  boats  at  Borgo- 
forte, and  the  day  after  Joachim  failed  at  Occhiobello 


CHAP.  XII      MURAT'S  LAST  CAMPAIGN  361 

Bianchi  was  ready  to  assume  the  offensive  towards 
Modena. 

Joachim  still  hoped  that  Pignatelli-Strongoli  would 
effect  his  junction  with  the  main  army  somewhere  in 
Romagna.  Carascosa  had  received  orders  to  send  out 
reconnaissances  along  the  road  to  Pistoja,  where  Nugent 
with  a  small  Austrian  detachment  was  attempting  to 
arrest  the  passage  of  the  Neapolitan  Guard.  In  other 
directions,  too,  Carascosa  had  detachments,  and  at 
Carpi,  eight  miles  on  the  road  to  Borgoforte,  he  had 
stationed  Pepe's  brigade.  Further  than  this  the  Nea- 
politans had  not  ventured,  and  at  this  point  they  had 
been  in  close  touch  with  the  enemy  ever  since  the 
action  on  the  Panaro,  for  Bianchi  had  retired  no  further 
than  was  necessary. 

At  Carpi  the  Neapolitans  and  Austrians  remained 
in  touch  from  the  6th  to  the  loth  of  April.  Joachim 
hoped  that  Bianchi  would  be  able  to  attempt  nothing 
until  he  had  brought  the  operations  at  Ferrara 
to  a  successful  issue  and  joined  Carascosa  with 
D'  Ambrosio's  division,  which,  with  the  advent  of 
Pignatelli-Strongoli  and  the  Guards,  would  have  con- 
centrated a  considerable  army  and  enabled  the  Nea- 
politans to  resume  the  offensive.  These  hopes  were 
dispelled  by  Bianchi,  who  advanced  on  the  morning 
of  the  loth,  and  after  some  heavy  skirmishing  in  which 
the  Neapolitans  were  much  outnumbered,  drove  Pepe 
from  Carpi.  The  Neapolitan  general  retired  with  such 
promptitude  that  his  killed  and  wounded  were  few, 
though  in  prisoners  he  lost  several  hundreds. 

Bianchi's  attack  at  Carpi  had  only  been  intended 
as  a  demonstration  to  relieve  the  pressure  on  Occhio- 
bello,  but  so  feeble  was  the  Neapolitan  resistance,  so 
large  the  number  of  deserters,  so  patent  the  signs  of 


362  THE  NAPOLEONIC  EMPIRE  part  i 

demoralization,  that  the  Austrian  general  decided  to 
continue  his  advance  and  pursued  Pepe  towards 
Modena.  On  the  following  day  Carascosa  retreated 
from  Modena  to  the  Panaro,  where  he  took  up  a 
defensive  position  and  was  joined  by  the  King.  On 
the  same  day  Mohr  made  a  sortie  from  the  bridge- 
head at  Occhiobello,  and  handled  D'  Ambrosio  so 
severely  that  he  ordered  his  division  to  fall  back  on 
Bologna.     Mohr  cautiously  followed  him. 

The  Austrians  now  had  several  divisions  in  motion 
south  of  the  Po,  under  such  competent  officers  as  Gober, 
Neipperg,  Merville,  and  Mohr  ;  Frimont  hoped  that 
with  these  he  would  be  able  to  defeat  Joachim  in  a 
battle  for  the  possession  of  Bologna.  But  the  position 
of  Joachim's  various  divisions  was  too  scattered  to 
afford  him  any  hope  of  success  before  concentrating 
his  army,  and  Bologna  was  the  only  point  at  which 
the  troops  from  Modena,  from  Cento,  and  from 
Ferrara  could  be  brought  together.  To  this  point 
accordingly  the  Neapolitan  retreat  was  continued, 
while  Carascosa's  division  screened  the  movement  by 
holding  the  banks  of  the  Panaro. 

On  the  13th  the  King  called  a  council  of  war  at 
Bologna.  At  this  the  opinion  of  the  generals  coincided 
with  his  own,  that  the  only  hope  of  success  lay  in 
defeating  the  Austrians  in  battle.  To  effect  this  the 
first  object  was  to  meet  them  under  the  most  favourable 
circumstances,  and  the  King  neither  liking  the  positions 
that  the  neighbourhood  of  Bologna  afforded,  nor  satis- 
fied to  fight  a  decisive  battle  without  the  Royal  Guard, 
decided  to  continue  his  retreat. 

Two  lines  were  open  for  retreating  from  Bologna  to 
the  kingdom  of  Naples,  the  one  by  Ancona,  the  other 
by  Florence,  the  one  east,  the  other  west  of  the  Apen- 


CHAP.  XII       MURAT'S  LAST  CAMPAIGN  363 

nines.  Their  length  was  approximately  equal.  The 
King  chose  the  former  because  it  offered  more  and 
better  defensive  positions,  because  his  magazines  were  at 
Ancona,  and  because  along  that  line  reinforcements  and 
supplies  were  being  continuously  pushed  up  from  Naples. 
A  retreat  by  way  of  Florence  only  offered  one  induce- 
ment, that  it  would  have  had  the  effect  of  uniting 
the  Royal  Guard  to  the  army  at  the  earliest  possible 
moment.^  Joachim  accordingly  issued  orders  for  the 
baggage  train  of  the  army  to  be  moved  to  Ancona, 
took  what  measures  he  could  to  retard  the  Austrians  in 
their  advance  towards  Bologna,  and  sent  instructions  to 
Pignatelli-Strongoli  to  rejoin  the  main  army  in  the 
Marches,  moving  through  Arezzo  and  S.  Sepolcro. 
This  order  to  retreat  Pignatelli-Strongoli  and  Livron 
responded  to  with  a  promptitude  and  alacrity  they  had 
not  hitherto  shown. 

The  operations  of  the  Royal  Guard  in  Tuscany  had 
been  far  from  glorious.  Fair  discipline  was  observed  on 
the  march,  though  a  great  deal  of  desertion  took  place, 
and  that  mostly  among  the  men  of  northern  origin, 
veterans  of  the  Spanish  and  German  wars.  Rome  was 
not  entered,  though  as  a  measure  of  precaution  the  Pope 
saw  fit  to  abandon  his  capital.  On  the  8th  of  April, 
as  we  have  already  seen,  Pignatelli-Strongoli  occupied 
Florence.  The  only  force  in  Tuscany  was  a  small 
Austrian  detachment  with  some  Tuscan  levies  ;  but 
the  impetuous  Nugent  was  their  commander.  How 
weak  he  was  in  numbers  may  be  clearly  inferred  from 

^  CoUctta  in  his  Memoria  militare,  following  D'  Ambrosio,  whose  MS.  he  appears 
to  have  largely  copied,  gives  a  long  dissertation  on  what  he  terms  Joachim's  excentric 
retreat,  somewhat  superfluously  dragging  in  Bulow  and  Jomini.  The  whole  discus- 
sion, like  so  many  of  CoUetta's  disquisitions,  is  quite  pointless,  because  between  the 
route  via  Florence  and  that  'via  Ancona  there  is  practically  no  difference  in  mileage. 
The  line  of  retreat  chosen  was  obvious  and  necessary. 


364  THE  NAPOLEONIC  EMPIRE  parti 

the  fact  that  he  abandoned  Florence  and  for  once  felt 
himself  compelled  to  fall  back  without  firing  a  shot. 
As  usual  with  him,  however,  he  judged  clearly  of  the 
military  exigencies  of  the  situation  and  what  risks  they 
demanded  that  he  should  run.  He  therefore  took  up 
his  position  at  Pistoja,  a  few  miles  north-west  of 
Florence,  and  there  made  show  of  awaiting  the  Neapo- 
litan advance.  Nugent  was  well  placed  in  the  lower 
Apennines,  midway  between  Florence  and  Modena,  and 
fully  understood  how  important  it  was  that  Pignatelli- 
Strongoli  and  Carascosa  should  not  effect  their  junction. 
His  mere  presence  had  a  result  that  his  military  re- 
sources could  not  have  secured,  for  the  Neapolitan 
generals  were  so  terrified  of  their  Austrian  opponent 
that  with  vastly  superior  numbers  and  better  troops 
they  failed  ignominiously. 

On  the  1 1  th  of  April  the  Guard  marched  out  of 
Florence  towards  Pistoja  ;  the  movement  might  have 
had  considerable  results  five  days  earlier  ;  it  was  now 
quite  useless.  Pignatelli-Strongoli  and  Livron  were 
both  afraid  of  Nugent ;  they  reconnoitred  but  could 
discern  no  Austrians ;  a  fog  came  on,  and  it  was 
reported  that  cavalry  was  in  movement  on  their 
flanks  ;  and  thereupon  they  resolved  to  retreat.  At 
the  same  time  orders  were  on  their  way  from  Joachim 
enjoining  caution,  directing  that  the  Royal  Guard  must 
be  kept  intact,  and  lastly,  as  already  noted,  commanding 
a  retreat  via  Arezzo  and  S.  Sepolcro.  No  order  could 
have  pleased  the  generals  more.  So  efficiently  did 
they  carry  it  out  that  on  the  i6th  Pignatelli-Strongoli 
and  Livron,  doubtless  to  the  amazement  of  Nugent, 
had  already  reached  Cortona,  more  than  fifty  miles 
south  of  Florence. 

While  Pignatelli-Strongoli  was  hurrying  to  Cortona, 


CHAP.  XII       MURAT'S  LAST  CAMPAIGN  365 

the  King's  positions  covering  Bologna  were  being  forced. 
On  the  15  th  Bianchi  surprised  a  Neapolitan  detachment 
at  Spilimberto  and  forced  the  passage  of  the  Panaro  at 
that  point.  Carascosa  retired.  A  skirmish  was  fought 
on  the  outskirts  of  Bologna,  but  on  the  night  of  the 
15  th  the  Neapolitans  abandoned  the  city,  and  on  the 
1 6th  fixed  their  headquarters  at  Imola. 

On  the  1 6th  the  Austrians  occupied  Bologna,  and  a 
council  of  war  was  held  to  determine  the  course  of 
future  operations.  Frimont  could  dispose  of  nearly 
45,000  men  to  carry  on  the  campaign  against  the  King 
of  Naples,  and  these  he  distributed  as  follows.  Neipperg, 
with  17,000  men,  was  ordered  to  follow  the  King's 
line  of  retreat.  Bianchi,  with  14,000,  was  ordered  to 
march  via  Florence,  Arezzo,  and  Perugia,  and  thence 
to  strike  across  at  the  Neapolitan  line  of  communica- 
tions in  the  neighbourhood  of  Ancona.  Nugent,  with 
some  5000,  was  ordered  to  push  on  towards  Rome  ; 
while  8000  more  were  to  act  as  a  reserve.  This  last 
body  did  not,  as  it  happened,  take  any  active  part  in 
the  campaign. 

It  is  difficult  to  reconcile  the  plan  of  the  Austrian 
commander  with  the  accepted  principles  of  strategy. 
It  can  only  be  defended  on  the  grounds  that  the 
Neapolitan  army  was  considered  so  demoralized  as  not 
to  be  capable  of  effective  resistance,  and  that  the  urgent 
need  of  placing  troops  on  the  French  frontier  made  a 
risk  worth  running  that  gave  a  greater  probability  of  a 
decisive  engagement  being  fought  at  the  earliest  possible 
moment.  Otherwise  the  splitting  up  of  the  Austrian 
army  into  two  nearly  equal  wings,  with  a  range  of 
mountains  between  them,  was  offering  the  Neapolitans 
the  best  possible  chance  of  concentrating  against  each 
wing  in  turn,  and  thus  gaining  an  immense  advantage 


366  THE  NAPOLEONIC  EMPIRE  parti 

of  numbers.  It  was  true  enough  that  the  Neapolitan 
rank  and  file  was  greatly  demoralized,  but,  as  was  sub- 
sequently proved,  Frimont  greatly  underrated  the  fight- 
ing quality  of  the  Royal  Guard  as  well  as  the  considerable 
personal  factor  represented  by  King  Joachim. 

The  part  that  Neipperg's  corps  was  intended  to  play 
was  not  to  engage  the  Neapolitans,  but  by  his  demon- 
strations to  delude  them  into  the  belief  that  the  whole 
Austrian  army  was  on  their  immediate  line  of  retreat. 
His  advance  was  to  be  slow  so  as  not  to  press  them, 
and  thus  to  gain  time  for  Bianchi  to  march  around  their 
flank  towards  Ancona.  This  plan  nearly  succeeded. 
Bianchi,  leaving  Bologna  on  the  17th,  got  to  Florence 
in  three  days,  and  in  three  more  to  Arezzo  ;  that  is  a 
march  of  115  miles  in  six  days, — a  wonderful  feat. 
At  the  same  time  Neipperg  was  advancing  in  far  more 
leisurely  fashion  along  the  Emilian  road.  Joachim's 
headquarters  had  remained  at  Imola  on  the  17th,  and 
on  the  three  following  days  had  been  in  turn  transferred 
to  Faenza,  Forli,  and  Cesena.  At  the  last-named  city 
Joachim  received  the  first  intimation  that  might  lead 
him  to  suspect  that  his  line  of  retreat  was  threatened. 
A  message  reached  him  from  Pignatelli-Strongoli,  which 
he  refused  to  believe,  that  an  Austrian  column  was 
operating  west  of  the  Apennines.^ 

So  far  Neipperg  had  made  no  show  of  energy  in 
following  up  the  retreating  army,  and  this  probably 
encouraged  the  King  to  reconnoitre  a  Hrq  defensive 
position  just  north  of  Cesena,  along  the  banks  of  the 
river  Ronco,  where  he  might  await  the  arrival  of  the 
Royal  Guard  and  the  attack  of  the  Austrians.     Intrench- 

1  Pignatelli-Strongoli,  Discorsi,  i.  27  ;  ii.  32.  This  probably  did  not  refer  to 
Bianchi's  corps,  which  only  reached  Florence  on  the  day  Joachim  is  said  to  have 
received  this  dispatch.  Either  Pignatelli-Strongoli  has  got  his  date  wrong,  which  is 
not  in  the  least  unlikely,  or  his  dispatch  refers  not  to  Bianchi  but  to  Nugent. 


CHAP.  XII      MURAT'S  LAST  CAMPAIGN  367 

merits  were  thrown  up,  and  the  army  was  extended 
in  position.  Joachim  was  now  as  anxious  to  waste 
time  as  three  weeks  before  he  had  been  anxious  to  gain 
it.  His  offensive  movement  having  failed,  and  Italy- 
having  received  his  political  overtures  with  unmistakable 
apathy,  it  was  plain  that  now  his  best  hope  lay  in  some 
general  scheme  of  pacification  that  might  possibly  be 
negotiated  between  Napoleon  and  the  Powers.  The 
hope  was  doubtless  a  slender  one,  yet  there  seemed 
to  be  no  better  course  than  to  defer  a  crisis  until 
Napoleon's  influence  could  make  itself  felt.  For  this 
or  similar  reasons,  Joachim  now  attempted  to  nego- 
tiate. He  sent  Colonel  Carafa  into  the  Austrian  lines, 
and  offered  to  conclude  an  armistice  with  a  view 
to  sending  plenipotentiaries  to  Vienna.  Neipperg  de- 
layed replying  for  two  days,  and  then  sent  an  evasive 
answer.  On  the  21st  and  22nd  there  were  demonstra- 
tions and  skirmishes  along  the  line  of  the  Ronco,  and 
in  the  evening  of  the  latter  day  Joachim  decided  to 
fall  back  to  some  position  nearer  to  Ancona.  Bianchi, 
although  the  King  was  unaware  of  the  fact,  was  already 
within  a  day's  march  of  Arezzo. 

From  the  day  on  which  the  line  of  the  Ronco  was 
abandoned,  the  Neapolitan  army  showed  greater  signs  ot 
demoralization  than  before.  Near  Cesena  an  officer 
of  the  rank  of  major  went  over  to  the  enemy  ;  deser- 
tion was  epidemic  in  the  rank  and  file ;  through  Cesena 
and  down  the  Emilian  road  Neipperg's  hussars  and 
Tyrolian  Jagers  hung  on  to  the  skirts  of  the  re- 
treating army  and  constantly  picked  up  prisoners  and 
demoralized  the  rear-guard.  Food  and  forage  were 
scarce  along  the  line  of  retreat,  for  even  before  the 
campaign  opened  Carascosa  had  warned  the  Govern- 
ment that  the  resources  of  the  country  were  exhausted. 


368  THE  NAPOLEONIC  EMPIRE  part  i 

Now  the  distress  of  the  soldiers  was  terrible  ;  the  com- 
missariat broke  down  ;  hunger  led  to  pillage  ;  pillage 
to  excess.  General  Lecchi,  in  command  of  the  Third 
Division,  had  given  up  all  hope  of  success,  and  made 
no  scruples  of  telling  his  subordinates  so. 

Leaving  the  details  of  the  march  in  charge  of  the 
divisional  commanders,  Joachim  now  went  on  to 
Ancona,  in  the  neighbourhood  of  which  fortress  the 
Royal  Guard  effected  its  junction  with  the  army.  On 
the  30th  he  proceeded  to  Macerata,  where  he  met 
Pignatelli-Strongoli,  between  whom  and  the  King  a 
violent  scene  of  recrimination  took  place.  On  that 
day  news  came  from  the  outposts  that  the  Austrians 
were  showing  in  force  in  the  direction  of  Tolentino. 
Bianchi  was  already  descending  from  the  Apennines. 

The  Austrian  general  had  continued  his  march  with 
great  rapidity.  At  Florence  on  the  20th,  at  Arezzo  on 
the  23  rd,  he  had  reached  Camerino  on  the  29th.  Thence 
he  had  extended  to  his  left,  towards  Jesi,  at  which 
point  he  hoped  to  get  into  touch  with  Neipperg,  and 
slowly  advanced  towards  Tolentino  and  Macerata. 

As  soon  as  Joachim  realized  that  the  Austrian  army 
was  in  two  wings,  and  that  these  two  wings  were 
rapidly  drawing  together,  he  decided  to  attack  them  at 
once,  and,  if  possible,  beat  them  in  detail.  Bianchi's 
army  was  the  more  threatening  to  his  line  of  communi- 
cations, and  he  rightly  decided  to  direct  his  main  attack 
against  it.  Carascosa  was  left  in  front  of  Neipperg, 
with  orders  to  delay  the  Austrian  advance  and  to  fall 
back  as  slowly  as  possible  towards  Ancona.  On  the 
30th  he  took  up  a  good  position  at  Sinigaglia,  and, 
supported  by  the  gunboats  that  caused  the  Austrians 
much  annoyance,  fought  a  brief  engagement  that 
momentarily  delayed    Neipperg.     Meanwhile  Joachim 


CHAP.  XII       MURAT'S  LAST  CAMPAIGN  369 

was  concentrating  his  remaining  divisions  as  rapidly  as 
possible  on  Macerata.  On  the  ist  of  May  Bianchi 
occupied  Tolentino,  and  pushed  detachments  down  the 
valley  of  the  Chieti.  They  soon  got  into  contact  with 
the  Neapolitans.  Joachim,  who  now  had  a  consider- 
able part  of  his  army  in  Macerata  and  the  immediate 
neighbourhood,  decided  to  attempt  a  reconnaissance  in 
force  towards  Tolentino  on  the  following  day. 

On  the  2nd  of  May  Joachim  advanced  up  the  valley 
of  the  Chieti  and  along  the  range  of  hills  on  its  northern 
bank,  with  D'  Ambrosio's  division  and  the  cavalry  of 
the  Guard  under  Livron.  Bianchi  also  advanced  and 
sent  a  considerable  detachment  of  infantry  to  occupy 
one  of  the  highest  points  between  Macerata  and 
Tolentino,  the  Monte  Milone.  The  Neapolitan  lancers 
in  the  valley  of  the  Chieti  first  came  into  contact  with 
the  Austrian  patrols,  which  they  drove  before  them. 
The  King,  having  reconnoitred  the  Monte  Milone,  decided 
to  get  possession  of  it  if  possible,  and  ordered  D'  Ambrosio 
to  deploy  and  attack  the  position.  The  troops  went 
forward,  but  as  soon  as  the  leading  regiment,  the  3rd 
Light  Infantry,  got  under  fire,  it  broke  up  in  confusion. 
Joachim  galloped  up,  dismounted,  threw  himself  among 
the  men,  rallied  them,  and  led  them  forward  again  in 
person.  But  the  attack  was  unsuccessful ;  the  King 
was  repulsed  and  General  D'  Ambrosio  was  severely 
wounded.  Then  Joachim  attempted  a  flanking  move- 
ment, this  time  with  better  success,  and  finally  the 
Austrians  withdrew,  leaving  the  Monte  Milone  with  a 
number  of  prisoners  in  the  King's  hands.  That  night 
D'  Ambrosio's  division,  the  command  of  which  had  now 
devolved  on  D'  Aquino,  camped  on  the  Monte  Milone. 
Bianchi  had  fallen  back  to  a  position  just  in  front  of 
Tolentino,  where  he  was  able  that  night  to  concentrate 
VOL.  I  2  B 


370  THE  NAPOLEONIC  EMPIRE  parti 

his  whole  force.  He  was  prepared  to  accept  battle  if 
necessary  on  the  following  day,  yet  he  was  by  no  means 
reassured  as  to  his  position,  for  he  had  not  yet  got 
into  touch  with  Neipperg,  and  he  realized  that  he  would 
probably  have  to  fight  unassisted  against  the  whole  of 
the  Neapolitan  army.  He  made  his  dispositions  for 
defence  in  the  following  manner.  A  detachment  was 
placed  to  the  south  of  the  Chieti.  The  main  Austrian 
line  was  drawn  up  to  the  north  of  and  at  right  angles 
to  that  stream  and  across  the  range  of  hills  that  runs 
parallel  to  it.  In  the  centre  an  advanced  position  was 
held  in  the  village  of  Cassone.  Further  to  the  left  the 
Austrians  faced  the  Monte  Milone,  and  on  the  extreme 
flank,  where  the  slopes  ran  down  into  flatter  country, 
Bianchi  placed  a  regiment  of  Tuscan  dragoons.  He 
had  about  1 1 ,000  men  in  line. 

Joachim  moved  the  Royal  Guard  up  the  valley  of 
the  Chieti  in  the  early  morning  of  the  3rd  of  May.  It 
was  intended  to  fill  the  space  between  the  river  and 
D'  Aquino's  division  on  the  Monte  Milone.  Lecchi 
had  orders  to  march  from  Macerata  and  take  up  his 
position  on  D'  Aquino's  right.  The  King's  intention 
was  to  attack  Cassone  with  the  Guard,  and  when  that 
had  sufficiently  drawn  the  Austrian  forces,  to  move 
forward  from  the  Monte  Milone  and  swing  Lecchi's 
division,  pivoting  on  D'  Aquino's,  right  around  Bianchi's 
left  flank.  Had  his  orders  been  carried  out  he  would 
have  had  some  15,000  men  in  the  field  ;  as  it  was  he 
had  not,  and  his  forces  actually  present  probably  did 
not  exceed  those  of  the  Austrians. 

The  chief  cause  of  the  failure  of  Joachim's  plans 
was  the  breakdown  of  the  commissariat  department. 
The  men  of  D'  Aquino's  division  had  scattered  from 
their  bivouac  on  the  Monte  Milone  in  search  of  food. 


CHAP.  XII       MURAT'S  LAST  CAMPAIGN  371 

The  Royal  Guard  had  only  obtained  the  scantiest  of 
rations  by  plundering  the  houses  of  Macerata.  Lecchi's 
division  had  fared  and  behaved  worst  of  all.  His  men 
had  arrived  near  Macerata  late  at  night  after  a  heavy 
march  and  had  not  been  able  to  find  any  food  whatever. 
They  dispersed  through  the  country  searching  for  sub- 
sistence, and  in  the  early  morning,  when  the  division 
should  have  marched  to  the  front,  it  was  impossible  to 
collect  a  single  battalion.  When  at  about  nine  o'clock 
Pignatelli-Strongoli  was  deploying  between  Monte 
Milone  and  the  Chieti,  D'  Aquino's  division  was  not  yet 
under  arms,  while  Lecchi  was  writing  to  the  chief  of 
staff  that  he  would  be  unable  to  march  from  Macerata 
until  his  men  had  obtained  food. 

The  position  was  a  distressing  one  for  Joachim,  yet 
it  might  have  been  remedied  in  the  course  of  a  few 
hours,  for  Bianchi  showed  no  sign  of  taking  the 
offensive  and  the  day  was  only  just  beginning  ;  but 
the  folly  and  indiscipline  of  Pignatelli-Strongoli  threw 
away  what  chance  of  success  yet  remained.  The 
commander  of  the  infantry  of  the  Guard  was  probably 
smarting  under  the  reproaches  addressed  to  him  by  the 
King  for  the  manner  in  which  he  had  acquitted  himself 
in  Tuscany.  Whether  for  this  reason,  or  from  mere 
wrongheadedness,  he  no  sooner  had  his  troops  de- 
ployed than  he  ordered  them  to  advance  and  attack  the 
Austrian  position  at  Cassone.  Joachim  galloped  up  as 
rapidly  as  he  could  to  the  point  where  firing  had  now 
broken  out.  He  arrived  too  late  to  disengage  the 
troops,  and  found  he  could  do  nothing  but  attempt  to 
direct  the  fighting  as  well  as  circumstances  would 
permit.  His  infantry  fought  well,  and  after  some 
heavy  firing  carried  Cassone  at  the  point  of  the  bayonet. 
But  Bianchi  had  some  artillery  well  placed  beyond  the 


372  THE  NAPOLEONIC  EMPIRE  part  i 

village,  and  the  Guard  appeared  unable  to  make  further 
headway.  It  was  urgent  that  pressure  should  be 
applied  at  some  other  point  of  the  Austrian  line. 
D*  Aquino's  division  had  now  been  in  part  assembled 
and  formed  under  cover  of  the  woods  about  the  Monte 
Milone,  and  Joachim  ordered  it  to  advance  against  the 
Austrian  left.  D'  Aquino  disposed  his  troops  en  echelon^ 
right  flank  forward,  each  echelon  made  up  of  one 
battalion  formed  in  square.  This  formation  in  squares, 
an  ineffective  and  clumsy  one  for  attack,  was  judged 
necessary  by  D'  Aquino  as  his  right  flank  was  not 
covered,  owing  to  the  non-arrival  of  Lecchi,  and  he 
feared  a  possible  charge  from  Bianchi's  dragoons. 

On  the  ridge  along  his  centre  Joachim  had  massed 
his  guns  and  was  directing  their  fire  across  a  hollow 
towards  the  Austrian  left.  Bianchi,  now  feeling  secure 
of  his  right  flank,  had  taken  up  his  position  at  the 
menaced  point,  and  transferred  a  couple  of  battalions 
of  Jagers  to  strengthen  his  line.  He  relied  greatly  on 
their  good  rifle  practice,  for  he  was  very  weak  in 
artillery.  D'  Aquino's  division  slowly  emerged  from 
the  woods,  moved  down  into  the  hollow,  and  marched 
towards  the  Austrian  position;  its  leading  echelon  was 
composed  of  the  3rd  Light  Infantry,  the  regiment  that 
had  behaved  so  badly  the  day  before  in  the  attack  on  the 
Monte  Milone.  When  within  firing  distance  the  Jagers 
and  Austrian  field-pieces  sent  a  plunging  fire  down  the 
hillside  into  the  Neapolitans,  and  nearly  immediately 
they  broke.  The  second  square,  seeing  the  first 
disbanding,  wavered.  At  this  moment  the  Tuscan 
dragoons  charged  on  the  Neapolitan  flank,  while  the 
Austrian  infantry  advanced,  and  in  a  few  minutes 
D'  Aquino's  division  was  routed. 

But  the  Neapolitan  guns  from  the  ridge  redoubled 


CHAP.  XII      MURAT'S  LAST  CAMPAIGN  373 

their  fire,  and  the  Austrians  soon  stopped,  unwilling  as 
yet  to  risk  an  offensive  movement.  The  King,  followed 
by  his  staff,  did  his  utmost  to  re-form  the  troops.  He 
exposed  himself  to  the  hottest  fire.  Many  of  the 
officers  were  killed  and  wounded  by  his  side,  but  all  in 
vain,  for  the  Neapolitan  army  was  rapidly  nearing 
defeat.  As  Joachim  was  attempting  to  re-form  his 
broken  troops  under  cover  of  the  artillery,  a  staff  officer 
rode  up  with  a  dispatch  from  the  Abruzzi.  It  announced 
that  Nugent  with  a  small  force  had  just  reached  Aquila, 
within  the  frontiers  of  the  kingdom,  and  nearly  on  the 
King's  line  of  communications.  Joachim  had  now  no 
choice  but  to  retreat,  and  not  only  to  retreat  but  to  do 
so  rapidly  enough  to  reach  Naples  before  any  detached 
Austrian  corps  could  cut  him  off.  Orders  were  at 
once  issued  for  the  troops  to  fall  back  on  Macerata. 

To  point  the  moral  of  Joachim's  defeat  is  superfluous, 
and  no  deduction  can  be  drawn  here  that  the  intelligent 
reader  could  fail  to  drav/  for  himself.  It  may,  however, 
be  said  that  this  last  appearance  on  a  battlefield  of  one 
of  the  finest  soldiers  of  his  day  was  by  no  means 
entirely  discreditable.  His  courage  and  spirit  were 
never  more  conspicuous,  and  rarely  has  the  unaided 
example  of  one  man  done  more  to  inspire  a  bad  army 
to  effort.  Even  his  strategy  was  not  entirely  faulty, 
for  the  battle  was  not  fought  on  the  lines  that  he 
intended  ;  indeed  Joachim  might  have  said  with  some 
show  of  justification  that  Pignatelli-Strongoli's  dis- 
obedience and  bad  conduct  had  lost  him  the  battle. 
Yet  on  the  other  hand  the  King's  greatest  fault  as  a 
soldier  was  never  more  clearly  shown  than  when  he 
failed  to  relieve  that  general  of  his  command  and 
merely  reproached  him  with  his  ill-behaviour.  So  well 
had  the  Royal  Guard  and  many  of  Joachim's  officers 


374  THE  NAPOLEONIC  EMPIRE  parti 

fought  that  Blanchi  declared  that  the  Neapolitans  had 
shown  great  courage.  The  Austrian  loss  was  over  800 
in  killed,  wounded,  and  missing  ;  the  Neapolitan  1720 
killed  and  wounded,  and  over  2000  prisoners. 

Pignatelli-Strongoli  had  continued  to  show  insub- 
ordination during  the  progress  of  the  battle,  and  an 
example  in  which  he  was  so  well  qualified  to  lead  the 
way  spread  rapidly  in  the  hour  of  misfortune.  No 
sooner  had  the  retreat  begun  than  the  Neapolitan 
generals,  nearly  without  exception,  abandoned  their 
commands  and  rode  into  Macerata.  There  an  informal 
consultation  at  the  King's  headquarters  degenerated 
into  a  scene  of  undignified  recrimination  and  reproach. 
D'  Aquino  had  the  hardihood  to  call  on  the  King  to 
abdicate,  and  was  immediately  relieved  of  his  command. 
Generals  and  men  were  starving  and  clamoured  for 
food.  In  the  course  of  the  ensuing  night  the  remnant 
of  D'  Aquino's  division  dispersed,  scouring  fields  and 
villages  for  the  means  of  preserving  life  ;  they  mostly 
fell  an  easy  prey  to  Bianchi's  cavalry  and  Jagers. 

Joachim's  retreat  from  Macerata  was  even  more 
disastrous  than  the  battle  of  Tolentino.  His  army 
literally  melted  away.  Heavy  rains  turned  the  Adriatic 
road  into  a  quagmire.  The  day  after  the  battle  it  was 
only  after  some  skirmishing  with  the  Austrians  and  the 
greatest  difiiculty  with  his  subordinates  that  the  King 
was  able  to  effect  a  junction  with  Carascosa  and  get 
the  army  started  on  the  road  to  Naples.  Bianchi  and 
Neipperg  together  could  now  dispose  of  22,000  men, 
and  they  hastened  on  in  pursuit  of  the  King.^  By  a 
rapid  advance  they  hoped  to  complete  the  demoraliza- 
tion of  the  Neapolitans  and  also  to  forestall  any  possible 

^  Neipperg  had  been  weakened  by  having  to  send  8000  men  under  Best  back 
from  Rimini  to  take  part  in  the  operations  against  France. 


CHAP.  XII      MURAT'S  LAST  CAMPAIGN  375 

move  of  the  British  against  Naples  by  sea.  Between 
the  Chieti  and  the  Tronto  Joachim's  army  lost  three- 
quarters  of  its  numbers.  Many  of  the  soldiers  of  the 
Royal  Guard  deserted  ;  the  Neapolitans  mutinied  or 
went  home.  In  six  days  Joachim  arrived  at  Castel  di 
Sangro,  in  the  heart  of  the  Abruzzi,  and  there,  with 
what  feelings  it  is  difficult  to  realize,  he  found  a  traveller 
from  Naples  come  to  meet  him,  his  old  companion  in 
arms,  his  chief  of  staff  when  he  commanded  the  cavalry 
of  the  Grande  Armee^  Count  Belliard.  This  capable 
and  influential  officer  had  been  sent  on  a  special  mission 
to  the  •  King  by  Napoleon,  who,  not  at  fault,  viewed 
with  complete  mistrust  the  generals  and  staff  of  the 
Neapolitan  army.  Belliard  was  intended  to  advise  and 
guide  Joachim,  but  had  arrived  when  no  counsel  could 
avail. 

Belliard  reached  Naples  on  the  morning  of  the 
9th  of  May.  Before  proceeding  to  join  the  King  he 
was  received  by  the  Queen,  and  she  declared  to  him 
that  her  utmost  endeavour  had  been  used  to  dissuade 
Joachim  from  war,  and  that  neither  she,  nor  Mosbourg, 
nor  Gallo  had  succeeded  in  moving  him.  But  a  few 
days  later  Belliard  noted  that  the  King's  version  of 
matters  was  precisely  the  reverse,  and  that  he  ascribed 
the  war  entirely  to  the  urgent  solicitations  of  Caroline. 

On  the  same  day  that  Belliard  reached  Castel  di 
Sangro,  what  was  left  of  the  Neapolitan  army  passed 
through  it,  not  retreating,  but  ''  fleeing,"  as  the  French 
general  recorded.  There  was  a  short  skirmish  with  the 
Austrian  advanced  guard,  and  the  retreat  was  continued 
to  Venafro.  For  a  few  days  after  this  the  King  main- 
tained some  semblance  of  taking  military  measures  to 
reorganize  the  army  and  defend  the  kingdom,  but  before 
coming  to  his  final  retreat  to  Naples  it  will  be  necessary 


376  THE  NAPOLEONIC  EMPIRE  part  i 

to  review  other  events  lost  to  sight  during  the  relation 
of  the  campaign  of  Tolentino. 

One  of  the  chief  reasons  that  had  dictated  to  Joachim 
as  the  basis  of  his  policy  a  rapid  and  unexpected  stroke 
at  northern  Italy  was  the  danger  that  for  some  years 
had  constantly  menaced  Naples,  the  danger  from  sea, 
from  Great  Britain.  Although  he  had  not  succeeded 
in  obtaining  a  treaty  of  peace  from  that  Power,  yet  by 
the  terms  of  the  armistice  signed  by  Bentinck  a  year 
before,  it  was  necessary  that  each  government  should 
give  the  other  three  months'  notice  before  resuming 
hostilities.  The  King,  therefore,  chose  to  assume  that 
no  attack  need  be  feared  from  Great  Britain  so  long  as 
the  armistice  was  not  denounced. 

This  attitude  availed  nothing,  for  Bentinck,  now 
once  more  in  Genoa,  as  alert  and  prompt  as  usual, 
demanded  explanations  of  the  military  preparations  of 
the  Neapolitan  Government  as  early  as  the  22  nd  of 
March  ;  while  on  the  5  th  of  April  he  declared  in  a 
formal  note  that  the  alliance  of  Great  Britain  with 
Austria  made  every  act  of  hostility  against  the  latter 
Power  one  against  the  former  as  well,  and  that  the  in- 
stant he  was  notified  by  the  Austrian  Government  that 
hostilities  had  occurred,  he  should  consider  the  armistice 
between  Great  Britain  and  Naples  at  an  end.  Bentinck's 
position  was  supported  by  the  British  Cabinet,  and  it 
was  quickly  arranged  that  an  Anglo-Sicilian  expedition 
should  once  more  be  sent  against  Naples.^ 

1  Stewart  to  Wellington,  April  25,  181  5,  Wellington,  Sup.  Dhps.  x.  128,  That 
Bentinck's  action  affected  the  King  of  Naples'  military  operations  in  the  valley  of 
the  Po,  as  is  generally  related,  cannot  be  believed.  If  those  operations  are  closely 
dated  and  followed  they  will  all  appear  to  depend  on  purely  military  reasons  that 
left  no  sound  alternative  course  up  to  the  14th  of  April.  After  that  date  it  might 
possibly  be  said  that  Joachim  could  have  concentrated  on  the  Reno  covering  Bologna, 
and  there  accepted  battle.  But  there  were  plenty  of  reasons — military,  political, 
and   of  expediency — against  that  course,  nor  can  the  fear  of  a   British  attack  on 


CHAP.  XII      MURAT'S  LAST  CAMPAIGN  377 

The  population  of  Naples  had  quite  as  sensitive  a 
political  instinct  for  the  danger  that  menaced  them  from 
the  sea,  from  Great  Britain  and  Sicily,  as  their  King. 
Besides  this,  the  anti-Napoleonic  feeling  that  had  coursed 
through  the  Continent  from  Moscow  to  Madrid  had 
its  counterpart  at  Naples.  Unmilitary  in  their  in- 
stincts, the  Neapolitans  were  weary  of  the  conscription, 
of  being  marched  to  distant  lands  for  the  pleasure  of 
the  French  Emperor  ;  they  resented  the  weight  of  taxa- 
tion that  kept  up  an  army  they  detested  and  the  pomp 
of  a  court  that  did  not  represent  them.  As  is  usual 
in  matters  of  government,  no  balance  of  gain  was 
struck,  the  benefits  that  had  been  secured  were  for- 
gotten in  what  gave  opportunity  for  present  criticism. 
The  death  of  Mary  Caroline  had  removed  one  great 
cause  of  dislike  to  the  Bourbons,  and  in  the  general 
feeling  of  unrest  and  desire  for  settlement,  nothing  of 
Ferdinand  was  so  well  remembered  as  his  paternal 
methods,  his  truly  Neapolitan  manners,  his  easy-going 
simplicity.  The  pomp  of  Joachim's  Court  was  main- 
tained from  a  well-administered  revenue,  while  the  old- 
fashioned  ceremonial  of  Ferdinand  represented  unintelli- 
gent, wasteful,  and  burdensome  finance.  But  sentiment, 
not  reason,  guides  popular  criticism  ;  and  sentiment 
at  Naples  now  apprehended  more  change,  more  revolu- 
tion, and  pined  for  Bourbonism  as  the  only  possible 
permanent  settlement.^  The  merchants  of  Naples  were 
dissatisfied.  The  trade  of  the  port,  that  had  sprung  up 
once  more  under  the  armistice  after  an  interruption  of 
so  many  years,  had  been  cut  ofi^  again  by  the  events 
that   had   followed  Napoleon's    departure   from   Elba ; 

Naples  be  thought  to  have  borne  on  the  choice  between  the  Reno  and  the  Ronco 
as  a  position  for  offering  battle.  The  supposition  rests  on  nothing  but  vague  asser- 
tion, and  must  be  dismissed. 

^  Malet,  Voyage  en  Italie,  i66. 


378  THE  NAPOLEONIC  EMPIRE  part  i 

English  cruisers  once  more  patrolled  the  coast  ;  gold 
was  becoming  scarce  ;  and  to  supply  his  wants  during 
the  campaign,  Joachim  had  raised  a  forced  loan  ot 
2,000,000  francs.  Strongest  of  all  the  influences  against 
the  King  was  that  of  the  Church.  He  had  never  been 
directly  recognised  by  the  Pope,  never  been  through 
the  rite  of  coronation,  a  ceremony  of  such  immense 
import  to  a  Catholic  people.  Between  the  uncrowned 
King  in  possession  and  the  duly  anointed  monarch 
not  far  away,  the  great  mass  of  the  people  made  a  choice 
that  was  kept  profoundly  secret.  The  antagonism  of 
the  Pope,  roused  by  the  occupation  of  part  of  his  terri- 
tory by  the  Neapolitan  troops,  and  carefully  fanned  by 
the  French  and  Spanish  Bourbons,  rendered  even  more 
hostile  the  attitude  of  the  Neapolitan  clergy  towards  the 
King.  Largely  as  a  consequence  of  that  attitude  the 
people  were  cold,  and  all  efforts  to  organize  a  general 
levy  were  fruitless. 

\^t  was  not  wrongly  that  Joachim  had  judged  that 
the  constitutional,  or  national,  or  Italian  party  was 
the  only  one  that  could  help  him.  And  it  is  not 
impossible  that  his  constant  reluctance  to  follow  them 
on  the  extreme  courses  they  were  constantly  advocat- 
ing stood  for  a  political  wisdom  that  discerned  fully 
how  weak  in  numbers  that  party  really  was.  How 
did  the  constitutional  question  stand  ?  In  a  cam- 
paign fought  with  the  clear  object  of  forming  a  large 
Italian  state  the  risk  taken  was  so  great,  his  crown  was 
so  clearly  staked,  that  it  appears  now  as  though  he 
should  not  have  hesitated  to  place  his  every  means  in 
the  scale,  as  though  he  should  have  clearly  announced 
that  the  war  was  more  than  one  of  ambition  and 
aggrandisement,  and  was  for  the  furtherance  of  the  civil 
liberties  of  the  Italian   people.  *    The   plausible  reason 


CHAP.  XII       MURAT'S  LAST  CAMPAIGN  379 

that  had  tied  his  hands  the  year  before  was  now  wanting. 
He  could  no  longer  say  that  his  alliance  with  Austria 
made  it  impolitic  for  him  to  give  his  subjects  a  consti- 
tution. Joachim  had  proved  less  bold,  and  even  less 
successful  in  a  political  than  in  a  military  sense.  On 
arriving  at  Ancona  to  take  command  of  the  army  he 
said  to  Pepe  :  .  .  .  "  We  will  talk  shortly  of  giving  a 
constitution  to  the  kingdom.  ..."  But  he  paltered 
with  a  question  that  ought  to  have  been  finally  settled, 
if  at  all,  before  he  left  Naples  for  the  front.  Only  when 
all  was  lost,  as  a  useless  and  ungracious  sop  to  exhausted 
fortune,  did  Joachim  proclaim  what  might,  two  years 
earlier,  have  crowned  the  great  political  work  of  the 
French  in  Italy.  On  the  12th  of  May,  when  the 
Neapolitan  army  had  fled  nearly  to  the  gates  of  the 
capital,  a  decree  was  issued  granting  Naples  a  constitu- 
tion ;  it  was  ante-dated  Rimini  the  30th  of  March. 

It  was  far  too  late  now  for  Joachim  to  attempt  by 
any  means,  political  or  military,  to  retrieve  his  broken 
fortunes.  His  rupture  with  Austria  had  immediately 
crystallized  into  unanimity  the  hitherto  divided  opinions 
of  the  Congress  of  Vienna,  and  the  war  in  which  he  had 
engaged  was  immediately  accepted  as  one  of  which  the 
only  conclusion  could  be  a  Bourbon  restoration.  Before 
the  battle  of  Tolentino  was  fought  the  NeapoHtan  camps 
were  flooded  with  proclamations  announcing  the  return 
of  Ferdinand.  Metternich  was  not  prepared  to  com- 
promise, and  when  he  heard  from  Neipperg  that  Joachim 
was  willing  to  treat,  he  instructed  him  that  the  only 
terms  he  could  offer  to  the  King  were  an  annual  revenue 
of  1,000,000  florins  in  a  private  station  in  return  for 
his  resignation  of  the  throne.  On  receipt  of  these 
instructions,  a  week  after  Tolentino,  Neipperg  and 
Bianchi  conferred  and  agreed  not  to  act  on  them,  for 


380  THE  NAPOLEONIC  EMPIRE  parti 

they  considered  Joachim's  position  now  so  hopeless 
that  nothing  could  prevent  the  Austrian  troops  from 
marching  into  Naples.  Nor  were  the  Austrian  generals 
mistaken. 

On  receipt  of  the  news  of  the  disaster  at  Tolen- 
tino,  Queen  Caroline  called  a  council,  and  urged  the 
Ministers  to  devise  measures  that  might  yet  save  the 
kingdom.  Manhes  was  sent  to  take  command  of  a 
small  division  on  the  frontier  beyond  S.  Germano. 
He  was  soon  recalled,  however,  as  the  Government 
hardly  knew  whether  to  fear  the  Austrians  or  the  Nea- 
politans the  more,  and  Caroline  was  firmly  resolved  that 
if  unable  to  resist  the  former,  she  would  at  all  events 
maintain  her  own  subjects  in  order. 

For  a  few  days  more  Joachim  attempted  to  collect 
an  army  on  the  Liri,  and  assembled  at  Capua  some  5000 
men,  a  force  substantial  in  numbers  but  far  more  anxious 
to  surrender  than  to  fight.  On  the  night  of  the  i6th 
D'  Aspre  surprised  a  division  of  4000  Neapolitans  at 
Mignano,  totally  dispersing  them  ;  this  marked  the  end 
of  military  operations.  Two  days  later  Joachim,  accom- 
panied by  Belliard  and  a  few  staff  officers,  rode  into 
Naples  and  proceeded  to  the  Royal  Palace.  On  the 
walls  were  pasted  proclamations  that  he  heeded  little, 
announcing  to  all  who  cared  to  believe  that  the  kingdom 
of  Naples  had  now  become  a  constitutional  monarchy. 
Outside  the  gates  of  the  Palace  a  small  crowd,  groups  of 
liberal  enthusiasts,  had  collected,  and  perhaps  for  the  first 
time  since  he  had  worn  the  crown  Joachim  Murat,  the 
defeated  king,  met  with  a  really  warm  popular  reception. 

Within  doors  Joachim  and  Caroline  met,  not  without 
recrimination  and  tears.  Napoleon's  sister  had  foreseen 
the  completeness  of  the  disaster  from  the  day  when 
the  fatal  news  from  Tolentino  reached  her,   and  had 


CHAP.  XII      MURAT'S  LAST  CAMPAIGN  381 

straightway  prepared  for  the  worst.  She  had  immedi- 
ately sent  off  to  Paris  all  the  members  of  the  Bonaparte 
family  at  Naples,  Madame  Mere,  Princess  Borghese,  and 
Cardinal  Fesch.  On  the  loth  of  May  a  British  ship, 
probably  the  Tremendous,  that  had  been  hovering  off  the 
coast  for  some  days,  opened  communication,  and  in  the 
course  of  the  next  few  days  Caroline  agreed  terms  with 
Commodore  Campbell  for  her  personal  surrender. 

While  these  negotiations  were  proceeding  the  people 
of  Naples  were  kept  as  much  in  the  dark  as  possible. 
The  Monitore,  as  a  general  rule,  abstained  from  giving 
any  news  at  all,  and  what  information  it  did  contain  was 
totally  misleading.  The  engagement  at  Monte  Milone 
on  the  2nd  of  May  figured  as  a  great  Neapolitan  victory, 
the  complete  defeat  of  the  following  day  as  an  insignifi- 
cant skirmish.  Yet  the  people  of  Naples  felt  that  the 
end  was  approaching,  and  grew  correspondingly  restless. 

It  was  on  the  13th  of  May,  five  days  before  Joachim's 
return,  that  Caroline  concluded  her  arrangement  with 
Campbell  for  being  taken  on  board  the  Tremendous. 
But  the  British  commodore  could  not  dispose  of  a 
sufficient  force  to  occupy  Naples,  and  the  Queen  there- 
fore determined  to  remain  at  her  post  and  to  repress 
the  possible  disorder,  perhaps  even  insurrection,  that  the 
approaching  Bourbon  restoration  might  excite  among 
the  lazzaroni.  On  the  15  th  the  population  showed 
great  signs  of  restlessness,  and  threatening  groups  began 
to  form  in  the  neighbourhood  of  the  Palace.  Caroline 
ordered  out  her  state  carriage,  and,  drawn  by  six  horses, 
drove  slowly  and  with  a  serene  face  through  the 
crowded  streets  of  the  city.  Later  in  the  day  she 
attired  herself  in  a  military  coat  and  mounting  a  charger, 
passed  the  civic  guards  in  review.  This  show  of  deter- 
mination and  courage  well   became  a  Princess  of  the 


382  THE  NAPOLEONIC  EMPIRE  parti 

House  of  Bonaparte.  It  allayed  the  excitement  of  the 
impressionable  Neapolitans  and  perhaps  saved  Naples 
from  a  repetition  of  the  scenes  of  horror  that  had 
accompanied  the  last  Bourbon  restoration. 

Joachim  also  had  attempted  to  negotiate,  but  with 
less  good  fortune  than  Caroline.  He  sent  Gallo  to 
Bianchi's  headquarters,  only  to  discover  that  the 
Austrians  would  grant  him  no  terms  of  any  sort.  He 
then  appears  to  have  momentarily  thought  of  entering 
Gaeta  and  defending  that  fortress,  but  Austrian  cavalry- 
patrols  were  already  between  that  point  and  the  capital, 
so,  abandoning  this  idea,  he  instructed  Carascosa  and 
Colletta  to  enter  into  a  military  convention  on  behalf 
of  the  army  for  terminating  hostilities.  They  were 
instructed  to  make  the  best  conditions  they  could  for  the 
country  and  themselves,  and  to  leave  the  King  out  of 
consideration.  At  Casa  Lanza,  three  miles  from  Capua, 
on  the  20th  of  May,  the  Neapolitan  generals  met 
Bianchi,  Neipperg,  and  Lord  Burghersh,  and  signed  a 
convention  that  recognised  Ferdinand  as  King  and  put 
an  end  to  hostilities  ;  its  provisions  will  be  noticed  later. 

The  last  hours  of  King  Joachim's  reign  had  come. 
On  the  1 8  th  of  May  the  Monitor e  maintained  an 
ominous  reserve  on  the  political  situation  ;  it  diplo- 
matically devoted  the  greater  part  of  its  space  to  a  far 
from  burning  topic, — an  imaginary  conversation  between 
Pericles  and  Anaxagoras.  On  the  following  day  it 
appeared  for  the  last  time,  announcing  the  return  of 
Joachim  to  his  capital  and  the  warm  reception  he  had 
met  with.^  Late  in  the  afternoon  of  the  19th  of  May- 
King    Joachim    rode    out   from    his    palace   of  Naples 

^  Nearly  as  curious  as  the  dialogue  between  Pericles  and  Anaxagoras  in  the 
expiring  Monitore  is  the  playbill  of  the  theatres.  On  the  last  night  of  Joachim's 
reign  the  Fiorentini  gave  Gli  accidenti  delta  -vita ;  the  Fenice,  V  infermo  ad  arte  ; 
while  the  Teatro  della  Sorte  announced  Con  la  burla  i'  incommincia  ' 


CHAP.  XII       MURAT'S  LAST  CAMPAIGN  383 

accompanied  by  his  Master  of  the  Horse,  the  Duke  of 
Roccaromana,  and  by  a  few  officers  of  his  staff.  He  had 
discarded  uniform  and  wore  plain  clothes.  He  pushed 
rapidly  through  the  crowded  streets  that  lead  up  to  the 
Pizzofalcone,  along  the  Riviera  di  Chiaja,  and  to  the 
entrance  of  the  grotto  of  Posilipo,  whence  he  saw  for 
the  last  time  that  wonderful  city  that  had  during  seven 
eventful  years  been  his  capital.  On  through  the  long 
tunnel  of  the  Romans  he  rode,  out  into  the  wild  and 
romantic  region  beyond,  where  the  red  and  white  houses 
of  Pozzuoli  and  Baia  give  life  and  give  depth  to  a 
wonderful  scene,  where  the  mighty  relics  of  a  past 
civilization  and  the  mightier  remains  of  upheaved  nature 
might  well  arouse  chastening  reflections  in  the  mind  of 
the  dethroned  monarch.  At  the  loveliest  hour  of  the  day, 
when  the  sun  rushes  down  to  the  ocean,  the  fugitive 
king  urged  his  horse  up  the  slopes  that  lead  from  Lake 
Averno  to  the  Arco  Felice.  If  he  then  gazed  backwards 
he  might  have  seen  once  more  in  all  its  sunset  glory  that 
enchanted  region,  the  capes  and  islands,  the  hills,  the 
blue  bays,  and  the  purple  cone  of  Vesuvius  watchful 
over  all ;  all  his, — and  now  all  sinking  into  night.  And 
riding  but  a  few  paces  more  along  the  road  the  Ancients 
built,  through  the  arch  that  crowns  the  Monte  Grillo,  he 
could  watch  the  sun  descend  to  the  blue  Mediterranean 
that  had  so  often  threatened  him,  fall  beyond  the 
islands  whence  his  enemies  had  so  long  struggled  to 
overthrow  him,  disappear  towards  Corsica  whence  the 
maker  of  his  fortune  had  come.  As  he  urged  his  horse 
down  towards  the  coast-line  through  the  ruins  of  ancient 
Kumas,  the  sky  was  darkening  and  the  curving  white 
fringed  shore  that  fades  into  the  haze  of  the  horizon 
towards  Gaeta  gradually  became  dim.  In  the  dark- 
ness the  little  group  of  horsemen  finally  rode  up  to  a 


384  THE  NAPOLEONIC  EMPIRE  part  i 

fisherman's  hut,  and  after  a  little  bargaining  hired  two 
small  vessels  that  lay  there  hauled  up  on  the  sand. 

Launched  on  the  vast  Mediterranean  in  a  small  boat 
there  was  but  little  Murat  could  attempt.  Once  more 
the  idea  appears  to  have  occurred  to  him  to  enter  Gaeta, 
where  the  commandant,  General  Begani,  could  be  relied 
on.  But  in  the  bay  of  Gaeta  British  cruisers  were  already 
hovering,  and  on  the  following  morning  the  fugitives 
found  their  way  barred,  and  had  to  turn  back  and 
seek  refuge  in  the  island  of  Ischia.  There,  close 
to  the  principal  town  of  the  island,  Joachim  remained 
in  extreme  peril  for  twenty -four  hours.  From  the 
cottage  where  he  and  his  party  had  taken  refuge  a 
small  xebec  was  perceived  on  the  morning  of  the  21st 
slowly  making  its  way  with  sweeps  along  the  channel 
that  divides  Ischia  from  Procida.  By  a  nearly  miracu- 
lous chance  the  xebec  turned  out  to  be  the  Santa 
Caterina^  chartered  by  and  conveying  General  Manhes 
and  his  party  to  France.  She  was  the  only  vessel  to 
which  Admiral  Lord  Exmouth,  who  had  arrived  in  the 
bay  on  the  20th,  had  given  a  permit  to  leave  Naples. 
Manhes  welcomed  Murat  and  his  followers  on  board, 
and  the  Santa  Caterina,  after  one  or  two  adventures 
with  British  cruisers,  brought  her  passengers  safely  to 
Cannes,  where  they  landed  on  the  30th  of  May. 

In  the  meanwhile  the  throne  of  Naples  had  been 
reoccupied  by  the  Bourbons.  On  the  21st  of  May 
Prince  Leopold,  the  King's  second  son  and  special 
representative,  joined  Bianchi's  headquarters  at  Teano. 
On  the  same  day  Caroline  Bonaparte  issued  her  last 
commands  as  Regent.  She  ordered  General  Florestano 
Pepe  and  the  commandants  of  the  forts  of  Naples  to 
facilitate  the  landing  of  British  sailors  that  would  take 
place  that  night.     Her  message  was  worded  with  the 


CHAP.  XII       MURAT'S  LAST  CAMPAIGN  385 

same  firmness  and  dignity  that  had  marked  her  whole 
conduct,  and  that  imparted  to  her  descent  from  the 
throne  a  quality  of  nobility  that  had  not  always  been 
present  during  her  tenure  of  it. 

Three  hundred  British  sailors  were  landed  that  night 
at  the  Arsenal,  immediately  at  the  back  of  the  Royal 
Palace,  and  Caroline  immediately  embarked  on  one  of 
their  boats  and  was  rowed  to  H.M.S.  Tremendous. 
At  two  o'clock  in  the  morning  of  the  22nd  of  May, 
Count  Neipperg,  at  the  head  of  two  weary  regiments  of 
cavalry,  marched  into  the  city.  Late  on  the  23rd  Prince 
Leopold  and  Bianchi  rode  into  Naples,  and  were  received 
with  loud  acclamations  and  demonstrations  of  joy  ;  the 
Tremendous  and  the  other  British  ships  were  dressed  with 
bunting  and  fired  a  welcoming  salute.  But  Caroline's 
courage  did  not  desert  her.  She  witnessed  these  proceed- 
ings from  Campbell's  quarter-deck,  and  haughtily  declared 
to  those  who  stood  about  her  that  her  brother  would  re- 
place her  on  the  throne  of  Naples  within  four  months. 

Principal  Authorities  consulted 

MSS. 
Arch,  di  Stato,  Guerra,xxv.  1052,  1053,  army  returns  5   1054,  move- 
ment of  troops,  etc.  ;  1055,  ^'^S^y  occupation  of  the  Marches  ;  1057,  1059, 
1060,  campaign  of  1815  ;  1061,  Caroline's  last  measures  at  Naples. 

SociETA  Patria,  D'  Ambrosto  MS.,  narrative  of  the  campaign  of  1815, 
see  p.  349. 

Printed  Books 

Beauchamp,  Catastrophe  de  Murat ,-  Belliard,  Mems. ;  Bertholdi, 
Mems.  ;  BiA^cui,  Diplomazia  Eur  op.  ;  Bianco,  Ultimi  a'v^enimenti ;  Brit. 
State  Papers,  1 8 14- 18 15  ;  Cacciatore,  Esame  ;  CANTt",  Cronistoria  ; 
Castlereagh,  Corr. ;  Colletta,  Opere  inedite ;  Colletta,  Storia ; 
CoNSALVi,  Corr.;  Desvernois,  Mems.;  Dufourcq,  Murat;  Hansard, 
Pari.  Debs.  xxxi. ;  Helfert,  Murat;  Houssaye,  iSi^  ;  Lemmi,  Murat ; 
Macirone,  Interesting  Facts ;  Malet,  Voyage  en  Italie ;  Memorie  sulla 
Condotta ;  Monitore  Napolitano  ;  Napoleon,  Corr.;  P.  G.,  A'weninienti ; 
Vefe,  Mems.  ;  Pignatelli-Strongoli,  Discorsi ;  Quintavalle,  Notizia 
Storica  ;  Rav aschieri,  Filangieri  ;  Savary,  Mems.  ;  Schirmer,  Feldzug  ; 
Sf GUR,  Mems. ;  Star  (London)  ;  Wellington,  Supp.  Dispatches. 

VOL.  I  2  C 


CHAPTER   XIII 

THE    TRAGEDY    OF    PIZZO 

Murat  in  Provence — Waterloo — Royalist  reaction — Murat  pursued 
— Escapes  to  Corsica — Franceschetti — State  of  Corsica — Gordon 
visits  Murat — Decides  on  expedition  to  Naples — Marches  to 
Ajaccio — Carabelli's  mission — Arrest  of  Otello — Correspond- 
ence of  Murat  with  Naples — The  guetapens  theory — Macirone 
—  Bastard  at  Bastia  —  Macirone  and  Carabelli  at  Ajaccio  — 
Murat  sails — His  plans — Lands  at  Pizzo — Situation  of  town — 
Coolness  of  inhabitants  —  Trentacapilli  —  Murat's  arrest  — 
Nunziante  sends  troops — The  news  at  Naples — Orders  sent  to 
Nunziante — Court-martial — Execution  of  Murat. 

Caroline  Bonaparte's  courageous  assertion  that  in 
four  months  her  brother  would  replace  her  on  the 
throne  was  not  destined  to  come  true.  When  but  little 
more  than  that  time  had  elapsed,  the  Emperor  of  the 
French  had  become  the  helpless  prisoner  of  St.  Helena, 
and  King  Joachim  had  come  to  an  even  more  merciful 
cessation  of  his  labours.^ 

Once  before  had  Joachim  Murat  landed  on  the 
southern  coast  of  France  after  successfully  escaping  the 
British  cruisers  patrolling  the  Mediterranean.  Then  the 
ill  success  of  Egypt  lay  behind :  now  that  of  Naples ;  then 
his  arm  was  ready  to  support  the  fortunes  of  Napoleon  : 

^  "  The  Calabrese  have  been  more  humane,  more  generous,  than  those  who  sent 
me  here,"  said  Napoleon  to  Las  Cases  when  informed  of  Murat's  end. 

386 


CHAP.  XIII      THE  TRAGEDY  OF  PIZZO  387 

now  it  was  equally  ready,  equally  useful,  but  rejected 
and  powerless.  The  last  of  the  Imperial  armies  was 
rapidly  being  concentrated  on  the  Belgian  frontier  at 
the  very  moment  when  Murat  landed  on  French  soil, 
and  his  first  thought  was  to  fly  to  that  station  which 
strung  to  its  highest  tension  every  fibre  of  his  nature, 
the  front  of  the  Emperor's  cavalry.  But  the  feeling  of 
the  army  against  their  old  comrade  was  so  strong 
that  even  had  Napoleon  been  willing  he  could  hardly 
have  utilized  his  services.  To  his  demand  for  permis- 
sion to  return  to  Paris  he  received  a  curt  reply,  the 
Emperor  propounding  the  cutting  and  unanswerable 
question  :  '*  What  treaty  of  peace  has  been  concluded 
between  France  and  Naples  since  1814.^'*-^ 

Murat  thus  unwillingly  found  himself  compelled  to 
settle  down  near  Toulon  and  await  events,  taking  up 
his  residence  at  a  villa  belonging  to  Admiral  Lallemand. 
There  he  lived  unostentatiously  with  a  small  suite, 
treated  respectfully  by  the  authorities  and  inhabitants. 
A  Mr.  de  Baudus  was  sent  to  reside  with  Murat  by  the 
Emperor  as  his  representative. 

On  this  footing  matters  remained  some  three  weeks, 
and  then  came  news  of  the  disaster  at  Waterloo,  followed 
by  the  second  abdication,  the  flight  of  Napoleon,  and 
the  second  restoration.  The  news  of  the  final  over- 
throw of  the  Empire  at  once  raised  a  royalist  agitation 
in  the  south,  and  Murat  was  immediately  placed  in  a 
position  of  great  anxiety.  The  royalist  mob  soon  broke 
out  into  excesses.  Marshal  Brune  was  barbarously 
murdered  at  Avignon.  A  few  days  later  a  reward  of 
8000  francs  was  offered  for  Murat's  capture.  He 
separated  from  his  followers  and  went  into  hiding.  He 
wandered  for  many  days  alone,  half  starved,  in  constant 

1  Macirone,  36. 


388  THE  NAPOLEONIC  EMPIRE  part  i 

fear  of  capture  and  assassination.  On  one  occasion, 
from  behind  some  shrubs  in  a  garden,  he  watched  a 
party  of  his  pursuers  search  the  house  where  but  a  few 
minutes  before  he  had  been  hospitably  received  and 
entertained.  Yet  through  all  his  wanderings  he  found  a 
few  faithful  friends,  and  sufficient  resources  in  his  own 
energy  and  abilities  to  escape  capture.  He  had  made 
an  offer  of  submission  to  Louis  XVIII.  and  implored 
his  magnanimity  immediately  after  the  downfall  of 
Napoleon  ;  he  had  also  applied  for  passports  and  per- 
mission to  take  refuge  in  England,  but  could  get  no 
tidings  from  his  agents. 

In  despair  at  not  hearing  from  Paris,  and  hopeless  of 
saving  his  life  from  the  numerous  bands  of  royalists 
searching  for  him,  Murat  decided  to  make  an  attempt 
to  escape  from  the  south  of  France  by  boat.  His  first 
intention  appears  to  have  been  to  sail  around  Spain  to 
Havre,  and  Roccaromana,  with  whom  he  remained  in 
communication,  succeeded  in  securing  a  small  vessel  for 
the  journey.  But  Joachim  was  so  closely  pursued  that 
he  was  only  able  to  reach  the  little  cove  where  he  was 
to  have  been  taken  off,  in  time  to  see  the  vesseFs  sails 
disappear  on  the  horizon.  Finally,  after  hiding  among 
vineyards  for  several  days,  he  succeeded  in  getting  out 
to  sea  in  a  small  rowing  boat  with  three  companions, 
— Langlade,  Blancard,  and  Donadieu,  ex-officers  in  the 
Imperial  navy. 

It  was  on  the  22  nd  of  August  that  Murat  and  his 
three  companions  embarked.  They  steered  for  Corsica. 
Thirty-six  hours  after  starting  they  were  overtaken  by  a 
gale  and  came  near  sinking.  Whether  they  would  ever 
have  reached  port  appears  doubtful  had  not  a  vessel 
then  crossed  their  course  and  rescued  them  ;  she  proved 
to  be  the  regular  packet  plying  from  Toulon  to  Bastia. 


cHAP.xiii      THE  TRAGEDY  OF  PIZZO  389 

Murat  was  recognised  on  board,  and  doubtless  found 
sympathisers  and  helpers,  for  although  unprovided  with 
a  passport  he  succeeded  in  passing  the  police  officers  on 
landing  in  Corsica ;  his  three  companions,  however, 
were  not  so  fortunate,  and  were  all  arrested.  Hearing 
that  Franceschetti,  a  general  whose  rank  he  had  himself 
conferred,  lived  near  Bastia,  at  the  little  village  of 
Vescovado,  Murat  at  once  set  out  for  his  house.  He 
arrived  there  alone  and  on  foot  on  the  25  th  of  August  ; 
but  would  Franceschetti  recognise  the  brilliant  King 
Joachim  in  the  ragged  wayfarer  who  stood  before  his 
door  .?  He  was  footsore  and  weary,  his  face  hidden  by 
a  thick  matted  beard,  his  head  covered  with  a  sailor's 
bonnet,  his  body  draped  in  a  long  black  cape.  For 
fiftcQn  days  he  had  not  slept  in  a  bed  and  had  lived  as 
a  hunted  outcast  and  vagrant. 

Franceschetti  had  made  good  his  escape  from 
Naples-^  at  the  time  of  the  entry  of  the  Austrians,  and, 
fortunately  for  Murat,  was  now  at  home  once  more  ; 
he  received  his  former  sovereign  with  every  sign  of 
affection  and  deference  and  the  warmest  Corsican 
hospitality.  The  principal  landowner  of  Vescovado 
was  the  mayor  Ceccaldi,  into  whose  family  Franceschetti 
had  married  ;  the  two  were  on  friendly  and  intimate 
terms. 

Ceccaldi,  with  most  of  the  inhabitants  of  Vescovado, 
as  indeed  of  Corsica,  was  a  strong  Bonapartist,  yet  he 
felt  obliged,  in  view  of  his  official  position,  to  report 
Murat's  presence  to  the  authorities  at  Bastia.  A 
detachment  of  gendarmerie  was  at  once  dispatched  by 
the  Prefect  to  arrest  the  ex-King  of  Naples  ;  but  the 
relatives    and    friends    of    Ceccaldi    and    Franceschetti, 

^  It  will  be  seen  in  the  next  chapter  that  the  French  officers  were  not  included 
in  the  Convention  of  Casa  Lanza,  and  were  treated  as  prisoners  of  war. 


390  THE  NAPOLEONIC  EMPIRE  parti 

among  whom  were  more  than  one  old  soldier  of  the 
wars  of  the  Empire,  immediately  armed  and  declared 
that  Murat  was  under  the  protection  of  their  hospitality 
and  could  not  be  touched.  The  lieutenant  in  command, 
after  an  apparently  amicable  conversation  with  Murat, 
returned  to  Bastia  empty-handed. 

The  island  of  Corsica  was  at  this  time  in  a  curious 
state.  The  white  flag  of  the  Bourbons  was  everywhere 
flying  ;  but  as  it  represented  the  fifth  change  of  govern- 
ment that  the  islanders  had  sufl^ered  in  less  than  fifty 
years,  it  is  not  matter  for  surprise  that  it  aroused  no 
particular  sentiment  of  loyalty.  In  reality  there  were 
two  factions  in  the  island,  representing  the  wars  of  the 
second  half  of  the  eighteenth  century,  British  and 
French  ;  and  the  latter  faction  was  now  strongly  in  the 
ascendant  and  ardently  Bonapartist.  There  were  not 
1000  troops  in  the  island,  and  the  whole  population 
was  armed.  Under  these  circumstances  Murat  was  for 
the  moment  safe  ;  the  old  Napoleonic  and  Muratist 
soldiers  in  the  island  were  sufficiently  numerous  to  make 
any  attempt  at  arresting  him  futile  until  the  Govern- 
ment could  collect  a  considerable  body  of  troops. 
Even  then  the  island  was  so  vast  and  so  wild,  and  the 
hospitality  of  the  Corsicans  was  so  staunch,  that  he 
might  reasonably  hope  to  evade  capture  for  many 
months  to  come. 

But  in  truth  Murat  was  now  weary  of  wandering, 
exasperated  with  the  new  part  Fortune  called  on  him 
to  play,  imbittered  with  the  humiliations  of  the  outlaw, 
desperate  at  the  silence  of  his  agents,  apprehensive  of 
the  worst  fate.  For  as  the  Powers  of  Europe  at  the 
Congress  of  Vienna  had  declared  Napoleon  a  public 
enemy  and  liable  to  public  vengeance,  might  not  Joachim 
have  to  fear  some  similar  decree  ?     He  could  get  no 


CHAP.  XIII       THE  TRAGEDY  OF  PIZZO  391 

word  from  Paris,  and  probably  not  many  days  after 
reaching  Franceschetti's  house  he  began  meditating  a 
desperate  scheme  that  should  clear  a  way  through  all 
his  troubles. 

On  the  nth  of  September,  a  little  more  than  two 
weeks  after  Murat's  arrival  at  Vescovado,  a  Colonel 
Gordon  made  his  way  there  from  Bastia.  He  was  a 
British  political  agent,  and  had  been  landed  by  the 
British  frigate  Meander,  To  him  Murat  declared  that 
his  presence  in  Corsica  was  due  to  the  fear  lest  staying 
longer  in  the  south  of  France  he  should  have  been 
assassinated  ;  he  asserted,  and  doubtless  sincerely,  that 
he  had  no  intention  whatever  of  creating  any  disturb- 
ance in  Corsica  ;  one  thing  only  he  asked  for,  passports 
for  any  destination  the  Powers  approved  save  only  St. 
Helena. 

These  passports  neither  Colonel  Gordon  nor  any 
other  authority  appeared  prepared  to  produce,  and  so 
ominous  and  suggestive  did  this  appear  that  in  the 
course  of  the  next  few  days  Murat  suddenly  resolved 
on  a  new  line  of  action  and  came  to  a  fatal  determination.^ 
Franceschetti  was  a  man  of  the  adventurer  type,  and 
heavily  in  debt.  The  political  revolution  just  accom- 
plished had  apparently  closed  all  future  prospects  for 
him  ;  the  presence  and  circumstances  of  Joachim  sug- 
gested the  possibility  of  an  enterprise  in  which,  whether 
in  one  way  or  in  another,  profitable  opportunities  might 
arise.  Franceschetti  and  Murat  together  decided  to 
organize  an  armed  force  for  the  purpose  of  an  expedi- 
tion to  Naples  to  replace  Joachim  oni  the  throne.  The 
example  of  Napoleon's  successful  return  from  Elba  six 
months  before,  doubtless  helped  to  inspire  this  resolve. 

In  his  flight  Murat  had  succeeded  in  concealing  and 

*  But  cf.  the  doubtful  assertion  of  Galvani  (p.  i6). 


392  THE  NAPOLEONIC  EMPIRE  parti 

saving  a  sum  of  4000  napoleons  in  gold,  with  two 
epaulettes  and  a  hat  loop  of  diamonds  worth  about 
three  times  as  much  more.  In  addition  to  these  re- 
sources he  had  money  in  a  private  account  at  his  bankers 
in  Paris  on  which  he  could  draw.  He  was  therefore  in 
a  position  to  fit  out  an  expedition  and  recruit  adherents. 
No  sooner  was  it  known  that  volunteers  were  wanted 
than  many  old  soldiers  presented  themselves,  mostly 
men  who  had  fought  in  the  Corsican  legions  in  the 
French  and  Neapolitan  services.  Several  experienced 
officers  also  joined  Murat,  among  them  General  Ottavj 
and  Colonel  Natali.  In  a  very  few  days  a  force  of  two 
to  three  hundred  men  was  assembled. 

On  the  20th  of  September  Murat  and  Franceschetti 
with  their  followers  marched  out  of  Vescovado  on 
their  way  to  Ajaccio,  the  principal  port  of  Corsica,  the 
home  of  the  Bonapartes,  the  birthplace  of  Napoleon. 
At  nearly  all  the  villages  they  passed,  the  population 
turned  out  and  gave  them  an  enthusiastic  greeting  ; 
Murat  was  deeply  touched.  At  Ajaccio,  where  he 
arrived  on  the  23rd  of  September,  his  reception  was 
warmer  than  elsewhere,  and  appears  to  have  inspired 
Joachim,  and  to  have  persuaded  him  that  even  at  Naples 
his  chance  of  a  good  welcome  would  not  be  slight.^ 
The  civil  authorities  of  Ajaccio  abandoned  the  town 
on  Murat's  approach  ;  Colonel  Laforet,  the  military 
commandant,  whose  small  body  of  soldiers  was  far  more 
likely  to  fraternize  with  the  invaders  than  to  oppose 
them,  shut  himself  up  in  the  citadel. 

^  Franceschetti's  statement  that  this  welcome  persuaded  Murat  into  the  expedi- 
tion in  spite  of  his  advice  to  the  contrary  clearly  bears  the  stamp  of  bad  faith. 
Murat  in  a  communication  to  Governor  Verrieres  from  Vescovado  on  the  17th 
was  already  assuming  the  royal  title.  It  is  as  nearly  certain  as  possible  that  the 
practical  decision  was  taken  between  the  nth  and  the  17th,  between  the  dates  of 
Gordon's  visit  and  the  letter  to  Verrieres,  and  therefore  at  Franceschetti's  house. 


CHAP.  XIII       THE  TRAGEDY  OF  PIZZO  393 

The  Powers  and  the  new  Government  of  Naples 
were  now  beginning  to  get  anxious  at  Murat's  presence 
in  Corsica.  As  soon  as  King  Ferdinand's  Ministers 
learned  of  the  ex-King's  arrival  at  Bastia,  they  sent  a 
secret  agent,  Carabelli  by  name,  to  watch  Murat  and 
inform  the  Government  as  to  his  plans  ;  leaving  Naples 
on  the  I  ith  of  September,  he  reached  Bastia  on  the  24th. 
Carabelli  had  been  one  of  the  officers  of  the  Corsican 
legion  that  took  part  in  the  first  military  operations 
in  Calabria.  He  had  soon  taken  to  administrative 
duties  and  had  been  in  close  touch  with  Saliceti.  He 
had  given  up  military  for  civilian  employment,  being 
appointed  Secretary-general  of  Calabria,  and  later  In- 
tendente  of  Capitanata.  He  was  now  anxious  to  retain 
his  occupation  under  the  new  Government,  and  prepared 
to  ingratiate  himself  by  performing  any  task  required 
of  him.  His  acquaintance  with  the  Corsicans,  among 
whom  Murat  might  find  sympathizers,  probably  led 
to  his  selection  for  the  duty  he  was  now  called  on  to 
perform. 

Immediately  before  Carabelli's  departure  from 
Naples  the  Government  had  arrested  a  Moor  of  the 
classic  name  of  Otello,  who,  under  the  preceding  reign, 
had  been  one  of  the  most  conspicuous  characters  in 
Naples.  He  was  a  personal  servant  of  Murat,  and  had 
accompanied  him  in  his  flight  to  France.  Later,  on  his 
master's  second  flight,  he  made  his  way  back  to  Naples, 
where  his  presence  appears  to  have  been  prompted  by 
no  more  criminal  intent  than  one  of  conjugal  affection. 
Yet  the  pohce  chose  to  recognise  in  Otello  a  secret 
emissary  of  Murat  and  to  arrest  him.  At  about  the 
same  time,  whether  brought  in  by  Otello  or  otherwise, 
several  letters  written  by  Murat  to  a  few  of  his  past 
subjects,   among  which  was    possibly   one    to    General 


394  THE  NAPOLEONIC  EMPIRE  parti 

Colletta,  were  handed  by  their  recipients  to  the 
Government,  and  caused  apprehension.^  Precautionary 
measures  were  at  once  taken.  A  patrol  of  gunboats 
was  established  along  the  Mediterranean  coast  of  the 
kingdom,  the  forts  of  Naples  were  provisioned,  the 
garrison  of  Gaeta  was  reinforced  with  Sicilian  troops, 
and  Carabelli  was  sent  on  his  secret  mission  to 
Corsica.^ 

Another  traveller  arrived  at  Bastia  within  a  few  hours 
of  Carabelli  ;  this  was  a  naturalised  British  subject, 
Neapolitan  by  birth,  named  Macirone.  He  had  been 
at  one  time  in  the  Neapolitan  military  service,  had  later 
become  connected  with  Fouche,  and  had  acted  as  a 
secret  intermediary  between  him  and  Wellington  after 
Waterloo.  He  had  also  remained  in  touch  with  Murat 
until  he  went  into  hiding.  Macirone  had  arrived  in 
Corsica  with  dispatches  for  Murat,  and  with  the  passport 
that  contained  the  guarantee  of  safety  the  ex-King  of 
Naples  had  so  long  been  kept  waiting  for.  At  Bastia 
was  the  British  frigate  Meander^  Captain  Bastard.     This 

^  Pignatelli-StrongoH,  Poche  osservazioniy  3  j  Radowsky,  123  ;  Medici's  report  in 
Helfert,  Murat,  211  ;  Carabelli,  21  ;  Colletta,  ii.  267. 

2  Medici's  report,  Helfert,  Murat,  211.  This  report  bears  every  mark  of  strongly 
exaggerating  what  little  the  police  knew  of  Murat's  movements.  The  controversy 
on  which  the  facts  just  narrated  bear  will  require  no  discussion  here,  as  Mons. 
Dufourcq's  and  Baron  Lumbroso's  criticisms  of  the  Marquis  de  Sassenay's  arguments 
are  conclusive.  These  criticisms  might  have  been  made  even  stronger  by  a  close 
comparison  of  dates.  Murat  reached  Vescovado  on  the  25th  of  August  ;  it  is 
probable  that  his  plan  for  returning  to  Naples  was  not  made  before  the  nth  of 
September.  Carabelli  left  Naples  on  the  14th  of  September,  reached  Bastia  on  the 
24th,  and  witnessed  Joachim's  departure  from  Ajaccio  on  the  28th.  How  could 
the  alleged  plot  of  the  Bourbon  Government  have  been  hatched  within  these  dates  ? 
A  recent  article  by  Signor  Lemmi  proves  nothing  more  than  that  a  rumour  was 
current  that  the  Neapolitan  police  had  laid  a  trap  for  Murat.  The  fact  that  such  a 
rumour  existed  is  past  question  j  and  this  second-  or  third-hand  evidence  of  the 
existence  of  the  rumour  adds  nothing  to  the  controversy.  As  to  Otello,  it  may 
further  be  pointed  out  that  as  he  did  not  follow  Murat  to  Corsica,  any  letters  he 
carried  must  have  come  from  France,  that  is,  before  Murat  had  formed  his 
plan. 


CHAP.  XIII       THE  TRAGEDY  OF  PIZZO  395 

officer  had  in  vain  sent  messages  to  Vescovado  summon- 
ing Murat  to  surrender  to  him.  He  remained  helpless 
at  Bastia  awaiting  some  opportunity  that  should  favour 
the  accomplishment  of  his  hopes.  Macirone  saw  him, 
explained  the  object  of  his  mission,  and  asked  for  his 
assistance.  Bastard  promised  to  await  the  result  of 
Macirone's  efforts. 

Early  in  the  morning  of  the  28  th  of  September 
Carabelli  and  Macirone  arrived  together  at  Ajaccio. 
Murat  had  been  busy  for  some  days  fitting  out  some 
small  vessels  and  occupied  one  of  the  principal  houses 
of  the  town  on  which  his  standard  was  displayed  and  in 
front  of  which  sentries  paced.  Carabelli  was  the  first  to 
present  himself  for  an  audience.  Murat,  whose  prepara- 
tions were  complete  and  mind  apparently  made  up,  made 
no  attempt  to  disguise  his  project,  offered  Carabelli 
promotion  if  he  would  join  him,  which  the  Corsican 
prudently  declined.  He  then,  according  to  Carabelli's 
account  of  what  passed,  became  somewhat  excited  and, 
speaking  of  Naples,  declared  more  than  once  :  *'  I  will 
not  give  up  my  kingdom  I  "  "I  have  only  to  show 
myself  to  succeed  !  "  "At  the  worst  I  shall  die  as  a 
king  !  "  1 

His  interview  with  Murat  told  Carabelli  all  he 
wished  to  know,  and  he  employed  the  remainder  of 
the  day  in  persuading  his  compatriot  General  Ottavj 
to  give  up  the  enterprise,  and  in  this  succeeded. 

With  Macirone  Murat  spent  several  hours  in  long 
and  earnest  conference.  Macirone  first  handed  him 
a  letter  inclosing  an  offer  from  Metternich  to  provide 
him  with  a  passport  to  Trieste.  That  passport  was  in 
Macirone's  possession,  and  was  vised  by  Stewart,  the 
British  ambassador  at  Paris  ;  in  it  Joachim  was  referred 

1   Carabelli,  33  ;   Galvani,  74, 


396  THE  NAPOLEONIC  EMPIRE  parti 

to  by  the  title  of  Duke  of  Lipona.-^  Macirone  further- 
more declared  that  Captain  Bastard  held  his  ship,  the 
Meander^  at  his  disposal,  ready  to  convey  Murat  to 
Trieste  under  the  terms  of  this  arrangement,  and  added 
his  entreaties  to  the  documents  he  produced.  But  it  was 
now  too  late  to  turn  Murat  from  his  plan.  The  die 
was  cast,  he  said,  this  offer  of  security  came  too  late. 
For  three  months  he  had  awaited  the  decision  of  the 
Allies  in  vain,  and  now  he  was  determined  to  risk  all 
to  regain  his  kingdom.  At  the  worst  he  would  meet 
death,  and  that  had  no  fears  for  him.  Besides  that, 
three  hundred  brave  men  had  now  compromised  them- 
selves in  his  cause,  and  was  he  to  draw  back  at  the  last 
minute  and  abandon  them  } 

Yet  the  passport  was  too  precious  a  safeguard  to 
neglect.  Murat  without  much  difficulty  persuaded 
Macirone  to  hand  it  to  him,  and  in  return  gave  him  a 
letter  in  which  he  said  : — 

"  Mr.  Macirone,  Envoy  of  the  Allied  Powers  to 
King  Joachim,  I  have  made  myself  acquainted  with  the 
documents  in  your  charge.  I  accept  the  passport  in- 
trusted to  you  for  me,  and  intend  using  it  for  the  pur- 
pose of  reaching  the  destination  therein  specified.  .  .  ." 
The  letter  went  on  to  decline  a  British  ship  for  his 
conveyance,  and  concluded  by  stating  that  he  would  be 
prepared  to  discuss  matters  with  the  Allies  after  having 
joined  his  family. 

His  interviews  with  the  emissaries  from  Paris  and 
Naples  not  having  disclosed  any  matter  affecting  the 
decision  he  had  already  taken,  Murat  prepared  im- 
mediately to  set  sail.  He  had  found  a  useful  officer 
for  the   naval   side  of  his  enterprise   in  Barbara,  who 

1  Lipona,   anagram   of   Napoli,   was   the   title   assumed    by  Caroline  on   leaving 

Naples. 


CHAP.  XIII       THE  TRAGEDY  OF  PIZZO  397 

had  ranked  as  a  captain  in  the  Neapolitan  navy,  and 
who  had  rendered  skilled  and  useful  service  at  the 
taking  of  Capri. ^  Under  the  supervision  of  Barbara, 
Murat  had  chartered  seven  feluccas  that  were  now 
lying  in  the  port.  They  were  small  vessels  of  from 
15  to  20  tons,  single  masted,  and  rigged  with  a  lateen 
sail.  On  this  little  flotilla  Murat  and  his  men  embarked 
late  on  the  night  of  the  28  th  of  September.  Before  going 
on  board  he  promoted  Natali  to  be  a  general,  and  gave 
similar  encouragement  and  promises  of  reward  to  his 
followers.  Then  with  some  250  or  300  men  all  told 
he  put  to  sea.  The  governor  of  the  citadel,  which 
overlooks  the  port,  ordered  his  soldiers  to  their  posts 
and  fired  several  rounds  at  the  expedition,  but  the 
gunners  appeared  unable  to  aim  straight  and  the  shots 
all  flew  harmlessly  very  wide  of  their  mark. 

What  Murat' s  plan  was  it  is  impossible  to  say. 
There  is  nothing  to  show,  nor  is  it  probable,  that  he 
had  concerted  measures  with  any  adherents  in  Naples. 
If  he  had  a  definite  plan  it  appears  clear  that  he  did 
precisely  what  his  circumstances  required  —  kept  it 
secret  from  every  one.  The  destination  of  the  ex- 
pedition was  perhaps  Salerno,  where  a  considerable 
number  of  soldiers  forming  part  of  the  old  army  had 
been  stationed.  Could  these  be  won  over  by  a  sudden 
appeal, — it  was  but  two  short  marches  to  Naples, — 
Murat  might  hope  by  rapidity  and  surprise  to  inspire 
panic  in  a  government  never  distinguished  for  resource 
or  courage,  and  thus  to  seize  the  capital. 

But  the  elements,  and  not  its  leader,  chose  the  land- 
fall of  the  expedition.  For  the  better  part  of  a  week 
light  head  winds  baffled  the  feluccas  ;   they  had  about 

^  Barbara  is  generally  described  as  somewhat  akin  to  a  pirate,  which  is  possible. 
CoUetta  states  that  Murat  created  him  a  baron  {Storia  di  Napoli,  ii.  268). 


398  THE  NAPOLEONIC  EMPIRE  parti 

reached  the  latitude  of  Naples  when  one  of  the  sudden 
and  violent  storms  usual  in  those  seas  at  that  period  of 
the  year  overtook  them.  Murat*s  frail  vessels  were 
instantly  dispersed.  The  one  on  which  he,  Frances- 
chetti,  Barbara,  and  some  thirty  followers  had  embarked 
was,  with  one  other,  blown  right  down  the  coast. 
On  the  night  of  the  7th  of  October,  the  weather  having 
now  moderated,  they  sighted  land  in  the  bay  of  S. 
Eufemia,  near  the  spot  whence  Sidney  Smith's  fleet 
had  watched  the  battle  of  Maida,  nine  years  before. 

What  course  could  now  be  taken  ^  Franceschetti 
relates  that  he  urged  Murat  to  abandon  an  enterprise 
which,  with  the  handful  of  supporters  he  was  now 
reduced  to,  could  only  be  viewed  as  madness.  He 
held  a  passport  for  Trieste,  and  the  wisest  course  would 
be  to  give  up  all  idea  of  landing,  and  to  proceed  to  that 
port  directly.  But  a  cruise  of  nine  days  had  exhausted 
the  feluccas*  water  and  provisions  ;  Barbara  represented 
the  absolute  necessity  of  landing  for  this  reason,  and 
Murat,  if  he  had  hesitated  for  a  moment,  was  now 
persuaded  to  carry  out  his  original  purpose  at  all 
risks. 

On  the  following  morning,  the  8th  of  October,  the 
two  feluccas  drew  close  to  the  little  town  of  Pizzo. 
Joachim  attired  himself  in  full  uniform,  his  hat  crowned, 
as  was  his  custom,  with  feathers  and  a  diamond  clasp. 
At  eleven  o'clock  the  boats  were  manned  and  rowed  in 
from  the  feluccas  to  the  shore,  where  the  invaders, 
numbering  eighty  in  all,  landed. 

Pizzo  was  not  a  locality  where  Murat  could  hope 
for  a  good  reception.  It  had  in  former  years  been 
quite  a  thriving  little  port,  but  had  seen  its  trade 
ruined  under  the  French  kings  by  the  blockade  of  the 
coasts.     A  French  officer  who  knew  it,  recorded  that 


CHAP.  XIII       THE  TRAGEDY  OF  PIZZO  399 

its  inhabitants  *'  were  reduced  to  a  state  of  great 
misery  .  .  .  and  were  ever  ready  to  manifest  their 
discontent."  ^  In  addition  to  this,  the  great  freeholder 
of  the  district  was  the  Duke  of  Infantado,  a  Spanish 
grandee,  whose  feelings  had  been  strongly  against 
Murat  ever  since  the  occupation  of  Madrid  in  1808. 
The  Duke's  steward,  Alcala  by  name,  possessed  great 
influence  among  the  people. 

Pizzo  was  largely  situated  on  a  hill,  or  clifF,  pro- 
jecting into  the  sea  ;  at  the  extremity  of  this  cliff  was 
a  small  mediaeval  castle,  used  as  a  coastguard  station. 
Back  of  the  castle  was  the  public  square  ;  at  the  foot 
of  the  hill  were  the  beach  and  landing-place.  Murat 
and  his  followers  marched  up  from  the  landing-place 
into  the  town  without  a  moment's  delay. 

Murat  was  leading.  It  was  a  Sunday  morning,  and 
in  the  market-place  a  large  number  of  people  were 
assembled  in  their  holiday  clothes.  As  he  passed  them 
he  began  calling  out :  "I  am  Joachim  ;  I  am  your 
King  ;  you  ought  to  recognise  me."  But  so  far  from 
this  producing  any  favourable  effect  it  immediately 
alarmed  the  hearers,  who  began  to  leave  the  market- 
place and  to  enter  their  houses. 

At  the  further  end  of  the  market-place,  in  front  of 
the  castle,  a  few  soldiers  of  the  coastguard  artillery 
there  stationed  were  parading  ;  their  uniform  was  as  yet 
unchanged.  Joachim  went  up  to  them,  and,  addressing 
the  sergeant  in  command,  said  :  "  Haven't  they  changed 
your  uniforms  yet.''  "  He  then  told  him  that  he  pro- 
moted him  captain,  and  ordered  him  to  have  the  drum 
beaten  and  to  follow  him.  But  the  drummer  would 
not  obey.  Murat  passed  behind  the  ranks  to  inspect 
the  men,   but  no  sooner  had   he   done    so   than   they 

^  Duret  de  Tavel,  no. 


400  THE  NAPOLEONIC  EMPIRE  part  i 

quickly  broke  from  their  alignment  and  dispersed. 
The  market-place  was  now  nearly  empty.  It  was 
manifest  that  Pizzo  was  far  from  any  feeling  of 
enthusiasm  at  the  presence  of  its  late  king. 

A  hasty  consultation  was  now  held  between  Murat  and 
his  principal  followers,  and  it  was  decided  at  once  to 
take  the  road  that  led  from  Pizzo  to  Monteleone,  five 
miles  away.  The  latter  was  an  important  town,  and 
its  civic  guard  had  always  been  strong  in  its  anti- 
Bourbon  sentiments  and  its  support  of  the  French  rule. 
Here,  if  anywhere,  a  favourable  spirit  might  be  met 
with  ;  here,  if  anywhere,  the  proclamations  Joachim 
carried  announcing  the  coming  into  effect  of  his  con- 
stitution on  the  ensuing  ist  of  January  might  lead  to 
some  result. 

On  this  decision  being  come  to,  the  party  marched 
out  from  the  market-place  on  to  the  Monteleone  road. 
No  sooner  had  they  departed  than  windows  began  to 
open  and  balconies  to  fill  ;  in  a  few  moments  the  square 
was  once  more  animated.  Among  those  who  now  came 
out  of  the  houses  was  a  man  named  Gregorio  Trenta- 
capilli ;  he  was  a  zealous  Bourbonist,  a  lieutenant  of 
police  and  government  agent  before  the  French  con- 
quest, later  a  capomassi,  and  now  once  more  in  favour 
and  exercising  police  functions  in  the  district.  On 
coming  into  the  market-place,  finding  Murat  gone  and 
the  townspeople  excited  and  showing  decided  signs  of 
hostility  to  the  invaders,  he  promptly  took  command  of 
the  movement.  Followed  by  a  number  of  men  who 
had  armed  themselves  he  took  the  road  to  Monteleone, 
on  which  Murat  had  preceded  him  by  a  few  minutes. 

About  a  quarter  of  a  mile  along  that  road  Murat  had 
stopped  to  enable  one  of  his  followers  to  get  him  a  saddle 
horse,  and  there  Trentacapilli,  and  the  mob  following, 


CHAP.  XIII      THE  TRAGEDY  OF  PIZZO  401 

came  up  with  him.  A  confused  scene,  in  which  gesticu- 
lation and  shouting  played  the  chief  part,  then  took 
place.  Murat  turned  to  the  crowd  and  declared  that 
all  was  a  misunderstanding,  that  he  was  travelling  to 
Trieste  and  was  provided  with  a  passport  all  in  due 
order.  Trentacapilli, — every  brigand's  and  policeman's 
instinct  in  his  frame  vibrating  at  the  sight  of  the 
brilliantly  adorned  prize  only  just  out  of  reach  of  his 
fingers, — pushed  and  edged  gradually  closer  and  closer, 
calling  loudly  on  Murat  to  surrender  himself  a  prisoner. 
Franceschetti,  with  a  few  others,  attempted  to  screen 
their  leader,  and  at  last  in  the  scuffling  a  pistol  shot  was 
fired. 

This  pistol  shot,  harmless  enough  in  itself,  broke  up 
the  crowd.  The  Corsicans  took  to  their  heels  and 
scattered  right  and  left  through  the  fields.  Murat, 
Franceschetti,  and  one  follower.  Captain  Pernice,  fled 
along  the  road  to  Monteleone  for  a  short  distance  ; 
then,  at  a  place  where  the  road  crosses  a  stream,  they 
turned  down  towards  the  sea.  By  hard  running  they 
succeeded  in  putting  a  good  distance  between  their 
pursuers  and  themselves,  and  as  they  rushed  down 
towards  the  beach  they  were  not  without  good  hope 
of  escaping.  But  when  at  last  they  reached  the  sand 
they  found  their  boats  gone  and  Barbara's  two  feluccas 
a  mile  or  more  away.^ 

At  this  moment,  when  all  seemed  lost,  the  fugitives 
espied  a  means  of  escape,  a  fisherman's  boat  hauled  high 
up  on  the  sand.  To  this  the  three  flew,  and  they 
struggled  desperately  to  drag  it  to  the  water.  As 
they  did  so  the  first  of  their  pursuers  were  appearing 

1  M.  Dufourcq  is  strongly  of  opinion  that  Barbara  did  not  betray  Murat,  and  as 
evidence  that  he  did  is  totally  wanting,  there  is  no  reason  for  not  agreeing  with 
him. 

VOL.  I  2   D 


402  THE  NAPOLEONIC  EMPIRE  parti 

at  the  edge  of  the  beach.  Their  efforts  became  more 
strenuous,  but  of  no  avail  ;  before  the  Hne  of  safety- 
could  be  reached,  the  crowd  was  on  them,  forming  a 
wide  half-circle.  Then  they  began  to  close  in.  Murat 
and  his  two  companions  now  drew  swords  and  pistols, 
and  as  the  crowd  edged  in  closer  and  closer,  Pernice 
fired.  His  shot  was  at  once  returned,  and  he  fell  dead. 
Then  ensued  a  scene  of  wild  confusion  ;  a  rush  was 
made  in  which  the  two  survivors  were  carried  off  their 
feet  and  rolled  on  to  the  sand.  For  a  whole  hour* they 
were  in  the  hands  of  the  mob,  many  of  them  women, 
and  it  was  miraculous  that  they  were  not  killed  or 
seriously  wounded.  The  pen  rebels  at  narrating  the 
indignities  that  Murat  then  suffered  :  he  was  pulled 
from  hand  to  hand  in  the  midst  of  the  howling  crowd, 
his  arms,  ornaments,  and  clothes  wrenched  from  him, 
his  face  and  body  begrimed  with  blood  and  sand, 
his  face  spat  upon,  his  hair  torn  from  his  head  in 
handfuls. 

This  miserable  scene  could  not  continue  long. 
Trentacapilli,  in  his  expert  way,  managed  to  secure 
Murat's  diamond  buckle  and  his  papers,  and  being  so 
far  satisfied,  he  succeeded  in  restoring  order,  marched 
the  prisoners  up  to  the  castle  and  sent  word  to  Monte- 
leone,  the  administrative  and  military  headquarters  of 
lower  Calabria,  of  what  had  happened.  The  general  in 
command  there  was  Don  Vito  Nunziante,  whom  we 
have  already  met  bravely  fighting  against  Regnier  at 
Mileto  some  eight  years  before  ;  he  was  a  good  officer 
and  an  honourable  and  humane  man.  Immediately 
on  hearing  of  Murat's  arrest  Nunziante  sent  the  news 
to  Naples  by  semaphore,  ordered  a  Te  Deum  to  be 
sung,  hurried  some  troops  off  to  Pizzo,  and  prepared 
to  follow  in  person. 


CHAP.  XIII      THE  TRAGEDY  OF  PIZZO  403 

Captain  Stratti  with  a  detachment  of  forty  men 
arrived  at  Pizzo  late  in  the  afternoon,  and  immediately 
took  charge  of  the  castle  and  its  inmates.  All  of 
Joachim's  followers  had  been  arrested,  making  a  total 
of  seventy-nine  prisoners.  Some  of  them  were  wounded, 
all  were  hungry  and  exhausted,  and  they  were  penned 
together  in  a  small  room  barely  sufficient  to  hold  them. 
Captain  Stratti  at  once  separated  Murat, — for  whom 
he  showed  great  respect  and  humanity, — from  the  other 
prisoners,  and  did  what  he  could  to  alleviate  their 
distress.  The  steward  of  the  Duke  of  Infantado, 
Alcala  by  name,  brought  clothes  and  other  necessaries 
for  Murat,  and  sent  a  doctor  to  attend  him.  On 
the  following  day  Nunziante  arrived.  He  approved 
the  action  of  Stratti  and  Alcala,  visited  Murat  and 
treated  him  with  the  same  respect  and  consideration 
that  his  subordinate  had  shown. 

In  the  meantime  the  line  of  semaphores  along  the 
coast  had  transmitted  the  news  to  Naples.  There  it 
was  already  known  on  the  6th,  through  Austrian 
channels,  that  Murat  had  sailed  with  an  expedition  from 
Ajaccio.  Anxiety  was  great  during  the  next  three 
days,  until  on  the  evening  of  the  9th,  while  Ferdinand 
was  at  the  San  Carlo  witnessing  the  opera,  he  heard, 
with  mixed  terror  and  delight,  as  Colletta  reports,  that 
Murat  was  a  prisoner.  Immediately  a  council  was 
called  to  determine  what  was  to  be  done,  and,  perhaps 
owing  to  the  fact  that  Murat  was  furnished  with  what 
amounted  to  a  joint  Austrian  and  British  safe-conduct, 
the  Ministers  of  those  two  Powers  were  sounded  as  to 
their  views. 

Prince  Jablonowsky,  the  Austrian  representative, 
was  too  profound  a  diplomat  to  deal  plainly  with  such 
a  painfully  direct  question  as  what  was  to  be  done  with 


404  THE  NAPOLEONIC  EMPIRE  parti 

a  Prince  with  whom  his  Court  had  entertained  such 
close  relations.  He  accordingly  found  a  diplomatic 
excuse  for  absenting  himself  from  Naples  for  a  few 
days.  What  a  Court  advised  the  Ministers  of  King 
Ferdinand  to  do  with  their  prisoner  cannot  be  said,  for 
apparently  no  record  has  survived  ;  but  it  will  not 
be  doing  him  an  injustice  to  infer  from  dispatches  of 
his  that  have  been  preserved,  from  his  well-known  feel- 
ing against  Murat,  and  from  the  reports  current  at  the 
time,  that,  knowing  the  incHnations  of  Ferdinand  and 
his  Ministers,  he  did  nothing  to  turn  them  towards  a 
more  merciful  course. 

As  a  result  of  deliberations  that  took  place  that 
night  orders  were  sent  to  Nunziante  early  on  the  morn- 
ing of  the  loth.  He  was  instructed  to  assemble  a 
council  of  war,  to  try  Murat  as  a  public  enemy,  and  to 
proceed  to  the  execution  of  the  sentence  within  fifteen 
minutes  of  passing  judgment.  This  order  arrived  at 
Pizzo  late  on  the  night  of  the  1 2th. 

On  the  following  morning  Nunziante  in  person 
informed  Murat  that  he  was  immediately  to  be  tried  by 
court-martial.  Up  to  this  moment  he  had  kept  some 
hope.  He  had  attempted  to  maintain  the  fiction  that 
he  was  merely  travelling  to  Trieste,  and  that  stress  of 
weather  and  lack  of  provisions  had  been  the  sole  causes 
of  his  landing  at  Pizzo.  He  had  retained  a  cheerful 
demeanour,  and  on  dining  the  day  before  with 
Nunziante  and  Captain  Robinson,  commander  of  some 
Neapolitan  gunboats  that  had  been  sent  for,  he  appeared 
cheerful  and  not  as  a  man  in  peril  of  his  life.  With 
Stratti  he  had  discussed  on  the  I2th  the  probability  of 
his  being  sent  on  to  Trieste,  but  when  that  officer  saw 
him  on  the  next  day,  after  Nunziante's  announcement 
had  been  made,  Murat  at  once  said  to  him  :    "  Ah,  my 


CHAP.  XIII       THE  TRAGEDY  OF  PIZZO  405 

dear  Stratti,  I  am  a  lost  man,  the  order  for  my  trial  is 
a  sentence  of  death  !  " 

The  court-martial  was  duly  assembled  ;  it  was  com- 
posed of  three  colonels  and  four  junior  officers,  every 
one  of  whom  had  served  in  Murat's  army  ;  yet  not 
one  of  those  selected  declined  the  task  set  before  him. 
They  proceeded  to  carry  out  certain  forms  of  judicial 
appearance  ;  listened  to  the  perfunctory  remarks  of  the 
officer  appointed  to  conduct  the  defence ;  found  il 
generate  francese,  as  they  described  their  late  King,  a 
public  enemy  ;  and  sentenced  him  to  be  shot  imme- 
diately in  the  courtyard  of  the  castle. 

Murat  played  his  appointed  part  in  these  necessary 
formalities  with  calm  and  dignity.  After  the  court  had 
pronounced  its  sentence  he  retired  to  the  small  room 
where  he  was  lodged,  and  there  received  the  visit  of  the 
Vicar  of  Pizzo,  Canon  Masdea.  Five  years  before,  at 
the  time  when  his  tent  had  been  pitched  in  the  midst  of 
a  formidable  army  on  the  hill  of  Piale,  whence  he  could 
watch  the  British  camps  he  longed  to  attack  in  Sicily, 
he  had  paid  a  visit  to  the  village  of  Pizzo,  and  Masdea 
had  then  received  from  the  King's  hands  a  large  sum 
from  his  private  purse  to  reconstruct  the  tower  of  his 
church  ;  it  was  now  Joachim's  turn  to  receive  from  the 
hands  of  the  humble  parish  priest  a  different  offering, 
that  of  the  last  ministrations  appointed  by  the  Catholic 
Church  for  those  about  to  die. 

It  was  now  four  o'clock  in  the  afternoon.  A  part- 
ing letter  to  his  wife  and  children  written,  the  priest's 
absolution  received,  Murat  was  more  fully  prepared 
than  he  had  been  often  enough  in  his  life  to  meet 
death.  An  officer  stood  waiting  at  the  door,  and  as  he 
rose  from  his  knees  he  said  to  the  priest  :  "  Let  us  go 
and  accomplish  the  will  of  God." 


4o6  THE  NAPOLEONIC  EMPIRE  parti 

Outside  was  a  dark  passage,  and  nearly  immediately 
to  the  left,  three  steps  down.  At  the  foot  of  the  steps  a 
chair  was  placed,  and  in  a  narrow  little  area  in  front  of 
it  stood  the  firing  party.  So  cramped  was  the  space  that 
the  twelve  men  who  composed  it  had  to  be  placed  in 
three  ranks. 

Murat  came  down  and  faced  them.  The  chair  he 
refused.  The  front  rank  was  so  close  to  him  that  their 
muskets  nearly  touched  his  breast.  In  his  left  hand 
Joachim  held  a  miniature  of  his  wife  and  children  ;  of 
all  those  present  he  was  the  most  calm  and  self-controlled. 
Deliberately  and  clearly  he  ordered  the  soldiers  to  present 
arms  and  to  go  through  the  necessary  manoeuvres,  but 
the  men  were  so  moved  that  the  line  of  muskets  came 
up  very  unsteady  and  ill-directed.  He  then  said  : 
''  Spare  my  face  ;  aim  at  the  heart,"  and,  trying  with  his 
right  hand  to  draw  in  the  muskets  towards  his  breast, 
gave  the  word  to  fire. 

The  triggers  were  pulled,  the  little  space  filled  with 
sound  and  smoke.  Murat's  body  remained  erect  for 
a  moment,  then  sank  down ;  his  forehead  as  it  fell 
struck  the  door  of  the  cell  where  his  comrades  were 
imprisoned.  Nunziante  was  outside  in  the  courtyard 
waiting,  holding  his  head  between  his  hands  and  leaning 
on  the  castle  walls,  and  when  the  dull  rumble  of  the 
volley  told  him  that  the  brave  soldier  within  had  ceased 
to  live,  he  burst  into  tears. 

Thus  came  to  an  inglorious  end  Joachim  Murat, 
for  whom,  whether  as  a  king,  as  a  general,  or  as  a  man, 
it  is  no  easy  matter  to  draw  up  a  just  epitaph.  For 
in  him  the  good  and  bad  qualities  were  equally 
conspicuous.  As  a  soldier  his  boldness  often  became 
rashness.  As  a  king  his  liberality  often  became  in- 
discriminate generosity.     As  a  man  his  keen  sense  for 


CHAP.  XIII       THE  TRAGEDY  OF  PIZZO  407 

personal  advancement  often  became  craftiness  and 
deceit.  Yet  he  was  one  of  the  most  notable  soldiers  of 
an  age  great  in  military  achievement,  one  of  the  most 
notable  kings  in  an  age  of  political  transformation,  one 
of  the  most  human  characters  produced  by  the  Revolu- 
tion. He  was  a  man  of  the  people,  a  man  of  his  time, 
and  its  representative  in  some  of  its  most  hopeful 
aspects.  Unlike  that  great  intellectual  accident  of  the 
period,  Napoleon,  Murat  did  not  lose  on  the  throne 
all  his  democratic  affinities.  Unlike  his  master,  he 
retained  his  popular  sympathies,  and  yet  displayed 
qualities  of  mind,  of  heart,  and  of  courage  that  might 
serve  as  an  example  to  kings  born  of  an  older  race. 
His  evil  star  drew  him  from  obscurity,  gave  him 
Napoleon  for  a  leader,  and  from  the  day  when  he 
became  King  of  Naples  heaped  difficulties  on  him  that 
would  have  overburdened  most  men.  And  when  we 
remember  that  his  successor,,  on  the  throne  of  Naples 
was  Ferdinand  of  Bourbon,  we  cannot  refrain  from  a 
pang  of  regret  for  the  tragic  fate  of  that  misguided 
soldier,  Joachim  Murat. 

Principal  Authorities  consulted 

Brit.  Foreign  Off.,  Sicily,  70  :  dispatches  of  a  Court. 
Arch,  di  Stato,  Giustizia,  1806  :  a  few  facts  as  to  Trentacapilli. 
Arch,  di  Stato,  Interna  z^  Inn^ent.  5077  :  a  few  facts  as  to  Carabelli. 
The  papers  as  to  Murat's  court-martial,  etc.,   once  at  the  Archives, 
appear  to  have  been  lost  or  misplaced.     • 

Printed  Books 

Belliard,  Mems.  ;  Bunbury,  Milit.  Transacs.  ;  Carabelli,  Calluniatori 
smascherati ;  Castlereagh,  Corr. ;  Colletta,  Storia ;  Craven,  Tour 
through  Naples;  Desvernois,  Mems.;  Dufourcq,  Murat;  Duret  de 
T AV EL,  Sejour  en  Calabre ;  Franceschetti,  Mems.;  Gallois,  Hist,  de 
Murat;  Galvani,  Mems.;  Gasparri,  Fine  di  un  regno  ;  Greco,  Annali ; 
Helfert,  Murat ;  Lemmi,  Fine  di  Murat ;  Macirone,  Interesting  Facts ; 


4o8  THE  NAPOLEONIC  EMPIRE  parti 

Orloff,  Mems.  ;  P.  G.,  Awenimenti ;  Pepe,  Mems. ;  Pignatelli-Stron- 
GOLI,  Pochi  osser^azioni ;  Quintavalle,  Notizia  Storica ;  Radowsky, 
Cost  memor.;  Romano,  Ricordi ;  Sassenay,  Guet  Apens ,-  Savelli,  Souve- 
nirs; Wellington,  Supp.  Disps. ;  Zahn,  Murafs  Ende ;  Zahn,  Murafs 
Gefangnahme. 


END    OF    VOL.    I 


Printed  by  R.  &  R.  Clark,  Limited,  Edinburgh. 


^iBSSS! 


DNIVERSITY  OF  TORONTO 
LIBRARY 


Acme   Library   Card   Pocket 

Under  Pat.  "  Ref .  Index  File." 
Made  by  LIBRAEY  BUREAU 


