
<<<PDFPAGE 1>>>
mM 
ance 
ist 
CS 
R 
ular 
Pop 
rench Wars 
the Fi 
tS, 
d Land 
ee 
1 
Partisans an 
trio 
Pa 
di 
rates 
E 
arles 
7 
d by Ch 
a 
l 
Esda 
ve 
Le 

<<<PDFPAGE 2>>>
5 

<<<PDFPAGE 3>>>
255607100 
UNO. 
| 
» . 
F rN 4 
& 
University of Stirfi 
? 
x 
ye 
Ty 
’ 
a g.Library 
Tel: “ 01786 467220 
~ > 
LONG 
LOAN© 
Please RET 
EN 
no later than the date’on 
the receipt 
Subject to recall if requested 

<<<PDFPAGE 4>>>
Digitized by the Internet Archive 
in 2024 
https://archive.org/details/popularresistancO000unse 

<<<PDFPAGE 5>>>
Popular Resistance in the French Wars 

<<<PDFPAGE 6>>>
Also by Charles J. Esdaile 
THE SPANISH ARMY IN THE PENINSULAR WAR 
THE DUKE OF WELLINGTON AND THE COMMAND OF THE SPANISH ARMY 
THE WARS OF NAPOLEON 
SPAIN IN THE LIBERAL AGE: From Constitution to Civil War 
THE FRENCH WARS 
THE PENINSULAR WAR: A New History 
FIGHTING NAPOLEON: Guerrillas, Bandits and Adventurers in Spain, 1808-1814 

<<<PDFPAGE 7>>>
Popular Resistance in 
the French Wars 
Patriots, Partisans and Land Pirates 
Edited by 
Charles J. Esdaile 
6100463 Ik . 

<<<PDFPAGE 8>>>
Editorial matter, selection, introduction and Chapters 1 and 10 
© Charles J. Esdaile 2005 
Chapters 2-9 © Palgrave Macmillan Ltd 2005 
All rights reserved. No reproduction, copy or transmission of this 
publication may be made without written permission. 
No paragraph of this publication may be reproduced, copied or transmitted 
save with written permission or in accordance with the provisions of the 
Copyright, Designs and Patents Act 1988, or under the terms of any licence 
permitting limited copying issued by the Copyright Licensing Agency, 
90 Tottenham Court Road, London W1T 4LP. 
Any person who does any unauthorized act in relation to this publication 
may be liable to criminal prosecution and civil claims for damages. 
The authors have asserted their rights to be identified 
as the authors of this work in accordance with the Copyright, 
Designs and Patehts Act 1988. 
First published 2005 by 
: 
PALGRAVE MACMILLAN 
Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire RG21 6XS and 
175 Fifth Avenue, New York, N.Y. 10010 
Companies and representatives throughout the world 
PALGRAVE MACMILLAN is the global academic imprint of the Palgrave 
Macmillan division of St. Martin’s Press, LLC and of Palgrave Macmillan Ltd. 
Macmillan® is a registered trademark in the United States, United Kingdom 
and other countries. Palgrave is a registered trademark in the European 
Union and other countries. 
ISBN 1-4039-3826-1 
This book is printed on paper suitable for recycling and made from fully 
managed and sustained forest sources. 
A catalogue record for this book is available from the British Library. 
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data 
Popular resistance in the French wars: patriots, partisans and land pirates / 
edited by Charles J. Esdaile. 
p. 
cm. 
“The papers contained in this volume of essays were originally presented 
at a symposium held in the School of History in the University of 
Liverpool in September 2003”—Pref. 
Includes bibliographical references and index. 
ISBN 1-4039-3826-1 (cloth) 
1. Wars of Liberation, 1813-1814. 
2. Guerrilla warfare—Europe— 
History—19th century. 
3. Napoleonic Wars, 1800-1815—Underground 
movements. 
4. France—History, Military—1789-1815. 
5. Europe—History, Military—1789-1815. 
6. Europe—Politics and 
government—1789-1815. 
7. Nationalism—Europe—History— 
19th century. 
|. University of Liverpool. School of History. 
DC236.P66 2004 
940.2’73—dc22 
2004053529 
WO 
Ee 
IS 
PD 
(45513 
2a 
le LOR 
OS 
OSe 
O7aOGNN05 
Printed and bound in Great Britain by 
Antony Rowe Ltd, Chippenham and Eastbourne 

<<<PDFPAGE 9>>>
This book is respectfully dedicated to the memory of the 192 
citizens of Madrid who died in the terrorist attacks of 11 March 
2004, and especially to that of Marion Subervieille, azafata of 
the Biblioteca Nacional: the world is a sadder place without her 
smile 

<<<PDFPAGE 10>>>
52536 SYshrmehiz 
soe 
cupalamaaatins 
7 
* 
| 
’ 
efeien 
5 
P Soeah 
” sulle oe none ef ‘f 
Pita 
ty - 
aii a 
7
: 
= Simhat az tyr as 
wecdes bien: i" 
niger aaa 
ence 
5 teas as 
a eats aa 
, 
— 
re 
Sore 
iangs chiar 
7 Ta A Sen 
arplcenty f=
: 
ORAL Ay) 
og Bae hy be Qe 
OEY Coy 
Lae st i mathe Ve pet 
: 
a 
18¢ 
oe 
: 
ay pear <0 
ep 
= tre ew << 
tyicoleathsy 
"ex Se Woe wd 
etetannd as atthe ee 3 
- 
= 
he mate dea ii i fa 
“ ais 
io 
4: | oe 
«se 
io@iice 
sorta 
Tele al Py 
ae 
ie) 
ioge 2s A id 
amar 
a) 
Sys! ating Baby n 
_ sa } 
c~ = 
a 
ais a 
, 
Asatte 
;
Senin taeg ante, <n it nn TS A el | 
- 
2 
125 Fibieaned, New FoR A.B " 
: 
a 
<5
‘ua 
rad \epeRanc 
encase 
feet 
p 
= 
a 
7 
: 
“onion 
—- * 
a 
oe 
~ 
; 
ee 
=v & 
ot 
) ied, 
Led 
- 
a1, a esas peo +t or © te fveeer Ne
= 
a 
> 
ond wrest 
- 
; 
7 i 7 
a Ga 
' 
i _ (<a WS. - _ 
a _ 
- te mec yeu euge 
mies ba Nites “Je 
a 
sevmged a 
* 
agitate 
_ wound 
a wy 
a 
= 
5 Dibe 
7 
- 
2 
,: 
. 
ers en 
aateh iran aie 
: seaey Ps 
ag 
2 pee 
— 
her 
po aera 0 en pemmiare 3 ‘nnn 
a diyctaca ace 
- 
up ms 
7 
_ 7 
5 
7 tire pinecone 
re 
: regen 
va 
> 
apt sare 
: 
sess 
te Seen 
ae 
: o 
=— 
a 
- 
c 
- 

<<<PDFPAGE 11>>>
Contents 
List of Figures 
ix 
Preface 
es 
Acknowledgement 
xi 
Notes on Contributors 
xii 
1 Patriots, Partisans and Land Pirates in Retrospect 
1 
Charles J. Esdaile 
2 The Ubiquitous Brigand: The Politics and Language 
of Repression 
29 
Alan Forrest 
3 Guerrilla Warfare avant la lettre: Northern Italy, 1792-97 
45 
Martin Boycott-Brown 
4 Resistance, Coilaboration or Third Way? Responses 
to Napoleonic Rule in Germany 
67 
Michael Rowe 
5 Popular Resistance in Catalonia: Somatens and Miquelets, 
1808-14 
91 
Antonio Moliner Prada 
6 The Anatomy of a Research Project: The Sociology of 
the Guerrilla War in Spain, 1808-14 
115 
Charles J. Esdaile and Leonor Hernandez Enviz 
7 Regulating the Irregulars: Spanish Legislation on /a guerrilla 
during the Peninsular War 
137. 
Vittorio Scotti-Douglas 
8 The Pen and the Sword: Political Catechisms and 
Resistance to Napoleon 
161 
Emilie Delivré 
Vii 

<<<PDFPAGE 12>>>
viii 
Contents 
9 The Patriotism of the Russian Army in the ‘Patriotic’ 
or ‘Fatherland’ War of 1812 
181 
Janet Hartley 
10 
Popular Resistance in Napoleonic Europe: Issues and 
Perspectives 
201 
Charles J. Esdaile 
Index 
225 

<<<PDFPAGE 13>>>
List of Figures 
Psi 
Fol 
Tie) 
7.4 
Ts 
7.6 
Moll 
7.8 
A9 
7.10 
Combatants in Ja guerrilla analyzed by status 
Combatants in Ja guerrilla analyzed by year and 
status, 1808-14 
Commandants as a percentage of combatants 
in la guerrilla, 1808-14 
Combatants in /a guerrilla analyzed by year, 
1808-14 
Combatants in Ja guerrilla analyzed by region, 
1808-14 
Commandants in Ja guerrilla analyzed by region, 
1808-14 
Combatants in Ja guerrilla analyzed by occupation, 
1808-14 
Combatants in Ja guerrilla analyzed by professional 
group, 1808-14 
Combatants in la guerrilla analyzed by estate, 1808-14 
Members of four different categories of armed force 
in la guerrilla, 1808-14 
129 
130 
Lon 
#3 
132 
132 
133 
134 
134 
1S 

<<<PDFPAGE 14>>>
Preface 
The papers contained in this volume of essays were originally presented 
at a symposium held in the School of History in the University of 
Liverpool in September 2003. One of a series of bi-annual meetings 
of scholars working on the Napoleonic period, it was funded by the British 
Academy, the London branch of the Instituto de Cervantes and the 
University of Liverpool, and to all of these organizations I should like to 
extend my special thanks. To all the contributors, too, 
1am most grateful: 
they have been models of patience and hard work and have in a number of 
cases withstood the assaults of an all too heayy editorial hand with 
grace and good humour. If any of them are to be singled out, it should 
be my research assistant, Leonor Hernandez Enviz, whose diligence, 
efficiency and sense of responsibility is the foundation of much that is 
contained within these pages. Behind the scenes, meanwhile, there stand 
my Head of School, Professor Pauline Stafford; our devoted School 
Administrator, Val Fry; and, at Palgrave Macmillan, Luciana O’Flaherty 
and Daniel Bunyard. Last but not least, there come my family: without 
their support and love none of this would have ever happened. 
CHARLES ESDAILE 
Liverpool 

<<<PDFPAGE 15>>>
Acknowledgement 
With regard to the jacket picture, which is here published for the first time, 
special thanks are due to the owner, Ilustrisimo Senor Don Antonio GOmez 
de Olea Nevada, Marqués de Velascé, who has kindly given his permission 
for its reproduction, and to the latter’s nephew, Teniente Coronel Don José 
Pardo de Figueroa, of the Spanish army’s Escuela de Guerra, whose good 
offices have throughout been of inestimable help in this connection. As so 
often before, then, the author is deeply indebted to Spanish generosity. 
xi 

<<<PDFPAGE 16>>>
Notes on Contributors 
Martin Boycott-Brown was for many years an English teacher in 
northern Italy. In 2002 he published The Road to Rivoli: Napoleon’s First 
Campaign. 
Emilie Delivré is a doctoral student at the European University Institute 
in Florence. She is working on the subject of political catechism in the 
Age of Revolution, and has presented papers at a number of international 
conferences. 
“ 
Charles J. Esdaile is a Reader in History at the University of Liverpool. The 
author of numerous works on the Napoleonic period, including, 
most recently, The Peninsular War: a New History (2002), and Fighting 
Napoleon: Guerrillas, Bandits and Adventurers in Spain, 1808-14 (2004), 
he is currently working on an international history of Napoleonic 
Europe. 
Alan Forrest is a leading specialist on the French Revolution. He has 
a Chair in the Department of History at the University of York, and is the 
author of many works on the Revolution and its armies, including the 
seminal Napoleon’s Men: the Soldiers of the Revolution and Empire (2002). 
Janet Hartley has a personal chair in the Department of International 
History at the London School of Economics. Britain’s leading expert on 
Russia in the Napoleonic period, she is the author of Alexander I (1994). 
Leonor Hernandez Enviz is a freelance researcher living in Madrid. She 
is the author of various conference papers on the Peninsular War, and is 
at present preparing a doctoral thesis at the Universidad Complutense. 
Antonio Moliner Prada is a professor at the Universidad Autonoma de 
Barcelona. A leading specialist on Spain and, especially, Catalonia, in 
the Napoleonic period, his many publications include La Catalunya 
Resistent a la Dominaci6é Francesa, 
1808-1812: 
la Junta Superior de 
Catalunya (Edicions 62, 1989), La Guerra del Francés a Mallorca, 1808-1814 
(2000) and La Guerrilla en la Guerra de la Independencia (2004). 
xii 

<<<PDFPAGE 17>>>
Notes on Contributors 
xiii 
Michael Rowe was until the summer of 2004 a lecturer in History at 
Queen’s University, Belfast. As this work was going to press, however, 
he was appointed to a lectureship at King’s College, London. The editor 
of a collection of essays on Napoleonic Europe that was published by 
Palgrave Macmillan in 2003, in the same year he also published From 
Reich to State: the Rhineland in the Revolutionary Age, 
1780-1830 (2003). 
Vittorio Scotti-Douglas is a senior fellow at the University of Trieste 
and is the editor of the historical journal, Spagna Contemporanea. An expert 
on the contents of the Archivo General de Simancas, he has published 
a variety of articles and conference papers on the Peninsular War. 

<<<PDFPAGE 18>>>
I 
pee 
manana) 
| 
bs 
are cok 3 cam 
od rig 
oe 
. @ 
i 
sitar 
sh) 
: 
ad fe: 
rid 
acl “m2 4 
aa 
eagis 
tty fae 
‘ 
Pale 
rata 
a 
, 
7 
' 
sno 
non; a 
nae i 
e —_ =e 
— 
- 
: 
: 
+ " 
i Ee 
ean 
Pre = 
. 
utter 
TRESS. WES « 
wey ies Nag 
7 
” Flee Pondvabat Wana ae 
re aba - 
niehy 
Bees 
ow 
ov 
co, 
os ee, 
— 
: 
vuln ‘iowa 
is a 
2s 
ey its <ibere 
i SS 
5 palling 2 cena vw 
SSaeeeaenl 
~ 
n 
velar yong we 
areas 
on 

<<<PDFPAGE 19>>>
1 
Patriots, Partisans and Land Pirates 
in Retrospect 
Charles J. Esdaile 
Summarizing two days of lively academic debate is not an easy task, and 
is one that will not be attempted here. Suffice to say that the symposium 
on which this collection of essays was based was united in its recog- 
nition of the facts; first, that the subject of armed popular resistance in 
Napoleonic Europe is an area of which we still know surprisingly little 
that is worthy of further exploration, and, second, that its investigation 
on a continent-wide 
scale is not something that could ever be 
attempted by a single scholar working on his or her own. As in the case 
of the governance, organization, implantation and impact of the 
Napoleonic empire, the way is therefore open for a variety of collaborative 
research projects. Where individual scholars can make a difference lies 
rather in the study of individual states, territories, regions or districts, 
and in this respect the hope was duly expressed that the revolts in 
Spain, Portugal, Calabria, northern Italy, the Tyrol and Germany would 
all receive further attention. Other topics that were raised as possibilities, 
meanwhile, include outbreaks of guerrilla warfare beyond the confines 
on the Napoleonic empire - the obvious examples are Finland and 
Serbia — and the extent of popular participation in the climactic 
campaigns of 1812, 1813 and 1814. It was noted, however, that even 
the more limited approach inherent in country-by-country studies was 
not without its difficulties: if one thing is apparent in relation to the 
subject of ‘people’s war’ in the age of Napoleon, it is that those who 
work in it must be polymaths who are capable of assimilating a wide 
variety of different approaches to their subject - who must, in short, be 
able to combine an understanding of, say, agrarian unrest with one of the 
origins and development of Ja petite guerre. Setting aside invitations to 
further study, however, what the Liverpool symposium chiefly provided 
1 

<<<PDFPAGE 20>>>
2 Patriots, Partisans and Land Pirates 
was an opportunity to review what we know of popular resistance and 
in the process to challenge a number of common suppositions. 
In this respect the most obvious place to begin is the idea that armed 
resistance on the part of the common people was in all parts of the 
Continent a likely response to French invasion. As the historical record 
shows, this was simply not so, or not, at least, if what is meant is anything 
more than a more-or-less isolated and short-lived riot or village insurrection. 
Guerrilla warfare was in almost every case the result of large scale popular 
insurrections against the French and their surrogates, and, with some 
exceptions (of which more below), such events did not occur in places 
where there were large concentrations of enemy troops. As Michael Rowe 
tells us, in the Rhineland enormous numbers of French troops were 
constantly in situe in the 1790s when the area was very much in the 
frontline of the Republic’s military campaigns, whilst even afterwards the 
fact that the area was the gateway to central Germany ensured that there 
was a constant to-ing and fro-ing of imperial bayonets. Thus, in 1805 it was 
a jumping off point for the campaign of Austerlitz; in 1808 large numbers 
of French troops marched back across it en route for the emperor’s revenge 
in Spain; in 1809 it was a base for the campaign against Austria; in 1811 
and 1813 it saw the passage of large contingents of conscripts bound for 
their deaths in Russia and Saxony; and in 1814 it was a bastion of 
Napoleonic resistance in the last ditch defence of France’s frontiers. There 
was, in fact, some low-level resistance in the 1790s — resistance that was in 
reality little more than brigandage — but by the time of the empire Trier, 
Mainz and the other Rhenish towns and cities were quiet postings where 
the soldiers of Napoleon could take their ease in safety. Grumbling took 
place aplenty, in which respect one might quote the memoirs of Heinrich 
von Brandt, a German officer serving with Napoleon’s auxiliary ‘Legion of 
the Vistula’. Thus, marching from Metz to Mayence in April 1812, he 
noticed ‘some unequivocal signs of discontent’; as he said, ‘People were 
growing tired of the continual passage of troops despite the money that 
was thus being spread along the way.’’ Nor is this surprising. Travelling 
the other way in 1808, the hussar officer, Rocca, remembered: 
After having passed the Elbe and the Weser, we reached the left bank 
of the Rhine and France. ..It was with deep sorrow and almost with 
tears in their eyes that our hussars quitted Germany... We traversed 
France as if it had been a land newly conquered and subjected to our 
arms... The soldiers of the grand army did not lose... the habit they 
had contracted 
in Germany of now and then maltreating the 
citizens... with whom they lodged.” 

<<<PDFPAGE 21>>>
Charles J. Esdaile 
3 
And yet, withal: 
The inhabitants of the towns and villages through which we passed 
suffered all patiently till the armed torrent was drained off. 
Why was this so? After all, the Rhineland’s forest and hills offered at 
least some potential for guerrilla operations, whilst, as Martin Boycott- 
Brown shows, the case of northern Italy suggests that the mere presence 
of large numbers of enemy troops was not in itself sufficient to guarantee 
acquiescence. For explanation, one might point to historical experience: 
in the seventeenth century the Rhineland had been repeatedly plagued, 
and sometimes physically devastated, by the visitations of occupying 
armies, and it may be that a habit of mind had been engendered that 
accepted such misfortunes as acts of God that were no more avoidable 
than bad harvests. To put the same point another way, experience may 
also have shown that armed opposition was in the end counter-productive — 
that it was literally easiest to choose the path of least resistance. Then, 
too, we come to the issue of leadership. As the AHRB-British Academy 
research project analysed in this study reveals, élite leadership was of 
great importance in the emergence of large scale popular resistance to 
the French. Indeed, this may have been even more the case than the 
figures given by the author and his colleague, Leonor Hernandez-Enviz, 
suggest: recent discussions with a direct descendant of the guerrilla 
commander, Francisco Longa - a man who has gone down in history as 
by origin a simple blacksmith - have revealed that the family papers 
show him to have been in reality the proprietor of a substantial iron 
foundry!* In the Rhineland, however, much of the élite seems to have 
been happy to go along with the French, whilst, in those cases where 
they were not, there was always the relatively easy option of emigration, as 
witness the case of Cleves. But what of the people themselves, or, to be 
more precise, the general populace? Under the empire the constant 
passage of French troops made their situation very unpleasant, whilst, 
as Rowe shows, the pressure of conscription was no more popular in, 
say, Trier than it was in Trieste. Yet there was more to Napoleonic rule 
than conscription and taxation. Much more work is needed on this 
issue, but so far as can be ascertained the Rhineland appears to have 
done slightly better out of the emperor than some other areas of the 
French imperium. Whereas in some states — the Grand Duchy of Warsaw, 
for example — the abolition of feudalism left the peasantry in many 
respects even worse off than they were before, in the four Rhenish 
departments the situation was rather different. Thus, the various judicial 

<<<PDFPAGE 22>>>
4 Patriots, Partisans and Land Pirates 
reforms introduced by the French made the law courts more accessible 
and more trusted (as Rowe shows), whilst the sale of the lands of the 
Church was administered in such a way as to assuage the sensibilities of 
the largely Catholic populace and allow the peasants to acquire a share 
of the spoils. At the same time, a reasonably favourable settlement was 
reached with regard to the thorny question of precisely which dues were 
still owed by the peasantry in the wake of emancipation, whilst a series 
of decrees against the Jews, including one which effectively annulled 
many of the debts owed to money lenders by the peasantry, further 
eased the financial situation. And, last but not least, the Rhineland’s 
agricultural products generally fetched high prices, and textiles and 
metallurgy developed apace, whilst even the behaviour of the soldiery 
was rendered somewhat more tolerable by the money that they paid for 
food, wine and other services. To quote Herbert Fisher, then: 
At the end of the Napoleonic period there were...complaints that 
the peasant had become over-prosperous, that he sat in the tap-room 
playing for gold stakes, and that no wine would content him but the 
best...It was not till 1813 that...an active spirit of discontent, 
mainly caused by military requisitions, manifested itself in the country. 
But the inhabitants had no burning desire to change their political 
allegiance, for upon the whole they had prospered under the rule of 
Napoleon.° 
The mere density of enemy troops, then, does not in itself necessarily 
explain away an absence of popular resistance. Whilst it may have been 
a factor, in the Rhineland, at least, other issues were also important. 
And even then it has to be accepted that the passivity depicted by both 
Fisher and Rowe can be exaggerated. In the 1790s the whole region was 
swarming with bandits, of whom the most famous was the infamous 
Johann Bickler or ‘Schinderhannes’, whilst on a number of occasions 
angry inhabitants rioted or attacked French soldiers. Given the important 
role played by banditry in Spain as a focus for la guerrilla, insurrection 
was therefore at least a possibility, and in 1799 anti-French feeling in 
the Rhineland reached such a pitch that, had the initial run of success 
enjoyed by the British, Russians and Austrians in the War of the Second 
Coalition continued, it is more than possible that the region would 
have risen in revolt: such at least is the opinion of Tim Blanning.° Yet if 
we look, as Rowe asks us to do, at examples where revolts did break out, 
we can see that the latter has a point. Let us take the case of Spain and 
Portugal. Thus, when insurrection broke out in 1808 neither country 

<<<PDFPAGE 23>>>
Charles J. Esdaile 
5 
had much more than a token French presence. The overall number of 
troops involved was quite impressive: there were 94 000 men in Spain 
and another 25 000 in Portugal. But the actual distribution of these 
forces reveals a different picture. In the former country the bulk of the 
French army — $6 000 men - was concentrated around Madrid, and apart 
from this the only substantial garrisons were to be found in Barcelona, 
Pamplona, San Sebastian, Burgos, Lerma, Vitoria and Figueras (to put 
this more graphically, the French zone of control consisted of no more 
than a long finger of territory extending from the French frontier at 
Hendaye along the line of the main road to Madrid, and a second such 
finger extending from the other end of the Pyrenees at Port-Bou to 
Barcelona). As for Portugal, meanwhile, 15 000 men held Lisbon and the 
mouth of the Tagus, whilst another 10 000 manned the border positions 
of Alcoutim, Elvas and Almeida. In large parts of the Iberian peninsula, 
then, there was literally not a Frenchman to be seen for hundreds of 
miles, whilst those French troops who had been seen were hardly such 
as to inspire much in the way of fear. Thus, the first ‘Army of Spain’ was 
very much a scratch force most of whose members were newly inducted 
conscripts who were so raw that they hardly knew how to load and fire 
their muskets. Organized in ad hoc provisional regiments and ‘legions of 
reserve’ and dressed in a motley collection of cast-off uniforms, they were 
not much of an advertisement for the Napoleonic military machine. 
Faced by even mildly difficult conditions, meanwhile, their bearing 
simply broke down under the strain: most of the troops dispatched to 
Lisbon in October 1807 fell out along the way, whilst those that 
managed to remain with the colours were reduced to such a state that 
they more resembled an army that had been thoroughly defeated than 
one that was engaged in a triumphal progress. Small wonder, then, that 
there appears to have been little awareness of what war against the 
emperor would entail, not to mention a credulous audience for patriotic 
writers whose stock-in-trade was a burlesque vision of a Napoleon 
gibbering with fear in his throne room at the thought of the heroism 
about to be unleashed on him.’ 
As in Iberia, so in the Tyrol. Taken from Austria after the battle of 
Austerlitz in 1805, this province had been given to Bavaria. French troops 
had been seen by the populace in all the campaigns of 1796-97, 1799 
and 1805, but in all of these the traditional Tyrolian militia — the landsturm 
and the somewhat better equipped schutzen — had acquitted themselves 
well against the forces who invaded the area from Italy, Switzerland and 
Bavaria (a fact that undoubtedly engendered the same sort of over- 
confidence that was on show in the Peninsula). At the end of 1805, 

<<<PDFPAGE 24>>>
6 Patriots, Partisans and Land Pirates 
however, all of the French troops as such had been withdrawn. Eager to 
assimilate their new acquisition, the Bavarians duly sent a garrison in 
their place, but the Bavarian army was hardly the most impressive in 
Europe — French complaints of its indiscipline and lackadaisical attitude 
are legion — whilst the number of men in cornflower-blue who appeared 
was surprisingly small: Thus, in 1809 there were no more than 4500 
Bavarian troops in the area, and possibly as few as 3400. Even these, 
meanwhile, were confined to just five posts, of which the most important 
were Innsbruck and Brixen. As such, each of these boasted precisely two 
battalions of infantry, one squadron of cavalry and two field pieces, 
whilst the insurgents could by contrast count on the support of around 
10 500 Austrian regulars who were poised to cross the frontier on the 
outbreak of hostilities. Outside help, then, was at hand, and it may be 
that this was a feature in provoking revolt whose importance has hitherto 
been overlooked. After all, as Martin Boycott-Brown tells us, there was a 
general expectation in Pavia that an Austrian army was in the vicinity, 
whilst in Calabria, too, the presence of British troops in Sicily may have 
encouraged the local inhabitants to believe that they could strike at the 
French with impunity. And in the Peninsula, of course, Patriot procla- 
mations, newspapers and handbills were soon full of claims that the 
redcoats — a common enough sight in both Spain and Portugal in the 
eighteenth century — were on their way. 
What, though, was the populace to do until help arrived? In Portugal, 
Piedmont — the barbets discussed by Boycott-Brown are a force that 
antedated the Revolutionary and Napoleonic Wars by many years, 
being irregular bands that were raised whenever war broke out with 
France to defend the passage of the Alps’ — the Tyrol and parts of Spain - 
Catalonia, the Basque provinces and Galicia — the answer was to be 
found in popular institutions that had survived intact for hundreds of 
years in the form of local homeguards. Irregular militias in which all 
men of military age were theoretically liable for service in time of war, 
these provided a means of organizing the populace for action against a 
foreign enemy as well as a legacy of practical experience: in such 
regions guerrilla warfare did not in any sense have to be invented, but 
was something that was a tried and tested response to invasion and 
conquest and, more to the point, a weapon that was ultimately in the 
hands of the state (though in 1809 the Tyrol was a temporary exception 
in this respect). As we have already seen in the case of the Tyrol, moreover, 
these forces had in many cases seen action against the French in the 
recent past, a further example here being the Basque and Catalan militias, 
both of which had been heavily involved in the Franco-Spanish conflict 

<<<PDFPAGE 25>>>
Charles J. Esdaile 
7 
of 1793-95. And, last but not least, the organization of the populace 
into such forces provided security in another sense, for men who were 
enrolled as ordenancas, barbetti, schutzen, landsturm, somatenes, migueletes 
or alarmas had some hope that combatants who fell into the hands of 
the enemy would not simply be executed as brigands. Also comforting 
was their association, at least on the whole, with regions that were 
extremely mountainous —- above all, the Alps and the Pyrenees — that 
offered irregular combatants some degree of shelter and protection, or, 
to put it more starkly still, the hope of survival. 
Was rebellion the fruit of rational calculation, then? By stressing issues 
such as the numerical strength of the occupying forces, the availability 
or otherwise of external help and the existence of traditional frameworks 
of organization and armament, we could easily come to such a conclusion. 
If we consider Italy, however, we can see that these arguments are not 
sufficient either. The French did not necessarily have a great many 
troops immediately to hand: in 1796 Napoleon only had 38 000 men 
with him when he invaded Piedmont, whilst ten years later the French 
officer put in charge of the occupation of Calabria, General Reynier, 
had a mere 10 000; equally, as Boycott-Brown tells us, rebellion broke 
out in Pavia after the main body of the French army had marched away. 
However, almost anywhere in Italy insurrection carried with it the 
threat of confrontation with the French troops. When the mountainous 
parts of the duchy of Piacenza rose in revolt in protest at the imposition 
of conscription towards the end of 1805, for example, they did so in the 
face of a French army of 50 000 men (though it is worth noting that the 
revolt coincided with the outbreak of the War of the Third Coalition, 
and, more particularly, the invasion of the neighbouring Kingdom of 
Italy by substantial Austrian forces headed by the renowned Archduke 
Charles).!° Indeed, resistance frequently arose directly out of confrontations 
between soldiers and civilians. Such situations were unusual in the rest 
of Europe: practically the only instance in which unarmed civilians 
who were not already in a state of war flung themselves directly on a 
French garrison that comes to mind is the rising of the Dos de Mayo in 
Madrid. Even this example, meanwhile, is subject to heavy qualification: 
the incident began as a species of panic thanks, above all, to the spread 
of rumours that the soldiers of Marshal Murat, who included a number 
of Muslim mamelukes whom Napoleon had brought back from Egypt, 
had launched an unprovoked attack on the inhabitants; meanwhile, the 
city itself again contained very few troops, the bulk of Murat’s men being 
encamped beyond its limits.'! In Italy, however, it is a different story. 
To take the example given us from the area of Rivoli by Boycott-Brown, 

<<<PDFPAGE 26>>>
8 Patriots, Partisans and Land Pirates 
trouble broke out at the village of Gaon as a direct response to French 
marauding, whilst in Calabria the first major incident of the insurrection 
arose out of a fight that broke out on 22 March 1806 in the town of 
Soveria between a group of French soldiers out requisitioning horses 
and a crowd of inhabitants led by one Carmine Caliguri.'* 
What is striking about all these examples, however, is the complete 
absence of any political or military preparation. In Spain the insurrection 
of 1808 was preceded by a long period of radicalization in which the 
populace was prepared for revolt against the legitimate authorities — for 
in the absence of French troops this was what insurrection necessarily 
amounted to — by a torrent of propaganda against the hated royal 
favourite, Manuel de Godoy. Equally, in the Tyrol anno neun was the 
fruit of a plot that was hatched by a group of notables who had 
succeeded in gaining the support of elements ofthe court in Vienna. In 
Italy, however, there was no such political context: indeed, efforts to 
raise the calabresi in defence of the régime of Ferdinand IV and Maria 
Carolina as the French moved in at the beginning of 1806 had proved 
an abject failure: far from fighting for the Bourbons, the populace 
rather turned on the British, Russian and Neapolitan soldiers deployed 
in Calabria and pillaged their supply trains. On occasion, indeed, they 
even actively supported the French. In the words of Roger de Damas, 
the French émigré general who commanded the bulk of King Ferdinand’s 
army: 
The people of the country, who had always been represented to the 
prince as ready to shed their last drop of blood for their sovereigns, 
had not furnished a single man to fight for them. In the hope of saving 
themselves from pillage by giving the French a good reception they 
hid all their provisions from us...I had to occupy the town of 
Cosenza... where I was absolutely obliged to give my troops twenty- 
four hours of rest. I found it necessary to protect myself from the 
inhabitants as much as from the enemy. The principal townsfolk 
came to assure me that if I should make any attempt at resistance 
under 
their 
walls, 
the people would 
join the French 
against 
me...When I left the town...the inhabitants carried out their 
threats and formed themselves into a body of infantry to support the 
enemy’s advanced guard of cavalry in attacking my rearguard. 
It will be objected here that in 1799 Cardinal Ruffo had succeed in stir- 
ring up a great revolt in Calabria against the short-lived Parthenopaean 
Republic. But in reality this is a most problematic example. Ruffo 

<<<PDFPAGE 27>>>
Charles J. Esdaile 
9 
landed at Reggio at the very time that the French, who were being 
hard pressed in the north by the Austrians, evacuated their Neapolitan 
conquests, and the result, as Damas observed, was that ‘in all his 
peregrinations he never met a single Frenchman’.'* As the general 
continued: 
When...the gazettes reported that Cardinal Ruffo had reconquered 
the kingdom with the Calabrian masses, no sensible person, surely, 
accepted the story as anything but a newspaper tale. He began his 
expedition at a time when there was no enemy to oppose him except 
Jacobinism, the rallying word of unbridled pillage. Two poor villages 
accused a rich one of Jacobinism, whereupon the cardinal promised 
that the two should combine to pillage the third. Without seeing a 
single Frenchman he advanced from province to province till he was 
reinforced by detachments of English, Russians and Turks, who all 
landed from their ships. Thus supported, he reached Naples, whence 
the French had gone to oppose the advance of Suvorov, so he 
handed over the capital to be devastated by his acolytes.'* 
In this account there is, or so one suspects, both personal jealousy and 
the fear of the common people that was but natural in the mind of an 
aristocrat who had opposed the French Revolution from the very begin- 
ning. Nor was Damas the most perspicacious of men. The British officer, 
Henry Bunbury, describes him as ‘a man of pretension and address, but 
not of abilities; gallant and gay in the proud alcoves of royalty, but 
without resources or judgement in difficulties’.!° Yet British observers 
paint much the same picture, both Bunbury, who served as the Quarter- 
master General — effectively chief of staff — of the British army in Sicily, 
and Sir John Moore writing with repulsion of the insurgents they 
encountered on the mainland of southern Italy during the campaign of 
Maida as mere bandits who were interested only in pillage and never 
came forth except when the French were weak or in retreat. In the 
words of the latter, indeed, they were ‘mafia...a lawless banditti, 
enemies to all governments whatever... fit to plunder and murder, but 
much too dastardly to face an enemy’.'’ Not for nothing, then, did the 
Napoleonic Wars give us the word ‘ruffian’. 
If these views are stripped of their élitist language they provide us 
with another slant on popular resistance. We come here to the issue of 
social conflict. In Calabria collaboration was associated with the towns 
and the propertied classes, and resistance with the countryside and the 
poor,.much the same distinctions being visible in Spain and Portugal. 

<<<PDFPAGE 28>>>
10 
Patriots, Partisans and Land Pirates 
In the Rhineland, Jews — a group who were perceived as having benefited 
both economically and politically from French conquest and furthermore 
were hated on account of their association with usury — were a favourite 
target of Biickler and his fellows. And, finally, in the Tyrol the revolt 
was very much a rural phenomenon, and one from which the burgers 
of Innsbruck and other towns suffered accordingly. Thus, when the 
capital was overrun by the rebels on 12 April 1809 it was systematically 
plundered and the more prosperous inhabitants subjected to a variety 
of indignities, other groups to suffer being officials — ‘peasant skinners’ 
in local parlance - and, once again, the Jews.'* Given the fact that in 
the Po valley opposition was closely linked to peasant risings of a sort 
that had long been familiar across Europe, from all this it would seem to 
follow that popular resistance was at root a social movement in which 
peasants and day labourers sought both to redress long-standing 
grievances and to escape from short-term pressures. After all, brigandage, 
especially, was at one and the same time a traditional response to rural 
poverty, a means of survival for would-be deserters and draft-evaders 
and a framework that could accommodate the hordes of malcontents 
generated by assimilation into the Napoleonic empire. But this view of 
popular resistance as a phenomenon linked to social protests is somewhat 
undermined by evidence from Spain, and, more specifically, the province 
of Navarre. Divided into the wet and mountainous montana, which 
borders on the Basque provinces and the Pyrenees, and the dry and 
undulating ribera, which borders on Aragon and Old Castile, this region 
is home to two very different systems of agriculture. Thus, the montaria 
is characterized by small farms worked by owner-occupiers and long- 
term tenants, and the ribera by great estates worked by day labourers. Of 
these two social groups the former was by Spanish standards reasonably 
prosperous and independent and the latter desperately poverty stricken 
and very much at the mercy of the landowners. Also very different was 
the position of the Church: in the montana the dominant institution 
was the small village parish ministered to by local men of peasant stock, 
whereas in the ribera it was rather the great monastery, the contrast 
being that support was contrasted with oppression. If social strife is the 
key to popular resistance, then the bulk of Navarre’s insurgents should 
logically have come from districts in the Ebro valley such as those of 
Tudela and Corella, but in reality the majority came from the north, the 
greatest centres of resistance being such areas as the isolated Pyrenean 
valleys of the Roncal and the Baztan.!” 
Very clearly, then, popular resistance — and in northern Navarre it 
is worth pointing out that what the French faced was not low-level 

<<<PDFPAGE 29>>>
Charles J. Esdaile 
11 
brigandage but a full scale war waged with a mixture of skill, energy and 
devotion — was not just linked to poverty. Yet, that said, the example of 
the Navarrese montafia is exceptional: one of the few areas of the Iberian 
peninsula where the rural populace may be said to have been genuinely 
contented with its lot - where it had, in short, positive reasons to fight 
for the ancien regime — it may fairly be contrasted with areas such as the 
Serrania de Ronda where there was great poverty but also high levels of 
resistance, even if the latter was combined with strong elements of jacquerie 
and hostility to the military authorities.2? Where, then, should this 
thought take us? Principally, it would seem, to the behaviour of the 
French themselves. Thus, in Navarre as much as in the Serrania de Ronda, 
in Piedmont as much as in Calabria, the catalyst that caused the French 
to come under attack from the civilian populace was the requisitioning 
and brutality engaged in by the French soldiers. To prove this point, let 
us examine it a little further. Thus, although both Spain and Naples 
were at war with Napoleon, and, in addition, engaged in an attempt to 
raise the entire populace against the invaders, in neither country did 
the authorities have much success so long as the French remained a dis- 
tant threat. If we take the region of Galicia as an example, we find that 
in 1808 active support for the war was almost non-existent: the number 
of patriotic volunteers soon dwindled to a trickle, whilst the battle to 
impose conscription proved long and difficult. In January 1809, however, 
all this changed. Determined to capture the army of Sir John Moore, 
which was retreating on the port of La Coruna at full speed, the French 
poured across the frontier from Leon and proceeded to wreak havoc in 
the towns and villages through which they passed. As a result, within a 
matter of days large parts of the province — again, for the most part, those 
areas that were not actually occupied by the enemy - rose in revolt.” 
It is worth noting here that the Galician revolt came as a response to 
occupation rather than invasion: when the French actually marched on 
Galicia, few of the inhabitants showed the slightest disposition to resist 
the oncoming enemy columns, whilst, in the same way, when the 
French moved into Andalucia in January 1810 attempts to meet them 
with an irregular levée en masse proved to be an embarrassing failure. 
Resistance, then, was to a certain extent linked to French policy. The 
business of requisitioning, for example, was certain to cause friction 
even if it was conducted with a modicum of restraint, and might even 
spark off a riot. But, to return to Boycott-Brown’s chapter, the example 
of Gaon shows that such events did not have to produce a guerrilla war. 
On the contrary, through the exercise of common sense and compromise 
the local French commander was able to avoid bloodshed and bring the 

<<<PDFPAGE 30>>>
12 
Patriots, Partisans and Land Pirates 
peasantry to accept the realities of occupation. Such prudence, however, 
was rare. As Alan Forrest has shown, the concept of brigandage was 
throughout the period 1792-1815 something that stirred strong feelings in 
the French mind. Those who engaged in acts of irregular resistance had 
ipso facto placed themselves beyond the pale of humanity not simply 
because of the savagery of which they were undoubtedly capable, but 
also because of their association with counter-revolution, or, to put it 
another way, their rejection of modern civilization. In Calabria and Spain 
alike, then, rebellion was met with a response so brutal as to destroy 
all hope of compromise, the speed and decision with which the French 
acted undoubtedly being accentuated by the Catholicism that charac- 
terized both these two parts of Europe. In the immediate wake of the 
outbreak of revolt in Calabria, for example, the town that had been the 
site of the first serious incident was sacked and, burned down, whilst a 
military tribunal established in Cosenza executed 200 suspects within a 
month. Also destroyed, meanwhile, were the villages of Savelli, Cassino, 
Gerenza and Cachari, whilst the savagery contained without let-up 
thereafter: in the memoirs of Nicolas Desvernois, a French cavalry 
officer serving in the new Neapolitan army established by Joseph 
Bonaparte who was made governor of Amalfi, there is a proud account 
of how he executed 184 men belonging to the band of one Giusipello 
and exhibited their heads along the main coast road in iron cages.”? 
And in Spain the firing squads that dealt with the insurgents who took part 
in the Dos de Mayo have been immortalized by Goya (though in fact 
the number of people they executed appears to have been no more than 
114), whilst 
a number of towns whose inhabitants were accused of firing 
on the French — most notably, Medina de Rio Seco and Chinchén - 
experienced appalling massacres.”* 
To describe this policy as genocide — a term that can certainly be 
applied in other contexts, most notably the Vendée - would be to go too 
far. Many French officers were, in fact, keenly aware that their aim had 
to be driving a wedge between the insurgents and the populace as a 
whole and struggled hard to keep their men under control, whilst further 
restraints were often exercized by the civilian officials who became 
involved in the various anti-bandit tribunals established by such rulers 
as Joseph Bonaparte. But the fact is that levels of repression were high 
and, on occasion, extreme, and that in the short term this exacerbated 
the problem. Thus, the population of entire villages might flee their 
homes and in consequence be left with no other means of survival than 
violence; equally, if some of the particular tales told in this respect are 
mere fables — among the Spanish guerrilla leaders who are falsely 

<<<PDFPAGE 31>>>
Charles J. Esdaile 
13 
claimed to have lost wives or parents to enemy atrocities are El Empecinado 
and Julian Sanchez - there were undoubtedly cases in which the French 
generated an intense desire for revenge. Nor was the situation aided by 
other aspects of occupation policy. The chief culprit here was conscription. 
Though never introduced in Spain and Portugal, fear that it was coming 
was undoubtedly an underlying factor in the Iberian insurrections, 
whilst it played a major role in radicalizing the population of the Tyrol, 
this province having traditionally enjoyed exemption from service in 
the regular army under the Habsburgs. But its impact was at its most 
severe in Calabria. Thus, by the spring of 1809 three years of a mixture 
of ferocious repression and efforts to win over the populace had done a 
great deal to reduce the strength of the insurrection. At this point, however, 
Joachim Murat, who had replaced Joseph Bonaparte as King of Naples 
when the latter had been transferred to Spain, introduced conscription. 
The result was immediate: large numbers of fresh recruits fled to the 
bands, whilst the French lost control of many villages that had hitherto 
been quiet.”4 
In this particular respect, the French were forced to back off: Calabria 
was informed that its manpower would only have to serve in the civic 
guard that had been organized in its towns and villages, whilst no 
soldiers were ever actually levied in this fashion. On occasion, too, 
compromise was reached in Spain where a pattern of tit-for-tat execu- 
tions eventually led Francisco Espoz y Mina and the French governor of 
Navarre to respect the lives of prisoners. In the midst of the most brutal 
warfare, then, there was generally sufficient flexibility on both sides to 
ensure that there was always some sort of ‘golden bridge’ that avoided 
full scale apocalypse. In rare exceptions, however, this was not the case, 
in which respect it behoves us to pay particular attention to the most 
obvious example, and all the more so as this has been regularly 
advanced as proof of the way in which the Napoleonic Wars generated 
new styles of warfare. We come here to the events that ravaged central 
Portugal between September 1810 and April 1811. In brief, faced by a 
French army of invasion commanded by Marshal Massena which he 
suspected he would not be able to check in the open field, Wellington 
fell back from his positions on the frontier of Beira in the direction of 
Lisbon, which he had protected by an impregnable zone of fortifications 
known as the Lines of Torres Vedras. As the French advanced, moreover, 
they were confronted by a scorched-earth policy that saw large numbers 
of the inhabitants driven from their homes and forced to migrate to 
ad hoc refugee camps created around the capital and such food stocks as 
could not be transported to Lisbon burned or spoiled. To these demands, 

<<<PDFPAGE 32>>>
14 
Patriots, Partisans and Land Pirates 
however, there was much resistance: many people refused to leave their 
homes and either hid supplies of grain and other foodstuffs in caves, 
cellars or abandoned houses, or buried them beneath barnyard or 
threshing floor. Confronted by the Lines of Torres Vedras, the invaders — 
some 60 000 men —- came to a dead halt, but, whilst Massena realised 
that trying to fight his way through the maze of inundations, abattis, 
escarpments and redoubts that Wellington had constructed was impossible, 
he refused to retreat, and therefore blockaded the Anglo-Portuguese forces 
in their positions in the hope that fresh troops might arrive from Spain. 
There followed one of the most dreadful episodes of the entire Napoleonic 
era. Assailed by ever growing hunger, the French 
turned 
on 
the 
inhabitants who had been left behind and set about extracting such 
food supplies as remained to them. Increasingly desperate, foraging 
parties resorted to torture and murder as a matter of course. Let us here 
quote Jean-Baptiste Lemonnier-Delafosse, an officer who was serving in 
a light-infantry regiment in the division of General Heudelet: 
The French army entered Portugal with six days’ worth of supplies in 
each soldier’s haversack, and on top of that a few wagons. It was, 
therefore, without any proper magazines, and soon it found itself 
without food of any sort. Nevertheless, it was necessary to live. Once 
the initial resources had run out...a regular system of marauding 
was organized... Woe be to the peasant who was caught by such an 
expedition! The poor unfortunate was stripped of all he had and 
often...put to death by men whom hunger...had rendered cruel 
and savage. When the troops were operating in places they did not 
know, guides were needed. If no-one came forward at their call, 
someone would be seized at random. Having got such a person, he 
would be ordered to take them to a village...and, once he had got 
there, to point out where all the food had been hidden...The poor 
devil would not know where it was any more than those who were 
searching for it, and the confusion into which he was necessarily 
thrown was taken as proof of bad faith by the soldiers. Threats were 
then quickly followed by actions: a rope would be put round his 
neck, and the unfortunate man would hear the words, ‘Up you go 
until you tell us where the grain is!’ As he could give no answer, he 
would be strung up until he began to turn blue, whereupon he would 
be taken down and given another chance to speak. Alas! Worse than 
barbarous as they were, these atrocious means sometimes succeeded, 
but this was only when fate had pitched upon an inhabitant of the 
village that was being raided. Unless that was the case, such men 

<<<PDFPAGE 33>>>
Charles J. Esdaile 
15 
could reveal nothing, and so the soldiers said to them in their ferocity, 
‘Oh, you don’t want to tell us where the grain is, do you? You are 
a brigand: hanged you were and hanged you will remain!’ 
Needless to say, the response of the population was to turn to wholesale 
resistance. In brief, there was nothing else left for them to do: it was 
literally a question of seizing food from the French or starving to death, 
and, still more bluntly, killing the invaders before they themselves were 
killed. As Lemonnier-Delafosse lamented, ‘Once an affair of civilized 
peoples, our war had become a war to the death.’”° Finding themselves 
assailed in this fashion, the French troops lost all vestige of humanity 
and engaged in a series of atrocities whose nature horrified the most 
hardened British soldiers when they reoccupied the area the following 
spring after Massena had finally given up the struggle and retreated to 
Spain. As one of Wellington’s aides de camp wrote, ‘The French have 
certainly made an inglorious campaign ...To picture the infamous way 
in which they have left the country and the inhabitants is quite impossible: 
they have burned every village and town they went through, and 
murdered every peasant they could find.’”” 
The apocalyptic scenes witnessed in central Portugal in the winter of 
1810-11 are no more typical of armed popular resistance in Napoleonic 
Europe than peasant risings and the formation of guerrilla bands are 
typical of the general response of the populace to the French imperium. 
Even in areas gripped by partisan warfare, it is fairly clear that the 
preferred option of a large part of the inhabitants was to stay out of 
harm’s way and remain aloof from the struggle. To quote the British 
diplomat, Thomas Sydenham: 
The feelings of all the provinces through which I have passed are 
decidedly inimical to the French and favourable to the common 
cause... At the same time... the patriotic feelings of the lower classes 
are of little use to their country. It is a passive feeling which murmurs 
under the oppression and tyranny which it suffers without exerting 
itself to remove or diminish what it complains of. The people pay their 
contributions and deliver up their mules, grain and provisions when- 
ever they are demanded...by the enemy. Of course they complain 
of these exactions and are happy to see the English... But...it does 
the enemy no harm nor us any good.”® 
In general, then, what we see is a situation in which, even in the 
relatively areas few areas where it was an issue, popular resistance was 

<<<PDFPAGE 34>>>
16 
Patriots, Partisans and Land Pirates 
a phenomenon that for the most part affected only a minority of the 
population. At the same time, it was something that was likely to take 
root only in certain very specific circumstances. Only very rarely could 
the common people be relied on to fight for the Old Order on social or 
economic grounds. Sensing this, a number of propagandists anxious to 
stir up people’s war against the French attempted to reach out to them, 
and, in particular, to air the political issues involved in the conflict in a 
style that was accessible to a mass audience. Hence the use, as outlined 
for us by Emilie Delivré, of political catechisms (though it should be 
noted that these were not the only form of propaganda to be made use 
of in this respect: in Spain, at least, we only see the employment of the 
literary style known as costumbrismo in which characters featured in 
pamphlets and manifestos were made to engage in dialogue couched in 
the language of the streets). But in the absence of the conditions that 
made revolt a reality the publication of such documents remained an 
empty gesture. There is little evidence that the efforts of Arndt, Von 
Kleist and Von Hormayr had much effect on the situation in Germany: 
only one popular insurrection — that seen in Hamburg — occurred in the 
campaign of 1813, and this not only took place after the French had 
evacuated the city; but also seems to have been the work of the ruling 
oligarchy, the chief aim of this group being to maintain order and 
ensure that their homes and businesses were not sacked by the Cossacks 
who appeared hot on the heels of the French.”” What is even more striking, 
meanwhile, is the very small number of examples of political catechism 
that Delivré has been able to uncover, not to mention the clear pref- 
erence that can be seen in the documents which she examines for 
keeping popular action under the control of the state. 
In Germany, then, it can safely be said that there was little real enthu- 
siasm for independent action on the part of the people. Nor was this 
only the case in Prussia, Austria and the states of the Confederation of 
the Rhine: In Spain, too, there was real ambivalence about the issue of 
guerrilla warfare. Here the political élites were rather more enthusiastic: 
aside from offering them a means of both preferment and self-glorification, 
the formation of partisan bands could be represented as being much 
more of a military necessity. In consequence, the Patriot authorities were 
besieged by pretendientes anxious to secure a commission as a cabecilla. 
Yet, whether implicitly or explicitly, there was constantly a sense of dicing 
with the devil: the people, might, or so it was argued, hate the French, 
but they were also brutal, ignorant, irrational and ungovernable. Even 
when formed into organized militias, in fact, the populacho - literally, 
the rabble — could not be relied upon. As Antonio Moliner shows us in 

<<<PDFPAGE 35>>>
Charles J. Esdaile 
17 
his paper on Catalonia, the somatens and miquelets of that province 
were always prone to riot, desertion and pillage, and could not always 
be trusted to put up much of a fight. Hence the emergence of the corpus 
of regulation analysed by Vittorio Scotti-Douglas: the formation of 
guerrilla bands and even ‘land piracy’ were to be encouraged, certainly, 
but the phenomenon was also to be kept under control and directed 
into safe channels. As was implicitly recognised, in fact, to the extent 
that it existed at all, the desire to take up arms reflected not devotion to 
the patria, but rather an attempt to find a solution to some of the prob- 
lems that beset the populace: the partidas, as we have seen, offered food, 
pay, plunder, freedom from service in the regular army and the chance 
to make an end of hated social superiors. In short, the French were 
right: apart from in certain very particular instances, left to itself, in so 
far as guerrilla warfare was concerned, genuine popular resistance — in 
other words, the action of irregular bands of armed civilians as opposed 
to that of detachments of regular troops sent into ‘the bush’ to harass 
the enemy — was brigandage, and only ceased to be brigandage to the 
extent that members of the élites or ambitious adventurers of vision 
and foresight succeeded in subjecting the phenomenon to military 
discipline. Even the worst brigands, of course, could still inflict harm 
on the enemy on occasion, but little was to be expected from such 
privateering. To quote a letter written by an officer of the Third Foot 
Guards named Wiliiam Stothert in December 1811: 
At present the only troops in Spain which carry on a successful war- 
fare against the French are the guerrillas, or armed peasants, and it 
may fairly be presumed that they are incited to attack the enemy’s 
convoys and straggling parties as much by the hope of plunder as 
from patriotism. This cannot be supposed to influence the minds of 
their gallant chiefs [a belief in which Stothert was sadly mistaken], 
but the peasant, when compelled by the ravages of war to abandon 
the scenes of peaceful industry, becomes of necessity a soldier...as 
the only means of supporting his existence... It is not surprising ... 
that such a body ...should carry terror and dismay ...into the ranks 
of the French soldiery ... But it is perfectly evident that the deliverance 
of Spain can never be achieved by the efforts of a force so rudely 
constituted, however ...successful as it has often proved against small 
parties of the enemy.*° 
In so far as possible, then, wherever we look we see that the people 
continued to be assimilated into the structures of the state. This leads 

<<<PDFPAGE 36>>>
18 
Patriots, Partisans and Land Pirates 
us on, however, to the very interesting question broached by Janet 
Hartley. Whatever the established order’s views on guerrilla warfare and 
popular revolt may have been, it cannot be denied that from Madrid to 
Moscow enemies of the French made greater use than ever before of 
language and methods that were designed to reach out to the people 
and persuade them that the overthrow of Napoleon was an enterprise 
in which they both had a stake and should sacrifice themselves and give 
their all. Did this encourage the mass armies that everywhere had 
perforce to be fielded against the French to fight harder and show greater 
willingness to accept their lot? As Hartley shows, in the case of Russia at 
least this cannot be proved: the officers were in many instances enthused 
by a new spirit that had as one of its consequences the Decemberist 
revolt of 1825, but it is difficult to argue the case one way or the other 
with regard to the common soldiers. Certainly, the Orthodox religion 
was made use of to stimulate loyalty and devotion, and certainly, too, 
at Borodino and other battles the Russian forces fought with desperate 
heroism. But had anything really changed? Russian soldiers were notorious 
for their fighting capacity and staying power: prior to the campaign of 
1812 Napoleon’s worst experience on the battlefield had come at the 
hands of General Bennigsen at the battle of Eylau, whilst in the Seven 
Years’ War Frederick the Great had repeatedly been very roughly handled 
by the green-coated soldiers of the Empress Elizabeth, gaining an 
extremely pyrrhic victory over them at Zorndorf in 1758 and going 
down to ignominious defeat at Kunersdorf in 1759. Other Russian 
victories from the same war numbered Gross-Jagersdorf and Kay, whilst 
in 1799 General Suvorov’s invasion of Switzerland had seen Russian 
troops gain a series of dramatic successes: on 1 October, for example, 
5000 troops under General Rosenberg had utterly defeated a column of 
more than twice as many Frenchmen under no less a figure than André 
Masséna, a general who is always rated as one of Napoleon’s greatest 
commanders. In all this the self-same factors generally identified as the 
mainspring of Russian patriotism in 1812 had made an appearance. 
Thus, throughout the eighteenth century commanders such as Rumiantsev 
and Suvorov had made every effort to play on the devotion of the soldiery 
to the Orthodox faith and to instill love of the tsar. In this respect it is 
the opinion of some historians that they appear to have had at least 
some success.*' Let us here quote Sir Robert Wilson’s account of the 
Russian army that fought at Eylau and Friedland in 1807: ‘The Russian, 
nurtured from earliest infancy to consider Russia as the supreme nation 
of the world, always regards himself as an important component part of 
the irresistible mass... Amidst the Russian qualities, the love of country is 

<<<PDFPAGE 37>>>
Charles J. Esdaile 
19 
also pre-eminent, and inseparable from the Russian soldier. This feeling 
is paramount, and in the very last hour his gaze is directed towards its 
nearest confines.’*” But, even supposing that this is so — and it should be 
noted that Wilson’s claims fit in with a long line of distinctly uncritical 
western writings on the subject of Russia that stressed the devotion of 
the common people to the ‘Little Father’ and the Motherland - the net 
result must be to suggest that what happened at such battles as 
Smolensk, Borodino, Maloyaroslavets and Polotsk was not representative 
of anything out of the ordinary. Indeed, it could even be argued that 
the Russian armed forces were actually less patriotic in 1812 than they 
had been in, say, 1762. Thus, as Hartley rightly points out, there were 
many non-Russian conscripts, most notably Ukrainians, in the army 
of Alexander II. What she neglects to say, however, is that conscription 
had only been extended beyond the frontiers of Great Russia in the 
reign of Paul I, and that a number of contemporary writers had been 
expressing fears that this would dilute the morale and fighting power of 
the soldiery.*8 
For all the determined efforts of the régime to whip up popular patriotism 
in 1812, then, there is little concrete evidence that these made much 
difference in so far as the motivation of the common soldier was 
concerned: the Russian soldier fought in much the same style as he had 
for the past century. Why, then, was he able to give the French, the 
Prussian and the Turks such a tough time? One explanation that is 
sometimes put forward is that the conscripted serfs who fought for the 
Romanovs were so brutalized, so stupid and so devoid of initiative that 
they simply did not understand the concept of running away. The 
Polish leader, Kosciuszko, said that Russian soldiers fought as fanatics 
and ignored enemy fire so long as they had officers left to lead them, 
whilst, to quote Christopher Duffy, ‘It was not enough simply to kill 
Rusians: you had to knock them down as well.’** However, this piece of 
type-casting does not work any better than that of the Russian soldier as 
the holy warrior of tsar and motherland. In the late eighteenth century, 
the Russian army had evolved a tactical doctrine that stressed initiative, 
flexibility and speed of movement, and, whilst Paul I did make some 
reforms, the fact is that he really only altered the emphasis of the 
regulations: firepower was now to be more important than the bayonet, 
but the same offensive spirit was still very much in evidence; simultan- 
eusly, meanwhile, the tsar initiated the practice of awarding medals to 
common 
soldiers. At the same time, under Alexander I there was a 
renewed move 
away from the Prussian 
models 
that had been 
favoured by Paul I and, at the time of the Seven Years’ War, the Empress 

<<<PDFPAGE 38>>>
20 
Patriots, Partisans and Land Pirates 
Elizabeth: ever more emphasis was placed on the use of skirmishers, whilst 
the infantry adopted the same mixture of line and column visible in 
other armies. At Eylau, Friedland and Borodino the Russians certainly 
fought in dense masses, but this was not the result of bovine stupidity: 
rather, the position of the army was in each case very cramped with the 
result that there was little option but to form the troops in column and 
no means for them to change their position or take shelter. From this 
it follows that the performance of the Russian army was in the end 
determined by military factors. In the first place, it was plentifully 
supplied with artillery and therefore able to inflict terrible damage on 
its opponents, who were generally less well served in this respect: at Kay 
28 000 Prussians and fifty-six guns faced 40 000 Russians and 186 guns, 
whilst at Kunersdorf 51 000 Prussians and 140 guns faced 41 000 Russians 
and 200 guns; moreover, both the organization and the armament of this 
arm of service were greatly improved under Paul I and Alexander I. The 
benefits of this situation continued to pertain in 1812 — at Borodino the 
Russian guns were both more numerous and heavier than their French 
opponents and even at the very end of the day they were still able to 
impose their superiority. Thus, according to the Russian commander, 
Kutuzov, ‘A ferocious artillery duel lasted until it was completely dark. 
Our artillery caused immense damage with its roundshot and compelled 
the enemy batteries to fall silent, after which all the French infantry 
and cavalry withdrew.’ Beyond this, meanwhile, Russian troops were 
frequently surprisingly 
well trained. 
Thus, the eighteenth-century 
reformer, Rumiantsev, the towering genius, Suvorov, and the victor of 
Borodino, Kutuzov, had all placed great emphasis on realistic battle 
drills, the fact being that the Russian army was therefore a very tough 
nut to crack. 
The issue of the extent to which patriotism became a force amongst 
the soldiers of the mass armies that eventually overthrew Napoleon is 
one that needs to be explored much further. If one has room to doubt 
the extent to which it was a factor of much importance in Russia, in the 
Prussian forces there is some evidence that there was a sea-change in 
the feelings of the soldiery. At Jena and Auerstaédt the Prussian army 
had fought adequately, but its performance had hardly been heroic. At 
Leipzig and Waterloo, by contrast, it is claimed that a very different 
vision was on show. Let us here quote Gunther Rothenberg: 
In 1806 the typical Prussian soldier had been a mercenary or a 
reluctant conscript; now he was animated both by patriotism and by 
a deep and even savage hatred of the French. The first expressed 

<<<PDFPAGE 39>>>
Charles J. Esdaile 
21 
itself, as it had in the days of Frederick, by religion. As the Prussian 
infantry saw the French retreating the evening of Waterloo, the fusi- 
liers began to sing the old Lutheran hymn, ‘A mighty fortress is our 
God’... Hatred of the French expressed itself in bitter fighting and in 
the ability to rally after initial defeat.°° 
Well, perhaps. The Prussian army certainly fought very bravely in the 
campaigns of 1813-15, but the reality is that, as in the case of its Russian 
counterpart, we simply do not know enough about its mentalités to be able 
to make such a judgement. Such primary evidence as we have of enthu- 
siasm for the war amongst the rank and file comes from the writings of 
confirmed German nationalists who were convinced that they were 
indeed engaged in a befreiungskrieg and were desperate to convey the 
impression that the struggle was genuinely a people’s crusade. But all 
the evidence suggests that conscription was hated, desertion rife and 
volunteers both few in number and for the most part confined to the 
same groups that had always provided German rulers with the bulk of 
the men who had chosen to enter their service without compulsion. 
Before we can take on board the notion of a Prussian army enthused by 
a positive desire to smash the foe, a great deal more work is therefore 
necessary both on the means that were used to excite the feelings of the 
troops and the feelings of the men themselves, in which latter respect 
one can only hope that some Germanist will uncover the same sort of 
treasure trove as that revealed by Alan Forrest in his seminal Napoleon’s 
Men. Only through the examination of such bundles of private letters 
will we ever be able to test the claims put forward by Rothenberg, and 
until that task has been carried out it is probably wise to remain at least 
a little sceptical. 
With this remark, we return to our point of departure, which was to 
reassert the need for greater attention to be paid to the subject of popular 
resistance. In this respect the Liverpool symposium undoubtedly provided 
a useful forum for debate, but at the same time it revealed just how little 
we know about this issue. For many years to come, then, the patriots, 
partisans and land-pirates whom we have discussed in these pages will, 
or so it is hoped, continue to occupy the attention of the historical 
community. One might even voice the hope, indeed, that they might 
attract the attention of more of the historical community than has 
hitherto been the case. Spain has, perhaps, now been dealt with 
adequately, but Italy, the Tyrol and Portugal all offer opportunities for 
truly ground-breaking monographs that would add enormously to our 
understanding of the subject whilst at the same time testing out some 

<<<PDFPAGE 40>>>
22 
Patriots, Partisans and Land Pirates 
of the conclusions reached in this collection of essays. In brief, these are 
five-fold. In the first place the popular will to take up arms was relatively 
limited even in those areas of Europe — a clear minority - which did 
experience armed resistance on the part of the populace. In the second, 
outbreaks of armed resistance were rarely ideological: whilst the masses 
were frequently worked on by members of the establishment, they do 
not seem to have been much moved by anti-French propaganda per se, 
but rather by their experience of enemy occupation and the extent of 
their ability to feed themselves and their families and to carry on some 
semblance of normal life. In the third, except in the cases of spontaneous 
riots and revolts such as those that gripped Pavia and Gaon - instances 
of violence that were on the whole very short-lived — the organization 
of effective popular resistance in many cases clearly depended on the 
state and its collaborators rather than springing from the populace 
itself. In the fourth, in those cases where popular resistance did spring 
from below, it was generally ineffectual and in the end prone to slide 
into mere banditry. And in the fifth it is clear that the subject cannot be 
studied effectively without a readiness to grapple with traditional military 
history: as the current author has shown in these pages, the motivation 
of the Russian army in 1812 needs to be discussed with the aid of some 
knowledge of its organization and war record; equally, in Fighting Napoleon: 
Guerrillas and Bandits in Spain, 1808-1814 he has established that the 
partidas will never properly be understood if the role played in them by 
the Spanish regular army is not accorded its full weight. So where, then, 
does all this leave us? With a subject of great complexity, certainly: the 
successful historian of popular resistance must necessarily be able to 
draw on a variety of different sub-disciplines, identify and manipulate 
sources that are frequently as obscure as they are fragmentary and 
have an eye for events not just in his or her own area of study but in 
Napoleonic Europe as a whole. That said, however, it is also a subject of 
great potential: a rich orchard whose fruits await only the hands that 
should be stretched out to pluck them. Let us, then, conclude, with a 
quote from the gospel of Saint Matthew: ‘The harvest is plentiful, but 
the labourers are few; therefore, ask the Lord of the Harvest to send out 
labourers into His harvest.’*” 
Notes 
1. H. von Brandt, In the Legions of Napoleon: the Memoirs of a Polish Officer in Spain 
and Russia, 1808-1813, ed. J. North (London, 1999), p. 186. 
2. A.J.M. de Rocca, Memoirs of the War of the French in Spain (London, 1815), 
pp. 24-S. 
3. Ibid p29: 

<<<PDFPAGE 41>>>
10. 
II 
Ww: 
3: 
14. 
ils 
16. 
iH 
18. 
19% 
20. 
Ae 
Pipe, 
23 
Charles J. Esdaile 
23 
. | owe this information to my esteemed friend Lieutenant Colonel José Pardo 
de Santayana of the Spanish army. 
. H. Fisher, Napoleonic Statesmanship: Germany (Oxford, 1903), pp. 370-2. For 
a very helpful, discussion of the economic impact of French rule on the 
Rhineland, cf. M. Rowe, From Reich to State: the Rhineland in the Revolutionary 
Age, 1780-1830 (Cambridge, 2003), pp. 193-210. His conclusion confirms 
the impression given by Fisher, viz. ‘The Rhineland was economically stronger 
at the end of the Napoleonic period than at the beginning.’ Ibid., p. 209. 
. For the banditry and unrest that gripped the Rhineland in the 1790s, cf. 
T.C.W. Blanning, The French Revolution in Germany: Occupation and Resistance 
in the Rhineland, 1792-1802 (Oxford, 1983), pp. 286-316. 
. For a discussion of the military situation in Spain and Portugal at the begin- 
ning of the Peninsular War, cf. C.J. Esdaile, The Peninsular War: a New History 
(London, 2002), pp. 46-64 passim. 
. F.G. Eyck, Loyal Rebels: Andreas Hofer and the Tyrolean Uprising of 1809 
(New York, 1986), pp. 59-60. 
. For some details of the barbetti, as they were called in Piedmont, cf. M. Broers, 
Napoleonic Imperialism and the Savoyard Monarchy, 1773-1821: State Building 
in Piedmont (New York, 1997), pp. 134-5. 
For the revolt in Piacenza, cf. M. Broers, Europe under Napoleon, 1799-1815 
(London, 1996), p. 104. 
The Dos de Mayo has yet to receive the scholarly analysis which it deserves. 
However, for a relatively recent Spanish account, cf. J.C. Monton, La revolucion 
armada del Dos de Mayo en Madrid (Madrid, 1983). 
M. Finley, The Most Monstruous of Wars: the Napoleonic Guerrilla War in Southern 
Italy, 1806-1811 (Columbia, South Carolina, 1994), p. 26. 
R. de Damas, Memoirs of the Comte Roger de Damas, 1787-1806, ed. J. Rambaud 
(London 1913), pp. 398-9. 
Ibid., p. 279. 
Ibid., pp. 400-1. 
H. Bunbury, Narratives of some Passages in the Great War with France from 1799 
to 1810 (London, 1854), p. 222. 
For a digest of these views, cf. C.J. Esdaile, The Wars of Napoleon (London, 
1995), pp. 119-20. 
Eyck, Loyal Rebels, pp. 69-70. 
For all this, cf. J.L. Tone, The Fatal Knot: the Guerrilla War in Navarre and the 
Defeat of Napoleon in Spain (Chapel Hill, North Carolina, 1994), pp. 9-41, 
162-71 passim. 
An excellent eye-witness account of the guerrilla war in the Serrania de Ronda 
may be found in Rocca, Memoirs, pp. 122-63; for a critical discussion, meanwhile, 
cf. C.J. Esdaile, Fighting Napoleon, pp. 124-S. 
For events in Galicia in 1808-09, cf. C.J. Esdaile, ‘Rebeldia, reticencia y resist- 
encia: el caso gallego de 1808’, Trienio, no. 35 (May, 2000), pp. 57-80. 
Finley, Most Monstruous of Wars, pp. 28-30; E. Bousson de Mairet (ed.), Souvenirs 
Militaires du Baron Desvernois, Ancien Général au Service de Joachim Murat, Roi 
de Napoles, Commandeur de la Légion d’Honneur et de l’Ordre Real de Deux Siciles 
(Paris, 1858), pp. 103-4. 
The incident that took place at Chinchon is commemorated in some of the 
gorier scenes in Goya’s famous Desastres de la Guerra. 

<<<PDFPAGE 42>>>
24 
26. 
.R. Muir (ed.), At Wellington’s Right Hand: the Letters of Lieutenant-Colonel 
Patriots, Partisans and Land Pirates 
. Finley, Most Monstruous of Wars, p. 116. 
Dy, C. Bourachot (ed.), Souvenirs Militaires du Capitaine Jean-Baptiste Lemonnier- 
Delafosse (Paris, 2002), pp. 57-8. 
Ibid., p. 59. 
Sir Alexander Gordon, 1808-1815 (London, 2003), p. 174. The full story of 
what went on behind Massena’s lines in the winter of 1810-11 has never 
been documented. However, for a most thoughtful and well-researched 
fictional version, cf. C.S. Forester, Death to the French (London, 1932). 
. T. Sydenham to H. Wellesley, 12 September 1812, University of Southampton, 
Wellington Papers, 1/361. 
. For the Hamburg insurrection, cf. Esdaile, Wars of Napoleon, p. 266. 
. W. Stothert, A Narrative of the Principal Events of the Campaigns of 1809, 1810 
and 1811 in Spain and Portugal (London, 1812), pp. 274-6. 
. E.g. B. Menning, ‘The imperial Russian army, 1725-1796’, in F. Kagan and 
R. Higham, The Military History of Tsarist Russia (London, 2002), p. 70. 
. R. Wilson, Brief Remarks on the Character and Composition of the Russian Army 
and a Sketch of the Campaigns in Poland in the Years 1806 and 1807 (London, 
1810), pp. 4-5. 
. A. and Y. Zhmodikov, Tactics of the Russian Army in the Napoleonic Wars 
(Westchester, Ohio, 2003), I, p. 5. 
. C. Duffy, Borodino and the War of 1812 (London, 1973), p. 39. For Kosciuszko’s 
views, cf. Zhomodikov, Tactics of the Russian Army, p. 3. 
. Duffy, Borodino, pp. 134-5. 
. G. Rothenberg, The Art of War in the Age of Napoleon (London, 1977), p. 195. 
. Matthew 9, 37-8. The text is from the New RSV. 

<<<PDFPAGE 43>>>
2 
The Ubiquitous Brigand: 
The Politics and Language 
of Repression 
Alan Forrest 
Brigands were familiar figures on the eighteenth-century landscape - 
only too familiar for traders and travellers between major cities if the 
reports of the local police and the story lines of early novels are to be 
taken as a guide. Thieves gathered in bandes to attack mail coaches and 
rob passing traders, often secure in the knowledge that, as local men, 
they could expect to enjoy a degree of protection from their own 
communities against the attentions of the law. They congregated on 
frontiers, mingling with bands of smugglers and contrebandiers who 
were assured rich pickings in the sand dunes around Dunkerque or the 
mountain pastures of the Pyrenees, areas where only they knew the 
hidden paths that led across into Spain or the Austrian Netherlands. Or 
they simply formed themselves into casual bands when famine threat- 
ened, groups of local men who had fallen on hard times and hoped, like 
so many others, to inspire sufficient trepidation within their community 
to deter informers and thwart the efforts of the maréchaussée. Often, it 
would seem, they succeeded only too well, since policing in many parts 
of France was ineptly organized and seriously underfunded, as Iain 
Cameron’s account of the police of the eighteenth-century Auvergne 
makes clear. Here the attentions of the maréchaussée were focussed 
almost entirely on capturing vagabonds and army deserters along the 
principal highways - the latter being a particular priority in times of 
warfare such as the American War of Independence. The only successful 
repression of a bande of thieves recorded over a seventy-year period 
revealed a few neighbours supplementing their income with occasional 
moonlight sorties, not at all the sort of banditry that spread fear and 
panic through the French countryside.’ 
ZS 

<<<PDFPAGE 44>>>
26 
The Ubiquitous Brigand 
The bandits of legend — those who terrorised whole provinces and 
who inspired a folklore all of their own - were on a different scale 
entirely, bands who lived en marge de la société, moving under cover of 
darkness from clearing to clearing, seeking refuge in shepherds’ huts on 
the slopes above isolated villages, robbing only those who were outsiders 
to the local community, celebrating their successes over noisy meals in 
wayside inns, and casually disarming any gendarmes sent to hunt them 
down. Some, like the notorious bande d’Orgéres in the Beauce, survived in 
this way for decades, robbing travellers on the highly lucrative turnpike 
between Paris and Orleans, and maintaining a fluctuating membership 
of men, women and children, all enjoying a degree of local protection 
while stubbornly living as outlaws, beyond the protection of civil society. 
They may have been feared by local people, and respected for their 
power and their defiance of the authorities, but there is no evidence 
that they were hated, especially since, like all the best bandit gangs, 
they served a useful and much-appreciated function in redistributing 
wealth, artificially injecting money stolen from merchants and other 
travellers into a hard-pressed local economy.” Eric Hobsbawm is surely 
tight when he presents some of the great bandits of history as men of 
the people, commemorated in folk-song and in popular prints, and 
lionized by those from whose roots they had sprung.* When they were 
finally caught and brought to trial men like Mandrin and Cartouche 
inspired awe as much as fear. They belonged to the same popular class 
as the mass of the people, yet they had turned their backs on poverty 
and cocked an almighty snook at the dual authority of Church and 
State. And in their way they were heroes to the mass of the people: even 
the more obscure among them were built into mighty figures of legend, 
their criminal exploits praised in folk-song and in luridly-coloured 
images d’Epinal. Even unexceptional robbers like Poulailler, by the time 
of the Revolution, were being featured in popular prints, distributed by 
peddlars at village fairs and in the popular quarters of Paris. Their 
crimes were talked of with awe, the danger they presented to the public 
unscrupulously exaggerated to inspire fear — there was talk of ‘the famous 
Poulailler, captain of a band of more than 500 robbers distributed 
between various provinces’.* The trials of such brigands became the 
subject of intense interest both amongst the educated public and in 
the pages of chapbooks and the bibliotheque bleue; while many of the 
thousands who turned out to watch their executions were there not to 
gloat at their downfall but to secure a last, secret glimpse of their folk- 
heroes. As Richard Cobb rightly observed, the Criminal Hero would easily 
outlast the Revolutionary Martyr. ‘Cartouche, Mandrin, Hulin remained 

<<<PDFPAGE 45>>>
Alan Forrest 
27 
far more popular, reassuring heroes than the newly established boys 
and girls who perished, holding the bridge, pierced with a thousand 
lances, or standing on burning decks’. 
The popular image of the brigand was thus tinged with a certain 
romanticism, an admiration for his daring, an empathy with his con- 
tempt for authority. Behind every bandit leader there was just a vestige 
of Robin Hood. Yet we should not be deceived. Not all bandits could aspire 
to be local heroes, just as not all had the swagger and the anarchic style 
needed to appeal to the popular imagination. The average brigand’s 
existence was generally more prosaic, his exploits born of simple des- 
peration rather than of an anarchic temperament, while his rapport 
with the local population was far from assured. Bands of outlaws were 
often formed from those with little or no stake in local society — vagabonds 
who had come into the area from elsewhere, from communes that could 
not give them sustenance, and were desperate for food and lodging, 
however they might come by it. They drew on a criminal underclass of 
men who had been released from jail after serving their sentence, gens 
sans aveu for whom no one would vouch and who had no escape from 
destitution; and deserters from the armies, their number swollen after 
each campaign, fearful of arrest and condemned to a life on the move, 
often, of course, armed, a prey to any temptation that might come along. 
Indeed, the mingling of deserters and draft dodgers with hardened 
criminals and smugglers served only to strengthen the equation that 
already existed in many people’s minds between soldiers and violent 
crime, the belief — shared by, among others, Voltaire — that the line 
armies of Europe were drawn from the dregs of society, the human 
detritus from prisons and poorhouses who, when they no longer had 
enemy armies to attack, would turn their violence and their weapons 
against peaceful civilians. It had, it seemed, always been so. Both the 
grandes compagnies of the fourteenth century and the écorcheurs who 
replaced them in the fifteenth belonged to that tradition, as did the 
Mandrins who ravaged much of rural France in the eighteenth. So, too, 
it was bands of soldiers, turning to crime when they were paid off after 
the end of the Italian Wars, who murdered and tortured their way 
across France until Francis I, in a bid to end what the whole country 
saw as a fearful scourge, turned state terror against its perpetrators, 
importing from Germany the terrible punishment of breaking on the 
wheel as a final deterrent for highway robbery. There was nothing 
romantic about this, a final act of savagery to add to the savage catalogue 
of crimes which the brigands had committed. But the popular prints 
of the day tell a slightly different story. The sheer horror of the wheel, 

<<<PDFPAGE 46>>>
28 
The Ubiquitous Brigand 
and the torment in which many of the most notorious brigands died, 
added an extra frisson to the public’s undoubted fascination with violent 
criminals.° 
The connection between brigandage and the soldiery was one that 
would have required no explanation to an eighteenth-century audience. 
They were used to the violence and debauchery of the armies that criss- 
crossed the continent during the long wars of the century, many of 
them foreign mercenaries, and would have had little cause to draw any 
significant distinction between those fighting for the French monarchy 
and those against whom they fought. Soldiers were reviled as being 
drunken, violent and — particularly when on foreign soil - gratuitously 
dangerous. Nor did they necessarily improve their behaviour when 
they ceased to be employed in the armed service of one or other of the 
European monarchs. The entry on ‘brigands’ in the Encyclopédie quite 
specifically makes a direct connection between soldiers and banditry. 
A brigand, it declares, is a ‘vagabond who makes use of military campaigns 
to plunder and rob travellers. The name is sometimes given to undisciplined 
soldiers who devastate the countries in which they are fighting and 
never stay around to fight the enemy’. Hence, the article continues, 
rather delicately stepping over contemporary examples in favour of the 
security of the exotic, ‘the Tartar hordes, and the gangs of Arabs who 
insult travellers in the Levant’. As for the origins of the term, there the 
encyclopaedists admit to a degree of uncertainty. It could come from 
the name of Burgand, who laid waste much of Guienne in the time of 
Nicholas I. Or again, they suggest, rising to their theme, it might stem 
from the reputation of a company of soldiers raised by the city of Paris 
back in 1356, and fitted out with brigandines to defend them against 
enemy archers. So heinous was their reputation with local people, and 
so serious the destruction that they caused, that they were referred to as 
brigands, and so, it was implied, the word had entered the language. In 
either case (and the article went on to propose other, similar explanations), 
the existence of a link between brigandage as a serious crime — ‘robbery 
openly carried out by force, such highway robbery and other such 
acts’ — a crime, moreover, that carried the death penalty in most 
European societies, and brigandage as the normal conduct of violent 
and lecherous soldiers, had been firmly established in the minds of 
their readers.’ 
That link was still understood by those who lived through the Revo- 
lutionary and Napoleonic Wars, since the huge armies that were 
recruited by all the main belligerents inevitably contained their quota 
of criminals and ne’er-do-wells, raised from among those who sought 

<<<PDFPAGE 47>>>
Alan Forrest 
29 
out army life to escape family squabbles at home, or had been given the 
option of enlistment or the gallows; this in turn fostered violence and 
produced a predictable explosion in crime. Soldiers billeted far from 
home felt few of the social constraints that helped moderate their conduct 
in their home villages, while debt, hunger, drink and sheer desperation 
all contributed to an increase in violent behaviour. There was the usual 
flurry of thefts from lonely farmhouses, stabbings in wayside bars and 
murders committed under the influence of drink, all of which were 
regarded as customary when armies passed through a rural community. 
Revolutionary and Napoleonic soldiers were no worse than those from 
previous eras; indeed, at certain times the laws against looting and pillage 
were so severe that standards of behaviour probably improved. But, 
more alarmingly for the authorities, there was an upsurge in highway 
robberies during these years, most particularly during the Directory. 
Soldiers were again turning to armed attacks and brigandage, though it 
was less a crime of serving soldiers than of those who sought to avoid 
service in the battalions, whether through desertion or by avoiding the 
draft, living a semi-clandestine existence in a demi-monde of vagrants 
and criminals. Such was the case with the infamous bande de Salembier, 
which ravaged much of the Nord and Pas-de-Calais during Years III] 
and IV, with army deserters merging into a band of ordinary criminals, 
sixty strong, complete with their women and their family groups. In the 
Sarthe eye-witnesses spoke of up to forty deserters grouped in bands 
and spreading terror through the countryside; in the Ardéche the 
government’s commissaire reported that ‘the bands of brigands who 
devastate us’ consisted principally of ‘conscripts and draftees’ who must 
be incorporated into their units without delay as a measure of public 
safety.® The link between soldiers and brigands was so clearly drawn in 
people’s minds that highway robbers around Nyons in the Drome were 
even reported to be passing themselves off as army deserters in order to 
allay public suspicion and gain a certain anonymity.” 
So-called brigands were to be found everywhere - in the Pyrenees 
ambushing French soldiers on their way to Spain, in the Alps and the 
Apennines, swarthy mountain-dwellers using their native cunning and 
their knowledge of the countryside to outwit the revolutionary forces, 
as well as in the lawless periphery of France itself, towards the delta of the 
Rhone, for instance, or in the badlands of the Dréme or the Vaucluse. 
They were, it might appear, a rather indiscriminate bunch. Some were 
simple criminals, outlaws who lived in the woods or on the edge of 
remote villages, robbing strangers and merchants on the highways or — 
particularly during the Directory — concealing their criminal intentions 

<<<PDFPAGE 48>>>
30. 
The Ubiquitous Brigand 
behind vaguely royalist names and concentrating their thieving on 
mail coaches and other property of the French state. Others appeared to 
be committed to the counter-revolutionary cause, in the Vendée, for 
instance, or among the chouans in Brittany, men and women who had 
chosen a deliberate political path and who, by so doing, had placed 
themselves beyond the protection of the law. They had made a conscious 
choice not to be citizens, and had in consequence forfeited the rights 
which citizenship bestowed. They had slipped, seemingly effortlessly, 
from their place among the generality of Frenchmen - those who lived 
within the law and who could be presumed to be good and civically- 
motivated — into that grey area inhabited by those who fell beyond the 
pale of revolutionary orthodoxy to become the victims of what Sophie 
Wahnich has termed ‘the logic of revolutionary exclusion’.!° And 
though the level of threat that they posed to the authorities was never 
again to reach the proportions of the full scale civil war that was the 
Vendée during the spring and summer of 1793, brigandage would 
achieve its greatest geographical extent during the later 1790s, in the 
years of the Directory and Consulate. 
The problem of brigandage during these years was one of public 
order, of course, and it is as such that it is generally treated in prefects’ 
reports and other administrative despatches. For the authorities it was 
a ‘social scourge’ or a ‘frightful plague’, something that could only be 
overcome through a policy of severe repression, and if the Directory 
never succeeded in stamping it out, Napoleon came rather closer to 
restoring public order by attacking the brigands with all the armed 
might of the state. But the rise in the incidence of brigandage in this 
period, especially in some of the more peripheral areas of the country — 
barbets in the Alps, for instance, and chauffeurs in the Nord — alarmed 
the authorities and posed a severe threat to the governability of these 
regions, while the targets they selected for attack and the presence in 
their ranks of large numbers of army deserters alerted the government 
to their political as well as criminal intent. They focussed their attacks 
on merchants and other outsiders so as not to alienate local people. 
Systematically, too, they attacked symbols of governmental prestige 
and authority, like mail coaches and liberty trees, while the presence in 
their ranks — in the South-east particularly — of priests and refractory 
clergy gave a clear indication to the communities where they were 
staked out of a Catholic and counter-revolutionary ideology.'! Their 
numbers were swollen by draft dodgers and by those who fell out with 
the revolutionary authorities, but — as the Directory itself recognized — the 
explosion in the scale of banditry in these years cannot be explained 

<<<PDFPAGE 49>>>
Alan Forrest 
31 
without reference to revolutionary politics. To take one example from 
just outside the hexagone, if the introduction of the conscription law 
caused the initial outburst of violence in Ghent in 1798, it cannot 
explain the so-called guerre des paysans which followed and which 
engulfed the Belgian departments: 
Conscription appears only to have been the pretext. [The revolt] was 
the result of British intrigue and of fanaticism. The motors of the 
rebellion are men attached either to the government of the erstwhile 
Belgian state or to the party of the stathouder; and the rebels them- 
selves priests, monks, vagabonds and foreigners. 
'” 
Brigandage, 
in other words, was 
a complex construction which 
blended both the anti-revolutionary and the anti-social. Some of those 
denounced 
as brigands, 
like the barbets along the Italian frontier, 
appeared to start out with rather idealistic goals and were driven by a 
political agenda, but they fell into ordinary crime to keep themselves 
alive and were, by the end of a twenty-five year campaign of violence in 
the department of Alpes-Maritimes, indistinguishable from any other 
band of thieves and bandits.'’ Others were simple criminals, who skulked 
in the outskirts of southern cities to waylay passing mail coaches, often 
using royalist or anti-republican slogans to give themselves some 
pretence of legitimacy. In either case the effect was to dislocate local 
government and to deflect the military from their true vocation. The 
brigands sapped the strength and manpower of the Republic, targeting 
the very soldiers and gendarmes who were sent out to confront them, to 
the point where, in Stephen Clay’s words, ‘the roads leading to and from 
the Army of Italy were strewn with the corpses of soldiers who had been 
ambushed by brigands’.'* Troops were tied down for months on end in 
an unsuccessful campaign to root them out, an aspect of Directorial 
policing which émigrés and counter-revolutionaries remarked upon 
with ill-concealed satisfaction, since it provided the proof they needed 
that public order had collapsed and that committed Catholics had 
been driven into clandestinity and a prolonged campaign of violence 
against the authorities. Like the various crimes on which they reported 
in France and the countries France occupied, the spread of brigandage 
was taken by the émigré press to demonstrate the social and moral 
degradation that resulted from the Revolution’s ‘new morality’."® 
But how far should the definition of ‘brigandage’ extend? Did it have 
to involve armed robbery, or could it be used in a more generic way, to 
cover all those who by their actions placed themselves outside society, 

<<<PDFPAGE 50>>>
32 
The Ubiquitous Brigand 
unprotected by the law? For the Napoleonic régime, both inside France 
and in occupied Europe, popular resistance was customarily explained 
away as a criminal activity, as the work of bandits and outlaws who 
sheltered among the people and cowed them into silence, rather than 
of some national or popular movement that might be accorded a degree 
of legitimacy. Napoleonic officials, both civil and military, sought to 
deny their opponents any vestige of dignity, to strip them of the kind of 
honourable feelings which only soldiers could be expected to display, 
in short to reduce them to the level of common criminals who abused 
popular trust in their quest for gain and local power. They could not, 
obviously, condemn foreign armies in these terms; men who fought 
against the French in the recognized military units of their states were 
accorded the meagre respect due to enemy soldiers, while their officers 
might expect to be treated with a respect appropriate to their rank. 
Brigands were men who were not soldiers — irregulars, freedom-fighters, 
guerrillas, militiamen, all might be wrapped up in the same term of 
condescension, and be criminalized in the event of a French victory. 
They were men who did not fight cleanly and did not accept the rules 
of war, men who laid ambushes for the French, sought concealment 
amongst the local civilian population, or otherwise resorted to tactics 
unworthy of fighting men. It was not a precise term in the way that 
‘guerrilla’ was to become, and it was used, apparently randomly and 
indiscriminately, to describe those whose activity was deemed improper, 
or underhand, or otherwise shameful. Napoleon did not hesitate, for 
instance, to suggest that the men who burned Moscow to drive back his 
advancing troops were themselves ‘brigands’. Though they had acted 
under the orders of General Rostopchin, he implied that they were no 
better than common criminals, and in his bulletin from Moscow on 
17 September 1812 he would say as much. ‘On the 16th,’ he reported, 
‘three to four hundred brigands set fire to the city in five hundred 
places at once’, and, fanned by fierce winds, their fires destroyed an 
entire capital. The loss was incalculable. ‘Churches, there were 1600 of 
them; palaces, more than 1000; immense magazines; almost everything 
has been consumed.’ And who was responsible for the destruction of 
such wealth and magnificence? ‘Brigands’, according to Napoleon, 
‘felons liberated from the prisons’, the lowest of men; the sorts of men 
who were not proper combatants and who therefore — as in the Peninsula 
or the Vendee — could not expect to be treated as soldiers if they fell 
into enemy hands. When the French captured them, they briefly inter- 
rogated them to establish that they had acted under orders; then, in 
their hundreds, they were summarily shot.!° 

<<<PDFPAGE 51>>>
Alan Forrest 
33 
This use of the term ‘brigand’ had by 1812 become a commonplace of 
French imperial usage, a means of distinguishing between the proper and 
honourable French way of doing things and the underhand stratagems 
that were resorted to by their opponents. It was widely used during the 
Italian campaign to describe those who took advantage of the Alpine 
weather and of their intimate knowledge of the local topography to 
embarrass the French forces — the variously-named barbets and chasseurs 
de montagne who were such a significant fighting force in the passes and 
valleys of the pré-Alpes. Italy was the first campaign where the French 
felt they were fighting brigands rather than soldiers, and where their 
efforts were undermined both by a local population that was always 
prone to revolt and by an army of part-timers and irregulars whom they 
were unable to repress. They could never be sure whom they were fighting, 
or who their real enemy was. Each day, it seemed, villagers joined with 
escaped prisoners-of-war to attack the French; it was not like fighting an 
army, for the enemy was constantly changing and rarely identified 
itself as a military unit. Each day, as one desperate French soldier 
expressed it, ‘We hunt down those villains who are set on murdering 
us, and when we do take prisoners we have no choice but to have them 
shot on the spot.’!? Why? Because the nature of the fighting and of the 
terrain made it impossible to keep prisoners — a factor that would have 
led to a lot of shootings even in more conventional warfare — but also 
because, as armed civilians, often indistinguishable by any form of 
uniform, they were ‘brigands’, men to whom the normal rules of war 
simply did not apply. ‘In the little town where I am stationed’, wrote 
Claude Lavit to his father in 1809, ‘the troops have their work cut out. 
The brigands are causing us a lot of trouble; for we are shooting large 
numbers of them, and we are the only ones to hunt them down, day 
and night.’* The imagery here is significant. Lavit is not talking of 
fighting or armed combat, man to man, as he would when describing 
engagements with the Austrians or Prussians. Rather it is the language 
of the hunter closing in on his prey. The ‘brigands’ are playing the 
role of wild animals, skulking in their dens, dehumanized, there to be 
killed before they could sink their fangs into the flesh of the troops 
themselves. 
If the Italians were brigands, so, too, were the Spaniards and the 
Portuguese. Indeed, in the brigandage stakes, the Italian campaign faded 
into relative insignificance; the Iberian peninsula was, without doubt, 
the main feature. Here the term was almost automatically transferred to 
the villagers and guerrilla fighters who, without being incorporated into 
any regular force, demonstrated a natural genius for war on their own 

<<<PDFPAGE 52>>>
34 
The Ubiquitous Brigand 
terrain, ambushing French units and critically holding up the armies’ 
advance. Local people connived with them, sheltered them and offered 
them protection, standing lookout for them and warning them of 
any French approach. They gave them food when they refused to sell 
anything to the French. They treated them as their own, as kith and 
kin, which they probably were in many cases, though the French had 
no means of knowing and little means of distinguishing between 
fighter and protector, soldier and civilian. It was this that made the 
troops in the Peninsula so mistrustful of everyone they met, male and 
female, old and young. All were potential enemies, secretly and stealthily, 
turning their villages into armed encampments where any French 
soldier risked being treated with legendary cruelty. All might be allied 
against the invader in a war without rules, where killing was the major 
goal of soldier and civilian alike. The entire population had become 
indistinguishable, merging into one vast and incoherent viper’s nest, 
a nation of ‘brigands’ who obeyed no laws and were governed by none. 
If this was the language of official proclamations and military 
communiqués, how much more was it that of the troops themselves, 
constantly apprehensive and unwilling to trust anyone in a society they 
saw as unparalleled in its duplicity.!? Napoleonic soldiers seem to have 
shared a horror of fighting there, especially after experience of other 
theatres of war, like Germany and Central Europe. Spain and Portugal were 
widely believed to be savage and inhospitable countries where French 
soldiers were left to die by callous villagers set on vengeance, where local 
people refused to sell them foodstuffs, and where they were virtually 
prisoners in their camps because of the activity of local ‘brigands’.”° The 
Peninsula was a miserable place for a soldier; as Jean Chapuy explained 
from Valladolid in 1809, the food and the climate conspired to make 
them ill, while the local people could then be counted upon to take 
advantage of their weakened state to attack them. ‘We are in a country 
where one is in danger of falling ill’, he wrote to his parents, ‘and where 
one is also at risk of being assassinated by the peasants who are in revolt 
in every part of Spain.’?! Few of his comrades would have disagreed 
with his pithy verdict. Even in hospital beds they were not safe, since in 
Iberia public morals were such, they believed, that no form of brutality 
or deception, however contemptible, could be ruled out. Joseph Vachin, 
a soldier from Mende in the Lozére, complained that an extended spell 
in hospital had reduced him to penury, since the orderlies stole from 
their patients while they were weak or delirious.” And the course of the 
war was so terribly unpredictable, they had no idea where the danger 
would appear from next. Letters spoke of troops being stoned and 

<<<PDFPAGE 53>>>
Alan Forrest 
35 
ambushed by civilians, of prisoners being brutally massacred, even of 
soldiers being burned alive. In words carefully chosen for posterity, Jean 
Marnier recalled that in Spain French troops faced a quite different sort 
of war. One of ‘constant ambushes, murders and extermination’, it was 
not like the ones that they had become accustomed to fighting elsewhere 
in Europe: 
There were not any battles to compare with Eylau or Friedland, but 
fighting on a daily basis against invisible assailants, spread out in 
their thousands behind bushes, at the bottom of ravines, hidden at 
the corner of every wall; we never enjoyed a truce or any rest, and 
treason was a constant risk, day and night, whether at the other side 
of the road or at the head of one’s bed. Everyone was to be feared, 
even those seemingly hospitable people who took you into their 
homes.”? 
Since in Spain and Portugal the rules of civilized warfare were not 
respected, it followed that any form of retaliation was justified. The 
soldiers accepted that, since they were dealing with bandits, they could 
not afford to treat the enemy with the respect which the rules of war 
demanded. The Iberian front, the French were convinced, was one like no 
other, where no prisoners were taken and all — soldiers and civilians — 
could expect to be butchered without mercy. Any reprisals, however 
brutal, seemed justified as guerrilla warfare disintegrated into random 
tit-for-tat killings, with the French forced to accept the methods of the 
guerrillas and often tempted to ignore their own military discipline: 
Our light infantry picked up all those who had taken to flight and 
had hidden in the rocks. Not a single prisoner was taken. As thirty- 
five dragoons had been murdered by the inhabitants of this area, all 
the villages were burned and their inhabitants put to the sword. On 
the following day the same routine was repeated.”* 
All this might sound barbaric in any other context other than the 
Peninsula, where torture and massacre went unpunished and brutality 
bred brutality. The French torched the Portuguese town of Amarantes, 
for instance, after a number of men of the 17th Regiment had been seized 
and thrown on to a fire of live coals. The fire had been lit explicitly for 
the purpose, with an almost sadistic deliberation, and the soldiers had 
been quite callously left to burn painfully to death.” Like any act of 
terrorism, it was intended to infuriate the invader, to goad the French 

<<<PDFPAGE 54>>>
36 
The Ubiquitous Brigand 
into losing their own discipline, and in this it undoubtedly succeeded. 
It is easy to see why the French loathed fighting in the Peninsula, and 
how deeply they came to hate Spain and Portugal and their people. 
‘The only thing that’s any good in this country [i.e. Spain]’, grumbled 
Vachin, ‘is the bread, the wine and the meat; without them it would be 
the end of the world.’”° 
For many soldiers the issue at stake was the nature of the war itself. 
They were prepared to treat other armies with decency because they 
shared the same conception of warfare, exposing themselves to the same 
dangers, admiring the same qualities of courage and military science. 
But guerrillas were different. They detested fighting against them, or 
responding to tactics which only too often were intended to goad regular 
troops into anger and outrages that would, in turn, help to unite local 
people against them. The troops found it very hard to resist turning 
their fury on the local population; they were tired, constrained by military 
discipline, and revolted by what they saw; and often their tolerance 
had been pushed beyond endurance. Chevalier cites this lurid but very 
typical instance from the war in Calabria, but it could just as easily have 
taken place in Spain or Portugal. The French had reached a little town 
called Lauria, perched on a rock over the plain, and their general had sent 
an officer to negotiate with its citizens and to ask for food to provision 
the army. Their response was abrupt: 
As soon as the officer entered the town, he was murdered by the 
inhabitants, who brutally cut his body into pieces, put them in 
a basket and got French prisoners to return them to us with the 
message: ‘This is the ration of food which the inhabitants of Lauria 
send to the French, the only one that can suit them’. Then our 
enraged soldiers scrambled up the rocks and, despite the desperate 
defence mounted by the inhabitants and a hail of bullets fired against 
them, they stormed the village. Everything was then sacrificed to 
pitiless vengeance. The old men, women and children fired on us 
from their windows or threw stones at us; it was just like Zaragoza. 
We were forced to set fire to every quarter of the town. A horrible 
scene then unfolded, as women, children and old men rushed from 
their blazing houses and threw themselves at the feet of the victors, 
only to be massacred by the enraged and furious troops.”’ 
Even the rawest conscript had little difficulty in distinguishing such 
behaviour from war. War had rules, and — as it was learned in the 
eighteenth-century regiment — it was played out according to certain 

<<<PDFPAGE 55>>>
Alan Forrest 
37 
principles of honour and chivalry. What they experienced in Spain 
could not therefore be encompassed within the normal vocabulary of 
warfare. It was unregulated barbarism which the soldiers regarded as 
criminal rather than military, base and demeaning behaviour which 
was best seen as a particularly nasty form of brigandage. 
The language of brigandage was not new to the First Empire; it had, 
indeed, been 
a favoured term during the French Revolution and 
throughout most of the eighteenth century to describe, belittle and 
demonize resistance to the authorities. Indeed, in revolutionary discourse 
about their opponents it is hard to escape references to ‘brigands’, or 
to avoid the feeling that ‘brigand’ had become by the mid-1790s a 
universally accepted term of abuse for political opponents, indeed for 
anyone who dared to reject the libertarian message that was handed 
down from Paris. And if for the Napoleonic armies the quintessential 
home of brigandage was the Iberian Peninsula, for the revolutionaries it 
was inside France itself, in a shadowy world inhabited by refractory 
priests and returned émigrés, monarchists and federalists and men 
bribed by the gold of Pitt and Albion. Most particularly, brigands were 
assumed to infest the six departments of the West that constituted the 
Vendée militaire and to stir up popular dissent amongst the peasantry. 
Local Jacobins in the cities of the West had reviled the peasant insurgents 
since the very first vestiges of revolt, long before the Convention or the 
Paris Jacobins joined in, denouncing the insurrectionists, quite predict- 
ably, as outlaws and murderers, and as ‘brigands’ who had chosen to 
betray their country and deny their membership of the French nation. 
For the authorities it was a natural term of abuse — as we shall see by 
examining the ways in which the rhetoric was used. The rebels, on the 
other hand, might adopt it with pride as a part of their collective identity, 
rather as the sans-culottes had done in Paris. Thus the more radical Patriots 
in Avignon showed little reluctance to be identified as bons brigands 
whilst they led their attack on the authorities, still glorying in the name 
after they had seized control of the Club and the National Guard in 
1791.78 Nor did the Belgian peasants in 1798 feel any embarrassment at 
adopting the language of brigandage, again the defiance of the bons, in 
their case against the iniquities of both revolution and occupation. It 
was a way of underlining their illegal status inside the French republic, 
and it was suggestive of the patriotism and the proto-nationalism they 
preached. Just as the Vendée would be remembered as a region defined 
by its politics, and by the intransigence of its opposition to the republic, 
so the peasants of 1798 would enter Belgian history as heroes — as 
‘pbrigands’ — led by national heroes like the capitaine des chauffeurs, 

<<<PDFPAGE 56>>>
38 
The Ubiquitous Brigand 
Moneuse.”’ In popular movements brigands had something rather heroic 
about them which radiated a more general appeal. It is no accident, as 
Xavier Rousseaux reminds us, that by the twentieth century the words 
‘Brigand’ and ‘Moneuse’ would be familiar in a rather different context, 
as widely appreciated brands of Belgian beer.*° 
The revolutionary response to the Vendée was not intended to 
evoke images of heroism, however, but to discredit any political or social 
movement that offered a different view of the world. To such people 
the Revolution could offer no quarter; they were therefore dismissed 
as Outlaws, as ‘brigands’, as common criminals who should be hunted 
down and slaughtered as such. Attempts to distinguish between leaders 
and followers were soon abandoned, since at a time when republican 
soldiers were being killed and tortured by the rebels any desire to 
distinguish between degrees of responsibility.soon faded. The entire 
population of the West was demonized as people in a state of rebellion, 
men and women led into sedition by their nobles and priests — especially 
by their priests in a countryside where all were assumed to be pawns 
of a refractory and deeply reactionary clergy. The Vendean is not just 
séditieux; he is fanatisé, deaf to reasoned argument and a dupe to the 
local clergy, his credulity and child-like faith making him putty in the 
hands of the local nobility and of British agents. He was perceived as 
the other, the epitome of all that was antipathetic to the Revolution 
and to republican France. On the battlefield he appeared to delight 
in acts of unspeakable cruelty. In Turreau’s words, ‘They are less 
concerned here with fighting than with taking us by surprise and 
massacring us. The leaders of the rebels kidnap our soldiers and make 
them die in the most indescribable torment’.*! Because, as in the 
Iberian peninsula, the French faced an enemy who elected to fight 
through ambushes and guerrilla tactics, leaning heavily on the support 
of villagers and of their womenfolk, there was little reason to count 
them as soldiers, or to treat with honour people who responded with 
cunning and savagery, the language of denunciation became stronger, 
the representation more cruelly distorting. The Vendean was condemned 
as a criminal, a bandit, an outlaw, out to undermine the republic and 
destroy public order - in short, he was a brigand. But he was also so 
much more. 
As this was a civil war in which hatreds ran much deeper, it was not 
sufficient merely to categorize the Vendean as a brigand. Brigands, after 
all, might be criminal in their use of violence against the republic, 
and might, if caught, deserve the death penalty for their crimes; but 
they remained human beings, capable of rational — if at times deeply 

<<<PDFPAGE 57>>>
Alan Forrest 
39 
flawed — choices. Of course they were not rational or enlightened human 
beings: that was 
self-evident. 
They were 
primitive peasants who 
belonged to what the revolutionaries saw as an alien and superstitious 
culture, one where men sought the blessing of their priests before battle 
and the promise that, should they have the honour of dying for Christ 
and King, they would return from the dead within three days.*? But was 
it possible that men who committed such atrocities in cold blood could 
retain even the palest remnants of human sensibility? Were they really 
men at all? In the language of urban commissaires and of deputies on 
mission to the West it is noticeable how systematically the terms of 
abuse that were heaped on the rebels sought to dehumanize them, and 
to suggest that their behaviour was akin to that of wild beasts rather 
than of men. The same language occurred again and again in reports 
and memoirs, words like ‘beasts’, ‘monsters’, ‘vermin’, or ‘ferocious 
animals who seek to devour the republic’ — words which were used with 
cold deliberation to devalue the lives of the enemy. They had, it was 
inferred, a taste for blood and a love of killing that more properly 
belong to wild animals, and, like refractory priests and émigré nobles, 
their savagery was reserved for supporters of the new political order. 
This impression was made more vivid when it was observed that they 
lived like beasts, skulking behind hedges, leaping out from bushes, 
retiring to lick their wounds in a clearing in the scrub or dragging their 
unfortunate victims back to their lairs (taniéres).*? The propaganda 
effect of this language was considerable, especially in the capital and 
the republican strongholds of the interior, and also in the army, where 
soldiers soon learned that these were not honourable opponents whom 
they should treat with respect. They obeyed no rules of war, nor had 
they any understanding of honour in the way the revolutionary soldiers 
understood it. Indeed, it was their animal instincts which best explained 
their successes in engaging the republican army. As one cavalryman 
from the Gironde wrote of his experience in the Vendée, ‘if they had 
not acted like wild beasts and sought refuge in the woods’, they would 
surely have been wiped out.** 
There was nothing haphazard about this representation. As in more 
recent wars, the government was dehumanizing its opponents and 
spreading atrocity stories with a clear awareness of the effects their 
propaganda would have in angering civilian opinion and spurring their 
soldiers to new efforts.*> This was a war in which public opinion 
mattered, and where words carried a special weight. Once dehumanized 
in this way, once stripped of those characteristics which others shared 
with him and depicted as a beast of the fields, the Vendean became an 

<<<PDFPAGE 58>>>
40 
The Ubiquitous Brigand 
easier target for vengeance. French civilians would be less likely to shelter 
him, while revolutionary soldiers would have fewer qualms about order- 
ing him before a firing squad. It is easy to see why. Wolves and wild dogs 
pose an obvious threat to human beings, and no French peasant would 
hesitate to gun them down. Vermin must be trapped or poisoned so 
that others can enjoy good health; they have to be wiped out, eradicated 
in the interests of survival. The language that was used to revile the 
Vendeans went a long way to remove any lingering sense of the sanctity 
of human life, leaving them vulnerable to republican revenge. It is the 
language of extermination, the extermination of a corrupt community, 
an act of killing that evoked few moral qualms or repugnance, and no 
danger of fellow-feeling. Killing became a cleansing exercise, épuration 
in the fullest sense of the term. The Vendean was a wild beast, unworthy 
of life; and, like a wild beast, his continued existence would put the 
French and their republic at risk. The Revolution had moved on from 
depictions of brigandage and criminalization to portrayals of the enemy 
as an inferior species, a systematic resort to dehumanization that has 
encouraged historians of the right, like Pierre Chaunu, to talk of the 
Republic’s record in the West as genocide, and to compare it to more 
infamous genocides of the twentieth century, in Germany, Rwanda, 
Cambodia, and elsewhere.°° 
This should, I suggest, be seen as a more extreme instance of the 
same process — the use of images and propaganda to belittle and demean 
the opponents of the régime, be it Revolutionary or Napoleonic. It had 
its effect on civilian opinion, and so, as in Spain, it affected the way 
French troops fought and the light in which they regarded the enemy. 
Just as they would do in Spain, French soldiers who were sent to fight 
in the Vendée learned from the propaganda of their generals and 
refused to see the Vendeans as combatants to whom the honours of war 
were due. And that in turn changed the character of the war.*” The 
French troops expressed their horror at the atrocities they witnessed, 
their comrades betrayed and ambushed before being left hacked to 
pieces with bayonets on the highway. They expressed contempt for 
the superstitious naivety — as they saw it — of the Vendeans, and for 
the gross excesses to which this gave rise. For Savary, for instance, 
everything came down to religion, since the Vendean believed anything, 
however absurd, that was whispered to him by his priest, to the extent 
that he became ‘the instrument and the victim of the forces that set 
him in motion’.** That helped explain his ruthlessness, his wanton 
cruelty, his lack of scruples; and it also explained the eager savagery of 
the French response. Faced with a population that was fanatisée and 

<<<PDFPAGE 59>>>
Alan Forrest 
41 
with potential enemies in every village and behind every hedgerow, the 
French could not afford the luxury of clemency. As Boissé, a municipal 
officer from Bordeaux serving in the West, wrote home in 1793, ‘In 
the Vendée the idea of forgiving an enemy is unthinkable.’*? Prisoners 
were therefore butchered — after the fall of Noirmoutier they shot them 
in batches of fifteen hundred — and the priests figured in the front line of 
their imagined foes. For Jean-Charles Bouquet, the son of an ironmonger 
from Reims and a committed republican, the society of the West was 
riddled with priests, and hence with the basest treachery; he had no 
sympathy for those who fell into republican hands and delighted in 
watching them drown in the Loire: 
The priests who had dared to resist the General Will were put on 
board a boat which already held a number of refractory priests, but, 
thanks — who knows? - to the workings of the Republican genius, a 
rotten plank got loose. With water pouring in on all sides, the vessel 
sank with all its equally rotten priestly cargo.*° 
This is one take on the noyades of Nantes which caused such outrage 
in Paris after Thermidor, when every detail was pored over during the 
public show trial of Carrier as France tried to purge itself of its 
collective guilt. It is an approach that suggests a terrible cruelty on the 
part of the republican troops, a cruelty that comes close to bloodlust. 
But the soldiers were the same men who had fought in Belgium, on the 
Rhine and along the Moselle, and who in these ordinary contexts had 
never thought in such terms. They were not naturally savage or inhumane. 
Rather they had been accustomed by relentless propaganda before they left 
for the West, and subsequently by evidence of how a guerrilla war was 
fought, to regard the enemy as less than honourable, 
as ‘brigands’, 
ultimately as wild beasts of the fields and woods. They were Untermenschen, 
unworthy of the name of humanity. That propaganda should be seen as 
an essential part of the French armoury in both the Vendée and, later, 
in the Peninsula. It was part of the nation’s defence against guerrillas 
and irregular forces, against whom regular battalions experienced consid- 
erable difficulties in the field. 
Its predictable outcome was a war 
conducted with a total lack of fellow-feeling or mutual understanding, 
with no hint of considération between the warring sides. To that degree 
the war against ‘brigands’ was also a victory for political rhetoric, for 
one discourse over another, a victory by revolutionary and Napoleonic 
spinmeisters which effectively complemented that of the nation’s milit- 
ary battalions in the field. 

<<<PDFPAGE 60>>>
42 
The Ubiquitous Brigand 
Notes 
ie 
Ze 
Se 
NON 
10. 
ibik. 
12. 
13: 
14. 
Isp 
16. 
We 
18. 
Sy, 
I.A. Cameron, Crime and Repression in the Auvergne and Guienne, 1720-1790 
(Cambridge, 1981), pp. 189-90. 
R. Cobb, Reactions to the French Revolution (Oxford, 1972), pp. 128-79. 
E. Hobsbawm, Bandits (London, 1967) provides an excellent overview of the 
place of bandits and brigands in history. 
. Cobb, Reactions to the French Revolution, frontispiece, and notes, pp. 272-S. 
. Ibid., p. 138. 
. M. Marion, Le brigandage pendant la Révolution (Paris, 1934), pp. i-iv. 
. D. Diderot and J. d’Alembert (eds) L’Encyclopédie, ou Dictionnaire raisonné des 
sciences, des arts et des métiers, (Paris, 1751), Il, p. 420. The word ‘brigandine’ 
was also used in the English language from mediaeval times onwards. However, 
a more common alternative was ‘jack’. Aside from giving us the expression 
‘every man-jack’, this term survives as a another term for the knave in a pack 
of cards. Again, then, we see the instinctive linkage between the soldier and 
crime. 
. A. Forrest, Conscripts and Deserters: the Army and French Society during the 
Revolution and Empire (New York, 1989), p. 124. 
. An excellent account of brigandage in this department is to be found in 
R. Maltby, ‘Le brigandage dans la Dr6me, 1795-1803’, Bulletin d’archéologie et 
de statistique de la Dréme, LXX1X, no. 390 (1973), pp. 117-34. 
S. Wahnich, ‘La logique de 1I’exclusion révolutionnaire’, in J.C. Martin (ed.), 
La guerre civile entre histoire et mémoire (Nantes, 1995), p. 65. 
G. Lewis, ‘Political brigandage and popular disaffection in the South-east of 
France, 1795-1804’, in G. Lewis and C. Lucas (eds), Beyond the Terror: Essays in 
French Regional and Social History, 1794-1815 (Cambridge, 1983), pp. 195-231. 
F. Stevens, ‘La résistance au Directoire dans les départements réunis: la 
“guerre des paysans” (octobre-novembre 1798)’, in P. Bourdin and B. Gainot 
(eds), La République directoriale (Clermont-Ferrand, 1998), i, pp. 1025-6. 
M.A. lafelice, ‘Les “barbets” des Alpes-Maritimes: origines et caractérisation 
du barbétisme’, in F. Lebrun and R. Dupuy (eds), Les résistances a la Révolution 
(Paris, 1987), pp. 126-32. 
S. Clay, ‘Le brigandage en Provence du Directoire au Consulat, 1795-1802’, 
in J.P. Jessenne (ed.), Du Directoire au Consulat (3): Brumaire dans I’histoire du 
lien politique et de l’Etat-Nation (Rouen, 2001), pp. 70-1. 
S. Burrows, French Exile Journalism and European Politics, 1792-1814 (London, 
2000), p. 209. 
Twentieth and Twenty-first Bulletins de la Grande Armée, Moscow,17 and 20 
September 1812, J.D. Markham, Imperial Glory. The Bulletins of Napoleon’s 
Grande Armée, 1805-1814 (London, pp. 298-300. 
A. Palluel-Guillard, ‘Correpondance et mentalité des soldats savoyards de 
l’'armée napoléonienne’, in Soldats et armées en Savoie: actes du 28e Congres des 
Sociétés Savantes de Savoie (Chambéry, 1981), p. 206. 
Archives Départementales (hereafter AD), Savoie, L1137: letter from C. Lavit, 
Legnano, 5 August 1809. 
The discussion that follows of soldiers’ views of fighting in Spain is taken 
from my recent book, Napoleon’s Men: the Soldiers of the Revolution and Empire 
(London, 2002), pp. 124-7. 

<<<PDFPAGE 61>>>
391s 
36. 
Bike 
38. 
3) 
40. 
Alan Forrest 
43 
. AD Oise, series R (unclassified): letters of imperial soldiers to their families, 
an Vill — 1823. 
. AD Haute-Loire, R5973: letter from Jean Chapuy to his parents in Saint-Julien- 
Chapteuil, 1 August 1809. 
. AD Lozeére, F424: letter from Joseph Vachin to his uncle in Mende, 1 September 
1808. 
. J. Marnier, Souvenirs de guerre en temps de paix (Paris, 1867), p. 36. 
. AD Finistére, 35J11: letter from Francois Avril to his parents from Zamora, 
26 July 1809. 
. Ibid. 
. AD Lozeére, F424: letter from Joseph Vachin to his uncle, from Burgos, 10 April 
1808. 
. J.M. Chevalier, Souvenirs des guerres napoléoniennes (Paris, 1970), p. 74. 
. R. Moulinas, Histoire de la Révolution d’Avignon (Avignon, 1986), pp. 175-9. 
. For a typically heroic view, cf. A. Gallez, Un émule de Cartouche sous le Directoire: 
le brigand Moneuse, capitaine des ‘chauffeurs du Nord’ (Brussels, 1959). 
. X. Rousseaux, ‘Brigandage, gendarmerie et justice: l’ordre républicain dans 
les départements du nord de la France et les départements réunis (Belgique, 
Rhénanie) entre Directoire et Consulat (1795-1804)’, in Jessenne, Brumaire, 
p. 94. 
. M. Chatry (ed.), Turreau en Vendée: Mémoires et correspondance (Cholet, 1992), 
pn 2/0; 
. P. Tyson, ‘The Role of Republican and Patriote Discourse in the Insurrection 
of the Vendée’ (MA dissertation, University of York, 1994), p. 98. 
. Ibid., pp. 96-7. 
. G. Pages, ‘Lettres de requis et volontaires de Coutras en Vendée et en Bretagne’, 
Revue historique et archéologique du Libournais, CXC (1983), p. 15S. 
Cf., by way of example, J. Horne and A. Kramer, German Atrocities, 
1914: A History of Denial (New Haven, 2001). 
R. Secher, Le génocide franco-francais: la Vendée-vengé (Paris, 1986), passim. The 
idea that the Vendée is best understood as genocide is proposed in the préface 
by Jean Meyer, who compares the repression of the region with that of 
German Jews in the Holocaust (p. 15), and in the avant-propos by Pierre 
Chaunu, who writes that ‘the sadistic imagination of Turreau’s columns 
equals that of the SS, the gulags and the Khmers Rouges’ (p. 22). 
A. Forrest, ‘La Guerre de l’Ouest vue par les soldats républicains’, in J.C. Martin 
(ed.), La guerre civile entre histoire et mémoire (Nantes, 1995), pp. 91-9. 
J.J. Savary, Guerres de Vendée et des Chouans contre la République Francaise 
(Paris, 1824), I, p. 29. 
A.D. Gironde, 12L1: letter from Boissé to the President of the Club National 
in Bordeaux, 24 September 1793. 
F. Coutansais, ‘La Guerre des Géants vue par les bleus’, Revue du Bas-Poitou, 
LXXIV (1963), p. 432. 

<<<PDFPAGE 62>>>
vi 
: 
ran 
Yeh 
. 
ee 
Hi Saget equy yes th pawe 
ey 
tye 
' nap 
Wy : pare | 
wes ie 
3 hes i 
mn 
yf Vl 
mle Foto 
3. 
shh) ieee ‘ge 
Segue 
1 linens 
Seay A. cay en pahaad c o ht 
wa 
ee Hea ha 
: 
eae " ai LRG ye hier 
ina sae 
oe a 
on gray. tatecpohyhudl 
meen) prrrhag ane « ist ad Maw? a0 Wiest 
wre 
awit ONE 
Wrdeatt TA 2S 
; tie ion ©) Sretlde =~ We zysiah alanis ‘site 
> +4 pepe dt 
i= gie 
- 
bi 
te abel 
PA ‘ i, tibeeda déqt 
A 
> 
a 
ib 
t Mate 
' ne Jad apna ald ert, sha 
Wa Wedel) iin appa | 
wal AS ra 
doe nits g 
nee! 
b 
MeO 
rs ull tas OE? 
9 itis) 
teal muro 
celeash he! 
isllnnndca ah 
‘ie 
7 eet t Ais Mie oh). mene ey 
1 f 
WA re tpl Oe eng anh, 
seiigayeel Pai a Inky der 4 ne 
41 9 
able), hs Sh veils ‘read lara) alse 
~~ /198e'1 gine x) Neen, 
ampithalals’ &: 
eh wae Kua sean! ongrd ay 
sich geal Pies 
iqyito. Gyphss quel ty De patent Muoeyial, 
all 
> 
wy shaft 8 i 
girs oo det 
wi ah byt why shart Gipsy 
ane! 
rere ssa Ce 
ARS Le play a+ aaj sry shores 
i 
a 
thy iee- 
(] 
tipi nog sania iam, 
224 
1, Ballets de anh othr oy. r 
sr lieth tA es _ yg bs} et 
pet? 
ies Ain 
ah 
‘a! Bia 
ade 
aheree la Le’, Sie Oa i 
; _naltanraard atteaii mp wn Vay Beas aye ae fe dated) nore 
oe 
iy etaairs naa ila snctnget 
au aa ow 
Fiat 
1% oie 
aa 
v 
0a 
Bees 
en Wey 
. 
: wilh. Qu toi gue? femmes aleve 
Ses dee spat sent ete pea! 
(Wile a 
09 we 
Raine 
Mpg hy han op Pe wiK Ll 
‘- leit Mra aif AOE Abe Rien 
Oe pth ~ palo 
a 
Da Tent rete owe Lot Lie “ a) 4421 
allt 
uh 
trig 
spite fs entre tke Bb Lhe Map sls 
19 Real sat 
A park, 
wena 
Lint itn 
4 Ba sagen ing 
fotihe $29 i whiny aia aera 
wi i 
e, sili rigividacd nit 
Bhs bo, nerieergiy 
SIEQMIL? REY 199M nil optics | 
' 
pbeiea 
Mesias os 
ean at ih 
ates aon mais ‘a 
WNC® 
eulha 
i 1 MPO 
LAG iil 
Alyy pets 
Sala oe 
df 
= sp 
ates 
anid. shy fa seb anenl Fo lh dts 
W) teal! ahatspae ne y 
tii ns 
“prlsgitchvegen pal, ba Boy Gute Maes Hale eer BI) et col 
Ss) 
ota eee eae haaneenst 
Th HN bedty) 0 shai we set SRE 
iter 
ot 
_ pebermarth, meets opin —- whi . erry i eaten od 
re 
> 
Seen 
pe 
AQT, 
re 
I gle ve 
G3 
cake af 
wht a 
; 
ce poh 
atk “si ah M 
sik Tg daniel TPE Sloe 
ic nF 
thy 
aww ine ily a4 Fit relents 
fy 
be waar: 
Ayes 
- Neen 
nc a Mae 
ive east * edb 
ot An 05D P Sastece 
eT) ne Seay 
race 
4 ioe 
a 
ia On aa eee 
bars mahi 
a fie te Aihe can are, aaah soe 
a 
A 
alemety Re Sigal He 4, 
i 
= 
Ve, Ss. 
BAAR ae th Peo i ald Ik be 
ate ni ee 
oon Ha? te bh a} pesiligee) | 
1g Ge aie 
ive 
pf 
ie 
an 
y 
(Wind, OT2, ri ee. 

<<<PDFPAGE 63>>>
> 
Guerrilla Warfare avant la lettre: 
Northern Italy, 1792-97 
Martin Boycott-Brown 
According to The Oxford English Dictionary, the term ‘guerrilla’ first 
appeared in the English language in 1809. However, it is fairly obvious 
that the concept of the guerrilla, and the type of warfare associated with 
it, are much older than that. If we look at the definition of the phenom- 
enon provided by The Shorter Oxford English Dictionary, which states 
that it is ‘an irregular war carried on by small bodies of men acting 
independently’ and that a guerrilla is ‘one engaged in such warfare’, we 
can see similarities with the type of military action that eighteenth- 
century military men often refer to as la petite guerre or klein Krieg, which 
was characterized by sporadic skirmishes, ambushes, and raids by small 
groups of lightly armed troops. However, this kind of fighting was 
normally carried out by men who were, at least technically speaking, 
soldiers. (In the case of the earliest Hungarian hussars and the first of 
the Austrian army’s Croats, there is at least some doubt whether they 
can properly be classed as ‘soldiers’.) Although the dictionary definition 
quoted above says nothing about the composition of guerrilla bands, it 
is probable that most people nowadays would not think of them as 
being made up of soldiers, but rather as consisting mostly of armed 
civilians, perhaps with a sprinkling of uniformed men. 
Such groups of armed civilians certainly existed in northern Italy in 
the 1790s, though in most cases they were not highly organized or 
long-lived, nor did they always have a truly military purpose. It should 
be noted that the dictionary definition implies that in order for a group 
of people to qualify for the name ‘guerrilla’ they have to be involved in 
war, not in some other violent activity, such as banditry, but there are 
times when it is difficult to know where one such activity ends and the 
other begins. However, arriving at a precise definition of the meaning 
45 

<<<PDFPAGE 64>>>
46 
Guerrilla Warfare avant la lettre 
of the terms ‘guerrilla’ and ‘guerrilla warfare’, and deciding whether the 
armed civilians of northern Italy were ‘proper’ guerrillas, is not what 
this chapter is about. Rather, the main intention is to look at a few spe- 
cific cases of popular resistance (in the mountains of the Riviera, in the 
Po valley, and around Rivoli), and the sometimes surprising French 
reaction to them. In other words, we will look, if only superficially, at 
the relationship between the civilians and the military, concentrating 
more on individuals than on relations at the level of leaders and institu- 
tions, and see what kinds of relations existed between them at different 
times and places. At this point it should be made clear that this chapter 
is based on published sources, so it owes a large debt to others, particu- 
larly some Italian local historians, who have found and published much 
interesting material relating to the subjects we shall be looking at. But 
as their work remains largely unknown to those who have no Italian, it 
is to be hoped that it will still add something to the debate. In passing, 
it might also be observed that this chapter touches on an aspect of 
war that is too often neglected by military historians, who rarely have 
anything to say about civilians and often write about warfare as if it 
took place in the middle of the ocean, in areas where nobody lives. Yet 
civilians suffer dreadfully from the effects of war, and every single 
campaign and battle —- with rare exceptions — takes place in somebody’s 
cornfield, in somebody’s orchard, or in somebody’s village. 
We shall begin by examining the Riviera, and, in common with the 
other areas we shall be discussing, it is important to look first at its 
geography. Put very simply, much of the area would seem to have been 
ideal terrain for brigands or guerrillas. Not only is it hilly or mountain- 
ous, but much of it is, and was, covered with fairly dense woods. There 
were few good roads, but many, many, mule tracks winding over the 
broken terrain, giving any number of escape routes, or places where 
ambushes could be made. It was also an extremely poor area, little 
suited to agriculture, and had a sparse population. Politically speaking, 
most of the coastal strip belonged to the Republic of Genoa, and was 
neutral in the War of the First Coalition, but only a few miles inland 
the territory belonged to Piedmont, which was at war with the French. 
The latter first moved into the Riviera in September 1792, when they 
captured Nice, which at that time was a Piedmontese possession. They 
then occupied various parts of the Riviera until Napoleon Bonaparte’s 
offensive of April 1796 took the main sphere of military operations 
inland to Lombardy. 
The French had not been in the Riviera long before they began to 
encounter hostile armed civilians (sometimes alone, and sometimes 

<<<PDFPAGE 65>>>
Martin Boycott-Brown 
47 
in bands) whom they called barbets. To return to terminology for a 
moment, barbet was a local dialect word of obscure origins that had 
once been applied to the Waldensians, who had been persecuted by 
the Piedmontese government because of their religion, and had taken 
refuge in the mountains. The barbets of the 1790s who ambushed French 
soldiers and raided some of their positions might be called brigands or 
guerrillas, though it is difficult to say which title is more appropriate. In 
referring to them, the French seem habitually to have used the word 
barbets, rather than ‘brigands’, but this may just have been the result of 
soldiers adopting the terminology used by local people in the area 
where they were serving, as happened in Spain from 1809, when the 
English began to use the word ‘guerrilla’. We should also probably not 
read too much into the fact that there are occasional references to the 
barbets’ mode of dress marking them out. When the body of a man with 
a musket beside him was found in the mountains near a village, for 
example, the local mayor commented that ‘It is probable that this body 
is that of a barbet, to judge from the clothes’.' Yet we have no way of 
knowing if this is a reference to clothes that were suitable to a life of 
fighting, or merely to a state of raggedness indicative of living rough. 
More to the point, perhaps, it seems impossible to prove that barbets 
ambushed passing French soldiers for military reasons, rather than 
reasons of theft, which makes it impossible to state categorically that 
they were involved in warfare rather than acts of brigandage. Indeed, it 
seems probable that these bands were not formed in response to the 
French invasion, but were originally groups of robbers who preyed on 
the many travellers who used the road from Nice to Turin, which 
passed over Colle di Tenda and was one of the most important routes 
from the Mediterranean into northern Italy. The character of these 
bands no doubt changed with the French invasion of Nice. Deserters 
from both the French and Piedmontese armies would have provided 
a useful flow of recruits, who would have brought their own weapons 
with them, and would have been familiar with the military methods of 
both sides, as well as being used to a dangerous and violent life. But the 
arrival of deserters from opposing camps must surely have made it 
much less likely that the bands would engage in the kind of patriotic 
struggle in defence of an invaded homeland that is commonly associ- 
ated with guerrilla activity. 
Whatever the reasons for their activities, the French soon found the 
barbets enough of a nuisance to mount organized operations against 
them. One of the earlier descriptions of such an operation dates from 
the spring of 1793, and formed part of a letter that Barthélemy-Catherine 

<<<PDFPAGE 66>>>
48 
Guerrilla Warfare avant la lettre 
Joubert (later one of the most successful generals of the 1796 campaign) 
wrote to his father. He says: 
At the end of April [1793] I was given the mission of chasing from 
their rocks and caves some barbets who were murdering our orderly 
dragoons. With fifty grenadiers I pursued them for a day and a night, 
in the most abominable places. One could only reach their rocks by 
having risked breaking one’s neck a hundred times. Often one had to 
drag oneself on one’s belly. Many times I found myself with one or 
two grenadiers at most. We killed a barbet and took eight of them.” 
The fact that a force of fifty men had been sent to deal with this band 
suggests that their activities must have been causing some annoyance, 
though we may infer that they did not pose a serious military threat. 
Indeed, after giving us this very brief description of the barbets, the rest 
of Joubert’s letter, which is a long one, deals with a conventional 
military operation against a Piedmontese outpost in the mountains. 
This gives us some idea of the relative importance of the two types of 
operation, at least in the mind of Joubert. Nevertheless, the County of 
Nice continued to be a most dangerous area for the French, and attacks 
on them showed no sign of ceasing. Indeed, they became so serious that 
Bonaparte mentioned them at the end of one of his letters to the French 
government, written from Milan on 25 August 1796: 
The King of Sardinia having disbanded his provincial regiments, the 
barbets have increased in number. A wagon carrying silver has been 
pillaged. General Dujard, while going to Nice, has been killed. I have 
organized a mobile column with a tribunal against the barbets to 
mete out justice to them.? 
A mobile column of 4000 men under General Casabianca had been 
duly formed, and the commander of the French garrisons in Piedmont, 
General Macquart, was ordered to cooperate with his task as much 
as possible. It does not seem to have been wholly successful, and in 
September Bonaparte invited the Piedmontese government to position 
their own troops in the areas 
of Limone, Demonte, Cuneo and 
Barcelonette, to oppose the barbets and protect the French convoys.* 
In other parts of the Riviera, armed resistance was undoubtedly 
directly linked to outrages committed by the French.° According to 
Leonello Oliveri, a historian who has made a special study of the wars 
in the Val Bormida (where the French first arrived in September 1794), 

<<<PDFPAGE 67>>>
Martin Boycott-Brown 
49 
‘To begin with, the local population did not welcome the French troops 
badly, but rather they watched their battles with the Austrians almost 
like neutral spectators...and the greatest worries were about the 
damage to the crops.’° But the French offensive of April 1796 brought 
a different set of circumstances, when French troops were pushed to the 
limit, and soon outdistanced their meagre and inefficient supply trains, 
having to go for days without rations. Moreover, the military situation 
was fluid and confused, and the rapid movement created conditions 
that many soldiers were able to exploit by absenting themselves to look 
for loot. The locals therefore found themselves inundated by hordes of 
desperate men looking for food, or money and valuables. Their reaction 
was as violent as the treatment they had been subjected to. A fairly 
graphic description of the fate of the area around Dego in April 1796 is 
given by a local minor noble, Count Moretti. He was avowedly pro- 
Austrian and anti-French, which may lend colour to his story, but there 
seems little reason to doubt the overall outline of his account: 
Now from these two battles [of Dego] begins the painful story of 
these villages of ours, Rocchetta, Dego, Giusvalla, Piana (our house is 
the one that suffered more than any other), Brovida, Santa Giulia, 
and La Scaletta were barbarously sacked without any restraint for 
eight days together...cattle, grain, wine, everything was taken, the 
furniture was taken away or burnt, people tortured with the most 
barbarous methods to get them to give up their money...the 
women were treated with the ultimate indignities, after first stripping 
them of whatever valuables they had...I will not speak of the 
churches and sacred objects, which are things that horrify. The last 
two days, however, the villagers recovering a little from the shock, 
especially those of the nearby langhe,’ and fear having changed to 
desperation, they united in armed bands, and moving day and 
night through the nearby hills and roads, they began to kill what- 
ever enemies fell into their hands without quarter, and firing on 
those who came out to sack, blunting their pride somewhat, keeping 
them away from many villages, so that all the langa of La Rocha, 
Serole, Gorio, Olmo, Perleto and Cagna were exempt from robberies. 
The villagers also continued this practice in the days after the truce 
[the armistice of Cherasco], attacking and despoiling entire convoys 
of French.® 
Moretti was not the only eye-witness to comment on the formation 
of bands of armed civilians. Another such was a lawyer from Millesimo, 

<<<PDFPAGE 68>>>
50 
Guerrilla Warfare avant la lettre 
called Fassino, who observed that civilian resistance continued after the 
end of the war with Piedmont in April 1796, and that ‘the French army 
was split up by the various bands of armed country people, who killed 
all those who remained behind, and the small squads that were trying 
to reach their units.” 
This does not seem like mere banditry, because the bands seem to 
have been formed to take revenge on the French for their excesses, 
rather than for motives of theft, but it is perhaps too much to attribute 
a truly military intention to their activities. As Oliveri remarks, ‘Infor- 
mation relative to the Val Bormida is fragmentary and does not permit 
us to know if there was organised resistance or mere episodes that did 
not come out of an agreed plan of combat.’!° Elsewhere he is more 
definite, stating: ‘This is not a guerrilla movement according to modern 
canons, but a spontaneous armed resistance which manifests itself here 
and there. Where the peasants have to pay the price of the invasion 
they do not welcome the French troops with that enthusiasm that was 
manifested in many intellectual coteries.’'' Yet for all that he may not 
have been a guerrilla, the Piedmontese peasant, faced with the devasta- 
tion of his home and the likelihood of death from starvation, put up a 
ferocious resistance. It was a reaction that was feared by at least some 
French generals. Joubert, for one, expressed his disquiet in a letter, 
saying: 
Everything would go very well if the soldiers did not abandon them- 
selves to pillage: not a day passes without some pillagers being shot. 
Despite this severity the mania does not stop: the country people are 
arming themselves. '* 
As Bonaparte himself had written before the beginning of the campaign, 
‘The poverty [of the troops] has authorised indiscipline, and without 
discipline, [there can be] no glory.’!’ It therefore seems likely that 
several threatening orders that were issued to the troops had as much 
the intention of maintaining the cohesion of the army as that of 
protecting civilians. 
To summarize, the French came up against determined, though 
limited, resistance from armed civilians along the Riviera, but though it 
caused annoyance it never became a serious threat to military oper- 
ations. Some of this resistance may well have been put up by pre-existing 
bands of brigands who were probably more interested in loot than in 
defeating a French invader, while other instances of resistance were 
born out of a struggle for survival or a desire for revenge, and involved 

<<<PDFPAGE 69>>>
Martin Boycott-Brown 
51 
groups of peasants taking up arms against isolated groups of soldiers. In 
this case there is an element of wishing to defeat an invader, but whether it 
can be called guerrilla warfare is highly debatable. As to the French 
reaction, it is somewhat surprising that the civilian sources quoted here 
make no mention of reprisals. One might have expected the heavy 
hand of repression, but Count Moretti, for example, says only that the 
French began to avail themselves of Piedmontese troops to protect their 
convoys, and gives not the slightest hint of any repressive measures 
being taken. Yet we know that when there were major insurrections in 
the Val Bormida three years later, the French shot more than a few 
insurgents when they captured them. It seems improbable that the 
French did not do their best to hunt down the armed peasants in 
the Langhe, particularly when they took such large measures against 
the barbets further west, but it would seem that they did not capture 
many. 
Let us now look at events in the Po valley, where the French were to 
spend nine months fighting the Austrians between the beginning of 
May 1796 and February 1797. As before, it is important to say something 
about the geography, which could hardly provide a greater contrast 
with the Riviera. While the latter is mountainous and forested, the Po 
valley is a wide, flat, open plain with only low hills in a few areas. The 
land has been intensively cultivated for centuries and there is almost no 
forest. Unlike the mountains of the Riviera, where a few peasants 
scratched out a living from the thin soil and there were no large towns, 
the Po valley was fertile and populous and home to wealthy cities like 
Milan. In other words, it was terrain that seemed to offer little to favour 
the guerrilla fighter. There were few, if any, natural refuges in which to 
conceal a band of men, and flat terrain makes cavalry and artillery 
both more usable and less dispensable. These are both arms in which 
guerrilla bands tend to be lacking, which puts them at a disadvantage 
against 
a conventional army in flat lands. 
It is not surprising, 
therefore, that the most serious instances of armed resistance to the French 
in the Po valley took the form of insurrections, rather than the raids and 
ambushes that characterized civilian action in the mountains. Most of 
these insurrections occurred in Lombardy (a province that had once been 
ruled by Spain and had then passed under Austrian control) and Emilia 
Romagna, which belonged to the Papal States. 
When the French launched themselves into Lombardy, it was with 
a lightning movement that gave rise to a situation that was every bit 
as confused and fluid as that which had existed during their attack 
through the mountains of the Riviera the previous month. As before, 

<<<PDFPAGE 70>>>
52. 
Guerrilla Warfare avant la lettre 
in rural areas the soldiers found opportunities to commit all sorts of 
abuses. The parish priest of Ombriano, a village not far from Crema, 
tells us that on 11 May, the day after the battle of Lodi, the French 
advance guard reached his village at about eight in the morning. It was 
a traumatic event: 
The troops... broken with fatigue, hungry, despoiled all the houses, 
the parishioners having fled to other villages and into the marshes... 
I was with Sig Francesco Donati, and was assailed by a picket of 
twelve French hussars, who robbed us of everything, with sabres and 
with muskets at our chests.4 
Terrified, the priest and his companion hid in a nearby mill, from 
which they could only watch in anguish as his house was broken into 
and his church desecrated, the soldiers taking away all the church 
vestments and sacred objects. This was not an isolated case, nor were 
the French the only culprits, as we may gather from the testimony of an 
engineer called Massari, who lived in Crema: 
We had only just entered the Ombriano Gate [of Crema] when we 
saw the country people come running panting into the town from 
the nearby villages, saying that the few Germans [i.e. Austrians] who 
were retiring had begun to steal, at first only at isolated farmhouses, 
and then in some of the villages, and the first small groups of French 
who pursued them had begun to do the same as well. At the very 
same instant that this news spread through the town, with the 
addition that the French themselves were arriving at any moment, 
you could see all the houses and shops and also even the gate of the 
town shut with precipitate speed, so that it seemed that the end of 
the world had come.!® 
According to Massari, the panicky reaction of the people of Crema was 
due to ‘the very great fear that they had of the French...a fear that had 
taken hold of almost all the inhabitants of Italy because of the great 
vendetta and tyranny that was attributed to them both by the public 
newspapers and gazettes as well as by all those who could not even hear 
speak of them, such was the hate and aversion that was generally felt 
towards the French in Italy.’'® 
Whether or not the views of most Italians were as Massari says, the 
French hardly conducted themselves in a manner that was conducive to 
good relations. Not only was there small scale pillaging of houses and 

<<<PDFPAGE 71>>>
Martin Boycott-Brown 
53 
churches by individuals and groups of soldiers, there was also official - 
or apparently official - looting on a grand scale. In addition, the French 
made exorbitant demands for supplies, and began to rearrange the 
government of Lombardy. Lodi provides a fairly good example of what 
happened in the province. First it had to provide a large number of 
rations for the Austrian army as it moved through in its retreat, then it 
had to do the same for the French army when it arrived. On 10 May it 
was ordered to provide 40 000 rations of food, and the same number for 
each of the following two days.’ For a town that counted 12 000 
inhabitants, this kind of demand meant using up practically all the 
reserves of staple foods, with the result that the local population would 
not have enough to last until the next harvest. Lodi was lucky in that it 
was able to obtain extra food from Milan, but the strain on local 
resources was enormous. The next misfortune that befell Lodi concerned 
its Monte di Pieta, a credit institution of a kind that was very common 
in Italy. They were run under the auspices of the church, and their 
function was to advance small loans to less affluent people at low rates 
of interest, in exchange for items deposited as securities. They therefore 
held numerous precious articles of every sort and description, as well as 
less valuable items. The total value of the cash and objects deposited 
with the Monte in Lodi at that time came to about 235 OOO lire, which 
made it a tempting target. On 11 May its offices were visited by a 
French commissary, Collot, who sequestered all the valuables, though 
in a show of Republican egalitarianism, poor people were allowed to 
reclaim non-valuable items free of charge. The tickets attached to the 
precious objects were ripped off, so that their owners could not be iden- 
tified, after which the objects themselves quickly disappeared. What 
happened to them does not seem to be recorded, so we do not know if 
they went into the army’s coffers, or Collot’s.’® 
It was much the same story in other parts of Lombardy, which the 
French seemed to regard as a kind of gold mine to be exploited without 
restraint. On 17 May, Bonaparte wrote to the French government 
saying, ‘We shall obtain twenty millions in contributions from this 
country. It is one of the richest in the universe’ though he completely 
undermined this justification by adding, ‘but [it is] entirely exhausted 
after five years of war’.'? Further bizarre contradictions followed hard 
on the heels of this. Apparently oblivious to the irony in what he was 
saying, Bonaparte issued an order the same day stating that French 
soldiers ‘must respect and protect the inhabitants of the lands [they] 
have conquered’ on the grounds that ‘the General in Chief has too lively 
a desire to maintain the honour of the army to suffer any individual to 

<<<PDFPAGE 72>>>
54 
Guerrilla Warfare avant la lettre 
violate property’.*° He also dictated various letters that day and the next 
concerning vast sums of money and paintings to be taken from Parma, 
Modena, and Milan to be sent to Paris. Then in a proclamation to the 
people of Lombardy issued on 19 May he unveiled to them the huge 
amount of money he expected them to hand over to the army, presenting 
it as a fair price for liberation from the Austrians, and ‘a very small 
contribution for countries so fertile’.2’ Yet Pietro Verri, who was involved 
in the administration of the province, commented that the sum was 
equivalent to four years’ direct taxation, and that it would take many 
years ‘perhaps even a generation’” to recover from the effects. 
Not only had the economy been thrown out of equilibrium by the 
arrival of the French, but so had the political organization of Lombardy. 
The Austrian governor (the Archduke Ferdinand) had left hurriedly, 
consigning power to a group of local notahles. Not only was this 
arrangement rapidly dismantled by the French, but a large number of 
local revolutionaries and French sympathisers, who had previously kept 
a low profile, began to throw their weight around, secure in the protec- 
tion of the ‘liberating’ army. Trees of liberty began to be erected in town 
squares and symbols of real or supposed tyranny were destroyed by 
excited ‘Jacobins’. One particular act of this kind was to be a large con- 
tributing factor in the gravest outbreak of civilian violence against the 
French. The events provide an interesting contrast with the kind of 
resistance that had sprung up in the mountains of the Riviera, where 
the occasional ambush seems to have been the norm. On 16 May a tree 
of liberty had been put up in the town square of Pavia. Unfortunately, 
the square was also the site of an ancient equestrian statue, known as 
the Regisole, which represented 
a Roman Emperor. The local people 
were proud of it, and it was regarded as something of a symbol of the 
city — but the Jacobins who had put up the tree of liberty decided that it 
must be the statue of a tyrant, and that it should not be allowed to 
share the same space as the new symbol of the people’s freedom. They 
therefore clamoured to smash it down. The French commanders in the 
town, generals Augereau and Rusca, seem to have been reluctant to 
sanction this act of vandalism, but eventually gave way. While the 
French did not directly take a hand in destroying the statue, it was only 
the presence of squads of soldiers in the square that made it possible for 
the Jacobins to carry out their work without being lynched. 
It seems worth commenting that what had been destroyed here was 
a powerful symbol of local identity and tradition. The attack on the 
local people’s sense of identity, though not directly carried out by the 
French, can only have increased the sense of alienation and enmity felt 

<<<PDFPAGE 73>>>
Martin Boycott-Brown 
55 
towards them. Although there was no immediate large reaction by the 
local civilians, there were clear signs of unrest in the country around 
Pavia in the days that followed. On 17 May a local man called Fenini, 
who was going to Milan on official business, noticed groups of up to 
100 peasants armed with agricultural implements at almost every village 
along the road.” The local authorities were sufficiently worried that 
they sent Fenini and two others to a couple of villages to try and restore 
calm. A letter from the bishop of Pavia, also appealing for calm, was 
read to the parish priests. For a while at least, a major outbreak of violence 
was avoided. It was a different story when the bulk of the French army 
began to move away in the direction of Mantua, where the Austrians 
had taken refuge. On the morning of 23 May, two days after Augereau’s 
division marched off, leaving a small garrison in Pavia, people began to 
gather in the square near the tree of liberty. Fenini recognised some of 
the people, whom he described as being ‘of humble origins’** and 
names half a dozen of them. The angry crowd tore down the tree of 
liberty, then the French soldiers guarding the gates were overpowered. 
Alarm bells were rung from the town hall and the churches, which 
attracted people armed with all sorts of weapons from the nearest 
villages. As the day progressed, the multitude grew, isolated French 
soldiers were attacked and some were killed. The Marchese Belcredi, a 
local diarist, wrote an arresting description of these events, in which he 
expressed a patrician distaste for the ‘lower orders’ who were at the 
forefront of the troubles, but also made some revealing comments 
regarding the behaviour of the civilians towards the soldiery, noting 
that: ‘It is remarkable that the common townsman is always more 
respectful and generous in his attitude towards the soldiers, but not so 
the rude and ferocious peasant.’” 
This difference could no doubt be partly traced to the different treatment 
that town and country dwellers received from the soldiers. Isolated 
houses or small hamlets were easier targets for pillagers, though they 
rarely contained much of value, so country districts suffered most from 
pillaging. Conversely, there was little scope for looting in the towns 
under normal circumstances, there being too many people who could 
prevent it, but towns tended to be where pillagers sold their ill-gotten 
valuables and spent the money they made from them, which meant 
a welcome increase in business for some of the townspeople. Unfortu- 
nately this had knock-on effects, and so many soldiers were selling 
items in Lodi that the local authorities had to prohibit townspeople 
from buying anything from them, in case it encouraged further looting.”° 
Although town and country people saw soldiers differently, however, 

<<<PDFPAGE 74>>>
56 
Guerrilla Warfare avant la lettre 
Belcredi observed that: ‘They were united in thought...in hunting the 
Jacobins, who were hated equally by everybody, and as many as they 
could herd together they took away as prisoners.’”’ As things got further 
out of hand, the French garrison barricaded itself in the castle. General 
Haquin, who was on his way to join the army, happened to enter the city 
and was promptly made prisoner. Four small ornamental cannons that 
had decorated the front of the palace of Prince Alberigo in Belgioioso 
were brought to the castle where they were loaded with scrap, as there 
was no proper ammunition for them. The day closed in a stand-off 
between the insurgents and the occupiers of the castle. 
Although the demolition of the Regisole and the revenge attack on 
the symbol of French identity, the tree of liberty, seem to have sparked 
off the revolt, there were clearly other causes as well. Belcredi gave three 
apart from the demolition of the Regisole, which he called an act of 
‘mere spite...on the part of the Jacobins which greatly irritated the 
people’. These were: the edict restoring the tax on salt and tobacco 
‘which seemed tyrannical to the plebeians and the peasants’; the fact 
that ‘the small number of French soldiers left to garrison Pavia awoke 
arrogance and boldness in the rabble who, ever cowardly as they are, 
seek the opportunity to bully and avenge themselves with unequal 
numbers’; and lastly the invitation put out by the Jacobins to ‘whoever 
wishes to live as the tranquil possessor of his goods’ to join them.”® 
He might have added that the local peasantry had been subjected to 
countless acts of pillaging by the French soldiers, and like the peasants 
of the Riviera had seized the opportunity for revenge, though not in the 
manner of isolated ambushes, but in the much more risky manner of an 
insurrection and the attempted capture of a whole town. The con- 
sequences of such a strategy cannot have been understood by most of 
those who took part in the rebellion, which seems to have been spontan- 
eous and without a guiding organization. A sober analysis by the most 
ordinary military mind would have concluded that there was no chance 
of the insurgents holding out against the French army, and there was 
certainly no place that such a band of insurgents could go and hide to 
avoid the retribution that was bound to come when French senior 
commanders realised what was happening. But to judge from Belcredi’s 
account of the events of 25 May, it seems likely that the insurgents 
were encouraged by the unfounded belief that the French had suffered 
a reverse, and that they were therefore safe from reprisals. 
It was not just the people in the area of Pavia who were driven to 
revolt, however, for Como saw an insurrection at the same time, so did 
Varese, and there were serious disturbances in Milan on the morning of 

<<<PDFPAGE 75>>>
Martin Boycott-Brown 
57 
24 May. A courier with news of the trouble was hurriedly sent off to 
Bonaparte, who had only left the city that morning on his way to start 
the next offensive in the direction of Mantua. Before long, news of 
what was happening in Pavia and other places began to filter through, 
forcing Bonaparte to turn back with a brigade of grenadiers commanded 
by Jean Lannes, some cavalry and artillery. This force made towards 
Pavia, but was halted in the afternoon at Binasco, half-way between 
Pavia and Milan, by a large body of insurgents. This has been variously 
estimated at between 700 and 1000 men. There was a short, unequal 
fight that drove the rebels to flight, after which the French sacked the 
village, then burnt it, destroying about half the houses. 
While this had been happening the situation in Pavia had continued 
to be chaotic. Belcredi tells us that: 
On the morning of Tuesday 24...they negotiated for the surrender 
[of the castle] but did not agree on the conditions. The bold peasants 
demanded bread, wine and cheese from the Municipality...The 
peasants, not content with the food supplied to them, demanded 
contributions of food and wine from all the citizens and the monas- 
teries, which caused great worry among those who foresaw the 
consequences. After lunch, the negotiations for the surrender of 
the castle were begun again through the forced mediation of the 
captured general [Haquin], and it was concluded that at eight o’clock 
on the following morning [Wednesday] the garrison would give itself 
up as prisoners, if the citizens guaranteed that they would accompany 
the soldiers and defend them from the insults of the peasantry.” 
The last sentence suggests that the French were well aware that they 
were in greater danger from the peasants than the townspeople, whom 
they must have known had suffered less from the depredations of the 
marauders. Haquin also noted that the town officials had protected him 
when the mob had dragged him out of the safety of the Town Hall, 
‘covering me with their bodies’ and making ‘every effort to contain the 
people’. 
We may also note from Belcredi’s comments that the insurgents had 
begun to demand ‘contributions’, or rations, not unlike a real army. This 
may have been nothing more complicated than a desire to profit from 
the power that the insurgents wielded at that moment, but it may, perhaps, 
give some indication of how they viewed themselves, and of their 
over-confident mood. Further proof of the latter was the continuing 
growth of the rebel force, and according to Belcredi, ‘On Wednesday 

<<<PDFPAGE 76>>>
58 
Guerrilla Warfare avant la lettre 
25 our streets swarmed even more with armed peasants.’*’ They also 
gained a notable victory with the surrender of the castle, the garrison, 
as had been requested, being taken away under the protection of the 
townspeople and given a meal. The surrender agreement was careful to 
stipulate that the Municipality had done everything in its power to 
protect the soldiers. 
Had there been any proper military scheme or leadership among the 
insurgents they might have garrisoned the castle, but according to 
Belcredi their behaviour was anything but prudent or disciplined: 
Almost as puffed up and drunk with exultation as if they had gained 
a vast empire, and even more because of the rumour that was spread 
by some evil-doers that the Germans [Austrians] were near, even that 
there were Croats...on the road to Milan and also uhlans at Santa 
Cristina, the armed rebels caused anguish among the good citizens 
who had an interest in keeping them quiet. They ordered the bells to 
begin ringing again, and wildly toured the city drinking, requisitioning 
things from the families, and many were already heated and fuming 
because of the excess of wine they had drunk.°” 
Unfortunately for the insurgents and the townspeople of Pavia it was 
the French, not the Austrians, who were approaching. Ahead of them 
came the Archbishop of Milan and two other prelates to appeal to the 
insurgents to lay down their arms, but their pleas were in vain, the mob 
becoming even more heated at their words. Even so, Belcredi felt that if 
the clerics had been given twenty-four hours to exercise their powers of 
persuasion, the situation could have been defused. But Bonaparte was 
not prepared to wait: 
Perhaps not even two hours had passed when the French were 
already investing the city from two sides...with cannons loaded 
with ball and grape, they bombarded it fiercely... Then the populace 
dispersed like a slight cloud at the puff of a north wind...and in the 
blink of an eye those squares and streets that had earlier swarmed 
with violent armed people were deserted.** 
The French troops were given licence to sack the town for a number 
of hours, though precautions were taken to protect some of the more 
illustrious inhabitants, such as the scientist, Alessandro Volta. The town 
was expertly pillaged, and French soldiers were later seen in Lodi trying 
to sell the most varied items, including the bishop’s mitre. 

<<<PDFPAGE 77>>>
Martin Boycott-Brown 
59 
The sad sequel to the troubles was predictable: courts martial were set 
up, various ringleaders were shot, and hostages were taken. Despite 
these reprisals, there were more insurrections in other areas within 
weeks. There was a rebellion in the Imperial fief of Arquata Scrivia on 
5 June, which was followed towards the end of the month by numerous 
revolts in Emilia Romagna. On 19 June it was the turn of Bologna, then 
Ferrara on the 23rd, Forli on the 24th, various villages around Lugo on 
the 27th, Cesena on the 29th, and finally Rimini and Lugo on the 30th. 
Yet more rebellions were to occur later, though it is noteworthy that the 
French difficulties at the end of July, when they had to abandon the 
siege of Mantua and retreat to Brescia, do not seem to have been 
accompanied by uprisings of any size or danger in Lombardy. By then, 
it would seem, the local civilians were coming to expect and fear French 
reprisals. 
It is striking that armed civilian resistance in the Po valley should 
have mostly taken the form of mass uprisings, usually focused on towns 
or villages, and leading to something that had vague similarities with 
conventional warfare (the capture of strong-points, use of artillery, 
action en masse) rather than the methodology of ambushes and raids 
favoured in the mountains of the Riviera, and it seems likely that ter- 
rain was the most important factor in this. It is also noteworthy that 
politics and religion seem to have had rather more importance than 
they had in the Riviera (at least in the examples we have looked at) and 
that the threat to a sense of local identity should also have played a part 
in driving the people to revolt. 
We now move on to the area around Rivoli. This is not only interesting 
for the battle which took place there, but also for a quite remarkable 
contemporary account of the French occupation of that area. It was 
written by a local priest called Giovanni Battista Alberghini, who was 
very roughly the same age as Napoleon, and it gives some unusual 
insights into relations between locals and soldiers. Because of this, it 
seems worth quoting long passages from it, though the good priest was 
no stylist, and his ponderous prose is not the easiest to read. The area 
described in Alberghini’s story lies right at the foot of the mountains 
that stand between Lake Garda and the River Adige. There is a marked 
contrast of terrain, with a fertile plain and low hills on one side, and 
high mountains fringed by woodland on the other. The mountains, 
which lie to the north, are quite suited to guerrilla warfare, and were 
actually used by partisans during the Second World War. The area was 
of great strategic importance in the eighteenth century, being the site of 
some of the best defensive positions on the main route from Innsbruck 

<<<PDFPAGE 78>>>
60 
Guerrilla Warfare avant la lettre 
to Mantua, the principal Austrian military base in northern Italy. For 
that reason, the French were eager to occupy Rivoli, though it belonged 
to the Republic of Venice, which was neutral. 
The French advanced into the area at the end of May 1796, and their 
arrival, not surprisingly, was accompanied by the same sort of ruthless 
plundering that had been visited on other areas, in this case mostly 
perpetrated by cavalrymen. Eventually this torment came to a stop, but 
was replaced by excessive requisitions for food. The French stayed for 
two months, after which they were forced to retreat because of an 
Austrian offensive that succeeded in relieving Mantua. The Austrian 
soldiers that passed through the area were no more angelic than the 
French, and another bout of looting and even murder resulted, all of 
which Alberghini recorded in some detail and in the most horrified 
tones. The Austrians were defeated shortly afterwards at the battle of 
Castiglione, and forced to retire, permitting the French to return to 
their old positions. With them came new disorders and sufferings for 
the villagers. Having just endured depredations at the hands the Austrians, 
they were less inclined to sit back and do nothing, as Alberghini tells us: 
The passing of the days brought no respite from the robberies and 
invasions of the houses by the soldiers, because, with the pretext of 
searching for food, there was no piece of furniture or small animal 
that was safe from their hands. Thus the villagers, tired and angry at 
seeing themselves slowly stripped of their possessions, decided to 
put up a violent defence, and having got together in their respective 
villages they put their resolute resistance to the test, even at the peril 
of their lives. The village of Gaon was the first to give signs of 
intrepid resolution, and also served as an example to the other villages, 
its inhabitants having decided to die rather than put up with slow 
and silent destruction. They gave the first proofs of their courage on 
the 18th day of August, when, some soldiers having gone there on 
horseback to steal, as they had done other times, they were put to 
flight by those few intrepid villagers. At this unexpected reception 
the soldiers shouted with anger and declared that they would 
revenge themselves and would come back with the others and knock 
down everything. Nor did they forget their promise, and two days 
after, that is to say on the 20th of the same month, about forty-eight 
of them came back, all on horseback and armed with sabres and 
firearms, with the intention of sacking the houses in revenge for the 
affront they had received. But the villagers, having been warned of 
this by the sound of the bells of their church, armed themselves with 

<<<PDFPAGE 79>>>
Martin Boycott-Brown 
61 
sticks, pitchforks, and some of them even with firearms and edged 
weapons, soon assembled, drove the soldiers from the houses where 
they had begun their plundering, and routed them merely by loosing 
on them a storm of stones. Scattered here and there because of the 
need to run from the blows of the sticks and the stones that rained 
on their shoulders and courageously followed by the aforesaid 
villagers, some Frenchmen lost weapons, some their hats, and some 
even their horses (from which they had dismounted since the animals 
could not gallop due to the badness of the roads). The dismay and 
fear of the aforesaid soldiers was so great that they did not even have 
the courage to put a hand to their weapons and defend themselves 
in some way. If one of them took a weapon in his hand he was soon 
forced to put it down again on seeing a pitchfork aimed at his 
chest, or on being threatened with being knocked from his horse 
with a long pole. Only one had the daring to fire a musket shot at 
the villagers, but at that very moment a villager replied with a similar 
shot. With this solemnity the above-mentioned robbers were accom- 
panied and chased by the courageous people of Gaon as far as the 
villa at Caiar, where the villagers themselves turned back towards 
their homes.** 
We should note a few things about this assault on the soldiers. First, it 
was not an offensive act, like an ambush on stragglers or a supply train, 
but a reaction to an invasion and violation of property. Since the 
defence took place in the village itself it was very obvious who had 
been involved in it and where they came from - in other words, it was 
not a clandestine act of the kind commonly associated with guerrilla 
warfare. There were obviously considerable risks in such an overt display 
of defiance. It should also be pointed out that none of the French soldiers 
are reported as being killed or wounded, so there had evidently been 
some restraint on the part of the villagers, who had merely tried to scare 
off the marauders. It did not look as if things were going to end there, 
however, and the villagers began to take more serious measures, as 
Alberghini relates: 
But fear, which is the follower of doubtful enterprises, awoke serious 
reflections in the minds of the aforementioned people of Gaon, and 
they suspected they would have to face a bigger attack. Because of 
this, not seeing any other means of protection, they took the 
extreme decision to resist to the death. Therefore, having gathered in 
the square they decided on the best method to defend themselves, 

<<<PDFPAGE 80>>>
62 
Guerrilla Warfare avant la lettre 
and in orderly fashion divided among themselves the tasks and the 
places to be occupied. They all soon found themselves weapons, and 
moulded lead bullets in the square in public to demonstrate their 
firm willingness to defend themselves at any cost. They also readied 
great quantities of stones that were suitable for throwing by hand, in 
certain places from where it was possible to bombard the roads 
without being seen, because the latter, since they climb almost 
continuously and have many bends, can easily be guarded from a 
few high points, and defended simply by throwing stones. They also 
placed small bodies of guards and a few sentinels on certain heights 
so they might see if the French could be observed from afar while 
making their way up there. Lastly, they ordered the women and 
children, and those who were not fit for the trial, to retire to the 
crest of the mountain which stands above the said village to the 
north, and to take their animals and movable goods with them. 
The women, animated by the same resolution, were determined to 
roll great boulders at the enemy, and defend themselves if they were 
attacked. This example of daring was a spur to the nearby villages, so 
the inhabitants of these also set out to defend themselves from the 
incursions of the thieves. Indeed, many of them joined in alliance 
and gave help to each other. The resolution of the villagers soon 
made the French soldiers desist from the thieving they had started, 
and they feared a general rebellion.*®* 
The striking thing here is the remarkable level of organization and 
planning that was put into the defensive measures, even extending to 
cooperation with other villages. Affairs seemed to have reached a critical 
point, and it is not difficult to see how the violence could have 
escalated, perhaps resulting in groups of men taking to the mountains 
and the woods and engaging in guerrilla warfare against the French. 
But there must have been at least one extremely wise head among the 
villagers, and they were not blind to the dangers of their situation: 
However, the villagers themselves having thought better of their 
decision, which could have turned out to their harm and final 
destruction because of the desire imprudently to take offence with 
an army, they sent some people to General of Brigade Rampon, who 
commanded the troops camped in this area, to give him news of 
what had happened and also to beg him to use his authority to 
remedy these disorders. And he promised that he would stop them, 
adding that if the villagers were disturbed in the future by marauding 

<<<PDFPAGE 81>>>
Martin Boycott-Brown 
63 
soldiers, they should defend themselves with stones, poles, and other 
similar weapons, but they should not use muskets.*° 
At first sight, the last sentence seems extraordinary, and one is moved 
to wonder how many generals might have given a group of civilians 
authority to use various weapons to defend themselves against the 
soldiery. But as well as being an honest man,*’ Rampon was clearly 
aware of the advantages that might flow from assisting the villagers, not 
to mention the dangers that attended ignoring the abuses they suffered 
at the hands of the troops. Other perceptive soldiers knew very well 
what these were, as we may gather from the memoirs of Captain 
Laugier, who had found himself surrounded by the enemy on the other 
side of Lake Garda only three weeks before, and recounts how a friendly 
approach to the locals could make a crucial difference: 
I persuaded a farmer to sell us [some food] which I paid for generously. 
The man was so pleased that he promised to go to the town on the 
morrow and find out what was happening there and bring us food. 
He did this, and reported that the enemy had committed outrages in 
the town, and that the inhabitants were so indignant that they 
seemed ready to rise up if we had the least advantage... Towards 
evening the farmer informed me of the enemy’s dispositions, that 
the main attack would be directed against the heights above us, and 
that it would take place on the morrow at the break of day, as duly 
happened. Such is the advantage that is obtained by respecting the 
inhabitants, that one is informed of everything, accurately and in 
good time.*® 
It was fortunate for both soldiers and civilians that the French army 
had its share of men like Laugier and Rampon. The latter’s conciliatory 
attitude soon had greatly beneficial effects for Alberghini and his flock, 
as the priest punctiliously set down, despite his many reservations 
about the French: 
The...general kept his promise: indeed, to remedy the disorders 
better, he had a picket of about forty soldiers with their respective 
officers detached from the camp at Preelle every day, and sent to the 
pieve of Caprino where they stayed all day. From this picket some 
patrols were sent out to go round the villages to prevent any disorder 
that might take place. Nor did the village of Caprino omit to recognize 
this service, and every morning some portions of bread were given to 

<<<PDFPAGE 82>>>
64 
Guerrilla Warfare avant la lettre 
each soldier in the picket by the parish, and the officers were also 
given a ration of wine. The soldiers appreciated such recompense, 
though small, and were ready to show their gratitude towards the 
parish and the whole town, of which they gave particular proof 
when it was necessary to give communion to a sick person, and [the 
Holy Sacrament was going to have to be carried past the place] where 
the picket was, and it was feared that some irreverence might be 
shown, as had unfortunately happened in other similar cases. One of 
the officers having been asked to make his soldiers respect the Holy 
Sacrament, he replied that everything would be as it should.°” 
Here we can see important steps being taken in the normalization of 
relations between the two sides. The local French commander institutes 
very visible and effective measures to solve the problem the villagers 
have complained about. The villagers show their gratitude in tangible 
form, and soldiery respond by showing respect towards a religious 
procession. The process continued even further: 
Every disorder having thus been remedied, and plundering and 
robbery prevented, the commissaries of the troops camped in the 
area did not, however, desist from troubling the communities with 
their arrogant demands, requesting, among other things, wood to 
bake bread. But the Councillors, made wise by experience, replied 
that they did not have wood to give them, and so, if they wanted it, 
they should go to the woods and cut it themselves. The French 
commissaries made no further resistance to this decision, but 
contenting themselves with this agreement they sent some villagers 
to cut it on Monte Gazo, where a section of woodland was assigned 
to them, and they paid the workmen every day in cash, also giving 
them a ration of bread and other things as had been agreed.” 
As we can see, once the two sides had opted for cooperation rather 
than enmity, it became possible to develop a working relationship that 
permitted them to live in relative harmony. Intransigence on one side 
would only have bred intransigence on the other, with painful con- 
sequences for both. It is a pity that the sensible behaviour of the village 
elders and the French commander was not more widely imitated. 
In conclusion, we may say that while there was a great deal of armed 
civilian resistance to the French in northern Italy between 1792 and 
1797, not much of it conformed to modern notions of guerrilla warfare. 
The outbreaks of armed resistance that had the greatest effect on French 

<<<PDFPAGE 83>>>
Martin Boycott-Brown 
65 
operations (in Lombardy and Emilia Romagna) seem more like a clumsy 
attempt to engage in conventional warfare than the hit-and-run tactics 
more usually associated with guerrilla activity. The area where there was 
something like guerrilla warfare (the Riviera) had terrain that was 
ideally suited to it, and it seems to have developed out of pre-existing 
brigandage. But despite the annoyance it caused to the French it had no 
major effect on their operations. In another place where it could easily 
have developed (near Rivoli) the situation was defused because of the 
willingness of both locals and French to find solutions to the problems 
of co-existence, and to arrive at a modus vivendi. Protecting local 
property, 
respecting local traditions and leaving local institutions 
untouched were crucial in this. Had this lesson been learnt and applied 
by others perhaps it is even possible that the word ‘guerrilla’ would not 
exist in the English language. 
Notes 
1. F. Maurandi, Les Annales de Levens, (Nice, 1931), p. 118. 
2. E. Chevrier, Le général Joubert d’apres sa correspondance (Paris, 1884), p. 8. 
3. Napoleon. Correspondance de Napoléon Ier publiée par ordre de l’empereur 
Napoléon Ii (Paris, 1858-69), no. 925 (hereafter CN). 
4. See J.B. Schels, ‘Die zweite EinschlieSung Mantuas, im August 1796, und 
gleichzeitige Ereignisse bei dem k. k. Heere unter dem FM Grafen Wurmser 
in Tirol und Vorarlberg’, Oesterreichische Militarische Zeitschrift, Bd. 4 (1831), 
p. 279. 
5. They were not the only ones to commit them. There are enough eye-witness 
accounts to prove that the Austrian soldiers could be just as keen for loot and 
as brutal in obtaining it. 
6. L. Oliveri, ‘L’insorgenza antifrancese in Val Bormida durante il periodo 
napoleonico (1794-1815)’, Bollettino della Societa per gli Studi Storici, Arche- 
ologici ed Artistici della Provincia di Cuneo, no. 91 (July 1984), p. 229. 
7. Langa (plural Langhe) refers to the hilly country districts around the Belbo 
and the Bormida. 
8. G. Conterno, ‘Una cronaca inedita di eta napoleonica in val Bormida’, Atti e 
Memorie della Societa Savonese di Storia Patria, XIX (1985), pp. 123-4. 
9. L. Oliveri, ‘Una comunita nella tempesta: la val Bormida durante l’invasione 
napoleonica 1792-1800’, Bollettino della Societa per gli Studi Storici, Archeologict 
ed Artistici della Provincia di Cuneo, no. 82 (January 1980), p. 136. 
10. Cf. Oliveri, ‘L’insorgenza antifrancese’, p. 230. 
11. Cf. Oliveri, ‘Una comunita nella tempesta’, p. 136. 
12. Cf. Chevrier, Le général Joubert d’apreés sa correspondance, p. 36. 
TEES BE IGING gery zl 
14. M. Benvenuti, ‘Curioso documento’, Archivio storico lombardo, no. 9 (1882): 
145-8, p. 147. 
15. G. Agnelli, 
‘La battaglia 
al ponte 
di Lodi 
e l’inizio 
della settimana 
napoleonica lodigiana’, Archivio storico lombardo, no. 60 (1933), pp. 58-9. 
16. Ibid., p. 60. 

<<<PDFPAGE 84>>>
66 
Guerrilla Warfare avant la lettre 
. Ibid., p. 49. 
. Ibid., p. 54. 
met GN moOrtove 
. Ibid., no. 442. 
. Ibid., no. 453. 
. P. Verri, Lettere e scritti inediti di Pietro e Alessandro Verri (Milan, 1881), Iv, 
Daz ls: 
. F. Bouvier, ‘La révolte de Pavie (23-26 mai 1796)’ Revue historique de la 
Révolution francaise, i, no. 2 (1911-12), p. 75. 
slbids pad 
Le 
. C. Capra, L’eta rivoluzionaria e napoleonica in Italia, 1796-1815 (Turin, 1978), 
p. 111. 
. Cf. Agnelli, ‘La battaglia al ponte di Lodi’, pp. 45, 60. 
. Cf. Capra, L’eta rivoluzionaria, p. 111. 
. Ibid., pp. 110-11. 
. Ibid., pp. 111-2. 
. Napoleon, Correspondance inédite officielle et confidentielle de Napoléon Bonaparte: 
avec les cours étrangéres, les princes, les ministres et les généraux francais et 
étrangers, en Italie, en Allemagne, et en Egypte (Paris, 1809), 1, pp. 207-9. 
. Cf. Capra, L’eta rivoluzionaria, p. 112. 
shartel, joy, Vals}, 
. Ibid., p. 113. 
. G.B. Alberghini, Gli austro-galli in val di Caprino (1796-1801) memoria storica 
(Verona, 1880), pp. 39-40. 
. Ibid., pp. 40-2. 
. Ibid., p. 42. 
. The brief description of Rampon written by General Desaix, himself a very 
upright man, includes the telling words ‘not a thief’. L. Desaix, Journal de voyage 
du général Desaix, Suisse et Italie (1797) (Paris, 1907), p. 138. 
. J. Laugier, Les cahiers du capitaine Laugier (Aix, 1893), pp. 93-4. 
. Cf. Alberghini, pp. 42-3. 
. Ibid., p. 43. 

<<<PDFPAGE 85>>>
4 
Resistance, Collaboration or Third 
Way? Responses to Napoleonic 
Rule in Germany 
Michael Rowe 
The terms ‘resistance’ and ‘collaboration’ are evocative, and are generally 
applied to Nazi-occupied Europe. The characteristics of the collaborator 
are uniformly negative: somebody motivated by cowardice, malice or 
even ideological affiliation with the invader who betrays his country 
and fellow citizens. The resister is a hero, courageous, patriotic, fighting 
against the odds. These are the popular images. Of course, theorists of 
‘collaboration’ and ‘resistance’, be they political scientists, sociologists 
or historians, are dissatisfied with such a simple dichotomy. Stephen 
Gilliatt, in his recent exploration of the dynamics of the phenomenon, 
notes that the term collaborazionistas, when it first appeared in an Italian 
dictionary in 1922 as a descriptor for socialists wanting to work with the 
bourgeois government, initially carried with it no negative connotations.’ 
However, it quickly gained these even before World War II, when its 
current emotive meaning became widespread. Works of scholarly 
detachment, in contrast, view ‘collaboration’ as a political strategy, not 
pathological behaviour: it is a possible way of managing conflicting 
interests, as indeed is resistance. Beyond that, they fail to agree on any 
definitions, but tend to recognise that both ‘collaboration’ and ‘resistance’ 
are blanket terms covering various forms of behaviour and motivation. 
Typical is the following, from Peter Davies’s recent book on wartime 
France: ‘... an act of resistance was, basically, anything that, in the mind 
of the person or group executing the act, fe/t like an act of resistance’ .” 
Such an act might range from full-scale military action to accidentally- 
on-purpose bumping into a German on the street. The act of resistance, 
or indeed, collaboration, according to such a definition, might not be 
recognizable as such by the occupying forces, the rest of the occupied 
community, 
or indeed 
the 
later 
historian. 
Conversely, 
something 
67 

<<<PDFPAGE 86>>>
68 
Resistance, Collaboration or Third Way? 
perceived as ‘resistance’ or ‘collaboration’ by the occupation authorities 
or community might well be motivated by other considerations, and 
simply represent an unintended outcome or secondary result. Some label 
this as ‘functional’ resistance or, presumably, ‘functional’ collaboration.* 
Clearly, collaboration and resistance are not as simple as they might 
first appear. 
Despite this, an attempt will be made in this chapter to apply these 
difficult concepts not to German-occupied France, but French-occupied 
Germany: more specifically, the German-speaking region to the west of 
the Rhine in the generation following the outbreak of the Revolutionary 
Wars in 1792. However, it is impossible to proceed without briefly 
considering the state of affairs in this region on the eve of occupation. 
The Rhineland lay in the far west of that loose collection of territories 
clustered within the 1000-year-old Holy Roman Empire.* It was one of 
the Reich’s most territorially fragmented regions, its 1.5-1.6 million 
inhabitants divided amongst over 100 (depending, in part, on defi- 
nition) sovereignties that recognized no higher temporal authority other 
than the Emperor. Some of these were very small indeed, representing 
no more than glorified villages with populations in the hundreds, and 
ruled over by a colourful collection of imperial counts (including the 
Metternichs), imperial knights, imperial abbesses and abbots, and 
other minor princelings.° For their subjects, rule was personal; the 
allegiance they owed was to an authority that was near, and tangible. 
The pocket states, in which a significant minority of Rhinelanders had 
resided for centuries, did not face the same challenge of ‘acculturizing’ 
their subjects as was the case in Europe’s larger territorial states. Hence 
the concepts of ‘resistance’ and ‘collaboration’, which are bound up 
with notions of legitimacy, patriotism and nationalism, hardly apply in 
these micro-states, or if so, in a form fundamentally different from 
larger territorial units. 
Most Rhinelanders, however, lived within one of the larger entities: 
under one of the three archbishop electors — Cologne, Mainz, Trier — or 
under the sceptre of a distant Hohenzollern or Wittelsbach prince, who 
governed substantial 
Rhenish 
territories 
from Berlin and Munich 
respectively. What is significant about both these categories of territory — 
the ecclesiastical electorates, and the so-called Nebenldnder ruled by the 
Hohenzollerns and Wittelsbachs — is that, through their nature, they 
failed to establish the kind of dynastic ties that existed elsewhere 
between princes and peoples. The monarchies of the ecclesiastical 
electorates could not, obviously, be hereditary; instead, their sovereigns 
were elected by the cathedral chapters. Certainly, some of them were 

<<<PDFPAGE 87>>>
=> Michael Rowe 
69 
monopolized by particular families for decades, if not centuries — as 
was the case with the Wittelsbachs in the Electorate of Cologne for 
much of the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries, for example — but 
they nonetheless failed to instil in their inhabitants the same kind of 
loyalty that the Wittelsbachs, Wettins, Habsburgs or Hohenzollerns 
managed in their core provinces. This same lack of devotion to dynasty 
was also apparent in the Rhenish possessions of German princes whose 
core territories lay far to the east. As already stated, their Rhenish 
territories are often referred to as Nebenldnder — literally, lands ‘beside 
from’ or ‘apart from’ the core of the dynastic state. This term is accurate. 
Geographically, these territories were separated from the dynastic centres 
by intervening principalities. However, the detachment was not simply 
geographical. Not surprisingly, 
the Wittelsbach and Hohenzollern 
monarchies focused their reforming zeal in the eighteenth century on 
their central provinces, not on vulnerable and possibly expendable 
peripheral territories. In consequence, Rhinelanders escaped the kind of 
absolutism that much of central and eastern Europe experienced. They 
had not been ‘broken in’ by a generation or two of living under the 
likes of King Frederick William I of Prussia before the French arrived on 
the scene in the early 1790s. The crucial point here, though, is that 
their ruling dynasties, like absentee landlords in Ireland, remained 
distant, remote figures, whose own destinies were obviously not too 
much bound up with those of their Rhenish subjects. 
So, given that the vast majority of Rhinelanders lacked a dynastic 
focus, what were they loyal to? There are several candidates here, and 
none of them are mutually exclusive. There was of course the Church. For 
the majority - a million out of the 1.5-1.6 million — this meant the 
Roman Catholic Church. For the rest, the church of Calvin or Luther, or, 
for perhaps 20 000, the synagogue. 
It goes without saying that 
religion, including the religious calendar, governed the lives of the vast 
majority, and that any power disruptive of this should be viewed with 
hostility.° Apart from the church, 
there was another power with 
universalistic pretensions (at least, originally), though one of a tem- 
poral rather than spiritual nature: the Holy Roman Empire. This institution 
has undergone much rehabilitation of late, and is now viewed as an at 
times surprisingly effective conflict resolution mechanism.’ This in 
part, arguably, explains the support it received from Rhinelanders: 
ultimately, it protected their rights against princely absolutism. Beyond 
that, its military structure provided some form of mechanism that 
potentially shielded the region from French attack, as it had done in the 
days of Louis XIV.° Furthermore, the reforming zeal of Emperor Joseph II 
Za 

<<<PDFPAGE 88>>>
7U 
Kesistance, COLLADOTALION OF LITA Vays 
held out some hope for those dissatisfied simply with the preservation 
of the status quo. 
What else might ordinary Rhinelanders owe their allegiance to? The 
answer is to either their city, or what in German is referred to as Land. 
Cities in old-régime Germany can be categorized according to the degree 
of independence they enjoyed from the territorial princes. Those with 
the greatest independence, and hence those whose citizenry generally 
invested the greatest pride in them, were the imperial cities. There were 
four in the Rhineland, the largest two being Aachen and Cologne. 
Cologne, founded in the days of Rome, had an especially well-developed 
sense of its own importance, something its burghers might share in.? 
More modest home towns, with smaller populations, less exalted histories, 
and less independence, could nonetheless engender similar loyalties. 
The Rhineland was relatively urbanized in comparison with Europe’s 
other regions, but nonetheless, most of its inhabitants were rural. They 
owed their allegiance not to a city, but to their Land. This word has no 
English equivalent. Historically, a Land was more than a mere territorial 
unit or administrative sub-division. Rather, it was defined by its peculiar 
and supposedly ancient customs and laws. Importantly, the ill-defined 
boundaries of the Lander did not match those of the dynastically 
defined territories into which the Reich was divided: larger dynastic 
conglomerations, 
like the Habsburg and Hohenzollern monarchies, 
contained many Lander. In territorially fragmented regions like the 
Rhineland, in contrast, individual Lander might be divided into many 
petty sovereignties. However, what is crucial is that loyalty towards the 
Land — Landespatriotismus — was not synonymous with loyalty towards 
the dynastic state — Staatspatriotismus. Indeed, the two might very well be 
conflicting. Loyalty towards the Reich, in contrast — Reichspatriotismus — 
would in all probability be compatible with Landespatriotismus (or loyalty 
to a city, in the case of urbanites), as the rights and privileges of Lander 
(and imperial cities) survived encroachment by the dynastic states 
thanks to the protection afforded by the Empire’s legal cocoon.'° 
In addition to the list above, was there anything else that attracted 
Rhinelanders’ allegiance? In particular, was there any sense of German 
nationalism? This is a controversial area. For much of the nineteenth 
and early twentieth centuries, the Rhine represented a national bone of 
contention between the French and Germans. Many a textbook on 
nineteenth-century Germany evokes the Rhine crisis of 1840 — the crisis 
that spawned Nikolaus Becker’s immensely successful poem, Der deutsche 
Rhein — as the first spontaneous eruption of popular German nationalism." 
The disputed status of the Rhineland in the immediate aftermath of 

<<<PDFPAGE 89>>>
SVEECTEUALE 
SNU YY 
a> & 
World War I aroused similar passions, on both sides. Given this, it is 
hardly surprising that historians from both traditions writing about the 
Napoleonic period tended to view that era through nationalist spectacles. 
Since the 1960s, however, and within the climate of Franco-German 
reconciliation, the tendency has been to deny the existence of German 
nationalism in this period. That is why the degree of popular opposition 
to French domination has often been played down, or else portrayed as 
something else, such as the hatred of ordinary people for the intrusion 
by the state into their everyday lives. 
The late eighteenth century witnessed a growing sense of German 
national consciousness, if not nationalism. In part this derived from 
a common pride, amongst Germany’s élite at least, at German achieve- 
ments on the cultural front. The proportion of books published in 
German as opposed to Latin was increasing. The public sphere, and 
especially the political newspaper press, was also expanding rapidly; 
contemporaries often complained of Lesesucht — the addiction to reading 
news 
— that extended beyond the élite to commoners, something 
boosted by the Seven Years War, the American War of Independence, 
and the French Revolution.” The victories of Frederick the Great in the 
first of these struggles were also seen by many Germans less in terms of 
a contribution to an ongoing German civil war between Austria and 
Prussia, but as specifically German victories over the Russians and 
above all the French.'’ Incongruously (given that Frederick was also at 
war with the Reich as well as with the Continental Great Powers — the 
army defeated at Rossbach was, after all, a joint Franco-Imperial force), 
the cult of Frederick the Great that transcended Prussia’s boundaries did 
not result in any diminution of Reichspatriotismus in the final decades of 
the century. The precise relationship between an early German national 
consciousness based upon culture, and a more politically orientated 
sense of affinity towards the Empire, is currently the subject of much 
scholarly debate.'* Certainly, the two cannot be assumed to be synony- 
mous: the one could be had without the other. For example, in parts of 
northern Italy where - it is not generally known —~ a residue of imperial 
rights and jurisdiction survived into the eighteenth century, a degree of 
Reichspatriotismus likewise subsisted. Yet obviously, no one here believed 
themselves part of a German Kulturnation.'° On the other hand, this is 
perhaps an obscure exception that proves the rule: the vast majority of 
the Reich’s inhabitants were German speakers; after all, the Empire’s 
full name was Heilige Romische Reich deutscher Nation. And whilst Reichs- 
patriotismus was not synonymous with a German cultural nationalism, 
it could, nonetheless, reinforce it: just as cultural nationalism could be 

<<<PDFPAGE 90>>>
72 
Resistance, Collaboration or Third Way? 
set up against French courtliness, so Reichspatriotismus might highlight 
the distinction between Bourbon despotism and German freedom. These 
ingredients, together with the aforementioned cult of Frederick the 
Great and the Francophobia based upon previous perceived injustices 
(such as Louis XIV’s devastation of the Palatinate, the centenary of 
which fortuitously coincided with the French Revolution), helped 
shape Rhenish attitudes to the Reich, to what it meant to be German, to 
the French, and to the Revolution. 
This chapter will now skip over the Revolutionary decade as quickly 
as possible, in order to focus on the Napoleonic period.'® The period 
1789 to 1799 can be split into two phases so far as the Rhineland is 
concerned. In the first phase, from 1789 to 1792 (the outbreak of the 
War of the First Coalition) Rhinelanders were spectators to events 
unfolding in France. These were viewed with «interest by a broad cross 
section of society, which avidly read the sensationalist reporting of 
atrocities and violence.’’ A minority of intellectuals were sympathetic 
in their interpretation of events. One common position, which many 
Rhinelanders held, was that revolution was required in France to over- 
throw centuries of despotism, but that it was not needed in Germany 
thanks to enlightened princes and the conflict resolution mechanisms 
provided by imperial law. 
Smug detachment turned into direct Rhenish involvement in the 
affairs of the French Revolution with the outbreak of the Revolutionary 
Wars. Due to its geographical position, the region became the major 
theatre of operations. It was occupied briefly by French forces in 1792, 
but these were pushed out by the Coalition the following year. French 
armies re-occupied the region in 1794, and this time they stayed. What 
can be said about the French military occupation? What is initially 
striking is its scale: 136 000 to 187 000 troops stationed in the region 
from 1794-97.'* This represented about one-in-ten of the population. 
This needs to be borne in mind when contrasting the relative passivity 
of Rhinelanders compared with Vendéens in the 1790s, or Spaniards 
after 1808, or Tyroleans in 1809. Would, for example, the Spanish have 
been so successful in creating trouble for Napoleon had he been able to 
deploy a force equivalent to a tenth of the population of Spain — an 
army of perhaps 1.3 million — to the Iberian peninsula? Consideration 
of why people collaborate or resist cannot lose sight of perhaps the 
most important variable: the sheer extent of the occupier’s power, and 
the concomitant chances of successful resistance. 
The presence of a massive French force in the region created great 
hardship for civilians: requisitioning on a huge scale, forced billeting, 

<<<PDFPAGE 91>>>
Michael Rowe 
73 
hostage-taking, 
simple brutality by ill-disciplined 
soldiers 
against 
a sullenly resentful population, anti-clerical outrages including the 
desecration of churches, the looting of cultural treasures, and sporadic 
attempts to impose hated revolutionary symbols and political practices, 
such as planting liberty trees and introducing the revolutionary calendar. 
How did Rhinelanders respond? Did they collaborate or resist? Armed 
resistance was out of the question, given French military power. However, 
there were plenty of other ways of registering hostility to the French 
and their revolution. These were largely of a symbolic or religious 
nature, and included vandalising liberty trees and other revolutionary 
symbols, ostentatiously taking part in religious processions, or — and in 
many respects, this is also a contemporary ~phenomenon — wearing 
rosettes or ribbons denoting allegiance to a power hostile to France. Of 
course, a popular and often effective means of resisting occupation was 
and remains the boycott: non-participation in revolutionary festivities, 
ignoring the new revolutionary calendar by donning one’s Sunday best 
and demonstratively sweeping the porch the evening before, and so on 
and so forth; a hundred possible small individual actions denoting, 
publicly, opposition to the new order of things. At times, the French tried 
to counter such acts by, for example, inflicting collective punishment 
such as forced billeting on villages and towns whose liberty trees had 
been chopped down, or by banning public religious manifestations, or 
forbidding rosettes. However, as other authorities in a similar position 
have discovered before and since, attempting to enforce such restrictions 
is extremely costly, and ultimately futile: as soon as one form of popular 
manifestation is suppressed, 
a new method of symbolising opposition is 
discovered. 
We have considered resistance. What about collaboration? It might 
be thought that this represented an easier option for Rhinelanders, but 
arguably it was the more difficult. The Rhineland might have been 
occupied by the French in the 1790s, but in terms of international law 
it remained part of the Holy Roman Empire. Both the Empire and the 
individual princes made it clear, in a number of decrees and proclamations 
from 1792 onwards, that ideological adhesion to the French cause would 
be viewed as treason, and punishable as such. Of course, these decrees 
and proclamations did not use the word ‘collaboration’, but they were 
referring to behaviour that today would be labelled as such. The decrees 
issued by Emperor Francis I in December 1792 and April 1793 referred to 
‘persons lacking German [sic] spirit and heart... who have volunteered 
or allowed themselves to be used as tools for seducing the people’, and 
to ‘criminals against us, the German Reich and their Fatherland’.’? The 

<<<PDFPAGE 92>>>
74 
Resistance, Collaboration or Third Way? 
explicit and deliberate references to Germany, or German characteristics, 
in these proclamations, suggests that the Habsburg government at least 
felt that there did indeed exist a sense of national solidarity amongst 
the peoples of the Reich that was worth playing upon. 
What is also interesting in these proclamations is the distinction 
made by the Emperor and the individual princes between committed 
ideological adhesion to the French, which was naturally deemed 
unacceptable and treasonable, and collaboration that took the form of 
local officials simply continuing to fulfil their public responsibilities 
under occupation. Collaboration of the latter sort was not merely 
tolerated, but actually encouraged. Indeed, the Palatine government in 
Diisseldorf actually threatened to punish officials who deserted their 
posts during the French occupation.”° Typical was the reasoning of the 
elector of neighbouring Cologne: ‘It is far better [that the administration] 
should be in the hands of old established families than sansculottes.’”! 
Not surprisingly, representatives of old established families in Cologne, 
and throughout the region, agreed, and used such arguments to justify 
working with the French occupation authorities. 
Within this context, it is worth leaping ahead two decades to the 
years immediately after 1814, following Napoleon’s defeat. During this 
period (the so-called Restoration), the Prussians, to whom most of the 
Rhineland was awarded by the Congress of Vienna, produced their own 
survey on the Rhenish administration they inherited. As part of this 
survey, they drew up reports on individual officials whom they categor- 
ized according to the extent to which they had collaborated with the 
French. These reports also sought to distinguish those who had engaged 
in disinterested public service from those besmirched by ideological 
commitment. Indeed, they split all those surveyed into three classes: 
class one consisted of those who had remained ‘German’ [sic] in their 
self-perception during French rule; class two included professionally 
competent individuals who had nonetheless soiled themselves through 
acceptance of a French honour, like the Légion d’Honneur. Class three, 
finally, contained unreformed Bonapartists who were deemed ‘completely 
French’ in their outlook.” These distinctions resemble those identified 
in Gilliatt’s theoretical book, between what he calls ‘collaborators’, who 
are basically intermediaries between occupier and the occupied, and 
‘collaborationists’, defined as ideological allies who genuinely believe 
in the political agenda of the occupying power.” 
Of course, 
difficulties inevitably arise over trying to distinguish 
between disinterested, apolitical service in order to mitigate the worst 
effects of occupation and full ideological commitment. However, arguably 

<<<PDFPAGE 93>>>
Michael Rowe 
75 
this had not been the case in earlier periods, but was a result of the 
ideological divisions created by the French Revolution. During previous 
occupations in Europe - 
for example, during the Franco-Austrian 
occupation of the Prussian Rhineland during the Seven Years War — it 
was easy for public servants dispassionately to exercise their functions in 
an apolitical way: after all, no ideological gulf separated the occupying 
powers from the occupied enemy. This changed after 1789, and there 
was no escaping politics under French occupation in the 1790s. The 
first wave of revolutionaries were proselytisers, seeking to spread their 
principles across Europe. Obviously, they viewed local officials as being 
crucial in furthering their agenda through, for example, the enforcement 
of the revolutionary calendar, the erection of liberty trees, imposition of 
police restrictions on public religious practices, and so on. 
Very quickly, therefore, Rhinelanders under French occupation in the 
1790s, and especially those shouldering public responsibilities, found 
themselves in a quandary. On the one side, they faced the French 
occupation. Quite apart from treating them more like conquered subjects 
than liberated brothers, and extracting vast resources from them, these 
authorities demanded public displays of ideological adherence to the 
Revolution. On the other side, the princes, who had fled across the 
Rhine in the face of the French invasion, joined with the Holy Roman 
Emperor in issuing threats against collaboration. How did Rhinelanders 
respond to these conflicting pressures? 
With respect to the princes, who had betrayed their lack of Landes- 
patriotismus through their flight across the Rhine, many Rhinelanders 
responded in a vein similar to the inhabitants of the Channel Islands 
one-and-a-half-centuries later, when confronted with a similar challenge: 
with a great deal of bitterness and resentment to those preaching to 
them from a position of safety. In October 1794, officials in the occupied 
Electorate of Trier, responding to earlier threats against collaboration 
issued by the exiled government from across the Rhine, gave vent to 
their frustration: the officials claamed they were motivated only by love 
for their sovereign and their ‘Fatherland’ (Vaterland), that the Elector, or 
rather, his evil advisers, were placing them in the impossible position of 
having to expose themselves to either retribution from the French or 
the government-in-exile, that this was unjust, and that if they resigned 
from their public responsibilities, other less scrupulous elements would 
take over. The officials concluded their statement with the bitter, if 
disingenuous, observation that the warning against collaboration must 
have been drafted without the Elector’s knowledge, as its outrageous 
contents questioned the loyalty of officials working under French 

<<<PDFPAGE 94>>>
76 
Resistance, Collaboration or Third Way? 
occupation. The warning and threats, they continued, had arrived as 
a bolt from the blue. Whilst they were being showered by French 
bombs and howitzer shells, they had at least expected sympathy and 
moral 
support from those sheltering behind 
fortifications 
on the 
opposite bank of the Rhine!** Similar resentment existed in the other 
French-occupied territories. Johann Adolf Kopstadt of Cleves, writing 
during the Restoration, noted how the inhabitants of his city had been 
abandoned by members of the Prussian élite on the eve of the French 
occupation. These acted purely out of their own interest, and not of that 
of the city.”> Such behaviour by the old-régime rulers only reinforced the 
view that they were essentially absentee landlords whose own interests 
were not synonymous with those of the Rhenish cities and the Rhenish 
Lander. Hence they did not possess the moral authority to call for 
resistance. Rather, the interests of the Lander and cities — true patriotism — 
demanded some form of engagement with the French occupation, if 
only to prevent worse. 
Of course, there were many other motives for collaboration other 
than either the extremes of ideological commitment to the French 
Revolution or, alternatively, a patriotic desire to act in the best interests 
of the community. Some of these motives were revealed in an investiga- 
tion into collaboration conducted by the government of the Electorate 
of Mainz following the temporary expulsion of the French from Mainz 
in early 1793.*° The survey revealed that for many, ‘collaboration’ 
stemmed from pragmatic, not ideological, considerations. Fear and 
peer pressure were crucial in governing behaviour, especially amongst 
groups particularly vulnerable to pressure from the occupying forces: 
those in public employ, dependants on public relief, and unpopular 
minority groups traditionally dependent upon the authorities 
for 
protection, like the Jews. Yet others were less motivated by pressures than 
by the commercial opportunities that were presented by occupation: 
tavern owners, who displayed revolutionary symbols in order to attract 
lucrative custom from French soldiers, for example. As in other examples 
that could be drawn from other lands and eras, collaboration (and 
indeed its opposite, resistance), could be motivated by a plethora of 
considerations. 
The revolutionary decade gave way to the Napoleonic period in 
November 1799, when General Bonaparte launched the Brumairian 
coup that terminated the Directory and instituted the Consulate. The 
new French régime faced massive challenges in the occupied German 
territories when it came to power, but it is fair to say that it mastered 
most of them relatively quickly.”” These challenges included the need 

<<<PDFPAGE 95>>>
Michael Rowe 
77 
to support a large occupation army at the expense of an exhausted 
region, which meant a continuation of the crushing burden on the 
native population. This, combined with a lack of legitimacy enjoyed 
by French rule, undermined administration in the territories. Both 
problems — the legitimacy deficit and deployment of an occupation 
army — were solved at a stroke by Napoleon’s victory in the War of the 
Second Coalition. This removed the need to station a vast army in 
the Rhineland to counter the Habsburgs, and instead allowed for the 
redeployment of forces for the ongoing struggle against the British. 
Victory also resulted in the Treaty of Lunéville (9 February 1801). This 
was of significance for the occupation, in that it legalized French rule in 
the Rhineland.** This was of no mean importance in a region whose 
political culture and traditions of conflict resolution had become 
increasingly legalistic in the eighteenth century. Indeed, respect for 
imperial law had been a key ingredient of the Reichspatriotismus that 
remained strong in the Rhineland to the bitter end. Lunéville, 
at 
a stroke, neutralized this strong alternative focus of loyalty. 
Victory alone, however, was insufficient to consolidate direct French 
rule over the new German departments. Lunéville might have removed 
the competing focus of allegiance represented by the Empire. That 
represented by the other power with universalistic pretensions, the 
Roman Catholic Church, remained. However, 
this too was largely 
resolved by the Concordat, concluded between Napoleon and Pius VII, 
and published on 18 April 1802. Certainly, problems remained on the 
religious front: the dissolution of most Rhenish monasteries that was 
rubber-stamped by the Concordat produced a large number of embittered 
and impoverished ex-regular clergy who formed a constituency opposed 
to French rule. On the plus side, the secularization of monastic and 
other church lands, and their auctioning off to wealthy Rhinelanders, 
produced another constituency with a vested interest in the preservation 
of at least this aspect of French rule.” 
Napoleon overcame other challenges in solidifying French rule. One 
was the attitude of Frenchmen themselves. The approximately 150 000 
French troops stationed in the Rhineland at any one time in the 1790s 
had not treated its inhabitants as anything other than a conquered 
people. This had not initially been so, but attitudes had hardened over 
the winter of 1792-93 when it became clear that they would not, as 
expected, be welcomed as liberators. All armies suffer from a degree 
of indiscipline, but this appears to have been especially the case with 
the revolutionary army of the 1790s.%° At least under the Terror, 
soldiers had to an extent been kept in check by the fearsome People’s 

<<<PDFPAGE 96>>>
78 Resistance, Collaboration or Third Way? 
Representatives-on-Mission. Following Thermidor, however, no effective 
civilian check existed on the field armies in the occupied territories. 
This changed under the Consulate. 
This statement might appear to go against accepted wisdom that 
Napoleonic France was highly militarized. In many respects, and 
compared to modern western democracies, it no doubt was. However, it 
is possible to interpret things slightly differently. Take, for example, the 
elegant uniforms and flamboyant ceremonial that were the hallmarks 
of the Napoleonic prefectoral administration, introduced in 1800. 
Prefects, subprefects, even humble mayors, not to mention their adjuncts 
and municipal police officers, as well as tax officials, and even, eventually, 
the presidents of consultative assemblies and electoral colleges, were 
prescribed their own unique uniform. Different colours marked out 
different branches of the administration, with the more braid indicating 
higher rank. At one level, this might be dismissed as the kind of show 
often associated with upstart régimes lacking historical legitimacy. 
It might also be interpreted as the introduction of military values 
into civilian administration. Or, and this interpretation seems to fit the 
evidence available from the Rhineland, it could be seen as one way of 
restoring the prestige of civilian officials in the eyes of the population. 
For, as some senior senators and councillors of state noted on their fact 
finding tours to the new Rhenish departments, the majority of inhabit- 
ants judged the position of an individual in the hierarchy according to 
his appearance. They would not respect a shabbily dressed mayor or 
subprefect, especially when forced aside by the passing carriage of an 
army Officer in resplendent uniform. Local notables, Napoleon recognized, 
would not collaborate by assuming official responsibilities until their 
status was visibly raised. Official etiquette might be thought of as a 
subordinate issue, but judging from the volume of paperwork devoted 
to it, it was seen as essential. The representational role of the chief civilian 
administrators in the departments, the prefects, and the struggle some 
of them waged to put the military in its place, should not be overlooked 
when assessing civil/military relations in Napoleonic France. It is a lesson 
that other occupying powers attempting to restore the primacy of civilian 
rule would be well advised to study.*! 
The establishment of peace with the other powers, the legitimization 
of French rule in international law, the Concordat, the sale of secularized 
properties, the assertion of the primacy of civilian administration, the 
restoration of the prestige of public posts including those likely to be 
occupied by natives, not to mention the restoration of law and order by 
the newly introduced gendarmerie: all this encouraged Rhinelanders to 

<<<PDFPAGE 97>>>
Michael Rowe 
79 
make their peace with the new régime. Many went further, and sub- 
sequently accepted official positions within the new hierarchy by the 
end of the Consulate. By the time of the establishment of the Empire in 
1804, Napoleon had succeeded in making French rule acceptable, if not 
popular, for the overwhelming majority of Rhinelanders. 
There was another, more profound reason, for the successful consoli- 
dation of Napoleonic rule on the Rhine. Napoleon once sneered at the 
Habsburgs for having out-of-date ideas; but, as Blanning observes, at 
least they had some.** Arguably, the very ideological flexibility - or, 
more unkindly put, lack of principle - inherent in Bonapartism was 
a key to its success (at least in the short-to-medium term). A hallmark of 
French government in the 1790s had been its tendency to divide 
individuals into either allies, defined narrowly as those who subscribed 
to the political agenda of whatever régime happened to be in power, or 
enemies, composed of everybody else. The politics of the short-lived 
‘sister republic’ of Mainz — the first modern republic on German soil — is 
illustrative of how this kind of governing principle operated when 
exported to the occupied territories. Its inhabitants were presented with 
two registers, one of which they were compelled to sign: a red one, 
denoting support for the freedom promised by the French, and a black 
one, decorated with chains and denoting the slavery of the Old Regime. 
Proposals for moderate reform, drafted by representatives of the guilds, 
were dismissed as counter-revolutionary; indeed, their author - an 
individual who would later serve as mayor of Mainz under Napoleon - 
was expelled from the city for his efforts.°* 
Bonapartism, in contrast, was not about confronting people with 
stark ideological choices. Nor was it about deliberately provocative 
symbols that simply provided people with opportunities to register 
their opposition to the régime. The flavour of the new régime became 
apparent soon after Brumaire, when the government ordered that only 
those public festivals on which popular opinion was ‘unanimous’ 
would henceforth be celebrated. Liberty trees were quietly removed 
from those towns and villages where they had caused most offence.** 
Experience in Corsica, Italy and Egypt had taught Napoleon that the 
world was not composed solely of people occupying extreme opposite 
poles marked ‘collaborator’ or ‘resister’, but that the majority preferred to 
position themselves in the spectrum in between; and, within the system 
he constructed, all but the most extreme and dangerous opponents 
could find their place. Aristocrats who had fled in the 1790s were 
allowed to return, so long as they adopted French citizenship. Even if 
they hated the new régime, and refused all dealings with it, they were 

<<<PDFPAGE 98>>>
80 
Resistance, Collaboration or Third Way? 
left in peace to sulk in self-imposed internal exile. At the other end of 
the spectrum, enthusiastic supporters were encouraged to compete for 
Napoleon’s favour by serving the Empire in a military or civilian cap- 
acity. Their reward might include membership of the Légion d’Honneur, 
elevation into the imperial nobility, a bursary for a son to enter a lycée, 
or nomination to the Senate. 
Collaboration does not imply necessarily a relationship between 
equals. It does, however, imply that the potential collaborator possesses 
something the occupier wants. Usually, if not always, the existence of 
collaborators allows for cheaper government than can be supplied if the 
entire administrative structure and personnel need to be shipped in from 
outside. There can never have been a power in history so secure in its 
omnipotence that it has not attempted to enlist the services of collab- 
orators. As John Breuilly has observed on the subject, even the Nazis 
sought out collaborators to help run the death camps.*° At another level, 
the British, in the nineteenth century, became experts in running the 
largest empire in history on the cheap by going through local élites.°° 
Obviously, Rhinelanders were in a stronger bargaining position than 
concentration camp inmates, but how indispensable were they, and 
what was Napoleon willing to pay for their services? On what did the 
price depend? It depended in large measure on the nature of the élites 
that he confronted. The Rhineland, though a region of limited size, had 
previously contained a large number of polities, each with its own élite. 
These differed in nature, so that in microcosm the region represents in 
certain respects the kind of diversity that one might expect to encounter 
in a much larger area — even an entire continent. Research on élites 
under Napoleonic rule suggests that from the occupiers’ perspective, there 
needs to be just the right level of social cohesion amongst the élites of an 
occupied area for the administration to operate most effectively. Too little 
social cohesion 
— 
social disintegration, 
as for example, Napoleon 
encountered in Spain — is disastrous. In such areas the occupier might 
identify and even win over the élite. The trouble is, the élite is not 
attached to anything, and is thus useless. Rather than provide support, 
it itself needs military protection.*’ In extreme cases, the entire élite 
might be destroyed, or emigrate en masse. This almost appears to have 
happened in Cleves, at the northern end of the Rhineland, a former 
Hohenzollern possession, and the one area where the local élite did 
form an attachment to a dynastic state — in this case, Prussia — that 
superseded attachment to the Land. A more dramatic example of the 
élite simply emigrating confronted Napoleon when he occupied Moscow 
in 1812. 

<<<PDFPAGE 99>>>
Michael Rowe 
81 
At the other extreme is a case of complete social cohesion amongst 
the élite. Such was the case in the former imperial city of Cologne. It 
possessed an élite that had successfully integrated new elements over 
previous decades, that had no rivals, and that was internally cohesive 
thanks to marriage ties and a basic union of interests.** In such a situation, 
the élite was in a strong position, as the French were presented with no 
alternatives other than bringing in their own men from outside, and 
that was always expensive. A more dramatic example of such social 
cohesion might be found in the Tyrol.’ From the French point of view 
the best environment was like that found in Aachen, another imperial 
city but one that had not been especially successful in incorporating 
new elements — notably, Protestant businessmen — into its élite in the 
eighteenth century.*® Here, the French could outflank the existing 
political élite by promoting new elements into positions of authority 
who then owed their status entirely to the French — a variation of divide 
and rule. 
Napoleon recognized the importance of propaganda in encouraging 
collaboration. Jean Tulard possibly goes too far in writing that the 
French cultural imperialism, as represented by the eighteenth-century 
Enlightenment, paved the way for the military imperialism of Napoleon; 
the present consensus 
denies the exclusively French nature of the 
Enlightenment, but instead emphasizes the unique characteristics of the 
Enlightenment - or better still, ‘enlightenments’ — in Europe’s diverse 
nations and regions.*! That accepted, one can nonetheless adopt Jacque 
Ellul’s formulation that the loose set of ideas commonly associated 
with the Enlightenment that circulated in much of educated Europe 
in the decades before Napoleon represented a form of indirect or 
sociological propaganda: ‘the penetration of an ideology by means of its 
sociological context’, something that informed not simply opinion, but 
lifestyle.” This ‘sociological’ propaganda was subsequently built upon 
by direct Napoleonic propaganda, which sought to portray France as 
the sole repository of enlightened progress, and the enemies of 
France as backward or anarchic. Hence, the French authorities in the 
Rhineland went out of their way to associate themselves with agricultural 
improvement societies, statistical surveys, infrastructure projects, the 
restoration of ancient monuments such as the famous Porta Nigra in 
Trier or the cathedral in Aachen, and so on.* Certainly, some of these 
policies served directly to strengthen France, especially those related 
to attempts to achieve autarchy as a means of destroying the British. 
However, there was more to it than that. Rhinelanders ‘collaborating’ 
with the French authorities by, for example, providing some of the raw 

<<<PDFPAGE 100>>>
82 
Resistance, Collaboration or Third Way? 
data that went into the compilation of the great departmental topo- 
graphical descriptions prepared under the Consulate, could congratulate 
themselves not so much for collaborating with a foreign occupier, but 
rather for contributing to the progress of humanity as a whole. Napoleonic 
patronage of Freemasonry can also be seen in this context. Lodges were 
founded in most major Rhenish cities during the course of the eighteenth 
century, but some at least had suffered harassment by the Old-Regime 
authorities, especially in the security crackdown ordered following the 
outbreak of the French Revolution. Lodges were refounded following 
the French occupation, and integrated into the Napoleonic Masonic 
structure after Brumaire. Rhenish freemasons could view themselves as 
favoured children of the Emperor, with whom they were collaborating 
in encouraging enlightened progress.** 
It was easy enough for the élite to collaborate with the French in an 
area of mutual benefit, such as economic improvement, or small-pox 
vaccination. What about where interests diverged? This was the case in 
areas such as taxation, which had been lower under the Old Regime, mil- 
itary conscription, which had not existed before the French period, and 
over the tariff barrier the French extended to the Rhine in 1798, which 
disrupted traditional trade flows. Rhenish resistance to the tariff barrier 
in the form of smuggling and customs fraud reached epic proportions, 
as has been demonstrated 
in particular by Roger Dufraisse, 
and 
implicated a whole cross section of society, from wealthy merchants and 
bankers to humble porters and boaters, and from tavern owners to pub- 
lic officials.*° Should we categorize this as resistance to French rule? 
Napoleon certainly viewed it as a crime against the state: not only did 
customs fraud deny the treasury substantial revenue, but the smuggling 
of illegal wares threatened to undermine the strategy for defeating 
Britain. Hence, its categorization as one of those crimes to be dealt with 
by special non-jury courts, crimes that included forgery, attacks against 
purchasers of biens nationaux, and armed insurgency. Beyond that, 
smuggling, as one official wrote, was not simply a crime in itself, but 
aphenomenon that was 
so widespread and involved such a large 
proportion of the population that it undermined all forms of authority.*° 
But can we see it as a form of resistance against the French? 
We return to the definition of resistance provided by Peter Davies: 
‘...an act of resistance was, basically, anything that, in the mind of 
the person or group executing the act, felt like an act of resistance’. 
Certainly, smuggling felt like resisting the law: it was something that 
had to be conducted illicitly, under cover of darkness, not out in the 
open. But did it feel like resisting the French? Admittedly, the vast 

<<<PDFPAGE 101>>>
Michael Rowe 
83 
majority of the customs men - the despised douaniers — were native 
Frenchmen; 
the special customs courts eventually established by 
Napoleon also contained a preponderance of native Frenchmen, unlike 
the ordinary courts which counted larger numbers of Rhinelanders.* 
So, on the face of it, smuggling was something that appears to have 
pitted Rhinelanders against Frenchmen. However, sources then remind 
us that smuggling involved not only Rhinelanders, but also native 
Frenchmen, including even high officials and military officers. Indeed, 
even the commander of the Gendarmerie in the Rhenish departments, 
Georgeon, was implicated, whilst on another occasion a French military 
officer involved ordered his men to fire at douaniers who were interfering 
in an operation.“ Ironically, smuggling was something that Frenchmen 
and Germans could collaborate in. In that sense, perversely, it might have 
assisted in the long-term aim of integrating the new departments into 
France. The most that can be conceded is that smuggling represented 
‘functional resistance’: it was not motivated primarily by the desire to 
undermine French rule, but by profit. 
The same conclusion can be reached with respect to opposition to 
military conscription, which manifested itself as draft evasion and 
desertion. Fortunately, we have quite good statistics on the incidence of 
both draft evasion and desertion within the entire French Empire, 
broken down by year and department.*” These statistics, provided by the 
general direction for conscription, allow us to build up a map illustrating 
where resistance to the draft was most serious. The Rhenish departments, 
though newly annexed and though they had never experienced con- 
scription before, appear amongst the most reliable departments from the 
government’s point of view. After a slow start, they quickly provided 
an above average quota of troops in relation to their population.°° It is 
estimated that in all, 80 000 Rhinelanders served in Napoleon’s armies 
at one time or another, representing about 30 per cent of the age groups 
concerned. Draft dodging was slightly above the national average, but 
desertion below. The one really worrying statistic, from the government’s 
perspective, was the tiny proportion of draft dodgers actually arrested, 
at least in the years covered by the statistics, which end in 1810: the 
average in the Rhenish departments was 6-8 per cent and 11-20 per cent 
for the Empire as a whole; and, as Alan Forrest correctly notes, draft 
dodging was less about individual choice and more about social cohesion: 
for it to succeed, it required community support.*! The statistics suggest 
this was provided in the Rhineland. 
Reference to ‘collaboration’ and ‘resistance’ suggests a relationship 
between two parties: the people, however defined, and some form of 

<<<PDFPAGE 102>>>
84 
Resistance, Collaboration or Third Way? 
authority, be it a government or occupying military power. It is recog- 
nized that the people are not homogeneous, but composed of numerous 
individuals and communities, and that these are positioned at various 
points on the spectrum between the extremes of collaboration and 
resistance. Nor, however, should we assume that governments or states 
are homogeneous. What do we mean when referring to the ‘French’, or 
‘Napoleonic state’, or ‘government’? After all, there were within the 
Napoleonic administration several, competing bureaucratic hierarchies: 
the customs administration, subordinate to the finance ministry in 
Paris; the regular administrative chain, running from mayors and 
adjuncts at the bottom, via the subprefects and prefects to the interior 
minister at the top; there was another parallel hierarchy running up to 
the police minister, and something analogous subordinate to the justice 
ministry. In many respects, the Catholic Church, with its ‘mayors in 
black’ (parish priests) and ‘prefects in purple’ (bishops) represented just 
one more Napoleonic hierarchy, subordinate to the Ministry of Cults. 
Collectively, these administrations represented the French state, but 
not individually.°? 
How do we rate Rhenish opposition to one or two of these adminis- 
trations (the customs administration and indirect tax collection agencies 
were, predictably, the least popular) coupled with support for another (and 
here the judiciary should be highlighted)? Does such a combination 
add up to resistance, or collaboration? 
This was essentially the point that one eminent Rhinelander, Georg 
Friedrich Rebmann, made when accused after 1814 by German nation- 
alists of collaborating with the French. Rebmann had served as a senior 
judge under Napoleon. Following Napoleon’s defeat, he was employed 
by the newly installed Bavarian authorities as a writer and journalist to 
counter the Prussian-backed nationalist press that attacked not only 
French rule in the Rhineland, but also those German states such as 
Bavaria that had allied themselves with Napoleon within the framework 
of the Confederation of the Rhine. In a balanced way, Rebmann listed 
the pros and cons of French rule. The former included the abolition of 
the vestiges of feudalism, the removal of fiscal privileges, state encour- 
agement of agriculture, and the civil and commercial codes. More 
generally, Rebmann argued that Napoleonic rule had been essential to 
the southern and western part of Germany, as it had allowed this area to 
modernize its antiquated structures. This was in contrast to Prussia, he 
admitted, where Napoleonic domination had resulted only in oppression 
and exploitation. Amongst the disadvantages of Napoleonic rule in 
the Rhineland listed by Rebmann were the increasingly authoritarian 

<<<PDFPAGE 103>>>
Michael Rowe 
85 
tendencies of the régime, as manifested in the penal code and the 
special non-jury courts.*? 
Rebmann’s background as an eminent judge gave his comments on 
Napoleonic legal institutions 
great weight. Of all the institutions 
bequeathed by Napoleon to the Rhineland, none, arguably, was more 
important than the law codes and the hierarchy of courts that enforced 
them. Defence of this legacy was something that Rhenish liberals united 
around throughout the first half of the nineteenth century, leading 
a socially broad-based coalition against attempts by the Prussian succes- 
sor régime to replace it with its more antiquated alternative. In this, they 
proved successful: the French codes remained the basis of law in the 
Rhineland until replaced by a new all-German code at the beginning of 
the twentieth century.%* 
Rhinelanders’ support for the Napoleonic code opened them up to 
accusations by later German nationalist historians like Treitschke of 
somehow being Francophile, and disloyal to the German nation.** The 
positive reception given to the codes does seem convincing evidence of 
Rhenish acceptance of French rule: surely it justifies locating the region 
securely within the inner empire.®*° Yet, there is an alterative explan- 
ation. Firstly, we need to consider what Rhinelanders liked about the 
Napoleonic legal system. This is not so difficult, thanks to a thorough 
investigation conducted by the Prussian authorities after 1815. The 
investigative commission solicited the opinion not only of Rhenish 
jurists, but of people more widely. This revealed that the French system 
was popular not so much because of the contents of the civil code or 
penal code, but rather because of the procedures of the French courts: 
the oral, public proceedings in front of juries, the principle of equality 
before the law, and the independence of the judiciary from political 
interference. Of course, what the Prussians were investigating was only 
part of the legal system established by Napoleon; they were not investi- 
gating the various special tribunals that he had established to try those 
crimes that were of peculiar interest to the state, and where juries 
might acquit. Crimes such as forgery of official documents, fraud in the 
conscription process, and smuggling, for example. These courts, which 
operated without juries and generally included military officers amongst 
those sitting in judgement, collapsed immediately upon the French 
army’s evacuation of the Rhineland in 1814. They had never been 
popular. Thanks to Napoleon’s defeat, the region had been fortuitously 
shorn of those elements of Napoleonic governance — not just the special 
courts, but also the customs men and special police commissioners, to 
name some — that had caused most public disquiet. What remained 

<<<PDFPAGE 104>>>
86 
Resistance, Collaboration or Third Way? 
intact was only a part of the Napoleonic edifice, but it was the most 
benign part that quite naturally attracted popular support.” 
Of course Prussophile German nationalists like Joseph Gorres, or 
Ernst Moritz Arndt, or indeed, the Freiherr vom Stein, tended to overlook 
such subtle distinctions in their hatred of the French, and condemned 
anything emanating from Napoleonic despotism. In their eagerness to 
de-Napoleonize, as Rebmann put it — ‘Entnapoleonisierung’ — they threatened 
to throw out the baby with the bathwater. Those, like Rebmann and many 
other Rhinelanders who supported aspects of the Napoleonic inheritance 
faced condemnation as Francophile traitors. This label, to an extent, stuck, 
being repeated by representatives of the Borussian school like Treitschke, 
writing in the hyperpatriotic (and anti-French) atmosphere that prevailed 
in the final decades of the nineteenth century, and by a later generation 
of historian, in the years after the First World War. In conclusion, 
Rhinelanders can neither be classified as collaborators nor resisters. Instead, 
they treated Napoleonic rule as an a la carte menu: they picked and 
chose, selecting those Napoleonic institutions and innovations that they 
liked best, and opposing the others. In so doing, they were motivated 
by hard-nosed self interest, not broader ideological considerations. 
Notes 
1. S. Gilliatt, An Exploration of the Dynamics of Collaboration and Non-Resistance 
(Lewiston, NY, 2000), p. 131. 
2. P. Davies, France and the Second World War. Occupation, Collaboration and 
Resistance (London, 2001), p. 49. 
3. For example, L. Taylor, Between Resistance and Collaboration. Popular Protest in 
Northern France, 
1940-45 (Basingstoke, 2000), passim. 
4. Though it should be noted, at this point, that a strand of the current German 
historiography of the Holy Roman Empire now views that entity less as an 
incoherent, loose collection of essentially sovereign territories and more as a 
‘state’ in its own right — indeed, a precursor of the German nation state. See 
especially G. Schmidt, ‘Das frihneuzeitliche Reich - komplementares Staat 
oder foéderative Nation’, Historische Zeitschrift, CCLXxIm, no. 2 (October, 2001), 
pp. 371-99; and H. Schilling, ‘Reichsstaat und friihneuzeitliche Nation der 
Deutschen oder teilmodernisiertes Reichssystem: Uberlegungen zu Charakter 
und Aktualitat des Alten Reiches’, Historische Zeitschrift, CCLXXII, no. 2 (April, 
2001), pp. 377-95. 
5. For a brief survey of the territorial order in the pre-revolutionary Rhineland, see 
M. Rowe, From Reich to State: the Rhineland in the Revolutionary Age, 1780-1830 
(Cambridge, 2003), pp. 14-15. 
6. This would become dramatically apparent when the French revolutionaries 
attempted to impose their new republican calendar and festivals on the region 
in the late 1790s. For more on this, cf. M. Rowe, ‘Forging “New-Frenchmen”: 
state propaganda in the Rhineland, 1794-1814’, in B. Taithe and T. Thornton 
(eds), Propaganda (Stroud, 1999), pp. 115-30. 

<<<PDFPAGE 105>>>
10. 
ae 
12. 
13% 
14. 
iS: 
16. 
Michael Rowe 
87 
. The current historiography of the Holy Roman Empire (referred to in note 4) 
marks the culmination of a longer process of rehabilitation that began at 
least as early as the 1960s. For a review of the early revisionism, cf. G. Strauss, 
‘The Holy Roman Empire revisited’, Central European History, Xi, no. 4 
(December, 1978), pp. 290-301. 
. For the military potential of the Reich, see P. Wilson, German Armies: War and 
German Politics, 1648-1806 (London, 1998). 
. Plenty of examples of the civic pride (and indeed arrogance) of Cologne’s 
burghers are provided by J. Hashagen, Das Rheinland und die franzésische 
Herrschaft: Beitrage zur Charakteristik ihres Gegensatzes (Bonn, 1908), pp. 9-24, 
29-45, 47-50, 72. 
For a relatively accessible indication of the kind of role imperial institu- 
tions played in the preservation of urban privilege, see C. Friedrichs, 
‘Urban conflicts and the imperial constitution in seventeenth-century 
Germany’, Journal of Modern History, Lvi (1986), supplement, pp. 98-123. 
For much 
more 
detailed 
examinations 
of the 
imperial 
courts, 
see 
B. Diestelkamp, Rechtsfalle aus dem alten Reich: denkwiirdige Prozesse vor dem 
Reichskammergericht (Munich, 1995), and also H. Gross, Empire and Sovereignty: 
a History of the Public Law Literature in the Holy Roman Empire, 1599-1804 
(Chicago, 1975). 
T. Nipperdey, Germany from Napoleon to Bismarck 
1800-1866 (Dublin, 1996), 
pp. 272-3. The German national anthem of Hoffmann von Fallersleben was 
also a product of this crisis. 
U. Mollney, Norddeutsche Presse um 1800. Zeitschriften und Zeitungen in 
Flensburg, 
Braunschweig, Hannover und Schaumburg-Lippe 
im Zeitalter der 
Franzosischen Revolution (Bielefeld, 1996). For a classic analysis of the rise of 
the public sphere, see J. Habermas, Strukturwandel der Offentlichkeit (6th edn, 
Neuwied, 1986). See also the works of H. Bodeker, and in particular, H. Bodeker, 
‘Prozesse und Strukturen politischer Bewuftseinsbildung der deutschen 
Aufklarung’, in H. Bodeker and U. Hermann (eds), Aufklarung als Politisierung — 
Politisierung als Aufkladrung (Hamburg, 1987), pp. 10-31. 
Frederick’s victory over the French at Rossbach in 1757 appears to have had 
an especially big impact throughout Germany. Cf. D. Showalter, The Wars of 
Frederick the Great (London and New York, 1996), p. 191. 
Two recent contributions include, W. Hardtwig, ‘Vom Elitebewuftseins zur 
Massenbewegung. Friihformen des Nationalismus in Deutschland 1500-1800’, 
in W. Hardtwig (ed.), Nationalismus und Biirgerkultur in Deutschland 1500-1914. 
Ausgewdhite Aufsdtze (Gottingen, 1994), pp. 34-54; Winfried Schulze, ‘Sua 
cuique nationi discrimina: nationales Denken und nationale Vorurteile in der 
Friuhen Neuzeit’, in S. Krim and W. Zirbs (eds), Die Deutschen und die Andern: 
Patriotismus, Nationalgefiihl und Nationalismus 
in der deutschen Geschichte 
(Munich, 1997), pp. 32-66. 
M. Schnettger, ‘Impero romano — Impero germanico: Italienische Perspektiven 
auf das Reich in der Friihen Neuzeit’, in M. Schnettger (ed.), Imperium 
Romanum - Irregulare Corpus — Teutscher Reichs-Staat: das Alte Reich im Verstandnis 
der Zeitgenossen und der Historiographie (Mainz, 2002), pp. 53-75. 
Readers of English are well-served when it comes to the Rhineland in the 
1790s, with T.C.W. Blanning, The French Revolution in Germany: Occupation 
and Resistance in the Rhineland, 1792-1802 (Oxford, 1983). 

<<<PDFPAGE 106>>>
88 
We 
18. 
i 
20; 
Pai fe 
28. 
Jays) 
31 
32 
34. 
Resistance, Collaboration or Third Way? 
The Rhenish press’s initial response to news of the Bastille’s fall is well docu- 
mented in J. Hansen (ed.), Quellen zur Geschichte des Rheinlandes im Zeitalter 
der Franzosischen Revolution, 1780-1801 (Bonn, 1931-8), 1, pp. 380-S. 
Blanning, French Revolution in Germany, p. 84. 
Hansen, Quellen, 11, pp. 668-9, 728-32, 848-SO0. 
Electoral order no. 2398, 14 July 1794, in J. Scotti, Sammlung der Gesetze und 
Verordnungen, welche in den ehemaligen Herzogthiimern Jiilich, Cleve, und Berg, 
und in dem vormaligen Grossherzogthum Berg tiber Gegenstdnde der Landeshoheit, 
Verfassung, Verwaltung und Rechtspflege ergangen sind. Vom Jahr 1475 bis zu der 
am 15. April eingetretenen K6niglich Preufsischen Landesregierung (Dusseldorf, 
1821), I, p. 742. 
. Hansen, Quellen, 11, pp. 618-21. 
. Hauptstaatsarchiv Diisseldorf (hereafter HStAD), Oberprasidium K6lIn, 1534. 
. Gilliatt, Dynamics of Collaboration, pp. 11, 14. 
. Hansen, Quellen, Il, pp. 280-2. 
. J.A. Kopstadt, Uber Kleve: in Briefen an einen Freund aus den Jahren 1811 und 
1814 (Frankfurt am Main, 1822), pp. viii-x. 
; 
. This investigation is brought to light by K. Wegert’s fascinating study, German 
Radicals Confront the Common People: Revolutionary Politics and Popular Politics 
1789-1849 (Mainz, 1992), pp. 26-37, upon which the remainder of this 
paragraph is based. 
The author is mindful of the danger of believing everything spouted by 
Napoleonic sources on the preceding Directory, a régime the new rulers of 
France had a vested interest in denigrating. That said, with respect to the 
occupied territories, and especially the Rhineland, the Consulate represented 
a definite improvement over what had preceded. For a positive assessment of 
the Directory’s achievements in France proper, see M. Lyons, France under the 
Directory (Cambridge, 1975); and, more recently, M. Crook, Napoleon Comes 
to Power: Democracy and Dictatorship in Revolutionary France, 1795-1804 
(Cardiff, 1998). 
Previous treaties referring to the Rhineland, such as Basel (1795) and Campo 
Formio (1797), were concluded by the French Republic and individual 
German princes with an interest in the region. Lunéville, however, bound the 
Holy Roman Empire, the body with ultimate sovereignty in the Rhineland. 
Hence the agreement’s importance. 
There has been a considerable amount of research into the secularization 
process in the Rhineland. Especially important, in terms of the sheer amount 
of scholarship it is built upon, 
is W. Schieder (ed.), Sdkularisation und 
Mediatisierung in den vier rheinischen Departements 1803-1813: Edition des 
Datenmaterials der zur verdussernden Nationalgiiter (Boppard am Rhein, 1991). 
. For the endemic indiscipline in the French army in the Rhineland in the 
1790s, see Blanning, French Revolution in Germany, pp. 15-16, 93-8, 123. 
Rowe, Reich to State, pp. 92-3. 
. T.C.W. Blanning, Joseph II (London, 1994), p. 203. 
. Much has been published on the Republic of Mainz. One of the best books 
remains F. Dumont, Die Mainzer Republik von 1792/93: Studien zur Revolution- 
ierung in Rheinhessen und der Pfalz (Alzey, 1982). 
For the relative 
success 
of Napoleonic propaganda 
in the Rhineland, 
see Rowe, ‘Forging “New-Frenchmen”. For Napoleonic propaganda more 

<<<PDFPAGE 107>>>
Bo. 
36. 
37h 
38. 
89: 
40. 
41. 
42. 
43. 
44, 
4S. 
46. 
47. 
48. 
49. 
50. 
Michael Rowe 
89 
generally, consult R. Holtman, Napoleonic Propaganda (Baton Rouge, Louisiana, 
1950). 
J. Breuilly, ‘Napoleonic Germany and State-formation’, in M. Rowe (ed.), 
Collaboration and Resistance in Napoleonic Europe: State-Formation in an Age of 
Upheaval, c.1800-1815 (Basingstoke, 2003), p. 125. 
S. Potter, ‘British Overseas Expansion’, in S. Ellis (ed.), Empires and States in 
European Perspective (Pisa, 2002), pp. 125-6. 
In Spain, as Esdaile demonstrates, the degree of social disintegration also 
impeded organized resistance to the French. Cf. C. Esdaile, ‘War and Politics 
in Spain, 1808-1814’, The Historical Journal, XXx1 (1988). 
W. Herborn, ‘Der Graduierte Ratsherr. Zur Enticklung einer neuen Elite im 
Kolner Rat der friuhen Neuzeit’, in H. Schilling and H. Diederiks (eds), 
Buirgerliche Eliten in den Niederlanden und in Nordwestdeutschland: Studien zur 
Sozialgeschichte des europdischen Biirgertums im Mittelalter und in der Neuzeit 
(Cologne, 1985), pp. 337-74. 
Though even here there were underlying rural-urban tensions. Cf. F.G. Eyck, 
Loyal Rebels: Andreas Hofer and the Tyrolean Uprising of 1809 (Lanham, New York, 
1986), pp. 1-17, 27-35, 37-41, 68-9, 109, 158-9. 
M. Sobania, ‘Das Aachener Burgertum am Vorabend der Industrialisierung’, 
in L. Gall (ed.), Vom alten zum neuen Biirgertum. Die mitteleuropdische Stadt im 
Umbruch 1780-1820 (Munich, 1991), pp. 218-22. 
Cf. especially R. Porter and M. Teich (eds), The Enlightenment in National 
Context (Cambridge, 1981). 
J. Ellul, Propaganda: the Formation of Men’s Attitudes (New York, 1968), pp. 15, 
30, 62-70. 
The French did the same in the northern, Hanseatic departments, annexed 
in 1810. Cf. A. Joulia, ‘Der Departementalverein Ober-Ems (1812): ein Erbe der 
Aufklarung oder ein Produkt des napoleonischen Dirigismus?’, Osnabriicker 
Mitteilungen, LXXVIlI (1971), pp. 151-9. 
For more on this, cf. Rowe, Reich to State, pp. 139-42. Also, W. Dotzauer, 
Freimaurergesellschaften 
am 
Rhein: 
Aufgeklarte 
Sozietaten 
auf dem 
linken 
Rheinufer vom Ausgang des Ancien Régime bis zum Ende der napoleonischen 
Herrschaft (Wiesbaden, 1977). For the same theme, but with reference to one 
of the German satellite states, cf. H. Gurtler, Deutsche Freimaurer im Dienste 
napoleonischer Politik: die Freimaurer im Konigreich Westfalen 1807-1813 
(Struckum, 1988). 
R. Dufraisse, ‘La contrebande dans les départements réunis de la rive gauche 
du Rhin a l’époque napoléonienne’, Francia, 1 (1973), pp. 508-36. 
Ibid., pp. 513, 529-32. 
For the national balance within the Napoleonic judiciary, cf. $. Graumann, 
Franzosische 
Verwaltung am 
Niederrhein. 
Das Roérdepartement 1798-1814 
(Essen, 1990), pp. 182-8, 192-3. 
Dufraisse, ‘Contrebande’, pp. 519-25; J. Bourdon, ‘La Contrebande a la frontiére 
de l’Est en 1811, 1812, 1813’, Annales de l’Est, Sth series, 11, no. 4 (December, 
1951), pp. 273-305. 
G. Vallée, Le Compte Général de la conscription de A.A. Hargenvilliers (Paris, 
L937): 
For a more in-depth account of Napoleonic conscription in the Rhineland, 
and the opposition it provoked, cf. Rowe, From Reich to State, pp. 158-92. 

<<<PDFPAGE 108>>>
34. 
DOs 
56. 
ov. 
Resistance, Collaboration or Third Way? 
. A. Forrest, Conscripts and Deserters: the Army and French Society during the 
Revolution and Empire (Oxford, 1989), pp. 135-6. 
. F. Ponteil, Napoléon Ier et l’Organisation Autoritaire de la France (Paris, 1956), 
passim. 
. The above paragraph on Rebmann is based on K. Faber, Die Rheinlande 
zwischen Restauration und Revolution: Probleme der Rheinischen Geschichte von 
1814 bis 1848 im Spiegel der zeitgendssischen Publizistik (Wiesbaden, 1966), 
pp. 46-55. For more on Bavaria’s propaganda drive, designed to counter 
accusations in the Prussian-backed nationalist press that it and the other 
southern states had betrayed Germany through their allegiance to Napoleon, 
cf. W. Piereth, Bayerns Pressepolitik und die Neuordnung Deutschlands nach den 
Befreiungskriegen (Munich, 1999). 
M. Rowe, ‘The Napoleonic legacy in the Rhineland and the politics of reform 
in Restoration Prussia’, in D. Laven and L. Riall (eds), Napoleon’s Legacy: 
Problems of Government in Restoration Europe (Oxford, 2000), pp. 129-SO. 
H. von Treitschke, History of Germany in the Nineteenth Century (London, 
1915), pp. 31-2, 59, 73, 107, 138, 146, 149, 200-3, 219. 
For the concept of an inner and outer Napoleonic empire, cf. M. Broers, 
Europe under Napoleon 1799-1815 (London, 1996). 
For much more detail on all this, cf. part 111 of Rowe, From Reich to State, 
pp. 213-81. 

<<<PDFPAGE 109>>>
5 
Popular Resistance in Catalonia: 
Somatens and Miquelets, 1808-14 
Antonio Moliner Prada 
A strongly independent-minded region with long traditions of polit- 
ical, judicial and cultural autonomy, Catalonia entered the nineteenth 
century with a proud record of self-defence that was above all founded 
on the idea of the ‘people-in-arms’. Thus, at the heart of Catalan military 
organization lay two forces which were in essence composed of armed 
civilians. Of these the first were the miquelets — volunteers contracted 
in time of war for a certain period of time for permanent service on 
a province-wide basis who drew their name from the followers of the 
sixteenth-century Catalan solider of fortune, Miquel de Prats. As for 
the second, it consisted of the somatens 
—- men raised by ballot as 
a homeguard for service 
in their own 
localities alone who were 
expected always to be on the qui vive against danger (hence the name, 
somatén being a contraction of som atent - literally, ‘be alert’). The 
heart and soul of the war effort in the Catalan revolt of the 1640s and 
the later struggle against Phillip V, these forces had for obvious 
reasons disappeared for most of the eighteenth century. However, the 
special circumstances thrown up by the Revolutionary and Napoleonic 
Wars led to their revival. In the so-called guerra gran — the war against 
the Convention of 1793-95 — for example, the somatén reappeared, but 
we are here concerned only with the guerra del francés of 1808-14. In 
this struggle - the Catalan experience of the Peninsular War - the 
wheel turned full circle. The professional army having largely disinte- 
grated in the wake of Duhesme’s occupation of Barcelona, the Supreme 
Junta of Catalonia, which was constituted at Lérida on 18 June 1808, 
promoted both the formation of tercios de miquelets and a general 
somatén, whilst similar moves had already been witnessed on the part 
of the local juntas de corregiment. Thereafter, meanwhile, both forces 
were tolerated and made use of by the military, whilst their actions 
91 

<<<PDFPAGE 110>>>
92 
Popular Resistance in Catalonia 
often overlapped with those of the guerrilla bands that also appeared 
in Catalonia.! 
At the beginning of the war against France the use of irregular forces 
was particularly prominent, this being so much the case that one of the 
chief contemporary chroniclers of the struggle, the regular army officer, 
Francisco Javier Cabanes, described the period from May to September 
1808 as the ‘somatén era’.* Nor is this surprising: most of the garrison of 
Catalonia had fallen into the hands of the French when the latter had 
occupied Barcelona, whilst it was some time before reinforcements 
reached the principality from the Balearic Islands, the latter being the 
principality’s nearest source of fresh troops. With few other means of 
protection, in fact, the insurgent authorities had no option but to turn 
to Catalonia’s own military traditions. The first Catalan somatén — in 
this context the word means irregular band ~ was therefore formed in 
early June 1808. Citizens of Igualada, Manresa and other neighbouring 
towns raised such a force in the Bruc mountains with the aim of halting 
General Schwartz’s march on Zaragoza. The skirmish, which took place 
on June 6, had the desired effect and succeeded in putting the imperial 
troops to flight. Made famous by the incident of the so-called ‘drummer 
of Bruc’, this was an important psychological victory — it was, indeed, 
the first defeat that Napoleon’s army suffered in Spain —- and was to 
become a symbol repeatedly exploited by the civil and military author- 
ities in their anti-French propaganda campaign. And, of course, it was 
a stimulus to further efforts of this type: following the Bruc battle, other 
villages that had previously not raised somatens, like Vilanova i la Geltru, 
quickly did so.° 
Very soon, then, somatens were in action in many parts of Catalonia. 
On 10 June the somatens of Vilafanca del Penedés, La Segarra and Urgell, 
attacked the French division commanded by Chabran at Vendrell, who 
in reprisal looted and set fire to the whole town. On 14 June another 
French attempt to force the pass of El Bruc was repulsed with many cas- 
ualties. On 17 June the somatens again confronted the French at Mon- 
gat, in which action 
a woman named Susana Claretona, who was the 
wife of a somatén sub lieutenant, D. Francesc Felonch, so distinguished 
herself that she was named co-commandant, along with her husband, 
of the band to which she belonged, and later helped prevent the French 
from taking Capellades. On 4 July forces under the command of Franc- 
esc Deu de Llisa and Josep Colomer y Riu attacked the French at Con- 
gost. But perhaps the somatens’ greatest glory was that which they 
attained in the successful defence of Gerona against repeated French 
assaults in the period from June to August 1808: with the city originally 

<<<PDFPAGE 111>>>
Antonio Moliner Prada 
93 
garrisoned only by a single understrength infantry battalion and a few 
artillerymen, it would undoubtedly have fallen to the French had not 
the local inhabitants stood to arms and manned the walls alongside the 
regulars.* Meanwhile, several thousand miquelets and somatens took part 
in the final relief of the city on 16 August 1808, the defence of the city 
also being notable for the involvement of a number of women, includ- 
ing Teresa Balaguer and Isabel Pi from Bagur, Esperansa Llorens from 
Cadaqués and Maria Plajas from Calonge.° 
It was not long, meanwhile, before the somatens were joined by fresh 
forces. Notwithstanding successes of the sort as that obtained at Bruc, it 
was Clear that an irregular militia that took to arms only when its own 
homes and families were in danger and at best served only for a few 
days, was hardly sufficient as a means of defence against the forces of 
Napoleon. Though some measure of relief was obtained by stipulating 
that men called up for the somatén should serve for a certain period of 
time and by forming the various local bands into larger units called 
divisiones, what was needed was clearly a permanent force that would be 
capable of carrying out special actions and of serving anywhere it was 
needed. No sooner had it assembled at Lérida, indeed, than the provin- 
cial junta that had been formed in the wake of the uprising decreed the 
formation of an army of 40 000 men. Needless to say, this was envis- 
aged in terms not of regular troops but of miquelets, of which there were 
to be 40 tercios or regiments. Each one of these units was to be based on 
a particular town or district, whilst the men were all to be volunteers 
who were expected to serve for the duration of the war. The third article 
of the orders established that, once each town had met the numbers 
assigned to it — Lérida was supposed to raise 1000 men; Cervera, 500; 
Tarragona, 1500; Tortosa, 1200; Manresa, 500; Vic 400; Vilafranca, 150 
and Igualada, 110 — the other men recruited should form a reserve and 
‘serve aS somatens whenever need be, to which end companies and 
tercios shall be formed, and drill in the use of arms’. As this suggests, 
the somatén was not forgotten, but there is nonetheless a distinct hint 
that what was envisaged was the militarization of at least some of the 
bands of militiamen springing up around the region, the decree that 
established the miquelets referring to them as an army of somatens and 
giving commissions in their ranks to a number of men who had acted 
as commandants in the latter force (examples here include a notary from 
Lérida named Joan Baget; a canon from Manresa named Montanya; and 
a lawyer from Igualada named Riera).° Yet, in general, the principle that 
the defence of Catalonia should rest in the hands of its own citizens 
was not forgotten, as witness, for example, the fact that the leadership 

<<<PDFPAGE 112>>>
94 Popular Resistance in Catalonia 
cadres of both the somatens and the miquelets continued to draw on 
men who could either have found no place in the old regular army, or 
had simply chosen other careers for themselves. There were, true, 
a number of retired and supernumerary officers such as Francisco Milans 
del Bosch and Joan Clarés. But commanding some somatens were 
clergymen like Francisco Campos, who reputedly carried out a number 
of exemplary actions in the region of the Emporda, and Francesc 
Rovira, who later went on to establish hiimself as one of Catalonia’s 
first guerrillas. And also prominent were the clothier, Josep Manso, the 
merchant, Antoni Franch, and the proprietor, Esteban Pascual y Casas, 
all of whom were wealthy notables with a considerable stake in society.’ 
Yet were the miquelets, in particular, really 4 people’s militia? It was 
true that there were certain differences from the old army. Setting aside 
the fact that the men were all volunteers, all officers up to the rank of 
captain were appointed by the local juntas (in theory more senior 
positions were in the gift of the Captain General, but here, too, one 
suspects that the civil authorities held the whip hand). Yet the men 
were paid wages, and, however simply, uniformed (regulations promul- 
gated in August 1808 speak of grey jackets with red facings and round 
hats bearing the national cockade; to distinguish the regiments one 
from another, meanwhile, the soldiers’ collars bore the initial of the 
towns from which they were raised). As for the officers, they were paid 
generous salaries — captains received 20 reales a day, lieutenants 16 and 
sub lieutenants 12 — whilst they were given the same rights and pre- 
rogatives as the regular army, and thereby admitted at least to the military 
estate, if not the army itself.* In the end, then, it is hard to see how the 
miquelets amounted to anything other than regular troops even if the 
regimental standards that they carried continued to mark them out as 
regular troops who were specifically Catalan and had forms and origins 
that were distinct from the rest of the Spanish infantry. 
The formation of the new force was not without its difficulties. Tortosa 
had provided 1200 men by early October 1808 and Vic another 800, 
but there were complaints that towns further from the French zone of 
control were not acting with the same speed.’ At the same time the 
response was certainly patchy: some areas, such as Manresa, Seu d’Urgell 
and Puigcerda produced rather more men than those required by the 
draft, while others fell short, like Matar6, La Marina, the Vall d’Aran 
and Camprodon. Acccording to Oman, indeed, at the beginning of 
August only 6000 men had been raised for service with the miquelets, 
whilst there were difficulties in arming and officering even such men as 
had come forward.'° Of the 40 000 men called up in the month of June, 

<<<PDFPAGE 113>>>
Antonio Moliner Prada 
95 
no more than 23 000 were actually assembled. But there is no doubt 
that many tercios de miqueletes were soon ready to take the field. Thus, 
Esdaile indicates the creation of a total of 27 tercios in 1808: two in 
Tarragona, four in Lérida, three in Gerona, one in Manresa, two in 
Cervera, one in Tortosa, two in Vic, one in Mataro, one in Seu d’Urgell, 
one in Berga, two in Talarn, one in Cerdanya, two in the Vall d’Aran, 
one in Barcelona, one in the Amporda, one in Igualada, one in Figueres 
and one in Granollers (in the case of the Barcelona and Figueres tercios, 
one assumes that what is meant is that the troops came from the towns, 
rather than actually being raised in them)." 
If the brunt of the June fighting had fallen upon the somatens, from 
July onwards their endeavours were increasingly shared by the miquelets. 
Knowledge of the terrain, particularly in the hills, enabled the two 
forces to cause the Napoleonic army heavy losses. With the aid of the 
local population, the patriots carried out a defensive war of attrition, 
accepting no real battle unless they had clear numerical superiority. The 
rest of 1808, then, was characterized by a long list of raids and skirmishes. 
For obvious reasons, it is impossible to detail all these actions here, but, 
in brief, whilst large forces of irregulars including the ‘divisions’ of 
somatens commanded by Arzt and Baget and the tercios de miquelets of 
Berga, Manresa and Igualada, blockaded Barcelona, whither Duhesme 
had retired with the bulk of his forces following his failure to capture 
Gerona, others closed in on the isolated garrison of Figueras and even 
raided the French frontier.‘ Amongst the most active leaders at this 
time was Milans del Bosch who in September 1808 alone is reported to 
have attacked the invaders at Moncada, Badalona and San Feliu de 
Guixols. 
_As the summer of 1808 wore on, however, so the war in Catalonia 
began to change. In August substantial forces of regular troops began to sy 
arrive at Tarragona from the Balearic Islands, and by October the 
Spaniards had put together a substantial army. Known as the ‘Army of 
the Right’, this was commanded by Juan Miguel de Vives. For many of 
the miqueletes, in particular, their experience of the war now began to 
change. Thus, now some 20 000 strong, many of their units were inte- 
grated into the ranks of Vives’ troops, of which the Vanguard Division 
contained the first and second tercios of Gerona, the first tercio of 
Tarragona, and the tercios of Igualada Cervera and Figueres, and the 
Fourth Division the first tercio of Lérida and the tercios of Vic, Manresa 
and Vallés.!4 Meanwhile, with the French shut up in Barcelona and 
Gerona, there was now much less need for the somatens and, to the fury 
of some of the juntas de corregimiento, many were either sent home or 

<<<PDFPAGE 114>>>
96 Popular Resistance in Catalonia 
drafted into the miquelets. But the move towards more formal methods 
of waging war was only temporary. Having first captured the petty 
fortress of Roses, on 9 December a large French force under Marshal 
St Cyr drove away the irregulars blockading Figueras and then headed 
for Barcelona, and for the next few days assorted groups of miquelets 
and somatens harassed the march of the French columns or sought to 
hold strategic positions blocking the route to the ciudad condal. Despite 
their courage, however - at one point St Cyr himself was almost captured 
whilst personally trying to find a vital goat track —- the French were 
not to be checked. Thanks in large part to Vives’ incompetence, indeed, 
a detachment of the Army of the Right was beaten at Cardedeu on 
16 December, and Barcelona relieved the next day. Nor was this all: on 
21 December St Cyr sallied out of Barcelona and routed the Spanish 
troops still lining the banks of the River Llobregat immediately to the 
south and west of Barcelona.'® 
Known as the battle of Molins de Rei, this last battle was almost fatal 
to the Army of the Right. ‘Having been responsible’, we are told, ‘for 
a thousand excesses in the towns they passed through, [the soldiers] 
reached Tarragona naked, disordered, starving and possessed by an 
inexplicable terror and panic’.'° According to Oman, meanwhile, the 
miquelets ‘mostly dispersed to their homes’.'’ Yet by the same token 
Molins de Rei also gave a new fillip to ‘people’s war’. Desperate to win 
time to reorganize his battered forces, the new Spanish commander in 
Catalonia, General Teodoro Reding, sought to revive the somatens as 
the best means of continuously harassing the enemy. With large 
swathes of the province now under enemy control, calling them up 
was by no means as easy as before but a call went out for men who had 
been serving in somatens that had been dispersed or disbanded to come 
forward to fight the French once more and this produced a small 
irregular force — in effect a guerrilla band — that was given to a regular 
brigadier named Iranzo. Under the direction of another general named 
Marti, meanwhile, a plan was drawn up to reorganize the miquelets on 
a much less costly basis and to turn the somatens into a reserve. 
Disrupted though these efforts were on 25 February 1809 by a fresh 
defeat at Valls, which saw the death of Reding, they continued unabated 
for most of the year that followed. The system of conscription already 
used for the somatens, 
it was 
agreed, should be extended 
to the 
miquelets, and both bodies were subjected to a common inspector gen- 
eral in the person of Joan Clarés. The somatens were divided into four 
divisions: the Ampurdan division, which was to operate from the fron- 
tier to the Ter; the Montseny, to cover the area between the Ter and 

<<<PDFPAGE 115>>>
Antonio Moliner Prada 
97 
the Tordera; the Vallés, from the Tordera to the Besés, and the Llobre- 
gat, to operate from the capital as far as the Penedés (the renowned 
irregular commander, Rovira, was given the first division, and the 
other three were placed under the command of the governors of Vic, 
Mataro and Vilafranca, respectively). And on a local level juntas such 
as that of Vilafranca del Penedeés tried to make service in their somatens 
more attractive by giving them the aspect more of a regular civic guard 
than a band of irregulars.!® 
Thanks to these efforts, the somatens, in particular, continued to play 
a part in the war. Led by a priest named Mas and one Otzet, peasants 
from Sallent, Moia and other villages carried out significant defensive 
actions, while Collbat6 and Capellades witnessed effective cooperation 
from bands led by Baltasar de Eixala and Josep Matheu.’? Outstanding 
in the Priorat region, meanwhile, was the somatén of Porrera. Led by 
Josep Pellicer i Fort, this participated in the campaign of Valls and later 
captured much food and ammunition from a French convoy that it 
attacked in late 1809 as well as preventing an enemy column from 
occupying Falset.”° In March and April 1809 the somatens of the Vallés 
Oriental made life uncomfortable for the enemy troops that had 
occupied Terrassa and Sabadell. Indeed, the action of the somatén of the 
latter city, commanded by Turull de Sentmenat, forced the French to 
withdraw, but they returned on Easter Wednesday, with more men and 
took full revenge: ‘Thieving, pillaging, the most horrific violence to 
women young and married filled Sabadell with wailing and conster- 
nation on a day as saintly as any celebrated by the Church.’*! In the 
villages of the Baix Camp, Alt Camp and Conca de Barbera (Albiol, 
Vimbodi, Coll de Alforja and Prades) regions of Tarragona, Jaume Palliser 
and Maria Palies led 300 men of the somatens in a series of strikes in 
March 1809 which forced the imperial troops to fall back on Montblanc.” 
And, finally, whilst the walls of the city were manned, among other 
units, by tercios of miquelets drawn from Gerona, Vic, Cervera and the 
Vall de Talarn, the third siege of Gerona (June-December 1809) saw 
large forces of somatens being employed in the various attempts that 
were made to raise the siege and get convoys of food through to the 
defenders.”* 
According to some observers, meanwhile, all this encouraged a certain 
bravado. Let us take, for example, a letter cited by the chief contemporary 
chronicler of events in Barcelona as having been written by a somatén 
commander named Fernando Chaparro. Thus, Chaparro was particularly 
impressed by the attitude adopted by the irregulars vis-a-vis the once- 
feared enemy cavalry: 

<<<PDFPAGE 116>>>
98 
Popular Resistance in Catalonia 
Every day the somatens provide fresh proof of their dash, and surely 
glory is deserved by these men whose occupation two months ago 
was the innocent tasks of farming, but who now know other tools 
than the mattock and the plough...and have humiliated the Saint- 
Cyrs, the Chabrans, the Lechis and other swarms of their generals? 
They now laugh at them wearing their cuirasses, which inspire about 
as much fear in them as the Easter processions, and pay them no 
attention other than to argue about who should have first dibs on 
them when it comes to taking them home to their villages. All the 
more is this the case since they have learned from experience that 
a musketball pierces the cuirass from more than 100 paces, killing 
the cuirassier and coming out of his arse. The somatens know full 
well that, once the cuirassiers have been knocked from their horses, 
they are little different from turtles, and are reduced to laughter by 
the clumsiness of men dressed up...in such junk.** 
For a French view of all this, meanwhile, we might turn to a French- 
man named Maffre-Baugé who refers in his memoirs to the trap the 
Catalan somatens prepared for him when, towards the end of 1809, a 
detachment 
of his troops was heading towards the monastery at 
Montserrat: ‘The Catalans rushed us in a mob, whilst from the top of 
the 
rocks 
they opened 
a harassing 
fire 
that 
caused 
us much 
loss... without us being able to hit back with any success.’”° 
Unlike the miquelets, which, as we shall see, were soon to disappear 
altogether, the somatens continued to operate for most of the war. Fol- 
lowing the capture of the fortress of San Fernando de Figueres by Rovira 
in April 1811, for example, a general somatén was ordered of some 
6400 men, with the target quotas being distributed as follows: Tarragona, 
1000; Montblanc, 400; Cervera, 1500; Lérida, 500; Manresa, 1500; 
Vilafranca, 1500. And when Tarragona was besieged two months later, 
the Junta attempted to call up another 12 500 men.*° At this time, 
indeed, the somatén again experienced a revival of interest in its fortunes. 
With large parts of the regular forces all set on departing for Valencia in 
the wake of the loss of the city that had been Catalonia’s temporary 
capital since 1808, Jacinto Buniva de Morera, a sub lieutenant in the 
Baza Infantry Regiment, proposed a general somatén — in effect, a national 
guard — coupled with the deployment of the available manpower into 
four divisions that would take it in turns to be ready to combat the 
enemy at a moment’s notice.”’ As for the somatens’ main successes in 
the latter part of the war, the most important was Rovira’s capture of 
the great citadel of San Fernando de Figueres. Thus, at the head of 2000 

<<<PDFPAGE 117>>>
Antonio Moliner Prada 
99 
irregulars, on the night of 9 April 1811 Rovira got into the fortress with 
the help of three young Catalans who had secured employment in its 
magazines. Having knocked out the Neapolitan troops defending the 
gate and detained the sleeping governor, the Spaniards found that 
they had taken 850 prisoners, provisions for 2000 men for four months, 
16 000 muskets, immense supplies of clothing and shoes, and 400 000 
francs. Following a four and a half month siege, in August the French 
took the fortress back but not before they had lost 4000 men to dysen- 
tery and malaria.”® 
Thus far, we have been talking about popular resistance in terms of 
Catalonia’s traditional system of militias. In the Spain of 1808-14 there 
had emerged an entirely separate phenomenon in the form of the 
independent guerrilla band. With more and more of the principality 
under enemy occupation — Gerona fell at the end of 1809, Lérida in the 
spring of 1810 and Tarragona in the summer of 1811 —- it was but logical 
that Catalonia should also have been affected by this development. As 
elsewhere, then, we see attempts to form cruzadas - literally ‘crusades’, 
though a better term would be ‘bands of crusaders’ 
—- composed of 
members of the clergy. In June 1809, for example, we find a canon of 
the collegiate church at Pons named Joan Pau Constans submitting 
a proposal for such a force to the Junta Central.”” These schemes rarely 
came to fruition, however: although his plan had the support of both 
the then Captain General of Catalonia, General Joaquin Blake and the 
Junta Central, Constans was unable to overcome the numerous obstacles 
he came up against in both the Junta of Catalonia and ecclesiastical 
circles, whilst the cruzada proposed by another priest named Joan Ferrer, 
who was chaplain of the Escuelas Pias School at Moia, met with a similar 
lack of success.*° In so far as can be ascertained, then, most of the 
guerrilla bands that were formed in Catalonia were wholly secular, 
though their leaders did sometimes come from the clergy, two examples 
that we might cite here being Josep Bertran, the parish priest of Llora, 
and Canon Francesc Rovira, who in 1811 had managed to gather 
together a band of stragglers and deserters from Manresa, Solsona, 
Cardona and Sant Llorens de Morunys at the head of which tercio de 
expatriados, as he called them, he was able to attain the rank of brigadier.*! 
If Rovira’s status as a priest was quite rare, this was less so with respect 
to the fact that he had been fighting the French since 1808. Thus, most 
of the Catalan guerrilla commanders were men who had earlier led 
troops belonging to either the juntas or the regular army and attained 
a considerable amount of promotion. As an example, we might cite the 
retired army officer, Joan Clarés, whose activities quickly gained him 

<<<PDFPAGE 118>>>
100 
Popular Resistance in Catalonia 
great notoriety (in September 1810, for example, he joined with Rovira 
in a raid on the Cerdagne, which caused the French authorities much 
alarm not just on account of the 30 000 francs that were extracted in 
ransoms for the various hostages taken by the Catalans, but also with 
respect to the cooperation which they were afforded by many of the 
local inhabitants).°? 
Unlike many other such forces, we happen to know a considerable 
amount about Clar6s’s partida. On 3 August 1811 his ‘division’, as it was 
known, comprised a total of 279 men, of whom 203 were soldiers from 
the First Regiment of Cervera, 38 stragglers from a variety of different 
corps, and 40 peasants who had rallied to his standard. The captains 
were José Cuadros and P. Barrios, who had both been appointed by 
Clarés; the lieutenants José Moya (an officer of the Granada Regiment, 
who had been captured by the French and later escaped), Ignacio Surés 
(an officer of the Soria Regiment, who was, again, a fugitive from 
French imprisonment), Francesc Franch (a straggler from the Catalan 
Legions, who had joined Clarés), and Ramon Marcos (an officer of the 
Third Regiment of Cervera, who was another escaped prisoner); and the 
sub lieutenants, Juan Vert (an officer of the light company of the First 
Regiment of Gerona), Juan Requena, Agustin Saberres and Mariano Borras 
(all of whom were stragglers from the Volunteers of Tarragona), Miguel 
Vines (a straggler from the Almogavares battalion), José Baleta (a deserter 
from the Savoya Regiment) and Miguel Darder (a deserter from the 
Iberia Regiment).*® 
Whether this somewhat patchwork appearance was typical of the 
guerrillas, we do not know. But we have already seen that Rovira’s band 
was largely recruited from men who had fled the French zone of 
occupation, whilst this is something that also appears to have been the 
case with the partida called the company of almogovares — a term used in 
the early-modern period to decribe Spanish light horse — formed in Olot 
in January 1810 under the command of Narcis Gay, the 378 men whom 
Gay had gathered together by 31 May of the same year for the most part 
coming from the Emporda (i.e. the district around Figueres).*4 
Thus far, then, thus good. Popular resistance in Catalonia was found 
in many forms both old and and new, whilst it also appears to have 
been constant. In this respect, the praise that even the most jaundiced 
British historians have lavished on the Catalans appears to have been 
well merited. Let us take, for example, the extremely anti-Spanish 
William Napier. Thus: ‘Their patriotism was purer and their efforts more 
sustained: the somatens were brave and active in battle, the population 
of the towns firm and the juntas apparently disinterested.’*> Similar 

<<<PDFPAGE 119>>>
Antonio Moliner Prada 
101 
views were, meanwhile, entertained by many Spanish historians, as well 
as by the contemporary chronicler, Father Raimundo Ferrer.*° And at 
the time of the war itself, it was very clearly the ‘official’ line. As the 
Junta of Catalonia’s gazette put it, for example: 
There is no difference between men in Catalonia, all are soldiers, in 
the fields, on the roads, in places, in the cities occupied by the 
enemy, wherever the Catalans show profound hatred for the French, 
an inextinguishable 
zeal for the Fatherland, 
a loyalty beyond 
question... Supplies, munitions, the French convoys fall to the 
valiant patriots that cover every inch of ground, and in the towns 
and villages where they have superiority in weapons, it is the houses 
and walls that are captive, not the hearts, which constantly exalt 
their loyalty in the most energetic, most heroic demonstrations.°’ 
But there is also another side to the story. From source after source 
come details that challenge or undermine the traditional version of 
events, whilst the Catalan archives are full of evidence that suggests 
a very different guerra del francés, and it is this to which we must now 
turn our attention. 
Let us begin with the somatén. In this respect it is a little disturbing to 
find that the famous defence of El Bruc was the work not just of heroic 
armed civilians, but also of large numbers of deserters from the garrison 
of Barcelona, including a detachment of the Swiss Wimpffen regiment 
commanded by Lieutenant Francisco Krutter preparing an ambush for 
the French. Dressed though these men may have been in Catalan 
barretina caps, if it is true, as at least one source claims, that the number 
involved came to around 500, then a very different view must be 
entertained of the defence of the pass.** Reinforcing such doubts is the 
fact that service in the somatén does not appear to have been that 
popular. Thus villages along the French frontier or close to areas of French 
occupation were concerned at the idea of sending off their menfolk and 
thereby depriving themslves of their only means of defence.*” From all 
parts of Catalonia came significant number of petitions from private 
citizens requesting that their sons be declared exempt from service.*° 
And later on, as at Vacarises, draft evasion was a problem with many 
men choosing to run away to join guerrilla bands such, in this instance, 
as that commanded by José Boadas.*! Finally, the local authorities 
themselves might make difficulties, as occurred at Vizcondado de Bas 
and Sant Joan de Les Fonts where the justices protested at complete 
strangers demanding costly contributions and the raising of somatens 

<<<PDFPAGE 120>>>
102 
Popular Resistance in Catalonia 
‘on they knew not what authority’.*” Nor was the situation with the 
miquelets any better. Not only did recruitment fall well short of the 
mark set by the Junta of Catalonia, but there were complaints of even 
such men as had enlisted destroying their weapons so that they would 
not have to go to war.*8 
It was not just a question of obtaining recruits, however. Thus, no 
sooner had many men enlisted or been called up, than they were looking 
for opportunities to escape, this being a problem that afflicted the 
somatens and miquelets alike. As the landowner Antoni Bellsolell recalls 
in his memoirs, for men with a little money one way out was to buy 
their freedom, and this happened with some frequency.** But for many 
of the poorer combatants, there was no hope‘of availing themselves of 
this privilege with the result that they turned to desertion. A problem 
throughout Spain - taking the country as a whole it may have affected 
20 per cent of the army’s manpower at one time or other — in Catalonia 
it was even more prominent. The papers of the Junta of Barcelona 
(a somewhat fugitive body that led a chequered existence not in the 
ciudad condal but in various towns in the hinterland) contain details of 
a number of cases that occurred in 1810. Amongst the citizens of 
Barcelona who had fled were Miquel Ferreras, who was thirty-three and 
a barber; Joan Llubregat, who was nineteen and another barber; Benet 
Miravet, who was seventeen and a painter; Isidre Valba, who was 
twenty-two and a shoemaker; and Josep Sola, who was thirty-six. For 
a closer look at such a man, meanwhile, we might take the case of 
Miquel Estop, who was a soldier of the First Catalan Legion, nineteen 
years old, the son of Antoni and Serafina, five foot one in height, and 
possessed of dark brown hair, brown eyes, a broad nose, dark skin and 
a scar. Estop having deserted on 2 May 1810, the Junta’s military 
commission was ordered to arrest him: ‘It is urgent that with due zeal 
you endeavour to collect the said individual by whatever means you 
deem prudent, and if that is not possible you should imprison the 
father, mother, brother, uncle or closest relative until he is produced 
and report that you have thus done so’.*° How the commission was to 
accomplish this feat in the midst of a city filled with French troops was 
not made apparent, but that is by-the-by. What matters is simply the 
fact that flight was an ever present reality. As Rovira informed the Junta 
of Manresa in January 1810, for example, the desertion going on 
around him was so ‘continued and scandalous’ that ‘in a short time I am 
likely to be left with no men but myself’.*° Still worse, meanwhile, the 
population were all too happy to connive at this activity, the situation 
not being helped in this respect by the fact that many magistrates not 

<<<PDFPAGE 121>>>
Antonio Moliner Prada 
103 
only failed to uphold the law but even went so far as to shelter both 
their own sons and those of their wealthier neighbours.*” 
As time went on, so a refuge other than home and hearth offered 
itself to would-be deserters. Thus, in November 1811, the arrest was 
ordered of Jaume Borrull, a citizen of Sant Climent, for having recruited 
men in a number of villages in order to form a guerrilla group, on the 
promise of exemption from the draft.** In this instance, the dodge was 
foiled, but the fact is that joining one of the many extra-official partidas 
that began to spring up was a wonderful way out of trouble for many 
soldiers, especially as these bands were generally in reality nothing 
more than companias de brivalla — literally ‘rabble companies’ - living by 
theft and highway robbery whose ransacking of village after village kept 
the entire population in a state of alarm. There were frequent tussles 
between the different bands and on occasions they even joined the 
French, whilst the local authorities were often forced to beg the Junta of 
Catalonia to help them keep them in order.*? For a good example of 
such a force one might cite the gang raised by a wealthy farmer named 
Pere Rovira y Galceran, which was in theory raised to assist in the 
blockade of Barcelona in the autumn of 1808, but in practice devoted 
itself to smuggling goods into the city and running a variety of protection 
rackets.°° In theory, authorized bands — those, for example of Gay and 
Rovira — were not supposed to allow deserters to enlist with them, but 
in practice it was not easy to distinguish between men who had run 
away from their units (desertores) and men who had returned to their 
homes or been scattered across the countryside after some defeat 
(dispersos). Nor did it help, meanwhile, that men who were willing to 
rejoin the army were often offered better pay than those who had stuck 
it out through thick and thin, and that food was often far more plentiful 
in irregular units such as that of Gay than it was in the rest of the 
army.°! Indeed, it was in part for this very reason that, despite his 
protests, Gay’s command was disbanded in August 1811.°7 
Assuming the status of a guerrilla was a useful tactic and there is 
plenty of evidence from other parts of Spain to suggest that many outlaws 
and deserters made use of it at one time or another. But, of course, the 
phenomenon of banditry was anything but new. And in Catalonia, in 
particular, gangs known as parrots or brivalles had a long tradition in the 
region going back to the seventeenth century. In short, banditry already 
had a solid base in 1808, and was in consequence a natural response 
to the misery suffered by the lower classes in these years of war. Not 
surprisingly, meanwhile, the number of such malefactors grew through- 
out the guerra del francés. As for the war, many of the gangs made no 

<<<PDFPAGE 122>>>
104 
Popular Resistance in Catalonia 
pretence of having any interest in the struggle. Thus, in July 1811 we 
find Lieutenant Pedro Antonio Alvanés reporting that a detachment of 
troops that he was with had just been attacked at Arboli, in the Baix 
Camp by a group of deserters who had their stronghold in caves at 
L’Alforja. Formed up in two groups, they had swept down on the 
soldiers, seized sixteen mules loaded with flour that had just been taken 
from the French, and mercilessly killed the commander of the detachment 
as he lay wounded on the ground. As for Alvanés, he managed to save 
himself by hiding in the house of the village priest. Determined to find 
him, the bandits had then turned all the houses upside down. Frustrated 
in this object, they had then destroyed all the weapons they could find 
(so as, one presumes, to frustrate the possibility of pursuit), and finally 
left to the accompaniment of claims to the effect that they had a 
monopoly on violence in the area. To quote the leader of the ruffians, 
‘Any deserter or armed villager we find that does not join us will be 
shot.’ 
Something of the extent of the problem faced by Catalonia is con- 
veyed by the report of an officer of the Cazadores de Catalufia battalion 
named Manuel Errando who was sent out with a small detachment 
comprising a sergeant, a corporal and eight men to hunt down deserters 
and thieves in central Catalonia in the early summer of 1812: 
In the present month of April we arrested fully armed the thief, Juan 
Quincles, alias Man, on the road that goes from Vic to Manresa, and 
a fortnight later we took his two companions, Manuel and Francisco 
Serrat...In the Sierra de Collespina five deserters who we took to 
Vique. Near Vidra in a house called El Barret6 we caught three deserters 
who we also took to Vic. Between La Fontella and Vilada and the 
parish of Malafieu we took three more, one of whom was wounded 
in the thigh whilst trying to escape... This month we have arrested 
as a thief and deserter, Antonio Sala y Golobandas, alias Solé, who is 
an inhabitant of Prats de Llusanés. In Llusa we took Juan Basa, alias 
Animota, the reason being, once again, that he was a deserter and 
thief. And in Berga we happened to chance on Josef Montorno, alias 
Tatxa, an inhabitant of Prats de Llusanés.*4 
The activities of Manuel Errando’s column were very effective and gave 
the bandits no respite. Thus, in June he also managed to arrest a well- 
known thief and deserter named Casadestis at Marlés, four deserters at 
Igualada, and five more deserters at Vic, as well as killing two or three 
members of a band of 12 thieves and smugglers that was operating from 

<<<PDFPAGE 123>>>
Antonio Moliner Prada 
105 
Viladecaballs.°° Yet to the end of the war Catalonia remained overrun 
with brivalles, whilst this allowed the French to maintain that the 
somatens and guerrillas were all bandits ipso facto. On 16 June 1810, for 
example, four young men, accused of numerous acts of violent robbery 
on the highroads, were sentenced to death in Barcelona by a French 
military commission, their names being Geroni Albas, aged thirty-three, 
who was a gunsmith and resident of Olot; Jaume Fargas, twenty-four, 
a shoemaker, also from Olot; Rafael Fluxeny, twenty, a butcher from 
Molins de Rei; and Pau Smith - curiously — who originally hailed from 
Alsace, and was currently an agricultural labourer in Mongat.°° What 
‘violent robbery on the highroads’ actually meant in this instance is 
unclear, but for the French there was no doubt: a brigand was a brigand, 
and the only good brigand a dead one. Whether a brigand was also 
a freedom fighter is another matter: at first sight one is tempted simply 
to say ‘no’, but consideration of the contemporary Balkan example of 
the hajduks — the insurgent bands that long harassed the Turks in their 
European dominions and headed the Serbian revolt of 1804 — suggests 
a more cautious answer. Thus, by their very banditry, men such as Albas 
and his companions dislocated society and thereby discredited French 
rule, and in this respect it is interesting to find the French commis- 
sioner of police in Gerona complaining that the deserters who infested 
the countryside were bringing commerce to a complete standstill.>” 
But this is beside the point. The bandits took to the hills not to fight 
the French but because they were starving, and because violence was an 
easy option in the context of the guerra del francés. Meanwhile, to return 
to our discussion of the Catalan forces, a further fact that strikes the 
historian very forcibly is that there was little or no difference between 
the behaviour of the somatens, miquelets and guerrillas when they were 
in their ranks and that which they displayed when they were out of the 
control of the authorities. Of this the evidence is legion. The abbot of 
the monastery of Sant Pere de Camprodon, for example, was insulted 
and mistreated by a band of miquelets.°* The citizens of Vic were regu- 
larly subjected to extortion by miquelets passing through the town.°? 
The tradesmen of Gerona were, in the words of General Nogués, all too 
frequently robbed and abused ‘by our troops, our miquelets and their 
supporters’.©° The inhabitants of La Bisbal experienced frequent cases of 
theft, disorder and crime of all forms at the hands of soldiers denied 
what they demanded.*! The Vallés region was devastated by bands of 
soldiers roaming its territory.°* And in 1810 Narcis Gay, the man behind 
the Cuerpo de Almogavares, reported: ‘The Figueres and Expatriado 
tercios are scattered about the hills, along with some draftees and deserters 
a 

<<<PDFPAGE 124>>>
106 
Popular Resistance in Catalonia 
that have escaped various Army corps; most of these people are pillaging» 
the countryside and murdering travellers. In order to halt as far as is 
possible so many excesses, I have seen the Rev. Rector of Llora and we have 
agreed to pursue... these people who are so pernicious for society’.°° 
If it is impossible to argue that the Catalan forces were models of 
discipline, it is also difficult to show that they were of very much value 
in military terms. In places such as the pass of El Bruc where the French 
could not deploy their cavalry the somatens were able to gain the 
occasional success, whilst they were also able to put up a good show 
behind the walls of such towns as Gerona and Roses. As sentinels and 
pickets, too, they were fine, but every time they had to confront the 
French in open battle they were swept away with heavy losses: thus, the 
action at Mongat in which Susana Claretona supposedly so distinguished 
herself was actually a run-away French victory in which the somatens 
fled after a few shots. Nor were the miquelets much better. In one 
skirmish at Sant Jeroni de Murtra in October 1808, for example, we are 
told that ‘the miquelets and their officers, far from withdrawing in good 
order...ran and scattered to the hills in shameful flight’.°* Nor is any of 
this surprising. As the contemporary military analyst, Francisco Javier 
Cabanes, explained in his Historia de las operaciones del ejército de 
Cataluria, while masses of militia might have been valuable in the War of 
Succession 100 years before, they could not adjust to the more sophisti- 
cated tactics of the Napoleonic era, and were in consequence utterly 
insufficient to Catalonia’s needs.®° For such troops, guerrilla warfare was 
more of an option, but even here there are questions that have to be 
answered, the image presented by contemporary documentary evi- 
dence being very critical of the guerrilla bands, for example, on account 
of their instability, fragility, high cost and limited effectiveness. 
Faced by this situation the military authorities were in no doubt: 
Catalan traditions and Catalan sensibilities alike would have to give way 
to the demands of the war effort. Until the end of 1809 the heroic 
defence of Gerona shielded the military and political authorities from 
the full realities of the situation, but the loss of that city brought a new 
realism, and all the more so as Catalonia possessed a new Captain 
General in the person of the energetic and ambitious Enrique O’Don- 
nell. For this officer, the way forward was quite clear. As he wrote to 
the provincial junta soon after taking over the army with respect to a 
particularly blatant case of mass desertion amongst the Castelltercol 
somaten, ‘This scandalous desertion on the part of the somatens clearly 
indicates that they cannot be counted on for the defence of the princi- 
pality, and that it is necessary to adopt other measures with which to 

<<<PDFPAGE 125>>>
Antonio Moliner Prada 
107 
increase the strength of the army.’°” Meanwhile, much the same reac- 
tion was elicited by that news that over 4000 of the 5500 men then 
commanded by Rovira had absconded: ‘God willing, the disenchantment 
of those who have to rely on these undisciplined people will stimulate 
Your Excellency to adopt swift measures in order to fill this army’s 
ranks and thus free this great country from the ruin that threatens it. 
The love I profess for the Principality and the love I profess for my 
homeland make me desirous of seeing the organization of real military 
forces, for these are the only means of making war.’® In rapid succession, 
there followed a number of measures, including, not least, the imposition 
of the hated system of conscription known as the quinta, and the dissol- 
ution of the miquelets, the few men who remained in their ranks being 
absorbed into a new set of regiments called Catalan Legions in line with 
proposals that had been submitted to the Junta in June 1809 by, 
amongst others, Milans del Bosch. Minor concessions were made to 
Catalan sentiment — service in the new units was to be for two years 
only whilst the rank and file were to enjoy thirty days’ leave a year — but 
the principality’s earlier particularism was much circumscribed whilst 
by the end of the war even the Catalan Legions had vanished in favour 
of ordinary units of the regular army even if they were allowed to go on 
bearing names that were clearly Catalan in their affiliations.®’ On taking 
over the Captain Generalcy of Catalonia after the fall of Tarragona in 
June 1811, the arrogant and thrusting Luis Lacy would have gone still 
further, and he in fact issued orders that would have forcibly incorp- 
orated all men serving in irregular forces of one kind or another into 
the regular army, but such was the desertion that resulted that he was 
forced to retract the order, or at least to restrict it solely to deserters.’° As 
for those soldiers who continued to abscond, Lacy dealt with the phe- 
nomenon in predictable fashion, circulating very strict orders that 
deprived deserters of all their rights and threatened the application of 
the strictest penalties.” 
As can be imagined, the Junta of Catalonia did not go along with this 
programme of militarization with any enthusiasm. Yet much of what 
O’Donnell and Lacy were trying to do was not repugnant to it. Thus, 
with respect to the problem of public order, as early as 11 July 1808 the 
Junta of Catalonia agreed to the creation in the principal town of each 
local Junta of a picket of 15 mounted soldiers led by an officer and 
a sergeant, whose task it would be ‘to prevent disorder of any kind, and to 
capture and take as prisoners...disturbers of the public peace, thieves, 
spies and any other wrongdoers’.”” Slightly later, meanwhile, it also agreed 
to proposals for the formation of an urban guard.’* Nor, meanwhile, did 

<<<PDFPAGE 126>>>
108 
Popular Resistance in Catalonia 
the Junta have any issue with the need to round up deserters: in July 
1811, for example, it agreed to the request of the parish priest of La 
Palma, Adria Ochando Ros, that he be allowed to form a force of 1000 
men from peasants, draft dodgers, prisoners who had escaped from the 
French and deserters native to his locality (interestingly, however, 
Ochando was not allowed, as he wished, to set himself up on the banks 
of the Ebro, but was instead directed to take such men as he got 
together to join Clarés).’* Content with the fact that it had been per- 
mitted to keep the somatén, the Junta therefore agreed to promulgate 
new regulations that sought not just to govern its operations but also to 
put an end to the problems of earlier years. Indeed, the new orders were 
very precise: ‘The somatens will be warned to keep strict discipline as 
any excesses will be punished.’ The villages would keep them supplied, 
and the magistrates ensure proportional shares in this respect. The 
objective would be to harass the enemy by all means possible, ‘especially 
in the mountains, with parties going into place in their rear to intercept 
convoys’. As for organization, ‘The somatén will be organised in companies 
of 100 men, who will choose their own commanders in the persons of 
a captain and a lieutenant and the corresponding sergeants.’ Making up 
the somatén were to be all men aged eighteen to fifty that could bear 
arms, with the only exceptions being magistrates and those priests who 
did not wish to do so. And finally, the somatens were to be ready for 
action at the first sound of the bugle.’> Nor was this the only measure 
that was introduced to curb the indiscipline of the somatén. On 29 
August 1811, the Junta of Catalonia’s comisién de armamento - literally, 
‘armament commission’ but the title is probably better rendered as 
‘mobilization commission’ - came up with a further list of rules and 
regulations. Particularly significant is the decision to apply the code of 
military justice and the army’s other ordenanzas to the somatens, whilst 
the latter were reminded that ‘subordination is the basis of all military 
instruction’. Also worth noting is the treatment afforded to dubious 
behaviour of various sorts: 
Disorder on the march, arson, forgery, violence to women, heinous 
crimes, false witness, rebellion, hiding or otherwise assisting deserters, 
cowardice, and theft will all be punished according to the sentences 
of army orders, it being understood that, although sacking and 
pillaging are allowable [in certain circumstances], they are never 
permitted ...except by order of the general. Whilst pillaging may be 
sometimes be necessary for reasons of state, it is necessary for it to be 
contained within certain limits so as to ensure that the laws of 

<<<PDFPAGE 127>>>
Antonio Moliner Prada 
109 
humanity are not lost sight of, nor still the respect due to all that 
profess the Holy, Roman, Catholic religion of the Apostles.”° 
What this rather confusing passage seems to add up to is, on the one 
hand, recognition that the somatens might on occasion have to live at free 
quarters — in other words to be fed and housed by the local populace — 
and could also expect from time to time to be let off the leash in respect 
of the enemy and his collaborators, and, on the other, an insistence 
that these pleasures could not be expected as of right. Whether this was 
sufficient to reassure public opinion in respect of the somatens’ behaviour 
is a moot point, but there is at least some suggestion that the traditional 
militia system continued to receive much support. Thus, in January 
1810 we find one Antonio Borras blaming most of the problem on the 
somatens’ officers, whom he regarded as corrupt and immoral; suggesting 
that such problems as were to be found amongst the men could be dealt 
with by revivalist missions and better religious instruction; and arguing 
that the somatén should actually be increased in numbers and equipped 
with cannon on the grounds that ‘a nation armed en masse is invin- 
cible’ and the guerra del francés a conflict that had begun ‘not with the 
military but with the peasants’.’” And as late as 1811 a letter to the 
Junta signed by someone styling himself ‘The Patriot of the mountains’ 
attributed all Catalonia’s ills to the inefficiency of the regular army 
which he attributed to the fact that its officers had adopted French 
forms of dress, turned their backs on religion, surrounded themselves 
by concubines, been grossly self indulgent, mistreated the populace and 
devoted all their time to playing games of chance.”® 
It was all very well to have faith in the heroism of the Catalan people 
and the efficacy of its traditional forms of military organization, how- 
ever. What observers such as Borras completely failed to tackle was the 
the failure of the inhabitants to live up to their expectations. Thus, like 
it or not, volunteers were few in number, conscription deeply unpopular 
and desertion general. But if this situation cannot be denied, can it be 
explained? In answer to this question, one needs to look at the experi- 
ences of Catalonia’s citizen soldiers and the circumstances in which the 
struggle was waged, the first point to note here being that the combatants 
were hardly well treated by the authorities. One of the claims made by 
‘The Patriot of the Mountains’ quoted above, for example, is that the 
soldiers’ pay was frequently in arrears.” And the commanders Claros 
and Manso both protested bitterly about their men having to go half- 
naked for want of uniforms for months on end.*° On top of all this 
there is also the issue of the amount of faith that could be placed in the 

<<<PDFPAGE 128>>>
110 
Popular Resistance in Catalonia 
military command. In the light of the evidence that we have from the 
rest of Spain, for instance, there seems little reason to doubt that many 
of the men who officered the Catalan forces did indeed cut a very poor 
figure, and certainly not one that was inclined to persuade militiamen, 
volunteers and conscripts to fight to the death. And, as disaster was 
heaped on disaster, so it became clear that the generals and other com- 
manders were not much better, in which respect we can do no better 
than to quote some of the popular sayings of the day. Thus, ‘The Baron 
of Eroles is a game of bowls...Gay never gets there... Milans fails to 
advance... Manso plays the goose.’*! 
Whether this is enough of an explanation is a moot point. But, 
whatever the reason may have been, the facts are clear enough. Thus, 
the revival of Catalonia’s traditional military institutions occasioned by 
the outbreak of the guerra del francés in 1808 proved short lived. On the 
one hand, the Junta of Catalonia’s hopes for the creation of an army of 
volunteer miquelets were only fulfilled in part, whilst on the other 
militia embodied by the somatens proved of only limited use in the 
struggle, the result being that the principle behind both forces had in 
the end to be abandoned: by the end of the war Catalonia’s manpower 
was subjected to the same system of conscription as that of the rest of 
Spain and forced to serve in units that were indistinguishable from 
those seen in the rest of the country (as we have seen, in 1811 the last 
remnants of the miquelet system were swept away in favour of ordinary 
units of infantry and cavalry, whilst in 1814 the somatén was absorbed 
into the national guard). It could be argued here that the Catalan military 
system never had a fair chance thanks to the lack of money and weap- 
ons that dogged the Junta of Catalonia (which was itself superceded in 
1812 by the new arrangements initiated by the cortes of Cadiz) right from 
the start. But on this the last word must probably go to Francisco Javier 
Cabanes, who, as we have seen, pointed out that in the Napoleonic era — 
and, by extension, the modern era in general — mere ‘crowd armies’ 
were of no avail. Perpetuated in the form guerrilla bands, the principles 
underlying the somatens and the miquelets may therefore at best be said 
to have kept the Patriot cause alive in Catalonia, but even here the 
waters are muddied by the links with banditry which can again be seen in 
other parts of Spain. Setting aside the issue of whether the population 
was possessed of sufficient in the way of national consciousness to be 
much interested in a war against Napoleon in 1808, the issue that 
dogged the Junta of Catalonia and its subordinate juntas de corregiment was 
therefore how to balance the demands of war with those of Catalan 
tradition. In this they failed — but then so did their successors of 1936. 

<<<PDFPAGE 129>>>
Antonio Moliner Prada 
111 
Notes 
ile 
TS: 
Please note that in this chapter, Catalan forms are used throughout (hence 
somatens and miquelets instead of somatenes and migueletes). With respect to 
place names, however, whilst minor places - e.g. Molins de Rei — have been 
treated in this fashion, places likely to be famliar to English readers have 
been allowed to retain their Castillian names (hence ‘Gerona’ rather than 
‘Girona’). 
. F.X. Cabanes, Historia de las Operaciones del Ejército de Catalufia en la Guerra 
de la Usurpacion: Campana Primera (Barcelona, 1815), pp. 13-42. 
. Conde de Toreno, Historia del levantamiento, guerra y revolucion de Espafia 
(B.A-E. edn; Madrid, 1953), p. 92. 
. For the fighting of June-July 1808, cf. J. Priego Lopez, Guerra de la Independ- 
encia, 1808-1814 (Madrid, 1972-2003), Il, pp. 98-115, 303-27. The story of 
Susana Claretona may be found in A. Delvillar, El somatén: su origen, su historia, 
su organizacion, su espiritu (Barcelona, n.d.), p. 34. 
. Delvillar, El somatén, p. 36. 
. Decree of Junta of Catalonia, 19 June 1808, Archivo de la Corona de Aragon 
(hereafter ACA), 74; for further details, cf. R. Ferrer, Barcelona cautiva, osea diario 
exacto de lo ocurrido en la misma ciudad mientras la oprimieron los franceses, 
esto es, desde el 13 de enero de 1808 hasta el 28 de mayo de 1814 (Barcelona, 
1815), 1, Appendix 2, p. CLVI. 
. The details respecting Francisco Campos come from the memorial which he 
submitted to the Junta of Catalonia on 24 August 1808, which may be found 
in Archivo de la Corona de Aragon, Seccion de la Junta Suprema de Catalalunya, 
(hereafter ACA. JSC.) 69. Otherwise I owe this information to the generosity 
of my esteemed colleagues, Charles Esdaile and Leonor Hernandez Enviz, 
who have extracted it from the data base discussed elsewhere in this work. 
. Various, ACA. JSC. 68. 
. Various, ACA. JSC. 3, 68. 
. C. Oman, A History of the Peninsular War (Oxford, 1902-30), 1, p. 322. 
. C. Esdaile, The Spanish Army in the Peninsular War (Manchester, 1988), p. 20S. 
. The blockade of Barcelona is covered in J. GOmez de Arteche, Guerra de la 
Independencia: Historia Militar de Espana de 1808 a 1814 (Madrid, 1868-1903), 
Il, pp. 181-214. For some details of the situation in the frontier districts, cf. 
J. Sarramon, Napoleon et les Pyrénées: les Chasseurs des Montagnes et la Couverture 
de la Frontiére, 1808-1814 (Selgues, 1992), pp. 36-44. 
J. Mifoz Maldonado, Historia Politica y Militar de la Guerra de la Independencia 
contra Napoleon Bonaparte desde 1808 a 1814 (Madrid, 1833), I, pp. 281-4; 
ibid., Il, pp. 68-70; E. Rodriguez Solis, Guerrilleros de 
1808: Historia Popular de 
la Guerra de la Independencia (Madrid, 1887), 1, iii, pp. 43-4. 
. Oman, Peninsular War, 1, pp. 635-6. 
. For all this, cf. ibid., 1, pp. 36-72; J. Priego LOpez, Guerra de la Independencia 
(Madrid, 1972-2002), 1, pp. 335-64. 
WAGGA SC./.6. 
. Oman, Peninsular War, Il, p. 72. 
. ACA. 76, various; Delvillar, El somatén, p. 49. 
. Delvillar, El] somatén, p. 41. 
. E. Fernandez i Pellicer, Un guerriller liberal al Priorat (Barcelona, 1972), pp.16-20. 
. Ferrer, Barcelona cautiva, I, p. 223. 

<<<PDFPAGE 130>>>
112 
Popular Resistance in Catalonia 
22, 
P13% 
24. 
ae 
26. 
WY. 
28. 
ES) 
30. 
hile 
Sy23 
Soe 
34. 
3S: 
36. 
BH: 
38. 
yh 
40. 
41. 
42 
43. 
44. 
45. 
Ibid., p. 207. 
For the third siege of Gerona, cf. Oman, Peninsular War, ll, pp. 19-66. 
Ferrer, Barcelona cautiva, Il, p. 207. 
M. Moliéres, Guerra a cuchillo: la Guérilla pendant la Guerre d’Indépendance 
Espagnole, 1808-1813 (Paris, 2002), p. 140. 
J. Perez Unzueta, El sometent a través de la historia (Barcelona, 1924), pp. 368-370. 
‘Plan o arreglo para el mejor regimen y salvacion de la provincia de Cataluna, 
sacado nuevamente a luz pra. la instruccidn y guia de los que desean su 
defensa, y presentado a la Superior Junta de Gobierno de dicha provincia por 
Don Jacinto Buniva de Morera, subteniente del Regimienitode Infanteria de 
Baza, en el mes de Julio de 1811’, ACA. JSC. 89. 
Oman, Peninsular War, IV, pp. 490-6, 536-8. According to some sources the 
number of prisoners taken in the fortress amounted to 2000 men, of whom 
half died of starvation and mistreatment during the siege, but this seems 
a wild exaggeration given that the garrison was no more than a single 
battalion. 
Cf. ‘Vindicta y reglamento del cuerpo religioso y militar de la Cruzada de 
Catalufia, formado por orden de su Majestad, por Don Juan Pablo Constans, 
sacerdote canonigo de la Iglesia de Pons, obispado de Urgell’, ACA. JSC. 89. 
P. Pascual, Curas y frailes guerrilleros en la Guerra de la Independencia: las 
partidas de cruzada reglamentadas por el carmelita zaragozano, P. Manuel Traggia 
(Zaragoza, 2000), pp. 31-35. 
Various, ACA. JSC. 87. 
For Clards’ raid on the Cerdagne, cf. Sarrramon, Napoleon et les Pyrénées, 
pp. 108-17. 
Various, ACA. JSC. 87. 
Various, ACA. JSC. 76. 
W. Napier, History of the War in the Peninsula and the South of France from the 
Year 1807 to the Year 1814 (London, 1828-1840), I, p. 57. 
E.g. M.A. Principe, Guerra de la Independencia: narracion historica de los acontec- 
imientos de aquella Epoca (Madrid, 1842-7) tl, p. 285. For Ferrer’s views, cf. 
Ferrer, Barcelona cautiva, I, pp. 93, 350. 
Gazeta Militar y Politica del Principado de Catalufia, 17 August 1809, Ferrer, 
Barcelona cautiva, ll, pp. 68-69. 
A. Carner i Borras, Les tropes suisses a Catalunya durant la guerra ‘de la inde- 
pendencia’ (Barcelona, 1976), pp. 24-31; J.M. Torras i Ribe, Sometents, exércit 
i poble a les batalles del Bruc: apunts sobre l’organitzacio de la resistencia contra 
els francesos l’any 1808 (Bruc, 1982), p. 7. 
Various, ACA. JSC. 68. 
Various, ACA. JSC. 69. 
Peres Unzueta, El sometent, p. 285. 
. Justices of Vizcondado de Bas and Sant Joan de les Fonts to Junta of Catalonia, 
24 August 1810, ACA. JSC. 76. 
Junta of Mataro to Junta of Catalonia, ACA. JSC. 4. 
A. Simon Tarres (ed.), ‘La Guerra del Francés segons les memories d’un hisendat 
del Corregiment de Girona (Memories d’Antoni Bellsolell)’, in L’Aveng, 
no. 113 (1988), pp. 42-7. 
Various, Institut Municipal d’Historia de Barcelona, Seccié de Consellers, 
C-XVI-316. 

<<<PDFPAGE 131>>>
6S. 
Antonio Moliner Prada 
113 
. F. Rovira to Junta of Catalonia, 18 January 1810, ACA. JSC. 76. 
. E.g. J. Manso to Junta of Catalonia, 2 June 1812, ACA. JSC. 86. 
. Various, ACA. JSC. 87. 
. E.g. E. Beulas and A. Dresa, La Guerra del Frances a Matar6, 1808-1814 
(Barcelona, 1989), pp. 115-16. The most well-known example of an irregular 
who went over to the French is constituted by the notorious Josep Pujol 
i Barraca. Generally known 
as ‘Boquica’, 
he had originally been a 
smuggler and had in 1808 taken part in the fringes of the guerra del francés, 
before leading his men over to the enemy, and becoming the head of an 
irregular force known as the Cazadores Distinguidos de Catalufia. For another 
example, cf. J. Bertran to Junta of Catalonia, 16 July 1810, ACA. JSC. 76. 
. Junta of Matar6 to Junta of Catalonia, 29 March 1810, ACA. JSC. 76. 
. E.g. Baron de Eroles to Junta of Catalonia, 4 August 1811, ACA. JSC. 87. 
. Cf. N. Gay to Junta of Catalonia, 20 August 1811, ibid. 
. P.A. Albanés to Junta of Catalonia, 11 July 1811, ACA. JSC. 87. 
. M. Errando to Junta of Catalonia, 19 May 1812, ACA. JSC. 86. 
. M. Errando to Junta of Catalonia, 12 June 1812, ibid. 
. Ferrer, Barcelona cautiva, v, Appendix no 45, pp. CLXXXIV—CLXXXVI. 
. H. de Beaumont Brivazac, Rapports addressés a S.E. le Général en Chef, Comte 
Decaen, Gouverneur-Général de la Catalogne, et a Monsieur le Général de Division, 
Comte Maurice Mathieu, Commandant Supérieur, par H. de Beaumont Brivasac 
(Barcelona, 1813), I, p. 19. 
. Various, ACA. JSC. 3. 
. Junta of Vic to Junta of Catalonia, 27 October 1808, ACA.JSC. 68. 
. S. Woolf, La Europa Napoleonica (Barcelona, 1992), pp. 309-310. 
. Various, ACA. JSC. 87. 
. Various, ACA. JSC. 71. 
. N. Gay to Junta of Catalonia, 22 May 1810, ACA. JSC. 76. 
. Junta of Granollers to Junta of Catalonia, 13 October 1808, ACA. JSC. 68. 
For a French view of this action, cf. Diario de Barcelona, 12 October 1808, 
pp. 1231-2. 
Cabanes, Ejército de Catalufa, 
pp. 41-2. Also worth consulting here is 
E. Canales, ‘Militares y civiles en la conduccién de la guerra de la Independ- 
encia: la vision de Francisco Javier Cabanes’, in J.A. Armillas (ed.), La Guerra 
de la Independencia: Estudios (Zaragoza, 2001), il, pp. 985-987. 
. Cf. M. Ramisa, La Guerra del Francés al corregiment de Vic (Vic, 1993), pp. 112-13; 
M. Ramisa, Els catalans i el domini napoleonic (Montserrat, 1995), pp. 433-40. 
. E.g. O’Donnell to Junta of Catalonia, n.d., ACA. JSC. 7. 
. O’Donnell to Junta of Catalonia, 20 January 1810, ibid. 
. Oman, Peninsular War, I, pp. 313-14; ibid., Iv, p. 540. 
. Cf. Pérez Unzueta, El somatent, pp. 290-1. 
nIbid:, pi Z286. 
. Ferrer, Barcelona cautiva, 1, Appendix no. 12, p. CLXXVIII. 
. .Cf. memorial of T. Artiés, 31 July 1808, ACA. JSC. 68. 
. Cf. memorial of A. Ochando Ros, 10 July 1811, ACA. JSC. 87; Pérez Unzueta, 
El somatent, pp. 288-9. 
. Decree of Junta of Catalonia, 11 July 1811, ACA. JSC. 89. 
. ‘Leyes penales para los Cuerpos de Reserva 0 cuando esten de servicio militar’, 
ACA. JSC. 88. 

<<<PDFPAGE 132>>>
114 
Popular Resistance in Catalonia 
77. Antonio Borras, ‘Memoria sobre somatens de la Provincia de Catalufia’, 29 
January 1810, ACA. JSC. 76. 
78. Anon. to Junta of Catalonia, n.d., ACA. JSC. 89. 
9. Ibid. 
80. J. Clarés to Junta of Catalonia, 31 May 1812, ACA. JSC. 86; J. Mansé6 to Junta 
of Catalonia, 12 July 1811, ACA. JSC. 87. 
81. A. Blanch, Historia de la Guerra de la Independencia en el Antiguo Principado 
(Barcelona, 1968), p. 475. The Catalan muns as follows: ‘Lo baro d’Eroles, es 
un joch de boles...En Gay, no hi arriba may 
...En Milans, ja no ataca com 
abans 
... En Manso, ja fa el ganso.’ 

<<<PDFPAGE 133>>>
The Anatomy of a Research Project: 
The Sociology of the Guerrilla War 
in Spain, 1808-14 
Charles J. Esdaile and Leonor Hernandez Enviz 
| 
The identity of the Spanish guerrillas of 1808-14 is not a subject that 
has ever gripped the attention of the historical community. Whilst there 
has been general agreement that popular resistance played a considerable 
role in Spain’s struggle against Napoleon, the men and women who 
, actually took up arms against the invaders have remained cloaked in 
- anonimity. Proud of the heritage of their patrias chicas, a number of local 
historians have sought to uncover the identities of the leaders of the 
guerrilla bands that operated in their own provinces, whilst the eagerness 
_ of the nineteenth-century Republican, Rodriguez Solis, to emphasise the 
_ heroism of the Spanish people encouraged him to embark on an extensive 
) catalogue of the partidas and their exploits that to this day remains an 
| important introduction to the subject.’ Other writers, meanwhile, have 
concentrated on painting a picture of individual cabecillas and in the 
_ process have afforded us a series of more or less useful introductions to 
_ 
the guerrilla in one part of Spain or another. However, this work is but a 
_ beginning. Whilst it has given us a picture of the main leaders, and here 
_ and there even provided us with the names of a few of their followers, it 
made no almost attempt to analyse such questions as age, occupation, 
social class or geographical origin (in fairness to Rodriguez Solis, he does 
provide some statistical detail on both the provinces that the men he 
uncovered operated in and the period in which they were active, but his 
data is so random, unreliable and unscientific that his figures are of 
little use). For a long time, meanwhile, there was little interest in taking 
matters further, whilst such historians who did feel the need to say 
something on the subject were reduced to making vague generalizations. 
Let us take, for example, the words of Gabriel Lovett: 
115 

<<<PDFPAGE 134>>>
116 
The Anatomy of a Research Project 
Who were the guerrillas and their leaders? A cross section of the 
whole Spanish nation, they included men from all walks of life. They 
were peasants, shepherds, students, smugglers, dispersed soldiers, or 
simply deserters who preferred to fight in groups untrammelled by 
military regulations and discipline to serving in the ranks of the 
remaining regular army units. There was an occasional nobleman 
and there were quite a few clergymen, but on the whole the bulk of 
these groups was made up of the sons of the humblest classes, espe- 
cially peasants.* 
In a general sense these remarks are probably sensible enough, but 
they are clearly based on nothing better than ‘guesstimation’. Nor, of 
course, do they offer us anything in the way of figures. Only very 
recently, indeed, has greater exploration of the immense wealth afforded 
by Spain’s national, provincial and municipal archives, together with 
the spread of information technology, prompted an interest in taking 
matters further, in which respect mention must be made of two names 
in particular. In Andalucia the present author’s esteemed friend and col- 
league Francisco Luis Diaz Torrejon has spent the past few years comb- 
ing the municipal archives of such towns as Osuna for evidence of 
irregular resistance in the provinces of Cadiz, Malaga and Seville, and 
great things are to be expected from his research, the result of which is 
due to be published in the not too distant future. And from his base in 
Valencia the distinguished British historian of the Spanish Civil War, 
Ronald Fraser, has for the past ten years been engaged in the elabora- 
tion of a social history of the Spanish War of Independence, which has 
incorporated a certain amount of work on the guerrillas. The results of 
this work having just been published in the Spanish journal, Historia 
Social, it seems appropriate to give them here for the purposes of com- 
parison. Thus, Fraser cites a total of 1091 individuals, including 748 
men whom he lists simply as guerrillas and another 343 whom he lists 
as men condemned to death as guerrillas or bandits by the special law 
courts set up by the josefino regime to try crimes relating to highway rob- 
bery and irregular resistance. As might be expected, these individuals are 
then characterized according to various headings, the first of these being 
the type of partida to which they belonged, in which respect we learn 
that 49 per cent belonged to groups which sprang up without any offi- 
cial organization, and the remainder — separate figures are not given — to 
bands set up with the sanction of the Patriot authorities, some of which 
were secular (corsarios) and others religious (cruzadas). We then move on 
to questions of occupation and social class. For reasons which are unclear, 

<<<PDFPAGE 135>>>
Charles J. Esdaile and Leonor Hernandez Enviz 
117 
but which are probably related to the fact that the papers of the juntas 
criminals extraordinarias — the josefino tribunals examined by Fraser — contain 
almost no details of the background of the prisoners who came before 
them, these are calculated solely in terms of the 748 ‘guerrillas’, or rather 
the 209 members of this group of whose occupation and place in society 
the author claims to have some knowledge (interestingly, the sources of 
the names concerned, nor, still less, the definition according to which they 
were compiled, are never specified, whilst we are also never provided with 
a clear numerical breakdown of the figures). However, from this we learn 
that 20.9 per cent of the individuals on the list were members of the 
privileged classes whilst another 25.6 per cent came from the populace. 
Groups involved in the former category include clergy (8.3 per cent), 
military (S.5 per cent), civil authorities (2.4 per cent), professionals (2.3 
per cent), students (1.3 per cent) and rentistas (1.1 per cent), and those 
involved in the latter peasants (12 per cent), day labourers (0.5 per cent), 
shepherds (3.4 per cent), muleteers and carters (1 per cent) artisans (4.3 per 
cent), bandits and smugglers (2.4 per cent), and others (2 per cent). If 
analysis is confined to partidas that ostensibly emerged without any official 
authorization, the percentage representing the privileged classes drops to 
18.8 per cent, whilst that representing the masses rises to 29.8 per cent 
(this begs an important question, however: we need to know far more about 
Fraser’s classification of the partidas he has looked at as many so-called 
partidas — good examples are those of Villacampa and Julian Sanchez — were 
actually units of the regular armed forces, and in consequence in no need 
of any such authorization). These figures are then contrasted with the 
contents of the only document in the twenty or so legajos in the Archivo 
General de Simancas pertaining to the juntas criminales extraordinarias that 
contains detailed information on the identities, place of residence and 
occupational backgrounds of a substantial group of guerrillas. Composed 
of 19 men - ten of them deserters from the regular army — from the bands 
of Juan Mendieta (El Capuchino) and Isidro Astorga captured in a raid near 
Valladolid in January 1810, we hear that of them one was a friar, six 
were peasants (labradores), three shepherds, one a market gardener, two 
barbers, one a butcher and one a shoemaker (the occupations of the last 
four are not recorded). To these we may add the occupations of the two 
leaders, neither of whom were captured. Thus, Mendieta, as his nick- 
name suggests, was a friar and Astorga a butcher. Though Fraser does 
not point this out specifically, an obvious difference is apparent. Thus, 
the 19 men captured from the French in very large part come from 
beyond the ranks of the élites, whereas, of the two cabecillas concerned, 
this is the case of only one of them. Nor is this surprising in view of the 

<<<PDFPAGE 136>>>
118 
The Anatomy of a Research Project 
analysis which Fraser provides us of the 118 commanders (out of 333) 
whose occupation he has been able to establish. Indeed, the figures 
given above for the 748 guerrillas as a whole are found to be reversed, 
28.2 per cent of the cabecillas coming from the privileged classes and 
20.3 per cent coming from the masses, whilst Fraser further notes that 
the ‘men of quality’ whom he has been able to find fighting in the 
rank and file of the guerrilla movement was, by contrast, 
a much 
lower percentage of the figure than the 20.9 per cent which they consti- 
tuted of the list as a whole. In brief, then, what we get is a movement 
whose rank and file was drawn largely from the rural lower classes (in 
many instances after they had fought for a while in the regular army: 
deserters, indeed, are said to have represented between one third and 
one half the total number) but whose leadership came from the élite, 
which is a picture not dissimilar from the one sketched out for us by 
Lovett. 
To quote an English proverb, ‘Great minds think alike.’ At the very 
same time that Fraser was producing the figures that we have just looked 
at, the current author was by coincidence engaged on a very similar 
project. In the course of many years research in Spain, he had come 
across a range of primary documents that suggested that it might be 
possible to construct a sociological study of the guerrilla movement. 
Having been awarded a two-year research fellowship by the Leverhulme 
Trust in May 2000, he was able to put this to good use and elaborate 
a database that by September 2002 contained the details of no fewer 
than 1166 individuals. In amassing this figure, however, much stricter 
parameters were imposed than those that seem to have been made use 
of by Fraser. For example, whilst the same volumes of documents relating 
to the juntas criminals extraordinarias were consulted, a very careful 
selection was made of their contents, and the men tried by the French 
were only added to the data base if there was strong evidence to suggest 
that they had been members of a partida (by which was meant a military 
force that, even if it was eventually militarized and subsumed into the 
ranks of the regular army, was in its origins independent of the regular 
structures of the state). At the same time, meanwhile, great care was 
taken to exclude forces which were made up of local militias and home 
guards, such as the Catalan somatén, or units of the regular armed 
forces, including the many new volunteer and conscript units raised in 
1808, the result of this having been the omission of a great many familiar 
names. To take just one example, no mention will be found of the famous 
Leonese leader, Julian Sanchez Garcia, on the grounds that he obtained 
a commission in 1808, albeit in a new regiment, and for the whole of 

<<<PDFPAGE 137>>>
Charles J. Esdaile and Leonor Hernandez Enviz 
119 
1809 operated as part of the regular Spanish forces based on the western 
frontiers of the province of Salamanca, only becoming a ‘guerrilla’ when 
the area was occupied by the French in 1810 (and, by the same token, 
reverting to fighting as part of the local field army when it was liberated 
two years later). In so far as can be ascertained, meanwhile, the range of 
sources was much wider: amongst the papers made use of, for example, 
was the copious personal archive of General Francisco Copons y Navia; 
held in the Real Academia de Historia in Madrid, it being ascertained 
that no one had accessed these papers since the current author had 
made use of them as a young doctoral student in the summer of 1982. 
What we have, then, is a study that is both very different and entirely 
independent from that of Fraser. Yet, broadly speaking, its conclusions 
were very similar. Thus, after extensive cross-checking, it was found 
that there were 322 men whose occupation in 1808 was known with a 
reasonable degree of certainty. Of these, no fewer than 204 (63.35 per cent) 
may be said in one sense or other to have been the representatives of 
property, power and social success as students, professionals, landowners 
or wealthy tenant farmers, serving or retired army officers, or members 
of the clergy (the remaining 118 include such groups as taverners, 
butchers, stall holders, municipal employees, muleteers, peasants, day 
labourers, artisans, common soldiers, smugglers, bandits and escaped 
prisoners). Too much emphasis should not be placed on such figures, 
for members of the Church, the army or the propertied classes were far 
more likely to leave a trace in archive or written record than members 
of the populacho. However, even if every single one of the remaining 
844 names whose occupation remains a mystery were to turn out to 
have come from the populace, we would still have a situation in which 
groups representing fewer than 10 per cent of the population provided 
17 per cent of the guerrilla movement. Also significant, meanwhile, is 
the identity of men who at one time or another commanded a partida, 
for, out of the 371 such leaders identified in the study, 103 came from 
middling or upper echelons of society, and only 37 from the populacho, 
the backgrounds of the remainder being unknown.* 
Amassing these figures was, of course, an interesting exercise, whilst 
it is gratifying to learn that they have been in some measure confirmed 
. 
by the independent work of Mr Fraser. Yet their generation also gave 
rise to considerable frustration. In the first place, and most obviously, 
there was the question of all the missing information. Who were, for 
example, the 829 men of whom we had little more than a name? When, 
too, had many of the men who were listed as militares enlisted in the 
armed forces? In the second place, meanwhile, there was a need to 

<<<PDFPAGE 138>>>
120 
The Anatomy of a Research Project 
come up with more names: it is impossible to establish exactly how 
many guerrillas took the field against French, but estimates for the total 
number in action have ranged up to 50 000, whilst a list of 22 partidas 
that was published in various Spanish newspapers in 1812 claimed that 
in October 1811 these alone amounted to 38 520 combatants.° In the 
third place, it could not but be felt that the selection of the material was 
random in the extreme: garnered in the pursuit of an entirely different 
project, it was determined not by considerations that were germane to 
itself, but by the dictates of what was required for the elaboration of 
Guerrillas, Bandits and Adventurers (for this reason it would be absurd to 
attempt to draw conclusions from it with regard to, say, the geographical 
origins of the guerrillas). In the fourth place, there were many sources 
which had of necessity been left untapped, a good example here being 
Spain’s many municipal archives. And, last but not least, studying the 
guerrillas suggested that there were many questions that might be 
illuminated by a more extensive database: one possibility, for example, 
would be to cross reference known guerrillas with the names of those 
executed for banditry after 1815, whilst a second might be to compare 
the social base of the guerrillas with that of the regular army. 
To pursue these goals, however, would clearly be quite impossible 
without the aid of dedicated research assistance, and to this end from 
the autumn of 2000 onwards, application was made to a variety of 
funding bodies in the hope of obtaining the necessary support. In May 
2002 these efforts paid off, the Arts and Humanities Research Board 
awarding the current author a grant of £51 000, of which the chief 
purpose was the employment of a Spanish research assistant. Initially, 
funding was sufficient only for one year, but a further grant of approxi- 
mately £19 000 has since been obtained from the British Academy. 
Work therefore continued until the summer of 2004, and the findings 
of the project are shortly to be made available to the academic community 
by means of the internet, all that remains to be said at this point in 
proceedings being to thank both the Arts and Humanities Research 
Board and the British Academy for their generosity, not to mention the 
many scholars in both Britain and Spain who have given ‘Guerrillas and 
Bandits’ their advice and support. 
Let us now turn to the question of ‘nuts and bolts’. The starting point 
for any database is that it should be accessible and easy to manipulate, 
in which respect matters are greatly facilitated by the widespread avail- 
ability of Access and Windows. Such is the dominance of these products 
that there was no need to consider any other system, and the bulk of the 
designers’ attention has therefore been directed more towards achieving 

<<<PDFPAGE 139>>>
Charles J. Esdaile and Leonor Hernandez Enviz 
121 
the greatest possible degree of coherence in the construction of the 
database, in which respect particular attention was paid to, first, considering 
the sort of information that might be gathered on the subject of the 
Spanish guerrillas, and, second, rationalizing the headings under which 
it would be entered. With this in mind, especial heed was also taken of 
the likely purposes for which the database might be used by future 
research projects. In the short term, meanwhile, it was agreed that the 
basic questions which the database should address were essentially 
two-fold. First of all, there was the issue of ‘quantity’. How many partidas 
existed? How many men fought in them? How frequently were they to 
be encountered? In what areas did they operate? Secondly, there was 
that of ‘content’. Who joined the guerrillas? How old were they? What 
were they? Were did they stand with regard to issues of politics? And, 
finally, there was that of ‘activity’. For how long was each partida active? In 
what actions did they fight the French? How many men could they 
muster at various moments of their existence? In addressing these ques- 
tions, however, it was obvious that many difficulties would have to be 
faced. The documentation, for example, is extremely fragmentary, whilst 
much of the information that is required is not usually recorded: indeed, 
we generally only have full details only of a small number of very 
prominent figures. Given these problems, it might have been thought 
that one solution would have been to reduce the number of questions 
to be asked in respect of each individual to a bare minimum, but this 
temptation was resisted: as research continues, there is always the hope 
that the gaps might gradually be filled as fresh information becomes 
available or fresh archives are tapped, and it was therefore be judged to 
be much better at least to create the option of adding such material 
rather than to preclude all chance of doing so right at the beginning of 
the project. It will further be noted, meanwhile, that the scope of the 
database 
is much wider than that of the primitive 
‘pilot’ model 
developed in the period 2000-02, the new model being designed so that 
it can accommodate not just armed civilians, but also the militias, 
home guards and regular troops who took part in /a guerrilla alongside 
them, the object here being first to spread the net as wide as possible in 
terms of information gathering and second to enable scholars to draw 
sociological comparisons between different aspects of resistance to the 
French. However, that said, it will further be noted that great care has 
been taken to keep the ‘true’ guerrillas separate from other combatants 
in the struggle. 
Before moving on to a discussion of material that has been entered 
into the database, it is worth highlighting two other issues that have 

<<<PDFPAGE 140>>>
122 
The Anatomy of a Research Project 
caused the designers much debate. The first is the obvious one of 
language. As it cannot be expected that all those who consult the database 
will have access to Spanish, it was decided that it would have to be pre- 
pared in duplicate, and, further, that in the English version all accents 
and other language marks should be suppressed. The second 
is a 
somewhat less obvious question of geography in that there have been 
repeated changes in Spain’s territorial organization since the Napoleonic 
era, and in this respect it was eventually agreed that towns, villages and 
such should be listed under their current affiliations. 
In so far as the organization of the material is concerned, 
it is 
arranged so that it may be consulted under a number of headings. A full 
list of these, together with the possible answers that may be returned in 
response to each query, is appended as an appendix to this paper. Needless 
to say, the number of permutations that enquiries may take is virtually 
infinite. It is, for example, possible to ask the database to give details of 
the number of ecclesiastics in the full list, the number of ecclesiastics 
who commanded partidas, the number of ecclesiastics who held subaltern 
rank, the number of ecclesiastics who fought as members of the rank 
and file and the number of ecclesiastics who were killed in action or 
executed by the invaders, and all this in connection with the whole war 
or some period thereof, and the whole of Spain or some part thereof. 
And, should it be wanted to go still further, the ecclesiastics could be 
broken down into their different categories — seminarians, deacons, priests, 
friars, archdeacons and so forth. 
The sources used for this study have included both primary sources 
and the published works of other historians. With regard to the former, 
considerations of time have forced the designers to concentrate on 
archival centres which contain large concentrations of material such as 
the Archivo Histérico Nacional, the Archivo General Militar, the Archivo 
General de Simancas, the Archivo de la Corona de Aragon, the Real 
Academia de Historia and the Archivo Municipal de Zaragoza. Collections 
consulted, meanwhile, include the 1007 volumes of pamphlets and 
other printed material known as the Coleccion Documental del Fraile, 
the papers of the Junta Central, the Junta Superior de Catalufia and the 
Juntas Criminales Extraordinarias, and the papers of Generals Blake, 
Castanos, Palafox and Copons y Navia. Where possible, material has 
also been incorporated into the database from English-language sources, 
the Wellington Papers and the extensive memoir material associated 
with the Peninsular army both containing many references to la guerrilla. 
With regard to secondary sources, meanwhile, the work of a wide range 
of authors has been carefully ‘trawled’ to provide as much information 

<<<PDFPAGE 141>>>
Charles J. Esdaile and Leonor Hernandez Enviz 
123 
as posible, and the results checked against the original documents 
(a process which has proved to be immensely time consuming: many 
works on /a guerrilla are, at best, intensely hagiographic). 
What, though, of the question of results? Given the huge obstacles 
posed by the nature of the material, progress in amassing the data has 
been much slower than the designers would have wished. At the time of 
writing, the number of guerrillas entered in the database stands at 
3024, of which 656 were commandants, 39 seconds-in-command, 2135 
‘subalterns’ (by which is meant all officers other than commandants 
and their seconds, all non-commmissioned officers and all members 
of the rank and file), 167 unknown and 27 civilian collaborators 
(Figure 7.1). Limited though these figures are, however, they have yet 
produced a number of interesting points. Of these, the first is clearly the 
fact that activity was not constant across the full length of the war. 
On the contrary, from 1809 onwards there was was a steady fall in the 
number of individuals active in any given year. Thus, in 1809, 628 of 
the combatants on the list were active, whereas in 1811 the number 
was 557 and in 1813 only 136 (Figure 7.2). Meanwhile, the guerrilla 
bands seem to have become fewer in number: in 1809 commandants 
constituted 42.4 per cent of the number of combatants, whereas by 1813 
this figure had fallen to 19.1 per cent (Figure 7.3). This itself is very 
interesting, confirming as it does the very considerable anecdotal 
evidence that suggests that there was a steady decline in the popularity 
of the war, and, by extension, the apathy of the civilian population. This 
is, perhaps, most graphically expressed by Figure 7.4, which shows the 
percentage of the survey known to have been in arms at any given time. 
Given that it may be interrogated with regard to both the number of 
partidas and the number of combatants operating in any given province, 
interesting details may also be obtained from the database with regard 
to the response of different regions of Spain to French occupation. In 
brief, in certain areas the response appears to have been much more 
enthusiastic than in others. Navarre, for example, accounts for 215 of 
the 3024 combatants (7.1 per cent), whereas in 1808, at 221 728, its 
population numbered only 2.1 per cent of that of Spain as a whole. Yet 
Andalucia had 1 909 422 inhabitants (18.1 per cent) and could only 
produce 290 combatants (9.6 per cent), whilst Galicia did still worse 
with 1 142 630 inhabitants (10.8 per cent) and 66 fighters (2.2 per cent). 
When it comes to the number of bands that have been traced, however, 
these figures are more or less reversed in that, at 129 (19.7 per cent) and 
38 (5.8 per cent) Andalucia and Galicia have a much larger share than 
the number of men that they turned out would seem to warrant, and 

<<<PDFPAGE 142>>>
124 
The Anatomy of a Research Project 
Navarre, by contrast, 
a much smaller one, the figure here being a mere 
24 (3.7 per cent).° In short, the less popular enthusiasm there was for 
the struggle, the smaller and more numerous were the guerrilla bands. 
Also evident, meanwhile, is the close connection that exists between 
this point and the extent to which militarization took hold amongst 
the guerrillas, almost all the bands that were eventually transformed 
into units of the regular army - examples include those of Espoz y 
Mina, Longa and Juan Martin Diez - coming from areas where support 
for the struggle appears to have been above the average. For all this, 
readers are referred to Figures 7.5 and 7.6. 
In so far as such questions as occupation and social class are concerned, 
as Figures 7.7 and 7.8 show, the database records the details of some 
534 individuals (as opposed to the 315 considered at an earlier date by 
the present author or the 209 analysed by Fraser). Unfortunately, differ- 
ences in the manner in which the data has been compiled and analysed 
make the elaboration of direct comparisons a slightly problematic task, 
but what stands out is the very high percentage of the men concerned 
who in some way were associated with either the Church, the Bourbon 
state or the social élite. Thus, 178 (33.3 per cent) come from the ranks 
of the Church, 122 (22.8 per cent) from those of the armed forces, 43 
(8.2 per cent) from those of the administration and the judiciary and 28 
(S.5 per cent) from commerce and the free professions. Given that 18 
(3.4 per cent) are described as rentiers and 11 (2.2 per cent) as students, 
some 400 (75.4 per cent) may be said to have come from the establishment 
or the upper echelons of society, whilst this figure may almost certainly 
be increased still further by the addition of at least some of the 59 
individuals who were involved in agriculture, the ranks of the latter 
undoubtedly including a number of prosperous tenant farmers or even 
landowners (for comparison, the corresponding figures in Fraser and 
Esdaile primitivo were 20.9 per cent and 63.35 per cent). What all this 
suggests, of course, is that participation in la guerrilla of those with 
some stake in society — something to lose, indeed — was far higher than 
that of those on its margins, this figure being strengthened still further 
by consideration of the fact that only 10.2 per cent of the individuals 
whose estate is known were definitely pecheros (Figure 7.9). 
There is, meanwhile, a further way of dissecting Ja guerrilla, and that 
it is to to look at the way in which it was composed in military terms. If 
the database is consulted with regard to the number of partidas that it 
lists, it will be discovered that there is mention of some 656. Not all of 
these units are bands of irregulars of the sort envisaged in the traditional 
historiography, however. On the contrary, the term is used rather to 

<<<PDFPAGE 143>>>
Charles J. Esdaile and Leonor Hernandez Enviz 
125 
mean simply an independent force of armed men. On occasion, this 
might be a band of armed civilians who had come together to fight the 
French, but, then again, it might not. Thus, it will be found that com- 
batants are listed under many other headings, including the volunteer 
and conscript units that were raised to supplement the regular army 
and the various local militias that were organized to help fight the 
French in Catalonia, Galicia and other areas. All this is reflected in Figure 
7.10, which shows the members of four different categories of partida 
over the course of the period 1808-12, and, more particularly, how 
generally only a minority of combatants were members of the group 
that has been defined as ‘unmilitarized partidas’ — in other words bands 
of armed civilians — at any given time (the one exception, by a short 
head, appears to be 1810). Especially noteworthy, too, is the collapse in 
support for the Catalan somatén, this being a force that has been much 
vaunted in traditional accounts of the war. This, however, is by-the-by, 
what matters at this point being rather the way in which a large part of 
la guerrilla can be seen to have depended on and been controlled by the 
Patriot authorities, rather than having been the spontaneous work of 
the armed pueblo. Moreover, many of the bands that did spring up from 
the ranks of the civilian population were themselves headed by members 
of the élite, rather than the commonalty, the fact being that figures 
such as the peasants Juan Martin Diez and Francisco Espoz y Mina were 
far less common than the legend suggests. 
It cannot be stressed strongly enough that great care must be taken 
with these figures, which are beyond doubt seriously distorted by the 
stronger footprint that property, education and social status will always 
leave in the archives. To believe, indeed, that the populace was absent 
from Ja guerrilla would be patently ridiculous. In Navarre archival evidence 
suggests that one third of the male population eventually took part in 
the struggle, whilst, even if this province is completely atypical — Navarre 
was one of the few areas in the country where many of the inhabitants 
of the countryside were reasonably prosperous — it is quite clear that the 
bulk of the rank and file were of humble stock (particularly noteworthy 
are the frequent references to the presence of large numbers of deserters 
from the regular army).’ Absence of evidence, then, is not the same as 
evidence of absence. But what is clear is that to paint a picture of the 
Spanish people rushing into the hills to take up arms in defence of dios, 
rey y patria is distinctly unwise, and all the more so given the great 
weight of evidence that exists in the archives to suggest that large numbers 
of recruits joined the partidas because they were starving, because they 
wished to clothe a life of crime with a veneer of respectability or because 

<<<PDFPAGE 144>>>
126 
The Anatomy of a Research Project 
taking the chance of service in their ranks was preferable to being 
marched off to France as a prisoner of war, because they wished to avoid 
service in the regular army or simply because they were conscripted. Still 
more can this be seen to be the case, meanwhile, if one takes into account 
the fact that the database shows that comparatively few participants in 
la guerrilla fought in the bands of armed civilians of legend. 
To conclude, then, what do we see? First of all, it is clear that, despite 
the old saw that the Spanish guerrillas, as a popular phenomenon, left 
no trace in the archives, a considerable amount of archival information 
is available on their identity and background. Not only is it available, 
moreover, but it may be woven together to provide a surprisingly clear 
picture of popular resistance to the French. In so far as can be ascertained, 
meanwhile, that picture is inclined to confirm both the rather vague 
generalizations that have hitherto been all that the historian has had to 
go on so far as the social composition of the guerrillas is concerned, and 
the increasingly iconoclastic line that the present author has taken over 
the years with regard to the participation of armed civilians in the struggle 
against Napoleon — a line, moreover, that is pressed home still further 
in his monograph, Fighting Napoleon: Guerrillas, Bandits and Adventurers 
in Spain, 
1808-14. That said, however, to pretend that the results of the 
research project currently under review have been entirely satisfactory 
would be dishonest. Setting aside the fact that a much wider selection 
of data would be welcome, one is in the end constrained to recognize 
that many problems are suggested even by such material as has been 
generated. Setting aside the issue of whether or not the data that has 
been collected can in any sense be relied upon, the fact remains that the 
privileged classes were always certain to be over represented in the findings 
of any exercise such as the one currently under discussion. This, of course, 
may be corrected easily enough in our interpretation of the figures, but, 
if the figures are to be corrected, how far, in the end, have we advanced 
from the ‘guesstimation’ with which this chapter commenced? But this, 
perhaps, is something that is rather to be welcomed, suggesting, as it 
does, that ‘number crunching’ has its limitations, and that there can in 
the end be no substitute for painting visions of the past. 
Notes 
1. E. Rodriguez Solis, Los Guerrilleros de 1808: Historia Popular de la Guerra de la 
Independencia (Madrid, 1887). For an example of such a regional study, cf. 
R. Guirao and L. Sorando, El Alto Aragon en la Guerra de la Independencia 
(Zaragoza, 1995). 
2. G. Lovett, Napoleon and the Birth of Modern Spain (New York, 1965), p. 672. 

<<<PDFPAGE 145>>>
Charles J. Esdaile and Leonor Hernandez Enviz 
127 
. For all this, cf. R. Fraser, ‘Identidades sociales desconocidas: las Guerrillas 
Espaniolas en la Guerra de la Independencia’, Historia Social, no. 46 (2003), 
pp. 3-23. 
. For full details, cf. C. Esdaile, Fighting Napoleon: Guerrillas, Bandits and Adventurers 
in Spain, 1808-14 (Yale University Press, 2004), pp. 92-3. 
. El Redactor General, 3 November 1812, Hemerdteca Municipal de Madrid 6/3. 
. Please note that all population figures are taken from the 1797 census. This 
is notoriously unreliable, the total of 10 541 221 that it gives being at least 
a million short of the reality, which has been calculated at 11 595 343, but 
it seems more logical to rely on this rather than on the earlier census of 
1786-87. 
. For detailed discussion of the exceptional case presented by Navarre, cf. J. Tone, 
The Guerrilla War in Navarre and the Defeat of Napoleon in Spain (Chapel Hill, North 
Carolina, 1994), pp. 9-41 passim, and F. Miranda, La Guerra de la Independencia 
en Navarra: la Accion del Estado (Pamplona, 1977), pp. 119-35. 

<<<PDFPAGE 146>>>
128 
The Anatomy of a Research Project 
Appendix: fields contained in the database 
1 
3 
4 
n 
16 
17 
18 
Identity: name, surname and nickname. 
Age in 1808. 
Marital status: single, married, married with children, widowed, widowed 
with children, ecclesiastic, unknown. 
Origin: place of birth/residence. 
Professional particulars: active, retired, unknown. 
Occupation: lawyer; postal official; fiscal official; mason; mayor; archdeacon; 
muleteer; barber; chemist; canon; chaplain; butcher; carpenter; clergyman; 
merchant; coachman; smuggler; corregidor; leather worker; priest; priest with 
benefice; priest without benefice; deacon; ecclesiastic; tobacconist; student; 
baize manufacturer; corn factor; tailor’s assistant; public prosecutor; 
friar; 
Agustinian friar; Benedictine friar; Bernardine friar; Capuchin friar; Carmelite 
friar; Carthusian 
friar; Franciscan 
friar; Mercenary friar; Trinitarian 
friar; 
customs 
guard (tobacco 
administration); 
day labourer; 
peasant; 
doctor; 
messenger; innkeeper; soldier; soldier (corporal); soldier (Guardia de Corps); 
naval officer (first lieutenant); soldier (retired); soldier (captain); soldier (colonel); 
soldier (private); naval officer (second lieutenant); notary; customs official; 
gensdarme; municipal official; shepherd; teacher; rentier; gravedigger; bartender; 
weaver; military accountant; clerk in minor orders; leather worker; shoemaker. 
Professional group: agriculture; government; clergy; regular clergy; secular 
clergy; commerce; construction; smuggler; army; education; functionary; 
artisanate; navy; other occupations; free professions; rentier; transport. 
Rating: apprentice; craftsman; master. 
Social class: commoner; ecclesiastic; noble; soldier. 
Economic class: tenant; large-property owner; medium-property owner; 
small-property owner. 
Cultural characteristics: illiterate; literate; university graduate. 
Military particulars in 1808: serving soldier; retired soldier; civilian; ecclesiastic; 
unknown. 
Rank in 1808. 
Unit in 1808. 
Combat experience prior to 1808: War of the Oranges (1801); Revolu- 
tionary War (1792-95); War against Britain (1796-1808); colonial campaigns 
(America), etc. 
Month and year of first appearance in the ‘little war’. 
Reason for enlistment: commissioned by the civilian or military authorities; 
dispersed; deserted; failure of the national army; revenge; unknown; granted 
permission to form a band; granted permission to form a cruzada; home 
defence; escaped French imprisonment; escaped from justice; juramentado 
taken prisoner by the guerrillas; carried off by force; transferred to land service 
for want of naval resources and/or objectives; requested permission to form 
a band; ordered by the Patriot authorities to join the guerrillas; freed from 
prison to fight the French; personal violence. 
Initial status: commandant; second commandant; subaltern; unknown; 
civilian collaborator. 

<<<PDFPAGE 147>>>
33 
34 
Charles J. Esdaile and Leonor Hernandez Enviz 
129 
Province and region in which activities began. 
Family members serving with the guerrillas. 
Military service, 1808-14 (by month). 
Status, 1808-14: commandant; second commandant; subaltern; unknown; 
civilian collaborator. 
Category of combatant in 1808: bandit; gendarmerie (resguardo); insurgent; 
local militia (alarma); local militia (cruzada); local militia (milicia honrada); local 
militia (rising); local militia (somatén); regular army (migueletes); militar-ized 
guerrilla band; unmilitarized guerrilla band; regular army (new regiment); 
regular army (pre-1808); Royal Navy (Spanish); unknown. 
Region/s of operation (by year). 
Band/unit (by year). 
Changes in status (by year). 
Combats (by month). 
Province or provinces of operation by month. 
Strength of band/unit. 
Political preferences: absolutist; liberal. 
Career after 1814, date and place of death. 
Fate (1808-14): garrotted by junta criminal; hung by French army; amnestied; 
died in combat; died of wounds; went over to enemy; imprisoned by Patriot 
authorities; captured by the French army; sent to France as prisoner of war; 
retired to civil life; executed by other guerrillas; executed by the French 
army; executed by the Patriot authorities; exiled to Portugal; exiled to 
France; exiled to Britain; wounded in battle; band dissolved by the Patriot 
authorities for misconduct; band dispersed by the French; captured by other 
guerrillas; sentenced to death by junta criminal; sentenced to death by hanging 
by junta criminal; imprisoned by junta criminal; surrendered to the French; 
returned to the ranks of the regular army. 
Fate (post-1814): stayed on in the army; fought against the absolutism of 
Fernando VII; took part in the Carlist War; returned to civil life; emigrated 
to Britain; fought against the liberals; participated in the Navarrese uprising 
of 1814. 
Sources: primary; secondary. 
Rank 
No. 
% 
Commandant 
656 
PNETh 
Second commandant 
39 
ies) 
Subaltern 
2135 
70.6 
Collaborator 
27 
0.9 
Unknown 
167 
Bye 
Total 
3024 
100.0 
Figure 7.1 
Combatants in Ja guerrilla analyzed by status 

<<<PDFPAGE 148>>>
130 
PI-8O8I ‘smje}s pue ead Aq pazdjeue vijiuan$ vj Ul syuRyeqUuIOD 
ZZ a/Ns1I 
DS Soe 
batt eo 
rob aere 
moat Be Ee 
oooh eas 
oot ee 
woot | 
soon | 
uMmoUyu 
JoyesogeyjoD 
wiayeqns 
JUBPURWIWOD PUDDES 
jUepUBWIWOD 

<<<PDFPAGE 149>>>
IH 
—@ % commandants 
1808 
1809 
1810 
1811 
1812 
1813 
1814 
Figure 7.3 
Commandants as a percentage of combatants in Ja guerrilla, 1808-14 
35.0 
25.0 
20.0 
15.0 
10.0 
50) 
1808 
1809 
1810 
1811 
1812 
1813 
1814 
Figure 7.4 
Combatants in Ja guerrilla analyzed by year, 1808-14 

<<<PDFPAGE 150>>>
132 
Regions 
No. 
% 
Andalucia 
290 
9.6 
Aragon 
1089 
36.0 
Asturias 
59 
2.0 
Cantabria 
48 
1.6 
Castilla La Mancha 
208 
6.9 
Castilla Le6n 
367 
12.1 
Cataluna 
238 
7.9 
Extremadura 
50 
Ust/ 
Galicia 
66 
Zee 
La Rioja 
104 
3.4 
Madrid 
32 
ile3! 
Murcia 
Ce 
ee 
0.0 
Navarra 
215 
Tis 
Pais Vasco 
74 
2.4 
Valencia 
150 
5.0 
Unknown 
34 
1.4 
Total 
3024 
100.0 
Figure 7.5 
Combatants in Ja guerrilla analyzed by region, 1808-14 
Regions 
No. 
% 
Andalucia 
129 
19.7 
Aragon 
88 
13.4 
Asturias 
20 
3.0 
Cantabria 
7 
alee 
Castilla La Mancha 
67 
10.2 
Castilla Leén 
67 
10.2 
Cataluna 
78 
11.9 
Extremadura 
19 
2.9 
Galicia 
38 
5.8 
La Rioja 
40 
6.1 
Madrid 
10 
1.5 
Murcia 
0 
0.0 
Navarra 
24 
She 
Pais Vasco 
27 
4.1 
Valencia 
36 
Sy) 
Unknown 
6 
0.9 
Total 
656 
100.0 
SE 
Figure 7.6 
Commandants in la guerrilla analyzed by region, 1808-14 

<<<PDFPAGE 151>>>
Occupation 
Actor 
Alderman 
Archdeacon 
Bandit 
Barber 
Blacksmith 
Botanist 
Clergyman 
Clerk in minor orders 
Coachman 
Corn factor 
Corregidor 
Custom Guard 
Customs Official 
Day labourer 
Deacon 
Doctor 
Ecclesiastic 
Fiel de fechos 
Fiscal official 
Foreman 
Friar 
Gensdarme 
Goverment official 
Gravedigger 
Gunsmith 
Income administator 
Figure 7.7 
Combatants in Ja guerrilla analyzed by occupation, 1808-14 
oOoOmMtwWwe_NWAHYHWHOHHHeHeH
HAFNWHN 
Occupation 
Leather worker 
Manufacturer 
Market gardener 
Mason 
Mayor 
Merchant 
Messenger 
Military chaplain 
Military accountant 
Muleteer 
Municipal official 
Notary 
Peasant 
Postal official 
Priest 
Procurador sindico 
Public prosecutor 
Rentier 
Seaman 
Seminarian 
Servant 
Shepherd 
Shoemaker 
Skinner 
Smuggler 
Soldier 
Spinner 
Student 
Surgeon 
Tailor’s assistant 
Tailors cutter 
Taverner 
Teacher 
Tobacconist 
Weaver 
Total 
— 
=—-—- 
=| 
= 
s+ 
WD 
WDM 
| 
WO 
— 
o— 
— 
0oOo 
Oo ide) 
BY 
SS 
(SN) 
aS 
NY 
SON) 
Gp 
es 
ee} 
Sy 
Ss 
Ce) 
Hs 
CA 
133 

<<<PDFPAGE 152>>>
134 
20.0 
18.0 
16.0 
14.0 
12.0 
10.0 
DB _ oF Wh os se wo Pod ao” 
© 
SO 
Py 
PHB” 
oh! 
VON’ 
J 
M8 omeee™ 
TOE AAT 
Leese Ao 
Soldier 
Noble 
Ecclesiastic 
Commoner 
Figure 7.9 
Combatants in la guerrilla analyzed by estate, 1808-14 

<<<PDFPAGE 153>>>
Charles J. Esdaile and Leonor Herndndez Enviz 
135 
120 
@ Unmilitarized guerrilla band 
w Militarized guerrilla band 
100 
i 
@ Regular army (new regiment) 
Local militia (Somatén) 
80 
60 
1808 
1809 
1810 
1811 
1812 
Figure 7.10 
Members of four different categories of armed force in la guerrilla, 
1808-14 
Notes 
Changes in the rank, status and affiliation of many individual combatants 
over the period 1808-14 makes the elaboration of overall figures of this 
sort very difficult. To make it possible at all, it has been necessary to 
establish certain ‘census points’. Taking Figure 7.1 as an example, we 
therefore find that it has been computed on the basis of the first appear- 
ance of each individual in the tables: in consequence, the figure for 
commandants does not include men such as the famous Espoz y Mina 
who originally enlisted in a partida in a subordinate capacity, but then 
established bands of their own. This principle of ‘first appearance’ has 
also been followed with regard to Figures 7.5 and 7.6, but in other cases, 
including, most notably, Figure 7.2, the base has rather been the 
number of combatants registered year by year. And in still other cases 
(Figures 7.7, 7.8 and 7.9), it has been possible simply to take the global 

<<<PDFPAGE 154>>>
136 
The Anatomy of a Research Project 
totals without reference to any further analysis. Finally, attention must 
also be paid to issues of distortion. In Figure 7.5, for example, it will be 
noted that Aragon accounts for a very large number of the combatants. 
This is by no means surprising: AragOn was under continuous French 
occupation longer than almost any province other than Navarre and 
the Basque provinces. But it also has to be recognized that Aragon is an 
area whose guerrilla is better known than almost any other, and the 
authors would here wish to pay particular tribute to the work of the 
Spanish historian, Ram6n Guirao, whose monograph Guerrilleros y Patriotas 
en el Alto Aragon (Huesca, 2000) contains the names of literally hundreds 
of men who enlisted to fight the French in the Huesca area. 

<<<PDFPAGE 155>>>
/ 
Regulating the Irregulars: 
Spanish Legislation on la guerrilla 
during the Peninsular War 
Vittorio Scotti-Douglas* 
Whether irregular warfare holds — together with prostitution — the dubious 
merit of being the most ancient form of human activity is something 
that can never be known for certain. However, all that need concern us 
here is that it is a very old and well-established way of fighting, usually 
employed against overwhelming odds. Tracing its long history is not 
the purpose of this chapter, and all the more so as the current author 
has written on this subject elsewhere.’ But talking about the concept of 
guerrilla does require at least a short philological introduction that will 
give us some insight into the origin and the meaning of this word. 
As is well known, guerrilla is a word that comes to us from Castillian. 
In this language, it is very old, whilst it is obviously derived as a 
diminutive from guerra (‘war’). We encounter it recorded for the first 
time in the famous Tesoro de la Lengua Castellana, 
o Espatiola by 
Sebastian de Covarrubias Orozco, published in Madrid in 1611. Found 
under the heading for guerra, it is defined as ‘a quarrel between private 
citizens that... causes them to split into rival bands and in consequence 
to incur severe punishment at the hands of the ruler of the state’.” Note, 
then, that guerrilla is at this stage is a private conflict, and, being a 
breach of the peace, something that worries rulers, who thus punish it. 
Slightly more than a century later, in the first edition of the Real 
Academia’s dictionary, we find some change, albeit a minor one: ‘Small 
armed conflict, or difference in opinions of little importance.’* There is 
also another definition of guerrilla relating to a carefully described game 
of cards, but this has no military connection other than the fact that, 
*I would like to thank my good friend, Dr Charles Esdaile, for his splendid work 
in editing this chapter; he has respected my thoughts absolutely whilst giving 
the chapter an accessible English form. 
137 

<<<PDFPAGE 156>>>
138 
Regulating the Irregulars 
judging from similar games played in other countries, it was probably 
first played by soldiers.* 
We can read the same things in the editions of the dictionary published 
in 1780, 1783 and 1791. But in the meantime, in 1780 there appeared 
the first Spanish translation of a treatise on the art of war that was, in 
its time, a real European ‘bestseller’. Entitled La Petite Guerre, ou Traité 
du Service des Troupes Légéres en Campagne, this had been written by 
a Frenchman, 
Augustin Thomas 
de Grandmaison, 
and _ originally 
published in 1756. In this work one could find explained the origins, 
development theory and practice of a particular way of waging war 
that, as the title suggests, the author defined as petite guerre — in other 
words ‘small’, ‘petty’ or ‘little’ war. As is well known petite guerre was the 
answer adopted by military theorists 
- and most especially French 
theorists° — to the problems caused for regular armies by the irregular 
forces met in a variety of campaigns from the Thirty Years War 
onwards. In so far as France was concerned, particularly important here 
was the War of the Austrian Succession of 1741-48, in which French 
troops suffered heavy losses at the hands of Maria Theresa’s Croat 
irregulars, but it should be noted that most armies faced such problems 
whilst they were not confined to Europe, as witness the problems faced 
by the British in North America in the Seven Years’ War (1756-63) and 
the American War of Independence (1775-83). Grandmaison’s treatise 
was neither the best, nor, still less, the only one on the subject, but it 
nevertheless proved an incredible success.° As noted above, the first 
Spanish translation was published in 1780, whilst its title was La Guerrilla, 
6 Tratado del Servicio de las Tropas Ligeras en Campania.’ The logical 
consequence of this was to establish an equivalence between guerrilla 
and petite guerre, whilst the expression partidas de guerrilla was used to 
designate the small detachments and cavalry employed in surprise 
attacks, intelligence gathering or advanced reconnaissance. In addition, 
meanwhile, the term might be applied to troops deployed in skirmish 
order on the battlefield, such men being described as being deployed 
en guerrilla.® 
Coming back to our own period, we find that the terms guerrilla and 
partida were employed throughout the Peninsular War. We find them, 
for instance, in General Castafios’ bulletin after the battle of Bailén,’ in 
a biography of the Empecinado published in 1814,!° and in memoirs 
written at the time but not published till long afterwards.'! In the course 
of the struggle, however, their meaning changed. At the beginning of 
hostilities, the word guerrilla referred specifically to regular soldiers, 
and this meaning continued in use for some time. But at the same time 

<<<PDFPAGE 157>>>
Vittorio Scotti-Douglas 
139 
it began to be used in connection with another meaning, this being 
that of the armed struggle of civilians, organized in irregular bands, 
against an invading enemy and/or against a government that was 
unjust or, as in Spain, illegitimate.!? This is, of course, the modern 
understanding of the term ‘guerrilla warfare’ and it is in this sense that 
it has entered languages other than Castillian. 
How, though is all this relevant to the current chapter? In brief, the 
link is found in this very change of meaning. Thus, nearly always 
spontaneously born and headed by local leaders, throughout the 
Peninsular War the new form of partida was frequently in conflict with 
the authorities, both civilian and military. First of all we have to 
consider what happened when insurrection first broke out against the 
French in May 1808. How did the authorities react to this development? 
The general attitude was to try and soothe the people by recommending 
calm, peace, prudence and obedient submission. Let us here cite, for 
instance, General Don Gregorio Garcia de la Cuesta, Capitan General de 
Castilla la Vieja y LeOn, who on 29 May 1808 wrote to the Leonese 
authorities, explaining that, as both Carlos IV and Fernando VII had 
renounced the crown, Spaniards had been freed from any fidelity to 
them, and that obedience was now due to the provisional government — 
the Junta de Gobierno - that for the time being ruled Spain in Napoleon’s 
name, whilst at the same time stressing the need for calm and the 
uselessness of resistance.!? We may discuss the reasons and even under- 
stand the grounds on which such decisions were taken, but there is no 
doubt that such blindness broke the bonds of trust that must necessarily 
unite rulers and ruled. And, needless to say, the expectation of passivity 
on which it was based was swept aside by the success of the uprising. 
Thus, on 6 June 1808 we find the Junta of Seville publishing a document 
entitled Prevenciones, in which it was suggested that general actions 
should be avoided in favour of a strategy in which the enemy would be 
attacked by small bands that would never let them rest, but always 
hang on their flanks and rear, wearing them out, intercepting their 
convoys, destroying their stores, and cutting their communications.'* 
Although it also contains passages which seem to suggest that much 
reliance should also be placed on organized home guards that could 
leap to the defence of bridge, city wall or mountain pass at the first sign 
of the French, this document can be seen as an unequivocal invitation 
to engage in irregular warfare. To put it another way, the Junta was 
specifically encouraging the perpetuation of the popular fury that had 
in many places administered rough justice - sometimes in a barbarous 
way - to all those held responsible, whether justly or not, for the country’s 

<<<PDFPAGE 158>>>
140 
Regulating the Irregulars 
supposed betrayal to the French.’® Contained within it, meanwhile, is 
an assumption on the part of the Junta, a revolutionary reincarnation 
of an ancient and traditional institution, of the army’s near uselessness, 
a popular uprising being held to be the only way — albeit a desperate 
one — of countering the troops of the great emperor. However, after the 
unexpected victory at Bailén on 19 July 1808, the supreme Spanish 
authorities somewhat changed their minds, 
as 
is shown by the 
exaggeratedly optimistic tone of the Manifiesto a la Nacion Espanola. 
A proclamation designed to legitimize the rule of the new Spanish 
government — the Junta Suprema Central de Gobierno del Reino — this 
is one of the most celebrated works of the writer, Manuel Quintana, and 
may almost be regarded as the Spanish equivalent of the United States’ 
declaration of independence."® Setting aside its political aspect — it was 
couched in terms that were strongly liberal - the Manifiesto spoke not 
just of ‘fighting the enemy with success’, but of driving the French 
beyond the Pyrenees, and compelling them to free the king and the 
royal family, and acknowledge Spain’s freedom and independence.” 
And as for how all this was to be done, the proclamation only spoke of 
armies and regular troops, and specifically states that it is only from 
them that the people has to expect its safety. Not a word was devoted to 
the first exploits of the guerrilleros, although stories were circulating that 
in some cases — most notably, El Empecinado — they had begun to 
attack the French even before the uprising of the Dos de Mayo. And all 
the more is this strange given that other episodes had already shown the 
importance of popular participation in the struggle: led by such figures 
as E] Empecinado, the first guerrilla bands had emerged in the summer 
of 1808, whilst one should also remember the success of the Catalan 
somatenes at El] Bruch, and the heroic defence of towns and cities such 
as Valdepefias, Zaragoza, Gerona and Tarragona, not to mention the 
events of the Dos de Mayo in Madrid. 
The irrelevance of Quintana’s approach was revealed very quickly. 
Thus, the general situation had started to deteriorate even before the 
proclamation had become widely available, whilst it continued to 
worsen very quickly in November and December. The list of battles 
against the French is a sequel of defeats — Zornoza (31 October), Gamonal 
(10 November), Espinosa de los Monteros (10-11 November), Tudela 
(23 November), Somosierra (30 November) — and all this culminated in 
Madrid’s capitulation to Napoleon on 4 December. Nor was this an end 
to the story: within a month of the fall of Madrid, the British were 
forced to re-embark at La Corufia; the Spaniards led by General Vives 
compelled to raise the blockade of Barcelona; and the French allowed 

<<<PDFPAGE 159>>>
Vittorio Scotti-Douglas 
141 
once again to besiege Zaragoza. But whilst the nobility, bureaucracy and 
a portion of the intelligentsia did choose the French side, for different 
and sometimes honourable reasons, there were increasing number of 
' guerrillas attacking the French, at first with daggers, knives and a few 
ancient blunderbusses and fowling pieces, and then with muskets and 
bayonets taken from the enemy, whose dead were also stripped of their 
uniforms and shoes. These men were generally grouped together in 
bands known as partidas. A totally irregular formation, a partida normally 
owed its origin to the decision to fight the French of one man who, for 
a variety of reasons — personal prestige, acknowledged courage, previous 
military service honourably discharged, or more simply because of what 
today we label as charisma — was able to gather together a band of 
individuals who were ready to follow him. Of course, some bands were 
unsuccessful and soon fell apart or were overcome, but where success 
was achieved it was a different story. Thus, victory increased the 
enthusiasm of the first members of the band, brought in new recruits, 
and increased the fame of the partida, and very soon the leader would 
become known not by his own name, but by a nickname, if he did not 
have already one. 
As the bands proliferated, however, the Junta Central began to hear 
complaints and protests about their independence. These were the work 
of a variety of provincial juntas and regional military commanders. 
What does the Junta do in the face of this growing clamour? Despite 
the fact that it was in a desperate military situation, it promulgates a 
reglamento or ordinance. Issued in Seville on 28 December 1808, this 
text is of the utmost importance from the historical, political, military 
and juridical point of view.'® It has a short but important foreword, 34 
articles or rules and a final declaration. Let us begin with the foreword, 
especially as this merits quotation in full: 
Spain abounds with subjects endowed with extraordinary bravery, 
who, exploiting the great advantages provided by their knowledge of 
the country, and the implacable hatred of all the nation against the 
tyrant who wants to subdue it by the most iniquitous means, are 
able to spread terror and consternation within his armies. To make it 
easier for them to attain so noble an aim, supply them with the 
means of honourably enriching themselves with the enemy’s booty, 
and allow them to immortalize their names with heroic deeds 
deserving an undying fame, His Royal Majesty [i.e. the Junta Central] 
has deigned to create a new kind of armed force, which is to go 
under the name of partidas or cuadrillas.'° 

<<<PDFPAGE 160>>>
}
142 
Regulating the Irregulars 
The statute’s articles dictate (or rather, as we shall see, try to dictate) a 
rules organizing the band, its ranks, discipline, pay, in a word th 
bureaucratic structure of the partidas, leaving only two articles, Articles 
22 and 23 for detailing the military aspect that is the paramount aim of
its birth. Some attention is also merited by Article 29, which runs as 
follows: 
Many subjects of distinguished bravery and undauntedness having, 
for want of a means of making use of their military talents in a worthy 
manner...devoted themselves to smuggling, they shall be pardoned 
and will be employed in another kind of partida called a cuadrilla... 
in order to make them useful to the state and give them the glorious 
career offered them by the circumstances of the day.”° 
And Articles 30 and 31 give in detail the rewards for smugglers who, 
volunteering to serve in a cuadrilla, arrive armed and with a horse, 
whilst laying down that, if they still had smuggled goods, these should 
be bought ‘at a price granting them [the smugglers] a moderate profit’.”! 
Also interesting, and for that reason worth quoting in full, is the final 
statement, which openly reveals the desire to connect the partidas with 
the regular military apparatus of the state that we shall go on to see. 
Thus: 
Everybody wishing to enlist...under the above rules, must present 
himself immediately to his local provincial junta...or Captain 
General, and then proceed to the commander of whichever field 
army happens to be stationed in the area in order to be sworn in, 
assigned to a unit and given his marching orders. The existence ot 
each partida and cuadrilla having been checked out, the Intendent 
shall then issue an order for them to be granted the relevant pay in 
accordance with a monthly review instituted by the Commissary, 01 
failing him, the local magistrate.” 
The historical importance of this document is quite clear. The firs’ 
text that attempts to legitimate a combat form totally irregular by it: 
own nature, waged by civilians armed with every kind and descriptior 
of arms, including agricultural implements, which, after being used tc 
kill passing Frenchmen, are returned to their peaceful fields, is also the 
confession of a government that cannot trust its army, and tries to us¢ 
laudatory words to win the support of ‘subjects of distinguished bravery 
and undauntedness’ and even smugglers, whose crimes are explainec 

<<<PDFPAGE 161>>>
Vittorio Scotti-Douglas 
143 
_ away by the fiction that they are men of natural military talent who 
_ could not find an outlet for their skills under the antiguo régimen. Just as 
| obvious, meanwhile, is its political, military and juridical importance, 
_ the point being that the independence of the guerrilla movement was 
_ being vitiated at the very moment that it was ostensibly legitimized as a 
phenomenon. Yet from the practical point of view, it was a dead letter 
from the start, the majority of historians agreeing that compliance with 
the reglamento was almost nonexistent. It is not clear if it was this failure 
that pushed the Junta into accepting a project, concocted by Vicente 
Alcala Galiano, that took the form of another set of regulations, but at 
all events on 17 April 1809 there duly appeared the Instruccién para el 
Corso Terrestre contra los Ejércitos Franceses.”? 
Here again a simple reading of the text offers us some very interesting 
points for our consideration. First of all, however, a short explanation 
is needed for the name given to the guerrillas in this document. 
This is very well clarified in the letter that was written to Martin de 
Garay, who was the Secretary of the Junta Central, by the author of 
the proposal. The brother of a naval officer who was killed fighting 
fighting heroically in the battle of Trafalgar, he seems to have been 
thinking primarily in terms of psychological warfare and even bluff. 
Thus: 
Unless I am very much mistaken, this plan ought to give even the 
emperor pause, whilst at the same time spreading fear and terror 
among his soldiers... Always inclined to set much store by the new, 
the French nation can be relied on not to look calmly at the situ- 
ation, and the troops will immediately imagine the countryside to be 
full of corsairs ready to rob and murder them the moment they relax 
their guard.”# 
As for the term itself, it stands, of course, for ‘land piracy’, the model on 
which it was based being that of naval privateering. For a definition, let 
us turn to the Shorter Oxford English Dictionary. In this we read that a 
privateer is ‘an armed vessel owned and officered by private persons, 
and holding a commission from the government, called ‘letters of 
marque’, authorizing the owners to use it against a hostile nation, 
and especially in the capture of merchant shipping’.”” Whilst still to 
all intents and purposes a pirate, the holder of the ‘letters of marque’ 
therefore became a kind of authorized and legal combatant. 
Now, then, we have a completely different situation. The call to arms 
was still universal, but the individual guerrilla was no longer an agent 

<<<PDFPAGE 162>>>
144 
Regulating the Irregulars 
of the state. On the contrary, he was now an entrepreneur who might 
benefit the state by his actions but was really acting on his own 
account. And, as the combatants were now specifically intended to 
spread terror amongst the enemy, it followed that there should be no 
restriction on their actions: no reference, in short, could be made to 
either the laws of war or the principles of common humanity. Much of 
this is clear from Article 1 of the new decree. Thus: 
Every inhabitant of the provinces occupied by the French troops 
who can arm himself, is authorized to do so...in order to attack and 
to plunder the French soldiers, when in favourable conditions, 
whether they are found alone or in groups, seizing the victuals and 
supplies meant for their maintenance, and, in short, inflicting all the 
evil and damage possible on them, with the understanding that this 
service will be considered as rendered to the Nation, and rewarded in 
proportion to its extent and results.”° 
It is easy to see, from the very beginning, that a very different spirit 
informs all the text, from the long introduction — an impassionate 
and stirring patriotic appeal, full of hatred against the French - to the 
18 short articles, with few bureaucratic rules and many promises for 
the fighting patriots. As for the author, in contrast to his predecessor, he 
comes over not as an official worried by red tape and the question of law 
and order, but as a Spaniard whose central interest is that of inflicting on 
the enemy ‘all the evil and damage possible’. This is further emphasized 
by the clarity of the general instructions contained in the introduction: 
the struggle will be longer and more costly if the Patriots do not succeed 
in making it difficult ‘for the French troops to acquire victuals and the 
other means necessary for surviving in the Country’; all communications 
must be cut or destroyed; a close eye must be kept on the enemy’s 
movements, aims and combinations; and the latter’s troops must be 
kept in a state of ‘continuous stress and alarm’. As for the Spaniards, 
meanwhile, they should at all times demonstrate ‘firmness and stead- 
fastness’, but who is the appeal directed to? In brief, the people, in 
which respect one statement is especially interesting: 
As Napoleon has succeeded with the basest and vilest arts in destroying 
and disorganizing Spain’s military force, in seizing her major fort- 
resses and taking prisoner her king, is it not very clear that it is now 
necessary for the civilian population to band together to fight her 
enemies?’ 

<<<PDFPAGE 163>>>
Vittorio Scotti-Douglas 
145 
One of the most important and noteworthy results of the Instrucci6n 
was the birth of the ‘Corso Terrestre de Navarra’, led by Martin Javier 
Mina y Larrea, better known by his nicknames of ‘El Mozo’ or ‘El Estudi- 
ante’. In this respect the document may be said to have had fundamen- 
tal results — the resistance movement which Mina founded eventually 
| became the most impressive in the whole of Spain — and it may well be 
for this development that the new measure will be chiefly remem- 
bered.”® 
» 
Whilst still on the subject of the Junta Central, a few words should 
perhaps be devoted to a third set of rules that it issued with respect to 
| the guerrillas. We come here to the question of the cruzadas, or ‘crusades’. 
| In principle, these consisted of guerrilla bands made up entirely of 
| priests, monks and friars, and the idea of such forces, which surfaced 
_ repeatedly in the course of 1809, may be regarded as an attempt at one 
_ and the same time to inject fresh energy into the guerrilla movement 
and to control its excesses.” Whatever the exact thinking behind the idea 
may have been, the Junta Central evidently felt it to be worth pursuing 
for on 30 December 1809 it issued a set of rules ‘for the creation of the 
cruzadas’.*° In theory, these bands should have been formed only of 
ecclesiastics, regular or secular, to the number of 50 to every partida. Yet 
there is no proof whatsoever of even one of these bands ever having 
been created. We know that many clerics — both regular and secular - 
did participate individually in the guerrilla bands, and that some of 
them succeeded in becoming famous leaders, the best known of whom 
is probably Jeronimo Mérino.*' But as an attempt to influence the 
development and behaviour of the guerrillas, the scheme got nowhere 
and may therefore be discounted. 
A close analysis of the Instruccion, especially if done in combination 
with the Reglamento, would offer us many interesting insights with 
respect to various other important points concerning the state of the 
Patriot Spain, good examples of such subjects being what they have to 
say with regard to desertion, the ever increasing problem of how the 
guerrillas should be supplied, and the situation of the rural and urban 
population, but these are not questions pertaining to the subject of the 
current paper. Returning to this latter issue — the attempts that were 
made to regulate the guerrilla bands — the two reglamentos of 1808-9 
were followed by a number of local decrees and codes of conduct. Of 
these, however, only a brief mention of just one example need suffice. 
For this purpose we shall look at a set of rules published by the then 
Captain General of Catalonia, General Luis Lacy on 9 September 1811. 
Entitled Reglamento para las Partidas Patrioticas, this consists of 15 articles, 

<<<PDFPAGE 164>>>
146 
Regulating the Irregulars 
and is very similar to the 1808 Reglamento.*? Thus, its contents are 
nearly all military and without anything of particular relevance, bar a 
hint about cooperation between the partidas and the somatenes — the 
Catalan home guard’ — at Article 15, and the significant contents of 
Article 14, which states that one of the main objects of the partidas 
should be ‘the pursuit and capture of deserters, robbers and wrongdoers, 
who must be brought to the nearest division’s commander’.*4 
If we accept that the Reglamento para los Cuerpos Francos o Partidas de 
Guerrilla of 28 July 1814 was clearly concerned solely with the demobil- 
ization of the guerrillas, the last important legislative provision concern- 
ing the guerrillas is the Reglamento para las Partidas de Guerrilla of 11 July 
1812.°> By the time that the former document was issued, the situation 
in Spain had changed enormously. Although 1812 was in all of Spain 
the ‘year of hunger’, from the military point of view there were increasing 
hopes of victory, thanks on the one hand to the news of Wellington’s 
successes, and on the other to the withdrawal of 30 000 French troops to 
fight in Russia. What we have in July 1812 is therefore not a desperate 
cry for popular involvement in the war effort, though it is notable that 
the text stresses the importance of propaganda and, especially, the task 
of keeping the populace informed with regard to the latest provisions of 
the authorities and the latest war news.*° Rather what we see is a well- 
considered piece of legislation that sought to repeat and improve upon 
the 1808 norms, and in particular to emphasize and develop their military 
aspects. Whilst there are no tactical or strategic innovations — the need 
to gather information, cut the enemy’s communications and engage in 
other such tasks is simply restated — there are new and more fastidious 
prescriptions on how to deal with the problem of booty when it concerns 
goods pertaining to Spaniards. ‘Good Spaniards’, of course, were not to 
be molested at all, whilst they were guaranteed the return of any goods 
taken from them. ‘Bad Spaniards’ were a different matter, but even they 
now got a better deal. Thus: ‘When they capture bad Spaniards... 
all 
the money, jewels, clothing and goods found on them shall be totally 
theirs, but they must be able to present detailed proof of their guilt.’%” 
But who should decide as to which Spaniards were ‘good’ and which 
Spaniards were ‘bad’? It is very clear from the text that the final decision 
lay with the leaders of the bands, and, that, proof or no proof, they had 
therefore acquired enormous liberties. More positively, however, much 
effort was devoted to regularizing the relationship between partida and 
pueblo, and, in particular to avoiding exactions and other kinds of 
abuses. Thus, a complicated system was established whereby guerrilla 
bands could be issued with certificates of good conduct ‘that will serve 

<<<PDFPAGE 165>>>
Vittorio Scotti-Douglas 
147 
as recommendation for the commanders, always provided that the 
justices of the same pueblos have not at a different time made separate 
complaints against them’.** 
This was, therefore, the corpus of legislation that, at least theoretically, 
ruled the guerrillas and governed their legal status (there are four other 
provisions that in some way or other deal with the issue, of which three 
were issued in 1809 by the Junta Central and the fourth in 1811 by the 
Regencia, but they do not change the sense of this chapter’). But what, 
in fact, actually happened? What were the relationships between the 
partidas and the civilian and military authorities? It is this scarcely 
charted and difficult territory that we must now explore. The task, 
however, is not an easy one, not the least of the problems being that the 
civilian authorities were all too often divided amongst themselves, and, 
even more so, at odds with their military counterparts. Before going any 
further, indeed, we must look at these problems. Let us begin with the 
civil power. The disappearance of a strong central authority in the first 
days of the insurrection led, as is well known, to the creation of local 
governments which under the name of ‘juntas’ took over the civilian 
power in their respective regions. This produced a reaction, and when 
the Junta Central was formed in September 1808, it was seen in some 
quarters as a solution to the atomization of political power. However, 
the reality was very different, as the Junta Central generally lacked any 
effective means of enforcing its authority, even in those areas that were 
not occupied by the French. Even if the theory was that all the district 
and provincial Juntas should submit to the new central government, 
this therefore in the end depended on the local authorities’ good will. 
But it was not just the central power that was weak. Thus, the dis- 
integration of authority had snowballed to such an extent that the 
provincial Juntas found it difficult to control their provinces and the 
district juntas difficult to control their districts. Especially in the case of 
communities rich in historical privileges or traditions of self-government, 
what mattered was therefore the pueblo, and it was often only at this 
level that questions of defence were considered.*? Moving on now to 
the issue of civil-military relations, we find that these were even more 
troubled. In this respect the fierce quarrel between the Marquess of La 
Romana and the Junta of Asturias is especially well known. However, it 
is not the only instance, and in this respect it is worth pointing out that 
the guerrillas were in fact one of the chief bones of contention when it 
came to clashes between army officers and the juntas. Thus, particularly 
if they had helped arm and recruit them, many juntas were inclined 
to regard guerrilla bands operating in the vicinity as de facto private 

<<<PDFPAGE 166>>>
148 
Regulating the Irregulars 
armies, and were therefore extremely unwilling to see them receive 
orders from the general in command of the district or even act on their 
own initiative. Meanwhile, such interference carried on even when 
partidas had been militarized (ie. organised into regular units and 
granted the status of troops of the line). On top of this there was the 
issue of the formation of new partidas. By 1810 many army officers were 
deeply suspicious of the value of the ‘classic’ guerrilla band and were 
actively opposing the formation of fresh partidas. Yet for the civilian 
authorities the issue was seen quite differently. On the one hand there 
was less awareness of the military problems thrown up by the irregulars, 
whilst on the other the creation of fresh partidas strengthened the 
hands of local and provincial juntas with regard to patronage and at the 
same time reinforced their power and influence. And here, of course, 
lay the basis for a very deep split with army officers accusing the juntas 
of selfishness and egotism, and juntas accusing army officers of lack of 
faith and vision.*! 
Yet, whilst they might look with favour on the guerrillas, this did not 
mean that the civil authorities were blind to the problems which they 
threw up. On the contrary, there was also a more or less clear fear that 
the partidas could become nests of bandits and robbers, and, in a word, 
a menace to the civilian authorities, the maintenance of peace and the 
social order. Such fear is absolutely obvious in the parliamentary debate 
held on the subject in the cortes on 9-10 of August 1811, even if the 
discussion concluded with the unanimous rejection of the new set of 
rules for guerrillas proposed by the Minister of War. One sees here the 
ambivalence that characterized the view of the guerrillas entertained by 
the leaders of civilian society in Patriot Spain: more centralised and 
militarized, the new rules bid fair to address the question of law and 
order, and yet they also challenged liberal notions of popular spontaneity 
and the nation in arms.** Hence, of course, the opposition in the cortes. 
But the problem would not go away, and thus we see provincial juntas 
from time to time themselves attempting to tackle the issue, a good 
example in this respect being the ordinance issued for the control of the 
guerrillas by the Junta of Asturias in 1810.% 
Curiously, the attempt to control the guerrillas was not all one-way. 
As the war went on, so some of the leaders of the more stable guerrilla 
bands realized the advantages of coming to some accommodation with 
civilian society, and in consequence set out to try to develop a normative 
framework for the guerrilla bands, which they both adopted for their 
own forces and sought to impose on others. By acting in this fashion 
they achieved a double purpose: on the one hand they obtained 

<<<PDFPAGE 167>>>
Vittorio Scotti-Douglas 
149 
the practical benefits - above all, help and support from the local 
community — resulting from acting within a framework of legality; and 
on the other they found a moral justification for forcing other partidas 
that refused to comply with the rules to submit to their authority, 
thereby increasing their own power (in the case of refusal, they could 
pursue ‘rebel’ bands, destroy them and add any survivors to the ranks of 
their own men). Thus, in March 1811, eight cabecillas in Castilla la 
Vieja, one of them the already famous D. Geronimo Merino, met in 
Novares and published a proclamation whose preamble announced that 
they were ‘intimately convinced of the need to establish...a system of 
government’ that would put an end to the manner in which they had, 
however inadvertently, hitherto been ‘harming their fellow citizens, 
offending justice and discrediting the most just and important cause 
that they defend’.** 
We have here a lucid attempt to regulate the irregular, limiting a war 
based on a lack of fixed rules with sets of more or less precise norms. 
But as such efforts did not have any central coordination, they could 
themselves become a problem: by clashing with one another, rival 
codes of conduct were at the heart of many of the competence disputes 
that from the very beginning affected the relationship between the 
guerrillas and the civilian authorities. In this respect, one of the most 
frequent problems was that of fixing the boundaries of authority in 
every district or region. In October 1809, for example, some members of 
the Junta of Navarre registered a protest with the Junta Central Suprema 
against the fashion in which their province was being raided by some 
partidas ‘that, not pertaining to any army, enter and act in it without 
any title other than one issued by the Junta of Arnedo, which is under 
the orders of the Junta of Molina de Aragén’.** Not only were these 
partidas imposing requisitions, harassing the civilian populace and 
employing violence, but in addition they lacked the sanction of the 
Junta of Navarre, although this was in fact the only body other than the 
Junta Central that had the right to authorise guerrilla activity in it. Not 
until the following year was the problem solved, and even than the 
solution was hardly to the Junta’s liking: by a mixture of brutality and 
cunning, the famous leader, Francisco Espoz y Mina, succeeded in 
establishing a monopoly of force in the province that ended the problem 
of the free-lance activity of which the Junta had complained, but at the 
same time he also imposed such an iron hand on the Junta of Navarra 
that it was reduced to a mere group of puppets. 
Was the case of the Junta of Navarre that has just been described in part 
an attempt to defend the local populace? In part, certainly: the ravages 

<<<PDFPAGE 168>>>
150 
Regulating the Irregulars 
indulged in by irregular bands whose activity hardly differed from that 
engaged in by simple bandits were often very serious, whilst in a draft 
of a letter of General Mahy to General Castafion, for example, we read 
the following: 
The Junta Superior of the Kingdom of Leén has complained to me of 
the devastating behaviour of the partidas that pretend to be at your 
orders. I am sure that you do not approve of such actions, but I am 
also certain of the truth of what has been reported to me, in con- 
sequence of which it is absolutely necessary that you summon 
the...leaders and make them understand, 
first, that they shall 
be undeserving of the name of patriots.unless they change their 
conduct towards their ruined fellow countrymen, and, second, that 
anybody who undermines national security and well being - the 
main object of the armed forces that have been mobilized against 
the enemy who wants to destroy our beloved Fatherland —- will be 
punished according to the laws.*° 
In this case the Junta’s complaint does not derive from a conflict of 
competence, but from the need to put a stop to plunder and speak up 
for the local community. But at the same time it is difficult completely 
to discard questions of power and influence: self-made men like El 
Empecinado and Espoz y Mina were, after all, a serious threat to the 
long-established oligarchies that almost invariably monopolized the 
organs of both central and local government in Patriot Spain. Mean- 
while, we might cite other instances where there is simply no possibility 
of ambiguity. Here the struggle assumes a very different aspect: it is a 
political confrontation. What is at stake is who should have the 
decision-making power, the power to organize military operations, to 
administer justice, to allot resources. A typical instance of such a 
conflict comes from La Rioja where the final months of 1809 saw the 
outbreak of a ferocious dispute between the Junta of Logrofio and a 
guerrilla commander named the Marqués de Barriolucio who had been 
granted control of the district by the distant Junta of Ciudad Rodrigo, 
which faute de mieux had taken the place of a proper Junta of Old Castile. 
Thus, moving into the area, the Marqués disarmed a number of partidas 
that had been formed by the Junta of Logrofio, either disbanding them 
or adding their men to his own, seized large quantities of supplies, 
munitions and confiscated goods, appointed men loyal to himself to 
key positions of authority, assumed control of the various prisoners 
languishing in custody on charges of disloyalty.*” Such at least is the 

<<<PDFPAGE 169>>>
Vittorio Scotti-Douglas 
151 
version of events that was offered by the Junta of Logrono. If it is to be 
believed, what Barriolucio was doing was in effect engaging in a 
species of coup d’état in order to secure a series of rights — and, beyond 
them, the cooperation of the local populace — to which he could have 
obtained access in no other way. In a word, indeed, he was bidding for 
control of the area. 
In this case the guerrillas played an important role in a conflict 
between two corporate powers, whose prerogatives, very vaguely defined, 
overlapped in the same space. Such overlapping appears very clearly in 
a petition presented to the Junta Central in Seville by the representatives 
of Logrono: 
Five contiguous Juntas can 
be observed 
to be operational 
in 
[Logronio]: that of Soto de Cameros [NB: the Junta of Logrofio itself], 
that of Barriolucio in Navarre, that of Arnedo, that of Menciso and 
that of Covaleda. Each is operating in the towns and villages that 
recognize them, so that there are continuous conflicts between them, 
and this obviously produces ...such confusion and disillusionment 
that the interests of not just the whole province but also the entire 
nation are severely affected. This evil has spread to the partidas... 
and, to our great shame and distress, the important services that they 
have been performing... may have sometimes been...undermined 
because of the dissension and conflict which they have experienced, 
this having sometimes reached such a pitch that the stronger bands 
have disarmed their weaker fellows.*® 
Because of this competition, guerrilla warfare acquired a new dimension. 
In brief, the guerrilla band can be seen to have become not just a means 
of fighting the French, but also a tool in the power struggle that raged 
between the different factions born from the political chaos of 1808. 
And in this fashion the partidas — at least those big enough to achieve a 
measure of influence and independence - joined with the generals, the 
central government, the juntas and, in the end, the cortes of Cadiz in 
helping to shape the future of Spain. 
With matters in this state the partidas made hay. Feeding on the political 
struggles between diverse local power lites, they started to entertain an 
extravagant idea of their own importance, acting outside any principle 
of operational unity and without any concerted plan. For a very lucid 
and pitiless diagnosis of this phenomenon, we might turn to a letter 
written to the Junta Central by the Junta of Najera — a local committee of 
government established by the Marqués de Barriolucio in La Rioja that 

<<<PDFPAGE 170>>>
152 
Regulating the Irregulars 
should probably be added to the five authorities listed above, though it 
is just possible that it is the otherwise rather mysterious Navarrese body 
mentioned in connection with the marquess — as part of his attempt to 
take over the area. Thus: 
The main cause of all of this, Sefior, is undoubtedly the fact that all 
these troops do not recognize a central authority, or rather, perhaps, 
that no authority has the strength to get them under control. All 
of them want to be independent leaders; all dispose of the property 
of the nation, the pueblos and the citizenry alike as if they were 
sovereigns. And, still worse, with unbelievable impudence, they 
frequently make use of the infamous word ‘traitor’ to satisfy their 
greed at the cost of the honour and survival of many unfortunates, 
who find themselves despoiled and stripped of everything, before 
being heard and judged.” 
A further issue that needs to be touched on here is that of provincialism. 
This is a feature common to all states lacking a strong central power, whilst 
it is likely to be especially pronounced in time of war, and especially, 
invasion. In Spain, certainly, between 1808 and 1813 every province 
thought of itself as the key to the entire war and the central bastion of 
Spanish resistance. The guerrilla bands, obviously, could not escape this 
problem, even if their answer was never going to be homogeneous. 
Both Martin Javier Mina y Larrea and his distant relative, Francisco 
Espoz y Mina, for instance, had a strong sense of territoriality, and 
would not allow any kind of meddling in Navarre. Already in November 
of 1809 we have a proof of this in a letter written by José Antonio 
Colmenares, an agent of the Junta Central who established himself in 
the area of Molina de Arag6n and from there sought to exercise general 
authority over a broad region embracing the modern provinces of Soria, 
Guadalajara, Cuenca, Logrono and Teruel. Although Mina was not yet 
famous and his band still very small, he was evidently still a force to be 
reckoned with. Thus, in an attempt to extend his authority into southern 
Navarre, Colmenares dispatched an army officer named Juan Garcés 
de los Fayos to Viana. No sooner had he got there, however, than his 
mission came to an abrupt end, Colmenares complaining that ‘in that 
town [he] was captured by a guerrilla commander... called Don Francisco 
Mina [sic: in reality this must be a reference to ‘El Mozo’: at this time 
Espoz y Mina was not an independent commander, whilst he did not 
adopt the name ‘Mina’ until the following year] who took away from 
him his commission, papers and baggage’.°° This habit, meanwhile, was 

<<<PDFPAGE 171>>>
Vittorio Scotti-Douglas 
153 
perpetuated by Espoz y Mina after he emerged as the new leader of 
Navarrese resistance in the wake of the capture of ‘El Mozo’ in March 
1810, as witness the fact that any other partida that entered the province 
from beyond its frontiers was either disarmed by him or integrated into 
his own forces. 
This does not mean that the Navarrese leaders were provincialists, at 
least not in the strict sense of the word. Francisco Espoz y Mina was not 
shy of fighting outside Navarre, as is shown by the action that he 
launched in western Aragon in 1811 in order to lure Suchet away from 
the attack he was planning on Valencia. Meanwhile, he also exploited a 
commission issued by the Junta of Aragon as a means of consolidating 
his authority in Navarre in the early days of his command.°! Yet, for all 
that, provincialism was certainly present, it being this force that was the 
underlying reason for perhaps the most well-known conflict that took 
place between a guerrilla leader and a junta in the course of the war. We 
come here to the clash between Juan Martin ‘El Empecinado’ and the 
Junta of Guadalajara. On the surface this was motivated by issues of 
competence, and, in particular, the question of who should have the 
command of military operations in the district, but beneath this was 
the issue of patria chica versus patria.°* To put this still more simply, 
which should take preference: Guadalajara or Spain? In so far as the 
Junta was concerned, there was no question here as to what the answer 
should be, and it therefore did everything that it could to obstruct any 
moves on the part of El Empecinado that were not exclusively devoted 
to the protection of the province and its rulers. For this, the justifica- 
tion was quite simple. So far as the Junta was concerned, as it had raised 
many of the famous guerrilla commander’s men, it ought also to have 
the exclusive use of them, and all the more so, or so it claimed, as it was 
forced to rely entirely on its own resources. Thus: 
Although intended for the defence of the province that supplies, 
arms, uniforms and pays it, this small division has not always 
operated within 
its boundaries...but 
the frank and generous 
conduct which this exemplifies has never received its just reward: no 
matter what the dangers have been in which it has found itself, it 
has never been supported by the different corps of the neighbouring 
provinces.°? 
Juan Martin’s answer was very sharp. The Junta’s attitude, he thundered, 
contradicted all the principles of good government, all the maxims of 
the ancients, and all the lessons of Spain’s current misfortunes. And at 

<<<PDFPAGE 172>>>
154 
Regulating the Irregulars 
the same time it was spreading ‘the spirit of provincialism’ and could 
persuade the soldiers to look ‘with indifference and even contempt on 
the troubles of other provinces, and cause them to become unwilling to 
obey the orders of a general, who wisely and at the right moment calls 
them somewhere else’.>4 
This difference of opinion is very striking. Contrary to what one might 
have initially suspected, it is the uneducated peasant, the individual with 
an experience of life limited more or less to the boundaries of his district, 
who rejects the idea that the province is the key to the life of the 
nation, and who understands that victory depends on the union of every 
community in the country, and, by extension, the extirpation of every 
localism. By contrast, it is the members of the Junta, men who stem 
from the dominant élites and who, as traditional holders of public 
offices in such institutions as the Ministry of Finance and the Post 
Office may be considered to be representatives of the state, defend at 
all cost a localist spirit that is detrimental to the war effort. In the 
end the Consejo de Regencia was to come down in favour of El 
Empecinado in this dispute, and therefore to make a stand for a 
national concept of the war, but the incident brings us to a very import- 
ant point that might serve as the conclusion for this chapter. Thus, 
the idea of Spain as a nation, interpreted according to the bourgeois 
construction of the term, cannot be associated with all the élites. 
In the same way it is not possible to exclude the idea that the 
populace possessed a certain political flair, at least in some of their 
representatives.°> Obviously this sophistication did not extend to all the 
guerrilleros, nor the peasants from which they sprang. On the contrary, 
the majority of the documents suggest that most of the common 
people identified primarily with their home districts and had a strong 
preference for staying there, and that these preferences were not over- 
come by serving in the partidas or the regular armies. At this point in 
Spanish history, then, the chief emotional bond was with the local 
community, just as the chief instinct of the populace was to protect 
the economic activities which permitted not just their survival but 
that of their families. In this respect, El Empecinado therefore stands out 
as an even more remarkable individual: 
a man who truly transcended 
his background. And, to return to the question of regulating the irregulars, 
it can be seen that the process should not just be interpreted in terms 
of the reconstruction of the state or the expansion of its power. In 
reality, moves to control the guerrillas could just as easily be the work 
of local oligarchies who were frantic to safeguard their own interests, 
in which respect it is interesting to note that, as the nineteenth century 

<<<PDFPAGE 173>>>
Vittorio Scotti-Douglas 
155 
wore on, the guerrilla was to be associated not with the liberal state, 
but rather the Carlism that was its antithesis. 
Notes 
1 . Cf. V. Scotti-Douglas, ‘Spagna 1808: la genesi della guerriglia moderna (1): 
guerra irregolare, petite guerre, guerrilla’, Spagna Contemporanea, no. 18 (Autumn, 
2000), pp. 9-31. 
. S$. de Covarrubias Orozco, Tesoro de la Lengua Castellana, o Espafiola, F. 
Maldonado 
(ed.) (Madrid, 1995), p. 613. Lit. ‘Cuando entre particulares hay pendencia y 
enemistad formada, que acuden unos a una parte y otros a otra; pero éstas 
castigan los principes de las republicas severamente.’ 
. Real Academia Espafiola, Diccionario de la lengua Castellana en que se explica el 
verdadero sentido de las voces, su naturaleza y calidad, con las phrases 0 modos de 
hablar, los proverbios 0 refranes y otras cosas convenientes al uso de la lengua 
(Madrid, 1726-39), Iv, p. 93. Lit. ‘Encuentro ligéro de armas, 6 contrariedad de 
dictamenes de poca entidad.’ 
. Ibid. The game was played according to a version of the well-known ‘Beat Jack 
out of Doors’, and it may be that there are some subconscious echoes of the 
realities of the civilian population’s experience of war in the ‘horse and musket’ 
period here: the game is a species of ‘beggar thy neighbour’ in which two players 
compete for all the cards in the pack and the inference is that soldiers — ‘jacks’ 
in common parlance — quartered on the populace had to be ‘beaten outside 
doors’ before they ate them out of house and home. Curiously enough, then, 
we can even see links with popular resistance to the military. 1 owe this 
insight to my friend and colleague, Dr Charles Esdaile, of the University of 
Liverpool. 
. Setting aside Grandmaison, a short list of French treatises on petite guerre 
includes J. de Jeney, Le partisan ou l’art de faire la petite guerre (Den Haag, 1749); 
J. de la Croix, Traité de la petite guerre pour les compagnies franches, dans lequel on 
voit leur utilité, la difference de leur service d’avec celui des autres corps, la maniére 
la plus avantageuse de les conduire, de les équiper, de les commander et de les dis- 
cipliner, et les ruses de guerre qui leur sont propres (Paris, 1752); and J.L. Lecointe, 
La science des postes militaires, ou traité de fortifications de campagne (Paris, 
WS): 
. After the first French edition in 1756, the book was translated into German in 
1758 and into Spanish in 1780, whilst it appeared in both languages in a variety 
of different editions. 
. Published in Valencia, the book was translated by Captain Victor Caballero, 
who added to it many personal observations on the use of light troops in war: 
cf. M. Garcia Hurtado, Traduciendo la guerra: influencias extranjeras y recepcion 
de las obras militares francesas en la Espana del siglo XVIII (La Coruna, 1999), 
pp. 103-4. For a general discussion of the assimilation of French military thought 
in Spain, cf. V. Scotti-Douglas, ‘La guerra “alla francese” nel XVIII secolo e la sua 
fortuna in Spagna’, Spagna Contemporanea, no. 17 (Spring, 2000), pp. 161-3. 
. Further information about the history and evolution of the term ‘partisan’ 
may be found in the article cited in n. 1. 
. Cf. J. G6mez de Arteche, Guerra de la Independencia: historia militar de Espania de 
1808 a 1814 (Madrid, 1866-1903), II, pp. 692-6. 

<<<PDFPAGE 174>>>
156 
Regulating the Irregulars 
10. 
Lf. 
12) 
ibe%e 
14. 
TS: 
16. 
1H 
18. 
ie 
20. 
oie 
Life 
Anon. Apuntes de la vida y hechos militares del Brigadier Don Juan Martin Diez 
El Empecinado por un admirador de ellos (Madrid, 1814), p. 6. 
As in N. Rivas Santiago (ed.), El alcalde de Otivar, héroe en la Guerra de la 
Independencia (Madrid, 1940), pp. 28, 30. Partida de guerrilla in the sense of 
light infantry detachment may be found in F. Casamayor, Diario de los sitios 
de Zaragoza, H. Lafoz Rabaza (ed.) (Zaragoza, 2000), pp. 49, 65. 
The first known use of the term in English comes in a letter written by the 
then Sir Arthur Wellesley in the summer of 1809. 
G. Garcia de la Cuesta to Junta of Leén, 29 May 1808, Archivo Histdérico 
Nacional, Secci6n de Estado (hereafter A.H.N., Estado) 68-D, no. 167. 
Proclamation of the Junta of Seville, 6 June 1808, Instituto de Historia y 
Cultura Militar (Madrid), Colecci6n Documental del Fraile (hereafter IHCM. 
CDF] DEGELXIV, p1s0: 
Cf., for instance, the dramatic description of popular wrath given by José 
Maria Blanco y Crespo — better known as Blanco White — in his Letters from 
Spain (London, 1822), p. 431: ‘“We wish, Sir, to kill somebody,” said the 
spokesman of the insurgents. “Someone has been killed at Trujillo; one or 
two others at Badajoz, another at Merida, and we will not be behind our 
neighbours. Sir, we will kill a traitor.” ’ 
Proclamation of the Junta Central, 26 October 1808, A. Dérozier, Manuel Josef 
Quintana et la naissance du libéralisme en Espagne (Paris, 1970), Il, pp. 165-74. 
Ibid., p. 167. 
For a recent version of the text of this document, cf. F. Diaz Plaja, La historia 
de Espania en sus documentos: el siglo XIX (Madrid, 1954), pp. 73-6. 
Lit. ‘La Espafia abunda en sugetos dotados de un valor extraordinario, que 
aprovechandose de las grandes ventajas que les proporciona el conocimiento 
del pais, y el odio implacable de toda la nacion contra el tirano que intenta 
subyugarla por los medios mas iniquos, son capaces de introducir el terror y 
la consternacion en sus ejércitos. Para facilitarles el modo de conseguir tan 
noble objeto, y proporcionarles los medios de enriquecerse honrosamente 
con el botin del enemigo, é inmortalizar sus nombres con hechos heroicos 
dignos de eterna fama, se ha dignado S.M. crear una milicia de nueva especie, 
con las denominaciones de partidas, y quadrillas.’ 
Lit. ‘Atendiendo a que muchos sugetos de distinguido valor é intrepidez, por 
falta de un objeto en que desplegar dignamente los talentos militares...se 
han dedicado al contrabando ...4 fin de proporcionarles la carrera gloriosa y 
utilisima al Estado que les presentan las circunstancias actuales, se les indultara 
para emplearlos en otra especie de partidas que se denominaran cuadrillas.’ 
The term cuadrilla was most probably employed on account of its association 
with the ancient organization of the Santa Hermandad, though it had also 
been employed as a military term for a subdivision of a larger unit since the 
fifteenth century. 
Lit. ‘se le tomaran y pagaran 4 un precio en que encuentre moderada ganancia’. 
Lit. ‘Todos los que bajo las expresadas reglas deseen alistarse y formar estas 
cuadrillas, se presentaran desde luego a la junta provincial de su respéctivo 
distrito, 6 al Capitan General de la provincia: y atin al general en jefe del 
ejército de campania que se halle en ella, para su admisi6n, destino, y servicio. 
Y verificada la formacién de cada partida y cuadrilla, se les mandaré por los 
intendentes respéctivos abonar los sueldos que quedan sefialados, precedida la 

<<<PDFPAGE 175>>>
23: 
24. 
25: 
26. 
Di fe 
28. 
29: 
30. 
Bile 
B22 
333 
Vittorio Scotti-Douglas 
157 
correspondiente revista de Comisario, y en defecto, de la Justicia mensualmente, 
con arreglo a ordenanza.’ 
For the text of the Instrucci6n and a variety of documents associated with it, 
cf. A.H.N. Estado, 51-A, nos. 3-6. 
V. Alcala Galiano to M. de Garay, 10 April, 1809. Lit. ‘O me engafia mucho 
mi juicio, o este pensamiento ha de hacer impresion en el animo del Emperador, 
y ha de producir miedo y aun terror a los soldados franceses, luego que llegue 
a su noticia. Esta nacion da siempre mucho valor y aprecio a todo lo nuevo, no 
medira con serenidad y sosiego sobre las cosas, y se figurara inmediatamente 
llenos los campos de Espafia de corsarios que los robaran y asesinaran al 
menor descuido.’ 
Shorter Oxford English Dictionary (Oxford, 1956), I, p. 1587. 
‘InstrucciOn para el Corso Terrestre contra los Ejércitos Franceses’, A.H.N. 
Estado, 51-A, no. 6. Lit.‘Todos los habitantes de las provincias ocupadas por 
las tropas francesas que se hallen en estado de armarse estan autorizados para 
hacerlo, hasta con armas prohibidas, para asaltar y despojar, siempre que hallen 
coyuntura favorable en particular y en comun, a los soldados franceses, 
apoderarse de los viveres y efectos que se destinan 4 su subsistencia, y en 
suma para hacerles todo el mal y dafio que sea posible en el concepto de que 
se considerara este servicio como hecho a la nacién, y sera recompensado 4 
proporcion de su entidad y consectiencias.’ 
Ibid. Lit. ‘Habiendo conseguido Napoleon por las artes mas bajas y viles destruir 
y desorganizar la fuerza militar de Espafia, apoderarse de sus principales 
fortalezas, y cautivar a su Rey, ;no es bien claro que es preciso que sean paisanos 
los que se reunan ahora para combatir sus huestes?’. 
Javier Mina, 1789-1817, began waging guerrilla warfare in Navarra in the 
summer of 1809, and very rapidly became the most famous and feared 
guerrilla leader in the region. Captured fortuitously in March 1810 and 
taken to France, he regained his liberty in April 1814. In 1816 he went to 
Mexico to aid the local insurgents in their fight for freedom and independence, 
but was captured and shot in November of the following year. For a recent 
biography, cf. M. Ortufio Martinez, Xavier Mina: guerrillero, liberal, insurgente 
(Pamplona, 2000). 
For a discussion of these schemes, cf. P. Pascual, Curas y frailes guerrilleras en 
la Guerra de la Independencia (Zaragoza, 1999), pp. 71-81. 
‘Reglamento segun el que podran erigirse las Cruzadas, si S.M. lo tuviese 
a bien’, 30 December 1809, A.H.N. Estado, leg. 41-A, no. 5”. 
The bibliography on Cura Merino is neither very rich, nor of sure historio- 
graphical value. The two most recent works, however, are E. de Ontanon, 
El Cura Merino, su vida en folletin (Madrid, 1933), and J.M. Codon, Biografia 
y Cronica del Cura Merino (Burgos, 1986). 
The text of General Lacy’s Reglamento may be found in J.M. Garcia-Rodriguez, 
Guerra de la Independencia: ensayo hist6rico-politico de una epopeya espaniola 
(Barcelona, Caralt, 1945), I, pp. 292-3. 
For the background to this force, cf. J. Fabregas Roig, La Guerra Gran, 1793-1795: 
el protagonisme de Girona i la mobilitzacié dels Miquelets (Lérida, 2000), and 
J. Fabregas Roig, Catalunya i la Guerra Gran: l’aportacié dels corregiments 
meridionals (Tarragona, 2000). As yet, however, the period 1808-14 is still 
awaiting its monograph. 

<<<PDFPAGE 176>>>
158 
Regulating the Irregulars 
34. 
35: 
36. 
Sie 
38. 
39; 
40. 
41. 
42. 
43. 
44. 
45. 
46. 
Garcia-Rodriguez, Guerra de la Independencia, ll, p. 293. Lit. ‘Uno de los princi- 
pales objetos de las partidas sera la persecuci6n y captura de desertores, 
ladrones y mal entretenidos, que deberan conducir al comandante de la 
division de tropas mas cercanas.’ 
Reglamento para la partidas de guerrilla, 11 July 1812, ICHM. Deposito de la 
Guerra, 1812/4; for the decree of 1814, cf. Decretos del Rey Don Fernando VII 
(Madrid, 1818-46), I, pp. 96-9. 
Further remarks on the propaganda war may be found in V. Scotti-Douglas, 
‘Las “comisiones reservadas” de los confidentes de la Junta Central Suprema 
Gubernativa’, in J.A. Armillas (ed.), La Guerra de la Independencia: Estudios 
(Zaragoza, 2001), I, pp. 165-90. 
Lit. ‘Cuando aprehendan a malos espanioles, fuera de poblacion, cuanto dinero, 
alhajas, ropas y efectos les encuentren sera absolutamente suyo; pero debera 
preceder una exacta justificacion de ser malos.’ 
Lit. ‘que serviran de recomendacion a los comandantes, siempre que por 
separado no haya quejas fundadas de las mismas justicias que obren contra él’. 
They are, in chronological order, Reglamento para la reduccion y reforma de las 
Juntas provinciales, 1 January, 1809; a decree dated 28 February 1809 confirming 
a proclamation by the Junta Provincial de Valencia; a manifesto addressed by 
the Junta Central to the French high command in defence of the guerrillas; 
and a preliminary draft of the decree of July 1812. 
E.g. N. Mahy to Ayuntamiento of Potes, 24 September 1810, IHCM, Coleccién 
Duque de Bailén (hereafter IHCM. CDB), 11/15/1. 
Cf., for instance, ‘Exposicion al Congreso Nacional del Estado Militar por 
Don Luis de Landaburu y Villanueva, Ayudante de Estado Mayor’, 19 July 
1811, IHCM. 30/41/81. 
For an interesting discussion of this debate, cf. J.R. Aymes, ‘La guérrilla dans 
la lutte espagnole pour l’indépendance (1808-1814): amorce d’une théorie et 
avatars d’une pratique’, in Bulletin Hispanique, LXVI, nos. 3-4 (July-December 
1976), pp. 337-8. 
Ordenanza que se ha de observar en el Principado de Asturias por todos los 
Comandantes de Partidas Sueltas, 29 May 1810, IHCM. CDB. 19/23/81. 
Proclama de los Comandantes de Partidas de Patriotas de Castilla la Vieja, 15 
March 1811, IHCM. CDB. 26/36/34. 
Petition of M. de Valenza and C. Ametria, 18 October 1809, AHN. Estado, 
41-D, no. 78. Lit. ‘que sin pertenecer 4 Exercito alguno, entran y obran en el 
sin mas titulo que el de una Junta de Arnedo, que se halla bajo las ordenes de 
la de Molina de Aragon’. 
N. Mahy to F. Castafiodn, 3 October 1810, IHCM. CDB. 13/17/29. Lit. ‘La 
Junta Superior del Reino de Le6én se me queja del porte devastador que 
observan las partidas de guerrilla que se dicen dependientes de V.S. Estoy seguro 
de que V.S. no es capaz de subscribir 4 semejantes procedimientos, como lo 
estoy tambien de que el relato que se me ha hecho es puntual, y de consigu- 
iente es de toda necesidad que V.S. convoque a los que sean tenidos por jefes 
y se les haga entender que se haran indignos del nombre de patriotas sino 
mudan su conducta con sus arruinados conciudadanos, y que sera castigado 
con arreglo 4 las reales instrucciones cualquiera agresor contra la seguridad y 
proteccion que debe concederse al pais con objeto principal de la fuerza 
armada contra el enemigo que aspira 4 la ruina de nuestra amada patria.’ 

<<<PDFPAGE 177>>>
47. 
48. 
49. 
SO. 
oi 
52. 
SOE 
Vittorio Scotti-Douglas 
159 
E.g. ‘Causa criminal formada por el Sr. Don Gorgonio Maximiano Ortiz 
de Cordoba, Comandante de Cruzada y individuo de la Real Junta de Soto, 
8 November 1809, AHN. Estado, 41-E, no. 98. 
Petition of P.J. del Canto and B. Bonifaz, 
4 December 1809, AHN. 41-E, 
no. 127. Lit. ‘Cinco juntas entre si inmediatas, se obserban en aquella pro- 
vincia: la de Soto de Cameros, la del Marques de Barriolucio en Navarra, la 
de Arnedo, la de Menciso y la de Covaleda. Cada una obra en los pueblos 
que la reconocen: son continuas las Competencias que se suscitan entre 
ellas, y esto produce desde luego por primer fruto y consecuencia inmediata 
el entorpecimiento y disgusto que se dejan entender con gravisimo perjuicio 
del interés de toda la provincia y atin de la nacion entera: este mal trasciende 
a las partidas de guerrilla y es lastima y sumamente doloroso que los impor- 
tantes servicios que ellas han estado haciendo y deben esperarse cada vez 
mayores de este sistema tan conocidamente util a la Patria cuanto perjudicial 
a los franceses, se haya obscurecido o debilitado alguna vez con los encuentros 
y disensiones que han tenido entre si hasta desarmar la mas fuerte 4 la que 
no lo era tanto.’ 
Junta of Najera to Junta Central, 30 November 1809, AHN. Estado, 41-E, 
no. 124. Lit. ‘La causa principal de todo es sin duda, Sefior, el no reconocer 
todas 
estas 
tropas 
un 
centro 
de autoridad, 
apoyado 
con 
la fuerza 
correspond iente. Todos quieren ser jefes independientes, todos disponen 
como soberanos de los efectos de la nacién, y aun lo que es mas de los 
pueblos y particulares valiendose frecuentemente del infame titulo de 
traidores para saciar su codicia a costa del honor y subsistencia de muchos 
miserables, que con un transtorno inaudito, se ven saqueados, y privados 
de todo, antes de ser oidos y juzgados.’ 
J.A. Colmenares to P. de Rivero, 23 November 1809, AHN. 41-E, no. 122. Lit 
‘Habiendo enviado yo al Reino de Navarra en consecuencia de la Real Orden 
de 11 de agosto, que me autorizo para ello, 4 D. Juan Garcés de los Fayos, que 
por el Ministerio de Guerra aspira a que se le declare el grado de brigadier..., 
iba este hombre a empezar en Viana su comisiOn y en dicha ciudad lo ha 
prendido un comandante de guerrilla de aquel reino llamado D. Francisco 
[sic] Mina, quitandole los titulos de su comision, papeles y equipajes.’ 
Cf. J.L. Tone, The Fatal Knot: the Guerrilla War in Navarre and the Defeat of 
Napoleon in Spain (Chapel Hill, 1994), p. 94. 
For a detailed description of this conflict, cf. A. Cassinello Pérez, Juan Martin, 
‘El Empecinado’, o el amor a la libertad (Madrid, 1995), pp. 109-70. 
Cf. Representacion que la Junta Superior de Guadalajara ha dirigido a S.A.S. el 
Supremo Consejo de Regencia contra el Brigadier Don Juan Martin el Empecinado, 
11 April 1811, AHN. Estado, 3010. Lit. ‘Esta corta division, adscrita a la 
defensa de la provincia que la mantiene, arma, viste y paga, no siempre ha 
operado dentro de ella...sin que su conducta franca y generosa haya 
tenido su retribucion, pues sean cuales fueran los apuros en que se han 
visto, nunca ha sido sostenida por los varios cuerpos de las provincias 
inmediatas.’ 
54. J. Martin to Consejo de Regencia, 22 July 1811, AHN. Estado 3146, Lit. 
‘derrama el espiritu del provincialismo, tan contrario a los buenos principios, 
como reprobado por las clausulas de los sabios y experiencia de resultados 
desastrosos, pudiendo contribuir esta maxima a que los 4animos de los soldados 

<<<PDFPAGE 178>>>
160 
Regulating the Irregulars 
miren con indiferencia, y acaso con desprecio las desgracias de otras provincias, 
y se hagan sordos a la voz de un general, que sabia y oportunamente les 
llama a otra parte.’ 
SS. For the details of the Council of Regency’s ruling, cf. Concejo de Regencia to 
Estado Mayor del Segundo Ejército, 7 April 1811, ICHM. CDB. 36/40/78. 

<<<PDFPAGE 179>>>
8 
The Pen and the Sword: 
Political Catechisms and 
Resistance to Napoleon 
Emilie Delivré 
Research on the important topic of the impact of Napoleon outside 
France is expanding, but not yet fully developed. In particular, our 
knowledge regarding the influence of resistance to Napoleon in Europe 
as a whole is still rather limited. For example, what factors could explain 
the diversity of European national reactions to the Napoleonic imperium? 
Does the answer lie in differences between the strategies that were adopted 
by the nations of Europe, or differences in the projects of Napoleon 
himself? Or is does it lie in pre-existing and deeply-rooted differences 
between the various national histories of Europe? And, if this last is the 
case, what importance should be attributed to such factors as revolution 
(or its absence), the Enlightenment, the dominant religious confession 
and national unity (or, again, its absence)? Can we expect to find a 
similar reaction to Napoleon in the cases of Germany, which was divided 
in terms of both politics and religion, Italy, which was divided in terms 
of politics but united in terms of religion, and Spain, which was united 
in terms of politics and religion alike? 
In order to advance a tentative answer to these questions, this chapter 
focuses on a specific aspect of the reaction to Napoleonic rule in the 
form of the political catechism. Political catechisms appeared in various 
countries, and most of them both encouraged and expressed resistance 
to the emperor. They are extremely significant because they form part 
of an attempt to build national strategies: short texts that essentially 
consisted of questions and answers, they point to the desire of the élite 
to reach the people by means that were likely to be both familiar and 
accessible to them. By focusing on this aspect of resistance, this chapter 
will try to show the possible relevance of political catechisms as literary 
sources for a historical interpretation of the Napoleonic Wars. 
161 

<<<PDFPAGE 180>>>
162 
The Pen and the Sword 
The analysis of catechism as a genre is relevant for two reasons. Firstly, 
although the origins of the phenomenon are religious, in most European 
countries it gradually developed a more political form. At the same 
time, by the beginning of the nineteenth century catechism had 
become so widespread as a means of expression that it may be said to 
have become a pan-European phenomenon. Secondly, despite their rigid 
form and religious origins, political catechisms vary greatly. They embodied 
and communicated the ideals of opposing political parties, and they 
played a variety of different (albeit usually quite important) roles in the 
great upheavals of the period under investigation. And, thirdly, political 
catechism was thus a form of expression which both reflected the nuances 
of, and was adapted to the cultural reality of, diverse European entities. 
Studying this genre during the Napoleonic Wars is therefore a valuable 
lens for the investigation of different nations’ modes of expressing their 
origins, their religion, and their hatred for their enemies. 
Meanwhile, by studying political catechism on a European scale, and 
by cross-referencing such texts from different countries, we should be 
able to pose interesting questions that go beyond the fundamental 
question of identity. For example, given that the period under investi- 
gation is characterized by a growing desire on behalf of the élite to 
educate the common people, should catechisms be understood as a means 
of education rather than a tool of persuasion? And, if they were indeed 
means of education, what criteria were employed to decide on the limits 
that were to be placed on giving the uneducated masses access to 
knowledge? Other interesting questions relate to the image of the 
enemy. We should ask not only how the enemy is portrayed — often 
‘manicheistically’ and as a caricature — but also how that image affects 
personal and collective memories. What became of distinctive national 
characteristics, given that catechisms were often legitimated by a religious 
origin that was held to be universal and timeless? Next we should 
enquire as to the identity of these texts? Were they part of the official 
apparatus of state propaganda? Were they journalists, or priests, or 
independent, and even marginal authors? What, too, of the question of 
readership? Were the texts widely circulated amongst thousands of 
commoners who were ready, in theory at least, for partisan war, or were 
they never really known outside a very limited group of intellectuals? And, 
finally, was the art of political catechism born in the context of a 
specific ideology and a specific enemy, and thereby condemned to remain 
a phenomenon of one specific moment in time, or was it rather a device 
of wider origins and applications that was in consequence promised 
a greater future? 

<<<PDFPAGE 181>>>
Emilie Delivré 
163 
In what follows, we shall first briefly review the literature on political 
catechism, discuss the history of this phenomenon and define the texts 
that are available for study in so far as the Napoleonic period is con- 
cerned. Moving on, we shall then examine the specific case of German 
political catechisms dating from the Napoleonic Wars in order to 
present and analyse the content of a sub-group of these writings that 
are particularly important and quite distinct, but have until now 
remained relatively unknown. And, last but not least, we shall towards 
the end examine the raison d’étre of political catechism during the 
Napoleonic Wars, and its relation with the concept of resistance. What, 
though, of the literature? Unfortunately, there is no historical research 
that deals with the overall question of political catechism. Nevertheless, 
there are a number of interesting articles that deal with the subject in 
the context of specific countries and specific periods. Most of these 
concern the French and Italian catechisms dating from the 1790s, 
but some works may also be found concerning the Spanish ‘war of inde- 
pendence’.' In the Spanish context, one might also cite the comprehensive 
work of Manuel Morales Munoz although this deals with the whole of 
the Spanish nineteenth century.* Beyond these monographs and articles, 
there is a limited body of comparative or semi-comparative works on 
the phenomenon of political catechisms whose chief protagonists 
are the Frenchman, Jean-René Aymes, the Italian, Luciano Guerci, the 
Mexican, Tancke de Estrada and the German, Michel (whose contribution 
is short but particularly engaging and influential).’ In consequence, 
then, it is much to be hoped that this chapter will form a significant 
addition to the existing literature, and all the more so as it will bring 
in the German case, which has hitherto not been discussed in any 
great detail, and thereby develop a more generalizable interpretation of 
political catechism. 
Initially little more than mere syntheses of prayers, catechisms first 
became prominent in the sixteenth century. This can be attributed to a 
number of reasons, including, not least, the use made of catechism by 
Reformation and Counter-Reformation in the sixteenth century. First, 
the term ‘catechism’ was redefined to dramatic effect by Martin Luther 
whose pioneering works —- the so-called ‘little’ and ‘big’ catechisms — 
helped form the identity of the territorial protestant churches in the 
Holy Roman Empire. And then, in the wake of the Council of Trent, 
Catholicism, too, began to generate new catechisms. Nor is this surprising: 
due to their reliance on short question-and-answer couplets, catechisms 
allowed the reader to memorize simple versions of fundamental concepts 
very quickly. At the same time, because of their format, catechisms 

<<<PDFPAGE 182>>>
164 
The Pen and the Sword 
could be produced in the form of little books that were ideal for children 
or those unused to handling heavy tomes. Once established in the literary 
canon, meanwhile, catechisms proved too useful to be allowed to fade 
into the background and were instead made use of by successive gener- 
ations and adapted to their own purposes. Thus, during the eighteenth 
century, in particular, catechisms began to be made use of for purposes 
other than religious ones. In both Protestant and Catholic countries 
(though more so in the former, thanks to the influence of Luther), for 
example, they increasingly became a means of practical instruction - a 
kind of taught course in practical ethics. Authors made use of examples 
drawn from religion — one of the few common denominators of society — 
to reach a non-sophisticated public.* Meanwhile, in Protestant countries, 
much more than in Catholic ones, catechism soon became a method to 
teach any matter, from agriculture to the art of midwives (during the 
eighteenth century, one finds numerous such textbooks). And at the same 
time catechism also acquired a political dimension. First of all, we see the 
philosophers of the French Enlightenment making use of catechisms in 
an attempt to popularize their rationalism and modern science. Given 
that they believed that they were preaching a message that was comparable 
in its dimensions with that of Christianity, such a move was all too 
logical, and all the more so as some of the more bitterly anti-clerical 
philosophes realised that the use of traditional Christian forms offered 
more means by which they could satirize and discredit the Catholic 
Church: hence the frequent appearance of catechisms in the work of 
Voltaire.’ And, as with the Enlightenment, so with the Revolution, the 
leaders of the new France attempting to use catechisms to spread the 
ideas of liberty, equality and fraternity. In this sense, despite the new 
social and political elements, catechisms remained unchanged in that 
they usually aspired to timelessness and universality. However, as we 
shall see, from now on that aspiration was to become decreasingly 
frequent and all the more so given the new genre of political catechism 
that now began to appear in Europe. 
Again, the new trend seems to have originated from France (note a 
few exceptions, such as seventeenth-century England, where one finds 
many political catechisms). As witness the work of Jean Hébrard, the 
Revolution saw the publication of numerous revolutionary catechisms 
at the hands of Mirabeau and other writers, all of which were designed 
to educate ‘the people’ with regard to their new rights and the means 
that had been adopted to protect them.° However, it is important to 
note that the phenomenon was not limited to France. In Italy, too, 
a wave of republican catechisms appeared, which Luciano Guerci has 

<<<PDFPAGE 183>>>
Emilie Delivré 
165 
studied in ‘Les catéchismes républicains en Italie, 1796-1799’.’ And one 
isolated example may even be found in Germany where a revolutionary 
sympathizer named Hofman published 
a similar tract entitled 
Aristokratenkatechismus.® Of different national origins to their 
French predecessors, they yet mirrored them most strikingly, these 
catechisms once again being marked by their desire to cement the loyalty 
of populace to the new constitutions that they had been given. As time 
went on, however, so the Italian ‘Jacobins’ who had initially welcomed the 
French were in some instances alienated by what they perceived as 
Napoleon’s betrayal of the ideals of the Revolution. In consequence, 
the Italian catechism split as a political phenomenon: whilst some 
remained slavishly loyal to France, others were at least implicitly anti- 
Napoleonic whilst yet remaining heavily influenced by French models 
and political ideas. 
Thus far, then, we are talking about a phenomenon that was clearly 
directed against the ancien regime (in this respect it should be noted that 
the Italian Jacobins who opposed Napoleon can clearly still be regarded 
as revolutionaries). However, catechism could also be made use in a 
context that was clearly counter-revolutionary or, at least, anti-French. 
This was first revealed south of the Pyrenees. Thrown into confusion by 
the motin de Aranjuez, the ambuscade of Bayonne and the Dos de Mayo, 
Spain rose in revolt against Napoleon in 1808, and no sooner had she done 
so than a series of catechisms appeared that mirrored the pre-occupations 
of the period. Clearly visible, then, are anger against Napoleon, Murat 
and Godoy; calls to take up arms and engage in guerrilla warfare; 
veneration of Ferdinand VII; loyalty to the church; and the depiction of 
an idealized nation. Still notorious today, these catechisms have been 
discussed by many different works. As examples we might mention, 
Jean-René Aymes’ article, ‘Du catéchisme religieux au catéchisme 
politique’;’? Alfonso Capitan Diaz’s Catecismos politicos en Espana, 
1808-1822" and ‘Catecismos politicos en los inicios del siglo XIX 
espafiol’.'! Note also the article by José Murioz Pérez entitled ‘Los catecismos 
politicos: de la ilustracion al primer liberalismo espafiol’,’” and finally Manuel 
Morales Muiioz’s ‘Las ensefianzas de la virtud : reglas civico-morales en los cat- 
ecismos del siglo XIX, Catecismos y la instrucci6n popular en la Espafia 
del siglo XIX’, and the fundamental Catecismos en la Espafia del siglo 
XIX.'3 As an example of the sort of work commented on by these 
authors, meanwhile, we might cite the passionate Catecismo civil y breve 
compendio de las obligaciones del espanol, conocimiento (practico) de su libertad, 
y explicacion de su enemigo, muy util en las actuales circunstancias para la 
ensefianza de los nifios ambos sexos, puesto en forma de didlogo, the Junta 

<<<PDFPAGE 184>>>
166 
The Pen and the Sword 
Central’s own Catecismo civil de Espafia en preguntas y respuestas, and, 
finally, the overtly clerical Catecismo catélico-politico, que con motivo de 
las actuales novedades de la Espafia, dirige y dedica a sus conciudadanos un 
sacerdote amante de la Religién, afecto a su patria y amigo de los hombres de 
1808, all of which date from the year 1808." 
These texts were all written to galvanize Spanish opinion, of course, 
but they also had a considerable impact on Germany. Thus, the blend 
of religious and civil ideas which they represented fell on fertile soil east 
of the Rhine. Thus, surrounded by large numbers of French troops as 
they were, many German intellectuals had been inspired by the Spanish 
example to call for a German insurrection against Napoleon. As such, 
they could not but be enthused by the manner in which the Spanish 
texts described the duties of the citizen vis a vis the nation and called 
him to take up arms against invasion. Along with proclamations calling for 
a German uprising, then, translated versions of the Spanish catechisms 
began to appear in print. For example, Joseph von Hormayr collected a few 
Spanish texts, some of which were catechisms, and had them translated 
and published 
in Vienna 
in the journal Germanien. 
Entitled 
the 
Sammlung der Aktenstiicke tiber die spanische Thronveranderung, these were 
read by the poet Heinrich von Kleist. Particularly influenced by the 
catecismo civil mentioned above, in 1809 Kleist wrote his own Katechismus 
der Deutschen, abgefasst nach dem Spanischen, zum Gebrauch fiir Kinder 
und Alte. Intended, as the title suggests, for both children and adults, 
Kleist’s work respected the standard question-and-answer form and 
consisted of a fictitious dialogue between a father and his young son, 
the latter answering the questions of the former. The dialogue was 
divided into seventeen chapters (the end of the tenth, the beginning of 
the eleventh and the whole of the twelth chapters have been lost). 
Written towards the end of April and the beginning of May 1809 in 
Dresden, this particular catechism was never published during the life 
of its author. The reason for this was quite simple. Kleist’s language was 
violent in the extreme - so much s0, in fact, that when it appeared in 
1862, even the notorious ‘ultra’, Heinrich von Treitschke, professed to 
be shocked by its tone - and there was simply no chance that such a 
document could have been permitted to circulate in the Germany of 
1809. Thus, the ‘Catechism of the Germans’ glorified the notion of 
fatherland’s 
love, celebrated German identity and national unity, 
demonized Napoleon and called on the author’s fellow Germans to take 
up arms against the French, Von Kleist having been much impressed by 
the example of the Spanish guerrillas. What Von Kleist hoped, indeed, 
was to encourage the Germans who ‘collaborated’ with Napoleon to 

<<<PDFPAGE 185>>>
Emilie Delivré 
167 
choose instead the cause of action and fight alongside the rest of the 
nation for the return of the Holy Roman Empire. And, when he saw 
that no such crusade was forthcoming — even the ‘War of Liberation of 
1813’ was not the affair of the people of patriotic German legend — he 
slid into a depression that, complicated by serious personal problems, 
led him to commit suicide in 1814, and thereby to miss out on the fall 
of his great enemy, Napoleon.'® 
Nor was Kleist alone, his fellow patriot, Ernst Moritz Arndt, writing 
two further anti-Napoleonic catechisms.'° These emerged in the context 
of the War of 1812. Having fled to Russia and taken service with Tsar 
Alexander I, the erstwhile leader of the Prussian reform movement, Freiherr 
vom Stein, decided to launch an attack on Napoleon’s rear. The obvious 
theatre of operations for this strategy was Germany, this being the 
emperor’s chief base for the attack on Russia, but Stein was not just 
motivated by military considerations: 
a convinced German nationalist, 
he also hoped to liberate the German states for their own sake and 
awaken the peoples of Germany to a sense of their identity. To this end, 
Stein sent for Ernst Moritz Arndt, a nationalist writer who was already 
very popular in literary circles. Obligingly, Arndt went to Russia, where 
he stayed for more than eighteen months as Stein’s secretary, whilst in 
the process boosting his reputation as a writer to fresh heights (in Russia, 
of course, he was free of Napoleon’s censors and possessed of resources 
and channels of distribution that far surpassed anything he had enjoyed in 
Germany). And, amongst many other things, Arndt published two cate- 
chisms. First to appear was the Kurzer Katechismus fiir deutsche Soldaten 
[Short catechism for German soldiers] which was published anonymously 
in Saint Petersburg at the end of October 1812. It was composed of fifteen 
chapters of equal length and was designed to be the bible of the so-called 
‘Russo-German Legion’, which was a force created in Russia in the wake 
of the French invasion on the basis of German deserters and prisoners 
of war who could be induced to fight Napoleon (it should be noted that 
less than half the grande armée of 1812 was even notionally French). 
Conceived as a protypical army of the Geman nation - as, indeed, a 
precursor of the people’s army that Von Kleist, Arndt and their fellows 
dreamed of as one day liberating Germany from the French yoke - it 
was supposed to be the bearer of ‘national hope’, and was originally 
officered by a number of Prussian officers who had refused to cooperate 
with the alliance between the German states, including, not least, Prussia, 
and Napoleon, and had in consequence emigrated to Russia. 
The Kurzer Katechismus disappeared for a century and was rediscovered 
in 1905 by the historian, Max Lehmann. Nor is this long period of 

<<<PDFPAGE 186>>>
168 
The Pen and the Sword 
oblivion surprising. On the one hand, the Russo-German Legion proved 
a most disappointing failure. Recruited from men driven not by nation- 
alist fervour but the desire to escape Russian imprisonment, it never 
became the nucleus of a new German army, nor, still less, 
a German 
people’s war, and was eventually absorbed into the Prussian forces as an 
ordinary infantry regiment, and one, moreover, that — strange symbol 
of national unity! — was arrayed not in Prussian dark blue but in Russian 
green. On the other, as in the case of Kleist’s efforts, there were practical 
difficulties that stood in the way of the Kurzer Katechismus becoming 
anything other than a piece of ephemera. Thus, Arndt’s original catechism 
was anti-absolutist and promoted the same reformist ideas about the army 
as those of the Prussian reformers, such as Clausewitz, Scharnhorst or 
Gneisenau. In particular, Arndt proposed norms for German soldiers 
that moved away from the traditional scheme of an army dominated by 
the nobility. Still worse, by advocating a national army, Arndt parted 
with centuries of feudalism, whilst, like Kleist, he strongly criticized those 
German princes who had entered into alliances with Napoleon. In so far as 
those German soldiers who continued to fight in the ranks of the grande 
armée were concerned, the message was clear, what Arndt advocated 
being a mass rejection of military discipline and traditional loyalty. But 
even this was not an end to it: even if they came out against Napoleon, 
the German princes were 
still potentially anti-patriotic. Thus, as a 
nationalist, Arndt rejected dynasty-related notions of legitimacy and 
proclaimed the absolute supremacy of the nation: what was divine was not 
the prince, but the Fatherland. Hence, of course, the document’s de facto 
suppression after 1814, Arndt’s message being completely unacceptable in 
the context of the Germany created by the Congress of Vienna. 
With Arndt convinced that the German nation should be united and 
not divided by the princes, the Kurzer Katechismus posed plenty of problems 
even before 1814. Thus, calling for desertion, mutiny and a German 
insurrection was all very well whilst the princes continued to support 
Napoleon as it was a good means of persuading them to think of changing 
sides, but once they had started to come over to the Allies then Arndt’s 
rhetoric became redundant and even dangerous. New print-runs of his 
catechism were therefore blocked, and he was formally invited to show 
more respect towards royalty. Left with little choice in the matter, 
Arndt therefore decided to rephrase and reformulate his catechism 
under the name of Katechismus fiir den deustchen Kriegs- und Wehrmann, 
worin gelehrt wird, wie ein christlicher Wehrmann sein und mit Gott in den 
Streit gehen soll [Catechism for the German soldier, in which it is taught 
how Christian soldiers should behave and fight, with the help of God]. 

<<<PDFPAGE 187>>>
Emilie Delivré 
169 
This second catechism appeared in August 1813 in Silesia. The fierce 
reaction of the authorities to the first version was due to the content of 
the first seven chapters, these being the parts in which Arndt invited the 
soldiers to disobey the orders of their ‘traitor’ princes, and condemned 
the officers who refused to believe in a united Germany. In consequence, 
Arndt had to eliminate those parts. This self-imposed silence, however, 
was less unbearable than it would have been before: in March 1813 
Prussia had joined the war against Napoleon with an army reorganized 
along the lines advocated by the reformers, whilst it was possible to 
believe that an unstoppable national revolt had begun; in consequence, 
the necessity for extreme nationalist rhetoric was not as pressing as 
before. Thus, in the new catechism, the language used by Arndt was much 
more composed and restrained. In place of the ‘dissident’ sections 
mentioned above, there now appeared a long historical prologue and 
several new chapters, all this material being much more politically neutral 
than before, whilst even those chapters that were retained from the 
original version were heavily edited. As for the catechism, it now became 
less of a text for German soldiers than a text for soldiers in general, and, 
for that matter, less an exposition of a patriotic ethic than an exposition 
of a Christian one. Indeed, in line with the tradition of the north German 
states of Prussia and Mecklenburg — then the only German states fighting 
for the Allies — Lutheran influences became much more evident, especially 
in the annex, which was composed of patriotic songs that were mostly 
based on religious melodies. Not surprisingly, then, this second catechism 
met with more approval, and, by extension, success. So acceptable was 
it to the German princes, indeed, that when Napoleon returned to France 
in 1815 a third version appeared that was slightly different from its 
predecessor of 1813 but possessed of the same title. 
Finally, to return to the case of Spain, by the time that Arndt was 
penning his soldiers’ texts, the wheel had come full circle. In France 
and, later, Italy, the period from 1789 to 1799 had seen catechisms used 
to promote the cause of revolution. Thereafter in Spain, Austria and 
Germany they had been used as the cause of counter-revolution or, at 
least, resistance to France. In the German case this had at least potentially 
threatened political upheaval, but in Spain we are now presented with a 
mirror image of the situation in France in the years of the Revolution. 
Thus, in 1810 the Spanish uprising against Napoleon had become 
something very different. Seizing the opportunity afforded them by the 
convocation of a national assembly in Cadiz, a progressive faction 
known as the ‘liberals’ had seized power and forced through the famous 
constitution of 1812. To defend and enshrine their new creation, they 

<<<PDFPAGE 188>>>
170 
The Pen and the Sword 
found no better means than the catechism, and thus it is that the 
period 1812-14 saw the publication of many catecismos expounding the 
work of the cortes of Cadiz. 
Political catechisms, then, appeared in large numbers in Revolutionary 
and Napoleonic Europe, but they did so in the context of different 
societies, different cultures and different political situations, and therefore 
assumed many different forms. As a genre, indeed, they can be highly 
contradictory. But in so far as the subject of resistance to Napoleon is 
concerned, this is all to the good as it enriches our understanding of the 
subject and provides us with an alternative approach to its study. Above 
all, it helps us to understand that, to the extent that there was a European 
anti-Napoleonic rebellion at all, one should not overlook its diversity. 
Not only did insurgent movements take very different forms, but they 
were also expressed in different ways, and, significantly, appeared for quite 
different reasons. For example, in Italy anti-Napoleonic catechisms 
appeared on the surface to accept the canons of Napoleonic rule — there 
does not, in fact, seem to have been a single case that was directly critical 
of the emperor - and rather expressed their resistance by continuing to 
evince support for the principles of 1789, whereas in Germany the 
opposition’s catechisms were both anti-Napoleonic and anti-French. 
Meanwhile, intranational differences are also quite telling. For example, 
the Spanish constitutional catechisms of 1812 were the products of a 
violent resistance movement against Napoleon, but they were as much 
concerned with building a new Spain as with fighting the emperor and are 
in fact only rarely explicitly directed against him, whereas their forebears 
of 1808-1809 essentially look to the defence of an old Spain and fill 
their pages with his demonization. And, last but not least, it is clear that 
the resistance espoused in the catechisms was by no means necessarily 
the same as the resistance espoused by the established order: in Germany, 
as we have seen, Von Kleist never secured official sponsorship at all, 
whilst Arndt was only able to retain it by dint of bending quite 
dramatically to the pressure placed on him by his political superiors; 
meanwhile, in Austria if Hormayr was permitted in 1809 to publish 
German translations of Spanish catechisms that could be read in the 
German context as putting duty to the nation before duty to the sovereign, 
it was only because the new war that was impending with France gave 
Vienna a strong interest in destabilizing such French satellities as Baden 
and Bavaria. 
To return to the question of the catechisms themselves, however, the 
German case in particular invites a series of additional questions. In those 
other areas of Europe where these publications appeared, they were as 

<<<PDFPAGE 189>>>
Emilie Delivré 
171 
we have seen, fairly numerous. In the case of Spain, for example, 
Manuel Morales Mufioz has shown that one quarter of the eighty Spanish 
political catechisms written in the nineteenth century belonged to the 
years 1808-1814." In Italy and France, too, there is a similar accumulation 
of such texts. Yet in so far as Germany is concerned, the vast majority of 
the political catechisms that appeared in the nineteenth century 
appeared in the context of the revolution of 1848, rather than the 
Napoleonic period. Indeed, throughout the period 1799-1815 the only 
catechisms to be found are the three mentioned above, whilst the 
example offered by the earlier tract of 1793 is even more isolated. We 
are, then, immediately faced by the task of trying to decide on the 
reasons for this great difference. On top of that, meanwhile, there is the 
issue of the link between levels of resistance and the publication of 
political catechisms though it is obvious that in this last respect a direct 
causal relationship between the one and the other should immediately 
be set aside (in the ‘War of Liberation’ of 1813-14, it seems certain that 
a far higher proportion of the German population was conscripted, or 
otherwise induced, to take up arms than was ever the case in the Peninsular 
War). In the rest of this chapter, we shall examine these issues, and in the 
process open up the debate to some additional questions, on the basis 
of some initial findings of a much broader research project on political 
catechisms. 
As a general rule, in terms of their form the political catechisms that 
we have examined are not very different from one another. Thus, they 
all propagate a corpus of ideas, whilst at the same time explaining their 
meaning; they all enjoin action (if only intellectual); and they all 
employ dialogue to get over their message. Their content, of course, 
is another matter — to repeat the obvious, some catechisms are clearly 
reactionary, while others, inspired by enlightened and/or liberal doctrines, 
endeavour to transmit to the less educated masses new concepts and 
definitions — but the French or Spanish catechism was not distinct 
enough from the German catechism to suggest that we shall find the 
answer to the questions that we have posed in this sort of area. In so far 
as Germany is concerned, then, the following questions arise. Does the 
low number of German catechisms during the Napoleonic wars signify 
less political effervescence and lower levels of resistance than in Spain 
or Italy, or is it rather the fruit of a less religious society in which 
religious catechisms had ceased to have much relevance? Is it simply 
that German society was less open to the traditional form of question 
and answer? And what do we mean by Germany? Can we also find 
variations between different German states (the result, for example, of 

<<<PDFPAGE 190>>>
172 The Pom amd Shee Saeed 
different confessional influences, or different degrees af Napokkonic 
influence)? And. lastly, coukd it be that, in divided Germany, the 
phenomenon of political catechism was unlikely to aOQQaIE MUch 
Promumence Simply Decause the very concept af a sagt catechins 
seemed to presuppose national unity? 
. 
None of these altemmative hypotheses seemy totally BWVVERY, However 
Ther Sem ft be NO general theory that Is Doth walled for most cases and 
capadle of explaining the presence (ar absence) af political catechion 
— 
amd the ditierences in Hy nature, Yet one or two general poiats do stand 
Out, Thus, the emergence of specific forms of catechins (PROKTENIVE QT 
reactionary) may de Aki to depend, Hist on the specific relationship 
between religion and politics in a particular country, and, second, the 
extent t which that relationship was affected Dy the experience af the 
Napoleonic Wary, Variables affecting the rehtionahip between religion 
and politics Include confessional Kdentity, historical experience (in 
particular, the presence or otherwise af revolution, entightonment and 
industrialization), socal development (we here chink particulany of the 
emergence af 2 Hourgenis social as) and geographical location twa 
be noted here that both Gemany and Spain Ry on the dander af | 
France). Hence, at least, some of the differences between Spain and 
Germany: in the former, political catechion emerged in the light afa 
powerful Catholic Church directly threatened Dy — as it aw it TeVORUtIOR, 
whereas in Protestant Germany — the zone of the Country that produced 
both Amdt and Von Rieist - religion was both weaker in institutional 
terms and less threatened by changes in govermmen®t with the result 
that the production of catechisms was more influenced by important 
intellectual debates about, for example, peckgogy, 
One way of investigating the key relation between religion and the 
Sate ls by Studying the standand fom af religious catechiom at the end 
of the eighteenth century, and the Changes that the Napaleanic experience 
drought. The farm of religious catechiams before the war often reflected 
the tension between hderal and reactionary forces both inside and 
outaide the dominant Church about the educational value of catechism, 
and the role of the dominant confessions in the education af the mas 8 
Meanwhile, the way in which both the Substantive content and the 
Speaific pedagogical form of such texts was pereived in a given country, 
or by @ Specific coniessian, directly influenced the development af 
political catechism. It seems that some evolutions af the genre (as the 
Comsaquence af the relation between religion and the state) permitted 
the ‘secularisation’ of catechisms, and others not. And in same countries, 
the Napoleonic Warn were an important factor that favoured this 

<<<PDFPAGE 191>>>
Emilie Delivré 
173 
evolution, creating the need for a familiar form of expression that 
could adapt itself to the exigencies of the situation and save the day in 
the emergency that now threatened. 
The question of whether or not catechism could be made use of for 
political purposes, or, to put it another way, this process of adaption, 
was soon placed at the centre of theological debate in even (and perhaps 
mostly) the most religious of countries. For some members of the clergy, 
catechisms were first and foremost sacral texts from which it followed 
that they should never be drawn into the temporal sphere. Yet for others 
catechisms were transferable objects that could on occasion be made 
use of for other purposes, one such being moments when the Church 
needed a means of answering practical, every-day questions that were 
relevant to the faithful at a time of great difficulty. To the extent that 
the Napoleonic invasions represented such times, for such men it fol- 
lowed that it was necessary to guide the masses in precisely this fashion. 
Not surprisingly, such divisions were particularly noticeable in Spain, 
where the use of catechism by the French ‘constitutional’ Church to 
justify its position in the 1790s had caused particular offence, and 
where many of the clergy continued to oppose the politicization of 
catechism under any circumstances. However, the case of Germany, 
where the tradition of practical catechism was longer, differs. Here the 
debate was dominated not by the clergy but rather by the intelligentsia 
and, in particular, its Romantic elements. In respect to these elements, 
it was earlier asked whether there was less nationalist fervour in Germany 
than in other European states. Setting aside the masses - an entirely 
separate question — we see that this was not so: in the university world, 
in particular, anti-French feeling was widespread and the discussion of 
nationalist ideas commonplace. But that did not in itself mean that the 
concept of katechismus automatically came to the fore. On the contrary, 
for many German intellectuals, the experience of the Enlightenment — a 
period that was already identified with French cultural imperialism — made 
catechism the weapon of the enemy, of Napoleon - the false roman 
emperor — and of the proponents of cold reason. For more conservative 
figures, meanwhile, the use of such texts had also been one of the 
factors which transformed the revolution into a bloody terror. Many 
nationalist writers therefore refused to see in the new unity of religion, 
ethics and politics, in their organic conception of society, any place for 
the teaching method of catechism. In this, of course, Arndt and Von Kleist 
differed from their fellows, but it would not be going too far to suggest 
that this prejudice may well be a key to the relative absence of catechism 
from the armoury of German intellectual resistance to Napoleon. Indeed, 

<<<PDFPAGE 192>>>
174 
The Pen and the Sword 
in his own catechism even Von Kleist referred to the empty philosophical 
verbalism of the enemy, and apologized for his own use of the catechetical 
genre. As his hypothetical father says to his equally hypothetical child, 
‘Don’t you find that, by offering you a catechism, your father errs in the 
same way as that which you are describing?’!” Nor were matters aided 
by the fact that the most prominent pedagogues of the time (such as 
Pestalozzi) were strongly against the teaching method of catechism, which 
seemed to them archaic. At the same time, Fichte, who proclaimed the 
necessity of teaching the nation, also disliked catechism. And, last but 
not least, the sort of revolutionary message propounded by German 
nationalists may well simply have sounded incongruous in the context 
of the Lutheran forms so closely associated with dynasties such as those 
of Prussia and Saxony. In consequence, only Arndt and Von Kleist 
chose this genre, whilst we should here again note the former’s efforts 
to conciliate his message with that of Lutheran tradition. Arndt’s second 
catechism thus adopted strong religious tones, even though religion 
was obviously instrumentalized for the benefit of the nationalist cause, 
in which respect it differed from Spanish political catechisms with religious 
tones, where the opposite was invariably true (i.e. political concepts were 
made use of to advance the cause of organized religion rather than the 
other way about). This may have been much against his will: Arndt 
himself acknowledged that he preferred the unity of the nation to the 
supremacy of any particular confession, and avowed that he had only 
given his catechism a religious aspect as a means of injecting it with a 
mystical accent capable of impressing the simple soldier. But all the 
evidence suggests that without such a change there was simply no means 
of proceeding with the tactic: Von Kleist, after all, had not managed to 
get his work off the ground at all. 
The weakness of anti-Napoleonic catechism is Germany is an interesting 
point that provokes further reflection. Despite frequent use by thinkers 
of the Enlightenment and the French Revolution of the genre of 
catechism as a means of spreading new universal religions based on the 
laws of ‘nature’ or the rights of man, this means of propaganda was at 
its most comfortable as an instrument of reaction, and, above all, Catholic 
reaction, and that despite the disputes outlined above. Unlike Lutheranism, 
for centuries the Catholic Church had been evangelizing new groups of 
potential converts, which also naturally meant adapting itself to new 
civilizations. For a living model of this, we have only to turn to the 
Jesuit missionaries of the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries. As Carlo 
Ginzburg writes, ‘In order to spread the faith of Christ they consciously 
decided to accommodate themselves to all kinds of customs, from the 

<<<PDFPAGE 193>>>
Emilie Delivré 
175 
caste system in India to the cult of ancestors in China.’”° In the words of 
a Jesuit missionary quoted by the same author, ‘One must be barbarous 
with the barbarians and polished with civilized people...In this way 
the uniform and unchanging gospel will be more easily insinuated into 
the spirits’.*’ In consequence, the principle of adapting the principle of 
catechism to a particular circumstance was well understood. In the 
crisis represented by the Revolutionary and Napoleonic era, meanwhile, 
catechisms presented unique advantages as a form of discourse. Inherent 
in the very concept of ‘resistance’ is that of an enemy, or, to put it 
another way, an ‘other’. And how better to define this concept than 
through catechism? Thus, on the one hand this could be used systemat- 
ically to set out the rival position, and on the other it could be used just 
as systematically to rubbish it. In this fashion, the old technique of 
sequencing questions and answers acquired a new relevance and 
efficacy, for it provided a means of, first, neutralizing the words of the 
enemy by placing them within the meaning of one’s own ideology, 
and, second, proving the opposite of what the enemy claimed. The enemy 
was thus disqualifying himself by the mere fact of speaking. 
Yet even here there were problems. For example, in Catholic Italy only 
one example of an anti-Napoleonic catechism specifically related to the 
cause of armed resistance to the French has ever been discovered (as 
opposed to catechisms that are secretly anti-Napoleonic, but which are 
yet ‘jacobinical’ in their outlook).”* In the Catholic parts of Germany 
there was no use of catechism to stimulate resistance. And in Spain, as 
Aymes shows, with one exception no counter-revolutionary catechism 
appeared until 1808.”* For much of the period in question this need not 
surprise us: the Spanish government was from 1795 to 1808 allied to 
France, whilst internal political debate was dominated by the hated 
figure of the royal favourite, Manuel de Godoy, from whose supposed 
clutches it came generally to be hoped that Napoleon would actually 
rescue Spain. Yet this leaves us with the issue of the period 1789-92. In 
these early days of the Revolutionary era, the regime of Carlos IV was 
deeply frightened by events in Paris and might therefore have been 
expected to welcome any means that could be devised of persuading 
the Spanish people to steer clear of the ideas that reigned across the 
Pyrenees. At the same time, too, the Spanish Church was ever more 
aware of the travails of its French cousin: aside from anything else, 
many non-juring clergy fled to Spain and took refuge in such provinces 
as Navarre and Catalonia. Yet counter-revolutionary catechisms came 
there none, and the inference is quite clearly that for Catholics there 
were deep inhibitions in this respect —- that the Catholic Church, in 

<<<PDFPAGE 194>>>
176 
The Pen and the Sword 
short, was clearly opposed to an instrumentalization of catechism. As 
Cabarrus noted in the early 1790s, indeed, ‘Political catechism has yet 
to appear among us.’** What, then, broke the log-jam? In brief, the 
answer is the coming of war, there being no coincidence in the discovery 
that the one exception to the rule - the catechism of the future liberal 
cortes deputy, Joaquin Lorenzo Villanueva — appeared at precisely the 
moment when armed conflict finally broke out between Bourbon Spain 
and Revolutionary France.” 
From all this we may make a general point. Such were the difficulties 
involved in the secularization of catechism as a tool of counter-revolution 
- that with the one unpublished exception of Von Kleist, it was only 
made use of when war against Napoleon had already broken out. In Spain, 
then, it appeared in 1793, and then did not ‘surface again until 1808, 
whilst Arndt did not put pen to paper until Napoleon had gone to war 
against Russia in 1812. The distinction is a little blurred — the original 
version of Arndt’s catechism called for both widespread desertion amongst 
the armies of the German states and revolution in the Fatherland, 
whilst the Spanish catecismos sought to stimulate resistance to the French 
throughout Spain rather than just in the areas that remained under the 
control of the Patriots — but it is therefore clear that on the whole cat- 
echisms were seen as a means of facilitating wars not of the people but 
of the state. To put it another way, the people were to take up arms 
more in accordance with norms and instructions received from above 
than in accordance with their own practices, experiences and instincts. 
And in this it must be said that they were a failure. Despite the long 
tradition accepting without question that Napoleon was faced by a 
great popular crusade in Spain and Portugal, the most recent research 
has shown that this was all but a myth. As Charles Esdaile has shown in 
a variety of works, voluntary enlistment was limited, conscription deeply 
unpopular and even the Spanish guerrillas an extremely complex phe- 
nomenon that defies many of the assumptions that have commonly 
been made about them. Nor, meanwhile, was the situation much better 
in Germany. Just as the Russo-German Legion was composed not of 
enthusiastic patriots, but men who had joined its ranks rather than 
starve to death in some Russian prison camp, so the German people did 
not rush to answer the cause in 1813. Prussia, true, hastily raised a mass 
army in March 1813, whilst her example was copied by many of the 
others states after they had changed sides in the course of the following 
autumn, but in the end the populace had to be forced to take up arms 
onwards, served but unwillingly and all too often did not let the figure 

<<<PDFPAGE 195>>>
Emilie Delivré 
177 
of Arndt’s Christian warrior get in the way of the business of pillage and 
rapine. 
In reality, then, in so far as it was used as a weapon against Napoleon, 
catechism was a failure. It was not used very often, whilst its impact 
seems to have been very limited. To reinforce this point, it has only to 
be observed that its future lay not with the cause of reaction but that of 
revolution. Isolated though they were, one cannot fail to notice the fact 
that the three German anti-napoleonic catechisms we have discussed 
announced the evolution of German thinking and mentality: from this 
point onwards the genre of political catechism gradually became insti- 
tutionalized, the production of these works reaching its climax in the 
revolution of 1848. In the same way, in Spain the development of 
catechisms that sought to defend the constitution of 1812 was proved 
to be a phenomenon that was repeated many times over in the trienio 
liberal of 1820-23. Nor is this surprising: apart from anything else the 
first half of the nineteenth century was an age in which the concepts of 
religion were losing their grip and becoming increasingly secularized. 
With hindsight, it is possible to argue that political catechism could 
never really succeed as a tactic of resistance. In trying to overcome the 
enemy, the resistance unconsciously incorporated in its argumentation 
some of the ideas that that same enemy stands for and therefore imper- 
ceptibly propagated some aspects of the new modernity. Also, for thinkers 
associated with the ancien regime, catechism was a double-edged sword 
in that it both called the people to arms but urged them to think for 
themselves and, in certain circumstances, act accordingly. But for men 
of the new age, there could be no such doubts, for getting the people to 
take up arms on their own account was the very heart of what they 
were about. At the same time, meanwhile, the concept of political 
catechism had originated amongst progressive thinkers. Amongst such 
groups, then, political catechism was perpetuated: indeed, the final authors 
of such texts would be socialists and communists - men who were the 
prophets of a new religion and the carriers of another kind of resistance.”° 
Notes 
1. For the period of the French Revolution, 
cf. B. Durruty, ‘Les auteurs de 
catéchismes révolutionnaires (1789-1799)', Annales Historiques de la Révolution 
francaise, no. 283 January, 1991), pp. 1-18; J. Hébrard, ‘La Révolution expliquee 
aux enfants : les catéchismes de 1!’an II’, in M.F. Levy (ed.) L’Enfant, la Famille 
et la Révolution Francaise (Paris, 1990), pp. 171-92; J. Hébrard, ‘Les catéchismes 
de la premiére Révolution et répertoire bibliographique des catéchismes révo- 
lutionnaires’ in L. Andriés (ed.), Colporter la Révolution : Lumiéres et Almanachs 
Populaires (Montreuil, 1989), pp. 53-81; R. Texier, ‘Les catéchismes du citoyen 
a la Révolution’, Impacts, nos. 1-2 (June 1990), pp. 35-S2. For the Spanish 

<<<PDFPAGE 196>>>
178 
The Pen and the Sword 
i) 
case, cf. J.R. Aymes, ‘Du catéchisme religieux au catéchisme politique (fin du 
XVIlle siécle — début du XIXe)’, in J.R. Aymes, E.M. Fell, and J.L. Guerena (eds), 
Ecole et Eglise en Espagne et Amérique Latine: Aspects Idéologiques et Institutionnels 
(Tours, 1988), pp. 17-32; A. Capitan Diaz, Los catecismos politicos en Espana. 
1808-1822 (Granada, 1978); A. Capitan Diaz, ‘Los catecismos politicos en 
los inicios del siglo XIX espafiol : un intento de formaci6n politica y social 
del pueblo’, in G. Ossenbach Santer etal. (eds) La Révolucion francesa y su 
influencia en la educaci6n en Espafia (Madrid, 1992), pp. 437-49; M. Morales 
Mufioz, ‘Los catecismos y la instrucci6n popular en la Espana del siglo XIX’ 
in Aymes etal., Ecole et Eglise, pp. 33-46; M. Morales Munoz, ‘Las ensenanzas 
de la virtud: reglas civico-morales en los catecismos del siglo XIX’, in R. Duroux 
(ed.), Les Traités de Savoir-Vivre en Espagne et au Portugal du Moyen-Age a nos 
Jours (Clermont-Ferrand, 1995), pp. 277-86; J. Munoz Perez, ‘Los catecismos 
politicos: de la ilustracion al primer liberalismo espanol, 1808-1822’, Gades, 
XVI (1987), pp. 209-10; M.A. Ruiz de Azta (ed.),sCatecismos politicos espanoles 
(Madrid, 1989). For the Italian case, cf. L. Guerci, ‘Les catéchismes républicains 
en Italie (1796-1799)’, in M. Vovelle, L’Image de la Révolution Francaise (Paris, 
1989), I, pp. 359-68; L. Guerci, Mente, cuore, coraggio, virtu repubblicane: educare 
il popolo nell? Italia in rivoluzione, 1796-1799 (Turini, 1992). 
. M. Morales Munoz, Los catecismos en la Espana del siglo XIX ( Malaga, 1990). 
. Cf. J.R. Aymes, ‘Catecismos franceses de la Révolucion y catecismos espanoles de 
la Guerra de la Independencia : esbozo de comparacion’ in Ossenbach 
Santer, La Révolucioén francesa y su influencia en la educacién en Espana, 
pp. 407-36; Guerci, ‘Mente, cuore, coraggio, virtu repubblicane’; D. Tanck de 
Estrada ‘Los catecismos politicos: de la RévoluciOn Francesa a México 
independiente’, in S. Alberro etal. (eds) La Révolucién Francesa en México 
(Mexico, 
1992), pp. 491-S06; M. Michel, Politische Katechismen: 
Volney, 
Kleist, Hefs (Frankfurt am Main, 1966). 
. For a discussion of these issues, cf. J.-C. Dhotel, Les origines du catéchisme 
moderne d’apres les premiers manuels imprimés en France (Paris, 1967), and 
J.R. Armogathe, ‘Les catéchismes et l’enseignement populaire en France 
au dix-huitieme siecle’, in A. Colin (ed.) Images du peuple au XVIIIe siécle 
(Aix, 1973), pp. 103-22. 
. Voltaire’s catechisms include Le catéchisme de l/honnéte homme (1763); Catéchisme 
chinois ou entretiens de Cu-Su, disciple de Confutzee, avec le Prince Kou, fils de 
Low, tributaire de l’empereur chinois Gnenvan, 417 ans avant notre ére vulgaire 
(1764); Catéchisme du jardinier ou entretien du Bacha Tuctan et du jardinier 
Karpos (1765); Catéchisme du curé (n.d.); Catéchisme du japonais (n.d.). 
. Hébrard, ‘Les catéchismes de la premiére Révolution’. 
. Guerci, ‘Les catéchismes républicains en Italie’. 
. AJ. Hofman, Der Aristokratenkatechismus: ein wunderschoenes Buechlein, gar 
erbaulich zu lesen fuer Junge und Alte (Mainz, 1792). 
. Aymes, ‘Du catéchisme religieux au catéchisme politique’. 
. Capitan Diaz, Los catecismos politicos en Espafia. 1808-1822. 
. Capitan Diaz, ‘Los catecismos politicos en los inicios del siglo XIX espanol’. 
. J. Munoz Pérez, ‘Los catecismos politicos : de la ilustracién al primer liberalismo 
espanol, 
1808-1822’. 
. Morales Munoz, ‘Ensefanzas de la virtud’; M. Morales Munoz, Los catecismos 
en la Espartia del siglo XIX. 

<<<PDFPAGE 197>>>
14. 
iS? 
16. 
We 
18. 
19: 
20. 
Zils 
2a 
23% 
24. 
29: 
26. 
Emilie Delivré 
179 
Anon., Catecismo civil y breve compendio de los obligaciones del espanol, conocimiento 
(practico) de su libertad, y explicatién de su enemigo, muy itil en las actuales 
circunstancias para la ensefienza de los nifios de ambos sexos, puesto en forma de 
dialogo (Madrid, 1808); Anon., ‘Catecismo civil de Espafia en preguntas y 
respuestas, mandado imprimir de orden de la Junta Suprema, por la viuda de 
hidalgo y sobrino’ (Sevilla, 1808), in Morales Mufioz, Catecismos politicos del 
siglo XIX, pp. 22-5; Anon., ‘Catecismo catélico-politico, que con motivo de 
las actuales novedades de la Espafia, dirige y dedica a sus Conciudadanos un 
sacerdote amante de le Religion, afecto a su patria y amigo de los hombres 
(Madrid, 1808), in ibid., pp. 28-62. 
H. v. Kleist, ‘Katechismus der Deutschen, abgefasst nach dem Spanischen, 
zum Gebrauch fiir Kinder und Alte’, in H. v. Kleist, Politische Schriften und 
andere Nachtradge zu seinen Werke, ed. R. Koepke (Berlin, 1862). The Spanish 
catecismo 
civil appeared in German 
as ‘Biirger-Katechismus und kurzer 
Inbegriff der Pflichten eines Spaniers, nebst praktischer Kenntnis seiner 
Freiheit und Beschreibung seines Feindes. Von groftem Nutzen bey den 
gegenwartigen Angelegenheiten. Gedruckt zu Sevillia und fir die Schulen 
der Provinzen vertheilt’. 
E.M. Arndt, Katechismus ftir den deutschen Kriegs und Wehrmann (Leipzig, 
1813), and Kurzer Katechismus ftir deutsche Soldaten’ (1812) in R. Weber, 
Drei Flugschriften (Berlin, 1988), pp. 1-33. 
Morales Munoz, Los catecismos en la Espania del siglo XIX, pp. 79-94. 
For a discussion of these issues, cf. W. Harle etal. (eds), Theologische 
Realenzyklopaedie (Berlin, 1988-98), XVII, pp. 686-710; ibid., XXIxX, pp. 33-49. 
Von Kleist, Katechismus der Deutschen, chapter 8. 
C. Ginzburg, History, Rhetoric and Proof (Hanover, 1999), p. 77. 
Ibid., p. 78. 
P. de Felice, Catechismo Reale, ossia istruzione ove per via di domande e risposte si 
propongono i dritti de’ re e gli obblighi de’ sudditi, per uso della diocesi di Sessa 
(Napoli, 1799). 
; 
For a discussion of these issues, cf. J.-R. Aymes: ‘Catecismos franceses de la 
Révolucion y catecismos espanioles de la Guerra de la Independencia : Esbozo 
de comparacién’. 
Aymes: ‘Catecismos franceses de la Révolucién y catecismos espanioles de la 
Guerra de la Independencia’, p. 424. The Spanish original, which is somewhat 
ambiguous, reads, ‘El catecismo politico esta por hacer.’ 
J.L. Villanueva, Catecismo del Estado segun los principios de la Religion, por el 
doctor D. Joaquin Lorenzo Villanueva, Presbitero, calificador del Santo oficio y 
Capellan Doctoral de S. M. en la Real Capilla de la Encarnacion (Madrid, 1793). 
For just two prominent examples, cf. L. Blanc, Catéchisme des socialistes 
(Paris, 1849), and R. Owen, The Catechism of the New Moral World (Leeds, 
1838). 

<<<PDFPAGE 198>>>
“5 = 18 Onyemteds eit ator tio 
ey ecieae 
Y 
ry ce 
ete 
’ 
p 
: 
7 
- 
stile titety blinds SS a ania 
ths Sat Seo 
aN TPE | 
cE? 
a 
rewdkal! 
Lay he ha ere aggenie! ay cobs Poet erating ep is Neth nhs Coin 
i vets fh is ical i Sali pete ec Siter ot “hacemiint ot tony tuririannonineay 
¥ aro te i uizifa 
DP Oohp Sy pt ‘metemnl® Lobia 
yn ator 
hay. agp Ba 
endl Mice tee GOCE Sy Sohne Viele iatribe mtn 
. 
Ah Hashes Wine Wi tls f oelpren’ ay) DT RL wheter 5) aq 
. 
ob evRotohcl mi) jenliipind: 
a welll Polinde, Raabo ay SY 
St ARE ina se Ae aghast (Sb iitp i INL el Bb debe hartii eiteddodine 
BSLATEN er ORT 
wrk 
dey od. 
OrgsteGhgeldal dite Gripttta ‘Woot 
NS eet Ee 
oe 
8 ie eel 
D 
Me 
oct eR AE a guste MU oto kt gts eyitiel tag ett eb et 
hr So 
AMSG felt 62 Gn SM heeeladined i4iteel ind ae 
Reba 
PRET Fae ajo (OP ne wena tet orga Vy acon tect 
eal Be” ipl ore aa) settee) 
oA Be smtp ldr)- Leanna 
onthe dite yaracoye Bion elWnage PeeGulGiht rote trawl 
a 
ok 
oe Task ink MAE path? olathe BAH: awa dy rree-sheehettege 
rallies 260 Bhaj aitmegh De Warton. huhthtenee 
gah taining 
SENS 
Opp TP ah .. Coit ene ae), 
creel geneva’ 
aaa : 
BAI Aig 
Ane: PASTA: Wither ogy Ady mal AE (Mhireet ia 
* 
RW SIRT Casebie? witanesti inl etched 
Mk 19 ard brine 
LR 
B$2 3K. Avaas, 
“Calechen, A Ale. Ce dy iiroat malay retin Uy bo a 7 
q 
ww Soh Ao Bins 
Cat ASE 
UT EW! be auiteeulsdy ke adriieddelty 
a ea 
— OBRE 
rite a0 enee aya WER 
ON beet) Nerd 
ene 
ee erey 
re 
pars Hs AIT 
MOCO] Sok eC 
ere, eee: 
YS 
, 
NG oe 
| 
7 
“ ays 
a. othe ti 
oe 
ee 
ate alae A HONS 
a aes tH cater Ty ufc Mei lies stk auido wate oh AS 
ob 
th -b Gay adh Heoktiaae TOT yt Tip 
av ah bap id si a 
cae SPY FTP 
aieipel 
QUIET: ae oer eee 
Gl 
sy 
tesehnaiveay Stain y frnili yz 4). eee eentn beeeemeige 
tin Me lh. 
_ skotte | inte bibenbHie 
a) bon hei) G16 wilotiepmacalniyeEin oma 
nelal 
» CSU 
FOS FD ia, Sis 
: 
os 
jo 
ee HOE egnnys Sh 
a an ‘bine istyea seine lls eb aint at tb) 
eereyr ech ecreaaeS 
danas 
ne 
Net aes SIAM Lorie Halted SOTe HEM “oy luton Sresqube 
ahaL Aceniiie ae 
ON DLNITS 
"SE ey ie Di hemp ail ay Ol nis Gaal 
ws 
Pr nde Foi’ ta oa 
inal anes 
hob a tenet tom hanfedl 
FRE 
| 
— Wire ay. fal aia CP wringer 
sd haarygele | (arr Trg 
COM tagh 
é 
é 
- 
; 
: 
wae = 
REBT 
Ss ao nolan eovege abel, eho 
Fin Met I 
Se Nencrel wpy 
i)», ‘ 
cane oh 
| 
Soe 
eh 
ae 
“ech EME pect My wehfiriie's sqenictong ae) jul WA 
ae 
Fertaty Gott 
A WR a iy eR Te nave! CR SERED: lob) bee 
- melee F Se teri het (vagy ed Ala Mini GGG. 0! 
ate 
“atu? 
= 
: A (aan Ste 
» 9) 
G 
we! ¥ 
A ¢ Ney i ane ue 
eee 
Sine a 
: - Const ins ine. ‘es 
: “2 
piel 
2 & 
_ ea 4h 
oe 
; 
i 
7 
Aad 
AiaG, Lt ioe Preto 
a itoleod bn» 
jis bys 
er 
ee 
y 
7 Pk ine 
a 
gv) : hy 
p _ “a. aa fie 
oy). i pst} 
. 
is 
J. 
OCS 
Ar. 
1? oT 
SAitl DV AD 
ote > Ae Yy laut. Yt tahh. 
MY aca 
j 
ay 
ee 
ON 
2 
<* 5 ee 
Canal. 18h, vale? 
. 
¥ 
: 
A 
ry 
iA 
ee 
bafiGas, bro rear ist Pe hi Wire) 
Mt Mon Me Leal, dip raster 
°° 
pite faye 
Ad tine 
Kee. 
} 
7 
aor 
co 
Jay 
J 
Vig 
A 
Dew 
Ag 
, 
at 
oS 
- 
a is 
- 
7 
i 
_—— 
, 
® 
% 
| 
Ou 
7 
iar 
= 
ie 
— 
: 
- 
or 

<<<PDFPAGE 199>>>
9 
The Patriotism of the Russian Army 
in the ‘Patriotic’ or ‘Fatherland’ 
War of 1812 
Janet Hartley 
In general, it is probably fair to say that the term ‘popular resistance’ 
conjures up visions of the reaction of populaces to invasion and 
occupation. But in the Napoleonic Wars - a period, after all, of mass 
armies — the peoples of Europe were conscripted for military service in 
immense numbers, thereby providing us with an alternative focus for 
the study of popular resistance. What justification is there for the study 
of the Russian army as opposed to the Russian people in 1812? The 
military performance of the Russian army in 1812 has been examined 
extensively but the ‘mood’, if you can call it that, of the army has not 
been the subject of the same level of investigation. Scholarship has 
focused on the so-called ‘people’s war’ (in Russian, the narodnaia voina); 
that is, the resistance by ordinary people, by which is meant essentially 
the peasants, or, in fact, the serfs, to the invaders and the contribution 
that this made to the defeat of the Napoleonic forces.'! The extent to 
which this popular resistance can be seen as ‘patriotic’ or ‘nationalistic’ 
has been the subject of extensive debate.” On the whole, Western histor- 
ians have dated the emergence of modern forms of Russian nationalism 
to the later nineteenth century and have characterized peasant resistance 
during the Napoleonic invasion as ‘xenophobic’ rather than ‘nationalistic’ 
but, nevertheless, the events of 1812 are regarded as an important stage 
in this development. 
The trauma and consequences of the invasion of 1812 have, inevitably, 
been a source of fascination to Russian scholars, and not only to Russian 
scholars 
of course. The Russian scholarly journals of the second half of 
the nineteenth century include a large number of memoirs, contemporary 
accounts and correspondence relating to the invasion. Tolstoi’s War 
181 

<<<PDFPAGE 200>>>
182 
The Patriotism of the Russian Army in 1812 
and Peace, published in 1866-69, reinforced the fascination with the 
participation of individuals in the great events of history. But the greatest 
stimulus to Russian scholarship on 1812 came one hundred years later, 
with the jubilee publications of 1912. These include the seven volumes 
entitled The Fatherland War and Russian Society, which brought together 
many of the most distinguished prerevolutionary Russian historians, 
including, just to mention two, Semevskii, whose two-volume study of 
peasants in the reign of Catherine II remains the great classic work on 
the subject, and Tugan-Baronovskii, who wrote an influential, if rather 
provocative, account of the development of the factory in Russia.’ Local 
historical journals and archives were very active in publications of 
contemporary materials in the jubilee year and have provided the basis 
for much of my own study of 1812. It has to remembered that the tsarist 
regime was vulnerable in 1912, almost as vulnerable as Alexander I had 
been in 1812. The defeat in the Russo-Japanese War in 1905-06 and the 
uneasy constitutional arrangements after 1906 had damaged the reputation 
of the tsar, and it is hardly surprising that the jubilee of a heroic Russian 
victory (followed by the 300-year celebration of the foundation of the 
Romanov dynasty in 1913) was welcomed as an opportunity to demon- 
strate how one hundred years earlier all members of society had pulled 
together, under the leadership of the tsar, and had triumphed together. 
This probably explains the publication in this year of such simplistic 
and nationalistic books as The Fatherland War of 1812 and Russian Jews 
and Heroic Women in 1812.° 
The prospect and then reality of a German invasion of Russia after 
1939 revived an interest in popular and patriotic resistance in 1812. 
A study was published in 1940 of the ‘people’s war’ in Smolensk, which 
made much of peasant resistance, although the unfortunate timing of 
the publication meant that the author was unable, as later authors, to 
equate the Russian military retreat in 1812 with the identical and skilful 
tactics of Stalin.° That book provided invaluable local material on events 
in 1812, but was marred by a crude interpretation. It took another jubilee, 
however, to provoke a further outpouring of scholarship on 1812 — this 
time in 1962, on the occasion of the 150th anniversary of the 1812 
invasion. This year saw a similar pattern to that of 1912 in that eminent 
Soviet scholars produced both individual and collective works. on the 
invasion, and further collections of documents.’ The emphasis, in this 
rather crude period of Cold War history, changed so that the role of the 
‘feudal élites’ (nobles and clergy) was diminished while that of the 
‘people’ was elevated to such an extent that they were now depicted as 
the only and the true ‘patriots’. The ‘people’s war’ was now also seen as 

<<<PDFPAGE 201>>>
Janet Hartley 
183 
an integral part of the class struggle against the feudal system. Nationalism 
was, of course, assumed to be part of the superstructure, an artificial 
creation of the bourgeois state intended deliberately to distract the 
proletariat from forming their natural class bonds across the boundaries 
of the nation state. But the Soviet state did not want to dismiss the 
significance of the role patriotism played in victory in the war of 
1941-45, a struggle which is always referred to as the ‘Great Patriotic 
War’. The patriotic support was interpreted as support for the Soviet 
régime and then was translated backwards to 1812, as, indeed, it was in 
other states, although with different ideological overtones.*® 
The fall of the Soviet Union has led to a revival of interest in 1812. 
The new popular historical journals which have emerged recount heroic 
events of 1812, whilst there is an interest in restoring tsarist monuments to 
1812 and groups which re-enact battle scenes of that year. Much of this 
activity is not very scholarly, but, to the extent that there is an underlying 
theme, it is more a return to the all-encompassing view of the patriotism 
and heroism of Russian society portrayed in 1912 than to the divisions 
in society highlighted by Soviet scholars. 
The emphasis by Russian and Soviet scholarship on the significance 
of popular resistance, has centred very firmly on the ‘people’s war’. This 
does not mean that the army has been totally neglected, but the treatment 
of this subject has been coloured by its association with the ‘people’s 
war’. I will start by discussing two aspects of the army which have been 
analysed in terms of patriotism, namely ‘partisan’ warfare and militias. 
I will then look at two areas which have been less studied, that is the 
extent to which a sense of patriotism can be detected in the mentalités 
of ordinary soldiers and of the officer corps in 1812. 
‘Partisan warfare’ (partizanskaia voina) was seen by both contemporaries 
and Tsarist and Soviet historians as an important feature of the struggle 
against Napoleon’s forces. I am not concerned here with primarily the 
effectiveness of partisans in the harassment of small groups of men 
which had become detached from the main body of the French troops. 
It is clear that General Kutuzov and General Bagration did have some 
doubts about the military effectiveness of partisan warfare and limited 
the number of regular troops released to perform this activity.” Napoleon 
was seemingly contemptuous at the time about the effectiveness of 
Russian, or Cossack, partisan units (as he was at the time about Spanish 
guerrillas). Both Russian and Soviet historians have described the success 
of Russian forces in the provinces of western Russia and have given 
accounts of encounters.where numbers of Napoleonic troops were killed 
or taken prisoner. 

<<<PDFPAGE 202>>>
184 
The Patriotism of the Russian Army in 1812 
My interest in partisans is not in their military activities per se but in 
the extent to which they can be portrayed as ‘patriotic’. Part of the issue 
here is semantics. The word partizan was used in Russian in 1812 to 
describe the use of small detachments of troops to attack French strag- 
glers, and which were released by the regular army for this purpose; it is 
the Russian word for ‘guerrilla’ and partizanskaia voina is translated as 
‘guerrilla war’ or ‘little war’. Many historians date the emergence of 
guerrilla warfare from the campaign in Spain in 1808, even though 
irregular fighting had occurred in other parts of the world before this 
time.!° The significance of the Napoleonic period is that ‘guerrilla war’, 
in Spain, Russia or the Tyrol, was conducted not simply by detachments 
of regular troops but also involved the ‘people’ rising against the 
invader, with or without regular military support. Contemporary theorists, 
such as Clausewitz, who had analysed warfare in both Spain and Russia, 
stressed the role and significance of regular army units in this warfare. 
Denis Davydov, the prominent leader of partisan detachments in 1812, 
also contributed to the military theories of partisan warfare from the 
perspective of an army officer. It is within this tradition, we shall see, 
that Russian historians discussed the role of partisans in their publications 
of 1912. 
Soviet historians received minimal guidance in this matter from the 
writings of Marx and Engels as these figures gave relatively little attention 
to guerrilla warfare and were generally sceptical about its potential 
effectiveness, at least in Europe. It was the experience of World War II 
that elevated the role of the partisan in Soviet eyes and led to the equating 
of partisan warfare with ‘the people’s war’ in 1812. The definition of 
‘partisan war in 1812’ in the Soviet Historical Encyclopedia makes it clear 
which element is perceived to be the most important: ‘Warfare waged 
by the people of Russia, especially the peasantry [my emphasis], and 
by detachments of the Russian army in the rear and along lines of 
communication of the Napoleonic army in Russia in 1812.’" But the 
twentieth-century understanding of the word also has other implications 
which were not necessarily present in 1812, namely that partisans operate 
in occupied territory (and it is hard to call the French presence in western 
Russia a formal occupation), that this includes acts of sabotage against 
the invader (not really relevant in 1812), and that the partisans are local 
armed inhabitants, who may or may not include members of the regular 
army. In 1812, peasants were armed by the regular army. Kochetkov, 
writing in 1962 and on whose analysis I have drawn for the Soviet view 
of partisans, stated that for this reason it would be a mistake to make 
the analogy between partisan activity in 1812 and 1941.!2 

<<<PDFPAGE 203>>>
Janet Hartley 
185 
The issue of patriotism is, however, relevant to the composition and 
leadership of the partisan groups. In 1912 the Russian publications 
stressed the heroism and bravery of individual partisan leaders such as 
Lieutenant-Colonel (later General) D.V. Davydov, Captain A.S. Figner 
and Captain A.N. Seslavin, all, of course, officers in the regular army. 
The Soviet historian Kochetkov criticized so-called ‘gentry’ historians 
for emphasizing the role of nobles in the organization of the ‘people’s 
war’.!> This is symptomatic of the Soviet approach to the whole question 
of popular resistance in 1812 where partisan warfare is inextricably linked 
to other aspects of the ‘people’s war’ and to the attacks by peasants on 
the feudal order to the extent that distinctions between these various 
forms of activity are blurred, making it almost impossible to establish 
the composition of specifically partisan groups, as opposed, for example, 
to peasant bands armed with pitchforks and axes who were simply 
defending their homes against soldiers. As part of the deliberate attempt 
to downplay the role of the élites in the defeat of Napoleon, Soviet 
analyses stressed the role of ‘non-nobles’ in organizing armed groups of 
peasants, including retired soldiers and members of the lower urban 
classes. Russian historians, in contrast, emphasized the role played by 
local nobles and officials in forming partisan groups (although the role 
of a certain V.G. Ragozin, a sexton, that is, a member of the lower clergy, 
was particularly commended by Kniaz’khov)." 
Peasant participation in partisan groups is particularly commended 
by Soviet historians. To Kochetkov, volunteering was a sign of patriotism 
(although he could offer no concrete evidence for this), albeit ‘not the 
patriotism called for in tsarist manifestos’ as ‘the struggle with the 
invaders did not extinguish the struggle against serfdom’.’* Kniaz’khov 
also praised the ‘unknown heroes’ including peasant partisan volunteers, 
and noted that Davydov promised Bagration that he would attract peasant 
volunteers by going into villages and asserting that the partisans would 
defend their priests and churches, this being a tactic that suggested 
a direct appeal to the most basic Russian national feeling (one sees here, 
of course, the symbiosis of Russian indentity with the Orthodox faith, 
to which matter I shall return later).'° Our problem, of course, is that 
these peasants were precisely ‘unknown heroes’ and left no record of their 
reasons for joining the partisans. All the evidence that I have found of 
the ‘people’s war’ suggests that peasants fought to defend their land, 
goods and families from the invader and that broader motives may be 
found in a gut, xenophobic, reaction against the ‘Godless’ and foreign 
invader. Beyond this, however, it is hard to go, and this is particularly 
true of the issue of a broader anti-feudal protest, all that can be said in 

<<<PDFPAGE 204>>>
186 
The Patriotism of the Russian Army in 1812 
this respect being that disorder in the countryside, which had been 
made more acute in western Russia by the virtual disappearance of law 
and order in the wake of the invasion, gave additional opportunities for 
violence. '” 
A further complication in the interpretation of the partisans as ‘patriotic’ 
is the leading role of Cossacks in these armed detachments. Cossacks 
had traditionally been used by the imperial army for skirmishes and 
irregular activities. They were particularly suited to this role as they 
were primarily horsemen rather than footsoldiers. The renowned ferocity 
and bravery of the Cossacks, coupled with their reputation for indiscipline, 
also accounted for their use in this way. But the characterization of this 
activity as specifically Russian ‘patriotism’ is problematic. Cossacks are 
not a separate ethnic group (although they were designated as such in 
the Soviet period); they comprise mainly Russian and Ukrainian peasants 
and fugitives who had fled to the southern borderlands. They nevertheless 
regarded themselves as a separate group within the Russian empire, 
with a separate institutional and social structure, who owed a loyalty to 
their Cossack host as well as to the Russian tsar. The eighteenth and the 
early nineteenth century saw the transformation of Cossack communities 
from active resistors to central tsarist authority to loyal servitors of the 
state,'* but this did not mean that they had lost their sense of separate 
identity or their distrust of Russians officials and grandees. Cossacks 
were Orthodox Christians, but many were Old Believers (that is, they 
rejected the reforms made to the Orthodox Church by the state in the 
mid-seventeenth century). Nor did the local population of western Russia 
always treat Cossacks as fellow ‘patriots’. Indeed, peasant resistance to 
Cossack marauders could be just as fierce as resistance to Napoleonic 
troops; one contemporary account notes that Cossacks were regarded 
by peasants as ‘worse than the enemy’.'” 
The final word on partisan activity should lie with Tolstoi’s account 
in War and Peace. It sees the young Petia, an eager and excited schoolboy 
‘with rosy cheeks and bright eyes’, accompanying the Cossack A.K. Denisov, 
leader of a partisan group comprising men of the regular army, Cossacks 
and hussars, but guided by an elderly peasant, against some French 
stragglers who were holding some Russian prisoners (including Pierre, 
one of the leading characters in the novel): 
Petia went closer, and his eyes fell on the pale face of a terrified 
Frenchmen, clinging with both hands to the shaft of a lance that was 
pointed at his breast. ‘Hurrah boys!’ shouted Petia, spurring his 
foaming horse, and riding up the street. ... By the time Petia rode up, 

<<<PDFPAGE 205>>>
Janet Hartley 
187 
he was overmastered. ‘Too late again!’ thought Petia. He made his 
way to where the fighting was briskest... A volley hit the air, the 
bullets whistled round. Petia was still tearing round the courtyard; 
but instead of holding the bridle, he was waving both arms wildly in 
the air, and leaning heavily over on one side. His horse... stopped 
short and Petia fell heavily. For a moment his hands and feet moved, 
his head was rigid. A bullet had entered his brain....‘Done for!’ 
repeated Dologhow, as if he found a particular pleasure in using 
those words; and he went back to the prisoners who were crowding 
round the Cossacks. ...[Denissov] lifted Petia’s head with trembling 
hands, and was looking at the poor, bloody and mud-stained face. 
‘I am fond of sweet things — these are capital raisins — take them 
all...’ The words [spoken by Petia to an imprisoned French drummer 
boy the day before] irresistably recurred in his mind; and the Cossacks 
looked on in amazement as they heard the short, hard breathing, 
almost like a dog’s bark, that broke from Denissov’s oppressed chest. He 
suddenly turned away and clutched convulsively at the railings.”° 
Thus Tolstoi depicted the ‘heroism’ of partisan warfare. 
The clearest links which have been drawn between ‘patriotism’ and 
the army, by both Russian and Soviet historians, but from very different 
perspectives, are the temporary militias that were established in 1812. 
Much has been written on the militias, but, as with the partisans, much 
of what has been written serves to obscure more than it does to clarify 
the composition and role of the militias. To non-Communist Russian 
historians, and especially those of the Tsarist era, the militias are particu- 
larly indicative of the patriotism of the nobles, who volunteered to form 
the officer corps of the militias, and who donated foodstuffs. But to 
Soviet historians, the true patriotism was shown by the peasants, many of 
whom wished to join the militias, whereas nobles were sometimes con- 
demned as ‘anti-patriotic’. 
Militias were not unique to the year 1812, and had been levied in 
1806 during the war of 1805-07. In 1812 a special levy for the temporary 
militia was made (in addition to the regular levies of that year) which 
raised over 200 000 men in Russia and over 74 000 in the Ukraine.” They 
were intended to be temporary units, and indeed they were disbanded 
at the end of the campaign in 1814. The ‘temporary nature’ of the militias 
was marked symbolically by the fact that soldiers in the militia retained 
their beards, unlike ordinary conscripts who were shaved once they had 
been accepted as recruits, as a sign that they now left the peasant estate 
and had become soldiers. When rumours reached him that militia 

<<<PDFPAGE 206>>>
188 
The Patriotism of the Russian Army in 1812 
conscripts were in fact being integrated with regular units of the army, 
Alexander I decreed that this was not to be allowed.”* Militias were raised 
in sixteen provinces, including the provinces closest to the invasion 
route. That seems to imply that the primary task of militias would be 
confined to local defence, although in fact militia units fought at the 
battle of Borodino and some fought outside the borders of the country 
in the campaigns of 1813 and 1814. A record of the officers rewarded 
for their service noted 13 officers from the Nizhnii Novgorod militia 
and ten from the Kazan’ militia who fought at the battle of Dresden.” 
The most problematic aspect of the militias, and the one which has 
most exercised Russian scholars of all shades of opinion is their com- 
position, and, in particular, the extent to which they comprised volunteers. 
The manifesto calling for the raising of militias in 1812 was directed to 
nobles with the intention that nobles should volunteer to serve as 
officers. As nobles had been freed from compulsory service to the state 
in 1762, they could not, of course, be forced to serve, and there is 
evidence both that young nobles volunteered and that older nobles 
left retirement to join the militias. Later a veteran of the Decembrist 
uprising, V.I. Shteingel’, for example, had retired from active naval 
service in 1810 because of ill health, but re-enlisted in 1812 and served 
in the St Petersburg and Novgorod militias from 1812 to 1814.”° Nobles 
also supplied the militias at their own expense and gave their serfs as 
conscripts.”° 
Some nobles may indeed have been motivated by patriotic feelings. 
Others, however, may have seen enlistment in the militias as a career 
opportunity that would otherwise be denied to them, a factor which 
has been ignored by both Russian and Soviet historians. To most young 
nobles, service in the army was far more desirable than in the civil 
service, and in particular service in local government institutions, but 
many lacked the social connections to gain a commission in a regiment. 
Once accepted in a local militia, however, it seems that it was easier for 
these nobles to transfer to a regular regiment. M.M. Spiridov, for example, 
who had been educated at home rather than at a prestigious cadet 
corps or noble boarding school in Moscow or St Petersburg, joined the 
Vladimir militia in 1812, aged probably sixteen, and then moved to a 
grenadier regiment in the following year.”” More striking is the case 
of A.A. Kriukov, who originally entered service in 1805 as an actuary. 
He joined the Nizhnii Novgorod militia in 1812 as a cornet, and then 
transferred to a more prestigious hussar regiment in 1815.78 
Soviet historians have not examined the various reasons why nobles 
enlisted in the militias; rather they have castigated nobles for being 

<<<PDFPAGE 207>>>
Janet Hartley 
189 
‘unpatriotic’ as they were reluctant to serve in the militias and put 
forward, in the words of one historian, ‘every excuse to avoid service’.”” 
This was indeed true of particular individuals, and was acknowledged at 
the time and by Russian historians. In Moscow, Governor Fedor Rostopchin 
noted that several nobles opposed the formation of the militia.*° Nobles, of 
course, were being asked to do more than voiunteer their own services; 
they were also being asked to supply their ‘human capital’, serfs, in 
order to serve in the militias, and also to supply the soldiers with arms, 
uniforms, horses and provisions. It is hardly surprising, then, that it 
proved impossible to supply the militias in full. In Smolensk province 
the shortfall was in the region of 7000 men and in Kaluga province it 
was almost 5000 men, but these provinces were in the path of the 
Napoleonic armies; other provinces, including Moscow, eventually 
conscripted more men than had been requested.*' Militias suffered 
from shortages of clothing, provisions and arms.** The Nizhnii Novgorod 
militia ‘had not a single doctor’ in October 1812. In March of the 
following year, the militia was still short of uniform and supplies.*? 
A recent, post-Soviet, study stated that the Khar’kov militia apparently 
never formed properly and challenges Soviet figures for the militia of 
that province.** It is difficult, however, to portray these shortages as 
‘anti-patriotic’. The majority of nobles in Russia were not wealthy, and 
in consequence they were simply unable to provide the human and 
material resources required. It was estimated in the 1760s that 32 per cent 
of nobles owned fewer than ten serfs; in 1797, 83.5 per cent owned 
fewer than 100 serfs.*° Russian regiments were also regularly under 
strength as the full complement of recruits rarely reached the recruiting 
station without losses through death, disease and desertion and regular 
regiments also suffered shortages of supplies. 
The militias aiso included non-noble volunteers. Kabanov mentions 
volunteers for the militia who were teachers at national schools, university 
students and seminarists.°° One student in Khar’kov seemingly accom- 
panied his request for enlistment in the militia with the words ‘I am a 
son of Russia and also love my fatherland’.*” But while some of these 
may have been motivated by patriotism as Kabanov suggests, they, even 
more than nobles, may well have also seen the militia an opportunity. 
Sons of clerics (Orthodox parish clergy had to marry) were obliged to 
attend seminaries and the most able sought careers elsewhere. Teachers 
in national schools were usually the sons of clerics; salaries were poor 
and irregularly paid and many young and physically able teachers 
would welcome the opportunity to escape their posts. Universities lost 
many of their students during the Napoleonic Wars as it became easier 

<<<PDFPAGE 208>>>
190 
The Patriotism of the Russian Army in 1812 
for them to get commissions in this period.** Minor officials also 
enlisted; Karl Hoffman, a collegiate registrar, requested a testimonial to 
join the Novgorod militia.°” 
Some volunteers, then, may have been hoping to get commissions as 
officers in the militias, though it should be noted that two of the groups 
with the greatest interest in securing this goal — seminarists and sacris- 
tans — were in theory only allowed to join the ranks.*° Soviet writers, 
however, lay special emphasis on volunteers from non-privileged members 
of society who enlisted as ordinary soldiers in the militias. According 
to the Soviet historian, Babkin, 
it was peasants and the ordinary 
(unprivileged) townspeople who were ‘patriotic’. He cited a peasant 
who enlisted his three sons, addressing them with the words, ‘We shall 
not let the miscreants drink our Orthodox blood; we will leave only 
bones; let the insatiable foe gnaw them’.* He also noted volunteers 
who were house serfs, peasants on crown land, coachmen (who are in 
effect state peasants in this period), and townspeople. Babkin goes as far 
as to claim that the ‘patriotic spirit’ of the peasants was such that they 
disguised serious illnesses and injuries so that they could enlist in the 
militias, one Nikifor Evstefeev even trying to hide the fact that his left 
leg was incapacitated by an old wound!*” 
There are problems, however, with Babkin’s assertions, not least in 
the fact that it is not always clear from the records what social estate some 
of his ‘volunteers’ came from. One of his main examples of patriotism, 
for example, is an elderly woman who brought her two grandsons to be 
enlisted with the words: ‘Only return to me when there is no enemy left 
on Russian soil’, which is all very well until one realizes that it is not 
clear from his source whether or not she was a peasant.** There is indeed 
an archival record of 13 coachmen in Moscow province volunteering 
out of ‘zeal and love of the fatherland’,** but this request had to be 
approved by Governor Rostopchin himself, which suggests that it was 
rather unusual. Serfs, of course, could not volunteer without permission 
from their masters, whilst state peasants (which includes coachmen) 
could not do so without permission from the state.** Babkin, inevitably, 
castigated the nobility for not allowing their serfs to volunteer for the 
army and claimed that serfs fled their estates in order to enlist (‘thus the 
serf régime mocked true patriots’).*° But in fact there is little evidence 
that serfs or peasants wished to join the army, whether on a permanent 
or a temporary basis. Sergeant Bourgogne recounted meeting some 
Polish peasants who ‘made us understand that they had to go to Minsk 
to join the Russian army, as they belonged to the militia; they had been 
forced to march against us by blows from the knout, and the Cossacks 

<<<PDFPAGE 209>>>
Janet Hartley 
191 
were stationed in the villages to drive them out’.*” Military service, as 
we shall see, was an obligation and not a privilege for these poor unfor- 
tunates. 
While Russian and Soviet historians have lauded the patriotism of 
peasants and other ‘non-privileged’ volunteers for the militias and partisan 
groups, they have made little attempt to penetrate the mind of the ordinary 
soldier, conscripted from the same social groups. One simple reason for 
this is simply the dearth of material on the subject, although it has to 
be said that lack of concrete evidence has not deterred these historians 
from asserting that feelings of patriotism and anti-feudalism motivated 
members of the militias and partisan groups. The vast majority of 
Russian soldiers were illiterate. There are no letters home from soldiers, 
whilst there is only one memoir by a ordinary soldier of which I am 
aware, and this gives no indication of patriotism or even the mindset of 
an ordinary soldier.** We have no evidence of the common soldier’s 
experience of battle. There are no accounts of the attitude of Russian 
soldiers towards the lands and peoples through which they passed in 
1813-14 or of their experience as an army of occupation in France from 
1815 to 1818. We simply do not know what the Russian soldier thought. 
The Russian army was, of course, a very different force from that of 
French Revolutionary of Napoleonic armies. This was a premodern army, 
and had more in common with the armies of the Austrian empire than 
with those of France, or with Prussia after the military reforms. The Russian 
army was a conscript army, and the mechanism of recruitment had not 
changed fundamentally from the time of Peter I. It was theoretically 
possible for peasants to volunteer to enlist if they had the permission of 
their noble landowners or the state peasant commune, but this was rare 
(although I suspect about as rare as peasants volunteering to join the 
militia). Furthermore, service in the Russian army was not a temporary 
obligation, as it was in France or Prussia. Peter had established that service 
was for life; this was later reduced to 25 years in 1793 but in most cases 
this in effect meant for life. Once a soldier was conscripted, he was in 
practice — as symbolised by the loss of his beard — separated forever from 
village, family and peasant society, and, in effect, regarded as dead. 
Most Russian veterans ended up in garrison regiments or were cared for 
by monasteries, as an obligation imposed on them by the state. The few 
who returned to their village were generally old, sick or maimed, and 
found themselves outcasts, who were unwanted, unwelcomed and unable 
to contribute to the economic life of the village. 
The dispatch of recruits from the villages demonstrates the true nature 
of the Russian army. There was no place here for the type of ceremonies 

<<<PDFPAGE 210>>>
192 
The Patriotism of the Russian Army in 1812 
which took place at the time of the levée en masse in France where 
recruits were reminded of their patriotic and civic duty to the nation. 
The departure of Russian conscripts, in contrast, was like the departure 
from life of a loved one. The songs accompanying the conscripts were 
laments rather than assertions of patriotic fervour. Robert Lyall, a British 
traveller in early nineteenth-century Russia described the scene in terms 
which could equally apply to a funeral: 
I have seen recruits upon télegas and sledges, drawn at a solemn pace, 
and surrounded by their relations and friends who bewailed their 
fate in the most lamentable manner; while they, dejected and absorbed 
in grief, sat like statues, or lay extended like corpses.” 
The recruit was typically the man (not always young and not always 
unmarried) who was the least valued member of the community — often 
a drunkard, idle or a trouble maker - or 
a member of an impoverished 
family that was unable to afford to buy a substitute to go in his place 
(and substitutes became far more expensive in 1812).°° Service in the 
Russian army, far from being a patriotic duty, was universally seen as 
the worst fate that could befall an individual. 
Does this mean that it is impossible to give any indication of the mentalité 
of the Russian soldier? Contemporary commentators — French as well as 
Russian — commented on the bravery and stoicism of Russian troops 
under fire. But this might arise from fear of their commanders, not to 
mention the practice of training canon on the backsides of the infantry. 
There is no evidence that Russian soldiers fought any less bravely outside 
Russia where the ‘fatherland’ was less directly in danger. Russian rates 
of desertion on campaign may have been lower than for some other 
European armies, although the statistics are not accurate enough to be 
certain. This may anyway have been not so much due to ‘patriotism’ as to 
the fact that the Russian passport system and mechanisms of social control 
made it almost impossible for a recruit to merge unnoticed into urban 
society and thereby forced deserters into a life of brigandage on the edges of 
society. It could also have been partly due to the ferocious punishments 
inflicted on deserters who were caught. Despite these disincentives, 
desertion rates of new recruits between the village and the recruiting 
post were extremely high, and this suggests that when the opportunity 
arose the Russian soldier was as at least as eager to abandon his military 
duty as his fellow soldiers in other European armies of the time.*! 
There are soldiers’ songs and folk songs which commemorate heroic 
victories against the enemy, brave Russian commanders and the defence of 

<<<PDFPAGE 211>>>
Janet Hartley 
193 
the country. This is, however, difficult evidence to use. It is not clear 
who wrote the songs, and when they were written; many were collected 
as folk songs by ethnographers in the late nineteenth century. Nor do we 
know how popular these songs were, the extent to which they genuinely 
reflected soldiers’ sentiments, or indeed if they were sung more by peasants 
than soldiers. But there are nevertheless a few popular songs which 
celebrate Russian victories over the French with words that are clearly 
contemporary. For example: 
Remember, remember, Russians... 
The French fled from Moscow; 
Russian soldiers saw them off. 
Or again: 
In the year eighteen twelve 
The French declared war 
On mother Moscow made of stone, 
On the whole of our Russia.°” 
The themes of saving Russia, and of ‘stone Moscow’ recur in other 
contemporary songs.’ Ordinary soldiers were depicted sympathetically 
in Russian dramas, as loyal, honest but simple folk, but their attitude 
towards their country was not explored or considered in this medium.** 
After the end of war, monuments were raised to the heroic defenders of 
the country, but soldiers were rarely depicted realistically and were 
more often portrayed in classical style or as Russian medieval knights.°° 
A modern sense of patriotism cannot, therefore, be proved for the 
ordinary Russian soldier. There some, rather tentative evidence, however, 
the Russia soldiers did have a religious identity and that defence of 
Orthodoxy could become equated with defence of Russia (which may 
perhaps explain the reluctance of Soviet historians to explore the question 
of soldiers’ loyalties). The association of Orthodoxy, or Christianity, 
with the defence of the fatherland had roots not in the French Revolu- 
tionary Wars, but in the conflicts between Russia and the Ottoman 
Empire in the second half of the eighteenth century, and was deliberately 
fostered in Russian celebratory odes and in state ceremonials marking 
victory over the infidel.°° Russian soldiers took holy icons into battle up 
to the First World War;*’ whilst troops were blessed by priests before 
battle. The religious element was of particular significance in the 
Napoleonic Wars as Napoleon had been anathematized by the Orthodox 

<<<PDFPAGE 212>>>
194 
The Patriotism of the Russian Army in 1812 
Church in 1806 and was popularly regarded as the anti-Christ. Priests in 
the provinces through which the Napoleonic armies passed deliberately 
whipped up popular feeling against the ‘Godless’ invader,*® and there is 
no reason to think that ordinary Russian soldiers were immune from 
this. But even this religious patriotism has to be treated with caution. 
A sizeable proportion of the Russian army was neither Orthodox nor 
Christian, and there 
is no evidence that Lutheran 
Balts, Catholic 
Lithuanians or Muslim Kalmyks fought less bravely than Orthodox 
soldiers. Ferocious attacks on enemy soldiers, and at times civilians, 
were not just confined to Muslim opponents. Russian troops had acted 
with great ferocity in the attack on Warsaw in 1794; over 100 000 Poles 
entered Russia with the Napoleonic armies and there is some evidence 
to suggest that traditional hostility to these neighbours was more 
evident than against the ‘Godless’ French.°? 
The patriotism of the officer corps, in contrast, has been more clearly 
documented. Russian and Soviet histories and contemporary documents 
cite nobles entering, or re-entering, military service, and the donations 
of noble assemblies as evidence of patriotism.®? Pushkin was 13 and 
a schoolboy in 1812 but recalled later in poetry his envy of boys who 
were slightly older and who had enlisted: 
You'll recollect: the wars soon swept us by, 
We bade farewell to all our elder brothers. 
And went back to our desks with all the others, 
In envy of all those who had gone to die 
Without us. 
Both Soviet and non-Soviet historians have, however, struggled with 
the patriotism of the Russian officer corps. The reason for that, it seems 
to me, lies not so much with the activities of the officers in 1812 but 
with events in 1825, when army officers, many of whom had served 
during the period 1812-14, led their men in an abortive rising known 
as the Decembrist Revolt in an attempt to force a constitution on 
Russia in the interregnum between the death of Alexander I and the 
accession of his brother, Nicholas I. This rebellion sits uneasily with the 
historiography of 1812. To the Russian historians of 1912, it must have 
been potentially embarrassing to acknowledge that some of the ‘heroes’ 
of 1812 (and a significant number of the Decembrists fought at the 
battle of Borodino and were rewarded for bravery at this or other battles) 
later became rebels and traitors. This was particularly the case in 1912 
as Nicholas II’s difficult relationship with the recently formed state 

<<<PDFPAGE 213>>>
Janet Hartley 
195 
duma made reference to an earlier, unsuccessful, armed attempt to 
introduce a constitution potentially provocative. The problem for Soviet 
historians was rather different. The Decembrists were portrayed favourably, 
albeit as rather romantic and confused individuals, not only because 
they physically opposed the tsar, and by extension the feudal order, but 
also because some of the political and social ideas of the more radical 
Southern Society could be directly related to Bolshevism. The result is 
that the Soviet period led to extensive scholarship on the Decembrists, 
including the publication of many of the papers of the investigating 
commission of 1826 and many memoirs, all of which provide invaluable 
source material for the historian. But the Decembrist movement has 
been treated by Soviet scholars quite separately from the studies of 1812 
and the links between the two have not been explored. 
There is no doubt, in fact, about the patriotism of the Decembrists. 
Nikita Murav’ev ended his studies at Moscow university in 1812 aged 16 
and enlisted as he ‘had no thought other than ardent love for the 
fatherland’. The experience of 1812 was a formative one. Baron Andrei 
Rozen (a Baltic German and not an Orthodox Russian) commented that 
‘the extraordinary events of 1812 had also brought about a powerful 
feeling of the people’s strength, and a sense of patriotism of which no 
one had before a conception.’ M.I. Murav’ev-Apostol’ recalled in 1826 
that his ‘love for the fatherland which we saved from the Napoleonic 
yoke inspired me’.™ S.P. Trubestskoi stated that: 
The invasion of Russia by Napoleon in the year 1812 aroused in 
Russians a love for the Fatherland in the highest degree; the happy 
conclusion to this war found all Russians proud of their names and 
everyone was happy to have participated in these sublime deeds 
which attested that each of them was useful to their Fatherland.” 
The difficulty for the Russian government was that this form of patriot- 
ism was potentially dangerous, not only to the régime but also to the 
whole political and social order. Officers, and soldiers, had seen how 
people lived outside Russia: ‘By comparison, the question naturally arose, 
why isn’t it like that here?’ asked Aleksandr Bestuzhev.” Patriotic officers 
now demanded that Russians should have at least as much as the 
European peoples who they saved (made more galling by the fact that the 
defeated powers of France and Poland had been granted constitutions, 
the former with Alexander’s agreement and the latter by his expressed 
desire). ‘The Poles received a constitution’ noted A.M. Murav’ev bitterly, 
while ‘Russians as a reward for their heroic exertions in the year 1812 

<<<PDFPAGE 214>>>
196 
The Patriotism of the Russian Army in 1812 
got — military colonies!’.°” The opening words of the constitution of the 
Northern Society were: ‘All the European nations are attaining con- 
stitutions and freedom. The Russian nation, more than any of them, 
deserves one as well as the other’.®* This meant not only a European, 
Napoleonic-style constitution but also posed a threat to serfdom, not 
least because some of the Decembrists had become particularly aware of 
the sufferings of the peasants in 1812. N.I. Turgenev went so far as to 
state that the peasant role in partisan warfare ‘gave them the right to 
freedom’. And ultimately, at least some of the Decembrists drew 
the logical conclusion from their experience in Europe, not just in the 
campaigns but also by witnessing events in Spain in 1820, that rulers 
could never be trusted to implement constitutional and social change 
without force; ‘there is no compact with kings’ stated P.D. Kakhovskii.” 
The experience of the Napoleonic invasion of Russia demonstrated 
that if ‘patriotism’ could be an asset for the state, it could also be a danger. 
It was an asset when it led to enlistment in the regular army and the 
militias, when it resulted in donations of money, goods, horses and, in 
the case of nobles, serfs for the struggle and when it encouraged peasants 
to resist the invaders. But patriotism could be a danger when it led to 
demands for fundamental change to the political and social order as a 
‘reward’ for the sacrifices made by the Russian people in freeing Europe 
from Napoleonic tyranny. Patriotism had be controlled and tied firmly 
to conservative values, such as tsardom and Orthodoxy, which also 
implied loyalty to the current political and social order, and to a vague 
sense of ‘Russianness’ that in turn was linked to Russian Orthodoxy and 
to the Russian tsar. It was this form of patriotism that was deliberately 
cultivated in the reign of Nicholas I and that was embodied in the 
expression ‘Autocracy, Orthodoxy and Nationality’ by the Minister of 
Education, Count S.S. Uvarov. The problems with this definition are all 
too obvious. Although the Russian Empire was predominantly Christian, 
not all Christians were Russian Orthodox (and the Orthodox included 
the Old Believers). By the late eighteenth century the ethnically Russian 
population had fallen to under 50 per cent; by 1833 it was estimated to 
be 45.32 per cent.’’ This only left tsardom, and by implication, the 
social and political order associated with tsardom, as a binding force for 
the empire. This did not prove to be either a stable basis for Russian 
patriotism or for the state in the following decades. 
Notes 
1. Some of the extensive scholarship is summarized in my ‘Russia and Napoleon: 
state, society and the nation’, in M. Rowe (ed.), Collaboration and Popular 

<<<PDFPAGE 215>>>
10. 
ik 
We 
133 
14. 
ils 
Janet Hartley 
197 
Resistance to Napoleon (Basingstoke, 2003), pp. 186-202. For typical Russian 
(pre-1917) and Soviet analyses of the ‘people’s war’, see V.P. Alekseev, 
‘Narodnaia voina’ in A.K. Dzhivelegov, $.M. Mel’gunov, V.I. Pichet (eds), 
Otechestvennaia voina i russkoe obshchestvo (St Petersburg, 1912), Iv, pp. 
227-37, and L.G. Beskrovnyi, Otechestvennaia voina 1812 goda (Moscow, 
1962), pp. 337-48. 
. Hartley, ‘Russia and Napoleon’, pp. 191-6; W.C. Fuller, Strategy and Power in 
Russia (New York, 1992), pp. 207-18. 
. V.I. Semevskii, ‘Volneniia krest’ian v 1812 g. i sviazannyia s Otechestvennoi 
voinoi’, in Dzhivelegov etal., Otechestvennaia voina, V, pp. 74-113 and M.I. 
Tugan-Baranovskii, ‘Voina 1812 g. i promyshlennoe razvitie Rossii’, in ibid., 
Vil, pp. 105-12. A full version of the latter’s work later appeared in English as 
M.I. Tugan-Baronovsky, The Russian Factory in the Nineteenth Century (Chicago, 
1970). 
. In particular my articles: ‘Russia in 1812, part I: the French Presence in the 
Gubernii of Smolensk and Mogilev’, Jahrbiicher fiir Geschichte Osteuropas, 
XXXVIII (1990), pp. 178-98, and ‘Russia in 1812, part II: the Russian adminis- 
tration of Kaluga gubernija’, ibid., XXX1X (1990), pp. 399-416. 
. $.M. Ginzburg, Otechestvennaia voina 1812 goda i russkie evrei (St Petersburg, 
1912); A.E. Zarin, Zhenshchina geroini v 1812 (Moscow, 1913). 
. P. Andreev, Narodnaia voina v Smolenskoi gubernii v 1812 godu (Smolensk, 
1940). 
. Beskrovnyi’s work on 1812, cited in note 1, was published in 1962, as 
a collection of articles: 1812 god. K stopiatidesiatiletiiu Otechestvennoi voiny. 
Sbornik statei (Moscow, 1962) (hereafter 1812 god). 
. See, for example, J. Werner, We Laughed at Boney (or, We’ve been through it all 
before) (London, 1943), which equates the British patriotic resistance to 
Napoleon with resistance to Hitler. 
. A.N. Kochetkov, ‘Partizanskaia voina’ in 1812 god, p. 174; S.A. Kniaz’kov, 
‘Partizany i partizanskaia voina v 1812-m godu’, in Dzhivelegov etal., 
Otechestvennaia voina, lV, p. 209. 
For a concise summary of the practice and theories of guerrilla warfare, see 
W. Laqueur, ‘The origins of guerrilla doctrine’, Journal of Contemporary 
History, X, no. 2 (April, 1975), pp. 341-82. The Bulavin revolt in the reign 
of Peter the Great has been characterized as an earlier example of guerrilla 
war: cf. C.W. Ingrao, ‘Guerrilla warfare in early-modern Europe: the Kuruc 
War (1703-11)’ in B.K. Kiraly and G.E. Rothenburg (eds), War and Society in 
East Central Europe, (New York, 1979), 1, p. 62. 
Entry by L.N. Bychkov in Sovetskaia istoricheskaia entsiklopediia (Moscow, 
1967), X, p. 886; translated in $.L. Wieczynski (ed.), The Modern Encyclopedia 
of Russian and Soviet History (Gulf Breeze, 1982), XXvI, p. 22. 
Kochetkov, ‘Partizanskaia voina’, p. 167. 
Ibid., p. 167. 
Slezsinskii commented that activity in Smolensk province depended on the 
availability of nobles and officials to form these groups: cf. A. Slezsinskii, 
‘Smolenskie partizany v 1812 godu’, Russkaia starina, Cill, no. 9 (September, 
1900), p. 663; Kochetkov, ‘Partizanskaia voina’, pp. 167, 172-7; ‘Kniaz’kov, 
‘Partizany’, p. 215. 
Kochetkov, ‘Partizanskaia voina’, p. 166. 

<<<PDFPAGE 216>>>
198 
The Patriotism of the Russian Army in 1812 
16. 
Wie 
18. 
iS). 
20. 
2A. 
22 
23: 
ZAR 
PRS 
34. 
35: 
36. 
Be 
38. 
39): 
40. 
41. 
Kniaz’koy, ‘Partizany’, pp. 210, 214. 
Hartley, ‘Napoleon in Russia, part I’, pp. 192-8. 
See P. Longworth, ‘Transformations in cossackdom, 1650-1850’ in Kiraly 
etal., War and Society in East Central Europe, pp. 393-407. 
LI. Prokhostsov, Riazanskaia guberniia v 1812 godu preimushchestvenno s bytovoi 
storony: materialy dlia istorii Otechestvennoi voiny (Riazan’, 1912), Il, p. 4. 
Tolstoi, War and Peace (Everyman edn, London, 1958), Ill, pp. 295-6. 
For a non-Communist account, cf. A.K. Kabanova, ‘Opolcheniia 1812 goda’ 
in Dzhivelegov etal., Otechestvennaia voina, Vv, pp. 43-74. The Soviet scholar 
who has most thoroughly studied the militias is V.I. Babkin in two publications 
of the same date: ‘Organizatsiia i voennye deistviia narodnogo opolcheniia 
v Otechestvennoi voine 1812 g’, in 1812 god, pp. 134-63; Narodnoe opolchenie 
v Otechestvennoi voine 1812 goda (Moscow, 1962). His views are echoed by 
Beskrovnyi, Otechestvennaia voina, pp. 456-64. 
Beskrovnyi, Otechestvenaia voina, pp. 461-2. 
Alexander I to L. Wittgenstein, 29 December 1812 Old Style, in L.G. 
Beskrovnyi (ed.), Narodnoe opolchenie v Otechestvennoi voine 1812 goda (Moscow, 
1962), pp. 26-7. 
List of officers in the militia who fought at the battle of Dresden, Russkii 
gosudarstvennyi voenno-istoricheskii arkhiv, Moscow (hereafter RGVIA), fond 
846, opis’ 16, delo 3395, f. 2. 
A.A. Pokrovskii et al. (eds.) Vosstanie Dekabristov: Materialy i Dokumenty. Dela 
Verhovnogo Ugolovnogo Suda i Sledstvennoi Komissii (Moscow, 1925-2001), XIv, 
pp. 148-9. 
. Kabanov, ‘Opolchenie’, pp. 46-7. 
. Vosstanie Dekabristov, Vv, p. 106. 
. Ibid., Xu, p. 134. 
. Babkin, ‘Organisatsiia’, p. 143. 
. Kabanov, ‘Opolchenie’, pp. 47-8. 
. Beskrovnyi, Otechestvennaia voina, p. 459. 
. Report from the Moscow militia, 14 August 1812 Old Style, in Beskrovnyi, 
Narodnoe opolchenie, p. 60. 
. Papers on the St Petersburg and Novgorod militias in 1812, RGVIA, fond 846, 
opis’ 16, delo 3447, ff. 46, 119. 
S.V Potrashev, ‘Uchastie Slobodsko-Ukrainskoi gubernii v Otechestvennoi 
voine 1812g.’, in Otechestvennaia voina 1812 goda: Istochniki, Pamiatniki, Prob- 
lemy (Borodino, 1998), pp. 139-41. 
J.M. Hartley, A Social History of the Russian Empire, 1650-1825 (London, 
1999), pp. 39-40. 
Kabanov, ‘Opolchenie’, pp. 60-1. 
S. 
Khrapov, 
‘Russkaia 
intelligentsia 
v 
Otechestvennoi 
voine 
1812’, 
Istoricheskii Zhurnal, 1943, no. 2, p. 73. 
J.T. Flynn, The University Reforms of Alexander I 1802-1835 (Washington, 
1988), pp. 33, 62. 
O. Kozadevlev to A.I. Gorchakov, 29 October 1812 Old Style, RGVIA, fond 
846, opis’ 16, delo 3447, f. 65. 
G.L. Freeze, The Parish Clergy in Nineteenth-Century Russia: Crisis, Reform, 
Counter-Reform (Princeton, 1983), p. 167. 
Babkin, ‘Organisatsiia’, p. 137; Babkin, Narodnoe opolchenie, pp. 33-4. 

<<<PDFPAGE 217>>>
42. 
43. 
44, 
45. 
46. 
47. 
Janet Hartley 
199 
Babkin, Narodnoe opolchenie, p. 37. 
Babkin, ‘Organisatsiia’, p. 137, Babkin, Narodnoe opolchenie, p. 33. The source 
for this quotation is an account by Count Rostopchin, which may not be totally 
reliable as he was deliberately trying to foster a Russian, patriotic, resistance 
to the invader. 
A request by coachmen from Moscow in the name of Rostopchin, 5 August 
1812 Old Style, Beskrovnyi, Narodnoe opolchenie, p. 55. 
A recent English historical account of 1812 misses this point and states that 
‘On 1812, 190 000 serfs joined the militia, thousands more the partisans’: 
N. Nicolson, Napoleon in 1812 (London, 1985), p. 67. I have in fact come 
across ‘volunteers’ in the course of my research for my forthcoming book on 
war, state and society in Russia 1762-1825, but the evidence suggests that 
this was a purely financial arrangement and that substitute recruits were in 
effect bought by richer peasants. 
Babkin, Narodnoe opolchenie, pp. 39-40. 
P. Cottin and M. Hénault (eds), The Memoirs of Sergeant Bourgogne (London, 
1975) pelos: 
48. ‘Zapiski soldata Pamfilova Nazarova, v inochestve Mitrofana, 1792-1839 ge’, 
49. 
Russkaia starina, XXII, no. 8 (August, 1878), pp. 529-S6. 
R. Lyall, Travels in Russia, the Krimea, the Caucasus and Georgia (London, 
1825), 1, p. 141. 
50. See J.M. Hartley, ‘The Russian recruit’ in J. Klein, S. Dixon and M. Fraanje 
Sil 
(eds), Reflections on Russia 
in the Eighteenth Century (Cologne, Weimar, 
Vienna, 2001), pp. 32-42. 
Ibid., p. 42. 
52. A.V. Buganov, Russkaia istoriia v pamiati krest’ian XIX veka i natsional’noe 
So: 
94. 
DOs 
56. 
yo 
58. 
oe) 
60. 
61. 
62. 
63. 
64. 
samosoznanie (Moscow, 1992), pp. 159-60. 
V.V. Kalash, ‘Otechestvennaia voina v russkoi narodnoi poezii’, in Dzhivelegov 
et al., Otechestvennaia voina, V, pp. 175-6. 
E.K. Wirtschafter, 
‘The common 
soldier in eighteenth-century Russian 
drama’, in Klein etal., Reflections on Russia, pp. 367-76. 
M.A. Nekrasov and S.M. Zemtsov, Otechestvennaia voina 1812 goda i russkoe 
iskusstvo (Moscow, 1969). 
A. Zorin, Kormia dvuglavogo orla...Literatura 
i gosudarstvennaia ideologiia 
v Rossii v poslednei treti X VIII — pervoi treti XIX veka (Moscow, 2001), pp. 65-122. 
Cf. W. Ryan, ‘Magic and the military in Russia’, in Klein etal., Reflections on 
Russia, p. 85. 
For more details, see J.M. Hartley, ‘Napoleon — saviour or antichrist?’, History 
Today, XU, no. 1 January 1991), pp. 28-34. 
Hartley, ‘Napoleon in Russia, part I’, pp. 180-1. 
See, for example, the patriotic activities of the Kaluga nobles in Hartley 
‘Napoleon in Russia, part II’, pp. 408-9, and Beskrovnyi, Otechestvennaia 
voina, p. 463. 
O. Figes, Natasha’s Dance: a Cultural History of Russia (Penguin, 2002), p. 82. 
Vosstanie Dekabristov, 1, p. 294. 
G. Barratt, Rebel on the Bridge: a Life of the Decembrist Baron Andrey Rozen, 
1800-84 (London, 1975), p. 37. 
Vosstanie Dekabristov, 1X, p. 217. 
65. L. Ia. Pavlova, Dekabristy — uchastniki voin 
1805-1814 gg (Moscow, 1979), p. 94. 

<<<PDFPAGE 218>>>
200 
The Patriotism of the Russian Army in 1812 
66. V.I. Semevskii, Politicheskiia i obshchestvennyia idei Dekabristov (St Petersburg, 
1909), p. 207. 
67. V.A. Fedorov, Memuary Dekabristov: severnoe obshchestvo (Moscow, 1981), 
p. 124. 
68. A.G. Mazour, The First Russian Revolution, 1825 (Stanford, 1961), [os Pil. 
69. Pavlova, Dekabristy, p. 94. 
70. I. de Madariaga, ‘Spain and the Decembrists’, European Studies Review, Ul, no. 
2 (April, 1973), p. 149. 
71. Hartley, Social History, pp. 10, 15. 

<<<PDFPAGE 219>>>
10 
Popular Resistance in Napoleonic 
Europe: Issues and Perspectives 
Charles J. Esdaile 
Popular resistance is a subject that must inevitably lie at the heart of 
any discussion of the Napoleonic empire. In the first place, as the 
French themselves recognized, it was inevitable. As Napoleon told his 
brother, Joseph, in 1806, ‘Two weeks earlier or later you will have an 
uprising. It always happens in a conquered country.’! On one level the 
reason was obvious, for occupation by the imperial armies was generally 
an experience that was as ruinous as it was unpleasant. But in addition 
to this there was also the issue of reform. To quote Michael Broers, ‘The 
consolidation of Napoleonic rule was a turbulent process, and the initial 
response it met with among the vast majority of people was resistance.’” 
Resistance, then, was something that was always there, and, furthermore, 
something that the French themselves had every expectation of having 
to deal with as soon as they made a new conquest. That said, however, 
it was not just part of the general backdrop to the history of Napoleon’s 
Europe. Thus, its extent was one of the chief factors that determined 
whether a given state or region should be considered part of — in Broers’ 
parlance - the ‘inner’ or the ‘outer’ empires, and, by the same token, of 
the extent to which the reforms associated with Napoleonic rule took 
root. At the simplest level collaboration was - on one reading of the 
situation, at least — less likely in areas where the local élites on whom 
the French and their allies inevitably depended for the implantation of 
their policies were likely to find themselves the victims of murder or 
mutilation. And at the same time the very policies of Napoleonic rule 
could not take effect against a background of violence that precluded 
the rule of law and drained away resources that might have funded, say, 
new systems of state education. End that violence, however, and it was 
a different matter. To quote Broers again, ‘Perhaps an essential defining 
characteristic of the lands which became the “inner empire” . 
.. was that 
201 

<<<PDFPAGE 220>>>
202 
Popular Resistance in Napoleonic Europe 
the balance slowly — and usually grudgingly — tipped away from resist- 
ance towards collaboration.” 
Beyond all this, there is also the issue of the role of guerrilla warfare 
in the fall of the Napoleonic empire. On the surface popular insurgency 
made the takeover of various parts of Europe a costly affair, and 
plunged the French into protracted military campaigns that in a variety 
of ways seriously destabilized the imperial war machine. Up until 
1808, it is said, the emperor’s conquests paid for themselves, whereas 
the Spanish guerrillas thereafter ensured that war was a drain on the 
treasury. By the same token, French casualties up until 1808 could be 
made up without pushing the French people further than they would 
stand on the conscription front, whereas after 1808 the daily blood- 
letting that was the cost of the war in Spain.ensured that the army’s 
demands for manpower rose steeply. Grumbling on the home front at 
the steady rise in taxation and conscription, meanwhile, was matched 
by grumbling in the army. Faced in Calabria and Spain by seemingly 
endless struggles that entailed a great deal of danger but precious little 
glory, the once loyal soldiers of the emperor grew cynical and resentful, 
with the result that their willingness to sacrifice their lives fell off 
dramatically. Still worse, perhaps, frightened, harassed and frustrated, 
the troops became increasingly undisciplined and engaged in acts of 
revenge or casual brutality that served only to augment the numbers of 
their opponents and discredit the cause of collaboration. Also problematic 
in this respect was an increase in desertion that provided the Allies with 
an important source of manpower whilst simultaneously augmenting 
the need for new conscripts: by 1813, for example, the Duke of 
Wellington had no fewer than three regiments of cavalry and seven 
battalions of infantry that were recruited in whole or in part from 
foreign deserters, whilst substantial numbers of deserters also appear 
to have been serving with the famous guerrilla commander, Francisco 
Espoz y Mina.* 
Well might, then, Napoleon have referred to the Peninsular War as 
his Spanish ulcer. And this is not even the end of the story. Other 
instances of popular insurrection were less far-reaching in their effects, 
but they are nevertheless not to be discounted. In 1809, for example, 
the Tyrolean revolt and the amorphous series of peasant risings that 
gripped the Kingdom of Italy seriously hampered operations against 
Austria, whilst in 1812 and 1813 partisan bands - in part inspired by 
the Spanish example - considerably increased the scale of French defeat 
in both Russia and Germany. Not for nothing, then, did the Napoleonic 
Wars give us the very word ‘guerrilla’. To quote George Rudé, ‘A new 

<<<PDFPAGE 221>>>
Charles J. Esdaile 
203 
element had crept into the situation: the protesting voices of the European 
peoples themselves.’ 
In saying all this, of course, we must not go too far. It is, for example, 
important to note that popular resistance was not the only factor that 
defined the extent to which areas were ‘napoleonized’. Where areas 
were only taken under French control after 1810, there was simply not 
the time to transform reformist principles into administrative and juridical 
realities. 
Also important were the attitudes 
of the satellite 
rulers 
appointed to rule the wider empire: placed on their thrones by French 
bayonets, Napoleon’s siblings were frequently none too willing to 
restrict themselves to the role of marionettes, and in the case of both 
Joseph and Louis they sought very hard to mediate between Paris on 
the one hand and the local élites on the other. At the same time even 
collaboration might wear an independent hue: in Naples, for example, 
notables who were quite prepared to go along with some aspects of 
French policy proved extremely reluctant to go along with others. 
Moving on from this, we must also be careful what we mean by ‘popular 
resistance’. In Calabria, the Tyrol, Spain and Portugal, there were bloody 
popular revolts against the French (or, at least, their surrogates), whilst 
there was also certainly a limited amount of popular involvement in 
the campaigns of 1812 and 1813 in Russia and Germany. But these 
examples are exceptions rather than the rule: whilst popular resistance 
of various sorts was widespread, it on the whole took forms that did not 
involve resort to the force of arms. At the head of the list probably 
comes draft evasion, but also important were such areas as smuggling 
and simple non-compliance, most notably with respect to French- 
approved forms of religious observance. And, last but not least, neither 
popular revolt nor guerrilla warfare was a new phenomenon in European 
history. Spain, for example, had seen the Catalans rise in rebellion in 
the 1640s; Britain had experienced the Monmouth rising of 1685 and 
the Jacobite risings of 1689, 1715 and 1745-46; and Genoa had to cope 
with an insurrection in Corsica that began in 1729 and was only 
brought to an end by cession of the island to France in 1768. As for 
guerrilla warfare, not only was it a feature of several of these revolts, but 
the War of the Spanish Succession had seen the appearance of numerous 
bands of irregulars in Spain; at the same time, wherever armies waged 
war in the course of the eighteenth century, desperate peasants fought 
to defend their homes against marauding bands of soldiers, or took 
their revenge for the numerous injuries done to them by murdering 
stragglers from the armies or attacking supply columns or convoys of 
wounded. To drive home the point still further, meanwhile, it is also 

<<<PDFPAGE 222>>>
204 
Popular Resistance in Napoleonic Europe 
worth pointing out that even in the Napoleonic period guerrilla warfare 
was not a phenomenon that was solely linked to French occupation: in 
Finland, for example, the Russian invasion of 1808-09 sparked off a 
bitter partisan struggle that foreshadowed the ‘winter war’ of 1939-40, 
whilst in Serbia the national insurrection in opposition to Turkish rule 
that exploded in 1804 was headed by irregular bands known as hajduks. 
In the end, however, all that is by-the-by, for it is difficult to find a 
commentator on the Napoleonic Wars who has not underlined either 
the significance of the armed people in the struggle or the supposedly 
ubiquitous nature of the phenomenon. This, for example, is the opinion 
of Geoffrey Best: ‘Most peoples whom the French dominated. 
.. sooner 
or later offered armed resistance in one mode or another.’° In much the 
same vein, we have the views of Jeremy Black, ‘Uprisings were not new, 
but they were more important in the period, in part because the French 
destroyed or took over existing power structures, leaving rebellion as 
the only way to express discontent.’” And lastly, if only to show that 
the idea is well established, we might cite Herbert Fisher: ‘The Spanish 
rising was the first example of a long series of popular and national 
movements which ultimately shattered the Napoleonic empire.’® 
There is, then, a general assumption that popular resistance was an 
important issue in so far as Napoleonic Europe is concerned. From this 
it might be expected that the subject ought to have generated a sub- 
stantial historiography, but, with respect to the English language at 
least, this is simply not the case. No general study exists of the role 
played by the people-in-arms in the Napoleonic Wars, and it is significant 
that not one of the speakers at a recent conference that was based on 
the theme of responses to the experience of Napoleonic rule chose to 
concentrate on guerrilla warfare.’ Also interesting here is the treatment 
accorded to popular resistance in several recent monographs on the 
Napoleonic empire. Let us take, for example, Broers’ excellent Europe 
under Napoleon. In this we have a long section — twenty-four pages, 
no less — headed ‘resistance’, whilst the subject also figures in other 
places, such as the author’s separate discussion of the Peninsular War. 
Yet throughout the focus is overwhelmingly political and cultural 
rather than military, and the reader is left with little clue as to who 
joined the guerrillas or, except in the most general terms, the forces 
that produced their enlistment. At the same time, too, the general 
impression created is that, even in the context of Spain and Portugal, 
in the end guerrilla warfare was not very important in a military 
sense.'° This is all very well - Broers’ views are not only entirely plausible, 
but backed up by the sources — but the fact is that the reader is entitled to 

<<<PDFPAGE 223>>>
Charles J. Esdaile 
205 
rather more exposition of his views in this respect than he is prepared 
to give them. Moving on from Broers, we come to Stuart Woolf’s seminal 
Napoleon’s Integration of Europe. In this case, from the very beginning 
we are confronted by the perception - entirely correct, be it said — that 
armed insurrection was the exception rather than the norm. Thus: ‘In 
practice, outbreaks of collective political opposition were rare and 
local... Apart from Spain, only two 
revolts 
seriously challenged 
French authority; the endemic war in Calabria and the Tyrol rising.’!’ 
Beyond that, however, discussion remains vague: Woolf tries hard to 
establish the conditions that produced revolt rather than other forms of 
resistance — for him the key factors appear to be Catholicism, rough 
terrain and the availability. of outside aid - and makes a series of inter- 
esting connections, most notably with banditry, desertion, seasonal 
migration and the organization of agriculture, but all this is compressed 
into a mere gee PaeS, and the general effect is to pose more questions 
than it answers.'* And, lest it appear that the author of the current 
paper is inclined to exempt himself from criticism, it should be noted that 
his own Wars of Napoleon suffers from exactly the same deficiencies: 
there is an attempt to explain the incidence of revolt - in addition to 
the factors noted by Woolf, attention is drawn to the importance of 
popular radicalization in response to reformist absolutisms in the period 
immediately preceding the coming of the French — not to mention a 
considerable amount of material on the various revolts, but at no 
point can it be said that the subject is ever addressed from the inside. 
Support for some of his arguments may be found in Broers’ Europe 
under Napoleon, in that its author points out that resistance was likely 
to be fiercest in areas where enlightened absolutism had either made 
no progress whatsoever, or alternatively had only recently begun to 
make inroads on traditional society, but, some ten years on from 
when the passages in question were first written, the impression is one of 
flaccidity — even of superficiality. Perhaps this is over-harsh, for The Wars 
of Napoleon does adopt a genuinely critical approach to the subject. 
Thus: ‘Though Europe experienced great suffering on account of the 
Napoleonic empire, only in certain areas did passive resentment and 
low-level unrest explode into active revolt. Where it did, moreover, it was 
fuelled by factors that were by no means always directly connected to 
French rule... As for the efficacy of popular resistance, it is all too 
clear that in itself it presented little threat to French domination.’ 
But assertion is one thing, and argument quite another: the case put 
forward by the author may well be plausible, but in the end it was not 
backed up by the necessary weight of evidence. 

<<<PDFPAGE 224>>>
206 
Popular Resistance in Napoleonic Europe 
The reasons why the general historiography of the Napoleonic Wars 
is so lacking when it comes to the analysis of guerrilla warfare is not 
hard to establish. Such is the romantic appeal of the subject that many 
traditionalist and, perhaps more to the point, populist accounts do not 
delve beneath the surface at all but are rather absolutely unquestioning 
in their acceptance of the heroic version of events. Typical of this 
tendency is the British author, Corelli Barnett, whose account of the 
emperor’s career can only be described as orthodox. For example: 
There was nothing novel about the Spanish uprising in itself. On 
previous occasions, after all, Bonaparte had barged into deeply 
traditional societies and set about reconstructing them on the model of 
Bonapartian France... And on those occasions, too, outraged peoples 
had taken up arms against him, with the result that the deceptively 
easy shortcut of conquest had proved to lead him only into a morass 
of political and social complication. The novelty about the Spanish 
revolt... consisted in its order of magnitude."* 
For academic historians interested primarily in political and social 
history, by contrast, the issue is not lack of critical thinking. That said, 
however, with the greatest respect it might be suggested that they wear 
blinkers of their own. Uninterested in military history — indeed, in some 
instances overtly hostile to it — it is difficult to suspect that they have 
not seized upon the relative paucity of armed popular resistance, not to 
mention the obvious questions that may be asked of its efficacy, as an 
excuse for skimming it with the lightest of brushes. Even for those 
historians who have wished to examine the subject in the context of a 
general study of Napoleonic Europe, there has been the problem of 
language and access to the archives: in the case of the present author, 
for example, his command of Spanish, French, Portuguese and Catalan 
is not matched by a similar command of German, Italian and Russian, 
just as the relatively generous research budget he has enjoyed in recent 
years has been barely sufficient to cover the costs of working in one 
country, let alone half a dozen. Ask interesting questions though they 
might, then, historians in the end cannot but be superficial once they 
stray beyond the frontiers of their own specialisms. And finally there is 
the issue of the immense complexity which compounds the problems 
facing the would-be historian of irregular warfare in the Napoleonic 
period. To quote Geoffrey Best, ‘The main stream of military historical 
writing has understandably neglected [the guerrillas]...because they 
are in fact difficult to categorise and assess.’!5 

<<<PDFPAGE 225>>>
Charles J. Esdaile 
207 
As Best continues, we therefore have no ‘adequate typology’ of the 
guerrillas. All the more is the case given the deficiencies in the English- 
language historiography pertaining to the individual areas affected by 
armed resistance. Let us take, for example, the question of the Tyrol. 
Thus, the only modern works available in English on the war of 1809 
consist of one book and one conference paper, and both of these are 
only ‘modern’ in terms of their year of publication, the dates concerned 
being 1986 and 1989. Largely composed of military narrative, they have 
little to tell us with regard to either the identities or the mentalities of 
the insurgents and are inclined to see the rebellions almost wholly in 
terms of loyalty to the Habsburgs, adumbrated though this may have 
been in terms of a desire to defend a favourable regional settlement that 
was threatened by foreign annexation. And, still more alarmingly, they 
in neither case seem to have made much use of the series of German- 
language works on the Tyrol that appeared in the early 1980s.'° The 
level of analysis on which they rest, meanwhile, is exemplified by the 
following passage from Eyck: 
The Tyrolean uprising of 1809 - anno neun as some of it native 
chroniclers proudly and reverently have called it...took place in 
some of the most scenic mountain areas of Europe. The men...who 
took part in the rising struggled for their ancient and cherished 
liberties. They fought in their colourful costumes representing the 
various districts populated by a free, proud and conservative peasantry. 
Their war was directed at one and the same time against foreign 
occupiers...and toward reassociation with their beloved Habsburg 
dynasty.’” 
If the Tyrol is bad, meanwhile, Portugal is even worse, for there is no 
discreet study of her insurrection and guerrilla movement at all, the 
only information that we have coming from British accounts of the 
Peninsular War. Yet these are in reality all but useless: written by historians 
interested only in the doings of Wellington’s army, their treatment of 
the subject is at best superficial. To take Oman, for example, all he does 
in this respect is to copy out various passages from the memoirs of 
French soldiers who fought in the successive invasion armies of Junot, 
Soult and Massena.’® Depressingly enough, there is little more to be got 
from modern English-language histories of Portugal — the two most 
recent, indeed, do not discuss the matter at all — whilst even accounts of 
the campaigns of some pretension do little more than claim that in 
1809 the French were ‘constantly harassed by guerrillas’ or that ‘the 

<<<PDFPAGE 226>>>
208 
Popular Resistance in Napoleonic Europe 
partisan war ceaselessly sapped the strength of [Soult’s] field army’. 
Similarly, there is Jan Read, who tells us that in 1810 the ‘stranglehold’ 
exercised by the irregulars was ‘so complete...that from 18 September 
to 15 November the garrisons at Almeida and Ciudad Rodrigo received no 
single message from Masséna...and Napoleon himself was dependent 
on what he read in the English newspapers’.”° This, however, is not 
good enough. Setting aside the fact that we do not in any sense ‘get 
inside’ the resistance, relying on French memoirs as a source for the 
Portuguese insurrection is a risky step. Many of the works consulted — 
Pelet, Lemonnier-Delafosse, Barrés, Marbot — say little or nothing on the 
subject in the evident hope of glossing matters over, whilst those that 
do tell us little more than that a prominent part in events was played by 
the clergy. Let us take, for example, Maximilien Foy, an officer who 
served in the French army that first occupied Portugal in 1807: 
The inhabitants of Torre de Moncorvo... hung on the enemy’s rear. 
Father José Joachim de |’Assomption [sic], 
a monk of the order of 
Black Friars, marched at the head of this multitude with his gown 
tucked up, firing a musket like the rest. Another monk, Father José 
Bernardo de Azevedo, went to Coimbra with...a crowd of peasants 
to slaughter some French soldiers who were in the hospital of that 
city... The priests perambulated the towns and hamlets, preaching 
the French crusade.*! 
Similar remarks, meanwhile, can be made with respect to Spain. Here, 
too, the memoirs of French veterans are not to be relied upon, or, at least, 
taken at face value. Thus, in the first place, emphasising the guerrilla war 
was a convenient way of explaining away French defeat in Iberia: the 
victors of Austerlitz, Jena and Friedland had only been worsted because 
they were confronted by an enemy who did not fight fair. To quote 
Joseph Bonaparte’s close friend and confidant, Miot de Melito: 
By that time [i.e. the summer of 1809] the formidable guerrilla system 
had been adopted by the Junta. Spread throughout every corner of 
Spanish territory...the guerrillas did us more harm than its regular 
armies, intercepting all our communications and forcing us neither 
to send out a dispatch without an escort, nor to allow soldiers to 
travel the roads on their own...This petty war undermined us most 
gravely. We only possessed the ground actually occupied by our 
armies, and our power never extended any further. All administration 
ceased, and there was neither order, nor justice, nor finance.” 

<<<PDFPAGE 227>>>
Charles J. Esdaile 
209 
And, in the second, it also provided a roundabout means of legitimizing 
France’s cause. When they were not motivated by a desire for plunder, 
the guerrillas, we are told, were the creation of a reactionary and super- 
stitious clergy desperate to protect the power, privileges and possessions 
of the Catholic Church, whilst every French veteran was also keen to 
stress the appalling atrocities committed by their irregular opponents. 
And, if they were faced by reaction, supersitition and savagery, it followed 
that they themselves were apostles of enlightenment and civilization, 
and the emperor himself the liberator that he had always claimed to be 
(it will be recalled in this respect that on St. Helena he always attributed 
his defeat in the Peninsula not to force of arms, but rather to the fact that 
the inhabitants of Spain and Portugal were too backward, too primitive 
and too put upon to appreciate the benefits of his rule).”* Typical, perhaps, 
are the remarks of the apothecary, Blaze. Thus: 
An enlightened government that would have overthrown the religious 
houses and rendered the enormous mass of priests and monks... 
who were making their fatherland groan beneath the weight of their 
tyranny ...useful to state and society would never have suited [the 
clergy]. To avoid this danger they harnessed their own interests to 
those of Heaven. Through their efforts the struggle became a war of 
religion sullied by all the horrors that religious fanaticism could 
inspire...The clergy skillfully employed the influence which they 
still enjoyed over Spanish credulity...to inflame the populace...In 
this fashion they encouraged a naturally cruel and barbarous people 
to commit the most revolting crimes with a clear conscience. They 
accused us of being Jews, heretics, sorcerers... As a result, just to be 
a Frenchman became a crime in the eyes of the country.” 
In this respect, of course, it did not help that Spain was in their eyes 
hopelessly backward. Let us here quote the hussar officer, Rocca: 
With regard to knowledge and the progress of social habits, Spain 
was at least a century behind the other nations of the continent. 
The...insular situation of the country and the severity of its reli- 
gious institutions had prevented the Spaniards from taking part in 
the disputes and controversies which had agitated and enlightened 
Europe.” 
When they were not being gulled by their priests, meanwhile, the 
common people were driven by greed. For the German officer, Von 

<<<PDFPAGE 228>>>
210 
Popular Resistance in Napoleonic Europe 
Brandt, for example, their chief motivation was the ‘hope of plunder’, 
whilst for Joseph Bonaparte’s aide-de-camp, Bigarré, ‘Appetite for gain and 
not love of glory was the chief desire that inspired them.’*° Meanwhile, 
according to the Frenchman, Fée: 
At that time one had to travel in Spain in the same way as one did in 
Arabia: woe be to he who strayed from the caravan. The Spaniards, in 
whose veins were still to be found some drops of African blood, 
became veritable Bedouins: motivated more by love of pillage than 
patriotic duty, they stalked their prey, threw themselves upon it, 
seized what they wanted and disappeared amongst the rocks to split 
up their booty and torture their prisoners.”’ 
The distortion that we see with regard to Portugal is therefore mirrored 
in the case of Spain. Thus, from the beginning the most exaggerated 
accounts of the guerrilla war were circulating in British, French and 
Spanish accounts alike, and these have ever since been given the most 
widespread and general credence. Of this a good example is the famous 
claim by Bigarré. Thus: 
The guerrillas did much more harm to the French troops than the 
regular armies in the course of the Spanish war. It is recognized that 
they killed at least 100 men per day. In the space of five years, they 
therefore killed 180 000 Frenchmen without having lost more than 
25 000 themselves.”® 
In other places, meanwhile, even more dramatic claims surfaced amongst 
French veterans of the Peninsular campaigns, the military theorist Jean 
le Miére de Corvey going so far, for example, as to put the death toll 
they inflicted at 80 000 men a year.” Whilst thousands of men may 
well have perished in minor combats rather than major battles and 
sieges, the constant repetition of such figures takes no account of the 
fact that many of the Allied participants in the ‘little war’ were not 
irregulars 
at all, but rather regular soldiers, and sometimes 
even 
members of either the British Royal Navy or even the Anglo-Portuguese 
army of the Duke of Wellington.*° Notwithstanding such problems, 
however, author after author has been quite uncritical in their treat- 
ment of the subject. Let us begin, for example, with Sir Charles Oman, an 
author who is hardly noted for his generous treatment of the Spaniards. 
For example: 

<<<PDFPAGE 229>>>
Charles J. Esdaile 
211 
Old Castile, Navarre and the lands of the upper Ebro were kept in a 
constant turmoil by a score of guerrilla chiefs, of whom the elder 
Mina was the leading figure...On the whole, there were probably 
never more than 20 000 guerrilleros in arms at once in the whole 
region between the Sierra de Guadarrama and the... Bay of Biscay. 
They never succeeded in. beating any French force more than two or 
three battalions strong, and were being continually hunted from 
corner to corner. Yet despite their weakness in the open field...they 
rendered good service... by pinning down... twice their own numbers 
of...French troops. Anyone who has read the dispatches of the 
commandants of Napoleon’s ‘military governments’ ... will recognize 
a remarkable likeness between the situation of affairs in northern 
Spain during 1810 and 1811 and that in South Africa during 1900 and 
1901. Lightly moving guerrilla bands, unhampered by a base to defend 
or a train to weight them down, and well-served as to intelligence by 
the residents of the countryside, can paralyze the action of an infinitely 
larger number of regular troops.*! 
In so far as the world 
of the Anglo-Saxon historiography was 
concerned, Oman’s magisterial conclusions set the seal of approval on 
the guerrillas, the eighty years that have passed since the publication of 
the last volume of his work having been accompanied by a veritable 
chorus of praise. On all sides the many populists who chose to write 
about the Peninsular War leapt to acknowledge the exploits of the 
guerrillas. To quote Longford, for example: 
Spain was to be saved... not by grape-shot, greybeards and grandees, 
but by hardy guerrillas and the sudden flash of the knife. These peasants 
spontaneously organized themselves into small do-or-die bands... 
headed by folk-heroes, Juan Martin Diaz called ‘El Empecinado’... 
Julian Sanchez...the Minas, elder and younger..:One chieftain 
called Moreno killed or wounded nine Frenchmen with a single 
discharge from his enormous blunderbuss...Even the basic force of 
200 000 veterans which Napoleon was compelled to keep, year after 
year, in Spain would never be safe from the noon-day ambush and 
things that went bump in the night.*” 
So enthusiastic were these writers that they were soon seeing the entire 
Spanish was effort in terms of the guerrillas, as witness the extraordinary 
account of the battle of Bailén - a wholly conventional field action 

<<<PDFPAGE 230>>>
212 
Popular Resistance in Napoleonic Europe 
fought entirely by regular troops of the old Bourbon army — that we 
must now quote from Richard Humble: 
As soon as Dupont put his demoralized troops on the march out of 
Andujar the Spaniards closed in and harried them. A running fight 
escalated into a full-scale engagement at Bailen... against an enemy 
who did not bother to attack them when they formed square, but 
only when they were least ready.** 
It was not just the writers of popular history who echoed the general 
refrain, however. Amongst historians of greater pretension Oman’s 
theories have also been accepted without question and even pushed to 
fresh lengths. ‘It was above all’, wrote David Chandler, ‘the interaction 
of Wellington’s operations with those of the guerrilla bands that... 
made the French problem wholly intractible...Even with 320 000 men 
the marshals could not both contain the diffuse... “war of the flea” and at 
the same time... meet Wellington’s latest foray deep into their territory.’** 
So enthusiastic, indeed, is Chandler that he sometimes makes it appear 
as if the guerrillas were among Wellington’s first concerns. Thus: 
As for Wellington, he appreciated that he had to preserve England’s 
only field army and at the same time give maximum possible assist- 
ance to Portuguese and Spanish resistance — especially the popular 
kind. Having established a safe base at Lisbon... he conducted forays 
into enemy-held territory to divert French attention and thus ease 
the pressures on the guerrillas and partisans; then, in 1812...he 
began a systematic reconquest of Spain by conventional means.*» 
Nor have British historians been the only ones to pick up on the 
theme of the guerrillas. Since the 1960s, for example, a succession of 
American and Canadian historians have produced work that lays great 
stress on their contribution to the struggle. 
‘The War of Independence did not produce on the Spanish side great 
generals... Nor did the conflict produce truly great political leaders... 
The true giants ...must be sought elsewhere. They could be found... 
in the craggy mountains, among the barren hills, in the forbidding 
gorges... They were the leaders of those intrepid bands that almost 
from the very beginning made the war in Spain a nightmare for 
the Napoleonic armies. Swooping down from their mountainous 
hideouts...they never let the invaders forget...that Spain had not 

<<<PDFPAGE 231>>>
Charles J. Esdaile 
213 
given up the fight. It is not an exaggeration to say that these 
bands...made history. They carried on the war against Napoleon 
when there were few regular Spanish forces left to continue the 
struggle, and through their perseverance and the damage they inflicted 
on the enemy, 
as well as the incalculable help they rendered 
Wellington’s... forces, they must be given a large, perhaps decisive 
share of the credit for the emperor’s failure in the Peninsula.’”*° 
In his detailed account of the ‘little war’ in Aragon — a study rendered 
the more valuable by the fact that it rests on detailed research in the 
French archives — Alexander argues that the ‘combination of conventional 
resistance, galvanised by Wellington’s army, and the irregular opposition 
of the partidas proved irresistible’; that ‘the partidas could probably have 
sustained resistance indefinitely’; and even that ‘the partisan leaders 
were able to forge from the spirit of opposition an army that managed 
to exploit French military difficulties and liberate Arag6n’.*’ And, finally, 
for John Tone, whose study of the guerrillas of Navarre is by far the 
most detailed work that the English language boasts on the subject: 
Armed peasants made chaos of French communications and per- 
formed other tasks of value to both English and Spanish regular forces. 
Partisans scoured the countryside of French spies and sympathizers 
and brought a continuous stream of information to the Allies. The 
guerrillas also effected a kind of psychological warfare in which the 
French had to be constantly on the alert, while the Allied armies 
could rest securely in the midst of a vigilant peasantry. The guerrilla 
war was a long and demoralizing nightmare for France. In the 
regions of insurgency, where each peasant was a potential guerrilla, 
there could be no campaigning season, no safe havens, no truces. 
Everywhere and always there existed the possibility of a hostile 
encounter...In guerrilla country, the French governed only where they 
could actually have troops in place. When these troops were with- 
drawn, the territory reverted to the guerrillas, becoming valueless to 
the French, if not a positive drain on their resources. War in Spain 
did not pay Napoleon as it had in other parts of Europe. On the 
contrary, guerrilla action made the occupation of Spain a constant 
burden and made the Spanish war unwinnable.*® 
As has already been intimated, however, this chorus of praise (which is, 
albeit for different reasons, replicated in both the French and the Spanish 
sources) does not rest on secure foundations. Too much stress has been 

<<<PDFPAGE 232>>>
214 
Popular Resistance in Napoleonic Europe 
placed, for example, on the activities of a small number of ‘heroic’ 
individuals who are in reality quite unrepresentative of the guerrilla 
movement as a whole, whilst the quite exceptional case of northern 
Navarre — probably the only region in the whole of Spain where the rural 
populace was reasonably satisfied with social and economic conditions — 
has over and over again been cited as if it were representative of the 
Spanish struggle as a whole. On top of that there has been a general 
failure to engage with the Spanish archives: many of the authors whom 
we have cited have not done so at all, whilst those of which this is not 
true have only done so in a partial and selective fashion, and the result 
has been that the more reflective amongst them have found themselves 
confronting a series of contradictions that they have had considerable 
difficulty in laying to rest. Such problems as desertion, resistance to 
conscription and overtly unpatriotic behaviour — an example is the refusal 
of many guerrilla bands to serve outside their home regions despite the 
fact that their services were needed elsewhere — are therefore explained 
in terms of such half-reasons as ‘localism’ rather than occasioning the 
fundamental rethinking that they actually require.*” As for the even 
thornier issue of banditry this is generally elided or shrugged off. To 
quote Gabriel Lovett, for example, ‘There were undoubtedly rogue 
guerrillas preying on their countrymen almost as much as on their 
enemy... Yet the bad had to be accepted with the good, because the 
positive accomplishments of the irregulars... overwhelmingly outweighed 
the negative aspects of the guerrilla war.’*° 
This, however, is not good enough. If all elements of Ja guerrilla are 
taken into account, all well and good. But, if the word ‘guerrilla’ is taken 
to mean an irregular combatant fighting outside the apparatus of the 
state (which is in fact the definition that the writers whom we have 
cited invariably adopt), the number of ‘rogue guerrillas’ becomes so 
large that the positive accomplishments of the irregulars are not so 
much outweighed as totally eclipsed. On too many occasions, meanwhile, 
such awkward matters are not raised at all: Lovett, for example, at all 
times simply takes the fact of a great people’s crusade against Napoleon 
as read, and that despite the fact that he has worked in archives which 
are literally bursting at the seams with evidence of a picture that is in 
reality much less flattering. About the only excuse that one can come 
up with for all this is that the Spanish historiography is not much 
better. Thanks in part to the experience of the Franco régime, military 
history in Spain is regarded with even greater prejudice than it is in Britain 
with the result that the guerrilla struggle has not received the attention 
that it merits. Astonishingly enough, until almost the very moment 
that this work was going to press there was no monograph on the subject 

<<<PDFPAGE 233>>>
Charles J. Esdaile 
215 
as a whole, and but one article, even this being very general and written 
from first principles rather than based on archival research.*! In so far as 
the author is aware, meanwhile, only two pieces of postgraduate work 
have appeared on the subject since the 1960s (if not before), and of these 
both are regional studies, whilst only one has resulted in publication.*” 
Beyond this one can only turn to the various academic studies that have 
appeared of the experiences of one province or another in the Peninsular 
War, but these never have the subject as a their main theme and are 
frequently deficient in what they do say (as an example here one might 
cite not one but two recent studies of Huelva that failed to make any 
_use of the very extensive papers of the Spanish general who headed the 
Patriot cause in the area following the appearance of the French in 
1810).** Such as it is then, the historiography is dominated by the work 
of amateur historians who lack the formation necessary to produce 
anything other than more or less hagiographic biographies of one or 
other of the main guerrilla commanders or, alternatively, regional or 
thematic monographs that are generally as confused in their organization 
as they are antiquarian in their approach.** About the best that can be 
said about it, indeed, is that at least the subject does have a historiography: 
to return to Portugal for a moment, not a single Lusitanian historian 
appears ever to have investigated the issue of ‘people’s war’ at all. 
All this, of course, makes for a rather depressing story. However, with 
regard to two areas of Europe in particular, there are signs both of 
greater interest and the emergence of a more critical approach. Of these, 
the first is Italy. Here, too, the historiography was originally not very 
good. Aside from one very brief contribution to an early meeting of the 
annual conference known as the Consortium on Revolutionary Europe, 
for example, there is no general introduction to the subject.** Whilst it 
might be thought that the obvious focus for historians interested in 
popular resistance is Calabria, the material that this region has generated 
has, on the whole, been rather disappointing. Thus, practically the only 
works that we have on the subject in English are those of Milton Finley, 
an American military historian whose writing is not only resolutely 
narrative, but seemingly bereft of any knowledge of the Italian sources.*° 
Working primarily from the memoirs and correspondence of French 
officers who served in Calabria, he is at the same time all too prone to 
falling prey to generalizations that could have flowed smoothly from 
the pen of any of Napoleon’s generals. For example: 
Underlying the revolt was the religious fanaticism of the area... One of 
the most effective guerrillas in the early stages of the war (Papasodero) 
was a priest. Anti-French uprisings in Strongoli, Nicastro and 

<<<PDFPAGE 234>>>
216 
Popular Resistance in Napoleonic Europe 
Castrovillari 
were 
led by local clergy. 
It was the priests who 
exhorted...Amantea not to surrender even when no hope was 
left...The many monasteries of Calabria offered guerrillas bases 
from which food and supplies could be obtained.*” 
In fairness, Finley does stress the importance of factors other than 
ideology in the causation of the revolt. Amongst the other issues that 
he mentions, indeed, are poverty, local traditions of brigandage, French 
pillaging and long-standing social and economic unrest, but this serves 
only to promote fresh neo-Napoleonic generalizations. Thus; ‘The 
Calabrian guerrillas much preferred the short-term goal of loot to any 
thought of long-term reform.’*® For an example of the way forward we 
must therefore turn to the works of Finley’s fellow American, Alexander 
Grab. A specialist on the Kingdom of Italy, Grab has over the years 
produced with a series of articles and conference papers in which he has 
dissected popular resistance in his region of specialization and presented 
us with an archivally-based picture of affairs that can be regarded as 
being so close to reality as makes no difference. Thus, what we see is not 
a nationalist or even religious phenomenon but rather the expression of 
concrete social and economic grievances combined with the survival of 
pre-Napoleonic patterns of rural crime (or, to put it another way, 
responses to poverty). Popular resistance, then, was primarily a social 
phenomenon rather than an ideological one, and, what is more, one 
that was not called forth by Napoleon but rather only exacerbated by 
him. That there was a political dimension is undeniable, but in the end 
the watchword is ambiguity. ‘Brigandage’, writes Grab, ‘constituted a 
violent response by the poor to their increasing destitution. Moreover, 
brigandage was also the most extreme reform of resistance of the Italian 
countryside to the growing power of the Napoleonic state, its increasing 
intrusiveness and mounting pressure, particularly in the realms of 
taxation and conscription.” And war of liberation there was none: 
guerrilla warfare as such was absent from the Kingdom of Italy, whilst 
the brigands were indiscriminate in their depredations, plundering all and 
sundry without regard for nationality, social class or political persuasion; 
as for the peasant risings of 1809, these were essentially timeless in their 
form, the fact being that, give or take a few Habsburg flags, they could 
just as easily have taken place in 1509, 1609 or 1709.°° 
What makes Grab’s work all the more interesting is that it ties in very 
neatly with the work of the current author. A specialist in the Peninsular 
War throughout his career, the latter was naturally well aware of the 
tendency of French authors to seek to maximize the contribution of the 

<<<PDFPAGE 235>>>
Charles J. Esdaile 
217 
guerrillas to Napoleon’s defeat in the Iberian Peninsula, whilst at the same 
time attributing their actions to a combination of greed, ignorance, 
fanaticism and the machinations of the clergy. These arguments, how- 
ever, he was inclined to discount as the fruit of Napoleonic propaganda. 
And, whilst working on the Wellington Papers in Southampton in 
1985, he came across a remarkable document that is so important that 
it is worth quoting from it at some length. Thus: 
It is very difficult to know what to say about the guerrillas. That 
some of them have been of eminent use during the progress of the 
war cannot be denied. They obliged the French to fortify them- 
selves in every village and town in the country; they harassed the 
parties who were spread through the provinces either to subsist 
themselves or to procure supplies for the enemy’s magazines; they 
murdered 
all stragglers and sometimes intercepted convoys of 
provisions and stores; they rendered the communications of the 
enemy very difficult and hazardous, and often cut them off for 
weeks together; and, finally, they assisted in keeping alive the spirit of 
resistance against the invaders. On the other hand, they doubled the 
calamities inflicted by the French. The inhabitants were compelled 
to feed the enemy with one hand and the guerrillas with the other. 
They plundered many towns with as little mercy as the French; and 
where the French preceded them they generally carried off all 
which the French left. Many of them under the pretence of patriotism 
and of serving against the enemy became regular freebooters and 
subsisted on the pillage of the country. It will probably become 
necessary one of these days to establish a new Santa Hermandad to 
clear Spain of these bands of robbers. They prevented the recruiting 
of the regular armies, for every Spanish peasant would naturally 
prefer rioting and plunder and living in free quarters with the 
guerrillas to being drilled and starved in the regular army. While 
some of them kept alive the spirit of resistance and the feeling of 
hatred against the French, others compelled the inhabitants to look 
to the French for protection, for the inhabitants would at length 
prefer the systematized pillage and regulated contributions of the 
enemy to the wasteful, capricious, uncertain and merciless plundering 
of their own countrymen. On the whole, therefore, it may be said 
that that the guerrillas did as much mischief to the country as they 
did to the French, but inasmuch as they certainly did considerable 
damage to the enemy, they were on the whole useful to the common 
cause.>! 

<<<PDFPAGE 236>>>
218 
Popular Resistance in Napoleonic Europe 
At the time that he first read these words, the current author was working 
on a study of Anglo-Spanish relations in the Peninsular War. Here, 
though, seemed to lie the basis of a whole new field of research, and 
over the years that followed a series of articles and conference papers 
were written that sought to examine the contradictions outlined in this 
document in the light of the ever-growing quantity of archival material 
that seemed to confirm the need for a revisionist approach.*” Finally, in 
2004 under the imprint of Yale University Press, there appeared Fighting 
Napoleon: Guerrillas, Bandits and Adventurers in Spain, 1808-1814, this 
being a full-scale monograph in which the problem is discussed at 
length. 
The fruit of a substantial programme of archival research funded by 
the University of Liverpool and the Leverhulme Trust (whose generosity 
is in both cases gratefully acknowledged), this work poses the starkest of 
challenges to traditional views of popular resistance. Thus, what we see 
is a picture that is far removed from the normal image of a great 
‘people’s crusade’. Indeed, almost every point of the usual canon is 
overthrown. The uprising of 1808, then, is seen not as an attack on the 
French invaders but rather an explosion of pent up social unrest that had 
strong echoes of the grand peur of 1789. Moving on, it is demonstrated 
that there was little popular interest in the war against Napoleon, and 
that the usual response to the conscription that was inevitably imposed 
once voluntary enlistment fell off, as it very quickly did, was draft 
evasion, riot and desertion. With desertion, however, came an increase 
in banditry and this was stimulated still further by the collapse in the 
economic life of the country brought about by the outbreak of war. 
Very soon, then, swarms of armed men were stalking the countryside of 
both the area occupied by the French and that which remained in the 
hands of their opponents - in the parlance of the day the Patriots — 
whilst they everywhere commingled with the bandits that had been so 
marked a feature of Spanish life for hundreds of years and were now 
once again in the ascendant on account of the economic misery that 
had gripped Spain in the reign of Carlos IV (1788-1808). From this milieu 
there emerged a variety of gangs — the original partidas — and these 
preyed on all and sundry: French, British, Portuguese and Spaniards; 
Patriots and afrancesados; soldiers and civilians; all suffered alike. Whilst 
continuing on occasion to kill the odd French courier, pounce on the 
odd French convoy, and sell the odd packet of dispatches to the Allied 
authorities, not to mention to assume the guise of guerrilleros when it 
suited them, many of these bands remained mere bandits: once the tide 
of French conquest receded in 1812-1813 leaders such as the Castillian 

<<<PDFPAGE 237>>>
Charles J. Esdaile 
219 
cabecillas, Principe and Saornil, were revealed in all their criminality, 
for, rather than following up the retreating enemy they battened upon 
the civilian population and lived, as Sydenham put it, ‘at free quarters’. 
From amongst these men, however, there emerged a number of more 
notable figures. Of relatively humble background, at heart they were 
mere adventurers — prospective bandits even — but they also possessed 
sufficient vision and common sense to realize that their survival and 
future prosperity depended on raising themselves above the common 
herd. In many cases genuinely exceptional individuals, they specifically 
associated themselves with the Patriot cause and struggled hard to turn 
their motley followers into disciplined and effective fighting forces. 
Acquiring military ranks, by the end of the war a number of them — the 
most prominent were Juan Martin (i.e. El Empecinado) and Francisco 
Espoz y Mina — were generals in the regular army, whilst their partidas 
had become brigades and divisions. From 1808 onwards, these men 
dedicated themselves to fighting the French, and in this they were joined 
by a large number of other cabecillas who had secured commissions 
from the civilian authorities, found themselves at the head of a partida 
by sheer accident, or been asked to take charge of specific guerrilla bands. 
Though they too contained their share of unscrupulous adventurers 
who aimed only at cutting a dash, feathering their own nests and 
ingratiating themselves with the authorities, this latter group were 
clearly of greater number and on the whole of greater repute, if at the 
same time generally of lesser calibre and enterprise: amongst their 
number were to be found students, government officials, army officers, 
ecclesiastics, and wealthy landowners, merchants and other proprietors. 
As such they had a stake in the system that provided them with a 
motive to fight the French that equalled the enlightened self-interest of 
self-made leaders such as El Empecinado - in some instances they may 
even genuinely deserve the term ‘patriot’ — whilst their exploits were on 
occasion no less impressive. But leaders are one thing, and rank and file 
quite another. Only in the very few areas of Spain where economic and 
conditions were such as to promote a genuine sense of contentment 
and well-being — the most obvious are the Basque provinces and northern 
Navarre — was la guerrilla genuinely a popular phenomenon in which 
men flocked to join the partidas out of a specific desire to fight the 
invaders. Whilst isolated cases can be found in the archives of men who 
came forward, or at least so they said, out of patriotism or a desire for 
revenge, beyond these areas such volunteers as the bands received seem 
to have_come in. as a result of desperation - one key to success was 
invariably the ability to pay a steady wage -— of a desire to escape service 

<<<PDFPAGE 238>>>
220 
Popular Resistance in Napoleonic Europe 
in the regular army, or because for one reason or another they had no 
option: a favourite target of Espoz y Mina, for example, were the long 
columns of Spanish prisoners that regularly made their way from’~ 
Madrid to the French frontier, whilst, as we have seen, many bands 
became a refuge for men who had had enough of fighting Napoleon’s 
wars and could find no other means of survival (likewise bandits who 
found themselves in a tight spot and needed to find some way of escaping 
the noose). Nor is this surprising: in both the Tyrol and Calabria fears of 
conscription to the Bavarian and Neapolitan armies and, by extension, 
of being marched away to die in Napoleon’s wars, played a major role in 
producing men for the fight, but in Spain King Joseph did not introduce 
compulsory military service. Meanwhile, an unknown number of the 
rank and file were men who were to all intents and purposes conscripts: 
in~ 
a number of cases, ploughboys and shepherds and the like seem literally 
~ 
to have been plucked from the fields, whilst in others guerrilla bands 
simply descended on one pueblo or another and rounded up all the men — 
of military age at the point of a gun. Facing the point of a gun, too, 
were the many bandits and enemy prisoners who were given the choice 
of enlistment or execution. Still another form of compulsion was that 
based on economic dependence: where men 
of substance formed 
partidas, their first recruits seem often to have come from the ranks of 
their servants, journeymen, tenants or day labourers. Also made use of 
was deception: some men were brought in by simple trickery and others 
by false rumours that the French were indeed about..to bring in 
conscription. Far from being a genuinely popular movement enthused 
by the determination to fight for God, king and fatherland, the guerrillas 
appear as a much more conventional phenomenon:men_ were not 
inspired to fight by the new force of patriotism, but rather driven.to__ 
fight by the old ones of poverty, hunger, despair and the voice of _ 
authority. 
" 
From this motley crew were in some cases fashioned powerful fighting 
forces that were able to cause the French serious problems — one again 
thinks here of the bands of El Empecinado and Espoz y Mina, although 
there were other instances, such as men led in Cantabria and Asturias 
by Juan Diaz Porlier and those commanded in Soria by José Joaquin 
Duran. But even the most disciplined and militarized of the guerrillas 
could never free themselves of the fact that at root they were not a 
patriotic phenomenon. For reasons that ranged from a genuine sense of 
patriotism through an association with systems of privilege threatened 
by the French invasion to an opportunistic determination to make the 
most of a once-in-a-lifetime opportunity, many of their commanders were 

<<<PDFPAGE 239>>>
Charles J. Esdaile 
221 
sincerely 
ly committed to the struggle against the French. However, for the 
rank 
and file it was a different matter. In so far as can be ascertained, 
few of the men who actually made up the partidas had any conscious 
interest in the struggle and it is clear that they deeply resented attempts 
to transform them into regular troops, whilst at the same time often 
being quite capable of either slipping off to become bandits on their 
own account or at the very least seizing upon such opportunities as 
they_could to engage in looting and a variety of other excesses. Given 
the fact that, for all that they still killed many Frenchmen and their 
collaborators, large numbers of bands never rose above the level of 
banditry, it is in consequence clear that the French of the term ‘brigands’ 
for their irregular opponents is not so very inappropriate. 
The task facing the historical community is therefore very clear. What 
is sauce for the Italian or Iberian goose is in all probability equally sauce 
for the Tyrolean gander, from which it follows that anno neun almost 
certainly needs to be revisited in the same manner (as, for that matter, 
Calabria). But beyond that stands a wider issue. In brief, we have a 
subject of great complexity that, for all its undoubted importance, has 
never been adequately studied in the context of the empire as a whole. 
If this is the case, meanwhile, it is in part because studies of the same 
subject on a national level have for the most part been inadequate. 
What is required therefore is more scholars who are prepared to set 
aside foolish prejudices, take the issue of popular resistance seriously 
and immerse themselves in the archives, both national and local, of 
Portugal, Spain, Italy, Germany and Austria. That said, however, the 
challenge is a difficult one. As the present author knows to his cost, a 
whole series of challenges await such historians. Not the least of these is 
the question of definition - who exactly are we referring to when we 
use the term ‘guerrillas’? — but there are also serious problems of inter- 
pretation, whilst the sources are both extremely diffuse and extremely 
fragmentary. In the end what has emerged, at least in the case of the 
author’s own work, is an artificial construct — a mosaic in which thousands 
of pieces of information have been pieced together to paint a picture of 
popular resistance that is highly revisionist. Inevitably, such a picture 
cannot but be open to challenge, but in this respect its creator would 
say three things. Thus, in the first place, it ties in very well with such 
serious research as has been done on popular resistance in other parts of 
Europe; in the second, it takes much better account of the numerous 
problems that are thrown up by the Spanish struggle than does the 
traditional version of events; and, in the third, it is no more artificial than 
the idea that the populace was motivated chiefly by issues of ideology. 

<<<PDFPAGE 240>>>
222 
Popular Resistance in Napoleonic Europe 
And, finally, whatever may be said about the Esdaile construct, so to 
speak, it is quite clear that without more such research projects it will 
never be possible to arrive at an adequate typology of popular resistance 
in Napoleonic Europe as a whole. 
Notes 
i 
2. 
Of 
4, 
Napoleon to Joseph Bonaparte, 2 March 1806, Correspondance de Napoléon I 
publiée par Ordre de l’Empereur Napoléon III (Paris, 1858-69), XII, p. 121. 
M. Broers, Europe under Napoleon, 1799-1815 (London, 1996), p. 101. 
Ibid. 
A full order of battle for Wellington’s army in the summer of 1813 may be 
found in C. Oman, A History of the Peninsular War (Oxford, 1902-30), VI, 
pp. 750-3 
(for the purposes of comparison, the full totals, excluding 
Portuguese, were eighteen regiments of cavalry, and fifty six battalions of 
infantry). For the presence of French deserters with the Spanish guerrillas, cf. 
CJ. Esdaile, Fighting Napoleon: Guerrillas, Bandits and Adventurers in the 
Peninsular War, 1808-14 (London, 2004), pp. 114-17. 
. G. Rudé, Revolutionary Europe, 1783-1815 (London, 1964), p. 114. 
. G. Best, War and Society in Revolutionary Europe, 1770-1870 (London, 1982), 
p. 168. 
. J. Black, Western Warfare, 1775-1882 (London, 2001), p. 55. 
. H. Fisher, Napoleon (London, 1912), p. 177. 
. For the proceedings of this conference, cf. M. Rowe (ed.), Collaboration and 
Resistance in Napoleonic Europe: State-Formation in an Age of Upheaval (London, 
2003). 
. Cf. Broers, Europe under Napoleon, pp. 101-25, 169-73, 210-11. 
. 8. Woolf, Napoleon's Integration of Europe (London, 1991), pp. 231-2. 
. Cf. ibid., pp. 230-6 passim. 
. Cf. C.J. Esdaile, The Wars of Napoleon (London, 1995), pp. 140-1. For a 
more developed version of the passage from which this quote is taken, cf. 
C.J. Esdaile, ‘Popular resistance to the Napoleonic empire’, in P. Dwyer 
(ed.), Napoleon and Europe (London, 2001), pp. 136-52. 
. C. Barnett, Bonaparte (London, 1978), p. 145. 
. C. Best, War and Society in Revolutionary Europe, 1770-1870 (London, 1982) 
p. 180. 
. The two works concerned are F.G. Eyck, Loyal Rebels: Andreas Hofer and the 
Tyrolean Uprising of 1809 (New York, 1986), and L. Harford, ‘Napoleon and 
the subjugation of the Tyrol’, Consortium on Revolutionary Proceedings, XX 
(1980), pp. 704-11. 
. Eyck, Loyal Rebels, p. xi. 
. For an example, cf. c. Oman, Peninsular War, 11 (Oxford, 1902-1930) pp. 229-30. 
. D. Gates, The Spanish Ulcer: a History of the Peninsular War (London, 1986), 
pp. 139, 142. 
. J. Read, War in the Peninsula (London, 1977), p. 160. 
. M.S. Foy, History of the War in the Peninsula under Napoleon (London, 1827), 
pp. 443-S. 
. 
A. Miot de Melito. Mémoires du Comte Miot de Melito, Ancien Ministre, 
Ambassadeur, Conseilleur d’état et Membre d’Institut (Paris, 1858), IU, p. 568. 

<<<PDFPAGE 241>>>
23. 
24. 
2% 
26. 
Dike 
42. 
43. 
Charles J. Esdaile 
223 
The attitude of French memoirs to the guerrillas is discussed in R. Farias, 
Memorias de la Guerra de la Independencia Escritas por Soldados Franceses 
(Madrid, 1919), pp. 317-20, and J.R. Aymes, ‘La guerrilla en la literature testi- 
monial francesa’, in J.A. Armillas (ed.), La Guerra de la Independencia: Estudios 
(Zaragoza, 2001), pp. 23-4. 
S. Blaze, Mémoires d’un Apothécaire sur la Guerre d’Espagne pendant les Années 
1808 a 1814 (Paris, 1828), 1, pp. 69-70. 
AJ.M. de Rocca, Memoirs of the War of the French in Spain (London, 1815), 
[Oe Zalle 
H. von Brandt, The Two Minas and the Spanish Guerrillas (London, 1825), 
p. 54; A. Bigarre, Mémoires du Général Bigarré, Aide de Camp du Roi Joseph, 
1775-1813 (Paris, 1903), p. 277. 
A.L.A. Fée, Souvenirs de la Guerre d’Espagne, dite de I’Independence (Paris, 
1856), p. 18. 
. Bigarré, Mémoires, p. 278. 
. Cf. G. Chaliand, The Art of War in World History: from Antiquity to the Present 
Day (Berkeley, California, 1994), p. 664. 
. For an analysis of the role played by regular soldiers in the ‘little war’, mean- 
while, readers are referred to C.J. Esdaile, Fighting Napoleon: Guerrillas, Bandits 
and Adventurers in Spain, 
1808-14 (Yale University Press, 2004), pp. 27-60. 
. Oman, Peninsular War, Il, pp. 488-92. 
. E. Longford, Wellington: the Years of the Sword (London, 1969), pp. 247-8. 
. R. Humble, Wellington’s Peninsular Marshals (London, 1974), p. 70. 
. D. Chandler, ‘Wellington at war: regular and irregular warfare’, International 
History Review, X1, no. 1 (February, 1989), p. 9 
. Times Literary Supplement, 4 July 1986, p. 742. 
. G. Lovett, Napoleon and the Birth of Modern Spain (New York, 1965), I, 
pp. 665-7. 
. D. Alexander, Rod of Iron: French Counter-Insurgency Policy in Aragon during the 
Peninsular War (Wilmington, Delaware, 1985) pp. 239-41. 
. J. Tone, The Fatal Knot: the Guerrilla War in Navarre and the Defeat of Napoleon 
(Chapel Hill, North Carolina, 1994), p. S. 
. E.g. J. Tone, ‘The Peninsular War’, in Dwyer, Napoleon and Europe, pp. 238-9. 
. Lovett, Napoleon and the Birth of Modern Spain, 1, p. 679. 
. For the article, cf. M. Artola, ‘La guerra de guerrillas’, Revista de Occidente, X 
(1964), pp. 12-43. The monograph is Antonio Moliner Prada, La Guerrilla en la 
Guerra de la Independencia (Barcelona, 2004). This offers some fresh information, 
particularly on Catalonia, but does not develop its subject sufficiently. 
The first of these studies is the unpublished Universidad Complutense de 
Madrid tesina of Antonio Carrasco Alvarez entitled ‘La naturaleza de la guerra 
de guerrillas en Espana (1808-1814)’, and the second the Universidad de 
Valladolid doctoral dissertation of Jorge Sanchez Fernandez on /a guerrilla in 
the area of Old Castile. Whilst not yet published in full, this has resulted in 
two useful studies, viz. La Guerrilla Vallesoletana, 1808-1814 (Valladolid, 
1997), and Nos Invaden! Guerrilla y Represion en Valladolid durante la Guerra de 
la Independencia Espanola (Valladolid, 2000). 
For these two works, cf. M.A. Pena, El Tiempo de los Franceses; la Guerra de la 
Independencia en el Suroeste Espafiol (Huelva, 2000), and D. Gonzalez Cruz, De 
la Revolucion Francesa a la Guerra de la Independencia: Huelva a Fines de la Edad 

<<<PDFPAGE 242>>>
224 
Popular Resistance in Napoleonic Europe 
44. 
45. 
46. 
47. 
48. 
49. 
SO. 
oy 
2: 
Moderna (Huelva, 2002). The general in question is Francisco Copons, whilst 
his papers — a veritable mine of information on the guerrillas - are held in 
the Real Academia de Historia in Madrid. 
For some examples of the former, cf. R.G. de Barthélemy, El Marquesito: Juan 
Didz Porlier, General que fue de los ejércitos nacionales, 
1788-1815 (Santiago de 
Compostela, 1995), J. M Codon, Biografia y Cronica del Cura Merino (Burgos, 
1968) and M. Ortufio, Xavier [sic] Mina; Guerrillero, Liberal, Insurgente (Pamplona, 
2000). As for the latter, cf. R. Guirao, Guerrilleros y Patriotas en el Alto Aragon, 
1808-1814 (Huesca, 2000), and P. Pascual, Curas y Frailes Guerrilleros en la 
Guerrade la Independencia (Zaragoza, 2000). 
For the paper concerned, cf. D. Koening, ‘Banditry in Napoleonic Italy’, 
Consortium on Revolutionary Europe Proceedings, V, (1975), pp. 72-9. 
His most important contribution to the literature is M. Finley, The Most 
Monstrous of Wars: the Napoleonic Guerrilla War in Southern Italy, 1806-1811 
(Colombia, South Carolina, 1994). 
Ibid., pp. 134-S. 
: 
IDids ip al3Si7. 
A. Grab, ‘State power, brigandage and rural resistance in Napoleonic Italy’, 
European History Quarterly, XXV, no. 1 January, 1995), p. 40. 
In addition to the above article, readers are also directed to A. Grab, ‘Army, 
state and society: conscription and desertion in Napoleonic Italy, 1802-1814’, 
Journal of Modern History, LXvil (March, 1995), pp. 25-54, and A. Grab, ‘Popular 
risings in Napoleonic Italy’, Consortium on Revolutionary Europe Proceedings, 
XX (1990), pp. 112-19. 
T. Sydenham to H. Wellesley, 10 October 1812, University of Southampton, 
Wellington Papers, WP.1/361. 
The most representative of these articles are C.J. Esdaile, ‘Heroes or villains? 
The Spanish guerrillas and the Peninsular War, 1808-14’, History Today, 
XXXVI, no. 4 (April, 1988), pp. 29-35; C.J. Esdaile, ‘The problem of the Spanish 
guerrillas’, in A. Berkeley (ed.), New Lights on the Peninsular War (Lisbon, 
1991), pp. 191-200; C.J. Esdaile, ‘“Heroes or villains” revisited: further 
thoughts on the Spanish guerrillas’, in E. Martinez Ruiz (ed.), IJ semanario 
Internacional sobre la Guerra de la Independencia (Madrid, 1996), pp. 191-210; 
and C.J. Esdaile, ‘La guerrilla espanola, 1808-14: el gran malentendido de la 
Guerra de la Independencia’, Trienio, no. 42 (November, 2003), pp. 55-76. 

<<<PDFPAGE 243>>>
Index 
Aachen 
81 
alarmas 
7 
Alberghini, Giovanni Battista 
59-64 
Alexander, Donald 
213 
Alexander! 
19, 20, 167, 188, 
194, 195 
army of 
19, 20, 188 
Alexander II, army of 
19 
almogovares 
100 
Alps, brigands in 
29, 30, 33 
Alvanés, Pedro Antonio 
104 
American wars and guerillas 
Andalucia 
11, 123 
Aragon 
136, 213 
aristocrats and Bonapartism 
79-80 
see also elites 
Arndt, Ernst Moritz 
16, 86, 
AO hs 
catechisms 
167, 168-9, 173, 
1 WHS, MOE 
Arquata Scrivia 
59 
Arzu 
95 
Astorga, Isidro 
117 
Asturias, Juntade 
147, 148 
atrocities 
see violence 
Augereau, General 
54, 55 
Austria 
202 
pillage by troops from 
60 
political catechisms 
169, 170 
War of Succession 
138 
Aymes, Jean-René 
163, 165, 175 
138 
Babkin, V.I. 
190 
Baget, Joan 
93,95 
Bagration, General 
183, 185 
Bailen, battle of 
138, 140, 
211-12 
Balaguer, Teresa 
93 
Balkans 
105 
bande de Salembier 
29 
banditry 
214 
deserters and 
guerrillas as bandits 
as heroic 
26-7 
historically 
26-7 
insurrection as 
8-9, 22 
redistributing wealth 
26 
103-4, 218 
218-19, 221 
229 
Rhineland 
4 
see also brigandage 
barbets 
6, 7, 30, 31, 33 
operations against 
47-8 
Barcelona 
95 
deserters from 
102 
Barnett, Corelli 
206 
Barres, M. 
208 
Barriolucio, Marqués de 
Barrios, P. 
100 
Basa, Juan 
104 
Basque provinces, guerrillas 
Bavarian army in Tyrol 
6 
Becker, Nikolaus 
70 
Belcredi, Marchese 
55, 56, 57, 58 
Belgian brigands 
37 
Bellsolell, Antoni 
102 
Bennigsen, General L.L. 
Bertran, Josep 
99 
Best, Geoffrey 
204, 206, 207 
Bestuzhev, Aleksandr 
195 
Bigarré, A. 
210 
billeting 
29 
Rhineland 
72, 73 
Black, Jeremy 
204 
Blake, General Joaquin 
99 
Blanning, Tim 
4, 79 
Blaze, S. 
209 
Boadas, José 
Boissé 
41 
Bologna 
59 
Bonaparte, Joseph 
13, 201, 203, 208, 
210 
150 
OAs, 
18 
101 
anti-bandit tribunals 
12 
Bonaparte, Louis 
203 
Bonaparte, Napoleon 
SO, 208, 211, 
215, 218 
on barbets 
48 
and civil/military relations 
and collaboration 
78 
Consulate 
76-7 
cost of Spanish war 
customs court 
83 
and Enlightenment 
propaganda 
81-2 
ideological flexibility 
79-80 
in Italy 
7, 46-8 
76-80 
Pals) 

<<<PDFPAGE 244>>>
226 
Index 
Bonaparte, Napoleon — continued 
on looting 
53-4 
and Pavia 
57,58 
and Pius VII Concordat 
77 
on sacking of Moscow 
32 
and social cohesion 
80-1 
‘Spanish ulcer’ 
202 
Borodino 
18, 19, 20, 194 
Borras, Antonio 
109 
Bouquet, Jean-Charles 
41 
Bourgogne, Sergeant 
190 
boycott of revolutionary 
festivities 
73 
Boycott-Brown, Martin 
3, 6, 7, 11, 
45-66 
Brandt, Heinrich von 
2, 209-10 
Breuilly, John 
80 
brigandage/brigands 
12 
as criminals 
32 
defining 
31-2 
dehumanizing 
39-41 
extent of 
25, 29-30 
link with soldiers 
28-9 
origin of term 
28 
political outlaws 
30 
public order problem 
30 
as response to poverty 
10, 216, 220 
tendency towards 
17 
see also banditry 
Britain, expected help from 
6 
see also Wellington 
Broers, Michael 
201-2, 204-5 
Bruc battle 
92, 101, 106, 140 
brutality 
see violence 
Buckler, Johann 
4, 10 
Bunbury, Henry 
9 
Buniva de Morera, Jacinto 
98 
Burgand 
28 
Cabanés, Francisco Javier 
110 
Cabarrus, Comte de 
176 
cabecilla 
16 
Calabria 
8-9, 205 
effect of conscription 
13 
inadequacy of literature 
215-16 
insurrection 
8, 203; as 
banditry 
8-9; and Britsh 
help 
6; response to 
12; 
violence 
36 
number of French troops 
7 
social conflict 
9 
Caliguri, Carmine 
8 
Cameron, lain 
25 
927,106; 
Campos, Francisco 
94 
Capitan Diaz, Alfonso 
165 
Capuchino, El (Mendieta) 
117 
CarlosIV_ 
139, 175, 218 
Cartouche 
26 
Casabianca, General Raphael 
48 
Castafion, General 
138, 150 
Castilla la Vieja y Leon, Capitan 
General de 
139 
Catalonia 
91-110 
banditry 
103-S 
conscription 
109 
guerrilla bands 
6, 99-100, 106 
patriotism 
100-1 
urban guard 
107 
catechisms 
as educative 
164 
history 
163-4 
political 
16, 161-77 
secularization of 
172-3, 175-6 
see also political catechisms 
Catholic Church 
12 
catechisms 
163; and 
political 
172-3, 174, 175-6 
and French rule 
77 
as Napoleonic hierarchy 
84 
and revolt 
205 
Cesena 
59 
Chabran, General 
92 
Chandler, David 
212 
Chaparro, Fernando 
97 
Chapuy, Jean 
34 
Charles, Archduke 
7 
chauffeurs 
30, 37 
Chaunu, Pierre 
40 
Chevalier, J.M. 
36 
chouans 
30 
civilian population 
76-80 
applying military values 
78 
see also collaboration 
Claretona, Susana 
92, 106 
Clarés, Joan 
94,96, 99-100, 108, 109 
members of partida 
100 
Clausewitz, Karl von 
168, 184 
Clay, Stephen 
31 
clergy 
activities of 
41, 208, 209 
and cruzadas 
99 
Cleves 
3, 76, 80 
Cobb, Richard 
26 
collaboration 
74 
definitions 
67-8 
and ideological commitment 
likelihood of 
201 
74-5 

<<<PDFPAGE 245>>>
and local elites 
80 
move from resistance 
202 
and patriotism 
76 
post-1814 Prussia 
74-5 
pragmatic 
76 
Rhineland 
73-4; warnings 
against 
75-6 
selective 
203 
typology 
74 
collaborazionistas 
67 
Collot 
53 
Colmenares, Jose Antonio 
152 
Cologne 
68, 81 
Colomer y Riu, Josep 
92 
Como 
56 
Concordat (1802) 
77, 78-9 
conscription 
3, 176 
and banditry 
220 
Catalonia 
107, 109 
miquelets 
96 
radicalizing populace 
13 
resistance to 
7, 83, 214, 218 
Russia 
191-2 
Constans, Joan Pau 
99 
contrebandiers 
see smuggling 
Copons y Navia, Francisco 
119 
corso terrestre 
143 
de Navarra 
145 
Corvey, Jean le Miére de 
210 
Cossacks 
186 
costumbrismo 
16 
Covarrubias Orozco, Sebastian 
de 
137 
Crema 
52 
cruzadas 
99, 145 
cuadrillas 
141, 142 
Cuadros, José 
100 
Damas, Roger de 
8, 9 
Davies, Peter 
67, 82 
Davydov, D. 
184, 185 
Decembrist revolt 
18, 194-5, 196 
Delivré, Emilie 
16, 161-80 
Denisov, A.K. 
186 
deserters 
214, 218 
and banditry 
27, 218; survival 
by 
10 
from French troops 
202 
miquelets 
101 
recruits to barbets 
47 
Rhineland 
83 
Russia 
192 
somatén 
101, 102-3 
Desvernois, Nicolas 
12 
Index 
227 
Deu de Llisa, Francesc 
92 
Diez, Juan Martin 
see Martin 
Diez, Juan 
Diaz Porlier, Juan 
220 
Diaz Torrejon, Francisco Luis 
116 
Dos de Mayo 
7, 12, 140 
draft evasion 
27, 218 
and brigandage 
10, 30 
and community support 
83 
Rhineland 
83 
somatén 
101 
Duffy, Christopher 
19 
Dufraisse, Roger 
82 
Duhesme, Philippe G. 
95 
Dujard, Jean-Lambert Marchal 
48 
Duran, José Joaquin 
220 
Eixala, Baltasar de 
97 
elites 
3 
and collaboration 
80-1 
conflict and local 
150-3 
enthusiasm for insurrection 
16 
as guerilla leaders 
117-18, 
119,125 
insurrection as social conflict 
9-10 
Russia 
185, 187, 188-9, 
194-5 
Elizabeth, Empress 
18 
Ellul, Jacques 
81 
Emilia Romagna 
51, 59 
Empecinado, El 
See Martin Diez 
Engels, F. 
184 
Enlightenment 
and catechisms 
164, 173, 174 
and French consolidation 
81-2 
Errando, Manuel 
104 
Esdaile, Charles 
1-24, 115-36, 
137, 176, 201-22 
Espoz y Mina, Francisco 
13, 
25202921 ZA 220 
and Junta of Navarre 
149, 152 
power of 
152-3 
as threat to establishment 
150 
Estop, Miquel 
102 
Eyck, E-Gae 
207, 
Eylau battle 
18, 20 
Farrara 
59 
Fée, A.L.A. 
210 
Felonch, D. Francesc 
92 
Ferdinand, Archduke 
54 
Fernando VII 
139 
Ferrer, Joan 
99 
Ferrer, Raimundo 
101 

<<<PDFPAGE 246>>>
228 
Index 
Fichte, J.G. 
174 
Figner, AS. 
185 
Finland 
1 
Finley, Milton 
215-16 
Fisher, Herbert 
4, 204 
Forli 
59 
Forrest, Alan 
12, 21, 25-44, 83 
France 
brigands within 
29, 37-40 
conscription 
202 
discontent 
202 
literature on defeat 
208-13 
political catechisms 
171 
see also French troops 
Franch, Antoni 
94 
Francis] 
27 
Francis II 
73-4 
Franco, General 
214 
Fraser, Ronald 
116, 117, 118, 
119, 124 
Frederick II (the Great) 
18, 21, 
Te? 
Frederick William I, King 
69 
Freemasonry 
82 
French troops 
behaviour 
11; flexibility 
13; 
violence 
14-15, 54-5, 97 
and Concordat 
78 
density of 
3, 4-5 
enemy as brigands 
33-5 
friendly approach from 
63-4, 65 
indiscipline 
50, 52-3, 73, 
202; and Consulate 
77-8 
looting and pillage 
60; resistance 
as response 
54-5, 60-3 
in Rhineland 
72-3 
Friedland battle 
18, 20 
Galiano, Vicente Alcala 
143 
Galicia 
11, 123 
guerrilla warfare 
6 
Gaonms A222 
resistance 
60-3 
Garay, Martinde 
143 
Garcés de los Fayos, Juan 
152 
Garcia de la Cuesta, Don 
Gregario 
139 
Gay, Narcis 
100, 103, 105, 110 
Genoa 
203 
Germany 
67-86, 202 
insurrection 
16 
political catechisms 
165, 166-9, 
170-2, 173-4, 177 
reluctant enlistment 
176 
Gerona 
95, 97,99 
bandits 
105 
somatens 
92-3, 106 
Ghent 
31 
Gilliatt, S. 
67, 74 
Ginzberg, Carlo 
174 
Gneisenau, August von 
168 
Gobierno, Junta de 
139, 140 
Godoy, Manuel de 
8, 165, 175 
Gorres, Joseph 
86 
Grab, Alexander 
216 
Grandmaison, Augustin Thomas 
de 
138 
Guadalajara, Junta of 
153-4 
Guerci, Luciano 
163, 164 
guerilla warfare 
2, 35 
definitions 
45-6, 137-9, 221 
history 
203-4 
literature 
208-13; dearth 
of 
204-7 
role of 
202 
Russia 
184 
sociology of Spanish 
115-36 
guerrillas 
as bandits 
105, 218-19, 221 
Catalonia 
99-100 
categories of 
135 
desperation of recruits 
220 
elite as leaders 
125 
instructions to 
144, 146 
and juntas 
141-4, 145-7; 
conflict 
150-1; encouraged 
by 
139-40 
motivation 
219-21 
political catechisms 
165 
as reason for French 
defeats 
208-13 
recruitment 
220 
regulation of 
141-4, 145-7; 
and local juntas 
154-5 
self-regulation 
148-9 
socio-economic status 
116-18, 
119, 124, 125, 128-9 
sociological study 
115-36 
see also guerrilla warfare; 
sociological study of guerrillas 
Guirao, Ramon 
136 
hajduks 
105, 204 
Hamburg 
16 
Haquin, General 
56, 57 
Hartley, Janet 
18, 19, 181-200 
Hébrard, Jean 
164 
Hernandez-Enviz, Leonor 
3, 115-36 

<<<PDFPAGE 247>>>
Hobsbawm, Eric 
26 
Hofman, A.J. 
165 
Hohenzollerri monarchy 
68-9 
Holy Roman Empire 
69 
Hormayr, Joseph von 
16, 166, 170 
Hulin 
26 
Humble, Richard 
212 
Iberian Peninsula 
guerrilla warfare 
38 
soldiers as brigands 
32-5 
see also Portugal; Spain 
insurrection 
as banditry 
8-9 
conditions for 
205 
contributions demanded 
57 
numerical strength of 
occupiers 
7-8 
and outside aid 
7, 205 
as rural phenomenon 
10 
as social protest 
9-10, 11 
Italy 
3,8 
brigands 
33, 216 
guerrilla warfare 
45-65 
insurgence as banditry 
8-9 
numerical strength of occupiers 
7 
political catechisms 
164-S, 
WAR ATS 
Jews in Rhineland 
10 
Joseph Il, Emperor 
69 
Joubert, Barthélemy-Catherine 
47-8, 
50 
Junta Central 
creation of 
147 
legitimizing guerrillas 
141-4, 
juntas 
conflict between 
150-1 
de Gobierno 
139, 140 
Logrono 
150-1 
Kabanov, A.K. 
189 
Kakhovskii, P.D. 
196 
Kleist, Heinrich von 
16, 168, 
170, 172, 174 
catechisms of 
166-7, 173, 176 
Kochetkov, A.N. 
184, 185 
Kopstadt, Johann Adolf 
76 
Kosciuszko, T. 
19 
Kriukov, A.A. 
188 
Krutter, Francisco 
101 
Kurzer Katechismus 
167-9 
Kutuzov, M. 
20, 183 
Index 
229 
Lacy, Luis 
107, 145 
land piracy 
143 
landsturm 
7 
Lannes, Jean 
57 
Laugier, Captain 
63 
Lauria 
36 
Lavit, Claude 
33 
Lehmann, Max 
167 
Lemonnier-Delafosse, 
Jean-Baptiste 
14-15, 208 
Lerida 
99 
liberty trees 
Pavia 
54-5, 56 
removal by French 
79 
Rhineland 
73 
Lines of Torres Vedras 
literature 
dearth of 
204-7 
on French defeat 
208-14 
future 
221, 222 
on guerrillas 
208-13 
on invasion of Russia 
181-3 
Llorens, Esperansa 
93 
localism 
154, 214 
Lodi 
53 
Logrono, Junta of 
150 
Lombardy 
51-2, 59 
Longa, Francisco 
3 
Longford, E. 
211 
looting and pillage 
29 
by French troops 
52-4, 58-9, 
60, 73; response to 
49, SO, 
54-6, 57-8 
by guerrillas 
217 
rural and urban 
differences 
55-6 
Lorenzo Villanueva, 
Joaquin 
176 
Louis XIV 
69, 72 
Lovett, Gabriel 
115-16, 
118, 214 
Lugo 
59 
Lunéville, Treaty of (1801) 
77 
Luther, Martin 
163 
Lyall, Robert 
192 
13-14 
Macquart, General 
48 
Maffré-Baugé, General 
98 
mafia 
9 
Mahy, General 
150 
Mainz 
68, 79 
collaboration 
76 
Mandrin, Louis 
26 
Mans6, Josep 
94, 110 

<<<PDFPAGE 248>>>
230 
Index 
Marbot, Baron de 
208 
Marnier, Jean 
35 
Marx, K. 
184 
Martin Diez, Juan 
125, 138, 211, 
219, 220 
desire for revenge 
13 
first exploits 
140 
and Junta of Guadalajara 
153-4 
as threat to establishment 
150 
Massari 
52 
Massena, Marshal Andre 
13, 14, 18 
Matheu, Josep 
97 
Mendieta, Juan 
117 
Merino, Jeronimo 
145, 149 
migueletes 
7 
see also migueletes 
Milan 
56-7 
Milans del Bosch, Francisco 
94, 95, 
107, 110 
Mina y Larrea, Martin Javier 
IS GAM 
Miot de Melito, A. 
208 
miquelets 
91, 93-7, 110 
and banditry 
105-6 
conscription 
96 
desertion 
101 
indiscipline 
17 
recruitment of 
93-5 
as regular troops 
93, 94 
see also migueletes 
Mirabeau, Marquis de 
164 
Moliner Prada, Antonio 
16, 91-114 
Molins de Rei, battle of 
96 
Moneuse 
38 
Montorno, Josef 
104 
Moore, SirJohn 
9, 11 
Morales Munoz, Manuel 
Moretti, Count 
49, 51 
Moscow, sacking of 
32 
Moya, Jose 
100 
Munoz Pérez, José 
165 
Murat, Joachim 
7, 13, 165 
Murav’ev, A.M. 
195-6 
Murav’ev, Nikita 
195 
Murav’ev-Apostol, M.I. 
195 
145, 
163, 165,171 
Nantes 
41 
Napier, William 
100 
Naples 
203 
Napoleon _ see Bonaparte; Napoleonic 
rule 
Napoleonic rule 
composition of government 
84 
diversity of reactions to 
161 
inner and outer empires 
201-2 
legal system 
85-6 
pros and cons of 
84-S 
resistance as inevitable 
201 
nationalism, German 
69-72 
Navarre 
13, 125, 152-3 
guerrillas 
213, 219 
reasons for insurrection 
214 
social protest 
10-11 
in study of guerrillas 
Nebenlander 
68-9 
NicholasI 
28, 194, 196 
Nicholas II 
194 
Nogués, General 
105 
Northern Society 
196 
123, 124 
occupation policy 
75 
radicalizing populace 
13 
Ochando Ros, Adria 
108 
O'Donnell, Enrique 
106, 107 
Oliveri, L. 
48-50 
Oman, Charles 
94, 96, 207, 208, 
210-11 
Ombriano 
52 
ordenan¢as 
7 
Orthodox religion, Russian 
18 
Palies, Maria 
97 
Palliser, Jaume 
97 
partidas 
22,115, 138, 218, 219 
categories of 
124-5 
and juntas 
148, 149-50 
and political struggles 
151 
regulation of 
141, 142-4, 145-7, 
148-9 
partisan warfare 
182-7 
Pascualy Casas, Esteban 
94 
patriotism 
Catalonia 
100-1 
and collaboration 
76 
dangers of 
195-6 
and religion 
193-4 
Russia 
183, 185-6, 187-91, 194-5 
Pauli 
L920 
Pavia 
6, 7,22 
liberty tree 
54-5, 56 
resistance 
54-6, 57-8 
peasants, benefits of occupation 
3-4 
Pelet, General 
208 
Pellicer i Fort, Josep 
97 
Pestalozzi, J.H. 
174 
Retention 
Pi, Isabel 
93 
Piacenza 
7 

<<<PDFPAGE 249>>>
Piedmont 
7, 46, 48 
pillage 
see looting 
Pius VII and Bonaparte 
77 
Plajas, Maria 
93 
Po Valley 
51-9 
geography of 
51 
insurrections 
$1 
terrain 
59 
political catechisms 
161-77 
advantages 
175 
authorship 
162, 164-5, 167-9, 
IAD), WA 
counter-revolutionary 
165-6, 
169-70 
as educative tool 
162, 164, 171, 
173-4 
failure of 
177 
Germany 
165, 166-9, 170-2, 
173-4, 177 
history 
164, 171 
Italy 
164-5, 171, 175 
and level of resistance 
171-2 
as persuasive tool 
162 
and religion-state 
relationship 
172-3 
with religious aspect 
174 
significance of 
161 
Spain 
175-6, 177 
see also catechisms 
popular songs, Russia 
192-3 
Portugal 
density of French 
troops 
4-S 
guerrilla warfare 
35-6 
literature on 
207-8; inadequacies 
@ye 
AIS) 
resistance 
13-15, 203 
violence of troops 
14-15 
Poulailler 
26 
poverty 
of French troops 
50 
insurrection as response 
10, 
ib, ZAG 
Prevenciones 
139 
Principe 
219 
propaganda 
146 
provincialism, Spain 
152-4 
Prussia 
20-1, 176 
public opinion and brigands 
39-40 
Pushkin, A. 
194 
Pyrenees, brigandsin 
25, 29 
Quincles, Juan 
104 
Quintana, Manuel 
140 
Index 
231 
Ragozin, V.G. 
185 
Rampon, Antoine Guillaume 
62, 63 
Read, Jan 
208 
Rebmann, Georg Friedrich 
84-5 
Reding, Teodoro 
96 
Regencia, Consejo de 
154 
Reichspatriotismus 
71-2 
religion 
and Russian patriotism 
18, 193-4 
and Vendeans 
40 
see also Catholic church 
requisitioning 
11 
Rhineland 
72, 73 
resistance 
as conventional warfare 
59, 64-5 
definitions 
67-8, 82 
efficacy of 
22, 205, 206 
extent of 
15-16, 22 
and external aid 
6, 7 
forms of 
203 
functional 
83 
as inevitable 
201 
move towards collaboration 
202 
as non-compliance 
203 
over-emphasis on 
contribution 
208-14 
as response to violence 
48-9, 
54-8, 60-3 
size of occupying force 
2, 3, 7, 72, 
HS 
as social unrest 
216, 218 
to conscription 
83 
see also banditry; brigandage 
Reynier, General 
7 
Rhineland 
4 
allegiance to Land 
69 
characteristics 
68 
civil/military relations 
76-80 
collaboration 
81-2; and 
resistance 
83-4 
conscription 
83 
consolidation of French rule 
78-9 
desertion 
83 
and French legal system 
85-6 
Jewsin 
10 
legalized occupation 
77-9 
level of resistance 
2-3 
loyalties 
69-70 
nationalism 
69-72 
numbers of French troops 
72 
passive phase 
72 
pros and cons of French rule 
84-5 
reactions to French rule 
85-6 
smuggling 
82-3 

<<<PDFPAGE 250>>>
232 
Index 
Rhone delta, brigands 
29 
Rimini 
59 
Rioja, La 
150, 151-2 
Riviera 
47-1 
barbets 
47-8 
terrain 
46, 65 
Rivoli 
7-8, 59-64, 65 
terrain 
59 
Rocca, A.J.M. de 
2-3, 209 
Romana, Marquess of La 
147 
Romanovs 
182 
Rosenberg, General 
18 
Roses 
106 
Rostopchin, General F.V. 
32, 
189, 190 
Rothenburg, Gunther 
20-1 
Rousseaux, Xavier 
38 
Rovira, Francesc 
94, 97, 98-9, 100, 
102, 103, 107 
Rovira y Galceran, Pere 
103 
Rowe, Michael 
2, 3, 4, 
63-90 
Rozen, Baron Andrei 
195 
Rudé, George 
202 
Ruffo, Cardinal 
8-9 
Rumiantsev, P.A. 
18, 20 
Rusca, General 
54 
Russia 
202 
1812 invasion, literature 
on 
181-3 
army 
18-21; characteristics of 
soldiers 
18-19, 20-1 
conscription 
191-2; beyond 
frontiers 
19 
Cossacks 
186 
desertion 
192 
elites 
187; patriotism of 
194-5 
militias 
187-92; composition 
of 
188; motivation 
188-90; 
nobles and 
187, 188-9; 
patriotism 
189, 190-2; 
religious identity 
193-4; 
temporary nature 
187-8; 
volunteers 
188 
partisan warfare 
183-7; 
motivation 
185-6; 
patriotism 
183, 185-6, 
187-91; Tolstoion 
186-7 
patriotism 
189, 190-2, 193-5; and 
demand for change 
195-6; 
and tsardom 
196 
peasant resistance 
181; and 
nationalism 
181 
‘people’s war’ 
182-3, 184 
popular songs 
192-3 
volunteers 
189-91; 
reluctance 
191-2 
Russo-German Legion 
167, 168, 176 
Sabadell 
97 
St Cyr, Marshal 
96 
Sala y Golobandas, Antonio 
104 
San Fernando de Figueres 
98-9 
Sanchez Garcia, Julian 
13, 117, 
118-19, 211 
Saornil 
219 
Savary, JJ. 
40 
Scharnhorst, G.J.D. von 
168 
schutzen 
7 
Schwartz, General 
92 
Scotti-Douglas, Vittorio 
17, 137-60 
Semevskii 
182 
Serbia 
1, 204 
Seslavin, AN. 
185 
Shteingel, V.I. 
188 
Smolensk 
19, 182 
smuggling 
25 
motivation for 
83 
pardons for 
142-3 
as resistance 
204 
Rhineland 
82-3 
social conflict 
9-10 
sociological study of 
guerrillas 
115-36 
combatants: by estate 
134; by 
professional group 
134; by 
region 
132; by year and 
Status 
H130),13i 135: 
occupation of 
133 
commandants 
135; by 
region 
132; as percentage of 
combatants 
131 
database construction 
120-1, 122, 
124; fields 
128-9 
funding 
120 
members of different 
categories 
135 
numbers studied 
123 
partidas 
124-5 
primary sources 
122 
research questions 
121 
secondary sources 
122-3 
socio-economic status 
116-18, 
119, 124, 125, 128-9 
Solis, Rodriguez 
115 
somatens (somatenes) 
7, 91-4 
conscription 
126 
defence of Gerona 
92-3 

<<<PDFPAGE 251>>>
deserters 
101, 102-3, 106-7, 109 
draft evaders 
101 
endof 
119 
as fighters 
98 
history of 
91 
indiscipline 
17, 108-9 
leaders of 
109, 110 
motivation for joining 
125-6 
as national guard 
98 
successes 
92-3, 95, 98-9, 140 
and Zaragoza 
92 
Soveria 
8 
Spain 
Army of the Right 
5, 95, 96 
brigands 
4, 33 
density of French troops 
4-5 
elites and guerrilla warfare 
16 
guerrilla warfare 
35 
insurrection 
16; and radicalization 
of populace 
8; response 
12-13 
localism 
154 
political catechisms 
175-6, 177 
provincialism 
152-4 
resistance 
203 
see also Catalonia; guerrillas; 
resistance 
Spiridov, M.M. 
188 
Stein, Freiherr vom 
86, 167 
Stothert, William 
17 
Surés, Ignacio 
100 
Suvorov, General A.V. 
9, 18, 20 
Sydenham, T. 
15, 219 
169-70, 
Tarctie de Extrada 
163 
Tarragona 
98, 99 
terrain and insurrection 
7, 65, 205 
Po valley 
59 
and somatens 
95 
Tolstoi, Leo 
181-2, 186 
Tone, John 
213 
Treitschke, Heinrich von 
85, 86, 166 
tribunal, anti-bandit 
12 
Trier 
68, 81 
Trubestskoi, S.P. 
195 
Tugan-Baronovskii, M.I. 
182 
Tulard, Jean 
81 
Turgenev, N.I. 
196 
Index 
233 
Turreau, Louis-Marie 
38 
Turull de Sentmenat 
97 
Tyrol 
5-6, 8, 202, 
203, 205 
dearth of literature 
207 
effect of conscription 
13 
guerilla warfare 
6 
insurrection as rural 
10 
social cohesion 
81 
Uvarov, S.S. 
196 
Vachin, Joseph 
34, 36 
vagabonds 
27 
see also banditry 
Val Bormida 
48-51 
Varese 
56 
Vendee 
30, 37-40 
Verri, Pietro 
54 
Vilafranca del Penedés 
97 
Villacampa 
117 
Vines, Miguel 
100 
violence 
14-15 
of Austrian troops 
60 
Calabria 
36 
of French troops 
60, 97; and 
insurrection 
11; 
Rhineland 
73 
of guerrillas 
217 
response to 
15 
of somatens 
105, 106 
Vives, Juan migual de 
95, 96 
Volta, Alessandro 
58 
Voltaire, F.-M. Arouet de 
27, 32 
catechisms 
164 
Wahnich, Sophie 
30 
Warsaw, Grand Duchy of 
3 
Wellington, Duke of 
13, 14, 15, 
BY NZ, Pas 
use of deserters 
202 
wheel as punishment 
Wilson, Robert 
18-19 
Wittelsbach monarchy 
68-9 
women in miquelets 
92, 93 
Woolf, Stuart 
205 
27-8 
Zaragoza 
141 
and somatens 
92 

<<<PDFPAGE 252>>>
; 
| 
4 
MM oat! 
7 
- 
: 
1 ened aan 
' 3 7 
erwernire? ab ips? 
Pe 
; 
J 
i? aR Ree 
paca 
i ras 
Shed ta 
Qe " Vee Wad 
7 
—* witviggn’ B Patt» 
Ls 
ayy Oa Nisin Mit 
“OR 
i’ 
tr e neha: 
Car: ope 
cs 
ie PO 
fulp< 
tas 
? b 
% 
Mie 
Ah 
saa 
7 
etn 
hh 
ae tel 
a 
wy 
nL 
— 
: 
we 
a 
ed 
Se 
a 
a? 
tell eee “ 
; 
rain’ 
[> e me Ty 
eo 
ay 
= 
ON ce 
= 
y 
rit a 
wep iby 
a 
2 
tag dl: eal 
ie 
ey 
7 = Bee 
ge 
ils ftw 
ans ao’ 
a 
: 
‘ 
® 
oa 
4 tree , 
5 Teh l ptilon 
a aoe 
" yr WA! sates) tt, 
at 
i. 
\tbte j 
a 
pee | 
agen dei 
— Bn 
ni 
thy, 
Seeels 
— FY 
'\ 
dieters 
/ 
a 
= ip ATP 
le 
ow ties 
8) 
ti aipgws 
ow “se a 
er ee 
> 
a roy 
, ie ohn 
7 
a 
“yah gh cont 
ta ~ | ¥ - bese 
_ 
| 
~ | Sy tits 
. 
oo 
aay 
, Py 
Seltex ; 
\ ve 
4p iy | 
tems ene a 
hb. teeth 
tmamintliW 
a ee 
Ge 
an 
y 
« 
rng 
pe, 
as 
S, Tyler S weer 
t 
= > Hin 
4 
PT 
yp: af 
~*~ i- 
ieee 
ad 
i> 
i a i ie 
TY | 
-~ ons 00 
aan. 1% 
- 
eee 
rte tes 8 PL hier’ 
aero mote, ba wit” 
nih ait 
iui 
Sea 
hie 
_ ‘ae 
wh Or 
fA ee aed 
aoe 
elit 
age i 
ra 
‘ 
t 
teh “pee! far 
to a 
Bh 
Quah eonslepsu 
eae 
core 
8 ft wiehicws 
nn) Rms 
em SI ah tulsind 
toe 
Ah 
r 
2 
*i. 
ol~<t 
~*~ 
a a ae: 
oe 
| ‘weitere 
= 
gat 
oerataa! “ revert 
sor 
hit Pe 
ATES mt 
= 
7 
whine Heilpttaivewn 
<2 COG 
setnpedegs 
slitz eine? ree 
» 
‘oP 
aVAey 
pa 
« 
see 
y 
w 
: 
(maa. 
4¥ oa ae 
y 
, 
et 
»anteand iaphay?, 
vii 
SwALLT 
% 
AS. 
bey ak lnm ornieyy eto aise) 
i 
a. 
are 
wal is7y 
i 
» 
ut wr 
bry 
i 
7 
rey Vo Tat 
Ook ane : 
i 
ee 
ACS aelat 
AWE - ey are chiiiall 
=f are 
an 
wohl a Ve ler 
i, oe 
=A, ¢ ige3 
th ie 
0 Li 
Lees etl T Nt fudged 
bs 
a lad fT divrngarragll fre wig 
meth 
ge 
160 Deh big) 
ray 
a 
 Ayeeyiod 
cy wie 
“3.4 
o 
: 
ih: beAulrhe 
yw 
here 
ctelroar (4 Cotig “eis 
P blag 

<<<PDFPAGE 253>>>
\ 

<<<PDFPAGE 254>>>
Hi 

<<<PDFPAGE 255>>>
macmillan 
—palorave _ 
a
eee 
A
ALISMHAIN/)
ONT 
RALLS 
i 
Wwod 
N
| 
——_ 
» 

<<<PDFPAGE 256>>>
Ue}}ILUDe 
WwW aneJsOjed 
_ 
The jacket reproduces a portrait by Vincent 
In the Napoleonic period warfare ceased to be a matter for armies alone — 
it also became an affair of the people, or so runs the usual claim. In Spain, 
Portugal, Italy, Germany and Russia outraged peasants and townsfolk rose 
against the French armies and fell upon them without mercy. From these 
insurrections we get the modern word ‘guerrilla’, but did armed civilians 
really play an important a role in the struggle? In this collection of essays 
specialists on the Napoleonic epoch tease out the question, and arrive at 
some startling conclusions. 
Charles J. Esdaile lectures on the Revolutionary and Napoleonic Wars, 
modern Europe and the Spanish Civil War at the University of Liverpool, 
UK. His publications include The Spanish Army in the Peninsular Wars 
(1988), The Duke of Wellington and the Command of the Spanish Army 
(1990) and The Wars of Napoleon (1995). 
Lopez of the guerrilla leader General 
Francisco Lépez at the battle of Vitoria, 21 
June 813 (courtesy of Ilustrisimo Senor 
Antonio Gémez de Olea Neveda, Marqués 
de Valasc6, and Teniente Coronel Don José 
Pardo de Figueroxof the Escuela de Guerra 
del Ejército in Madrid). 
Printed
in.Grea
Britain
